VIRAL RESEARCH KNOWLEDGE BASE FOR GEN-AI SEMANTIC SEARCH
Source: NCBI PubMed Central (PMC) / Entrez API
Focus: Full Text of Open Access Papers on Pathogenesis and Transmission Mechanisms


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: SARS-COV-2
================================================================================
Title: Making sense of spike D614G in SARS-CoV-2 transmission

No full text body available.


Title: Epidemiology, transmission and pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2

2.1IntroductionCoronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), has resulted in more than 205 million confirmed cases and 4.3 million deaths (https://covid19.who.int). Coronavirus term is derived from Latin word “Corona” meaning crown. The name suggests the unique appearance of the virus under an electron microscope that contains round particles with a rim of projection. Coronavirus is an enveloped, single-stranded ribonucleic acid (RNA), positive sense virus that was first isolated from humans in 1965 (Tyrrell & Bynoe, 1966). Coronaviruses belong to the family Coronaviridae, which produce mild to severe respiratory disease in humans. Coronaviruses are found in various animals, including bats, birds, cattle, cats, and pigs. In recent decades, there have been three major Coronavirus outbreaks worldwide. In 2002 and 2012, two highly pathogenic Coronaviruses with the zoonotic origin, severe acute respiratory syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, (2020) and Middle East respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), respectively, caused fatal respiratory illness, making these Coronaviruses a new public health concern in the 21st century (Zumla et al., 2015). Key differences among SARS-CoV, MERS, and SARS-CoV-2 are summarized in Table 2.1
.Table 2.1Key differences among severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus, and Middle East respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus.SARS-CoV-2SARS-CoVMERS-CoVGenusClade I, lineage BClade I, lineage BClade II, lineage CLength of nucleotides29.9 kilobases29.75 kilobases30.11 kilobasesEmergence dateDecember 7, 2019 Wuhan, ChinaNovember 16, 2002 Foshan, ChinaApril 4, 2012, Zarqa, JordanVirus identification firstJan-20Mar-03Jun-12Possibly natural reservoirBatBatBatPossibly intermediate hostMalayan Pangolins & turtlePalm CivetsCamelPredominant cellular receptorsAngiotensin-converting enzyme receptor-2Angiotensin-converting enzyme receptor-2Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 receptorCurrent statusPandemic ongoingCompletely controlSporadic continuousSymptomsSevere acute respiratory syndrome, 4.2% mortality rateSevere acute respiratory syndrome,11% mortality rateSevere acute respiratory syndrome,34% mortality rateTill the writing of this chapter, several countries have experienced at least two waves of COVID-19. Several vaccines have been approved by the Federal Drug Agency (FDA), the European agency, Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, New Delhi. COVID-19 vaccination has decreased the severity of the disease in the exposed individuals. Several SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VoC) that alter transmission or disease characteristics or impact vaccine, therapeutics, diagnostics, or effectiveness preventive and social measures have been detected. These VoC pose challenges for the eradication of the COVID-19 pandemic.
2.2The emergence of Coronavirus disease-2019 as a pandemicAt the end of 2019, a novel Coronavirus emerged in Wuhan, China (Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, 2020) and caused an outbreak of unusual viral pneumonia. The virus began its spread in the seafood wholesale market in the Wuhan, Hubei province of China. It was proposed that an infected animal, an intermediate host of the virus, was sold in the market, causing the spread of the virus in the marketplace. Growing evidence that bats are the natural host of SARS-CoV-2, which might have infected humans through an intermediate host such as pangolins and civet cats (Zhou et al., 2020). Owing to the high transmission rate of SARS-CoV-2, it spread quickly to the entire globe. On January 7, 2020, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention isolated a Coronavirus strain from a swab of a hospitalized patient (Chen, 2020). Outside mainland China, the first laboratory-confirmed case of SARS-CoV-2 infection was reported by Thailand on January 13, 2020 (Boldog et al., 2020). Subsequently, on February 11, 2020, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses named the novel Coronavirus as “SARS-CoV-2” and the WHO named the disease “COVID-19” [naming the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the virus that causes it]. According to the 11th situation report of WHO on novel Coronavirus, by the end of January 2020, SARS-CoV-2 spread to 19 countries outside Mainland China and 9826 confirmed cases were reported (World Health Organization, Novel Coronavirus (2019-NCoV) Situation Report-11, 2020). On the recommendations of the Emergency Committee, on January 30, 2020, the WHO declared the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern (World Health Organization, Novel Coronavirus (2019-NCoV) Situation Report-11, 2020). Considering the global threat due to the widespread SARS-CoV-2 infection in more than 100 countries, on March 11, 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 as a pandemic (World Health Organization, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report-52, 2020). Till August 2021, North America has reported the highest number of confirmed cases, followed by Europe and Asia Fig. 2.1A
. In terms of a total of COVID-19 cases and the number of deaths, the United States of America (USA) tops the list, followed by India, Brazil, and Russia Fig. 2.1B and C (World Health Organization, WHO Coronavirus COVID-19, n.d.). The chronology of important events is given in Figure 2.1, Figure 2.2
.Figure 2.1Geographical distribution of Coronavirus disease-2019 cases. (A) Proportion of COVID-19 cases in different continents; (B) Top 10 affected countries in terms of a total number of COVID-19 cases; (C) Top 10 affected countries in terms of a total number of deaths caused due to COVID-19 (till August 11, 2021).Figure 2.2Chronology of events related to Coronavirus disease-2019 pandemic.2.3Origin and transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2The transmission mode of SARS-CoV-2 is mainly person-to-person. The exact transmission route in “the patient zero” and primary transmission of SRAS-CoV-2 is not known. However, it became clear that it is zoonotic transmission (Chen, 2020). Bats are the natural reservoir of Coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, and are considered as a potential reservoir of SARS-CoV-2 (Guo et al., 2020; Mahdy et al., 2020). Indeed, the SARS-CoV-2 genome shows 96.2 % nucleotide sequence similarity to RaTG13, a bat Coronavirus, suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 might have originated and transmitted from bats. Bats are not available for sale in the Wuhan seafood market, suggesting that the virus might have been transmitted to humans through some other intermediate hosts. Pangolins, civet cats, and snakes have been suggested as intermediate hosts of SARS-CoV-2 (Guo et al., 2020). SARS-CoV-2 might have also been transmitted from wild animals to pets and farm animals that infect human beings (Mahdy et al., 2020) Fig. 2.3
.Figure 2.3Transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) through an intermediate host. SARS-CoV-2 might have evolved from a bat virus. SARS-CoV-2 might have reached humans through intermediate hosts (wild animals or pet and farm animals).Among all carriers of SARS-CoV-2, Rhinolophids bats are more dangerous carriers that do not exhibit any clinical signs of infection.2.3.1Human-to-human transmissionCurrently, available data shows that the main mode of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is human-to-human transmission. It is thought to occur mainly through close contact, either in the form of respiratory droplets or aerosols. Droplets can be broadly described as macro entities (>5 µm) that can gravitate to the ground, that is, approximately within 3–6 feet of the source person (Klompas et al., 2020). Viruses present in respiratory secretion in infected persons spread via coughing, sneezing, talking, or through contaminated surface contact. The mean incubation period for the disease is 5–6 days. When a healthy person comes in contact with an infected person, either direct or indirect (inhalation) may cause disease Fig. 2.3. Infection might also occur through touching the infected surface and, after that, touching the face, nose, and mouth. This type of transmission can be prevented by frequent hand wash, sanitizing hands with alcohol-based sanitizer, and avoiding touching the face, nose, and mouth through the contaminated hand. SARS-CoV-2 transmission for long distances may also occur through aerosols (small droplets that are suspended in air) through inhalation, but the extent to which this mode of transmission is contributed is controversial (Klompas et al., 2020). Generally, many symptomatic COVID-19 patients may infect other human beings who come in close contact. However, most of the asymptomatic patients can serve as carriers of COVID-19, and can unknowingly transmit infection. This may be one of the reasons for drastically and rapidly increased infection worldwide and that lax in the practice of isolation and social distancing and also within families having asymptomatic carrier patients (Phan et al., 2020, Riley et al., 2003). Another way of transmission is dust particles laden with the virus. They will enter and get themselves deep-seated in the respiratory tract. When the dust particles or droplet nuclei are less than 5 µm, they can travel greater than 1-meter distance and become much more problematic. It becomes a threat when there is aerosolization of particles, especially during endobronchial intubation, bronchoscopy, cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, and other procedures.2.3.1.1Fecal–oral route transmissionBesides airborne, SARS-CoV-2 can also be transmitted via other routes. The virus is shed in the feces of the COVID-19 patient. But the fecal–oral route transmission of the disease is still not clear. It has been observed that patients who have been discharged after completing the treatment and whose throat swabs tested negative for the virus showed a positive result for the virus in the stool samples. A study has shown that even asymptomatic COVID-19 patients shed the virus in the stools. This shedding of virus in stool samples is much more common in pediatric patients (Xu et al., 2020). The spread of the virus through this route occurs due to poor sanitation. Therefore, stool samples of COVID-19 patients should also be handled very carefully.
2.3.1.2Vertical transmissionThe transmission of Coronaviruses from mother to baby is not fully understood (Kotlyar et al., 2021). However, babies born to COVID-19 patients showed an elevated titer of IgM antibodies as early as 2 hours after the birth (Dong et al., 2020), raising the possibility of vertical transmission of the virus. No vertical transmission was reported to the newborns in the case of cesarean section (Chen, 2020), but the presence of the SARS-CoV-2 genome in one out of 32 specimens of umbilical cord blood, at-term placenta, vaginal mucosa of pregnant women and breast milk specimen has been reported (Fenizia et al., 2020). Thus, based on the current evidence, the possibility of vertical transmission either through vaginal delivery or through cesarean is very low.2.3.1.3Sexual routeSeminal fluid from COVID-19 patients who recovered from the disease tested negative. However, semen testing for SARS-CoV-2 resulted in 15.8% positivity in 15.8% COVID-19 patients, of which some were in the acute stage of infection and others were in the recovery phase (Li et al., 2020). The study by Pan et al. showed that there was a low expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in human testes, and SARS-CoV-2 was not detected in the semen of recovered patients (Pan et al., 2020). Considering the fact that SARS-CoV-2 was detected in the semen of recovering patients, thus there is a risk of transmission through the sexual route, and safe practices should be followed.2.3.1.4Ocular routeThe ocular surface may also serve as a reservoir and source of SARS-CoV-2 infection. It could be transmitted through hand–eye contact or aerosol or the nasolacrimal route (Qu et al., 2021).2.4Infectiousness and transmissibility severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2The basic reproduction number (R0) is the expected number of secondary cases that could arise from a single case in a susceptible population (Dhar Chowdhury & Oommen, 2020). R0 is a very important parameter in the epidemiology of infectious diseases and it is used to measure the infectiousness or transmission potential of a communicable disease (Viceconte & Petrosillo, 2020). R0 represents the number of people each infected person will infect on average, assuming that there is no preexisting immunity in the population. Whereas effective reproduction number (Re) is the number of people that can be infected by an infected person at any specific time, and it changes as the community becomes increasingly immunized. When Re is greater than 1, it means each person affected by the transmittable disease is expected to infect a number of subjects that increase exponentially related to R0 value, and the disease is expected to spread through the susceptible population. If Re is less than 1, it means each case transmits the disease to one or less than one individual, and the disease is expected to die out in a population (Mahase, 2020). The concept of R0 is based on a complex model and may lead to misinterpretations, especially for the concerns about the spreading of infectious disease and the feasibility of controlling epidemics (20). The World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated the R0 for COVID-19, which ranges between 1.4 and 2.5 (Dhar Chowdhury & Oommen, 2020).2.5Pathogenesis of Coronavirus disease-2019The genome of SARS-CoV-2 is comprised of approximately 29 kilobases of single-stranded positive-sense RNA. The envelope surrounding the genome consists of four structural proteins: (1) a membrane protein (M), (2) an envelope protein (E), (3) a nucleoprotein, and (4) a spike protein (S). Spike glycoprotein is a very important component because it is responsible for the entry of the virus into the host cell. The detailed structure, genome, and proteomic markers of SARS-CoV-2 have been described in Chapter 4.
2.5.1Lung pathogenesisUpon exposure of a healthy person to a SARS-CoV-2 infected person, viral particles reach the superficial epithelium of the nasal cavity. The viral spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 binds to the target cells by ACE2, present on the epithelial cells of the nasal cavity. The entry of the virus into the epithelial cells is facilitated by transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2), which helps in the fusion of the membrane. Children have a low-level expression of this ACE2 receptor, which explains the reason for the lower severity of the disease in children. From nasal epithelial cells, the pathway by which it enters into lower respiratory tract is not much clear. But there are two proposed theories. According to the first theory, microaspiration of virus particles leads to the spread of the virus to the lower respiratory tract. The other theory is the direct entry of virus particles into the lower respiratory tract by bypassing the nasal cavity. Neuropilin-1 is abundantly expressed in the respiratory and olfactory epithelium and enhances the SARS-CoV-2 infectivity (Cantuti-Castelvetri et al., 2020). Once the viral genome enters the host cell, its genes replicate, undergo transcription, and form new virions (Shanmugam et al., 2020). After reaching the lower respiratory tract, the virus attaches to the alveolar epithelial cells through ACE2 receptors present on them. Type-2 alveolar epithelial cells are more involved than type-1. SARS-CoV-2 has a unique polybasic S1/S2 protease cleavage site and an insertion of tetra-peptide SPRR, which increases cleavage efficiency. Consequent to the engagement of spike with ACE2, TMPRSS2 present in the host cell membrane cleaves the above site and thus exposing S2 fusion protein, resulting in the fusion of the virus with the host cell membrane. After the membrane fusion, the internalization of viral RNA occurs, resulting in the replication and formation of viral proteins. SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid proteins bind with the viral RNA, covered by envelope and membrane proteins resulting in complete virion formation (Fig. 2.4
) (Shanmugam et al., 2020).Figure 2.4Pathophysiology of severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) induced lung injury. Following inhalation (1), SARS-CoV-2 infects type-2 alveolar cells, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells through binding of its spike protein with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor. The serine protease type-2 transmembrane serine protease (TMPRSS2) promotes viral uptake by cleaving spike. SARS-CoV-2 replicates in the host cells and generates new virions (2). SARS-CoV-2 damages type-2 alveolar cells and reduce surfactant synthesis, thereby increasing surface tension causing the collapse of alveoli (3). Damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) released by macrophages and alveolar cells recruit T lymphocytes, monocytes, and neutrophils. These cells secrete an excess amount of inflammatory cytokines resulting in a cytokine storm (4).SARS-CoV-2 damages type-2 alveolar cells, which are essential for surfactant synthesis and repair of damaged tissues. Thus, there will be an increase in the surface tension, causing dyspnoea. In addition, the viral genome and proteins act as a pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) and stimulate the innate immune system. In the cytoplasm, viral RNA is recognized by cytosolic receptor melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), the viral RNA receptor retinoic-acid inducible gene I (RIG-I), and nucleotidyl transferase cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS). In the endosome, viral RNA is recognized by endosomal TLRs, leading to activation of downstream cascades, resulting in cytokine production, especially type-1I interferon (IFN-1). Other cytokines such as IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-17, macrophage colony-stimulating factor (MCSF), granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), MCP-1, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α), interferon gamma-induced protein-10 (IP-10), IFN-γ, TNF-α, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) levels also increase during COVID-19 infection, causing massive a cytokine storm and thus worsening the patient’s condition (Tahaghoghi-Hajghorbani et al., 2020). Monocytes release proinflammatory cytokines responsible for pneumocyte apoptosis. Macrophages release chemokines and cytokines, which increase capillary permeability and also cause the recruitment of neutrophils. Excessive degranulation of neutrophils causes permanent damage to pneumocytes breaking the alveolar–capillary barrier. The end result of all these mechanisms is a transmigration of blood proteins resulting in alveolar and interstitial edema (Batah & Fabro, 2021). Inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including C-C motif chemokine ligand (CCL)-2, CCL3, CCL5, C-X-C motif ligand (CXCL)-8, and CXCL9, lead to accumulation of macrophages, neutrophils, monocytes, causing damage to the lungs and other tissues (Tahaghoghi-Hajghorbani et al., 2020).The common symptom in COVID-19 patients is hypoxia, if worsened, may lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). An unusual phenomenon seen in COVID patients is silent hypoxemia. The patients with silent hypoxemia experience no or mild respiratory discomfort and dyspnoea despite critically low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) (Grasselli et al., 2020). Pulmonary pathology of deceased COVID-19 subjects with ARDS shows typical features of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) with hyaline membranes (Fig. 2.5
) and AT2 cell hyperplasia (Borczuk et al., 2020). DAD has two phases; the first one is the exudative phase, which involves hyaline membrane formation due to the polymerization of fibrin present in plasma leaked into interstitial space. This phase is accompanied by alveolar–capillary barrier injury, resulting in red blood cell extravasation and inflammatory cell infiltration. The second phase of DAD is the proliferative phase, which involves excessive fibroblast and myofibroblast proliferation resulting in acute fibrinous organizing pneumonia with extracellular matrix deposition (Batah & Fabro, 2021). Radiological findings on computed tomography show bilateral ground-glass opacities along with peripheral distribution. Lung fibrosis is a complication of ARDS which occurs in severe COVID-19 patients. It occurs due to profibrotic factors like transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) released from the damaged lung tissues. Usually, it promotes tissue repair and causes resolution of infection-induced damage. But in severely affected patients, excessive secretion of TGF-beta and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition results in fibrosis of the lung (Batah & Fabro, 2021).Figure 2.5Pathophysiology of diffuse alveolar damage and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Diffuse alveolar has two phases; the first one is the exudative phase, which involves hyaline membrane formation. This phase is accompanied by alveolar-capillary barrier injury, resulting in red blood cell extravasation and inflammatory cell infiltration. The second phase of diffuse alveolar damage is the proliferative phase, which involves excessive fibroblast and myofibroblast proliferation resulting in acute fibrinous organizing pneumonia with extracellular matrix deposition.2.5.2Hematological manifestationsThe hematological manifestations in COVID-19 patients include both thrombotic and bleeding disorders. Disseminated-intravascular coagulation (DIC) has been noted in COVID-19 patients. There are two types of DIC (1) enhanced fibrinolytic DIC and (2) suppressed fibrinolytic DIC. In enhanced fibrinolytic DIC, the thrombus is formed and is broken by fibrinolytic activation. D-Dimer is an important marker in the determination of the prognosis of COVID-19 patients. It is formed as a result of the degradation of fibrin polymer by plasmin. In suppressed fibrinolytic DIC, the thrombus is not broken down, resulting in only a mild increase in D-Dimer levels (Asakura & Ogawa, 2021). Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the DIC in COVID-19 patients (Lo et al., 2020). One of the mechanisms responsible for thrombotic manifestations is endothelial cell disruption. Inflammatory cytokines released due to SARS-CoV-2 infection activate endothelial activation, which also causes thrombosis. Damaged endothelial cells and/or activated endothelial cells release Weibel-Palade granules containing ultra-large molecular-weight multimers of von Willebrand factor (vWF). These ultra-large granules spontaneously bind to the platelets and cause microthrombosis. Usually, these large granules are broken down by ADAMTS13, a vWF-cleaving protease. But the activity of ADAMTS13 is reduced in COVID-19 patients. The elevated levels of vWF and increased clotting activity of factor-VIII are due to the acute phase reaction, resulting in thrombosis (Lo et al., 2020).Complement activation is another mechanism responsible for hematological manifestations observed in COVID-19 patients. The complement pathway mediates during mild-to-moderate inflammation, leading to the removal of harmful agents and thus helping in tissue regeneration (Lo et al., 2020). Complement activation and cytokine production are interlinked to each other. Low complement levels inhibit cytokine production; however, uncontrolled action of complement pathway results in hyperinflammation and much collateral damage, which include excess production of cytokines by macrophages. The antimicrobial activity of neutrophils gets reduced, and endothelial cells produce tissue factor which increases thrombosis resulting in DIC. Adding to these, SARS-CoV-2 can increase the transcription of complement (C1r, C1s, C3) and coagulation genes (fibrinogen) in the lungs and in the liver (Lo et al., 2020).COVID-19 patients present with various forms of thrombosis, including retiform purpura with extensive deposition of C3d, C4d, MAC, and viral spike protein (Lo et al., 2020). Moreover, SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein has been shown to directly activate the complement pathway. It can increase mannose-binding lectin (MBL)-associated serine protease-2 (MASP-2)-dependent complement activation. Ficolin-2 expression gets upregulated in monocyte-derived macrophages, which further increases the MBL pathway of complement activation. This results in degranulation and increased production of cytokines, NETosis, increased production of reactive oxygen species and eicosanoids. Owing to the membrane activation complex (MAC)-mediated cell death, damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) are released, which acts as positive feedback and further increases complement production (Lo et al., 2020). Notably, N-protein-mediated complement activation occurs only in the absence of an envelope membrane (Lo et al., 2020). In mild disease, a complete virus with an envelope is released. But in severe cases, due to the collateral damage to the cells, immature virions lacking the envelope are released and thus expose N-protein, resulting in enhanced complement activation and elevated thrombosis (Lo et al., 2020). The complement and coagulation pathways are interlinked in two ways. MAC and MASP2 can cleave prothrombin. Factor 10a, plasmin, thrombin can cleave C3. In this way, they together interact and cause an increase in thrombosis and thus explain inflammation around retiform purpura in COVID-19 patients (Lo et al., 2020).2.5.3Cardiovascular manifestationsThe frequent cardiovascular complications observed in COVID-19 patients are myocardial infarction, heart failure, venous-thromboembolic episodes, and palpitations. Acute myocardial infarction is due to atherosclerotic plaque rupture due to inflammation and hyperstability (Long et al., 2020). Some of the COVID-19 patients experience palpitations which may be due to hypoxia, abnormal metabolism, and inflammatory stress. The pathology involved in heart failure is not known, but it is most likely due to the exacerbation of previously undiagnosed heart failure. So, immune system dysregulation, hypercoagulability, increased metabolic demand are some causes of cardiovascular diseases in COVID-19 patients (Long et al., 2020).2.5.4Kidney and excretory systemCOVID-19 patients with preexisting renal diseases have a poor prognosis and have high mortality. So, understanding the pathogenesis of kidney involvement and treating it is very much essential to reduce mortality in COVID-19 patients. In COVID-19 patients, acute kidney injury increases the severity of the disease, resulting in increased mortality and morbidity in the patients (Han & Ye, 2020). Kidney damage involves tubular damage, impaired glomerular filtration, proteinuria and is associated with elevated levels of serum urea and serum creatinine (Han & Ye, 2020). The virus can gain entry through ACE2 receptors present in proximal kidney tubules, making tubular damage more common (Han & Ye, 2020). Inflammatory cytokines and hypoxia also aggravate sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (AKI). Rhabdomyolysis caused due to further hypoxia increases the damage to the kidney. Diarrhea caused due to GI injury leads to dehydration which may also play some role in damaging kidney function Fig. 2.6
.
Figure 2.6Pathophysiology of renal injury by severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2. Acute renal injury in Coronavirus disease-2019 patients involves tubular damage, impaired glomerular filtration, and myoglobinuria. The virus can directly cause harm to the kidney by binding to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 present in proximal renal tubules. Inflammatory cytokines, rhabdomyolysis, nephrotoxins, and hypoxia also aggravate acute kidney injury (Han & Ye, 2020).2.5.5Neurological manifestationsThe neurological manifestations in COVID-19 can be divided into two groups: central nervous system (CNS) manifestations and peripheral nervous system (PNS) manifestations. The symptoms in CNS manifestations include headache and dizziness, and PNS include dysgeusia and hyposmia (Pryce-Roberts et al., 2020). One of the most common symptoms experienced by COVID-19 patients is anosmia. ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are expressed in vascular pericytes of the olfactory bulb as well as in the olfactory neuroepithelium (Lin et al., 2021). SARS-CoV-2 binds ACE2 present on the olfactory bulb; thus, via olfactory nerves, it spreads into the CNS through the cribriform plate, thus causing anosmia. Another way of transmission is the retrograde pathway through trigeminal and vagus nerves and also by entry of infected leucocytes through the blood–brain barrier (BBB) into the CNS, causing anosmia (Lin et al., 2021).BBB is involved in many pathophysiological mechanisms resulting in neurological manifestations of COVID-19. ACE2 is expressed in varying levels on the vascular endothelium of BBB, which gets infected by SARS-CoV-2 triggers proinflammatory and procoagulable states and leads to vasculitis (Johansson et al., 2021). SARS-CoV-2 binding to ACE2 receptors present in sympathoadrenal systems may disrupt the autoregulation of systemic and intracranial blood pressure, thus causing dysregulation of blood pressure (Johansson et al., 2021). Systemic inflammatory responses also affect the integrity of BBB. Blood vessel-associated microglia maintain the integrity of BBB through tight junction proteins. Astrocytes help in the maintenance of BBB endothelium via posttranslational modifications of occludin, a component of tight junction proteins. Microglia gets activated by a systemic inflammatory response and thus disrupts the BBB, which further leads to increased neuro-inflammation and hyperexcitability, resulting in seizures, functional disturbance, fatigue, encephalopathy, and neuronal death. Severe hypoxia due to respiratory complications cause cerebral vasodilation and interstitial edema (Johansson et al., 2021). Headache experienced by COVID-19 patients is due to the invasion of trigeminal nerve endings directly by the virus in the nasal cavity. Elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines also affect the perivascular nerve endings, resulting in headaches (Sharifian-Dorche et al., 2020).2.5.5.1Acute cerebrovascular eventsAcute ischemic stroke and intracranial hemorrhage have been noted in COVID-19 patients. SARS-CoV-2 infection induces coagulation abnormalities, resulting in elevated levels of procoagulant factors, including fibrinogen, IL-6, D-Dimer, and platelets that contribute to many thrombo-embolic events. Furthermore, the elevated inflammatory markers such as CRP, IL-6, IL-7 increase the vulnerability of atherosclerotic plaque to rupture. Imbalance in rennin–angiotensin-system (RAS) results in endothelial dysfunction. All the above-stated reasons contribute to ischemic stroke (Sharifian-Dorche et al., 2020). Several hematological manifestations of COVID-19, including DIC, thrombocytopenia, increased prothrombin time, may cause intracranial hemorrhage. The RAS system plays a very important role in blood pressure regulation. Downregulation of ACE2 receptors is an important component of the RAS system. ACE2 catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin 2 (Ang 2) to Ang 1. Ang 1 is a potent vasoconstrictor and atherogenic molecule, and the balance between Ang 2 and Ang 1 regulate blood pressure, and ACE2 plays a critical role in this balance. ACE2 after SARS-CoV-2 binding is internalized and degraded. Hence ACE2 activity on the cell surface is reduced, leading to an increase in the concentration of Ang 2 and a decrease in the concentration of Ang (1–7). The downregulation of ACE2 results in dysfunction of cerebral autoregulation, and an increase in blood pressure results in arterial rupture and hemorrhage (Dettlaff-Pokora and Swierczynski, 2021, Sharifian-Dorche et al., 2020).2.5.6Psychiatric manifestationsThe SARS-CoV-2 infection also results in psychiatric manifestations like psychosis, posttraumatic stress disorder, and even suicide in some patients (Orsini et al., 2020). Sleep deprivation and feeling excessive fear are some of the reasons for depression and posttraumatic stress disorder in these patients. The psychiatric symptoms may be due to a direct neurotropic effect or may be due to a systemic immune-inflammatory response (Orsini et al., 2020). The proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF-alpha, IL-1, IL-6 produced by cytokine storm, exert their effect on indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase. This enzyme is responsible for the degradation of tryptophan which is important for the synthesis of serotonin, a mood elevator. The increase in the activity of this enzyme results in depletion of serotonin causing depressive symptoms and other psychiatric manifestations. Furthermore, prolonged stay of COVID-19 in the intensive care unit causes psychosis, delirium in some patients (Orsini et al., 2020).2.5.7Dermatological manifestationsCommon dermatological manifestations observed in COVID-19 patients are maculopapular eruptions, acral areas of erythema with vesicles and pustules, urticarial lesions, vesicular eruptions, livedo or necrosis (Kaya et al., 2020). The pathophysiological mechanism behind dermatological manifestations is the cytokine storm, which stimulates the dermal dendritic cells, macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes and promotes erythema, urticarial lesions, and eruptions (Kaya et al., 2020). Obliterative microangiopathy due to endothelial and myointimal growth has also been reported in COVID-19 patients (Kaya et al., 2020). This occurs due to complement activation resulting in pseudo-chilbian and purpuric lesions. ACE2 receptors are also present in the basal layer of the epidermis and in the endothelial cells of dermal blood vessels, which form the target site for the action of the virus and result in acantholysis and dyskeratosis (Kaya et al., 2020).2.5.8Reproductive system manifestationsACE2 receptors and Ang 2 are widely expressed on all the components of the female reproductive system, including the ovary, uterus, and vagina (Jing et al., 2020). ACE2 and Ang 1 regulate follicle development, ovulation, luteal angiogenesis, and degeneration. Ang 1 is an endogenous ligand for the G protein-coupled receptor Mas and specifically inhibits Ang 2 by the antagonism of AT1 receptors (Jing et al., 2020). Thus, SARS-CoV-2 affects ovarian tissue, granulosa cells and affects ovarian function, oocyte viability, resulting in infertility and miscarriage. It also damages endometrial cells and thus distressing the implantation of the embryo. In pregnant women, it causes vascular mal-perfusion of the placental bed, chorangio-hemangioma, and intervillous fibrin deposition (Jing et al., 2020). Male gender serves as a risk factor for COVID-19. TMPRSS2 receptor expression is enhanced by the androgen receptor. TMPRSS2 gene is expressed more in the adult prostate. In the same way, ACE2 expression is enhanced and causes the passage of virus into cells by androgens.2.5.9Gastrointestinal and hepatic manifestationsThe most common gastrointestinal (GI) symptom observed in COVID-19 patients is diarrhea. Other symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, abdominal pain, and dysgeusia (Cha et al., 2020). The symptoms related to the involvement of the liver mostly include a change in the laboratory parameters. These include elevated levels of serum aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, bilirubin, prolonged prothrombin time, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (Cha et al., 2020). Some of the symptoms are thought to be due to the interaction between CNS and the gut. The proinflammatory cytokines cause alteration in the gut-CNS axis of the vagal nerve or through the lymphatic or vascular system. The lateral hypothalamic nuclei control nausea and vomiting, and if it is affected due to neurological damage, it may also become the cause of vomiting and diarrhea (Perisetti et al., 2020). ACE2 receptor is abundantly expressed in the GI tract, including the tongue, esophagus, stomach, ileum, rectum, and possess mucosa. The gastric acid secreted in the stomach kills the virus, but still, the virus finds its way into the duodenum and distal ileum, showing its effect (Perisetti et al., 2020). Once the virus gains entry into the cells, it divides rapidly and proliferates, resulting in cytopathic changes causing viral cytopathic effects. In addition to these, COVID-19 patients are given many antibiotics which cause alteration of gut flora. The cytokine storm seen in COVID-19 patients increases IL-2, IL-7, GM-CSF, TNF-alpha, which causes alteration in the GI motility and also plays a role in alteration of GI flora resulting in diarrhea. Also, medications used in the treatment of COVID-19 have side effects like diarrhea (Perisetti et al., 2020). The liver is much less affected in COVID-19 patients because it does not express many ACE2 receptors (Perisetti et al., 2020, PMID: 32807535). But the cholangiocytes and biliary epithelium have more of these receptors, making them a potential site for the virus to act. The virus gains access into the biliary system through the portal vein. This way, it can directly cause hepatocytes' cytopathic effect, resulting in microvesicular steatosis (Perisetti et al., 2020).2.6Effect of host factors on Coronavirus disease-2019 pathogenesisThe disease outcome depends not only on the virulence factors but also on some host factors like gender, age, obesity, tobacco consumption/smoking, and comorbidities like preexisting respiratory disease, cardiovascular disease, genetic factors, cerebrovascular diseases, diabetes, hypertension. The severity of the disease is different in males and females. Females have a better prognosis compared to males. This might be due to the immunomodulatory effect of estrogen. Virus replication is suppressed by estrogen, resulting in less viral load in females (Shanmugam et al., 2020). Estrogen causes suppression of some micro-RNA like miR125 and let7A, resulting in repression of monocyte-macrophage infiltration (Shanmugam et al., 2020). Some genes present on the X-chromosome like TLR-7, which upregulates IFN-beta in dendritic cells and provides protection (Shanmugam et al., 2020). Obesity causes the release of certain cytokines like TGF-beta, TNF-alpha, IL-6, which delay innate and acquired immunity and result in the fast spread of the virus. Attenuation of cytokine signaling proteins in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells and lungs, which reduces the production of IFN-1, and proinflammatory cytokines. In people with hypertension, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), cause an increase in the production of ACE receptors, making them more prone to the virus. In addition, in diabetic patients, MHC-1 expression and antibody production is reduced due to glycation. Furthermore, decreased production of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha by NK cells and macrophages results in immune paralysis (Shanmugam et al., 2020). The macrophages present in the lungs of smokers produce fewer amounts of IL-1, -6, and TNF-alpha. In smokers, decreased NK cell activity and increased production of ACE receptors make them more prone to COVID-19.2.7ConclusionCOVID-19 primarily affects the respiratory system, vasculature, and immune system. SARS-CoV-2 infected patients can have a range of clinical manifestations ranging from no symptoms to critical illness associated with ARDS, septic shock, and multiorgan failure. Effective antiviral drugs for SARS-CoV-2 are still not available. Therefore, preventive measures such as social distancing, personal hygiene, and usage of masks along with vaccination are key armor for the containment of the COVID-19 pandemic. Owing to evolutionary pressure, SARS-CoV-2 is rapidly mutating, and several VOC have emerged that have further spread to several countries. The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 VOC with increased contagiousness or escaping neutralizing antibodies poses challenges in eradicating SARS-CoV-2. Thus, the development of an effective antiviral drug is the need of the hour.AcknowledgmentFunding received from the Science Engineering and Research Board, Govt. of India (IPA/2020/000130) to AK is gratefully acknowledged.


Title: Transmission of SARS-CoV-2, Required Developments in Research and Associated Public Health Concerns

IntroductionSARS-CoV-2 has infected over five million people worldwide after its emergence in Wuhan, China (1). The world has witnessed that this virus can spread rapidly to cause the death-causing COVID-19 disease. Although the rate of recovery is higher in people with strong immune responses, however, the immune-compromised individuals are at higher risks to be readily killed by the infection (2). The major reasons for higher morbidity and mortality rates are rapid human-human transmission, unavailability of promising diagnostic and therapeutic options, scarcity of clinical supplies, shortage of medical and clinical staff, and lack of effective preventive measures (3). Besides the physical illness, the COVID-19 epidemic has also increased the risk of psychological problems among healthcare workers, infected individuals, and the general public (3, 4), due to the fear of treatment failure, higher morbidity and mortality, lack of psychological interventions, and infodemia (3, 5, 6).During the early days of the epidemic in China, a number of countries suspended travel to and from China, evacuated their nationals from the epicenter, and placed them in quarantine to curb the risks of pandemic (6). These responses were not sufficient to prevent the spread of COVID-19, therefore, it became a global pandemic (7). Considering the seriousness of this situation scientists and medical researchers came forward and extended their services to the development of therapeutic strategies, preventive measures, and strategies to control the unfolding pandemic. Until now, researchers have unveiled some of the important biological and clinical features for COVID-19 infection, including the characterization of the whole genome (8) and spike glycoproteins (9), investigation of clinical features and evaluation of different broad-spectrum antiviral drugs in combination with either antibacterial, antimalarial and/or traditional Chinese medicines (10). Nevertheless, more research work is required to further investigate the sources of transmission, the biology of viral incubation and reemergence, and the potential of vertical transmission from mothers to neonates. In this article, we discuss the features of coronaviruses, the mechanism of infectiousness of SARS-CoV-2, and its medical consequences. We also describe the populations at higher risk and challenges in research progress. This narrative review article will benefit the public and scientific community regarding the current progress and the need for further work.MethodologyTo identify and select the papers in this review we searched the published research and review articles relevant to origin and outbreaks of three human coronaviruses, and features, transmission, spread, entry mechanisms, infectiousness, control strategies, and animals hosts for SARS-CoV-2. We also search the papers published on SARS and MERS coronaviruses in the aspects of animal models and sources of transmission. We reviewed the World Health Organization, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Nature reports, Medline, PubMed Central, Embase, google scholar, and ScienceDirect, according to the relevancy as explained earlier, until April 20, 2020. The search terms “novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, SARS and MERS” were broadly used. Studies conducted in laboratory and clinical based observations, and/or conducted through bioinformatics techniques were included.Clinical Features of COVID-19Pneumonia is one of the most frequent manifestations of COVID-19 infection, which is characterized by fever, bilateral infiltrates on chest imaging, cough, and dyspnea (11). The period from infection to symptoms appearance ranges from 2 to 14 days, while the average period reported so far is ~5 days (12). One of the previous studies reported the onset of fever and respiratory symptoms ~3–6 days in a family cluster of infections (13). Similarly, in an analysis of 10 patients with confirmed COVID-19 pneumonia, the estimated mean incubation period was 5 days (11). Furthermore, the majority of the individuals showed moderate symptoms whereas 20% of the infected patients showed severe illness of respiratory failure and septic shock and gastrointestinal complications (11, 13). Common laboratory abnormalities associated with COVID-19 are lymphopenia and elevated aminotransferase levels (10). C-reactive protein (CRP) levels have been reported to alter with the development of symptoms, such that patients with severe pneumonia present high CRP levels (10, 14). In a recent study, Wang (14) reported that CRP levels at the early stage of COVID-19 are positively correlated with lung lesions and symptoms development, which can be used as one of the key indicators for disease development and severity. Wang et al. (10) investigated 138 patients [median age; 56 years, interquartile range; 42–68 years] with COVID-19 pneumonia in Wuhan and reported that 136 patients developed fever, 82 patients had a dry cough and 96 patients had fatigue. Besides lymphopenia, parenchymal lung abnormalities were also common among all patients as depicted from computed tomography of the chest, including bilateral patchy shadows or ground-glass opacities. Nonetheless, some people have been reported to be initially asymptomatic and may remain asymptomatic or go on to develop disease on later stages (WHO; March 23, 2020). Although it is important to know about the symptoms' appearance and severity, however, understanding the transmission of the infection to healthy individuals from COVID-19 patients and zoonotic sources can be of great importance in the aspects of developing strategies to prevent and control the spread of COVID-19.Emergence and Transmission of CoronavirusesDuring November 2002, a novel coronavirus caused SARS epidemic in Guangdong, China (15), followed by subsequent outbreaks in Hong Kong (15, 16). This outbreak was reported to be caused by SARS-CoV, originated from market civets before its transmission and infection in humans (17). By the end of the epidemic, SARS-CoV infected 8,098 people and caused 774 fatalities in 29 different countries (16). Later on, during June 2012 a patient infected with MERS-CoV developed severe pneumonia and died in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (16, 18), following by series of clustered outbreak in the Middle East and several other countries (16, 19). Before transmitting into humans, MERS-CoV originated and replicated in dromedary camels (17). Until 2020, MERS-CoV infected 2,468 individuals and caused 851 fatalities worldwide (20, 21).In December 2019, clusters of patients reported with COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 were epidemiologically found linked to animals and the seafood selling market in Wuhan, China (22). The zoonotic source of its origin and transmission is still debatable, however, some reports suggested bats (23) as the possible sources of transmission (9). The human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is thought to occur mainly via respiratory droplets produced by coughing or sneezing from an infected individual (24). The rapid increase in suspected as well-confirmed cases has also been inferred with viral transmission through the fecal-oral route and aerosol formation. The half-life on the surfaces of stainless steel, copper, and cardboard is ~5.8 h, while that on the plastic surface is 6.8 h (25). Moreover, several reports have confirmed the asymptomatic transmission while there is a chance for the animal to humans transmission (26). Overall, these observations indicate that appropriate care is necessary while handling both confirmed and suspected individuals. Moreover, the surfaces of potentially virus-contaminated places, objects, and containers should be cleaned with effective disinfectants.Infectiousness and Cellular Entry of SARS-CoV-2The SARS-CoV-2 contains a single-stranded RNA with 29,891 nucleotides, encoding for 9,860 amino acids (27). The spike glycoproteins of SARS-CoV-2 contain two subunits (S1 and S2) (8). The S2 subunit contains transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains along with fusion peptide. Novel coronavirus has over 80% identity with SARS-CoV. However, spike receptor-binding domains (RBD) are only 40% identical (28), while structural elements open reading frame (ORF)3b and ORF8 were found with no homology (29). Coronaviruses contain six ORFs regions which serve as templates for the production of sub-genomic mRNAs and encode protein, spike, nucleocapsid, and membrane proteins. ORFs are responsible for the production of pp1a and pp1ab polypeptides (30). Both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infect bronchial epithelial cells and type II pneumocytes through ACE2 and CD26 receptors, respectively (17, 31, 32). The mechanism associated with the infectiousness of SARS-CoV-2 is yet to investigate, however, it likely infects the bronchial cells through ACE2.In general, a virus entry to the host cell comprises a series of fundamental interactions; (i) binding to a target host cell via cellular receptors; (ii) fusing the envelope with a cellular membrane; and (iii) forking over its genetic material inside the cell (Figure 1). The process of viral genomic delivery of nucleic acids into the host cell is highly dependent upon binding specificity to receptors, proteolytic activation, and endocytosis efficiency (33, 34). Coronaviruses demonstrate a great degree of plasticity regarding the entry pathways, which can occur at the plasma membrane or through the endocytic pathway (35) (Figure 2). The entry to the host cell process of SARS-CoV-2 is regulated by Glycosylated spike (S) fusion protein and host receptor known as ACE2. The S proteins is capable of significant structural rearrangement thus, play a crucial role in fusing the viral membrane with the host cell membrane (36). This fusion process sparks off with binding of the S1 subunit to ACE2 and is linked with the accessibility of receptor determined by hinge-like conformational movements of the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of S1. Thus, RBD can transiently hide or expose the determinants of receptor binding through receptor-inaccessible state or receptor-accessible state, respectively (37). Once the virus has entered to the host cell, the replication-transcription complex (RTC) is organized in double-membrane vesicles to initiate transcription of polyprotein 1a/1ab (pp1a/pp1ab). These pp1a/pp1ab proteins encode chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro), main protease (Mpro), and papain-like proteases for the production of non-structural proteins (nsps) (28). Trans-membrane helical segments in the ORF1ab region encodes for nsp2 and nsp3 (38). The structural proteins and nsps play a role in the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 by blocking the innate immune response and assembly and release of newly synthesized virions (39).Figure 1The most common entry to host cells mechanisms of human viruses. (A) SARS-CoV entry. Key points are, virion attachment to receptor; virion internalization by endocytosis; lowering the pH (5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein; insertion into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of vacuolar membranes and the viral; viral nucleocapsid release into the cytosol. (B) Poliovirus entry. virion binding to cell surface receptors, endocytosed and ultimately delivered to endosomes (low pH); conformational changes in viral capsid due to low pH environment result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, producing a pore for viral genome exit and entry into cytoplasm. (C) HIV entry. Virion attaches to various attachment factor on cell surface, such as DC-SIGN. The attachment of viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4 alters the structure of envelope glycoprotein, which then induces the second receptor binding domain exposure resulting in the engagement of CCR5 or CXCR4 coreceptors, that in turn causes the viral fusion with the cell membrane.Figure 2The SARS-CoV-2 transmission from bats via unknown intermediate to humans causes infectiousness known as COVID-19 disease. The binding of S protein to ACE2 receptor initiates the life cycle which is then followed by conformational changes in the S protein, which further facilitates the fusion of viral envelope and host cell membrane. Following the fusion through endosomal pathway, SARS-CoV-2 then releases RNA into the host cell, which is translated into pp1a and pp1ab. Next, viral proteinases cleave the translated proteins into small products, meanwhile a series of sub-genomic mRNAs are produced by polymerase enzyme through discontinuous transcription, which are then translated into specific viral proteins. These viral proteins and genome RNA are assembled to form virions in Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum, which are later transported out of the cell via vesicles. This figure was designed by updating and modifying the information from our previously published paper (29).During the first days of the Wuhan epidemic, two strains of novel coronavirus were reported namely S strain and L strain. Observations suggested that L strain was more aggressive and more fatal as compared to S strain. A group of researchers from Pasteur Institute Shanghai and Peking university reported that the rate of infection for L strain was as high as 70%, while that of S was ~30% as indicated by the analyzed samples. On the other hand, S type strain was found to be the ancestral version and was closely related to viruses like TG13. Further analysis based on population genetics indicated that these strains mainly differed at orf1ab and ORF8 regions. Interestingly, the development of new variations of the spike protein in SARS-CoV-2 variants is linked to mutations, and natural selection (40). Therefore, further studies should evaluate the combinational impacts of genomic data, epidemiological data, and chart records of the clinical symptoms of patients with COVID-19.Current Research Gaps Associated With COVID-19 TransmissionAfter the identification of SARS-CoV-2, debates started among scientists on its sources of origination and zoonotic source of transmission to humans (29). The identity of the animal source of SARS-CoV-2, is still one of the key missing gaps that scientists are being racing to investigate. It is a known fact that coronaviruses circulate in mammals and birds (17), and researchers have already suggested bats to be the source of origination for SARS-CoV-2 (23). However, an intermediate animal was probably the source of transmission of the virus to humans. Early claims came from researchers related to intermediate sources of transmission faced controversies (9). A recent report discredited an earlier statement that pangolin could be the possible intermediate source that might have received the virus from the bat and transferred it to humans (40). According to more recent study on molecular and phylogenetic analyses, it is unlikely that SARS-CoV-2 emerged directly from the pangolin coronaviruses (41), suggesting that pangolins may not be responsible for the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to humans.With further spread of the virus after its outbreak in Wuhan, more people became infected, thus, human to human transmission became more evident. One of the reasons for the high rate of infectiousness in humans is thought to be the higher affinity of RBD for binding to ACE2 receptors (29, 42). In addition, the determination of host range and binding to the ACE2 are highly dependent on six RBD amino acids “L455, F486, Q493, S494, N501, and Y505 in SARS-CoV-2” in SARS-CoV-2, thus, RBD can also bind to ACE2 from ferrets and cats (42). On the other hand, the high-affinity of RBD to human ACE2 is thought to be linked with natural selection on a human ACE2, indicating that SARS-CoV-2 was not produced with purposeful manipulation (42). These observations support the hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 was transmitted from a yet unknown intermediate zoonotic source to humans.Spike glycoproteins have been well-documented in the aspects of transmission and entry of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells (13, 28). It is notable that the polybasic cleavage site of SARS-CoV-2 at the junction of S1 and S2 allows cleavage by proteases such as furin, which plays a crucial role in infectiousness and determining host range. Despite the unknown functional consequence, the higher genetic variation in spike indicates that SARS-CoV-2 with polybasic cleavage sites may be discovered in several other species (42, 43), which can be the possible source of transmission for SARS-CoV-2 to humans. Interestingly, the mutation found in the polybasic cleavage site was not related to that of the bat and pangolin viruses (42), therefore, it may be linked with the virus's ability for transmission and infection in humans. The determination of polybasic cleavage and predicted O-linked glycans further suggest that the virus was most likely transferred from an animal with ACE2 to humans, as these are not possible in cell cultures (42). Further research to determine the impact of polybasic cleavage and predicted O-linked glycans on transmissibility and pathogenesis is necessary.Although investigating the mechanisms underlying entry to host cell, transmission, polybasic cleavage, and predicted O-linked glycans are required to determine the research gaps associated with transmission and origination, however, this work requires suitable animal models. Unfortunately, there is no promising model while the non-human primates tested for SARS and MERS were unable to develop severe diseases in response to the infectiousness (44). Nevertheless, the models developed for the expression of human ACE2 and DPP4 (16) can be further modified and used to study the transmission and infectiousness of SARS-CoV02. Moreover, CRISPR-interceded genetically modified small animals can be also utilized for the study of the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2. Nevertheless, it is important to investigate the ultimate source of viral transfer to humans, as even if the virus is eradicated with social distancing, other sources including zoonotic and environmental sources can again cause the transfer into humans, and thus another outbreak will be the result.Major Health Concerns Associated With COVID-19The ability of rapid human to human transmission of COVID-19 infection especially through asymptomatic infected individuals and aerosol, has paralyzed life across the globe (29, 43). Although the COVID-19 infection primarily affects physical health, however, it can also affect mental health through the fear of transmission from unknown sources and high mortality rate that can further paralyze life (5). It is deemed necessary that timely effective services should be provided to the vulnerable populations as reported by Khan et al. (5). The adverse impacts of COVID-19 are specific to the populations, therefore, we discuss the most vulnerable populations, the current evidence on known vulnerable groups and the associated health risks in response to the COVID-19 infection.Rapidly increasing mortalities and morbidities in healthcare workers are causing serious medical concerns and adversely affecting healthcare services worldwide (3). The fear of being infected due to close contacts with infected symptomatic and asymptomatic patients, and prolonged working schedules may decrease the working efficiency in current doctors and nurses (3, 7). A large number of medical and clinical staff are likely to be infected with COVID-19 infection. Only in Wuhan, more than 15 hundred persons from healthcare settings were reported infected (3). In addition to the high risk of contracting infection due to direct interaction with infected and suspected individuals (3), healthcare workers have also been reported to develop severe mental conditions including stress, anxiety, and related mental illnesses (3, 4). To mitigate the risk of contracting infection the medical staff should adhere to standard precautions while providing patient care (45, 46).According to the CDC report on coronavirus disease, individuals with underlying chronic medical conditions are at higher risk for contracting COVID-19 infection. Huang et al. reported that 32% of SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals had diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease (11). The fatality rate was also high in individuals who had diabetes mellitus, chronic lung disease (47), cerebrovascular diseases (48), and hypertension (47). Furthermore, COVID-19 infection in patients with lung cancer can develop severe COVID-19 disease that can lead to death (49). Luo et al. (49) reported that more than half of the COVID-19 infected individuals who had lung cancer, needed hospitalization, whereas nearly a quarter of them died. However, people living with human immunodeficiency virus do not present excess morbidity and mortality among symptomatic COVID-19 patients (50). The higher risk of disease and death in individuals with underlying diseases might be linked with weaker or comprised immune responses.The elder individuals are comparatively more affected by COVID-19 infection; however, individuals of any age can acquire the infection (51). According to the previous reports, 87% of infected individuals were between 30 and 79 years old. Moreover, the mortality rate was higher in older people. The case fatality rate of 8% was observed among individuals having age between 70 and 79 years, while 15% fatality rate was reported in people with 80 years or older (47).COVID-19 infection in pregnant women is of serious concern, as it might have detrimental effects not only on mother's health but also on neonatal health can be at risk (52). In a recent study, COVID-19 infection was found to cause adverse neonatal outcomes. Two of the neonates were tested positive, and for COVID-19 while, five were found with neonatal pneumonia, suggesting the possibility of a link between adverse pregnancy outcomes and COVID-19 infection (52). Dong et al. (53) reported a newborn with elevated IgM antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, who was born to a mother with COVID-19, suggesting the possibility of vertical transmission. Therefore, further investigations should focus on adverse pregnancy outcomes and the possibility of vertical transmission. The approach to prevention, evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of pregnant women with suspected COVID-19 should be similar to that in non-pregnant individuals, with the consideration that pregnant women with other potentially severe respiratory infections, such as influenzaappear to be more vulnerable to developing severe sequelae. Moreover, pregnant women should be given attention and provided with the utmost facilities in terms of treatment and diagnosis.Controlling The Spread of COVID-19Controlling the spread and transmission of infection is one of the major issues that authorities are currently considering with serious attention. World Health Organization (WHO) and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend face and eye protection for droplet and contact precautions. During aerosol-generating procedures, such as non-invasive ventilation, tracheotomy, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, tracheal intubation, bronchoscopy, and manual ventilation before intubation, additional precautions are warranted such as airborne infection isolation room and wearing the appropriate personal protective equipment (ref 1 and ref 2).To control the transmission requires the identification and isolation of the infected individuals. Samples from the nasopharyngeal swab, oropharyngeal swab, sputum, tracheal aspirate, or bronchoalveolar lavage should be tested for the detection of the virus (54). The symptoms of COVID-19 pneumonia are primarily similar to influenza and seasonal allergies (10, 55, 56), therefore using thermo-scanners and physical observations are not are not able to adequately differentiate between those conditions. Although quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) is the major confirmatory test however, to provide further testing support developing additional testing kits that could rapidly detect SARS-CoV-2 with maximum accuracy in suspected, confirmed, and asymptomatic patients may be useful.To control the ongoing pandemic and risk of future epidemics, the development of safe and effective vaccines is necessary, that should be available for individuals at high risk of contracting COVID-19 infection. Until now, effective vaccine against COVID-19 is not available, however, some vaccines with preventive potential against COVID-19 infection are in pipeline. Such as the mRNA-based vaccine developed by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in USA, is being trialed (57). While the INO-4800-DNA based vaccine is currently being developed (57). Moreover, Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) in China has started working on inactivated virus vaccine that may be used widely if found promising (57, 58). Stermirna Therapeutics has reported the development of mRNA-based vaccines that can soon be available for trials (57, 58). Nevertheless, more work is required; SARS-CoV specific live-attenuated (16) and rhesus θ-defensin 1 and protein cage nanoparticles based vaccines can be evaluated for COVID-19 infection (59, 60). Moreover, monoclonal antibodies should be considered that are effective in inhibiting virus-cell receptor binding and virus-cell fusion (16).Conclusions and PerspectivesSARS-CoV-2 is likely originated in bats and introduced to the world through a yet unknown intermediate. Without finding the missing intermediate, SARS-CoV-2 may reemerge even if the current spread is controlled completely through social distancing and isolation. An earlier report that indicated pangolins as the possible source of transmission of SARS-COV-2 has been discredited, therefore, further work is required to identify the unknown intermediate animal source that caused the transmission of the virus to humans. Based on their role in transmission and infectiousness, spike glycoproteins, RBD binding to ACE2 and mutations in polybasic cleavage sites related to different animals should be studied further.Given the importance of the current outbreak in Wuhan, further studies are necessary to provide deep understating of replication, pathogenesis, and biological properties using the relevant biological techniques such as reverse genetics and molecular techniques. To unveil pathogenesis and entry mechanisms further investigations should focus on structural elements ORF3b and ORF8 in novel coronavirus. These regions may play an important role in high human to human spread and may be linked to the severity of the disease. These investigations will help the control and prevention of COVID-19 mediated pneumonia and novel emerging diseases in the future. The COVID-19 outbreak has affected millions of people around the globe by causing mortalities and morbidities. Thus, curbing COVID-19 and preventing it from spreading further requires the development of effective strategies t related to detection of the virus, curing the disease, vaccination and prevention, and identification of the transmission sources. The research work should focus on preventing the spread and transmission of the virus, however, without taking effective measures the virus will come back again.Author ContributionsSK is the leading author while JL and MX contributed to revisions. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 Transmission and Pathogenesis

The Emergence of a Third, Novel CoronavirusCurrent State of the COVID-19 PandemicCoVs have caused three large-scale outbreaks over the past two decades: severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS), and now COVID-19. The origin of the COVID-19 pandemic was traced back to a cluster of pneumonia cases connected to a wet seafood market in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China [1]. Following the likely spillover of a zoonotic disease (see Glossary), further work confirmed the etiological agent to be a novel Betacoronavirus related to SARS-CoV [1,2]. The first patients developed symptoms on December 1, 2019 after which rapid human-to-human transmission and intercontinental spread later ensued, being declared a pandemic by the WHO in March 2020 [3]. Since then, ~35 million people have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, with >1 million deaths in 235 countries, areas, or territories [4]. Although SARS-CoV-2 appears to be less lethal than SARS-CoV or MERS-CoV, its transmissibility is higher. To find solutions to contain this raging pandemic, global research efforts have been quickly mobilized, each day resulting in new advances in basic and clinical research, therapy, diagnosis, vaccine and drug development, as well as epidemiology. Here, we conduct a comprehensive review of the current state of COVID-19 research, with a principal focus on the mechanisms of transmission and pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 stemming from clinical and animal studies.SARS-CoV-2 CharacteristicsSARS-CoV-2 Genome and StructureCoVs of the family Coronaviridae are enveloped, positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses [5]. All of the highly pathogenic CoVs, including SARS-CoV-2, belong to the Betacoronavirus genus, group 2 [5]. The SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence shares ~80% sequence identity with SARS-CoV and ~50% with MERS-CoV [1,6]. Its genome comprises 14 open reading frames (ORFs), two-thirds of which encode 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp 1–16) that make up the replicase complex [6,7]. The remaining one-third encodes nine accessory proteins (ORF) and four structural proteins: spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N), of which Spike mediates SARS-CoV entry into host cells [8]. However, the S gene of SARS-CoV-2 is highly variable from SARS-CoV, sharing <75% nucleotide identity [1,6,9]. Spike has a receptor-binding domain (RBD) that mediates direct contact with a cellular receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), and an S1/S2 polybasic cleavage site that is proteolytically cleaved by cellular cathepsin L and the transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) (Figure 1
) [1,9,10]. TMPRSS2 facilitates viral entry at the plasma membrane surface, whereas cathepsin L activates SARS-CoV-2 Spike in endosomes and can compensate for entry into cells that lack TMPRSS2 (Figure 1) [10]. Once the genome is released into the host cytosol, ORF1a and ORF1b are translated into viral replicase proteins, which are cleaved into individual nsps (via host and viral proteases: PLpro); these form the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (nsp12 derived from ORF1b) [8]. Here, the replicase components rearrange the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) into double-membrane vesicles (DMVs) that facilitate viral replication of genomic and subgenomic RNAs (sgRNA); the latter are translated into accessory and viral structural proteins that facilitate virus particle formation (Figure 1) [11,12].Figure 1The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Lifecycle.The SARS-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2) lifecycle commences by binding of the envelope Spike protein to its cognate receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Efficient host cell entry then depends on: (i) cleavage of the S1/S2 site by the surface transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2); and/or (ii) endolysosomal cathepsin L, which mediate virus–cell membrane fusion at the cell surface and endosomal compartments, respectively. Through either entry mechanism, the RNA genome is released into the cytosol, where it is translated into the replicase proteins (open reading frame 1a/b: ORF1a/b). The polyproteins (pp1a and pp1b) are cleaved by a virus-encoded protease into individual replicase complex nonstructural proteins (nsps) (including the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase: RdRp). Replication begins in virus-induced double-membrane vesicles (DMVs) derived from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which ultimately integrate to form elaborate webs of convoluted membranes. Here, the incoming positive-strand genome then serves as a template for full-length negative-strand RNA and subgenomic (sg)RNA. sgRNA translation results in both structural proteins and accessory proteins (simplified here as N, S, M, and E) that are inserted into the ER–Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) for virion assembly. Finally, subsequent positive-sense RNA genomes are incorporated into newly synthesized virions, which are secreted from the plasma membrane [6,8,11,12]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 1Tissue Tropism of SARS-CoV-2The establishment of viral tropism depends on the susceptibility and permissiveness of a specific host cell. During the SARS epidemic, patients often presented with respiratory-like illnesses that progressed to severe pneumonia, observations mirroring the disease course of COVID-19, suggesting that the lung is the primary tropism of SARS-CoV-2 [13]. Both CoVs were then found to bind the same entry receptor, ACE2 [1,14,15]. Of note, the key mutations in the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 Spike make additional close contacts with ACE2, correlating with higher binding affinity and perhaps increased infectivity [1,14,16]. The presence of a unique furin cleavage site at the S1/S2 junction of SARS-CoV-2 Spike is also suspected to enhance human transmission events, although this remains to be further investigated [17,18]. The currently predominant SARS-CoV-2 isolate worldwide carries a D614G mutation that is absent from its presumptive common ancestor, and is more infectious, likely underlying, in part, an increased human-to-human transmission efficiency [19., 20., 21.]. Although associated with an increased viral load in the upper respiratory tract (URT) of patients with COVID-19, the D614G variant does not correlate with disease severity, suggesting that pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 is linked to mechanisms that are more than just SARS-CoV-2 infectivity [21].Once SARS-CoVs enter the host via the respiratory tract, airway and alveolar epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells and alveolar macrophages are among their first targets of viral entry [22., 23., 24.]. These cells are probably ‘ground-zero’ for early infection and subsequent replication due to their expression of ACE2 [25]. Although ACE2 mRNA is detected in human and many mammalian (bat, ferret, cat, dog, etc.) lung biopsies, their expression is rather low compared with extrapulmonary tissues [26]. Thus, the permissiveness of these cells to SARS-CoVs may depend on additional, unappreciated cell-intrinsic factors that aid in efficient infection. First, viral entry may heavily depend on the expression of TMPRSS2, because nearly undetectable amounts of ACE2 still support SARS-CoV entry as long as TMPRSS2 is present [27]. Second, the mRNA expression of cellular genes, such as endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery gene members (including CHMP3, CHMP5, CHMP1A, and VPS37B) related to a pro-SARS-CoV-2 lifecycle is higher in a small population of human type II alveolar cells with abundant ACE2, relative to ACE2-deficient cells [28]. This suggests that SARS-CoV-2 hijacks a small population of type II alveolar cells with high expression of ACE2 and other proviral genes for its productive replication. Third, the lung, as the main tropism of SARS-CoVs, may be contingent on the regulation of ACE2 at the transcriptional and protein levels [24,25,29., 30., 31.]. For example, in human airway epithelial cells, ACE2 gene expression is upregulated by type I and II interferons (IFNs) [25,31] during viral infection. Lastly, compared with other SARS-CoVs, SARS-CoV-2 Spike contains a unique insertion of RRAR at the S1/S2 cleavage site [17,18]. This site can be precleaved by furin, thus reducing the dependence of SARS-CoV-2 on target cell proteases (TMPRSS2/cathepsin L) for entry [17,18] and potentially extending its cellular tropism, given that proteolytically active furin is abundantly expressed in human bronchial epithelial cells [32,33].One of the distinctions between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 is the ability of the latter to efficiently infect the URT, such as nasopharyngeal (NP) and/or oropharyngeal (OP) tissues, possibly due to its higher affinity for ACE2, which is expressed in human nasal and oral tissues [23,25,34., 35., 36.]. The readily detectable titers of SARS-CoV-2 in the URT mucus of patients with COVID-19 during prodromal periods might help explain the more rapid and effective transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 relative to SARS-CoV [37].Human CoVs often cause enteric infections, with variable degrees of pathogenicity [38]. Indeed, ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are abundantly expressed within the human and many other mammalian intestinal tracts, specifically the brush border of intestinal enterocytes [23,25,26,39]. Accordingly, gastrointestinal illness has been frequently reported in patients with COVID-19 [40,41], consistent with the recovery of SARS-CoV from stool samples of patients with SARS [42], suggesting a potential fecal–oral route of transmission for these two CoVs. Of note, ~20% of patients with COVID-19 examined have had detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA in feces, even after respiratory symptoms subsided, suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 titers may be prolonged in the intestinal tract [41]. Although further testing is warranted, these data suggest the possibility that fecal–oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurs. Evidently, robust epidemiological studies are needed to conclusively demonstrate whether patients with COVID-19 recovering from respiratory illness are able to spread SARS-CoV-2.Transmission Dynamics of SARS-CoV-2Human CoVs are transmitted primarily through respiratory droplets, but aerosol, direct contact with contaminated surfaces, and fecal–oral transmission were also reported during the SARS epidemic [43., 44., 45.]. Early reports of patients with cough, lung ground glass opacities, and symptom progression to severe pneumonia, suggested communicability of SARS-CoV-2 via the respiratory route (Figure 2
) [1., 2., 3.]. Direct transmission by respiratory droplets is reinforced by productive SARS-CoV-2 replication in both the URT and lower respiratory tract (LRT), and the increasing number of reports indicating human-to-human spread among close contacts exhibiting active coughing (Figure 2) [35,46., 47., 48.]. So far, the basic reproduction number (R0) is ~2.2, based on early case tracking during the beginning of the pandemic, with a doubling time of 5 days [47,49]. Furthermore, there is now evidence for nonsymptomatic/presymptomatic spread of SARS-CoV-2, which is in contrast to the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV [50]. This finding underscores the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to colonize and replicate in the throat during early infection [37,51,52]. Based on these apparent disparities in virus transmission, one study modeled the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 in presymptomatic individuals, and indicated that the presymptomatic R0 has approached the threshold for sustaining an outbreak on its own (R0 >1); by contrast, the corresponding estimates for SARS-CoV were approximately zero [49]. Similarly, asymptomatic spread of SARS-CoV-2 has been documented throughout the course of the pandemic [48,51,53., 54., 55., 56.]. Understanding the relative importance of cryptic transmission to the current COVID-19 pandemic is essential for public health authorities to make the most comprehensive and effective disease control measures, which include mask-wearing, contact tracing, and physical isolation.Figure 2Proposed Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Transmission Routes.The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in numerous accounts of different transmission routes between humans. Droplet transmission (>5 μm) is the most pronounced and heavily implicated mode of transmission reported during the pandemic. Direct contact spread from one infected individual to a second, naïve person has also been considered a driver of human-to-human transmission, especially in households with close interactions between family members. The contagiousness of SARS-CoV-2 after disposition on fomites (e.g., door handles) is under investigation, but is likely a compounding factor for transmission events, albeit less frequently than droplet or contact-driven transmission. Both airborne and fecal–oral human-to-human transmission events were reported in the precursor SARS-CoV epidemic but have yet to be observed in the current crises. Solid arrows show confirmed viral transfer from one infected person to another, with a declining gradient in arrow width denoting the relative contributions of each transmission route. Dashed lines show the plausibility of transmission types that have yet to be confirmed. SARS-CoV-2 symbol in ‘infected patient’ indicates where RNA/infectious virus has been detected [43,44,47., 48., 49.,57,59,60]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 2For SARS-CoV-2, various modes of transmission have been proposed, including aerosol, surface contamination, and the fecal–oral route, representing confounding factors in the current COVID-19 pandemic; thus, their relative importance is still being investigated (Figure 2) [57]. Aerosol transmission (spread >1 m) was implicated in the Amoy Gardens outbreak during the SARS epidemic, but the inconsistency of these findings in other settings suggested that SARS-CoV was an opportunistic airborne infection [43,58]. Similarly, no infectious SARS-CoV-2 virions have been isolated, although viral RNA was detectable in the air of COVID-19 hospital wards [59]. Generation of experimental aerosols carrying SARS-CoV-2 (comparable to those that might be generated by humans) have offered the plausibility of airborne transmission, but the aerodynamic characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 during a natural course of infection is still an area of intense inquiry [60]. Nonetheless, deposition of virus-laden aerosols might contaminate objects (e.g., fomites) and contribute to human transmission events [59,61]. Finally, fecal–oral transmission has also been considered as a potential route of human spread, but remains an enigma despite evidence of RNA-laden aerosols being found nearby toilet bowls, along with detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA in rectal swabs during the precursor epidemic of COVID-19 in China [41,59,62].SARS-CoV-2 PathogenesisClinical Presentation of COVID-19In general, common cold CoVs tend to cause mild URT symptoms and occasional gastrointestinal involvement (Figure 3
). By contrast, infection with highly pathogenic CoVs, including SARS-CoV-2, causes severe ‘flu’-like symptoms that can progress to acute respiratory distress (ARDS), pneumonia, renal failure, and death [46,48,63,64]. The most common symptoms are fever, cough, and dyspnea, accounting for 83%, 82%, and 31% of patients with COVID-19 (N = 99), respectively, in one epidemiological study [65]. The incubation period in COVID-19 is rapid: ~5–6 days versus 2–11 days in SARS-CoV infections [38,47,48]. As the pandemic is progressing, it has become increasingly clear that COVID-19 encompasses not only rapid respiratory/gastrointestinal illnesses, but can also have long-term ramifications, such as myocardial inflammation [66]. Furthermore, severe COVID-19 is not restricted to the aged population as initially reported; children and young adults are also at risk [67]. From a diagnostic perspective, COVID-19 presents with certain ‘hallmark’ laboratory and radiological indices, which can be helpful in assessing disease progression (Table 1
). Together, COVID-19 initially presents with ‘flu’-like symptoms and can later progress to life-threatening systemic inflammation and multiorgan dysfunction.Figure 3Clinical Symptoms of Coronavirus Infectious Disease 2019 (COVID-19).COVID-19 manifestations in humans have been described to incorporate multiple body systems with varying degrees of onset and severity. Both the upper respiratory tract and lower respiratory tract manifestations are often the most noticeable if a patient is not asymptomatic, in addition to systemic symptoms that are the most frequently reported regardless of disease severity. Red-highlighted signs/symptoms tend to be over-represented in severe patients, but common symptoms are also present in more advanced COVID-19. A severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus symbol denotes where a live virus and/or viral RNA has been isolated. Abbreviation: ARDS: acute respiratory distress syndrome [37,46,48,66,139]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 3Table 1Common Laboratory Indices and Radiological Findings from Patients with COVID-19Table 1Laboratory findingsCOVID-19 studyaRefs[65][140][141][137][73][138]Patient populationMiddle-aged, hospitalized; N = 99Middle-aged, hospitalized/ICU; N = 1099Elderly, mild-severeN = 71Middle-aged, hospitalized adults; N = 140Elderly, deceased; N = 82Young, mild disease; N = 46Ground-glass opacities1456.4b10099.3--63Pneumonia (unilateral or bilateral)c10091.173--93.9--Lymphocytopenia35 (1.1–3.2 ×109/ml)83.2 (<1500/mm3)37 (<1200/μl)75.489.2 (<1.0 ×109/l)63 (<1.5×109/l)Leukopenia9 (3.5–9.5x109/ml)33.7 (<4000/mm3)21 (<4000/μl)19.6 (3.5–9.5×109/ml)21.7 (<4×109/l)Thrombocytopenia12 (125–350×109/ml)36.2 (<150 000/mm3)10 (<15×104/μl)--24.3 (<100 ×109/l)21.7 (<150 ×109/l)Neutrophilia38 (1.8–6.3×109/ml)------74.3 (>6.3 ×109/l)--↑d C-reactive protein (mg/l)86 (0–5)60.7 (≥10)59 (>10–30)91.9 (0–3)100 (>10)19.6 (≥10)↑ Alanine aminotransferase (U/l)28 (9–50)21.3 (>40)18 (>45)--30.6 (>40)15.2 (>40)↑ D-dimer (μg/l)36 (0–1.5)46.4 (≥500)--43.2 (0–243)97.1 (>550)15.2 (≥500)↑ Prothrombin time (s)5 (10.5–13.5)------100 (12.3–14.3)e--aValues for each laboratory manifestation represent the percentage of patients with that clinical finding above or below the normal range (listed below in brackets); dashed lines indicate measurements not taken during referenced study.bPercentage of patients with lung ground-glass opacity on a chest CT scan (technique specifically denoted in original study).cPneumonia was not always definitively mentioned in studies, albeit lung manifestations were commonly recorded.d↑ denotes an elevation of measured indices above reference value for those percentage of patientseOver the past 24 h, leading up to death, all 13 patients who were included for this metric had a prothrombin time of >12.1 s.Age-Associated COVID-19 SeverityIt is widely accepted that the aging process predisposes individuals to certain infectious diseases [68]. In the case of COVID-19, older age is associated with greater COVID-19 morbidity, admittance to the intensive care unit (ICU), progression to ARDS, higher fevers, and greater mortality rates [69., 70., 71.]. Moreover, lymphocytopenia, neutrophilia, elevated inflammation-related indices, and coagulation-related indicators have been consistently reported in older (≥65-years old) relative to young and middle-aged patients with COVID-19 (Table 1) [46,65,71., 72., 73., 74., 75.]. At the cellular level, a lower capacity of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells to produce IFN-γ and IL-2, as well as an impairment in T-cell activation from dendritic cells (DCs) in patients with acute COVID-19 (≥55-years old) could compromise an optimal adaptive immune response [76]. Based on examples from mice, a productive CD4+ T-cell response relies heavily on lung-resident DCs (rDCs) and abates SARS-CoV infection [77,78]. However, whether a reduction in the DC population in the lungs of older patients with more severe COVID-19 causes suboptimal T-cell activation during SARS-CoV-2 infection remains to be robustly investigated.Higher proportions of proinflammatory macrophages and neutrophils have also been observed in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms compared with those exhibiting mild symptoms (Figure 4
, Key Figure) [79]. Accordingly, proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6 and IL-8) are elevated in the BALF of patients with severe COVID-19, along with higher expression of inflammatory chemokines (e.g., CCL2) in macrophages relative to patients with nonsevere COVID-19 [79., 80., 81., 82.]. Indeed, similar inflammatory milieux have been associated with severe lung pathology in patients with SARS, along with the notable ‘cytokine storm’ that can present in patients critically ill with COVID-19 [71,83., 84., 85., 86., 87.]. These proinflammatory mediators can, in turn, perpetuate lung disease by elevating C-reactive protein (CRP) from the liver (Table 1) through signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-IL-6 signaling [88]. Therefore, an increase in CRP concentrations can correlate with elevated serum IL-6 production observed in patients with COVID-19 [79,80,88]. From another angle, formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) inside microvessels is pronounced in patients with severe relative to mild COVID-19, implicating NETs as possible potentiators of COVID-19 pathogenesis [89]. The recruitment of these activated neutrophils and monocytes may be driven by pulmonary endothelial cell dysfunction through vascular leakage, tissue edema, endotheliitis, and possibly, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) pathways; indeed, a recent study demonstrated direct SARS-CoV-2 infection of vascular endothelial cells with concomitant accumulation of inflammatory mononuclear cells (e.g., neutrophils) in multiple organs (lung, heart, kidney, small bowel, and liver) in patients with severe COVID-19 (Figure 4) [90]. In fact, many patients with COVID-19 have met the DIC case definition based on elevated serum D-dimer amounts and prolonged prothrombin times [91,92]. Together, it is reasonable to assume that direct viral insult and immune cell recruitment escalate endothelial contractility and the loosening of gap junctions, thus promoting vascular leakage and the systemic impairment of the circulatory system in this pathology.Figure 4Key Figure. A Brief Overview of Lung Pathology in Patients with Coronavirus Infectious Disease 2019 (COVID-19).Following inhalation of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) into the respiratory tract, the virus traverses deep into the lower lung, where it infects a range of cells, including alveolar airway epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells, and alveolar macrophages. Upon entry, SARS-CoV-2 is likely detected by cytosolic innate immune sensors, as well as endosomal toll-like receptors (TLRs) that signal downstream to produce type-I/III interferons (IFNs) and proinflammatory mediators. The high concentration of inflammatory cytokines/chemokines amplifies the destructive tissue damage via endothelial dysfunction and vasodilation, allowing the recruitment of immune cells, in this case, macrophages and neutrophils. Vascular leakage and compromised barrier function promote endotheliitis and lung edema, limiting gas exchange that then facilitates a hypoxic environment, leading to respiratory/organ failure. The inflammatory milieu induces endothelial cells to upregulate leukocyte adhesion molecules, thereby promoting the accumulation of immune cells that may also contribute to the rapid progression of respiratory failure. Hyperinflammation in the lung further induces transcriptional changes in macrophages and neutrophils that perpetuate tissue damage that ultimately leads to irreversible lung damage. Recent evidence suggests that systemic inflammation induces long-term sequela in heart tissues [66,79,80,82,84,87,90,95]. Abbreviations: BALF, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; IRF3, interferon regulatory factor 3; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; RIG-I, retinoic acid-inducible gene I; STAT1/2, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1/2; STING, Stimulator of interferon genes. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 4SARS-CoV-2 Innate Immune Evasion Strategies: Examples from other Betacoronavirus InfectionsThe recognition of virus infection begins with the detection of viral nucleic acid by host cell pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which signal downstream via recruited adaptor proteins, ubiquitin ligases, and kinases, culminating in transcription factors and ultimate expression of immune genes, including IFNs, cytokines, and chemokines (Figure 5
). The IFN pathway is often a primary target of evasion due to its rapidity and potency in eliminating viral infection. CoVs have evolved multiple mechanisms to target the signaling components of several PRR-IFN pathways to survive in host cells (Figure 5). CoVs are highly sensitive to IFN and, therefore, act at several levels in these pathways to antagonize mammalian immune recognition, interfering with downstream signaling, or inhibiting specific IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) products [93]. Specifically, CoVs can avoid immune sensing by: (i) the formation of DMVs that sequester viral nucleic acid from being recognized by PRRs; and (ii) direct ablation of the functionality of immune signaling molecules by viral proteins [11,94]. The structural and functional conservation of these proteins across the Betacoronavirus and in nsps between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 suggest that some of these suppressive mechanisms are used by SARS-CoV-2 (see later) [1]. Indeed, patients with severe COVID-19 have reported an imbalanced immune response with high concentrations of inflammatory cytokines/chemokines, but little circulating IFN-β or IFN-λ, resulting in persistent viremia [95]. Of note, among several respiratory viruses tested, SARS-CoV-2 has demonstrated to most potently suppress type I and type III IFN expression in both human bronchial epithelial cells and ferrets [81]. Thus, evasion of IFN signaling by SARS-CoV-2 and impaired IFN production in human peripheral blood immune cells might contribute to the productive viral replication, transmission, and severe pathogenesis during COVID-19, although further testing is warranted to fully dissect these putative evasion pathways [95].Figure 5Evasion of the Pattern Recognition Receptor-Type I Interferon (PRR-IFN-I) Pathways by Coronaviruses (CoVs).A simplified schematic of the canonical IFN response after sensing RNA viruses. Viral nucleic acid is first recognized by PRRs (e.g., retinoic acid-inducible gene I; RIG-I) that perpetuate signal transduction through an adaptor complex on the mitochondrial (mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein; MAVS) or endoplasmic reticulum (Stimulator of interferon genes; STING) membrane surface. Here, the PRR–adaptor interactions recruit kinases that converge into a large complex, leading to phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3/7 (IRF3/7) and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), transcription factors that enter the nucleus and transcribe IFN genes. Type-I and type-III IFNs then signal in an autocrine or paracrine manner through the Janus kinase 1 (JAK1)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 and 2 (STAT1/2) pathway, culminating in antiviral IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) transcription. Listed here are SARS-CoV (CoV), SARS-CoV-2 (CoV-2), and MERS-CoV (M-CoV) IFN-I antagonists, which render these viruses resistant to IFN responses. IFN-III is also implicated in exhibiting potent antiviral effects in lung/intestinal tissues, but the underlying evasion strategies of this pathway for these viruses are currently unknown. SARS-CoV proteins are highlighted in blue, while functions of SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV proteins are highlighted in red and green, respectively. ? denotes that a SARS-CoV-2 protein bound a member of that signaling pathway in [122], but further work is necessary to confirm its immunological mechanism. SARS-CoV-2 proteins with * denotes functional conservation with SARS-CoV [93., 94., 95., 96.,98,100., 101., 102., 103., 104., 105., 106., 107.]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 5With regard to functional conservation of viral proteins, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV nsps and accessory proteins circumvent viral RNA-sensing pathways at multiple stages [e.g., retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5; MDA-5) through proteasomal degradation and/or prevention of protein activation (Figure 5) [94]. Functional conservation between SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV PLpro (encoded by nsp3) proteins has been reported, where these proteins target the initial PRR signaling cascade at multiple levels of the pathway including, but not limited to, RIG-I, mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and nuclear factor (NF)-κB (Figure 5) [96., 97., 98.]. The SARS-CoV PLpro also targets the DNA-sensing pathway at Stimulator of IFN genes (STING) (Figure 5); antagonizing this pathway might be important because mitochondrial stress during dengue virus infection triggers IFN-β production that is dependent on STING activation [99,100]. Recent evidence suggests the SARS-CoV-2 PLpro also inhibits IFN-I expression in human kidney epithelial cells, yet the mechanisms remain to be defined [101]. Moreover, nsp1 of highly pathogenic HCoVs, including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, displays a pleiotropic effect, targeting several components of IFN-I signaling (Figure 5) [102,103]. This potent suppressive function of nsp1 also appears to be maintained in SARS-CoV-2, primarily through shutdown of translational machinery and prevention of immune gene expression [101,104,105]. Furthermore, because there are only five accessory genes in the MERS-CoV genome compared with eight and seven in the SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 genomes, respectively, similar immunosuppressive mechanisms may exist but appear to be mediated via different proteins [106,107]. For example, SARS-CoVs ORF6 can inhibit IRF3 activation and STAT1 nuclear translocation, whereas this same effect is obtained by ORF4a/b and ORF5 of MERS-CoV (Figure 5) [106,107]. Coincidently, the apparent loss of these proteins may provide evidence for why MERS-CoV is more sensitive to IFN treatment than are SARS-CoVs in primary and continuous cells of the human airways [110]. The SARS-CoV-2 proteins appear to have stronger inhibitory effects than their counterparts in highly pathogenic SARS- and MERS-CoV [105]. In light of these findings, SARS-CoV-2 has replicated more efficiently than SARS-CoV in ex vivo human lung explants, possibly through the greater suppression of IFN-I/III cytokines [111]; further work will be needed to discern whether the suppressive nature of SARS-CoV-2 can impact virus transmission during early phases of COVD-19, when IFNs are typically important for virus control. The ‘common-cold’ CoVs (e.g., HCoV-229E) and murine hepatitis virus (MHV) also compensate for the loss of many supplementary immunosuppressive proteins through capping viral mRNAs via nsp16 2′-O-methyltransferase (2′-O-MTase), and mutants lacking this activity exhibit diminished replication and dissemination in mice [112]. Thus, further investigation is warranted to determine whether these evasion genes account for the increased virulence observed in individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 (see Outstanding Questions).Animal Models of SARS-CoV-2Mouse ModelsGiven that SARS-CoV-2 uses the same ACE2 entry receptor as SARS-CoV, rapid deployment of mouse models for pathogenesis studies was well underway within weeks of the inception of the pandemic. However, various impediments remain for SARS-CoV-2 in productively infecting mice in these models, because it is unable to bind mouse ACE2 (mACE2) [113]. To overcome these prerequisites, several mouse models have been developed that recapitulate certain components of human COVID-19. One of these strategies is to genetically modify mice to express human ACE2 (hACE2) (humanized mice) under the epithelial cell-specific cytokeratin-18 (Krt
18) promoter [114], a universal chicken beta-actin promoter [115], or the endogenous mACE2 promoter [113]. All these mice are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection, but phenotypic disease varies because of differential hACE2 tissue expression [113., 114., 115.]. For instance, Krt18-hACE2 and beta-actin-hACE2-transgenic mice rapidly succumb to SARS-CoV-2 infection with lung infiltration of inflammatory immune cells inducing severe pulmonary disease, accompanied by evident thrombosis and anosmia, which partially recapitulate human COVID-19 [116,117]. Given that the onset of severe histopathological changes occurs days after peak virus infection, these models recapture the delayed morbidity seen in patients with COVID-19 as a result of inflammatory cell infiltration [117]. Therefore, using humanized mouse models of severe SARS-CoV-2 infection might be useful for testing the efficacy of antiviral drugs, vaccines, and immune therapeutics that ablate hyperinflammation [116]. However, the broad expression of hACE2 in these models significantly expands SARS-CoV-2 tissue tropisms and might alter its pathogenic mechanisms [116,117]. For example, both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections lead to encephalitis in these mouse models, which is not common in patients with COVID-19 [115,117,118]. Given that most human SARS-CoV-2 infections are asymptomatic or mild, mice originally bearing mACE2 that is replaced by hACE2 may be more appropriate for assessing pathogenesis and tissue tropism [113]. This model develops mild lung pathology, with SARS-CoV-2 infection being restricted to the lung and intestine [113]. In addition to the transgenic modification, mice can also be sensitized to SARS-CoV-2 infection via transient transduction of adenovirus (Ad5)- or adeno-associated virus (AAV)-expressing hACE2 in respiratory tissues, akin to the approach used for MERS-CoV infection [108,109]. These mice develop viral pneumonia, weight loss, severe pulmonary pathology, and a high viral load in the lung, consistent with human COVID-19 [109]. This approach might be quickly adapted to many genetically modified mouse strains that could provide mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and protective immune responses. However, this model is limited by the transient ectopic expression of hACE2 from the Ad5/AAV vector that can induce mild bronchial inflammation and expand cell tropism of SARS-CoV-2 and, thus, alter disease pathogenesis [119].Rather than genetic modification in host animals, viruses can also be genetically modified and used in model animals [120,121]. For instance, in one study, serial passaging of SARS-CoV-2 in mice led to enrichment of a N501Y viral mutant that elicited interstitial pneumonia and inflammatory responses in both young and aged wild-type BALB/c mice [122]. Another mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 strain (MA10) carrying three mutations in the RBD of Spike protein caused severe lung pathology and ARDS in mice, characteristic of severe COVID-19 [123]. Despite the three mutations in the RBD of the mouse-adapted Spike, vaccination with full-length SARS-CoV-2 Spike elicited robust neutralizing antibody titers and complete protection against a secondary challenge with MA10 [123]; these findings suggest that this strain is applicable to pathogenesis studies, as well as antiviral drug and vaccine testing in rodents.Nonhuman Primate ModelsThe role of nonhuman primates (NHP) in evaluating coronavirus pathogenesis cannot be understated. Depending on the NHP model utilized, clinical signs/symptoms may be mild or absent entirely [124., 125., 126.]. In rhesus macaques, several studies noted reduced appetite, transient fevers (1 day post infection: dpi) and mild weight loss without overt signs of respiratory distress or mortality [124., 125., 126.]. By contrast, cynomolgus macaques did not display any observational signs of disease in another study [125]. Although certain NHPs appear to only mimic mild disease (if any), rhesus macaques have exhibited high viral loads in nasal swabs, throat samples, and BALF early post inoculation, and viral RNA was still measurable by quantitative (q)PCR in the trachea and lung 21 dpi, highlighting the apparent tropism of SARS-CoV-2 for the URT and lingering viral nucleic acid in respiratory tissues after resolution of disease [51,124]. SARS-CoV-2 has also been detected in nasal swabs at 10 dpi in NHPs, consistent with the prolonged URT shedding of virus in patients with COVID-19 at ~9 dpi [51,124,125,127]. The tropism of SARS-CoV-2 for the LRT in NHPs has also been recapitulated by the development of multifocal lesions and interstitial pneumonia, supporting the hypothesis that lung injury is driven by increased infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages into the lung following viral infection [124., 125., 126.].However, additional hallmarks of severe disease are absent in NHPs, particularly the characteristic systemic ‘cytokine storm’ present in patients with COVID-19; indeed, only transient elevations of serum inflammatory cytokines have been observed in NHPs, and have been reported to decline rapidly by 2 dpi [124]. Overall, these NHP models display mild disease accompanied by viral dissemination in the URT and LRT, leading to localized lung inflammation, but devoid of the sustained systemic inflammatory response that has been noted in patients with COVID-19. Thus, NHP models might be useful for studying mild COVID-19 characteristics, but provide little information on the pathogenic mechanism(s) of severe COVID-19. To partially overcome this issue, aged rhesus macaques (15-years old) have been tested following SARS-CoV-2 infection and have demonstrated shedding of the virus for longer periods of time (14 days), as well as increased radiological and histopathological changes, such as thickened alveolar septum and diffuse severe interstitial pneumonia, compared with young macaques (3–5-years old) [128]. Therefore, these studies highlight the importance of also considering age, as an additional variable, when selecting animal models that might closely, or accurately, recapitulate human disease.Evaluating efficacious vaccine candidates in NHPs will also be important for understanding correlates of protection against SARS-CoV-2. Accordingly, reports of antibody-dependent enhancement, as well as of non-neutralizing humoral responses to the conserved regions of SARS-CoV-2, raise concerns on our future ability to effectively administer an immunogen without inducing immunopathology [129,130]. Furthermore, upon viral challenge, lymphocytes have expanded in rhesus macaque models around 5 dpi with complementary B cell responses against SARS-CoV-2 Spike appearing 10–15 dpi in blood samples [124]; expansion of these adaptive immune compartments was analogous to those observed in patients with COVID-19 [37,124,131., 132., 133.]. Subsequent rechallenged rhesus macaque have presented a rapid anamnestic immune response characterized by significantly higher neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers compared with the primary infection macaques [126]. Thus, protective efficacy appears to depend primarily on NAb titers, at least in NHPs; so far, T-cell numbers have not substantially increased in the serum following rechallenge of these animals and, in a secondary study, CD4+ and CD8+ cytokine (e.g., IFN- γ) responses did not correlate with immune protection from DNA vaccines with different components of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein [126,134]. Although these animals have failed to manifest overt signs of infection and respiratory compromise, NHPs still represent the ‘gold standard’ for evaluating the protective efficacy of human-bound SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based on parallels to humans in terms of viral tropism, immunopathology, and correlates of protection [126]. Further research is urgently needed to explore the durability of immune responses to SARS-CoV-2, considering reports of waning immunity to other CoVs and the detection of pre-existing cross-reactive ’common-cold‘ CoV T-cells with SARS-CoV-2 in naïve humans (see Outstanding Questions) [135,136].Concluding RemarksThe emergence of SARS-CoV-2 as the most recent example of zoonotic virus spillovers into humans underscores the fundamental need for well-funded surveillance organizations. The unrivaled spread of SARS-CoV-2 urgently demands that the global science community acts in harmony to disseminate accurate and stipulatory knowledge, with an immediate potential to influence policy and public health strategies/interventions at the national and local levels. Studies stemming from previous CoVs have jumpstarted our basic understanding of SARS-CoV-2 biology and facilitated the rapid deployment of vaccine candidates into clinical trials. Although clinical symptoms of COVID-19 resemble some aspects of SARS and MERS, respectively, distinct and significant disparities exist in the transmissibility and immune responses to SARS-CoV-2. To modify therapeutics that protect against the full spectrum of disease (see Outstanding Questions), additional research will need to define the molecular mechanisms contributing to severe immunopathology in some patients, whereas others are completely protected from clinical symptoms. Prior work involving other CoVs, together with current and future studies of SARS-CoV-2, should provide society with the foundational knowledge to prepare for expected seasonal resurgences of SARS-CoV-2, as well as any potential spillover of additional CoVs into human populations; hopefully, current investigations will make important advances and contribute to increased knowledge and preparedness in this regard.Outstanding QuestionsWhich animal(s) serves as the natural reservoir of SARS-CoV-2?Does active replication of SARS-CoV-2 in the URT contribute to enhanced transmissibility in humans?Is intestinal SARS-CoV-2 infection a source of virus transmission?Which SARS-CoV-2 proteins antagonize innate and adaptive immune responses? Do the SARS-CoV-2 proteins with more potent antagonistic immune functions increase virulence in humans compared with other HCoVs? Why do some recovered patients fail to develop neutralizing antibodies?What are the host and/or viral factors driving inflammatory imbalances in severe COVID-19 cases?What are the underlying mechanisms contributing to an inadequate IFN response to SARS-CoV-2?What are the correlates of immune protection for SARS-CoV2 and will they provide sterilizing immunity?Will candidate vaccines against SARS-CoV2 also be effective in older subpopulations (with or without comorbidities)?Alt-text: Outstanding Questions



Title: Gastrointestinal Manifestations of SARS-CoV-2: Transmission, Pathogenesis, Immunomodulation, Microflora Dysbiosis, and Clinical Implications

1. IntroductionSARS-CoV-2 is a virus that falls under the Nidovirales order, which is known for its positive single-stranded RNA genome [1]. SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 are well-known respiratory illnesses-causing agents. However, they can also infect other organs, including the nasal mucosa, lungs, small intestine, colon, liver, spleen, and brain [2].While respiratory symptoms like cough, dyspnea, and fever are prevalent among individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2, also referred to as COVID-19, a clinically significant subset of patients with COVID-19 have also reported gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. Diarrhea is the most common GI symptom observed in children and adults infected with SARS-CoV-2; this occurs because of viral spread from the infected to uninfected cells of the GI tract [3]. During SARS-CoV-2 infection, initially, a high viral load and reduced inflammatory activity are observed, in addition to certain symptoms associated with GI illness [4]. Although many studies have reported diarrhea as a symptom of COVID-19, a strict definition is missing [3,4,5]. The direct impact of SARS-CoV-2 on the gastrointestinal tract may contribute to diarrhea during infection, while its effects on the gastrointestinal tract can lead to bleeding and inflammation, further complicating the COVID-19 disease process in other organs [6,7].Coronaviruses (CoVs) are RNA viruses belonging to the order Nidovirales in the subfamily Coronaviridae; they comprise enveloped and positive-stranded viruses [1]. Among the four types (α, β, γ, and δ) of coronaviruses, α- and β-CoVs have been identified as causative agents of both respiratory tract infections and gastroenteritis in both humans and animals [8]. Seven different human CoVs (HCoVs) have been identified: HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-229E, and HCoV-HKU1 are endemic viruses and SARS-CoV-1and Middle-East respiratory syndrome virus (MERS-CoV) is epidemic, and SARS-CoV-2 a pandemic virus. HCoVs are well recognized as the causative agent of respiratory illness. Besides the nasal mucosa, these viruses are capable of infecting multiple organs, including the colon, spleen, liver, lungs, and brain [2]. HCoVs may be present along the GI tract, particularly in the intestinal epithelial cells (at least in one intestinal segment), as evidenced by biopsies performed using endoscopy and infected patients presenting positive virus in their feces even after viral clearance from the respiratory tract [2,9,10].The entry of SARS-CoV-2 infection involves binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor on the surface of host cells [5,9]. Other than the lung, ACE2 is highly expressed in GI organs such as the esophagus, ileum, and colon, mainly in esophageal epithelial cells and absorptive enterocytes [11,12,13,14]. ACE2 expression is significantly more abundant in the GI system, particularly in the colon, by a factor of 100 in comparison to the respiratory system [14]. Specific organs exhibit increased susceptibility to infection due to their high abundance of ACE2 receptors. Notably, the epithelial cells lining the terminal ileum and colon display a particularly high expression of ACE2 receptors. This observation holds significance as mucosal inflammation, a characteristic feature of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), is commonly observed in these specific intestinal regions among patients diagnosed with Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) [15,16]. Given the high number of ACE2-expressing organs in the GI system, it is not unexpected that this system is vulnerable to viral infiltration.Emerging research indicates that COVID-19 can affect the gut–lung axis and lead to dysbiosis, a microbial imbalance in the gut. Moreover, higher mortality rates have been observed among elderly patients [17]. Changes in gut permeability and decreased epithelial integrity can also impact the severity of liver disease and metabolic diseases, inducing systemic inflammation. Pulmonary diseases have also been linked to disrupted gut microbiota and intestinal barrier [18,19]. In fact, COVID-19 patients with digestive symptoms are more likely to experience liver injury, underscoring the importance of maintaining a healthy gut microbiota. Therefore, understanding the interplay between SARS-CoV-2 and the gut microbiota is crucial for improving our understanding of the pathophysiology of COVID-19.Increasing evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 infections affect multiple GI areas, possibly resulting in several symptoms associated with a dysfunctional GI system. In order to advance our comprehension of the correlation between SARS-CoV-2 and the GI tract, it is imperative to acquire a comprehensive understanding of the digestive manifestations and pathophysiology associated with these viruses. Therefore, this review summarizes the manifestations and potential mechanisms of GI injuries in patients with COVID-19.2. Routes of Transmission of SARS-CoV-2The transmission of all HCoVs most commonly occurs via respiratory droplets produced by infected individuals, direct contact with infected people and animals, and exposure to infected particles or surfaces [20,21,22,23,24]. However, epidemiological and virological studies and bioinformatics modeling suggest that HCoVs can be transmitted to humans via the GI tract and that viral RNA can be detected in the feces of many people with confirmed HCoV infection. Notably, HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, and HCoV-OC43 can be detected in the fecal samples of children with acute gastroenteritis [25,26]. Likewise, the infection has been documented in cases where actively replicating virus, and viral particles were detected in fecal samples of patients afflicted with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-1 [27,28]. These viruses are detected in the fecal samples within 14–21 days of disease onset, confirming the fecal-to-oral route transmission [23,29,30]. Although it has been demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 RNA can be detected in feces, it is still unclear whether or not the virus can be transmitted through feces. Aerosols containing viral RNA have been found in surrounding toilet bowls, further confirming fecal-to-oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2 [31,32]. Even after the virus is cleared from respiratory samples, SARS-CoV-2 can still be found in feces [9]. Approximately 70% of the infected patients shed their viral RNA through the GI tract [33]. Significantly, the identification of subgenomic mRNAs (sg mRNAs) of SARS-CoV-2 in fecal samples from a patient provides evidence of actively infected cells within the GI system. Since sg mRNAs are not encapsulated within virions, they have the potential to withstand RNAse digestion and traverse the GI tract. Consequently, current research has demonstrated the recovery of viable SARS-CoV-2 from fecal specimens obtained from individuals experiencing severe cases of COVID-19 [31,34]; other studies have reported being unable to isolate infectious virions from fecal samples. Therefore, whether the presence of SARS-CoV-2 infectious virions in feces is a rare or frequent occurrence remains unknown. While HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-229E have not been known to spread through the fecal–oral route, the presence of viral particles and the fecal–oral transmission has been established for viruses such as SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, and HCoV-HKU1. Nevertheless, more studies are warranted to analyze the level of fecal-to-oral transmission.3. Digestive Manifestations and Pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2 InfectionSARS-CoV-2 is generally known to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS); however, recent studies suggest that these viruses also cause gastroenteritis by replicating in human enterocytes. The GI symptoms associated with SARS-CoV-2 were anorexia (15.8–50.2%), nausea and vomiting (2.0–22.7%), abdominal pain (0.1–4.4%), and diarrhea (2.0–49.5%) [5,32,35]. The main symptoms observed in SARS-CoV-2-induced (GI) involvement are diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, and abdominal pain, and GI lesions are similar to the symptoms observed in SARS-CoV-2-induced GI manifestations [31]. The detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in feces suggests that the virus can multiply within the epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract [34,36]. Autopsy and biopsy studies on COVID-19 patients have reported several gastrointestinal changes, including necrosis, exfoliation of the epithelium of the esophagus, stomach, and intestine, stem cell degeneration, hepatic sinus congestion, hepatomegaly, and the infiltration of mononuclear cells and lymphocytes into the portal area. Leading to focal necrosis with neutrophilic infiltration [37,38]. A study reported that in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, diarrhea occurs before the manifestation of respiratory symptoms in 2.9–6.3% of patients [38]. GI symptoms expose patients with COVID-19 to electrolyte disturbances, including decreased sodium levels; this may, in turn, aggravate the disease [3]. In patients with gastroenteritis, the symptoms include severe abdominal pain (0.98–5.8%), nausea (1.0–27.5%), anorexia (10.1–39.7%), vomiting (1.0–12.5%), and diarrhea (2.0–55.0%) [31,39,40]. According to a recent study, approximately 79% of patients infected with COVID-19 exhibited GI symptoms at the onset of infection and during subsequent hospitalization [41]. On the other hand, in a case series at a UK center, GI symptoms such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, and dyspepsia were observed after COVID-19 infection [42]. Studies on the long-term effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection have revealed that the recovery from COVID-19 and its aftereffects is associated with long-term sequelae of physiological and GI dysfunction [43]. Individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 but continue to experience symptoms even after >12 weeks of the infection are said to suffer from “long COVID” [44,45]. Patients with long COVID continue to suffer from digestive symptoms such as abdominal pain and vomiting or develop digestive sequelae such as abdominal pain, acid reflux, abdominal distension, vomiting, belching, and rectal bleeding [46]. However, the presence of pre-existing chronic conditions has not been definitively established as a confirmed risk factor for persistent GI symptoms in patients with COVID-19. Nevertheless, it is important to note that these chronic conditions have been identified as risk factors for hospitalization and mortality.Effenberger et al. [47] found that SARS-CoV-2 infection causes an inflammatory reaction in the GI tract, characterized by elevated levels of fecal calprotectin, which is a biomarker for intestinal inflammation primarily produced in neutrophil granulocytes, as well as a systemic IL-6 response. According to studies conducted by Hung et al. [6] and Tian et al. [41], severe COVID-19 patients who manifested gastrointestinal symptoms were also observed to have esophageal bleeding accompanied by erosions and ulcers, as well as notable changes in their intestinal histology. In addition, a considerable number of infiltrating plasma cells and lymphocytes accompanied by interstitial edema were observed in the lamina propria of the gastrointestinal tract among 73 COVID-19 patients who were hospitalized [6,41].IBD and COVID-19 are two pathological conditions that seriously compromise the structure and function of the GI tract; they share, at least in part, several pathological mechanisms, including gut inflammation, mucosal hyperpermeability, intestinal barrier breakdown, gut bacterial overgrowth, dysbiosis, and changes in the blood and fecal metabolomes [48]. The two medical conditions classified under the umbrella of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) [49]. Several investigations have explored the vulnerability of individuals with IBD to SARS-CoV-2 infection, the appropriate management of these patients during the COVID-19 outbreak, and the advantages and disadvantages of administering immunomodulatory therapy, specifically in children [50,51,52]. However, there is contradictory evidence regarding the effects of IBD on the incidence and outcome of COVID-19 [53]. Imperatore et al. [54] reported a case study involving a male patient who experienced severe abdominal pain and chronic bloody diarrhea following recovery from a SARS-CoV-2 infection. The patient was admitted to the hospital and underwent bowel sonography, endoscopy, and histological examination. The findings revealed a diagnosis of de novo colitis, as the patient had not exhibited GI symptoms during the SARS-CoV-2 infection and had not been previously diagnosed with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Recently, several studies have reported that SARS-CoV-2 infection may lead to a de novo UC in patients without GI symptoms before the infection [54,55]. The connection between COVID-19 and IBD was investigated in a recent meta-analysis, which analyzed the overall incidence of COVID-19, hospitalization due to COVID-19, severe COVID-19 cases, and mortality in patients with IBD [56], and identified notable correlations between UC and heightened susceptibility to COVID-19, COVID-19-related hospitalization, and severe cases in COVID-19 patients. Conversely, they also discovered that CD is noticeably linked with a reduced risk of severe COVID-19. One possible explanation for the increased hospitalization rate and severity of COVID-19 in UC patients compared to CD patients is the more severe form of the disease, greater degree of immunosuppression, and greater likelihood of hospitalization resulting from COVID-19. While COVID-19 typically presents with milder symptoms in children and infants, there is a possibility of a severe systemic inflammatory response known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). MIS-C is characterized by persistent fever, inflammation, and severe illness that often requires hospitalization. Anomalies in the digestive system may be the cause of MIS-C. Interestingly, >80% of patients with MIS-C have GI symptoms [57]; on the other hand, only 10–15% of adults with COVID-19 have GI symptoms [50]. The occurrence of GI symptoms and the prolonged interval between infection and clinical manifestation in patients with MIS-C suggest that the underlying mechanisms contributing to GI pathology in these patients may differ from those observed in adults with active COVID-19. Notably, MIS-C associated with COVID-19 is frequently accompanied by GI symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. These clinical observations suggest that the development of MIS-C involves biological mechanisms that are associated with intestinal mucosal dysfunction and disruption of the epithelial barrier. Yonker et al. [58] observed that children with MIS-C had increased levels of plasma zonulin, a protein that dilates the tight junctions in the intestinal and gastric walls, as well as detectable SARS-CoV-2, indicating ongoing viral replication in the intestines. Therefore, they proposed that intestinal barrier breakdown could lead to SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia, ultimately resulting in the development of MIS-C. Supporting this hypothesis, Yonker et al. [58] observed higher levels of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, particularly the SARS-CoV-2 spike 1 (S1) component, in the plasma of children with MIS-C than in those without MIS-C or healthy controls. Furthermore, they conducted a fascinating proof-of-concept experiment in which they administered larazotide, a zonulin antagonist, to a child with MIS-C which led to a marked improvement in the child’s clinical condition suggesting that therapeutic strategies aimed at reestablishing epithelial barrier integrity in SARS-CoV-2-infected children warrants further investigation [58]. 4. Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in the GI TractSARS-CoV-2 primarily infects humans and leads to respiratory and GI tract discomfort, as well as systemic manifestations affecting multiple organs. However, in the case of several organs, it remains unclear whether the virus directly infects the organ or if the symptoms arise as a result of the lung’s side effects due to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nevertheless, in the case of GI tract symptoms, the presence of the viral genome in the feces suggests that SARS-CoV-2 replicates in the epithelial cells [34,36]. In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, ACE2 and other receptors are downregulated in both infected and neighboring cells as well as in ileum-derived and colon organoids [2]. Clinical studies on several patients have revealed that viral entry does not involve the digestive system but that the virus enters through the epithelial cells of the intestinal mucosa [37].Abdominal pain is a common symptom observed in severely infected patients [38], possibly resulting from the substantial infiltration of lymphocytes in the squamous epithelium of the rectum, stomach, and duodenum [3,33,59]. Further, SARS-CoV-2 infection alters intestinal membrane permeability, leading to enterocyte dysfunction [4]. In addition to enterocyte dysfunction, intestinal inflammation and diarrhea also suggest the pathological importance of ACE2 expression in the epithelial cells of the small intestinal, which are more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection [60]. In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, stress-induced gastric mucosal damage occurs owing to multiorgan failure, hypoxia, disease severity, mechanical ventilation, ARDS, and psychological stress [61]. Patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection frequently display increased levels of calprotectin, a biomarker released by neutrophils during inflammation of the GI tract, along with increased levels of serum IL-6 [4]. The infection-induced cytokine storm triggers secondary hemophagocytic lymph histiocytosis, a hyperinflammatory disease linked to multiorgan failure and high mortality rates in COVID-19 patients [3,62,63]. In addition, there are many clinical similarities between MIS-C and toxic shock syndrome (TSS), which is induced by bacterial superantigens (SAgs) [64]. Owing to the striking similarities between MIS-C and TSS, SARS-CoV-2 was studied to identify the presence of SAg-like structures; it was found that the S1 glycoprotein contains a novel SAg-like motif that is highly similar to a Staphylococcal enterotoxin B fragment. Bioinformatics analyses revealed a strong level of specificity in the binding of the SAg-like motif to T-cell receptors (TCRs) and major histocompatibility complex class II proteins. The notable increase in the expression of a TCR β variable gene in peripheral blood samples obtained from MIS-C patients aligns with a SAg-induced immune response. It is associated with the severity of MIS-C and serum cytokine levels. Finally, children with MIS-C have increased levels of circulating S1, increased gut permeability, and prolonged persistence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the gut [64]. Having to deal with trillions of microorganisms, the intestinal epithelium has developed a mechanism to generate antimicrobial peptides, such as HD5, a peptide with lectin-like properties that can bind to lipid-glycosylated proteins [64]. The production of HD5 is abundant in the small intestine’s Paneth cells and in the neutrophils’ granules [64,65]. It inhibits viral entry into the enterocyte by binding to the ACE2 receptor, thereby blocking several sites of the ligand binding domain of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. HD5 exhibits a higher binding affinity to ACE2 than HD5 and the other intestinal α-defensin HD6 [64]. Similarly, the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into Caco-2 cells was inhibited using spray-dried HD5 powder [65]. The secretion of antimicrobial peptides from Paneth cells, which harbor a compositional diversity of bacteria, as well as the release of cytokines (IL-2, IL-7, TNF-α, interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) inducible protein, and macrophage inflammatory protein1-α) results in convalescent stages in patients with diarrhea [14,66,67]. Recently, Yantiss et al. [58] have employed various techniques such as immunohistochemical analysis, in situ hybridization for spike protein, and ultrastructural visualization of viruses within the intestinal epithelium to confirm the presence of SARS-CoV-2 infection. They observed cytoplasmic blebs and tufted epithelial cells in the infected area, but no inflammation was detected. Additionally, the study found that even after the virus was undetectable, it could still result in gastrointestinal symptoms. The authors suggest that the damage to the epithelial cells and the subsequent diarrheal symptoms may be due to systemic cytokine and complement cascades rather than direct viral injury [68]. These observations align with existing clinical and in vitro data and expand our knowledge of the various manifestations of COVID-19. These findings imply that SARS-CoV-2 may cause severe harm to the human GI tract distinctly from the respiratory system, potentially disrupting the microbial balance and contributing to the development of different diseases.5. Role of Receptors in SARS-CoV-2 PathogenesisSARS-CoV-2 attaches to its host cell via interactions between the spike glycoprotein (S) and ACE2 [2,8,9,10]. Before the release of SARS-CoV-2 S protein into the cytosol of host cells, it undergoes processing by a plasma membrane-associated type II transmembrane serine protease (TMPRSS2) following its binding to the ACE2 receptor. Glandular epithelial cells in the GI tract, specifically those in the gastric, duodenal, and rectal regions, display elevated levels of ACE2 receptor expression. However, the ACE2 receptor is not expressed in the colon [34,69]. Comparative and differential expression pattern analyses of ACE2 across >150 different cell types representing all major human tissues and organs revealed that ACE2 expression was highest in enterocytes, including those in the small intestine, colon, and duodenum [70]. Single-cell sequencing revealed higher expression of ACE2 in intestinal epithelial cells than in lung cells [2,9,71]. The messenger RNA for ACE2 is stabilized by the neutral amino acid transporter B0AT1, a member of solute carrier family 6 (SLC6A19) [72], present in the GI system; therefore, it is a prerequisite for SARS-CoV-2 infection. ACE2 is required as a functional partner for the expression of B0AT1, on the luminal surface of intestinal epithelial cells [59]. Furthermore, it has been reported that transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) plays a crucial role in facilitating the entry of enteric viruses, including SARSCoV-2, into host cells [73]. Furthermore, Ning et al. [26] utilized shotgun proteomics with tandem mass tags to show that ACE2 levels were higher in inflamed regions of the intestines among CD patients as opposed to UC patients.A study reported that SARS-CoV-2 exhibits nearly 20 times greater affinity to ACE2 than other SARS-CoV-1s that bind to the ACE2 receptor [23]; this demonstrates the extremely contagious nature of SARS-CoV-2. In the small intestine, ACE2 is particularly present in proximal and distal enterocytes [10]. The jejunum has the highest expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2. Further, ACE2 is abundantly expressed in ciliated cells. The expression of the ACE2 receptor during viral infection greatly varies among different individuals [74]. The epithelial cells in the ileum express high levels of ACE2 in the absorptive enterocytes and low levels of ACE2 in the progenitor absorptive cells [35]. In contrast, the expression of the increased TMPRSS2 levels observed in the colon and ileum could potentially aid the viral invasion of enterocytes in the GI [10]. Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes unveiled the co-expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in various cell types, including upper esophageal cells, upper epithelial cells, gland cells, and absorptive enterocytes in the ileum and colon [61]. Further, ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are co-expressed in huge amounts in small intestinal enterocytes (20%) and colon cells (5%) [75]. They also found that immature enterocytes 2 are the primary targets for SARS-CoV-2 in the human intestinal epithelial cells in both the colon and ileum. However, these cells do not exhibit the highest expression levels of ACE2. However, the expression level of TMPRSS2 is high in immature enterocytes 2. This implies that the degree of susceptibility to viral infection is not strongly linked to the expression level of ACE2 [2]. Nonetheless, the co-expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in the enterocytes is crucial for the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells [73,75]. While SARS-CoV-2 employs various receptors for binding, the ACE2 receptor is prominently expressed in the GI tract. This abundance of ACE2 receptors in the GI tract suggests that the virus has the potential to induce digestive manifestations.SARS-CoV entry relies, in addition to ACE2, on TMPRSS2/TMPRSS4 because the latter assists in the cleavage of the S protein of the virus on the cell membrane, thereby facilitating viral fusion with the cell membrane [74]. In the absence of TMPRSS2, cathepsin L is responsible for cleaving the S1/S2 polybasic cleavage site to activate the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in endosomes [73,76,77]. To evade detection by the host system, SARS-CoV-2 can potentially enter the host using either a clathrin-dependent or clathrin-independent endocytosis pathway [33,78]. Recently, a study demonstrated that besides fusion with the plasma membrane, SARS-CoV-2 also enters the host cell through the novel clathrin- and caveolae-mediated endocytic pathway [79]. The S protein regulates the fusion of SARS-CoV-2 with the host cell membrane, an essential step in cellular uptake. Host trypsin-like proteases regulate the activation of the S protein via proteolytic cleavage; their activity is upregulated in patients with IBD. The activation of the S protein is also regulated by host trypsin-like proteases through proteolytic cleavage, and their function is increased in IBD patients [16,80]. This upregulation may promote viral infection in IBD patients. Notably, ACE2 protein expression was found to be higher in the colon and terminal ileum of patients with IBD compared to noninflamed subjects [16]. Furthermore, when compared to both healthy individuals and patients with active inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), patients with IBD exhibited higher ACE2 activity in the noninflamed colon. Moreover, the plasma of patients with IBD displayed a higher ACE2: ACE ratio compared to individuals without IBD. Notably, patients with IBD, particularly those with Crohn’s disease (CD), demonstrated elevated levels of soluble ACE2 expression [16]. Due to ACE2‘s ability to modulate the inflammatory immune response, COVID-19 may impact immune-inflammatory diseases such as IBD that affect the ileum by interfering with ACE2 [81]. Taken together, these observations suggest that individuals with IBD may be more vulnerable to COVID-19. However, at present, there is no evidence to support this notion. The pictorial representation of SARS-CoV-2 causing or exacerbating IBD by modulating mucosal immune response is depicted in Figure 1.6. Immune Response of the Host to SARS-CoV-2 InfectionThe progression of the disease and elimination of the virus is influenced by the innate and adaptive immune response of the host to the viral infection. The initial line of protection against viruses is the innate immune system [82]. The release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines into the bloodstream due to the stimulation of innate and adaptive immune cells can impact the gut microbiota [4]; this alteration of the gut microbiome is called gut dysbiosis [83,84]. During secondary infection by CoVs, the initial phase of respiratory symptoms escalates, while intestinal symptoms subside; nevertheless, cytokine-induced inflammation worsens. In response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems of the infected host are activated. This leads to the release of mediators and chemokines by infected cells, which in turn causes the localized accumulation of neutrophils at the site of infection. Infection with SARS-CoV-2 stimulates the activation of both the innate and adaptive immune systems in the host. As a result, the infected cells release mediators and chemokines, leading to the accumulation of neutrophils at the site of infection. The accumulated neutrophils perform antiviral effector functions and secrete chemokines and cytokines to attract other immune cells, including T lymphocytes and monocytes [3]. Infected patients with gastroenteritis exhibit higher neutrophil counts, an elevated neutrophil–lymphocyte ratio, lower lymphocyte counts, elevated C-reactive protein levels and decreased eosinophil, monocyte, and basophil counts [3,4] Neutrophil recruitment also occurs when a disturbance in the intestinal flora promotes Th17 cell polarization in the small intestine and the production of excessive IL-17A [85].7. Innate Immune Responses in the Gut during SARS-CoV-2 InfectionThe mucosa’s initial antiviral innate response is followed by a potent and efficient adaptive immune response. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) in the large intestine and gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) in the Peyer’s patches of the small intestine harbor microfold cells (M cells). M cells, by transporting antigens from the intestinal lumen to immune cells, contribute to the initiation of region-specific immune responses. Following this, immune cells, along with antigen-presenting cells, migrate to a specialized pocket situated on the surface of the basement membrane of M cells. During excessive viral replication, M cells get destroyed, leading to inflammation and diarrhea, and thus SARS-CoV-2 manages to evade immune detection by not presenting antigens to lymphoid follicles [86]. As a result, direct infection of enterocytes can lead to cytokine release and the immune response weakens. This allows viral particles in the lumen to infect more enterocytes, resulting in further damage to the GI tract. The inflammation caused by cytokine release is regulated by the intestinal signaling pathway via dendritic cells [4]. As a result, inflammatory cells are recruited; this, in turn, results in the production of inflammatory cytokines in intestinal epithelial cells [87].The innate immune system detects viral materials that may be pathogenic and signals to the nucleus to express types I and III interferons (IFNs) and other proinflammatory cytokines. IFNs suppress viral replication and reduce the number of infected cells by activating a cascade of cellular and molecular events. In SARS-CoV-2 infection, 36 genes were reported to be involved in the immune pathways and cytokine signaling, i.e., the IFN-γ signaling pathway [4]. Type I IFNs are secreted in the innate immune response, whereas type III IFNs are secreted in the intrinsic immune response, with the latter capable of acting on intestinal epithelial cells, reinforcing an antiviral state against the infection [2]. The release of cytokines from the human epithelial cells of the lamina propria may serve as an alternate source of the cytokine storm in the lungs [2]. Upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, the intestinal epithelium and colon organoids exhibit a distinct antiviral response characterized by the secretion of type III interferons (IFNs), in contrast to the airway epithelium. Moreover, human intestinal organoids are capable of producing both type I and type III IFNs upon enteric viral infection [2]. IFNs, the most common antiviral component, are also produced by the human intestinal epithelial cells upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. They induce the IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in a paracrine manner to control viral infection in neighboring cells. SARS-CoV-2 is capable of blocking IFN signaling [2]. Further, Triana et al. [88] reported that human intestinal epithelial cells generate strong proinflammatory and IFN-mediated responses upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, as revealed by comparative gene expression analyses. Several gene expression and pathway analyses in this study confirmed that the colon-derived and ileum-derived immature enterocytes 2 exhibit a robust NF-κB/TNF-mediated response. Conversely, neighboring immature enterocytes 2 demonstrate an IFN-mediated response, resulting in the expression of ISGs in a paracrine manner. Moreover, the study found that organoids derived from the ileum exhibit a stronger immune response compared to those derived from the colon. In SARS-CoV-2 infection, viral replication is reduced by the recognition of the virus by the innate immune system, which produces type II IFNs and the cytokines IL-4, IL-10, and IL-6 [37,88]. In the early stage of SARS-CoV-2 infection, there is a delayed release of chemokines and cytokines from dendritic cells and macrophages; this is followed by the release of small amounts of antiviral IFNs and large amounts of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines [32]. Because of the gut–lung axis, the gastric and respiratory flora could influence each other, and any disorder in the flora could be bidirectional [37,89,90]. Further, the gut–lung axis may be influenced by intestinal mucosal damage and bacterial imbalance [37]. To evade recognition by the host’s innate immune system, several viral proteins of coronaviruses, such as papain-like protease (PLpro), NSP1, ORF3b, and N, inhibit two crucial transcription factors (IRF3 and IRF7) that are required for the transcription of IFN [67]. the structural proteins of SARS-CoV, such as NSP1, ORF6, and N proteins [91,92] block the IFN and NF-kB pathways by binding to the signaling proteins in these pathways. ORF6 mainly blocks the nuclear import protein and enhances SARS-CoV replication [91]. Moreover, ACE2 regulates innate immune responses and influences the composition of the intestinal microbiota of the host [93]. Different mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 activates the innate immune system in the intestine are depicted in Figure 2.A study reported that active replication of SARS-CoV-2 is required for immune responses [88]. The signaling pathway data from single-cell RNA sequencing were analyzed to identify the signaling pathways in the infected and neighboring cells. Upon closer investigation of the signaling pathways, it was revealed that neighboring cells displayed the activation of transcription factors IRF1 and STAT1, whereas infected cells exhibited activation of cJun. Importantly, despite the presence of IFN, cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 did not show upregulation of the JAK-STAT pathway or expression of ISG [88]. These signaling pathways were confirmed by the expression of ISG and NF-κB and inhibition of HSP90 using the Calu-3 and Caco-2 cell lines. As a result, the inflammation level in the patients was directly proportional to the degree of the GI lesions. In case of a severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, the patients secreted higher levels of IL-10, IL-7, IL-2, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in the plasma and had elevated levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), INF-γ-induced protein-10, TNF-α, and macrophage inflammatory protein-1A. Patients with a severe SARS-CoV-2 infection exhibit increased secretion of IL-10, IL-7, IL-2, and G-CSF in their plasma, alongside increased levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), IFNF-γ-induced protein-10, TNF-α, and macrophage inflammatory protein-1A [37,94]. In addition, elevated levels of hyperinflammation markers, including procalcitonin, C reactive protein, D-dimer, and ferritin, are observed in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infections [3,95]. The inflammatory response of the gut mucosa can alter the intercellular space of enterocytes, leading to an increase in intestinal permeability. Consequently, bacterial antigens and toxins may translocate into the bloodstream, exacerbating the disease state of COVID-19 patients. The Notch pathway plays an important role in regulating innate immunity and inflammation [96,97]. Notch pathway elements can be affected by viral proteins, leading to abnormal functions [98], and the upregulation of NOTCH signaling signatures was substantiated in the lungs of SARS-CoV-2-infected rhesus macaques [99]. Therefore, targeting Notch may prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection [99]. Upon interaction with its ligand, the transmembrane receptor undergoes successive proteolytic cleavages mediated by the ADAM10 or ADAM17 protease and the γ-secretase complex, resulting in the transcription of Notch target genes, including furin and miRNA-145 [99]. Furin has been shown to be essential for viral entry into cells, in addition to ACE2 [100]. Notch1 induces the transcription of furin, and inhibiting Notch1 may decrease furin levels, potentially interfering with the virus’s ability to enter cells [99,101]. The proteolytic cleavage of ACE2 and competition with TMPRSS2 both need ADAM17, which is highly expressed in the heart and lungs [101,102,103]. The Notch pathway positively regulates furin and negatively regulates ADAM17 [103]. However, there is conflicting information on the role of ADAM17-mediated cleavage in SARS-CoV-2 entry [102,104].Elevated levels of serum interleukin 6 (IL-6) were observed in COVID-19 patients. The immune response in these patients is triggered and sustained by the interplay between Notch signaling and IL-6, which leads to a cytokine storm [99]. Delta-like ligand 4 (Dll4)-induced Notch signaling in macrophages causes an increase in IL-6 production, and IL-6 upregulates the expression of Notch ligands like Dll1 and Dll4 [105]. This feedback loop further drives the expression of IL-6. Disrupting the positive feedback loop responsible for the cytokine storm seen in COVID-19 could be achieved by targeting the Notch pathway and inhibiting Dll ligands. Furthermore, there is a relationship between Notch and immune response, with SARS-CoV-2 causing a cytokine storm in COVID-19 patients. Therefore, inhibiting Notch could be a therapeutic strategy for preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection and relieving COVID-19 symptoms [106].8. Adaptive Immune ResponseWhile there is a growing body of research on the effect of SARS-CoV-2 infections on pulmonary and systemic immune responses [107,108], there is a dearth of data on intestinal immune responses. Immunohistochemistry and mass cytometry analyses conducted on intestinal tissue obtained from COVID-19 patients have revealed a notable elevation in intraepithelial CD8+ lymphocytes and CD4+/CD8+ effector T cells in the lamina propria when compared to healthy individuals [109]. On the other hand, a significant decrease in inflammatory dendritic cells within the lamina propria was observed in COVID-19 patients who exhibited GI symptoms [9]. In addition, Livanos, et al. [9] uncovered a substantial downregulation in pathways related to antigen processing, TH17 cell differentiation and reduced levels of key inflammatory proteins, including IL-6, CXCL8, IL-17A and CCL28 in circulation. These results suggest that SARS-CoV-2 infection in the intestines may modify the composition of systemic immune cells by transforming proinflammatory immune signatures into a more favorable immune environment. This phenomenon may account for the notable decrease in levels of IL-6 and IL-17 in COVID-19 patients experiencing GI symptoms, resulting in reduced mortality rates compared to COVID-19 patients lacking these symptoms.It is possible that persistent SARS-CoV-2 infection in the intestines plays a crucial role in generating and sustaining a stable anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody response by B cells. In spite of the absence of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA in nasopharyngeal swabs, Gaebler et al. [110] observed that SARS-CoV-2 virus particles and mRNA were potentially detectable in duodenal and ileal biopsies of COVID-19 patients even after a period of 3 months from the initial onset of the disease. Based on the data, it appears that SARS-CoV-2 viral reservoirs in the intestines can stimulate the production of long-lasting neutralizing anti-viral IgA antibodies. However, the levels of IgM and IgG antibodies targeting the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein receptor binding decrease six months after infection [110]. The prolonged existence of IgA antibodies may be particularly significant for maintaining long-term immune responses, as IgA dimers have demonstrated the ability to effectively neutralize SARS-CoV-2 [111]. These findings indicate that the presence of persistent viral infection in the intestines may play a crucial role in generating and sustaining effective immune responses against SARS-CoV-2.A severe infection with SARS-CoV-2 can cause the death of activated immune cells. In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, reduced numbers of natural killer cells, B cells in the lower range, lymphocytopenia, a normal CD4+/CD8+ ratio, and decreased numbers of effector regulatory cells (CD25+CD127+) and memory T cells (CD45RO+) were observed [3]. Concurrently, there was an increase in immunological parameters such as IL-8, IL-10, IL-6, IFN-γ-inducible protein-10/CXCL-10, and MCP-1. Moreover, deviations in the frequencies of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) and conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) have been noted [9]. As the next line of response, CD4+ T cells mediate protective and humoral immunity so that B cells produce virus-specific antibodies. Finally, to limit local infection, CD8+ T cells exhibit a cytotoxic function [3]. The presence of effector CD4+ T cells in the intestinal mucosa plays a critical role in both mucosal immunity and the development of chronic enteritis. Further, the C-C chemokine receptor type 9 (CCR9) is crucial for the entry of the CD4+ T cells into the small intestine and for interplay between CCR9 and CD4 in terms of SARS-CoV-2 [37]. CCL25 expressed in the epithelial cells of the small intestine can attract CCR9+ CD4+ T cells, which could compromise the intestinal immune system and modulate the homeostasis of the gut microbiome [37,112].The levels of CD4+ T cells are reduced, and the distribution of naive and memory CD8+ and CD4+ cells influence the decrease in naive T cells [9]. The myeloid cells of the lamina propria exhibit reduced levels of cDCs, pDCs, and CD206+CD1c+ cells and increased levels of effector CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, CD8+CD103+ T cells, CD4+CD103+ T cells, CD4− CD8− T cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, and IgM+ plasma cells [9]. Key inflammatory genes, genes associated with inflammatory dendritic cells, and the host receptor neuropilin-1 (NRP1) are downregulated in the lamina propria of the intestine [9]. The upregulated genes involved in the immunomodulation of the lamina propria and epithelial cells include the genes for the antimicrobial peptide lipocalin-2, metallothionein, and transmembrane protein. Additionally, there is an elevation in the levels of oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS), a viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) sensor that possesses antiviral activity, in the lamina propria. The canonical antiviral genes and OAS3 in the epithelial cells are also upregulated. Conversely, the genes encoding heat shock proteins HSPA1A and HSPA1B are downregulated. Epithelial cells have decreased CD206+ T cells and increased CD4−CD8+ and CD8+ T cells. Certain inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (IFN-γ, IL-1b, CXCL8, and CCL24) are downregulated in the intestine of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, while CCL25 is upregulated, which is structurally similar to an antimicrobial peptide. Furthermore, there is a non-significant elevation in specific subsets, namely CD8+ T cells, intraepithelial lymphocytes, and CD8+CD69+ T cells, accompanied by the activation of (CD29+39+) CD4+ T cells in peripheral blood [9]. Symptomatic patients exhibit decreased levels of IL-17, IL-6, and CCL28 in their circulation. Taken together, the results suggest that the immune system activates ILs, IFNs, cytokines, chemokines, T and B cells, and white blood cells against SARS-CoV-2. An augmented effector function of Th17 cells, as well as other T cells in the gut mucosa, has been detected in COVID-19 infection. Consequently, SARS-CoV-2 has developed mechanisms to evade the innate antiviral response by modulating signaling pathways at various stages, thereby suppressing innate immune responses. More research will be necessary to determine if COVID-19 can also induce long-lasting T-cell memory responses or if it merely shares the intestinal persistence of SARS-CoV-2. Important aspects of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including localized immune reactions and gut dysbiosis in the intestine, are depicted in Figure 3A,B.9. COVID-19 and Gut MicrobiotaNormally, the GI tract harbors a highly diverse and complex microbial ecosystem that interacts with the host to maintain immune homeostasis [113,114,115]. Healthy gut microbiota contains Faecalibacterium spp., Bifidobacterium spp., Ruminococcus spp., and Prevotella spp., the latter being associated with low systemic inflammation [4,116]. A case study in Wuhan reported that the gut microbiome of healthy people is correlated with the susceptibility to contracting COVID-19 [117]. The study found that higher levels of Lactobacillus were associated with increased levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, better disease outcomes, and elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines and bacterial species such as Streptococcus, Klebsiella, and Ruminococcus gnavus [117]. Patients with conditions such as IBD, obesity, and diabetes have exhibited an increased abundance of certain bacterial species in their gut microbiota [117].In the presence of gut dysbiosis and inflammation, ACE2 levels may rise, impacting innate immunity, dietary amino acid equilibrium, and the microbial ecology of the gut [117]. In patients infected with the virus, the microbiota interacts with the viral particles, resulting in positive and negative consequences [118]. The surfaces of the bacterial envelope containing lipopolysaccharides in gram-negative bacteria and peptidoglycan in gram-positive bacteria have a positive correlation with viral proteins, probably to enhance receptor affinity of the latter and their entry into the host cells or for other similar mechanisms to facilitate infection in vivo [119]. Significant changes in the gut microbiota, called gut dysbiosis, occur because of the IFNs released by the viral molecules. These IFNs deplete the obligate anaerobic bacteria Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Eubacterium and promote the pathogenic bacteria Corynebacterium and Ruthenibacterium [117,120]. The fecal samples of patients with COVID-19 contained Bacteroides species capable of downregulating ACE2 expression in the murine gut; this alteration could increase the accessibility of the intestinal epithelial cells to SARS-CoV-2 [121], and the bacterium Firmicutes (Erysipelotrichaceae), which demonstrates a positive correlation in the murine gut. Gut dysbiosis was also detected in fatal SARS-CoV-2 cases with immune depletion and hypoxemia. Notably, gut dysbiosis is also observed in patients with obesity, diabetes, and autoimmune- and aging-related diseases [122]. ACE2 has been implicated in the modulation of the gut microbiota, as demonstrated by a study involving ACE2-KO animals. These animals exhibited altered gut microbiota, decreased expression of AMP, and reduced levels of amino acids like tryptophan. ACE2 facilitates the absorption of neutral amino acids such as tyrosine, valine, leucine, and tryptophan in the intestine [123,124]. The binding of SARS-CoV-2 to ACE2 receptors in the bowel reduces the number of free receptors available and disrupts the absorption of tryptophan, resulting in malabsorption and dysbiosis of the gut microbiota.COVID-19-induced diarrhea may be caused by decreased ACE2 expression, reduced tryptophan absorption, gut dysbiosis, and dysregulated gut microbiota. The downregulation of ACE2 expression in infected enterocytes leads to intestinal dysbiosis. Dysbiosis, in turn, activates intestinal autophagy by inhibiting the mechanistic target of rapamycin [125,126]. As a result, NHE3, a protein that functions as a brush border Na+/H+ exchanger and controls NaCl absorption in the intestine [127], is degraded by autophagy. An increase in intestinal fluids and a secretory type of diarrhea are caused by decreased NHE3 levels [128]. Gut microbiota dysbiosis in patients with COVID-19 is mainly associated with changes in the abundance of Bacteroides spp. (Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Bacteroides dorei, Bacteroides ovatusis, and Bacteroides massiliensis) because these are associated with the attenuation of ACE2 expression in the gut. Therefore, changes in microbial composition may increase the accessibility of intestinal epithelial cells to SARS-CoV-2 [129].In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, Ruminococcus gnavus exhibited the highest positive correlation with inflammatory markers, followed by an abundance of Clostridium hathewayi Clostridium ramosum and Coprobacillus Sp., which correlated with COVID-19 severity; further, an inverse correlation was observed with the abundance of anti-inflammatory bacterium Faecalibacterium prausnitzii [4]. The gut contains bacterial species capable of fermenting amino acids, including arginine [126]. These alterations in the gut microbiota composition can lead to an increased abundance of L-arginine-fermenting bacteria, resulting in a further decrease in the levels of free L-arginine. By increasing myeloid-derived suppressor cell numbers, impeding local T cell function, and increasing ROS generation, L-arginine depletion in the intestines can amplify intestinal inflammation [130].The microbes residing in the gut can regulate mucosal sites located outside the intestine via the metabolites they produce, including short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). These SCFAs can enter the bloodstream and influence other organs, playing a role in immune regulation and inducing the production of immunoglobulins while also exhibiting anti-inflammatory effects [35]. Fecal samples with high SARS-CoV-2 load specifically contain certain bacterial species, namely, Morganella morganii, Streptococcus infantis, Collinsella aerofaciens and Collinsella tanakaei, and [4]; in contrast, fecal samples with low to no SARS-CoV-2 load contain SCFA-producing bacteria, namely, Alistipes onderdonkii, Bacteroides stercoris, Lachnospiraceae bacterium, and Parabacteroides merdae [4]. An altered gut microbiota can promote the growth of SARS-CoV-2 and trigger the production of inflammatory cytokines, causing a “cytokine storm” that can damage tissues, trigger septic shock, and lead to multiorgan failure [37].The administration of probiotics, such as lactic acid bacteria or bifidobacteria, has the potential to alleviate diarrhea symptoms and enhance the production of antiviral antibodies [37]. Further, the abovementioned probiotics may provide the required nutritional support to restore intestinal flora balance after microbial dysbiosis in the intestine owing to weak immunity [83,129]. The abundance of the opportunistic pathogens Corynebacterium and Ruthenibacterium was elevated, and a change in the fecal microbial profile was also observed [129]. Studies have reported a relationship between bacterial surface molecules and SARS-CoV infection. For example, the peptidoglycan of Bacillus subtilis has reduced SARS-CoV infectivity owing to the presence of surfactin, a cyclic lipopeptide responsible for CoV inhibition by disrupting the integrity of viral particles [131]. This study highlights the significance of the microbiota in viral pathogenesis and therapeutic interventions. The frequent utilization of antibiotics, such as penicillin, cephalosporins, macrolides, and quinolones, disrupts the gut microbiota and elevates the risk of lung cancer in humans [111,116]. In the COVID-19 diagnosis in China, the intestinal microecological balance is maintained using microecological regulators that help prevent secondary bacterial infections [37]. The emergence of new strains can have a considerable impact on the GI tract; therefore, studies on strain surveillance and its role in gut infection must be increased [132].In short, an imbalance in the gut microbiota may stimulate the replication of SARS-CoV-2 and increase the production of inflammatory proteins and cytokines, leading to the development of a “cytokine storm” state. This can ultimately result in significant tissue damage, septic shock, and multiorgan failure. In summary, an imbalanced gut microbiota has the potential to facilitate SARS-CoV-2 replication and induce the release of cytokines and inflammatory proteins, ultimately leading to the onset of a severe “cytokine storm”. This, in turn, may result in significant septic shock, tissue damage, and multiorgan failure. Additional factors that can disrupt the gut microbiota in patients with COVID-19 include conditions such as diabetes mellitus, advanced age, and the administration of antibiotics, antivirals, and steroids, which can all negatively impact prognosis The severity of COVID-19 can be augmented by disruptions to the gut microbiota, which can be caused by factors such as diabetes, advanced age, and the use of medications like antibiotics, antivirals, and steroids [133].10. Gut-Lung Axis in COVID-19The interplay between the immune system’s innate and adaptive responses and the invasion of SARS-CoV-2 characterizes the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. This interaction sets off a cascade of events that triggers inflammation and a cytokine storm in several organs, including the lungs, gut, heart, liver, and kidneys, ultimately leading to multiorgan dysfunction [134]. These pathologies overlap in respiratory and gastrointestinal tract diseases [18,19], leading to the emergence of the “gut–lung axis” concept [19]. The gut–lung axis refers to the intricate interaction between the gut and the lungs, regulated by a diverse array of immunological, neurological, and microbial mediators. The gut microbiome has emerged as a key regulator of the gut–lung axis. Specific microorganisms and their metabolites exert profound effects on pulmonary immune responses and inflammation [135]. The gut–lung axis appears to be implicated in the pathogenesis of COVID-19, as evidenced by clinical observations indicating that patients with COVID-19 who exhibit gastrointestinal symptoms are more likely to experience severe respiratory manifestations, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, hepatic injury, and shock [136,137].The elderly are at a heightened risk of contracting SARS-CoV-2 and developing severe COVID-19, possibly due to their less diverse intestinal flora and diminished populations of beneficial microorganisms like Bifidobacterium spp. [17]. These findings underscore the pressing need to restore microbiota balance in COVID-19 patients. Probiotics and prebiotics have been shown to be effective in reestablishing a healthy gut/lung microbiota balance and lowering the probability of secondary infections caused by bacterial translocation [138]. Consequently, the use of probiotics and prebiotics in preventing COVID-19 and staving off disease progression to severe stages is gaining traction [139,140,141]. In the context of COVID-19, preliminary evidence suggests that the administration of probiotics and prebiotics may offer potential benefits by interacting with the lungs through the gut–lung axis or by modulating systemic inflammation. While the immunological advantages of these interventions are widely recognized, additional clinical and laboratory research is required to ascertain their specific roles in combating COVID-19 infections. Furthermore, further investigation is needed to elucidate the connection between microbial dysbiosis and COVID-19 and to determine whether dysbiosis is a cause or a consequence of the disease. Prebiotics and probiotics may help reduce the intensity and impact of the pandemic; thus, their potential usage should be investigated. 11. TherapeuticsThe rapid manifestation of the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in isolation, desolation, and panic among the general masses; these have been further aggravated in the absence of any curative drugs or preventive vaccinations for this most-dreaded disease of the current century. Recognizing the severity of the current challenging situation, numerous researchers are actively exploring potential therapeutic approaches to combat the COVID-19 outbreak. This endeavor has led to the development of various drug modalities targeting COVID-19; however, definitive conclusions are still pending. Nevertheless, there is an urgent need for novel treatments to effectively address this ongoing pandemic. In-silico research has been undertaken to identify several repurposed medicines as first-line therapy for moderate-to-severe COVID-19. Some of them are antivirals (monulapiravir, favipiravir remdesivir, arbidol, baloxavir, ritonavir, lopinavir and marboxil), antiparasitic medicines (hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and ivermectin) and immunomodulators (tocilizumab dexamethasone, IFNs, and 2-deoxy-d-glucose) [82]. A study used ivermectin and observed that it could reduce GI complications and the number of ventilator-free days in patients with severe COVID-19 [142]. Nevertheless, further research is warranted to study the mechanism of action of ivermectin.To treat SARS-CoV-2 infection, viral entry may be prevented by inhibiting TMPRSS2, which plays an important role in S protein priming [73]. A recent study reported that camostat (brand name: Foypan), a nonspecific serine protease inhibitor, can inhibit TMPRSS2; its use resulted in ten-fold reduced infection by SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 in Calu-3 cells [73]. Selective inhibitors or RNA interference can prevent the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into cell cultures and decrease its infectivity by inhibiting the interaction between NRP1 and the S1 spike protein [73,143]. The symptomatic treatments recommended for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection are the management of diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. Antagonists such as a 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor, metoclopramide, and domperidone may be used for treating nausea and vomiting [38]. Considering that diarrhea is a common symptom observed in most cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection, patients are typically advised to ensure proper rehydration and monitoring of potassium levels. However, it is important to note that there is currently no evidence supporting the use of antidiarrheal drugs as a specific treatment for this symptom [4]. Although the development of diarrhea in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection may warrant the use of antidiarrheal drugs, antimotility drugs (such as loperamide and diphenoxylate-atropine) will increase the transit time and consequently prolong the course of the infection [144]. If necessary, adsorbents (such as smectite and kaolin-pectin) can be used as antidiarrheal drugs because they bind to the digestive mucus and toxins, reducing water loss in patients with diarrhea. Antiviral drug-induced diarrhea may be treated by adjusting drug dosage because, at present, there is no drug for treating diarrhea caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection [38]. Although probiotics and dioctahedral montmorillonite can be used, which should also be considered when selecting treatments, the possibility of antibiotic-associated diarrhea or Clostridium difficile infection remains [38]. To develop novel treatment approaches, it is necessary to understand the immune pathways and microbiota interactions in the host and their cytokine responses [4]. Typically, managing food-borne enteric pathogens involves using active probiotic strains to promote their growth in the gut. In the context of COVID-19 infection, clinical trials have been carried out to explore the potential advantages of probiotic administration. These trials aim to investigate the efficacy of probiotics in alleviating the severity of COVID-19 symptoms and enhancing the immune system [135]. Clinical studies investigated a range of probiotic interventions, including Lactobacillus plantarum, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and a combination of Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium lactis [145,146,147]. The outcomes measured in these studies included changes in inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), clinical symptoms such as fever and cough, and disease severity as measured by radiological findings or hospitalization rates [145]. In a human clinical study, a decrease in proinflammatory biomarkers was observed in patients with colitis with both GI and non-GI conditions after 6–8 weeks of probiotic treatment [123]. A research study conducted in China examined the impact of Lactobacillus plantarum on COVID-19 patients with mild symptoms. The findings revealed that patients who received the probiotic intervention exhibited significantly reduced levels of CRP and IL-6 compared to those who received standard care without the probiotic [148]. Additionally, Zhang et al. [147] reported that a probiotic mixture containing LactoBacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Lactobacillus rhamnosus improved clinical symptoms and reduced inflammatory markers in COVID-19 patients. Similarly, Gutiérrez-Castrellón et al. [149] aimed to evaluate the efficacy of a combination of four probiotic strains in COVID-19 patients who were admitted to the intensive care unit. The treatment group showed a significantly higher rate of complete remission, reduced viral load, lung infiltrates, and symptom duration, a significant increase in IgM and IgG antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, and a faster reduction in D-Dimers. These findings indicate that probiotics hold promise as a potential therapeutic approach for individuals affected by COVID-19. Although these studies provide some preliminary evidence for the potential therapeutic role of probiotics in COVID-19 management, more research is necessary to validate the beneficial effects of probiotics on COVID-19 patients.Immunomodulatory therapies, including glucocorticoid, cytokine, and convalescent plasma therapies, are currently used to ameliorate the inflammatory status of patients with COVID-19 with gastroenteritis [37]. Certain phytocompounds in traditional medicine, including baicalin in Chinese medicine and scutellarin, hesperetin, glycyrrhizin, and nicotinamide, may be combined with ACE2 for effective treatment [37]. To prevent future CoV outbreaks, more drugs and vaccines targeting RNA viruses should be developed. At present, there is no effective targeted treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Developing new therapeutic candidates that can target viral proteins, and their associated host proteins are necessary to bridge this gap, eliminate viral infection, and facilitate its clearance [82].12. Limitations of the StudyAlthough this review provides comprehensive insights into the potential involvement of SARS-CoV-2 in gastrointestinal symptoms, it is important to acknowledge certain limitations stemming from the scarcity of information. The precise mechanisms linking gastroenteritis to the severity of COVID-19 are still not fully elucidated, and it remains unclear whether the common GI dysfunctions, including loss of appetite, anorexia, nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting, serve as protective responses against COVID-19 or are the consequences of prolonged infection with the virus. In addition, the prevalence and durability of gastroenteritis symptoms in long COVID cases are currently being examined and remain unknown, despite these symptoms being common in individuals with COVID-19. While the emerging evidence suggests a potential link between gut microbiota and COVID-19 pathogenesis, several limitations still need to be addressed. A better understanding of leaky gut associated with gut dysbiosis in COVID-19 also remains unclear. Future research should focus on elucidating the underlying mechanisms of this relationship, developing more targeted therapies, and conducting longitudinal studies to understand better the temporal relationship between changes in gut microbiota and COVID-19 severity.13. ConclusionsMany patients with COVID-19 develop gastroenteritis, and many researchers have confirmed the direct infection of SARS-CoV-2 in human intestinal epithelial cells. The present review provides evidence for fecal-to-oral route transmission as a confirmation of GI infection. The presence of receptors for SARS-CoV-2 binding within the GI tract, positive results for nucleic acid testing of these viruses from intestinal samples, and occurrence of GI symptoms in approximately 25–40% of the patients prove the strong association between CoVs and GI tract infections. To control the symptom of diarrhea, it is necessary to first identify its cause (whether it is due to SARS-CoV-2 infection or the use of other therapeutics such as antiviral agents, antibiotics, and certain traditional Chinese medicines). Patients exhibiting GI manifestations should receive treatments aimed at preserving GI functions. Additionally, further research is needed to explore the alterations in the gut microbiota caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection, with the goal of developing effective strategies to leverage these changes for gastroenteritis treatment. Gastroenterologists should also prioritize vigilance toward atypical digestive symptoms in infected individuals to prevent viral transmission through various potential routes and effectively manage the spread of COVID-19. Future research should be focused on developing SARS-CoV-2 resistance in patients by modulating the gut microflora, using prebiotics and probiotics (mainly to understand the GI tract’s bacterial dynamics), and using the novel approach of fecal transplant. Furthermore, drugs and vaccines targeting multiple viral RNAs should be developed to control CoVs. Studies on the host cell’s immune response to viral infection are also warranted to understand the virulence of these viruses and to develop more effective drugs capable of promoting the immune system. Individuals with deficient HD5, as well as those with IBDs such as UC and CD, or individuals who have undergone small intestine transplantation, are more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to healthy individuals. Exploring the mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 entry into the intestinal tract, the resulting gastrointestinal symptoms, and the host’s immune response to the infection could aid in the development of improved therapeutic strategies for managing viral infections in patients. Understanding the gastrointestinal manifestations of COVID-19 is important for several reasons. First, it can help healthcare providers recognize and manage GI symptoms in COVID-19 patients, which can improve patient outcomes. Second, it may help identify potential transmission routes for the virus, which can inform public health interventions. Finally, investigating the effects of COVID-19 on the GI tract could lead to the development of novel treatment approaches for COVID-19 patients experiencing GI complications.


Title: Human ACE2 protein is a molecular switch controlling the mode of SARS-CoV-2 transmission

IntroductionSevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) causes coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19); in only a few months, COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China, became a global pandemic. Studying the transmission mechanism of SARS-CoV-2 will provide insights into the reasons for its high transmissibility, which can be used to formulate strategies to suppress its spread. Viruses can spread among cells via two routes: cell-free virion and cell-to-cell transmission, and each route has its advantages and disadvantages [1, 2]. The advantage of cell-free transmission, a major route for the interhost transmission, is that it facilitates the infection of remote targets. However, cell-free virions are vulnerable to physical or immune attacks. Enveloped viruses can spread directly from one cell to another without being released into the extracellular environment, which is known as cell-to-cell transmission; they can avoid immune attacks from neutralizing antibody (NAb) [1, 2].Cell-free virion infection is the standard method used to conduct experiments in SARS-CoV-2-related studies. Cell-free viruses shed into the extracellular space are used not only to evaluate the effectiveness of various anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs in vitro, but also to determine the infectious capacity of patients with COVID-19 [3]. The cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 has also been demonstrated in different cells [4–6], and this route can facilitate the infection of SARS-CoV-2-nonpermissive cells [6]. SARS-CoV-2 infection induces the formation of filopodia [7], and SARS-CoV-2 particles have been observed on filopodia and tunneling nanotubes [6, 7], indicating the possible role of intercellular extensions in SARS-CoV-2 cell-to-cell transmission. However, the mechanisms underlying the cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and the factors determining the route remain unclear.Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) is the major SARS-CoV-2 receptor, and it interacts with the receptor binding domain (RBD) of viral spike (S) glycoproteins [8]. Although the lung is the target of SARS-CoV-2, human ACE2 (hACE2) expression is very low in the lung and is limited to type II alveolar epithelial cells [9–11]. How this hACE2-limited environment can support SARS-CoV-2 infection remains unclear. ACE2 is an interferon-stimulated gene (ISG), and its expression is upregulated after virus infection in humans [10]. In this study, we investigated whether and how dynamic hACE2 expression contributes to SARS-CoV-2 infection, especially virus transmission. To address these questions, we generated stable cell lines with different expression levels of hACE2 to evaluate how the hACE2 expression level can affect SARS-CoV-2 transmission.MethodsCells, viruses, and chemicalsHuman lung epithelial A549 cells (CCL-185, ATCC) were maintained in F-12 medium (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum. A549 cells stably expressing hACE2 (hACE2-A549 cells) were kindly gifted by Dr. Chia-Yi Yu (National Institute of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, National Health Research Institutes, Taiwan). African green monkey kidney Vero E6 cells (CRL-1586, ATCC) were maintained in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.The expression of exogenous genes was achieved using a lentivirus system. hACE2-A549 cells were transduced with RFP-expressing lentiviruses from RNA Technology Platform and Gene Manipulation Core (RNAi Core, Taiwan) to generate hACE2-RFP-A549 cells. A549 cells were transduced with mCherry-expressing lentiviruses (RNAi Core) to generate mCherry-A549 cells. To generate hACE2-A549 clones, single cell was sorted from the population of hACE2-A549 cells by using a FACSJazz-6 color cell sorter (BD Biosciences). These clones were cultured in 96-well plates for 1 week and then transferred to 6-well plates for 4 days to obtain sufficient cells for further experiments. The hACE2 expression level of each hACE2-A549 clone was analyzed using IFA and then confirmed through Western blotting with anti-ACE2 antibody.SARS-CoV-2 (hCoV-19/Taiwan/4/2020, GISAID accession ID: EPI_ISL_411927) isolated from a patient with COVID-19 was obtained from the Taiwan Centers of Disease Control. The virus was amplified in Vero E6 cells and the virus titer was determined using a tissue culture infective dose assay.We used the following primary antibodies: anti-tubulin rabbit monoclonal antibody (mAb) (#2128, Cell Signaling), anti-ACE2 rabbit mAb (GTX01160), anti-SARS-CoV-2 S protein mouse mAb (GTX632604), anti-SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid protein (N) mouse mAb (GTX632269), anti-SARS-CoV-2 nonstructural protein 3 (NSP3) rabbit polyclonal antibody (GTX135589) (GTX all from GeneTex), and anti-SARS-CoV-2 S protein humanized monoclonal antibody (hmAb; kindly gifted by Dr. An-Suei Yang, Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taiwan). Secondary antibodies included goat Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse, Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-human, and Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated anti-rabbit IgG antibodies (Thermo Fisher).Neutralizing hmAbs against the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 S protein were kindly gifted by Dr. Han-Chung Wu [12] (Institute of Cellular and Organism Biology, Academia Sinica, Taiwan). The control hmAb was kindly gifted by Dr. Kuo-I Lin (Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taiwan).Virus transmission assaysFor cell-free infection, hACE2-A549 cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2, which was premixed with antibodies or plasma at 37 °C for 1 h, at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.2. At 1 h post infection (hpi), additional antibody- or plasma-containing medium was added. The supernatant was harvested for the virus infectivity assay, and cells were fixed for IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody and high-content image analysis at 24 hpi.For the coculture system, hACE2-A549 cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.2 for 24 h for obtaining the virus donor cells. The virus donor cells were trypsinized and cocultured with virus recipient cells (hACE2-RFP-A549 cells) at a 1:1 ratio in antibody- or plasma-containing medium. The supernatant was harvested for the virus infectivity assay, and at 24 h after coculture, the cells were fixed and subjected to IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody and high-content image analysis.For temporal viral spread analysis, hACE2-A549 clones at approximately 90% confluence seeded in 96-well plates were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01. At 1 hpi, the medium was replaced with antibody-containing medium. At 24, 48, and 72 hpi, the supernatant was harvested for the virus infectivity assay, and the cells were fixed and subjected to IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody and high-content image analysis.For the virus infectivity assay, hACE2-A549 cells with approximately 50% confluence were seeded in 96-well plates and then incubated with the supernatant harvested from the virus transmission assay. At 24 h after culture, the cells were fixed and subjected to IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody.For the viral shedding assay, hACE2-A549 clones were adsorbed with SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.2 for 1 h. After the removal of the viral inoculant, the cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and incubated in fresh medium. At 24 hpi, the supernatant was harvested and viral RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) and was quantified using real-time reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with primers targeting the E gene of SARS-CoV-2, as described previously [13]. The viral RNA copy number was determined using a real-time RT-PCR standard generated from a synthetic oligonucleotide fragment of E gene (Genomics BioSci and Tech).All experiments involving SARS-CoV-2 were conducted in a biosafety level 3 laboratory in accordance with the guidelines established by the Biosafety Level 3 Facility of the Institute of Biomedical Sciences (IBMS), Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.Immunofluorescence assay (IFA) and fluorescence stainingCells were seeded in 96-well plates or on coverslips for 24 h. After infection, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 20 min, permeated with 0.5% Triton X-100 buffer for 2 min, and blocked with 3% BSA for 30 min. The cells were stained with primary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h, washed three times with PBS, and incubated with secondary antibodies, DAPI (Sigma) for nuclear staining, or Alexa Fluor 647 phalloidin (Thermo Fisher) for F-actin staining at room temperature for 1 h. Viral RNA (vRNA) was stained using the RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent V2 Assay kit (ACD) with a SARS-CoV-2-specific probe (NC_045512.2, ACD).For high-content image analysis, immunofluorescence images were acquired using the ImageXpress Micro XLS Widefield high-Content Analysis System (Molecular Devices), and the virus infection rate was measured using MetaXpress Software (Molecular Devices), as described previously [14]. To obtain super-resolution immunofluorescent images, images were acquired using a Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope equipped with Airyscan [15].Correlative light and electron microscopy (CLEM)First, 5 × 105 hACE2-A549 cells were infected with SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.2 for 24 h and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and 0.2% glutaraldehyde in PBS at room temperature for 1 h. The fixed cells were washed twice with PBS for 5 min before immunofluorescence staining as described above. The immunofluorescence images were acquired using a Zeiss LSM700 microscope. Next, the same sample was incubated with 0.1% OsO4 in 0.1 M PBS for postfixation, dehydrated, and embedded in Spurr’s resin for further transmission electron microscopy (TEM) examination. Ultrathin Sects. (100 nm) were examined using Tecnai G2 Spirit TWIN TEM (Thermo Fisher). Subsequently, for precise interpretation of CLEM data, both immunofluorescence and TEM images were aligned using the ec-CLEM plugin on the Icy platform.Statistical analysisData are presented as mean ± SD from three independent samples. Statistical significance was set at p < 0.05, and the data were analyzed using two-tailed Student’s t test.ResultsCell-free and cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in human lung cellsThe human lung epithelial A549 cell line can serve as a model for type II alveolar epithelial cells with limited amount of hACE2 expression. Therefore, A549 cell with exogenous expression of hACE2 is commonly employed in the study of SARS-CoV-2 infection [7, 16–19]. In this study, we used hACE2-expressing A549 (hACE2-A549) cells in viral transmission assays for evaluating the cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 1a).Fig. 1Cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in lung cells. a Schematic viral transmission assay. b–d Cell-free infection: SARS-CoV-2 was preincubated with neutralizing antibody (NAb) or control antibody (Ctrl Ab) and then used to infect hACE2-RFP-A549 cells (R) for 24 h. Coculture system: SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells (MOI = 0.2, 24 hpi) were used as virus donor cells (D) and cocultured with hACE2-RFP-A549 cells with NAb or Ctrl Ab for 24 h. NSP3 expression was analyzed using IFA (b and c) and the infection of R cells was quantified with a high-content image analysis system (d). The supernatant was harvested for the virus infectivity assay (e). f mCherry-A549 cells (without exogenous hACE2 expression, exhACE2-) and hACE2-RFP-A549 cells (with exogenous hACE2 expression, exhACE2 +) were used as R cells for cell-free infection and cell-to-cell transmission assay. The infection of R cells was quantified with a high-content image analysis system at 24 hpi. Arrowhead, SARS-CoV-2-infected R cells; scale bar, 50 μm; Ctrl Ab groups (d and e) and exhACE2 + groups (f) were defined as 100%; all data indicated means with standard deviation (SD) (n = 3) of each group; ***p < 0.001, determined using two-tailed unpaired Student’s t testIn cell-free infection, hACE2-A549 cells with red fluorescent protein (RFP, hACE2-RFP-A549) were readily infected by SARS-CoV-2 in the presence of control antibody, as revealed by an IFA with NSP3 (Fig. 1b, Ctrl Ab) and as quantified using high-content image analysis (Fig. 1d). This infection could be completely blocked by premixing SARS-CoV-2 with an NAb against the RBD of S protein [12] (Fig. 1b and d, NAb). Similar results were also obtained using the convalescent plasma from patients with COVID-19 instead of the NAb (Additional file 1: Fig. S1). The abolishment of remaining viral infectivity in the culture supernatants by NAb indicated that it was effective for blocking SARS-CoV-2 infection (Fig. 1e), and that cell-free transmission was sensitive to NAb neutralization.Distinct results were noted for the coculture system, in which SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells were used as virus donors for infecting hACE2-RFP-A549 cells. SARS-CoV-2 infection, measured based on NSP3 expression in cocultured hACE2-RFP-A549 cells, was only slightly reduced by NAb treatment (Fig. 1c and d), indicating NAb-resistant cell-to-cell transmission. The infection rate of both cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission was greatly reduced in A549 cells without exogenous hACE2 expression (Fig. 1f), suggesting the involvement of hACE2 in both modes of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Taken together, our data suggest that SARS-CoV-2 infection proceeds through both cell-free and cell-to-cell modes among cells expressing hACE2.hACE2 expression levels regulate SARS-CoV-2 transmissionSARS-CoV-2 infection has been reported to induce dynamic hACE2 expression in humans [10]. To determine whether different hACE2 expression levels affect the mode of transmission, we examined SARS-CoV-2 infection in several A549 cell clones with different expression levels of the hACE2 protein (Fig. 2a and b, and Additional file 2: Fig. S2). To monitor virus progeny transmission over a long period of infection, we infected cells with SARS-CoV-2 at a low MOI in the presence of control antibody or NAb for up to 3 days (Fig. 2c). Notably, different distribution patterns of infected cells were noted between cells with low hACE2 expression (hACE2-A549 #1–1 and #1–2; low-hACE2 cells) and high hACE2 expression (hACE2-A549 #2 and #3; high-hACE2 cells; Fig. 2d).Fig. 2hACE2 expression controls the preference of SARS-CoV-2 infection between cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission. a and b The hACE2 expression level in each hACE2-A549 clone was determined using Western blotting with an anti-ACE2 antibody, and then quantified utilizing ImageJ software. hACE2 expression was normalized to actin expression, and the #1–1 clone was defined as 1. c–e, hACE2-A549 clones were adsorbed with SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 for 1 h, and then the cells were replenished with fresh medium containing NAb or Ctrl Ab. At 24, 48, and 72 hpi, the cells were fixed for IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody (d), and the virus infection rate was quantified with a high-content image analysis system (e). f The sizes of infected foci in NAb treatment groups at 48 hpi were measured with over 200 infected foci for each clone. g The supernatants at each time point were harvested for virus infectivity assay. The virus infectivity in supernatant from the #1–1 hACE2-A549 clone at 24 hpi was defined as 1. h vRNA in supernatant from each hACE2-A549 clone was quantified using real-time RT-PCR at 24 hpi. Low: low hACE2 expression; High: high hACE2 expression; scale bar, 200 μm; data indicated means (f) or means with SD (n = 3) (b, e, g and h) of each group; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, determined using two-tailed unpaired Student’s t testCompared with control antibody, NAb treatment significantly reduced virus spread in low-hACE2 cells, but not in high-hACE2 cells, at 48 and 72 hpi (Fig. 2d and e). Furthermore, the infection foci in high-hACE2 cells were significantly bigger than those in low-hACE2 cells, especially at 48 hpi (Fig. 2f). The clusters of infected high-hACE2 cells expanded faster than those of infected low-hACE2 cells in the presence of NAb, implying that cell-to-cell transmission was more efficient in high-hACE2 cells. Furthermore, the viral infectivity measured in the culture supernatant indicated that much more infectious SARS-CoV-2 virions were released from low-hACE2 cells than from high-hACE2 cells (Fig. 2g, control antibody), despite a similar level of infected cells (measured based on the expression of the viral NSP3 protein) in both high-hACE2 and low-hACE2 cells (Fig. 2d). To determine the cause for the discrepancy in infectivity, we measured the amount of viral RNA (vRNA) in the supernatant by using real-time RT-PCR. vRNA levels were lower in high-hACE2 cells (Fig. 2h), suggesting that higher hACE2 expression leads to the lower release of progeny virus. Our data indicated that compared with cell-free transmission, cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is predominant in infected high-hACE2 cells, and the opposite was also true in infected low-hACE2 cells.SARS-CoV-2 transmits through intercellular extensionsIt has been demonstrated that cells can internalize extracellular vesicles through various endocytic pathways [20]. To investigate whether cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurs via extracellular vesicles, we introduced endocytosis inhibitors into the experimental setup of cell-to-cell transmission. The findings revealed that the use of endocytosis inhibitors did not lead to a substantial reduction in SARS-CoV-2 cell-to-cell transmission (Additional file 3: Fig. S3). To elucidate the characteristics of cell-to-cell transmission, we employed super-resolution microscopy to examine the subcellular distribution of viral components such as S and N proteins, as well as vRNA. The formation of intercellular extensions connecting virus donor and recipient cells was noted in our coculture system (Fig. 3a–c). Some of the extensions were elongated with a length of up to 100 µm (data not shown), and the morphology was similar to that of tunneling nanotubes [21, 22], which has been reported to be involved in cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 [6]. Furthermore, S proteins (Fig. 3a), N proteins (Fig. 3b), and vRNA (Fig. 3c) were observed in intercellular extensions. vRNA signals in the body of recipient cells were close to the vRNA-containing intercellular extension (Fig. 3c, arrow), suggesting that the virus was transported from the donor cells through intercellular extension to the recipient cells. Thus, SARS-CoV-2 can be transmitted directly through intercellular extensions.Fig. 3SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted among cells through intercellular extensions. a–c The super-resolution immunofluorescence images of cell-to-cell transmission assay at 24 h after coculture. S proteins (a) and N proteins (b) were stained with antibodies. vRNA (c) was detected using a vRNA probe. D: virus donor cells (SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells); R: hACE2-RFP-A549 cells; arrow: vRNA in recipient cells (c); scale bar, 10 μm. d Cells were treated with cytoskeleton inhibitors during cell-to-cell transmission assay. The infection of R cells was analyzed using IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody and quantified with a high-content image analysis system. Solvent control groups were defined as 100%; the data indicated means with SD (n = 3) of each group; *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, determined using two-tailed unpaired Student’s t testTo verify the importance of intercellular extensions in the cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2, we treated the coculture system with cytochalasin D and nocodazole for disrupting F-actin and microtubule assembly, which are involved in the formation of intercellular extensions and in cargo transportation, respectively [23]. This treatment significantly reduced cell-to-cell transmission in a nearly dose-dependent manner (Fig. 3d). Thus, our data suggest that SARS-CoV-2 infection spreads directly to neighboring cells through intercellular extensions.SARS-CoV-2 virions are packaged in hACE2-containing vesicles for intercellular transportationTo understand how the viral-entry receptor hACE2 affects SARS-CoV-2 transmission, we monitored the intracellular distribution of hACE2 proteins in infected cells through super-resolution immunofluorescence imaging and TEM. In mock-infected cells, hACE2 proteins were mainly located on the cell surface (Fig. 4a), whereas they were noted around intracellular vesicles and colocalized with viral S proteins in SARS-CoV-2-infected cells at 24 hpi (Fig. 4b). Thus, during SARS-CoV-2 replication, hACE2 proteins were likely redistributed to intracellular vesicles.Fig. 4Progenies of SARS-CoV-2 are packaged in hACE2-containing vesicles. Super-resolution immunofluorescence images of mock control (a) and SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells (MOI = 0.2, 24 hpi, b). Scale bar, 20 μm (a and b). c CLEM image from SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells (MOI = 0.2, 24 hpi), which combined the immunofluorescence images and TEM images from the same sample. Arrowhead, single membrane; arrow, VLSs; scale bar, 500 nmTo investigate the ultrastructure of hACE2/S-protein-positive vesicles, we used a CLEM approach [24], which enables the acquisition of both immunofluorescence images and TEM micrographs from the same sample. The hACE2/S-protein-positive vesicles appeared to be single-membrane vesicles (SMVs) (Fig. 4c, arrowhead in TEM image) and contained virus-like structures (VLSs) (Fig. 4c, arrow) with a diameter of 80–100 nm, the size of which was similar to the size of SARS-CoV-2 [25, 26]. Notably, these SMVs differed from the double-membrane compartments responsible for SARS-CoV-2 replication [27], suggesting that these are post-replication vesicles. Furthermore, the VLSs appeared to accumulate near the inner surface of the SMV (Fig. 4c), which was similar to the localization of S protein signals in the super-resolution immunofluorescence images (Fig. 4b). Thus, we suspect that these VLSs were SARS-CoV-2 virions produced after virus replication.To determine whether SARS-CoV-2 was transported through intercellular extensions, we examined the super-resolution immunofluorescence images and several CLEM micrographs (Fig. 5). The hACE2/S-protein-positive vesicles were transported along intercellular extensions (Fig. 5a and b), and VLSs were accumulated inside these vesicles (Fig. 5c). These data confirm our finding that the cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurs through intercellular extensions and suggest that the hACE2-containing vesicles are likely the vehicles of virus transmission. Overall, our study demonstrated that increased hACE2 expression may cause switching from cell-free transmission to cell-to-cell transmission for SARS-CoV-2 infection, and that hACE2 also plays a role in virus transportation through intercellular extensions.Fig. 5SARS-CoV-2 particles are transported by hACE2-containing vesicles through cellular extensions. a Super-resolution immunofluorescence images from SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells (MOI = 0.2, 24 hpi). Scale bar, 20 μm. b, c CLEM images from SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells (MOI = 0.2, 24 hpi). c The magnified images from the white dotted frame in b. Arrow, VLSs; scale bar, 50 μm (b) and 500 nm (c)DiscussionOur results demonstrated that hACE2 is a molecular switch for the mode of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. We propose a model of hACE2-regulated SARS-CoV-2 transmission, in which hACE2 serves as a molecular switch that controls the balance between cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission (Fig. 6). In hACE2 limited cells, the balance tilts toward cell-free transmission, with SARS-CoV-2 infected cells releasing numerous virions, benefiting long-distance viral spread. In hACE2 abundant cells, the balance tilts toward cell-to-cell transmission, with SARS-CoV-2 spreading to neighboring cells likely through hACE2-containing vesicles and intercellular extensions, thus evading humoral immunity.Fig. 6The model of hACE2-regulated SARS-CoV-2 transmission. The hACE2 protein is crucial in regulating the cell-free and cell-to-cell routes of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. When hACE2 levels are limited in cells, the balance tips toward cell-free transmission. Conversely, when hACE2 levels are abundant in cells, the balance tilts toward cell-to-cell transmissionIt is perplexing how the hACE2-limited environment in the lung facilitates high SARS-CoV-2 transmissibility. Between 44 and 69% of SARS-CoV-2 infections are estimated to be transmitted from presymptomatic donors [28, 29], creating major challenges for disease prevention and control. Our finding that SARS-CoV-2 shedding is negatively regulated by hACE2 expression supports the notion of high-level viral shedding in early stages of COVID-19 [28, 30]; this massive release of virions in the low-hACE2 environment in the lung may facilitate interhost transmission. Additionally, the early peak of SARS-CoV-2 shedding preceding the induction of antibody-mediated immune responses [28, 30, 31] could further increase the likelihood of virus spread.Similar phenomena of decreased viral shedding in an environment with high levels of viral receptors have been reported for other viruses. For instance, sialic acids, the receptors for influenza virus, capture budding progeny virions on the cell surface and inhibit their release while viral neuraminidase is inactivated [32]. The suppression of viral shedding by neuraminidase inhibitors remains the primary therapeutic strategy against flu [33], emphasizing the importance of receptor–virus interactions in viral shedding and pathogenesis. In the present study, we observed that many SARS-CoV-2 particles accumulated in hACE2-containing SMVs. This virion accumulation may be due to the abundant hACE2 proteins on the inner surface of SMVs, which retain the virions through a mechanism similar to the sialic acid–influenza virus interaction. These hACE2-containing vesicles likely transport progeny SARS-CoV-2 particles for cell-to-cell transmission through intercellular extensions. Notably, our observation that SARS-CoV-2 particles were inside the intercellular extensions making them more likely to evade NAb attacks, compared with the virions observed on (outside) intercellular extensions in previous studies [6, 7]. However, whether the SARS-CoV-2 accumulation in hACE2-containing vesicles is the cause or the consequence of the switch to cell-to-cell transmission requires further study.We also demonstrated that increased hACE2 expression promotes the cell-to-cell transmission of SARS-CoV-2. ACE2 is an ISG that is upregulated following viral infection in humans after the induction of innate immunity and then adaptive immunity. Thus, it is beneficial for viral spread in cases where SARS-CoV-2 infection can switch from cell-free transmission to cell-to-cell transmission to avoid attacks from NAb. Additionally, SARS-CoV-2 may be capable of infecting neurons through cell-to-cell transmission [6], thus potentially contributing to the neurological symptoms associated with COVID-19, including long COVID-19 [34]. However, the exact mechanisms of neuronal infection and the long-term consequences of SARS-CoV-2 infection for neurons remain unclear.ConclusionsOur study demonstrated that hACE2 not only functions as the receptor for SARS-CoV-2, enabling viral entry, but also serves as a molecular switch that controls the mode of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Cell-free transmission and cell-to-cell transmission have different advantages and disadvantages. Their dynamic regulation through hACE2 allows SARS-CoV-2 to maximize its transmission fitness and adapt to different stages of COVID-19 progression in an individual. Furthermore, it is worth noting that neutralizing antibodies can only impede cell-free transmission, while our study demonstrates that hACE2 plays a role in both cell-free and cell-to-cell transmission. Therefore, the use of ACE2 inhibitor in combination with other antivirals may enhance the treatment’s efficacy by halting SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Our study provides new insights into the COVID-19 pandemic in terms of the infectivity and spread of SARS-CoV-2, and the study results can guide the development of new antiviral measures.Supplementary Information
Additional file 1: Figure S1. SARS-CoV-2 efficiently spreads among hACE2-expressing cells when cell-free transmission is completely blocked by convalescent plasma. Cell-free infection: SARS-CoV-2 was preincubated with convalescent (CP) or control (Ctrl) plasma and then used to infect hACE2-RFP-A549 cells (R) for 24 h. Coculture system: SARS-CoV-2-infected hACE2-A549 cells (MOI = 0.2, 24 hpi) as virus donor cells (D) were cocultured with hACE2-RFP-A549 cells with CP or Ctrl plasma for 24 h. The infection of R cells was determined using IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody (a) and quantified with a high-content image analysis system (b). The supernatant was harvested for the virus infectivity assay (c). Arrowhead, SARS-CoV-2 infected R cells; Scale bar = 50 μm; Ctrl groups were defined as 100%; Data indicated means with standard deviation (SD) (n = 3) of each group.Additional file 2: Figure S2. hACE2 expression level of hACE2-A549 clones. hACE2 expression level of each hACE2-A549 clone was analyzed using Western blotting with anti-ACE2 antibody.Additional file 3: Figure S3. The effect of endocytosis inhibitors on SARS-CoV-2 cell-to-cell transmission. Cells were treated with endocytosis inhibitor (dynasore) or clathrin-mediated endocytosis inhibitor (piststop 2) during cell-to-cell transmission assay. The infection of R cells was analyzed using IFA with anti-NSP3 antibody and quantified with a high-content image analysis system. Cell viability is determined by the total cell count, with nuclei stained using DAPI. Cell counting was performed using a high-content image analysis system. Solvent control groups were defined as 100%; the data indicated means with SD (n = 3) of each group.


Title: Molecular epidemiology in the HIV and SARS-CoV-2 pandemics

INTRODUCTIONThe principal goal of epidemiology is to identify the causative and correlative factors that drive a disease to enable a rational basis for infection prevention and disease control. This includes addressing the basic questions of what is the causative agent, how is it spread, who is at risk, where is it prevalent, when is it a threat, and why does it cause disease? At the beginning of the HIV pandemic, these questions were addressed through the use of contact tracing, case finding, and well executed case–control studies, the basic tools of infectious disease epidemiologic investigation. With advances in molecular biology, most notably PCR and gene sequencing, new molecular-based approaches to perform epidemiological investigations were developed, oftentimes directly in response to the HIV epidemic itself. Today, molecular epidemiology is indispensable to the investigation of a new disease or disease outbreak. Indeed, these approaches were deployed very early in the SARS-like coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) epidemic to inform urgent outstanding questions of cause, origin, transmission, and risk. Despite these successes, several limitations to these approaches have been exposed by these two different epidemics, especially in regards to implementation. Here, we discuss some of the tools of molecular epidemiology, their use and limitations as applied to the HIV epidemic, and lessons we have learned so far in applying these approaches to SARS-CoV-2. Box 1no caption availableMolecular diagnostics: antibody and PCR-based testingOne of the first challenges faced by clinicians, public health experts, and epidemiologists during a new epidemic is the need for accurate and sensitive diagnostic tools. Traditionally, diagnostic procedures were heavily dependent on clinical symptom tracking, history of exposure, and standard microbiology practices to isolate infectious agents. Although often sufficient for extracting population level trends, these tools alone are often complicated by variability in clinical presentation, incomplete medical histories, insufficient resources or inadequate protocols for microbial isolation, and high rates of overall uncertainty [1–3]. The development of molecular diagnostic tools for the detection of specific pathogens, or an immune response to specific pathogens, revolutionized our capacity to diagnose infectious diseases accurately within large populations. Although the sensitivity of these tests is still largely dependent on the quality and timing of sample collection relative to the infection time course, their specificity is generally high when properly controlled [1–3].The first molecular diagnostic tool for HIV was an IgG antibody test developed in 1985, just 2 years after the isolation and discovery of the virus as the causative agent of AIDS [4–6]. This first-generation test was an ELISA that used HIV-1 infected cell lysates as the fixed antigen over which patient serum would be applied. Anti-HIV antibodies would stick to the HIV antigens for detection with IgG-specific secondary antibodies that could be quantified by a chemiluminescence readout. In order to rule out false-positive tests (due to pregnancy, autoimmune disease, and other undetermined reasons) and further differentiate HIV-1 from HIV-2, a subsequent validation of these results was required by immunoblotting or immunoflourescence [7,8]. This two-part testing algorithm (serology with secondary confirmation) would be refined in the second and third generations to improve the breadth of HIV subtypes that could be detected and to standardize the antigens used as bait for mass production. Although these algorithms had high sensitivity and specificity, their reliance on antibody detection dictated a significant lag time between exposure and diagnosis. In other words, due to the time it takes for the body to mount a specific antibody response detectable in the blood (i.e. the time to seroconversion), these tests were not be able to detect infection for 3–12 weeks following exposure [9–11]. To narrow this negative window, fourth-generation tests that incorporated direct antigen detection were developed, first becoming available in 1997 (Fig. 1a). These tests similarly relied on ELISA methodology, but for detection of both HIV p24 antigen as well as anti-HIV antibodies [9,12]. Fifth-generation tests that included separate readouts for antigens and antibodies were developed in 2015. These tests are usually effective at detecting HIV infection within 18–45 days following exposure. These later tests also allowed for more rapid and improved differentiation between HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection [13].FIGURE 1Evolution of HIV diagnostic algorithms. (a) This cartoon depicts the abundance of HIV diagnostic substrates in the serum of a figurative patient during the first several weeks following infection. Although first-generation HIV tests that relied on detection of anti-HIV IgG antibodies in patient serum had a large ‘negative window’ between infection and detection, each successive generation of tests reduced this gap. Nucleic acid tests are primarily used for medical management of disease, but are used for diagnostic/screening purposes in some algorithms. (b) The current HIV testing algorithm based on guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control.Serological tests for diagnostic purposes are relatively cheap, have a low barrier to entry and can be readily adapted to rapid, at-home or point-of-care testing platforms [14,15]. These ‘rapid’ tests generally rely on immunochromatography wherein differences in antibody movement in the presence or absence of its antigen can be detected by laminar flow. Rapid tests generally have lower specificity than the traditional ELISA-based tests, and so require result confirmation, but enable outreach and testing to a much broader population than otherwise would be accessible [14,15]. There is currently one FDA-approved rapid self-test for HIV in the United States (OraQuick), which detects anti-HIV antibodies from an oral swab. Rapid, point-of-care tests are also available that use a single drop of blood from a fingertip (i.e. Alere Determine, among others) [14–16].Although serological assays are the recommended diagnostic tests for HIV, PCR-based testing is also a helpful adjunct in certain diagnostic situations. Rather than detecting the virus-specific antibodies or viral proteins, these tests rely on detection of viral nucleic acids [17–19]. In these tests, viral RNA is extracted from blood samples, converted into complementary DNA (cDNA), and amplified with HIV-specific oligonucleotide primers. If done in a quantifiable way, these assays can also be used to determine viral load, which can be an important determinant of transmission and pathogenesis [20–24]. Although these tests are generally more expensive, more prone to false positivity than the current antibody testing algorithms, and can be subject to longer turnaround times, they can be used to detect HIV infection within 3–14 days following exposure, often prior to the appearance of quantifiable p24 antigen or anti-HIV antibodies in the blood [17–19]. PCR-based assays are primarily used as a diagnostic adjunct in cases wherein acute infection is suspected very soon after a high-risk exposure (with follow-up antibody algorithm confirmation) [18], for the detection of mother-to-child transmission (to differentiate infant infection given the passive transfer of antibody in utero) [25], and for surveillance of blood donations [26]. Following acute infection, some individuals may have viral set points below the limit of detection for PCR-based assays, so serological tests are often preferred at time points beyond the immediate post-exposure period. As such, PCR assays for plasma HIV RNA are primarily used for medical management and not generally recommended as a stand alone diagniostic.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC's) current HIV testing algorithm calls for primary screening with a fourth or fifth-generation HIV-1/2 antigen/antibody immunoassay (Fig. 1b) [27]. A majority of these tests, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Abbott Architect HIV Ag/Ab test or the GS Combo Ag/Ab EIA test, have been extensively evaluated with reported sensitivity and specificity ranging from 99.7 to 100% [27–29]. Due to the high sensitivity, a follow-up test is not recommended, unless an exposure event is suspected within the test's negative window (roughly within the previous 2–4 weeks), in which case a PCR-based nucleic acid test is suggested. If the initial assay gives a positive result, a follow-up immunoassay to confirm diagnosis and differentiate between HIV-1 and HIV-2 is required. If a negative result is obtained in follow-up, a PCR-based nucleic acid test is again suggested to test for acute infection in the negative window. If a preliminary positive result is obtained from a rapid, point-of-care test, result confirmation using this algorithm in a certified clinical laboratory is required.The type of diagnostic test that is most effective is highly dependent on the nature of the virus and the goal of the test. HIV establishes a chronic infection throughout the lifetime of an individual, so while early diagnosis is optimal, diagnostic tools that are effective at any stage of disease are useful for protecting patient health and for controlling future spread [20,21,30▪▪]. Viruses that do not establish chronic infections, however, afford only a small window in which diagnostic tests can be used to inform treatment and prevent spread. By the time serological responses are developed against SARS-CoV-2, for example, a majority of people have already cleared the virus and cannot transmit the infection. Thus, although serological tests that indicate prior exposure to SARS-CoV-2 may be informative for transmission models, such results are of limited benefit for determining if there is a current risk of further transmission [31,32▪]. Given this limitation, PCR-based testing has emerged as the primary diagnostic test for detecting SARS-CoV-2 infection in the clinic. There are a large variety of these tests available, most of which rely on amplification of a portion of the viral nucleocapsid (N) or RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) genes [31,33▪,34].When properly controlled, the specificity of PCR-based diagnostic tests can be near perfect in high prevalence symptomatic populations given their dependency on unique sequences of nucleic acids. The sensitivity of PCR-based testing, however, may be substantially lower dependent on the timing of the sample, sample source, and sample collection quality [34]. For example, the sensitivity and specificity of most nucleic acid tests for HIV are greater than 99.5%, but the sensitivity of these assays drop if the specimen is collected too early or late relative to acute infection, if the specimen used is from an oral swab or dried blood spot as opposed to serum, or if the specimen is processed outside a certified clinical laboratory [27,35]. Variation in the sensitivity of PCR-based SARS-CoV-2 testing is similarly dependent on timing, specimen collection and sample processing. To avoid these issues, best practices include amplification of a housekeeping gene within each specimen to validate sample quality, repeat testing after possible exposure to validate negative results (especially in cases shortly after exposure) and limitation of testing to certified clinical labortaories with trained personnel [36]. Even when using best practices, however, initial studies estimate that the sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 PCR-based testing for COVID-19 pneumonia may be as low as 70% [37▪▪]. The relatively low sensitivity of these tests and the subsequently higher probabilities of false negatives emphasize the need for additional surveillance mechanisms (contact tracing, symptom monitoring and so on) as well as for careful adherence to public health guidelines (social distancing, wear masks in public spaces, wash hands regularly and so on). More studies are needed to determine the true sensitivity of the various tests currently being employed in clinical versus population-based settings and to determine how much sensitivity varies in symptomatic versus asymptomatic people [37▪▪].Given the frequency and scale with which SARS-CoV-2 testing is needed for diagnosis, surveillance and monitoring, additional innovations in diagnostic testing strategies are required. The development of point-of-care testing strategies that either enable more reliable self-sampling (i.e. through oral rinsates), faster turn around times (i.e. rapid tests such as the Abbott ID NOW or Cepheid Xpert Xpress) or less reliance on specialized equipment are being explored [38–40]. Much like with the development of rapid HIV tests, these are not meant to serve as a stand-in for clinical testing, but rather as a means to broaden capacity and outreach, link potential pateints to clinical care sites, and inform potentially contagious individuals of steps to limit transmission. Beyond changing the test procedure itself, assorted pooling strategies are being explored to better enable bulk testing [41,42]. Orginally developed as a way to increase the throughput of blood borne pathogen testing in the blood supply, these strategies rely on pooling a given number of patient samples prior to testing [26,43]. Individual specimens that compose negative pools are presumed negative, while individual specimens that compose positive pools are then routed to individual testing. The number of samples in each pool is dictated by both the local positivity rate and the overall sensitivity of the assay. Many of these strategies and others are being developed with support from the National Institutes of Health Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx) programme [40,44].In sum, molecular diagnostics have become a vital tool in epidemic management to link people to care, monitor transmission, enact preventative measures and answer the most basic of epidemiological questions: who is being or has been infected? Although these tests may seem definitive, the sensitivity and specificity of the test, its implementation, and the exact nature of the readout dictate the strengths and weaknesses of each approach. As such, they are best leveraged in the context of complete clinical care and health surveillance that includes symptom monitoring, contact tracing, and risk communication. Improved study of the limitations of these tests in clinical practice and improved communication of these limitations to health providers and patients will go a long way towards optimal implementation of molecular diagnostics in the context of an ongoing epidemic.Virus genome sequencingAlthough molecular diagnostics have become vital tools for infectious disease surveillance, genetic sequencing approaches have likewise matured to become important tools for understanding disease cause and transmission. The genetic information obtained from viral sequences is a high-resolution source of information that can be used not only for studying biological properties of pathogenic viruses, but also for understanding critical elements of viral spread that inform and direct public health policies [45–48]. The extraordinary development of sequencing technologies and analysis methods even within the last decade have accelerated these trends in recent years. In addition, the establishment of publicly available sequence databases such as the Los Alamos HIV sequence database, HIV sequence compendium, GenBank, and GISAID have provided scientists with rapid access to global viral sequences for an increased analysis power and much faster response for monitoring epidemic trends.The first HIV genomic sequences were described in a series of papers in 1985 [49,50]. Due to the relatively low abundance of viral DNA in patient tissues, these viruses were first passaged in tissue culture cells prior to molecular cloning and sequencing using dideoxynucleotide chain termination. Eventually, methods were developed to sequence clinical specimens directly [51]. It quickly became clear that HIV genetic diversity was not only remarkably high, but also critically important for defining the biological nature of the disease as well as the clinical efficacy of early antiviral drugs [52–54]. Indeed, as sequencing of clinical isolates became cheaper and easier, and the clinical significance of antiviral drug resistance became clear, sequencing of patient HIV plasma RNA became a standard of care in order to check for known antiviral resistance mutations and inform the use of appropriate therapeutics [55,56]. Later, these same results began to inform public health departments of potential risk networks (see Molecularly assisted Contact Tracing below). For the clinical purposes of drug resistance and coreceptor tropism prediction, high-throughput sequencing methods that target selected regions of the HIV genome (most commonly the HIV polymerase gene, pol) are effective [57–61], though more recent whole-genome sequencing methods have been developed for other applications such as global and within-host evolutionary analyses of HIV [62–64].Experience with sequencing HIV and other viruses has resulted in three major approaches to viral whole-genome sequencing: metagenomic, PCR amplicon, or target enrichment (reviewed in [65]). Each sequencing approach begins with extraction of total nucleic acids from the clinical specimen. When sequencing RNA viruses such as HIV or SARS-CoV-2, a reverse transcription step is first undertaken to convert RNA to cDNA. In metagenomic sequencing approaches, total cDNA obtained from the specimen is used to generate a platform-specific sequencing library for shotgun sequencing. The resulting sequence reads are then filtered to remove sequences of human host origin prior to being assembled and/or aligned to a reference genome sequence. Metagenomic sequencing has the advantage of being the fastest and most direct of the sequencing methods, requiring the fewest intermediate steps and, by minimizing PCR cycles, presents fewer opportunities for the introduction of PCR bias into the results. Metagenomic sequencing has the greatest potential for novel viral pathogen discovery and was the method used, in conjunction with targeted PCR, to first identify the SARS-CoV-2 virus sequence from a patient with COVID-19 symptoms at the beginning of the pandemic [66▪▪]. These advantages are offset, however, by the higher cost and lower sensitivity of the metagenomic approach, as considerably deeper sequencing is often required to obtain sufficient sequence relative to the large proportion of contaminating host or commensal organism nucleic acids.In PCR amplicon sequencing, the viral genome is amplified directly from the clinical specimen using PCR primers against the viral genome sequence to generate a library of tiled and overlapping amplicons. Sequence reads are aligned to a reference viral genome sequence to identify variants. PCR amplicon sequencing approaches were quickly developed and implemented for SARS-CoV-2, and have been crucial for several early discoveries [67,68▪]. This approach has the advantage of being able to selectively enrich the viral genome prior to sequencing, minimizing the amount of contaminating DNA or RNA being sequenced. This both decreases the cost of sequencing and increases the efficiency and throughput of clinical investigations as many isolates can be indexed and sequenced simultaneously. The amplification step also improves the sensitivity for detecting viruses in low abundance in the clinical specimen. Limitations of this approach include increased complexity of the library preparation and the possibility that viral variability could result in primer mismatches and incomplete sequencing. Relative to HIV, however, the low mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 somewhat tempers these concerns [69,70].Target enrichment, also known as pull-down, bait, or capture assays, involve DNA or RNA probes complementary to the viral sequence bound to a solid phase such as magnetic beads or others. After library preparation from the clinical specimen, viral genomes are allowed to hybridize to leader sequences on the bead-bound probes. The captured nucleic acids then undergo a limited number of PCR amplification cycles and sequencing. Multiple target enrichment probe sets were quickly developed for SARS-CoV-2 [71,72]. This approach can include multiple probes against the same virus such that a mutation in any one region does not disrupt sequencing or get replaced with primer or probe sequence. In addition, as there are fewer PCR amplification steps, there is less risk of introducing mutations into the genome sequence not found in the host.Several platforms for high throughput whole genome sequencing of viruses using these library preparation approaches are available. These include the short-read sequencing technologies such as Illumina's MiniSeq, MiSeq or NextSeq platforms with maximum read lengths of 300 bp and long-read platforms such as the Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) Sequel II or Oxford Nanopore MinION or GridION systems, which can each produce reads averaging several thousand bases in length. These platforms differ also in read accuracy with read sequences from short read platforms having error rates often below 1% compared with the approximately 5–15% error rate of the PacBio and Nanopore platforms [73]. The higher error rates of sequences produced on long-read platforms can complicate the resolution of HIV quasispecies in clinical specimens, which can result from prolonged chronic infection in the setting of high rates of both mutation and replication of the virus [74]. Hence, short read sequencing is currently more favoured for high throughput targeted or whole genome sequencing of HIV [75,76]. In contrast, the low mutation rate and limited infection duration of SARS-CoV-2 allow for either short or long-read sequencing platforms to be used to elucidate the sole or dominant variant in clinical specimens.Phylogenetic and phylodynamic methodsMost viruses, especially RNA viruses, accumulate variability at very high rates due to their elevated mutation rates, high progeny production, and short replication cycles [77–81]. This variability is affected by transmission patterns, host population structure and selective processes operating on the viral population, such as immune responses or antiviral therapies [74,82–85]. Due to the effect of these factors on the viral genetic variability, we can study the viral sequences and their variability patterns to infer the different processes the viral populations have gone through. Although the high mutation rates of other viruses such as HIV (inter-host substitution rate of ∼5x10−3 substitutions/site/year [70]) or influenza virus (∼4x10−3 substitutions/site/year [86]) allow for robust variability analysis based on targeted sequencing of selected genes or genome regions, the relatively low mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 (estimated substitution rate of ∼8x10−4 substitutions/site/year [69,87]) mandates complete viral genome sequencing to enable variability analyses.Generally, the first step in variation analysis is to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree with a representative set of sequences by applying nucleotide substitution models that best fit the data (i.e. the model that best explains the observed rates at which each nucleotide is substituted by another) [88]. The most commonly used methods for viral phylogenetic tree reconstruction are Maximum Likelihood [89–91] and Bayesian approaches [92,93]. The inclusion of specimens from different time points allows for evolutionary rate calculation by including a temporal parameter in the tree reconstruction and assuming a time-dependent accumulation of mutations (i.e. a molecular clock) [94,95]. The inferred phylogeny will depict the genetic relationships between the viral sequences along the reconstructed branches of the tree (Fig. 2a). Using these phylogenies, analytical methods can be used to surmise epidemiological processes using both traditional phylogenetic and newly developed phylodynamic methods.FIGURE 2Phylodynamic methods for measuring epidemiological parameters. (a) A hypothetical, temporal phylodynamic tree with geographical information (indicated by colors) where the x-axis represents the time of sample isolation. The combination of genetic distance and spatiotemporal metadata allows for the visualization of outbreaks over time and for estimation of viral evolutionary rates, selective pressures, diversification patterns and migration events, among other parameters. (b) These same phylogenies can be used to estimate viral population sizes of the outbreak at different times. (c) The degree of genetic diversification over time, as shown by the number of lineages over time, in relation to population size changes and other inferred evolutionary dynamics, can help estimate epidemiological parameters like spread or transmission.Traditional phylogenetic methods use molecular evolution and population genetics to infer characteristics of the viral populations being analysed, such as the most likely path of viral evolution and the origin of different viral lineages by statistical reconstruction of the most-probable ancestors of the sampled sequences along the phylogenetic tree [96,97]; the selective processes operating in the population by comparison of the rates of synonymous and nonsynonymous mutations [98–100]; and the viral population structure by measurement of the degree of compartmentalization [101,102] or neutrality [103] throughout the tree. Newer phylodynamic methods merge classic epidemiological models, such as the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model, with traditional phylogenetic methods to more directly study viral epidemics [74,83,104,105]. These methods allow the extraction of epidemiological parameters from the genetic information including viral origins, transmission networks, viral population size changes and risk factors (Fig. 2b,c). Moreover, these models allow the inclusion of geographical information in the analyses to study spatiotemporal dynamics of the viral populations using phylogeography [106]. Phylodynamic approaches have already been successfully applied in the study of multiple viral pathogens, including HIV-1 transmission networks [107▪,108–110,111▪▪] and epidemiological studies [105,112–114], influenza pandemics [115–117], Ebolavirus outbreaks [118–121] and hepatitis C virus studies [122,123], among others. More recently, phylodynamic analyses are being widely utilized to understand the new SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and inform public health measures [69,87,124,125].Although traditional epidemiological studies based on surveys, detailed contact tracing, and mathematical modeling are instrumental for studying epidemics, they require careful examination of confounding factors, are limited by missing or misclassified clinical care data, and can be prone to sampling issues [126]. Likewise, molecular-based methods for estimating key epidemiological parameters face a number of limitations due to evolutionary complexities, recombination, sampling bias and incorrect rooting of the phylogenies (i.e. incorrect assumption of the most recent common ancestor) [127]. The lower mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2, in particular, necessitates a careful adaptation of some of the phylogenetic assumptions previously optimized for studying RNA viruses with higher mutation rates. However, when used properly, these methods can provide confident and precise estimates of epidemiological parameters with reasonable predictive power that is difficult to achieve through traditional approaches alone [47,104,126,128].These types of molecular surveillance methods have already been implemented to help understand and track HIV spread in both research and public health settings. Phylogenetics were used in a landmark HIV prevention clinical trial to determine if participants on antiretroviral therapy (ART) were the source of new infections [129,130] and by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to help stop an outbreak of HIV among needle sharing partners [131]. Phylodynamic approaches have also enabled identification of gaps in current HIV prevention, care and treatment programmes that can improve detection, monitoring and control of chronic, local HIV subepidemics [132,133]. In this case, molecular surveillance by sampling a large statewide repository of HIV-1 sequence data identified steady onward propagation over years of certain sequences, uncovering previously unrecognized characteristics of those local subepidemics [132]. Another report assessed sources of transmission among recently infected MSM in the Netherlands, finding that the majority of recent infections could have been prevented with a public health approach informed by phylogenetic analyses [134]. Likewise, these methods have been used to describe the likely origin of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks around the world, identify newly emergent variants of the virus associated with higher viral loads in patient airways and define the potential for re-infection.Molecularly assisted contact tracingAlthough retrospective genetic variation analyses, such as those highlighted above, have been unquestionably valuable, real-time use of molecular surveillance may be more relevant for public health control of both HIV and SARS-CoV-2 spread. Unfortunately, the application of genome sequencing approaches and their analysis is both time and cost intensive, while public health agencies have been, and are now, resource-constrained. They generally do not have the time, analytical expertise or necessary resources to learn and apply the computationally intensive phylogenetic and phylodynamic methods above, which therefore now seem to have greater potential for real-time viral surveillance in the research setting than in public health organizations. Towards this end, another analytic methodology, HIV TRAnsmission Cluster Engine (HIVTRACE), has enabled frontline public health personnel to perform near real-time HIV molecular surveillance [111▪▪]. This method uses pairwise comparisons of genetic distances between sequences, without constructing phylogenetic trees, to identify ‘molecular clusters’ of HIV sequences. HIVTRACE has been deployed (with security measures) in recent years by the CDC to many state and city health departments across the USA [111▪▪]. This has been enabled by laws in a majority of states that mandate diagnostic laboratories to report full nucleotide sequences of a short, subgenomic region of HIV-1 (the pol gene, most commonly). These sequences are determined from plasma virion RNA as part of routine HIV care to guide selection of antiretrovirals to which an individual patient's virus is not resistant due to viral pol gene mutations. The CDC has used HIV pol sequence comparisons on a national level to bring large intra and inter-state molecular clusters to attention of relevant local jurisdictions for investigations aimed at interdicting further spread.At state and city health departments, research is ongoing to determine how HIVTRACE analyses may further augment HIV contact tracing. Large-scale contact tracing for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) began during World War II, and local public health agencies evolved this effort in response to the HIV epidemic into what is now called ‘partner elicitation services’. This involves a public health worker interviewing a person newly diagnosed with HIV and/or recently entering HIV care to identify all their sexual and drug-use partners (within a certain time frame). The health department then reaches out to these reported contacts privately and confidentially to determine what, if any, services would benefit them and help curtail further HIV transmission. This includes HIV testing for those who are not diagnosed with HIV. Linkage to care is arranged with the goal of enabling ART-mediated viral suppression to prevent further spread for those newly testing positive. Named partners who test negative for HIV are considered for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) if they meet indications based on ongoing behavioral risk for HIV acquisition. Viremia suppression and possibly engagement (or re-engagement) to care are services provided to named partners who are already known to have HIV.In many communities with high HIV incidences, timely access to partner services can be challenging. Ongoing research leveraging HIVTRACE is seeking to determine best practices for molecular surveillance with the goal of increasing the efficiency of partner services while maximally interdicting further HIV spread. The concept is that molecular clusters may include some individuals with related sequences who were not named as partners by the index case. In addition, the ‘riskiest’ molecular clusters might be prioritized, so that partner services workers can prioritize identifying the larger ‘transmission clusters’ that may be more problematic for public health. HIV-infected persons who lack sequences in the database because they were either not diagnosed or did not have HIV pol genotyping results reported to the health department would be added to relevant clusters by contact tracing. This, in turn, could facilitate further public health outreach to the larger ‘risk network’ that includes both HIV-infected persons (with and without HIV sequences) as well as uninfected persons who are at-risk via reported contact with those infected person(s) (Fig. 3).FIGURE 3Interpretation of molecular clusters in an epidemiological outbreak. Molecular clusters identified by viral sequencing and phylogenetics represent a subset of individuals within a transmission cluster who are linked by direct or indirect transmission events. These individuals are a further subset of people in an overall risk network who may or may not have already been exposed to a disease. Determining how representative a molecular cluster is of a risk network depends on a combination of molecular surveillance, contact tracing, and community engagement.Research applying a phylodynamic-like approach used HIVTRACE in combination with annual numbers of new diagnoses to determine that the molecular clusters with the most rapid and recent growth in the prior few years are at greatest risk for future cluster growth [110,135,136]. To define a growing cluster, the CDC now uses a tight genetic distance threshold (0.5%), a short time window for querying surveillance sequence databases (3 years), and any number above a small number of new infections (five new diagnoses) joining the molecular cluster within the most recent 12-month period [110]. However, more research is needed to define the optimal metric to monitor growing clusters and guide efforts to control further spread [137]. This includes developing more effective means to identify larger HIV transmission and risk networks from initial molecular clusters, for example, through iterative name elicitation or by using social network strategies [138–140].How well these emerging lessons in HIV molecular surveillance might apply to SARS-CoV-2 is not yet clear. Differences in droplet/aerosol/contact route of transmission versus sexual transmission, as well as the shorter duration of infectivity of SARS-CoV-2, may make elicitation of names of potential contacts more difficult for those diagnosed with, or exposed to, SARS-CoV-2 than HIV. This could increase the potential benefits of adding molecular surveillance to public health epidemiological investigations. That being said, decreased SARS-CoV-2 genetic diversity, relative to HIV, may or may not be countered by using full genome sequences for clustering, complicating the interpretation of molecular clusters. Furthermore, the scale and pace of SARS-CoV-2 spread outstrips that of HIV, raising the possibility that sequence cluster assessments may be much more challenging to apply to COVID-19 control.One critical lesson from these efforts for HIV is that molecular surveillance may complement, but not replace, current contact tracing that relies on elicitation of names of close contacts. It is important to note that there is far from complete concordance between partners named by an index case in a partner services interview and those persons with HIV sequences that molecularly cluster with that same index case. One report found that 48% of named partners had genetically closely related viruses, and that persons with genetically similar HIV sequences comprised 53% of named partners [141]. Persons diagnosed with HIV (female and male) who reported high-risk heterosexual contact were more likely to name at least one partner with a genetically similar virus than those reporting their HIV risk was via more stigmatized/unlawful behaviors, such as injection drug use or sex between men [141]. It is speculated that the latter HIV risk behaviours involve anonymity of partners, more partners or unwillingness to disclose names for multiple reasons; stigma and marginalization associated with those behavioral risks for HIV acquisition remain pervasive. Although only a subset of those undergoing contact tracing for SARS-CoV-2 exposure may face such repercussions for reporting (i.e. potentially based on immigration status, race, or adverse consequences enforced by educational or professional institutions), this highlights the importance of community engagement for successful control of viral spread by contact tracing. Indeed, the extensive literature on many persisting ethical issues raised by HIV molecular surveillance that still require work should inform the cautions and safeguards appropriate for research on potentially advancing molecular surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 [133,142–148].Electronic medical record dataAlthough the approaches above focus on the who, what, where and when of epidemiological investigation, understanding how infectious diseases are spread and why certain people may be more at risk usually depend on the cultivation and maintenance of clinical care data that track patient demographics, spatiotemporal variables, symptoms, behaviours, medical history, exposure, timing, etc. In conjunction with molecular information, including diagnostics, viral load, viral sequence and even patient genotypic information, these datasets can yield an epidemiological goldmine of information that shed light on transmission dynamics, pathogenesis, risk factors, and treatment outcomes. Traditionally, these data had to be manually curated from medical records and case files, which was not only time consuming, but exceptionally laborious. Today, much of this information can be extracted from electronic medical record (EMR) systems, though several challenges with these types of data persist.The AIDS pandemic began in an era without EMR systems and was first described by the CDC through standard epidemiological practices, including contact tracing, case finding and well executed case--control studies. This was done well before any laboratory had identified or sequenced HIV and this sentinel work defined routes of transmission and high-risk populations that continue to hold true today [149]. As EMR systems became popular and an essential part of medical care throughout the early to mid-2000s, HIV researchers have harnessed the power of EMRs to study real-world shifts in disease as individuals with HIV are aging and care has moved from in-hospital treatment of opportunistic infections to outpatient chronic management [150–153]. Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, EMR systems helped investigators quickly describe the clinical syndrome of hospitalized patients, define risk for poor outcomes and assess therapeutic interventions [154,155,156▪▪,157–159]. As we study the epidemiology of long-term complications of COVID-19 and of milder disease managed in the outpatient setting, we can expect to face several of the challenges we are currently facing in the use of EMR data to inform HIV research.These global pandemics have highlighted the need for rapid, reliable and comprehensive clinical information to help inform the evolving epidemiology of old and new health problems. EMR systems can fill this role, but we must remember that they were originally developed not to serve as an epidemiological research database, but rather for documentation of clinical care, managing day to day care of patients and for billing payers of medical services. Generally, public health and epidemiological based research have been an afterthought with EMR generated data analysed in a retrospective fashion. As such, EMR datasets are often complicated by missing information, inconsistencies, subjectivity and mixtures of longitudinal and static information. Thus, although EMR-based researchers often have the power of ‘Big Data’, they are ultimately at the mercy of clinical care providers for the type and timing of data generated. EMR research requires advanced statistical methods and careful consideration of clinical data management and standardization across data systems. At times, this requires clinician case review of individual EMRs to verify information, understand the completeness of electronic data capture and minimize misclassification of critical disease outcomes [160–162].The Centers for AIDS Research Network of Integrated Clinical Systems (CNICS; https://sites.uab.edu/cnics/) has been notably successful in harnessing the power of multi-site EMR data for HIV research and should serve as a model for how we move COVID-19 EMR-based research into the next phase of epidemiological and translational research [163–165]. This group consists of eight HIV clinical care sites throughout the USA with diverse demographics and geography. Each site is responsible for curating clinical data on HIV patients in care from the EMR and periodically submitting to the data management centre (DMC) at the University of Washington where quality checks, reconciliation and data standardization is a critical component of creating useful and rich research datasets [163,166▪]. Each site locally collects and stores biological samples (plasma and cells) annually on a subset of participants and CNICS has a centralized process to quickly identify research samples paired with clinical data. One of the unique strengths of CNICS is their approach of performing patient-reported outcome (PRO) assessments within the context of routine clinical care for in-depth longitudinal evaluations of substance/alcohol abuse, tobacco consumption, mental health, sexual behaviour and neurocognitive performance [167]. Finally, CNICS has an organized and efficient process to quickly perform research feasibility assessments, review research concept proposals, obtain letters for grant applications, give expert feedback and mentorship to investigators, and provide large research datasets. In addition to collaborative research across the network, CNICS sites have utilized their data to understand local HIV epidemics and identify potential participants for other observational or interventional HIV clinical studies.Future COVID-19 research on the evolution of viral genetics, long-term outcomes, reinfection, immune dysfunction, immunity and risk for end organ disease will require a similar approach with a central process for standardization and verification of EMR data, robust biological sample collection, and thoughtful participant centered evaluations. A much larger national network of clinical care sites each contributing COVID-19 (and comparator) clinical data from EMRs for research analyses has rapidly been developed (https://ncats.nih.gov/n3c), providing the potential for even more powerful data analyses for COVID-19 given these lessons can be learned and applied.As shown throughout this review, our understanding of disease diagnosis, pathogenesis and relevant outcomes will change with advancements in research and technology. At the same time, EMR systems must be flexible and evolve to play a bigger better role in providing high-quality information for public health surveillance and epidemiology research. In this way, we hope that lessons learned from years of HIV/AIDS EMR-based research can lead the path forward for COVID-19.CONCLUSIONIn the past few decades, major advances in molecular biology have revolutionized the ways in which we study and understand human health and disease. New technologies in serology, PCR, gene sequencing and computational modelling have revealed new methods to understand and identify the causative and correlative factors that drive disease. Molecular epidemiology approaches are providing new means for diagnosis, for tracking transmission and for understanding pathogenesis. These techniques, often developed in response to and optimized in conjunction with the ongoing HIV epidemic, are now being applied to the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in force. Although the advantages of these approaches are real, they also face several limitations and challenges, particularly in regards to implementation, that must be overcome by further research to reach their full potential. In any case, these approaches have been found to complement and enhance, but not supplant, traditional means of epidemiological study. Moving forward, we should take this opportunity to advance and employ new, blended methods of traditional and molecular epidemiology to improve both our understanding and management of current and future epidemics.AcknowledgementsNone.Financial support and sponsorshipThis work was supported by the Gilead Sciences Research Scholars Program in HIV (JFH), NIH grant K22 AI136691 (JFH), NIH grant R01 AI150998 (JFH), the NIH-supported Third Coast CFAR P30 AI117943 (RLR, JFH, CJA, RTD), a supplement from the NIH-sponsored HARC Center P50 GM082250 (JFH), NIH grant R01 AI 136056 (RTD), the NIH National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences grant UL1 TR001422 (RTD), a CTSA supplement to NCATS UL1 TR002389 (JFH), the generous support of the Dixon Family Foundation (JFH, EAO), a supplement to the Northwestern University Cancer Center P30 CA060553 (JFH), as well as through a generous contribution from the Walder Foundation (JFH, EAO). The funding sources had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, interpretation or writing of the report.Conflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGPapers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:▪ of special interest▪▪ of outstanding interest


Title: The furin cleavage site is required for pathogenesis, but not transmission of SARS-CoV-2

IntroductionSARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019 and initiated a global pandemic with a massive impact on the economy and global public health1. Over the past five years, SARS-CoV-2 has continued to cause infection and disease despite development of effective vaccine and therapeutics2. The continued infection and spread of SARS-CoV-2 have been attributed to its ability to evolve and produce variants of concern that evade key aspects of immunity and improve viral fitness3,4. Much of the evolution of the virus has occurred in the spike protein with new variants able to evade host immunity5. In addition, several spike mutations have improved fitness and transmission of the virus in the human populations6–9. Despite all the changes that have occurred in SARS-CoV-2, two key elements of the spike protein have remained intact throughout the pandemic: the presence of a furin cleavage site (FCS) and an extended S1/S2 loop10–12. Each are unique features of SARS-CoV-2 compared to other sarbecoviruses and play key roles in infection.The CoV spike protein consists of a globular head (S1 subunit) and a stalk (C-terminal of S1 and S2 subunit)13. The head is responsible for attachment and binding to host receptor ACE2. In contrast, the stalk contains the highly conserved fusion machinery. CoV spike must undergo two cleavages to enable host cell fusion, first at an S1/S2 junction site and a second at an S2’ site in the stalk to activate fusion. Unlike other sarbecoviruses, SARS-CoV-2 spike contains a unique furin cleavage site (FCS; RXXR) at the S1/S2 junction that aids in the efficiency of its cleavage. The FCS, not shared among other group 2B coronaviruses, is maintained in all SARS-CoV-2 variants. The multi-basic cleavage motif, PRRAR, exists on the S1/S2 junction loop and is involved in spike cleavage as a virion exits a producer cell. Our lab has previously investigated the importance of the FCS by generating an FCS deletion SARS-CoV-2 mutant (ΔPRRA; Fig.1A) and performing in vitro and in vivo characterization11. Our results indicated that deleting the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo compared to wild-type (WA-1 strain)11.Soon after, we investigated the function of the QTQTN motif immediately upstream the FCS, which is commonly deleted in cell culture stocks. Our group generated a QTQTN deletion mutant (ΔQTQTN; Fig. 1A) and performed in vitro and in vivo testing12. The ΔQTQTN mutant, like ΔPRRA, has attenuated infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo12. Both deletion mutants shorten the spike S1/S2 loop and demonstrate that loop length is important for SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. However, these studies do not evaluate importance of the FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 loop found in SARS-CoV-2. To address this question, we generated an infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2 that disrupts the FCS without shortening the loop (PQQAR mutant). We demonstrate that disruption of the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells and pathogenesis in hamsters. The PQQAR mutant has inhibited spike processing and altered protease usage for host cell entry. We also found that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 contact transmission in hamsters, but plays a role in transmission efficiency. Together, the data indicate that the SARS-CoV-2 FCS is important for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission.ResultsGeneration of the PQQAR mutantThe furin cleavage site (FCS; PRRA motif) of SARS-CoV-2 exists at the S1/S2 junction site on an external disordered loop in the spike protein (Fig. 1B). Our prior work evaluated the importance of the furin cleavage site by deleting the PRRA motif upstream of the S1/S2 cleavage site11. While the ΔPRRA mutant was attenuated, subsequent work shortening the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) of SARS-CoV-2 had a similar phenotype, indicating the importance of the loop length in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis12. However, the role of the actual FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 spike loop was still unclear. To investigate how the FCS, independent of loop length, impacts infection and pathogenesis, we generated an FCS mutant in the SARS-CoV WA-1 backbone that substituted arginine at position 682 and 683 to glutamines (PQQAR) (Fig. 1C). The PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 maintains the S1/S2 loop length but disrupts the furin cleavage site allowing evaluation of the role of the FCS. Using our reverse genetic system, we were able to recover the PQQAR mutant which grew to robust stock titers in Vero cells.PQQAR mutant attenuates viral replication in respiratory cell.Deletion of the FCS and shortening of the S1/S2 loops of the spike had previously been shown to impact viral replication11,12. Therefore, we first examined the PQQAR mutant in Vero E6 cells (African green monkey kidney cells) which lack type I interferon responses14. Following low MOI (0.01) infection, the PQQAR mutant shows no significant attenuation compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 in Vero cells (Fig. 1D). In fact, the PQQAR mutant grew to slightly higher viral titer, although not significantly different that WT. These results are consistent with prior studies shortening the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length and correspond with a fitness advantage in Vero cells11,12. In contrast, the PQQAR mutant has attenuated replication in Calu-3 2B4 cells, a human respiratory cell line (Fig. 1E). At 24 and 48 hours post infection (hpi), the PQQAR mutant has ~3 log reduction in titers compared to WT. Again, these results are consistent with prior studies(ΔQTQTN, ΔPRRA)11,12 and demonstrate that the both the S1/S2 loop and the FCS play a role in effective SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells.PQQAR mutant has attenuated in vivo pathogenesisHaving established attenuation in human respiratory cells, we next evaluated how disruption of the FCS impacts SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis in vivo. Utilizing the golden Syrian hamster model, three- to four-week-old male hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 focus forming units (FFU) of WT or PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 and followed over a 7-day time course (Fig. 2A). WT-infected hamsters exhibited weight loss starting at 2 dpi with peak weight loss of ~10–12% before beginning to recover at 6 dpi (Fig. 2B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant produced minimal weight loss following infection. Similarly, disease score corresponded with weight loss as WT had observable disease between days 3 and 6 characterized by ruffled fur, hunched posture, and reduced activity. In contrast, no disease was noted in PQQAR mutant infected hamsters. Together, the data demonstrated that disruption of the FCS attenuated disease in the hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection.PQQAR mutant has altered replication in upper and lower respiratory tract.Having established attenuated disease, we next evaluated viral replication in the lung, nasal wash, and trachea following infection with WT and PQQAR mutant. Examining the lung, we found that both WT and the PQQAR mutant replicated in the lungs following infection (Fig. 2C). However, the PQQAR mutant had a 1 log reduction in viral replication compared to WT at day 2 but was equal to WT at day 4. Probing the upper airway, the PQQAR mutant had a significant increase (~10-fold) in viral replication from nasal washes at both days 2 and 4 as compared to WT (Fig. 2D). These results are similar to prior studies that shortened the spike S1/S2 loop length or deleted the FCS11,12. In addition, the PQQAR mutant had similar and increased replication in the trachea at days 2 and 4 as compared to WT-infected hamsters (Fig. 2E). Overall, the replication data demonstrate viral replication attenuation of the PQQAR mutant in the lung but also augmented replication of the mutant in the upper airway tissues.Viral antigen staining confirms attenuation of PQQAR mutant in vivo.To further evaluate viral replication and distribution, we examined antigen staining following infection with WT or PQQAR mutant at days 2 and 4 post infection. Briefly, lung sections from infected hamsters were stained for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid and scored in a blinded manner for antigen in the airways, parenchyma, and overall as previously described8. We observed wide-spread antigen staining in both the parenchyma and airways following WT SARS-CoV-2 infection at both day 2 and 4 (Fig. 3A–B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant had more limited antigen staining compared to WT (Fig. 3C–D). While showing modest attenuation in the airways (Fig. 3E), the scores from the parenchyma (Fig. 3F) and overall (Fig. 3G) demonstrated that the PQQAR mutant had a significant deficit in antigen staining as compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 infection. The antigen staining in the large airways may be consistent with potentially greater replication in the airways (Fig. 2D–E). Similarly, the attenuation in the parenchyma and overall staining corresponds to reduced viral titer in the lung of PQQAR mutant-infected animals (Fig. 2C). Together, these results demonstrate attenuation in PQQAR mutant as compared to WT in terms of viral infection and distribution in the lung.PQQAR mutant infection shows reduced immune infiltration and damage.To further evaluate disease and damage, WT- and PQQAR- infected hamsters were evaluated for changes in histopathology. Lung sections were H&E stained and subsequently evaluated by a board-certified pathologist in a blinded manner. After infection, WT-infected hamsters demonstrated significant disease and damage characterized by interstitial pneumonia, peribrochiolitis, epithelial cytopathology, arterial mononuclear cell margination, and presence of polymorphonuclear cells in the bronchioles in some animals at day 2 (Fig. 4A). In contrast, significantly less disease was observed in the PQQAR mutant infected hamsters and was characterized by mild bronchiolitis, and interstitial pneumonia (Fig. 4B). At day 4, WT infected hamsters showed increased lung involvement by area involved with the addition of hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, perivasculitis, and infiltration of mononuclear cells (Fig. 4C). Notably, while increased compared to day 2, PQQAR mutant-infected animals had much less lung involvement and less severe disease and damage as compared to WT (Fig. 4D). While no significant disease and damage was observed in mock infected animals (Fig. 4E), the SARS-CoV-2 associated lesion were much more extensive in WT as compared to PQQAR mutant infected hamsters. WT-infected hamsters had significant increases in SARS-CoV-2 lesion percentages in lung section at days 2, 4, and 7 days post infection as compared to PQQAR mutant infection (Fig. 4F). These results are consistent with the weight loss and disease data (Fig. 2B) and indicate that the PQQAR mutant is attenuated in terms of pathogenesis in vivo.FCS disruption attenuates spike processingSpike mediated entry requires sequential cleavage at the S1/S2 junction and the S2’ site to activate fusion15. Prior work has established that the SARS-CoV-2 spike is partially cleaved prior to release from cells16; shortening the S1/S2 loop disrupts this cleavage on released virions. Here, we evaluate if FCS disruption affected spike cleavage on purified virions from the PQQAR mutant. Briefly, WT, PQQAR, and the ΔFCS mutant SARS-CoV-2 were collected from Vero E6 cells, purified using ultracentrifugation sucrose cushion, inactivated, and blotted for spike and nucleocapsid (Fig. 5A). Normalizing to nucleocapsid, we observe that both PQQAR and ΔFCS mutants have a reduction in S1/S2 cleavage product as compared to WT (Fig. 5B). While WT SARS-CoV-2 has ~40% of spike cleaved following infection of Vero cells, both disruption and deletion of the FCS results in mutants with very minimal S1/S2 cleavage product (Fig. 5C). Together, the results indicate that an intact FCS is required for spike processing prior to release of SARS-CoV-2 virions.TMPRSS2 plays role in attenuation of PQQAR mutantSARS-CoV-2 enters the host cell through either the endosomal route mediated by host cathepsins or the cell surface route mediated by host serine proteases like TMPRSS2 (Fig. 5D)15. The PQQAR mutant shows significant attenuation in Calu-3 2B4, but has no deficit in Vero E6 cells (Fig. 1C, 1D). A major distinction between the two cell lines is expression of TMPRSS2, which is highly expressed in Calu3 cells, but absent in Vero E6 cells. To determine if TMPRSS2 expression contributes to attenuation, we utilize Calu3 cells with TMPRSS2 knocked out. We subsequently infected the TMPRSS2 KO Calu3 cells with both WT SARS-CoV-2 and PQQAR mutant as previously described. Following infection, we note that both PQQAR and WT virus replication is not significantly different over the course of infection (Fig. 5E). Compared to standard Calu3 cells (Fig. 5F), WT SARS-CoV-2 infection was reduced to the same level of PQQAR mutant indicating that the primary difference between replication of the WT and FCS mutant virus in Calu3 cells is due to the activity of TMPRSS2. These results indicate that spike processing through the FCS plays an important role in utilization of TMPRSS2 mediated entry of SARS-CoV-2.Intact FCS is not required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in vivoThe disruption of the FCS by the PQQAR mutant demonstrates that the importance of the motif to SARS-CoV-2 infection of respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo. Yet, it remains unclear if the furin cleavage site is required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2. While attenuated in the lung, the PQQAR mutant displayed robust and augmented replication in the upper airways as compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 2C). With the upper airway infection thought to seed transmission, it left the possibility that the PQQAR mutant could still be transmited without a functional FCS. To test this question, we performed studies with WT and PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 to evaluate the capacity of the mutant virus to be transmitted in hamsters. Briefly, “donor” hamster were intranasally infected with 105 (FFU) of WT SARS-CoV-2 or PQQAR mutant (Fig. 6A). After 24 hours, each donor was individually co-housed 1:1 with a naïve “recipient” with no additional barriers to evaluate contact transmission for 8 hours. After cohousing, donors and recipients were separated into individual cages for the duration of the study. Before being returned to new cages, donor hamsters were nasal washed to measure their shedding titer on the day of exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for changes in weight and disease, euthanized two days post infection/exposure, and tissues/washes evaluated for viral load.Following infection of donors, we observed that the shedding titers in the nasal wash were similar between WT and PQAAR mutant after the exposure period (Fig. 6B). We also observed that donor titers at 2 days post infection showed the PQAAR mutant had higher viral load in the nasal wash, but reduced titer in the lung (Fig. 6C–D). These results are consistent with observations from acute infection showing greater replication of PQQAR mutant in the airways versus the lung (Fig. 2C–D). Examining transmission from donors to recipient, we observed that transmission of both WT and PQQAR mutants was 100% successful. All 5 donor pairs infected with either WT or PQQAR mutant resulted in detectable viral loads in the nasal wash and lungs of recipient animals 2 days post exposure (Fig. 6E–F). Yet, while transmission occurred, PQQAR mutant recipient hamsters had significant lower viral titers compared to WT for both the lung and nasal washes (Fig. 6E–F). The results suggest that while the FCS is not strictly required for transmission, its presence impacts the viral load observed in recipient animals. Regardless of reduced viral load, the results indicate that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the direct contact hamster model.FCS necessary for transmission fitness in vivoTo investigate how loss of the FCS impacts transmission fitness, we performed a competition transmission study between WT and PQQAR mutant virus in hamsters. Briefly, donor hamsters were intranasally infected with an equal mixture (1:1) of WT and PQQAR mutant virus with a total of 105 focus forming units (Fig. 7A). At 24 hours post infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with naïve recipients for 12 hours before separation into individual cages. Upon separation, the donor hamsters were nasal washed after exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for weight loss and disease over a four-day time course. Animals were euthanized and RNA from lung tissue/nasal washes were collected from the hamsters at 2- and 4-days post-infection or post-contact. The extended time point (4 dpi) evaluated if the competition results changed after an prolonged period of time post infection.We used Next-Generation sequencing (NGS) to evaluate transmission dynamics of WT and PQQAR from in vivo competition. NGS libraries were made from extracted RNA samples with “Tiled-ClickSeq”17, an approach that utilizes ”click chemistry” and >300 SARS-CoV-2 specific primers to fully examine the SARS-CoV-2 genome. The abundance of viral RNA comprised of WT or PQQAR genotypes suggests their relative ratio during transmission competition. Examining donor hamsters, we find that PQQAR mutant had substantially reduced transmission efficiency than WT for 1, 2, or 4 dpi. (Fig. 7B–D). From nasal wash, PQQAR mutant comprised ~2–20.1% of total viral reads (mean: 8.63% +/− 0.05%) or a ~12.3-fold transmission reduction compared to WT. From lung tissue, PQQAR mutant comprised ~0.2–5.1% of total viral reads (mean: 1.95% +/− 0.02%) or 162.7-fold transmission reduction relative to WT. Our competition results differ from the findings in the first transmission study that found robust replication of the PQQAR mutant in donor animals (Fig. 6B–D). The single viral inoculum experiment (Fig. 6) demonstrates that PQQAR is replication-competent in vivo, while the mixed inoculum experiment (Fig. 7) shows that although PQQAR can replicate, it is outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2.From recipient hamsters, the PQQAR mutant was found to have even lower transmission efficiency as compared to WT (Fig. 7E–F). Examination of both the lung and nasal washes revealed that the PQQAR mutant was found to be <5% of the reads. Notably, despite the low levels of viral reads, the PQQAR mutant RNA was detected in all recipient animals at levels well above the number of background mutations (Fig. 7G) indicating that the detected PQQAR genotype is a result of actual transmission, rather than random mutations. However, the PQQAR mutant is unable to compete with WT virus that maintains an intact FCS. Together, the results demonstrate that while not strictly required, the SARS-CoV-2 spike FCS site aids in transmission efficiency.DiscussionThe presence of the furin cleavage site in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein plays a key role in infection and pathogenesis. As novel variants continue to emerge, SARS-CoV-2 has maintained its furin cleavage site and extended S1/S2 loop length in the spike protein indicating its necessity. While we previously established the importance of the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length11,12, this study addresses how the furin cleavage site itself impacts SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesis. We found that disruption of the FCS significantly attenuates replication in human respiratory cells in vitro and pathogenesis in vivo. The FCS mutant (PQQAR) has inhibited spike processing and modified host protease usage during cell entry. Notably, despite attenuated pathogenesis, the PQQAR mutant is successfully transmitted to all contact recipients but has decreased transmission fitness. Together, our data indicate that the furin cleavage site is critical for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission fitness.Overall, our studies confirm that both the loop length and an intact furin cleavage site are required for pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2. Previously, deletion mutants, ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN, both had attenuated pathogeneicity in hamsters; the results showed that the SARS-CoV-2’s extended S1/S2 loop played a critical role in pathogenesis11,12. However, the previous findings failed to evaluate the FCS requirement in the context of an extended S1/S2 loop. In this study, we demonstrate that disruption of the FCS also causes attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis and has viral replication kinetics similar to the ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN deletion mutants. The PQQAR mutant maintains the extended loop length, but still results in reduced body weight loss and significantly less lung pathology in hamsters. While there is slightly augmented replication in the upper airways, the PQQAR mutant infected animals had lower viral loads in the lung and reduced antigen staining. Together, these data highlight the importance of both an intact FCS and extended S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.Combined with prior studies, our results indicate that spike processing and protease usage play a key role in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. Disruption of the furin cleavage site (PQQAR) or shortening of the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) both independently ablate spike processing of SARS-CoV-2 virions11,12. Spike processing changes on the SARS-CoV-2 virion also correspond with changes in protease usage; the FCS and shortened loop mutants were unable to utilize TMPRSS2-mediated pathways as effectively. The changes in spike processing and protease usage also correspond with attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis. The results argue that the S1/S2 loop length and the FCS both play critical roles in SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease. Importantly, a number of other SARS-CoV-2 spike mutations found in variants of concern have been shown to modulate both spike processing and protease usage8,18,19. In each case, these results impact disease pathogenesis and highlight the importance of both the FCS and S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 disease and damage.In contrast to its role in pathogenesis, our results indicate that an intact FCS is not strictly required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission but likely plays a role in transmission and infection efficiency. Prior studies in ferrets found that deletion of the furin cleavage site ablated transmission of the virus via direct contact20. In contrast, we found that disrupting the FCS did not prevent transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the direct contact hamster model with all 5 recipients infected. A major distinction is the nature of the FCS mutations as the prior study deleted the entire cleavage loop motif (PRRAR) ablating the S1/S2 site as well as shortening the loop20. Our study maintains the S1/S2 loop length by disrupting only the furin targeted motif and also maintaining the Sarbecovirus cleavage site (PQQAR)7. Our findings indicate that the intact FCS is not a requirement but leaves the possibility that the S1/S2 extended loop may be necessary for efficient transmission. Further studies are necessary to explore the role of the extended S1/S2 loop for SARS-CoV-2 transmission.While the PQQAR mutant was able to be passed to 100% of recipient animals, the efficiency of transmission was reduced. Examining viral loads, the PQQAR mutant recipient had lower viral loads as compared to WT controls following single virus transmission study. Similarly, the PQQAR mutant was outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2 in direct competition studies (Fig. 7). While the results corresponded with attenuation PQQAR mutant loads in the lung upon direct challenge, surprisingly, the prior observed advantage in the upper airway disappeared in recipient animals. The results suggest that furin site plays a role in efficiency of transmission and infection of recipient animals. Notably, despite clear attenuation relative to WT, the PQQAR mutant virus RNA was observed in every hamster pair, indicating transmission occurred even in the presence of WT SARS-CoV-2. Together, the results indicate that while the FCS is not strictly required, it does aid in transmission efficiency of SARS-CoV-2.Overall, the manuscript data demonstrate that an intact furin cleavage site plays a critical role in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission efficiency. Disruption of the FCS in the S1/S2 loop results in ablated spike processing, altered host protease usage, and reduced disease in vivo. Importantly, while not strictly required for transmission, the FCS plays a critical role in efficiency of infection in recipient hamsters. Together, these results demonstrate the critical importance of an intact FCS in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission.MethodsCellsVero E6 cells and Vero E6 cells expressing TMPRSS2 (Sekisui XenoTech) were grown in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco #11965–092) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (HyClone #SH30071.03) and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco #5240062). Calu-3 2B4 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate. Human TMPRSS2 knockout Calu-3 cells (Abcam #273734) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 20% defined FBS (HyClone #SH30070.03), 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, 1% non-essential amino acid solution (NEAA; Gibco #11140050), and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate.VirusesThe recombinant WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virus sequences are based on the USA-WA1/2020 isolate sequence provided by the World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses (WRCEVA), which was originally obtained from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)21. Wild-type and mutant SARS-CoV-2 were generated using standard cloning techniques and reverse genetics system as previously described22,23 and propagated on Vero E6 cells. The mutations in PQQAR mutant have been verified by Sanger sequencing. The recovered mutant virus was further sequenced with NGS to confirm the maintenance of nucleotide mutations up to P2.Infectious titers were measured by focus-forming assay. All experiments involving infectious virus were conducted at the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) in an approved biosafety level (BSL) 3 laboratory with routine medical monitoring of staff.In Vitro InfectionViral infections in Vero E6, TMRPSS2-expressing Vero E6, Calu-3 2B4, and Calu-3 TMPRSS2 KO cells were performed as previously described22,24. Briefly, cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 for 45 min at 37 °C. Following absorption, cells were washed three times with PBS and fresh growth media was added to represent time 0. Three or more biological replicates were collected at each time point and each experiment was repeated at least twice.Focus Forming AssayFocus forming assays (FFAs) were performed as previously described25. Briefly, Vero E6 cells were seeded in 96-well plates to be 100% confluent. Samples were 10-fold serially diluted in serum-free media and 20 μl was to infect cells. Cells were incubated for 45 min at 37°C with 5% CO2 before 100 μl of 0.85% methylcellulose overlay was added. Cells were incubated for 24 hrs at 37°C with 5% CO2. After incubation, overlay was removed, and cells were washed three times with PBS before fixed and virus inactivated by 10% formalin for 30 min at room temperature. Cells were then permeabilized and blocked with 0.1% saponin/0.1% BSA in PBS before incubated with α-SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid primary antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) at 1:1000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. Cells are then washed three times with PBS before incubated with Alexa FluorTM 555-conjugated α-mouse secondary antibody (Invitrogen #A28180) at 1:2000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were washed three times with PBS. Fluorescent foci images were captured using a Cytation 7 cell imaging multi-mode reader (BioTek), and foci were counted manually.Virion Purification and Western Blotting.Vero E6 cells were infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01. Supernatant was harvested 24 hpi and clarified by low-speed centrifugation. Virus particles were then pelleted by ultracentrifugation through a 20% sucrose cushion at 26,000 rpm for 3 h using a Beckman SW28 rotor. Pellets were resuspended in 2× Laemmli buffer to obtain protein lysates. Relative viral protein levels were determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by Western blot analysis as previously described11,12. In brief, sucrose-purified WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virions were inactivated by boiling in Laemmeli buffer. Samples were loaded in equal volumes into 4 to 20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gels (Bio-Rad #4561093) and electrophoresed by SDS–PAGE. Protein was transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes. Membranes were probed with SARS-CoV S-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100–56578) and followed with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074). Membranes were stripped and reprobed with SARS-CoV N-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100–56576) and the HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary IgG to measure loading. Signal developed using Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705060) or Clarity Max Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705062) and imaging on a ChemiDoc MP System (Bio-Rad #12003154). Densitometry was performed using ImageLab 6.0.1 (Bio-Rad #2012931).Hamster Infection StudyMale golden Syrian hamsters (3 to 4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo (HsdHan:AURA strain). All studies were conducted under a protocol approved by the UTMB Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and complied with USDA guidelines in a laboratory accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. Procedures involving infectious SARS-CoV-2 were performed in the Galveston National Laboratory ABSL3 facility. Hamsters were intranasally inoculated with 105 pfu of WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 in100 μl. Infected hamsters were weighed and monitored for illness over 7 days. Hamsters were anesthetized with isoflurane (Henry Schein Animal Health) and nasal washes were collected with 400 μl of PBS on endpoint days (2, 4, and 7 dpi). Hamsters were euthanized by CO2 for organ collection. Nasal wash and lung were collected to measure viral titer. Left lungs were collected for histopathology.Hamster TransmissionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. Each group (WT, PQQAR, or PBS) had 10 donor hamsters that were intranasally infected with 100 uL of 105 pfu of virus or PBS depending on the group. 24 hrs post infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 8 hrs for contact transmission. After 8 hrs, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing and the donors were nasal washed. At 2 days post infection for donors and post contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 μl of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol, and RNA was extracted to perform next generation sequencing as previously described.Hamster Transmission CompetitionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. ten donor hamsters were intranasally infected with a 1:1 ratio of WT:PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 totaling 105 pfu in 100 μl and were subsequently individually housed. At 24 hrs post infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 12 hrs for contact transmission. After 8 hrs, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing and the donors were nasal washed for D1 values. At 2 and 4 days post infection for donors and post contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 μl of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol. RNA was extracted to perform next generation sequencing.HistologyHistopathology was performed as previously described26,27. Briefly, left lungs were harvested from hamsters and fixed in 10% buffered formalin solution for at least 7 d. Fixed tissue was then embedded in paraffin, cut into 5 μM sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin on a SAKURA VIP6 processor by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. H&E staining was performed by the University of Texas Medical Branch Histology Laboratory and then analyzed and scored by a blinded pathologist.ImmunohistochemistryAntigen staining was performed as previously described28, Briefly, fixed and paraffin-embedded left lung lobes from hamsters were cut into 5 μM sections and mounted onto slides by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. Paraffin-embedded sections were warmed at 56°C for 10 min, deparaffinized with xylene (3× 5-min washes) and graded ethanol (3× 100% 5-min washes, 1× 95% 5-min wash), and rehydrated in distilled water. After rehydration, antigen retrieval was performed by steaming slides in antigen retrieval solution (10 mM sodium citrate, 0.05% Tween-20, pH 6) for 40 min (boil antigen retrieval solution in microwave, add slides to boiling solution, and incubate in steamer). After cooling and rinsing in distilled water, endogenous peroxidases were quenched by incubating slides in TBS with 0.3% H2O2 for 15 min followed by 2× 5-min washes in 0.05% TBST. Sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum in BSA diluent (1% BSA in 0.05% TBST) for 30 min at room temperature. Sections were incubated with primary anti-N antibody (Sino #40143-R001) at 1:1000 in BSA diluent overnight at 4°C. Following overnight primary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3x for 5 min in TBST. Sections were incubated in secondary HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074) at 1:200 in BSA diluent for 1 hour at room temperature. Following secondary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3x for 5 min in TBST. To visualize antigen, sections were incubated in ImmPACT NovaRED (Vector Laboratories #SK-4805) for 3 min at room temperature before rinsed with TBST to stop the reaction followed by 1× 5-min wash in distilled water. Sections were incubated in hematoxylin for 5 min at room temperature to counterstain before rinsing in water to stop the reaction. Sections were dehydrated by incubating in the previous xylene and graded ethanol baths in reverse order before mounted with coverslips.Structural ModelingStructural models previously generated were used as a base to visualize residues mutated in Omicron12. Briefly, structural models were generated using SWISS-Model to generate homology models for WT and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 spike protein based on the SARS-CoV-1 trimer structure (Protein Data Bank code 6ACD). Homology models were visualized and manipulated in PyMOL (version 2.5.4) to visualize the PQQAR mutation.Next Generation Sequencing and data analysisNext generation sequencing (NGS) method was used to determine viral RNA populations from infected animals. Briefly, total cellular RNA samples were extracted from animal tissues and NGS libraries were prepared with Tiled-ClickSeq method17,25. A modified pre-RT annealing protocol was applied as previously described25 to reduce mis-priming. The final libraries comprising of 300–600 bps fragments were pooled and sequenced on an ElementBio Aviti platform with paired-end sequencing (120 bp R1 and 30 bp R2). The raw Illumina data of the Tiled-ClickSeq libraries were processed with established bioinformatics pipelines (https://github.com/andrewrouth/TCS). The relative ratio between WT and PQQAR was calculated based on the average Pilon-reported29 G-to-A mutation rate at specific genomic loci (G23607A, G23608A, G23610A, G23611A). A baseline mutation rate is also evaluated by averaging the background mutation rates from nts. 23606–23612.


Title: The furin cleavage site is required for pathogenesis, but not transmission, of SARS-CoV-2

INTRODUCTIONSARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019 and initiated a global pandemic with a massive impact on the economy and global public health (1). Over the past 5 years, SARS-CoV-2 has continued to cause infection and disease despite the development of effective vaccines and therapeutics (2). The continued infection and spread of SARS-CoV-2 have been attributed to its ability to evolve and produce variants of concern that evade key aspects of immunity and improve viral fitness (3, 4). Much of the evolution of the virus has occurred in the spike protein, with new variants able to evade host immunity (5). In addition, several spike mutations have improved fitness and transmission of the virus in the human populations (6–9). Despite all the changes that have occurred in SARS-CoV-2, two key elements of the spike protein have remained intact throughout the pandemic: the presence of a furin cleavage site (FCS) and an extended S1/S2 loop (10–12). Each is a unique feature of SARS-CoV-2 compared to other sarbecoviruses and plays key roles in infection.The CoV spike protein consists of a globular head (S1 subunit) and a stalk (C-terminal of S1 and S2 subunit) (13). The head is responsible for attachment and binding to the host receptor ACE2. In contrast, the stalk contains the highly conserved fusion machinery. CoV spike must undergo two cleavages to enable host cell fusion, first at an S1/S2 junction site and a second at an S2′ site in the stalk to activate fusion. Unlike other sarbecoviruses, SARS-CoV-2 spike contains a unique furin cleavage site (RXXR) at the S1/S2 junction that aids in the efficiency of its cleavage. The FCS, not shared among other group 2B coronaviruses, is maintained in all SARS-CoV-2 variants. The multi-basic cleavage motif, PRRAR, exists on the S1/S2 junction loop and is involved in spike cleavage as a virion exits a producer cell. Our lab has previously investigated the importance of the FCS by generating an FCS deletion SARS-CoV-2 mutant (ΔPRRA; Fig. 1A) and performing in vitro and in vivo characterization (11). Our results indicated that deleting the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo compared to wild-type (WA-1 strain) (11).Fig 1Generation and in vitro characterization of SARS-CoV-2 PQQAR mutant. (A) Alignment of the S1/S2 cleavage site of SARS-CoV-2 WA1 and series of mutant viruses generated for evaluation including deletion of the furin cleavage site (ΔFCS), truncation of the extended loop (ΔQTQTN), and disruption of the furin cleavage site motif (PQQAR). (B) SARS-CoV-2 spike trimer structure (gray) highlighting the S1/S2 cleavage loop. WT (left) and PQQAR mutant (right) are zoomed with mutated residues (Q682 and Q683) in orange to disrupt the furin cleavage site. (C) Schematic of SARS-CoV-2 spike with PQQAR substitutions identified. (D) Viral titer from Vero E6 infected with WT (black) or PQQAR (orange) SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 (n = 3). (E) Viral titer from Calu-3 2B4 infected with WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 (n = 3). Data are mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001.Sequence alignment, structure, and viral titer plots comparing wild-type and mutant SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins. Mutant PQQAR variant alters S1/S2 cleavage loop and reduces replication in Calu-3 cells but not in Vero E6.Soon after, we investigated the function of the QTQTN motif immediately upstream of the FCS, which is commonly deleted in cell culture stocks. Our group generated a QTQTN deletion mutant (ΔQTQTN; Fig. 1A) and performed in vitro and in vivo testing (12). The ΔQTQTN mutant, like ΔPRRA, has attenuated infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo (12). Both deletion mutants shorten the spike S1/S2 loop and demonstrate that loop length is important for SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. However, these studies do not evaluate the importance of the FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 loop found in SARS-CoV-2. To address this question, we generated an infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2 that disrupts the FCS without shortening the loop (PQQAR mutant). We demonstrate that disruption of the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells and pathogenesis in hamsters. The PQQAR mutant has inhibited spike processing and altered protease usage for host cell entry. We also found that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 contact transmission in hamsters, but it plays a role in transmission efficiency. Together, the data indicate that the SARS-CoV-2 FCS is important for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission.RESULTSGeneration of the PQQAR mutantThe furin cleavage site (PRRA motif) of SARS-CoV-2 exists at the S1/S2 junction site on an external disordered loop in the spike protein (Fig. 1B). Our prior work evaluated the importance of the furin cleavage site by deleting the PRRA motif upstream of the S1/S2 cleavage site (11). While the ΔPRRA mutant was attenuated, subsequent work shortening the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) of SARS-CoV-2 had a similar phenotype, indicating the importance of the loop length in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis (12). However, the role of the actual FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 spike loop was still unclear. To investigate how the FCS, independent of loop length, impacts infection and pathogenesis, we generated an FCS mutant in the SARS-CoV WA-1 backbone that substituted arginine at positions 682 and 683 to glutamines (PQQAR) (Fig. 1C). The PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 maintains the S1/S2 loop length but disrupts the furin cleavage site, allowing evaluation of the role of the FCS. Using our reverse genetic system, we were able to recover the PQQAR mutant, which grew to robust stock titers in Vero cells.PQQAR mutant attenuates viral replication in respiratory cellsDeletion of the FCS and shortening of the S1/S2 loops of the spike had previously been shown to impact viral replication (11, 12). Therefore, we first examined the PQQAR mutant in Vero E6 cells (African green monkey kidney cells), which lack type I interferon responses (14). Following low MOI (0.01) infection, the PQQAR mutant showed no significant attenuation compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 in Vero cells (Fig. 1D). In fact, the PQQAR mutant grew to slightly higher viral titer, although not significantly different from WT. These results are consistent with prior studies shortening the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length and correspond with a fitness advantage in Vero cells (11, 12). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant has attenuated replication in Calu-3 2B4 cells, a human respiratory cell line (Fig. 1E). At 24 and 48 h post-infection (hpi), the PQQAR mutant has ∼3 log reduction in titers compared to WT. Again, these results are consistent with prior studies (ΔQTQTN and ΔPRRA) (11, 12) and demonstrate that both the S1/S2 loop and the FCS play a role in effective SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells.PQQAR mutant has attenuated in vivo pathogenesisHaving established attenuation in human respiratory cells, we next evaluated how disruption of the FCS impacts SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis in vivo. Utilizing the golden Syrian hamster model, 3–4-week-old male hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 focus-forming units (FFUs) of WT or PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 and followed over a 7-day time course (Fig. 2A). WT-infected hamsters exhibited weight loss starting at 2 dpi with peak weight loss of ∼10%–12% before beginning to recover at 6 dpi (Fig. 2B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant produced minimal weight loss following infection. Similarly, disease score corresponded with weight loss as WT had observable disease between days 3 and 6, characterized by ruffled fur, hunched posture, and reduced activity. In contrast, no disease was noted in PQQAR mutant-infected hamsters. Together, the data demonstrated that disruption of the FCS attenuated disease in the hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection.Fig 2SARS-CoV-2 PQQAR mutant attenuated in golden Syrian hamsters. (A and B) Schematic of golden Syrian hamster infection with WT (black) or PQQAR mutant (orange) SARS-CoV-2. Three- to four-week-old male hamsters were infected with 105 pfu and monitored for (B) weight loss and disease for 7 days post-infection. (C through E) Viral titers were measured at days 2 and 4 from (C) infected lung, (D) nasal wash, and (E) trachea. Data are representative of mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Experimental schematic was made in BioRender.Hamster infection study comparing wild-type and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. PQQAR-infected animals maintain body weight and exhibit reduced viral titers in lung, nasal wash, and trachea, indicating attenuated pathogenicity relative to wild-type virus.PQQAR mutant has altered replication in the upper and lower respiratory tractHaving established attenuated disease, we next evaluated viral replication in the lung, nasal wash, and trachea following infection with WT and PQQAR mutant. Examining the lungs, we found that both WT and the PQQAR mutant replicated in the lungs following infection (Fig. 2C). However, the PQQAR mutant had a 1 log reduction in viral replication compared to WT at day 2 but was equal to WT at day 4. Probing the upper airway, the PQQAR mutant had a significant increase (~10-fold) in viral replication from nasal washes at both days 2 and 4 as compared to WT (Fig. 2D). These results are similar to prior studies that shortened the spike S1/S2 loop length or deleted the FCS (11, 12). In addition, the PQQAR mutant had similar and increased replication in the trachea at days 2 and 4 as compared to WT-infected hamsters (Fig. 2E). Overall, the replication data demonstrate viral replication attenuation of the PQQAR mutant in the lung but also augmented replication of the mutant in the upper airway tissues.Viral antigen staining confirms attenuation of the PQQAR mutant in vivoTo further evaluate viral replication and distribution, we examined antigen staining following infection with WT or PQQAR mutant at days 2 and 4 post-infection. Briefly, lung sections from infected hamsters were stained for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid and scored in a blinded manner for antigen in the airways, parenchyma, and overall as previously described (8). We observed widespread antigen staining in both the parenchyma and airways following WT SARS-CoV-2 infection at both days 2 and 4 (Fig. 3A and B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant had more limited antigen staining compared to WT (Fig. 3C and D). While showing modest attenuation in the airways (Fig. 3E), the scores from the parenchyma (Fig. 3F) and overall (Fig. 3G) demonstrated that the PQQAR mutant had a significant deficit in antigen staining as compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 infection. The antigen staining in the large airways may be consistent with potentially greater replication in the airways (Fig. 2D through E). Similarly, the attenuation in the parenchyma and overall staining corresponds to reduced viral titer in the lung of PQQAR mutant-infected animals (Fig. 2C). Together, these results demonstrate attenuation in PQQAR mutant as compared to WT in terms of viral infection and distribution in the lung.Fig 3Attenuated antigen staining in PQQAR-infected hamsters. (A–D) Nucleocapsid antigen staining of left lung section from hamsters infected with 105 FFU of either (A and B) WT or (C and D) PQQAR mutant at 2 or 4 dpi. Antigen staining was scored in a blinded manner by location in the (E) airway, (F) parenchyma, and (G) total for WT (black) or PQQAR (orange) infected lungs. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001.Immunohistochemistry of hamster lungs infected with wild-type or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. WT lungs display stronger antigen staining than PQQAR at both time points. Bar graphs confirm significantly lower airway, parenchymal, and antigen scores in PQQAR group.PQQAR mutant infection shows reduced immune infiltration and damageTo further evaluate disease and damage, WT- and PQQAR-infected hamsters were evaluated for changes in histopathology. Lung sections were H&E stained and subsequently evaluated by a board-certified pathologist in a blinded manner. After infection, WT-infected hamsters demonstrated significant disease and damage characterized by interstitial pneumonia, peribronchitis, epithelial cytopathology, arterial mononuclear cell margination, and presence of polymorphonuclear cells in the bronchioles in some animals at day 2 (Fig. 4A). In contrast, significantly less disease was observed in the PQQAR mutant-infected hamsters and was characterized by mild bronchiolitis and interstitial pneumonia (Fig. 4B). At day 4, WT-infected hamsters showed increased lung involvement by area involved with the addition of hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, perivasculitis, and infiltration of mononuclear cells (Fig. 4C). Notably, while increased compared to day 2, PQQAR mutant-infected animals had much less lung involvement and less severe disease and damage as compared to WT (Fig. 4D). While no significant disease and damage were observed in mock-infected animals (Fig. 4E), the SARS-CoV-2-associated lesions were much more extensive in WT as compared to PQQAR mutant-infected hamsters. WT-infected hamsters showed significant increases in SARS-CoV-2 lesion percentages in lung sections at days 2, 4, and 7 days post-infection compared to PQQAR mutant infection (Fig. 4F). These results are consistent with the weight loss and disease data (Fig. 2B) and indicate that the PQQAR mutant is attenuated in terms of pathogenesis in vivo.Fig 4Reduced inflammation and damage in PQQAR-infected lungs. (A through G) Representative H&E staining of the left lung of hamsters infected with 105 pfu of either WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 at (A and B) 2 days, (C and D) 4 days, or (E and F) 7 days post-infection or (G) mock. (H) WT (black), PQQAR (orange), or PBS (gray) lung sections from each day were scored for histopathological analysis, with sections from individual animals averaged and representing a single point. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001.H&E-stained lung sections comparing pathology in wild-type and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters. WT lungs exhibit more extensive lesions at all time points. Quantification confirms significantly reduced lung damage in PQQAR and mock groups.FCS disruption attenuates spike processingSpike-mediated entry requires sequential cleavage at the S1/S2 junction and the S2′ site to activate fusion (15). Prior work has established that the SARS-CoV-2 spike is partially cleaved prior to release from cells (16); shortening the S1/S2 loop disrupts this cleavage on released virions. Here, we evaluate whether FCS disruption affected spike cleavage on purified virions from the PQQAR mutant. Briefly, WT, PQQAR, and the ΔFCS mutant SARS-CoV-2 were collected from Vero E6 cells, purified using ultracentrifugation sucrose cushion, inactivated, and blotted for spike and nucleocapsid (Fig. 5A). Normalizing to nucleocapsid, we observe that both PQQAR and ΔFCS mutants have a reduction in S1/S2 cleavage product as compared to WT (Fig. 5B). While WT SARS-CoV-2 has ~40% of spike cleaved following infection of Vero cells, both disruption and deletion of the FCS result in mutants with very minimal S1/S2 cleavage product (Fig. 5C). Together, the results indicate that an intact FCS is required for spike processing prior to the release of SARS-CoV-2 virions.Fig 5Disruption of FCS alters spike processing and protease usage. (A) Schematic of SARS-CoV-2 virion sucrose cushion purification approach. (B) Lysates from sucrose cushion purified WT, PQQAR, and ΔFCS virions grown in Vero E6 were probed with α-Spike and α-Nucleocapsid (N) antibodies by Western blot. Full-length spike (FL) and S1/S2 cleavage product are indicated. (C) Quantification of densitometry of the proportion between FL (black) and S1/S2 (red) of the total spike shown (lower). (D) Schematic of SARS-CoV-2 entry and protease usage, including knockout of TMPRSS2-mediated entry. (E) Viral titer from Calu-3 TMPRSS2 knock-out cells infected with WT (black) or PQQAR (orange) SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 (n = 3). (F) Viral titer at 48 hpi from Calu3 WT (Fig. 1D) and Calu3 TMPRSS2-/- cells. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Entry schematic was made in BioRender.Workflow and results comparing spike cleavage and viral replication of WT, PQQAR, and ΔFCS SARS-CoV-2. Western blot and quantification reveal reduced spike processing in PQQAR and ΔFCS. TMPRSS2 knockout bypasses entry defects across strains.TMPRSS2 plays a role in the attenuation of the PQQAR mutantSARS-CoV-2 enters the host cell through either the endosomal route mediated by host cathepsins or the cell surface route mediated by host serine proteases like TMPRSS2 (Fig. 5D) (15). The PQQAR mutant shows significant attenuation in Calu-3 2B4 but has no deficit in Vero E6 cells (Fig. 1C and D). A major distinction between the two cell lines is the expression of TMPRSS2, which is highly expressed in Calu3 cells but absent in Vero E6 cells. To determine if TMPRSS2 expression contributes to attenuation, we utilize Calu3 cells with TMPRSS2 knocked out. We subsequently infected the TMPRSS2 KO Calu3 cells with both WT SARS-CoV-2 and PQQAR mutant as previously described. Following infection, we note that both PQQAR and WT virus replication are not significantly different over the course of infection (Fig. 5E). Compared to standard Calu3 cells (Fig. 5F), WT SARS-CoV-2 infection was reduced to the same level as PQQAR mutant, indicating that the primary difference between the replication of the WT and FCS mutant virus in Calu3 cells is due to the activity of TMPRSS2. These results indicate that spike processing through the FCS plays an important role in the utilization of TMPRSS2-mediated entry of SARS-CoV-2.Intact FCS is not required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in vivoThe disruption of the FCS by the PQQAR mutant demonstrates the importance of the motif to SARS-CoV-2 infection of respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo. Yet, it remains unclear if the furin cleavage site is required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2. While attenuated in the lung, the PQQAR mutant displayed robust and augmented replication in the upper airways compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 2C). With the upper airway infection thought to seed transmission, it left the possibility that the PQQAR mutant could still be transmitted without a functional FCS. To test this question, we performed studies with WT and PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 to evaluate the capacity of the mutant virus to be transmitted in hamsters. Briefly, “donor” hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 FFU of WT SARS-CoV-2 or PQQAR mutant (Fig. 6A). After 24 h, each donor was individually co-housed 1:1 with a naive “recipient” with no additional barriers to evaluate contact transmission for 8 h. After cohousing, donors and recipients were separated into individual cages for the duration of the study. Before being returned to new cages, donor hamsters were nasal washed to measure their shedding titer on the day of exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for changes in weight and disease, euthanized 2 days post-infection/exposure, and tissues/washes were evaluated for viral load.Fig 6The FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission. (A) Schematic of transmission experiment in golden Syrian hamsters. Three- to four-week-old male donor hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 pfu of WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 and individually housed. Donors were subsequently paired 1:1 with recipients 24 hpi and cohoused for 8 h before separating and nasal washing donors. (B through F) Nasal washes and lungs were collected at 2 days post-infection for donors (dpi) (B through D) and post-contact for recipients (E and F). Viral titers were measured using focus-forming assays for donor and recipient samples. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Experimental schematic was made in BioRender.Hamster transmission study comparing wild-type and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. Donor shedding is similar, but PQQAR shows reduced nasal and lung titers in donors and recipients, indicating transmission efficiency and attenuated replication in contact animals.Following infection of donors, we observed that the shedding titers in the nasal wash were similar between WT and PQAAR mutant after the exposure period (Fig. 6B). We also observed that donor titers at 2 days post-infection showed that the PQAAR mutant had higher viral load in the nasal wash but reduced titer in the lung (Fig. 6C and D). These results are consistent with observations from acute infection showing greater replication of PQQAR mutant in the airways versus the lung (Fig. 2C and D). Examining transmission from donors to recipients, we observed that transmission of both WT and PQQAR mutants was 100% successful. All five donor pairs infected with either WT or PQQAR mutant resulted in detectable viral loads in the nasal wash and lungs of recipient animals 2 days post-exposure (Fig. 6E and F). Yet, while transmission occurred, PQQAR mutant recipient hamsters had significantly lower viral titers compared to WT for both the lung and nasal washes (Fig. 6E and F). The results suggest that while the FCS is not strictly required for transmission, its presence impacts the viral load observed in recipient animals. Regardless of reduced viral load, the results indicate that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the direct contact hamster model.FCS is necessary for transmission fitness in vivoTo investigate how loss of the FCS impacts transmission fitness, we performed a competition transmission study between WT and PQQAR mutant virus in hamsters. Briefly, donor hamsters were intranasally infected with an equal mixture (1:1) of WT and PQQAR mutant virus with a total of 105 focus-forming units (Fig. 7A). At 24 h post-infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with naive recipients for 12 h before separation into individual cages. Upon separation, the donor hamsters underwent nasal washing after exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for weight loss and disease over a 4-day time course. Animals were euthanized, and RNA from lung tissue/nasal washes was collected from the hamsters at 2- and 4-days post-infection or post-contact. The extended time point (4 dpi) evaluated if the competition results changed after a prolonged period of time post-infection.Fig 7The furin cleavage site impacts SARS-CoV-2 transmission efficiency. (A) Schematic of transmission competition experiment in golden Syrian hamsters. Three- to four-week-old male donor hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 pfu of WT:PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 in a 1:1 ratio and were individually housed. (B through F) After 24 hpi, donors were paired with recipients and cohoused for 12 h before separating and nasal washing on donors. Nasal washes and lungs were collected at 2 and 4 days post-infection for donors (dpi) and post-contact for recipients (dpc). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on extracted RNA to measure the percentage of WT (gray) and PQQAR (orange) present in the nasal wash and lung of donors (B through D) and recipients (E and F). The expected distribution (B–F, top bar) based on NGS percentage mutant/WT observed in the inoculating dose (two inoculum preparations with RNA sequenced twice from each) if no differences between WT and mutant virus were observed. (G) Level of PQQAR mutation detection in recipient animals (orange) versus background mutations (black). Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Experimental schematic was made in BioRender.Hamster co-infection study assessing competition between WT and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. Bar plots indicate WT dominance in nasal washes and lungs of donors and recipients. Dot plot quantifies mutation frequency, confirming reduced prevalence of PQQAR.We used next-generation sequencing (NGS) to evaluate transmission dynamics of WT and PQQAR from in vivo competition. NGS libraries were made from extracted RNA samples with “Tiled-ClickSeq” (17), an approach that utilizes “click chemistry” and >300 SARS-CoV-2-specific primers to fully examine the SARS-CoV-2 genome. The abundance of viral RNA comprising WT or PQQAR genotypes suggests their relative ratio during transmission competition. Examining donor hamsters, we find that PQQAR mutants had substantially reduced transmission efficiency than WT for 1, 2, or 4 dpi. (Fig. 7B through D). From nasal wash, PQQAR mutant comprised ~2%–20.1% of total viral reads (mean: 8.63% ± 0.05%) or a ~12.3-fold transmission reduction compared to WT. From lung tissue, PQQAR mutant comprised ~0.2%–5.1% of total viral reads (mean: 1.95% ± 0.02%) or 162.7-fold transmission reduction relative to WT. Our competition results differ from the findings in the first transmission study that found robust replication of the PQQAR mutant in donor animals (Fig. 6B through D). The single viral inoculum experiment (Fig. 6) demonstrates that PQQAR is replication competent in vivo, while the mixed inoculum experiment (Fig. 7) shows that although PQQAR can replicate, it is outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2.From recipient hamsters, the PQQAR mutant was found to have even lower transmission efficiency compared to WT (Fig. 7E and F). Examination of both the lung and nasal washes revealed that the PQQAR mutant was found to be <5% of the reads. Notably, despite the low levels of viral reads, the PQQAR mutant RNA was detected in all recipient animals at levels well above the number of background mutations (Fig. 7G), indicating that the detected PQQAR genotype is a result of actual transmission, rather than random mutations. However, the PQQAR mutant is unable to compete with the WT virus that maintains an intact FCS. Together, the results demonstrate that while not strictly required, the SARS-CoV-2 spike FCS site aids in transmission efficiency.DISCUSSIONThe presence of the furin cleavage site in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein plays a key role in infection and pathogenesis. As novel variants continue to emerge, SARS-CoV-2 has maintained its furin cleavage site and extended S1/S2 loop length in the spike protein, indicating its necessity. While we previously established the importance of the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length (11, 12), this study addresses how the furin cleavage site itself impacts SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesis. We found that disruption of the FCS significantly attenuates replication in human respiratory cells in vitro and pathogenesis in vivo. The FCS mutant (PQQAR) has inhibited spike processing and modified host protease usage during cell entry. Notably, despite attenuated pathogenesis, the PQQAR mutant is successfully transmitted to all contact recipients but has decreased transmission fitness. Together, our data indicate that the furin cleavage site is critical for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission fitness.Overall, our studies confirm that both the loop length and an intact furin cleavage site are required for the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2. Previously, deletion mutants, ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN, both had attenuated pathogenicity in hamsters; the results showed that SARS-CoV-2’s extended S1/S2 loop played a critical role in pathogenesis (11, 12). However, the previous findings failed to evaluate the FCS requirement in the context of an extended S1/S2 loop. In this study, we demonstrate that disruption of the FCS also causes attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis and has viral replication kinetics similar to the ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN deletion mutants. The PQQAR mutant maintains the extended loop length but still results in reduced body weight loss and significantly less lung pathology in hamsters. While there is slightly augmented replication in the upper airways, the PQQAR mutant-infected animals had lower viral loads in the lung and reduced antigen staining. Together, these data highlight the importance of both an intact FCS and extended S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.Combined with prior studies, our results indicate that spike processing and protease usage play a key role in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. Disruption of the furin cleavage site (PQQAR) or shortening of the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) both independently ablate spike processing of SARS-CoV-2 virions (11, 12). Spike processing changes on the SARS-CoV-2 virion also correspond with changes in protease usage; the FCS and shortened loop mutants were unable to utilize TMPRSS2-mediated pathways as effectively. Here, we found that WT SARS-CoV-2 had equivalent replication to the PQQAR mutant if TMPRSS2 was knocked out in Calu3 cells (Fig. 5E). While the standard and KO Calu3 cells are from different lineages, the difference between the mutant and WT virus shows the importance of the FCS for TMPRSS2 utilization. These results correspond to our prior studies restoring WT SARS-CoV in Vero cells with overexpression of TMPRSS2 (11). Overall, the data demonstrate a key role for the FCS in both spike processing and protease usage.The changes in spike processing and protease usage also correspond with the attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis. Animals infected with the PQQAR mutant had attenuated weight loss and antigen staining in the lung (Fig. 2B and 3); yet, the viral loads in the lung remained similar in the mutant compared to WT. The similarities in viral load may be indicative of a shift in infection tropism, with the mutant replicating better in airway cells. Alternatively, loss of FCS activity may impair cell-to-cell spread, resulting in reduced CoV lesion size in the mutant and more released virus detectable by FFU assay. Despite the discrepancy in viral titer, the results argue that the S1/S2 loop length and the FCS both play critical roles in SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease. Importantly, a number of other SARS-CoV-2 spike mutations found in variants of concern have been shown to modulate both spike processing and protease usage (8, 18, 19). In each case, these results impact disease pathogenesis and highlight the importance of both the FCS and S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 disease and damage.In contrast to its role in pathogenesis, our results indicate that an intact FCS is not strictly required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission but likely plays a role in transmission and infection efficiency. Prior studies in ferrets found that deletion of the furin cleavage site ablated transmission of the virus via direct contact (20). In contrast, we found that disrupting the FCS did not prevent the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the direct contact hamster model, with all five recipients infected. A major distinction is the nature of the FCS mutations, as the prior study deleted the entire cleavage loop motif (PRRAR), ablating the S1/S2 site as well as shortening the loop (20). Our study maintains the S1/S2 loop length by disrupting only the furin-targeted motif and also maintaining the Sarbecovirus cleavage site (PQQAR) (7). Our findings indicate that the intact FCS is not a requirement, but it leaves open the possibility that the S1/S2 extended loop may be necessary for efficient transmission. Further studies are necessary to explore the role of the extended S1/S2 loop for SARS-CoV-2 transmission.While the PQQAR mutant was able to be passed to 100% of the recipient animals, the efficiency of transmission was reduced. Examining viral loads, the PQQAR mutant recipient had lower viral loads as compared to WT controls following the single virus transmission study. Similarly, the PQQAR mutant was outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2 in direct competition studies (Fig. 7). While the results corresponded with attenuation of PQQAR mutant loads in the lung upon direct challenge, surprisingly, the prior observed advantage in the upper airway disappeared in recipient animals. The results suggest that the furin site plays a role in the efficiency of transmission and infection of recipient animals. Notably, despite clear attenuation relative to WT, the PQQAR mutant virus RNA was observed in every hamster pair, indicating transmission occurred even in the presence of WT SARS-CoV-2. Together, the results indicate that while the FCS is not strictly required, it does aid in the transmission efficiency of SARS-CoV-2.The key role for motifs in the spike S1/S2 loop of SARS-CoV-2 for pathogenesis adds to the framework to evaluate the threats posed by zoonotic coronaviruses. Traditionally, binding to capacity to a human receptor like ACE2 or DPP4 has been a primary consideration in evaluating emergence potential for CoVs (21, 22). Over the past decade, numerous CoVs have been identified in animal populations with this capacity (23–27). Yet, receptor binding is only part of the equation for success, and here, we offer both the S1/S2 loop length as well as the furin cleavage site as additional parameters. The presence of one or both motifs would potentially raise the risk posed by a zoonotic CoV. For example, BANAL-236, a sarbecovirus closely related to SARS-CoV-2, has the capacity to use human ACE2 receptor without adaptation (26). However, the zoonotic strain lacks both the extended S1/S2 loop as well as an FCS. Compared to other CoVs that may have these motifs, BANAL-236 CoV could be considered a lesser threat. The presence of these motifs and others, both within and outside the spike, could form a framework for evaluating the emergence risk posed by discovered zoonotic CoVs.Overall, the manuscript data demonstrate that an intact furin cleavage site plays a critical role in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission efficiency. Disruption of the FCS in the S1/S2 loop results in ablated spike processing, altered host protease usage, and reduced disease in vivo. Importantly, while not strictly required for transmission, the FCS plays a critical role in the efficiency of infection in recipient hamsters. Together, these results demonstrate the critical importance of an intact FCS in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. The findings also provide an additional motif for the framework to evaluate the threat posed by zoonotic CoVs.MATERIALS AND METHODSCellsVero E6 cells and Vero E6 cells expressing TMPRSS2 (Sekisui XenoTech) were grown in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco #11965-092) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (HyClone #SH30071.03) and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco #5240062). Calu-3 2B4 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate. Human TMPRSS2 knockout Calu-3 cells (Abcam #273734) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 20% defined FBS (HyClone #SH30070.03), 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, 1% non-essential amino acid solution (NEAA; Gibco #11140050), and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate.VirusesThe recombinant WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virus sequences are based on the USA-WA1/2020 isolate sequence provided by the World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, which was originally obtained from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (28). Wild-type and mutant SARS-CoV-2 were generated using standard cloning techniques and the reverse genetics system as previously described (29, 30) and propagated on Vero E6 cells. The mutations in the PQQAR mutant have been verified by Sanger sequencing. The recovered mutant virus was further sequenced with NGS to confirm the maintenance of nucleotide mutations up to P2.Infectious titers were measured by focus-forming assay. All experiments involving infectious virus were conducted at the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) in an approved biosafety level 3 laboratory with routine medical monitoring of staff.In vitro infectionViral infections in Vero E6, TMRPSS2-expressing Vero E6, Calu-3 2B4, and Calu-3 TMPRSS2 KO cells were performed as previously described (29, 31). Briefly, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 for 45 min at 37°C. Following absorption, cells were washed three times with PBS, and fresh growth media was added to represent time 0. Three or more biological replicates were collected at each time point, and each experiment was repeated at least twice.Focus-forming assayFocus-forming assays were performed as previously described (32). Briefly, Vero E6 cells were seeded in 96-well plates to be 100% confluent. Samples were 10-fold serially diluted in serum-free media, and 20 µL was used to infect cells. Cells were incubated for 45 min at 37°C with 5% CO2 before 100 µL of 0.85% methylcellulose overlay was added. Cells were incubated for 24 h at 37°C with 5% CO2. After incubation, the overlay was removed, cells were washed three times with PBS before being fixed, and the virus was inactivated by 10% formalin for 30 min at room temperature. Cells were then permeabilized and blocked with 0.1% saponin/0.1% BSA in PBS before being incubated with α-SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid primary antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) at 1:1,000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. Cells are then washed three times with PBS before being incubated with Alexa FluorTM 555-conjugated α-mouse secondary antibody (Invitrogen #A28180) at 1:2,000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were washed three times with PBS. Fluorescent foci images were captured using a Cytation 7 cell imaging multi-mode reader (BioTek), and foci were counted manually.Virion purification and Western blottingVero E6 cells were infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01. Supernatant was harvested 24 hpi and clarified by low-speed centrifugation. Virus particles were then pelleted by ultracentrifugation through a 20% sucrose cushion at 26,000 rpm for 3 h using a Beckman SW28 rotor. Pellets were resuspended in 2× Laemmli buffer to obtain protein lysates. Relative viral protein levels were determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by Western blot analysis as previously described (11, 12). In brief, sucrose-purified WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virions were inactivated by boiling in Laemmli buffer. Samples were loaded in equal volumes into 4%–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gels (Bio-Rad #4561093) and electrophoresed by SDS-PAGE. Protein was transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Membranes were probed with SARS-CoV S-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100-56578) and followed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074). Membranes were stripped and reprobed with SARS-CoV N-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100-56576) and the HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary IgG to measure loading. Signal was developed using Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705060) or Clarity Max Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705062) and imaged on a ChemiDoc MP System (Bio-Rad #12003154). Densitometry was performed using ImageLab 6.0.1 (Bio-Rad #2012931).Hamster infection studyMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo (HsdHan:AURA strain). Procedures involving infectious SARS-CoV-2 were performed in the Galveston National Laboratory ABSL3 facility. Hamsters were intranasally inoculated with 105 pfu of WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 in 100 µL. Infected hamsters were weighed and monitored for illness over 7 days. Hamsters were anesthetized with isoflurane (Henry Schein Animal Health), and nasal washes were collected with 400 µL of PBS on endpoint days (2, 4, and 7 dpi). Hamsters were euthanized by CO2 for organ collection. Nasal wash and lungs were collected to measure viral titer. The left lungs were collected for histopathology.Hamster transmissionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. Each group (WT, PQQAR, or PBS) had 10 donor hamsters that were intranasally infected with 100 µL of 105 pfu of virus or PBS, depending on the group. Twenty-four hours post-infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 8 h for contact transmission. After 8 h, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing, and the donors were nasal washed. At 2 days post-infection for donors and post-contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 µL of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol, and RNA was extracted to perform next-generation sequencing as previously described.Hamster transmission competitionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. Ten donor hamsters were intranasally infected with a 1:1 ratio of WT:PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 totaling 105 pfu in 100 µL and were subsequently individually housed. At 24 h post-infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 12 h for contact transmission. After 8 h, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing, and the donors were nasal washed for D1 values. At 2 and 4 days post-infection for donors and post-contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 µL of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol. RNA was extracted to perform next-generation sequencing.HistologyHistopathology was performed as previously described (33, 34). Briefly, the left lungs were harvested from hamsters and fixed in 10% buffered formalin solution for at least 7 days. Fixed tissue was then embedded in paraffin, cut into 5 µm sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin on a SAKURA VIP6 processor by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. H&E staining was performed by the University of Texas Medical Branch Histology Laboratory and then analyzed and scored by a blinded pathologist.ImmunohistochemistryAntigen staining was performed as previously described (35). Briefly, fixed and paraffin-embedded left lung lobes from hamsters were cut into 5 µm sections and mounted onto slides by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. Paraffin-embedded sections were warmed at 56°C for 10 min, deparaffinized with xylene (3× 5-min washes) and graded ethanol (3× 100% 5-min washes and 1× 95% 5-min wash), and rehydrated in distilled water. After rehydration, antigen retrieval was performed by steaming slides in antigen retrieval solution (10 mM sodium citrate and 0.05% Tween-20, pH 6) for 40 min (antigen retrieval solution was boiled in a microwave, slides were added to the boiling solution, and incubated in a steamer). After cooling and rinsing in distilled water, endogenous peroxidases were quenched by incubating slides in TBS with 0.3% H2O2 for 15 min followed by 2× 5 min washes in 0.05% TBST. Sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum in BSA diluent (1% BSA in 0.05% TBST) for 30 min at room temperature. Sections were incubated with primary anti-N antibody (Sino #40143-R001) at 1:1,000 in BSA diluent overnight at 4°C. Following overnight primary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3× for 5 min in TBST. Sections were incubated in secondary HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074) at 1:200 in BSA diluent for 1 h at room temperature. Following secondary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3× for 5 min in TBST. To visualize the antigen, sections were incubated in ImmPACT NovaRED (Vector Laboratories #SK-4805) for 3 min at room temperature before being rinsed with TBST to stop the reaction, followed by 1× 5-min wash in distilled water. Sections were incubated in hematoxylin for 5 min at room temperature to counterstain before rinsing in water to stop the reaction. Sections were dehydrated by incubating in the previous xylene and graded ethanol baths in reverse order before being mounted with coverslips.Structural modelingStructural models previously generated were used as a base to visualize residues mutated in Omicron (12). Briefly, structural models were generated using SWISS-Model to generate homology models for WT and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 spike protein based on the SARS-CoV-1 trimer structure (Protein Data Bank code 6ACD). Homology models were visualized and manipulated in PyMOL (version 2.5.4) to visualize the PQQAR mutation.Next-generation sequencing and data analysisNext-generation sequencing method was used to determine viral RNA populations from infected animals. Briefly, total cellular RNA samples were extracted from animal tissues, and NGS libraries were prepared with the Tiled-ClickSeq method (17, 32). A modified pre-RT annealing protocol was applied as previously described (32) to reduce mis-priming. The final libraries comprising 300–600 bp fragments were pooled and sequenced on an ElementBio Aviti platform with paired-end sequencing (120 bp R1 and 30 bp R2). The raw Illumina data of the Tiled-ClickSeq libraries were processed with established bioinformatics pipelines (https://github.com/andrewrouth/TCS). The relative ratio between WT and PQQAR was calculated based on the average Pilon-reported (36) G-to-A mutation rate at specific genomic loci (G23607A, G23608A, G23610A, and G23611A). A baseline mutation rate is also evaluated by averaging the background mutation rates from nts 23,606–23,612.


Title: SARS-CoV-2 Variant Spike and accessory gene mutations alter pathogenesis

IntroductionIn December of 2019, a cluster of viral pneumonia cases were observed in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.1 The etiologic agent of this infection was found to be a novel coronavirus that we now call severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).2 By early 2020, the virus was rapidly spreading, leading to infections on all seven continents and in every country around the world. There have since been over 420 million cases and almost six million deaths from this virus.3 Despite the rapid development and deployment of vaccines, the pandemic persists.SARS-CoV-2 is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus that is 79% identical in sequence to SARS-CoV-1, the virus responsible for localized epidemic outbreaks beginning in February 2003.4 The genome of this and other beta coronaviruses is composed of Open Reading Frames (ORFs) which are functionally divided between replicase proteins, structural proteins, and accessory proteins, the latter of which are unique to each CoV species.5, 6 From the 5′ to 3′ end, the virus encodes the replicase (ORF1a/b) and the four ORFS for the structural proteins spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N). The replicase is responsible for encoding sixteen nonstructural proteins that compose the replicative machinery of the virus. Additionally, interspersed with the structural proteins at the 3′ end of the genome is a variety of accessory ORFs. The accessory ORFs encode proteins which are not essential for viral replication in vitro but generally contribute to viral pathogenesis. The accessory ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 are very similar to those of SARS-CoV-1, and many of the functions of these ORFs have been inferred based on the previously identified functions of the SARS-CoV-1 accessory ORFs.5The functions of the accessory ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 involve modulation of several different host pathways including antagonism of the innate immune response. For example, SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b has been shown to antagonize interferon signaling and ORF7a has been shown to interfere with the interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) BST2.7, 8, 9 SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 also participates in this antagonism of the innate immune response as it has been shown to antagonize the IFN-induced nuclear translocation of STAT1 which results in the reduced expression of ISGs.10The continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic is largely due to the emergence of mutated strains or “variants” of SARS-CoV-2. The variants differ most notably in the sequence of their spike proteins, which bind to the receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) to allow for internalization of the virus. As the spike protein is the immunodominant antigen, the emergence of variants has raised concerns regarding the breadth of protection of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is important to note that many of the variants of SARS-CoV-2 possess mutations in one or more of the accessory proteins. The impact of such mutations outside of the spike protein on pathogenesis of these variants remains understudied.To elucidate the role of the accessory proteins of SARS-CoV-2 in pathogenesis, we developed a synthetic genomics assembly approach based on transformation-associated recombination (TAR) in yeast for the creation of infectious clones of SARS-CoV-2.11–14 We then synthesized deletion viruses of ORFs 3a/3b, 6, 7a/7b, and 8 in the prototype SARS-CoV-2 (isolate USA/-WA1/2020 or WA-1) strain of SARS-CoV-2. We then investigated the replicative fitness of these viruses in vitro before proceeding to characterization of the effect of these accessory deletions on pathogenesis in a murine model. To begin to characterize the impact of naturally occurring accessory mutations found in the variants on pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2, we developed recombinant variant spike proteins in the WA-1 backbone (B.1.1.7, B.1.351, and P.1). We then compared the replicative fitness in vitro of these recombinant viruses to the parent variants and characterized differences in pathogenesis in a mouse model.MethodsInfectious Clone Construction and RescueTAR-cloning SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragments:To clone each SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragment, each of the target PCR amplicons of the genome was cloned into a TAR vector backbone for replication in budding yeast and Escherichia coli. TAR vectors consist of the vector backbone flanked by restriction sites to release the genomic region and homologous “hooks” of sequence. To assemble DNA fragment clones, the TAR vectors were PCR amplified from pCC1BAC-his3 with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA) using the construction primers (labeled “Con”, Table S1).15 40 bp of homology and an I-SceI restriction site were introduced by the Con primers to each end of the vector backbone. Each DNA fragment was amplified with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA) using cDNA from SARS-CoV-2/human/USA/WA-CDC-WA1/2020 and contains 80 bp of homology to its adjacent fragments for assembly. PCR products were digested with DpnI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) before transformation as per the manufacturer’s directions.The SARS-CoV-2 WA1 genome was cloned as 7 individual DNA fragments: 1a-1, 1a-2, 1a-3, 1b-1, 1b-2, S and AP. 50 fmol of each WA1 PCR amplicon was transformed with 15 fmol of the appropriate amplified YCpBAC vector into Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain VL6–48N spheroplasts (MATα, his3-Δ200, trp1-Δ1, ura3-Δ1, lys2, ade2–101, met14, cir°) as described in.13–15 Transformants were patched on synthetic dropout medium plates without histidine (SDhis). After sufficient growth, yeast cells were lysed by incubation in 25 mM NaOH at 95°C for 30 min. Detection PCR amplification, with Q5 polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), lysed cell supernatant as template, and detection primers (RCO493 + “Det-F” or RCO495 + “Det-R” primers, Table S2), was used to confirm correct junctions between the fragment and vector. Sanger sequencing of PCR products (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ) across the SARS-CoV-2 regions was used to verify the DNA fragment clone. DNA of sequenced-validated clones was extracted from yeast patches and electroporated into E. coli DH10B (Thermo Fisher).13
E. coli transformants were screened by colony PCR amplification for correct junction sizes with the appropriate “F” and “R” detection primers (Table S2). Plasmid DNAs from the DNA fragment clones were isolated from E. coli by the Purelink HiPure Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) and modified or used for full-length genome assembly.DNA fragment modifications:In vitro CRISPR-Cas9 digestion and TAR assembly were used to make accessory ORF deletions in the AP DNA fragment. Cas9 target sites near the desired mutant coordinate were identified using Benchling’s CRISPR guide RNA design tool (www.benchling.com/crispr/). Single guide RNA (sgRNA) was transcribed from a PCR amplicon, generated as described in PMID: 28928148, containing 18 bp of specific target sequence upstream of the PAM sequence. The AP DNA fragment was digested in vitro using Cas9 nuclease, Streptococcus pyogenes (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), as described previously13 An oligonucleotide containing 40 bases of homology to either side of the target accessory ORF was TAR-assembled with each appropriate Cas9-digested AP DNA fragment in yeast by spheroplast transformation. Yeast transformants were screened for the desired mutation by Sanger sequencing of PCR amplicons (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ) using lysed yeast culture supernatant as template. DNA was then extracted from yeast, transformed into E. coli, screened for correctness, and isolated from E. coli as with DNA fragment clones described above.SARS-CoV-2 variant spike genes were generated as described previously.25 Briefly, to generate SARS-CoV-2 variant spike genes, short fragments were amplified with Platinum SuperFi II DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) using the wild-type S DNA fragment clone as template. Variant mutations (Table S6) were introduced by primers into each amplicon, which had 30–35 bp homology at each end between the adjacent fragments. Amplicons were digested with DpnI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) to remove template DNA and purified with a Qiagen PCR purification kit. 50 fmol of each amplicon and 15 fmol of YCpBAC vector were assembled using a standard Gibson assembly reaction (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), transformed into E. coli DH10B competent cells (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA), and plated on LB medium with 12.5 mg/ml chloramphenicol. Assembled plasmids were confirmed to have the desired mutations by colony PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ), and then isolated from E. coli using the Purelink HiPure Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). Table S3 lists the primers used for the construction of the variant S DNA fragments.Full-length genome assembly:The TAR vector for assembly of the full-length genome was amplified from pCC1BAC-ura3 using primers ConCMVpR and ConBGHtermF with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA).15 The CMV promoter was amplified from HCMV Toledo genomic DNA using primers CMVpromF and CMVpromR. Hepatitis delta virus ribozyme (HDV Rz) with bovine growth hormone (BGH) terminator fragment was obtained as a gBlock (IDT), Hu1-34. A fragment to introduce a BamHI restriction site and a fragment with a polyA region were synthesized by IDT (Pcmv-BamHI fix and PA35-HDV fix, Table S4). Each fragment has 40 bp of homology at each end to its adjacent fragments. To generate the TAR vector for the complete genome, the pCC1-ura3 amplicon, the CMV amplicon, the BamHI fragment, the polyA fragment, and the HDVR+BGH region were assembled into circular DNA in yeast by TAR.SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragments, isolated from E. coli, were digested with I-SceI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Ma) to release the overlapping DNA fragments from the vector whereas the full-length TAR vector was linearized by BamHI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) digestion. 50 fmol of each fragment and 15 fmol of full-length genome TAR vector were mixed with yeast spheroplasts for TAR-assembly.12, 13 Transformants were patched on SD-URA plates, and positive clones were screened by PCR amplification with the detection primers listed in Table S5. The subsequent DNA isolation from yeast, transformation into and isolation from E. coli were performed as described for the SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragment clones.Virus Reconstitution:24 hours prior to transfection, 5e4 VeroE6 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were plated per well in 1mL of VeroE6 media (DMEM (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD), 10% FBS (Gibco, Waltham, MA), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gemini Bio Products, Sacramento, CA), 1% L-Glutamine (Gibco, Waltham, MA)). For transfection, 5μg of the infectious clone and 100ng of a SARS-CoV-2 WA-1 nucleoprotein expression plasmid were diluted in 100μL of OptiMEM (Gibco, Waltham, MA). 3μL of TransIT-2020 (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI) was added and the reactions were incubated for 30 minutes prior to addition to the cells in the BSL-3. Cells were checked for cytopathic effect (CPE) 72–96 hours after transfection and the supernatant collected for plaque purification. For plaque purification, 6e5 VeroE6 cells were plated in a 6-well plate in 2mL of VeroE6 media 24 hours prior to infection. 25μL of this supernatant was then serial diluted 1:10 in DMEM and 200μL of this supernatant was added to the VeroE6 cells. The cells were rocked every 15 minutes for 1 hour at 37°C prior to overlay with 2mL of a solid agarose overlay (EMEM (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD), 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin, 1% L-Glutamine, 0.4% w/v SeaKem agarose (Lonza Biosciences, Morrisville, NC). Cells were incubated for 72 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2 and individual plaques were picked and then transferred to a well of a 6-well plate with 4e5 VeroE6 cells in 3mL VeroE6 media. After 48 hours, successful plaque picks were assessed by presence of CPE. 1mL of a well showing CPE was transferred to a T175 with 8e6 VeroE6 cells in 30mL of VeroE6 media and the virus stock was collected 48 and 72 hours after. The stocks were then titered by plaque assay.Titering of Virus Stocks, Growth Curve Samples, Tissue Homogenates by Plaque AssayThe day prior to infection, 2e5 VeroE6 cells were seeded per well in a 12-well plate in 1mL of VeroE6 media. Tissue samples were thawed and homogenized with 1mm beads in an Omni Bead ruptor (Omni International Inc., Kennesaw, GA) and then spun down at 21,000×g for 2 minutes. A 6-point dilution curve was prepared by serial diluting 25μL of sample 1:10 in 225μL DMEM. 200μL of each dilution was then added to the cells and the plates were rocked every 15 minutes for 1 hour at 37°C. After 1hr, 2mL of a semi-solid agarose overlay was added to each well (DMEM, 4%FBS, 0.06% UltraPure agarose (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). After 72 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2, plates were fixed in 2% PFA for 20 minutes, stained with 0.5mL of 0.05% Crystal Violet and 20% EtOH, and washed 2× with H2O prior to counting of plaques. The titer was then calculated. For tissue homogenates, this titer was multiplied by 40 based on the average tissue sample weight being 25mg.Growth Curve Infection and Sample ProcessingThe day prior to infection, 1.5e5 VeroE6 cells were seeded in a 12-well plate in 1.5mL of VeroE6 media. The day of infection, cells were washed with 500μL of DMEM and the volume of virus needed for an M.O.I. of 0.01 was diluted in 100μL DMEM and added to a well in triplicate. The plates were rocked every 15 minutes for 1hr at 37°C. After 1hr, the inoculum was removed, the cells were washed with 500μL of VeroE6 media and then 1.5mL of VeroE6 media was added to each well. 300μL of this supernatant was taken as the 0hr timepoint and replaced with fresh media. 300μL of supernatant was pulled and replaced with fresh media at 0hr, 6hr, 24hr, 48hr, 72hr, and 96hr timepoints. This supernatant was then titered.Infection of BALB/c and hACE2/k18 MiceAll animals were cared for according to the standards set forth by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Maryland-Baltimore. On Day 0, 12-week old BALB/c (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) and 12-week old hACE2 transgenic K18 mice (K18-hACE2) (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, ME) were anesthetized interperitoneally with 50μL ketamine(1.3mg/mouse)/ xylazine (0.38mg/mouse). The BALB/c mice were then inoculated with 1e4 PFU of each virus in 50μL PBS. The K18-hACE2 mice were inoculated with 1e3 PFU of each virus in 50μL PBS. The mock infected mice received 50μL PBS only. Mice were then weighed every day until the end of the experiment. Mice were euthanized with isoflurane on Day 2 and Day 4. From each mouse, the left lung was collected in PFA for histology and the right lung was split in half with one half placed in PBS for titer and one half placed in TRIzol for RNA extraction. For the K18-hACE2 mice, the brain was also collected, with half of the brain in PBS for titering and the other half in TRIzol for RNA extraction.RT-qPCR of Tissue HomogenatesSamples were homogenized in an Omni Bead ruptor in TRIzol and then the RNA was extracted from 300μL of each sample using the Direct-zol RNA miniprep kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA). 2μL of isolated RNA from each sample was then converted to cDNA using the RevertAID first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) in a 20μL volume. For qPCR for SARS2 Rdrp, 20μL reactions were prepared using 2μL cDNA, 1μL of 10mM Rdrp Forward primer (10006860, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), 1μL of Rdrp Reverse primer (10006881, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), and 10μL of 2x SYBR Green (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). The reactions were then run on a 7500 Fast Dx Real-Time PCR Instrument (4357362R, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). For qPCR for murine GAPDH, 20μL reactions were prepared using 2μL cDNA, 1μL of a 20x murine GAPDH primer (MM.pt.39a.1, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), and 10μL of 2x SYBR Green. The reactions were then run on a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR Instrument (A28133, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA).H/E Staining of Lungs and Pathological ScoringLungs were scored in a blinded fashion with a 0–5 score given, 0 being no inflammation and 5 being the highest degree of inflammation. Interstitial inflammation and peribronchiolar inflammation were scored separately then scores were averaged for the overall inflammation score.Cytokine ArraysThe concentration of lung RNA was quantified using a Nanodrop (NanoVue Plus). 400ng of RNA was converted to cDNA using the Qiagen RT2 First Strand Kit (330404, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The cDNA was analyzed with the Qiagen RT2 Mouse Cytokines and Chemokines array (PAMM-150Z, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Reactions were run on a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR Instrument (A28133, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). The results were analyzed with the Qiagen analysis spreadsheet provided with the kit.Statistical AnalysisAll statistical analyses were carried out using the GraphPad Prism software. The statistical tests run were unpaired t-tests assuming unequal variances. The cutoff value used to determine significance was p≤0.05.Biosafety approvalAll virus experiments and recombinant virus creation was approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee at The University of Maryland, Baltimore. At their request, the P.1 S in WA-1 virus has been destroyed due to it increased in vivo pathogenesis compared to the clinical P.1 strain.ResultsInfectious Clone SystemTo enable rapid and combinatorial modification of SARS-CoV-2, we established a yeastbased assembly approach using transformation-associated recombination (TAR) to assemble a complete genome from overlapping DNA fragments. This approach is based on one that we previously used to engineer human herpesviruses.13, 14 It involves first, generating a set of sequence-validated DNA fragments that encompass a complete genome which can then be modified individually and in parallel to obtain DNA fragments containing the desired changes. The modified fragments can be mix and matched with unmodified DNA fragments for assembly into complete genomes to generate the desired mutant viruses. For SARS-CoV-2, the genome was deconstructed into 7 individual DNA fragments: 3 for ORF1a (1a-1 to 1a-3), 2 for ORF1b (1b-1 and 1b-2), 1 for Spike (S) and 1 for the accessory protein 3’ genome region (AP) [Figure 1A]. Each individual fragment was TAR-cloned by transforming into yeast each target fragment amplified by PCR using SARS-CoV-2 WA1 cDNA as template with primer pairs listed in Table S1 together with a PCR-amplified YCpBAC vector that contains each set of appropriate homologous sequences at either end (Table S1). Each individual DNA fragment was confirmed by junction PCR amplification using a primer homologous to the YCpBAC vector and a primer homologous to the target DNA fragment (Figure S1, Table S2). Positive yeast clones were then transformed into Escherichia coli to enable isolation of large amounts of DNA and again confirmed by junction PCR amplification (Figure S1). Finally, each individual DNA fragment, which was validated by Sanger sequencing, is flanked by I-SceI sites and contains 80 base pairs of homologous sequence to its adjacent fragments. Deletion of the accessory genes were performed at the DNA fragment level (AP) by cleaving with Cas9 protein in vitro guided by guide RNAs specific to each accessory gene and then transforming into yeast each cleaved DNA fragment together with the appropriate “fix” that contains 40 bases of homology to either side of the coding region of the target accessory gene (Table S3). Positive clones were identified by PCR amplification across the target gene and then transformed into E. coli for large quantity isolation of DNA (Figure S2). The Spike ORFs from select SARS-CoV-2 variants were generated by rebuilding the WA1 S DNA fragment by Gibson assembly in E. coli from PCR amplified products using primers to introduce the changes where needed and the WA1 S DNA fragment as template (Table S3). Each of the SARS-CoV-2 S variant generated was validated by Sanger sequencing. Finally, to generate the different full-length genomes by TAR assembly, the appropriate sets of DNA fragments (1a-1 to AP) were cleaved with I-SceI to separate the SARS-CoV-2 fragment from the YCpBAC vector and then transformed into yeast together with a YCpBAC vector that contains a CMV promoter and homology to DNA fragment 1a-1 at one end and homology to DNA fragment AP, Hepatitis delta virus ribozyme sequence as well as bovine growth hormone terminator at the other end (Figure 1A, Table S4). Correct assembly of the full-length genomes were confirmed by junction PCR amplification (Figure 1B) using primer pairs that span the SARS-CoV-2 genome (Table S5). Positive clones were transferred to E. coli for isolation of SARS-CoV-2 full-length genome DNA.Following confirmation of the successful synthesis of each full-length genome clone, VeroE6 cells were transfected with each isolated YCpBAC. 72–96 hours later, the cells were monitored for CPE, supernatant was collected. The virus was then plaque-purified and stocked. The accessory ORF deletion viruses of WA-1 were successfully recovered and sequence-verified prior to use in experiments.Replication of SARS-CoV-2 deletion viruses in cells.The growth of the wildtype SARS-CoV-2 (WA-1) and the accessory ORF deletion series was analyzed. To evaluate the replicative kinetics of the deletion viruses in vitro, VeroE6 cells were infected with an M.O.I. of 0.01 of WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a/b, WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b, and WA-1ΔORF8. Supernatant was titered at 0, 6, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours post infection by plaque assay. Compared to the wildtype WA-1 virus, WA-1ΔORF3a/b was the only accessory gene deletion virus to show an attenuated phenotype, demonstrating significantly attenuated growth at 48 and 72 hours (Figure 2A p=0.0027 and p=0.0014).WA-1 Accessory Deletion Viruses in K18-hACE2 mice.We sought to identify the role of the accessory proteins in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis using a mouse model of COVID-19. C57BL/6 K18/hACE2 (K18-hACE2) are highly permissive to SARS-CoV-2 due to the widespread expression of human ACE2 (hACE2). This hACE2 is expressed under the control of the keratin 18 (K18) promoter, leading to hACE2 expression in almost all cells of the mouse. Previous reports have shown this mouse strain to be permissive to wildtype SARS-CoV-2 infection without the need for any adaptations or mutations in the Spike protein. We utilized these mice in the comparison of wildtype and deletion strains so that no alteractions to the Spike protein would be needed for replication. To evaluate the role of each accessory protein, 12-week old K18-hACE2 mice were infected with 1e3 pfu of each virus, weighed daily, and euthanized at 2 and 4 days post-infection (dpi) for collection of tissue samples. Wildtype WA-1 displayed ~12% weight loss through 4 days of infection, with similar weight loss for WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b and WA-1ΔORF8 viruses (Figure 2B). However, infection with WA-1ΔORF3a/b resulted in an attenuated weight loss phenotype in the mice, with these mice losing less than 4% of their starting weight (Figure 2B).Lung titers for wildtype and deletion viruses were analyzed at day 2 and 4 post infection to determine if there were differences in replicative fitness between the mutants and WA-1. Lung titers for WA-1 reached 7e7 and 8e6 pfu/g lung at day 2 and 4, respectively (Figure 2C). The mutant viruses WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b and WA-1ΔORF8 had similar lung titers to WA-1 at day 2. This was also found with infection of WA-1ΔORF6 and WA-1ΔORF7a/b at day 4. WA-1ΔORF8 did exhibit a one log reduction in lung titer at day 4, although this reduction was not significant (Figure 2C). Consistent with the observed attenuation in weight loss, mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b had significantly attenuated lung titers at both day 2 and 4 with one log lower lung titer at day 2 (p=0.012) and three logs lower titer at day 4 post infection (p=0.0030) compared to WA-1 (Figure 2C).Lung viral RNA was analyzed for WA-1 and each mutant virus at day 2 and 4 post infection. The levels for viral RNA for each of the deletion viruses were compared to the RNA levels by fold change in the lungs of the mice infected with the wildtype virus. Although none of the fold changes were significant, mice infected with the deletion viruses for ORF6, ORF7a/b, and ORF8 showed higher viral RNA levels compared to WA-1 while mice infected with the ORF3a/b deletion virus showed slightly lower lung RNA levels compared to WA-1 (Figure 2E).Due to the over-expression of hACE2 in neural tissues in the K18-hACE2 mice, SARS-CoV-2 can invade and replicate in the brain of these mice. We therefore assessed the replication of WA-1 and the accessory deletion viruses in brain tissue as well. For all of the accessory deletion viruses, there were undetectable live virus titers in the brain at day 2 and day 4 post-infection (Figure 2D). Despite there being little virus in the brain by plaque assay, there was viral RNA detected in the brain in levels that were not significantly different between the accessory deletions when compared to WA-1 (Figure 2F).Lungs were fixed and stained with H&E to determine whether inflammation and lung damage were different between the wildtype WA-1 and deletion mutants. They were scored in a blinded fashion with a 0–5 score given, 0 being no inflammation and 5 being the highest degree of inflammation. Interstitial inflammation and peribronchiolar inflammation were scored separately then scores were averaged for the overall inflammation score. Despite the attenuation of weight loss with infection with WA-1ΔORF3a/b, there is no significant difference in lung pathology in the mice when compared to WA-1 (Figure 3A, 3B). Across the accessory deletion panel, there were no significant differences in lung pathology seen with any of the accessory deletion viruses except for an unexpected increase in lung pathology scores for mice infected with WA-1ΔORF8 at day 4 (p=0.0037, Figure 3A, 3B). The increased pathology of WA-1ΔORF8 is intriguing because of the reported immunomodulatory role of the secreted ORF8 protein in pathogenesis. This finding is being studied in future experiments.Creation of infectious clones of variant spikes in a WA-1 (icWA-1) background and analysis in cellsThe Spike ORFs from selected SARS-CoV-2 variants were cloned into the icWA-1 clone to replace the WA-1 Spike ORF. The goal of these mutant viruses is to dissociate the effects of the variant Spike ORF from the other mutations in the genomes and to determine if differences exist in pathogenesis in the mouse model. This allows for the identification of whether the variant viruses replicate and have similar pathogenesis to a virus containing only the Spike mutations alone on the same background SARS-CoV-2 virus.The Spike variant viruses were cloned, rescued, sequenced and analyzed for their replication in vitro and in vivo. Upon successful recovery and sequence verification of the variant spikes in WA-1 viruses, the replication of these viruses was compared to the parent variants at an M.O.I. of 0.01 in VeroE6 cells. The variant spike and parental variant pairs, B.1.351 and B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1, showed no difference in supernatant viral titers at all timepoints tested (Figure 4A). The supernatant titer for P.1 S in WA-1 was significantly lower than the parent variant P.1 at only the 72hr timepoint (Figure 4A, p=0.0015).Variant spike in WA-1 viruses compared to variant clinical isolates in K18-hACE2 miceThe variant Spike viruses were then tested to determine if their pathogenesis in mice was different than the parent clinical isolates that have the Spike mutations and the full composition of non-spike mutations. To investigate differences in pathogenesis in vivo, 12-week old K18-hACE2 mice were infected with 1e3 pfu of each virus. Mice were weighed every day and were euthanized at either day 2 or day 4 post-infection for collection of lung tissue and brain tissue. Reflective of the in vitro results, mice infected with B.1.351 and mice infected with B.1.351 S in WA-1 displayed similar weight loss of around 12%. Mice infected with B.1.1.7 and mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 also exhibited similar weight loss of around 10% (Figure 4B). However, mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 showed a weight loss ~12% despite there being very minimal weight loss in mice infected with the P.1 parent variant (Figure 4B). The lung titers of the mice reflected the weight loss, with mice infected with B.1.351 S in WA-1 or B.1.17 S in WA-1 displaying similar lung titers of around 108 on day 2 and 106 on day 4 which was seen in the mice infected with the parent variants (Figure 4C). Mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 had significantly higher lung titers at day 2 compared to mice infected with P.1, which lung titers being roughly one log higher at this time (Figure 4C, p=0.00057).As with the accessory deletion viruses, viral titers in the brain were also analyzed. Although none of the infected mice had measurable titer in the brain at day 2, the brain titers for day 4 trended with the lung titer results, with B.1.351 and B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showing similar titers of ~107 – 108 at day 4 (Figure 4D). P.1 S in WA-1 showed 100X higher titer in the brain at day 4 compared to P.1, although this was not statistically significant (Figure 4D).Viral RNA levels were quantified in lung and brain to compare to live virus titer results. The viral RNA levels in the lung and in the brain are reflective of the titers (Figure 4E and Figure 4F), with the only significant difference being between the day 2 lung RNA levels of P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 (Figure 4E, p=0.00070).Lung inflammation was also analyzed across clinical isolates and Spike mutant viruses. The lungs for the variant spike in WA-1 mice looked similar in terms of inflammation to the lungs of the mice infected with the parental variant viruses (Figure 5A). Although there were no significant differences in lung inflammation between the parent variant viruses and the variant spike in WA-1 viruses, the P.1 S in WA-1 lungs had higher lung pathology scores on both day 2 and day 4 when compared to the P.1 mice, which trends with both the titer and the weight loss data (Figure 5B).Variant Spikes in WA-1 in BALB/c MiceThe wildtype SARS-CoV-2/WA-1 virus does not replicate in wildtype mice due to poor interactions with mouse ACE2. The N501Y mutation in Spike does however allow for replication in wildtype mice. Interestingly, the variants examined in this study do have the N501Y mutation allowing for comparison of pathogenesis between recombinant viruses variants and their parent strains in BALB/c mice. For this comparison, 12-week old BALB/c mice were infected with 1e4 pfu of each virus and euthanized at either Day 2 or Day 4 post-infection for analysis. As we observed with the K18-hACE2 mouse experiment, infection with P.1 S in WA-1 resulted in increased weight loss of around 5% compared to infection with P.1 which produced no weight loss. Both B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 infection produced minimal weight loss in these mice. Unlike the results from the infection in K18-hACE2 mice, mice with B.1.351 S in WA-1 showed attenuated weight loss of around 7% compared to B.1.351, which produced roughly 12% weight loss (Figure 6A).The viral titers in the lung homogenates were mostly reflective of the weight loss findings, with infection with B.1.351 S in WA-1 producing significantly lower lung titers by about two logs at day 2 and day 4 as compared to infection with B.1.351 (Figure 6B, p=0.008 and p=0.014). Despite there being no differences in weight loss, B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 infection resulted in significantly higher lung titers by two logs at day 2 post infection (p=0.013) compared to B.1.1.7, with both viruses being nearly cleared by day 4 post infection (Figure 6B). Infection with P.1 S in WA-1 resulted in higher lung titers by two logs at day 2 and one log at day 4 as compared to infection with P.1, although only the day 4 titers differed significantly (Figure 6B, p=0.011).The viral RNA levels in the lungs at these timepoints correlated to the viral titer levels, although none of these findings were statistically significant (Figure 6C). Lung pathology was also analyzed. The lungs of mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showed similar pathology to the mice infected with B.1.1.7 and this was also reflected by the pathology scores (Figure 7A/B). The lungs of mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 showed increased inflammation compared to the lungs of mice infected with P.1 on both day 2 and day 4 (Figure 7A/B) post-infection. Despite B.1.351 S in WA-1 producing attenuated weight loss, the lung pathology scores for these mice were higher compared to mice infected with B.1.351, although none of the lung pathology differences were statistically significant (Figure 7A/B).Lung Cytokine Profiling for WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a, P.1, and P.1 S in WA-1We then analyzed the host response to selected viruses that showed the most significant differences in weight loss and titer when compared to the parent strains. We compared the inflammatory cytokine and chemokine profile by qPCR on both the Day 2 lungs and the Day 4 lungs of the K18-hACE2 mice infected with WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a/b, P.1, and P.1 S in WA-1 (Table S7). It is interesting to note that for both the WA-1ΔORF3a/b to WA-1 comparison and the P.1 S in WA-1 to P.1 comparison, the majority of significant cytokine and chemokine changes were seen at Day 2. For this reason, we will focus on the changes we saw at Day 2.For K18-hACE2 mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b, the majority of significant fold changes in cytokine and chemokine levels compared to mice infected with WA-1 were less than 1. The top five significantly downregulated genes are Ccl7, Csf3, Cxcl1, Cxcl3, and Cxcl5, which are key cytokines involved in neutrophil production and recruitment (Table 1). There was a small subset of genes which were significantly upregulated. These genes are Adipoq, Bmp7, Ctf1, Cxcl11, Il4, and Il5, which are mostly cytokines involved in cell survival and the early stages of T-cell activation (Table 1).As was seen with the WA-1ΔORF3a and WA-1 comparison, the majority of significant fold changes occurred at Day 2 for the P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 comparison. There were few differences in gene induction when comparing P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 in relation to the WA-1ΔORF3a/b and WA-1 differentially expressed genes. The top five upregulated genes were Ccl1, Ccl20, Csf3, Cxcl5, and Osm, which are involved in the attraction of neutrophils and lymphocytes (Table 2). All of the downregulated genes had similar fold changes. These genes include Csf2, Il12a, and Il21, which are known to be secreted by innate immune cells, including natural killer cells (Table 2).DiscussionA unique characteristic of coronaviruses is the inclusion of genes in the 3’ end of the genome that are unique to each coronavirus family.16 These genes are called “accessory genes” because, while unique to each family, they are not essential for replication.17 Many of these genes across the coronavirus family have been shown to alter host pathways including interferon signaling, cell cycle progression, and other assorted anti-viral responses to viral infection that enhance replication and pathogenesis.9, 10, 18, 19We designed two ways to analyze the functional consequences of the accessory genes in SARS-CoV-2 in vivo. First, we produced deletion viruses that deleted each ORF from our infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2. Second, we produced mutant SARS-CoV-2 viruses that contained the spike of each previously circulating variant. As variants of SARS-CoV-2 have emerged, the increasing incidence of mutations both within spike and outside of spike were noted. Although, the mutations in spike may enhance entry and kinetics of infection, the mutations observed in the other genes may alter disease severity through interactions with the host immune system. In our experiments we sought to differentiate between the role of spike mutations in each variant and those in other genes of the variant genome. As many of these non-spike mutations in the genome are in the accessory ORFs, we decided to couple our work with our variant spikes in WA-1 viruses with our work with accessory deletion viruses. This allows us to determine which accessory ORFs contribute significantly to pathogenesis through infection with our deletion viruses, and to link mutations in the corresponding variant ORFs to impacts on ORF function and pathogenesis.Our work with the accessory deletion viruses has revealed that ORF3a and ORF3b contribute significantly to viral replication in K18-hACE2 mice. Mice infected with a WA-1ΔORF3a/b deletion virus demonstrated attenuated weight loss and significantly reduced lung titers at both day 2 and day 4. Our finding that an ORF3a/b deletion virus is attenuated in mice is supported by previously published work as does our finding that WA-1ΔORF6 is not attenuated in mice.20 This paper also found that deletions of ORF7a, ORF7b, and ORF8 show reduced lung titer, which we did not find in our experiments. This may be due to inoculation differences in our model where mice were infected with a non-lethal dose of 103 pfu instead of 105 pfu as used in the previous study. It is possible that we may see attenuation in weight loss and viral replication of WA-1ΔORF7a/7b, and WA-1ΔORF8 at higher doses or in different mouse backgrounds, which were not studied here.The lung cytokine and chemokine profiles of mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b demonstrated reduced expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines compared to WA-1. This difference is most likely attributed to the fact the WA-1ΔORF3a/b virus demonstrates attenuated replication in mice. As expected, the attenuated replication of WA-1ΔORF3a/b results in the downregulation of cytokines and chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment, including Ccl7, Csf3, Cxcl1, Cxcl3, and Cxcl5. There is a small subset of genes that are upregulated in the WA-1ΔORF3a/b lungs. Two of these upregulated genes are Il4 and Il5, which function to drive the Th2 response. Interestingly, COVID-19 is known to skew to a Th2 response through stimulating the production of Il4 and Il5.21 Given that the WA-1ΔORF3a/b virus is attenuated compared to WA-1, we would expect a downregulation of these cytokines. The downregulation of Il4 might in part be explained by its role in the tissue remodeling process, with the faster clearance of WA-1ΔORF3a/3b allowing for tissue repair to take place.22 Another of these upregulated genes, adipoq, encodes the insulin-sensitizing hormone, adiponectin. Interestingly, reduced adiponectin levels are associated with severe respiratory failure in COVID-19 patients.23 Future work to characterize the role of these cytokines and chemokines SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis will focus on how these pathways interact with the accessory genes of the virus.As the emergence of variants of SARS-CoV-2 occurred, we noted the appearance of point mutations in the accessory genes of SARS-CoV-2. To elucidate the impact of non-spike mutations on viral pathogenesis, we synthesized variant spikes in the WA-1 backbone. We focused on the synthesis of the B.1.351, B.1.1.7, and P.1 lineages. When comparing the in vitro replication of the parent variants to their paired variant spikes in WA-1, we did not see many significant differences in replication in VeroE6 cells. The only significant difference we saw was a significant decrease in supernatant viral titer at 72 hours of P.1 S in WA-1 when compared to P.1.In the K18-hACE2 mice, the absence of in vitro replicative differences for B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 in WA-1 were reflected. Mice infected with B.1.351 in WA-1 exhibited no differences in weight loss, lung titer, and brain titer compared to mice infected with B.1.351. This was also true for mice infected with B.1.1.7 when compared to mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1. Results from the BALB/c experiment differed significantly for the B.1.351 S in WA-1/B.1.351 pairing, with B.1.351 S in WA-1 showing attenuated weight loss and lung titers compared to B.1.351. The mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showed an increase in lung titer on day 2, but no difference in weight loss was seen when compared to B.1.1.7.The most significant replicative differences in both BALB/c and K18-hACE2 mice was seen with P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1. In both sets of mice, mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 demonstrated increased weight loss and significantly higher lung titers by plaque assay and qPCR than mice infected with P.1. In the K18-hACE2 mice, the brain RNA and brain titers trended with this data as well, although the values were not significant.Given the significant differences in P.1 S in WA-1 and P.1 replication in vivo, we analyzed cytokine and chemokine gene expression on both the day 2 and day 4 lungs of these mice. Compared to P.1, the P.1 S in WA-1 cytokine and chemokine profiled differed the most on Day 2. Most of the significant changes seen involved the upregulation of genes involved in neutrophil recruitment. The most upregulated gene was cxcl5, which has been implicated as the major chemoattractant for neutrophils in SARS-CoV-2 and a major cause of inflammation.24 It is therefore not unexpected that this gene would be upregulated due to the increased lung titer of P.1 S in WA-1 compared to P.1. The downregulated genes of interest include thpok and Il5, which are important for driving the differentiation of CD4+ T-cells. This finding could suggest that there is some inhibition of the CD4+ T-cell recruitment pathway by the non-spike genes in WA-1 that is attenuated or absent in P.1. There is also evidence of the loss of early interferon antagonism in the non-spike genes in P.1, as IFNγ levels in lungs from the P.1 S in WA-1 mice were reduced at day 2 compared to the P.1 mice despite the higher lung titers in the mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1. However, this difference was not seen at Day 4.Together this work demonstrates that ORF3a/b have substantial roles in pathogenesis and host responses to SARS-CoV-2. It is interesting to note that two of the variant spike in WA-1 viruses studied here, B.1.351 and P.1, possess mutations in ORF3a. This points to the fact the emergence of mutations in the variant accessory ORFs, particularly ORF3a, contribute to viral pathogenesis. The possible advantageous effects on viral fitness and likelihood of transmission of these mutations is supported by the continued identification of mutations in these ORFs in new variants. We interpret this data to suggest that mutations outside of spike may be driving critical phenotypes of SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease. Although spike mutations may allow for better engagement of ACE2 to facilitate entry into cells as well as evasion of antibodies, the mutations in the accessory proteins may actually be negatively impacting disease leading to less severe clinical phenotypes. The balance of these two strategies may confer longer courses of virus replication and spread in the lungs while allowing for increased time for virus transmission from one infected person to their contacts. We hypothesize that this balance is critical for further evolution of SARS-CoV-2 and, as more variants emerge, we will identify additional mutations outside of spike that contribute significantly to viral replication, transmission, and pathogenesis.Supplementary Material1


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: SARS-COV
================================================================================
Title: The furin cleavage site is required for pathogenesis, but not transmission, of SARS-CoV-2

INTRODUCTIONSARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019 and initiated a global pandemic with a massive impact on the economy and global public health (1). Over the past 5 years, SARS-CoV-2 has continued to cause infection and disease despite the development of effective vaccines and therapeutics (2). The continued infection and spread of SARS-CoV-2 have been attributed to its ability to evolve and produce variants of concern that evade key aspects of immunity and improve viral fitness (3, 4). Much of the evolution of the virus has occurred in the spike protein, with new variants able to evade host immunity (5). In addition, several spike mutations have improved fitness and transmission of the virus in the human populations (6–9). Despite all the changes that have occurred in SARS-CoV-2, two key elements of the spike protein have remained intact throughout the pandemic: the presence of a furin cleavage site (FCS) and an extended S1/S2 loop (10–12). Each is a unique feature of SARS-CoV-2 compared to other sarbecoviruses and plays key roles in infection.The CoV spike protein consists of a globular head (S1 subunit) and a stalk (C-terminal of S1 and S2 subunit) (13). The head is responsible for attachment and binding to the host receptor ACE2. In contrast, the stalk contains the highly conserved fusion machinery. CoV spike must undergo two cleavages to enable host cell fusion, first at an S1/S2 junction site and a second at an S2′ site in the stalk to activate fusion. Unlike other sarbecoviruses, SARS-CoV-2 spike contains a unique furin cleavage site (RXXR) at the S1/S2 junction that aids in the efficiency of its cleavage. The FCS, not shared among other group 2B coronaviruses, is maintained in all SARS-CoV-2 variants. The multi-basic cleavage motif, PRRAR, exists on the S1/S2 junction loop and is involved in spike cleavage as a virion exits a producer cell. Our lab has previously investigated the importance of the FCS by generating an FCS deletion SARS-CoV-2 mutant (ΔPRRA; Fig. 1A) and performing in vitro and in vivo characterization (11). Our results indicated that deleting the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo compared to wild-type (WA-1 strain) (11).Fig 1Generation and in vitro characterization of SARS-CoV-2 PQQAR mutant. (A) Alignment of the S1/S2 cleavage site of SARS-CoV-2 WA1 and series of mutant viruses generated for evaluation including deletion of the furin cleavage site (ΔFCS), truncation of the extended loop (ΔQTQTN), and disruption of the furin cleavage site motif (PQQAR). (B) SARS-CoV-2 spike trimer structure (gray) highlighting the S1/S2 cleavage loop. WT (left) and PQQAR mutant (right) are zoomed with mutated residues (Q682 and Q683) in orange to disrupt the furin cleavage site. (C) Schematic of SARS-CoV-2 spike with PQQAR substitutions identified. (D) Viral titer from Vero E6 infected with WT (black) or PQQAR (orange) SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 (n = 3). (E) Viral titer from Calu-3 2B4 infected with WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 (n = 3). Data are mean ± SD. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001.Sequence alignment, structure, and viral titer plots comparing wild-type and mutant SARS-CoV-2 spike proteins. Mutant PQQAR variant alters S1/S2 cleavage loop and reduces replication in Calu-3 cells but not in Vero E6.Soon after, we investigated the function of the QTQTN motif immediately upstream of the FCS, which is commonly deleted in cell culture stocks. Our group generated a QTQTN deletion mutant (ΔQTQTN; Fig. 1A) and performed in vitro and in vivo testing (12). The ΔQTQTN mutant, like ΔPRRA, has attenuated infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo (12). Both deletion mutants shorten the spike S1/S2 loop and demonstrate that loop length is important for SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. However, these studies do not evaluate the importance of the FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 loop found in SARS-CoV-2. To address this question, we generated an infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2 that disrupts the FCS without shortening the loop (PQQAR mutant). We demonstrate that disruption of the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells and pathogenesis in hamsters. The PQQAR mutant has inhibited spike processing and altered protease usage for host cell entry. We also found that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 contact transmission in hamsters, but it plays a role in transmission efficiency. Together, the data indicate that the SARS-CoV-2 FCS is important for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission.RESULTSGeneration of the PQQAR mutantThe furin cleavage site (PRRA motif) of SARS-CoV-2 exists at the S1/S2 junction site on an external disordered loop in the spike protein (Fig. 1B). Our prior work evaluated the importance of the furin cleavage site by deleting the PRRA motif upstream of the S1/S2 cleavage site (11). While the ΔPRRA mutant was attenuated, subsequent work shortening the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) of SARS-CoV-2 had a similar phenotype, indicating the importance of the loop length in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis (12). However, the role of the actual FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 spike loop was still unclear. To investigate how the FCS, independent of loop length, impacts infection and pathogenesis, we generated an FCS mutant in the SARS-CoV WA-1 backbone that substituted arginine at positions 682 and 683 to glutamines (PQQAR) (Fig. 1C). The PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 maintains the S1/S2 loop length but disrupts the furin cleavage site, allowing evaluation of the role of the FCS. Using our reverse genetic system, we were able to recover the PQQAR mutant, which grew to robust stock titers in Vero cells.PQQAR mutant attenuates viral replication in respiratory cellsDeletion of the FCS and shortening of the S1/S2 loops of the spike had previously been shown to impact viral replication (11, 12). Therefore, we first examined the PQQAR mutant in Vero E6 cells (African green monkey kidney cells), which lack type I interferon responses (14). Following low MOI (0.01) infection, the PQQAR mutant showed no significant attenuation compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 in Vero cells (Fig. 1D). In fact, the PQQAR mutant grew to slightly higher viral titer, although not significantly different from WT. These results are consistent with prior studies shortening the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length and correspond with a fitness advantage in Vero cells (11, 12). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant has attenuated replication in Calu-3 2B4 cells, a human respiratory cell line (Fig. 1E). At 24 and 48 h post-infection (hpi), the PQQAR mutant has ∼3 log reduction in titers compared to WT. Again, these results are consistent with prior studies (ΔQTQTN and ΔPRRA) (11, 12) and demonstrate that both the S1/S2 loop and the FCS play a role in effective SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells.PQQAR mutant has attenuated in vivo pathogenesisHaving established attenuation in human respiratory cells, we next evaluated how disruption of the FCS impacts SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis in vivo. Utilizing the golden Syrian hamster model, 3–4-week-old male hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 focus-forming units (FFUs) of WT or PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 and followed over a 7-day time course (Fig. 2A). WT-infected hamsters exhibited weight loss starting at 2 dpi with peak weight loss of ∼10%–12% before beginning to recover at 6 dpi (Fig. 2B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant produced minimal weight loss following infection. Similarly, disease score corresponded with weight loss as WT had observable disease between days 3 and 6, characterized by ruffled fur, hunched posture, and reduced activity. In contrast, no disease was noted in PQQAR mutant-infected hamsters. Together, the data demonstrated that disruption of the FCS attenuated disease in the hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection.Fig 2SARS-CoV-2 PQQAR mutant attenuated in golden Syrian hamsters. (A and B) Schematic of golden Syrian hamster infection with WT (black) or PQQAR mutant (orange) SARS-CoV-2. Three- to four-week-old male hamsters were infected with 105 pfu and monitored for (B) weight loss and disease for 7 days post-infection. (C through E) Viral titers were measured at days 2 and 4 from (C) infected lung, (D) nasal wash, and (E) trachea. Data are representative of mean ± SEM. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Experimental schematic was made in BioRender.Hamster infection study comparing wild-type and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. PQQAR-infected animals maintain body weight and exhibit reduced viral titers in lung, nasal wash, and trachea, indicating attenuated pathogenicity relative to wild-type virus.PQQAR mutant has altered replication in the upper and lower respiratory tractHaving established attenuated disease, we next evaluated viral replication in the lung, nasal wash, and trachea following infection with WT and PQQAR mutant. Examining the lungs, we found that both WT and the PQQAR mutant replicated in the lungs following infection (Fig. 2C). However, the PQQAR mutant had a 1 log reduction in viral replication compared to WT at day 2 but was equal to WT at day 4. Probing the upper airway, the PQQAR mutant had a significant increase (~10-fold) in viral replication from nasal washes at both days 2 and 4 as compared to WT (Fig. 2D). These results are similar to prior studies that shortened the spike S1/S2 loop length or deleted the FCS (11, 12). In addition, the PQQAR mutant had similar and increased replication in the trachea at days 2 and 4 as compared to WT-infected hamsters (Fig. 2E). Overall, the replication data demonstrate viral replication attenuation of the PQQAR mutant in the lung but also augmented replication of the mutant in the upper airway tissues.Viral antigen staining confirms attenuation of the PQQAR mutant in vivoTo further evaluate viral replication and distribution, we examined antigen staining following infection with WT or PQQAR mutant at days 2 and 4 post-infection. Briefly, lung sections from infected hamsters were stained for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid and scored in a blinded manner for antigen in the airways, parenchyma, and overall as previously described (8). We observed widespread antigen staining in both the parenchyma and airways following WT SARS-CoV-2 infection at both days 2 and 4 (Fig. 3A and B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant had more limited antigen staining compared to WT (Fig. 3C and D). While showing modest attenuation in the airways (Fig. 3E), the scores from the parenchyma (Fig. 3F) and overall (Fig. 3G) demonstrated that the PQQAR mutant had a significant deficit in antigen staining as compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 infection. The antigen staining in the large airways may be consistent with potentially greater replication in the airways (Fig. 2D through E). Similarly, the attenuation in the parenchyma and overall staining corresponds to reduced viral titer in the lung of PQQAR mutant-infected animals (Fig. 2C). Together, these results demonstrate attenuation in PQQAR mutant as compared to WT in terms of viral infection and distribution in the lung.Fig 3Attenuated antigen staining in PQQAR-infected hamsters. (A–D) Nucleocapsid antigen staining of left lung section from hamsters infected with 105 FFU of either (A and B) WT or (C and D) PQQAR mutant at 2 or 4 dpi. Antigen staining was scored in a blinded manner by location in the (E) airway, (F) parenchyma, and (G) total for WT (black) or PQQAR (orange) infected lungs. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001.Immunohistochemistry of hamster lungs infected with wild-type or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. WT lungs display stronger antigen staining than PQQAR at both time points. Bar graphs confirm significantly lower airway, parenchymal, and antigen scores in PQQAR group.PQQAR mutant infection shows reduced immune infiltration and damageTo further evaluate disease and damage, WT- and PQQAR-infected hamsters were evaluated for changes in histopathology. Lung sections were H&E stained and subsequently evaluated by a board-certified pathologist in a blinded manner. After infection, WT-infected hamsters demonstrated significant disease and damage characterized by interstitial pneumonia, peribronchitis, epithelial cytopathology, arterial mononuclear cell margination, and presence of polymorphonuclear cells in the bronchioles in some animals at day 2 (Fig. 4A). In contrast, significantly less disease was observed in the PQQAR mutant-infected hamsters and was characterized by mild bronchiolitis and interstitial pneumonia (Fig. 4B). At day 4, WT-infected hamsters showed increased lung involvement by area involved with the addition of hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, perivasculitis, and infiltration of mononuclear cells (Fig. 4C). Notably, while increased compared to day 2, PQQAR mutant-infected animals had much less lung involvement and less severe disease and damage as compared to WT (Fig. 4D). While no significant disease and damage were observed in mock-infected animals (Fig. 4E), the SARS-CoV-2-associated lesions were much more extensive in WT as compared to PQQAR mutant-infected hamsters. WT-infected hamsters showed significant increases in SARS-CoV-2 lesion percentages in lung sections at days 2, 4, and 7 days post-infection compared to PQQAR mutant infection (Fig. 4F). These results are consistent with the weight loss and disease data (Fig. 2B) and indicate that the PQQAR mutant is attenuated in terms of pathogenesis in vivo.Fig 4Reduced inflammation and damage in PQQAR-infected lungs. (A through G) Representative H&E staining of the left lung of hamsters infected with 105 pfu of either WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 at (A and B) 2 days, (C and D) 4 days, or (E and F) 7 days post-infection or (G) mock. (H) WT (black), PQQAR (orange), or PBS (gray) lung sections from each day were scored for histopathological analysis, with sections from individual animals averaged and representing a single point. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; ***P ≤ 0.001.H&E-stained lung sections comparing pathology in wild-type and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2-infected hamsters. WT lungs exhibit more extensive lesions at all time points. Quantification confirms significantly reduced lung damage in PQQAR and mock groups.FCS disruption attenuates spike processingSpike-mediated entry requires sequential cleavage at the S1/S2 junction and the S2′ site to activate fusion (15). Prior work has established that the SARS-CoV-2 spike is partially cleaved prior to release from cells (16); shortening the S1/S2 loop disrupts this cleavage on released virions. Here, we evaluate whether FCS disruption affected spike cleavage on purified virions from the PQQAR mutant. Briefly, WT, PQQAR, and the ΔFCS mutant SARS-CoV-2 were collected from Vero E6 cells, purified using ultracentrifugation sucrose cushion, inactivated, and blotted for spike and nucleocapsid (Fig. 5A). Normalizing to nucleocapsid, we observe that both PQQAR and ΔFCS mutants have a reduction in S1/S2 cleavage product as compared to WT (Fig. 5B). While WT SARS-CoV-2 has ~40% of spike cleaved following infection of Vero cells, both disruption and deletion of the FCS result in mutants with very minimal S1/S2 cleavage product (Fig. 5C). Together, the results indicate that an intact FCS is required for spike processing prior to the release of SARS-CoV-2 virions.Fig 5Disruption of FCS alters spike processing and protease usage. (A) Schematic of SARS-CoV-2 virion sucrose cushion purification approach. (B) Lysates from sucrose cushion purified WT, PQQAR, and ΔFCS virions grown in Vero E6 were probed with α-Spike and α-Nucleocapsid (N) antibodies by Western blot. Full-length spike (FL) and S1/S2 cleavage product are indicated. (C) Quantification of densitometry of the proportion between FL (black) and S1/S2 (red) of the total spike shown (lower). (D) Schematic of SARS-CoV-2 entry and protease usage, including knockout of TMPRSS2-mediated entry. (E) Viral titer from Calu-3 TMPRSS2 knock-out cells infected with WT (black) or PQQAR (orange) SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 (n = 3). (F) Viral titer at 48 hpi from Calu3 WT (Fig. 1D) and Calu3 TMPRSS2-/- cells. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Entry schematic was made in BioRender.Workflow and results comparing spike cleavage and viral replication of WT, PQQAR, and ΔFCS SARS-CoV-2. Western blot and quantification reveal reduced spike processing in PQQAR and ΔFCS. TMPRSS2 knockout bypasses entry defects across strains.TMPRSS2 plays a role in the attenuation of the PQQAR mutantSARS-CoV-2 enters the host cell through either the endosomal route mediated by host cathepsins or the cell surface route mediated by host serine proteases like TMPRSS2 (Fig. 5D) (15). The PQQAR mutant shows significant attenuation in Calu-3 2B4 but has no deficit in Vero E6 cells (Fig. 1C and D). A major distinction between the two cell lines is the expression of TMPRSS2, which is highly expressed in Calu3 cells but absent in Vero E6 cells. To determine if TMPRSS2 expression contributes to attenuation, we utilize Calu3 cells with TMPRSS2 knocked out. We subsequently infected the TMPRSS2 KO Calu3 cells with both WT SARS-CoV-2 and PQQAR mutant as previously described. Following infection, we note that both PQQAR and WT virus replication are not significantly different over the course of infection (Fig. 5E). Compared to standard Calu3 cells (Fig. 5F), WT SARS-CoV-2 infection was reduced to the same level as PQQAR mutant, indicating that the primary difference between the replication of the WT and FCS mutant virus in Calu3 cells is due to the activity of TMPRSS2. These results indicate that spike processing through the FCS plays an important role in the utilization of TMPRSS2-mediated entry of SARS-CoV-2.Intact FCS is not required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in vivoThe disruption of the FCS by the PQQAR mutant demonstrates the importance of the motif to SARS-CoV-2 infection of respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo. Yet, it remains unclear if the furin cleavage site is required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2. While attenuated in the lung, the PQQAR mutant displayed robust and augmented replication in the upper airways compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 2C). With the upper airway infection thought to seed transmission, it left the possibility that the PQQAR mutant could still be transmitted without a functional FCS. To test this question, we performed studies with WT and PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 to evaluate the capacity of the mutant virus to be transmitted in hamsters. Briefly, “donor” hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 FFU of WT SARS-CoV-2 or PQQAR mutant (Fig. 6A). After 24 h, each donor was individually co-housed 1:1 with a naive “recipient” with no additional barriers to evaluate contact transmission for 8 h. After cohousing, donors and recipients were separated into individual cages for the duration of the study. Before being returned to new cages, donor hamsters were nasal washed to measure their shedding titer on the day of exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for changes in weight and disease, euthanized 2 days post-infection/exposure, and tissues/washes were evaluated for viral load.Fig 6The FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission. (A) Schematic of transmission experiment in golden Syrian hamsters. Three- to four-week-old male donor hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 pfu of WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 and individually housed. Donors were subsequently paired 1:1 with recipients 24 hpi and cohoused for 8 h before separating and nasal washing donors. (B through F) Nasal washes and lungs were collected at 2 days post-infection for donors (dpi) (B through D) and post-contact for recipients (E and F). Viral titers were measured using focus-forming assays for donor and recipient samples. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Experimental schematic was made in BioRender.Hamster transmission study comparing wild-type and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. Donor shedding is similar, but PQQAR shows reduced nasal and lung titers in donors and recipients, indicating transmission efficiency and attenuated replication in contact animals.Following infection of donors, we observed that the shedding titers in the nasal wash were similar between WT and PQAAR mutant after the exposure period (Fig. 6B). We also observed that donor titers at 2 days post-infection showed that the PQAAR mutant had higher viral load in the nasal wash but reduced titer in the lung (Fig. 6C and D). These results are consistent with observations from acute infection showing greater replication of PQQAR mutant in the airways versus the lung (Fig. 2C and D). Examining transmission from donors to recipients, we observed that transmission of both WT and PQQAR mutants was 100% successful. All five donor pairs infected with either WT or PQQAR mutant resulted in detectable viral loads in the nasal wash and lungs of recipient animals 2 days post-exposure (Fig. 6E and F). Yet, while transmission occurred, PQQAR mutant recipient hamsters had significantly lower viral titers compared to WT for both the lung and nasal washes (Fig. 6E and F). The results suggest that while the FCS is not strictly required for transmission, its presence impacts the viral load observed in recipient animals. Regardless of reduced viral load, the results indicate that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the direct contact hamster model.FCS is necessary for transmission fitness in vivoTo investigate how loss of the FCS impacts transmission fitness, we performed a competition transmission study between WT and PQQAR mutant virus in hamsters. Briefly, donor hamsters were intranasally infected with an equal mixture (1:1) of WT and PQQAR mutant virus with a total of 105 focus-forming units (Fig. 7A). At 24 h post-infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with naive recipients for 12 h before separation into individual cages. Upon separation, the donor hamsters underwent nasal washing after exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for weight loss and disease over a 4-day time course. Animals were euthanized, and RNA from lung tissue/nasal washes was collected from the hamsters at 2- and 4-days post-infection or post-contact. The extended time point (4 dpi) evaluated if the competition results changed after a prolonged period of time post-infection.Fig 7The furin cleavage site impacts SARS-CoV-2 transmission efficiency. (A) Schematic of transmission competition experiment in golden Syrian hamsters. Three- to four-week-old male donor hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 pfu of WT:PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 in a 1:1 ratio and were individually housed. (B through F) After 24 hpi, donors were paired with recipients and cohoused for 12 h before separating and nasal washing on donors. Nasal washes and lungs were collected at 2 and 4 days post-infection for donors (dpi) and post-contact for recipients (dpc). Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was performed on extracted RNA to measure the percentage of WT (gray) and PQQAR (orange) present in the nasal wash and lung of donors (B through D) and recipients (E and F). The expected distribution (B–F, top bar) based on NGS percentage mutant/WT observed in the inoculating dose (two inoculum preparations with RNA sequenced twice from each) if no differences between WT and mutant virus were observed. (G) Level of PQQAR mutation detection in recipient animals (orange) versus background mutations (black). Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed Student’s t test. *P ≤ 0.05; **P ≤ 0.01; and ***P ≤ 0.001. Experimental schematic was made in BioRender.Hamster co-infection study assessing competition between WT and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2. Bar plots indicate WT dominance in nasal washes and lungs of donors and recipients. Dot plot quantifies mutation frequency, confirming reduced prevalence of PQQAR.We used next-generation sequencing (NGS) to evaluate transmission dynamics of WT and PQQAR from in vivo competition. NGS libraries were made from extracted RNA samples with “Tiled-ClickSeq” (17), an approach that utilizes “click chemistry” and >300 SARS-CoV-2-specific primers to fully examine the SARS-CoV-2 genome. The abundance of viral RNA comprising WT or PQQAR genotypes suggests their relative ratio during transmission competition. Examining donor hamsters, we find that PQQAR mutants had substantially reduced transmission efficiency than WT for 1, 2, or 4 dpi. (Fig. 7B through D). From nasal wash, PQQAR mutant comprised ~2%–20.1% of total viral reads (mean: 8.63% ± 0.05%) or a ~12.3-fold transmission reduction compared to WT. From lung tissue, PQQAR mutant comprised ~0.2%–5.1% of total viral reads (mean: 1.95% ± 0.02%) or 162.7-fold transmission reduction relative to WT. Our competition results differ from the findings in the first transmission study that found robust replication of the PQQAR mutant in donor animals (Fig. 6B through D). The single viral inoculum experiment (Fig. 6) demonstrates that PQQAR is replication competent in vivo, while the mixed inoculum experiment (Fig. 7) shows that although PQQAR can replicate, it is outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2.From recipient hamsters, the PQQAR mutant was found to have even lower transmission efficiency compared to WT (Fig. 7E and F). Examination of both the lung and nasal washes revealed that the PQQAR mutant was found to be <5% of the reads. Notably, despite the low levels of viral reads, the PQQAR mutant RNA was detected in all recipient animals at levels well above the number of background mutations (Fig. 7G), indicating that the detected PQQAR genotype is a result of actual transmission, rather than random mutations. However, the PQQAR mutant is unable to compete with the WT virus that maintains an intact FCS. Together, the results demonstrate that while not strictly required, the SARS-CoV-2 spike FCS site aids in transmission efficiency.DISCUSSIONThe presence of the furin cleavage site in the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein plays a key role in infection and pathogenesis. As novel variants continue to emerge, SARS-CoV-2 has maintained its furin cleavage site and extended S1/S2 loop length in the spike protein, indicating its necessity. While we previously established the importance of the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length (11, 12), this study addresses how the furin cleavage site itself impacts SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesis. We found that disruption of the FCS significantly attenuates replication in human respiratory cells in vitro and pathogenesis in vivo. The FCS mutant (PQQAR) has inhibited spike processing and modified host protease usage during cell entry. Notably, despite attenuated pathogenesis, the PQQAR mutant is successfully transmitted to all contact recipients but has decreased transmission fitness. Together, our data indicate that the furin cleavage site is critical for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission fitness.Overall, our studies confirm that both the loop length and an intact furin cleavage site are required for the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2. Previously, deletion mutants, ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN, both had attenuated pathogenicity in hamsters; the results showed that SARS-CoV-2’s extended S1/S2 loop played a critical role in pathogenesis (11, 12). However, the previous findings failed to evaluate the FCS requirement in the context of an extended S1/S2 loop. In this study, we demonstrate that disruption of the FCS also causes attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis and has viral replication kinetics similar to the ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN deletion mutants. The PQQAR mutant maintains the extended loop length but still results in reduced body weight loss and significantly less lung pathology in hamsters. While there is slightly augmented replication in the upper airways, the PQQAR mutant-infected animals had lower viral loads in the lung and reduced antigen staining. Together, these data highlight the importance of both an intact FCS and extended S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.Combined with prior studies, our results indicate that spike processing and protease usage play a key role in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. Disruption of the furin cleavage site (PQQAR) or shortening of the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) both independently ablate spike processing of SARS-CoV-2 virions (11, 12). Spike processing changes on the SARS-CoV-2 virion also correspond with changes in protease usage; the FCS and shortened loop mutants were unable to utilize TMPRSS2-mediated pathways as effectively. Here, we found that WT SARS-CoV-2 had equivalent replication to the PQQAR mutant if TMPRSS2 was knocked out in Calu3 cells (Fig. 5E). While the standard and KO Calu3 cells are from different lineages, the difference between the mutant and WT virus shows the importance of the FCS for TMPRSS2 utilization. These results correspond to our prior studies restoring WT SARS-CoV in Vero cells with overexpression of TMPRSS2 (11). Overall, the data demonstrate a key role for the FCS in both spike processing and protease usage.The changes in spike processing and protease usage also correspond with the attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis. Animals infected with the PQQAR mutant had attenuated weight loss and antigen staining in the lung (Fig. 2B and 3); yet, the viral loads in the lung remained similar in the mutant compared to WT. The similarities in viral load may be indicative of a shift in infection tropism, with the mutant replicating better in airway cells. Alternatively, loss of FCS activity may impair cell-to-cell spread, resulting in reduced CoV lesion size in the mutant and more released virus detectable by FFU assay. Despite the discrepancy in viral titer, the results argue that the S1/S2 loop length and the FCS both play critical roles in SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease. Importantly, a number of other SARS-CoV-2 spike mutations found in variants of concern have been shown to modulate both spike processing and protease usage (8, 18, 19). In each case, these results impact disease pathogenesis and highlight the importance of both the FCS and S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 disease and damage.In contrast to its role in pathogenesis, our results indicate that an intact FCS is not strictly required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission but likely plays a role in transmission and infection efficiency. Prior studies in ferrets found that deletion of the furin cleavage site ablated transmission of the virus via direct contact (20). In contrast, we found that disrupting the FCS did not prevent the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the direct contact hamster model, with all five recipients infected. A major distinction is the nature of the FCS mutations, as the prior study deleted the entire cleavage loop motif (PRRAR), ablating the S1/S2 site as well as shortening the loop (20). Our study maintains the S1/S2 loop length by disrupting only the furin-targeted motif and also maintaining the Sarbecovirus cleavage site (PQQAR) (7). Our findings indicate that the intact FCS is not a requirement, but it leaves open the possibility that the S1/S2 extended loop may be necessary for efficient transmission. Further studies are necessary to explore the role of the extended S1/S2 loop for SARS-CoV-2 transmission.While the PQQAR mutant was able to be passed to 100% of the recipient animals, the efficiency of transmission was reduced. Examining viral loads, the PQQAR mutant recipient had lower viral loads as compared to WT controls following the single virus transmission study. Similarly, the PQQAR mutant was outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2 in direct competition studies (Fig. 7). While the results corresponded with attenuation of PQQAR mutant loads in the lung upon direct challenge, surprisingly, the prior observed advantage in the upper airway disappeared in recipient animals. The results suggest that the furin site plays a role in the efficiency of transmission and infection of recipient animals. Notably, despite clear attenuation relative to WT, the PQQAR mutant virus RNA was observed in every hamster pair, indicating transmission occurred even in the presence of WT SARS-CoV-2. Together, the results indicate that while the FCS is not strictly required, it does aid in the transmission efficiency of SARS-CoV-2.The key role for motifs in the spike S1/S2 loop of SARS-CoV-2 for pathogenesis adds to the framework to evaluate the threats posed by zoonotic coronaviruses. Traditionally, binding to capacity to a human receptor like ACE2 or DPP4 has been a primary consideration in evaluating emergence potential for CoVs (21, 22). Over the past decade, numerous CoVs have been identified in animal populations with this capacity (23–27). Yet, receptor binding is only part of the equation for success, and here, we offer both the S1/S2 loop length as well as the furin cleavage site as additional parameters. The presence of one or both motifs would potentially raise the risk posed by a zoonotic CoV. For example, BANAL-236, a sarbecovirus closely related to SARS-CoV-2, has the capacity to use human ACE2 receptor without adaptation (26). However, the zoonotic strain lacks both the extended S1/S2 loop as well as an FCS. Compared to other CoVs that may have these motifs, BANAL-236 CoV could be considered a lesser threat. The presence of these motifs and others, both within and outside the spike, could form a framework for evaluating the emergence risk posed by discovered zoonotic CoVs.Overall, the manuscript data demonstrate that an intact furin cleavage site plays a critical role in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission efficiency. Disruption of the FCS in the S1/S2 loop results in ablated spike processing, altered host protease usage, and reduced disease in vivo. Importantly, while not strictly required for transmission, the FCS plays a critical role in the efficiency of infection in recipient hamsters. Together, these results demonstrate the critical importance of an intact FCS in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. The findings also provide an additional motif for the framework to evaluate the threat posed by zoonotic CoVs.MATERIALS AND METHODSCellsVero E6 cells and Vero E6 cells expressing TMPRSS2 (Sekisui XenoTech) were grown in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco #11965-092) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (HyClone #SH30071.03) and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco #5240062). Calu-3 2B4 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate. Human TMPRSS2 knockout Calu-3 cells (Abcam #273734) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 20% defined FBS (HyClone #SH30070.03), 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, 1% non-essential amino acid solution (NEAA; Gibco #11140050), and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate.VirusesThe recombinant WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virus sequences are based on the USA-WA1/2020 isolate sequence provided by the World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, which was originally obtained from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (28). Wild-type and mutant SARS-CoV-2 were generated using standard cloning techniques and the reverse genetics system as previously described (29, 30) and propagated on Vero E6 cells. The mutations in the PQQAR mutant have been verified by Sanger sequencing. The recovered mutant virus was further sequenced with NGS to confirm the maintenance of nucleotide mutations up to P2.Infectious titers were measured by focus-forming assay. All experiments involving infectious virus were conducted at the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) in an approved biosafety level 3 laboratory with routine medical monitoring of staff.In vitro infectionViral infections in Vero E6, TMRPSS2-expressing Vero E6, Calu-3 2B4, and Calu-3 TMPRSS2 KO cells were performed as previously described (29, 31). Briefly, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 for 45 min at 37°C. Following absorption, cells were washed three times with PBS, and fresh growth media was added to represent time 0. Three or more biological replicates were collected at each time point, and each experiment was repeated at least twice.Focus-forming assayFocus-forming assays were performed as previously described (32). Briefly, Vero E6 cells were seeded in 96-well plates to be 100% confluent. Samples were 10-fold serially diluted in serum-free media, and 20 µL was used to infect cells. Cells were incubated for 45 min at 37°C with 5% CO2 before 100 µL of 0.85% methylcellulose overlay was added. Cells were incubated for 24 h at 37°C with 5% CO2. After incubation, the overlay was removed, cells were washed three times with PBS before being fixed, and the virus was inactivated by 10% formalin for 30 min at room temperature. Cells were then permeabilized and blocked with 0.1% saponin/0.1% BSA in PBS before being incubated with α-SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid primary antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) at 1:1,000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. Cells are then washed three times with PBS before being incubated with Alexa FluorTM 555-conjugated α-mouse secondary antibody (Invitrogen #A28180) at 1:2,000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were washed three times with PBS. Fluorescent foci images were captured using a Cytation 7 cell imaging multi-mode reader (BioTek), and foci were counted manually.Virion purification and Western blottingVero E6 cells were infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01. Supernatant was harvested 24 hpi and clarified by low-speed centrifugation. Virus particles were then pelleted by ultracentrifugation through a 20% sucrose cushion at 26,000 rpm for 3 h using a Beckman SW28 rotor. Pellets were resuspended in 2× Laemmli buffer to obtain protein lysates. Relative viral protein levels were determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by Western blot analysis as previously described (11, 12). In brief, sucrose-purified WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virions were inactivated by boiling in Laemmli buffer. Samples were loaded in equal volumes into 4%–20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gels (Bio-Rad #4561093) and electrophoresed by SDS-PAGE. Protein was transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Membranes were probed with SARS-CoV S-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100-56578) and followed by horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074). Membranes were stripped and reprobed with SARS-CoV N-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100-56576) and the HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary IgG to measure loading. Signal was developed using Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705060) or Clarity Max Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705062) and imaged on a ChemiDoc MP System (Bio-Rad #12003154). Densitometry was performed using ImageLab 6.0.1 (Bio-Rad #2012931).Hamster infection studyMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo (HsdHan:AURA strain). Procedures involving infectious SARS-CoV-2 were performed in the Galveston National Laboratory ABSL3 facility. Hamsters were intranasally inoculated with 105 pfu of WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 in 100 µL. Infected hamsters were weighed and monitored for illness over 7 days. Hamsters were anesthetized with isoflurane (Henry Schein Animal Health), and nasal washes were collected with 400 µL of PBS on endpoint days (2, 4, and 7 dpi). Hamsters were euthanized by CO2 for organ collection. Nasal wash and lungs were collected to measure viral titer. The left lungs were collected for histopathology.Hamster transmissionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. Each group (WT, PQQAR, or PBS) had 10 donor hamsters that were intranasally infected with 100 µL of 105 pfu of virus or PBS, depending on the group. Twenty-four hours post-infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 8 h for contact transmission. After 8 h, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing, and the donors were nasal washed. At 2 days post-infection for donors and post-contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 µL of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol, and RNA was extracted to perform next-generation sequencing as previously described.Hamster transmission competitionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. Ten donor hamsters were intranasally infected with a 1:1 ratio of WT:PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 totaling 105 pfu in 100 µL and were subsequently individually housed. At 24 h post-infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 12 h for contact transmission. After 8 h, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing, and the donors were nasal washed for D1 values. At 2 and 4 days post-infection for donors and post-contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 µL of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol. RNA was extracted to perform next-generation sequencing.HistologyHistopathology was performed as previously described (33, 34). Briefly, the left lungs were harvested from hamsters and fixed in 10% buffered formalin solution for at least 7 days. Fixed tissue was then embedded in paraffin, cut into 5 µm sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin on a SAKURA VIP6 processor by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. H&E staining was performed by the University of Texas Medical Branch Histology Laboratory and then analyzed and scored by a blinded pathologist.ImmunohistochemistryAntigen staining was performed as previously described (35). Briefly, fixed and paraffin-embedded left lung lobes from hamsters were cut into 5 µm sections and mounted onto slides by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. Paraffin-embedded sections were warmed at 56°C for 10 min, deparaffinized with xylene (3× 5-min washes) and graded ethanol (3× 100% 5-min washes and 1× 95% 5-min wash), and rehydrated in distilled water. After rehydration, antigen retrieval was performed by steaming slides in antigen retrieval solution (10 mM sodium citrate and 0.05% Tween-20, pH 6) for 40 min (antigen retrieval solution was boiled in a microwave, slides were added to the boiling solution, and incubated in a steamer). After cooling and rinsing in distilled water, endogenous peroxidases were quenched by incubating slides in TBS with 0.3% H2O2 for 15 min followed by 2× 5 min washes in 0.05% TBST. Sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum in BSA diluent (1% BSA in 0.05% TBST) for 30 min at room temperature. Sections were incubated with primary anti-N antibody (Sino #40143-R001) at 1:1,000 in BSA diluent overnight at 4°C. Following overnight primary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3× for 5 min in TBST. Sections were incubated in secondary HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074) at 1:200 in BSA diluent for 1 h at room temperature. Following secondary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3× for 5 min in TBST. To visualize the antigen, sections were incubated in ImmPACT NovaRED (Vector Laboratories #SK-4805) for 3 min at room temperature before being rinsed with TBST to stop the reaction, followed by 1× 5-min wash in distilled water. Sections were incubated in hematoxylin for 5 min at room temperature to counterstain before rinsing in water to stop the reaction. Sections were dehydrated by incubating in the previous xylene and graded ethanol baths in reverse order before being mounted with coverslips.Structural modelingStructural models previously generated were used as a base to visualize residues mutated in Omicron (12). Briefly, structural models were generated using SWISS-Model to generate homology models for WT and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 spike protein based on the SARS-CoV-1 trimer structure (Protein Data Bank code 6ACD). Homology models were visualized and manipulated in PyMOL (version 2.5.4) to visualize the PQQAR mutation.Next-generation sequencing and data analysisNext-generation sequencing method was used to determine viral RNA populations from infected animals. Briefly, total cellular RNA samples were extracted from animal tissues, and NGS libraries were prepared with the Tiled-ClickSeq method (17, 32). A modified pre-RT annealing protocol was applied as previously described (32) to reduce mis-priming. The final libraries comprising 300–600 bp fragments were pooled and sequenced on an ElementBio Aviti platform with paired-end sequencing (120 bp R1 and 30 bp R2). The raw Illumina data of the Tiled-ClickSeq libraries were processed with established bioinformatics pipelines (https://github.com/andrewrouth/TCS). The relative ratio between WT and PQQAR was calculated based on the average Pilon-reported (36) G-to-A mutation rate at specific genomic loci (G23607A, G23608A, G23610A, and G23611A). A baseline mutation rate is also evaluated by averaging the background mutation rates from nts 23,606–23,612.


Title: Mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 Transmission and Pathogenesis

The Emergence of a Third, Novel CoronavirusCurrent State of the COVID-19 PandemicCoVs have caused three large-scale outbreaks over the past two decades: severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS), and now COVID-19. The origin of the COVID-19 pandemic was traced back to a cluster of pneumonia cases connected to a wet seafood market in Wuhan City, Hubei Province, China [1]. Following the likely spillover of a zoonotic disease (see Glossary), further work confirmed the etiological agent to be a novel Betacoronavirus related to SARS-CoV [1,2]. The first patients developed symptoms on December 1, 2019 after which rapid human-to-human transmission and intercontinental spread later ensued, being declared a pandemic by the WHO in March 2020 [3]. Since then, ~35 million people have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, with >1 million deaths in 235 countries, areas, or territories [4]. Although SARS-CoV-2 appears to be less lethal than SARS-CoV or MERS-CoV, its transmissibility is higher. To find solutions to contain this raging pandemic, global research efforts have been quickly mobilized, each day resulting in new advances in basic and clinical research, therapy, diagnosis, vaccine and drug development, as well as epidemiology. Here, we conduct a comprehensive review of the current state of COVID-19 research, with a principal focus on the mechanisms of transmission and pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 stemming from clinical and animal studies.SARS-CoV-2 CharacteristicsSARS-CoV-2 Genome and StructureCoVs of the family Coronaviridae are enveloped, positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses [5]. All of the highly pathogenic CoVs, including SARS-CoV-2, belong to the Betacoronavirus genus, group 2 [5]. The SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence shares ~80% sequence identity with SARS-CoV and ~50% with MERS-CoV [1,6]. Its genome comprises 14 open reading frames (ORFs), two-thirds of which encode 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp 1–16) that make up the replicase complex [6,7]. The remaining one-third encodes nine accessory proteins (ORF) and four structural proteins: spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N), of which Spike mediates SARS-CoV entry into host cells [8]. However, the S gene of SARS-CoV-2 is highly variable from SARS-CoV, sharing <75% nucleotide identity [1,6,9]. Spike has a receptor-binding domain (RBD) that mediates direct contact with a cellular receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), and an S1/S2 polybasic cleavage site that is proteolytically cleaved by cellular cathepsin L and the transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) (Figure 1
) [1,9,10]. TMPRSS2 facilitates viral entry at the plasma membrane surface, whereas cathepsin L activates SARS-CoV-2 Spike in endosomes and can compensate for entry into cells that lack TMPRSS2 (Figure 1) [10]. Once the genome is released into the host cytosol, ORF1a and ORF1b are translated into viral replicase proteins, which are cleaved into individual nsps (via host and viral proteases: PLpro); these form the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (nsp12 derived from ORF1b) [8]. Here, the replicase components rearrange the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) into double-membrane vesicles (DMVs) that facilitate viral replication of genomic and subgenomic RNAs (sgRNA); the latter are translated into accessory and viral structural proteins that facilitate virus particle formation (Figure 1) [11,12].Figure 1The Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Lifecycle.The SARS-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2) lifecycle commences by binding of the envelope Spike protein to its cognate receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2). Efficient host cell entry then depends on: (i) cleavage of the S1/S2 site by the surface transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2); and/or (ii) endolysosomal cathepsin L, which mediate virus–cell membrane fusion at the cell surface and endosomal compartments, respectively. Through either entry mechanism, the RNA genome is released into the cytosol, where it is translated into the replicase proteins (open reading frame 1a/b: ORF1a/b). The polyproteins (pp1a and pp1b) are cleaved by a virus-encoded protease into individual replicase complex nonstructural proteins (nsps) (including the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase: RdRp). Replication begins in virus-induced double-membrane vesicles (DMVs) derived from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), which ultimately integrate to form elaborate webs of convoluted membranes. Here, the incoming positive-strand genome then serves as a template for full-length negative-strand RNA and subgenomic (sg)RNA. sgRNA translation results in both structural proteins and accessory proteins (simplified here as N, S, M, and E) that are inserted into the ER–Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) for virion assembly. Finally, subsequent positive-sense RNA genomes are incorporated into newly synthesized virions, which are secreted from the plasma membrane [6,8,11,12]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 1Tissue Tropism of SARS-CoV-2The establishment of viral tropism depends on the susceptibility and permissiveness of a specific host cell. During the SARS epidemic, patients often presented with respiratory-like illnesses that progressed to severe pneumonia, observations mirroring the disease course of COVID-19, suggesting that the lung is the primary tropism of SARS-CoV-2 [13]. Both CoVs were then found to bind the same entry receptor, ACE2 [1,14,15]. Of note, the key mutations in the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 Spike make additional close contacts with ACE2, correlating with higher binding affinity and perhaps increased infectivity [1,14,16]. The presence of a unique furin cleavage site at the S1/S2 junction of SARS-CoV-2 Spike is also suspected to enhance human transmission events, although this remains to be further investigated [17,18]. The currently predominant SARS-CoV-2 isolate worldwide carries a D614G mutation that is absent from its presumptive common ancestor, and is more infectious, likely underlying, in part, an increased human-to-human transmission efficiency [19., 20., 21.]. Although associated with an increased viral load in the upper respiratory tract (URT) of patients with COVID-19, the D614G variant does not correlate with disease severity, suggesting that pathogenesis of severe COVID-19 is linked to mechanisms that are more than just SARS-CoV-2 infectivity [21].Once SARS-CoVs enter the host via the respiratory tract, airway and alveolar epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells and alveolar macrophages are among their first targets of viral entry [22., 23., 24.]. These cells are probably ‘ground-zero’ for early infection and subsequent replication due to their expression of ACE2 [25]. Although ACE2 mRNA is detected in human and many mammalian (bat, ferret, cat, dog, etc.) lung biopsies, their expression is rather low compared with extrapulmonary tissues [26]. Thus, the permissiveness of these cells to SARS-CoVs may depend on additional, unappreciated cell-intrinsic factors that aid in efficient infection. First, viral entry may heavily depend on the expression of TMPRSS2, because nearly undetectable amounts of ACE2 still support SARS-CoV entry as long as TMPRSS2 is present [27]. Second, the mRNA expression of cellular genes, such as endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery gene members (including CHMP3, CHMP5, CHMP1A, and VPS37B) related to a pro-SARS-CoV-2 lifecycle is higher in a small population of human type II alveolar cells with abundant ACE2, relative to ACE2-deficient cells [28]. This suggests that SARS-CoV-2 hijacks a small population of type II alveolar cells with high expression of ACE2 and other proviral genes for its productive replication. Third, the lung, as the main tropism of SARS-CoVs, may be contingent on the regulation of ACE2 at the transcriptional and protein levels [24,25,29., 30., 31.]. For example, in human airway epithelial cells, ACE2 gene expression is upregulated by type I and II interferons (IFNs) [25,31] during viral infection. Lastly, compared with other SARS-CoVs, SARS-CoV-2 Spike contains a unique insertion of RRAR at the S1/S2 cleavage site [17,18]. This site can be precleaved by furin, thus reducing the dependence of SARS-CoV-2 on target cell proteases (TMPRSS2/cathepsin L) for entry [17,18] and potentially extending its cellular tropism, given that proteolytically active furin is abundantly expressed in human bronchial epithelial cells [32,33].One of the distinctions between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 is the ability of the latter to efficiently infect the URT, such as nasopharyngeal (NP) and/or oropharyngeal (OP) tissues, possibly due to its higher affinity for ACE2, which is expressed in human nasal and oral tissues [23,25,34., 35., 36.]. The readily detectable titers of SARS-CoV-2 in the URT mucus of patients with COVID-19 during prodromal periods might help explain the more rapid and effective transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 relative to SARS-CoV [37].Human CoVs often cause enteric infections, with variable degrees of pathogenicity [38]. Indeed, ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are abundantly expressed within the human and many other mammalian intestinal tracts, specifically the brush border of intestinal enterocytes [23,25,26,39]. Accordingly, gastrointestinal illness has been frequently reported in patients with COVID-19 [40,41], consistent with the recovery of SARS-CoV from stool samples of patients with SARS [42], suggesting a potential fecal–oral route of transmission for these two CoVs. Of note, ~20% of patients with COVID-19 examined have had detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA in feces, even after respiratory symptoms subsided, suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 titers may be prolonged in the intestinal tract [41]. Although further testing is warranted, these data suggest the possibility that fecal–oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2 occurs. Evidently, robust epidemiological studies are needed to conclusively demonstrate whether patients with COVID-19 recovering from respiratory illness are able to spread SARS-CoV-2.Transmission Dynamics of SARS-CoV-2Human CoVs are transmitted primarily through respiratory droplets, but aerosol, direct contact with contaminated surfaces, and fecal–oral transmission were also reported during the SARS epidemic [43., 44., 45.]. Early reports of patients with cough, lung ground glass opacities, and symptom progression to severe pneumonia, suggested communicability of SARS-CoV-2 via the respiratory route (Figure 2
) [1., 2., 3.]. Direct transmission by respiratory droplets is reinforced by productive SARS-CoV-2 replication in both the URT and lower respiratory tract (LRT), and the increasing number of reports indicating human-to-human spread among close contacts exhibiting active coughing (Figure 2) [35,46., 47., 48.]. So far, the basic reproduction number (R0) is ~2.2, based on early case tracking during the beginning of the pandemic, with a doubling time of 5 days [47,49]. Furthermore, there is now evidence for nonsymptomatic/presymptomatic spread of SARS-CoV-2, which is in contrast to the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV [50]. This finding underscores the ability of SARS-CoV-2 to colonize and replicate in the throat during early infection [37,51,52]. Based on these apparent disparities in virus transmission, one study modeled the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 in presymptomatic individuals, and indicated that the presymptomatic R0 has approached the threshold for sustaining an outbreak on its own (R0 >1); by contrast, the corresponding estimates for SARS-CoV were approximately zero [49]. Similarly, asymptomatic spread of SARS-CoV-2 has been documented throughout the course of the pandemic [48,51,53., 54., 55., 56.]. Understanding the relative importance of cryptic transmission to the current COVID-19 pandemic is essential for public health authorities to make the most comprehensive and effective disease control measures, which include mask-wearing, contact tracing, and physical isolation.Figure 2Proposed Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) Transmission Routes.The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in numerous accounts of different transmission routes between humans. Droplet transmission (>5 μm) is the most pronounced and heavily implicated mode of transmission reported during the pandemic. Direct contact spread from one infected individual to a second, naïve person has also been considered a driver of human-to-human transmission, especially in households with close interactions between family members. The contagiousness of SARS-CoV-2 after disposition on fomites (e.g., door handles) is under investigation, but is likely a compounding factor for transmission events, albeit less frequently than droplet or contact-driven transmission. Both airborne and fecal–oral human-to-human transmission events were reported in the precursor SARS-CoV epidemic but have yet to be observed in the current crises. Solid arrows show confirmed viral transfer from one infected person to another, with a declining gradient in arrow width denoting the relative contributions of each transmission route. Dashed lines show the plausibility of transmission types that have yet to be confirmed. SARS-CoV-2 symbol in ‘infected patient’ indicates where RNA/infectious virus has been detected [43,44,47., 48., 49.,57,59,60]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 2For SARS-CoV-2, various modes of transmission have been proposed, including aerosol, surface contamination, and the fecal–oral route, representing confounding factors in the current COVID-19 pandemic; thus, their relative importance is still being investigated (Figure 2) [57]. Aerosol transmission (spread >1 m) was implicated in the Amoy Gardens outbreak during the SARS epidemic, but the inconsistency of these findings in other settings suggested that SARS-CoV was an opportunistic airborne infection [43,58]. Similarly, no infectious SARS-CoV-2 virions have been isolated, although viral RNA was detectable in the air of COVID-19 hospital wards [59]. Generation of experimental aerosols carrying SARS-CoV-2 (comparable to those that might be generated by humans) have offered the plausibility of airborne transmission, but the aerodynamic characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 during a natural course of infection is still an area of intense inquiry [60]. Nonetheless, deposition of virus-laden aerosols might contaminate objects (e.g., fomites) and contribute to human transmission events [59,61]. Finally, fecal–oral transmission has also been considered as a potential route of human spread, but remains an enigma despite evidence of RNA-laden aerosols being found nearby toilet bowls, along with detectable SARS-CoV-2 RNA in rectal swabs during the precursor epidemic of COVID-19 in China [41,59,62].SARS-CoV-2 PathogenesisClinical Presentation of COVID-19In general, common cold CoVs tend to cause mild URT symptoms and occasional gastrointestinal involvement (Figure 3
). By contrast, infection with highly pathogenic CoVs, including SARS-CoV-2, causes severe ‘flu’-like symptoms that can progress to acute respiratory distress (ARDS), pneumonia, renal failure, and death [46,48,63,64]. The most common symptoms are fever, cough, and dyspnea, accounting for 83%, 82%, and 31% of patients with COVID-19 (N = 99), respectively, in one epidemiological study [65]. The incubation period in COVID-19 is rapid: ~5–6 days versus 2–11 days in SARS-CoV infections [38,47,48]. As the pandemic is progressing, it has become increasingly clear that COVID-19 encompasses not only rapid respiratory/gastrointestinal illnesses, but can also have long-term ramifications, such as myocardial inflammation [66]. Furthermore, severe COVID-19 is not restricted to the aged population as initially reported; children and young adults are also at risk [67]. From a diagnostic perspective, COVID-19 presents with certain ‘hallmark’ laboratory and radiological indices, which can be helpful in assessing disease progression (Table 1
). Together, COVID-19 initially presents with ‘flu’-like symptoms and can later progress to life-threatening systemic inflammation and multiorgan dysfunction.Figure 3Clinical Symptoms of Coronavirus Infectious Disease 2019 (COVID-19).COVID-19 manifestations in humans have been described to incorporate multiple body systems with varying degrees of onset and severity. Both the upper respiratory tract and lower respiratory tract manifestations are often the most noticeable if a patient is not asymptomatic, in addition to systemic symptoms that are the most frequently reported regardless of disease severity. Red-highlighted signs/symptoms tend to be over-represented in severe patients, but common symptoms are also present in more advanced COVID-19. A severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus symbol denotes where a live virus and/or viral RNA has been isolated. Abbreviation: ARDS: acute respiratory distress syndrome [37,46,48,66,139]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 3Table 1Common Laboratory Indices and Radiological Findings from Patients with COVID-19Table 1Laboratory findingsCOVID-19 studyaRefs[65][140][141][137][73][138]Patient populationMiddle-aged, hospitalized; N = 99Middle-aged, hospitalized/ICU; N = 1099Elderly, mild-severeN = 71Middle-aged, hospitalized adults; N = 140Elderly, deceased; N = 82Young, mild disease; N = 46Ground-glass opacities1456.4b10099.3--63Pneumonia (unilateral or bilateral)c10091.173--93.9--Lymphocytopenia35 (1.1–3.2 ×109/ml)83.2 (<1500/mm3)37 (<1200/μl)75.489.2 (<1.0 ×109/l)63 (<1.5×109/l)Leukopenia9 (3.5–9.5x109/ml)33.7 (<4000/mm3)21 (<4000/μl)19.6 (3.5–9.5×109/ml)21.7 (<4×109/l)Thrombocytopenia12 (125–350×109/ml)36.2 (<150 000/mm3)10 (<15×104/μl)--24.3 (<100 ×109/l)21.7 (<150 ×109/l)Neutrophilia38 (1.8–6.3×109/ml)------74.3 (>6.3 ×109/l)--↑d C-reactive protein (mg/l)86 (0–5)60.7 (≥10)59 (>10–30)91.9 (0–3)100 (>10)19.6 (≥10)↑ Alanine aminotransferase (U/l)28 (9–50)21.3 (>40)18 (>45)--30.6 (>40)15.2 (>40)↑ D-dimer (μg/l)36 (0–1.5)46.4 (≥500)--43.2 (0–243)97.1 (>550)15.2 (≥500)↑ Prothrombin time (s)5 (10.5–13.5)------100 (12.3–14.3)e--aValues for each laboratory manifestation represent the percentage of patients with that clinical finding above or below the normal range (listed below in brackets); dashed lines indicate measurements not taken during referenced study.bPercentage of patients with lung ground-glass opacity on a chest CT scan (technique specifically denoted in original study).cPneumonia was not always definitively mentioned in studies, albeit lung manifestations were commonly recorded.d↑ denotes an elevation of measured indices above reference value for those percentage of patientseOver the past 24 h, leading up to death, all 13 patients who were included for this metric had a prothrombin time of >12.1 s.Age-Associated COVID-19 SeverityIt is widely accepted that the aging process predisposes individuals to certain infectious diseases [68]. In the case of COVID-19, older age is associated with greater COVID-19 morbidity, admittance to the intensive care unit (ICU), progression to ARDS, higher fevers, and greater mortality rates [69., 70., 71.]. Moreover, lymphocytopenia, neutrophilia, elevated inflammation-related indices, and coagulation-related indicators have been consistently reported in older (≥65-years old) relative to young and middle-aged patients with COVID-19 (Table 1) [46,65,71., 72., 73., 74., 75.]. At the cellular level, a lower capacity of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells to produce IFN-γ and IL-2, as well as an impairment in T-cell activation from dendritic cells (DCs) in patients with acute COVID-19 (≥55-years old) could compromise an optimal adaptive immune response [76]. Based on examples from mice, a productive CD4+ T-cell response relies heavily on lung-resident DCs (rDCs) and abates SARS-CoV infection [77,78]. However, whether a reduction in the DC population in the lungs of older patients with more severe COVID-19 causes suboptimal T-cell activation during SARS-CoV-2 infection remains to be robustly investigated.Higher proportions of proinflammatory macrophages and neutrophils have also been observed in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of COVID-19 patients with severe symptoms compared with those exhibiting mild symptoms (Figure 4
, Key Figure) [79]. Accordingly, proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6 and IL-8) are elevated in the BALF of patients with severe COVID-19, along with higher expression of inflammatory chemokines (e.g., CCL2) in macrophages relative to patients with nonsevere COVID-19 [79., 80., 81., 82.]. Indeed, similar inflammatory milieux have been associated with severe lung pathology in patients with SARS, along with the notable ‘cytokine storm’ that can present in patients critically ill with COVID-19 [71,83., 84., 85., 86., 87.]. These proinflammatory mediators can, in turn, perpetuate lung disease by elevating C-reactive protein (CRP) from the liver (Table 1) through signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)-IL-6 signaling [88]. Therefore, an increase in CRP concentrations can correlate with elevated serum IL-6 production observed in patients with COVID-19 [79,80,88]. From another angle, formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) inside microvessels is pronounced in patients with severe relative to mild COVID-19, implicating NETs as possible potentiators of COVID-19 pathogenesis [89]. The recruitment of these activated neutrophils and monocytes may be driven by pulmonary endothelial cell dysfunction through vascular leakage, tissue edema, endotheliitis, and possibly, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) pathways; indeed, a recent study demonstrated direct SARS-CoV-2 infection of vascular endothelial cells with concomitant accumulation of inflammatory mononuclear cells (e.g., neutrophils) in multiple organs (lung, heart, kidney, small bowel, and liver) in patients with severe COVID-19 (Figure 4) [90]. In fact, many patients with COVID-19 have met the DIC case definition based on elevated serum D-dimer amounts and prolonged prothrombin times [91,92]. Together, it is reasonable to assume that direct viral insult and immune cell recruitment escalate endothelial contractility and the loosening of gap junctions, thus promoting vascular leakage and the systemic impairment of the circulatory system in this pathology.Figure 4Key Figure. A Brief Overview of Lung Pathology in Patients with Coronavirus Infectious Disease 2019 (COVID-19).Following inhalation of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) into the respiratory tract, the virus traverses deep into the lower lung, where it infects a range of cells, including alveolar airway epithelial cells, vascular endothelial cells, and alveolar macrophages. Upon entry, SARS-CoV-2 is likely detected by cytosolic innate immune sensors, as well as endosomal toll-like receptors (TLRs) that signal downstream to produce type-I/III interferons (IFNs) and proinflammatory mediators. The high concentration of inflammatory cytokines/chemokines amplifies the destructive tissue damage via endothelial dysfunction and vasodilation, allowing the recruitment of immune cells, in this case, macrophages and neutrophils. Vascular leakage and compromised barrier function promote endotheliitis and lung edema, limiting gas exchange that then facilitates a hypoxic environment, leading to respiratory/organ failure. The inflammatory milieu induces endothelial cells to upregulate leukocyte adhesion molecules, thereby promoting the accumulation of immune cells that may also contribute to the rapid progression of respiratory failure. Hyperinflammation in the lung further induces transcriptional changes in macrophages and neutrophils that perpetuate tissue damage that ultimately leads to irreversible lung damage. Recent evidence suggests that systemic inflammation induces long-term sequela in heart tissues [66,79,80,82,84,87,90,95]. Abbreviations: BALF, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid; IRF3, interferon regulatory factor 3; NF-κB, nuclear factor-κB; RIG-I, retinoic acid-inducible gene I; STAT1/2, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1/2; STING, Stimulator of interferon genes. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 4SARS-CoV-2 Innate Immune Evasion Strategies: Examples from other Betacoronavirus InfectionsThe recognition of virus infection begins with the detection of viral nucleic acid by host cell pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), which signal downstream via recruited adaptor proteins, ubiquitin ligases, and kinases, culminating in transcription factors and ultimate expression of immune genes, including IFNs, cytokines, and chemokines (Figure 5
). The IFN pathway is often a primary target of evasion due to its rapidity and potency in eliminating viral infection. CoVs have evolved multiple mechanisms to target the signaling components of several PRR-IFN pathways to survive in host cells (Figure 5). CoVs are highly sensitive to IFN and, therefore, act at several levels in these pathways to antagonize mammalian immune recognition, interfering with downstream signaling, or inhibiting specific IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) products [93]. Specifically, CoVs can avoid immune sensing by: (i) the formation of DMVs that sequester viral nucleic acid from being recognized by PRRs; and (ii) direct ablation of the functionality of immune signaling molecules by viral proteins [11,94]. The structural and functional conservation of these proteins across the Betacoronavirus and in nsps between SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 suggest that some of these suppressive mechanisms are used by SARS-CoV-2 (see later) [1]. Indeed, patients with severe COVID-19 have reported an imbalanced immune response with high concentrations of inflammatory cytokines/chemokines, but little circulating IFN-β or IFN-λ, resulting in persistent viremia [95]. Of note, among several respiratory viruses tested, SARS-CoV-2 has demonstrated to most potently suppress type I and type III IFN expression in both human bronchial epithelial cells and ferrets [81]. Thus, evasion of IFN signaling by SARS-CoV-2 and impaired IFN production in human peripheral blood immune cells might contribute to the productive viral replication, transmission, and severe pathogenesis during COVID-19, although further testing is warranted to fully dissect these putative evasion pathways [95].Figure 5Evasion of the Pattern Recognition Receptor-Type I Interferon (PRR-IFN-I) Pathways by Coronaviruses (CoVs).A simplified schematic of the canonical IFN response after sensing RNA viruses. Viral nucleic acid is first recognized by PRRs (e.g., retinoic acid-inducible gene I; RIG-I) that perpetuate signal transduction through an adaptor complex on the mitochondrial (mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein; MAVS) or endoplasmic reticulum (Stimulator of interferon genes; STING) membrane surface. Here, the PRR–adaptor interactions recruit kinases that converge into a large complex, leading to phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3/7 (IRF3/7) and nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB), transcription factors that enter the nucleus and transcribe IFN genes. Type-I and type-III IFNs then signal in an autocrine or paracrine manner through the Janus kinase 1 (JAK1)/signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 and 2 (STAT1/2) pathway, culminating in antiviral IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) transcription. Listed here are SARS-CoV (CoV), SARS-CoV-2 (CoV-2), and MERS-CoV (M-CoV) IFN-I antagonists, which render these viruses resistant to IFN responses. IFN-III is also implicated in exhibiting potent antiviral effects in lung/intestinal tissues, but the underlying evasion strategies of this pathway for these viruses are currently unknown. SARS-CoV proteins are highlighted in blue, while functions of SARS-CoV-2 and MERS-CoV proteins are highlighted in red and green, respectively. ? denotes that a SARS-CoV-2 protein bound a member of that signaling pathway in [122], but further work is necessary to confirm its immunological mechanism. SARS-CoV-2 proteins with * denotes functional conservation with SARS-CoV [93., 94., 95., 96.,98,100., 101., 102., 103., 104., 105., 106., 107.]. Figure generated with BioRender.Figure 5With regard to functional conservation of viral proteins, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV nsps and accessory proteins circumvent viral RNA-sensing pathways at multiple stages [e.g., retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5; MDA-5) through proteasomal degradation and/or prevention of protein activation (Figure 5) [94]. Functional conservation between SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV PLpro (encoded by nsp3) proteins has been reported, where these proteins target the initial PRR signaling cascade at multiple levels of the pathway including, but not limited to, RIG-I, mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and nuclear factor (NF)-κB (Figure 5) [96., 97., 98.]. The SARS-CoV PLpro also targets the DNA-sensing pathway at Stimulator of IFN genes (STING) (Figure 5); antagonizing this pathway might be important because mitochondrial stress during dengue virus infection triggers IFN-β production that is dependent on STING activation [99,100]. Recent evidence suggests the SARS-CoV-2 PLpro also inhibits IFN-I expression in human kidney epithelial cells, yet the mechanisms remain to be defined [101]. Moreover, nsp1 of highly pathogenic HCoVs, including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, displays a pleiotropic effect, targeting several components of IFN-I signaling (Figure 5) [102,103]. This potent suppressive function of nsp1 also appears to be maintained in SARS-CoV-2, primarily through shutdown of translational machinery and prevention of immune gene expression [101,104,105]. Furthermore, because there are only five accessory genes in the MERS-CoV genome compared with eight and seven in the SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 genomes, respectively, similar immunosuppressive mechanisms may exist but appear to be mediated via different proteins [106,107]. For example, SARS-CoVs ORF6 can inhibit IRF3 activation and STAT1 nuclear translocation, whereas this same effect is obtained by ORF4a/b and ORF5 of MERS-CoV (Figure 5) [106,107]. Coincidently, the apparent loss of these proteins may provide evidence for why MERS-CoV is more sensitive to IFN treatment than are SARS-CoVs in primary and continuous cells of the human airways [110]. The SARS-CoV-2 proteins appear to have stronger inhibitory effects than their counterparts in highly pathogenic SARS- and MERS-CoV [105]. In light of these findings, SARS-CoV-2 has replicated more efficiently than SARS-CoV in ex vivo human lung explants, possibly through the greater suppression of IFN-I/III cytokines [111]; further work will be needed to discern whether the suppressive nature of SARS-CoV-2 can impact virus transmission during early phases of COVD-19, when IFNs are typically important for virus control. The ‘common-cold’ CoVs (e.g., HCoV-229E) and murine hepatitis virus (MHV) also compensate for the loss of many supplementary immunosuppressive proteins through capping viral mRNAs via nsp16 2′-O-methyltransferase (2′-O-MTase), and mutants lacking this activity exhibit diminished replication and dissemination in mice [112]. Thus, further investigation is warranted to determine whether these evasion genes account for the increased virulence observed in individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 (see Outstanding Questions).Animal Models of SARS-CoV-2Mouse ModelsGiven that SARS-CoV-2 uses the same ACE2 entry receptor as SARS-CoV, rapid deployment of mouse models for pathogenesis studies was well underway within weeks of the inception of the pandemic. However, various impediments remain for SARS-CoV-2 in productively infecting mice in these models, because it is unable to bind mouse ACE2 (mACE2) [113]. To overcome these prerequisites, several mouse models have been developed that recapitulate certain components of human COVID-19. One of these strategies is to genetically modify mice to express human ACE2 (hACE2) (humanized mice) under the epithelial cell-specific cytokeratin-18 (Krt
18) promoter [114], a universal chicken beta-actin promoter [115], or the endogenous mACE2 promoter [113]. All these mice are susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection, but phenotypic disease varies because of differential hACE2 tissue expression [113., 114., 115.]. For instance, Krt18-hACE2 and beta-actin-hACE2-transgenic mice rapidly succumb to SARS-CoV-2 infection with lung infiltration of inflammatory immune cells inducing severe pulmonary disease, accompanied by evident thrombosis and anosmia, which partially recapitulate human COVID-19 [116,117]. Given that the onset of severe histopathological changes occurs days after peak virus infection, these models recapture the delayed morbidity seen in patients with COVID-19 as a result of inflammatory cell infiltration [117]. Therefore, using humanized mouse models of severe SARS-CoV-2 infection might be useful for testing the efficacy of antiviral drugs, vaccines, and immune therapeutics that ablate hyperinflammation [116]. However, the broad expression of hACE2 in these models significantly expands SARS-CoV-2 tissue tropisms and might alter its pathogenic mechanisms [116,117]. For example, both SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infections lead to encephalitis in these mouse models, which is not common in patients with COVID-19 [115,117,118]. Given that most human SARS-CoV-2 infections are asymptomatic or mild, mice originally bearing mACE2 that is replaced by hACE2 may be more appropriate for assessing pathogenesis and tissue tropism [113]. This model develops mild lung pathology, with SARS-CoV-2 infection being restricted to the lung and intestine [113]. In addition to the transgenic modification, mice can also be sensitized to SARS-CoV-2 infection via transient transduction of adenovirus (Ad5)- or adeno-associated virus (AAV)-expressing hACE2 in respiratory tissues, akin to the approach used for MERS-CoV infection [108,109]. These mice develop viral pneumonia, weight loss, severe pulmonary pathology, and a high viral load in the lung, consistent with human COVID-19 [109]. This approach might be quickly adapted to many genetically modified mouse strains that could provide mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and protective immune responses. However, this model is limited by the transient ectopic expression of hACE2 from the Ad5/AAV vector that can induce mild bronchial inflammation and expand cell tropism of SARS-CoV-2 and, thus, alter disease pathogenesis [119].Rather than genetic modification in host animals, viruses can also be genetically modified and used in model animals [120,121]. For instance, in one study, serial passaging of SARS-CoV-2 in mice led to enrichment of a N501Y viral mutant that elicited interstitial pneumonia and inflammatory responses in both young and aged wild-type BALB/c mice [122]. Another mouse-adapted SARS-CoV-2 strain (MA10) carrying three mutations in the RBD of Spike protein caused severe lung pathology and ARDS in mice, characteristic of severe COVID-19 [123]. Despite the three mutations in the RBD of the mouse-adapted Spike, vaccination with full-length SARS-CoV-2 Spike elicited robust neutralizing antibody titers and complete protection against a secondary challenge with MA10 [123]; these findings suggest that this strain is applicable to pathogenesis studies, as well as antiviral drug and vaccine testing in rodents.Nonhuman Primate ModelsThe role of nonhuman primates (NHP) in evaluating coronavirus pathogenesis cannot be understated. Depending on the NHP model utilized, clinical signs/symptoms may be mild or absent entirely [124., 125., 126.]. In rhesus macaques, several studies noted reduced appetite, transient fevers (1 day post infection: dpi) and mild weight loss without overt signs of respiratory distress or mortality [124., 125., 126.]. By contrast, cynomolgus macaques did not display any observational signs of disease in another study [125]. Although certain NHPs appear to only mimic mild disease (if any), rhesus macaques have exhibited high viral loads in nasal swabs, throat samples, and BALF early post inoculation, and viral RNA was still measurable by quantitative (q)PCR in the trachea and lung 21 dpi, highlighting the apparent tropism of SARS-CoV-2 for the URT and lingering viral nucleic acid in respiratory tissues after resolution of disease [51,124]. SARS-CoV-2 has also been detected in nasal swabs at 10 dpi in NHPs, consistent with the prolonged URT shedding of virus in patients with COVID-19 at ~9 dpi [51,124,125,127]. The tropism of SARS-CoV-2 for the LRT in NHPs has also been recapitulated by the development of multifocal lesions and interstitial pneumonia, supporting the hypothesis that lung injury is driven by increased infiltration of neutrophils and macrophages into the lung following viral infection [124., 125., 126.].However, additional hallmarks of severe disease are absent in NHPs, particularly the characteristic systemic ‘cytokine storm’ present in patients with COVID-19; indeed, only transient elevations of serum inflammatory cytokines have been observed in NHPs, and have been reported to decline rapidly by 2 dpi [124]. Overall, these NHP models display mild disease accompanied by viral dissemination in the URT and LRT, leading to localized lung inflammation, but devoid of the sustained systemic inflammatory response that has been noted in patients with COVID-19. Thus, NHP models might be useful for studying mild COVID-19 characteristics, but provide little information on the pathogenic mechanism(s) of severe COVID-19. To partially overcome this issue, aged rhesus macaques (15-years old) have been tested following SARS-CoV-2 infection and have demonstrated shedding of the virus for longer periods of time (14 days), as well as increased radiological and histopathological changes, such as thickened alveolar septum and diffuse severe interstitial pneumonia, compared with young macaques (3–5-years old) [128]. Therefore, these studies highlight the importance of also considering age, as an additional variable, when selecting animal models that might closely, or accurately, recapitulate human disease.Evaluating efficacious vaccine candidates in NHPs will also be important for understanding correlates of protection against SARS-CoV-2. Accordingly, reports of antibody-dependent enhancement, as well as of non-neutralizing humoral responses to the conserved regions of SARS-CoV-2, raise concerns on our future ability to effectively administer an immunogen without inducing immunopathology [129,130]. Furthermore, upon viral challenge, lymphocytes have expanded in rhesus macaque models around 5 dpi with complementary B cell responses against SARS-CoV-2 Spike appearing 10–15 dpi in blood samples [124]; expansion of these adaptive immune compartments was analogous to those observed in patients with COVID-19 [37,124,131., 132., 133.]. Subsequent rechallenged rhesus macaque have presented a rapid anamnestic immune response characterized by significantly higher neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers compared with the primary infection macaques [126]. Thus, protective efficacy appears to depend primarily on NAb titers, at least in NHPs; so far, T-cell numbers have not substantially increased in the serum following rechallenge of these animals and, in a secondary study, CD4+ and CD8+ cytokine (e.g., IFN- γ) responses did not correlate with immune protection from DNA vaccines with different components of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein [126,134]. Although these animals have failed to manifest overt signs of infection and respiratory compromise, NHPs still represent the ‘gold standard’ for evaluating the protective efficacy of human-bound SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based on parallels to humans in terms of viral tropism, immunopathology, and correlates of protection [126]. Further research is urgently needed to explore the durability of immune responses to SARS-CoV-2, considering reports of waning immunity to other CoVs and the detection of pre-existing cross-reactive ’common-cold‘ CoV T-cells with SARS-CoV-2 in naïve humans (see Outstanding Questions) [135,136].Concluding RemarksThe emergence of SARS-CoV-2 as the most recent example of zoonotic virus spillovers into humans underscores the fundamental need for well-funded surveillance organizations. The unrivaled spread of SARS-CoV-2 urgently demands that the global science community acts in harmony to disseminate accurate and stipulatory knowledge, with an immediate potential to influence policy and public health strategies/interventions at the national and local levels. Studies stemming from previous CoVs have jumpstarted our basic understanding of SARS-CoV-2 biology and facilitated the rapid deployment of vaccine candidates into clinical trials. Although clinical symptoms of COVID-19 resemble some aspects of SARS and MERS, respectively, distinct and significant disparities exist in the transmissibility and immune responses to SARS-CoV-2. To modify therapeutics that protect against the full spectrum of disease (see Outstanding Questions), additional research will need to define the molecular mechanisms contributing to severe immunopathology in some patients, whereas others are completely protected from clinical symptoms. Prior work involving other CoVs, together with current and future studies of SARS-CoV-2, should provide society with the foundational knowledge to prepare for expected seasonal resurgences of SARS-CoV-2, as well as any potential spillover of additional CoVs into human populations; hopefully, current investigations will make important advances and contribute to increased knowledge and preparedness in this regard.Outstanding QuestionsWhich animal(s) serves as the natural reservoir of SARS-CoV-2?Does active replication of SARS-CoV-2 in the URT contribute to enhanced transmissibility in humans?Is intestinal SARS-CoV-2 infection a source of virus transmission?Which SARS-CoV-2 proteins antagonize innate and adaptive immune responses? Do the SARS-CoV-2 proteins with more potent antagonistic immune functions increase virulence in humans compared with other HCoVs? Why do some recovered patients fail to develop neutralizing antibodies?What are the host and/or viral factors driving inflammatory imbalances in severe COVID-19 cases?What are the underlying mechanisms contributing to an inadequate IFN response to SARS-CoV-2?What are the correlates of immune protection for SARS-CoV2 and will they provide sterilizing immunity?Will candidate vaccines against SARS-CoV2 also be effective in older subpopulations (with or without comorbidities)?Alt-text: Outstanding Questions



Title: The furin cleavage site is required for pathogenesis, but not transmission of SARS-CoV-2

IntroductionSARS-CoV-2 emerged in late 2019 and initiated a global pandemic with a massive impact on the economy and global public health1. Over the past five years, SARS-CoV-2 has continued to cause infection and disease despite development of effective vaccine and therapeutics2. The continued infection and spread of SARS-CoV-2 have been attributed to its ability to evolve and produce variants of concern that evade key aspects of immunity and improve viral fitness3,4. Much of the evolution of the virus has occurred in the spike protein with new variants able to evade host immunity5. In addition, several spike mutations have improved fitness and transmission of the virus in the human populations6–9. Despite all the changes that have occurred in SARS-CoV-2, two key elements of the spike protein have remained intact throughout the pandemic: the presence of a furin cleavage site (FCS) and an extended S1/S2 loop10–12. Each are unique features of SARS-CoV-2 compared to other sarbecoviruses and play key roles in infection.The CoV spike protein consists of a globular head (S1 subunit) and a stalk (C-terminal of S1 and S2 subunit)13. The head is responsible for attachment and binding to host receptor ACE2. In contrast, the stalk contains the highly conserved fusion machinery. CoV spike must undergo two cleavages to enable host cell fusion, first at an S1/S2 junction site and a second at an S2’ site in the stalk to activate fusion. Unlike other sarbecoviruses, SARS-CoV-2 spike contains a unique furin cleavage site (FCS; RXXR) at the S1/S2 junction that aids in the efficiency of its cleavage. The FCS, not shared among other group 2B coronaviruses, is maintained in all SARS-CoV-2 variants. The multi-basic cleavage motif, PRRAR, exists on the S1/S2 junction loop and is involved in spike cleavage as a virion exits a producer cell. Our lab has previously investigated the importance of the FCS by generating an FCS deletion SARS-CoV-2 mutant (ΔPRRA; Fig.1A) and performing in vitro and in vivo characterization11. Our results indicated that deleting the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo compared to wild-type (WA-1 strain)11.Soon after, we investigated the function of the QTQTN motif immediately upstream the FCS, which is commonly deleted in cell culture stocks. Our group generated a QTQTN deletion mutant (ΔQTQTN; Fig. 1A) and performed in vitro and in vivo testing12. The ΔQTQTN mutant, like ΔPRRA, has attenuated infection in respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo12. Both deletion mutants shorten the spike S1/S2 loop and demonstrate that loop length is important for SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. However, these studies do not evaluate importance of the FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 loop found in SARS-CoV-2. To address this question, we generated an infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2 that disrupts the FCS without shortening the loop (PQQAR mutant). We demonstrate that disruption of the FCS attenuates SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells and pathogenesis in hamsters. The PQQAR mutant has inhibited spike processing and altered protease usage for host cell entry. We also found that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 contact transmission in hamsters, but plays a role in transmission efficiency. Together, the data indicate that the SARS-CoV-2 FCS is important for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission.ResultsGeneration of the PQQAR mutantThe furin cleavage site (FCS; PRRA motif) of SARS-CoV-2 exists at the S1/S2 junction site on an external disordered loop in the spike protein (Fig. 1B). Our prior work evaluated the importance of the furin cleavage site by deleting the PRRA motif upstream of the S1/S2 cleavage site11. While the ΔPRRA mutant was attenuated, subsequent work shortening the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) of SARS-CoV-2 had a similar phenotype, indicating the importance of the loop length in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis12. However, the role of the actual FCS in the context of the extended S1/S2 spike loop was still unclear. To investigate how the FCS, independent of loop length, impacts infection and pathogenesis, we generated an FCS mutant in the SARS-CoV WA-1 backbone that substituted arginine at position 682 and 683 to glutamines (PQQAR) (Fig. 1C). The PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 maintains the S1/S2 loop length but disrupts the furin cleavage site allowing evaluation of the role of the FCS. Using our reverse genetic system, we were able to recover the PQQAR mutant which grew to robust stock titers in Vero cells.PQQAR mutant attenuates viral replication in respiratory cell.Deletion of the FCS and shortening of the S1/S2 loops of the spike had previously been shown to impact viral replication11,12. Therefore, we first examined the PQQAR mutant in Vero E6 cells (African green monkey kidney cells) which lack type I interferon responses14. Following low MOI (0.01) infection, the PQQAR mutant shows no significant attenuation compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 in Vero cells (Fig. 1D). In fact, the PQQAR mutant grew to slightly higher viral titer, although not significantly different that WT. These results are consistent with prior studies shortening the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length and correspond with a fitness advantage in Vero cells11,12. In contrast, the PQQAR mutant has attenuated replication in Calu-3 2B4 cells, a human respiratory cell line (Fig. 1E). At 24 and 48 hours post infection (hpi), the PQQAR mutant has ~3 log reduction in titers compared to WT. Again, these results are consistent with prior studies(ΔQTQTN, ΔPRRA)11,12 and demonstrate that the both the S1/S2 loop and the FCS play a role in effective SARS-CoV-2 replication in human respiratory cells.PQQAR mutant has attenuated in vivo pathogenesisHaving established attenuation in human respiratory cells, we next evaluated how disruption of the FCS impacts SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis in vivo. Utilizing the golden Syrian hamster model, three- to four-week-old male hamsters were intranasally infected with 105 focus forming units (FFU) of WT or PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 and followed over a 7-day time course (Fig. 2A). WT-infected hamsters exhibited weight loss starting at 2 dpi with peak weight loss of ~10–12% before beginning to recover at 6 dpi (Fig. 2B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant produced minimal weight loss following infection. Similarly, disease score corresponded with weight loss as WT had observable disease between days 3 and 6 characterized by ruffled fur, hunched posture, and reduced activity. In contrast, no disease was noted in PQQAR mutant infected hamsters. Together, the data demonstrated that disruption of the FCS attenuated disease in the hamster model of SARS-CoV-2 infection.PQQAR mutant has altered replication in upper and lower respiratory tract.Having established attenuated disease, we next evaluated viral replication in the lung, nasal wash, and trachea following infection with WT and PQQAR mutant. Examining the lung, we found that both WT and the PQQAR mutant replicated in the lungs following infection (Fig. 2C). However, the PQQAR mutant had a 1 log reduction in viral replication compared to WT at day 2 but was equal to WT at day 4. Probing the upper airway, the PQQAR mutant had a significant increase (~10-fold) in viral replication from nasal washes at both days 2 and 4 as compared to WT (Fig. 2D). These results are similar to prior studies that shortened the spike S1/S2 loop length or deleted the FCS11,12. In addition, the PQQAR mutant had similar and increased replication in the trachea at days 2 and 4 as compared to WT-infected hamsters (Fig. 2E). Overall, the replication data demonstrate viral replication attenuation of the PQQAR mutant in the lung but also augmented replication of the mutant in the upper airway tissues.Viral antigen staining confirms attenuation of PQQAR mutant in vivo.To further evaluate viral replication and distribution, we examined antigen staining following infection with WT or PQQAR mutant at days 2 and 4 post infection. Briefly, lung sections from infected hamsters were stained for SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid and scored in a blinded manner for antigen in the airways, parenchyma, and overall as previously described8. We observed wide-spread antigen staining in both the parenchyma and airways following WT SARS-CoV-2 infection at both day 2 and 4 (Fig. 3A–B). In contrast, the PQQAR mutant had more limited antigen staining compared to WT (Fig. 3C–D). While showing modest attenuation in the airways (Fig. 3E), the scores from the parenchyma (Fig. 3F) and overall (Fig. 3G) demonstrated that the PQQAR mutant had a significant deficit in antigen staining as compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 infection. The antigen staining in the large airways may be consistent with potentially greater replication in the airways (Fig. 2D–E). Similarly, the attenuation in the parenchyma and overall staining corresponds to reduced viral titer in the lung of PQQAR mutant-infected animals (Fig. 2C). Together, these results demonstrate attenuation in PQQAR mutant as compared to WT in terms of viral infection and distribution in the lung.PQQAR mutant infection shows reduced immune infiltration and damage.To further evaluate disease and damage, WT- and PQQAR- infected hamsters were evaluated for changes in histopathology. Lung sections were H&E stained and subsequently evaluated by a board-certified pathologist in a blinded manner. After infection, WT-infected hamsters demonstrated significant disease and damage characterized by interstitial pneumonia, peribrochiolitis, epithelial cytopathology, arterial mononuclear cell margination, and presence of polymorphonuclear cells in the bronchioles in some animals at day 2 (Fig. 4A). In contrast, significantly less disease was observed in the PQQAR mutant infected hamsters and was characterized by mild bronchiolitis, and interstitial pneumonia (Fig. 4B). At day 4, WT infected hamsters showed increased lung involvement by area involved with the addition of hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, perivasculitis, and infiltration of mononuclear cells (Fig. 4C). Notably, while increased compared to day 2, PQQAR mutant-infected animals had much less lung involvement and less severe disease and damage as compared to WT (Fig. 4D). While no significant disease and damage was observed in mock infected animals (Fig. 4E), the SARS-CoV-2 associated lesion were much more extensive in WT as compared to PQQAR mutant infected hamsters. WT-infected hamsters had significant increases in SARS-CoV-2 lesion percentages in lung section at days 2, 4, and 7 days post infection as compared to PQQAR mutant infection (Fig. 4F). These results are consistent with the weight loss and disease data (Fig. 2B) and indicate that the PQQAR mutant is attenuated in terms of pathogenesis in vivo.FCS disruption attenuates spike processingSpike mediated entry requires sequential cleavage at the S1/S2 junction and the S2’ site to activate fusion15. Prior work has established that the SARS-CoV-2 spike is partially cleaved prior to release from cells16; shortening the S1/S2 loop disrupts this cleavage on released virions. Here, we evaluate if FCS disruption affected spike cleavage on purified virions from the PQQAR mutant. Briefly, WT, PQQAR, and the ΔFCS mutant SARS-CoV-2 were collected from Vero E6 cells, purified using ultracentrifugation sucrose cushion, inactivated, and blotted for spike and nucleocapsid (Fig. 5A). Normalizing to nucleocapsid, we observe that both PQQAR and ΔFCS mutants have a reduction in S1/S2 cleavage product as compared to WT (Fig. 5B). While WT SARS-CoV-2 has ~40% of spike cleaved following infection of Vero cells, both disruption and deletion of the FCS results in mutants with very minimal S1/S2 cleavage product (Fig. 5C). Together, the results indicate that an intact FCS is required for spike processing prior to release of SARS-CoV-2 virions.TMPRSS2 plays role in attenuation of PQQAR mutantSARS-CoV-2 enters the host cell through either the endosomal route mediated by host cathepsins or the cell surface route mediated by host serine proteases like TMPRSS2 (Fig. 5D)15. The PQQAR mutant shows significant attenuation in Calu-3 2B4, but has no deficit in Vero E6 cells (Fig. 1C, 1D). A major distinction between the two cell lines is expression of TMPRSS2, which is highly expressed in Calu3 cells, but absent in Vero E6 cells. To determine if TMPRSS2 expression contributes to attenuation, we utilize Calu3 cells with TMPRSS2 knocked out. We subsequently infected the TMPRSS2 KO Calu3 cells with both WT SARS-CoV-2 and PQQAR mutant as previously described. Following infection, we note that both PQQAR and WT virus replication is not significantly different over the course of infection (Fig. 5E). Compared to standard Calu3 cells (Fig. 5F), WT SARS-CoV-2 infection was reduced to the same level of PQQAR mutant indicating that the primary difference between replication of the WT and FCS mutant virus in Calu3 cells is due to the activity of TMPRSS2. These results indicate that spike processing through the FCS plays an important role in utilization of TMPRSS2 mediated entry of SARS-CoV-2.Intact FCS is not required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in vivoThe disruption of the FCS by the PQQAR mutant demonstrates that the importance of the motif to SARS-CoV-2 infection of respiratory cells and pathogenesis in vivo. Yet, it remains unclear if the furin cleavage site is required for transmission of SARS-CoV-2. While attenuated in the lung, the PQQAR mutant displayed robust and augmented replication in the upper airways as compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 (Fig. 2C). With the upper airway infection thought to seed transmission, it left the possibility that the PQQAR mutant could still be transmited without a functional FCS. To test this question, we performed studies with WT and PQQAR mutant SARS-CoV-2 to evaluate the capacity of the mutant virus to be transmitted in hamsters. Briefly, “donor” hamster were intranasally infected with 105 (FFU) of WT SARS-CoV-2 or PQQAR mutant (Fig. 6A). After 24 hours, each donor was individually co-housed 1:1 with a naïve “recipient” with no additional barriers to evaluate contact transmission for 8 hours. After cohousing, donors and recipients were separated into individual cages for the duration of the study. Before being returned to new cages, donor hamsters were nasal washed to measure their shedding titer on the day of exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for changes in weight and disease, euthanized two days post infection/exposure, and tissues/washes evaluated for viral load.Following infection of donors, we observed that the shedding titers in the nasal wash were similar between WT and PQAAR mutant after the exposure period (Fig. 6B). We also observed that donor titers at 2 days post infection showed the PQAAR mutant had higher viral load in the nasal wash, but reduced titer in the lung (Fig. 6C–D). These results are consistent with observations from acute infection showing greater replication of PQQAR mutant in the airways versus the lung (Fig. 2C–D). Examining transmission from donors to recipient, we observed that transmission of both WT and PQQAR mutants was 100% successful. All 5 donor pairs infected with either WT or PQQAR mutant resulted in detectable viral loads in the nasal wash and lungs of recipient animals 2 days post exposure (Fig. 6E–F). Yet, while transmission occurred, PQQAR mutant recipient hamsters had significant lower viral titers compared to WT for both the lung and nasal washes (Fig. 6E–F). The results suggest that while the FCS is not strictly required for transmission, its presence impacts the viral load observed in recipient animals. Regardless of reduced viral load, the results indicate that an intact FCS is not required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the direct contact hamster model.FCS necessary for transmission fitness in vivoTo investigate how loss of the FCS impacts transmission fitness, we performed a competition transmission study between WT and PQQAR mutant virus in hamsters. Briefly, donor hamsters were intranasally infected with an equal mixture (1:1) of WT and PQQAR mutant virus with a total of 105 focus forming units (Fig. 7A). At 24 hours post infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with naïve recipients for 12 hours before separation into individual cages. Upon separation, the donor hamsters were nasal washed after exposure. Animals were subsequently examined for weight loss and disease over a four-day time course. Animals were euthanized and RNA from lung tissue/nasal washes were collected from the hamsters at 2- and 4-days post-infection or post-contact. The extended time point (4 dpi) evaluated if the competition results changed after an prolonged period of time post infection.We used Next-Generation sequencing (NGS) to evaluate transmission dynamics of WT and PQQAR from in vivo competition. NGS libraries were made from extracted RNA samples with “Tiled-ClickSeq”17, an approach that utilizes ”click chemistry” and >300 SARS-CoV-2 specific primers to fully examine the SARS-CoV-2 genome. The abundance of viral RNA comprised of WT or PQQAR genotypes suggests their relative ratio during transmission competition. Examining donor hamsters, we find that PQQAR mutant had substantially reduced transmission efficiency than WT for 1, 2, or 4 dpi. (Fig. 7B–D). From nasal wash, PQQAR mutant comprised ~2–20.1% of total viral reads (mean: 8.63% +/− 0.05%) or a ~12.3-fold transmission reduction compared to WT. From lung tissue, PQQAR mutant comprised ~0.2–5.1% of total viral reads (mean: 1.95% +/− 0.02%) or 162.7-fold transmission reduction relative to WT. Our competition results differ from the findings in the first transmission study that found robust replication of the PQQAR mutant in donor animals (Fig. 6B–D). The single viral inoculum experiment (Fig. 6) demonstrates that PQQAR is replication-competent in vivo, while the mixed inoculum experiment (Fig. 7) shows that although PQQAR can replicate, it is outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2.From recipient hamsters, the PQQAR mutant was found to have even lower transmission efficiency as compared to WT (Fig. 7E–F). Examination of both the lung and nasal washes revealed that the PQQAR mutant was found to be <5% of the reads. Notably, despite the low levels of viral reads, the PQQAR mutant RNA was detected in all recipient animals at levels well above the number of background mutations (Fig. 7G) indicating that the detected PQQAR genotype is a result of actual transmission, rather than random mutations. However, the PQQAR mutant is unable to compete with WT virus that maintains an intact FCS. Together, the results demonstrate that while not strictly required, the SARS-CoV-2 spike FCS site aids in transmission efficiency.DiscussionThe presence of the furin cleavage site in SARS-CoV-2 spike protein plays a key role in infection and pathogenesis. As novel variants continue to emerge, SARS-CoV-2 has maintained its furin cleavage site and extended S1/S2 loop length in the spike protein indicating its necessity. While we previously established the importance of the SARS-CoV-2 S1/S2 loop length11,12, this study addresses how the furin cleavage site itself impacts SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesis. We found that disruption of the FCS significantly attenuates replication in human respiratory cells in vitro and pathogenesis in vivo. The FCS mutant (PQQAR) has inhibited spike processing and modified host protease usage during cell entry. Notably, despite attenuated pathogenesis, the PQQAR mutant is successfully transmitted to all contact recipients but has decreased transmission fitness. Together, our data indicate that the furin cleavage site is critical for SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission fitness.Overall, our studies confirm that both the loop length and an intact furin cleavage site are required for pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2. Previously, deletion mutants, ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN, both had attenuated pathogeneicity in hamsters; the results showed that the SARS-CoV-2’s extended S1/S2 loop played a critical role in pathogenesis11,12. However, the previous findings failed to evaluate the FCS requirement in the context of an extended S1/S2 loop. In this study, we demonstrate that disruption of the FCS also causes attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis and has viral replication kinetics similar to the ΔPRRA and ΔQTQTN deletion mutants. The PQQAR mutant maintains the extended loop length, but still results in reduced body weight loss and significantly less lung pathology in hamsters. While there is slightly augmented replication in the upper airways, the PQQAR mutant infected animals had lower viral loads in the lung and reduced antigen staining. Together, these data highlight the importance of both an intact FCS and extended S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis.Combined with prior studies, our results indicate that spike processing and protease usage play a key role in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis. Disruption of the furin cleavage site (PQQAR) or shortening of the S1/S2 loop (ΔQTQTN) both independently ablate spike processing of SARS-CoV-2 virions11,12. Spike processing changes on the SARS-CoV-2 virion also correspond with changes in protease usage; the FCS and shortened loop mutants were unable to utilize TMPRSS2-mediated pathways as effectively. The changes in spike processing and protease usage also correspond with attenuation of in vivo pathogenesis. The results argue that the S1/S2 loop length and the FCS both play critical roles in SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease. Importantly, a number of other SARS-CoV-2 spike mutations found in variants of concern have been shown to modulate both spike processing and protease usage8,18,19. In each case, these results impact disease pathogenesis and highlight the importance of both the FCS and S1/S2 loop in SARS-CoV-2 disease and damage.In contrast to its role in pathogenesis, our results indicate that an intact FCS is not strictly required for SARS-CoV-2 transmission but likely plays a role in transmission and infection efficiency. Prior studies in ferrets found that deletion of the furin cleavage site ablated transmission of the virus via direct contact20. In contrast, we found that disrupting the FCS did not prevent transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the direct contact hamster model with all 5 recipients infected. A major distinction is the nature of the FCS mutations as the prior study deleted the entire cleavage loop motif (PRRAR) ablating the S1/S2 site as well as shortening the loop20. Our study maintains the S1/S2 loop length by disrupting only the furin targeted motif and also maintaining the Sarbecovirus cleavage site (PQQAR)7. Our findings indicate that the intact FCS is not a requirement but leaves the possibility that the S1/S2 extended loop may be necessary for efficient transmission. Further studies are necessary to explore the role of the extended S1/S2 loop for SARS-CoV-2 transmission.While the PQQAR mutant was able to be passed to 100% of recipient animals, the efficiency of transmission was reduced. Examining viral loads, the PQQAR mutant recipient had lower viral loads as compared to WT controls following single virus transmission study. Similarly, the PQQAR mutant was outcompeted by WT SARS-CoV-2 in direct competition studies (Fig. 7). While the results corresponded with attenuation PQQAR mutant loads in the lung upon direct challenge, surprisingly, the prior observed advantage in the upper airway disappeared in recipient animals. The results suggest that furin site plays a role in efficiency of transmission and infection of recipient animals. Notably, despite clear attenuation relative to WT, the PQQAR mutant virus RNA was observed in every hamster pair, indicating transmission occurred even in the presence of WT SARS-CoV-2. Together, the results indicate that while the FCS is not strictly required, it does aid in transmission efficiency of SARS-CoV-2.Overall, the manuscript data demonstrate that an intact furin cleavage site plays a critical role in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission efficiency. Disruption of the FCS in the S1/S2 loop results in ablated spike processing, altered host protease usage, and reduced disease in vivo. Importantly, while not strictly required for transmission, the FCS plays a critical role in efficiency of infection in recipient hamsters. Together, these results demonstrate the critical importance of an intact FCS in SARS-CoV-2 infection, pathogenesis, and transmission.MethodsCellsVero E6 cells and Vero E6 cells expressing TMPRSS2 (Sekisui XenoTech) were grown in Dulbecco modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco #11965–092) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (HyClone #SH30071.03) and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco #5240062). Calu-3 2B4 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate. Human TMPRSS2 knockout Calu-3 cells (Abcam #273734) were grown in DMEM supplemented with 20% defined FBS (HyClone #SH30070.03), 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, 1% non-essential amino acid solution (NEAA; Gibco #11140050), and 1 mg/mL sodium pyruvate.VirusesThe recombinant WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virus sequences are based on the USA-WA1/2020 isolate sequence provided by the World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses (WRCEVA), which was originally obtained from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)21. Wild-type and mutant SARS-CoV-2 were generated using standard cloning techniques and reverse genetics system as previously described22,23 and propagated on Vero E6 cells. The mutations in PQQAR mutant have been verified by Sanger sequencing. The recovered mutant virus was further sequenced with NGS to confirm the maintenance of nucleotide mutations up to P2.Infectious titers were measured by focus-forming assay. All experiments involving infectious virus were conducted at the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) in an approved biosafety level (BSL) 3 laboratory with routine medical monitoring of staff.In Vitro InfectionViral infections in Vero E6, TMRPSS2-expressing Vero E6, Calu-3 2B4, and Calu-3 TMPRSS2 KO cells were performed as previously described22,24. Briefly, cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01 for 45 min at 37 °C. Following absorption, cells were washed three times with PBS and fresh growth media was added to represent time 0. Three or more biological replicates were collected at each time point and each experiment was repeated at least twice.Focus Forming AssayFocus forming assays (FFAs) were performed as previously described25. Briefly, Vero E6 cells were seeded in 96-well plates to be 100% confluent. Samples were 10-fold serially diluted in serum-free media and 20 μl was to infect cells. Cells were incubated for 45 min at 37°C with 5% CO2 before 100 μl of 0.85% methylcellulose overlay was added. Cells were incubated for 24 hrs at 37°C with 5% CO2. After incubation, overlay was removed, and cells were washed three times with PBS before fixed and virus inactivated by 10% formalin for 30 min at room temperature. Cells were then permeabilized and blocked with 0.1% saponin/0.1% BSA in PBS before incubated with α-SARS-CoV-2 Nucleocapsid primary antibody (Cell Signaling Technology) at 1:1000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. Cells are then washed three times with PBS before incubated with Alexa FluorTM 555-conjugated α-mouse secondary antibody (Invitrogen #A28180) at 1:2000 in permeabilization/blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were washed three times with PBS. Fluorescent foci images were captured using a Cytation 7 cell imaging multi-mode reader (BioTek), and foci were counted manually.Virion Purification and Western Blotting.Vero E6 cells were infected with WT or mutant SARS-CoV-2 at an MOI of 0.01. Supernatant was harvested 24 hpi and clarified by low-speed centrifugation. Virus particles were then pelleted by ultracentrifugation through a 20% sucrose cushion at 26,000 rpm for 3 h using a Beckman SW28 rotor. Pellets were resuspended in 2× Laemmli buffer to obtain protein lysates. Relative viral protein levels were determined by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) followed by Western blot analysis as previously described11,12. In brief, sucrose-purified WT and mutant SARS-CoV-2 virions were inactivated by boiling in Laemmeli buffer. Samples were loaded in equal volumes into 4 to 20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gels (Bio-Rad #4561093) and electrophoresed by SDS–PAGE. Protein was transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes. Membranes were probed with SARS-CoV S-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100–56578) and followed with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074). Membranes were stripped and reprobed with SARS-CoV N-specific antibodies (Novus Biologicals #NB100–56576) and the HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary IgG to measure loading. Signal developed using Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705060) or Clarity Max Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad #1705062) and imaging on a ChemiDoc MP System (Bio-Rad #12003154). Densitometry was performed using ImageLab 6.0.1 (Bio-Rad #2012931).Hamster Infection StudyMale golden Syrian hamsters (3 to 4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo (HsdHan:AURA strain). All studies were conducted under a protocol approved by the UTMB Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and complied with USDA guidelines in a laboratory accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care. Procedures involving infectious SARS-CoV-2 were performed in the Galveston National Laboratory ABSL3 facility. Hamsters were intranasally inoculated with 105 pfu of WT or PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 in100 μl. Infected hamsters were weighed and monitored for illness over 7 days. Hamsters were anesthetized with isoflurane (Henry Schein Animal Health) and nasal washes were collected with 400 μl of PBS on endpoint days (2, 4, and 7 dpi). Hamsters were euthanized by CO2 for organ collection. Nasal wash and lung were collected to measure viral titer. Left lungs were collected for histopathology.Hamster TransmissionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. Each group (WT, PQQAR, or PBS) had 10 donor hamsters that were intranasally infected with 100 uL of 105 pfu of virus or PBS depending on the group. 24 hrs post infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 8 hrs for contact transmission. After 8 hrs, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing and the donors were nasal washed. At 2 days post infection for donors and post contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 μl of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol, and RNA was extracted to perform next generation sequencing as previously described.Hamster Transmission CompetitionMale golden Syrian hamsters (3–4 weeks old) were purchased from Envigo. ten donor hamsters were intranasally infected with a 1:1 ratio of WT:PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 totaling 105 pfu in 100 μl and were subsequently individually housed. At 24 hrs post infection, donor hamsters were cohoused 1:1 with a recipient hamster for 12 hrs for contact transmission. After 8 hrs, hamster pairs were separated into individual housing and the donors were nasal washed for D1 values. At 2 and 4 days post infection for donors and post contact for recipients, hamsters were nasal washed with 400 μl of PBS and euthanized for lung and nasal wash collection. Nasal washes and lungs were processed in TRIzol. RNA was extracted to perform next generation sequencing.HistologyHistopathology was performed as previously described26,27. Briefly, left lungs were harvested from hamsters and fixed in 10% buffered formalin solution for at least 7 d. Fixed tissue was then embedded in paraffin, cut into 5 μM sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin on a SAKURA VIP6 processor by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. H&E staining was performed by the University of Texas Medical Branch Histology Laboratory and then analyzed and scored by a blinded pathologist.ImmunohistochemistryAntigen staining was performed as previously described28, Briefly, fixed and paraffin-embedded left lung lobes from hamsters were cut into 5 μM sections and mounted onto slides by the University of Texas Medical Branch Surgical Pathology Laboratory. Paraffin-embedded sections were warmed at 56°C for 10 min, deparaffinized with xylene (3× 5-min washes) and graded ethanol (3× 100% 5-min washes, 1× 95% 5-min wash), and rehydrated in distilled water. After rehydration, antigen retrieval was performed by steaming slides in antigen retrieval solution (10 mM sodium citrate, 0.05% Tween-20, pH 6) for 40 min (boil antigen retrieval solution in microwave, add slides to boiling solution, and incubate in steamer). After cooling and rinsing in distilled water, endogenous peroxidases were quenched by incubating slides in TBS with 0.3% H2O2 for 15 min followed by 2× 5-min washes in 0.05% TBST. Sections were blocked with 10% normal goat serum in BSA diluent (1% BSA in 0.05% TBST) for 30 min at room temperature. Sections were incubated with primary anti-N antibody (Sino #40143-R001) at 1:1000 in BSA diluent overnight at 4°C. Following overnight primary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3x for 5 min in TBST. Sections were incubated in secondary HRP-conjugated anti-rabbit antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #7074) at 1:200 in BSA diluent for 1 hour at room temperature. Following secondary antibody incubation, sections were washed 3x for 5 min in TBST. To visualize antigen, sections were incubated in ImmPACT NovaRED (Vector Laboratories #SK-4805) for 3 min at room temperature before rinsed with TBST to stop the reaction followed by 1× 5-min wash in distilled water. Sections were incubated in hematoxylin for 5 min at room temperature to counterstain before rinsing in water to stop the reaction. Sections were dehydrated by incubating in the previous xylene and graded ethanol baths in reverse order before mounted with coverslips.Structural ModelingStructural models previously generated were used as a base to visualize residues mutated in Omicron12. Briefly, structural models were generated using SWISS-Model to generate homology models for WT and PQQAR SARS-CoV-2 spike protein based on the SARS-CoV-1 trimer structure (Protein Data Bank code 6ACD). Homology models were visualized and manipulated in PyMOL (version 2.5.4) to visualize the PQQAR mutation.Next Generation Sequencing and data analysisNext generation sequencing (NGS) method was used to determine viral RNA populations from infected animals. Briefly, total cellular RNA samples were extracted from animal tissues and NGS libraries were prepared with Tiled-ClickSeq method17,25. A modified pre-RT annealing protocol was applied as previously described25 to reduce mis-priming. The final libraries comprising of 300–600 bps fragments were pooled and sequenced on an ElementBio Aviti platform with paired-end sequencing (120 bp R1 and 30 bp R2). The raw Illumina data of the Tiled-ClickSeq libraries were processed with established bioinformatics pipelines (https://github.com/andrewrouth/TCS). The relative ratio between WT and PQQAR was calculated based on the average Pilon-reported29 G-to-A mutation rate at specific genomic loci (G23607A, G23608A, G23610A, G23611A). A baseline mutation rate is also evaluated by averaging the background mutation rates from nts. 23606–23612.


Title: Molecular epidemiology in the HIV and SARS-CoV-2 pandemics

INTRODUCTIONThe principal goal of epidemiology is to identify the causative and correlative factors that drive a disease to enable a rational basis for infection prevention and disease control. This includes addressing the basic questions of what is the causative agent, how is it spread, who is at risk, where is it prevalent, when is it a threat, and why does it cause disease? At the beginning of the HIV pandemic, these questions were addressed through the use of contact tracing, case finding, and well executed case–control studies, the basic tools of infectious disease epidemiologic investigation. With advances in molecular biology, most notably PCR and gene sequencing, new molecular-based approaches to perform epidemiological investigations were developed, oftentimes directly in response to the HIV epidemic itself. Today, molecular epidemiology is indispensable to the investigation of a new disease or disease outbreak. Indeed, these approaches were deployed very early in the SARS-like coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) epidemic to inform urgent outstanding questions of cause, origin, transmission, and risk. Despite these successes, several limitations to these approaches have been exposed by these two different epidemics, especially in regards to implementation. Here, we discuss some of the tools of molecular epidemiology, their use and limitations as applied to the HIV epidemic, and lessons we have learned so far in applying these approaches to SARS-CoV-2. Box 1no caption availableMolecular diagnostics: antibody and PCR-based testingOne of the first challenges faced by clinicians, public health experts, and epidemiologists during a new epidemic is the need for accurate and sensitive diagnostic tools. Traditionally, diagnostic procedures were heavily dependent on clinical symptom tracking, history of exposure, and standard microbiology practices to isolate infectious agents. Although often sufficient for extracting population level trends, these tools alone are often complicated by variability in clinical presentation, incomplete medical histories, insufficient resources or inadequate protocols for microbial isolation, and high rates of overall uncertainty [1–3]. The development of molecular diagnostic tools for the detection of specific pathogens, or an immune response to specific pathogens, revolutionized our capacity to diagnose infectious diseases accurately within large populations. Although the sensitivity of these tests is still largely dependent on the quality and timing of sample collection relative to the infection time course, their specificity is generally high when properly controlled [1–3].The first molecular diagnostic tool for HIV was an IgG antibody test developed in 1985, just 2 years after the isolation and discovery of the virus as the causative agent of AIDS [4–6]. This first-generation test was an ELISA that used HIV-1 infected cell lysates as the fixed antigen over which patient serum would be applied. Anti-HIV antibodies would stick to the HIV antigens for detection with IgG-specific secondary antibodies that could be quantified by a chemiluminescence readout. In order to rule out false-positive tests (due to pregnancy, autoimmune disease, and other undetermined reasons) and further differentiate HIV-1 from HIV-2, a subsequent validation of these results was required by immunoblotting or immunoflourescence [7,8]. This two-part testing algorithm (serology with secondary confirmation) would be refined in the second and third generations to improve the breadth of HIV subtypes that could be detected and to standardize the antigens used as bait for mass production. Although these algorithms had high sensitivity and specificity, their reliance on antibody detection dictated a significant lag time between exposure and diagnosis. In other words, due to the time it takes for the body to mount a specific antibody response detectable in the blood (i.e. the time to seroconversion), these tests were not be able to detect infection for 3–12 weeks following exposure [9–11]. To narrow this negative window, fourth-generation tests that incorporated direct antigen detection were developed, first becoming available in 1997 (Fig. 1a). These tests similarly relied on ELISA methodology, but for detection of both HIV p24 antigen as well as anti-HIV antibodies [9,12]. Fifth-generation tests that included separate readouts for antigens and antibodies were developed in 2015. These tests are usually effective at detecting HIV infection within 18–45 days following exposure. These later tests also allowed for more rapid and improved differentiation between HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection [13].FIGURE 1Evolution of HIV diagnostic algorithms. (a) This cartoon depicts the abundance of HIV diagnostic substrates in the serum of a figurative patient during the first several weeks following infection. Although first-generation HIV tests that relied on detection of anti-HIV IgG antibodies in patient serum had a large ‘negative window’ between infection and detection, each successive generation of tests reduced this gap. Nucleic acid tests are primarily used for medical management of disease, but are used for diagnostic/screening purposes in some algorithms. (b) The current HIV testing algorithm based on guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control.Serological tests for diagnostic purposes are relatively cheap, have a low barrier to entry and can be readily adapted to rapid, at-home or point-of-care testing platforms [14,15]. These ‘rapid’ tests generally rely on immunochromatography wherein differences in antibody movement in the presence or absence of its antigen can be detected by laminar flow. Rapid tests generally have lower specificity than the traditional ELISA-based tests, and so require result confirmation, but enable outreach and testing to a much broader population than otherwise would be accessible [14,15]. There is currently one FDA-approved rapid self-test for HIV in the United States (OraQuick), which detects anti-HIV antibodies from an oral swab. Rapid, point-of-care tests are also available that use a single drop of blood from a fingertip (i.e. Alere Determine, among others) [14–16].Although serological assays are the recommended diagnostic tests for HIV, PCR-based testing is also a helpful adjunct in certain diagnostic situations. Rather than detecting the virus-specific antibodies or viral proteins, these tests rely on detection of viral nucleic acids [17–19]. In these tests, viral RNA is extracted from blood samples, converted into complementary DNA (cDNA), and amplified with HIV-specific oligonucleotide primers. If done in a quantifiable way, these assays can also be used to determine viral load, which can be an important determinant of transmission and pathogenesis [20–24]. Although these tests are generally more expensive, more prone to false positivity than the current antibody testing algorithms, and can be subject to longer turnaround times, they can be used to detect HIV infection within 3–14 days following exposure, often prior to the appearance of quantifiable p24 antigen or anti-HIV antibodies in the blood [17–19]. PCR-based assays are primarily used as a diagnostic adjunct in cases wherein acute infection is suspected very soon after a high-risk exposure (with follow-up antibody algorithm confirmation) [18], for the detection of mother-to-child transmission (to differentiate infant infection given the passive transfer of antibody in utero) [25], and for surveillance of blood donations [26]. Following acute infection, some individuals may have viral set points below the limit of detection for PCR-based assays, so serological tests are often preferred at time points beyond the immediate post-exposure period. As such, PCR assays for plasma HIV RNA are primarily used for medical management and not generally recommended as a stand alone diagniostic.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC's) current HIV testing algorithm calls for primary screening with a fourth or fifth-generation HIV-1/2 antigen/antibody immunoassay (Fig. 1b) [27]. A majority of these tests, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Abbott Architect HIV Ag/Ab test or the GS Combo Ag/Ab EIA test, have been extensively evaluated with reported sensitivity and specificity ranging from 99.7 to 100% [27–29]. Due to the high sensitivity, a follow-up test is not recommended, unless an exposure event is suspected within the test's negative window (roughly within the previous 2–4 weeks), in which case a PCR-based nucleic acid test is suggested. If the initial assay gives a positive result, a follow-up immunoassay to confirm diagnosis and differentiate between HIV-1 and HIV-2 is required. If a negative result is obtained in follow-up, a PCR-based nucleic acid test is again suggested to test for acute infection in the negative window. If a preliminary positive result is obtained from a rapid, point-of-care test, result confirmation using this algorithm in a certified clinical laboratory is required.The type of diagnostic test that is most effective is highly dependent on the nature of the virus and the goal of the test. HIV establishes a chronic infection throughout the lifetime of an individual, so while early diagnosis is optimal, diagnostic tools that are effective at any stage of disease are useful for protecting patient health and for controlling future spread [20,21,30▪▪]. Viruses that do not establish chronic infections, however, afford only a small window in which diagnostic tests can be used to inform treatment and prevent spread. By the time serological responses are developed against SARS-CoV-2, for example, a majority of people have already cleared the virus and cannot transmit the infection. Thus, although serological tests that indicate prior exposure to SARS-CoV-2 may be informative for transmission models, such results are of limited benefit for determining if there is a current risk of further transmission [31,32▪]. Given this limitation, PCR-based testing has emerged as the primary diagnostic test for detecting SARS-CoV-2 infection in the clinic. There are a large variety of these tests available, most of which rely on amplification of a portion of the viral nucleocapsid (N) or RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) genes [31,33▪,34].When properly controlled, the specificity of PCR-based diagnostic tests can be near perfect in high prevalence symptomatic populations given their dependency on unique sequences of nucleic acids. The sensitivity of PCR-based testing, however, may be substantially lower dependent on the timing of the sample, sample source, and sample collection quality [34]. For example, the sensitivity and specificity of most nucleic acid tests for HIV are greater than 99.5%, but the sensitivity of these assays drop if the specimen is collected too early or late relative to acute infection, if the specimen used is from an oral swab or dried blood spot as opposed to serum, or if the specimen is processed outside a certified clinical laboratory [27,35]. Variation in the sensitivity of PCR-based SARS-CoV-2 testing is similarly dependent on timing, specimen collection and sample processing. To avoid these issues, best practices include amplification of a housekeeping gene within each specimen to validate sample quality, repeat testing after possible exposure to validate negative results (especially in cases shortly after exposure) and limitation of testing to certified clinical labortaories with trained personnel [36]. Even when using best practices, however, initial studies estimate that the sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 PCR-based testing for COVID-19 pneumonia may be as low as 70% [37▪▪]. The relatively low sensitivity of these tests and the subsequently higher probabilities of false negatives emphasize the need for additional surveillance mechanisms (contact tracing, symptom monitoring and so on) as well as for careful adherence to public health guidelines (social distancing, wear masks in public spaces, wash hands regularly and so on). More studies are needed to determine the true sensitivity of the various tests currently being employed in clinical versus population-based settings and to determine how much sensitivity varies in symptomatic versus asymptomatic people [37▪▪].Given the frequency and scale with which SARS-CoV-2 testing is needed for diagnosis, surveillance and monitoring, additional innovations in diagnostic testing strategies are required. The development of point-of-care testing strategies that either enable more reliable self-sampling (i.e. through oral rinsates), faster turn around times (i.e. rapid tests such as the Abbott ID NOW or Cepheid Xpert Xpress) or less reliance on specialized equipment are being explored [38–40]. Much like with the development of rapid HIV tests, these are not meant to serve as a stand-in for clinical testing, but rather as a means to broaden capacity and outreach, link potential pateints to clinical care sites, and inform potentially contagious individuals of steps to limit transmission. Beyond changing the test procedure itself, assorted pooling strategies are being explored to better enable bulk testing [41,42]. Orginally developed as a way to increase the throughput of blood borne pathogen testing in the blood supply, these strategies rely on pooling a given number of patient samples prior to testing [26,43]. Individual specimens that compose negative pools are presumed negative, while individual specimens that compose positive pools are then routed to individual testing. The number of samples in each pool is dictated by both the local positivity rate and the overall sensitivity of the assay. Many of these strategies and others are being developed with support from the National Institutes of Health Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx) programme [40,44].In sum, molecular diagnostics have become a vital tool in epidemic management to link people to care, monitor transmission, enact preventative measures and answer the most basic of epidemiological questions: who is being or has been infected? Although these tests may seem definitive, the sensitivity and specificity of the test, its implementation, and the exact nature of the readout dictate the strengths and weaknesses of each approach. As such, they are best leveraged in the context of complete clinical care and health surveillance that includes symptom monitoring, contact tracing, and risk communication. Improved study of the limitations of these tests in clinical practice and improved communication of these limitations to health providers and patients will go a long way towards optimal implementation of molecular diagnostics in the context of an ongoing epidemic.Virus genome sequencingAlthough molecular diagnostics have become vital tools for infectious disease surveillance, genetic sequencing approaches have likewise matured to become important tools for understanding disease cause and transmission. The genetic information obtained from viral sequences is a high-resolution source of information that can be used not only for studying biological properties of pathogenic viruses, but also for understanding critical elements of viral spread that inform and direct public health policies [45–48]. The extraordinary development of sequencing technologies and analysis methods even within the last decade have accelerated these trends in recent years. In addition, the establishment of publicly available sequence databases such as the Los Alamos HIV sequence database, HIV sequence compendium, GenBank, and GISAID have provided scientists with rapid access to global viral sequences for an increased analysis power and much faster response for monitoring epidemic trends.The first HIV genomic sequences were described in a series of papers in 1985 [49,50]. Due to the relatively low abundance of viral DNA in patient tissues, these viruses were first passaged in tissue culture cells prior to molecular cloning and sequencing using dideoxynucleotide chain termination. Eventually, methods were developed to sequence clinical specimens directly [51]. It quickly became clear that HIV genetic diversity was not only remarkably high, but also critically important for defining the biological nature of the disease as well as the clinical efficacy of early antiviral drugs [52–54]. Indeed, as sequencing of clinical isolates became cheaper and easier, and the clinical significance of antiviral drug resistance became clear, sequencing of patient HIV plasma RNA became a standard of care in order to check for known antiviral resistance mutations and inform the use of appropriate therapeutics [55,56]. Later, these same results began to inform public health departments of potential risk networks (see Molecularly assisted Contact Tracing below). For the clinical purposes of drug resistance and coreceptor tropism prediction, high-throughput sequencing methods that target selected regions of the HIV genome (most commonly the HIV polymerase gene, pol) are effective [57–61], though more recent whole-genome sequencing methods have been developed for other applications such as global and within-host evolutionary analyses of HIV [62–64].Experience with sequencing HIV and other viruses has resulted in three major approaches to viral whole-genome sequencing: metagenomic, PCR amplicon, or target enrichment (reviewed in [65]). Each sequencing approach begins with extraction of total nucleic acids from the clinical specimen. When sequencing RNA viruses such as HIV or SARS-CoV-2, a reverse transcription step is first undertaken to convert RNA to cDNA. In metagenomic sequencing approaches, total cDNA obtained from the specimen is used to generate a platform-specific sequencing library for shotgun sequencing. The resulting sequence reads are then filtered to remove sequences of human host origin prior to being assembled and/or aligned to a reference genome sequence. Metagenomic sequencing has the advantage of being the fastest and most direct of the sequencing methods, requiring the fewest intermediate steps and, by minimizing PCR cycles, presents fewer opportunities for the introduction of PCR bias into the results. Metagenomic sequencing has the greatest potential for novel viral pathogen discovery and was the method used, in conjunction with targeted PCR, to first identify the SARS-CoV-2 virus sequence from a patient with COVID-19 symptoms at the beginning of the pandemic [66▪▪]. These advantages are offset, however, by the higher cost and lower sensitivity of the metagenomic approach, as considerably deeper sequencing is often required to obtain sufficient sequence relative to the large proportion of contaminating host or commensal organism nucleic acids.In PCR amplicon sequencing, the viral genome is amplified directly from the clinical specimen using PCR primers against the viral genome sequence to generate a library of tiled and overlapping amplicons. Sequence reads are aligned to a reference viral genome sequence to identify variants. PCR amplicon sequencing approaches were quickly developed and implemented for SARS-CoV-2, and have been crucial for several early discoveries [67,68▪]. This approach has the advantage of being able to selectively enrich the viral genome prior to sequencing, minimizing the amount of contaminating DNA or RNA being sequenced. This both decreases the cost of sequencing and increases the efficiency and throughput of clinical investigations as many isolates can be indexed and sequenced simultaneously. The amplification step also improves the sensitivity for detecting viruses in low abundance in the clinical specimen. Limitations of this approach include increased complexity of the library preparation and the possibility that viral variability could result in primer mismatches and incomplete sequencing. Relative to HIV, however, the low mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 somewhat tempers these concerns [69,70].Target enrichment, also known as pull-down, bait, or capture assays, involve DNA or RNA probes complementary to the viral sequence bound to a solid phase such as magnetic beads or others. After library preparation from the clinical specimen, viral genomes are allowed to hybridize to leader sequences on the bead-bound probes. The captured nucleic acids then undergo a limited number of PCR amplification cycles and sequencing. Multiple target enrichment probe sets were quickly developed for SARS-CoV-2 [71,72]. This approach can include multiple probes against the same virus such that a mutation in any one region does not disrupt sequencing or get replaced with primer or probe sequence. In addition, as there are fewer PCR amplification steps, there is less risk of introducing mutations into the genome sequence not found in the host.Several platforms for high throughput whole genome sequencing of viruses using these library preparation approaches are available. These include the short-read sequencing technologies such as Illumina's MiniSeq, MiSeq or NextSeq platforms with maximum read lengths of 300 bp and long-read platforms such as the Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) Sequel II or Oxford Nanopore MinION or GridION systems, which can each produce reads averaging several thousand bases in length. These platforms differ also in read accuracy with read sequences from short read platforms having error rates often below 1% compared with the approximately 5–15% error rate of the PacBio and Nanopore platforms [73]. The higher error rates of sequences produced on long-read platforms can complicate the resolution of HIV quasispecies in clinical specimens, which can result from prolonged chronic infection in the setting of high rates of both mutation and replication of the virus [74]. Hence, short read sequencing is currently more favoured for high throughput targeted or whole genome sequencing of HIV [75,76]. In contrast, the low mutation rate and limited infection duration of SARS-CoV-2 allow for either short or long-read sequencing platforms to be used to elucidate the sole or dominant variant in clinical specimens.Phylogenetic and phylodynamic methodsMost viruses, especially RNA viruses, accumulate variability at very high rates due to their elevated mutation rates, high progeny production, and short replication cycles [77–81]. This variability is affected by transmission patterns, host population structure and selective processes operating on the viral population, such as immune responses or antiviral therapies [74,82–85]. Due to the effect of these factors on the viral genetic variability, we can study the viral sequences and their variability patterns to infer the different processes the viral populations have gone through. Although the high mutation rates of other viruses such as HIV (inter-host substitution rate of ∼5x10−3 substitutions/site/year [70]) or influenza virus (∼4x10−3 substitutions/site/year [86]) allow for robust variability analysis based on targeted sequencing of selected genes or genome regions, the relatively low mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 (estimated substitution rate of ∼8x10−4 substitutions/site/year [69,87]) mandates complete viral genome sequencing to enable variability analyses.Generally, the first step in variation analysis is to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree with a representative set of sequences by applying nucleotide substitution models that best fit the data (i.e. the model that best explains the observed rates at which each nucleotide is substituted by another) [88]. The most commonly used methods for viral phylogenetic tree reconstruction are Maximum Likelihood [89–91] and Bayesian approaches [92,93]. The inclusion of specimens from different time points allows for evolutionary rate calculation by including a temporal parameter in the tree reconstruction and assuming a time-dependent accumulation of mutations (i.e. a molecular clock) [94,95]. The inferred phylogeny will depict the genetic relationships between the viral sequences along the reconstructed branches of the tree (Fig. 2a). Using these phylogenies, analytical methods can be used to surmise epidemiological processes using both traditional phylogenetic and newly developed phylodynamic methods.FIGURE 2Phylodynamic methods for measuring epidemiological parameters. (a) A hypothetical, temporal phylodynamic tree with geographical information (indicated by colors) where the x-axis represents the time of sample isolation. The combination of genetic distance and spatiotemporal metadata allows for the visualization of outbreaks over time and for estimation of viral evolutionary rates, selective pressures, diversification patterns and migration events, among other parameters. (b) These same phylogenies can be used to estimate viral population sizes of the outbreak at different times. (c) The degree of genetic diversification over time, as shown by the number of lineages over time, in relation to population size changes and other inferred evolutionary dynamics, can help estimate epidemiological parameters like spread or transmission.Traditional phylogenetic methods use molecular evolution and population genetics to infer characteristics of the viral populations being analysed, such as the most likely path of viral evolution and the origin of different viral lineages by statistical reconstruction of the most-probable ancestors of the sampled sequences along the phylogenetic tree [96,97]; the selective processes operating in the population by comparison of the rates of synonymous and nonsynonymous mutations [98–100]; and the viral population structure by measurement of the degree of compartmentalization [101,102] or neutrality [103] throughout the tree. Newer phylodynamic methods merge classic epidemiological models, such as the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model, with traditional phylogenetic methods to more directly study viral epidemics [74,83,104,105]. These methods allow the extraction of epidemiological parameters from the genetic information including viral origins, transmission networks, viral population size changes and risk factors (Fig. 2b,c). Moreover, these models allow the inclusion of geographical information in the analyses to study spatiotemporal dynamics of the viral populations using phylogeography [106]. Phylodynamic approaches have already been successfully applied in the study of multiple viral pathogens, including HIV-1 transmission networks [107▪,108–110,111▪▪] and epidemiological studies [105,112–114], influenza pandemics [115–117], Ebolavirus outbreaks [118–121] and hepatitis C virus studies [122,123], among others. More recently, phylodynamic analyses are being widely utilized to understand the new SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and inform public health measures [69,87,124,125].Although traditional epidemiological studies based on surveys, detailed contact tracing, and mathematical modeling are instrumental for studying epidemics, they require careful examination of confounding factors, are limited by missing or misclassified clinical care data, and can be prone to sampling issues [126]. Likewise, molecular-based methods for estimating key epidemiological parameters face a number of limitations due to evolutionary complexities, recombination, sampling bias and incorrect rooting of the phylogenies (i.e. incorrect assumption of the most recent common ancestor) [127]. The lower mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2, in particular, necessitates a careful adaptation of some of the phylogenetic assumptions previously optimized for studying RNA viruses with higher mutation rates. However, when used properly, these methods can provide confident and precise estimates of epidemiological parameters with reasonable predictive power that is difficult to achieve through traditional approaches alone [47,104,126,128].These types of molecular surveillance methods have already been implemented to help understand and track HIV spread in both research and public health settings. Phylogenetics were used in a landmark HIV prevention clinical trial to determine if participants on antiretroviral therapy (ART) were the source of new infections [129,130] and by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to help stop an outbreak of HIV among needle sharing partners [131]. Phylodynamic approaches have also enabled identification of gaps in current HIV prevention, care and treatment programmes that can improve detection, monitoring and control of chronic, local HIV subepidemics [132,133]. In this case, molecular surveillance by sampling a large statewide repository of HIV-1 sequence data identified steady onward propagation over years of certain sequences, uncovering previously unrecognized characteristics of those local subepidemics [132]. Another report assessed sources of transmission among recently infected MSM in the Netherlands, finding that the majority of recent infections could have been prevented with a public health approach informed by phylogenetic analyses [134]. Likewise, these methods have been used to describe the likely origin of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks around the world, identify newly emergent variants of the virus associated with higher viral loads in patient airways and define the potential for re-infection.Molecularly assisted contact tracingAlthough retrospective genetic variation analyses, such as those highlighted above, have been unquestionably valuable, real-time use of molecular surveillance may be more relevant for public health control of both HIV and SARS-CoV-2 spread. Unfortunately, the application of genome sequencing approaches and their analysis is both time and cost intensive, while public health agencies have been, and are now, resource-constrained. They generally do not have the time, analytical expertise or necessary resources to learn and apply the computationally intensive phylogenetic and phylodynamic methods above, which therefore now seem to have greater potential for real-time viral surveillance in the research setting than in public health organizations. Towards this end, another analytic methodology, HIV TRAnsmission Cluster Engine (HIVTRACE), has enabled frontline public health personnel to perform near real-time HIV molecular surveillance [111▪▪]. This method uses pairwise comparisons of genetic distances between sequences, without constructing phylogenetic trees, to identify ‘molecular clusters’ of HIV sequences. HIVTRACE has been deployed (with security measures) in recent years by the CDC to many state and city health departments across the USA [111▪▪]. This has been enabled by laws in a majority of states that mandate diagnostic laboratories to report full nucleotide sequences of a short, subgenomic region of HIV-1 (the pol gene, most commonly). These sequences are determined from plasma virion RNA as part of routine HIV care to guide selection of antiretrovirals to which an individual patient's virus is not resistant due to viral pol gene mutations. The CDC has used HIV pol sequence comparisons on a national level to bring large intra and inter-state molecular clusters to attention of relevant local jurisdictions for investigations aimed at interdicting further spread.At state and city health departments, research is ongoing to determine how HIVTRACE analyses may further augment HIV contact tracing. Large-scale contact tracing for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) began during World War II, and local public health agencies evolved this effort in response to the HIV epidemic into what is now called ‘partner elicitation services’. This involves a public health worker interviewing a person newly diagnosed with HIV and/or recently entering HIV care to identify all their sexual and drug-use partners (within a certain time frame). The health department then reaches out to these reported contacts privately and confidentially to determine what, if any, services would benefit them and help curtail further HIV transmission. This includes HIV testing for those who are not diagnosed with HIV. Linkage to care is arranged with the goal of enabling ART-mediated viral suppression to prevent further spread for those newly testing positive. Named partners who test negative for HIV are considered for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) if they meet indications based on ongoing behavioral risk for HIV acquisition. Viremia suppression and possibly engagement (or re-engagement) to care are services provided to named partners who are already known to have HIV.In many communities with high HIV incidences, timely access to partner services can be challenging. Ongoing research leveraging HIVTRACE is seeking to determine best practices for molecular surveillance with the goal of increasing the efficiency of partner services while maximally interdicting further HIV spread. The concept is that molecular clusters may include some individuals with related sequences who were not named as partners by the index case. In addition, the ‘riskiest’ molecular clusters might be prioritized, so that partner services workers can prioritize identifying the larger ‘transmission clusters’ that may be more problematic for public health. HIV-infected persons who lack sequences in the database because they were either not diagnosed or did not have HIV pol genotyping results reported to the health department would be added to relevant clusters by contact tracing. This, in turn, could facilitate further public health outreach to the larger ‘risk network’ that includes both HIV-infected persons (with and without HIV sequences) as well as uninfected persons who are at-risk via reported contact with those infected person(s) (Fig. 3).FIGURE 3Interpretation of molecular clusters in an epidemiological outbreak. Molecular clusters identified by viral sequencing and phylogenetics represent a subset of individuals within a transmission cluster who are linked by direct or indirect transmission events. These individuals are a further subset of people in an overall risk network who may or may not have already been exposed to a disease. Determining how representative a molecular cluster is of a risk network depends on a combination of molecular surveillance, contact tracing, and community engagement.Research applying a phylodynamic-like approach used HIVTRACE in combination with annual numbers of new diagnoses to determine that the molecular clusters with the most rapid and recent growth in the prior few years are at greatest risk for future cluster growth [110,135,136]. To define a growing cluster, the CDC now uses a tight genetic distance threshold (0.5%), a short time window for querying surveillance sequence databases (3 years), and any number above a small number of new infections (five new diagnoses) joining the molecular cluster within the most recent 12-month period [110]. However, more research is needed to define the optimal metric to monitor growing clusters and guide efforts to control further spread [137]. This includes developing more effective means to identify larger HIV transmission and risk networks from initial molecular clusters, for example, through iterative name elicitation or by using social network strategies [138–140].How well these emerging lessons in HIV molecular surveillance might apply to SARS-CoV-2 is not yet clear. Differences in droplet/aerosol/contact route of transmission versus sexual transmission, as well as the shorter duration of infectivity of SARS-CoV-2, may make elicitation of names of potential contacts more difficult for those diagnosed with, or exposed to, SARS-CoV-2 than HIV. This could increase the potential benefits of adding molecular surveillance to public health epidemiological investigations. That being said, decreased SARS-CoV-2 genetic diversity, relative to HIV, may or may not be countered by using full genome sequences for clustering, complicating the interpretation of molecular clusters. Furthermore, the scale and pace of SARS-CoV-2 spread outstrips that of HIV, raising the possibility that sequence cluster assessments may be much more challenging to apply to COVID-19 control.One critical lesson from these efforts for HIV is that molecular surveillance may complement, but not replace, current contact tracing that relies on elicitation of names of close contacts. It is important to note that there is far from complete concordance between partners named by an index case in a partner services interview and those persons with HIV sequences that molecularly cluster with that same index case. One report found that 48% of named partners had genetically closely related viruses, and that persons with genetically similar HIV sequences comprised 53% of named partners [141]. Persons diagnosed with HIV (female and male) who reported high-risk heterosexual contact were more likely to name at least one partner with a genetically similar virus than those reporting their HIV risk was via more stigmatized/unlawful behaviors, such as injection drug use or sex between men [141]. It is speculated that the latter HIV risk behaviours involve anonymity of partners, more partners or unwillingness to disclose names for multiple reasons; stigma and marginalization associated with those behavioral risks for HIV acquisition remain pervasive. Although only a subset of those undergoing contact tracing for SARS-CoV-2 exposure may face such repercussions for reporting (i.e. potentially based on immigration status, race, or adverse consequences enforced by educational or professional institutions), this highlights the importance of community engagement for successful control of viral spread by contact tracing. Indeed, the extensive literature on many persisting ethical issues raised by HIV molecular surveillance that still require work should inform the cautions and safeguards appropriate for research on potentially advancing molecular surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 [133,142–148].Electronic medical record dataAlthough the approaches above focus on the who, what, where and when of epidemiological investigation, understanding how infectious diseases are spread and why certain people may be more at risk usually depend on the cultivation and maintenance of clinical care data that track patient demographics, spatiotemporal variables, symptoms, behaviours, medical history, exposure, timing, etc. In conjunction with molecular information, including diagnostics, viral load, viral sequence and even patient genotypic information, these datasets can yield an epidemiological goldmine of information that shed light on transmission dynamics, pathogenesis, risk factors, and treatment outcomes. Traditionally, these data had to be manually curated from medical records and case files, which was not only time consuming, but exceptionally laborious. Today, much of this information can be extracted from electronic medical record (EMR) systems, though several challenges with these types of data persist.The AIDS pandemic began in an era without EMR systems and was first described by the CDC through standard epidemiological practices, including contact tracing, case finding and well executed case--control studies. This was done well before any laboratory had identified or sequenced HIV and this sentinel work defined routes of transmission and high-risk populations that continue to hold true today [149]. As EMR systems became popular and an essential part of medical care throughout the early to mid-2000s, HIV researchers have harnessed the power of EMRs to study real-world shifts in disease as individuals with HIV are aging and care has moved from in-hospital treatment of opportunistic infections to outpatient chronic management [150–153]. Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, EMR systems helped investigators quickly describe the clinical syndrome of hospitalized patients, define risk for poor outcomes and assess therapeutic interventions [154,155,156▪▪,157–159]. As we study the epidemiology of long-term complications of COVID-19 and of milder disease managed in the outpatient setting, we can expect to face several of the challenges we are currently facing in the use of EMR data to inform HIV research.These global pandemics have highlighted the need for rapid, reliable and comprehensive clinical information to help inform the evolving epidemiology of old and new health problems. EMR systems can fill this role, but we must remember that they were originally developed not to serve as an epidemiological research database, but rather for documentation of clinical care, managing day to day care of patients and for billing payers of medical services. Generally, public health and epidemiological based research have been an afterthought with EMR generated data analysed in a retrospective fashion. As such, EMR datasets are often complicated by missing information, inconsistencies, subjectivity and mixtures of longitudinal and static information. Thus, although EMR-based researchers often have the power of ‘Big Data’, they are ultimately at the mercy of clinical care providers for the type and timing of data generated. EMR research requires advanced statistical methods and careful consideration of clinical data management and standardization across data systems. At times, this requires clinician case review of individual EMRs to verify information, understand the completeness of electronic data capture and minimize misclassification of critical disease outcomes [160–162].The Centers for AIDS Research Network of Integrated Clinical Systems (CNICS; https://sites.uab.edu/cnics/) has been notably successful in harnessing the power of multi-site EMR data for HIV research and should serve as a model for how we move COVID-19 EMR-based research into the next phase of epidemiological and translational research [163–165]. This group consists of eight HIV clinical care sites throughout the USA with diverse demographics and geography. Each site is responsible for curating clinical data on HIV patients in care from the EMR and periodically submitting to the data management centre (DMC) at the University of Washington where quality checks, reconciliation and data standardization is a critical component of creating useful and rich research datasets [163,166▪]. Each site locally collects and stores biological samples (plasma and cells) annually on a subset of participants and CNICS has a centralized process to quickly identify research samples paired with clinical data. One of the unique strengths of CNICS is their approach of performing patient-reported outcome (PRO) assessments within the context of routine clinical care for in-depth longitudinal evaluations of substance/alcohol abuse, tobacco consumption, mental health, sexual behaviour and neurocognitive performance [167]. Finally, CNICS has an organized and efficient process to quickly perform research feasibility assessments, review research concept proposals, obtain letters for grant applications, give expert feedback and mentorship to investigators, and provide large research datasets. In addition to collaborative research across the network, CNICS sites have utilized their data to understand local HIV epidemics and identify potential participants for other observational or interventional HIV clinical studies.Future COVID-19 research on the evolution of viral genetics, long-term outcomes, reinfection, immune dysfunction, immunity and risk for end organ disease will require a similar approach with a central process for standardization and verification of EMR data, robust biological sample collection, and thoughtful participant centered evaluations. A much larger national network of clinical care sites each contributing COVID-19 (and comparator) clinical data from EMRs for research analyses has rapidly been developed (https://ncats.nih.gov/n3c), providing the potential for even more powerful data analyses for COVID-19 given these lessons can be learned and applied.As shown throughout this review, our understanding of disease diagnosis, pathogenesis and relevant outcomes will change with advancements in research and technology. At the same time, EMR systems must be flexible and evolve to play a bigger better role in providing high-quality information for public health surveillance and epidemiology research. In this way, we hope that lessons learned from years of HIV/AIDS EMR-based research can lead the path forward for COVID-19.CONCLUSIONIn the past few decades, major advances in molecular biology have revolutionized the ways in which we study and understand human health and disease. New technologies in serology, PCR, gene sequencing and computational modelling have revealed new methods to understand and identify the causative and correlative factors that drive disease. Molecular epidemiology approaches are providing new means for diagnosis, for tracking transmission and for understanding pathogenesis. These techniques, often developed in response to and optimized in conjunction with the ongoing HIV epidemic, are now being applied to the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in force. Although the advantages of these approaches are real, they also face several limitations and challenges, particularly in regards to implementation, that must be overcome by further research to reach their full potential. In any case, these approaches have been found to complement and enhance, but not supplant, traditional means of epidemiological study. Moving forward, we should take this opportunity to advance and employ new, blended methods of traditional and molecular epidemiology to improve both our understanding and management of current and future epidemics.AcknowledgementsNone.Financial support and sponsorshipThis work was supported by the Gilead Sciences Research Scholars Program in HIV (JFH), NIH grant K22 AI136691 (JFH), NIH grant R01 AI150998 (JFH), the NIH-supported Third Coast CFAR P30 AI117943 (RLR, JFH, CJA, RTD), a supplement from the NIH-sponsored HARC Center P50 GM082250 (JFH), NIH grant R01 AI 136056 (RTD), the NIH National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences grant UL1 TR001422 (RTD), a CTSA supplement to NCATS UL1 TR002389 (JFH), the generous support of the Dixon Family Foundation (JFH, EAO), a supplement to the Northwestern University Cancer Center P30 CA060553 (JFH), as well as through a generous contribution from the Walder Foundation (JFH, EAO). The funding sources had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, interpretation or writing of the report.Conflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGPapers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:▪ of special interest▪▪ of outstanding interest


Title: Transmission of SARS-CoV-2, Required Developments in Research and Associated Public Health Concerns

IntroductionSARS-CoV-2 has infected over five million people worldwide after its emergence in Wuhan, China (1). The world has witnessed that this virus can spread rapidly to cause the death-causing COVID-19 disease. Although the rate of recovery is higher in people with strong immune responses, however, the immune-compromised individuals are at higher risks to be readily killed by the infection (2). The major reasons for higher morbidity and mortality rates are rapid human-human transmission, unavailability of promising diagnostic and therapeutic options, scarcity of clinical supplies, shortage of medical and clinical staff, and lack of effective preventive measures (3). Besides the physical illness, the COVID-19 epidemic has also increased the risk of psychological problems among healthcare workers, infected individuals, and the general public (3, 4), due to the fear of treatment failure, higher morbidity and mortality, lack of psychological interventions, and infodemia (3, 5, 6).During the early days of the epidemic in China, a number of countries suspended travel to and from China, evacuated their nationals from the epicenter, and placed them in quarantine to curb the risks of pandemic (6). These responses were not sufficient to prevent the spread of COVID-19, therefore, it became a global pandemic (7). Considering the seriousness of this situation scientists and medical researchers came forward and extended their services to the development of therapeutic strategies, preventive measures, and strategies to control the unfolding pandemic. Until now, researchers have unveiled some of the important biological and clinical features for COVID-19 infection, including the characterization of the whole genome (8) and spike glycoproteins (9), investigation of clinical features and evaluation of different broad-spectrum antiviral drugs in combination with either antibacterial, antimalarial and/or traditional Chinese medicines (10). Nevertheless, more research work is required to further investigate the sources of transmission, the biology of viral incubation and reemergence, and the potential of vertical transmission from mothers to neonates. In this article, we discuss the features of coronaviruses, the mechanism of infectiousness of SARS-CoV-2, and its medical consequences. We also describe the populations at higher risk and challenges in research progress. This narrative review article will benefit the public and scientific community regarding the current progress and the need for further work.MethodologyTo identify and select the papers in this review we searched the published research and review articles relevant to origin and outbreaks of three human coronaviruses, and features, transmission, spread, entry mechanisms, infectiousness, control strategies, and animals hosts for SARS-CoV-2. We also search the papers published on SARS and MERS coronaviruses in the aspects of animal models and sources of transmission. We reviewed the World Health Organization, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Nature reports, Medline, PubMed Central, Embase, google scholar, and ScienceDirect, according to the relevancy as explained earlier, until April 20, 2020. The search terms “novel coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19, SARS and MERS” were broadly used. Studies conducted in laboratory and clinical based observations, and/or conducted through bioinformatics techniques were included.Clinical Features of COVID-19Pneumonia is one of the most frequent manifestations of COVID-19 infection, which is characterized by fever, bilateral infiltrates on chest imaging, cough, and dyspnea (11). The period from infection to symptoms appearance ranges from 2 to 14 days, while the average period reported so far is ~5 days (12). One of the previous studies reported the onset of fever and respiratory symptoms ~3–6 days in a family cluster of infections (13). Similarly, in an analysis of 10 patients with confirmed COVID-19 pneumonia, the estimated mean incubation period was 5 days (11). Furthermore, the majority of the individuals showed moderate symptoms whereas 20% of the infected patients showed severe illness of respiratory failure and septic shock and gastrointestinal complications (11, 13). Common laboratory abnormalities associated with COVID-19 are lymphopenia and elevated aminotransferase levels (10). C-reactive protein (CRP) levels have been reported to alter with the development of symptoms, such that patients with severe pneumonia present high CRP levels (10, 14). In a recent study, Wang (14) reported that CRP levels at the early stage of COVID-19 are positively correlated with lung lesions and symptoms development, which can be used as one of the key indicators for disease development and severity. Wang et al. (10) investigated 138 patients [median age; 56 years, interquartile range; 42–68 years] with COVID-19 pneumonia in Wuhan and reported that 136 patients developed fever, 82 patients had a dry cough and 96 patients had fatigue. Besides lymphopenia, parenchymal lung abnormalities were also common among all patients as depicted from computed tomography of the chest, including bilateral patchy shadows or ground-glass opacities. Nonetheless, some people have been reported to be initially asymptomatic and may remain asymptomatic or go on to develop disease on later stages (WHO; March 23, 2020). Although it is important to know about the symptoms' appearance and severity, however, understanding the transmission of the infection to healthy individuals from COVID-19 patients and zoonotic sources can be of great importance in the aspects of developing strategies to prevent and control the spread of COVID-19.Emergence and Transmission of CoronavirusesDuring November 2002, a novel coronavirus caused SARS epidemic in Guangdong, China (15), followed by subsequent outbreaks in Hong Kong (15, 16). This outbreak was reported to be caused by SARS-CoV, originated from market civets before its transmission and infection in humans (17). By the end of the epidemic, SARS-CoV infected 8,098 people and caused 774 fatalities in 29 different countries (16). Later on, during June 2012 a patient infected with MERS-CoV developed severe pneumonia and died in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia (16, 18), following by series of clustered outbreak in the Middle East and several other countries (16, 19). Before transmitting into humans, MERS-CoV originated and replicated in dromedary camels (17). Until 2020, MERS-CoV infected 2,468 individuals and caused 851 fatalities worldwide (20, 21).In December 2019, clusters of patients reported with COVID-19 caused by SARS-CoV-2 were epidemiologically found linked to animals and the seafood selling market in Wuhan, China (22). The zoonotic source of its origin and transmission is still debatable, however, some reports suggested bats (23) as the possible sources of transmission (9). The human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is thought to occur mainly via respiratory droplets produced by coughing or sneezing from an infected individual (24). The rapid increase in suspected as well-confirmed cases has also been inferred with viral transmission through the fecal-oral route and aerosol formation. The half-life on the surfaces of stainless steel, copper, and cardboard is ~5.8 h, while that on the plastic surface is 6.8 h (25). Moreover, several reports have confirmed the asymptomatic transmission while there is a chance for the animal to humans transmission (26). Overall, these observations indicate that appropriate care is necessary while handling both confirmed and suspected individuals. Moreover, the surfaces of potentially virus-contaminated places, objects, and containers should be cleaned with effective disinfectants.Infectiousness and Cellular Entry of SARS-CoV-2The SARS-CoV-2 contains a single-stranded RNA with 29,891 nucleotides, encoding for 9,860 amino acids (27). The spike glycoproteins of SARS-CoV-2 contain two subunits (S1 and S2) (8). The S2 subunit contains transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains along with fusion peptide. Novel coronavirus has over 80% identity with SARS-CoV. However, spike receptor-binding domains (RBD) are only 40% identical (28), while structural elements open reading frame (ORF)3b and ORF8 were found with no homology (29). Coronaviruses contain six ORFs regions which serve as templates for the production of sub-genomic mRNAs and encode protein, spike, nucleocapsid, and membrane proteins. ORFs are responsible for the production of pp1a and pp1ab polypeptides (30). Both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infect bronchial epithelial cells and type II pneumocytes through ACE2 and CD26 receptors, respectively (17, 31, 32). The mechanism associated with the infectiousness of SARS-CoV-2 is yet to investigate, however, it likely infects the bronchial cells through ACE2.In general, a virus entry to the host cell comprises a series of fundamental interactions; (i) binding to a target host cell via cellular receptors; (ii) fusing the envelope with a cellular membrane; and (iii) forking over its genetic material inside the cell (Figure 1). The process of viral genomic delivery of nucleic acids into the host cell is highly dependent upon binding specificity to receptors, proteolytic activation, and endocytosis efficiency (33, 34). Coronaviruses demonstrate a great degree of plasticity regarding the entry pathways, which can occur at the plasma membrane or through the endocytic pathway (35) (Figure 2). The entry to the host cell process of SARS-CoV-2 is regulated by Glycosylated spike (S) fusion protein and host receptor known as ACE2. The S proteins is capable of significant structural rearrangement thus, play a crucial role in fusing the viral membrane with the host cell membrane (36). This fusion process sparks off with binding of the S1 subunit to ACE2 and is linked with the accessibility of receptor determined by hinge-like conformational movements of the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of S1. Thus, RBD can transiently hide or expose the determinants of receptor binding through receptor-inaccessible state or receptor-accessible state, respectively (37). Once the virus has entered to the host cell, the replication-transcription complex (RTC) is organized in double-membrane vesicles to initiate transcription of polyprotein 1a/1ab (pp1a/pp1ab). These pp1a/pp1ab proteins encode chymotrypsin-like protease (3CLpro), main protease (Mpro), and papain-like proteases for the production of non-structural proteins (nsps) (28). Trans-membrane helical segments in the ORF1ab region encodes for nsp2 and nsp3 (38). The structural proteins and nsps play a role in the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2 by blocking the innate immune response and assembly and release of newly synthesized virions (39).Figure 1The most common entry to host cells mechanisms of human viruses. (A) SARS-CoV entry. Key points are, virion attachment to receptor; virion internalization by endocytosis; lowering the pH (5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein; insertion into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of vacuolar membranes and the viral; viral nucleocapsid release into the cytosol. (B) Poliovirus entry. virion binding to cell surface receptors, endocytosed and ultimately delivered to endosomes (low pH); conformational changes in viral capsid due to low pH environment result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, producing a pore for viral genome exit and entry into cytoplasm. (C) HIV entry. Virion attaches to various attachment factor on cell surface, such as DC-SIGN. The attachment of viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4 alters the structure of envelope glycoprotein, which then induces the second receptor binding domain exposure resulting in the engagement of CCR5 or CXCR4 coreceptors, that in turn causes the viral fusion with the cell membrane.Figure 2The SARS-CoV-2 transmission from bats via unknown intermediate to humans causes infectiousness known as COVID-19 disease. The binding of S protein to ACE2 receptor initiates the life cycle which is then followed by conformational changes in the S protein, which further facilitates the fusion of viral envelope and host cell membrane. Following the fusion through endosomal pathway, SARS-CoV-2 then releases RNA into the host cell, which is translated into pp1a and pp1ab. Next, viral proteinases cleave the translated proteins into small products, meanwhile a series of sub-genomic mRNAs are produced by polymerase enzyme through discontinuous transcription, which are then translated into specific viral proteins. These viral proteins and genome RNA are assembled to form virions in Golgi and endoplasmic reticulum, which are later transported out of the cell via vesicles. This figure was designed by updating and modifying the information from our previously published paper (29).During the first days of the Wuhan epidemic, two strains of novel coronavirus were reported namely S strain and L strain. Observations suggested that L strain was more aggressive and more fatal as compared to S strain. A group of researchers from Pasteur Institute Shanghai and Peking university reported that the rate of infection for L strain was as high as 70%, while that of S was ~30% as indicated by the analyzed samples. On the other hand, S type strain was found to be the ancestral version and was closely related to viruses like TG13. Further analysis based on population genetics indicated that these strains mainly differed at orf1ab and ORF8 regions. Interestingly, the development of new variations of the spike protein in SARS-CoV-2 variants is linked to mutations, and natural selection (40). Therefore, further studies should evaluate the combinational impacts of genomic data, epidemiological data, and chart records of the clinical symptoms of patients with COVID-19.Current Research Gaps Associated With COVID-19 TransmissionAfter the identification of SARS-CoV-2, debates started among scientists on its sources of origination and zoonotic source of transmission to humans (29). The identity of the animal source of SARS-CoV-2, is still one of the key missing gaps that scientists are being racing to investigate. It is a known fact that coronaviruses circulate in mammals and birds (17), and researchers have already suggested bats to be the source of origination for SARS-CoV-2 (23). However, an intermediate animal was probably the source of transmission of the virus to humans. Early claims came from researchers related to intermediate sources of transmission faced controversies (9). A recent report discredited an earlier statement that pangolin could be the possible intermediate source that might have received the virus from the bat and transferred it to humans (40). According to more recent study on molecular and phylogenetic analyses, it is unlikely that SARS-CoV-2 emerged directly from the pangolin coronaviruses (41), suggesting that pangolins may not be responsible for the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 to humans.With further spread of the virus after its outbreak in Wuhan, more people became infected, thus, human to human transmission became more evident. One of the reasons for the high rate of infectiousness in humans is thought to be the higher affinity of RBD for binding to ACE2 receptors (29, 42). In addition, the determination of host range and binding to the ACE2 are highly dependent on six RBD amino acids “L455, F486, Q493, S494, N501, and Y505 in SARS-CoV-2” in SARS-CoV-2, thus, RBD can also bind to ACE2 from ferrets and cats (42). On the other hand, the high-affinity of RBD to human ACE2 is thought to be linked with natural selection on a human ACE2, indicating that SARS-CoV-2 was not produced with purposeful manipulation (42). These observations support the hypothesis that SARS-CoV-2 was transmitted from a yet unknown intermediate zoonotic source to humans.Spike glycoproteins have been well-documented in the aspects of transmission and entry of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells (13, 28). It is notable that the polybasic cleavage site of SARS-CoV-2 at the junction of S1 and S2 allows cleavage by proteases such as furin, which plays a crucial role in infectiousness and determining host range. Despite the unknown functional consequence, the higher genetic variation in spike indicates that SARS-CoV-2 with polybasic cleavage sites may be discovered in several other species (42, 43), which can be the possible source of transmission for SARS-CoV-2 to humans. Interestingly, the mutation found in the polybasic cleavage site was not related to that of the bat and pangolin viruses (42), therefore, it may be linked with the virus's ability for transmission and infection in humans. The determination of polybasic cleavage and predicted O-linked glycans further suggest that the virus was most likely transferred from an animal with ACE2 to humans, as these are not possible in cell cultures (42). Further research to determine the impact of polybasic cleavage and predicted O-linked glycans on transmissibility and pathogenesis is necessary.Although investigating the mechanisms underlying entry to host cell, transmission, polybasic cleavage, and predicted O-linked glycans are required to determine the research gaps associated with transmission and origination, however, this work requires suitable animal models. Unfortunately, there is no promising model while the non-human primates tested for SARS and MERS were unable to develop severe diseases in response to the infectiousness (44). Nevertheless, the models developed for the expression of human ACE2 and DPP4 (16) can be further modified and used to study the transmission and infectiousness of SARS-CoV02. Moreover, CRISPR-interceded genetically modified small animals can be also utilized for the study of the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2. Nevertheless, it is important to investigate the ultimate source of viral transfer to humans, as even if the virus is eradicated with social distancing, other sources including zoonotic and environmental sources can again cause the transfer into humans, and thus another outbreak will be the result.Major Health Concerns Associated With COVID-19The ability of rapid human to human transmission of COVID-19 infection especially through asymptomatic infected individuals and aerosol, has paralyzed life across the globe (29, 43). Although the COVID-19 infection primarily affects physical health, however, it can also affect mental health through the fear of transmission from unknown sources and high mortality rate that can further paralyze life (5). It is deemed necessary that timely effective services should be provided to the vulnerable populations as reported by Khan et al. (5). The adverse impacts of COVID-19 are specific to the populations, therefore, we discuss the most vulnerable populations, the current evidence on known vulnerable groups and the associated health risks in response to the COVID-19 infection.Rapidly increasing mortalities and morbidities in healthcare workers are causing serious medical concerns and adversely affecting healthcare services worldwide (3). The fear of being infected due to close contacts with infected symptomatic and asymptomatic patients, and prolonged working schedules may decrease the working efficiency in current doctors and nurses (3, 7). A large number of medical and clinical staff are likely to be infected with COVID-19 infection. Only in Wuhan, more than 15 hundred persons from healthcare settings were reported infected (3). In addition to the high risk of contracting infection due to direct interaction with infected and suspected individuals (3), healthcare workers have also been reported to develop severe mental conditions including stress, anxiety, and related mental illnesses (3, 4). To mitigate the risk of contracting infection the medical staff should adhere to standard precautions while providing patient care (45, 46).According to the CDC report on coronavirus disease, individuals with underlying chronic medical conditions are at higher risk for contracting COVID-19 infection. Huang et al. reported that 32% of SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals had diabetes, hypertension, and cardiovascular disease (11). The fatality rate was also high in individuals who had diabetes mellitus, chronic lung disease (47), cerebrovascular diseases (48), and hypertension (47). Furthermore, COVID-19 infection in patients with lung cancer can develop severe COVID-19 disease that can lead to death (49). Luo et al. (49) reported that more than half of the COVID-19 infected individuals who had lung cancer, needed hospitalization, whereas nearly a quarter of them died. However, people living with human immunodeficiency virus do not present excess morbidity and mortality among symptomatic COVID-19 patients (50). The higher risk of disease and death in individuals with underlying diseases might be linked with weaker or comprised immune responses.The elder individuals are comparatively more affected by COVID-19 infection; however, individuals of any age can acquire the infection (51). According to the previous reports, 87% of infected individuals were between 30 and 79 years old. Moreover, the mortality rate was higher in older people. The case fatality rate of 8% was observed among individuals having age between 70 and 79 years, while 15% fatality rate was reported in people with 80 years or older (47).COVID-19 infection in pregnant women is of serious concern, as it might have detrimental effects not only on mother's health but also on neonatal health can be at risk (52). In a recent study, COVID-19 infection was found to cause adverse neonatal outcomes. Two of the neonates were tested positive, and for COVID-19 while, five were found with neonatal pneumonia, suggesting the possibility of a link between adverse pregnancy outcomes and COVID-19 infection (52). Dong et al. (53) reported a newborn with elevated IgM antibodies to SARS-CoV-2, who was born to a mother with COVID-19, suggesting the possibility of vertical transmission. Therefore, further investigations should focus on adverse pregnancy outcomes and the possibility of vertical transmission. The approach to prevention, evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment of pregnant women with suspected COVID-19 should be similar to that in non-pregnant individuals, with the consideration that pregnant women with other potentially severe respiratory infections, such as influenzaappear to be more vulnerable to developing severe sequelae. Moreover, pregnant women should be given attention and provided with the utmost facilities in terms of treatment and diagnosis.Controlling The Spread of COVID-19Controlling the spread and transmission of infection is one of the major issues that authorities are currently considering with serious attention. World Health Organization (WHO) and U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend face and eye protection for droplet and contact precautions. During aerosol-generating procedures, such as non-invasive ventilation, tracheotomy, cardiopulmonary resuscitation, tracheal intubation, bronchoscopy, and manual ventilation before intubation, additional precautions are warranted such as airborne infection isolation room and wearing the appropriate personal protective equipment (ref 1 and ref 2).To control the transmission requires the identification and isolation of the infected individuals. Samples from the nasopharyngeal swab, oropharyngeal swab, sputum, tracheal aspirate, or bronchoalveolar lavage should be tested for the detection of the virus (54). The symptoms of COVID-19 pneumonia are primarily similar to influenza and seasonal allergies (10, 55, 56), therefore using thermo-scanners and physical observations are not are not able to adequately differentiate between those conditions. Although quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) is the major confirmatory test however, to provide further testing support developing additional testing kits that could rapidly detect SARS-CoV-2 with maximum accuracy in suspected, confirmed, and asymptomatic patients may be useful.To control the ongoing pandemic and risk of future epidemics, the development of safe and effective vaccines is necessary, that should be available for individuals at high risk of contracting COVID-19 infection. Until now, effective vaccine against COVID-19 is not available, however, some vaccines with preventive potential against COVID-19 infection are in pipeline. Such as the mRNA-based vaccine developed by National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases in USA, is being trialed (57). While the INO-4800-DNA based vaccine is currently being developed (57). Moreover, Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CCDC) in China has started working on inactivated virus vaccine that may be used widely if found promising (57, 58). Stermirna Therapeutics has reported the development of mRNA-based vaccines that can soon be available for trials (57, 58). Nevertheless, more work is required; SARS-CoV specific live-attenuated (16) and rhesus θ-defensin 1 and protein cage nanoparticles based vaccines can be evaluated for COVID-19 infection (59, 60). Moreover, monoclonal antibodies should be considered that are effective in inhibiting virus-cell receptor binding and virus-cell fusion (16).Conclusions and PerspectivesSARS-CoV-2 is likely originated in bats and introduced to the world through a yet unknown intermediate. Without finding the missing intermediate, SARS-CoV-2 may reemerge even if the current spread is controlled completely through social distancing and isolation. An earlier report that indicated pangolins as the possible source of transmission of SARS-COV-2 has been discredited, therefore, further work is required to identify the unknown intermediate animal source that caused the transmission of the virus to humans. Based on their role in transmission and infectiousness, spike glycoproteins, RBD binding to ACE2 and mutations in polybasic cleavage sites related to different animals should be studied further.Given the importance of the current outbreak in Wuhan, further studies are necessary to provide deep understating of replication, pathogenesis, and biological properties using the relevant biological techniques such as reverse genetics and molecular techniques. To unveil pathogenesis and entry mechanisms further investigations should focus on structural elements ORF3b and ORF8 in novel coronavirus. These regions may play an important role in high human to human spread and may be linked to the severity of the disease. These investigations will help the control and prevention of COVID-19 mediated pneumonia and novel emerging diseases in the future. The COVID-19 outbreak has affected millions of people around the globe by causing mortalities and morbidities. Thus, curbing COVID-19 and preventing it from spreading further requires the development of effective strategies t related to detection of the virus, curing the disease, vaccination and prevention, and identification of the transmission sources. The research work should focus on preventing the spread and transmission of the virus, however, without taking effective measures the virus will come back again.Author ContributionsSK is the leading author while JL and MX contributed to revisions. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Gastrointestinal Manifestations of SARS-CoV-2: Transmission, Pathogenesis, Immunomodulation, Microflora Dysbiosis, and Clinical Implications

1. IntroductionSARS-CoV-2 is a virus that falls under the Nidovirales order, which is known for its positive single-stranded RNA genome [1]. SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 are well-known respiratory illnesses-causing agents. However, they can also infect other organs, including the nasal mucosa, lungs, small intestine, colon, liver, spleen, and brain [2].While respiratory symptoms like cough, dyspnea, and fever are prevalent among individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2, also referred to as COVID-19, a clinically significant subset of patients with COVID-19 have also reported gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. Diarrhea is the most common GI symptom observed in children and adults infected with SARS-CoV-2; this occurs because of viral spread from the infected to uninfected cells of the GI tract [3]. During SARS-CoV-2 infection, initially, a high viral load and reduced inflammatory activity are observed, in addition to certain symptoms associated with GI illness [4]. Although many studies have reported diarrhea as a symptom of COVID-19, a strict definition is missing [3,4,5]. The direct impact of SARS-CoV-2 on the gastrointestinal tract may contribute to diarrhea during infection, while its effects on the gastrointestinal tract can lead to bleeding and inflammation, further complicating the COVID-19 disease process in other organs [6,7].Coronaviruses (CoVs) are RNA viruses belonging to the order Nidovirales in the subfamily Coronaviridae; they comprise enveloped and positive-stranded viruses [1]. Among the four types (α, β, γ, and δ) of coronaviruses, α- and β-CoVs have been identified as causative agents of both respiratory tract infections and gastroenteritis in both humans and animals [8]. Seven different human CoVs (HCoVs) have been identified: HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, HCoV-229E, and HCoV-HKU1 are endemic viruses and SARS-CoV-1and Middle-East respiratory syndrome virus (MERS-CoV) is epidemic, and SARS-CoV-2 a pandemic virus. HCoVs are well recognized as the causative agent of respiratory illness. Besides the nasal mucosa, these viruses are capable of infecting multiple organs, including the colon, spleen, liver, lungs, and brain [2]. HCoVs may be present along the GI tract, particularly in the intestinal epithelial cells (at least in one intestinal segment), as evidenced by biopsies performed using endoscopy and infected patients presenting positive virus in their feces even after viral clearance from the respiratory tract [2,9,10].The entry of SARS-CoV-2 infection involves binding to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor on the surface of host cells [5,9]. Other than the lung, ACE2 is highly expressed in GI organs such as the esophagus, ileum, and colon, mainly in esophageal epithelial cells and absorptive enterocytes [11,12,13,14]. ACE2 expression is significantly more abundant in the GI system, particularly in the colon, by a factor of 100 in comparison to the respiratory system [14]. Specific organs exhibit increased susceptibility to infection due to their high abundance of ACE2 receptors. Notably, the epithelial cells lining the terminal ileum and colon display a particularly high expression of ACE2 receptors. This observation holds significance as mucosal inflammation, a characteristic feature of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), is commonly observed in these specific intestinal regions among patients diagnosed with Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) [15,16]. Given the high number of ACE2-expressing organs in the GI system, it is not unexpected that this system is vulnerable to viral infiltration.Emerging research indicates that COVID-19 can affect the gut–lung axis and lead to dysbiosis, a microbial imbalance in the gut. Moreover, higher mortality rates have been observed among elderly patients [17]. Changes in gut permeability and decreased epithelial integrity can also impact the severity of liver disease and metabolic diseases, inducing systemic inflammation. Pulmonary diseases have also been linked to disrupted gut microbiota and intestinal barrier [18,19]. In fact, COVID-19 patients with digestive symptoms are more likely to experience liver injury, underscoring the importance of maintaining a healthy gut microbiota. Therefore, understanding the interplay between SARS-CoV-2 and the gut microbiota is crucial for improving our understanding of the pathophysiology of COVID-19.Increasing evidence suggests that SARS-CoV-2 infections affect multiple GI areas, possibly resulting in several symptoms associated with a dysfunctional GI system. In order to advance our comprehension of the correlation between SARS-CoV-2 and the GI tract, it is imperative to acquire a comprehensive understanding of the digestive manifestations and pathophysiology associated with these viruses. Therefore, this review summarizes the manifestations and potential mechanisms of GI injuries in patients with COVID-19.2. Routes of Transmission of SARS-CoV-2The transmission of all HCoVs most commonly occurs via respiratory droplets produced by infected individuals, direct contact with infected people and animals, and exposure to infected particles or surfaces [20,21,22,23,24]. However, epidemiological and virological studies and bioinformatics modeling suggest that HCoVs can be transmitted to humans via the GI tract and that viral RNA can be detected in the feces of many people with confirmed HCoV infection. Notably, HCoV-HKU1, HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, and HCoV-OC43 can be detected in the fecal samples of children with acute gastroenteritis [25,26]. Likewise, the infection has been documented in cases where actively replicating virus, and viral particles were detected in fecal samples of patients afflicted with MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-1 [27,28]. These viruses are detected in the fecal samples within 14–21 days of disease onset, confirming the fecal-to-oral route transmission [23,29,30]. Although it has been demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 RNA can be detected in feces, it is still unclear whether or not the virus can be transmitted through feces. Aerosols containing viral RNA have been found in surrounding toilet bowls, further confirming fecal-to-oral transmission of SARS-CoV-2 [31,32]. Even after the virus is cleared from respiratory samples, SARS-CoV-2 can still be found in feces [9]. Approximately 70% of the infected patients shed their viral RNA through the GI tract [33]. Significantly, the identification of subgenomic mRNAs (sg mRNAs) of SARS-CoV-2 in fecal samples from a patient provides evidence of actively infected cells within the GI system. Since sg mRNAs are not encapsulated within virions, they have the potential to withstand RNAse digestion and traverse the GI tract. Consequently, current research has demonstrated the recovery of viable SARS-CoV-2 from fecal specimens obtained from individuals experiencing severe cases of COVID-19 [31,34]; other studies have reported being unable to isolate infectious virions from fecal samples. Therefore, whether the presence of SARS-CoV-2 infectious virions in feces is a rare or frequent occurrence remains unknown. While HCoV-NL63, HCoV-OC43, and HCoV-229E have not been known to spread through the fecal–oral route, the presence of viral particles and the fecal–oral transmission has been established for viruses such as SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, MERS-CoV, and HCoV-HKU1. Nevertheless, more studies are warranted to analyze the level of fecal-to-oral transmission.3. Digestive Manifestations and Pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2 InfectionSARS-CoV-2 is generally known to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS); however, recent studies suggest that these viruses also cause gastroenteritis by replicating in human enterocytes. The GI symptoms associated with SARS-CoV-2 were anorexia (15.8–50.2%), nausea and vomiting (2.0–22.7%), abdominal pain (0.1–4.4%), and diarrhea (2.0–49.5%) [5,32,35]. The main symptoms observed in SARS-CoV-2-induced (GI) involvement are diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, and abdominal pain, and GI lesions are similar to the symptoms observed in SARS-CoV-2-induced GI manifestations [31]. The detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in feces suggests that the virus can multiply within the epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract [34,36]. Autopsy and biopsy studies on COVID-19 patients have reported several gastrointestinal changes, including necrosis, exfoliation of the epithelium of the esophagus, stomach, and intestine, stem cell degeneration, hepatic sinus congestion, hepatomegaly, and the infiltration of mononuclear cells and lymphocytes into the portal area. Leading to focal necrosis with neutrophilic infiltration [37,38]. A study reported that in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, diarrhea occurs before the manifestation of respiratory symptoms in 2.9–6.3% of patients [38]. GI symptoms expose patients with COVID-19 to electrolyte disturbances, including decreased sodium levels; this may, in turn, aggravate the disease [3]. In patients with gastroenteritis, the symptoms include severe abdominal pain (0.98–5.8%), nausea (1.0–27.5%), anorexia (10.1–39.7%), vomiting (1.0–12.5%), and diarrhea (2.0–55.0%) [31,39,40]. According to a recent study, approximately 79% of patients infected with COVID-19 exhibited GI symptoms at the onset of infection and during subsequent hospitalization [41]. On the other hand, in a case series at a UK center, GI symptoms such as abdominal pain, diarrhea, and dyspepsia were observed after COVID-19 infection [42]. Studies on the long-term effects of SARS-CoV-2 infection have revealed that the recovery from COVID-19 and its aftereffects is associated with long-term sequelae of physiological and GI dysfunction [43]. Individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 but continue to experience symptoms even after >12 weeks of the infection are said to suffer from “long COVID” [44,45]. Patients with long COVID continue to suffer from digestive symptoms such as abdominal pain and vomiting or develop digestive sequelae such as abdominal pain, acid reflux, abdominal distension, vomiting, belching, and rectal bleeding [46]. However, the presence of pre-existing chronic conditions has not been definitively established as a confirmed risk factor for persistent GI symptoms in patients with COVID-19. Nevertheless, it is important to note that these chronic conditions have been identified as risk factors for hospitalization and mortality.Effenberger et al. [47] found that SARS-CoV-2 infection causes an inflammatory reaction in the GI tract, characterized by elevated levels of fecal calprotectin, which is a biomarker for intestinal inflammation primarily produced in neutrophil granulocytes, as well as a systemic IL-6 response. According to studies conducted by Hung et al. [6] and Tian et al. [41], severe COVID-19 patients who manifested gastrointestinal symptoms were also observed to have esophageal bleeding accompanied by erosions and ulcers, as well as notable changes in their intestinal histology. In addition, a considerable number of infiltrating plasma cells and lymphocytes accompanied by interstitial edema were observed in the lamina propria of the gastrointestinal tract among 73 COVID-19 patients who were hospitalized [6,41].IBD and COVID-19 are two pathological conditions that seriously compromise the structure and function of the GI tract; they share, at least in part, several pathological mechanisms, including gut inflammation, mucosal hyperpermeability, intestinal barrier breakdown, gut bacterial overgrowth, dysbiosis, and changes in the blood and fecal metabolomes [48]. The two medical conditions classified under the umbrella of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) [49]. Several investigations have explored the vulnerability of individuals with IBD to SARS-CoV-2 infection, the appropriate management of these patients during the COVID-19 outbreak, and the advantages and disadvantages of administering immunomodulatory therapy, specifically in children [50,51,52]. However, there is contradictory evidence regarding the effects of IBD on the incidence and outcome of COVID-19 [53]. Imperatore et al. [54] reported a case study involving a male patient who experienced severe abdominal pain and chronic bloody diarrhea following recovery from a SARS-CoV-2 infection. The patient was admitted to the hospital and underwent bowel sonography, endoscopy, and histological examination. The findings revealed a diagnosis of de novo colitis, as the patient had not exhibited GI symptoms during the SARS-CoV-2 infection and had not been previously diagnosed with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Recently, several studies have reported that SARS-CoV-2 infection may lead to a de novo UC in patients without GI symptoms before the infection [54,55]. The connection between COVID-19 and IBD was investigated in a recent meta-analysis, which analyzed the overall incidence of COVID-19, hospitalization due to COVID-19, severe COVID-19 cases, and mortality in patients with IBD [56], and identified notable correlations between UC and heightened susceptibility to COVID-19, COVID-19-related hospitalization, and severe cases in COVID-19 patients. Conversely, they also discovered that CD is noticeably linked with a reduced risk of severe COVID-19. One possible explanation for the increased hospitalization rate and severity of COVID-19 in UC patients compared to CD patients is the more severe form of the disease, greater degree of immunosuppression, and greater likelihood of hospitalization resulting from COVID-19. While COVID-19 typically presents with milder symptoms in children and infants, there is a possibility of a severe systemic inflammatory response known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). MIS-C is characterized by persistent fever, inflammation, and severe illness that often requires hospitalization. Anomalies in the digestive system may be the cause of MIS-C. Interestingly, >80% of patients with MIS-C have GI symptoms [57]; on the other hand, only 10–15% of adults with COVID-19 have GI symptoms [50]. The occurrence of GI symptoms and the prolonged interval between infection and clinical manifestation in patients with MIS-C suggest that the underlying mechanisms contributing to GI pathology in these patients may differ from those observed in adults with active COVID-19. Notably, MIS-C associated with COVID-19 is frequently accompanied by GI symptoms such as diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. These clinical observations suggest that the development of MIS-C involves biological mechanisms that are associated with intestinal mucosal dysfunction and disruption of the epithelial barrier. Yonker et al. [58] observed that children with MIS-C had increased levels of plasma zonulin, a protein that dilates the tight junctions in the intestinal and gastric walls, as well as detectable SARS-CoV-2, indicating ongoing viral replication in the intestines. Therefore, they proposed that intestinal barrier breakdown could lead to SARS-CoV-2 antigenemia, ultimately resulting in the development of MIS-C. Supporting this hypothesis, Yonker et al. [58] observed higher levels of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein, particularly the SARS-CoV-2 spike 1 (S1) component, in the plasma of children with MIS-C than in those without MIS-C or healthy controls. Furthermore, they conducted a fascinating proof-of-concept experiment in which they administered larazotide, a zonulin antagonist, to a child with MIS-C which led to a marked improvement in the child’s clinical condition suggesting that therapeutic strategies aimed at reestablishing epithelial barrier integrity in SARS-CoV-2-infected children warrants further investigation [58]. 4. Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in the GI TractSARS-CoV-2 primarily infects humans and leads to respiratory and GI tract discomfort, as well as systemic manifestations affecting multiple organs. However, in the case of several organs, it remains unclear whether the virus directly infects the organ or if the symptoms arise as a result of the lung’s side effects due to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nevertheless, in the case of GI tract symptoms, the presence of the viral genome in the feces suggests that SARS-CoV-2 replicates in the epithelial cells [34,36]. In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, ACE2 and other receptors are downregulated in both infected and neighboring cells as well as in ileum-derived and colon organoids [2]. Clinical studies on several patients have revealed that viral entry does not involve the digestive system but that the virus enters through the epithelial cells of the intestinal mucosa [37].Abdominal pain is a common symptom observed in severely infected patients [38], possibly resulting from the substantial infiltration of lymphocytes in the squamous epithelium of the rectum, stomach, and duodenum [3,33,59]. Further, SARS-CoV-2 infection alters intestinal membrane permeability, leading to enterocyte dysfunction [4]. In addition to enterocyte dysfunction, intestinal inflammation and diarrhea also suggest the pathological importance of ACE2 expression in the epithelial cells of the small intestinal, which are more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection [60]. In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, stress-induced gastric mucosal damage occurs owing to multiorgan failure, hypoxia, disease severity, mechanical ventilation, ARDS, and psychological stress [61]. Patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection frequently display increased levels of calprotectin, a biomarker released by neutrophils during inflammation of the GI tract, along with increased levels of serum IL-6 [4]. The infection-induced cytokine storm triggers secondary hemophagocytic lymph histiocytosis, a hyperinflammatory disease linked to multiorgan failure and high mortality rates in COVID-19 patients [3,62,63]. In addition, there are many clinical similarities between MIS-C and toxic shock syndrome (TSS), which is induced by bacterial superantigens (SAgs) [64]. Owing to the striking similarities between MIS-C and TSS, SARS-CoV-2 was studied to identify the presence of SAg-like structures; it was found that the S1 glycoprotein contains a novel SAg-like motif that is highly similar to a Staphylococcal enterotoxin B fragment. Bioinformatics analyses revealed a strong level of specificity in the binding of the SAg-like motif to T-cell receptors (TCRs) and major histocompatibility complex class II proteins. The notable increase in the expression of a TCR β variable gene in peripheral blood samples obtained from MIS-C patients aligns with a SAg-induced immune response. It is associated with the severity of MIS-C and serum cytokine levels. Finally, children with MIS-C have increased levels of circulating S1, increased gut permeability, and prolonged persistence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the gut [64]. Having to deal with trillions of microorganisms, the intestinal epithelium has developed a mechanism to generate antimicrobial peptides, such as HD5, a peptide with lectin-like properties that can bind to lipid-glycosylated proteins [64]. The production of HD5 is abundant in the small intestine’s Paneth cells and in the neutrophils’ granules [64,65]. It inhibits viral entry into the enterocyte by binding to the ACE2 receptor, thereby blocking several sites of the ligand binding domain of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein. HD5 exhibits a higher binding affinity to ACE2 than HD5 and the other intestinal α-defensin HD6 [64]. Similarly, the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into Caco-2 cells was inhibited using spray-dried HD5 powder [65]. The secretion of antimicrobial peptides from Paneth cells, which harbor a compositional diversity of bacteria, as well as the release of cytokines (IL-2, IL-7, TNF-α, interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) inducible protein, and macrophage inflammatory protein1-α) results in convalescent stages in patients with diarrhea [14,66,67]. Recently, Yantiss et al. [58] have employed various techniques such as immunohistochemical analysis, in situ hybridization for spike protein, and ultrastructural visualization of viruses within the intestinal epithelium to confirm the presence of SARS-CoV-2 infection. They observed cytoplasmic blebs and tufted epithelial cells in the infected area, but no inflammation was detected. Additionally, the study found that even after the virus was undetectable, it could still result in gastrointestinal symptoms. The authors suggest that the damage to the epithelial cells and the subsequent diarrheal symptoms may be due to systemic cytokine and complement cascades rather than direct viral injury [68]. These observations align with existing clinical and in vitro data and expand our knowledge of the various manifestations of COVID-19. These findings imply that SARS-CoV-2 may cause severe harm to the human GI tract distinctly from the respiratory system, potentially disrupting the microbial balance and contributing to the development of different diseases.5. Role of Receptors in SARS-CoV-2 PathogenesisSARS-CoV-2 attaches to its host cell via interactions between the spike glycoprotein (S) and ACE2 [2,8,9,10]. Before the release of SARS-CoV-2 S protein into the cytosol of host cells, it undergoes processing by a plasma membrane-associated type II transmembrane serine protease (TMPRSS2) following its binding to the ACE2 receptor. Glandular epithelial cells in the GI tract, specifically those in the gastric, duodenal, and rectal regions, display elevated levels of ACE2 receptor expression. However, the ACE2 receptor is not expressed in the colon [34,69]. Comparative and differential expression pattern analyses of ACE2 across >150 different cell types representing all major human tissues and organs revealed that ACE2 expression was highest in enterocytes, including those in the small intestine, colon, and duodenum [70]. Single-cell sequencing revealed higher expression of ACE2 in intestinal epithelial cells than in lung cells [2,9,71]. The messenger RNA for ACE2 is stabilized by the neutral amino acid transporter B0AT1, a member of solute carrier family 6 (SLC6A19) [72], present in the GI system; therefore, it is a prerequisite for SARS-CoV-2 infection. ACE2 is required as a functional partner for the expression of B0AT1, on the luminal surface of intestinal epithelial cells [59]. Furthermore, it has been reported that transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2) plays a crucial role in facilitating the entry of enteric viruses, including SARSCoV-2, into host cells [73]. Furthermore, Ning et al. [26] utilized shotgun proteomics with tandem mass tags to show that ACE2 levels were higher in inflamed regions of the intestines among CD patients as opposed to UC patients.A study reported that SARS-CoV-2 exhibits nearly 20 times greater affinity to ACE2 than other SARS-CoV-1s that bind to the ACE2 receptor [23]; this demonstrates the extremely contagious nature of SARS-CoV-2. In the small intestine, ACE2 is particularly present in proximal and distal enterocytes [10]. The jejunum has the highest expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2. Further, ACE2 is abundantly expressed in ciliated cells. The expression of the ACE2 receptor during viral infection greatly varies among different individuals [74]. The epithelial cells in the ileum express high levels of ACE2 in the absorptive enterocytes and low levels of ACE2 in the progenitor absorptive cells [35]. In contrast, the expression of the increased TMPRSS2 levels observed in the colon and ileum could potentially aid the viral invasion of enterocytes in the GI [10]. Analysis of single-cell transcriptomes unveiled the co-expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in various cell types, including upper esophageal cells, upper epithelial cells, gland cells, and absorptive enterocytes in the ileum and colon [61]. Further, ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are co-expressed in huge amounts in small intestinal enterocytes (20%) and colon cells (5%) [75]. They also found that immature enterocytes 2 are the primary targets for SARS-CoV-2 in the human intestinal epithelial cells in both the colon and ileum. However, these cells do not exhibit the highest expression levels of ACE2. However, the expression level of TMPRSS2 is high in immature enterocytes 2. This implies that the degree of susceptibility to viral infection is not strongly linked to the expression level of ACE2 [2]. Nonetheless, the co-expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in the enterocytes is crucial for the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells [73,75]. While SARS-CoV-2 employs various receptors for binding, the ACE2 receptor is prominently expressed in the GI tract. This abundance of ACE2 receptors in the GI tract suggests that the virus has the potential to induce digestive manifestations.SARS-CoV entry relies, in addition to ACE2, on TMPRSS2/TMPRSS4 because the latter assists in the cleavage of the S protein of the virus on the cell membrane, thereby facilitating viral fusion with the cell membrane [74]. In the absence of TMPRSS2, cathepsin L is responsible for cleaving the S1/S2 polybasic cleavage site to activate the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein in endosomes [73,76,77]. To evade detection by the host system, SARS-CoV-2 can potentially enter the host using either a clathrin-dependent or clathrin-independent endocytosis pathway [33,78]. Recently, a study demonstrated that besides fusion with the plasma membrane, SARS-CoV-2 also enters the host cell through the novel clathrin- and caveolae-mediated endocytic pathway [79]. The S protein regulates the fusion of SARS-CoV-2 with the host cell membrane, an essential step in cellular uptake. Host trypsin-like proteases regulate the activation of the S protein via proteolytic cleavage; their activity is upregulated in patients with IBD. The activation of the S protein is also regulated by host trypsin-like proteases through proteolytic cleavage, and their function is increased in IBD patients [16,80]. This upregulation may promote viral infection in IBD patients. Notably, ACE2 protein expression was found to be higher in the colon and terminal ileum of patients with IBD compared to noninflamed subjects [16]. Furthermore, when compared to both healthy individuals and patients with active inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), patients with IBD exhibited higher ACE2 activity in the noninflamed colon. Moreover, the plasma of patients with IBD displayed a higher ACE2: ACE ratio compared to individuals without IBD. Notably, patients with IBD, particularly those with Crohn’s disease (CD), demonstrated elevated levels of soluble ACE2 expression [16]. Due to ACE2‘s ability to modulate the inflammatory immune response, COVID-19 may impact immune-inflammatory diseases such as IBD that affect the ileum by interfering with ACE2 [81]. Taken together, these observations suggest that individuals with IBD may be more vulnerable to COVID-19. However, at present, there is no evidence to support this notion. The pictorial representation of SARS-CoV-2 causing or exacerbating IBD by modulating mucosal immune response is depicted in Figure 1.6. Immune Response of the Host to SARS-CoV-2 InfectionThe progression of the disease and elimination of the virus is influenced by the innate and adaptive immune response of the host to the viral infection. The initial line of protection against viruses is the innate immune system [82]. The release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines into the bloodstream due to the stimulation of innate and adaptive immune cells can impact the gut microbiota [4]; this alteration of the gut microbiome is called gut dysbiosis [83,84]. During secondary infection by CoVs, the initial phase of respiratory symptoms escalates, while intestinal symptoms subside; nevertheless, cytokine-induced inflammation worsens. In response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems of the infected host are activated. This leads to the release of mediators and chemokines by infected cells, which in turn causes the localized accumulation of neutrophils at the site of infection. Infection with SARS-CoV-2 stimulates the activation of both the innate and adaptive immune systems in the host. As a result, the infected cells release mediators and chemokines, leading to the accumulation of neutrophils at the site of infection. The accumulated neutrophils perform antiviral effector functions and secrete chemokines and cytokines to attract other immune cells, including T lymphocytes and monocytes [3]. Infected patients with gastroenteritis exhibit higher neutrophil counts, an elevated neutrophil–lymphocyte ratio, lower lymphocyte counts, elevated C-reactive protein levels and decreased eosinophil, monocyte, and basophil counts [3,4] Neutrophil recruitment also occurs when a disturbance in the intestinal flora promotes Th17 cell polarization in the small intestine and the production of excessive IL-17A [85].7. Innate Immune Responses in the Gut during SARS-CoV-2 InfectionThe mucosa’s initial antiviral innate response is followed by a potent and efficient adaptive immune response. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) in the large intestine and gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) in the Peyer’s patches of the small intestine harbor microfold cells (M cells). M cells, by transporting antigens from the intestinal lumen to immune cells, contribute to the initiation of region-specific immune responses. Following this, immune cells, along with antigen-presenting cells, migrate to a specialized pocket situated on the surface of the basement membrane of M cells. During excessive viral replication, M cells get destroyed, leading to inflammation and diarrhea, and thus SARS-CoV-2 manages to evade immune detection by not presenting antigens to lymphoid follicles [86]. As a result, direct infection of enterocytes can lead to cytokine release and the immune response weakens. This allows viral particles in the lumen to infect more enterocytes, resulting in further damage to the GI tract. The inflammation caused by cytokine release is regulated by the intestinal signaling pathway via dendritic cells [4]. As a result, inflammatory cells are recruited; this, in turn, results in the production of inflammatory cytokines in intestinal epithelial cells [87].The innate immune system detects viral materials that may be pathogenic and signals to the nucleus to express types I and III interferons (IFNs) and other proinflammatory cytokines. IFNs suppress viral replication and reduce the number of infected cells by activating a cascade of cellular and molecular events. In SARS-CoV-2 infection, 36 genes were reported to be involved in the immune pathways and cytokine signaling, i.e., the IFN-γ signaling pathway [4]. Type I IFNs are secreted in the innate immune response, whereas type III IFNs are secreted in the intrinsic immune response, with the latter capable of acting on intestinal epithelial cells, reinforcing an antiviral state against the infection [2]. The release of cytokines from the human epithelial cells of the lamina propria may serve as an alternate source of the cytokine storm in the lungs [2]. Upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, the intestinal epithelium and colon organoids exhibit a distinct antiviral response characterized by the secretion of type III interferons (IFNs), in contrast to the airway epithelium. Moreover, human intestinal organoids are capable of producing both type I and type III IFNs upon enteric viral infection [2]. IFNs, the most common antiviral component, are also produced by the human intestinal epithelial cells upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. They induce the IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in a paracrine manner to control viral infection in neighboring cells. SARS-CoV-2 is capable of blocking IFN signaling [2]. Further, Triana et al. [88] reported that human intestinal epithelial cells generate strong proinflammatory and IFN-mediated responses upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, as revealed by comparative gene expression analyses. Several gene expression and pathway analyses in this study confirmed that the colon-derived and ileum-derived immature enterocytes 2 exhibit a robust NF-κB/TNF-mediated response. Conversely, neighboring immature enterocytes 2 demonstrate an IFN-mediated response, resulting in the expression of ISGs in a paracrine manner. Moreover, the study found that organoids derived from the ileum exhibit a stronger immune response compared to those derived from the colon. In SARS-CoV-2 infection, viral replication is reduced by the recognition of the virus by the innate immune system, which produces type II IFNs and the cytokines IL-4, IL-10, and IL-6 [37,88]. In the early stage of SARS-CoV-2 infection, there is a delayed release of chemokines and cytokines from dendritic cells and macrophages; this is followed by the release of small amounts of antiviral IFNs and large amounts of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines [32]. Because of the gut–lung axis, the gastric and respiratory flora could influence each other, and any disorder in the flora could be bidirectional [37,89,90]. Further, the gut–lung axis may be influenced by intestinal mucosal damage and bacterial imbalance [37]. To evade recognition by the host’s innate immune system, several viral proteins of coronaviruses, such as papain-like protease (PLpro), NSP1, ORF3b, and N, inhibit two crucial transcription factors (IRF3 and IRF7) that are required for the transcription of IFN [67]. the structural proteins of SARS-CoV, such as NSP1, ORF6, and N proteins [91,92] block the IFN and NF-kB pathways by binding to the signaling proteins in these pathways. ORF6 mainly blocks the nuclear import protein and enhances SARS-CoV replication [91]. Moreover, ACE2 regulates innate immune responses and influences the composition of the intestinal microbiota of the host [93]. Different mechanisms by which SARS-CoV-2 activates the innate immune system in the intestine are depicted in Figure 2.A study reported that active replication of SARS-CoV-2 is required for immune responses [88]. The signaling pathway data from single-cell RNA sequencing were analyzed to identify the signaling pathways in the infected and neighboring cells. Upon closer investigation of the signaling pathways, it was revealed that neighboring cells displayed the activation of transcription factors IRF1 and STAT1, whereas infected cells exhibited activation of cJun. Importantly, despite the presence of IFN, cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 did not show upregulation of the JAK-STAT pathway or expression of ISG [88]. These signaling pathways were confirmed by the expression of ISG and NF-κB and inhibition of HSP90 using the Calu-3 and Caco-2 cell lines. As a result, the inflammation level in the patients was directly proportional to the degree of the GI lesions. In case of a severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, the patients secreted higher levels of IL-10, IL-7, IL-2, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor in the plasma and had elevated levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), INF-γ-induced protein-10, TNF-α, and macrophage inflammatory protein-1A. Patients with a severe SARS-CoV-2 infection exhibit increased secretion of IL-10, IL-7, IL-2, and G-CSF in their plasma, alongside increased levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), IFNF-γ-induced protein-10, TNF-α, and macrophage inflammatory protein-1A [37,94]. In addition, elevated levels of hyperinflammation markers, including procalcitonin, C reactive protein, D-dimer, and ferritin, are observed in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infections [3,95]. The inflammatory response of the gut mucosa can alter the intercellular space of enterocytes, leading to an increase in intestinal permeability. Consequently, bacterial antigens and toxins may translocate into the bloodstream, exacerbating the disease state of COVID-19 patients. The Notch pathway plays an important role in regulating innate immunity and inflammation [96,97]. Notch pathway elements can be affected by viral proteins, leading to abnormal functions [98], and the upregulation of NOTCH signaling signatures was substantiated in the lungs of SARS-CoV-2-infected rhesus macaques [99]. Therefore, targeting Notch may prevent SARS-CoV-2 infection [99]. Upon interaction with its ligand, the transmembrane receptor undergoes successive proteolytic cleavages mediated by the ADAM10 or ADAM17 protease and the γ-secretase complex, resulting in the transcription of Notch target genes, including furin and miRNA-145 [99]. Furin has been shown to be essential for viral entry into cells, in addition to ACE2 [100]. Notch1 induces the transcription of furin, and inhibiting Notch1 may decrease furin levels, potentially interfering with the virus’s ability to enter cells [99,101]. The proteolytic cleavage of ACE2 and competition with TMPRSS2 both need ADAM17, which is highly expressed in the heart and lungs [101,102,103]. The Notch pathway positively regulates furin and negatively regulates ADAM17 [103]. However, there is conflicting information on the role of ADAM17-mediated cleavage in SARS-CoV-2 entry [102,104].Elevated levels of serum interleukin 6 (IL-6) were observed in COVID-19 patients. The immune response in these patients is triggered and sustained by the interplay between Notch signaling and IL-6, which leads to a cytokine storm [99]. Delta-like ligand 4 (Dll4)-induced Notch signaling in macrophages causes an increase in IL-6 production, and IL-6 upregulates the expression of Notch ligands like Dll1 and Dll4 [105]. This feedback loop further drives the expression of IL-6. Disrupting the positive feedback loop responsible for the cytokine storm seen in COVID-19 could be achieved by targeting the Notch pathway and inhibiting Dll ligands. Furthermore, there is a relationship between Notch and immune response, with SARS-CoV-2 causing a cytokine storm in COVID-19 patients. Therefore, inhibiting Notch could be a therapeutic strategy for preventing SARS-CoV-2 infection and relieving COVID-19 symptoms [106].8. Adaptive Immune ResponseWhile there is a growing body of research on the effect of SARS-CoV-2 infections on pulmonary and systemic immune responses [107,108], there is a dearth of data on intestinal immune responses. Immunohistochemistry and mass cytometry analyses conducted on intestinal tissue obtained from COVID-19 patients have revealed a notable elevation in intraepithelial CD8+ lymphocytes and CD4+/CD8+ effector T cells in the lamina propria when compared to healthy individuals [109]. On the other hand, a significant decrease in inflammatory dendritic cells within the lamina propria was observed in COVID-19 patients who exhibited GI symptoms [9]. In addition, Livanos, et al. [9] uncovered a substantial downregulation in pathways related to antigen processing, TH17 cell differentiation and reduced levels of key inflammatory proteins, including IL-6, CXCL8, IL-17A and CCL28 in circulation. These results suggest that SARS-CoV-2 infection in the intestines may modify the composition of systemic immune cells by transforming proinflammatory immune signatures into a more favorable immune environment. This phenomenon may account for the notable decrease in levels of IL-6 and IL-17 in COVID-19 patients experiencing GI symptoms, resulting in reduced mortality rates compared to COVID-19 patients lacking these symptoms.It is possible that persistent SARS-CoV-2 infection in the intestines plays a crucial role in generating and sustaining a stable anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibody response by B cells. In spite of the absence of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA in nasopharyngeal swabs, Gaebler et al. [110] observed that SARS-CoV-2 virus particles and mRNA were potentially detectable in duodenal and ileal biopsies of COVID-19 patients even after a period of 3 months from the initial onset of the disease. Based on the data, it appears that SARS-CoV-2 viral reservoirs in the intestines can stimulate the production of long-lasting neutralizing anti-viral IgA antibodies. However, the levels of IgM and IgG antibodies targeting the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein receptor binding decrease six months after infection [110]. The prolonged existence of IgA antibodies may be particularly significant for maintaining long-term immune responses, as IgA dimers have demonstrated the ability to effectively neutralize SARS-CoV-2 [111]. These findings indicate that the presence of persistent viral infection in the intestines may play a crucial role in generating and sustaining effective immune responses against SARS-CoV-2.A severe infection with SARS-CoV-2 can cause the death of activated immune cells. In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, reduced numbers of natural killer cells, B cells in the lower range, lymphocytopenia, a normal CD4+/CD8+ ratio, and decreased numbers of effector regulatory cells (CD25+CD127+) and memory T cells (CD45RO+) were observed [3]. Concurrently, there was an increase in immunological parameters such as IL-8, IL-10, IL-6, IFN-γ-inducible protein-10/CXCL-10, and MCP-1. Moreover, deviations in the frequencies of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) and conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) have been noted [9]. As the next line of response, CD4+ T cells mediate protective and humoral immunity so that B cells produce virus-specific antibodies. Finally, to limit local infection, CD8+ T cells exhibit a cytotoxic function [3]. The presence of effector CD4+ T cells in the intestinal mucosa plays a critical role in both mucosal immunity and the development of chronic enteritis. Further, the C-C chemokine receptor type 9 (CCR9) is crucial for the entry of the CD4+ T cells into the small intestine and for interplay between CCR9 and CD4 in terms of SARS-CoV-2 [37]. CCL25 expressed in the epithelial cells of the small intestine can attract CCR9+ CD4+ T cells, which could compromise the intestinal immune system and modulate the homeostasis of the gut microbiome [37,112].The levels of CD4+ T cells are reduced, and the distribution of naive and memory CD8+ and CD4+ cells influence the decrease in naive T cells [9]. The myeloid cells of the lamina propria exhibit reduced levels of cDCs, pDCs, and CD206+CD1c+ cells and increased levels of effector CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, CD8+CD103+ T cells, CD4+CD103+ T cells, CD4− CD8− T cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, and IgM+ plasma cells [9]. Key inflammatory genes, genes associated with inflammatory dendritic cells, and the host receptor neuropilin-1 (NRP1) are downregulated in the lamina propria of the intestine [9]. The upregulated genes involved in the immunomodulation of the lamina propria and epithelial cells include the genes for the antimicrobial peptide lipocalin-2, metallothionein, and transmembrane protein. Additionally, there is an elevation in the levels of oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS), a viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) sensor that possesses antiviral activity, in the lamina propria. The canonical antiviral genes and OAS3 in the epithelial cells are also upregulated. Conversely, the genes encoding heat shock proteins HSPA1A and HSPA1B are downregulated. Epithelial cells have decreased CD206+ T cells and increased CD4−CD8+ and CD8+ T cells. Certain inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (IFN-γ, IL-1b, CXCL8, and CCL24) are downregulated in the intestine of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, while CCL25 is upregulated, which is structurally similar to an antimicrobial peptide. Furthermore, there is a non-significant elevation in specific subsets, namely CD8+ T cells, intraepithelial lymphocytes, and CD8+CD69+ T cells, accompanied by the activation of (CD29+39+) CD4+ T cells in peripheral blood [9]. Symptomatic patients exhibit decreased levels of IL-17, IL-6, and CCL28 in their circulation. Taken together, the results suggest that the immune system activates ILs, IFNs, cytokines, chemokines, T and B cells, and white blood cells against SARS-CoV-2. An augmented effector function of Th17 cells, as well as other T cells in the gut mucosa, has been detected in COVID-19 infection. Consequently, SARS-CoV-2 has developed mechanisms to evade the innate antiviral response by modulating signaling pathways at various stages, thereby suppressing innate immune responses. More research will be necessary to determine if COVID-19 can also induce long-lasting T-cell memory responses or if it merely shares the intestinal persistence of SARS-CoV-2. Important aspects of SARS-CoV-2 infections, including localized immune reactions and gut dysbiosis in the intestine, are depicted in Figure 3A,B.9. COVID-19 and Gut MicrobiotaNormally, the GI tract harbors a highly diverse and complex microbial ecosystem that interacts with the host to maintain immune homeostasis [113,114,115]. Healthy gut microbiota contains Faecalibacterium spp., Bifidobacterium spp., Ruminococcus spp., and Prevotella spp., the latter being associated with low systemic inflammation [4,116]. A case study in Wuhan reported that the gut microbiome of healthy people is correlated with the susceptibility to contracting COVID-19 [117]. The study found that higher levels of Lactobacillus were associated with increased levels of the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, better disease outcomes, and elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines and bacterial species such as Streptococcus, Klebsiella, and Ruminococcus gnavus [117]. Patients with conditions such as IBD, obesity, and diabetes have exhibited an increased abundance of certain bacterial species in their gut microbiota [117].In the presence of gut dysbiosis and inflammation, ACE2 levels may rise, impacting innate immunity, dietary amino acid equilibrium, and the microbial ecology of the gut [117]. In patients infected with the virus, the microbiota interacts with the viral particles, resulting in positive and negative consequences [118]. The surfaces of the bacterial envelope containing lipopolysaccharides in gram-negative bacteria and peptidoglycan in gram-positive bacteria have a positive correlation with viral proteins, probably to enhance receptor affinity of the latter and their entry into the host cells or for other similar mechanisms to facilitate infection in vivo [119]. Significant changes in the gut microbiota, called gut dysbiosis, occur because of the IFNs released by the viral molecules. These IFNs deplete the obligate anaerobic bacteria Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, and Eubacterium and promote the pathogenic bacteria Corynebacterium and Ruthenibacterium [117,120]. The fecal samples of patients with COVID-19 contained Bacteroides species capable of downregulating ACE2 expression in the murine gut; this alteration could increase the accessibility of the intestinal epithelial cells to SARS-CoV-2 [121], and the bacterium Firmicutes (Erysipelotrichaceae), which demonstrates a positive correlation in the murine gut. Gut dysbiosis was also detected in fatal SARS-CoV-2 cases with immune depletion and hypoxemia. Notably, gut dysbiosis is also observed in patients with obesity, diabetes, and autoimmune- and aging-related diseases [122]. ACE2 has been implicated in the modulation of the gut microbiota, as demonstrated by a study involving ACE2-KO animals. These animals exhibited altered gut microbiota, decreased expression of AMP, and reduced levels of amino acids like tryptophan. ACE2 facilitates the absorption of neutral amino acids such as tyrosine, valine, leucine, and tryptophan in the intestine [123,124]. The binding of SARS-CoV-2 to ACE2 receptors in the bowel reduces the number of free receptors available and disrupts the absorption of tryptophan, resulting in malabsorption and dysbiosis of the gut microbiota.COVID-19-induced diarrhea may be caused by decreased ACE2 expression, reduced tryptophan absorption, gut dysbiosis, and dysregulated gut microbiota. The downregulation of ACE2 expression in infected enterocytes leads to intestinal dysbiosis. Dysbiosis, in turn, activates intestinal autophagy by inhibiting the mechanistic target of rapamycin [125,126]. As a result, NHE3, a protein that functions as a brush border Na+/H+ exchanger and controls NaCl absorption in the intestine [127], is degraded by autophagy. An increase in intestinal fluids and a secretory type of diarrhea are caused by decreased NHE3 levels [128]. Gut microbiota dysbiosis in patients with COVID-19 is mainly associated with changes in the abundance of Bacteroides spp. (Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron, Bacteroides dorei, Bacteroides ovatusis, and Bacteroides massiliensis) because these are associated with the attenuation of ACE2 expression in the gut. Therefore, changes in microbial composition may increase the accessibility of intestinal epithelial cells to SARS-CoV-2 [129].In patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection, Ruminococcus gnavus exhibited the highest positive correlation with inflammatory markers, followed by an abundance of Clostridium hathewayi Clostridium ramosum and Coprobacillus Sp., which correlated with COVID-19 severity; further, an inverse correlation was observed with the abundance of anti-inflammatory bacterium Faecalibacterium prausnitzii [4]. The gut contains bacterial species capable of fermenting amino acids, including arginine [126]. These alterations in the gut microbiota composition can lead to an increased abundance of L-arginine-fermenting bacteria, resulting in a further decrease in the levels of free L-arginine. By increasing myeloid-derived suppressor cell numbers, impeding local T cell function, and increasing ROS generation, L-arginine depletion in the intestines can amplify intestinal inflammation [130].The microbes residing in the gut can regulate mucosal sites located outside the intestine via the metabolites they produce, including short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). These SCFAs can enter the bloodstream and influence other organs, playing a role in immune regulation and inducing the production of immunoglobulins while also exhibiting anti-inflammatory effects [35]. Fecal samples with high SARS-CoV-2 load specifically contain certain bacterial species, namely, Morganella morganii, Streptococcus infantis, Collinsella aerofaciens and Collinsella tanakaei, and [4]; in contrast, fecal samples with low to no SARS-CoV-2 load contain SCFA-producing bacteria, namely, Alistipes onderdonkii, Bacteroides stercoris, Lachnospiraceae bacterium, and Parabacteroides merdae [4]. An altered gut microbiota can promote the growth of SARS-CoV-2 and trigger the production of inflammatory cytokines, causing a “cytokine storm” that can damage tissues, trigger septic shock, and lead to multiorgan failure [37].The administration of probiotics, such as lactic acid bacteria or bifidobacteria, has the potential to alleviate diarrhea symptoms and enhance the production of antiviral antibodies [37]. Further, the abovementioned probiotics may provide the required nutritional support to restore intestinal flora balance after microbial dysbiosis in the intestine owing to weak immunity [83,129]. The abundance of the opportunistic pathogens Corynebacterium and Ruthenibacterium was elevated, and a change in the fecal microbial profile was also observed [129]. Studies have reported a relationship between bacterial surface molecules and SARS-CoV infection. For example, the peptidoglycan of Bacillus subtilis has reduced SARS-CoV infectivity owing to the presence of surfactin, a cyclic lipopeptide responsible for CoV inhibition by disrupting the integrity of viral particles [131]. This study highlights the significance of the microbiota in viral pathogenesis and therapeutic interventions. The frequent utilization of antibiotics, such as penicillin, cephalosporins, macrolides, and quinolones, disrupts the gut microbiota and elevates the risk of lung cancer in humans [111,116]. In the COVID-19 diagnosis in China, the intestinal microecological balance is maintained using microecological regulators that help prevent secondary bacterial infections [37]. The emergence of new strains can have a considerable impact on the GI tract; therefore, studies on strain surveillance and its role in gut infection must be increased [132].In short, an imbalance in the gut microbiota may stimulate the replication of SARS-CoV-2 and increase the production of inflammatory proteins and cytokines, leading to the development of a “cytokine storm” state. This can ultimately result in significant tissue damage, septic shock, and multiorgan failure. In summary, an imbalanced gut microbiota has the potential to facilitate SARS-CoV-2 replication and induce the release of cytokines and inflammatory proteins, ultimately leading to the onset of a severe “cytokine storm”. This, in turn, may result in significant septic shock, tissue damage, and multiorgan failure. Additional factors that can disrupt the gut microbiota in patients with COVID-19 include conditions such as diabetes mellitus, advanced age, and the administration of antibiotics, antivirals, and steroids, which can all negatively impact prognosis The severity of COVID-19 can be augmented by disruptions to the gut microbiota, which can be caused by factors such as diabetes, advanced age, and the use of medications like antibiotics, antivirals, and steroids [133].10. Gut-Lung Axis in COVID-19The interplay between the immune system’s innate and adaptive responses and the invasion of SARS-CoV-2 characterizes the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. This interaction sets off a cascade of events that triggers inflammation and a cytokine storm in several organs, including the lungs, gut, heart, liver, and kidneys, ultimately leading to multiorgan dysfunction [134]. These pathologies overlap in respiratory and gastrointestinal tract diseases [18,19], leading to the emergence of the “gut–lung axis” concept [19]. The gut–lung axis refers to the intricate interaction between the gut and the lungs, regulated by a diverse array of immunological, neurological, and microbial mediators. The gut microbiome has emerged as a key regulator of the gut–lung axis. Specific microorganisms and their metabolites exert profound effects on pulmonary immune responses and inflammation [135]. The gut–lung axis appears to be implicated in the pathogenesis of COVID-19, as evidenced by clinical observations indicating that patients with COVID-19 who exhibit gastrointestinal symptoms are more likely to experience severe respiratory manifestations, including acute respiratory distress syndrome, hepatic injury, and shock [136,137].The elderly are at a heightened risk of contracting SARS-CoV-2 and developing severe COVID-19, possibly due to their less diverse intestinal flora and diminished populations of beneficial microorganisms like Bifidobacterium spp. [17]. These findings underscore the pressing need to restore microbiota balance in COVID-19 patients. Probiotics and prebiotics have been shown to be effective in reestablishing a healthy gut/lung microbiota balance and lowering the probability of secondary infections caused by bacterial translocation [138]. Consequently, the use of probiotics and prebiotics in preventing COVID-19 and staving off disease progression to severe stages is gaining traction [139,140,141]. In the context of COVID-19, preliminary evidence suggests that the administration of probiotics and prebiotics may offer potential benefits by interacting with the lungs through the gut–lung axis or by modulating systemic inflammation. While the immunological advantages of these interventions are widely recognized, additional clinical and laboratory research is required to ascertain their specific roles in combating COVID-19 infections. Furthermore, further investigation is needed to elucidate the connection between microbial dysbiosis and COVID-19 and to determine whether dysbiosis is a cause or a consequence of the disease. Prebiotics and probiotics may help reduce the intensity and impact of the pandemic; thus, their potential usage should be investigated. 11. TherapeuticsThe rapid manifestation of the COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in isolation, desolation, and panic among the general masses; these have been further aggravated in the absence of any curative drugs or preventive vaccinations for this most-dreaded disease of the current century. Recognizing the severity of the current challenging situation, numerous researchers are actively exploring potential therapeutic approaches to combat the COVID-19 outbreak. This endeavor has led to the development of various drug modalities targeting COVID-19; however, definitive conclusions are still pending. Nevertheless, there is an urgent need for novel treatments to effectively address this ongoing pandemic. In-silico research has been undertaken to identify several repurposed medicines as first-line therapy for moderate-to-severe COVID-19. Some of them are antivirals (monulapiravir, favipiravir remdesivir, arbidol, baloxavir, ritonavir, lopinavir and marboxil), antiparasitic medicines (hydroxychloroquine, chloroquine, and ivermectin) and immunomodulators (tocilizumab dexamethasone, IFNs, and 2-deoxy-d-glucose) [82]. A study used ivermectin and observed that it could reduce GI complications and the number of ventilator-free days in patients with severe COVID-19 [142]. Nevertheless, further research is warranted to study the mechanism of action of ivermectin.To treat SARS-CoV-2 infection, viral entry may be prevented by inhibiting TMPRSS2, which plays an important role in S protein priming [73]. A recent study reported that camostat (brand name: Foypan), a nonspecific serine protease inhibitor, can inhibit TMPRSS2; its use resulted in ten-fold reduced infection by SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 in Calu-3 cells [73]. Selective inhibitors or RNA interference can prevent the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into cell cultures and decrease its infectivity by inhibiting the interaction between NRP1 and the S1 spike protein [73,143]. The symptomatic treatments recommended for patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection are the management of diarrhea, nausea, and vomiting. Antagonists such as a 5-hydroxytryptamine receptor, metoclopramide, and domperidone may be used for treating nausea and vomiting [38]. Considering that diarrhea is a common symptom observed in most cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection, patients are typically advised to ensure proper rehydration and monitoring of potassium levels. However, it is important to note that there is currently no evidence supporting the use of antidiarrheal drugs as a specific treatment for this symptom [4]. Although the development of diarrhea in patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection may warrant the use of antidiarrheal drugs, antimotility drugs (such as loperamide and diphenoxylate-atropine) will increase the transit time and consequently prolong the course of the infection [144]. If necessary, adsorbents (such as smectite and kaolin-pectin) can be used as antidiarrheal drugs because they bind to the digestive mucus and toxins, reducing water loss in patients with diarrhea. Antiviral drug-induced diarrhea may be treated by adjusting drug dosage because, at present, there is no drug for treating diarrhea caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection [38]. Although probiotics and dioctahedral montmorillonite can be used, which should also be considered when selecting treatments, the possibility of antibiotic-associated diarrhea or Clostridium difficile infection remains [38]. To develop novel treatment approaches, it is necessary to understand the immune pathways and microbiota interactions in the host and their cytokine responses [4]. Typically, managing food-borne enteric pathogens involves using active probiotic strains to promote their growth in the gut. In the context of COVID-19 infection, clinical trials have been carried out to explore the potential advantages of probiotic administration. These trials aim to investigate the efficacy of probiotics in alleviating the severity of COVID-19 symptoms and enhancing the immune system [135]. Clinical studies investigated a range of probiotic interventions, including Lactobacillus plantarum, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and a combination of Lactobacillus acidophilus and Bifidobacterium lactis [145,146,147]. The outcomes measured in these studies included changes in inflammatory markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6), clinical symptoms such as fever and cough, and disease severity as measured by radiological findings or hospitalization rates [145]. In a human clinical study, a decrease in proinflammatory biomarkers was observed in patients with colitis with both GI and non-GI conditions after 6–8 weeks of probiotic treatment [123]. A research study conducted in China examined the impact of Lactobacillus plantarum on COVID-19 patients with mild symptoms. The findings revealed that patients who received the probiotic intervention exhibited significantly reduced levels of CRP and IL-6 compared to those who received standard care without the probiotic [148]. Additionally, Zhang et al. [147] reported that a probiotic mixture containing LactoBacillus acidophilus, Bifidobacterium bifidum, and Lactobacillus rhamnosus improved clinical symptoms and reduced inflammatory markers in COVID-19 patients. Similarly, Gutiérrez-Castrellón et al. [149] aimed to evaluate the efficacy of a combination of four probiotic strains in COVID-19 patients who were admitted to the intensive care unit. The treatment group showed a significantly higher rate of complete remission, reduced viral load, lung infiltrates, and symptom duration, a significant increase in IgM and IgG antibodies against SARS-CoV-2, and a faster reduction in D-Dimers. These findings indicate that probiotics hold promise as a potential therapeutic approach for individuals affected by COVID-19. Although these studies provide some preliminary evidence for the potential therapeutic role of probiotics in COVID-19 management, more research is necessary to validate the beneficial effects of probiotics on COVID-19 patients.Immunomodulatory therapies, including glucocorticoid, cytokine, and convalescent plasma therapies, are currently used to ameliorate the inflammatory status of patients with COVID-19 with gastroenteritis [37]. Certain phytocompounds in traditional medicine, including baicalin in Chinese medicine and scutellarin, hesperetin, glycyrrhizin, and nicotinamide, may be combined with ACE2 for effective treatment [37]. To prevent future CoV outbreaks, more drugs and vaccines targeting RNA viruses should be developed. At present, there is no effective targeted treatment for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Developing new therapeutic candidates that can target viral proteins, and their associated host proteins are necessary to bridge this gap, eliminate viral infection, and facilitate its clearance [82].12. Limitations of the StudyAlthough this review provides comprehensive insights into the potential involvement of SARS-CoV-2 in gastrointestinal symptoms, it is important to acknowledge certain limitations stemming from the scarcity of information. The precise mechanisms linking gastroenteritis to the severity of COVID-19 are still not fully elucidated, and it remains unclear whether the common GI dysfunctions, including loss of appetite, anorexia, nausea, diarrhea, and vomiting, serve as protective responses against COVID-19 or are the consequences of prolonged infection with the virus. In addition, the prevalence and durability of gastroenteritis symptoms in long COVID cases are currently being examined and remain unknown, despite these symptoms being common in individuals with COVID-19. While the emerging evidence suggests a potential link between gut microbiota and COVID-19 pathogenesis, several limitations still need to be addressed. A better understanding of leaky gut associated with gut dysbiosis in COVID-19 also remains unclear. Future research should focus on elucidating the underlying mechanisms of this relationship, developing more targeted therapies, and conducting longitudinal studies to understand better the temporal relationship between changes in gut microbiota and COVID-19 severity.13. ConclusionsMany patients with COVID-19 develop gastroenteritis, and many researchers have confirmed the direct infection of SARS-CoV-2 in human intestinal epithelial cells. The present review provides evidence for fecal-to-oral route transmission as a confirmation of GI infection. The presence of receptors for SARS-CoV-2 binding within the GI tract, positive results for nucleic acid testing of these viruses from intestinal samples, and occurrence of GI symptoms in approximately 25–40% of the patients prove the strong association between CoVs and GI tract infections. To control the symptom of diarrhea, it is necessary to first identify its cause (whether it is due to SARS-CoV-2 infection or the use of other therapeutics such as antiviral agents, antibiotics, and certain traditional Chinese medicines). Patients exhibiting GI manifestations should receive treatments aimed at preserving GI functions. Additionally, further research is needed to explore the alterations in the gut microbiota caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection, with the goal of developing effective strategies to leverage these changes for gastroenteritis treatment. Gastroenterologists should also prioritize vigilance toward atypical digestive symptoms in infected individuals to prevent viral transmission through various potential routes and effectively manage the spread of COVID-19. Future research should be focused on developing SARS-CoV-2 resistance in patients by modulating the gut microflora, using prebiotics and probiotics (mainly to understand the GI tract’s bacterial dynamics), and using the novel approach of fecal transplant. Furthermore, drugs and vaccines targeting multiple viral RNAs should be developed to control CoVs. Studies on the host cell’s immune response to viral infection are also warranted to understand the virulence of these viruses and to develop more effective drugs capable of promoting the immune system. Individuals with deficient HD5, as well as those with IBDs such as UC and CD, or individuals who have undergone small intestine transplantation, are more vulnerable to SARS-CoV-2 infection compared to healthy individuals. Exploring the mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2 entry into the intestinal tract, the resulting gastrointestinal symptoms, and the host’s immune response to the infection could aid in the development of improved therapeutic strategies for managing viral infections in patients. Understanding the gastrointestinal manifestations of COVID-19 is important for several reasons. First, it can help healthcare providers recognize and manage GI symptoms in COVID-19 patients, which can improve patient outcomes. Second, it may help identify potential transmission routes for the virus, which can inform public health interventions. Finally, investigating the effects of COVID-19 on the GI tract could lead to the development of novel treatment approaches for COVID-19 patients experiencing GI complications.


Title: Drawing Comparisons between SARS-CoV-2 and the Animal Coronaviruses

1. IntroductionSince its first detection in cases with atypical pneumonia from the city of Wuhan, China, in December of 2019, the novel coronavirus (CoV), designated as SARS-CoV-2, has infected 46,182 million people, resulting in 1,197,026 deaths worldwide (as of 1 November 2020) [1,2,3,4]. The ensuing pandemic, known as COVID-19, is one of unprecedented proportions that has crippled the global economy and exerted far-reaching, detrimental impacts on societies [5,6]. The complex origin, extended human-to-human transmission, pathogenesis including immunopathology, and the various clinical presentations of SARS-CoV-2 have presented serious challenges to the scientific and medical communities towards properly understanding and combating the pandemic situation [3,7,8,9,10,11]. Data available so far strongly indicated that SARS-CoV-2 is a zoonotic virus that might have been derived from bats with, or without, the involvement of another animal species (pangolins?) as intermediate host/s [11]. SARS-CoV-2 is the 7th CoV to be reported in humans, and with respect to novelty, differs from the other important human respiratory CoVs: SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV [2,3,11,12].Animal CoVs have been known to cause important diseases in livestock and companion animals [13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23]. Although human CoVs received attention only after the SARS-CoV outbreak of 2002–2003 [24], animal CoVs have been studied extensively for many decades, providing a plethora of important information on their complex genetic diversity, transmission, tissue tropism and pathology, host immune responses, therapeutics, and prophylaxis, some of which have striking resemblance to those seen with SARS-CoV-2. Moreover, the evolution of human CoVs including SARS-CoV-2 is intermingled with those of animal CoVs. Information on animal CoVs might enhance our understanding of SARS-CoV-2, and accordingly, benefit the development of effective control and prevention strategies against COVID-19. Since January 2020, many review articles have been written on the COVID-19 pandemic. However, these were mostly focused on various aspects of SARS-CoV-2 in humans. In this comprehensive review, attempts have been made to compare the current knowledge on evolution, transmission, pathogenesis, therapeutics, and prophylaxis of SARS-CoV-2 with those of CoVs in various animals.2. Taxonomy of CoronavirusesThe current International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) classification system for CoVs is primarily based on comparative analysis of the replicative protein-encoding genes (3CLpro, NiRAN, RdRp, ZBD, and HEL1), assisted by the DivErsity pArtitioning by hieRarchical Clustering (DEmARC) software [25]. To date, at least 2 subfamilies, 5 genera, 28 subgenera, and 46 species have been recognized within the family Coronaviridae (order Nidovirales) [26]. Coronaviruses belong to the subfamily Orthocoronavirinae that consists of four genera: Alphacoronavirus, Betacoronavirus, Gammacoronavirus, and Deltacoronavirus [26]. The alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses infect mammals and include important pathogens of livestock and companion animals (Figure 1, Table 1) [13,24]. On the other hand, the gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses have been mostly detected in avian species, although there are some reports from mammals, including detection of a gammacoronavirus in a beluga whale (Figure 1, Table 1) [13,24,27].Among the human CoVs of zoonotic origin, SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV have been assigned to the species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus within the subgenus Sarbecovirus (genus betacoronavirus) that also include the SARS-related CoVs (SARS-rCoVs) from bats and pangolins (Figure 1) [11,24,26]. Although only virus isolates from the 2002–2003 SARS-CoV-2 outbreak were confirmed to cause clinical SARS (severe acute respiratory syndrome) in humans, all members of Sarbecovirus have names derived from the SARS-CoV, which is a reflection of the phylogenetic grouping rather than clinical presentation of the virus [25]. Even though SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV belong to the same species and bind to the same receptor (angiotensin converting enzyme II (ACE2)) on host cells, they share low sequence similarity (~79%) between themselves [11,28]. The MERS-CoVs from humans and dromedary camels were assigned to the species Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus, and together with the species Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5, Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4, and Hedgehog coronavirus 1 constitute the subgenus Merbecovirus (Figure 1) [26]. The other two human betacoronaviruses, HCoV-OC43 (species Betacoronavirus 1) and HCoV-HKU1 (species Human coronavirus HKU1), are members of the subgenus Embecovirus that also includes CoVs detected in alpacas, bovines, dogs, dromedaries, pigs, and rodents (Figure 1) [13,26]. Human alphacoronaviruses HCoV-NL63 and HCoV-229E belong to the subgenera Setracovirus (also including species NL63-related bat CoV strain BtKYNL63-9b) and Duvinacovirus, respectively [26].3. Coronavirus Morphology and GenomeCoronaviruses are so called because of their crown-like morphology that resembles a solar corona in electron microscopy [43,44]. Virions are enveloped, spherical (sometimes pleomorphic), and ~80 to 120 nm in diameter [44]. Coronaviruses possess a positive sense, single-stranded RNA genome that is unusually large in size (~27 to 32 kb) compared to those of most other RNA viruses [45,46]. The CoV genome is organized into a 5′(capped)-leader-untranslated region (UTR) (~200-500 nucleotides (nt))-replicase-S (Spike)-E (Envelope)-M (Membrane)-N (Nucleocapsid)-UTR (~250–500 nt)-3′-poly (A) tail, and includes a variable number of accessory genes that are interspersed between the structural genes in the 3′- region of the viral genome [28,47] (Figure 2).The replicase gene constitutes two-thirds of the CoV genome, and consists of two overlapping open reading frames (ORFs), ORF 1a and 1b, which are translated into two large polypeptides, pp1a and pp1ab, through a −1 frameshifting mechanism involving an RNA pseudoknot [15,47,48,49]. Eventually, both the polypeptides are proteolytically cleaved into 15, or 16 non-structural proteins (nsp). The CoV nsps form the replication–transcription complex (RTC) in double membrane vesicles, which drives the synthesis of genomic and subgenomic RNAs. The nested set of subgenomic RNAs, produced through discontinued transcription, serve as mRNAs for all the CoV structural and accessory genes.The ORFs encoding the major CoV structural proteins (S, E, M, and N) are located in the one-third of the viral genome near the 3′-end (Figure 2) [15,47]. The S protein mediates virus attachment and fusion to the host cell membrane, which is crucial for determining tissue tropism and the host range of CoVs. The S protein is antigenically significant, as it is the primary inducer of host immune responses against CoVs [50,51,52]. The E protein is the smallest of the major structural proteins and has been proposed to play roles in viral replication, assembly, and pathogenesis [53]. However, for unknown reasons, the requirement of E protein has been shown to vary among CoVs. Murine CoVs produced viable replicating progeny in the absence of E protein, whilst lack of E arrested the trafficking and maturation of transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV, a CoV in pigs), and generated attenuated SARS and propagation-defective MERS virus particles [54,55,56,57].The M protein, with its three transmembrane domains, is the most abundant of the CoV structural proteins [49,58,59]. The M protein defines the shape of the viral envelope, regulates membrane curvature, and is considered as the central organizer of virus assembly [53,58,60]. The N protein complexes with the viral RNA to form a helical nucleocapsid, which is unusual for plus sense RNA viruses, and interacts with the nsp3 and M proteins to tether the viral genome to RTCs [47,49,61]. The N protein has also been proposed to play various other roles in virus replication, transcription, and translation, and modulate/inhibit host cellular responses, such as the inhibition of interferon production and viral suppressors of RNA silencing (VSR) [49,61,62]. Besides the four major structural proteins, members of the subgenus Embecovirus (genus Betacoronavirus) encode an additional structural protein, the hemagglutinin-esterase (HE), which is related to the HE fusion protein of Influenza C viruses (Figure 2) [63]. However, the HE of CoVs lacks membrane fusion activity [63].The accessory genes are scattered among, or even overlap, the structural genes in the 3′- portion of the CoV genome, and can vary in number, size, and location between different CoVs (Figure 2) [64,65,66]. These genes do not exhibit significant homology among different subgroups of CoVs, and not much is known about the various functions of the proteins they encode. In general, the accessory genes/proteins are considered nonessential for virus replication in vitro. However, during in vivo infection, the CoV accessory proteins have been shown to play important roles in virus–host interactions [65,66,67,68,69]. Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) exhibited reduced virulence in the absence of accessory proteins, whilst infectious bronchitis virus (IBV, a CoV of poultry) demonstrated enhanced virulence after mutation in the accessory (3b) gene [67,68]. Accessory proteins 3a and 8a were associated with compensatory functions in the absence of E protein in SARS-CoV. Accessory proteins have been involved in the modulation of cellular responses (programmed cell death, cytokine production, and interferon signaling) [65,69].4. Evolution of Human and Animal CoronavirusesThe evolution of CoVs is driven by mutation and recombination events, facilitated by the large size of the viral RNA genome that allows for extra plasticity, and has resulted in the emergence of CoVs with altered antigenicity, virulence, tissue tropism, and/or host range [13,24,70,71,72,73]. Although CoVs have genetic proofreading mechanisms [74,75], their estimated long term mutation rates (average of ~104 substitutions per year per site) are moderate-to-high compared to those of other single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) viruses [70], which, in part, may be attributed to the high replication rates of CoVs in host cells [11]. Because of their template switching ability during virus replication, CoVs are subjected to increasing rates of recombination [47,70,71]. Both homologous (between CoVs) and heterologous (with other viruses) recombination events have been documented for CoVs [63,70,76,77]. The evolution of CoVs in animals and humans is shown in Figure 3.The possible roles of recombination and mutation in the origin and spread of SARS-CoV-2 have been evaluated [11,78]. The SARS-CoV-2 genome shared a maximum nucleotide sequence identity of 96.2% with that of bat CoV strain RaTG13 (from a horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus affinis) sampled in Yunnan province, China in 2013) [79]. However, the receptor binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV-2 shared only 85% similarity and differed in five of the six crucial amino acid residues with that of RaTG13 [11,78,79]. Interestingly, the RBD of SARS-rCoVs from Malayan pangolins (Manis javanica, illegally trafficked into animal markets in China) was closely related (97% amino acid sequence similarity and shared all the six critical amino acid residues shaping the ACE receptor) to that of SARS-CoV-2, although the rest of the pangolin CoV and SARS-CoV-2 genomes lacked significant sequence homology between each other [11,78,80]. Based on the above, it was speculated that the RBD region of the spike protein of SARS-CoV-2 may have been derived through recent recombination events in pangolins [78,80]. However, divergence time analysis of CoV coding sequences encompassing the critical amino acid sites did not corroborate the hypothesis [78]. Therefore, it might be possible the identical RBD sites in the SARS-CoV-2 and pangolin SARS-rCoV genomes resulted from coincidental convergent evolution [78,80]. The possibility of SARS-CoV-2 acquiring key mutations during cryptic transmission in humans prior to the first reported case in Wuhan in December 2019 has also been proposed [11]. Several nonsynonymous substitutions have been identified among SARS-CoV-2 strains circulating in human populations [7]. Notable among these are the D614G mutation in the spike protein gene that has been reported with increasing frequency in multiple countries [81], and a 382-nucleotide deletion in ORF8 of CoV genomes from a cluster of clinical cases in Singapore [82]. However, there is yet no conclusive evidence that these genetic changes influence the viral fitness, transmissibility, and/or pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in humans [7,83].Among the other important respiratory betacoronaviruses in humans, the progenitor of SARS-CoV was hypothesized to have originated from recombination events within bats, and eventually, was transmitted to masked palm civets (Paguma larvata) by feco–oral transmission [24,84,85]. Thereafter, the virus underwent rapid mutations in the S gene and orf8, and spread among market civets before infecting and adapting to humans. The MERS virus was speculated to have been introduced in dromedary camels from bats at least 30 years back, followed by spillover from camels to humans [24,48,86]. Comparisons of the genomes of bat MERS-rCoVs with those of camel and human MERS-CoVs suggested substantial evolution, including recombination events during the emergence of MERS-CoVs. In addition to betacoronaviruses, bat-derived alphacoronaviruses, HCoV-NL63, and HCoV-229E (through alpacas as intermediate host) have been detected in humans with mild respiratory infections [87,88]. Although intermediate animal hosts have been proposed in the zoonotic transmission of respiratory CoVs [11,24], (i) the detection of antibodies against the SARS-rCoV nucleocapsid in humans residing near a bat cave [89] and (ii) identification of all genetic elements required to form a SARS-CoV in a single bat cave [13,90] indicated the possibility of direct transmission events from bats to humans. Other than bats, rodents have been proposed as possible ancestors to human CoVs: HCoV-OC43 (through a bovine intermediate host) and HCoV-HKU1 (intermediate host, if any, unknown) [24,87,88].Similar to the human CoVs, animal CoVs exhibit complex evolutionary pathways that reveal the genetic footprints of cross-species transmission events (Figure 3) [13,15]. By sequence comparisons and phylogenetic analyses, bats are believed to be the ancestors of alphacoronaviruses and betacoronaviruses, whilst rodents have been proposed to play important role/s in the evolution of members of the subgenus Embecovirus [13,91]. Furthermore, BCoVs, thought to be descendants of the rodent CoVs, were hypothesized to be involved in the evolution of non-bovine CoVs, such as canine respiratory CoVs (CRCoV), porcine hemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus (PHEV), and equine CoVs [13,88,92]. On the other hand, birds are considered as reservoirs of the ancestors of gammacoronaviruses and deltacoronaviruses [13,93].Recombination and mutation are intimately linked with the evolution of animal CoVs, and have been associated with changes in virulence, tissue tropism, and host specificity [13,14,15,17,18,21,91]. Canine CoV-II (CCoV-II) appears to have evolved from recombination events between CCoV-I and an unknown CCoV, resulting in the progressive loss of orf3 in the CCoV-II genome [15,94]. Furthermore, recombinant CCoV-II strains that are related to prototype TGEV-like strains in the 5′- and 3′- ends of the S gene, and classified as CCoV-IIb based on the amino acid sequence of the N-terminal region of the S protein, have been reported in Europe, Latin and Central America, China, and Southeast Asia [95,96,97,98,99]. Feline CoV-II (FCoV-II) appears to have originated through different recombination events involving FCoV-I and CCoV-II [15,17,100]. Although conclusive data are lacking, mutations (point mutations in S gene, or insertion/deletion in 3c, 7a, or 7b genes of FCoV) have been proposed to play role/s in the transformation of feline enteric CoV (FECoV, replicates in enterocytes of intestinal villi and causes mild diarrhea in cats) to the more virulent feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV, increased affinity for macrophages/monocytes and causes severe systemic disease and immunopathology) [13,15,17,101,102,103]. Similar to FCoVs, two distinct forms of CoV (ferret enteric CoV (FRECV) that causes epizootic catarrhal enteritis, and ferret systemic CoV (FRSCV) that causes a systemic disease that resembles FIPV) that are differentiated by low sequence identities in the S gene between FRECV and FRSCV and truncated orf3 product in FRSCV have been identified in ferrets [104,105]. Complete genomic analysis of ferret CoVs (FRCoVs) also revealed recombination events involving the S, 3c, and E genes [106,107].Porcine CoVs are excellent examples of transmission of CoVs between unrelated host species. Based on the high genetic relatedness between CCoV-II and porcine transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), and the presence of remnants of orf3 in genomes of both CoVs, it has been proposed that TGEV originated from CCoV-II [18,19,20]. Although TGEV causes acute gastroenteritis in pigs, which can be fatal in piglets, a large deletion (~600 nt at 5′- end) in the S gene transformed TGEV into a mild porcine respiratory CoV, designated as PRCoV [19,20]. Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) was found to be genetically more closely related to bat CoV (BtCoV/512/2005) than those of other alphacoronaviruses including TGEV. Moreover, PEDV and bat CoVs shared signature motifs in the 5′-UTR, and PEDV has been shown to infect cells derived from bats [18,108]. Taken together, these observations suggested that PEDV might have originated from spillover of CoVs from bats to pigs [18,109]. PEDV genotypes (S-INDEL and NTD-del) with insertions/deletions in the S gene that cause mild clinical disease, and PEDV-TGEV recombinants have also been reported [18,108]. More recently, another porcine alphacoronavirus, swine enteric alphacoronavirus (SeACoV), also referred to as swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV) or porcine enteric alphacoronavirus (PEAV), which emerged in Guangdong province in China in 2016, was derived from Rhinolophus bat CoV-HKU2-like strains [24,35,110]. The ancestor of porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV) was proposed to have originated through recombination events involving sparrow CoV HKU15 and bulbul CoV HKU11 [13,93].Among avian CoVs (ACoVs), the evolution of IBV in poultry has been more studied compared to those of other viruses. High rates of mutation, especially in the hypervariable S1 domain, and inter-lineage recombination events including those between vaccine and wild strains, have resulted in the emergence of multiple IBV serotypes, genotypes, and pathotypes, some of which caused serious outbreaks and contributed to vaccine failure [21,22,39,111]. IBV was proposed to participate in recombination events with unknown ACoVs, resulting in the origin of turkey CoV (TCoV) and guinea fowl CoV (GfCoV) [112]. These events might have resulted in alterations in tissue tropism, as all IBV strains cause respiratory disease (although some enterotropic forms have also been detected), whilst TCoV and GfCoV are enteric pathogens [111,112]. Recombination events between IBV and TCoV have also been reported [113].5. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and the Animal CoronavirusesSince SARS-CoV-2 is predominantly regarded as a respiratory pathogen, direct contact and respiratory droplets have been considered as the primary routes of human-to-human transmission so far [8]. However, recent findings have raised speculations on the possible spread of SARS-CoV-2 by other routes, such as fecal–oral, airborne, contaminated surfaces, environmental wastewater, sexual, ocular, and vertical transmission [8,114]. Fecal–oral and airborne transmission routes of SARS-CoV-2 have received serious attention. The prolonged fecal shedding of the virus, especially in individuals with RT-qPCR negative throat swabs and/or without clinical signs, and detection of viral RNA in the pharynx, esophagus, gastric mucosa, rectal mucosa, and duodenal mucosa corroborate the fecal–oral transmission potential of SARS-CoV-2. Fecal–oral transmission has also been proposed to cause further spread by environmental contamination, posing serious risks to countries with poor sanitary conditions [114,115,116,117]. Although SARS-CoV-2 is not considered an airborne virus, adsorption of the virus on moisture laden dust/particulate matter could facilitate long distance transport, resulting in pollution-to-human transmission [118,119]. The viability of SARS-CoV-2 on various inanimate surfaces supports the prospects of indirect transmission through aerosol or contaminated surfaces/fomites [120].Many of the animal CoVs (CCoV-I and -II, FCoV-I and -II, FRCoV, PEDV, PDCoV, TGEV, mink CoV (MCV), TCoV, quail CoV (QCoV), GfCoV) are enteric pathogens, and are mainly transmitted by the fecal–oral route [13,14,17,18,19,20]. Interestingly, enteric CoVs, such as PEDV and PDCoV, were shown to infect pigs via airborne transmission routes, possibly resulting from ingestion of aerosolized viral particles [121]. Respiratory animal CoVs, such as CRCoVs, are primarily transmitted via droplet infection, or direct contact with infected dogs, while porcine respiratory coronaviruses (PRCoVs) are derived from enteric CoV TGEV inside the porcine host [20,42,122]. Certain CoVs, such as bovine CoV (BCoV) in cattle and IBV of poultry, are shed in both feces and respiratory secretions [20,123,124]. Ocular transmission of BCoV, albeit in low titers, has been reported in a single study [125]. Although vertical transmission of CoVs in animals is not clearly established and is considered rare, a few studies have provided some preliminary evidence: (i) in utero transmission in mice following oronasal inoculation of MHV [126], (ii) detection of FCoV in newborn and still-born kittens born to a FIPV-positive queen cat [127], and (iii) the presence of IBV in day-old chicks and eggs from infected hens [124,128].Differences in organotropism within the same CoV species have been shown to influence virus transmission routes, such as enterotropic MHV being shed in high titers in feces, whilst the respiratory MHV are transmitted via direct contact with infected mice [23]. Prolonged/recurrent shedding of virus/viral RNA without clinical signs, or subclinically from animals, has been reported with certain animal CoVs, mirroring similar findings with SARs-CoV-2; however, these shedding patterns might not always reflect the transmission potential of CoVs [17,18,19,20,21,124]. Indirect transmission of CoVs through contaminated surfaces/fomites/environment, feed/water, and/or people have been well documented in animals [14,17,18,19,20,21,22,42,123,124].Reverse zoonosis of SARS-CoV-2 has been reported in companion animals (cats, dogs), captive wildlife (tigers, lions), and farmed minks (Figure 3) [29,129]. The virus was shown to be transmitted from infected to healthy cats under controlled conditions [130,131]. Studies based on experimental infections have shown that cats, ferrets, fruit bats, hamsters, nonhuman primates, tree shrews, and transgenic mice are susceptible, whilst dogs, pigs, and poultry are resistant to SARS-CoV-2 [29,129,132,133]. A recent review of the diversity and natural host range of betacoronaviruses in bats suggested that more than 40 species of temperate zone North American bats could be immunologically naive and susceptible to infection by SARS-CoV-2 [134]. On the other hand, a study in the Netherlands provided preliminary sequencing-based evidence for mink-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 [135]. However, in another study, the virus was not detected in cats and dogs living in close contact with SARS-CoV-2-positive humans [136]. Although there is still a lack of solid evidence for natural animal-to-human transmission or sustained animal-to-animal transmission, these observations warrant further investigations of the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 between animals and humans [29]. Transmission of CoVs between different animal species has been discussed in the section on CoV evolution (Figure 3).6. Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 and the Animal CoronavirusesThe pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 in humans has been excellently reviewed by Tay et al. (2020) [137] and Gupta et al. (2020) [9]. SARS-CoV-2 appears to be less fatal, but far more infectious than MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV [2]. SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to cause substantial pulmonary disease, including pneumonia and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and extrapulmonary clinical manifestations (cardiac, cutaneous, gastrointestinal, gustatory, hematological, hepatic, neurological, olfactory, ocular, and renal) have also been observed [9,138].Following entry into the host, SARS-CoV-2 infects cells of the upper and lower respiratory tract [137]. Successful virus entry requires co-expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 (transmembrane protease, serine 2) on the surface of host cells. Although SARS-CoV-2 and SARS share the same host cell receptor (ACE2), SARS-CoV-2 RBD has more affinity for ACE2 than SARS-CoV, and the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 contains a furin-like cleavage site that is absent in SARS-CoV, which may, in part, explain the enhanced infectivity of SARS-CoV-2 over SARS-CoV. The receptor binding motif (RBM) of SARS-CoV-2 differs in five critical amino acid residues (Y455L, L486F, N493Q, D494S, and T501F) with that of SARS-CoV [139,140]. These residue changes have been proposed to stabilize two virus-binding hotspots at the SARS-CoV-2 RBD–ACE2 interface. Additionally, the RBM of SARS-CoV-2 contains a four-residue motif (amino acids 482–485, GVEG), which results in a more compact conformation of its ACE2-binding ridge compared to SARS-CoV, facilitating better contact with the N-terminal helix of ACE2 [139,140]. Increased atomic interactions have been observed between the C-terminal domain of SARS-CoV-2 S protein and human ACE2 compared to those between SARS-CoV RBD and human ACE2 [141]. Nanomechanical studies have revealed that the RBD of SARS-CoV-2 is more stable than that of SARS-CoV [142]. By combining sequence alignment, probability analysis, and binding free energy calculation, it has been hypothesized that a few residues on the viral RBM (452, 489, 500, 501, and 505) have high chances to mutate into more infectious SARS-CoV-2 strains [143]. On the other hand, non-RBD mutations have also been implicated to impact the transmissibility of the SARS-CoV-2, suggesting possible roles of non-RBD sites in influencing virus–receptor interactions [144]. The SARS-CoV-2 polybasic cleavage sites, although located ~10 nm away from the RBD, were shown to enhance the RBD−ACE2 binding affinity via electrostatic interactions and hydration [144]. The spike protein mutation D614G, which became dominant in the COVID-19 pandemic, was shown to enhance viral loads in the upper respiratory tract of experimentally inoculated hamsters, suggesting a possible role of the mutation in increased human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV-2 [145].Replication of SARS-CoV-2 induces pyroptosis of host cells, causing the release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) (Figure 4). Neighboring epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and alveolar macrophages recognize the DAMPs as well as pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as viral RNA from damaged cells, triggering increased secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. Monocytes, macrophages, and T lymphocytes are eventually attracted to the site of infection, facilitating further inflammation and forming a pro-inflammatory feedback loop [137,146]. In a defective immune response, extensive lung damage ensues from increased accumulation of immune cells and overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The cytokine storm may spread to other organs, resulting in multi-organ damage (Figure 4). Other key mechanisms of multi-organ damage may include direct viral toxicity (corroborated by recovery of viral RNA from different organs), endothelial cell damage and thromboinflammation, and dysregulation of the renin–angiotensin system (RAS) [9]. Non-neutralizing anti-SARS-CoV-2 antibodies produced by B cells may exhibit antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), promoting infection and aggravating organ damage [137]. T cell lymphopenia has been observed in cases with SARS-CoV-2 and may be due to the pulmonary recruitment of immune cells, direct virus killing of lymphocytes, and/or apoptosis of T cells [9].Studies on the complex and evolving pathobiology of various animal CoVs have revealed the enigmatic nature of the virus. One of the best examples in this regard that also mirrors the immunopathology seen with SARS-CoV-2 is that of FCoV (Figure 4). Based on pathogenicity, FCoVs (both FCoV-I and FCoV-II) are classified into two biotypes, FECoV (causes mild diarrhea/asymptomatic) and FIPV (causes fatal systemic infection and immunodysregulation) [17]. According to the most accepted hypothesis, due to unknown reasons (possibly mutations), FECoV (primarily enterotropic) transforms into FIPV (replicate efficiently in monocytes/macrophages) in 5–10% of infected cats [103,147]. Virus infected monocytes/macrophages cause a systemic FIPV infection that is characterized by excessive systemic release of cytokines, depletion of lymphocytes, vasculitis, body cavity effusions, and fibrinous and/or granulomatous inflammatory lesions in various organs including the central nervous system (CNS) [16,17,103,148,149]. ADE of FIPV has been shown to enhance infection in cats, with implications on vaccine development [16,17]. Based on the host immune responses (cell-mediated immunity vs. humoral immunity), wet (effusive), dry (noneffusive), or mixed FIPV forms may be observed in cats [17,147]. Among the cytokines studied in association with FIPV, interleukin-6 (IL-6) exhibited the greatest hepatic upregulation, and showed significant activity in the more fatal effusive form (sera and ascitic fluids) compared to the dry form of the disease in cats [149,150]. Interestingly, elevated systemic levels of IL-6 have been associated with a poor prognosis of SARS-CoV-2 [151].Similar to FCoVs, porcine CoVs have been found to switch tissue tropism within the host, as revealed by the transformation of TGEV (causes diarrhea) to PRCoV (infects upper and lower respiratory tract and causes mild respiratory disease) [18,20]. This alteration of tissue tropism has been attributed to a deletion in the 5′- end of the S gene of TGEV, which resulted in the loss of sialic acid binding activity (crucial for virus attachment to intestinal mucins and enteric infection) in PRCoV [152]. PRCoV infection in pigs confer partial immunity against TGEV, and therefore, widespread distribution of PRCoV may have accounted for a significant reduction in TGE outbreaks in swine herds worldwide [19,153]. Alteration of tissue tropism has also been observed for CCoVs. Although CCoVs (CCoV-I and CCoV-II) generally cause mild diarrhea or asymptomatic enteric infection, hypervirulent CCoV-IIa strains, designated as pantropic CCoVs, have been associated with systemic and fatal disease in dogs from Europe and South America since 2005 [14,99,154,155,156]. Pantropic CCoVs spread to extraintestinal tissues and are characterized by vomiting, hemorrhagic diarrhea, severe leukopenia, neurological signs (ataxia, seizures), severe lesions in the major organs, and death [14,99,154,155,156]. However, the molecular basis for enhanced virulence and expanded tissue tropism of pantropic CCoVs remains to be clearly elucidated [14,156]. Furthermore, experimental studies have revealed that the outcomes of pantropic CCoV infection may not be invariably fatal, and that the severe clinical signs are those from concurrent infections, aggravated by pantropic CCoV-induced leukopenia [14,157].The involvement of multiple organs has been observed in the pathogenesis of respiratory CoVs in animals. BCoV infects the intestine and the upper and lower respiratory tract, and has been associated with three distinct clinical syndromes in cattle: calf diarrhea (1- to 3-week-old calves), winter dysentery (adult dairy and beef cattle), and calf respiratory disease (2- to 10-month-old cattle) [20,158,159]. Mild respiratory signs with concurrent diarrhea are usually seen in infected animals, which can be exacerbated by coinfections with other pathogens. Although the respiratory and enteric strains of BCoV are antigenically similar, they (including strains from the same animal) exhibit genetic differences (point mutations) between themselves. Furthermore, during cell culture, an enteric BCoV strain was found to accumulate mutations that resembled those of respiratory BCoV from the same animals [160]. Based on these observations, a quasispecies concept that confers certain viruses with enhanced ability to infect the respiratory tract than the gut, or vice versa, has been proposed [160]. The IBV of poultry has been subjected to rapid mutation rates, viral recombination, and host selection pressure, resulting in the emergence of strains with novel genotype, serotype, and/or pathogenicity including multiorgan tropisms [21,22,39,111,161,162]. Although the respiratory tract is the primary site of infection for all IBV strains (characterized by conjunctivitis, tracheitis, and ciliostasis), certain strains have been shown to cause renal (nephropathogenic: nephritis and urate deposition), reproductive (fall in egg production, misshaped eggs, and lesions in oviduct), and/or enteric disease. CRCoV (genus betacoronavirus) is predominantly a respiratory pathogen of dogs, and unrelated to the enteric CCoVs (genus alphacoronavirus) [14]. However, CRCoVs have been detected, albeit rarely, in extrapulmonary tissues (spleen, mesenteric lymph nodes, and intestines) of dogs including those with diarrhea, warranting further investigations on the tissue tropism of the virus [42,122]. Limited replication of PRCoVs have also been observed in the swine enterocytes [19,20].The CNS is involved in the pathogenesis of MHV and PHEV. Two organotropic forms have been identified in MHVs: respiratory (polytropic) and enterotropic [23]. Following initial replication in the nasal respiratory and olfactory epithelium, the respiratory (polytropic) MHV strains spread into the brain, liver, lung, bone marrow, lymphoid tissue, and reproductive organs, whilst enterotropic MHV strains primarily replicate in the intestine, but can also spread to the liver, lymphoid tissue, and spleen [23]. MHVs have been associated with more severe disease in T cell-deficient compared to B cell-deficient, or immunocompetent mice, suggesting that the host’s response/s to CoV might play role/s in determining the form of CoV disease [163]. PEHV replicates primarily in the respiratory tract and can further spread to the central nervous system through the peripheral nerves, resulting in encephalomyelitis, vomiting (due to infection of vagal ganglia), and/or wasting (due to lesions in the myenteric plexus) in piglets [37].7. Therapeutics against SARS-CoV-2 and the Animal CoronavirusesSince the various therapeutic strategies against SARS-CoV-2 have been extensively reviewed elsewhere [164,165], this section will primarily focus on similar therapeutic approaches against animal CoVs. Among the antivirals, Remdesivir (GS-5734), an adenosine nucleotide analogue prodrug that inhibits the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), has been considered as one of the most promising drugs against SARS-CoV-2 [164,165]. In vitro studies have revealed that remdesivir is highly efficacious against PDCoV [166]. On the other hand, mutation studies with MHV have shown that viruses with improved proofreading activity exhibit resistance, whilst those devoid of proofreading ability were more sensitive to remdesivir [167,168]. The parent nucleoside of remdesivir, GS-441524, was shown to be a safe and promising therapeutic candidate against FIPV in tissue culture, experimental, and natural cat infection studies [168,169,170,171]). Because of its synthetic simplicity and in vivo efficacy under veterinary settings, GS-441524 has been proposed to be more superior to remdesivir for COVID-19 treatment [172].Although randomized clinical trials with drugs Lopinavir/Ritonavir revealed little/no benefit in SARS-CoV-2 patients [164,165,173], the antiviral activities of protease inhibitors have been evaluated against CoVs in different animal species. The 3C-like protease inhibitor (3CLpro) GC376, previously shown to block FIPV infection in naturally and experimentally infected cats, was found to inhibit replication of SARS-CoV-2 and PEDV in cell culture [174,175,176,177]. By FRET assays, broadly acting 3CLpro inhibitors have been identified against feline, ferret, and mink CoVs [178]. In another study, Galanthus nivalis agglutinin and nelfinavir were shown to synergistically exert an antiviral effect on FCoVs in vitro [179]. The chemotherapeutic drug, 6-thioguanine, was found to noncompetitively inhibit the PEDV papain-like protease 2 [180]. Interestingly, 3CLpro inhibitor resistant MHV mutants were shown to be attenuated for replication and pathogenesis in mice, revealing a low genetic barrier but high fitness cost of resistance for CoVs [181].The efficacy of ribavirin (a synthetic guanosine nucleoside analogue that blocks viral RNA synthesis and viral mRNA capping) against SARS-CoVs has been questioned [164], although promising results were obtained when ribavirin was used in combination with protease inhibitors and interferon-ß-1b (IFN-ß-1b) during a randomized clinical trial against SARS-CoV-2 [182]. A combination of ribavirin and recombinant human leukocyte (alpha) IFN (rHuIFN-α) caused a significant increase in antiviral activities against FIPV compared with that produced by ribavirin, or rHuIFN-α alone [183]. However, ribavirin is not recommended for treatment of FIPV because of its intrinsic toxicity, marginal antiviral activities (in vivo) at maximal doses, and low therapeutic index against FIPV [184]. Ribovirin was shown to effectively inhibit PEDV infection in cell culture at subcytotoxic doses [185].Chloroquine Phosphate (CQ) and Hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), approved by the FDA for the treatment of malaria, lupus erythematosus, and extraintestinal amebiasis, have received a lot of attention in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 [164]. Both forms are believed to exhibit antiviral activity by increasing endosomal pH (thereby, impairing fusion between the virus envelope and host cell endosomal membrane), interfering with the glycosylation of ACE2, and exerting immunomodulatory effects [164,186]. The therapeutic effect of CQ against FIPV was investigated in vivo and in vitro by Takano et al. (2013) [187]. Although CQ was found to exhibit an inhibitory effect against the replication of FIPV, and demonstrated anti-inflammatory effects (in vitro), it did not induce any antiviral effects in cells already infected with the virus. In another study, a combination of HCQ and recombinant feline IFN-ω (rfIFN-ω) resulted in increased antiviral activity against type I FIPV infection [188]. HCQ in combination with homoharringtonine (HHT) was found to exhibit higher antiviral activity against PEDV than that with either agent alone [189]. On the other hand, HCQ did not show antiviral activity or clinical efficacy in macaques infected with SARS-CoV-2 [190].Ivermectin, a veterinary drug, has been shown to possess antimicrobial, antiviral, and anticancer properties, and is being evaluated as a potential candidate in the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 [191,192]. The antiviral effect of ivermectin might be due to inhibition of the importin (IMP) a/ß receptor, which is responsible for the nuclear transport of viral proteins [193]. Although there is no information on the antiviral activity of ivermectin against animal CoVs so far, the antiviral effects of ivermectin have been observed against various RNA (avian influenza A virus, Newcastle virus, porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus, Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, West Nile virus) and DNA (bovine herpesvirus 1, equine herpes type 1, porcine circovirus 2, and pseudorabies) viruses of animals [192].Cyclophilin inhibitors (Cyclosporine A and analogues such as Alisporivir) are immunosuppressive drugs with anti-calcineurin properties [194]. Alisporivir has been shown to exhibit strong, dose-dependent antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 in vitro, and is being considered for a phase-2, proof-of-concept clinical trial [195,196]. However, concerns have been raised about the safety of cyclosporine in SARS-CoV-2 patients [194]. Previously, cyclophilin inhibitors have been shown to inhibit the replication of animal CoVs (FCoV, IBV, and MHV) and human CoVs (HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV) [194,195,197].Antiviral peptides (AVPs) are short and simple amino acid sequences that can exert antiviral effects by targeting different viral components [198]. Synthetic peptides targeting the viral envelope (Mucroporin-M1) or S protein (EK1 and EK1C4), or AVPs inhibiting the late endosomal acidification in infected host cells, thereby preventing the release of viral RNA (P9 peptide), have been found to exhibit anti-CoV activities [198]. Lipid conjugation to an inhibitory peptide derived from the C-terminal heptad repeat (HRC) domain of SARS-CoV-2 S protein was found to inhibit virus infection in Vero E6 cells, and block the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in human airway epithelial (HAE) cultures [199]. Neutralization of the polybasic cleavage site of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein with a negatively charged tetrapeptide, GluGluLeuGlu, was shown to lessen the RBD-ACE2 binding strength by 34% [144]. The antiviral effects of several peptides targeting the S1 domain of FIPV S protein have also been studied, revealing inhibitory effects on virus infection [200]. In another study, combination of a synthetic peptide FP5 (designed from the putative HR2 domain of the spike protein of FCoV) with interferon-alpha (IFN-α) was found to significantly inhibit FCoV replication in cultured Felis catus whole fetus-4 (fcwf-4) cells [201]. Peptides derived from HR2 were shown to inhibit PEDV entry and infection in cell culture [202]. In addition to antiviral effects, AVPs can be used as immunomodulators, or shield the host receptors from viral recognition and attachment [198]. Human Intestinal Defensin-5 was shown to cloak several sites in the ligand binding domain of ACE2, which are crucial for effective binding of the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 to ACE2 [203].Lipid metabolism plays a crucial role in the viral replication cycle, and virus infection-associated host lipid metabolic remodeling has been demonstrated for CoVs [204,205,206]. Therefore, drugs targeting the lipid metabolic pathways that are pivotal to CoV infection could be explored as potential therapeutic options against SARS-CoV-2. In a recent study, cholesterol 25-hydroxylase was shown to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 and other CoVs by depleting accessible cholesterol from the plasma membrane, thereby suppressing virus–host cell membrane fusion [207]. Agents that deplete/inhibit cholesterol synthesis/transport have been found to inhibit the replication of animal CoVs in vitro, such as U18666A-inhibited FIPV and methyl-beta-cyclodextrin-inhibited FIPV and PEDV [208,209]. Linoleic acid (LA) is a free fatty acid with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties [205]. Exogenous supplementation of linoleic acid (LA) has been shown to inhibit virus replication in HCoV-229E- or MERS-CoV-infected cells [205]. Recently, analysis of the 2.85 Å cryo-electron microscopy structure of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein revealed three composite binding pockets that tightly bind LA [210]. It has been hypothesized that sequestration of LA by SARS-CoV-2 might enhance CoV-mediated immune dysregulation and inflammation [210]. On the other hand, binding of LA to these pockets generated a locked S protein structure, which reduced virus RBD-ACE2 interaction in vitro, offering the prospects of developing intervention strategies that target the LA binding sites of SARS-CoV-2 [210].Neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) that target the RBD on the S protein of SARS-CoV-2 have shown the potential for both therapeutic and prophylactic applications, and several SARS-CoV-2 mAbs are currently poised to enter into human clinical trials [211,212,213]. Neutralizing antibodies targeting the S protein have been studied in various animal CoVs: PEDV and TGEV [214,215,216,217,218], BCoV [219] and IBV [220,221]. Monoclonal antibodies targeting other CoV proteins have also been investigated, such as four of the six mAbs against BCoV E2 and E3 glycoproteins exhibited neutralization activity in vivo [222]. However, none of these mAbs have been used in routine treatment protocols. Monoclonal antibodies attenuating the cytokine-mediated inflammatory response, such as tocilizumab, a humanized mAb targeting IL-6 receptor, have been used in the treatment of SARs-CoV-2 patients [165]. Monoclonal antibodies against tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α, involved in aggravating pathology of FIPV) were shown to be effective in preventing progression to FIP in experimentally infected cats [223].Short interference RNAs (siRNAs) are small non-coding double-stranded RNA molecules that control gene expression by mediating the degradation of target RNA in a sequence-specific manner [224]. siRNAs have been used in the treatment of various virus infections [224,225,226]. siRNAs inhibited SARS-CoV infection and replication in vivo, and suppressed SARS-like symptoms in nonhuman primates [226]. A panel of eight synthetic siRNAs targeting four different regions of the FCoV genome were found to inhibit virus replication in vitro [227]. In another study, different combinations of five siRNAs targeting coding and noncoding regions of the FCoV genome achieved more effective viral inhibition compared to individual siRNAs [228]. Combined siRNA therapy was shown to prevent escape of siRNA-resistant FCoV mutants in vitro [229]. siRNAs restricted viral protein expression and inhibited the replication of PEDV, PDCoV, PHEV, and SADS-CoV in vitro [230,231,232]. siRNA expression inhibited virus replication, lowered inflammation, significantly decreased mortality, and improved weight gain in poultry experimentally infected with IBV [233].Interferons (IFNs) are key components of the innate immune responses against viruses [225,226]. IFN-ß has been used in combination with other drugs in clinical trials against SARS-CoV-2 [182]. Although recombinant feline interferon-omega (rFeIFN-ω) improved clinical signs and reduced concurrent viral excretion in cats naturally infected with retroviruses, it did not prolong survival time or improve quality of life in FIPV-positive cats [234,235]. Recombinant feline interferon (rFeIFN) KT-80 exerted inhibitory effects on the replication of FCoV and other enteric viruses in vitro [236]. Porcine IFN-λ3 and IFN-γ demonstrated antiviral activity against PEDV and TGEV, respectively, in vitro [237,238]. Recombinant chicken IFN type I (rChIFN-α) inhibited the replication of IBV in vitro, and was shown to protect chicks by delaying the onset of disease and reducing the severity of illness [239].Dexamethasone, a corticosteroid with anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressant effects, has been shown to improve survival and mortality in patients critically ill with SARS-CoV-2 [164]. In experimental studies, dexamethasone treatment alleviated early proinflammatory responses in PRCoV infected pigs; however, continued use for a longer period enhanced viral replication and exacerbated infection by decreasing cellular immune responses [240,241]. In another study, experimental challenge with TGEV induced profuse diarrhea in dexamethasone-treated pigs [242]. In cattle, dexamethasone was shown to cause immune suppression and influence the occurrence of diarrhea and virus shedding in calves challenged with BCoV [243].Other therapeutic considerations against SARS-CoV-2 that have been tried against animal CoVs include (i) glycopeptide antibiotics and pyridine N-oxide derivatives (inhibited FIPV and SARS-CoV in vitro) [244,245]; (ii) lithium (demonstrated antiviral effect against PEDV in vitro) [246]; (iii) antifungal drug itraconazole (antiviral activity against FIPV) [247]; (iv) Janus-Kinase inhibitors (inhibited replication of TGEV) [248]; (v) immunostimulants (shown to increase survival time in cats with dry form of FIPV) [249]; (vi) stem cells (transduction of hematopoietic stem cells stimulated RNA interference against FIPV) [250]; and (vii) natural product-derived phytochemicals [251].To date, there are no approved treatment protocols against the animal CoVs [252]. On the other hand, a recent study conducted by the World Health Organization Solidarity trial consortium at 405 hospitals in 30 countries revealed that remdesivir, hydroxychloroquine, lopinavir, and IFN regimens may have little or no effect on hospitalized cases of SARS-CoV-2, as evident from the data on overall mortality, initiation of ventilation, and duration of hospital stay [253].8. Prophylaxis against SARS-CoV-2 and the Animal CoronavirusesProphylactic strategies against SARS-CoV-2 have been comprehensively reviewed by Jeyanathan et al. (2020) [10] and several others. At least 166 vaccine candidates, based on different platforms (DNA-based, inactivated virus, live attenuated virus, mRNA-based, protein subunit, virus-vectored (replicating and non-replicating), virus-like particles), are in various stages of preclinical, or clinical development. Whilst the race for developing a vaccine against human CoVs has gained momentum, licensed CoV vaccines are already available for use in livestock (cattle, pigs, and poultry) and companion (cats and dogs) animals [30]. Some of the licensed animal CoV vaccines include candidates against other pathogens, such as BCoV with rotavirus, clostridia and Escherichia coli, CCoV with canine adenovirus, canine distemper virus, canine parvovirus-2, Leptospira and Lyme disease, PEDV with rotavirus and TGEV, and IBV with Newcastle disease, or infectious bursal disease and reovirus [30,32,254]. The different prophylactic strategies against animal CoVs are shown in Table 1. Although the currently licensed animal CoV vaccines appeared to reduce mortality/viral shedding, none seem to offer complete protection [33]. Other concerns associated with the animal CoV vaccines included a relatively short duration of protective immunity, lack of a clear understanding of the correlates of protection against CoVs, emergence of multiple serotypes/subtypes that influence vaccine efficacy, and/or ADE enhanced disease [14,17,18,22,30,32,33,254,255].One of the potential safety issues with SARS-CoV-2 vaccines is possible disease enhancement by ADE [256]. Although antibodies generally play protective roles, non/sub-neutralizing antibodies might promote enhanced virus uptake into host cells via Fcγ receptors (FcγR), aggravating the disease condition. This phenomenon, known as ADE, has been observed with dengue in humans, and typically involves macrophages [256,257]. There is no direct evidence for ADE in SARS-CoV-2 infection so far, and macrophages/monocytes do not appear to be the primary targets of the virus [10]. However, FcγRs have been proposed to facilitate SARS-CoV uptake into monocytes/macrophages and B cells through pre-existing virus-specific antibodies, and ADE has been reported in some laboratory animals immunized with experimental SARS-CoV vaccines [10,258,259,260]. Furthermore, exaggerated cytokine profiles, resembling those of macrophage activation syndrome, have been observed in patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 [9,137]. ADE-enhanced FIPV infection has been demonstrated in experimentally infected cats, and was best observed after re-infection with the same serotype [17]. The antibody-opsonized FIPV virions interact with the FcγRs on macrophages/monocytes, and are eventually internalized and released into the cytoplasm of the host cell [16]. In experimental challenge studies, conventional domestic cats immunized with recombinant FIPV vaccine, or antibodies against FIPV spike proteins developed an accelerated disease course, whilst specific pathogen-free cats were found to be protected against FIPV [17,261,262,263]. In a recent study, 50% of passively immunized cats that were inoculated orally with FIPV-I KU-2 developed FIP through ADE [264]. ADE-enhanced FIPV is believed to be of low relevance under natural settings [103]. Although the only licensed intranasal FIP vaccine was shown to be safe in cats over 16 weeks of age, it is not recommended by the American Association of Feline Practitioners because of conflicting results between efficacy studies, and that most kittens are endemic to FCoV before 16 weeks of age [41].There is no evidence for antigenic drift or antigenic shift among SARS-CoV-2 strains circulating in humans so far [81]. However, the possibility of such events cannot be ruled out, especially with the extended human-to-human transmission, long duration of the pandemic, and possible transmission to other hosts [7,11,81,129]. Both antigenic drift and shift have been shown to influence vaccine efficacy against animal CoVs [18,19,21,22,32,254]. The IBV genome, especially the antigenically significant S protein encoding gene, evolves rapidly by random mutation (antigenic drift) and/or recombination (antigenic shift) events, resulting in a wide variety of genotypes, serotypes, and pathotypes [21,22]. Recombination events have not only been reported between field strains, but also between live attenuated vaccine and field strains. Mutations inducing even minor changes (<5%) in the S1 protein sequence might influence IBV vaccine efficacy [30]. Since the different serotypes of IBV do not exhibit cross-protection, vaccination programs against IBV adopt either a “multi-monovalent”, or “protectotype” strategy [254]. Because of high strain diversity between countries/regions, the attenuated viruses used in the current IBV vaccines vary depending on the geographical location (M41 (Massachusetts), Arkansas and Connecticut in North America, 4/91 and D274 in Europe, and QX in China). Similar to IBV, recombination events including a recent report on recombination between a highly pathogenic field PEDV strain and a low pathogenic attenuated vaccine PEDV strain have been found to negatively impact the efficacy of the current PEDV vaccines [18,32,255]. On the other hand, genetic diversity in the CoV genome has also resulted in the emergence of naturally attenuated viruses that offer protection against the virulent counterparts, such as PRCoV (deletion mutant of TGEV, causes mild respiratory disease), which has been attributed to the worldwide reduction in outbreaks of severe gastroenteritis with TGEV [20,153].The route of vaccination would be crucial in determining vaccine efficacy against SARS-CoV-2, as intranasal vaccines elicit a strong local IgA response and fewer systemic antibodies, whilst parenteral vaccines induce sufficient virus neutralizing antibodies in serum that also appear in respiratory mucosa, but do not elicit an effective IgA response [10]. As with SARS-CoV-2, the correlates of immunity to respiratory CoV infections in animals remain to be clearly elucidated [20,30,33]. In poultry, the primary response to an ocular IBV vaccine (attenuated Ark DPI vaccine) was dominated by IBV-specific IgA, whilst the secondary response to the vaccine was characterized by an increase in IgG antibody titers and a decrease in IgA antibody titers in both tears and plasma [265]. High titers of viral neutralizing antibodies in serum have been proposed to prevent the spread of IBV from the respiratory tract to other organs [33]. Serum neutralizing antibodies were correlated with the protection of naturally infected feedlot cattle against bovine respiratory disease complex (BDRC), whilst intranasal vaccination of calves with a live attenuated BCoV vaccine (licensed for oral use against BCoV-induced diarrhea) prior to entering feedlot minimized the risk of BDRC in calves [20]. With swine enteric CoVs, IgA in milk and colostrum were found to be correlates of passive immunity in piglets [32]. In general, live attenuated CoV vaccines were shown to be more effective than inactivated CoV vaccines in animals, although the former carries the risk of reversal to virulence [21,22,30,32,254].In conclusion, it should be noted that the veterinary CoV vaccines are unlikely to prevent COVID-19 in humans, as the animal vaccine candidates are antigenically unrelated to SARS-CoV-2. Furthermore, the licensed veterinary CoV vaccines are directed against diseases of animals that do not exactly resemble the pathology (severe atypical pneumonia) seen with SARS-CoV-2 [14,17,19,20,22]. Nevertheless, information on various aspects of animal CoV vaccines (development, efficacy, and setbacks) might prove useful in the development of an effective and safe vaccine against SARS-CoV-2.9. ConclusionsSatirically, the crown-like morphology of SARS-CoV-2 indeed befits the virus, for SARS-CoV-2 would surely be crowned as one of the most devastating viruses of recent times with regards to its impact on health, economies, and societies worldwide [2,3,5,6]. Although the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has triggered a global wave of research studies on CoVs at an unprecedented scale, human CoVs attracted attention only after the SARS outbreak of 2002–2003. On the other hand, animal CoVs have long been identified as major causes of mortality and morbidity in livestock and companion animals. As a result, animal CoVs have been studied extensively, yielding a plethora of information on CoV evolution, transmission including interspecies transmission events, pathogenesis including immunopathology, therapeutics, and prophylaxis, evaluation of which might allow for a better understanding of CoV disease in humans.Surveillance and genome sequencing of CoVs from various animals species, including wildlife, were extremely crucial in tracing the possible origin and transmission of SARS-CoV-2 (and that of SARS-CoV and MERS), suggesting that these viruses were most likely derived from bats with/without an animal intermediate host (Figure 3) [11,24,139]. Antibodies against SARS-CoV have been detected in humans living near bat caves in China [89]. Recently, SARS-COV-2 has been reported in cats, dogs, minks, and captive wildlife, indicating possible human-to-animal transmission events [129]. Taken together, these observations underscored the significance of continuous monitoring of zoonotic and zooanthroponotic pathogens in animals, especially wildlife, and in humans residing near wildlife habitats. Once again, evolutionary analysis of SARS-CoV-2 reiterated the importance of reducing contact potential between humans and wildlife by addressing climate change and deforestation, and banning wildlife trade/wet animal markets [11,266,267].Compared to the other human CoVs and many other zoonotic viruses, the rapidity and extent of human-to-human spread of SARS-CoV-2 has intrigued many researchers [1,3,7]. Although remarkable, this observation might not appear surprising, at least to animal virologists, for studies on animal CoVs have previously revealed the capability of CoVs to jump the species barrier, and successfully adapt and spread in a new host species. Widely prevalent animal CoVs, such as FCoV-II, PEDV, and TGEV, have been proposed to be derived from heterologous hosts including unrelated animal species (Figure 3) [13,15,16,17,18,19].Studies on animal CoVs have revealed the enigmatic nature of CoVs, such as alterations in tissue tropism (pantropic CCoV-IIa, FIPV, and PRCoV), multi-organ tropism (BCoV, pantropic CCoV-IIa, FIPV, IBV, MHV, and PHEV), and/or immunopathology (FIPV) [14,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,37]. Although changes in the CoV genome have been proposed to induce alterations in tissue tropism, except for that of PRCoV, the molecular basis for such events remain to be clearly elucidated. Interestingly, SARS-CoV-2, considered as a respiratory pathogen, has been associated with extra-clinical manifestations, and viral RNA has been detected in various organs and fecal samples [8,9,137]. Furthermore, the cytokine storm observed in SARS-CoV-2 patients mirrors that in cats with FIP [9,17] (Figure 4). Considering the above, it would be interesting to compare the genetic variations and pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 strains from various organs.The development of an effective and safe vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 is of paramount importance. Although there are no licensed vaccines against CoVs in humans so far, the various issues (lack of complete protection, short duration of immunity, correlates of protection against CoVs, emergence of multiple serotypes/subtypes including virulent recombinants between vaccine and field strains, and/or ADE enhanced disease) observed with the veterinary CoV vaccines should be taken into consideration while devising immunization strategies against SARS-CoV-2 [17,18,22,30,32,33,254,255].SARS-CoV-2 has challenged the very basic tenet of human existence: “United We Stand, Divided We Fall”. Measures aimed at reducing human-to-human transmission have resulted in a crisis situation, where, unfortunately, “Divided We Stand, United We Fall” has become the motto for survival. However, pandemics, especially those caused by zoonotic pathogens such as SARS-CoV-2, could be avoided, or effectively controlled, by adopting a One Health approach that unites the various streams of animal, human, and environmental health, thereby reinforcing the concept of “United We Stand, Divided We Fall”.


Title: Epidemiology, transmission and pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2

2.1IntroductionCoronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2), has resulted in more than 205 million confirmed cases and 4.3 million deaths (https://covid19.who.int). Coronavirus term is derived from Latin word “Corona” meaning crown. The name suggests the unique appearance of the virus under an electron microscope that contains round particles with a rim of projection. Coronavirus is an enveloped, single-stranded ribonucleic acid (RNA), positive sense virus that was first isolated from humans in 1965 (Tyrrell & Bynoe, 1966). Coronaviruses belong to the family Coronaviridae, which produce mild to severe respiratory disease in humans. Coronaviruses are found in various animals, including bats, birds, cattle, cats, and pigs. In recent decades, there have been three major Coronavirus outbreaks worldwide. In 2002 and 2012, two highly pathogenic Coronaviruses with the zoonotic origin, severe acute respiratory syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, (2020) and Middle East respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus (MERS-CoV), respectively, caused fatal respiratory illness, making these Coronaviruses a new public health concern in the 21st century (Zumla et al., 2015). Key differences among SARS-CoV, MERS, and SARS-CoV-2 are summarized in Table 2.1
.Table 2.1Key differences among severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2, severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus, and Middle East respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus.SARS-CoV-2SARS-CoVMERS-CoVGenusClade I, lineage BClade I, lineage BClade II, lineage CLength of nucleotides29.9 kilobases29.75 kilobases30.11 kilobasesEmergence dateDecember 7, 2019 Wuhan, ChinaNovember 16, 2002 Foshan, ChinaApril 4, 2012, Zarqa, JordanVirus identification firstJan-20Mar-03Jun-12Possibly natural reservoirBatBatBatPossibly intermediate hostMalayan Pangolins & turtlePalm CivetsCamelPredominant cellular receptorsAngiotensin-converting enzyme receptor-2Angiotensin-converting enzyme receptor-2Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 receptorCurrent statusPandemic ongoingCompletely controlSporadic continuousSymptomsSevere acute respiratory syndrome, 4.2% mortality rateSevere acute respiratory syndrome,11% mortality rateSevere acute respiratory syndrome,34% mortality rateTill the writing of this chapter, several countries have experienced at least two waves of COVID-19. Several vaccines have been approved by the Federal Drug Agency (FDA), the European agency, Central Drugs Standard Control Organization, New Delhi. COVID-19 vaccination has decreased the severity of the disease in the exposed individuals. Several SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VoC) that alter transmission or disease characteristics or impact vaccine, therapeutics, diagnostics, or effectiveness preventive and social measures have been detected. These VoC pose challenges for the eradication of the COVID-19 pandemic.
2.2The emergence of Coronavirus disease-2019 as a pandemicAt the end of 2019, a novel Coronavirus emerged in Wuhan, China (Coronaviridae Study Group of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, 2020) and caused an outbreak of unusual viral pneumonia. The virus began its spread in the seafood wholesale market in the Wuhan, Hubei province of China. It was proposed that an infected animal, an intermediate host of the virus, was sold in the market, causing the spread of the virus in the marketplace. Growing evidence that bats are the natural host of SARS-CoV-2, which might have infected humans through an intermediate host such as pangolins and civet cats (Zhou et al., 2020). Owing to the high transmission rate of SARS-CoV-2, it spread quickly to the entire globe. On January 7, 2020, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention isolated a Coronavirus strain from a swab of a hospitalized patient (Chen, 2020). Outside mainland China, the first laboratory-confirmed case of SARS-CoV-2 infection was reported by Thailand on January 13, 2020 (Boldog et al., 2020). Subsequently, on February 11, 2020, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses named the novel Coronavirus as “SARS-CoV-2” and the WHO named the disease “COVID-19” [naming the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the virus that causes it]. According to the 11th situation report of WHO on novel Coronavirus, by the end of January 2020, SARS-CoV-2 spread to 19 countries outside Mainland China and 9826 confirmed cases were reported (World Health Organization, Novel Coronavirus (2019-NCoV) Situation Report-11, 2020). On the recommendations of the Emergency Committee, on January 30, 2020, the WHO declared the outbreak to be a public health emergency of international concern (World Health Organization, Novel Coronavirus (2019-NCoV) Situation Report-11, 2020). Considering the global threat due to the widespread SARS-CoV-2 infection in more than 100 countries, on March 11, 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 as a pandemic (World Health Organization, Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report-52, 2020). Till August 2021, North America has reported the highest number of confirmed cases, followed by Europe and Asia Fig. 2.1A
. In terms of a total of COVID-19 cases and the number of deaths, the United States of America (USA) tops the list, followed by India, Brazil, and Russia Fig. 2.1B and C (World Health Organization, WHO Coronavirus COVID-19, n.d.). The chronology of important events is given in Figure 2.1, Figure 2.2
.Figure 2.1Geographical distribution of Coronavirus disease-2019 cases. (A) Proportion of COVID-19 cases in different continents; (B) Top 10 affected countries in terms of a total number of COVID-19 cases; (C) Top 10 affected countries in terms of a total number of deaths caused due to COVID-19 (till August 11, 2021).Figure 2.2Chronology of events related to Coronavirus disease-2019 pandemic.2.3Origin and transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2The transmission mode of SARS-CoV-2 is mainly person-to-person. The exact transmission route in “the patient zero” and primary transmission of SRAS-CoV-2 is not known. However, it became clear that it is zoonotic transmission (Chen, 2020). Bats are the natural reservoir of Coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, and are considered as a potential reservoir of SARS-CoV-2 (Guo et al., 2020; Mahdy et al., 2020). Indeed, the SARS-CoV-2 genome shows 96.2 % nucleotide sequence similarity to RaTG13, a bat Coronavirus, suggesting that SARS-CoV-2 might have originated and transmitted from bats. Bats are not available for sale in the Wuhan seafood market, suggesting that the virus might have been transmitted to humans through some other intermediate hosts. Pangolins, civet cats, and snakes have been suggested as intermediate hosts of SARS-CoV-2 (Guo et al., 2020). SARS-CoV-2 might have also been transmitted from wild animals to pets and farm animals that infect human beings (Mahdy et al., 2020) Fig. 2.3
.Figure 2.3Transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) through an intermediate host. SARS-CoV-2 might have evolved from a bat virus. SARS-CoV-2 might have reached humans through intermediate hosts (wild animals or pet and farm animals).Among all carriers of SARS-CoV-2, Rhinolophids bats are more dangerous carriers that do not exhibit any clinical signs of infection.2.3.1Human-to-human transmissionCurrently, available data shows that the main mode of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is human-to-human transmission. It is thought to occur mainly through close contact, either in the form of respiratory droplets or aerosols. Droplets can be broadly described as macro entities (>5 µm) that can gravitate to the ground, that is, approximately within 3–6 feet of the source person (Klompas et al., 2020). Viruses present in respiratory secretion in infected persons spread via coughing, sneezing, talking, or through contaminated surface contact. The mean incubation period for the disease is 5–6 days. When a healthy person comes in contact with an infected person, either direct or indirect (inhalation) may cause disease Fig. 2.3. Infection might also occur through touching the infected surface and, after that, touching the face, nose, and mouth. This type of transmission can be prevented by frequent hand wash, sanitizing hands with alcohol-based sanitizer, and avoiding touching the face, nose, and mouth through the contaminated hand. SARS-CoV-2 transmission for long distances may also occur through aerosols (small droplets that are suspended in air) through inhalation, but the extent to which this mode of transmission is contributed is controversial (Klompas et al., 2020). Generally, many symptomatic COVID-19 patients may infect other human beings who come in close contact. However, most of the asymptomatic patients can serve as carriers of COVID-19, and can unknowingly transmit infection. This may be one of the reasons for drastically and rapidly increased infection worldwide and that lax in the practice of isolation and social distancing and also within families having asymptomatic carrier patients (Phan et al., 2020, Riley et al., 2003). Another way of transmission is dust particles laden with the virus. They will enter and get themselves deep-seated in the respiratory tract. When the dust particles or droplet nuclei are less than 5 µm, they can travel greater than 1-meter distance and become much more problematic. It becomes a threat when there is aerosolization of particles, especially during endobronchial intubation, bronchoscopy, cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, and other procedures.2.3.1.1Fecal–oral route transmissionBesides airborne, SARS-CoV-2 can also be transmitted via other routes. The virus is shed in the feces of the COVID-19 patient. But the fecal–oral route transmission of the disease is still not clear. It has been observed that patients who have been discharged after completing the treatment and whose throat swabs tested negative for the virus showed a positive result for the virus in the stool samples. A study has shown that even asymptomatic COVID-19 patients shed the virus in the stools. This shedding of virus in stool samples is much more common in pediatric patients (Xu et al., 2020). The spread of the virus through this route occurs due to poor sanitation. Therefore, stool samples of COVID-19 patients should also be handled very carefully.
2.3.1.2Vertical transmissionThe transmission of Coronaviruses from mother to baby is not fully understood (Kotlyar et al., 2021). However, babies born to COVID-19 patients showed an elevated titer of IgM antibodies as early as 2 hours after the birth (Dong et al., 2020), raising the possibility of vertical transmission of the virus. No vertical transmission was reported to the newborns in the case of cesarean section (Chen, 2020), but the presence of the SARS-CoV-2 genome in one out of 32 specimens of umbilical cord blood, at-term placenta, vaginal mucosa of pregnant women and breast milk specimen has been reported (Fenizia et al., 2020). Thus, based on the current evidence, the possibility of vertical transmission either through vaginal delivery or through cesarean is very low.2.3.1.3Sexual routeSeminal fluid from COVID-19 patients who recovered from the disease tested negative. However, semen testing for SARS-CoV-2 resulted in 15.8% positivity in 15.8% COVID-19 patients, of which some were in the acute stage of infection and others were in the recovery phase (Li et al., 2020). The study by Pan et al. showed that there was a low expression of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in human testes, and SARS-CoV-2 was not detected in the semen of recovered patients (Pan et al., 2020). Considering the fact that SARS-CoV-2 was detected in the semen of recovering patients, thus there is a risk of transmission through the sexual route, and safe practices should be followed.2.3.1.4Ocular routeThe ocular surface may also serve as a reservoir and source of SARS-CoV-2 infection. It could be transmitted through hand–eye contact or aerosol or the nasolacrimal route (Qu et al., 2021).2.4Infectiousness and transmissibility severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2The basic reproduction number (R0) is the expected number of secondary cases that could arise from a single case in a susceptible population (Dhar Chowdhury & Oommen, 2020). R0 is a very important parameter in the epidemiology of infectious diseases and it is used to measure the infectiousness or transmission potential of a communicable disease (Viceconte & Petrosillo, 2020). R0 represents the number of people each infected person will infect on average, assuming that there is no preexisting immunity in the population. Whereas effective reproduction number (Re) is the number of people that can be infected by an infected person at any specific time, and it changes as the community becomes increasingly immunized. When Re is greater than 1, it means each person affected by the transmittable disease is expected to infect a number of subjects that increase exponentially related to R0 value, and the disease is expected to spread through the susceptible population. If Re is less than 1, it means each case transmits the disease to one or less than one individual, and the disease is expected to die out in a population (Mahase, 2020). The concept of R0 is based on a complex model and may lead to misinterpretations, especially for the concerns about the spreading of infectious disease and the feasibility of controlling epidemics (20). The World Health Organization (WHO) has estimated the R0 for COVID-19, which ranges between 1.4 and 2.5 (Dhar Chowdhury & Oommen, 2020).2.5Pathogenesis of Coronavirus disease-2019The genome of SARS-CoV-2 is comprised of approximately 29 kilobases of single-stranded positive-sense RNA. The envelope surrounding the genome consists of four structural proteins: (1) a membrane protein (M), (2) an envelope protein (E), (3) a nucleoprotein, and (4) a spike protein (S). Spike glycoprotein is a very important component because it is responsible for the entry of the virus into the host cell. The detailed structure, genome, and proteomic markers of SARS-CoV-2 have been described in Chapter 4.
2.5.1Lung pathogenesisUpon exposure of a healthy person to a SARS-CoV-2 infected person, viral particles reach the superficial epithelium of the nasal cavity. The viral spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 binds to the target cells by ACE2, present on the epithelial cells of the nasal cavity. The entry of the virus into the epithelial cells is facilitated by transmembrane serine protease 2 (TMPRSS2), which helps in the fusion of the membrane. Children have a low-level expression of this ACE2 receptor, which explains the reason for the lower severity of the disease in children. From nasal epithelial cells, the pathway by which it enters into lower respiratory tract is not much clear. But there are two proposed theories. According to the first theory, microaspiration of virus particles leads to the spread of the virus to the lower respiratory tract. The other theory is the direct entry of virus particles into the lower respiratory tract by bypassing the nasal cavity. Neuropilin-1 is abundantly expressed in the respiratory and olfactory epithelium and enhances the SARS-CoV-2 infectivity (Cantuti-Castelvetri et al., 2020). Once the viral genome enters the host cell, its genes replicate, undergo transcription, and form new virions (Shanmugam et al., 2020). After reaching the lower respiratory tract, the virus attaches to the alveolar epithelial cells through ACE2 receptors present on them. Type-2 alveolar epithelial cells are more involved than type-1. SARS-CoV-2 has a unique polybasic S1/S2 protease cleavage site and an insertion of tetra-peptide SPRR, which increases cleavage efficiency. Consequent to the engagement of spike with ACE2, TMPRSS2 present in the host cell membrane cleaves the above site and thus exposing S2 fusion protein, resulting in the fusion of the virus with the host cell membrane. After the membrane fusion, the internalization of viral RNA occurs, resulting in the replication and formation of viral proteins. SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid proteins bind with the viral RNA, covered by envelope and membrane proteins resulting in complete virion formation (Fig. 2.4
) (Shanmugam et al., 2020).Figure 2.4Pathophysiology of severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) induced lung injury. Following inhalation (1), SARS-CoV-2 infects type-2 alveolar cells, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells through binding of its spike protein with angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor. The serine protease type-2 transmembrane serine protease (TMPRSS2) promotes viral uptake by cleaving spike. SARS-CoV-2 replicates in the host cells and generates new virions (2). SARS-CoV-2 damages type-2 alveolar cells and reduce surfactant synthesis, thereby increasing surface tension causing the collapse of alveoli (3). Damage-associated molecular pattern (DAMP) released by macrophages and alveolar cells recruit T lymphocytes, monocytes, and neutrophils. These cells secrete an excess amount of inflammatory cytokines resulting in a cytokine storm (4).SARS-CoV-2 damages type-2 alveolar cells, which are essential for surfactant synthesis and repair of damaged tissues. Thus, there will be an increase in the surface tension, causing dyspnoea. In addition, the viral genome and proteins act as a pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) and stimulate the innate immune system. In the cytoplasm, viral RNA is recognized by cytosolic receptor melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), the viral RNA receptor retinoic-acid inducible gene I (RIG-I), and nucleotidyl transferase cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS). In the endosome, viral RNA is recognized by endosomal TLRs, leading to activation of downstream cascades, resulting in cytokine production, especially type-1I interferon (IFN-1). Other cytokines such as IL-1, IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, IL-17, macrophage colony-stimulating factor (MCSF), granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), MCP-1, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α), interferon gamma-induced protein-10 (IP-10), IFN-γ, TNF-α, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) levels also increase during COVID-19 infection, causing massive a cytokine storm and thus worsening the patient’s condition (Tahaghoghi-Hajghorbani et al., 2020). Monocytes release proinflammatory cytokines responsible for pneumocyte apoptosis. Macrophages release chemokines and cytokines, which increase capillary permeability and also cause the recruitment of neutrophils. Excessive degranulation of neutrophils causes permanent damage to pneumocytes breaking the alveolar–capillary barrier. The end result of all these mechanisms is a transmigration of blood proteins resulting in alveolar and interstitial edema (Batah & Fabro, 2021). Inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including C-C motif chemokine ligand (CCL)-2, CCL3, CCL5, C-X-C motif ligand (CXCL)-8, and CXCL9, lead to accumulation of macrophages, neutrophils, monocytes, causing damage to the lungs and other tissues (Tahaghoghi-Hajghorbani et al., 2020).The common symptom in COVID-19 patients is hypoxia, if worsened, may lead to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). An unusual phenomenon seen in COVID patients is silent hypoxemia. The patients with silent hypoxemia experience no or mild respiratory discomfort and dyspnoea despite critically low partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) (Grasselli et al., 2020). Pulmonary pathology of deceased COVID-19 subjects with ARDS shows typical features of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) with hyaline membranes (Fig. 2.5
) and AT2 cell hyperplasia (Borczuk et al., 2020). DAD has two phases; the first one is the exudative phase, which involves hyaline membrane formation due to the polymerization of fibrin present in plasma leaked into interstitial space. This phase is accompanied by alveolar–capillary barrier injury, resulting in red blood cell extravasation and inflammatory cell infiltration. The second phase of DAD is the proliferative phase, which involves excessive fibroblast and myofibroblast proliferation resulting in acute fibrinous organizing pneumonia with extracellular matrix deposition (Batah & Fabro, 2021). Radiological findings on computed tomography show bilateral ground-glass opacities along with peripheral distribution. Lung fibrosis is a complication of ARDS which occurs in severe COVID-19 patients. It occurs due to profibrotic factors like transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) released from the damaged lung tissues. Usually, it promotes tissue repair and causes resolution of infection-induced damage. But in severely affected patients, excessive secretion of TGF-beta and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition results in fibrosis of the lung (Batah & Fabro, 2021).Figure 2.5Pathophysiology of diffuse alveolar damage and acute respiratory distress syndrome. Diffuse alveolar has two phases; the first one is the exudative phase, which involves hyaline membrane formation. This phase is accompanied by alveolar-capillary barrier injury, resulting in red blood cell extravasation and inflammatory cell infiltration. The second phase of diffuse alveolar damage is the proliferative phase, which involves excessive fibroblast and myofibroblast proliferation resulting in acute fibrinous organizing pneumonia with extracellular matrix deposition.2.5.2Hematological manifestationsThe hematological manifestations in COVID-19 patients include both thrombotic and bleeding disorders. Disseminated-intravascular coagulation (DIC) has been noted in COVID-19 patients. There are two types of DIC (1) enhanced fibrinolytic DIC and (2) suppressed fibrinolytic DIC. In enhanced fibrinolytic DIC, the thrombus is formed and is broken by fibrinolytic activation. D-Dimer is an important marker in the determination of the prognosis of COVID-19 patients. It is formed as a result of the degradation of fibrin polymer by plasmin. In suppressed fibrinolytic DIC, the thrombus is not broken down, resulting in only a mild increase in D-Dimer levels (Asakura & Ogawa, 2021). Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the DIC in COVID-19 patients (Lo et al., 2020). One of the mechanisms responsible for thrombotic manifestations is endothelial cell disruption. Inflammatory cytokines released due to SARS-CoV-2 infection activate endothelial activation, which also causes thrombosis. Damaged endothelial cells and/or activated endothelial cells release Weibel-Palade granules containing ultra-large molecular-weight multimers of von Willebrand factor (vWF). These ultra-large granules spontaneously bind to the platelets and cause microthrombosis. Usually, these large granules are broken down by ADAMTS13, a vWF-cleaving protease. But the activity of ADAMTS13 is reduced in COVID-19 patients. The elevated levels of vWF and increased clotting activity of factor-VIII are due to the acute phase reaction, resulting in thrombosis (Lo et al., 2020).Complement activation is another mechanism responsible for hematological manifestations observed in COVID-19 patients. The complement pathway mediates during mild-to-moderate inflammation, leading to the removal of harmful agents and thus helping in tissue regeneration (Lo et al., 2020). Complement activation and cytokine production are interlinked to each other. Low complement levels inhibit cytokine production; however, uncontrolled action of complement pathway results in hyperinflammation and much collateral damage, which include excess production of cytokines by macrophages. The antimicrobial activity of neutrophils gets reduced, and endothelial cells produce tissue factor which increases thrombosis resulting in DIC. Adding to these, SARS-CoV-2 can increase the transcription of complement (C1r, C1s, C3) and coagulation genes (fibrinogen) in the lungs and in the liver (Lo et al., 2020).COVID-19 patients present with various forms of thrombosis, including retiform purpura with extensive deposition of C3d, C4d, MAC, and viral spike protein (Lo et al., 2020). Moreover, SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (N) protein has been shown to directly activate the complement pathway. It can increase mannose-binding lectin (MBL)-associated serine protease-2 (MASP-2)-dependent complement activation. Ficolin-2 expression gets upregulated in monocyte-derived macrophages, which further increases the MBL pathway of complement activation. This results in degranulation and increased production of cytokines, NETosis, increased production of reactive oxygen species and eicosanoids. Owing to the membrane activation complex (MAC)-mediated cell death, damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) are released, which acts as positive feedback and further increases complement production (Lo et al., 2020). Notably, N-protein-mediated complement activation occurs only in the absence of an envelope membrane (Lo et al., 2020). In mild disease, a complete virus with an envelope is released. But in severe cases, due to the collateral damage to the cells, immature virions lacking the envelope are released and thus expose N-protein, resulting in enhanced complement activation and elevated thrombosis (Lo et al., 2020). The complement and coagulation pathways are interlinked in two ways. MAC and MASP2 can cleave prothrombin. Factor 10a, plasmin, thrombin can cleave C3. In this way, they together interact and cause an increase in thrombosis and thus explain inflammation around retiform purpura in COVID-19 patients (Lo et al., 2020).2.5.3Cardiovascular manifestationsThe frequent cardiovascular complications observed in COVID-19 patients are myocardial infarction, heart failure, venous-thromboembolic episodes, and palpitations. Acute myocardial infarction is due to atherosclerotic plaque rupture due to inflammation and hyperstability (Long et al., 2020). Some of the COVID-19 patients experience palpitations which may be due to hypoxia, abnormal metabolism, and inflammatory stress. The pathology involved in heart failure is not known, but it is most likely due to the exacerbation of previously undiagnosed heart failure. So, immune system dysregulation, hypercoagulability, increased metabolic demand are some causes of cardiovascular diseases in COVID-19 patients (Long et al., 2020).2.5.4Kidney and excretory systemCOVID-19 patients with preexisting renal diseases have a poor prognosis and have high mortality. So, understanding the pathogenesis of kidney involvement and treating it is very much essential to reduce mortality in COVID-19 patients. In COVID-19 patients, acute kidney injury increases the severity of the disease, resulting in increased mortality and morbidity in the patients (Han & Ye, 2020). Kidney damage involves tubular damage, impaired glomerular filtration, proteinuria and is associated with elevated levels of serum urea and serum creatinine (Han & Ye, 2020). The virus can gain entry through ACE2 receptors present in proximal kidney tubules, making tubular damage more common (Han & Ye, 2020). Inflammatory cytokines and hypoxia also aggravate sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (AKI). Rhabdomyolysis caused due to further hypoxia increases the damage to the kidney. Diarrhea caused due to GI injury leads to dehydration which may also play some role in damaging kidney function Fig. 2.6
.
Figure 2.6Pathophysiology of renal injury by severe acute respiratory syndrome-Coronavirus-2. Acute renal injury in Coronavirus disease-2019 patients involves tubular damage, impaired glomerular filtration, and myoglobinuria. The virus can directly cause harm to the kidney by binding to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 present in proximal renal tubules. Inflammatory cytokines, rhabdomyolysis, nephrotoxins, and hypoxia also aggravate acute kidney injury (Han & Ye, 2020).2.5.5Neurological manifestationsThe neurological manifestations in COVID-19 can be divided into two groups: central nervous system (CNS) manifestations and peripheral nervous system (PNS) manifestations. The symptoms in CNS manifestations include headache and dizziness, and PNS include dysgeusia and hyposmia (Pryce-Roberts et al., 2020). One of the most common symptoms experienced by COVID-19 patients is anosmia. ACE2 and TMPRSS2 are expressed in vascular pericytes of the olfactory bulb as well as in the olfactory neuroepithelium (Lin et al., 2021). SARS-CoV-2 binds ACE2 present on the olfactory bulb; thus, via olfactory nerves, it spreads into the CNS through the cribriform plate, thus causing anosmia. Another way of transmission is the retrograde pathway through trigeminal and vagus nerves and also by entry of infected leucocytes through the blood–brain barrier (BBB) into the CNS, causing anosmia (Lin et al., 2021).BBB is involved in many pathophysiological mechanisms resulting in neurological manifestations of COVID-19. ACE2 is expressed in varying levels on the vascular endothelium of BBB, which gets infected by SARS-CoV-2 triggers proinflammatory and procoagulable states and leads to vasculitis (Johansson et al., 2021). SARS-CoV-2 binding to ACE2 receptors present in sympathoadrenal systems may disrupt the autoregulation of systemic and intracranial blood pressure, thus causing dysregulation of blood pressure (Johansson et al., 2021). Systemic inflammatory responses also affect the integrity of BBB. Blood vessel-associated microglia maintain the integrity of BBB through tight junction proteins. Astrocytes help in the maintenance of BBB endothelium via posttranslational modifications of occludin, a component of tight junction proteins. Microglia gets activated by a systemic inflammatory response and thus disrupts the BBB, which further leads to increased neuro-inflammation and hyperexcitability, resulting in seizures, functional disturbance, fatigue, encephalopathy, and neuronal death. Severe hypoxia due to respiratory complications cause cerebral vasodilation and interstitial edema (Johansson et al., 2021). Headache experienced by COVID-19 patients is due to the invasion of trigeminal nerve endings directly by the virus in the nasal cavity. Elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines also affect the perivascular nerve endings, resulting in headaches (Sharifian-Dorche et al., 2020).2.5.5.1Acute cerebrovascular eventsAcute ischemic stroke and intracranial hemorrhage have been noted in COVID-19 patients. SARS-CoV-2 infection induces coagulation abnormalities, resulting in elevated levels of procoagulant factors, including fibrinogen, IL-6, D-Dimer, and platelets that contribute to many thrombo-embolic events. Furthermore, the elevated inflammatory markers such as CRP, IL-6, IL-7 increase the vulnerability of atherosclerotic plaque to rupture. Imbalance in rennin–angiotensin-system (RAS) results in endothelial dysfunction. All the above-stated reasons contribute to ischemic stroke (Sharifian-Dorche et al., 2020). Several hematological manifestations of COVID-19, including DIC, thrombocytopenia, increased prothrombin time, may cause intracranial hemorrhage. The RAS system plays a very important role in blood pressure regulation. Downregulation of ACE2 receptors is an important component of the RAS system. ACE2 catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin 2 (Ang 2) to Ang 1. Ang 1 is a potent vasoconstrictor and atherogenic molecule, and the balance between Ang 2 and Ang 1 regulate blood pressure, and ACE2 plays a critical role in this balance. ACE2 after SARS-CoV-2 binding is internalized and degraded. Hence ACE2 activity on the cell surface is reduced, leading to an increase in the concentration of Ang 2 and a decrease in the concentration of Ang (1–7). The downregulation of ACE2 results in dysfunction of cerebral autoregulation, and an increase in blood pressure results in arterial rupture and hemorrhage (Dettlaff-Pokora and Swierczynski, 2021, Sharifian-Dorche et al., 2020).2.5.6Psychiatric manifestationsThe SARS-CoV-2 infection also results in psychiatric manifestations like psychosis, posttraumatic stress disorder, and even suicide in some patients (Orsini et al., 2020). Sleep deprivation and feeling excessive fear are some of the reasons for depression and posttraumatic stress disorder in these patients. The psychiatric symptoms may be due to a direct neurotropic effect or may be due to a systemic immune-inflammatory response (Orsini et al., 2020). The proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF-alpha, IL-1, IL-6 produced by cytokine storm, exert their effect on indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase. This enzyme is responsible for the degradation of tryptophan which is important for the synthesis of serotonin, a mood elevator. The increase in the activity of this enzyme results in depletion of serotonin causing depressive symptoms and other psychiatric manifestations. Furthermore, prolonged stay of COVID-19 in the intensive care unit causes psychosis, delirium in some patients (Orsini et al., 2020).2.5.7Dermatological manifestationsCommon dermatological manifestations observed in COVID-19 patients are maculopapular eruptions, acral areas of erythema with vesicles and pustules, urticarial lesions, vesicular eruptions, livedo or necrosis (Kaya et al., 2020). The pathophysiological mechanism behind dermatological manifestations is the cytokine storm, which stimulates the dermal dendritic cells, macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes and promotes erythema, urticarial lesions, and eruptions (Kaya et al., 2020). Obliterative microangiopathy due to endothelial and myointimal growth has also been reported in COVID-19 patients (Kaya et al., 2020). This occurs due to complement activation resulting in pseudo-chilbian and purpuric lesions. ACE2 receptors are also present in the basal layer of the epidermis and in the endothelial cells of dermal blood vessels, which form the target site for the action of the virus and result in acantholysis and dyskeratosis (Kaya et al., 2020).2.5.8Reproductive system manifestationsACE2 receptors and Ang 2 are widely expressed on all the components of the female reproductive system, including the ovary, uterus, and vagina (Jing et al., 2020). ACE2 and Ang 1 regulate follicle development, ovulation, luteal angiogenesis, and degeneration. Ang 1 is an endogenous ligand for the G protein-coupled receptor Mas and specifically inhibits Ang 2 by the antagonism of AT1 receptors (Jing et al., 2020). Thus, SARS-CoV-2 affects ovarian tissue, granulosa cells and affects ovarian function, oocyte viability, resulting in infertility and miscarriage. It also damages endometrial cells and thus distressing the implantation of the embryo. In pregnant women, it causes vascular mal-perfusion of the placental bed, chorangio-hemangioma, and intervillous fibrin deposition (Jing et al., 2020). Male gender serves as a risk factor for COVID-19. TMPRSS2 receptor expression is enhanced by the androgen receptor. TMPRSS2 gene is expressed more in the adult prostate. In the same way, ACE2 expression is enhanced and causes the passage of virus into cells by androgens.2.5.9Gastrointestinal and hepatic manifestationsThe most common gastrointestinal (GI) symptom observed in COVID-19 patients is diarrhea. Other symptoms include nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, abdominal pain, and dysgeusia (Cha et al., 2020). The symptoms related to the involvement of the liver mostly include a change in the laboratory parameters. These include elevated levels of serum aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, bilirubin, prolonged prothrombin time, and elevated lactate dehydrogenase (Cha et al., 2020). Some of the symptoms are thought to be due to the interaction between CNS and the gut. The proinflammatory cytokines cause alteration in the gut-CNS axis of the vagal nerve or through the lymphatic or vascular system. The lateral hypothalamic nuclei control nausea and vomiting, and if it is affected due to neurological damage, it may also become the cause of vomiting and diarrhea (Perisetti et al., 2020). ACE2 receptor is abundantly expressed in the GI tract, including the tongue, esophagus, stomach, ileum, rectum, and possess mucosa. The gastric acid secreted in the stomach kills the virus, but still, the virus finds its way into the duodenum and distal ileum, showing its effect (Perisetti et al., 2020). Once the virus gains entry into the cells, it divides rapidly and proliferates, resulting in cytopathic changes causing viral cytopathic effects. In addition to these, COVID-19 patients are given many antibiotics which cause alteration of gut flora. The cytokine storm seen in COVID-19 patients increases IL-2, IL-7, GM-CSF, TNF-alpha, which causes alteration in the GI motility and also plays a role in alteration of GI flora resulting in diarrhea. Also, medications used in the treatment of COVID-19 have side effects like diarrhea (Perisetti et al., 2020). The liver is much less affected in COVID-19 patients because it does not express many ACE2 receptors (Perisetti et al., 2020, PMID: 32807535). But the cholangiocytes and biliary epithelium have more of these receptors, making them a potential site for the virus to act. The virus gains access into the biliary system through the portal vein. This way, it can directly cause hepatocytes' cytopathic effect, resulting in microvesicular steatosis (Perisetti et al., 2020).2.6Effect of host factors on Coronavirus disease-2019 pathogenesisThe disease outcome depends not only on the virulence factors but also on some host factors like gender, age, obesity, tobacco consumption/smoking, and comorbidities like preexisting respiratory disease, cardiovascular disease, genetic factors, cerebrovascular diseases, diabetes, hypertension. The severity of the disease is different in males and females. Females have a better prognosis compared to males. This might be due to the immunomodulatory effect of estrogen. Virus replication is suppressed by estrogen, resulting in less viral load in females (Shanmugam et al., 2020). Estrogen causes suppression of some micro-RNA like miR125 and let7A, resulting in repression of monocyte-macrophage infiltration (Shanmugam et al., 2020). Some genes present on the X-chromosome like TLR-7, which upregulates IFN-beta in dendritic cells and provides protection (Shanmugam et al., 2020). Obesity causes the release of certain cytokines like TGF-beta, TNF-alpha, IL-6, which delay innate and acquired immunity and result in the fast spread of the virus. Attenuation of cytokine signaling proteins in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells and lungs, which reduces the production of IFN-1, and proinflammatory cytokines. In people with hypertension, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs), cause an increase in the production of ACE receptors, making them more prone to the virus. In addition, in diabetic patients, MHC-1 expression and antibody production is reduced due to glycation. Furthermore, decreased production of IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha by NK cells and macrophages results in immune paralysis (Shanmugam et al., 2020). The macrophages present in the lungs of smokers produce fewer amounts of IL-1, -6, and TNF-alpha. In smokers, decreased NK cell activity and increased production of ACE receptors make them more prone to COVID-19.2.7ConclusionCOVID-19 primarily affects the respiratory system, vasculature, and immune system. SARS-CoV-2 infected patients can have a range of clinical manifestations ranging from no symptoms to critical illness associated with ARDS, septic shock, and multiorgan failure. Effective antiviral drugs for SARS-CoV-2 are still not available. Therefore, preventive measures such as social distancing, personal hygiene, and usage of masks along with vaccination are key armor for the containment of the COVID-19 pandemic. Owing to evolutionary pressure, SARS-CoV-2 is rapidly mutating, and several VOC have emerged that have further spread to several countries. The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 VOC with increased contagiousness or escaping neutralizing antibodies poses challenges in eradicating SARS-CoV-2. Thus, the development of an effective antiviral drug is the need of the hour.AcknowledgmentFunding received from the Science Engineering and Research Board, Govt. of India (IPA/2020/000130) to AK is gratefully acknowledged.


Title: Making sense of spike D614G in SARS-CoV-2 transmission

No full text body available.


Title: SARS-CoV-2 Variant Spike and accessory gene mutations alter pathogenesis

IntroductionIn December of 2019, a cluster of viral pneumonia cases were observed in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.1 The etiologic agent of this infection was found to be a novel coronavirus that we now call severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).2 By early 2020, the virus was rapidly spreading, leading to infections on all seven continents and in every country around the world. There have since been over 420 million cases and almost six million deaths from this virus.3 Despite the rapid development and deployment of vaccines, the pandemic persists.SARS-CoV-2 is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus that is 79% identical in sequence to SARS-CoV-1, the virus responsible for localized epidemic outbreaks beginning in February 2003.4 The genome of this and other beta coronaviruses is composed of Open Reading Frames (ORFs) which are functionally divided between replicase proteins, structural proteins, and accessory proteins, the latter of which are unique to each CoV species.5, 6 From the 5′ to 3′ end, the virus encodes the replicase (ORF1a/b) and the four ORFS for the structural proteins spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N). The replicase is responsible for encoding sixteen nonstructural proteins that compose the replicative machinery of the virus. Additionally, interspersed with the structural proteins at the 3′ end of the genome is a variety of accessory ORFs. The accessory ORFs encode proteins which are not essential for viral replication in vitro but generally contribute to viral pathogenesis. The accessory ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 are very similar to those of SARS-CoV-1, and many of the functions of these ORFs have been inferred based on the previously identified functions of the SARS-CoV-1 accessory ORFs.5The functions of the accessory ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 involve modulation of several different host pathways including antagonism of the innate immune response. For example, SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b has been shown to antagonize interferon signaling and ORF7a has been shown to interfere with the interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) BST2.7, 8, 9 SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 also participates in this antagonism of the innate immune response as it has been shown to antagonize the IFN-induced nuclear translocation of STAT1 which results in the reduced expression of ISGs.10The continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic is largely due to the emergence of mutated strains or “variants” of SARS-CoV-2. The variants differ most notably in the sequence of their spike proteins, which bind to the receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) to allow for internalization of the virus. As the spike protein is the immunodominant antigen, the emergence of variants has raised concerns regarding the breadth of protection of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is important to note that many of the variants of SARS-CoV-2 possess mutations in one or more of the accessory proteins. The impact of such mutations outside of the spike protein on pathogenesis of these variants remains understudied.To elucidate the role of the accessory proteins of SARS-CoV-2 in pathogenesis, we developed a synthetic genomics assembly approach based on transformation-associated recombination (TAR) in yeast for the creation of infectious clones of SARS-CoV-2.11–14 We then synthesized deletion viruses of ORFs 3a/3b, 6, 7a/7b, and 8 in the prototype SARS-CoV-2 (isolate USA/-WA1/2020 or WA-1) strain of SARS-CoV-2. We then investigated the replicative fitness of these viruses in vitro before proceeding to characterization of the effect of these accessory deletions on pathogenesis in a murine model. To begin to characterize the impact of naturally occurring accessory mutations found in the variants on pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2, we developed recombinant variant spike proteins in the WA-1 backbone (B.1.1.7, B.1.351, and P.1). We then compared the replicative fitness in vitro of these recombinant viruses to the parent variants and characterized differences in pathogenesis in a mouse model.MethodsInfectious Clone Construction and RescueTAR-cloning SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragments:To clone each SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragment, each of the target PCR amplicons of the genome was cloned into a TAR vector backbone for replication in budding yeast and Escherichia coli. TAR vectors consist of the vector backbone flanked by restriction sites to release the genomic region and homologous “hooks” of sequence. To assemble DNA fragment clones, the TAR vectors were PCR amplified from pCC1BAC-his3 with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA) using the construction primers (labeled “Con”, Table S1).15 40 bp of homology and an I-SceI restriction site were introduced by the Con primers to each end of the vector backbone. Each DNA fragment was amplified with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA) using cDNA from SARS-CoV-2/human/USA/WA-CDC-WA1/2020 and contains 80 bp of homology to its adjacent fragments for assembly. PCR products were digested with DpnI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) before transformation as per the manufacturer’s directions.The SARS-CoV-2 WA1 genome was cloned as 7 individual DNA fragments: 1a-1, 1a-2, 1a-3, 1b-1, 1b-2, S and AP. 50 fmol of each WA1 PCR amplicon was transformed with 15 fmol of the appropriate amplified YCpBAC vector into Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain VL6–48N spheroplasts (MATα, his3-Δ200, trp1-Δ1, ura3-Δ1, lys2, ade2–101, met14, cir°) as described in.13–15 Transformants were patched on synthetic dropout medium plates without histidine (SDhis). After sufficient growth, yeast cells were lysed by incubation in 25 mM NaOH at 95°C for 30 min. Detection PCR amplification, with Q5 polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), lysed cell supernatant as template, and detection primers (RCO493 + “Det-F” or RCO495 + “Det-R” primers, Table S2), was used to confirm correct junctions between the fragment and vector. Sanger sequencing of PCR products (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ) across the SARS-CoV-2 regions was used to verify the DNA fragment clone. DNA of sequenced-validated clones was extracted from yeast patches and electroporated into E. coli DH10B (Thermo Fisher).13
E. coli transformants were screened by colony PCR amplification for correct junction sizes with the appropriate “F” and “R” detection primers (Table S2). Plasmid DNAs from the DNA fragment clones were isolated from E. coli by the Purelink HiPure Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) and modified or used for full-length genome assembly.DNA fragment modifications:In vitro CRISPR-Cas9 digestion and TAR assembly were used to make accessory ORF deletions in the AP DNA fragment. Cas9 target sites near the desired mutant coordinate were identified using Benchling’s CRISPR guide RNA design tool (www.benchling.com/crispr/). Single guide RNA (sgRNA) was transcribed from a PCR amplicon, generated as described in PMID: 28928148, containing 18 bp of specific target sequence upstream of the PAM sequence. The AP DNA fragment was digested in vitro using Cas9 nuclease, Streptococcus pyogenes (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), as described previously13 An oligonucleotide containing 40 bases of homology to either side of the target accessory ORF was TAR-assembled with each appropriate Cas9-digested AP DNA fragment in yeast by spheroplast transformation. Yeast transformants were screened for the desired mutation by Sanger sequencing of PCR amplicons (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ) using lysed yeast culture supernatant as template. DNA was then extracted from yeast, transformed into E. coli, screened for correctness, and isolated from E. coli as with DNA fragment clones described above.SARS-CoV-2 variant spike genes were generated as described previously.25 Briefly, to generate SARS-CoV-2 variant spike genes, short fragments were amplified with Platinum SuperFi II DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) using the wild-type S DNA fragment clone as template. Variant mutations (Table S6) were introduced by primers into each amplicon, which had 30–35 bp homology at each end between the adjacent fragments. Amplicons were digested with DpnI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) to remove template DNA and purified with a Qiagen PCR purification kit. 50 fmol of each amplicon and 15 fmol of YCpBAC vector were assembled using a standard Gibson assembly reaction (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), transformed into E. coli DH10B competent cells (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA), and plated on LB medium with 12.5 mg/ml chloramphenicol. Assembled plasmids were confirmed to have the desired mutations by colony PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ), and then isolated from E. coli using the Purelink HiPure Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). Table S3 lists the primers used for the construction of the variant S DNA fragments.Full-length genome assembly:The TAR vector for assembly of the full-length genome was amplified from pCC1BAC-ura3 using primers ConCMVpR and ConBGHtermF with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA).15 The CMV promoter was amplified from HCMV Toledo genomic DNA using primers CMVpromF and CMVpromR. Hepatitis delta virus ribozyme (HDV Rz) with bovine growth hormone (BGH) terminator fragment was obtained as a gBlock (IDT), Hu1-34. A fragment to introduce a BamHI restriction site and a fragment with a polyA region were synthesized by IDT (Pcmv-BamHI fix and PA35-HDV fix, Table S4). Each fragment has 40 bp of homology at each end to its adjacent fragments. To generate the TAR vector for the complete genome, the pCC1-ura3 amplicon, the CMV amplicon, the BamHI fragment, the polyA fragment, and the HDVR+BGH region were assembled into circular DNA in yeast by TAR.SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragments, isolated from E. coli, were digested with I-SceI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Ma) to release the overlapping DNA fragments from the vector whereas the full-length TAR vector was linearized by BamHI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) digestion. 50 fmol of each fragment and 15 fmol of full-length genome TAR vector were mixed with yeast spheroplasts for TAR-assembly.12, 13 Transformants were patched on SD-URA plates, and positive clones were screened by PCR amplification with the detection primers listed in Table S5. The subsequent DNA isolation from yeast, transformation into and isolation from E. coli were performed as described for the SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragment clones.Virus Reconstitution:24 hours prior to transfection, 5e4 VeroE6 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were plated per well in 1mL of VeroE6 media (DMEM (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD), 10% FBS (Gibco, Waltham, MA), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gemini Bio Products, Sacramento, CA), 1% L-Glutamine (Gibco, Waltham, MA)). For transfection, 5μg of the infectious clone and 100ng of a SARS-CoV-2 WA-1 nucleoprotein expression plasmid were diluted in 100μL of OptiMEM (Gibco, Waltham, MA). 3μL of TransIT-2020 (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI) was added and the reactions were incubated for 30 minutes prior to addition to the cells in the BSL-3. Cells were checked for cytopathic effect (CPE) 72–96 hours after transfection and the supernatant collected for plaque purification. For plaque purification, 6e5 VeroE6 cells were plated in a 6-well plate in 2mL of VeroE6 media 24 hours prior to infection. 25μL of this supernatant was then serial diluted 1:10 in DMEM and 200μL of this supernatant was added to the VeroE6 cells. The cells were rocked every 15 minutes for 1 hour at 37°C prior to overlay with 2mL of a solid agarose overlay (EMEM (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD), 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin, 1% L-Glutamine, 0.4% w/v SeaKem agarose (Lonza Biosciences, Morrisville, NC). Cells were incubated for 72 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2 and individual plaques were picked and then transferred to a well of a 6-well plate with 4e5 VeroE6 cells in 3mL VeroE6 media. After 48 hours, successful plaque picks were assessed by presence of CPE. 1mL of a well showing CPE was transferred to a T175 with 8e6 VeroE6 cells in 30mL of VeroE6 media and the virus stock was collected 48 and 72 hours after. The stocks were then titered by plaque assay.Titering of Virus Stocks, Growth Curve Samples, Tissue Homogenates by Plaque AssayThe day prior to infection, 2e5 VeroE6 cells were seeded per well in a 12-well plate in 1mL of VeroE6 media. Tissue samples were thawed and homogenized with 1mm beads in an Omni Bead ruptor (Omni International Inc., Kennesaw, GA) and then spun down at 21,000×g for 2 minutes. A 6-point dilution curve was prepared by serial diluting 25μL of sample 1:10 in 225μL DMEM. 200μL of each dilution was then added to the cells and the plates were rocked every 15 minutes for 1 hour at 37°C. After 1hr, 2mL of a semi-solid agarose overlay was added to each well (DMEM, 4%FBS, 0.06% UltraPure agarose (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). After 72 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2, plates were fixed in 2% PFA for 20 minutes, stained with 0.5mL of 0.05% Crystal Violet and 20% EtOH, and washed 2× with H2O prior to counting of plaques. The titer was then calculated. For tissue homogenates, this titer was multiplied by 40 based on the average tissue sample weight being 25mg.Growth Curve Infection and Sample ProcessingThe day prior to infection, 1.5e5 VeroE6 cells were seeded in a 12-well plate in 1.5mL of VeroE6 media. The day of infection, cells were washed with 500μL of DMEM and the volume of virus needed for an M.O.I. of 0.01 was diluted in 100μL DMEM and added to a well in triplicate. The plates were rocked every 15 minutes for 1hr at 37°C. After 1hr, the inoculum was removed, the cells were washed with 500μL of VeroE6 media and then 1.5mL of VeroE6 media was added to each well. 300μL of this supernatant was taken as the 0hr timepoint and replaced with fresh media. 300μL of supernatant was pulled and replaced with fresh media at 0hr, 6hr, 24hr, 48hr, 72hr, and 96hr timepoints. This supernatant was then titered.Infection of BALB/c and hACE2/k18 MiceAll animals were cared for according to the standards set forth by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Maryland-Baltimore. On Day 0, 12-week old BALB/c (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) and 12-week old hACE2 transgenic K18 mice (K18-hACE2) (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, ME) were anesthetized interperitoneally with 50μL ketamine(1.3mg/mouse)/ xylazine (0.38mg/mouse). The BALB/c mice were then inoculated with 1e4 PFU of each virus in 50μL PBS. The K18-hACE2 mice were inoculated with 1e3 PFU of each virus in 50μL PBS. The mock infected mice received 50μL PBS only. Mice were then weighed every day until the end of the experiment. Mice were euthanized with isoflurane on Day 2 and Day 4. From each mouse, the left lung was collected in PFA for histology and the right lung was split in half with one half placed in PBS for titer and one half placed in TRIzol for RNA extraction. For the K18-hACE2 mice, the brain was also collected, with half of the brain in PBS for titering and the other half in TRIzol for RNA extraction.RT-qPCR of Tissue HomogenatesSamples were homogenized in an Omni Bead ruptor in TRIzol and then the RNA was extracted from 300μL of each sample using the Direct-zol RNA miniprep kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA). 2μL of isolated RNA from each sample was then converted to cDNA using the RevertAID first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) in a 20μL volume. For qPCR for SARS2 Rdrp, 20μL reactions were prepared using 2μL cDNA, 1μL of 10mM Rdrp Forward primer (10006860, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), 1μL of Rdrp Reverse primer (10006881, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), and 10μL of 2x SYBR Green (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). The reactions were then run on a 7500 Fast Dx Real-Time PCR Instrument (4357362R, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). For qPCR for murine GAPDH, 20μL reactions were prepared using 2μL cDNA, 1μL of a 20x murine GAPDH primer (MM.pt.39a.1, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), and 10μL of 2x SYBR Green. The reactions were then run on a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR Instrument (A28133, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA).H/E Staining of Lungs and Pathological ScoringLungs were scored in a blinded fashion with a 0–5 score given, 0 being no inflammation and 5 being the highest degree of inflammation. Interstitial inflammation and peribronchiolar inflammation were scored separately then scores were averaged for the overall inflammation score.Cytokine ArraysThe concentration of lung RNA was quantified using a Nanodrop (NanoVue Plus). 400ng of RNA was converted to cDNA using the Qiagen RT2 First Strand Kit (330404, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The cDNA was analyzed with the Qiagen RT2 Mouse Cytokines and Chemokines array (PAMM-150Z, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Reactions were run on a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR Instrument (A28133, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). The results were analyzed with the Qiagen analysis spreadsheet provided with the kit.Statistical AnalysisAll statistical analyses were carried out using the GraphPad Prism software. The statistical tests run were unpaired t-tests assuming unequal variances. The cutoff value used to determine significance was p≤0.05.Biosafety approvalAll virus experiments and recombinant virus creation was approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee at The University of Maryland, Baltimore. At their request, the P.1 S in WA-1 virus has been destroyed due to it increased in vivo pathogenesis compared to the clinical P.1 strain.ResultsInfectious Clone SystemTo enable rapid and combinatorial modification of SARS-CoV-2, we established a yeastbased assembly approach using transformation-associated recombination (TAR) to assemble a complete genome from overlapping DNA fragments. This approach is based on one that we previously used to engineer human herpesviruses.13, 14 It involves first, generating a set of sequence-validated DNA fragments that encompass a complete genome which can then be modified individually and in parallel to obtain DNA fragments containing the desired changes. The modified fragments can be mix and matched with unmodified DNA fragments for assembly into complete genomes to generate the desired mutant viruses. For SARS-CoV-2, the genome was deconstructed into 7 individual DNA fragments: 3 for ORF1a (1a-1 to 1a-3), 2 for ORF1b (1b-1 and 1b-2), 1 for Spike (S) and 1 for the accessory protein 3’ genome region (AP) [Figure 1A]. Each individual fragment was TAR-cloned by transforming into yeast each target fragment amplified by PCR using SARS-CoV-2 WA1 cDNA as template with primer pairs listed in Table S1 together with a PCR-amplified YCpBAC vector that contains each set of appropriate homologous sequences at either end (Table S1). Each individual DNA fragment was confirmed by junction PCR amplification using a primer homologous to the YCpBAC vector and a primer homologous to the target DNA fragment (Figure S1, Table S2). Positive yeast clones were then transformed into Escherichia coli to enable isolation of large amounts of DNA and again confirmed by junction PCR amplification (Figure S1). Finally, each individual DNA fragment, which was validated by Sanger sequencing, is flanked by I-SceI sites and contains 80 base pairs of homologous sequence to its adjacent fragments. Deletion of the accessory genes were performed at the DNA fragment level (AP) by cleaving with Cas9 protein in vitro guided by guide RNAs specific to each accessory gene and then transforming into yeast each cleaved DNA fragment together with the appropriate “fix” that contains 40 bases of homology to either side of the coding region of the target accessory gene (Table S3). Positive clones were identified by PCR amplification across the target gene and then transformed into E. coli for large quantity isolation of DNA (Figure S2). The Spike ORFs from select SARS-CoV-2 variants were generated by rebuilding the WA1 S DNA fragment by Gibson assembly in E. coli from PCR amplified products using primers to introduce the changes where needed and the WA1 S DNA fragment as template (Table S3). Each of the SARS-CoV-2 S variant generated was validated by Sanger sequencing. Finally, to generate the different full-length genomes by TAR assembly, the appropriate sets of DNA fragments (1a-1 to AP) were cleaved with I-SceI to separate the SARS-CoV-2 fragment from the YCpBAC vector and then transformed into yeast together with a YCpBAC vector that contains a CMV promoter and homology to DNA fragment 1a-1 at one end and homology to DNA fragment AP, Hepatitis delta virus ribozyme sequence as well as bovine growth hormone terminator at the other end (Figure 1A, Table S4). Correct assembly of the full-length genomes were confirmed by junction PCR amplification (Figure 1B) using primer pairs that span the SARS-CoV-2 genome (Table S5). Positive clones were transferred to E. coli for isolation of SARS-CoV-2 full-length genome DNA.Following confirmation of the successful synthesis of each full-length genome clone, VeroE6 cells were transfected with each isolated YCpBAC. 72–96 hours later, the cells were monitored for CPE, supernatant was collected. The virus was then plaque-purified and stocked. The accessory ORF deletion viruses of WA-1 were successfully recovered and sequence-verified prior to use in experiments.Replication of SARS-CoV-2 deletion viruses in cells.The growth of the wildtype SARS-CoV-2 (WA-1) and the accessory ORF deletion series was analyzed. To evaluate the replicative kinetics of the deletion viruses in vitro, VeroE6 cells were infected with an M.O.I. of 0.01 of WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a/b, WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b, and WA-1ΔORF8. Supernatant was titered at 0, 6, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours post infection by plaque assay. Compared to the wildtype WA-1 virus, WA-1ΔORF3a/b was the only accessory gene deletion virus to show an attenuated phenotype, demonstrating significantly attenuated growth at 48 and 72 hours (Figure 2A p=0.0027 and p=0.0014).WA-1 Accessory Deletion Viruses in K18-hACE2 mice.We sought to identify the role of the accessory proteins in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis using a mouse model of COVID-19. C57BL/6 K18/hACE2 (K18-hACE2) are highly permissive to SARS-CoV-2 due to the widespread expression of human ACE2 (hACE2). This hACE2 is expressed under the control of the keratin 18 (K18) promoter, leading to hACE2 expression in almost all cells of the mouse. Previous reports have shown this mouse strain to be permissive to wildtype SARS-CoV-2 infection without the need for any adaptations or mutations in the Spike protein. We utilized these mice in the comparison of wildtype and deletion strains so that no alteractions to the Spike protein would be needed for replication. To evaluate the role of each accessory protein, 12-week old K18-hACE2 mice were infected with 1e3 pfu of each virus, weighed daily, and euthanized at 2 and 4 days post-infection (dpi) for collection of tissue samples. Wildtype WA-1 displayed ~12% weight loss through 4 days of infection, with similar weight loss for WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b and WA-1ΔORF8 viruses (Figure 2B). However, infection with WA-1ΔORF3a/b resulted in an attenuated weight loss phenotype in the mice, with these mice losing less than 4% of their starting weight (Figure 2B).Lung titers for wildtype and deletion viruses were analyzed at day 2 and 4 post infection to determine if there were differences in replicative fitness between the mutants and WA-1. Lung titers for WA-1 reached 7e7 and 8e6 pfu/g lung at day 2 and 4, respectively (Figure 2C). The mutant viruses WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b and WA-1ΔORF8 had similar lung titers to WA-1 at day 2. This was also found with infection of WA-1ΔORF6 and WA-1ΔORF7a/b at day 4. WA-1ΔORF8 did exhibit a one log reduction in lung titer at day 4, although this reduction was not significant (Figure 2C). Consistent with the observed attenuation in weight loss, mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b had significantly attenuated lung titers at both day 2 and 4 with one log lower lung titer at day 2 (p=0.012) and three logs lower titer at day 4 post infection (p=0.0030) compared to WA-1 (Figure 2C).Lung viral RNA was analyzed for WA-1 and each mutant virus at day 2 and 4 post infection. The levels for viral RNA for each of the deletion viruses were compared to the RNA levels by fold change in the lungs of the mice infected with the wildtype virus. Although none of the fold changes were significant, mice infected with the deletion viruses for ORF6, ORF7a/b, and ORF8 showed higher viral RNA levels compared to WA-1 while mice infected with the ORF3a/b deletion virus showed slightly lower lung RNA levels compared to WA-1 (Figure 2E).Due to the over-expression of hACE2 in neural tissues in the K18-hACE2 mice, SARS-CoV-2 can invade and replicate in the brain of these mice. We therefore assessed the replication of WA-1 and the accessory deletion viruses in brain tissue as well. For all of the accessory deletion viruses, there were undetectable live virus titers in the brain at day 2 and day 4 post-infection (Figure 2D). Despite there being little virus in the brain by plaque assay, there was viral RNA detected in the brain in levels that were not significantly different between the accessory deletions when compared to WA-1 (Figure 2F).Lungs were fixed and stained with H&E to determine whether inflammation and lung damage were different between the wildtype WA-1 and deletion mutants. They were scored in a blinded fashion with a 0–5 score given, 0 being no inflammation and 5 being the highest degree of inflammation. Interstitial inflammation and peribronchiolar inflammation were scored separately then scores were averaged for the overall inflammation score. Despite the attenuation of weight loss with infection with WA-1ΔORF3a/b, there is no significant difference in lung pathology in the mice when compared to WA-1 (Figure 3A, 3B). Across the accessory deletion panel, there were no significant differences in lung pathology seen with any of the accessory deletion viruses except for an unexpected increase in lung pathology scores for mice infected with WA-1ΔORF8 at day 4 (p=0.0037, Figure 3A, 3B). The increased pathology of WA-1ΔORF8 is intriguing because of the reported immunomodulatory role of the secreted ORF8 protein in pathogenesis. This finding is being studied in future experiments.Creation of infectious clones of variant spikes in a WA-1 (icWA-1) background and analysis in cellsThe Spike ORFs from selected SARS-CoV-2 variants were cloned into the icWA-1 clone to replace the WA-1 Spike ORF. The goal of these mutant viruses is to dissociate the effects of the variant Spike ORF from the other mutations in the genomes and to determine if differences exist in pathogenesis in the mouse model. This allows for the identification of whether the variant viruses replicate and have similar pathogenesis to a virus containing only the Spike mutations alone on the same background SARS-CoV-2 virus.The Spike variant viruses were cloned, rescued, sequenced and analyzed for their replication in vitro and in vivo. Upon successful recovery and sequence verification of the variant spikes in WA-1 viruses, the replication of these viruses was compared to the parent variants at an M.O.I. of 0.01 in VeroE6 cells. The variant spike and parental variant pairs, B.1.351 and B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1, showed no difference in supernatant viral titers at all timepoints tested (Figure 4A). The supernatant titer for P.1 S in WA-1 was significantly lower than the parent variant P.1 at only the 72hr timepoint (Figure 4A, p=0.0015).Variant spike in WA-1 viruses compared to variant clinical isolates in K18-hACE2 miceThe variant Spike viruses were then tested to determine if their pathogenesis in mice was different than the parent clinical isolates that have the Spike mutations and the full composition of non-spike mutations. To investigate differences in pathogenesis in vivo, 12-week old K18-hACE2 mice were infected with 1e3 pfu of each virus. Mice were weighed every day and were euthanized at either day 2 or day 4 post-infection for collection of lung tissue and brain tissue. Reflective of the in vitro results, mice infected with B.1.351 and mice infected with B.1.351 S in WA-1 displayed similar weight loss of around 12%. Mice infected with B.1.1.7 and mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 also exhibited similar weight loss of around 10% (Figure 4B). However, mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 showed a weight loss ~12% despite there being very minimal weight loss in mice infected with the P.1 parent variant (Figure 4B). The lung titers of the mice reflected the weight loss, with mice infected with B.1.351 S in WA-1 or B.1.17 S in WA-1 displaying similar lung titers of around 108 on day 2 and 106 on day 4 which was seen in the mice infected with the parent variants (Figure 4C). Mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 had significantly higher lung titers at day 2 compared to mice infected with P.1, which lung titers being roughly one log higher at this time (Figure 4C, p=0.00057).As with the accessory deletion viruses, viral titers in the brain were also analyzed. Although none of the infected mice had measurable titer in the brain at day 2, the brain titers for day 4 trended with the lung titer results, with B.1.351 and B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showing similar titers of ~107 – 108 at day 4 (Figure 4D). P.1 S in WA-1 showed 100X higher titer in the brain at day 4 compared to P.1, although this was not statistically significant (Figure 4D).Viral RNA levels were quantified in lung and brain to compare to live virus titer results. The viral RNA levels in the lung and in the brain are reflective of the titers (Figure 4E and Figure 4F), with the only significant difference being between the day 2 lung RNA levels of P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 (Figure 4E, p=0.00070).Lung inflammation was also analyzed across clinical isolates and Spike mutant viruses. The lungs for the variant spike in WA-1 mice looked similar in terms of inflammation to the lungs of the mice infected with the parental variant viruses (Figure 5A). Although there were no significant differences in lung inflammation between the parent variant viruses and the variant spike in WA-1 viruses, the P.1 S in WA-1 lungs had higher lung pathology scores on both day 2 and day 4 when compared to the P.1 mice, which trends with both the titer and the weight loss data (Figure 5B).Variant Spikes in WA-1 in BALB/c MiceThe wildtype SARS-CoV-2/WA-1 virus does not replicate in wildtype mice due to poor interactions with mouse ACE2. The N501Y mutation in Spike does however allow for replication in wildtype mice. Interestingly, the variants examined in this study do have the N501Y mutation allowing for comparison of pathogenesis between recombinant viruses variants and their parent strains in BALB/c mice. For this comparison, 12-week old BALB/c mice were infected with 1e4 pfu of each virus and euthanized at either Day 2 or Day 4 post-infection for analysis. As we observed with the K18-hACE2 mouse experiment, infection with P.1 S in WA-1 resulted in increased weight loss of around 5% compared to infection with P.1 which produced no weight loss. Both B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 infection produced minimal weight loss in these mice. Unlike the results from the infection in K18-hACE2 mice, mice with B.1.351 S in WA-1 showed attenuated weight loss of around 7% compared to B.1.351, which produced roughly 12% weight loss (Figure 6A).The viral titers in the lung homogenates were mostly reflective of the weight loss findings, with infection with B.1.351 S in WA-1 producing significantly lower lung titers by about two logs at day 2 and day 4 as compared to infection with B.1.351 (Figure 6B, p=0.008 and p=0.014). Despite there being no differences in weight loss, B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 infection resulted in significantly higher lung titers by two logs at day 2 post infection (p=0.013) compared to B.1.1.7, with both viruses being nearly cleared by day 4 post infection (Figure 6B). Infection with P.1 S in WA-1 resulted in higher lung titers by two logs at day 2 and one log at day 4 as compared to infection with P.1, although only the day 4 titers differed significantly (Figure 6B, p=0.011).The viral RNA levels in the lungs at these timepoints correlated to the viral titer levels, although none of these findings were statistically significant (Figure 6C). Lung pathology was also analyzed. The lungs of mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showed similar pathology to the mice infected with B.1.1.7 and this was also reflected by the pathology scores (Figure 7A/B). The lungs of mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 showed increased inflammation compared to the lungs of mice infected with P.1 on both day 2 and day 4 (Figure 7A/B) post-infection. Despite B.1.351 S in WA-1 producing attenuated weight loss, the lung pathology scores for these mice were higher compared to mice infected with B.1.351, although none of the lung pathology differences were statistically significant (Figure 7A/B).Lung Cytokine Profiling for WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a, P.1, and P.1 S in WA-1We then analyzed the host response to selected viruses that showed the most significant differences in weight loss and titer when compared to the parent strains. We compared the inflammatory cytokine and chemokine profile by qPCR on both the Day 2 lungs and the Day 4 lungs of the K18-hACE2 mice infected with WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a/b, P.1, and P.1 S in WA-1 (Table S7). It is interesting to note that for both the WA-1ΔORF3a/b to WA-1 comparison and the P.1 S in WA-1 to P.1 comparison, the majority of significant cytokine and chemokine changes were seen at Day 2. For this reason, we will focus on the changes we saw at Day 2.For K18-hACE2 mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b, the majority of significant fold changes in cytokine and chemokine levels compared to mice infected with WA-1 were less than 1. The top five significantly downregulated genes are Ccl7, Csf3, Cxcl1, Cxcl3, and Cxcl5, which are key cytokines involved in neutrophil production and recruitment (Table 1). There was a small subset of genes which were significantly upregulated. These genes are Adipoq, Bmp7, Ctf1, Cxcl11, Il4, and Il5, which are mostly cytokines involved in cell survival and the early stages of T-cell activation (Table 1).As was seen with the WA-1ΔORF3a and WA-1 comparison, the majority of significant fold changes occurred at Day 2 for the P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 comparison. There were few differences in gene induction when comparing P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 in relation to the WA-1ΔORF3a/b and WA-1 differentially expressed genes. The top five upregulated genes were Ccl1, Ccl20, Csf3, Cxcl5, and Osm, which are involved in the attraction of neutrophils and lymphocytes (Table 2). All of the downregulated genes had similar fold changes. These genes include Csf2, Il12a, and Il21, which are known to be secreted by innate immune cells, including natural killer cells (Table 2).DiscussionA unique characteristic of coronaviruses is the inclusion of genes in the 3’ end of the genome that are unique to each coronavirus family.16 These genes are called “accessory genes” because, while unique to each family, they are not essential for replication.17 Many of these genes across the coronavirus family have been shown to alter host pathways including interferon signaling, cell cycle progression, and other assorted anti-viral responses to viral infection that enhance replication and pathogenesis.9, 10, 18, 19We designed two ways to analyze the functional consequences of the accessory genes in SARS-CoV-2 in vivo. First, we produced deletion viruses that deleted each ORF from our infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2. Second, we produced mutant SARS-CoV-2 viruses that contained the spike of each previously circulating variant. As variants of SARS-CoV-2 have emerged, the increasing incidence of mutations both within spike and outside of spike were noted. Although, the mutations in spike may enhance entry and kinetics of infection, the mutations observed in the other genes may alter disease severity through interactions with the host immune system. In our experiments we sought to differentiate between the role of spike mutations in each variant and those in other genes of the variant genome. As many of these non-spike mutations in the genome are in the accessory ORFs, we decided to couple our work with our variant spikes in WA-1 viruses with our work with accessory deletion viruses. This allows us to determine which accessory ORFs contribute significantly to pathogenesis through infection with our deletion viruses, and to link mutations in the corresponding variant ORFs to impacts on ORF function and pathogenesis.Our work with the accessory deletion viruses has revealed that ORF3a and ORF3b contribute significantly to viral replication in K18-hACE2 mice. Mice infected with a WA-1ΔORF3a/b deletion virus demonstrated attenuated weight loss and significantly reduced lung titers at both day 2 and day 4. Our finding that an ORF3a/b deletion virus is attenuated in mice is supported by previously published work as does our finding that WA-1ΔORF6 is not attenuated in mice.20 This paper also found that deletions of ORF7a, ORF7b, and ORF8 show reduced lung titer, which we did not find in our experiments. This may be due to inoculation differences in our model where mice were infected with a non-lethal dose of 103 pfu instead of 105 pfu as used in the previous study. It is possible that we may see attenuation in weight loss and viral replication of WA-1ΔORF7a/7b, and WA-1ΔORF8 at higher doses or in different mouse backgrounds, which were not studied here.The lung cytokine and chemokine profiles of mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b demonstrated reduced expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines compared to WA-1. This difference is most likely attributed to the fact the WA-1ΔORF3a/b virus demonstrates attenuated replication in mice. As expected, the attenuated replication of WA-1ΔORF3a/b results in the downregulation of cytokines and chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment, including Ccl7, Csf3, Cxcl1, Cxcl3, and Cxcl5. There is a small subset of genes that are upregulated in the WA-1ΔORF3a/b lungs. Two of these upregulated genes are Il4 and Il5, which function to drive the Th2 response. Interestingly, COVID-19 is known to skew to a Th2 response through stimulating the production of Il4 and Il5.21 Given that the WA-1ΔORF3a/b virus is attenuated compared to WA-1, we would expect a downregulation of these cytokines. The downregulation of Il4 might in part be explained by its role in the tissue remodeling process, with the faster clearance of WA-1ΔORF3a/3b allowing for tissue repair to take place.22 Another of these upregulated genes, adipoq, encodes the insulin-sensitizing hormone, adiponectin. Interestingly, reduced adiponectin levels are associated with severe respiratory failure in COVID-19 patients.23 Future work to characterize the role of these cytokines and chemokines SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis will focus on how these pathways interact with the accessory genes of the virus.As the emergence of variants of SARS-CoV-2 occurred, we noted the appearance of point mutations in the accessory genes of SARS-CoV-2. To elucidate the impact of non-spike mutations on viral pathogenesis, we synthesized variant spikes in the WA-1 backbone. We focused on the synthesis of the B.1.351, B.1.1.7, and P.1 lineages. When comparing the in vitro replication of the parent variants to their paired variant spikes in WA-1, we did not see many significant differences in replication in VeroE6 cells. The only significant difference we saw was a significant decrease in supernatant viral titer at 72 hours of P.1 S in WA-1 when compared to P.1.In the K18-hACE2 mice, the absence of in vitro replicative differences for B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 in WA-1 were reflected. Mice infected with B.1.351 in WA-1 exhibited no differences in weight loss, lung titer, and brain titer compared to mice infected with B.1.351. This was also true for mice infected with B.1.1.7 when compared to mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1. Results from the BALB/c experiment differed significantly for the B.1.351 S in WA-1/B.1.351 pairing, with B.1.351 S in WA-1 showing attenuated weight loss and lung titers compared to B.1.351. The mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showed an increase in lung titer on day 2, but no difference in weight loss was seen when compared to B.1.1.7.The most significant replicative differences in both BALB/c and K18-hACE2 mice was seen with P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1. In both sets of mice, mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 demonstrated increased weight loss and significantly higher lung titers by plaque assay and qPCR than mice infected with P.1. In the K18-hACE2 mice, the brain RNA and brain titers trended with this data as well, although the values were not significant.Given the significant differences in P.1 S in WA-1 and P.1 replication in vivo, we analyzed cytokine and chemokine gene expression on both the day 2 and day 4 lungs of these mice. Compared to P.1, the P.1 S in WA-1 cytokine and chemokine profiled differed the most on Day 2. Most of the significant changes seen involved the upregulation of genes involved in neutrophil recruitment. The most upregulated gene was cxcl5, which has been implicated as the major chemoattractant for neutrophils in SARS-CoV-2 and a major cause of inflammation.24 It is therefore not unexpected that this gene would be upregulated due to the increased lung titer of P.1 S in WA-1 compared to P.1. The downregulated genes of interest include thpok and Il5, which are important for driving the differentiation of CD4+ T-cells. This finding could suggest that there is some inhibition of the CD4+ T-cell recruitment pathway by the non-spike genes in WA-1 that is attenuated or absent in P.1. There is also evidence of the loss of early interferon antagonism in the non-spike genes in P.1, as IFNγ levels in lungs from the P.1 S in WA-1 mice were reduced at day 2 compared to the P.1 mice despite the higher lung titers in the mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1. However, this difference was not seen at Day 4.Together this work demonstrates that ORF3a/b have substantial roles in pathogenesis and host responses to SARS-CoV-2. It is interesting to note that two of the variant spike in WA-1 viruses studied here, B.1.351 and P.1, possess mutations in ORF3a. This points to the fact the emergence of mutations in the variant accessory ORFs, particularly ORF3a, contribute to viral pathogenesis. The possible advantageous effects on viral fitness and likelihood of transmission of these mutations is supported by the continued identification of mutations in these ORFs in new variants. We interpret this data to suggest that mutations outside of spike may be driving critical phenotypes of SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease. Although spike mutations may allow for better engagement of ACE2 to facilitate entry into cells as well as evasion of antibodies, the mutations in the accessory proteins may actually be negatively impacting disease leading to less severe clinical phenotypes. The balance of these two strategies may confer longer courses of virus replication and spread in the lungs while allowing for increased time for virus transmission from one infected person to their contacts. We hypothesize that this balance is critical for further evolution of SARS-CoV-2 and, as more variants emerge, we will identify additional mutations outside of spike that contribute significantly to viral replication, transmission, and pathogenesis.Supplementary Material1


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: MERS-COV
================================================================================
Title: Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus: transmission and phylogenetic evolution

Global spread of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirusThe initial case of MERS-CoV was reported from a patient from Bisha who was subsequently admitted to a private hospital in Jeddah, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) in 2012 [1]. Given that the etiology of this severe community-acquired pneumonia became known as MERS-CoV, formerly novel coronavirus, a retrospective investigation of an outbreak of 13 cases of severe acute respiratory infection clustered in a hospital in Zarqa, Jordan was conducted. The investigation revealed two confirmed and 11 probable cases in March 2012 [2]. Since then, cases have been reported from KSA 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, Jordan 2, 12, France 13, 14, United Arab Emirates (UAE) 13, 14, 15, Qatar 3, 16, Tunisia [3] (http://www.promedmail.org/direct.php?id=1725864), UK [17], Italy [18], Oman (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2014_05_15_mers/en/), Kuwait, Yemen, Germany, The Netherlands, Greece, Malaysia, Philippines, Iran, and Egypt (http://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/mers/index.html). The total global cases as of 16 June 2014 were 701 laboratory-confirmed cases officially reported to the World Health Organization (WHO), including 249 (35.5%) deaths (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2014_06_16_mers/en/). The number of cases per reporting country is shown in Table 1
. In this review, we highlight the transmission, evolution, and pathogenesis of MERS-CoV infection.Table 1Number of reported MES-CoV cases and number of deaths per countryaCountryCasesDeathsSaudi Arabia689283United Arab Emirates709Qatar74Jordan185Oman22Kuwait31Egypt10Yemen11Lebanon10Iran21UK43Germany21France21Italy10Greece10The Netherlands20Malaysia11Tunisia31Algeria20Philippines10USA20Total815313aAs of 4 June 2014, according to European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (http://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/press/news/_layouts/forms/News_DispForm.aspx?List=8db7286c-fe2d-476c-9133-18ff4cb1b568&ID=1016).Interhuman transmission of MERS-CoV and genetic analysisIt is thought that most MERS-CoV cases are acquired through human-to-human transmission. An analysis of 144 confirmed and 17 probable cases showed that 95 cases (59%) were secondary cases with an epidemiologic link to other confirmed cases [3]. The acquisition of infection in these 95 cases occurred more frequently in healthcare settings (63.2%) and among family contacts (13.7%) [3]. In a recent update by the WHO, it was noted that the number of laboratory-confirmed MERS-CoV cases increased sharply at the beginning of mid-March 2014, in KSA and UAE, in relation to the occurrence of healthcare-associated outbreaks (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2014_05_28_mers/en/). The occurrences of healthcare-associated clusters were reported from KSA [3], Jordan 2, 12, France [13], UAE, and Qatar [3]. Household transmission and clusters were also reported from KSA 5, 6 and Tunisia [3], and transmission occurring in both healthcare and household settings was reported from UK [17] and Italy [18].Another large healthcare-associated cluster reported from Al-Hasa, KSA involved 23 hemodialysis patients, family members, and healthcare workers [4]. It was evident epidemiologically that person-to-person transmission occurred in 21 (91.3%) of the cases [4]. Subsequent phylogenetic analysis of the virus isolates from the Al-Hasa outbreak revealed that there was more than one possibility of the MERS-CoV virus being introduced from the community [19]. The Al-Hasa MERS-CoV variants were not detected in any other part of KSA, and the Al-Hasa region has remained free of other virus variants [20]. The same analysis of 32 MERS-CoV isolates from May 2013 to September 2013 revealed four different MERS-CoV clades, namely: Hafr-Al_Batin_1 clade; Buraidah_1 clade; Riyadh_3 clade; and Al-Hasa clade [20]. The second three clades (i.e., not the Hafr-Al_Batin_1 clade) were no longer circulating or contributing to cases in KSA [20]. In addition, the Al-Hasa clade was confined to an area in the eastern region of KSA. The other three clades were detected in cases from many locations, suggesting a mobile human or nonhuman source. The duration of the existence of each clade was 98 days (range: 62–147 days) [20]. Recently, analysis of reported genetic data from a community cluster in the city of Hafr Al-Batin showed that at least two of the infected contacts could not have been directly infected from the index patient and, thus, an alternate source was a possibility [11]. Therefore, the reported cases seemed to originate in the community with nonsustained human-to-human transmission and subsequent amplification of cases in the healthcare setting. This is more evident with the current increase in the number of cases in the Jeddah region, where there was also amplification in the healthcare setting for these cases [21] (http://www.moh.gov.sa/en/CoronaNew/PressReleases/Pages/default.aspx). Thus, immediate isolation of these MERS-CoV cases in the healthcare setting would prevent subsequent transmission of the virus.It is estimated that the rate of molecular evolution of MERS-CoV is 1.12×10−3 substitutions/site per year [20]. The spike protein is important in potentiating membrane fusion and coronavirus entry and a variation in this protein was documented in the main Saudi Arabian lineage and the Munich/Abu Dhabi/2013 cluster [19]. The genetic analysis of MERS-CoV, especially in the Al-Hasa outbreak and in the community from Hafr Al-Batin, showed multiple introduction of MERS-CoV, possibly from an animal source as well as limited human-to-human transmission, with different clades in circulation in different regions.Transmission among family and healthcare worker contactsScreening of healthcare workers and family contacts of presumed index cases have been extensively studied 2, 7, 14, 16, 17, 22, 23. A summary of the contact investigation results is shown in Table 2
2, 7, 12, 14, 16, 17, 22, 23. In the UK, contacts of two index cases and an additional two (2.17%) secondary cases out of 92 contacts were identified, but none of the 43 contacts of the secondary cases were positive 17, 22. In France, one (0.8%) of 124 contacts of the index case and none of the 39 contacts of the secondary case were positive for MERS-CoV [14]. Using serology, investigation of 85 contacts of an index case failed to demonstrate any positive cases [16], and the use of respiratory PCR and serology among 83 contacts of another case did not reveal any positive cases [23]. The largest screening of contacts is from KSA [7]. Of the 1695 healthcare contacts and 462 family contacts of confirmed MERS cases, a positive result was obtained from 19 (1.12%) healthcare workers and 14 (3.6%) cases of family contacts [7]. Thus, the rate of secondary transmission among family contact is higher than other contacts. Thus, close and prolonged contact with the index case seems to be a requirement for the spread of the disease. Another possible explanation is exposure of other family members to the same source of infection, as was evident from the Hafr Al-Batin community outbreak [11].Table 2Results of contact investigationMethodCaseNumber of contactsNumber (%) positiveCountryRefsRespiratory PCROutbreak132 (15.4)Jordan[2]SerologyOutbreak1249 (7.5)Jordan[12]Respiratory PCRIndex922 (2.2)UK17, 22Respiratory PCRSecondary430 (0)UK2, 17Respiratory PCRIndex1241 (0.8)France[14]Respiratory PCRSecondary390 (0)France[14]SerologyIndex850 (0)Germany[16]SerologySecondary830 (0)Germany[23]Respiratory PCRIndex secondary1695 (HCW)a; 462 (family)19 (1.12); 14 (3.6)KSA[7]aAbbreviation: HCW, healthcare workers.Zoonotic transmission of MERS-CoVThe origin of the MERS-CoV and the intermediate host is currently not well known. CoVs are grouped into: Alphacoronavirus, Betacoronavirus (classified as clades 2a–2d), Gammacoronavirus, and Deltacoronavirus, and all known 2c bat CoVs originate from bats [24]. It was also thought that MERS-CoV originates from bats because MERS is classified in the C betacoronaviruses [25]. A fragment of CoV sequence (182 nucleotides) was recovered from Taphozous perforatus (Egyptian tomb bats) [25]. The bat was found living near the home and work location of a case of MERS-CoV infection in the city of Bisha in western KSA [26]. It was also found that DPP4 receptor is also the receptor for bats HKU4 virus [87]. Analysis of many human MERS-CoV genomes showed diversity within the isolates and suggested the possibility of multiple independent zoonotic events 15, 19. More recent studies point toward camels as possible reservoirs or intermediate hosts.The first study to point to camels as a possible source and reservoir was based on positive serological results from 50 serum samples from dromedary camels (Camelus dromedaries) from Oman that showed a high titer of neutralizing antibodies against MERS-CoV [27]. Subsequently, multiple studies showed positive antibodies in camels from many countries (Table 3
) 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, including Spain (Canary Islands), Egypt, Qatar, KSA, UAE, and Jordan. The detection of MERS-CoV by PCR was also obtained from two out of nine (22.2%) camels from the farm of a patient in Jeddah, KSA [32]. Similarly, in an investigation of two human cases of MERS-CoV in Qatar, of the 14 tested dromedary camels, three tested positive by PCR for MERS-CoV [28]. In dromedary camels, there is more than one genomic variant compared with humans, who have one variant, and this suggests interspecies transmission of MERS-CoV of specific genotypes [38]. There was one amino acid change in the spike protein within the receptor-binding domain and other changes were outside the receptor-binding domain [38]. Despite the evidence linking camels to MERS-CoV, camel contact of patients was reported in only 4.3% of the total 161 cases and in 18.3% of the 49 cases with documented animal exposure [17]. More recently, MERS-CoV was isolated from the milk of five out of 12 camels, suggesting another mode of transmission [39]. However, it is unusual for milk consumption to cause respiratory illness because the pathogenesis of the initial events of MERS-CoV is thought to be upper respiratory tract infection with subsequent viremia rather than viremia causing respiratory infection. Interestingly, a recent study showed that camels may have acquired MERS-CoV from bats in sub-Saharan Africa, with subsequent importation of camels to the Arabian peninsula [40]. Identification of the major route of animal-to-human transmission is needed to understand the overall picture of persistence and evolution in the different hosts [41].Table 3Summary of different studies of MERS-CoV in camelsCountry of studyDate of samplingTestNumber testedNumber positive% positiveRefsOman2013Serology5050100[27]Spain (Canary Islands)2012–2013Serology1951514[27]Qatar17 October 2013Neutralization assay1414100[28]PCR14321[28]EgyptJune 2013Serology11010394[29]Saudi Arabia (Al-Hasa & Riyadh)2010–2013Serology31028090[30]UAE2003Serology151151100[31]2013Serology50048196[31]KSA (Jeddah)2014PCR9222.2[32]EgyptJune–December 2013Pseudoparticle neutralization assay524892.3[33]PCR11043.6[33]OmanDecember 2013PCR7656.6[34]UAEFebruary–October 2005Neutralization test11981.8[35]USA, Canada2000–2001Neutralization test600[35]Ethiopia2010–11Serology18818196[36]Nigeria2010–2011Serology35833694[36]Tunisia2010–2011Serology2049948.5[36]JordanJune and September 2013Serology1111100[37]Kenya1993–2013Serology77421327.5[88]Egypt1997Serology433581.4[89]Sudan1983Serology605286.7[89]Somalia1983Serology252080[89]Somalia1984Serology615285.2[89]Transmission mode of MERS-CoVPossible routes of transmission were elucidated from the largest nosocomial outbreak of MERS-CoV in the Al-Hasa region in May–June 2012 4, 42, 43, 44. Respiratory droplet transmission was the most likely mode of transmission, with the possibility of direct or indirect contact and airborne transmission during aerosol-generating procedures as other possible routes of transmission 4, 45. Healthcare workers are advised to follow contact and droplet isolation precautions when dealing with patients with MERS-CoV with the addition of airborne infection isolation precautions during aerosol-generating procedures 45, 46. The only study describing infection among healthcare workers showed that many healthcare workers were involved in aerosol-generating procedures, such as intubation (71.4%), airway suctioning (57%), and sputum induction (28.6%) [47]. Further recommendations for the use of airborne infection isolation precautions were recently discussed in two recent publications [48] (http://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/press/news/_layouts/forms/News_DispForm.aspx?List=8db7286c-fe2d-476c-9133-18ff4cb1b568&ID=1002). Airborne spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-CoV and MERS-CoV is thought to be predominantly in the form of large respiratory droplets expelled during coughing and sneezing and via contact with fomites [48]. A recent study showed that identical MERS-CoV RNA fragments were detected in an air sample collected from the barn of a camel that shared similar MERS-CoV with an infected person [49]. However, the evidence of aerosol dissemination was lacking.Coronaviruses are categorized based on the levels of oral–fecal and respiratory transmission, as indicated by protein intrinsic disorder predictions [50]. Based on these predictions, MERS-CoV has hard inner and outer shells that enable its persistence in the environment [50]. Thus, MERS-CoV is predicted to have the highest oral–fecal transmission rates and relatively low respiratory transmission rates [50]. In a patient with MERS-CoV, the virus was detected in stool samples obtained on days 12 and 16, with a viral load of up to 1031 RNA copies/g [15]. Patients with SARS commonly show high virus concentrations and prolonged virus excretion in stools, leading to the use of stool samples for routine virological diagnosis 51, 52, 53. Diarrhea was reported to occur in patients with MERS-CoV 6, 8, 13. An oral–fecal route of transmission of MERS-CoV was not documented in the clinical setting. MERS-CoV seems to be more stable at low temperatures and low humidity. MERS-CoV was recovered after 48 h at 20°C and 40% relative humidity (RH), and the virus was viable for 8 h at 30°C and 80% RH and for 24 h at 30°C and 30% RH [54].In addition to the required respiratory or airborne infection isolation precautions, it is recommended to use contact isolation precautions 42, 43, 45. In the SARS-CoV era, the amplification of infection in the healthcare setting is thought to be related to multiple factors, including overcrowding and reduced space between patient beds of less than 1 m; poor ventilation; use of nebulization; oxygen or non-invasive ventilation therapy; and resuscitation of patients 55, 56. The US and European Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have called for the use of airborne infection isolation precautions when dealing with patients with MERS-CoV while they await further evidence to support their superiority over contact and droplet precautions (http://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/press/news/_layouts/forms/News_DispForm.aspx?List=8db7286c-fe2d-476c-9133-18ff4cb1b568&ID=1002).MERS and SARS pathogenesis comparisonMost of the data relating to the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV come from in vitro studies. The virus is thought to enter the cells through dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4), which is also known as CD26 [57]. DPP4 is found on the surfaces of nonciliated bronchial epithelial cells in humans [57]. The MERS-CoV spike protein interacts with cellular DPP4 and mediates viral attachment to the host cells [58]. In studies of the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV, the use of anti-DPP4 antibodies resulted in the inhibition of MERS-CoV infection of primary human bronchial epithelial cells [57]. Adenosine deaminase is a DPP4-binding protein that competes for virus binding and acts as a natural antagonist for MERS-CoV infection [59]. Thus, the presence of DPP4 dictates which species are infected with MERS-CoV and explains the difference in hosts between MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV. SARS-CoV-like viruses have been found in Himalayan palm civets (Paguma larvata), raccoon dogs (Nyctereutes procyonoides), and the Chinese ferret badger (Melogale moschata) [60]. The MERS-CoV was found to bind to DPP4 from various animals, such as camel, goat, cow, and sheep [61]. However, there was no serological evidence of MERS-CoV in these animals [37] and only camels were found to have MERS-CoV antibodies 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37.Similar to SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV papain-like proteases (PLpro) block the regulation of the cytokines CCL5, interferon β (IFN-β), and CXCL10 in stimulated cells [62]. Human, camel, and horse cells were more likely to be infected with MERS-CoV than were goat and bat cells, and the presence of a cell surface lung protease increased susceptibility to MERS-CoV [63]. MERS-CoV can infect lower respiratory, kidney, intestinal, and liver cells, as well as histiocytes [64], and may infect nonhuman primate, porcine, bat, civet, and rabbit cell lines 64, 65. When human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs) were infected with either MERS-CoV or SARS-CoV, neither virus significantly stimulated the expression of antiviral cytokines (IFN-α and IFN-β) but both induced similar levels of tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). However, MERS-CoV induced significantly higher levels of IL-12, IFN-γ and chemokines (IP-10/CXCL-10, MCP-1/CCL-2, MIP-1α/CCL-3, RANTES/CCL-5, and IL-8) [66]. The presence and activation of immune cell recruiting chemokines and immunostimulating cytokines were higher and more prolonged in cases of MERS-CoV, compared with SARS-CoV and this may explain the presence of more severe disease and a higher fatality rate in patients with MERS-CoV [66]. MERS-CoV uses a viral double-stranded RNA-binding protein (4a protein) to evade the innate host response [67]. The MERS-CoV 4a protein is an immunosuppressive factor that antagonizes type I interferon production [67]. Thus, MERS-CoV might cause severe disease in humans by counteracting host immunity and the sensing of virus invasion [67]. Understanding how MERS-CoV weakens virus sensing would be informative for the development of new strategies for therapy and vaccine.Recently, a recombinant protein containing the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of MERS-CoV spike (S) glycoprotein infused with Fc of human IgG (RBD-Fc) resulted in neutralizing antibodies in mice 68, 69. The use of the intranasal MERS-CoV RBD-Fc vaccination resulted in a similar systemic humoral immune responses to subcutaneous vaccination, and higher systemic cellular immune responses and local mucosal immune responses [70]. DPP4 in mice did not support MERS-CoV infection, but using mouse DPP4 as a scaffold showed that two critical amino acids (A288L and T330R) are important for the development of a mouse-adapted MERS-CoV strain for rapid assessment of therapy and vaccines [71]. Understanding the contribution of different antigenic components of the MERS-CoV and utilizing spike glycoprotein may result in the development of an effective vaccine.Variation in the MERS-CoV infection responseThere is wide variation in the host response and clinical outcome of MERS-CoV infection from asymptomatic, to mildly symptomatic to a fatal disease 7, 8. MERS-CoV infection was also found to have a male predominance and more specifically among those with underlying comorbid conditions. These differences in the susceptibility may be related to underlying genetic variation, environmental exposure, or demography [72]. A patient with a poor outcome did not promote type 1 IFN and IFN-α compared with a patient who survived [73]. IFN-α promotes antigen presentation in response to viruses, impairs the development of a robust antiviral response and, thus, decreases viral clearance [73]. Two human RBD-specific neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (MERS-4 and MERS-27) inhibited infection of live MERS-CoV with IC50 (half-maximal inhibitory concentration) at nanomolar concentrations [74]. Given that MERS-CoV was initially limited to patients with chronic diseases [4], causing severe disease in those with comorbid conditions and tends to affect certain individuals among family contacts [7]. Understanding the factors involved in the pathogenesis of the disease would facilitate the development of therapeutic options.Prospects for control of MERS-CoVThe emergence of SARS in 2003 and the subsequent control of the virus shed light on important measures for the control of emerging viral respiratory infections. These measures include: quick case detection, isolation of suspected cases, effective contact tracing, and the practice of basic infection control measures [75] (http://www.who.int/csr/sars/en/WHOconsensus.pdf). In a mathematical model, a combination of household-based quarantine, isolation of cases outside the household, and targeted prophylactic use was shown to be effective in the prevention of viral transmission [76]. Delays of more than 3 days in contact tracing, case identification, and quarantine adversely affected the effectiveness of isolation [77]. One study estimated the effectiveness of the isolation of symptomatic patients and the tracing and quarantine of contacts [78]. The authors concluded that SARS could be controlled by effective isolation of symptomatic patients [78]. This finding is in contrast to the case of pandemic influenza because of the high level of presymptomatic transmission that does not occur with SARS [78]. In a review of the effectiveness of community quarantine, it was found that this is an effective preventive measure, but quantification of the effect was lacking 79, 80. The delay in the isolation of patients in the healthcare setting also contributed to the spread of SARS [79]. The Al-Hasa MERS-CoV outbreak and the recent increase of MERS-CoV cases in April–May 2014 also point to inadequate infection control measures [4] (http://www.who.int/csr/disease/coronavirus_infections/MERS_CoV_RA_20140424.pdf?ua=1). Prompt identification of patients with SARS and the implementation of infection control measures resulted in the prevention of secondary transmission of SARS [81]. Different strategies may be used for the control of an outbreak in a healthcare setting. A hospital closure is needed to control nosocomial transmission if the outbreak is detected late, or closure early in an outbreak is sufficient to remove exposed persons to a designated location or keeping them in one place [82]. In a study of family members and other visiting patients with SARS, it was shown that the rate of SARS among visitors was lower when they used masks [83]. Thus, prompt identification of cases with subsequent proper isolation in the healthcare setting or community quarantine is a key measure to prevent the spread of emerging respiratory pathogens.Concluding remarksIn conclusion, the number of MERS-CoV cases has recently increased due to multiple introductions into humans from the animal reservoir, with no long-term sustained human-to-human transmission. There is no human reservoir of cases with few or no symptoms [84]. Infection in the healthcare setting is an important risk factor for human-to-human transmission. It is not easy to identify patients with MERS-CoV during the early stages of the disease based on clinical presentation alone because patients may have mild or atypical symptoms [84]. In a univariate analysis, the presence of a normal white blood cell count (WBC) and interstitial infiltrate may be used as clues to the presence of MERS-CoV infection [10]. Thus, it is important to have a high index of suspicion and to isolate those patients early to avoid healthcare transmission. It is also important to have early diagnostic tests based on respiratory specimens, preferably lower respiratory tract specimen for rapid diagnosis [85]. The implications of MERS-CoV for travelers with comparison with SARS-CoV were recently reviewed 21, 86. The origin of SARS-COV and MERS-CoV is an animal source with subsequent human transmission 21, 86. Although SARS resulted in a widespread infection, MERS-CoV has caused limited travel-associated human cases with no major events related to the Hajj [86]. In regard to their clinical presentation, both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have significant overlap of signs and symptoms [21]. Further studies are needed to identify the presence of other animal reservoirs for MERS-CoV and to pinpoint the risk for the development of severe disease (Box 1
).Box 1Outstanding questions
•How is MERS-CoV transmitted to humans?•What promotes interspecies transmission?•Are camels the only animal host?•What is the prevalence of immunity among the general population in the affected countries?•Why is there enhanced disease severity in people with comorbidities or the elderly?•What is the exact period of infectiousness?



Title: Searching for animal models and potential target species for emerging pathogens: Experience gained from Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) coronavirus

1IntroductionOver the past years, outbreaks of zoonotic diseases and growing resistance against antibiotics have emphasized the need for interdisciplinary collaboration between human health, veterinary medicine and environmental sciences, a concept commonly known as “One health” [1]. Most of emerging diseases are zoonotic [2]. For instance, the human flu pandemics have originated in domestic animals and wildlife, and have been driven by ecological, behavioral, or socioeconomic changes [3]. In these cases, the reaction time between detection of a new outbreak and application of medical countermeasures are critical in terms of epidemic control. To understand the potential role that animal sources could play in virus dissemination and the epidemiology of the disease, surveillance studies, as well as experimental infections in potential target species, are required. Furthermore, after having identified the novel or re-emerged virus responsible of the outbreak, it is important to rapidly provide an accurate diagnosis as a basis for quarantine measures. It is also imperative to focus on the search for new vaccines and treatments for highly pathogenic viruses, especially for those that represent a threat to human and animal health, particularly livestock.Until the beginning of the last decade, human coronaviruses (HCoV) infections were considered to be restricted to the upper respiratory tract (URT), with low mortality rate, and recognized as the second ranked cause of the common cold after rhinoviruses [4]. However, in the late-2002, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) emerged in China. It rapidly spread worldwide with more than 8000 causalities and a lethality rate of 10% [5]. Ten years later, a novel HCoV associated with severe pneumonia emerged in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [6]. The new CoV was named Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and by March 2014, a total of 207 cases and 45% fatalities were recorded. One month later, only in April 2014, an increase in human cases was registered with at least 217 more infected people and 38 fatalities. More recently, as of December 2016, 1842 cases of MERS-CoV have been reported to the World Health Organization (WHO), including at least 652 deaths [7].Besides coronaviruses, highly pathogenic viruses belonging to other families represent a threat to either human or animal health, or both. One of the most recent examples is the outbreak of Ebola virus (Filoviridae) in West Africa, which started in December of 2013 in Guinea and evolved as the largest Ebola outbreak recorded with more than 28,600 cases [8]. Furthermore, during recent years, outbreaks caused by other emerging viral pathogens from Arenaviridae, Bunyaviridae, and Flaviviridae families among others, disturbed public and private health, social networks and the economies of the affected countries [9], [10]. Prevention and control of emerging and reemerging viral diseases is efficient when several actions are combined: i.e. creating diagnostic networks and surveillance programs, training medical and veterinary staff, informing the population about sanitary measures, and also promoting research on prophylaxis, treatments and on the causative agent pathogenesis. Regarding the last point, animal models are crucial to study the viral and host factors contributing to the disease as well as transmission outcomes of virus infection and to allow pre-clinical testing of antiviral drugs and vaccines. Non-human primates (NHP) are the preferred models for pathogenesis studies, and potential vaccine and treatment testing, as they better translate to humans [11]. However, working with NHP is costly, with limited availability, and raises ethical problems. Therefore small-animal models are usually the first choice for drug screening. The United States Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Animal Rule provides guidelines concerning the appropriateness of animal models for licensing purposes [12]. Additionally, by controlling the disease in animal reservoirs and/or in intermediate hosts, virus transmission to humans can be significantly reduced [13], [14]. This is particularly true for domestic or feral animals for which efficient vaccines and vaccination strategies can be implemented [15]. Therefore, in cases of new pathogenic virus outbreaks, the search for natural hosts or potential target animals (as opposed to laboratory animals) seems to be relevant not only to implement prophylactic solutions but also to improve the preparedness for an eventual global extension of diseases. Nowadays, this task is rendered possible by the availability of improved biosafety levels 3 and 4 (BSL3 and 4) animal facilities, which can accommodate large animal experimentation with such highly virulent pathogens [16].In this article, the current situation of comprehension on potential hosts for MERS-CoV is reviewed. Based on the coronaviruses experience, benefits and limitations of these species as animal models and transmission studies are discussed.2Animal models for MERS researchSeveral review articles have described and discussed animal models for MERS-CoV infection [17], [18], [19], [20]. In this section, the current status of animal models for MERS disease reproduction is briefly summarized.After the identification of MERS-CoV in 2012 [6], the efforts were directed to develop an animal model to study pathogenesis and to test the efficacy of vaccines and/or treatments in vivo. Similar to SARS-CoV, rhesus macaques have demonstrated susceptibility to MERS-CoV [21], [22], [23]. A work led by Munster demonstrated that the common marmoset is also suitable as a MERS-CoV model [24]. They showed that this model recapitulates the disease observed in humans; therefore, findings in the evaluation of potential therapeutic strategies might be implemented in humans. However, small animals are required for controlled, large and comprehensive studies. While, at first, experiences with SARS-CoV turned out to be very helpful for the research on MERS-CoV, the development of a small animal model for MERS was a more difficult task [18], [19]. Raj and collaborators rapidly identified dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) as the functional receptor for MERS-CoV [25], and DPP4 is present in lung cells of many rodents. Thus, rodents were expected to be susceptible for MERS-CoV. However, and as predicted by the crystal structure analysis of the MERS-CoV receptor binding domain (RBD) with the human DPP4 (hDDP4) extracellular domain [26], so far, no rodent model is naturally permissive for MERS-CoV infection. In Syrian hamster, the DPP4 receptor was shown to be expressed on bronchiolar epithelium, but inoculation of MERS-CoV via aerosols or intratracheal routes with different doses did not lead to productive infection [27]. Wild type and immune-deficient mice were also tested for MERS-CoV infection without success [28]. Since then, several groups have been focused on new strategies to develop a small animal model susceptible to MERS-CoV infection. It was found that mouse cells could be made permissive for MERS-CoV when expressing hDPP4. Consequently, the hDPP4 was transduced into mouse lungs using an adenovirus vector, which resulted in animals susceptible to MERS-CoV infection. These mice exhibited pneumonia and extensive inflammatory-cell infiltration with the presence of virus in the lungs [29]. Recently, a transgenic mice model expressing hDPP4, highly susceptible to MERS-CoV infection and able to display systemic lesions, has been developed [30]. As demonstrated for several diseases, transgenic animal models have become an important tool to improve medical research [31]. On the other hand, glycosylation of the murine DPP4 is a major factor impacting the receptor function by blocking the binding to MERS-CoV [32]. Therefore, the modification of the mouse genome to match the sequence in the hDPP4 made this species susceptible to MERS-CoV infection [33]. Accordingly, these newly established mice models are useful to evaluate the efficacy of vaccines and therapeutic agents against MERS-CoV infection [30], [34], [35], [36]. VelocImmune and VelociGene technologies have been used to develop a humanized mouse model for MERS-CoV infection [36]; these methodologies can be also applied for other pathogens in future emerging epidemics.3MERS-CoV animal reservoir and the role of domestic animalsResearchers worldwide have identified several animal species which could have a role in the transmission of MERS-CoV to humans (summarized in Fig. 1). Bats have been suggested to be the reservoir for MERS-CoV, but RNA of MERS-like CoVs (and no MERS-CoV) has been found in several bat families (Vespertillionidae, Molosidae, Nycteridae and Emballonuridae) in Africa, America, Asia and Europe [37], [38]. Recently, an experimental infection with Jamaican fruit bats (Artibeus jamaicensis) confirmed that MERS-CoV can replicate in bats [39]. However, MERS-CoV strains causing disease in humans have not been so far identified in bats. The presence of MERS-CoV neutralizing antibodies has been reported in dromedary camels (Camelus dromedaries) [40], [41] and, more recently, a link between MERS-CoV infection in camels and a human infection in Qatar has been suggested [42], [43], [44], [45]. Most importantly, the MERS-CoV strain that caused the 2015 human outbreak was found in dromedary camels; in fact, phylogenetic analyses indicate that MERS-CoV was generated in this species by recombination [46]. In addition, Adney and collaborators have provided experimental evidence to support the role of dromedary camels as a MERS-CoV reservoir [47]. Recently, evidence was provided that other members of the Camelidae family such as alpaca (Vicugna pacos) and llama (Lama glama), are also susceptible to MERS-CoV infection [48], [49], [50]. Field studies with alpacas performed in Qatar confirmed this finding [51]. A recently published experimental study has demonstrated that domestic pigs are also susceptible to MERS-CoV infection, suggesting the possibility of MERS-CoV circulation in other unsuspected animal species such suidae [50]. While DPP4 in silico predictions and in vitro studies suggested that other livestock species such as goats, sheep, or horses could be susceptible to MERS-CoV infection, experimental data suggested the opposite [50]. Each natural and potential host for MERS-CoV infection is discussed below in detail and summarized in Table 1, Table 2.Fig. 1Illustration of the known and potential host range of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Dromedary camel is a demonstrated reservoir of MERS-CoV, but other species might act as hosts. In red: reported MERS-CoV-seropositive species and/or species in which virus has been naturally detected. In orange: other animal species that might be considered potential hosts since they are experimentally susceptible to MERS-CoV infection. Alpacas fit into both scenarios (red and orange). In black: animals (bats, to date) in which RNA of different sequences of MERS-CoV-like viruses have been found. Continuous arrows represent already described intra- and inter-species transmission events. Discontinuous arrows represent potential inter-species transmission.Fig. 1Table 1Summary of MERS-CoV shedding and presence of virus in different tissues in the potential animal reservoirs for MERS-CoV after experimental inoculation.Table 1SpeciesRoute and dose of inoculationMERS-CoV sheddingMERS-CoV RNA in tissuesMERS-CoV antigen in tissuesInfectious MERS-CoV in tissuesReferencesCamelidsDromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius)IT, IN, conjunctival or IN only; 107 TCID50Viral RNA in NS (1 to 13 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 6 dpi)URT, LRT, tracheal LN, pulmonary LN, cervical LN, tonsil, PSG, intestine, liver, spleen, kidney, heart, adrenalNasal respiratory epithelial cellsURT, trachea, large bronchus, tracheal LN[47], [53]Alpacas (Vicugna pacos)IN; 107 PFU in 3 mL saline solutionInfectious virus in NS (1 to 5 dpi)URT, tracheaNasal respiratory epithelial cellsND[48], [49]Llamas (Lama glama)IN; 107 TCID50 in 3 mL saline solutionViral RNA in NS (1 to 15 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 7 dpi)URT, trachea and bronchusNasal respiratory epithelial cellsND[50]Non-camelid domestic speciesDomestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus)IN; 107 TCID50 in 3 mL saline solutionViral RNA in NS (1 to 10 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 4 dpi)URT, trachea and bronchusNasal respiratory epithelial cellsND[50]Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)IN (1 × 106 TCID50), IT (4 × 106 TCID50)Viral RNA in NS (1 to 10 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 7 dpi)Mainly in URT, LRTNasal respiratory and bronchiolar epithelial cellsND[54]NHPRhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta)IT, OC, oral, IN; 7 × 106 TCID50/IT, 6,5 × 107 TCID50Viral RNA in NS, BAL samples, and few OSURT, lung, mediastinal LNType I and II pneumocytes, alveolar MΦLung[21], [22], [23]Common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)OC, oral, IT, IN; 5 × 106/IT, 5 × 107 TCID50Viral RNA in NS and OSURT, lung, mediastinal LN, bloodType I pneumocytes, alveolar MΦNasal mucosa, trachea, lung[24], [55]Abbreviations: BAL, bronchoalveolar lavages; dpi, days post inoculation; IN, intranasal; IT, intratracheal; LN, lymph node; LRT, lower respiratory tract; MΦ, macrophages; ND, non-determined; NHP, non-human primates; NS, nasal swabs; OC, ocular; OS, oropharyngeal swabs; PFU, plaque-forming units; PSG, parotid salivary gland; RNA, ribonucleic acid; TCID50, 50% tissue culture infectious dose; URT, upper respiratory tract.Table 2Summary of clinical signs, pathological findings and target cells in tissues of natural and potential reservoir hosts for MERS-CoV infection as experimental animal models.Table 2SpeciesClinical signsGross findingsHistopathological lesionsTarget cells in tissuesReferencesCamelidsDromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius)Mild respiratory disease, nasal dischargeNot presentMultifocal moderate rhinitis, tracheitis and bronchitis with epithelial necrosis. Hyperplasia of lymph nodes and tonsilRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[47], [53]Alpacas (Vicugna pacos)Not observableNot presentSquamous metaplasia of the epithelium of the turbinate. Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of lymph nodesRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[48], [49]Llamas (Lama glama)Mild mucus secretion in one nostrilNot presentMild to severe rhinitisRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[50]Non-camelid domestic speciesDomestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus)Mild excretion of mucus in the noseNot presentMild to severe rhinitisRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[50]Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)Not observableNot presentFocal mild to moderate rhinitis with necrosisRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[54]NHPRhesus macaquesa(Macaca mulatta)Fever, mild to moderate respiratory diseaseLung congestion and nodules in lungNo extra pulmonary lesionsMultifocal mild-to-moderate interstitial pneumoniaType I and II pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages[21], [22], [23]Common marmoseta(Callithrix jacchus)Mild to severe respiratory diseaseCongestion of bronchiolesDiffuse interstitial infiltration in lower lung lobes, bronchointerstitial pneumoniaType I pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages[24]Abbreviations: NHP, non-human primates; URT, upper respiratory tract.aAlso animal models of disease (translation to human).3.1CamelidsDromedary camels are the main source of MERS-CoV zoonotic transmission (reviewed in [52]). In experimental intranasal inoculations with MERS-CoV, only mild clinical signs (i.e. nasal discharge) with URT infection were observed. Viral RNA was detected in nasal swabs, in upper and lower respiratory tracts, and also in extra-pulmonary tissues (i.e. lymph nodes, tonsil, intestine, liver, adrenal gland, etc.). In contrast, infectious virus was only detected in the URT, trachea, large bronchus and tracheobronchial lymph node. Gross lesions were not observed in dromedary camels, but inflammation in the nasal cavity, trachea and bronchus was present. The virus replication in dromedaries was only detected in epithelial cells in the URT [47], [53].Llamas and alpacas, also known as domestic new world camelids, developed a similar clinical-pathological picture to that of dromedaries after experimental MERS-CoV infection. In both species the virus was inoculated via intranasal route, and either no clinical signs (alpacas) or mild mucus secretion (llamas) was observed. MERS-CoV was detected in nasal swabs, and in the URT and trachea of both llamas and alpacas. None of the species showed lesions macroscopically, but microscopically mild to severe rhinitis was detected in alpacas as well as metaplasia of the epithelium of the turbinate in alpacas. Similar to dromedaries, the epithelial cells in the URT were the main target cells for virus replication. Concomitant to an antibody response, the virus was cleared from the URT 7 to 10 days after experimental infection [48], [49], [50].3.2Non-camelid domestic speciesAfter intranasal inoculation of MERS-CoV, only mild excretion of mucus was observed in 6 to 8-week old domestic pigs [50]. Viral RNA was detected in nasal swabs, in the URT, trachea and bronchus. Although gross lesions were not present in pigs, they showed mild to moderate rhinitis, with virus replication observed in the epithelial cells in the URT. Shedding of MERS-CoV was detected in nasal swabs from days 1 to 10 PI, but infectious virus was only detected until day 4 PI. Viral RNA was also detected in the URT, trachea and bronchus [50].New Zealand white rabbits did not exhibit clinical signs or significant gross lesions at necropsy after experimental MERS-CoV inoculation; thus, they were considered an animal model of asymptomatic infection [54]. Similar to pigs, mild to moderate rhinitis with necrosis was observed, and respiratory epithelial cells in the URT were identified as the target cells for MERS-CoV replication. Viral RNA was present in nasal swabs, and upper and lower respiratory tracts. Infectious virus was also detected in nasal swabs up to 7 days PI [54].3.3Non-human primatesThe rhesus macaque was used as the first animal model developed for MERS-CoV infection, showing mild to moderate respiratory disease from day 1 to 4 PI after intratracheal inoculation [21]. Gross lesions were present only in the lung, consisting in congestion and presence of nodules, and the main observed microscopical lesion was interstitial pneumonia. Although MERS-CoV RNA was detected in nasal swabs, bronchoalveolar lavage samples, oropharyngeal swabs, and also in some upper and lower respiratory tract tissue samples, infectious virus was only isolated from the lungs. MERS-CoV replication occurred in type I and II pneumocytes, and viral antigen co-localized with sites of pneumonia [21]. Macaques represent a useful model to study mild MERS-CoV infection because they develop a transient respiratory disease similar to humans.On the other hand, common marmosets exhibited moderate to severe respiratory disease from 1 to 13 days after inoculation of MERS-CoV through multiple routes (ocular, oral, intratracheal and intranasal) [24]. Similar to macaques, gross findings were present only in the lung and correlated with moderate to severe bronchointerstitial pneumonia. MERS-CoV antigen was detected by immunohistochemistry in both type I and II pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages, but the virus replicated only in type I pneumocytes and macrophages. Similar results were observed in marmosets after inoculation of MERS-CoV only via intratracheal route [55]. However, the outcome of MERS-CoV infection in marmosets has been controversial after the publication of a recent study by Johnson and collaborators, which demonstrated no lethality after intratracheal inoculation [56]. The outcome of experimental infections in both species is reviewed in recent publications [17], [18], [19], [20].4Advantages and disadvantages of animal hosts used for MERS-CoV experimental infectionAs described in the previous section, a number of animal species have been described as either natural reservoir (dromedary camel) or potential intermediate hosts of MERS-CoV, each one with its benefits and limitations (Table 3) when used as experimental infection models. Camelids (dromedary camels, alpacas and llamas), non-camelid domestic species (pigs and rabbits), and NHP (rhesus macaques and common marmosets) have been experimentally demonstrated to be susceptible to MERS-CoV infection, but with differences among them [21], [22], [23], [24], [47], [48], [49], [50], [53], [54]. Experiments with dromedary camels, the natural MERS-CoV host, and probably the first target for controlling MERS through vaccination [53], are costly and represent a high security risk for animal caretakers because of the difficulty in handling these animals under appropriate biosafety conditions. The main advantages of using the llama or alpaca models are that both belong to the family Camelidae, have smaller size, more gentle behavior, and are more available at a commercial level than dromedary camels; importantly, specific reagents for immune monitoring have been developed for new world camelids [57]. Therefore, they may be useful surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions. However, both models are also quite expensive and require large and complex BSL3 facilities. In contrast to camelids, other domestic species such as pigs and rabbits are readily available, with lower cost and easier handling. Additionally, an extensive panel of specific-immunological reagents is available for these species. When compared to camelids, however, lower MERS-CoV titers were detected in nasal cavities and tissue samples of pigs and rabbits during the infection. Furthermore their usefulness as animal models for transmission studies has not yet been addressed.Table 3Advantages and limitations of natural and potential intermediate hosts for MERS-CoV infection as experimental animal models as well as for transmission studies.Table 3SpeciesAdvantagesLimitationsCamelidsDromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius)•Natural host for MERS-CoV•Efficient animal-to-animal transmission (field studies)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)Alpacas (Vicugna pacos)•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Efficient animal-to-animal transmission (experimental)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)Llamas (Lama glama)•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)•No animal-to-animal transmission studies availableNon-camelid domestic speciesDomestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus)•Relative low cost and readily available•Ease handling•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Animal-to-animal transmission (experimental)•Pig-specific immunological reagents are available•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)•Limited transmission (only via direct contact, and during few days)•Lower viral titers in NS and tissues upon infectionRabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)•Low cost and readily available•Ease handling•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Rabbit-specific immunological reagents are available•No animal-to-animal transmission studies available•Lower viral titers in NS and tissues upon infectionNHPRhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta)•Human-specific immunological reagents are widely available•Clinical disease similar to humans: translational research (for intra species transmission)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)•No animal-to-animal transmission studies availableCommon marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)•Some human-specific immunological reagents cross-react•Clinical disease similar to humans: translational research (for intra species transmission)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities);•No animal-to-animal transmission studies availableAbbreviations: BSL3, biosafety level 3; MERS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome; NHP, non-human primates; NS, nasal swabs.Contrary to the mentioned species, both macaques and common marmosets develop clinical disease relatively similar to humans. In that respect, phylogenetically-related species as baboons [58], which live in Africa and Arabic Peninsula, might also play a role in the transmission of the virus. However, little attention has been paid to these species since no sero-epidemiology has been documented. There are important limitations when working with NHP models, namely the complex husbandry requirements that lead to substantially increased costs, some controversy results among different groups. Besides practical considerations, human-specific immunological reagents cross-react with NHP species and are widely available.5Conclusion and future stepsAs summarized in this review, several species of animals are susceptible to experimental MERS-CoV infection; thus, they might act as potential intermediate hosts of the disease. However, the presence of viral RNA and/or specific antibodies against the virus has been only demonstrated in the field in dromedaries and alpacas [41], [51]. At the light of recent experimental studies, it seems that the list of potential host targets for MERS-CoV is not closed. MERS surveillance programs should be implemented in endemic areas in animal species for which experimental evidence of susceptibility has been provided and species closely related to them.SARS and MERS outbreaks taught us many lessons, and one of the most important is that, even in the absence of an overt threat, there is the possibility of the re-emergence of a virus or other similar viruses. On the other hand, and since the first case of MERS, continuous new cases have been described in different countries around the world [59], [60], [61], [62]. This underlines the importance of the development of animal models closer to the natural host targets. The key role of domestic animals and wildlife in the transmission of MERS-CoV should be further elucidated; meanwhile, countermeasures against deadly coronaviruses must be further explored since the risk of a global outbreak is not negligible. Noteworthy, after more than a decade of SARS and five years of MERS epidemics, there are still no licensed preventive or therapeutic drugs available that could be used in case of an eventual re-emergence of SARS or MERS. This scenario is not the outcome of technical issues, since effective vaccine prototypes against those pathogens are already available [53], [63], [64]. In case of MERS-CoV, vaccination of dromedary camels, the main source of zoonotic transmission, might be useful to control the spread of MERS [53]. However, when developing a vaccine, besides testing the protection efficacy, researchers need to think about social problems such as the reticence of camel owners to vaccinate their animals. Thus, the development of a dual vaccine able to protect against both, MERS-CoV and camelpox virus (an endemic disease in the Middle East, Africa and Asia) might be an ideal solution [53]. Recently, another dual-vaccine for humans and animals against MERS-CoV and rabies virus has been designed [65]. Political aspects have also a key role in the release of a vaccine into the market. Unless the requirements and timings for vaccine licensing procedures are facilitated, pharmaceutical companies will unlikely invest in their development taking into account the current market demand. Moreover, fragmentation of intellectual property rights may also adversely affect the development of vaccines to combat those infections [66].Conflicts of interestNone.


Title: Species-Specific Colocalization of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Attachment and Entry Receptors

INTRODUCTIONCoronaviruses use their spike (S) protein to attach to host cell surface molecules and enter target cells. The N-terminal part of this S protein, known as S1, is responsible for attachment to host cells, while the C-terminal part mediates virus fusion to host cells postattachment (1). For Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), the S1 protein comprises four individually folded domains, designated S1A through S1D (2, 3). Two of these domains, S1A and S1B, are involved in binding to host cell surface molecules during the attachment phase. The S1A domain preferentially binds to several glycotopes of α2,3-sialic acids, while the S1B domain recognizes a host exopeptidase named dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4), the viral receptor (4, 5). The absence of DPP4 renders cells insusceptible to MERS-CoV (4). Meanwhile, elimination of sialic acids in susceptible cell lines significantly reduces MERS-CoV infection (5). These findings indicated that besides DPP4, the functional entry receptor of MERS-CoV, α2,3-sialic acids act as attachment receptors (4, 5).DPP4 expression has been mapped in tissues of different susceptible species. It is expressed in the nasal epithelium of camelids, pigs, and rabbits, in which MERS-CoV causes upper respiratory tract infection (6–12). In the human respiratory tract, it is mainly expressed in type II pneumocytes in the lungs (8, 13), in line with clinical data showing that in humans, MERS-CoV mainly replicates in the lower respiratory tract (14–16). In common pipistrelle bats, a potential reservoir for MERS-CoV-like viruses, DPP4 is scarcely detected in the respiratory tract but abundantly present in the intestinal tract (17). Accordingly, MERS-CoV-like viruses are detected mostly in fecal samples of this species as well as in other insectivorous bat species (18–20). Sheep, on the other hand, do not seem to express DPP4 in their respiratory tract and thus hardly shed infectious virus and did not seroconvert upon experimental intranasal MERS-CoV inoculation (7, 21). Epidemiological studies did not reveal MERS-CoV-seropositive sheep in the field, except for one study using sheep sera obtained from Senegal (22–25). Altogether, these data support the role of DPP4 in determining the host range and tissue tropism of MERS-CoV.The localization of α2,3-sialic acids in the respiratory tract of both humans and dromedary camels has been mapped using lectin histochemistry (5). These molecules are mainly present in the lower respiratory tract epithelium of humans and the upper respiratory tract epithelium of dromedary camels, in line with the localization of DPP4 (5, 26). However, it is important to note that MERS-CoV S1A does not indiscriminately bind to all α2,3-sialic acids. It does not recognize those with 5-N-glycosylation or 9-O-acetylation but preferentially binds 5-N-acetyl-modified sialic acids (5). Among these α2,3-linked, N-acetyl-modified sialic acids, MERS-CoV S1A predominantly binds to short, sulfated, α2,3-linked monosialosaccharides and to long, branched, di- and triantennary α2,3-linked sialic acids, with a minimum extension of 3 N-acetyl-d-lactosamine tandem repeats (5). These glycotopes were previously identified by glycan array analysis using nanoparticles displaying multivalent MERS-CoV S1A (5). Here, using these nanoparticles, we developed a histochemistry-based technique to map the MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes in the tissues of different susceptible species. The results of our study offer further insight into the importance of these glycotopes in MERS-CoV host range, tropism, and transmission.RESULTSMERS-CoV S1A binds specifically to the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels.The nasal epithelia of dromedary camels express DPP4 and are susceptible to MERS-CoV upon experimental inoculation (8, 27). Recent studies revealed that these tissues also express α2,3-sialic acids based on Maackia amurensis lectin II binding (5). However, this lectin binds to a broad range of modified α2,3-sialic acids and thus may not represent a specific marker for glycotopes recognized by MERS-CoV S1A (28). In order to map these glycotopes, we displayed MERS-CoV S1A in a multivalent manner using 60-meric self-assembled nanoparticles generated from the lumazine synthase protein of the bacterium Aquifex aeolicus (np-S1A) (5) and subsequently used these nanoparticles to set up a histochemistry assay. We previously showed that both np-S1A and MERS-CoV virions can agglutinate human erythrocytes, while dimeric MERS-CoV S1A cannot, indicating that multivalent presentation is necessary for the hemagglutination phenotype of MERS-CoV S1A. Similarly, np-S1A, but not dimeric MERS-CoV S1A, can bind to tissues in our assay. As shown in Fig. 1, np-S1A binds specifically to the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels. We found that these glycotopes are expressed in clusters of ciliated and goblet cells in the nasal epithelium in a random multifocal pattern (Fig. 1A). We determined the binding specificity of np-S1A by using blank nanoparticles and tissues pretreated with neuraminidase as negative controls (Fig. 1A). Goblet cells, however, are DPP4 negative and thus are not susceptible to MERS-CoV despite expressing these glycotopes (Fig. 1B). The nasal tissues used for the np-S1A binding experiment, DPP4 detection, and periodic acid-Schiff staining were obtained from noninfected dromedary camels, while those used to visualize both np-S1A binding and MERS-CoV nucleoprotein were obtained from MERS-CoV-infected dromedary camels. The tissues of these animals were collected during a previous study (27).FIG 1MERS-CoV S1A binds specifically to the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels. (A) Nanoparticles displaying a multivalent MERS-CoV S1A domain (np-S1A) bind to the apical surface of camel nasal ciliated epithelial cells, as revealed by red staining. np-S1A binding is inhibited by prior neuraminidase treatment of these nasal tissues. Blank nanoparticles also do not bind to these tissues. (B) Goblet cells (arrows), visualized in purple by periodic acid-Schiff stain, are DPP4 negative, unlike nasal ciliated columnar epithelial cells (arrowheads). DPP4 expression is indicated in red. MERS-CoV S1A binding to these goblet cells (red) can be abrogated by neuraminidase treatment. In MERS-CoV-infected camels, MERS-CoV S1A (green) binds to both nasal ciliated columnar epithelial cells and goblet cells, while MERS-CoV N protein (red) is detected only in nasal ciliated columnar epithelial cells. np-S1A binding is abrogated by a nanobody against the S1A domain (Nb anti-S1A) but not by one against the S1B domain (Nb anti-S1B). The tissues used in these experiments were sequentially cut. All pictures were taken at a ×400 magnification. (C) Nb anti-S1A and Nb anti-S1B bind specifically to S1A and S1B domains, respectively, and both bind to S1 protein, as revealed by an ELISA. The control nanobody does not bind to S1, S1A, and S1B. Nanobody binding is expressed as optical density at 450 nm (OD450) values determined by an ELISA.In a previous study, we generated a nanobody library from the bone marrow of dromedary camels vaccinated with modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) expressing the MERS-CoV spike protein and identified S1B-reactive nanobodies (29). We rescreened this library using the S1A domain and identified an S1A-reactive nanobody. We confirmed its specific binding to the S1A domain through S1, S1B, and S1A enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). While the control nanobody (29) was negative in all three ELISAs, each of the anti-S1A and anti-S1B nanobodies reacted specifically to its corresponding domain and to S1 in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. 1B). The identified S1A nanobody inhibited np-S1A binding to nasal epithelial cells, whereas the S1B-reactive nanobody did not, further confirming the np-S1A binding specificity and the potential role of S1A-specific antibodies in blocking MERS-CoV attachment (Fig. 1A).MERS-CoV S1A does not bind to the nasal epithelium of pigs and rabbits.Similar to dromedary camels, pigs and rabbits also develop upper respiratory tract infection upon MERS-CoV inoculation. However, both pigs and rabbits shed less infectious virus (mainly between 102 and 103 50% tissue culture infectious doses [TCID50]/ml) than do dromedary camels (between 104 and 105 TCID50/ml) postinoculation (6, 7, 9–11, 27, 30). In line with these findings, we found smaller numbers of infected nasal epithelial cells in the nasal tissues of these MERS-CoV-infected pigs and rabbits than in dromedary camels (Fig. 2). Using the nasal tissues obtained from mock-infected dromedary camels, pigs, and rabbits, we show that DPP4 is highly expressed in the nasal epithelium of these three species (Fig. 2), indicating that the differences in infectious virus shedding observed in these three species are not likely due to differences in DPP4 expression. Subsequent screening for the presence of α2,3-sialic acids in these tissues using lectin histochemistry revealed that the nasal epithelium of pigs does not express these sialic acids, in accordance with the results of previous studies (31, 32). In contrast, these sialic acids were detected in the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels and rabbits (Fig. 2). We then used np-S1A to test for the presence of MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes in the nasal epithelium of pigs and rabbits and found that unlike dromedary camels, both species do not express these glycotopes (Fig. 2). The absence of these glycotopes in the nasal epithelium of rabbits, despite the abundant presence of α2,3-sialic acids, further supports the fine specificity of A domain binding.FIG 2Detection of MERS-CoV N protein, DPP4, α2,3-sialic acids, and MERS-CoV S1A binding in the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels, pigs, and rabbits. MERS-CoV N protein, DPP4, α2,3-sialic acid, and MERS-CoV S1A binding are all indicated in red. MERS-CoV N protein is detected in the nasal epithelium tissues of MERS-CoV-infected dromedary camels, pigs, and rabbits. DPP4, α2,3-sialic acid, and MERS-CoV S1A binding were evaluated on the tissues of noninfected animals. MERS-CoV N protein and DPP4 are detected in the nasal epithelium of dromedary camel, pig, and rabbit. α2,3-Sialic acids are detected in the nasal epithelium of dromedary camel and rabbit but not in that of pig. Meanwhile, MERS-CoV S1A binds merely to the nasal epithelium of dromedary camel. Magnification, ×400.MERS-CoV S1A binds specifically to the intestinal epithelium of pipistrelle bats.DPP4 has been reported to mediate MERS-CoV infection in various bat cell lines derived from different bat species (33, 34). It has also been shown to mediate entry of pseudotyped viruses expressing spike proteins of two MERS-CoV-like viruses, i.e., HKU4 and Hypsugo pulveratus BatCoV HKU25, in target cells (19, 35, 36). DPP4, detected using a previously described immunohistochemistry method (8, 17), has also been shown to be abundantly expressed in the intestinal epithelium of both insectivorous and frugivorous bats (17). Altogether, these studies suggest the susceptibility of various bat species to MERS-CoV-like viruses. However, not all susceptible bat species may act as hosts for these viruses, as they were preferentially detected in insectivorous bats (18–20). One study conducted a large screening of over 5,000 insectivorous bats, from Ghana, Ukraine, Romania, Germany, and The Netherlands, showing that these viruses were mainly detected in Nycteris bats and pipistrelle bats (20). Using np-S1A, we investigated whether MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes were differentially expressed in the intestinal epithelium of insectivorous bats, i.e., common pipistrelle (Pipistrellus pipistrellus) and serotine (Eptesicus serotinus) bats, and frugivorous bats, i.e., Gambian epauletted (Epomophorus gambianus) and Egyptian fruit (Rousettus aegyptiacus) bats. We observed that np-S1A binds to the apical surface of the intestinal epithelium of common pipistrelle bats in both villi and crypts, while in others, np-S1A binds only to the intestinal crypts (Fig. 3).FIG 3DPP4 expression and MERS-CoV S1A binding in intestinal tissues of common pipistrelle bat, serotine bat, Gambian epauletted fruit bat, and Egyptian fruit bat. DPP4 expression and MERS-CoV S1A binding are indicated in red. DPP4 is expressed at the apical surface of the intestinal epithelial cells of these four bat species. MERS-CoV S1A binds to the apical surface of the intestinal epithelial cells of common pipistrelle bats in both villi and crypts, while in other bat species, it mostly binds to intestinal epithelial cells within the crypts. Magnification, ×400.MERS-CoV S1A binds specifically to cells in the human lower respiratory tract.Since lower respiratory tract samples from MERS human cases have higher levels of virus and the virus was detected by immunohistochemistry in the lungs of two cases, it has been concluded that MERS-CoV mainly replicates in the human lower respiratory tract (14–16, 37). In line with these observations, DPP4 is expressed in the lower airway epithelium but not in the upper airway epithelium. It was detected in bronchiolar and alveolar epithelial cells but primarily in type II pneumocytes (Fig. 4A), consistent with previous studies (8, 13). Our lectin histochemistry staining showed that both bronchiolar epithelial cells and type II pneumocytes express α2,3-sialic acids (26). Both cell types also express MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes, as indicated by the binding of np-S1A (Fig. 4B). Using immunofluorescence, we show that DPP4 expression and np-S1A binding colocalize in the same alveolar epithelial cells in the human lung (Fig. 4C).FIG 4MERS-CoV receptor and attachment factor in the human lower respiratory tract epithelium. (A) The MERS-CoV receptor, DPP4, is expressed in the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels, while in the lungs, it is mainly expressed in endothelial cells. In the human respiratory tract, DPP4 is expressed in bronchiolar epithelial cells (arrowhead) and type II pneumocytes (arrow) in the lungs but not in the nasal epithelium. (B) α2,3-Sialic acid expression and MERS-CoV S1A binding are also detected in human bronchiolar epithelial cells (arrowheads) and type II pneumocytes (arrows). DPP4 expression, α2,3-sialic acids, and MERS-CoV S1A binding are indicated in red. (C) In human alveoli, DPP4 expression (red) colocalizes in the same cells where MERS-CoV S1A binds (green). Pictures of the nasal epithelium were taken at a ×400 magnification, and those of the alveoli were taken at a ×1,000 magnification.The function of MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes as an attachment factor thus far has been observed only in Calu3 cells, which is a cell line originating from a human lung adenocarcinoma. These cells express both DPP4 and the glycotopes of α2,3-sialic acids recognized by MERS-CoV. Removal of sialic acids on these cells using neuraminidase prior to MERS-CoV infection significantly reduced the number of infected cells (5). In contrast, neuraminidase treatment of Vero cells, which do not express MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes, had no effect on the number of infected cells (5). Primary well-differentiated normal human bronchiolar epithelial (wd-NHBE) cells also express DPP4 and MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes (Fig. 5A). These wd-NHBE cells were obtained from healthy human bronchial epithelial cells and cultured at the air-liquid interface to mimic the human airway environment. Previous studies have reported that these cells are susceptible to MERS-CoV in a DPP4-dependent manner (38–40). Here we show that neuraminidase treatment of paraffin-embedded wd-NHBE cells reduces np-S1A binding but not DPP4 expression (Fig. 5A). Neuraminidase treatment prior to MERS-CoV infection of these cells also significantly reduced the number of infected cells (Fig. 5B), similar to our previous findings in Calu3 cells (5). Thus, our results further support the importance of MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes as an attachment factor during infection of human airway epithelial cells.FIG 5Binding of the MERS-CoV S1A domain and MERS-CoV infection in primary normal human bronchial epithelial cells are inhibited upon prior neuraminidase treatment. (A) Removal of sialic acids using neuraminidase (NA) treatment diminishes MERS-CoV S1A binding to primary normal human bronchial epithelial cells but not DPP4 expression in these cells. (B) The same treatment also significantly inhibits MERS-CoV infection in these cells up to 50%. Immunofluorescence images in panel A were taken at a ×400 magnification, and those in panel B were taken at a ×100 magnification. ***, P value of <0.0001 by a t test.DISCUSSIONThe S1 protein is an important determinant for the host range and tissue tropism of coronaviruses. This domain initiates infection by binding to host cell surface molecules, either proteinaceous, sialoglycan based, or both (41). The S1 proteins of feline coronavirus, transmissible gastroenterovirus, and MERS-CoV have been demonstrated to have dual-binding specificity, allowing them to engage both sialoglycans and proteinaceous molecules (5, 38, 41–45). We have previously reported that for MERS-CoV, this dual binding is facilitated by distinct domains of its S1 protein, i.e., S1A and S1B (4, 5). The S1B domain binds DPP4, the functional receptor of MERS-CoV (38). DPP4 has been demonstrated to have a major influence on viral host range and tropism since its tissue localization varies between species (7, 8, 13, 17, 33, 38, 46–48). It is detected in the nasal epithelium of camelids, pigs, and rabbits (7, 8). In bats, it is mainly expressed in the small intestinal epithelium of common pipistrelle and serotine bats and in both the respiratory and intestinal epithelia of Gambian epauletted and Egyptian fruit bats (17). Meanwhile, in the human airways, it is present merely in the lower respiratory tract epithelium, particularly in type II pneumocytes (8, 13). Besides DPP4, MERS-CoV preferentially binds α2,3-linked sialic acids via its S1A domain and uses these sialic acids as an attachment factor (5). Using nanoparticles displaying a multivalent S1A domain, we show that the tissue localization of these glycotopes varies between various tissues in susceptible species. The S1A domain bound to the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels and type II pneumocytes in human lungs but not the nasal epithelium of pigs and rabbits. Binding of particles to other molecules besides sialic acids such as mucus and extracellular factors that are removed during the preparation of tissue sections as a result of the boiling procedure, however, cannot be excluded.Previous studies have shown that MERS-CoV-inoculated pigs and rabbits shed less infectious virus than did dromedary camels (6, 7, 10, 11, 27). In addition, these animals did not transmit the virus via either contact or airborne routes (30, 49). In contrast, MERS-CoV is easily transmitted among dromedary camels (12, 50–53). The absence of MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes in the nasal epithelium of pigs and rabbits might render them less permissive to MERS-CoV, thus shedding less infectious virus, which subsequently limited virus transmission. This is supported by our finding that the loss of these glycotopes, e.g., through desialylation, could significantly reduce MERS-CoV infection (5). However, it is important to note that the expression of other factors, such as proteases and interferons, may also influence MERS-CoV replication and transmission. MERS-CoV has been reported to use host cell proteases, such as TMPRSS2, furin, and cathepsins, to mediate fusion to host cells (54–56). The virus has been shown to be sensitive to type I interferon, an essential host innate immune cytokine (5, 54–58). Thus, the absence of these proteases and the presence of an inhibiting host innate immune response could effectively limit MERS-CoV replication and transmission, in combination with the absence of MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes (5, 54–58). The importance of glycotopes in MERS-CoV transmission, either solely or in combination with other factors, remains to be further elucidated. These studies would likely require experimental infection of camelids, particularly dromedary camels (50, 51, 59, 60).Our data also show that besides their presence in the respiratory tract of dromedary camels and humans, MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes are expressed at the apical surface of the villi and crypts of the intestinal epithelium of common pipistrelle bats. Interestingly, in serotine bats and both Gambian epauleted and Egyptian fruit bats, these glycotopes are detected merely in the intestinal crypts. This finding further supports the belief that insectivorous bats are one of the natural hosts of MERS-CoV-like viruses (18–20) and also suggests that not all insectivorous bats express the α2,3-sialic acid glycotopes recognized by MERS-CoV in their intestines. However, how sialic acid abundance and distribution in the intestine relate to infection by MERS-CoV-like viruses in various bat species remains to be investigated. Such studies would likely rely on the availability of primary bat intestinal cell culture or bat intestinal organoids, since experiments in insectivorous bats are difficult to perform, partly due to legal restrictions.In general, our results showed that the tissue localization of α2,3-sialic acid glycotopes recognized by MERS-CoV S1A varies between susceptible species. These glycotopes and DPP4 are both expressed in the nasal ciliated epithelial cells of dromedary camels, type II pneumocytes of humans, and intestinal epithelial cells of common pipistrelle bats, providing further evidence that these tissues are the main replication sites of MERS-CoV in the respective species. This study corroborates α2,3-sialic acid glycotopes as an important attachment factor for MERS-CoV (5) and highlights the necessity to further understand their role in MERS-CoV pathogenesis and transmission. Importantly, our results also imply that the MERS-CoV S1A domain should be considered a target for vaccines (61, 62).MATERIALS AND METHODSTissue samples.Human formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) lung tissues were obtained from the Erasmus MC Tissue Bank and had been used in a previous study (8). These tissue samples were residual human biomaterials taken either from healthy donors or from patients with nonmalignant lung tumors, which were collected, stored, and issued by the Erasmus MC Tissue Bank under ISO 15189:2007 standard operating procedures. Use of these materials for research purposes is regulated according to human tissue and medical research under the code of conduct for responsible use (64). Dromedary camel, pig, and rabbit FFPE nasal tissues, both MERS-CoV infected and mock infected, were obtained from previous studies. The dromedary camels and pigs were inoculated via the intranasal route with 107 tissue culture infectious doses (TCID50), while the rabbits were inoculated with 106 TCID50 via the intranasal route and 4 × 106 TCID50 via the intratracheal route. Mock-infected animals were inoculated with cell culture medium. Infected animals were all sacrificed at day 4 postinoculation (6, 7, 27). Bat FFPE intestinal tissues were also obtained from a previous study (17). Tissues of common pipistrelle and serotine bats were obtained from bats that were stranded or severely wounded and admitted to an official local bat shelter in The Netherlands. The Gambian and Egyptian fruit bats used in this study originated from free-ranging populations in Ghana. The animals were euthanized and necropsied by licensed veterinarians. The bat tissues included in this study were histologically normal as determined by using hematoxylin-eosin staining prior to our experiment.Histochemistry and immunofluorescence analysis.MERS-CoV nucleoprotein was detected with 5 μg/ml mouse anti-MERS nucleoprotein (Sino-Biological, Beijing, China), while DPP4 expression was detected with either 5 μg/ml goat anti-human DPP4 (R&D, Minneapolis, MN, USA) or 10 μg/ml mouse anti-human DPP4 (clone 11D7; Origene, Rockville, MD, USA). Briefly, the paraffin-embedded tissues were deparaffinized using xylene, hydrated using graded concentrations of alcohol, boiled in 10 mM citric acid buffer (pH 6) for 15 min, and subsequently incubated in 3% H2O2 for 10 min and in 5% normal goat serum for 30 min before staining with antibodies. This protocol has been more thoroughly described in previous studies (7, 8, 13, 17). Periodic acid-Schiff staining was performed by deparaffinizing and hydrating the tissue slides, subsequently incubating them in a periodic acid solution for 5 min and Schiff’s reagent for 15 min, and counterstaining them with Gill’s hematoxylin for 1 min, with water rinsing between steps. This protocol has also been used in our previous study (7). Expression of α2,3-sialic acids was detected using biotinylated Maackia amurensis lectin II (Vector Labs, Burlingame, CA, USA) at a 1:800 dilution and streptavidin-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) at a 1:300 dilution, both diluted in 1× Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1 M MnCl2, 1 M MgCl2, and 0.1 M CaCl2, and then subsequently visualized using 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole and counterstained with hematoxylin. Detection of S1A binding on the tissues was performed using nanoparticles displaying a multivalent S1A domain (np-S1A) and a Strep-tag generated in a previous study (5). The tissues were boiled in 10 mM citric acid buffer (pH 6) for 15 min and blocked with 5% normal goat serum (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) before staining with 3 μg/ml np-S1A overnight at 4°C. Tissues that were stained with an equal concentration (3 μg/ml) of blank nanoparticles and those that were pretreated with 800 mU/ml neuraminidase from Vibrio cholerae (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) for 4 h at 37°C were used as negative controls. Additional controls were performed by staining tissues with np-S1A previously incubated for 1 h at 37°C with either anti-S1A, anti-S1B, or control nanobodies at a 15-μg/ml concentration. These nanobodies were obtained from a nanobody library generated in a previous study (29). These tissues were subsequently stained with rabbit anti-Strep-tag sera generated in-house and goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), each at a 1:100 dilution, for 1 h at room temperature and then visualized with 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole and counterstained with hematoxylin. For immunofluorescence staining, fluorescence-conjugated secondary antibody was applied in the experiment, i.e., goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 and goat anti-mouse IgG conjugated with Alexa Fluor 594 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA), both at a 1:250 dilution, with a 1-h incubation at room temperature.MERS-CoV S1, S1B, and S1A ELISAs.The specificity of anti-S1A, anti-S1B, and control nanobodies for MERS-CoV S1, S1A, and S1B proteins was determined using ELISAs as previously described (29). In brief, 96-well ELISA plates were coated with 1 μg/ml MERS-CoV S1 (amino acids 1 to 751), S1A (amino acids 1 to 357), or S1B (amino acids 358 to 588) protein in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.4) and incubated overnight at 4°C. Wells were then washed with PBS and blocked with 1% bovine serum albumin in PBS–0.5% Tween 20 for 1 h at 37°C. Nanobodies were 2-fold serially diluted in blocking buffer starting at a 1-μg/ml concentration, 100 μl of each dilution was added per well, and plates were incubated at 37°C for 1 h. Next, plates were washed three times in PBS–0.05% Tween 20 (PBST), after which they were incubated with mouse anti-His tag antibodies (1:2,000; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37°C for 1 h. Following incubation, the plates were washed and further incubated with goat anti-mouse HRP (1:2,000; Dako) at 37°C for 1 h. After this incubation, plates were washed three times in PBST, a 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine substrate (eBioscience) was added, and the plates were incubated for 10 min. The reaction was stopped with 0.5 N H2SO4 (Sigma). The absorbance of each sample was read at 450 nm with an ELISA reader (Tecan Infinite F200).MERS-CoV infection in well-differentiated primary normal human bronchial epithelial cells.Primary NHBE cells (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) were cultured on Transwell permeable support (Costar) according to the protocol suggested by the manufacturer (Clonetics airway epithelial cell systems; Lonza, Basel, Switzerland). The cells were differentiated at the air-liquid interface for 6 weeks to promote mucociliary differentiation, resulting in the presence of a multilayered epithelium, ciliated cells, and goblet cells (63). These cells were subsequently either mock treated or pretreated with a mixture of 40 mU of Arthrobacter ureafaciens neuraminidase (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 50 U of Clostridium perfringens neuraminidase (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA) for 1 h before infection. Each well was inoculated with the MERS-CoV EMC/2012 strain (6, 7) at 106 TCID50/ml (multiplicity of infection [MOI] of 5), incubated for 36 h, and fixed in 10% formalin. MERS-CoV-infected cells were visualized with 5 μg/ml mouse anti-MERS nucleoprotein (Sino-Biological, Beijing, China) and a 1:250 dilution of goat anti-mouse IgG conjugated with Alexa Fluor 594 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). MERS-CoV infection experiments in NHBE cells were performed in triplicate per individual donor. The number of infected cells was counted for each well, and the percentage of infected cells was determined as described in our previous study (5). Statistical analysis was performed using Student’s t test, and results are presented as means ± standard deviations for each group.


Title: Recent Aspects on the Pathogenesis Mechanism, Animal Models and Novel Therapeutic Interventions for Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Infections

IntroductionThe coronaviruses such as HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63 (α-coronavirus) and HCoV-OC43 and HKU1 (β-coronavirus) circulated in the human population and caused mild respiratory infections (Hamre and Procknow, 1966; Fouchier et al., 2004; van der Hoek et al., 2004; Woo et al., 2005). Over the last two decades, there have been two zoonotic emergence of coronaviruses into the human population, both linked with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) (Drosten et al., 2003; Kuiken et al., 2003) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) (Zaki et al., 2012; Chafekar and Fielding, 2018).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus belonged to β-coronavirus, clade-c (van Boheemen et al., 2012; de Groot et al., 2013) and was initially known as Human Coronavirus Erasmus Medical Center/2012. or HCoV-EMC/2012 (Chan et al., 2012). MERS-CoV infections resulted high mortality rate in human, and till date, very limited therapeutic intervention or vaccine are available for the treatment of infections caused by the virus (Mustafa et al., 2017; Hui et al., 2018).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus found in various natural hosts such as the dromedary calves (Camelus dromedarius), bats (Vespertilio superans and Neoromicia capensis), and European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) (Zhang et al., 2016; Lau et al., 2017). The replication of the virus has observed in various other animals such as rabbit, goat, civet, pig, camelid, and horse (Muller et al., 2012; Chan et al., 2013a; Al-Tawfiq et al., 2014; Eckerle et al., 2014; Meyer et al., 2015). The prevalence MERS-CoV was recently reported in non-camelid domestic mammals such as sheep, goat, donkey, and cow that were in contact with camels (Kandeil et al., 2019). The origin of human MERS-CoV is considered to be from the bats. Several coronaviruses were isolated and found that which were genetically similar to human MERS-CoV. Phylogenetic analysis of MERS-CoV showed that a close relationship to Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5 and Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4 (Selinger et al., 2014). Studies have suggested that there were few evidences where the virus showed camel origin (Zhang et al., 2016). Studies revealed that the sero-prevalence of the virus was greater among the people those who were exhibited direct and indirect contact with dromedary camels when compared to those who were exhibited with the general population (Watson et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2015; Conzade et al., 2018). Recent study revealed that the prevalence of MERS-CoV infection in camel workers was found to be very high in Saudi Arabia (Alshukairi et al., 2018). Thus, this review provide the recent perspectives on the epidemiology and genome composition of MERS-CoV with a special emphasis on the viral entry, clinical manifestations, mechanism of pathogenesis, animal models, detection, and development of vaccines with an insight on various computational biology perspectives.EpidemiologyThe first case of MERS-CoV infection was reported in Saudi Arabia in 2012 (Zaki et al., 2012). From the period of its emergence, the virus has infected and propagated across more than 20 countries, contributing to a wide number of laboratory-confirmed cases. In 2015, the MERS-CoV outbreak in South Korea involved 186 cases which included 38 fatalities. A total of 83% cases of transmission were due to five super spreaders, and 44% of 186 cases were in the patients those who were experienced nosocomial transmission at 16 hospitals. The epidemic lasted for 2 months and the government authorities quarantined 16,993 persons for 14 days to manage the outbreak. This outbreak provides an exclusive opportunity to seal the gap in our awareness of MERS-CoV infection (Oh et al., 2018). Recent statistics suggested that as of 31 December 2018, the total of 2,279 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV with 806 associated deaths (case fatality rate: 35.4%) were reported in 27 countries [Harcourt et al., 2018; World Health Organization (WHO), 2018a]. Among various cases, 1901 confirmed cases with 732 related deaths (fatality rate 38.5%) were reported from Saudi Arabia [Harcourt et al., 2018; World Health Organization (WHO), 2018a].In a comprehensive report by WHO, 1841 laboratory cases were confirmed between 2012 and 2016 in which 80% of them were reported from Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The remaining cases were reported from 27 countries in Middle East, Asia, North Africa, United States of America, and Europe [World Health Organization (WHO), 2016a]. A total of 13 cases were reported between October to November 2017, amongst which 12 cases were reported in male and only one case was reported in female. Most of the infected individuals were hospitalized due to the contact with camels and consumption of camel milk with the virus [World Health Organization (WHO), 2017a]. Additionally, two laboratory cases were also reported in which the patients belonged to the countries such as Malaysia and United Arab Emirates [World Health Organization (WHO), 2018a]. The laboratory confirmed cases and deaths reported in several countries from the year 2012 to 2018 are shown in Table 1.Table 1Laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infections and deaths reported in several countries from the year 2012 to 2018.YearRegionMERS-CoV infectionsDeaths due to MERS-CoV infectionsReference2012Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Jordan93World Health Organization, 20122013Saudi Arabia, United Kingdom, France, Tunisia, and Italy16771World Health Organization (WHO), 2013a2014Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Iran, and Egypt765273World Health Organization, 20142015Saudi Arabia, Republic of Korea, Jordan, Kuwait, The Philippines, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, Oman, Qatar, China, and Iran680237World Health Organization, 2015a,b2016Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Lebanon, and Oman24375World Health Organization (WHO), 2016b2017Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Lebanon, and Oman25881World Health Organization (WHO), 2017b2018Saudi Arabia and Malaysia, United Arab Emirates9641World Health Organization (WHO), 2018aThe Genome of MERS-CoVIn the early years of 2000, coronaviruses were not acquired great importance in research and development. With the emergence of SARS in the year 2002 and MERS in 2012, the interest of many researchers was stimulated toward coronavirus (Perlman, 2015).The morphology of coronavirus includes spherical or pleomorphic shapes with a diameter of 80–120 nm (Masters, 2006). The genome of the coronavirus consists of 6 and 7 open reading frames (ORFs). The ORF 1a and 1b encompass two-third of the viral genome which encodes the non-structural poly-proteins and the other four ORFs on the downstream side encode for the structural proteins such as envelope protein (E), Spike protein (S), nucleocapsid protein (N), and membrane protein (M). In some coronaviruses, hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) gene is present in the region between ORF 1b and S (Marra et al., 2003; Rota et al., 2003; Snijder et al., 2003). These structural proteins are folded and entered in to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and transported to the ER-Golgi transitional slot (Masters, 2006). During the replication of coronavirus, substantial amounts of structural proteins are synthesized in order to assemble the progeny virions (Fung and Liu, 2014). They occupy the RNA genome which encodes structural proteins such as S protein, M protein, and N protein (Snijder et al., 2003).The genome size of the first imported MERS-CoV strain was identified to be 30,114 nucleotide (nt) long, including the 3′and 5′ UTRs. This strain showed the genome structural ornaisation of typical betacoronavirus such as a 5′-untranslated region (UTR) (nt 1 to 272), replicase complex ORF1ab (nt 273 to 21508), S gene (nt 21450 to 25511), ORF3 (nt 25526 to 25837), ORF4a (nt 25846 to 26175), ORF4b (nt 26087 to 26827), ORF5 (nt26834 to 27508), E gene (nt 27584 to 27832), M gene (nt 27847 to 28506), N gene (nt 28560 to 29801), ORF8b gene (nt 28756 to 29094), and 3′UTR (nt 29094 to 30114). The two main poly-proteins such as pp1ab and pp1a are cleaved into 15/16 non-structural proteins (nsp) by 3C-like protease (3CLpro) and papain-like protease (PLpro). These proteases are cleaved from pp1ab along with other ORFs encoding nsp which are essential for activating RNA dependent RNA polymerase, helicase, exo-ribonuclease, endo-ribonuclease, and methyltransferase. These nsp were identified to be nsp12, nsp13, nsp14, nsp15, and nsp16. The nsp14 is necessary for proofreading the ubiquitous mutation of RNA virus (Ziebuhr et al., 2000; Snijder et al., 2003; Gorbalenya et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2013; Raj et al., 2014; Durai et al., 2015). Studies revealed that the accessory ORF proteins play an important role in MERS-CoV infection and pathogenesis (Menachery et al., 2017). This study showed that the absence of major accessory ORFs such as deletion of ORF3, -4a, -4b, and -5 (dORF3-5) played major role in the viral replication and pathogenesis. Further, the attenuation of the mutant dORF3-5 was found to be responsible for the dysregulated host responses such as augmented interferon (IFN) pathway activation, disrupted cell processes, and robust inflammation. Thus, the disruption of accessory ORFs probably provide platform to the attenuation of future emergent strains of MERS-CoV accessory ORF mutants. The accessory ORF functions can be targeted for both therapeutic and vaccine treatments in response to MERS-CoV and related group 2C corona viruses (Menachery et al., 2017). The graphical representation of the genome organization of MERS-CoV is illustrated in Figure 1. Coronaviruses have demonstrated the establishment of double membrane vesicles (DMVs) in the infected cells. Based on immune-histochemistry and electron microscopic studies, the coronavirus replicase proteins are co-localized with the DMVs and are assumed to be the site of replication/transcription complex (Fung and Liu, 2014).FIGURE 1(A) Graphical representation of the structure of the MERS-CoV. The schematic representation shows that the structure of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus, which contains the RNA enclosed in the nucleocapsid within the envelope that is embedded with spike proteins, glycoproteins and membrane proteins (van den Brand et al., 2015). (B) Genome organization of MERS CoV. The genomic organization of MERS-CoV displays the viral genes S, 3, 4a, 4b, 5, E, M, 8b, and N. The genome encodes for five unique accessory proteins such as 3, 4a, 4b, 5 and 8b and four major structural proteins which are illustrated in the genome scheme (Gao et al., 2016). (C) Experimental structure of MERS-CoV complexes with human DPP4 (PDB ID: 4L72). DPP4 is an extracellular RBD domain, which comprises of both N- and C-terminal. The N-terminal is the β-propeller domain and C-terminal is the α/β hydrolase domain (Wang et al., 2013). (D) Genome organization of receptor binding domain (RBD) that illustrates the S1 and S2 sub-domains (Zhang et al., 2015).An interesting fact of coronaviruses is that they display recombination, high rates of mutation, and propensity to cross species. One such event was reported during the 2002–2003 epidemic, where the transmission of SARS-CoV has occurred from Chinese horseshoe bats to human populations (Perlman and Netland, 2009). MERS-CoV has the capability to adjust new environments and acquire various virulence factors and enhance their ability to transfer these factors from human-to-human due to continues outbreak (Zumla et al., 2015). The phylogenetic analysis revealed that all human and camel MERS-CoVs were identified to be homologous to each other. Additionally, the hedgehog and bat MERS-CoVs demonstrated para-phyletic group to human and camel MERS-CoV clade (Zhang et al., 2016).Kim (2016) reported that the occurrence of a mutant strain of MERS-CoV toward the human CD26 receptor during the South Korean outbreak. Furthermore, they isolated 13 new viral genomes in which, 12 possessed point mutation in the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of S protein (Kim, 2016). The S protein is suggested to be essential for the host tropism through its interaction with the host CD26 receptor (van Doremalen et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014).PathogenesisViral EntryThe entry of MERS-CoV to the host is facilitated by its type-I transmembrane glycoprotein known as S protein (Xia et al., 2014). The RBD of MERS-CoV consists of S1 subunit which ranged from 367 to 606 amino acids and can be grouped into an external sub domain and core domain as shown in Figure 1C,D. The receptor-binding motif, V484 – L567 of RBD is situated at the external sub domain and the core sub domain consists of anti-parallel β-sheet (five-stranded) and six helices in the center. The two small β-strands make a globular fold. The core domain structure is balanced by three disulfide linkages. The MERS-CoV RBD external sub domain contains a β-sheet along with one small and three large strands which are organized in anti-parallel manner. The RBD core is attached to this region by special intervening loops and it binds to the core sub-domain by a clamp at the lower and upper regions. Most of the connecting loops and two small 310 helices are located in the inner region of the sheet. The fourth disulfide linkage is stabilized among the residues starting from C503 to C526 and β6-strand linked with η3-helix. Three helices (HR1) at the center and three chains (HR2) near to the core promote the release of the viral particle into the cytoplasm and promote the progression of the infection (Durai et al., 2015).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus can also enter the cell through an auxiliary pathway on the cell surface via transmembrane proteases. The binding of MERS-CoV into host cell and replication of the virus is shown in Figure 2. The host protease cleaves coronavirus S protein into two functional domains distinctive to each other at the N-terminal region (denoted as the S1 subunit) which comprised of RBD, and C-terminal portion (S2 subunit) comprised of a fusion peptide, two heptad repeats (HR2 and HR1) and the transmembrane (TM) domain (Weiss and Navas-Martin, 2005). The membrane fusion is conciliated by main conformational rearrangement which exposed the fusion peptide resulting in the development of six-helix bundle (6HB). The core of 6HB consists of a triple-stranded coiled like structure constructed by HR1s of the three spike subunits forming trimers; the HR2 elements are found to be packed within the grooves of the coiled coil in an anti-parallel direction. Owing to their central role in membrane fusion, it was reported that various antiviral peptides interfere the formation 6HB (Forni et al., 2015).FIGURE 2Life cycle of MERS-CoV displaying fusion with plasma membrane. The fusion of S protein to the plasma membrane of host cell, formation of a double membrane vesicle in the host cell, eventually releasing the RNA enclosed in the nucleocapsid followed by genome transcription. The viral RNA undergoes replication and transcription followed by the 4, 5, and 6 RNA synthesis and translation; the endoplasmic reticulum aids the assembly and packaging of virus particle forming a complete double membrane vesicle and lastly through exocytosis and MERS-CoV is released out of the host cell (Du et al., 2009).Transmission and Clinical PresentationThe clinical presentation of MERS-CoV compasses from severe respiratory diseases to subclinical infections (Drosten et al., 2013; Hui et al., 2018). Infected patients often indicate the presence of hemoptysis, sore throat, fever, cough, shortness of breath, and other gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting (Albarrak et al., 2012; Assiri et al., 2013a,b; Guery et al., 2013; Health Protection Agency, 2013; Omrani et al., 2013). A low range of lower pulmonary infiltrate associated with viral pneumonia was observed in the radiograph of patients infected with MERS-CoV (Memish et al., 2013a; Wang, 2014). It was observed that greater than 60% of the initially reported cases of MERS-CoV infection, the patients experienced severe disease which demanded intensive care treatments like extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and mechanical ventilation. Hematological aberrations delineated for the clinical cases of neutrophilia (8%), lymphopenia (34%), thrombocytopenia (36%), and lymphocytosis (11%). While the conditions of kidney failure necessitate renal replacement therapy for a considerable number of MERS-CoV cases, several studies detected MERS-CoV antigens and particles in the renal tissues in vivo, which is the direct indication of the virus replication in renal tissues and long term acute infection (Yeung et al., 2016; Alsaad et al., 2018).The first evidence of human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV was reported in few cases in United Kingdom, when an adult male traveled to Saudi Arabia and transferred the infectious virus to two of his family members (Perlman and Netland, 2009). It was suggested that MERS-CoV infections were due to the introduction of the virus in humans and the close contact with camels was one of risk factors for the transmission of MERS as reported by World Health Organization [World Health Organization (WHO), 2016b].The transmission of MERS-CoV is determined as spasmodic, often healthcare associated, intra-familial, and required prolonged and close contact (Memish et al., 2013a,b, Memish et al., 2014a,b; Puzelli et al., 2013; Drosten et al., 2014). In a domestic study conducted with MERS-CoV infected patients, 14 out of 280 contacts of 26 positively indexed patients (antibody positive or RNA) suggested that the frequency of the transmission even during outbreaks was approximately 3% (Drosten et al., 2014). Several studies suggested that the virus was not self-sustained, as during local epidemic of MERS-CoV, which has not been readily transmitted to more than one human and has been reported in majority of human related cases (Bauch and Oraby, 2013; Breban et al., 2013; Cauchemez et al., 2014; Chowell and Nishiura, 2014). The mode of transmission of the virus is illustrated in Figure 3.FIGURE 3Transmission of MERS-CoV and symptoms possessed by infected human. The figure shows the path by which the virus is transmitted from the infected camel to the human and camel to various animals (Kandeil et al., 2019); further, this virus is transmitted to other human population via human to human transmissions (Shehata et al., 2016).The serological analysis and extensive investigation of those potentially exposed to the patients suggested that there were no secondary infections [World Health Organization (WHO), 2013b]. As a minimum of 18 cases of asymptomatic MERS-CoV infections were reported in health care personals, the function of these subclinical cases in the transfer of infection was found to be uncertain (de Sousa et al., 2014).Molecular Mechanism of the PathogenesisWhile there were intensive studies on coronavirus research over the past 5 years, limited reports are available on the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV. Recent post-mortem histopathological studies revealed that the localization of viral particles in the pulmonary and extra pulmonary tissue of a 33-year-old male patient of T cell lymphoma, who acquired MERS-CoV infection (Ng et al., 2016; Alsaad et al., 2018). The histopathological analysis of the biopsies were collected from lung, brain, liver, heart, kidney, and skeletal muscle demonstrated that there were pulmonary diffuse alveolar damage, necrotizing pneumonia, acute kidney injury, portal and lobular hepatitis and myositis with muscle atrophic changes. Further, the viral particles were found to be localized in the pulmonary macrophages, pneumocytes, renal proximal tubular epithelial cells and macrophages infiltrating the skeletal muscles (Alsaad et al., 2018).Studies suggested that the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV in human and animals are mainly due to three mechanisms such as DPP4 (dipeptidyl peptidase-4) mediated mechanism, papain like protease PLpro mediated mechanism and accessory proteins like p4a and membrane M protein mediated mechanism. Hence, these proteins are probably considered as one of the potential therapeutic targets for MERS-CoV infections (Durai et al., 2015). The molecular mechanisms exhibited by various modes of pathogenesis are illustrated in Figure 4.FIGURE 4The molecular mechanism of pathogenesis by MERS-CoV in human and animals. The pathogenesis mechanism is mainly occurred by DPP4, papian like protease PLpro, and accessory proteins such as p4a and membrane M protein (Durai et al., 2015).DPP4 Mediated MechanismDPP4 is a type-II transmembrane glycoprotein consists of approximately 766 amino acids and function as major receptor for MERS-CoV. The three dimensional structural analysis revealed that this receptor has α/β-hydrolase domain and a β-propeller domain with eight blades that helped in the binding of receptor binding domain in MERS-CoV (Raj et al., 2014). The crystal structure of DPP4 is illustrated in Figure 1C. A DPP4 binding protein, adenosine deaminase, is considered as one of the major inhibitors of the S protein of MERS-CoV (Drosten, 2013).A number of cell lines such as human-derived HFL, Calu-3, Caco-2, Huh-7, HEK, His-1 cell lines, CD8+, and CD4+ that are susceptible to MERS-CoV were reported (Chan et al., 2013b; Shirato et al., 2013; Chu et al., 2016). Two S protein ecto-domains can be divided into fusion-catalyzing domains (FD) and RBD. The S RBDs bind to DPP4 after which the FDs are exposed through unfolding. Further, the cellular and viral membranes were joined together by refolding (Raj et al., 2013). The unfolding FD required the cleavage of S protein by host proteases. Out of various proteolytic cleavage sites between the FD and RBD, the cleavage at S1/S2 site is essential for the infection of Calu3 cells by MERS-CoV (Park et al., 2016).It has been revealed that upon infection, monocyte chemo attractant protein-1 and IFN-γ-inducible protein-10 were induced and suppressed the proliferation of human myeloid progenitor cells (Zhou et al., 2014). MERS-CoV can infect T-cells from human lymphoid organs and causes the peripheral blood inducing apoptosis by intrinsic and extrinsic pathways (Chu et al., 2016). A study conducted by Al-Qahtani et al. (2017) suggested that the inhibition of DPP4 mitigated the induction of PPARγ (the transcriptional repressor) and IRAK-M (negative regulator of TLR signaling) which indicated that the immunosuppressive action of S glycoprotein regulated by DPP4.Papain Like Protease PLpro Mediated MechanismUpon entry into the cells, two ORFs at the 5′-end of the viral genome are translated into two poly-proteins. They are processed by two viral proteases, PLpro and 3C-like proteinase (3CLpro) and form 16 nonstructural proteins which are necessary for the membrane-associated replication complex. PLpro is located in nonstructural protein 3. PLpro was found to be multifunctional enzymes with deISGylating (removal of ISG15 conjugates from host cell factors) and de-ubiquitinating (cleavage of ubiquitin from host cell factors) properties in addition to protease activity in many coronaviruses (Clasman et al., 2017). This resulted in the host antiviral immune response being antagonized and promoting the viral replication. PLpro can inhibit the mitochondrial anti-viral signaling protein induced IFN-β reporter activity and reduce TNF-α induced NF-κB reporter activity. Hence, MERS-CoV PLpro is considered to be important antiviral target (Mielech et al., 2014; Harrigan et al., 2018).The coronavirus genome is encoded by two ubiquitin-like domains (Ubl1 and Ubl2), out of which Ubl2 is considered to be an important component which influences the PLpro activity. Clasman et al. (2017) reported that PLpro has not showed the deISGylating, de-ubiquitinating or protease activities in the absence of Ubl2 domain. There were no variations in the process of inhibition, substrate specificity, catalytic efficiency and thermal stability (Clasman et al., 2017).Accessory Proteins Mediated MechanismThe viral genome is recognized by melanoma differentiation-associated protein-5 (MDA5), retinoic acid inducible gene-1 (RIG-1) and endosomal toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) as pathogen-associated molecular patterns. This recognition resulted in the formation of type-1 interferon (IFN1). As an evasion mechanism, virus synthesize proteins that hinder the production IFN1 in the pathway (Zinzula and Tramontano, 2013).In the absence of MDA5 and RIG-1, MERS-CoV used the protein such as 4a (p4a) which contain RNA-binding motif for binding (Rabouw et al., 2016). By a direct binding, this motif masks the dsRNA of MERS-CoV. The p4a possesses αβββα fold with the β1-β2 loop and α1 helix which bind to the minor groove of dsRNA. The mutational studies revealed that p4a-dsRNA complex stabilized by the amino acids such as K27, W45, K63, and K67 (Batool et al., 2017). In a study carried out by Canton et al. (2018) suggested that, NF-κB remained in the cytoplasm of MERS-CoV infected cells while 4b was found to be attached with the nucleus. In the absence of 4b, expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines was observed as NF-κB translocated to the nucleus. This was also observed in the case of 4b mutants that devoid of nuclear localization signal, indicating that nuclear localization signal mediated process of 4b is essential for NF-κB expression (Canton et al., 2018).As a component of the viral envelope, M protein is involved in various functions such as viral assembly along with other proteins such as E, S, N. The M, E, and S proteins interact with N protein in the ER-Golgi complex. This interaction hinders the fusion of viral and cellular membranes (Mustafa et al., 2018). It was observed that the expression of M protein in MERS-CoV might suppressed the type-I IFN expression in response to poly (I: C) induction or Sendai virus infection. This reaction was detected to be specific for the activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), however, not activated the nuclear factor-κB. The interaction of MERS-CoV M protein with TRAF3 and the association of disrupted TRAF3–TBK1 lead to reduced activation of IRF3 (Lui et al., 2016).Host Immune ResponseMiddle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus can readily infect human respiratory epithelial cells, macrophages, T-cells, dendritic cells and can influence the production and induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (Zhou et al., 2015). Studies on ex vivo human lung tissue and respiratory epithelial cell lines showed that the induction of antiviral interferons followed by MERS-CoV infection by stimulated epithelial cells was found to be limited. A study by Menachery et al. (2014) described that the cells infected with MERS-CoV demonstrated distinctly altered chromatin structures such as repressive histone markers, that could limit the transcription factors from binding to the promoter regions of interferon-stimulated gene. The changes in DNA methylation found to be one of the reasons for down regulation of IFN-γ–associated antigen-presenting gene after the infection (Menachery et al., 2018). MERS-CoV proteins such as 4a, 4b, M, and PLpro were found to be suppressed the induction of interferons (Yang et al., 2013; Mielech et al., 2014; Canton et al., 2018). Further, the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokine response in these cells was found to be limited. A delayed induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines such as IL-6, IL-8, and IL-1β were observed upon the viral infection (Lau et al., 2013; Canton et al., 2018).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus could infect and replicate in human monocyte-derived macrophages and immature monocyte-derived dendritic cells, while it failed to perform similar functions in mature monocyte-derived dendritic cells. This indicate that the maturation restrict the viral replication. Immature dendritic cells were unable to stimulate T-cell even after the antigen uptake, delaying the activation of T-cells and permitting further viral replication (Cong et al., 2018). The infection of human macrophages induced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines such as MCP-1/CCL-2, IFN-α2, IFN-γ, MIP-1α/CCL-3, IP-10/CXCL-10, RANTES/CCL-5, IL-8, TNF-α, IL-12p40, and IL-6 (Zhou et al., 2015; Cong et al., 2018). The infected dendritic cells induced the expression of IL-12, RANTES/CCL-5, IP-10/CXCL-10 and IFN-γ, however, showed low expression of IFN-α and no expression of IFN-β (Zhou et al., 2015).T-cells can be directed to the infection site by type-I IFN stimulated secretion of IL-10 and CXCL10. Due to their uncontrolled and strong expression, the expression of IFN-γ and IL-12 were inhibited and restricted the activation of T-helper cells. With the added effect of down-regulated antigen-presentation pathways, the activation of T cells is inhibited. Hence, the sequestered T cells failed to target the virus (Ying et al., 2016). Previous studies revealed that when the serum samples and bronchoalveolar lavage were analyzed from two patients, it was observed that the patients with low level secretion of IFN-α were failed to survive and the patients displayed high level secretion of type-I IFN were survived (Faure et al., 2014).Animal ModelsThe animal models are one of the vital components for translation of the findings from drug discovery process from bench to bedside. These animal models are indispensable for the deeper understanding of any diseases and safe and protective vaccine development process (Lorenzen et al., 2015). The main criteria for the validation of animal models in preclinical studies are face validity, predictive validity and target validity. The face validity means that the proper similarity between the animal model and the human disease in terms of the biology and symptoms of the disease. However, assessing face validity is a tedious task due to the lack of understanding on the core biology of the disease symptoms. Predictive validity means the display of clinical interventions which exhibited similar effect in the animal models. This is also very difficult to achieve due to the incomplete correlation between animal models, the mechanism of human diseases and the incapability of standard drugs to active in many animal models. Target validity is another essential component for the validation of animal models in which the target under study must have an analogous function in the disease model as in the clinical condition (Denayer et al., 2014).An ideal animal model is the one where an immunocompetent animal, on receiving the challenge virus at a realistic dose through a suitable inoculation route, is able to replicate the characteristics of a human disease as closely as possible (Doremalen and Munster, 2015). Ferrets, hamsters, mice and other small laboratory animals are not ideal animal models for MERS-CoV owing to the variations in DPP4 receptor. The rhesus macaque and the common marmoset are the first non-human primate species (NPS) to be used as the animal models for MERS-CoV. Glycosylation of mouse DPP4 (mDPP4) prevents its binding to S protein of MERS-CoV. Hence, transgenic hDPP4 (human DPP4) mice were developed as animal model (Peck et al., 2015). The major advantages and limitations of MERS-CoV animal models are listed in Table 2.Table 2Advantages and limitations of MERS-CoV experimental animal models.SpeciesAdvantagesLimitationsReferenceRabbitReadily available and easy to handleAnimal-to-animal transmission studies are not available No clinical disease, Low viral titers in tissues upon infection Develop mild pulmonary lesionsHaagmans et al., 2015; Vergara-Alert et al., 2017Rhesus macaquesHuman-specific reagents available for immunologic analysis Immune and respiratory systems similar to humans; clinical disease similar to humans Useful for confirming vaccine efficacy testingLimited availability and expensive Expert husbandry requirements Animal-to-animal transmission studies are not available Transient disease Ethical concernsBaseler et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2017Common marmosetModel severe, potentially fatal MERS-CoV infection Some human-specific immunological reagents cross-react Respiratory and immune systems similar to humans; clinical disease similar to humans Useful for confirming antiviral and vaccine efficacy testingLimited availability and expensive Expert husbandry requirements Ethical concerns Animal-to-animal transmission studies are not availableVergara-Alert et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2017hDPP4-transgenic miceModel severe, potentially fatal MERS-CoV infection Easy to handle Reagents available Useful for screening antivirals and vaccinesGlobal over expression of hDPP4Baseler et al., 2016; Coleman et al., 2017MiceStudies suggested that the glycosylation of certain amino acids prevented the binding of mouse DPP4 (mDPP4) to S protein of MERS-CoV (Doremalen and Munster, 2015). The first transgenic MERS-CoV mouse model was established by Agrawal et al. (2015). The mice expressed hDPP4 and developed severe respiratory MERS-CoV infections. The transgenic mice infected with an intra-nasal dose of 106 TCID50 of MERS-CoV developed pneumonia, weight loss, acute pulmonary viral infection, ruffled fur, squinting, and death within few days (Agrawal et al., 2015). A transgenic mouse model developed by Zhao et al. (2015) showed that limited utility for pathogenic studies due to the systemic dissemination and development of severe neurological diseases. The other lung infection models were lack mortality and weight loss, however, developed lung pathology in response to 50% TCID50 of MERS-CoV (Tao et al., 2015).Recent studies suggested that the transgenic mice models were developed where the full-length mDPP4 gene replaced by hDPP4 (Coleman et al., 2017). The infection and replication of MERS-CoV was observed in the lungs, however, disseminated slow impact to the other organs during the post injection with dose range of 102–105 PFU. The pathology of infected mice showed pneumonia-like symptoms (Coleman et al., 2017).The CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing tools were used to produce mice susceptible to MERS-CoV infection by modifying their genome sequence (positions 288 and 330) homologous to the sequence of hDPP4. In certain mice model the characteristic symptoms such as pulmonary hemorrhage, low survival, decreased pulmonary function and weight loss were observed. The 288-330+/+MERS-CoV mouse model demonstrated severe respiratory infection as observed in humans (Cockrell et al., 2016).Rhesus Macaques and MarmosetsUpon infection with MERS-CoV, rhesus macaques and marmosets were developed moderate respiratory disease which are comparable with mild human MERS-CoV infection. As observed in human cases, they also showed complete blood count abnormalities. Rhesus macaque and marmoset models were found to be suitable for pathogenic studies of mild infections. Both the models can be used for the efficacy testing of prophylactic and therapeutic countermeasures (Baseler et al., 2016).Yu et al. (2017) reported that when 2-3 old rhesus macaques and common marmosets were intra-tracheally injected with hCoV-EMC, hematoxylin and eosin stained tissues of the infected model demonstrated lesions primarily in the lungs with various degrees of inflammation, hemorrhaging, pulmonary oedema, interstitial pneumonia, eosinophil infiltration and necrosis in bronchial epithelial cells and pneumocytes. The lungs of the infected marmosets demonstrated widespread pulmonary oedema and hemorrhaging. The oedematous alveolar cavities showed fibrinous exudates and neutrophil infiltration. In both the cases, DPP4 was widely expressed in alveolar macrophages and type-I and II pneumocytes were also actively involved. The pathological changes as a result of viral infection were not observed in any other organs of the infected animal (Yu et al., 2017).RabbitsIn most cases, MERS-CoV causes severe infection in the lower respiratory tract in humans. Nasal swabs collected from the infected rabbits demonstrated the presence of MERS-CoV. They generally develop respiratory diseases such as asymptomatic and mild human infections as sometimes observed in immune-competent patients (Haagmans et al., 2015).Recently, Houser et al. (2017) revealed that the infected New Zealand rabbits were developed asymptomatic pulmonary infections with high levels of viral antigens and RNA. Multiple lung lobes showed peri-vascular inflammation. The antibodies developed by the rabbits lacked neutralizing activity, and as a result the animals were susceptible to re-infection. In fact, enhanced pulmonary inflammation was observed after re-infection. However, re-infection elicited the neutralizing antibodies (Nabs). Hence, it was suggested that upon re-infection, there might be greater risk of severe lung disease in those who do not develop neutralizing antibody response, or those whose neutralizing antibody titers have decreased after the initial infection (Houser et al., 2017). The clinical signs and lesions along with the occurrence of MERS-CoV RNA and antigens observed in MERS-CoV infected animal models are shown in Table 3.Table 3Clinical signs and lesions along with the occurrence of MERS-CoV RNA and antigens as seen in MERS-CoV infected animal models.Animal modelClinical signsLesionsOccurrence of MERS-Cov RNAOccurrence of MERS-antigenReferenceRabbitAsymptoticRhinitis with necrosisLung, upper respiratory tract, lymph nodesType I and II pneumocytesHaagmans et al., 2015Rhesus MacaquesMild to moderate respiratory diseaseInterstitial pneumoniaLung, lymph nodes, upper respiratory tractType I and II pneumocytes, alveolar macrophagesde Wit et al., 2013a,b; Yao et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2017Common MarmosetMild to severe respiratory diseaseBroncho-interstitial pneumoniaLung, blood, lymph nodes, visceral organs, upper respiratory tractType I pneumocytes, alveolar macrophagesFalzarano et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2017hDPP4- transgenic miceSevere fatal respiratory diseaseBroncho-interstitial pneumoniaLung, brain, visceralorgansType I and type II pneumocytesAgrawal et al., 2015Diagnostic ApproachesThe primary diagnosis of MERS-CoV infection was performed by molecular techniques such as real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) (Corman et al., 2012a), reverses transcription–loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-RTPA) (Shirato et al., 2014) and reverses transcription-recombinase polymerase amplification (RT-LAMP) (Abd et al., 2013). Numerous serological assays were used to detect MERS-CoV or closely related viruses in seropositive camels; these tests were protein microarrays like indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), recombinant spike immunofluorescent assay, spike pseudoparticle neutralization and microneutralization assay (Buchholz et al., 2013; Perera et al., 2013). However, none of the serological assays showed evidence of the precise occurrence of MERS-CoV in camels (Song et al., 2015). Recent study reported that a rapid and specific assay for the detection of MERS-CoV such as nucleic acid visualization technique which combine the reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification technique and a vertical flow visualization strip (RT-LAMP-VF) to detect the N gene of MERS-CoV (Huang et al., 2018). The study suggested that in comparison with the real-time RT-PCR (rRT-PCR) method recommended by the World Health Organization, the RT-LAMP-VF assay is easy to perform and the rapid detection of MERS-CoV within 35 min was achieve by this approach (Huang et al., 2018).An assay was developed based on the detection of N protein of MERS-CoV (Song et al., 2015). The NP protein preferred as better target than the S protein. In this type of assay, firstly, the antigen binds to gold labeled monoclonal antibodies which lead to the formation of antigen-antibody complex. The complex further passed through nitrocellulose membrane and bind to monoclonal antibody at the test region and formed band which could be conveniently analyzed (Tang, 2014).Currently, multiple purified monoclonal antibodies are available in clinical and preclinical studies for the development of antimicrobials (Rockx et al., 2010). Studies suggested that two human antibodies (REGN3048 and REGN3051) are known to bind with MERS-CoV RBD and prevent the interaction of cellular receptor DPP4 with S protein and effectively neutralize MERS-CoV infection (Pascal et al., 2015). The antibodies such as REGN3048 and REGN3051 showed no binding with S protein, thus, employed as effective combination for inhibiting MERS-CoV (Aderem et al., 2011). REGN3048 and REGN3051 co-interact with MERS-CoV RBD, which suggested that these antibodies bind to discrete epitopes as they bind to regions of MERS-CoV S protein that are conserved during the natural evolution of the virus. These two antibodies were blocked entry of the virus into susceptible cell lines and neutralize the infection (Pascal et al., 2015).The diagnostically relevant variations in the neutralization activity have not been detected in several isolates of MERS-CoV. In order to detect the serological response to a specific type of single MERS-CoV serotype, specific protein based sero-assays are essential to be performed (Muth et al., 2015). The development of potential serological assays demand well delineated human or animal sera and antibodies specific to MERS-CoV (Meyer et al., 2014).Vaccines and TherapeuticsPrevious studies revealed that both cellular and humoral responses are required for the complete protection against MERS-CoV infections (Faure et al., 2014; Park et al., 2015; Corman et al., 2016). Nabs and T-cell responses are the main agents in providing protective immunity against coronaviruses. In a study by Zhao et al. (2014) reported that MERS-CoV cleared by mice which lack B-cells while those deficient in T-cells failed to perform similar functions. Further, since virus-specific humoral responses were decreased over time, developing a vaccine which could induce long-lived memory T-cell response considered to be beneficial. However, any vaccine compounds which are able to induce both T and B-cell responses are required for immune protection (Okba et al., 2017).Current Vaccine and Antiviral CandidatesMERS-CoV vaccine candidates are still under development with DNA based, protein based, live attenuated and vectored-virus based vaccines (Arabi et al., 2017). Out of the four structural proteins and sixteen non structural proteins encoded by the viral genome, S protein showed the highest immunogenicity which induced T-cell responses. In most of the MERS-CoV, Nabs target the RBD of the S protein. The variations in amino acid sequences of the S protein detected amongst MERS-CoV is limited, thus, designing a vaccine against one strain most likely to be protected against all the other circulating strains (Okba et al., 2017). The S1 protein located outside the RBD probably considered as potential drug target to develop therapeutic strategies against MERS-CoV. RBD-specific mAbs are considered to be displayed greater neutralizing activity than those were targeted the S1 or S2 region outside RBD (Du et al., 2013).DPP4-targeting therapeutic agents are capable of blocking the interaction between MERS-CoV RBD and DPP4, and therefore inhibit MERS-CoV infection. The anti-DPP4 (CD26) antibodies such as 1F7, 2F9, and YS110 prevent the entry of MERS-CoV into susceptible cells, obstructing the virus infection (Ohnuma et al., 2013). Additionally, DPP4-binding protein adenosine deaminase (ADA) competes the binding with MERS-CoV RBD to DPP4, specifically at crucial residues such as Q286 and L294, defining their role as a naturally occurring antagonist (Raj et al., 2014).Recent studies revealed that the DNA vaccines are the safest vaccines for immune-compromised patients. They possessed comparatively greater amounts of DNA (e.g., 0.5–2 mg) thus requires multiple inoculations to induce potent immune responses in rhesus macaques and mice (Wirblich et al., 2017). Chi et al. (2017) developed a DNA vaccine which encoded the first 725 amino acids of S protein in MERS-CoV which induced the cell mediated and antigen-specific humoral immune responses in mice. Post three immunizations, it was observed that high titers of Nabs (up to 1: 104) were produced without any adjuvant. A prophylactic DNA-plasmid vaccine known as GLS-5300, which encodes for S protein, is the first MERS-CoV vaccine to be considered for the human trials developed by GeneOne Life Inc., which has been enlisted in the on-going list of vaccines by WHO [Rabaan et al., 2017; World Health Organization (WHO), 2018b].The vaccines that imitate the natural infection, such as recombinant viral vectors or live-attenuated virus present the antigens in natural ways which further stimulate the activation of humoral and cell-mediated immunity to the native protein conformation. As the live attenuated viruses have been the most immunogenic platforms available, they exhibited the capability to present numerous antigens across the viral life cycle in their native conformations (Henderson and Moss, 1999). Agrawal et al. (2016) vaccinated the mice with an inactivated MERS-CoV vaccine and which demonstrated hypersensitivity risk factors in MERS-CoV infection. Although there were extensive research in the last few years, limited anti-MERS-CoV therapeutics have been approved for human use. Originally, conventional IFAs were employed in the human sero-surveys and these relied on the MERS-CoV infected cell cultures. These cell cultures were the primary antigen sources for detecting the presence of human anti-MERS-CoV Nabs, IgM, and IgG in human samples (Corman et al., 2012b). Further, it was reported that human monoclonal antibody m336 demonstrated significant neutralizing properties against MERS-CoV in vitro conditions (Houser et al., 2016).Recent studies revealed that there were few antiviral agents in the developmental stage. It was reported that the antiviral drug chlorpromazine demonstrated strong anti-MERS-CoV potential; however, the high cytotoxicity of the drug limiting the potential window for drug utilization. Similarly, another drug Toremifene showed moderate activity when tested in antigen presenting cells, however, the high cytotoxicity of this drug also narrowing its application as a therapeutic remedy against MERS-CoV (Cong et al., 2018). Further, studies suggested that a nucleoside analog GS-5734 known as Remdesivir, which showed potential antiviral activity against human and zoonotic CoVs in vitro and the drug inhibited MERS-CoV at 50% effective concentration values (EC50) (Agostini et al., 2018).Novel Therapeutic ApproachesThe conserved nature of the N protein was used to develop vaccines that can induce an adaptive immune response against these proteins. In a study by Zhao et al. (2016) reported that a vaccine candidate induced airway memory CD4+ T cell response against N-specific epitopes of MERS-CoV. In another study suggested that vaccination with recombinant N-terminal domain (rNTD) triggered greater T-cell response than the mice vaccinated with rRBD. The neutralizing activity was also observed in the sera (Jiaming et al., 2017). Recent study revealed that the combination of fusion inhibitory peptide which targets the protein HR1 domain of MERS-CoV S2 and a neutralizing antibody specific for the S1 protein RBD showed synergistic therapeutic activities against MERS-CoV (Wang et al., 2019). Further, the researchers have developed novel neutralizing nanobodies (Nb) which specifically bind to the RBD of MERS-CoV S protein. The Nb was found to be interacted with the conserved domain of MERS-CoV RBD with high affinity and blocked binding of RBD to the receptor of MERS-CoV (Zhao et al., 2018).Some immunodominant epitopes within the protein structure may contribute negatively to the neutralization activity of the vaccine. For example, a short region of RBD was able to induce higher titer of IgG when compared to other longer regions (Ma et al., 2014). The negative effects of these epitopes can be surmounted by immunofocusing; mapping of the most neutralizing RBD fragment and eliminating unnecessary fragments. This can help in focusing the immune response to important epitopes (Ma et al., 2014). Pallesen et al. (2017) suggested that the structure-based design of S proteins improved their immunogenicity where the high titers of Nabs were observed against MERS-CoV. The major categories of vaccines developed and tested against various animal models are shown in Table 4.Table 4Categories of vaccine developed against MERS-CoV, their potential candidate, and their target long with their immunological response and efficacy.Vaccine categoriesVaccine candidateTarget antigenAnimal modelImmunological responseEfficacyReferenceProtein basedS1S1MiceNabNot testedWang et al., 2015rRBD-FcS377-588Ad/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabProtectiveMa et al., 2014rNTDS18-353Ad/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabProtectiveJiaming et al., 2017Recombinant viral vectorsBNSP333-S1S1Ad/hDPP4-miceNabProtectiveWirblich et al., 2017S377-588-FcSAd/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabNot testedTang et al., 2015VRP-SS288/330+/+miceNabProtectiveCockrell et al., 2016DNA vaccinepcDNA3.1-S1S1Ad5/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabProtectiveChi et al., 2017pVax1-SSNon human primatesT-cell, NabProtectiveMuthumani et al., 2015Therapeutic Screening by Computational BiologyThe technological progression is reflected upon a series of genome wide molecular screening platforms and computational biology approaches that provided novel insights to prompt response against emerging viral diseases. The prototype of these approaches included the in vivo animal model, tissue culture model, human challenge model, and vaccine studies. These model systems are anxious by challenges, preferably yielding a spectra of the severity of the diseases like lethal versus sub-lethal in order to increase divergence for downstream data mining and modeling (McDermott et al., 2011; Drosten et al., 2013; Law et al., 2013). A diversity of computational methodologies and network approach were used to detect the regulatory networks of various viral systems by de novo studies (Hou and Zhao, 2013; Mitchell et al., 2013).Recently, studies have shown that peptides can be utilized as highly potent signal transduction agents for various viral infections. It has been suggested that antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) can be used as potential therapeutic option against MERS-CoV infections (Mustafa et al., 2018). Computational biology approach in combination with virology can be employed to design novel peptide based therapeutics against various strains of MERS-CoV with high efficacy. Recent studies have suggested that repurposing of existing and clinically approved anti-viral peptides can be used as promising lead molecules for the development of novel anti-MERS-CoV agents (Mustafa et al., 2018).The RBD and S protein based vector vaccines are considered to be one of the efficient targets for designing MERS-CoV vaccine, as it comprised of multiple neutralizing epitopes which offer higher potential to prompt Nabs against the virus (Shi et al., 2015). The vast developments in computational biology have led to the new line of immunoinformatics databases and tools, which are other operative ways for vaccine development (Terry et al., 2015). The screening of dominant immunogens based on the availability of genome sequence data is crucial for designing novel vaccines, which is assisted by immunoinformatics (Firbas et al., 2006). The epitope directed lead design was one of the critical steps involved in the lead identification by immunoinformatics approaches (Shi et al., 2015). MHC-I restrained CD8+ cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs) identification provides profound insight in designing novel antiviral agents (Terry et al., 2015).In conclusion, MERS-CoV infection continued to be fatal disease and has emerged as one of the epidemic concern. Irrespective of the various studies conducted to determine the distribution, the exact intermediates remain unidentified. There are various animal models available which provided profound insight in understanding the transmission and pathogenecity of the virus in human. The common pathogenesis mechanisms of the virus such as DPP4, PLpro, accessory proteins like p4a and membrane M protein provided significant insight for the screening of novel drug targets for vaccine development. The detailed understanding of the binding mechanism of various inhibitors toward the structural, non-structural, and accessory proteins of the virus probably provide profound insight for lead development. The integration of genome analysis, proteomics studies, immunoinformatics, and systems biology approaches on various animal models have made the recognition of new targets and lead molecules much easier in than the approaches available during earlier time. By considering MERS-CoV infections as one of the great public threats, there is high demand for undertaking the coronavirus research at the deeper molecular level to understand the mechanism of viral infection, development of advanced and rapid detection methods and futuristic therapeutic strategies to combat MERS-CoV infections.Author ContributionsSS, SC, SP, SK, and VS collected data and prepared the complete manuscript. Further, SS reviewed, revised, and edited the manuscript.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: SARS and MERS: recent insights into emerging coronaviruses

MainThis century has seen the global spread of two previously unknown coronaviruses. In November 2002, the first known case of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) occurred in Foshan, China1. New cases emerged in mainland China, and by February 2003, more than 300 cases had been reported, around one-third of which were in health care workers1. Individuals who were infected and subsequently travelled spread the outbreak to Hong Kong2 and from there to Vietnam, Canada and several other countries3. In March 2003, the WHO established a network of laboratories to determine the causative agent of SARS. A remarkable global effort led to the identification of SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in early April of that year4,5,6. By July 2003 and after a total of 8,096 reported cases, including 774 deaths in 27 countries7, no more infections were detected, and the SARS pandemic was declared to be over. Five additional SARS cases, resulting from zoonotic transmission, occurred in December 2003–January 2004 (Ref. 8), but no human SARS cases have been detected since. Measures of infection control, rather than medical interventions, ended the SARS pandemic. However, certain SARS-CoV-like viruses found in bats have recently been shown to be able to infect human cells without prior adaptation9,10, which indicates that SARS could re-emerge.In June 2012, 10 years after the first emergence of SARS-CoV, a man in Saudi Arabia died of acute pneumonia and renal failure. A novel coronavirus, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), was isolated from his sputum11. A cluster of cases of severe respiratory disease had occurred in April 2012 in a hospital in Jordan and was retrospectively diagnosed as MERS12, and a cluster of three cases of MERS in the UK was identified in September 2012 (Ref. 13). MERS-CoV continued to emerge and spread to countries outside of the Arabian Peninsula as a result of travel of infected persons; often, these imported MERS cases resulted in nosocomial transmission. In May 2015, a single person returning from the Middle East started a nosocomial outbreak of MERS in South Korea that involved 16 hospitals and 186 patients14. As of 26 April 2016, there have been 1,728 confirmed cases of MERS, including 624 deaths in 27 countries15.This Review highlights the pandemic and epidemic potential of emerging coronaviruses and discusses our current knowledge of the biology of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, including their transmission, their pathogenesis and the development of medical countermeasures. Key features of these viruses are the dominance of nosocomial transmission, and pathogenesis that is driven by a combination of viral replication in the lower respiratory tract and an aberrant host immune response. Several potential treatments for SARS and MERS have been identified in animal and in vitro models, including small-molecule protease inhibitors, neutralizing antibodies and inhibitors of the host immune response. However, efficacy data from human clinical trials are lacking but are needed to move these potential countermeasures forward.Replication of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoVSARS-CoV and MERS-CoV belong to the Coronavirus genus in the Coronaviridae family and have large, positive-sense RNA genomes of 27.9 kb and 30.1 kb, respectively (Fig. 1a). Similarly to all viruses in the order Nidovirales, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV have a unique coding strategy: two-thirds of the viral RNA is translated into two large polyproteins, and the remainder of the viral genome is transcribed into a nested set of subgenomic mRNAs16,17 (Fig. 1b). The two polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab, encode 16 non-structural proteins (nsp1–nsp16)18 that make up the viral replicase–transcriptase complex. The polyproteins are cleaved by two proteases, papain-like protease (PLpro; corresponding to nsp3) and a main protease, 3C-like protease (3CLpro; corresponding to nsp5). The nsps rearrange membranes that are derived from the rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) into double-membrane vesicles, in which viral replication and transcription occur19. One unique feature of coronaviruses is the exoribonuclease (ExoN) function of nsp14 (Ref. 20), which provides the proofreading capability required to maintain a large RNA genome without the accumulation of detrimental mutations21,22. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV transcribe 12 and 9 subgenomic RNAs, respectively, and these encode the four structural proteins spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N), as well as several accessory proteins that are not involved in viral replication but interfere with the host innate immune response or are of unknown or poorly understood function.Figure 1SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV structure and replication.a | The single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) genomes of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) encode two large polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab, which are proteolytically cleaved into 16 non-structural proteins (nsps), including papain-like protease (PLpro), 3C-like protease (3CLpro), RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), helicase (Hel) and exonuclease (ExoN). An additional 9–12 ORFs are encoded through the transcription of a nested set of subgenomic RNAs. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV form spherical particles that consist of four structural proteins. The envelope glycoprotein spike (S) forms a layer of glycoproteins that protrude from the envelope. Two additional transmembrane glycoproteins are incorporated in the virion: envelope (E) and membrane (M). Inside the viral envelope resides the helical nucleocapsid, which consists of the viral positive-sense RNA ((+)RNA) genome encapsidated by protein nucleocapsid (N). b | Following entry of the virus into the host cell, the viral RNA is uncoated in the cytoplasm. ORF1a and ORF1ab are translated to produce pp1a and pp1ab, which are cleaved by the proteases that are encoded by ORF1a to yield 16 nsps that form the RNA replicase–transcriptase complex. This complex localizes to modified intracellular membranes that are derived from the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in the perinuclear region, and it drives the production of negative-sense RNAs ((−)RNAs) through both replication and transcription. During replication, full-length (−)RNA copies of the genome are produced and used as templates for full-length (+)RNA genomes. During transcription, a subset of 7–9 subgenomic RNAs, including those encoding all structural proteins, is produced through discontinuous transcription. In this process, subgenomic (−)RNAs are synthesized by combining varying lengths of the 3′ end of the genome with the 5′ leader sequence necessary for translation. These subgenomic (−)RNAs are then transcribed into subgenomic (+)mRNAs. Although the different subgenomic mRNAs may contain several ORFs, only the first ORF (that closest to the 5′ end) is translated. The resulting structural proteins are assembled into the nucleocapsid and viral envelope at the ER–Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC), followed by release of the nascent virion from the infected cell.
PowerPoint slide
The envelope spike glycoprotein binds to its cellular receptor, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) for SARS-CoV and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) for MERS-CoV23. After membrane fusion, either directly with the host cell membrane or with the endosome membrane, the viral RNA genome is released into the cytoplasm, and the RNA is uncoated to allow translation of the two polyproteins, transcription of the subgenomic RNAs and replication of the viral genome (Fig. 1b). Newly formed envelope glycoproteins are inserted in the RER or Golgi membranes; genomic RNA and nucleocapsid proteins combine to form nucleocapsids, and the viral particles bud into the ER–Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC). Virion-containing vesicles subsequently fuse with the plasma membrane to release the virus24.Reservoirs and transmissionThe first indication of the source of SARS-CoV was the detection of the virus in masked palm civets and a raccoon dog and the detection of antibodies against the virus in Chinese ferret badgers in a live-animal market in Shenzhen, China25. However, these animals were only incidental hosts, as there was no evidence for the circulation of SARS-CoV-like viruses in palm civets in the wild or in breeding facilities26. Rather, bats are the reservoir of a wide variety of coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-like and MERS-CoV-like viruses27 (Fig. 2).Figure 2The emergence of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.Bats harbour a wide range of coronaviruses, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV)-like and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)-like viruses. SARS-CoV crossed the species barrier into masked palm civets and other animals in live-animal markets in China; genetic analysis suggests that this occurred in late 2002. Several people in close proximity to palm civets became infected with SARS-CoV. A MERS-CoV ancestral virus crossed the species barrier into dromedary camels; serological evidence suggests that this happened more than 30 years ago. Abundant circulation of MERS-CoV in dromedary camels results in frequent zoonotic transmission of this virus. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV spread between humans mainly through nosocomial transmission, which results in the infection of health care workers and patients at a higher frequency than infection of their relatives.
PowerPoint slide
Thus, the search for the reservoir of MERS-CoV initially focused on bats, but a serological survey in dromedary camels from Oman and the Canary Islands showed a high prevalence of MERS-CoV-neutralizing antibodies in these animals28. In addition, MERS-CoV RNA was detected in swabs that were collected from dromedary camels at a farm in Qatar that was linked to two human cases of MERS, and infectious virus was isolated from dromedary camels in Saudi Arabia and Qatar29,30,31,32. Serological evidence for the circulation of a MERS-CoV-like virus in dromedary camels has been obtained in the Middle East, Eastern Africa and Northern Africa, dating back as far as 1983 (Ref. 33). Dromedary camels in Saudi Arabia harbour several viral genetic lineages34, including those that have caused human outbreaks. Taken together, these data strongly point to the role of dromedary camels as a reservoir for MERS-CoV. The ubiquity of infected dromedary camels close to humans and the resulting continuing zoonotic transmission may explain why MERS-CoV continues to cause infections in humans, whereas SARS-CoV, without the continuing presence of an infected intermediate host and with relatively infrequent human–bat interactions, has caused no more infections in humans.Human-to-human transmission of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV occurs mainly through nosocomial transmission; 43.5–100% of MERS cases in individual outbreaks were linked to hospitals, and very similar observations were made for some of the SARS clusters35,36. Transmission between family members occurred in only 13–21% of MERS cases and 22–39% of SARS cases. Transmission of MERS-CoV between patients was the most common route of infection (62–79% of cases), whereas for SARS-CoV, infection of health care workers by infected patients was very frequent (33–42%)35. The predominance of nosocomial transmission is probably due to the fact that substantial virus shedding occurs only after the onset of symptoms37,38, when most patients are already seeking medical care39. An analysis of hospital surfaces after the treatment of patients with MERS showed the ubiquitous presence of viral RNA in the environment for several days after patients no longer tested positive40. Moreover, many patients with SARS or MERS were infected through super spreaders14,35,37,41,42,43.The pathogenesis of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoVThe clinical courses of SARS and MERS are remarkably similar, although there are subtle differences (Box 1). Owing to the current sparsity of data on human MERS-CoV infections44, the pathogenesis of this virus is poorly understood; however, similar mechanisms may underlie the pathogenesis of both MERS and SARS.The binding of spike protein to ACE2 and the subsequent downregulation of this receptor contribute to lung injury during SARS45. Although it seems counterintuitive that receptor downregulation would increase pathology, it has been shown that ACE2 can protect against acute lung injury. The downregulation of ACE2 results in the excessive production of angiotensin II by the related enzyme ACE, and it has been suggested that the stimulation of type 1a angiotensin II receptor (AGTR1A) increases pulmonary vascular permeability, thus potentially explaining the increased lung pathology when the expression of ACE2 is decreased46.Immunopathology. The immune response is essential for the resolution of an infection, but it can also result in immunopathogenesis. One indication that immunopathogenesis may contribute to SARS was the observation that viral loads were found to be decreasing while disease severity increased39,47. It is unclear whether a similar trend applies to MERS48,49. Moreover, progression to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is associated with the upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, particularly interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-8, IL-6, CXC-chemokine ligand 10 (CXCL10) and CC-chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2)50,51; increased plasma levels of these molecules have been detected in patients with SARS52,53,54,55. Retrospective longitudinal studies in patients who recovered from SARS versus those who succumbed to the disease have shown an early expression of interferon-α (IFNα), IFNγ, CXCL10, CCL2 and proteins that are encoded by IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in all patients, but only patients who survived then had gene expression profiles that are indicative of the development of an adaptive immune response. By contrast, patients who succumbed maintained high levels of CXCL10, CCL2 and ISG-encoded proteins, whereas spike-specific antibodies were present at low levels or were absent56, which suggests that severe disease is related to the lack of a switch from an innate immune response to an adaptive immune response.Experiments using Collaborative Cross mouse lines and mouse-adapted SARS-CoV identified one host gene, Trim55, as important for SARS pathogenesis. Although there was no difference in clinical signs or viral replication in Trim55−/− mice compared with wild-type mice, perivascular cuffing and the number of inflammatory cells in the lungs were reduced in the Trim55−/− mice57.The involvement of the host immune response in the pathogenesis of SARS, and most likely also that of MERS, suggests that drugs which inhibit viral replication will need to be combined with treatments that control detrimental immune responses.Immune evasion. SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV use several strategies to avoid the innate immune response. Viral pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) or uncapped mRNA, are detected by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I protein (RIG-I; also known as DDX58) or melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5; also known as IFIH1)58. This triggers complex signalling cascades involving MYD88 that lead to the production of type I IFNs and the activation of the transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB). In turn, active NF-κB induces the transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines (Fig. 3a). Type I IFNs signal through IFNα/β receptor (IFNAR) and downstream molecules such as signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins to stimulate the production of antiviral proteins that are encoded by ISGs, such as IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT1; Fig. 3b). Collectively, this establishes an antiviral immune response that limits viral replication in infected and in neighbouring cells (Fig. 3).Figure 3Evasion of the innate immune response by SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV.a | The innate immune response is activated by the detection of viral pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) or uncapped mRNA. This occurs via host pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), such as retinoic acid-inducible gene I protein (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5), potentially via dsRNA-binding partners such as IFN-inducible dsRNA-dependent protein kinase activator A (PRKRA). Following PRR-mediated detection of a PAMP, the resulting interaction of PRRs with mitochondrial antiviral-signalling protein (MAVS) activates nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) through a signalling cascade involving several kinases. Activated NF-κB translocates to the nucleus, where it induces the transcription of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The kinases also phosphorylate (P) IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7, which form homodimers and heterodimers and enter the nucleus to initiate the transcription of type I interferons (type I IFNs). Both severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have developed mechanisms to interfere with these signalling pathways, as shown; these subversion strategies involve both structural proteins (membrane (M) and nucleocapsid (N)) and non-structural proteins (nsp1, nsp3b, nsp4a, nsp4b, nsp5, nsp6 and papain-like protease (PLpro); indicated in the figure by just their nsp numbers and letters). b | Binding of type I IFNs to their dimeric receptor, IFNα/β receptor (IFNAR), activates the Janus kinase (JAK)–signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) signalling pathway, in which JAK1 and TYK2 kinases phosphorylate STAT1 and STAT2, which form complexes with IRF9. These complexes move into the nucleus to initiate the transcription of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) under the control of promoters that contain an IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE). Collectively, the expression of cytokines, IFNs and ISGs establishes an antiviral innate immune response that limits viral replication in infected and in neighbouring cells. Again, viral proteins have been shown to inhibit these host signalling pathways to evade this immune response. IκBα, NF-κB inhibitor-α.
PowerPoint slide
Infection of knockout mice revealed the importance of innate immunity. Infection of Myd88−/− and Stat1−/− mice, but not mice that were deficient in IFN receptors, with a mouse-adapted strain of SARS-CoV resulted in more severe disease than infection with a non-adapted SARS-CoV strain59,60. Moreover, MERS-CoV infection of wild-type mice that were transduced with human DPP4 caused mild disease, but symptoms were more severe in Myd88−/− mice and Ifnar1−/− mice61.SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV avoid host detection of their dsRNA by replicating in virus-induced double-membrane vesicles that lack PRRs19,62,63. Moreover, the recognition of SARS-CoV mRNAs, for example, by MDA5 and IFIT1 is prevented by capping of the viral mRNAs by nsp14 and the nsp10–nsp16 complex64. Recombinant SARS-CoV that lacks the methylation activity of nsp16 is attenuated and exhibits increased sensitivity to type I IFNs. This effect is dependent on IFIT1 or MDA5, as the same virus is not attenuated in mice that are deficient in either molecule65. Although mRNA capping has not yet been shown for MERS-CoV, structural similarity between the MERS-CoV nsp10–nsp16 complex and the SARS-CoV nsp10–nsp16 complex suggests that a similar mechanism exists to avoid host recognition of MERS-CoV mRNAs by cytosolic PRRs66.SARS-CoV encodes at least eight proteins that interact with the signalling cascades downstream of PRRs; in MERS-CoV, several proteins have been identified with similar functions (Fig. 3). The nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV has been associated with the suppression of RNAi in mammalian cells67. Furthermore, this protein antagonizes IFN induction, probably early in the signalling cascade, as downstream signalling molecules relieve the inhibition68. MERS-CoV ORF4a has a similar IFN-antagonistic function, involving the binding of dsRNA and subsequent inhibition of MDA5 activation69, potentially through interaction with IFN-inducible dsRNA-dependent protein kinase activator A (PRKRA; also known as PACT), which interacts with MDA5 and RIG-I70. Moreover, MERS-CoV ORF4a, ORF4b, ORF5 and membrane protein inhibit the nuclear trafficking of IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and activation of the IFNB promoter71. These viral proteins, except for ORF5, also inhibit the expression of genes that are under the control of an IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE), and ORF4a reduces the expression of genes that are stimulated by NF-κB71. Finally, MERS-CoV ORF4b interacts with TBK1 and inhibitor of NF-κB kinase-ɛ (IKKɛ), thereby suppressing the interaction between IKKɛ and mitochondrial antiviral-signalling protein (MAVS) and inhibiting the phosphorylation of IRF3 (Ref. 72).The membrane protein of SARS-CoV inhibits the formation of a signalling complex that contains IKKɛ, thus repressing the activation of IRF3 and IRF7 and their induction of type I IFN expression. The membrane protein of MERS-CoV inhibits IRF3 function and the expression of genes that are regulated by an ISRE, including IFNβ71, but whether this occurs through a mechanism similar to that of SARS-CoV is unclear.SARS-CoV PLpro disrupts NF-κB signalling73 and blocks the phosphorylation of IRF3 indirectly73,74. Furthermore, SARS-CoV PLpro inhibits the induction of type I IFNs, potentially through the deubiquitylation of phosphorylated IRF3 (Refs 73,75). Similar functions have been described for MERS-CoV PLpro76.Experiments involving recombinantly expressed proteins, in vitro translation, protein overexpression and minireplicon systems have shown that nsp1 of SARS-CoV blocks the IFN response through the inhibition of STAT1, degradation of host mRNAs and inactivation of the host translational machinery through a tight association with the 40S ribosomal subunit77,78,79,80. Nsp1 of MERS-CoV also inhibits the translation of mRNAs and induces mRNA degradation, although the translational inhibition is achieved through a different mechanism than ribosome binding, which selectively targets the translation of nuclear mRNAs and thereby spares cytoplasmic viral mRNAs81.SARS-CoV ORF3b inhibits the production of type I IFN, the phosphorylation of IRF3 and gene expression from an ISRE promoter82,83. SARS-CoV ORF6 also blocks the nuclear translocation of STAT1 (Ref. 83).Both nsp7 and nsp15 from SARS-CoV were also suggested to be IFN antagonists, but the underlying mechanism is unknown73. nsp15 is an inhibitor of MAVS-induced apoptosis; however, this occurs through an IFN-independent mechanism84. Finally, transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of human airway cell cultures showed that MERS-CoV but not SARS-CoV induces repressive histone modifications that downregulate the expression of certain ISGs85.It should be noted that most of the interactions of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV proteins with innate immune pathways were established in in vitro systems, which rely on the overexpression of viral and, sometimes, cellular proteins, and these interactions have rarely been confirmed in the context of viral replication in vitro or in vivo.Box 1: Clinical features of SARS and MERSSevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) have an incubation period of ∼5 days, and 95% of patients develop disease within 13 days of exposure14,38,144,145,146. Common early symptoms are fever, chills, coughing, malaise, myalgia and headache, and less common symptoms include diarrhoea, vomiting and nausea2,6,39,89,90,92,95,144,146,147,148. Upper respiratory tract symptoms and viral shedding are rare, which explains difficulties in obtaining a laboratory diagnosis from nasal or nasopharyngeal swabs149. Abnormal chest X-rays are more common in patients with MERS (90–100%)144,148 than in those with SARS (60–100%)39,89. Accordingly, only 20–30% of patients with SARS require intensive care and subsequent mechanical ventilation, whereas 50–89% of patients with MERS require intensive care2,39,89,90,95,144,147,148. The higher incidence of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in individuals with MERS is reflected in the case fatality rate: this is ∼36% for MERS compared with ∼10% for SARS15,145.Comorbidities have an important role in both SARS and MERS. Several risk factors are associated with poor disease outcome, especially advanced age and male sex2,14,39,144,146,148,150,151. For MERS, additional risk factors for a poor outcome include diabetes mellitus, hypertension, cancer, renal and lung disease, and co-infections14,144,146,148,150,151.Health care settings seem to increase the risk of viral transmission owing to aerosol-generating procedures such as intubation and bronchoscopy. Appropriate hospital hygiene practices and awareness are crucial to limit future nosocomial outbreaks.Treatment of severe coronavirus infectionsSeveral strategies are being considered to treat infections with MERS-CoV (Table 1) and SARS-CoV, including the use of antibodies, IFNs, inhibitors of viral and host proteases, and host-directed therapies.Table 1Potential therapeutics for MERS
PowerPoint slide
TreatmentStage of developmentReferencesHost protease inhibitorsIn vitro inhibition
132
Viral protease inhibitorsIn vitro inhibition97,99,112,113,114Repurposed FDA-approved drugsIn vitro inhibition62,99,113,115Monoclonal and polyclonal antibodiesEffective in mouse, rabbit and non-human primate models118,119,120,121,123,124,125,126,127,128Convalescent plasmaEffective in a mouse model; clinical trial approved
122
InterferonsEffective in non-human primate models; off-label use in patients87,97,98,99,101,102,103,104,105,108,109,110,111RibavirinEffective in a non-human primate model; off-label use in patients87,88,101,102,108,109,111Mycophenolic acidFailed to protect in a non-human primate model97,99,105,113Lopinavir and ritonavirEffective in a non-human primate model; off-label use in patients105,109,110,111MERS, Middle East respiratory syndrome.Current therapies. In the absence of a clinically proven effective antiviral therapy against SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV, patients mainly receive supportive care, which is often supplemented by different combinations of drugs. Ribavirin86 and various types of IFN have been given to patients with MERS in Saudi Arabia87 and China88, typically in combination with a broad-spectrum antibiotic and oxygen. The efficacy of treatments for SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection currently remains unclear. In addition, treatment for MERS is typically started only in a late disease stage, when immunopathology predominates and antiviral drugs are likely to provide little benefit.Ribavirin was used most frequently during the SARS outbreak, often in combination with corticosteroids, which have an anti-inflammatory effect2,89,90,91,92. IFNα was also given, usually in combination with immunoglobulins or thymosins, which stimulate the development of T cells, and in a small number of cases in combination with ribavirin93,94. None of these treatments was tested in a clinical trial, which makes it difficult to assess their efficacy. In fact, retrospective analysis did not yield a treatment combination that was clearly effective. Moreover, the data from patients are contradictory about whether ribavirin, when used alone, provided a benefit or was possibly even detrimental89,90,92,95. In vitro coronaviruses have a lower sensitivity to ribavirin than other viruses. Deletion of the nsp14-encoding sequence increases the sensitivity of coronaviruses to ribavirin; however, the underlying mechanism is unclear and is not related to the proofreading function of nsp14 (Ref. 96). Therefore, ribavirin should be considered only in combination with other antiviral treatments.Although IFNs are effective against MERS-CoV in vitro97,98,99, their effect in humans has yet to be proved. The effectiveness of IFN is increased in vitro if ribavirin is added98,100, and a combined use of the two drugs reduces disease severity in a rhesus macaque model of MERS101. The potential side effects of these treatments, such as fatigue, depression and anaemia, have inhibited their use as a first-line treatment for MERS, and they are generally administered only after a patient's condition starts to deteriorate. For example, one study of five patients who were infected with MERS-CoV indicated no survival following ribavirin and IFNα2b therapy; however, therapy was not started until 10 days after admission87. A separate study found an improvement in survival 14 days after MERS diagnosis and the start of treatment, but not 28 days after102. In a third study, a combination of IFNα2a and ribavirin or IFNβ1a and ribavirin did not improve survival; however, some of the patients were more than 50 years old and had pre-existing renal failure103. In a single case in which ribavirin and IFNα2b were started shortly after admission to hospital, the patient started to improve on day 6 after admission and made a complete recovery104.IFNβ1b is a more potent inhibitor of MERS-CoV replication in vitro than other types of IFN97,99, and an improved outcome of disease was observed in common marmosets after challenge with MERS-CoV105. Thus, the type of IFN that is used for treatment in humans should be reconsidered (usually, IFNα is used). Furthermore, ribavirin and/or IFNs should be tested in clinical trials to determine their efficacy in MERS treatment and to establish treatment protocols.Additional antiviral treatments. The protease inhibitors lopinavir and ritonavir, which are used in combination to treat infection with HIV, improved the outcome of patients with SARS when combined with ribavirin, compared with patients who were treated with ribavirin alone106,107. Lopinavir showed no clear antiviral activity against MERS-CoV in vitro97, and it is thus rarely used in patients with MERS. However, lopinavir and ritonavir improve the outcome in common marmosets when treatment is initiated 6 hours after infection with MERS-CoV105. Thus, the testing of lopinavir and ritonavir in clinical trials in patients with MERS should be reconsidered. One patient who received pegylated IFNα, ribavirin, lopinavir and ritonavir in combination had undetectable levels of MERS-CoV in the blood 2 days after the initiation of therapy; however, this patient did not survive108. The combination of IFNα, ribavirin, lopinavir and ritonavir was also used for MERS treatment in South Korea, but efficacy data are not yet available. However, three case reports indicate recovery in five out of seven patients who were treated with this combination109,110,111.As 3CLpro and PLpro are essential for cleavage of the viral polyproteins and are distinct from cellular proteases, they are ideal drug targets, in particular PLpro, which is involved in both viral replication and IFN antagonism. Indeed, most antiviral drug-like molecules have been developed against 3CLpro and PLpro, which was aided by the rapid report of crystal structures of these proteases112.PLpro was initially identified as a drugable target for SARS-CoV; recently, it has been noted that some of the compounds that target PLpro from SARS-CoV are also active against PLpro from MERS-CoV. For example, both 6-mercaptopurine and 6-thioguanine inhibit MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV in vitro113; however, the efficacy of these molecules has not yet been tested in vivo. Mycophenolic acid also inhibits the replication of MERS-CoV in vitro97,99 through the inhibition of PLpro113, but it had no effect in marmosets105.As new coronaviruses are likely to emerge from bats, protease inhibitors were designed against bat coronaviruses with the goal of developing a universal antiviral compound against emerging zoonotic coronaviruses. This approach yielded an inhibitor of Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4 (HKU4-CoV), which is closely related to MERS-CoV11. This inhibitor, named SG85, indeed inhibits MERS-CoV replication in vitro112. Similarly, peptidomimetics that target and inhibit 3CLpro of MERS-CoV, HKU4-CoV and Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5 (HKU5-CoV) have also been identified, but have not yet progressed beyond the in vitro stage114.Several other drugs that were approved for use in humans were shown to inhibit the replication of MERS-CoV in vitro, notably chloroquine, chlorpromazine, loperamide and cyclosporine A62,99,113,115, although their mechanisms of action are unknown, and the benefit of cyclosporine A in patients is debatable owing to the immunosuppressive effect of the drug. Although cyclophilin inhibitors that do not result in immunosuppression are available, their activity against MERS-CoV has not yet been tested.Antibody and plasma therapy. Plasma from convalescent patients and/or antibody therapies have been the leading proposed treatment for MERS so far116. There are several potential advantages to this approach. For example, as case numbers increase, the pool of survivors becomes larger; provided these individuals have sufficiently high antibody titres and are willing and able to donate plasma, this is a low-tech, reasonably safe treatment option. Furthermore, generation of monoclonal antibodies for use in humans is well established, with a fairly straightforward path to safety and efficacy testing. However, to date, there are very few reports on the use of convalescent plasma and none on the use of monoclonal antibodies as treatments for acute, severe respiratory disease in humans. A post hoc meta-analysis of 32 studies of either SARS or severe influenza found a significant reduction in the pooled odds of mortality when convalescent plasma was used117. However, study design was rated as low or very low quality, as there were generally a lack of control groups and a moderate-to-high risk of bias, which suggests that a properly designed clinical trial of convalescent plasma use in severe respiratory infections is needed117. Potent monoclonal antibodies that neutralize the MERS-COV spike protein in vitro have been developed118,119,120,121. However, with a few exceptions, in vivo data relating to the use of convalescent plasma or monoclonal antibodies in the treatment of MERS are currently lacking. Serum from high-titre dromedary camels decreased MERS-CoV loads in the lungs of mice that had been transduced with human DPP4 (Ref. 122). Human polyclonal antibodies against the spike protein were generated by vaccinating transchromosomic bovines, and treatment with these antibodies reduced viral titres in the lungs of DPP4-transduced mice when treatment was administered 24 or 48 hours after challenge with MERS-CoV123. DPP4-transduced mice were also treated with humanized neutralizing monoclonal antibody 4C2h, which is directed against the receptor-binding domain of the MERS-CoV spike protein, 1 day after MERS-CoV challenge, and this treatment also decreased viral titres in the lungs124, as did the neutralizing antibody LCA60, which was obtained from a convalescent patient and produced recombinantly125. Human neutralizing monoclonal antibodies REGN3048 and REGN3051 also provided a benefit in mice that expressed human DPP4 and were challenged with MERS-CoV126. The human neutralizing monoclonal antibody m332 reduced MERS-CoV replication in the lungs of rabbits following prophylactic, but not therapeutic, treatment127. Treatment of rhesus macaques with the human monoclonal antibody 311B-N1 day after challenge resulted in reduced lung pathology128. In all of these studies, viral replication was not completely inhibited, and there were some pathological alterations to the lungs, despite the therapy. Furthermore, none of the studies addressed the potential emergence of escape mutants in vivo.Alternatively, antibodies that target the region of DPP4 that binds to the spike protein could be used to prevent entry of MERS-CoV; this approach was successful in vitro129. However, whether such a treatment would be feasible and would not have substantial adverse effects in humans remains to be determined.Host-directed therapies. Host-directed strategies can also limit viral replication. For example, the spike protein of SARS-CoV is cleaved by cathepsin B and cathepsin L, transmembrane protease serine 2 (TMPRSS2) and possibly other host proteases130,131. Inhibition of host serine proteases by camostat reduced the entry of SARS-CoV and increased survival in a mouse model132. However, the targeting of host proteases is more likely to result in undesirable side effects than the targeting of viral proteases.Another underappreciated strategy is attenuation of detrimental host responses. The development of such treatments would require a thorough understanding of the host responses that are involved in acute lung injury and ARDS, processes that are unfortunately poorly understood at the moment. Nonetheless, in vitro studies and limited studies in animal models with other respiratory viruses have shown that anaphylatoxin C5a is important for the development of acute lung injury, and blocking anaphylatoxin C5a can reduce lung pathology133.Changes in gene expression during in vitro MERS-CoV infection were used to predict potential effective drugs. One of the drugs with predicted efficacy, the kinase inhibitor SB203580, modestly inhibited SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV replication following the treatment of cells prior to infection, but treatment after infection inhibited replication of only SARS-CoV and not MERS-CoV134.Vaccines. Vaccination could be used to prevent infection or to reduce disease severity, viral shedding and thereby transmission, thus helping to control MERS outbreaks. Several vaccination strategies were developed against SARS-CoV and tested in animals, such as an inactivated virus, a live-attenuated virus, viral vectors, subunit vaccines, recombinant proteins and DNA vaccines135,136. Similar approaches have been used for the development of experimental MERS-CoV vaccines137. To date, three MERS-CoV vaccines have been evaluated in non-human primates. In one study, rhesus macaques were primed with DNA encoding the spike protein, followed by boosts with spike DNA and with recombinant protein consisting of the spike subunit containing the receptor-binding domain, or primed and boosted once with the subunit protein. Both approaches reduced pathological changes in lung function in animals that were infected with MERS-CoV 19 weeks after the last vaccination138. Moreover, three vaccinations with a recombinantly expressed protein that contains the receptor-binding domain of the spike protein reduced viral loads and lung pathology in rhesus macaques that were infected 2 weeks after the last vaccination139. Three DNA vaccinations with a construct encoding the full-length spike sequence reduced viral loads and pathology in the lungs after challenge with MERS-CoV 5 weeks after the last vaccination140.One concern of vaccination in humans is vaccine-mediated enhancement of disease, a process in which the disease following infection is more severe in vaccinated individuals than in unvaccinated individuals. Although this was observed in only a small subset of vaccine studies that were carried out for SARS-CoV136 and has not yet been observed in any of the published MERS-CoV vaccine studies, it is an important concern. Moreover, it is unclear who to vaccinate against MERS-CoV, as healthy individuals seem to be at little risk of severe disease. Older patients or patients with underlying disease, who have the highest risk of severe MERS, would be important target populations. However, vaccination in such patients can be problematic owing to their poor immune responses, as has been established for influenza virus141. In addition, vaccination of people with a high risk of exposure to MERS-CoV, such as health care workers, slaughterhouse workers and camel herders, is advisable142.OutlookAs our understanding of the pathogenesis of emerging coronaviruses increases, so will the opportunities for the rational design of therapeutics that target viral replication or immunopathology. The rational design of new drugs and the repurposing of existing compounds have already resulted in the development of PLpro inhibitors and the identification of kinase inhibitors that inhibit the replication of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV in vitro. However, only a few potential treatments have progressed past the identification of an effect in vitro, and in vivo studies to select the most promising treatment options are required. The development of several mouse models of MERS is thus an important step forward (Box 2). Owing to the acute nature of MERS and the important role of immunopathology, combination therapies aimed at simultaneously inhibiting viral replication, limiting viral dissemination and dampening the host response are likely to yield the best results. Furthermore, treatment should be started as early as possible, rather than waiting until the patient has already developed extensive lung damage.The development of therapies against SARS and MERS needs to focus on testing in humans, in properly controlled clinical trials. The current non-standardized, uncontrolled approach to treatment is not informative and may not be beneficial to the patient. The recent Ebola outbreak has demonstrated that rapid clinical trial design and approval are possible and that exceptional situations call for deviations from normal procedures (Box 3).While treatments are being developed and evaluated, the prevention of viral transmission is key to reducing the burden of MERS. The large proportion of nosocomial MERS-CoV infections indicates that preventive measures in hospitals are currently either not fully implemented or insufficient. Prevention of zoonotic transmission from dromedary camels is another possibility to decrease the number of MERS cases. The first vaccines against MERS-CoV have been tested in dromedary camels140,143; indeed, when camels were vaccinated with a modified vaccinia virus that expresses the MERS-CoV spike protein, subsequent challenge of these animals with MERS-CoV resulted in less viral shedding than in unvaccinated animals143, thereby potentially limiting the transmission to naive animals or to humans. Certainly, there has been progress in the development of vaccines and therapies against emerging coronaviruses, but more research and rigorous testing is required if we are to successfully combat these novel pathogens.Box 2: Animal modelsMost of our understanding of the pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) comes from animal studies. Ideally, these models recapitulate all or specific aspects of human disease. Several mouse models have been established, for example by using mouse-adapted SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) or expressing human receptors in mice152. Although it has been recognized that mice might poorly mimic specific human responses to infection, the availability of knockout and transgenic mice enables the targeted study of virus–host interactions. Several non-human primate models have been developed for SARS-CoV and MERS coronavirus (MERS-CoV)152. The close relationship of non-human primates to humans often allows faithful recapitulation of a disease and the host response. However, these benefits are countered by the need for specialized husbandry, the sometimes limited availability of the animals and reagents, and high costs.The pathogenesis of SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV in their respective reservoir hosts is not nearly as well studied as that in humans. Currently, only one experimental-infection study has been carried out in bats with MERS-CoV153, and none has been carried out for other coronaviruses. Thus, data are mostly limited to the detection of coronaviruses in naturally infected bats. The detection of coronaviruses mainly in faecal samples from bats and not in oral swabs suggests that replication in bats occurs predominantly in the gastrointestinal tract9,154,155. By contrast, a combination of intratracheal and intranasal inoculation of masked palm civets with SARS-CoV resulted in interstitial pneumonia, with oral and rectal viral shedding156.The pathogenesis of MERS-CoV in dromedary camels has been studied experimentally in a limited number of animals. These animals developed transient mild disease; however, large quantities of MERS-CoV were shed from the upper respiratory tract, in line with the predominant replication of MERS-CoV in the nasal turbinates and larynx in these animals, which explains the frequent zoonotic transmission157.Box 3: Preparing for emerging viruses: lessons from SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV and Ebola virusWhen the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak developed into the first pandemic of the twenty-first century, it became clear that the medical and scientific communities were not adequately prepared for the emergence of highly pathogenic viruses. Whereas several months elapsed and several thousand cases of SARS were observed before the causative agent was identified as SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV)4,5,6, subsequent advances in molecular diagnostic tools, such as next generation sequencing, meant that Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) was identified before it caused a large outbreak of MERS11. The availability of the full-length genome of MERS-CoV enabled the rapid development and distribution of diagnostic assays. The first animal models of disease, several treatment efficacy studies and the identification of the reservoir followed soon after. Unfortunately, the SARS pandemic did not yield solid clinical data on the efficacy of treatment regimens. These data are urgently needed for the treatment of MERS, as well as to prepare for novel coronaviruses that may emerge. Several studies have used synthetic biology to study the zoonotic transmission potential of SARS-CoV-like viruses from bats9,10,158,159.The Ebola virus outbreak in West Africa has highlighted the need for fast-tracking of potential treatments, as several clinical trials were started only towards the end of the outbreak. The combined experiences of the outbreaks of SARS, MERS and Ebola provide a blueprint for the response to emerging pathogens: after the identification of the causative agent, diagnostic assays need to be developed and distributed rapidly, and simultaneously, awareness of the new syndrome and reporting of (suspected) cases must be increased. In addition, infection control measures in health care facilities are essential. Research needs to focus on understanding the epidemiology, including pathogen transmission and identification of the reservoir and/or intermediate hosts. Animal models need to be developed, as well as therapeutic and prophylactic measures. Finally, promising treatments need to be fast-tracked into clinical trials.


Title: A comparative review of pathogenesis and host innate immunity evasion strategies among the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)

IntroductionCoronaviruses (CoVs) from the family Coronaviridae, and order Nidovirales are the enveloped, non-segmented, positive-sense RNA viruses which are grouped into four genera: alpha (α), beta (β), gamma (γ), and delta (δ).CoVs among which the β-CoVs include the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and the Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) (Rabaan et al. 2020; Fehr and Perlman 2015). All these viruses have the highly conserved genomic organization, consisting of the 5′ cap-leader-UTR (untranslated region)—replicase (around 20 kb)—S (Spike)—E (Envelope)—M (Membrane)—N (Nucleocapsid)—3′ UTR-poly (A) tail scheme, along with the accessory genes interspersed within the structural genes at the 3′ end of the RNA (Fehr and Perlman 2015). The events within the life cycle of these viruses are the same: (1) attachment and entry into the host, (2) expression of the replicase protein, (3) viral replication and transcription, (4) viral assembly and subsequent release (Rabaan et al. 2020; Fehr and Perlman 2015; Noor and Maniha 2020; Chu et al. 2020; Noor 2021). Both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV may originate from bats; SARS-CoVs were transmitted to humans from market civets; and the MERS-CoVs from the dromedary camels (Huang et al. 2020; Lu et al. 2020). SARS-CoV-2 has the similar transmission pattern like SARS-CoV; i.e., from bats, pangolins, snakes as the intermediate hosts further facilitating the spillover of SARS-CoV-2 to the humans; and its spread is enabled by human-to-human transmission via the respiratory droplets and due to the international traveling (Rabaan et al. 2020; Noor and Maniha 2020). Although the MERS-CoV originated from bats, however, the intermediate host was camel which transferred the infection to humans, and afterwards human-to-human spread triggered the epidemic (Fehr and Perlman 2015). SARS-CoV- 2 infection commonly manifests the onset of pneumonia, fever, dry cough, dyspnea, myalgia, fatigue, and in fatal case, the acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) (Noor and Maniha 2020). Nearly similar clinical manifestations have also been noticed for both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (Fehr and Perlman 2015).SARS-CoV was first isolated from the wild animals sold as food in Guangdong, China in November 2002; and the SARS-CoV epidemic caused around 8000 cases in 26 countries (Rabaan et al. 2020; Chu et al. 2020). The MERS-CoV infection, also known as camel flu was first isolated in the Saudi Arabia in June 2012 with a very limited case of infections (approximately 2500 infected cases) (Chu et al. 2020). At present, the world population is at its highest risk imposed by COVID-19 pandemics (in 223 countries) caused by the SARS-CoV-2 (originated from the Wuhan City of China at the end of December 2019), with 2,360,280 deaths and 107,423,526 infected cases (WHO 2021). Along the last 20 years, the SARS-CoV epidemic took place in 2002; and the onset of the MERS-CoV was noticed in 2012 only in the Middle East (Tay et al. 2020). Thus, SARS-CoV-2 has appeared to be the most dreadful pandemic with a very high transmission dynamics whereas the SARS-CoV or the MERS-CoV had a much lesser impact on the global public health. Study of phylogeny revealed that SARS-CoV-2 is actually quite distant both from the SARS-CoV (79% sequence homology) and MERS-CoV (only 50% homology) (Noor and Maniha 2020).The extensive study on the pathophysiological impact on the SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV and the MERS-CoV concentrated on the alterations within the host immune cells including various pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines upon the viral infection (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Lee et al. 2020). The ongoing SARS-CoV-2 and the earlier SARS-CoV have been noticed to share a great deal of resemblances in terms disease progression escaping the host immunity, resulting in ARDS (Rabaan et al. 2020; Fehr and Perlman 2015; Noor 2021). Therefore, figuring out the pathogenic events along with the host immunity avoidance for each of these three viruses would be beneficial for the deeper understanding of the viral infectivity together with the possible scopes of effective drug designing. The information on the viral pathogenesis and the host immunological response for all three viruses has been schematically presented with separate models (Figs. 1, 2, 3) in the current review which may further facilitate to develop anti-viral drugs for mitigating the recurring infection. The key points of the current review include: (1) using the spike (S) protein, both the SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV bind to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE 2) receptor of the host whereas MERS-CoV utilizes the host receptor dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) as shown in the models plotted in Figs. 1, 2 and 3 (Rabaan et al. 2020; Fehr and Perlman 2015; Lu et al. 2020; Lee et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Kaushal 2020); (2) SARS-CoV-2 possesses a longer spike protein than that of SARS-CoV (Rabaan et al. 2020; Fehr and Perlman 2015); (3) antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) can increase the severity of disease in any respiratory viral infection e.g., respiratory syncytial virus, measles, influenza etc. ADE might be caused by other proteins like cytokines, non-specific antibodies and in case of other viral infections etc.; to exacerbate the infection. ADE has been reported, previously, in SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (in vivo and in vitro). ADE could occur in COVID-19 too. Recent studies have revealed that S- and RBD-specific antibodies IgG in COVID-19 patients have the lower level of fucosylation within the Fc domain could mediate the antibody-dependent enhancement in cellular cytotoxicity (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Noor 2021; Lee et al. 2020); (4) the regulations of IL-17 are up-regulated and prolonged in MERS-CoV as compared to SARS-CoV, which is believed to induce the immune-mediated pathology contributing to the mortality. Other inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-8, IL-1β and anti-viral cytokines TNF-α, IFN-β and IP-10 were also observed as compared to SARS. But, high leucocyte count, C-reactive protein, D-dimer and high expression of IL-2, IL-7, IL-10, G-CSF, IP-10, MCP-1-α, and TNF-α were found in individuals admitted in ICU with COVID-19 disease. This situation is denoted as "cytokine syndrome" or "cytokine storm" contribute to develop lung injury leading to fatal ARDS (Lee et al. 2020; Tay et al. 2020; Lai et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020; Wan et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2020; Kaushal 2020).Fig. 1Immuno-pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2. Details are written in the text. Briefly, the SARS-CoV infection triggers the generation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (IL-6, IP-10, MIP1α), MIP1β and MCP-1) which attract monocytes, macrophages and T cells (in addition to the IFNγ) to the site of infection, promoting further inflammation. In case of defective immunity, the accumulation of immune cells in the lungs causes the overproduction of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which in turn harms the lung and other organs. The non-neutralizing antibodies further facilitate the viral infection through ADE, and thereby fostering the organ damageFig. 2Immuno-pathogenicity of SARS-CoV. The interaction between SARS-CoV infection with the subsequent immune response as well as the pathogenesis causing the tissue damage triggering the disease fatality has been shown here. Details are described in the textFig. 3Immuno-pathogenicity of MERS-CoV. Details are described in the text. Briefly, upon the viral entry, the type I interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immune response is activated through the production of IFN-α and IFN-β; elevation in macrophages, the tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α), IL-6, IL-12, and IFN-γ. The pathogenesis depends on the IFN antagonists especially ORF4a and ORF4b. Inhibition of the interferon production as well as the type I interferon-induced JAK/STAT and the NF-kβ signaling pathway accelerates the pathogenesisProteins of β-coronaviruses (CoVs) required for pathogenesisIn general, all the three viruses consist of large replicase with four structural proteins: S (spike), E (envelope), M (membrane), and N (nucleocapsid) proteins; the N protein holds the RNA genome, and the S, E, and M proteins together create the viral envelope. The elucidation of the genomic organization revealed that the leader sequence and the 5′ UTR consist of multiple stem loop structures helping in the viral RNA replication and transcription while the transcriptional regulatory sequences (TRSs) reside at the beginning of each structural gene to promote their expressions (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Noor and Maniha 2020; Chu et al. 2020; Noor 2021). Usually in CoVs, the S protein is cleaved into two separate polypeptides: the S1 fraction, which makes up the large receptor-binding domain (RBD); and the second part, S2 which forms the stalk of the spike molecule (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Noor 2021). The distinctive attribute of SARS-CoV-2 genome is that the genes orf8 and orf3b encode the spike glycoproteins; and the Orf3b protein encoded by the orf3b gene has been reported to play important role in the SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis (Noor and Maniha 2020). The N-linked glycosylated S protein utilizes an N-terminal signal sequence to gain access to the ER; and the class I fusion protein of S mediates attachment to the host receptor (Fehr and Perlman 2015). M protein gives the viral shape; and binds to the nucleocapsid (Fehr and Perlman 2015). The E protein mediates the assembly and release of the virus; and its ion channel activity has been shown to be essential for the SARS-CoV pathogenesis (Fehr and Perlman 2015). The N protein has been found with several activities in the viral pathogenesis including the detection of the transcriptional regulatory sequences (TRSs) and the genomic packaging signal; and binding to nsp3, the key component of the replicase complex, and binding to the M protein as well (Fehr and Perlman 2015). Such an interaction facilitates tether the viral RNA to the replicase–transcriptase complex (RTC) trailed by the encapsidation of the viral genome (Rabaan et al. 2020; Fehr and Perlman 2015). The hemagglutinin esterase (HE) can act as a hemagglutinin, binding to the sialic acids on the host surface glycoproteins, and mediating the acetyl-esterase activity which in turn accelerates the S protein-mediated entry of the virus followed by the invasion along the mucosa (Fehr and Perlman 2015).Pathogenesis mediated by SARS-CoV-2Like the common traits of β-coronaviruses, the N protein of SARS-CoV-2 is involved in the viral replication, assembly, and budding as well as involved in the host response (Chu et al. 2020). A total of 14 open reading frames (ORFs) within the SARS-CoV-2 have been identified: the first two at 5ʹ UTR encode polyproteins pp1a/ab which mediate the viral replication; and 16 non-structural proteins (nsps, that are needed for the transcription and replication as well (Lai et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020; Wan et al. 2020). Then structural proteins are encoded by the rest of the genome; and at the 3ʹ terminus, the accessory genes: 3a, 3b, p6, 7a, 7b, 8b, 9b and orf14 reside (Noor and Maniha 2020; Chu et al. 2020; Noor 2021). The transmissibility of virus remains undetected/unnoticed during the incubation period after infection, in case of asymptomatic individuals (Rabaan et al. 2020; Noor and Maniha 2020).Interaction between the spike (S) protein and ACE receptor during the viral entryAs mentioned earlier, the spike (S) protein of the SARS-CoV-2 binds to the angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE 2) receptor (a metallopeptidase: the key molecule in the renin-angiotensin system) of the human host (Lai et al. 2020). Upon the ACE receptor engagement with the S protein, the cellular surface serine protease TMPRSS2 (the plasma membrane-associated type II transmembrane serine protease) is engaged to prime the spike protein (S) to expedite the membrane fusion that is needed for the release of the viral genome into the host cell cytosol (Noor and Maniha 2020). In addition, the antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of viral entry may occur whereby a neutralizing monoclonal antibody (Mab, through the IgG Fc receptor) targets the RBD of the spike, and subsequently allows it to undergo certain conformational changes which permit the viral entry into the IgG Fc receptor-expressing cells (Kikkert 2020; Wan et al. 2020). However, it is to be noted that the ADE phenomenon is noticed with monoclonals in case of SARS-CoV; and normally it does not happen with all coronaviruses. It has also not been noticed in case of SARS-CoV-2 till date (Fehr and Perlman 2015). The phylogenetic analysis revealed that the longer spike protein is encoded by the SARS-CoV-2 in comparison with SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (Lu et al. 2020). The binding affinity between the SARS-CoV-2 spike ectodomain and human ACE2 was also calculated to be 10- to 20-fold higher than that of the SARS-CoV (Chu et al. 2020). Moreover, the antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of viral entry has also been noticed (Wan et al. 2020). Regarding the dreadfulness of SARS-CoV pathogenesis, successive mutations and recombination may largely account; and the evolutionary rate has been calculated up to 10–4 nucleotide substitutions per site per year for RNA viruses like SARS-CoV-2, which in turn may upshot the corresponding mutations at every replication cycle (Lu et al. 2020). Regarding the viral entry, the innate immune signaling is orchestrated through the recognition of the pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by the pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) like the RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) and the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) from viral components or the replication intermediates (Zhang et al. 2020). Also, this is to be noted that the upregulation of cellular receptor ACE2 by SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV; and the inflammatory cytokines may facilitate their infection (Kaushal 2020; Zhuang et al. 2020).Pathogenic events after the viral entry and immunological responsesIn case of a healthy immune response, the initial inflammation by the SARS-CoV entry attracts the virus-specific T cells to the site of infection as stated earlier (Tay et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020). Indeed, at the time of viral entry, antigen is processed by the antigen presenting cells (APCs) through MHC to activate the T cells; and the antibodies are produced by the B cells thereafter; i.e., IgM within 6–7 days followed by IgG, IgA titer in 3–4 weeks, which are specifically directed to combat the secondary infections (Kaushal 2020). This is to be mentioned that these antibodies usually do not halt the virus at the beginning (entry phase); actually, the viral spread can be arrested if a person is immunized with the virus (Kaushal 2020). However, the recognition of the viruses and apoptotic cells by the alveolar macrophages may eliminate the viral particles by phagocytosis (Tay et al. 2020). As shown in Fig. 1, the pathophysiological impact in the CoV-affected patients largely depends on the alteration of the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines; i.e., the generation of the cytokine storm (Tay et al. 2020; Ralph et al. 2020). Upon the viral entry mediated by ACE2 and TMPRSS2, the active replication with the subsequent release of the virus instigate the host cell to undergo pyroptosis (a condition of cell death and inflammation) together with the release of damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) including ATP, nucleic acids and ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein with a caspase-recruitment domain) oligomers (Tay et al. 2020). The antibodies produced by the B cells may also accelerate the infection through the ADE (Tay et al. 2020). Once the virus gets inside, (1) it travels down the bronchial tubes to the lungs letting the respiratory tree lining to be injured, (2) the nerves of the lining of the airway get irritated, making the mucous membranes of the lungs inflamed and hardened (Lee et al. 2020). As a result, it becomes difficult for lungs to supply oxygen to the blood, resulting in the shortness in breathing or the ARDS (Rabaan et al. 2020; Tay et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020).As stated earlier, the SARS-CoV-2 first adheres to the ACE2 receptors in nasopharynx and respiratory epithelium; and the host immune response is instigated through the elevated levels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines generated from various lymphocytes, which in turn trigger the lung injury with the subsequent onset of ARDS, a state whereby the alveolar spaces are dominated by the infiltered neutrophils and monocytes which finally lead to hyper cytokinemia. (Kikkert 2020; Kaushal 2020). Besides, the hyper activation of various immune cells uniquely against the nucleocapsid of the virus cause the cytokine storm which is responsible for the ARDS, and the multi-organ malfunction at the later stage (Rabaan et al. 2020; Fehr and Perlman 2015; Lee et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020; Kaushal 2020). This is also worth to mention that the pro-inflammatory macrophages and granulocytes cause the innate inflammation in lungs; i.e., difficulty in breathing as well as cyanosis which in turn require ventilation in the COVID-19 patient. A potential cause of such lung fatality is hyaluronan (HA) which is produced by the HA synthase (HAS2) in CD31-endothelium, EpCAM-lung alveolar epithelial cells, and fibroblasts, triggered by IL-1 and TNF (Kaushal 2020). HA in turn absorbs water in significantly higher amount (approximately 1000-fold than normal), and thereby causing the difficulty in oxygen supply in lungs (Kaushal 2020).As shown in Fig. 1, the DAMPs are recognized by the neighboring epithelial cells, endothelial cells and the alveolar macrophages, which then trigger the production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines including IL-6, IP-10, macrophage inflammatory protein 1α (MIP1α), MIP1β and MCP-1, which entice the monocytes, macrophages, T cells and IFNγ to the site of infection and thus promoting further inflammation (Tay et al. 2020). In case of defective immunity, the above-mentioned cells over accumulate in the lungs resulting in the state of the elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines (cytokine storm), which subsequently impairs the lung infrastructure (Tay et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020). The cytokine storm further circulates to other organs, causing the multi-organ damage (Tay et al. 2020).Evasion of host immunity by SARS-CoV-2Dodging of the host protective immunity is the principal strategy to impart the viral pathogenesis (Lee et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020). As the virus spreads along the nasopharyngeal tract, cells of the innate immune defense mechanisms are concomitantly avoided (Kikkert 2020). Indeed, after the viral infection starts, both the adaptive (regulated by the MHC antigens/HLA classes) and innate immunity commence within host (Kikkert 2020; Kaushal 2020). The protective innate immunity is diminished in the severe symptomatic stages of pathogenesis with excessive lymphopenia the NK cells which in turn impart the virus to dodge the host immunity; however, the monocytes and macrophages rush towards the infected site and thus create a hyperinflammatory state (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Noor 2021; Kikkert 2020; Kaushal 2020). Moreover, as the virus skips the NK-cell-mediated protective immunity, eventually the viral spread occurs resulting inflammations of lungs and other major organs (Kaushal 2020). Besides the impairment of innate immunity, the presentation of viral antigens by MHC class I and II can be compromised with the APCs which in turn instigate the weakening of the T-cell response; and thus, the adaptive immunity is also hindered (Noor 2021).From the molecular point of view, the viral RNA circumvents the innate immune cells by adding a cap-structure (the cap-snatching mechanism, aided by the N protein) to its 5′-end and resulting in the release of the short, 5′-capped transcripts; helping them to be detected by the host translational apparatuses (Kikkert 2020; Vlugt et al. 2018). The 2′-O methylation of the viral cap structures is facilitated by the nsp16, which helps to avoid recognition by the immune sensor MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5) (Kikkert 2020; Menachery et al. 2014). The second mechanism relies on the viral endoribonuclease activity to avoid the protein kinase R (PKR), and the 2′–5′ Oligoadenylate Synthetase (OAS)/RNAse L system (the interferon, IFN effector) (Lee et al. 2020). Thus, the SARS-CoV-2 accelerates its own RNA during the infection processes with the concomitant avoidance of the host immune system (Lee et al. 2020). Thirdly, the N protein reduces the chance of the viral mRNA destruction as well (Kikkert 2020).Pathogenesis mediated by SARS-CoV and immunological responseImmunological response upon viral infection can either limit virus spreading or surprisingly can cause the pathological damages to the host tissues which mainly depends on the accumulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines (released by activated macrophages) in alveoli as stated earlier (Tay et al. 2020; Kikkert 2020; Ralph et al. 2020; Vlugt et al. 2018; Menachery et al. 2014; Chen et al. 2010; Glass et al. 2003). Like SARS-CoV-2, the prime factor for SARS-CoV progression also depends on the ACE2 receptor although both SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV consists of a relatively shorter spike protein than that of SARS-CoV-2 (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Chu et al. 2020; Ge et al. 2013; Nicholls et al. 2003; Xu and Gao 2004; Gu and Korteweg 2007). As shown in Fig. 2, upon the SARS-CoV infection, the macrophages, dendritic cells, and the alveolar epithelial cells have been shown to trigger a remarkable elevation of the pro-inflammatory chemokines: (1) the macrophage inflammatory protein-1α (MIP-1α), (2) normal T cells; (3) IP-10, (4) interleukin (IL) 2, 5, 6 and IL-8, and (5) monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), (6) tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and (7) chemokines (CXCL10, CCL2, CCL3, and CCL5) correlated with migration of NK cells CXCL8 (Glass et al. 2003; Xu and Gao 2004; Gu and Korteweg 2007). Within the spleen a reduction in the CD4+ lymphocytes, CD8+ lymphocytes, CD20+ lymphocytes, plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), macrophages, and natural killer (NK) cells were observed upon SARS-CoV infection (Xu and Gao 2004; Gu and Korteweg 2007). Additionally, the diminution of the mucosal lymphoid tissue in the small intestines and appendix was noticed along with a succeeding decline in the lymphocytes (Gu and Korteweg 2007). Besides the role of various inflammatory cytokines and chemokines in the pathogenic consequence of the virus as stated above, the molecular pathways recognized by the TLRs (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Kaushal 2020). As the virus enters the host cells; viral RNAs are recognized by the TLRs (7/8,3) to work on three pathways; and the virus turns off two protective immunity intracellular pathways: (1) MyD88 and interferon regulatory transcription factor 7 (IRF7) to produce IFN-1; and (2) tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and IRF3 to activate T cells. However, the virus turns on the third intracellular inflammatory pathway; i.e., the p38 MAP Kinase- and AP-1 pathway for the production of inflammatory molecules (Kaushal 2020).Protective immunitySARS-CoV-specific serum Abs (specific IgG) become detectable in the late first week after the onset of symptoms and 25 days after the onset of the infection (Xu and Gao 2004). The neutralizing Abs (directed against the S glycoprotein) were noticed to be able to block the viral entry into host cells (Xu and Gao 2004). Using mouse model, a DNA vaccine encoding the S glycoprotein of SARS-CoV was previously noticed to induce T cell and the neutralizing antibody responses (protective immunity) (Xu and Gao 2004; Yang et al. 2004). Other than humoral immunity, the anti-viral CD4+ helper T cells were observed to mediate the production of virus-specific Abs by B cells; and also, the CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) could kill the virus-infected host cells (Fig. 2), and facilitated the lysis of MHC-matched tumor cell lines expressing the S glycoprotein (Xu and Gao 2004). Interestingly, both CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses were found to be induced by immunization with the expression vectors encoding for the S protein of SARS-CoV (Xu and Gao 2004; Yang et al. 2004). Additionally, the earlier evidence showed that the intervention of intra-balance among different cytokines, Th1/Th2 cells, and the innate/adaptive immunity can be an operative way of treating the SARS-CoV infection (Glass et al. 2003).Pathogenesis mediated by the MERS-CoVAlthough the genomic organization is nearly similar to that of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2; however, unlike these two, the MERS-CoV utilizes the host receptor dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4, which is also known as CD26) to interact with its spike protein during the entry into the host and subsequently to spread the viral infection (Fehr and Perlman 2015; Chafekar and Fielding 2018; Taylor and Mossman 2013; Randall and Goodbourn 2008; Dawson et al. 2019). Besides, to completely understand the MERS-CoV pathogenesis, the role of the MERS-CoV accessory proteins needs to be deciphered for mediating the viral pathogenesis. Like other CoV genomes, the first 5′ two-thirds of the MERS-CoV genome comprises the replicase complex (ORF1a and ORF1b); and the remaining 3′ one-third encodes the structural proteins S, E, M, and N; and the five accessory proteins (ORF3, ORF4a, ORF4b, ORF5 and ORF8b) which are not actually required for the genome replication, but these accessory proteins may facilitate the viral pathogenesis (Chafekar and Fielding 2018; Dawson et al. 2019). Upon entry into the host, the MERS-CoV can infect the alveolar epithelial cells, macrophages, fibroblasts, and the endothelial cells resulting in the alveolar damage; and the virus is capable to replicate within kidney and liver cells (Dawson et al. 2019).Immunological response and IFN antagonism during MERS-CoV pathogenesisUpon MERS-CoV entry into the host cell, the type I interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immune response is activated through the production of type I IFNs; i.e., IFN-α and IFN-β (Chafekar and Fielding 2018; Taylor and Mossman 2013; Randall and Goodbourn 2008). An elevation in monocyte-derived macrophages has been noticed (Fig. 3) along with the elevated levels of the tumor necrosis factor α (TNF α), IL-6, IL-12, and IFN-γ (Dawson et al. 2019). MERS-CoV pathogenesis stringently relies on the ORF4a (dsRNA binding protein), which acts as an antagonist of the anti-viral activity of IFN as it (1) inhibits the interferon production (IFN-β promoter activity, the IFN-regulatory transcription factors: IRF3 and IRF7; and the activation of NF-κB (the nuclear factor kappa light chain enhancer of activated B cells); and (2) blocks the ISRE (interferon-stimulated response element) promoter element signaling pathways; i.e., the type I IFN-induced JAK/STAT signaling pathway (Dawson et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2013). As shown in Fig. 3, the MERS-CoV ORF4b inhibits the activation of RNase L, which possesses an IFN-induced potent anti-viral activity and also hinders the type I IFN and NF-kβ signaling pathways, resulting in the viral pathogenesis (Dawson et al. 2019; Thornbrough et al. 2016).It is clear from the above discussion that escaping the host innate immunity by MERS-CoV largely depends on the IFN antagonism since the MERS-CoV-encoded IFN antagonist proteins are known to block one or more key signaling proteins in the IFN and NF-κB signaling pathways thereby mediating the viral infectivity (Chafekar and Fielding 2018; Taylor and Mossman 2013; Randall and Goodbourn 2008). Impedance of the IFN production by the interference with the global expression of IFN‐stimulated genes (ISGs), and by the degradation of the transcription factors IRF3/7, nuclear factor‐κB or NF‐κB, or ATF‐2/c‐jun (activating transcription factor 2 binding to the cyclic AMP responsive elements or CRE) as well as blocking the JAK/STAT signal transduction pathway or by obstructing the type I IFN receptor are the keys to the MERS-CoV pathogenesis (Taylor and Mossman 2013). MERS-CoV prevents the initial detection of virus by the host immune cells by damaging the Toll‐like receptors (TLR) or the retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG‐I)‐like receptors, or by masking the receptor ligands (Taylor and Mossman 2013; Yang et al. 2013). In summary, the MERS-CoV pathogenesis has been reported to evolve mechanisms to utilze its M protein, and the ORF4a, ORF4b and ORF5 proteins (all are strong IFN antagonists) to evade the host immune system and thus continuing pathogenesis by inhibiting both type I IFN induction and the NF-kB signaling pathways (Dawson et al. 2019). Besides ORF4a and ORF4b, the MERS-CoV replicase proteins, including nsp1, nsp3, and nsp14 also interfere with the innate immune response signaling pathways (Dawson et al. 2019).ConclusionIn the current review, the molecular and cellular strategies for the SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV to lapse the protective innate immune system have been discussed. Although the genome organization of all these three β-coronaviruses are nearly similar, the priming of pathogenesis differs especially regarding the viral entry; i.e., the SARS-CoV-2 and the SARS-CoV employed their spike protein to the RBD of the host ACE2 receptor whereas the MERS-CoVs used their spike proteins to attach with the host DPP4 receptor. Moreover, the SARS-CoV-2 was found to show stronger affinity for the ACE2 receptor than that of the SARS-CoV. In all three cases, the pathogenesis depends on the escaping performances of the host innate immunity. The pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV is related to the cytokine storm whereas the MERS-CoV pathogenesis is allied with the host NK cell inactivation by the viral antagonist proteins towards the host IFN. The pathogenesis scheme with such immunological response has been presented as schematic model for each virus. Such a knowledge may aid to further focus on their virulence rate and the transmission dynamics, and the possible anti-viral therapies including the vaccine development strategies.


Title: Emerging viral respiratory tract infections—environmental risk factors and transmission

This is the third in a Series of five papers on emerging respiratory tract infectionsIntroductionSince the recognition of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003, several new viruses have emerged in different parts of the world. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) was first identified in Saudi Arabia and Jordan in 2012, with several cases documented in European travellers who had visited the Middle East. More than 840 human cases of MERS-CoV infection have been confirmed as of July, 2014. Most patients had respiratory disease with a range of clinical manifestations from mild, asymptomatic cases to severe multisystem illness; mortality was about 38%. Human adenovirus 14 (HAdV14) was first recognised in 1955 and it re-emerged in 2006 in the USA in a slightly different form (HAdV-14p1). Outbreaks have been restricted to the USA and China, with cases totalling in the hundreds, and mortality has been low. Influenza A H7N9 virus emerged in eastern China in early 2013 with very few cases occurring outside of China. As of June, 2014, more than 448 confirmed human cases have been documented with an estimated 39% mortality rate. Avian influenza A H10N8, the first strain of which was isolated from birds several decades ago, emerged in 2013 to infect at least three people in China, leading to one death. Similarly, in 2011 a novel swine-like influenza H3N2 variant virus emerged in two states in the USA, causing disease in 12 people. By the end of 2013, the virus had spread to ten states and caused at least 340 people to be ill (with one death). In this paper, we review the epidemiology of these emerging viruses, including their geographical distribution, modes of transmission, and where appropriate their zoonotic characteristics.MERSGeographical distributionMERS-CoV infection is a new human disease that was first reported in Saudi Arabia in June, 2012 (figure
).1 Retrospective investigation of a hospital outbreak of 13 cases of respiratory infections in Zarqa, Jordan in April, 2012, identified two confirmed and 11 probable cases of which ten were among health-care workers.2 As of the end of July, 2014, 841 confirmed cases, including 327 deaths (38·4%), have been reported by local authorities worldwide.3 Almost all confirmed cases were reported from the Middle East, notably Saudi Arabia, but also neighboring countries including Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, United Arab Emirates (UAE), and Yemen. According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), cases have been reported in Algeria, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Philippines, Tunisia, the UK, and the USA. Overall, all cases originated from or had a history of travel to the Middle East, with few secondary cases.3
FigureGeographical distribution of human cases of emerging respiratory viruses
Key messages
•Over the past decade, several new viruses causing respiratory tract disease in human beings have emerged in different parts of the world.•Human adenovirus (HAdV) 14p1 has been identified in people only, but Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), influenza A H7N9, influenza A H10N8, and influenza A H3N2 variant are zoonotic diseases.•HAdV14 first recognised in 1955 re-emerged in 2006 in the USA and China.•As of June, 2014, more than 448 confirmed human cases of avian Influenza A H7N9 virus infection have been documented since its first discovery in early 2013.•Influenza A H7N9 virus can survive for months in the environment, and the absence of clinical signs in poultry, ducks, and wild birds makes it particularly difficult to control.•An avian influenza H10N8 virus has recently emerged in 2013 to infect at least three people in China.•In 2011 a novel swine-like influenza A H3N2 variant virus emerged in two states in the USA, and by the end of 2013 it had spread to ten states and caused illness in at least 340 people. The absence of clinical signs among influenza A H3N2 variant infected pigs is a major concern in that people are essentially serving as sentinels of infection.•First identified in Saudi Arabia in 2012, the number of human cases of MERS-CoV infection have steadily increased to more than 840. Nosocomial transmission to patients and health-care workers has been documented.•While geographically restricted to the Middle East, MERS-CoV is of major public health concern since millions of pilgrims from 184 countries visit Saudi Arabia for pilgrimage throughout the year.•There is a mounting evidence suggesting that camels are the likely reservoir of MERS-CoV human infections although the precise mode of transmission to humans remains unknown.•A united and coordinated global response is needed to tackle new infectious diseases threats posed by novel viruses that can cause fatal respiratory tract infections over the past decade and to fill major gaps that remain in the understanding of their epidemiology and transmission dynamics.

Most cases of MERS-CoV infection have been in Saudi Arabia where the Hajj, a large religious mass gathering, takes place each year. The Hajj draws 2–3 million pilgrims from within Saudi Arabia and around the world. Worldwide attention has focused on the potential spread of MERS-CoV after the Hajj pilgrimage because pilgrims have a high risk of respiratory tract infections because of crowded conditions.4 In 2013, the Saudi Ministry of Health recommended that elderly people (older than 65 years), people with chronic diseases (eg, heart disease, kidney disease, respiratory disease, and diabetes), the immunocompromised (congenital and acquired), people with malignant disease or terminal illnesses, pregnant women, and children (age less than 12 years) postpone their participation in the Hajj and Umrah for their own safety.5 Investigations done among French pilgrims participating in the 2013 Hajj showed that 48% had at least one disorder for which the Saudi Ministry of Health recommends participation in the Hajj be postponed.6, 7 None of 179 individuals at risk decided to cancel participation, even after receiving this advice during consultation.6, 7 All countries (particularly those with returning pilgrims) were advised by the International Health Regulations Emergency Committee to strengthen their surveillance capacities and ensure robust reporting of any identified cases.8 Cohort surveys of returning French pilgrims with systematic screening of MERS-CoV nasal carriage by PCR were done in 2012 and 2013, and the results were negative despite high rates of respiratory symptoms.9, 10 However, pilgrims rapidly acquired other respiratory viruses during their stay in Saudi Arabia (especially rhinovirus and influenza viruses, which emphasises the potential of these infections to spread in the pilgrims' home countries on their return.10, 11 Screening of pilgrims from 22 countries before (3210 pilgrims) and after (2025) Hajj in 2013 did not reveal any positive cases by RT-PCR.12
Between human transmission of MERS-CoVMost MERS-CoV cases reported have probably acquired infection through human-to-human transmission. Among 144 confirmed and 17 probable cases analysed by the MERS-CoV Research Group in November, 2013, 95 (59%) were classified as secondary cases with epidemiological links to other confirmed cases. Among these, most acquired the infection in health-care settings (63·2%), followed by those infected in household settings (13·7%).13 In the same report, clusters of cases secondary to human-to-human transmission occurred with a cluster size ranging from two to 25 patients. The largest cluster was in Al-Hasa (Saudi Arabia) with 25 cases among patients undergoing hemodialysis, visiting family members, and health-care workers.14 However, a description of the geographical distribution and phylogenetic relation of MERS-CoV infections across time suggests that the Al-Hasa hospital outbreak might have been caused by more than one virus introduction.15 Other clusters in the health-care setting have been described in France, Jordan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE.13 Several clusters have been described in the context of the household setting in Saudi Arabia and Tunisia, or in both the contexts of health-care and household settings in the UK.13, 16, 17 Transmission in all reported clusters is restricted, and evidence from contact-tracing suggests that transmission did not extend beyond close contacts into the community. Assessment of the between-human transmissibility of MERS-CoV by two teams with available non-hospital epidemiological data confirmed the restricted pattern of transmission. The estimated R0 was 0·60–0·69 in one study and 0·8–1·3 in another (table 1
).18, 19 In the absence of appropriate hospital infection control, R0 might be greater than 1 in hospitals admitting patients with MERS-CoV.Table 1Emerging respiratory viruses as of June, 2014Total human casesTotal human deathsClustersEnvironmental propertiesR0MERS-CoV*841327Family and health-care settingsStable at low temperature and low humidity0·60–0·69 vs 0·8–1·3Human adenovirus 14p1Many13Military and school settingsUnknownUnknownH7N9 avian influenza virus448157Family settingsSurvives for months in the environment0·11–0·45H10N8 avian influenza virus31NoneWater persistenceUnknownH3N2 variant influenza virus3401Geriatric ward settings··UnknownMERS-CoV=Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus.*Data to end of July, 2014.Evidence for a zoonotic source for MERS-CoVMERS-CoV belongs to the lineage C βcoronaviruses, which are associated with bats.20 Close relatives of MERS-CoV have been identified in European, Asian, Central American, and South African bats.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 A new β-coronavirus related to MERS-CoV has also been characterised in European hedgehogs.28 The genome diversity of human MERS-CoV isolates suggests that human infections result from several independent zoonotic events from an unknown reservoir in the Middle East.15, 29 Among 161 patients with MERS-CoV analysed by the MERS-CoV Research Group in November, 2013, 51 (32%) were classified as probably sporadic (table 2
) or index cases (no exposure to other known cases). Contact of patients with camels was documented in only five of 51 cases; however, reliable information was available from only 28 cases.13 MERS-CoV spike-protein-binding antibodies and virus neutralising antibodies are reported in high proportions of camels from the Canary Islands, Egypt, Jordan, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE, but not from other livestock including sheep, goats, cattle, and chickens.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37 A higher seroprevalence was reported in adults than in juvenile camels.33, 36 Furthermore, MERS-CoV was detected by quantitative (q) RT-PCR from nasal samples in 11 of 14 camels from a farm in Qatar linked to two confirmed human cases, five of 76 camels from Oman, 36 of 104 juvenile camels from Saudi Arabia, 15 of 98 adult camels from Saudi Arabia, and four of 110 camels from Egypt, two of which were imported from Sudan and Ethiopia.31, 33, 38, 39 Genomic sequences of MERS-CoV isolates from two patients and from their infected camels were almost identical, suggesting camel-to-human transmission.40, 41
Table 2Potential sources and transmission patterns of emerging respiratory virusesPotential sourcesTransmission patternsMiddle East respiratory syndrome coronavirusHuman patients, camels, bats, and environment (camel farms)Human-to-human (59%), sporadicHuman adenovirus 14p1Human patients and asymptomatic sheddersSporadic, human-to-human (close and frequent contact)H7N9 avian influenza virusLive birds, poultry, environment (bird markets, poultry farms, wet markets — soil and surface waters), and human patientsDirect contact with live poultry, human-to-human (possible but restricted and non-sustainable)H10N8 avian influenza virusLive birds and poultry, environment (soil and surface water)Exposure to poultryH3N2 variant influenza virusPigs, pig environments (agriculture fairs), and human patientsDirect or indirect contact with pigs, human-to-human (possible but restricted and non-sustainable)A novel coronavirus (DcCoV UAE-HKU23) was detected by qRT-PCR in 21% of faecal samples from dromedary calves in UAE. 97–100% of camels were positive for MERS-CoV antibody testing by various methods, whereas 52% only had antibodies against DcCoV UAE-HKU23, which shows that little correlation exists between seropositivity to the two viruses.35 Additionally, a gene fragment was recovered from a faecal sample from a bat in Saudi Arabia, near the home of a confirmed human case; bat and human isolates were 100% homologous.42 Studies addressing the seroprevalence of MERS-CoV among human beings are highly demanding from a technical perspective, because titres are generally low, and there is crossreactivity between coronaviruses.43
Studies done on 624 serum specimens from people in Saudi Arabia, including slaughterhouse workers, by discriminative methods failed to show evidence for the presence of antibodies.43, 44 Dromedary camels harbour the virus and shed MERS-CoV in respiratory secretions. The frequency of positive serology in camels versus human beings strongly suggests that camels are the reservoir for human exposure. Unpasteurised camel milk is a possible route of transmission, but so far few studies have assessed the prevalence of MERS-CoV in camel milk. A study in April, 2014 showed that camel milk was positive for MERS-CoV by qRT-PCR.45 Finally, the reservoirs might have complex ecology, and bats might play a part.Evidence for environmental source for MERS-CoVOnly one study has investigated the stability of MERS-CoV under different environmental conditions.46 MERS-CoV was stable at low temperatures and low humidity and could be recovered after 48 h at 20°C and 40% relative humidity. Aerosolisation of MERS-CoV did not affect its stability. These data show the potential for MERS-CoV to be transmitted via contact or fomite transmission as a result of prolonged environmental presence.Putative mode of transmission of MERS-CoVThe exact mode of transmission of MERS-CoV is unknown. However, several MERS-CoV clusters have implicated human-to-human transmission among health-care worker, hospital inpatient, and family cluster case series.47 Such transmission could be through respiratory droplets or direct or indirect contact.48 With a model developed by measurement of the hardness of coronavirus inner and outer protein shells, MERS-CoV was predicted to be readily transmitted through an oral–faecal route and also possibly via respiratory secretions.49
Human adenovirus 14Geographical distributionHAdDV-14 was first discovered in 1955 during an outbreak of acute respiratory infections among military trainees in the Netherlands.50 Soon after, other outbreaks were reported in Czechoslovakia, England, and Uzbekistan (figure).51, 52, 53, 54 The circulation and case reports of HAdV-14 infections ceased during the early 1960s until the beginning of the 1970s when the virus was again detected in the Netherlands.53 In the early part of this century, suspected cases of HAdV-14 were identified in Taiwan.55 During 2006, a variant of HAdV-14 (later dubbed HAdV-14p1) caused epidemics among US military trainees in five states: California, Georgia, Illinois, Montana, and Texas.53, 56, 57 From 2003 until now, sporadic HAdV-14p1 cases and clusters of cases were also described among civilians throughout the USA (Alaska, California, Kansas, New York, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin)53, 58, 59, 60, 61 In 2009–10, nine sporadic cases were reported in Ireland.61 In October 2010, HAdV-14p1 was detected by culture in a 17-month-old child with tonsillitis living in Guangzhou, southern China.62 In December 2010, HAdV-14p1 was isolated from a 6-month-old child presenting with pneumonia in Beijing, China.63 In April 2011, an outbreak occurred affecting 43 children (8–15 years old) attending school in the Tongwei County of the Gansu province (northwestern China), of whom 11 were identified with infection of HAdV-14p1.64 During summer 2011, three sporadic epidemiologically unrelated HAdV-14p1 cases were identified in the Canadian province of New Brunswick.65
Between-human transmission of HAdV-14p1HAdVs are chiefly transmitted via direct contact, aerosol, or contact with fomites. HAdV-14 strains are predominantly associated with upper and lower respiratory infections, and hence respiratory secretions are infectious. Adenoviruses are ubiquitous in military training facilities.66 People at risk of HAdV-14p1 infection include military trainees, young children, and the immunocompromised (table 1). During HAdV outbreaks, the high prevalence of asymptomatic infected individuals renders the surveillance and targeted countermeasures very difficult to enforce (table 2). So far, the basic reproductive rate (R0) has not been estimated for HAdV-14p1.Evidence for a zoonotic source for HAdV-14p1Cross-species transmission of a simian adenovirus from monkeys to man has been documented with scarce human-to-human infection.67, 68 HAdV-14 strains are human adenovirus B (mastadenoviruses of the family Adenoviridae); all other adenovirus B are human viruses (HAdV-3, 7, 11, 16, 21, 34, 35, 50) except for the simian adenovirus 21.69 Most of the simian adenoviruses isolated from non-human primates are phylogenetically related to human adenoviruses and belong to the species B, C, and E.70 However, there are no observational data to suggest that human HAdV-14p1 infections might be epidemiologically linked to contact with non-human primates. There is no evidence that HAdV-14p1 is zoonotic.Evidence for environmental sources of HAdV-14p1No specific data for HAdV-14p1 suggest either an environmental reservoir or an environmental source of infection. However, other human adenoviruses are stable in the environment, and HAdV-B14p1 probably has similar characteristics. The infectivity of mastadenoviruses is suppressed after 10 min at 56°C or above; they are infectious when frozen, stable when exposed to mild acids, and insensitive to lipid solvents.69
Putative mode of transmission of HAdV-14No study is specifically dedicated to the transmissions of HAdV-14p1; however, this virus is probably transmitted through mechanisms similar to those recorded for other human adenoviruses that cause respiratory tract infections. Adenoviruses frequently cause epidemics among military trainees, children (especially newborns), institutionalised people in hospitals and nursing homes, and immunocompromised people.71, 72, 73, 74 Because of their innate nature, adenoviruses are hardy and resistant to environmental changes; they can be transmitted directly from person to person, and indirectly from environment to person.69 For HAdV-14p1, the substantial proportion of epidemic episodes that occurred in a community (eg, schools and military camps) suggests that close proximity is a key factor for outbreaks.53
Avian influenza H7N9 virusGeographical distributionThe outbreak of a human novel influenza A H7N9 virus infection that occurred in early 2013 in eastern China (figure) raised serious concerns among public health professionals about the possibility of an imminent influenza pandemic.75, 76 As of June, 2014, more than 440 laboratory-confirmed cases and more than 150 deaths from influenza A H7N9 have occurred.77 Novel influenza A H7N9 spread rapidly, involving numerous provinces in China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, and Taiwan.76, 78 Influenza A H7N9 virus infections are associated with fever, chills, shivering, cough, chest pain, dyspnoea, nausea and vomiting,79 lymphocytopenia, leucopenia,80 hyperpyrexia, respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, multiorgan failure,81 fulminant pneumonia, septic shock, rhabdomyolysis, and encephalopathy.82
Between-human transmissionThe poorly understood pathogenesis and unknown mode of transmission of H7N9,83 coupled with the absence of mass deaths in poultry and wild birds before disease outbreaks makes public health intervention measures difficult to implement.84 The risk of human-to-human transmission of influenza A H7N9 is controversial since cases of family clustering could be a result of between-human transmission or a result of common exposure to infected poultry or other environmental risk factors.85 Some researchers argue that routes of human infections are only through exposure to poultry, wild birds, or via avian environmental exposures.75 They claim that between-human transmission is unlikely since many close contacts of confirmed H7N9 cases did not have evidence for influenza A H7N9 infection.80 Supporters of the bird-exposure hypothesis also argue that the reduction in human H7N9 cases after the April 2013 closure of live poultry and bird markets supports their view.86 Furthermore, they argue that recorded family clustering can be explained as a result of common exposure to birds or their environments and not as a result of human-to-human transmission.79 Some researchers also used mathematical models to suggest that the reproduction number for human-to-human transmission of the novel influenza A H7N9 is well below unity87 Other researchers argue that there is a strong possibility of restricted and non-sustainable H7N9 human-to-human transmission.81 They argue that a confirmed case, without exposure to live birds or live poultry markets, developed the disease and died of multiorgan failure after taking care of a confirmed sick close relative who also died of the disease, with the genome sequencing of the viruses isolated from the two patients being almost identical.81 A case-control study also excluded a participant from the study on the grounds of being infected with a possible human-to-human transmission.88 Another study showed that some close relatives of confirmed cases developed respiratory symptoms but did not give positive results for influenza A H7N9 virus, thereby stating that, although low, the risk of human-to-human transmission is still a possibility.89
Evidence for a zoonotic sourceExposure to infected poultry seems to be the major cause of human infection with influenza A H7N9 (table 2)75, 76, 87 because of the strong similarity between influenza A H7N9 isolates detected among human beings and poultry.80 Almost all cases had either a direct contact with live poultry89 or were exposed to environmental sources such as live bird markets, poultry farms, and wet markets where live birds are slaughtered and processed.75, 76, 79 Most outbreaks occurred in provinces along the eastern Asian–Australian flyway, along which migratory birds travel, flying over areas with densely populated poultry farms, live bird markets, rice farms, and free grazing ducks.84, 90, 91 Influenza A H7N9 viruses have been isolated from chickens and pigeons in markets in some of the affected provinces,79, 80 and from poultry cages and faeces in some live poultry and bird markets in the provinces.88
Evidence for an environmental sourceEnvironmental factors have important roles in the onset and maintenance of H7N9 outbreaks.90 Many of the confirmed cases had occupational exposures such as being a poultry worker, slaughtering birds in wet poultry markets, or visiting or purchasing live birds or poultry from live bird markets.76, 85, 89 Environmental samples in live poultry markets yielded positive results for the novel influenza H7N9 virus,76 which was also isolated from contaminated soils and surface water90 and from the immediate environment of a confirmed case.76 H7N9 can survive for months in the environment thereby leading to risk of infections to poultry or human beings long after initial detection (table 1).76, 90 Since the closure of live bird markets, which create environments allowing prolonged and repeated exposure of live birds and people (thereby increasing the risk of disease outbreaks), there has been a substantial decrease in the number of human cases of H7N9 in the affected regions.92
Putative modes of transmissionThe transmissibility and pathogenesis of the novel influenza A H7N9 are still poorly understood,76 but direct contact to host agents and exposure to environmental risk factors seem to be the generally approved means of transmission to human beings.90 Bird-to-human route, poultry-to-human route, and exposure to environmental risk factors are probably the major causes of human infection with the novel influenza A H7N9,75, 76, 79 though some researchers believe that human-to-human transmission is thus far non-sustainable.Avian influenza H10N8Geographical distributionIn December, 2013, WHO reported the first human case of avian influenza A H10N8 virus in China (figure),93, 94 but the virus was first isolated from birds in Italy in 1965.95 Though usually without clinical signs in birds,96 H10N8 has been isolated in both North America and Asia.95 All three human cases (including one death) were detected in Nanchang City, Jiangxi Province, China.93, 94 Signs and symptoms are consistent with other influenza-like illnesses and include chills,93, 94 cough, chest pain, shivering, pneumonia, respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and multiorgan failure.79, 82, 94 Despite the few human cases,92 these H10N8 infections are a cause for concern because this is the first H10N8 influenza virus to affect human beings. 95
Between-human transmissionThe small number of human cases of illness caused by influenza A H10N8 infection94 and absence of adequate information with respect to the reported human cases95 have made it difficult to fully understand the transmission potential of influenza A H10N8 virus. So far, there is no evidence of between-human transmission of influenza A H10N8 virus because close contacts of the cases have not yet developed influenza A H10N8 infection.93
Evidence for a zoonotic sourceEvidence points to zoonotic sources as the major cause of infection with influenza A H10N8 virus. All three human cases had live bird market exposures (table 2).94, 96 Avian sources seem to be the major reservoir for H10N8 since the viruses are believed to be circulating without clinical signs among poultry and have been isolated from migratory species.95
Evidence for environmental sourceEnvironmental factors seem to have key roles in maintaining the transmission of influenza A H10N8 virus with persistence in water being particularly important to transmission both among birds and to human beings.96 Influenza A H10N8 has been isolated from water samples from Dongting Lake in Hunan province China in 2007,96 and a live poultry market in southern China in 2012, thereby showing the importance of environmental factors in its transmission (table 1).Putative modes of transmissionSince human-to-human transmission of influenza A H10N8 has not been documented,94 the avian-to-human route of transmission seems to be the main route of human infection.93 Despite being considered as having low or non-pathogenicity in avian species,96 the small number of patients might make it difficult to know the actual virulence of influenza A H10N8 virus in people.93 Studies suggest that nucleotide changes or substitution can increase the transmissibility of the virus in human beings,95 since wild strains that were non-pathogenic in mice later caused weight loss and death in mice after two lung passages;96 and genetic analysis of all influenza A H10N8 isolates obtained from the NCBI Influenza Virus Resource Database showed the presence of genetic markers that favour mammalian adaptation or increased virulence in mammals.95
Influenza A H3N2 virusGeographical distributionPig H3N2 virus is believed to have circulated among human beings since 1968,97 with more than 30 human cases reported from 2005 to June 2011 in the USA and Canada (figure).98, 99, 100 The emergence of a variant swine-like influenza A H3N2 virus in July, 2011,101 however, alarmed public health officials. The variant virus likely evolved from the 2009 pandemic influenza A H1N1,102 many cases had direct or indirect exposure to pigs in agricultural fairs,98, 99, 103, 104 and this virus seemingly has more pandemic potential than other swine-like viruses.105 As of June 5, 2014, 340 laboratory-confirmed cases of human influenza A H3N2 and one death have been documented in 13 US states.101, 103, 105, 106, 107, 108 Additional cases of human influenza A H3N2 have been reported in various countries including Denmark,109 the UK,110 Italy,111 Hong Kong,112 France,100 Japan,113 Taiwan, and Singapore.114 Disease symptoms are consistent with other influenza-like symptoms, which include fever (temperature >38°C), sore throat, cough, rhinorrhoea, vomiting or diarrhoea, fatigue, myalgia or joint pain,103, 115 headache, lethargy, rhinorrhoea, emesis, dyspnoea, and eye irritation.99, 100
Between human transmissionSeroepidemiological studies suggest that roughly 90% of US children less than 10 years of age were susceptible to influenza A H3N2 infection.115, 116, 117 Although many studies suggest the occurrence of no or restricted and unsustainable human-to-human transmission of influenza A H3N2,98, 113, 118 some researchers believe there is every possibility of human-to-human transmission.99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 119 Evidence includes an outbreak of influenza A H3N2 in three geriatric wards in France (table 1),100 a US daycare centre,99 and other US case series involving infected people without exposure to pigs.101, 103
Evidence for a zoonotic sourcePig species are mixing bowls through which avian influenza viruses might mix with other influenza viruses and cross over to human beings (table 2).120 Many studies suggest that zoonotic sources had important roles in the outbreak of influenza A H3N2 since most confirmed human cases had direct or indirect exposure to pigs during agricultural fairs.99, 100, 104, 105 Pig samples taken from agricultural fairs have tested positive for H3N2,97, 121, 122 and one study documented antigenic similarity between H3N2 taken from pigs in agricultural fairs and those associated with commercial pig farms,107 thereby showing the importance of pigs in the transmission and maintenance of H3N2 among human beings.Evidence for an environmental sourceThe high rate of outbreaks of human influenza A H3N2 among people that attended or exhibited at the agricultural fairs,98, 99, 103, 104 suggests that there is a substantial association between disease outbreaks and physical location of individuals. Agricultural fairs are recognised as a potential place for pigs and human beings to share pathogens,98 thereby creating enabling environments for the re-assortment of pig and human viruses with the potential of generating novel viruses.118
Putative modes of transmissionThe pig-to-human route is probably the main transmission route for influenza A H3N2, whereas human-to-human transmission is likely a secondary mechanism.98, 99, 103, 104 As a respiratory virus, common means of H3N2 transmission include direct contact, respiratory droplets, and aerosol particles from infected pigs or people. The acquisition of the matrix gene from the 2009 pandemic virus is believed to have caused influenza A H3N2 to be more virulent than the seasonal H3N2 strains.101
ConclusionWhile HAdV-14p1 has been identified in humans only, MERS-CoV, influenza A H7N9, influenza A H10N8, and influenza A H3N2 are zoonotic diseases. There is a mounting evidence suggesting that camels are the likely reservoir of human exposure to MERS-CoV. Influenza A H7N9 and influenza A H10N8 reservoirs consist of poultry, ducks, and wild birds. The influenza A H3N2 reservoir consists of pigs. One possible way to prevent these zoonotic infections is avoiding direct contact with these animals or their dairy products in the respective areas of endemicity. It is advisable avoiding staying in environments where such animals are concentrated, including farms and markets. The absence of massive deaths and even of clinical signs among the reservoir animals leaves little or no time for public health preparations and intervention measures to curtail the impacts by culling. Given the possible interhuman transmission of these viruses (notably MERS-Cov and HAdV-14p1), the individual preventive measures aiming at reducing the risk of respiratory infections (use of face-mask, hand hygiene, cough etiquette, social distancing) should be reinforced.Because of the poor current knowledge of the specific pathogenesis and mode of transmission of HAdV-14p1, recommendations for control and preventive measures have to be extrapolated by reference to other human adenoviruses causing respiratory infections.123 Fortunately, most HAdV-14p1 infections do not cause severe illness.124 Thus, direct methods to detect and identify HAdV-14p1, which have been recently described, will help to improve rapidly surveillance and diagnosis.125 The high mutation or reassortment rate of influenza viruses could lead to the emergence of more virulent and transmissible strains.76, 126 The identification of several novel viruses that can cause fatal respiratory tract infections over the past decade, and major gaps that remain in the understanding of their epidemiology and transmission dynamics, calls for a more united and coordinated global response for tackling new infectious diseases threats.Search strategy and selection criteria
References for this Series paper were identified through searches of PubMed for articles published in the English and French languages from January, 1994, to June, 2014, through use of the terms “respiratory tract infections”, “Middle East Respiratory Syndrome”, “MERS-CoV”, “influenza”, “human adenovirus 14”, “H7N9”, “H10N8”, “H3N2 variant”, “Environmental”, and “Risk factor”. We reviewed articles resulting from these searches and relevant references cited in those articles.



Title: Pathogenesis, Symptomatology, and Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through Analysis of Viral Genomics and Structure

INTRODUCTIONThe current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, caused by the Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) virus, represents an acute global health crisis. Symptoms of the disease can range from mild to severe or fatal (1) and can affect a variety of organs and systems (2). Outcomes of infection can include acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and acute lung injury, as well as damage to other organ systems (2, 3). Understanding the progression of the disease, including these diverse symptoms, depends on understanding how the virus interacts with the host. Additionally, the fundamental biology of the virus can provide insights into how it is transmitted among people, which can, in turn, inform efforts to control its spread. As a result, a thorough understanding of the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 is a critical foundation on which to build an understanding of COVID-19 and the pandemic as a whole.The rapid identification and release of the genomic sequence of the virus in January 2020 (4) provided early insight into the virus in a comparative genomic context. The viral genomic sequence clusters with known coronaviruses (order Nidovirales, family Coronaviridae, subfamily Orthocoronavirinae). Phylogenetic analysis of the coronaviruses reveals four major subclades, each corresponding to a genus: the alpha, beta, gamma, and delta coronaviruses. Among them, alpha and beta coronaviruses infect mammalian species, gamma coronaviruses infect avian species, and delta coronaviruses infect both mammalian and avian species (5). The novel virus now known as SARS-CoV-2 was identified as a beta coronavirus belonging to the B lineage based on phylogenetic analysis of a PCR amplicon fragment from five patients along with the full genomic sequence (6). This lineage also includes the Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (SARS-CoV-1) that caused the 2002–2003 outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in humans (6). (Note that these subclades are not to be confused with variants of concern [VOC] within SARS-CoV-2 labeled with Greek letters; i.e., the Delta variant of SARS-CoV-2 is still a beta coronavirus).Because viral structure and mechanisms of pathogenicity are highly conserved within the order, this phylogenetic analysis provided a basis for forming hypotheses about how the virus interacts with hosts, including which tissues, organs, and systems would be most susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Coronaviruses that infect humans (HCoVs) are not common, but prior research into other HCoVs such as SARS-CoV-1 and Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus (MERS-CoV), as well as other viruses infecting humans such as a variety of influenza virus species, established a strong foundation that accelerated the pace of SARS-CoV-2 research.Coronaviruses are large viruses that can be identified by their distinctive “crown-like” shape (Fig. 1). Their spherical virions are made from lipid envelopes ranging from 100 to 160 nm in which peplomers (protruding structures) of two to three spike (S) glycoproteins are anchored, creating the crown (7, 8). These spikes, which are critical both to viral pathogenesis and to the response by the host immune system, have been visualized using cryo-electron microscopy (9). Because they induce the human immune response, they are also the target of many proposed therapeutic agents (10, 11). Viral pathogenesis is typically broken down into three major components: entry, replication, and spread (12). However, in order to draw a more complete picture of pathogenesis, it is also necessary to examine how infection manifests clinically, identify systems-level interactions between the virus and the human body, and consider the possible effects of variation or evolutionary change on pathogenesis and virulence. Thus, clinical medicine and traditional biology are both important pieces of the puzzle of SARS-CoV-2 presentation and pathogenesis.FIG 1Structure of SARS-CoV-2 capsid and genome. (A) The genomic structure of coronaviruses is highly conserved and includes three main regions. Open reading frames (ORFs) 1a and 1b contain two polyproteins that encode the nonstructural proteins (nsp). The nsp include enzymes such as RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). The last third of the genome encodes structural proteins, including the spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins. Accessory genes can also be interspersed throughout the genome (13). (B) The physical structure of the coronavirus virion, including the components determined by the conserved structural proteins S, E, M, and N. This figure was adapted from “Human Coronavirus Structure,” by BioRender.com (2020), retrieved from https://app.biorender.com/biorender-templates.CORONAVIRUS STRUCTURE AND PATHOGENESISStructure of coronaviruses.Genome structure is highly conserved among coronaviruses, meaning that the relationship between the SARS-CoV-2 genome and its pathogenesis can be inferred from prior research in related viral species. The genomes of viruses in the Nidovirales order share several fundamental characteristics. They are nonsegmented, which means the viral genome is a single continuous strand of RNA, and are enveloped, which means that the genome and capsid are encased by a lipid bilayer. Coronaviruses have large positive-sense RNA (ssRNA+) genomes ranging from 27 to 32 kb in length (13, 14). The SARS-CoV-2 genome lies in the middle of this range at 29,903 bp (14). Genome organization is highly conserved within the order (13). There are three major genomic regions: one containing the replicase gene, one containing the genes encoding structural proteins, and interspersed accessory genes (13) (Fig. 1). The replicase gene comprises about two-thirds of the genome and consists of two open reading frames that are translated with ribosomal frameshifting (13). This polypeptide is then translated into 16 nonstructural proteins (nsp), except in gamma coronaviruses where nsp1 is absent, which form the replication machinery used to synthesize viral RNA (15). The remaining third of the genome encodes structural proteins, including the spike (S), membrane, envelope, and nucleocapsid proteins. Additional accessory genes are sometimes present between these two regions, depending on the species or strain. Much attention has been focused on the S protein, which is a critical structure involved in cell entry.Pathogenic mechanisms of coronaviruses.While it is possible that SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, like most viruses, enter cells through endocytosis, a process conserved among coronaviruses enables them to target cells for entry through fusion with the plasma membrane (16, 17). Cell entry proceeds in three steps: binding, cleavage, and fusion. First, the viral spike protein binds to a host cell via a recognized receptor or entry point. Coronaviruses can bind to a range of host receptors (18, 19), with binding conserved only at the genus level (5). Viruses in the beta coronavirus genus, to which SARS-CoV-2 belongs, are known to bind to the CEACAM1 protein, 5-N-acetyl-9-O-acetyl neuraminic acid, and to angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) (18). This recognition is driven by domains in the S1 subunit (20). SARS-CoV-2 has a high affinity for human ACE2, which is expressed in the vascular epithelium, other epithelial cells, and cardiovascular and renal tissues (21, 22), as well as many others (23). The binding process is guided by the molecular structure of the spike protein, which is structured in three segments: an ectodomain, a transmembrane anchor, and an intracellular tail (24). The ectodomain forms the crown-like structures on the viral membrane and contains two subdomains known as the S1 and S2 subunits (25). The S1 (N-terminal) domain forms the head of the crown and contains the receptor binding motif, and the S2 (C-terminal) domain forms the stalk that supports the head (25). The S1 subunit guides the binding of the virus to the host cell, and the S2 subunit guides the fusion process (24).After the binding of the S1 subunit to an entry point, the spike protein of coronaviruses is often cleaved at the S1/S2 boundary into the S1 and S2 subunits by a host protease (20, 26, 27). This proteolytic priming is important because it prepares the S protein for fusion (26, 27). The two subunits remain bound by van der Waals forces, with the S1 subunit stabilizing the S2 subunit throughout the membrane fusion process (20). Cleavage at a second site within S2 (S2′) activates S for fusion by inducing conformational changes (20). Similar to SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2 exhibits redundancy in which host proteases can cleave the S protein (28). Both transmembrane protease serine protease-2 (TMPRSS-2) and cathepsins B/L have been shown to mediate SARS-CoV-2 S protein proteolytic priming, and small-molecule inhibition of these enzymes fully inhibited viral entry in vitro (28, 29). Other proteases known to cleave the S1/S2 boundary in coronaviruses include TMPRSS-4, trypsin, furin, cathepsins, and human airway trypsin-like protease (HAT) (29).Unlike in SARS-CoV-1, a second cleavage site featuring a furin-like binding motif is also present near the S1/S2 boundary in SARS-CoV-2 (30). This site is found in HCoVs belonging to the A and C lineages of beta coronavirus, including MERS-CoV, but not in the other known members of the B lineage of beta coronavirus that contains SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 (30). It is associated with increased virulence in other viral species (30) and may facilitate membrane fusion of SARS-CoV-2 in the absence of other proteases that prime the S1/S2 site (31). However, given that proteases such as HAT are likely to be present in targets like the human airway, the extent to which this site has had a real-world effect on the spread of SARS-CoV-2 was initially unclear (31). Subsequent research has supported this site as an important contributor to pathogenesis: in vitro analyses have reported that it bolsters pathogenicity specifically in cell lines derived from human airway cells (Calu3 cell line) (32–34) and that furin inhibitors reduced pathogenic effects in VeroE6 cells (35).Electron microscopy suggests that in some coronaviruses, including SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV, a six-helix bundle separates the two subunits in the postfusion conformation, and the unusual length of this bundle facilitates membrane fusion through the release of additional energy (5). The viral membrane can then fuse with the endosomal membrane to release the viral genome into the host cytoplasm. Once the virus enters a host cell, the replicase gene is translated and assembled into the viral replicase complex. This complex then synthesizes the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) genome from the genomic ssRNA(+). The dsRNA genome is transcribed and replicated to create viral mRNAs and new ssRNA(+) genomes (13, 36). From there, the virus can spread into other cells. In SARS-CoV-2, the insertion of the furin-like binding site near the S1/S2 boundary is also thought to increase cell-cell adhesion, making it possible for the viral genome to spread directly from cell to cell rather than needing to propagate the virion itself (37). In this way, the genome of SARS-CoV-2 provides insight into the pathogenic behavior of the virus.Evidence also suggests that SARS-CoV-2 may take advantage of the specific structure of endothelial cells to enter the circulatory system. Endothelial cells are specialized epithelial cells (38) that form a barrier between the bloodstream and surrounding tissues. The endothelium facilitates nutrient, oxygen, and cellular exchange between the blood and vascularized tissues (39). The luminal (interior) surface of the endothelium is lined with glycocalyx, a network of both membrane-bound and soluble proteins and carbohydrates, primarily proteoglycans and glycoproteins (40, 41). The glycocalyx varies in thickness from 0.5 μm in the capillaries to 4.5 μm in the carotid arteries and forms a meshwork that localizes both endothelium- and plasma-derived signals to the inner vessel wall (40). Heparan sulfate is the dominant proteoglycan in the glycocalyx, representing 50 to 90% of glycocalyx proteoglycan content (42). The SARS-CoV-2 spike protein can bind directly to heparan sulfate, which serves in part as a scaffolding molecule to facilitate ACE2 binding and entry into endothelial cells (41). A heparan sulfate binding site has also been identified near the ACE2 binding site on the viral receptor binding domain (RBD), and modeling has suggested that heparan sulfate binding yields an open conformation that facilitates binding to ACE2 on the cell surface (41). Degrading or removing heparan sulfate was associated with decreased binding (41). Heparan sulfate may also interact with the S1/S2 proteolytic cleavage site and other binding sites to promote binding affinity (43). Notably, treatment with soluble heparan sulfate or even heparin (a commonly used anticoagulant and vasodilator that is similar in structure to heparan sulfate [44]) potently blocked spike protein binding and viral infection (41). This finding is particularly interesting because degradation of heparan sulfate in the glycocalyx has previously been identified as an important contributor to ARDS and sepsis (45), two common and severe outcomes of COVID-19, and suggests that heparan sulfate could be a target for pharmaceutical inhibition of cell entry by SARS-CoV-2 (46–50). Together, this evidence suggests that heparan sulfate can serve as an important adhesion molecule for SARS-CoV-2 cell entry. It may represent a therapeutic target but has not been pursued as much as other candidate targets (10).Immune evasion strategies.Research in other HCoVs provides some indication of how SARS-CoV-2 infection can proceed despite human immune defenses. Infecting the epithelium can help viruses such as SARS-CoV-1 bypass the physical barriers, such as mucus, that comprise the immune system’s first line of defense (51). Once the virus infiltrates host cells, it is adept at evading detection. CD163+ and CD68+ macrophage cells are especially crucial for the establishment of SARS-CoV-1 in the body (51). These cells most likely serve as viral reservoirs that help shield SARS-CoV-1 from the innate immune response. According to a study on the viral dissemination of SARS-CoV-1 in Chinese macaques, viral RNA could be detected in some monocytes throughout the process of differentiation into dendritic cells (51). This lack of active viral replication allows SARS-CoV-1 to escape the innate immune response because reduced levels of detectable viral RNA allow the virus to avoid both natural killer cells and Toll-like receptors (51). Even during replication, SARS-CoV-1 is able to mask its dsRNA genome from detection by the immune system. Although dsRNA is a pathogen-associated molecular pattern that would typically initiate a response from the innate immune system (52), in vitro analysis of nidoviruses including SARS-CoV-1 suggests that these viruses can induce the development of double-membrane vesicles that protect the dsRNA signature from being detected by the host immune system (53). This protective envelope can therefore insulate these coronaviruses from the innate immune system’s detection mechanism (54).HCoVs are also known to interfere with the host immune response, rather than just evade it. For example, the virulence of SARS-CoV-2 is increased by nsp1, which can suppress host gene expression by stalling mRNA translation and inducing endonucleolytic cleavage and mRNA degradation (55). SARS-CoV-1 also evades the immune response by interfering with type I interferon (IFN) induction signaling, which is a mechanism that leads to cellular resistance to viral infections. SARS-CoV-1 employs methods such as ubiquitination and degradation of RNA sensor adaptor molecules MAVS and TRAF3/6 (56). Also, MERS-CoV downregulates antigen presentation via major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and MHC class II, which leads to a reduction in T cell activation (56). These evasion mechanisms, in turn, may facilitate systemic infection. Coronaviruses such as SARS-CoV-1 are also able to evade the humoral immune response through other mechanisms, such as inhibiting certain cytokine pathways or downregulating antigen presentation by the cells (53).Host cell susceptibility.ACE2 and TMPRSS-2 have been identified as the primary entry portal and as a critical protease, respectively, in facilitating the entry of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 into a target cell (9, 28, 57–59). This finding has led to a hypothesized role for the expression of these molecules in determining which cells, tissues, and organs are most susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. ACE2 is expressed in numerous organs, such as the heart, kidney, and intestine, but it is most prominently expressed in alveolar epithelial cells; this pattern of expression is expected to contribute to the virus’ association with lung pathology (21, 60, 61) as well as that of SARS (62). A retrospective observational study reported indirect evidence that certain antineoplastic therapies, such as the chemotherapy drug gemcitabine, may reduce risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection in patients with cancer, possibly via decreased ACE2 expression (63). Additionally, the addition of the furin site insertion at the S1/S2 boundary means that SARS-CoV-2 does not require TMPRSS-2 when furin, a ubiquitously expressed endoprotease (64), is present, enabling cell-cell fusion independent of TMPRSS-2 availability (65).Clinical investigations of COVID-19 patients have detected SARS-CoV-2 transcripts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) (93% of specimens), sputum (72%), nasal swabs (63%), fibrobronchoscopy brush biopsy specimens (46%), pharyngeal swabs (32%), feces (29%), and blood (1%) (66). Two studies reported that SARS-CoV-2 could not be detected in urine specimens (66, 67); however, a third study identified four urine samples (out of 58) that were positive for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acids (68). Although respiratory failure remains the leading cause of death for COVID-19 patients (69), SARS-CoV-2 infection can damage many other organ systems including the heart (70), kidneys (71, 72), liver (73), and gastrointestinal tract (74, 75). As it becomes clear that SARS-CoV-2 infection can damage multiple organs, the scientific community is pursuing multiple avenues of investigation in order to build a consensus about how the virus affects the human body.CLINICAL PRESENTATION OF COVID-19SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis is closely linked with the clinical presentation of the COVID-19 disease. Reports have described diverse symptom profiles associated with COVID-19, with a great deal of variability both within and between institutions and regions. Definitions for nonsevere, severe, and critical COVID-19, along with treatment recommendations, are available from the World Health Organization living guidelines (76). A large study from Wuhan, China, conducted early in the pandemic identified fever and cough as the two most common symptoms that patients reported at hospital admission (77), while a retrospective study in China described the clinical presentations of patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 as including lower respiratory tract infection with fever, dry cough, and dyspnea (shortness of breath) (78). This study (78) noted that upper respiratory tract symptoms were less common, suggesting that the virus preferentially targets cells located in the lower respiratory tract. However, data from the New York City region (79, 80) showed variable rates of fever as a presenting symptom, suggesting that symptoms may not be consistent across individuals. For example, even within New York City, one study (79) identified low oxygen saturation (<90% without the use of supplemental oxygen or ventilation support) in 20.4% of patients upon presentation, with fever being present in 30.7%, while another study (80) reported cough (79.4%), fever (77.1%), and dyspnea (56.5%) as the most common presenting symptoms; both of these studies considered only hospitalized patients. A later study reported radiographic findings such as ground-glass opacity and bilateral patchy shadowing in the lungs of many hospitalized patients, with most COVID-19 patients having lymphocytopenia, or low levels of lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) (77). Patients may also experience loss of smell, myalgias (muscle aches), fatigue, or headache. Gastrointestinal symptoms can also present (81), and the CDC includes nausea and vomiting, as well as congestion and runny nose, on its list of symptoms consistent with COVID-19 (1). An analysis of an app-based survey of 500,000 individuals in the United States found that among those tested for SARS-CoV-2, a loss of taste or smell, fever, and a cough were significant predictors of a positive test result (82). It is important to note that in this study, the predictive value of symptoms may be underestimated if they are not specific to COVID-19. This underestimation could occur because the outcome measured was a positive, as opposed to a negative, COVID-19 test result, meaning an association would be more easily identified for symptoms that were primarily or exclusively found with COVID-19. At the time the surveys were conducted, due to limits in U.S. testing infrastructure, respondents typically needed to have some symptoms known to be specific to COVID-19 in order to qualify for testing. Widespread testing of asymptomatic individuals may therefore provide additional insight into the range of symptoms associated with COVID-19.Consistent with the wide range of symptoms observed and the pathogenic mechanisms described above, COVID-19 can affect a variety of systems within the body in addition to causing respiratory problems (83). For example, COVID-19 can lead to acute kidney injury, especially in patients with severe respiratory symptoms or certain preexisting conditions (84). Some patients are at risk for collapsing glomerulopathy (85).COVID-19 can also cause neurological complications (86–88), potentially including stroke, seizures, or meningitis (89, 90). One study on autopsy samples suggested that SARS-CoV-2 may be able to enter the central nervous system via the neural-mucosal interface (91). However, a study of 41 autopsied brains (92) found no evidence that the virus can actually infect the central nervous system. Although there was viral RNA in some brain samples, it was found in only very small amounts, and no viral protein was found. The RNA may have been in the blood vessels or blood components and not in the brain tissue itself. Instead, the neuropathological effects of COVID-19 are more likely to be caused indirectly by hypoxia, coagulopathy, or inflammatory processes rather than by infection in the brain (92). COVID-19 has been associated with an increased incidence of large vessel stroke, particularly in patients under the age of 40 (93), and other thrombotic events including pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis (94). The mechanism behind these complications has been suggested to be related to coagulopathy, with reports indicating the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (95) and elevated levels of d-dimer and fibrinogen degradation products in deceased patients (96). Other viral infections have been associated with coagulation defects and changes to the coagulation cascade; notably, SARS was also found to lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation and was associated with both pulmonary embolism and deep vein thrombosis (97). The mechanism behind these insults has been suggested to be related to inflammation-induced increases in the von Willebrand factor clotting protein, leading to a procoagulative state (97). Abnormal clotting (thromboinflammation or coagulopathy) has been increasingly discussed recently as a possible key mechanism in many cases of severe COVID-19 and may be associated with the high d-dimer levels often observed in severe cases (98–100). This excessive clotting in lung capillaries has been suggested to be related to a dysregulated activation of the complement system, part of the innate immune system (101, 102).Finally, concerns have been raised about long-term sequelae of COVID-19. Some COVID-19 patients have reported that various somatic symptoms (such as shortness of breath, fatigue, and chest pain) and psychological symptoms (depression, anxiety, or mild cognitive impairment) can last for months after infection (103). Such long-term effects occur in both adults (104) and children (105). Sustained symptoms affecting a variety of biological systems have been reported across many studies (e.g., references 103, 106, and 107). The phenomenon of “long COVID” is not fully understood, although various possible explanations have been proposed, including damage caused by immune response to infection as well as by the infection itself, in addition to negative consequences of the experience of lengthy illness and hospitalization. However, a lack of consistency among definitions used in different studies makes it difficult to develop precise definitions or identify specific symptoms associated with long-term effects of COVID-19 (108, 109). Patient and family support groups for “long haulers” have been formed online, and patient-driven efforts to collect data about postacute COVID-19 provide valuable sources of information (e.g., reference 106). The specific relationship between viral pathogenesis and these reported sequelae remains to be uncovered, however.Pediatric presentation.The presentation of COVID-19 infection can vary greatly among pediatric patients and, in some cases, manifests in distinct ways from COVID-19 in adults. Evidence suggests that children and adolescents tend to have mostly asymptomatic infections and that those who are symptomatic typically exhibit mild illness (110–113). One review examined symptoms reported in 17 studies of children infected with COVID-19 during the early months of the COVID-19 epidemic in China and one study from Singapore (114). In the more than a thousand cases described, the most common reports were for mild symptoms such as fever, dry cough, fatigue, nasal congestion, and/or runny nose, while three children were reported to be asymptomatic. Severe lower respiratory infection was described in only one of the pediatric cases reviewed. Gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting or diarrhea were occasionally reported. Radiologic findings were not always reported in the case studies reviewed, but when they were mentioned, they included bronchial thickening, ground-glass opacities, and/or inflammatory lesions (114). Neurological symptoms have also been reported (115).These analyses indicate that most pediatric cases of COVID-19 are not severe. Indeed, it is estimated that less than 1% of pediatric cases result in critical illness (112, 116), although reporting suggests that pediatric hospitalizations may be greater with the emergence of the Delta variant of concern (VOC) (117–119). Serious complications and, in relatively rare cases, deaths have occurred (120). Of particular interest, children have occasionally experienced a serious inflammatory syndrome, multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C), following COVID-19 infection (121). This syndrome is similar in some respects to Kawasaki disease, including Kawasaki disease shock syndrome (122–124), and is thought to be a distinct clinical manifestation of SARS-CoV-2 due to its distinct cytokine profile and the presence of burr cells in peripheral blood smears (125, 126). MIS-C has been associated with heart failure in some cases (127). A small number of case studies have identified presentations similar to MIS-C in adults associated with SARS-CoV-2 (128–131). However, not all cases of severe COVID-19 in children are characterizable as MIS-C. A recent study (132) described demographic and clinical variables associated with MIS-C in comparison with non-MIS-C severe acute COVID-19 in young people in the United States. Efforts to characterize long-term sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection in children face the same challenges as in adults, but long-term effects remain a concern in pediatric patients (105, 133, 134), although some early studies have suggested that they may be less of a concern than in adults (135–137). Research is ongoing into the differences between the pediatric and adult immune responses to SARS-CoV-2, and future research may shed light on the factors that lead to MIS-C; it is also unknown whether the relative advantages of children against severe COVID-19 will remain in the face of current and future variants (138).Cytokine release syndrome.The inflammatory response was identified early on as a potential driver of COVID-19 outcomes due to existing research in SARS and emerging research in COVID-19. While too low of an inflammatory response is a concern because it will fail to eliminate the immune threat (139), excessive proinflammatory cytokine activity can cascade (140) and cause cell damage, among other problems (141). A dysregulated immune response can cause significant damage to the host (142–144), including pathogenesis associated with sepsis. Sepsis, which can lead to multiorgan failure and death (145, 146), is traditionally associated with bacterial infections. However, sepsis associated with viral infections may be underidentified (147), and sepsis has emerged as a major concern associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection (148). Hyperactivity of the proinflammatory response due to lung infection is commonly associated with acute lung injury and more rarely with the more severe manifestation, ARDS, which can arise from pneumonia, SARS, and COVID-19 (140, 145). Damage to the capillary endothelium can cause leaks that disrupt the balance between proinflammatory cytokines and their regulators (149), and heightened inflammation in the lungs can also serve as a source for systemic inflammation, or sepsis, and potentially multiorgan failure (145). The shift from local to systemic inflammation is a phenomenon often referred to broadly as a cytokine storm (145) or, more precisely, as cytokine release syndrome (150).Cytokine dysregulation is therefore a significant concern in the context of COVID-19. In addition to the known role of cytokines in ARDS and lung infection more broadly, immunohistological analysis at autopsy of deceased SARS patients revealed that ACE2-expressing cells that were infected by SARS-CoV-1 showed elevated expression of the cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) (151). Similarly, the introduction of the S protein from SARS-CoV-1 to mouse macrophages was found to increase production of IL-6 and TNF-α (152). For SARS-CoV-2 infection leading to COVID-19, early reports described a cytokine storm syndrome-like response in patients with particularly severe infections (60, 153, 154). Sepsis has been identified as a major contributor to COVID-19-related death. Among patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, 112 out of 191 (59%) developed sepsis, including all 54 of the nonsurvivors (78).While IL-6 is sometimes used as a biomarker for cytokine storm activity in sepsis (145), the relationship between cytokine profiles and the risks associated with sepsis may be more complex. One study of patients with and at risk for ARDS, specifically those who were intubated for medical ventilation, found that shortly after the onset of ARDS, anti-inflammatory cytokine concentration in BALF increased relative to the concentration of proinflammatory cytokines (149). The results suggest that an increase in proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 may signal the onset of ARDS, but recovery depends on an increased anti-inflammatory response (149). However, patients with severe ARDS were excluded from this study. Another analysis of over 1,400 pneumonia patients in the United States reported that IL-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and IL-10 were elevated at intake in patients who developed severe sepsis and/or ultimately died (155). However, unlike the study analyzing pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines in ARDS patients (149), this study reported that unbalanced pro/anti-inflammatory cytokine profiles were rare. This discrepancy could be related to the fact that the sepsis study measured only three cytokines. Although IL-6 has traditionally been considered proinflammatory, its pleiotropic effects via both classical and trans signaling allow it to play an integral role in both the inflammatory and anti-inflammatory responses (156), leading it to be associated with both healthy and pathological responses to viral threat (157). While the cytokine levels observed in COVID-19 patients fall outside the normal range, they are not as high as typically found in patients with ARDS (158). Regardless of variation in the anti-inflammatory response, prior work has therefore made it clear that pulmonary infection and injury are associated with systemic inflammation and with sepsis. Inflammation has received significant interest in regard to both the pathology of COVID-19 as well as potential avenues for treatment, as the relationship between the cytokine storm and the pathophysiology of COVID-19 has led to the suggestion that a number of immunomodulatory pharmaceutical interventions could hold therapeutic value for the treatment of COVID-19 (10, 159).INSIGHTS FROM SYSTEMS BIOLOGYSystems biology provides a cross-disciplinary analytical paradigm through which the host response to an infection can be analyzed. This field integrates the “omics” fields (genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, etc.) using bioinformatics and other computational approaches. Over the last decade, systems biology approaches have been used widely to study the pathogenesis of diverse types of life-threatening acute and chronic infectious diseases (160). Omics-based studies have also provided meaningful information regarding host immune responses and surrogate protein markers in several viral, bacterial, and protozoan infections (161). Though the complex pathogenesis and clinical manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection are not yet fully understood, omics technologies offer the opportunity for discovery-driven analysis of biological changes associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection.Transcriptomics.Through transcriptomic analysis, the effect of a viral infection on gene expression can be assessed. Transcriptomic analyses, whether in vivo or in situ, can potentially reveal insights into viral pathogenesis by elucidating the host response to the virus. For example, infection by some viruses, including by the coronaviruses SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, and MERS-CoV, is associated with the upregulation of ACE2 in human embryonic kidney cells and human airway epithelial cells (60). This finding suggests that SARS-CoV-2 facilitates the positive regulation of its own transmission between host cells (60). The host immune response also likely plays a key role in mediating infection-associated pathologies. Therefore, transcriptomics is one critical tool for characterizing the host response in order to gain insight into viral pathogenesis. For this reason, the application of omics technologies to the process of characterizing the host response is expected to provide novel insights into how hosts respond to SARS-CoV-2 infection and how these changes might influence COVID-19 outcomes.Several studies have examined the cellular response to SARS-CoV-2 in vitro in comparison to other viruses. One study (162) compared the transcriptional responses of three human cell lines to SARS-CoV-2 and to other respiratory viruses, including MERS-CoV, SARS-CoV-1, Human parainfluenza virus 3, Respiratory syncytial virus, and Influenza A virus. The transcriptional response differed between the SARS-CoV-1-infected cells and the cells infected by other viruses, with changes in differential expression specific to each infection type. Where SARS-CoV-2 was able to replicate efficiently, differential expression analysis revealed that the transcriptional response was significantly different from the response to all of the other viruses tested. A unique proinflammatory cytokine signature associated with SARS-CoV-2 was present in cells exposed to both high and low doses of the virus, with the cytokines IL-6 and IL1RA uniquely elevated in response to SARS-CoV-2 relative to other viruses. However, one cell line showed significant IFN-I or IFN-III expression when exposed to high, but not low, doses of SARS-CoV-2, suggesting that IFN induction is dependent on the extent of exposure. These results suggest that SARS-CoV-2 induces a limited antiviral state with low IFN-I or IFN-III expression and a moderate IFN-stimulated gene response, in contrast to other viruses. Other respiratory viruses have been found to encode antagonists to the IFN response (163, 164), including SARS-CoV-1 (165) and MERS-CoV (166).The analysis of SARS-CoV-2 suggested that this transcriptional state was specific to cells expressing ACE2, as it was not observed in cells lacking expression of this protein except with ACE2 supplementation and at a very high (10-fold increase) level of SARS-CoV-2 exposure (162). In another study, direct stimulation with inflammatory cytokines such as type I interferons (e.g., IFN-β) was also associated with the upregulation of ACE2 in human bronchial epithelial cells, with treated groups showing 4-fold-higher ACE2 expression than control groups at 18 h posttreatment (167). This hypothesis was further supported by studies showing that several nsp in SARS-CoV-2 suppress interferon activity (168) and that the SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b gene suppresses IFNB1 promoter activity (IFN-I induction) more efficiently than the SARS-CoV-1 ORF3b gene (169). Taken together, these findings suggest that a unique cytokine profile is associated with the response to the SARS-CoV-2 virus and that this response differs depending on the magnitude of exposure.Susceptibility and IFN induction may also vary by cell type. Using poly(A) bulk transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) to analyze dynamic transcriptional responses to SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 revealed negligible susceptibility of cells from the H1299 line (<0.08 viral read percentage of total reads) compared to those from the Caco-2 and Calu-3 lines (>10% of viral reads) (170). This finding suggests that the risk of infection varies among cell types and that cell type could influence which hosts are more or less susceptible. Based on visual inspection of microscopy images alongside transcriptional profiling, the authors also showed distinct responses among the host cell lines evaluated (170). In contrast to Caco-2, Calu-3 cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 showed signs of impaired growth and cell death at 24 h postinfection, as well as moderate IFN induction with a strong upregulation of IFN-stimulated genes. Interestingly, the results were similar to those reported in Calu-3 cells exposed to much higher levels of SARS-CoV-2 (162), as described above. This finding suggests that IFN induction in Calu-3 cells is not dependent on the level of exposure, in contrast to A549-ACE2 cells. The discrepancy could be explained by the observations that Calu-3 cells are highly susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 and show rapid viral replication (29), whereas A549 cells are incompatible with SARS-CoV-2 infection (171). This discrepancy raises the concern that in vitro models may vary in their similarity to the human response, underscoring the importance of follow-up studies in additional models.As a result, transcriptional analysis of patient tissue is an important application of omics technology to understanding COVID-19. Several studies have collected blood samples from COVID-19 patients and analyzed them using RNA-seq (172–177). Analyzing gene expression in the blood is valuable to understanding host-pathogen interactions because of the potential to identify alterations associated with the immune response and to gain insights into inflammation, among other potential insights (172). One study compared gene expression in 39 COVID-19 inpatients admitted with community-acquired pneumonia to that of control donors using whole-blood-cell transcriptomes (172). They also evaluated the effect of mild versus severe disease. A greater number of differentially expressed genes were found in severe patients compared to controls than in mild patients compared to controls. They also identified that the transcriptional profiles clustered into five groups and that the groups could not be explained by disease severity. Most severe cases fell into two clusters associated with increased inflammation and granulocyte and neutrophil activation. The presence of these clusters suggests the possibility that personalized medicine could be useful in the treatment of COVID-19 (172). Longitudinal analysis of granulocytes from patients with mild versus severe COVID-19 revealed that granulocyte activation-associated factors differentiated the disease states, with greater numbers of differentially expressed genes early in the disease course (172). This study therefore revealed distinct patterns associated with COVID-19 and identified genes and pathways associated with each cluster.Many other studies have also identified transcriptomic signatures associated with the immune response and inflammation. Other studies have profiled the transcriptome of BALF (174) and the nasopharynx (178). One study used single-cell transcriptomics techniques to investigate cell types including brain and choroid plexus cells compared to healthy controls and controls with influenza; among other signals of neuroinflammation, this study reported cortical T cells only in COVID-19 patients (179). Transcriptomic analysis can thus provide insight into the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 and may also be useful in identifying candidate therapeutics (172).Proteomics.Proteomics analysis offers an opportunity to characterize the response to a pathogen at a level above transcriptomics. Especially early on, this primarily involved evaluating the effect of the virus on cell lines. One early proteomics study investigated changes associated with in vitro SARS-CoV-2 infection using Caco-2 cells (180). This study reported that SARS-CoV-2 induced alterations in multiple vital physiological pathways, including translation, splicing, carbon metabolism, and nucleic acid metabolism in the host cells. Another area of interest is whether SARS-CoV-2 is likely to induce changes similar to those by other HCoVs. For example, because of the high level of sequence homology between SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1, it has been hypothesized that sera from convalescent SARS-CoV-1 patients might show some efficacy in cross-neutralizing SARS-CoV-2-S-driven entry (28). However, despite the high level of sequence homology, certain protein structures might be immunologically distinct, which would be likely to prohibit effective cross-neutralization across different SARS species (181). Consequently, proteomic analyses of SARS-CoV-1 might also provide some essential information regarding the new pathogen (182, 183).Proteomics research has been able to get ahead of the timeline for development of omics-level big data sets specific to SARS-CoV-2 by adopting a comparative bioinformatics approach. Data hubs such as UniProt (184), NCBI Genome Database (185), The Immune Epitope Database and Analysis Resource (186), and The Virus Pathogen Resource (187) contain a wealth of data from studies in other viruses and even HCoVs. Such databases facilitate the systems-level reconstruction of protein-protein interaction networks, providing opportunities to generate hypotheses about the mechanism of action of SARS-CoV-2 and identify potential drug targets. In an initial study (188), 26 of the 29 SARS-CoV-2 proteins were cloned and expressed in HEK293T kidney cells, allowing for the identification of 332 high-confidence human proteins interacting with them. Notably, this study suggested that SARS-CoV-2 interacts with innate immunity pathways. Ranking pathogens by the similarity between their interactomes and that of SARS-CoV-2 suggested West Nile virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Human papillomavirus infections as the top three hits. The fact that the host-pathogen interactome of the bacterium Mycobacterium tuberculosis was found to be similar to that of SARS-CoV-2 suggests that changes related to lung pathology might comprise a significant contributor to these expression profiles. Additionally, it was suggested that the envelope protein, E, could disrupt host bromodomain-containing proteins, i.e., BRD2 and BRD4, which bind to histones, and the spike protein could likely intervene in viral fusion by modulating the GOLGA7-ZDHHC5 acyl-transferase complex to increase palmitoylation, which is a posttranslational modification that affects how proteins interact with membranes (189).An example of an application of this in silico approach comes from another study (190), which used patient-derived peripheral blood mononuclear cells to identify 251 host proteins targeted by SARS-CoV-2. This study also reported that more than 200 host proteins were disrupted following infection. In particular, a network analysis showed that nsp9 and nsp10 interacted with NF-κB-repressing factor, which encodes a transcriptional repressor that mediates repression of genes responsive to nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells. These genes are important to pro-, and potentially also anti-, inflammatory signaling (191). This finding could explain the exacerbation of the immune response that shapes the pathology and the high cytokine levels characteristic of COVID-19, possibly due to the chemotaxis of neutrophils mediated by IL-8 and IL-6. Finally, it was suggested (192) that the E protein of both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 has a conserved Bcl-2 homology 3-like motif, which could inhibit antiapoptosis proteins, e.g., BCL2, and trigger the apoptosis of T cells. Several compounds are known to disrupt the host-pathogen protein interactome, largely through the inhibition of host proteins. Therefore, this research identifies candidate targets for intervention and suggests that drugs modulating protein-level interactions between virus and host could be relevant to treating COVID-19.As with other approaches, analyzing the patterns found in infected versus healthy human subjects is also important. COVID-19 infection has been associated with quantitative changes in transcripts, proteins, metabolites, and lipids in patient blood samples (193). One longitudinal study (194) compared COVID-19 patients to symptomatic controls who were PCR negative for SARS-CoV-2. The longitudinal nature of this study allowed it to account for differences in the scale of inter- versus intraindividual changes. At the time of first sampling, common functions of proteins upregulated in COVID-19 patients relative to controls were related to immune system mediation, coagulation, lipid homeostasis, and protease inhibition. They compared these data to the patient-specific time points associated with the highest levels of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and found that the actin-binding protein gelsolin, which is involved in recovery from disease, showed the steepest decline between those two time points. Immunoglobulins comprised the only proteins that were significantly different between the COVID-19 and control patients at both of these time points. The most significantly downregulated proteins between these time points were related to inflammation, while the most significantly upregulated proteins were immunoglobulins. Proteins related to coagulation also increased between the two time points. The selection of a symptomatic control cohort rather than healthy comparisons also suggests that the results are more likely to highlight the response to SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 specifically, rather than to disease more broadly. This study also compared the disease course in patients who ultimately survived to the course in those who died and found that ITIH4, a protein associated with the inflammatory response to trauma, may be a biomarker useful to identify patients at risk of death. Thus, these results indicate the value of studying patients in a longitudinal manner over the disease course. By revealing which genes are perturbed during SARS-CoV-2 infection, proteomics-based analyses can thus provide novel insights into host-virus interaction and serve to generate new avenues of investigation for therapeutics.VIRAL VIRULENCELike that of SARS-CoV-1, the entry of SARS-CoV-2 into host cells is mediated by interactions between the viral spike glycoprotein, S, and human ACE2 (hACE2) (20, 28, 195–200). Differences in how the S proteins of the two viruses interact with hACE2 could partially account for the increased transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2. Studies have reported conflicting binding constants for the S-hACE2 interaction, though they have agreed that the SARS-CoV-2 S protein binds with equal affinity as, if not greater affinity than, the SARS-CoV-1 S protein does (9, 20, 198). The C-terminal domain of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein in particular was identified as the key region of the virus that interacts with hACE2, and the crystal structure of the C-terminal domain of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein in complex with hACE2 reveals stronger interaction and a higher affinity for receptor binding than that of SARS-CoV-1 (199). Among the 14 key binding residues identified in the SARS-CoV-1 S protein, eight are conserved in SARS-CoV-2, and the remaining six are semiconservatively substituted, potentially explaining variation in binding affinity (20, 198). Studies of crystal structure have shown that the RBD of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein, like that of other coronaviruses, undergoes stochastic hinge-like movement that flips it from a “closed” conformation, in which key binding residues are hidden at the interface between protomers, to an “open” one (9, 20). Spike proteins cleaved at the furin-like binding site are substantially more likely to take an open conformation (66%) than those that are uncleaved (17%) (201). Because the RBD plays such a critical role in viral entry, blocking its interaction with ACE2 could represent a promising therapeutic approach. Nevertheless, despite the high structural homology between the SARS-CoV-2 RBD and that of SARS-CoV-1, monoclonal antibodies targeting SARS-CoV-1 RBD failed to bind to SARS-CoV-2-RBD (9). However, in early research, sera from convalescent SARS patients were found to inhibit SARS-CoV-2 viral entry in vitro, albeit with lower efficiency than it inhibited SARS-CoV-1 (28).Comparative genomic analysis reveals that several regions of the coronavirus genome are likely critical to virulence. The S1 domain of the spike protein, which contains the receptor binding motif, evolves more rapidly than the S2 domain (18, 19). However, even within the S1 domain, some regions are more conserved than others, with the receptors in S1’s N-terminal domain (S1-NTD) evolving more rapidly than those in its C-terminal domain (S1-CTD) (19). Both S1-NTD and S1-CTD are involved in receptor binding and can function as RBDs to bind proteins and sugars (18), but RBDs in the S1-NTD typically bind to sugars, while those in the S1-CTD recognize protein receptors (5). Viral receptors show higher affinity with protein receptors than sugar receptors (5), which suggests that positive selection on or relaxed conservation of the S1-NTD might reduce the risk of a deleterious mutation that would prevent binding. The SARS-CoV-2 S protein also contains an RRAR furin recognition site at the S1/S2 junction (9, 20), setting it apart from both bat coronavirus RaTG13, with which it shares 96% genome sequence identity, and SARS-CoV-1 (202). Such furin cleavage sites are commonly found in highly virulent influenza viruses (203, 204). The furin recognition site at the S1/S2 junction is likely to increase pathogenicity via destabilization of the spike protein during fusion to ACE2 and the facilitation of cell-cell adhesion (9, 20, 37, 201, 203, 204). These factors may influence the virulence of SARS-CoV-2 relative to other beta coronaviruses. Additionally, a major concern has been the emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants with increased virulence. The extent to which evolution within SARS-CoV-2 may affect pathogenesis is reviewed below.MOLECULAR SIGNATURES, TRANSMISSION, AND VARIANTS OF CONCERNGenetic variation in SARS-CoV-2 has been used to elucidate patterns over time and space. Many mutations are neutral in their effect and can be used to trace transmission patterns. Such signatures within SARS-CoV-2 have provided insights during outbreak investigations (205–207). Similar mutations observed in several patients may indicate that the patients belong to the same transmission group. The tracking of SARS-CoV-2 mutations is recognized as an essential tool for controlling future outbreaks and tracing the path of the spread of SARS-CoV-2. In the first months of the pandemic in early 2020, early genomic surveillance efforts in Guangdong, China, revealed that local transmission rates were low and that most cases arising in the province were imported (208). Since then, efforts have varied widely among countries: for example, the United Kingdom has coordinated a national database of viral genomes (209), but efforts to collect this type of data in the United States have been more limited (210). Studies have applied phylogenetic analyses of viral genomes to determine the source of local COVID-19 outbreaks in Connecticut (USA) (211), the New York City area (USA) (212), and Iceland (213). There has been an ongoing effort to collect SARS-CoV-2 genomes throughout the COVID-19 outbreak, and as of summer 2021, millions of genome sequences have been collected from patients. The sequencing data can be found at GISAID (214), NCBI (215), and the COVID-19 data portal (216).Ongoing evolution can be observed in genomic data collected through molecular surveillance efforts. In some cases, mutations can produce functional changes that can impact pathogenesis. One early example is the spike protein mutation D614G, which appeared in March 2020 and became dominant worldwide by the end of May 2020 (217, 218). This variant was associated with increased infectivity and increased viral load but not with more severe disease outcomes (217, 219). This increased virulence is likely achieved by altering the conformation of the S1 domain to facilitate binding to ACE2 (219). Similarly, the N439K mutation within the RBD of the spike protein is likely associated with increased transmissibility and enhanced binding affinity for hACE2, although it is also not thought to affect disease outcomes (220). In contrast, a mutation in ORF8 that was identified in Singapore in the early months of 2020 was associated with cases of COVID-19 that were less likely to require treatment with supplemental oxygen (221), and a deletion surrounding the furin site insertion at the S1/S2 boundary has been identified only rarely in clinical settings (222), suggesting that these mutations may disadvantage viral pathogenesis in human hosts. Thus, mutations have been associated with both virological and clinical differences in pathogenesis.Several VOCs have also been identified and designated through molecular surveillance efforts (223). The Alpha variant (lineage B.1.1.7) was first observed in the United Kingdom in October 2020 before it quickly spread around the world (224). Other variants meriting further investigation have also been identified, including the Beta variant (B.1.351 lineage) first identified in South Africa and the Gamma variant (P.1 lineage) initially associated with outbreaks in Brazil. These lineages share independently acquired mutations that may affect pathogenicity (225–229). For example, they are all associated with a greater binding affinity for hACE2 than that of the wild-type variant (227, 230, 231), but they were not found to have more efficient cell entry than the wild-type virus (232). A fourth VOC, the Delta variant (B.1.617.2 and AY.1, AY.2, and AY.3 lineages), was identified in India in late 2020 (233). Some of the mutations associated with this lineage may alter fusogenicity and enhance furin cleavage, among other effects associated with increased pathogenicity (234). The changes in these VOC demonstrate how ongoing evolution in SARS-CoV-2 can drive changes in how the virus interacts with host cells.QUANTIFYING VIRAL PRESENCEAssessing whether a virus is present in a sample is a more complex task than it initially seems. Many diagnostic tests rely on real-time PCR (RT-PCR) to test for the presence versus absence of a virus (235). They may report the cycle threshold (CT) indicating the number of doubling cycles required for the target (in this case, SARS-CoV-2) to become detectable. A lower CT therefore corresponds to a higher viral load. The CT that corresponds to a positive can vary widely but is often around 35. This information is sufficient to answer many questions, since an amplicon must be present in order to be duplicated in RT-PCR. For example, if a patient is presenting with COVID-19 symptoms, a positive RT-PCR test can confirm the diagnosis.However, RT-PCR analysis alone cannot provide the information needed to determine whether a virus is present at sufficient levels to be infectious (236). Some studies have therefore taken the additional step of cultivating samples in vitro in order to observe whether cells become infected with SARS-CoV-2. One study collected upper respiratory tract samples from COVID-19 patients, analyzed them with RT-PCR to determine the cycle threshold, and then attempted to cultivate the SARS-CoV-2 virus in VeroE6 cells (236). This study found that out of 246 samples, fewer than half (103 samples) produced a positive culture. Moreover, at a CT of 35, only 5 out of 60 samples grew in vitro. Therefore, the RT-PCR-confirmed presence of SARS-CoV-2 in a sample does not necessarily indicate that the virus is present at a high-enough concentration to grow and/or spread.MECHANISMS OF TRANSMISSIONWhen a human host is infected with a virus and is contagious, person-to-person viral transmission can occur through several possible mechanisms. When a contagious individual sneezes, coughs, or exhales, they produce respiratory droplets that can contain a large number of viral particles (237). Viral particles can enter the body of a new host when they then come in contact with the oral, nasal, eye, or other mucus membranes (237). The primary terms typically used to discuss the transmission of viruses via respiratory droplets are droplet, aerosol, and contact transmission (238). The distinction between droplet and aerosol transmission is typically anchored on whether a particle containing the virus is larger or smaller than 5 μm (239, 240). Droplet transmission typically refers to contact with large droplets that fall quickly to the ground at close range, such as breathing in droplets produced by a sneeze (237, 239). Aerosol transmission typically refers to much smaller particles (less than 5 μm) produced by sneezing, coughing, or exhaling (237, 238) that can remain suspended over a longer period of time and potentially be moved by air currents (237). It is also possible that viral particles deposited on surfaces via large respiratory droplets could later be aerosolized (237). The transmission of viral particles that have settled on a surface is typically referred to as contact or fomite transmission (237, 241). Any respiratory droplets that settle on a surface could contribute to fomite transmission (237). Droplet and contact transmission are both well-accepted modes of transmission for many viruses associated with common human illnesses, including influenza virus and rhinovirus (237).The extent to which aerosol transmission contributes to the spread of respiratory viruses is more widely debated. In influenza A, for example, viral particles can be detected in aerosols produced by infected individuals, but it is not clear to what extent these particles drive the spread of influenza A virus infection (237, 238, 242–244). Regardless of its role in the spread of influenza A, however, aerosol transmission likely played a role in outbreaks such as the 1918 Spanish influenza (H1N1) and 2009 “swine flu” (pH1N1) (244). All three of these mechanisms have been identified as possible contributors to the transmission of HCoVs (237), including the highly pathogenic coronaviruses SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV (245, 246). Transmission of SARS-CoV-1 is thought to proceed primarily through droplet transmission, but aerosol transmission is also considered possible (237, 247, 248), and fomite transmission may have also played an important role in some outbreaks (249). Similarly, the primary mechanism of MERS transmission is thought to be droplets because interindividual transmission appears to be associated with close interpersonal contact (e.g., household or health care settings), but aerosolized particles of the MERS virus have been reported to persist much more robustly than influenza A virus under a range of environmental conditions (250, 251). However, few of these analyses have sought to grow positive samples in culture and thus to confirm their potential to infect new hosts.Contact, droplet, and aerosol transmission are therefore all worth evaluating when considering possible modes of transmission for a respiratory virus like SARS-CoV-2. The stability of the SARS-CoV-2 virus both in aerosols and on a variety of surfaces was found to be similar to that of SARS-CoV-1 (252). Droplet-based and contact transmission were initially put forward as the greatest concern for the spread of SARS-CoV-2 (253), with droplet transmission considered the dominant mechanism driving the spread of the virus (254) because the risk of fomite transmission under real-world conditions is likely to be substantially lower than the conditions used for experimental analyses (255). The COVID-19 pandemic has, however, exposed significant discrepancies in how terms pertaining to airborne viral particles are interpreted in different contexts (239). The 5-μm distinction between “droplets” and “aerosols” is typical in the biological literature but is likely an artifact of historical science rather than a meaningful boundary in biology or physics (240). Additionally, various ambient conditions such as airflow can influence how particles of different sizes fall or spread (239). Despite initial skepticism about airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 through small particles (240), evidence now suggests that small particles can contribute to SARS-CoV-2 transmission (252, 256–258). For example, one early study detected SARS-CoV-2 viral particles in air samples taken from hospitals treating COVID-19 patients, although the infectivity of these samples was not assessed (259). Subsequently, other studies have been successful in growing SARS-CoV-2 in culture with samples taken from the air (260, 261) while others have not (262, 263) (see reference 264 for a systematic review of available findings as of July 2020). The fact that viable SARS-CoV-2 may exist in aerosolized particles calls into question whether some axioms of COVID-19 prevention, such as 2-m social distancing, are sufficient (240, 260, 265).Symptoms and viral spread.Other aspects of pathogenesis are also important to understanding how the virus spreads, especially the relationship between symptoms, viral shedding, and contagiousness. Symptoms associated with reported cases of COVID-19 range from mild to severe (1), but some individuals who contract COVID-19 remain asymptomatic throughout the duration of the illness (266). The incubation period, or the time period between exposure and the onset of symptoms, has been estimated at 5 to 8 days, with means of 4.91 (95% confidence interval [CI], 4.35 to 5.69) and 7.54 (95% CI, 6.76 to 8.56) reported in two different Asian cities and a median of 5 (interquartile range [IQR], 1 to 6) reported in a small number of patients in a Beijing hospital (267, 268).However, the exact relationship between contagiousness and viral shedding remains unclear. Estimates suggest that viral shedding can, in some cases, begin as early as 12.3 days (95% CI, 5.9 to 17.0) before the onset of symptoms, although this was found to be very rare, with fewer than 0.1% of transmission events occurring 7 or more days before symptom onset (269). Transmissibility appeared to peak around the onset of symptoms (95% CI, −0.9 to 0.9 days), and only 44% (95% CI, 30 to 57%) of transmission events were estimated to occur from presymptomatic contacts (269). A peak in viral load corresponding to the onset of symptoms was also confirmed by another study (236). As these trends became apparent, concerns arose due to the potential for individuals who did not yet show symptoms to transmit the virus (270). Recovered individuals may also be able to transmit the virus after their symptoms cease. A study of the communicable period based on 24 individuals who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 prior to or without developing symptoms estimated that individuals may be contagious for 1 to 21 days, but the authors note that this estimate may be low (266). In an early study, viral nucleic acids were reported to remain at observable levels in the respiratory specimens of recovering hospitalized COVID-19 patients for a median of 20 days and with a maximum observed duration through 37 days, when data collection for the study ceased (78).As more estimates of the duration of viral shedding were released, they converged around approximately 3 weeks from first positive PCR test and/or onset of symptoms (which, if present, are usually identified within 3 days of the initial PCR test). For example, in some studies, viral shedding was reported for up to 28 days following symptom onset (271) and for 1 to 24 days from first positive PCR test, with a median of 12 days (67). On the other hand, almost 70% of patients were reported to still have symptoms at the time that viral shedding ceased, although all symptoms reduced in prevalence between onset and cessation of viral shedding (272). The median time that elapsed between the onset of symptoms and cessation of viral RNA shedding was 23 days, and that between first positive PCR test and cessation of viral shedding was 17 days (272). The fact that this study reported symptom onset to predate the first positive PCR test by an average of 3 days, however, suggests that there may be some methodological differences between it and related studies. Furthermore, an analysis of residents of a nursing home with a known SARS-CoV-2 case measured similar viral loads in residents who were asymptomatic regardless of whether they later developed symptoms, and the load in the asymptomatic residents was comparable to that of residents who displayed either typical or atypical symptoms (273). Taken together, these results suggest that the presence or absence of symptoms is not a reliable predictor of viral shedding or of SARS-CoV-2 status (e.g., reference 274). However, it should be noted that viral shedding is not necessarily a robust indicator of contagiousness. The risk of spreading the infection was low after 10 days from the onset of symptoms, as viral load in sputum was found to be unlikely to pose a significant risk based on efforts to culture samples in vitro (271). The relationship between symptoms, detectable levels of the virus, and risk of viral spread is therefore complex.The extent to which asymptomatic or presymptomatic individuals are able to transmit SARS-CoV-2 has been a question of high scientific and community interest. Early reports (February and March 2020) described transmission from presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2-positive individuals to close family contacts (275, 276). One of these reports (276) also included a description of an individual who tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 but never developed symptoms. Later analyses also sought to estimate the proportion of infections that could be traced back to a presymptomatic or asymptomatic individual (e.g., reference 277). Estimates of the proportion of individuals with asymptomatic infections have varied widely. The proportion of asymptomatic individuals on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, which was the site of an early COVID-19 outbreak, was estimated at 17.9% (278). In contrast, a model using the prevalence of antibodies among residents of Wuhan, China, estimated a much higher rate of asymptomatic cases, at approximately 7 in 8, or 87.5% (279). An analysis of the populations of care homes in London found that, among the residents (median age 85 years), the rate of asymptomatic infection was 43.8%, and among the caretakers (median age 47 years), the rate was 49.1% (280). The duration of viral shedding may also be longer in individuals with asymptomatic cases of COVID-19 than in those who do show symptoms (281). As a result, the potential for individuals who do not know they have COVID-19 to spread the virus raises significant concerns. In Singapore and Tianjin, two cities studied to estimate incubation period, an estimated 40 to 50% and 60 to 80% of cases, respectively, were considered to be caused by contact with asymptomatic individuals (267). An analysis of viral spread in the Italian town of Vo’, which was the site of an early COVID-19 outbreak, revealed that 42.5% of cases were asymptomatic and that the rates were similar across age groups (282). The argument was thus made that the town’s lockdown was imperative for controlling the spread of COVID-19 because it isolated asymptomatic individuals. While more models are likely to emerge to better explore the effect of asymptomatic individuals on SARS-CoV-2 transmission, these results suggest that strategies for identifying and containing asymptomatic but contagious individuals are important for managing community spread.Estimating the fatality rate.Estimating the occurrence of asymptomatic and mild COVID-19 cases is important to identifying the mortality rate associated with COVID-19. The mortality rate of greatest interest would be the total number of fatalities as a fraction of the total number of people infected. One commonly reported metric is the case fatality rate (CFR), which compares the number of COVID-19-related deaths to the number of confirmed or suspected cases. However, in locations without universal testing protocols, it is impossible to identify all infected individuals because so many asymptomatic or mild cases go undetected. Therefore, a more informative metric is the infection fatality rate (IFR), which compares the known deaths to the estimated number of cases. It thus requires the same numerator as CFR but divides by an approximation of the total number of cases rather than only the observed/suspected cases. IFR varies regionally, with some locations observed to have IFRs as low as 0.17% while others are as high as 1.7% (283). Estimates of CFR at the national and continental level and IFR at the continent level are maintained by the Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (284). Several meta-analyses have also sought to estimate IFR at the global scale. These estimates have varied; one peer-reviewed study aggregated data from 24 other studies and estimated IFR at 0.68% (95% CI, 0.53% to 0.82%), but a preprint that aggregated data from 139 countries calculated a global IFR of 1.04% (95% CI, 0.77% to 1.38%) when false negatives were considered in the model (283, 285). A similar prevalence estimate was identified through a repeated cross-sectional serosurvey conducted in New York City that estimated the IFR as 0.97% (286). Examination of serosurvey-based estimates of IFR identified convergence on a global IFR estimate of 0.60% (95% CI, 0.42% to 0.77%) (283). All of these studies note that IFR varies widely by location, and it is also expected to vary with demographic and health-related variables such as age, sex, prevalence of comorbidities, and access to health care and testing (287). Estimates of infection rates are becoming more feasible as more data become available for modeling and will be bolstered as serological testing becomes more common and more widely available. However, this research may be complicated due to the emergence of variants over time, as well as the varying availability and acceptance of vaccines in different communities and locations.DYNAMICS OF TRANSMISSIONDisease spread dynamics can be estimated using R0, the basic reproduction number, and Rt, the effective reproduction number. Accurate estimates of both are crucial to understanding the dynamics of infection and to predicting the effects of different interventions. R0 is the average number of new (secondary) infections caused by one infected person, assuming a wholly susceptible population (288), and is one of the most important epidemiological parameters (289). A simple mechanistic model used to describe infectious disease dynamics is a susceptible-infected-recovered compartmental model (290, 291). In this model, individuals move through three states: susceptible, infected, and recovered; two parameters, γ and β, specify the rate at which the infectious recover and the infection transmission rate, respectively, and R0 is estimated as the ratio of β and γ (289, 292). A pathogen can invade a susceptible population only if R0 is >1 (289, 293). The spread of an infectious disease at a particular time t can be quantified by Rt, the effective reproduction number, which assumes that part of the population has already recovered (and thus gained immunity to reinfection) or that mitigating interventions have been put into place. For example, if only a fraction St of the population is still susceptible, Rt = St × R0. When Rt is greater than 1, an epidemic grows (i.e., the proportion of the population that is infectious increases); when Rt is less than 1, the proportion of the population that is infectious decreases. R0 and Rt can be estimated directly from epidemiological data or inferred using susceptible-infected-recovered-type models. To capture the dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 accurately, the addition of a fourth compartment, i.e., a susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered model, may be appropriate because such models account for the relative lengths of incubation and infectious periods (294).Original estimates of R0 for COVID-19 lie in the range R0 = 1.4 to 6.5 (295–297). Variation in R0 is expected between different populations, and the estimated values of R0 discussed below are for specific populations in specific environments. The different estimates of R0 should not necessarily be interpreted as a range of estimates of the same underlying parameter. In one study of international cases, the predicted value was R0 = 1.7 (298). In China (both Hubei province and nationwide), the value was predicted to lie in the range R0 = 2.0 to 3.6 (295, 299, 300). Another estimate based on a cruise ship where an outbreak occurred predicted R0 = 2.28 (301). Susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered model-derived estimates of R0 range from 2.0 to 6.5 in China (302–305) to R0 = 4.8 in France (306). Using the same model as for the French population, a study estimated R0 = 2.6 in South Korea (306), which is consistent with other studies (307). From a meta-analysis of studies estimating R0 (296), the median R0 was estimated to be 2.79 (IQR 1.16) based on 12 studies published between 1 January and 7 February 2020.Inference of the effective reproduction number can provide insight into how populations respond to an infection and the effectiveness of interventions. In China, Rt was predicted to lie in the range of 1.6 to 2.6 in January 2020, before travel restrictions (308). Rt decreased from 2.35 1 week before travel restrictions were imposed (23 January 2020), to 1.05 1 week after. Using their model, the authors also estimated the probability of new outbreaks occurring. Assuming individual-level variation in transmission comparable to that of MERS or SARS, the probability of a single individual exporting the virus and causing a large outbreak is 17 to 25%, and assuming variation like that of SARS and transmission patterns like those observed for COVID-19 in Wuhan, the probability of a large outbreak occurring after ≥4 infections exist at a new location is greater than 50%. An independent study came to similar conclusions, finding Rt = 2.38 in the 2-week period before January 23 with a decrease to Rt = 1.34 (using data from January 24 to February 3) or Rt = 0.98 (using data from January 24 to February 8) (297). In South Korea, Rt was inferred for February through March 2020 in two cities, Daegu (the center of the outbreak) and Seoul (307). Metro data were also analyzed to estimate the effects of social distancing measures. Rt decreased in Daegu from around 3 to <1 over the period that social distancing measures were introduced. In Seoul, Rt decreased slightly but remained close to 1 (and larger than Rt in Daegu). These findings indicate that social distancing measures appeared to be effective in containing the infection in Daegu, but in Seoul, Rt remained above 1, meaning secondary outbreaks remained possible. The study also shows the importance of region-specific analysis: the large decline in caseload nationwide was mainly due to the Daegu region and could mask persistence of the epidemic in other regions, such as Seoul and Gyeonggi-do. In Iran, estimates of Rt declined from 4.86 in the 1st week to 2.1 by the 4th week after the first cases were reported (309). In Europe, analysis of 11 countries inferred the dynamics of Rt over a time range from the beginning of the outbreak until 28 March 2020, by which point most countries had implemented major interventions (such as stay-at-home orders, public gathering bans, and school closures) (310). Across all countries, the mean Rt before interventions began was estimated as 3.87; Rt varied considerably, from below 3 in Norway to above 4.5 in Spain. After interventions, Rt decreased by an average of 64% across all countries, with mean Rt = 1.43. The lowest predicted value was 0.97 for Norway, and the highest was 2.64 for Sweden, which could be related to the fact that Sweden did not implement social distancing measures on the same scale as other countries. The study concludes that while large changes in Rt are observed, it is too early to tell whether the interventions put into place are sufficient to decrease Rt below 1.Evolution within SARS-CoV-2 has also driven changes in the estimated reproduction number for different populations at different times. As of June 2021, the reproduction number had increased globally relative to 2020, and increased transmissibility over the wild-type variant was observed for the Alpha, Beta, Gamma, and Delta VOC (311). In the United States. between December 2020 and January 2021, B.1.1.7 (Alpha) was estimated to have an increased transmission of 35% to 45% relative to common SARS-CoV-2 variants at the time, with B.1.1.7 being the dominant SARS-CoV-2 variant in some places at some time points (312). This lineage was estimated to have increased transmissibility of 43% to 90% in the United Kingdom (313). An estimate of the reproduction number of B.1.1.7 in the United Kingdom from September to December 2020 yielded 1.59 overall and between 1.56 and 1.95 in different regions of the country (229). The Delta variant is particularly transmissible, and it has been estimated to be twice as transmissible as the wild-type variant of SARS-CoV-2 (311). A review of the literature describing the Delta variant identified a mean estimated R0 of 5.08 (314). Such differences can affect fitness and therefore influence the relative contributions of different lineages to a given viral gene pool over time (315). Therefore, the evolution of the virus can result in shifts in the reproduction rate.More generally, population-level epidemic dynamics can be both observed and modeled (292). Data and empirically determined biological mechanisms inform models, while models can be used to try to understand data and systems of interest or to make predictions about possible future dynamics, such as the estimation of capacity needs (316) or the comparison of predicted outcomes among prevention and control strategies (317, 318). Many current efforts to model Rt have also led to tools that assist the visualization of estimates in real time or over recent intervals (319, 320). These are valuable resources, yet it is also important to note that the estimates arise from models containing many assumptions and are dependent on the quality of the data they use, which varies widely by region.CONCLUSIONSThe novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is the third HCoV to emerge in the 21st century, and research into previous HCoVs has provided a strong foundation for characterizing the pathogenesis and transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Critical insights into how the virus interacts with human cells have been gained from previous research into HCoVs and other viral infections. With the emergence of three devastating HCoVs over the past 20 years, emergent viruses are likely to represent an ongoing threat. Contextualizing SARS-CoV-2 alongside other viruses not only serves to provide insights that can be immediately useful for combating this virus itself but may also prove valuable in the face of future viral threats.Host-pathogen interactions provide a basis not only for understanding COVID-19 but also for developing a response. As with other HCoVs, the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 is likely driven by detection of its spike protein, which allows it to enter cells through ACE2. Epithelial cells have also emerged as the major cellular target of the virus, contextualizing the respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms that are frequently observed in COVID-19. Many of the mechanisms that facilitate the pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2 are currently under consideration as possible targets for the treatment or prevention of COVID-19 (10, 11). Research in other viruses also provides a foundation for understanding the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 among people and can therefore inform efforts to control the virus’s spread. Airborne forms of transmission (droplet and aerosol transmission) have emerged as the primary modes by which the virus spreads to new hosts. Asymptomatic transmission was also a concern in the SARS outbreak of 2002 to 2003 and, as in the current pandemic, presented challenges for estimating rates of infection (321). These insights are important for developing a public health response, such as the CDC’s shift in its recommendations surrounding masking (322).Even with the background obtained from research in SARS and MERS, COVID-19 has revealed itself to be a complex and difficult-to-characterize disease that has many possible presentations that vary with age. Variability in presentation, including cases with no respiratory symptoms or with no symptoms altogether, was also reported during the SARS epidemic at the beginning of the 21st century (321). The variability of both which symptoms present and their severity has presented challenges for public health agencies seeking to provide clear recommendations regarding which symptoms indicate SARS-CoV-2 infection and should prompt isolation. Asymptomatic cases add complexity to efforts to estimate statistics both such as R0 and Rt, which are critical to understanding the transmission of the virus, and IFR, which is an important component of understanding its impact on a given population. The development of diagnostic technologies over the course of the pandemic has facilitated more accurate identification, including of asymptomatic cases (235). As more cases have been diagnosed, the health conditions and patient characteristics associated with more severe infection have also become more clear, although there are likely to be significant sociocultural elements that also influence these outcomes (323). While many efforts have focused on adults, and especially older adults because of the susceptibility of this demographic, additional research is needed to understand the presentation of COVID-19 and MIS-C in pediatric patients. As more information is uncovered about the pathogenesis of HCoV and SARS-CoV-2 specifically, the diverse symptomatology of COVID-19 has and likely will continue to conform with the ever-broadening understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 functions within a human host.While the SARS-CoV-2 virus is very similar to other HCoVs in several ways, including in its genomic structure and the structure of the virus itself, there are also some differences that may account for differences in the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the SARS and MERS epidemics of the past 2 decades. The R0 of SARS-CoV-2 has been estimated to be similar to that of SARS-CoV-1 but much higher than that of MERS-CoV (324), although a higher R0 has been estimated for some VOC. While the structures of the viruses are very similar, evolution among these species may account for differences in their transmissibility and virulence. For example, the acquisition of a furin cleavage site at the S1/S2 boundary within the SARS-CoV-2 S protein may be associated with increased virulence. Additionally, concerns have been raised about the accumulation of mutations within the SARS-CoV-2 species itself, and whether these could influence virulence (325). These novel variants may be resistant to vaccines and antibody treatments such as bamlanivimab that were designed based on the wild-type spike protein (10, 326). As a consequence of reliance on targeting the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein for many therapeutic and prophylactic strategies, increased surveillance is required to rapidly identify and prevent the spread of novel SARS-CoV-2 variants with alterations to the spike protein. The coming of age of genomic technologies has made these types of analyses feasible, and genomics research characterizing changes in SARS-CoV-2 along with temporal and spatial movement is likely to provide additional insights into whether within-species evolution influences the effect of the virus on the human host. Additionally, the rapid development of sequencing technologies over the past decade has made it possible to rapidly characterize the host response to the virus. For example, proteomics analysis of patient-derived cells revealed candidate genes whose regulation is altered by SARS-CoV-2 infection, suggesting possible approaches for pharmaceutical invention and providing insight into which systems are likely to be disrupted in COVID-19 (190). As more patient data become available, the biotechnological advances of the 2000s are expected to allow for more rapid identification of potential drug targets than was feasible during the SARS, or even MERS, pandemic.Thus, the COVID-19 crisis continues to evolve, but the insights acquired over the past 20 years of HCoV research have provided a solid foundation for understanding the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the disease it causes. As the scientific community continues to respond to COVID-19 and to elucidate more of the relationships between pathogenesis, transmission, host regulatory responses, and symptomatology, this understanding will no doubt continue to evolve and to reveal additional connections among virology, pathogenesis, and health. This review represents a collaboration between scientists from diverse backgrounds to contextualize this virus at the union of many different biological disciplines (327). At present, understanding the SARS-CoV-2 virus and its pathogenesis is critical to a holistic understanding of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the future, interdisciplinary work on SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19 may guide a response to a new viral threat.


Title: Molecular Pathogenesis of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) Coronavirus

IntroductionCoronaviruses have historically been associated with low impact human disease, such as the common cold [1, 2]. It was the sudden emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus (CoV) in 2003 that made us aware of deadly versions of coronaviruses that can cause large outbreaks associated with high mortality and global panic. SARS-CoV caused an outbreak that was deemed a pandemic and an international threat by the World Health Organization (WHO). A total of 8098 people were infected and of these 774 died [3]. Extensive epidemiological studies and wildlife surveillance revealed that SARS-CoV had originated in bats and somehow spread to civet cats. The virus is speculated to have later “jumped” from civet cats to humans [4–7]. This outbreak established the importance of wildlife (i.e., bats) in the emergence of highly pathogenic coronaviruses.Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) emerged in September 2012 in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [8]. MERS-CoV causes a lower respiratory tract infection in humans with 35% mortality. Since its emergence, 2279 laboratory-confirmed cases have been identified in humans with 806 deaths. Twenty-seven countries have reported cases of MERS with many associated with travel. MERS-CoV has been listed on the WHO’s blueprint of priority diseases needing immediate research.Currently, only supportive treatment exists for MERS-CoV. MERS-CoV, like many other viruses, has evolved proteins that can effectively counteract human antiviral responses [9–11]. The sudden appearance of MERS, the high infectivity rate of the virus, and the need for a high containment level 3 lab for research have hindered progress in designing vaccines and therapeutics against this virus. Development of vaccine candidates is further complicated by the ability of coronaviruses to rapidly mutate and recombine [6]. Several quasispecies of the virus can be detected in camels [12], which are reservoirs of the virus, and it is extremely difficult to develop therapeutic strategies against a pathogen that can exist as several different variants.The evolution of MERS-CoV is intriguing. It is speculated that MERS-CoV originally spilled over from bats to camels. Several MERS-like CoVs have been detected in bats [13–15, 16•, 17–19]. Current models propose that camels are reservoirs of the virus and are often the source of human infection [20–22]. Human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV has also been documented [23]. In spite of these advances in our understanding of how the virus has evolved, there is a significant lack of knowledge about virus transmission dynamics and ecological and environmental factors that drive the emergence and evolution of MERS-CoV.Several novel approaches are being currently developed to combat MERS-CoV, including small molecule inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies and vaccines. In this mini-review, we have discussed the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV and the role of various viral proteins in subverting antiviral responses in humans. We also discuss current approaches that are being developed and tested to control MERS-CoV replication and associated disease. Finally, we bring forward additional strategies to identify therapeutic targets and molecules to improve the outcome of MERS-CoV infections in humans.Coronavirus: Structure and ReplicationA mature CoV particle is spherical in shape and has a diameter of around 100 nm [24]. Virus particles have a protein coat, called the capsid, which protects the virus’ genetic material. CoVs have an additional envelop of lipids surrounding the protein capsid. This layer is derived from portions of host cell membranes (phospholipids and proteins) but also include some viral glycoproteins. CoV virions contain four essential viral glycoproteins—spike (S), membrane (M), envelop (E), and nucleocapsid (N), all of which are encoded within the 3′ end of the viral genome [25]. S protein is club-shaped and located on the surface of the virion, giving CoVs a distinct appearance of a solar corona, hence the name—Coronaviruses. S protein is critical for the initial attachment of the virion to the host cell receptor, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) [26]. Recent studies have demonstrated that the spike protein can adapt to interact with DPP4 from different species of bats to enable cross-species entry and replication of MERS-CoV [27••]. The structure of CoVs is maintained by M protein while E protein facilitates the assembly and release of the virus. CoVs have helically symmetrical nucleocapsids and the only structural protein associated with the nucleocapsid is the N protein, which helps in the packaging of the virus genome (reviewed here [25, 28, 29]).Viruses use host cell machinery to replicate (Fig. 1). CoVs have large, non-segmented positive-sense (+) RNA genomes of ~ 30 kb and use their own RNA replicase enzymes to create copies of their genomes in the cytoplasm. CoVs complete their life cycle in 4 steps: (1) entry, (2) expression of the replicase protein, (3) replication and transcription of their genome, and (4) release of assembled progeny virions (reviewed here [25] and Fig. 1). CoVs interact through S protein with its cognate receptor on the surface of susceptible cells. The specificity of this interaction determines the host range and tissue tropism of CoVs. Many CoVs bind peptidases as their cognate receptor for entry, but the choice of receptor has been reported to vary across different CoVs, for example, SARS-CoV uses an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE2) [30] and MERS-CoV binds to DPP4 [26]. Subsequently, S protein undergoes acid-dependent proteolytic cleavage, resulting in the fusion of viral and cellular membranes and the release of the viral genome into the cytoplasm (reviewed here [29]).Fig. 1MERS-CoV replication. MERS-CoV interacts with cellular DPP4 receptor to enter permissive cells. Inside the cell, the virus capsid disintegrates in endosomal compartments to release the positive (+) sense genome in the cytoplasm. The 5′ end of the (+) sense genome is translated to make replicase proteins, which enable transcription and replication of the genome. The (+) sense genome is transcribed to make (−) sense full-length genome, which acts as a template for the synthesis of full-length (+) sense genome. (−) sense full-length genome is also used as a template to make sub-genomic (+) sense RNAs of varying lengths, which are transcribed to (+) sense mRNAs. These mRNAs are translated to make several structural and accessory proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. The genomic (+) sense RNA and the proteins come together to form a new virion in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC). The new virions are released through secretory vesiclesCoronavirus genomes include a 5′ cap structure and a 3′ poly (A) tail, allowing them to act as messenger RNA (mRNA; positive-sense RNA) templates for translation of replicase polyproteins. The replicase gene encodes two large open reading frames (ORFs), rep1a and rep1ab, which express two co-terminal polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab. These polyproteins are cleaved into individual non-structural proteins (Nsps). Nsp3 encodes a papain-like protease (PLpro) that cleaves Nsp1/2, Nsp2/3 and Nsp3/4 boundaries. Serine-type protease, also known as main protease (Mpro), which is encoded by Nsp5, cleaves the polyproteins into remaining Nsps. Nsps facilitate viral RNA synthesis, for example, Nsp12 encodes RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). The formation of a replicase-transcriptase complex (RTC) containing Nsps initiates viral RNA synthesis. The RTC complex localizes to modified intracellular membranes which are derived from the rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and initiates the production of negative-sense RNAs through both replication and transcription. Full-length copies of CoV negative-sense RNA genomes serve as a template to synthesize full-length positive-sense RNA genomes that eventually get packaged into new virions. CoVs utilize discontinuous transcription to generate a subset of sub-genomic negative-sense RNAs, including those encoding structural proteins [31]. Varying lengths of the 3′ end of the genome is combined with the 5′ leader sequence to make sub-genomic negative-sense RNAs. These sub-genomic negative-sense RNAs are then transcribed into sub-genomic positive-sense mRNAs for translation.The viral structural proteins, such as S, E, and M, are translated from sub-genomic positive-sense mRNAs. The structural proteins are inserted into the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC). The viral genomes, encapsidated by N protein, bud into ERGIC containing the structural proteins for assembly. The newly assembled mature virions are then transported to the cell surface in vesicles and are released from the infected cell by exocytosis. The genome organization, replication and associated replicase-transcriptase proteins of murine hepatitis virus (MHV) have been extensively studied [32]. All identified coronaviruses use a similar replication strategy (reviewed here [25, 29]).Pathogenesis of MERS-CoVPathological changes in a MERS-CoV infected patient have been studied with the help of a single research-oriented autopsy. The pathology in this fatal case primarily included exudated diffuse alveolar damage with hyaline membranes, pulmonary edema, type 2 pneumocyte hyperplasia, interstitial pneumonia that was predominantly lymphocytic, and multinucleate syncytial cells [33, 34].Several studies have characterized MERS-CoV in cell lines and animal models. Like other viruses, MERS-CoV has evolved strategies to evade innate antiviral responses. The ability of the virus to suppress antiviral responses [11] and promote an exaggerated inflammatory response [35••] contributes to its pathogenesis. As described above, MERS-CoV is made up of several structural, non-structural, and accessory proteins. MERS-CoV accessory proteins are dispensable for virus replication in tissue culture [36] but play an important role in modulating the host’s antiviral defensive responses. Human and most mammalian cells have evolved evolutionarily conserved molecules (pattern recognition receptors or PRRs) that can detect conserved structures in viruses called pathogen-associated molecular patterns. When a coronavirus infects and enters a cell, it releases its RNA genome, which rapidly initiates the process of translation and RNA replication and transcription. This process produces long strands of single and double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). The cells detect exogenous single and dsRNA through PRRs such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs), a retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), and melanoma differentiation–associated protein 5 (MDA5). PRRs initiate a series of signaling events in these cells to stimulate the expression of antiviral proteins such as interferons (IFNs), which in turn express interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) in the infected cells (autocrine effect) and neighboring uninfected cells (paracrine effect) (reviewed here [37–39]). Thus, the battle between the host (infected individual) and the pathogen (MERS-CoV) begins at a molecular level.MERS-CoV has evolved several accessory proteins that can inhibit innate antiviral responses by modulating the signaling pathway at several stages (Fig. 2). MERS-CoV protein 4a (ORF 4a) inhibits PACT-induced activation of RIG-I and MDA5 by directly binding with dsRNA [9] (Fig. 2). PACT is a cellular dsRNA binding protein that activates RIG-I to initiate downstream antiviral responses [40]. Thus, ORF 4a can inhibit antiviral responses at the very first step of viral nucleic acid sensing. Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a central mediator of antiviral signaling in human cells [41] and thus, the activation of IRF3 is also the target of several viral proteins, including proteins from MERS-CoV. In human cells, once TLRs, RIG-I, and MDA-5 have sensed viral nucleic acid, the cells activate kinases such as TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit epsilon (IKKε), which phosphorylate IRF3. Phosphorylated IRF3 forms dimers in the cytoplasm and localizes to the nucleus of the cells to initiate the expression of IFNs. MERS-CoV ORFs 4a, 4b, 5, and protein M inhibit kinase-mediated phosphorylation of IRF3 (Fig. 2). Ectopic expression of these proteins inhibits nuclear localization of IRF3 in human cells and downstream antiviral signaling in response to virus infection and synthetic dsRNA (polyI:C) stimulation [10, 11]. Although the cellular interacting partners of all MERS-CoV viral proteins have not been identified, M protein has been shown to inactivate TBK1-mediated phosphorylation of IRF3 by disrupting TRAF3-TBK1 association [42••]. MERS-CoV ORF 4b also inhibits nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cell (NFκB)–dependent antiviral responses by abrogating nuclear import of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) [43•] (Fig. 2).Fig. 2MERS-CoV inhibits innate antiviral signaling. Mammalian cells have evolved conserved pathogen sensing molecules called pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). When a coronavirus, such as MERS-CoV, infects a human cell, the virus produces dsRNA as replication and transcription intermediates. dsRNA stimulates cellular sensors of viral nucleic acid such as TLR3, RIGI, and MDA5. These sensors, through adaptor proteins and cellular kinases (TBK1 and IKKε), activate interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Activated IRF3 molecules form homodimers and translocate to the nucleus of the infected cell to induce the expression of type I IFNs (IFNα and IFNβ). IFNs then bind to IFN α/β receptor (IFNAR) to stimulate the Jak/Stat pathway, which in turn induces the expression of antiviral interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). ISGs protect cells from subsequent virus replication and associated cell damage. MERS-CoV proteins M and ORFs 4a, 4b, and 5 (depicted in italics) have evolved different strategies to inhibit the expression of interferon and ISGs. ER = endoplasmic reticulumIn addition to accessory proteins, Nsps that are generated from the polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab also play a role in modulating host processes. MERS-CoV Nsp1 selectively targets mRNAs that are generated in the nucleus and transported to the cytoplasm (cellular mRNA) for translation inhibition and mRNA degradation. Nsp1 spares mRNAs that are introduced directly in the cytoplasm or virus-like mRNAs that originate in the cytoplasm [44]. Thus Nsp1 inhibits cellular processes while promoting viral replication.There are limited studies with MERS-CoV, largely due to containment requirements. The modulation of adaptive immune responses by MERS-CoV has not been extensively studied, and cytokine responses in infected dendritic cells, macrophages, and other white blood cells have not been fully explored. In one study, antibody-mediated responses or seroconversion was observed in individuals that developed an asymptomatic infection with MERS-CoV. Patients that seroconverted at later time points developed pneumonia with or without respiratory failure. Although the rate of seroconversion increased with disease severity, 75% of the deceased MERS-CoV infected patients who developed pneumonia did not seroconvert [45]. Another study by Choi et al. demonstrated the absence of neutralizing antibodies one year after successful treatment of MERS-CoV infected patients who had developed mild pneumonia [46]. Their observation is consistent with the previous study where disease severity correlated with seroconversion. The inability to produce long-term neutralizing antibodies would put these individuals at risk for re-infection with MERS-CoV in the future. This possibility needs to be monitored and studied. These observations warrant further investigations on the ability of MERS-CoV to modulate humoral responses in patients.The role of T cells in MERS-CoV infections has been recently reported. Zhao et al. analyzed antibody and T cell responses in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and sera from twenty-one MERS survivors. The authors identified that patients with higher antibody and CD4+ T cell responses had longer intensive care unit stays and demonstrated prolonged virus shedding. In the same study, MERS survivors with undetectable MERS-CoV-specific antibody responses mounted CD8+ T cell responses [47]. This observation adds more detail to previous studies where neutralizing antibody levels were not detected in MERS survivors and disease severity correlated with seroconversion [45, 46]. These observations raise an important question: can MERS-CoV infection be augmented by the presence of antibodies? MERS-CoV can infect and propagate in macrophages. MERS-CoV Nsp15 is an endoribonuclease, and it is speculated to suppress the activation of dsRNA sensors in infected cells, such as macrophages. Although the mechanism of action for Nsp15 is not known, Nsp15 mutant MERS-CoV displays significant dispersal of dsRNA associated with replication complexes relative to wild-type virus [48]. Since macrophages display Fc receptors that bind to the Fc portion of antibodies [49], it is of interest to identify if antibodies bound to MERS-CoV can enhance virus uptake by macrophages and subsequent virus replication. In addition, the replication potential of MERS-CoV in other Fc receptor–bearing immune cells needs to be explored as well.Current Approaches to Tackle MERS-CoVThere are currently no approved treatment or vaccine for MERS-CoV, but different approaches are being tested and developed to inhibit virus replication with promising preliminary data. These approaches have been extensively reviewed in recent reviews [50–52]. We mention broad strategies that are currently being discovered to orient readers to the possibilities of future treatment and preventative options.The most commonly studied strategy is the inhibition of virus entry in human cells (Fig. 3). As previously mentioned, MERS-CoV binds to the human receptor DPP4 via its receptor-binding domain (RBD) in the spike protein. Monoclonal antibodies against the RBD and the receptor-binding motif within the RBD are being developed to inhibit this interaction (reviewed here [51]). Small molecules capable of disrupting the interaction between MERS-CoV spike protein and DPP4 are also being developed and tested (reviewed here [51]). MERS-CoV entry is accomplished through the fusion of the virus and cellular membranes that is mediated by the S2 region of the virus spike protein [53]. Inhibitory peptides targeting the S2 region of the spike protein to prevent fusion, and thus, entry of the virus are also being developed [52].Fig. 3Therapeutic approaches to disrupt MERS-CoV spike (S) protein and DPP4 interaction. MERS-CoV binds to its cellular receptor, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4), via the receptor-binding domain (RBD) in the S1 subunit of the S protein. Following these interactions, the S2 subunit facilitates the fusion of viral and cellular membranes to release the virus particle inside the cell. Monoclonal antibodies and small molecules directed against the RBD of the S1 subunit are being developed to disrupt the interaction between DPP4 and MERS-CoV S protein. In addition, small peptides are being developed to inhibit the membrane fusion activity of the S2 subunit of MERS-CoV S proteinCurrent studies have focused on disrupting the interaction between MERS-CoV spike protein and the cellular DPP4 receptor. The recent discovery of an attachment factor, membrane-associated 78-kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), that augments MERS-CoV entry [54] further complicates this approach. There is a need to identify and target additional interacting partners that may facilitate MERS-CoV binding and entry. An alternate, but interesting approach led Xia et al. to identify peptides that can inhibit MERS-CoV fusion by studying the bat HKU4 coronavirus. The authors identified inhibitory peptides in the HR2 domain of the HKU4 spike protein. These peptides were able to significantly inhibit MERS-CoV-mediated cell-cell fusion and viral infection in human cells [52]. We have also shown that MERS-CoV (EMC/2012 strain) cannot inhibit antiviral responses in insectivorous bat cells, unlike human cells where wild-type virus can efficiently inhibit these responses [55]. Future studies exploring the antiviral adaptations in bats and camelid reservoir species may enable us to identify better therapeutic targets in spillover mammals, such as humans.While attempts are ongoing to develop vaccines and therapeutics for humans, considerable progress is being made to develop a vaccine for camels. Since MERS-CoV transmission has been primarily documented from camels to humans, it is of interest to develop a vaccine to inhibit virus replication in camels that would limit the cycle of transmission. A recent study provides promising data for an adjuvanted MERS-CoV spike protein subunit vaccine that confers complete protection from MERS-CoV disease in alpaca and results in reduced and delayed viral shedding in the upper airways of dromedary camels [56]. Other relevant advances in developing MERS-CoV vaccines have been reviewed here [50].ConclusionMERS-CoV is an emerging pathogen that necessitates immediate research to develop therapeutics and vaccine candidates. Unlike SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV has not emerged to spread and cause a global pandemic, yet. We risk the emergence of an efficient human-to-human transmissible strain unless we develop intervention strategies for the current circulating strains of MERS-CoV.The lack of resources and the need for high containment labs have hindered our attempts to study this virus. There is a need to isolate other strains of MERS-CoV to determine variations in the circulating strains and associated pathogenesis. The correlates of protection in surviving patients are not well defined, but early intervention seems to offer some protection. However, it is easy to confuse early symptoms of MERS with that of the common cold. We need to establish a public communication strategy and prioritize patients that have had known contacts with camels.In an observation study, combination treatment with interferon-beta and ribavirin was identified to be effective in early-stage patients but not in patients who were diagnosed late [57]. An ongoing clinical trial is studying the efficacy of interferon and antiviral combination treatments in MERS-CoV infected patients [58]. These studies will shed more light on possible ways to treat MERS patients. In the meantime, ongoing research is identifying several novel strategies to inhibit MERS-CoV entry and replication in cells. Thus, in the future, it might be possible to use these experimental treatment options, in combination or alone, to prevent the onset of severe disease in patients that have likely been exposed to MERS-CoV. However, the timing of the treatment will be crucial and it will be essential to identify patients during the early stages of infection. This further emphasizes the need for effective differential diagnostics and appropriate training of healthcare professionals. Vaccines for coronaviruses have been challenging to develop due to the ability of coronaviruses to recombine [59] and the possibility of exacerbating disease symptoms post an immune challenge [60, 61]. However, subunit vaccines using the spike protein have generated promising results in Camelids and may one day be suitable for human-use, although not in the near future.


Title: Host Determinants of MERS-CoV Transmission and Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionMiddle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is a novel pathogen that was isolated in late 2012 [1]. Since then, the virus has caused multiple outbreaks and infected more than 2000 individuals, [2] who then develop a respiratory infection ranging in severity from asymptomatic to fatal [3,4]. Severe-to-fatal MERS-CoV patients have a higher chance of transmitting this virus since they shed a higher amount of virus progeny in comparison to the asymptomatic-to-mild ones [5,6,7,8]. Identifying and quarantining these patients in healthcare facilities where outbreaks have occurred, together with implementing proper infection control, has been effective in reducing transmission and containing these outbreaks [9,10]. However, new MERS-CoV cases are still being reported, especially in the Arabian Peninsula [2,11]. This is partly due to the continuous zoonotic introduction of this virus to the human population in this region by dromedaries [12]. The dromedary camel is the only animal species that has been reported to transmit this virus to humans [13,14,15,16]. MERS-CoV infection in these animals merely causes mild upper respiratory tract infection [17,18], but seroepidemiological studies showed that this virus has been circulating in dromedary camels for decades, suggesting the efficient transmission of MERS-CoV in this species [19,20,21,22].Although the clinical manifestations, as well as transmission, are remarkably different in MERS-CoV-infected humans and dromedary camels, the viruses isolated from these two species are highly similar, if not indistinguishable [12,16]. This indicates that host factors play a significant role in MERS-CoV pathogenesis and transmission. However, the identity of these host factors and how they affect the pathogenesis and transmission of MERS-CoV are generally not well understood. Dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4)—the MERS-CoV receptor, sialic acids, proteases, and interferons are all examples of potentially critical host factors that have been shown to affect MERS-CoV infection in vitro [23,24,25,26]. This review highlights the role of some MERS-CoV-interacting host factors—especially DPP4—in MERS-CoV pathogenesis and transmission.2. MERS-CoV-Interacting Host FactorsMERS-CoV infection of a target cell is initiated by the virus attachment to the cell surface [23,27]. MERS-CoV uses the N-terminal part of its spike (S)—the so called S1 protein (Figure 1A)—to bind to two host cell surface molecules, dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) and α2,3-sialic acids [23,24]. DPP4 is the functional receptor of MERS-CoV; its absence renders cells resistant to this virus, while its transient expression in non-susceptible cells permits viral replication [23]. DPP4 is a serine exopeptidase, which is either expressed at the cell surface or shed in a soluble form. It has the capacity to cleave-off dipeptides from polypeptides with either l-proline or l-alanine at the penultimate position. Accordingly, DPP4 is capable of cutting various substrates, such as hormones, cytokines, chemokines, and neuropeptides, allowing it to be involved in multiple physiological functions as well as pathophysiological conditions [28]. This enzymatic activity is mediated by the α/β hydrolase domain of DPP4, while MERS-CoV infection is mediated by the binding of S1 protein to the β-propeller domain of this exopeptidase (Figure 1B) [28,29,30,31]. There are 11 critical residues within the β-propeller domain that directly interact with the S1 protein [29,30,31]. These residues are quite conserved in camelids, primates, and rabbits—species shown to be susceptible to MERS-CoV [17,31,32,33]. In contrast, ferrets, rats, and mice resist MERS-CoV infection due to differences in some critical DPP4 residues [31,34,35,36]. These data illustrate that DPP4 has the capacity to determine the host range of MERS-CoV.Other MERS-CoV-interacting host factors besides DPP4 are less extensively studied and have mostly been investigated in vitro. Glycotopes of α2,3-sialic acids coupled with 5-N-acetylated neuraminic acid are recognized by the S1 protein of MERS-CoV during attachment [24]. In the absence of these glycotopes, MERS-CoV entry is reduced but not abolished, indicating their function as an attachment factor rather than a receptor [24]. Besides α2,3-sialic acids, CEACAM5 and GRP78 have also been suggested to be attachment factors for MERS-CoV, but their roles in vivo during MERS-CoV infection are not clear at this moment [37,38]. Post attachment, MERS-CoV uses the C-terminal part of its S protein—known as S2 (Figure 1A)—to interact with host proteases, such as furin, TMPRSS2, and cathepsins [39,40,41,42]. These proteases cleave the S protein and induce conformational changes, allowing fusion between viral and host cellular membranes, resulting in the release of viral RNA into the cell cytoplasm [27]. TMPRSS2 and DPP4 are held in one complex at the cell surface by a scaffolding protein, the tetraspanin CD9, leading to a rapid and efficient entry of MERS-CoV into the susceptible cells [43]. Once fusion with host cell membranes has occurred, MERS-CoV subsequently replicates its genetic material and produces viral proteins in the cell cytoplasm to generate new virus progeny. During this stage, MERS-CoV uses its nsp3–4 polyproteins to build its replication organelles as well as its accessory proteins such as the 4a and 4b proteins to inhibit host anti-viral defense mechanisms [44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54]. However, the capacity of MERS-CoV accessory proteins to impede several pathways of host immune response in the lungs may be limited. MERS-CoV inoculation of macaques and genetically modified mice generally results in limited clinical manifestations; thus, adapting this virus through serial passaging or defecting the type I interferon pathway may be needed to enhance viral replication and pathogenesis in these animals [32,55,56,57,58]. These observations, together with studies showing type I interferon capacity to inhibit MERS-CoV infection in vitro [25,59], highlight the importance of the innate immune response, especially type I interferon, as an inhibiting factor for MERS-CoV.3. Host Factors in MERS-CoV TransmissionSo far MERS-CoV has been isolated from dromedary camels and humans [1,60]. Both species are not only susceptible to MERS-CoV infection, but also capable of transmitting this virus [7,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,22]. However, current data indicate that virus spread is more efficient in dromedary camels than in humans [5,7,19,20,21,61]. This difference in transmissibility could be partially due to the different tropism of MERS-CoV in these two species. In dromedaries, MERS-CoV has been shown to replicate in the nasal epithelium upon experimental in vivo infection [17], while in humans, MERS-CoV mainly replicates in the lower respiratory tract, particularly in the bronchiolar and alveolar epithelia [23,62,63,64,65]. Higher viral RNA levels in the sputum and lavage samples of MERS-CoV patients compared to nasal and throat swabs are consistent with the tropism of MERS-CoV in humans [66,67,68]. This different MERS-CoV tropism in dromedary camels and humans is in line with the localization of DPP4 in the respiratory tract tissues of these two species. In humans, DPP4 is absent in the nasal epithelium but present in the lower respiratory tract epithelium, mainly in type II pneumocytes [69,70]. In contrast, DPP4 is expressed in the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels [69]. This difference in DPP4 localization between humans and dromedary camels therefore explains MERS-CoV tropism in these two species and highlights DPP4 as an essential determinant of MERS-CoV tropism.DPP4 localization has also been investigated in many other MERS-CoV-susceptible species. In Gambian and Egyptian fruit bats, DPP4 is expressed in the respiratory tract and intestinal epithelium, suggesting that MERS-CoV can target both tissues [71]. In line with this finding, MERS-CoV inoculation via intranasal and intraperitoneal routes in the Jamaican fruit bat led to viral RNA shedding both in the respiratory tract and the intestinal tract [72]. In contrast to frugivorous bats, DPP4 is limitedly expressed in the respiratory tract epithelium of two insectivorous bats, i.e., common pipistrelle and common serotine bats, but abundant in their intestinal epithelium [71]. Accordingly, sequences of MERS-like-CoVs were mainly obtained from rectal swabs and fecal samples of insectivorous bats [73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80]. These findings not only support insectivorous bats as the origin host of MERS-CoV [73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80], but also indicate the importance of intestinal tropism and fecal–oral transmission of MERS-like-CoV in these insectivorous bats.Besides bats, humans, and dromedary camels, other animal species have also been proposed as potential hosts of MERS-CoV. Remarkably, DPP4 of horses, llamas, alpacas, pigs, bovines, goats, sheep, and rabbits has been demonstrated to recognize the S protein of MERS-CoV [81,82]. In most of these species, there is a preferential upper respiratory tract expression of DPP4 observed. Rabbits express DPP4 in the upper and lower respiratory tract epithelium, and thus may allow MERS-CoV to replicate in both compartments [33,83]. Horses, llamas, and pigs mainly express DPP4 in the upper respiratory tract—particularly the nasal epithelium [84]. Upon intranasal MERS-CoV inoculation, llamas, alpacas, and pigs developed upper respiratory tract infection, while horses did not seroconvert and only shed infectious virus in a limited amount [84,85,86,87,88]. The reason why horses seem to be less permissive to MERS-CoV remains to be investigated, but a chronic co-infection in the guttural pouch, a common disease among horses, might be one of the explanations. This guttural pouch infection results in excessive mucus production that might hinder MERS-CoV from attaching and entering the nasal epithelium [84,89,90]. Sheep, on the other hand, did not seem to express significant levels of DPP4 in their respiratory tract, and thus did not seroconvert nor shed infectious virus upon experimental MERS-CoV inoculation [84,88]. Comparable to sheep, goats limitedly shed infectious virus upon experimental infection and did not transmit this virus to other naïve goats upon direct contact [88]. The results of experimental MERS-CoV infection in livestock animals are in line with data from epidemiological studies. MERS-CoV seropositive llamas and alpacas are present in the field, while horses, goats, and sheep are generally found to be seronegative [22,86,87,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98].Given the fact that experimental in vivo infection studies and DPP4 expression analysis in different animal species revealed that dromedary camels are not the only animals in which MERS-CoV has an upper respiratory tract tropism [17,18,83,84], it is then relevant to question whether other animals can potentially spread MERS-CoV as well. New World camelids, i.e., alpacas and llamas, are able to transmit the virus to respective naïve animals upon contact [86]. Pigs and rabbits, on the other hand, hardly transmit the virus—neither by contact nor airborne routes [83,99]. Most likely, this is caused by the fact that pigs and rabbits, unlike dromedary camels, shed low levels of infectious virus upon MERS-CoV inoculation (Figure 2). This difference indicates that other host factors besides DPP4 could cause interspecies variation in MERS-CoV infection. Indeed, several glycotopes of α2,3-sialic acids that function as attachment factors of MERS-CoV are present in the nasal epithelium of dromedary camels but absent in that of rabbits and pigs (Figure 3) [24,100]. The lack of these glycotopes in pigs and rabbits might limit the susceptibility and transmission of MERS-CoV in these animals. Although the role of these glycotopes in MERS-CoV transmission still requires further investigation, it remains plausible that an efficient transmission of this virus might require the presence of both DPP4 and MERS-CoV-recognized glycotopes of α2,3-sialic acids (Figure 3).Besides entry and attachment receptors, MERS-CoV has been demonstrated to use both cell surface and lysosomal proteases to enter its target cells [39,40,43,101]. The preference of MERS-CoV to use certain host proteases is influenced by the type of target cell and the cleavage stage of their S protein prior to infection [40]. It has also been reported that the lysosomal proteases from bat cells support coronavirus spike-mediated virus entry more efficiently than their counterparts from human cells [39]. These observations suggest that host proteases from different host species may determine the species and tissue tropism of MERS-CoV.Because MERS-CoV has been circulating in dromedary camels for decades before emerging in the human population [19,20,21,22], it is plausible that this virus inhibits the immune response of dromedary camels more efficiently than that of other species, including pigs and rabbits. The difference in immune response among MERS-CoV-susceptible species is therefore another factor that might yield interspecies variation in permissiveness to MERS-CoV. Characterizing the difference in host proteases and immune responses among MERS-CoV-susceptible species, as performed for DPP4 and MERS-CoV-recognized α2,3-sialic acid glycotopes (Figure 3), has not yet been investigated. These data, however, may further explain interspecies variation in MERS-CoV infection and transmission.4. Host Factors in MERS-CoV PathogenesisMERS-CoV causes respiratory infection in humans ranging from asymptomatic to severe pneumonia [3,4]. However, it is currently unclear what causes this intraspecies variation. Epidemiology data indicate that individuals with certain risk factors are at higher risk of developing severe MERS-CoV infection [4,102]. This implies that some host factors may dictate the outcome of MERS-CoV infection, thus rendering intraspecies variation. Two of the risk factors, i.e., smoking and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), have been shown to upregulate DPP4 expression in the lungs [70,102,103,104], suggesting DPP4 as a possible reason for intraspecies variation observed among MERS-CoV patients. In healthy human lungs, DPP4 is almost exclusively expressed in type II pneumocytes [69,70]. Type II pneumocytes are small cuboidal cells that can regenerate alveolar epithelium upon injury, and roughly cover 2% of the alveolar surface area. Meanwhile, around 95% of the surface area of the alveolus is occupied by type I pneumocytes that are morphologically flat and responsible for gas exchange [105,106]. In the lungs of smokers and COPD patients, unlike in healthy human lungs, DPP4 is prominently expressed in both type I and II pneumocytes, indicating upregulated expression on type I pneumocytes [104]. Autopsy reports from fatal MERS-CoV patients showed that both type I and II pneumocytes expressed DPP4 and became infected by MERS-CoV, proposing a role of DPP4-expressing type I pneumocytes in MERS-CoV pathogenesis [64,107]. Damage to type I cells in the lung alveoli during viral infection may lead to diffuse alveolar damage [108]. In line with observations made in human MERS cases, common marmosets that express DPP4 in both type I and II pneumocytes have been reported to produce more infectious virus upon experimental MERS-CoV infection, compared to rhesus and cynomolgus macaques that merely expressed DPP4 in type II pneumocytes [58,109,110,111,112]. Accordingly, these common marmosets developed moderate-to-severe infection, while macaques generally developed mild transient pneumonia [32,58,109,110,111,112]. Similarly, in genetically modified mice that displayed MERS-CoV tropism for type II pneumocytes, only mild clinical manifestations were observed upon MERS-CoV infection [56,113]. Adapting MERS-CoV through serial passaging or upregulating DPP4 expression throughout the airway epithelium in mice, however, will induce severe clinical disease [55,56]. These data altogether support the role of DPP4-expressing type I pneumocytes in the pathogenesis of severe MERS-CoV infection.The differential expression of host factors that limits the infection should also be taken into account. DPP4 in soluble form has been demonstrated to protect against MERS-CoV infection in vitro and in a mouse model [23,114]; however, its presence in the lungs and role in MERS-CoV pathogenesis remain to be investigated. The host immune response also has the capacity to inhibit MERS-CoV infection. MERS-CoV has been shown to replicate to higher levels in immunocompromised rhesus macaques [115], consistent with the observation that immunocompromised individuals have difficulties clearing MERS-CoV upon infection [68,107,116]. The survivors of MERS-CoV infection have been shown to develop virus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses, implying the role of T cells in virus clearance [117]. However, the depletion of T cells in mice can either lead to failure in MERS-CoV clearance or improvement in clinical outcome, depending on the type of mouse model used [57,118]. Therefore, the role of adaptive immune response in MERS-CoV pathogenesis is currently unclear. On the other hand, one of the main components of the host innate immune response, type I interferon, inhibits MERS-CoV replication in susceptible cells, partly by inhibiting double membrane vesicles (DMV) formation [25,57,59,119,120]. The absence of type I interferon signaling in mice also resulted in more severe clinical manifestations and histopathological lesions upon MERS-CoV infection [57]. Advance age, which can cause delayed type I interferon response upon viral infection, is a well-known risk factor for fatal MERS-CoV infection [4,102,121,122,123]. Collectively, these data highlight the role of host innate immune response as a potent inhibitor for MERS-CoV infection.It is indubitable that severe MERS-CoV infection is not solely driven by the pathogen. Additional underlying conditions increase MERS-CoV replication and induce severe-to-fatal clinical manifestations [4,11,103,124,125]. It is plausible that more than one underlying condition is needed to yield a fatal outcome. DPP4 upregulation in type I pneumocytes and insufficient type I interferon response might be crucial determinants for severe MERS-CoV infection (Figure 4). Further investigation of the host determinants of MERS-CoV pathogenesis may offer insights for developing novel therapeutic measures.5. Concluding Remarks and Future PerspectivesAlthough MERS-CoV has been reported to undergo some genotypic changes since it emerged in the human population [12,126,127,128,129], this has not resulted in distinct phenotypic changes so far [63,126]. Therefore, host factors remain the most significant determinant in explaining inter- and intraspecies variations observed in MERS-CoV pathogenesis and transmission. DPP4 and MERS-CoV-recognized α2,3-sialic acids might partially explain these variations, since their localization has been demonstrated to be variable between MERS-CoV-susceptible species [69,71,84,100]. DPP4 expression in human lungs has also been shown to vary due to certain comorbidities [70,96,104]. Nevertheless, it is undoubtable that the inter- and intraspecies variation in MERS-CoV pathogenesis and transmission is a complex phenomenon influenced by more than one host factor. Current data suggest proteases and interferons as other critical host factors, but how they instigate inter- and intraspecies variations, as well as their role in MERS-CoV pathogenesis and transmission, still remain to be further elucidated. Characterization of the host determinants of MERS-CoV pathogenesis and transmission could potentially offer insight into this virus epidemiology and guide novel therapeutic development. It may also help to identify the most vulnerable individuals to protect against MERS-CoV infection—for example, by using vaccination. 


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: INFLUENZA A VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Viral RNA-binding ability conferred by SUMOylation at PB1 K612 of influenza A virus is essential for viral pathogenesis and transmission

IntroductionInfluenza A virus (IAV) is an important zoonotic pathogen that causes frequent epidemics and occasional pandemics in humans. Based on the antigenicity of the surface glycoproteins hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), IAVs are classified into 18 different HA subtypes and 11 different NA subtypes [1]. Since 1900, humans have suffered four influenza pandemics, among which the most recent 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus transmitted to over 215 countries and territories between April 2009 and August 2010 [2]. Moreover, humans are also constantly facing threats posed by avian influenza viruses (AIVs), with H5N1 and H7N9 human infections as two prime examples. The first human infection with H5N1 AIV occurred in Hong Kong in 1997 [3], and between 2003 and 2020, 861 human infection cases were reported, of which 455 were fatal [4]. The H7N9 low pathogenic AIVs identified in 2013 and the subsequently mutated H7N9 highly pathogenic AIVs in 2017 [5–8] led to 1568 human infections, including 615 fatal cases [9]. Therefore, continued efforts to elucidate the factors and mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs remain critical for the development of novel anti-influenza therapies.The viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex of IAVs is composed of individual viral RNA segments, three polymerase subunits [i.e., polymerase basic protein 1 (PB1), polymerase basic protein 2 (PB2), polymerase acidic protein (PA)], and nucleoprotein (NP) [10]. PB1 functions as the catalytic subunit and the assembly core of the RdRp [11–13], which is responsible for the transcription and replication of the IAV genome [14,15]. In addition to its N- and C-terminal extensions that make contact with PA and PB2, respectively, PB1 contains a central region comprising finger, fingertips, palm, and thumb domains [16], which are characteristics of RdRp. Terminal initiation during replication is dependent on the priming loop in the thumb domain of PB1 [17], which is also essential for transcriptional elongation, but not for transcriptional initiation [17,18].SUMOylation is an important regulatory posttranslational protein modification mechanism in eukaryotic cells. SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier) is a ubiquitin-like protein that is covalently conjugated to a target protein. There are four SUMO forms in humans, SUMO1, SUMO2, SUMO3, and SUMO4, among which SUMO1-SUMO3 are ubiquitously expressed and covalently conjugated to the lysine residues of target proteins [19]. SUMOs are conjugated to target proteins via a three-step cascade, involving a heterodimeric E1 activating enzyme, SAE1/SAE2; a unique E2 conjugating enzyme, Ubc9; and several E3 ligases [19,20]. The SUMOylation of a particular substrate may interfere with or facilitate its interaction with binding partners, regulate its activity, function, subcellular localization, and can affect its stability [21,22].IAV proteins are also targets of SUMOylation. To date, three IAV proteins [i.e., non-structural protein 1 (NS1), matrix protein 1 (M1), and NP] have been clearly identified as substrates of SUMO and the role of their SUMOylation in virus replication has been clarified. Among them, NS1 was the first identified SUMOylated IAV protein, the SUMOylation of which leads to enhanced protein stability and improved virus growth in cell culture [23,24]. SUMOylation of M1 has been shown to facilitate the nuclear export of vRNP complexes and the assembly of virus particles [25]; SUMOylation of NP is essential for the intracellular trafficking of NP and for virus growth in vitro [26]. More IAV proteins could be targets of SUMO modification, and IAV infection has been shown to induce a global increase in cellular SUMOylation [27,28]. However, the role of SUMO modification in the pathogenesis and transmission of IAV has not been explored.Here, we demonstrated that PB1, the catalytic core of the viral RdRp, is SUMOylated by SUMO1 in both transfected and virus-infected cells. We found a highly conserved lysine residue at position 612 (K612) is the key SUMO acceptor site of PB1. The SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 was found to be critical for vRNP complex activity and virus replication in vitro. Mechanistically, the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 was essential for PB1 to function in the binding of vRNA. Importantly, a SUMOylation-deficient PB1 K612R mutation significantly attenuated the virulence of H1N1, H5N1 and H7N9 viruses in mice. Furthermore, the replication and respiratory droplet transmission of the PB1 K612R mutant of a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus in ferrets was reduced compared with the wild-type virus, which created a stress condition that drove the R612K reversion mutation in inoculated and exposed ferrets.ResultsIAV PB1 is mainly SUMOylated by SUMO1Given the importance of SUMOylation in the posttranslational modification of viral proteins, we first investigated whether IAV PB1, the core subunit of viral RdRp, is a target of the host SUMOylation system. HEK293T cells were cotransfected with Flag-tagged PB1 of A/WSN/33 (WSN, H1N1) virus (WSN-H1PB1), along with or without SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9, SUMO1 or SUMO1mut (a conjugation-deficient SUMO1 variant), and SUMO-specific protease SENP1 or SENP1mut (SENP1 with loss-of-function mutations) [24,26]. At 48 h post-transfection, the cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag agarose, and then western blotted with an anti-PB1 monoclonal antibody (mAb). When WSN-H1PB1 was cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO1, a clear additional band for PB1 of ~110 kDa was detected, reflecting the potential modification of PB1 (95 kDa) by SUMO1. In contrast, this 110-kDa band was absent from cells cotransfected with SUMO1mut, indicating that WSN-H1PB1 is indeed SUMOylated (Fig 1A). To confirm these results, we introduced an expression construct for the de-SUMOylating enzyme SENP1 or SENP1mut into the transfection. The high molecular weight band of SUMOylated PB1 at ~110 kDa was markedly reduced when cotransfected with SENP1, whereas it was unaffected in the SENP1mut-expressing cells (Fig 1A). Of note, the same molecular weight bands of WSN-H1PB1 were also detected when the precipitated proteins were analyzed by using an anti-SUMO1 mAb, further confirming that WSN-H1PB1 was modified by SUMO1 (Fig 1A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g001Fig 1IAV PB1 is mainly SUMOylated by SUMO1.(A-C) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids expressing Flag-tagged PB1 from WSN (H1N1) (A), VN/1180 (H5N1) (B), or AH/1 (H7N9) (C), together with or without SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, Ubc9, and SENP1 or SENP1mut. At 48 h post-transfection, cell lysates were prepared, immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and western blotted to detect PB1 and SUMO1 with the indicated antibodies. (D-F) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged PB1 from WSN (H1N1) (D), VN/1180 (H5N1) (E), or AH/1 (H7N9) (F), together with or without Ubc9, and SUMO2 or SUMO3. At 48 h post-transfection, cell lysates were prepared, immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and western blotted to detect PB1 with an anti-PB1 mAb. The values on the left of the blots are molecular sizes in kilodaltons of the corresponding bands. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments.Next, we examined the SUMO1 modification of PB1 of other IAV subtypes and found that the PB1 proteins of A/chicken/Vietnam-Ca Mau/1180/2006 (VN/1180, H5N1) (VN-H5PB1) and A/Anhui/1/2013 (AH/1, H7N9) (AH-H7PB1) were also SUMOylated by SUMO1 in transfected HEK293T cells (Fig 1B and 1C). Collectively, these results indicate that SUMOylation of IAV PB1 by SUMO1 is a common posttranslational modification that lacks viral subtype specificity.Finally, we determined whether IAV PB1 was also SUMOylated by the other two forms of SUMO, SUMO2 and SUMO3. As shown in Fig 1D–1F, WSN-H1PB1, VN-H5PB1, and AH-H7PB1 were not SUMOylated when cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO2 or SUMO3.Taken together, these results clearly demonstrate that IAV PB1 protein is a target for SUMOylation by SUMO1, but not SUMO2 or SUMO3.The lysine residue at position 612 (K612) is the SUMOylation site of IAV PB1To identify the SUMOylation site(s) of PB1 protein, we used the in silico prediction program GPS-SUMO [29]. Three lysine residues, K379, K612, and K736, were predicted to be potential candidate sites for SUMO-conjugation in WSN-H1PB1 (Fig 2A). Individual K-to-R mutant PB1 proteins for all three predicted lysine residues were then generated, and their effect on the SUMOylation of PB1 was examined by coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) and western blotting analysis. The precipitated proteins were detected by using an anti-PB1 mAb and an anti-SUMO1 mAb, respectively. As expected, WSN-H1PB1 was SUMOylated to form a 110-kDa high molecular weight band when cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO1. The main SUMOylated band was also present in the lanes transfected with the PB1/K379R and PB1/K736R mutants, but not the PB1/K612R mutant. These results indicate that K612, but not K379 or K736, is the key SUMO acceptor site of WSN-H1PB1 (Fig 2B).10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g002Fig 2K612 is the key SUMOylation site of IAV PB1.(A) Candidate SUMOylated sites (indicated in boldface and underline) in IAV PB1 were predicted by using the GPS-SUMO software. (B) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or its potential SUMOylation site mutant WSN-H1PB1/K379R, WSN-H1PB1/K612R, or WSN-H1PB1/K736R, together with or without SUMO1 and Ubc9. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were prepared, immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and western blotted with an anti-PB1 or anti-SUMO1 mAb. (C) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or the indicated potential SUMOylation site mutant, together with SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and Ubc9. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blotting were performed as in (B). (D, E) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged VN/1180-H5PB1 (D) or AH/1-H7PB1 (E), or their corresponding K612R mutant, together with SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and Ubc9. IP and western blotting were performed as in (B). Data shown are representative of three independent experiments in (B-E).To confirm that K612 was indeed the major SUMO acceptor site, the WSN-H1PB1 and WSN-H1PB1 mutants were each cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and then co-IPed and western blotted. As shown in Fig 2C, the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band was detected when WSN-H1PB1, WSN-H1PB1/K379R, or WSN-H1PB1/K736R was cotransfected with SUMO1, whereas the indicated SUMOylated PB1 band disappeared when SUMO1mut was used instead of SUMO1. However, when the WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant was cotransfected with SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band was not detected. These data further confirm that K612 is the authentic SUMOylation site of WSN-H1PB1.We next determined whether VN-H5PB1 and AH-H7PB1, which both possess K612, were also SUMOylated at this site. Compared with wild-type VN-H5PB1 and AH-H7PB1, which were SUMOylated by SUMO1, analysis of the VN-H5PB1/K612R and AH-H7PB1/K612R mutants did not reveal the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band (Fig 2D and 2E), indicating that the lysine residue at position 612 is also a major SUMOylation site of VN-H5PB1 and AH-H7PB1. By performing a systemic sequence analysis involving 14,226 PB1 sequences, we found that the K612 residue is highly conserved among different IAV subtypes (S1 Table). Collectively, our results indicate that the K612 residue is a common SUMO acceptor site of the IAV PB1 proteins.PB1 is SUMOylated at K612 in infected cellsTo address whether the SUMOylation of PB1 protein occurs during IAV infection, SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutants of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses (WSN-PB1K612R, VN/1180-PB1K612R, and AH/1-PB1K612R) were generated by reverse genetics and deep-sequenced to ensure that they contained no unwanted mutations (S2 Table). HEK293T cells transiently overexpressing Ubc9 and SUMO1-Flag or SUMO1mut-Flag were infected with WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), AH/1 (H7N9), or their PB1/K612R mutants at an MOI of 2. Eighteen hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag agarose and then western blotted with an anti-PB1 mAb. As shown in Fig 3A, a band of 110 kDa corresponding to PB1-SUMO1 was detected in WSN (H1N1) virus-infected cells transfected with SUMO1 and Ubc9; whereas the indicated PB1-SUMO1 band disappeared when SUMO1mut was used in place of SUMO1. In contrast, the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band was not detectable in cells infected with the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus (Fig 3A). When tested in the background of the VN/1180 (H5N1) and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses, similar results were obtained (Fig 3B and 3C). These data demonstrate that IAV PB1 is SUMOylated at K612 in infected cells.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g003Fig 3IAV PB1 is SUMOylated in infected cells.HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and Ubc9. At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (A), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (B), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (C) at an MOI of 2. Eighteen hours later, the cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads and western blotted with an anti-PB1 mAb. The asterisk indicates unknown protein. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments.SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the stability or cellular localization of PB1After identifying K612 as the major SUMOylation site of IAV PB1, we investigated whether the stability of PB1 is affected by SUMOylation at K612. HEK293T cells were transfected with an expression plasmid encoding WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant. At 24 h post-transfection, protein synthesis was blocked with cycloheximide (CHX) and the steady-state levels of PB1 after CHX treatment were monitored by use of western blotting. Both PB1 and PB1/K612R protein levels remained stable at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 12 h under CHX treatment (Fig 4A), indicating that SUMOylation at K612 has no effect on the stability of IAV PB1. To further demonstrate that SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 does not alter protein stability, we cotransfected Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant with Ubc9 and SUMO1 in HEK293T cells. As shown in Fig 4B, both native PB1 and SUMOylated PB1 were present in cells expressing WSN-H1PB1, and the level of total PB1 remained stable across different time points; native PB1, but not the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1, was detected in cells expressing WSN-H1PB1/K612R, whose level remained unchanged. These results demonstrate that the stability of IAV PB1 is unaffected by the SUMOylation status of the K612 residue. We also found that SUMOylation at K612 did not affect the stability of VN-H5PB1 or AH-H7PB1 (Fig 4C–4F). Together, these data show that SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the stability of IAV PB1.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g004Fig 4SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the stability of IAV PB1.(A, C, and E) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R (A), VN/1180-H5PB1 or VN/1180-H5PB1/K612R (C), or AH/1-H7PB1 or AH/1-H7PB1/K612R (E). At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were treated with 100 μg/ml cycloheximide (CHX). The steady-state levels of PB1 protein after CHX treatment were then assessed at the indicated time points by western blotting with an anti-PB1 mAb. Western blots of whole cell lysates with an anti-GAPDH mAb are shown as loading controls. (B, D, and F) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R (B), VN/1180-H5PB1 or VN1180-H5PB1/K612R (D), or AH/1-H7PB1 or AH/1-H7PB1/K612R (F), together with SUMO1 and Ubc9. At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were treated with 100 μg/ml CHX for the time indicated. The cell lysates were then immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and both the precipitated proteins and the whole cell lysates were western blotted by using an anti-PB1 mAb. Arrow, SUMOylated PB1 protein. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments.Since SUMOylation could potentially affect the cellular localization of target proteins, we examined whether SUMOylation at K612 altered the intracellular distribution of IAV PB1. A549 cells were infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus at an MOI of 5, and the cellular localization of the PB1 protein was analyzed by use of an immunofluorescence assay. As shown in Fig 5A and 5B, at 2 h post-infection (p.i.), the fluorescence signal of PB1 was very weak, and PB1 mainly localized to the cytoplasm of both WSN- and WSN-PB1K612R-infected cells. At 4 h p.i., PB1 had entered the nucleus and appeared to accumulate there. At 6 h and 8 h p.i., the PB1 signal was strong in the nucleus of the infected cells, and by 10 h p.i., PB1 was largely exported from the nucleus and had accumulated in the cytoplasm. Overall, no observable quantitative difference was found between WSN- and WSN-PB1K612R-infected cells with respect to the localization of PB1 across the infection course (Fig 5C). These results indicate that PB1 SUMOylation at 612K does not influence the cellular localization of PB1 during virus infection.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g005Fig 5SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the cellular localization of PB1.(A, B) A549 cells were infected with WSN (H1N1) (A) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (B) at an MOI of 5, and the cells were fixed at the indicated time points, followed by staining with a rabbit anti-PB1 pAb and incubation with Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L). The nuclei were stained with DAPI. Representative images are shown. (C) Quantitative analysis of PB1 localization in virus-infected cells. The results shown are calculated from one hundred cells. On the basis of the confocal microscopy in panels A and B, the localization of PB1 was categorized into three types: predominantly cytoplasmic localization (blue), clear nuclear localization (red), and simultaneous localization in the cytoplasm and nucleus (green).SUMOylation at PB1 K612 does not affect the assembly of the viral RNP complexPB1 is the core subunit of the viral heterotrimeric polymerase complex, with its N-terminal region interacting with PA and its C-terminal region binding PB2 [12,13]. We therefore tested whether the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 affects the PB1-PA and PB1-PB2 interactions. HEK293T cells were transfected for 48 h with WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant individually or simultaneously were transfected with WSN-H1PB2 or WSN-H1PA. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-PB1 mAb and then western blotted to detect PB1, PB2, or PA. The amount of PB2 or PA that was immunoprecipitated by WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R was comparable (Fig 6), indicating that the interactions between PB1-PB2 and PB1-PA were not affected by the SUMOylation at K612 of PB1. We also tested whether the SUMOylation at PB1 K612 affects the assembly of the viral RNP complex. Viral RNP complexes, bearing WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R, were reconstituted in HEK293T cells by co-transfection of expression plasmids for PB2, PB1 or PB1/K612R, PA, and NP of WSN (H1N1) virus, together with pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, which was used to provide a vRNA-like template RNA [30–32]. At 48 h post-transfection, the vRNP complexes were immunoprecipitated from cell lysates by using an anti-PB1 mAb, and the presence of PB2, PA, and NP in the precipitated vRNP complexes was detected by western blotting. No significant differences in the amounts of PB2, PA, and NP were observed between vRNP complexes bearing WSN-H1PB1 and those bearing WSN-H1PB1/K612R (S1 Fig). These results indicate that SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 has no effect on the assembly of the vRNP complex of IAV.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g006Fig 6SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 has no effect on the interaction of PB1 with PB2 or PA.(A) PB1/K612R mutation does not affect the PB1-PB2 interaction. HEK293T cells were transfected individually or in combination as indicated with plasmids expressing WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant, and WSN-H1PB2. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with a mouse anti-PB1 mAb, followed by western blotting with antibodies against PB1 and PB2. (B) Quantification of immunoprecipitated PB2 in (A). Band intensities of western blots from three assays were quantified by using ImageJ software, and the amount of precipitated PB2 was normalized to that of precipitated PB1. (C) PB1/K612R mutation does not affect the PB1-PA interaction. HEK293T cells were transfected individually or in combination as indicated with plasmids expressing WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant, and WSN-H1PA. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with a mouse anti-PB1 mAb, followed by western blotting with antibodies against PB1 and PA. (D) Quantification of immunoprecipitated PA in (C) as described in (B). The amount of precipitated PA was normalized to that of precipitated PB1. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of three assays and the significance was tested with a Student’s t-test (B, D). NS, not significant.SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 enhances vRNP complex activityThe vRNP complex of IAV is responsible for the transcription and replication of the viral genome [14,15]. We therefore asked whether vRNP complex activity was affected by SUMOylation of PB1 at K612. To this end, a minigenome assay was performed in HEK293T cells, which were transfected with the four vRNP complex protein expression plasmids, PB2, PB1 or PB1/K612R, PA, and NP of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus, together with a reporter plasmid, pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, encoding a vRNA-like firefly luciferase gene [30–32]. Forty-eight hours later, the luciferase activity of the cell lysates was measured to reveal the vRNP complex activity. The results showed that the vRNP complex activity of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) virus decreased by approximately 50%, 55%, and 95%, respectively, in cells expressing PB1/K612R compared with that of PB1 (Fig 7A–7C). These findings demonstrate that the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 is essential for the vRNP complex activity of IAV.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g007Fig 7SUMOylation at K612 of IAV PB1 is essential for vRNP complex activity and virus replication in vitro.(A-C) Four vRNP protein expression plasmids (PB2, PA, NP, and PB1 or a PB1/K612R mutant) derived from WSN (H1N1) (A), VN/1180 (H5N1) (B), or AH/1 (H7N9) (C), together with a luciferase reporter, pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, and an internal control reporter, pRL-TK, were cotransfected into HEK293T cells. Forty-eight hours later, the cell lysates were subjected to a dual-luciferase reporter assay. Western blotting was also performed to assess the expression of the transfected vRNP protein constructs (bottom panel). (D-F) Plaque phenotypes of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (D), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (E), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (F) on MDCK cells. (G-I) Growth curves of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (G), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (H), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (I). MDCK cells were inoculated with the indicated viruses at an MOI of 0.001, and the supernatants were collected at the indicated time points to determine the virus titers by use of plaque assays. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments. The results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) of triplicates and the significance was tested with a Student’s t-test (A-C) or a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test (G-I). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation impairs IAV replicationTo determine the effect of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation on the in vitro replication of IAV, we first compared the plaque morphologies of the wild-type WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses with those of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant viruses in MDCK cells. Compared with the wild-type viruses, which formed large plaques, the PB1/K612R mutant viruses formed much smaller plaques, indicating that virus growth was greatly impaired by the lack of SUMOylation of PB1 at position 612 (Fig 7D–7F).We next examined the replication kinetics of the PB1/K612R mutant viruses. MDCK cells were infected with one of the wild-type viruses or with the PB1/K612R mutant viruses at an MOI of 0.001. Supernatants were collected at 12, 24, 36, and 48 h p.i. and titrated by a plaque assay on MDCK cells. We found that the PB1/K612R mutation led to 25- to 76-, 2- to 7-, and 3- to 22-fold reductions in growth titers from 12 to 48 h p.i. for the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1), and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) viruses, respectively, compared with the corresponding wild-type viruses. These data further demonstrate that the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 is critical for optimal replication of IAV (Fig 7G–7I).The K612R mutation impairs the ability of PB1 to bind vRNAThe C-proximal sequences located downstream of position 493 (494–757) of PB1 binds to vRNA [33]. The amino acid K612 is located in the vRNA binding domain (Fig 8A). We therefore determined whether the SUMOylation-defective K612R mutation affects the ability of PB1 to bind to vRNA. HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid expressing the Flag-tagged 494–757 region of wild-type PB1 or the PB1/K612R mutant of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus (Fig 8B–8D). A model vRNA was transcribed from the NS gene of the WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus in vitro (Fig 8E–8G), and the protein-vRNA binding assay was carried out as previously reported [34]. As shown in Fig 8H, the amount of vRNA bound by WSN-H1PB1494-757 protein was much higher than that bound by WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R. When tested in the VN/1180 (H5N1) or AH/1 (H7N9) background, the VN/1180-H5PB1494-757 and AH/1-H7PB1494-757 proteins again bound much more model vRNA than the corresponding PB1/K612R mutant proteins, VN/1180-H5PB1494-757/K612R and AH/1-H7PB1494-757/K612R (Fig 8I and 8J). These data demonstrate that the K612R mutation impairs the vRNA-binding ability of PB1.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g008Fig 8K612R mutation impairs the ability of PB1 to bind to vRNA.(A) Schematic illustration of IAV PB1 and its C-terminal 494–757 region that is involved in the vRNA-binding activity of PB1. The vRNA binding regions in PB1 protein are marked in pink. (B-D) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids expressing the Flag-tagged 494–757 region of wild-type PB1 or a K612R mutant PB1 of WSN (H1N1) (B), VN/1180 (H5N1) (C), or AH/1 (H7N9) (D) virus; plasmid expression was verified by western blotting. (E-G) Model vRNAs were transcribed from the NS gene of the WSN (H1N1) (E), VN/1180 (H5N1) (F), or AH/1 (H7N9) (G) virus in vitro, and detected by gel electrophoresis. (H-J) A protein binding vRNA assay was performed to quantify the amount of vRNA bound by the truncated wild-type or mutant PB1 proteins. The amount of vRNA bound by WSN-H1PB1494-757 or WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R (H), VN/1180-H5PB1494-757 or VN/1180-H5PB1494-757/K612R (I), or AH/1-H7PB1494-757 or AH/1-H7PB1494-757/K612R (J) was quantified by use of qRT-PCR. (K-M) An RNA-protein pull-down assay was performed to quantify the amount of truncated wild-type or mutant PB1 protein that was bound by the model vRNA. The amount of truncated PB1 protein WSN-H1PB1494-757 or WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R (K), VN/1180-H5PB1494-757 or VN/1180-H5PB1494-757/K612R (L), or AH/1-H7PB1494-757 or AH/1-H7PB1494-757/K612R (M) bound and unbound by the model vRNA was detected by western blotting. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments in (H-M). The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of triplicates and the significance was tested with a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test (H-J). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.To further confirm that the K612R mutation affects the binding of the PB1 protein to vRNA, we conducted an RNA-protein pull-down experiment. Ten micrograms of biotinylated model vRNA was captured with streptavidin magnetic beads. Cell lysates containing 100 μg of total protein that had previously been transfected with a plasmid expressing truncated WSN-H1PB1 protein (PB1494-757 or PB1494-757/K612R) or pCAGGS vector as a control were then added to the RNA-bound beads. The amount of both unbound and vRNA-bound proteins was analyzed by western blotting. We found that the same amount of vRNA bound more WSN-H1PB1494-757 protein than WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R protein (Fig 8K). When we conducted this experiment in the VN/1180 (H5N1) and AH/1 (H7N9) backgrounds, we found that the amount of the PB1/K612R protein bound by vRNA was significantly lower than that of the wild-type protein (Fig 8L and 8M). Collectively, these results demonstrate that the K612R mutation in IAV PB1 impairs the ability of the PB1 protein to bind vRNA.The virulence of SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant viruses is attenuated in miceTo determine the significance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 to the virulence of IAVs, we evaluated the replication of the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant viruses in mice. Three 6-week-old female BALB/c mice were inoculated with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, or 105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus, or 106 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus. The mice were killed on day 3 p.i., and the virus titers in their organs were determined by using plaque assays on MDCK cells. The WSN (H1N1) and WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant viruses replicated only in respiratory organs, and the titers of the WSN (H1N1) virus in the nasal turbinates and lungs of the mice were significantly higher than those in these tissues of the mice that were inoculated with the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus (Fig 9A). The VN/1180 (H5N1) virus caused systemic infection, with virus replication detected in the nasal turbinates, lungs, spleens, and kidneys, whereas the replication of the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus was restricted to the respiratory tract, with much lower titers in the nasal turbinates and lungs than the wild-type VN/1180 (H5N1) virus (Fig 9B). Similarly, the viral titers of AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus in the nasal turbinates and lungs of mice were much lower than those inoculated with AH/1 (H7N9) virus (Fig 9C). These results demonstrate that the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation significantly attenuates the replication of IAVs in vivo.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g009Fig 9SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation attenuates the replication and pathogenicity of IAVs in mice.(A) Replication of WSN (H1N1) and WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) in mice. Six-week-old BALB/c mice were inoculated intranasally with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), and organs were collected on day 3 p.i. for virus titration by plaque assays (n = 3). Data shown are mean ± SD for organ samples from three mice; significance was assessed with a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. NS, not significant. (B) Replication of VN/1180 (H5N1) and VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) in mice inoculated with 105 PFU of the indicated virus, as determined in (A). (C) Replication of AH/1 (H7N9) and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) in mice inoculated with 106 PFU of the indicated virus, as determined in (A). (D, E) Mortality assessment of mice infected with WSN (H1N1) (D) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (E). Mice were inoculated intranasally with different doses of the indicated viruses and observed for 14 days. (n = 5 mice for each group). (F, G) Mortality assessment of mice infected with VN/1180 (H5N1) (F) and VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (G) as determined in (D, E). (H, I) Mortality assessment of mice infected with AH/1 (H7N9) (H) and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (I) as determined in (D, E). (J-M) Hematoxylin-and-eosin (H&E) staining (J, L) and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for viral NP (K, M) of lung sections prepared on day 3 p.i. from mice intranasally infected with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1). (N-Q) H&E staining (N, P) and IHC staining for viral NP (O, Q) of lung sections prepared on day 3 p.i. from mice intranasally infected with 105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1). (R-U) H&E staining (R, T) and IHC staining for viral NP (S, U) of lung sections prepared on day 3 p.i. from mice intranasally infected with 106 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9). Scale bars = 200 μm (J, L, N, P, R, and T); Scale bars = 100 μm (K, M, O, Q, S, and U).We next determined the 50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) of the PB1/K612R mutant viruses. Groups of five mice were intranasally inoculated with serially diluted mutant viruses or the corresponding wild-type viruses, and their body weight, disease signs, and death were monitored daily for 14 days. The wild-type WSN (H1N1) virus caused severe disease and killed the mice at an MLD50 of 103.5 PFU (Figs 9D and S2A). However, no deaths were observed among the mice inoculated with any dose of the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, and all of the mice had gained weight at the end of the observation period (S2B Fig), yielding an MLD50 of >106.5 PFU (Fig 9E). Consistent with these results, mice inoculated with the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus lost much less body weight than those inoculated with the same dose of the wild-type VN/1180 virus (S2C and S2D Fig); the MLD50 of the VN/1180 (H5N1) virus was 102.22 PFU, whereas the lethality of the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus was reduced by 100-fold (MLD50 = 104.22 PFU) (Fig 9F and 9G). Similarly, the body weight loss of mice inoculated with AH/1 (H7N9) virus and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus were observed in the 105–107 PFU groups, with more severe body weight loss observed in mice inoculated with AH/1 (H7N9) virus than AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus (S2E and S2F Fig); and the MLD50 was 105.5 PFU for AH/1 (H7N9) virus, whereas was >107.5 PFU for AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus, displaying an at least 100-fold reduction compared with the wild-type virus (Fig 9H and 9I). These data indicate that the virulence of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant viruses is highly compromised compared with that of the wild-type viruses in mice.We also performed histopathological studies on lung sections from the wild-type- and PB1/K612R mutant virus-inoculated mice. The WSN (H1N1) virus-infected mice exhibited more severe lung lesions (i.e. perivascular edema, infiltration of inflammatory cells, necrosis, and exfoliation of bronchiole epithelial cells) compared with the mice infected with the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus. Immunohistochemical analysis with an anti-NP pAb revealed more viral antigen-positive cells in the lungs of mice infected with the wild-type WSN (H1N1) virus than in mice infected with the mutant virus (Fig 9J–9M). Similar results were observed in the lungs of mice infected with the wild-type VN/1180 (H5N1), AH/1 (H7N9) and their corresponding PB1/K612R mutant viruses (Fig 9N–9U). These data show that the PB1/K612R mutant viruses induce significantly less severe lung lesions compared with the wild-type viruses. Collectively, the above findings indicate that the SUMOylation at PB1 K612 plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of IAVs in mice.SUMOylation at PB1 K612 may facilitate the replication and respiratory droplet transmission of IAV in ferretsEfficient and sustained transmission among humans is the most prominent property of pandemic and epidemic IAVs [35]. To determine whether the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 affects the transmissibility of IAVs, a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus, A/Fuzhou/1/2009 (FZ/1, H1N1), and its SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) were rescued by reverse genetics. We then tested the replication ability of these viruses in ferrets. Both the FZ/1 (H1N1) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) viruses were detected in the nasal turbinates, soft palate, tonsils, trachea, and lungs of the inoculated ferrets on day 4 p.i. Overall, the titers of the FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus in the organs tested were lower than those of the FZ/1 (H1N1) virus, especially in nasal turbinates, tonsils, and lungs (Fig 10A and 10B). We next tested the respiratory droplet transmissibility of the FZ/1 (H1N1) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) viruses in ferrets. Both the FZ/1 (H1N1) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) viruses were detected in nasal washes from inoculated ferrets between days 2 and 6 p.i. Notably, FZ/1 (H1N1) was present in the nasal washes of all three exposed ferrets on days 3, 5, and 7 post-exposure (p.e.), and was present in the nasal wash of one exposed ferret on day 9 p.e., with peak titers ranging from 6.0 to 7.3 log10 PFU/mL (Fig 10C). By contrast, in the FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1)-exposed group, the virus was detected in the nasal wash of only one ferret on day 3 p.e., and in the nasal wash of another ferret until day 7 p.e., with peak titers ranging from 3.9 to 6.3 log10 PFU/mL (Fig 10D). All of the inoculated ferrets and the exposed ferrets that shed viruses seroconverted on day 21 p.i. or p.e. (Fig 10E and 10F). These results suggest that the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation is correlated with the impaired replication and transmission of the FZ/1 (H1N1) virus in ferrets.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g010Fig 10PB1/K612R mutation compromises the replication and respiratory droplet transmission of IAVs in ferrets.(A, B) Replication of a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus FZ/1 and its mutant FZ/1-PB1K612R in ferrets. Groups of two ferrets were intranasally inoculated with 106 PFU of FZ/1 (A) or FZ/1-PB1K612R (B). The ferrets were euthanized on day 4 post-inoculation and the indicated organs were collected for virus titration by plaque assays. Each color bar represents the virus titer from an individual animal. (C, D) Respiratory droplet transmission of FZ/1 (H1N1) (C) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) (D) in ferrets. Groups of three ferrets were intranasally inoculated with 106 PFU of the tested virus, and 24 h later three naïve ferrets were introduced into the neighboring cages. Nasal washes were collected every 2 days for virus titration by plaque assays. Each color bar represents the virus titer from an individual ferret. (E, F) Seroconversion was confirmed by use of a hemagglutinin inhibition (HI) assay. Each bar represents the HI antibody titer from an individual animal. The dashed black lines indicate the lower limit of detection.Finally, we sought to determine whether the introduced PB1/K612R mutation was stably maintained during viral replication in ferrets. Viral RNAs extracted from nasal washes of FZ/1-PB1K612R-inoculated and -exposed ferrets were reverse-transcribed into cDNA, and the full-length PB1 gene was amplified and deep-sequenced. Strikingly, PB1/K612R was not stably maintained during virus replication in ferrets. The R612K reversion mutation in PB1 was found on day 2 p.i. in the inoculated ferrets, and all of the viruses contained the R612K reversion mutation in the inoculated animals on day 4 p.i. (S3 Table). In the virus-positive exposed ferret on day 3 p.e., 99% of the viruses in the nasal wash contained PB1 R612. However, the viruses mutated to K612 quickly, with 96% of the sequencing reads bearing K612 on day 5 p.e. Interestingly, the second virus-positive exposed ferret had already acquired the PB1 R612K reversion mutation when the virus was detected in the nasal wash on day 7 p.e. (Fig 10D and S3 Table). These results suggest that the transmission of the FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus may have occurred or have been enhanced after it acquired the R612K reversion mutation in its PB1 protein.DiscussionPosttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, and SUMOylation, play important roles in the regulation of protein activity, localization and stability [36]. SUMOylation is an important reversible posttranslational modification that is extensively involved in the regulation of viral protein functions [37]. Several viral proteins of IAV, for example, NS1, M1, and NP, are reported to be SUMOylated in transfected and infected cells [23,25–27,38]. As the assembly core of the IAV polymerase complex, PB1 binds to the PA protein through its N-terminal domain and binds to the PB2 protein through its C-terminal domain in order to play a central role in the transcription and replication of the viral genome. In addition to the clear role of SUMOylation in the posttranslational modification of the specific IAV proteins mentioned above, IAV infection has been shown to induce a global increase in cellular SUMOylation levels and PB1 has been suggested to be a target of SUMOylation [27,28]. However, the molecular details of PB1 SUMOylation and its role in virus replication remain unclear. More importantly, the biological significance of SUMOylation for the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs has never been investigated.In the present study, we clearly demonstrated that IAV PB1 is SUMOylated by SUMO1 in transfected and infected cells, and we mapped the key SUMOylation site of the PB1 protein to residue K612 in the C-terminal region. Large-scale sequence analysis revealed that the lysine residue at position 612 of PB1 is highly conserved among different IAV strains. These findings reveal that SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 is a common posttranslational modification mechanism of IAVs. We speculate that the acquisition and stable maintenance of K612 in PB1 is the outcome of host adaptation of IAVs to achieve optimal viral fitness.The functional consequences of SUMOylation are highly diverse depending on the target proteins [21,39,40]. We investigated the effect of SUMOylation of K612 on the biological properties of the PB1 protein, and found that SUMOylation at K612 did not affect the interaction of PB1 with the other two polymerase subunits, PB2 and PA, and also did not interfere with vRNP complex assembly. Unlike the viral NS1 protein, which is stabilized by SUMOylation [24], the SUMOylation of K612 had no effect on the stability of PB1, and also did not change the cellular localization of PB1 in infected cells. Functionally, we found that the vRNP complex activity decreased significantly when the PB1 protein could not undergo SUMO modification at the mutated K612R residue. In the WSN (H1N1) and VN/1180 (H5N1) virus backgrounds, the vRNP complex activity was reduced by about 50% due to the PB1/K612R mutation, and in the AH/1 (H7N9) virus background, this mutation led to an approximately 95% reduction in vRNP complex activity. Because the SUMO acceptor site K612 is located in the vRNA binding domain of the PB1 protein, we tested whether the K612R mutation affects the binding of PB1 to vRNA. We found that lack of SUMOylation of PB1 at the mutated K612R residue significantly impaired the ability of the PB1 protein to bind to vRNA, thereby severely limiting the replication and transcription of IAVs. These data clearly indicate that SUMOylation at K612 is indispensable to PB1 for the ability to bind to vRNA with high affinity, which is essential for PB1 to fulfil its function as the enzymatic core of the vRNP complex.In characterizing the effect of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 on the replication of IAVs, we found that SUMOylation-defective PB1 K612R mutant viruses formed much smaller plaques in MDCK cells than the wild-type viruses, and that their growth kinetics were also severely compromised in MDCK cells. These results are consistent with the role of SUMOylation of other IAV proteins, such as NP, M1, and NS1, for viral replication in vitro [24–26]. Consistent with the in vitro growth properties, the PB1/K612R mutant viruses replicated to much lower titers in mouse organs compared with the corresponding wild-type viruses; of note, the replication of the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus was restricted to respiratory organs, whereas the wild-type VN/1180 (H5N1) virus caused systemic infection.The biological significance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 on the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs was thoroughly explored. In the mouse model, we found that the virulence of the SUMOylation-defective PB1 K612R mutant viruses was significantly attenuated compared with that of the wild-type WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1) or AH/1 (H7N9) virus, indicating that SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 is necessary for IAVs to be virulent in mice. Sustained respiratory droplet transmission is an essential property of pandemic and epidemic IAVs [35], and we found that the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 may facilitate the transmission of IAVs. The wild-type 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus, A/Fuzhou/1/2009, transmitted to all three exposed ferrets via respiratory droplets, whereas the PB1-K612R mutant virus transmitted to two of the three exposed ferrets. Notably, the R612K reversion mutation was identified on day 2 p.i., and accounted for 100% of the residues at position 612 of PB1 on day 4 p.i., in all three inoculated ferrets; virus shedding in one of the two positive exposed ferrets was detected until day 7 p.e., and almost all shed viruses carried the R612K reversion mutation. These findings indicate that the stress condition, caused by the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation, drives the reversion of the mutant virus to the wild-type phenotype. The SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 would, therefore, appear to be a prerequisite for the efficient replication and transmission of pandemic influenza viruses. Together, these data shed light on the importance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 in the pathogenesis and the transmission of IAVs.In summary, here we found that IAVs can manipulate the host SUMOylation system to modify their PB1 protein. The highly conserved K612 residue of PB1 was pinpointed as the key acceptor site that conjugates with SUMO1. vRNP complex activity and viral replication were severely attenuated in the presence of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation, which were attributed to the impaired binding affinity to vRNA caused by this mutation. Strikingly, the SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 was important for the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs in mammalian models. Collectively, our study revealed the biological significance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 in IAV infection, which could serve as a potential therapeutic target for the development of novel antiviral therapies.Materials and methodsEthics statementsThis study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the Ministry of Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of China. The protocols for animal studies were approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of the Harbin Veterinary Research Institute (HVRI) of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) (approval numbers BRDW-XBS–19 for mice and BRDW-XD–19 for ferrets).FacilityAll experiments with live H5N1 and H7N9 viruses were conducted within the enhanced animal biosafety level 3 (ABSL3+) facility at the HVRI of CAAS, which is approved for such use by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. All animal studies were approved by the Review Board of the HVRI, CAAS. The details of the facility and the biosafety and biosecurity measures used have been previously reported [31,41].Cells and virusesHEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich), human lung carcinoma cells (A549) were cultured in F12K medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS, and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were cultured in MEM (Life Technologies) containing 5% newborn calf serum (Sigma-Aldrich). All cells were maintained in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2 at 37°C.A/chicken/Vietnam-Ca Mau/1180/2006 (VN/1180, H5N1) and A/Anhui/1/2013 (AH/1, H7N9) were grown in 10-day-old specific-pathogen-free (SPF) embryonated chicken eggs, as reported previously [6,42]. A/WSN/33 (WSN, H1N1) and a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus, A/Fuzhou/1/2009 (FZ/1, H1N1), were propagated in MDCK cells cultured in MEM containing 0.3% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.5 μg/ml N-tosyl-L-phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich).PlasmidsThe PB2, PB1, PA, and NP genes of three influenza viruses [i.e. WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9)] were cloned into the mammalian expression vector pCAGGS [43]. pCAGGS-Flag-WSN-H1PB1, pCAGGS-Flag-VN/1180-H5PB1, and pCAGGS-Flag-AH/1-H7PB1 were generated by inserting the PB1 open reading frames (ORFs) of the WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses with a Flag tag sequence fused at the N-terminus into the pCAGGS vector. Truncation constructs of the three different PB1 proteins, WSN-H1PB1494-757, VN/1180-H5PB1494-757, AH/1-H7PB1494-757, as well as the corresponding K612R mutants, were generated by using a PCR approach. The full-length ORFs of human SUMO1, SUMO2, and SUMO3 were cloned into the pCAGGS vector with an HA tag at the N-terminus. SUMO1 was further subcloned into pCAGGS with a Flag tag at the N-terminus. SUMO1mut was obtained by a PCR approach using primers containing GG-to-AA mutations at the C-terminus of SUMO1 as previously reported [26]. The ORFs of SENP1 and Ubc9 were amplified from human A549 cDNA and cloned into pCDNA3.1 and pCAGGS, respectively. The SENP1 catalytic mutant plasmid, pCDNA3.1-SENP1mut-V5 (SENP1mut), was generated from SENP1 by site-directed mutagenesis as described previously [44]. Plasmids expressing the WSN-H1PB1 mutants, including WSN-H1PB1/K379R, WSN-H1PB1/K612R, and WSN-H1PB1/K736R, were derived from pCAGGS-Flag-WSN-H1PB1 by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis. By using a PCR approach, a K612R mutation was introduced into different viral PB1 genes, which were then cloned into the pHH21 vector [15]. The plasmid pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, for the expression of a viral RNA-like firefly luciferase gene under the control of the human RNA polymerase I promoter, has been reported previously [30,31]. All constructs were sequenced to ensure the absence of unwanted mutations. The primer sequences used for cloning are available upon request.AntibodiesRabbit anti-NP polyclonal antibody (pAb) and mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against IAV PB1, PB2, PA, and NP were prepared and stored in our laboratory [30,45]. The following primary antibodies were purchased from commercial sources: rabbit anti-SUMO-1 (C9H1) mAb (4940, Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti-PB1 pAb (GTX125923, GeneTex), anti-Flag M2 affinity gel (A2220, Sigma-Aldrich), mouse anti-GAPDH mAb (60004-1-Ig, Proteintech), and rabbit anti-GAPDH pAb (10494-1-AP, Proteintech). The secondary antibodies DyLight 800 goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (072-07-18-06) and DyLight 800 goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (072-07-15-06), purchased from KPL (Gaithersburg, MD), were used for western blotting. The secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (A21206, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used in the immunofluorescence assay, and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (A9169, Sigma-Aldrich) was used in the immunohistochemical assay.Generation of mutant viruses by reverse geneticsMutant viruses with the PB1/K612R mutation (AAA at positions 1858–1860 of PB1 gene were mutated to CGA) in the WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), AH/1 (H7N9) and FZ/1(H1N1) background were generated by using the reverse genetics system as described previously [15]. The rescued viruses were fully sequenced to ensure the absence of unwanted mutations.Co-IP and western blotting analysisHEK293T cells were transfected for 48 h with the indicated plasmids by using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen). To determine the SUMOylation of the PB1 protein during viral infection, HEK293T cells were first transfected for 24 h with Ubc9, SUMO1, or SUMO1mut, followed by infection with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus (MOI = 2) or mock infection for 18 h. The transfected or infected cells were then washed with cold PBS and lysed with NP40 buffer (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) containing complete protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche Diagnostics) for 30 min on ice. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was then subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-Flag agarose at 4°C for 6 h. The beads were washed four times with cold PBS (containing 1 mM PMSF), and the bound proteins were eluted with SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare), which were blocked in 5% skimmed milk in PBST for 1 h, and then incubated with the indicated primary and secondary antibodies. Blots were visualized with the Odyssey infrared imaging system (Li-Cor BioScience).Immunofluorescence assayA549 cells seeded in glass-bottom dishes were infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus at an MOI of 5. At 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 h p.i., the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 h and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 15 min. The permeabilized cells were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin in PBS for 1 h, and then were incubated with rabbit anti-PB1 pAb for 1 h. After three washes with PBS, the cells were incubated with the secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) for 1 h, followed by incubation with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min to stain the nuclei. Images were acquired by using a Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope.Plaque assayPlaque assays were performed on MDCK cells in 12-well plates as described previously [43]. Briefly, MDCK cells were infected with 10-fold serial dilutions of virus supernatants in 1×MEM (0.3% BSA) for 1 h at 37°C. Then the cells were washed with PBS and overlaid with 1% SeaPlaque agarose (Lonza) in 1×MEM (0.3% BSA, 0.5 μg/ml TPCK-treated trypsin). After 48 to 72 h of incubation, the cells were fixed with formalin, and plaques were stained with 0.1% crystal violet and counted.Dual-luciferase reporter assayHEK293T cells were transfected with pCAGGS constructs expressing viral PB2, PB1 (wild-type or K612R mutant), PA, and NP proteins (0.5 μg each), the construct pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc (0.1 μg), and an internal control pRL-TK (0.05 μg, Promega) by using Lipofectamine LTX & Plus reagents (Invitrogen). Cells were incubated at 37°C for 48 h, and cell lysates were subsequently prepared by using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega). The luciferase activities were measured on a GloMax 96 microplate luminometer (Promega) as reported previously [30–32].Generation of model vRNAA 360-nucleotide model vRNA was transcribed in vitro from a cDNA containing the T7 promoter and the noncoding region of the NS gene of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus by using the RiboMax Large Scale RNA Production Systems (Promega) as described previously [34]. The vRNAs transcribed in vitro were concentrated and purified by using a Spin Column RNA Cleanup & Concentration Kit (Sangon Biotech) and quantified by using NanoDrop (ThermoFisher).Protein binding vRNA assayA protein binding vRNA assay was carried out as described previously [34]. Briefly, HEK293T cells were transfected with a plasmid expressing Flag-tagged truncated PB1494-757 or PB1494-757/K612R or with pCAGGS-Flag vector as a control. The cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (ThermoFisher) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Anti-Flag agarose was added to cell lysates containing 100 μg of total protein, followed by incubation for 4 h on a roller at 4°C. After three washes with diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated 0.1M NaCl, vRNA (3 μg) transcribed in vitro was added to the beads and incubated on a roller for 4 h at 4°C. The supernatant containing the unbound vRNA and the beads bearing the protein-bound vRNA were isolated and quantified by means of real-time RT-PCR (primer sequences available upon request).RNA-protein pull-down assayThe RNA binding protein assay was performed according to the instructions of the Pierce Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit (20164, ThermoFisher). In brief, 10 μg of model vRNA was labeled with a single desthiobiotinylated cytidine bisphosphate at the 3’ end by using T4 RNA ligase. Then, the labeled vRNA was captured with streptavidin magnetic beads. After the beads were washed twice with 20 mM Tris (pH7.5) and Protein-RNA binding buffer, cell lysates containing 100 μg of total protein were added to the RNA-bound beads and incubated for 1 h at 4°C with rotation. The beads containing the biotinylated RNA/protein complexes were collected on a magnetic stand. The supernatants were harvested for subsequent detection and analysis. The beads were then washed three times with washing buffer and boiled in SDS loading buffer. Both the supernatants and the precipitates were resolved by means of 10% SDS-PAGE followed by western blotting.Mouse studyTo evaluate the replication and pathogenicity of viruses in mice, groups of three 6-week-old female BALB/c mice (Vital River Laboratories, China) were inoculated intranasally with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, 105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus, or 106 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus. The mice were euthanized on day 3 p.i., and their organs, including nasal turbinates, lungs, spleens, kidneys and brains, were collected and titrated for virus infectivity by use of plaque assays on MDCK cells. Simultaneously, a lobe of lung tissue was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and histopathologically examined.To determine the 50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) of the wild-type and mutant viruses, groups of five 6-week-old female BALB/c mice were lightly anesthetized with CO2 and inoculated intranasally with 10-fold serial dilutions containing 103−106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, 101−105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus, or 103−107 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus, in a volume of 50 μl. The mice were monitored daily for 14 days for weight loss and mortality. The MLD50 was calculated by using the method of Reed and Muench.HistopathologyLung samples from mice infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) were collected on day 3 p.i., fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 4-μm sections. The sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) or used in immunohistochemical (IHC) assays with a rabbit anti-NP pAb and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG.Ferret studyFour-month-old female ferrets (Wuxi Cay Ferret Farm, China) that were serologically negative for influenza viruses were used in this study. The animals were anesthetized via intramuscular injection with ketamine (20 mg/kg) and xylazine (1 mg/kg). To investigate virus replication, groups of two ferrets were anesthetized and inoculated i.n. with 106 PFU of test virus in a 500-μl volume (250 μl per nostril). The ferrets were euthanized on day 4 p.i. and their nasal turbinates, soft palate, tonsils, trachea, lung, spleen, kidneys, and brain were collected for virus titration. For the respiratory droplet transmission studies, groups of three ferrets were inoculated i.n. with 106 PFU of test virus and housed in specially designed cages inside an isolator as described previously [6,7,46]. Twenty-four hours later, three naïve ferrets were placed in an adjacent cage (4 cm away), separated by a double-layered net divider. Nasal washes were collected from each of the virus-infected ferrets on days 2, 4, 6, and 8 p.i. and from each of the exposed ferrets on days 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 p.e., and were titrated by use of plaque assays on MDCK cells. Sera were collected from all animals on day 21 p.i. or p.e. for HI antibody detection.Deep sequencingViral RNA was extracted from the stock virus, nasal washes, or lung homogenates by using the QIAmp viral RNA mini kit (QIAGEN) and was reverse-transcribed into cDNA by use of Uni12 primer (5’-AGCRAAAGCAGG-3’). The genome of the viruses was amplified and sequenced as described previously [31]. Briefly, next generation sequencing libraries were constructed by using the NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina. For each sample, 1 μg of DNA was randomly fragmented to <500 bp by sonication. The fragments were then treated with End Repair Mix for end repairing and with A-Tailing Mix for dA-tailing, followed by a T-A ligation to add adaptors to both ends. Each sample was then amplified by PCR using P5 and P7 primers. The PCR products were cleaned and quantified by using a Qubit2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen). Then, libraries with different indices were multiplexed and loaded onto an Illumina HiSeq instrument. Sequencing was carried out using a 2×150 paired-end configuration; image analysis and base calling were conducted by the HiSeq Control Software (HCS) + OLB + GAPipeline-1.6 (Illumina) on the HiSeq instrument. The genomes of all of the samples sequenced yielded more than 5000-fold genome coverage depth (with raw sequencing data of approximately 2.0 Gb obtained per sample). The sequences were processed and analyzed by GENEWIZ (GENEWIZ Biotechnology).Statistical analysisQuantitative data are presented as means ± SD of at least three biological replicates. Data were statistically analyzed with a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test or a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test by using GraphPad Prism 7.0 software. Statistical parameters are reported in the figures and figure legends. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.Supporting informationS1 TableAnalysis of the SUMO acceptor lysine residue at position 612 (K612) of PB1 protein in different subtypes of influenza A virus.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableFrequency of the indicated amino acid at position 612 of PB1 protein of the indicated viruses.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S3 TableAssessment of the amino acid phenotypes at position 612 of PB1 protein in the viruses recovered from the nasal washes of FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) inoculated or exposed ferrets.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S1 FigSUMOylation at K612 of PB1 has no effect on the assembly of the vRNP complex of IAV.(A) HEK293T cells were cotransfected with plasmids encoding PB2, PB1 or PB1/K612R, PA, and NP of WSN (H1N1) virus, together with the pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc construct. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with a mouse anti-PB1 mAb, followed by western blotting to detect the vRNP components, PB2, PA, and NP. (B) Quantification of immunoprecipitated PB2, PA, NP in (A) by using ImageJ software. The amounts of precipitated PB2, PA, and NP were normalized to the amount of precipitated PB1. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of three assays and the significance was tested with a multiple t test (B). NS, not significant.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigBody weight change of mice inoculated with wild-type or PB1K612R mutant viruses.(A-F) Five mice per group were inoculated intranasally with the indicated doses of WSN (H1N1) (A), WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (B), VN/1180 (H5N1) (C), VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (D), AH/1 (H7N9) (E), or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (F) virus. Body weights were monitored daily for 14 days.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Timelines of infection and transmission dynamics of H1N1pdm09 in swine

IntroductionThe 2009 H1N1 pandemic demonstrated the potential of swine origin influenza viruses to cause significant human morbidity and mortality globally [1–3]. Swine influenza viruses (SwIV) are also of great economic importance for the pig industry as they contribute to the respiratory disease complex and can cause severe pulmonary distress, growth retardation and sub-optimal reproductive performance [4–6]. SwIV are distributed worldwide and are endemic in US and European herds, putting pig industry workers at increased risk of infection [1,2,7]. The pandemic A/H1N1 2009 strain (H1N1pdm09) represented 10% of SwIV isolations in Europe from 2010–2013 [8], while in the UK 42% of pigs tested were seropositive to H1N1 pdm09 [3].Understanding SwIV transmission is pivotal to managing the risk of spread between pigs and spillover to humans. However, despite the common occurrence of H1N1pdm09 in pigs there is limited information on the viral kinetics and parameters determining influenza A virus transmission between pigs. Transmission models used to predict epidemics rely on natural history parameters that describe the time-course of influenza, such as the latent period or the duration of infectiousness. In addition, it has been previously assumed that infectiousness (which is the ability of an infected individual to transmit a pathogen) is proportional to viral titre. However, this hypothesis has never been tested to our knowledge. It is therefore crucial to provide estimates of natural history parameters and to investigate the link between shed virus titre and the probability of transmission.Because the pig is an important natural host for influenza A viruses and a source of new pandemic viruses, it is also an appropriate large animal model for human influenza. Pigs and humans are infected by the same subtypes of virus and have similar distributions of sialic acid receptors in the respiratory tract [9,10]. The pig is genetically, immunologically and physiologically more similar to humans than small animals [11]. Furthermore, infection dynamics are similar between the two species. Experimental influenza virus infection lasts on average 1.3 to 7.0 days in humans depending on the infectiousness threshold [12] and 2.0 to 7.5 days in influenza virus naive pigs depending on route of challenge [13]. Pigs are therefore a suitable model to study influenza virus infection and transmission [14,15]. We have previously shown that SwIV viral shedding, infectivity, immune response and pathology depends on the inoculated dose and route of infection [13]. It is therefore important to design studies mimicking natural infection, i.e. infection by contact, to develop a quantitative understanding of SwIV infection dynamics and transmission.Here, we used an experimental design in which experimental SwIV transmission was analyzed in pigs infected by contact. In our study, a series of individual recipient pigs were placed in contact for a short time with a donor pig also infected by contact. This allows us to follow the time course of a contact acquired influenza virus infection including, precise information on when an infected donor is infectious to a susceptible recipient. We analyzed data on viral and antibody titres to identify determinants of transmission between pigs and to quantify the infection kinetics of naturally acquired H1N1pdm09 influenza in pigs.ResultsTransmission experimentsTwelve individual transmission experiments were performed. During each experiment, two “seeder” (S) pigs were intranasally inoculated with A/swine/England/1353/2009 virus (H1N1pmd09). Two days post inoculation (dpi), the two S pigs were put in contact with two “donor” (D) pigs for 24 hr to allow natural infection. After the 24 h exposure, one D pig was chosen randomly, designated as donor 1 (D1), and placed in contact with a different naïve recipient (R) pig each day for 18 hours during an 8 day period (recipients R1 to R8) (Fig 1). The second D pig, designated as D2, was a companion pig for D1 on welfare grounds. In total, we collected samples from 133 pigs: 24 S pigs, 21 D pigs and 88 R pigs. Three D pigs (1 in contact with R pigs and 2 companion donors) and 8 R pigs (in contact with the excluded D pig) were excluded from the analysis as they presented with detectable levels of antibody at baseline (S1 Table). Full viral kinetics and antibody increase patterns were observed only in D pigs. Only partial viral kinetics are available for S and R pigs as they were euthanized before the end of shedding (Fig 2).10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g001Fig 1Experimental design.A) Two seeder (S1 and S2) pigs were infected with MAD device and put in contact 2 days later with two donor (D1 and D2) pigs. After 24 h the seeders pigs were culled and one of the donor pig (D1) is put in contact with a different recipient pig (R1-R8) for 18hr (between 2 pm and 8 am). During the remaining 6hr, D1 is co-housed with donor pig 2 (D2). Recipient pigs were sampled daily during 6 days. Each grey rectangle shows a contact, between S and D and between D and R. B) Contact chamber in which donor and recipients were co-housed for 18 hours every day.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g002Fig 2Individual viral kinetics for seeder pigs (upper left panel), donor pigs (lower left panel) and recipient pigs (right panel).Each grey line represents an individual pig. The black line represents the mean viral shedding titre at each sample time. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean. For the seeder pigs time represents the day post inoculation (dpi) whereas for the donors and recipients time represents day post contact (dpc) with the seeder and donor, respectively. For the recipient pigs, the color of the lines represents the day of contact between the donor and the recipient (since the infection of the donor). The dashed line represents the limit of detection.We recorded a transmission event when a R pig shed virus above the limit of detection at least once. All donor pigs transmitted influenza virus at least once during the 8 days of follow-up (Fig 3 & S2 Fig). The number of transmission events ranged between 1 (transmission experiment 4) and 7 (transmission experiment 11). The average number of transmission events per donor pig was 3.7 ± 0.5 (Table 1 & S1 Fig). In total, 24/24 S pigs, 21/21 D pigs and 43/88 R pigs were infected.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g003Fig 3Individual donor and recipient pigs’ infection kinetics.Each box represents a donor pig. The viral kinetics is represented by a black line. Black triangles represents the average daily shed virus titres on days with transmission event and open circles represent the average daily shed virus titres on day without transmission events. The time since separation of seeder and donor is shown on the x axis. Antibody titers are represented by the grey line. The red filled boxes represent the pigs with baseline antibodies that were excluded from the analysis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.t001Table 1Viral kinetics and transmission events description and predicted from viral kinetic model coupled to the Bayesian logistic regression prediction.For quantitative variables: mean ±se [range], for qualitative variables: number or percentage. Dpi stands for days post inoculation and dpc for days post contact. Predictions: 100 replicates of 11 pigs datasets: average of replicates mean, {5th-95th percentiles of replicates mean}—Not observed; * estimated for 21 donors; ** estimated for the 11 donors in contact with recipients; £: estimated for 41 infected recipients.† fixed in the model.ObservedPredicted (100 replicates)Relative Bias (%)Pig typeSeedersDonorsRecipientsDonorsNumber of pigs24218811†Exposed animals who become infected–%1001004785.8 {72.7–100}-14.2Latent period (dpi/dpc)<12.54±0.28 [1.00–6.25]3.22 [1.00–6.00]£2.20 {1.49–2.70}-15.4* Time to last detected virus titre (dpc)-7.05±0.28 [5.00–8.25]-7.52 {6.56–8.76}+6.7*Duration of shedding (days)-4.51±0.31 [1.25–7.00]-5.33 {4.19–6.88}+18.2*Time to maximal shed virus titre: Tmax (dpc)-4.51±0.32[2.00–8.00]-4.43 {3.81–5.20}-1.8*Maximal shed virus titre: Vmax (log10 pfu/mL)-4.58±0.29 [1.81–6.54]-5.49 {4.27–6.97}+19.9* Generation time: Tg (days)-4.62±0.26 [2.73–7.42]-4.17 {3.56–4.75}-9.7**Time to 1st transmission event (dpc)-2.27±0.33 [1.00–4.00]-1.85{0–5.23}-18.5**Transmission period (days)-3.91±0.49 [1.00–6.00]-3.54 {0–6.00}-9.5**Number of transmission events-3.73±0.49 [1.00–6.00]-4.13{1.00–9.30}+10.7*Onset of antibody production (dpc)-7.84±0.12 [7.00–9.00]-7.55 {7.18–8.09}-3.7Virus shedding and antibody responseThe average daily shed virus titre was above the limit of detection in D pigs for 67/88 D-R contacts. Among these 67 contacts where the D pig was shedding virus, transmission to R pigs occurred on 42/67 (60%) occasions. Only one R pig was infected after being in contact with D pigs with undetected virus shedding: 5R1 (before the onset of detected shedding) (Table 2, Figs 3 and 4A). The number of transmission events correlates with the area under the curve (AUC) of the donor shed virus titre (Kendall’s ρ = 0.94, P<0.0001) (Fig 4A and S2 Fig). On average the first transmission event was observed at 2.27 ± 0.33 dpc (range: 1–4), which is similar to the latent period (2.54±0.30 dpc), which was defined as the time interval between time of inoculation for S pigs or time of first contact for D and R pigs and the time when virus titre was first detected (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g004Fig 4Transmission events and contact shedding.A. Each row represents a transmission experiment. The color of the tiles from the main panel represent the viral titre of the contact donor pig at the start of the in contact period. The side panel represent the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) in log scale. Transmission experiment T03 was excluded due to the presence of antibody in the contact donor pigs at the start of the experiment. B. Contact pig maximal viral titre vs. average daily virus shedding of parent pigs. C. Contact pig viral shedding onset vs. average daily virus shedding of parent pigs. SD and DR stand for Seeder-Donor and Donor-Recipient contact, respectively.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.t002Table 2Bayesian logistic regression result.95% CI stands for 95% credibility interval. R^ is a convergence diagnostic that compares the between- and within-chain estimates for model parameters. We considered that model converged if all R^ are <1.01. ESS stands for effective sample size. We considered that model converged if all ESS > 400.Odds [95% CI]R^ESSStandardized average shed virus titre during the contact period for contact donor (D1) pig—in log scale57.0[10.6–377]1.0025840Standardized contact donor (D1) pig antibody titre at the beginning of contact period0.171[0.002–1.92]1.0013893Standardized recipient pig age at the beginning of the contact period0.259[0.072–0.899]1.0023315Standardized breed (of D and R pigs)0.555[0.138–1.92]1.0014769When virus is detected, transmission events occur more frequently when antibody titre is ≤1:10 than when antibody titre is >1:10 at the first time of contact with 39 out of 56 (69.6%) vs. 1 out of 11 (9.1%) transmission events respectively. When virus is not detected, only one out of 10 (10%) transmission event was observed when antibody titre ≤1:10 and none when antibody titre > 1:10.Prediction of transmission eventsWe fit a Bayesian regression model to estimate the effect of virus and animal properties on the probability of transmission. The best model fits included the following standardized predictors: the average raw shed virus titre of the D pig during the contact period, the D pig antibody titre at the beginning of the contact period, the D and R pigs’ breed and R pig age at time of first contact (Fig 5). The model converged correctly (S2 Fig & Table 2). We evaluated the model fit with leave-one-out cross-validation using Pareto smoothed importance sampling. All Pareto shape parameters were <0.7 and the effective number of parameters was estimated as 3.1 (se = 0.8), lower than the number of parameters. This indicated that the model fits the observations well.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g005Fig 5Probability of transmission according to each estimated effect.A. standardized shed virus titre, B. standardized antibody titre, C. Standardized R pigs’ age at time of first contact, D. Pigs’ breed. Donors antibody titre at time of first contact binned as undetected and quartiles for detectable levels; D. Pig breed. The dots represents empirical observations, the black line represent the expected values of the posterior predictive distribution and the grey area represent the 95% uncertainty interval. The values of non-varying predictors were set as the estimated mean.Parameters estimates are shown as odds in Table 2. The odds associated with the D pig average shed virus titre during the contact period and with R pig age at time of first contact were 57.0 (95% credible interval—95%CI = [10.6 − 377]) and 0.259, (95%CI = [0.0724 − 0.899]), respectively. The model therefore suggests that younger pigs exposed to higher virus titres have greater odds to be infected (Fig 6). For these two parameters, the 95% credible intervals did not contain the value 1, suggesting a possible true effect of D pig shed virus titre during contact and of age.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g006Fig 6Observed transmission rate according to the putative predictors.A. Donor average viral titre during contact period binned by quartile; B. Recipient age at time of first contact binned by quartile; C. Transmission rates were computed as the ratio of transmission events to all contact times for each variable bin.D pigs’ level of antibody titres, on the other hand, tended to decrease the odds of transmitting influenza virus (odds = 0.171). However the 95% credible interval contained the value 1 (95%CI = [0.002–1.92]). Similarly for breed, Landrace pigs tended to decrease the odds of transmitting influenza virus (odds = 0.555). However the 95% credible interval contained the value 1 (95%CI = [0.138 − 1.92]) (Table 2 & Fig 6).Viral shedding and antibody production modelingWe fit a viral kinetics model to D pigs viral shedding titres. We have tried to fit previously developed mechanistic models [12,16–18], however these models failed to converge. We therefore fit simpler phenomenological models independently to viral titre and antibody titre. In the viral kinetics model, we considered two possible profiles of shedding which we called “peaked” (described by the following parameters: latent period, LA, increasing slope, s1A, time from infectious contact to the maximal shed virus titre, Tmax and decreasing slope, s2A) and “plateau” (described by the following parameters: latent period, LB, increasing slope, s1B, time from infectious contact to the begining of the plateau, T1, decreasing slope, s2A and time from infectious contact to the end of the plateau, T2). We did not make any assumption of the individual viral kinetics profiles. The proportion of pigs showing a peaked pattern, p, was unknown and the group to which each pig belongs was defined as the group of highest conditional probability.The best viral kinetics model included an additive error model and random effects on the following parameters: LA, LB, Tmax, T1, and T2. S2 Table shows the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters. The model fitted well the observed shed virus titres (S2 Fig). The proportion of pigs with a peaked viral kinetics profile was p = 0.475. After a latent period lasting 2.48 days for the peaked and 1.16 days for the plateau profile, shed virus titre increased with slope s1A = 2.17 log10(pfu/mL)/day or s1B = 1.16 log10(pfu/mL)/day until Tmax = 4.25 dpc or T1 = 2.70 dpc, for peaked and plateau, respectively. Shed virus titre decreased with slope s2A = 0.798 log10(pfu/mL)/day after Tmax for peaked responses or with slope s2B = 1.48 log10(pfu/mL)/day after a plateau lasting 2.78 days until T2 = 5.48 dpc (S2 Table). The estimated standard deviation of the random effects are also presented in S2 Table.The estimated onset of antibody production A1 was 5.86 dpc (S2 Table).Natural history of experimental swine influenza virus infectionThe natural history of a disease is described as the course of a pathology from onset to resolution [19] and therefore describes the progression of a disease process in an individual over time, in the absence of treatment.The percentage of exposed animals that become infected and the latent period varied between the different categories (Table 1). The percentage of exposed contacts that became infected was 100% (21/21) for the S-D contacts and 47% (41/88) for the D-R contacts. The latent period lasted <1 day for the S pigs. For D and R pigs that shed virus the mean latent period was 2.54 (range: 1.00–6.25) days and 3.22 (range 1.00–6.00) days respectively. It should be noted that a latent period >6 dpc would not be detected as recipient pigs were euthanized at 6 dpc.The other natural history parameters (time to last detected viral titre, duration of shedding, Vmax, Tmax, onset of transmission, generation time Tg (which is an epidemiological parameter representing the mean interval between infection of a primary case and its secondary cases and onset of antibody increase) were only observed in D pigs. An average maximal shed virus titre Vmax = 4.58 ± 0.29 log10 pfu/ml was observed at Tmax = 4.51 ± 0.32 dpc in D pigs. Virus was detected for the last time at 7.05 ± 0.28 dpc on average leading to an average duration of shedding of 4.51 ± 0.31 days. The resulting area under the curve (AUC) was estimated as 17.1 ± 1.5 log10 pfu/ml. However it is noteworthy that the duration of shedding was right-censored since several pigs did not reach undetectable virus titre at the end of follow up (Fig 3—5D1). The average generation time computed in D pigs was 4.62 ± 0.26 days (range: 2.73–7.42) when computed for shed virus titre in arithmetic scale. Antibody titres were monitored in 19 out of the 21 D pigs (serum samples were not available for pigs 1D2 and 4D2). The latent period and Vmax in contact pigs (i.e. D pig in S-D contact and R pig in D-R contact) were significantly associated with the daily average shed virus titre. Pigs exposed to higher shed virus titres started to shed virus earlier and shed on average higher shed virus titres (Fig 6). The correlation between the daily average shed virus titre in infectious pig and the latent period in contact pigs was τ = -0.66 (Kendall’s correlation test P<0.0001) and the correlation between the daily average shed virus titre and maximum shed virus titre, Vmax in the contact pig was τ = 0.58 (Kendall’s correlation test P<0.0001).Antibody was first detected on average at 7.8 ± 0.5 dpc. At the end of the follow-up (9 dpc), the average antibody titre was 1:120.5 ± 1:82.8.Comparison of predicted and observed natural history parametersTo assess the accuracy of the model predictions, we simulated viral and antibody kinetics over 100 replicates of the original dataset and computed the relative bias between the natural history parameters computed from the original dataset and the simulated datasets.For all natural history parameters, the relative bias varied between -20% and +20% (Table 1 & Fig 7). We predict than only 85.8% of pigs would shed virus above the limit of detection. For the latent period, time to last detected virus titre, duration of shedding, time to maximal virus titre, generation time, time to first transmission, transmission period and onset of antibody production, the predicted values were less than 0.5 day different from the observed value, which is shorter than the duration of contact (18 hr).10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g007Fig 7Natural history parameters.Grey dots represent the observed values, red square represent the average simulated replicates mean and the blue intervals, 90%, 95% and 99% prediction intervals computed from 100 replicates of 11 pigs experiments.DiscussionExperimental transmission studies can provide valuable parameter estimates to inform models of disease spread in animal populations. However, the reliability of these transmission studies depends on the animals transmitting virus receiving a challenge consistent with natural exposure in the field. We established a one-to-one transmission model to accurately estimate transmission parameters of H1N1pdm09 virus in pigs. Donor animals were infected by contact with a seeder pig to mimic naturally acquired infection, with the time of infectious contact known. These donor animals were closely monitored with nasal swabs taken twice daily (before and after contact with the recipient) for shed virus titre measurement and blood samples taken daily for antibody titre measurement. Donor animals were in contact for an 18h period with one recipient pig to allow identification of transmission events and avoid an extended exposure window for the recipient animal.We found that seeder pigs were shedding virus at very high titers shortly (<24h) after inoculation, while donor pigs started to shed virus between 1 and 6 dpi/dpc which is consistent with experiments where contact pigs were co-housed with animals inoculated with A/swine/Cotes d’Armor/0388/2009 H1avN1 (clade 1C) strain which started to shed virus between 3 and 7 days [20]. This is also consistent with estimates from outbreaks of A/swine/Cotes d’Armor/0388/2009 (H1avN1), A/Swine/Scotland/410440/94 (H1huN2) and A/Swine/Flandres/1/98 (H3N2) in farms where latent period was estimated as 1.4 to 5 days [20]. Noticeably, the latent period of recipient pigs was more than 16 hr longer than in donor pigs. However, the latent period from D pigs was about 2-fold that observed in human volunteer experimental challenge [12,21].Consequently, the observed time to viral titre peak was also observed later in D pigs than in human experimental infections where it consistently averaged at 2 days post inoculation [12,16,21–23] and the generation time was also longer in D pigs than in human experimental infections where it was estimated as 2.1 or 2.3 days [12,21].The duration of shedding (4.51±0.31 days) was similar with experiments where 10 unvaccinated contact pigs were co-housed with one pig inoculated with A/swine/Cotes d’Armor/0388/2009 H1avN1 shed virus during 4.50±1.07 days [24] but was shorter than previously reported in another study (6.1 days) [25], however in this latter experiment pigs were co-housed during the whole experiment with two seeder pigs and therefore exposed to high level of shed virus titre for a long period. Interestingly, the duration of shedding was also similar to that reported from a review of volunteer challenge studies were A/H1N1 infection lasted on average 4.50 days [21].Overall, compared with seasonal A/H1N1 virus experimental infection studies in humans, during which inoculation was most frequently intranasal with the strain A/Texas/36/91 [12,16,21–23], the D pigs started to shed virus later but the duration of shedding was similar.All these results, suggested that high dose exposure would reduce the influenza latent period. We could not compare the dynamics from human experimental challenge with the S pigs’ influenza dynamics that also received intranasal inoculum because of their short follow-up (2 days).Virus shedding was, as expected, by far the most important predictor of transmission events. However, despite using an experimental set-up designed to maximize the chances of transmission over an 18 hour period, we only observed transmission on 60% of occasions when virus was detected in the D pig. We note that, importantly, estimates of the transmission period are slightly shorter than the duration of shedding (Table 1). This difference appears to be largely accounted by the lack of transmission (given that virus was detected): on 9/10 and 17/56 occasions when neutralizing antibodies were detected and not detected respectively. There was a single instance of transmission in the presence of antibody. However, the estimated effect of antibody titre with Bayesian logistic regression was not significant. From these results, the role of antibodies remains unclear in the case of primary infection, whether they are blocking the exit of the virus or are only a proxy of late stage infection during which the pigs are less infectious.We fit a mixture of segmented linear models with random effects to describe the donor pigs viral kinetics and variability. We considered two viral shedding profiles: peaked (47.5% of donor pigs) and plateau (52.5% of donor pigs). Pigs shedding virus according to the plateau pattern shed more, earlier and for a longer period.We tried and did not succeed to fit mechanistic models as previously used in human, mice and ponies [12,16–18], using mixed effects. This is certainly due to the relatively small number of donor pigs and the high between-subject variability, especially concerning the initial viral titre. In the previous models, the data fitted all came from experimental infection with intranasal inoculation of high doses of virus. Particularly, the latent period in [12] was less variable than observed in the present work. This highlights the importance of developing more realistic transmission experiments.Recipient pigs exposed to high shed virus titres from donor pigs started to shed virus earlier and at a higher level and therefore had a higher probability of transmitting infection. We also found that younger pigs exposed to higher virus titre during the contact period were at higher risk of being infected. We estimated influenza generation time for the first time in pigs at 4.6 days (with low variance). We note that estimated generation time varies slightly with the scale used to quantify virus titre.Epidemic models rely on infection kinetics parameters [26]. We therefore combined the viral kinetics model and the Bayesian logistic regression results to predict transmission events in 100 replicated datasets of 11 donor pig populations and to compute natural history parameters. All natural history parameters were accurately predicted with a limited relative bias. Hence, this approach could be used to model viral kinetics and the risk of transmission to predict outbreaks in pig farms and efficacy of control measures such as quarantine of imported pigs. For instance, as we predicted that the time to last detected virus titre is on average 7.52 days post infection, and is shorter than 8.76 days for 95% of the pigs, several scenarios of quarantine for imported pigs could be tested. The effect of the duration of the quarantine (for instance 7, 10 or 14 days) on the protection of the rest of the farm population could be tested. More elaborate quarantine scenarios could also be investigated where the quarantine duration could be adapted considering the detection and possibly the quantification of viral titre, with a cost-effectiveness analyses.One limitation of our study was that we did not control for the behavior of the donor and contact pigs, though this may have influenced the likelihood of transmission. Our study probably underestimates variability under natural conditions where animals of different ages, socialisation and immune status are co-housed. Also, we cannot determine whether direct contact, aerosols or contact with contaminated surfaces was the most important mode of transmission in our experiments [25,27].There is a critical need to develop better models to understand influenza A dynamics that more closely mimic events in humans. Pigs and humans are infected by the same subtypes of influenza A viruses and integrally connected in the ecology of influenza A viruses [28]. Pigs have similar virus shedding patterns and pathogenesis when infected with influenza A virus and are an appropriate animal model for studying immunity to and transmission of influenza virus [15,29]. Understanding influenza transmission has application for humans and swine with the mutual benefit of reducing the zoonotic threat and increasing output in pig farming. However, it is noteworthy that in humans, most of the transmission events occur between case and contacts who have experienced prior exposure and sometimes have been vaccinated. We did not explore the impact of pre-existing immunity in the present work.To our knowledge, this is the first experimental design of one to one transmission using in-contact infected pigs which allowed us to analyze both viral kinetics and transmission events from animals with naturally acquired influenza virus infection. This allowed us to estimate key parameters including the latent period, duration of virus shedding and onset of antibody production and, to relate these to direct observation of precisely timed transmission events. The design generates much more precise data than can be obtained from the observation of natural transmission events, as in studies of influenza virus transmission in humans [30]. In addition, while we expected that the probability of transmission would depend on viral titre and age, we found that the contact pig virus shedding profile depends on the level of exposure to influenza virus. This should be investigated further to quantify the impact that level of exposure and mitigation measures decreasing this level of exposure have on epidemiological parameters such as the generation time, and therefore the timing and severity of influenza epidemics.Material and methodsEthics statementAnimal experimentation was approved by the Pirbright Institute Ethical Review Board under the authority of a Home Office project licence (70/7505) in accordance with UK Home Office Guidance on the Operation of the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and associated guidelines.Transmission experimentsTwelve transmission experiments were performed. Female pigs were used between seven and ten weeks of age (except for transmission 4 where the pigs were 11 weeks and transmission 5 where they were of unknown age). All pigs weighed 18 to 40 kg, were either Landrace or Landrace x Hampshire breed and were obtained from a commercial high health status herd. All pigs were acclimatized for a period of 7 days before the start of the transmission experiment and randomly allocated to become seeders, donors or recipients.Two “seeder” (S) pigs were intranasally inoculated with a mucosal atomization device (MAD) with 1 x107 pfu of MDCK grown A/swine/England/1353/2009 virus (H1N1pmd09), as previously described [13]. Two days post inoculation (dpi), the two S pigs were put in contact with two “donor” (D) pigs for 24 hr to allow natural infection. The S pigs were then removed and culled. After the 24 h exposure, one D pig was chosen randomly, designated as donor 1 (D1), and placed in contact with a different naïve recipient (R) pig each day for 18 hours (between 2pm and 8 am) during an 8 day period (recipients R1 to R8) (Fig 1A). The other D pig was the companion pig to D1 and was designated as D2. This contact took place in a chamber made from perplex with dimensions 2.46 m x 2.46 m and 1.4 m high at 19°C (Fig 1B). During the remaining 6 hours of each day from 8 am to 2 pm, while the contact room was cleaned, the two donor pigs were co-housed in a separate room. The R pigs were removed at 8 am to a separate room and supplied with a companion on welfare grounds (Fig 1). S, D and R pigs were euthanized with an overdose of pentobarbital after 3, 9 and 6 days of follow-up, respectively.Viral load determinationNasal swabs were collected daily for the S and R pigs and twice daily (at 8 am and 2 pm) from D pigs with the exception of transmission 1, where only the 8 am nasal swabs were taken. Two nasal swabs (one per nostril) were placed into 2 ml of virus transport medium comprising tissue culture medium 199 (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 25mM Hepes, 0.035% sodium bicarbonate, 0.5% BSA, penicillin, streptomycin and nystatin, vortexed, centrifuged to remove debris and stored at -80°C for subsequent virus determination.Infectious shed virus titres in nasal swabs were determined by plaque assay on MDCK cells. Samples were 10-fold serially diluted and 100 μl of each dilution added to confluent MDCK cells in 12 or 24 well tissue culture plates. After 1 hr, the plates were washed and overlayed with 2 ml 1:3 2% agarose: medium. Plates were incubated at 37°C for 48 hrs and plaques visualized using 0.1% crystal violet.Blood samples were collected daily from the 24 D pigs and were not collected from S or R pigs. The microneutralization assay was carried out as previously described with the following modifications [31]. Pig sera were heat inactivated for 30 min at 56°C. Dilutions of heat-inactivated pig sera in 50 μl starting at 1:10 were added to 50 μl of homologous H1N1pdm09 and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The following antibodies were used to stain the fixed monolayer, first layer mouse anti-NP monoclonal antibody Clone AA5H IgG2a (BioRad) followed by the secondary polyclonal goat anti-mouse Ig HRP antibody (Dako). Titers were defined as the serum dilution resulting in 50% reduction in NP expression.Estimation of transmission probabilityWe used a Bayesian logistic regression to quantify the effect of each putative predictor on DR transmission events. We included the following putative population predictors: average shed virus titre (computed from the arithmetic scale) of the D pig during the contact period, D pig antibody titre at the beginning of the contact period, D and R pigs’ breed, R pig age at time of first contact.Inputs were standardized following Gelman’s recommendations [32,33]. The priors were set as Cauchy distributions of scale 2.5 [33]. We fitted the model using 4 MCMC chains of 10,000 iterations with 10% burn-in. To assess model convergence, we visually inspected each parameter trace looking for a “hairy caterpillar” aspect. Effective sample size > 400 were considered as acceptable. We also performed leave-one-out cross-validation using Pareto smoothed importance sampling implemented in the brms package [34,35].Antibody and viral kinetics modelingTo model antibody kinetics, we used a segmented regression with mixed effects described by 2 parameters, A1 and A2 representing the time to antibody production and the slope of increasing antibody titre, respectively.Influenza shed virus titre (in pfu/ml) and antibody titre were log10- and log2-transformed for subsequent analysis, respectively. To model viral kinetics, we used a mixture of segmented regressions with mixed effects. We call zi the label of the structural model for pig i, with M1 for “peaked” (M1) and M2 for “plateau”. In the peaked model, after a latent period lasting LA, shed virus titres increase from below the limit of detection to the maximum shed virus titre Vmax occurring at time Tmax according to the slope s1A and then decreases according to a slope s2A. In the plateau model, after a latent period lasting LB, shed virus titre increases from below the limit of detection to the maximum shed virus titre Vmax according to the slope s1B. Shed virus titre remains at Vmax during the plateau between T1 and T2, and then decreases according to a slope s2B.We estimated the vector of fixed effects (μ), the inter-individual variance-covariance matrix (Ω), the variances (σV and σA, respectively) of the additive error terms for viral kinetics (VK) and antibody kinetics (AK) models and the vector π = (πM1, πM2) of probabilities for each virus shedding profile (M1 or M2 here). The random effects and error terms were assumed to follow N(0,ω),N(0,σV) and N(0,σA), respectively. We call θ = (μ, Ω, σV, σA, π) the vector of population parameters.The individual parameters were estimated as empirical Bayes estimates. More specifically, the group to which each individual pig belongs was estimated as the group of highest conditional probability: zi^=argmaxmP(zi=m|,yi,θ), where zi^ is the estimated structural model of pig i, m = {M1, M2} is the label of the structural model, yij is the observed shed virus titre of pig i and θ is the vector of population parameters [36,37].We censored shed virus titres at the detection limit of 1 pfu/mL and antibody titres at the detection limit of 1:10. For model parameters with a random effect, we assumed that parameters for individual pigs were lognormally distributed about a population log-mean value, with an estimated standard deviation describing the random effect.Viral kinetics model parameters were estimated using the SAEM (Stochastic Approximation of Expectation Maximization) algorithm implemented in Monolix2018R1 [38]. In a first step, we estimated the parameters with the simulated annealing version of the SAEM algorithm to find the global maximum of the likelihood. During the second step, we re-estimated the parameters using the estimates from step 1 as initial values. We performed model selection using an Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) to determine which kinetics parameters should have random effects, using the rule “the smaller the better”.Experimental swine influenza virus infection natural history parametersWe considered that pigs were infected if virus was detected from the nasal swab. In D pigs this was confirmed by the detection of antibody at the end of the experiment.The natural history of a disease refers to the time course of a disease in the absence of treatment and more specifically to the latent period/incubation, duration of shedding, maximal shed virus titre (Vmax), time to Vmax, onset of transmission, generation time, proportion of exposed contacts who becomes infected [39,40].We defined the latent period as the interval between inoculation or contact and first detection of virus. The duration of shedding is the interval between the onset of shedding and the last sample time when virus is detected. We defined the onset of antibody production as the time interval between the infection of a pig and the first time antibody is detected. It is noteworthy that the times to first and last virus detection and to first antibody detection are interval censored, therefore the observed latent period is an upper limit whereas the duration of shedding is a lower limit. For instance, the moment of first detectable virus occurred at an unknown time during the time interval between the last sample when shed virus titre was undetected and the first sample when it was detected. Therefore, considering first detection of virus for the definition of latent period means that we consider the upper limit of this time interval.We considered that a transmission event occured when virus is detected at least once in one of the recipient (R) pigs. We therefore defined the onset of transmission as the time interval between the infection of an individual and the first time when a transmission event is observed from this individual. Here, the onset of transmission and duration of transmission are upper and lower limit values respectively.Generation time, Tg is the period of time between the onset of virus shedding in a primary case and the onset of infectiousness in a secondary case infected by the primary. It has been assumed that the probability to observe a transmission from a D to an R pig at time t, also called infectiousness is proportional to D1 pig’s viral shedding at t, V(t) [21,41]. We call k1 the proportionality constant. We also assumed random contacts between contact donor (D1) and R pigs (i.e. homogeneous mixing independent of infection time course, with a contact rate k2). Hence, the probability of observing a transmission event at time t is given by: P(E = 1│t) = k1k2V(t).The total amount of virus shed by a D pig is given by the area under the curve, AUC=∫0+∞V(x)dx. Therefore, we can compute the generation time Tg as the expectation of P(E = 1│t) by integrating P(E = 1│t)t with respect to t and normalized by the total rate of transmissions over time, which is k1k2AUC. Dropping the constants k1 and k2 leads to the following expression:
Tg=∫0+∞t×V(t)AUCdtAll integrals were computed using the trapezoidal rule as implemented in the caTools package [42]. We presented the estimates as mean ± standard error (se) for quantitative variables.Assessing model predictions accuracyTo assess the accuracy of the model predictions, we simulated viral and antibody kinetics over 10 days for 100 datasets of 11 pigs, using the mlxR package. Individual parameters were sampled from the estimated population distribution.Using the viral kinetic profiles simulated for the 11 pigs in each replicated dataset, we simulated the transmission events for each day according to the Bayesian logistic regression estimates.We then computed the natural history parameters for the 100 replicates and compared their distributions to the parameters computed directly from the observations. To quantify the accuracy of our predictions, we computed the relative bias as E[θ^]-θθ, where θ^ is the mean of the parameter computed from the simulated data for a given replication, E[θ^] is the expectation of the within-simulation mean across the 11 simulated viral kinetics of parameter and θ the observed mean parameter computed from the original dataset.Supporting informationS1 TableCharacteristics of pigs with baseline antibody.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableViral kinetics and antibody kinetics population parameter estimates.rse stands for relative standard error. The fixed effect represent the average population parameter value and the random effect represents the between pig variability.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S1 FigBayesian logistic regression parameters.Left panels: posterior distribution. Right panels: convergence traces.(TIFF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigViral kinetics model fit.Observations are shown by the grey dots and best fit curves by the black lines. Each box represents a donor pig.(TIFF)Click here for additional data file.S1 FileRaw data.(ZIP)Click here for additional data file.S2 FileModeling support (R codes and Monolix models).(ZIP)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Transmission of H7N9 influenza virus in mice by different infective routes

BackgroundOn 19 February 2013, the first patient infected with the novel influenza A H7N9 virus from an avian source showed signs of sickness. More than 347 laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported in mainland China, with 109 cases resulting in death. Most cases of H7N9 infection have occurred in elderly men who had recently been exposed to live poultry. Patients with laboratory-confirmed H7N9 infections had an exposure history that included direct contact with respiratory secretions or fecal material. Exposure to live poultry is a case-fatality risk associated with influenza A H7N9 virus infection [1–6]. Live bird markets are suspected of being the source of human infections; shutting down live poultry markets resulted in an immediate reduction in cases [7]. There is a precedent for the human transmission of H7 influenza, with limited person-to-person transmission observed in an H7N7 outbreak in the Netherlands in 2003 [8]. Three suspected family clusters of cases were reported [9], indicating the possibility of limited human-to-human transmission of the H7N9 virus [10].Previous studies have reported aerosol transmission of the H7N9 virus among ferrets [11]. Other researchers have used a mouse model to study contact-dependent transmission of influenza A virus [12]. We evaluated the transmission of the H7N9 virus in mice to provide insights into potential human transmissibility.ResultsPathogenicity of influenza virus strains in miceMice were infected with influenza A/Anhui/1/2013 virus (106.25–108.25 TCID50) to determine the LD50 and survival of H7N9 in mice (Figure 1a). The LD50 values of the three viruses we investigated were 107.5, 101, and 104.8 TCID50 for H7N9, H5N1, and H1N1, respectively. At a dose of 106 TCID50, mice infected with H5N1 or H1N1 virus died during the observation period (Figure 1b). After inoculation with the H7N9 virus at 106 TCID50, weight loss was observed at 2 days post inoculation (dpi; Figure 1c); the average weight loss at 7 dpi was greater than 30%. Mice infected with the H7N9 virus at 106 TCID50 exhibited weight loss from 2 dpi but recovered around 8 dpi.Figure 1
Avian influenza virus H7N9 (A/Anhui/1/2013) infects mice. (a) LD50 of A/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9). Representative results of three doses (108.25–106.25 TCID50) are shown. (b) Survival comparison of mice infected with H5N1, H1N1, or H7N9 viruses. (c) Percentage initial weight loss in mice infected with 106 TCID50 of H7N9 (A/Anhui/1/2013). Data are presented as the average values from two independent experiments ± SD (n =10 per group).Virus titers in the tissues of infected mice administered 106 TCID50 of virus were determined using MDCK cells. Viable virus was detected in the lungs of mice infected with any of the influenza viruses from 1–7 dpi (Additional file 1: Table S2). Virus was transiently isolated from the liver, kidneys, and intestines of H5N1- or H7N9-infected mice, but not H1N1-infected mice (Table 1). The virulence of the H7N9 virus was less than that of the H5N1 virus. Viable virus was detected in the brains of 33% (2/6) of H7N9-infected mice at 2 dpi. The distribution of viruses in tissues was assessed using immunohistochemistry incorporating a mouse monoclonal antibody against the influenza HA nucleoprotein (1:200 dilution). Following H7N9 infection viable antigens were primarily located within epithelial cells of the bronchi and alveoli in the lungs, epithelial cells of the intestine, renal tubules in the kidney, and gliocytes in the brain (Figure 2a). H5N1 antigens were also detected in the brain parenchyma (Figure 2a). Viral antigens were mainly detected in the lungs of H1N1-infected mice (Figure 2a). Confluent interstitial pneumonia, necrosis of epithelial cells of the bronchi and alveoli, inflammatory cell infiltration, congestion, and fibrin exudation were observed at 3 and 5 dpi in lung tissues (Figure 2b).Table 1
Virus titers in the tissues of infected mice
Virus
a
Days post-infectionVirus titer (log
10TCID
50 ± SD)HeartLiverSpleenLungKidneyIntestineBrainNoseA/CA/07/09 (H1N1)5NPd
-b
+4.83 ± 1.7---NPA/SZ/406H/06 (H5N1)5NP3.62 ± 1.11.62 ± 0.233.50 ± 1.921.17 ± 0.321.38 ± 0.272.17 ± 0.41NPA/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9)1---4.00 ± 1.20---3.50 ± 1.382-0.811.505.50 ± 1.902.00-+c
2.50 ± 0.753-0.75-5.00 ± 1.85--2.50 ± 0.755---6.00 ± 2.15-0.86 ± 0.13-3.50 ± 1.387---3.50 ± 1.77-0.75-2.00 ± 0.38
aMice were infected with influenza viruses at a dose of 106 TCID50.
bViable virus was not detected after three passages in MDCK cells.
cCyotpathic effects were observed but TCID50 values were less than 0.5.
d
NP, Not performed.Figure 2
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of infected mice. (a) Distribution of H7N9, H5N1, and H1N1 viruses in the tissues of infected mice as determined by IHC. Representative viral antigen distribution in tissues at 3 dpi is shown. Viral antigens are denoted with solid arrows (400× magnification). (b) Hematoxylin and eosin stain (HE) staining of lung tissues from infected mice (100× magnification).H7N9 influenza virus transmission in miceWe sought to determine whether mice infected with the H7N9 influenza virus could transmit virus to naïve mice in close contact. At 24 h post-inoculation (hpi), seven H7N9-naïve mice were introduced into the same cage as three intranasally infected mice (107 TCID50). We detected virus in the lungs and intestines of the initially uninfected mice that were placed in contact with mice exposed to H7N9 or H1N1 virus. We were unable to detect H5N1 in either tissue (Table 2).Table 2
Transmissibility of H7N9 influenza virus in mice put in contact with infected mice
VirusVirus titer (mean log
10TCID
50 ± SD)LungKidneyIntestineBrainNoseInfected contact mice
b
Weight loss (%)
c
Seroconverted
d
Days post-infection575 and 75755A/SZ/406H/06 A/CA/07/09-NPa
-f
--NP0002.07 ± 0.161.47 ± 0.19NP---+8/14114/7A/Anhui/1/20131.26 ± 0.410.67 ± 0.01-1.34 ± 0.250.97 ± 0.01+e
+7/1463/7
a
NP, Not performed.
bNumber of contact mice containing virus in the lung, brain, and nose at 5 and 7 days after co-housing.
cMaximum proportional weight loss.
dHI titers >40.
eCyotpathic effects were observed but TCID50 values were less than 0.5.
fViable virus was not detected after three passages in MDCK cells.All mice (6/7) exposed to the H7N9 virus exhibited weight loss; the maximal loss observed in one mouse was 6% (Table 2). Around 43% (3/7) of mice exposed to the virus became infected (Table 2). Viable virus was detected in the brain of one mouse and in the nose of another mouse (Table 2). Approximately 6/7 mice exposed to H1N1 exhibited weight loss; the highest level of weight loss approached 11% (Table 2). Of the mice exposed to H1N1, 57% (4/7) became infected (Table 2). In the tissues of the naïve mice that were co-housed with H7N9-infected mice, viral antigens were primarily located in the lung and intestine, similar to their localization in infected mice (Figure 3a). However, virus titers in contact mice were lower than those in the infected mice. Mild lesions were observed in the tissues of naïve mice that were placed in contact with infected mice after 3 days. A dilated area of interstitial pneumonia and congestion were observed in lungs 7 days after contact with infected mice (Figure 3b). We detected antibodies against H7 viruses in seven naïve mice 14 days after contact with infected mice; we also detected H7N9 virus in 3/7 naïve mice (Table 2).Figure 3
H7N9 virus is transmissible among mice by direct contact. Seven naïve mice were placed in direct contact with three mice infected with 106 TCID50 of H7N9 virus. (a) IHC observations in tissues of mice exposed to H7N9-infected mice. Viral antigen distribution in tissues at 5 days following exposure to infected mice. Viral antigens are denoted with solid arrows (400× magnification). Viral antigens are within the epithelial cells of the bronchi and small intestinal villi, and within infiltrating inflammatory cells of the small intestine. (b) HE staining of lung tissue from mice that came in contact with H7N9-infected mice (100× magnification). At 3 days after coming into contact with infected mice, mild dilation of the interstitial pulmonary vasculature was observed in the lungs; congestion was observed after 7 days.Secretions from mice infected with H7N9 influenza virusTo evaluate the infectious secretions of H7N9-infected mice, we collected eye and pharyngeal secretions from inoculated mice at 1, 2, and 3 dpi and inoculated them intranasally into mice. Virus was detected in the lungs and intestinal tissues of mice inoculated with the ES-2 inoculum derived from eye secretions, but not with the ES-1 or ES-3 inocula. Virus was detected in the lungs and intestinal tissues of mice administered the TS-1 (throat swab), −2, or −3 inocula. Virus was detected in the lungs and intestines of mice inoculated with feces from H7N9-infected mice (Table 3).Table 3
Viable virus in naïve mice inoculated with eye, nasal, or fecal samples
Virus sample typeVirus titer (mean log
10TCID
50 ± SD)LungIntestineNoseES-1---ES-21.17 ± 0.300.94 ± 0.62-ES-3---TS-11.20 ± 0.300.94 ± 0.62-TS-21.02 ± 0.650.86-TS-30.860.86-F0.860.86-Transmission route of H7N9 in miceWe tested different transmission routes in contact mice. When using ES inocula, viable virus was detected in the intestines at 2 days, and in both the lungs and intestines at 4 days. Virus antigens were detected in the lungs, stomach, and intestines. TS inoculum was injected into the tail veins of the mice, and viable virus was detected in the same tissues as for the ocular route of administration. Following virus transmission by the fecal-oral route, virus was detected in the nasal passages, trachea, intestines, and lungs; viral antigens were detected in the lungs, stomach, and intestines (Table 4). At 5 dpi, viral antigens were detected in mice infected via the oral route, primarily within the epithelial cells of the lungs, gastric mucosa, and intestinal mucosa, and in infiltrating inflammatory cells of the small intestine (Figure 4). At the same time point, we also observed limited interstitial pneumonia and inflammatory cell infiltration, degeneration and necrosis of mucosal and gastric epithelial cells, vacuolar degeneration of the epithelial cells of the villi, and degeneration of the small intestine.Table 4
Detection of viable virus following inoculation of naïve mice via different routes
Route of administrationDaysVirus titer in tissue (TCID
50 ± SD)Viral antigen distribution in tissuesNoseTracheaIntestineLungLungStomachIntestineOral3-------52.132.711.803.57 ± 1.132/32/32/3Intravenous3--1.802.89 ± 0.782/32/32/35--1.80--1/31/3Eye3--2.05--1/31/35--1.801.801/31/31/3Figure 4
Transmission of influenza H7N9 virus among mice. Naïve mice were inoculated with throat secretions collected from infected mice. At 5 dpi, viral antigens were found in epithelial cells of the lungs, gastric and intestinal mucosa, and in infiltrating inflammatory cells of the small intestine (solid arrows; 400× magnification). At 5 dpi, limited interstitial pneumonia and inflammatory cell infiltration, degeneration and necrosis of epithelial cells in the gastric mucosa, and vacuolar degeneration of epithelial cells in small intestine villi was seen (100× magnification).DiscussionA second wave of H7N9 viral infections in humans occurred in 2014 across China, with over 50 deaths recorded in 1 month. The Chinese government enforced a temporary closure of live poultry markets in affected provinces, resulting in an immediate reduction in the number of human cases. This provided further evidence of the role live poultry markets play in the spread of the virus, and clearly showed that closure of the markets was an effective control strategy [7]. However, the transmission routes of the H7N9 virus remained unknown, therefore it was still considered a serious threat to human health worldwide [13].The mouse is a typical model used to evaluate the virulence of influenza viruses, and in its quantitation. It has been reported that a murine model can be used to study contact-dependent transmission of the influenza A virus [12]. In the current study, H7N9 virus-infected mice displayed symptoms of lethality, with pathological changes seen in mice that came in contact with infected mice. We conducted a study on the aerosol transmission of H7N9 in ferrets [11], and used a murine model to study other potential routes of transmission.Our results indicated that the novel H7N9 virus could efficiently replicate in mice without prior host adaptation. We inoculated BALB/c mice intranasally with A/Anhui/1/2013 to determine H7N9 virus replication, morbidity (as measured by weight loss), and the LD50 in mice. The LD50 titers for the H7N9 virus were lower than those for H5N1 and H1N1 viruses. Mice inoculated with H7N9 virus showed severe morbidity (30% weight loss), a value comparable to that seen for HPAI H5N1 and H1N1 virus infections, which have a high pathogenicity phenotype in this model. Our findings were similar to those reported in previous studies [14]. The H7N9 virus was detected in extra-respiratory intestines, liver, spleen, kidneys, and brains of infected mice, with viral antigen detected in the same tissues. Weight loss was used as a measurable outcome and a marker of virulence following virus infection in these mice [15–20]. In our study, the duration of H7N9 virus infection in mice was about 12 days, a similar duration to that seen with human H7N9 infections (4–11 days) [15, 21–23]. Virus was detected at higher titers in the lungs than in nasal samples (Table 1). From our transmission experiments we found that virus titers in the lungs of co-housed mice at 5 dpi were higher than those at 7 dpi, with the proportion of infected mice higher than at 7 dpi (Table 2). Results with the H7N9-infected mice were similar to those for H1N1-infected mice. It was previously reported that an avian H7N9 virus effectively replicated in mice with minimal symptoms and that the virus could be transmitted in mice without any pathogenic effects observed [24]. Our results indicate that the H7N9 virus could be transmitted in mice, however weight loss and ruffled coats were observed. The virus was detected at different time points and in several tissues, although virus titer was low.The transmission of H7N9 influenza virus in ferrets has been shown to occur via aerosols and respiratory droplets [11, 14]. Our results show that the H7N9 influenza virus can also be transmitted between mice via eye secretions (Table 4). Virus in the lung tissues was detected at 4 dpi following ocular administration of ES inocula in mice.Eye and pharynx secretions, and feces from infected mice proved to be infectious via mucosal, intravenous, and oral routes. Virus was present in lung and intestinal samples (Table 3); at 3 and 7 dpi, mild dilatation of the interstitial pulmonary vasculature was observed in the lungs (Figure 3b). Pathological changes in the lungs were milder in naïve mice than in the infected mice; this difference positively correlated with the amount of virus detected in naïve mice.Our results indicate that influenza virus can be detected in secretions from the eyes, throat and feces. Virus titer was higher in throat secretions than from eye secretions or fecal samples. Secretions from H7N9-infected mice are able to transmit virus by the ocular, oral, and blood-borne routes. An understanding of viral pathogenesis and of the several transmission routes of the virus would allow for various interventions in animals to prevent a future human pandemic [25].ConclusionViable virus was found in secretions from the eyes and oral cavities of mice infected with the H7N9 influenza virus. The H7N9 virus was transmitted to contact mice by several routes, including the mucosal and fecal-oral routes. We have provided some leads for interpreting transmission of the novel H7N9 influenza virus in humans.Materials and methodsVirusesInfluenza virus A/Anhui/1/2013 was isolated from a patient with a laboratory-confirmed human A (H7N9) virus infection. The patient was a 35-year-old woman who lived in the Anhui Province of China. On day 6 after the onset of illness, she developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock, and acute renal damage; the patient died 13 days later [1]. A throat swab (TS) was collected from the patient and propagated in the allantoic sac and amniotic cavity of 9–11-day-old embryonic chicken eggs. The propagated virus was then passaged once in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. A Q226L (H3 numbering) substitution at the 210-loop of the HA gene was found in this virus. This site has been shown to change receptor binding from avians to humans, possibly increasing the ability of the virus to be transmitted by airborne routes [26]. In addition, the virus encoded PB2 627 K, which is essential for efficient replication of avian influenza viruses in mammals. The highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1) virus A/Shenzhen/406H/06 and 2009 pandemic A (H1N1) virus A/California/07/2009 were also isolated from two patients and propagated in embryonic chicken eggs and MDCK cells. The A (A/Shenzhen/406H/06; H5N1) and 2009 pandemic A (A/California/07/2009; H1N1) viruses were obtained from the University of Hong Kong. MDCK cells were maintained in Eagle’s minimal essential medium (EMEM, Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and were incubated at 37°C/5% CO2.H7N9 influenza virus in miceMurine studies were performed in an animal biosafety level 3 (ABSL3) facility using HEPA-filtered isolators. All procedures in this study involving animals were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, Peking Union Medical College (ILAS-PC-2013-006).The 50% mouse lethal dose (LD50) of the virus was determined by intranasally inoculating five groups of mice (n =10 mice per group) with 10-fold serial dilutions of the virus in a volume of 50 μl. The LD50 was calculated by the method of Reed and Muench [27]. The H5N1 A/Shenzhen/406H/06 and H1N1 A/CA/07/09 strains were used as controls. Mice were infected with 106 TCID50 of H7N9, H1N1, or H5N1 virus to compare the virulence of strains.We anesthetized female 4-week-old mice using isoflurane, and then inoculated them intranasally with the appropriate virus. Heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidney, intestines, brain tissue specimens and turbinate samples were collected from mice and placed into 10% (w/v) phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) on 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 dpi (Additional file 2: Table S1). Viruses were titrated in MDCK cells and virus titer was expressed as TCID50, as per the Reed-Muench method. We euthanized six mice for every virus at each time point. Additionally, three mice were sacrificed for every virus at each time point, with lungs, intestines, and brain tissues collected for immunohistochemical and pathological analysis. The remaining 10 mice in each group were observed daily for weight loss and mortality until 14 dpi.Murine model of H7N9 virus transmissionThree groups of mice were used in this study. For each group, three 4-week-old BALB/c mice were infected, and seven naïve mice were placed in direct contact with infected mice (Additional file 2: Table S1). The three infected mice were lightly anesthetized and inoculated intranasally with 50 μl of 107 TCID50 virus in PBS as previously described. At 24 hpi, all materials in the cage were replaced and sterilized, and the seven naïve mice (co-housed mice) were placed in the same cage. The seven co-housed mice were observed daily, with detailed recording of clinical signs and weight loss continuing until 14 dpi. To monitor viral shedding, nasal washes were collected from seven co-housed mice at 3, 5, and 7 dpi. One group of mice was used for each time point. We dripped 50 μl of PBS into the nose of each mouse; the liquid was then allowed to fall back into a collection tube. This was repeated three times. The seven co-housed mice were then euthanized at 3, 5, and 7 dpi. The lungs, kidney, brain, and intestines were collected, and immersed into 1 ml of PBS. Virus titers in the tissues were determined using MDCK cells as previously described [27]. The number of co-housed mice that became infected was calculated by determining the virus titer in the lungs, brain, and nose at 5 and 7 days after co-housing. Pathological examination of the lungs and intestines occurred on days 3 and 7. Sera were obtained from co-housed mice on 14 dpi to confirm seroconversion using hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays with 0.5% chicken erythrocytes.Secretions from H7N9-infected miceTo collect eye secretions (ESs), a swab pre-wetted with PBS was used to wipe the eyes of six mice (5–7 wipes) at 1, 2, and 3 dpi, and then placed into 1 ml of PBS. Throat swabs (TSs) were collected from inoculated mice at 1, 2, and 3 dpi, and transferred to 1 ml of PBS. The ESs and TSs were vortexed and centrifuged (300 g, 10 min), and the supernatants filtered. Five pellets of fecal (F) samples from inoculated animals were collected at 5 dpi and placed into 10% (w/v) PBS, vortexed, and centrifuged (300 g, 10 min). Supernatants were then filtered. The liquid from the ES, TS, and F samples were used to intranasally inoculate mice on days 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Six inoculated mice were then euthanized at 4 dpi (Additional file 2: Table S1). Tissues from the lungs, nasal cavity, and intestines were collected in 1 ml of PBS. Viral titers in tissues were determined using MDCK cells as previously described.Transmission route of H7N9 in miceConjunctival secretions from H7N9-infected mice were used to wipe the eyes of twelve naïve mice (Eye). Pharynx secretions were injected into the tail veins (150 μl per mouse) of naïve mice (IV). The secretion was concentrated using a hyperfiltration tube (Millipore Amicon). The virus titer of conjunctival secretions was 103.8 TCID50, while that for pharynx secretions was 103.8 TCID50. Similar virus titers were seen for the fecal suspensions. Six naïve mice were given the fecal suspensions from H7N9-infected by gavage administration (Or; 200 μl per mouse). Six mice infected through Or, Eye and IV routes were autopsied at 3 and 5 dpi. Three mice were used for the isolation of lung, tracheal, and intestinal tissues for pathological and histochemical examinations at 5 dpi. Three mice were used to obtain nasal washes and lung tissues to determine virus titers at 3 and 5 dpi (Additional file 2: Table S1).Virus titrationsVirus titrations were performed by end-point titration in MDCK cells. MDCK cells were inoculated with 100.5-fold serial dilutions of homogenized tissues, nasal washes, and TSs. At 1 hpi, cells were washed once with PBS and incubated in 200 μl of infection medium (EMEM, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 1 μg/ml TPCK-trypsin). At 3 dpi, supernatants of infected cell cultures were tested for agglutinating activity using turkey erythrocytes as an indicator of cellular infection. Infectious titers were calculated from five replicates using the Reed-Muench method [27].Histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC)Animal necropsies were performed according to standard protocols. Samples for histological examination, comprising formalin-inflated lungs, were stored in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned (4-μm thickness). The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) for examination by light microscopy, or via an immunohistochemical method using a monoclonal antibody against the nucleoprotein of influenza A virus. All slides were examined by a pathologist with 10 years’ experience, and results were confirmed by a second pathologist.HI assaysStandard HI assays were performed on post-exposure mouse sera using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes against homologous virus. Sera were collected from inoculated or naïve mice at 14 dpi or 14 days after coming into contact with infected mice, respectively, and tested for the presence of H7N9-specific antibodies.Statistical analysisDifferences in body weight, viral copy numbers, and virus titers among groups were analyzed by one-way ANOVA and post-hoc Bonferroni correction. Differences between two groups were analyzed by Student’s t-test using SPSS 11.5. A P-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.Electronic supplementary materialAdditional file 1: Table S2: Virus titers in the lungs of infected mice. NP, Not performed. bDays post-infection. cMice were infected with viruses at a dose of 106 TCID50.
(DOCX 38 KB)Additional file 2: Table S1: Experimental mouse groups used in this study. (DOCX 37 KB)


Title: Replication, Pathogenesis and Transmission of Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 Virus in Non-Immune Pigs

IntroductionIn April 2009, an H1N1 virus was detected in humans [1] that was described as putatively of swine origin since seven of the eight gene segments originated from historical swine influenza viruses [2]. Further cases of infection of humans with this virus in the absence of direct contact with pigs were rapidly described together with proven human-to-human transmission. Although the virus ostensibly derived from pig populations, the consequences of infection in swine were unknown. The role of pigs in the epidemiology of influenza has been well described [3], although their direct involvement in the genesis of a pandemic influenza virus strain has never been demonstrated. Following reverse zoonosis (spread of virus from humans to animals) into pig populations, viruses are subjected to different selection pressures and evolve in distinct lineages, enabling clear separation from their counterpart strains circulating in humans. During the last ten years, substantial changes have been noted in the epidemiology of influenza in pigs, particularly with reference to significant geographical variations in terms of the virus subtypes and their associated genotypes. The pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus shows genetic and antigenic distance in the major glycoproteins of the virus compared to contemporaneous swine strains [2]. Therefore, important questions are raised regarding pigs given their well-established linkage in the evolution and ecology of influenza viruses.In this study, using an established infection and transmission model [6], [7], we address the outcomes, infection dynamics and pathogenesis of H1N1/09 virus infection in non-immune pigs.ResultsClinical SignsClinical signs were detectable in all of the pigs (100% morbidity) infected directly (INF) via the intranasal route or contact exposed (TC) (Methods), with variations in the range, pattern and severity between individuals although all pigs apparently recovered. The signs induced remained typical of influenza A infections in pigs (see Text S1 and Table S1).The onset of clinical disease was characterised by elevations in rectal temperature and serous, bilateral nasal discharge between 1–3 days post-infection (dpi), generally coincident with the onset and maintenance of nasal virus shedding (Fig. 1A). In pigs that were INF, peak rectal temperatures in individual animals (>39.5°C) ranged from dpi 1–5 (modal value dpi 2), with mean rectal temperatures peaking from dpi 3–8. Biphasic rectal temperatures profiles were observed in some animals (3/4 infected pigs remaining from dpi 5 onwards; 5/8 in-contacts), interspersed by a substantial temperature reduction (≥1°C) in some individual animals below the mean control animal rectal temperature (38.0°C). Highly significant differences between the overall mean rectal temperatures of the INF, TC and control animals (P<0.001) were also observed. Furthermore, variations were apparent in the overall peak and intervals to peak rectal temperatures recorded for the in-contact pigs, the mean clinical scores (per day post-exposure) between INF and TC pigs, and in daily live weight gain comparing INF, TC and control pigs (Text S1 and Figures S2 and S3).10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.g001Figure 1Semi-quantitative H1N1/09 virus shedding.Shedding from infected (INF) and transmission cycle (TC) pigs from the nasal (a), oral (b) and ocular (c) routes. Shedding expressed as (REU log10; mean + SE). Relative equivalent units (REU) represent an equivalent viral infectivity titre related to RRT-PCR threshold cycle (Ct) values. dpi/dpc refers to days post infection/contact.Other observed clinical signs included bilateral serous ocular discharge, coughing with an increased respiratory rate, lethargy and inappetence. The observed initial serous nasal discharge progressed to be mucoid and then muco-purulent in nature by dpi 4 in the remaining infected and contact exposed pigs, with discharge resolving in survivors by dpi 10–16.Virus SheddingShedding was measured in all samples through the detection of viral RNA in quantitative real-time RT-PCR. By the use of a standard curve (on each test plate) generated from a dilution series of infectious H1N1/09 virus quantitated in standard infectivity titrations, we were able to determine the relative equivalent unit (REU) from viral RNA based upon the cycle threshold (CT) value obtained for each sample. Virus shedding was detected from all of the INF pigs, mainly via the nasal route (Fig. 1). Peak nasal shedding (3–4 REU log10) occurred between 4–6 dpi, with intermittent, low level shedding (1–2 REU log10) from dpi 10–15, and ceased from dpi 16 (Fig. 1A).All uninfected pigs exposed by contact with infected pigs during the four successive transmission cycles (see Methods: Groups TC1, TC2, TC3 and TC4) developed broadly similar trajectories of infection to the directly infected pigs (Figure S4). Furthermore, irrespective of exposure mode, all pigs shed similar amounts of virus from the nasal route (Fig. 1A). In contrast, overall lower levels of shedding, but with similar trajectories to that of the nasal cavity were detected from the oral (Fig. 1B) and ocular (Fig. 1C) routes (individual pigs peak range for either route was 1.5–3.0 REU log10). Rectal shedding was rare, detected on just three occasions (peak 2.3 REU log10) from two infected animals (INF, 3245 and 3261) only (at dpi 2–5). In-contact pigs (TC1-TC4) developed similar infection and nasal (Figure S4), oral and ocular shedding profiles to INF pigs (Fig. 1). However, variations were evident in the intervals to both the onset and peak of nasal shedding between TC groups (see Text S1).Transmission Cycle Shedding PatternsThe onset of nasal shedding was detected from one day post-contact (dpc 1) for all pigs in Groups TC1, TC2, and TC3, and from dpc 2 during TC4. Variations were also evident between contact transmission groups in the interval to and duration of peak nasal shedding, and the total duration of nasal shedding (Figure S4). During TC1, nasal shedding from the pair of exposed pigs peaked at dpc 3–6, with an overall duration of 7 days and 10 days respectively. Similarly, during TC2, peak nasal shedding was detected at dpc 6, with no further shedding after dpc 12–13. Overall nasal shedding from the exposed pigs during TC3 was detected for longer (dpc 14). However, the interval to peak nasal shedding was similar to that in TC1 and TC2 (dpc 4–6). Peak nasal shedding was detected at dpc 3–4 during TC4, with no detectable shedding via the nasal cavity from dpc 9.These data also show that the contact period required for successful transmission of virus to both pigs, as determined by the detection of nasal shedding and a mean REU >1.5 log10 (at which point the TC was initiated), was 72 hours for TC1, TC2 and TC4. Interestingly, during TC3, a period of four days was required for these criteria to be fulfilled. In addition, during TC1 and TC4, peak shedding was 2–3 days earlier than in TC2 and TC3. However, overall the interval to onset and the duration of peak shedding was broadly similar in the infected and all of the contact exposed (TC1-TC4) pigs (Figure S4, panel F).SerologyAt the start of the study the seronegative status of all animals was confirmed by haemagglutination inhibition (HI) test using four swine influenza virus subtypes (classical H1N1, avian-like swine H1N1, swine H1N2 and human-like swine H3N2) and A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v. During the study, samples were tested using A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v only. Two of four INF animals seroconverted by dpi 7, with substantial homologous HI titres (80 and 320) detected from the two pigs (3245, 3261) that remained in the study beyond that point. The eight TC animals seroconverted between 10–14 dpc, with peak HI titres in the range 40–640 from 14–18 dpc.Acute Phase Protein (APP) ResponsesSelected APP responses were measured in serum samples collected from infected animals, specifically C-reactive protein and haptoglobin. Infection kinetics were supported by increases above the acute phase response threshold [8], [9] in the levels of both APPs over time (dpi/dpc) in all of the infected pigs (Figure S5). The C-reactive protein levels peaked at dpi/dpc 4 with more protracted responses detected after dpi/dpc 7 in one of the remaining infected pigs (3261) and the in-contact animals. The haptoglobin responses were more protracted, peaking at dpi/dpc 9–11 in both infected and TC pigs.PathologyPathological changes in infected pigs (including by contact exposure) were restricted to the respiratory tract and associated lymphoid tissues. At 3 and 4 dpi or dpc, pulmonary lesions comprised multifocal, cranioventral, lobular consolidation, increasing in number and extension at dpi/dpc 7, when the cranial and middle lung lobes appeared almost entirely consolidated (Fig. 2A and Text S1). For full details of histopathological and immunohistochemistry (IHC) findings see Text. S1 In summary histopathology revealed moderate to severe necrotising bronchiolitis, atelectasis and alveolitis followed by hyperplasia of airway epithelium as regeneration occurred in some lobules from day 7 which resolved by day 17 (Fig. 2C). The pigs were derived from a ‘PRRSV free’ source and the histopathological findings were not considered to indicate the presence of other pathogens. Furthermore, we have shown that live virus (mediated through virus re-isolation), viral antigen (detected using IHC) and viral RNA (detected by modified influenza A Matrix gene real time RT-PCR) were detectable in respiratory and associated lymphoid tissues from dpi 1–7 and dpc 11, but was not detected in examples of consumer commodities such as meat (longissimus dorsi and biceps femoris) or viscera (Table 1). This is in addition to the absence of viral RNA in plasma samples collected from directly infected animals and contact exposed pigs, consistent with no detectable viraemia.10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.g002Figure 2Pathological changes (a,c) and immunohistochemical detection of viral antigen.
a. Lung. In-contact animal (TC4), 11 dpc. Multiple dark red areas of cranioventral pulmonary consolidation in the cranial and middle lung lobes. b. Nasal mucosa, 2 dpi. Influenza A nucleoprotein (brown) in numerous respiratory epithelial cells 20x. c. Lung, 7 dpi. Marked attenuation of bronchiolar epithelium due to epithelial cell necrosis, bronchiolar plug and peribronchiolar lymphohistiocytic infiltration. Haematoxylin and eosin 40x. d. Lung, 4 dpi. Viral nucleoprotein in abundant bronchiolar epithelial cells and cellular debris in the bronchiolar lumen and in several pulmonary alveolar macrophages 20x.10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.t001Table 1Qualitative results for the detection of virus in tissues collected from challenged or contact exposed pigs by virus re-isolation, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and RRT- PCR.Pig IDPMEGroupTurbinateNaso-pharynxThoracic TracheaLung lobesLymph Nodes*
CranialMidCaudalAccessory3242Day 3Mock−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−3249dpi 2INF+/+/++/−/+−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−3252dpi 2INF+/+/++/−/++/−/+−/−/−+/+/++/−/++/−/+−/+3246dpi 3INF+/+/+−/−/++/−/−+/−/++/+/++/−/+−/−/+−/−3243dpi 4INF+/+/++/−/++/+/++/+/++/+/++/+/++/+/+−/+3260dpi 7INF+/+/+−/+/−+/+/++/+/++/+/−+/+/++/+/+−/+3244dpi 7INF+/−/++/−/−−/−/−−/+/++/+/−−/+/++/+/+−/+3257dpc 11TC4−/−/+−/−/−−/−/−−/−/+−/−/−−/+***/+−/−/−−/−−/−/−  =  Virus re-isolation/IHC/PCR.*Lymph nodes, IHC: Superficial inguinal, lateral retropharyngeal**, medial retropharyngeal, right, middle and left tracheobronchial**, mediastinal and mesenteric (Virus re-isolation and PCR only).Other: Commodities and offal - spleen, liver, kidney and ileum plus muscle (longissimus dorsi and biceps femoris) were all negative when tested by virus re-isolation & PCR.***Only in cell debris in lumen of three bronchioles (no bronchial or bronchiolar epithelial or macrophage immunolabelling).Shaded rows represent a mock-infected control animal from the equivalent of dpi 3 and a transmission cycle (TC4) animal at 11 days post-contact (dpc) representing for comparative purposes the closest animal to the direct infected group PMEs.Sequencing and Genetic AnalysesFull genome sequence analysis was conducted for selected nasal swab RNA samples from four infected animals (3244, 3245, 3260, 3261) and both contact exposed pigs in each TC group between days 3–6 (dpi/dpc). The lowest Ct values were selected representing a REU log10 range of 2.3–4.1 (Table 2). There were no significant deviations from the inoculum sequence observed for all the genes encoding internal proteins and the neuraminidase gene in either directly infected or TC animals. No molecular markers for pathogenicity (e.g. PB2 E627K) were detected. Haemagglutinin (HA1) gene mutations observed throughout the study are described in Table 2 (see Text S1).10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.t002Table 2HA1 locations at which amino acid changes were observed in directly infected and contact pigs.Animal statusPig IDHA1REU (log10)(dpi/dpc)Location225226Inoculum:Not applicableX* (D/G)X (R/Q)
Infected:
3261 (3 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.373261 (4 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.433244 (5 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.603245 (5 dpi)--3.913260 (5 dpi)X (D/G)Q2.883261 (5 dpi)X (D/G)Q4.123261 (6 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.32
In-contacts:
TC13240 (3 dpc)
-

-
3.66TC13254 (3 dpc)DQ4.16TC23250 (5 dpc)--3.36TC23256 (6 dpc)DQ3.91TC33258 (5 dpc)DQ2.33TC33259 (5 dpc)DQ2.31TC43247(5 dpc)--2.93TC43257 (4 dpc)DQ3.41
Infected: Middle lung lobe3253 (1 dpi)X (D/G)Q4.383252 (2 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.883243 (4 dpi)GQ6.833260 (7 dpi)GQ6.21Virus derived from nasal swabs unless otherwise stated. H3 numbering [ref. 27] is used in the table and throughout the text. Where a mixed population was observed this is represented by an X with the possible mixture of amino acids described in parentheses. Dash indicates sequence data not available. Semi-quantitative nasal H1N1/09v virus shedding (REU log10).The HA sequence data for the inoculum (egg passage 5) was identical to the published sequence for egg grown (egg passage 2) isolate A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v (GenBank accession: FJ969540) containing a mixture of two amino acids at positions 225 and 226 (H3 numbering), D/G and R/Q respectively. Upon infection in pigs, 226Q was selected, but 225D/G remained present. For contact animals, 226Q remained and, in addition, 225D was selected for (Table 2). HA1 sequencing was also conducted on a small subset of middle lung lobe tissue samples from directly infected pigs in order to assess variation in receptor tropism and possible relationship to pathogenesis. Of the four middle lung lobe samples analysed, all four had 226Q. Two samples (ex INF pigs dpi 1 and dpi 2) showed a dual population of 225D/G, whilst the two other samples (ex INF pigs dpi 4 and dpi 7) showed 225G (Table 2, Figure S6). Furthermore, it is interesting to note that the latter samples from INF pigs containing 225G in HA1 also had REU's >6.0 (Table 2) suggestive of efficient replication at this site.DiscussionIn this study we have shown that pigs can be readily infected with pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus (A/California/07/09), resulting in the induction of clinical signs, viral pathogenesis restricted to the respiratory tract, infection dynamics consistent with endemic strains of influenza A in pigs, virus transmissibility between pigs (four cycles) and virus-host adaptation events.The type and pattern of clinical signs and induced host responses were consistent with those typical of swine influenza virus [10], including the infection dynamics, characterised by shedding from the upper respiratory tract. Rectal shedding was only rarely detected potentially reflecting a lack of tropism for replication in the alimentary tract (Table 1) that was further supported by the lack of immunolabelled enterocytes in the ileum (note the possibility of contamination of the perineum with nasal discharge cannot be excluded due the natural inquisitive and social behaviour of pigs). In addition, the onset of clinical disease was preceded by elevations in rectal temperature, and biphasic rectal temperature profiles were observed in some animals (3/4 infected pigs remaining from dpi 5 onwards; 5/8 in-contacts), a clinical feature often observed during influenza infections [11]–[13]. The measurement of selected APP responses provided further confirmation of infection dynamics. It is recognised that the porcine APP response to infection is typically characterised by elevations in serum levels of C-reactive protein as the major APP [14]. Our data supports this observation, and furthermore we have shown that C-reactive protein responses are higher in infected pigs than in TC1-TC4 pigs (Figure S5), and were more elevated in the infected and TC1 animals than the later transmission cycles.Furthermore, our results clearly demonstrate that extant H1N1/09 is fully capable of becoming established in global pig populations. We have also shown that a 72-hour contact period within the first six days of infection is sufficient to establish virus spread in an experimental setting. We have used determinations of precise levels of viral RNA related to approximations of infectious virus which also enabled the analysis of large datasets derived from intensive sampling. However, further study would be required to refine the transmission window, and it is also important to note that events may differ in a field setting. For example, the observed levels of morbidity and mortality may differ depending on the role played by other inter-current infections and/or pig husbandry and management factors that could also result in more severe economic impacts to the swine industry. Interestingly, the limited natural occurrences of early field infections of pigs were relatively mild [15]–[17]. Similarly, whilst infection dynamics in a field setting will be different through availability and numbers of both susceptible and infected pigs, it could be reasonably expected that H1N1/09 will transmit efficiently in immunologically naïve farmed pig populations.The pathogenesis described in this study is consistent with that of infections with endemic swine influenza viruses [10], [18], [19]. Our results with H1N1/09 were more severe than those obtained in mini-pigs [20], but similar to experiments performed in 10-week-old commercial pigs [21]. This variability may be related to virus strain, but more possibly due to breed of pig with this study using a breed commonly reared on a commercial scale. Overall, clinical signs and pathology were of much greater severity than those caused by infections with avian influenza viruses, such as highly pathogenic H5N1 or low pathogenic viruses of different subtypes, in pigs infected experimentally [22]–[24]. Furthermore they were broadly similar to those in small mammals infected with pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus [20], [25]–[26]. Whilst we used pigs sourced from a high health herd and the histopathological findings did not indicate the presence of other pathogens, we did not further exclude intercurrent infections other than by close reference to the control pigs.In this study we observed an apparent host selection within the H1N1/09 population based upon the haemagglutinin (HA1) gene as the virus replicated in directly infected pigs and transmitted to contact exposed pigs (Table 2). Influenza virus HA is the surface protein involved in binding host cell sialic acid in order to initiate infection, and the specificity of the HA binding depends on the virus and host species, with human and swine viruses preferentially binding α2,6-linked sialyl receptors whereas avian viruses bind α2,3-linked sialyl receptors [reviewed in ref 27].For technical reasons we used egg-grown A/California/07/2009 (H1N1)v at passage level 5 for the direct infection of pigs. The HA gene sequencing of virus inoculum revealed that it differs from the original virus, A/California/07/2009 (GenBank accession numbers: FJ966974, FJ969540 and FJ981613)[2] through the presence of a mixture of two amino acids at HA positions 225 and 226 (H3 numbering, [27]), D/G and R/Q, respectively. We assume that the inoculum was a mixture of quasispecies of a wild type virus (HA, 225D/226Q) [2] and at least two egg-derived mutants (HA, 225G and HA, 226R). The mutation Q226R has been observed previously in egg-adapted seasonal human H1N1 viruses [28], [29]. Isolates with 226R grow well in vitro, but are thought to be severely impaired in vivo
[29]. The data presented here supports this hypothesis, since the 226R variant was absent from all viruses examined from infected pigs (Table 2).A mutation G225D/E in the HA of H1N1 viruses is known to be important for the alteration of the viral receptor specificity during adaptation of avian viruses to humans and pigs [5], [30], [31]. Interestingly, studies with the 1918 pandemic H1N1 virus describe it as circulating as a mixture of variants with either 225D or 225G [5], but the biological significance of this heterogeneity remains unknown. Both variants infected ferrets, but transmission of the variant with 225G was not as efficient as for variant 225D [29]. Our data for H1N1/09 are consistent with this finding in that all viruses detected in nasal secretions from the contact exposed pigs (TC1-TC4) possessed 225D (Table 2), indicating that it appears more transmissible than variant 225G.Glycine at HA position 225 of human and swine H1N1 viruses enhances virus binding to α2,3 receptors without markedly compromising ability to bind to α2,6 receptors [27], [30], [31]. Although non-egg-adapted swine and seasonal human H1N1 viruses typically display 225D/E [27], [30], here we show possible selection of the 225G in affected middle lung lobe tissue from a small subset of samples from directly infected pigs, potentially indicative of different selection pressure within this compartment compared to cells of the upper respiratory tract (Table 2, Figure S6) even though cells of the lower respiratory tract of pigs express both α2,3 and α2,6 receptors [4]. These findings demonstrate the roles of viral receptor specificity in both transmission and tissue tropism providing potential clues to the existence and biological significance of viral receptor-binding variants with 225D and 225G during the 1918 pandemic [5].We have shown that pigs are susceptible to infection with H1N1/09 and incursion from infected humans to the farmed pig population appears likely. However, the impact of such transmission will be compounded by a number of variables that we were not able to address in the current study, such as prior immunity to H1 influenza viruses, age of animal, husbandry factors, including production type, and intercurrent disease. Close monitoring of global pig populations is required if the dynamic is to be fully understood, as is further virus evolution to allow assessment of human and veterinary health risks.Our results on different selective pressures in the upper and lower respiratory epithelium in pigs provide further insights into host selection preferences and may suggest possible differences in relation to transmissibility and pathogenesis within the same animal. In particular, this finding prompts further studies on the enigma of co-circulation of two receptor-binding variants of the 1918 pandemic virus and on their relative role in pathogenesis.MethodsThis work was approved by the VLA ethics committee for animal studies and was carried out in accordance with the UK 1986 Animal Scientific Procedure Act and VLA code of practice for performance of scientific studies using animals (available on request). Furthermore, these guidelines meet the requirement for the European Directive for Animal Experimentation (86/609).Study DesignThe infection and transmission study comprised twenty-two Landrace hybrid pigs, aged 4–5 weeks old at the outset, randomly allocated to six separate study groups (Figure S1). All of the pigs were sourced from a high health status herd (PRRS virus free) and were shown to be both influenza A virus and antibody (subtypes H1N1, H1N2, H3N2) negative by Matrix (M) gene real time RT-PCR (described below) and haemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays [32] respectively prior to the start of the study. Infection was initially established in a group of eleven pigs by intra-nasal inoculation with a total dose of 105.8 EID50 A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v, delivered in a final volume of 2 ml per nostril, using a mucosal atomisation device (MAD® Nasal, Wolfe Tory Medical, Inc.) to mimic aerogenous infection. The virus strain (A/California/07/2009(H1N1v) was propagated in embryonated fowls' eggs (passage history, egg passage 5).In addition to the group of infected pigs (INF), four successive transmission cycles (TC1-TC4) were established between infected and naïve pigs at monitored intervals (once sustained nasal shedding from both of the pigs in each cycle was confirmed). TC1 was established by placing two naïve contact exposed pigs with infected pigs at dpi 2. With nasal shedding detected from the pair of TC1 pigs, they were removed to a separate room to establish TC2, by infection of a second pair of naïve pigs. Two further transmission cycles were then established between successive pairs of infected and naïve, contact exposed pigs (TC3, TC4). Three uninfected pigs were maintained as a control group (Controls), two of which were mock-inoculated and one was non-inoculated. The mock-inoculated pigs were challenged by the intra-nasal route using allantoic fluid suspended and delivered in a final volume of 2 ml PBS per nostril, using the same method as the infected pigs.Clinical Measurements and SamplingEach day throughout the duration of the study (25 days) clinical parameters were assessed by veterinary inspections, with swab samples (nasal, ocular, oral and rectal) collected. The swabs were then immediately tested by a modified influenza A M gene real-time RT (RRT)-PCR assay (described below), enabling confirmation of pig infection and shedding status (Fig. 1 and Figure S4). In addition to the daily procedures and sampling conducted for each of the directly infected pigs (INF), control animals (Controls) were swabbed on three occasions, equivalent to dpi 0, 6 and 20. The same types of swab sample were also collected on a daily basis from each contact exposed pig (TC1-4) from the first day of their respective transmission cycles and processed daily for M gene RRT-PCR testing.Blood Samples and AssaysBlood samples were collected by jugular venepuncture from all of the pigs prior to the start of the study, and from the directly infected pigs up to dpi 4, and again at dpi 7 for assessment of viraemia, acute phase protein responses and antibody production (described below). Blood samples for were then collected twice weekly from infected pigs, and the contact exposed pigs (TC1-TC4) as they were recruited to the study during the successive transmission cycles, with collection of terminal blood samples from all remaining pigs prior to euthanasia (Figure S5).Haemagglutination Inhibition (HI) AssayHaemagglutinin specific antibodies were detected in pig sera using HI tests performed according to standard methods [32] with A/California/07/09 as antigen.Acute Phase Protein (APP) ResponsesC-reactive protein and haptoglobin responses were measured in serum as previously described [8], [9] using a commercially available ELISA assay, according to manufacturers instructions (Tridelta Development Ltd., Kildare, Ireland) (see Protocol S1).Post-Mortem Examination (PME)At defined intervals infected pigs were removed for post-mortem examination, with systematic recording of macroscopic findings and collection of a range of tissues for histopathology and virus detection assays (Table 1). Pairs of infected pigs (INF) were subject to PME on dpi 2, 3, 4 and 7, with one infected pig PME on each of dpi 1, dpi 17 and dpi 21. Further PMEs were performed on contact exposed pigs on dpi 21 and dpi 25 (Figure S1). A full range of tissue specimens was collected, with selected fresh tissue samples (Table 1) stored at −70°C. Samples collected for histopathology and IHC were stored in 10% (v/v) phosphate-buffered formalin pending final processing (described below) and analysis.Virus Detection in TissuesVirus detection (Table 1) was performed by IHC, M gene RRT-PCR (PCR), and virus re-isolation in 9–11 day old embryonated fowls' eggs [32] (two eggs per sample for each passage, with a total of two passages). Frozen tissues were thawed and a 10% homogenate prepared in PBS with antibiotics [14] using a powered homogeniser system (Omni homogenizer (GLH), using Omni Tip™ Plastic Generator Probes (hard tissue); Omni International, Marietta, GA, USA). Debris was removed by centrifugation (10 minutes at ∼1500 g) and the supernatant collected and passed through a 0.8 µm sterile filter (Satorius Ltd., Goettingen, Germany) prior to RNA extraction or virus re-isolation. Clarified material was then inoculated into embryonated fowls' eggs and the presence of virus determined by the haemagglutination of chicken erythrocytes [32]. The same tissue homogenate supernatant was used for the PCR assay (described below).Matrix (M) Gene RRT-PCRTotal RNA was extracted from swine clinical specimens (above) as previously described, including a positive extraction control that was prepared to yield a pre-determined Ct value [33]. The modified M gene RRT-PCR utilised the forward primer and probe described originally by Spackman et al
[34] at final concentrations of 0.4 µM and 0.3 µM respectively, but the reverse primer consisted of an equimolar mixture of the original reverse primer plus a reverse primer modified to provide a perfect sequence match with the pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus, typified by A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v (accession number: FJ966975). The four altered nucleotides in the modified reverse primer are indicated in upper case: 5′-tgc aaa Gac aCT ttc Cag tct ctg-3′. The final concentration of each of the reverse primers was 0.2 µM. Cycling conditions, temperatures and chemistry details were as outlined for the M gene RRT-PCR [35]. RNA extracted from a titrated allantoic fluid preparation of A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v was used to construct a ten-fold dilution series. This served to calibrate the Ct values derived from testing extracted clinical specimens by the modified M gene RRT-PCR with an equivalent viral infectivity titre [35] that is expressed in relative equivalent units (REU) [33].Histopathology and ImmunohistochemistryFollowing PME, all phosphate-buffered formalin-fixed samples were routinely embedded in paraffin wax. 4 µm thick sections, cut on a rotary microtome, were stained with haematoxylin and eosin or used for IHC detection of influenza A nucleoprotein by the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method [33] (see Protocol S1).Sequencing and Genetic AnalysesRNA was extracted from inoculum, swab or tissue samples (Table 2) using the QIAamp Viral RNA Kit (Qiagen). Genes were reverse transcribed and amplified using the OneStep RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) (Primers available on request). RT-PCR products were excised from agarose gels and purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). DNA was sequenced using the Prism BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit on the 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). All commercial kits were used following manufacturer's instructions. The Lasergene package (DNASTAR) was used for nucleotide sequence analysis and alignment. Full genome sequencing and further detailed genetic analyses were performed to compare the inoculum strain and selected output viruses (Table 2, Figure S6).Statistical AnalysesDescriptive data includes mean and standard deviation within the text. Mean and standard error of the mean are shown in graphical formats. Clinical scores, weights, temperatures and shedding levels were analysed using analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA with 95% confidence intervals) in the Minitab software package (Release 14).Supporting InformationProtocol S1(0.03 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Text S1(0.04 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Table S1Clinical scoring system for influenza A challenge in pigs.(0.03 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S1Study plan including timeline (date and day post-infection), animal numbers, post-mortem examinations (PME), transmission cycles (TC) and animal movements. An unplanned PME was carried out on pig 3261 dpi 17 on welfare grounds.(0.07 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2Mean daily rectal temperature (oC) plus standard errors for infected (INF), transmission cycle (TC) and control (C) pigs.(0.07 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S3Mean live weight gain (kg) plus standard errors for infected (INF), transmission cycle (TC) and control (C) pigs.(0.72 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S4Semi-quantitative nasal H1N1/09v virus shedding (REU log10; mean + SE) from infected (INF, panel A) and transmission cycle (TC, panels B–E) pigs. Panel F is the combined data (A–E).(3.91 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S5Acute Phase Protein responses, mean C-Reactive protein (A) and Haptoglobin (B), for infected (INF) and transmission cycle (TC) pigs.(0.03 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S6HA receptor selection. Figure shows a representative sequence chromatogram covering codons 225 and 226 (H3 numbering, [ref. 20]) for the inoculum, nasal swabs from directly infected pigs (INF) and contact exposure transmission cycle (TC1-4) isolates, and for two variations observed between middle lung lobe tissues at 1/2 dpi and 4/7 dpi. Amino acid and nucleotide sequences are shown above and below the trace respectively. Positions where a mixed amino acid population is observed are represented by an X.(0.09 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Asparagine Substitution at PB2 Residue 701 Enhances the Replication, Pathogenicity, and Transmission of the 2009 Pandemic H1N1 Influenza A Virus

IntroductionInfluenza A viruses are important human and animal pathogens that cause frequent epidemics and epizootics, and emergence of novel viruses in humans and animals continue to pose a pandemic threat. Transmission and pathogenesis of influenza A viruses are polygenic traits influenced by the interaction of viral components with host cells. The three RNA polymerase subunits (PB1, PB2, and PA) are encoded by different genomic RNA segments and the proteins interact to form a heterotrimeric RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), which transcribes and replicates the eight different nucleoprotein (NP) encapsidated genomic RNA segments that comprise the viral genome. The RdRp and the NP are major determinants of host species-specificity, transmission, and pathogenesis. The 2009 influenza A pandemic was caused by H1N1 subtype viruses (H1N1pdm), which have a triple reassortant RNA polymerase and NP gene constellation that contains avian (PB2, and PA), human (PB1) and swine (NP) lineage gene segments [1–3]. It is anticipated that additional adaptations will evolve in the H1N1pdm viruses unique triple reassortant gene constellation as it adapts to humans, and these changes have the potential to enhance its virulence and/or transmission.The avian-lineage PB2 gene of H1N1pdm is one of the gene segments likely to undergo evolutionary selection in the new human host. This avian-lineage PB2 lacks some characteristic human/mammalian amino acid signatures, such as lysine at residue 627 (PB2-627K) or asparagine at residue 701 (PB2-701N). Several groups have shown that introduction of the PB2-E627K substitution into H1N1pdm viruses had little effect on the pathogenesis and/or transmission of H1N1pdm viruses in mice and ferrets [4–8]. This was unexpected to some extent, since many studies have shown that introduction of PB2-627K into H5N1 and other zoonotic avian influenza A virus subtypes increased virulence and transmissibility in mammalian models [9–13]. However, this contradiction was nicely explained by two studies showing that a unique substitution (PB2-Q591R) in the avian-lineage PB2 of the H1N1pdm virus compensated for the PB2-627E commonly found in human H1N1pdm viruses [6,14].PB2-701N has also been shown to compensate for the lack of PB2-627K and enhance the replication of some strains of influenza A viruses in mammalian hosts [15]. For example, studies with the mouse adapted avian H7N7 influenza virus SC35M showed that PB2-701N increased the polymerase activity and enhanced virulence in mice and PB2-701N in the avian H5N1 virus DKGX/35 showed enhanced pathogenesis in mice and that it was a prerequisite for transmission in guinea pigs [16]. Additionally, Steel et al., demonstrated the compensatory effects of PB2-701N on avian and human viruses containing PB2-627E using the guinea pig transmission model [12]. We hypothesized that since the PB2-D701N substitution has been observed in some zoonotic avian H5N1 viruses and some avian-lineage swine influenza viruses [15–17], it may provide an advantage to H1N1pdm viruses as their avian-lineage PB2 gene segment evolves in the human population. Therefore, to evaluate the potential role that PB2-D701N may play in the adaptation of H1N1pdm viruses to humans, we conducted a comprehensive study to determine the influence that PB2-D701N has on viral replication and transmissibility. The results show that although the wild type H1N1pdm virus contained the PB2-591R polymorphism, the PB2-D701N substitution increased the viral polymerase activity in human cell lines, conferred more efficient virus replication in a restrictive mouse epithelial cell line, increased virulence in the BALB/c mouse model, and increased virus transmission in the ferret transmission model. Additionally, the PB2-D701N virus reduced secretion of the antiviral IFN-λ cytokines and showed enhanced replication in primary human alveolar epithelial cells relative to the wild type H1N1pdm virus.Materials and MethodsBiosafety and ethics statementThis study was reviewed and approved by the Wadsworth Center Institutional Biosafety Committee, the National Jewish Institutional Biosafety Committee, and it was reviewed under the CDC procedures for identification of dual use research of concern. All experiments with infectious virus were performed using procedures and facilities that met or exceeded the requirements set forth by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for propagation of influenza A viruses. In vitro experiments with infectious H1N1pdm viruses were conducted in biosafety level 2 laboratory as described by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention interim biosafety guidelines. In vivo experiments were carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. Mouse study was performed in a biosafety level 3 laboratory approved for such use by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Department of Agriculture and were conducted under animal care and use protocols approved by Wadsworth Center’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC protocol 09-377). No survival surgery was performed, and all efforts were made to minimize suffering. All ferret procedures were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International-accredited facility. Animal studies were performed in accordance with the IACUC guidelines under protocol #2195TUMFERC-A3: “Studies on the Pathogenesis and Transmission of Recombinant Influenza Viruses in Ferrets”.Cell linesHuman embryonic kidney 293T (HEK-293T) cells and mouse rectum epithelial carcinoma (CMT-93) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were maintained in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) supplemented with 5% FBS. Human lung epithelial (Calu-3) cells were maintained in EMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% nonessential amino acids, and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. MDCK, CMT-93, and Calu-3 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, Rockville, MD.Generation of recombinant virusesRecombination-based In-Fusion cloning method was used to mutate the NY1682 PB2 plasmid to generate the PB2-D701N mutant reverse genetics construct [18–20]. The recombinant rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses were generated using the rescue protocol described previously [21]. Briefly, 0.6 µg of plasmid for each gene segment was mixed and incubated with 15 µl of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 20°C for 20 min. The Lipofectamine-DNA mixture was transferred to 90% confluent 293T/MDCK cell monolayers in a 35-mm tissue culture dish and incubated at 33°C with 5% CO2 for 8 h. The transfection supernatant was replaced with 3 ml of Opti-Mem I medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 0.3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) fraction V (Invitrogen), 3 µg/ml tosylsulfonyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ), and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Invitrogen). Three days post-transfection, the supernatant was collected and viruses were propagated in MDCK cells at 33°C. Titers of the viruses used in this study were determined by TCID50 and/or plaque assay in MDCK cells.Mini-genome replication assayThe luciferase-mediated mini-genome replication assay was performed as previously described, using a PolI-driven reporter plasmid and pDZ-based PB2, PB1, PA, and NP bidirectional expression plasmids [18,22]. Briefly, HEK-293T cells in 24-well plates were cotransfected with 0.2 µg each of pPolI-NS-Luc plasmid (pBZ81A36) and plasmids to express the NY1682 PB2 (PB2-WT or PB2-D701N), PB1, PA, and NP proteins, and to control for transfection efficiency, 0.02 µg of the Renilla luciferase plasmid pRL-TK (Promega, Madison, WI) was also cotransfected. Cells were incubated at 33oC, 37oC, and 39oC for 6 or 18 hours, and then luciferase production was assayed using the dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Firefly luciferase expression was normalized to Renilla luciferase expression (relative activity). At each temperature, the relative activity of WT polymerase was set at 100%, and the activities of the PB2-D701N were determined relative to that of the WT. All results shown are the averages from triplicate experiments, and the standard deviation is shown.Replication kinetics in vitro
MDCK or CMT-93 cell monolayers in 12-well plates were washed twice with PBS, and then 2 ml of virus growth medium (VGM) was added to each well. The cells were inoculated at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 TCID50/cell with recombinant NY1682 WT or NY1682 D701N viruses. Supernatants were collected at 2, 24, 48, 72 (and 96) hours post inoculation (hpi). Infections of Calu-3 cells were performed similarly, except that an MOI of 0.02 TCID50/cell was used and cultures were maintained at three different temperatures (33oC, 37oC, and 39oC) after inoculation. The VGM used for MDCK and CMT-93 cells was EMEM supplemented with 0.15% BSA fraction V, 2 µg/ml TPCK-trypsin, and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, and the VGM used for Calu-3 cells was EMEM supplemented with 0.3% BSA fraction V, 1 µg/ml TPCK-trypsin, and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic. All virus titers were determined by TCID50 assay using MDCK cells.Replication and cytokines secretion in primary human alveolar epithelial cellsAlveolar type II (ATII) cells were isolated from de-identified human lungs that were not suitable for transplantation but donated for medical research as described previously [23]. The Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at National Jewish Medical and Research Center approved this research. To transdifferentiate type II cells into type I-like cells, type II cells were plated on tissue culture plastic plates at a density of 2.0X105/cm2 in DMEM with 10% FBS [24]. After 24-48 h of adherence, the medium was changed to DMEM with 5% FBS and cells were cultured for 6 days and then used for virus infection.The primary cultured alveolar type I-like cells were infected with the rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N viruses at an MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell and washed twice with medium after 1 h of incubation at 37oC. Culture supernatants of the infected cells were collected at 1, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hpi and viral titers were determined using plaque assay in MDCK cells. Supernatants collected at 24 hpi were used to determine the protein levels of selected cytokines/chemokines using specific enzyme-linked immunesorbent assays (ELISAs) as described previously [25]. The ELISA kits for human IFN-λ, CCL5, IL-6, and IL-8 were purchased from ELISA Tech (ELISA Tech, Aurora, CO).Mouse experimentsTo determine virus replication in vivo, six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=3/group/time-point, Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were anesthetized with isoflurane and inoculated intranasally with 50 µl EMEM diluent containing 103 TCID50 of rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N. Animals were euthanized at 12, 24, 48, 96 hpi. The entire lung of each animal was homogenized in 1 ml of media and clarified by centrifugation, and nasal washes were collected from each mouse in 1 ml of media. Virus titers in the lungs and nasal washes were determined by TCID50 assay.To determine morbidity and mortality, groups of five-to-six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=5/group) were inoculated intranasally with the recombinant viruses at the indicated doses in 50 µl of EMEM diluent or mock inoculated with EMEM to serve as controls. Body weight was measured daily for 14 days, and clinical observations were recorded. Mice that lost more than 25% of their original weight were euthanized for humane reasons using Avertin anesthesia followed by bilateral thoracotomy or cervical dislocation.Ferret transmission experimentsMale Fitch ferrets (Triple F Farms, Sayre, PA), six months of age and serologically negative by hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay for currently circulating influenza viruses, were used in this study. In a Duo-Flow Bioclean environmental enclosure (Lab Products, Inc., Seaford, DE), ferrets were housed in adjacent transmission cages, each modified so that a side wall was replaced with a stainless-steel, perforated wall with holes 1–5 mm in diameter and spaced 3 mm apart to facilitate the transfer of respiratory droplets through the air while preventing direct contact between ferrets and indirect contact with the bedding and food of neighboring ferrets [26,27]. A total of six ferrets were used for each respiratory droplet transmission experiment. Three ferrets were inoculated intranasally with 1 ml of 106 PFU of the NY1682-WT or NY1682-D701N virus. Twenty-four hours after inoculation, three naive ferrets were each placed in a cage adjacent to an inoculated ferret. Ferrets were monitored for clinical signs through 14–18 dpi as previously described. Nasal washes were collected on 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 dpi from the inoculated ferrets and were collected on 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 dpc (days post-contact) from the contact ferrets. Viral titers were determined in MDCK cells by plaque assay. HI analysis was also performed on post-exposure ferret sera collected 14–18 dpc using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes against homologous virus.StatisticsStatistical analyses were conducted in GraphPad Prism version 5.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) using ANOVA analysis with Bonferroni post-test. For simple comparisons, Student’s t test with two-tailed analysis was used as indicated in the text.ResultsPB2-D701N substitution increases viral RNA polymerase activity in vitro
We used a luciferase-mediated mini-genome assay to examine the effects of the PB2-D701N substitution on the H1N1pdm viral polymerase activity. Human embryonic kidney-293T cells (HEK-293T) were co-transfected with plasmids expressing the NY1682 PB2 (either WT or D701N), PB1, PA, NP proteins, and a pPolI-NS-Luc reporter plasmid [8]. After 6 h or 18 h incubation at 33oC, 37oC, or 39oC, luciferase production was assayed. At both time points and all temperatures, the PB2-D701N substitution resulted in a significantly higher level of relative luciferase activity compared to the PB2-WT (p<0.05, t-test) (Figure 1), indicating that the D701N substitution in the PB2 protein enhances activity of the H1N1pdm RdRp. The PB2-D701N substitution also increased the H1N1pdm polymerase activity in A549 cells, a human lung epithelial cell line (data not shown). Using the same assay, we have previously shown that introduction of E627K into NY1682-PB2 increased polymerase activity by 400% and E158G substitution in NY1682-PB2 increased activity by 1500% [8]. Although the increased RNA polymerase activity conferred by PB2-D701N was fairly modest in comparison to other mutations (e.g., E627K, and E158G) [8], seemingly small differences in RNA polymerase activity may still influence transmission or pathogenesis. Therefore, the effects of the PB2-D701N substitution on virus replication, pathogenesis, and transmission were investigated.10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g001Figure 1PB2-D701N substitution enhances viral RNA polymerase activity in human cells.HEK-293T cells were transfected with pPolI-NS-Luc plasmid (pBZ81A36) that expresses negative sense virus-like RNA encoding a destabilized firefly luciferase enzyme that can be transcribed by the viral RdRp. The HEK-293T cells were also co-transfected with plasmids expressing the NY1682 PB1, PA and NP, and one of the PB2 clones (WT, or D701N) to generate different viral RdRp. Cells were also co-transfected with a Renilla luciferase expression plasmid to control for transfection efficiency. After 6 h and 18 h incubation at 33oC, 37oC, or 39oC, both firefly and Renilla luciferase production were measured, and Renilla expression was used to normalize the data. The averages of triplicate experiments are shown with error bars that represent standard deviation (SD). * Indicates that the difference between the PB2-WT and PB2-D701N was statistically significant (p<0.05, t-test).The rNY1682-D701N virus replicates more efficiently in mouse epithelial cells and in human lung epithelial cells at an elevated temperaturePrevious studies have shown that D701N substitution in the PB2 protein of H5N1 virus can improve virus growth in mammalian cells [17,28]. To determine if the D701N substitution also has a similar effect on the H1N1pdm virus, we created a recombinant H1N1pdm virus that differed from the wild-type A/New York/1682/2009 (rNY1682-WT) at PB2-D701N (rNY1682-701N). The growth kinetics of the rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses was almost identical in MDCK cells, and both viruses reached peak titers of 107.7 TCID50/ml by 24 hpi (Figure 2A). These data are consistent with results obtained by Herfst et al., in the background of another H1N1pdm strain, rA/Netherlands/602/2009 virus [7].10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g002Figure 2Replication kinetics of rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N in
vitro.(A) Confluent monolayers of Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were inoculated with the rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) viruses at 0.01 TCID50/cell. Supernatants were collected at 2, 24, 48 and 72 hours post inoculation (hpi). (B) Confluent mouse rectal epithelial carcinoma cells (CMT-93) were inoculated with rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) viruses at 0.01 TCID50/cell and supernatants were harvested at 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hpi. (C, D, E) Confluent human lung epithelial cells (Calu-3) were inoculated with rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) viruses at 0.02 TCID50/cell and supernatants were harvested at 2, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hpi. Cells were incubated at 33oC (C), 37oC (D), or 39oC (E) for the respective growth curves. The averages of triplicate experiments are shown with error bars (+/-) representing the standard deviation, and * indicates that the differences were statistically significant (p<0.001, ANOVA).Since MDCK cells are an ideal substrate for the replication of influenza viruses and even attenuated viruses often replicate efficiently in this cell line, we also compared the replication kinetics of these two viruses in a restrictive mouse epithelial cell line (CMT-93) that we had previously found to be more sensitive to the effects of RdRp mutations than MDCK and some other cell lines [8]. In the CMT-93 cells, the rNY1682-D701N replicated more efficiently than rNY1682-WT, and the titers of rNY1682-D701N were significantly higher (~8-fold) than that of rNY1682-WT at 48, 72 and 96 hpi (p<0.001, ANOVA) (Figure 2B).Although the mini-genome assay results indicate that the D701N substitution increases the polymerase activity in human kidney and lung cell lines (HEK-293T and A549), rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N showed similar growth kinetics in the human lung Calu-3 cell line at 33oC and 37oC (Figure 2C and D). Interestingly, at 39oC, rNY1682-D701N replicated faster and the viral titer was modestly higher than rNY1682-WT at 48 hpi (p<0.001, ANOVA) (Figure 2E). The higher temperature may modestly restrict replication of the rNY1682-WT virus replication in Calu-3 cells.PB2-D701N reduces induction of IFN-λ and enhances virus replication in primary human alveolar epithelial cellsThe increased virus replication in restricted cell lines prompted us to examine the viruses in primary human alveolar epithelial cells. About 95% of the alveolar epithelium is covered by flattened alveolar type I (ATI) cells [29], which makes them an important target for respiratory viruses in the gas exchange portions of the lung. Although isolation and culture of human ATI cells have not been reported to our knowledge, Wang et al., transdifferentiated alveolar type II cells into type I-like cells and established the virus infection model in these cells [30–32]. To determine if the PB2-D701N substitution influences the replication of the H1N1pdm virus in human lung cells, primary cultured ATI-like cells were prepared from lungs of seven de-identified donors as described previously [23], and were infected with the rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses at 37oC. The culture supernatants were collected at different time points post infection (1, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hpi) and the virus titers were determined by plaque assay. Although viral titer from different donors varied, we found that the rNY1682-D701N virus always replicated to modestly higher titers than the rNY1682-WT virus (Figure 3A). Therefore, the ATI-like cells may be more sensitive than the Calu-3 cells for the detection of the effects from the PB2-D701N mutation (compare to Figure 2D). It is possible that at the optimal temperature (37°C), the rNY1682-WT virus replicated to very high titers (107.8 TCID50/ML) in the Calu-3 cells (Figure 2D), to which the rNY1682-D701N virus was unable to surpass. In contrast, the rNY1682-D701N replicated faster and to higher titer than rNY1682-WT virus in ATI-like cells. Taken together, the rNY1682-D701N virus consistently demonstrated similar or enhanced replication kinetics compared to the rNY1682-WT (Figures 2 and 3).10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g003Figure 3Analysis of cytokine response and virus replication in primary human alveolar epithelial cells.Human alveolar type I-like cells were infected at 37°C with MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell of the rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) virus, or were mock infected (Mock). Supernatants from the culture were collected at various time points post infection. (A) Supernatants collected at 1, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hpi were determined for viral titers by plaque assay. Representative growth kinetics of the WT and D701N viruses in one donor cells are shown. Supernatants collected at 24 hpi were analyzed by ELISA for the levels of (B) IFN-λ, (C) CCL5, (D) IL-6, and (E) IL-8. Each symbol represents an average value of 2 or 3 repeats using the same cells from one donor and thus seven different symbols represent the data from seven independent experiments performed using cells from seven donors. Due to the variation in cytokine responses among different donors, for each donor, cytokine/chemokine induced by WT was set as 100% and cytokine/chemokine induced by D701N or Mock was presented as a percentage of WT. Horizontal bar in each group indicates the average value from seven donors and * indicates a statistical difference between WT and D701N (p<0.05, ANOVA).The growth advantage of the rNY1682-D701N virus in ATI-like cells could be the result of interaction between the viral factor, PB2-D701N, and multiple host factors. To examine host factors involved in the different virus growth kinetics, we focused on selected cytokines and chemokines that are important for host immune response to influenza viruses. At 24 hpi, supernatants from infected cells were collected and examined by ELISA for the levels of IFN-λ, CCL5, IL-6, and IL-8. Compared to the rNY1682-WT infected cells, rNY1682-D701N infected cells secreted significantly lower amount of IFN-λ (Figure 3B), which represents important virus induced antiviral type III interferon (IL28/29). In contrast, rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N infected cells secreted comparable levels of CCL5 (Figure 3C), IL-6 (Figure 3D), and IL-8 (Figure 3E). Additionally, we performed a similar experiment (one donor) using an MOI of 3 and detected the same trend in IFN-λ response (rNY1682-D701N lower than rNY1682-WT, data not shown). The lower level of IFN-λ Induced by the rNY1682-D701N virus may give the virus a replication advantage in the type I-like cells.PB2-D701N enhances lung replication and pathogenicity of the H1N1pdm virus in a mouse modelTo determine if the PB2-D701N substitution also enhances H1N1pdm virus replication in vivo, six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and inoculated intranasally with 50 µl virus diluent containing 103 TCID50 of either rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N. Compared to rNY1682-WT, rNY1682-D701N replicated more rapidly and had 40-fold higher titers in the lungs as early as 24 hpi (Figure 4A). Statistical analysis of the data demonstrated that the rNY1682-D701N infected mice had significantly higher titers at 12 and 24 hpi (p<0.05, ANOVA), whereas the modest titer differences in the nasal washes at 24 and 48 hpi (Figure 4B) were not statistically significant compared to the rNY1682-WT (p>0.05, ANOVA). The dramatic increase in viral titer in the lungs of mice infected by rNY1682-D701N indicate that this substitution has a stronger impact on replication in vivo than in the mouse CMT-93 cell line, which didn’t show a difference between rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N until 48 hpi (Figure 2B).10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g004Figure 4Analysis of viral replication efficiency in the respiratory tracts of mice.Six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=3/group/time-point) were inoculated intranasally with 50 µl containing 103 TCID50 of rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N). Animals were euthanized at 12, 24, 48, 96 hpi. The entire lung of each animal was homogenized in 1 ml of media and clarified by centrifugation, and nasal washes were collected from each mouse in 1 ml of media. (A) Viral titers of clarified lung homogenates or (B) nasal washes were determined by TCID50 assay using MDCK cells. The average of each group is shown with error bars representing SD(+/-), and * indicates a statistical difference between WT and D701N (p<0.05, ANOVA). The dotted lines at 1.5 log10 indicate the lower limit of detection of infectious virus.The rapid and robust replication of rNY1682-D701N in mouse respiratory tract warranted further evaluation of the effect of PB2-D701N on the pathogenicity of H1N1pdm virus. We compared H1N1pdm viruses that expressed wild type PB2 (rNY1682-WT), PB2-E627K (rNY1682-E627K), PB2-D701N (rNY1682-D701N), or a PB2-E158G (rNY1682-E158G) substitution that we previously showed significantly increases the pathogenicity of the H1N1pdm virus [8]. BALB/cJ mice were inoculated intranasally with 105 TCID50 of each virus and monitored for clinical signs and weight loss for 14 days (n=5/group). Mice inoculated with rNY1682-WT, rNY1682-E627K and rNY1682-D701N, began to lose weight by 3 dpi; and more significant weight loss was observed in the mice inoculated with rNY1682-D701N than in mice inoculated with rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-E627K as early as 4 dpi (p<0.01, ANOVA) (Figure 4A). The mice inoculated with rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-E627K had an average maximum weight loss of approximately 12% and began to recover by 8 dpi (Figure 5A). In contrast, the group of mice infected by rNY1682-D701N continued to lose weight throughout the experiment and all of these animals succumbed to infection by 7 dpi (Figure 5A and 5B).10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g005Figure 5Pathogenicity of rNY1682-WT, rNY1682-E158G, rNY1682-E627K, and rNY1682-D701N viruses in mice.Six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=5/group) were inoculated intranasally with 50 µl containing 105 TCID50 of different recombinant viruses (rNY1682-WT (WT), rNY1682-E158G (E158G), rNY1682-E627K (E627K), or rNY1682-D701N (D701N)) or they were mock inoculated (Mock). (A) Morbidity was assessed by weight loss over a 14 day period and is graphed as a percentage of the animals weights on the day of inoculation (day 0). The average body weight of each group is shown with error bars representing SD (+/-), and a significant difference between D701N and WT or E627K was evident as early as 4 d.p.i (*, p<0.01, ANOVA). (B) Mortality associated with infection by the recombinant viruses (rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N)) was also examined. Five-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=5/group) were inoculated intranasally with 50 µl containing 1×103, 104, 105, or 106 TCID50 of rNY1682-D701N or they were mock inoculated. (C) Morbidity was assessed by weight changes over a 14 day period and it is graphed as a percentage of the weight on the day of inoculation (day 0). The average body weight of each group is shown with error bars representing SD. (D) Mortality of the mice was also monitored for 14 days post inoculation. In accordance with our animal welfare protocol, mice that lost more than 25% of their original weight were euthanized for humane reasons.To further evaluate the influence of PB2-D701N, we determined the 50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) by intranasally inoculating BALB/cJ mice with 103, 104, 105, or 106 TCID50 of rNY1682-D701N; all of the groups of mice showed prominent weight loss (Figure 5C), and the mortality rate was 0%, 40%, 80%, and 100%, respectively (Figure 5D). The MLD50 of rNY1682-D701N was 2X104 TCID50, which is at least 300-fold lower than that of the parental virus rNY1682-WT (>6X106 TCID50) and 33-fold higher than that of the rNY1682-E158G virus (6X102 TCID50) [8]. These data show that rNY1682-D701N is more virulent than either rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-E627K, and that it is less virulent than the highly pathogenic rNY1682-E158G virus.PB2-D701N increases the transmissibility of the H1N1pdm virus in a ferret modelWe used the well-established ferret respiratory droplet transmission model to evaluate the effects of PB2-D701N on the transmissibility of H1N1pdm virus by housing ferrets in adjacent cages, each with a perforated side wall that prevented direct contact but allowed spread of virus through the air [26,33]. Three ferrets were inoculated intranasally with 106 PFU of the rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N virus, and 24 h later three naïve ferrets were each placed in a transmission cage adjacent to an inoculated ferret. Ferrets inoculated with rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses exhibited similar clinical signs including transient weight loss and fever before returning to baseline levels (data not shown). However, mean nasal wash virus titers from the rNY1682-D701N inoculated ferrets were significantly higher than that from the rNY1682-WT inoculated ferrets on day 3 and day 5 post inoculation (P<0.001, Figure 6A and 6B), consistent with the replication advantage of the rNY1682-D701N virus has in cells (human primary ATI-like cells, Calu-3 cells, and mouse CMT-93) and mice.10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g006Figure 6Respiratory droplet transmissibility of rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses in ferrets.Three ferrets were inoculated with 106 PFU of (A) rNY1682-WT or (B) rNY1682-D701N virus. All ferrets were housed individually in specialized cages that permit exchange of respiratory droplets, but prevent direct or indirect contact between inoculated-contact animal pairs. A naïve ferret was placed in an adjacent cage to an inoculated ferret 1 day post-inoculation (0 day post-contact). Viral replication was determined by titration of nasal washes collected on alternate days from inoculated (left bars) and contact (right bars) ferrets. Values for individual ferrets are shown and the dotted lines at 1 log10 indicate the lower limit of detection of infectious virus.The ability of the viruses to undergo respiratory droplet transmission among ferrets was assessed by measuring virus titers in nasal washes from contact animals, collected at 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 days post-contact (dpc). The rNY1682-WT virus transmitted to two out of three contact ferrets (Figure 6A), demonstrating the same transmission efficiency as other H1N1pdm viruses previously evaluated in the same ferret transmission model [33–35]. This result was confirmed by the hemagglutation inhibition (HI) assay of the sera collected from these three ferrets, which showed that the two positive ferrets had HI antibody titers of 5280 and 2560 and the negative ferret had no detectable HI antibody (HI<10, at 18 dpc). In contrast, the rNY1682-D701N virus transmitted efficiently to all of the three contact ferrets (Figure 6B) and all of them were seroconverted (data now shown). Notably, in contrast to the largely delayed transmission of the rNY1682-WT virus, the rNY1682-D701N virus transmitted to contact ferrets as early as 1 dpc and all the ferrets showed relatively high virus titers by 3 dpc (Figure 6B).Finally, to confirm our findings, an additional independent ferret transmission study was conducted with the same experimental design. In that study, we again found that the rNY1682-D701N virus transmitted to all three of the contact ferrets and with similar kinetics of transmission as was observed in the first study (in total 6/6 for PB2-701N on day 3 verses 4/6 for PB2-701D on day 7, Figure 6B and data not shown).DiscussionAsparagine (N) at residue 701 improves the binding of PB2 to mammalian importin-a isoforms [36–38], and for H5N1 and H7N7 avian influenza viruses it is associated with increased viral replication in mammalian cell lines, enhanced virulence in the mouse model, and more efficient transmission in the guinea pig model [12,16,28,39]. The data presented in this study demonstrate that the PB2-D701N substitution also increased the H1N1pdm virus replication in primary human cells, pathogenicity in the mouse model, and transmission in the ferret model. Notably, this is the first demonstration that PB2-D701N substitution enhances the transmissibility of influenza A viruses in the ferret transmission model.Two other studies that examined the PB2-D701N and other PB2 mutations in the context of rA/Netherlands/602/2009 and rA/California/04/2009 H1N1pdm viruses concluded that both the PB2-E627K and PB2-D701N mutations had little impact on pathogenicity and transmissibility [6,7]. However, the supplemental data published by Yamada et al., showed the PB2-D701N substitution in rA/California/04/2009 H1N1pdm enhanced morbidity in BALB/cJ mice, which is consistent with our findings. However, the tissue titers of the rA/California/04/2009 PB2-701N virus were comparable with those of the PB2-701D virus at 3 dpi and 6 dpi, and the authors did not remark that PB2-D701N actually showed enhanced virulence as their supplemental data suggested [6]. One limitation with the study by Yamada et al. [6], is that tissue titers were not determined at early time points (e.g., 12, 24, and 48 hpi.), when higher levels of replication in the lungs are more pronounced (Figure 4), and thus differences from the wild type virus early in the course of infection would not have been evident. The data from Herfst et al., suggested that the PB2-D701N substitution didn’t increase the transmission efficiency of the rA/Netherlands/602/2009 virus in their ferret transmission model [7]. The inconstant results between that study and the data presented in this study may result from differences in the virus strains used (four residues are different between the NY/1682 and Netherlands/602 strains), or the differences in the experimental design for the ferret transmission experiments. It appears that the transmission model for the wild type H1N1pdm (A/Netherlands/602/2009) used by Herfst et al.[7], is less stringent (4 of 4 contact ferrets are infected) than the transmission model used for this study, which consistently demonstrates that only two out of three contact ferrets show transmission with several other wild type H1N1pdm strains [33–35]. This more stringent transmission model allows one to detect the increased transmission rate upon introduction of the PB2-D701N substitution into the H1N1pdm virus and the data also clearly shows increased transmission kinetics (Figure 6). The faster transmission kinetics of the PB2-701N substitution may be related to the fact that this substitution enhances RdRp activity at cooler temperatures such as those found in the upper respiratory tract (Figure 1 D).Collectively, using more detailed experimentation including using various cell lines at various temperatures, primary human lung cells, a well-designed mouse model, and a stringent ferret transmission model, we showed that the PB2-701N substitution enhanced the replication, pathogenesis, and transmission of an H1N1pdm virus in mice, ferrets, and primary cultured human alveolar epithelial cells. Therefore, we speculate that H1N1pdm viruses containing a PB2-D701N substitution may be more virulent and/or transmissible in humans than the viruses that circulated in the early years of the pandemic. Surprisingly, of the approximate 4,000 H1N1pdm PB2 sequences available in the major influenza virus databases (Influenza Research Database [40], NIH/NCBI Influenza Virus Resource [41], EpiFlu Database [42]), there is only one H1N1pdm virus (A/Wisconsin/51/2009) containing the PB2-D701N mutation (GISAID EpiFlu, accession#EPI273622, accessed 08-15-2012). The rarity of PB2 sequences with D701N mutation indicates that so far the mutation has not conferred better fitness to the H1N1pdm virus for transmission in humans, which is plausible since fitness and evolution in the human population is a polygenic trait. However, considering the estimated large number of infections worldwide [43], additional viruses with the PB2-D701N mutation may exist in the population. The higher polymerase activity and virus replication observed in human cells, and lower IFN-λ induction may give the virus an advantage by increasing mRNA transcription and genome replication. PB2 has been shown to inhibit interferon-β expression through its N-terminal region [36,44], and the mechanism underlying this IFN-λ suppression effect caused by a mutation in the C-terminal region is intriguing and warrants further investigation. With increased rounds of replication, additional mutations are more likely to occur, which may lead to emergence of other known or unknown virulence determinants [45]. Those virulence factors alone, or in combination with the PB2-D701N mutation, may increase the replication and pathogenicity of H1N1pdm viruses.In summary, our findings support a role for the asparagine residue at PB2-701 in contributing to the virulence of influenza A viruses and show that PB2-D701N in the H1N1pdm virus increases its viral RNA polymerase activity in human and other mammalian cells, confers more efficient replication in cell lines and in primary human alveolar epithelial cells, and results in increased pathogenicity in mice and increased transmissibility in ferrets. The true threat of the PB2-D701N substitution to humans is unknown; however, if H1N1pdm viruses containing PB2-701N do emerge as this unique virus continues to evolve in human populations, it may pave the way to a more severe disease burden [39].


Title: Effect of Prior Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 Virus Infection on Pathogenesis and Transmission of Human Influenza A(H5N1) Clade 2.3.4.4b Virus in Ferret Model

Highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses have exhibited rapid global spread in wild birds since 2021 (1,2). That spread has resulted in numerous outbreaks in domestic poultry and sporadic infections in nonavian hosts (1,2), including >20 mammal species in the United States alone since January 2022 (3). On March 25, 2024, H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b virus was reported in dairy cows in Texas and Kansas (4), and the virus was subsequently detected in dairy herds from over a dozen states within 5 months (5). Those outbreaks resulted in several confirmed human infections, primarily after exposure to infected dairy cows or poultry (6). Although human cases from 2024 generally exhibited mild symptoms (7,8), clade 2.3.4.4b viruses can cause severe infection in humans (9). Viruses isolated before and concurrent with ongoing dairy farm outbreaks possess an efficient capacity for replicating in mammalian hosts and are capable of systemic spread and lethal infection in both mouse and ferret models (10–13). Furthermore, some clade 2.3.4.4b viruses, including viruses isolated from dairy farm workers in 2024, exhibit a limited capacity for airborne transmission between ferrets, suggesting a heightened risk to public health (10–12,14). Those incidents highlight the ongoing threat posed by H5N1 viruses and underscore the need for comprehensive risk assessments to evaluate the capacity of clade 2.3.4.4b viruses to cause infection and disease in diverse human populations.Although almost all influenza A(H5N1) human cases in the United States have been associated with mild disease, and no human-to-human transmission has been reported, assessing whether the human population has cross-reactive antibodies that can provide protection against the disease caused by H5N1 virus infection is critical. Despite previous serologic surveys indicating very low (0%–1.9%) seropositivity against H5N1 virus in the general population (15), recent findings have shown relatively high levels of cross-reactive neuraminidase inhibition antibodies to H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses in healthy adults, likely because of prior exposure to influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 (pH1N1) virus (16). In addition, broadly reactive hemagglutinin (HA) stalk antibodies induced by seasonal influenza A(H1N1) and A(H3N2) virus infections in humans have been suggested to provide some level of protection against zoonotic H5N1 and H7N9 virus infections (17,18).Well-controlled studies in mammalian models can provide crucial insight into the ability of prior influenza A virus (IAV) exposure to modulate subsequent disease after homologous or heterologous viral challenge (19). Cross-protection against H5N1 clade 1 viruses induced by prior human seasonal IAV infection has been previously shown in the ferret model (20,21). However, those studies have not assessed the role of preexisting immunity in modulating transmission outcomes and have not explored the extent of cross-protection or the specific types of cross-reactive antibodies in preimmune animals. We used a ferret model to evaluate viral replication and transmission of the H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferrets with or without prior immunity against pH1N1 virus. Materials and MethodsVirusesWe propagated stocks of 3 virus strains: pH1N1 A/Nebraska/14/2019 (Neb/14); highly pathogenic H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024 (Texas/37); and low pathogenicity H7N9 A/Anhui/1/2013 (Anhui/1), which was isolated from the first wave of human infections in China in 2013, as described previously (11,22,23). All virus preparation and animal infection experiments were conducted in Biosecurity Level 3 containment laboratories including enhancements required by the US Department of Agriculture and the Federal Select Agent Program. All animal studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and were conducted under the guidance of the CDC’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee in an AAALAC-accredited animal facility.Primary Intranasal Infection with pH1N1 VirusWe serologically tested twelve 8-month-old ferrets by using the 2023–2024 World Health Organization influenza reagent kit; all tested negative for circulating influenza viruses, including A/Victoria/2570/2019 (H1N1)pdm09, A/Delaware/01/2021 (H3N2), B/Phuket/3073/2013 (Yamagata lineage), and B/Michigan/01/2021 (Victoria lineage). We then intranasally inoculated the ferrets with >102 PFU Neb/14 virus per ferret in 1 mL phosphate-buffered saline under ketamine/xylazine anesthesia. All 12 ferrets developed productive infection and exhibited hemagglutination inhibition (HI) titers of 80–320 against homologous virus by day 93 postinoculation. We termed that group of ferrets as preimmune.Ferret Inoculation and Evaluation of Viral Replication and TransmissionWe then inoculated groups of the preimmune ferrets and naive ferrets by respiratory inhalation of aerosolized virus for 15 minutes, as previously described (24), and used an elevated relative humidity (≈65%) to better emulate environmental conditions on dairy farms. We administered doses varying from 100.5 to 102.8 PFU (Table). At 24 hours postinoculation, we pair-housed groups of 3 naive or preimmune ferrets with inoculated ferrets at a 1:1 donor:contact ratio to assess virus transmission in a direct contact setting. We observed all ferrets daily for clinical signs of infection, including temperature rise, weight loss, and lethargy, and collected nasal wash daily until day 3 postinoculation for Texas/37 or day 4 postinoculation for Anhui/1 virus, as previously described (11,22), at which time we humanely euthanized inoculated animals to evaluate virus replication and systemic spread. We monitored contact ferrets for virus shedding and seroconversion at day 21 postinoculation as determined by HI titers using 0.5% turkey red blood cells. We determined productive transmission by detection of infectious virus in nasal wash specimens and seroconversion to homologous challenge virus.TablePathogenicity and transmissibility of influenza viruses in naive and preimmune ferrets in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model*Challenge virusInoculated animals‡Contact animalsStatus†Dose, PFU§Lethargy¶Temp. rise, °C#% Weight loss**Peak titer (SD)††Peak titer (SD)††Transmission/ inoculation‡‡DonorContactTexas/37NaiveNaive100.51.52.4 (2/2)7.3 (2/2)5.5 (0.7)2.5 (0.6)2/2Texas/37NaivePreimmune102.41.91.7 (3/3)7.9 (3/3)4.2 (0.4)NA0/3Texas/37PreimmuneNaive102.4–2.51.71.5 (2/3)5.5 (2/3)2.5 (1.8)NA0/3Anhui/1NaiveNaive102.71.21.9 (2/3)4.7 (3/3)5.7 (0.8)6.1 (1.5)3/3Anhui/1NaivePreimmune102.81.11.5 (2/3)5.4 (1/3)6.5 (0.4)5.4 (0.8)3/3Anhui/1PreimmuneNaive102.61.11.6 (2/3)5.4 (2/3)6.3 (0.2)3.3 (1.5)2/3*Preimmune ferrets were those inoculated with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 (A/Nebraska/14/2019). Naive and preimmune ferrets were challenged with highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024 (Texas/37) and low pathogenicity influenza A(H7N9) A/Anhui/1/2013 (Anhui/1). NA, not applicable because titers were below the limit of detection; temp., temperature. 
†Ferrets were serologically naive to contemporary influenza A viruses (naive) or inoculated with A/Nebraska/14/2019 influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus 3 months before use in this study (preimmune). 
‡Inoculated ferrets were monitored for clinical signs of disease for 3 days for the Texas/37 virus and 4 days for the Anhui/1 virus. All animals that were productively infected after aerosol exposure are shown (n = 3 for all groups except Texas/37 naive donor/naive contact, which is n = 2).
§Presented dose of virus to ferrets following 15-min inhalation exposure to aerosolized virus. 
¶Relative inactivity index of ferrets inoculated with the challenge virus specified. 
#Values in parentheses are no. affected/no. inoculated. Mean maximum temperature rise >1°C among all inoculated animals in degrees centigrade; number of ferrets with temperature rise >1°C in all productively infected ferrets was shown in parentheses. 
**Values in parentheses are no. affected/no. inoculated. Mean maximum weight loss >1% among all inoculated animals expressed as a percentage; number of ferrets with weight loss >1% in all productively infected ferrets was shown in parentheses. 
††Mean maximum nasal wash titer +SD reported as log10 PFU/mL among ferrets with positive virus shedding; for NA, titers for all ferrets were below limit of detection of 10 PFU. 
‡‡Values are no. affected/no. inoculated. Transmission was defined as both the detection of productive virus shedding and seroconversion of surviving animals to homologous challenge virus or confirmed infection requiring euthanasia. Two contact ferrets, each co-housed with a ferret productively infected with the Texas/37 virus, were humanely euthanized on days 3 and 4 postcontact; all contact ferrets co-housed with ferrets inoculated with Anhui/1 virus survived through day 21 postcontact. All samples collected for infectious virus determination were frozen at −80°C until titration by standard plaque assay in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells (limit of detection 10 PFU/mL or g of tissue). We used a 2-way analysis of variance test in Prism 7.05 (GraphPad Software Inc., https://www.graphpad.com) to assess viral titer differences between naive and preimmune groups. We considered p<0.05 statistically significant.Serologic Assessment of Cross-Reactive Antibodies after Primary pH1N1 Virus ChallengeWe developed and performed a high-throughput multiplex influenza antibody detection assay, as described previously (25,26). In brief, we included HA globular head, HA stalk, neuraminidase (NA), and nucleoprotein (NP) antigens from IAVs and HA globular head from influenza B viruses in this study (Appendix 1 Table). We obtained antigens from Sino Biological U.S. Inc. (https://www.sinobiological.com), the International Reagent Resource (https://www.internationalreagentresource.org), or by using an in-house baculovirus expression system to express and purify our own reagents (27,28). To each well of a black-wall 96-well plate, we added 50 µL of microsphere suspension containing 2,000 microspheres for each of the 32 bead regions in an assay buffer comprising 1× PBS with 0.05% Tween 20, 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), and 0.5 mol sodium chloride (total 64,000 microspheres/well). We then added 1:200 diluted naive or preimmune ferret serum in assay buffer to appropriate wells in duplicates, including 2 serum pools on each plate as intraassay and interassay controls. We incubated plates in the dark at room temperature for 60 minutes on an orbital shaker, then washed plates 3 times with 100 μL of assay buffer by using Bio-Plex Handheld Magnetic Washer (Bio-Rad Laboratories, https://www.bio-rad.com). We then added 100 µL of protein A–phycoerythrin conjugate and incubated plates in the dark at room temperature for 60 minutes on an orbital shaker. Then, we washed plates 3 times with 100 μL of reading buffer comprising 1× PBS with 0.05% Tween 20, 1% BSA and read the plates by using a Bio-Plex MAGPIX Multiplex Reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories). We calculated median fluorescence intensities by using GraphPad 7.05 software (GraphPad Software Inc.).ResultsCross-Reactive Antibodies Induced by pH1N1 Virus InfectionWe tested serum samples collected 93 days after primary pH1N1 virus infection for reactivity against various HA, NA, and NP antigens (Figure 1). We found the highest serum antibody levels detected were against the HA globular head from pH1N1 viruses predating the challenge strain, but we consistently detected antibodies against all 6 H1 HA targets assessed. We also detected antibodies reactive to the N1 NA, which were derived from either H1N1 or H5N1 virus isolates, including Texas/37, in all preimmune animals. Moreover, we detected antibodies against NP protein of pH1N1 virus A/Brisbane/10/2007 in preimmune ferrets. The NP proteins between Texas/37 and Neb/14 viruses share 94% similarity. However, we detected no antibodies against the HA globular head of H3, H5, or H7 viruses, or the NA from H3N2 or H7N9 viruses. In addition, Neb/14 virus infection induced antibodies reactive to group 1, but not group 2, HA stalks (Figure 1). Furthermore, alignments of surface exposed residues in the HA, including HA1 head and HA2 stalk, and NA proteins of Neb/14 and Texas/37 virus revealed higher similarities in NA surface residues (83.4%, 186/223) and in the HA2 stalk (80.4%, 111/138) compared with HA1 surface exposed residues (45%, 107/238) (Appendix 2 Figures 1). That finding supports the observed cross-reactivity to the HA2 stalk and Texas/37 NA but not to the Texas/37 HA head in preimmune ferrets. Our serologic findings demonstrated that pH1N1 infection can induce low levels of cross-reactive antibodies to H5N1 NA and the HA stalk from the group 1 H5N1 but not to group 2 H7N9, virus where cross-reactive antibodies remained at undetectable levels.Figure 1Detection of cross-reactive antibodies in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model. After primary pH1N1 infection, we detected cross-reactive antibodies by using a high-throughput multiplex influenza antibody detection assay. Serum samples from naive and preimmune ferrets were prediluted 200-fold and added to plates containing antigen-coated microspheres, then plates were incubated with protein A–phycoerythrin conjugate. Reported values represent the mean of duplicate assays. Antibody titers were expressed as median fluorescence intensity. Full virus strain names and sources of all antigens are provided (Appendix 1 Table). HA, hemagglutinin; IAV, influenza A virus; IBV, influenza B virus; NA, neuraminidase; NP, nucleoprotein.Attenuation of Texas/37 Virulence and Transmission in pH1N1 Preimmune FerretsTo assess if cross-reactive antibodies elicited in ferrets after pH1N1 infection could reduce H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b virus virulence and transmissibility, we challenged preimmune and naive control ferrets via respiratory inhalation of aerosolized Texas/37 virus, to closely emulate natural mammalian exposure to IAV. First, we exposed a group of 3 ferrets to a low (≈3 PFU) dose of aerosolized Texas/37 virus. In agreement with prior work (29), we productively infected 2/3 ferrets, which led to a severe and fatal infection in serologically naive ferrets. In addition, after 48 hours of sustained contact, we detected successful transmission to cohoused naive animals in direct contact with infected animals (Table). To provide a robust challenge, both naive and preimmune ferrets received inhaled doses of 102.4–102.5 PFU of H5N1 virus; then, preimmune ferrets served as either donors or contacts in direct contact transmission experiments. We humanely euthanized all donor ferrets on day 3 postinoculation to assess systemic dissemination of virus.Serologically naive ferrets inoculated by the aerosol inhalation route with Texas/37 virus exhibited a rapid and severe infection within 3 days postinoculation (Table). As with the inoculated naive ferrets, preimmune ferrets exhibited clinical symptoms by day 3 postinoculation, but clinical signs were less severe, and lethargy, temperature rise, and weight loss were less pronounced. Virus shedding in nasal wash specimens from the preimmune ferrets was delayed (Figures 2, 3), and only 1/3 ferrets had detectable virus shedding on days 1 and 2 postinoculation, compared with 2/3 and 3/3 ferrets in the inoculated naive group at those timepoints (Figure 2, panel A). Although viral titers in day 3 postinoculation nasal wash and tissues proximal to the upper respiratory tract (i.e., nasal turbinate, ethmoid turbinate, soft palate) were comparable between the preimmune and naive ferret groups, virus was either undetectable in the lower respiratory tract (trachea, lung), extrapulmonary tissues (spleen, kidney), and blood, or detected at lower frequency in other tissues (brain, olfactory bulb, intestines, liver) in preimmune ferrets relative to naive animals (Figure 2, panel C).Figure 2Virus shedding in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model. A, B) Nasal wash viral titers for influenza A(H5N1) Texas/37 virus (A) and influenza A(H7N9) Anhui/1 virus (B). C, D) Virus titers from tissues for Texas/37 H5N1 virus collected 3 days postinoculation (C) and Anhui/1 H7N9 virus collected 4 days postinoculation (D). Horizontal bars indicate median, dots indicate individual titers, whiskers indicate range of positive titers. Three naive and 3 pH1N1 preimmune ferrets were inoculated via respiratory inhalation with Texas/37 or Anhui/1 virus (Table). Nasal wash specimens (A, B) were collected daily. Virus titers were determined by standard plaque assay in MDCK cells. Tissue samples collected from nasal turbinate, ethmoid turbinate, soft palate, blood, and rectal swabs were reported in log10 PFU/mL. Tissues collected from lung, brain, olfactory bulb, intestines, liver, spleen, kidney were reported in log10 PFU/g. The limit of detection was 10 PFU per mL or g. Statistical analyses were performed using 2-way analysis of variance test when samples were positive for viral titers in all 3 inoculated animals; we considered p<0.05 statistically significant. When <3 inoculated ferrets had detectable virus, the detection frequency is indicated above the corresponding positions. Anhui/1, low pathogenicity influenza A(H7N9) A/Anhui/1/2013; NS, not statistically significant; Texas/37, highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024. Figure 3Contact transmission of Texas/37 influenza A(H5N1) virus and Anhui/1 influenza A(H7N9) virus in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model. A, C, E) Transmission of Texas/37 H5N1 virus among ferrets; B, D, F) transmission of Anhui/1 H7N9 virus among ferrets. Different shades indicate individual animals. We inoculated 3 naive ferrets per virus (A–D) and 3 preimmune ferrets per virus (E, F) by respiratory inhalation exposure (Table). Each inoculated ferret was pair-housed with a contact recipient, with (C, D) or without preimmunity (A, B, E, F); contact was sustained for 48 hours for Texas/37 and for 72 hours for Anhui/1 before inoculated animals were humanely euthanized. Nasal wash samples were collected daily from inoculated ferrets (days 1–4 postinfection) and on alternate days from the contact animals (days 1–11 postcontact). The limit of detection was 10 PFU/mL. Two naive contact ferrets (panel A) reached humane endpoints and were euthanized on days 3 and 4 postinfection. Anhui/1, low pathogenicity influenza A(H7N9) A/Anhui/1/2013; EP, endpoint; NS, not statistically significant; Texas/37, highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024.Unlike the efficient transmissibility of Texas/37 virus during direct contact when both donor and contact animals were serologically naive (Table; Figure 3, panel A), Texas/37 did not transmit by that route when preimmune ferrets served as either donor or recipient animals. We did not recover infectious virus from nasal wash specimens collected from contact animals nor did those animals seroconvert to H5N1 virus (Table; Figure 3 panels C, E). Thus, we found that prior exposure to a 2019 pH1N1 virus in ferrets reduced disease severity and limited viral spread to the lower respiratory tract and extrapulmonary tissues after rechallenge with Texas/37 virus via respiratory inhalation compared with serologically naive animals. We also observed reduced transmissibility of Texas/37 virus during direct contact when either the donor or recipient animals had prior pH1N1 exposure.Effect of Preexisting pH1N1 Immunity on H7N9 Virus Pathogenesis and Transmission Because we detected antibodies against antigens other than HA and NA, such as NP, in preimmune serum samples (Figure 1), we performed a parallel experiment, to better understand the breadth and magnitude of cross-protection. For that experiment we used the group 2 low pathogenicity (H7N9 Anhui/1 virus, which has distinct HA and NA subtypes to which pH1N1 convalescent serum does not react. Anhui/1 virus has previously been reported to cause milder disease and exhibit lower replication capacity in ferrets compared with the Texas/37 virus (11,22). Donor ferrets received an aerosol inhalation dose of 102.6–102.8 PFU of Anhui/1 virus. Donor and contact animals cohoused for 72 hours before donor animals were humanely euthanized on day 4 postinoculation, which was a sufficient time for efficient transmission to occur in direct contact between serologically naive donor and contact animals (Table; Figure 3, panel B).Upon Anhui/1 virus respiratory inhalation challenge, only mild clinical signs were observed in both naive and preimmune ferrets (Table). Virus shedding in nasal wash specimens and systemic tissues were generally similar across naive and preimmune donor animals, except for day 4 postinoculation ethmoid turbinate and trachea titers, which were significantly higher in naive ferrets (p<0.05) (Figure 2, panels B, D). Efficient virus transmission during direct contact was observed when preimmune ferrets served as either donor or contact animals (Figure 3, panels D, F). Overall, we found that prior exposure to pH1N1 virus had no substantial effect on H7N9 virus shedding, replication, or transmission during direct contact, in contrast to viral challenge with H5N1 virus.DiscussionKey elements in the risk assessment of emerging IAVs include evaluating virus transmissibility in animal models, assessing population immunity against novel IAVs, and determining disease severity and pathogenesis in humans and animals after infection (30). Assessing the risk for human infection and human-to-human transmission of emerging HPAI H5N1 clade 2.4.4.4b virus, which has caused sporadic human infections among poultry and dairy farm workers in the United States, is crucial for pandemic preparedness. We showed that ferrets with existing pH1N1 virus immunity had reduced disease severity and limited viral systemic spread after aerosol inhalation exposure to Texas/37 virus. Moreover, direct-contact transmission was abolished when either the donor or recipient animals had prior H1N1 immunity. However, the protective effect of pH1N1 immunity did not extend to the virus with an HA from different phylogenetic group and NA from a distinct subtype, as evidenced by the minimal effect that pH1N1 immunity had on infection and transmission after challenge with a group 2 H7N9 virus.This study builds upon a growing body of literature on ferrets previously exposed to seasonal IAVs and subsequently challenged with either seasonal or zoonotic IAV (19,21,31). Use of ferrets with existing IAV immunity from prior infection with wild-type viruses can provide contextual data for risk assessment studies (31). Of note, we used a contemporary 2019 pH1N1 strain to establish prior immunity, which could influence the subsequent preimmune profile of animals, as supported by varying serum H1 HA and N1 NA antibody levels depending on the year of virus isolation (Figure 1). Our findings from use of 2019 pH1N1 virus underscores the importance of considering the specific pH1N1 strain used for primary infection in such studies, and conducting future work that explores the full breadth of diverse infection histories seen in humans.Our findings extend the understanding of cross-protective effects of pH1N1 immunity against H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses by challenging animals with a recent human isolate, Texas/37. Unlike other US isolates, Texas/37 carries a PB2–627K mutation, likely contributing to enhanced virulence in ferrets (7). In line with a similar study using a bovine isolate (32), we observed reduced disease severity and systemic viral spread in pH1N1 preimmune ferrets relative to naive controls. In addition, we found that while virus shedding in nasal wash specimens was delayed in preimmune animals early (days 1–2) after infection relative to naive animals, titers from both groups reached comparable levels by day 3 postinoculation in specimens from the upper respiratory tract (nasal wash, nasal and ethmoid turbinates) and the surrounding milieu (soft palate). Of note, a previous study also reported that H1N1-preimmune ferrets exhibited substantially reduced virus shedding in nasal secretions and viral replication in both upper and lower respiratory tissues compared with naive ferrets when challenged with an H5N1 bovine isolate (32). The differences between that study and ours could be attributed to variation in H5N1 challenge strains, cross-protective antibody levels, or differences in inoculation doses and routes. Beyond examination of directly inoculated animals, transmission in the presence of direct contact was reduced when either donor or recipient ferrets were preimmune, likely the result of altered host susceptibility and delayed virus shedding. Although we did not assess respiratory droplet transmission in this study, we anticipate that droplet transmission would be unlikely under this more stringent transmission setting. Of note, we used inhalation of aerosolized virus to challenge the animals, which is known to delay onset of detectable virus replication and peak titers in nasal wash specimens (24), more closely emulating the kinetics of natural human exposure to IAVs.In our study, using a comprehensive panel of antigens in serologic tests, we identified antibodies that reacted to H5N1 NA and the group 1 HA stalk, but not to the HA heads of H5 and H7 viruses or the group 2 HA stalk. Broadly reactive NA and HA stalk antibodies have been shown to play a key role in cross-heterosubtypic protection in animal models (33,34), which likely contributed to the cross-protection observed in our study. In addition, human epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that populations with previous exposure to pH1N1 might experience less severe outcomes from H5N1 infection (18). However, we only explored cross-protective immunity at approximately 3 months after seasonal pH1N1 primary infection. The duration of such immunity and correlation between the level of NA or HA stalk antibodies, specifically H5 HA stalk antibodies, and protection efficacy warrant further study, as do comprehensive evaluations of how prior vaccination may contribute to modulating disease severity. Our experimental evidence from the ferret model underscores the potential role of cross-reactive HA stalk and NA antibodies in reducing disease severity and transmission after H5N1 virus infection. However, future studies of larger group sizes are warranted, as are studies investigating how antibodies targeting internal influenza virus proteins, such as NP, or cellular immunity, contribute to cross-protection. In addition, a single seasonal virus infection in naive ferrets cannot fully recapitulate the complexity of human IAV immune history. Future studies involving ferrets vaccinated with different types of influenza vaccines or repeatedly exposed to seasonal viruses more closely mirroring the varied infection histories in humans will help provide deeper insights into cross-immunity elicited across different IAV subtypes. Furthermore, inclusion of multiple zoonotic strains to assess relative contributions of nonspecific effects in preimmune animals, as demonstrated here by performing tandem challenge studies and serology assessments with both H5N1 and H7N9 viruses, is a practice not typically used in the field yet shown to be a key provider of essential contextual information.In conclusion, our results showed that prior pH1N1 virus infection more effectively reduced the replication and transmission of H5N1 virus than it did H7N9 virus in a ferret model. Those results suggest that pH1N1 virus immunity may confer some level of protection against H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4.b virus in humans.Appendix 1Antigens used in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model.Appendix 2Additional information on study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model.


Title: The Next Disease X‐ H5N6 Avian Influenza's Evolving Threat to Human Health and Chances of Future Global Outbreak: A Narrative Review

1BackgroundThe name Disease X is given to an unknown pathogen that could later trigger a global pandemic. It refers to things a public health system needs to be defended against, from a brand‐new virus to an existing one that mutates into a worse virus. WHO defined this term to indicate the necessity for forward‐thinking readiness [1]. By focusing on viruses that can lead to a pandemic and accelerating the development of vaccines and diagnostics, Disease X helps get ready for whatever could happen next [2]. The emergence of an unknown pathogen that can cause a global pandemic is represented with the idea of “Disease X”. It is a warning that new diseases, especially those that can jump from animals to humans are always a possibility [3]. This is where the idea of Disease X comes in, a concept that means public health systems need to be proactive and stay ahead, not playing catch up once it's too late. Tools such as ‘SpillOver’ (from the University of California, Davis) highlight for example which pathogens are at the highest risk of becoming the cause of a pandemic and need to be monitored closely [4]. Thus, the focus on Disease X helps speed vaccine development, better diagnostics, and global cooperation so we are ready for whatever comes next [3, 4]. More than ever, the world must be prepared to deal with new and unpredictable health threats. Disease X is no imaginary scenario it's an intense reminder to remain sharp and prepared in case something does happen. Hence, it becomes an incentive to develop better tools and strategies for fighting infectious diseases before they can transform into full‐blown global crises [5].Influenza A virus (IAV) is a very common virus that can cause serious illness in humans. It mainly lives in wild birds but can also infect many animals like poultry, seals, dolphins, cats, dogs, and humans. The 1918 Spanish flu, which caused a large pandemic, was found to be a type of bird flu (H1N1) that had adapted to infect humans [1, 2, 3, 4]. In April 2014, the first human case of H5N6 bird flu was found in Sichuan, China. Since then, many more cases have appeared in different parts of China. However, we still don't fully understand important details about how the disease spreads, its symptoms, and the risk of it passing from person to person [5, 6]. This study examines past cases of how the H5N6 bird flu spreads to humans, its epidemiology, genetic mutations, pathogenesis, and ways to treat and prevent it from becoming the next Disease X. The goal is to provide answers that can help better understand, manage and stop future outbreaks of H5N6.Among the various avian influenza subtypes, H5N6 has emerged as a particularly concerning zoonotic pathogen. Since the first confirmed human case in Sichuan, China in 2014, the virus has caused nearly a hundred human infections, with a consistently high case fatality rate ranging from 52% to 61% depending of the study period and population examined [6, 7]. The majority of these cases occurred in southern China and were associated with direct or indirect contact with infected poultry, particularly in live bird markets or through backyard farming [8]. Epidemiological investigations show that exposure to sick or dead birds results in significantly higher mortality, likely due to greater viral loads [9]. Genetically, H5N6 viruses have undergone extensive reassortment, producing at least 13 distinct genotypes, and the predominant hemagglutinin subclade 2.3.4.4b is known to possess mutations such as Q226L and S227R in the HA gene that enhance binding to human‐type receptors [8, 10]. These genetic changes, coupled with high pathogenicity in animal models and limited but plausible evidence of human‐to‐human transmission, underscore H5N6's potential to breach species barriers. As such, H5N6 represents a credible candidate for the next “Disease X,” warranting urgent attention from both clinical and public health perspectives. This review aims to consolidate current knowledge of the virus's epidemiology, molecular evolution, and clinical behaviour to support future efforts in surveillance and preparedness in case of potential pandemics.2Epidemiology of H5N6 InfectionIn 2014, a human case of H5N6 avian influenza came to world attention when it was found in Sichuan Province, China [11]. Since then, this virus has been primarily confined to China, with a few cases emerging in neighboring countries like Laos. There have been 93 laboratory‐confirmed human cases in the world as of October 2024. The infection has been particularly dangerous, with a case fatality rate (CFR) of 61 percent. The total death number among the infected remains 57. The recent‐most reported case is from China's Anhui province, detected on 17 June 2024 [7]. Most of these cases are due to direct or indirect contact with infected birds, most often at live bird markets and backyard poultry settings [11]. Table 1 gives an overview of the geographical distribution of H6N6 infections by region from 2014 to 2023 [6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].Table 1Geographical distribution of H5N6 infections by region from 2014 To 2023.Region/ProvinceNumber of human casesSourcesGuangxi Zhuang, China19[9, 11, 12]Hunan, China15[9, 11, 12]Guangdong, China14[6, 8, 9, 10]Sichuan, China13[8, 9, 11, 12]Jiangsu, China5[9, 11, 12]Chongqing, China3[9, 11, 12]Jiangxi, China3[9, 11, 12]Anhui, China2[9, 11, 12]Yunnan, China2[6, 8, 9, 10]Fujian, China2[9, 11, 12]Zhejiang, China2[8, 9, 10, 11]Beijing, China1[9, 11, 12]Guizhou, China1[9, 11, 12]Hubei, China1[9, 11, 12]Henan, China1[9, 11, 12]Laos1[11, 13]Vietnam0[12, 14]South Korea0[12, 14]Canada0[13, 14]
Description: The cited studies were used to extract key epidemiological details such as the number of cases and spread of the virus among different regions. The Table 1 summarizes the number of human infection cases of the virus in China and in neighboring countries like Laos and Vietnam for 2014–2023. According to data from several epidemiological studies, it places Guangxi, Hunan, and Guangdong as major hotspots of confirmed viral spread in animals. Guangxi Zuan and Hunan in China produced the highest number of human cases with 19,15 and 14 cases, respectively. Despite cases of animal infection, there were no human cases in places like Vietnam, South Korea, and Canada.John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A Map of China showing the trend of human infection of H5N6 highlighted on the basis of provinces is illustrated in Figure 1 [6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13].Figure 1Map of China with the infected provinces highlighted based on severity of number of infections. The red area highlights provinces whose infection rate is higher than 13, orange highlights infection rate from 13 to 6, yellow highlights provinces with cases less than 6 and green denotes provinces free of H5N6 infection (as of 17th October, 2024). The map indicates that the highest infection rates occur in provinces that are located in the South‐east. As we go north, infection rate is reduced while the northern most provinces are completely free of H5N6 infection.Age distribution of H5N6 infected based on studies ranges from infants under 2 to 81 with a mean age of 30's or 40's. Most cases (66.7%) fall in the 20–60 age group [9, 13]. The virus has affected both males and females equally [9, 12, 13]. Higher risks of severe outcomes and mortality for older age (60 years and older) [9, 12]. Figure 2 illustrates the number of cases based on age groupings [9, 12, 13].Figure 2Number of H5N6 cases based on age groups. 16 cases (66.7%) are in 20–60 years age group. Amongst 5 cases are represented in the 2–20 years and > 60 years age groups, and the < 2 years group has only 1 case. The findings indicate that older people are more vulnerable to the virus and are thus at risk of severe outcomes.H5N6 has been able to jump from wild and domestic birds to humans because of the spread among them. These cases usually occur in cooler months as a result of increased contact with migratory birds and seasonal movement of poultry markets. In 2021, there were 37 cases reported, far higher than in any of the previous years. These cases were spread across 6 regions in China which differed from 1 to 5 regions per year in the previous years [11]. Surveillance systems erected during the COVID‐19 pandemic improved the detection and reporting of infections, leading to this uptick during the pandemic [7]. Although lower than 2021, human cases were still reported in 2023 suggesting that the virus is predominant in the region [11]. Figure 3 shows the temporal trend of the H5N6 virus in China [6, 9, 15].Figure 3Temporal trend of H5N6 virus infections in China from 2014 to 2023. In 2016, there was a peak at 6 cases (25% of total cases during this period). In 2020, there was a slight decline before the virus resurged with 5 cases, almost certainly because new genotypes appeared. Subsequent years have lower infection numbers and only 1 case reported each for 2022 and 2023.Exposure data obtained from 71 cases indicate that 100% reported direct or indirect bird contact before infection. Other common exposure settings include visitation of live bird markets (LBMs), poultry farming or employment in the poultry industry, and direct or indirect contact with domestic poultry. Occupational data indicates that of 31 available cases, 71% reported employment in the poultry industry or the poultry market [11].H5N6 hasn't achieved sustained human‐to‐human spread, but the risk it does pose remains. The ability of the virus to mix its genetic material with other influenza strains could place it on the fast track to becoming a more infectious virus. The detection of the virus in Canada within birds in 2022, for example, is a reminder that the virus remains relevant beyond Asia [11]. Vigilance remains vital, particularly in high‐risk environments, such as live bird markets or wet markets, where increased and enhanced biosecurity measures will go a long way to reducing the odds of H5N6 evolving into a much more serious public health threat.3Genetic Mutation of H5N6Over time, the H5N6 avian influenza virus has undergone significant genetic changes which has been a cause of worry throughout the world. The virus has spread widely among wild birds, poultry, and in rare cases humans, especially by clade 2.3.4.4. H5N6 was first identified in 2014, and since then has evolved into a variety of subtypes, adapting in different ways. Other subclades include 2.3.4.4b, which have been linked to outbreaks in Korea and China, for instance [16, 17].From 2019 to 2020 the virus was found in wild birds and live poultry markets in Bangladesh. Studies suggest that migratory birds likely brought the virus from Central Asia. The strain found in Bangladesh—of subclade 2.3.4.4 h—is genetically related to virus strains that was previously found in China and Mongolia [16]. What's worrying is that the virus was found in seemingly healthy wild and domestic birds, demonstrating how easily the disease can spread without obvious signs and symptoms of illness. A major outbreak in 2020 in China's swans in Xinjiang showed just how dangerous the virus could be to birds. Genetic analysis revealed that these viruses turned out to have a high degree of similarity to ones from Guangdong Province, which confirmed how fast the virus can spread across a region [18]. The hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) genes of these strains are mutated, making them highly pathogenic in birds and potentially more dangerous in mammals, although less well‐defined in humans [18].In South Korea, meanwhile, scientists found new versions of H5N6 in 2023 and have found that the virus continues to evolve. What is particularly notable about these new strains is that they represent the genetic combination of H5N1 and low pathogenicity viruses, that show that the virus can interchange genetic material with others [17]. The constant evolution of the virus means that it is harder to predict how it may behave in the future, thus posing a serious risk that it will evolve into a more dangerous version. The virus is a rapidly changing strain that isn't only a threat to birds but could also be a threat to humans. Its adaptability and ability to spread makes this a virus that needs to be watched closely, and continued research into [16, 17].Genomic analysis of H5N6 viruses isolated from poultry markets in Guangdong based on GISAID sequences, revealed several important mutations and reassortment events. Most isolates belonged to clade 2.3.4.4b, which replaced earlier clades such as 2.3.4.4 h. A notable mutation observed in many H5N6 isolates was an 11‐amino acid deletion in the stalk region of the N6 neuraminidase gene, a change associated with increased virulence and replication efficiency in poultry. In addition, full‐genome analysis identified extensive reassortment involving internal gene segments, particularly PB1 and PA, derived from both highly pathogenic and low pathogenic avian influenza viruses. While known mammalian‐adaptive mutations such as PB2‐E627K and PB2‐D701N were not detected, the recurrent genetic reshuffling and expansion of genotypes indicate an ongoing diversification that may facilitate future cross‐species transmission. Mutations such as S137A, S158N, and T160A in the HA gene, which increase human receptor binding affinity, were universally present, highlighting the growing zoonotic potential of these evolving H5N6 strains [10].4Transmission and Spread of H5N6 to Cause InfectionAvian flu virus H5N6 mostly spreads from bird to bird via droppings, secretions, and contaminated environments [11, 14]. The virus is the natural host of waterfowl but can be spread to humans through close contact with infected poultry. Such activities include bird handling at live markets, in slaughterhouses, or in contact with domestic bird populations [14].H5N6 in the past has spread to several continents, with outbreaks now reported in Asia, Europe, and Africa. Of the 85 confirmed human cases, 84 were in China with one case in Laos by June 2023. Most people had been exposed to an infected bird before becoming ill with 84 percent reporting direct bird contact [11]. Although experts say that human‐to‐human transmission is still very rare, they fear the virus could mutate and spread more easily between people [14].Live bird markets and agricultural activities are linked to the virus's continuing spread. The death rate due to human infections is around 61%. Infection can develop at any time of year, but cases are slightly down in summer [11]. Avian flu viruses that circulate the world—including H5N6—have a greater chance of changing in ways that could make them more dangerous to humans [14].H5N6 persists in wild bird populations and domestic birds, so further outbreaks and human cases are expected. Continued surveillance and enhanced biosecurity measures are necessary to stop the virus and future infections [11, 14].5Disease Pathogenesis of H5N6 Infection in HumansThe H5N6 avian influenza virus has become a growing concern due to its severe impact on human health with a case fatality rate ranging between 44% and 55.4% as reported in some studies [8, 14] while other studies report a mortality rate as high as 61% [11].Table 2 classifies mortality rates based on criteria like age group, exposure type, gender, and geographic region [8, 9, 11, 13, 14].Table 2Classification of mortality rates.CriteriaSubcategoriesSourcesAge Group< 2 years: 100%, 2–20 years: 50%, 20–60 years: 37.5%, > 60 years: 100%[9, 12, 14]Exposure TypeSick/Dead Birds: 100%, Live Birds: 35.3%, Slaughtered Birds: 8.3%[9, 12]GenderMale: 41.7%, Female: 63.6%[9, 15]Geographic RegionGuangdong: Higher mortality, Guangxi: Higher exposure rate, Sichuan: Moderate risk[8, 9, 12]Underlying Health ConditionsHigher mortality in older adults with underlying conditions like respiratory issues[8, 9, 14]John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.A graphical representation of the mortality rate based on different age groups is shown in Figure 4 [9, 12, 13].Figure 4H5N6 infections cause highest mortality rates in the < 2 years and > 60 years age groups, both with 100% fatality rate. Mortality rate is 37.5% for the 20–60 age group, which is the majority, and the mortality rate for the 2–20 age group is 50%. In these findings, these individuals are also especially vulnerable to severe outcomes.Fever and cough are common symptoms, but most patients require intensive care soon afterwards with pneumonia. About 93.8 percent of those infected wind up in the ICU and often require mechanical ventilation or, in the worst cases, lifesaving interventions such as extracorporeal membrane [8]. Other symptoms include upper respiratory symptoms and muscle aches (myalgia). The infection quickly began to spread to lower respiratory tract diseases such as pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), multiorgan failure, and in the severest cases death [11].There has been no consistent evidence of human to human transmission, but occasional cases within households suggest it could be possible under some circumstances [8, 14]. Older adults and people with certain underlying conditions – such as heart or lung disease—have generally been at greater risk of higher fatality rates [15]. From symptom onset to hospitalization, the median delay was 4 days (range: 0‐13 days) [11].Long‐term consequences of the disease have been identified with severe and irreversible sequelae in some patients being reported such a case of a Zhejiang patient with pulmonary fibrosis and lung damage that caused a severely impaired quality of life, including chronic pulmonary bleeding and a Jiangsu patient with encephalitis who developed follow‐up neurological complications, including posterior cerebral atrophy [9].The biggest problem with H5N6 is its ability to evolve. The virus has undergone genetic changes that have allowed it to infect both birds and humans [15]. Early onset treatment is important, and delays in treatment with antiviral therapies are associated with poorer outcomes [8]. Meanwhile, of the cases for which there was known disposition, 90 percent were in critical condition at the most recent report [11].6Therapeutic and Preventive Measures of H5N6 InfectionH5N6 may be prevented by avoiding exposure to the virus. It includes avoiding close contact (direct) with live or dead poultry in areas where there are known outbreaks [19, 20]. People who work with birds or those who are at risk with exposure should wear protective gear such as gloves, masks and eye protection [21]. Washing hands thoroughly after any direct contact with birds is a must [20].Along with killing the virus, cooking poultry thoroughly (at least 165 °F, or 74°C) makes the meat safe to eat [19]. For anyone going to countries with H5N6 cases, it is advisable to stay away from places like live poultry markets [20]. Reporting any sick or dead birds to local authorities and keeping up to date with safety guidelines can do a great deal in protecting the individual and their community from the risk of H5N6 [19, 21].Antiviral medications such as oseltamivir, zanamivir, and peramivir will treat the infection. Ideally, these drugs should be taken initially 48 h after the first symptom. The illness may be less severe and shorter in duration if the medications are taken early. For those with more serious cases (pneumonia, difficulty in breathing) support care (oxygen therapy, fluids, etc) is key [19, 21]. This care may also include the use of ventilators to help with breathing [20]. How quickly the treatment process starts and in how good shape the patient is playing a large role in whether or not these treatments will be successful.No specific vaccine is currently approved to protect people against H5N6. There are some experimental vaccines developed, but they have not been widely available [21]. Because H5N6 is so unique, seasonal flu vaccines, updated to tackle new strains, don't always work against it [19]. Future outbreaks are in mind, and researchers are working on developing more targeted vaccines [20]. The unavailability of a vaccine for the virus indicates our unpreparedness for a potential mutation of the strain and its eventual evolution towards becoming a pandemic.Primarily, inactivated vaccines targeted at specific strains of avian influenza viruses are vaccines developed for poultry against the H5N6 virus. Table 3 lists the types of vaccines used for poultry and in which region they are largely used in [9, 10, 11, 14].Table 3Poultry vaccines used against H5N6.Vaccine TypeDescriptionUsed InSourceH5 Reassortant Inactivated Vaccines (Re‐11, Re‐12)They contain H5N6 hemagglutinin gene and internal genes that came from other avian influenza viruses.China (Guangdong, Guangxi)[9]Bivalent H5/H7 VaccinesSpecifically target multiple avian influenza subtypes particularly subtypes H5 and H7.China[8, 15]Oil‐Emulsion Inactivated VaccinesThey are inactivated vaccine prepared with oil‐based adjuvant to evoke better immune response.China, large‐scale poultry farms[6]John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Table 4 lists some candidate vaccines that are under trial for H5N6 [21, 23].Table 4Vaccine candidates in development for H5N6.Vaccine candidateTypeImmune responseVirus subtypesSourcesH5‐Re13, H5‐Re14, H7‐Re4Inactivated virus vaccinesAntibody‐mediated responseH5N1, H5N6, H5N8, H7N9[21, 22]MF59‐adjuvanted seasonal influenza vaccine (Fluad®)Trivalent inactivated vaccineAntibody and cell‐mediated responseH5N1 (potential for H5N6)AS03‐adjuvanted prepandemic H5N1 vaccineInactivated virus vaccineAntibody and cell‐mediated responseH5N1 (potential for H5N6)Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) H5 VaccineVector‐based vaccineAntibody, mucosal, and cell‐mediated responseH5N1 (potential for H5N6)John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.7Prediction of H5N6 Infection to Cause Global PandemicsIn 2021, when human infections with the H5N6 virus spiked, researchers singled out new genotypes known as 2021 A, 2021B, 2021 C, and 2021D. In these findings, we also see that the virus is still evolving genetically, in particular its reassortment with clade 2.3.4.4b strains. This shows the ability of the virus to cross species boundaries, continuing to acquire genes from other viruses of avian influenza H5N8 and H9N2. The changes help the virus adapt better to bird and mammal hosts, increasing its ability to transmit from one species to the next. [8] H5N6 is of special concern because, unlike most avian influenza viruses, it has evolved to bind to human respiratory cell receptors. As opposed to typical avian influenza viruses, which mainly bind to avian‐type receptors (SAα2,3 Gal), H5N6 can also bind to human‐type receptors (SAα2,6 Gal). That means the virus is becoming more adept at infecting human respiratory tissues. Research in ferret models, which are typically used to study human‐to‐human flu transmission, has found that H5N6 can infect ferrets through direct contact and therefore may become optimized for human‐to‐human transmission [12, 23].H5N6 is one of a group of H5 viruses transmitted by migratory birds and via the poultry trade across Asia, Europe, and beyond. The spread of this virus around the world means there is higher potential of humans’ exposure and more opportunities for the virus to develop and spread more easily between humans. The virus is evolving in a manner that bestows concern for what it may achieve in terms of a more rapid transmission capability in the future [12, 13]. H5N6 has not yet shown airborne transmission between humans, a key determinant of pandemic potential, but experiments in ferrets show that the virus is capable of being passed via direct contact. Although it hasn't reached the level of easy human‐to‐human spread, H5N6 has shown a worrying ability to infect mammals more effectively than earlier strains like H5N1 [13, 23]. H5N6 has replaced H5N1 as the predominating avian influenza in southern China, occurring mainly in ducks and geese [12]. The absence of specific antiviral drugs and vaccines, along with the need for ongoing research, stresses the importance of being prepared and staying alert. To prevent a potential pandemic, we must track genetic changes, understand transmission patterns, and develop treatments and vaccines. This will need global cooperation and continuous research [7]. H5N6's ability to bind to human respiratory cell receptors marks a significant shift, allowing it to potentially infect human tissues more effectively and raising alarms about its pandemic risk. As H5N6 spreads globally through migratory birds and poultry trade, the chances of human exposure increase, presenting more opportunities for the virus to evolve into a more easily transmissible form. To effectively combat the rising threat of H5N6, it is crucial to enhance global surveillance and foster collaborative research efforts. By doing so, we can better understand its evolution and transmission, ultimately safeguarding public health against future pandemics.8ConclusionH5N6 avian influenza is a serious public health concern because of its high mortality rate, broad adaptability, and ability to infect humans. While the virus hasn't yet spread easily between people, experts worry about how far it will evolve and whether it can continue to bind to human respiratory cells before it can be contained as a pandemic. This paper emphasizes the need for continually looking, particularly in high‐risk areas such as live poultry markets, and the need for stronger biosecurity. They also line up accelerating vaccine development and international cooperation as essential tactics for narrowing the gap to when the H5N6 might become the next Disease X. In light of the dangers that new infectious diseases will pose to the world, and an increased appreciation of the need to be prepared for emerging viruses like H5N6, there is a need to be ready for worse to come. So, it may be proactive to take measures now to help save lives and minimize the repercussions of this rapidly morphing virus.Author Contributions
Shoubeho Sadique Shandhi: Writing – original draft; Writing – review and editing; Software. Mosiur Rahman: Writing – review and editing; Writing – original draft. Mohammad Shahriar: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – review and editing. Ramisa Anjum: Conceptualization; Supervision; Writing – review and editing.Ethics StatementThe authors have nothing to report.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.1Transparency StatementThe lead author Ramisa Anjum affirms that this manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been explained.


Title: Avian influenza H5N1: an update on molecular pathogenesis

No full text body available.


Title: Influenza A virus PB1-F2 protein prolongs viral shedding in chickens lengthening the transmission window

IntroductionThe natural reservoir for the first 16 haemagglutinin (HA) and 9 neuraminidase (NA) subtypes of influenza A viruses (IAVs) is the wild aquatic bird population, where infection is generally asymptomatic and reassortment between strains occurs regularly (Reperant et al., 2012). Spillover of these viruses into domesticated poultry populations has resulted in the evolution of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) subtypes such as the Asian-lineage H5N1 which has been circulating continuously in birds since 2003 and has caused upwards of 700 human infections (To et al., 2012). Low pathogenicity avian influenza (LPAI) H9N2 viruses are frequently found circulating in the same geographical areas as HPAI H5N1. HPAI H5N1 as well as LPAI H9N2 can cause a significant economic and welfare burden in geographical regions such as the Middle East and Southeast Asia. In these areas both subtypes are enzootic in the poultry populations making control costly and challenging (Alexander, 2007). As well as threatening food security, an increasing range of avian influenza subtypes causing zoonotic infections in humans is of considerable concern for public health agencies (Yu et al., 2014). Increasing the fundamental knowledge base about avian influenza virus interactions within avian hosts will enable the design and implementation of better control strategies.IAVs have a segmented ssRNA genome that encodes for a core repertoire of 10 viral proteins which all subtypes express, allowing successful viral replication. In addition there are a plethora of accessory proteins encoded by IAVs that are non-essential for replication, but may contribute to the virulence, pathogenesis and transmissibility of strains in different host species. The first of these so-called accessory proteins to be identified was the PB1-F2 protein (Chen et al., 2001), which can range in full-length size from 90 to 101 aa and is translated in a +1 reading frame from the same viral mRNA that encodes the viral RNA-dependant RNA polymerase subunit, PB1.Functional characterization of PB1-F2 has been undertaken in mammalian cell lines and hosts. However, in viruses isolated from mammalian hosts, humans and swine, PB1-F2 is often truncated as a result of mutations that generate stop codons in the PB1-F2 ORF (Krumbholz et al., 2011; Zell et al., 2007). More than half of all human and swine isolate sequences deposited in the public sequence databases encode a PB1-F2 less than 90 aa in length. In contrast, more than 90 % of sequences from isolates sequenced from avian hosts retain the coding capacity for a full-length PB1-F2 protein (Kamal et al., 2015; Zell et al., 2007). This disparity of PB1-F2 full-length conservation between virus isolates from mammalian and avian hosts suggests a unique pressure to maintain a full-length PB1-F2 protein with evolutionary significance in avian hosts. The most fundamental evolutionary pressure for IAVs is to transmit. To date there has been no robust assessment of the involvement of PB1-F2 in transmission of influenza viruses in any host species.In mammalian IAVs, PB1-F2 has been reported to have a wide range of roles influencing pathogenesis including modulating the innate immune response (Le Goffic et al., 2010), affecting activity of the viral polymerase (Mazur et al., 2008) and increasing susceptibility to secondary bacterial infections (McAuley et al., 2007). Work to delineate the function of avian influenza virus PB1-F2 in avian hosts has only been limited to highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza strains and these studies have concentrated on reading out pathogenic outcomes (Hulse-Post et al., 2007; Leymarie et al., 2014; Schmolke et al., 2011). No publications have examined the role of PB1-F2 in a LPAI background, which make up the vast majority of avian influenza infections globally.Avian influenza viruses rely on close mixing of infected and susceptible species and/or the sharing of common contaminated areas, such as water sources, for effective transmission of the virus either through aerosol or fomite ingestion (Breban et al., 2009; Brown et al., 2007; Hinshaw et al., 1979). In this study, we utilize a LPAI H9N2 to assess whether PB1-F2 contributes to transmission dynamics in chickens. We measure infectivity, pathogenic outcomes as well as transmissibility using two different transmission scenario settings. The first scenario models transmission in a crowded, confined environment, representing a large commercial poultry shed. The second scenario models transmission that may result as a consequence of sporadic contact, reflective of behaviours in the natural avian species reservoir and incursions into traditional backyard flocks found abundantly in the Middle East and Southeast Asia where H9N2 viruses are enzootic.In line with previous results seen investigating functions of PB1-F2 with HPAI viruses (Leymarie et al., 2014), we observed a significant increase in pathogenicity when PB1-F2 was removed from our LPAI H9N2 virus, in an embryonated chicken egg model and in chickens in vivo. We also determined that the presence of PB1-F2 in an H9N2 virus prolonged the infectious shedding period in infected chickens which resulted in an extended transmission window with enhanced transmission.ResultsA full-length PB1-F2 protein is conserved at a higher rate in avian viral isolates compared to mammalian isolatesPrevious analyses indicated that the full-length PB1-F2 ORF was more often conserved in IAV strains isolated from avian hosts than those isolated from mammalian hosts. To verify and extend these data, we downloaded all full-length PB1 influenza segment nucleotide sequences from the NCBI database for avian, swine and human hosts, removing duplicate sequences. Subsequently, 24 803 PB1 nucleotide sequences were analysed in the +1 reading frame to determine the length of the PB1-F2 ORF. We defined full-length PB1-F2 as 87 aa or longer since this is the length of the well-studied PB1-F2 protein of PR8 virus, and has been shown to enable mitochondrial targeting in all instances where it has been assessed. Other published analyses have used a PB1-F2 length of 79 aa or more (Zell et al., 2007), based on the minimal length for an intact mitochondrial targeting sequence of porcine isolates in HeLa cells (Zell et al., 2007), but this is a notional cut-off bearing in mind mitochondrial targeting has been seen for a PB1-F2 of only 75 aa for PR8 in Vero cells (Yamada et al., 2004) vs 87 aa in HeLa cells (Gibbs et al., 2003) and even then not all PB1-F2 proteins of length greater than 89 aa localize to the mitochondria (Chen et al., 2010). However, a reanalysis of our data for length at least 79 aa indicates little alteration of the frequencies from using 89 aa or more (Table S1, available in the online Supplementary Material). The percentage of full-length PB1-F2 in human, swine and avian hosts was calculated as 43, 48 and 93 %, respectively (Table 1).Table 1.Percentage of influenza A sequences possessing full-length PB1-F2 (≥87 aa) isolated from avian, human and swine hostsHost% Sequences with PB1-F2 ≥87 aa (n)*Avian†93 (10 401)Anseriformes97 (6917)Galliformes87 (1804)Charadriiformes98 (1298)Human43 (11 729)Swine48 (2673)Total100 (24 803)*(n), Number of sequences.†All avian orders.Generation of a recombinant virus lacking PB1-F2To understand the role of the PB1-F2 protein in the poultry host, we used a LPAI virus strain that is representative of a H9N2 major lineage (G1-like) that circulates in the enzootic Pakistan region of the Middle East (Iqbal et al., 2013). A reverse genetics system for the A/chicken/Pakistan/UDL01/08 (UDL01) H9N2 strain used previously (Long et al., 2016) was rescued as infectious virus using standard techniques (Hoffmann et al., 2000). UDL01 contains a full-length 90 aa PB1-F2 protein encoded in the +1 reading frame of the PB1 segment, and this virus was designated as WT. Alongside the WT version we generated an isogenic virus that had a stop codon introduced at aa position 12 in the PB1-F2 ORF, producing a non-functional 11 aa PB1-F2 fragment, which we termed knockout (KO). The introduction of the stop codon did not alter the aa sequence of the PB1 reading frame. To assess if this method of PB1-F2 KO altered protein expression levels of either PB1 or PB1-N40 protein, we utilized a previously published method (Wise et al., 2011) of tagging the different reading frames from which the mRNAs are transcribed (Fig. 1a). A plasmid was generated whereby the viral sequence, including the upstream non-coding region that the ribosome recognizes preceding the initiation codon for PB1, was cloned and two different constructs were generated in which GFP was placed in-frame at the C-terminus with either the PB1, PB1-N40 or in the +1 frame with the PB1-F2 message. Expression in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells and subsequent detection and densitometry quantification of the viral proteins expressed, indicated no alteration in the level of PB1 or PB1-N40 expression occurred when mutation of the +1 frame to KO PB1-F2 was introduced (Fig. 1b, c).Fig. 1.Segment 2 gene expression from UDL01 influenza virus. (a) Schematic of the ORF structure of 5′ end of UDL01 influenza virus segment 2 mRNA fused to eGFP in either frame 1 or frame 2. Nucleotide positions are indicated. Red bar indicates the position of a stop codon at aa position 12 of PB1-F2 in the KO UDL01. (b) Lysates from 293T cells harvested 48 h post transfection with indicated plasmids were detected via Western blot with anti-GFP with anti-α-tubulin as a loading control. (c) Levels of PB1-, PB1-N40- and PB1-F2-GFP from transfected lysates were quantified using densitometry. Means±sd were calculated from three independent transfections. Levels of significance were based upon P-values from a Student’s t-test; ****P<0.0001.PB1-F2 has no effect on viral replication of H9N2 virus in avian cells in vitroWe assessed the ability of the isogenic H9N2 virus pair to undergo multiple cycles of replication from a low m.o.i. (0.0001 p.f.u.) in a range of avian cell substrates in vitro. No replication differences were found between the WT and KO H9N2 viruses in Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells (Fig. 2a). Similarly no replicative differences between the two viruses were observed in primary chicken kidney cells (cKCs), ex vivo chicken tracheal organ cultures (cTOCs) and 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs (Fig. 2b–d).Fig. 2.In vitro growth curves of UDL01 WT and KO viruses. Cellular substrates were inoculated at a low m.o.i. with either WT (blue circles) or KO (red squares) UDL01 influenza virus. The level of infectious virus was determined at times specified. Data represent the means of at least three independent experiments±sd. (a) MDCK cells and (b) primary cKCs were inoculated at an m.o.i. of 0.0001. (c) Chicken tracheal organ cultures were inoculated with 100 p.f.u. (d) The 10-day old Rhode Island Red chicken eggs were inoculated into the allantoic cavity with 100 p.f.u.Presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein reduces pathogenic outcome of infection in ovoDuring the growth curve analyses of the UDL01-WT and KO viruses, we observed that eggs infected with the KO virus were reaching terminal end points (no movement of the embryo or haemolysis of blood vessels) between 24 and 32 hours post infection (hpi)compared to 32–48 hpi for those infected with the WT virus. Therefore, we used a 10-day-old embryonated chicken egg model to assess the pathogenicity of the two viruses by performing a minimum lethal dose (MLD) assay. A 10-fold dilution series of each virus, WT and KO, was used to inoculate groups of embryonated eggs which were monitored twice daily for end point. The percentage death in each group of H9N2-infected eggs reached after 72 h was calculated for each dilution. The MLD was defined as the lowest viral dose resulting in death of all infected embryonated eggs by 72 h (Table S2). The presence of a full-length PB1-F2 in the WT virus resulted in a higher MLD (1 p.f.u.) compared to the KO virus (0.01 p.f.u.). The minimum infectious dose (MID) defined as the lowest viral dose required to produce infection in all embryonated chicken eggs was the same for both the WT and KO virus (0.1 p.f.u.). Having seen no difference in the magnitude or rate of infectious virus particle production in embryonated eggs, we wanted to determine if differing levels of defective viral particles were produced by the KO virus in comparison to the WT virus that could explain the increased pathogenicity. Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR)to quantify influenza virus M gene viral RNA (vRNA) levels was performed on the allantoic fluid recovered after inoculation of embryonated eggs. We assessed three independent egg stocks and the genome copy number: particle forming unit ratio remained the same between the WT (14.5±2.13) and KO (12.39±4.37) viruses, indicating no difference in defective particle levels (Table S2). Another virus tested in parallel with an internal gene constellation of an HPAI H5N1 virus (A/chicken/England/50–92/91) had a significantly different genome : p.f.u. ratio (43±6.9) to the two H9N2 viruses.Presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein reduces pathogenic outcome of infection for LPAI virus in vivoLeymarie et al. (2014) previously reported that the removal of the PB1-F2 protein from an HPAI H5N1 virus resulted in an increase in chicken mortality at low dose. To determine if the absence of PB1-F2 also increased the pathogenicity of LPAI viruses in chickens, we inoculated groups of chickens via the nares with either a low dose (5×103 p.f.u.) or high dose (1×105 p.f.u.) of the UDL01-WT or KO virus. The chickens were monitored daily for clinical signs and scored accordingly. Infection of birds with WT virus produced transient clinical signs including red and watering eyes, swollen combs and swollen foreheads. No difference in clinical signs was observed in birds infected with the KO virus at the low dose. However, upon infection with the higher viral dose, 35 % (5/14) of the birds infected with the KO virus died between days 4 and 5 post inoculation. There was no significant difference in clinical score prior to death between the WT and KO groups. The remaining birds infected with the KO virus showed no ill effects out to day 14 post inoculation when the experiment was ended. No deaths were recorded for the group infected with WT virus (Fig. 3).Fig. 3.Survival curves of chickens inoculated with WT or KO UDL01 influenza virus. Survival curves of chickens inoculated into the nares with 100 µl of PBS containing (a) 5×103 p.f.u. (low dose) or (b) 1×105 p.f.u. (high dose) of either WT (blue line) or KO (red dashed line) UDL01 influenza virus.A full-length PB1-F2 protein prolongs infectious virus shedding from chickensTo ascertain if the presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein effected in vivo virus replication in chickens, we determined the level of infectious virus shed from both the buccal and cloacal cavities of birds inoculated with both high and low doses for 10 days following infection. All birds directly inoculated with either virus, WT or KO, robustly shed infectious virus from the buccal cavity commencing on day 1 post inoculation and there was no difference in the titre of infectious virus shed from the buccal cavity between the two groups up to day 4 post inoculation (Figs 4a and S1a). However, on day 5 post inoculation, for both viral doses, we observed that the majority of birds in the KO group had ceased shedding infectious virus from the buccal cavity and those that did shed virus had less than 100 p.f.u. ml−1 detectable [average p.f.u. ml−1 shed was 70 (±102) and 8 (±3) for the low and high dose, respectively]. In contrast at day 5 post inoculation, birds directly infected with the WT virus continued to shed significant levels of infectious virus from the buccal cavity [average p.f.u. ml−1 shed was 14 524 (±35 907) and 1082 (±1008) for the low and high dose, respectively] (Figs 4b and S1b). We detected sporadic shedding from the cloacal cavity of chickens inoculated with both the low and high viral doses of the WT and KO viruses and the number of birds shedding virus was lower in the KO (29 and 10 %, respectively) than the WT group (50 and 39 %, respectively) (Table 2).Fig. 4.Virus shedding from the buccal cavity of high-dose-inoculated chickens and environmental viral titres. Infectious virus from groups of 20 chickens inoculated with 1×105 p.f.u. (high dose) with either WT (blue circles) or KO (red squares) UDL01 influenza virus. Grey dotted baselines indicate limit of detection. (a) Mean infectious virus titres from buccal swabs. (b) Buccal shedding titres from individual birds at 2, 5 and 6 days post inoculation. (c) Infectious virus titres in communal drinking water. A pooled sample from the water sources in each isolator was assessed daily. Means±sd are shown where applicable. Levels of significance were based upon P-values from a Mann–Whitney U-test; **P<0.001.Table 2.Cloacal shedding from chickens inoculated with WT and KO UDL01 influenza virusVirus doseVirus% Birds shedding (n)Mean shedding duration (days)*Mean shedding titre (p.f.u.)†HighWT35 % (7/20)1.571.67×103 (±4.13×103)KO10 % (2/20)11.50×103 (±2.05×103)LowWT50 % (7/14)1.142.76×103 (±4.36×103)KO29 % (4/14)1.251.74×102 (±1.76×102)*Shedding assayed daily until 10 days post inoculation.†Mean (±SD).The lower incidence of cloacal shedding of the KO virus from inoculated chickens led us to characterize the tissue tropism of the two viruses. Leymaire et al. (2014) have previously shown that the presence of a PB1-F2 protein increased the amount of vRNA detected in the intestine of birds inoculated with an HPAI virus at 2 days post inoculation. Using both qRT-PCR for vRNA and infectious virus particle titration, we determined the relative levels of the WT and KO viruses in a panel of respiratory and gastrointestinal tract tissues at both day 2 and 5 post inoculation for the high-dose infection study (Fig. 5). We found that in the respiratory tract (nasal turbinate, trachea and lungs) on day 2 there were no differences in either vRNA or infectious particle levels. The differences we observed in the respiratory tissues on day 5, higher levels of WT than KO virus in the nasal turbinate, were in line with the higher level of infectious particle shedding from the buccal cavity on day 5 by birds infected with the WT virus. In the gastrointestinal tract (oesophagus, duodenum, ileum and colon), we observed more virus in tissues from birds infected with the WT virus on both days 2 and 5 post inoculation, (Fig. 5), however, the increase was only statistically significant in the colon tissue samples.Fig. 5.Viral titres in tissues harvested from high-dose-inoculated chickens. A panel of respiratory and gastrointestinal chicken tissues were harvested from the chickens inoculated with 1×105 (high dose) of either WT (blue) or KO (red) UDL01 influenza virus. Tissues were harvested and processed at (a) 2 or (b) 5 days post inoculation. Copies of viral M gene vRNA (left axis) were determined via influenza specific qPCR on total tissue RNA (bars). Infectious virus (right axis) was determined by virus titration of homogenized chicken tissues (circles/squares). Grey dotted base lines indicate the limit of infectious virus detection. Means±sem were calculated from a minimum of three individual animals. Levels of significance were based upon P-values from Student t-tests; * P<0.05 for infectious virus, ∗∗P<0.05 for copies of viral mRNA.Increased environmental contamination by UDL01-WT virusWe measured the level of infectious virus in both the communal water and food sources shared by birds during the high-dose experiment. Whilst we found no infectious virus in the food source, even at the peak of viral shedding, we were able to isolate infectious virus from the common water source in the isolators, for both viruses (Fig. 4c). In the isolator that housed birds infected with WT virus, we detected virus from day 1 to 5 post inoculation; in contrast the KO virus was only detected on days 2–4 post inoculation, indicating that the presence of full-length PB1-F2 protein can lengthen the period of infectious environmental contamination for LPAI virus. PB1-F2 is believed to be a non-structural protein and several studies have failed to find it as a component of the influenza virus particle (Hutchinson et al., 2015; Shaw et al., 2008). Therefore, it is unlikely that an absence of PB1-F2 would affect virus particle stability. However, we did assess WT and KO infectious virus persistence in water at 25 °C (akin to the poultry isolator set up in which the in vivo experiments were conducted). No difference in stability of the infectious virus particles was seen (data not shown). There were also no HA sequence changes in samples of the viruses shed from both inoculated and in contact birds which also ruled out inherent stability differences between the viruses. The fact of increased environmental contamination has direct consequences for the efficiency of transmission to naive birds as the presence of PB1-F2 can lengthen the window of opportunity for naive birds to contract the virus from contaminated environmental sources, presumably through fomite/faecal-oral transmission routes.PB1-F2 increases the opportunity for in-contact transmission between chickensThe difference in viral clearance dynamics and the environmental contamination period of the two viruses, that differed only by the presence of a PB1-F2 protein, lead us to investigate whether PB1-F2 had any effect on transmission parameters in co-housed chickens who shared a common water and food source. Transmission from directly inoculated chickens to in-contact birds at both early (24 h post inoculation) and later (5 days post inoculation) time points was assessed by the introduction of naive sentinels at these time points in separate experiments. Unsurprisingly, as no difference in buccal shedding between the WT and KO viruses was observed at early time points, naive sentinel animals that were introduced 24 h after the donor animals were directly inoculated, all became robustly infected independently of the virus to which they were exposed (Fig. 6a). Infection in the sentinel animals was determined via titration of infectious virus in buccal and/ or cloacal swabs and seroconversion 14 days post exposure (Fig. 6). In these early exposure contact animals, we saw a similar pattern to directly inoculated birds of prolonged viral shedding from birds infected by the virus containing a full-length PB1-F2 protein in contrast to earlier clearance of virus in those infected by the PB1-F2 KO virus (Fig. 6a). This experimental setup models a commercial poultry farming operation where large numbers of birds are continuously confined in close proximity.Fig. 6.Transmission to naive contacts introduced at 1 and 5 days post inoculation. (a, b) Infectious virus titres in buccal (solid lines) and cloacal (dashed lines) swabs from naive contact chickens housed with either WT (blue) or KO (red) infected chickens. Contacts were exposed to infected chickens at either (a) early (1 day post inoculation) or (b) late (5 days post inoculation) time points. Grey baselines indicate the limit of detection. (c) HA inhibition titres on serum from contacts exposed to chickens inoculated with WT (blue circles) or KO (red squares) UDL01 at early (1 day post inoculation) or late (5 days post inoculation) time points. Serum was collected at 14 days post exposure and titred against the virus used for inoculation.To assess a more field-like environment experienced by the wild bird reservoir or poultry in a backyard flock, we introduced naive sentinel birds at 5 days post inoculation of the donor animals, when the disparity of buccal viral shedding in the donor birds was apparent. These birds were again co-housed and shared common water and food sources. The premise of this experimental setup was that in a free roaming environment birds can come into contact or share nourishment sources at any point during the viral infectious period since they are not strictly confined and their interactions are more transient. Therefore, initial contact at later time points during the infection period is important in the spreading of virus. We found that all birds in contact with those directly inoculated with a virus containing a full-length PB1-F2 (WT) became robustly infected, shedding virus from both buccal and cloacal cavities (Fig. 6b). In contrast, no viral shedding for any of the in-contact birds co-housed with those inoculated with the KO virus was detected (Fig. 6b). Serology performed on the in-contact birds confirmed there was also no seroconversion 14 days after exposure (Fig. 6c). This is the first time that the presence of a PB1-F2 protein has been demonstrated to affect transmission parameters in any species and suggests a scenario whereby it might be more favourable in an avian host for IAVs to encode for a full-length PB1-F2 protein.DiscussionThe small PB1-F2 protein of IAVs is termed an accessory protein as it is not required for the basic replicative cycle of influenza in multiple host species (Pena et al., 2012; Zamarin et al., 2006). It has been established in several studies that there is a low aa evolutionary rate for the PB1 protein, necessary due to the vital structural and functional integrity of the viral polymerase protein; however, this results in a higher rate of aa evolution in the +1 reading frame and thus PB1-F2 (Trifonov et al., 2009; Westgeest et al., 2014). Despite this, there is an apparent unique pressure to maintain a full-length ORF of the protein in isolates that have been retrieved from avian species and this contrasts with the frequent truncation of the protein in mammalian host viral isolates by the incorporation of one or more stop codons (Krumbholz et al., 2011; Zell et al., 2007).Analysis of 24 803 influenza PB1 segment sequences available on the NCBI database found that 93 % of viruses isolated from avian hosts maintained a full-length PB1-F2. Recently it has been reported that approximately 61 % of HPAI H5N1 isolates from 2013 had a truncated PB1-F2 (Kamal et al., 2015); therefore we also examined if avian virus pathogenicity as defined by a multiple basic cleavage site (two or more basic aa), in the HA protein, was associated with PB1-F2 length. We found little variation in the frequency of full-length PB1-F2 in HPAI or LPAI viruses and a marginal reduction in HPAI (87.7 % HPAI vs 91.0 % LPAI) was entirely due to the H5 subtype (Table S3). An assessment of avian HA subtypes and full-length PB1-F2 conservation found that H5 (90 %), H6 (88 %), H9 (81 %), H13 (88 %) and H16 (83 %) subtypes all had lower percentages of full-length PB1-F2. A full analysis of all 16 avian HA subtypes is presented in Table S4.Further analysis within the avian host grouping indicated that isolates from the order Galliformes (chickens, turkeys, quail, etc.) have a conserved full-length PB1-F2 at a slightly lower frequency of 87 % compared to the natural host reservoir bird orders of Anseriformes (ducks, geese, swans, etc.; 97 %) and Charadriiformes (shorebirds such as waders and gulls; 98 %) (Table 1) (Olsen et al., 2006; Webster et al., 1992). A full analysis of all avian orders can be found in Table S5. This suggested that PB1-F2 may contribute to a process more critical to the natural avian field environment than an intensive poultry rearing scenario. An obvious difference between these two avian settings is the modes and dynamics of transmission of IAVs.The aim of this study was to interrogate fully the contribution that PB1-F2 makes to viral fitness in an avian host. We assessed viral infectivity, pathogenicity and transmissibility between chickens of isogenic viruses differing only by the presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein.Two other published studies have undertaken a similar approach to understanding the role of PB1-F2 in the context of avian species infection with influenza viruses (Leymarie et al., 2014; Schmolke et al., 2011). However, both focused solely on the effect that a full-length PB1-F2 protein has on the pathogenic nature on H5N1 viruses which were already highly pathogenic. The study by Schmolke et al. (2011) assessed the effect of knocking out the PB1-F2 protein on the pathogenicity of H5N1 in White Pekin ducks. No effect on pathogenicity was observed, but an increased systemic spread of the virus in the ducks was demonstrated for HPAI H5N1 virus containing a full-length PB1-F2 in contrast to when PB1-F2 expression was absent (Schmolke et al., 2011). Leymaire et al. (2014) considered the effect of a full-length PB1-F2 on the pathogenicity of an HPAI H5N1 virus in the chicken model and in accordance with our findings presented here, found that removal of full-length PB1-F2 actually enhanced pathogenicity (when examined at doses at which WT virus is not 100 % lethal). This study also found increased viral tissue dissemination both in ovo of 10-day-old chicken embryonated eggs and in experimentally inoculated chickens when PB1-F2 protein was present (Leymarie et al., 2014). Recently, another study that investigated the effect of PB1-F2 on transmission in turkeys concluded that lack of a full-length PB1-F2 gene in a triple-reassortant H3N2 swine influenza virus increased histopathology in turkeys and provided a transmission advantage (Deventhiran et al., 2015). While the increase in pathogenicity when PB1-F2 is absent is in line with Leymaire et al. (2014) and our study the transmission advantage of a virus lacking PB1-F2 differed to our finding. Transmission in the Deventhiran et al. (2015) study was not robustly assessed and was determined on a single clinical sign (diarrhoea) and weak positive seroconversion; no virus was detected from any of the in-contact birds. In addition, differences in the genetic history of the virus isolates studied, and/or inherent pathogenicity may account for these differences.In our study we demonstrate that, in an LPAI background, the presence of a PB1-F2 protein suppressed pathogenicity in a chicken model. The increased pathogenicity observed between days 4 and 5 post inoculation of the birds was preceded by the observation of increased viral dissemination in vivo on day 2 post inoculation. Virus was recovered more frequently, and in higher titres, from the gastrointestinal tract of chickens when a full-length PB1-F2 protein was present. The intrinsic pathogenicity of a virus could also impact on its transmission potential (Cho et al., 2007). A pathogenic virus which can induce a great clinical impact on an infected host has the potential to modulate the infected subject’s and their contacts’ behaviour in a manner that would reduce interactions: hiding away and lethargy. In contrast during a low or non-pathogenic viral infection, the mixing of hosts may be more likely.In Pakistan and Southeast Asian countries where H9N2 LPAI virus is enzootic, informal poultry farming accounts for approximately 30 % of total poultry production (Conan et al., 2012; Tufail et al., 2012). In this setting it is rare for birds to be densely packed together for prolonged periods of time with birds transiently interacting or sharing resources, limiting the time and incidence of direct transmission between hosts. In these natural field conditions, poultry transmission of influenza viruses is thought to occur predominately through the faecal-oral route by ingestion of virus from contaminated food and water sources. It is therefore important that influenza virus is maintained in the environment for effective transmission to occur (Brown et al., 2007; Hinshaw et al., 1979). Transmission is an area of influenza biology which has not previously been robustly investigated in relation to PB1-F2.Importantly, in this study we show that the PB1-F2 protein prolongs viral shedding from infected chickens and that this has the effect of increasing the window of opportunity for transmission to naive birds. Increased cloacal shedding of the UDL01-WT virus in comparison to the UDL01-KO virus was detected which complemented the observation that more WT virus was present in gastrointestinal tissues of infected birds. In addition, buccal shedding of the virus was sustained for 1–2 more days from chickens infected with the virus containing full-length PB1-F2. The increase of both buccal and cloacal viral shedding in the WT-infected birds resulted in longer environmental contamination of the chicken’s water source during these studies. The alteration of these parameters by the presence of a full-length PB1-F2 resulted in transmission at a later time point (5 days post inoculation) for the UDL01-WT, whereas no transmission at this time point was observed for the UDL01-KO virus.Our results point to a role for PB1-F2 in enhancing the transmission potential of IAVs in the natural avian reservoir or in backyard flock environments rather than in close living commercial poultry farms. This aligns with the avian sequence data which showed that PB1-F2 length is conserved at a high frequency in the influenza virus reservoir species Anseriformes and Charadriiformes than poultry (Galliformes) despite genetic pressure on the +1 reading frame of the essentially conserved viral polymerase segment. Poultry samples in the NCBI database are likely isolated from intensively farmed poultry where the role of PB1-F2 in transmission is less important than the free living natural reservoir aquatic birds.In summary, we conclude that the IAV accessory protein PB1-F2 enhances pathogenicity and transmission of avian influenza viruses in avian hosts. This work emphasizes the need to understand host-specific differences in terms of both genetics and behaviour when analysing the role of viral proteins.MethodsEthics statement.All animal work was approved and regulated by the UK government Home Office under the project licence (PPL 30/2952). All personnel involved in the procedures were licensed by the UK Home Office. Euthanasia of chickens was carried out by intravenous administration of sodium pentobarbital and confirmed through cervical dislocation.Viruses and cells.Recombinant A/chicken/Pakistan/UDL01/08 H9N2 virus (UDL01-WT) was generated using reverse genetics as previously described (Hoffmann et al., 2000). UDL01-KO whereby a stop codon was introduced at aa position 12 in the PB1-F2 ORF was constructed by site-directed mutagenesis in the PB1 genetic segment prior to rescue. Virus stocks were produced via passage in 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs; the allantoic fluid was harvested after 48 h and titrated by plaque assay on Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells (ATCC).MDCK and human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells (ATCC) were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) (Gibco-Invitrogen) supplemented with 10 % FBS (Biosera), 1 % penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 % non-essential aa (Sigma-Aldrich). Primary chicken kidney cells (cKCs) were prepared in house as previously described (Penzes et al., 1994) from 2–3-week-old Rhode Island Red chickens and maintained in EMEM, 7 % BSA (Sigma), 1 % penicillin/streptomycin and tryptose phosphate broth. Both MDCKs and cKCs were maintained at 37 °C with 5 % CO2. Ex vivo chicken tracheal organ cultures (cTOCs) were prepared as previously described (Armesto et al., 2009) and maintained in EMEM supplemented with 1M HEPES and 1 % penicillin/streptomycin; these were maintained under liquid at 37 °C with no addition of CO2.Validation of segment 2 gene expression.To analyse viral gene expression from transfected plasmids, a previously published strategy was adopted (Wise et al., 2011). Briefly, nucleotides 1–380 of UDL-1/08 PB1 were cloned into AgeI/KpnI sites of pEGFPN1 (Clontech). Using site-directed mutagenesis the position of the EGFP ORF was adjusted into frame with either the PB1 or PB1-F2 reading frames, while concurrently removing the GFP ATG codon. Additional segment 2 mutations as detailed in the results section were made using site directed mutagenesis with the WT segment plasmids as templates. 2 µg of each plasmid was transfected into HEK 293T cells using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 12 h after transfection, 10 µM MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the medium for a further 12 h. Cells were harvested and the presence of alpha-tubulin and PB1-, PB1-N40- and PB1-F2-GFP was detected via Western blot using rabbit anti-alpha tubulin (Abcam) and mouse anti-GFP (Gene Tex) antibodies with IRDye 800CW/IRDye 680RD secondary antibodies (LI-COR) and visualized using the Odyssey CLx (Li-Cor). Densitometric analysis was performed using Image Studio software (Li-Cor) from three independent experiments and the intensities for PB1-, PB1-N40- and PB1-F2-GFP were normalized to alpha-tubulin. Fold change in protein expression relative to the WT was calculated.Multi-cycle growth curves.MDCK cells and cKCs were infected with virus m.o.i. of 0.0001 at 37 °C for 1 h, in triplicate. The cells were washed and incubated at 37 °C in serum-free DMEM containing 2 µg ml−1 TPCK trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). A 500 µl aliquot of supernatant was taken 24, 48 and 72h after infection and stored at −80 °C and 500 µl of fresh medium was added back to each well. Virus was titrated by plaque assay.Five cTOCs per time point were inoculated with 100 p.f.u. of virus at 37 °C for 1 h in cTOC maintenance medium. cTOCs were washed then placed in glass tubes for rotation at 37 °C in 1 ml of maintenance medium. Medium was harvested from five individual cTOCs at 24, 48 and 72 h for each virus. The virus in the supernatants was titrated by plaque assay.To perform growth curves in ovo, three 10-day-old embryonated hens’ eggs per virus, per time point, were inoculated into the allantoic cavity with 100 p.f.u. of virus. Eggs were incubated at 37 °C for 24, 48 or 72 h; the allantoic fluid was harvested and titrated by plaque assay.Titration of infectious virus.Infectious virus in growth curves, chicken swabs, environmental samples or homogenized tissue was titrated by plaque assay on MDCK cells. MDCK cells were inoculated with 10-fold serially diluted samples and overlaid with 0.6 % agarose (Oxoid) in supplemented DMEM (1× MEM, 0.21 % BSA V, 1 mM l-glutamate, 0.15 % sodium bicarbonate, 10 mM HEPES, 1× penicillin/streptomycin (all Gibco) and 0.01 % Dextran DEAE (Sigma-Aldrich), with 2 µg ml−1 TPCK trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). They were then incubated at 37 °C for 72 h. Plaques were developed using crystal violet stain containing methanol. The limit of virus detection in the plaque assays was 6.67 p.f.u. ml−1.Minimum lethal dose and minimum infectious dose assays.Groups of five, 10-day-old embryonated hens’ eggs were inoculated into the allantoic cavity with 100 µl of 10-fold decreasing concentrations of each virus in PBS from 10 000 to 0.001 p.f.u. The embryos were monitored in a double-blinded study by two people, twice daily until 72 hpi or until signs of end point as defined by lack of embryo movement and/or severe haemorrhage. Eggs were chilled at 4 °C to confirm death and the allantoic fluid was harvested and presence of infectious virus determined. The influenza viral infectivity assay was performed by inoculating a 96-well plate of MDCK cells with 100 µl of undiluted allantoic fluid for 1 h at 37 °C. Following washing in PBS, serum-free DMEM was added to the cells for 12 h. Cells were fixed with 50 % methanol : 50 % acetone and immune-stained for influenza nucleoprotein (NP). NP was detected using a mouse α-NP antibody produced at The Pirbright Institute and an IRDye 800CW α-mouse secondary antibody (Li-Cor) and visualized using Odyssey Imaging Systems (Li-Cor). The MLD was defined as the lowest viral dose resulting in death of all infected embryonated chicken eggs and the MID defined as the lowest viral dose required to produce infection in all embryonated chicken eggs.Infection and transmission of virus in chickens.Mixed, sex-specific pathogen free (SPF) Rhode Island Red chickens bred at The Pirbright Institute poultry production unit were used at 3 weeks old. Pre-infection sera were obtained from all chickens and all were negative for reactive influenza antibodies against A/chicken/Pakistan/UDL01/08 (UDL01). Chickens were split into three groups: Mock, UDL01-WT and UDL01-KO. The UDL01-WT and UDL01-KO were housed in self-contained BioFlex B50 Rigid Body Poultry isolators (Bell Isolation Systems). Chickens were inoculated intranasally with 100 µl (50 µl nare−1) of PBS for Mock group or UDL01-WT or UDL01-KO either at a low dose of virus (5×103 p.f.u.) or high dose (1×105 p.f.u.). Naive sentinel birds were introduced into the isolators with infected birds 24 h or 5 days after direct inoculation to assess transmission. Birds were humanely euthanized 14 days post inoculation and sera samples collected for analysis of virus specific antibodies.Sample collection from chickens and the isolator environment.Infection of birds was assessed by swabbing both the buccal and cloacal cavities daily with sterile polyester tipped swabs (Fisher Scientific) which were transferred into viral transport medium (WHO, 2006), vortexed briefly, clarified and stored at −80 °C prior to virus detection.On days 2 and 5 post inoculation, four birds from each group were humanely culled and organs (nasal tissue, trachea, lungs, oesophagus, proventriculus, duodenum, ileum, colon, blood and spleen) were snap frozen. Prior to processing, the organs were thawed on ice and homogenized inside a tube containing a 5 mm steel bead in a Bead Mill (Retsch MM 300) under the conditions of 20 Hz for 4 min. For infectious virus quantification, 20 % w/v of organ to PBS containing 1 % penicillin/streptomycin was added to the tube prior to homogenization; this was then clarified by centrifugation and the supernatant was used in plaques assays.For environmental sample collection, approximately 1 ml of drinking water was collected from both water sources inside each isolator. To the sample, 10× DMEM was added to achieve 1× DMEM. Approximately 1 g of dry food was added to 1 ml of viral transport medium and vortexed briefly. Both environmental sample types were clarified of debris by centrifugation at 450 g for 2 min and stored at −80 °C prior to virus detection by plaque assay.qRT-PCR of viral M gene.For viral M gene detection from chicken tissue, 750 µl of Trizol LS (Life Technologies) was added prior to homogenization. RNA was extracted from homogenized tissues by chloroform extraction and purification with a RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Quantification of vRNA copies was undertaken using a single-step real-time reverse transcription PCR, the Superscript III Platinum One-Step qRT-PCR Kit (Life Technologies). Primers and a TaqMan probe specific for a conserved region of the influenza A matrix gene were used as described previously (Spackman et al., 2002). Cycling conditions were: 50 °C, 5 min; 95 °C, 2 min and then 40 cycles of 95 °C, 3 s and 60 °C, 30 s, using a 7500 fast real-time PCR machine (Applied Biosystems). A T7 transcribed RNA standard of the M gene was run alongside each assay to generate a standard curve.Genome: p.f.u. ratios.Three independently produced viral stocks in embryonated chicken eggs for each virus were assessed. The p.f.u. were determined using standard plaque assay on MDCK cells. In parallel, RNA was extracted and the number of influenza M gene copies determined via qRT-PCR as previously described. The genome : p.f.u. ratio was calculated and the mean for each virus reported with sd.Statistical analysis.All statistics were performed using the statistical function on GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad Software). Statistical calculations included two-tailed paired Student’s t-test and Mann–Whitney U-test. P-values <0.05 were considered significant.Bioinformatics.In June 2015, all sequences were downloaded from the NCBI Influenza Virus Database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/Database/nph-select.cgi?go=database) as full-length DNA sequences; we excluded identical sequences through the collapse function. All sequences were analysed using mega6: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis version 6.0 (Tamura et al., 2013). For PB1-F2 length analysis, full-length PB1 sequences were downloaded and the PB1-F2 ORFs were extracted, aligned and translated. Only sequences with methionine at the canonical aa position zero were analysed to only include C-terminal truncations. For species analysis, separate sequence sets were downloaded for human, swine and avian. The avian orders and specific subtypes were categorized from total avian sequences after download. For analysis of PB1-F2 by pathogenicity, matched full-length HA and PB1 sequences were downloaded. The sequence surrounding the cleavage site of HA was extracted, aligned and translated. Viruses were classified as HPAI if they contained >2 basic aa (Arg, Lys or His) upstream, proximal to the cleavage motif as defined previously (OFFLU, 2014).Supplementary Data301Supplementary File 1Click here for additional data file.


Title: Effect of D222G Mutation in the Hemagglutinin Protein on Receptor Binding, Pathogenesis and Transmissibility of the 2009 Pandemic H1N1 Influenza Virus

IntroductionThe 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza virus spread from its first detection in humans in March 2009 to all populated continents in a matter of weeks, causing over 18,000 laboratory-confirmed deaths reported to WHO in over 215 countries [1]. Although the WHO assessed the impact of the H1N1 pandemic as moderate since the majority of infected patients experienced mild influenza-like illness (www.who.int), the 2009 H1N1 virus caused a wide spectrum of influenza-related complications in children less than 5 years of age, pregnant women, and those with certain underlying comorbidities [2], [3], [4], [5]. Although preexisting immune status and underlying chronic medical conditions are recognized risk factors for severe disease, the viral molecular determinants governing virulence of the 2009 H1N1 virus are poorly understood.Previous studies on highly pathogenic influenza viruses have contributed to the identification of numerous molecular markers associated with adaptation to human hosts and increased virulence and transmissibility, including key amino acids at the 627 and 701 positions in PB2 and the presence of full-length PB1-F2 and NS1 proteins [6], [7], [8], [9]. However, the analysis of 2009 H1N1 viruses revealed an absence of these known molecular determinants, underscoring the virus-specific nature of such determinants and the existence of as yet unrecognized molecular features that contributed to the establishment of the 2009 H1N1 virus as a pandemic strain with moderate virulence [10]. A potential virulence marker associated with 2009 H1N1 viruses was first identified among patients in Norway, with a change from aspartic acid to glycine at position 222 (D222G) in HA1 present in 18% of clinical specimens from patients with severe disease but in 0% of those from mild cases [11]. Subsequent reports from cases worldwide further strengthened this association [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. These retrospective analyses have found that cases bearing the D222G mutation were more likely to be associated with severe pneumonia, admission to intensive care facilities, and death [18]. Several studies in in vitro and in vivo models have examined the role of D222G in 2009 H1N1 virus virulence with varying outcomes. The majority of studies have reported that presence of D222G is sufficient to enhance virus replication and lethality in mouse models, with this effect ranging from modest to pronounced [19], [20], [21]. However, other groups have not observed substantial differences between wild-type and D222G viruses in mouse or ferret models [22], indicating the need for further investigation into the role of D222G in virulence of 2009 H1N1 pandemic viruses.The location of position 222 in the receptor binding site of HA predicts that alteration of this position would influence the binding specificity of a virus bearing this mutation [23]. Recent studies have reported that the D222G mutation confers enhanced binding to α2-3 linked sialic acids, suggesting a greater ability to bind to lung cells in the lower respiratory tract in humans and cause an exacerbation of disease [22], [24]. In the present study, a 2009 H1N1 virus A/California/04/09 (CA/04) was mutated to generate the HA D222G mutation in order to study the role of D222G in pathogenesis and transmission in both ferret and mouse models. A dose-dependent direct binding glycan array analysis of virus carrying the D222G HA mutation showed observable changes in binding to glycans terminated by both α2-6 and α2-3-linked sialic acids. Although the presence of this mutation did not cause a significant increase in pathogenesis and transmission in ferrets, it caused heightened virulence of this virus in mice and exhibited enhanced replication in human respiratory cells in comparison to the wild-type CA/04 virus.ResultsEffect of D222G mutation on the receptor binding properties of HAAsp222 in the wild-type CA/04 HA is a characteristic residue predominantly found in human-adapted H1N1 viruses. This residue has been shown to play a key role in providing optimal contacts with the penultimate Gal sugar in glycans terminated by α2-6-linked sialic acid [25], [26]. Therefore a D222G mutation is likely to affect the molecular contacts of this key residue position with the glycan receptor. It was demonstrated previously that an analogous mutation in the prototypic 1918 pandemic (A/South Carolina/1/1918 or SC18) HA resulted in shifting its glycan receptor-binding from high specificity for α2-6 sialylated glycans to a mixed binding to both α2-6 (albeit at a lower affinity than wild-type HA) and α2-3 sialylated glycans [27], [28].To investigate the effect of D222G mutation on glycan-receptor binding properties of CA/04 virus, we analyzed the binding of both wild-type and mutant virus in a dose-dependent fashion to representative α2-3 and α2-6 sialylated glycans on a glycan array platform (Figure 1). Our analysis showed that D222G mutation resulted in a modest reduction in the binding avidity to α2-6 sialylated glycans (6′SLN and, to a lesser extent, 6′SLN-LN) in comparison with the wild-type virus. The notable difference in glycan-binding properties was the substantial increase in binding of D222G mutant virus to α2-3 sialylated glycans (relative to its α2-6 binding) compared with that of wild-type virus. These results with CA/04 virus are consistent with previous observations demonstrating an increase in α2-3 binding of other 2009 H1N1 viruses carrying the D222G mutation [24].10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.g001Figure 1Dose-dependent glycan array-binding of CA/04 D222G virus.Dose-dependent binding of CA/04 D222G (A) or wild-type CA/04 (B) virus to representative α2-3 and α2-6 sialylated glycans on the glycan array. The y-axis shows percentage of maximum binding signal intensities. In both cases saturation binding signals were observed at viral titers of 128 HAUs. The chemical description of glycans is provided in Table S1. The 6′SLN-LN glycan is representative of the predominant glycan motifs expressed in the human upper respiratory tract.Effect of D222G mutation on pathogenesis and respiratory droplet transmissionA recent study demonstrated that the introduction of D222G in a 2009 H1N1 virus did not alter the pathogenicity or transmissibility of a 2009 H1N1 isolate A/Netherlands/602/09 in ferrets [22]. However, the use of a parental strain which already possesses a highly transmissible phenotype may limit the ability to identify additional molecular changes which could confer enhanced transmissibility [29]. In contrast, the 2009 H1N1 CA/04 virus, which exhibits reduced transmissibility in the ferret model compared with seasonal H1N1 viruses, and previously enabled us to identify an HA mutation which conferred efficient transmission by respiratory droplets in ferrets was used in this study to more stringently assess the impact of D222G on virus transmission [30], [31].Ferrets inoculated with the D222G virus exhibited similar clinical signs as CA/04 wild-type virus and a reverse-genetics derived CA/04 virus, with ferrets exhibiting transient weight loss (mean maximum weight loss of 11.3% on day 6–7 p.i.) and fever (mean maximum fever 1.9°C over baseline day 2 p.i.) before returning to baseline levels [30], [31]. D222G virus-infected ferrets further exhibited a mild, transient lymphopenia (22% decrease in circulating lymphocytes on day 3 p.i.) which was comparable to ferrets infected with other 2009 H1N1 viruses [32]. D222G virus was detected in the ferret upper respiratory tract (6.7±0.2 log10 PFU/ml nasal turbinates) and the lower respiratory tract (6.3±0.6 log10 PFU/g lung tissue) at similar titers as 2009 H1N1 wild-type viruses day 3 p.i. [22]. Moreover, the D222G mutant virus was detected in the intestinal tract of 1/3 ferrets day 3 p.i. (2.29 log10 PFU/ml), and in rectal swabs collected on days 1 and 3 p.i. in 2/3 ferrets (average titer 1.4±0.2 log10 PFU/ml), comparable to other 2009 H1N1 isolates [31].To evaluate the transmissibility of D222G virus by respiratory droplets, three ferrets were inoculated with 106 PFU of virus. Approximately 24 hours p.i., inoculated-contact pairs were established by placing naïve ferrets in each of three adjacent modified cages with a perforated side wall, allowing air exchange between ferrets in the absence of direct or indirect contact. Nasal washes (NW) were collected on alternate days p.i. or post-contact (p.c.) for virus titration. Detection of infectious virus in NW of contact ferrets and seroconversion of contact ferrets were considered evidence of virus transmission. Consistent with the experimental transmission data obtained with wild type 2009 H1N1 viruses [31], CA/04 virus did not spread by respiratory droplet to every contact ferret; infectious virus was detected in the nasal washes of two of three contact ferrets (Figure 2A) [30]. D222G virus replicated efficiently in the upper respiratory tract of inoculated ferrets, reaching peak mean titers of 7.5±0.2 log10 PFU/ml day 1 p.i., significantly higher than CA/04 virus at this time (p<0.03) [30]. Similar to CA/04 virus, D222G mutant virus was detected in NW of two of three contact ferrets, with virus titers >7 log10 PFU/ml on day 3 p.c. (Figure 2B). While detectable virus was not observed in NW of the third contact ferret, all three contact ferrets seroconverted to homologous virus by day 20 p.i. (HI titer range 320–640). This pattern of D222G virus transmission by respiratory droplets was confirmed in a duplicate experiment that resulted in virus detection in NW in two of three contact ferrets and seroconversion of all contact ferrets (data not shown). Ferret lung and NW samples from inoculated and contact animals that were harvested were sequenced to confirm the mutation. All samples yielded the expected mutant sequence; reversion of the mutation (222G to 222D) was not observed.10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.g002Figure 2Respiratory droplet transmissibility of D222G virus.Three ferrets were inoculated with 106 PFU of reverse-genetics CA/04 (published previously in [30]) (A) or D222G (B) virus. All ferrets were housed individually in specialized cages that permit exchange of respiratory droplets, but prevent direct or indirect contact between inoculated-contact animal pairs. A naïve ferret was placed in an adjacent cage to an inoculated ferret 24 hrs p.i. Viral replication was determined by titration of nasal washes collected on alternate days from inoculated (left bars) and contact (right bars) ferrets. The limit of virus detection was 10 PFU/ml.Enhanced virulence of D222G virus in mice by the intranasal but not intraocular routeTo determine whether the D222G mutation conferred heightened virulence of a 2009 H1N1 virus in a mouse model, we inoculated mice i.n. with 105 PFU of either CA/04 or D222G virus. Mice inoculated with D222G virus by the intranasal route exhibited greater weight loss than CA/04 virus-inoculated mice; one mouse from the D222G group was euthanatized on day 11 p.i. due to excessive weight loss (Table 1). However, neither virus exhibited >50% lethality in mice when inoculated at this dose. While both viruses replicated efficiently in the lungs of mice on days 3 and 6 p.i., D222G virus replicated to a significantly higher mean titer compared with CA/04 virus at day 6 p.i. (p<0.05). Virus was found infrequently and at low titer in the nose and intestines of mice from both groups on day 3 p.i. only (Table 1 and data not shown). Similar titers of virus in the lung and sporadic detection of virus in intestinal tissue with these viruses was observed with numerous other 2009 H1N1 viruses in this model [33].10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.t001Table 1Pathogenesis of CA/04 and 222G viruses following intranasal inoculation in mice.Viral titerb
Virus% wt lossa
SurvivalLung (D3)Nose (D3)Intestine (D3)Lung (D6)CA/0415.8% (4)5/56.0±0.3 (3/3)2.1 (1/3)1.5 (1/3)5.1±0.5 (2/3)D222G22.1% (10)4/56.2±0.1 (3/3)1.7±0.6 (2/3)1.7 (1/3)5.9±0.1 (3/3)c

aMean maximum percent weight loss (5 mice per group) following inoculation with 105 PFU. Day post-inoculation (p.i.) indicated in parentheses.
bVirus endpoint titers are expressed as the mean log10 PFU/ml plus standard deviation. Day 3 (D3) and Day 6 (D6) p.i. are shown. Numbers of mice with detectable virus included in the mean are indicated in parentheses.
cp<0.05 compared with CA/04 virus by Student's t test.A recent report indicated that the presence of D222G enhanced the ability of a 2009 H1N1 virus to cause ocular disease in mice, with virus detected in the eye of one mouse following intranasal inoculation [22]. We did not observe extrapulmonary spread of virus to the eyes of mice following intranasal inoculation with either CA/04 or D222G virus, and ocular disease was not observed during visual examination of mice during the course of infection (data not shown). However, to better assess the ability of the D222G mutation to cause ocular disease in mice, we inoculated mice by the ocular route with both viruses. The right eye of each mouse was lightly scarified with a 2-mm corneal trephine blade, and 105 PFU of each virus in a 5 µl volume was deposited onto the corneal epithelial surface and massaged into the eye with the eyelid. Mice inoculated by the ocular route with either virus did not exhibit substantial morbidity, and virus was not detected in the eye, nose, intestine, or lung on day 3 or 6 p.i. (data not shown). These results indicate that CA/04 virus is not well suited to infect mice by the ocular route, and the presence of D222G does not confer an ocular tropism in this model.D222G mutation does not alter 2009 H1N1 virus tropism in human respiratory and ocular cellsPrevious studies have demonstrated that select influenza viruses which do not demonstrate an ocular tropism in mice nonetheless are capable of high-titer replication in human ocular cells [34]. To rule out the possibility that the D222G mutation confers an ocular tropism not observed in our murine model, we compared the ability of CA/04 and D222G viruses to replicate in primary human corneal epithelial cells (HCEpiC), which predominantly express α2-3 linked sialic acids [34]. HCEpiC were infected at a MOI of 0.01 and supernatants were collected at indicated times p.i. to quantify infectious virus (Figure 3, open symbols). Both CA/04 and D222G viruses were detected at low levels (<3 log10 PFU/ml) through 72 hrs p.i. in this cell type. In contrast, both viruses replicated efficiently in the human bronchial epithelial cell line Calu-3 (Figure 3, closed symbols). Similar to a previous study, we observed a slight delay in D222G virus replication in Calu-3 cells at 24 hrs p.i., with titers of D222G virus being 10-fold lower than CA/04 virus (p<0.02) [22]. However, at 48 and 72 hrs p.i., D222G virus replicated to significantly higher titer than CA/04 virus in the human respiratory cells (p<0.0005). Primary human lung blood microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-LBI) express a greater proportion of α2-3 linked sialic acids compared with Calu-3 cells (H. Zeng, personal communication), but did not support efficient replication of either CA/04 or D222G viruses. Taken together, these findings indicate that the D222G mutation confers enhanced replication in respiratory epithelial cells but does not alter the ocular tropism of 2009 H1N1 virus.10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.g003Figure 3Replication kinetics of CA/04 and D222G viruses in human ocular and respiratory cells.Calu-3 (circles), HMVEC-LBI (triangles), or HCEpiC (squares) cells were infected at a MOI of 0.01 with the indicated viruses (CA/4, closed symbols; D222G, open symbols). Culture supernatants were removed at indicated times p.i., and titers were determined for infectious virus by standard plaque assay. The limit of virus detection was 10 PFU/ml. The mean from triplicate independent cultures per virus ± standard deviation is shown.DiscussionThe detection of D222G among severe and fatal cases of human infection has resulted in analyses to determine if this mutation represents the first virulence marker associated with 2009 H1N1 pandemic viruses. Previous studies have investigated the effect of D222G HA mutation on glycan-binding using binding assays such as red blood cell agglutination and binding to glycan arrays at saturating viral titers [22], [24]. While these assays serve as good screening tools to understand the extent of α2-3 or α2-6 binding, they were not designed to understand relative binding-avidity of the virus in a dose-dependent fashion. In this study, we used a dose-dependent direct binding assay, mammalian models, and human in vitro cultures to evaluate the relative contribution of this mutation to the virulence of a 2009 H1N1 virus. We demonstrate that a single D222G amino acid change augments binding to α2-3 linked sialic acids and results in higher overall titers of infectious virus in human airway cells and mouse lungs compared with wild-type virus. However, this change is not sufficient to enhance disease or confer efficient transmission of this virus by respiratory droplets in the ferret model and does not augment the ability to replicate in α2-3-rich human or murine ocular tissue.The consequence of the D222G mutation on viral replication kinetics has been assessed previously in several relevant cell lines. Compared with wild-type virus, a D222G-bearing virus replicated to higher titers in human alveolar basal epithelial A549 cells, although generally similar kinetics between D222G and wild-type viruses were observed in the human placental cell line JEG-3 and MDCK cells [20], [21], [22]. We observed lower viral titers of D222G virus compared with CA/04 virus 24 hrs p.i. in Calu-3 cells, in agreement with a previous study using MDCK cells which also noted reduced viral titers with a virus bearing this mutation at this time p.i. [22]; however, significantly higher titers of D222G virus compared with wild-type virus were detected in Calu-3 cells at 48 and 72 hrs p.i. Interestingly, similar viral replication kinetics were observed in our murine model, with comparable titers between CA/04 and D222G viruses in the lungs of mice on day 3 p.i. but higher D222G virus titers in this tissue at day 6 p.i. However, the enhanced ability of D222G virus to bind to α2-3 linked sialic acids did not confer the ability to replicate efficiently in respiratory endothelial cells. Along with these previously published studies, our data suggests that the presence of D222G can enhance viral replication in some cell types, but this contribution is modest and is only apparent at later stages of infection.Previous studies have demonstrated that, in general, 2009 H1N1 viruses are not highly pathogenic in mice [33], [35]. However, these viruses are capable of acquiring a lethal phenotype in mice following acquisition of key mutations, one of which is D222G [20], [36]. A previous study found that the D222G mutation on the CA/04 background conferred greater morbidity, mortality, and heightened virus replication in the lungs of mice compared with a wild-type virus, which is in agreement with our results [19]. An additional study performed a similar assessment of virulence with this mutation, but the use of a parental strain which is lethal for mice may have masked subtle differences conferred by the D222G mutation [22]. In the ferret model, the D222G mutation on the CA/04 background did not confer enhanced virulence, in accordance with previous results [22]. Thus, results in the ferret model have not supported a role of D222G in enhancing 2009 H1N1 virus virulence. Extrapulmonary spread of virus to the intestinal tract was detected following infection with both CA/04 and D222G viruses, a feature shared by numerous wild-type 2009 H1N1 viruses [31]. However, D222G virus failed to spread to other tissues following infection in either mice or ferrets. The enhanced replication and morbidity in mice, but not ferrets following D222G virus infection, is consistent with augmented binding to α2-3 sialylated glycans and the known predominance of α2-3 sialic acids in the mouse model [37].Unlike seasonal influenza viruses which exhibit efficient transmission by respiratory droplets in the ferret model, our studies have shown that most 2009 H1N1 viruses and triple-reassortant swine H1N1 viruses possess reduced transmissibility by this route [29], [31], [32], [38]. The 2009 H1N1 viruses consistently transmitted to two of three ferrets, as measured by virus detection in nasal washes (Figure 2A and [31]). Although a single base-pair change (leading to the I216K mutation) in CA/04 HA can lead to efficient transmission in ferrets [30], we found that the D222G mutation did not appear to significantly enhance or diminish transmission (4 of 6 naïve contact ferrets had detectable virus in nasal washes) of the 2009 H1N1 virus. The enhanced transmission observed with the HA (Ile219→Lys) may be due, at least in part, to its increased human receptor-(α2-6) binding affinity (particularly to the 6′SLN-LN glycan) by several-fold in comparison with wild-type [30]. However, differences in receptor binding specificity between CA/04 and D222G did not preclude efficient replication of both viruses in ferret nasal wash samples. The inability of D222G virus to confer efficient respiratory droplet transmission may be related to the findings that this particular HA mutation does not substantially improve α2-6 binding avidity of the virus. In fact, molecular epidemiologic studies revealed that the majority of 2009 H1N1 viruses circulating during the pandemic did not bear the D222G mutation, further suggesting that this mutation is not a determinant of virus transmissibility [11], [39].While rare, reports of conjunctivitis following 2009 H1N1 virus infection have been documented [17], [40], [41]. Studies have also shown that select 2009 H1N1 viruses are capable of replicating in human ocular cell types, albeit to lower titer than avian influenza viruses [42]. However, it appears that 2009 H1N1 viruses, similar to seasonal influenza viruses, are not well-suited to use the eye as a portal of entry, as ocular infection of mice with these viruses fails to result in a productive virus infection [33]. In the present study, the presence of D222G did not confer the ability of this virus to infect mice by the ocular route or the ability to replicate more efficiently compared with wild-type CA/04 virus in human corneal epithelial cells. The detection of macroscopic ocular symptoms in mice infected with a virus bearing the D222G mutation in a previous study may be due to strain-specific differences between parental viruses used or laboratory-specific conditions, but does not appear to be a universal property of 2009 H1N1 viruses possessing this mutation [22]. Nonetheless, the lack of productive replication of D222G virus in human ocular cells indicates that the enhanced cell tropism present with this virus, observed in the ability to bind both ciliated and non-ciliated cells in HTBE cell cultures, does not translate to all cell types [24].The relatively rapid emergence of D222G during serial passage in mice, cells, or eggs indicates the ability of 2009 H1N1 viruses to acquire this mutation under the right conditions, and the lack of reversion observed in this study suggests that this mutation is stably maintained. [20], [24], [36], [43]. In support of this, numerous studies have reported that the mutation arises during course of human influenza (2009 H1N1) infection [11], [12], [13]. Further study is needed to better understand other molecular markers of the 2009 H1N1 virus that are known to be associated with severe disease and the role of these mutations on the virulence of other virus subtypes. This work underscores the importance of studying the contribution of virulence markers such as D222G on parental strains that do not themselves possess heightened virulence to avoid masking subtle differences which, while minor, nonetheless result in a detectable increase in virus pathogenicity in mammals. These results taken together with those of others demonstrate that it can be difficult to unequivocally demonstrate experimentally that a particular mutation is associated with enhanced severity since different animal models yield different results. In addition, subtle differences in viruses, experimental conditions and other factors may result in somewhat different results from different laboratories; nevertheless, the association of the D222G mutation with more severe human infections highlights the need to continue research in this area.Materials and MethodsRescue of recombinant influenza A virusesThe eight reverse-genetics plasmids used for the rescue of recombinant influenza A/California/04/09 (CA/04) virus were constructed as described previously [30], [44], [45]. The mutation from Asp to Gly at HA position 222 was achieved by altering the position 222 codons from GAT(D) to GGT(G) using a Stratagene QuikChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) per manufacturer's instructions on the CA/04 HA plasmid template.CA/04 and 222G viruses were rescued as described previously [30]. Briefly, 293T cells were transfected with the eight CA/04 plasmids and co-cultured with MDCK cells 12 hrs post-transfection. Rescued viruses were isolated by plaque purification on MDCK cells. Coding sequences of plasmids and rescued viruses were confirmed by automated sequencing performed at the Influenza Sequence Activity, Influenza Division, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Experiments with CA/04 and 222G viruses were conducted under biosafety level 3 containment with enhancements, in accordance with guidelines of the WHO. (https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/swineflu/Laboratorybioriskmanagement.pdf).Dose dependent direct binding of CA/04 D222G virus by glycan arrayA streptavidin plate array comprising representative biotinylated α2→3 and α2→6 sialylated glycans as described previously [28], [30] (Table S1) was used for the analysis. 3′SLN, 3′SLN-LN, 3′SLN-LN-LN are representative avian receptors. 6′SLN and 6′SLN-LN are representative human receptors. The biotinylated glycans were obtained from the Consortium of Functional Glycomics through their resource request program. Streptavidin-coated High Binding Capacity Pierce 384-well Microplates (Pierce, Rockford, IL) were loaded to the full capacity of each well by incubating the well with 50 µl of 2.4 µM of biotinylated glycans overnight at 4°C. Excess glycans were removed through extensive washing with PBS. The viruses were diluted based on hemagglutinating units (HAU, obtained using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes) with 1X PBS+1% BSA. 50 µl of the diluted virus was added to each of the glycan – coated wells and incubated overnight at 4°C. This was followed by three washes with 1X PBST (1X PBS+0.1% Tween-20) and three washes with 1X PBS. Each of the wells was blocked with 1X PBS+1% BSA for 2 h at 4°C. The wells were incubated with primary antibody (ferret anti – CA/04 antisera; 1∶500 diluted in 1X PBS+1% BSA) and incubated for 5 h at 4°C. This was followed by three washes with 1X PBST and three washes with 1X PBS. Finally the wells were incubated with the secondary antibody (goat anti – ferret HRP conjugated antibody from Abcam; 1∶500 diluted in 1X PBS+1% BSA). The wells were washed with 1X PBST and 1X PBS as before. The binding signals were determined based on the HRP activity using the Amplex Red Peroxidase Assay (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The assays were done in triplicate and appropriate negative controls were included.Ferret pathogenesis and transmission experimentsMale Fitch ferrets (Triple F Farms, Sayre, PA), 8–10 months of age and serologically negative by hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay for currently circulating influenza viruses, were used in this study. Ferrets were housed for the duration of the experiment in cages within a Duo-Flow Bioclean environmental enclosure (Lab Products, Seaford, DE). The pathogenesis of each virus was assessed following intranasal (i.n.) inoculation of 106 PFU of virus in a 1 ml volume, a dose reported to consistently infect ferrets with human or avian influenza viruses, was determined as previously described [46], [47]. Ferret hematologic and blood chemistry analyses were performed as previously described [32]. Transmission of virus by respiratory droplets was performed as previously described [38]. Nasal washes were collected from ferrets every other day for at least 9 days post-inoculation (p.i.) or contact (p.c.) and titrated by standard plaque assay using MDCK cells. Post-exposure serum was collected from virus-inoculated (15–19 days p.i.) and contact (18–21 days p.c.) ferrets and tested for H1-specific antibodies against homologous virus by HI assay using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes [48].Mouse pathogenesis and ocular tropism experimentsFemale BALB/c mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA), 8–12 weeks of age, were inoculated i.n. with 105 PFU of CA/04 or D222G virus in a 50 µl volume as previously described [33]. Ocular infection of mice with CA/04 and D222G viruses was performed as previously described using 105 PFU in a 5 µl volume [34]. Five mice per group were monitored daily for 14 days p.i. for morbidity, as measured by body weight, and mortality. Any mouse which lost >25% of its pre-inoculation body weight was euthanatized. Three mice per group were euthanatized on days 3 and 6 p.i., and eye, nose, intestine, and lung tissues were collected to determine replication and systemic spread of virus. Tissues were homogenized in 1 ml of cold PBS, and clarified homogenates were titrated by standard plaque assay. Statistical significance for these and all experiments was determined using Student's t test.
In vitro replication kineticsThe bronchial epithelial cell line Calu-3 (ATCC, Manassas, VA) was cultured on membrane inserts and infected apically as previously described [49]. Primary human corneal epithelial cells (HCEpiC) were obtained from ScienCell (San Diego, CA) at passage 1 and were prepared for virus infection as described previously [34]. Primary human lung blood microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-LBI) were obtained from Lonza (Walkersville, MD) and cultured with Endothelial Cell Basal Medium-2 (Lonza) (Zeng et al, in preparation). Virus was added to Calu-3, HCEpiC, or HMVEC-LBI monolayers at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 for one hour before washing. Cell type specific serum-free media was added to all wells with the addition of 300 µg/L N-p-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone-treated (TPCK) trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in cultures using primary human cells. Aliquots of culture supernatant taken post-infection (p.i.) from triplicate cultures were immediately frozen at −80°C until titrated for the presence of infectious virus by standard plaque assay.Ethics StatementAll animal research described in this study was specifically approved by CDC's Institutional Animal care and Use Committee (IACUC). The animal research was conducted under the guidance of CDC's IACUC and in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International-accredited facility.Supporting InformationTable S1
Expanded nomenclature of glycans used in the glycan array.
a Neu5Ac: N-acetyl D-neuraminic acid; Gal: D-galatose; GlcNAc: N-acetyl D-glucosamine. α/β: anomeric configuration of the pyranose sugars. All the sugars are linked via a spacer to biotin (-Sp-LC-LC-Biotin as described in http://www.functionalglycomics.org/static/consortium/resources/resourcecored5.shtml).(DOC)Click here for additional data file.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: INFLUENZA B VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Timelines of infection and transmission dynamics of H1N1pdm09 in swine

IntroductionThe 2009 H1N1 pandemic demonstrated the potential of swine origin influenza viruses to cause significant human morbidity and mortality globally [1–3]. Swine influenza viruses (SwIV) are also of great economic importance for the pig industry as they contribute to the respiratory disease complex and can cause severe pulmonary distress, growth retardation and sub-optimal reproductive performance [4–6]. SwIV are distributed worldwide and are endemic in US and European herds, putting pig industry workers at increased risk of infection [1,2,7]. The pandemic A/H1N1 2009 strain (H1N1pdm09) represented 10% of SwIV isolations in Europe from 2010–2013 [8], while in the UK 42% of pigs tested were seropositive to H1N1 pdm09 [3].Understanding SwIV transmission is pivotal to managing the risk of spread between pigs and spillover to humans. However, despite the common occurrence of H1N1pdm09 in pigs there is limited information on the viral kinetics and parameters determining influenza A virus transmission between pigs. Transmission models used to predict epidemics rely on natural history parameters that describe the time-course of influenza, such as the latent period or the duration of infectiousness. In addition, it has been previously assumed that infectiousness (which is the ability of an infected individual to transmit a pathogen) is proportional to viral titre. However, this hypothesis has never been tested to our knowledge. It is therefore crucial to provide estimates of natural history parameters and to investigate the link between shed virus titre and the probability of transmission.Because the pig is an important natural host for influenza A viruses and a source of new pandemic viruses, it is also an appropriate large animal model for human influenza. Pigs and humans are infected by the same subtypes of virus and have similar distributions of sialic acid receptors in the respiratory tract [9,10]. The pig is genetically, immunologically and physiologically more similar to humans than small animals [11]. Furthermore, infection dynamics are similar between the two species. Experimental influenza virus infection lasts on average 1.3 to 7.0 days in humans depending on the infectiousness threshold [12] and 2.0 to 7.5 days in influenza virus naive pigs depending on route of challenge [13]. Pigs are therefore a suitable model to study influenza virus infection and transmission [14,15]. We have previously shown that SwIV viral shedding, infectivity, immune response and pathology depends on the inoculated dose and route of infection [13]. It is therefore important to design studies mimicking natural infection, i.e. infection by contact, to develop a quantitative understanding of SwIV infection dynamics and transmission.Here, we used an experimental design in which experimental SwIV transmission was analyzed in pigs infected by contact. In our study, a series of individual recipient pigs were placed in contact for a short time with a donor pig also infected by contact. This allows us to follow the time course of a contact acquired influenza virus infection including, precise information on when an infected donor is infectious to a susceptible recipient. We analyzed data on viral and antibody titres to identify determinants of transmission between pigs and to quantify the infection kinetics of naturally acquired H1N1pdm09 influenza in pigs.ResultsTransmission experimentsTwelve individual transmission experiments were performed. During each experiment, two “seeder” (S) pigs were intranasally inoculated with A/swine/England/1353/2009 virus (H1N1pmd09). Two days post inoculation (dpi), the two S pigs were put in contact with two “donor” (D) pigs for 24 hr to allow natural infection. After the 24 h exposure, one D pig was chosen randomly, designated as donor 1 (D1), and placed in contact with a different naïve recipient (R) pig each day for 18 hours during an 8 day period (recipients R1 to R8) (Fig 1). The second D pig, designated as D2, was a companion pig for D1 on welfare grounds. In total, we collected samples from 133 pigs: 24 S pigs, 21 D pigs and 88 R pigs. Three D pigs (1 in contact with R pigs and 2 companion donors) and 8 R pigs (in contact with the excluded D pig) were excluded from the analysis as they presented with detectable levels of antibody at baseline (S1 Table). Full viral kinetics and antibody increase patterns were observed only in D pigs. Only partial viral kinetics are available for S and R pigs as they were euthanized before the end of shedding (Fig 2).10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g001Fig 1Experimental design.A) Two seeder (S1 and S2) pigs were infected with MAD device and put in contact 2 days later with two donor (D1 and D2) pigs. After 24 h the seeders pigs were culled and one of the donor pig (D1) is put in contact with a different recipient pig (R1-R8) for 18hr (between 2 pm and 8 am). During the remaining 6hr, D1 is co-housed with donor pig 2 (D2). Recipient pigs were sampled daily during 6 days. Each grey rectangle shows a contact, between S and D and between D and R. B) Contact chamber in which donor and recipients were co-housed for 18 hours every day.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g002Fig 2Individual viral kinetics for seeder pigs (upper left panel), donor pigs (lower left panel) and recipient pigs (right panel).Each grey line represents an individual pig. The black line represents the mean viral shedding titre at each sample time. The error bars represent the standard error of the mean. For the seeder pigs time represents the day post inoculation (dpi) whereas for the donors and recipients time represents day post contact (dpc) with the seeder and donor, respectively. For the recipient pigs, the color of the lines represents the day of contact between the donor and the recipient (since the infection of the donor). The dashed line represents the limit of detection.We recorded a transmission event when a R pig shed virus above the limit of detection at least once. All donor pigs transmitted influenza virus at least once during the 8 days of follow-up (Fig 3 & S2 Fig). The number of transmission events ranged between 1 (transmission experiment 4) and 7 (transmission experiment 11). The average number of transmission events per donor pig was 3.7 ± 0.5 (Table 1 & S1 Fig). In total, 24/24 S pigs, 21/21 D pigs and 43/88 R pigs were infected.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g003Fig 3Individual donor and recipient pigs’ infection kinetics.Each box represents a donor pig. The viral kinetics is represented by a black line. Black triangles represents the average daily shed virus titres on days with transmission event and open circles represent the average daily shed virus titres on day without transmission events. The time since separation of seeder and donor is shown on the x axis. Antibody titers are represented by the grey line. The red filled boxes represent the pigs with baseline antibodies that were excluded from the analysis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.t001Table 1Viral kinetics and transmission events description and predicted from viral kinetic model coupled to the Bayesian logistic regression prediction.For quantitative variables: mean ±se [range], for qualitative variables: number or percentage. Dpi stands for days post inoculation and dpc for days post contact. Predictions: 100 replicates of 11 pigs datasets: average of replicates mean, {5th-95th percentiles of replicates mean}—Not observed; * estimated for 21 donors; ** estimated for the 11 donors in contact with recipients; £: estimated for 41 infected recipients.† fixed in the model.ObservedPredicted (100 replicates)Relative Bias (%)Pig typeSeedersDonorsRecipientsDonorsNumber of pigs24218811†Exposed animals who become infected–%1001004785.8 {72.7–100}-14.2Latent period (dpi/dpc)<12.54±0.28 [1.00–6.25]3.22 [1.00–6.00]£2.20 {1.49–2.70}-15.4* Time to last detected virus titre (dpc)-7.05±0.28 [5.00–8.25]-7.52 {6.56–8.76}+6.7*Duration of shedding (days)-4.51±0.31 [1.25–7.00]-5.33 {4.19–6.88}+18.2*Time to maximal shed virus titre: Tmax (dpc)-4.51±0.32[2.00–8.00]-4.43 {3.81–5.20}-1.8*Maximal shed virus titre: Vmax (log10 pfu/mL)-4.58±0.29 [1.81–6.54]-5.49 {4.27–6.97}+19.9* Generation time: Tg (days)-4.62±0.26 [2.73–7.42]-4.17 {3.56–4.75}-9.7**Time to 1st transmission event (dpc)-2.27±0.33 [1.00–4.00]-1.85{0–5.23}-18.5**Transmission period (days)-3.91±0.49 [1.00–6.00]-3.54 {0–6.00}-9.5**Number of transmission events-3.73±0.49 [1.00–6.00]-4.13{1.00–9.30}+10.7*Onset of antibody production (dpc)-7.84±0.12 [7.00–9.00]-7.55 {7.18–8.09}-3.7Virus shedding and antibody responseThe average daily shed virus titre was above the limit of detection in D pigs for 67/88 D-R contacts. Among these 67 contacts where the D pig was shedding virus, transmission to R pigs occurred on 42/67 (60%) occasions. Only one R pig was infected after being in contact with D pigs with undetected virus shedding: 5R1 (before the onset of detected shedding) (Table 2, Figs 3 and 4A). The number of transmission events correlates with the area under the curve (AUC) of the donor shed virus titre (Kendall’s ρ = 0.94, P<0.0001) (Fig 4A and S2 Fig). On average the first transmission event was observed at 2.27 ± 0.33 dpc (range: 1–4), which is similar to the latent period (2.54±0.30 dpc), which was defined as the time interval between time of inoculation for S pigs or time of first contact for D and R pigs and the time when virus titre was first detected (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g004Fig 4Transmission events and contact shedding.A. Each row represents a transmission experiment. The color of the tiles from the main panel represent the viral titre of the contact donor pig at the start of the in contact period. The side panel represent the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) in log scale. Transmission experiment T03 was excluded due to the presence of antibody in the contact donor pigs at the start of the experiment. B. Contact pig maximal viral titre vs. average daily virus shedding of parent pigs. C. Contact pig viral shedding onset vs. average daily virus shedding of parent pigs. SD and DR stand for Seeder-Donor and Donor-Recipient contact, respectively.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.t002Table 2Bayesian logistic regression result.95% CI stands for 95% credibility interval. R^ is a convergence diagnostic that compares the between- and within-chain estimates for model parameters. We considered that model converged if all R^ are <1.01. ESS stands for effective sample size. We considered that model converged if all ESS > 400.Odds [95% CI]R^ESSStandardized average shed virus titre during the contact period for contact donor (D1) pig—in log scale57.0[10.6–377]1.0025840Standardized contact donor (D1) pig antibody titre at the beginning of contact period0.171[0.002–1.92]1.0013893Standardized recipient pig age at the beginning of the contact period0.259[0.072–0.899]1.0023315Standardized breed (of D and R pigs)0.555[0.138–1.92]1.0014769When virus is detected, transmission events occur more frequently when antibody titre is ≤1:10 than when antibody titre is >1:10 at the first time of contact with 39 out of 56 (69.6%) vs. 1 out of 11 (9.1%) transmission events respectively. When virus is not detected, only one out of 10 (10%) transmission event was observed when antibody titre ≤1:10 and none when antibody titre > 1:10.Prediction of transmission eventsWe fit a Bayesian regression model to estimate the effect of virus and animal properties on the probability of transmission. The best model fits included the following standardized predictors: the average raw shed virus titre of the D pig during the contact period, the D pig antibody titre at the beginning of the contact period, the D and R pigs’ breed and R pig age at time of first contact (Fig 5). The model converged correctly (S2 Fig & Table 2). We evaluated the model fit with leave-one-out cross-validation using Pareto smoothed importance sampling. All Pareto shape parameters were <0.7 and the effective number of parameters was estimated as 3.1 (se = 0.8), lower than the number of parameters. This indicated that the model fits the observations well.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g005Fig 5Probability of transmission according to each estimated effect.A. standardized shed virus titre, B. standardized antibody titre, C. Standardized R pigs’ age at time of first contact, D. Pigs’ breed. Donors antibody titre at time of first contact binned as undetected and quartiles for detectable levels; D. Pig breed. The dots represents empirical observations, the black line represent the expected values of the posterior predictive distribution and the grey area represent the 95% uncertainty interval. The values of non-varying predictors were set as the estimated mean.Parameters estimates are shown as odds in Table 2. The odds associated with the D pig average shed virus titre during the contact period and with R pig age at time of first contact were 57.0 (95% credible interval—95%CI = [10.6 − 377]) and 0.259, (95%CI = [0.0724 − 0.899]), respectively. The model therefore suggests that younger pigs exposed to higher virus titres have greater odds to be infected (Fig 6). For these two parameters, the 95% credible intervals did not contain the value 1, suggesting a possible true effect of D pig shed virus titre during contact and of age.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g006Fig 6Observed transmission rate according to the putative predictors.A. Donor average viral titre during contact period binned by quartile; B. Recipient age at time of first contact binned by quartile; C. Transmission rates were computed as the ratio of transmission events to all contact times for each variable bin.D pigs’ level of antibody titres, on the other hand, tended to decrease the odds of transmitting influenza virus (odds = 0.171). However the 95% credible interval contained the value 1 (95%CI = [0.002–1.92]). Similarly for breed, Landrace pigs tended to decrease the odds of transmitting influenza virus (odds = 0.555). However the 95% credible interval contained the value 1 (95%CI = [0.138 − 1.92]) (Table 2 & Fig 6).Viral shedding and antibody production modelingWe fit a viral kinetics model to D pigs viral shedding titres. We have tried to fit previously developed mechanistic models [12,16–18], however these models failed to converge. We therefore fit simpler phenomenological models independently to viral titre and antibody titre. In the viral kinetics model, we considered two possible profiles of shedding which we called “peaked” (described by the following parameters: latent period, LA, increasing slope, s1A, time from infectious contact to the maximal shed virus titre, Tmax and decreasing slope, s2A) and “plateau” (described by the following parameters: latent period, LB, increasing slope, s1B, time from infectious contact to the begining of the plateau, T1, decreasing slope, s2A and time from infectious contact to the end of the plateau, T2). We did not make any assumption of the individual viral kinetics profiles. The proportion of pigs showing a peaked pattern, p, was unknown and the group to which each pig belongs was defined as the group of highest conditional probability.The best viral kinetics model included an additive error model and random effects on the following parameters: LA, LB, Tmax, T1, and T2. S2 Table shows the maximum likelihood estimates of the parameters. The model fitted well the observed shed virus titres (S2 Fig). The proportion of pigs with a peaked viral kinetics profile was p = 0.475. After a latent period lasting 2.48 days for the peaked and 1.16 days for the plateau profile, shed virus titre increased with slope s1A = 2.17 log10(pfu/mL)/day or s1B = 1.16 log10(pfu/mL)/day until Tmax = 4.25 dpc or T1 = 2.70 dpc, for peaked and plateau, respectively. Shed virus titre decreased with slope s2A = 0.798 log10(pfu/mL)/day after Tmax for peaked responses or with slope s2B = 1.48 log10(pfu/mL)/day after a plateau lasting 2.78 days until T2 = 5.48 dpc (S2 Table). The estimated standard deviation of the random effects are also presented in S2 Table.The estimated onset of antibody production A1 was 5.86 dpc (S2 Table).Natural history of experimental swine influenza virus infectionThe natural history of a disease is described as the course of a pathology from onset to resolution [19] and therefore describes the progression of a disease process in an individual over time, in the absence of treatment.The percentage of exposed animals that become infected and the latent period varied between the different categories (Table 1). The percentage of exposed contacts that became infected was 100% (21/21) for the S-D contacts and 47% (41/88) for the D-R contacts. The latent period lasted <1 day for the S pigs. For D and R pigs that shed virus the mean latent period was 2.54 (range: 1.00–6.25) days and 3.22 (range 1.00–6.00) days respectively. It should be noted that a latent period >6 dpc would not be detected as recipient pigs were euthanized at 6 dpc.The other natural history parameters (time to last detected viral titre, duration of shedding, Vmax, Tmax, onset of transmission, generation time Tg (which is an epidemiological parameter representing the mean interval between infection of a primary case and its secondary cases and onset of antibody increase) were only observed in D pigs. An average maximal shed virus titre Vmax = 4.58 ± 0.29 log10 pfu/ml was observed at Tmax = 4.51 ± 0.32 dpc in D pigs. Virus was detected for the last time at 7.05 ± 0.28 dpc on average leading to an average duration of shedding of 4.51 ± 0.31 days. The resulting area under the curve (AUC) was estimated as 17.1 ± 1.5 log10 pfu/ml. However it is noteworthy that the duration of shedding was right-censored since several pigs did not reach undetectable virus titre at the end of follow up (Fig 3—5D1). The average generation time computed in D pigs was 4.62 ± 0.26 days (range: 2.73–7.42) when computed for shed virus titre in arithmetic scale. Antibody titres were monitored in 19 out of the 21 D pigs (serum samples were not available for pigs 1D2 and 4D2). The latent period and Vmax in contact pigs (i.e. D pig in S-D contact and R pig in D-R contact) were significantly associated with the daily average shed virus titre. Pigs exposed to higher shed virus titres started to shed virus earlier and shed on average higher shed virus titres (Fig 6). The correlation between the daily average shed virus titre in infectious pig and the latent period in contact pigs was τ = -0.66 (Kendall’s correlation test P<0.0001) and the correlation between the daily average shed virus titre and maximum shed virus titre, Vmax in the contact pig was τ = 0.58 (Kendall’s correlation test P<0.0001).Antibody was first detected on average at 7.8 ± 0.5 dpc. At the end of the follow-up (9 dpc), the average antibody titre was 1:120.5 ± 1:82.8.Comparison of predicted and observed natural history parametersTo assess the accuracy of the model predictions, we simulated viral and antibody kinetics over 100 replicates of the original dataset and computed the relative bias between the natural history parameters computed from the original dataset and the simulated datasets.For all natural history parameters, the relative bias varied between -20% and +20% (Table 1 & Fig 7). We predict than only 85.8% of pigs would shed virus above the limit of detection. For the latent period, time to last detected virus titre, duration of shedding, time to maximal virus titre, generation time, time to first transmission, transmission period and onset of antibody production, the predicted values were less than 0.5 day different from the observed value, which is shorter than the duration of contact (18 hr).10.1371/journal.ppat.1008628.g007Fig 7Natural history parameters.Grey dots represent the observed values, red square represent the average simulated replicates mean and the blue intervals, 90%, 95% and 99% prediction intervals computed from 100 replicates of 11 pigs experiments.DiscussionExperimental transmission studies can provide valuable parameter estimates to inform models of disease spread in animal populations. However, the reliability of these transmission studies depends on the animals transmitting virus receiving a challenge consistent with natural exposure in the field. We established a one-to-one transmission model to accurately estimate transmission parameters of H1N1pdm09 virus in pigs. Donor animals were infected by contact with a seeder pig to mimic naturally acquired infection, with the time of infectious contact known. These donor animals were closely monitored with nasal swabs taken twice daily (before and after contact with the recipient) for shed virus titre measurement and blood samples taken daily for antibody titre measurement. Donor animals were in contact for an 18h period with one recipient pig to allow identification of transmission events and avoid an extended exposure window for the recipient animal.We found that seeder pigs were shedding virus at very high titers shortly (<24h) after inoculation, while donor pigs started to shed virus between 1 and 6 dpi/dpc which is consistent with experiments where contact pigs were co-housed with animals inoculated with A/swine/Cotes d’Armor/0388/2009 H1avN1 (clade 1C) strain which started to shed virus between 3 and 7 days [20]. This is also consistent with estimates from outbreaks of A/swine/Cotes d’Armor/0388/2009 (H1avN1), A/Swine/Scotland/410440/94 (H1huN2) and A/Swine/Flandres/1/98 (H3N2) in farms where latent period was estimated as 1.4 to 5 days [20]. Noticeably, the latent period of recipient pigs was more than 16 hr longer than in donor pigs. However, the latent period from D pigs was about 2-fold that observed in human volunteer experimental challenge [12,21].Consequently, the observed time to viral titre peak was also observed later in D pigs than in human experimental infections where it consistently averaged at 2 days post inoculation [12,16,21–23] and the generation time was also longer in D pigs than in human experimental infections where it was estimated as 2.1 or 2.3 days [12,21].The duration of shedding (4.51±0.31 days) was similar with experiments where 10 unvaccinated contact pigs were co-housed with one pig inoculated with A/swine/Cotes d’Armor/0388/2009 H1avN1 shed virus during 4.50±1.07 days [24] but was shorter than previously reported in another study (6.1 days) [25], however in this latter experiment pigs were co-housed during the whole experiment with two seeder pigs and therefore exposed to high level of shed virus titre for a long period. Interestingly, the duration of shedding was also similar to that reported from a review of volunteer challenge studies were A/H1N1 infection lasted on average 4.50 days [21].Overall, compared with seasonal A/H1N1 virus experimental infection studies in humans, during which inoculation was most frequently intranasal with the strain A/Texas/36/91 [12,16,21–23], the D pigs started to shed virus later but the duration of shedding was similar.All these results, suggested that high dose exposure would reduce the influenza latent period. We could not compare the dynamics from human experimental challenge with the S pigs’ influenza dynamics that also received intranasal inoculum because of their short follow-up (2 days).Virus shedding was, as expected, by far the most important predictor of transmission events. However, despite using an experimental set-up designed to maximize the chances of transmission over an 18 hour period, we only observed transmission on 60% of occasions when virus was detected in the D pig. We note that, importantly, estimates of the transmission period are slightly shorter than the duration of shedding (Table 1). This difference appears to be largely accounted by the lack of transmission (given that virus was detected): on 9/10 and 17/56 occasions when neutralizing antibodies were detected and not detected respectively. There was a single instance of transmission in the presence of antibody. However, the estimated effect of antibody titre with Bayesian logistic regression was not significant. From these results, the role of antibodies remains unclear in the case of primary infection, whether they are blocking the exit of the virus or are only a proxy of late stage infection during which the pigs are less infectious.We fit a mixture of segmented linear models with random effects to describe the donor pigs viral kinetics and variability. We considered two viral shedding profiles: peaked (47.5% of donor pigs) and plateau (52.5% of donor pigs). Pigs shedding virus according to the plateau pattern shed more, earlier and for a longer period.We tried and did not succeed to fit mechanistic models as previously used in human, mice and ponies [12,16–18], using mixed effects. This is certainly due to the relatively small number of donor pigs and the high between-subject variability, especially concerning the initial viral titre. In the previous models, the data fitted all came from experimental infection with intranasal inoculation of high doses of virus. Particularly, the latent period in [12] was less variable than observed in the present work. This highlights the importance of developing more realistic transmission experiments.Recipient pigs exposed to high shed virus titres from donor pigs started to shed virus earlier and at a higher level and therefore had a higher probability of transmitting infection. We also found that younger pigs exposed to higher virus titre during the contact period were at higher risk of being infected. We estimated influenza generation time for the first time in pigs at 4.6 days (with low variance). We note that estimated generation time varies slightly with the scale used to quantify virus titre.Epidemic models rely on infection kinetics parameters [26]. We therefore combined the viral kinetics model and the Bayesian logistic regression results to predict transmission events in 100 replicated datasets of 11 donor pig populations and to compute natural history parameters. All natural history parameters were accurately predicted with a limited relative bias. Hence, this approach could be used to model viral kinetics and the risk of transmission to predict outbreaks in pig farms and efficacy of control measures such as quarantine of imported pigs. For instance, as we predicted that the time to last detected virus titre is on average 7.52 days post infection, and is shorter than 8.76 days for 95% of the pigs, several scenarios of quarantine for imported pigs could be tested. The effect of the duration of the quarantine (for instance 7, 10 or 14 days) on the protection of the rest of the farm population could be tested. More elaborate quarantine scenarios could also be investigated where the quarantine duration could be adapted considering the detection and possibly the quantification of viral titre, with a cost-effectiveness analyses.One limitation of our study was that we did not control for the behavior of the donor and contact pigs, though this may have influenced the likelihood of transmission. Our study probably underestimates variability under natural conditions where animals of different ages, socialisation and immune status are co-housed. Also, we cannot determine whether direct contact, aerosols or contact with contaminated surfaces was the most important mode of transmission in our experiments [25,27].There is a critical need to develop better models to understand influenza A dynamics that more closely mimic events in humans. Pigs and humans are infected by the same subtypes of influenza A viruses and integrally connected in the ecology of influenza A viruses [28]. Pigs have similar virus shedding patterns and pathogenesis when infected with influenza A virus and are an appropriate animal model for studying immunity to and transmission of influenza virus [15,29]. Understanding influenza transmission has application for humans and swine with the mutual benefit of reducing the zoonotic threat and increasing output in pig farming. However, it is noteworthy that in humans, most of the transmission events occur between case and contacts who have experienced prior exposure and sometimes have been vaccinated. We did not explore the impact of pre-existing immunity in the present work.To our knowledge, this is the first experimental design of one to one transmission using in-contact infected pigs which allowed us to analyze both viral kinetics and transmission events from animals with naturally acquired influenza virus infection. This allowed us to estimate key parameters including the latent period, duration of virus shedding and onset of antibody production and, to relate these to direct observation of precisely timed transmission events. The design generates much more precise data than can be obtained from the observation of natural transmission events, as in studies of influenza virus transmission in humans [30]. In addition, while we expected that the probability of transmission would depend on viral titre and age, we found that the contact pig virus shedding profile depends on the level of exposure to influenza virus. This should be investigated further to quantify the impact that level of exposure and mitigation measures decreasing this level of exposure have on epidemiological parameters such as the generation time, and therefore the timing and severity of influenza epidemics.Material and methodsEthics statementAnimal experimentation was approved by the Pirbright Institute Ethical Review Board under the authority of a Home Office project licence (70/7505) in accordance with UK Home Office Guidance on the Operation of the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986 and associated guidelines.Transmission experimentsTwelve transmission experiments were performed. Female pigs were used between seven and ten weeks of age (except for transmission 4 where the pigs were 11 weeks and transmission 5 where they were of unknown age). All pigs weighed 18 to 40 kg, were either Landrace or Landrace x Hampshire breed and were obtained from a commercial high health status herd. All pigs were acclimatized for a period of 7 days before the start of the transmission experiment and randomly allocated to become seeders, donors or recipients.Two “seeder” (S) pigs were intranasally inoculated with a mucosal atomization device (MAD) with 1 x107 pfu of MDCK grown A/swine/England/1353/2009 virus (H1N1pmd09), as previously described [13]. Two days post inoculation (dpi), the two S pigs were put in contact with two “donor” (D) pigs for 24 hr to allow natural infection. The S pigs were then removed and culled. After the 24 h exposure, one D pig was chosen randomly, designated as donor 1 (D1), and placed in contact with a different naïve recipient (R) pig each day for 18 hours (between 2pm and 8 am) during an 8 day period (recipients R1 to R8) (Fig 1A). The other D pig was the companion pig to D1 and was designated as D2. This contact took place in a chamber made from perplex with dimensions 2.46 m x 2.46 m and 1.4 m high at 19°C (Fig 1B). During the remaining 6 hours of each day from 8 am to 2 pm, while the contact room was cleaned, the two donor pigs were co-housed in a separate room. The R pigs were removed at 8 am to a separate room and supplied with a companion on welfare grounds (Fig 1). S, D and R pigs were euthanized with an overdose of pentobarbital after 3, 9 and 6 days of follow-up, respectively.Viral load determinationNasal swabs were collected daily for the S and R pigs and twice daily (at 8 am and 2 pm) from D pigs with the exception of transmission 1, where only the 8 am nasal swabs were taken. Two nasal swabs (one per nostril) were placed into 2 ml of virus transport medium comprising tissue culture medium 199 (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 25mM Hepes, 0.035% sodium bicarbonate, 0.5% BSA, penicillin, streptomycin and nystatin, vortexed, centrifuged to remove debris and stored at -80°C for subsequent virus determination.Infectious shed virus titres in nasal swabs were determined by plaque assay on MDCK cells. Samples were 10-fold serially diluted and 100 μl of each dilution added to confluent MDCK cells in 12 or 24 well tissue culture plates. After 1 hr, the plates were washed and overlayed with 2 ml 1:3 2% agarose: medium. Plates were incubated at 37°C for 48 hrs and plaques visualized using 0.1% crystal violet.Blood samples were collected daily from the 24 D pigs and were not collected from S or R pigs. The microneutralization assay was carried out as previously described with the following modifications [31]. Pig sera were heat inactivated for 30 min at 56°C. Dilutions of heat-inactivated pig sera in 50 μl starting at 1:10 were added to 50 μl of homologous H1N1pdm09 and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The following antibodies were used to stain the fixed monolayer, first layer mouse anti-NP monoclonal antibody Clone AA5H IgG2a (BioRad) followed by the secondary polyclonal goat anti-mouse Ig HRP antibody (Dako). Titers were defined as the serum dilution resulting in 50% reduction in NP expression.Estimation of transmission probabilityWe used a Bayesian logistic regression to quantify the effect of each putative predictor on DR transmission events. We included the following putative population predictors: average shed virus titre (computed from the arithmetic scale) of the D pig during the contact period, D pig antibody titre at the beginning of the contact period, D and R pigs’ breed, R pig age at time of first contact.Inputs were standardized following Gelman’s recommendations [32,33]. The priors were set as Cauchy distributions of scale 2.5 [33]. We fitted the model using 4 MCMC chains of 10,000 iterations with 10% burn-in. To assess model convergence, we visually inspected each parameter trace looking for a “hairy caterpillar” aspect. Effective sample size > 400 were considered as acceptable. We also performed leave-one-out cross-validation using Pareto smoothed importance sampling implemented in the brms package [34,35].Antibody and viral kinetics modelingTo model antibody kinetics, we used a segmented regression with mixed effects described by 2 parameters, A1 and A2 representing the time to antibody production and the slope of increasing antibody titre, respectively.Influenza shed virus titre (in pfu/ml) and antibody titre were log10- and log2-transformed for subsequent analysis, respectively. To model viral kinetics, we used a mixture of segmented regressions with mixed effects. We call zi the label of the structural model for pig i, with M1 for “peaked” (M1) and M2 for “plateau”. In the peaked model, after a latent period lasting LA, shed virus titres increase from below the limit of detection to the maximum shed virus titre Vmax occurring at time Tmax according to the slope s1A and then decreases according to a slope s2A. In the plateau model, after a latent period lasting LB, shed virus titre increases from below the limit of detection to the maximum shed virus titre Vmax according to the slope s1B. Shed virus titre remains at Vmax during the plateau between T1 and T2, and then decreases according to a slope s2B.We estimated the vector of fixed effects (μ), the inter-individual variance-covariance matrix (Ω), the variances (σV and σA, respectively) of the additive error terms for viral kinetics (VK) and antibody kinetics (AK) models and the vector π = (πM1, πM2) of probabilities for each virus shedding profile (M1 or M2 here). The random effects and error terms were assumed to follow N(0,ω),N(0,σV) and N(0,σA), respectively. We call θ = (μ, Ω, σV, σA, π) the vector of population parameters.The individual parameters were estimated as empirical Bayes estimates. More specifically, the group to which each individual pig belongs was estimated as the group of highest conditional probability: zi^=argmaxmP(zi=m|,yi,θ), where zi^ is the estimated structural model of pig i, m = {M1, M2} is the label of the structural model, yij is the observed shed virus titre of pig i and θ is the vector of population parameters [36,37].We censored shed virus titres at the detection limit of 1 pfu/mL and antibody titres at the detection limit of 1:10. For model parameters with a random effect, we assumed that parameters for individual pigs were lognormally distributed about a population log-mean value, with an estimated standard deviation describing the random effect.Viral kinetics model parameters were estimated using the SAEM (Stochastic Approximation of Expectation Maximization) algorithm implemented in Monolix2018R1 [38]. In a first step, we estimated the parameters with the simulated annealing version of the SAEM algorithm to find the global maximum of the likelihood. During the second step, we re-estimated the parameters using the estimates from step 1 as initial values. We performed model selection using an Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) to determine which kinetics parameters should have random effects, using the rule “the smaller the better”.Experimental swine influenza virus infection natural history parametersWe considered that pigs were infected if virus was detected from the nasal swab. In D pigs this was confirmed by the detection of antibody at the end of the experiment.The natural history of a disease refers to the time course of a disease in the absence of treatment and more specifically to the latent period/incubation, duration of shedding, maximal shed virus titre (Vmax), time to Vmax, onset of transmission, generation time, proportion of exposed contacts who becomes infected [39,40].We defined the latent period as the interval between inoculation or contact and first detection of virus. The duration of shedding is the interval between the onset of shedding and the last sample time when virus is detected. We defined the onset of antibody production as the time interval between the infection of a pig and the first time antibody is detected. It is noteworthy that the times to first and last virus detection and to first antibody detection are interval censored, therefore the observed latent period is an upper limit whereas the duration of shedding is a lower limit. For instance, the moment of first detectable virus occurred at an unknown time during the time interval between the last sample when shed virus titre was undetected and the first sample when it was detected. Therefore, considering first detection of virus for the definition of latent period means that we consider the upper limit of this time interval.We considered that a transmission event occured when virus is detected at least once in one of the recipient (R) pigs. We therefore defined the onset of transmission as the time interval between the infection of an individual and the first time when a transmission event is observed from this individual. Here, the onset of transmission and duration of transmission are upper and lower limit values respectively.Generation time, Tg is the period of time between the onset of virus shedding in a primary case and the onset of infectiousness in a secondary case infected by the primary. It has been assumed that the probability to observe a transmission from a D to an R pig at time t, also called infectiousness is proportional to D1 pig’s viral shedding at t, V(t) [21,41]. We call k1 the proportionality constant. We also assumed random contacts between contact donor (D1) and R pigs (i.e. homogeneous mixing independent of infection time course, with a contact rate k2). Hence, the probability of observing a transmission event at time t is given by: P(E = 1│t) = k1k2V(t).The total amount of virus shed by a D pig is given by the area under the curve, AUC=∫0+∞V(x)dx. Therefore, we can compute the generation time Tg as the expectation of P(E = 1│t) by integrating P(E = 1│t)t with respect to t and normalized by the total rate of transmissions over time, which is k1k2AUC. Dropping the constants k1 and k2 leads to the following expression:
Tg=∫0+∞t×V(t)AUCdtAll integrals were computed using the trapezoidal rule as implemented in the caTools package [42]. We presented the estimates as mean ± standard error (se) for quantitative variables.Assessing model predictions accuracyTo assess the accuracy of the model predictions, we simulated viral and antibody kinetics over 10 days for 100 datasets of 11 pigs, using the mlxR package. Individual parameters were sampled from the estimated population distribution.Using the viral kinetic profiles simulated for the 11 pigs in each replicated dataset, we simulated the transmission events for each day according to the Bayesian logistic regression estimates.We then computed the natural history parameters for the 100 replicates and compared their distributions to the parameters computed directly from the observations. To quantify the accuracy of our predictions, we computed the relative bias as E[θ^]-θθ, where θ^ is the mean of the parameter computed from the simulated data for a given replication, E[θ^] is the expectation of the within-simulation mean across the 11 simulated viral kinetics of parameter and θ the observed mean parameter computed from the original dataset.Supporting informationS1 TableCharacteristics of pigs with baseline antibody.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableViral kinetics and antibody kinetics population parameter estimates.rse stands for relative standard error. The fixed effect represent the average population parameter value and the random effect represents the between pig variability.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S1 FigBayesian logistic regression parameters.Left panels: posterior distribution. Right panels: convergence traces.(TIFF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigViral kinetics model fit.Observations are shown by the grey dots and best fit curves by the black lines. Each box represents a donor pig.(TIFF)Click here for additional data file.S1 FileRaw data.(ZIP)Click here for additional data file.S2 FileModeling support (R codes and Monolix models).(ZIP)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Pathogenesis and Transmission of a Reassorted H1 Influenza A Virus Detected in North American Swine

1IntroductionInfluenza A virus (IAV) causes illness ranging from asymptomatic infection to severe pneumonia and death in various domestic and wild animal species and humans [1]. Three IAV subtypes, H1N1, H1N2, and H3N2, are endemic in swine populations worldwide, with significant diversity in the hemagglutinin (HA), neuraminidase (NA), and the remaining six gene segments [2]. The diversity of swine IAVs presents a significant obstacle to pandemic risk assessment and control of the virus in swine. A primary reason for this diversity is that pigs are natural hosts to swine‐adapted strains and may also be permissive for avian‐ and human‐origin IAVs [3]. The observed genetic and antigenic diversity reflects the dynamic evolutionary path of endemic swine IAVs, driven by reassortment with avian‐ and human‐origin IAVs introduced into swine over the past century [4]. This diversity contributes to zoonotic transmission to humans and increases the risk of a second swine‐origin pandemic [5, 6, 7].There are two IAV lineages within the H1 subtype that cocirculate in the United States [8]. These include the 1A classical swine lineage, derived from the 1918 human pandemic virus, which has been circulating in swine populations for over a century [9], and the 1B human seasonal lineage, derived from pre‐2009 human seasonal spillovers that became established in swine populations [8]. The 1A lineage includes the 1A.3.3.2 genetic clade that caused the 2009 H1N1 pandemic (H1N1pdm09) [10] and, along with four additional genetic clades (1A.1.1.3, 1A.4, 1A.3.3.2, and 1A.3.3.3), represents nearly 45.6% of all public IAV detections in US swine between 2022 and 2025 [11]. Swine H1 viruses may be paired with NA genes of either the N1 or N2 subtype, both of which reflect interspecies spillovers and subsequent transmission and evolution in swine. Within the N1 subtype, there are genes that share ancestry with the 1918 H1N1 virus (N1.classical) or genes that are associated with the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus (N1.pdm) [12]. The N2 subtype detected in swine is associated with different H1N2 or H3N2 human‐to‐swine spillover events that have persisted and reassorted with endemic swine H1 viruses; these N2 genes are grouped by their year of introduction into swine (N2.1998, N2.2002, and N2.2016) [13, 14]. These endemic swine IAV surface protein genes are paired with six other genes that have genetic diversity reflected by interspecies transmission from birds and humans to swine and onward transmission in pigs following reassortment. These genes are categorized using an evolutionary lineage: TRIG (T), representing the triple‐reassortant virus detected in the 1990s [15]; H1N1pandemic (P), reflecting genes associated with the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus [16]; and a live attenuated influenza virus vaccine briefly used in the United States [17]. Over the past decade, 29 different internal gene constellations have been detected in U.S. swine. Within the H1 subtype alone, 24 patterns have been identified, with one genome constellation, TTTPPT, representing 52.6% of all swine IAV detections [11]. Although few studies quantify the impact of the internal genes on virus phenotype [18, 19], evidence suggests that different gene pairings affect transmission efficiency and that reassortment in these genes spurs diversification of surface proteins.The detection frequency of the H1N1 and H1N2 genetic groups of viruses in the United States varies annually, but the 1A.1.1.3 clade detection has increased in recent years, reaching 14.2% in 2022–2023 and then 21.4% in 2023–2024 [11]. Moreover, clade 1A.1.1.3 was the most frequently detected HA clade in the United States in 2023 [11]. The increase in 1A.1.1.3 detection frequency in 2021 coincided with multiple reassortment events, primarily involving the NA gene [11]. Prior to 2021, the 1A.1.1.3 HA gene was primarily paired with an N2 subtype gene from the N2‐2002B lineage [11]. However, between 2022 and 2024, the H1 1A.1.1.3 HA clade was increasingly paired with N1‐classical and N1‐pdm genes, and its detection frequency rose substantially [11]. For example, the frequency of the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐classical pairing increased by 33% from January 2022 to January 2024 [11]. During the same interval, the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm pairing increased by 2.4%, and pairing with N2‐2002B rose by 2.8% [11]. These HA–NA gene pairings tended to maintain the same six internal genes.In this study, we hypothesized that the increase in the detection frequency of the 1A.1.1.3 clade was driven by the acquisition of new NA genes that generated novel viruses with increased IAV transmission efficiency in swine. The NA gene of IAV enhances transmission efficacy by enzymatically cleaving mucins to increase contact with the respiratory epithelium [20, 21] and by removing immature virions from the surface of infected cells through destruction of sialic acid receptors [22, 23]. Additionally, immunity to the NA protein may contribute to protection [24], and antigenically novel NA genes could influence detection frequencies by reducing the protective impact of prior exposure or vaccination [12]. We evaluated representative strains from four distinct HA–NA gene pairings among the 1A.1.1.3 IAVs that circulated in 2022–2023, including the historically dominant N2‐2002B pairing, in a swine pathogenesis and transmission study. We demonstrated that different pairings of 1A.1.1.3 HA with different NA subtypes did not affect transmission efficiency. Although there was variation in the titers of viral nasal shedding across the groups, all IAV strains were transmitted to the indirect contact pigs. Our data suggest that reassortment to acquire new NA genes unlikely affected detection frequency of the 1A.1.1.3 due to transmission phenotype. We suggest that the increase in 1A.1.1.3 may instead be determined by the antigenic novelty of the N1 genes, the host immune landscape driven by prior exposure or vaccination, or agricultural practices that move pigs and viruses across the landscape, allowing for random reassortment events and viral dispersion. These data demonstrate that although reassortment alters genetic diversity, there was not a simple association between reassortment and transmission efficiency [25]. In conclusion, our findings highlight the relevance of characterizing reassorted IAVs to understand the viral and host factors that influence transmission dynamics and detection patterns in North American swine populations.2Materials and Methods2.1Genetic Analysis and Strain SelectionWe used the octoFLUdb database (https://github.com/flu‐crew/octofludb) to query and classify all genetic sequences collected as part of the USDA IAV in swine surveillance system. This provided evolutionary lineage or clade classification for the HA and NA clades, as well as internal gene constellations using the octoFLU classifier [26]. We extracted HA and NA sequences associated with the H1 clade 1A.1.1.3, resulting in n = 593 HA–NA pairs collected between January 1, 2013, and May 31, 2023. The extracted HA and NA sequences were aligned separately using MAFFT v7.475 [27], and phylogenetic trees were inferred using FastTree v2.1.11 [28] under the generalized time‐reversible (GTR) model of nucleotide substitution with 20 gamma‐distributed rate categories [29]. We analyzed the reassortment history between the HA and NA gene segments among the 593 strains using TreeSort v0.1.6 [30]. To select representative 1A.1.1.3 HA–NA gene pairings, we used PARNAS v0.1.6 [31] with the HA phylogeny as input. We selected one representative strain that included a N2‐2002B to reflect the 1A.1.1.3 clade prior to reassortment and three post‐reassortment representative strains: one 1A.1.1.3 paired with an N1‐classical gene segment and two 1A.1.1.3 representatives paired with N1 genes derived from the 2009 H1N1 pandemic lineage (pdm09). An N1‐pdm09 representative A/swine/Missouri/A02861328/2023 H1N1 was a field isolate with reports of notable clinical disease (Phillip Gauger, personal communication). All selected strains were collected in 2022 and 2023 and shared a conserved internal genome constellation of TTTPPT. This genome constellation reflects different evolutionary lineages and is presented in the order of PB2‐PB1‐PA‐NP‐M‐NS, with each letter representing either triple reassortant origin (T) or H1N1 pandemic origin (P) genes. TTTPPT was the dominant internal gene constellation among 1A.1.1.3 clade viruses with whole‐genome sequence data collected between January 1, 2013, and May 31, 2023.2.2VirusesThe representative H1 1A.1.1.3 IAV isolates were obtained from the National Veterinary Services Laboratories (NVSL). The viruses used in this study were from the following HA and NA clades: 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B (A/swine/Ohio/A02750994/2022 H1N2), 1A.1.1.3/N1‐classical (A/swine/Indiana/A02750630/2022 H1N1), and 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm (A/swine/Missouri/A02750646/2022 H1N1 and A/swine/Missouri/A02861328/2023 H1N1). The viruses were propagated in Madin‐Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells grown in Opti‐MEM (Life Technologies, Waltham, MA, USA). The virus growth media contained antibiotics and antimycotics and 1 μg/mL of tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)‐trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ, USA). The NA activity of the viruses was assessed using an enzyme‐linked lectin assay (ELLA) [32], and results were expressed as EC50 values, representing the virus dilution that produced 50% of maximal NA activity in the linear range. Briefly, high‐binding 96‐well plates were coated with fetuin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) to allow binding. Viruses were diluted to a starting titer of 106 TCID50 per mL, and twofold serial dilutions were prepared in supplemented Dulbecco's phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS). Diluted viruses were added to the coated plates and incubated for 16–18 h at 37°C. After incubation, plates were washed to remove unbound virus. Peanut agglutinin (PNA) (Sigma‐Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (HRPO, Sigma) was added to detect exposed sialic acids released by NA activity. Following incubation and washing, o‐phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD, Sigma) was added to generate a colorimetric signal. The reaction was stopped after 10 min with 1 N H2SO4, and absorbance was read at 650 nm. ELLA results were plotted as the log2 of the virus dilution divided by 10 on the x‐axis and the optical density (OD) on the y‐axis to calculate EC50, which was then reverse transformed to a reciprocal titer. Hemagglutination activity was assessed to determine the viral HA units. Viruses diluted to 106 TCID50/mL were added to a V‐bottom plate and serially twofold diluted. A 0.5% red blood cell (RBC) suspension was added to each well. After 30‐min incubation at room temperature, the highest dilution showing visible agglutination was recorded as the HA titer for standardized comparison across all virus samples in this assay. Each virus was tested in duplicate in a biosafety level 2 (BSL‐2) laboratory.2.3Swine‐to‐Swine Transmission Study DesignSixty‐five weaned, healthy pigs of mixed sex were confined in an ABSL‐2 containment facility at the National Animal Disease Center (NADC) in accordance with an approved US Department of Agriculture (USDA)—Agricultural Research Service (ARS) National Animal Disease Center (NADC) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Protocol. Pigs were confirmed to be free of porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) and of IAV antibodies. Before transport, pigs received prophylactic treatment with ceftiofur (Excede; Zoetis, Florham Park, NJ, USA) at the source farm, in accordance with label dosage, and received enrofloxacin (Baytril; Bayer Animal Health, Shawnee Mission, KS, USA) after arrival to resolve or prevent bacterial infections. Prior to the start of the study, serum was collected and tested for antibodies against influenza A nucleoprotein (NP) by a commercial enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (AI MultiS‐Screen kit, IDEXX, Westbrook, ME, USA) to confirm the absence of preexisting immunity from previous exposure or passively acquired maternal antibodies. Pigs were randomly assigned to four experimentally inoculated groups (n = 10) and one naïve control group (n = 5). Each animal was given a unique identification number and placed in separate confinement rooms. Pigs received a subcutaneous radio‐frequency microchip (Deston Fearing, Dallas, TX, USA) for daily body temperature monitoring, with readings recorded prior to IAV exposure for establishing a baseline.Primary pigs were inoculated intranasally (1 mL) and intratracheally (2 mL) with 105 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50)/mL of each assigned virus diluted in PBS in a separate ABSL‐2 containment room per virus group [23]. Inoculation was performed under sedation using an intramuscular injection of a cocktail consisting of ketamine (8 mg/kg of body weight), xylazine (4 mg/kg), and Telazol (6 mg/kg) (Zoetis Animal Health, Parsippany, NJ, USA). At 2 days post inoculation (DPI), five indirect contact pigs were placed in a separate deck approximately 91 cm from the deck housing the inoculated group in each ABSL‐2 containment room to evaluate indirect respiratory (airborne) transmission. Pigs were observed daily for respiratory clinical signs. To assess virus replication, nasal swab (NS) (FLOQSwabs, Copan Diagnostics, Murrieta, CA, USA) samples were collected from 0 to 5 DPI for inoculated pigs and from 0 to 5 days post contact (DPC), then on 7 and 9 DPC for indirect contact pigs, following methods previously described [33]. To evaluate lung lesions, inoculated pigs were then humanely euthanized with a lethal dose of pentobarbital (Fatal‐Plus, Vortech Pharmaceuticals, Dearborn, MI, USA) and necropsied at 5 DPI, as previously described [34]. Postmortem samples included bronchoalveolar fluid (BALF), trachea, and right cardiac or affected lung lobe. Indirect contact pigs were humanely euthanized at 14 DPC. Figure 1 shows a diagram of the study design.FIGURE 1Diagram of study design. Ten pigs per group were inoculated intranasally and intratracheally with each assigned virus. Five indirect contact pigs were housed in a deck separated by approximately 91 cm within the same room of each inoculated group at 2 DPI. Timeline of sample collection and necropsy is shown.To confirm indirect transmission to contact pigs, sera from indirect contact pigs collected at 14 DPC were analyzed by hemagglutination‐inhibition (HI) assay and ELISA. Prior to the HI assay, sera were treated with a 20% Kaolin suspension (Sigma‐Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), heat‐inactivated at 56°C, and adsorbed with 50% turkey RBC using standard techniques [35]. Reciprocal titers were divided by 10‐fold, log2‐transformed, and reported as the geometric mean. To assess antigenic relationships among the four viruses, cross‐HI assays were performed. Sera from five pigs from each of the four virus exposure groups were tested against all four viruses. Antigenic similarity was inferred when the difference in HI titer between homologous and heterologous virus–antiserum pairs was less than fourfold.2.4Virus Replication and SheddingNS and BALF samples were titrated on confluent MDCK cells to assess viral replication in the nasal cavities and lungs, as previously established [34]. The cytopathic effect (CPE) of MDCK‐inoculated monolayers was assessed 48–72 h post‐infection. Monolayers were fixed using 4% phosphate‐buffered formalin and stained via immunocytochemistry (ICC) with an anti‐influenza A NP monoclonal antibody [36]. Virus titers (TCID50/mL) were calculated for each sample according to the Reed and Muench method [37]. NS samples that tested positive by virus isolation but negative by virus titration were confirmed using the qPCR VetMAX‐Gold SIV Detection Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Samples were analyzed by qPCR with a standard curve ranging from 10 to 1,000,000 copies per μL. The detection limit for virus titration was 0.5 log10 TCID50/mL.2.5Pathological ExaminationThe percentage of the lung affected by the purple‐red consolidation typical of IAV was assessed after the lungs were removed during necropsy at 5 DPI [34]. The percentage of pneumonia on the lung surface was visually evaluated for each lobe. Weighted proportions of each lobe relative to total lung capacity were used to compute the total percentage of lung involvement [38]. Tissue samples from the trachea and lungs were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for histopathologic analysis and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Using previously established criteria [39], a veterinary pathologist, blinded to treatment groups, evaluated microscopic tracheal lesions and assigned a combined tracheal lesion score on a scale of 0–8. The same veterinary pathologist evaluated microscopic lung lesions and assigned a combined lung lesion score on a scale of 0–20 [40].2.6Microbiological AssaysBALF samples were screened for aerobic bacterial growth on blood agar and Casmin (NAD‐enriched) plates to detect possible coexistence of bacterial pneumonia. Samples were screened for other respiratory pathogens, such as PRRSV, porcine circovirus types 2 and 3 (PCV2 and PCV3), and 
Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae
 (VetMax, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) by qPCR [20] following the guidelines provided by the manufacturer.2.7Data AnalysisStatistical analysis to compare different treatment groups was performed using analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a significance level of p < 0.05 using Graph Pad Prism 8 Software (GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA). Variables that exhibited significant differences among treatment groups were further analyzed through pairwise mean comparisons using the Tukey–Kramer test. Reciprocal HI titers were converted to a log2 scale, geometric means were calculated, and means transformed back to reciprocal geometric mean titers. Neuraminidase EC50 values for each virus were determined using a Log(agonist) versus response curve in Graph Pad Prism 8, with the log2 virus dilution plotted on the x‐axis and the OD on the y‐axis. EC50 titers were extrapolated from the resulting dose‐response curve for each virus.3Results3.1H1 1A.1.1.3 Reassortment and Genomic EvolutionAmong the swine IAV strains collected between January 2022 and May 2023, the 1A.1.1.3 HA gene was paired with five different NA clades, including three distinct N2 clades (1998B, 2002A, and 2002B) [41] and two N1 clades (N1.classical swine lineage and N1.pdm09) [12]. We identified 17 reassortment events involving the 1A.1.1.3 HA switching to a different NA clade (Figure 2). The estimated HA–NA reassortment rate was 0.073 events per year per virus, which is approximately 2.5 times higher than the general HA–NA reassortment rate for swine H1s previously reported [30]. Previously, the 1A.1.1.3 HA was predominantly paired with N2 genes [11], whereas a shift occurred in the 2022–2023 time period, and the N1 gene is now the most frequently detected pairing with this HA [43]. To understand whether this shift was linked to changes in virus phenotype, we selected four representative strains, one representing the previously dominant H1N2 subtype and three representing H1N1 strains with two different N1 lineages (Figure 2). The four viruses exhibited NA activity within a twofold difference when standardized to a starting titer of 106 TCID50/mL, with N2‐2002B exhibiting an EC50 reciprocal titer of 275, followed by N1‐classical with 266, N1‐pdm‐MO/23 with 164, and N1‐pdm‐MO/22 with 152. All four viruses also displayed similar HA activity with N2‐2002B and N1‐classical reciprocal titers of 256 HA units and N1‐pdm‐MO/22 and N1‐pdm‐MO/23 reciprocal titers of 128 HA units.FIGURE 2Evolutionary history of H1 subtype influenza A virus in swine from the 1A.1.1.3 hemagglutinin group collected in the United States between January 2022 and May 2023. The branches of the tree were colored by the associated NA clade assigned by smot v0.16.0 [42]. The strains selected for this study were annotated on the tree by stars with the color of the star reflecting the evolutionary lineage of the neuraminidase gene. Stars indicate the following viruses: MO/23 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm (A/swine/Missouri/A02861328/2023 H1N1), MO/22 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm (A/swine/Missouri/A02750646/2022 H1N1), OH/22 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B (A/swine/Ohio/A02750994/2022 H1N2), and IN/22 1A.1.1.3/N1‐classical (A/swine/Indiana/A02750630/2022 H1N1). The selected strains represent three distinct NA clades that were most frequently associated with 1A.1.1.3 hemagglutinin across this time period.3.2Lower Respiratory Tract Pathology and Viral Detection in the Lungs of Inoculated PigsThe percentage of macroscopic lung lesions, viral titers in BALF, and microscopic lung and tracheal lesion scores in inoculated pigs at 5 DPI are presented in Figure 3. The 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B virus induced a significantly higher percentage of macroscopic lung lesions in pigs (14.3 ± 8.7) compared to all other groups, except for N1‐classical (8.8 ± 4.6) (Figure 3A). The average percentage of macroscopic lesions was low in pigs inoculated with 1A.1.1.3 paired with N1‐pdm‐MO/22 (4.7 ± 2.1) or N1‐pdm‐MO/23 (3.3 ± 2.6), and these values were not statistically different from the NC group. All challenged groups exhibited similar high virus titers in the lungs, with no significant differences between groups (Figure 3B). Pigs inoculated with 1A.1.1.3/N1‐classical, 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/22, or 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B exhibited moderate microscopic lung lesions, whereas those inoculated with N1‐pdm‐MO/23 presented mild lesions (Figure 3C). Pigs inoculated with A.1.1.3 paired with either N1‐classical or N2‐2002B showed moderate microscopic tracheal lesions, whereas pairing with N1‐pdm‐MO/22 or N1‐pdm‐MO/23 resulted in mild lesions (Figure 3D).FIGURE 3Macroscopic lung lesions, viral titers in BALF, and scores of microscopic lung and tracheal lesions in pigs inoculated with 1A.1.1.3 representative strains paired with N2‐2002B, N1‐classical, N1‐pdm‐MO/22, or N1‐pdm‐MO/23 at 5 DPI. (A) Percentage of lung affected with purple‐red consolidation; (B) viral titers in BALF; (C) scores of microscopic lung lesions (0–20); and (D) scores of microscopic tracheal lesions (0–8). Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM), with individual pigs represented by scattered dots. Bars that do not share lowercase letters indicate statistically significant differences between group means at p < 0.05. NC, negative control.3.3Nasal Virus Shedding in Inoculated PigsAll pigs inoculated with 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B shed virus at all time points, with group mean titers of 4.3, 3.8, 4.5, 4.0, and 3.4 log10 TCID50/mL on 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 DPI, respectively (Figure 4). Similarly, all pigs inoculated with 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/22 shed virus at every time point, with group mean titers of 3.3, 3.7, 2.9, 3.4, and 3.2 log10 on 1–5 DPI, respectively. In the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐classical group, two pigs did not shed virus on 1 DPI; however, all pigs shed virus from 2 to 5 DPI, with group mean titers of 4.0, 4.5, 4.2, and 3.7 log10 on 2–5 DPI, respectively. Three pigs inoculated with 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/23 shed virus on 1 DPI, resulting in a low group mean titer of 0.5 log10. On 2 DPI, nine out of 10 pigs shed virus, and all pigs shed virus from 3 to 5 DPI, with group mean titers of 2.9, 2.0, 3.2, and 3.2 log10, respectively. There were no significant differences in viral shedding among the four groups on 2, 4, and 5 DPI. However, because only three pigs shed N1‐pdm‐MO/23 on 1 DPI, the group mean titer for this group was significantly lower than that of the other groups (0.5 log10 vs. a combined average of 3.4 log10). Similarly, on 3 DPI, the N1‐pdm‐MO/23 group had a significantly lower group mean titer compared to the N2‐2002B and N1‐classical groups (2.0 log10 vs. a combined average of 4.5 log10) but was not statistically different from the N1‐pdm‐MO/22 group (2.9 log10).FIGURE 4Viral titers in nasal swabs from inoculated pigs collected from 1 to 5 DPI with IAVs. (A–E) Data from 1 to 5 DPI, respectively. Numbers above the error bars indicate the number of positive pigs out of the total number in each group. Bars that do not share lowercase letters indicate statistically significant differences between group means at p < 0.05. Values are presented as mean log10 TCID50/mL titers ± SEM.3.4Transmission to Indirect Contact PigsNS viral titers were assessed in indirect contact pigs from 0 to 5 DPC, as well as at 7 and 9 DPC (Figure 5). No virus shedding was detected on 0 or 1 DPC, and these time points are not shown. The three viruses displayed different levels of transmissibility to indirect contact pigs. In the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐classical group, one out of five indirect contact pigs shed virus at 2 DPC with a titer of 0.5 log10 TCID50/mL; two out of five pigs shed virus at 3 DPC with an average titer of 1.5 log10; and all five pigs shed virus at 4 and 5 DPC, with an average titer of 3.1 log10 and 4.9 log10, respectively. Although all indirect contact pigs remained infected afterward, the average titer decreased markedly to 2.6 log10 at 7 DPC and 0.5 log10 at 9 DPC. In summary, at least one contact pig in the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐classical group was positive at every time point, totaling 23 positive samples throughout the experiment.FIGURE 5Evidence of transmission in indirect contact pigs. (A–F) Viral titers in nasal swabs of indirect contact pigs following infection with IAVs, measured from 2 to 5 DPC, then again at 7 and 9 DPC. Values are shown as mean log10 TCID50/mL titers ± SEM. Numbers above the error bars indicate the number of positive indirect contact pigs out of the total in each group. Different lowercase letters indicate significant difference at p < 0.05. (G) Antibody response in indirect contact pigs at 14 DPC, measured by HI assay. Values are shown as mean log10 geometric mean titers ± SEM. Numbers above the error bar depict the number of seropositive pigs out of the total in each group. Bars that do not share lowercase letters indicate statistically significant differences between group means at p < 0.05.In the 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B group, three out of five indirect contact pigs shed virus at low levels at 3 DPC, with an average titer of 2 log10 TCID50/mL, and no virus shedding was detected at 2 DPC. All five indirect contact pigs shed virus at 4 DPC, with a peak average titer of 5.2 log10. The average titer declined gradually over the remainder of the study, reaching 4.1 log10 at 5 DPC, 3.3 log10 at 7 DPC, and 1.1 log10 at 9 DPC. Although titers decreased sharply, particularly at 9 DPC, all indirect contact pigs continued to shed virus at the final three time points. To summarize, at least three indirect contact pigs housed with 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B‐inoculated animals tested positive at every time point except 1 and 2 DPC, when no virus shedding was detected, totaling 23 positive samples.In the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/22 group, two out of five indirect contact pigs shed virus at 3 DPC, with an average titer of 1.6 log10 TCID50/mL. All five indirect contact pigs shed virus at 4 DPC with an average titer of 4.1 log10, and viral titers increased at 5 DPC, reaching a peak of 5.4 log10. Although all indirect contact pigs shed virus until the end of the study, viral titers decreased significantly, dropping to 3.7 log10 at 7 DPC and 0.9 log10 at 9 DPC. None of the N1‐pdm‐MO/22 indirect contact pigs shed virus at 2 DPC. However, two indirect contact pigs began shedding at 3 DPC and continued through the end of the study, yielding a total of 22 positive samples.All indirect contact pigs in the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/23 group shed virus at 4 DPC, with a peak average titer of 2.9 log10 TCID50/mL. The average titer then decreased to 2.5 log10 on 5 DPC, with four out of five indirect contact pigs shedding virus. Viral titers continued to decline on 7 DPC, with all indirect contact pigs testing positive at an average of 1.6 log10. By 9 DPC, the average titer was 0.1 log10, with only one pig shedding virus. None of the indirect contact pigs in the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/23 group shed virus on 2 or 3 DPC. However, most began shedding by 4 DPC and continued until the end of the study, resulting in a total of 15 positive samples.All pigs from all indirect contact groups seroconverted by 14 DPC (Figure 5G). Antigenic phenotypes among the four challenge strains were assessed by HI assay and comparison between homologous and heterologous geometric mean titers of the five seroconverted indirect contact pigs in each group. The difference in HI titer between homologous and heterologous virus–antiserum pairs was less than fourfold, meaning that no significant antigenic differences were observed among the four viruses (Table 1).TABLE 1Antigenic relationships among the four viruses by hemagglutination inhibition assays.AntigensN2‐2002B
a

N1‐classicalN1‐pdm‐MO/22N1‐pdm‐MO/23A/swine/Ohio/A02750994/20221607021180A/swine/Indiana/A02750630/20228010612153A/swine/Missouri/A02750646/202216080243106A/swine/Missouri/A02861328/202324361160121
a
Antisera in columns from five indirect contact exposure pigs at 14 DPC. Results are shown in reciprocal geometric mean titers. Homologous titers are highlighted in gray.DiscussionSwine populations harbor a diversity of endemic IAVs, and cocirculation patterns reflect virus fitness, the host immune landscape, and the ecology of modern agricultural production. Evolutionary dynamics such as reassortment and immune‐driven antigenic drift result in viruses distinct from IAVs in human populations and represent a zoonotic threat [44, 45, 46]. A recent risk assessment of North American H1 IAVs in swine found almost no cross‐reactivity in human sera to the 1A.1.1.3 swine virus. This clade was also the most antigenically distant from the human vaccine strains [11, 46]. Understanding what factors affect the detection frequency of 1A.1.1.3 swine viruses in the United States can facilitate the control of the virus in swine populations and enhance pandemic preparedness and risk assessments. In this study, we evaluated the pathogenesis and transmission in pigs of the 1A.1.1.3 HA gene paired with an N2‐2002B, the most frequently detected NA pairing prior to reassortments detected in increasing frequency after 2021, and three post‐reassortment pairings: an N1‐classical and two N1 pandemic lineage genes derived from human seasonal introductions (pdm09‐classical human influenza viruses from the 2010s). Our data suggest that different pairings of the 1A.1.1.3 HA with N1 genes did not enhance IAV transmission in swine. For the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/23, transmission kinetics was negatively impacted by the N1pdm23 pairing. These findings suggest that the increased detection frequency of the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade was driven by other factors, such as population immunity arising from differential vaccine use and composition, previous exposure, or variation in ecological and production practices.All IAV strains inoculated the pigs and were transmitted to the indirect contact pigs. Infection in contact pigs was confirmed by HI titers ranging from 40 to 320. In line with our findings, a previous study conducted by our group found that the 1A.1.1.3 swine virus achieved 100% transmission from pigs to ferrets, with all ferrets both shedding the virus and seroconverting [47]. However, one virus showed lower replication efficiency, 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/23, compared to the other groups, as only one inoculated pig shed virus at 1 DPI (Figure 4A). This decreased viral shedding in the inoculated pigs likely delayed transmission to the indirect contact pigs, as pigs in this group began shedding virus 1 day later post‐contact than those in the other groups (Figures 5B and 4C). However, despite the decreased transmission kinetics, the 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/23 strain was eventually transmitted to all indirect contact pigs, as confirmed by positive geometric mean titers (average of 2.4 log2) (Figure 5G). The 1A.1.1.3/N1‐pdm‐MO/23 strain reproduced to comparable levels in the lungs of inoculated pigs compared to other virus groups, suggesting a possible preference for the lower respiratory tract compared to nasal epithelium for this strain.The other two 1A1.1.3/N1 viruses replicated in the upper respiratory tract and transmitted similarly to the 1A.1.1.3/N2‐02 strain (Figure 3). Although all viruses infected pigs and replicated efficiently in the lungs, 1A.1.1.3/N2‐2002B and N1‐classical strains produced more macroscopic lung lesions than the other groups (Figure 3). Previous investigations have reported a similar discordance between the percentage of lung lesions and viral replication in the lungs [48, 49]. The reason for the discordance remains unclear and requires further investigation, as several factors influence influenza pathogenesis, including induction of inflammation, infectivity, virulence, and replication efficiency—for example, the balance between HA binding and NA cleavage activities [50]. The NA and HA activity results were consistent with the viral titers in BALF, microscopic lung lesions, and tracheal lesion scores, all showing no significant differences among the viruses. However, N2‐2002B exhibited a higher macroscopic percentage of lung consolidation compared to N1‐pdm‐MO/22 and N1‐pdm‐MO/23, suggesting that N2‐2002B may induce greater inflammation, though these differences require further investigation. Specific gene segments, along with the combination and balance of multiple genes, collectively modulate influenza A viral fitness (e.g., replication and transmission) and phenotype [25]. A previous study used a human‐seasonal H3N2 virus and a swine H3N1 virus to assess the contributions of gene combinations to IAV replication and transmission in swine [7]. The study showed that a swine‐adapted HA gene alone enabled replication in the lungs, regardless of the NA or internal gene constellations of the two genotypes paired with it. However, efficient replication in the upper respiratory tract and transmission to indirect contact pigs depends on specific combinations with NA and/or internal genes. The glycoproteins HA and NA recognize sialic acid and exhibit complementary functions. HA binds sialic acid on host cells through its receptor‐binding site to initiate viral infection, whereas NA facilitates the release of new virions by cleaving sialic acid residues from the cell surface. The balance between HA (binding) and NA (cleavage) exhibits considerable flexibility, and its regulation has a greater impact on viral replication and interspecies transmission than either HA affinity or NA activity independently [51]. For example, viral release would be hampered if HA bound sialic acid with excessively high affinity or if NA were inactive, as seen when inhibitors were present [50]. Additionally, HA and NA continuously evolve through a series of amino acid substitutions. If these changes disrupt the existing HA–NA balance, they could lead to alterations in one or both glycoproteins, affecting viral fitness [52, 53].Viruses with increased detection frequency should be investigated to understand how the interaction between HA and NA combinations impacts IAV transmission in swine. In our study, reassortment to acquire a new N1 gene did not explain the expansion of the 1A.1.1.3 HA clade in the swine population. The increased detection frequency of the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade is also unlikely to be due to antigenic drift, as the four strains were antigenically similar (based on cross‐HI data showing < 4‐fold changes). Instead, the rise in detection frequency of this clade may be attributed to external contributors focused on host and environmental factors, including variations in vaccine use and composition, prior exposure histories, and differences in production practices and ecological conditions. The TTTPPT constellation increased in detection frequency within the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade, rising from 22.2% in 2018–2019 to 27.6% in 2019–2020, becoming the most detected constellation in the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade for the first time [11]. In the following years, the TTTPPT constellation continued to increase in detection, comprising 83.3% of the detections within the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade in 2024–2025 [11]. When evaluating all IAV clades, the detection frequency of the TTTPPT constellation significantly increased from 24.6% in 2018–2019 to 75.8% in 2024–2025 [11]. Given the higher detection frequency of the TTTPPT constellation in the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade, this constellation might be associated with the increased fitness of the IAVs used in our study [25]. The characteristics necessary for a virus to spread effectively and establish itself in pig populations are largely unclear and most likely relate to the entire genome. Routine whole‐genome sequencing can help predict when an HA–NA combination will increase or decrease in detection frequency by identifying internal genes or constellations that have been shown to impact transmission or represent unique pairings.Our study indicated that different pairings of 1A.1.1.3 HA with N1 subtype clades that all contained TTTPPT genotypes did not show a difference in pathogenesis or improve transmission efficiency over the N2‐02 pairing, as all three N1 viruses infected 10 primary pigs and were transmitted to five indirect contact pigs per group. Consequently, the increased detection frequency of the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade could be due to the immunological landscape of the swine population or variations in production methods and ecological conditions. Future research incorporating serologic analyses, such as HI assays using field sera, will be crucial to assess the importance of population immunity in driving the dynamics of 1A.1.1.3 virus detection. Moreover, given the higher detection frequency of the TTTPPT constellation currently present in the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade, it is plausible that this constellation might be associated with the increased fitness of the four HA–NA pairings in the strains used in our study in a similar manner observed with the constellation paired with an H3 subtype HA gene [25]. It is imperative to elucidate the mechanisms by which reassortment and evolutionary events give rise to more transmissible IAV strains and how these alterations influence the detection frequency of the H1 1A.1.1.3 clade. Understanding the mechanisms that facilitate the evolution and persistence of IAVs in swine populations is essential for the development of targeted health interventions aimed at mitigating viral transmission between pigs and from pigs to humans.Author Contributions
Débora B. Goulart: investigation (lead), formal analysis (lead), writing – original draft (lead). Carine K. Souza: formal analysis (supporting), writing – review and editing (equal). Giovana C. Zanella: formal analysis (supporting), writing – review and editing (equal). Celeste A. Snyder: formal analysis (supporting), writing – review and editing (equal). Janice C. Zanella: formal analysis (supporting), writing – review and editing (equal). Alexey Markin: investigation (equal), data curation (lead), writing – original draft (supporting). Bailey Arruda: formal analysis (supporting), supervision (equal), writing – review and editing (equal). Tavis K. Anderson: conceptualization (equal), supervision (equal), writing – review and editing (equal). Amy L. Baker: conceptualization (equal), funding acquisition (lead), investigation (equal), project administration (lead), resources (lead), supervision (lead), writing – review and editing (equal).FundingThis work was supported in part by the USDA‐ARS (ARS project number 5030‐32000‐231‐000D); USDA‐APHIS (ARS project numbers 5030‐32000‐231‐104‐I and 5030‐32000‐231‐111‐I); the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services (Contract No. 75N93021C00015); the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (contract numbers 21FED2100395IPD and 24FED2400250IPC); and the SCINet project of the USDA‐ARS (ARS project number 0500‐00093‐001‐00‐D). Participants were supported in part by an appointment to the Agricultural Research Service (ARS) Research Participation Program administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) through an interagency agreement between the US Department of Energy (DOE) and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA). ORISE is managed by ORAU under DOE contract number DE‐SC0014664 The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.Ethics StatementThis study was approved by the USDA‐ARS National Animal Disease Center Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.


Title: Transmission of H7N9 influenza virus in mice by different infective routes

BackgroundOn 19 February 2013, the first patient infected with the novel influenza A H7N9 virus from an avian source showed signs of sickness. More than 347 laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported in mainland China, with 109 cases resulting in death. Most cases of H7N9 infection have occurred in elderly men who had recently been exposed to live poultry. Patients with laboratory-confirmed H7N9 infections had an exposure history that included direct contact with respiratory secretions or fecal material. Exposure to live poultry is a case-fatality risk associated with influenza A H7N9 virus infection [1–6]. Live bird markets are suspected of being the source of human infections; shutting down live poultry markets resulted in an immediate reduction in cases [7]. There is a precedent for the human transmission of H7 influenza, with limited person-to-person transmission observed in an H7N7 outbreak in the Netherlands in 2003 [8]. Three suspected family clusters of cases were reported [9], indicating the possibility of limited human-to-human transmission of the H7N9 virus [10].Previous studies have reported aerosol transmission of the H7N9 virus among ferrets [11]. Other researchers have used a mouse model to study contact-dependent transmission of influenza A virus [12]. We evaluated the transmission of the H7N9 virus in mice to provide insights into potential human transmissibility.ResultsPathogenicity of influenza virus strains in miceMice were infected with influenza A/Anhui/1/2013 virus (106.25–108.25 TCID50) to determine the LD50 and survival of H7N9 in mice (Figure 1a). The LD50 values of the three viruses we investigated were 107.5, 101, and 104.8 TCID50 for H7N9, H5N1, and H1N1, respectively. At a dose of 106 TCID50, mice infected with H5N1 or H1N1 virus died during the observation period (Figure 1b). After inoculation with the H7N9 virus at 106 TCID50, weight loss was observed at 2 days post inoculation (dpi; Figure 1c); the average weight loss at 7 dpi was greater than 30%. Mice infected with the H7N9 virus at 106 TCID50 exhibited weight loss from 2 dpi but recovered around 8 dpi.Figure 1
Avian influenza virus H7N9 (A/Anhui/1/2013) infects mice. (a) LD50 of A/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9). Representative results of three doses (108.25–106.25 TCID50) are shown. (b) Survival comparison of mice infected with H5N1, H1N1, or H7N9 viruses. (c) Percentage initial weight loss in mice infected with 106 TCID50 of H7N9 (A/Anhui/1/2013). Data are presented as the average values from two independent experiments ± SD (n =10 per group).Virus titers in the tissues of infected mice administered 106 TCID50 of virus were determined using MDCK cells. Viable virus was detected in the lungs of mice infected with any of the influenza viruses from 1–7 dpi (Additional file 1: Table S2). Virus was transiently isolated from the liver, kidneys, and intestines of H5N1- or H7N9-infected mice, but not H1N1-infected mice (Table 1). The virulence of the H7N9 virus was less than that of the H5N1 virus. Viable virus was detected in the brains of 33% (2/6) of H7N9-infected mice at 2 dpi. The distribution of viruses in tissues was assessed using immunohistochemistry incorporating a mouse monoclonal antibody against the influenza HA nucleoprotein (1:200 dilution). Following H7N9 infection viable antigens were primarily located within epithelial cells of the bronchi and alveoli in the lungs, epithelial cells of the intestine, renal tubules in the kidney, and gliocytes in the brain (Figure 2a). H5N1 antigens were also detected in the brain parenchyma (Figure 2a). Viral antigens were mainly detected in the lungs of H1N1-infected mice (Figure 2a). Confluent interstitial pneumonia, necrosis of epithelial cells of the bronchi and alveoli, inflammatory cell infiltration, congestion, and fibrin exudation were observed at 3 and 5 dpi in lung tissues (Figure 2b).Table 1
Virus titers in the tissues of infected mice
Virus
a
Days post-infectionVirus titer (log
10TCID
50 ± SD)HeartLiverSpleenLungKidneyIntestineBrainNoseA/CA/07/09 (H1N1)5NPd
-b
+4.83 ± 1.7---NPA/SZ/406H/06 (H5N1)5NP3.62 ± 1.11.62 ± 0.233.50 ± 1.921.17 ± 0.321.38 ± 0.272.17 ± 0.41NPA/Anhui/1/2013 (H7N9)1---4.00 ± 1.20---3.50 ± 1.382-0.811.505.50 ± 1.902.00-+c
2.50 ± 0.753-0.75-5.00 ± 1.85--2.50 ± 0.755---6.00 ± 2.15-0.86 ± 0.13-3.50 ± 1.387---3.50 ± 1.77-0.75-2.00 ± 0.38
aMice were infected with influenza viruses at a dose of 106 TCID50.
bViable virus was not detected after three passages in MDCK cells.
cCyotpathic effects were observed but TCID50 values were less than 0.5.
d
NP, Not performed.Figure 2
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis of infected mice. (a) Distribution of H7N9, H5N1, and H1N1 viruses in the tissues of infected mice as determined by IHC. Representative viral antigen distribution in tissues at 3 dpi is shown. Viral antigens are denoted with solid arrows (400× magnification). (b) Hematoxylin and eosin stain (HE) staining of lung tissues from infected mice (100× magnification).H7N9 influenza virus transmission in miceWe sought to determine whether mice infected with the H7N9 influenza virus could transmit virus to naïve mice in close contact. At 24 h post-inoculation (hpi), seven H7N9-naïve mice were introduced into the same cage as three intranasally infected mice (107 TCID50). We detected virus in the lungs and intestines of the initially uninfected mice that were placed in contact with mice exposed to H7N9 or H1N1 virus. We were unable to detect H5N1 in either tissue (Table 2).Table 2
Transmissibility of H7N9 influenza virus in mice put in contact with infected mice
VirusVirus titer (mean log
10TCID
50 ± SD)LungKidneyIntestineBrainNoseInfected contact mice
b
Weight loss (%)
c
Seroconverted
d
Days post-infection575 and 75755A/SZ/406H/06 A/CA/07/09-NPa
-f
--NP0002.07 ± 0.161.47 ± 0.19NP---+8/14114/7A/Anhui/1/20131.26 ± 0.410.67 ± 0.01-1.34 ± 0.250.97 ± 0.01+e
+7/1463/7
a
NP, Not performed.
bNumber of contact mice containing virus in the lung, brain, and nose at 5 and 7 days after co-housing.
cMaximum proportional weight loss.
dHI titers >40.
eCyotpathic effects were observed but TCID50 values were less than 0.5.
fViable virus was not detected after three passages in MDCK cells.All mice (6/7) exposed to the H7N9 virus exhibited weight loss; the maximal loss observed in one mouse was 6% (Table 2). Around 43% (3/7) of mice exposed to the virus became infected (Table 2). Viable virus was detected in the brain of one mouse and in the nose of another mouse (Table 2). Approximately 6/7 mice exposed to H1N1 exhibited weight loss; the highest level of weight loss approached 11% (Table 2). Of the mice exposed to H1N1, 57% (4/7) became infected (Table 2). In the tissues of the naïve mice that were co-housed with H7N9-infected mice, viral antigens were primarily located in the lung and intestine, similar to their localization in infected mice (Figure 3a). However, virus titers in contact mice were lower than those in the infected mice. Mild lesions were observed in the tissues of naïve mice that were placed in contact with infected mice after 3 days. A dilated area of interstitial pneumonia and congestion were observed in lungs 7 days after contact with infected mice (Figure 3b). We detected antibodies against H7 viruses in seven naïve mice 14 days after contact with infected mice; we also detected H7N9 virus in 3/7 naïve mice (Table 2).Figure 3
H7N9 virus is transmissible among mice by direct contact. Seven naïve mice were placed in direct contact with three mice infected with 106 TCID50 of H7N9 virus. (a) IHC observations in tissues of mice exposed to H7N9-infected mice. Viral antigen distribution in tissues at 5 days following exposure to infected mice. Viral antigens are denoted with solid arrows (400× magnification). Viral antigens are within the epithelial cells of the bronchi and small intestinal villi, and within infiltrating inflammatory cells of the small intestine. (b) HE staining of lung tissue from mice that came in contact with H7N9-infected mice (100× magnification). At 3 days after coming into contact with infected mice, mild dilation of the interstitial pulmonary vasculature was observed in the lungs; congestion was observed after 7 days.Secretions from mice infected with H7N9 influenza virusTo evaluate the infectious secretions of H7N9-infected mice, we collected eye and pharyngeal secretions from inoculated mice at 1, 2, and 3 dpi and inoculated them intranasally into mice. Virus was detected in the lungs and intestinal tissues of mice inoculated with the ES-2 inoculum derived from eye secretions, but not with the ES-1 or ES-3 inocula. Virus was detected in the lungs and intestinal tissues of mice administered the TS-1 (throat swab), −2, or −3 inocula. Virus was detected in the lungs and intestines of mice inoculated with feces from H7N9-infected mice (Table 3).Table 3
Viable virus in naïve mice inoculated with eye, nasal, or fecal samples
Virus sample typeVirus titer (mean log
10TCID
50 ± SD)LungIntestineNoseES-1---ES-21.17 ± 0.300.94 ± 0.62-ES-3---TS-11.20 ± 0.300.94 ± 0.62-TS-21.02 ± 0.650.86-TS-30.860.86-F0.860.86-Transmission route of H7N9 in miceWe tested different transmission routes in contact mice. When using ES inocula, viable virus was detected in the intestines at 2 days, and in both the lungs and intestines at 4 days. Virus antigens were detected in the lungs, stomach, and intestines. TS inoculum was injected into the tail veins of the mice, and viable virus was detected in the same tissues as for the ocular route of administration. Following virus transmission by the fecal-oral route, virus was detected in the nasal passages, trachea, intestines, and lungs; viral antigens were detected in the lungs, stomach, and intestines (Table 4). At 5 dpi, viral antigens were detected in mice infected via the oral route, primarily within the epithelial cells of the lungs, gastric mucosa, and intestinal mucosa, and in infiltrating inflammatory cells of the small intestine (Figure 4). At the same time point, we also observed limited interstitial pneumonia and inflammatory cell infiltration, degeneration and necrosis of mucosal and gastric epithelial cells, vacuolar degeneration of the epithelial cells of the villi, and degeneration of the small intestine.Table 4
Detection of viable virus following inoculation of naïve mice via different routes
Route of administrationDaysVirus titer in tissue (TCID
50 ± SD)Viral antigen distribution in tissuesNoseTracheaIntestineLungLungStomachIntestineOral3-------52.132.711.803.57 ± 1.132/32/32/3Intravenous3--1.802.89 ± 0.782/32/32/35--1.80--1/31/3Eye3--2.05--1/31/35--1.801.801/31/31/3Figure 4
Transmission of influenza H7N9 virus among mice. Naïve mice were inoculated with throat secretions collected from infected mice. At 5 dpi, viral antigens were found in epithelial cells of the lungs, gastric and intestinal mucosa, and in infiltrating inflammatory cells of the small intestine (solid arrows; 400× magnification). At 5 dpi, limited interstitial pneumonia and inflammatory cell infiltration, degeneration and necrosis of epithelial cells in the gastric mucosa, and vacuolar degeneration of epithelial cells in small intestine villi was seen (100× magnification).DiscussionA second wave of H7N9 viral infections in humans occurred in 2014 across China, with over 50 deaths recorded in 1 month. The Chinese government enforced a temporary closure of live poultry markets in affected provinces, resulting in an immediate reduction in the number of human cases. This provided further evidence of the role live poultry markets play in the spread of the virus, and clearly showed that closure of the markets was an effective control strategy [7]. However, the transmission routes of the H7N9 virus remained unknown, therefore it was still considered a serious threat to human health worldwide [13].The mouse is a typical model used to evaluate the virulence of influenza viruses, and in its quantitation. It has been reported that a murine model can be used to study contact-dependent transmission of the influenza A virus [12]. In the current study, H7N9 virus-infected mice displayed symptoms of lethality, with pathological changes seen in mice that came in contact with infected mice. We conducted a study on the aerosol transmission of H7N9 in ferrets [11], and used a murine model to study other potential routes of transmission.Our results indicated that the novel H7N9 virus could efficiently replicate in mice without prior host adaptation. We inoculated BALB/c mice intranasally with A/Anhui/1/2013 to determine H7N9 virus replication, morbidity (as measured by weight loss), and the LD50 in mice. The LD50 titers for the H7N9 virus were lower than those for H5N1 and H1N1 viruses. Mice inoculated with H7N9 virus showed severe morbidity (30% weight loss), a value comparable to that seen for HPAI H5N1 and H1N1 virus infections, which have a high pathogenicity phenotype in this model. Our findings were similar to those reported in previous studies [14]. The H7N9 virus was detected in extra-respiratory intestines, liver, spleen, kidneys, and brains of infected mice, with viral antigen detected in the same tissues. Weight loss was used as a measurable outcome and a marker of virulence following virus infection in these mice [15–20]. In our study, the duration of H7N9 virus infection in mice was about 12 days, a similar duration to that seen with human H7N9 infections (4–11 days) [15, 21–23]. Virus was detected at higher titers in the lungs than in nasal samples (Table 1). From our transmission experiments we found that virus titers in the lungs of co-housed mice at 5 dpi were higher than those at 7 dpi, with the proportion of infected mice higher than at 7 dpi (Table 2). Results with the H7N9-infected mice were similar to those for H1N1-infected mice. It was previously reported that an avian H7N9 virus effectively replicated in mice with minimal symptoms and that the virus could be transmitted in mice without any pathogenic effects observed [24]. Our results indicate that the H7N9 virus could be transmitted in mice, however weight loss and ruffled coats were observed. The virus was detected at different time points and in several tissues, although virus titer was low.The transmission of H7N9 influenza virus in ferrets has been shown to occur via aerosols and respiratory droplets [11, 14]. Our results show that the H7N9 influenza virus can also be transmitted between mice via eye secretions (Table 4). Virus in the lung tissues was detected at 4 dpi following ocular administration of ES inocula in mice.Eye and pharynx secretions, and feces from infected mice proved to be infectious via mucosal, intravenous, and oral routes. Virus was present in lung and intestinal samples (Table 3); at 3 and 7 dpi, mild dilatation of the interstitial pulmonary vasculature was observed in the lungs (Figure 3b). Pathological changes in the lungs were milder in naïve mice than in the infected mice; this difference positively correlated with the amount of virus detected in naïve mice.Our results indicate that influenza virus can be detected in secretions from the eyes, throat and feces. Virus titer was higher in throat secretions than from eye secretions or fecal samples. Secretions from H7N9-infected mice are able to transmit virus by the ocular, oral, and blood-borne routes. An understanding of viral pathogenesis and of the several transmission routes of the virus would allow for various interventions in animals to prevent a future human pandemic [25].ConclusionViable virus was found in secretions from the eyes and oral cavities of mice infected with the H7N9 influenza virus. The H7N9 virus was transmitted to contact mice by several routes, including the mucosal and fecal-oral routes. We have provided some leads for interpreting transmission of the novel H7N9 influenza virus in humans.Materials and methodsVirusesInfluenza virus A/Anhui/1/2013 was isolated from a patient with a laboratory-confirmed human A (H7N9) virus infection. The patient was a 35-year-old woman who lived in the Anhui Province of China. On day 6 after the onset of illness, she developed acute respiratory distress syndrome, septic shock, and acute renal damage; the patient died 13 days later [1]. A throat swab (TS) was collected from the patient and propagated in the allantoic sac and amniotic cavity of 9–11-day-old embryonic chicken eggs. The propagated virus was then passaged once in Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells. A Q226L (H3 numbering) substitution at the 210-loop of the HA gene was found in this virus. This site has been shown to change receptor binding from avians to humans, possibly increasing the ability of the virus to be transmitted by airborne routes [26]. In addition, the virus encoded PB2 627 K, which is essential for efficient replication of avian influenza viruses in mammals. The highly pathogenic avian influenza A (H5N1) virus A/Shenzhen/406H/06 and 2009 pandemic A (H1N1) virus A/California/07/2009 were also isolated from two patients and propagated in embryonic chicken eggs and MDCK cells. The A (A/Shenzhen/406H/06; H5N1) and 2009 pandemic A (A/California/07/2009; H1N1) viruses were obtained from the University of Hong Kong. MDCK cells were maintained in Eagle’s minimal essential medium (EMEM, Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 IU/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and were incubated at 37°C/5% CO2.H7N9 influenza virus in miceMurine studies were performed in an animal biosafety level 3 (ABSL3) facility using HEPA-filtered isolators. All procedures in this study involving animals were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Institute of Laboratory Animal Science, Peking Union Medical College (ILAS-PC-2013-006).The 50% mouse lethal dose (LD50) of the virus was determined by intranasally inoculating five groups of mice (n =10 mice per group) with 10-fold serial dilutions of the virus in a volume of 50 μl. The LD50 was calculated by the method of Reed and Muench [27]. The H5N1 A/Shenzhen/406H/06 and H1N1 A/CA/07/09 strains were used as controls. Mice were infected with 106 TCID50 of H7N9, H1N1, or H5N1 virus to compare the virulence of strains.We anesthetized female 4-week-old mice using isoflurane, and then inoculated them intranasally with the appropriate virus. Heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidney, intestines, brain tissue specimens and turbinate samples were collected from mice and placed into 10% (w/v) phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) on 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 dpi (Additional file 2: Table S1). Viruses were titrated in MDCK cells and virus titer was expressed as TCID50, as per the Reed-Muench method. We euthanized six mice for every virus at each time point. Additionally, three mice were sacrificed for every virus at each time point, with lungs, intestines, and brain tissues collected for immunohistochemical and pathological analysis. The remaining 10 mice in each group were observed daily for weight loss and mortality until 14 dpi.Murine model of H7N9 virus transmissionThree groups of mice were used in this study. For each group, three 4-week-old BALB/c mice were infected, and seven naïve mice were placed in direct contact with infected mice (Additional file 2: Table S1). The three infected mice were lightly anesthetized and inoculated intranasally with 50 μl of 107 TCID50 virus in PBS as previously described. At 24 hpi, all materials in the cage were replaced and sterilized, and the seven naïve mice (co-housed mice) were placed in the same cage. The seven co-housed mice were observed daily, with detailed recording of clinical signs and weight loss continuing until 14 dpi. To monitor viral shedding, nasal washes were collected from seven co-housed mice at 3, 5, and 7 dpi. One group of mice was used for each time point. We dripped 50 μl of PBS into the nose of each mouse; the liquid was then allowed to fall back into a collection tube. This was repeated three times. The seven co-housed mice were then euthanized at 3, 5, and 7 dpi. The lungs, kidney, brain, and intestines were collected, and immersed into 1 ml of PBS. Virus titers in the tissues were determined using MDCK cells as previously described [27]. The number of co-housed mice that became infected was calculated by determining the virus titer in the lungs, brain, and nose at 5 and 7 days after co-housing. Pathological examination of the lungs and intestines occurred on days 3 and 7. Sera were obtained from co-housed mice on 14 dpi to confirm seroconversion using hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays with 0.5% chicken erythrocytes.Secretions from H7N9-infected miceTo collect eye secretions (ESs), a swab pre-wetted with PBS was used to wipe the eyes of six mice (5–7 wipes) at 1, 2, and 3 dpi, and then placed into 1 ml of PBS. Throat swabs (TSs) were collected from inoculated mice at 1, 2, and 3 dpi, and transferred to 1 ml of PBS. The ESs and TSs were vortexed and centrifuged (300 g, 10 min), and the supernatants filtered. Five pellets of fecal (F) samples from inoculated animals were collected at 5 dpi and placed into 10% (w/v) PBS, vortexed, and centrifuged (300 g, 10 min). Supernatants were then filtered. The liquid from the ES, TS, and F samples were used to intranasally inoculate mice on days 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Six inoculated mice were then euthanized at 4 dpi (Additional file 2: Table S1). Tissues from the lungs, nasal cavity, and intestines were collected in 1 ml of PBS. Viral titers in tissues were determined using MDCK cells as previously described.Transmission route of H7N9 in miceConjunctival secretions from H7N9-infected mice were used to wipe the eyes of twelve naïve mice (Eye). Pharynx secretions were injected into the tail veins (150 μl per mouse) of naïve mice (IV). The secretion was concentrated using a hyperfiltration tube (Millipore Amicon). The virus titer of conjunctival secretions was 103.8 TCID50, while that for pharynx secretions was 103.8 TCID50. Similar virus titers were seen for the fecal suspensions. Six naïve mice were given the fecal suspensions from H7N9-infected by gavage administration (Or; 200 μl per mouse). Six mice infected through Or, Eye and IV routes were autopsied at 3 and 5 dpi. Three mice were used for the isolation of lung, tracheal, and intestinal tissues for pathological and histochemical examinations at 5 dpi. Three mice were used to obtain nasal washes and lung tissues to determine virus titers at 3 and 5 dpi (Additional file 2: Table S1).Virus titrationsVirus titrations were performed by end-point titration in MDCK cells. MDCK cells were inoculated with 100.5-fold serial dilutions of homogenized tissues, nasal washes, and TSs. At 1 hpi, cells were washed once with PBS and incubated in 200 μl of infection medium (EMEM, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 1 μg/ml TPCK-trypsin). At 3 dpi, supernatants of infected cell cultures were tested for agglutinating activity using turkey erythrocytes as an indicator of cellular infection. Infectious titers were calculated from five replicates using the Reed-Muench method [27].Histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC)Animal necropsies were performed according to standard protocols. Samples for histological examination, comprising formalin-inflated lungs, were stored in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned (4-μm thickness). The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) for examination by light microscopy, or via an immunohistochemical method using a monoclonal antibody against the nucleoprotein of influenza A virus. All slides were examined by a pathologist with 10 years’ experience, and results were confirmed by a second pathologist.HI assaysStandard HI assays were performed on post-exposure mouse sera using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes against homologous virus. Sera were collected from inoculated or naïve mice at 14 dpi or 14 days after coming into contact with infected mice, respectively, and tested for the presence of H7N9-specific antibodies.Statistical analysisDifferences in body weight, viral copy numbers, and virus titers among groups were analyzed by one-way ANOVA and post-hoc Bonferroni correction. Differences between two groups were analyzed by Student’s t-test using SPSS 11.5. A P-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.Electronic supplementary materialAdditional file 1: Table S2: Virus titers in the lungs of infected mice. NP, Not performed. bDays post-infection. cMice were infected with viruses at a dose of 106 TCID50.
(DOCX 38 KB)Additional file 2: Table S1: Experimental mouse groups used in this study. (DOCX 37 KB)


Title: Effect of D222G Mutation in the Hemagglutinin Protein on Receptor Binding, Pathogenesis and Transmissibility of the 2009 Pandemic H1N1 Influenza Virus

IntroductionThe 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza virus spread from its first detection in humans in March 2009 to all populated continents in a matter of weeks, causing over 18,000 laboratory-confirmed deaths reported to WHO in over 215 countries [1]. Although the WHO assessed the impact of the H1N1 pandemic as moderate since the majority of infected patients experienced mild influenza-like illness (www.who.int), the 2009 H1N1 virus caused a wide spectrum of influenza-related complications in children less than 5 years of age, pregnant women, and those with certain underlying comorbidities [2], [3], [4], [5]. Although preexisting immune status and underlying chronic medical conditions are recognized risk factors for severe disease, the viral molecular determinants governing virulence of the 2009 H1N1 virus are poorly understood.Previous studies on highly pathogenic influenza viruses have contributed to the identification of numerous molecular markers associated with adaptation to human hosts and increased virulence and transmissibility, including key amino acids at the 627 and 701 positions in PB2 and the presence of full-length PB1-F2 and NS1 proteins [6], [7], [8], [9]. However, the analysis of 2009 H1N1 viruses revealed an absence of these known molecular determinants, underscoring the virus-specific nature of such determinants and the existence of as yet unrecognized molecular features that contributed to the establishment of the 2009 H1N1 virus as a pandemic strain with moderate virulence [10]. A potential virulence marker associated with 2009 H1N1 viruses was first identified among patients in Norway, with a change from aspartic acid to glycine at position 222 (D222G) in HA1 present in 18% of clinical specimens from patients with severe disease but in 0% of those from mild cases [11]. Subsequent reports from cases worldwide further strengthened this association [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. These retrospective analyses have found that cases bearing the D222G mutation were more likely to be associated with severe pneumonia, admission to intensive care facilities, and death [18]. Several studies in in vitro and in vivo models have examined the role of D222G in 2009 H1N1 virus virulence with varying outcomes. The majority of studies have reported that presence of D222G is sufficient to enhance virus replication and lethality in mouse models, with this effect ranging from modest to pronounced [19], [20], [21]. However, other groups have not observed substantial differences between wild-type and D222G viruses in mouse or ferret models [22], indicating the need for further investigation into the role of D222G in virulence of 2009 H1N1 pandemic viruses.The location of position 222 in the receptor binding site of HA predicts that alteration of this position would influence the binding specificity of a virus bearing this mutation [23]. Recent studies have reported that the D222G mutation confers enhanced binding to α2-3 linked sialic acids, suggesting a greater ability to bind to lung cells in the lower respiratory tract in humans and cause an exacerbation of disease [22], [24]. In the present study, a 2009 H1N1 virus A/California/04/09 (CA/04) was mutated to generate the HA D222G mutation in order to study the role of D222G in pathogenesis and transmission in both ferret and mouse models. A dose-dependent direct binding glycan array analysis of virus carrying the D222G HA mutation showed observable changes in binding to glycans terminated by both α2-6 and α2-3-linked sialic acids. Although the presence of this mutation did not cause a significant increase in pathogenesis and transmission in ferrets, it caused heightened virulence of this virus in mice and exhibited enhanced replication in human respiratory cells in comparison to the wild-type CA/04 virus.ResultsEffect of D222G mutation on the receptor binding properties of HAAsp222 in the wild-type CA/04 HA is a characteristic residue predominantly found in human-adapted H1N1 viruses. This residue has been shown to play a key role in providing optimal contacts with the penultimate Gal sugar in glycans terminated by α2-6-linked sialic acid [25], [26]. Therefore a D222G mutation is likely to affect the molecular contacts of this key residue position with the glycan receptor. It was demonstrated previously that an analogous mutation in the prototypic 1918 pandemic (A/South Carolina/1/1918 or SC18) HA resulted in shifting its glycan receptor-binding from high specificity for α2-6 sialylated glycans to a mixed binding to both α2-6 (albeit at a lower affinity than wild-type HA) and α2-3 sialylated glycans [27], [28].To investigate the effect of D222G mutation on glycan-receptor binding properties of CA/04 virus, we analyzed the binding of both wild-type and mutant virus in a dose-dependent fashion to representative α2-3 and α2-6 sialylated glycans on a glycan array platform (Figure 1). Our analysis showed that D222G mutation resulted in a modest reduction in the binding avidity to α2-6 sialylated glycans (6′SLN and, to a lesser extent, 6′SLN-LN) in comparison with the wild-type virus. The notable difference in glycan-binding properties was the substantial increase in binding of D222G mutant virus to α2-3 sialylated glycans (relative to its α2-6 binding) compared with that of wild-type virus. These results with CA/04 virus are consistent with previous observations demonstrating an increase in α2-3 binding of other 2009 H1N1 viruses carrying the D222G mutation [24].10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.g001Figure 1Dose-dependent glycan array-binding of CA/04 D222G virus.Dose-dependent binding of CA/04 D222G (A) or wild-type CA/04 (B) virus to representative α2-3 and α2-6 sialylated glycans on the glycan array. The y-axis shows percentage of maximum binding signal intensities. In both cases saturation binding signals were observed at viral titers of 128 HAUs. The chemical description of glycans is provided in Table S1. The 6′SLN-LN glycan is representative of the predominant glycan motifs expressed in the human upper respiratory tract.Effect of D222G mutation on pathogenesis and respiratory droplet transmissionA recent study demonstrated that the introduction of D222G in a 2009 H1N1 virus did not alter the pathogenicity or transmissibility of a 2009 H1N1 isolate A/Netherlands/602/09 in ferrets [22]. However, the use of a parental strain which already possesses a highly transmissible phenotype may limit the ability to identify additional molecular changes which could confer enhanced transmissibility [29]. In contrast, the 2009 H1N1 CA/04 virus, which exhibits reduced transmissibility in the ferret model compared with seasonal H1N1 viruses, and previously enabled us to identify an HA mutation which conferred efficient transmission by respiratory droplets in ferrets was used in this study to more stringently assess the impact of D222G on virus transmission [30], [31].Ferrets inoculated with the D222G virus exhibited similar clinical signs as CA/04 wild-type virus and a reverse-genetics derived CA/04 virus, with ferrets exhibiting transient weight loss (mean maximum weight loss of 11.3% on day 6–7 p.i.) and fever (mean maximum fever 1.9°C over baseline day 2 p.i.) before returning to baseline levels [30], [31]. D222G virus-infected ferrets further exhibited a mild, transient lymphopenia (22% decrease in circulating lymphocytes on day 3 p.i.) which was comparable to ferrets infected with other 2009 H1N1 viruses [32]. D222G virus was detected in the ferret upper respiratory tract (6.7±0.2 log10 PFU/ml nasal turbinates) and the lower respiratory tract (6.3±0.6 log10 PFU/g lung tissue) at similar titers as 2009 H1N1 wild-type viruses day 3 p.i. [22]. Moreover, the D222G mutant virus was detected in the intestinal tract of 1/3 ferrets day 3 p.i. (2.29 log10 PFU/ml), and in rectal swabs collected on days 1 and 3 p.i. in 2/3 ferrets (average titer 1.4±0.2 log10 PFU/ml), comparable to other 2009 H1N1 isolates [31].To evaluate the transmissibility of D222G virus by respiratory droplets, three ferrets were inoculated with 106 PFU of virus. Approximately 24 hours p.i., inoculated-contact pairs were established by placing naïve ferrets in each of three adjacent modified cages with a perforated side wall, allowing air exchange between ferrets in the absence of direct or indirect contact. Nasal washes (NW) were collected on alternate days p.i. or post-contact (p.c.) for virus titration. Detection of infectious virus in NW of contact ferrets and seroconversion of contact ferrets were considered evidence of virus transmission. Consistent with the experimental transmission data obtained with wild type 2009 H1N1 viruses [31], CA/04 virus did not spread by respiratory droplet to every contact ferret; infectious virus was detected in the nasal washes of two of three contact ferrets (Figure 2A) [30]. D222G virus replicated efficiently in the upper respiratory tract of inoculated ferrets, reaching peak mean titers of 7.5±0.2 log10 PFU/ml day 1 p.i., significantly higher than CA/04 virus at this time (p<0.03) [30]. Similar to CA/04 virus, D222G mutant virus was detected in NW of two of three contact ferrets, with virus titers >7 log10 PFU/ml on day 3 p.c. (Figure 2B). While detectable virus was not observed in NW of the third contact ferret, all three contact ferrets seroconverted to homologous virus by day 20 p.i. (HI titer range 320–640). This pattern of D222G virus transmission by respiratory droplets was confirmed in a duplicate experiment that resulted in virus detection in NW in two of three contact ferrets and seroconversion of all contact ferrets (data not shown). Ferret lung and NW samples from inoculated and contact animals that were harvested were sequenced to confirm the mutation. All samples yielded the expected mutant sequence; reversion of the mutation (222G to 222D) was not observed.10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.g002Figure 2Respiratory droplet transmissibility of D222G virus.Three ferrets were inoculated with 106 PFU of reverse-genetics CA/04 (published previously in [30]) (A) or D222G (B) virus. All ferrets were housed individually in specialized cages that permit exchange of respiratory droplets, but prevent direct or indirect contact between inoculated-contact animal pairs. A naïve ferret was placed in an adjacent cage to an inoculated ferret 24 hrs p.i. Viral replication was determined by titration of nasal washes collected on alternate days from inoculated (left bars) and contact (right bars) ferrets. The limit of virus detection was 10 PFU/ml.Enhanced virulence of D222G virus in mice by the intranasal but not intraocular routeTo determine whether the D222G mutation conferred heightened virulence of a 2009 H1N1 virus in a mouse model, we inoculated mice i.n. with 105 PFU of either CA/04 or D222G virus. Mice inoculated with D222G virus by the intranasal route exhibited greater weight loss than CA/04 virus-inoculated mice; one mouse from the D222G group was euthanatized on day 11 p.i. due to excessive weight loss (Table 1). However, neither virus exhibited >50% lethality in mice when inoculated at this dose. While both viruses replicated efficiently in the lungs of mice on days 3 and 6 p.i., D222G virus replicated to a significantly higher mean titer compared with CA/04 virus at day 6 p.i. (p<0.05). Virus was found infrequently and at low titer in the nose and intestines of mice from both groups on day 3 p.i. only (Table 1 and data not shown). Similar titers of virus in the lung and sporadic detection of virus in intestinal tissue with these viruses was observed with numerous other 2009 H1N1 viruses in this model [33].10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.t001Table 1Pathogenesis of CA/04 and 222G viruses following intranasal inoculation in mice.Viral titerb
Virus% wt lossa
SurvivalLung (D3)Nose (D3)Intestine (D3)Lung (D6)CA/0415.8% (4)5/56.0±0.3 (3/3)2.1 (1/3)1.5 (1/3)5.1±0.5 (2/3)D222G22.1% (10)4/56.2±0.1 (3/3)1.7±0.6 (2/3)1.7 (1/3)5.9±0.1 (3/3)c

aMean maximum percent weight loss (5 mice per group) following inoculation with 105 PFU. Day post-inoculation (p.i.) indicated in parentheses.
bVirus endpoint titers are expressed as the mean log10 PFU/ml plus standard deviation. Day 3 (D3) and Day 6 (D6) p.i. are shown. Numbers of mice with detectable virus included in the mean are indicated in parentheses.
cp<0.05 compared with CA/04 virus by Student's t test.A recent report indicated that the presence of D222G enhanced the ability of a 2009 H1N1 virus to cause ocular disease in mice, with virus detected in the eye of one mouse following intranasal inoculation [22]. We did not observe extrapulmonary spread of virus to the eyes of mice following intranasal inoculation with either CA/04 or D222G virus, and ocular disease was not observed during visual examination of mice during the course of infection (data not shown). However, to better assess the ability of the D222G mutation to cause ocular disease in mice, we inoculated mice by the ocular route with both viruses. The right eye of each mouse was lightly scarified with a 2-mm corneal trephine blade, and 105 PFU of each virus in a 5 µl volume was deposited onto the corneal epithelial surface and massaged into the eye with the eyelid. Mice inoculated by the ocular route with either virus did not exhibit substantial morbidity, and virus was not detected in the eye, nose, intestine, or lung on day 3 or 6 p.i. (data not shown). These results indicate that CA/04 virus is not well suited to infect mice by the ocular route, and the presence of D222G does not confer an ocular tropism in this model.D222G mutation does not alter 2009 H1N1 virus tropism in human respiratory and ocular cellsPrevious studies have demonstrated that select influenza viruses which do not demonstrate an ocular tropism in mice nonetheless are capable of high-titer replication in human ocular cells [34]. To rule out the possibility that the D222G mutation confers an ocular tropism not observed in our murine model, we compared the ability of CA/04 and D222G viruses to replicate in primary human corneal epithelial cells (HCEpiC), which predominantly express α2-3 linked sialic acids [34]. HCEpiC were infected at a MOI of 0.01 and supernatants were collected at indicated times p.i. to quantify infectious virus (Figure 3, open symbols). Both CA/04 and D222G viruses were detected at low levels (<3 log10 PFU/ml) through 72 hrs p.i. in this cell type. In contrast, both viruses replicated efficiently in the human bronchial epithelial cell line Calu-3 (Figure 3, closed symbols). Similar to a previous study, we observed a slight delay in D222G virus replication in Calu-3 cells at 24 hrs p.i., with titers of D222G virus being 10-fold lower than CA/04 virus (p<0.02) [22]. However, at 48 and 72 hrs p.i., D222G virus replicated to significantly higher titer than CA/04 virus in the human respiratory cells (p<0.0005). Primary human lung blood microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-LBI) express a greater proportion of α2-3 linked sialic acids compared with Calu-3 cells (H. Zeng, personal communication), but did not support efficient replication of either CA/04 or D222G viruses. Taken together, these findings indicate that the D222G mutation confers enhanced replication in respiratory epithelial cells but does not alter the ocular tropism of 2009 H1N1 virus.10.1371/journal.pone.0025091.g003Figure 3Replication kinetics of CA/04 and D222G viruses in human ocular and respiratory cells.Calu-3 (circles), HMVEC-LBI (triangles), or HCEpiC (squares) cells were infected at a MOI of 0.01 with the indicated viruses (CA/4, closed symbols; D222G, open symbols). Culture supernatants were removed at indicated times p.i., and titers were determined for infectious virus by standard plaque assay. The limit of virus detection was 10 PFU/ml. The mean from triplicate independent cultures per virus ± standard deviation is shown.DiscussionThe detection of D222G among severe and fatal cases of human infection has resulted in analyses to determine if this mutation represents the first virulence marker associated with 2009 H1N1 pandemic viruses. Previous studies have investigated the effect of D222G HA mutation on glycan-binding using binding assays such as red blood cell agglutination and binding to glycan arrays at saturating viral titers [22], [24]. While these assays serve as good screening tools to understand the extent of α2-3 or α2-6 binding, they were not designed to understand relative binding-avidity of the virus in a dose-dependent fashion. In this study, we used a dose-dependent direct binding assay, mammalian models, and human in vitro cultures to evaluate the relative contribution of this mutation to the virulence of a 2009 H1N1 virus. We demonstrate that a single D222G amino acid change augments binding to α2-3 linked sialic acids and results in higher overall titers of infectious virus in human airway cells and mouse lungs compared with wild-type virus. However, this change is not sufficient to enhance disease or confer efficient transmission of this virus by respiratory droplets in the ferret model and does not augment the ability to replicate in α2-3-rich human or murine ocular tissue.The consequence of the D222G mutation on viral replication kinetics has been assessed previously in several relevant cell lines. Compared with wild-type virus, a D222G-bearing virus replicated to higher titers in human alveolar basal epithelial A549 cells, although generally similar kinetics between D222G and wild-type viruses were observed in the human placental cell line JEG-3 and MDCK cells [20], [21], [22]. We observed lower viral titers of D222G virus compared with CA/04 virus 24 hrs p.i. in Calu-3 cells, in agreement with a previous study using MDCK cells which also noted reduced viral titers with a virus bearing this mutation at this time p.i. [22]; however, significantly higher titers of D222G virus compared with wild-type virus were detected in Calu-3 cells at 48 and 72 hrs p.i. Interestingly, similar viral replication kinetics were observed in our murine model, with comparable titers between CA/04 and D222G viruses in the lungs of mice on day 3 p.i. but higher D222G virus titers in this tissue at day 6 p.i. However, the enhanced ability of D222G virus to bind to α2-3 linked sialic acids did not confer the ability to replicate efficiently in respiratory endothelial cells. Along with these previously published studies, our data suggests that the presence of D222G can enhance viral replication in some cell types, but this contribution is modest and is only apparent at later stages of infection.Previous studies have demonstrated that, in general, 2009 H1N1 viruses are not highly pathogenic in mice [33], [35]. However, these viruses are capable of acquiring a lethal phenotype in mice following acquisition of key mutations, one of which is D222G [20], [36]. A previous study found that the D222G mutation on the CA/04 background conferred greater morbidity, mortality, and heightened virus replication in the lungs of mice compared with a wild-type virus, which is in agreement with our results [19]. An additional study performed a similar assessment of virulence with this mutation, but the use of a parental strain which is lethal for mice may have masked subtle differences conferred by the D222G mutation [22]. In the ferret model, the D222G mutation on the CA/04 background did not confer enhanced virulence, in accordance with previous results [22]. Thus, results in the ferret model have not supported a role of D222G in enhancing 2009 H1N1 virus virulence. Extrapulmonary spread of virus to the intestinal tract was detected following infection with both CA/04 and D222G viruses, a feature shared by numerous wild-type 2009 H1N1 viruses [31]. However, D222G virus failed to spread to other tissues following infection in either mice or ferrets. The enhanced replication and morbidity in mice, but not ferrets following D222G virus infection, is consistent with augmented binding to α2-3 sialylated glycans and the known predominance of α2-3 sialic acids in the mouse model [37].Unlike seasonal influenza viruses which exhibit efficient transmission by respiratory droplets in the ferret model, our studies have shown that most 2009 H1N1 viruses and triple-reassortant swine H1N1 viruses possess reduced transmissibility by this route [29], [31], [32], [38]. The 2009 H1N1 viruses consistently transmitted to two of three ferrets, as measured by virus detection in nasal washes (Figure 2A and [31]). Although a single base-pair change (leading to the I216K mutation) in CA/04 HA can lead to efficient transmission in ferrets [30], we found that the D222G mutation did not appear to significantly enhance or diminish transmission (4 of 6 naïve contact ferrets had detectable virus in nasal washes) of the 2009 H1N1 virus. The enhanced transmission observed with the HA (Ile219→Lys) may be due, at least in part, to its increased human receptor-(α2-6) binding affinity (particularly to the 6′SLN-LN glycan) by several-fold in comparison with wild-type [30]. However, differences in receptor binding specificity between CA/04 and D222G did not preclude efficient replication of both viruses in ferret nasal wash samples. The inability of D222G virus to confer efficient respiratory droplet transmission may be related to the findings that this particular HA mutation does not substantially improve α2-6 binding avidity of the virus. In fact, molecular epidemiologic studies revealed that the majority of 2009 H1N1 viruses circulating during the pandemic did not bear the D222G mutation, further suggesting that this mutation is not a determinant of virus transmissibility [11], [39].While rare, reports of conjunctivitis following 2009 H1N1 virus infection have been documented [17], [40], [41]. Studies have also shown that select 2009 H1N1 viruses are capable of replicating in human ocular cell types, albeit to lower titer than avian influenza viruses [42]. However, it appears that 2009 H1N1 viruses, similar to seasonal influenza viruses, are not well-suited to use the eye as a portal of entry, as ocular infection of mice with these viruses fails to result in a productive virus infection [33]. In the present study, the presence of D222G did not confer the ability of this virus to infect mice by the ocular route or the ability to replicate more efficiently compared with wild-type CA/04 virus in human corneal epithelial cells. The detection of macroscopic ocular symptoms in mice infected with a virus bearing the D222G mutation in a previous study may be due to strain-specific differences between parental viruses used or laboratory-specific conditions, but does not appear to be a universal property of 2009 H1N1 viruses possessing this mutation [22]. Nonetheless, the lack of productive replication of D222G virus in human ocular cells indicates that the enhanced cell tropism present with this virus, observed in the ability to bind both ciliated and non-ciliated cells in HTBE cell cultures, does not translate to all cell types [24].The relatively rapid emergence of D222G during serial passage in mice, cells, or eggs indicates the ability of 2009 H1N1 viruses to acquire this mutation under the right conditions, and the lack of reversion observed in this study suggests that this mutation is stably maintained. [20], [24], [36], [43]. In support of this, numerous studies have reported that the mutation arises during course of human influenza (2009 H1N1) infection [11], [12], [13]. Further study is needed to better understand other molecular markers of the 2009 H1N1 virus that are known to be associated with severe disease and the role of these mutations on the virulence of other virus subtypes. This work underscores the importance of studying the contribution of virulence markers such as D222G on parental strains that do not themselves possess heightened virulence to avoid masking subtle differences which, while minor, nonetheless result in a detectable increase in virus pathogenicity in mammals. These results taken together with those of others demonstrate that it can be difficult to unequivocally demonstrate experimentally that a particular mutation is associated with enhanced severity since different animal models yield different results. In addition, subtle differences in viruses, experimental conditions and other factors may result in somewhat different results from different laboratories; nevertheless, the association of the D222G mutation with more severe human infections highlights the need to continue research in this area.Materials and MethodsRescue of recombinant influenza A virusesThe eight reverse-genetics plasmids used for the rescue of recombinant influenza A/California/04/09 (CA/04) virus were constructed as described previously [30], [44], [45]. The mutation from Asp to Gly at HA position 222 was achieved by altering the position 222 codons from GAT(D) to GGT(G) using a Stratagene QuikChange II Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) per manufacturer's instructions on the CA/04 HA plasmid template.CA/04 and 222G viruses were rescued as described previously [30]. Briefly, 293T cells were transfected with the eight CA/04 plasmids and co-cultured with MDCK cells 12 hrs post-transfection. Rescued viruses were isolated by plaque purification on MDCK cells. Coding sequences of plasmids and rescued viruses were confirmed by automated sequencing performed at the Influenza Sequence Activity, Influenza Division, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Experiments with CA/04 and 222G viruses were conducted under biosafety level 3 containment with enhancements, in accordance with guidelines of the WHO. (https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/swineflu/Laboratorybioriskmanagement.pdf).Dose dependent direct binding of CA/04 D222G virus by glycan arrayA streptavidin plate array comprising representative biotinylated α2→3 and α2→6 sialylated glycans as described previously [28], [30] (Table S1) was used for the analysis. 3′SLN, 3′SLN-LN, 3′SLN-LN-LN are representative avian receptors. 6′SLN and 6′SLN-LN are representative human receptors. The biotinylated glycans were obtained from the Consortium of Functional Glycomics through their resource request program. Streptavidin-coated High Binding Capacity Pierce 384-well Microplates (Pierce, Rockford, IL) were loaded to the full capacity of each well by incubating the well with 50 µl of 2.4 µM of biotinylated glycans overnight at 4°C. Excess glycans were removed through extensive washing with PBS. The viruses were diluted based on hemagglutinating units (HAU, obtained using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes) with 1X PBS+1% BSA. 50 µl of the diluted virus was added to each of the glycan – coated wells and incubated overnight at 4°C. This was followed by three washes with 1X PBST (1X PBS+0.1% Tween-20) and three washes with 1X PBS. Each of the wells was blocked with 1X PBS+1% BSA for 2 h at 4°C. The wells were incubated with primary antibody (ferret anti – CA/04 antisera; 1∶500 diluted in 1X PBS+1% BSA) and incubated for 5 h at 4°C. This was followed by three washes with 1X PBST and three washes with 1X PBS. Finally the wells were incubated with the secondary antibody (goat anti – ferret HRP conjugated antibody from Abcam; 1∶500 diluted in 1X PBS+1% BSA). The wells were washed with 1X PBST and 1X PBS as before. The binding signals were determined based on the HRP activity using the Amplex Red Peroxidase Assay (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The assays were done in triplicate and appropriate negative controls were included.Ferret pathogenesis and transmission experimentsMale Fitch ferrets (Triple F Farms, Sayre, PA), 8–10 months of age and serologically negative by hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay for currently circulating influenza viruses, were used in this study. Ferrets were housed for the duration of the experiment in cages within a Duo-Flow Bioclean environmental enclosure (Lab Products, Seaford, DE). The pathogenesis of each virus was assessed following intranasal (i.n.) inoculation of 106 PFU of virus in a 1 ml volume, a dose reported to consistently infect ferrets with human or avian influenza viruses, was determined as previously described [46], [47]. Ferret hematologic and blood chemistry analyses were performed as previously described [32]. Transmission of virus by respiratory droplets was performed as previously described [38]. Nasal washes were collected from ferrets every other day for at least 9 days post-inoculation (p.i.) or contact (p.c.) and titrated by standard plaque assay using MDCK cells. Post-exposure serum was collected from virus-inoculated (15–19 days p.i.) and contact (18–21 days p.c.) ferrets and tested for H1-specific antibodies against homologous virus by HI assay using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes [48].Mouse pathogenesis and ocular tropism experimentsFemale BALB/c mice (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA), 8–12 weeks of age, were inoculated i.n. with 105 PFU of CA/04 or D222G virus in a 50 µl volume as previously described [33]. Ocular infection of mice with CA/04 and D222G viruses was performed as previously described using 105 PFU in a 5 µl volume [34]. Five mice per group were monitored daily for 14 days p.i. for morbidity, as measured by body weight, and mortality. Any mouse which lost >25% of its pre-inoculation body weight was euthanatized. Three mice per group were euthanatized on days 3 and 6 p.i., and eye, nose, intestine, and lung tissues were collected to determine replication and systemic spread of virus. Tissues were homogenized in 1 ml of cold PBS, and clarified homogenates were titrated by standard plaque assay. Statistical significance for these and all experiments was determined using Student's t test.
In vitro replication kineticsThe bronchial epithelial cell line Calu-3 (ATCC, Manassas, VA) was cultured on membrane inserts and infected apically as previously described [49]. Primary human corneal epithelial cells (HCEpiC) were obtained from ScienCell (San Diego, CA) at passage 1 and were prepared for virus infection as described previously [34]. Primary human lung blood microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-LBI) were obtained from Lonza (Walkersville, MD) and cultured with Endothelial Cell Basal Medium-2 (Lonza) (Zeng et al, in preparation). Virus was added to Calu-3, HCEpiC, or HMVEC-LBI monolayers at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 for one hour before washing. Cell type specific serum-free media was added to all wells with the addition of 300 µg/L N-p-tosyl-L-phenylalanine chloromethyl ketone-treated (TPCK) trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) in cultures using primary human cells. Aliquots of culture supernatant taken post-infection (p.i.) from triplicate cultures were immediately frozen at −80°C until titrated for the presence of infectious virus by standard plaque assay.Ethics StatementAll animal research described in this study was specifically approved by CDC's Institutional Animal care and Use Committee (IACUC). The animal research was conducted under the guidance of CDC's IACUC and in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International-accredited facility.Supporting InformationTable S1
Expanded nomenclature of glycans used in the glycan array.
a Neu5Ac: N-acetyl D-neuraminic acid; Gal: D-galatose; GlcNAc: N-acetyl D-glucosamine. α/β: anomeric configuration of the pyranose sugars. All the sugars are linked via a spacer to biotin (-Sp-LC-LC-Biotin as described in http://www.functionalglycomics.org/static/consortium/resources/resourcecored5.shtml).(DOC)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Pathogenesis and transmission of avian influenza A (H7N9) virus in ferrets and mice

MainLaboratory-confirmed H7N9 infections in humans have been reported in eight contiguous provinces in eastern China (Anhui, Fujian, Henan, Hunan, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Shandong and Zhejiang), two municipalities (Beijing and Shanghai) and Taiwan to date4. Although historically this subtype resulted in mild illness among humans3, the majority of novel A(H7N9) cases have resulted in severe respiratory illness in adults, representing the largest occurrence of H7 virus infections in humans2. Unlike highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 viruses, which exhibit lethality in poultry and cause severe human disease, low pathogenic (LPAI) H7N9 viruses seem to be asymptomatic or cause mild disease in poultry and wild bird populations, possibly due to the presence of a single amino acid in the haemagglutinin (HA) cleavage site of this virus2,5. Similar to H5N1 viruses, human cases with H7N9 virus seem to result from direct contact with infected poultry, yet >20% of confirmed H7N9 cases have reported no exposure to live animals6. Although sustained human-to-human transmission has not been observed with this virus to date, reports of family clusters of A(H7N9) infection suggest the potential for virus spread between close contacts6. Understanding the properties of A(H7N9) viruses which contribute to human disease and their capacity for human-to-human transmission is a critical requirement for guidance of public health responses. The ferret (Mustela putorius furo) is recognized as the best small mammalian model for the concurrent study of influenza virus pathogenicity and transmissibility, and was used here to assess the virulence of A(H7N9) viruses.A/Anhui/1/13 (Anhui/1) virus was isolated from a throat-swab specimen collected from an adult female patient with known poultry exposure and who died from ARDS 6 days after illness onset. A/Shanghai/1/13 (Shanghai/1) virus was isolated from an adult male patient with no known poultry exposure who died from refractory hypoxemia 13 days after illness onset2. These A(H7N9) viruses from China possess several molecular markers previously associated with human adaptation, including the presence of E627K in the PB2 protein and Q226L in the 210-loop in the HA gene2. Glycan microarray analysis of these phylogenetically distinct viruses revealed that Shanghai/1 (bearing Q226 in the HA (H3 numbering)) largely binds to avian α2,3 receptor analogues (glycans 4 to 40) (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 1), whereas Anhui/1 virus (bearing L226), revealed a mixed α2,3/α2,6 receptor preference (Fig. 1b and Supplementary Table 1); the single Q226L amino substitution has long been recognized to modulate receptor-binding specificity7. In particular, Anhui/1 virus bound to human biantennary structures (glycans 43 to 47), as well as the longer, linear α2,6 sialylated tri-N-acetyl lactosamine (glycans 58–60), some of which have been detected in N glycans of cultured human bronchial epithelial cells8. These findings are in accord with recent studies showing that Anhui/1 virus binds to human tracheal tissue sections, albeit at a lower intensity than other human-adapted viruses9,10.Figure 1Receptor specificity of A(H7N9) viruses.a, b, Glycan microarray analysis of Shanghai/1 (a) and Anhui/1 (b) viruses. Coloured bars highlight glycans that contain α2,3 sialosides (blue), α2,6 sialosides (red), α2,6/α2,3 mixed sialosides (purple), N-glycolyl sialosides (green), α2,8 sialosides (brown), β2,6 and 9-O-acetyl sialosides (yellow), and non-sialoside glycans (grey) and are expressed as relative fluorescence units (RFU). Error bars reflect the s.e.m. in the signal for six independent replicates on the array. Structures of each of the numbered glycans are found in Supplementary Table 1.
PowerPoint slide
Select contemporary North American and Eurasian H7 viruses associated with human infection have previously demonstrated the capacity to transmit between ferrets in a direct-contact model, but not by respiratory droplets in the absence of direct contact11. To characterize the transmissibility of A(H7N9) isolates, we intranasally inoculated ferrets with 106 plaque-forming units (p.f.u.) of virus. Approximately 24 h post-inoculation (p.i.), inoculated–contact pairs were established by placing a naive ferret in the same cage as an inoculated ferret (direct contact transmission), or in an adjacent cage with perforated side-walls (respiratory droplet transmission)12. Nasal washes were collected on alternate days from all animals and titred for the presence of infectious virus12. The A(H7N9) viruses were compared to a seasonal H3N2 virus, A/Texas/50/2012 (Texas/50), representative of H3N2 viruses circulating in the 2012–2013 northern hemisphere season13.Ferrets inoculated with Anhui/1 or Shanghai/1 virus showed modest weight loss and transient inactivity, but generally did not exhibit signs of severe disease (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). However, two of eight Shanghai/1 virus-inoculated ferrets were euthanized due to severe lethargy (laboured breathing, tremors, unresponsiveness day 4 p.i.) or excessive weight loss (26.6% drop from initial body weight day 12 p.i.) (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 1). A(H7N9) virus was detected at elevated titres in the nasal turbinates and trachea (Supplementary Fig. 2). However, unlike the seasonal H3N2 virus, A(H7N9) virus was detected in the lower respiratory tract (peak mean titre >105 p.f.u. per g lung tissue) (Supplementary Fig. 1)10,14. Infectious virus was detected in the brain and olfactory bulb of 1/3 and 2/3 ferrets inoculated with Anhui/1 and Shanghai/1 viruses, respectively (Supplementary Fig. 2); viraemia or systemic spread of virus to the spleen, kidney or liver was not detected. Similar to the 2009 H1N1 pandemic virus, gastrointestinal symptoms have been noted following A(H7N9) virus infection in humans5; rectal swabs were positive for virus detection in 7/11 and 5/8 Anhui/1 and Shanghai/1 virus-inoculated ferrets, respectively, whereas H3N2 virus was not detected in this sample (Supplementary Fig. 3). Furthermore, intestinal tract samples were positive in 3/3 Shanghai/1 inoculated ferrets day 3 p.i. (Supplementary Fig. 2). In agreement with reports of lymphopenia among A(H7N9) virus-infected patients5, ferrets showed transient lymphopenia that was sustained through day 7 p.i., with greater reductions in circulating lymphocytes in A(H7N9) virus-infected ferrets compared to ferrets infected with H3N2 virus (Supplementary Table 2).Table 1Clinical signs, virus replication, and transmission of H7N9 and H3N2 viruses in ferretsInoculated animalsDirect contact animalsRespiratory droplet contact animalsVirusWeight loss† (%)Respiratory symptoms‡Lethargy§Lethality‖Nasal wash titre¶Virus detectedSeroconvertedVirus detectedSeroconvertedAnhui/18.83/111.1 (7/11)0/117.1 (1)*4/44/42/62/6Shanghai/19.25/81.3 (7/8)2/86.7 (1)*4/44/41/31/3Texas/5010.14/61.0 (2/6)0/65.6 (1)3/33/33/33/3†The percentage mean maximum weight loss observed during the first 10 days p.i.‡Number of ferrets that exhibited sneezing or nasal discharge during the first 10 days p.i.§Relative inactivity index of ferrets during the first 10 days p.i. (number of ferrets with observed lethargy in parentheses).‖Number of animals euthanized before the end of the 14 day experimental period because of reaching a clinical end point.¶Peak mean log10 (p.f.u. ml−1) nasal wash titre (day p.i. in parentheses). *P < 0.05 compared with Texas/50 by one-way ANOVA.Ferrets inoculated with A(H7N9) virus shed high titres of virus in nasal washes as early as day 1 p.i., significantly higher than Texas/50 virus-infected ferrets at this time point (P < 0.05) (Table 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4). Mean titres in nasal washes were sustained at >105 p.f.u. in Anhui/1 and Shanghai/1 virus-infected ferrets through day 3 p.i. (Supplementary Fig. 4). Efficient direct contact transmission occurred by day 1 post-contact, with viral titres in nasal wash samples reaching comparable titres to inoculated ferrets by day 3 post-contact. Respiratory droplet transmission of Anhui/1 virus was observed in 2/6 ferrets, with detection of virus in contact ferret nasal washes delayed 2–4 days compared to seasonal H3N2 virus; Shanghai/1 virus was detected in 1/3 ferrets in this model (Supplementary Fig. 4). These results are in accord with a recently published study demonstrating only limited transmissibility of A/Shanghai/2/13 virus by the airborne route15. Sequence analysis of virus gene segments obtained from nasal wash samples of A(H7N9) respiratory droplet contact animals (total n = 3) revealed no substantial amino acid changes. No sequence changes were observed from nasal washes obtained from the Shanghai/1 respiratory droplet contact ferret compared to Shanghai/1 sequences submitted to GISAID. Sequencing of nasal wash samples obtained on days 5–7 p.i. from Anhui/1 respiratory droplet contact ferrets revealed only one amino acid substitution in the HA protein at R140M (H3 numbering), not found among Anhui/1 inoculated ferrets. This position is located in the HA 140 loop region of HA1 and is not known to be associated with changes in H7 HA receptor binding or influenza virus transmission. Although A(H7N9) viruses are not readily transmissible by respiratory droplets, the efficient virus transmission observed in the direct-contact model has not been observed with H5N1 viruses12 and may indicate the capacity of an A(H7N9)-like virus to acquire properties that would confer efficient airborne transmission.Phylogenetic analysis showed that the H7N9 virus is a triple reassortant comprising an HA from an H7N3 virus, the neuraminidase (NA) of an H7N9 virus, and all six internal genes from an H9N2 virus2. To assess the relative contribution of these avian precursors to the pathogenicity of the 2013 H7N9 viruses, we inoculated BALB/c mice intranasally with A/shoveler/Egypt/00215-NAMRU3/07 (shv/Egypt/07)16, an H7N9 virus with high surface glycoprotein amino acid sequence identity to Anhui/1, A/chicken/Vietnam/NCVD-1156/2011 (ck/VN/11), an H9N2 virus possessing internal genes with high genetic similarity to Anhui/1 virus, and the 2013 A(H7N9) viruses to determine virus replication, morbidity (as measured by weight loss), the 50% mouse infectious dose (MID50), and the 50% mouse lethal dose (LD50). MID50 titres were markedly low for all viruses, demonstrating high infectivity of the avian viruses in this model; typically human viruses do not replicate efficiently in mice without prior host adaptation17 (Table 2). Mice inoculated with Anhui/1 or Shanghai/1 virus showed severe morbidity (>20% weight loss) and a LD50 of 103.3–103.4, a value comparable to the select group of HPAI H5N1 and H7N7 viruses which have a high-pathogenicity phenotype in this model18,19. In contrast, the avian precursor viruses shv/Egypt/07 and ck/VN/11 caused moderate morbidity in mice, but did not display a lethal phenotype (Table 2). Collectively, lung titres in Anhui/1 and Shanghai/1 virus-inoculated mice were significantly higher than LPAI precursor viruses examined day 3 p.i. (P < 0.05); by day 6 p.i., all H7N9 viruses were detected at comparable titre, >100-fold higher than the H9N2 virus at this time point (P < 0.05). All viruses examined replicated to low titres in the nose day 3 and 6 p.i. (Supplementary Fig. 5), and systemic spread of virus to the brain was not detected.Table 2Pathogenicity of H7N9 and related viruses in BALB/c miceVirusSubtypeWeight loss†Lung titre (d 3)‡Lung titre (d 6)‡MID50§LD50§Anhui/1H7N922.2 (7)7.2 ± 0.65.5 ± 0.50.253.4Shanghai/1H7N925.6 (4)6.6 ± 0.25.6 ± 0.20.253.3shv/Egypt/07H7N916.5 (3)4.4 ± 0.25.6 ± 0.32.25>6ck/VN/11H9N218.1 (6)4.8 ± 0.23.1 ± 0.11.5>6†Maximum per cent weight loss (5 mice per group) after infection with 106 p.f.u. of virus (day p.i. in parentheses).‡Average lung titres of three mice on indicated days p.i., expressed as log10 (p.f.u. ml−1) ± SD.§MID50 and LD50 are expressed as the log10 p.f.u. ml−1 required to give one MID50 or one LD50.Unlike past human infections with H7 viruses, conjunctivitis has not been reported among A(H7N9)-infected individuals5. Viral titres in ferret eye or conjunctiva samples were not frequently detected in H7N9 or H3N2 virus-infected animals, although conjunctival washes from 50% of Anhui/1 virus-infected ferrets were positive for virus (Supplementary Figs 2 and 3). Ocular inoculation of mice with shv/Egypt, Anhui/1 or Shanghai/1 H7N9 viruses did not result in consistent virus replication in eye tissue (Supplementary Table 3). However, viral titres in the nose were detected days 3 and 6 p.i. following ocular inoculation with Anhui/1 and Shanghai/1 virus in mice with greater frequency compared to shv/Egypt/07 virus (Supplementary Table 3). These studies provide evidence that the 2013 A(H7N9) virus does not maintain the ocular tropism typical of H7 viruses, but is capable of using the eye as an entry portal to cause a productive respiratory infection.The ability of Anhui/1 virus to form plaques in the presence or absence of the trypsin protease was assayed in MDCK cells by standard plaque methods20. Proteolytic cleavage of the HA molecule is a prerequisite for multi-cycle replication, and the ability of virus to replicate in the absence of trypsin is thought to be an important determinant of influenza virus pathogenicity in mammals21. Similar to the seasonal Texas/50 virus which requires an exogenous protease source for multi-cycle replication and plaque formation, the A(H7N9) virus failed to form visible plaques without the addition of trypsin (data not shown).Because the airway epithelium is the primary site of influenza virus replication in humans, we investigated the A(H7N9) virus replication efficiency in Calu-3 cells, derived from human bronchial epithelium and grown on permeable cell culture membranes to resemble the in vivo airway epithelium20 (Fig. 2a). For all viruses tested, titres of progeny virus progressively increased during the first 48 h p.i. Anhui/1 virus showed a 20- to 400-fold increase in replication at 48 h p.i. when compared to the other virus subtypes tested in Calu-3 cells (P < 0.04). Notably, compared to the seasonal H3N2 virus, Anhui/1 virus showed an 80,000-fold increase in replication at 24 h p.i.Figure 2Replication kinetics of A(H7N9) influenza viruses in polarized human airway epithelial cells.a, Replication at 37 °C; b, viral titre at 24 h post-infection. Calu-3 cells cultured for 1 week were inoculated with virus at an MOI of 0.01. Culture supernatants were collected at the times indicated and virus titres were determined by plaque assay. Titre values represent the average for three independent wells plus s.d. *indicates statistically significant difference between 37 °C and 33 °C for each virus, based on the Mann–Whitney test (P < 0.004).
PowerPoint slide
As previous studies have suggested an association between the transmissibility of influenza viruses in ferrets and their ability to replicate efficiently at the lower temperature (33 °C), found in the environment of the mammalian upper airway22, we evaluated the replication kinetics of A(H7N9) virus in Calu-3 cells cultured at either 33 °C or 37 °C. Whereas the seasonal Texas/50 virus replicated equally well at both temperatures, A(H7N9) viruses showed significantly reduced replication at 33 °C compared with 37 °C at 24 h, characteristic of avian subtype viruses (Fig. 2b)21; comparable titres at either temperature were detected by 48 h for all viruses (data not shown). These data demonstrate that the A(H7N9) viruses replicate productively in polarized bronchial epithelial cells at 37 °C, but less efficiently at the lower temperature of the human proximal airways early after infection.The recent cases of human infection with H7N9 viruses highlight the need to better understand the potential of these viruses to spread and cause disease in humans. Although the novel H7N9 influenza virus has caused severe illness and death among individuals in China, the initial epidemiologic findings suggest that there is no evidence of sustained human-to-human transmission of this virus. Our ferret transmission results are consistent with this observation and suggest that additional virus adaptation in mammals would be required to reach the high-transmissible phenotypes observed by the respiratory droplet route with pandemic and seasonal influenza A viruses10.Methods SummaryViruses and cellsH7N9 and H9N2 viruses were passaged in eggs; H1N1 virus was propagated in MDCK cells. Detailed culture conditions for Calu-3 cells are included in Methods. Virus titrations were performed in MDCK cells by standard plaque assay20.Biosafety and biosecurityExperiments were conducted in biosafety level 3 facilities with enhancements (BSL3+) in accordance with U.S. Federal and WHO guidelines. Features of the BSL3+ containment laboratories include a double door entrance, double door autoclave, HEPA filtration of intake and exhaust air, shower out room, and a liquid effluent sterilizer. Security is monitored through an automated access control system and entrance to the laboratory is restricted by guard stations, cameras, card-controlled doors and biometric readers. Use of powered air-purifying respirators in the laboratory and yearly training requirements are mandatory for all staff with access.Glycan arraysMicroarray printing and influenza virus analyses were performed as previously described11; specific details on the glycans analysed are provided in Methods.AnimalsSix-to-eight week old female BALB/c mice (Jackson Laboratory) and six-to-seven month old influenza virus-seronegative male ferrets (Triple F Farms) were used in all experiments. All intranasally inoculated animals were administered 106 p.f.u. of virus except for determination of mouse infectivity and lethality, where mice were administered serial 10-fold dilutions of virus. Virus transmission in ferrets was measured by co-housing an inoculated and naive ferret (direct contact transmission) or by placing an inoculated and naive ferret in adjacent cages with a perforated side wall (respiratory droplet transmission)12. Transmission was determined by presence of virus in nasal washes and seroconversion of contact ferrets. Detailed procedures are included in Methods for pathotyping, transmission and tropism studies.Online MethodsVirusesAll animal experiments were conducted under biosafety level 3 facilities with enhancements (BSL3+) in accordance with US Federal and World Health Organization guidelines. Biocontainment for the BSL3+ laboratories is based on the 5th Edition of Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories. A/Anhui/1/13 (H7N9), A/Shanghai/1/13 (H7N9), A/shoveler/Egypt/00215-NAMRU3/07 (H7N9), A/chicken/Vietnam/NCVD-1156/2011 (H9N2) and A/Goose/Nebraska/17097-4/11 (H7N9) viruses were propagated in 10-day-old embryonated hens’ eggs for 42 h at 37 °C as previously described18,23. A/Texas/50/12 was propagated in Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells as previously described24.Ferret experimentsAll animal research was approved by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and conducted in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International-accredited animal facility. Male Fitch ferrets (Triple F Farms), 6 to 7 months of age and serologically negative by haemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay for currently circulating influenza viruses, were used in all experiments. A minimum number of animals were used to achieve reproducible results in each experiment per ethical guidelines; investigators were not blinded to groups. Ferrets were housed in cages within a Duo-Flow Bioclean mobile clean room (Lab Products) and randomly assigned to experimental groups. Temperatures were measured using a subcutaneous implantable temperature transponder (BioMedic Data Systems). Ferrets were inoculated intranasally with 106 p.f.u. of virus in a 1 ml volume diluted in PBS, then monitored daily for changes in body temperature, weight and clinical signs of infection. Lethargy was measured as described previously14. Any ferret that lost >25% of its pre-inoculation body weight or showed neurological dysfunction was euthanized and submitted to post-mortem examination. Nasal washes, conjunctival washes and rectal swabs were collected on alternate days post-inoculation (p.i.) or post-contact, immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at −70 °C until titration as previously described25. Tissue specimens collected for virus titration were immediately frozen on dry ice and stored at −70 °C until titration as previously described18. Blood was collected from inoculated ferrets on indicated days p.i. in EDTA Vacutainer tubes (BD) and complete blood counts were quantified using a Hemavet HV950FS instrument per the manufacturer’s instructions (Drew Scientific).For transmission experiments, ferrets were inoculated as described above. Approximately 24 h after inoculation, a naive ferret was placed in the same cage as an inoculated animal (for assessment of virus transmission in the presence of direct contact) or in an adjacent cage with perforated side-walls (holes 1–5 mm in diameter, with cages spaced ∼3 mm apart) to allow for air exchange between cages in the absence of direct or indirect contact (for assessment of virus transmission by respiratory droplets). The term ‘respiratory droplet transmission’ refers to virus transmission in the absence of direct or indirect contact and does not imply an understanding of the size of droplets or aerosols involved in the transmission events. To prevent inadvertent transmission in direct contact or respiratory droplet experiments, investigators always handled the contact animals first, and decontaminated all surfaces which came into contact with each ferret before handling the next animal.Whole-genome sequencing of nasal washesRNA was extracted from nasal wash samples from the peak day of virus shedding presenting in the inoculated and respiratory droplet contact (2/6 for Anhui/1 ferrets, and 1/3 for Shanghai/1 virus experiment) ferrets and subjected to RT–PCR (PCR with reverse transcription) followed by DNA sequencing analysis. Obtained sequences obtained from all virus gene segments were compared with relevant virus sequences available from The Global Initiative on Sharing All Influenza Data (GISAID) database.Mouse experimentsFemale BALB/c mice 6 to 9 weeks old were anaesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of 0.15 ml of 2,2,2-tribromoethanol in tert-amyl alcohol (Avertin; Sigma-Aldrich) prior to virus inoculation. Intranasal inoculations were performed by instilling 50 μl of virus diluted in PBS onto the nares of the animals. The 50% mouse infectious dose (MID50, determined by virus detection in the lungs day 3 p.i) and 50% lethal dose (LD50) were determined by inoculating groups of eight mice with serial 10-fold dilutions of virus. Three mice per dilution were euthanized on day 3 p.i.; lungs were collected from each mouse, immediately frozen on dry ice, and stored at −70 °C. Tissues were thawed, homogenized in 1 ml cold PBS, and clarified by centrifugation prior to titration by standard plaque assay. Five mice per dilution were observed daily for 14 days for morbidity (as measured by weight loss) and mortality; any mouse which lost >25% of its pre-inoculation weight was euthanized. MID50 and LD50 values were determined following ref. 26. To investigate the ability of each virus to spread systemically in mice, an additional three mice were euthanized at days 3 and 6 p.i. from mice inoculated with 106 p.f.u. of each virus for collection of nose, lung and brain tissue, which were stored and processed as described above.Ocular inoculations were performed by lightly scarifying the right eye of the mouse with a corneal trephine and instilling 5 μl of virus (106 p.f.u.) onto the surface of the eye and massaging the virus into the eye with the eyelid as previously described27. An additional three mice were inoculated and euthanized on days 3 and 6 p.i. for collection of eye, nose and lung tissue, which were stored and processed as described above.Cell culture and viral replicationThe human bronchial epithelial cell line Calu-3 (ATCC) was grown on membrane inserts as previously described20. Cells were grown to confluence in six-well plates for 1 week until the confluent monolayer reached a stable transepithelial resistance of >1,000 Ω cm2. Virus was added to cells apically in serum-free medium at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 for one hour before washing. Plates were incubated at either 37 °C or 33 °C for the duration of the experiment as indicated. Aliquots of culture supernatant taken p.i. were immediately frozen at −80 °C until titration. All samples collected for replication kinetics were titrated for the presence of infectious virus by standard plaque assay in MDCK cells.SerologyHI assays were performed with ferret sera collected 16–20 days after inoculation or exposure to infected animals using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes against homologous virus28.Cytokine and chemokine quantificationClarified mouse lung tissue homogenates were analysed with the BioPlex protein array system (Bio-Rad), according to manufacturer’s instructions. A minimum of three independent samples were collected and tested in duplicate for each condition.Glycan microarray analysisMicroarray printing and influenza virus analyses have been described previously11. A/Anhui/1/2013 virus was analysed at a HA titre of 512 while A/Shanghai/1/2013 was analysed at an HA titre of 256. Specific details on the glycans analysed in these studies are provided in Supplementary Table 1.StatisticsStatistical significance (P < 0.05) for murine and ferret studies was determined by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a Bonferroni post-test. Statistical significance for in vitro studies was determined using the Mann–Whitney and Student’s t tests. All in vitro studies were conducted with sufficient sample size for statistical analyses performed; indicated tests were chosen as appropriate for each data set to be analysed and all data meet the assumptions of the tests.Supplementary information
Supplementary InformationThis file contains Supplementary Tables 1-3 and Supplementary Figures 1-6. (PDF 995 kb)



Title: Effect of Prior Influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 Virus Infection on Pathogenesis and Transmission of Human Influenza A(H5N1) Clade 2.3.4.4b Virus in Ferret Model

Highly pathogenic avian influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b viruses have exhibited rapid global spread in wild birds since 2021 (1,2). That spread has resulted in numerous outbreaks in domestic poultry and sporadic infections in nonavian hosts (1,2), including >20 mammal species in the United States alone since January 2022 (3). On March 25, 2024, H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b virus was reported in dairy cows in Texas and Kansas (4), and the virus was subsequently detected in dairy herds from over a dozen states within 5 months (5). Those outbreaks resulted in several confirmed human infections, primarily after exposure to infected dairy cows or poultry (6). Although human cases from 2024 generally exhibited mild symptoms (7,8), clade 2.3.4.4b viruses can cause severe infection in humans (9). Viruses isolated before and concurrent with ongoing dairy farm outbreaks possess an efficient capacity for replicating in mammalian hosts and are capable of systemic spread and lethal infection in both mouse and ferret models (10–13). Furthermore, some clade 2.3.4.4b viruses, including viruses isolated from dairy farm workers in 2024, exhibit a limited capacity for airborne transmission between ferrets, suggesting a heightened risk to public health (10–12,14). Those incidents highlight the ongoing threat posed by H5N1 viruses and underscore the need for comprehensive risk assessments to evaluate the capacity of clade 2.3.4.4b viruses to cause infection and disease in diverse human populations.Although almost all influenza A(H5N1) human cases in the United States have been associated with mild disease, and no human-to-human transmission has been reported, assessing whether the human population has cross-reactive antibodies that can provide protection against the disease caused by H5N1 virus infection is critical. Despite previous serologic surveys indicating very low (0%–1.9%) seropositivity against H5N1 virus in the general population (15), recent findings have shown relatively high levels of cross-reactive neuraminidase inhibition antibodies to H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses in healthy adults, likely because of prior exposure to influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 (pH1N1) virus (16). In addition, broadly reactive hemagglutinin (HA) stalk antibodies induced by seasonal influenza A(H1N1) and A(H3N2) virus infections in humans have been suggested to provide some level of protection against zoonotic H5N1 and H7N9 virus infections (17,18).Well-controlled studies in mammalian models can provide crucial insight into the ability of prior influenza A virus (IAV) exposure to modulate subsequent disease after homologous or heterologous viral challenge (19). Cross-protection against H5N1 clade 1 viruses induced by prior human seasonal IAV infection has been previously shown in the ferret model (20,21). However, those studies have not assessed the role of preexisting immunity in modulating transmission outcomes and have not explored the extent of cross-protection or the specific types of cross-reactive antibodies in preimmune animals. We used a ferret model to evaluate viral replication and transmission of the H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferrets with or without prior immunity against pH1N1 virus. Materials and MethodsVirusesWe propagated stocks of 3 virus strains: pH1N1 A/Nebraska/14/2019 (Neb/14); highly pathogenic H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024 (Texas/37); and low pathogenicity H7N9 A/Anhui/1/2013 (Anhui/1), which was isolated from the first wave of human infections in China in 2013, as described previously (11,22,23). All virus preparation and animal infection experiments were conducted in Biosecurity Level 3 containment laboratories including enhancements required by the US Department of Agriculture and the Federal Select Agent Program. All animal studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and were conducted under the guidance of the CDC’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee in an AAALAC-accredited animal facility.Primary Intranasal Infection with pH1N1 VirusWe serologically tested twelve 8-month-old ferrets by using the 2023–2024 World Health Organization influenza reagent kit; all tested negative for circulating influenza viruses, including A/Victoria/2570/2019 (H1N1)pdm09, A/Delaware/01/2021 (H3N2), B/Phuket/3073/2013 (Yamagata lineage), and B/Michigan/01/2021 (Victoria lineage). We then intranasally inoculated the ferrets with >102 PFU Neb/14 virus per ferret in 1 mL phosphate-buffered saline under ketamine/xylazine anesthesia. All 12 ferrets developed productive infection and exhibited hemagglutination inhibition (HI) titers of 80–320 against homologous virus by day 93 postinoculation. We termed that group of ferrets as preimmune.Ferret Inoculation and Evaluation of Viral Replication and TransmissionWe then inoculated groups of the preimmune ferrets and naive ferrets by respiratory inhalation of aerosolized virus for 15 minutes, as previously described (24), and used an elevated relative humidity (≈65%) to better emulate environmental conditions on dairy farms. We administered doses varying from 100.5 to 102.8 PFU (Table). At 24 hours postinoculation, we pair-housed groups of 3 naive or preimmune ferrets with inoculated ferrets at a 1:1 donor:contact ratio to assess virus transmission in a direct contact setting. We observed all ferrets daily for clinical signs of infection, including temperature rise, weight loss, and lethargy, and collected nasal wash daily until day 3 postinoculation for Texas/37 or day 4 postinoculation for Anhui/1 virus, as previously described (11,22), at which time we humanely euthanized inoculated animals to evaluate virus replication and systemic spread. We monitored contact ferrets for virus shedding and seroconversion at day 21 postinoculation as determined by HI titers using 0.5% turkey red blood cells. We determined productive transmission by detection of infectious virus in nasal wash specimens and seroconversion to homologous challenge virus.TablePathogenicity and transmissibility of influenza viruses in naive and preimmune ferrets in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model*Challenge virusInoculated animals‡Contact animalsStatus†Dose, PFU§Lethargy¶Temp. rise, °C#% Weight loss**Peak titer (SD)††Peak titer (SD)††Transmission/ inoculation‡‡DonorContactTexas/37NaiveNaive100.51.52.4 (2/2)7.3 (2/2)5.5 (0.7)2.5 (0.6)2/2Texas/37NaivePreimmune102.41.91.7 (3/3)7.9 (3/3)4.2 (0.4)NA0/3Texas/37PreimmuneNaive102.4–2.51.71.5 (2/3)5.5 (2/3)2.5 (1.8)NA0/3Anhui/1NaiveNaive102.71.21.9 (2/3)4.7 (3/3)5.7 (0.8)6.1 (1.5)3/3Anhui/1NaivePreimmune102.81.11.5 (2/3)5.4 (1/3)6.5 (0.4)5.4 (0.8)3/3Anhui/1PreimmuneNaive102.61.11.6 (2/3)5.4 (2/3)6.3 (0.2)3.3 (1.5)2/3*Preimmune ferrets were those inoculated with influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 (A/Nebraska/14/2019). Naive and preimmune ferrets were challenged with highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024 (Texas/37) and low pathogenicity influenza A(H7N9) A/Anhui/1/2013 (Anhui/1). NA, not applicable because titers were below the limit of detection; temp., temperature. 
†Ferrets were serologically naive to contemporary influenza A viruses (naive) or inoculated with A/Nebraska/14/2019 influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus 3 months before use in this study (preimmune). 
‡Inoculated ferrets were monitored for clinical signs of disease for 3 days for the Texas/37 virus and 4 days for the Anhui/1 virus. All animals that were productively infected after aerosol exposure are shown (n = 3 for all groups except Texas/37 naive donor/naive contact, which is n = 2).
§Presented dose of virus to ferrets following 15-min inhalation exposure to aerosolized virus. 
¶Relative inactivity index of ferrets inoculated with the challenge virus specified. 
#Values in parentheses are no. affected/no. inoculated. Mean maximum temperature rise >1°C among all inoculated animals in degrees centigrade; number of ferrets with temperature rise >1°C in all productively infected ferrets was shown in parentheses. 
**Values in parentheses are no. affected/no. inoculated. Mean maximum weight loss >1% among all inoculated animals expressed as a percentage; number of ferrets with weight loss >1% in all productively infected ferrets was shown in parentheses. 
††Mean maximum nasal wash titer +SD reported as log10 PFU/mL among ferrets with positive virus shedding; for NA, titers for all ferrets were below limit of detection of 10 PFU. 
‡‡Values are no. affected/no. inoculated. Transmission was defined as both the detection of productive virus shedding and seroconversion of surviving animals to homologous challenge virus or confirmed infection requiring euthanasia. Two contact ferrets, each co-housed with a ferret productively infected with the Texas/37 virus, were humanely euthanized on days 3 and 4 postcontact; all contact ferrets co-housed with ferrets inoculated with Anhui/1 virus survived through day 21 postcontact. All samples collected for infectious virus determination were frozen at −80°C until titration by standard plaque assay in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells (limit of detection 10 PFU/mL or g of tissue). We used a 2-way analysis of variance test in Prism 7.05 (GraphPad Software Inc., https://www.graphpad.com) to assess viral titer differences between naive and preimmune groups. We considered p<0.05 statistically significant.Serologic Assessment of Cross-Reactive Antibodies after Primary pH1N1 Virus ChallengeWe developed and performed a high-throughput multiplex influenza antibody detection assay, as described previously (25,26). In brief, we included HA globular head, HA stalk, neuraminidase (NA), and nucleoprotein (NP) antigens from IAVs and HA globular head from influenza B viruses in this study (Appendix 1 Table). We obtained antigens from Sino Biological U.S. Inc. (https://www.sinobiological.com), the International Reagent Resource (https://www.internationalreagentresource.org), or by using an in-house baculovirus expression system to express and purify our own reagents (27,28). To each well of a black-wall 96-well plate, we added 50 µL of microsphere suspension containing 2,000 microspheres for each of the 32 bead regions in an assay buffer comprising 1× PBS with 0.05% Tween 20, 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA), and 0.5 mol sodium chloride (total 64,000 microspheres/well). We then added 1:200 diluted naive or preimmune ferret serum in assay buffer to appropriate wells in duplicates, including 2 serum pools on each plate as intraassay and interassay controls. We incubated plates in the dark at room temperature for 60 minutes on an orbital shaker, then washed plates 3 times with 100 μL of assay buffer by using Bio-Plex Handheld Magnetic Washer (Bio-Rad Laboratories, https://www.bio-rad.com). We then added 100 µL of protein A–phycoerythrin conjugate and incubated plates in the dark at room temperature for 60 minutes on an orbital shaker. Then, we washed plates 3 times with 100 μL of reading buffer comprising 1× PBS with 0.05% Tween 20, 1% BSA and read the plates by using a Bio-Plex MAGPIX Multiplex Reader (Bio-Rad Laboratories). We calculated median fluorescence intensities by using GraphPad 7.05 software (GraphPad Software Inc.).ResultsCross-Reactive Antibodies Induced by pH1N1 Virus InfectionWe tested serum samples collected 93 days after primary pH1N1 virus infection for reactivity against various HA, NA, and NP antigens (Figure 1). We found the highest serum antibody levels detected were against the HA globular head from pH1N1 viruses predating the challenge strain, but we consistently detected antibodies against all 6 H1 HA targets assessed. We also detected antibodies reactive to the N1 NA, which were derived from either H1N1 or H5N1 virus isolates, including Texas/37, in all preimmune animals. Moreover, we detected antibodies against NP protein of pH1N1 virus A/Brisbane/10/2007 in preimmune ferrets. The NP proteins between Texas/37 and Neb/14 viruses share 94% similarity. However, we detected no antibodies against the HA globular head of H3, H5, or H7 viruses, or the NA from H3N2 or H7N9 viruses. In addition, Neb/14 virus infection induced antibodies reactive to group 1, but not group 2, HA stalks (Figure 1). Furthermore, alignments of surface exposed residues in the HA, including HA1 head and HA2 stalk, and NA proteins of Neb/14 and Texas/37 virus revealed higher similarities in NA surface residues (83.4%, 186/223) and in the HA2 stalk (80.4%, 111/138) compared with HA1 surface exposed residues (45%, 107/238) (Appendix 2 Figures 1). That finding supports the observed cross-reactivity to the HA2 stalk and Texas/37 NA but not to the Texas/37 HA head in preimmune ferrets. Our serologic findings demonstrated that pH1N1 infection can induce low levels of cross-reactive antibodies to H5N1 NA and the HA stalk from the group 1 H5N1 but not to group 2 H7N9, virus where cross-reactive antibodies remained at undetectable levels.Figure 1Detection of cross-reactive antibodies in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model. After primary pH1N1 infection, we detected cross-reactive antibodies by using a high-throughput multiplex influenza antibody detection assay. Serum samples from naive and preimmune ferrets were prediluted 200-fold and added to plates containing antigen-coated microspheres, then plates were incubated with protein A–phycoerythrin conjugate. Reported values represent the mean of duplicate assays. Antibody titers were expressed as median fluorescence intensity. Full virus strain names and sources of all antigens are provided (Appendix 1 Table). HA, hemagglutinin; IAV, influenza A virus; IBV, influenza B virus; NA, neuraminidase; NP, nucleoprotein.Attenuation of Texas/37 Virulence and Transmission in pH1N1 Preimmune FerretsTo assess if cross-reactive antibodies elicited in ferrets after pH1N1 infection could reduce H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b virus virulence and transmissibility, we challenged preimmune and naive control ferrets via respiratory inhalation of aerosolized Texas/37 virus, to closely emulate natural mammalian exposure to IAV. First, we exposed a group of 3 ferrets to a low (≈3 PFU) dose of aerosolized Texas/37 virus. In agreement with prior work (29), we productively infected 2/3 ferrets, which led to a severe and fatal infection in serologically naive ferrets. In addition, after 48 hours of sustained contact, we detected successful transmission to cohoused naive animals in direct contact with infected animals (Table). To provide a robust challenge, both naive and preimmune ferrets received inhaled doses of 102.4–102.5 PFU of H5N1 virus; then, preimmune ferrets served as either donors or contacts in direct contact transmission experiments. We humanely euthanized all donor ferrets on day 3 postinoculation to assess systemic dissemination of virus.Serologically naive ferrets inoculated by the aerosol inhalation route with Texas/37 virus exhibited a rapid and severe infection within 3 days postinoculation (Table). As with the inoculated naive ferrets, preimmune ferrets exhibited clinical symptoms by day 3 postinoculation, but clinical signs were less severe, and lethargy, temperature rise, and weight loss were less pronounced. Virus shedding in nasal wash specimens from the preimmune ferrets was delayed (Figures 2, 3), and only 1/3 ferrets had detectable virus shedding on days 1 and 2 postinoculation, compared with 2/3 and 3/3 ferrets in the inoculated naive group at those timepoints (Figure 2, panel A). Although viral titers in day 3 postinoculation nasal wash and tissues proximal to the upper respiratory tract (i.e., nasal turbinate, ethmoid turbinate, soft palate) were comparable between the preimmune and naive ferret groups, virus was either undetectable in the lower respiratory tract (trachea, lung), extrapulmonary tissues (spleen, kidney), and blood, or detected at lower frequency in other tissues (brain, olfactory bulb, intestines, liver) in preimmune ferrets relative to naive animals (Figure 2, panel C).Figure 2Virus shedding in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model. A, B) Nasal wash viral titers for influenza A(H5N1) Texas/37 virus (A) and influenza A(H7N9) Anhui/1 virus (B). C, D) Virus titers from tissues for Texas/37 H5N1 virus collected 3 days postinoculation (C) and Anhui/1 H7N9 virus collected 4 days postinoculation (D). Horizontal bars indicate median, dots indicate individual titers, whiskers indicate range of positive titers. Three naive and 3 pH1N1 preimmune ferrets were inoculated via respiratory inhalation with Texas/37 or Anhui/1 virus (Table). Nasal wash specimens (A, B) were collected daily. Virus titers were determined by standard plaque assay in MDCK cells. Tissue samples collected from nasal turbinate, ethmoid turbinate, soft palate, blood, and rectal swabs were reported in log10 PFU/mL. Tissues collected from lung, brain, olfactory bulb, intestines, liver, spleen, kidney were reported in log10 PFU/g. The limit of detection was 10 PFU per mL or g. Statistical analyses were performed using 2-way analysis of variance test when samples were positive for viral titers in all 3 inoculated animals; we considered p<0.05 statistically significant. When <3 inoculated ferrets had detectable virus, the detection frequency is indicated above the corresponding positions. Anhui/1, low pathogenicity influenza A(H7N9) A/Anhui/1/2013; NS, not statistically significant; Texas/37, highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024. Figure 3Contact transmission of Texas/37 influenza A(H5N1) virus and Anhui/1 influenza A(H7N9) virus in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model. A, C, E) Transmission of Texas/37 H5N1 virus among ferrets; B, D, F) transmission of Anhui/1 H7N9 virus among ferrets. Different shades indicate individual animals. We inoculated 3 naive ferrets per virus (A–D) and 3 preimmune ferrets per virus (E, F) by respiratory inhalation exposure (Table). Each inoculated ferret was pair-housed with a contact recipient, with (C, D) or without preimmunity (A, B, E, F); contact was sustained for 48 hours for Texas/37 and for 72 hours for Anhui/1 before inoculated animals were humanely euthanized. Nasal wash samples were collected daily from inoculated ferrets (days 1–4 postinfection) and on alternate days from the contact animals (days 1–11 postcontact). The limit of detection was 10 PFU/mL. Two naive contact ferrets (panel A) reached humane endpoints and were euthanized on days 3 and 4 postinfection. Anhui/1, low pathogenicity influenza A(H7N9) A/Anhui/1/2013; EP, endpoint; NS, not statistically significant; Texas/37, highly pathogenic influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b A/Texas/37/2024.Unlike the efficient transmissibility of Texas/37 virus during direct contact when both donor and contact animals were serologically naive (Table; Figure 3, panel A), Texas/37 did not transmit by that route when preimmune ferrets served as either donor or recipient animals. We did not recover infectious virus from nasal wash specimens collected from contact animals nor did those animals seroconvert to H5N1 virus (Table; Figure 3 panels C, E). Thus, we found that prior exposure to a 2019 pH1N1 virus in ferrets reduced disease severity and limited viral spread to the lower respiratory tract and extrapulmonary tissues after rechallenge with Texas/37 virus via respiratory inhalation compared with serologically naive animals. We also observed reduced transmissibility of Texas/37 virus during direct contact when either the donor or recipient animals had prior pH1N1 exposure.Effect of Preexisting pH1N1 Immunity on H7N9 Virus Pathogenesis and Transmission Because we detected antibodies against antigens other than HA and NA, such as NP, in preimmune serum samples (Figure 1), we performed a parallel experiment, to better understand the breadth and magnitude of cross-protection. For that experiment we used the group 2 low pathogenicity (H7N9 Anhui/1 virus, which has distinct HA and NA subtypes to which pH1N1 convalescent serum does not react. Anhui/1 virus has previously been reported to cause milder disease and exhibit lower replication capacity in ferrets compared with the Texas/37 virus (11,22). Donor ferrets received an aerosol inhalation dose of 102.6–102.8 PFU of Anhui/1 virus. Donor and contact animals cohoused for 72 hours before donor animals were humanely euthanized on day 4 postinoculation, which was a sufficient time for efficient transmission to occur in direct contact between serologically naive donor and contact animals (Table; Figure 3, panel B).Upon Anhui/1 virus respiratory inhalation challenge, only mild clinical signs were observed in both naive and preimmune ferrets (Table). Virus shedding in nasal wash specimens and systemic tissues were generally similar across naive and preimmune donor animals, except for day 4 postinoculation ethmoid turbinate and trachea titers, which were significantly higher in naive ferrets (p<0.05) (Figure 2, panels B, D). Efficient virus transmission during direct contact was observed when preimmune ferrets served as either donor or contact animals (Figure 3, panels D, F). Overall, we found that prior exposure to pH1N1 virus had no substantial effect on H7N9 virus shedding, replication, or transmission during direct contact, in contrast to viral challenge with H5N1 virus.DiscussionKey elements in the risk assessment of emerging IAVs include evaluating virus transmissibility in animal models, assessing population immunity against novel IAVs, and determining disease severity and pathogenesis in humans and animals after infection (30). Assessing the risk for human infection and human-to-human transmission of emerging HPAI H5N1 clade 2.4.4.4b virus, which has caused sporadic human infections among poultry and dairy farm workers in the United States, is crucial for pandemic preparedness. We showed that ferrets with existing pH1N1 virus immunity had reduced disease severity and limited viral systemic spread after aerosol inhalation exposure to Texas/37 virus. Moreover, direct-contact transmission was abolished when either the donor or recipient animals had prior H1N1 immunity. However, the protective effect of pH1N1 immunity did not extend to the virus with an HA from different phylogenetic group and NA from a distinct subtype, as evidenced by the minimal effect that pH1N1 immunity had on infection and transmission after challenge with a group 2 H7N9 virus.This study builds upon a growing body of literature on ferrets previously exposed to seasonal IAVs and subsequently challenged with either seasonal or zoonotic IAV (19,21,31). Use of ferrets with existing IAV immunity from prior infection with wild-type viruses can provide contextual data for risk assessment studies (31). Of note, we used a contemporary 2019 pH1N1 strain to establish prior immunity, which could influence the subsequent preimmune profile of animals, as supported by varying serum H1 HA and N1 NA antibody levels depending on the year of virus isolation (Figure 1). Our findings from use of 2019 pH1N1 virus underscores the importance of considering the specific pH1N1 strain used for primary infection in such studies, and conducting future work that explores the full breadth of diverse infection histories seen in humans.Our findings extend the understanding of cross-protective effects of pH1N1 immunity against H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b viruses by challenging animals with a recent human isolate, Texas/37. Unlike other US isolates, Texas/37 carries a PB2–627K mutation, likely contributing to enhanced virulence in ferrets (7). In line with a similar study using a bovine isolate (32), we observed reduced disease severity and systemic viral spread in pH1N1 preimmune ferrets relative to naive controls. In addition, we found that while virus shedding in nasal wash specimens was delayed in preimmune animals early (days 1–2) after infection relative to naive animals, titers from both groups reached comparable levels by day 3 postinoculation in specimens from the upper respiratory tract (nasal wash, nasal and ethmoid turbinates) and the surrounding milieu (soft palate). Of note, a previous study also reported that H1N1-preimmune ferrets exhibited substantially reduced virus shedding in nasal secretions and viral replication in both upper and lower respiratory tissues compared with naive ferrets when challenged with an H5N1 bovine isolate (32). The differences between that study and ours could be attributed to variation in H5N1 challenge strains, cross-protective antibody levels, or differences in inoculation doses and routes. Beyond examination of directly inoculated animals, transmission in the presence of direct contact was reduced when either donor or recipient ferrets were preimmune, likely the result of altered host susceptibility and delayed virus shedding. Although we did not assess respiratory droplet transmission in this study, we anticipate that droplet transmission would be unlikely under this more stringent transmission setting. Of note, we used inhalation of aerosolized virus to challenge the animals, which is known to delay onset of detectable virus replication and peak titers in nasal wash specimens (24), more closely emulating the kinetics of natural human exposure to IAVs.In our study, using a comprehensive panel of antigens in serologic tests, we identified antibodies that reacted to H5N1 NA and the group 1 HA stalk, but not to the HA heads of H5 and H7 viruses or the group 2 HA stalk. Broadly reactive NA and HA stalk antibodies have been shown to play a key role in cross-heterosubtypic protection in animal models (33,34), which likely contributed to the cross-protection observed in our study. In addition, human epidemiologic studies have demonstrated that populations with previous exposure to pH1N1 might experience less severe outcomes from H5N1 infection (18). However, we only explored cross-protective immunity at approximately 3 months after seasonal pH1N1 primary infection. The duration of such immunity and correlation between the level of NA or HA stalk antibodies, specifically H5 HA stalk antibodies, and protection efficacy warrant further study, as do comprehensive evaluations of how prior vaccination may contribute to modulating disease severity. Our experimental evidence from the ferret model underscores the potential role of cross-reactive HA stalk and NA antibodies in reducing disease severity and transmission after H5N1 virus infection. However, future studies of larger group sizes are warranted, as are studies investigating how antibodies targeting internal influenza virus proteins, such as NP, or cellular immunity, contribute to cross-protection. In addition, a single seasonal virus infection in naive ferrets cannot fully recapitulate the complexity of human IAV immune history. Future studies involving ferrets vaccinated with different types of influenza vaccines or repeatedly exposed to seasonal viruses more closely mirroring the varied infection histories in humans will help provide deeper insights into cross-immunity elicited across different IAV subtypes. Furthermore, inclusion of multiple zoonotic strains to assess relative contributions of nonspecific effects in preimmune animals, as demonstrated here by performing tandem challenge studies and serology assessments with both H5N1 and H7N9 viruses, is a practice not typically used in the field yet shown to be a key provider of essential contextual information.In conclusion, our results showed that prior pH1N1 virus infection more effectively reduced the replication and transmission of H5N1 virus than it did H7N9 virus in a ferret model. Those results suggest that pH1N1 virus immunity may confer some level of protection against H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4.b virus in humans.Appendix 1Antigens used in study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model.Appendix 2Additional information on study of the effect of prior influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 virus infection on pathogenesis and transmission of human influenza A(H5N1) clade 2.3.4.4b virus in ferret model.


Title: Influenza A virus PB1-F2 protein prolongs viral shedding in chickens lengthening the transmission window

IntroductionThe natural reservoir for the first 16 haemagglutinin (HA) and 9 neuraminidase (NA) subtypes of influenza A viruses (IAVs) is the wild aquatic bird population, where infection is generally asymptomatic and reassortment between strains occurs regularly (Reperant et al., 2012). Spillover of these viruses into domesticated poultry populations has resulted in the evolution of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) subtypes such as the Asian-lineage H5N1 which has been circulating continuously in birds since 2003 and has caused upwards of 700 human infections (To et al., 2012). Low pathogenicity avian influenza (LPAI) H9N2 viruses are frequently found circulating in the same geographical areas as HPAI H5N1. HPAI H5N1 as well as LPAI H9N2 can cause a significant economic and welfare burden in geographical regions such as the Middle East and Southeast Asia. In these areas both subtypes are enzootic in the poultry populations making control costly and challenging (Alexander, 2007). As well as threatening food security, an increasing range of avian influenza subtypes causing zoonotic infections in humans is of considerable concern for public health agencies (Yu et al., 2014). Increasing the fundamental knowledge base about avian influenza virus interactions within avian hosts will enable the design and implementation of better control strategies.IAVs have a segmented ssRNA genome that encodes for a core repertoire of 10 viral proteins which all subtypes express, allowing successful viral replication. In addition there are a plethora of accessory proteins encoded by IAVs that are non-essential for replication, but may contribute to the virulence, pathogenesis and transmissibility of strains in different host species. The first of these so-called accessory proteins to be identified was the PB1-F2 protein (Chen et al., 2001), which can range in full-length size from 90 to 101 aa and is translated in a +1 reading frame from the same viral mRNA that encodes the viral RNA-dependant RNA polymerase subunit, PB1.Functional characterization of PB1-F2 has been undertaken in mammalian cell lines and hosts. However, in viruses isolated from mammalian hosts, humans and swine, PB1-F2 is often truncated as a result of mutations that generate stop codons in the PB1-F2 ORF (Krumbholz et al., 2011; Zell et al., 2007). More than half of all human and swine isolate sequences deposited in the public sequence databases encode a PB1-F2 less than 90 aa in length. In contrast, more than 90 % of sequences from isolates sequenced from avian hosts retain the coding capacity for a full-length PB1-F2 protein (Kamal et al., 2015; Zell et al., 2007). This disparity of PB1-F2 full-length conservation between virus isolates from mammalian and avian hosts suggests a unique pressure to maintain a full-length PB1-F2 protein with evolutionary significance in avian hosts. The most fundamental evolutionary pressure for IAVs is to transmit. To date there has been no robust assessment of the involvement of PB1-F2 in transmission of influenza viruses in any host species.In mammalian IAVs, PB1-F2 has been reported to have a wide range of roles influencing pathogenesis including modulating the innate immune response (Le Goffic et al., 2010), affecting activity of the viral polymerase (Mazur et al., 2008) and increasing susceptibility to secondary bacterial infections (McAuley et al., 2007). Work to delineate the function of avian influenza virus PB1-F2 in avian hosts has only been limited to highly pathogenic H5N1 influenza strains and these studies have concentrated on reading out pathogenic outcomes (Hulse-Post et al., 2007; Leymarie et al., 2014; Schmolke et al., 2011). No publications have examined the role of PB1-F2 in a LPAI background, which make up the vast majority of avian influenza infections globally.Avian influenza viruses rely on close mixing of infected and susceptible species and/or the sharing of common contaminated areas, such as water sources, for effective transmission of the virus either through aerosol or fomite ingestion (Breban et al., 2009; Brown et al., 2007; Hinshaw et al., 1979). In this study, we utilize a LPAI H9N2 to assess whether PB1-F2 contributes to transmission dynamics in chickens. We measure infectivity, pathogenic outcomes as well as transmissibility using two different transmission scenario settings. The first scenario models transmission in a crowded, confined environment, representing a large commercial poultry shed. The second scenario models transmission that may result as a consequence of sporadic contact, reflective of behaviours in the natural avian species reservoir and incursions into traditional backyard flocks found abundantly in the Middle East and Southeast Asia where H9N2 viruses are enzootic.In line with previous results seen investigating functions of PB1-F2 with HPAI viruses (Leymarie et al., 2014), we observed a significant increase in pathogenicity when PB1-F2 was removed from our LPAI H9N2 virus, in an embryonated chicken egg model and in chickens in vivo. We also determined that the presence of PB1-F2 in an H9N2 virus prolonged the infectious shedding period in infected chickens which resulted in an extended transmission window with enhanced transmission.ResultsA full-length PB1-F2 protein is conserved at a higher rate in avian viral isolates compared to mammalian isolatesPrevious analyses indicated that the full-length PB1-F2 ORF was more often conserved in IAV strains isolated from avian hosts than those isolated from mammalian hosts. To verify and extend these data, we downloaded all full-length PB1 influenza segment nucleotide sequences from the NCBI database for avian, swine and human hosts, removing duplicate sequences. Subsequently, 24 803 PB1 nucleotide sequences were analysed in the +1 reading frame to determine the length of the PB1-F2 ORF. We defined full-length PB1-F2 as 87 aa or longer since this is the length of the well-studied PB1-F2 protein of PR8 virus, and has been shown to enable mitochondrial targeting in all instances where it has been assessed. Other published analyses have used a PB1-F2 length of 79 aa or more (Zell et al., 2007), based on the minimal length for an intact mitochondrial targeting sequence of porcine isolates in HeLa cells (Zell et al., 2007), but this is a notional cut-off bearing in mind mitochondrial targeting has been seen for a PB1-F2 of only 75 aa for PR8 in Vero cells (Yamada et al., 2004) vs 87 aa in HeLa cells (Gibbs et al., 2003) and even then not all PB1-F2 proteins of length greater than 89 aa localize to the mitochondria (Chen et al., 2010). However, a reanalysis of our data for length at least 79 aa indicates little alteration of the frequencies from using 89 aa or more (Table S1, available in the online Supplementary Material). The percentage of full-length PB1-F2 in human, swine and avian hosts was calculated as 43, 48 and 93 %, respectively (Table 1).Table 1.Percentage of influenza A sequences possessing full-length PB1-F2 (≥87 aa) isolated from avian, human and swine hostsHost% Sequences with PB1-F2 ≥87 aa (n)*Avian†93 (10 401)Anseriformes97 (6917)Galliformes87 (1804)Charadriiformes98 (1298)Human43 (11 729)Swine48 (2673)Total100 (24 803)*(n), Number of sequences.†All avian orders.Generation of a recombinant virus lacking PB1-F2To understand the role of the PB1-F2 protein in the poultry host, we used a LPAI virus strain that is representative of a H9N2 major lineage (G1-like) that circulates in the enzootic Pakistan region of the Middle East (Iqbal et al., 2013). A reverse genetics system for the A/chicken/Pakistan/UDL01/08 (UDL01) H9N2 strain used previously (Long et al., 2016) was rescued as infectious virus using standard techniques (Hoffmann et al., 2000). UDL01 contains a full-length 90 aa PB1-F2 protein encoded in the +1 reading frame of the PB1 segment, and this virus was designated as WT. Alongside the WT version we generated an isogenic virus that had a stop codon introduced at aa position 12 in the PB1-F2 ORF, producing a non-functional 11 aa PB1-F2 fragment, which we termed knockout (KO). The introduction of the stop codon did not alter the aa sequence of the PB1 reading frame. To assess if this method of PB1-F2 KO altered protein expression levels of either PB1 or PB1-N40 protein, we utilized a previously published method (Wise et al., 2011) of tagging the different reading frames from which the mRNAs are transcribed (Fig. 1a). A plasmid was generated whereby the viral sequence, including the upstream non-coding region that the ribosome recognizes preceding the initiation codon for PB1, was cloned and two different constructs were generated in which GFP was placed in-frame at the C-terminus with either the PB1, PB1-N40 or in the +1 frame with the PB1-F2 message. Expression in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells and subsequent detection and densitometry quantification of the viral proteins expressed, indicated no alteration in the level of PB1 or PB1-N40 expression occurred when mutation of the +1 frame to KO PB1-F2 was introduced (Fig. 1b, c).Fig. 1.Segment 2 gene expression from UDL01 influenza virus. (a) Schematic of the ORF structure of 5′ end of UDL01 influenza virus segment 2 mRNA fused to eGFP in either frame 1 or frame 2. Nucleotide positions are indicated. Red bar indicates the position of a stop codon at aa position 12 of PB1-F2 in the KO UDL01. (b) Lysates from 293T cells harvested 48 h post transfection with indicated plasmids were detected via Western blot with anti-GFP with anti-α-tubulin as a loading control. (c) Levels of PB1-, PB1-N40- and PB1-F2-GFP from transfected lysates were quantified using densitometry. Means±sd were calculated from three independent transfections. Levels of significance were based upon P-values from a Student’s t-test; ****P<0.0001.PB1-F2 has no effect on viral replication of H9N2 virus in avian cells in vitroWe assessed the ability of the isogenic H9N2 virus pair to undergo multiple cycles of replication from a low m.o.i. (0.0001 p.f.u.) in a range of avian cell substrates in vitro. No replication differences were found between the WT and KO H9N2 viruses in Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells (Fig. 2a). Similarly no replicative differences between the two viruses were observed in primary chicken kidney cells (cKCs), ex vivo chicken tracheal organ cultures (cTOCs) and 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs (Fig. 2b–d).Fig. 2.In vitro growth curves of UDL01 WT and KO viruses. Cellular substrates were inoculated at a low m.o.i. with either WT (blue circles) or KO (red squares) UDL01 influenza virus. The level of infectious virus was determined at times specified. Data represent the means of at least three independent experiments±sd. (a) MDCK cells and (b) primary cKCs were inoculated at an m.o.i. of 0.0001. (c) Chicken tracheal organ cultures were inoculated with 100 p.f.u. (d) The 10-day old Rhode Island Red chicken eggs were inoculated into the allantoic cavity with 100 p.f.u.Presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein reduces pathogenic outcome of infection in ovoDuring the growth curve analyses of the UDL01-WT and KO viruses, we observed that eggs infected with the KO virus were reaching terminal end points (no movement of the embryo or haemolysis of blood vessels) between 24 and 32 hours post infection (hpi)compared to 32–48 hpi for those infected with the WT virus. Therefore, we used a 10-day-old embryonated chicken egg model to assess the pathogenicity of the two viruses by performing a minimum lethal dose (MLD) assay. A 10-fold dilution series of each virus, WT and KO, was used to inoculate groups of embryonated eggs which were monitored twice daily for end point. The percentage death in each group of H9N2-infected eggs reached after 72 h was calculated for each dilution. The MLD was defined as the lowest viral dose resulting in death of all infected embryonated eggs by 72 h (Table S2). The presence of a full-length PB1-F2 in the WT virus resulted in a higher MLD (1 p.f.u.) compared to the KO virus (0.01 p.f.u.). The minimum infectious dose (MID) defined as the lowest viral dose required to produce infection in all embryonated chicken eggs was the same for both the WT and KO virus (0.1 p.f.u.). Having seen no difference in the magnitude or rate of infectious virus particle production in embryonated eggs, we wanted to determine if differing levels of defective viral particles were produced by the KO virus in comparison to the WT virus that could explain the increased pathogenicity. Quantitative reverse transcription PCR (qRT-PCR)to quantify influenza virus M gene viral RNA (vRNA) levels was performed on the allantoic fluid recovered after inoculation of embryonated eggs. We assessed three independent egg stocks and the genome copy number: particle forming unit ratio remained the same between the WT (14.5±2.13) and KO (12.39±4.37) viruses, indicating no difference in defective particle levels (Table S2). Another virus tested in parallel with an internal gene constellation of an HPAI H5N1 virus (A/chicken/England/50–92/91) had a significantly different genome : p.f.u. ratio (43±6.9) to the two H9N2 viruses.Presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein reduces pathogenic outcome of infection for LPAI virus in vivoLeymarie et al. (2014) previously reported that the removal of the PB1-F2 protein from an HPAI H5N1 virus resulted in an increase in chicken mortality at low dose. To determine if the absence of PB1-F2 also increased the pathogenicity of LPAI viruses in chickens, we inoculated groups of chickens via the nares with either a low dose (5×103 p.f.u.) or high dose (1×105 p.f.u.) of the UDL01-WT or KO virus. The chickens were monitored daily for clinical signs and scored accordingly. Infection of birds with WT virus produced transient clinical signs including red and watering eyes, swollen combs and swollen foreheads. No difference in clinical signs was observed in birds infected with the KO virus at the low dose. However, upon infection with the higher viral dose, 35 % (5/14) of the birds infected with the KO virus died between days 4 and 5 post inoculation. There was no significant difference in clinical score prior to death between the WT and KO groups. The remaining birds infected with the KO virus showed no ill effects out to day 14 post inoculation when the experiment was ended. No deaths were recorded for the group infected with WT virus (Fig. 3).Fig. 3.Survival curves of chickens inoculated with WT or KO UDL01 influenza virus. Survival curves of chickens inoculated into the nares with 100 µl of PBS containing (a) 5×103 p.f.u. (low dose) or (b) 1×105 p.f.u. (high dose) of either WT (blue line) or KO (red dashed line) UDL01 influenza virus.A full-length PB1-F2 protein prolongs infectious virus shedding from chickensTo ascertain if the presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein effected in vivo virus replication in chickens, we determined the level of infectious virus shed from both the buccal and cloacal cavities of birds inoculated with both high and low doses for 10 days following infection. All birds directly inoculated with either virus, WT or KO, robustly shed infectious virus from the buccal cavity commencing on day 1 post inoculation and there was no difference in the titre of infectious virus shed from the buccal cavity between the two groups up to day 4 post inoculation (Figs 4a and S1a). However, on day 5 post inoculation, for both viral doses, we observed that the majority of birds in the KO group had ceased shedding infectious virus from the buccal cavity and those that did shed virus had less than 100 p.f.u. ml−1 detectable [average p.f.u. ml−1 shed was 70 (±102) and 8 (±3) for the low and high dose, respectively]. In contrast at day 5 post inoculation, birds directly infected with the WT virus continued to shed significant levels of infectious virus from the buccal cavity [average p.f.u. ml−1 shed was 14 524 (±35 907) and 1082 (±1008) for the low and high dose, respectively] (Figs 4b and S1b). We detected sporadic shedding from the cloacal cavity of chickens inoculated with both the low and high viral doses of the WT and KO viruses and the number of birds shedding virus was lower in the KO (29 and 10 %, respectively) than the WT group (50 and 39 %, respectively) (Table 2).Fig. 4.Virus shedding from the buccal cavity of high-dose-inoculated chickens and environmental viral titres. Infectious virus from groups of 20 chickens inoculated with 1×105 p.f.u. (high dose) with either WT (blue circles) or KO (red squares) UDL01 influenza virus. Grey dotted baselines indicate limit of detection. (a) Mean infectious virus titres from buccal swabs. (b) Buccal shedding titres from individual birds at 2, 5 and 6 days post inoculation. (c) Infectious virus titres in communal drinking water. A pooled sample from the water sources in each isolator was assessed daily. Means±sd are shown where applicable. Levels of significance were based upon P-values from a Mann–Whitney U-test; **P<0.001.Table 2.Cloacal shedding from chickens inoculated with WT and KO UDL01 influenza virusVirus doseVirus% Birds shedding (n)Mean shedding duration (days)*Mean shedding titre (p.f.u.)†HighWT35 % (7/20)1.571.67×103 (±4.13×103)KO10 % (2/20)11.50×103 (±2.05×103)LowWT50 % (7/14)1.142.76×103 (±4.36×103)KO29 % (4/14)1.251.74×102 (±1.76×102)*Shedding assayed daily until 10 days post inoculation.†Mean (±SD).The lower incidence of cloacal shedding of the KO virus from inoculated chickens led us to characterize the tissue tropism of the two viruses. Leymaire et al. (2014) have previously shown that the presence of a PB1-F2 protein increased the amount of vRNA detected in the intestine of birds inoculated with an HPAI virus at 2 days post inoculation. Using both qRT-PCR for vRNA and infectious virus particle titration, we determined the relative levels of the WT and KO viruses in a panel of respiratory and gastrointestinal tract tissues at both day 2 and 5 post inoculation for the high-dose infection study (Fig. 5). We found that in the respiratory tract (nasal turbinate, trachea and lungs) on day 2 there were no differences in either vRNA or infectious particle levels. The differences we observed in the respiratory tissues on day 5, higher levels of WT than KO virus in the nasal turbinate, were in line with the higher level of infectious particle shedding from the buccal cavity on day 5 by birds infected with the WT virus. In the gastrointestinal tract (oesophagus, duodenum, ileum and colon), we observed more virus in tissues from birds infected with the WT virus on both days 2 and 5 post inoculation, (Fig. 5), however, the increase was only statistically significant in the colon tissue samples.Fig. 5.Viral titres in tissues harvested from high-dose-inoculated chickens. A panel of respiratory and gastrointestinal chicken tissues were harvested from the chickens inoculated with 1×105 (high dose) of either WT (blue) or KO (red) UDL01 influenza virus. Tissues were harvested and processed at (a) 2 or (b) 5 days post inoculation. Copies of viral M gene vRNA (left axis) were determined via influenza specific qPCR on total tissue RNA (bars). Infectious virus (right axis) was determined by virus titration of homogenized chicken tissues (circles/squares). Grey dotted base lines indicate the limit of infectious virus detection. Means±sem were calculated from a minimum of three individual animals. Levels of significance were based upon P-values from Student t-tests; * P<0.05 for infectious virus, ∗∗P<0.05 for copies of viral mRNA.Increased environmental contamination by UDL01-WT virusWe measured the level of infectious virus in both the communal water and food sources shared by birds during the high-dose experiment. Whilst we found no infectious virus in the food source, even at the peak of viral shedding, we were able to isolate infectious virus from the common water source in the isolators, for both viruses (Fig. 4c). In the isolator that housed birds infected with WT virus, we detected virus from day 1 to 5 post inoculation; in contrast the KO virus was only detected on days 2–4 post inoculation, indicating that the presence of full-length PB1-F2 protein can lengthen the period of infectious environmental contamination for LPAI virus. PB1-F2 is believed to be a non-structural protein and several studies have failed to find it as a component of the influenza virus particle (Hutchinson et al., 2015; Shaw et al., 2008). Therefore, it is unlikely that an absence of PB1-F2 would affect virus particle stability. However, we did assess WT and KO infectious virus persistence in water at 25 °C (akin to the poultry isolator set up in which the in vivo experiments were conducted). No difference in stability of the infectious virus particles was seen (data not shown). There were also no HA sequence changes in samples of the viruses shed from both inoculated and in contact birds which also ruled out inherent stability differences between the viruses. The fact of increased environmental contamination has direct consequences for the efficiency of transmission to naive birds as the presence of PB1-F2 can lengthen the window of opportunity for naive birds to contract the virus from contaminated environmental sources, presumably through fomite/faecal-oral transmission routes.PB1-F2 increases the opportunity for in-contact transmission between chickensThe difference in viral clearance dynamics and the environmental contamination period of the two viruses, that differed only by the presence of a PB1-F2 protein, lead us to investigate whether PB1-F2 had any effect on transmission parameters in co-housed chickens who shared a common water and food source. Transmission from directly inoculated chickens to in-contact birds at both early (24 h post inoculation) and later (5 days post inoculation) time points was assessed by the introduction of naive sentinels at these time points in separate experiments. Unsurprisingly, as no difference in buccal shedding between the WT and KO viruses was observed at early time points, naive sentinel animals that were introduced 24 h after the donor animals were directly inoculated, all became robustly infected independently of the virus to which they were exposed (Fig. 6a). Infection in the sentinel animals was determined via titration of infectious virus in buccal and/ or cloacal swabs and seroconversion 14 days post exposure (Fig. 6). In these early exposure contact animals, we saw a similar pattern to directly inoculated birds of prolonged viral shedding from birds infected by the virus containing a full-length PB1-F2 protein in contrast to earlier clearance of virus in those infected by the PB1-F2 KO virus (Fig. 6a). This experimental setup models a commercial poultry farming operation where large numbers of birds are continuously confined in close proximity.Fig. 6.Transmission to naive contacts introduced at 1 and 5 days post inoculation. (a, b) Infectious virus titres in buccal (solid lines) and cloacal (dashed lines) swabs from naive contact chickens housed with either WT (blue) or KO (red) infected chickens. Contacts were exposed to infected chickens at either (a) early (1 day post inoculation) or (b) late (5 days post inoculation) time points. Grey baselines indicate the limit of detection. (c) HA inhibition titres on serum from contacts exposed to chickens inoculated with WT (blue circles) or KO (red squares) UDL01 at early (1 day post inoculation) or late (5 days post inoculation) time points. Serum was collected at 14 days post exposure and titred against the virus used for inoculation.To assess a more field-like environment experienced by the wild bird reservoir or poultry in a backyard flock, we introduced naive sentinel birds at 5 days post inoculation of the donor animals, when the disparity of buccal viral shedding in the donor birds was apparent. These birds were again co-housed and shared common water and food sources. The premise of this experimental setup was that in a free roaming environment birds can come into contact or share nourishment sources at any point during the viral infectious period since they are not strictly confined and their interactions are more transient. Therefore, initial contact at later time points during the infection period is important in the spreading of virus. We found that all birds in contact with those directly inoculated with a virus containing a full-length PB1-F2 (WT) became robustly infected, shedding virus from both buccal and cloacal cavities (Fig. 6b). In contrast, no viral shedding for any of the in-contact birds co-housed with those inoculated with the KO virus was detected (Fig. 6b). Serology performed on the in-contact birds confirmed there was also no seroconversion 14 days after exposure (Fig. 6c). This is the first time that the presence of a PB1-F2 protein has been demonstrated to affect transmission parameters in any species and suggests a scenario whereby it might be more favourable in an avian host for IAVs to encode for a full-length PB1-F2 protein.DiscussionThe small PB1-F2 protein of IAVs is termed an accessory protein as it is not required for the basic replicative cycle of influenza in multiple host species (Pena et al., 2012; Zamarin et al., 2006). It has been established in several studies that there is a low aa evolutionary rate for the PB1 protein, necessary due to the vital structural and functional integrity of the viral polymerase protein; however, this results in a higher rate of aa evolution in the +1 reading frame and thus PB1-F2 (Trifonov et al., 2009; Westgeest et al., 2014). Despite this, there is an apparent unique pressure to maintain a full-length ORF of the protein in isolates that have been retrieved from avian species and this contrasts with the frequent truncation of the protein in mammalian host viral isolates by the incorporation of one or more stop codons (Krumbholz et al., 2011; Zell et al., 2007).Analysis of 24 803 influenza PB1 segment sequences available on the NCBI database found that 93 % of viruses isolated from avian hosts maintained a full-length PB1-F2. Recently it has been reported that approximately 61 % of HPAI H5N1 isolates from 2013 had a truncated PB1-F2 (Kamal et al., 2015); therefore we also examined if avian virus pathogenicity as defined by a multiple basic cleavage site (two or more basic aa), in the HA protein, was associated with PB1-F2 length. We found little variation in the frequency of full-length PB1-F2 in HPAI or LPAI viruses and a marginal reduction in HPAI (87.7 % HPAI vs 91.0 % LPAI) was entirely due to the H5 subtype (Table S3). An assessment of avian HA subtypes and full-length PB1-F2 conservation found that H5 (90 %), H6 (88 %), H9 (81 %), H13 (88 %) and H16 (83 %) subtypes all had lower percentages of full-length PB1-F2. A full analysis of all 16 avian HA subtypes is presented in Table S4.Further analysis within the avian host grouping indicated that isolates from the order Galliformes (chickens, turkeys, quail, etc.) have a conserved full-length PB1-F2 at a slightly lower frequency of 87 % compared to the natural host reservoir bird orders of Anseriformes (ducks, geese, swans, etc.; 97 %) and Charadriiformes (shorebirds such as waders and gulls; 98 %) (Table 1) (Olsen et al., 2006; Webster et al., 1992). A full analysis of all avian orders can be found in Table S5. This suggested that PB1-F2 may contribute to a process more critical to the natural avian field environment than an intensive poultry rearing scenario. An obvious difference between these two avian settings is the modes and dynamics of transmission of IAVs.The aim of this study was to interrogate fully the contribution that PB1-F2 makes to viral fitness in an avian host. We assessed viral infectivity, pathogenicity and transmissibility between chickens of isogenic viruses differing only by the presence of a full-length PB1-F2 protein.Two other published studies have undertaken a similar approach to understanding the role of PB1-F2 in the context of avian species infection with influenza viruses (Leymarie et al., 2014; Schmolke et al., 2011). However, both focused solely on the effect that a full-length PB1-F2 protein has on the pathogenic nature on H5N1 viruses which were already highly pathogenic. The study by Schmolke et al. (2011) assessed the effect of knocking out the PB1-F2 protein on the pathogenicity of H5N1 in White Pekin ducks. No effect on pathogenicity was observed, but an increased systemic spread of the virus in the ducks was demonstrated for HPAI H5N1 virus containing a full-length PB1-F2 in contrast to when PB1-F2 expression was absent (Schmolke et al., 2011). Leymaire et al. (2014) considered the effect of a full-length PB1-F2 on the pathogenicity of an HPAI H5N1 virus in the chicken model and in accordance with our findings presented here, found that removal of full-length PB1-F2 actually enhanced pathogenicity (when examined at doses at which WT virus is not 100 % lethal). This study also found increased viral tissue dissemination both in ovo of 10-day-old chicken embryonated eggs and in experimentally inoculated chickens when PB1-F2 protein was present (Leymarie et al., 2014). Recently, another study that investigated the effect of PB1-F2 on transmission in turkeys concluded that lack of a full-length PB1-F2 gene in a triple-reassortant H3N2 swine influenza virus increased histopathology in turkeys and provided a transmission advantage (Deventhiran et al., 2015). While the increase in pathogenicity when PB1-F2 is absent is in line with Leymaire et al. (2014) and our study the transmission advantage of a virus lacking PB1-F2 differed to our finding. Transmission in the Deventhiran et al. (2015) study was not robustly assessed and was determined on a single clinical sign (diarrhoea) and weak positive seroconversion; no virus was detected from any of the in-contact birds. In addition, differences in the genetic history of the virus isolates studied, and/or inherent pathogenicity may account for these differences.In our study we demonstrate that, in an LPAI background, the presence of a PB1-F2 protein suppressed pathogenicity in a chicken model. The increased pathogenicity observed between days 4 and 5 post inoculation of the birds was preceded by the observation of increased viral dissemination in vivo on day 2 post inoculation. Virus was recovered more frequently, and in higher titres, from the gastrointestinal tract of chickens when a full-length PB1-F2 protein was present. The intrinsic pathogenicity of a virus could also impact on its transmission potential (Cho et al., 2007). A pathogenic virus which can induce a great clinical impact on an infected host has the potential to modulate the infected subject’s and their contacts’ behaviour in a manner that would reduce interactions: hiding away and lethargy. In contrast during a low or non-pathogenic viral infection, the mixing of hosts may be more likely.In Pakistan and Southeast Asian countries where H9N2 LPAI virus is enzootic, informal poultry farming accounts for approximately 30 % of total poultry production (Conan et al., 2012; Tufail et al., 2012). In this setting it is rare for birds to be densely packed together for prolonged periods of time with birds transiently interacting or sharing resources, limiting the time and incidence of direct transmission between hosts. In these natural field conditions, poultry transmission of influenza viruses is thought to occur predominately through the faecal-oral route by ingestion of virus from contaminated food and water sources. It is therefore important that influenza virus is maintained in the environment for effective transmission to occur (Brown et al., 2007; Hinshaw et al., 1979). Transmission is an area of influenza biology which has not previously been robustly investigated in relation to PB1-F2.Importantly, in this study we show that the PB1-F2 protein prolongs viral shedding from infected chickens and that this has the effect of increasing the window of opportunity for transmission to naive birds. Increased cloacal shedding of the UDL01-WT virus in comparison to the UDL01-KO virus was detected which complemented the observation that more WT virus was present in gastrointestinal tissues of infected birds. In addition, buccal shedding of the virus was sustained for 1–2 more days from chickens infected with the virus containing full-length PB1-F2. The increase of both buccal and cloacal viral shedding in the WT-infected birds resulted in longer environmental contamination of the chicken’s water source during these studies. The alteration of these parameters by the presence of a full-length PB1-F2 resulted in transmission at a later time point (5 days post inoculation) for the UDL01-WT, whereas no transmission at this time point was observed for the UDL01-KO virus.Our results point to a role for PB1-F2 in enhancing the transmission potential of IAVs in the natural avian reservoir or in backyard flock environments rather than in close living commercial poultry farms. This aligns with the avian sequence data which showed that PB1-F2 length is conserved at a high frequency in the influenza virus reservoir species Anseriformes and Charadriiformes than poultry (Galliformes) despite genetic pressure on the +1 reading frame of the essentially conserved viral polymerase segment. Poultry samples in the NCBI database are likely isolated from intensively farmed poultry where the role of PB1-F2 in transmission is less important than the free living natural reservoir aquatic birds.In summary, we conclude that the IAV accessory protein PB1-F2 enhances pathogenicity and transmission of avian influenza viruses in avian hosts. This work emphasizes the need to understand host-specific differences in terms of both genetics and behaviour when analysing the role of viral proteins.MethodsEthics statement.All animal work was approved and regulated by the UK government Home Office under the project licence (PPL 30/2952). All personnel involved in the procedures were licensed by the UK Home Office. Euthanasia of chickens was carried out by intravenous administration of sodium pentobarbital and confirmed through cervical dislocation.Viruses and cells.Recombinant A/chicken/Pakistan/UDL01/08 H9N2 virus (UDL01-WT) was generated using reverse genetics as previously described (Hoffmann et al., 2000). UDL01-KO whereby a stop codon was introduced at aa position 12 in the PB1-F2 ORF was constructed by site-directed mutagenesis in the PB1 genetic segment prior to rescue. Virus stocks were produced via passage in 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs; the allantoic fluid was harvested after 48 h and titrated by plaque assay on Madin–Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells (ATCC).MDCK and human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293T cells (ATCC) were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) (Gibco-Invitrogen) supplemented with 10 % FBS (Biosera), 1 % penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 % non-essential aa (Sigma-Aldrich). Primary chicken kidney cells (cKCs) were prepared in house as previously described (Penzes et al., 1994) from 2–3-week-old Rhode Island Red chickens and maintained in EMEM, 7 % BSA (Sigma), 1 % penicillin/streptomycin and tryptose phosphate broth. Both MDCKs and cKCs were maintained at 37 °C with 5 % CO2. Ex vivo chicken tracheal organ cultures (cTOCs) were prepared as previously described (Armesto et al., 2009) and maintained in EMEM supplemented with 1M HEPES and 1 % penicillin/streptomycin; these were maintained under liquid at 37 °C with no addition of CO2.Validation of segment 2 gene expression.To analyse viral gene expression from transfected plasmids, a previously published strategy was adopted (Wise et al., 2011). Briefly, nucleotides 1–380 of UDL-1/08 PB1 were cloned into AgeI/KpnI sites of pEGFPN1 (Clontech). Using site-directed mutagenesis the position of the EGFP ORF was adjusted into frame with either the PB1 or PB1-F2 reading frames, while concurrently removing the GFP ATG codon. Additional segment 2 mutations as detailed in the results section were made using site directed mutagenesis with the WT segment plasmids as templates. 2 µg of each plasmid was transfected into HEK 293T cells using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. 12 h after transfection, 10 µM MG132 (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the medium for a further 12 h. Cells were harvested and the presence of alpha-tubulin and PB1-, PB1-N40- and PB1-F2-GFP was detected via Western blot using rabbit anti-alpha tubulin (Abcam) and mouse anti-GFP (Gene Tex) antibodies with IRDye 800CW/IRDye 680RD secondary antibodies (LI-COR) and visualized using the Odyssey CLx (Li-Cor). Densitometric analysis was performed using Image Studio software (Li-Cor) from three independent experiments and the intensities for PB1-, PB1-N40- and PB1-F2-GFP were normalized to alpha-tubulin. Fold change in protein expression relative to the WT was calculated.Multi-cycle growth curves.MDCK cells and cKCs were infected with virus m.o.i. of 0.0001 at 37 °C for 1 h, in triplicate. The cells were washed and incubated at 37 °C in serum-free DMEM containing 2 µg ml−1 TPCK trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). A 500 µl aliquot of supernatant was taken 24, 48 and 72h after infection and stored at −80 °C and 500 µl of fresh medium was added back to each well. Virus was titrated by plaque assay.Five cTOCs per time point were inoculated with 100 p.f.u. of virus at 37 °C for 1 h in cTOC maintenance medium. cTOCs were washed then placed in glass tubes for rotation at 37 °C in 1 ml of maintenance medium. Medium was harvested from five individual cTOCs at 24, 48 and 72 h for each virus. The virus in the supernatants was titrated by plaque assay.To perform growth curves in ovo, three 10-day-old embryonated hens’ eggs per virus, per time point, were inoculated into the allantoic cavity with 100 p.f.u. of virus. Eggs were incubated at 37 °C for 24, 48 or 72 h; the allantoic fluid was harvested and titrated by plaque assay.Titration of infectious virus.Infectious virus in growth curves, chicken swabs, environmental samples or homogenized tissue was titrated by plaque assay on MDCK cells. MDCK cells were inoculated with 10-fold serially diluted samples and overlaid with 0.6 % agarose (Oxoid) in supplemented DMEM (1× MEM, 0.21 % BSA V, 1 mM l-glutamate, 0.15 % sodium bicarbonate, 10 mM HEPES, 1× penicillin/streptomycin (all Gibco) and 0.01 % Dextran DEAE (Sigma-Aldrich), with 2 µg ml−1 TPCK trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich). They were then incubated at 37 °C for 72 h. Plaques were developed using crystal violet stain containing methanol. The limit of virus detection in the plaque assays was 6.67 p.f.u. ml−1.Minimum lethal dose and minimum infectious dose assays.Groups of five, 10-day-old embryonated hens’ eggs were inoculated into the allantoic cavity with 100 µl of 10-fold decreasing concentrations of each virus in PBS from 10 000 to 0.001 p.f.u. The embryos were monitored in a double-blinded study by two people, twice daily until 72 hpi or until signs of end point as defined by lack of embryo movement and/or severe haemorrhage. Eggs were chilled at 4 °C to confirm death and the allantoic fluid was harvested and presence of infectious virus determined. The influenza viral infectivity assay was performed by inoculating a 96-well plate of MDCK cells with 100 µl of undiluted allantoic fluid for 1 h at 37 °C. Following washing in PBS, serum-free DMEM was added to the cells for 12 h. Cells were fixed with 50 % methanol : 50 % acetone and immune-stained for influenza nucleoprotein (NP). NP was detected using a mouse α-NP antibody produced at The Pirbright Institute and an IRDye 800CW α-mouse secondary antibody (Li-Cor) and visualized using Odyssey Imaging Systems (Li-Cor). The MLD was defined as the lowest viral dose resulting in death of all infected embryonated chicken eggs and the MID defined as the lowest viral dose required to produce infection in all embryonated chicken eggs.Infection and transmission of virus in chickens.Mixed, sex-specific pathogen free (SPF) Rhode Island Red chickens bred at The Pirbright Institute poultry production unit were used at 3 weeks old. Pre-infection sera were obtained from all chickens and all were negative for reactive influenza antibodies against A/chicken/Pakistan/UDL01/08 (UDL01). Chickens were split into three groups: Mock, UDL01-WT and UDL01-KO. The UDL01-WT and UDL01-KO were housed in self-contained BioFlex B50 Rigid Body Poultry isolators (Bell Isolation Systems). Chickens were inoculated intranasally with 100 µl (50 µl nare−1) of PBS for Mock group or UDL01-WT or UDL01-KO either at a low dose of virus (5×103 p.f.u.) or high dose (1×105 p.f.u.). Naive sentinel birds were introduced into the isolators with infected birds 24 h or 5 days after direct inoculation to assess transmission. Birds were humanely euthanized 14 days post inoculation and sera samples collected for analysis of virus specific antibodies.Sample collection from chickens and the isolator environment.Infection of birds was assessed by swabbing both the buccal and cloacal cavities daily with sterile polyester tipped swabs (Fisher Scientific) which were transferred into viral transport medium (WHO, 2006), vortexed briefly, clarified and stored at −80 °C prior to virus detection.On days 2 and 5 post inoculation, four birds from each group were humanely culled and organs (nasal tissue, trachea, lungs, oesophagus, proventriculus, duodenum, ileum, colon, blood and spleen) were snap frozen. Prior to processing, the organs were thawed on ice and homogenized inside a tube containing a 5 mm steel bead in a Bead Mill (Retsch MM 300) under the conditions of 20 Hz for 4 min. For infectious virus quantification, 20 % w/v of organ to PBS containing 1 % penicillin/streptomycin was added to the tube prior to homogenization; this was then clarified by centrifugation and the supernatant was used in plaques assays.For environmental sample collection, approximately 1 ml of drinking water was collected from both water sources inside each isolator. To the sample, 10× DMEM was added to achieve 1× DMEM. Approximately 1 g of dry food was added to 1 ml of viral transport medium and vortexed briefly. Both environmental sample types were clarified of debris by centrifugation at 450 g for 2 min and stored at −80 °C prior to virus detection by plaque assay.qRT-PCR of viral M gene.For viral M gene detection from chicken tissue, 750 µl of Trizol LS (Life Technologies) was added prior to homogenization. RNA was extracted from homogenized tissues by chloroform extraction and purification with a RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Quantification of vRNA copies was undertaken using a single-step real-time reverse transcription PCR, the Superscript III Platinum One-Step qRT-PCR Kit (Life Technologies). Primers and a TaqMan probe specific for a conserved region of the influenza A matrix gene were used as described previously (Spackman et al., 2002). Cycling conditions were: 50 °C, 5 min; 95 °C, 2 min and then 40 cycles of 95 °C, 3 s and 60 °C, 30 s, using a 7500 fast real-time PCR machine (Applied Biosystems). A T7 transcribed RNA standard of the M gene was run alongside each assay to generate a standard curve.Genome: p.f.u. ratios.Three independently produced viral stocks in embryonated chicken eggs for each virus were assessed. The p.f.u. were determined using standard plaque assay on MDCK cells. In parallel, RNA was extracted and the number of influenza M gene copies determined via qRT-PCR as previously described. The genome : p.f.u. ratio was calculated and the mean for each virus reported with sd.Statistical analysis.All statistics were performed using the statistical function on GraphPad Prism 7 (GraphPad Software). Statistical calculations included two-tailed paired Student’s t-test and Mann–Whitney U-test. P-values <0.05 were considered significant.Bioinformatics.In June 2015, all sequences were downloaded from the NCBI Influenza Virus Database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/FLU/Database/nph-select.cgi?go=database) as full-length DNA sequences; we excluded identical sequences through the collapse function. All sequences were analysed using mega6: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis version 6.0 (Tamura et al., 2013). For PB1-F2 length analysis, full-length PB1 sequences were downloaded and the PB1-F2 ORFs were extracted, aligned and translated. Only sequences with methionine at the canonical aa position zero were analysed to only include C-terminal truncations. For species analysis, separate sequence sets were downloaded for human, swine and avian. The avian orders and specific subtypes were categorized from total avian sequences after download. For analysis of PB1-F2 by pathogenicity, matched full-length HA and PB1 sequences were downloaded. The sequence surrounding the cleavage site of HA was extracted, aligned and translated. Viruses were classified as HPAI if they contained >2 basic aa (Arg, Lys or His) upstream, proximal to the cleavage motif as defined previously (OFFLU, 2014).Supplementary Data301Supplementary File 1Click here for additional data file.


Title: Viral RNA-binding ability conferred by SUMOylation at PB1 K612 of influenza A virus is essential for viral pathogenesis and transmission

IntroductionInfluenza A virus (IAV) is an important zoonotic pathogen that causes frequent epidemics and occasional pandemics in humans. Based on the antigenicity of the surface glycoproteins hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), IAVs are classified into 18 different HA subtypes and 11 different NA subtypes [1]. Since 1900, humans have suffered four influenza pandemics, among which the most recent 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus transmitted to over 215 countries and territories between April 2009 and August 2010 [2]. Moreover, humans are also constantly facing threats posed by avian influenza viruses (AIVs), with H5N1 and H7N9 human infections as two prime examples. The first human infection with H5N1 AIV occurred in Hong Kong in 1997 [3], and between 2003 and 2020, 861 human infection cases were reported, of which 455 were fatal [4]. The H7N9 low pathogenic AIVs identified in 2013 and the subsequently mutated H7N9 highly pathogenic AIVs in 2017 [5–8] led to 1568 human infections, including 615 fatal cases [9]. Therefore, continued efforts to elucidate the factors and mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs remain critical for the development of novel anti-influenza therapies.The viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex of IAVs is composed of individual viral RNA segments, three polymerase subunits [i.e., polymerase basic protein 1 (PB1), polymerase basic protein 2 (PB2), polymerase acidic protein (PA)], and nucleoprotein (NP) [10]. PB1 functions as the catalytic subunit and the assembly core of the RdRp [11–13], which is responsible for the transcription and replication of the IAV genome [14,15]. In addition to its N- and C-terminal extensions that make contact with PA and PB2, respectively, PB1 contains a central region comprising finger, fingertips, palm, and thumb domains [16], which are characteristics of RdRp. Terminal initiation during replication is dependent on the priming loop in the thumb domain of PB1 [17], which is also essential for transcriptional elongation, but not for transcriptional initiation [17,18].SUMOylation is an important regulatory posttranslational protein modification mechanism in eukaryotic cells. SUMO (small ubiquitin-related modifier) is a ubiquitin-like protein that is covalently conjugated to a target protein. There are four SUMO forms in humans, SUMO1, SUMO2, SUMO3, and SUMO4, among which SUMO1-SUMO3 are ubiquitously expressed and covalently conjugated to the lysine residues of target proteins [19]. SUMOs are conjugated to target proteins via a three-step cascade, involving a heterodimeric E1 activating enzyme, SAE1/SAE2; a unique E2 conjugating enzyme, Ubc9; and several E3 ligases [19,20]. The SUMOylation of a particular substrate may interfere with or facilitate its interaction with binding partners, regulate its activity, function, subcellular localization, and can affect its stability [21,22].IAV proteins are also targets of SUMOylation. To date, three IAV proteins [i.e., non-structural protein 1 (NS1), matrix protein 1 (M1), and NP] have been clearly identified as substrates of SUMO and the role of their SUMOylation in virus replication has been clarified. Among them, NS1 was the first identified SUMOylated IAV protein, the SUMOylation of which leads to enhanced protein stability and improved virus growth in cell culture [23,24]. SUMOylation of M1 has been shown to facilitate the nuclear export of vRNP complexes and the assembly of virus particles [25]; SUMOylation of NP is essential for the intracellular trafficking of NP and for virus growth in vitro [26]. More IAV proteins could be targets of SUMO modification, and IAV infection has been shown to induce a global increase in cellular SUMOylation [27,28]. However, the role of SUMO modification in the pathogenesis and transmission of IAV has not been explored.Here, we demonstrated that PB1, the catalytic core of the viral RdRp, is SUMOylated by SUMO1 in both transfected and virus-infected cells. We found a highly conserved lysine residue at position 612 (K612) is the key SUMO acceptor site of PB1. The SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 was found to be critical for vRNP complex activity and virus replication in vitro. Mechanistically, the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 was essential for PB1 to function in the binding of vRNA. Importantly, a SUMOylation-deficient PB1 K612R mutation significantly attenuated the virulence of H1N1, H5N1 and H7N9 viruses in mice. Furthermore, the replication and respiratory droplet transmission of the PB1 K612R mutant of a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus in ferrets was reduced compared with the wild-type virus, which created a stress condition that drove the R612K reversion mutation in inoculated and exposed ferrets.ResultsIAV PB1 is mainly SUMOylated by SUMO1Given the importance of SUMOylation in the posttranslational modification of viral proteins, we first investigated whether IAV PB1, the core subunit of viral RdRp, is a target of the host SUMOylation system. HEK293T cells were cotransfected with Flag-tagged PB1 of A/WSN/33 (WSN, H1N1) virus (WSN-H1PB1), along with or without SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9, SUMO1 or SUMO1mut (a conjugation-deficient SUMO1 variant), and SUMO-specific protease SENP1 or SENP1mut (SENP1 with loss-of-function mutations) [24,26]. At 48 h post-transfection, the cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag agarose, and then western blotted with an anti-PB1 monoclonal antibody (mAb). When WSN-H1PB1 was cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO1, a clear additional band for PB1 of ~110 kDa was detected, reflecting the potential modification of PB1 (95 kDa) by SUMO1. In contrast, this 110-kDa band was absent from cells cotransfected with SUMO1mut, indicating that WSN-H1PB1 is indeed SUMOylated (Fig 1A). To confirm these results, we introduced an expression construct for the de-SUMOylating enzyme SENP1 or SENP1mut into the transfection. The high molecular weight band of SUMOylated PB1 at ~110 kDa was markedly reduced when cotransfected with SENP1, whereas it was unaffected in the SENP1mut-expressing cells (Fig 1A). Of note, the same molecular weight bands of WSN-H1PB1 were also detected when the precipitated proteins were analyzed by using an anti-SUMO1 mAb, further confirming that WSN-H1PB1 was modified by SUMO1 (Fig 1A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g001Fig 1IAV PB1 is mainly SUMOylated by SUMO1.(A-C) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids expressing Flag-tagged PB1 from WSN (H1N1) (A), VN/1180 (H5N1) (B), or AH/1 (H7N9) (C), together with or without SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, Ubc9, and SENP1 or SENP1mut. At 48 h post-transfection, cell lysates were prepared, immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and western blotted to detect PB1 and SUMO1 with the indicated antibodies. (D-F) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged PB1 from WSN (H1N1) (D), VN/1180 (H5N1) (E), or AH/1 (H7N9) (F), together with or without Ubc9, and SUMO2 or SUMO3. At 48 h post-transfection, cell lysates were prepared, immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and western blotted to detect PB1 with an anti-PB1 mAb. The values on the left of the blots are molecular sizes in kilodaltons of the corresponding bands. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments.Next, we examined the SUMO1 modification of PB1 of other IAV subtypes and found that the PB1 proteins of A/chicken/Vietnam-Ca Mau/1180/2006 (VN/1180, H5N1) (VN-H5PB1) and A/Anhui/1/2013 (AH/1, H7N9) (AH-H7PB1) were also SUMOylated by SUMO1 in transfected HEK293T cells (Fig 1B and 1C). Collectively, these results indicate that SUMOylation of IAV PB1 by SUMO1 is a common posttranslational modification that lacks viral subtype specificity.Finally, we determined whether IAV PB1 was also SUMOylated by the other two forms of SUMO, SUMO2 and SUMO3. As shown in Fig 1D–1F, WSN-H1PB1, VN-H5PB1, and AH-H7PB1 were not SUMOylated when cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO2 or SUMO3.Taken together, these results clearly demonstrate that IAV PB1 protein is a target for SUMOylation by SUMO1, but not SUMO2 or SUMO3.The lysine residue at position 612 (K612) is the SUMOylation site of IAV PB1To identify the SUMOylation site(s) of PB1 protein, we used the in silico prediction program GPS-SUMO [29]. Three lysine residues, K379, K612, and K736, were predicted to be potential candidate sites for SUMO-conjugation in WSN-H1PB1 (Fig 2A). Individual K-to-R mutant PB1 proteins for all three predicted lysine residues were then generated, and their effect on the SUMOylation of PB1 was examined by coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP) and western blotting analysis. The precipitated proteins were detected by using an anti-PB1 mAb and an anti-SUMO1 mAb, respectively. As expected, WSN-H1PB1 was SUMOylated to form a 110-kDa high molecular weight band when cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO1. The main SUMOylated band was also present in the lanes transfected with the PB1/K379R and PB1/K736R mutants, but not the PB1/K612R mutant. These results indicate that K612, but not K379 or K736, is the key SUMO acceptor site of WSN-H1PB1 (Fig 2B).10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g002Fig 2K612 is the key SUMOylation site of IAV PB1.(A) Candidate SUMOylated sites (indicated in boldface and underline) in IAV PB1 were predicted by using the GPS-SUMO software. (B) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or its potential SUMOylation site mutant WSN-H1PB1/K379R, WSN-H1PB1/K612R, or WSN-H1PB1/K736R, together with or without SUMO1 and Ubc9. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were prepared, immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and western blotted with an anti-PB1 or anti-SUMO1 mAb. (C) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or the indicated potential SUMOylation site mutant, together with SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and Ubc9. Immunoprecipitation (IP) and western blotting were performed as in (B). (D, E) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged VN/1180-H5PB1 (D) or AH/1-H7PB1 (E), or their corresponding K612R mutant, together with SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and Ubc9. IP and western blotting were performed as in (B). Data shown are representative of three independent experiments in (B-E).To confirm that K612 was indeed the major SUMO acceptor site, the WSN-H1PB1 and WSN-H1PB1 mutants were each cotransfected with Ubc9 and SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and then co-IPed and western blotted. As shown in Fig 2C, the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band was detected when WSN-H1PB1, WSN-H1PB1/K379R, or WSN-H1PB1/K736R was cotransfected with SUMO1, whereas the indicated SUMOylated PB1 band disappeared when SUMO1mut was used instead of SUMO1. However, when the WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant was cotransfected with SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band was not detected. These data further confirm that K612 is the authentic SUMOylation site of WSN-H1PB1.We next determined whether VN-H5PB1 and AH-H7PB1, which both possess K612, were also SUMOylated at this site. Compared with wild-type VN-H5PB1 and AH-H7PB1, which were SUMOylated by SUMO1, analysis of the VN-H5PB1/K612R and AH-H7PB1/K612R mutants did not reveal the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band (Fig 2D and 2E), indicating that the lysine residue at position 612 is also a major SUMOylation site of VN-H5PB1 and AH-H7PB1. By performing a systemic sequence analysis involving 14,226 PB1 sequences, we found that the K612 residue is highly conserved among different IAV subtypes (S1 Table). Collectively, our results indicate that the K612 residue is a common SUMO acceptor site of the IAV PB1 proteins.PB1 is SUMOylated at K612 in infected cellsTo address whether the SUMOylation of PB1 protein occurs during IAV infection, SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutants of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses (WSN-PB1K612R, VN/1180-PB1K612R, and AH/1-PB1K612R) were generated by reverse genetics and deep-sequenced to ensure that they contained no unwanted mutations (S2 Table). HEK293T cells transiently overexpressing Ubc9 and SUMO1-Flag or SUMO1mut-Flag were infected with WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), AH/1 (H7N9), or their PB1/K612R mutants at an MOI of 2. Eighteen hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag agarose and then western blotted with an anti-PB1 mAb. As shown in Fig 3A, a band of 110 kDa corresponding to PB1-SUMO1 was detected in WSN (H1N1) virus-infected cells transfected with SUMO1 and Ubc9; whereas the indicated PB1-SUMO1 band disappeared when SUMO1mut was used in place of SUMO1. In contrast, the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1 band was not detectable in cells infected with the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus (Fig 3A). When tested in the background of the VN/1180 (H5N1) and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses, similar results were obtained (Fig 3B and 3C). These data demonstrate that IAV PB1 is SUMOylated at K612 in infected cells.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g003Fig 3IAV PB1 is SUMOylated in infected cells.HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged SUMO1 or SUMO1mut, and Ubc9. At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (A), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (B), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (C) at an MOI of 2. Eighteen hours later, the cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads and western blotted with an anti-PB1 mAb. The asterisk indicates unknown protein. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments.SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the stability or cellular localization of PB1After identifying K612 as the major SUMOylation site of IAV PB1, we investigated whether the stability of PB1 is affected by SUMOylation at K612. HEK293T cells were transfected with an expression plasmid encoding WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant. At 24 h post-transfection, protein synthesis was blocked with cycloheximide (CHX) and the steady-state levels of PB1 after CHX treatment were monitored by use of western blotting. Both PB1 and PB1/K612R protein levels remained stable at 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 12 h under CHX treatment (Fig 4A), indicating that SUMOylation at K612 has no effect on the stability of IAV PB1. To further demonstrate that SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 does not alter protein stability, we cotransfected Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant with Ubc9 and SUMO1 in HEK293T cells. As shown in Fig 4B, both native PB1 and SUMOylated PB1 were present in cells expressing WSN-H1PB1, and the level of total PB1 remained stable across different time points; native PB1, but not the 110-kDa PB1-SUMO1, was detected in cells expressing WSN-H1PB1/K612R, whose level remained unchanged. These results demonstrate that the stability of IAV PB1 is unaffected by the SUMOylation status of the K612 residue. We also found that SUMOylation at K612 did not affect the stability of VN-H5PB1 or AH-H7PB1 (Fig 4C–4F). Together, these data show that SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the stability of IAV PB1.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g004Fig 4SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the stability of IAV PB1.(A, C, and E) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R (A), VN/1180-H5PB1 or VN/1180-H5PB1/K612R (C), or AH/1-H7PB1 or AH/1-H7PB1/K612R (E). At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were treated with 100 μg/ml cycloheximide (CHX). The steady-state levels of PB1 protein after CHX treatment were then assessed at the indicated time points by western blotting with an anti-PB1 mAb. Western blots of whole cell lysates with an anti-GAPDH mAb are shown as loading controls. (B, D, and F) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding Flag-tagged WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R (B), VN/1180-H5PB1 or VN1180-H5PB1/K612R (D), or AH/1-H7PB1 or AH/1-H7PB1/K612R (F), together with SUMO1 and Ubc9. At 24 h post-transfection, the cells were treated with 100 μg/ml CHX for the time indicated. The cell lysates were then immunoprecipitated with anti-Flag M2 agarose beads, and both the precipitated proteins and the whole cell lysates were western blotted by using an anti-PB1 mAb. Arrow, SUMOylated PB1 protein. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments.Since SUMOylation could potentially affect the cellular localization of target proteins, we examined whether SUMOylation at K612 altered the intracellular distribution of IAV PB1. A549 cells were infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus at an MOI of 5, and the cellular localization of the PB1 protein was analyzed by use of an immunofluorescence assay. As shown in Fig 5A and 5B, at 2 h post-infection (p.i.), the fluorescence signal of PB1 was very weak, and PB1 mainly localized to the cytoplasm of both WSN- and WSN-PB1K612R-infected cells. At 4 h p.i., PB1 had entered the nucleus and appeared to accumulate there. At 6 h and 8 h p.i., the PB1 signal was strong in the nucleus of the infected cells, and by 10 h p.i., PB1 was largely exported from the nucleus and had accumulated in the cytoplasm. Overall, no observable quantitative difference was found between WSN- and WSN-PB1K612R-infected cells with respect to the localization of PB1 across the infection course (Fig 5C). These results indicate that PB1 SUMOylation at 612K does not influence the cellular localization of PB1 during virus infection.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g005Fig 5SUMOylation at K612 does not affect the cellular localization of PB1.(A, B) A549 cells were infected with WSN (H1N1) (A) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (B) at an MOI of 5, and the cells were fixed at the indicated time points, followed by staining with a rabbit anti-PB1 pAb and incubation with Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L). The nuclei were stained with DAPI. Representative images are shown. (C) Quantitative analysis of PB1 localization in virus-infected cells. The results shown are calculated from one hundred cells. On the basis of the confocal microscopy in panels A and B, the localization of PB1 was categorized into three types: predominantly cytoplasmic localization (blue), clear nuclear localization (red), and simultaneous localization in the cytoplasm and nucleus (green).SUMOylation at PB1 K612 does not affect the assembly of the viral RNP complexPB1 is the core subunit of the viral heterotrimeric polymerase complex, with its N-terminal region interacting with PA and its C-terminal region binding PB2 [12,13]. We therefore tested whether the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 affects the PB1-PA and PB1-PB2 interactions. HEK293T cells were transfected for 48 h with WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant individually or simultaneously were transfected with WSN-H1PB2 or WSN-H1PA. Cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with anti-PB1 mAb and then western blotted to detect PB1, PB2, or PA. The amount of PB2 or PA that was immunoprecipitated by WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R was comparable (Fig 6), indicating that the interactions between PB1-PB2 and PB1-PA were not affected by the SUMOylation at K612 of PB1. We also tested whether the SUMOylation at PB1 K612 affects the assembly of the viral RNP complex. Viral RNP complexes, bearing WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R, were reconstituted in HEK293T cells by co-transfection of expression plasmids for PB2, PB1 or PB1/K612R, PA, and NP of WSN (H1N1) virus, together with pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, which was used to provide a vRNA-like template RNA [30–32]. At 48 h post-transfection, the vRNP complexes were immunoprecipitated from cell lysates by using an anti-PB1 mAb, and the presence of PB2, PA, and NP in the precipitated vRNP complexes was detected by western blotting. No significant differences in the amounts of PB2, PA, and NP were observed between vRNP complexes bearing WSN-H1PB1 and those bearing WSN-H1PB1/K612R (S1 Fig). These results indicate that SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 has no effect on the assembly of the vRNP complex of IAV.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g006Fig 6SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 has no effect on the interaction of PB1 with PB2 or PA.(A) PB1/K612R mutation does not affect the PB1-PB2 interaction. HEK293T cells were transfected individually or in combination as indicated with plasmids expressing WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant, and WSN-H1PB2. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with a mouse anti-PB1 mAb, followed by western blotting with antibodies against PB1 and PB2. (B) Quantification of immunoprecipitated PB2 in (A). Band intensities of western blots from three assays were quantified by using ImageJ software, and the amount of precipitated PB2 was normalized to that of precipitated PB1. (C) PB1/K612R mutation does not affect the PB1-PA interaction. HEK293T cells were transfected individually or in combination as indicated with plasmids expressing WSN-H1PB1 or WSN-H1PB1/K612R mutant, and WSN-H1PA. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with a mouse anti-PB1 mAb, followed by western blotting with antibodies against PB1 and PA. (D) Quantification of immunoprecipitated PA in (C) as described in (B). The amount of precipitated PA was normalized to that of precipitated PB1. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of three assays and the significance was tested with a Student’s t-test (B, D). NS, not significant.SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 enhances vRNP complex activityThe vRNP complex of IAV is responsible for the transcription and replication of the viral genome [14,15]. We therefore asked whether vRNP complex activity was affected by SUMOylation of PB1 at K612. To this end, a minigenome assay was performed in HEK293T cells, which were transfected with the four vRNP complex protein expression plasmids, PB2, PB1 or PB1/K612R, PA, and NP of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus, together with a reporter plasmid, pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, encoding a vRNA-like firefly luciferase gene [30–32]. Forty-eight hours later, the luciferase activity of the cell lysates was measured to reveal the vRNP complex activity. The results showed that the vRNP complex activity of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) virus decreased by approximately 50%, 55%, and 95%, respectively, in cells expressing PB1/K612R compared with that of PB1 (Fig 7A–7C). These findings demonstrate that the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 is essential for the vRNP complex activity of IAV.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g007Fig 7SUMOylation at K612 of IAV PB1 is essential for vRNP complex activity and virus replication in vitro.(A-C) Four vRNP protein expression plasmids (PB2, PA, NP, and PB1 or a PB1/K612R mutant) derived from WSN (H1N1) (A), VN/1180 (H5N1) (B), or AH/1 (H7N9) (C), together with a luciferase reporter, pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, and an internal control reporter, pRL-TK, were cotransfected into HEK293T cells. Forty-eight hours later, the cell lysates were subjected to a dual-luciferase reporter assay. Western blotting was also performed to assess the expression of the transfected vRNP protein constructs (bottom panel). (D-F) Plaque phenotypes of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (D), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (E), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (F) on MDCK cells. (G-I) Growth curves of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (G), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (H), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (I). MDCK cells were inoculated with the indicated viruses at an MOI of 0.001, and the supernatants were collected at the indicated time points to determine the virus titers by use of plaque assays. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments. The results are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) of triplicates and the significance was tested with a Student’s t-test (A-C) or a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test (G-I). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation impairs IAV replicationTo determine the effect of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation on the in vitro replication of IAV, we first compared the plaque morphologies of the wild-type WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses with those of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant viruses in MDCK cells. Compared with the wild-type viruses, which formed large plaques, the PB1/K612R mutant viruses formed much smaller plaques, indicating that virus growth was greatly impaired by the lack of SUMOylation of PB1 at position 612 (Fig 7D–7F).We next examined the replication kinetics of the PB1/K612R mutant viruses. MDCK cells were infected with one of the wild-type viruses or with the PB1/K612R mutant viruses at an MOI of 0.001. Supernatants were collected at 12, 24, 36, and 48 h p.i. and titrated by a plaque assay on MDCK cells. We found that the PB1/K612R mutation led to 25- to 76-, 2- to 7-, and 3- to 22-fold reductions in growth titers from 12 to 48 h p.i. for the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1), and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) viruses, respectively, compared with the corresponding wild-type viruses. These data further demonstrate that the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 is critical for optimal replication of IAV (Fig 7G–7I).The K612R mutation impairs the ability of PB1 to bind vRNAThe C-proximal sequences located downstream of position 493 (494–757) of PB1 binds to vRNA [33]. The amino acid K612 is located in the vRNA binding domain (Fig 8A). We therefore determined whether the SUMOylation-defective K612R mutation affects the ability of PB1 to bind to vRNA. HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmid expressing the Flag-tagged 494–757 region of wild-type PB1 or the PB1/K612R mutant of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus (Fig 8B–8D). A model vRNA was transcribed from the NS gene of the WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus in vitro (Fig 8E–8G), and the protein-vRNA binding assay was carried out as previously reported [34]. As shown in Fig 8H, the amount of vRNA bound by WSN-H1PB1494-757 protein was much higher than that bound by WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R. When tested in the VN/1180 (H5N1) or AH/1 (H7N9) background, the VN/1180-H5PB1494-757 and AH/1-H7PB1494-757 proteins again bound much more model vRNA than the corresponding PB1/K612R mutant proteins, VN/1180-H5PB1494-757/K612R and AH/1-H7PB1494-757/K612R (Fig 8I and 8J). These data demonstrate that the K612R mutation impairs the vRNA-binding ability of PB1.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g008Fig 8K612R mutation impairs the ability of PB1 to bind to vRNA.(A) Schematic illustration of IAV PB1 and its C-terminal 494–757 region that is involved in the vRNA-binding activity of PB1. The vRNA binding regions in PB1 protein are marked in pink. (B-D) HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids expressing the Flag-tagged 494–757 region of wild-type PB1 or a K612R mutant PB1 of WSN (H1N1) (B), VN/1180 (H5N1) (C), or AH/1 (H7N9) (D) virus; plasmid expression was verified by western blotting. (E-G) Model vRNAs were transcribed from the NS gene of the WSN (H1N1) (E), VN/1180 (H5N1) (F), or AH/1 (H7N9) (G) virus in vitro, and detected by gel electrophoresis. (H-J) A protein binding vRNA assay was performed to quantify the amount of vRNA bound by the truncated wild-type or mutant PB1 proteins. The amount of vRNA bound by WSN-H1PB1494-757 or WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R (H), VN/1180-H5PB1494-757 or VN/1180-H5PB1494-757/K612R (I), or AH/1-H7PB1494-757 or AH/1-H7PB1494-757/K612R (J) was quantified by use of qRT-PCR. (K-M) An RNA-protein pull-down assay was performed to quantify the amount of truncated wild-type or mutant PB1 protein that was bound by the model vRNA. The amount of truncated PB1 protein WSN-H1PB1494-757 or WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R (K), VN/1180-H5PB1494-757 or VN/1180-H5PB1494-757/K612R (L), or AH/1-H7PB1494-757 or AH/1-H7PB1494-757/K612R (M) bound and unbound by the model vRNA was detected by western blotting. Data shown are representative of three independent experiments in (H-M). The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of triplicates and the significance was tested with a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test (H-J). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.To further confirm that the K612R mutation affects the binding of the PB1 protein to vRNA, we conducted an RNA-protein pull-down experiment. Ten micrograms of biotinylated model vRNA was captured with streptavidin magnetic beads. Cell lysates containing 100 μg of total protein that had previously been transfected with a plasmid expressing truncated WSN-H1PB1 protein (PB1494-757 or PB1494-757/K612R) or pCAGGS vector as a control were then added to the RNA-bound beads. The amount of both unbound and vRNA-bound proteins was analyzed by western blotting. We found that the same amount of vRNA bound more WSN-H1PB1494-757 protein than WSN-H1PB1494-757/K612R protein (Fig 8K). When we conducted this experiment in the VN/1180 (H5N1) and AH/1 (H7N9) backgrounds, we found that the amount of the PB1/K612R protein bound by vRNA was significantly lower than that of the wild-type protein (Fig 8L and 8M). Collectively, these results demonstrate that the K612R mutation in IAV PB1 impairs the ability of the PB1 protein to bind vRNA.The virulence of SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant viruses is attenuated in miceTo determine the significance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 to the virulence of IAVs, we evaluated the replication of the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant viruses in mice. Three 6-week-old female BALB/c mice were inoculated with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, or 105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus, or 106 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus. The mice were killed on day 3 p.i., and the virus titers in their organs were determined by using plaque assays on MDCK cells. The WSN (H1N1) and WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant viruses replicated only in respiratory organs, and the titers of the WSN (H1N1) virus in the nasal turbinates and lungs of the mice were significantly higher than those in these tissues of the mice that were inoculated with the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus (Fig 9A). The VN/1180 (H5N1) virus caused systemic infection, with virus replication detected in the nasal turbinates, lungs, spleens, and kidneys, whereas the replication of the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus was restricted to the respiratory tract, with much lower titers in the nasal turbinates and lungs than the wild-type VN/1180 (H5N1) virus (Fig 9B). Similarly, the viral titers of AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus in the nasal turbinates and lungs of mice were much lower than those inoculated with AH/1 (H7N9) virus (Fig 9C). These results demonstrate that the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation significantly attenuates the replication of IAVs in vivo.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g009Fig 9SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation attenuates the replication and pathogenicity of IAVs in mice.(A) Replication of WSN (H1N1) and WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) in mice. Six-week-old BALB/c mice were inoculated intranasally with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), and organs were collected on day 3 p.i. for virus titration by plaque assays (n = 3). Data shown are mean ± SD for organ samples from three mice; significance was assessed with a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01. NS, not significant. (B) Replication of VN/1180 (H5N1) and VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) in mice inoculated with 105 PFU of the indicated virus, as determined in (A). (C) Replication of AH/1 (H7N9) and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) in mice inoculated with 106 PFU of the indicated virus, as determined in (A). (D, E) Mortality assessment of mice infected with WSN (H1N1) (D) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (E). Mice were inoculated intranasally with different doses of the indicated viruses and observed for 14 days. (n = 5 mice for each group). (F, G) Mortality assessment of mice infected with VN/1180 (H5N1) (F) and VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (G) as determined in (D, E). (H, I) Mortality assessment of mice infected with AH/1 (H7N9) (H) and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (I) as determined in (D, E). (J-M) Hematoxylin-and-eosin (H&E) staining (J, L) and immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for viral NP (K, M) of lung sections prepared on day 3 p.i. from mice intranasally infected with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1). (N-Q) H&E staining (N, P) and IHC staining for viral NP (O, Q) of lung sections prepared on day 3 p.i. from mice intranasally infected with 105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1). (R-U) H&E staining (R, T) and IHC staining for viral NP (S, U) of lung sections prepared on day 3 p.i. from mice intranasally infected with 106 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9). Scale bars = 200 μm (J, L, N, P, R, and T); Scale bars = 100 μm (K, M, O, Q, S, and U).We next determined the 50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) of the PB1/K612R mutant viruses. Groups of five mice were intranasally inoculated with serially diluted mutant viruses or the corresponding wild-type viruses, and their body weight, disease signs, and death were monitored daily for 14 days. The wild-type WSN (H1N1) virus caused severe disease and killed the mice at an MLD50 of 103.5 PFU (Figs 9D and S2A). However, no deaths were observed among the mice inoculated with any dose of the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, and all of the mice had gained weight at the end of the observation period (S2B Fig), yielding an MLD50 of >106.5 PFU (Fig 9E). Consistent with these results, mice inoculated with the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus lost much less body weight than those inoculated with the same dose of the wild-type VN/1180 virus (S2C and S2D Fig); the MLD50 of the VN/1180 (H5N1) virus was 102.22 PFU, whereas the lethality of the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus was reduced by 100-fold (MLD50 = 104.22 PFU) (Fig 9F and 9G). Similarly, the body weight loss of mice inoculated with AH/1 (H7N9) virus and AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus were observed in the 105–107 PFU groups, with more severe body weight loss observed in mice inoculated with AH/1 (H7N9) virus than AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus (S2E and S2F Fig); and the MLD50 was 105.5 PFU for AH/1 (H7N9) virus, whereas was >107.5 PFU for AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus, displaying an at least 100-fold reduction compared with the wild-type virus (Fig 9H and 9I). These data indicate that the virulence of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant viruses is highly compromised compared with that of the wild-type viruses in mice.We also performed histopathological studies on lung sections from the wild-type- and PB1/K612R mutant virus-inoculated mice. The WSN (H1N1) virus-infected mice exhibited more severe lung lesions (i.e. perivascular edema, infiltration of inflammatory cells, necrosis, and exfoliation of bronchiole epithelial cells) compared with the mice infected with the WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus. Immunohistochemical analysis with an anti-NP pAb revealed more viral antigen-positive cells in the lungs of mice infected with the wild-type WSN (H1N1) virus than in mice infected with the mutant virus (Fig 9J–9M). Similar results were observed in the lungs of mice infected with the wild-type VN/1180 (H5N1), AH/1 (H7N9) and their corresponding PB1/K612R mutant viruses (Fig 9N–9U). These data show that the PB1/K612R mutant viruses induce significantly less severe lung lesions compared with the wild-type viruses. Collectively, the above findings indicate that the SUMOylation at PB1 K612 plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of IAVs in mice.SUMOylation at PB1 K612 may facilitate the replication and respiratory droplet transmission of IAV in ferretsEfficient and sustained transmission among humans is the most prominent property of pandemic and epidemic IAVs [35]. To determine whether the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 affects the transmissibility of IAVs, a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus, A/Fuzhou/1/2009 (FZ/1, H1N1), and its SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutant FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) were rescued by reverse genetics. We then tested the replication ability of these viruses in ferrets. Both the FZ/1 (H1N1) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) viruses were detected in the nasal turbinates, soft palate, tonsils, trachea, and lungs of the inoculated ferrets on day 4 p.i. Overall, the titers of the FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus in the organs tested were lower than those of the FZ/1 (H1N1) virus, especially in nasal turbinates, tonsils, and lungs (Fig 10A and 10B). We next tested the respiratory droplet transmissibility of the FZ/1 (H1N1) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) viruses in ferrets. Both the FZ/1 (H1N1) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) viruses were detected in nasal washes from inoculated ferrets between days 2 and 6 p.i. Notably, FZ/1 (H1N1) was present in the nasal washes of all three exposed ferrets on days 3, 5, and 7 post-exposure (p.e.), and was present in the nasal wash of one exposed ferret on day 9 p.e., with peak titers ranging from 6.0 to 7.3 log10 PFU/mL (Fig 10C). By contrast, in the FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1)-exposed group, the virus was detected in the nasal wash of only one ferret on day 3 p.e., and in the nasal wash of another ferret until day 7 p.e., with peak titers ranging from 3.9 to 6.3 log10 PFU/mL (Fig 10D). All of the inoculated ferrets and the exposed ferrets that shed viruses seroconverted on day 21 p.i. or p.e. (Fig 10E and 10F). These results suggest that the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation is correlated with the impaired replication and transmission of the FZ/1 (H1N1) virus in ferrets.10.1371/journal.ppat.1009336.g010Fig 10PB1/K612R mutation compromises the replication and respiratory droplet transmission of IAVs in ferrets.(A, B) Replication of a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus FZ/1 and its mutant FZ/1-PB1K612R in ferrets. Groups of two ferrets were intranasally inoculated with 106 PFU of FZ/1 (A) or FZ/1-PB1K612R (B). The ferrets were euthanized on day 4 post-inoculation and the indicated organs were collected for virus titration by plaque assays. Each color bar represents the virus titer from an individual animal. (C, D) Respiratory droplet transmission of FZ/1 (H1N1) (C) and FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) (D) in ferrets. Groups of three ferrets were intranasally inoculated with 106 PFU of the tested virus, and 24 h later three naïve ferrets were introduced into the neighboring cages. Nasal washes were collected every 2 days for virus titration by plaque assays. Each color bar represents the virus titer from an individual ferret. (E, F) Seroconversion was confirmed by use of a hemagglutinin inhibition (HI) assay. Each bar represents the HI antibody titer from an individual animal. The dashed black lines indicate the lower limit of detection.Finally, we sought to determine whether the introduced PB1/K612R mutation was stably maintained during viral replication in ferrets. Viral RNAs extracted from nasal washes of FZ/1-PB1K612R-inoculated and -exposed ferrets were reverse-transcribed into cDNA, and the full-length PB1 gene was amplified and deep-sequenced. Strikingly, PB1/K612R was not stably maintained during virus replication in ferrets. The R612K reversion mutation in PB1 was found on day 2 p.i. in the inoculated ferrets, and all of the viruses contained the R612K reversion mutation in the inoculated animals on day 4 p.i. (S3 Table). In the virus-positive exposed ferret on day 3 p.e., 99% of the viruses in the nasal wash contained PB1 R612. However, the viruses mutated to K612 quickly, with 96% of the sequencing reads bearing K612 on day 5 p.e. Interestingly, the second virus-positive exposed ferret had already acquired the PB1 R612K reversion mutation when the virus was detected in the nasal wash on day 7 p.e. (Fig 10D and S3 Table). These results suggest that the transmission of the FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) virus may have occurred or have been enhanced after it acquired the R612K reversion mutation in its PB1 protein.DiscussionPosttranslational modifications, such as phosphorylation, acetylation, ubiquitination, and SUMOylation, play important roles in the regulation of protein activity, localization and stability [36]. SUMOylation is an important reversible posttranslational modification that is extensively involved in the regulation of viral protein functions [37]. Several viral proteins of IAV, for example, NS1, M1, and NP, are reported to be SUMOylated in transfected and infected cells [23,25–27,38]. As the assembly core of the IAV polymerase complex, PB1 binds to the PA protein through its N-terminal domain and binds to the PB2 protein through its C-terminal domain in order to play a central role in the transcription and replication of the viral genome. In addition to the clear role of SUMOylation in the posttranslational modification of the specific IAV proteins mentioned above, IAV infection has been shown to induce a global increase in cellular SUMOylation levels and PB1 has been suggested to be a target of SUMOylation [27,28]. However, the molecular details of PB1 SUMOylation and its role in virus replication remain unclear. More importantly, the biological significance of SUMOylation for the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs has never been investigated.In the present study, we clearly demonstrated that IAV PB1 is SUMOylated by SUMO1 in transfected and infected cells, and we mapped the key SUMOylation site of the PB1 protein to residue K612 in the C-terminal region. Large-scale sequence analysis revealed that the lysine residue at position 612 of PB1 is highly conserved among different IAV strains. These findings reveal that SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 is a common posttranslational modification mechanism of IAVs. We speculate that the acquisition and stable maintenance of K612 in PB1 is the outcome of host adaptation of IAVs to achieve optimal viral fitness.The functional consequences of SUMOylation are highly diverse depending on the target proteins [21,39,40]. We investigated the effect of SUMOylation of K612 on the biological properties of the PB1 protein, and found that SUMOylation at K612 did not affect the interaction of PB1 with the other two polymerase subunits, PB2 and PA, and also did not interfere with vRNP complex assembly. Unlike the viral NS1 protein, which is stabilized by SUMOylation [24], the SUMOylation of K612 had no effect on the stability of PB1, and also did not change the cellular localization of PB1 in infected cells. Functionally, we found that the vRNP complex activity decreased significantly when the PB1 protein could not undergo SUMO modification at the mutated K612R residue. In the WSN (H1N1) and VN/1180 (H5N1) virus backgrounds, the vRNP complex activity was reduced by about 50% due to the PB1/K612R mutation, and in the AH/1 (H7N9) virus background, this mutation led to an approximately 95% reduction in vRNP complex activity. Because the SUMO acceptor site K612 is located in the vRNA binding domain of the PB1 protein, we tested whether the K612R mutation affects the binding of PB1 to vRNA. We found that lack of SUMOylation of PB1 at the mutated K612R residue significantly impaired the ability of the PB1 protein to bind to vRNA, thereby severely limiting the replication and transcription of IAVs. These data clearly indicate that SUMOylation at K612 is indispensable to PB1 for the ability to bind to vRNA with high affinity, which is essential for PB1 to fulfil its function as the enzymatic core of the vRNP complex.In characterizing the effect of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 on the replication of IAVs, we found that SUMOylation-defective PB1 K612R mutant viruses formed much smaller plaques in MDCK cells than the wild-type viruses, and that their growth kinetics were also severely compromised in MDCK cells. These results are consistent with the role of SUMOylation of other IAV proteins, such as NP, M1, and NS1, for viral replication in vitro [24–26]. Consistent with the in vitro growth properties, the PB1/K612R mutant viruses replicated to much lower titers in mouse organs compared with the corresponding wild-type viruses; of note, the replication of the VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus was restricted to respiratory organs, whereas the wild-type VN/1180 (H5N1) virus caused systemic infection.The biological significance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 on the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs was thoroughly explored. In the mouse model, we found that the virulence of the SUMOylation-defective PB1 K612R mutant viruses was significantly attenuated compared with that of the wild-type WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1) or AH/1 (H7N9) virus, indicating that SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 is necessary for IAVs to be virulent in mice. Sustained respiratory droplet transmission is an essential property of pandemic and epidemic IAVs [35], and we found that the SUMOylation of PB1 at K612 may facilitate the transmission of IAVs. The wild-type 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus, A/Fuzhou/1/2009, transmitted to all three exposed ferrets via respiratory droplets, whereas the PB1-K612R mutant virus transmitted to two of the three exposed ferrets. Notably, the R612K reversion mutation was identified on day 2 p.i., and accounted for 100% of the residues at position 612 of PB1 on day 4 p.i., in all three inoculated ferrets; virus shedding in one of the two positive exposed ferrets was detected until day 7 p.e., and almost all shed viruses carried the R612K reversion mutation. These findings indicate that the stress condition, caused by the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation, drives the reversion of the mutant virus to the wild-type phenotype. The SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 would, therefore, appear to be a prerequisite for the efficient replication and transmission of pandemic influenza viruses. Together, these data shed light on the importance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 in the pathogenesis and the transmission of IAVs.In summary, here we found that IAVs can manipulate the host SUMOylation system to modify their PB1 protein. The highly conserved K612 residue of PB1 was pinpointed as the key acceptor site that conjugates with SUMO1. vRNP complex activity and viral replication were severely attenuated in the presence of the SUMOylation-defective PB1/K612R mutation, which were attributed to the impaired binding affinity to vRNA caused by this mutation. Strikingly, the SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 was important for the pathogenesis and transmission of IAVs in mammalian models. Collectively, our study revealed the biological significance of SUMOylation at K612 of PB1 in IAV infection, which could serve as a potential therapeutic target for the development of novel antiviral therapies.Materials and methodsEthics statementsThis study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the Ministry of Science and Technology of the People’s Republic of China. The protocols for animal studies were approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of the Harbin Veterinary Research Institute (HVRI) of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS) (approval numbers BRDW-XBS–19 for mice and BRDW-XD–19 for ferrets).FacilityAll experiments with live H5N1 and H7N9 viruses were conducted within the enhanced animal biosafety level 3 (ABSL3+) facility at the HVRI of CAAS, which is approved for such use by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People’s Republic of China. All animal studies were approved by the Review Board of the HVRI, CAAS. The details of the facility and the biosafety and biosecurity measures used have been previously reported [31,41].Cells and virusesHEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Sigma-Aldrich), human lung carcinoma cells (A549) were cultured in F12K medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% FBS, and Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were cultured in MEM (Life Technologies) containing 5% newborn calf serum (Sigma-Aldrich). All cells were maintained in a humidified incubator containing 5% CO2 at 37°C.A/chicken/Vietnam-Ca Mau/1180/2006 (VN/1180, H5N1) and A/Anhui/1/2013 (AH/1, H7N9) were grown in 10-day-old specific-pathogen-free (SPF) embryonated chicken eggs, as reported previously [6,42]. A/WSN/33 (WSN, H1N1) and a 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus, A/Fuzhou/1/2009 (FZ/1, H1N1), were propagated in MDCK cells cultured in MEM containing 0.3% bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.5 μg/ml N-tosyl-L-phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-treated trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich).PlasmidsThe PB2, PB1, PA, and NP genes of three influenza viruses [i.e. WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9)] were cloned into the mammalian expression vector pCAGGS [43]. pCAGGS-Flag-WSN-H1PB1, pCAGGS-Flag-VN/1180-H5PB1, and pCAGGS-Flag-AH/1-H7PB1 were generated by inserting the PB1 open reading frames (ORFs) of the WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) viruses with a Flag tag sequence fused at the N-terminus into the pCAGGS vector. Truncation constructs of the three different PB1 proteins, WSN-H1PB1494-757, VN/1180-H5PB1494-757, AH/1-H7PB1494-757, as well as the corresponding K612R mutants, were generated by using a PCR approach. The full-length ORFs of human SUMO1, SUMO2, and SUMO3 were cloned into the pCAGGS vector with an HA tag at the N-terminus. SUMO1 was further subcloned into pCAGGS with a Flag tag at the N-terminus. SUMO1mut was obtained by a PCR approach using primers containing GG-to-AA mutations at the C-terminus of SUMO1 as previously reported [26]. The ORFs of SENP1 and Ubc9 were amplified from human A549 cDNA and cloned into pCDNA3.1 and pCAGGS, respectively. The SENP1 catalytic mutant plasmid, pCDNA3.1-SENP1mut-V5 (SENP1mut), was generated from SENP1 by site-directed mutagenesis as described previously [44]. Plasmids expressing the WSN-H1PB1 mutants, including WSN-H1PB1/K379R, WSN-H1PB1/K612R, and WSN-H1PB1/K736R, were derived from pCAGGS-Flag-WSN-H1PB1 by PCR-based site-directed mutagenesis. By using a PCR approach, a K612R mutation was introduced into different viral PB1 genes, which were then cloned into the pHH21 vector [15]. The plasmid pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc, for the expression of a viral RNA-like firefly luciferase gene under the control of the human RNA polymerase I promoter, has been reported previously [30,31]. All constructs were sequenced to ensure the absence of unwanted mutations. The primer sequences used for cloning are available upon request.AntibodiesRabbit anti-NP polyclonal antibody (pAb) and mouse monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against IAV PB1, PB2, PA, and NP were prepared and stored in our laboratory [30,45]. The following primary antibodies were purchased from commercial sources: rabbit anti-SUMO-1 (C9H1) mAb (4940, Cell Signaling Technology), rabbit anti-PB1 pAb (GTX125923, GeneTex), anti-Flag M2 affinity gel (A2220, Sigma-Aldrich), mouse anti-GAPDH mAb (60004-1-Ig, Proteintech), and rabbit anti-GAPDH pAb (10494-1-AP, Proteintech). The secondary antibodies DyLight 800 goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (072-07-18-06) and DyLight 800 goat anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (072-07-15-06), purchased from KPL (Gaithersburg, MD), were used for western blotting. The secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) (A21206, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used in the immunofluorescence assay, and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (A9169, Sigma-Aldrich) was used in the immunohistochemical assay.Generation of mutant viruses by reverse geneticsMutant viruses with the PB1/K612R mutation (AAA at positions 1858–1860 of PB1 gene were mutated to CGA) in the WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), AH/1 (H7N9) and FZ/1(H1N1) background were generated by using the reverse genetics system as described previously [15]. The rescued viruses were fully sequenced to ensure the absence of unwanted mutations.Co-IP and western blotting analysisHEK293T cells were transfected for 48 h with the indicated plasmids by using Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen). To determine the SUMOylation of the PB1 protein during viral infection, HEK293T cells were first transfected for 24 h with Ubc9, SUMO1, or SUMO1mut, followed by infection with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus (MOI = 2) or mock infection for 18 h. The transfected or infected cells were then washed with cold PBS and lysed with NP40 buffer (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) containing complete protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche Diagnostics) for 30 min on ice. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm at 4°C for 10 min, and the supernatant was then subjected to immunoprecipitation with anti-Flag agarose at 4°C for 6 h. The beads were washed four times with cold PBS (containing 1 mM PMSF), and the bound proteins were eluted with SDS loading buffer and separated by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare), which were blocked in 5% skimmed milk in PBST for 1 h, and then incubated with the indicated primary and secondary antibodies. Blots were visualized with the Odyssey infrared imaging system (Li-Cor BioScience).Immunofluorescence assayA549 cells seeded in glass-bottom dishes were infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus at an MOI of 5. At 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 h p.i., the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 1 h and permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 15 min. The permeabilized cells were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin in PBS for 1 h, and then were incubated with rabbit anti-PB1 pAb for 1 h. After three washes with PBS, the cells were incubated with the secondary antibody Alexa Fluor 488 donkey anti-rabbit IgG (H+L) for 1 h, followed by incubation with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Sigma-Aldrich) for 15 min to stain the nuclei. Images were acquired by using a Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope.Plaque assayPlaque assays were performed on MDCK cells in 12-well plates as described previously [43]. Briefly, MDCK cells were infected with 10-fold serial dilutions of virus supernatants in 1×MEM (0.3% BSA) for 1 h at 37°C. Then the cells were washed with PBS and overlaid with 1% SeaPlaque agarose (Lonza) in 1×MEM (0.3% BSA, 0.5 μg/ml TPCK-treated trypsin). After 48 to 72 h of incubation, the cells were fixed with formalin, and plaques were stained with 0.1% crystal violet and counted.Dual-luciferase reporter assayHEK293T cells were transfected with pCAGGS constructs expressing viral PB2, PB1 (wild-type or K612R mutant), PA, and NP proteins (0.5 μg each), the construct pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc (0.1 μg), and an internal control pRL-TK (0.05 μg, Promega) by using Lipofectamine LTX & Plus reagents (Invitrogen). Cells were incubated at 37°C for 48 h, and cell lysates were subsequently prepared by using the Dual-Luciferase Reporter Assay System (Promega). The luciferase activities were measured on a GloMax 96 microplate luminometer (Promega) as reported previously [30–32].Generation of model vRNAA 360-nucleotide model vRNA was transcribed in vitro from a cDNA containing the T7 promoter and the noncoding region of the NS gene of WSN (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1), or AH/1 (H7N9) virus by using the RiboMax Large Scale RNA Production Systems (Promega) as described previously [34]. The vRNAs transcribed in vitro were concentrated and purified by using a Spin Column RNA Cleanup & Concentration Kit (Sangon Biotech) and quantified by using NanoDrop (ThermoFisher).Protein binding vRNA assayA protein binding vRNA assay was carried out as described previously [34]. Briefly, HEK293T cells were transfected with a plasmid expressing Flag-tagged truncated PB1494-757 or PB1494-757/K612R or with pCAGGS-Flag vector as a control. The cells were lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (ThermoFisher) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Anti-Flag agarose was added to cell lysates containing 100 μg of total protein, followed by incubation for 4 h on a roller at 4°C. After three washes with diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated 0.1M NaCl, vRNA (3 μg) transcribed in vitro was added to the beads and incubated on a roller for 4 h at 4°C. The supernatant containing the unbound vRNA and the beads bearing the protein-bound vRNA were isolated and quantified by means of real-time RT-PCR (primer sequences available upon request).RNA-protein pull-down assayThe RNA binding protein assay was performed according to the instructions of the Pierce Magnetic RNA-Protein Pull-Down Kit (20164, ThermoFisher). In brief, 10 μg of model vRNA was labeled with a single desthiobiotinylated cytidine bisphosphate at the 3’ end by using T4 RNA ligase. Then, the labeled vRNA was captured with streptavidin magnetic beads. After the beads were washed twice with 20 mM Tris (pH7.5) and Protein-RNA binding buffer, cell lysates containing 100 μg of total protein were added to the RNA-bound beads and incubated for 1 h at 4°C with rotation. The beads containing the biotinylated RNA/protein complexes were collected on a magnetic stand. The supernatants were harvested for subsequent detection and analysis. The beads were then washed three times with washing buffer and boiled in SDS loading buffer. Both the supernatants and the precipitates were resolved by means of 10% SDS-PAGE followed by western blotting.Mouse studyTo evaluate the replication and pathogenicity of viruses in mice, groups of three 6-week-old female BALB/c mice (Vital River Laboratories, China) were inoculated intranasally with 106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, 105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus, or 106 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus. The mice were euthanized on day 3 p.i., and their organs, including nasal turbinates, lungs, spleens, kidneys and brains, were collected and titrated for virus infectivity by use of plaque assays on MDCK cells. Simultaneously, a lobe of lung tissue was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and histopathologically examined.To determine the 50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) of the wild-type and mutant viruses, groups of five 6-week-old female BALB/c mice were lightly anesthetized with CO2 and inoculated intranasally with 10-fold serial dilutions containing 103−106 PFU of WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) mutant virus, 101−105 PFU of VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) mutant virus, or 103−107 PFU of AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) mutant virus, in a volume of 50 μl. The mice were monitored daily for 14 days for weight loss and mortality. The MLD50 was calculated by using the method of Reed and Muench.HistopathologyLung samples from mice infected with WSN (H1N1) or WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1), VN/1180 (H5N1) or VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1), and AH/1 (H7N9) or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) were collected on day 3 p.i., fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 4-μm sections. The sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) or used in immunohistochemical (IHC) assays with a rabbit anti-NP pAb and horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG.Ferret studyFour-month-old female ferrets (Wuxi Cay Ferret Farm, China) that were serologically negative for influenza viruses were used in this study. The animals were anesthetized via intramuscular injection with ketamine (20 mg/kg) and xylazine (1 mg/kg). To investigate virus replication, groups of two ferrets were anesthetized and inoculated i.n. with 106 PFU of test virus in a 500-μl volume (250 μl per nostril). The ferrets were euthanized on day 4 p.i. and their nasal turbinates, soft palate, tonsils, trachea, lung, spleen, kidneys, and brain were collected for virus titration. For the respiratory droplet transmission studies, groups of three ferrets were inoculated i.n. with 106 PFU of test virus and housed in specially designed cages inside an isolator as described previously [6,7,46]. Twenty-four hours later, three naïve ferrets were placed in an adjacent cage (4 cm away), separated by a double-layered net divider. Nasal washes were collected from each of the virus-infected ferrets on days 2, 4, 6, and 8 p.i. and from each of the exposed ferrets on days 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 p.e., and were titrated by use of plaque assays on MDCK cells. Sera were collected from all animals on day 21 p.i. or p.e. for HI antibody detection.Deep sequencingViral RNA was extracted from the stock virus, nasal washes, or lung homogenates by using the QIAmp viral RNA mini kit (QIAGEN) and was reverse-transcribed into cDNA by use of Uni12 primer (5’-AGCRAAAGCAGG-3’). The genome of the viruses was amplified and sequenced as described previously [31]. Briefly, next generation sequencing libraries were constructed by using the NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina. For each sample, 1 μg of DNA was randomly fragmented to <500 bp by sonication. The fragments were then treated with End Repair Mix for end repairing and with A-Tailing Mix for dA-tailing, followed by a T-A ligation to add adaptors to both ends. Each sample was then amplified by PCR using P5 and P7 primers. The PCR products were cleaned and quantified by using a Qubit2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen). Then, libraries with different indices were multiplexed and loaded onto an Illumina HiSeq instrument. Sequencing was carried out using a 2×150 paired-end configuration; image analysis and base calling were conducted by the HiSeq Control Software (HCS) + OLB + GAPipeline-1.6 (Illumina) on the HiSeq instrument. The genomes of all of the samples sequenced yielded more than 5000-fold genome coverage depth (with raw sequencing data of approximately 2.0 Gb obtained per sample). The sequences were processed and analyzed by GENEWIZ (GENEWIZ Biotechnology).Statistical analysisQuantitative data are presented as means ± SD of at least three biological replicates. Data were statistically analyzed with a two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test or a one-way ANOVA followed by t-test by using GraphPad Prism 7.0 software. Statistical parameters are reported in the figures and figure legends. P values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.Supporting informationS1 TableAnalysis of the SUMO acceptor lysine residue at position 612 (K612) of PB1 protein in different subtypes of influenza A virus.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableFrequency of the indicated amino acid at position 612 of PB1 protein of the indicated viruses.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S3 TableAssessment of the amino acid phenotypes at position 612 of PB1 protein in the viruses recovered from the nasal washes of FZ/1-PB1K612R (H1N1) inoculated or exposed ferrets.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S1 FigSUMOylation at K612 of PB1 has no effect on the assembly of the vRNP complex of IAV.(A) HEK293T cells were cotransfected with plasmids encoding PB2, PB1 or PB1/K612R, PA, and NP of WSN (H1N1) virus, together with the pHH21-SC09NS F-Luc construct. Forty-eight hours later, cell lysates were immunoprecipitated with a mouse anti-PB1 mAb, followed by western blotting to detect the vRNP components, PB2, PA, and NP. (B) Quantification of immunoprecipitated PB2, PA, NP in (A) by using ImageJ software. The amounts of precipitated PB2, PA, and NP were normalized to the amount of precipitated PB1. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of three assays and the significance was tested with a multiple t test (B). NS, not significant.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigBody weight change of mice inoculated with wild-type or PB1K612R mutant viruses.(A-F) Five mice per group were inoculated intranasally with the indicated doses of WSN (H1N1) (A), WSN-PB1K612R (H1N1) (B), VN/1180 (H5N1) (C), VN/1180-PB1K612R (H5N1) (D), AH/1 (H7N9) (E), or AH/1-PB1K612R (H7N9) (F) virus. Body weights were monitored daily for 14 days.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Replication, Pathogenesis and Transmission of Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 Virus in Non-Immune Pigs

IntroductionIn April 2009, an H1N1 virus was detected in humans [1] that was described as putatively of swine origin since seven of the eight gene segments originated from historical swine influenza viruses [2]. Further cases of infection of humans with this virus in the absence of direct contact with pigs were rapidly described together with proven human-to-human transmission. Although the virus ostensibly derived from pig populations, the consequences of infection in swine were unknown. The role of pigs in the epidemiology of influenza has been well described [3], although their direct involvement in the genesis of a pandemic influenza virus strain has never been demonstrated. Following reverse zoonosis (spread of virus from humans to animals) into pig populations, viruses are subjected to different selection pressures and evolve in distinct lineages, enabling clear separation from their counterpart strains circulating in humans. During the last ten years, substantial changes have been noted in the epidemiology of influenza in pigs, particularly with reference to significant geographical variations in terms of the virus subtypes and their associated genotypes. The pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus shows genetic and antigenic distance in the major glycoproteins of the virus compared to contemporaneous swine strains [2]. Therefore, important questions are raised regarding pigs given their well-established linkage in the evolution and ecology of influenza viruses.In this study, using an established infection and transmission model [6], [7], we address the outcomes, infection dynamics and pathogenesis of H1N1/09 virus infection in non-immune pigs.ResultsClinical SignsClinical signs were detectable in all of the pigs (100% morbidity) infected directly (INF) via the intranasal route or contact exposed (TC) (Methods), with variations in the range, pattern and severity between individuals although all pigs apparently recovered. The signs induced remained typical of influenza A infections in pigs (see Text S1 and Table S1).The onset of clinical disease was characterised by elevations in rectal temperature and serous, bilateral nasal discharge between 1–3 days post-infection (dpi), generally coincident with the onset and maintenance of nasal virus shedding (Fig. 1A). In pigs that were INF, peak rectal temperatures in individual animals (>39.5°C) ranged from dpi 1–5 (modal value dpi 2), with mean rectal temperatures peaking from dpi 3–8. Biphasic rectal temperatures profiles were observed in some animals (3/4 infected pigs remaining from dpi 5 onwards; 5/8 in-contacts), interspersed by a substantial temperature reduction (≥1°C) in some individual animals below the mean control animal rectal temperature (38.0°C). Highly significant differences between the overall mean rectal temperatures of the INF, TC and control animals (P<0.001) were also observed. Furthermore, variations were apparent in the overall peak and intervals to peak rectal temperatures recorded for the in-contact pigs, the mean clinical scores (per day post-exposure) between INF and TC pigs, and in daily live weight gain comparing INF, TC and control pigs (Text S1 and Figures S2 and S3).10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.g001Figure 1Semi-quantitative H1N1/09 virus shedding.Shedding from infected (INF) and transmission cycle (TC) pigs from the nasal (a), oral (b) and ocular (c) routes. Shedding expressed as (REU log10; mean + SE). Relative equivalent units (REU) represent an equivalent viral infectivity titre related to RRT-PCR threshold cycle (Ct) values. dpi/dpc refers to days post infection/contact.Other observed clinical signs included bilateral serous ocular discharge, coughing with an increased respiratory rate, lethargy and inappetence. The observed initial serous nasal discharge progressed to be mucoid and then muco-purulent in nature by dpi 4 in the remaining infected and contact exposed pigs, with discharge resolving in survivors by dpi 10–16.Virus SheddingShedding was measured in all samples through the detection of viral RNA in quantitative real-time RT-PCR. By the use of a standard curve (on each test plate) generated from a dilution series of infectious H1N1/09 virus quantitated in standard infectivity titrations, we were able to determine the relative equivalent unit (REU) from viral RNA based upon the cycle threshold (CT) value obtained for each sample. Virus shedding was detected from all of the INF pigs, mainly via the nasal route (Fig. 1). Peak nasal shedding (3–4 REU log10) occurred between 4–6 dpi, with intermittent, low level shedding (1–2 REU log10) from dpi 10–15, and ceased from dpi 16 (Fig. 1A).All uninfected pigs exposed by contact with infected pigs during the four successive transmission cycles (see Methods: Groups TC1, TC2, TC3 and TC4) developed broadly similar trajectories of infection to the directly infected pigs (Figure S4). Furthermore, irrespective of exposure mode, all pigs shed similar amounts of virus from the nasal route (Fig. 1A). In contrast, overall lower levels of shedding, but with similar trajectories to that of the nasal cavity were detected from the oral (Fig. 1B) and ocular (Fig. 1C) routes (individual pigs peak range for either route was 1.5–3.0 REU log10). Rectal shedding was rare, detected on just three occasions (peak 2.3 REU log10) from two infected animals (INF, 3245 and 3261) only (at dpi 2–5). In-contact pigs (TC1-TC4) developed similar infection and nasal (Figure S4), oral and ocular shedding profiles to INF pigs (Fig. 1). However, variations were evident in the intervals to both the onset and peak of nasal shedding between TC groups (see Text S1).Transmission Cycle Shedding PatternsThe onset of nasal shedding was detected from one day post-contact (dpc 1) for all pigs in Groups TC1, TC2, and TC3, and from dpc 2 during TC4. Variations were also evident between contact transmission groups in the interval to and duration of peak nasal shedding, and the total duration of nasal shedding (Figure S4). During TC1, nasal shedding from the pair of exposed pigs peaked at dpc 3–6, with an overall duration of 7 days and 10 days respectively. Similarly, during TC2, peak nasal shedding was detected at dpc 6, with no further shedding after dpc 12–13. Overall nasal shedding from the exposed pigs during TC3 was detected for longer (dpc 14). However, the interval to peak nasal shedding was similar to that in TC1 and TC2 (dpc 4–6). Peak nasal shedding was detected at dpc 3–4 during TC4, with no detectable shedding via the nasal cavity from dpc 9.These data also show that the contact period required for successful transmission of virus to both pigs, as determined by the detection of nasal shedding and a mean REU >1.5 log10 (at which point the TC was initiated), was 72 hours for TC1, TC2 and TC4. Interestingly, during TC3, a period of four days was required for these criteria to be fulfilled. In addition, during TC1 and TC4, peak shedding was 2–3 days earlier than in TC2 and TC3. However, overall the interval to onset and the duration of peak shedding was broadly similar in the infected and all of the contact exposed (TC1-TC4) pigs (Figure S4, panel F).SerologyAt the start of the study the seronegative status of all animals was confirmed by haemagglutination inhibition (HI) test using four swine influenza virus subtypes (classical H1N1, avian-like swine H1N1, swine H1N2 and human-like swine H3N2) and A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v. During the study, samples were tested using A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v only. Two of four INF animals seroconverted by dpi 7, with substantial homologous HI titres (80 and 320) detected from the two pigs (3245, 3261) that remained in the study beyond that point. The eight TC animals seroconverted between 10–14 dpc, with peak HI titres in the range 40–640 from 14–18 dpc.Acute Phase Protein (APP) ResponsesSelected APP responses were measured in serum samples collected from infected animals, specifically C-reactive protein and haptoglobin. Infection kinetics were supported by increases above the acute phase response threshold [8], [9] in the levels of both APPs over time (dpi/dpc) in all of the infected pigs (Figure S5). The C-reactive protein levels peaked at dpi/dpc 4 with more protracted responses detected after dpi/dpc 7 in one of the remaining infected pigs (3261) and the in-contact animals. The haptoglobin responses were more protracted, peaking at dpi/dpc 9–11 in both infected and TC pigs.PathologyPathological changes in infected pigs (including by contact exposure) were restricted to the respiratory tract and associated lymphoid tissues. At 3 and 4 dpi or dpc, pulmonary lesions comprised multifocal, cranioventral, lobular consolidation, increasing in number and extension at dpi/dpc 7, when the cranial and middle lung lobes appeared almost entirely consolidated (Fig. 2A and Text S1). For full details of histopathological and immunohistochemistry (IHC) findings see Text. S1 In summary histopathology revealed moderate to severe necrotising bronchiolitis, atelectasis and alveolitis followed by hyperplasia of airway epithelium as regeneration occurred in some lobules from day 7 which resolved by day 17 (Fig. 2C). The pigs were derived from a ‘PRRSV free’ source and the histopathological findings were not considered to indicate the presence of other pathogens. Furthermore, we have shown that live virus (mediated through virus re-isolation), viral antigen (detected using IHC) and viral RNA (detected by modified influenza A Matrix gene real time RT-PCR) were detectable in respiratory and associated lymphoid tissues from dpi 1–7 and dpc 11, but was not detected in examples of consumer commodities such as meat (longissimus dorsi and biceps femoris) or viscera (Table 1). This is in addition to the absence of viral RNA in plasma samples collected from directly infected animals and contact exposed pigs, consistent with no detectable viraemia.10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.g002Figure 2Pathological changes (a,c) and immunohistochemical detection of viral antigen.
a. Lung. In-contact animal (TC4), 11 dpc. Multiple dark red areas of cranioventral pulmonary consolidation in the cranial and middle lung lobes. b. Nasal mucosa, 2 dpi. Influenza A nucleoprotein (brown) in numerous respiratory epithelial cells 20x. c. Lung, 7 dpi. Marked attenuation of bronchiolar epithelium due to epithelial cell necrosis, bronchiolar plug and peribronchiolar lymphohistiocytic infiltration. Haematoxylin and eosin 40x. d. Lung, 4 dpi. Viral nucleoprotein in abundant bronchiolar epithelial cells and cellular debris in the bronchiolar lumen and in several pulmonary alveolar macrophages 20x.10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.t001Table 1Qualitative results for the detection of virus in tissues collected from challenged or contact exposed pigs by virus re-isolation, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and RRT- PCR.Pig IDPMEGroupTurbinateNaso-pharynxThoracic TracheaLung lobesLymph Nodes*
CranialMidCaudalAccessory3242Day 3Mock−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−3249dpi 2INF+/+/++/−/+−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−/−−/−3252dpi 2INF+/+/++/−/++/−/+−/−/−+/+/++/−/++/−/+−/+3246dpi 3INF+/+/+−/−/++/−/−+/−/++/+/++/−/+−/−/+−/−3243dpi 4INF+/+/++/−/++/+/++/+/++/+/++/+/++/+/+−/+3260dpi 7INF+/+/+−/+/−+/+/++/+/++/+/−+/+/++/+/+−/+3244dpi 7INF+/−/++/−/−−/−/−−/+/++/+/−−/+/++/+/+−/+3257dpc 11TC4−/−/+−/−/−−/−/−−/−/+−/−/−−/+***/+−/−/−−/−−/−/−  =  Virus re-isolation/IHC/PCR.*Lymph nodes, IHC: Superficial inguinal, lateral retropharyngeal**, medial retropharyngeal, right, middle and left tracheobronchial**, mediastinal and mesenteric (Virus re-isolation and PCR only).Other: Commodities and offal - spleen, liver, kidney and ileum plus muscle (longissimus dorsi and biceps femoris) were all negative when tested by virus re-isolation & PCR.***Only in cell debris in lumen of three bronchioles (no bronchial or bronchiolar epithelial or macrophage immunolabelling).Shaded rows represent a mock-infected control animal from the equivalent of dpi 3 and a transmission cycle (TC4) animal at 11 days post-contact (dpc) representing for comparative purposes the closest animal to the direct infected group PMEs.Sequencing and Genetic AnalysesFull genome sequence analysis was conducted for selected nasal swab RNA samples from four infected animals (3244, 3245, 3260, 3261) and both contact exposed pigs in each TC group between days 3–6 (dpi/dpc). The lowest Ct values were selected representing a REU log10 range of 2.3–4.1 (Table 2). There were no significant deviations from the inoculum sequence observed for all the genes encoding internal proteins and the neuraminidase gene in either directly infected or TC animals. No molecular markers for pathogenicity (e.g. PB2 E627K) were detected. Haemagglutinin (HA1) gene mutations observed throughout the study are described in Table 2 (see Text S1).10.1371/journal.pone.0009068.t002Table 2HA1 locations at which amino acid changes were observed in directly infected and contact pigs.Animal statusPig IDHA1REU (log10)(dpi/dpc)Location225226Inoculum:Not applicableX* (D/G)X (R/Q)
Infected:
3261 (3 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.373261 (4 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.433244 (5 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.603245 (5 dpi)--3.913260 (5 dpi)X (D/G)Q2.883261 (5 dpi)X (D/G)Q4.123261 (6 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.32
In-contacts:
TC13240 (3 dpc)
-

-
3.66TC13254 (3 dpc)DQ4.16TC23250 (5 dpc)--3.36TC23256 (6 dpc)DQ3.91TC33258 (5 dpc)DQ2.33TC33259 (5 dpc)DQ2.31TC43247(5 dpc)--2.93TC43257 (4 dpc)DQ3.41
Infected: Middle lung lobe3253 (1 dpi)X (D/G)Q4.383252 (2 dpi)X (D/G)Q3.883243 (4 dpi)GQ6.833260 (7 dpi)GQ6.21Virus derived from nasal swabs unless otherwise stated. H3 numbering [ref. 27] is used in the table and throughout the text. Where a mixed population was observed this is represented by an X with the possible mixture of amino acids described in parentheses. Dash indicates sequence data not available. Semi-quantitative nasal H1N1/09v virus shedding (REU log10).The HA sequence data for the inoculum (egg passage 5) was identical to the published sequence for egg grown (egg passage 2) isolate A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v (GenBank accession: FJ969540) containing a mixture of two amino acids at positions 225 and 226 (H3 numbering), D/G and R/Q respectively. Upon infection in pigs, 226Q was selected, but 225D/G remained present. For contact animals, 226Q remained and, in addition, 225D was selected for (Table 2). HA1 sequencing was also conducted on a small subset of middle lung lobe tissue samples from directly infected pigs in order to assess variation in receptor tropism and possible relationship to pathogenesis. Of the four middle lung lobe samples analysed, all four had 226Q. Two samples (ex INF pigs dpi 1 and dpi 2) showed a dual population of 225D/G, whilst the two other samples (ex INF pigs dpi 4 and dpi 7) showed 225G (Table 2, Figure S6). Furthermore, it is interesting to note that the latter samples from INF pigs containing 225G in HA1 also had REU's >6.0 (Table 2) suggestive of efficient replication at this site.DiscussionIn this study we have shown that pigs can be readily infected with pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus (A/California/07/09), resulting in the induction of clinical signs, viral pathogenesis restricted to the respiratory tract, infection dynamics consistent with endemic strains of influenza A in pigs, virus transmissibility between pigs (four cycles) and virus-host adaptation events.The type and pattern of clinical signs and induced host responses were consistent with those typical of swine influenza virus [10], including the infection dynamics, characterised by shedding from the upper respiratory tract. Rectal shedding was only rarely detected potentially reflecting a lack of tropism for replication in the alimentary tract (Table 1) that was further supported by the lack of immunolabelled enterocytes in the ileum (note the possibility of contamination of the perineum with nasal discharge cannot be excluded due the natural inquisitive and social behaviour of pigs). In addition, the onset of clinical disease was preceded by elevations in rectal temperature, and biphasic rectal temperature profiles were observed in some animals (3/4 infected pigs remaining from dpi 5 onwards; 5/8 in-contacts), a clinical feature often observed during influenza infections [11]–[13]. The measurement of selected APP responses provided further confirmation of infection dynamics. It is recognised that the porcine APP response to infection is typically characterised by elevations in serum levels of C-reactive protein as the major APP [14]. Our data supports this observation, and furthermore we have shown that C-reactive protein responses are higher in infected pigs than in TC1-TC4 pigs (Figure S5), and were more elevated in the infected and TC1 animals than the later transmission cycles.Furthermore, our results clearly demonstrate that extant H1N1/09 is fully capable of becoming established in global pig populations. We have also shown that a 72-hour contact period within the first six days of infection is sufficient to establish virus spread in an experimental setting. We have used determinations of precise levels of viral RNA related to approximations of infectious virus which also enabled the analysis of large datasets derived from intensive sampling. However, further study would be required to refine the transmission window, and it is also important to note that events may differ in a field setting. For example, the observed levels of morbidity and mortality may differ depending on the role played by other inter-current infections and/or pig husbandry and management factors that could also result in more severe economic impacts to the swine industry. Interestingly, the limited natural occurrences of early field infections of pigs were relatively mild [15]–[17]. Similarly, whilst infection dynamics in a field setting will be different through availability and numbers of both susceptible and infected pigs, it could be reasonably expected that H1N1/09 will transmit efficiently in immunologically naïve farmed pig populations.The pathogenesis described in this study is consistent with that of infections with endemic swine influenza viruses [10], [18], [19]. Our results with H1N1/09 were more severe than those obtained in mini-pigs [20], but similar to experiments performed in 10-week-old commercial pigs [21]. This variability may be related to virus strain, but more possibly due to breed of pig with this study using a breed commonly reared on a commercial scale. Overall, clinical signs and pathology were of much greater severity than those caused by infections with avian influenza viruses, such as highly pathogenic H5N1 or low pathogenic viruses of different subtypes, in pigs infected experimentally [22]–[24]. Furthermore they were broadly similar to those in small mammals infected with pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus [20], [25]–[26]. Whilst we used pigs sourced from a high health herd and the histopathological findings did not indicate the presence of other pathogens, we did not further exclude intercurrent infections other than by close reference to the control pigs.In this study we observed an apparent host selection within the H1N1/09 population based upon the haemagglutinin (HA1) gene as the virus replicated in directly infected pigs and transmitted to contact exposed pigs (Table 2). Influenza virus HA is the surface protein involved in binding host cell sialic acid in order to initiate infection, and the specificity of the HA binding depends on the virus and host species, with human and swine viruses preferentially binding α2,6-linked sialyl receptors whereas avian viruses bind α2,3-linked sialyl receptors [reviewed in ref 27].For technical reasons we used egg-grown A/California/07/2009 (H1N1)v at passage level 5 for the direct infection of pigs. The HA gene sequencing of virus inoculum revealed that it differs from the original virus, A/California/07/2009 (GenBank accession numbers: FJ966974, FJ969540 and FJ981613)[2] through the presence of a mixture of two amino acids at HA positions 225 and 226 (H3 numbering, [27]), D/G and R/Q, respectively. We assume that the inoculum was a mixture of quasispecies of a wild type virus (HA, 225D/226Q) [2] and at least two egg-derived mutants (HA, 225G and HA, 226R). The mutation Q226R has been observed previously in egg-adapted seasonal human H1N1 viruses [28], [29]. Isolates with 226R grow well in vitro, but are thought to be severely impaired in vivo
[29]. The data presented here supports this hypothesis, since the 226R variant was absent from all viruses examined from infected pigs (Table 2).A mutation G225D/E in the HA of H1N1 viruses is known to be important for the alteration of the viral receptor specificity during adaptation of avian viruses to humans and pigs [5], [30], [31]. Interestingly, studies with the 1918 pandemic H1N1 virus describe it as circulating as a mixture of variants with either 225D or 225G [5], but the biological significance of this heterogeneity remains unknown. Both variants infected ferrets, but transmission of the variant with 225G was not as efficient as for variant 225D [29]. Our data for H1N1/09 are consistent with this finding in that all viruses detected in nasal secretions from the contact exposed pigs (TC1-TC4) possessed 225D (Table 2), indicating that it appears more transmissible than variant 225G.Glycine at HA position 225 of human and swine H1N1 viruses enhances virus binding to α2,3 receptors without markedly compromising ability to bind to α2,6 receptors [27], [30], [31]. Although non-egg-adapted swine and seasonal human H1N1 viruses typically display 225D/E [27], [30], here we show possible selection of the 225G in affected middle lung lobe tissue from a small subset of samples from directly infected pigs, potentially indicative of different selection pressure within this compartment compared to cells of the upper respiratory tract (Table 2, Figure S6) even though cells of the lower respiratory tract of pigs express both α2,3 and α2,6 receptors [4]. These findings demonstrate the roles of viral receptor specificity in both transmission and tissue tropism providing potential clues to the existence and biological significance of viral receptor-binding variants with 225D and 225G during the 1918 pandemic [5].We have shown that pigs are susceptible to infection with H1N1/09 and incursion from infected humans to the farmed pig population appears likely. However, the impact of such transmission will be compounded by a number of variables that we were not able to address in the current study, such as prior immunity to H1 influenza viruses, age of animal, husbandry factors, including production type, and intercurrent disease. Close monitoring of global pig populations is required if the dynamic is to be fully understood, as is further virus evolution to allow assessment of human and veterinary health risks.Our results on different selective pressures in the upper and lower respiratory epithelium in pigs provide further insights into host selection preferences and may suggest possible differences in relation to transmissibility and pathogenesis within the same animal. In particular, this finding prompts further studies on the enigma of co-circulation of two receptor-binding variants of the 1918 pandemic virus and on their relative role in pathogenesis.MethodsThis work was approved by the VLA ethics committee for animal studies and was carried out in accordance with the UK 1986 Animal Scientific Procedure Act and VLA code of practice for performance of scientific studies using animals (available on request). Furthermore, these guidelines meet the requirement for the European Directive for Animal Experimentation (86/609).Study DesignThe infection and transmission study comprised twenty-two Landrace hybrid pigs, aged 4–5 weeks old at the outset, randomly allocated to six separate study groups (Figure S1). All of the pigs were sourced from a high health status herd (PRRS virus free) and were shown to be both influenza A virus and antibody (subtypes H1N1, H1N2, H3N2) negative by Matrix (M) gene real time RT-PCR (described below) and haemagglutination inhibition (HI) assays [32] respectively prior to the start of the study. Infection was initially established in a group of eleven pigs by intra-nasal inoculation with a total dose of 105.8 EID50 A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v, delivered in a final volume of 2 ml per nostril, using a mucosal atomisation device (MAD® Nasal, Wolfe Tory Medical, Inc.) to mimic aerogenous infection. The virus strain (A/California/07/2009(H1N1v) was propagated in embryonated fowls' eggs (passage history, egg passage 5).In addition to the group of infected pigs (INF), four successive transmission cycles (TC1-TC4) were established between infected and naïve pigs at monitored intervals (once sustained nasal shedding from both of the pigs in each cycle was confirmed). TC1 was established by placing two naïve contact exposed pigs with infected pigs at dpi 2. With nasal shedding detected from the pair of TC1 pigs, they were removed to a separate room to establish TC2, by infection of a second pair of naïve pigs. Two further transmission cycles were then established between successive pairs of infected and naïve, contact exposed pigs (TC3, TC4). Three uninfected pigs were maintained as a control group (Controls), two of which were mock-inoculated and one was non-inoculated. The mock-inoculated pigs were challenged by the intra-nasal route using allantoic fluid suspended and delivered in a final volume of 2 ml PBS per nostril, using the same method as the infected pigs.Clinical Measurements and SamplingEach day throughout the duration of the study (25 days) clinical parameters were assessed by veterinary inspections, with swab samples (nasal, ocular, oral and rectal) collected. The swabs were then immediately tested by a modified influenza A M gene real-time RT (RRT)-PCR assay (described below), enabling confirmation of pig infection and shedding status (Fig. 1 and Figure S4). In addition to the daily procedures and sampling conducted for each of the directly infected pigs (INF), control animals (Controls) were swabbed on three occasions, equivalent to dpi 0, 6 and 20. The same types of swab sample were also collected on a daily basis from each contact exposed pig (TC1-4) from the first day of their respective transmission cycles and processed daily for M gene RRT-PCR testing.Blood Samples and AssaysBlood samples were collected by jugular venepuncture from all of the pigs prior to the start of the study, and from the directly infected pigs up to dpi 4, and again at dpi 7 for assessment of viraemia, acute phase protein responses and antibody production (described below). Blood samples for were then collected twice weekly from infected pigs, and the contact exposed pigs (TC1-TC4) as they were recruited to the study during the successive transmission cycles, with collection of terminal blood samples from all remaining pigs prior to euthanasia (Figure S5).Haemagglutination Inhibition (HI) AssayHaemagglutinin specific antibodies were detected in pig sera using HI tests performed according to standard methods [32] with A/California/07/09 as antigen.Acute Phase Protein (APP) ResponsesC-reactive protein and haptoglobin responses were measured in serum as previously described [8], [9] using a commercially available ELISA assay, according to manufacturers instructions (Tridelta Development Ltd., Kildare, Ireland) (see Protocol S1).Post-Mortem Examination (PME)At defined intervals infected pigs were removed for post-mortem examination, with systematic recording of macroscopic findings and collection of a range of tissues for histopathology and virus detection assays (Table 1). Pairs of infected pigs (INF) were subject to PME on dpi 2, 3, 4 and 7, with one infected pig PME on each of dpi 1, dpi 17 and dpi 21. Further PMEs were performed on contact exposed pigs on dpi 21 and dpi 25 (Figure S1). A full range of tissue specimens was collected, with selected fresh tissue samples (Table 1) stored at −70°C. Samples collected for histopathology and IHC were stored in 10% (v/v) phosphate-buffered formalin pending final processing (described below) and analysis.Virus Detection in TissuesVirus detection (Table 1) was performed by IHC, M gene RRT-PCR (PCR), and virus re-isolation in 9–11 day old embryonated fowls' eggs [32] (two eggs per sample for each passage, with a total of two passages). Frozen tissues were thawed and a 10% homogenate prepared in PBS with antibiotics [14] using a powered homogeniser system (Omni homogenizer (GLH), using Omni Tip™ Plastic Generator Probes (hard tissue); Omni International, Marietta, GA, USA). Debris was removed by centrifugation (10 minutes at ∼1500 g) and the supernatant collected and passed through a 0.8 µm sterile filter (Satorius Ltd., Goettingen, Germany) prior to RNA extraction or virus re-isolation. Clarified material was then inoculated into embryonated fowls' eggs and the presence of virus determined by the haemagglutination of chicken erythrocytes [32]. The same tissue homogenate supernatant was used for the PCR assay (described below).Matrix (M) Gene RRT-PCRTotal RNA was extracted from swine clinical specimens (above) as previously described, including a positive extraction control that was prepared to yield a pre-determined Ct value [33]. The modified M gene RRT-PCR utilised the forward primer and probe described originally by Spackman et al
[34] at final concentrations of 0.4 µM and 0.3 µM respectively, but the reverse primer consisted of an equimolar mixture of the original reverse primer plus a reverse primer modified to provide a perfect sequence match with the pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus, typified by A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v (accession number: FJ966975). The four altered nucleotides in the modified reverse primer are indicated in upper case: 5′-tgc aaa Gac aCT ttc Cag tct ctg-3′. The final concentration of each of the reverse primers was 0.2 µM. Cycling conditions, temperatures and chemistry details were as outlined for the M gene RRT-PCR [35]. RNA extracted from a titrated allantoic fluid preparation of A/California/07/2009(H1N1)v was used to construct a ten-fold dilution series. This served to calibrate the Ct values derived from testing extracted clinical specimens by the modified M gene RRT-PCR with an equivalent viral infectivity titre [35] that is expressed in relative equivalent units (REU) [33].Histopathology and ImmunohistochemistryFollowing PME, all phosphate-buffered formalin-fixed samples were routinely embedded in paraffin wax. 4 µm thick sections, cut on a rotary microtome, were stained with haematoxylin and eosin or used for IHC detection of influenza A nucleoprotein by the avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex method [33] (see Protocol S1).Sequencing and Genetic AnalysesRNA was extracted from inoculum, swab or tissue samples (Table 2) using the QIAamp Viral RNA Kit (Qiagen). Genes were reverse transcribed and amplified using the OneStep RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) (Primers available on request). RT-PCR products were excised from agarose gels and purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). DNA was sequenced using the Prism BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit on the 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). All commercial kits were used following manufacturer's instructions. The Lasergene package (DNASTAR) was used for nucleotide sequence analysis and alignment. Full genome sequencing and further detailed genetic analyses were performed to compare the inoculum strain and selected output viruses (Table 2, Figure S6).Statistical AnalysesDescriptive data includes mean and standard deviation within the text. Mean and standard error of the mean are shown in graphical formats. Clinical scores, weights, temperatures and shedding levels were analysed using analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA with 95% confidence intervals) in the Minitab software package (Release 14).Supporting InformationProtocol S1(0.03 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Text S1(0.04 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Table S1Clinical scoring system for influenza A challenge in pigs.(0.03 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S1Study plan including timeline (date and day post-infection), animal numbers, post-mortem examinations (PME), transmission cycles (TC) and animal movements. An unplanned PME was carried out on pig 3261 dpi 17 on welfare grounds.(0.07 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2Mean daily rectal temperature (oC) plus standard errors for infected (INF), transmission cycle (TC) and control (C) pigs.(0.07 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S3Mean live weight gain (kg) plus standard errors for infected (INF), transmission cycle (TC) and control (C) pigs.(0.72 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S4Semi-quantitative nasal H1N1/09v virus shedding (REU log10; mean + SE) from infected (INF, panel A) and transmission cycle (TC, panels B–E) pigs. Panel F is the combined data (A–E).(3.91 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S5Acute Phase Protein responses, mean C-Reactive protein (A) and Haptoglobin (B), for infected (INF) and transmission cycle (TC) pigs.(0.03 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.Figure S6HA receptor selection. Figure shows a representative sequence chromatogram covering codons 225 and 226 (H3 numbering, [ref. 20]) for the inoculum, nasal swabs from directly infected pigs (INF) and contact exposure transmission cycle (TC1-4) isolates, and for two variations observed between middle lung lobe tissues at 1/2 dpi and 4/7 dpi. Amino acid and nucleotide sequences are shown above and below the trace respectively. Positions where a mixed amino acid population is observed are represented by an X.(0.09 MB DOC)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Asparagine Substitution at PB2 Residue 701 Enhances the Replication, Pathogenicity, and Transmission of the 2009 Pandemic H1N1 Influenza A Virus

IntroductionInfluenza A viruses are important human and animal pathogens that cause frequent epidemics and epizootics, and emergence of novel viruses in humans and animals continue to pose a pandemic threat. Transmission and pathogenesis of influenza A viruses are polygenic traits influenced by the interaction of viral components with host cells. The three RNA polymerase subunits (PB1, PB2, and PA) are encoded by different genomic RNA segments and the proteins interact to form a heterotrimeric RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), which transcribes and replicates the eight different nucleoprotein (NP) encapsidated genomic RNA segments that comprise the viral genome. The RdRp and the NP are major determinants of host species-specificity, transmission, and pathogenesis. The 2009 influenza A pandemic was caused by H1N1 subtype viruses (H1N1pdm), which have a triple reassortant RNA polymerase and NP gene constellation that contains avian (PB2, and PA), human (PB1) and swine (NP) lineage gene segments [1–3]. It is anticipated that additional adaptations will evolve in the H1N1pdm viruses unique triple reassortant gene constellation as it adapts to humans, and these changes have the potential to enhance its virulence and/or transmission.The avian-lineage PB2 gene of H1N1pdm is one of the gene segments likely to undergo evolutionary selection in the new human host. This avian-lineage PB2 lacks some characteristic human/mammalian amino acid signatures, such as lysine at residue 627 (PB2-627K) or asparagine at residue 701 (PB2-701N). Several groups have shown that introduction of the PB2-E627K substitution into H1N1pdm viruses had little effect on the pathogenesis and/or transmission of H1N1pdm viruses in mice and ferrets [4–8]. This was unexpected to some extent, since many studies have shown that introduction of PB2-627K into H5N1 and other zoonotic avian influenza A virus subtypes increased virulence and transmissibility in mammalian models [9–13]. However, this contradiction was nicely explained by two studies showing that a unique substitution (PB2-Q591R) in the avian-lineage PB2 of the H1N1pdm virus compensated for the PB2-627E commonly found in human H1N1pdm viruses [6,14].PB2-701N has also been shown to compensate for the lack of PB2-627K and enhance the replication of some strains of influenza A viruses in mammalian hosts [15]. For example, studies with the mouse adapted avian H7N7 influenza virus SC35M showed that PB2-701N increased the polymerase activity and enhanced virulence in mice and PB2-701N in the avian H5N1 virus DKGX/35 showed enhanced pathogenesis in mice and that it was a prerequisite for transmission in guinea pigs [16]. Additionally, Steel et al., demonstrated the compensatory effects of PB2-701N on avian and human viruses containing PB2-627E using the guinea pig transmission model [12]. We hypothesized that since the PB2-D701N substitution has been observed in some zoonotic avian H5N1 viruses and some avian-lineage swine influenza viruses [15–17], it may provide an advantage to H1N1pdm viruses as their avian-lineage PB2 gene segment evolves in the human population. Therefore, to evaluate the potential role that PB2-D701N may play in the adaptation of H1N1pdm viruses to humans, we conducted a comprehensive study to determine the influence that PB2-D701N has on viral replication and transmissibility. The results show that although the wild type H1N1pdm virus contained the PB2-591R polymorphism, the PB2-D701N substitution increased the viral polymerase activity in human cell lines, conferred more efficient virus replication in a restrictive mouse epithelial cell line, increased virulence in the BALB/c mouse model, and increased virus transmission in the ferret transmission model. Additionally, the PB2-D701N virus reduced secretion of the antiviral IFN-λ cytokines and showed enhanced replication in primary human alveolar epithelial cells relative to the wild type H1N1pdm virus.Materials and MethodsBiosafety and ethics statementThis study was reviewed and approved by the Wadsworth Center Institutional Biosafety Committee, the National Jewish Institutional Biosafety Committee, and it was reviewed under the CDC procedures for identification of dual use research of concern. All experiments with infectious virus were performed using procedures and facilities that met or exceeded the requirements set forth by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for propagation of influenza A viruses. In vitro experiments with infectious H1N1pdm viruses were conducted in biosafety level 2 laboratory as described by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention interim biosafety guidelines. In vivo experiments were carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. Mouse study was performed in a biosafety level 3 laboratory approved for such use by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Department of Agriculture and were conducted under animal care and use protocols approved by Wadsworth Center’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC protocol 09-377). No survival surgery was performed, and all efforts were made to minimize suffering. All ferret procedures were approved by Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International-accredited facility. Animal studies were performed in accordance with the IACUC guidelines under protocol #2195TUMFERC-A3: “Studies on the Pathogenesis and Transmission of Recombinant Influenza Viruses in Ferrets”.Cell linesHuman embryonic kidney 293T (HEK-293T) cells and mouse rectum epithelial carcinoma (CMT-93) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were maintained in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) supplemented with 5% FBS. Human lung epithelial (Calu-3) cells were maintained in EMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% nonessential amino acids, and 1 mM sodium pyruvate. MDCK, CMT-93, and Calu-3 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection, Rockville, MD.Generation of recombinant virusesRecombination-based In-Fusion cloning method was used to mutate the NY1682 PB2 plasmid to generate the PB2-D701N mutant reverse genetics construct [18–20]. The recombinant rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses were generated using the rescue protocol described previously [21]. Briefly, 0.6 µg of plasmid for each gene segment was mixed and incubated with 15 µl of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) at 20°C for 20 min. The Lipofectamine-DNA mixture was transferred to 90% confluent 293T/MDCK cell monolayers in a 35-mm tissue culture dish and incubated at 33°C with 5% CO2 for 8 h. The transfection supernatant was replaced with 3 ml of Opti-Mem I medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 0.3% bovine serum albumin (BSA) fraction V (Invitrogen), 3 µg/ml tosylsulfonyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)-trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood, NJ), and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Invitrogen). Three days post-transfection, the supernatant was collected and viruses were propagated in MDCK cells at 33°C. Titers of the viruses used in this study were determined by TCID50 and/or plaque assay in MDCK cells.Mini-genome replication assayThe luciferase-mediated mini-genome replication assay was performed as previously described, using a PolI-driven reporter plasmid and pDZ-based PB2, PB1, PA, and NP bidirectional expression plasmids [18,22]. Briefly, HEK-293T cells in 24-well plates were cotransfected with 0.2 µg each of pPolI-NS-Luc plasmid (pBZ81A36) and plasmids to express the NY1682 PB2 (PB2-WT or PB2-D701N), PB1, PA, and NP proteins, and to control for transfection efficiency, 0.02 µg of the Renilla luciferase plasmid pRL-TK (Promega, Madison, WI) was also cotransfected. Cells were incubated at 33oC, 37oC, and 39oC for 6 or 18 hours, and then luciferase production was assayed using the dual-luciferase reporter assay system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Firefly luciferase expression was normalized to Renilla luciferase expression (relative activity). At each temperature, the relative activity of WT polymerase was set at 100%, and the activities of the PB2-D701N were determined relative to that of the WT. All results shown are the averages from triplicate experiments, and the standard deviation is shown.Replication kinetics in vitro
MDCK or CMT-93 cell monolayers in 12-well plates were washed twice with PBS, and then 2 ml of virus growth medium (VGM) was added to each well. The cells were inoculated at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 TCID50/cell with recombinant NY1682 WT or NY1682 D701N viruses. Supernatants were collected at 2, 24, 48, 72 (and 96) hours post inoculation (hpi). Infections of Calu-3 cells were performed similarly, except that an MOI of 0.02 TCID50/cell was used and cultures were maintained at three different temperatures (33oC, 37oC, and 39oC) after inoculation. The VGM used for MDCK and CMT-93 cells was EMEM supplemented with 0.15% BSA fraction V, 2 µg/ml TPCK-trypsin, and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic, and the VGM used for Calu-3 cells was EMEM supplemented with 0.3% BSA fraction V, 1 µg/ml TPCK-trypsin, and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic. All virus titers were determined by TCID50 assay using MDCK cells.Replication and cytokines secretion in primary human alveolar epithelial cellsAlveolar type II (ATII) cells were isolated from de-identified human lungs that were not suitable for transplantation but donated for medical research as described previously [23]. The Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at National Jewish Medical and Research Center approved this research. To transdifferentiate type II cells into type I-like cells, type II cells were plated on tissue culture plastic plates at a density of 2.0X105/cm2 in DMEM with 10% FBS [24]. After 24-48 h of adherence, the medium was changed to DMEM with 5% FBS and cells were cultured for 6 days and then used for virus infection.The primary cultured alveolar type I-like cells were infected with the rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N viruses at an MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell and washed twice with medium after 1 h of incubation at 37oC. Culture supernatants of the infected cells were collected at 1, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hpi and viral titers were determined using plaque assay in MDCK cells. Supernatants collected at 24 hpi were used to determine the protein levels of selected cytokines/chemokines using specific enzyme-linked immunesorbent assays (ELISAs) as described previously [25]. The ELISA kits for human IFN-λ, CCL5, IL-6, and IL-8 were purchased from ELISA Tech (ELISA Tech, Aurora, CO).Mouse experimentsTo determine virus replication in vivo, six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=3/group/time-point, Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME) were anesthetized with isoflurane and inoculated intranasally with 50 µl EMEM diluent containing 103 TCID50 of rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N. Animals were euthanized at 12, 24, 48, 96 hpi. The entire lung of each animal was homogenized in 1 ml of media and clarified by centrifugation, and nasal washes were collected from each mouse in 1 ml of media. Virus titers in the lungs and nasal washes were determined by TCID50 assay.To determine morbidity and mortality, groups of five-to-six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=5/group) were inoculated intranasally with the recombinant viruses at the indicated doses in 50 µl of EMEM diluent or mock inoculated with EMEM to serve as controls. Body weight was measured daily for 14 days, and clinical observations were recorded. Mice that lost more than 25% of their original weight were euthanized for humane reasons using Avertin anesthesia followed by bilateral thoracotomy or cervical dislocation.Ferret transmission experimentsMale Fitch ferrets (Triple F Farms, Sayre, PA), six months of age and serologically negative by hemagglutination inhibition (HI) assay for currently circulating influenza viruses, were used in this study. In a Duo-Flow Bioclean environmental enclosure (Lab Products, Inc., Seaford, DE), ferrets were housed in adjacent transmission cages, each modified so that a side wall was replaced with a stainless-steel, perforated wall with holes 1–5 mm in diameter and spaced 3 mm apart to facilitate the transfer of respiratory droplets through the air while preventing direct contact between ferrets and indirect contact with the bedding and food of neighboring ferrets [26,27]. A total of six ferrets were used for each respiratory droplet transmission experiment. Three ferrets were inoculated intranasally with 1 ml of 106 PFU of the NY1682-WT or NY1682-D701N virus. Twenty-four hours after inoculation, three naive ferrets were each placed in a cage adjacent to an inoculated ferret. Ferrets were monitored for clinical signs through 14–18 dpi as previously described. Nasal washes were collected on 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 dpi from the inoculated ferrets and were collected on 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 dpc (days post-contact) from the contact ferrets. Viral titers were determined in MDCK cells by plaque assay. HI analysis was also performed on post-exposure ferret sera collected 14–18 dpc using 0.5% turkey erythrocytes against homologous virus.StatisticsStatistical analyses were conducted in GraphPad Prism version 5.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA) using ANOVA analysis with Bonferroni post-test. For simple comparisons, Student’s t test with two-tailed analysis was used as indicated in the text.ResultsPB2-D701N substitution increases viral RNA polymerase activity in vitro
We used a luciferase-mediated mini-genome assay to examine the effects of the PB2-D701N substitution on the H1N1pdm viral polymerase activity. Human embryonic kidney-293T cells (HEK-293T) were co-transfected with plasmids expressing the NY1682 PB2 (either WT or D701N), PB1, PA, NP proteins, and a pPolI-NS-Luc reporter plasmid [8]. After 6 h or 18 h incubation at 33oC, 37oC, or 39oC, luciferase production was assayed. At both time points and all temperatures, the PB2-D701N substitution resulted in a significantly higher level of relative luciferase activity compared to the PB2-WT (p<0.05, t-test) (Figure 1), indicating that the D701N substitution in the PB2 protein enhances activity of the H1N1pdm RdRp. The PB2-D701N substitution also increased the H1N1pdm polymerase activity in A549 cells, a human lung epithelial cell line (data not shown). Using the same assay, we have previously shown that introduction of E627K into NY1682-PB2 increased polymerase activity by 400% and E158G substitution in NY1682-PB2 increased activity by 1500% [8]. Although the increased RNA polymerase activity conferred by PB2-D701N was fairly modest in comparison to other mutations (e.g., E627K, and E158G) [8], seemingly small differences in RNA polymerase activity may still influence transmission or pathogenesis. Therefore, the effects of the PB2-D701N substitution on virus replication, pathogenesis, and transmission were investigated.10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g001Figure 1PB2-D701N substitution enhances viral RNA polymerase activity in human cells.HEK-293T cells were transfected with pPolI-NS-Luc plasmid (pBZ81A36) that expresses negative sense virus-like RNA encoding a destabilized firefly luciferase enzyme that can be transcribed by the viral RdRp. The HEK-293T cells were also co-transfected with plasmids expressing the NY1682 PB1, PA and NP, and one of the PB2 clones (WT, or D701N) to generate different viral RdRp. Cells were also co-transfected with a Renilla luciferase expression plasmid to control for transfection efficiency. After 6 h and 18 h incubation at 33oC, 37oC, or 39oC, both firefly and Renilla luciferase production were measured, and Renilla expression was used to normalize the data. The averages of triplicate experiments are shown with error bars that represent standard deviation (SD). * Indicates that the difference between the PB2-WT and PB2-D701N was statistically significant (p<0.05, t-test).The rNY1682-D701N virus replicates more efficiently in mouse epithelial cells and in human lung epithelial cells at an elevated temperaturePrevious studies have shown that D701N substitution in the PB2 protein of H5N1 virus can improve virus growth in mammalian cells [17,28]. To determine if the D701N substitution also has a similar effect on the H1N1pdm virus, we created a recombinant H1N1pdm virus that differed from the wild-type A/New York/1682/2009 (rNY1682-WT) at PB2-D701N (rNY1682-701N). The growth kinetics of the rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses was almost identical in MDCK cells, and both viruses reached peak titers of 107.7 TCID50/ml by 24 hpi (Figure 2A). These data are consistent with results obtained by Herfst et al., in the background of another H1N1pdm strain, rA/Netherlands/602/2009 virus [7].10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g002Figure 2Replication kinetics of rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N in
vitro.(A) Confluent monolayers of Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells were inoculated with the rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) viruses at 0.01 TCID50/cell. Supernatants were collected at 2, 24, 48 and 72 hours post inoculation (hpi). (B) Confluent mouse rectal epithelial carcinoma cells (CMT-93) were inoculated with rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) viruses at 0.01 TCID50/cell and supernatants were harvested at 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hpi. (C, D, E) Confluent human lung epithelial cells (Calu-3) were inoculated with rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) viruses at 0.02 TCID50/cell and supernatants were harvested at 2, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hpi. Cells were incubated at 33oC (C), 37oC (D), or 39oC (E) for the respective growth curves. The averages of triplicate experiments are shown with error bars (+/-) representing the standard deviation, and * indicates that the differences were statistically significant (p<0.001, ANOVA).Since MDCK cells are an ideal substrate for the replication of influenza viruses and even attenuated viruses often replicate efficiently in this cell line, we also compared the replication kinetics of these two viruses in a restrictive mouse epithelial cell line (CMT-93) that we had previously found to be more sensitive to the effects of RdRp mutations than MDCK and some other cell lines [8]. In the CMT-93 cells, the rNY1682-D701N replicated more efficiently than rNY1682-WT, and the titers of rNY1682-D701N were significantly higher (~8-fold) than that of rNY1682-WT at 48, 72 and 96 hpi (p<0.001, ANOVA) (Figure 2B).Although the mini-genome assay results indicate that the D701N substitution increases the polymerase activity in human kidney and lung cell lines (HEK-293T and A549), rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N showed similar growth kinetics in the human lung Calu-3 cell line at 33oC and 37oC (Figure 2C and D). Interestingly, at 39oC, rNY1682-D701N replicated faster and the viral titer was modestly higher than rNY1682-WT at 48 hpi (p<0.001, ANOVA) (Figure 2E). The higher temperature may modestly restrict replication of the rNY1682-WT virus replication in Calu-3 cells.PB2-D701N reduces induction of IFN-λ and enhances virus replication in primary human alveolar epithelial cellsThe increased virus replication in restricted cell lines prompted us to examine the viruses in primary human alveolar epithelial cells. About 95% of the alveolar epithelium is covered by flattened alveolar type I (ATI) cells [29], which makes them an important target for respiratory viruses in the gas exchange portions of the lung. Although isolation and culture of human ATI cells have not been reported to our knowledge, Wang et al., transdifferentiated alveolar type II cells into type I-like cells and established the virus infection model in these cells [30–32]. To determine if the PB2-D701N substitution influences the replication of the H1N1pdm virus in human lung cells, primary cultured ATI-like cells were prepared from lungs of seven de-identified donors as described previously [23], and were infected with the rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses at 37oC. The culture supernatants were collected at different time points post infection (1, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hpi) and the virus titers were determined by plaque assay. Although viral titer from different donors varied, we found that the rNY1682-D701N virus always replicated to modestly higher titers than the rNY1682-WT virus (Figure 3A). Therefore, the ATI-like cells may be more sensitive than the Calu-3 cells for the detection of the effects from the PB2-D701N mutation (compare to Figure 2D). It is possible that at the optimal temperature (37°C), the rNY1682-WT virus replicated to very high titers (107.8 TCID50/ML) in the Calu-3 cells (Figure 2D), to which the rNY1682-D701N virus was unable to surpass. In contrast, the rNY1682-D701N replicated faster and to higher titer than rNY1682-WT virus in ATI-like cells. Taken together, the rNY1682-D701N virus consistently demonstrated similar or enhanced replication kinetics compared to the rNY1682-WT (Figures 2 and 3).10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g003Figure 3Analysis of cytokine response and virus replication in primary human alveolar epithelial cells.Human alveolar type I-like cells were infected at 37°C with MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell of the rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N) virus, or were mock infected (Mock). Supernatants from the culture were collected at various time points post infection. (A) Supernatants collected at 1, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hpi were determined for viral titers by plaque assay. Representative growth kinetics of the WT and D701N viruses in one donor cells are shown. Supernatants collected at 24 hpi were analyzed by ELISA for the levels of (B) IFN-λ, (C) CCL5, (D) IL-6, and (E) IL-8. Each symbol represents an average value of 2 or 3 repeats using the same cells from one donor and thus seven different symbols represent the data from seven independent experiments performed using cells from seven donors. Due to the variation in cytokine responses among different donors, for each donor, cytokine/chemokine induced by WT was set as 100% and cytokine/chemokine induced by D701N or Mock was presented as a percentage of WT. Horizontal bar in each group indicates the average value from seven donors and * indicates a statistical difference between WT and D701N (p<0.05, ANOVA).The growth advantage of the rNY1682-D701N virus in ATI-like cells could be the result of interaction between the viral factor, PB2-D701N, and multiple host factors. To examine host factors involved in the different virus growth kinetics, we focused on selected cytokines and chemokines that are important for host immune response to influenza viruses. At 24 hpi, supernatants from infected cells were collected and examined by ELISA for the levels of IFN-λ, CCL5, IL-6, and IL-8. Compared to the rNY1682-WT infected cells, rNY1682-D701N infected cells secreted significantly lower amount of IFN-λ (Figure 3B), which represents important virus induced antiviral type III interferon (IL28/29). In contrast, rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N infected cells secreted comparable levels of CCL5 (Figure 3C), IL-6 (Figure 3D), and IL-8 (Figure 3E). Additionally, we performed a similar experiment (one donor) using an MOI of 3 and detected the same trend in IFN-λ response (rNY1682-D701N lower than rNY1682-WT, data not shown). The lower level of IFN-λ Induced by the rNY1682-D701N virus may give the virus a replication advantage in the type I-like cells.PB2-D701N enhances lung replication and pathogenicity of the H1N1pdm virus in a mouse modelTo determine if the PB2-D701N substitution also enhances H1N1pdm virus replication in vivo, six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and inoculated intranasally with 50 µl virus diluent containing 103 TCID50 of either rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N. Compared to rNY1682-WT, rNY1682-D701N replicated more rapidly and had 40-fold higher titers in the lungs as early as 24 hpi (Figure 4A). Statistical analysis of the data demonstrated that the rNY1682-D701N infected mice had significantly higher titers at 12 and 24 hpi (p<0.05, ANOVA), whereas the modest titer differences in the nasal washes at 24 and 48 hpi (Figure 4B) were not statistically significant compared to the rNY1682-WT (p>0.05, ANOVA). The dramatic increase in viral titer in the lungs of mice infected by rNY1682-D701N indicate that this substitution has a stronger impact on replication in vivo than in the mouse CMT-93 cell line, which didn’t show a difference between rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N until 48 hpi (Figure 2B).10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g004Figure 4Analysis of viral replication efficiency in the respiratory tracts of mice.Six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=3/group/time-point) were inoculated intranasally with 50 µl containing 103 TCID50 of rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N). Animals were euthanized at 12, 24, 48, 96 hpi. The entire lung of each animal was homogenized in 1 ml of media and clarified by centrifugation, and nasal washes were collected from each mouse in 1 ml of media. (A) Viral titers of clarified lung homogenates or (B) nasal washes were determined by TCID50 assay using MDCK cells. The average of each group is shown with error bars representing SD(+/-), and * indicates a statistical difference between WT and D701N (p<0.05, ANOVA). The dotted lines at 1.5 log10 indicate the lower limit of detection of infectious virus.The rapid and robust replication of rNY1682-D701N in mouse respiratory tract warranted further evaluation of the effect of PB2-D701N on the pathogenicity of H1N1pdm virus. We compared H1N1pdm viruses that expressed wild type PB2 (rNY1682-WT), PB2-E627K (rNY1682-E627K), PB2-D701N (rNY1682-D701N), or a PB2-E158G (rNY1682-E158G) substitution that we previously showed significantly increases the pathogenicity of the H1N1pdm virus [8]. BALB/cJ mice were inoculated intranasally with 105 TCID50 of each virus and monitored for clinical signs and weight loss for 14 days (n=5/group). Mice inoculated with rNY1682-WT, rNY1682-E627K and rNY1682-D701N, began to lose weight by 3 dpi; and more significant weight loss was observed in the mice inoculated with rNY1682-D701N than in mice inoculated with rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-E627K as early as 4 dpi (p<0.01, ANOVA) (Figure 4A). The mice inoculated with rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-E627K had an average maximum weight loss of approximately 12% and began to recover by 8 dpi (Figure 5A). In contrast, the group of mice infected by rNY1682-D701N continued to lose weight throughout the experiment and all of these animals succumbed to infection by 7 dpi (Figure 5A and 5B).10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g005Figure 5Pathogenicity of rNY1682-WT, rNY1682-E158G, rNY1682-E627K, and rNY1682-D701N viruses in mice.Six-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=5/group) were inoculated intranasally with 50 µl containing 105 TCID50 of different recombinant viruses (rNY1682-WT (WT), rNY1682-E158G (E158G), rNY1682-E627K (E627K), or rNY1682-D701N (D701N)) or they were mock inoculated (Mock). (A) Morbidity was assessed by weight loss over a 14 day period and is graphed as a percentage of the animals weights on the day of inoculation (day 0). The average body weight of each group is shown with error bars representing SD (+/-), and a significant difference between D701N and WT or E627K was evident as early as 4 d.p.i (*, p<0.01, ANOVA). (B) Mortality associated with infection by the recombinant viruses (rNY1682-WT (WT) or rNY1682-D701N (D701N)) was also examined. Five-week-old female BALB/cJ mice (n=5/group) were inoculated intranasally with 50 µl containing 1×103, 104, 105, or 106 TCID50 of rNY1682-D701N or they were mock inoculated. (C) Morbidity was assessed by weight changes over a 14 day period and it is graphed as a percentage of the weight on the day of inoculation (day 0). The average body weight of each group is shown with error bars representing SD. (D) Mortality of the mice was also monitored for 14 days post inoculation. In accordance with our animal welfare protocol, mice that lost more than 25% of their original weight were euthanized for humane reasons.To further evaluate the influence of PB2-D701N, we determined the 50% mouse lethal dose (MLD50) by intranasally inoculating BALB/cJ mice with 103, 104, 105, or 106 TCID50 of rNY1682-D701N; all of the groups of mice showed prominent weight loss (Figure 5C), and the mortality rate was 0%, 40%, 80%, and 100%, respectively (Figure 5D). The MLD50 of rNY1682-D701N was 2X104 TCID50, which is at least 300-fold lower than that of the parental virus rNY1682-WT (>6X106 TCID50) and 33-fold higher than that of the rNY1682-E158G virus (6X102 TCID50) [8]. These data show that rNY1682-D701N is more virulent than either rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-E627K, and that it is less virulent than the highly pathogenic rNY1682-E158G virus.PB2-D701N increases the transmissibility of the H1N1pdm virus in a ferret modelWe used the well-established ferret respiratory droplet transmission model to evaluate the effects of PB2-D701N on the transmissibility of H1N1pdm virus by housing ferrets in adjacent cages, each with a perforated side wall that prevented direct contact but allowed spread of virus through the air [26,33]. Three ferrets were inoculated intranasally with 106 PFU of the rNY1682-WT or rNY1682-D701N virus, and 24 h later three naïve ferrets were each placed in a transmission cage adjacent to an inoculated ferret. Ferrets inoculated with rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses exhibited similar clinical signs including transient weight loss and fever before returning to baseline levels (data not shown). However, mean nasal wash virus titers from the rNY1682-D701N inoculated ferrets were significantly higher than that from the rNY1682-WT inoculated ferrets on day 3 and day 5 post inoculation (P<0.001, Figure 6A and 6B), consistent with the replication advantage of the rNY1682-D701N virus has in cells (human primary ATI-like cells, Calu-3 cells, and mouse CMT-93) and mice.10.1371/journal.pone.0067616.g006Figure 6Respiratory droplet transmissibility of rNY1682-WT and rNY1682-D701N viruses in ferrets.Three ferrets were inoculated with 106 PFU of (A) rNY1682-WT or (B) rNY1682-D701N virus. All ferrets were housed individually in specialized cages that permit exchange of respiratory droplets, but prevent direct or indirect contact between inoculated-contact animal pairs. A naïve ferret was placed in an adjacent cage to an inoculated ferret 1 day post-inoculation (0 day post-contact). Viral replication was determined by titration of nasal washes collected on alternate days from inoculated (left bars) and contact (right bars) ferrets. Values for individual ferrets are shown and the dotted lines at 1 log10 indicate the lower limit of detection of infectious virus.The ability of the viruses to undergo respiratory droplet transmission among ferrets was assessed by measuring virus titers in nasal washes from contact animals, collected at 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11 days post-contact (dpc). The rNY1682-WT virus transmitted to two out of three contact ferrets (Figure 6A), demonstrating the same transmission efficiency as other H1N1pdm viruses previously evaluated in the same ferret transmission model [33–35]. This result was confirmed by the hemagglutation inhibition (HI) assay of the sera collected from these three ferrets, which showed that the two positive ferrets had HI antibody titers of 5280 and 2560 and the negative ferret had no detectable HI antibody (HI<10, at 18 dpc). In contrast, the rNY1682-D701N virus transmitted efficiently to all of the three contact ferrets (Figure 6B) and all of them were seroconverted (data now shown). Notably, in contrast to the largely delayed transmission of the rNY1682-WT virus, the rNY1682-D701N virus transmitted to contact ferrets as early as 1 dpc and all the ferrets showed relatively high virus titers by 3 dpc (Figure 6B).Finally, to confirm our findings, an additional independent ferret transmission study was conducted with the same experimental design. In that study, we again found that the rNY1682-D701N virus transmitted to all three of the contact ferrets and with similar kinetics of transmission as was observed in the first study (in total 6/6 for PB2-701N on day 3 verses 4/6 for PB2-701D on day 7, Figure 6B and data not shown).DiscussionAsparagine (N) at residue 701 improves the binding of PB2 to mammalian importin-a isoforms [36–38], and for H5N1 and H7N7 avian influenza viruses it is associated with increased viral replication in mammalian cell lines, enhanced virulence in the mouse model, and more efficient transmission in the guinea pig model [12,16,28,39]. The data presented in this study demonstrate that the PB2-D701N substitution also increased the H1N1pdm virus replication in primary human cells, pathogenicity in the mouse model, and transmission in the ferret model. Notably, this is the first demonstration that PB2-D701N substitution enhances the transmissibility of influenza A viruses in the ferret transmission model.Two other studies that examined the PB2-D701N and other PB2 mutations in the context of rA/Netherlands/602/2009 and rA/California/04/2009 H1N1pdm viruses concluded that both the PB2-E627K and PB2-D701N mutations had little impact on pathogenicity and transmissibility [6,7]. However, the supplemental data published by Yamada et al., showed the PB2-D701N substitution in rA/California/04/2009 H1N1pdm enhanced morbidity in BALB/cJ mice, which is consistent with our findings. However, the tissue titers of the rA/California/04/2009 PB2-701N virus were comparable with those of the PB2-701D virus at 3 dpi and 6 dpi, and the authors did not remark that PB2-D701N actually showed enhanced virulence as their supplemental data suggested [6]. One limitation with the study by Yamada et al. [6], is that tissue titers were not determined at early time points (e.g., 12, 24, and 48 hpi.), when higher levels of replication in the lungs are more pronounced (Figure 4), and thus differences from the wild type virus early in the course of infection would not have been evident. The data from Herfst et al., suggested that the PB2-D701N substitution didn’t increase the transmission efficiency of the rA/Netherlands/602/2009 virus in their ferret transmission model [7]. The inconstant results between that study and the data presented in this study may result from differences in the virus strains used (four residues are different between the NY/1682 and Netherlands/602 strains), or the differences in the experimental design for the ferret transmission experiments. It appears that the transmission model for the wild type H1N1pdm (A/Netherlands/602/2009) used by Herfst et al.[7], is less stringent (4 of 4 contact ferrets are infected) than the transmission model used for this study, which consistently demonstrates that only two out of three contact ferrets show transmission with several other wild type H1N1pdm strains [33–35]. This more stringent transmission model allows one to detect the increased transmission rate upon introduction of the PB2-D701N substitution into the H1N1pdm virus and the data also clearly shows increased transmission kinetics (Figure 6). The faster transmission kinetics of the PB2-701N substitution may be related to the fact that this substitution enhances RdRp activity at cooler temperatures such as those found in the upper respiratory tract (Figure 1 D).Collectively, using more detailed experimentation including using various cell lines at various temperatures, primary human lung cells, a well-designed mouse model, and a stringent ferret transmission model, we showed that the PB2-701N substitution enhanced the replication, pathogenesis, and transmission of an H1N1pdm virus in mice, ferrets, and primary cultured human alveolar epithelial cells. Therefore, we speculate that H1N1pdm viruses containing a PB2-D701N substitution may be more virulent and/or transmissible in humans than the viruses that circulated in the early years of the pandemic. Surprisingly, of the approximate 4,000 H1N1pdm PB2 sequences available in the major influenza virus databases (Influenza Research Database [40], NIH/NCBI Influenza Virus Resource [41], EpiFlu Database [42]), there is only one H1N1pdm virus (A/Wisconsin/51/2009) containing the PB2-D701N mutation (GISAID EpiFlu, accession#EPI273622, accessed 08-15-2012). The rarity of PB2 sequences with D701N mutation indicates that so far the mutation has not conferred better fitness to the H1N1pdm virus for transmission in humans, which is plausible since fitness and evolution in the human population is a polygenic trait. However, considering the estimated large number of infections worldwide [43], additional viruses with the PB2-D701N mutation may exist in the population. The higher polymerase activity and virus replication observed in human cells, and lower IFN-λ induction may give the virus an advantage by increasing mRNA transcription and genome replication. PB2 has been shown to inhibit interferon-β expression through its N-terminal region [36,44], and the mechanism underlying this IFN-λ suppression effect caused by a mutation in the C-terminal region is intriguing and warrants further investigation. With increased rounds of replication, additional mutations are more likely to occur, which may lead to emergence of other known or unknown virulence determinants [45]. Those virulence factors alone, or in combination with the PB2-D701N mutation, may increase the replication and pathogenicity of H1N1pdm viruses.In summary, our findings support a role for the asparagine residue at PB2-701 in contributing to the virulence of influenza A viruses and show that PB2-D701N in the H1N1pdm virus increases its viral RNA polymerase activity in human and other mammalian cells, confers more efficient replication in cell lines and in primary human alveolar epithelial cells, and results in increased pathogenicity in mice and increased transmissibility in ferrets. The true threat of the PB2-D701N substitution to humans is unknown; however, if H1N1pdm viruses containing PB2-701N do emerge as this unique virus continues to evolve in human populations, it may pave the way to a more severe disease burden [39].


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL VIRUS (RSV)
================================================================================
Title: Interactions Between Bovine Respiratory Syncytial Virus and Cattle: Aspects of Pathogenesis and Immunity

1. IntroductionBovine respiratory syncytial virus (BRSV) belongs to the Pneumoviridae family in the Orthopneumovirus genus and Mononegavirales order, a group of enveloped negative-sense RNA (ssRNA−) viruses [1,2]. Formerly, BRSV was classified as Paramyxoviridae, but in 2015, the Pneumoviridae family was created with BRSV belonging to this family. BRSV was renamed as Bovine orthopneumovirus in 2016. In 2022, BRSV was then renamed Orthopneumovirus bovis [2]. We will adhere to the historical terminology to maintain consistency with the previous literature. First described in Europe [3], BRSV was reported in the USA in 1974 [4], and to this day, this agent remains as a relevant respiratory pathogen worldwide [5,6,7,8], acting either as the sole agent involved in respiratory disease in young calves or involved in bovine respiratory disease (BRD) in cattle. BRD is a common illness in young cattle and the most important infectious cause of economic burden to the feedlot industry. The disease is complex and multifactorial, involving a combination of factors such as viral and bacterial pathogens, stress factors (e.g., weaning, transportation, and the commingling of cattle from different sources), and environmental conditions (e.g., dust and temperature fluctuations). BRSV increases the susceptibility of calves to secondary infections and allows for the colonization of the lower respiratory tract by bacteria [9,10,11]. Fatalities, reduced production, prevention, and treatment costs contribute to associated economic losses. Still, more animals displaying lung lesions at slaughter are reported than the number of clinical BRD cases identified in herds, indicating that losses might be underestimated [12]. Respiratory diseases are also one of the leading causes of antimicrobial use in cattle, with consequences for animals, public health, and the environment [13,14]. Young calves are the most susceptible to BRSV, but the generated immunity is short-lived, and reinfections occur even in older animals, maintaining the virus’s circulation [5,15,16].2. BRSV Genome and StructureThe BRSV genome consists of an ssRNA− 15.1 kb in length, encoding ten genes containing two overlapping open reading frames (ORFs), resulting in the production of 11 proteins (Figure 1A). The genome sequence from the three prime end to the five prime end includes two nonstructural (NS) genes (NS1 and NS2), followed by nucleoprotein (N) (also called nucleocapsid protein), phosphoprotein (P), matrix protein (M), small hydrophobic protein (SH), fusion glycoprotein (F), major attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix 2 (M2), and large polymerase protein (L). The M2 gene encodes two separate proteins, M2-1 and M2-2, from overlapping ORFs (Figure 1A) [17].Virions may be spherical but typically present highly filamentous or pleomorphic structures measuring around 200 nm in diameter. The viral particles are encased in a lipid membrane about 7–15 nm thick, which is host-derived. This membrane is adorned with cube-shaped projections forming well-defined bridges between virus particles, creating a unique network structure [18,19,20]. Three viral transmembrane surface glycoproteins are associated with the envelope: G, F, and the SH proteins, while the M protein is located beneath the envelope (Figure 1B). The lipid membrane encloses the nucleocapsid nucleoprotein core, with the M protein forming an outer protein shell around the nucleocapsid [21]. The nucleocapsid is tightly associated with the ssRNA and comprises four viral proteins: N, P, L, and the transcription processivity factor (M2-1) [20,22]. The N protein is responsible for the structure that protects the genome (Figure 1B). The M2-1 and M2-2 proteins, along with the L protein, which acts as the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), are all involved in transcription and genome replication [22].3. Viral ReplicationViral entry and replication are initiated by the interaction of the G protein and surface glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) on epithelial respiratory cells (Figure 2A) [23,24], followed by the fusion to the host cell mediated by the F protein [22,25,26]. Alternatively, pneumoviruses’ fusion to the cell membrane may require an internalization mechanism, such as macropinocytosis and clathrin- or caveolin-mediated endocytosis, with the fusion taking place in an endosome upon the proteolytic activation of the F protein (Figure 2A [27,28,29]; reviewed by [30]). Although G is the primary attachment protein, the F protein also has an attachment function, and its expression is sufficient to mediate infection in cell lines but results in an attenuated profile in vivo [31,32,33]. The fusion process is initiated when the F protein binds to a specific receptor on respiratory epithelial cells. This interaction triggers a conformational change in the F protein, converting it from its pre-fusion form to a post-fusion conformation, allowing the fusion peptide of the F protein to be inserted into the plasma membrane and a stable fusion pore formation [34]. As a result, the viral envelope and the host cell membrane merge, and the viral genome can enter the host cell (Figure 2A) [34,35,36]. While studies confirming the cellular receptors for BRSV fusion are still lacking, human RSV F protein binds to nucleolin, which functions as a cell receptor for the virus [37], with several co-receptors also identified, including C-type lectins [38], intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) [39], epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) [40], insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF1R) [41], and toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4), which also presents recognition activity related to the immunity against BRSV infection [42,43].The viral RNA and associated nucleoproteins (N, P, and L) are released into the host cytoplasm upon fusion. Transcription takes place following a three′ to five′ gradient (Figure 2A). The polymerase transcribes each gene, resulting in sub-genomic mRNAs (with a five′ to three′ orientation), which are in turn translated into viral proteins by the host cell machinery. The viral genome is replicated for progeny generation by transcription of the positive-sense antigenome (with a five′ to three′ orientation) by the polymerase, later generating new negative-sense full-genome copies. Viral assembly and maturation occur at the plasma membrane [44,45]. Recent evidence shows that some initial steps of RSV virions’ assembly may alternatively happen within the cytoplasm before the complexes reach the plasma membrane [46,47]. Upon assembly, new virions bud out or stay closely associated with the host cell membrane (Figure 2A), leading to the formation of syncytia [22,48,49].The F protein is primarily responsible for syncytium formation, the characteristic fusion of infected cells, from which BRSV derives its name [25]. While the binding of the virion to a host cell leads to viral entry [30,34,50], during viral replication, the F protein is expressed on the host cell plasma membrane, mediating cell-to-cell fusion and multinucleated syncytium formation [51]. This cytopathic characteristic is a feature of infection and occurs both in cell lines (Figure 2B) and in vivo (Figure 2C). In infected animals, syncytia are observed mainly as large multinucleated cells formed by infected respiratory epithelial cells (Figure 2C). Syncytium formation may contribute to the pathogenesis of BRSV and is thought to influence viral replication kinetics and viral spread along neighboring cells while minimizing virus exposure to extracellular components of the immune system [32,52,53]. Additionally, due to its critical role in the viral infection process, the F protein is a target for vaccine development [54,55,56,57]. Vaccines that elicit a strong immune response against the F protein may protect cattle from BRSV infections. Still, strong antibodies directed against post-F conformation have been implicated in vaccine-enhanced disease with disastrous consequences in humans [58] and contradictory evidence in cattle [59,60]. Similarly, antiviral drugs that inhibit the function of the F protein could potentially prevent the virus from entering host cells, thereby blocking infection [61,62].4. Common Pathological FindingsBRSV infection often triggers increased mucus production and inflammation, contributing to exudate accumulation in the bronchioles and alveoli. Bronchiolitis, characterized by inflammation, necrosis, and obstruction of the bronchioles, leads to airway constriction, impaired airflow, and respiratory distress, compromising overall respiratory function (Figure 2D). Lung consolidation ensues due to the accumulation of inflammatory cells, fluid, and debris in the alveoli and bronchioles, resulting in added respiratory distress and in the appearance of a solid lung in imaging studies or during macroscopic gross examination. Interstitial pneumonia, another common pathological finding, also occurs due to inflammation and the thickening of the lung’s interstitial tissue, worsening the calf’s respiratory distress. In severe cases, the virus can cause bronchiolar obstruction and alveolar damage, compromising the calf’s overall respiratory function (Figure 2C,D) [63,64,65].5. Host–Pathogen InteractionInfection and replication are integral to the virus life cycle, but these processes expose viruses to detection and elimination by the host immune mechanisms. Viral nucleic acids, replication products, and some viral proteins are common detection targets of the innate immune system [66,67]. The timing and the kinetics of early viral detection by innate immune mechanisms significantly influence infection progression, the establishment of adaptive immunity, and ultimately impact disease outcome. Likewise, BRSV has evolved many escaping mechanisms to evade, delay, and/or subvert immune detection and antiviral host responses [68,69,70].The host immune system is equipped with an arsenal of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that convert microbial and danger sensing into immediate host defense responses (Table 1 and Figure 3 and Figure 4). Viral detection results in a series of signaling pathways culminating in the secretion of type I interferons (IFNs), pro-inflammatory cytokines, and other inflammatory mediators, resulting in leukocyte recruitment, tissue infiltration, and later on, T-cell activation and antibody production. While these are steps necessary to achieve viral clearance, those responses frequently contribute to clinical signs, including fever, cough, increased mucus production, anorexia, respiratory distress, and depression [71,72,73].5.1. Innate ImmunityInitial BRSV infection and replication occur in the superficial layer of the nasal, tracheal, and bronchial epithelium, and later replication occurs in the bronchiolar and alveolar epithelium. The host innate detection is based on the presence of PRRs, which sense distinct evolutionarily conserved structures on pathogens, termed microbial-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs). PRRs include toll-like receptors (TLRs), retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptors (RLRs), nucleotide oligomerization domain-like receptors (NLRs), and cytosolic DNA sensors. PRRs are expressed in cells of the immune system as well as non-immune cells and are present in multiple cellular compartments (cytosol, endosomal, or cell membrane), allowing virally infected cells to trigger defense mechanisms that decrease replication and signal infection to neighboring cells, triggering innate and adaptive immunity components [74,75]. In response to viral MAMPs’ detection, cells produce type I IFNs, particularly IFN-α and IFN-β, which are crucial in inhibiting viral replication and spread. These IFNs signaling in neighboring cells activate the Janus kinase/signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT) signaling pathways, leading to the expression of hundreds of genes with antiviral functions [76,77].While some viral proteins can trigger PRRs, nucleic acids detected in intracellular spaces during replication are predominant viral molecular patterns. Upon viral entry into host target cells, the BRSV viral RNA and its replication products are recognized by the nucleotide oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2), retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), and melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA-5), leading to the production of type I IFNs and establishing an antiviral state within the infected and neighboring cells. In this state, various defense mechanisms are upregulated, including the expression of antiviral proteins, to thwart viral replication and spread. This intricate interplay between cytosolic detection and the establishment of an antiviral state is a crucial aspect of the innate immune system’s ability to combat viral infections effectively [77,78,79]. In addition to type I IFN, innate immune cells release pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), which contribute to inflammation and the recruitment of immune cells to the site of infection, while also mediating systemic clinical signs associated with the infection.While the NOD2 and RIG-I are the most important NLR and RLR involved in the immune response against BRSV, the heterodimer TLR-2-TLR-6, TLR-3, TLR-4, TLR-7, and TLR-8 have also been shown to recognize BRSV [80,81,82,83,84]. It is essential to highlight that the cellular expression of PRRs, as well as the levels of their expression, differs among different cell types and stimuli, as do the signaling molecules involved in the pathway that leads to cytokine and IFN production. For example, dendritic cells (DCs) are specialized in expressing TLR-3, TLR-7, and TLR-9 with the activation of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), leading to a strong type I IFN secretion. These cells are in contrast with macrophages, known for their high expression of TLR-2 and TLR-4, primarily producing pro-inflammatory cytokines [74,85]. In cattle, γδ T-cells also express TLR-2, TLR-3, TLR-4, and TLR-7 [86]. Epithelial cells are crucial in the BRSV response, as they are not only a physical barrier but also the virus’s main target and, therefore, involved in immune activation. BRSV G protein binds to sialic acid residues on cell surfaces, and the F protein works with the G protein to mediate cellular invasion [22,87]. This virus has been shown to infect different respiratory tract cells in the trachea, bronchi, and pneumocytes [87,88]. The main PRRs involved in the anti-BRSV response, the cell types in which they are present, their location within the cell, and the MAMPs each one recognizes (their main ligands) are described in Table 1.viruses-16-01753-t001_Table 1Table 1Pattern recognition receptors putatively involved in the immune response against bovine respiratory syncytial virus.PRRCell TypesLocationLigandTLR-2/6 [89]Dendritic cells [90], macrophages [91], monocytes [91], neutrophils [92], mast cells [93], eosinophils [94], basophils [95], γδ T-cells [86], epithelial cells [96]Cell surface [74]Large attachment Glycoprotein (G) [80,97]TLR-3 [98]Dendritic cells [90,99] macrophages [100], eosinophils [94], mast cells [101], epithelial cells [96], γδ T- = cells [82]Endosome [74]Viral dsRNA [82,102]TLR-4 [103]Dendritic cells [90], macrophages [89], mast cells [93], neutrophils [92], monocytes [90], eosinophils [104], epithelial cells [105]Cell surface [74]Fusion protein (F) [43,80,81,83]TLR-7 [90]Dendritic cells [90], neutrophils [92], macrophages [89], eosinophils [104], epithelial cells [98], γδ T-cells [106]Endosome [74]Viral ssRNA [107,108]TLR-8 [84]Dendritic cells [90], macrophages [89], neutrophils [109], eosinophils [94], monocytes [110], regulatory T-cells [111], epithelial cells [112]Endosome [74]Viral ssRNA [107,108]NOD2 [113]Dendritic cells [114], macrophages [115], monocytes [116], epithelial cells [117]Cytoplasm [118]Viral ssRNA [118]RIG-I [84]Dendritic cells [119], macrophages [120], neutrophils [121], epithelial cells [122]Cytoplasm [123]Viral ssRNA [118]MDA-5 [84]Dendritic cells [124], macrophages [125], neutrophils [121], epithelial cells [126]Cytoplasm [118]Viral dsRNA [127]Abbreviations: PRR = pattern recognition receptor; TLR-2/6, TLR-3, TLR-4, TLR-7, TLR-8 = toll-like receptor 2/6, 3, 4, 7, and 8; NOD2 = nucleotide oligomerization domain 2; RIG-I = retinoic acid-inducible gene 1; MDA-5 = melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5; ssRNA = single-stranded RNA; dsRNA = double-stranded RNA.Pattern Recognition Receptors’ Signaling PathwaysNLRs and RLRs are key components of the cytosolic sensing system within cells. These receptors play a crucial role in the innate immune response, detecting MAMPs and damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) within the cytosol of cells. NLRs and RLRs are involved in the immune response against BRSV (Figure 3). NOD2 detects viral ssRNA and is associated with mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS), also known as IFN-β promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA), or caspase activation recruitment domain-adaptor inducing IFN-β (CARDIF) [75]. After interaction with MAVS, transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B-cells (NFκB) are activated and lead to type I IFNs and pro-inflammatory cytokines’ production, respectively [128].RIG-I and MDA-5 have been shown to detect RSV, with some evidence in cattle (BRSV) [10,78,129,130]. RIG-I is activated by 5′ triphosphorylated ends of RNA and uses MAVS as an intermediate. The pathway culminates in IRF3 and NFκB activation and the secretion of type I IFN and pro-inflammatory cytokines [131,132]. RIG-I activity with RSV recognition has been shown in cell lines and primary cell cultures [133,134,135], as well as in vivo in mice [136], human patients hospitalized due to RSV [137], and in BRSV-infected calves [130].The sensing of cytosolic dsRNA by MDA-5 also recruits the adaptor protein MAVS, leading to the activation of TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and the inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase ε (IKKε) [138]. TBK1 and IKKε induce IRF3 phosphorylation, which culminates with its translocation to the nucleus, where IRF3 induces type I IFNs’ production [75]. According to Loo et al. [139], RIG-I, but not MDA-5, was crucial in the immune defense against RSV, and cells lacking RIG-I were more permissive to RSV infection than wild-type cells and cells lacking MDA-5. MDA-5 may also be involved in the RSV modulation of type I IFN, as it colocalizes with the N protein inside inclusion bodies early post-infection [134].TLRs are structurally composed of leucine-rich repeats (LRRs), which are responsible for ligand recognition, and a toll/interleukin-1 receptor-like (TIR) domain. The TIR domain is responsible for interacting with adaptor proteins to engage the signaling process [140]. Generally, every TLR uses the myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (MyD88) signaling pathway, except for TLR-3, which uses only TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-β (TRIF), also known as TIR-containing adapter molecule 1 (TICAM-1), as an adaptor protein, and TLR-4, which can use both MyD88 and TRIF [141,142].TLR-2 forms a dimer with either TLR-1 or TLR-6; however, previous studies have shown that especially the RSV species are recognized by the dimer TLR-2-TLR-6, and not TLR-2-TLR-1 [143], and that the TLR2-TLR6 dimer recognizes RSV G protein [97]. The signaling pathway executed by TLR-2 uses TIRAP (toll/interleukin-1 receptor like-domain containing adaptor protein), also known as MyD88-adaptor-like (MAL), as the adaptor to MyD88, leading to NFκB translocation and pro-inflammatory cytokines’ production [144]. TLR-4 was the first TLR reported to recognize viral pathogens and bind to the F protein of RSV [42] and BRSV [83]. Also, TLR-4 polymorphism is related to human RSV disease severity [145]. The TLR-4 pathway recruits either MyD88 or TRIF, and these pathways may be competitive (Figure 4A) [146]. TIRAP-MyD88 regulates early NFκB activation and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, while the TRIF-dependent pathway involves the recruitment of the adaptor proteins TRIF and TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM). TRAM-TRIF signals activate IRF3 via TRAF3. IRF3 activation induces the production of type I IFNs [147,148,149]. On the MyD88-dependent pathway, once the TLR-4 recognizes the BRSV F protein (Figure 4A), the intracellular domain of the TLR recruits MyD88, which attracts interleukin 1 receptor (IL-1R)-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1) and 4 (IRAK4), forming a complex known as myddosome [150]. This formation activates IRAK4, which phosphorylates IRAK1, subsequently releasing IRAK1, which associates itself with TNF-α-receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), activating it. The activated TRAF6 forms a new complex, along with transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β)-activated kinase 1 (TAK1), which is now activated. TAK1 then activates the IKK complex, which is composed of IKKα, IKKβ, and IKKγ, also known as NFκB essential modulator (NEMO). Once activated, the IKK complex phosphorylates the inhibitor of NFκB, which can now translocate to the cell nucleus, where it leads to the transcription of critical pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, and TNF-α [74,85,151].The secondary route executed by TLR-4 uses TRIF in place of MyD88 and leads to the increased production of type I IFNs [147,152]. The MyD88-independent pathway executed by TLR-4 is similar to endosomal TLR-3 signaling, shown in Figure 4B. Upon TRIF adaptor protein recruitment, TRAF6 is engaged, which interacts with both TRAF3 and receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1). TRAF6 is involved in NFκB activation by forming a complex with RIP1 and TAK1 which activates the IKK complex, phosphorylating IKκA, which in turn phosphorylates the NFκB inhibitor nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells inhibitor alpha (IκBα). Upon phosphorylation, IκBα dissociates from NFκB, undergoing ubiquitination and degradation. Once IκBα dissociates from the complex, NFκB can translocate to the nucleus, where it will induce the production of inflammatory cytokines (Figure 4) [85,153,154]. Alternatively, TRIF recruits TRAF3, which binds to NFκB-activating kinase (NAK)-associated protein 1 (NAP1), attracting TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IKKε, forming a complex. TBK1 and IKKε are responsible for phosphorylating IRF3. Phosphorylated IRF3 forms dimers that are the active form of the transcription factor and translocate into the nucleus. Once in the nucleus, IRF3 dimers bind to specific DNA sequences known as interferon-stimulated response elements (ISREs) present in the promoters of target genes, inducing type I IFN production (IFN-α and IFN-β) [155]. Moreover, in response to TLR-3 activation by BRSV, γδ T-cells present higher levels of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1, also known as C-C motif chemokine ligand 2, CCL2) [82]. MCP-1 directs leukocyte infiltration, affects T-cell proliferation and function, activates macrophages, and promotes inflammation. MCP-1 may also act as a regulator in the polarization of T-cells toward a Th2 phenotype [156,157,158].Infection with BRSV leads to an increase in several cytokines and chemokines in circulation, including IL-6, TNF-α, IL-18, chemokine-x-c motif ligand (CXCL8), CCL2, CCL3, and CCL5, mediating the subsequent influx of leukocytes, predominantly neutrophils [159,160]. A whole blood transcriptome analysis in BRSV-infected dairy calves revealed that several genes in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway for Influenza A were influenced by the infection, including bovine-MHC genes (BOLA-DQ5 and BOLA-DQB), chemokines and cytokines (CXCL8, IL-12B, CXCL10), viral detection genes (DDX58 and IFIH1, which encode RIG-I and MDA5, respectively), and genes for cellular antiviral response and innate immune signaling (MX1, IRF7, EIF2AK2, RSAD2, OAS1Y, and OAS1Z) [10,129,130].BRSV-infected lungs show intense neutrophilic infiltration that coincides with the occurrence and peak of clinical signs [63,161]. NETosis is a specialized form of cell death performed by neutrophils characterized by the release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). This process involves expulsing DNA, histones, and antimicrobial proteins from the neutrophil, forming a web-like structure that traps and neutralizes pathogens [162,163,164,165]. RSV stimulates NETosis, resulting in the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) [166]. The mechanisms underlying NET formation require ROS production, and while both NETosis and ROS are important immune mechanisms, exacerbated responses damage tissue. ROS and NETosis have been implicated in lower respiratory tract disease pathogenesis caused by BRSV and RSV [167,168,169]. The results of a study using a bronchoalveolar lavage to sample BRSV-infected calves are also consistent with neutrophil activation and NETosis and decreased antioxidant repairing mechanisms that would counteract tissue damage [168].Oxidative stress, an imbalance in the production of ROS and antioxidant responses, was also reported in vitro in a BRSV infection of bovine turbinate primary cell line and ex vivo in lung tissues with lesions versus without lesions of BRSV-infected calves, with increased ROS genes and cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 (infected vs. non-infected) and decreased myeloperoxidase (MPO), NADPH oxidase (NOX)1, NOX4, and NOX5), and superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD-1) (lesioned vs. non-lesioned lungs of infected animals) [170]. SOD-1 products are anti-oxidative and mediate the removal of oxygen radicals. The evaluation of global changes in mRNA abundance in healthy lung and lung lesions from BRSV-infected calves also pointed to oxidative stress and the production of nitric oxide and ROS to be activated in the tissues of the BRSV-challenged animals in another study [171].While nitric oxide and reactive oxygen are immune mechanisms involved in pathogen destruction and apoptosis, they have been shown to be used by viruses to facilitate replication [172,173,174]. Supporting the idea that the virus may benefit from intense lung neutrophilic infiltration and oxidative response, the differential regulation of cytokine production by IL-17A and IL-17F (which support neutrophils function and downregulate IL-10, an important anti-inflammatory cytokine) has also been reported in lung lesions [171]). Collectively, a transcriptome analysis of lung tissues with lesions versus without lesions from calves infected with BRSV supports dysregulated oxidative stress, cell damage, and depressed innate and adaptive immune functions [171,175]. The downregulation of B- and T-cells’ activation and differentiation, cytokine production, and adaptive immune response were typical findings in lesioned tissue samples, while the chemotaxis of immune cells (particularly innate immune cells) was increased. Differential gene expression suggested that increased chemotaxis may be a compensatory mechanism to the depressed functional activity of innate immune cells in lesions and their overall inability to efficiently control the infection.Limiting inflammation and immune cells’ influx into the lung therapeutically by the use of broad-spectrum antioxidants and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including COX-2 inhibitors, was attempted to curb tissue damage and improve lung function and disease outcome in humans [176]. While in mice, the use of such drugs has been shown to be promising, in calves, the treatment of BRSV-infected calves with ibuprofen (an NSAID) was correlated with increased viral shedding, even though it reduced weight loss and clinical illness [177]. In contrast, the use of ibuprofen as an adjunct therapy with antiviral fusion protein inhibitor (FPI) was shown to enhance the specific antiviral effect of FPI and reduce the damaging impact of prostanoids and oxidative stress [62,175,178].5.2. Adaptive ImmunityBRSV may cause exacerbated respiratory tract inflammation and the recruitment of innate leukocytes to the lungs of infected animals, accompanied by decreased cell function and tissue-sparing mechanisms [170,171,175,179]. Adaptive immunity is initiated by the action of professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) that carry foreign material from the infection site into secondary lymphoid organs to activate T-cells, while the lymph drainage of infected sites carries native antigens for B-cell recognition and activation [180]. Innate defense events may impact the ability of DCs to properly and timely activate protective adaptive responses.BRSV is most severe in young animals, which present inexperienced immune systems and a concomitant downregulation of several immune mechanisms [181]. Immunosuppression in neonates is highly dynamic and tightly regulated, with a short and early stage when T-cell subsets synergize towards a narrow pro-tolerogenic window that favors non-inflammatory colonization [181,182]. BRSV infection in neonates may also occur during the pulmonary transition to life after birth [183,184,185]. Significant physiological changes in respiratory and hemodynamic function are initiated by breathing at birth and the clamping of the umbilical cord, and a complex adaptation takes place several weeks after birth [186,187,188]. While those processes contribute to the maturation of the lungs and the immune system, they hamper effective immune responses against BRSV [182,184,185]. Additionally, BRSV employs different strategies to curb innate and adaptive immune responses, which have detrimental effects on immunological memory [5,189]. DC function may be subverted during infection, leading to imbalanced adaptive immune responses: more protective responses, such as T helper (Th) 1 activity being delayed or suppressed (low IL-12 production) and harmful responses (Th2, with some evidence of Th17) being favored (IL-4, IL-10, IL-33, IL-13, IL-22, IL-6, and TGF-β) [190,191]. T-cells are important effector immune cells but are only activated after a highly orchestrated differentiation process. Upon an initial encounter with DCs in secondary lymphoid organs, naïve T-cells integrate signals through their T-cell receptor (TCR) and co-stimulatory molecule interactions [192]. This initial priming is amplified by cytokine signaling, for example, IL-12 differentiates CD4 T-cells into their Th1 phenotypes [193,194], and IL-12 and type I IFN activate naïve CD8 T-cells in their cytotoxic profile [195,196]. IL-4 secretion differentiates CD4 T-cells into their Th2 phenotype, while IL-6 and TGF-β production together leads to Th17 differentiation. Additionally, paracrine and autocrine IL-2 signaling allows T-cells to initiate a program of rapid and extensive division and differentiation [197,198,199].Detrimental responses to BRSV have been more extensively studied in the context of vaccine-associated enhanced disease (VAERD). Both RSV and BRSV formalin-inactivated (FI) vaccination have resulted in enhanced respiratory disease after virulent virus infection [200,201,202,203,204]. Th2-biased responses are frequently associated with FI-BRSV vaccines [200,202] and have also been observed in the context of BRSV infection [205]. FI-BRSV vaccination in calves induces IL-4 production, high IgE titers [200,202], a significant influx of eosinophils in the lungs [200], and reduced IFN-γ production by lymphocytes [203]. Th2 responses trigger the activation of mast cells, eosinophils, and IgE-producing plasma cells [206], leading to inflammation and low levels of effectiveness against viral pathogens [204]. In fact, Th2 polarization, with IL-4 production and the presence of anti-BRSV IgE antibodies, is shown to correlate to disease severity and poor outcomes in cattle [73,205].The development of an adaptive immune response, especially Th1 responses, is associated with BRSV infection control, and the clearance of BRSV is concomitant with the induction of BRSV-specific CD8 T-cell responses in peripheral blood and their influx into the lungs [207,208,209]. In cattle, the depletion of CD8 T-cells results in the delayed clearance of BRSV from the upper and lower respiratory tract and a more severe pulmonary pathology [207,209,210,211]. A bronchial lymph node transcriptome analysis in BRSV-infected calves revealed an intense activation of host immune response genes, with granzyme B being the most upregulated gene in the lymph nodes of infected calves in the study conducted by Johnston et al. [10]. Granzyme B has also been shown to be increased in CD8 T-cells, NK cells, and CD4 T-cells in tracheal aspirates from children infected with RSV [212].Similar to the results of a whole blood transcriptome analysis [130], in the bronchial lymph node transcriptome, the KEGG pathway for Influenza A was also enriched, and upregulated genes, including cytokines responsible for the induction of the febrile response, programmed cell death, and interferon-stimulated genes [10], are also supported by the study of Tizioto et al. [81]. No indication of Th2 polarization was observed in these studies, although genes related to B-cell receptor signaling were consistently enriched. Likewise, IL-12, involved in Th1 polarization, was not detected as a differentially expressed gene, even though acute phase response signaling was upregulated [10,81]. Nevertheless, it is worth noting that calves in these studies presented mild to subclinical infections, and samples were obtained at a single time point (day 7 post-infection).Features of severe BRSV infection in calves include rapid neutrophil infiltration, excessive mucus production, delayed virus-adaptive T-cell response [161], and the expression of Th2 or Th17 cytokines, such as IL-4, IL-13, and IL-17 [213,214,215]. The therapeutic inhibition of IL-17 by digoxin can limit BRSV-associated disease in neonatal calves without significant adverse impacts on the viral burden [213]. Regarding the recognition of RSV proteins, T-cell responses are directed at epitopes within several viral proteins, including N, M, NS2, M2-1, F, and G proteins [216]. The F and G proteins are major antigenic CD4 T-cell targets in humans and cattle [217,218]. The F protein of RSV and BRSV has been studied in depth and is described as containing multiple antigenic regions [55,71,219].Mucosal immunity is crucial for protection against BRSV in limiting virus replication at the initial site of infection [71,220,221]. Studies in calves in which the primary mucosal response to BRSV was inhibited by maternally acquired antibodies (MDAs) and studies of BRSV vaccine efficacy suggest that the ability to mount a rapid secondary mucosal immunoglobulin (IgA) response may be more important in protection than the level of pre-existing mucosal antibodies [71,179,221,222,223]. There is also evidence that while the presence of MDA leads to poor antibody response to vaccination, memory cell formation is preserved, and vaccines may still elicit protective responses to subsequent challenges with rapid antibody production and T-cell responses, specific IgG, and neutralizing antibodies [224].The persistence of memory T-cells post-infection ensures a more rapid and efficient response upon re-exposure to the virus, although BRSV usually leads to suboptimal memory responses [5,71]. Despite their multiple protective mechanisms, cattle, similar to RSV in humans, still experience multiple BRSV reinfections. Subsequent infections tend to be less severe but maintain the virus circulation in the population, contributing to the infection of highly susceptible young calves.While adaptive immunity is essential for viral clearance, these responses may be delayed by the many evasion molecules employed by the virus, physiological immune regulation in neonatal calves, and the inexperienced immune system of young calves. Likewise, antibodies and T-cells have also been shown to contribute to BRSV pathogenesis and may participate in pathology, especially Th2 cells that support the production of BRSV-specific IgE antibodies and eosinophil involvement in the context of formalin-inactivated vaccines [225,226].6. Viral Immune-Evading MechanismsBRSV has evolved several mechanisms for evading the immune response to facilitate prolonged virus replication in the host. Two nonstructural proteins, NS1 and NS2, are the first to be produced and, therefore, are abundant in early infection (Figure 2A) [22,227]. Recombinant BRSV lacking NS1/NS2 proteins induced higher type I IFN levels in bovine cell cultures when compared to wild-type BRSV, and the viral replication was significantly higher in 2-year-old calves challenged with wild-type BRSV than in those that received the recombinant BRSV lacking NS proteins [228]. Moreover, NS1 and NS2 can work independently and together to suppress IFN production [229,230]. NS1 binds to MAVS, the adaptor protein that the RIG-I receptor uses in the signaling pathway, and NS2 interacts with the CARD domain of RIG-I. These interventions inhibit IRF3 activation, preventing downstream signaling from happening (Figure 5A,B) [230,231,232,233,234]. Interference by NS proteins in the IRF3 pathway has been described for both RSV and BRSV [230,232,234]. Additionally, the G protein from RSV was shown to inhibit IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in epithelial cells from mice [235] and humans [236].Inclusion bodies perform multiple roles in the virus’s life cycle, including the compartmentalization of viral replication and transcription (Figure 2A). Recently, BRSV inclusion bodies were shown to participate in evasion mechanisms by sequestering cellular proteins involved in the antiviral response. In BRSV-infected cells, NFκB component p65 is recruited to inclusion bodies during viral replication (Figure 5C), blocking NFκB translocation to the nucleus and the transactivation of the NFκB reporter, even after TNF-α stimulation. While inclusion bodies were shown to contain BRSV N, P, L, M, and M2-1 proteins, light electron microscopy indicated colocalization, pointing to a possible interaction between N and p65 in BRSV inclusion bodies [70]. The SH protein was also shown to prevent apoptosis in infected cells in vitro and to interfere with pro-inflammatory cytokine production through NFκB pathway inhibition (Figure 5D) [237,238].By interfering with antiviral mechanisms, BRSV infection also suppresses the maturation of DCs, which can all be, at least partially, a result of type I IFN inhibition (Figure 5E) [228,239,240,241]. The interference of the type I IFN pathway is so significant that type III IFN may predominate in RSV antiviral responses, differing from most other viruses [135]. Cytotoxic T-cells and Th1 cells become activated by the IL-12 secreted by DCs [242,243,244]. However, the modulation of DC activity by BRSV inhibits IL-12 secretion and may favor the release of interleukin-4 (IL-4). The lack of IL-12 and the presence of IL-4 result in a Th2-biased response (Figure 5E) [245]. Other studies have shown that human RSV interaction with DCs reduces their ability to produce essential cytokines that would lead to an effective T-cell response [66], and further research on BRSV described similar findings in experimentally infected calves [246]. In this scenario, protective BRSV-specific CD8 T-cell responses are suppressed or delayed [66,247]. This Th2-biased response, that is not only induced by NS proteins, is correlated with disease severity, as the clinical signs are not necessarily caused by the virus alone but also by the immune response to the infection.The N protein can also inhibit T-cell activation in RSV infection [248]. In mice, NS1 was shown to reduce IL-17 production [249] and to decrease viral load in the lungs [250]. However, Long et al. [251] reported an association between increased IL-17 levels and the severity of RSV-caused pneumonia in mice. BRSV-infected calves also express significant levels of IL-17 (primarily produced by activated γδ and Th17 cells) [214,252]. In vitro analyses have also shown high levels of IL-17 production after BRSV infection and even higher levels when peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) are co-infected with Mannheimia haemolytica, another important agent involved in BRD [214]. In neonatal BRSV-infected calves, reduced IL-17 levels lead to improved disease outcomes and milder disease. Nevertheless, BRSV infection was shown to lead to Th17 cell differentiation [214]. The consequent IL-17 production recruits neutrophils [253], leading to NETosis and ROS-formation-enhancing pathology (Figure 5F) [166,169].In addition to being produced in its full length as a transmembrane protein, the RSV G sequence contains a second translation initiative site that leads to the production of a truncated G form, which is secreted (sG). This is preserved in RSV and BRSV viruses and has been suggested as an evading mechanism (Figure 5G) [254]. In addition, the G protein participates in the Th2-biased induced response, as it enhances IL-4 levels, which leads to Th2 production and suppresses the Th1 transcription factor [255]. The F protein, despite acting mainly to incite immune response and not to evade it, can cause damage to the host, as the F-TLR-4 signaling pathway induces the formation of NETs [256]. NETs have been shown to provoke extensive injury to the respiratory tract during viral infections, with reports in cattle [62]. Considering all these factors, BRSV has the potential to evade the host immune defenses and succeed in replicating and spreading further, emphasizing the need for greater vaccines against this agent.7. ConclusionsIn summary, many viral proteins play a role in delaying the translation of viral detection into effective immune responses. The inhibition of type I IFN and establishment of an anti-viral state paradoxically occur with the abundant recruitment of phagocytes that poorly control viral replication and spread. The resulting adaptive response, in the context of decreased Th1 polarizing cytokines, may result in Th2- or Th17-biased responses, which further allow for viral replication, phagocyte recruitment, and inflammation, aggravating the clinical disease. Likewise, the virus may benefit from the induction of poorly protective and sometimes harmful adaptive immune responses to the detriment of cytotoxic T-cells and supporting Th1 responses that would halt viral replication and control inflammation. The present study reviewed the main PRRs involved in the anti-BRSV response, which MAMP they recognize, and the further signaling pathway initiated by viral recognition. Innate immunological components, such as IFN signaling and cytokine release, play a critical role in adaptive response, memory immunity, and disease outcomes. This paper also presents the escape mechanisms developed by this virus that may contribute to disease severity and impair lasting immunity development, contributing to maintaining the virus’s circulation and its high morbidity levels. Finally, a deeper and updated understanding of the immunological features involved in BRSV infection is essential for improving the current methods of prophylaxis and treatment.


Title: Long-Term Infection and Pathogenesis in a Novel Mouse Model of Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus

1. IntroductionAs a member of genus Pneumovirus, human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) is a negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus [1]. It was the second leading aetiology of lower respiratory infection deaths overall, with pneumococcal pneumonia the leading cause [2]. Children under 2 years of age are the main susceptible population [3], with mild upper respiratory tract infection signs, low-grade or no fever, coughing and coryza [4,5]. The severe clinical symptoms of hRSV infection include bronchiolitis especially seen in young children 2–5 months old, which can easily cause airway obstruction and hypoxia, severe wheezing, and pneumonia [6,7]. Although decades have passed since this pathogen was discovered in an infected chimpanzees in 1956 [8], there is still no effective and licensed hRSV vaccine has been approved [9]. Most studies are still at the experimental stage, and there was only limited success in pre-clinical studies, which is partly due to the lack of animal models that can fully recapitulate the pathogenesis of human RSV infection [10]. Notably, there are also no animal model that can support persistent infection and replication with high viral titers in vivo.The existing hRSV animal models, including the frequently used non-human primates (NHPs) and rodents, all have specific advantages and limitations. Chimpanzees are highly susceptible to hRSV infection and allow hRSV to freely replicate in vivo [11]. Moreover, the infection titers, upper respiratory tract symptoms and histopathological changes are similar to human infants [11,12,13]. This model is unmatched by other animals, but few studies used chimpanzees as an animal model due to ethical issues, high cost and limited availability. Although it is difficult to replicate clinical signs of hRSV infection in rodents, mice and cotton rats are still widely used in the development of monoclonal antibodies to prevent severe hRSV infection in high-risk infants [14,15] and provide an animal platform for studying immune mechanism and pathogenesis [16]. However, cotton rats and mice are semi-permissible hosts for hRSV, so that high titer inoculation is required to produce effective infection, and some animals still fail to become infected [17,18]. Improved susceptibility was observed in immunocompromised cotton rats treated with cyclophosphamide [19,20]. Inspired by this study, a stably inherited Rag2 gene knockout C57BL/6 mouse model was created using CRISPR/Cas9 technology. This novel mouse model has inherently defective T and B cells, resulting in long-term infection with hRSV and severe histopathological manifestations.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Animal ChallengeWT (wild-type C57BL/6) mice and Rag2−/− mice (Rag2 knockout mice) were supplied by the Institute for Laboratory Animal Resources and were raised at the barrier facility of NIFDC. Three-week-old WT (N = 24) and Rag2−/− mice (N = 24) were challenged with hRSV strain Long (Reference Sequence, NC_038235.1) via the intranasal (IN) route. The mice were lightly anesthetized with pentobarbital sodium solution (15 mg/mL, 30 mg/kg) before challenging. An inoculum comprising 40 μL of hRSV virion suspension or DMEM culture medium was sucked and slowly dripped into the nostrils of the mice. 2.2. Cells and VirusHEp-2 cells were obtained from the Center for Cell Resource Conservation Research, NIFDC. Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin solution (PS, Gibco) was used to maintain HEp-2 cells in a 37 °C, 5% CO2 incubator. hRSV strain Long was amplified in HEp-2 cells to a titer of 1.0 × 106 TCID50 for the challenge experiments. The virion suspension was kept at −80 °C for long-term storage.2.3. Development of the Rag2−/− Mouse ModelRag2 sgRNA-oligos (Figure 1A) were designed using the CRISPR online tool crispr.mit.edu), and the linearized pT7-sgRNA vector was ligated with the annealed sgRNA fragment. In vitro sgRNA transcription and purification were conducted using the MEGA ShortScriptTM Kit (Ambion). SgRNA and Cas9 mRNA were microinjected into C57BL/6 mouse zygotes which were transplanted into pseudo-pregnant mice to obtain F0 generation mice. The offspring were genotyped using the primers Rag2-F (5′-GCCAGAAAGGCTGGCCTAA-3′) and Rag2-R (5′-CCCATGCTTTTCCCTC GACTA-3′).2.4. Observation of Clinical SymptomsThe body weight of inoculated mice was measured on 6 consecutive days, and every two days after 6 dpi to 21 dpi (days post infection). The body temperature of the mice was measured by a rectal temperature measuring instrument at the same time period for 8 consecutive days, and every 1 day after 10 dpi to 18 dpi. While measuring the body temperature and weight, clinical symptoms, including respiratory signs, hunched back, or behavioral changes were observed.2.5. RNA Extraction and QuantificationThe mice were sacrificed using pentobarbital sodium solution (15 mg/mL, 75 mg/kg), after which the nasal tissue, trachea and lungs were collected, immediately immersed in RNAlater® stabilization reagent (Invitrogen) and stored at −80 °C until further use. Total RNA was extracted from the tissues using the TRIzol reagent, and revers-transcription (RT) of hRSV RNA into cDNA was conducted using Takara’s PrimeScript RT reagent Kit with gDNA Eraser (Takara). The viral loads were determined using real-time quantitative PCR (RT-QRCR) with a reverse transcription kit containing TB green dye (Takara), using the primers hRSV-F (5′-AACGC ACCGCTAAGACAC-3′) and hRSV-R (5′-GCCATCATATTCATAG CCTCGG-3′). Data were presented as lg viral RNA copies/g tissue.2.6. TCID50 AssayAfter anesthesia, the nasal tissue, trachea and lungs were collected and weighted under aseptic conditions. Tissues were homogenized in DMEM with 1% PS to form 10% suspensions. Following centrifugation at 4 °C and 500 g for 10 min, the supernatants were passed through 0.45 μm pore-size Millipore filters and stored at −80 °C until further use. The virus titer was assayed in 96-well tissue culture plates using HEp-2 cells, which were inoculated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 5 to 6 days, as described elsewhere [19].2.7. Flow CytometrySamples comprising 200 μL of blood were collected from the inner canthus vein of mice, and ethylene diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) was employed as anticoagulants. T, B and NK Cells in the peripheral blood were labeled using BioLegend fluorescently labeled antibodies, including PerCP-Cy5.5 anti-Mouse CD45 antibody, PE-Cy7 anti-Mouse CD19 antibody, APC-Cy7 anti-Mouse CD49b antibody. FACS Diva 6.0 Software was used to obtain cell data on the BD LSRII flow cytometer.2.8. Cytokine Assay Cytokines concentrations were detected via the MSD (Meso Scale Discovery) method using the Bio-Plex Pro Mouse Cytokine 23-plex Assay kit (Bio-Rad, Berkeley, CA, USA) and quantified as pg/mL using the Bio-Plex 200 system.2.9. Histopathological AnalysisThe nasal tissue, trachea, and lungs were fixed in 10% neutral formalin fixation solution. The nasal tissues were decalcified using EDTA at pH 7. The tissues were trimmed, dehydrated, embedded, sectioned to about 3 μm thickness, stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), and then examined using a conventional light microscope.2.10. Evaluation of the In Vivo Effect of the Antibody via Bioluminescence ImagingGroups of Rag2−/− mice were intraperitoneally administrated 1 or 5 mg/kg of a monoclonal antibody (Supplied by Sino Celltech Ltd. Beijing, China) against hRSV to test the in vivo antiviral activity. Six hours after antibody administration, the mice from the antibody groups (N = 3), as well as the control group (N = 3) were challenged intranasally with 40 μL of hRSV-Fluc (1 × 106.5 TCID50), containing a luciferase expression cassette [21]. Before imaging, mice were intraperitoneally administered the bioluminescent substrate D-Luciferin (75 mg/kg, 15 mg/mL, PerkinElmer) and then anesthetized with pentobarbital sodium intraperitoneally (75 mg/kg, 15 mg/mL). After 10 min, the bioluminescence intensity of the mice whole body or organs was measured using the IVIS-Lumina II imaging system (Xenogen). The relative intensities of the bio-optical signal were coded from red (intense) to the blue (weak) and presented quantitatively as photon flux in photons/second/cm2/steradian.2.11. Statistical AnalysisResults of each experiment were presented as the mean values and standard deviations (SD). The data were analyzed using Prism software 9.0 (GraphPad Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). One-way ANOVA or two-way ANOVA was used to assess the significance of differences which were considered statistically significant at p values of less than 0.05.3. Results3.1. Establishment of Rag2 Knockout Mice by CRISPR/Cas9 TechnologyA protein encoded by the Rag2 gene (recombination activating gene 2) is one of the most important recombinases, which plays a key role in the initiation of V(D)J recombination during B and T cell development [22]. The Rag2 gene generates 2 transcripts. Therefore, the common exons of the transcripts were selected, which are as close as possible to the 5′ end of the gene (Figure 1A). The predicted Rag2-sgRNA with the highest score and the lowest probability of off-target effect were selected using the MIT CRISPR online tool (Figure 1A).The sgRNA and Cas9 mRNA were injected into 258 zygotes from C57BL/6 mice. The surviving zygotes were transplanted into 6 pseudo-pregnant mice, and 25 offspring were born (Table 1). To detect whether the Cas9 protein cleaved the sgRNA target site, the PCR amplicons were recovered and sequenced. The results confirmed that the target gene of heterozygous mouse No. 5 had a knockout 2 bp (Figure 1B,C). Positive heterozygous Rag2 deficient mice were crossed to generate homozygous mice, which were named B6-Rag2em5/NIFDC, abbreviated as Rag2−/− mice.Deletion of the Rag2 gene leads to no mature T/B lymphocytes in the peripheral blood of Rag2−/− mice theoretically [23,24]. To confirm this, flow cytometry was employed to detect the presence of T, B and NK cells in the peripheral blood of homozygous Rag2−/− mice. Figure 1D,E showed that the abundance of T and B cells was significantly reduced in Rag2−/− mice, in line with expectations and previous reports [25]. By contrast, Rag2−/− mice had slightly higher NK cell numbers than wild-type mice. In summary, we successfully established a homozygous Rag2 knockout mouse by CRISPR/Cas9 technology, which can be used in subsequent experiments.3.2. Establishment of a hRSV Infection Model Using Rag2−/− MiceRag2−/− mice were challenged intranasally with hRSV strain Long at the dose of 1 × 106 TCID50/mL, and samples were collected at various time points (Figure 2A). There were no clinical symptoms such as respiratory signs, standing hair or arched back during the infection period up to 35 days. Infected Rag2−/− mice showed no significant loss of body weight, but the average body weight of the Rag2−/− mice was lower than that of both challenged and unchallenged wild-type mice from the 6th day post infection (Figure 2B). This weight fluctuation may be associated with virus infection, as was reported for Rag2−/− rats infected with vaccinia virus [26]. Infected Rag2−/− mice showed no significant fever, and their body temperature actually decreased on most days post infection (Figure 2C), especially on day 12.RT-QPCR revealed the presence of hRSV virus in the nasal tissue, trachea, and lungs of Rag2−/− mice. The viral loads on the 4th day reached about 1 × 107–1 × 109 copies/g in lungs and nasal tissue, implying a rapid virus replication occurring in Rag2−/− mice (Figure 2D). The viral load continued to rise until the peak of 1 × 109.8 copies/g (mean) on 11 dpi and was detectable in the nasal tissue up to 35 dpi. In the lungs, the viral load reached the peak of 1 × 109 copies/g on 11 dpi and remained at this level up to 35 dpi. These results indicated that there was a delay of viral replication in the trachea, which reached the highest viral titer of 1 × 107 copies/g approximately on day 20 post infection. However, it remained at a high titer during the infection (Figure 2D). By contrast, wild-type mice could only support a shorter, burst of viral replication at lower titers, followed by rapid viral clearance from both the upper and lower respiratory tract, consistent with previous reports [16]. Hence, there was a significant difference in susceptibility between Rag2−/− and wild-type mice, as expected.In addition to RT-QPCR, homogenates of nasal tissue, trachea and lungs were used to determine the titer of live hRSV (Figure 2D). The results showed that the change trend of live hRSV virus titer in the respiratory tract was basically consistent with the total viral copies detected by RT-QPCR detections, with high and stable hRSV replication in nasal tissue, trachea, and lungs, with titers of 1 × 104–1 × 106.5 TCID50 lasting for 5 weeks, until the end of the experiments. By contrast, the wild-type mice had detectable viable virions in the trachea and lung tissues collected on 4th day, after which they could not be detected in all the mice, indicating rapid clearance.3.3. Histopathological Findings of a hRSV Infection Model Using Rag2−/− MiceThe histopathological changes in susceptible organs were consistently observed. On 4 dpi, no obvious changes were seen in the nasal cavity and trachea of Rag2−/− mice and wild-type mice (Figure 3B,F), while minimal mononuclear cell infiltration around the blood vessels were seen in lung tissues. On 11 dpi, the transitional epithelium in the nasal cavity of Rag2−/− mice showed degeneration and inflammatory cell infiltration (Figure 3D). At the same time, obvious histopathological changes appeared in the lower respiratory tract of partial some Rag2−/− mice (Figure 3H–P). Although some areas of the lung tissue were basically normal (Figure 3I), other areas showed severe lesions (Figure 3H), such as dilated and severely compressed bronchi and alveolar spaces (Figure 3K), accumulation inflammatory cells (predominantly neutrophils) in the bronchial lumen and alveolar spaces (Figure 3J,L,O), and enlargement of the alveolar septum (Figure 3P). Most of the neutrophils located in the center of the bronchial lumen were dead and degraded (Figure 3M), while cells at the edges still survived (Figure 3L). It seemed that the histopathological changes recovered on 35 dpi, and no lesion were seen in tissues sampled at this time. The infected and mock-treated wild-type mice showed no inflammatory cell infiltration or other pathological changes. In all, the results indicated that hRSV infection could cause mild interstitial pneumonia, severe bronchopneumonia and suppurative bronchitis in Rag2−/− mice.3.4. hRSV Infection Causing Upregulation of NK Cells, Serum Cytokines and ChemokinesThe T, B, NK and NKT cell counts in peripheral blood were determined by flow cytometry on 0, 4, 20, and 35 dpi (Figure 4A). Since the Rag2 gene was knocked out, the T and B cell counts have no obvious fluctuation in Rag2−/− mice. However, the NK cell counts in the peripheral blood of Rag2−/− mice significantly increased (more than 20%) after infection, and reached a plateau at 4 dpi, where it stayed until 35 dpi (Figure 4B). The NKT cell count also increased in the early stage of infection and then decreased.In addition to detecting immune cells, a total of 23 cytokines in the sera of Rag2−/− and wild-type infected mice were quantified using the MSD method [27]. Most expression of cytokines including IFNG did not change significantly after hRSV infection in Rag2−/− mice and wild-type mice (Figure 4C). However, the concentrations of IL1A, IL1B, IL6, CSF3(G-CSF), CSF2(GM-CSF), and CCL2(MCP-1) in infected Rag2−/− mice increased at each time-point, while there were almost no changes in wild-type mice (Figure 4D). The concentrations of IL-1a, IL-1b and GM-CSF in Rag2−/− mice remained at the same high level up to 20 days of infection, whereas the expression of IL-6 reached a peak on the 4th day, and then decreased to the initial level.3.5. A BLI Rag2−/− Mouse Model Evaluating the In Vivo Antiviral Activity of a Humanized Monoclonal AntibodyTo establish a bioluminescence luminescence imaging (BLI) animal model, Rag2−/− mice were infected with hRSV-Fluc intranasally (Figure 5A). Obvious light was seen in the nasal cavity of the mice after 4 days of inoculation in the PBS group (Figure 5B) and the bioluminescence signal remained at a high level up to 11 dpi (Figure 5C,D).To evaluate the in vivo antiviral activity of humanized monoclonal antibody against hRSV, two dosages (1 and 5 mg/kg) of the antibody were administered to Rag2−/− mice. The results showed that no obvious luminescent signal was detected in the whole body of mice until 11 dpi. The nasal tissue, trachea and lungs were taken for tissue imaging, and only the nasal tissue and lungs of the mice in the control group (mock-treated with PBS) had obvious fluorescence signals (Figure 5E,F), while the corresponding organs from the mice administered with 1 or 5 mg/kg of the antibody showed no light signals, indicating that even a lower dose of the antibody could effectively inhibit viral infection and replication in Rag2−/− mice and the humanized monoclonal antibody had strong antiviral activity.4. DiscussionBecause of the semi-permissive host [10], the virus cannot persistently replicate at high titer in the preexisting animal models, resulting in rapid clearance [16,28] and inability to evaluate the long-lasting antiviral activity of drugs in vivo. Previous reports showed that rats dosed with immunosuppressor showed increased permission of hRSV [19,20,29]. Obviously, to establish such drug-induced model needs complicated operations and accompanied with poor repeatability. In this study, CRISPR/Cas9 technology was used to delete Rag2 gene in C57BL/6 mice to establish a genetically inherited immunodeficient mouse model, which was expected to support long-term hRSV infection.Rag2−/− mice supported efficient viral replication of hRSV in respiratory organs, including the nasal cavity, trachea, and lungs, which is consistent with both upper and lower respiratory tract infection of clinical patients [30]. The viral replication level was very high in nasal cavity and lungs (Figure 2). Notably, such an efficient infection also had a long duration, and maintained a stable infectious state, so that even at the end of the experiments on the 35th day, no decrease of viral titer was observed (Figure 2D). It is possible that the infection duration in Rag2−/− mice would last longer than the 6 weeks reported previously in cotton rats [19,20]. In addition, this Rag2−/− also showed typical pathological changes (Figure 3) and host immune responses (Figure 4), indicating Rag2−/− mice had clear advantages over existing rodent models of hRSV.In addition to the symptoms of pneumonia such as inflammatory cell infiltration, and thickened alveolar septum, severely suppurative bronchitis and bronchopneumonia associated with increased neutrophil infiltration were seen in Rag2−/− mice. Neutrophils are the major leukocytes that infiltrate the airways [31] and studies have shown that longer hRSV infection lasts, leads to higher neutrophil infiltration of the airways and enhances the ability of hRSV to damage and isolate airway epithelial cells [32]. It is worth mentioning that hRSV is one of the causative pathogens of viral sepsis [33], which was often found in immunocompromised hosts infected by respiratory virus [34]. In this study, Rag2−/− mice kept immune suppression stage with no functional T and B cells (Figure 1) and suffered from a high level of viral infection (Figure 2). These characteristics are conditions that can allow hRSV-infected Rag2−/− mice to develop viral sepsis. If the infected Rag2−/− mice were observed for longer, more severe clinical symptoms such as sepsis might be found. Overall, the observed pathological changes indicated the potential of Rag2−/− mice as a model for future studies focusing on the pathology of viral infection.In suckling mice, NK cells will appear quickly in the lungs and BAL after infection [35]. The activity of NK cells reaches its maximum on the 3rd day and resolves on the 8th day [36]. Here, we observed that the number of NK cells increased quickly upon the hRSV infection (Figure 3) in Rag2−/− mice, which have a severe lack of T and B cells, indicating compensation for adaptive immune deficiency. Thus, NK cells may participate in virus clearance in the early stage of hRSV infection. However, NK cells may not the main cells terminating hRSV infection since there was high-level replication from the beginning to the end (Figure 3).According to previous reports, humans infected with hRSV have high levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as TNF, IL6, IL1A, and CXC/CC, as well as chemokines such as CXCL8, CCL3, CCL2 and CCL5 [37], IFNG, IL4, IL5, IL10, IL9 and IL17A [38], and also the colony stimulating factor CSF3 [39]. In this study, the expression of IL1A, IL1B, IL6, CSF3, CSF2, and CCL2 was up-regulated, which was similar to that of clinical patients [40,41,42]. In this study, the cytokines that were altered with hRSV infection could be secreted by somatic cells rather than immune cells [43,44,45,46], and these cytokines may correlate with virus infection, replication, and pathogenesis. Infection of respiratory epithelial cells by hRSV [47] results in high expression of pro-inflammatory factors such as IL6, which may play a relevant role in the pathogenesis of hRSV in the lungs of infected infants [48], as well as Rag2−/− mice. It is worth noting that T and B cell deficiency may result in the lack of secretion of some cytokines, so that the innate immunity and adaptive immune responses cannot mount an effective antiviral defense. As a result, the positive feedback loop in which immune cells secrete large amounts of cytokines, which in turn stimulates immune cells during the immune response may be blocked. This may be a possible explanation why the Rag2−/− mice can support long-term, high level hRSV infection, but fail to show obvious clinical symptoms as in humans infected with hRSV.No vaccines against hRSV have been registered to date, and the development of therapeutic drugs, including antibodies and chemicals, is urgently needed. Here, we presented a visual in vivo efficacy evaluation model based on the highly susceptible Rag2−/− mouse, which will contribute to the development of therapeutics in the future. The limitation of the present mouse model is that it cannot be used to evaluate the in vivo efficacy of vaccines, which can be overcome by developing an immunocompetent mouse expressing human RSV receptors.


Title: Cohort profile: A Prospective Household cohort study of Influenza, Respiratory syncytial virus and other respiratory pathogens community burden and Transmission dynamics in South Africa, 2016–2018

Strengths and limitations of this study
PHIRST was conducted in urban and rural African settings with high HIV prevalence, allowing assessment of the effect of HIV on community burden and transmission dynamics of respiratory pathogens.Households were selected randomly to provide a representative sample of the community. Twice‐weekly sampling from each cohort of individuals for 6–10 months irrespective of symptoms allows estimation of community burden, household secondary infection risk, and serial interval including asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic episodes.Polymerase chain reaction testing of >100 000 nasopharyngeal swab samples for multiple pathogens (influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, pertussis and Streptoccocus pneumonia) allows detailed examination of disease burden and transmission and pathogen interactionsPHIRST was not powered to assess severe outcomes (i.e. hospitalisation and death).We only examined four pathogens, but other micro‐organisms may be important. Samples have been stored which could allow us to implement broader multi‐pathogen testing in the future.
1INTRODUCTIONIn 2015, lower respiratory tract infections caused an estimated 2.7 million deaths globally.
1
 Among children aged <5 years, the highest mortality rates are in sub‐Saharan Africa where the HIV‐epidemic has increased morbidity of severe pneumonia. Influenza, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), pertussis and pneumococcus are among the leading causes of pneumonia globally.
2
, 
3
, 
4
, 
5

Approximately 30% of influenza and RSV transmission is estimated to occur within households.
6
, 
7
 Data on community burden and transmission of respiratory pathogens are important to guide vaccination strategies such as reduced pneumococcal conjugate vaccine dose schedules,
8
 optimal timing of booster doses
9
 and vaccinating community transmitters.
10
, 
11
 Illness episodes in the community may be associated with substantial community impact including absenteeism from school or work and loss of income.
12

The PHIRST study aimed to estimate the community burden of influenza and RSV (including the incidence of infection and symptomatic fraction) and to assess household transmission of influenza and RSV (Table S1). Secondary objectives included describing the community burden and transmission of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Bordetella pertussis, estimating the impact of HIV infection and age on disease burden, estimating rates of tuberculosis infection and transmission and investigating the interaction between respiratory viruses and bacteria. We also aimed to evaluate the role of asymptomatic influenza and RSV infection in household transmission.2COHORT DESCRIPTION2.1Study population and household eligibility criteriaA prospective cohort study of randomly selected households in South Africa was conducted in a rural and an urban site, each with established surveillance for pneumonia and influenza‐like illness (Figure 1).
13
, 
14
 The rural site in Mpumalanga Province (Agincourt subdistrict) is part of a health and socio‐demographic surveillance system (HDSS), including approximately 116 000 people in 31 contiguous villages.
15
, 
16
 Approximately 30% of the population are former Mozambicans who migrated there in the 1980s.
15
 The urban site, Jouberton Township in Klerksdorp, is part of the municipality of Matlosana in North West Province, with a population of approximately 180 000 people. Mining of gold and uranium, although declining, remains a primary driver of the local economy.
17

FIGURE 1Location of rural (Agincourt) and urban (Jouberton) study sites in South AfricaWe aimed to enroll approximately 1500 individuals (approximately 500 individuals per year) over three consecutive influenza and RSV seasons to allow the estimation of 20% risk of infection and a 10% risk of illness with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and 5% absolute precision. Assuming an average household size of five individuals and a loss to follow‐up of 10%, based in previous studies,
18
 we aimed to enroll approximately 55 households with >2 household members per site each year with at least 50% having at least one child aged <5 years in the house.In rural Agincourt, each year, we purposively selected two different villages within the HDSS. Within these villages, we randomly selected households with >2 members from an enumerated list obtained from the HDSS. In urban Jouberton township, we generated a list of 450 random global positioning system (GPS) coordinates located within a polygon defining the township boundaries using Google Earth. Study staff navigated to the location represented by the coordinates and selected the nearest house. If there was no dwelling within 30 m, the coordinates were discarded. Households were approached consecutively until the desired sample size was reached. If a household withdrew during January–April of each year, it was replaced by a new household, selected consecutively, for the remaining follow‐up period.At each household with >2 members, study staff requested permission from the head of household to inform members about the study purpose, risks and benefits. If the head of household was a minor or unavailable after three attempts, the household was excluded. Written informed consent was required to participate in the study from all household members aged ≥18 years; assent was required from children aged 7–17 years, and consent from a parent/guardian of children aged <18 years. We included households where ≥80% of household members consented.2.2Frequency of follow‐upEach year, a new cohort of individuals was enrolled and following enrolment, all participants and households had a period of active twice‐weekly follow‐up for 6–10 months. During the year of active follow‐up, participants received twice‐weekly scheduled follow‐up visits (once during Monday–Wednesday and again during Thursday–Saturday) to the household during May–October in 2016 (due to delayed start in the first study year), and January–October in 2017 and 2018 (Figure 2) for the collection of symptom data and nasopharyngeal swabs.FIGURE 2Weekly numbers of nasopharyngeal samples tested and influenza and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) detections and timing of serology blood draws, a rural and an urban site, South Africa, 2016–2018Household surveys were conducted once during the follow‐up period to evaluate household income, housing quality, oropharyngeal carriage of meningococcus, Corynebacterium diphtheriae and Group A streptococcus and presence of S. pneumoniae DNA in blood by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Serum samples were also collected at enrolment, before the influenza season, and at the end of the active follow‐up period. In addition, sera were also collected from the 2016 and 2017 cohorts in subsequent years (Figures 2 and S1). Environmental assessments including respirable particulate matter and temperature were undertaken twice a year (summer and winter) (Table 1).TABLE 1Data and specimens collected on exposures and outcomes in the PHIRST study, South Africa, 2016–2018Type of dataDetailsFrequencyData collection toolData collectedEnrolment formHousehold characteristics (number of individuals and rooms, water source, electricity, smoking in house, cooking in house and relationships)EnrolmentCase intake formAge, sex, education, occupation, daily contacts, smoking, alcohol, hand washing, past medical history, documented vaccinations, HIV status and treatmentEnrolmentHousehold income formTotal household income categoryAnnual surveyHousing quality checklistType and condition of dwelling, roofing, ceiling, walls, windows, floors, temperature control, security, type of toilet, dampness, cooking and space heating fuels, ventilation and petsAnnual surveyEnvironmental assessmentRespirable particulate matter (PM4), carbon dioxide, temperature and relative humidity)Bi‐annual survey (aim for 1 in winter and 1 in summer)TB formCough, night sweats or weight loss for >2 weeksMonthly TB visitsFollow‐up visit formSymptoms (cough, fever, sore throat, runny nose, headache, body pains, difficulty breathing, chest pain, vomiting and diarrhoea), medication, outpatient visits, pharmacist, traditional healer, hospitalisation and deathTwice‐weekly follow‐up visitsProximity surveyNumber and duration of contact events (≤1.5 m apart) between participants wearing sensorsProximity surveys (4 in 2018)Contact diaryAge, gender and household member of each individual participant had contact with as well as type of contact, where contact took place and duration of contactOne day in August – October period 2018Time use surveyActivity and location for each hour of the dayOne day in August – October period 2018Costing surveyOut of pocket costs related to illness among individuals reporting symptomsOctober–November 2018SpecimensTests performedNasopharyngeal flocked swabsPCR for influenza, RSV, B. pertussis, and S. pneumoniae
Enrolment and twice‐weekly follow‐up visitsClotted blood
Serology for influenza, RSV, pertussis
HIV testing for consenting patients
Enrolment and at blood draws (2–3 times per year)EDTA bloodCD4+ T cell count and HIV viral load for HIV‐infected individualsEnrolment and end of yearBlood dropRapid HIV test for consenting patientsEnrolmentUrineQuantitative cotinineEnrolmentEDTA bloodPneumococcal lytA PCRAnnual surveyOropharyngeal flocked swabs
C. diptheriae, N. meningitidis and Streptococcus pyogenes
Annual surveyExpectorated sputum
M. tuberculosis culture, B. pertussis PCRMonthly TB visits if symptoms of tuberculosisAbbreviations: EDTA, ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; TB, tuberculosis.2.3Baseline, symptom and health contact dataData were collected using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture)
19
. Following enrolment, a baseline questionnaire was completed for each household including information on household members, relationships, sleeping arrangements and housing. For each individual, we collected baseline information on demographics, underlying illnesses, vaccinations and occupation. During the twice‐weekly follow‐up phase, at each visit, for each participant, a questionnaire assessing presence of symptoms, absenteeism and health system contacts was completed and nasopharyngeal (NP) swabs were collected regardless of the presence or absence of symptoms (Table 1). Field workers were trained in the identification of respiratory signs and symptoms at the beginning of each year. Symptoms assessed at twice‐weekly visits included fever (self‐reported or measured tympanic temperature ≥38°C), cough, difficulty breathing, sore throat, nasal congestion, chest pain, muscle aches, headache, vomiting or diarrhoea. In 2017 and 2018, procedures for collection of symptom data were improved following review of symptom data from 2016. These improvements included simplification of the symptom collection form and monthly training of fieldworkers on signs and symptoms identification and recording and frequent emphasis of the importance of symptom reporting to participants.2.4Laboratory measurementsNP samples were collected using flexible nasopharyngeal nylon flocked swabs (PrimeSwab™, Longhorn Vaccines & Diagnostics, San Antonio, Texas, USA), placed in PrimeStore® Molecular Transport Medium (MTM) (Longhorn Vaccines & Diagnostics, San Antonio, Texas, USA) and transported at 2–8°C to the National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) in Johannesburg, where the samples were tested, aliquoted and stored at 2–8°C before freezing at −70°C. Nucleic acids were extracted from PrimeStore® MTM using the Roche MagNA Pure 96 instrument (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. NP samples were tested for RSV and influenza A and B viruses by real‐time PCR (RT‐PCR) using the FTD Flu/RSV detection assay (Fast Track Diagnostics, Luxembourg). Influenza A positive samples were subtyped using the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) influenza A (H1/H3/H1pdm09) subtyping kit and influenza B lineage was determined using the CDC B/Yamagata‐B/Victoria lineage typing kit (available through International Reagent Resource Program; http://www.internationalreagentresource.org) using SuperScript™ III One‐Step RT‐PCR System with Platinum™ Taq DNA Polymerase (ThermoFisher, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA)
20
. RSV A and B subgroups were determined by an in‐house RT‐PCR.
21
, 
22
 Twice‐weekly NP samples were tested for S. pneumoniae using an in‐house singleplex (lytA) quantitative real‐time PCR assay.
23
 NP and sputum samples were tested for Bordetella spp. (including B. pertussis, B. parapertussis, B. bronchiseptica and B. holmesii) by a combination of a triplex and singleplex real‐time PCR assays and results interpreted as previously described.
24

Clotted blood samples from serology surveys collected in vacutainer tubes were centrifuged, aliquoted and stored frozen before being sent in batches to NICD on dry ice. Hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assays using turkey red blood cells were performed to determine serological reactivity titres for serum samples against influenza.
25
 Virus strains for testing were selected based on the Southern Hemisphere vaccine strains and strains predominantly circulating in South Africa during each year. Cultures from circulating strains representing the following subtypes and lineages were prepared in Madin–Darby Canine Kidney cells: A/Singapore/NFIMH‐16‐0019/2016‐like for influenza A (H3N2), A/Michigan/45/2015‐like for influenza A(H1N1)pdm09, B/Brisbane/60/2008‐like for influenza B Victoria lineage and B/Phuket/3073/2013‐like for influenza B Yamagata lineage. RSV antibody titres were determined using an enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (EUROIMMUN Anti‐RSV IgG; Lübeck, Germany).
26
 Serology for pertussis antibody was performed using the commercially available anti‐Pertussis toxin ELISA (EUROIMMUN, Lübeck, Germany).
27

Urine cotinine tests were performed using the IMMULITE® 1000 Nicotine Metabolite Assay Kit (Siemens Medical Solutions Diagnostics, Gly Rhonwy, UK). Sputum samples were collected at baseline from individuals who could expectorate and thereafter from any individual with fever, cough or weight loss for >2 weeks, assessed monthly. Sputum samples were tested for tuberculosis using GeneXpert MTB/RIF (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and cultured using the Mycobacteria Growth Indicator Tube (MGIT) 960 instrument (Becton Dickinson, East Rutherford, NJ, USA).Tuberculin skin tests were performed twice‐annually 6–10 months apart. Five units of purified tuberculin were injected intradermally on the volar aspect of the forearm. Results were assessed 48–72 h thereafter, for induration and, if present, study staff measured the diameter in millimetres transverse to the axis of the forearm. HIV testing, according to the double rapid test algorithm in place in each province was offered to all participants older than 10 years of age.
28
 Participants were considered HIV infected if they had one of the following during the follow‐up period: two positive rapid HIV tests, evidence of a positive HIV laboratory result or evidence of antiretroviral treatment. Participants were considered HIV uninfected if they had a documented negative HIV test result during the study. A documented HIV negative status for the mother was considered confirmation of HIV negative status for a child aged <10 years. Infants were defined as HIV exposed but uninfected if they were HIV uninfected, but the mother was HIV infected. HIV infection was confirmed by PCR in children aged <18 months. For all HIV‐infected individuals, specimens were collected for CD4+ T cell and quantitative HIV viral load testing. Patients newly diagnosed with HIV were referred to the local clinic for assessment and initiation of antiretroviral treatment.2.5Environmental assessmentEnvironmental monitoring was conducted in a convenience subset of 150 households for one week each year during summer and winter. Respirable particulate matter <4‐μm diameter (PM4) concentrations were measured indoors using a stationary photometric monitor (DustTrak II Model 8530, TSI Incorporated, Shoreview, MN, USA) and gravimetric filter sampling to measure the quantity of airborne particulate matter. During the same period, one member of each household carried a personal exposure monitoring device (SidePak AM510, TSI Incorporated, Shoreview, MN, USA) throughout the daytime. Indoor carbon dioxide and ambient PM4 (ES‐642, MetOne Instruments, Inc, Grants Pass, OR, USA) levels were measured during 2018. Thermochron® iButton sensors (Maxim Integrated, San Jose, California, USA) were located in the indoor (all households) and ambient (subset) environments to measure temperature (Model DS1921G‐F5) and relative humidity (Model RS1923l‐F5 in 2018) concurrently with the air pollution monitoring in 2016 and continuously during 2017–2018.2.6Housing quality surveyInformation on housing type, construction, materials and condition, water sources, water security and water storage, fuel use and expenditure for cooking, space and water heating, waste removal services, visible dampness and smoking practices was collected annually for all households.2.7Proximity and contact studyIn 2018, four surveys of household contact using proximity monitors (http://www.sociopatterns.org) were conducted to capture information on intra‐household contact patterns for three seasons (summer, autumn and winter). To measure contacts of participants of the study outside the home, participants were interviewed by field workers to complete a contact diary and time‐use questionnaire for one day between August and October 2018.2.8Costing surveyWe surveyed all symptomatic household members during August–October 2018 to assess cost of medically attended and non‐medically attended illness episodes.3FINDINGS TO DATE3.1Household and individual characteristicsFrom 2016 to 2018 at both sites combined, 881 households were approached: for 409 (46%) households, the head of household agreed to participate and 327 (78%) of these were included in the final analysis (Figures 3a and 2b). There were 1861 individuals residing in the 327 included households, of whom, 1684 (90%) consented and were included in the final analysis. Reasons for non‐inclusion are shown in Figure 3a,b. A higher percentage of approached houses were included at the rural site (159/267, 60%) compared to the urban site (168/614, 27%). This is because rural site houses with >2 members were pre‐selected from the HDSS database and a higher proportion of household members consented to participate in the study among eligible households (209/252, 83% vs. 200/326, 61%, p < .001).FIGURE 3Flow chart of participant enrolment at the rural and urban sites, South Africa, 2016–2018. (A) Rural (Agincourt) and (B) urban (Jouberton). Individuals or households were not included if they withdrew or moved away before completing >10 visits with collection of a nasopharyngeal swab. Bars indicate timing of serology blood draws. Grey bars indicate number of nasopharyngeal swabs tested each visit. Blood draw dates in year 2016 were Draw 1 (16 March to 15 April) and Draw 2 (17 October to 24 November). Blood draw dates in year 2017 were 2016 cohort Draw 1 (6 February to 4 March), Draw 2 (3–26 May), Draw 3 (2–18 October); 2017 cohort Draw 1 (24 November 2016 to 24 February 2017), Draw 2 (2–26 May) and Draw 3 (12–27 October). Blood draw dates in year 2018 were 2016 cohort Draw 1 (29 January to 9 February), Draw 2 (4 May to 6 June), Draw 3 (1 October to 5 November); 2017 cohort Draw 1 (12 February to 9 March), Draw 2 (4 May to 4 June), Draw 3 (17–31 October); 2018 cohort Draw 1 (28 November 2017 to 24 January 2018), Draw 2 (21 April to 1 June 2018) and Draw 3 (1–31 October)At the rural site, characteristics of included households were similar to those of households within the HDSS that were not included (Table 2a). However, when compared to individuals from the HDSS who were not included, included individuals were less likely to be aged 15–44 years, male, employed or have completed secondary education. This likely reflects migrant worker patterns and the fact that within included households, males and individuals aged 15–44 years were less likely to participate in the study (Table S2). At the urban site, characteristics of households and individuals included in PHIRST were compared to those of residents of Jouberton Township from the 2011 census
29
 (Table 2b). Compared to the general population, included households were more likely to be formal (brick houses on a municipal stand) houses rather than shacks within informal settlements, possibly because larger stands are more likely to be sampled using GPS coordinates. HIV prevalence among included individuals aged 15–49 years with available data was 27% (99/370) at the rural site and 29% (97/329) at the urban site, compared to 23% (95% CI 20–26%) and 23% (95% CI 18–28) reported for Mpumalanga (rural site) and North West (urban site) Provinces in 2017, respectively.
30

TABLE 2aCharacteristics of included participants and households in PHIRST during 2016–2018 at the rural site (Agincourt) compared to those not included, using data from the 2017 Agincourt health and socio‐demographic surveillance system site (HDSS) censusCharacteristicIncluded n/N (%) or number (range)Not included n/N (%) or number (range)
p
Household levelMean number (range) members in household4 (1–20)4 (1–15).479Modern house (vs. traditional)136/136 (100)16 738/16 785(99.7).587Toilet siteIn house2/136 (1)268/16 782 (2).658In yard121/136 (89)15 249/16 782 (91)Other13/136 (10)1265/16 782 (8)Type of toiletModern3/136 (2)245/16 780 (1).151VIP7/136 (5)1841/16 780 (11)Pit latrine116/136 (85)13 676/16 780 (82)Other10/136 (7)1018/16 780 (6)Source of energy for cookingElectricity58/136 (43)8929/16 781 (53).050Wood77/136 (57)7759/16 781 (46)Gas/Paraffin (kerosene)/Other1/136 (1)93/16 781 (1)Individual levelAge group (years)<12/791 (0.3)1302/99 645 (1)<.0011–4114/791 (14)9079/99 645 (9)5–14296/791 (37)22 568/99 645 (23)15–44274/791 (35)51 128/99 645 (51)45–6470/791 (9)9966/99 645 (10)65+35/791 (4)4602/99 645 (5)Female sex499/791 (63)52 972/98 640 (54)<.001Level of education
a

None173/704 (25)17 500/88 149 (20)<.001Primary265/704 (38)24 238/88 149 (27)Some secondary202/704 (29)26 088/88 149 (30)Completed secondary64/704 (9)20 322/88 149 (23)Post‐secondary0/704 (0)1/88 149Currently working
b

60/495 (12)19 267/74 923 (26)<.001
Note: Only households and individuals with data available in the Agincourt HDSS included, for individual level analysis only permanent (non‐migrant) household members included. Data are mean (range) or n/N (%).Abbreviation: VIP, ventilated improved pit latrine.
a
The highest level an individual has attained at the time of observation.
b
Individuals aged ≥17 years.TABLE 2bCharacteristics of included participants at the urban site (Jouberton) during 2016–2018 from PHIRST database and characteristics of the general population from the 2011 Census
29

CharacteristicEnrolled n/N (%) or number (range)General population
a

n/N (%) or number (range)Household levelMean number (range) members in household5 (3–14)4 (3–5)
b

Mean number (range) rooms in household5 (2–11)4 (1–18)Monthly household income≤R800 (<$54)18/167 (11)7119/32 136 (22)R801–R1600 ($55–$108)35/167 (21)2835/32 136 (9)R1601–R3200 ($109–$116)49/167 (29)6507/32 136 (20)R3201–R6400 ($117–$232)34/167 (20)7251/32 136 (23)R6401–R12800 ($233–$464)9/167 (5)4851/32 136 (15)>R12800 (>$464)5/167 (3)3558/32 136 (11)Did not disclose17/167 (10)15/32 136 (0)Type of dwellingFormal house158/167 (95)23 379/32 130 (73)Informal dwelling6/167 (4)6777/32 130 (21)Formal dwelling in backyard0/167 (0)882/32 130 (3)Flat0/167 (0)225/32 130 (1)Traditional dwelling0/167 (0)93/32 130 (0)Other3/167 (2)774/32 130 (2)Individual levelAge group (years)<127/858 (3)2664/111 936 (2)1–489/858 (10)10 590/111 936 (9)5–14238/858 (28)21 051/111 936 (19)15–44334/858 (39)54 297/111 936 (49)45–64124/858 (14)18 684/111 936 (17)65+46/858 (5)4650/111 936 (4)Female sex487/859 (57)57 129/111 939 (51)Level of education
c

No schooling26/443 (6)7872/98 442 (8)Primary schooling116/443 (26)34 767/98 442 (35)Some secondary207/443 (47)35 295/98 442 (36)Secondary completed81/443 (18)18 015/98 442 (18)Post‐secondary13/443 (3)2493/98 442 (3)Currently working
d

154/444 (35)24 642/72 981 (34)
a
Data on general population obtained from census 2011
29
 unless otherwise indicated. Data are median (IQR) or n/N (%).
b
Source: Wong et al.
18


c
>18 years PHIRST, >5 years in census.
d
>18 years PHIRST, >15 years in census.Among 327 households included in the study, the median household size was five individuals (interquartile range 3–10) and 160 (49%) reported crowding (>2 people per sleeping room) (Table 3). Among 1684 study participants, 16% were aged <5 years, 32% aged 5–14 years and 60% were female. Compared to the urban site, households in the rural site were more likely to have a child aged <5 years in the house and to use wood as fuel for cooking, and less likely to report smoking in the house or to have a handwashing place with water. Compared to the urban site, individuals in the rural site were more likely to be aged <15 years, female, unemployed and less likely to drink alcohol or smoke.TABLE 3Baseline characteristics of households and participants included in the final cohort by site, a rural and an urban site in South Africa, PHIRST study, 2016–2018CharacteristicOverall n (%) or median (IQR)Rural n (%) or median (IQR)Urban n (%) or median (IQR)OR (95% CI)
p
Household level characteristics
N = 327
N = 159
N = 168Year2016100 (31)50 (31)50 (30)Reference.9322017109 (33)53 (33)56 (33)1.1 (0.6–1.8)2018118 (36)56 (35)62 (37)1.1 (0.6–1.9)Number of household members3–5196 (60)89 (56)107 (64)Reference.3416–10119 (36)63 (40)56 (33)0.7 (0.5–1.2)>1012 (4)7 (4)5 (3)0.6 (0.2–1.9)Number of household members5 (3–10)5 (3–11)5 (3–10)Not estimated.442Number of rooms5 (2–9)5 (1–10)5 (2–8)Not estimated.453Number of rooms for sleeping2 (1–4)3 (1–4)2 (1–4)Not estimated.256Crowding (>2 people per sleeping room)160 (49)83 (52)77 (46)0.8 (0.5–1.2).250Child aged <5 years in house225 (69)141 (89)84 (50)0.1 (0.1–0.2)<.001HIV‐infected household member172 (53)80 (50)92 (55)1.2 (0.8–1.8).421Cigarette smoke in house71 (22)18 (11)53 (32)3.6 (2.0–6.5)<.001Main water source tap inside (vs. tap outside)154 (47)71 (45)83 (49)0.8 (0.5–1.3).390Handwashing place with water in house264 (81)100 (63)164 (98)24.2 (8.6–68.3)<.001Main fuel for cookingElectricity244 (75)89 (56)155 (93)121.9 (16.6–892.8)<.001Wood71 (22)70 (44)1 (1)ReferenceParaffin (kerosene)/gas/other10 (3)0 (0)10 (6)Not estimatedMonthly household income
a

≤R800 (<$54)39 (12)21 (14)18 (11)Reference.807R801–R1600 ($55–$108)75 (24)36 (23)39 (24)1.3 (0.6–2.7)R1601–R3200 ($109‐$116)109 (34)56 (36)53 (33)1.1 (0.5–2.3)R3201–R6400 ($117–$232)70 (22)32 (21)38 (23)1.4 (0.6–3.0)R6401–R12800 ($233–$464)18 (6)8 (5)10 (6)1.5 (0.5–4.5)>R12800 (>$464)7 (2)2 (1)5 (3)0.9 (0.5–16.8)Individual level characteristics
N = 1684
N = 849
N = 835Age group (years)<136 (2)15 (2)21 (3)2.5 (1.2–5.1)<.0011–4243 (14)156 (18)87 (10)Reference5–14547 (32)309 (36)238 (29)1.4 (1.1–1.9)15–44590 (35)265 (31)325 (39)2.1 (1.6–3.0)45–64195 (12)74 (9)121 (14)2.9 (2.0–4.3)65+73 (4)30 (4)43 (5)2.6 (1.5–4.4)Female sex1009 (60)533 (63)476 (57)0.8 (0.6–0.9).016Year2016542 (32)280 (33)262 (31)Reference.7682017577 (34)289 (34)288 (34)1.1 (0.8–1.3)2018565 (34)280 (33)285 (34)1.1 (0.9–1.4)Level of education
b

No schooling90 (12)65 (22)25 (6)Reference<.001Primary schooling158 (22)60 (20)98 (23)4.2 (2.4–7.5)Some secondary285 (39)85 (28)200 (47)6.1 (3.6–10.3)Secondary completed174 (24)87 (29)87 (21)2.6 (1.5–4.5)Post‐secondary19 (3)5 (2)14 (3)7.3 (2.4–22.3)Employment
b

Unemployed400 (55)182 (60)218 (51)Reference.014Employed267 (37)88 (29)179 (42)1.7 (1.2–2.3)Student59 (8)32 (11)27 (6)0.7 (0.9–1.5)Reported alcohol use
c

337 (39)57 (15)280 (57)7.3 (5.2–10.2)<.001Reported current cigarette smoking
c

139 (16)22 (6)117 (24)4.9 (3.0–7.9)<.001Reported current snuff smoking
c

97 (11)5 (1)92 (19)17.0 (6.8–42.1)<.001Reported current any smoking
c

242 (28)28 (8)214 (44)9.5 (6.2–14.4)<.001Cigarette smoke inside house
d

99 (41)7 (25)92 (43)2.3 (0.9–5.5).048Urine cotinine (all ages)
e

Negative649 (42)530 (68)119 (16)Reference<.001Passive exposure660 (43)222 (28)438 (57)8.8 (6.8–11.4)Active smoking241 (16)31 (4)210 (27)30.2 (19.7–46.2)Unknown1346668Not includedHIV status
e

Uninfected1379 (85)715 (86)664 (83)Reference.158Infected249 (15)117 (14)132 (17)1.2 (0.9–1.6)Unknown561739Not includedPrevious tuberculosis88 (5)15 (2)73 (9)5.3 (3.0–9.4)<.001Current tuberculosis24 (1)3 (<1)21 (3)7.3 (2.2–24.5)<.001Other underlying illness
f

50 (3)5 (1)45 (5)9.6 (3.8–24.3)<.001Influenza vaccination current year2 (<1)1 (<1)1 (<1)1.0 (0.1–16.2).990Pneumococcal vaccine up to date for age
g

Yes221 (81)137 (81)84 (80)0.2 (0.1–1.3).182No7 (3)2 (1)5 (5)ReferenceNo data46 (17)30 (18)16 (15)0.2 (0.1–1.2)DTaP‐IPV/Hib vaccine up to date for age
g

Yes222 (81)135 (80)87 (83)0.9 (0.2–3.9).735No7 (3)4 (2)3 (3)ReferenceNo data45 (16)30 (18)15 (14)0.7 (0.1–3.4)
a
Data available for 318 households, 155 rural and 163 urban.
b
Individuals aged ≥18 years N = 726, 302 at rural and 424 at urban site.
c
Self‐reported, individuals aged ≥15 years N = 858, 369 at rural and 489 at urban site.
d
Amongst those reporting any current smoking.
e
% and p value among individuals with known status.
f
Self‐reported history of asthma, lung disease, heart disease, stroke, spinal cord injury, epilepsy, organ transplant, immunosuppressive therapy, organ transplantation, cancer, liver disease, renal disease or diabetes.
g
Individuals aged <5 years N = 274, 169 at rural site and 105 at urban site, 229 with available vaccination data, 139 at the rural site and 90 at the urban site.Among 1684 included individuals, 1605 (95%) were present at end of the twice‐weekly follow‐up phase. Of 79 lost to follow‐up, 53 (67%) left the study sites, 21 (27%) withdrew and 5 (6%) died (Table 4). Just over half of the individuals in the 2016 and 2017 cohorts completed three serology blood draws in the years after completion of the swabbing phase. Individuals lost to follow‐up were more likely to be aged 15–44 years, possibly due to economic migration, compared to those completing follow‐up (Table S3).TABLE 4Follow‐up rates by site and year among 1684 individuals included in the analysis of the PHIRST study, South Africa, 2016–2018SiteYearCharacteristicOverall N (%)Rural N (%)Urban N (%)2016 N (%)2017 N (%)2018 N (%)Twice‐weekly follow‐up phaseIndividualsTotal included in analysis1684849835542577565Initially enrolled
a

1555 (92)790 (93)765 (92)505 (93)551 (95)499 (88)Late enrolments for replacement or in‐migration to household129 (8)59 (7)70 (8)37 (7)26 (5)66 (12)Lost to follow‐up79 (5)32 (4)47 (6)21 (4)31 (5)27 (5)Withdrawal n(%)21 (27)13 (41)8 (17)9 (43)6 (19)6 (22)Left study site n(%)53 (67)17 (53)36 (77)12 (57)21 (68)20 (74)Death n(%)5 (6)2 (6)3 (6)0 (0)4 (13)1 (4)Completed follow‐up1605 (95)817 (96)788 (94)521 (96)546 (95)538 (95)HouseholdsTotal included327159168100109118Initially enrolled
a

308 (94)148 (93)160 (95)96 (96)105 (96)107 (91)Late enrolments for replacement or in‐migration to household19 (6)11 (7)8 (5)4 (4)4 (4)11 (9)Lost to follow‐up6 (2)1 (1)5 (3)1 (1)2 (2)3 (3)Withdrawal n (%)3 (1)1 (1)2 (1)1 (1)2 (2)0 (0)Left study site n (%)3 (1)0 (0)3 (2)0 (0)0 (0)3 (3)Completed follow‐up321 (98)158 (99)163 (97)99 (99)107 (98)115 (97)Serology phase individuals
b


n/N (%)
n/N (%)
n/N (%)2016 cohort: three blood draws in serology phase 2017297/542 (55)116/280 (41)181/262 (69)NANANA2016 cohort: three blood draws in serology phase 2018295/542 (54)117/280 (42)178/262 (68)NANANA2017 cohort: three blood draws in serology phase 2018303/577 (53)118/289 (41)185/288 (64)NANANAAbbreviation: NA, not applicable.
a
Before 31 March for 2016, before 31 January for 2017 and 2018.
b
Timing of blood draws indicated graphically in Figure 3. Participants in the 2016 cohort had two blood draws during 2016 and three each in 2017 and 2018, participants in the 2017 cohort had three blood draws in 2017 and three in 2018, participants in the 2018 cohort had three blood draws in 2018.3.2Samples collected and symptomsThere were 122 113 potential individual follow‐up visits over the 3 years, and participants were interviewed for 105 783 (87%) of these. In 2017–2018, there were 94 786 potential visits, of which participants were interviewed for 81 943 (86%) and 81 928 (>99%) had available data on symptoms. At least one symptom was reported for 8% (6692) of visits overall. At least one symptom over the follow‐up period in 2017–2018 was reported by 89% (1012/1142) of individuals and was more commonly reported among children aged <5 years (97%, 180/185) compared to older individuals (5–18 years 87%, 404/466; 19–65 years 87%, 390/450; >65 years 93%, 38/41, p < .001 chi‐squared test). The commonest symptoms reported were cough (76%, 863/1142) and runny nose (74%, 841/1142). The rate of clinic visits in 2017–2018 for acute complaints was 1.3 per 100 person weeks of follow‐up (n = 520) (2.1 in <5 years, 0.9 in 5–18 years, 1.3 in 19–65 years and 2.0 in >65 years) and of hospitalisations was 0.05 per 100 person weeks of follow‐up (n = 36) (0.09 in <5 years, 0.05 in 5–18 years, 0.10 in 19–65 years and 0.3 in >65 years).From May 2016 to December 2018, a total of 105 683 nasopharyngeal swabs, 4217 clotted blood samples, 1442 whole blood samples, 1567 urine samples and 741 sputum samples were collected. Out of 105 683 nasopharyngeal swabs from follow‐up visits collected and tested from 1684 participants, in 327 households, 1258 (1%), 1026 (1%), 273 (<1%), 38 829 (37%) tested positive on PCR for influenza viruses, RSV, pertussis and pneumococcus, respectively.Analysis of data from 2017–2018 on influenza identified high attack rates with 79% of households had at least one individual testing influenza positive each season and 37% of household members infected at least once with PCR‐confirmed influenza each year.
31
 Incidence was similar in the urban and rural site. Repeat influenza infections within the same season were identified in 17% of individuals experiencing at least one influenza infection and were more common in children. The incidence of PCR‐confirmed influenza infection was highest among children aged <5 years and decreased with increasing age. Overall, 56% of infections were associated with ≥1 symptom and 35% of these had fever and cough. The proportion of symptomatic infections was higher in children aged <5 years (74% in this age group vs. 39% in those aged 19–44 years). Overall, there was influenza transmission to 10% of household contacts of an index case. Transmission was highest among children and individuals with ≥2 symptoms (17%); however, asymptomatic individuals did transmit influenza to 6% of household contacts.3.3Future plansHouseholds enrolled in the PHIRST study during 2016–2018 were eligible for inclusion in a study of SARS‐CoV‐2 transmission initiated in July 2020. This study uses similar testing frequency and household selection methods to assess the community burden of SARS‐CoV‐2 infection and the role of asymptomatic infection in virus transmission.4STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS4.1StrengthsPHIRST was conducted in urban and rural African settings. Situation in a high HIV prevalence setting with high study uptake of HIV testing (97%) allows assessment of the effect of HIV on community burden and transmission dynamics of respiratory pathogens. Households were selected randomly to provide a representative sample of the community. Sampling from individuals irrespective of symptoms allows estimation of community burden, household secondary infection risk and serial interval including asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic episodes.
32
 It also allows the estimation of the proportion of transmission from asymptomatic individuals. PHIRST utilised multiple laboratory‐confirmed infection endpoints including PCR and serology, which provide additional data on the community burden of these pathogens and allows evaluation of the correlation between pathogen detection and serological response in individuals of different age and HIV‐infection status. Laboratory confirmation of multiple respiratory pathogens simultaneously allows study of the effect of respiratory co‐infections on disease severity and transmissibility and the interaction between different pathogens. Our twice‐weekly sampling strategy was unlikely to miss many episodes of infection and allowed accurate ascertainment of first and subsequent infections from the same or different pathogens in the household. Our long period of active follow‐up for each cohort allowed us to describe burden and transmission of infection within described seasons.4.2LimitationsThis study was not powered to assess severe outcomes (i.e., hospitalisation and death). Repeated assessment of symptoms at twice‐weekly visits over an extended period may lead to possible fatigue and under‐reporting by participants. High rates of migration and movement in communities under study affected follow‐up rates. The study was intensive, and nasopharyngeal swabs are uncomfortable for participants, which may have resulted in fewer participants consenting and reduced follow‐up rates. Quality of specimen collection may have varied; however, >99% of samples tested positive for the presence of human DNA. We only examined four pathogens, but other micro‐organisms may be important. Samples have been stored which could allow us to implement broader multi‐pathogen testing in the future. We did not test staff members for the presence of organisms under study, because a previous similar study in which staff were sampled weekly did not identify any influenza or RSV infections among field staff.
33

ETHICAL REVIEWThe protocol was registered on http://clinicaltrials.gov on 6 August 2015 (Reference NCT02519803) and was approved by the University of the Witwatersrand Human Research Ethics Committee (Reference 150808) and the US CDC's Institutional Review Board relied on the local review (#6840). Participants provided individual written consent or assent prior to enrolment and received a grocery store voucher of ZAR25‐30 (USD 2–2.5) per visit for their time.PATIENT AND PUBLIC INVOLVEMENTBoth study sites have community advisory boards (CAB) consisting of representatives from community‐based and faith‐based organisations who were involved in the planning of the PHIRST study. The CABs meet regularly and give advice on protocols, consents and recruitment plans and also provide feedback to communities on results of studies. In addition, feedback sessions on study findings were held for participating families.CONFLICT OF INTERESTCheryl Cohen has received research grants awarded to her institution from Sanofi Pasteur, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cheryl Cohen has had costs for travel to a meeting supported by Parexel. Maimuna Carrim was awarded the Robert Austrian Research Award in Pneumococcal Vaccinology sponsored by Pfizer. Neil Martinson has a research grant awarded to his institution by Pfizer South Africa. Anne von Gottberg has received research grants awarded to her institution from Sanofi Pasteur, Pfizer and US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSCC, MM, TM, JM, FKT, OH, NW, NAM, KK, AvG and ST: conception or design of protocol. All co‐authors: acquisition, analysis or interpretation of data for the work. FKT, OH, NW, MC, AB, LM and AvG: laboratory testing of samples. LL, MM, KM, FW and SN: enrolment and follow‐up of participants. CC, MM and ST: drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual content. All co‐authors: final approval of the version to be published. All co‐authors: agreement to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved.DISCLAIMERThe findings and conclusions in this report are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official position of the funding agencies.PEER REVIEWThe peer review history for this article is available at https://publons.com/publon/10.1111/irv.12881.Supporting information
Table S1 PHIRST study primary and secondary objectives and public health importance of questions
Table S2 Comparison of characteristics of individuals who participated in the study compared to those who did not participate within included households, a rural and an urban site, South Africa, 2016–2018
Table S3 Comparison of individual and household‐level characteristics of individuals lost to follow‐up for twice‐weekly visits to those with complete follow‐up, a rural and an urban site, South Africa, 2016–2018
Figure S1 Timing of study procedures in relation to enrolment, follow‐up and season, a rural and an urban site, South Africa, 2016–2018 (A) rural site and (B) urban siteClick here for additional data file.


Title: Molecular epidemiology of respiratory syncytial virus transmission in childcare

1BackgroundRespiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection is the most important viral cause of severe respiratory tract infection in young children.1 In the first year of life, 98% of children become infected with RSV, with frequent reinfections in their second and third years.2, 3 The vast proportion of children with RSV are not hospitalized. The burden of RSV disease in the community is substantial, though molecular epidemiology of transmission is not well-characterized.4, 5, 6, 7 In the United States, 41% of children attend childcare,8 which is a known risk factor for severe RSV disease, and likely serves as an important route of transmission to other attendees and family members.9, 10 The socioeconomic impact of illness associated with childcare attendance includes work days missed and parental stress.11 A 16-year longitudinal study of childcare attendees in the 1980s using culture techniques showed that RSV was the most frequent viral etiology of respiratory illness.2, 12
The molecular epidemiology of RSV transmission is characterized by sequencing the hypervariable region of the glycoprotein (G) coding region.13 Transmission of genetically identical virus as well as the presence of multiple distinct co-circulating strains have been described in nosocomial settings.14, 15 No studies have been performed to characterize RSV disease burden in a community childcare setting using current molecular diagnostics despite its importance as a potential setting for public health interventions, such as vaccines and infection control measures.2ObjectivesThe goal of our study was to characterize the transmission and clinical impact of RSV in childcare. We hypothesized that the spread of unique viral strains within a childcare setting would be rapid. Rapid transmission was defined as detection of an identical viral strain within a one-week period within the childcare facilities. We further hypothesized that RSV infections in childcare attendees would be associated with increased symptom duration as compared to infections with other respiratory viruses.3Methods3.1SubjectsChildren age 4 weeks–30 months attending full-time childcare on Fort Lewis Army Base, Fort Lewis, Washington, USA were enrolled in a prospective cohort study from February 1, 2006 to April 30, 2008, and from October 28, 2008 to June 30, 2009.16, 17 Informed consent was obtained from caregivers. Children were followed for the presence of respiratory symptoms, and the study nurse was alerted at symptom onset by childcare staff or caregivers. An illness episode was defined as at least 2 of 5 symptoms, including cough, rhinorrhea, fever, wheezing and nasal congestion. Each child had a nasopharyngeal swab collected at symptom onset and weekly thereafter until symptom resolution. A daily symptom diary was completed by the caregiver for 10 days following symptom onset. From February 1, 2006 to May 1, 2006, nasopharyngeal samples were collected only with illness episodes. In children enrolled after May 1, 2006, a sample was also collected at time of enrollment regardless of symptom status.Childcare centers designated as Facilities X, Y, and Z were located several kilometers apart. Children were enrolled from rooms where full-time care was provided, defined as >20 h/week. These included 6 of 11 rooms in Facility X, 7 of 11 rooms in Facility Y, and 2 of 11 rooms in Facility Z. Infection control procedures were performed and documented according to a standard operating procedure, including daily bleach disinfection of all toys, routine hand washing after toileting and diaper changes and before and after meals, and surface decontamination with bleach.18 IRB approval was obtained from Seattle Children's Hospital and Madigan Army Medical Center.3.2Virologic methodsNasopharyngeal samples were tested for 13 respiratory viruses by real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay, including RSV, human metapneumovirus, influenza viruses A and B, parainfluenza virus 1–4, adenovirus, human coronavirus Group 1 (229E, N6L 63) and Group 2 (OC43 and HKU1), rhinovirus, and human bocavirus. Subtyping was performed for RSV-positive samples according to previously published protocols.19, 20 RSV-positive samples were sequenced using a hemi-nested PCR protocol targeting the second hypervariable region of the glycoprotein coding region.21 Complementary DNA (M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase, USB Corp, Cleveland, OH) was amplified with forward primer GAB (5′-YCAYTTTGAAGTGTTCAACTT-3′; G gene, 504–524 nt) and reverse primer FV (5′-GTTATGACACTGGTATACCAACC-3′; F gene, 186–163 nt). The amplification procedure included 2 min at 98 °C, 35 cycles of 98 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 1 min, and 72 °C for 1 min, followed by 72 °C for 7 min. A hemi-nested PCR was then performed using M13-tagged forward primer GAB and reverse primer F1AB (5′-CAACTCCATTGTTATTTGCC-3′; F gene, 3–22 nt) and 2.5 μL of PCR product with the same protocol as in step 1. Five hundred base pair amplicons were gel-extracted (QIAquick Gel Extraction kit, QIAGEN, Germany) and sequenced (Applied Biosystems 3730XL sequencer). PCR products from some samples were cloned (TOPO TA Cloning Kit, Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY) prior to sequencing. RSV-positive community samples during the same respiratory seasons were sequenced to serve as controls.3.3Statistical analysisSociodemographic, clinical, and virologic data were analyzed using Stata 10.1 (STATA Corp, College Station, TX). Generalized estimating equations (GEEs) to account for multiple illness episodes per child were used to compare symptom duration (using identity link) and health care visit frequency (using Poisson link) in RSV-positive and RSV-negative illnesses and viral load, symptom duration, and positive sample duration in RSV illnesses with and without another respiratory virus detected. Univariable GEE (using linear link) was used to estimate the influence of clinical characteristics on RSV viral load. Cumulative incidence curves were constructed to describe RSV spread within individual childcare rooms. Rapid transmission was defined as the presence of an identical viral strain within the childcare facility within one week.16, 22
Nucleotide sequences corresponding to a 205 and 305 base pair region of the G glycoprotein coding region for subtypes A and B, corresponding to nucleotides 5373–5577 for subtype A (GenBank GU591768.1) and nucleotides 5406–5565 for subtype B (GenBank NC_001781.1). These were aligned using Seaview 4.3.23 Phylogenetic reconstruction was performed using PhyML 3.0 within DIVEIN.24, 25 Neighbor joining trees were drawn using FigTree v1.3.1 using the maximum likelihood method with 100 bootstrap replicates.26 A Slatkin-Maddison test of compartmentalization of clades was performed to evaluate for sequence diversity.27 Nucleotide sequences were submitted to GenBank (JX398254–JX398285).4Results4.1Clinical characteristicsOverall, 255 children were enrolled in the study; 110 (49%) were male. The median age at enrollment was 9 months (range, 1–26 months); median weekly hours of childcare attendance was 40 (range, 20–60 h), median number of siblings was 1 (range, 0–5 siblings), and the median duration of follow up was 210 days (range, 12–811 days). In total, 138 (61%), 72 (32%), and 15 (7%) children were enrolled at Facility X, Y, and Z, respectively. The median age at enrollment was 8, 12, and 5 months at Facility X, Y, Z, respectively. Gender and number of hours of childcare attendance did not differ by facility. Overall, 523 illness episodes occurred in 181 (80%) children with 332 (63%) episodes in Facility X, 175 (28%) in Facility Y, and 16 (3%) in Facility Z (Fig. 1
). The median number of illness episodes per child was 3 (range, 1–14). A respiratory virus was detected in 429 (82%) of 523 illnesses. Asymptomatic enrollment samples were collected for 127 (56%) children, and 89 (70%) of these were positive for a respiratory virus, with the most common viruses detected being rhinovirus (n
 = 57; 45%), bocavirus (n
 = 26; 20%), and adenovirus (n
 = 18; 14%).Fig. 1Flow chart of illness episodes.4.2Clinical and virologic characteristics of RSV illness episodesRSV was detected in 59 (11%) of the 523 illness episodes, and 3 (2%) asymptomatic enrollment samples. Of the 59 illness episodes, 35 (59%) occurred in children under one year. Compared to the 464 RSV-negative episodes (Table 1
), RSV-positive episodes were associated with more days of wheezing (P
 < 0.001), fever (P
 < 0.001), cough (P
 < 0.001), congestion (P
 = 0.003), and an increased percentage of visits to a health care provider (P
 < 0.001) and childcare (P
 < 0.001) and parental work days missed (P
 < 0.001). The median duration of symptoms was 10 days (range, 4–10 days). The median initial viral load was 7.5 log10
 copies/mL (range, 2.6–10.0). Initial RSV viral load was not correlated with age at illness onset (r
2
 = 0.03; P
 = 0.22; data not shown), duration of detection of RSV (r
2
 < 0.01; P
 = 0.73; data not shown) or number of days of symptoms (r
2
 = 0.01; P
 = 0.43; data not shown). There was no relationship between age at illness onset and number of days of symptoms (r
2
 < 0.01; P
 = 0.86; data not shown).Table 1Comparison of characteristics of illness episodes with and without RSV detected.523 illness episodesNo RSV detected (n = 464) (89%)aRSV detected (n = 59) (11%)ap-ValuebRSV-only detected (n = 12)p-ValuecAge at illness (months)12.2 [6.5]11.5 [6.7]0.7413.0 [7.5]0.03Days of wheezing1.1 [2.5]2.6 [3.4]<0.0012.4 [3.1]<0.001Days of fever1.1 [1.7]1.7 [1.7]<0.0012.9 [1.9]<0.001Days of cough6.5 [3.5]8.1 [2.4]<0.0018.0 [2.1]0.03Days of congestion6.5 [3.7]7.5 [3.0]0.0037.4 [2.8]0.06Childcare days missed1.2 [1.6]2.6 [7.7]<0.0011.5 [1.3]0.21Work days missed1.1 [1.5]2.5 [7.7]<0.0011.1 [0.9]0.80Proportion of health care visits per illness episodes [n (%)]197 (43%)41 (69%)<0.00114 (82%)<0.001aNumbers are mean [SD] values unless otherwise specified.bCalculated using generalized estimating equations adjusting for multiple illnesses per child; compares RSV-positive and RSV-negative illness episodes.cCalculated using generalized estimating equations adjusting for multiple illnesses per child; compares illness episodes with only RSV detected and RSV-negative illness episodes.In 42 (71%) RSV-positive episodes, at least one other respiratory virus was detected. The most common were bocavirus (n
 = 28; 67%), rhinovirus (n
 = 18; 43%), adenovirus (n
 = 18; 43%), coronavirus (n
 = 5; 12%), and parainfluenza type 3 (n
 = 5; 12%). Duration of symptoms was not significantly different between illness episodes with and without another respiratory virus, though numbers of childcare and work days missed were increased (Table 2
). The RSV viral load was not significantly different between RSV-positive episodes with and without another respiratory virus identified (16.1 vs. 17.1 log10
 copies/mL; P
 = 0.38), though duration of detection of RSV (4.9 vs. 1.8 days; P
 < 0.001) was increased.Table 2Comparison of clinical and virologic characteristics of RSV-positive illness episodes with and without another respiratory virus detected.59 illness episodesRSV only (n = 17) (29%)aRSV and another respiratory virus (n = 42) (71%)ap-ValuebAge at illness (months)13.0 [7.5]10.7 [6.1]0.34Days of wheezing2.4 [3.1]2.7 [3.5]0.03Days of fever2.1 [1.9]1.6 [1.6]0.16Days of cough8.0 [2.1]8.2 [2.5]0.87Days of congestion7.4 [2.8]7.6 [3.1]0.93Childcare days missed1.5 [1.3]3.1 [9.1]<0.001Work days missed1.1 [0.9]3.0 [9.1]<0.001Proportion of health care visits per illness episodes [n (%)]14 (82%)27 (64%)0.20Viral load (log10 copies/mL)17.1 (0.8)16.1 (0.7)0.38Days of RSV detection1.8 (0.6)4.9 (1.3)<0.001aNumbers are mean [SD] values unless otherwise specified.bCalculated using generalized estimating equations adjusting for multiple illnesses per child.Three children had a second illness episode, with a median of 12 months [range, 1–13 months] between illnesss episodes and a median decline in viral load of 8.7 log10
 copies/mL [range, 8.2–9.0]. Duration of symptoms was a median of 8 days [range, 5–10 days] for the first illness episode, and 7 days [range, 4–10 days] for the 2nd illness episode.4.3Molecular epidemiology of RSV episodesRSV episodes occurred from November to April in the three successive winter seasons of the study. RSV subtype B predominated in Season 1 with 21 (78%) of 27 episodes, while RSV subtype A predominated in Seasons 2 and 3 with 7 (88%) of 8 episodes and 20 (74%) of 27 episodes, respectively [Fig. 2A and B (1, 8, and 6 episodes in Seasons 1, 2, and 3, respectively, were not included due to occurrence outside of the time interval illustrated)]. We sequenced samples from 25 (42%) of 59 illness episodes as well as one nasopharyngeal sample collected from an asymptomatic child at enrollment. Episodes that were sequenced were more likely to have higher viral loads (P
 < 0.001), but did not differ by date of collection (P
 = 0.71), implying that the inability to sequence a subset of samples was due to limited template rather than sample degradation. Clusters of identical RSV strains were detected in childcare samples from the same seasons and within rooms, which were distinct from six community controls, eight reference sequences obtained from GenBank, and viruses isolated during different time periods in the same childcare facilities. Phylogenetic trees constructed for subtype A (Fig. 3
) and subtype B viruses (Fig. 4
) showed evidence of compartmentalized clades for subtype A (P
 < 0.001), but insufficient variation within subtype B strains to distinguish clades.Fig. 2Epidemic curve of RSV spread within childcare rooms by subtype in Season 1 (2A) and Season 3 (2B) from November to January. The y-axis is the number of episodes. The x-axis represents time. Each box represents one episode. The numbers and letters within each box represent the facility and room number of the child. One, eight, and six episodes in seasons 1, 2, and 3, respectively, were not included due to occurrence outside of the time period shown.Fig. 3Phylogenetic trees were constructed using 17 subtype A viral strains detected in 3 seasons compared to community controls and GenBank sequences. The samples are identified by date followed by location and patient identifier. GenBank sequences are identified by year of sample followed by “Ref.” Community controls are identified by the year of the sample followed by “CC.” The numbers at the nodes are the bootstrap values. The log likelihood value is −416.0 with 100 bootstrap replicates.Fig. 4Phylogenetic trees were constructed using 9 subtype B viral strains detected in 3 seasons compared to community controls and GenBank sequences. The samples are identified by date followed by location and patient identifier. GenBank sequences are identified by year of sample followed by “Ref.” Community controls are identified by the year of the sample followed by “CC.” The numbers at the nodes are the bootstrap values. The log likelihood value is −423.6 with 100 bootstrap replicates.4.4Classroom-level transmissionWe identified clusters of RSV episodes in rooms Y11 (Subtype B, Season 1) and X3 (Subtype A, Season 3). During both clusters, 50% of enrolled children in each room were infected within six days of the first case (Fig. 5
). In total, 8 of 12 children in Y11 and 8 of 13 children in X3 developed RSV over a 16-day period. Samples from two episodes 14 days apart in Y11 contained the same RSV strain, as did 5 episodes in X3 that spanned the entire 16-day period. These results suggest that child-to-child transmission of one viral strain was likely responsible for these clusters of RSV illness. A third cluster of seven RSV episodes was identified in room X3 during Season 1, consisting of two subtype A and five subtype B viruses. Sequencing of the two subtype A episodes showed identical viral strains, while sequencing of three subtype B episodes showed two different viral strains, indicating that multiple viral strains co-circulated simultaneously in the childcare room (Fig. 6
).Fig. 5Cumulative incidence curves of RSV spread in two childcare rooms in Season 1 and Season 3.Fig. 6Epidemic curve of RSV spread within childcare rooms by strain for the 12 sequenced samples from November to March in Season 3. The y-axis is the number of episodes. The x-axis represents time. Each box represents one episode. The numbers and letters within each box represent the facility and room number of the child. The pattern of the box corresponds to the viral strain. Three unique viral strains were detected during Season 3.4.5Facility-level transmissionIn Season 1, we identified four subtype B episodes with identical strains in rooms Y11 and X3 from November 13 to December 8. At the same time, three subtype A episodes with identical strains were identified in rooms X3 and Y2. These two facilities were located several kilometers apart, making it less likely that direct inoculation from child-to-child was the mode of transmission. No RSV-positive sibling pairs enrolled in the study were located in different facilities. However, sibling pairs who were not enrolled in the study or parents, many of whom worked on Fort Lewis, may also have transmitted RSV. In Season 3, eight subtype A episodes with identical strains were detected in Facility X in rooms X3, X5, and X6 from November 18 to December 5, suggesting transmission both within and between rooms within Facility X during Season 3, with temporal and geographic clustering of two additional clusters of identical strains in December and March (Fig. 6).RSV was also detected in two sibling pairs, both in the same childcare room. In one sibling pair, RSV was detected simultaneously in both children. Sequencing results from this pair showed identical viral strains in both children. In the other sibling pair, RSV was detected one week apart, though these samples were not sequenced.5DiscussionOur study is the first to describe the molecular epidemiology of RSV transmission in childcare, a potential target of infection control interventions in the community. Among childcare attendees in our study, RSV-positive illness episodes were associated with greater symptom duration, number of parental work and childcare days missed, and visits to health care providers than illness episodes without RSV detected. Using molecular sequencing, we documented high rates of infection and transmission of identical RSV strains in childcare. Within one week of the index case, we detected an identical viral strain in another child in the same facility. This same strain was detected in 7 additional children in the facility within a 16-day period.RSV viral load in hospitalized infants may predict duration of hospitalization and studies of experimentally RSV-infected adults show that peak viral load correlates with symptom score.28, 29 We did not find a relationship between viral load and symptom duration. The criteria used to characterize disease severity in the inpatient setting may not be applicable to our outpatient population, or we may have captured both primary and secondary RSV cases, potentially impacting viral load.The significance of respiratory viral co-infection remains controversial. We found no relationship between co-infection and RSV viral load or symptom duration. Four prior studies did not find increased RSV disease severity among hospitalized children when multiple viruses were detected.30, 31, 32, 33 This is in contrast to a study showing that co-infection with RSV and human metapneumovirus was associated with increased disease severity compared to RSV alone, as measured by intensive care unit admission.34 No children were co-infected with RSV and human metapneumovirus in our study.We documented simultaneous circulation of multiple RSV strains in an outbreak setting with predominance of one viral strain within a 16-day period among 9 childcare attendees in the same facility. We showed that within one week of the first case, another child had an identical strain detected, suggesting rapid child-to-child transmission within the facility. Further, we demonstrated that once RSV was detected in a childcare room, over 50% of children in the room became infected within a week. While there was clustering of identical viral strains within rooms and facilities, we also found that several unique viral strains circulated in a room simultaneously during an outbreak. This is consistent with data from outbreaks in bone marrow transplant settings,35, 36 but has not been previously investigated in the childcare setting, an important source of community-acquired respiratory viral infections. Viral transmission correlates directly with degree and intensity of hand or nasal inoculation with large droplets or fomites,37, 38 activities which are likely to be frequent within childcare. Although infection control measures including handwashing and sanitation of surfaces were utilized according to current guidelines in our facilities,39, 40, 41 our results imply that RSV is readily transmitted in childcare facilities despite these routine measures.This study has some limitations. Children may shed and transmit RSV after they become asymptomatic, and we did not perform regular sampling in asymptomatic participants.42 Although we captured ten days of symptom data, younger children may experience symptoms lasting longer. Further, we were not able to use a preceding asymptomatic period as criteria for a new illness episode. Many children enrolled in our childcare facilities were never symptom-free, particularly when considering cough and rhinorrhea. Each new illness episode that was close in timing to a prior illness episode was reviewed by the study staff and a consensus decision was made to decide whether this should be classified as a new episode versus a continuation of a prior illness. In general, children who developed new symptoms, as opposed to worsening of previous symptoms, were classified as having a new illness episode. Finally, we sequenced RSV from only 42% of episodes, though our ability to sequence viruses from clinical samples is consistent with other studies characterizing RSV transmission.35
Our study shows that the childcare setting is a significant source of rapid child-to-child RSV transmission, and that once acquired, RSV leads to significantly greater symptom duration than other respiratory viruses. These results highlight the significant clinical and socioeconomic impact of RSV in the community, and emphasize that the childcare setting is an important potential site of interventions to reduce the burden of RSV disease. Interventions that reduce RSV transmission in childcare, such as vaccines and enhanced infection control measures, are likely to have a substantial clinical and socioeconomic impact.FundingThis study was supported by the National Institutes of Health [T32 5T32AI007044-35 (HYC) & K24 AI071113 (AW)] and an investigator-initiated grant from MedImmune, Inc. (JAE).Competing interestJAE has received research support from MedImmune, Inc. and Novartis, and serves as a consultant for GlaxoSmithKline and Novavax. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest.Ethical approvalIRB approval was obtained from Seattle Children's Hospital and Madigan Army Medical Center.Authors’ contributionsHYC and JAE jointly conceived the study. HYC, CR, and JK designed and performed the laboratory portion. HYC, MS, and AM performed the statistical analysis. HYC wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and implications and commented on the manuscript at all stages.Prior presentation of resultsThe findings described here are unpublished but were presented in part as a poster abstract at the Clinical Virology Symposium (Daytona Beach, FL, April 21–25, 2012) and the 2007 RSV International Symposium (Marcos Island, FL, October 27, 2007).


Title: Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection Changes Cargo Composition of Exosome Released from Airway Epithelial Cells

IntroductionExosomes are a nano-sized (30–100 nm) subclass of extracellular vesicles with exposed external domains of transmembrane proteins1–3. Exosomes are formed during the maturation of endosomes upon invagination and budding of the limiting membrane of late endosomes as intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) of multivesicular bodies (MVBs). These small vesicles are termed ILVs while contained in MVBs and ‘exosomes’ when released in to the extracellular environment. They are secreted by virtually all cell types and their presence has been confirmed in all bodily fluids such as blood, urine, saliva, breast milk, bronchial lavage, cerebral spinal fluid and amniotic fluid4–17. Exosomes have been shown to contain different types of biomolecules including proteins, carbohydrates, lipids and nucleic acid signature of source of origin18–22. Because of that, they have emerged as an important tool for intercellular communication, giving birth to a new concept that cellular communication in mammals can be mediated by the exchange of information through the horizontal transfer of biologically active proteins, lipids and regulatory RNAs23. RNA and protein composition of exosomes varies in both quantity and quality depending on the type and physiological/pathological state of the cells they originate from; suggesting that recruitment of RNA and protein in to exosome is a regulated process19,24.Because of the ability to carry complex biological information (proteins, lipids and RNAs), exosomes have been implicated in a variety of normal as well as pathophysiological conditions, such as lactation, immune response, neuronal function, development and progression of liver disease, neurodegenerative diseases, cancer and viral infections14,23,25–29. Exosome-mediated extracellular delivery of nucleic acids and proteins between virus-infected and uninfected bystander cells has been shown to play a role in viral transmission and modulation of immune responses, as some viruses exploit the exosomal pathway for their assembly/budding/release, and either suppression or activation of the immune system30–33.Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is an important cause of acute respiratory tract infections in children, elderly and immunocompromised individuals with a huge global health impact. Each year, over 33 million children under the age of 5 years are affected by this disease, leading to over 3 million hospitalizations and almost 200,000 deaths34. In the United States only, over 2 million children younger than 5 years of age require medical attention because of RSV each year35. RSV is the most common cause of bronchiolitis and pneumonia in children younger than 1 year. Infants born preterm and children with congenital heart disease, chronic lung disease, and other high-risk medical conditions have greater risk of developing more severe RSV infection36. While considered a high priority, development of a safe and effective vaccine and specific treatment still remain elusive for RSV, therefore increasing our knowledge of how the virus interacts with the host is important to better understand disease pathogenesis and to develop new therapeutic approaches. In this study, we characterized exosomes released from RSV-infected airway-derived A549 cells and found that RSV induces significant changes in exosome RNA cargo composition, investigated using next generation sequencing. We observed that both RNA and protein signatures of RSV were present in exosomes, however, exosomes were not associated with infectious viral particles and were not able to establish productive infection in uninfected cells. Exosomes isolated from RSV-infected cells were able to induce chemokine release from human monocytes and A549 cells, suggesting that exosomes released during infection could alter cellular responses, leading to either suppression or activation of the innate immune system. These findings reveal a new dimension in host-pathogen interactions highlighting the possible role of extracellular vesicles in RSV infection.ResultsPurification and characterization of exosomes from virally-infected cellsTo investigate changes in exosome cargo composition, transmission of RNA/protein/virus to uninfected cells or in intercellular communication, a population of exosomes devoid of cellular and viral contaminants is necessary. Since RSV particles and exosome size range overlaps, traditional differential centrifugation/ultracentrifugation methods alone would not yield a pure population of exosomes37. For our study, we opted for a two-step exosome purification method that included precipitation reagent-based exosome enrichment, followed by CD63 antibody based immuno-magnetic isolation, as there is no evidence from the literature that RSV virions contain this particular molecule38,39, and because RSV assembles and egress cells through a pathway similar to influenza, which has been shown to be devoid of CD63 and other tetraspannins40. An illustration of exosome enrichment and purification is shown in Fig. 1.Figure 1Diagram of exosome isolation and characterization. Exosomes were isolated using ExoQuick reagent from conditioned cell culture supernatants and subjected to CD63 immuno-magnetic selection for recovery of highly pure exosomes. Immuno-purified exosomes were then characterized by western blot, using an exosome marker antibody array, and by nanoparticle tracking analysis.
Following purification, exosomes isolated from mock- (mock-infected) and RSV-infected cells were subjected to characterization using three different methods. First, we confirmed presence of common exosome markers using an antibody array. We found that, seven out of eight exosome marker proteins detected by the array, namely CD63, CD81, ALIX, FLOT1, ICAM1, ANXA5 and TSG101, were present in our exosome preparations. EpCAM was not detected in our preparations. The cis-Golgi marker GM130, included to monitor cellular contamination from other membrane compartments, was also absent as expected (Fig. 2a). Interestingly, ALIX was strongly upregulated in exosomes isolated from virus-infected cells, compared to mock-infected. We then confirmed the presence of the exosome markers CD63 and ALIX by western blot (Fig. 2b), which also showed an enrichment of ALIX in exosomes derived from infected cells. The exosomes were further analyzed by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA) and compared to exosomes enriched by Exoquick precipitation but not immunopurified. The size range of Exoquick-enriched exosomes varied from 30 to 200 nm, with a median diameter of 124.1 +/− 0.4 nm and a mode diameter of 92 +/− 4.1 nm. On the other hand, the exosome population obtained after CD63 purification was more uniform in terms of size and most exosomes were in the size range of 50–150 nm with a median diameter of 101.5 +/− 3.5 nm and mode diameter of 77 +/− 5.0 nm (Fig. 2c). Finally, equal volumes of exosomes enriched by Exoquick were analyzed for CD63 expression by western blot (Fig. 2d). There was a slight increase in CD63 levels in RSV vs mock exosomes, which was however statistically significant, suggesting that infection could enhance exosome release.Figure 2Characterization of purified exosomes. (a) Characterization of equal amounts of purified exosomes by protein marker antibody array. The exosome marker array detects 8 known exosome markers namely – CD63, Immunoglobulin superfamily, member 8 (CD81), Programmed cell death 6 interacting protein (ALIX), Flotillin 1 (FLOT1), Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCam), Annexin A5 (ANXA5) and Tumor susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101). Cis-Golgi matrix protein marker GM130 serves as control to monitor cellular contamination in exosome preparations. PC stands for positive control. (b) Western blot of equal amounts of CD63-purified exosomes using the exosome markers ALIX and CD63. (c) Absolute size determination and quantification of RSV exosomes either reagent enriched or CD63-purified by NanoSight LM10 analysis. The particles were tracked and sized based on Brownian motion and the diffusion coefficient. The mean and mode diameter of exosomes particles are shown. The absolute count of exosome particles was determined and expressed as particles/ml. (d) Exosomes were enriched from 24 h cell supernatants and equal volumes were analyzed for CD63 expression by Western blot assay. Right panel represents densitometric analysis of three independent experiments. ‘*’ Indicates a statistically significant difference (P value < 0.05) comparing RSV exosomes versus mock.
Exosomes derived from virus-infected cells contain RSV components but do not transmit RSV infectionExosomes have been shown to carry pathogen signatures of infected cells, along with host cellular components, as reported for certain viral, bacterial and parasitic infections41–46. Both viral proteins and RNAs have been identified in exosomes obtained from infected cells31,44,46. To investigate if exosomes carry RSV protein, lysates of CD63 immuno-purified exosomes from virus- and mock-infected A549 cells were analyzed by western blot. We found that exosomes isolated from virus-infected cells contained RSV nucleocapsid protein N, attachment protein G and fusion protein F (Fig. 3a). To determine whether exosomes derived from infected A549 cells would carry viral RNA, RT-PCR for RSV N, M and NS1 gene detection was performed on RNA isolated from CD63-purified exosomes. All three genes were amplified by RT-PCR in RSV exosomes but not in exosomes of mock-infected cells (Fig. 3b). We also tested the presence of RSV genome and antigenome using specific primers for amplification of intergenic regions and found that both of them were detectable in RSV exosomes, although the majority was antigenomic in nature (Fig. 3c).Figure 3RSV viral RNA and protein content in exosomes. (a) Western blot of protein lysates of exosomes using a polyclonal antibody against RSV. (b) RSV N, M and NS1 gene amplification by RT-PCR from CD63-purified exosome RNA. (c) qRT-PCR amplification of genomic and antigenomic RNA present in RSV exosomes.
In the case of Hepatitis C, exosomes containing full-length viral RNA, along with core and envelope proteins, were shown to be infectious and a major route of transmission45. As we found presence of viral RNAs and proteins in exosomes isolated from infected cells, we investigated whether these exosomes could establish a productive infection in naive cells. Purified exosomes from RSV-infected cells were inoculated on to highly susceptible Hep-2 cells, a cell line routinely used for RSV propagation, which were observed for the presence of typical cytopathic effect and harvested at different day p.i., up to day 14, to assess viral replication. We were not able to detect significant virus replication associated with the exosome preparations of RSV-infected cells.Exosome RNA cargo comprises short RNA sequences and is protected from degradationExosomes carry biologically active RNA signals to recipient cells47–49, which need to be protected from ubiquitously present RNA exonucleases. Using the Agilent Bioanalyzer, we investigated RNA length profile and RNase protection of exosomes isolated from mock and infected cells. We observed that the length profiles of exosomal RNA was distinct from that of whole cell RNA isolated from A549 cells. As expected, the exosomal RNA cargo comprised of short RNA fragments ranging from 20–250 nucleotide in length, whereas whole cell RNA sequences were considerably long, 25 to 4000 nucleotide (nt) in size (Fig. 4a ii–iii). To serve as effective signal carrier in cell to cell communication, exosome RNA is protected from RNA exonuclease that might be present in extracellular spaces. To determine whether RNA obtained from our exosome preparations was indeed from exosomes, not just associated or co-purified during isolation, we analyzed RNA length profile of CD63-purified exosomes treated with enzyme RNase A in the presence or absence of a membrane-permeabilizing detergent (Triton X-100) using Agilent Bioanalyzer. The results showed that exosomal RNA remained intact following treatment with RNase in the absence of the detergent (Fig. 4a iv), but was degraded in the presence of Triton X-100 (Fig. 4a vi). Triton X-100 alone had no effect on exosome RNA cargo integrity (Fig. 4a v). These findings indicate that the RNA was confined within the exosomal membrane and thereby protected from degradation.Figure 4Exosome RNA cargo length profile. (a) Electropherograms and (b) gel images of RNA extracted from exosomes untreated or treated with RNase A in the presence or absence of Triton X-100 and run on the Agilent Bioanalyzer to determine size of RNA fragments.
Small RNA profiling in exosomes derived from mock- and virus-infected cellsNext generation high throughput sequencing (NGS) technologies have been utilized extensively to gain insights into small noncoding RNAs/regulatory RNAs in several species50–54. Virus infections are known to induce significant changes in host cells to facilitate their replication and transmission and it has been shown that virus infections induce changes in composition of exosomal RNA31,44,46. To compare RNA cargo of exosomes released from mock-infected and RSV-infected A549 cells, total exosomal RNA was isolated and small RNAs were sequenced and analyzed as described in methods. NGS analysis pipeline flowchart is shown in Fig. 5. RNA cargo of exosomes isolated from mock- and RSV-infected cells was composed of a diverse range of RNA types, which were present in both sets of exosomes although their quantities were different in the two sets (Table 1). In exosomes isolated from mock-infected A549 cells, antisense sequences to repeat elements (23.126%), antisense to introns (18.575%), RefSeq introns (16.473%), short interspersed nuclear elements (SINE) (10.080%) formed the largest part of sequences present (68.254%). Sequences that did not map to any known region of human genome were represented as unannotated and formed 13.790% of total RNA reads. The remaining reads (17.956%) were from antisense to exons, antisense to non-coding RNAs (ncRNA), CDBox Small nucleolar RNA, HAcaBox Small nucleolar RNA, long intergenic non-coding RNA (lincRNA), large interspersed nuclear elements (LINE), long terminal repeats (LTR), microRNA (miRNA), Other Rfam ncRNA, piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA), RefSeq exons, RefSeq lncRNA, ribosomal RNA (rRNA), small Cajal body-specific RNAs (scaRNA), Tandem repeat, transfer RNA (tRNA), tRNA-like. RSV infection resulted in considerable changes in the proportion of RNA types recruited to the exosomes, with antisense sequences to repeat elements, exons and introns, RefSeq intron and unannotated sequences present at a significantly lower level compared to mock exosomes. On the other hand, SINE and rRNA sequences increased considerably in exosomes from virus-infected cells. To graphically demonstrate the changes in RNA type packaging to exosomes, we grouped the RNAs into five broad categories namely genome, small non-coding (nc) RNA, repeat elements, ribosomal RNA and unannotated RNA sequences. The complete list with read counts of the identified RNA types is provided in Supplementary Data 1 excel file (SD1).Figure 5Next generation high-throughput RNA sequencing analysis pipeline flowchart. The flowchart demonstrates how the next generation sequencing data was analyzed. In brief, raw sequencing reads were quality checked for sequencing errors and contaminants using FastQC. Adapter sequences, primers, Ns, and reads with quality score below 28 were trimmed using fastq-mcf of ea-utils and PRINSEQ. Reads < 16 bp after trimming were discarded. Pseudo single-end reads were mapped to the human genome using bowtie. Raw read counts were calculated for known gene categories including ncRNAs, antisense transcripts, coding and intronic regions of mRNAs, and repeats. Annotations of known genes were retrieved from miRBase release 20, NCBI RefSeq, Human lincRNA Catalog, and UCSC Genome Browser. hRSV- Human Respiratory Syncytial Virus, miRNA- microRNA, piRNA- piwi interacting RNA, tRNA- transfer RNA, snRNA- small nucleolar RNA, mRNA-messenger RNA, sncRNA-small noncoding RNA, lincRNA- long intergenic noncoding RNA.
Table 1Percentage of RNA types in exosomes derived from mock- and RSV-infected A549 cells derived by dividing the RNA type specific reads by total number of mapped reads.RNA typePercentage in Mock ExosomesPercentage in RSV ExosomesAntisense to exons1.70.3Antisense to introns18.610.8Antisense to ncRNAs3.42.1Antisense to repeat elements23.110.8CDBox0.0030.05HAcaBox00.006lincRNA0.1550.043LINE4.20.4LTR2.40.1miRNA0.040.3Other Rfam ncRNA0.45.7piRNA0.10.8RefSeq exons1.80.2RefSeq introns16.59.7RefSeq lncRNA0.514.2rRNA0.924.1scaRNA00.002SINE10.118.4Tandem repeat00tRNA1.30.7tRNA_like1.10.4Unannotated13.81.0
Small ncRNAs in exosomes isolated from RSV infected A549 cellsAlthough the small ncRNA sequences represented a smaller fraction of the total RNA reads in both mock and RSV exosome populations, they contain important regulatory RNAs such as miRNA, piwi RNA and tRNA, therefore we analyze these RNA species separately from the others (Fig. 6). tRNA and tRNA-like sequences formed most of the RNA sequences in mock exosomes representing more than 90% of RNA reads in the small RNA category. MiRNA and piRNA formed ~1.5% and ~3.9% of total small RNA reads in mock exosomes. There was a significant increase in miRNA and piRNA levels in exosome isolated from infected cells, indicating that RSV infection was associated with profound changes in exosome miRNA and piRNA content (Fig. 6). Looking at the expression profiles of miRNAs with >10 reads, a total of 100 miRNAs were detected between mock and RSV exosomes. Out of these 100, 66 miRNAs were present in both mock and RSV exosomes, with 56 significantly upregulated and 10 downregulated in exosomes isolated from virus-infected cells, compared to mock. The top miRNAs upregulated (≥4 fold) and downregulated (≥2 fold) are shown in Table 2. Of the remaining 34, 25 miRNA were only detected in RSV exosomes, and 9 miRNA in mock exosomes (Table 3). The complete list of miRNAs whose expression in exosomes was changed following infection is shown in Supplementary Table 1 (ST1).Figure 6Graphic representation of the relative abundance of small ncRNAs from exosomes.
Table 2Top 20 miRNAs upregulated (≥4 fold) and 10 miRNAs downregulated (≥2 fold) in RSV exosomes.S. No.miRNARead Count (Avg)Log2 FoldMock ExoRSV ExoChange1hsa-mir-608745.5939800.599.7692hsa-let-7e0.62468.179.5653hsa-miR-182-5p0.2543.347.4334hsa-miR-181b-5p0.6277.216.9655hsa-mir-128-10.2514.685.8726hsa-miR-19b-3p0.2513.245.7227hsa-mir-23b1.1454.525.5858hsa-let-7i12.76610.075.5789hsa-mir-22279.135.30310hsa-miR-24-3p5.98229.595.26311hsa-mir-1821.3945.85.04612hsa-mir-378a0.8728.125.01713hsa-mir-99b1.1435.934.98314hsa-miR-320b2.6274.634.83115hsa-let-7f-122.5590.864.71416hsa-miR-45162.9777.274.70017hsa-mir-21121.43155.144.69918hsa-mir-30c-22.142.724.34319hsa-miR-423-5p2.2444.064.29820hsa-miR-320c1.7534.034.27821hsa-mir-223210.17−6.91122hsa-mir-2964a62.140.57−6.76723hsa-mir-20518.170.29−5.99324hsa-mir-14365.391.41−5.53225hsa-miR-3168222.714.82−5.53026hsa-miR-146a-5p15.80.46−5.10227hsa-miR-10b-5p56.074−3.80928hsa-mir-32821.771.83−3.57529hsa-miR-1246237.7423.03−3.36730hsa-miR-185-5p17.36.91−1.324
Table 3miRNAs detected either in RSV-exosomes or mock-exosomes.S. No.miRNARead Count (Avg)Mock ExoRSV Exo1hsa-mir-310529.152hsa-mir-36870114.573hsa-mir-222080.934hsa-mir-151a066.105hsa-miR-4449065.296hsa-mir-663a056.037hsa-mir-196a-2053.418hsa-mir-4508037.129hsa-mir-1248034.6410hsa-miR-4497028.1911hsa-mir-1273f028.0812hsa-mir-28026.6713hsa-mir-191020.4414hsa-miR-3648017.5415hsa-miR-194-5p017.1416hsa-miR-128014.3017hsa-mir-1307013.9118hsa-mir-744013.0719hsa-miR-148b-3p012.3120hsa-miR-1307-3p012.0221hsa-mir-663b011.3322hsa-miR-152011.1923hsa-mir-421010.9924hsa-mir-7-1010.4325hsa-mir-486010.2626hsa-miR-132150.50027hsa-mir-20434.07028hsa-mir-63722.18029hsa-mir-468919.39030hsa-mir-14415.38031hsa-miR-426911.12032hsa-mir-88510.50033hsa-mir-479510.50034hsa-mir-71810.290
To characterize potential targets of miRNAs identified in exosomes, we integrated the lists of microRNAs with target predictions available from the TargetScan version 7.1, containing 1,387,426 human miRNA-target interactions. We identified 4,816 potential targets of miRNAs upregulated in the exosomes following RSV infection, 925 potential targets of miRNAs downregulated in exosomes and 2,122 targets of miRNAs highly abundant in exosomes (see ST2, ST3 and ST4). We then characterized the most prevalent functions of the predicted target genes of the identified miRNAs using the Gene Ontology functional classification, focusing on molecular function, biological processes and pathways. We found that the most significant groups of targets of regulated miRNAs are related to DNA-binding, transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, alternative splicing, chromatin modification, and embryonic development. A summary of the top twenty function/processes are presented in Tables 4 and 5, while the complete analysis is provided as nine supplementary excel files (SD2 to SD10).Table 4Top biological processes from potential miRNA targets of Tables 2 and 3.Table 2Table 3GO:0045944~positive regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoterGO:0045893~positive regulation of transcriptionGO:0000122~negative regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoterGO:0045944~positive regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoterGO:0006351~transcriptionGO:0000122~negative regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoterGO:0045893~positive regulation of transcriptionGO:0006366~transcription from RNA polymerase II promoterGO:0045892~negative regulation of transcriptionGO:0006351~transcriptionGO:0006468~protein phosphorylationGO:0045892~negative regulation of transcriptionGO:0006366~transcription from RNA polymerase II promoterGO:0006468~protein phosphorylationGO:0023014~signal transduction by protein phosphorylationGO:0042472~inner ear morphogenesisGO:0006355~regulation of transcriptionGO:0007507~heart developmentGO:0016569~covalent chromatin modificationGO:0048015~phosphatidylinositol-mediated signalingGO:1900740~positive regulation of protein insertion into mitochondrial membrane involved in apoptotic signaling pathwayGO:0007173~epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathwayGO:0048015~phosphatidylinositol-mediated signalingGO:0035335~peptidyl-tyrosine dephosphorylationGO:0006915~apoptotic processGO:0030097~hemopoiesisGO:0009952~anterior/posterior pattern specificationGO:0001525~angiogenesisGO:0043525~positive regulation of neuron apoptotic processGO:0031175~neuron projection developmentGO:0060021~palate developmentGO:0018105~peptidyl-serine phosphorylationGO:0016055~Wnt signaling pathwayGO:0006607~NLS-bearing protein import into nucleusGO:0010468~regulation of gene expressionGO:0009952~anterior/posterior pattern specificationGO:0035278~miRNA mediated inhibition of translationGO:0035194~posttranscriptional gene silencing by RNAGO:0035194~posttranscriptional gene silencing by RNAGO:0007165~signal transduction
Table 5Top molecular functions from potential miRNA targets of Tables 2 and 3.Table 2Table 3GO:0005515~protein bindingGO:0005515~protein bindingGO:0003700~transcription factor activityGO:0003700~transcription factor activityGO:0003677~DNA bindingGO:0043565~sequence-specific DNA bindingGO:0008134~transcription factor bindingGO:0001077~transcriptional activator activityGO:0001077~transcriptional activator activityGO:0004672~protein kinase activityGO:0004674~protein serine/threonine kinase activityGO:0004674~protein serine/threonine kinase activityGO:0046332~SMAD bindingGO:0044212~transcription regulatory region DNA bindingGO:0046872~metal ion bindingGO:0008270~zinc ion bindingGO:0008270~zinc ion bindingGO:0008134~transcription factor bindingGO:0043565~sequence-specific DNA bindingGO:0004702~receptor signaling protein serine/threonine kinase activityGO:0003730~mRNA 3′-UTR bindingGO:0000978~RNA polymerase II core promoter proximal region sequence-specific DNA bindingGO:0000978~RNA polymerase II core promoter proximal region sequence-specific DNA bindingGO:0003714~transcription corepressor activityGO:0004702~receptor signaling protein serine/threonine kinase activityGO:0004725~protein tyrosine phosphatase activityGO:0003682~chromatin bindingGO:0042826~histone deacetylase bindingGO:0004842~ubiquitin-protein transferase activityGO:0008013~beta-catenin bindingGO:0044325~ion channel bindingGO:0019838~growth factor bindingGO:0003714~transcription corepressor activityGO:0003682~chromatin bindingGO:0005524~ATP bindingGO:0003677~DNA bindingGO:0044212~transcription regulatory region DNA bindingGO:0005524~ATP bindingGO:0004843~thiol-dependent ubiquitin-specific protease activityGO:0000979~RNA polymerase II core promoter sequence-specific DNA binding
To validate findings obtained by NGS, out of the upregulated miRNAs in RSV exosomes, we selected 4 miRNAs from the top upregulated (miR-6087, miR-22, Let-7f, miR-21) and 4 miRNAs with >200 reads in RSV exosomes (Let-7a, miR-31, miR-320a and miR-4449), and examined their expression by RT-PCR in mock and RSV exosomes, as well as in mock- and RSV-infected cells. We found that miR-6087, Let-7a, Let-7f, miR-320a, miR-21, miR-4449, and miR-22 were all differentially expressed in RSV-infected A549 cells, compared to mock (Fig. 7a, left panel), and that their level in RSV exosomes was significantly higher than in virally infected cells (Fig. 7a, right panel). To determine if similar viral-induced changes in exosome miRNA composition were present in normal cells, RNA was extracted from SAECs infected with RSV and harvested at 24 h p.i. and from exosomes enriched from supernatants of mock and infected SAECs. Same miRNAs investigated in A549 cells were analyzed by RT-PCR. While there was not a significant induction of the selected miRNAs in RSV-infected cells vs mock (Fig. 7b, left panel), exosomes derived from infected cells showed a high enrichment of the same targets (Fig. 7b, right panel), similar to the either in RSV-exosomes or mock-exosomes is indeed associated with changes in exosome small RNA levels and composition that are not a simple reflection of changes occurring in cells upon RSV infection.Figure 7Validation of miRNA expression in cells and exosomes. RNA extracted from A549 cells (a) or SAE cells (b) mock- and RSV-infected for 24 h (left panels) and from mock and RSV exosomes (right panels) was subjected to miRNA analysis by RT-PCR. Fold changes in miRNA expression were determined by the 2-ΔΔCt method and represent mean ± SD normalized to small-nucleolar RNA U6 (RNU6).
The piRNAs have emerged as an important population of small RNAs involved in regulation of gene expression55. We observed that 52 piRNAs (>10 reads) were present in both mock and RSV infected exosomes, with 28 upregulated and 24 downregulated in RSV exosomes. Top up and downregulated piRNAs (≥4 fold) are listed in Table 6. We also found that 19 piRNAs were only present in RSV exosomes and 3 piRNAs exclusively detected in mock exosomes (Table 7). The complete list of piRNAs whose expression in exosomes was changed following infection is shown in Supplementary Table 5 (ST5).Table 6Top 15 highly up and downregulated piRNAs (≥4 fold) in RSV exosomes.S. No.piRNARead Count (Avg)Log2 FoldMock ExoRSV ExoChange1piR-32678127.4127150.887.7352piR-316230.6248.196.2853piR-347361.74128.936.214piR-361696.52231.035.1475piR-361706.52231.035.1476piR-4914322.5590.864.7147piR-337487.13108.23.9228piR-453717.13108.23.9229piR-49144126.891387.43.45010piR-3304333.7291.083.11011piR-3304433.7291.083.11012piR-345315.8824.212.04113piR-345325.8824.212.04114piR-345335.8824.212.04115piR-345345.8824.212.04116piR-591691364.926.02−7.82417piR-5065322.70.13−7.47318piR-5065422.70.13−7.47319piR-5065522.70.13−7.47320piR-5586522.70.13−7.47321piR-5622622.70.13−7.47322piR-3475610411.1882.62−6.97723piR-3437028.390.29−6.63724piR-4506521.570.29−6.24125piR-4024950.070.74−6.07026piR-4051459.651.03−5.85527piR-3603785.041.78−5.57828piR-3491629.190.63−5.52429piR-5664740.041.03−5.28030piR-5908910.750.29−5.236
Table 7piRNAs detected either in RSV-exosomes or mock-exosomes.S. No.piRNARead Count (Avg)Mock ExoRSV Exo1piR-317030254.192piR-336500209.913piR-409820209.394piR-320790209.215piR-319610208.916piR-335270153.927piR-335260153.028piR-367160127.969piR-367150127.6710piR-367140127.3911piR-364940127.0112piR-367130125.7713piR-350590124.9714piR-346080118.3715piR-485170118.3716piR-60668058.0717piR-61919046.0118piR-31701036.719piR-34221021.8720piR-6195019.15021piR-5955413.59022piR-6197411.120
Exosomes isolated from virally-infected cells induce proinflammatory mediator secretion in by-stander cellsExosomes have been shown to modulate the state of naïve cells by transferring viral or host components from neighboring infected cells to uninfected cells, leading to activation or inhibition of immune responses56,57. To determine whether exosomes isolated from RSV-infected A549 cells would exert a similar effect on innate cell responses, human monocytes were isolated from PBMCs and stimulated with purified exosomes to measure levels of eight cytokine and chemokine production in cell culture media. We found that exosomes isolated from virus-infected cells induced significantly higher secretion of MCP-1, IP-10, and RANTES in monocytes (Fig. 8a), compared to mock exosomes. To determine whether cytokine/chemokine release from exosome treated monocytes was due to Fc receptor mediated stimulation, monocytes were treated with Fc block reagent prior stimulation with exososomes and RANTES levels was measured in cell supernatant by ELISA. We found that RSV exosomes still induced a significant amount of RANTES secretion, compared to mock exosome-stimulated monocytes, indicating that chemokine release was not Fc receptor-dependent (Fig. 8b). We also tested A549 cells response to mock and RSV exosomes. Similar to monocytes, addition of RSV exosomes to A549 cells induced significantly higher levels of RANTES, IP-10 and TNF-α secretion, compared to mock exosomes (Fig. 8c), indicating that exosomes released from virus-infected cells carry biological signals that can alter innate immune responses during RSV infection.Figure 8Proinflammatory mediator secretion by monocytes and A549 cells in response to exosome stimulation. Human monocytes were stimulated with mock or RSV exosomes and harvested 24 h later to collect cell supernatants to measure cytokine and chemokine secretion by cytokine multiplex assay (a) or ELISA (b). Similar experiment was performed in A549 cells (c). Data are expressed as mean ± SEM, and ‘*’ indicates a statistically significant difference (P value < 0.05).
DiscussionThe present study is the first to characterize exosomes derived from RSV-infected A549 cells, which is widely used as an in vitro model of paramyxovirus infection of airway epithelial cell line. We found that RSV induces significant changes in exosome RNA cargo composition, as exosomes isolated from RSV-infected cells carry both viral proteins and viral RNA along with host mRNA and rRNA fragments and small non-coding RNAs, miRNAs, piRNAs and tRNAs, in a proportion different from exosomes isolated from mock-infected cells. We also found that exosomes isolated form infected cells could activate innate immune responses by inducing the release of proinflammatory mediators, however, they were not able to establish new infection in bystander cells.Characterization of exosome cargo composition and exosome functions requires a fairly pure population of exosomes. Although density gradient centrifugation is the most common procedure for exosome purification37, similar methods are used for RSV purification as well58 and density of RSV virions is quite close to the density of exosomes18,58. The two-step purification approach we used is similar to the one used in a recent study to prepare exosomes from HCV infected cells46, and yielded a population of vesicles of appropriate size, carrying multiple known exosome markers, devoid of replicating virus. Interestingly, exosomes isolated from RSV-infected cells showed higher levels of ALIX expression. The formation of the ILVs within the MVBs and the budding of enveloped virions share many features. Although RSV does not utilize for budding the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT) pathway, which is necessary for MVB formation and ILV release, differently from other viruses such as herpes, hepatitis B and C and Ebola59–61, our finding suggests that these pathways do interact with each other.Similar to what reported in other studies, RNA cargo of exosomes isolated from A549 cells was stable and resistant to degradation by ribonucleases62,63. Although it has been reported that exosomes may carry full length mRNA sequences along with small regulatory RNAs18,64, we found that most of the RNA content was represented by short RNA sequences of 25–250 nucleotides. An increasing number of studies on exosomes have shown that viruses can induce selective packaging of viral RNAs and proteins to exosomes29,31,44,61. Exosomes from HIV-1 infected cells carry viral transactivating response (TAR) element and viral microRNAs44,65, while exosomes released from HCV-infected cells contain HCV RNA, as well as HCV core proteins, and they are able to establish a productive infection in uninfected cells56. We found that exosomes released from virus-infected cells indeed carried both RSV RNAs and proteins, however they were not able to transmit infection to recipient cells, most likely due to inability to carry a competent full length genome.When we sequenced RNA from mock and RSV exosomes, we found in both populations a variety of small noncoding RNAs, along with other RNA type fragments such as rRNA. miRNAs are an important class of small regulatory RNAs associated with either degradation or translational repression of target mRNAs66,67. Multiple studies suggest that miRNAs do not always remain cellular, but are also released in to extracellular spaces via exosomes and can be readily detected in exosomes isolated from various bodily fluids68,69. In a recent study, exosomes released by Epstein Bar Virus (EBV)-infected cells were shown to deliver functional miRNAs to uninfected monocyte-derived dendritic cells and could mediate inhibition of expression of specific target genes31. RSV infection led to upregulation and downregulation, of a number of miRNAs in exosomes, many of them not known to be affected by the infection at the cellular level. Let-7f, -7i, miR-24, -31 and -221 have been shown to be upregulated in infected epithelial cells or nasal mucosa of infected infants70–72. miR-221 and Let-7f have been recently shown to modulate RSV replication in epithelial cells70,71, while miR-24 expression facilitate porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) infection73. Although most of the data were obtained in exosomes derived from a carcinoma-derived cell line, we found that the profile of enriched miRNAs was quite similar in exosomes isolated from infected normal SAECs, which we have extensively shown to behave very similar to A549 cells74–77.Target prediction analysis using TargetScan78 suggested that miR-6087 could possibly target multivesicular body subunit 12B (MVB12B), which is a component of the ESCRT-I complex and is involved in sorting of cargos into multivesicular bodies, and coiled-coil domain containing 36 (CCDC36) gene involved in positive regulation of host antiviral defense response. Similarly, miR-182-5p target include Flotillin 1 (FLOT-1) which is a component of exosomes, miR-24-3p may target apoptosis facilitator BCL2-like11, and interferon gamma (IFNG) genes. Argonaute RISC catalytic subunit 2 (Ago2) RNA was found to have a conserved sites for miR-99-5p in its 3′UTR. The Gene Ontology functional classification found that the most significant groups of targets of regulated miRNAs are related to DNA-binding, transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, alternative splicing, chromatin modification, and embryonic development. Extensive experimental studies are needed to determine the exact role of these miRNAs in general and specifically in RSV infection.Expression/recruitment to exosomes of other classes of regulatory RNA, namely piRNA and tRNA, were also affected by RSV infection. We found that several piRNAs were found to be up and downregulated in RSV exosomes. PiRNAs have been implicated in transcriptional gene regulation and transgenerational epigenetic inheritance55, however there is recent evidence in the literature that piRNA can regulate immune mediator expression, as in the case of piRNA-30840 which binds to IL-4 pre-mRNA via sequence complementarity and mediates its decay in nuclear exosomes79. The role of host cell piRNA generated during the course of virus infection, whether part of the exosome cargo or not, is currently unknown. RSV infection has been recently shown to induce tRNA fragment formation and one of them, corresponding to the 5′-half of mature tRNA derived from tRNA-Glu-CTC, displays target gene repression capabilities and promotes RSV replication80, suggesting an additional mechanism of small non-coding RNAs to modulate viral infection.Our study reveals a potential role for secreted exosomes in host-virus interactions during RSV infection. We found that exosomes released from RSV-infected cells induced enhanced release of the chemokines MCP-1, IP-10, and RANTES. Exosome-mediated export of host/viral components may have variety of outcomes and these observations suggest that sequestration and export of viral components/regulatory RNAs via exosomes possibly serve both as a viral strategy to evade pathogen sensing in infected cells and host strategy to induce innate responses in neighboring uninfected cells. For example, the activation of innate immune response may have antiviral effects via release of proinflammatory cytokines and apoptosis in recipient cells. On the other hand, it could also have proviral effects by having inhibitory effects on the release of proinflammatory cytokine/chemokines or by vesicular sequestration of otherwise immunostimulatory viral RNA/protein components from cellular sensing machinery of the recipient cell [reviewed in81–83]. The use of exosomes by RSV reveals a previously unappreciated and less characterized method by which the virus may deliver proteins and/or RNA to the host cell to manipulate host cell responses in uninfected bystander cells. A better understanding of how exosomes may influence RSV entry/replication and whether they facilitate or inhibit immune responses in the course of infection will provide valuable insights into host-pathogen interactions and possibly identify novel targets for therapy.Material and MethodsCell cultureHuman airway epithelial cell line A549 (human alveolar type II cell line -American Type Culture Collection, USA) were cultured and maintained in F12K culture media, supplemented with 10% FBS (HyClone; GE Healthcare USA), 100 U/mL penicillin G, 100 μg/mL streptomycin and 2 mM glutamine. Small alveolar epithelial cells (SAECs) (Lonza Inc., San Diego, CA), derived from terminal bronchioli of cadaveric donors, were grown in small airway epithelial cell (SAEC) growth medium, containing 7.5 mg/mL bovine pituitary extract (BPE), 0.5 mg/mL hydrocortisone, 0.5 µg/mL hEGF, 0.5 mg/mL epinephrine, 10 mg/mL transferrin, 5 mg/mL insulin, 0.1 µg/mL retinoic acid, 0.5 µg/mL triiodothyronine, 50 mg/mL gentamicin and 50 mg/mL bovine serum albumin. When SAE were used for RSV infection, they were changed to basal medium, not supplemented with growth factors, 6 h prior to and throughout the length of the experiment.Virus stock preparationFor preparation of RSV stocks, RSV Long strain was grown in Hep-2 cells and purified by centrifugation on discontinuous sucrose gradients as described previously84. The virus titer of the purified RSV pools was 8–9 log10 plaque forming units (PFU)/mL using a methylcellulose plaque assay. No contaminating cytokines were found in these sucrose-purified viral preparations85. LPS, assayed using the limulus hemocyanin agglutination assay, was not detected. Virus pools were aliquoted, quick-frozen on dry ice/alcohol, and stored at −80 °C until used.Infection of epithelial cells with RSVBefore infection, cells were maintained in exosome free culture media. At 80% to 90% confluence, cell monolayers were infected with RSV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1. An equivalent amount of 30% sucrose solution was added to uninfected cells, as a control. After RSV infection, cells were maintained in exosome free medium.Exosome purificationCulture media collected from 2 × 107 mock-infected or infected cells for 24 h was subjected to debris removal by centrifugation at 3,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The clear media was subjected to further cleaning by filtration through 0.22 μm sterile filter to remove any remaining debris. Exoquick-TC (System Biosciences, USA) reagent was added to the filtered media, mixed thoroughly and incubated overnight at 4 °C to precipitate the exosomes. Next morning the mixture was subjected to centrifugation at 1,500 g for 30 min, the exosome pellet was washed and resuspended in filtered PBS. To remove contaminating viral particles, exosomes were subjected to CD63 immuno-purification using CD63 exosome isolation reagents (System Biosciences, USA), following manufacturer’s instructions. The purified exosomes were eluted from the bound CD63 beads in an average of 300 μl and used for experimental procedures. Protein concentration was determined using a protein assay kit from Bio-Rad, USA. Purified exosomes were screened for presence of replicating virus, to avoid using contaminated preparations. This screening was done by plaque assay, inoculating a fraction of the exosome pool onto Hep2 cells. In the experiments performed to determine whether purified exosomes were able to establish a productive infection, we used pools devoid of replicating virus.Nanosight particle tracking analysisThe size and concentration of CD63 purified exosomes were analyzed using the NanoSight™ LM10-HS10 system (Malvern Instruments, UK). For analysis, a monochromatic laser beam (405 nm) was applied to the diluted exosome solution (1:100 in 0.02 μm filtered PBS) that was injected into a LM12 viewing unit using a computer controlled syringe pump. NanoSight™ tracking analysis (NTA) software version 2.3 was used to produce the mean and median vesicle size together with the vesicle concentration (in millions). Samples were measured 3 times to ensure reproducibility. The average yield of enriched exosomes collected from 2 × 107.Western blotExosome samples were lysed in buffer (0.5% Triton; 300 mM NaCl; 50 mM TrisNaCl) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Equal amount of proteins (about 10 μg) were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto polyvinylidene difluoride membrane. Nonspecific binding was blocked by immersing the membrane in Tris-buffered saline-Tween (TBST) blocking solution containing 5% skim milk powder. After a short wash in TBST, the membranes were incubated with the primary antibody overnight at 4 °C, followed by the appropriate secondary antibody diluted in TBST for 1 h at room temperature. Proteins were detected using enhanced-chemiluminescence assay. The primary antibody used for western blot were rabbit anti human CD63, mouse anti human ALIX (Abcam USA), and goat anti RSV (US Biologicals, USA).Exosome antibody arrayCharacterization of isolated exosomes was done by Exo-Check antibody array (System Biosciences, USA) following manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, similar quantities of exosome preparations were lysed and incubated with the array for the pre-printed antibodies to capture their respective exosome proteins. Later the array membranes were incubated with appropriate HRP conjugated secondary antibody diluted in TBST for 1 h at room temperature. Proteins were detected using enhanced-chemiluminescence assay. The array detects 8 known exosome markers namely CD63, CD81, ALIX, FLOT1, ICAM1, EpCam, ANXA5 and TSG101 and a GM130 cis-Golgi marker to monitor for other cellular compartment contamination.Extraction and biochemical characterization of RNARNA was purified from mock or RSV exosomes by phenol/chloroform extraction using all RNA-grade reagents. For this purpose, 150 uL of LETS buffer (0.1 M LiCl, 0.01 MNa2EDTA, 0.01 M Tris-Cl pH = 7.4, 0.2% SDS, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to 50 μL of exosomes resuspended in PBS followed by addition of 200 μL Ultra-Pure buffer saturated phenol pH = 7.4 (Life Technologies, USA). The mixture was vortexed vigorously and centrifuged for 2 min at 13,000 × g in a microcentrifuge at room temperature. The upper aqueous phase was collected. RNA was precipitated by addition of 0.3 M NaCl, 2 μg/mL glycogen (Ambion, Life Technologies, USA) and 75% EtOH, and overnight incubation at −20 °C. RNA was pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. RNA pellets were washed with ice-cold 75% ethanol and resuspended in 10–20 μL ddH2O. RNA concentration was determined by measuring the OD260 with the nanodrop (Thermo Scientific, USA) and used for various assays.RNA Length ProfilesTo look at length profiles of exosome-derived RNA, 2 μg of purified A549 total RNA and 1 μg of exosome RNA were first treated with 5 units DNase I (Thermo Scientific, USA) for 30 min at 37 °C.DNase was inactivated by 2.5 mM EDTA and incubation at 65 °C for 10 min followed by phenol-chloroform extraction and ethanol precipitation. RNA was resuspended in 4 μL ddH2O and RNA length profiles were obtained with the Agilent Bioanalyzer using the RNA 6000 Pico kit (Agilent Technologies, USA). To assess whether the exosomal membrane was protecting the vesicular RNA from degradation by exogenous RNases, intact exosomes, resuspended in PBS were treated with 0.4 mg/mL RNAse A for 30 mins at 37 °C in the presence or absence of 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). After incubation, samples were extracted with phenol/chloroform and RNA was ethanol precipitated. Samples were then treated with DNase, again phenol/chloroform extracted and ethanol precipitated, resuspended in 4 μL ddH2O and run on the Agilent Bioanalyzer to determine whether or not RNA had undergone degradation. RNA pico ladder (Agilent Technologies, USA) served as untreated RNA control along with A549 cell RNA.Reverse Transcription (RT)-PCRFor reverse transcription, 500 ng of isolated RNA was subjected to cDNA synthesis using SuperScript® III First-Strand Synthesis system (Thermo Scientific, USA) following manufactures instructions. 1ul cDNA was used as template for gene amplification. For PCR amplification of viral genes, REDTaq® ReadyMix™ PCR Reaction Mix (Sigma Aldrich, USA) was used. RSV N, M and NS1 genes were amplified using specific primers (sequence available upon request) that amplify both viral and corresponding antigenome sequences, under following thermal conditions: denaturation at 94 °C for 1 min, annealing at 55 °C for 1 min and extension at 72 °C for 1 min for 35 cycles and a final extension step at 72 °C for 7 min. The PCR product were subjected to agarose gel (1.5%) electrophoresis and analyzed under UV trans-illuminator. To determine whether exosomes would carry RSV specific genome and/or antigenome sequences, we used primers targeting intergenic regions of RSV genome as previously described86.To validate the upregulation of miRNA expression in RSV exosomes, miRNA expression was examined using miScript II cDNA synthesis reagents, miRNA primers and miScript SYBR Green PCR system (all from Qiagen Inc.), following manufactures instructions.Next Generation small RNA sequencingNext generation sequencing libraries were generated with the TailorMix Micro RNA Sample Preparation kit version 2 following manufacturer’s instructions (SeqMatic LLC, USA). Briefly, after RNA isolation, 3′-adapter was ligated to the RNA sample and excess 3′-adapters were removed subsequently. 5′-adapter was then ligated to the 3′-adapter ligated samples, followed by first strand cDNA synthesis. cDNA library was amplified and barcoded via enrichment PCR. Final RNA library was size-selected on an 8% TBE polyacrylamide gel and purified, quality checked with Bio-analyzer. Sequencing was performed on the Illumina HiSeq. 2500 platform at SR50 (Illumina Inc., USA).Sequencing data analysisAnalysis of sequencing data was done using Exosome small RNA-seq Analysis Kit 1.0 pipeline (Maverix Biomics, USA). Briefly, the raw sequencing reads were subjected to FastQC analysis to determine the quality of the data and make sure there were no sequencing issues and contaminants. After mapping the spike-in DNA with Bowtie2, the adapter sequences, primers and reads with quality score below 28 were trimmed using fastq-mcf of ea-utils87 and PRINSEQ88. Reads with a remaining length of less than 16 bp after trimming were discarded. Once the data preprocessing step removed N’s, trimmed sequencing adaptors, filtered reads for quality and length, FastQC was re-run to analyze trimmed reads to allow a before and after comparison. The improved pseudo single-end reads formed by merging the post-trimmed paired-end reads using SeqPrep89 were mapped to the human genome (GRCh37/hg19) using Bowtie90. Read coverage on forward and reverse strands for genome browser91 visualization was computed using SAMtools92 BEDtools93, and UCSC Genome Browser utilities91. Raw read counts were calculated for known gene categories including ncRNAs, antisense transcripts, coding and intronic regions of mRNAs, and repeats. Annotations of known genes were retrieved from miRBase release 2094, NCBI RefSeq95, Human lincRNA Catalog96, and UCSC Genome Browser91. The final steps of the analysis were abundance determination and differential expression analysis. Raw read counts were normalized across all samples and then used for pairwise differential expression analysis using DEseq97. Significant differentially expressed genes were determined by adjusted P-value with a threshold of 0.05. Log2 (fold change) between samples were hierarchically clustered using Pearson correlation. The original raw data (read counts) for all identified categories are presented in a supplementary file.Predicted targets of miRNA and functional analysisTo characterize potential targets of miRNAs identified in exosomes, we integrated the lists of microRNAs with target predictions available from the TargetScan database. We used version 7.1 of Targetscan, containing 1,387,426 human miRNA-target interactions. Candidate target genes of identified miRNAs were called whenever the gene was paired with the miRNA (or its variant) in the “default predictions” table of Targetscan. We have thus identified 4,816 potential targets of miRNAs upregulated in the exosomes following RSV infection, 925 potential targets of miRNAs downregulated in exosomes (see Table 2), and 2,122 targets of mRNAs highly abundant in exosomes (see Table 3).We characterized the most prevalent functions of the predicted target genes of the identified miRNAs using the Gene Ontology (GO) functional classification. The GO analysis has been performed using the DAVID 6.8 database. For each group of predicted target genes 1: Upregulated in exosomes following RSV infection, 2: Downregulated in Exosomes following RSV infection, 3: Targets of highly abundant miRNAs listed in Table 3. Because of the high number of genes identified as potential targets of upregulated miRNAs, we limited the set of genes to targets of at least two such miRNAs (2752 genes). The relative frequencies and statistical significance of enrichments were calculated against the entire human genome used as background. The results are presented in supplementary files, with a p-value threshold of detection set to 0.01.Monocyte and A549 cell stimulationPBMC were isolated using Ficoll Hypaque (GE Healthcare, USA). Monocyte isolations were done using EasySep human monocyte isolation kit without CD16 depletion as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Stemcell Technologies, Canada). The viability of cells after isolation was ≥96%, and the purity was >92%. Monocytes or A549 cells were left untreated or treated with 10 μg of exosomes for 24 h and supernatant was subjected to cytokine and chemokine measurements using a custom 8-plex Bioplex assay (BioRad, USA) containing eight targets, namely interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), interleukin- 9 (IL-9), Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1 (MCP-1), Macrophage Inflammatory Protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α), Macrophage Inflammatory Protein-1 beta (MIP-1β), IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10 (IP-10), and the chemokine CCL5/regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), as per manufacturer’s instructions.Statistical analysisThe data presented are representative of experiments that were performed a minimum of three times. The NGS sequencing data shown are average of three independent experiments. The raw read counts were normalized across all samples and then used for pairwise differential expression analysis using DEseq. Significant differentially expressed genes were determined by adjusted P-value with a threshold of 0.05. Log2 (fold change) between samples were hierarchically clustered using Pearson correlation. In miRNA validation RT-PCR experiments fold changes in miRNA expression were determined by the 2-ΔΔCt method and represent mean ± SD of 3-4 independent experiments. Data from the cytokine/chemokine release experiment in monocytes and A549 cells were expressed as mean ± SEM of experiments done in triplicate and the significance between samples was determined by statistical test one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using GraphPad Prism v4 (GraphPad Software). A P value <0.05 was considered to indicate a statistically significant difference.Data availability statementThe datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study, and not submitted as supplementary material, are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary Information
Supplementary Dataset 1
Supplementary Dataset 2
Supplementary Dataset 3
Supplementary Dataset 4
Supplementary Dataset 5
Supplementary Dataset 6
Supplementary Dataset 7
Supplementary Dataset 8
Supplementary Dataset 9
Supplementary Dataset 10



Title: Transmission of Respiratory Syncytial Virus genotypes in Cali, Colombia

1INTRODUCTIONRespiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the main causes of acute respiratory infection (ARI) among infants and the elderly. This virus is particularly associated to the admission into intensive care units in children under the age of two years, who develop either influenza‐like illness (ILI) or severe acute respiratory infection (SARI).
1
, 
2
, 
3
 Environments with low humidity and high temperatures favor the survival of RSV virions, while during the winter or rainy seasons, the number of infections increases, since more people remain indoors.
4
, 
5
 In temperate zones, this virus has seasonal transmission with onsets matching the coldest weeks of winter.
1
, 
6
, 
7
 In equatorial countries, RSV is involved in ARI cases all year round, with outbreaks in those rainy seasons of high humidity and low temperature.RSV has been classified in two types (RSV‐A and RSV‐B), based on genetic differences in the region encoding glycoprotein G, a protein that facilitates binding of the virus to epithelial cells of the airway.
7
 Within these types, 11 RSV‐A (GA1‐GA7, NA, SAA, ON, LBA) and 23 RSV‐B genotypes (GB1‐GB4, SAB1‐SAB4, URU1, URU2, BA1‐BA12, THB) have been established.
9
, 
10
 New RSV genotypes arise by mutations and duplications in the glycoprotein G gene and spread according to their antigenicity and virulence; these properties are also influenced by substitutions in the fusion protein.
8
, 
10
, 
11

In Colombia, RSV is endemically transmitted throughout the year, with higher occurrence during the rainy seasons.
12
, 
13
, 
14
 RSV‐A and RSV‐B circulate in a biannual rotational dynamic characterized by an increase in cases and hospitalizations when RSV‐A predominates.
15
 This observation results from a couple of studies and whether the prediction accommodates to demographics and climatic diversity across the country is yet to be established.
12
, 
14
, 
16
 Recently, 37 samples collected between 2000 and 2009 were genotyped for RSV.
17
 Researchers found genotypes RSV‐A‐GA2, RSV‐A‐GA5, and RSV‐B‐BA circulating in the country; however, data are scattered at random dates within this period, and most samples come from a single location.New variants of RSV‐A with duplications in glycoprotein G are replacing genotypes like those found in Colombia by Avila and coworkers. Among these, RSV‐A‐NA1 was associated with severe bronchiolitis in children,
18
 and RSV‐A‐ON1 has been linked to higher severity of ILI, to a sooner onset for hospitalization,
19
 and to longer stays in intensive care units.
20
 Genotype RSV‐A‐ON, initially detected in Ontario (Canada) in 2010, is believed to have virulence comparable to its more likely predecessors, genotypes RSV‐A‐GA2 and RSV‐A‐NA1,
19
, 
21
, 
22
 but with a higher dispersal capacity.
23
, 
24
 In spite of its broad distribution during recent years, no official record has been established on the presence of genotype RSV‐A‐ON in Colombia.According to the National Epidemiological Surveillance System (SIVIGILA), onsets of RSV transmission in Cali, main city in Valle del Cauca, coincide with those reported nationwide.
13
, 
25
 However, for 2016 and 2017, nationwide proportions of RSV in virus‐positive samples were 51% and 67%, while in Cali the RSV percentages among virus positives were 50% and 51%.
26
, 
27
 In 2017, increase of ILI‐SARI and augment of RSV and influenza A frequencies was observed in Valle del Cauca.
25
 Although many of these differences are attributable to methodological variations in RSV detection, microclimatic and virus‐derived factors may also account for RSV prevalence across the Colombian territory. This work deepens the analysis of the epidemiology of ILI‐SARI cases associated with RSV among infants in Cali, by reviewing the virus circulation patterns in 2014 ‐ 2018, and detecting genetic variants circulating in the city in years 2016‐2017.2METHODS2.1ARI cases related to RSV in CaliTo construct a RSV circulation curve in children in Cali, younger than two years of age, information contained in SIVIGILA, from 2014 to 2018, was analyzed. Data were provided by collaborators in charge, according to protocols for data protection. Cases of ILI are those of acute respiratory infections with fever ≥ 38°C and coughing symptoms of maximum seven days of evolution, requiring ambulatory care; SARI cases include patients with acute respiratory infections with a history of fever and coughing not longer than 10 days, who require hospitalization. Indirect immunofluorescence (IFI) is used for virus detection, as guided by Colombian Institute of Health. From 2014 to 2018, a total of 6,440 records were obtained for the region, 2,148 of them meeting the criteria for this study.2.2Samples for RSV genotypingSpecimens come from the biobank of respiratory samples processed in Laboratory for Diagnosis of Biological Agents (LDAB) at Universidad del Valle, from 2016 to 2018. Typification was done to samples randomly selected among the RSV positives, in children younger than two, from 2016 to 2017. Procedures had the approval number 015‐016 from the institutional human research ethics committee of College of Health from Universidad del Valle. For a subset of specimens, information on clinical evolution of the child was provided by the medical team. Screening for respiratory viruses in these samples was performed by IFI with the “Respiratory panel viral screening and identification IFA Kit,” (Light Diagnostics™; cat. # 3105) and “Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) direct immunofluorescence assay" (Light Diagnostics™; cat. Cat. # 3124) (Millipore Corporation, Livingston, UK). These kits detect influenza A, influenza B, RSV, adenovirus, parainfluenza 1, 2, and 3 and hMPV, by detecting viral antigens in infected cells. The immune preparations were analyzed under a fluorescence microscope using Evan's blue dye as contrast stain.2.3RSV subtype identificationThe type of virus was identified by amplification of the region encoding glycoprotein G by multiplex RT‐PCR. Viral RNA purified with viral RNA minikit kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA). Amplification was performed with the SuperScript III One‐Step RT‐PCR system (Life Technologies Corporation, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and primers set G1A/G2A for RSV‐A (5'‐TCAAGCAAATTCTGGCCTTA‐3 '/ 5'‐CTGCAATTCTGTTACAGCAT‐3')
28
 and G1B/BGR for RSV‐B (5'‐ACAAGCAAATTTTGGCCCTA‐3 '/ 5'‐TGCCCCAGRTTTAATTTCGTTC‐3').
28
, 
33
 These pairs of oligonucleotides generate bands of approximately 1,600 bp in RSV‐A and 1,400 bp in RSV‐B, which makes it possible to differentiate RSV types and identify dual infections using 1.5% agarose gels.2.4Genotype assignment and variability in selected samplesThe hypervariable region, a fragment of about 270 nucleotides for RSV‐A and 360 for RSV‐B, which encodes the second mucin‐rich region,
29
 was used for taxonomic and phylogenetic characterization. Amplicons were cleaned directly or using agarose gels (NucleoSpin® Gel and PCR Clean‐up, Macherey‐Nagel, Switzerland) and sequenced by the Sanger method with primer AL18 (5'‐TTGGCAATGATAATCTCAACYTC‐3 ') plus either primer G2A or BGR; primer AL18 was designed to bind in the central conserved domain of the glycoprotein G in all subtypes of RSV. Sequences were assembled by mapping to a reference in Geneious 6.1.6 [Biomatters, Newark, USA]. The resulting contigs were aligned by ClustalW to reconstruct phylogenies with the maximum likelihood method in MEGA 7.0.
30
 Reference sequences for the 11 recognized genotypes of RSV‐A and representatives of main genotypes of RSV‐B were included. Potential for N‐glycosylation was assigned to residues scoring more than 0.5 in at least two of predictors NetNglyc1.0, Glycomine and N‐GlyDE
31
; potential for O‐glycosylation was evaluated with Glycomine, as recommended.
32

2.5Relationship between RSV subtype and symptomsThe association between the main clinical manifestations and RSV type was analyzed by comparing proportions between independent groups. Qualitative variables (fever, coughing, etc) were compared using Fisher's exact test with Bonferroni correction. Student's test was used for the comparison of quantitative data (ie, length of stay in intensive care unit); values were taken as different when the corresponding test showed a probability value lower than 0.05.3RESULTS3.1Surveillance of RSV infections in CaliSurveillance for ILI‐SARI in the city has improved during the last five years, with the consequent augment in RSV reports. By 2014, these data were almost absent, but in the following years reports increased by four to eightfold. Between 2014 and 2018, a total of 6,440 ILI‐SARI cases were reported to SIVIGILA from Valle del Cauca, 4,083 of them autochthonous from Cali (Figure 1). Almost half of these cases, 52.61% (2,148), corresponded to children two years of age, or younger, RSV occurred in 20.02% of the 2,148 minors, 13.5% were positive for other viruses, and 66.5% of them did not have a viral infection. RSV frequency in these children was 23.5, 17.2, 18.4, 19.6, and 20.1, for 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018, respectively (Supplementary Table 1). Most RSV positives were reported from FVL, a facility that serves communities with higher income as compared to ESE‐LS.FIGURE 1
Study design. To describe circulation of RSV in children in Cali, records of influenza‐like illness or severe acute respiratory infection fed to SIVIGILA, from two sentinel centers, were filtered and analyzed. To identify variability of RSV, samples from children younger than two, submitted to the LDAB service in 2016‐2018 for a respiratory virus test, were used. A proportion was typified to identify RSV‐A and/or RSV‐B; subsequent analysis in LDAB data subsets included the following: a) genotypification in 14% of typified samples by sequencing the hypervariable region of glycoproteins G; b) scrutiny of medical records to evaluate the effect of RSV variability in symptomatologyIn children under two years, the male to female ratio of RSV infections was almost equal during all years (1:2.2, 1.45:1, 1:1.04, 1.26:1, and 1:1.08 for 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018, respectively) (Supplementary Table 1). Average age in the ILI‐SARI cases was 9.8 months, but 8.6 months was the average age for RSV positives. Among the 1,053 samples received at LDAB, 805 corresponded to children two years of age, or younger, with an average age of 7.2 months; the minors were predominantly males, with a male to female ratio of 1.9:1 among RSV positives; proportion of RSV among virus positives in here were 84.6%, 69.5%, and 78.6% in 2016, 2017, and 2018, respectively (Figure 2, Supplementary Table 1).FIGURE 2
RSV dynamics in the surveillance dataset from Cali (2014‐2018). Data include autochthonous ARI cases from Cali, in children two years of age, or younger. Left y‐axis indicates samples identified as RSV positives (red bars), having another respiratory virus (blue bars), or negative for the seven viruses routinely screened (gray bars). A black line shows the average precipitation per epidemiological week, with values indicated in the right y‐axisOnsets of RSV transmission in Cali match those periods with higher precipitation during the first semester of 2015, 2016, 2017, and 2018, although the more intense rainy seasons not necessarily correlate with a higher RSV transmission (see second semester results in 2014 and 2017, in Figure 2). Improvement in ARI surveillance is one of the reasons which may explain these results. While RVS cases drastically diminished after week 25 in 2014, 2015, and 2016, this reduction is less evident in 2017 and basically disappears by 2018.3.2Distribution of RSV‐A and RSV‐B in LDAB samplesDuring 2016, the majority of RSV positives occurred between epidemiological weeks 13 ‐ 25. In the first semester of 2017, there was an increase in cases of RSV between weeks 11 ‐ 13 (see Figure 3), but a second and more conspicuous onset was detected in weeks 19‐21, two weeks behind the main transmission peak of RSV in SIVIGILA data for 2017 (Figure 2). Although samples received at LDAB in 2018 were not subject to RSV typification, peaks of cases occurred during weeks 8‐12, with weeks 14 and 21 having the highest rate of RSV positives (data not shown).FIGURE 3
Distribution of RSV cases identified in samples processed in LDAB, in 2016 and 2017. The black line indicates the overall number of RSV cases detected per week; bars show the number of samples typified as RSV‐A (red) or RSV‐B (blue) in randomly selected weeksRSV‐A was detected in 77% (30/39) of the samples, almost every week of 2016, while RSV‐B appeared only in a few weeks, scattered across the first semester of this year. For 2017, frequency of RSV‐A dropped to 58% (43/74) and distribution of RVS‐B extended to many weeks in both semesters. Hence, co‐circulation of the two types of RSV was detected (Figure 3) with RSV‐A predominating at the beginning but the proportion of the two types was balanced during most of 2017. Neither type can be blamed for the abrupt increase in RSV recorded in week 13 of 2016, nor for the peaks of highest transmission occurring in weeks 11 and 20 of 2017 (Figure 3).3.3RSV‐A and RSV‐B genotypes in Cali 2016 ‐ 2017Genotype of RSV‐A detected during both years was ON, while RSV‐B sequences belong to the BA clade (see Figure 4A and 4B). Within the ON major clade, two minor clades, the ON1 and ON2, have been proposed. ON1 can be subdivided into at least four subclades (ON1.1, ON1.2, ON1.3, and ON1.4)
23
, 
33
 and sequences from Cali fit the ON1.1 and ON1.2 clades, but no representatives of the ON1.3 were found. Similarly, BA genotype of RSV‐B has evolved into multiple subclades, including BA1 to BA10, plus additional groups recently proposed.
9
, 
10
 Sequences from Cali collapsed into a subclade containing representatives of BA lineages classified by diverse authors as BA9, BA12, BA13, or even TBH, according to their respective approach; the isolates analyzed here correspond to the newest genotypes of RSV‐B and have probably diverged from those previously found circulating in Colombia.
17

FIGURE 4
Clustering of RSV‐A and RSV‐B specimens from Cali. (A) Phylogenetic grouping of the hypervariable region of RSV‐A compared to reference sequences of ancient and novel RSV‐A genotypes, plus an extended view of ON lineage. (B) Phylogenetic reconstruction of hypervariable region of RSV‐B, showing clusters of BA genotypes. Sequences coming from this work are indicated with red dots. Both phylogenies were constructed in MEGA7 using the maximum likelihood method based on the general time reversible model and considering all nucleotides as informative; the unit for branch lengths is number of nucleotide substitutions per site 30
3.4Amino acid profile in the hypervariable region of glycoprotein GAs observed in Figure 5A, the fragment of glycoprotein G sequenced for these samples revealed the duplication characteristic of ON variants (residues 282‐306). There were 12 variable sites compared to five in the original region (residues 259‐289). However, the variation per site is low, as ten of the variable positions detected in the duplication are unique to one sequence. Residues prone to be N‐glycosylated occur before this duplication, and four of them (N237, N242, N251, and N255) are highly conserved among isolates from Cali, ON variants and representatives of NA1 genotype; an additional site with potential for N‐glycosylation occurs in a few isolates from Cali. Amino acids with potential for O‐glycosylation are placed near or in the duplication itself; except for LDAB‐369, which has two of these residues, isolates from Cali have four or more residues that cross the threshold for O‐glycosylation potential, similar to KJ710391‐NA1 and the ON variants referenced.FIGURE 5
Analysis of glycosylation potential in the second mucin‐rich domain of glycoprotein G. (A) Alignment of residues 232‐321 in RSV‐A isolates from Cali compared to reference sequences of ON, LBA1, and NA1 clades. (B) Alignment of amino acids 214‐307 of RSV‐B isolates from Cali compared to reference sequences of BA and GB clades. Sequences were aligned by MUSCLE in MEGA7 and manually edited. Residues shadowed in yellow and blue are those with a predicted potential of N‐glycosylation and O‐glycosylation higher than 0.5, respectivelyAlignment in Figure 5B shows the duplication characteristic of the BA clade and how it is involved in the diversification of glycoprotein G. All clades contain conserved sites for O‐glycosylation at the c‐terminal, while N‐glycosylation sites, also conserved, are located before and after the duplicated region. Interestingly, the duplicated region in these variants is not accumulating residues prone to glycosylation and variability is low, if compared to the duplicated stretch in RSV‐A variants.3.5RSV genotype and clinical manifestationsAbout one third of samples positive for RSV correspond to cases whose medical records were available (Supplementary Table 1). Overall, RSV is causing mild to moderate infections that manifest with cough, nasal congestion, and respiratory difficulty. Hospitalization was required in 75% of these cases. Males were slightly more prone to RSV‐A (odds ratio 1.7, 95% CI 0.50 ‐ 5.73). In spite of the fact that the most common viral type in this subgroup is RSV‐A, comparison of proportions indicates that the viral type is not related to a greater severity of symptoms; children infected by RSV‐A tend to be younger and to need oxygen for a longer period of time. However, p‐values do not support these periods of time as different clinical behaviors (Supplementary Table 2).4DISCUSSIONRSV transmission pattern in Cali is differentiable from that described in national conglomerates and data exclusively from Bogotá, although some characteristics of the main transmission season are common. In Bogotá, where historically more data are captured by SIVIGILA,
34
 RSV prevalence ranges between 30% and 52%, with onsets correlated with the first rainy season, during the months of March‐May.
16
 Bogotá has an average temperature of 13.1°C and relative humidity ranging from 77% to 83%, whereas some other main cities in the country are coastal or inter‐Andean, with average temperatures above 20°C and longer dry seasons. Prevalence of RSV in the warmest cities ranges between 7% and 13%, without a clear link to rainy seasons.
16

According to oceanic Niño indexes, a variable that uses changes of oceanic temperature in the Pacific area influenced by El Niño Southern Oscillation to define warm (“el niño”) and cold (“la niña”) intervals, the most recent warm period was recorded for 2016, followed by a subtle decrease of temperatures in 2017 and 2018
36
; 2014 and 2015 were also cold periods in the Niño1 + 2 sector in which the Colombian Pacific is located. Rainy patterns for 2014 and 2015 allow to differentiate dry seasons, here taken as those with precipitation lower than 40 mm (Figure 1). However, higher precipitation seems to be becoming more frequent and less seasonal, which may explain the continued transmission of RSV observed in 2018 and, in part, the higher record of ARI cases in 2016, 2017, and 2018.The pattern of transmission of RSV observed in Cali is co‐circulation of the two virus types, which implies that infants are at risk of reinfection.
35
 However, no cases of co‐infection with multiple genotypes were observed. Putting together SIVIGILA data with RSV types detected per week, the trend is to have longer transmission seasons of both genotypes. Whether this is an effect of the above‐mentioned climatological phenomenon could be evaluated by expanding RSV variability surveillance. Evidence accumulated here suggests that in Cali, RSV transmission seasons are changing to last all year round.RSV‐A samples characterized clearly belong to the contemporary ON clades.
23
, 
33
 The same was obtained for RSV‐B, with variants that group to the BA9 and more recent subclades.
9
 This variability has been described in different parts of the world, and therefore, in Cali the transmission of RSV does not occur as an isolated event, but rather as a result of the successful genotypes spreading throughout all continents.We found no association of the type of virus with disease severity. However, findings are to be taken cautiously as the small number of samples analyzed here could be misleading. Similarly, associations between RSV‐A‐ON and SARI, as previously reported,
19
, 
20
, 
24
 could not be evaluated with the amount of genetic variation obtained in this study.Since glycoprotein G is one of the main antigens on the surface of RSV, its variability is directly reflected in viral fitness. In the second hypervariable region, known to support a considerable amount of carbohydrates,
37
 the glycosylation potential showed no particular glycosylation profile as a characteristic of the newest RSV variants. However, a series of conserved threonine O‐glycosylation sites were spotted as likely indispensable for the functioning of this domain. The duplicated region of RSV‐A augments the amount of N‐glycosylation sites, but this is not the case in RSV‐B variants. In RSV‐B variants, the duplication increased the distance between conserved glycosylation sites; whether this has structural effects, such as an improvement in the affinity of glycoprotein to membranes, or an evasion of immune response, is yet to be established.This work represents an update of RSV epidemiology in Colombia and describes, for the first time, the circulation of ON1 genotype in the country. Unlike samples collected from Bogotá and a few other places before 2010, only RSV genotypes with duplications of glycoprotein G were found in Cali, suggesting a complete establishment of these genotypes in the country. There was no association between RSV type or genotype to the severity of SARI, which may also indicate that clinical manifestations depend on patient's risk factors that promote RSV infection complications.CONFLICT OF INTERESTWe declare no conflict of interest.Supporting informationTableS1‐S2Click here for additional data file.


Title: Decoding respiratory syncytial virus morphology: distinct structural and molecular signatures of spherical and filamentous particles

IntroductionRespiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a leading cause of acute lower respiratory tract infections, especially in infants, young children, and the elderly (Mufson et al., 1973; WHO, 2025). Globally, RSV is responsible for ~3.6 million hospitalizations and about 100,000 deaths in children under 5 each year (WHO, 2025). It also causes significant morbidity and mortality in older adults (WHO, 2025). RSV is an enveloped, negative-sense RNA virus (family Pneumoviridae) that exhibits pleomorphic virion morphology, budding from infected cells as both spherical and filamentous particles. Spherical RSV virions are typically 150–300 nm in diameter, whereas filamentous forms can be as thin as 60–100 nm and extend up to 10 μm in length (Berthiaume et al., 1974; Roberts et al., 1995). Filamentous morphologies are also observed in other respiratory viruses, such as influenza and parainfluenza viruses, and their emergence may be modulated by viral structural genes and host factors including the cytoskeleton and lipid microdomains (Roberts et al., 1998). In the case of influenza A virus, the matrix protein M1 is a principal determinant of virion shape (Shaikh et al., 2012). By contrast, RSV filament formation appears to rely primarily on viral proteins (e.g., the matrix protein M) and can occur even when actin polymerization is inhibited (Shaikh et al., 2012) highlighting that the exact molecular determinants of RSV morphology remain to be elucidated (Shaikh et al., 2012). Previous studies have shown that activation of the host small GTPase RhoA and the incorporation of RSV assembly sites into cholesterol-rich lipid rafts promote the formation of filamentous virus and the development of syncytia (Gower et al., 2001; McCurdy and Graham, 2003). RhoA signaling in infected cells facilitates the formation of long viral filaments that protrude from the cell surface and disrupting RhoA or depleting membrane cholesterol results in shorter or absent filaments and reduced cell–cell fusion (Gower et al., 2005). Selective budding from lipid raft microdomains appears to drive filamentous virion assembly in microvilli, which is associated with enhanced cell-to-cell spread (syncytium formation) (Gower et al., 2005). Thus, while RSV’s pleomorphic nature is well recognized, the precise viral and host factors governing whether RSV buds as a filament or a sphere are not well defined and require further investigation (Shaikh et al., 2012).Understanding how virion morphology influences RSV infection and pathogenesis is important because different particle forms may play distinct roles during infection. Filamentous virions can remain attached to infected cells and form physical bridges to neighboring cells (Gower et al., 2005), enabling direct cell-to-cell transmission of infection without diffusing through extracellular space. This mode of spread via syncytium formation likely helps RSV evade certain immune defenses, such as neutralizing antibodies, by avoiding exposure of virions to the extracellular environment (Bitko et al., 2003; Partlow et al., 2025). Indeed, cell fusion (syncytium formation) is considered an efficient mechanism of viral dissemination between cells (Bitko et al., 2003). Spherical virions, in contrast, are more compact and may be better suited for cell-free transmission (for example, in respiratory droplets or aerosols) due to their smaller size and use of fewer resources per particle (Partlow et al., 2025). Knowledge of these morphology-specific roles is important for vaccine development and antiviral strategies, as interventions might need to target both forms. For instance, if filamentous particles preferentially mediate cell-to-cell spread and immune evasion, antiviral approaches that disrupt filament formation could limit RSV’s ability to form syncytia and persist in host tissues. Likewise, a better understanding of RSV morphology could inform manufacturing of live-attenuated vaccines by ensuring the production of the most immunogenic or transmissible form.In this study, we set out to isolate and characterize the spherical and filamentous forms of RSV and to compare their structural and molecular features. We developed a velocity sedimentation approach to separate RSV particles by morphology and then analyzed each population’s protein composition, lipid composition, and genome content. By defining distinct signatures of spherical vs. filamentous RSV, we aim to shed light on how virion morphology might influence viral infectivity, pathogenicity, and interaction with the host. These insights could provide the basis for novel antiviral strategies that target virion assembly or exploit the vulnerabilities associated with each morphological form.Materials and methodsVirus and cell cultureRSV strain A2 (subgroup A) was obtained from Dr. Robert Chanock (NIH, Bethesda, MD) and propagated in HEp-2 cells as described previously (Graham et al., 1988). HEp-2 cells (ATCC CCL-23) were maintained in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (EMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM L-glutamine, 50 μg/mL gentamicin, and 100 U/mL penicillin G, at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere.Virus infection and harvestHEp-2 cell monolayers in T-162 flasks (growth area 162 cm²) were infected with RSV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.5. The virus was allowed to adsorb for 1 hour at 37°C, then fresh culture medium was added. After 72 hours of incubation (when extensive cytopathic effect was observed but before complete cell detachment), the infected cell cultures were harvested for virus purification.Sucrose gradient separation of RSV particlesTo separate spherical and filamentous RSV particles, we developed a velocity sedimentation method using a continuous sucrose gradient. Infected cell suspensions (including cells and supernatant) were layered onto a 15–60% (w/v) continuous sucrose gradient prepared in TM buffer (50 mM Tris, 10 mM MgSO4, pH 7.4). Gradients were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C in a Sorvall SureSpin 630 swinging-bucket rotor. Twelve 2-ml fractions were carefully collected from the top of the gradient. Each fraction was analyzed for infectious virus by plaque assay on HEp-2 cells (see below) to identify peaks of viral infectivity.Plaque assayRSV titers in gradient fractions were determined by plaque assay on HEp-2 cell monolayers (80% confluence in 12-well plates), as described by Graham et al. (1988). Serial ten-fold dilutions of each sample were prepared in EMEM and applied to cells for 2 hours at 37°C. The inoculum was then removed, and cells were overlaid with 0.8% methylcellulose in maintenance medium. After 5 days of incubation, monolayers were fixed with 10% formalin and stained with 1% crystal violet to visualize plaques. Plaque-forming units (PFU) per ml were calculated for each fraction.Concentration of peak fractionsFractions corresponding to the major infectivity peaks were pooled or processed individually as needed for downstream analysis. To concentrate virus particles from these fractions, samples were subjected to ultracentrifugation. Each selected fraction (~2 mL) was diluted in TM buffer and pelleted at 14,000 rpm (approximately 20,000 × g) for 10 minutes at 4°C in a Beckman ultracentrifuge. The virus pellet was resuspended in a small volume (50–100 µL) of TM buffer for further analyses.Immunofluorescence microscopyAliquots of the concentrated peak fractions were used for immunofluorescence microscopy to visualize virion morphology. A 50 µL drop of each sample was smeared onto a glass coverslip and allowed to air dry. The attached virus particles were fixed by incubation in 3.7% formaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for 30 minutes at room temperature. After three rinses in PBS, samples were blocked with 5% non-fat dry milk in PBS for 30 minutes. RSV particles on the coverslip were stained with a mouse monoclonal antibody against the RSV fusion glycoprotein F (Maine Biotechnology Services) as the primary antibody (detects both cleaved and uncleaved F). After washing, samples were incubated with rhodamine-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) secondary antibody (ThermoFisher) for 1 hour. Following three washes with PBS containing 0.1% Tween-20, the coverslips were mounted on glass slides with Fluoromount-G. Specimens were examined using a Zeiss AxioPlan 2 fluorescence microscope. Images were captured with a Hamamatsu ORCA-ER digital camera and processed using Zeiss imaging software.Transmission electron microscopyTo confirm particle morphology, gradient peak fractions were examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Advanced Biotechnologies Inc., Columbia, MD). Sample aliquots (20 µL) from the spherical and filamentous peaks were deposited on carbon-coated 300-mesh gold grids. After 5 minutes, excess liquid was blotted, and the grids were immediately negatively stained with 2% phosphotungstic acid (pH ~7.0) for 30 seconds. Grids were air-dried and then observed with a JEOL 1200EX TEM at an accelerating voltage of 80 kV. For size calibration, 112 nm latex beads were included as a reference on some grids. Digital micrographs were taken at 50,000–65,000× magnification. Particle lengths and diameters were measured from TEM images to distinguish spherical vs. filamentous forms.Western blot analysis of viral proteinsThe protein composition of RSV in each fraction was analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Western blot. Gradient fractions (1–12) were first concentrated by ultracentrifugation as described above. Each virus pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent, Pierce Biotechnology) and the total protein content was quantified using a bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce). Equal amounts of viral protein from each fraction were mixed with Laemmli sample buffer, boiled, and separated on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Proteins were transferred to PVDF membranes (Millipore). The blots were probed with a rabbit anti-RSV polyclonal antibody (Chemicon) that detects multiple RSV structural proteins, followed by an HRP-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (GE Amersham). Bound antibodies were detected using an enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) substrate (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Chemiluminescent signals were captured on X-ray film. For quantification, digital images of the developed films were analyzed using ImageJ software. Densitometry was performed on each lane to measure relative band intensities corresponding to specific RSV proteins (the viral fusion protein F0/F1 and major internal proteins N, P, M). Care was taken to ensure signals were in the linear range of detection; background was subtracted, and no additional brightness/contrast adjustments were applied prior to analysis.Phospholipid analysis by HPLC–mass spectrometryLipid extraction and analysis were performed to compare the envelope lipid composition of spherical vs. filamentous RSV. Viral membrane lipids were extracted from purified particle preparations (pooled peak fractions) using the Folch method (Folch et al., 1957), which partitions lipids into a chloroform-methanol phase. The extracted lipids were dried under nitrogen and re-dissolved in chloroform: methanol (2:1) containing a mixture of deuterated internal standards for quantification. Lipid samples were analyzed by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS), as described by Kim et al. (1994). Briefly, samples were injected onto a C18 analytical column (150 × 2.0 mm, 5 µm particle, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA). Phospholipid molecular species were separated using a gradient mobile phase of water and methanol-hexane (with 0.5% ammonium hydroxide) and detected with a Hewlett-Packard 1100 MSD mass spectrometer. Key phospholipid classes analyzed included sphingomyelins (SM), phosphatidylserines (PS), phosphatidylcholines (PC), and phosphatidylinositols (PI). Peak integration and quantification were done against the internal standards to determine the relative abundance of specific lipid molecular species in each sample.RNA extraction and quantitative real-time PCRTo determine the viral genomic RNA content in each virus population, we performed quantitative real-time RT-PCR targeting the RSV N gene. Viral RNA was extracted from the purified peak fractions (spherical and filamentous) using RNAzol-B reagent (Isotex Diagnostics) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Extracted RNA was resuspended in RNase-free water and quantified by spectrophotometry. For cDNA synthesis, 1 µg of viral RNA from each sample was reverse transcribed using Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) with an RSV N gene-specific primer (N2, see below). The resulting cDNA was treated with RNase H and used as template for PCR. Primers and probe were selected based on published sequences (Hu et al., 2003) to specifically detect RSV nucleocapsid (N) gene RNA. The forward primer N1 (positions 19–45 of the N gene, 5′-GCTCTTAGCAAAGTCAAGTTGAATGA-3′) and reverse primer N2 (positions 81–101, 5′-TGCTCCGTTGGATGGTGTATT-3′) amplify a 63-nt segment. The TaqMan probe NPB48 (positions 47–79, 5′-ACACTCAACAAAGATCAACTTCTGTCATCCAGC-3′) was labeled with 6-FAM at the 5′ end and TAMRA at the 3′ end. Primers were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies and the probe by Applied Biosystems. Quantitative PCR was performed in 50 µL reactions containing cDNA (equivalent to 0.05 µL of original sample RNA), Platinum Quantitative PCR SuperMix-UDG (Invitrogen), 0.5 µM of primers N1 and N2, and 0.2 µM probe. Amplification and real-time fluorescence detection were carried out on an MJ Research Opticon 2 thermocycler with the following cycling conditions: UDG incubation at 50°C for 2 min, initial denaturation at 95°C for 2 min, followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 60°C for 30 s. Fluorescence data were collected during the 60°C annealing/extension phase each cycle. Standard curves were generated using ten-fold serial dilutions of a plasmid containing the RSV N gene, to enable calculation of genome copy numbers in each sample. All reactions were run in triplicate, and no-template and no-RT controls were included to confirm specificity.ResultsSeparation of spherical and filamentous RSV particlesRSV grown in cell culture was successfully separated into two distinct populations by velocity sedimentation on a sucrose gradient. Traditional purification methods such as ultracentrifugation through discontinuous gradients (e.g., iodixanol) often yield mixed viral populations (Gias et al., 2008). In our continuous sucrose gradient (15–60%), two peaks of infectivity were observed in the plaque assay of gradient fractions, corresponding to fraction 2 and fraction 6 (
Figure 1
, Panel 1). Fraction 2 (upper band) and fraction 6 (lower band) contained the majority of viral PFUs, suggesting that RSV particles partition into two subsets by sedimentation rate. Fluorescence microscopy of these fractions stained for the F glycoprotein revealed that fraction 2 consisted predominantly of small, punctate particles consistent with spherical or short-filament virions, whereas fraction 6 was enriched in long filamentous particles (
Figure 1
, Panel 2; A, B). Transmission EM further confirmed the morphology: fraction 2 contained mostly spherical virions ~200 nm in diameter (
Figure 1
, Panel 2; C), while fraction 6 contained abundant filamentous virions ranging from 1–10 µm in length (
Figure 1
, Panel 2; D). Interestingly, at high magnification the viral envelope in both preparations displayed a regular patterned structure. In particular, the filamentous virions showed a unique “honeycomb” surface lattice, likely reflecting a symmetrical arrangement of the viral envelope glycoproteins (F and G) on the virion surface. This ordered “grid-like” array of surface spikes has not been previously described for RSV (Unpublished data). Further structural analysis (e.g., by cryo-electron tomography) will be needed to confirm this novel observation.Figure 1Separation of spherical and filamentous RSV particles by sucrose gradient velocity sedimentation. Panel 1: Infectivity profile of gradient fractions. RSV was grown for 72 h and loaded onto a 15–60% continuous sucrose gradient. Twelve fractions were collected after centrifugation. Plaque assays of each fraction (PFU/mL on the y-axis) revealed two distinct peaks of infectious virus (major peaks at fraction 2 and fraction 6). Panel 2;
(A, B): Immunofluorescence images of virus in peak fractions. Fraction 2 (A) shows mostly spherical particles (examples indicated by arrowheads), whereas fraction 6 (B) is enriched in filamentous particles (arrows). RSV particles were stained with anti-F monoclonal antibody and rhodamine-labeled secondary antibody (red). Scale bar = 10 µm. Panel 2;
(C, D): Transmission EM of peak fractions confirms particle morphology. (C) Representative spherical RSV virions from fraction 2 (diameters ~200 nm). (D) Representative filamentous RSV from fraction 6 (lengths ≥1 µm). Data represent three independent experiments yielding similar results. Scale Bar =100 nm (C, D).Protein composition of RSV spherical vs. filamentous particlesWe next compared the viral protein composition of the separated spherical and filamentous RSV populations. Limited information has been available in the literature regarding how the protein content of RSV might differ by virion morphology. To address this, we performed Western blot analysis on the gradient fractions using polyclonal antibodies that recognize RSV structural proteins. Viral proteins were detected across multiple fractions, but distinct patterns emerged for the two peaks. 
Figure 2A
 shows a representative blot of RSV proteins in fractions 1–12. Fractions 2 and 6 (the infectivity peaks) both contained the major RSV structural proteins, including the fusion protein F (present as uncleaved F0 and cleaved F1 subunits), the nucleocapsid protein N, the phosphoprotein P, and the matrix protein M, among others. Densitometric quantification of band intensities from three independent experiments is summarized in 
Figures 2B, C
. We found that the uncleaved fusion protein precursor F0 was significantly more abundant (relative to total protein) in the filamentous particle fractions (peaking at fraction 6–7) than in the spherical particle fraction (fraction 2). Conversely, the cleaved F1 subunit of the fusion protein was relatively enriched in spherical particles. This indicates that filamentous RSV virions tend to carry more uncleaved F, whereas spherical virions carry more processed fusion protein, suggesting a difference in maturation or activation state of the fusion machinery between the two forms.Figure 2RSV protein composition in spherical versus filamentous virions. (A) Western blot of RSV proteins in gradient fractions 1–12. Blot was probed with anti-RSV polyclonal antibodies that detect major structural proteins. Key bands corresponding to F0 (unprocessed fusion protein), F1 (cleaved fusion protein subunit), N (nucleocapsid), P (phosphoprotein), and M (matrix) are indicated. (B) Densitometric analysis of envelope glycoproteins F0 and F1 in spherical (fraction 2) vs. filamentous (fractions 6–7) particles. The filamentous-rich fractions contain a higher proportion of uncleaved F0 relative to cleaved F1, whereas spherical particles have more F1. (C) Densitometry of internal proteins N, P, and M shows higher levels in filamentous particle fractions than in spherical. Data represent mean band intensity (arbitrary units) from three independent experiments (error bars indicate range).In addition, the major internal proteins showed quantitative differences: the N, P, and M proteins were all found at higher levels in fraction 6 (filamentous) compared to fraction 2 (spherical) (
Figure 2C
). For example, the matrix protein M, which forms the internal virion layer underlying the envelope, was present at notably higher amounts in filamentous virions. The greater abundance of these proteins in filamentous particles could simply reflect the larger size (and thus greater total protein content) of filaments. Indeed, a single filamentous virion (which can be several microns long) has a much greater mass than a ~200 nm spherical particle, so it would inherently contain more copies of each structural protein. Thus, the higher N, P, and M signals do not necessarily indicate a higher concentration of those proteins per unit volume of virion; rather, they likely scale with particle size. Interestingly, the phosphoprotein P exhibited a bimodal distribution, with peaks in both fraction 2 and fraction 6 that correlated with the highest infectious titers. This observation raises the possibility that P protein levels might be linked to infectivity, perhaps by influencing the assembly of the viral polymerase complex in new virions, although further studies would be needed to confirm any functional role.Overall, our analysis confirmed that both spherical and filamentous RSV particles contain the full complement of viral structural proteins, but the relative representation of certain proteins (such as F0 vs F1, and the quantities of N/P/M) differs between the two morphologies. These protein composition differences could have functional implications. For instance, a higher content of uncleaved F0 in filaments might affect their fusion activity or stability, since F0 must be cleaved to F1 to trigger membrane fusion. The presence of more M protein in filaments might relate to the role of the matrix in assembling and maintaining a long filamentous structure; in other viruses like influenza, matrix oligomerization is critical for filament formation (Shaikh et al., 2012). Likewise, N and P are components of the nucleocapsid; their higher levels in filaments could reflect multiple genome copies packaged (see below) or a structural requirement for stabilizing the extended ribonucleoprotein in a filamentous virion.Lipid composition of RSV spherical vs. filamentous particlesEnveloped viruses like RSV acquire their membrane from the host cell during budding, and the lipid composition of the virion envelope can influence properties such as particle budding efficiency, stability, and cell entry. Many enveloped viruses preferentially bud from cholesterol-rich lipid rafts in the plasma membrane, which can concentrate viral glycoproteins and facilitate assembly (Ripa et al., 2021). RSV in particular has been reported to utilize lipid microdomains for assembly: filamentous RSV particles bud almost exclusively from lipid raft regions, whereas spherical particles can bud from both raft and non-raft regions (McCurdy and Graham, 2003). To examine whether the two forms of RSV have different lipid makeups, we performed quantitative lipidomics on purified spherical and filamentous virions (corresponding to peak fractions 2 and 6). Both forms of RSV showed lipid profiles characteristic of raft-derived membranes. In both spherical and filamentous particles, the relative content of cholesterol was high, and we observed enrichment of sphingomyelin (SM) and phosphatidylserine (PS), along with a corresponding lower proportion of phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylinositol (PI), compared to typical non-raft cell membrane composition. These features confirm that both morphologies incorporate significant amounts of raft-associated lipids into their envelope, consistent with the idea that RSV assembly occurs in cholesterol-rich microdomains.Despite these overall similarities, we detected notable differences in specific phospholipid molecular species between spherical and filamentous RSV. 
Figure 3A
 summarizes the comparative lipidomic analysis. Spherical particles had higher levels of certain phospholipid species, for example: 16:0–20:4 PLS (a phosphatidylserine containing palmitic acid and arachidonic acid), 16:0 SM (palmitoyl sphingomyelin), and two particular PC species (18:1–20:2 PC and a mixed 18:1–22:4/18:0–22:5 PC). In contrast, filamentous particles showed elevated levels of other lipid species, including 16:0–16:1 PLS and 16:1–16:1 PLS (phosphatidylserines containing palmitic and palmitoleic or dipalmitoleic acids), 24:0 SM (lignoceroyl sphingomyelin), and a specific PI species (16:0–18:2/16:1–18:1 PI). These differences suggest that the two forms of RSV incorporate lipids in different proportions, which could affect the biophysical properties of the virion envelope. For instance, sphingomyelin and saturated fatty acids confer more ordered, less fluid membrane domains, which might help maintain the structural integrity of long filaments. Phosphatidylserine exposure on the outer leaflet of viral envelopes is known to influence immune recognition, as some viruses exploit PS to bind host receptors (e.g., TIM/TAM family) and dampen immune responses (Meertens et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2021). If filamentous RSV particles have a different PS content or distribution, this could potentially modulate how they interact with phagocytic cells or complement compared to spherical particles.Figure 3RSV lipid composition of spherical vs. filamentous virions. Lipids were extracted from RSV particles using the Folch method (Folch et al., 1957) and analyzed by reversed-phase HPLC-electrospray ionization mass spectrometry with a C18 column (Kim et al., 1994). Lipid extracts, spiked with d35-labeled phospholipids as internal standards, were directly injected onto the column and separated using a mobile phase containing water and 0.5% ammonium hydroxide in methanol-hexane. Detection was performed on a Hewlett-Packard HPLC-MS Series 1100 MSD instrument. (A) Specific phospholipid molecular species differentially enriched in spherical (blue bars) versus filamentous (red bars) RSV particles. Examples include distinct species of phosphatidylserine (PLS), sphingomyelin (SM), phosphatidylcholine (PC), and phosphatidylinositol (PI) that show statistically significant differences between the two forms (p < 0.05). (B) Comparison of total phospholipid and cholesterol content per particle (arbitrary units normalized to spherical virion = 1). Filamentous virions have a higher total lipid content, consistent with their larger membrane area. Data represent the average of three independent experiments. Abbreviations: SM, sphingomyelin; PS, phosphatidylserine; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PI, phosphatidylinositol.When comparing overall lipid quantity, filamentous RSV particles contained a greater total amount of phospholipid and cholesterol per virion than spherical particles (
Figure 3B
). Again, this is expected given the much larger membrane area of a filamentous virion. Importantly, however, the enrichment of certain lipid types in one morphology over the other might reflect adaptations to each form’s mode of assembly or function. For example, the unique set of lipid species found in filamentous virions might contribute to the curvature and flexibility needed for extremely elongated particles or might influence how these filaments fuse with cell membranes. Conversely, spherical virions, being smaller, might prioritize lipid species that maximize fusion efficiency or stability in extracellular environments.Genome packaging and infectivity of RSV particlesTo evaluate how virion morphology might relate to genome packaging and infectivity, we quantified the number of RSV genome copies in spherical and filamentous particles and compared this to infectious titers.Genome copy number per particle: To quantitate the genome copy per particle, we compared particle count enumerated by electron microscopy from fraction 2 and fraction 6 to RNA copy numbers obtained by Taqman real-time PCR method targeting the N gene. The particle counts of spherical and filamentous were 1.26x105 and 2.6x105, respectively. The RNA copy number from quantitative real-time PCR were 3.8x105 for spherical particles and 4.7x105 for filamentous particles (
Figure 4
). Therefore, spherical RSV particles were found to contain on average approximately 3 genomic RNA copies per virion, whereas filamentous RSV particles contained about 2 copies per virion. This difference (3 vs 2 copies) was small but consistently observed across experiments. The presence of more than one genome per virion in both cases suggests that RSV, like many other RNA viruses, can package multiple ribonucleocapsids in a single envelope, especially in larger particles (Roberts et al., 1995, 1998). However, not all packaged genomes may be complete or functional. In fact, it is known that many enveloped RNA viruses produce a proportion of defective genomes during replication, leading to the formation of defective interfering (DI) particles that contain truncated or inoperative genomes (Lazzarini et al., 1981; Treuhaft and Beem, 1982). These DI particles cannot establish infection on their own but can interfere with standard virus replication when present.Genome copy number per plaque: RSV stability is influenced by temperature and buffer composition, potentially affecting infectivity. Previous studies suggest that filamentous RSV particles are more infectious than spherical ones (Roberts et al., 1995). To determine the number of viable virus and to compare the infectivity of spherical and filamentous particles, we quantitated the genome copy per plaque by comparing the number of plaques (infectious titer) from fraction 2 and fraction 6 to RNA copy numbers obtained by Taqman real-time PCR method. The plaque assay from fraction 2 and fraction 6 yielded 3.6x 107 pfu/ml and 4.4 x 107 pfu/ml, respectively. The RNA copy number obtained from fraction 2 and fraction 6 were 1.5 x 108 and 1.9 x 108 pfu/ml, respectively (data not shown). This indicates that approximately 1 in 4 particles (25% infectivity) of both morphological forms were infectious, with no significant difference in infectivity between spherical and filamentous particles. The implication is that both forms contribute to the total infectious pool of virus and that both carry a comparable proportion of non-infectious particles. These non-infectious particles likely include the DI virions or otherwise damaged virions that carry genomic RNA but cannot initiate infection (Lazzarini et al., 1981; Treuhaft and Beem, 1982). The presence of DI particles might play a role in RSV pathogenesis by modulating viral replication dynamics and evading immune responses, as has been proposed for other paramyxoviruses (Roberts et al., 1998).Figure 4Genome copy number of RSV particles determined by quantitative real-time PCR: PCR reactions were carried out with 0.05 µl cDNA in a 50-µl reaction mixture containing Platinum Quantitative PCR SuperMix-UDG (Invitrogen), 0.5 µM N1 and N2 primers, and 0.2 µM probe, as recommended by the manufacturer. Real-time RT-PCR was performed using an Opticon 2 detection system (MJ Research). The cycling conditions were 50°C for 2 min (UDG incubation), 95°C for 2 min (UDG inactivation), followed by 45 cycles of 15 s at 95°C and 1 min at 60°C to amplify the RT products. Standard curve of quantitative real-time PCR for RSV N gene (positive control) was used to calculate genome copies in each sample. Negative controls and serial dilutions of positive controls (plasmid containing the N gene) were included in each PCR assay. Tenfold serial dilutions of the pTM-N plasmid were prepared, containing 4.8×10¹10
(a), 4.8×109
(b), 4.8×108
(c), 4.8×106
(d), and 4.8×10³ (g) copies per reaction mixture. Additionally, 0.05 µl of reverse-transcribed cDNA from peak fraction 2 (f) and fraction 6 (e) was used per reaction, with RSV copy numbers of 3.8×105 and 4.7×105, respectively. Data represent three independent experiments.DiscussionOur study provides new insights into the distinct structural and molecular characteristics of RSV’s two virion forms – spherical and filamentous. By physically separating these morphologies and analyzing their content, we have clarified some differences that may underlie their roles in infection and transmission. The determinants of RSV morphology have been an open question, and our results begin to address why the virus might produce both forms.One key finding is that filamentous RSV particles are enriched in certain viral components (like uncleaved F protein and matrix protein) and specific host-derived lipids compared to spherical particles. These differences likely reflect adaptations of the filamentous form to its mode of assembly and function. The RSV matrix (M) protein in particular appears to be more abundant in filamentous virions, which aligns with the idea that robust M self-assembly is required to support the elongated filament structure (Shaikh et al., 2012). In related viruses such as influenza, mutations that disrupt matrix oligomerization prevent filament formation (Shaikh et al., 2012). It is plausible that RSV filaments similarly depend on a helical or lattice-like arrangement of M protein along their length, as suggested by recent cryo-ET studies (Ke et al., 2018) that visualized an organized matrix layer inside RSV filaments. The higher content of F0 (uncleaved fusion precursor) in filaments is also intriguing. Uncleaved F0 is fusion-inactive until proteolytically cleaved to F1 and F2, but its presence might stabilize the virion or modulate fusion timing. Perhaps filamentous particles, which often remain attached to the cell, retain more F0 to avoid premature triggering of fusion, whereas spherical particles (destined to be released and infect new cells) carry more readily activatable F1. This is speculative, but differential F protein cleavage could influence how each particle type mediates membrane fusion with target cells.The enrichment of cholesterol and raft-associated lipids in both particle types reinforce the model that RSV buds from lipid raft microdomains of the plasma membrane (McCurdy et al., 2003). These microdomains not only concentrate the viral glycoproteins F and G but also host proteins like RhoA and CD44 that have been implicated in filament formation (McCurdy et al., 2003). The linkage between lipid rafts and syncytium formation is particularly noteworthy: RhoA-mediated actin reorganization leads to the formation of microvilli rich in raft lipids, and RSV filaments bud from these structures, effectively forming viral bridges between cells (Gower et al., 2005). By assembling in lipid rafts, RSV may ensure that the nascent virions (especially filaments) are in optimal locations to initiate fusion with adjacent cells. Our observation that filamentous virions have a somewhat unique lipid signature (e.g., more saturated phospholipids and specific sphingomyelins) suggests their membranes may be more ordered. A more ordered, rigid envelope could be advantageous for filaments, lending them the structural stability to protrude from cells without breaking. It could also influence their interaction with the host’s immune system. For instance, higher levels of phosphatidylserine in virion envelopes might enable RSV to engage PS-recognizing receptors on phagocytic cells (a strategy some viruses use to mimic apoptotic cell debris and dampen immune activation) (Meertens et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2021). Whether RSV exploits such a mechanism remains to be determined, but differences in lipid composition could conceivably affect how efficiently the immune system detects or neutralizes spherical vs. filamentous virions.Our study also touches on the long-standing observation that many RSV particles are non-infectious. We quantified a particle-to-PFU ratio of ~4:1 for both forms, meaning roughly 75% of particles did not result in productive infection. This high ratio is not unusual for RSV and other paramyxoviruses, which commonly produce defective interfering genomes during replication (Lazzarini et al., 1981; Treuhaft and Beem, 1982). These DI particles, while not infectious by themselves, can modulate infection dynamics by competing for resources and by stimulating innate immune responses. The fact that both spherical and filamentous RSV had similar infectivity ratios suggests that both forms likely include a mix of standard and defective particles. It is interesting to consider whether the morphology could influence the generation or packaging of defective genomes. One could speculate that the larger volume of filaments might allow them to accommodate more genomic RNA segments, potentially increasing the chance of including a defective RNA along with a full genome. However, our data showed filaments actually had slightly fewer genomes on average than spheres (2 vs 3), which might indicate a more selective packaging or a requirement for maintaining a certain genome density. Regardless, the end result is that each form delivers about one viable genome per several particles. This parity in infectivity implies that the predominance of one form or the other in a given context (e.g., in vivo) could influence viral load and spread without one form being inherently more infectious than the other on a per-particle basis.Implications for pathogenesisThe ability of RSV to form filamentous virions appears to confer advantages for within-host spread. Filamentous RSV can form networks of infected cells via membranous bridges (large syncytia) (Gower et al., 2005), which may help the virus disseminate across the respiratory epithelium while evading neutralization by antibodies present in mucus or extracellular fluid. This mode of direct cell-to-cell transmission is reminiscent of other viruses that induce syncytia (e.g., measles virus, human metapneumovirus), and it can lead to extensive infection foci in tissues. Indeed, our understanding of RSV disease suggests that syncytium formation contributes to tissue pathology and persistence of the virus in the lungs. On the other hand, spherical particles, which are efficiently released into extracellular spaces, are likely important for initiating new infections in distal sites within the host or transmitting to new hosts via respiratory droplets. Spherical virions, being smaller, might penetrate mucus barriers more easily during aerosol transmission. Studies on influenza have shown that pleomorphic viruses can adopt different shapes under different conditions: when conditions favor cell-free transmission, smaller particles dominate, whereas under immune pressure or other stresses, filamentous forms increase (Partlow et al., 2025). Although RSV is different from influenza, it is tempting to speculate that RSV might similarly modulate its shape distribution in response to the host environment. For example, early in infection when spreading within the host, filamentous forms may be favored to maximize local cell-to-cell spread and immune evasion (Partlow et al., 2025). Later, or in the upper airway where virus exit is imminent, more spherical particles might be produced for efficient aerosolization. This “mixed-strategy” of pleomorphism could be a way for RSV to balance between maximizing replication within a host and transmission to the next host, as has been suggested for other pleomorphic viruses (Partlow et al., 2025).Immune evasion considerationsThe structural differences we observed could impact how the immune system recognizes RSV. The honeycomb-like arrangement of glycoproteins on filamentous RSV, for instance, might affect the exposure of neutralizing epitopes on the F and G proteins. If the glycoproteins are packed more closely or in an ordered array, certain epitopes might be less accessible to antibodies. Some recent work on RSV has indicated that changes in virion shape (for example, when the matrix dissociates and filaments collapse into spheres) can alter the efficacy of complement deposition by antibodies (Kuppan et al., 2021). In line with this, one could imagine that the filamentous form, with its intact matrix and ordered surface, might present a more challenging target for the immune system, whereas the more “loose” arrangement on spherical particles could be easier for antibodies to bind. Moreover, syncytium formation itself is a form of immune evasion: by spreading directly from cell to cell, RSV reduces the time it spends exposed outside cells. Our data reinforce the connection between lipid rafts, filaments, and syncytia – all features that help RSV minimize exposure to neutralization. It has been observed that filamentous virions of some viruses are more resistant to neutralizing antibodies or physical stresses (Partlow et al., 2025). Filamentous RSV could similarly be more resilient in certain contexts, which might help it persist in the face of host immune responses.Therapeutic and vaccine implicationsThe distinctions between RSV particle types open up potential strategies for intervention. One approach is to target the host factors that favor filament formation. Our findings and prior studies point to the RhoA signaling pathway as a critical driver of filamentous virion morphogenesis and cell fusion (Gower et al., 2001, 2005). Inhibiting RhoA or its downstream effectors (e.g., with small molecule inhibitors or peptides) can prevent the formation of filaments and syncytia (Gower et al., 2005). In fact, a RhoA-derived peptide has been shown to block RSV-induced syncytium formation in cell culture and significantly reduce viral titers in mice (Pastey et al., 2000), highlighting this pathway as a viable antiviral target. Another strategy is to disrupt the lipid raft platform that RSV requires for efficient budding. Treatments that deplete membrane cholesterol or otherwise disrupt lipid rafts (for example, cyclodextrins or statin drugs) have been found to inhibit RSV assembly and reduce the release of infectious virus (Gower et al., 2005). Our demonstration that both spherical and filamentous virions are raft-derived suggests that cholesterol-targeting interventions could broadly impair RSV production. Notably, one study reported that the cholesterol-lowering drug lovastatin can inhibit RSV filament formation and reduce viral spread in vitro (as indicated by a reduction in cell-associated virus transmission) (Ravi et al., 2013). Such findings align with our observations and propose a potential repurposing of statins or other raft-disrupting agents as adjunct therapies for RSV infection.From a vaccine perspective, understanding virion morphology is relevant for antigen presentation. If filamentous and spherical particles present viral antigens differently, the immune response elicited by each might vary. Most laboratory preparations of RSV (for vaccines or challenge stocks) are produced in Vero or HEp-2 cell culture, where the proportion of filaments can vary with cell type and conditions. It may be important to ensure that vaccine candidates (live-attenuated or inactivated) induce immunity against antigens in both contexts—for instance, antibodies that can neutralize virus in the context of a cell-associated filament, not just free virions. Our identification of the honeycomb glycoprotein lattice might be a structural feature to exploit: if confirmed, regions of F or G involved in that lattice could be targets for broadly neutralizing antibodies or structure-based vaccine design.In conclusion, this work advances our understanding of RSV’s pleomorphic nature by delineating how spherical and filamentous virions differ in composition and potential function. The structural heterogeneity of RSV is not merely a curiosity; it has tangible effects on viral transmission, immune evasion, and pathogenicity. Filamentous virions, enriched in matrix and raft lipids, appear tailored for direct cell-to-cell spread and persistence in tissues, whereas spherical virions excel in cell-free dissemination and initiating new infection foci. Future research should build on these findings to uncover the precise molecular mechanisms that govern RSV morphology—such as the roles of specific RSV proteins (F, G, M) and host factors (RhoA, cytoskeletal elements, membrane domains) in deciding filament vs. sphere. It will also be valuable to investigate RSV morphology in vivo in respiratory tract tissues, to see how these forms contribute to disease severity or tropism. Ultimately, a deeper understanding of RSV particle morphology could inform novel antiviral interventions, such as drugs that tip the balance towards a less pathogenic form, or vaccines that effectively target the virus in all its forms. By “decoding” RSV morphology, we open the door to potentially disrupting a key aspect of the RSV life cycle that has so far been an elusive target.


Title: Respiratory syncytial virus after the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic — what next?

Until 2019, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) had predictable seasonality in temperate regions, with case numbers peaking in the winter months. However, the non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs; such as masking, ‘stay at home’ guidance and social distancing) that were introduced to control the spread of SARS-CoV-2 have had a marked effect on RSV circulation, with a significant reduction in RSV cases in the Northern Hemisphere during the winter of 2020–2021 and an unusual spring–summer wave of infection in 2021. Altered patterns of RSV circulation were also seen in the Southern Hemisphere1, and the RSV season still seems to be aberrant in the Northern Hemisphere in the spring–summer of 2022. NPIs have affected RSV transmission by increasing the number of children that are naive for RSV and reducing community levels of immunity against RSV2. The lack of RSV circulation in the population during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic might also have resulted in reduced transfer of passive immunity from mothers to their infants.The differential effect of NPIs on the spread of different respiratory infections can potentially inform us about their modes of transmission and therefore relevant prevention strategies. RSV is not the only pathogen to have reduced in circulation as a result of NPIs; for example, the B/Yamagata lineage of influenza B virus may have become extinct3, and human metapneumovirus and adenovirus have seen shifts in their seasonality. In the UK, RSV transmission was considerably lower than historical norms in the winter of 2020–2021, when nurseries and pre-schools were open but adult activities were more constrained by ‘stay at home’ orders, which suggests that adult-to-child transmission of RSV might have a previously under-looked role. It is not known from where RSV re-seeded populations in each country, but a study from Australia looking at the re-emergence of RSV concluded that cryptic human-to-human transmission of the virus may have had a role1.Against this background of changing RSV transmission, the prevention landscape for RSV has also undergone marked changes in recent years. Two classes of immune-mediated intervention are close to licensure, involving improved prophylaxis by monoclonal antibodies and vaccination.Passive immunizationThe currently licensed prophylaxis for RSV is passive immunization with the humanized mouse monoclonal antibody palivizumab, directed against the RSV fusion (RSV-F) protein, which is administered monthly to high-risk infants throughout the RSV season. Palivizumab prevents approximately 50% of RSV-related hospitalizations in premature children4. But it is costly and has to be regularly administered, meaning that it is predominantly used in high-risk children in high-income countries. The recent changes to RSV circulation have important implications for prophylaxis schedules, as the normal season-based administration may no longer align with RSV surges, leaving infants vulnerable to infection. Indeed, in the UK from June 2021 to the end of January 2022, the number of doses of palivizumab was increased from five to seven, and those eligible for prophylaxis could start in July rather than the usual October. With the possibility of further unpredictable changes to RSV seasonality, prophylaxis by monoclonal antibodies will require continual monitoring. This will be particularly pertinent if the age profile of those developing severe RSV infections or who are at high risk of doing so changes.Other monoclonal antibodies that target RSV-F that are in development include nirsevimab (also known as MEDI8897; developed by AstraZeneca and licensed to Sanofi) and MK-1654 (Merck), which both have a longer half-life than palivizumab. In a phase 3 clinical trial, nirsevimab had 74.5% efficacy against medically attended RSV in healthy and pre-term infants (ClinicaTrials.gov: NCT03979313)5, and it is expected to undergo regulatory review in 2022. MK-1654 is currently being evaluated in a phase 3 study for infants at increased risk of severe RSV infection (Clinical Trials.gov: NCT04938830).Active immunizationThe field of RSV vaccines has finally overcome the legacy of the failed formalin-inactivated vaccine in the 1960s, with much progress being made over the past decade and several vaccine candidates now in clinical trials. Much of this progress came after the determination of the structure of the pre-fusion conformation of RSV-F and the engineering of a stabilized pre-fusion form (pre-F)6; indeed, lessons from the engineering of pre-F were crucial for the development of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines.Subunit vaccines that use recombinant RSV-F are currently in clinical trials. Whereas previous unsuccessful RSV vaccine trials have targeted infants, two target groups have been considered in the current trials — expectant mothers and older adults (≥60 years). The late-phase maternal vaccine trials have been unsuccessful. The phase 3 trial by GlaxoSmithKline of an un-adjuvanted pre-F protein antigen in pregnant women aged 18–49 was voluntarily halted in February 2022, and enrolment and vaccination since then have been stopped owing to safety concerns (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT04605159, NCT04980391 and NCT05229068). Another maternal vaccine trial of ResVax (Novavax), an aluminium-adjuvanted, recombinant RSV-F nanoparticle vaccine, failed to meet the primary endpoint of reducing the incidence of medically significant RSV lower respiratory tract infection in infants in the first 90 days of life (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02624947)7. These two trials were unsuccessful for different reasons, with a safety signal for one and a lack of efficacy for the other, demonstrating the complexity of developing a vaccine for pregnant women specifically to protect the infant.However, vaccines that target older adults seem to be more promising. The phase 3 trial of a pre-F subunit vaccine, RSVpreF (Pfizer), is currently recruiting in adults ≥60 years (ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT05035212), with trial completion estimated for June 2024. A recent human challenge study in 18–50 year olds showed significant reduction of viral load and symptoms in those immunized with RSVpreF8. Furthermore, GlaxoSmithKline have recently announced significant efficacy for their over-60s vaccine, RSVPreF3 OA (RSV pre-F adjuvanted with AS03).Surveillance for immune escapeSurveillance for sequence variations in RSV will be important after the introduction of new monoclonal antibodies or vaccines. Both approaches target RSV-F; although the gene that encodes F protein is more genetically stable than the gene that encodes the other surface protein G, RNA viruses can mutate, particularly when under immune selective pressure, as has been seen for SARS-CoV-2. A mutation in RSV-F (K272E) has been detected in children treated with palivizumab, conferring resistance to it and another monoclonal antibody, motavizumab. More worryingly, antibody-resistant mutations of RSV-F have already been documented after nirsevimab prophylaxis, and these affect the binding affinity of the antibody without significantly affecting viral replication9. A cautionary tale is that of suptavumab (also known as REGN2222; Regeneron), which was predicted to have 10-fold more neutralization activity than palivizumab for RSV-A and 5-fold more for RSV-B in vitro. However, in the phase 3 trial, suptavumab was completely ineffective against RSV-B strains owing to a spontaneous mutation in the site to which the antibody binds10.The future of RSV preventionThere is likely to be a new monoclonal antibody with a longer half-life available for RSV prophylaxis in the near future, which depending on pricing could enable much wider use. Whether this will reduce cases of RSV disease or delay them into the second year of life is an important question, and the effect on disease severity is unknown. Monitoring RSV sequences will be important to ensure antibodies remain effective against circulating strains, and also following the deployment of a vaccine. Although the failures of the phase 3 trials make further maternal vaccine trials unlikely, the possibility of an effective vaccine for older adults is an exciting prospect. The deployment of such a vaccine and how it impacts disease in infants will be of interest for other respiratory infections. One consideration from SARS-CoV-2 vaccines is the required end state; these vaccines have had a significant effect on disease without necessarily reducing infection. A disease-reducing RSV vaccine would be of considerable benefit. However, returning to the possibility that adult-to-child transmission is important in RSV, a potential strategy could be to immunize adults to protect children, which would require the vaccine to effectively block RSV transmission. The next decade will see considerable changes in RSV control; as we have seen with influenza virus and SARS-CoV-2, respiratory viruses seldom behave as we expect, so close monitoring will be required in parallel with the deployment of new prevention strategies.


Title: Nosocomial Transmission of Respiratory Syncytial Virus in an Outpatient Cancer Center

IntroductionRespiratory syncytial virus (RSV) causes substantial morbidity and mortality among hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) and oncology patients who are at high risk for progression to lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI)-associated respiratory failure and death [1]. Mortality rates for RSV-associated LRTI range from 15% to 70% 2, 3. Treatment regimens for RSV-associated LRTI include aerosolized ribavirin, often in combination with palivizumab or intravenous immunoglobulin; supplemental oxygen; and respiratory support 4, 5, 6. However, antiviral therapies are expensive, difficult to administer, and have not reliably prevented progression to LRTI 7, 8. With no available vaccine or prophylaxis measures available for adults, infection control practices remain the only effective method to limit RSV outbreaks among adult cancer patients.RSV may be acquired in a health care setting and has been implicated in outbreaks in inpatient hematology-oncology and transplant wards [9]. Hospital-based outbreaks of RSV infection in HSCT recipients occur through introduction of circulating community strains as well as nosocomial transmission of identical viral strains [10]. The molecular epidemiology of RSV is characterized by sequencing a hypervariable region of the attachment (G) glycoprotein gene 11, 12. Evidence of acquisition of the same viral strain in inpatient cancer care settings has demonstrated the importance of specific infection control policies to prevent nosocomial RSV transmission, although data describing this in the outpatient setting are not available [13]. Studies have shown outpatient transmission of parainfluenza, a respiratory virus also associated with high mortality in immunocompromised cancer patients [14].Efforts to enhance infection control to prevent RSV spread include strict hand hygiene, use of droplet precautions, cohorting of nursing staff, and symptom screening of employees and visitors 15, 16. Previous studies in inpatient settings have shown that the number of RSV-positive cases decreased after implementation of these infection control interventions [17]. However, most cancer care is now delivered in the outpatient setting. The routine use of antibiotic prophylaxis and hematopoietic growth factors has reduced many risks associated with prolonged neutropenia and prolonged hospital stays [18]. It has been assumed that outpatients generally acquire their respiratory infections in the community through routine daily activities, such as work and exposure to children, and not through contact within the health care setting. Few data are currently available on transmission of RSV infection in the outpatient cancer care setting. In this study molecular virologic methods were used to demonstrate nosocomial transmission of RSV during 2 RSV outbreaks at a large outpatient cancer care center.MethodsThe Seattle Cancer Care Alliance (SCCA) is an inpatient and outpatient cancer care center based in Seattle, Washington. In 2012, 5599 patients were treated for cancer at the SCCA over the course of 72,300 visits. Patients at the SCCA are seen by teams of providers in different physical locations at a single site, divided by type of cancer or therapy, designated as Teams A through F. Allogeneic stem cell transplant recipients were seen by Teams A and B, autologous stem cell transplants were seen by Team C, pediatric patients were seen by Team D, patients in long-term follow-up were seen by Team E, and hematology-oncology patients were seen by Team F providers. The SCCA infection control team tracks incident RSV cases using an electronic system that identifies patients by provider team and location.Electronic medical records were used to abstract sociodemographic and clinical data for patients with RSV detected during the 2 outbreak periods. Lymphopenia was defined as ≤500 cells/μL and severe lymphopenia as ≤300 cells/μL. Respiratory specimens were obtained in patients for testing by nasal washes or from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid when clinically indicated by the primary treatment team [19]. Direct fluorescent antibody detection was performed using RSV-specific mouse monoclonal antibodies (Chemicon, Temecula, CA) on all nasal wash samples before January 21, 2008, and reverse transcriptase PCR was performed afterward at the University of Washington Virology Laboratories using previously published methods 19, 20. All bronchoalveolar lavage samples undergo routine direct testing for RSV using direct fluorescent antibody, shell vial culture, and/or reverse transcriptase PCR testing.During the 2007-2008 outbreak, all employees at the SCCA were administered a daily 12-symptom respiratory screening paper questionnaire for presence of runny nose, sinus congestion/stuffy nose, postnasal drip, shortness of breath, cough, wheezing or chest tightness, sputum production, sore throat, sneezing, watery eyes, ear pain, or fever (temperature >100.4°F) and had a nasal wash collected for respiratory viral testing per institutional policy at the time. Testing for RSV and 11 other respiratory viruses, including influenza A and B, human metapneumovirus, parainfluenza 1-4, rhinovirus, human coronavirus groups 1 and 2, and bocavirus were performed on employee samples using previously published methods 19, 21. Employees who had a positive nasal wash for any respiratory virus were not permitted to return to work until complete resolution of all symptoms and clearance by Occupational Health. To compare the outbreak with community data, rates of RSV detected in community samples from the Seattle and Pacific Northwest region were obtained from the University of Washington Diagnostic Virology Laboratory database (http://depts.washington.edu/rspvirus/respiratory.htm).Sequencing was attempted from residual RSV-positive samples from the 2 respiratory seasons using a semi-nested PCR protocol targeting the second hypervariable region of the attachment glycoprotein coding region [22]. Random residual de-identified RSV-positive community samples collected from subjects seeking medical care during the same respiratory seasons were also sequenced to serve as control subjects. Sequences were submitted to GenBank with accession numbers KC565494 to KC565526. Sociodemographic, clinical, and virologic data were analyzed using Stata 12.0 (STATA Corp, College Station, TX). Nucleotide sequences for 233 and 212 base pair regions of the second hypervariable region of the RSV attachment glycoprotein coding region were aligned using ClustalX2 [23].Phylogenetic trees were constructed separately for the 2007-2008 and 2012 outbreaks using MEGA5 with evolutionary distances calculated using the maximum likelihood method with 1000 bootstrap replicates [24]. This was performed using the Tamura-Nei model. The tree with the highest log likelihood is shown. When the number of common sites was 100 or less than one-fourth of the total number of sites, the maximum parsimony method was used; otherwise, the BioNJ method with MCL distance matrix was used. The trees were drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site.The analysis involved 32 nucleotide sequences. All positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated. A total of 233 positions was included in the data set for the 2007 tree and 212 positions in the data set for the 2012 tree. Reference and community sequences were included in the comparison. Community samples included were sequences obtained from community childcare attendees from November 2006 to March 2009 and from random residual de-identified samples collected from adult and pediatric inpatients at the University of Washington and Seattle Children's Hospital form November to March of each RSV season in the Pacific Northwest from 2006 to 2009 and 2011 to 2012. Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center Institutional Review Board.ResultsRSV Outbreak 2007-2008In November 2007, a cluster of 3 RSV cases at the SCCA prompted the implementation of an active respiratory virus surveillance system (Figure 1
A). This plan designated 3 levels of infection control measures (Figure 2
), with the immediate enforcement of Level 3 precautions starting January 1, 2008 (Figure 1A). As part of this plan, all patients, staff, and visitors to the clinic were screened for the presence of respiratory symptoms in the prior week using the 12-symptom respiratory screening questionnaire. Symptomatic persons were placed in respiratory isolation and a nasal wash for respiratory virus testing was collected. Of 51 cases of RSV identified in patients, 42 (82%) patients were HSCT recipients and 9 (18%) had hematologic or solid organ malignancies (Table 1
). In the week before RSV detection, 33 patients (65%) were seen only in the outpatient clinic, whereas 7 (14%) were hospitalized and 11 (22%) had no associated health care visits. One of 11 subjects with no associated health care visits attended childcare; the others did not indicate recent sick contacts.Figure 1Histogram of all RSV cases at the SCCA per day in the 2007-2008 outbreak (A) and only cases where the viral strain was sequenced (B). Histogram of all RSV cases at the SCCA per day in the 2012 outbreak (C) and only cases where the viral strain was sequenced (D). The asterisk represents an identical viral strain for that season. The pattern of the box represents the team of providers seen by the patient.Figure 2Our Respiratory Virus Management Plan was implemented January 1, 2008 and included designation of 3 tiers of heightened respiratory viral surveillance and infection control strategies.Table 1Sociodemographic and Clinical Characteristics of Patients with RSV Detected in the 2007-2008 and 2012 OutbreaksCharacteristics2007-2008 Outbreak [n (%)]2012 Outbreak [n (%)]Patients51 (68%)24 (32%)Median age, yr (range)53 (2-75)58 (8-69)Women25 (49)14 (58)Underlying condition Malignancy9 (18)5 (21) HSCT recipient42 (82)19 (79)Lymphopenia (≤500 cells/μL)∗14 (30)10 (59)Severe lymphopenia (≤300 cells/μL)∗8 (17)6 (35)Health care location Hospital7 (14)3 (13) Clinic33 (65)15 (63) No associated health care visits11 (22)6 (25)Specimen type Nasal wash48 (94)24 (100) Bronchoalveolar lavage3 (6)0 (0)Ribavirin treatment15 (29)3 (13)LRTI diagnosis4 (8)1 (4)Follow-up testing performed23 (45)19 (79) Repeat testing positive7 (30)7 (37)Clinical outcome Survival47 (92)24 (100) Death due to other causes3 (6)0 (0) Death attributed to RSV1 (2)0 (0)HSCT indicates hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipient; LRTI, lower respiratory tract infection; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus.∗Lymphocyte count available within 1 week of RSV detection for 47 patients in the 2007-2008 outbreak and 17 patients in the 2012 outbreak.Our institutional policy for RSV treatment during this time included the administration of inhaled ribavirin to prevent progression of RSV upper respiratory tract infection to LRTI in patients with severe lymphopenia and the use of palivizumab or intravenous immunoglobulin for documented RSV-associated LRTI. Lymphocyte counts were measured within 1 week of RSV detection in 47 patients; 14 (30%) were lymphopenic and 8 (17%) had severe lymphopenia. Only 4 (8%) were diagnosed with LRTI. Fifteen patients (29%) received ribavirin alone or in combination with intravenous immunoglobulin, including 11 with LRTI. Twenty-three patients (45%) had repeat testing performed a median of 13 days later (range, 4 to 32 days) with 7 (30%) having detectable virus. One patient (2%) died due to RSV pneumonia, 3 (6%) died of other causes, and 47 (92%) survived.Fifty-one cases of RSV were observed over 131 days in the 2007-2008 outbreak (0.39 RSV cases per day; Figure 1A). Residual samples from 19 of 51 patients (37%) in the 2007-2008 outbreak were available for sequencing; 15 outbreak samples (29%) were successfully sequenced, as well as an additional 13 community samples. These included 14 subtype A strains and 1 subtype B strain. During the 2007-2008 outbreak, illness episodes with sequenced samples did not differ by patient age (P = .28) or location of care (P = .43) from those unable to be sequenced, although sequenced samples were collected later in the epidemic (P = .01).Of the 15 illness episodes sequenced, 10 (67%) were identical, spanning a 43-day period from November 28, 2007 to January 9, 2008 (Figure 1B). Nine of these patients were hospitalized or seen in the clinic in the 7 days before RSV detection, whereas 1 patient had no associated prior health care visits. The first patient with this strain was a pediatric outpatient seen by Team D providers, and the next was seen by Team B providers 5 days later. Of the 10 cases with identical viral strains, only the index case was seen by Team D providers, whereas 3 patients were seen by Team A and 5 by Team B providers. Two of these patients subsequently died with RSV pneumonia as a contributing, although not the primary, cause of their death.Three other distinct viral strains co-circulated during the outbreak period. One cluster of 2 patients was seen by Team B providers in a 4-day period. In another cluster of 2 patients, 1 was seen in December 2007 by Team B providers and another was seen in February 2008 by Team E providers. No clear epidemiologic link was noted for these 2 patients. One patient seen by Team A providers in December 2007 had a distinct viral strain, similar to circulating community strains from 2009.Employees with RSV detected included 1 Team D and 1 Team A provider and 2 who provided care across multiple teams. Employee samples were not saved and therefore not available for sequencing from the 2007-2008 outbreak. The volume of patients seen in the clinic remained constant during the outbreak period, with an average of 1909 patient-days during weekdays and 341 patient-days during weekends (Figure 3
A).Figure 3Chart of RSV cases per day during the outbreak as compared with numbers of patients seen and numbers of community RSV cases in the Pacific Northwest Region for the (A) 2007-2008 season and (B) 2011-2012 season. The bars represent the numbers of RSV-positive cases at the SCCA clinic. The dotted line represents the number of patients (in multiples of 1000) seen at the SCCA clinic. The dashed line represents the numbers of community cases in the Pacific Northwest.RSV Outbreak 2012In March 2012, a cluster of 24 RSV cases was observed in the outpatient clinic (Figure 1C). Baseline sociodemographic and clinical data were similar to those of the patients in the 2007-2008 outbreak (Table 1). One patient (4%) had a diagnosis of LRTI; 3 patients (13%), all with URTI, received ribavirin to prevent progression to LRTI. Eleven of 24 patients (46%) were epidemiologically linked to a single outpatient care team (Team A) over 4 weeks. Although Level 2 precautions had been implemented since January, the Infection Control Team noted they had not been strictly enforced. Specifically, staff with active respiratory symptoms continued to work in the clinic, visitors/staff were not using the screening stickers consistently, and patients with documented respiratory virus symptoms were not tested immediately. On April 3, 2012, the Infection Control Team strictly enforced Level 2 precautions by sending a bulletin to all staff members detailing concerns regarding RSV, increasing outpatient rounds to occur on a daily basis during the week, and implemented education to re-engage staff. Level 3 precautions were not implemented in the 2012 outbreak.Samples from 21 of 24 patients (88%) in the 2012 outbreak were available for sequencing; 10 of these outbreak samples (48%) were successfully sequenced, as well as 8 community samples from the same time period. An identical RSV subtype A strain was detected in 9 of 10 patients (90%) during a 27-day period between March 23, 2012 and April 19, 2012 (Figure 1D), whereas a distinct subtype B viral strain was detected in 1 patient (10%). Seven of these patients with identical strains were seen in the clinic or hospitalized, whereas 2 had no associated health care visits. Six were seen by Team A, 2 by Team F, and 1 by Team C providers. A patient with a unique viral strain was seen by Team A providers on March 27, 2012. Phylogenetic analysis of the viral strains demonstrated clustering of samples within each outbreak distinct from community samples from the same season (Figures 4 and 5
).Figure 4Phylogenetic trees were constructed using sequenced samples from the 2 outbreaks. The outbreak strains are identified by year followed by provider team. The reference and community strains are labeled with year followed by reference strain (RS) or community strain (CS). The numbers at the nodes are the bootstrap values. This phylogenetic tree shows the sequenced samples from the 2007-2008 outbreak. Of the 15 outbreak strains, 14 were subtype A and 1 was subtype B. The tree with the highest log likelihood (–1047.02) is shown. Community samples were collected during RSV season in the Seattle region from November to April from inpatients at Seattle Children's Hospital and the University of Washington, as well as community childcare attendees.Figure 5Phylogenetic trees were constructed using sequenced samples from the 2 outbreaks. The outbreak strains are identified by year followed by provider team. The reference and community strains are labeled with year followed by reference strain (RS) or community strain (CS). The numbers at the nodes are the bootstrap values. This phylogenetic tree shows the sequenced samples from the 2012 outbreak. Of the 10 outbreak strains, 9 were subtype A and 1 was subtype B. The tree with the highest log likelihood (–905.54) outbreak is shown. Community samples were collected during RSV season in the Seattle region from November to April from inpatients at Seattle Children's Hospital and the University of Washington, as well as community childcare attendees.In 2012, the numbers of patients seen in the clinic averaged 3128 patient-days during weekdays and 659 patient-days during weekends (Figure 3B). Overall, 1015 employees worked in the outpatient oncology clinic during the 2007-2008 outbreak compared with 1459 employees during the 2012 outbreak. The number of community-acquired RSV cases in the Pacific Northwest region as detected at the University of Washington Clinical Virology Laboratory during the 5-season period from 2007 to 2012 remained stable (median, 713 RSV cases per season; range, 610 to 804 cases; http://depts.washington.edu/rspvirus/respiratory.htm), although no RSV outbreaks were observed in the SCCA in the intervening years.Employee Testing ResultsOf the daily symptom screenings conducted in 1015 employees who worked during the 2007-2008 outbreak, 254 had respiratory symptoms prompting the collection of a nasal wash. Ninety-one nasal wash samples (34%) had at least 1 respiratory virus detected, including 14 samples (15%) with RSV. Multiple other respiratory viruses detected in employees included human metapneumovirus (n = 12; 13%), influenza A (n = 14; 15%), influenza B (n = 13; 14%), coronavirus (n = 18; 20%), parainfluenza type 1 (n = 2; 2%), and parainfluenza type 3 (n = 2; 2%). Twelve employees had RSV detected from December 20, 2007 to March 13, 2008, with 2 employees positive on repeat testing. Ten (83%) had direct patient contact; 4 of these worked in the transplant or oncology departments. The first employee with RSV detected had no direct contact with patients with documented RSV, although she had been symptomatic since early December with an upper respiratory illness. Of the 12 employees with RSV, only 1 had contact with a patient with documented RSV. However, transmission between the employee and patient seemed unlikely because the timing of symptom onset and diagnosis dates did not indicate an epidemiologic link between the 2 cases.DiscussionMolecular sequencing of RSV strains detected during 2 distinct outbreaks from patients attending a large outpatient cancer care center demonstrated circulation of identical viral strains, suggesting the outpatient clinic can serve as a source of nosocomially acquired respiratory infections. In our center, outpatients are seen by multiple providers in common locations, engage in on-site meetings with other patients, providers, and families, and continue to work and interact with others outside of the medical setting. Traditional infection control interventions shown to be effective in hospital settings, such as the use of strict respiratory isolation and limitation of visitors and staff, may not be as effective as in the inpatient setting due to multiple potential sources to introduce infection [17]. Contact tracing is also more difficult in outpatient environments, making it harder to identify patterns of transmission.Traditionally, cancer care has been delivered to inpatients until neutrophil recovery and clinical improvement. However, early discharge followed by continued outpatient treatment has become more standard in recent years. Delivering care as an outpatient has multiple advantages, including cost savings, improved quality of life, and potentially reduction of nosocomial infections 25, 26. However, many of these patients are seen routinely in outpatient clinics such as ours, where they continue to interact with health care providers and other patients on a regular basis. Few prior studies have examined nosocomial transmission of respiratory viral infections in the outpatient setting. A study by Nichols et al. [27] conducted at our institution documented outpatient transmission of parainfluenza virus, and a small study by Machado et al. [10] documented clusters of identical RSV strains in an HSCT inpatient and outpatient treatment center in Sao Paolo, Brazil. The Brazilian study used direct fluorescent antibody for RSV diagnosis, a much less sensitive technique that likely limited the sensitivity of detection of RSV among the patients.In response to the RSV outbreak in 2007-2008, we implemented intervention strategies based on Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines for inpatient infection control settings, with interventions including staff cohorting, employee screening, and hand hygiene 28, 29, 30. In an inpatient study by Lavergne et al. [17], measures that included restriction of visitors with respiratory symptoms, droplet isolation precautions, and use of gowns, gloves, and masks by all patients, staff, and visitors were associated with a .09 relative risk of RSV as compared with a more traditional infection control policy. The interventions we implemented in an outpatient setting including heightened symptom surveillance of employees, visitors, and patients at every entry point to the clinic and the strict restriction from access to the clinic based on a positive symptom screen, use of gowns and gloves, and droplet isolation precautions of all clinic patients with respiratory symptoms. We observed that the number of new cases decreased after the intervention in 2008 despite continued high levels of community RSV activity as well as steady numbers of patient visits at the SCCA, suggesting that implementation of our strategy was effective in reducing the magnitude of the outbreak. In 2012, the magnitude of the outbreak was limited due to strict reinforcement of Level 2 precautions rather than escalation to Level 3 precautions. It is possible that Level 3 precautions would not have been necessary in 2008 if heightened enforcement of Level 2 precautions had been strictly enforced at that time as well.In the 2007-2008 outbreak, a respiratory virus was identified in one third of employees with respiratory symptoms, including 12 with RSV. Detection of respiratory viruses in symptomatic staff, including high-risk pathogens such as RSV, influenza, parainfluenza, and metapneumovirus, indicates multiple opportunities for staff to introduce community respiratory viruses into an outpatient clinic. All these respiratory viruses have been associated with inpatient nosocomial outbreaks and have the potential to cause severe disease in immunocompromised patients 31, 32, 33. Strict policies restricting symptomatic staff from working may mitigate the potential impact of provider transmission as the source of nosocomial outbreaks.A study limitation is that we were unable to sequence most samples from the 2 outbreaks. Many samples were inadvertently discarded at the end of the RSV season and were not available for sequencing, including all employee samples. Possibilities for the inability to sequence the remainder of the samples include low viral loads and sample degradation. In the 2007-2008 outbreak in particular, only samples early in the outbreak were sequenced. It is therefore not possible to know whether the cases later in the season were due to continued transmission of the outbreak strain or to sporadic community cases. Additionally, no samples were collected from visitors or family members. These data may have provided additional information regarding the degree of clonal transmission by health care providers and family members in the outbreaks. We also acknowledge no clear epidemiologic data linking outbreak cases. However, in our center, there are multiple sites of potential interaction between patients and care providers, including radiology, phlebotomy, and waiting areas for clinics. Although not documented, we believe these interactions may provide potential exposures of patients to sick employees, and vice versa. It is also possible that the clustering of the RSV strains during the 2 outbreaks was a reflection of the dominant strain circulating during the season in the region. The molecular epidemiology of RSV usually involves 1 dominant strain that circulates over the course of a season 34, 35. However, we found clustering of samples from both outbreaks distinct from co-circulating community strains collected during the same period, making this less likely. Increased sampling and detection during periods of the RSV outbreak may have been partially due to heightened awareness among providers, leading to potential sampling bias. Further, although we observed decreases in numbers of new cases after implementation of our infection control plan, we were unable to document efficacy of the intervention due to the retrospective observational nature of the study.Molecular sequencing was useful in identifying potential modes of nosocomial spread of RSV in an outpatient cancer care center during 2 separate RSV outbreaks. Infection control interventions used traditionally in inpatient settings should be considered for implementation in outpatient cancer settings to reduce person-to-person transmission and limit progression of RSV outbreaks.


Title: Spatial Transmission Dynamics of Respiratory Syncytial Virus A in China

1. IntroductionRespiratory infectious diseases (RIDs) represent a growing global health burden, exacerbated by increasing global connectivity. As one of the most, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a prominent respiratory pathogen, disproportionately affects vulnerable populations, particularly children and the elderly. From 1995 to 2019, RSV was the leading cause of pediatric pneumonia worldwide [1]. Notably, RSV-associated pneumonia deaths among older adults aged 70 years and older increased significantly by 100.3% (92.4–108.6) [2]. Recent estimates for 2019 indicate that RSV was responsible for 33 million (25.4–44.6) cases of acute lower respiratory infections(ALRIs)in children under 5 years of age, leading to 3.6 million (2.9–4.6) hospitalizations and 26,300 (15,100–49,100) deaths from RSV-associated ALRI [3], with a higher risk in low- and middle-income countries. In China, surveillance data reveal that RSV is the most prevalent virus among acute respiratory infections (ARIs) in children under 5 years of age, with a detection rate of 25.7%, nearly twice that of the influenza virus (14.2%) [4].RSV, also known as human RSV (HRSV) and human orthopneumovirus, is a negative-sense, single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the genus Orthopneumovirus of the family Pneumoviridae in the order Mononegavirales [5]. Its genome, approximately 15,200 nucleotides long, encodes 11 proteins, with the surface glycoproteins G and F serving as key antigens. RSV strains are classified into RSV subgroup A (RSVA) and B (RSVB) based on monoclonal antibody specificity to these glycoproteins. While the F protein is a primary target for vaccine and monoclonal antibody development, the G protein exhibits greater variability, featuring two hypervariable regions (HVRs) that are important markers for genotyping and evolutionary studies [6]. RSVA typically exhibits higher viral loads and faster transmission dynamics than RSVB [7], while both subtypes co-circulate, RSVA consistently dominates seasonal epidemics in China [4, 8]. Notably, RSVA is more strongly associated with severe clinical outcomes, including lower respiratory tract infections (LRTIs) in infants and young children [9].While the seasonality, spatial distribution, and demographic characteristics of RSV incidence, along with shifts in predominant circulating genotypes in China, have been individually studied, a comprehensive understanding of RSV's evolutionary and transmission dynamics across China, and the interplay of factors influencing them, remains elusive [8, 10–12]. To address this critical gap, we compiled a unique dataset integrating socioeconomic and meteorological variables (e.g., population mobility and temperature) with the HVR2 of the RSVA G gene from various Chinese provinces. This study aimed to elucidate the phylogenetic characteristics and the driving forces behind the transmission of RSVA.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Genetic DataIn this study, we searched for RSVA sequences originating from China in GenBank using the keyword “Human respiratory syncytial virus A”. Meanwhile, the spatial and temporal information of the sequences, that is, their sampling time and location, was also summarized. Sequences were aligned against the NC_038235 reference strain, and those lacking precise collection dates or geographic locations were excluded from subsequent analyses. Due to the high genetic variability of the G gene, we focused our analysis on nucleotides 634–891, which correspond to the second HVR (HVR2) of the G protein coding sequence. Following extraction, we excluded sequences containing gaps or ambiguous bases. From the remaining Chinese sequences collected between 2011 and 2019 with complete provincial metadata, we performed spatiotemporal grouping by year and province, followed by removal of duplicate sequences within each group. This stringent filtering process yielded a dataset of 1081 RSVA G gene HVR2 sequences with verified spatiotemporal information.To mitigate sampling bias associated with provincial population sizes and economic disparities, we implemented a stratified downsampling strategy. Sequences were first grouped by province of origin, and provinces containing fewer than five sequences were excluded. For remaining provinces, we applied the following sampling protocol: (1) provinces with 5–30 sequences were retained in their entirety; (2) provinces with 30–50 sequences were subsampled to 25 sequences; (3) provinces with 50–70 sequences to 30 sequences; (4) provinces with 70–100 sequences to 35 sequences; (5) provinces with >100 sequences to 40 sequences. Following comprehensive quality control, including gene extraction, deduplication, and downsampling, we obtained a final dataset of 446 high-quality sequences spanning 17 Chinese provinces for phylogenetic reconstruction (Figure 1). For generalized linear model (GLM) analysis, we further restricted the dataset to mainland China (395 sequences from 15 provinces) to match the available population flows data.2.2. Covariate DataMeteorological data, including average temperature (AT), precipitation (PP), relative humidity (RH), air pressure (AP), and wind speed (WS), were obtained from the China Integrated Meteorological Information Service System (https://data.cma.cn). The station data were interpolated to China using the Kriging method, and then the daily data for each province were averaged to obtain the winter mean meteorological data for each province. China's normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) and night light data were downloaded from the resource and environmental data cloud platform (http://www.resdc.cn), which were also averaged and summarized by province. Annual provincial socioeconomic data, such as urbanization rate, urban population density, and GDP, were obtained from the National Bureau of Statistics (https://data.stats.gov.cn). These data are harmonized using 2015 values. The population flow data in this study were sourced from the 2023 provincial migration ratios provided by Baidu population migration numbers (https://qianxi.baidu.com). Specifically, the provincial population migration ratios calculated by aggregating real-world inter-city mobility patterns, represent the proportion of inter-provincial migrants relative to the national total, offering a robust proxy for actual population movement dynamics. The provincial migration data were structured into an origin-destination matrix using R (v4.2), where rows denote source provinces, columns indicate destination provinces, and cell values reflect the corresponding migration ratios.2.3. Phylogenetic and Evolutionary Dynamic AnalysisSequence alignment was performed using MAFFT [13, 14], followed by extraction of the 634–891 nucleotide segment corresponding to the HVR2 of the G gene coding sequence, using NC_038235 as the reference genome. We next generated a maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree in IQ-TREE [15] and assessed its temporal signal strength with TempEst [16]. The GTR + F + G4 nucleotide substitution model was selected using ModelFinder [17] based on the best-fit criteria. The best-fit molecular clock model and tree prior were determined through marginal likelihood estimation using both path-sampling (ps) and stepping-stone (ss) approaches in BEAST [18]. A relaxed molecular clock with lognormal distribution [19] was implemented, along with a coalescent skygrid prior to model temporal changes in effective population size [20]. Parameters, such as tMRCA and evolutionary rate were estimated using the BEAST package (version 1.10.4) [18]. Two independent chains were run with a chain length of 2 × 108, and then Tracer (v1.7) [21] for convergence and mixture analysis with a burn-in period of 10% of the total chain length, with an effective sampling size >200 guaranteed for all parameters. Bayesian SkyGrid was used as the tree prior to estimate the effective population size over time. MCC trees were generated using TreeAnnotator (version 1.10.4) and illustrated in ggtree [22].2.4. Discrete Phylogeographic AnalysesWe implemented an asymmetric discrete-trait phylogeographic model in BEAST, combined with Bayesian Stochastic Search Variable Selection (BSSVS), to reconstruct the spatiotemporal dissemination history of RSVA across Chinese provinces [23]. The Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method was implemented with two independent chains, each comprising 2 × 108 steps and a sampling interval of 20,000 steps. The sampled steps were then combined across chains, with the initial 10% discarded as a result of the burn-in phase. The convergence of the MCMC in Tracer (v1.7) was verified to ensure that the effective sample size of parameters exceeded 200. Utilizing the posterior inference results from the BEAST analysis, the interprovincial viral migration patterns were quantified through the Markov jump counts between locations. The interprovincial migration routes were summarized using SpreaD3 [24], while the intensity of viral migration between provinces was calculated as the sum of incoming and outgoing migration events. Finally, map visualization was performed using the ggplot package in R (v4.2).In addition, the GLMs extension of the discrete phylogeographic model [25] was used to jointly infer the relevance and contribution of potential predictors to the spatial diffusion patterns among discrete locations in BEAST. This approach models transition rates as a function of latent factors, and quantifies the degree of contribution and significance level of latent factors through the GLM coefficient and the Bayes factor. The Bayes factor represents the ratio of the posterior probability to the prior probability based on the explanatory factors entering the model. Generally, a Bayes factor greater than 3 and a posterior probability greater than 0.5 indicates that the data support the entry of the explanatory factors into the model in a suggestive way, if the Bayes factor is greater than 20, indicating that the data is strongly supportive, and it is greater than 100 that indicates decisive support [26].Current evidence indicates that both environmental and socioeconomic factors influence RSV prevalence and transmission dynamics [10, 27–31]. To systematically assess these associations, we selected the variables for analysis by considering the influence of covariates on RSV prevalence and the interdependence of covariates. Specifically, our framework incorporated three environmental variables (mean winter temperature, PP, and RH), five socioeconomic indicators (urbanization rate, urban population density, GDP, population flows, and night light index), and one spatial distance indicator (Haversine spherical distance). All environmental variables were derived from winter seasonal averages to align with the primary RSV transmission period. To account for potential sampling bias, we developed parallel models with and without sample size as a covariate. These analyses were restricted to sequences from mainland China with complete spatiotemporal metadata and matched covariate data.3. Results3.1. Evolutionary and Phylogeographic AnalysisRoot-to-tip regression analysis revealed a significant temporal signal in the RSVA sequences (Supporting Information 1: Figure S2, correlation coefficient = 0.76, R2 = 0.58), with no outliers observed. This robust correlation validates the application of molecular clock models for time-calibrated phylogenetic reconstruction. Parameter estimates for molecular clock models are presented in Table 1. The Bayesian SkyGrid tree prior coupled with an uncorrelated lognormal relaxed clock emerged as the optimal configuration, with marginal likelihoods of −8127.9 (path sampling) and −8205.9 (ss sampling) supporting this selection.The maximum clade credibility (MCC) tree (Figure 2) revealed the phylogenetic relationships of RSVA in China, in which the time of the most recent common ancestor (tMRCA) of RSVA was estimated to be 1993.5, with a 95% highest posterior density (HPD) range of 1976.7–2004.6, and the average evolutionary rate of the RSVA partial G gene was 5.27 (4.27–6.36) × 10−3 substitutions per site per year. The root location with the highest posterior probability was identified as Fujian, with a posterior probability of 0.39.  Figure 3 illustrates the dynamics of the effective population size of RSVA over time, as constructed by the Bayesian SkyGrid model. This construction indicates cyclical fluctuations with a period of 3–5 years between 2011 and 2019, marked by peaks in 2011, 2014, and 2018, and troughs in 2012 and 2016.To understand the dispersal of RSVA in China, we reconstructed the spatial transmission patterns of RSVA between 2011 and 2019.  Figure 4 shows the estimated migration counts of RSVA, indicating that Beijing, Shanghai, Zhejiang, Sichuan, Chongqing, Guangdong, Taiwan, and Hong Kong are major destinations, while Beijing, Guangdong, Hong Kong, Gansu, Zhejiang, Jilin, and Shanghai are significant sources, each with Markov jump counts exceeding 40, which confirms complex transmission dynamics.  Figure 5 illustrates the significant epidemiological unidirectional pathways of RSVA, supporting 21 migration paths by Bayesian phylogeographic analysis (BF ≥ 3 and posterior probability ≥ 0.5), with nine paths receiving decisive support (BF ≥ 100): Sichuan to Hong Kong, Guangdong to Henan, Taiwan to Shaanxi, Hong Kong to Jilin, Henan to Shandong, Chongqing to Sichuan, Shaanxi to Gansu, Gansu to Hunan, and Hunan to Beijing, and the remaining 12 paths with BF greater than 15. Within these paths, there were 10 transmission paths from north to south: Jilin to Shandong and Zhejiang, Hebei to Zhejiang, Beijing to Taiwan and Guangdong, Shanghai to Taiwan, Gansu to Chongqing and Hunan, Shaanxi to Fujian, and Sichuan to Hong Kong. Meanwhile, there were seven south-to-north transmission paths: Taiwan to Shaanxi, Hong Kong to Jilin, Guangdong to Zhejiang and Henan, Zhejiang to Hebei and Ningxia, and Hunan to Beijing. Also, we counted the location attributes of branches in the MCC tree (Figure 2) and found that the counts of location transitions for southward dispersal and northward dispersal are 103 and 88, respectively. We identified more significant paths for southward diffusion than for northward diffusion. Besides, the remaining paths spread between neighboring provinces, such as Chongqing to Sichuan, Henan to Shandong, and Shaanxi to Gansu.3.2. Potential Factor Identification of Dispersal PatternsIdentifying covariates associated with RSVA spatial dispersal patterns in China is crucial for informing public health interventions. To quantify the contributions of potential drivers, we employed a GLM extension of Bayesian discrete phylogeographic inference to analyze interprovincial diffusion dynamics. Our analysis incorporated meteorological factors (temperature, PP, and RH), socioeconomic factors (the night light index, urbanization rate, population density, GDP, and population mobility), and spatial distances potentially influencing RSVA transmission. Using a comprehensive modeling approach that evaluated all predictors simultaneously, we identified several significant drivers of provincial-scale RSVA dispersal (Figure 6 and Supporting Information 1: Figure S1, Table 2). Notably, winter temperature, winter RH, urbanization rate, population density, and population mobility showed statistically significant associations with viral spread patterns.The multivariable analysis revealed distinct directional effects: viral lineage diffusion was positively associated with mean winter RH in the origin province, urbanization rate in destination provinces, and population mobility between provinces. Conversely, negative associations were observed for the mean winter temperature in destination provinces and urban population density in origin provinces.To assess potential sampling bias, we included sequence sample size as an additional covariate in sensitivity analyses. Notably, even when the sample size in the origin provinces was included as a significant predictor in the model (Figure 6 and Supporting Information 1: Figure S1, Table 2), the identified associations retained their consistency and stability.4. DiscussionThis study confirms that RSV was the predominant viral pathogen for ARI among children under 5 years of age in China between 2011 and 2019. This finding aligns with global observations of viral rebounds following the COVID-19 pandemic, where hospitalization rates in high-income regions have already returned to pre-epidemic levels by 2022 [32]. By integrating extensive genetic data of RSVA with natural, socioeconomic, and population flow data, as well as relevant temporal and geographic information, we reconstructed the dispersal patterns of RSVA within China. Our analysis revealed frequent interprovincial transmission events, characterized by a predominant north-to-south dispersal trend. Furthermore, we demonstrate that both environmental conditions and socioeconomic factors synergistically shape the spread dynamics of RSVA.Bayesian phylogenetic analysis estimated the time to the most recent common ancestor (tMRCA) of RSVA strains isolated in China (2011–2019) to be 1993.5 (95% HPD: 1976.7–2004.6). Fujian province was identified as the most probable root location for RSVA transmission. This is supported by previous findings that Fujian Province harbored the highest number of co-circulating RSVA subtypes in China during 2011–2013 [8]. This observation underscores that Fujian province functions as a critical source of RSVA genetic diversity and a significant historical viral reservoir, even with limited observed gene flow.The population dynamics of RSVA, characterized by 3–5 year fluctuations in effective population size between 2011 and 2019, with peaks in 2011, 2014, and 2018, and troughs in 2012 and 2016, which coincided with previous studies [8]. These fluctuations likely reflect the rapid turnover of dominant RSVA genotypes, particularly the swift replacement of the NA1 genotype by ON1, first identified in China in 2011 [8, 12]. The cyclical dynamics of the population are attributed to the continuous shift of major genotypes and subtypes associated with the alternating epidemics of RSVA and RSVB, which is related to the current immune profile of the population caused by the previously endemic strains, as well as the spatial spread of the virus across provinces and countries [33–35].The migration analysis revealed distinct patterns of RSVA dissemination across China. Beijing, Shanghai, Zhejiang, Sichuan, and Taiwan were identified as key source provinces for viral importation, while Beijing, Guangdong, Hong Kong, Gansu, and Zhejiang served as major export hubs. The economically developed regions (notably Beijing and Shanghai) exhibited higher migration frequencies. Despite this, surveillance data indicated that nearly all provinces contributed to the overall spread of RSVA. Unlike the distance-dependent decay often observed in avian influenza transmission [36], our findings revealed complex spatial transmission patterns. Analysis of significant diffusion pathways (Bayes factor ≥ 3 and posterior probability ≥ 0.5) and the MCC tree consistently demonstrated a predominant southward dispersal trend, with viral lineages spreading more frequently from northern to southern provinces than vice versa. This directional bias likely reflects environmental influences, specifically the strong winter seasonality of northern epidemics. Lower winter temperatures in these regions may enhance RSV stability, potentially facilitating viral spread and accelerating evolutionary dynamics [11, 30].Our study identifies winter temperature and RH as critical environmental determinants of RSVA transmission dynamics. The relationship between temperature and RSV infection exhibits a general U-shaped pattern, with peak activity occurring at temperatures above 24–30°C or within the 2–6°C range. Importantly, within colder climates, RSV transmission exhibits a negative correlation with temperature, an effect attributed to enhanced viral stability at lower temperatures [9, 37–39]. This finding is particularly relevant for China, where widespread low winter temperatures align with observations in colder climates; consequently, interprovincial RSV transmission shows a negative correlation with the mean winter temperature of destination provinces. In temperate and subtropical regions, RSV activity positively correlates with RH [9, 37–39]. For China, where winter RH generally falls within a moderate range, increasing humidity is associated with higher RSV transmission efficiency, leading to a positive correlation between interprovincial RSVA transmission and the winter RH of source provinces.Socioeconomic factors, including population flows, urbanization rate, and urban population density, also significantly influence RSVA transmission. Population mobility directly contributes to the spatial spread of RSVA, consistent with recent evidence linking viral pedigree similarity to higher population migration flows [33]. Subsequently, destination urbanization rate positively influences viral spread, as economic development in urban centers enhances medical infrastructure, tourism appeal, and transportation networks, thereby increasing population influx and facilitating viral transmission through heightened social interactions in densely populated public spaces. Conversely, urban population density in source provinces exhibits a negative association with interprovincial viral dispersal. High-density provinces (e.g., Henan, Gansu, and Shaanxi) typically feature lower urbanization levels and are characterized by out-migration patterns dominated by young adults, which may potentially reduce viral export risk.This study has several limitations. First, our analysis was constrained by the quality and completeness of publicly available RSVA genetic sequences. The reliance on while we endeavored to compile a comprehensive dataset, partial G gene sequences, and potential residual sampling biases, despite our mitigation efforts, may influence the reconstructed phylogenetic and dispersal patterns. Second, covariates were used from a single point in time, whereas genetic data spans many years, and the effect of those factors that change over time may be affected, for example, urbanization rate and population movement. Third, the significant effects of PP and RH on virus transmission were not consistently observed across all analyses. This may be due to the spatial heterogeneity of factors influencing RSV diffusion in China, as evidenced by differing correlations with humidity in northern and southern regions [10, 40]. Finally, RSV engages in complex interactions with other respiratory viruses, encompassing both synergistic and competitive relationships. Coinfections with influenza viruses, coronaviruses, parainfluenza viruses, adenoviruses, and other pathogens are associated with more severe clinical outcomes, such as asthma exacerbations or viral reassortment [41, 42]. Conversely, influenza viruses and RSV may exhibit a competitive interplay, where infection with one virus confers transient cross-protection against the other, potentially delaying the epidemiological circulation of RSV [43]. Future research should aim to collect more comprehensive datasets and further investigate the nuanced roles of PP and RH on RSVA transmission across distinct epidemiological regions.5. ConclusionBetween 2011 and 2019, RSVA transmission in China exhibited a predominant north-to-south dispersal pattern, with provinces experiencing high population mobility serving as key transmission hubs. Our findings indicate that higher winter temperatures and lower RH were associated with reduced transmission, while urbanization and population mobility promoted virus spread. Therefore, we recommend: (1) strengthening surveillance in regions with significant population movement during the period of high humidity; (2) developing predictive models that integrate climatic and mobility data; (3) implementing targeted control strategies focused on key transmission hubs.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HUMAN RHINOVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Defining critical roles for NF-κB p65 and type I interferon in innate immunity to rhinovirus

→ See accompanying article http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/emmm.201202032INTRODUCTIONThe immune response to virus infections involves a robust innate anti-viral response meditated by type I and III interferons (IFNs) and a potent inflammatory response involving both rapid immune cell recruitment and damage of infected cells and tissues. The regulation of type I IFN-β, IFN-αs and type III IFN-λs has been well studied with IFN-β being used as a model system of eukaryotic gene expression since the early 1990s (Du et al, 1993). The IFN-β promoter contains four positive regulatory domains (PRDs), which allow the DNA binding of distinct transcription factors (Du et al, 1993; Falvo et al, 2000; Thanos & Maniatis, 1995; Wathelet et al, 1998). These transcription factors include IRF-1, IRF-3 and IRF-7 as well as the heterodimeric ATF/c-Jun and members of the NF-κB or Rel family, which is composed of five related proteins, p65 (Rel A, NF-κB3), p50 (NF-κB1, precursor of which is p105), p52 (NF-κB2, precursor of which is p100), c-Rel and Rel B. Rel proteins have a central role in innate immunity with NF-κB p65 implicated in expression of type I and type III IFNs and pro-inflammatory cytokines.Numerous studies over the years including electromobility shift assays (Thanos & Maniatis, 1995), X-ray crystallography (Berkowitz et al, 2002; Panne et al, 2007) and nucleosome analysis of the IFN-β locus (Apostolou & Thanos, 2008) have overwhelmingly supported the current paradigm that all of these transcription factors are required for virus-induced IFN-β transcription; although subtle differences in different cell types have been reported. The recent use of cells from gene-deficient mice (Wang et al, 2007) have questioned the role of NF-κB p65 for IFN-β gene expression, with two recent studies from the same laboratory providing conflicting data (Wang et al, 2007, 2010). A recent editorial on this subject (Balachandran & Beg, 2011) proposes that NF-κB family members including p65 are required to maintain basal activation of the IFN-β promoter or are required very early during infection before IRF-3 activation is optimal. Furthermore, all studies to date report that p65 is also required for IFN-λ gene expression, (Onoguchi et al, 2007; Osterlund et al, 2007; Siegel et al, 2011). Importantly, the current data for IFN-β and IFN-λ gene expression is entirely based on in vitro studies mostly utilizing cell lines or gene-deficient murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with model viruses that are not important human pathogens. The role of NF-κB p65 in IFN-β and IFN-λ production has never been investigated in vivo and the wider implications of the selective targeting of NF-κB p65 in important human diseases caused by virus infections is a subject of much interest yet one poorly addressed in mouse models of human disease.Considering the lack of studies investigating the importance of p65 in IFN induction by important human viruses in vivo, we have investigated the role of NF-κB p65 and type I IFN signalling in the host defence and inflammatory response to human rhinovirus (RV) in vivo and in vitro. RVs are responsible for a range of severe human illnesses including acute exacerbations of lower airways diseases such as asthma (Johnston et al, 1995, 2005). A cardinal feature of RV infection in vitro is production of pro-inflammatory molecules, the expression of which is transcriptionally regulated by members of the NF-κB transcription factor family (Zhu et al, 1996, 1997). In asthma exacerbations, increased airway inflammation is strongly associated with clinical illness severity (Message et al, 2008; Papi et al, 2006; Wark et al, 2002) and this is thought to be mediated by NF-κB p65 activation, although studies directly demonstrating activated NF-κB p65 during RV infection or RV-induced asthma exacerbations in vivo are yet to be reported.Asthmatic subjects experience significantly increased lower respiratory tract symptoms following either natural (Corne et al, 2002) or experimental RV infection (Message et al, 2008). Impaired antiviral immunity is likely to explain this increased susceptibility to RV infection as deficient type I and type IIII IFN production by asthmatic bronchial epithelial cells (Contoli et al, 2006; Uller et al, 2010; Wark et al, 2005) and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) macrophages (Contoli et al, 2006) has been observed ex vivo, with the latter related to increased virus load and exacerbation severity in vivo. These relationships suggest, but are unable to definitively show, a causal relationship between IFN deficiency and disease severity. These data, along with the data reporting a requirement of p65 for IFN gene expression, suggest that approaches that inhibit p65 would suppress RV-induced IFN in the asthmatic lung, further impairing antiviral immunity, increasing virus loads, virus-induced inflammation and exacerbation severity. Therefore, understanding whether or not NF-κB p65 is involved in IFN production to RV is extremely important and this key issue is yet to be addressed as there are no data reported on the causal role of p65 or type I IFN in lung host defence against RV infection using in vivo human and mouse models of RV. Further, the requirement of p65 for RV-induced antiviral IFN expression in human bronchial epithelial cells (HBECs) in vitro is also unknown. Determining the contribution of p65 to IFN-mediated antiviral and pro-inflammatory responses is vital to identifying therapeutic targets for RV-induced lower airway diseases. Demonstrating that IFN is critical for antiviral responses to RV in vivo is necessary to justify further development of IFN-based therapies (Hayden & Gwaltney, 1984; Koltsida et al, 2011).This is the first report investigating the role of p65 in immunity to a virus in vivo and includes combined studies in human and mouse models of RV infection to demonstrate that NF-κB p65 is a central regulator of RV-induced inflammation in the airways. Furthermore, we provide evidence that suppressing p65 expression, whilst reducing airways inflammation, did not affect IFN production or antiviral immune responses, despite over 20 years of in vitro experiments that suggest the contrary. Inhibition of p65 is therefore identified as an attractive target for development of anti-inflammatory therapies that would not further impair IFN responses in virus-induced asthma exacerbations. In doing so, we have also provided clear evidence that responses mediated by type I IFN in vivo are critical for antiviral responses to RV thereby identifying IFN as another therapeutic approach likely to be beneficial.RESULTSNF-κB is activated by RV infection in vivo in the lung and in vitro in primary bronchial epithelial cellsAs it is not known whether RV infection leads to activation of NF-κB p65 in vivo, we initially investigated this in human and mouse models of RV infection. Fig 1A shows increased activation of NF-κB p65 as assessed by p65 nuclear stained bronchial epithelial cells in bronchial biopsies, from baseline (BL) to day4 (D4) following experimental human RV infection (Message et al, 2008). NF-κB in lung tissue was also activated in a mouse model of RV infection. Induction of binding to labelled NF-κB-containing oligonucleotides was observed in nuclear protein extracted from whole lung of RV-infected mice. No signal was observed for mice dosed with UV-inactivated virus indicating that NF-κB activation was replication-dependent. NF-κB binding was also effectively competed with 100× excess unlabelled probe demonstrating NF-κB binding specificity (Fig 1B). Activation of p65 was confirmed by nuclear p65-DNA binding experiments performed over time in Bl/6 129 mice (Fig 1B). In HBECs, RV1B caused IκBα degradation from 8 h post-infection (Fig 1C) and NF-κB-dependent reporter gene activation (Fig 1D). Transfection of HBECs with plasmids expressing constitutively active forms of the RV RNA-sensing molecules RIG-I (ΔRIG-I) (Yoneyama et al, 2004) and TRIF (ΔTRIF; Slater et al, 2010; Yamamoto et al, 2003) also activated the NF-κB-dependent reporter (Fig 1D).Figure 1RV and RV-mediated signalling pathways activate NF-κB in vitro and in vivoHealthy human subjects (n = 5) were infected with RV16 and bronchial biopsies were taken prior to (BL) and D4 after infection and stained to quantify bronchial epithelial cell nuclear NF-κB p65. Horizontal line indicates a scale of 20 µM. Arrows indicate nuclear p65 staining. The negative control was stained with non-specific rabbit Ig rather than primary rabbit anti-p65 antibody. Graph shows each data point with mean, differences between groups were identified by t-test *p < 0.05.BALB/c mice were infected intranasally with RV1B. Negative controls were dosed with UV-inactivated RV1B or PBS intranasally and NF-κB activation in lung nuclear protein extract assessed by NF-κB-DNA binding in EMSA (upper panel). Presence of p65 in RV infection in vivo was confirmed by measuring nuclear p65-DNA binding in a timecourse performed in BL/6 129 mice (lower panel). Data was analysed by one-way ANOVA (n = 1 experiment, five mice per group) **p < 0.01.HBECs were infected with RV1B and IκBα degradation measured by Western blot.HBECs were infected with RV1B which caused activation of a minimal NF-κB promoter at 24 h compared to medium treated cells (n = 5 independent experiments). HBECs were transfected with plasmids encoding constitutively active molecules involved in RV sensing pathways, ΔRIG-I and ΔTRIF. Both ΔRIG-I and ΔTRIF induced NF-κB reporter activation relative to empty vector controls pEF-BOS and pUNO1, respectively (n = 6 independent experiments). Reporter data is presented as fold induction versus control and analysed by t-test ***p < 0.001 unless otherwise stated, as indicated all data are expressed as mean ± SEM.Allergen challenge with RV infection increases NF-κB p65 activation and NF-κB-regulated cytokines and chemokinesWe have previously reported that RV infection exacerbates allergic airways inflammation (Bartlett et al, 2008). Using this model, we examined NF-κB p65 activation at early time points (8 h) observing that live RV infection during allergen challenge (RV1B-OVA) increased NF-κB p65 DNA binding in lung nuclear protein extracts when compared to live infection alone (RV1B-PBS) and allergen challenge together with inactivated RV (UV-RV1B-OVA; Fig 2A). Either RV infection alone (RV-PBS) or OVA challenge with inactivated RV1B (UV-OVA) induced more NF-κB p65 DNA binding than that observed in double-negative controls (UV-RV1B-PBS; Fig 2A). NF-κB p65 activation in the context of allergen and virus challenge was associated with markedly increased induction of IL-6, which was not induced by either stimulus alone, and clear further augmentation of IL-1β, which was induced by virus but not allergen alone (Fig 2A). The pleotropic chemokine CCL5, which is a chemoattractant for both granulocytes and lymphocytes, was highly synergistically increased in RV1B-OVA compared to all other groups (Fig 2B). Lymphocyte attracting chemokines CXCL10, CXCL11 CCL17 and CCL22 were also highest in RV1B-OVA as were the eosinophil-attracting chemokines CCL11 and CCL24 (Fig 2B). This data is direct in vivo evidence that RV infection in the allergic lung causes increased NF-κB p65 activation and expression of NF-κB-regulated pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines implicating this transcription factor in the pathogenesis of RV-induced exacerbation of allergic airway inflammation.Figure 2Exacerbation of allergic airway inflammation involves enhanced NF-κB p65 activation and NF-κB p65-responsive genesBalb/c mice were sensitized by i.p injection of OVA and challenged 10 days later on 3 consecutive days with either intranasal OVA or PBS administration; receiving intranasal RV1B or UV-RV1B on the third day. BAL and whole lung was harvested at 8 and 24 h.From whole lung, nuclear NF-κB p65 DNA binding was measured at 8 h post infection. RV1B-OVA, RV1B-PBS and UV-RV1B-OVA had significantly elevated p65 binding versus UV-RV1B-PBS, and RV1B-OVA treated mice had increased p65 binding versus the other groups. At 8 h post infection, RV1B-OVA mice had increased BAL pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6, and IL-1β compared to RV1B-PBS or UV-RV1B-OVA treated groups.At 24 h post infection, RV1B-OVA mice had increased BAL CCL5, CXCL10, CXCL11, CCL17, CCL22, CCL11 and CCL24 compared to RV1B-PBS or UV-RV1B-OVA treated groups (n = 1 experiment with five mice per group or per time point). All data was analysed by one way ANOVA *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 versus UV-RV1B-PBS, #p < 0.05, ##p < 0.01, ###p < 0.001 versus RV1B-OVA group. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM.Specific inhibition of NF-κB p65 does not suppress RV-induced IFNs but inhibited pro-inflammatory chemokine production in bronchial epithelial cellsThe major IFN subtypes induced by RV infection of bronchial epithelial cells are IFN-β and IFN-λ (Khaitov et al, 2009). Using small interfering RNA (siRNA) in HBECs, we showed that NF-κB p65 was not required for RV-induced IFN-β, IFN-λ1 or IFN-λ2/3 at 24 h (Fig 3A). In the same experiments, p65-specific siRNA significantly and almost completely prevented RV-induced expression of pro-inflammatory chemokines CCL5, CXCL8 and CXCL5 (Fig 3B). In contrast to p65, IRF3 was required for RV-induced IFN-β and IFN-λ1 and IFN-λ2/3 mRNA expression (Fig 3C). Specific siRNAs reduced both target mRNA and protein levels (Supporting Information Figs S1 and S2) and, in the absence of RV, did not induce IFN or chemokine expression (Supporting Information Tables SI and SII) confirming the role of these transcription factors in expression of RV-induced genes. Furthermore, p65 siRNA did not affect expression of other Rel family members (Supporting Information Tables SIII) and IRF3 siRNA did not inhibit expression of IRF1, IRF5, IRF7 and IRF9 mRNA (Supporting Information Tables SIV). To further confirm that NF-κB p65 was not required for RV-stimulated IFN-β or IFN-λ expression, we investigated stimulation of wild-type IFN promoters by RV in the presence or absence of an IκBα dominant-negative mutant (DN). IκBα is the major IκB species that prevents p65 nuclear translocation (Urban & Baeuerle, 1990; Zabel & Baeuerle, 1990). We found that RV-induced IL-6 expression was significantly reduced by the IκBα DN, however, RV could still drive IFN-β and IFN-λ1 promoter activation in the presence of the IκBα DN, providing further evidence that NF-κB p65 activation is not essential for RV-induced IFN expression (Fig 3D).Figure 3NF-κB p65 is not required for RV-induced IFN but for RV-induced pro-inflammatory cytokine expression in HBECsHBECs were transfected with siRNA specific to NF-κB p65 or irrelevant control siRNA and infected with RV1B or treated with medium (n = 5 independent experiments). IFN mRNA was assessed and expressed as % of mRNA copies relative to RV infected and transfected with control siRNA. The p65 specific siRNA did not significantly reduce RV1B induced IFN-β, IFN-λ1 or IFN-λ2/3 at 24 h post infection.HBECs were transfected with siRNA specific to NF-κB p65 or irrelevant control siRNA and infected with RV1B or treated with medium (n = 5). Pro-inflammatory cytokine mRNA was assessed and expressed as % of mRNA copies relative to RV infected and transfected with control siRNA. The p65 specific siRNA did significantly reduce RV1B induced CCL5, CXCL8 and CXCL5.HBECs were transfected with siRNA specific to IRF3 or irrelevant control siRNA and infected with RV1B or treated with medium (n = 5 independent experiments). IFN mRNA was assessed and expressed as % of mRNA copies relative to RV infected and transfected with control siRNA. IRF3 specific siRNA reduced IFN-β, IFN-λ1 and IFN-λ2/3 mRNA at 24 h.BEAS-2B cells were transfected with a plasmid encoding IκBα DN or empty vector control along with a Renilla luciferase plasmid and the IL-6, IFN-β or IFN-λ1 promoters and infected with RV1B for 24 h. Lysates were harvested and firefly and Renilla luciferase measured. Reporter data is presented as a ratio of firefly/Renilla and converted to a % of RV1B infected empty vector control (n = 4 independent experiments). All data was analysed by one way ANOVA **p < 0.01 and ***p < 0.001 versus control siRNA or control vector plus RV1B, data are expressed as mean ± SEM.Unlike NF-κB p65, type I IFN signalling is critical for antiviral responses to RVTo define the role of p65 in vivo, we have used RV infection models using p65+/+ and p65+/− mice on a Bl/6 129 TNFR1−/− background. In this model, cellular responses induced by RV were replication-dependent as UV-inactivated virus did not induce airway inflammation (Supporting Information Fig S3). To demonstrate functional p65 deficiency, we showed that p65+/−mice expressed less p65 protein and exhibited less p65 activation during RV infection when compared to p65+/+ controls (Supporting Information Fig S4). To determine if the TNFR1−/− background influenced immune responses to RV infection, we performed additional experiments in wild-type Bl/6 129 mice. We found that wild-type Bl/6 129 mice and TNFR1−/−
p65+/+ Bl/6 129 mice both induced robust p65 activation, neutrophillic and lymphocytic inflammation, cytokine chemokine and IFN production (Supporting Information Fig S5). Consistent with the HBEC in vitro data, p65-deficient mice did not show reduced levels of type I or type III IFN following RV infection in vivo. In fact, p65+/− mice tended to produce more IFN protein in BAL compared with p65+/+ mice, and this was significant for IFN-α (Fig 4A). As p65+/− mice had intact or even enhanced IFN production, we hypothesized that lung antiviral interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) expression levels would also be comparable between p65+/+
and p65+/− mice whereas ISG expression would be impaired in IFNAR1−/− mice, which lack type I IFN receptor signalling. The NF-κB p65-regulated pro-inflammatory enzyme cyclooxygenase (COX-2) was used as a control in these experiments. As expected, RV-infected p65 deficient mice expressed significantly reduced levels of COX-2 mRNA compared with p65+/+ mice. In contrast, we observed normal RV-induced Viperin, double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase R (PKR) and 2′,5′-oligoadenylate synthetase 1 (OAS1A) expression in p65-deficient mice (Fig 4B). To confirm the importance of type I IFN signalling for antiviral responses to RV infection in the mouse model, we performed parallel infection experiments with wild-type (wt) and IFNAR1−/− mice and observed that production of type I and type III IFNs was significantly impaired (Fig 4C). In contrast to our observations in p65+/− mice, COX-2 gene expression was normal in the lungs of RV-infected IFNAR1−/− mice whilst ISG expression was severely impaired (Fig 4D). We next assessed the effect of NF-κB p65 suppression and absence of IFNAR1 signalling on RV load. RV viral (v) RNA increased from 8 to 24 h when it peaked at similar levels in p65+/+ and p65+/− mice, but was significantly increased in IFNAR1−/− mice compared wt controls (Fig 4E).Figure 4P65+/− mice exhibit robust antiviral responsesMice were inoculated with intranasal RV1B or PBS and harvested at various time points.NF-κB p65+/+ and p65+/− mice had similar BAL IFN-β levels at 8–96 h post infection, while p65+/− mice had significantly increased BAL IFN-α at 24 h but similar BAL IFN-λ levels at 8–96 h post infection (n = 2–3 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment). Data was analysed by two-way ANOVA **p < 0.01 as indicated.From lung tissue, ISG mRNA expression was determined by quantitative PCR at 24 h (n = 2 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group per experiment). NF-κB p65+/− mice had significantly reduced levels of COX2 mRNA whilst expressing similar levels of Viperin, PKR and OAS1A mRNA compared to p65+/+ mice at 24 h. Data was analysed by one way ANOVA *p < 0.05 as indicated.IFNAR1−/− had reduced IFN-α protein in BAL at 24–72 h and reduced IFN-λ at 48 h post infection compared to wild-type control mice (n = 2–3 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment). Data was analysed by two-way ANOVA ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01 as indicated.IFNAR1−/− mice had similar COX2 mRNA expression compared to wild-type mice however had reduced levels of Viperin, PKR and OAS1A mRNA at 24 h post-infection (n = 2 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group per experiment). Data was analysed by one way ANOVA *p < 0.05 as indicated.NF-κB p65+/+ and p65+/− mice had similar RV1B virus load whilst IFNAR1−/− mice had increased virus load compared to wild-type mice at 24 h post infection (n = 1 experiment with 4–6 mice per group or per time point). Data was analysed by two-way ANOVA, **p < 0.01 as indicated. ns = not significant, all data are presented as mean ± SEM.Lack of type I IFN signalling and reduced p65 expression differentially regulate RV-induced neutrophilic inflammationLung neutrophilia is associated with disease severity in asthma exacerbations (Message et al, 2008). We therefore investigated regulation of neutrophilic inflammation in p65+/− and IFNAR1−/− mice. Reduced expression of p65 clearly attenuated RV-induced airway neutrophilia in terms of both total number and percentage of cells in BAL and this was significant at 8 h post-infection (Fig 5A). Impaired neutrophil recruitment in RV-infected p65-deficient mice was associated with reduced induction of the neutrophil-attracting chemokines CXCL1, CXCL2 and CXCL5 at 8 h. In contrast, production of the granulocyte growth and activation factor GM-CSF was not different between p65+/+ and p65+/− mice (Fig 5B). We also investigated the role of IFNAR1 signalling in RV-induced airway neutrophilia. Initially, RV-induced neutrophil recruitment in IFNAR1−/− mice was similar to wild-type mice. However, by 48 h significantly increased numbers of neutrophils were observed in the BAL from IFNAR1−/− mice (Fig 5C). Consistent with similar kinetics of neutrophil recruitment and in contrast to p65-deficient mice, no differences in neutrophil chemokine production were observed, however, we did observe twofold increased GM-CSF levels in the BAL of IFNAR1−/− mice at 8 h (Fig 5D).Figure 5P65+/− mice have reduced airway neutrophilic inflammationMice were inoculated with intranasal RV1B or PBS and harvested at various time points.NF-κB p65+/− mice had reduced BAL neutrophils (total number and % of BAL cells) at 8 h compared to p65+/+ mice (n = 2–3 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment). Data was analysed by two-way ANOVA **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05 as indicated.At 8 h post infection, NF-κB p65+/− mice had reduced BAL CXCL1, CXCL5, CXCL2 but not GM-CSF compared to p65+/+ controls (n = 2 independent experiments with 8–12 mice per group). Data was analysed by one way ANOVA ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01, *p < 0.05 as indicated.IFNAR1−/− mice had increased BAL neutrophils (total number and % of BAL cells) at 48 h (n = 2–3 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment). Data was analysed by two-way ANOVA, *p < 0.05 as indicated.At 8 h post infection, IFNAR1−/− mice had equal BAL CXCL1, CXCL5, CXCL2 and elevated GM-CSF levels compared to wildtype controls (n = 2 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group per experiment). Data was analysed by one way ANOVA, **p < 0.01 as indicated, ns = not significant, all data are expressed as mean ± SEM.Type I IFN signalling, but not NF-κB p65, is critical for lung lymphocyte recruitmentRecruitment of lymphocytes to the airways is a cardinal feature of the host defence immune response to RV infection (Bartlett et al, 2008; Fraenkel et al, 1995; Message et al, 2008). We observed no differences between p65+/+ and p65+/− mice with respect to lymphocyte numbers or lymphocyte-recruiting chemokines in BAL following RV infection (Fig 6A) indicating that inhibition of p65 would be unlikely to impact on this aspect of host defence. The converse was true for type I IFN signalling. IFNAR1−/− mice were severely deficient for lymphocyte recruitment and this was associated with significantly impaired lymphocyte-recruiting chemokine (CCL5, CXCL10 and CXCL11) production in BAL (Fig 6B).Figure 6Type I IFN and not p65 are important for lymphocyte recruitmentMice were inoculated with intranasal RV1B or PBS and harvested at various time points.P65+/− mice had similar BAL lymphocytes at 8–96 h compared to p65+/+ mice (n = 2–3 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment), and had similar levels of BAL CCL5, CXCL10, and CXCL11 (n = 2 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment). Data was analysed by two-way ANOVA, ns = not significant.IFNAR1−/− mice had reduced BAL lymphocytes from 48–72 h post infection compared to controls (wt, n = 2–3 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment), and reduced BAL CCL5 at 24–48 h, reduced CXCL10 at 8 h elevated CXCL11 at 8 h which was reduced at 72 h (n = 2 independent experiments with 4–6 mice per group or per time point per experiment). Data was analysed by two-way ANOVA, ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01 as indicated, all data are expressed as mean ± SEM.IFNAR1−/− mice exhibit impaired NK- and T-cell responses to RV infectionWe next assessed the specific cell types that composed the early lymphocyte response to RV by flow cytometry. The details of the flow cytometry analysis are shown in Supporting Information Fig S6. In lung tissue, p65+/− mice had similar numbers of RV-induced NK cells that were activated [CD69+, granzyme B+ (Grz B+) or IFN-γ+] compared to p65+/+ controls. Numbers of activated (CD69+) T cells were also similar between p65+/− and p65+/+ mice. In contrast, these NK- and T-cell responses were significantly impaired in the lungs of IFNAR1−/− mice (Fig 7A). We also analysed NK- and T-cell responses in the BAL and found that p65+/− mice had similar numbers of NK, CD69+ NK cells, T cells and CD69+ T cells to p65+/+ mice. The IFNAR1−/− mice had almost no BAL NK or T cells at 72 h post RV infection. The few NK and T cells that could be detected in the BAL did not exhibit significant up-regulation of CD69 expression (Fig 7B).Figure 7Type I IFN but not p65 are important for antiviral NK- and T-cell responsesMice were inoculated with intranasal RV1B or PBS and harvested at 72 h.Flow cytometry was used to show that P65+/+ and p65+/− mice had similar numbers of lung CD69+ lung NK cells, NK cells expressing Grz B and IFN-γ and CD69+ CD3+ T cells (left panel) while IFNAR1−/− mice had reduced lung CD69+ NK cells and Grz B+ NK cells a trend for reduced numbers of NK cells expressing IFN-γ and less CD3+ CD69+ T cells compared to wildtype (right panel; n = 2 independent experiments with six mice per group per experiment for both). Data was analysed by one way ANOVA, ***p < 0.001, *p < 0.05 as indicated. ns = not significant.NF-κB p65+/+ and p65+/− had similar numbers of total BAL NK cells, CD69+ NK cells, total CD3+ T cells and CD69+ CD3+ T cells, (left panel). IFNAR1−/− mice had reduced numbers of BAL NK cells, reduced CD69+ NK cells, reduced CD3+ T cells and CD69+ CD3+ T cells (right panel; n = 2 independent experiments with six mice per group per experiment for both). Data was analysed by one way ANOVA, *p < 0.05 as indicated. ns = not significant. All data are expressed as mean ± SEM.DISCUSSIONWe have observed for the first time RV-induced activation of NF-κB p65 in the human bronchial epithelium in vivo and have used mouse models of RV infection to demonstrate that NF-κB p65 is a central regulator of RV-induced inflammation in the airways in vivo. Furthermore, we provide evidence that suppressing p65 expression, whilst reducing airways inflammation, did not suppress IFN production or antiviral immune responses. NF-κB p65 is therefore identified as an attractive target for development of anti-inflammatory therapies that would not further impair already deficient IFN responses in exacerbations of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD). In doing so, we have also provided clear evidence that responses mediated by type I IFN are critical for antiviral responses to RV in vivo. Thus, development of new therapies to replace deficient IFN responses in these conditions is also likely to be of clinical benefit.Historically, the IFN-β promoter has been thought to be activated via an enhanceosome, requiring the coordinated assembly of IRFs, NF-κB p65 and p50 subunits and the DNA-bending protein high mobility group protein-1 (HMG-1; Du & Maniatis, 1994; Panne et al, 2007). This paradigm has persevered for several years until experiments in the chemically mutated fibrosarcoma P2.1 cell line demonstrated that NF-κB was not required for dsRNA-induced IFN-β transcription (Peters et al, 2002). In these studies, the different subunits of NF-κB were not considered and this observation remained merely an interesting observation in an unusual cell type. More recently, studies in MEFs considered the role of NF-κB subunits including p65 and found that it wasn't required for IFN-β gene transcription in response to various viruses (Wang et al, 2007); yet, a follow-up paper then proposed that NF-κB p65 was crucial for early IFN-β induction before IRF-3 activation was maximal (Wang et al, 2010). These studies highlight that our understanding of IFN-β gene expression during virus infection is still very much incomplete. Importantly, no studies to date have investigated the role of transcription factors in regulating IFN induction by a clinically important virus in its natural host cell, and none have done so in vivo.In light of the current prevailing dogma, our findings that NF-κB p65 is not required for IFN-β induction in vitro or the antiviral response to RV in vivo at any time point are very surprising. Regarding the more recently discovered antiviral type III IFN-λs, three in vitro studies show that their induction is NF-κB-dependent (Onoguchi et al, 2007; Osterlund et al, 2007; Siegel et al, 2011). Studies reported here clearly showed no functional role in IFN-λ regulation for NF-κB p65 in vitro or in vivo.To define the role of p65, we have used RV infection models in vitro and in vivo where p65 expression is substantially reduced by up to 90% (Supporting Information Figs S1 and S4). We chose siRNA knockdown of p65 and an IκB DN as methods to inhibit NF-κB p65; another potential approach could have been pharmacological IKK-β inhibitors (Birrell et al, 2005; Frelin et al, 2003; Kishore et al, 2003). We elected to use molecular approaches over pharmacological inhibition of IKK-β as several reports describe IKK-β mediating IFN production (Chu et al, 1999; Schmolke et al, 2009; Wang et al, 2010), possibly through IRF3 activation (Han et al, 2004). It is possible that NF-κB may simply not be required for IFN-β and IFN-λ gene expression upon RV infection or that p65 has a less important role (Wang et al, 2007, 2010). Further experiments are required to distinguish between p65 acting in either a reduced capacity versus being completely irrelevant for IFN transcription. If p65 is required for IFN induction but at a reduced capacity, our data support the notion that p65 inhibition in vivo with available inhibitors that achieve substantial but incomplete p65 inhibition (Birrell et al, 2005) could be useful, as they would likely suppress inflammation but not affect IFN expression.To confirm our in vitro studies, we bred p65+/− mice for use in an in vivo model of RV infection. We first attempted to breed p65−/− mice but found these died from bacterial infection before 6 weeks of age despite antibiotic treatment and could not be studied. As p65 deletion is embryonic lethal (Beg et al, 1995), these mice are bred on a TNFR1-deficient background. The original report showed that p65-deficient mice had normal p50 expression, although the other NF-κB subunits were not examined. Despite the TNFR1−/− background, we still observed robust neutrophil accumulation in the BAL in p65+/+
TNFR1−/− animals, and wild-type Bl/6 129 mice were comparable to TNFR1−/−
p65+/+ mice in terms of airway neutrophilia, pro-inflammatory cytokine induction and p65 activation. Despite the obvious effect of partial p65 depletion on neutrophilia, the lack of effect of partial p65 depletion on IFN and ISG induction, NK cells, T cells and RV replication in vivo clearly demonstrated that NF-κB p65 was not important for IFN-mediated antiviral immunity to RV. Together, these data strongly suggest that targeted inhibition of p65 in vivo will still significantly impact on excessive airway inflammation without interfering with antiviral immunity. Hence, we provide important new evidence that IFN-β and IFN-λ are regulated independently of NF-κB p65 in an in vivo model relevant to human disease.NF-κB p65 activation is associated with inflammation in the airways of asthmatics (Hart et al, 1998). Little is known about RV infection and NF-κB in vivo, however, numerous in vitro studies have shown that RV infection is also a potent activator of p65, which in turn regulates production of pro-inflammatory cytokines (Funkhouser et al, 2004; Kato et al, 2007; Zhu et al, 1996, 1997). Here, we provide direct evidence in man and mouse that RV infection increases NF-κB activation in the lung. Based on separate studies of RV infection (Bossios et al, 2008) and asthma (Broide et al, 2005; Poynter et al, 2002; Stacey et al, 1997), it has been speculated that RV-induced asthma exacerbations are a consequence of allergen-induced responses and infection interacting to cause increased NF-κB activation and NF-κB-regulated inflammation in the airways. We can now report this to be the case in vivo demonstrating enhanced p65 DNA binding activity.Type I IFN is critical for antiviral immunity, which in turn is essential for efficient control of viral infection and resolution of associated immunopathology. Therapeutic anti-inflammatory approaches that impair innate IFN production may be harmful in asthma, where IFN-mediated antiviral responses are already deficient (Contoli et al, 2006; Wark et al, 2005). We show here that reduced NF-κB p65 expression did not affect antiviral immune responses and had no impact on virus load. RV infection of mice, which lacked the type I IFN receptor, had completely contrasting effects. Severely impaired antiviral responses were associated with increased viral load and prolonged neutrophilic inflammation. Showing that RV and allergen interact to enhance NF-κB p65 and airways inflammation, and by comparing RV infection in p65 gene-deficient mice has, for the first time, provided clear evidence that suppressing p65 is an attractive anti-inflammatory approach for asthma exacerbations that will not impair host antiviral defence. Furthermore, we definitively show the role of type I interferon in RV infection in vivo and its importance in controlling RV replication and RV driven inflammation, important endpoints in human exacerbations of asthma.Previous studies have shown that RV infection evokes IFN production from human lung bronchial epithelial cells (Khaitov et al, 2009; Slater et al, 2010) and IFN-β treatment stimulates antiviral resistance in RV-infected bronchial epithelial cells (Cakebread et al, 2011; Wark et al, 2005). Only one study has linked deficient production of RV-induced antiviral IFN with RV-induced disease severity in vivo (Contoli et al, 2006). From such studies, the importance of IFN in vivo has been inferred, however, causal relationships cannot be definitively established by correlations alone. Here, we have demonstrated that IFNAR1 signalling is required for amplification of IFN and maximal type III IFN protein expression. These data clearly demonstrate the importance of IFN-induced IFN for amplification of virus-induced IFN in antiviral immunity. For type III IFN, in the absence of type I IFN signalling, expression was deficient later (48 h) in the infection presumably because viral RNA levels had dropped by this time and there was no type I IFN signalling to amplify IFN-λ production. The temporal responses of type I IFN and IFN-λ in IFNAR1−/− mice highlight the critical role IFN production plays in a positive feedback loop, which is important in reducing peak virus load and virus-induced airways inflammation.Using recently developed mouse RV infection models, we and others have demonstrated RV replication in mouse lung tissue using detection of total or negative-strand viral RNA (Bartlett et al, 2008; Newcomb et al, 2008) or RV proteins in bronchial epithelium (Newcomb et al, 2008). However, the current mouse models do exhibit limited permissiveness for RV replication such that even in IFNAR1−/− mice (where antiviral responses are attenuated and virus titres are significantly higher than that in controls) virus clearance still occurs. Nonetheless, this model clearly identifies type I IFN signalling (and not NF-κB p65) as being important for controlling RV replication and inducing anti-viral immunity.This study is the first to distinguish molecules required for either RV-induced inflammation or anti-viral immune responses in vivo. A previous study investigated the importance of MDA5 and TLR3 for lung interferon and pro-inflammatory cytokine gene expression and RV clearance (Wang et al, 2011). Analyses were almost entirely limited to lung mRNA expression and anti-viral cellular responses were not reported. RV-infected MDA5-knockout mice did exhibit reduced IFN production, however, there was not a clear difference in viral replication. Wang et al also studied TLR3-knockout mice reporting absence of TLR3 has no effect on RV-induced type I or type III IFN production and virus clearance. This result is puzzling since studies by this group (Wang et al, 2009) and ourselves (Slater et al, 2010) have reported that TLR3 signalling is required for RV-induced IFN expression in vitro by primary HBECs. Our in vitro and in vivo models do support the conclusion that NF-κB p65 is not important for RV-induced IFN and anti-viral responses, yet is critical for RV-induced inflammation.The absence of IFNAR1 almost completely abolished RV-induced lymphocyte recruitment and lymphocyte chemokines. RV infection has been shown to directly induce expression of lymphocyte chemokines in vitro (Zaheer & Proud, 2010). For CXCL10 this has been shown to be directly regulated by IFN-β (Chen et al, 2006). Given the profound effect of IFNAR1 signalling on chemokine production and subsequent lung lymphocyte recruitment, we examined CD3+ lymphocytes and NK cells since they were likely to constitute the dominant early antiviral lymphocyte response in the lungs (Gazit et al, 2006; Taylor et al, 1985). IFNAR1−/− had reduced lung tissue and BAL NK-cell responses. Very little is known about the role NK cells play following RV infection other than the observation that human PBMC-derived NK cells are activated upon infection (Gern et al, 1996; Hsia et al, 1990; Levandowski & Horohov, 1991). No studies to date have examined RV-induced NK-cell responses in the lung. We demonstrate that RV infection elicits a type I IFN-dependent NK-cell response (involving up-regulation of CD69, Grz B and IFN-γ) in the lung.In conclusion, we report that inhibition of NF-κB p65 suppresses airway inflammation but does not impact on host antiviral defence suggesting that while crucial for inflammation, p65 is not critical for IFN gene expression and is therefore an attractive therapeutic target for RV-induced asthma exacerbations. In contrast, we show that type I IFN signalling is critical for effective anti-viral immunity and therefore replacement of deficient IFN in asthma exacerbations is a further attractive therapeutic approach.MATERIALS AND METHODSCells and virusesHBECs from non-asthmatic, non-smoking individuals were obtained from a commercial source (Clonetics, Wokingham, UK), and cultured in BEGM with supplements according to the suppliers recommended protocol (Clonetics). Unless otherwise stated, all data was derived from experiments from three different HBEC sources. BEAS-2B cells (European Collection of Cell Cultures) were cultured in RPMI with 10% FCS (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK). Major group RV16 and minor group RV1B were grown in HeLa cells. For in vivo use, RV1B was purified as previously described (Bartlett et al, 2008).Plasmids and siRNAΔRIG-I, PEF-BOS and IFN-β Luc-125 bp were gifts from T. Fujita (Kyoto, Japan). IL-6-Luc, containing a 651 bp fragment of the human IL-6 promoter was obtained from R. Panettieri. ΔTRIF and pUNO1 were purchased from Invivogen (Nottingham, UK). The IκBα DN mutant was purchased from Clontech, and pcDNA3.1 from Stratagene. IFN-λ1.3 Luc was produced by cutting a 371 bp fragment from the parental 1kB IFN-λ1 promoter (Osterlund et al, 2007) and subcloned into pGL3 (Promega, Madison, USA). All siRNA including control siRNA (specific for luciferase) were purchased from Dharmacon (Lafayette, CO, USA). SiRNA to each target were a pool of four individual siRNA, while the control siRNA was a single individual siRNA specific for an irrelevant gene (firefly luciferase).Transient transfections of HBECs and BEAS-2B cells with siRNA or plasmid DNAHBEC cells were cultured to 80% confluence in 12 well plates and transfected with 100 nM specific siRNA or control siRNA for 24 h prior to infection with RV1B. All siRNA experiments were performed and validated as previously described (Slater et al, 2010). HBECs were cultured to near confluence in 12 well plates and then transfected with 0.8 µg per well of a minimal NF-κB reporter (Agilent Technologies, Stockport UK), and 0.2 µg of Renilla plasmid (Promega) for 5 h. All transfections utilized Lipofectamine 2000 (Qiagen, Crawley, UK) according to the manufacturers recommended protocol. Complexes were removed, medium replaced and cells left for 24 h. Cells were infected with RV1B and lysates taken 24 h post infection. Alternatively, HBECs were transfected with 0.65 µg per well of ΔRIG-I, pEF-BOS control vector (Yoneyama et al, 2004) or constitutively active TRIF (ΔTRIF, Invivogen) or the pUNO1 control vector (Invivogen), 0.25 µg minimal NF-κB reporter and 0.1 µg Renilla as above. BEAS-2B cells were transfected with 0.1 µg per well of IκBα DN (Clontech), pcDNA3.1 as empty vector control (Stratagene) along with 0.7 µg per well of the IL-6 Luc, IFN-β or IFN-λ1 Luc promoter, with 0.1 µg Renilla (Promega). Transfections used Superfect (Qiagen), according to the manufacturer's recommended protocol. Lysates were harvested 24 h post transfection, and luciferase measured according to the dual luciferase protocol (Promega) on a Berthold luminometer (Berthold, UK). Data were expressed as ratios of firefly over Renilla luciferase.Infection of HBECsHBEC cells were placed in BEGM without serum or additives and then infected with RV1B or treated with medium for 1 h with shaking. Medium was replaced and lysates or supernatants harvested at relevant time points.Immunostaining of human bronchial biopsiesBronchial biopsies were obtained from five non-allergic, non-asthmatic, non-smoking individuals in a previous in vivo challenge study with RV16 (Message et al, 2008). All subjects gave informed consent and the study was approved by St Mary's National Health Service Trust Research Ethics Committee. Bronchial biopsies were embedded in Tissue Tek II OCT (Miles Scientific, Naperville, IL), frozen within 15 min in isopentane pre-cooled in liquid N2 and stored at −80°C. Frozen samples were then oriented and 6 µm thick cryostat sections were cut for immunohistochemical staining and analysis using light microscopy, as previously described (Di Stefano et al, 2002). We quantified the cells with at least a portion of the nucleus clearly seen close to the area of immunopositivity (Jeffery et al, 2003). The number of positive cells was enumerated, with a cell being scored positive if 50% or more of their nucleus stained positive for NF-κB p65.Mice and RV infectionsAll work involving mice was in accordance with legislation outlined by the Home Office, UK. TNFR1−/− NF-κB p65+/− mice and TNFR1−/− NF-κB p65+/+ on Bl6/129 background were bred as previous described (Quinton et al, 2007). IFNAR1−/− mice on C57/Bl6 background were bred in house, female Balb/c, Bl/6 129 and C57/Bl6 controls were purchased from Harlan (Harlan-Sprague-Dawley, UK). The mouse RV-infection and exacerbation of allergic airways inflammation models been described previously (Bartlett et al, 2008).BAL cell preparation and analysis by cytologyCells were pelleted by brief centrifugation, resuspended in ACK buffer to lyse red cells, washed with PBS and resuspended in 1 ml RPMI with 10% FCS. Cells were stained with Quik Diff (Reagena) for differential counts.Electrophoretic mobility gel shift Assay (EMSA) and assessment of nuclear p65 activationThe levels of NF-κB in the nuclear fraction were assessed by EMSA as described previously (Birrell et al, 2005). Nuclear NF-κB p65 activation in a model of RV exacerbation of allergic airways inflammation was also assessed using a commercial kit (TransAM p65 DNA binding assay, Active Motif, La Hulpe, Belgium), using 20 µg per well of nuclear protein and the manufacturer's recommended protocol.The paper explainedPROBLEM:Asthma is a disease affecting 300 million people worldwide. The majority of the morbidity and mortality of asthma is associated with asthma exacerbations, a form of the disease, which responds poorly to conventional asthma treatments. Respiratory infections by human rhinovirus account for most asthma exacerbations, with virus-induced lung inflammation and lung damage directly related to loss of lung function. Asthmatics are also deficient in production of type I and type III interferons, anti-viral cytokines required for defence against rhinovirus, although the role interferon plays in rhinovirus infection in vivo is incompletely elucidated. Importantly, several decades of research have suggested that NF-κB p65 is required for both virus-induced inflammation and interferon production; however, detailed investigations using virus–host combinations relevant to human disease are lacking.RESULTS:In vitro, in primary bronchial epithelial cells and cell lines, inhibition of NF-κB p65 resulted in inhibition of rhinovirus-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines, however, type I and type III interferons were not inhibited. In vivo, p65+/− mice had reduced neutrophils and pro-inflammatory cytokines but had intact anti-viral responses including interferons and intracellular anti-viral enzymes. In parallel studies, the importance of interferon in the host response to rhinovirus in vivo was revealed using interferon-α receptor 1-deficient mice (IFNAR1−/−), which had intact inflammatory responses but reduced anti-viral immunity in the form of type III interferon induction, anti-viral intracellular enzymes, lung T- and NK-cell recruitment and greater virus loads when compared to control mice.IMPACT:The data highlight the fact that in rhinovirus infection, protective anti-viral responses can be uncoupled from harmful, pro-inflammatory responses. Targeting NF-κB p65 may be a reasonable therapeutic strategy for asthma exacerbations, specifically addressing inflammation without compromising beneficial anti-viral immunity, which is sub-optimal in asthmatics. The data also question several years of research supporting the role of NF-κB p65 in type I interferon and type III interferon gene expression and that interferon is crucial to the control of rhinovirus infection in vivo.RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis and Quantitative PCRTotal RNA was extracted from HBECs (RNeasy kit, Qiagen), and 2 µg was used for cDNA synthesis (Omniscript RT kit, Qiagen). Total RNA was also extracted from the apical lobe of the mouse lung, and placed in RNA later (Qiagen), prior to RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis (as above). Quantitative PCR was carried out using specific primers and probes for each gene (Supporting Information Table SV). Reactions were analysed using an ABI 7500 TaqMan, (ABI Foster City, CA, USA). Each gene was normalized to 18S rRNA, and expressed as copies per microlitre cDNA reaction using a standard curve based on amplification with plasmid DNA. For siRNA experiments in HBECs, copy number was expressed as a % of copy number versus RV1B infected and transfected with control siRNA.ELISA analysis of BAL cytokine productionELISAs for mouse IFN-α, IFN-β, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL5, GM-CSF, CXCL11, CXCL10, TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, CCL5, CCL11, CCL17, CCL22, CCL24 and IFN-λ (IL-28) were from R&D Systems (Abingdon, UK). All ELISAs were used according to the manufacturer's recommended protocol.SDS–PAGE and Western BlottingWestern blotting, was performed as previously described (Slater et al, 2010), using the following primary antibodies; NF-κB p65, (0.2 µg/ml, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., CA, USA), IRF1 (1.2 µg/ml, Abnova Corporation, Taipei, Taiwan), IRF3 (0.2 µg/ml, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), IκBα (0.5 µg/ml, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), α-tubulin (1 µg/ml, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.), or β-actin (1 µg/ml, Biovision, Mountain View CA, USA).Flow cytometryLungs were crudely dissociated using the GentleMACS™ tissue dissociator (Miltenyi Biotech, Germany) and digested by incubating at 37°C in buffer containing 1 mg/ml collagenase Type XI and 80 units/ml Bovine Pancreatic DNase Type IV (both Sigma–Aldrich Dorset, UK). Single cell suspensions were attained by further GentleMACS™ dissociation, red cells were lysed with ACK buffer and cells were filtered through a 100 µm cell strainer. For IFN-γ and Grz B expression analyses by intracellular cytokine staining (ICS), lung cells were stimulated for 3 h with PMA (50 ng/ml) and ionomycin (500 ng/ml), (Sigma–Aldrich) in the presence of monensin (Golgi block, BD Biosciences. Lung and BAL cells were stained with Live/dead fixable dead cell stain kit (Invitrogen) with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 (FC block, BD Biosciences). Cell surface markers analysed: CD3e (clone 500A2), NK1.1 (clone PK136) and CD69 (clone H1.2F3; all BD Biosciences). For ICS, cells were permeablized with 0.5% saponin and stained for IFN-γ (clone XMG1.2, BD Biosciences) and Grz B (clone GB12, Invitrogen). Data were acquired using a nine colour CyanADP flow cytometer and Summit v4.3 software (both Dako Ely, UK). Analysis was also performed using Summit v4.3 software.Statistical analysisAll in vitro experiments were performed 4–6 times, all data expressed as mean ± SEM. Experiments using siRNA or transfection with plasmids were analysed by one-way ANOVA and Bonferroni's multiple comparison test. For differences between two groups, a student's t-test was employed with p < 0.05 taken as significant. Staining of human bronchial epithelium for p65 was analysed by using the t-test, p < 0.05 taken as significant. Experiments in the mouse model involved 4–6 animals per group, in up to three independent experiments. Data were analysed using two-way ANOVA and Bonferroni's multiple comparison test. All statistics were performed using Graph Pad Prism 4 software, with p < 0.05 taken as significant.Author contributionsAll experiments were conceived by MRE, NWB, LS and SLJ; LS, JJH and MRE performed in vitro work, with advice from SVK; NWB performed in vivo mouse model studies, JPM provided NF-κB p65+/− mice and assisted with experimental design; NG performed flow cytometery analysis on lung and BAL samples; DLC and NWB performed gel shift studies on mouse lung samples with advice from MB. Clinical samples from experimental RV infections were from a study performed by SDM and PM, with assistance from TK and JA; JZ, PC and GC performed immunohistochemistry of bronchial biopsies for nuclear p65 with advice from AP; MRE, NWB and SLJ wrote the manuscript.


Title: Human rhinovirus infections in symptomatic and asymptomatic subjects

Rhinovirus infections are among the most frequent causes of the common colds (18). It is the most common etiology of viral respiratory infections among diverse populations, including adults, children and more recent studies have linked HRVs to more severe lower respiratory illnesses in otherwise healthy young children (11–12), immunocompromised (4, 6), and elderly patients. (5, 13, 23). In Brazil, there are few HRV studies, Arruda et.al. (1991), realized the first Brazilian study detecting a 45.5% rate on symptomatic children in Fortaleza – CE. Another study realized in Salvador – BA also showed a high prevalence (48.5%) (Souza ,2003). The only study describing adults was realized by Bellei and colleagues (2007) detecting 37.7%.The dynamic of rhinovirus transmission is relevant to address for the epidemiology characteristics of infection within families, schools and nosocomial outbreaks. Rhinovirus can be easily transmitted from person to person mainly through hand contact with infected respiratory secretions (15). Studies of asymptomatic infected individuals pointed to 15 – 30% rates (9, 19, 14, 20, 7, 19) of HRV infection but the role of infected subjects as reservoirs for secondary cases infections is unknown.Many studies have investigated the occurrence of rhinovirus among community cases but there is a lack of information about the frequency of rhinovirus asymptomatic cases. We investigated HRV infections rates on selected populations of a pair of one child and one family member, health care workers (HCW), and immunocompromised patients with and without respiratory symptoms from June to September.In this study, a total of 191 nasal swab (NS) specimens were collected from three groups. One hundred and eleven health care workers (HCW) from São Paulo Hospital, 36 pairs of one child and one family member and 8 blood marrow transplanted hospitalized patients (BMT). They were considered eligible symptomatic patients if possible viral etiology within 7 days of symptoms onset. The clinical criterion was presentation of at least one respiratory symptom (cough, sore throat, or nasal congestion) and one constitutional symptom (headache, malaise, myalgia, chills). For asymptomatic patients the criteria was the absence of respiratory symptoms up to one week before sampling. All subjects were interviewed by a research team after evaluation by a physician. Written informed consent was obtained from all adult participants; parents provided consent on behalf of children participants and a questionnaire was applied including demographic data, place of work, their clinical presentation and household children contact.The symptomatic group included subjects with acute respiratory infections (ARI): children, BMT patients and health care workers. The asymptomatic group included one parent of each symptomatic children, health care workers caring for BMT symptomatic patients or others referring a close contact with symptomatic patient in the hospital.The nasal swab was obtained from the single nostril from a depth of 2 – 3 cm by using a sterile swab that was then inserted into a vial containing 2.0 ml of viral transport medium (Cultilab, Brazil). The samples were immediately transported to the Clinical Virology Laboratory for routine respiratory viruses testing. All samples were stored at -70ºC until analyzed.For each sample the viral RNA was extracted using QIAamp Viral RNA extraction Kit (QIAGEN, Germany), according manufacturer´s instructions. Amplification of 5’NCR and VP4/VP2 genes of HRV was done by RT-PCR assay described elsewhere (17–18), with minor modifications. The eluted RNA was transcribed into cDNA with Moloney Murine Reverse Transcriptase (MMLV-RT; Invitrogen, USA) and virus specific oligonucleotide primer, for 1 h at 37°C. After, MMLV-RT denaturation at 70°C, virus-specific oligonucleotide primer (0.6µM), 2.5U Platinum Taq DNA Polymerase (Invitrogen, USA), 1x PCR Buffer, 0.2mM each dNTP, 3.5mM MgCl2 and nuclease-free water were added. The amplification condition was performed in a thermo cycler under the following settings: initial denaturation at 95° for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles consisting of denaturation (45 sec at 95°), annealing (45 sec at 61°C), and DNA extension (1 min at 72°C). The presence of PCR products were visualized on an 1,5% agarose gel electrophoresis according to their 549bp molecular weight. Positive (HRV-39) and negative controls (water) were tested in all reactions.Descriptive statistics consisted of the characterization of the studied individuals and the assessment of symptomatology and rhinovirus infection through calculation of the respective percentages, median value and range. Bivariate analysis consisted of Fisher’s Exact Test for the comparison of categorical values, with a significance level of p < 0.05. In multivariate analysis, non-conditional logistic regression was used to identify associations between presence of symptomatology, groups of individuals and rhinovirus infection status. All reported values are two-tailed. The dependent variable was presence of rhinovirus infection and the independent variables were presence of symptomatology and groups of individuals. The results were presented as odds ratio (OR) with the respective 95% confidence interval (CI) and p value. All data were entered into and analyzed by using SPSS version 11.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).Epidemiological and clinical characterization of patients is shown in Table 1.Table 1Epidemiological and clinical characterization of patientsCharacteristicsNo .Cases (%)childparentHCWBMT PatientsMedian age , years (range)6.2 (0.5 - 12)58.5(27–66)25.5 (21–44)51.3 (19–80)Gendermale17 (47.2)2 (5.5)36 (31.8)6 (75)Female19 (52.8)34(94.5)75 (68.2)2(25)Smoker06(16.7)2 (1.8)exposure to children (≤ 5 years)-17 (47.2)23 (20.3)2(25)Patient contact-31(86.1)94 (83.2)1 (12.5)Health Statusno comorbidities-26(72.2)110 (97.4)-Asthma-3 (8.3)1 (0.8)-Others lung diseases-2 (5.5)--diabetes-1 (2.8)--Hypertension-3 (8.3)2 (1.8)-Cardiovascular diseases-1 (2.8)--Total36361118HCW – health care workersBMT – bone marrow transplanted hospitalized patientA total of 191 samples from both symptomatic (81) and asymptomatic cases (110) were tested for the presence of rhinovirus and 23 samples (12%) were positive. HRV was detected in 23.5% (19/81) of symptomatic subjects, compared with 3.6% (4/110) of asymptomatic subjects. The HRV infection was associated with the presence of symptoms [p <0.0001, OR 8.1 (95% CI 2.6 – 25.0)].Table 2 shows the HRV infection rates among symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals, divided by groups. Six isolated cases of symptomatic parents negative for HRV were excluded from this analysis. There were no significant associations.Table 2Rhinovirus infection among symptomatic and asymptomatic subjectsSymptomaticPositiveNegativepOR(95%CI)Child9 (25%)27 (75%)-1Health care worker8 (25.8%)23 (74.2%)0.941.04 (0.35–3.14)BMT Patient2 (25%)6 (75%)1.001.00 (0.17–5.87)AsymptomaticPositiveNegativepOR(95%CI)Parent2 (6.7%)28 (93.3%)0.302.79 (0.37–20.73)Health care worker2 (2.5%)78 (97.5%)-1BMT Patient----The symptoms reported by symptomatic group were fever (38.5%), coryza (86.7%), cough (74.7%), headache (21.7%), sore throat (35%), myalgia (12%). Wheezing was observed in 39% of children, but none of them were HRV positive. The symptoms among positive children cases were coryza (100%), cough (77.8%) and fever and sore throat (22%).The rate of rhinovirus infection among a pair of asymptomatic parent of a rhinovirus symptomatic child was 2.8% (1/36). This was the only case with a close contact with a laboreatory confirmed patient. The others three asymptomatic infection had no close contact with positive symptomatic studied patients. Two symptomatic patients reported close contact a BMT patient and his nurse.Rhinovirus infections occurred all over the year in Brazil (2). There is a lack of studies about asymptomatic rhinovirus infections. The majority of reported data regarding asymptomatic rhinovirus infections have been conducted in hospitalized children elsewhere and high rates were reported -12% to 45% (16, 14, 7, 3). Jartti et al. (2008) reviewed many studies describing asymptomatic subjects with high respiratory virus detection rates using PCR techniques. Van Kraajj and colleagues (2005) identified etiology in 63% and 9% of symptomatic and asymptomatic adult stem cell transplants recipients respectively, and rhinovirus was the predominant pathogen detected.In our study, HRV was detected more frequently in symptomatic than asymptomatic individuals as previous reported (21, 22, 10) and a low rate as identified by Johnson et al. (1993) in their study among in immunocompetent adults (4%). Discrepancies among different studies may be explained by the fact that most of them included hospitalized children instead of community population. Indeed nosocomial transmission may occur without clinical expression.Health care workers group had a 25.8 % rate. Bellei and colleagues (2007) reported the detection of HRV in 37.7% of symptomatic health care workers samples. Professional profile is an important transmission pathway in hospitals. Long-term clinical studies can clarify the impact of this reservoir in the transmission of the virus for patients (10).We found a high frequency of rhinovirus infection in parents than health care works. The study from Bellei and colleagues (2008) also reported that 39% of those HCW had exposure to children up to 5 years old and rhinoviruses were detected in half of the personnel from pediatric wards.Despite of the small number of subjects included, our study showed lower detection in selected asymptomatic individuals in contrast to previous studies that found higher frequencies on epidemiological surveys. Further studies would contribute to better understand the dynamic of rhinoviruses infections.


Title: Rhinoviruses

IntroductionThe common cold has that name for a reason: It is the illness that most frequently affects humans around the world. Rhinovirus is the causal agent for about 50% of common colds.Human rhinovirus (HRV) has a special affinity for the nasal airway mucosa (rhino means nose). Rhinoviruses can infect ciliated cells in the nasal epithelium but may also infect other nasal cells. ICAM-1 is the receptor that most rhinovirus serotypes use to gain entrance into human cells (Greve et al., 1989). A minority of rhinovirus serotypes use the LDH receptor and one rhinovirus serotype uses sialoprotein. Rhinoviruses belong to the Picornavirus family and are closely related to the enteroviruses. In contrast to enterovirus, however, rhinovirus is killed by gastric acid and does not cause gastrointestinal infection in normal individuals. Laboratory detection of infectious rhinovirus has been performed in human fibroblast monolayer cultures for many years. Recently, more sensitive methods for detection of rhinovirus RNA utilizing reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) technology have provided new perspectives toward understanding the epidemiology of rhinovirus infection, and the clinical implications continue to be developed.EnvironmentRhinovirus is common throughout the world. Adults usually contract colds from children living in the same household. Crowded places such as nursery and day care centers, schools, and military camps are ideal settings for high transmission rates of rhinovirus among young adults and children. Rhinovirus infections occur throughout all seasons, but the infection rate of rhinovirus colds seems to vary during the year due to the prevalence of other more seasonal respiratory viruses. Rhinovirus accounts for up to 80% of colds during the fall season in temperate areas of the United States, but occur less frequently during the winter and spring months when influenza virus types A and B, parainfluenza types I–III, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, coronavirus, metapneumovirus and bocavirus are also present. In tropical areas, the respiratory virus season coincides with the rainy season from May through November. Recent new epidemiologic data of rhinovirus infection determined by RT-PCR suggest that the relative number of rhinovirus infections over the year is fairly constant. It is interesting to note that the frequency of rhinovirus infections may not be a result of the effects of temperature or humidity on rhinovirus survival in nature, but rather that climate alters human behavior. One hypothesis suggests that minor climate changes, such as cooler air or rainy days, will keep people indoors and thereby increase the risk of rhinovirus transmission.TransmissionMost rhinovirus infections are thought to occur when virus deposited onto the fingertips is introduced to the conjunctiva or nose (self-inoculation from fomites), although small particle aerosol transmission is also a potential inoculation route. The number of rhinovirus particles required to infect nonimmune individuals is low; indeed, a tissue culture infectious dose50 less than 10 can cause infection. Rhinovirus deposited in the conjunctiva reach the nose by way of the tear duct to cause infection in the nose. The eye is not infected following deposit of rhinovirus. Inoculation of rhinovirus into the oral mucosa does not cause infection of the oral or tonsillar mucosa. Saliva may occasionally contain a small amount of rhinovirus, probably from diluted nasopharyngeal secretions, but in general transmission by coughing, sneezing, kissing, or drinking from the same glass is not likely to occur in otherwise healthy individuals. On the other hand, transmission of rhinovirus in nasal mucus from a person with a cold to a susceptible individual is likely either by touching shared environmental objects or by direct hand-to-hand contact (handshakes, holding hands, or high fives) followed by self-inoculation with a contaminated finger into the nose or eye. Rhinovirus can survive on environmental surfaces for at least 4 days. Adults with colds commonly contaminate environmental surfaces during normal daily activities. An individual is most contagious during the first several days of the cold, when the concentration of rhinovirus in nasal secretions is highest. Rhinovirus infection may also play an important role in dispersal of bacteria, such as community-acquired methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), especially among children.PathogenesisRhinovirus has a propensity to affect young children disproportionately. A recent study demonstrated that preschool-age children have approximately six rhinovirus infections per year. These infections are caused by different rhinovirus serotypes. Each serotype is thought to give lifelong immunity, but with at least 100 different rhinovirus serotypes, it is no wonder that colds are common. Rhinovirus replicate in the nasal cells for up to 3 weeks until the humoral neutralizing antibodies terminate the infection. Following rhinovirus infection, most individuals develop neutralizing antibodies of 1:16 dilution or greater, and are resistant to reinfection with the same serotype. Rhinovirus infection causes lysis of the infected cells and a decrease in nasal mucociliary clearance. However, the nasal lining remains intact, as observed by light and scanning electron microscopy (Figure 1
), because only a limited number of cells are infected at one time. The symptoms of a rhinovirus infection are thought to be caused by the host response to the rhinovirus infection (Hendley, 1998) due to an elaboration of pro-inflammatory mediators and cytokines, and the influx of a high number of polymorphonuclear cells.Figure 1Scanning electron microscopy showing intact nasal epithelial surface with ciliated cells. From a patient with a common cold (day 2).Several inflammatory pathways, including neurologic reflexes triggered by the infection, have been identified as playing a role in the pathogenesis of rhinovirus symptoms. Increased kinin levels are found in nasal secretions during rhinovirus infection and may be responsible in part for sore throat symptoms and contribute to rhinorrhea due to plasma transudation (Proud et al., 1990). Kinins are also thought to release histamine from mast cells, although most studies have not demonstrated elevated levels of histamine in nasal secretions during colds. Inflammatory events that occur during rhinovirus infection include stimulation of pain, cough, and sneeze reflexes, vasodilation, transudation of plasma, and increased glandular output of secretions from goblet cells and seromucous glands. The parasympathetic tone is increased during the early phase of a cold, resulting in an increase of secretions from the anterior serous gland on the nasal mucosa. Several pro-inflammatory mediators are increased (e.g., interleukin (IL)-1, -6 and -8). IL-8 is a chemoattractant for polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) and results in an influx of PMNs on days 1 and 2 during rhinovirus infection. The number of PMNs increases about 100-fold in nasal secretions and has been found to correlate well with symptom expression. Colored nasal discharge (yellow or green) occurs in about 50% of adults and correlates with the increased number of PMNs, but bacteria have not been shown to increase in the nasopharynx during uncomplicated colds.Symptom Expression of a Rhinovirus InfectionAlthough the majority of rhinovirus infections occur in children, our knowledge of the symptomatology is mainly acquired from adults. Accurate determination of symptoms is a challenge in children because symptoms are reported second-hand by parents trying to interpret what their child may feel. Two studies have evaluated the expression of cold symptoms in children who were brought to the doctor. A recent study evaluated cold symptoms in normal school-age children who actively participated with the parent in recording their symptoms (Winther, 2002). Cough, nasal congestion, and runny nose were present in roughly 60% of school-age children and continued for more than 10 days in uncomplicated colds. Feverishness was reported in 15% during the early phase. Rhinovirus was detected in 46% of these reported colds, and one or more bacterial pathogens were isolated in 29%. Symptom profiles for rhinovirus illnesses versus those with bacteria isolated were not different. In adults, 60% of those with colds report sore throat, sneezing, nasal discharge and obstruction, while cough and malaise are reported in approximately 40%. Fever is rare in uncomplicated colds, and feverishness is reported in less than 10% of adults with colds. Most cold symptoms in adults have diminished by day 7, with sneezing, congestion, and runny nose reported in less than 20%, whereas cough is still reported as present in roughly 40%.Different serotypes of rhinovirus are thought to cause a similar symptom profile, although the symptom severity may vary due to the influence of stress and the status of the immune system and host responsiveness. Experimental rhinovirus infections with two different rhinovirus serotypes have demonstrated that approximately 20% of antibody-free adults become infected following rhinovirus challenge but do not report symptoms. The reason for this is unknown, but a similar trend has been found in children. Roughly 30% of children may have a rhinovirus infection without the signs or symptoms of a cold. This may be caused by infection without symptom expression, or that the cold symptoms are not recognized by the parents.Signs of Rhinovirus InfectionExamination of the nasal cavity in adults with rhinovirus infection reveals an increase in nasal secretions but is otherwise unspecific, since abnormal erythema and swelling of the turbinates is seldom observed. Rhinovirus infection causes abnormalities in the Eustachian tube and middle ear. Eustachian tube dysfunction results in intermittent negative middle ear pressure and fluid accumulation. Abnormal middle ear pressure can easily be measured by tympanometry and is present in 40–75% of rhinovirus infections in both children and adults. Approximately 40% of young children have changes in middle ear pressure prior to the time when the parent or caretaker realizes that the child has a cold (Moody et al., 1998). The causes of abnormal middle ear pressure during colds are unknown. Rhinovirus infection of the adenoid in the nasopharynx may result in Eustachian tube dysfunction, or rhinovirus infection may spread into the Eustachian tube and middle ear.Abnormalities of the paranasal sinuses are also very common during the course of rhinovirus infection, as evidenced by computed tomographic scanning (CT scan). Image studies have shown sinusitis during the first week of illness in up to 75–87% of children and young adults, suggesting that sinus involvement is an inherent feature of a cold. It has recently been shown that nose blowing can generate intranasal pressure sufficient to propel nasal secretions into the sinus cavity. The majority of the abnormalities observed by CT scans during colds are likely due to accumulation of sinus secretions rather than mucosal swelling. Stagnant secretions in the sinuses may be due to blockage in the ostiomeatal complex, a narrow opening from the sinus to the nose, or it may be due to decreased ciliary clearance in the sinuses.Clinical DiagnosisColds in adults are usually self-diagnosed, as everyone is familiar with the symptoms of a cold. Adults may commonly misdiagnose the involvement of a viral infection in the sinuses and middle ear as a bacterial complication, when in fact it is part of the rhinoviral infection.Differential diagnoses to common colds are allergic rhinitis and vasomotor rhinitis, both of which will usually produce more prolonged sneezing attacks than the common cold. Rhinovirus infection can be distinguished from classic influenza in adults based on the more acute onset of malaise and frequently occurring fever present with influenza. However, milder cases of influenza cannot be easily distinguished from rhinovirus infection, especially in children.Clinical ImplicationsFollowing introduction into the nose, rhinovirus can first be recovered from the adenoid area in the nasopharynx. Over several days, newly produced rhinovirus is excreted into the nasal mucus and may be distributed to other areas of upper respiratory mucosa. Adults seem more prone to paranasal sinus involvement, whereas young children seem more prone to otitis media during colds. The paranasal sinuses are not fully developed until about age 12, but other factors may also influence these differences. Children are not good nose blowers and thus may be less likely to spread rhinovirus into the sinuses. On the other hand, children spend more time asleep, and a horizontal position may facilitate the spread of mucus (and thus rhinovirus) into the middle ear cavity. Rhinovirus has been demonstrated in fluid obtained from the maxillary sinus/ear cavity of 40–50% of patients with acute sinusitis and otitis media (Pitkaranta et al., 1997, Pitkaranta et al., 1998). Multiple rhinovirus infections may cause hypertrophic adenoids (lymphatic glands in the posterior oropharynx) in children with blockage of the nasal passages, and consecutive rhinovirus infections in children without a wellness period in between may create a clinical picture simulating the chronic sinusitis seen in adults (chronic nasal discharge for more than 6 weeks).It is very difficult to distinguish an acute viral otitis media or sinusitis from an acute bacterial otitis media or sinusitis. It is generally accepted that acute bacterial sinusitis complicates an estimated 0.5–2.2% of viral colds. The complication rate of acute bacterial otitis media following colds is not clear (Hendley, 2002). Suppurative otitis media, defined as a bulging tympanic membrane with purulent middle ear fluid or purulent otorrhea from a perforated tympanic membrane, occurs in only 2–15% of young children, but mild otitis media may occur in 40–50%. One problem may be that viruses and bacteria gain entrance to the sinus and ear cavities and are trapped without causing real mucosal invasion or infection.In addition to the sinuses and middle ear, rhinovirus may also spread to the lower airways. Young children commonly develop bronchiolitis/reactive airway disease during rhinovirus infections (Heymann et al., 2005). The mechanism by which rhinovirus infection induces wheezing is not well understood. Adults with chronic bronchitis frequently develop exacerbation of their illness during rhinovirus infections with transient decreased pulmonary function. Rhinovirus is also an important precipitant for asthma attacks in both children and adults. The severity of cold symptoms is not greater in allergic patients with rhinovirus infection than in normal individuals, but patients with allergic rhinitis have increased airway responsiveness to histamine during rhinovirus infections.Serious Complications of Rhinovirus InfectionsFatal pneumonia caused by rhinovirus infection has been reported in immunocompromised patients.TreatmentAt the present time, there is no commercially available antiviral drug for treatment of rhinovirus infections. Intranasal interferon-α2b topically applied for 2 days has been shown to decrease viral titers in nasal secretions (Gwaltney, 1992). Nonprescription drug treatments to relieve symptoms are available to and often warranted by cold sufferers, but treatment measures to prevent rhinovirus infections from further development into viral otitis media, viral acute sinusitis, or bronchiolitis are not available.Infants have the highest prevalence per year of otitis media as a result of frequent colds. Public perception that bacteria cause colds and that antibiotics are required for otitis media with colds continues to fuel the inappropriate overprescription of antibiotics for colds. Infants with colds also have the disadvantage of being obligate nose breathers. Cold remedies for infants introduce the potential for enhanced toxicity since metabolism and drug excretion vary by age and safe dosing levels have not been established in infants. Evacuation of secretions from the nasal cavity with a bulb suction device remains the best option at this point in time. Mild fever may be treated with acetaminophen for few days.Symptomatic or supportive therapies are widely used in older children and multiple treatment choices are available. Many treatment options are based on a combination of drugs targeted at several cold symptoms at once. Parents and caregivers are unrelenting in their search for cold remedies for their children and often turn to herbal medicines (e.g., Echinacea herbal derivatives) with unknown and potentially harmful effects. It is important for clinicians to obtain detailed information about the administration of cold remedies from the caregiver when seeing a child with an upper respiratory tract infection. Unintentional dosing errors, especially in young children, can have catastrophic outcomes.Evidence of symptomatic relief of cold in adults has been demonstrated with several drugs.Nasal SpraysA methacholine nasal spray can reduce the amount of nasal secretions, which often pour from the nose during the first few days of a cold (Borum et al., 1981). After 1 or 2 days, when nasal breathing becomes difficult due to the increased viscosity of the nasal secretions, a nasal decongestant spray such as oxymethazoline can relieve congestion. Topical nasal steroid sprays are not recommended for rhinovirus infection; the symptomatic benefit is limited and viral shedding is actually increased.Oral Combination TherapiesOral antihistamines with anticholinergic and sedative effects (first-generation antihistamines such as chlorpheniramine and brompheniramine) and oral sympathomimetics (such as pseudoephedrine hydrochloride and phenylephrine hydrochloride) have been shown to be efficacious in adults for reducing nasal congestion, cough, and sneezing during colds. Codeine and dextromethorphan are used to suppress cough, but have not been shown to be effective in controlled studies with patients with colds.Oral Anti-inflammatory MedicationsAspirin, naproxen, and ibuprofen are effective for reducing systemic aches, headache, and sore throat. In addition, naproxen has been shown to diminish cough and ibuprofen to reduce sneezing. Oral steroids have not been shown to be beneficial for symptomatic relief in rhinovirus infection. Anti-inflammatory treatment of rhinovirus colds increases viral shedding.Hand SanitizersA reduction in the frequency of rhinovirus infections might be possible through interruption of transmission, since rhinoviruses must be acquired from another person. However, the alcohol gels commonly used as hand sanitizers to prevent colds were not shown to reduce rhinovirus infections in a controlled field trial (Sandora et al., 2005). In laboratory tests, alcohol may reduce titer but does not eradicate rhinovirus. Careful hand-washing will remove rhinovirus.Socioeconomic ImpactAlthough a single rhinovirus infection is generally mild and self-limited, the frequency of colds produces morbidity that is a challenge to public health officials. Colds occur at an estimated rate of one billion per year in the United States, with about 25 million patients seeking medical care for uncomplicated upper respiratory illness and 5 million for otitis media. Colds account for an estimated 22 million missed days of school and 20 million absences from work annually. It is obvious that a better understanding of the pathogenesis of rhinovirus infections and more effective treatment modalities would have a strong impact on public health.See also
Bacterial Infections: Overview; Enteroviruses; Influenza; Pneumonia



Title: Airborne rhinovirus detection and effect of ultraviolet irradiation on detection by a semi-nested RT-PCR assay

BackgroundRhinoviruses have been associated with 40% to 65% of "common colds" studied by methods of virus culture [1,2]. With the use of reverse transcriptase – polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), rhinovirus has been shown to be associated with 53% of all colds throughout the year and up to 92% of colds during the autumn outbreak period [3]. Rhinviruses have been implicated in the exacerbation of asthma symptoms [4] and may even play a role in asthma related deaths [5]. Due to their role in the exacerbation of asthma symptoms, rhinoviruses are a major cause of pediatric hospitalizations [6].Although rhinoviruses have been thought to be transmitted via large droplets or contact [7], studies in the 1980's demonstrated that fomites are not an effective means of transmitting rhinovirus infections [8-10]. While direct inoculation of respiratory secretions has been shown to transmit infection, this is not a likely route of transmission in older children and adults as survival on hands is brief [9]. Airborne transmission of infection was clearly demonstrated in one experimental study on adults [8]. However, in the absence of epidemiological studies designed to conclusively identify modes of transmission, the role of airborne transmission in viral respiratory infection remains controversial.An impediment to future studies of airborne transmission of respiratory infections is the lack of established methods for the detection of airborne respiratory microorganisms appropriate for epidemiological studies. Several laboratory studies have been conducted in which aerosolized respiratory viruses have been collected and quantified with culture based methods [11-13]. These studies were conducted to determine the effects of temperature and relative humidity on the infectivity of respiratory viruses, but their methods are not suitable for the extremely low concentrations of virus in field experiments. PCR based assays have been employed to detect airborne respiratory viruses in a number of small studies conducted in hospital rooms of infected patients [14-17] and in pig houses [18].To determine if airborne microorganisms can be inactivated, and therefore, prevent infection transmission, studies during the 1940's–1970's used ultraviolet germicidal irradation (UVGI) to inactivated airborne microorganisms under experimental conditions [19-22] and reduced airborne infections in a number of settings, such as hospitals [23], military housing [24], and classrooms [25]. However, UVGI was not effective against the highly contagious measles virus when children had extensive contact in buses and crowded tenements [26,27]. Thus, it fell into disfavor and has not been extensively employed nor has it been studied using molecular methods of detecting its efficacy.Because we anticipate future studies of UVGI will use PCR based detection methods, it is important to determine how PCR assays react to UVGI damaged genetic material. In DNA, UVGI predominately produces damage in the form of cyclobutylpyrimidine dimers and (6–4) photoproducts. These photoproducts disrupt the replication of the genetic material and, therefore, inhibit the replication. There is limited information regarding the effect of UVGI on RNA. There are conflicting studies on viruses with RNA genomes that have attempted to determine if PCR assays are inhibited by UVGI. Two studies involving hepatitis A virus (single-stranded positive sense RNA genome) and rotavirus (double-stranded RNA genome), showed their PCR assays to be inhibited by UV inactivation of the viruses [28,29]. Conversely, Ma et al showed no effect of UV on a PCR assay when they irradiated poliovirus (single-stranded positive sense RNA genome) [30]. In this study, we present an extremely sensitive PCR based assay to detect airborne rhinovirus and demonstrate the effect of ultraviolet irradiation on the assay.MethodsOrganismWe obtained rhinovirus 16 strain 11757 from ATCC (Manassas, Virginia) with a titer of 107.25 particles per 0.2 ml. The suspension was diluted with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) to create four different concentrations to be used in the experiment.Aerosolization and chamber descriptionWe generated a rhinoviral aerosol with a 6-jet Collison nebulizer (model CN-38, BGI, Waltham, MA), which generates 2-μm mass-median diameter (MMD) droplets when run at 20 psig of air pressure [31]. The nebulizing solution consists of PBS, diluted virus, and 0.05 g/l uranine. We used the uranine as a fluorescent tracer, so that some filters could be used to determine the percentage of actual collection versus theoretical collection. The aerosol was generated in a specially designed aerosolization chamber that had been used in studies of UV sensitivity of Serratia marcescens and bacilli Calmette-Guérin (Figure 1) [32].Figure 1Schematic diagram of the experimental chamber. a: Teflon filter; b: manifold; c: baffles; d: UV fixture; e: UV exposure chamber; f: sampling slide; g: air valve; h: port with the same features as the port below; i: drying jar; j: Collison nebulizer; k: pressure regulator; l: air valve; m: vacuum pump; n: rotameter; o: temperature and RH sensorThe chamber consists of four parts: a drying jar, a 165 mm square duct where the aerosol first enters the chamber, a UV exposure chamber, and sampling ports. We attached a Collison nebulizer to the drying jar, where the aerosol is given time to dry, before entering the square duct through a 9-port manifold, which creates a uniformly distributed aerosol. The aerosol next enters the UV exposure chamber. The UV exposure chamber is comprised of a fused quartz UV exposure window (279 × 254 mm), on which a UV fixture containing six 36-watt UV lamps (Lumalier, Memphis, Tennessee) sits. We inserted two types of screens beneath the UV fixture to adjust the level of irradiance. Downstream of the exposure chamber a slide contains three ports. One port is used to collect the aerosol sample with our sampling filters (Teflo 2.0 μm pore, Pall Gelman, Ann Arbor, Michigan) mounted in filter cassettes (Millipore Corp., Bedford, Massachusetts) while the other ports can be loaded with two Teflo filters in series, to allow a bypass while changing sampling filters. Two filters were used in the bypass to ensure that no aerosol escaped the chamber. The multiple ports allow changing of filters without interrupting the aerosol flow. Makeup air passes through a Teflon filter prior to entering the chamber to prevent environmental microorganisms from entering the chamber.Filtered air was pumped through the chamber at a rate of 8.5 l/min monitored by a rotameter. To provide additional protection, the experimental chamber was housed within a Class II, Type A biosafety cabinet. Although temperature and %RH were not controlled, they were measured with continuous monitors (HOBO H08-004-02 four channel data loggers, Onset Computer Corp., Bourne, Massachusetts) downstream of the sampling filters.Aerosol proceduresAirflow through the chamber was maintained at 8.5 l/min for 10 minutes. We then began the aerosolization of the rhinoviral solution and allowed the aerosol to flow through the bypass filter for 20 minutes. Air samples were then collected for 10 minutes. For sampling runs that included testing for effects of UV exposure, the UV radiation was turned on and allowed to warm up for 10 minutes while airflow was directed through the bypass filter. An air sample was then collected for 10 minutes. Three replicates of UV exposed and nonexposed particle samples were collected during each sampling run. Aerosols were exposed to an irradiance level of 30 mW/m2 for 22.8 s for a UV dose of 684 mJ/m2.Spiking experimentsPrior to the aerosol experiments, we spiked filters with progressively more dilute viral suspensions to determine the limit of detection of our extraction and semi-nested RT-PCR assay. For spiking, 1 μl methanol was placed on the filter as a wetting agent followed by 1 μl of diluted virus. Filters were and allowed to dry prior to extraction. We also spiked one filter prior to each aerosol chamber run as a positive control. To test the stability of virus on the filters, a test was conducted in which spiked filters were used to collect air samples for one week in our laboratory, which has single pass air and is therefore an unlikely source of rhinovirus.Filter extractionWe placed the filters face down in a 60 mm petri dish using sterile forceps. We then added 560 μl of prepared AVL buffer containing carrier RNA (Qiagen QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit) and 140 μl phosphate buffered saline (PBS). After placing the lids on the dishes, the dishes were secured to an orbital tabletop shaker (VWR Scientific Products, Thorofare, New Jersey) and rotated for 20 minutes at 360 RPM. After shaking, we pipeted the eluted material from the petri dish into a sterile microfuge tube.RNA extractionWe extracted the RNA from the filter samples with the Qiagen QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit following manufacturer's protocol. The use of the Qiagen QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit resulted in 80 μl of purified viral RNA.Semi-nested RT-PCR amplificationFollowing extraction, we first amplified the picornavirus RNA using primers OL26 (5'-GCA CTT CTG TTT CCC C-3') [33] and OL27 (5'-CGG ACA CCC AAA GTA G-3') [33] using the Invitrogen SuperScript One-Step RT-PCR with PLATINUM Taq Kit (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, California). The PCR mixture contained 2 × reaction buffer (0.4 mM of each dNTP, 2.4 mM MgSO4), 1 μl of each primer (0.2 μM), 1 μl RT/PLATINUM Taq Mix and 10 μl of the RNA template in a final volume of 50 μl. We conducted the PCR reaction in a MJ Research (Watertown, Massachusetts) PTC-200 Peltier Thermal Cycler programmed with an initial cDNA synthesis and pre-denaturation step of 50°C for 30 minutes and 94°C for 2 minutes followed by then 36 cycles of denature, annealing and extension (15 s at 94°C, 30 s at 55°C, 30 s at 68°C).We then amplified the PCR products from the RT-PCR step using primers OL26 (5'-GCA CTT CTG TTT CCC C-3') and JWA-1b (5'-CAT TCA GGG GCC GGA GGA-3') [34]. The PCR mixture contained 2 × reaction buffer (0.4 mM of each dNTP, 2.4 mM MgSO4), 1 μl of each primer (0.2 μM), 0.25 μl AmpliTaq (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California) and 10 μl of RT-PCR product in a final volume of 50 μl. We conducted the PCR reaction for 36 cycles of denature, annealing and extension (15 s at 94°C, 30 s at 55°C, 30 s at 68°C), followed by a final extension of 4 min at 72°C.Gel electrophoresisAmplified products were detected by electrophoresis analysis on 2% agarose gel containing 8 μl of ethidium bromide per 200 ml of gel followed by examination under UV light.PCR productsThe OL26 and OL27 primer pair generates a 388 base pair amplicon from a region of the 5' noncoding region of the picornavirus genome. The semi-nested primer pair of OL26 and JWA-1b generates an amplicon of ~292 base pairs from within the original amplicon. The 292 bp amplicon does not differentiate between rhinovirus and enterovirus [34].Uranine analysisUranine was used as a fluorescent tracer, which allowed us to determine a percent yield for each sampling run. To determine the amount of aerosol collected on each filter, uranine analysis was conducted on three filters per sampling run, one each from the beginning, middle and end of each run. The filters used for uranine analysis were removed from cassette holders and placed into a 100 mm test tube with sterile forceps. We added 5 ml of PBS to each tube and sonicated for an hour with vortexing every 15 minutes. We also collected samples of the nebulizing fluid before and after nebulization. Filter samples and nebulizing fluid samples were diluted with 0.01 N NaOH and analyzed with a spectrofluorometer (excitation 485 nm and emission 535 nm) (Tecan Corp. Spectrafluor Plus, Mannedorf, Switzerland). We averaged the results of the three filters to calculate an estimated percent yield for the sampling run.Data analysisThe amount of uranine nebulized during each sampling run was determined by measuring the amount of fluid consumed and by measuring the fluorescence of nebulizing fluid before and after each sampling run. Using the total aerosolization time during the sampling run, we determined the amount of uranine that theoretically would be on each filter if we collected 100% of the aerosol generated during the 10-minute exposure of each filter. Using the filter samples that were analyzed for uranine, we determined the actual amount of uranine collected per sample. We averaged the three filter samples per run and divided by the total amount of uranine consumed to determine a percent yield (observed/expected) for the sampling run.We computed the expected number of TCID50 on each filter sample from the known TCID50 and fluid volume added to the nebulizer, the amount of nebulizing fluid consumed per minute, and the sampling time. The expected TCID50 was adjusted for the yield for the uranine samples.ResultsWe were able to obtain from the dilution gradient filter spiking experiments a positive band from a 1:500,000 dilution of virus, which translates into a detected amount of approximately 0.77 TCID50 or 0.39 PFU's per filter. The stability tests, in which, filters spiked with 25 TCID50/filter were used to collect air samples for 40 hours did not display any difference in band strength compared to control filters. Figure 2 displays the results from the aerosol experiments with the lowest concentration of virus detected.Figure 2PCR analysis of experimental contaminated air samples from VA Run 13 Lane 1: Marker; Lane 2:Nebulizer solution before run; Lane 3: Nebulizer solution after run; Lane 4: Filter sample; Lane 5: Filter sample; Lane 6: Spiked filter; Lane 7: Filter sample; Lane 8: Blank filter; Lane 9: Positive control; Lane 10: Negative control.Table 1 summarizes results of the aerosol experiments, including the expected TCID50 captured on each filter during each sampling run and the number of filters that produced positive RT-PCR results. The limit of detection of our semi-nested RT-PCR assay with primers OL26, OL27 and JWA-1b is in the range of 1.3 TCID50/filter, yielding a clearly visible 292 bp band. No signal was detected from samples with 0.5 TCID50/filter. The percent yields for each sampling run, were low, ranging from 4% to 10%. Temperature and relative humidity were recorded in the air downstream of the chamber. The average temperature inside the chamber was very consistent, ranging from 26.4°C to 27°C and the %RH ranged from 24.9 to 50.7.Table 1Detection of Experimental Rhinovirus 16 Aerosols by Semi-nested RT-PCR of Filter SamplesNebulizing SolutionRun NumberTCID50 per mlTotal ml NebulizedFractional Sampling Time per FilteraYieldbPredicted TCID50 per FiltercPositive Filters/TotalVA Run 1216.115.20.1360.0411.43/3VA Run 1710.124.20.0850.1032.13/3VA Run 136.515.00.1420.0931.32/3VA Run 143.316.70.1190.0720.50/3aSampling time of each filter (10 minutes) divided by total run time. bFluorescence yield (observed/expected) for sampling run. cPredicted = TCID50 per ml * Total ml nebulized * Fractional sampling time per filter * Yield.Figure 3 shows the results from test of the effect of UV exposure on aerosolized rhinovirus. Lanes 5 and 6 contain PCR products from filters containing UV exposed aerosol. No difference was detected between the UV exposed and nonexposed filter samples.Figure 3PCR analysis of experimental contaminated air samples from VA Run 17 Lane 1: Marker; Lane 2:Nebulizer solution before run; Lane 3: Nebulizer solution after run; Lane 4: Filter without UV exposure; Lane 5: UV exposed filter; Lane 6: UV exposed filter; Lane 7: Filter without UV exposure; Lane 8: Spiked filter Lane 9: Filter without UV exposure; Lane 10: Blank filter; Lane 11: Positive control; Lane 12: Negative control.In order to determine if the uranine in the viral suspension was inhibiting the extraction and detection assay, two otherwise identical runs were conducted – one with and one without uranine. Each sampling run was conducted with nebulizing solution containing 10.1 TCID50 per ml. Results of the two runs were identical, demonstrating that the uranine was not inhibitory to the extraction or RT-PCR assay.DiscussionThe majority of rhinoviral transmission among adults is thought to occur via airborne infectious droplet nuclei [8-10]. This study was conducted to assess the ability to detect airborne rhinovirus on air sampling filters and documents the first successful attempt to detect airborne rhinovirus using RT-PCR amplification-based techniques. These techniques allow for a highly sensitive method to conduct air sampling for rhinovirus. This assay also is capable of detecting aerosolized enterovirus, although future studies are necessary to confirm the limit of detection for enteroviral aerosolsOur limit of detection for the collection, extraction and amplification of aerosolized rhinovirus was 1.3 TCID50. The spiking experiments we conducted had a limit of detection of approximately 0.8 TCID50 or 60% of what was detected when the virus was aerosolized. These results can be interpreted in several ways. One possibility is that the virus may be damaged during the process of aerosolization in the Collison nebulizer, and that the RNA from the damaged virus cannot be amplified. This explanation would account for the results shown in Figure 2 where the nebulization solution prior to aerosolization yielded a positive result while after aerosolization we obtained a negative result. Another possible explanation is that it is easier to extract the virus from a dried liquid droplet, as was done in the spiking experiments, than from an aerosol spread uniformly over the filter surface.We were unable to recover the majority of aerosol that was expelled into the chamber. The main reason for the low yields appears to be the result of large droplets falling out in the drying jar prior to entry into the exposure chamber. Because the yields were the same regardless of the UV status, the low yields should not affect our results.Previous studies have shown that UV inhibits PCR assays in single and double stranded RNA viruses,[28,29] while our RT-PCR method did not detect a difference between UV exposed and nonexposed rhinoviral aerosols. The most likely reason for this is a matter of dose, although it is possible that characteristics of the particular viruses and PCR methods could also explain the results. Neither of the previous studies were conducted on aerosolized virus and the dose of UV was several orders of magnitude greater. This study, did not determine whether the rhinovirus aerosol was capable of infection after exposure to the high UV dose used in these experiments. It is possible that the UV irradiation damaged other regions of the viral RNA and not the region that our primers amplified, or that the amount of damage required to prevent RT-PCR amplification is greater than the amount of damage sufficient to prevent infection. This suggests possible future studies to investigate the relationship between UV damage, infectiousness, and detection by RT-PCR of various regions of the rhinovirus genome.The limit of detection of our assay must be put into context with the amount of virus shed by an infectious individual. A study of rhinoviral shedding detected a titer of at least 1,600 TCID50 per ml of nasopharngeal wash in 17 out of 26 infected volunteers [35]. So it is clear that infected people can produce a large amount of virus, but it is unknown how much of that virus becomes airborne through coughs, sneezes, respiration and talking.Two studies have attempted to determine the infectious dose 50% (ID50) of rhinovirus for humans [36,37]. The ID50 for microorganisms depend on at least four criteria: (1) the strain of the organism, (2) the route of transmission, (3) the method of inoculation, and (4) host immunity. In a study published in 1966, investigators from the U.S. Army Biological Laboratories and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, conducted a series of tests designed to determine if respiratory viral agents were transmitted via the aerosol route. Using rhinovirus type 15, they inoculated volunteers in the nose with both nasal drops and an aerosol (particle size 0.3 to 2.5 μm). The authors estimated a human ID50 of 0.032 TCID50 for nasal drops and 0.68 TCID50 for aerosols [36]. In a study conducted in 1984, researchers inoculated volunteers with rhinovirus type 16 with droplets of viral suspension in several locations. The authors determined the ID50 for nasal drops was 0.28 TCID50 [37]. If we assume that the infectious dose is acquired through an aerosol, the aerosol data from 1966 suggests that our assay can detect an amount approximately equal to twice the ID50 in humans. But, if the spiking experiment is a better estimate of actual detection limit due to the inactivation by the nebulizer, then our detection limit is approximately equal to the ID50.Caution must be taken when interpreting results from PCR-based air samples. Nucleic acid detection methods, such as the one presented here, are capable of detecting very small quantities of microorganisms, but these techniques cannot determine if the microorganism is infectious at the time of detection.ConclusionsThe filter collection and PCR-based detection methods developed here offers some clear advantages over the use of more traditional methods such as impinger collection and cell culture based detection. The use of filter collection allows for a much longer sample time, while impingers cannot be used for longer than 15–20 minutes. As was demonstrated here, filters can be used to collect at least 40-hour samples without reduced ability to detect virus on the filter. Cell culture methods, while useful in determining the amount of infectious virus, could not be used to detect the very low levels of infectious virus present in room air because collection of viable virus over long sampling times is not currently feasible. Therefore, the use of filter collection and PCR based detection is the only method presently available to detect low concentrations of respiratory virus in air. However, at UV doses much higher than typically used in upper room UV applications, this method was unable to distinguish between UV irradiated aerosols and nonexposed aerosols.AbbreviationsPBS – Phosphate buffered salineMMD – Mass-median diameterRT-PCR – Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reactionTCID50 – Tissue culture infectious dose 50%UVGI – Ultraviolet germicidal irradiationCompeting interestsNone declaredAuthors' contributionsTM participated in the study design, the modification of the chamber, and performed the aerosol experiments and molecular assays. SJ participated in development of the molecular assays and study design. SR participated in the design of the study and modification of the chamber. DM participated in study design and coordination of the study.Pre-publication historyThe pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:


Title: Transmission of colds

No full text body available.


Title: Fomite-mediated transmission as a sufficient pathway: a comparative analysis across three viral pathogens

BackgroundWhile pathogens are sometimes transmitted by direct contact between infected and susceptible individuals, the environment is often an important mediator of transmission. Water, food, and fomites can act as environmental reservoirs, enhancing pathogens’ ability to be transmitted from host to host. A thorough understanding of these environmental pathways that affect risk can provide important opportunities for public health interventions.Microbial risk assessment has a long history of focusing on risks associated with food and water transmission pathways. There is growing recognition, however, that many diseases previously considered to be primarily transmitted through direct contact, may in fact have significant fomite-mediated pathways. For example, norovirus, estimated to be responsible for 93% of nonbacterial gastroenteritis outbreaks in the United States [1], is transmitted not only by food and water, but also via contaminated surfaces. Influenza infection, annually costing greater than $10 billion in direct medical expenses [2], is transmitted through multiple routes: the air, direct droplet-spray (which may be thought of as direct contact), and potentially fomite-mediated transmission. Rhinovirus has also been shown to be transmitted through contaminated surfaces [3, 4]. Guidance on appropriate non-pharmaceutical interventions (e.g., masks, hand hygiene, and surface decontamination) depend on the dominant model of transmission [5].In spite of the potential significance of fomite-mediated transmission, there is a longer tradition of environmental risk assessment and modeling environmental infection transmission through water [6, 7], food [8, 9], and even the air [10]; only recently has there been published work on fomite-mediated transmission [5, 11–14]. These fomite transmission models explicitly model pathogen transmission to susceptible hosts by assuming that pathogens in the environment only cause infection when they are eventually transferred to a susceptible host, an important departure from traditional transmission models that ignore pathogens in the environment. As such, this exposure pathway may be counteracted by: 1) natural background inactivation of the pathogen, 2) background clearance (e.g. air exchanges), and 3) intervention measures that aim to remove pathogen contamination (from air, water, hands, or surfaces). The effect of these measures may vary substantially between specific pathogens due to differences in environmental persistence and transfer efficiency from one medium to another.To better understand fomite-mediated transmission across pathogens, we use microbiological and epidemiological data to inform a mechanistic compartmental model of the dynamics of contact and pathogen transfer between individuals via their hands and fomites, pathogen persistance in the environment, and pathogen shedding and recovery of infected individuals. We use this model to compare and contrast three viral pathogens (norovirus, influenza, and rhinovirus) that differ in their environmental persistence and shedding rates. We also examine the impact of venue contact rates, age groups present within the given setting, and contamination-accessible surfaces on transmission. We broadly conceptualized the differences in these variables as roughly corresponding to three general types of venues: subways, offices, and schools/daycares.We selected three viral pathogens that varied in their persistence on hands and fomites to illustrate how different environmental sensitivities influence transmission dynamics. For each pathogen, we review the literature to summarize specific environmental transmission parameter values. Next, we use these pathogen-specific parameters to calculate the transmissibility of each pathogen in a range of venues. Finally, we ascertain the degree to which transmission of each pathogen may be controlled through environmental interventions (either hand hygiene or surface decontamination). Our focus here is a comparative analysis of fomite transmission across pathogens and venues. This analysis does not compare transmission that might occur by other routes, allowing us to focus on the impact of fomites as a reservoir of pathogens as well as interventions specifically targeting this pathway.MethodsEITS modelOur model is an extension of the Environmental Infection Transmission System (EITS) modeling framework [12, 14]. Individuals are divided among susceptible (S), infectious (I) and removed (R) compartments. Pathogens that survive outside the host either contaminate a fomite (F) or individuals’ hands. We explicitly track the transfer of pathogens to and from hands and designate the hands compartments as the sum of all pathogens in susceptible hands (HS), infectious hands (HI) and removed hands (HR). We note that hand contamination is separate from infection status–a person who is infected may not have contaminated hands and a susceptible person may have contaminated hands. Individuals with contaminated hands may become infected through self-innoculation. The dynamics of the system are driven by the following events: 
Inoculation. An individual’s hands, which could be contaminated with pathogens, touch the mouth and other membranes that could be a route of infection at a rate ρ. A fraction χ of the pathogens present in the hands (HS/S, in the case of susceptibles) are transferred to an exposure site (e.g., the nasal mucosa). The probability of infection is modeled by the linear dose-response function P. Therefore, new infections emerge at a rate ρP(χHS/S).Fomite touching. Individuals touch fomites at a rate ρT, exchanging pathogens on fomites and hands. Transfer efficiencies are denoted by τFH (fomite to hand) and τHF (hand to fomite). Due to the lack of bidirectional measurements, some mathematical models assume τFH=τHF. [14, 15]. However, recent studies have questioned the validity and consequences of this assumption [16]. Where bi-directional measurements were available, we parameterized these two transfer events separately. During a touching event, the amount of pathogens acquired is a function of the expected quantity of pathogen on F, the rate of effective touching (ρTτFH) and the size of the area touched by fingers (κ, proportional to λ), so that the overall transfer of pathogens from fomites to hands is ρFH=ρTτFHκ, while ρHF=ρTτHF.Excretion. Shedding by an infectious individual (coughing, sneezing, exhaling, vomit, etc.) at a rate α contributes to contamination of surfaces and hands. A pathogen units are shed per excretion event, and a proportion ϕH of it is deposited in hands, while the remaining ϕF=1−ϕH is collected in surfaces. Only a proportion λ of surfaces is accessible for contamination. The parameter for the proportion of accessible surfaces is an abstraction to represent that not all fomites can realistically be shed upon. The pathogen contamination rates to hands and surfaces are given by αH=AαϕH and αF=AαϕFλ, respectively.Pathogen inactivation (decay). Pathogens in the environment are inactivated at rate μF on fomites and μH on hands.Recovery. Individuals transition from the I to the R class after recovery, at a rate γ.Cleaning. Decontamination occurs at the hourly rate ΘF on fomites and ΘH on hands. Each cleaning event has an efficacy of qF and qH. The product of these two terms (θF for fomites and θH for hands) gives the effective pathogen removal rate per hour due to the cleaning intervention.We model these dynamics using the following ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The fomite compartment describes the contamination of fomites (averaged) in a particular venue and takes units of pathogen/hour. Table 1 provides a complete list of parameters. 
1\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ {{}\begin{aligned} \frac{dS}{dt} & = - \rho P(\chi H_{S}/S) S, \quad \quad \frac{dI}{dt} = \rho P(\chi H_{S}/S) S - \gamma I, \quad \quad \frac{dR}{dt} = \gamma I \\[.2cm] \frac{dF}{dt} & = a_{F} I - (\rho_{FH} N + \mu_{F} + \theta_{F}) F + \rho_{HF} (H_{S} + H_{I} + H_{R}) \\[.2cm] \frac{dH_{S}}{dt} & = \rho_{FH} S F - \mu_{H} H_{S} - \rho_{HF} S \tfrac{H_{S}}{S} - \theta_{H} H_{S} \\ &\quad - \rho S \left[ \tfrac{H_{S}}{S} P(\chi H_{S} / S) + \chi \tfrac{H_{S}}{S} (1 - P(\chi H_{S} / S))\right] \\[.2cm] & = \rho_{FH} S F - (\mu_{H} + \rho_{HF} + \chi \rho + \theta_{H}) H_{S} - (1-\chi) \rho P(\chi H_{S} / S) H_{S} \\[.2cm] \frac{dH_{I}}{dt} & = \rho_{FH} I F - \mu_{H} H_{I} - \rho_{HF} I \tfrac{H_{I}}{I} - \chi \rho I \tfrac{H_{I}}{I} - \theta_{H} H_{I}+ a_{H} I \\ &\quad+ (1-\chi) \rho H_{S} P(\chi H_{S} / S) - \gamma I \frac{H_{I}}{I} \\[.2cm] & = \rho_{FH} I F - (\mu_{H} + \rho_{HF} + \chi \rho + \theta_{H}) H_{I} + a_{H} I\\ &\quad+ (1-\chi) \rho P(\chi H_{S} / S) H_{S} - \gamma H_{I} \\[.2cm] \frac{dH_{R}}{dt} & = \rho_{FH} R F - \mu_{H} H_{R} - \rho_{HF} R \tfrac{H_{R}}{R} - \chi \rho R \tfrac{H_{R}}{R} - \theta_{H} H_{R} + \gamma H_{I} \\[.2cm] & = \rho_{FH} R F - (\mu_{H} + \rho_{HF} + \chi \rho + \theta_{H}) H_{R} + \gamma H_{I} \end{aligned}}  $$ \end{document}dSdt=−ρP(χHS/S)S,dIdt=ρP(χHS/S)S−γI,dRdt=γIdFdt=aFI−(ρFHN+μF+θF)F+ρHF(HS+HI+HR)dHSdt=ρFHSF−μHHS−ρHFSHSS−θHHS−ρSHSSP(χHS/S)+χHSS(1−P(χHS/S))=ρFHSF−(μH+ρHF+χρ+θH)HS−(1−χ)ρP(χHS/S)HSdHIdt=ρFHIF−μHHI−ρHFIHII−χρIHII−θHHI+aHI+(1−χ)ρHSP(χHS/S)−γIHII=ρFHIF−(μH+ρHF+χρ+θH)HI+aHI+(1−χ)ρP(χHS/S)HS−γHIdHRdt=ρFHRF−μHHR−ρHFRHRR−χρRHRR−θHHR+γHI=ρFHRF−(μH+ρHF+χρ+θH)HR+γHI
Table 1List of pathogen-specific parameters values and references used to produce Figs. 3 and 4InfluenzaRhinovirusNorovirus
Pathogen-specific parameters
1/γ: Infectious6[38–40]10.4[41]15[42]period (days)α: Shedding rate (pathogen hours −1 people −1)1×104[43–45]1×103[46, 47]2.88×103[48, 49]μF: Inactivation rate0.121[50–52]1.44[53, 54]0.288[8]in fomites (hours −1)(0.058, 0.121)(0.990, 1.44)(0.0006, 0.288)μH: Inactivation rate88.2[13, 50, 52]0.767[55]1.07[9, 56, 57]in hands (hours −1)(55.2, 88.2)(0, 1.07)τFH: Transfer0.1[13, 16, 50, 58]0.2[55, 59–61]0.07[62]efficacy (F to H) (proportion)(0.04, 0.16)(0.1, 0.40)(0.051, 0.089)τHF: Transfer0.025[13, 16, 50, 58]0.2[55, 59–61]0.13[62]efficacy (H to F) (proportion)(0.01, 0.04)(0.1, 0.40)(0.094, 0.166)ϕH: Pathogen0.150.150.90excreted to H (proportion)(0.10, 0.2)(0.10, 0.2)(0.50, 1)ϕF: Pathogen1−ϕH1−ϕH1−ϕHexcreted to F (proportion)π:Infectivity parameter in contactwith x pathogens (unitless) a6.93e-052.46e-34.78e-4aH: rate pathogens are added to hands
α
ϕ
H

α
ϕ
H

α
ϕ
H
(pathogen time −1 people −1)
Venue-specific parameters
λ: Accessible surfaces (proportion)(0, 0.6)(0, 0.6)(0, 0.6)κ: fingertip to surface ratio per individual
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\frac {6e-06}{\lambda }$\end{document}6e−06λ

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\frac {6e-06}{\lambda }$\end{document}6e−06λ

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\frac {6e-06}{\lambda }$\end{document}6e−06λ
(1/people) bρT: Rate of fomite touching (days −1)(0, 60)(0, 60)(0, 60)ρFH: rate of pathogen pick up from fomites to hand
ρ
T
τ
FH
κ

ρ
T
τ
FH
κ

ρ
T
τ
FH
κ
1/(days × people)ρFH: rate of pathogen deposit from hand to fomite
ρ
T
τ
HF

ρ
T
τ
HF

ρ
T
τ
HF
1/(days × people)aF: rate pathogens are added to fomites
α
ϕ
F
λ

α
ϕ
F
λ

α
ϕ
F
λ
(pathogen days −1 people −1)
Cleaning parameters
ΘF: Rate of fomite cleaning (days −1)(0, 2)(0, 2)(0, 2)ΘH: Rate of hand cleaning (days −1)(0, 3)(0, 3)(0, 3)qF: Fomite cleaning efficacy (proportion)111qH: Hand cleaning efficacy (proportion)111θF: Effective fomite cleaning rate
q
F
Θ
F

q
F
Θ
F

q
F
Θ
F
θH: Effective hand cleaning rate
q
H
Θ
H

q
H
Θ
H

q
H
Θ
H

Fixed parameters (across pathogens

and venues)
ρ: Inoculation (hours −1)15.8[23, 24]15.8[23, 24]15.8[23, 24]χ: proportion of pathogens absorbed when111self-inoculation occurs (proportion)a Parameter fixed based on linearization of the dose-response curveb Parameter fixed based on relative finger to body size.Point values appear on the left and references to the right. A range is also included for parameters that were used to perform a sensitivity analysis. Derived parameters are shown as a function of the parameters used to derive them. Bold headings are used to separate the table into subsections for legibilityFigure 1 summarizes the flows between compartments in the above equations. The dose response function P(x) gives the probability that a susceptible contracts the disease when inoculated with x units of pathogen from his/her hands. While a range of dose response functions have been proposed including linear (mass action), exponential, beta-Poisson, and Hill functions, these models yield similar results under low pathogen loads (small values of x). As a result, we use a linear dose response mechanism [17].
Fig. 1Model diagram Model tracks people (in compartments S, I or R) and pathogens on fomites (F) and hands (HS, HI, HR). The six events (inoculation, fomite touching, excretion, pathogen inactivation recovery and cleaning) are represented by arrows in the direction of the corresponding flowOur model parameters were based on both pathogen-specific characteristics (such as recovery rates, pathogen inactivation/persistence, pathogen excretion and pathogen dose response) and venue-specific characteristics (including surface touching rates and the amount of surfaces that could be contaminated with pathogen). A literature review was performed to obtain parameter values for influenza, rhinovirus, and norovirus (Table 1). We characterize pathogens based on their environmental persistence and transfer efficiencies in Fig. 2a.
Fig. 2a The persistence duration on hands and fomite-hand transfer efficiency of the three pathogens examined. b Examples of three different venues as characterized by their proportion of accessible surfaces and the rate of contact with those surfacesTransmission venues are complex environments characterized both by their physical properties (e.g. types and quantity of fomites) and by the nature of host behaviors within these spaces (e.g. frequency of contact with fomites, the duration of time spent in a venue, or the density of hosts within the venue). Furthermore, risk within a venue may also vary by age group based on not only differences in contact rates but also shedding rates. For our analysis, we use a simplified representation of a venue, based three factors: the proportion of contamination-accessible fomites, shedding rates, and how frequently individuals interact with those fomites. For example, we characterize a daycare as a venue with a large fraction of accessible surfaces, high shedding rates, and a high contact rate between children and fomites. A subway is a compact environment that also has many surfaces that may be contaminated–but subway riders are in general older than daycare attendees and less likely to touch their environment as often due to perceived risk of disease. In contrast, an office setting in general will have fewer contaminated surfaces but likely higher touching rates. The parameter λ reflects the proportion of surfaces in a venue that are accessible to contamination, ρT controls the rate of fomite touching within a given venues, and α reflects the shedding rate. While we have no way of estimating the touching rates and proportion of accessible surfaces by venue directly, Fig. 2b summarizes where example venues are generally situated in our framework with respect to λ and ρT. Because the parameter values corresponding to each type of venue are not known precisely, we simulate our model across the plausible range, using these values as general benchmarks to aid in interpreting our findings.For this analysis, we treat each venue as a closed system and do not consider host movement. This approximation should not bias our results for venues in which the ratio of susceptible to infected individuals who come in and out of a venue remains constant. This assumption is likely to hold for settings like offices and daycares, for which the population that utilizes these venues is relatively constant over time, but might be more problematic for subways.Finally, we include control measures parameters (cleaning rate and the proportion of pathogens killed by decontamination) to contrast the effectiveness of control measures among the pathogens and across venues. While the feasible frequency of cleaning is likely to vary by venue, we consider the same three frequencies for all three venues: 1 /2 days, daily, and twice daily. We expected that cleaning more often than twice per day was unlikely to be feasible for any of the three venues considered, and thus our interventions represent a theoretical upper bound on the effectiveness of surface decontamination interventions in these contexts. As with any mathematical model intended to capture a highly complex process, simplifying assumptions were included in our system. The population size is assumed to be constant (N=S+I+R), individuals are identical, except for the state they are in (Susceptible S, Infected I or Recovered R) and we do not include a latent (infectious) state. The I individuals are assumed to be the only source of infection, and new infections are produced only via self-inoculation; hand to hand spread of pathogens between individuals is not modeled. In addition, for this analysis we do not model the effect of imported cases in order to focus on the endogenous dynamics of our system. Finally, we assume that pathogens in fomites and fingertips distribute homogeneously, do not replicate and are instantaneously well mixed.Literature ReviewWe queried PubMed and Google Scholar to find sources for the biologically based parameters in our model: infectious period, inoculation rate, shedding rate, inactivation rate in fomites, inactivation rate in hands, transfer efficiency (fomite-hand), transfer efficacy (hand-fomite), and the proportion of pathogens excreted to hands.\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 and contribution of transmission routesWe calculate the reproductive number \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 for our model to characterize each pathogen’s outbreak potential across a range of venues as well as to evaluate the impact of environmental interventions. We use the next generation matrix method to compute \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 [18, 19]. We identified the transmission (new infections) and transition (changes in states, like removal, death or recovery) factors and linearized around the disease free equilibrium in order to define two matrices: (i) the matrix associated with transmission, which contains the rate at which infected individuals are produced; and (ii) the matrix associated with transitions, whose inverse contains the average lengths of time spent in each compartment. From these matrices, we identified \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 (the dominant eigenvalue of the product of the above defined matrices, see Additional file 1: Appendix for details).The next generation approach yields an expression for \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 that agrees with the formula given in [14] and can be decomposed as follows [20–22]. 
2\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$ {{}\begin{aligned}\mathcal{R}_0 \,=\, P_{\text{{{inoculation}}}} P_{\text{{{pickup}}}} P'(0) \left[ \frac{a_{F}}{\gamma} + \frac{a_{H}}{\gamma} P_{\text{deposit}} \right] \,=\, \mathcal{R}_{0,F} + \mathcal{R}_{0,H},  \end{aligned}}  $$ \end{document}R0=PinoculationPpickupP′(0)aFγ+aHγPdeposit=R0,F+R0,H,where 
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $${{}\begin{aligned} \begin{array}{lll} &{}P_{\text{{{inoculation}}}} =& \frac{\chi \rho}{\mu_{H} + \rho_{HF} + \chi \rho + \theta_{H}}\\ &&\text{Proportion of pathogens on hands that are self} \\ && \text{ inoculated while still viable} \\[.2cm] &\!\!\!P_{\text{{{deposit}}}} =& \frac{\rho_{HF}}{\mu_{H} + \rho_{HF} + \rho \chi + \theta_{H}}\\ [4pt] &&\text{Proportion of pathogens on hands that are deposited} \\ && \text{ in fomites} \\[.2cm] &\!\!P_{\text{{{pickup}}}} =& \frac{\frac{\rho_{FH} N}{\rho_{FH} N + \mu_{F} + \theta_{F}}}{1 - \frac{\rho_{FH} N}{\left(\rho_{FH} N + \mu_{F} + \theta_{F}\right)} \frac{\rho_{HF}}{\left(\mu_{H} + \rho_{HF} + \chi \rho + \theta_{H}\right)}}\\ && \text{Pathogens on fomites that are picked up by hands} \\[.4cm] &\ \ \mathcal{R}_{0,F} =& \frac{a_{F}}{\gamma} P_{\text{{{inoculation}}}} P_{\text{{{pickup}}}} P'(0)\\ && \text{Direct fomite route contribution to} \mathcal{R}_0 \\[.3cm] &\ \mathcal{R}_{0,H} =& \frac{a_{H}}{\gamma} P_{\text{{{inoculation}}}} P_{\text{{{pickup}}}} P_{\text{{{deposit}}}} P'(0)\\ &&\text{Hand-fomite route contribution to} \mathcal{R}_{0}\\ \end{array} \end{aligned}} $$ \end{document}Pinoculation=χρμH+ρHF+χρ+θHProportion of pathogens on hands that are selfinoculated while still viablePdeposit=ρHFμH+ρHF+ρχ+θHProportion of pathogens on hands that are depositedin fomitesPpickup=ρFHNρFHN+μF+θF1−ρFHNρFHN+μF+θFρHFμH+ρHF+χρ+θHPathogens on fomites that are picked up by handsR0,F=aFγPinoculationPpickupP′(0)Direct fomite route contribution toR0R0,H=aHγPinoculationPpickupPdepositP′(0)Hand-fomite route contribution toR0Our model considers only fomite-mediated transmission, interactions between people such as handshake are ignored, meaning that pathogens must pass by a fomite to reach a susceptible. Using Eq. 2 we can analyze the two fomite mediated transmission routes (i) Direct fomite contamination route: (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0,F}: I \to F \to H_{S} \to S$\end{document}R0,F:I→F→HS→S) and (ii) Hand-fomite contamination route (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0,H}: I \to H_{I} \to F \to H_{S} \to S$\end{document}R0,H:I→HI→F→HS→S). Essentially, the former component of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 captures the contribution to infection from surfaces near an infected person, that become contaminated without the need for hand contact (for example, through droplet spray or vomiting directly on a surface), while the latter represents the contribution of contaminated hands of infected individuals when virus is then deposited to surfaces.In our initial analysis we test the case where there is no intervention (i.e. θH=θF=0). We also set inactivation rates on fomites (μF) and hands (μH) to their maximum value observed in the literature to provide conservative \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 estimates. We note, however, that results were similar throughout the plausible range of inactivation for each pathogen for a common surface type (see Additional files).Two types of interventions are considered in the model: (1) hand hygiene (θH=ΘHqH) and (2) surface decontamination (θF=ΘFqF). In both cases, the parameter associated to this measure is given by the product of frequency and efficacy of the cleaning event. In our simulations, we assume that all individuals (both infected and uninfected) wash their hands at the specified rate. Due to the deterministic nature of the model the control measures are applied continuously. The effectiveness is assessed by computing the control reproduction number \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{C}$\end{document}RC, a reduced version of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 due to the control measures that can be calculated using the equations presented above, where θH and θF are non-zero.All code used to produce the results of this paper has been uploaded as additional materials.ResultsLiterature ReviewWe relied on the literature to determine empirically plausible values for 8 model parameters (Table 1). Some of our parameter estimates required additional assumptions. While the parameters used in our model varied widely by pathogen, some of the ‘events’ we model also depended on other environmental factors, including humidity and surface porosity. We were not able to find detailed information about the influence of environmental factors on each pathogen separately. However, for all three pathogens, we had data for non-porous surfaces at relatively low humidity (20-40%). Therefore, we used parameters consistent with these environmental conditions in our simulations to allow us to make comparisons across pathogens and venues. Where a range of values for these environmental conditions were available, we used the maximum reported decay rate such that our estimates of the contribution of fomite transmission would be conservative. We describe our findings about the role of these other environmental factors on transmission parameters below. For the same reason, we also used the minimum shedding rate reported in the experimental literature.Our model considered two behavioral parameters: the rate of self-innoculation (ρ, face-touching events) and the rate of fomite touching (ρT). We used the same two sources for the self-innoculation rate for all three pathogens [23, 24] as this rate does not appear to change meaningfully between pathogens. We assumed that the rate of fomite touching is more strongly determined by venue. We simulated across a range of fomite touching rates, with the lowest touching rates expected in subways and much higher touching rates in daycare settings (Fig. 2b).Another parameter for which we found no information in the literature review was the fraction of pathogens shed to hands (ϕH) versus directly into the environment for our pathogens of interest. We assumed that this fraction would vary depending on the mechanism of shedding (i.e. coughing openly vs. vomiting). We argue that gastrointestinal pathogens would have a higher fraction of shedding to hands vs. fomites due to the more localized nature of GI shedding events. Thus, our model is parameterized such that norovirus shedding contaminates hands more than rhinovirus or influenza.For the remaining 6 parameters in our model (γ,μF,μH,τFH,τHF, and α), we identified 10, 7, and 6 articles for influenza, rhinovirus, and norovirus respectively. When meta-analyses were available, these estimates were used instead of individual parameter estimates. Thus the number of unique empirical studies used to inform our model is somewhat higher. References corresponding to each of these parameter values are shown in Table 1.Infectious period (1/γ) The infectious period of each pathogen has been relatively well-studied. Notably, all three pathogens exhibit shedding beyond their symptomatic period, with norovirus having the longest total duration of shedding.Inactivation rates on fomites and hands (μF andμH) For all pathogens, the inactivation rates on fomites were highly variable by surface, with higher inactivation rates on hands (which are a porous surface). Influenza, the only pathogen for which decay rates were available for porous environmental surfaces besides stainless steel, had much higher inactivation rates on porous surfaces. Notably, some pathogens exhibited biphasic inactivation, with faster initial inactivation followed by a period of slow inactivation or persistence without measurable decay. When this occurred, we used the average inactivation estimates over the first hour, when decay rates were highest, to parameterize our model. Influenza appears to survive for the shortest amount of time on hands, with an order of magnitude higher inactivation rate than either rhinovirus or norovirus. While inactivation rates on fomites were relatively insensitive to temperature, they were more sensitive to changes in humidity, with drier conditions generally promoting higher inactivation rates. The exception was influenza, which appeared to survive better at low humidity.Transfer efficiencies (τF,H,τH,F) For influenza and norovirus, transfer efficacies appear to be asymmetrical. Influenza transfers more readily from fomites to hands than hands to fomites. The reverse appears to be true for norovirus. However, studies of rhinovirus do not appear to measure directional transfer. For influenza, transfer efficiency was also lower for porous than non-porous surfaces.Shedding rate (α) Shedding concentrations varied considerably between pathogens as well as between individuals for a given pathogen. We modeled the overall shedding rate as the product of the concentration of pathogen shed per event, the volume of fluid excreted per event, and the number of shedding events. An example of this calculation can be found in the Additional file 1: Appendix. The average shedding rate for influenza was found to be an order of magnitude higher than for rhinovirus and norovirus. Existing studies characterizing the volume and frequency of shedding events were available for influenza and norovirus, but not rhinovirus. Given that rhinovirus causes similar upper respiratory tract symptoms as influenza, we used the same parameterization for these two pathogens for volume of fluid excretion and number of shedding events, but influenza had a higher concentration per shedding event. While viral shedding rates were similar for all age groups for both rhinovirus and norovirus, very young children (< 1 year) had higher influenza shedding rates [25–27]. Between-individual shedding rates were high among young children and we were only able to find estimates from one small study, which suggested that young children might shed up 2 orders of magnitude more than older individuals [25]. Both because data describing differences in shedding rates were sparse and because this difference in shedding was only found for young children who are less mobile and may interact with their environment in different ways, we used the same shedding rates for all age groups and venues in our simulations. However, qualitatively, this increased shedding in children would tend to increase risk of fomite-mediated transmission in daycare settings.Outbreak potential (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0) by pathogen and venueBehavior and venue are important drivers of transmission. For influenza, transmission via the fomite route is only sustainable for venues with high touching rates (ρT>20) such as child care centers (Fig. 3, column 1). Airborne transmission may therefore be more likely to sustain influenza transmission in venues where either the touching rate is low (e.g. offices) or proportion of accessible surfaces is very low (e.g. outdoor venues). By contrast, our model suggests that rhinovirus and norovirus transmission by the fomite pathway are sustainable in nearly all venues (Fig. 3, columns 2 and 3). In all venues characterized by our chosen range of touching rates and accessible surface fractions, norovirus has the highest overall \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0, followed by rhinovirus with influenza having the lowest overall \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0. While norovirus and rhinovirus shed fewer viral copies than influenza, they have much longer infectious periods, as well as longer persistence on hands.
Fig. 3Reproduction numbers \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 as a function of fomite touching rate (ρT) and proportion of touchable surfaces (λ)When we examine the two components of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0,F}$\end{document}R0,F and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0,H}$\end{document}R0,H), we see that the direct fomite route is most important for transmission of influenza (Fig. 3, row 2), whereas the hand-fomite route was more important for rhinovirus and norovirus (see Fig. 3). Based on our sensitivity analyses (not shown), for norovirus and influenza, the relative importance of each pathway was highly sensitive to the fraction of pathogens shed onto hands rather than surfaces. When a larger proportion of pathogens was shed onto surfaces, the direct fomite route became more important. For rhinovirus, the fraction of pathogens shed to hands (ϕH) was less uncertain and altering this quantity did not greatly impact the relative importance of the two pathways. The reason the hand-fomite route dominated for rhinovirus is due to its relatively larger transfer efficiency proportion and low inactivation rate on hands.The overall reproduction number for both pathways combined is strongly impacted by the shedding rate, α. In particular, the shedding rate acts as an effect modifier on \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0. When this shedding rate is high, the overall reproduction number can remain high, even when persistence on hands and fomites is low. For norovirus in particular, small decreases in the overall shedding rate led to large decreases in the overall reproduction number of this pathogen. In contrast, although influenza had the highest shedding rate, our model suggests it had the lowest transmissibility through the fomite route, largely because of its rapid inactivation on hands and low transfer efficiencies (τHF and τFH).Risk reduction by cleaning strategiesOur results indicate that higher reductions on \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 can be achieved by increasing the frequency of surface decontamination (Fig. 4). In contrast, hand washing did not have an appreciable effect on \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0. In Fig. 4, we show effects for three times daily hand washing only. As a sensitivity analysis, we also considered increasing the frequency of hand washing to hourly and found very similar results.
Fig. 4Contours for the ratio \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\frac {R_{C}}{R_{0}}$\end{document}RCR0 for cleaning strategies consisting of hand washing three times a day and surface decontamination at varying frequency (Solid lines). Green regions indicate venues where RC<1, i.e. the interventions successfully prevent an outbreak. The results for each pathogen (influenza, rhinovirus, and norovirus) are summarized by column, while different strategies are shown by row. Surface cleaning is performed every two days (top row), once a day (middle row), or two times a day (bottom row). Hand washing occurs three times per day for each rowFor influenza, only higher frequency (≥ 1/day) surface decontamination strategies appear to meaningfully reducing \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0, with a maximum reduction of 40% in low surface contact venues. However, from Fig. 3, fomite transmission is only possible in settings with higher touching rates and proportions of accessible surfaces. Thus, surface decontamination for influenza may prevent outbreaks in venues with moderate surface contact rates and many accessible surfaces. In contrast, in our simulations similar interventions for rhinovirus and norovirus were not effective, even with cleaning frequencies of up to twice per day. For rhinovirus, an effect of no more than 5% is observed and for norovirus the maximum effect size was 20%. Even with this 20% effect size, our model suggests that \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 would remain substantially above 1. While higher cleaning frequencies may demonstrate improved efficacy, they are likely not practical to implement and so were not considered in this analysis.DiscussionFomites are an important source reservoir for pathogens that can persist in the environment. Environmentally persistent pathogens like norovirus and rhinovirus are able to exploit fomite pathways in a variety of potential venues. For pathogens with higher surface die-off rates such as influenza, fomite transmission is sustainable in a narrower range of venues. Based on these findings, the fomite-mediated pathway may be sufficient to sustain transmission even if interventions targeting more direct pathways are successful.Focusing on fomite-mediated routes allow us to examine a transmission pathway that might otherwise be masked by faster processes such as direct transmission and provides a natural way to evaluate the effectiveness of environmental interventions such as surface decontamination. While we do not consider transmission that might occur through other routes, we show that the extent to which environmental interventions can successfully control fomite-mediated transmission is affected by both the venue in which transmission occurs (both physical properties and behavioral factors) and intrinsic pathogen properties (including inactivation rates, transfer efficiencies, and shedding rate) (Additional file 2).Characterizing pathogensThe impact of interventions on fomite-mediated transmission varied by pathogen. For influenza, high-frequency surface decontamination could prevent outbreaks by reducing \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 for the fomite route below 1 in venues with high proportions of accessible surfaces and moderate surface contact rates. This is because influenza demonstrated the lowest overall fomite \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 in our analysis. However, even in venues that are not favorable for fomite transmission, influenza may still be able to maintain transmission by inhalation of aerosolized viral particles or direct droplet spray, necessitating additional control strategies. Notably, it may be important to tailor environmental interventions to specific venues, as the effect of a given influenza transmission mechanism may not be consistent between venues with different environmental properties [5]. For rhinovirus and norovirus, none of the interventions considered had an appreciable effect, suggesting that alternative strategies may be needed to control these pathogens. These results are consistent with recent work by Lei et al, who found that the fomite-mediated route was important for norovirus, but less so for influenza [28]. To be effective, surface decontamination interventions for norovirus and rhinovirus may need to be more frequent (> 1x /day), tailored to the specific context, and timed early in outbreaks to interrupt transmission. These differences were driven by the interaction between multiple properties of the pathogens. Because of its low transfer efficiency, high inactivation rates on hands, and relatively short duration of infectiousness, influenza had the lowest \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 for the fomite route, making fomite-mediated transmission easier to control despite its high shedding rate. Both rhinovirus and norovirus were more efficiently transferred, had high persistence on both hands and fomites, and produce longer periods of shedding, making the transmission potential high for both pathways and consequently more difficult to control, even with frequent surface decontamination.Our model parameterization is derived from pathogen data from existing literature. While this allows us to examine concrete scenarios, the underlying data is subject to substantial uncertainty. Resolving this uncertainty will require additional empirical studies, particularly for factors affecting pathogen inactivation rates (e.g., humidity, surface porousity, etc.) and transfer efficiencies. Many of the commonalities shown here in our literature review may not hold for other pathogens and more work is needed to determine which pathogen features contribute to their different behavior on surfaces. For example, while our literature review found that low humidity promoted higher inactivation for rhinovirus and norovirus, for influenza the association is in fact reversed, with higher humidity resulting in high inactivation rates. In addition, while transmission potential from nonporous surfaces is generally lower for many bacteria due to increased inactivation rates on and lower transfer efficiencies from those surfaces, we only had data from multiple surface types for influenza [29, 30]. Given that prior work has also shown that certain viruses, like polio, do not exhibit these same trends, we did not assume that these same trends held for rhinovirus and norovirus and more experiments are needed to verify these patterns [29].Defining venuesTransmission dynamics are strongly dependent on the context in which that transmission occurs. In our model, the important factors governing these contexts are their physical properties, e.g. the degree to which surfaces can be contaminated by shedding events and behavioral properties e.g., how frequently those fomites are touched. It is important to note that interpreting a transmission venue in our framework depends on the method of shedding. For example, norovirus is primarily shed through contaminated fecal matter and vomiting. These shedding events may occur at a lower rate than coughing episodes that can spread respiratory pathogens and are also more likely to be confined to smaller locations, such as bathrooms. In reality a given location may be comprised of multiple sub-venues with differing transmission potentials, e.g. an office floor has both high potential locations for norovirus such as restrooms, and lower potential locations such as open work spaces.These dimensions of transmission venues can be addressed by different interventions. For example, individual based interventions might focus on reducing fomite touching whereas centralized interventions change the surfaces available for contamination. In general, we found that \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 for the fomite route was more sensitive to surface properties than to the rate of touching fomites. By extension, interventions that improve surface decontamination may be more effective than hand washing interventions when fomites are the primary transmission route. Specifically, when the proportion of accessible surfaces (λ) was low (such as in an office or subway scenario), touching rates were most important for determining fomite \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 because surfaces were highly concentrated. However, at higher values of λ, touching rates did not contribute as much to fomite \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0. Of the four venues considered, the highest values of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 for the fomite route occurred in settings like schools and daycares, where both the proportion of accessible surfaces and the touching rates were high leading to frequent exposure to surfaces with somewhat lower concentration of pathogen. Daycares may be an even greater source of risk for pathogens that have higher shedding rates among children. These venues are likely to be of particular interest for infection control efforts as non-pharmaceutical intervention and environmental microbiology studies have indicated that pathogen persistence on school and day care surfaces could be an important source of infections [31, 32]. Additionally, healthcare settings exhibit many features of high contact and high accessible surface venues. Indeed, fomite-targeted interventions are important as preventative measures to reduce nosocomial infections [33–35].Future workGiven our specific interest in fomite-mediated transmission, we have chosen to ignore transmission that might occur through other routes, including direct hand to hand contact. Leaving out this pathway may contribute to our finding that hand washing appears to be less efficacious at reducing transmission than surface decontamination. Future studies could extend our work by including direct transmission through hand to hand contact. Our fomite-mediated transmission framework could be extended to address further aspects of host behaviors in venues. In particular, venues vary considerably in terms of the density of hosts present both between types of venues, and over time within a given venue. Additionally, hosts move between multiple venues in a given day, limiting the total amount of time in each venue. Finally, host behaviors may change upon infection (e.g. staying home due to symptoms), which may impact their exposure to potential co-infections or sequential reinfection. Addressing these factors will likely require a stochastic, individual based model, as variation in host behavior can make ODE models computationally inefficient and difficult to analyze.Whenever possible, we have chosen to make assumptions and use parameter values that would tend to minimize the potential contribution of the fomite route, so that our results would be a lower bound. For example, we used the lowest transfer rates and highest shedding rates available for nonporous surfaces, we assumed that all individuals washed their hands with the handwashing intervention (both infected and uninfected), and we did not consider heterogeneity of fomite touching rates within a given venue. All of these assumptions would tend to decrease \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0. For heterogeneity in touching rates within a venue, we know from other work that when heterogeneity is high (for example, the presence of key fomites with high touching rates in a venue with generally low touching rates), its presence will generally increase the variance of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 within a given setting. In a deterministic framework, this pattern tends to lead to a higher average \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 whereas in a stochastic framework it leads to more stochastic die out of outbreaks, but also increased outbreak size when outbreaks do occur [36].The main exception to this generally conservative approach is that we relied on data for non-porous surfaces to parameterize our model, which generally have lower inactivation rates and higher transfer rates than porous surfaces. The difference in transmission between porous and non-porous surfaces is likely to have a larger impact on pathogens that are already close to the threshold for fomite transmission, such as influenza, and is probably less crucial for other pathogens, like norovirus and rhinovirus, where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 for the fomite route is far greater than 1. In office and subway settings, a large proportion of environmental fomites are non-porous, whereas many fomites are porous in daycare settings. Future studies should explore the extent to which pathogen persistence and transfer efficiency varies by surface. These data would would allow for a more sophisticated analysis of the potential for fomite transmission across different venues.ConclusionsFomite-mediated transmission introduces both challenges and opportunities for infection control due to interactions between the properties of pathogens and venues. Our analysis has shown that fomites can be an important source of risk for pathogens that are often considered to be, primarily, directly transmitted. In particular, we found that fomite-mediated transmission is dependent on both behavioral factors influencing contact with fomites as well as the physical environment and surfaces available for contamination in each venue. This result underscores the need to think critically about how a venue is characterized from a transmission perspective in order to design interventions that can appropriately target key stages in the transmission process. Overall, our analysis provides a useful conceptual framework for considering fomite-mediated transmission as a pathway that can be used in other environmental models. Our use of empirical studies to parameterize the transmission model offers an important link between laboratory and modeling studies. Empirical studies offer substantial information for use in parameterizing mechanistic models, while constructing these models can also reveal which biological parameters have not been well studied, or show substantial variation between studies.When appropriately constrained by pathogen- and venue-specific data, transmission models that explicitly account for fomite-mediated transmission can be a useful tool to compare transmission potential across different pathogens and different venues.Additional files
Additional file 1Appendix. The appendix shows the derivation of the \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\mathcal {R}_{0}$\end{document}R0 calculations. (PDF 607 kb)

Additional file 2Code Files. This file contains the code used for generating figures 1, 3, and 4. (DOCX 22 kb)



Title: The Role of IL-15 Deficiency in the Pathogenesis of Virus-Induced Asthma Exacerbations

IntroductionRhinovirus (RV) infections in healthy individuals manifest as common colds but in asthma are strongly associated with acute exacerbations [1], [2]. Type I (α/β), II (γ) and III (λ) interferon (IFN) responses are important in anti-viral immunity and increased susceptibility to RV infection has been demonstrated in asthma in vivo
[2], [3]. RV infection of asthmatic bronchial epithelial cells (BEC) in vitro resulted in reduced IFN-β and -λ production and increased viral replication [4], [5]. Monocytes/macrophages are also infected and activated by RV [6] and macrophage IFN-λ production is also impaired in asthma and related to asthma exacerbation severity and virus load in vivo
[5]. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cell IFN-γ induction by RV is also impaired in asthma and related to exacerbation severity in vivo
[3].IL-15 is important in linking innate and adaptive antiviral immune responses, promoting natural killer (NK) and memory CD8 T cell anti-viral immune responses [7], [8] and monocytes/macrophages produce IL-15 in response to virus infections [7]-[10]. There is little reported data on IL-15 in asthma. IL-15 mRNA expression levels in bronchial biopsies in asthma are not increased [11], while protein levels in sputum are undetectable in normal subjects and steroid naïve asthmatics, but detectable in steroid-treated asthmatics [12]. There is a single report that IL-15 gene expression is increased in asthma exacerbations in children [13] but no data on IL-15 in RV infections. Since (i) α/βIFNs are reported to induce IL-15 in dendritic cells and monocytes [14], [15], (ii) RV induction of IFN-β is reported deficient in asthma [4], (iii) IL-15 is important in innate and acquired antiviral immunity and (iv) there is increased susceptibility to RV infection in asthma [1]–[3] we hypothesized that IL-15 production may be deficient in asthma and related to asthma exacerbation pathogenesis.We have therefore tested the hypotheses that RV infection of macrophages in vitro induces IL-15 production and that this is mediated by α/β IFNs and the transcription factor nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB). In addition, we determined whether RV induction of IL-15 ex vivo is deficient in macrophages from asthmatic subjects and whether IL-15 levels in BAL fluid are deficient in asthma. We also investigated whether IL-15 deficiency in asthma is related to parameters of severity and virus load during experimental RV16 infection in vivo.ResultsRV up-regulates IL-15 production in macrophagesTo investigate whether RV induces IL-15 release from macrophages we used two models of monocyte-derived macrophages in which RV induces replication-dependent activation [6]. We did not measure virus replication in this study however we have previously reported that rhinovirus replication was productive in THP-1 macrophages, leading to release of infectious virus into supernatants, but was limited in monocyte-derived macrophages [6]. IL-15 protein release into supernatants was significantly induced by RV16, at 48 and 72 hours for THP-1-derived macrophages and between 24 and 72 hours for monocyte-derived macrophages (Figure 1A and B). RV9 (major group) and RV1B (minor group) also induced IL-15 release from THP-1-derived macrophages (Figure 1C) indicating that IL-15 induction was not RV serotype- or receptor-dependent. IL-15 release was reduced significantly by UV-inactivation, confirming that induction was largely replication-dependent (Figure 1C).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002114.g001Figure 1Rhinovirus infection induces IL-15 protein and mRNA production in human monocyte-derived macrophages.(A) THP-1-derived macrophages and (B) peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages were infected with RV16 (closed squares) or incubated with medium alone (open squares) at time 0. Supernatants were harvested at 4, 8, 24, 48 and 72 hours and levels of IL-15 released determined by ELISA. (C) THP-1-derived macrophages were exposed to major group rhinovirus (RV16 and RV9), minor group rhinovirus (RV1B), medium alone and UV-inactivated RV16 (UV RV16) at time 0 and supernatants harvested at 72 hours. (D) THP-1-derived macrophages were infected as for (A). Total RNA was extracted from cell lysates at 4, 8, 24, 48 and 72 hours post-infection. IL-15 mRNA was quantified by PCR and results normalised to constitutive 18S ribosomal RNA and expressed as fold induction over medium alone. Mean and SEM from at least four independent experiments (performed in triplicate) are shown. * P<0.05, ** P<0.01, *** P<0.001 for live virus compared to medium, and # P<0.05 for live RV16 compared to UV-inactivated.Because IL-15 protein can be stored intracellularly in macrophages and virus infection could simply trigger the release of preformed protein we next investigated whether RV infection up-regulated IL-15 mRNA expression and found that IL-15 mRNA was significantly induced by RV at 24 hours and 48 hours (Figure 1D).NF-κB activation is required for IL-15 induction in RV-infected macrophagesThe IL-15 promoter has been shown to have binding sites for nuclear factor (NF)-κB and interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) which are important for its activation by other stimuli [10], [16]–[18]. To assess the role of NF-κB in RV-induced IL-15 production we inhibited activation of the NF-κB pathway with a NF-κB pharmacological inhibitor (AS602868) [6] at the time point of maximal IL-15 production. We used the IKK2 inhibitor AS602868 at a concentration of 5 µM, which we have previously shown to be optimal for rhinovirus induced TNF-α inhibition and without cell toxicity [6].RV16-induced IL-15 production was significantly decreased in THP-1-derived macrophages (p<0.01) and monocyte-derived macrophages (p<0.01) (Figure 2A and B) in the presence of the NF-κB inhibitor, confirming that RV-induction of IL-15 was NF-κB-dependent in both cell types.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002114.g002Figure 2NF-kB-activation is required for rhinovirus induction of macrophage IL-15 production.(A) THP-1-derived macrophages and (B) monocyte-derived macrophages were pre-treated for 1 hour with an inhibitor of NF-κB activation (the NF-κB inhibitor AS602868 5 µM) or diluent control, before infection with RV16. The same concentration of drug/diluent was added to the medium after infection. Supernatants were harvested at 72 hours and IL-15 release quantified by ELISA. Means and SEM from at least three independent experiments (performed in triplicate) are shown. ** P<0.01 for live virus infected cells, NF-κB inhibitor compared to diluent control.IFN-α/β induction in RV-infected macrophages is dependent on NF-κBAs α/β IFNs are induced during viral infections and are implicated in IL-15 induction in other systems, we next investigated RV induction of IFN-α/β in macrophages. RV16 infection induced IFN-β production at 8 and 48 hours (p<0.05), peaking at 24 hours (p<0.001, Figure 3A) while IFN-α was induced at 24 hours (p<0.001) and 48 hours (p<0.01, Figure 3B). RV9 and RV1B induced similar levels confirming that IFN-α/β production in macrophages is not serotype- or receptor-dependent and UV-inactivation completely abolished IFN-α/β induction demonstrating that induction is replication-dependent (Figure 3C and D). RV induction of IFN-α/β was also dependent on NF-κB activation as the NF-κB inhibitor markedly decreased RV-induction of IFN-β and IFN-α (Figure 3E and F, both p<0.01).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002114.g003Figure 3IFN-β and IFN-α are induced by rhinovirus infection of macrophages via NF-κB-dependent mechanisms.(A–B) Monocyte-derived macrophages were infected with RV16 (closed squares) or incubated with medium alone (open squares) at time 0, supernatants were harvested at 4, 8, 24 and 48 hours and levels of IFN-β (A) and IFN-α (B) quantified by ELISA. Means and SEM from at least four independent experiments (performed in triplicate) are shown. (C–D) Monocyte-derived macrophages were exposed to medium alone, UV-inactivated RV16 (UV RV16) or infected with RV16, RV9 or RV1B, cultured for 24 hours, supernatants harvested and IFN-β (C) and IFN-α (D) quantified by ELISA. Means and SEM from at least five independent experiments (performed in triplicate) are shown. P<0.05, ** P<0.01, *** P<0.001 for live virus compared to medium, and ## P<0.01 for live RV16 compared to UV-inactivated RV16. (E–F) Monocyte-derived macrophages were pre-treated for 1 hour with an inhibitor of NF-κB activation (the NF-κB inhibitor AS602868 5 µM) or diluent control, before infection with RV16. The same concentration of drug/diluent was added to the medium after infection. Supernatants were harvested at 24 hours and IFN-β (E) and IFN-α (F) quantified by ELISA. Means and SEM from at least five independent experiments (performed in triplicate) are shown. ** P<0.01 for live virus infected cells, NF-κB inhibitor compared to diluent control. G. BAL cells from the baseline bronchoscopy of normal (circles, n = 9) or asthmatic (squares, n = 7) subjects were incubated for 48 hours with medium alone (open symbol, medium) or live rhinovirus (closed symbol, RV16) and IFN-α and IFN-β release into supernatants assessed by ELISA. Bars are median values, ** P<0.01, RV16 vs medium.We previously reported that there is deficient IFN-β production in bronchial epithelial cells in asthmatics upon RV infection [4] and that macrophage production of IFN-λ was similarly deficient [5]. Therefore we wished to investigate if type I IFN production is also deficient in alveolar macrophages from asthmatics. Cells were obtained with bronchoalveolar lavage and the composition of the lavage was ∼90% macrophages in all subjects with no differences in cellular composition between the asthmatics and the non-asthmatics [5]. In vitro RV16 infection of BAL cells induced significantly higher IFN-α levels compared with medium in normal subjects (p<0.01) but infection of BAL cells from asthmatics did not result in significantly up-regulated IFN-α levels (Figure 3G). IFN-α levels produced by BAL cells from normals were higher than levels from asthmatics but this difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.09). No IFN-β could be detected in supernatants of BAL cells at the 48 hour time point studied in either normal or asthmatic subjects.We attempted to confirm deficient production of these IFNs in vivo, by measuring IFN-α and IFN-β directly in BAL fluid. Despite using up to 30x concentrated BAL fluid, no IFN-α or IFN-β could be detected in BAL fluid taken at the baseline, day 4 post-RV16 infection or the convalescence bronchoscopies.RV induction of IL-15 in macrophages is IFN-α/β dependentHaving demonstrated that RV induces IL-15 and IFN-α/β production we next investigated whether IFN-α/β signalling is required for RV induction of IL-15 in macrophages. Firstly we investigated whether IFN-β could induce IL-15 secretion in macrophages and found that recombinant human IFN-β induced IL-15 secretion from both THP-1-derived and monocyte-derived macrophages in a dose dependent manner (Figure 4A). Using a blocking antibody against the IFN-α-receptor subunit 2 (IFNAR2) we found that RV16-induced IL-15 production was almost completely inhibited by blocking antibody, but not isotype control in both THP-1-derived and monocyte-derived macrophages (Figure 4B and C, p<0.01 and p<0.001 respectively). Since interferon regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1) is induced by type I IFN [19] and regulates IL-15 gene transcription in other systems [20] we next investigated IRF-1 protein induction by RV. Unstimulated THP-1-derived macrophages expressed low levels of IRF-1, however both IFN-β and RV16 increased IRF-1 intracellular protein levels as early as 4 hours, both remaining elevated to 24 hours (Figure 4D). Blocking the IFNAR, but not isotype control markedly inhibited IRF-1 induction by RV16 (Figure 4E), confirming that the IFN-α/β-IFNAR pathway was also required for IRF-1 activation by RV in macrophages.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002114.g004Figure 4IFN-β induces IL-15 in macrophages and rhinovirus induction is via IFN-αβ receptor signalling.(A) THP-1-derived macrophages (THP-1) or monocyte-derived macrophages were stimulated with diluent control (0), or recombinant IFN-β at concentrations of 10, 100 and 1000 IU/mL, supernatants harvested at 72 hours and IL-15 quantified by ELISA. Means and SEM from at least three independent experiments (performed in triplicate) are shown. * P<0.05, ** P<0.01 and *** P<0.001, compared with diluent control. (B) THP-1-derived macrophages and (C) monocyte-derived macrophages were pre-treated for 1 hour with IFN-αβ receptor blocking antibody (anti-IFNAR) or isotype control (both at 5 µg/mL), the same concentration of antibody was added to the medium after infection with RV16, supernatants were harvested at 24 hours (C) and 72 hours (B) and IL-15 quantified by ELISA. Means and SEM from at least four independent experiments (performed in triplicate) are shown. ** P<0.01 and *** P<0.001 compared with isotype control. (D) Lysates of THP-1-derived macrophages incubated with medium alone (medium), or stimulated with IFN-β (IFN-β) at 1000 IU/mL or RV16 (RV16) were analysed for the presence of IRF-1 by Western blot at 4, 8 and 24 hours. A representative image of three independent experiments with similar results is shown. (E) Monocyte-derived macrophages treated as in (C) were lysed after 24 hours and analysed for IRF-1 by Western blot. RV16 induction of IRF-1 protein over medium control (medium) was clearly inhibited by prevention of αβ IFN signalling with an IFN-αβ receptor blocking antibody (anti-IFNAR), but not by isotype control (IgG control), or diluent alone (control). A representative image of three independent experiments with similar results is shown.RV induces IL-15 production in alveolar macrophages ex vivo; induction is deficient in asthma and related to lower respiratory symptom severity during RV infectionHaving shown that RV infection induces IL-15 in two macrophage models in vitro we next investigated if induction is observed in alveolar macrophages infected ex vivo and whether induction is deficient in asthmatics. Supernatants from BAL cells (>90% alveolar macrophages) from normal and asthmatic subjects exposed ex vivo to RV16 for 48 hours were assessed for levels of IL-15 by ELISA. IL-15 levels were significantly increased by RV16 in BAL cells from normal subjects (p<0.05), but not in cells obtained from asthmatics, and levels in supernatants from RV16-infected cells were significantly higher in normal compared to asthmatic subjects (Figure 5A, p<0.01). IL-15 production by RV infected macrophages was inversely related to lower respiratory symptom severity on subsequent RV16 experimental infection in the same subjects in vivo (r = −0.6, p = 0.022, Figure 5B). Although IL-15 levels were very low, they were above the lower limit of detection (0.25 pg/mL) and differences observed were both statistically significant and related to a number of different clinical parameters.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002114.g005Figure 5Rhinovirus induction of IL-15 release from alveolar macrophages; induction is inversely related to severity of lower respiratory symptoms following rhinovirus infection in vivo.
(A) BAL cells were collected at bronchoscopy from normal (circles, n = 10) or asthmatic (squares, n = 7) subjects. Cells were incubated for 48 hours with medium alone (open symbol, medium) or live rhinovirus (closed symbol, RV16) and IL-15 release into supernatants assessed by ELISA. Bars are median values, * P<0.05, RV16 vs medium and ** P<0.01 RV16 asthmatic vs. RV16 normal subjects. (B) Levels of IL-15 released ex vivo in RV16 infected cultures from normal (closed circles, n = 8) and asthmatic (closed squares, n = 6) subjects were significantly related to severity of total lower respiratory symptoms during the 2 weeks following experimental infection with RV16 in vivo.BAL IL-15 levels are deficient in asthmatics and related to airway hyperresponsiveness and virus load during subsequent RV infection in vivo
To investigate whether IL-15 levels are deficient in asthma in vivo, IL-15 was measured in BAL fluid collected from asthmatic and normal subjects when clinically stable prior to experimental RV16 infection. The study recruited 15 non-atopic healthy and 10 atopic mild asthmatic subjects, all rhinovirus-16 serum neutralizing antibody negative and all non-smokers. The healthy control group had a median age of 24, sex ratio 8 male/7 female and a median baseline FEV1% predicted of 99% and the asthmatic subjects were inhaled steroid naïve, median age of 22, sex ratio 2 male/8 female and a median baseline FEV1% predicted of 104% as previously reported [3].IL-15 levels were significantly lower in asthmatic compared to normal subjects (Figure 6A, p<0.05) and were significantly correlated with airway hyperresponsiveness as measured by baseline PC10 histamine (r = 0.47, p = 0.021, Figure 6B). IL-15 levels in vivo were also significantly related to virus loads in nasal lavage (r = −0.57, p = 0.005), induced sputum (r = −0.44, p = 0.041) and BAL (r = −0.61, r = 0.024) upon subsequent in vivo RV16 experimental infection in the same subjects (Figure 6C–E).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002114.g006Figure 6IL-15 levels in BAL fluid in asthma are inversely related to airway hyperresponsiveness and virus load on subsequent in vivo rhinovirus infection.Airway hyperresponsiveness was assessed and BAL fluid collected at a baseline bronchoscopy from normal volunteers and asthmatic subjects. Two weeks later, the same subjects were experimentally infected with RV16 and virus load measured in nasal lavage, sputum and BAL. (A) IL-15 levels were measured by ELISA in BAL fluid collected at bronchoscopy from normal (n = 14) and asthmatic subjects (n = 9). Bars are median values, * P<0.05 for comparison between groups. (B) Levels of IL-15 in BAL fluid in asthmatic (n = 8) and normal subjects (n = 15) were inversely related to bronchial hyperresponsiveness. (C–E) Levels of IL-15 in BAL fluid in asthmatic and normal subjects were inversely related to virus load during a subsequent experimental RV16 infection in vivo: (C) peak virus load in nasal lavage, (D) virus load in induced sputum on day 3 post infection, (E) virus load in BAL on day 4 post infection.DiscussionWe report herein the first investigation of the role of IL-15 in the pathogenesis of RV-induced asthma exacerbations. IL-15 production was induced by RV in macrophage cell lines in vitro, as well as in primary alveolar macrophages. IL-15 induction by RV was deficient in cells from asthmatic compared to normal subjects and levels in BAL fluid deficient in asthmatics. IL-15 induction ex vivo and levels in vivo were both related to airway hyperresponsiveness, lower respiratory symptom severity and virus load following experimental RV16 infection in vivo. Finally, IL-15 induction was dependent on IFN-α/β and both IL-15 and IFN-α/β induction were dependent on NF-κB.These findings have important implications as they suggest IL-15 as a novel candidate for development for treatment or prevention of asthma exacerbations. As IL-15 is deficient in asthma this suggests either or both of prophylactic or therapeutic treatment approaches may have value. Further, IL-15 inducers such as IFN-β may have additional benefit beyond directly enhancing anti-viral immunity in bronchial epithelium, since, via induction of IL-15 production, they may enhance other aspects of both innate and acquired anti-viral immunity. Finally, NF-κB inhibitors are in development as possible therapies for asthma exacerbations, our data that IFN-α, IFN-β and IL-15 induction by RV are all NF-κB dependent suggest that such approaches may further impair already deficient responses in asthma.Rhinoviruses are the respiratory viruses most commonly associated with asthma exacerbations. Asthma is the most common chronic respiratory disease, and it is increasing in many countries. The major cause of asthma related morbidity and mortality are acute exacerbations and current asthma treatments are only partially effective at preventing asthma exacerbations. Therefore, new approaches to treatment and prevention are urgently required and these are likely to stem from a better understanding of the pathogenesis of asthma exacerbations.Asthma exacerbation pathogenesis is poorly understood, however, it is clear that people with asthma have increased susceptibility to respiratory virus infections [2], [3]. We have previously reported deficient IFN-β and IFN-λ production in response to RV infection of bronchial epithelial cells in asthmatics [4], [5], further these deficiencies were related to increased RV replication in the same cells, and replacement with exogenous IFN-β restored normal resistance to RV infection. Deficiency of IFN-λ induction by RV was observed in macrophages from asthmatic subjects, and this was related to virus load, asthma exacerbation severity and severity of airway inflammation in vivo
[5]. These findings led to inhaled IFN-β being developed as a possible novel therapy to treat/prevent asthma exacerbations – currently in a Phase II clinical trial.We have also recently reported deficient IFN-γ production in asthma and related impaired IFN-γ production to greater virus loads and reductions in lung function in a human model of asthma exacerbation in vivo
[3]. IFN-γ is produced by both innate and acquired arms of the antiviral immune system. As IL-15 is also important in linking innate and adaptive antiviral immune responses, and in other systems, has been shown to be induced by type I IFNs we wished to investigate the hypothesis that IL-15 might also be deficient in asthma, and that deficiency might be related to the pathogenesis of asthma exacerbations.Alveolar macrophages are important immune cells in lung antiviral immune responses and we previously reported that monocytes/macrophages support RV replication, become activated and secrete immunomodulatory cytokines [3], [6], [21], [22]. However, there are no published data on IL-15 induction in macrophages by RV, nor on its possible importance in the pathogenesis of asthma exacerbations. Consequently, we investigated macrophage IL-15 and type I IFN responses during RV infection in vitro and in vivo, in both asthmatic and normal subjects.The most important findings of this study are the deficient induction of IL-15 by RV in alveolar macrophages from asthmatic subjects in vitro, deficient IL-15 levels in asthma in BAL fluid in vivo, and the relationships of these to airway hyperresponsiveness, severity of symptoms and virus load on subsequent RV infection in vivo. The correlations between IL-15 levels in BAL fluid at baseline and PC10 histamine at baseline and virus load during an experimental rhinovirus infection were only statistically significant when all subjects were included. There were no significant correlations within the group of asthmatic subjects alone, presumably due to the low numbers of asthmatic patients included, and larger studies are required to confirm the link between asthma exacerbation pathogenesis, virus replication and IL-15. However these findings taken together suggest IL-15 as a promising candidate for development as a novel therapy to enhance deficient antiviral immunity in asthma, to correct the increased susceptibility to virus infection present in this condition [2], [3] and in particular as a potential treatment to prevent/treat asthma exacerbations.IL-15, via the IL-2/IL-15 receptor β-chain and common γ chain receptor, promotes NK cell activation, as well as enhancing memory CD8 T cell antiviral immunity [7], [8], [23]. In addition it enhances type I (α/β) IFN production by dendritic cells and macrophages [24], [25] as well as IFN-γ production by NK and CD8 T cells [7], [8], [26]. Since induction of both IFN types is deficient in asthma and related to asthma exacerbation severity, IL-15 has potential to correct deficiencies present in antiviral immunity in asthma.Our findings also have important implications for development of type I IFNs as potential therapies for asthma exacerbations, as we show that RV infection of macrophages induces α/β IFNs, that IL-15 is induced by IFN-β stimulation and that RV induction of IL-15 in macrophages is dependent on IFN-α/β receptor signalling. These data suggest that administration of α/β IFNs in asthma is likely to enhance IL-15 baseline levels, as well as enhancing induction upon RV infection, both of which we have shown to be deficient in this report. Type I IFN administration might therefore have benefits well beyond correcting the specific deficit in anti-viral immunity in bronchial epithelial cells, indirectly enhancing deficient IFN-γ production, as well as other NK and CD8 responses via correction of deficient IL-15 production.These findings also have important implications for development programmes for inhibitors of NF-κB [27]. This transcription factor is implicated in many pro-inflammatory responses linked with the pathogenesis of asthma exacerbations and many pharmaceutical companies have active NF-κB inhibitor development programmes. However we find that RV induction of IFN-α, IFN-β and IL-15 are all profoundly suppressed by inhibition of NF-κB. These data suggest that administration of such inhibitors in asthma, while inhibiting pro-inflammatory mediator production, is likely to further impair deficient type I IFN and IL-15 production, and therefore might have potential to increase rather than decrease severity of virus induced asthma exacerbations. Careful investigation of these outcomes, as well as their relationships with clinical outcomes in human models of RV-induced asthma exacerbations [3] may shed further light on these possibilities.Because signalling by IL-15 occurs via the IL-2/IL-15 receptor β-chain (CD122) and common γ chain receptor (CD132) expressed primarily by NK and memory CD8 T cells [7], [8], [23], [26], it will be of great interest to determine the levels of these receptors on airway NK and CD8 T cells in virus-induced asthma.Finally, our findings of deficient IL-15 production in asthma, combined with previous reports of deficient IFN-β [4], IFN-λ [5], IFN-γ and IL-12 [3], [22], suggest complex impairment of anti-viral immune responses in asthma. The mechanisms behind these complex deficiencies clearly require urgent investigation. These findings also have major implications for management of pandemic influenza, where asthma is a major risk factor for severe disease and death [28], as replacing deficient anti-viral immune proteins such as IFN-β and now IL-15, may have therapeutic potential to ameliorate severity of disease and perhaps prevent death.Materials and MethodsCells, viruses and cell infection/stimulationHeLa and THP-1 cell lines (ECCC) were cultured in E-MEM and RPMI-1640 (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) respectively with 10% foetal calf serum (FCS). RV serotype 16, 9 (major group) and 1B (minor group) stocks were prepared and their identities confirmed by neutralisation using serotype-specific antibodies (ATCC), UV-inactivation was performed as previously described [29]. Peripheral blood monocyte-derived macrophages and THP-1-derived macrophages were generated and infected with RV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 as previously described [6]. Recombinant human IFN-β (10–1000 IU/mL, R&D, Abingdon, UK) was added to wells. Supernatants, RNA or protein lysates were harvested and stored at −80°C.IL-15 mRNA quantificationTotal RNA was extracted with RNeasy Kit (Qiagen) and 2 µg was used for cDNA synthesis (Omniscript RT Kit, Qiagen). Quantitative RT-PCR was performed using specific primers and probe for IL-15 (forward GGGAAAGTGATGTTCACCCC, reverse CATCTCCGGACTCAAGTGAAATAA, probe ATCTGGATGCAAAGAATGTGAGGAACTGGA). IL-15 gene expression was normalized to 18S rRNA and presented as fold induction relative to medium [30].Ethics statementEthics approval (No 99/BA/345) was obtained from St Mary's Local Research Ethics Committee, London, UK. All study participants gave written informed consent.Human experimental model of RV-induced asthma exacerbationThe exacerbation model, clinical details including allergy testing and lung function, sampling and analysis are described in detail elsewhere [3]. The study recruited 15 non-atopic healthy control and 10 atopic, inhaled steroid naïve asthmatic subjects; all were non-smokers. Assessment of airway hyperresponsiveness by determination of the provocative concentration of histamine inducing a 10% fall in FEV1 (PC10 histamine) and BAL were performed at baseline ∼2 weeks prior to experimental RV infection as described [3]. Baseline BAL fluid was collected in a single plastic chamber and transferred immediately to polypropylene tubes on ice, transported to the laboratory, filtered (100 µm), centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, the fluid decanted, aliquoted and stored at −80°C till analysed. Because we could not detect IL-15 in un-concentrated BAL fluid, we concentrated the BAL fluid 30 times as described below. Baseline BAL cells were cultured and exposed to RV16 MOI 5/medium as described [3]. After 48 hours, supernatants were harvested and stored at −80°C.Virus load on days 1–8 and 11 post-infection for nasal lavage, on day 3 post-infection for sputum and on day 4 post-infection for BAL were determined using quantitative PCR as described [3]. Lower respiratory symptom severity during the two weeks post infection was derived using a chest symptom score as described [3].BAL fluid concentration for IL-15 ELISAIL-15 levels were measured after concentrating the baseline BAL fluid up to 30 times using a centrifugal filter with a nominal molecular weight value of 3000 kD (Millipore, Centriplus YM-3). Values were corrected for variability in dilution during lavage, and during subsequent concentration using total protein concentration of the concentrated BAL (Bradford method, Sigma) [31].Western blot for IRF-1 expressionTHP-1-derived macrophages were lysed into SDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Western blot was performed as previously described [6]. After blocking, membranes were incubated with rabbit anti-human IRF-1 (1/500) followed by HRP swine anti-rabbit antibody (1/4000) (AbD Serotec). Bands were visualized by chemiluminescence with the ECL Western blotting detection reagent (GE Healthcare).IL-15, IFN-α and IFN-β ELISALevels of IFN-α and IFN-β were measured using ELISA kits (BioSource International) (sensitivity 15 pg/mL and 5 IU/mL respectively). For the IL-15 ELISA we used commercially available paired antibodies (R&D Systems) at concentrations recommended by the manufacturer and for the standard curve recombinant human IL-15 (Biosource). The protocol recommended by the manufacturer was modified by incubating the plates for 10 minutes with streptavidin-HRP (Biosource) at a concentration of 0.5 µg/mL. A TMB containing substrate solution was used to develop the colour. Once optimised, we could reproducibly detect levels of IL-15 over 0.25 pg/mL.NF-κB and IFN - IFN-receptor pathway inhibitionThe effect of NF-κB activation on IL-15 production was evaluated using a NF-κB inhibitor (AS602868) as previously described [6]. The role of type I interferons in IL-15 production was assessed using a blocking antibody to IFNAR2, a matched isotype antibody was used as control (Merck Chemicals). Cells were pre-treated for 1 hour before infection with IFNAR2 blocking antibody/isotype control at a concentration of 5 µg/mL. The same concentration of antibody was added to the medium after infection.Statistical analysisThe results were analyzed using GraphPad Prism version 4.00 for Windows (GraphPad Software, California, USA). For in vitro experiments results expressed as mean±standard error of the mean (SEM) and analyzed using ANOVA for multiple comparisons followed where appropriate by paired Student's t tests for paired comparisons. Differences between normal and asthmatic groups were analysed using Mann Whitney tests and correlations using Spearman's rank correlation.


Title: Evidence of nosocomial transmission of human rhinovirus in a neonatal intensive care unit

BackgroundRespiratory syncytial virus and influenza are 2 common respiratory viruses that are well-known for nosocomial transmission; however, new rapid diagnostic respiratory tests have implicated other viruses, such as human rhinovirus (HRV), in severe respiratory infections.HRV is divided into 3 distinct species: HRV species A, B, and C.1 HRV species C is associated with respiratory tract infections, severe asthma exacerbations in children, and apnea in infants.2 We describe a nosocomial outbreak of HRV species C in a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). To our knowledge, there are only 2 previously published studies implicating HRV in a NICU respiratory infection outbreak.3, 4
MethodsSettingThis study took place in an urban public safety net hospital with a level II-III NICU. The NICU has 20 beds with 8 single occupancy rooms and 4 triple occupancy rooms. All visitors are screened by the patient's nurse for signs of illness and asked to leave if they are ill.Outbreak detection and investigationAfter 2 infants becoming ill with respiratory symptoms, respiratory viral testing and routine bacterial cultures were undertaken. Each patient's medical record was reviewed with attention to vital signs, examination findings, respiratory and ventilator support, white blood cell counts, radiographic studies, room location, and staff members, including nurses, respiratory therapists, and physicians.Isolate testingThe FilmArray Respiratory Panel (Biofire Diagnostics, Salt Lake City, UT) was used for viral and bacterial detection. This multiplex polymerase chain reaction system is used to detect the presence of adenovirus, coronavirus, metapneumovirus, rhinovirus-enterovirus, influenza, parainfluenza, respiratory syncytial virus, Bordetella pertussis, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Both children's specimens tested positive for rhinovirus-enterovirus complex, and the samples were sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for further confirmatory testing.ResultsCasesPatient 1 was a 73-day-old boy who was born at 25 weeks, weighing 670 g, to a 38-year old mother via Cesarean section at an outside hospital and transferred to our facility on day of life 27 and hospital day (HD) 1. The patient's neonatal course was complicated by prenatal exposure to cocaine, maternal chorioamnionitis secondary to Escherichia coli, and lung disease. From HD 42-47, the patient's oxygen requirement increased to 100%; respiratory support changed from nasal cannula oxygenation to bilevel positive airway pressure. From HD 46-56, upper airway congestion was noted, and moderate to large respiratory secretions were suctioned. Neither fever nor leukocytosis was present.Patient 2 was a 16-day-old boy born at our facility on HD 32 at 31 6/7 weeks, weighing 1,575 g. He was delivered via Cesarean section for nonreassuring biophysical profile. Secondary diagnoses included respiratory insufficiency, suspected bacteremia, and hyperbilirubinemia. On HD 45, the patient had desaturation episodes into the low 80s and large cloudy secretions suctioned from nose. On HD 46 and 47, the patient's oxygen requirement increased to 175 mL/min prior to the use of bilevel positive airway pressure. Chest radiograph revealed multifocal pulmonary opacities in the left lower lobe and right middle lobe. The patient did not have a fever or leukocytosis, and blood cultures were negative.InvestigationPatients 1 and 2 were in the NICU concurrently for 11 days and cared for by separate staff; then on HD 42, patient 2 was moved into patient 1's triple occupancy room (Fig 1
). They were the only patients in this room during this time. This was the same day that patient 1's oxygen requirement increased, whereas patient 2 did not have any signs or symptoms of infection. On HD 45 and 46, patient 2 and patient 1 developed nasal congestion, respectively. On HD 47, both patients 1 and 2 tested positive for rhinovirus-enterovirus. During the 5 days they shared a room prior to positive HRV species C test, patient 1 was in an isolette, and patient 2 was in an open crib. They had 6 common nurses, with 3 caring for them on multiple days. They did not share any physicians or respiratory staff. None of the shared staff members called in ill in the 2 weeks before or after the respiratory outbreak, but it is unknown if any staff worked while having mild or moderate illness. Patient 1 had a family member visit, and patient 2 had 2 family members visit in the 5 days prior to HRV species C diagnosis, one of them being a young sibling; none of these family members were noted to be ill.Fig 1Locations of case patients, days of positive human rhinovirus test, and signs symptoms of infection. Abbreviation: P, patient.DiscussionThis report describes 2 nosocomial cases of HRV species C. HRV species C is transmitted either person to person through contact (either direct or through a fomite) or through aerosolization.5, 6, 7
We suspect that HRV species C was from a single point source given the 2 infants became symptomatic on the same day through either staff members or common use patient items within the room. The most plausible explanation would be a shared health care worker who was ill, but not ill enough to call in sick. It is possible that a staff member was ill with HRV species C the week prior to patient care and was shedding virus after the symptoms resolved. Adults with symptomatic HRV can shed virus for at least a week after infection, but it can persist up to 2-3 weeks in some adults.8 Another possibility of transmission could have occurred from the young family member of patient 2. The sibling could have either had an asymptomatic infection or the family neglected to tell the staff that the child was feeling ill. Children <4 years old have had asymptomatic rates of infection range from 12%-32%.9, 10 Because patient 1 was in an isolette, this is a less likely scenario. Alternatively, HRV species C may have been spread through inanimate surfaces. HRV is able to survive for hours to days on environmental surfaces.11 However, there are very few items that are shared between 2 neonates in the NICU.We report a series of nosocomial transmission of HRV species C in neonates. Although we cannot be certain, the timing of this cluster makes us suspect that a single health care worker exposed both infants. Both patients exhibited signs and symptoms within a day of each other and tested positive on the same day, making it most likely that they were exposed by a single source. Exposure by a symptomatic or asymptomatic family member is less likely because family members of infants did not directly interact with the other infant. An inanimate object was also unlikely because the infants were not mobile, and no other infants in the NICU were found to have HRV species C at that time.In conclusion, we report a cluster of possible nosocomial HRV species C in a NICU. The detection of this outbreak likely was because of improved laboratory techniques, namely the multiplex polymerase chain reaction system. We suspect an increase in reports of nosocomial viral transmission. We hope that molecular technology will continue to advance so that we can determine clonality of viruses and trace exposure etiology and determine if concurrent cases are coincidence or from a common source.


Title: Genomic Epidemiology of Healthcare-Associated Respiratory Virus Infections

No full text body available.


Title: Survival of rhinoviruses on human fingers

IntroductionRhinoviruses are non-enveloped, positive-stranded RNA viruses belonging to the Enterovirus genus within the Picornaviridae family and the main causative agent of the common cold [1], the most frequent infection worldwide. Although usually a self-limited viral disease, it remains a source of significant morbidity in the community. Rhinovirus is associated also with asthma/wheezing and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease exacerbations, as well as several complications, such as acute otitis media, sinusitis, bronchitis and, in some cases, lower respiratory tract diseases. Pre-school children seem to be the main reservoir [2], as approximately six rhinovirus infections are observed per year and per child [3]. There are more than 150 different rhinovirus types with almost no cross-protection, which explains the frequency of rhinovirus infections and the absence of an effective vaccine or antiviral treatment. Only preventive measures are currently effective against these highly prevalent viruses and understanding their mode of transmission is important to reduce the number of infected patients.The nasal mucosa and posterior nasopharynx have been documented as the main sites of viral replication and therefore the main shedding site [4], [5]. It is reported that person-to-person transmission is most likely due to the contamination of hands by the nasal secretions of the infected person passed to a susceptible individual, either directly to the fingers or via an environmental intermediary; infection then follows from self-inoculation to the upper nasal airways or eyes [6], [7], [8], [9]. The required infecting virus dose is below one median tissue culture infectious dose/mL (TCID50) [8], [10]. Three possible transmission routes have been described: via aerosols of respiratory droplets, direct contact by hands, or indirect contact with environmental objects (fomites).Aerosols produced by coughing or sneezing originate mainly from saliva [11] in which the viral load is approximately 30 times lower than in nasal secretions [4], [8]. As rhinovirus transmission depends on the concentration of virus in secretions [4], this supports expert opinion that aerosol or oral transmission is a rare event [12], [13], [14]. Direct contact appears to play a major role in transmission. Rhinoviruses have been shown to transiently survive on human skin [4], [6], [13], [15], leading to the hypothesis that hand-related transmission is the main transmission mechanism [6], [13], [16]. Although less frequently than on skin [13], [17], [18], rhinovirus has been shown to survive on fomites. In an experimental study, 50% of volunteers who touched their nasal mucosa or conjunctiva after handling a contaminated fomite developed infection [15]. However, many authors consider that indirect transmission is unlikely because of the important loss of infectivity during the process [17], [19], [20]. Our study was designed to test rhinovirus stability on fingers under experimental conditions, which aimed to reproduce natural conditions as far as possible.Materials and methodsWe conducted a series of experiments to assess the duration of human rhinovirus infectiousness duration on fingers, as well as the impact of viral concentration on survival rates. Survival was defined as the ability of the virus to grow on HeLaOH cells after 7 days, confirmed by immunofluorescence. Experimental conditions aimed to reproduce natural conditions as far as possible.Viral suspensions and cell linesAll experiments were performed using the RV-B14 strain and HeLaOH cells (kindly provided by F.H. Hayden, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, USA) for viral culture. RV-B14 stock (1 × 10e8 TCID50/mL) was diluted with respiratory mucus to obtain three different concentrations: 1 × 10e5 TCID50/mL (high concentration (HC)); 1 × 10e4 TCID50/mL (average concentration (AC)); and 1 × 10e2 TCID50/mL (low concentration (LC)). Each HC and AC droplet contained 1.1 × 10e5 and 2.8 × 10e4 viral RNA copies (5.5 × 10e7 and 1.4 × 10e7 copies/mL), respectively. LC droplet viral copies were below the limit of detection by real-time RT-PCR assay, but they were expected to represent 200 viral copies given their equivalence to 100 dilutions of the AC. HC represents the average viral load of paediatric nasopharyngeal swabs in our laboratory, whereas LC corresponds to the average measured adult concentration. These values also correlate with epidemiological findings in the literature for paediatric and adult patients [6], [13], [17], [21]. Respiratory mucus was obtained by mixing clinical samples sent for routine testing that were RT-PCR and cell culture negative for the usual human respiratory viruses (influenza virus A/B, human metapneumovirus, coronavirus 229E/HKU1/OC43/NL63, respiratory syncytial virus A/B, picornavirus and parainfluenza virus 1/2/3). A further 20 min of ultraviolet radiation ensured inactivation of putative undetected viruses. To guarantee optimal growth, only mucus with a pH between 6.5 and 7 was retained.Participants and finger contamination procedureSix specialized laboratory collaborators (technicians and MD/PhD graduates) were recruited on a voluntary basis as previously described [22]. The protocol was approved by the institutional review board of the University Hospitals of Geneva.Determination of infectiousnessA 2-μL drop of viral suspension of human RV-B14 mixed with respiratory secretions was deposited on the fingertips of each participant. This volume represents the mean size of a large respiratory droplet and can be easily reproduced [22]. For each subject, nine drops containing rhinovirus at different concentrations (three HC, three AC, three LC) were deposited and one negative control (mucus only). Each contaminated finger was kept untouched for a defined period of time at room temperature before testing for the presence of infectious rhinovirus. Participants' fingers were then immersed in wells (Becton Dickinson and Co., Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) containing 1 mL of McCoy's 5A medium (1 ×) with 2% serum (Gibco, New York, NY, USA) for 60 seconds. Then, 400 μL of this eluate was used to immediately inoculate HeLaOH cells. This represents an additional 2.5-fold dilution of the viral load present in droplets before inoculation onto cell cultures (4.4 × 10e4 viral copies for HC, 1.1 × 10e4 viral copies for AC, and <100 copies for LC). After 1 h of adsorption at 33°C, 1 mL of McCoy's 5A medium (1 ×) with 2% serum (Gibco) was added and cells were incubated in 5% CO2 at 33°C for 7 days. For each 24-well plate, a negative control as well as a mock-infected control finger was included. The cytopathic effect was read daily until day 7. Cells were collected after 7 days and submitted to an immunofluorescence assay.ImmunofluorescenceA J2 mouse monoclonal antibody [23] that recognizes double-stranded RNA and an anti-mouse monoclonal IgG fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated antibody were used to confirm the presence of viral infection (Chemicon-Millipore, Zug, Switzerland).ResultsBased on preliminary pilot experiments, we determined that rhinovirus survival on fingertips was equivalent across different incubation times as it remained infectious on all fingers after 30, 60, 90 and 120 min. Immediately after deposition, half of the droplets were disrupted and spread on the surface of the fingertip using a pipette tip to determine whether disrupting the integrity and environment of the droplet decreased virus survival. As all intact and disrupted droplets yielded positive culture results, we decided to continue experiments with disrupted droplets only so as to reproduce real-life conditions as much as possible.One hour after the deposit of disrupted droplets on the fingers of the six volunteers, infectious viruses could be detected by culture in all subjects contaminated with HC droplets (6/6), in four of the six volunteers with AC droplets, and none of the six volunteers with LC droplets, which confirmed the influence of concentration on survival (Fig. 1
). Of note, when droplets were directly incubated without a passage on fingers, the virus survived in 100% (4/4) of tested fingers at HC compared with 25% (1/4) at LC, despite being below the limit of detection by PCR (data not shown). Overall, the proportion of fingers with detectable viruses was 16/18 fingers at HC, compared with 6/18 and 0/18 for the AC and LC droplets, respectively (Fig. 1). Laboratory room (mean ± standard deviation 24.6 ± 0.7°C) and hood (26.4 ± 1.8°C) temperature, as well as humidity (44.5 ± 5.6%), were similar for all experiments with all subjects.Fig. 1Percentage of volunteers (n = 6) and fingers (n = 18) with positive culture after 1 h.DiscussionWe aimed to investigate rhinovirus transmission by person-to-person contact, the main transmission route for the most prevalent human respiratory infection worldwide. Experiments were designed to reproduce, as much as possible, conditions that could lead to rhinovirus contamination of fingertips in the community. Our study showed that rhinovirus can survive on hands for several hours, similar to previous reports of virus survival on human skin [4], [6], [13], [15], [17], emphasizing that hand-related transmission is the main transmission route. There was no influence of drying time on virus survival under 2 h, in contrast to the study of Ansari et al. where virus survival decreased during the first hour [24].Our study showed that virus survival, and therefore infectiousness, was related to the viral concentration in droplets. This correlates well with D'Alessio et al. who found that the secondary attack rate was related to the viral concentration in the nose [4]. Inoculum seems to be a restrictive factor for transmission, with infectiousness rapidly dropping below a given concentration. As infected children appear to have a higher viral load than adults, this may explain why children are considered to be the main transmission vector. The fact that the viral load in LC droplets was below the level of detection explains why the virus could not be recovered at these concentrations, except in one case without a passage on fingers. LC droplets correspond to the viral concentration recovered in rhinovirus-infected adults and this suggests that transmission via adults occurs rarely. A recent study investigating the transmission of cold-like illnesses between siblings showed that younger children tended to become infected first in most cases. However, the secondary attack rate was greater for older siblings, probably because of a higher viral load in younger siblings' secretions. As younger children tend also to touch nasal secretions directly with their fingers, it is probable that this enhances transmission. The viral load in the mucus of more than 1000 rhinovirus-infected children below 1 year of age was 5.79 × 10e6 TCID50/mL, which is 10 to 100 times higher than our HC of 1 × 10e5 (Regamey et al., private communication). It is very probable that the difference in virus survival between adults and children is even higher than in our results.We showed that virus survival increased at LC when there was no passage on hands. The loss of infectiousness during interhuman contact or fomite manipulation has already been described [20], [24], highlighting again the importance of viral load for transmission. Similarly, rhinovirus was more frequently recovered on fingers from subjects with a high nasal viral load compared with a low nasal viral load [17].Our study confirmed that droplet disruption had no influence on survival at a given concentration. We have previously shown that influenza virus survival on fingers was not related to virus concentration in a study using a similar methodology to the present experiments [22]. Survival of influenza virus on fingers declined rapidly, with less than 15% of the fingers remaining positive after 30 min [22]. The influenza envelope, which is known to be a determinant factor decreasing virus survival, may explain why survival was shorter and affected by droplet disruption, which was not the case for rhinovirus [22]. In a similar study, RV-14 in 10-μL droplets at 2.9 × 10e4 to 1.4 × 10e5 TCID50/mL survived for 1 h on almost 40% of fingers [24]. The fact that virus survival was lower compared with our results, despite the use of bigger droplets and higher viral concentrations, may be explained by the fact that our volunteers did not wash their hands or use an alcohol-based hand rub before experiments as hand rubbing has been shown to decrease virus survival even several hours after use [25]. The fact that disinfecting hands or objects with an iodine or alcohol-based solution reduces the secondary illness rate of rhinovirus infections emphasizes also the importance of hand-related transmission [8], [15], [26].In conclusion, these laboratory results confirm that hand-related transmission of rhinovirus is possible and support hand hygiene as a key measure to prevent transmission, particularly in children who represent the main transmission source.Transparency declarationThe authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: ADENOVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Experimental Cross-Species Infection of Common Marmosets by Titi Monkey Adenovirus

IntroductionAdenoviruses (AdVs) are non-enveloped icosahedral double-stranded DNA viruses that infect a number of vertebrate hosts, including humans and nonhuman primates. The genus Mastadenovirus within the Adenoviridae family includes 7 human adenoviral species A-G (HAdV-A through HAdV-G) and 1 simian adenoviral species A (SAdV-A) [1]. In humans, infections by adenoviruses cause conjunctivitis, gastroenteritis, hepatitis, myocarditis, and acute respiratory illness, ranging from the “common cold” syndrome to fatal outbreaks of pneumonia [2], [3]. However, existing animal models of adenovirus infection to date have been primarily confined to rodents [4], [5], and no nonhuman primate (NHP) model has been established to study adenoviruses that infect humans and/or NHPs.We previously identified a novel adenovirus, titi monkey adenovirus (TMAdV) in association with a fatal outbreak of pneumonia and hepatitis in a closed colony of captive New World titi monkeys (Callicebus cupreus), with evidence for potential cross-species transmission to a human researcher and family member with concurrent acute respiratory symptoms [6]. The origin and natural host reservoir for TMAdV remained unknown, although neutralizing antibodies to TMAdV were found in 23 titi monkeys demonstrating clinical signs, 14 titi monkeys exposed to animals demonstrating clinical signs, 1 rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta), and the 2 humans. Studies by other groups have also revealed the widespread presence of closely related adenoviruses in both human and nonhuman primates [7], [8], [9], and large-scale serological surveys have detected antibodies to monkey adenoviruses in humans living in endemic regions [10], [11]. In addition, human adenovirus species E and G each contain only one member isolated from humans [12], [13], with the remaining members all isolated from monkeys or apes. Collectively, these data have raised concerns regarding the potential of adenoviruses as sources for emerging zoonotic disease in humans.To further investigate the pathogenicity of the novel adenovirus TMAdV, we sought to develop an in vivo animal model of infection and disease for TMAdV. While TMAdV was originally discovered in a closed colony of captive titi monkeys (Callicebus cupreus) at the California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC), we recognized that in vivo testing in this monkey species was contraindicated due to the significant devastation to the colony caused by the virus. Since TMAdV was able to be successfully propagated in the marmoset lymphocyte cell line B95a in vitro (Table 1), we instead elected to pursue in vivo testing of TMAdV infection in the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus).10.1371/journal.pone.0068558.t001Table 1Tropism of TMAdV in human and monkey cells and cell lines.SourceName of Cell LineCell TypeGrowthHumanHEK293human embryonic kidney+CaCo-2human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma++A549human epithelial lung adenocarcinoma+++HFDLhuman fetal diploid lung+++MonkeyPMKprimary rhesus monkey kidney (Old World monkey)+++B95amarmoset monkey lymphoblastoid (New World monkey)++VeroAfrican green monkey kidney (Old World monkey)+++BSC-1African green monkey kidney (Old World monkey)++++, weak cytopathic effect (CPE); ++, moderate CPE, +++, strong CPE.The common marmoset is a New World primate that is small, easily handled, and highly susceptible to infectious agents, and thus a suitable nonhuman primate model for infectious disease [14], [15]. Marmosets have been successfully used to characterize a number of emerging viral diseases, including filovirus- and arenavirus-induced hemorrhagic fevers, encephalitis, and severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) [16]. Since titi monkeys (Family Pithecidae, subfamily Callicebiniae) and marmoset monkeys (Family Cebidae, subfamily Callitrichinae) are classified into separate families [17], the use of the marmoset for in vivo testing of TMAdV infection also afforded the opportunity to directly test the capacity of TMAdV, and, by extension, adenoviruses in general, to cross the species barrier and cause productive infection in a related yet taxonomically distinct secondary host.ResultsCell Culture Adaptation of TMAdVPreviously, we were only able to successfully propagate TMAdV in the A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cell line [6]. Viral adaptation, as assessed by robust cytopathic effect (CPE), occurred by passage 6, and, while the wild-type or early passaged strains grew poorly in available human and monkey cells, the fully adapted passage 10 was able to efficiently infect both types of cells (Fig. 1A) [6]. To understand the molecular basis behind this adaptation, unbiased next-generation, or “deep” sequencing was used to resequence the TMAdV genome corresponding to the original isolate, derived from a lung swab corresponding to a titi monkey who died of TMAdV pneumonia, and passages 4 and 10 in A549 cells (Fig. 1A). From approximately 16, 30, and 54 million 100-nt (“nucleotide”) reads generated per sample, 15,122, 74,986, and 505,224 reads corresponding to the original isolate, passage 4, and passage 10 (P10), respectively, were mapped to the TMAdV genome. A consensus genome was calculated from the mapped reads, and then scanned to identify SNPs, or single nucleotide polymorphisms, that differed from the Sanger-sequenced TMAdV genome (GenBank accession number HQ913600). In total, only 3 SNPs were detected between the Sanger-sequenced TMAdV genome and the 3 genomes assembled by deep sequencing (Fig. 1B). Two of the SNPs, 14776A and 36545A, were identical in all three TMAdV genomes assembled, and thus likely correspond to PCR and/or sequencing errors in the original Sanger-sequenced viral genome. The sole remaining SNP is a C→G mutation at position 3202 that results in a putative amino acid change from proline to arginine at position 388 of the TMAdV E1B-55k protein (388P→R). PCR, cloning, and sequencing of a short gene segment encompassing position 3202 at different viral passages confirmed the correlation between the presence of the 3202 C→G mutation at passages 7 through 13 and TMAdV adaptation in A549 cells beginning at passage 6 (Fig. 1A; Table S1). Since the adenoviral E1B-55K protein is known to interact with and degrade cellular DNA repair proteins such as p53 and the MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) complex [18], [19], a multiple amino acid sequence alignment of E1B-55K proteins was performed between TMAdV and representative human and simian adenoviruses to determine whether the identified mutation might be involved (Fig. 1C). The 388P→R amino acid change was found to be located in a putative p53/MRN-binding region of the E1B-55K protein [18], [19].10.1371/journal.pone.0068558.g001Figure 1Whole-Genome Sequencing of Serially Passaged TMAdV.(A) Genomic coverage of TMAdV by mapping of deep sequencing reads from a lung swab from a titi monkey with TMAdV pneumonia, passage 4 in A549 cells, and passage 10 in A549 cells. The coverage (y-axis) achieved at each position along the ∼37 kB TMAdV genome (x-axis) is plotted on a logarithmic scale. (B) Identification of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in assembled TMAdV genomes. The coverage at each SNP position is shown in parentheses. SNP positions 14776A and 36545A (cyan lollipops) correspond to probable sequencing errors in the Sanger sequenced TMAdV genome (Genbank HQ913600). A 3202CG mutation is observed to occur between passage 4 (black lollipop) and passage 10 (red lollipop), which results in a 388PR amino acid coding change in the TMAdV E1B-55K protein. (C) A multiple sequence alignment of the E1B-55K protein of TMAdV and representative human and simian adenoviruses reveals that position 388 resides within a putative binding region for p53 and/or the MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) complex. Human adenovirus type 5 (HAdV-5) mutants containing a nearby H534 insertion or mutations in the downstream C2H2 zinc finger inhibit binding to p53 and/or MRN [18].Next, we attempted to propagate P10 TMAdV in a variety of human and monkey cell lines (Table 1). Productive infection as assessed by the magnitude of CPE was observed in all cell lines tested. Notably, moderate growth of TMAdV was seen using marmoset lymphoblastoid B95a cells, the only New World monkey cell line tested. Both human epithelial colorectal cells (CaCo-2) and lung cells (A549, HFDL) also supported TMAdV replication.Experimental Infection of Marmosets with TMAdVWe examined TMAdV infectivity by inoculating marmosets intranasally with 0.1 mL of 105 TCID50/mL of P10 virus for which sufficient viral stocks were available. The inoculation dose (104 TCID50) was chosen to be similar to the physiologic doses used in experimental nasal inoculation of nonhuman primates at the TBRI with acute respiratory viruses such as RSV (respiratory syncytial virus). Three marmosets, CJ29012, CJ29019, and CJ29020, were inoculated with culture-adapted TMAdV (passage 13), while one marmoset, CJ29021, was inoculated with cell culture media as a control (Fig. 2A). All animals appeared normal until approximately 5 to 10 days after infection, when clinical signs presented in 3/3 inoculated monkeys (clinical scores >4) (Fig. 2C; Table S2). Animals exhibited reduced activity, had decreased stool production, became anorexic, and developed low-grade fevers. Marmoset CJ29012 demonstrated the most severe clinical signs and was in guarded physical condition with nasal congestion and sneezing by day 10. After day 11, all 3 experimentally infected animals recovered quickly, with marmosets CJ29019 and CJ29020 fully recovered at the time of euthanasia on day 15. To assess the effect of re-infection with TMAdV, marmoset CJ29012 was re-inoculated on day 15 and, along with control marmoset CJ29021, was observed for an additional 21 days prior to euthanasia at day 36. No clinical signs of infection were observed in marmoset CJ29012 (experimental TMAdV animal) or marmoset CJ29021 (experimental control animal) after re-inoculation (clinical scores < = 4).10.1371/journal.pone.0068558.g002Figure 2Experimental TMAdV Infection in the Common Marmoset.(A) Outline of TMAdV infection protocol and sample collections. The “[X]” refers to a marmoset that is sacrificed at the designated timepoint. (B) Results from PCR analysis of nasal swab samples collected at serial timepoints. Shown in parentheses are the calculated viral titers in genome copy numbers per mL associated with each timepoint. (C) Clinical scores in TMAdV-infected and control marmosets. The asterisks (*) refer to timepoints during which each infected marmoset exhibited the most pronounced clinical signs of illness (inset box). For a definition of the clinical scoring system, see Table S2. (D) Antibody titers in TMAdV-infected and control marmosets as measured using a TMAdV neutralization assay.TMAdV Detection by PCR and Neutralizing Antibody TitersNasal swabs collected from the 3 experimental marmosets were positive for TMAdV by real-time qRT-PCR on 2, 4, 6, and 8 days post-inoculation, and negative by day 15 at the time of euthanasia (Fig. 2B). After re-inoculation, nasal swabs from marmoset CJ29012 were positive for TMAdV on days 26 and 31 after re-inoculation, but negative by day 36 at the time of euthanasia. Calculated viral titers ranged from 1.1×105 to 1.1×107 genome copies per mL by qRT-PCR (Fig. 2B). There was no evidence of viremia by qRT-PCR or nested PCR in serum samples from any of the marmosets studied (data not shown).A virus neutralization assay was then used to screen experimentally infected marmosets for the development of neutralizing antibodies (Abs) to TMAdV (Fig. 2D). Interestingly, whereas marmosets CJ29012, CJ29019, and CJ29021 (control) each had negative pre-inoculation Ab titers of <1∶8, marmoset CJ29020 had a pre-existing antibody titer of 1∶16. Antibody titers in TMAdV-infected marmosets CJ29012 and CJ29019 rose to 1∶32 and 1∶16 by days 6 and 8 post-inoculation, respectively, whereas the antibody titer in marmoset CJ29020 rose slightly from 1∶16 to 1∶32 on day 6. Antibody titers remained constant at 1∶16 upon re-inoculation of marmoset CJ29012 on day 15 and during the entire 21-day follow-up observation period.Gross Pathology and HistologyNo significant gross pathological lesions were observed. Only a few salient histologic findings were specific to TMAdV-inoculated animals (Table 2). A mild bronchitis (Fig. 3A–B) and focal area of atypical nodular hyperplasia of the liver (Fig. 3E–F) were observed in marmoset CJ29019 (Table 2). All 3 inoculated animals were found to have a mild enteritis (Fig. 3C–D) and/or colitis. Typical basophilic intranuclear inclusions consistent with active adenovirus infection were not observed in tissues from any of the TMAdV-infected marmosets. The paucity of histologic findings observed in marmosets experimentally infected with TMAdV is in sharp contrast with the striking lesions observed in moribund titi monkeys with TMAdV-associated pneumonia and hepatitis (Table 2) [6].10.1371/journal.pone.0068558.g003Figure 3TMAdV-Associated Pathology in Experimentally Infected Marmoset CJ29019.Histologic findings on necropsy tissue from day 15 post-inoculation include a mild bronchitis (A and B), enteritis (C and D), and an atypical nodular hyperplasia in the liver (E and F). The black rectangle in panels A, C, or E outlines the region magnified in panels B, D, or F, respectively.10.1371/journal.pone.0068558.t002Table 2Salient histologic findings in TMAdV-infected marmoset and titi monkeys with rapidly fatal pneumonia.MonkeyTissuePathologyIntranuclear InclusionBodiesFinding for indicated animal2901229019MarmosetIlverAtypical nodular hyperplasiaabsent−++lungbronchitisabsent−+intestineenteritis/colitisabsent++titi monkey with pneumoniatiti*
liverhepatitis, necrosispresent+++lungpneumonia, hemorrhagepresent+++tracheainflammation, destructionof normal architecturepresent++++, mild; ++, moderate; +++, severe; −, absent.*some titi monkeys developed only subclinical infection or mild acute respiratory illness from TMAdV, for which tissue is unavailable [6].Screening for TMAdV in Necropsy Tissues by Direct ImmunofluorescenceA direct immunofluorescence assay for broad detection of adenoviruses was used to screen for TMAdV in necropsy tissues from experimentally infected marmosets in the current study and naturally infected titi monkeys from the previously reported pneumonia outbreak [6]. Areas of bright apple-green fluorescence, predominantly cytoplasmic, were observed in lung tissues from titi monkeys with fatal TMAdV pneumonia (Fig. 4A–D), but not in lung or intestinal tissues from experimentally TMAdV-infected marmosets (Fig. 4E–H). To confirm these negative findings, necropsy marmoset tissues were then tested for the presence of TMAdV by real-time qPCR and nested PCR. TMAdV was not detected in necropsy tissues from any of the marmosets by these two PCR assays.10.1371/journal.pone.0068558.g004Figure 4TMAdV Antibody Staining of Titi and Marmoset Monkey Tissues.Direct immunofluorescence staining of lung from two TMAdV-infected titi monkeys with fatal pneumonia (A-B, with corresponding magnified views in C-D) [6], and lung and liver from two TMAdV-inoculated marmosets (E-H) are shown. TMAdV staining is evident in lung from naturally infected titi monkeys who died from pneumonia, but absent in lung and liver from experimentally infected marmosets.DiscussionHere we present evidence supporting infection of common marmosets with TMAdV, a novel adenovirus previously associated with acute respiratory illness in humans and rapidly fatal hepatitis and pneumonia in titi monkeys [6]. Although we were unable to re-isolate the virus from blood or tissues from TMAdV-infected marmosets, nasal cultures were positive for TMAdV by real-time qRT-PCR for up to 15 days post-inoculation, and TMAdV inoculation produced both clinically apparent disease and antibody responses in inoculated animals. Thus, River’s modifications to Koch’s postulates, which recognize the additional serological evidence of antibody production in response to a viral infection, have been fulfilled [20], [21]. Experimental infection by nasal inoculation at a physiologic dose of 104 TCID50 resulted in an acute, self-resolving “flu-like” illness starting around days 5 to 10 post-inoculation and was characterized by low-grade fever, reduced activity, decreased stool production, and anorexia; repeated episodes of sneezing were observed in 1 animal. This was accompanied by an increase in virus-specific neutralizing antibody titers in serum in all 3 inoculated animals, confirming an acute, productive yet self-limited infection by TMAdV in marmosets. The sole animal with pre-existing neutralizing antibody to TMAdV was a surprising finding given that we did not anticipate that infection by TMAdV or a serologically cross-reactive New World monkey adenovirus was prevalent among marmoset populations. Further investigation into this possibility is ongoing. The general lack of significant histologic lesions consistent with active adenovirus infection in inoculated animals (Table 2) may be a function of the delay between appearance of clinical signs and necropsy. Taken together, these results demonstrate that TMAdV is infectious and causes disease in marmosets, and clearly documents the ability of adenoviruses to cross species barriers in closely related hosts.
In vivo infection of marmosets with a physiologic dose of TMAdV was unable to replicate the rapidly fatal pneumonia and hepatitis syndrome seen in some of the titi monkeys infected with the virus during the pneumonia outbreak at the CNPRC (Table 3) [6], and necropsy tissues including lung, intestine, liver, were negative for TMAdV, albeit after complete resolution of clinical signs. Although the mild bronchitis seen in one TMAdV-infected marmoset (CJ29019) is consistent with acute respiratory infection, the enteritis and/or colitis seen in all 3 inoculated marmosets is most likely a manifestation of mild marmoset wasting syndrome, which is extremely common even in healthy marmoset populations [22], especially given the absence of intranuclear inclusion bodies and negative immunofluorescence results (Fig. 4). The difference in clinical outcome from TMAdV infection may also be related to anatomical differences between titi monkeys and common marmosets. In titi monkeys, enlargement of the larynx and the presence of laryngeal air sacs have been described [23], which may have predisposed the animals to aspiration pneumonia secondary to laryngeal swelling from viral infection. It is possible that evidence of more severe and invasive infection would have been observed by increasing the infectious dose or numbers of experimentally infected animals, or by serial sacrifice experiments. However, naturally acquired infections by adenoviruses are typically mild and fatal outcomes are rare in immunocompetent individuals [24]. Notably, clinical signs in more than one-third of titi monkeys documented to be infected by TMAdV during the previously reported pneumonia outbreak by antibody testing were also mild or absent [6].10.1371/journal.pone.0068558.t003Table 3Differences in TMAdV-associated disease between marmosets, titi monkeys, and humans.Marmoset (n = 3)*
Titi Monkey (n = 37)**
Human (n = 2)***
mode of infectionexperimental, with passaged TMAdV harboring a 3202C→G mutationnatural, with wild-type TMAdVnatural, with wild type TMAdV (probable zoonotic transmission)clinical signs or symptomslow grade-fever, reduced activity,decreased stool, anorexia, sneezing (n = 1)fever, cough, lethargy, respiratorydistress (23 cases)fever, cough, pleurisydiseasebrief respiratory illness with spontaneous recoverysevere pneumonia and hepatitisprolonged (4 weeks) upper respiratory illnesssubclinical/mild infection possible?yes (100%, or 3 of 3)yes (14 cases)unknowncase fatality rate0% (0 of 3)83% (19 of 23 cases with pneumonia/hepatitis)0% (0 of 2)viremia presentno (0 of 3)yes, rarely (2 of 6 fatal cases; 0 of 4survivors among cases examined)unknownnecropsy findingsmild bronchitis and atypical nodular hyperplasia of the liver (1 of 3),mild enteritis and/or colitis (3 of 3)diffuse, consolidated pneumonia with hemorrhage; hepatic necrosis and hemorrhage; destruction of normal lung, tracheal, and liver architecture (in fatal cases)n/aintranuclear inclusionbodies observed?no (0 of 3)yes (in fatal cases)n/aImmunofluorescent staining of lungand liver positive for TMAdV?no (0 of 3)yes (in fatal cases)n/aelectron microscopy of lung positivefor adenoviral particles?not doneyes (lung alveoli)n/amagnitude of antibody responseto TMAdV infection1∶16–1∶32up to >1∶5121∶16 (researcher) and 1∶8 (household member)*3 marmosets experimentally infected with TMAdV in the current study.**23 cases of largely fatal pneumonia/hepatitis and 14 cases of subclinical TMAdV infection in titi monkeys at the California National Primate Research Center (CNPRC) [6].***TMAdV-infected human researcher and household member at the CNPRC [6].Similar to the 3 inoculated marmosets in the present study, infection by TMAdV in a human researcher at the CNPRC and household member was associated with self-limited “flu-like” respiratory illness [6]. The observed peak levels of neutralizing antibodies (1∶16 to 1∶32) in response to TMAdV infection in marmosets from the current study, as well as in rhesus monkeys, titi monkeys, and humans with mild/absent clinical signs or symptoms during the CNPRC outbreak, were significantly decreased relative to those in titi monkeys with fulminant pneumonia (up to >1∶512) [6]. Levels of neutralizing antibody titers may thus correlate with disease severity, as seen for other respiratory diseases such as SARS [25], and this association may be related to the phenomenon of immune hyperactivity and “cytokine storm” in critically ill individuals.Necropsy tissues tested negative for TMAdV by both PCR and immunofluorescence, and TMAdV was also absent in blood throughout the course of infection. The absence of significant viremia in TMAdV-infected marmosets is not surprising given that TMAdV viremia was rarely found even in titi monkeys with fatal pneumonia and hepatitis (Table 3). These results indicate that the respiratory tract, and not blood, may be the primary site of infection and replication by TMAdV. Indeed, in our current study, we were able to detect TMAdV in marmosets up to 2 weeks after post-inoculation in nasal swabs but not in blood.Another potential explanation for the differences in TMAdV infection between marmosets or humans (acute, self-respiratory illness) and some titi monkeys (fulminant pneumonia) may have been attenuation of the virulence of the serially passaged inoculated strain by the lone 388P→R amino acid change in the adenoviral E1B-55K protein (Fig. 1; Table S1). Previously, we noted that adaptation of TMAdV to cell culture required 6 passages for robust growth in Old World monkey (rhesus and African green monkey) and human A549 cells [6]. The present study has now uncovered the molecular basis for that adaptation. We hypothesize that this single 388P→R coding alteration during passaging may have promoted growth and adaptation of TMAdV in culture, yet may have attenuated the infectivity and/or virulence of the virus in vivo. The clinical significance, if any, of this alteration is unclear; the original proline residue at that position can be found in simian, bovine, porcine, and tree shrew, but not human adenoviruses (data not shown), but the 388P→R change or an arginine at that position has not been noted in any sequenced adenovirus to date. Experiments to investigate this role of this amino acid change in infectivity are now underway.The different manifestations of TMAdV-associated disease between naturally-infected titi monkeys and experimentally-infected marmosets are also not surprising given that they are members of two different families of nonhuman primates. For many viral infections, such as monkey herpesvirus B infection in humans and macaques [26], the spectrum and severity of the disease vary significantly between different, albeit related, hosts. In this study, productive infection of marmosets by TMAdV is documented by the clinical signs of illness beginning at days 5-10, specific neutralizing antibody responses, and detection of the virus in nasal swabs up to 2 weeks post-inoculation. These results along with additional data from recent literature [7], [8], [9], [27] now firmly establish that infection by adenoviruses can indeed cross taxonomic barriers within different nonhuman primate and human hosts. Additional research is needed to develop the common marmoset as a nonhuman primate model for adenovirus disease, especially from viral strains such as TMAdV with the potential to cause both fulminant illness and cross-species infection [6].MethodsAnimal Ethics StatementThis study was carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health and under animal biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) conditions with personnel using BSL-3 practices as approved by the Institutional Biohazards Committee of the Texas Biomedical Research Institute (TBRI). The protocol for marmoset study 1305-CJ, “The pathogenicity of the novel adenovirus TMAdV in a marmoset animal model”, was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and the Institutional Biohazards Committee of the TBRI. TBRI is accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) International and operates in accordance with the NIH and U.S. Department of Agriculture guidelines and the Animal Welfare Act. Marmosets were kept healthy and well-nourished with strict feeding protocols and close monitoring of their health status prior to the start of the study and during the entire study period. One week before inoculation, animals were transferred to the biosafety level-3/4 facility at the TBRI and housed individually in cages specifically developed for marmoset work. Marmosets were sedated and humanely euthanized by administration of a sodium pentobarbital solution by a licensed veterinarian at the TBRI.TMAdV CultivationThe 4 human cell lines (HEK293, CaCo-2, A549, and HFDL) and 4 monkey cell lines (PMK, B95a, Vero, and BSC-1) used in this study have been previously established and are routinely maintained at the Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory (VRDL) branch of the California Department of Public Health for use in viral diagnostic studies [27], [28]. Viral supernatants for cell culture passaging or the generation of infectious stocks were subjected to 3 freeze-thaw cycles and clarified by centrifugation for 10 min×4000 g. After cells achieved 80–90% confluency, cell culture media were changed to maintenance media with 2% FBS and were inoculated with 100 µL of passaged viral supernatant. Viral replication was monitored over 14 days by visual inspection under light microscopy for cytopathic effect (CPE).Early passages of TMAdV were not suitable for generation of infectious viral stocks for marmoset inoculation because of poor growth and insufficient titers in both monkey and human cell lines [6]. Thus, in vivo work with experimental marmoset infection using wild-type or early passages of TMAdV, while desirable, was not practical. Robust growth was only observed after passage 7 in A549 cells, with the appearance of the 3202 C→G in the TMAdV E1B-55k resulting in the 388P→R amino acid change (Fig. 1), reflecting TMAdV adaptation. Viral stocks at titers of ∼107 TCID50/mL were prepared from passage 10 TMAdV initially isolated in BSC-1 and PMK cells and serially passaged in A549 cells (Fig. 1A). Infectious viral stocks were quantitated by an end-point dilution assay.Deep Sequencing of TMAdV200 µL of lung swab sample in universal transport media or 100 µL of viral supernatant were passed through a 0.22 µm filter (Millipore, Temecula, CA) and total nucleic acid extraction was performed using commercially available kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Deep sequencing libraries were then prepared using a variation of the TruSeq protocol (Illumina) as described previously [6]. Raw 100-bp sequence reads were stripped of adapter and primer sequences and aligned to the reference TMAdV genome (accession number HQ913600) using BLASTn (word size = 11, E-value = 1×10−10) [29]. Using Geneious software [30], reads were then trimmed to exclude low quality bases or regions and mapped to the TMAdV genome. The consensus sequences were then compared to the reference TMAdV genome, with the requirement of no ambiguity at each discrepant nucleotide position.Experimental Infection of Marmosets with TMAdVThree healthy adult female marmosets, 5.5 years of age and ranging in weight from 392 to 422 g, were obtained from the Southwest National Primate Research Center at the TBRI. Random screening of animals from the colony by antibody testing had been previously performed, with no viruses other than GBV-A (GB virus A) and MLCV (marmoset EBV-like lymphocryptovirus) detected. Individual screening was not performed for the 3 selected animals. In particular, screening for TMAdV was not performed because there was no a priori evidence that this virus naturally infected captive common marmosets. One additional female marmoset 5.5 years of age and weighing 405 g was used as a control. On day 0, three animals were transferred to a BSL-2/3 facility and then intranasally inoculated with 105 TCID50
/mL of virus diluted in saline, while the remaining control animal received an equivalent volume of diluted cell culture medium. At predetermined time intervals, animals were sedated and blood and nasal swab samples were collected for viral analysis. Animals began to exhibit clinical signs at days 5–10 post-inoculation and were closely observed for evidence of clinical deterioration. However, as all 3 animals recovered quickly, by day 15, two of the 3 experimentally infected marmosets were randomly selected to be euthanized. The remaining experimentally infected marmoset and control marmoset were re-inoculated with TMAdV or control media, respectively, and observed for an additional 21 days prior to euthanasia on day 36. The purpose of the re-inoculation was to assess whether repeated challenge with TMAdV would result in more severe infection or whether prior infection by TMAdV conferred any degree of protection from subsequent exposure to the virus.HistologySamples of aseptically removed tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin for histology. Paraffin-embedded tissues were cut in 5 µm sections, deparaffinized, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) prior to visualization by light microscopy. Additional samples were freshly frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept stored in a −80°C freezer until analyzed. Histologic sections were evaluated independently by two board-certified veterinary pathologists and the degree of tissue inflammation subjectively graded as mild, moderate, or severe.PCR AnalysisNasal swabs, serum, and tissues from experimentally infected and control marmosets were screened for TMAdV using a qPCR assay from the adenoviral IVα2 gene with standard curve analysis as previously described [6]. Negative results were then screened further using a more sensitive nested PCR assay from the hexon gene. PCR amplicons were confirmed to be TMAdV by Sanger sequencing. Primers used for the PCR assays are listed in Table S3.Immunofluorescent StainingFrozen tissues were cut in 4 µm sections, fixed in acetone for 20 minutes at room temperature, and stained with murine monoclonal antibodies to adenovirus 2 hexon (Diagnostic Hybrids, Athens, OH) conjugated to FITC at 37°C for 30 minutes. These antibodies have previously been shown to broadly detect a variety of mammalian adenoviruses [31]. Staining was visualized using an epifluorescence microscope.Nucleotide Sequence Accession NumbersGenBank accession numbers for the adenoviral sequences in Fig. 1C are as follows: HAdV-2, AC_000007; HAdV-3, DQ086466; HAdV-4, AY458656; HAdV-5, AC_000008; HAdV-9, AJ854486; HAdV-40, NC_001454; HAdV-52, DQ923122; SAdV-3, NC_006144; SAdV-18, FJ025931; SAdV-49, NC_015225; TMAdV (titi monkey adenovirus), HQ913600. Deep sequencing reads corresponding to wild-type, passage 4, and passage 10 TMAdV have been submitted to the NCBI Sequence Read Archive (accession number pending).Supporting InformationTable S1(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Table S2(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Table S3(PDF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Molecular epidemiological study of adenovirus infecting western lowland gorillas and humans in and around Moukalaba-Doudou National Park (Gabon)

IntroductionAdenoviruses (AdVs) are non-enveloped icosahedral double-stranded DNA viruses. They belong to the family of Adenoviridae, which is divided into five genera: Mastadenovirus, Atadenovirus, Aviadenovirus, Siadenovirus, and Ichtadenovirus. Members of species belonging to genera Mastadenovirus and Atadenovirus are known to infect mammalian hosts [1, 2]. Mastadenoviruses infecting primates encompass seven Human mastadenovirus species (HAdV-A to G), the accepted species Simian mastadenovirus A and candidate species SAdV-B to G, and further not yet classified mastadenoviruses [2–4]. That classification into species is based on hemagglutination features, DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) homology, and genomic organization [5]. There are currently over 60 HAdV types with HAdV-D containing the most members [5].Adenoviruses were first isolated from humans and identified as the causative agent of epidemic febrile respiratory disease among military recruits in the 1950s [6, 7]. It is estimated that more than 90 % of the human population is seropositive for one or more serotypes of adenoviruses [8, 9]. The molecular biology of human-derived adenoviruses has been characterized extensively for species HAdV-C, for which human adenovirus 2 (HAdV-2) and HAdV-5 serve as prototypes [10]. Adenoviruses cause a variety of non-lethal infectious diseases in humans, and lethal disseminated adenovirus infection occurs in immunosuppressed patients [10].The first description of a simian adenovirus in the literature was of a chimpanzee AdV [11], today known as SAdV-21 within the species H. mastadenovirus B. Later, when investigating chimpanzees suffering from kuru, four novel ape AdVs were discovered [12]. Ape AdVs have been detected or isolated from African apes including chimpanzees, bonobos, and gorillas [13–18]. Gorilla adenoviruses have been proposed to be members of HAdV-B, C, E, and F [13–18]. A recent report confirmed that the species HAdV-B which includes viruses from mixed host origin [14], originated from gorillas and have switched to humans and to chimpanzees during two different host switch events [18]. Serological surveys have found that anti-AdV antibodies were prevalent in 96 % of mountain gorillas, suggesting that AdVs are circulating among these animals [19]. In addition, Hoppe et al. recently reported high prevalence of AdV in wild apes including gorillas (45−100 %) [18]. Because AdVs are shed in the feces and saliva of infected animals [13], these viruses could possibly be transmitted among host animals via the fecal–oral route and inhalation of aerosols [20].Comprehensive studies are still needed to clarify the origin and the diversity of adenoviruses spread in human and non-human primate populations.Thus, to fill the gap, understanding the evolution pattern of AdVs spread in non-human primates and in people frequently coming in contact with these animals is critical.In this study, we investigated AdV infection in two habituated western lowland gorilla groups in Moukalaba-Doudou national park (MDNP). In addition, we assessed AdV infection in the local people living around the national park to evaluate potential zoonotic transmissions.Materials and methodsSample collection and preparationThe study site MDNP is located in the south-western part of Gabon (Fig. 1). MDNP has been reported to have a high gorilla density (more than three gorillas per square kilometer) [21], and the absence of hunting pressure from local villagers makes it a major habitat for western lowland gorillas in central Africa. From December 2010 to November 2011, during tracking, we collected 112 fresh fecal samples from 2 wild gorilla groups, which were named Group Gentil (GG) and Group 8 (G8). GG and G8 had been habituated to human observers since 2003 [21] and 2011, respectively. During the study period, GG consisted of 20−21 individuals, including 1 adult (expected age ≥13 years old) male, 6 adult (≥10 years old) females, 10 young (4–6 years old) males, and 3 young females, and all members were individually identified. In contrast, G8 was estimated to consist of 8–12 individuals, including 1 adult male, 2 adult females, and 5−8 young males and females. GG was mainly sampled near the village Doussala, in the ancient plantations, where the forest has been formerly used in various crop fields, while G8 was found far from the village in the primary forest (Fig. 1). In addition to the gorilla samples, 20 fecal samples were collected from villagers, including trackers working for the habituation of gorillas. Upon collection, each fecal specimen was immediately placed into a tube containing 2 ml of RNAlater (Ambion, Austin, TX, USA). The tubes were kept at room temperature for at most 20 days at the field camp until the samples were transported to the laboratory in Libreville, the capital city of Gabon. At the laboratory, the tubes were stored at –20 °C until DNA extraction.Fig. 1Location features of the sampling area. a Map of Gabon, showing Moukalaba-Doudou National Park [21]. b The sampling area in the MDNP (blue line: rivers; black line: roads; red line: hunting area limitation; green line with black strips: national park limitation; dark green: primary forest; olive green: secondary forest; brown: savanna; spotted green: swamp; black circle: sampling points of G8 pointed by an arrow; gray circle pointed by an arrowhead: sampling points of GG; white circle: base camp; black rectangle with a black flag: village; white squares: habitations) (Color figure online)DNA extraction and PCRTotal DNA was extracted from the sample using the QIAamp DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We used the following primer sets for nested PCR: (1) 4431-s/4428-as and 4428-s/4429-as (Supplementary Table 1), targeting the HAdV DNA polymerase (DPOL) gene [14] and (2) AdhexF1/AdhexR1 and AdhexF2/AdhexR2, targeting loop 1—encompassing the hypervariable region (HVR1–6)—of the hexon gene of mastadenoviruses [22]. PCR for the DPOL gene was performed in a total volume of 20 µl containing 10 µl of 2× GoTaq Green Master Mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), 20 pmol of each primer, and 50 ng of DNA template. The following cycling conditions, slightly modified from Wevers et al. [14], were used: 95 °C for 2 min; 35 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s, 55 °C for 1 min, and 72 °C for 1 min; and a 7-min final extension step at 72 °C. PCR amplification of the hexon gene (HVR1–6) was performed in a total volume of 50 µl containing 200 µM of each dNTP, 20 pmol of each primer, 1.25 U of PrimeSTAR GXL polymerase (TaKaRa, Tokyo, Japan), and 50 ng of DNA template. The cycling conditions were as follows: 98 °C for 3 min; 35 cycles of 98 °C for 10 s, 45 °C for 1 min, and 72 °C for 2 min; and a final extension of 72 °C for 7 min. For the nested reaction, 2 µl of the first PCR product was amplified as above. Amplified products were separated on 1.5 % agarose gel and purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions; the amplicons were then directly sequenced with the primers for the second PCR.BLAST searchBLAST searches were carried out in the NCBI database (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) using the determined nucleotide sequence as a query in the BLASTN program. The queries with at least 90 % identity with the deposited adenovirus gene sequences were considered for AdV species identification.Sequencing and phylogenetic analysisTwenty-four of the 27 positive samples (DNA quantity ≥5 ng/µl) were subjected to direct sequencing of DPOL gene fragments. Six samples were selected randomly for cloning and sequencing of DPOL and hexon HVR1–6 gene fragments. The PCR products were cloned into plasmid vector pCR-Blunt II-TOPO using the Zero Blunt TOPO PCR cloning kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Plasmid extraction was carried out using the Wizard Miniprep Kit (Promega), and the extracted plasmids were sequenced by Big Dye terminator cycle sequencing (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).The hexon HVR1–6 and DPOL gene sequences were edited and aligned using GENETYX software version 12.0 (Genetyx Co., Tokyo, Japan) and MEGA software version 5.05 [23]. The nucleotide sequences of DPOL (528-bp, corresponding to the position 29,200–29,727 in the reference simian adenovirus 21) and 782-bp fragments of the hexon gene (corresponding to the position 18,867–19,635 in the reference simian adenovirus 21) were aligned using MUSCLE, with the default parameters for gap opening and gap extension. These alignments were used for phylogenetic analyses. Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the neighbor-joining method in MEGA 5.05 [23]. A statistical test for the phylogeny was computed by means of bootstrapping. Percentages of 100 bootstrap replicates at the node were calculated to ensure the reliability of the trees.Nucleotide sequence accession numbersPreliminary names were given to candidate novel HAdVs following the method used by Wevers et al. [14]. The gorilla adenoviruses detected in this study were named as follows: Gorilla gorilla AdV B11-B23 (KM886307-KM886309, KM886311, KM886325-KM886328, KM886331-KM886335), Gorilla gorilla AdV C10-C18 (KM886310, KM886320-KM886324, KM886329), and Gorilla gorilla AdV E1 (KM886330). The sequences used as references for phylogenetic analysis are presented in Supplementary Table 2.ResultsDetection of AdV genes in western lowland gorillas in MDNPTo survey AdV infection in gorillas in MDNP, we collected fecal samples from two gorilla groups (GG: well-habituated group, G8: newly habituated group) and analyzed them by nested PCR targeting the DPOL and hexon genes. The DPOL and hexon genes were detected in both groups (Table 1). The overall prevalence of AdV in the gorilla population was 24.1 % (27/112): of the 86 samples from GG, 21 were positive for both genes, 4 were positive only for the DPOL gene, and 1 sample was positive only for the hexon gene. In contrast, only 1 of the 26 samples was positive for both tested genes in G8 (Table 1). These data suggest that AdVs are naturally circulating among gorillas in MDNP. To confirm the detected AdV species, we further determined the nucleotide sequences of the amplicons and determined the species of the detected AdVs by BLAST searches. Of the tested samples, 16 belonged to HAdV-B; 10 to HAdV-C; and 1 to HAdV-E.Table 1Detection of adenovirus DPOL and hexon genes in samples from gorilla groups in MDNPGorilla groupsNo. of tested samplesNo. of positive samples in PCR (%)HAdV SpeciesNo. of samplesBCEGG8626 (30.2 %)1691G8261 (3.8 %)010Total11227 (24.1 %)16101Detection of AdV genes in local people living around the national parkThe prevalence of AdVs in well-habituated gorillas (30.2 % in GG group) was higher than that of newly habituated ones (3.8 % in G8 group), raising two possibilities either the AdVs in gorillas are derived from humans during the habituation process or AdVs are ubiquitous in the environment in and around the areas of human habitation. Therefore, we screened the local people (village Doussala in Fig. 1) for AdV infection. The prevalence in the local people was 35.0 % (7/20): two samples were positive for both DPOL and hexon genes, and five were positive only for the hexon gene (Table 2). These results revealed that the local people including trackers were also infected with AdVs. We sequenced the detected virus genes and identified the species of AdVs: one sample was infected with a HAdV-C type, and the others harbored HAdV-D members.Table 2Adenovirus infection in humansSample IDPCR DPOLPCR hexonH1HAdV-CHAdV-CH2HAdV-DH3H4H5H6HAdV-DH7H8HAdV-DH9H10H11HAdV-DH12HAdV-DH13H14H15H16H17HAdV-DHAdV-DH18H19H20Phylogenetic analysisHAdV-C genes were detected in both gorillas and humans in MDNP, suggesting zoonotic transmission of AdV between the human and gorilla populations. To investigate this possibility, as well as to gain insights into the genetic diversity of adenoviruses in MDNP, we performed phylogenetic analyses.In gorillas, on the tree based on the DPOL gene, 14 AdV genes identified in this study were divided into two groups; they clustered with SAdV-28.2, SAdV-46, SAdV-47, and gorilla AdV strains 6588 and 6575, which are representative strains of HAdV-B in gorillas, and unidentified simian adenoviruses recently described [18] (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1). Nine AdV genes were clustered with simian AdV-45 and simian AdV-43, which are representative strains of HAdV-C in gorilla and new unidentified simian adenoviruses [18] (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1). In contrast, one AdV gene clustered with SAdV-26 and chimpanzee AdV strain Y25, which are chimpanzee-specific strains belonging to HAdV-E (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 1). On the hexon gene-based trees, five HAdV-B (Supplementary Fig. 2a) and HAdV-E (Fig. 3) strains were identified among those isolated from gorillas. HADV-E is divided into four groups (Fig. 3): two groups of human origin and two of simian origin. The HAdV-E detected in gorillas in this study belonged to the H mastadenovirus E of simian origin (Fig. 3).Fig. 2Phylogenetic tree of adenovirus (AdV) DPOL. The tree was constructed based on the alignment of AdV DPOL (539 bp) by using the neighbor-joining bootstrap-confirmed method in MEGA 5.05 software with 100 replicates. The names of simian isolates include the serotype nomenclature and the animal species of isolation (Ch chimpanzee, Go gorilla, Bo bonobo). Names of novel sequences obtained in this study are indicated with black dots. Bootstrap values <90 % are omitted. Scale bar, nucleotide substitutions per siteFig. 3Phylogenetic tree of the adenovirus hexon gene loop 1 of HAdV-E. The tree was constructed based on the alignment of a 792-bp sequence of the hexon gene by using the neighbor-joining bootstrap-confirmed method in MEGA 5.05 software with 100 replicates. The names of simian isolates include the serotype nomenclature and the animal species of isolation (Ch chimpanzee, Go gorilla Bo bonobo). Names of novel sequences obtained in this study are indicated with black dots
In the case of humans, the tree based on the DPOL gene showed one AdV gene clustered with HAdV-1 (HAdV-C), which is genetically different from the strains detected in gorillas (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 2b), and one clustered with the human AdV type 44 and human AdV type 47, which belong to the HAdV-D (Supplementary Fig. 1). The HAdV-D seems to be exclusively limited to the human population as reported earlier [18].DiscussionIn this study, we detected several species of AdVs in western lowland gorillas in MDNP as well as in local people residing nearby. Interestingly, the positive rate in the well-habituated group (30.2 %) was higher than that of the newly habituated group (3.8 %). In addition, members of HAdV-C were detected in both gorillas and humans. However, the phylogenetic analyses revealed that the AdVs detected from gorillas are genetically distinct from those from local people living around the national park. Therefore, gorilla viruses and human viruses may have been separately circulating in each population in this region, and transmission between human and animals does not seem to happen easily in either direction, although we cannot exclude the possibility that we just missed zoonotically transmitted AdVs in this study. The difference in the prevalence between groups GG and G8 may be attributed to the quality of samples, because samples from GG might have been fresher than the ones from G8; GG was sampled while following animals, but G8 was sampled on trails, sometimes without observing the animals. In contrast, AdVs were reported to be transmitted between humans and non-human primates, indicating that AdVs have zoonotic potential [15, 18], despite the belief that AdVs have co-evolved with their hosts and are usually not transmitted to other species.Adenovirus infections have been reported in high prevalence in wild gorillas’ populations as well as in other great apes [15, 17, 18]. In this study, the overall prevalence of AdV infection in gorillas was 24.1 %, which is lower than the previously reported figure of 44.9 % in free-ranging gorillas in Congo Republic [17] or of 48 % in free-ranging gorillas in Loango National Park (Gabon) [18]. These differences might be due to the quality of the samples and/or sensitivity of the PCR. In addition, the PCR systems used in this study targeted the conserved DNA polymerase gene of mastadenovirus or the hypervariable region of the hexon gene, but in some samples, only one of the two genes was amplified. This shows that our PCR system might not be able to amplify all gene variants or that the samples could have been partially degraded [18]. Alternatively, the DNA amount of AdV in the gorillas included in this study was lower than detection limit. Further systematic studies are needed to assess these possibilities.We detected members of three species: HAdV-B, HAdV-C, and HAdV-E in western lowland gorillas in MDNP; these AdV species have been reported earlier [15–18] in western lowland gorillas as well as in other gorilla sub-species in sub-Saharan Africa. The gorilla adenoviruses of this study mainly belong to the HAdV-B (59 %). This confirms the gorilla as the major host of HAdV-B in sub-Saharan Africa. Based on the hexon tree (Supplementary Fig. 2a), the new virus named Gorilla gorilla adenovirus B19, together with the Human mastadenovirus B isolates 6560 and 6674 constitutes a single clade. The pattern observed within the species Human mastadenovirus C (Supplementary Fig. 1) is compatible with the host-pathogen divergence as previously reported [13, 15, 18]. All the lineages in HAdV-C are host specific [18]. The only member of HAdV-E detected in this study clusters with chimpanzee strains (Fig. 3). This finding supports previous report describing the non-human primate AdVs members of the HAdV-E to originate from chimpanzees [18]. We can suspect the Gorilla gorilla adenovirus E1 of this study to be the result of chimpanzee-to-gorilla transmission, as chimpanzees and gorillas are living sympatrically in MNDP. Broader screening would clarify the evolution of viruses belonging to HAdV-E.On the other hand, the adenoviruses detected in the human population around MDNP are mainly members of the HAdV-D (85.71 %) which confirms that the species HAdV-D originated in humans [18] and so far has been exclusively human specific. Four different serotypes were detected in this study, highlighting the diversity of adenoviruses circulating in the target human population. Further systematic studies should clarify the circulation of AdVs in human population.Taken together, our results show that AdVs are naturally present among gorillas and humans in MDNP in Gabon. Although there is no evidence of zoonotic transmission of AdVs in this region, our data show the feasibility of monitoring viral agents in wild habituated gorillas [24] and in local people living nearby for the safe management of wild gorilla populations and human health, as well as for understanding the evolution of virus. Since the zoonotic transmission of adenovirus already occurred during hominin evolution, assessing the zoonotic transmission of that virus in the context of habituation sites such as MNDP is recommended.Electronic supplementary materialBelow is the link to the electronic supplementary material.
Supplementary material 1 (DOC 1146 kb)


Title: Mechanistic insights into the kidney injury in chickens induced by hypervirulent fowl adenovirus serotype 4

INTRODUCTIONHypervirulent fowl adenovirus serotype 4 (FAdV-4) was first reported in Ankara, Pakistan, in 1987 and is also known as “Ankara disease” (1). FAdV-4 has become globally prevalent since 2015, with documented infections in Japan (2, 3), China (4, 5), the United States (6), South Korea (7), Canada (8), and other nations. It is a nonenveloped, dicosahedral, and double-stranded DNA virus belonging to the genus Aviadenovirus, which commonly infects chickens, ducks, geese, and peacocks. The FAdV-4 is categorized into two types based on its virulence: pathogenic and nonpathogenic strains. Since 2015, a novel genotype of virulent FAdV-4 with hydropericardium syndrome has emerged in China and has become a predominant pathogen on poultry farms (9). This novel virulent genotype strain spreads quickly, with a wide range of multi-organ and multi-tissue tropism. It replicates in the liver, kidney, spleen, lung, and other tissues, leading to the production of high viral titers. These infections are associated with pathologies such as hepatitis-hydropericardium syndrome and nephritis, with mortality rates ranging from 30% to 100% (10, 11), resulting in substantial economic losses for the poultry industry.Recent studies of FAdV-4 have focused on pathogenicity (12, 13), innate immunity (14), and vaccines (15). Despite ongoing efforts to contain the occurrence and transmission of FAdV-4 disease, further elucidation of the molecular pathogenesis of FAdV-4 is still crucial for disease prevention and control. Previous research has demonstrated the liver injury caused by FAdV-4 infection, revealing that the activation of the LXR-α signaling pathway post-infection leads to the accumulation of triglyceride in liver cells and subsequent liver steatosis (12, 16). These findings suggest that a robust inflammatory response and lipid accumulation in the liver play significant roles in the pathogenesis of FAdV-4. However, the molecular mechanism underlying kidney injury induced by FAdV-4 infection remains unclear.Autophagy is a highly conserved catabolic degradation process in which bilayer membrane vesicles are generated that coat and isolate pathogens, abnormal proteins, and organelles for degradation in lysosomes, thus maintaining cellular homeostasis. Autophagy is induced by various stress stimuli, including endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, starvation, oxidative stress, and viral infections (17). Autophagy has been a double-edged sword in viral evolution, and various strategies have been developed to either enhance or restrict viral replication (18, 19). For instance, the egg drop syndrome virus activates autophagy in duck embryo fibroblasts through the PI3K/AKT/MTOR pathway to facilitate viral replication (20). Several studies have also shown the significant role of autophagy in FAdV-4 infection (21, 22), in which the viral hexon protein interacts with host BAG3 to induce cellular autophagy and promote viral replication in LMH cells (23). In contrast, the binding of the viral protein VP2 to the Avibirnavirus receptor triggers autophagy, leading to the inhibition of viral replication (24). Despite these findings, the precise molecular mechanism by which hypervirulent FAdV-4 induces cellular autophagy remains unclear.Autophagy not only triggers the innate immune response but also breaks down cellular components to create an environment suitable for eliminating invaders (25). However, the excessive activation or inhibition of autophagy can result in ER stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, which is detrimental to the host, leading to tissue damage and potential death. Research has shown a correlation between autophagy and kidney injury (26, 27). The role of cellular autophagy in the pathogenesis of various poultry diseases, including kidney injury, is an area of significant interest (26). However, it remains unclear how autophagy influences different patterns of cell death in kidney injury and what molecular interactions occur during dynamic homeostasis to affect overall cell fate. Several viruses have evolved mechanisms to either prevent the formation of autophagosomes or to hijack them for their own survival and replication, even utilizing the metabolites and energy generated by autophagy for their benefit. Different viruses manipulate autophagy to adjust host cellular life cycles and pathogenesis, although the precise molecular mechanisms remain unclear. The interrelation between autophagy and infection is more intricate than previously thought, and viruses have evolved to effectively subvert and disrupt autophagy (19). Studies have shown that interferon gamma (IFN-γ)-induced GTPases inhibit viral replication by targeting the Norovirus replication complex with LC3 (28). This research has shed light on how autophagy (specifically, the LC3-coupled system) and the innate immune response (IFN-induced GTPases) collaborate to combat viral infections.In this study, we primarily elucidated the underlying molecular mechanism of the kidney injury induced by FAdV-4 infection in specific-pathogen-free (SPF) chickens, using both in vitro and in vivo models. Our results showed that FAdV-4 infection of chickens causes the degeneration and necrosis of kidney epithelial cells, glomerular injury, expansion of the ER, and a robust inflammatory response in kidney cells. Notably, we observed the cell-to-cell transmission of virus particles mediated by autophagosome-like vesicles, which facilitated the movement of viral particles among primary chick kidney cells, thus increasing the efficiency of hypervirulent FAdV-4 infection. The viral infection-induced cellular autophagy facilitated viral replication in the kidney cells. These findings offer a novel perspective to understand the molecular mechanisms of FAdV-4-induced kidney injury and establish a basis for further investigation into the molecular pathogenesis of hypervirulent FAdV-4.MATERIALS AND METHODSStrains and animalsThe FAdV-4 strain (GenBank ID: MG856954.1) was isolated from Meizhou City, Guangdong Province, and maintained by the Fujian Key Laboratory for Avian Diseases Control and Prevention, Fujian Academy of Agricultural Sciences (11). SPF chickens and SPF chick embryos were purchased from Jinan SPAFAS Poultry Co., Ltd (Shandong, China).Ultrastructural analysis of primary chick kidney cells post-infectionKidneys were aseptically removed with tweezers from two 18-day-old SPF chick embryos. The extracted kidney tissues were rinsed with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) three times before they were transferred to a new Petri dish and cut into small pieces. Trypsin (0.25%, 2 mL) was added to digest the kidney tissues for 2 min for five cycles. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 1,200 × g for 3 min to obtain the cell precipitate. A volume of 5 mL of DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin was added to disperse the cells, and the cell density was adjusted to 1 × 106/mL and cultured in a CO2 incubator. After the primary chick kidney cells had been cultured for approximately 24 h and had formed a fresh monolayer, they were inoculated with two median tissue culture infective doses (2 TCID50) of FAdV-4 viral suspension. The cytopathogenic changes in the primary chick kidney cells were observed under a microscope at 48 hpi. To investigate the replication dynamic changes of the FAdV-4 in primary chick kidney cells, the viral suspensions were collected at the indicated times (12, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 h) post-infection. The viral loads of FAdV-4 in collected suspensions were determined by the qPCR method (11).After inoculation with FAdV-4, both the infected cells and normal control cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), digested with 0.25% trypsin for 150 s, and then centrifuged at 1,200 × g at room temperature for 3 min to obtain the cell precipitates. Ultrathin sections of the cells were prepared after 500 µL of electron microscopy fixing solution containing 5% glutaraldehyde was added. The sections were washed three times with PBS, fixed with 1% osmic acid for 1.5 h, washed again three times with ddH2O, and dehydrated with a graded series of alcohol. The sections were then stained with 3% uranyl acetate and lead citrate and washed for 5 min with ddH2O. The ultrastructure of the primary chick kidney cells after FAdV-4 infection was observed under an electron microscope (Hitachi HT7700, Tokyo, Japan) at 80 kV. Autophagosome-like vesicles are defined as double-membraned or single-membraned vesicles with a diameter of 0.3–2.0 µm.Histopathological analysis of the kidney post-infectionThirty-five-day-old SPF chickens were divided into two groups for histopathological analysis. One group was injected intramuscularly with 0.5 × 103.8 TCID50/mL FAdV-4 suspension in an injection dose of 0.2 mL per chicken. The control group was injected with 0.2 mL of PBS. Kidney tissue samples were collected 24 h after the viral challenge, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) at 4°C for 24 h, and then processed into paraffin sections for hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining to observe the early pathological injury in kidney tissue after FAdV-4 infection. The detailed HE staining method used was based on reference (11).Immunohistochemical assayParaffin sections were prepared from infected chicken kidney tissues and normal kidney tissues 24 h after the viral challenge. Antigen repair was conducted after dewaxing, and the sections were treated with 4% bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 45 min. A rabbit anti-fiber-2 polyclonal antibody (diluted 1:500; primary antibody) was then added, and the samples were incubated overnight at 4°C. A goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody (Sigma-Aldrich; diluted 1:10,000) was then added, and the samples were incubated at 37°C for 45 min. After the sections were washed four times with PBS, they were stained with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine and then with hematoxylin for 10 min. After decolorization, the tissue sections were dehydrated in a gradient of alcohol, rendered transparent with xylene, and sealed with neutral gum. The histopathology before and after FAdV-4 infection was compared microscopically, with a brown-yellow color indicating a positive signal of Fiber2 protein post-FAdV-4 infection.Immunofluorescence assayTo investigate the relationship between autophagy and viral replication in kidney tissue after FAdV-4 infection, colocalization of the viral Fiber2 protein with the host autophagy-related proteins LC3B (Abcam, Shanghai, China) and CD63 (Bioss, Beijing, China) was examined with an immunofluorescence assay. The kidney tissues from SPF chickens infected with FAdV-4 for 24 h were collected, cut into 3 × 3 × 3 mm3 sections, fixed in paraformaldehyde (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) at 4°C for 24 h, and processed into paraffin sections. After antigen retrieval, the sections were coated with 2% BSA for 120 min. A rabbit anti-Fiber2 antibody of FAdV-4 was added and incubated for 60 min, followed by a rabbit anti-LC3B polyclonal antibody (ab63817, Santa Cruz, USA) and a rabbit anti-CD63 polyclonal antibody (bs-23032R, Beijing, China) for 60 min each. Goat anti-rabbit secondary antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 or cyanine 3 (Cy3) were added, and the samples were incubated for 60 min. The cell nuclei were counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 10 min. The sections were then sealed and examined with confocal immunofluorescence microscopy (TCS SP8; Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) to observe the positive fluorescent signals.Quantitative real-time PCRQuantitative real-time PCR was used to assess the expression levels of inflammatory factors (IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α), as well as antiviral cytokines (IFN-α, IFN-γ, MX-1, and OASL), to investigate the innate immune response in the kidneys of FAdV-4-infected chickens. A total of 50 mg of kidney tissue was obtained from chickens (n = 3 birds for each group) at various time points (6, 12, and 24 hpi). Each kidney tissue sample was immersed in 500 µL of Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) and quickly frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total RNA was then extracted from every sample and reverse transcribed into cDNA using a reagent kit (Takara, Dalian, China). The RT-qPCR reaction protocols and primers applied in this investigation were based on reference (11). The relative mRNA expression levels of the inflammatory factors (IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, and IL-8) and antiviral cytokines (TNF-α, IFN-α, IFN-γ, MX-1, and OASL) were calculated utilizing the 2-ΔΔCt method. Data analysis was performed using two-way ANOVA with Prism 8 software (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).Western blotting analysisThe expression levels of autophagy-related factors LC3B, SQSTM1, BECN1, ATG5, and GRP78 in the kidneys of SPF chickens infected with FAdV-4 were analyzed with western blotting. Kidney tissue samples (100 mg) were homogenized, and RIPA lysate containing 1 mM PMSF (Servicebio, Wuhan, China) was added for cell lysis for 10 min on ice. After centrifugation at 12,000 × g at 4°C for 10 min, the supernatants were collected, and the protein concentrations were adjusted to 2 mg/mL, with a loading sample volume of 10 µL per well. Electrophoresis was performed on an SDS-PAGE gel, and the proteins were transferred at 200 mA to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore, Bedford, USA) for 12 h. The membranes were then blocked with 5% skim milk solution (Servicebio, Wuhan, China) for 2 h. Primary antibodies (directed against LC3B [Abcam]; SQSTM1, Beclin1, ATG5, GRP78 [Bioss]; and Fiber2) were diluted 1:1,000, added to the PVDF membranes, and incubated overnight at 4°C. After the membranes were washed three times with PBS containing Tween-20, HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich; diluted 1:10,000) were added, and the membranes were incubated with shaking for 2 h. The membranes were washed three times with Tris-buffered saline containing Tween 20, and an enhanced chemiluminescence kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Beijing, China) was used to visualize the color reaction. The protein bands were captured with a gel imaging system and quantified with the ImageJ software.Impact of cellular autophagy regulators on FAdV-4 replicationTo determine whether the autophagy regulators rapamycin and 3-MA affect the activities of primary kidney cells and whether the pharmacological alteration of autophagy affects cell viability, we used a Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) kit (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, primary chick kidney cells were diluted to 1 × 105 cells/mL. After the primary cells had grown into a fresh monolayer, they were treated with gradient concentrations of rapamycin (5, 10, 25, and 50 nM) or 3-MA (1, 2, 3, and 4 mM) for 48 h. The viability of the primary chick kidney cells was determined with the CCK-8 assay to determine the suitable concentrations of autophagy regulators. Five biological replicates were prepared for each concentration, with 100 µL of cell suspension per well. After 48 hpi, the plates were washed with PBS to remove the autophagy regulators, and 100 µL of DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin was added. The CCK-8 solution (10 µL) was then added to each well (Sangon Biotech, Shanghai, China). After gentle mixing, the plates were further incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for 4 h. The optical density at a wavelength of 450 nm (OD450) of each well was then measured with a microplate reader (Infinite 200 Pro, servoLAB GmbH, Kumberg, Austria).After the primary chick kidney cells had grown to fresh monolayers in a 6-well plate, optimized solutions of the autophagy regulators rapamycin and 3-MA were added to the cultured cells. The cells were then cultured in a 5% CO2 incubator for 4 h, treated with 2 TCID50 FAdV-4, and cultured at 37°C for 2 h. The supernatant was removed and replaced with DMEM containing 2% fetal bovine serum for maintenance culture. Samples were collected at 24 and 48 h, respectively. The protein expression levels of LC3B, SQSTM1, Beclin1, ATG5, and GRP78 were assessed with western blotting. The expression of fiber 2 before and after treatment with the autophagy regulators was also measured.Statistical analysisThe data were analyzed with the two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 software. The data are presented as the means ± standard deviation of three independent experiments. ns, P > 0.05; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; and ***P < 0.001.RESULTSUltrastructural analysis of kidney cells infected by FAdV-4Typical cytopathic effects were observed at 48 hpi, the primary chick kidney cells were enlarged and formed clumps, characteristic of cytopathic lesions (Fig. 1A). The viral loads significantly increased at 24 and 48 hpi, suggesting that the FAdV-4 were in the logarithmic growth phase (Fig. 1B). Assemblies of virus particles were observed in the nucleus at 48 hpi, with a clearly visible virus assembly factory in the single-cell ultrastructure (Fig. 1C through E). These virus particles were approximately 70 nm in size and formed crystalline arrays. Following infection with FAdV-4, the nuclear membrane ruptured and gradually disintegrated as compared to normal cells. The ER exhibited expansion and abnormality post-infection. The infected cells had numerous vacuoles and discontinuous nuclear membranes in the cytoplasm after virus infection, with progeny viruses being released from the damaged nucleus through the cell membrane.Fig 1Virus culture and electron microscope observation. (A) The typical cytopathic effects post-FAdV-4 infection. Scale bar, 50 µm. (B) The growth curve of FAdV-4-infected primary kidney cells at the indicated times using qPCR. Data are means ± SD of the results of three independent experiments. (C) The virus particles are arranged in the form of a crystal lattice pattern in the nucleus. (D and E) Local magnification views of panel C; black and red dotted rectangles represent panels D and E, respectively.Bright-field images of cell morphology differences before and after infection. Growth curve plots viral copy numbers over time with statistical significance markers. Electron microscopy images display hexagonal viral particles in cytoplasm.Additionally, mitochondria in the cytoplasm were deformed and swollen, with disordered ridge structures, and some mitochondria even disappeared or formed vacuoles (Fig. 2). Notably, virus particles were observed within some of the mitochondria, suggesting that viral infection may cause mitochondrial injury.Fig 2Ultrastructural analysis in primary chick kidney infected with FAdV-4. (A) Autophagosome-like structures in the cytoplasm. (B) Autophagosome-like structures are wrapping the virus particles. Local magnification views of panel A. Mitochondria swell was observed post-FAdV-4 infection. (C) Vesicles that transport viral particles in the cytoplasm in the primary chick kidney cells post-infection. (D) Enlargement of autophagosome-like structure of panel C (black dotted rectangles). (E) Autophagosome-like vesicles contain damaged mitochondria in the cytoplasm. (F) Extracellular vesicle facilitated FAdV-4 transmission cell to cell. N, nucleus. Blue arrow, autophagosome-like vesicles contain viral particles or damaged organelles. Red arrows, virus particles. Green arrows, mitochondria infected by FAdV-4.Electron microscopy depicts clusters of viral particles in the cytoplasm, some near cellular organelles. Arrows depict viral structures, vesicles, and cellular components. Enlarged views reveal detailed viral morphology and intracellular distribution.Autophagosome-like vesicles were observed in the cytoplasm following viral infection and appeared to contain damaged organelles, cell fragments, or viral particles, indicating that cellular autophagy was activated post-infection (Fig. 2, blue arrow). FAdV-4 infection triggered autophagic flux. Notably, these vesicles were observed in both the kidney cytoplasm and extracellular space and delivered a significant number of virus particles, suggesting a potential mechanism for the infection and transmission of the hypervirulent FAdV-4.Histopathological analysis of the kidney post-infectionHistopathological changes in the kidneys of chickens following infection were analyzed by staining with hematoxylin and eosin and immunohistochemical analysis (Fig. 3). The structures of the tubular epithelial cells and capillaries in normal kidneys were intact, with no exudate observed in the tubule lumens. However, at 24 hpi, the tubular epithelial cells exhibited denaturation, necrosis, and swelling. The kidney tubular lumens displayed a significant presence of red blood cells and shedding of epithelial cells. Circular vacuoles appeared in the cytoplasm of kidney epithelial cells, and some nuclei were displaced or showed nucleolysis. Additionally, the glomeruli appeared dilated and denatured, with enlarged lacunae in the kidney sacs. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed brownish-yellow staining of the kidney interstitium, epithelial cells, and some glomerular cells post-FAdV-4 infection, indicating that FAdV-4 primarily targeted these cells in the kidney. The structural damage and scar formation indicated potential kidney dysfunction.Fig 3Histopathological changes to the FAdV4-infected kidney. (A) Representative histopathological images post-FAdV-4 infection. (B) Histopathological changes of the FAdV4-infected kidney. (a and b) Hematoxylin-eosin staining. (a) Normal kidney. (b) The kidney post-FAdV-4 infection (scale bar, 100 µm). (c–f) Immunohistochemical assay results, where brownish-yellow staining indicates positive signals. (c) Normal tubules. (e) Kidney abnormalities post-infection. (d) Normal glomeruli. (f) The glomeruli were dilated and denatured, with enlarged lacunae in the kidney sacs post-infection. Scale bar, 20 µm.Experimental process from virus culture to histopathological analysis. Microscopic images compare normal and FAdV-4-infected kidney tissues, showing structural damage, cellular infiltration, and viral antigen presence in infected samples.mRNA levels of cytokines in the kidney post-infectionThe mRNA levels of cytokines in the kidney were analyzed at 6, 12, and 24 hpi, as depicted in Fig. 4. The mRNA levels of the inflammatory factors IL-1β and IL-2 were relatively low in the kidney, whereas mRNA levels of IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α were significantly upregulated at 24 hpi by 2.7-, 2.7-, and 2.0-fold, respectively. The mRNA expression levels of IFN-α at 6, 12, and 24 hpi were significantly downregulated during early viral infection. IFN-γ expression level was downregulated at 6 hpi and then significantly upregulated at 24 hpi by 10.0-fold. Additionally, MX-1 and OASL mRNA expression levels were significantly upregulated at 24 hpi by 54.0- and 41.7-fold, respectively. These findings indicated that FAdV-4 at 24 hpi elicited significant upregulation of the inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α, as well as the antiviral cytokines IFN-γ, MX-1, and OASL. Notably, upregulation of the IFN-stimulated cytokines MX-1 and OASL elicited a robust antiviral innate immune response.Fig 4Changes to kidney cytokine levels post-FAdV-4 infection. (A) IL-1β, (B) IL-2, (C) IL-6, (D) IL-8, (E) TNF-α, (F) IFN-α, (G) IFN-γ, (H) MX-1, and (I) OASL. The data were analyzed with the two-way ANOVA using GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 software. The data are presented as the means ± SD of three independent experiments. ns, P > 0.05; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; and ***P < 0.001.Bar graphs compare relative gene expression levels of inflammatory cytokines and antiviral response genes over time between PBS and FAdV-4 challenges. Significant differences are marked, depicting increased expression in infected samples.FAdV-4 infection promoted cellular autophagy in the kidneyTo investigate the impact of FAdV-4 infection on cellular autophagy in the kidney cells of SPF chickens, western blotting analysis was utilized to analyze changes in the expression levels of the autophagy-related proteins LC3B, SQSTM1, Beclin1, and ATG5, as well as the ER stress marker GRP78 (Fig. 5). The expression of LC3-II, a key marker of autophagy, was upregulated in FAdV-4-infected kidney tissues by 2.7-fold. Furthermore, the expression levels of ATG5 and BECN1 were upregulated by 3.1- and 3.3-fold, respectively, while the expression of SQSTM1 was decreased by 2.6-fold as compared to uninfected tissues, indicating induction of complete autophagy post-FAdV-4 infection in the kidney. Interestingly, GRP78 expression was increased by 2.3-fold following FAdV-4 infection, suggesting a potential link between ER stress-mediated autophagy and viral replication in vivo.Fig 5FAdV-4 promoted cellular autophagy in chicken kidney cells. (A) The expression levels of the autophagy-related proteins of LC3B, SQSTM1, Beclin1, ATG5, and GRP78 in the spleen post-infection were measured by western blotting analysis. (B) The protein bands were quantified against ACTB expression using ImageJ software. Data are means ± SD of the results of three independent experiments. ns, no significant difference; P > 0.05; *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; and ***P < 0.001.Western blot analysis compares protein expression levels between control and FAdV-4-infected samples. Bar graphs quantify relative expression levels, depicting significant increases in autophagy and stress-related proteins upon infection.Impact of cellular autophagy regulators on FAdV-4 replicationThe CCK-8 assay was utilized to assess the impact of cellular autophagy regulators rapamycin and 3-MA on the viability of primary chick kidney cells (Fig. S1). As the concentration of the autophagy regulators was increased, cell viability gradually decreased. Specifically, when the concentration of rapamycin ranged from 5 to 25 nM, cell viability remained greater than 90%. However, at a concentration of 50 nM, cell viability decreased to 86.03%. Similarly, at 3-MA concentrations of 1 and 2 mM, cell viabilities were 98.82% and 95.49%, respectively. With a further increase in 3-MA concentrations to 3 mM, cell viability decreased to 85.67%. Overall, the CCK-8 assay indicated that the optimal concentrations of rapamycin and 3-MA were 10 nM and 1 mM, respectively, which might exhibit minimal impact on primary kidney cell viability.To investigate the impact of cellular autophagy on FAdV-4 proliferation, primary chick kidney cells were cultured with rapamycin (10 nM) or 3-MA (1 mM) to assess the expression levels of the autophagy-related proteins LC3B, SQSTM1, Beclin1, ATG5, GPR78, and viral Fiber2 (Fig. 6). The results showed that Fiber2 protein expression increased with enhanced autophagy post-FAdV-4 infection without the addition of autophagy regulators. In the rapamycin group, Fiber2 protein expression was elevated but inhibited in the 3-MA group. The rapamycin-treated cells exhibited upregulation of LC3B, Beclin1, ATG5, and GPR78 by 2.20-, 1.63-, 1.38-, and 1.60-fold, respectively, with a 2.24-fold decrease in SQSTM1 at 24 hpi. Moreover, the protein expression levels of LC3B, Beclin1, ATG5, and GPR78 were upregulated by 2.85-, 2.69-, 2.81-, and 2.79-fold, respectively, with a 2.47-fold decrease in SQSTM1 at 48 hpi. Conversely, the protein expression levels of LC3B, Beclin1, ATG5, and GPR78 were downregulated by 2.20-, 1.92-, 2.27-, and 2.12-fold, respectively, while SQSTM1 expression was increased by 1.66-fold in the 3-MA group as compared to the control group at 24 hpi. Meanwhile, the expression levels of LC3B, Beclin1, ATG5, and GPR78 were decreased by 5.25-, 3.31-, 3.14-, and 3.18-fold, respectively, with a 1.73-fold increase in SQSTM1 at 48 hpi.Fig 6Impact of autophagy regulators on FAdV-4 replication. (A) The expression levels of autophagy-related proteins (LC3B, ATG5, BECN1, and SQSTM1), GRP78, and viral Fiber2 after rapamycin treatment as detected by western blotting analysis. (B) The expression levels of autophagy-related proteins (LC3B, ATG5, BECN1, and SQSTM1), GRP78, and viral Fiber2 after 3-MA treatment as detected by western blotting analysis. The abundance of each protein band was quantified with the ImageJ software and normalized to ACTB; the protein/ACTB ratio was shown below each band.Western blot analysis of protein expression levels in FAdV-4-infected cells treated with rapamycin or 3-MA at 24 and 48 h. Bands indicate autophagy-related and stress-response protein levels, with numerical values representing relative expression.Virus replication and cellular autophagy in infected chickensTo investigate the correlation between autophagy and viral replication, specific antibodies were used to identify the subcellular localization of the viral proteins Fiber2 and LC3B in kidney tissue cells infected with FAdV-4 (Fig. 7). Fluorescent signals indicating aggregation of LC3B, a marker of cellular autophagy formation, were observed in FAdV-4-infected kidney cells. Both LC3B and Fiber2 proteins were co-localized in kidney cells, suggesting that FAdV-4-induced cellular autophagy could enhance viral replication in kidney cells. Additionally, the distribution of CD63, an exosome-specific marker protein involved in vesicular trafficking and cargo sorting, was examined post-FAdV-4 infection. The co-localization of CD63 and Fiber2 in FAdV-4-infected kidney cells implies a potential role of autophagosome-like vesicles in the replication of FAdV-4.Fig 7Immunofluorescence confocal images of co-localization in primary kidney cells post-FAdV-4 infection. (A) Fiber2 was colocalized with LC3B post-infection. (B) Fiber2 was colocalized with CD63 post-infection. Scale bar, 5 µm. Arrows point to cellular co-location (orange fluorescence signals). Images show the results of one out of three replicates.Fluorescence microscopies depict DAPI-stained nuclei, Fiber2, and colocalization with LC3 or CD63. Merged images highlight overlapping signals, indicating viral and autophagy or exosome marker interactions. Arrows point to colocalized regions.DISCUSSIONAutophagy is a dynamic cellular process for the degradation of damaged or abnormal proteins and senescent organelles in the cytoplasm through autophagy-lysosome pathways. Damaged organelles and cell debris are primarily degraded by lysosomes facilitated by the formation of single-membrane or double-membrane vesicles (29). The formation of autophagosomes helps maintain cell homeostasis in response to stimuli, such as pathogen infection (30). Autophagy serves as a natural defense mechanism against viruses and is integral to the innate immune response. Certain viruses have developed strategies to manipulate cellular autophagy via specific viral proteins to benefit replication (31, 32). Autophagy plays a significant role in the response of host cells to FAdV-4 infection, as evidenced by in vitro studies of LMH cells (12, 23). The low basal level of autophagy in normal kidney cells indicates the importance of basal autophagy in the maintenance of homeostasis of host cells. Upon the FAdV-4 challenge, the autophagy-related marker proteins LC3B, ATG5, and BECN1 were upregulated in kidney tissues, accompanied by the degradation of p62/SQSTM1. LC3B and ATG5 are crucial for the formation of autophagosomes and regulation of autophagy pathways, while LC3B is also involved in membrane expansion and closure of vesicles. ATG5 promotes vesicle formation and maturation, and BECN1 regulates the early stages of autophagy and is also associated with the formation of vesicles. Overall, these proteins are closely linked to autophagosome formation (33). The results of the present study indicated that FAdV-4 infection boosts autophagic flux, leading to a complete autophagic response in host kidney cells. Post-FAdV-4 infection, cellular autophagy is enhanced, resulting in increased expression levels of Fiber2, which indicates the promotion of viral replication. In this study, rapamycin promptly activated cellular autophagy and decreased Fiber2 levels during FAdV-4 infection, while 3-MA, an autophagy inhibitor, exhibited an opposite effect, inferring that host cellular autophagy might be excessively active during virus infection and degrade Fiber2, a crucial immune component of FAdV-4 (19). Previous research has shown that the autophagy cargo receptor p62/SQSTM1 is involved in the degradation of the Avibirnavirus capsid protein VP2. The interaction between SQSTM1 and VP2 enhances autophagy induction, thereby facilitating degradation of the viral protein VP2 (34). Coincidentally, the host factor OASL can directly target the ubiquitinated VP2 protein of infectious bursal disease virus for degradation through the OASL-p62/SQSTM1 autophagy pathway, thereby limiting viral replication (35). The host cellular autophagy acts like a “double-edged sword” in the process of viral infection (19). However, further investigations are needed to elucidate the specific interactions among Fiber2, LC3B, and SQSTM1 in the regulation of cellular autophagy post-FAdV-4 infection, as well as the underlying mechanism.To further elucidate the relationship between cellular autophagy and viral infection in kidney cells post-FAdV-4 infection, co-localization analysis was conducted using confocal immunofluorescence microscopy to examine the interaction of the viral Fiber2 protein with the autophagy marker LC3 and the exosome marker CD63. The results revealed that Fiber2, a structural protein crucial for FAdV-4 early infection and replication, co-localized with LC3B or CD63. LC3B, an essential component of the mature autophagosome membrane, was identified as a marker of autophagy (36). CD63, a classic exosome marker, is reportedly involved in the formation and trafficking of vesicles and exocytosis (37). The results of the present study suggested that FAdV-4 infection triggers cellular autophagy by host cells, with autophagosome-like vesicles potentially playing a role in viral replication. This implies that the autophagy pathway is necessary to facilitate replication and enhance infection efficiency during FAdV-4 infection, particularly in the early stages. While these findings emphasize the significance of the autophagy pathway in FAdV-4 infection, the precise mechanism linking cellular autophagy to viral replication needs to be examined in depth.Vesicles secreted by host cells play a protective role in virus transmission and transport. Recent studies have demonstrated that vesicles can sequester virions from the intercellular environment and facilitate the transfer of signaling molecules between cells and potentially modify the functions of target cells (38). The aggregation and packaging of virus particles within cytoplasmic vesicles enable the transportation of multiple viruses to new host cells. This study presented a novel finding of vesicle-dependent transmission of FAdV-4, which might enhance virus replication, thereby further clarifying the pathogenesis and tissue tropism of FAdV-4. Autophagosome-like vesicles were observed in the intracellular and extracellular primary kidney cells post-FAdV-4 infection. Some clusters of mature infectious virus particles were observed within these vesicles, suggesting that these vesicles play a role in transporting viruses through cell-to-cell transmission and might facilitate subsequent infection (39, 40). A previous study also observed autophagosome-like vesicles in the cytoplasm of LMH cells. Interestingly, we observed the autophagosome-like vesicles delivering virus particles in both the intracellular and extracellular kidney primary cells. There might be a novel mechanism of vesicle-mediated intercellular transmission of virulent FAdV-4 that hijacks autophagosomal vesicles (Fig. 8). Vesicle transport is a novel mode of cellular communication that allows cells to influence neighboring and distant cells, consequently increasing infectivity (41). A prior study demonstrated that vesicle-like autophagosomes bypassed fusion with lysosomes and instead fused with the plasma membrane to release vesicle-carrying poliovirus particles (39). Utilizing intercellular contact or vesicle-dependent transmission can enhance the transmission efficiency of viruses while also allowing evasion of neutralization by antibodies, thus facilitating effective immune escape (42). Previous study has shown that FAdV-4 infection leads to a reduction in PKR protein levels in host cells to evade innate immune responses (43).Fig 8Schematic diagram of the vesicle-mediated kidney cell-to-cell transmission mode of FAdV-4.Schematic of FAdV-4 infection, depicting viral entry, autophagosome formation, and vesicle-mediated transfer between cells. Second cell releases viral DNA, indicating replication. Nucleus and ER are depicted as cellular structures involved in the process.Interestingly, FAdV-4 particles were also observed in the abnormal mitochondria of kidney cells during infection, indicating that FAdV-4 may manipulate host cell mitochondria and potentially induce injury. This study is the first to report virus particles within mitochondria at the ultrastructural level. Infiltration of mitochondria in kidney tubular epithelial cells by FAdV-4 could disrupt homeostasis, leading to structural and functional impairments of host cells, cell death, kidney tissue damage, and potentially organ failure.Taken together, our findings primarily demonstrate that FAdV-4 infection induces damage to kidney tissues, characterized by epithelial cell degeneration and necrosis, glomerular swelling and degeneration, and ER stress, while also triggering a robust inflammatory response in kidney cells. Infection by hypervirulent FAdV-4 leads to damage and disintegration of the nuclear membrane, release of nucleic acids into the cytoplasm and bloodstream, and elicitation of an inflammatory response (44). Meanwhile, the inflammatory factors IL1-β, IL-2, IL-6, and TNF-α were upregulated in the kidney post-FAdV-4 infection. These cytokines are crucial signaling molecules in immune regulation and the inflammatory response. Besides, the expression levels of the autophagy-related markers LC3B, ATG5, and BECN1 were increased, while SQSTM1 was degraded, suggesting that changes to the autophagosome levels of immune cells, mediated by cytokines, may play a pivotal role in immunity and inflammation. However, the relationship between the inflammatory response triggered by FAdV-4 infection and the autophagy signaling pathway remains unclear. Previous research has shown that certain viruses can utilize autophagy to combat innate immunity (45), and there exists a complex interplay between autophagy and various pattern recognition receptors, involving both cooperative and antagonistic interactions. Our study offers novel insights into the pathogenesis of hypervirulent FAdV-4 from the perspective of kidney injury post-infection.


Title: Persistent mammalian orthoreovirus, coxsackievirus and adenovirus co-infection in a child with a primary immunodeficiency detected by metagenomic sequencing: a case report

BackgroundIndividuals suffering from primary immunodeficiencies (PIDs) are prone to a variety of infections, and some types of PIDs can predispose the affected individuals to particular pathogens. Infections that are usually controlled and asymptomatic in immunocompetent individuals often cause chronic, active disease in immunocompromised individuals [1].Rapid diagnosis of viral infections is crucial in immunocompromised patients. While a range of established molecular tests can detect specific viruses, high-throughput metagenomic sequencing is based on virus-sequence independent amplification of nucleic acids isolated directly from clinical samples; as such, it has the potential to identify any virus in an “open diagnostics” approach [2, 3]. Hence, this approach can detect rare viruses that are not included in routine diagnostic panels and viruses with sequence variations that would otherwise be missed [4]. Here we used metagenomic sequencing to complement routine diagnostic methods in a child with a PID suffering from persistent diarrhea.Case presentationWe report on a female child living in Switzerland with a combined B- and T-cell immunodeficiency, hypogammaglobulinaemia and autoimmunity (diabetes mellitus) under immunoglobulin replacement therapy. In early February 2014, the patient, aged 11 at that time, presented with flu-like symptoms with cough, headache, fever and severe diarrhea. Although the other symptoms resolved, the diarrhea persisted. In view of low initial calprotectin levels (100–400 μg/g), a fecal marker for intestinal inflammation, the diarrhea was considered as caused by the underlying PID and not by an infectious agent. However, a rise in calprotectin level to 4000 μg/g in March 2015 prompted us to initiate virological investigations. Enterovirus had been detected over several months using a specific RT-PCR (Additional file 1: Table S1) and was thus considered as causative agent although other viruses were not tested for during this time period.As symptoms continued, additional testing was performed. A stool sample (November 3rd 2015) was positive in Caco-2 cell culture showing a cytopathic effect (CPE) after 9 days of incubation. The culture sample stained positive with a pool of anti-enterovirus monoclonal antibodies, but we did not succeed to further subtype the suspected enterovirus using routine immunostaining methods. In order to identify the virus amplified in the Caco-2 cell culture, we applied unbiased metagenomic sequencing as previously described [4]. For three sampling time points in September and November 2015, we sequenced both the Caco-2 culture supernatant and the original stool suspension. We detected many reads of Mammalian orthoreovirus 3 (MRV-3) in the cell culture supernatant and reads of Coxsackievirus A (CV-A) in the original stool suspension (Table 1). No virus reads were detected in the supernatant of a non-infected Caco-2 cell culture used as a negative control.Table 1Retrospective viral diagnostics using cell culture, metagenomic sequencing and specific PCRsCell culture (CPE)Metagenomic sequencing (number of reads)Specific PCR (threshold cycle)DateSampleOriginal materialOriginal materialCell culture supernatantMRV-3 original materialMRV-3 cell culture supernatantCV-A original materialHAdV original materialHAdV cell culture supernatant25.09.2014colon biopsynananaundetna37.3undetna02.01.2015stoolnegativeCV-A (9′618)naundetna20.133.0na29.04.2015colon biopsynananaundetnaundetundetna30.04.2015stoolpositiveCV-A (555)HAdV-C (328′173)undetundet23.635.312.026.05.2015stoolpositiveCV-A (746′862) HAdV-C (6′131)HAdV-C (228′718)undetundet28.040.513.830.06.2015stoolpositivenaHAdV-C (439′345)undetundet24.037.014.614.07.2015stoolpositivenaHAdV-C (452′131)undetundet23.533.312.210.09.2015stoolpositiveCV-A (195′249)MRV-3 (6′580)undet21.620.1undetna3.11.2015stoolpositiveCV-A (414)MRV-3 (2′742)35.822.227.3undetna25.11.2015stoolpositiveCV-A (1′549’977) HAdV-C (102)MRV-3 (850)37.324.021.2undetundet09.02.2016stoolnananaundetna14.5undetna18.03.2016stoolnegativenanaundetnaundetundetna04.05.2016stoolnegativenanaundetna23.538.24nana not done or not available, undet undetermined threshold cycle (> 45), cell culture (CPE) was tested on Caco-2 cellsTo trace the timing of these two virus infections we conducted a retrospective analysis of the available stool samples by both cell culture and metagenomic sequencing (Table 1). In cell cultures, a CPE was visible after about 14 days of culturing. By sequencing the cell culture supernatants, we found numerous reads for Human adenovirus C (HAdV-C) in these earlier time points, but none for MRV-3. By sequencing original stool suspensions, we identified reads corresponding to the previously identified CV-A.We verified all the metagenomics analyses by specific PCRs designed for the isolates in this study (Table 1). In addition to confirming MRV-3 in the three cell cultures supernatants with MRV-3 reads, we also detected MRV-3 in two corresponding stool suspensions by specific PCR. CV-A was confirmed in all stool suspensions and in one of two colon biopsies; HAdV-C was confirmed in all tested cell cultures and stool suspensions (Table 1).To define the MRV-3 infection in more detail, we combined sequencing reads from all time points and reconstructed a consensus sequence that covered the full coding sequences in all 10 segments of the MRV-3 isolate (GenBank KX932029 - KX932038). Phylogenetic analyses showed that the MRV-3 sequence isolated in this study was most related in all 10 segments to an isolate from a child in Slovenia [5] and further clustered with isolates from bats in Germany [6] and pigs in Italy [7] (Fig. 1a and Additional file 1: Figures S1-S9).Fig. 1Mammalian orthoreovirus infection confirmed by phylogenetic analysis and immunofluorescence staining. a Phylogenetic analysis of Mammalian orthoreovirus segment S1 isolated in this study (circle, mew716_S1_type_3_human) reveals a close relationship with previously described isolates identified in a child in Slovenia (triangle, KF154730), bats in Germany (JQ412761), and pigs in Italy (KX343206). Phylogenetic trees were constructed in MEGA7 using the Maximum Likelihood method based on the Kimura 2-parameter model. Bootstrap values from 1000 tries are shown. MRV-type and host species are depicted if available. b Anti-MRV-3 immunofluorescence of patient plasma before and after seroconversion on MRV-3-infected and uninfected Caco-2 cellsIn order to proof active replication and diagnosis of MRV infection, we performed immunofluorescence for the detection of MRV-specific antibodies of the patient. Patient plasma from time points after MRV detection were positive for anti-MRV IgG antibodies showing that the patient seroconverted (Fig. 1b).We were able to reconstruct the full-length coxsackievirus genome present in this patient using additional sequence information from sequencing with CV-A22 serotype consensus primers. Genotyping and bootscan analysis revealed that the isolate (GenBank KX932039) probably resulted from recombination between CV-A19 and CV-A22 (Additional file 1: Figures S10 and S11). The detected HAdV-C was type 2, strain human/ARG/A15932/2002/2[P2H2F2] (JX173079.1).Discussion and conclusionsUsing a metagenomic sequencing approach, we detected multiple virus infections in a child with PID and persistant diarrhea. Although routine PCR methods detected Enterovirus in stool samples for a prolonged period of time, an attempt to subtype the virus after cell culturing was not successful. In order to resolve this, we performed metagenomic sequencing of cell culture supernatants and stool suspensions.The most unexpected finding was the infection with MRV-3, proven by metagenomic sequencing and serology of samples from several time points. MRVs belong to the Reoviridae family, a group of non-enveloped dsRNA viruses with 10 genome segments and have been isolated from a wide range of mammalian hosts and in a variety of clinical contexts [5–7]. To date, the diseases associated with MRV infections in humans include respiratory disease [8], meningitis [9–11], acute necrotizing encephalopathy [12] and (in a similar case involving a child living in Slovenia) acute gastroenteritis [5]. Zoonotic transmission is often suspected [6, 13, 14]. Our patient lives close to a farm and might have come in contact with pets, farm animals and animal feces making a zoonotic infection conceivable, however, due to the lack of data on MRV distribution and appropriate samples we can only hypothesize on the transmission route [7]. Stool samples from 16 children with suspicion of gastrointestinal infection treated at the same hospital during 2015 all tested negative with qPCR (data not shown).The virus growing in the initial Caco-2 cell culture was therefore MRV-3 and not an enterovirus as suggested by the serotyping assay. In fact, the manufacturer’s datasheet for the reagent used states that there is potential for cross-reaction with Hepatitis A, Reovirus 3, and some Rhinovirus and Astrovirus strains. The latter highlights the genuine difficulty in accurate detection of highly diverse virus families with numerous genotypes such as Enteroviruses where typing by specific PCR can be challenging due to the high susceptibility to recombination and the emergence of novel strains [15]. Notably, CV-A was detected in stool suspensions but not in cell culture supernatants. While cell culturing was critical for MRV-3 detection, CV-A, in line with a general difficulty to culture coxsackieviruses [16], did not infect Caco-2 cells. The reason that MRV-3 was not detected by metagenomic sequencing in the original stool suspension, but only after amplification in cell culture, is likely because it was at levels too low to be detected with the applied depth of sequencing.In summary, this case highlights the complexity of infections in immunocompromised hosts and reveals limitations of routine diagnostic methods. A combination of traditional cell culture, metagenomic sequencing, verification by specific PCRs and serology proved key to detect a persistent co-infection with three clinically relevant viruses. While the presence of these viruses in stool specimen suggests a link with the observed pathogenesis, it cannot be defined to what extent each of the viruses contributed to the initial flu-like symptoms and prolonged diarrhea. Based on the timing of virus detection, the earlier detected CV-A and HAdV-C are more likely to be involved in the child’s condition than the later emerging MRV-3.


Title: A Novel Airway-Organoid Model Based on a Nano-Self-Assembling Peptide: Construction and Application in Adenovirus Infection Studies

IntroductionViral diseases are important among diseases caused by pathogenic microorganisms, which seriously endanger human health and threaten human life. However, there is not enough research on the human infection and replication processes of viruses, virus and host interactions, host antiviral immune responses, etc., which restricts the research and development of antiviral drugs. Current research on a variety of human viral diseases and antiviral drugs is based primarily on the use of traditional two-dimensional (2D) monolayer cell culture or animal models. However, 2D monolayer cell culture cannot accurately mimic the physiological conditions of the in vivo microenvironment in humans, and it cannot accurately reproduce the natural infection process or the host’s response. Moreover, animal models are expensive, and there are ethical problems related to their use. There are species differences between animals and humans, and viral pathogenesis in humans typically cannot be captured or simulated in animal models.1 With the development of biotechnology, three-dimensional (3D) cell culture technology based on cell scaffolds has been developed and can simulate the physiological conditions of natural organs.2 Some scholars have applied various types of 3D cell culture models to viral cell culture in vitro,3–7 and studies have found that some viruses that cannot proliferate in traditional 2D cell culture models, such as human rhinovirus and human Boca virus, can proliferate in 3D cell culture.8 However, organs and tissues in vivo are composed of many kinds of cells. The local microenvironment of virus invasion is formed by the interaction between cells and the extracellular matrix. Therefore, the virus infection model constructed by a single type of cell still has some limitations.Organoids are 3D structures formed by the self-assembly of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), human adult stem cells (hASCs) or a variety of other cell lines in vitro.9–14 As the cell composition, tissue organization, physiological characteristics, and even functions are similar to those of natural organs in the body, these organoids simulate the physiological state of body tissues to the greatest extent, so they can more truly reflect the occurrence and development of body physiology and pathophysiology. Recent studies have shown that organoid culture is a powerful tool for research on human viruses, including respiratory viruses, enteroviruses, and neuroviruses.6,15–18 Organoid culture requires cell growth scaffolds to provide a spatial framework. Matrigel et al are currently the most popular cell scaffolds. However, these kinds of scaffold materials come from animals, and maintaining a consistent composition across batches is difficult; there may also be potential pathogens.19 These factors may interfere with the experimental results. Nano-self-assembling peptide RADA16-I (Ac-RADARADARADA-CONH2) is a chemically synthesized biomaterial. It has unique amino acid sequences and can self-assemble into nanofiber hydrogels with more than 99% water content in physiological saline solutions.20 Their porosity and high water content are conducive not only to cell adhesion and growth but also to the diffusion and absorption of various nutrients and signal molecules in the microenvironment.21 Compared with natural cell culture scaffold materials, RADA16-I hydrogels have stable ingredients, display no immunogenicity, no dangerous pathogens, and no cytotoxicity and can promote cell adhesion, growth and differentiation. At present, RADA16-I and its derivatives are undergoing increasingly extensive research and application in cell culture, tissue engineering, regenerative medicine and other fields.22,23In previous studies, RADA16-I hydrogels were successfully used for different mammalian cell cultures, including chondrocytes, liver cancer cells, ovarian cancer cells, and 293T cells.24–27 The cells grew as microspheres, and their proliferation activity was similar to that in Matrigel et al.26 We also successfully constructed a 3D culture model of adenovirus in vitro. Research has shown that adenovirus can continue to proliferate in a 3D culture model.27,28 However, viral infection in vivo is a complex process, and the target organ of infection is often composed of a variety of cells. Respiratory bronchioles originate from the endoderm and are the target organ of adenovirus infection. They consist mainly of airway epithelial cells, mesenchymal cells and vascular endothelial cells. To further simulate the real microenvironment of adenovirus survival in vivo, this study used human small airway epithelial cells (HSAEC1-KT), human lung microvascular endothelial cells (HuLEC-5a) and human embryonic lung fibroblasts (HELF) to construct an airway-organoid model for adenovirus infection using RADA16-I Nanogel as a culture scaffold in vitro, providing an experimental tool for virus isolation and culture, pathogenesis research, and antiviral drug screening and providing an experimental and theoretical basis for the application of this kind of chemically synthesized nano self-assembled short peptide in virology research.Materials and MethodsMaterialsHSAEC1-KT and HuLEC-5a cells were purchased from Shanghai BinSui Biological Technology Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The HELF cell line was purchased from CCTCC (Wuhan Province, China). Adenovirus-EGFP was purchased from Shanghai GeneChem Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium Nutrient Mixture F-12 (catalog No. 8120317) and fetal bovine serum (catalog No. 10099141) were purchased from Gibco (USA). MTS (catalog No. 0000277301) was purchased from Promega (USA). Calcein-AM (Ca-AM, catalog No. C0875), phalloidin (catalog No. P5282), propidium iodide (PI, catalog No. C0080), 4′6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, catalog No. C0065), and a DNA Quantitation Kit (catalog No. DNAQF) were purchased from Sigma‒Aldrich (USA). Primary antibodies against CC10 (catalog No. 49757), VIM (catalog No. 21488), CD31 (catalog No. 29555), AQP5 (catalog No. 29573), SPC (catalog No. C32459) and KRT8 (catalog No. 38010) and secondary antibodies against AF488-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG (catalog No. L3016) and AF647-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG (catalog No. L3038) were purchased from Signalway Antibody LLC (USA). The TIANamp Virus DNA/RNA Kit was purchased from Tiangen Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. (catalog No. DP315, Beijing, China). qPCR primers were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (USA). The nano-self-assembling peptide RADA16-I (Ac-RADA RADA RADARADA-CONH2, purity 99%) was synthesized by Shanghai Biotech Bioscience & Technology Co., Ltd. (catalog No. pep20201109-91, Shanghai, China).Material CharacterizationThe RADA16-I hydrogel was prepared to 0.5% weight/volume (wt/vol) and washed. The 0.5% RADA16-I hydrogel was fixed with 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde for 2 h at 37°C and dehydrated in 70%, 80%, 90%, and 100% ethanol. Critical point drying was used to dry the samples. Finally, the samples were mounted on scanning electron microscopy (SEM) stubs using double-coated carbon-conductive tape for SEM (Hitachi, S-3400 N, Japan) observation.Generation of Human Airway Organoids3D Cell CultureHSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells were seeded in 25-cm2 culture flasks and grown at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 in DMEM/F-12 supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum. When the density reached 90%, each tape of cells was detached using 0.05% trypsin-EDTA and washed twice with a 10% sucrose solution. The density of each of the three sucrose cell suspensions was adjusted to 4×105/mL. The ratio of the HSAEC1-KT: HuLEC-5a: HELF cell types was 10:7:2. Twenty-five microliters of a cell suspension containing 1×104 cells was added to 25 µL of 1% RADA16-I hydrogel (HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a, HELF cells and a mixture of these cells at 10:7:2 were inoculated according to this inoculation method), gently mixed, and deposited in a 12-well plate with complete medium. Each well was inoculated with 3 gel-cell clumps and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 30 min before the first medium change. Twenty-four hours later, the medium was changed again. Afterward, the medium was changed at 1-day intervals. For some experiments, 3D cultures were scaled to a 96-well plate using 25 µL of cell suspension containing 1×104 cells and 25 µL of 1% RADA16-I hydrogel, and each hole was inoculated with 1 gel-cell clump.Morphological and Histological ObservationTo test anchorage-dependent cell growth in RADA16-I hydrogels, 3D-cultivated cells were incubated in 12-well plates, and the morphology was observed using inverted phase contrast microscopy, SEM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). For SEM measurements, airway organoids were cultured in RADA16-I hydrogels for 7 days, washed with PBS twice, fixed with 2.5% (v/v) glutaraldehyde for 2 h at 37°C, and dehydrated in 70%, 80%, 90%, and 100% ethanol. Critical point drying was used to dry the samples. Finally, the samples were mounted on SEM stubs using double-coated carbon-conductive tape for SEM observation. For TEM, the airway organoids were harvested at 7 days. Afterward, the samples were postfixed using 1% osmic acid at 4°C for 3 h, dehydrated through a graded series of alcohol, embedded with Spurr resin, and cut into ultrathin sections (thickness 70 nm). Specimens were then stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and images were obtained using a JEM1230 TEM (JEOL, Japan) at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV.The airway organoids were cultured in RADA16-I hydrogels for 14 days and then embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound. For HE staining, 10 μm longitudinal sections were stained with hematoxylin solution for 5 min followed by 5 s in 1% acid ethanol and then rinsed in distilled water. Then, the sections were stained with eosin solution for 5 min followed by dehydration with graded alcohol. For phalloidin/DAPI staining, 10 μm longitudinal sections were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and washed with PBS twice. The gel-cell clumps were then permeabilized with PBS containing 0.3% Triton X-100 for 20 min, stained for 5 min with rhodamine phalloidin (Invitrogen) and DAPI, and washed with PBS buffer. The mounted slides were then examined and photographed using an Olympus IX71 fluorescence microscope. The morphological and structural characteristics of airway organoids were observed by H&E and phalloidin staining. The morphological and structural characteristics of human lung tissue were observed as a control.Cell Viability and Cell Proliferation3D-cultivated cells and airway organoids were incubated in 96-well plates, and 20 µL of MTS reagent was added directly to the wells at 0, 4, 8…, and 20 days after cultivation. Then, the cell samples were incubated at 37°C for 2 h in the dark, and the absorbance was measured at 490 nm. 3D-cultivated cells and airway organoids were incubated in 96-well plates and collected at 0, 4, 8…, and 20 days after cultivation. The DNA density (µg/mL) was determined by fluorometric quantification of the DNA content using a DNA fluorescence assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, molecular probes). For qualitative observations of cell proliferation, the gel-cell clumps were incubated in PBS containing 1.2 μg/mL calcein AM to stain the live cells, and 10 μg/mL propidium iodide (PI) was used to stain dead cells. An inverted Olympus IX71 fluorescence microscope was used to capture fluorescent signals.Immunofluorescence StainingFresh RADA16-I hydrogel 3D airway organoid cultures and adult human lung tissues were embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound. Samples were sectioned at 10 mm. The sections were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min and permeabilized using 0.3% Triton X-100 for 20 min. Organoids were treated with 1% BSA/PBS for 1 h. After three additional PBS washes, samples were incubated overnight with primary antibodies at 4°C. Specimens were washed three times in PBS and incubated with the corresponding secondary antibodies at a 1:200 dilution for 1 h. Samples were mounted with mounting medium containing the nuclear counterstain DAPI. Immunofluorescence images were obtained by an inverted Olympus IX71 microscope. Antibodies are listed in Table 1. The study involving adult human lung tissues was reviewed and approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Zunyi Medical University ((2022)1–017). The lung cancer donor treated at The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University provided written informed consent to participate.Table 1Cells Marker Proteins Associated with Airway TissuePrimary AntibodiesDilutionLabel CellSecondary Antibodies and FluorescenceRabbit Anti-Human VIM1:100Mesenchymal cellsAF488-labelled goat anti-mouse IgG (Green)Mouse Anti-Human CD311:200Vascular endothelial cellsAF 647-labelled goat anti-Rabbit IgG (Red)Rabbit Anti-Human AQP51:100Alveolar epithelial type-I cellsAF488-labelled goat anti-mouse IgG (Green)SPC Conjugated Antibody1:100Alveolar epithelial type-II cellsRedRabbit Anti-Human CC101:100Proximal airway epithelial cellsAF488-labelled goat anti-mouse IgG (Green)Mouse Anti-Human KRT81:200Luminal airway epithelial cellsAF 647-labelled goat anti-Rabbit IgG (Red)Construction of an Adenovirus Infection Model of Human Airway OrganoidsAdenovirus Infection of Airway OrganoidsFor infection experiments, cells grown in RADA16-I hydrogels were incubated for 7 days in a 12-well or 96-well plate, as previously described. Then, the cells were inoculated with adenovirus-EGFP (3×106 copies viral nucleotides per well in 12-well/1×106 copies viral nucleotides per well in 96-well) for 24 h at 37°C. Afterward, the solution was removed, and airway organoid cultures were washed three times with PBS and covered with complete medium. Observations were carried out every day after infection.Proliferation of Adenovirus and CytopathyAirway organoid cultures in 12-well plates were infected with adenovirus-EGFP as previously described. The EGFP reporter gene was used as a label to detect virus proliferation under direct fluorescence microscopy at 3, 6, and 9 dpi. At the same time points, cytopathy was observed by inverted phase contrast microscopy.Cell Viability and Cell Proliferation Assay in Adenovirus-Infected Airway OrganoidsAdenovirus (1×106 copies viral nucleotides per well) was inoculated into the airway-organoid model after 7 d of culture, while the control group was not infected with adenovirus. Afterward, 20 µL of MTS reagent was added to the wells at 0, 4, 8, 20 days, the cell samples were incubated at 37°C for 2 h in the dark, and the absorbance was measured at 490 nm. Airway organoids were maintained under normal adenovirus-infected conditions as described above and collected at each time point. DNA density (µg/mL) was determined by fluorometric quantification of the DNA content using a DNA fluorescence assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen, molecular probes). For qualitative observations of cell proliferation, the gel-cell clumps were incubated in PBS containing 10 μg/mL propidium iodide (PI) to stain dead cells. An inverted Olympus IX71 fluorescence microscope was used to capture fluorescent signals.TEM Observation of Adenovirus in Airway OrganoidsAirway organoids cultured in 3D conditions in a 12-well plate were infected with adenovirus as previously described, and the gel-cell clumps were harvested at 8 dpi. The samples were then postfixed using 1% osmic acid at 4°C for 3 h, dehydrated through a graded series of alcohol, embedded in Spurr resin, and cut into ultrathin sections (thickness 70 nm). Specimens were then stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and images were obtained using a JEM1230 TEM (JEOL, Japan) at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV.DNA Extraction and Quantitative qPCR of Organoid-Cultured AdenovirusAirway organoids in 96-well plates were infected with adenovirus (1×106 copies viral nucleotides per well), and the gel-cell clumps were harvested at 1, 3, 5, and 15 dpi and stored at −20°C. Subsequently, viral nucleic acids were extracted with a DNA/RNA extraction kit (Tiangen DP315) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. qPCR systems were prepared using a BIO-RAD qPCR kit in accordance with the manufacturer’s protocol. The primers used for detection were as follows: EGFP, 5ʹ-TTCAAGATCCGCCAC-AACA-3ʹ and 5ʹ- CGCTTCTCGTTGGGGTC-3ʹ. The qPCR conditions were as follows: predenaturation at 95°C for 2 min, 39 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 5 s, annealing at 60°C for 30s and a melting curve temperature between 65°C and 95°C. Negative (water) and positive (adenovirus standard samples) controls were established for each amplification. After the reaction was complete, the system automatically generated a standard curve and calculated the copy number of the complete viral genome in the corresponding samples.Detection of Adenovirus Infectivity Produced in Airway OrganoidsThe gel-cell clumps in the supernatants were collected at 9 dpi (5×105 copies based on qPCR amplification quantification) and then used to infect 293T cells grown in 2D culture. The supernatants and cells of 2D culture were collected at 24, 48 and 72 hpi. Thereafter, viral DNA was extracted and amplified by qPCR.StatisticsAll statistical analyses were performed using SPSS18.0. Each data point represents the mean of at least three independent experiments. Data are represented as the mean value ± SD of a triplicate experiment. Independent sample t-tests were used for comparisons between the two groups, and a value of 0.05 was the significance threshold for all assays.ResultsScaffold Characterization of RADA16-ISEM was used to analyze the reticulated nanofiber structure of the RADA16-I Nanogel in solution (Figure 1). RADA16-I self-assembled in the presence of ions to form highly crosslinked nanofibers, and interwoven nanofiber networks were clearly observed. The fibers were uniform and long, crossed into a grid, and wound around each other into a three-dimensional network structure, similar to the structure of the ECM.
Figure 1RADA16-I was evaluated by SEM and applied to 3D cell cultures. (A) and (B) are SEM images of RADA16-I peptide scaffold nanofibers, RADA16-I self-assembled to form crosslinked nanofiber grids, and its porosity was similar to that of the natural ECM.Cell Proliferation in 3D CultureAs shown in Figure 2A-I–C-I), HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells in 2D culture all showed flat monolayer growth. However, in RADA16-I Nanogel 3D culture starting with a single cell, dense multicellular microspheres began to form on the third day of culture. The microspheres of HSAEC1-KT and HuLEC-5a cells were round (Figure 2A-II and B-II), and branches appeared around the microspheres of HELF cells (Figure 2C-II). The microspheres of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells increased with prolonged culture time (Figure 2A-III–C-III), On the 7th day, the branches of the HELF cell microspheres were cross-linked with each other (Figure 2C-III). suggesting that the three kinds of cells could grow well in the RADA16-I Nanogel and that HELF cells had an aggregation function in the RADA16-I Nanogel.
Figure 2Continued.Figure 2Growth and morphological characteristics of cells in 3D culture. (A–C) Phase-contrast images of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells cultured in 2D for 3 days and 3D conditions for 3 days and 7 days. In 2D culture, the cells grew in a flat monolayer. In 3D culture, the cells formed dense multicellular spheroids, and the cell spheres increased gradually over time. Branches and crosslinks appeared around the multicellular spheres cultured by HELF 3D culture (D). Phase-contrast images of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cocultured in RADA16-I hydrogel at a ratio of 10:7:2 for 1 day, 7 days and 14 days. On the first day of culture, the cells were scattered and distributed; on the 7th day, the cells self-assembled and showed tubular growth; on the 14th day, the tracheal structure was formed (E). Phase-contrast images of HSAEC1-KT in RADA16-I hydrogel for 1 day, 7 days and 14 days. Multicellular spheroids appeared and gradually increased in size (F). Phase-contrast images of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cocultured in RADA16-I hydrogel at a ratio of 10:7:2 for 7 days. These cells were self-assembled into tubes through mutual aggregation (G). SEM showed that the cells were connected to each other, the cells gathered together showed 3D growth, and the cells were closely connected (H). TEM observation showed that the cells were connected by pseudopods. Interconnected cells are indicated by the white arrow, three-dimensional cells are indicated by the yellow arrow, and pseudopods are indicated by the red arrow.Construction of the Airway Organoid ModelMorphological ObservationHSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells were cocultured in RADA16-I Nanogel. The ratio of the HSAEC1-KT: HuLEC-5a: HELF cell types was 10:7:2. Inverted microscopy showed that the cells were scattered on the first day (Figure 2D-I). With the extension of culture time, the cell groups gradually grew, connected with each other, and began to self-assemble. On the 7th day, the self-assembly was tubular (Figure 2D-II). On the 14th day of culture, the cell self-assembly showed a lumen-like structure, similar to the structure of the human airway (Figure 2D-III). However, HSAEC1-KT cells alone in 3D culture showed microsphere aggregation and no lumen-like structure (Figure 2E-I-III). Further observation of the growth of the cocultured cells by inverted phase contrast microscope and SEM showed that interconnected cells in the RADA16-I Nanogel grew in three dimensions and were closely connected with each other, which resembled the growth morphology of host cells in vivo (Figure 2F and G). TEM observation revealed that the cells were connected and communicated with each other (Figure 2H). It is suggested that RADA16-I Nanogel can not only provide an ECM-like microenvironment for cell growth but also promote the growth of mixed cell populations of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF to form an airway-like lumen structure.Histological ObservationTo further verify whether the airway-like lumen structure was hollow under an inverted microscope, airway-like cell masses cultured in RADA16-I Nanogel for 14 days were embedded in OCT and observed by H&E staining and phalloidin staining. The 3D results showed that HSAEC1-KT cells cultured alone gathered into dense cell clusters without lumen-like structures (Figure 3A-I and B-I). In contrast, the airway-like structure formed by the self-assembly of mixed cells was a hollow lumen, and a large number of cells were arranged and distributed around the lumen (Figure 3A-II and B-II), which is similar to the normal lung tissue structure (Figure 3A-III and B-III). These results suggest that HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells cocultured at 10:7:2 in RADA16-I Nanogel can self-assemble to form a hollow airway-like structure, which is similar to normal human airway tissue.
Figure 3The morphology and structure of 3D cultured cells and normal lung tissues were observed by H&E staining and phalloidin staining. (A) H&E staining. (B) Phalloidin staining (A-I and B-I). Gel‑cell clumps of HSAEC1-KT cells in RADA16‑I were harvested on day 14 and then stained by frozen sectioning. The cells were clustered into dense cell masses without tubular structure (A-II and B-II). Gel‑cell clumps of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cocultured in RADA16-I at a ratio of 10:7:2 were harvested on day 14 and then stained by frozen sectioning. The cells self-assembled into a hollow tubular structure, and a large number of cells were arranged and distributed around the lumen (A-III and B-III). Human normal lung tissues were stained as frozen sections. The structure of the airway lumen was observed, and a large number of cells were arranged and distributed around the lumen. Green indicates F‑actin, and blue indicates DAPI‑stained cell nuclei.Cell Viability, Proliferation and GrowthWe then investigated the activity and proliferation of cells self-assembled into airway-like organs. Preliminary cell growth and viable cell fate were observed by green fluorescent Ca-AM staining and DNA quantitative analysis. The results of Ca-AM/PI staining showed that the HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells had good cell activity with almost no dead cells, and the cell aggregation was similar to that of a small airway on the 6th day (Figure 4A). A tube-like structure was observed on the 12th day of culture. The cell activity was still good, and only a few dead cells were observed (Figure 4B). However, HSAEC1-KT cells cultured alone in 3D formed spherical or nearly spherical structures, and with extension of the culture time, the microspheres gradually expanded, no lumen-like structure was observed, and the cell activity remained good (Figure 4C and 4D). The proliferative activity of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a, and HELF cells 3D cultured individually and that of fixed cultured cells was detected by MTS. The results showed that the cells could proliferate well for a long time. The proliferative activity was maintained at a high level from 8 to 16 days and then decreased gradually (Figure 4E). DNA quantitative analysis showed that the cells continued to proliferate after 20 days (Figure 4F). The above results show that the cocultured cells can self-assemble to form an air-like structure and maintain proliferative activity for a long time.
Figure 4Proliferation and activity analysis of cells in RADA16-I hydrogels. (A and B). Morphology and activity of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cocultured in RADA16-I hydrogels at a ratio of 10:7:2 for 6 and 12 days. With the extension of culture time, the self-assembly of the cell population showed growth of the airway structure, and the cell activity was good (C and D). Morphology and activity of HSAEC1-KT in RADA16-I hydrogels for day 6 and day 12. The cells gathered as dense microspheres, and the cell activity was good. Ca-AM staining in green shows the live cells, PI staining in red shows the dead cells, and DAPI staining in blue shows the cell nucleus (E). The proliferative activity curves of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a, HELF and cocultured cells in RADA16-I hydrogels were detected by MTS. All the cells could grow in RADA16-I hydrogels for a long time with good proliferative activity. The proliferative activity remained high at 8–16 days and then declined gradually. Each data point represents the mean of at least three independent experiments (F). The viable cell proliferation curves of HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a, HELF and cocultured cells in RADA16-I hydrogel were calculated from DNA quantitative analysis. All the cells proliferated continuously in the RADA16-I hydrogel. Each data point represents the mean of at least three independent experiments.Expression of Specific Labeled Proteins in Airway OrganoidsTo further clarify whether airway-like structures express airway tissue-specific labeled proteins, immunofluorescence staining was used to detect the expression of the mesenchymal cell marker protein VIM, the vascular endothelial cell marker protein CD31, the proximal airway epithelial cell marker protein CC10, the distal lung alveolar epithelial cell type I (AECI) and type II (AECII) marker proteins AQP5 and SPC, and the luminal marker protein KRT8, and the results were compared with those in normal lung tissue. HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells were cocultured in RADA16-I Nanogel at a ratio of 10:7:2. On the 14th day, OCT-embedded frozen sections were stained with immunofluorescence. The results showed that the expression of VIM (Figure 5A-I), CD31 (Figure 5A-II), AQP (Figure 5B-I), SPC (Figure 5B-II), CC10 (Figure 5C-I), and KRT8 (Figure 5C-II) was similar to that in normal lung tissue structure (Figure 5D–F). The airway epithelial marker protein KRT8 is related to airway lumen formation. The results showed that KRT8 was persistently and stably expressed in the lumen on the 14th and 21st days of culture (Figure 5G and H). Epithelial cell clusters self-assembled into tubular structures of varying shapes and sizes. These results suggest that the cocultured cells can self-assemble to form airway-like organs and express specific biomarkers related to airway tissue.
Figure 5Continued.Figure 5Self-organization of cells within airway organoids and the expression of specific marker proteins. (A–C and G) Frozen sections of airway organoids cultured for 14 days. (H) Frozen sections of airway organoids cultured for 21 days. (D–F) Frozen sections of normal lung tissue. mesenchymal cells VIM (green, A-I), vascular endothelial cells CD31 (red, A-II), and proximal airway epithelial cells CC10 (green, C-I) clustered together and then differentiated into distal alveolar epithelial cells AECI AQP5 (green, B-I) and AECII SPC (red, B-II) formed the lumen structure of the airway sample and stably and continuously expressed the lumen airway epithelial marker protein KRT8 (red, C-II, G-I and H-I). Airway organoid cell arrangement and labeled protein expression were similar to those of normal human lung tissue (D–H). DAPI (blue, showing nucleus).Construction of an Adenoviral Infection Model of Airway OrganoidsViral Proliferation in Airway OrganoidsWe cocultured HSAEC1-KT cells at a ratio of 10:7:2 with HuLEC-5a and HELF cells in RADA16-I Nanogel, and the tubular structure was formed on the 7th day and infected with adenovirus-EGFP. The successfully infected cells showed a green fluorescence signal under a fluorescence inverted microscope. As shown in Figure 6A, green fluorescent cells were observed in the airway organoids at 3 dpi, but the fluorescence intensity was very weak. Thereafter, the number of fluorescent cells and the fluorescence intensity increased gradually from the edge of the gel, reaching a maximum at 9 dpi. With the extension of infection time, the number of round and scattered cells in the Nanogel gradually increased (Figure 6B). TEM scans were performed to further observe the adenovirus particles in the cells of infected airway organoids, and at 8 dpi, a small number of virions with diameters of 60–90 nm were observed in the cytoplasm (Figure 7). These results showed that adenovirus could infect airway organoids and cause cytopathic effects.
Figure 6Growth and proliferation activity of airway organoids after adenovirus infection. (A). Fluorescence microscopy observation of airway organoids at 3 dpi, 6 dpi and 9 dpi. Green fluorescent cells were observed at 3 dpi, and the number of fluorescent cells and the fluorescence intensity increased gradually from the edge of the gel, peaking at 9 dpi (B). Inverted microscope observation of airway organoids at 3 dpi, 6 dpi and 9 dpi. With the extension of infection time, the cells in airway organoids became round and scattered. Adenovirus (Adenovirus-EGFP, green fluorescence) (C). PI staining observation of airway organoids at 9 dpi. The red fluorescence signal was strong, there were more dead cells, and the lesions of cells were visible under the bright field view (D). The proliferative activity curves of airway organoids after adenovirus infection were obtained by MTS. The cell activity of airway organoids in the infected group was significantly lower than that in the uninfected group at 12 to 20 days after culture (4 dpi to 12 dpi). Each data point represents the mean of at least three independent experiments (E). The viable cell proliferation curves of airway organoids after adenovirus infection were calculated from DNA quantification. The cell proliferation of airway organoids in the infected group was significantly lower than that in the uninfected group at 12 to 20 days after culture (4 dpi to 12 dpi). Each data point represents the mean of at least three independent experiments; PI (red, indicating dead cells) and DAPI (blue, indicating nuclei). The dotted line indicates the onset of infection;**Compared with the uninfected group, P < 0.01.
Figure 7TEM analysis of adenovirus virions in airway organoids. (A). The nucleus and cytoplasmic region of the cells in the airway organoids (B). The region where adenovirus particles appear in the cytoplasm. Virus-like particles are indicated by the red arrows.Analysis of Cell Viability and ProliferationThe effect of adenovirus infection on the proliferation and activity of airway organoids was observed. HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a and HELF cells were cocultured in RADA16-I Nanogel at 10:7:2 and infected with adenovirus on the 7th day. PI staining, the MTS method and DNA quantitative analysis were used to detect the cell activity and proliferation of airway organoids after adenovirus infection. PI staining showed that the red fluorescence signal of airway organoids was strong at 9 dpi, and the cells were obviously round and scattered in the bright-field image (Figure 6C), indicating that adenovirus infection and proliferation could cause cytopathic changes and even death in airway organoids. The cell activity of airway organoids infected with adenovirus was detected by MTS. The results showed that the cell activity of airway organoids in the infected group was lower than that in the uninfected group (P<0.01) from 12 to 20 days of culture (4–12 dpi) (Figure 6D). DNA quantitative analysis showed that the cell proliferation in the infected group was lower than that in the uninfected group (P<0.01) after 12 to 20 days of culture (4–12 dpi) (Figure 6E). The above results suggested that the cells of airway organoids showed pathological changes and that their proliferation and activity decreased after adenovirus infection.Characteristics of Adenovirus Replication in Airway OrganoidsWe next monitored viral DNA at different time points after infection by qPCR. The results of qPCR detection showed that the viral load of airway organoids infected by adenovirus began to increase significantly at 3 dpi and proliferated rapidly. The viral load reached 5.15×105 copies/mL at 9 dpi and then decreased rapidly, and almost no viral nucleic acid was detected at 15 dpi. To determine whether the inoculated adenovirus remained in the RADA16-I Nanogel, resulting in incorrect qPCR detection, adenovirus infection and nucleic acid detection were also performed on the cell-free RADA16-I Nanogel. The results showed that a large number of viruses in the RADA16-I Nanogel were not detected in the absence of cells (Figure 8A). The adenovirus amplified from RADA16-1 Nanogel successfully infected 2D cultured 293T cells and proliferated continuously, and the proliferation trend was consistent with that of the 2D adenovirus standard infection group (Figure 8B). This shows that adenoviruses can infect airway organoids and be amplified.
Figure 8qPCR measurement of adenovirus proliferation in airway organoids. (A). Adenovirus proliferation in airway organoids was measured by qPCR. “airway organoids” indicates adenovirus amplification in airway organoids; “3D medium” indicates adenovirus amplification in RADA16-I hydrogel without cells (B). The infectivity of airway organoid-amplified virions was measured by qPCR. “ADV Standard” indicates standard adenovirus amplification in 2D culture; ‘virions form airway organoids’ indicates airway organoid-generated adenovirus virions (5 × 105 copies based on qPCR amplification quantification) in 2D culture. Airway organoid-generated adenovirus virions were present in airway organoid supernatants harvested at 9 dpi. Each data point represents the mean of at least three independent experiments.DiscussionOrganoid technology has developed rapidly in recent years, and organoids are considered an ideal model for the in-depth exploration of virus pathogenesis and host‒virus interactions, antiviral drug screening, and vaccine research and development.29–31 Currently, hESCs or hiPSCs are most commonly used for organoid construction, but the culture process requires the addition of multiple growth factors to promote the induction and differentiation of organoids. The culture conditions are complex, the cost is high, and there are ethical problems. Moreover, there are many uncertain factors affecting the experimental results. These problems also exist in using normal tissue or tumor tissue to induce differentiation to construct organoids. However, using cell lines to construct organoids is relatively simple and inexpensive. In this study, human lung-derived cell lines (HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a, HELF) were used to construct airway organoids. The growth time of the three kinds of cells was limited under two-dimensional culture conditions, and the cells were stretched flat. When the three kinds of cells were cultured separately in RADA16-I hydrogel, the cells grew like microspheres. The microspheres could maintain growth for a longer time without the formation of a tracheal cavity structure. When the three cell types were cocultured in RADA16-I Nanogel at a ratio of HSAEC1-KT: HuLEC-5a: HELF=10:7:2, the cells could form tracheal structures more similar to the airways through self-assembly, and the cells could maintain their activity and proliferation for a long time. At the same time, the expression of proximal airway epithelial cell marker protein (CC10), distal alveolar epithelial marker protein (AQP5, SPC), vascular endothelial cell marker protein (CD31), mesenchymal cell marker protein (VIM), and lumen formation-related epithelial marker protein (KRT8) was detected, which shows that the cells differentiate into distal lung tissue through coculture and self-assembly. This is similar to the results reported by Tan et al.13 This suggests that organoids similar to airway tissue in vivo can be successfully constructed by using human lung-derived cell lines and cocultures in certain proportions.With the development of biotechnology, a variety of biological materials have been used in 3D cell culture. As a kind of biological material, nano-self-assembled peptides have unique amino acid sequences and easily self-assemble into a nanonetwork fiber structure with a water content of more than 99% in physiological salt solution by using existing molecular components in nature. Among them, RADA16-I is a commonly used scaffold for cell culture, possibly because of its amino acid sequence design. The sequence RAD (arginine-alanine-aspartic acid) is similar to the sequence of the RGD (arginine-glycine-aspartic acid) polypeptide, the ligand binding site of integrin on the cell membrane.32 It provides a microenvironment similar to the natural ECM in which cells can adhere to hydrogels and grow. In this study, RADA16-I was used as a scaffold for cell culture, which provided a microenvironment similar to that in vivo for cell growth, which was conducive to the growth and aggregation of cell populations. At the same time, human embryonic lung fibroblasts (HELFs) were selected in the culture, which had an agglutinative effect. In the RADA16-I hydrogel, the cells formed long pseudopods and grew like branches, which made the connections between cells tight, conducive to communication between different cells, and thus promoted the self-assembly of cells to form airway organoids. In this study, no additional growth factors were added in the culture process of constructing airway organoids, and normal culture conditions were adopted. Compared with organoid construction induced by stem cell differentiation, this method has the advantages of simplicity, low culture cost and a short culture cycle, which is more conducive to repeated experiments and batch research. This approach also provides an experimental basis for the use of nano-self-assembled peptide hydrogels to construct a bionic model of human organoids.Adenoviruses have a diameter of 60~90 nm, while the fiber mesh size formed by RADA16-I self-assembly is approximately 5~200 nm. Previous studies have demonstrated that the virus can infect 293T cells through scaffold pores. In this study, three human lung cell lines were cocultured until the 7th day. When the tracheal structure of the airway sample was observed, adenovirus was added to construct the infection model. The qPCR results showed that the amount of adenovirus increased logarithmically at 3 dpi and peaked at 9 dpi. The rapid proliferation time is consistent with the incubation period of clinical adenovirus infection, which shows that this model can accurately simulate clinical adenovirus infection. At the same time, cell proliferation activity decreased significantly from 4 dpi, which may be because adenoviruses are nonenveloped viruses, which lead to damage and rupture of host cells after massive replication and the release of progeny viruses. Airway epithelial cells are the main constituent cells of airway tissue and are sensitive cells to adenovirus infection. These airway organoids can simulate the characteristics of internal organs composed of various cells, simulate the morphological structure and phenotype characteristics of airway tissue, and reproduce the process of viral infection. However, in the traditional 2D culture model, after the virus infects monolayer cells, the cells usually exhibit rapid rounding, shedding, necrosis and other phenomena: the virus cannot proliferate repeatedly, and the infection is maintained for a short time and unable to reproduce the infection process in vivo. In this study, the adenovirus-infected airway organoid model maintained a long proliferation time, and the amplified progeny virus was infectious, similar to the viral behavior during in vivo infection. This model can provide a more reliable experimental platform for adenovirus isolation and culture, pathogenic mechanism research and antiviral drug development.In this study, airway organoids were successfully constructed using RADA16-I hydrogel as a scaffold, and an adenovirus infection model of airway organoids was established in vitro on this basis. However, there are some limitations. First, this study confirmed that adenovirus can maintain long-term proliferation in these airway organoids, but whether it can be used as an infection model for other respiratory viruses needs further study. Second, the self-assembly ability of airway organoids constructed by cell lines from different sources is random, so the conditions need to be further optimized to establish a stable and large-scale bionic organoid model, and whether the airway organoids constructed by these cell lines can truly replace the physiological states of different individuals also needs to be further discussed. Third, the internal organs have a vascular system. In this study, human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HuLEC-5a) were selected for the construction of blood vessels, but no angiogenesis was observed, which needs to be further studied by coculture with cells with vascular differentiation potential. In conclusion, three human lung-derived cell lines (HSAEC1-KT, HuLEC-5a, HELF) in RADA16-I hydrogel showed strong self-assembly ability and certain differentiation potential and could form airway-like morphology. However, these airway organoids still differ from normal human airway tissue due to the lack of a complete system, such as the circulatory system, immune system and nervous system, so it is necessary to further explore the construction of a coculture system with endothelial, neuron, immune and other lineages of cells, which is similar to the current status of reported organoid research.33,34 The body is a complex environment where multiple organs and systems coexist. Viruses infect the body, grow in the body, and cause a series of processes, such as the occurrence and development of diseases, which involve not only a single organ system but also complex pathophysiological processes involving multiple organs and systems. Some scholars35 have combined organoid culture technology with chip technology to build an organoid integrated system on a chip platform for drug screening research. Organ-on-A-chip systems can connect various organoids to each other to make up for the isolated communication of a single organoid, which may have epoch-making significance for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of viral diseases.ConclusionAn airway-organoid model for adenovirus infection with three human lung-derived cell lines was successfully constructed in vitro based on nano-self-assembling peptide RADA16-I hydrogels. The model has the potential to be exploited as a novel research method for adenovirus isolation and culture, pathogenesis research, and antiviral drug screening. This model can be expected to be used to explore new targets for the diagnosis and treatment of respiratory virus infection and explore new strategies for diagnosis, treatment and functional therapy.


Title: Emerging viral respiratory tract infections—environmental risk factors and transmission

This is the third in a Series of five papers on emerging respiratory tract infectionsIntroductionSince the recognition of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003, several new viruses have emerged in different parts of the world. Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) was first identified in Saudi Arabia and Jordan in 2012, with several cases documented in European travellers who had visited the Middle East. More than 840 human cases of MERS-CoV infection have been confirmed as of July, 2014. Most patients had respiratory disease with a range of clinical manifestations from mild, asymptomatic cases to severe multisystem illness; mortality was about 38%. Human adenovirus 14 (HAdV14) was first recognised in 1955 and it re-emerged in 2006 in the USA in a slightly different form (HAdV-14p1). Outbreaks have been restricted to the USA and China, with cases totalling in the hundreds, and mortality has been low. Influenza A H7N9 virus emerged in eastern China in early 2013 with very few cases occurring outside of China. As of June, 2014, more than 448 confirmed human cases have been documented with an estimated 39% mortality rate. Avian influenza A H10N8, the first strain of which was isolated from birds several decades ago, emerged in 2013 to infect at least three people in China, leading to one death. Similarly, in 2011 a novel swine-like influenza H3N2 variant virus emerged in two states in the USA, causing disease in 12 people. By the end of 2013, the virus had spread to ten states and caused at least 340 people to be ill (with one death). In this paper, we review the epidemiology of these emerging viruses, including their geographical distribution, modes of transmission, and where appropriate their zoonotic characteristics.MERSGeographical distributionMERS-CoV infection is a new human disease that was first reported in Saudi Arabia in June, 2012 (figure
).1 Retrospective investigation of a hospital outbreak of 13 cases of respiratory infections in Zarqa, Jordan in April, 2012, identified two confirmed and 11 probable cases of which ten were among health-care workers.2 As of the end of July, 2014, 841 confirmed cases, including 327 deaths (38·4%), have been reported by local authorities worldwide.3 Almost all confirmed cases were reported from the Middle East, notably Saudi Arabia, but also neighboring countries including Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Qatar, United Arab Emirates (UAE), and Yemen. According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), cases have been reported in Algeria, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Philippines, Tunisia, the UK, and the USA. Overall, all cases originated from or had a history of travel to the Middle East, with few secondary cases.3
FigureGeographical distribution of human cases of emerging respiratory viruses
Key messages
•Over the past decade, several new viruses causing respiratory tract disease in human beings have emerged in different parts of the world.•Human adenovirus (HAdV) 14p1 has been identified in people only, but Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), influenza A H7N9, influenza A H10N8, and influenza A H3N2 variant are zoonotic diseases.•HAdV14 first recognised in 1955 re-emerged in 2006 in the USA and China.•As of June, 2014, more than 448 confirmed human cases of avian Influenza A H7N9 virus infection have been documented since its first discovery in early 2013.•Influenza A H7N9 virus can survive for months in the environment, and the absence of clinical signs in poultry, ducks, and wild birds makes it particularly difficult to control.•An avian influenza H10N8 virus has recently emerged in 2013 to infect at least three people in China.•In 2011 a novel swine-like influenza A H3N2 variant virus emerged in two states in the USA, and by the end of 2013 it had spread to ten states and caused illness in at least 340 people. The absence of clinical signs among influenza A H3N2 variant infected pigs is a major concern in that people are essentially serving as sentinels of infection.•First identified in Saudi Arabia in 2012, the number of human cases of MERS-CoV infection have steadily increased to more than 840. Nosocomial transmission to patients and health-care workers has been documented.•While geographically restricted to the Middle East, MERS-CoV is of major public health concern since millions of pilgrims from 184 countries visit Saudi Arabia for pilgrimage throughout the year.•There is a mounting evidence suggesting that camels are the likely reservoir of MERS-CoV human infections although the precise mode of transmission to humans remains unknown.•A united and coordinated global response is needed to tackle new infectious diseases threats posed by novel viruses that can cause fatal respiratory tract infections over the past decade and to fill major gaps that remain in the understanding of their epidemiology and transmission dynamics.

Most cases of MERS-CoV infection have been in Saudi Arabia where the Hajj, a large religious mass gathering, takes place each year. The Hajj draws 2–3 million pilgrims from within Saudi Arabia and around the world. Worldwide attention has focused on the potential spread of MERS-CoV after the Hajj pilgrimage because pilgrims have a high risk of respiratory tract infections because of crowded conditions.4 In 2013, the Saudi Ministry of Health recommended that elderly people (older than 65 years), people with chronic diseases (eg, heart disease, kidney disease, respiratory disease, and diabetes), the immunocompromised (congenital and acquired), people with malignant disease or terminal illnesses, pregnant women, and children (age less than 12 years) postpone their participation in the Hajj and Umrah for their own safety.5 Investigations done among French pilgrims participating in the 2013 Hajj showed that 48% had at least one disorder for which the Saudi Ministry of Health recommends participation in the Hajj be postponed.6, 7 None of 179 individuals at risk decided to cancel participation, even after receiving this advice during consultation.6, 7 All countries (particularly those with returning pilgrims) were advised by the International Health Regulations Emergency Committee to strengthen their surveillance capacities and ensure robust reporting of any identified cases.8 Cohort surveys of returning French pilgrims with systematic screening of MERS-CoV nasal carriage by PCR were done in 2012 and 2013, and the results were negative despite high rates of respiratory symptoms.9, 10 However, pilgrims rapidly acquired other respiratory viruses during their stay in Saudi Arabia (especially rhinovirus and influenza viruses, which emphasises the potential of these infections to spread in the pilgrims' home countries on their return.10, 11 Screening of pilgrims from 22 countries before (3210 pilgrims) and after (2025) Hajj in 2013 did not reveal any positive cases by RT-PCR.12
Between human transmission of MERS-CoVMost MERS-CoV cases reported have probably acquired infection through human-to-human transmission. Among 144 confirmed and 17 probable cases analysed by the MERS-CoV Research Group in November, 2013, 95 (59%) were classified as secondary cases with epidemiological links to other confirmed cases. Among these, most acquired the infection in health-care settings (63·2%), followed by those infected in household settings (13·7%).13 In the same report, clusters of cases secondary to human-to-human transmission occurred with a cluster size ranging from two to 25 patients. The largest cluster was in Al-Hasa (Saudi Arabia) with 25 cases among patients undergoing hemodialysis, visiting family members, and health-care workers.14 However, a description of the geographical distribution and phylogenetic relation of MERS-CoV infections across time suggests that the Al-Hasa hospital outbreak might have been caused by more than one virus introduction.15 Other clusters in the health-care setting have been described in France, Jordan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and UAE.13 Several clusters have been described in the context of the household setting in Saudi Arabia and Tunisia, or in both the contexts of health-care and household settings in the UK.13, 16, 17 Transmission in all reported clusters is restricted, and evidence from contact-tracing suggests that transmission did not extend beyond close contacts into the community. Assessment of the between-human transmissibility of MERS-CoV by two teams with available non-hospital epidemiological data confirmed the restricted pattern of transmission. The estimated R0 was 0·60–0·69 in one study and 0·8–1·3 in another (table 1
).18, 19 In the absence of appropriate hospital infection control, R0 might be greater than 1 in hospitals admitting patients with MERS-CoV.Table 1Emerging respiratory viruses as of June, 2014Total human casesTotal human deathsClustersEnvironmental propertiesR0MERS-CoV*841327Family and health-care settingsStable at low temperature and low humidity0·60–0·69 vs 0·8–1·3Human adenovirus 14p1Many13Military and school settingsUnknownUnknownH7N9 avian influenza virus448157Family settingsSurvives for months in the environment0·11–0·45H10N8 avian influenza virus31NoneWater persistenceUnknownH3N2 variant influenza virus3401Geriatric ward settings··UnknownMERS-CoV=Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus.*Data to end of July, 2014.Evidence for a zoonotic source for MERS-CoVMERS-CoV belongs to the lineage C βcoronaviruses, which are associated with bats.20 Close relatives of MERS-CoV have been identified in European, Asian, Central American, and South African bats.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 A new β-coronavirus related to MERS-CoV has also been characterised in European hedgehogs.28 The genome diversity of human MERS-CoV isolates suggests that human infections result from several independent zoonotic events from an unknown reservoir in the Middle East.15, 29 Among 161 patients with MERS-CoV analysed by the MERS-CoV Research Group in November, 2013, 51 (32%) were classified as probably sporadic (table 2
) or index cases (no exposure to other known cases). Contact of patients with camels was documented in only five of 51 cases; however, reliable information was available from only 28 cases.13 MERS-CoV spike-protein-binding antibodies and virus neutralising antibodies are reported in high proportions of camels from the Canary Islands, Egypt, Jordan, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, UAE, but not from other livestock including sheep, goats, cattle, and chickens.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37 A higher seroprevalence was reported in adults than in juvenile camels.33, 36 Furthermore, MERS-CoV was detected by quantitative (q) RT-PCR from nasal samples in 11 of 14 camels from a farm in Qatar linked to two confirmed human cases, five of 76 camels from Oman, 36 of 104 juvenile camels from Saudi Arabia, 15 of 98 adult camels from Saudi Arabia, and four of 110 camels from Egypt, two of which were imported from Sudan and Ethiopia.31, 33, 38, 39 Genomic sequences of MERS-CoV isolates from two patients and from their infected camels were almost identical, suggesting camel-to-human transmission.40, 41
Table 2Potential sources and transmission patterns of emerging respiratory virusesPotential sourcesTransmission patternsMiddle East respiratory syndrome coronavirusHuman patients, camels, bats, and environment (camel farms)Human-to-human (59%), sporadicHuman adenovirus 14p1Human patients and asymptomatic sheddersSporadic, human-to-human (close and frequent contact)H7N9 avian influenza virusLive birds, poultry, environment (bird markets, poultry farms, wet markets — soil and surface waters), and human patientsDirect contact with live poultry, human-to-human (possible but restricted and non-sustainable)H10N8 avian influenza virusLive birds and poultry, environment (soil and surface water)Exposure to poultryH3N2 variant influenza virusPigs, pig environments (agriculture fairs), and human patientsDirect or indirect contact with pigs, human-to-human (possible but restricted and non-sustainable)A novel coronavirus (DcCoV UAE-HKU23) was detected by qRT-PCR in 21% of faecal samples from dromedary calves in UAE. 97–100% of camels were positive for MERS-CoV antibody testing by various methods, whereas 52% only had antibodies against DcCoV UAE-HKU23, which shows that little correlation exists between seropositivity to the two viruses.35 Additionally, a gene fragment was recovered from a faecal sample from a bat in Saudi Arabia, near the home of a confirmed human case; bat and human isolates were 100% homologous.42 Studies addressing the seroprevalence of MERS-CoV among human beings are highly demanding from a technical perspective, because titres are generally low, and there is crossreactivity between coronaviruses.43
Studies done on 624 serum specimens from people in Saudi Arabia, including slaughterhouse workers, by discriminative methods failed to show evidence for the presence of antibodies.43, 44 Dromedary camels harbour the virus and shed MERS-CoV in respiratory secretions. The frequency of positive serology in camels versus human beings strongly suggests that camels are the reservoir for human exposure. Unpasteurised camel milk is a possible route of transmission, but so far few studies have assessed the prevalence of MERS-CoV in camel milk. A study in April, 2014 showed that camel milk was positive for MERS-CoV by qRT-PCR.45 Finally, the reservoirs might have complex ecology, and bats might play a part.Evidence for environmental source for MERS-CoVOnly one study has investigated the stability of MERS-CoV under different environmental conditions.46 MERS-CoV was stable at low temperatures and low humidity and could be recovered after 48 h at 20°C and 40% relative humidity. Aerosolisation of MERS-CoV did not affect its stability. These data show the potential for MERS-CoV to be transmitted via contact or fomite transmission as a result of prolonged environmental presence.Putative mode of transmission of MERS-CoVThe exact mode of transmission of MERS-CoV is unknown. However, several MERS-CoV clusters have implicated human-to-human transmission among health-care worker, hospital inpatient, and family cluster case series.47 Such transmission could be through respiratory droplets or direct or indirect contact.48 With a model developed by measurement of the hardness of coronavirus inner and outer protein shells, MERS-CoV was predicted to be readily transmitted through an oral–faecal route and also possibly via respiratory secretions.49
Human adenovirus 14Geographical distributionHAdDV-14 was first discovered in 1955 during an outbreak of acute respiratory infections among military trainees in the Netherlands.50 Soon after, other outbreaks were reported in Czechoslovakia, England, and Uzbekistan (figure).51, 52, 53, 54 The circulation and case reports of HAdV-14 infections ceased during the early 1960s until the beginning of the 1970s when the virus was again detected in the Netherlands.53 In the early part of this century, suspected cases of HAdV-14 were identified in Taiwan.55 During 2006, a variant of HAdV-14 (later dubbed HAdV-14p1) caused epidemics among US military trainees in five states: California, Georgia, Illinois, Montana, and Texas.53, 56, 57 From 2003 until now, sporadic HAdV-14p1 cases and clusters of cases were also described among civilians throughout the USA (Alaska, California, Kansas, New York, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas, Washington, and Wisconsin)53, 58, 59, 60, 61 In 2009–10, nine sporadic cases were reported in Ireland.61 In October 2010, HAdV-14p1 was detected by culture in a 17-month-old child with tonsillitis living in Guangzhou, southern China.62 In December 2010, HAdV-14p1 was isolated from a 6-month-old child presenting with pneumonia in Beijing, China.63 In April 2011, an outbreak occurred affecting 43 children (8–15 years old) attending school in the Tongwei County of the Gansu province (northwestern China), of whom 11 were identified with infection of HAdV-14p1.64 During summer 2011, three sporadic epidemiologically unrelated HAdV-14p1 cases were identified in the Canadian province of New Brunswick.65
Between-human transmission of HAdV-14p1HAdVs are chiefly transmitted via direct contact, aerosol, or contact with fomites. HAdV-14 strains are predominantly associated with upper and lower respiratory infections, and hence respiratory secretions are infectious. Adenoviruses are ubiquitous in military training facilities.66 People at risk of HAdV-14p1 infection include military trainees, young children, and the immunocompromised (table 1). During HAdV outbreaks, the high prevalence of asymptomatic infected individuals renders the surveillance and targeted countermeasures very difficult to enforce (table 2). So far, the basic reproductive rate (R0) has not been estimated for HAdV-14p1.Evidence for a zoonotic source for HAdV-14p1Cross-species transmission of a simian adenovirus from monkeys to man has been documented with scarce human-to-human infection.67, 68 HAdV-14 strains are human adenovirus B (mastadenoviruses of the family Adenoviridae); all other adenovirus B are human viruses (HAdV-3, 7, 11, 16, 21, 34, 35, 50) except for the simian adenovirus 21.69 Most of the simian adenoviruses isolated from non-human primates are phylogenetically related to human adenoviruses and belong to the species B, C, and E.70 However, there are no observational data to suggest that human HAdV-14p1 infections might be epidemiologically linked to contact with non-human primates. There is no evidence that HAdV-14p1 is zoonotic.Evidence for environmental sources of HAdV-14p1No specific data for HAdV-14p1 suggest either an environmental reservoir or an environmental source of infection. However, other human adenoviruses are stable in the environment, and HAdV-B14p1 probably has similar characteristics. The infectivity of mastadenoviruses is suppressed after 10 min at 56°C or above; they are infectious when frozen, stable when exposed to mild acids, and insensitive to lipid solvents.69
Putative mode of transmission of HAdV-14No study is specifically dedicated to the transmissions of HAdV-14p1; however, this virus is probably transmitted through mechanisms similar to those recorded for other human adenoviruses that cause respiratory tract infections. Adenoviruses frequently cause epidemics among military trainees, children (especially newborns), institutionalised people in hospitals and nursing homes, and immunocompromised people.71, 72, 73, 74 Because of their innate nature, adenoviruses are hardy and resistant to environmental changes; they can be transmitted directly from person to person, and indirectly from environment to person.69 For HAdV-14p1, the substantial proportion of epidemic episodes that occurred in a community (eg, schools and military camps) suggests that close proximity is a key factor for outbreaks.53
Avian influenza H7N9 virusGeographical distributionThe outbreak of a human novel influenza A H7N9 virus infection that occurred in early 2013 in eastern China (figure) raised serious concerns among public health professionals about the possibility of an imminent influenza pandemic.75, 76 As of June, 2014, more than 440 laboratory-confirmed cases and more than 150 deaths from influenza A H7N9 have occurred.77 Novel influenza A H7N9 spread rapidly, involving numerous provinces in China, Hong Kong, Malaysia, and Taiwan.76, 78 Influenza A H7N9 virus infections are associated with fever, chills, shivering, cough, chest pain, dyspnoea, nausea and vomiting,79 lymphocytopenia, leucopenia,80 hyperpyrexia, respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, multiorgan failure,81 fulminant pneumonia, septic shock, rhabdomyolysis, and encephalopathy.82
Between-human transmissionThe poorly understood pathogenesis and unknown mode of transmission of H7N9,83 coupled with the absence of mass deaths in poultry and wild birds before disease outbreaks makes public health intervention measures difficult to implement.84 The risk of human-to-human transmission of influenza A H7N9 is controversial since cases of family clustering could be a result of between-human transmission or a result of common exposure to infected poultry or other environmental risk factors.85 Some researchers argue that routes of human infections are only through exposure to poultry, wild birds, or via avian environmental exposures.75 They claim that between-human transmission is unlikely since many close contacts of confirmed H7N9 cases did not have evidence for influenza A H7N9 infection.80 Supporters of the bird-exposure hypothesis also argue that the reduction in human H7N9 cases after the April 2013 closure of live poultry and bird markets supports their view.86 Furthermore, they argue that recorded family clustering can be explained as a result of common exposure to birds or their environments and not as a result of human-to-human transmission.79 Some researchers also used mathematical models to suggest that the reproduction number for human-to-human transmission of the novel influenza A H7N9 is well below unity87 Other researchers argue that there is a strong possibility of restricted and non-sustainable H7N9 human-to-human transmission.81 They argue that a confirmed case, without exposure to live birds or live poultry markets, developed the disease and died of multiorgan failure after taking care of a confirmed sick close relative who also died of the disease, with the genome sequencing of the viruses isolated from the two patients being almost identical.81 A case-control study also excluded a participant from the study on the grounds of being infected with a possible human-to-human transmission.88 Another study showed that some close relatives of confirmed cases developed respiratory symptoms but did not give positive results for influenza A H7N9 virus, thereby stating that, although low, the risk of human-to-human transmission is still a possibility.89
Evidence for a zoonotic sourceExposure to infected poultry seems to be the major cause of human infection with influenza A H7N9 (table 2)75, 76, 87 because of the strong similarity between influenza A H7N9 isolates detected among human beings and poultry.80 Almost all cases had either a direct contact with live poultry89 or were exposed to environmental sources such as live bird markets, poultry farms, and wet markets where live birds are slaughtered and processed.75, 76, 79 Most outbreaks occurred in provinces along the eastern Asian–Australian flyway, along which migratory birds travel, flying over areas with densely populated poultry farms, live bird markets, rice farms, and free grazing ducks.84, 90, 91 Influenza A H7N9 viruses have been isolated from chickens and pigeons in markets in some of the affected provinces,79, 80 and from poultry cages and faeces in some live poultry and bird markets in the provinces.88
Evidence for an environmental sourceEnvironmental factors have important roles in the onset and maintenance of H7N9 outbreaks.90 Many of the confirmed cases had occupational exposures such as being a poultry worker, slaughtering birds in wet poultry markets, or visiting or purchasing live birds or poultry from live bird markets.76, 85, 89 Environmental samples in live poultry markets yielded positive results for the novel influenza H7N9 virus,76 which was also isolated from contaminated soils and surface water90 and from the immediate environment of a confirmed case.76 H7N9 can survive for months in the environment thereby leading to risk of infections to poultry or human beings long after initial detection (table 1).76, 90 Since the closure of live bird markets, which create environments allowing prolonged and repeated exposure of live birds and people (thereby increasing the risk of disease outbreaks), there has been a substantial decrease in the number of human cases of H7N9 in the affected regions.92
Putative modes of transmissionThe transmissibility and pathogenesis of the novel influenza A H7N9 are still poorly understood,76 but direct contact to host agents and exposure to environmental risk factors seem to be the generally approved means of transmission to human beings.90 Bird-to-human route, poultry-to-human route, and exposure to environmental risk factors are probably the major causes of human infection with the novel influenza A H7N9,75, 76, 79 though some researchers believe that human-to-human transmission is thus far non-sustainable.Avian influenza H10N8Geographical distributionIn December, 2013, WHO reported the first human case of avian influenza A H10N8 virus in China (figure),93, 94 but the virus was first isolated from birds in Italy in 1965.95 Though usually without clinical signs in birds,96 H10N8 has been isolated in both North America and Asia.95 All three human cases (including one death) were detected in Nanchang City, Jiangxi Province, China.93, 94 Signs and symptoms are consistent with other influenza-like illnesses and include chills,93, 94 cough, chest pain, shivering, pneumonia, respiratory failure, acute respiratory distress syndrome, and multiorgan failure.79, 82, 94 Despite the few human cases,92 these H10N8 infections are a cause for concern because this is the first H10N8 influenza virus to affect human beings. 95
Between-human transmissionThe small number of human cases of illness caused by influenza A H10N8 infection94 and absence of adequate information with respect to the reported human cases95 have made it difficult to fully understand the transmission potential of influenza A H10N8 virus. So far, there is no evidence of between-human transmission of influenza A H10N8 virus because close contacts of the cases have not yet developed influenza A H10N8 infection.93
Evidence for a zoonotic sourceEvidence points to zoonotic sources as the major cause of infection with influenza A H10N8 virus. All three human cases had live bird market exposures (table 2).94, 96 Avian sources seem to be the major reservoir for H10N8 since the viruses are believed to be circulating without clinical signs among poultry and have been isolated from migratory species.95
Evidence for environmental sourceEnvironmental factors seem to have key roles in maintaining the transmission of influenza A H10N8 virus with persistence in water being particularly important to transmission both among birds and to human beings.96 Influenza A H10N8 has been isolated from water samples from Dongting Lake in Hunan province China in 2007,96 and a live poultry market in southern China in 2012, thereby showing the importance of environmental factors in its transmission (table 1).Putative modes of transmissionSince human-to-human transmission of influenza A H10N8 has not been documented,94 the avian-to-human route of transmission seems to be the main route of human infection.93 Despite being considered as having low or non-pathogenicity in avian species,96 the small number of patients might make it difficult to know the actual virulence of influenza A H10N8 virus in people.93 Studies suggest that nucleotide changes or substitution can increase the transmissibility of the virus in human beings,95 since wild strains that were non-pathogenic in mice later caused weight loss and death in mice after two lung passages;96 and genetic analysis of all influenza A H10N8 isolates obtained from the NCBI Influenza Virus Resource Database showed the presence of genetic markers that favour mammalian adaptation or increased virulence in mammals.95
Influenza A H3N2 virusGeographical distributionPig H3N2 virus is believed to have circulated among human beings since 1968,97 with more than 30 human cases reported from 2005 to June 2011 in the USA and Canada (figure).98, 99, 100 The emergence of a variant swine-like influenza A H3N2 virus in July, 2011,101 however, alarmed public health officials. The variant virus likely evolved from the 2009 pandemic influenza A H1N1,102 many cases had direct or indirect exposure to pigs in agricultural fairs,98, 99, 103, 104 and this virus seemingly has more pandemic potential than other swine-like viruses.105 As of June 5, 2014, 340 laboratory-confirmed cases of human influenza A H3N2 and one death have been documented in 13 US states.101, 103, 105, 106, 107, 108 Additional cases of human influenza A H3N2 have been reported in various countries including Denmark,109 the UK,110 Italy,111 Hong Kong,112 France,100 Japan,113 Taiwan, and Singapore.114 Disease symptoms are consistent with other influenza-like symptoms, which include fever (temperature >38°C), sore throat, cough, rhinorrhoea, vomiting or diarrhoea, fatigue, myalgia or joint pain,103, 115 headache, lethargy, rhinorrhoea, emesis, dyspnoea, and eye irritation.99, 100
Between human transmissionSeroepidemiological studies suggest that roughly 90% of US children less than 10 years of age were susceptible to influenza A H3N2 infection.115, 116, 117 Although many studies suggest the occurrence of no or restricted and unsustainable human-to-human transmission of influenza A H3N2,98, 113, 118 some researchers believe there is every possibility of human-to-human transmission.99, 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 119 Evidence includes an outbreak of influenza A H3N2 in three geriatric wards in France (table 1),100 a US daycare centre,99 and other US case series involving infected people without exposure to pigs.101, 103
Evidence for a zoonotic sourcePig species are mixing bowls through which avian influenza viruses might mix with other influenza viruses and cross over to human beings (table 2).120 Many studies suggest that zoonotic sources had important roles in the outbreak of influenza A H3N2 since most confirmed human cases had direct or indirect exposure to pigs during agricultural fairs.99, 100, 104, 105 Pig samples taken from agricultural fairs have tested positive for H3N2,97, 121, 122 and one study documented antigenic similarity between H3N2 taken from pigs in agricultural fairs and those associated with commercial pig farms,107 thereby showing the importance of pigs in the transmission and maintenance of H3N2 among human beings.Evidence for an environmental sourceThe high rate of outbreaks of human influenza A H3N2 among people that attended or exhibited at the agricultural fairs,98, 99, 103, 104 suggests that there is a substantial association between disease outbreaks and physical location of individuals. Agricultural fairs are recognised as a potential place for pigs and human beings to share pathogens,98 thereby creating enabling environments for the re-assortment of pig and human viruses with the potential of generating novel viruses.118
Putative modes of transmissionThe pig-to-human route is probably the main transmission route for influenza A H3N2, whereas human-to-human transmission is likely a secondary mechanism.98, 99, 103, 104 As a respiratory virus, common means of H3N2 transmission include direct contact, respiratory droplets, and aerosol particles from infected pigs or people. The acquisition of the matrix gene from the 2009 pandemic virus is believed to have caused influenza A H3N2 to be more virulent than the seasonal H3N2 strains.101
ConclusionWhile HAdV-14p1 has been identified in humans only, MERS-CoV, influenza A H7N9, influenza A H10N8, and influenza A H3N2 are zoonotic diseases. There is a mounting evidence suggesting that camels are the likely reservoir of human exposure to MERS-CoV. Influenza A H7N9 and influenza A H10N8 reservoirs consist of poultry, ducks, and wild birds. The influenza A H3N2 reservoir consists of pigs. One possible way to prevent these zoonotic infections is avoiding direct contact with these animals or their dairy products in the respective areas of endemicity. It is advisable avoiding staying in environments where such animals are concentrated, including farms and markets. The absence of massive deaths and even of clinical signs among the reservoir animals leaves little or no time for public health preparations and intervention measures to curtail the impacts by culling. Given the possible interhuman transmission of these viruses (notably MERS-Cov and HAdV-14p1), the individual preventive measures aiming at reducing the risk of respiratory infections (use of face-mask, hand hygiene, cough etiquette, social distancing) should be reinforced.Because of the poor current knowledge of the specific pathogenesis and mode of transmission of HAdV-14p1, recommendations for control and preventive measures have to be extrapolated by reference to other human adenoviruses causing respiratory infections.123 Fortunately, most HAdV-14p1 infections do not cause severe illness.124 Thus, direct methods to detect and identify HAdV-14p1, which have been recently described, will help to improve rapidly surveillance and diagnosis.125 The high mutation or reassortment rate of influenza viruses could lead to the emergence of more virulent and transmissible strains.76, 126 The identification of several novel viruses that can cause fatal respiratory tract infections over the past decade, and major gaps that remain in the understanding of their epidemiology and transmission dynamics, calls for a more united and coordinated global response for tackling new infectious diseases threats.Search strategy and selection criteria
References for this Series paper were identified through searches of PubMed for articles published in the English and French languages from January, 1994, to June, 2014, through use of the terms “respiratory tract infections”, “Middle East Respiratory Syndrome”, “MERS-CoV”, “influenza”, “human adenovirus 14”, “H7N9”, “H10N8”, “H3N2 variant”, “Environmental”, and “Risk factor”. We reviewed articles resulting from these searches and relevant references cited in those articles.



Title: 


IntroductionHuman adenovirus (HAdV) infections have been recognized for decades as an important cause of acute respiratory disease (ARD) [1]. Human adenovirus type 55 (HAdV-B55) belongs to the HAdV-B family, and this adenovirus was recently recognized as a re-emerging respiratory pathogen [2], [3]. HAdV-B55 has been associated with both mild and severe clinical disease, presenting with high fever and respiratory symptoms such as cough, myalgia and sore throat [2], [4]. The virus has been reported to have caused outbreaks of ARD among military trainees in Turkey, Spain and Singapore since 1969 and in school populations in China [4]–[8]. These outbreaks usually spread quickly but are only associated with occasional mortality.Bioinformatics analysis demonstrated that HAdV-B55 evolved from an intertypic recombination event in the hexon gene between HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14, producing a new serotype [2], [3]. Both HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11 belong to the subspecies HAdV-B2. HAdV-B14 has been described in association with outbreaks of ARD, with high rates of illness and death, in military and civilian populations in the United States, China and Europe [9]–[12]. Severe respiratory infections caused by HAdV-B14p1, an emerging variant of HAdV-B14, have been recorded in the United States and Europe since 2006 [10], [11], [13], [14]. Interestingly, although HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B55 commonly cause respiratory tract infections, HAdV-B11 instead generally leads to kidney and urinary tract infections. Genome recombination plays an important role in the evolution of HAdVs [15]. Although the major capsid protein hexon is a hot spot for homologous recombination and critical for infection by HAdVs [16], [17], the potential effect of homologous recombination in the hexon gene on the tropism changes and disease severity of HAdV-B55 is currently not well understood.In the current study, the in vitro biological characteristics of HAdV-B55 were investigated and compared with those of HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14. Our results describe the distinct biological features of HAdV-B55 in comparison with its parental viruses, HAdV-B11 and HADV-B14. These findings expand current knowledge about this re-emerging recombinant HAdV, shedding light on the potential pathogenesis of HAdV-B55.Materials and MethodsCellsThe human lung cell line A549 (American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) catalog # CCL-185), the human cervical cell line HeLa (ATCC catalog # CCL-2), the human liver cell line HepG2 (ATCC catalog # HB-8065), the human laryngeal cancer cell line HEp-2 (ATCC catalog # CCL-23), the human rhabdomyosarcoma cell line RD (ATCC catalog # CCL-136) and the human kidney cell line HEK-293 (ATCC catalog # CRL-1573) were maintained in DMEM or RPMI 1640 (Life Technologies, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies) plus 100 IU of penicillin and 100 µg of streptomycin per ml at 37°C in the presence of 5% CO2.VirusesHAdV-B55 strain Y16/SX/2011 was isolated in Taiyuan city, Shanxi province, China, in 2012. Swab samples from a patient with febrile respiratory infectious illness were collected and subjected to viral isolation in A549 cells. The presence of HAdV-B55 strain Y16/SX/2011 was confirmed by whole-genome sequencing (GenBank accession number KF911353).HAdV-B11 prototype strain Slobitski (GenBank accession number NC_011202, ATCC catalog # VR-12) and HAdV-B14 prototype strain de Wit (GenBank accession number AY803294, ATCC catalog # VR-15) were obtained from the ATCC. All viral stocks were prepared in A549 cells, and the viral titers were measured using a standard plaque assay.Plaque assayA standard plaque assay was used to determine the viral titers. The assay was performed using 100% confluent A549 cells in 12-well plates. Briefly, A549 cells were inoculated with viruses and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. The monolayers were then washed twice with PBS, overlaid with 1 ml of 2% low-melting-point agarose (Promega, WI, USA) mixed 1∶1 with 2×1640 (20% FBS plus 200 IU of penicillin and 200 µg of streptomycin per ml), and placed in a 37°C incubator with 5% CO2 for 6 d. Six days post-infection, the plates were fixed with 4% formaldehyde and stained with a 1% (wt/vol) crystal violet solution. The plaques were counted, and the titers were calculated and expressed in PFU/ml.Cell infectivityThe infectivity of these three human adenoviruses in various cells of distinct origins was evaluated. Six human cell lines, including A549, HeLa, HepG2, RD, HEp-2 and HEK-293, were separately infected with HAdV-B55, HAdV-B11 or HAdV-B14 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 in RPMI 1640 or DMEM with 2% FBS and incubated at 37°C for 2 h, after which the inoculum was removed and replaced with fresh RPMI 1640 or DMEM with 2% FBS. The development of cytopathic effects (CPEs) was observed daily. The titers of viruses released into the cell supernatant were determined by plaque assays, whereas the viral loads in the cells were determined by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR) methods.Growth kinetics assayHEp-2 cells in DMEM containing 2% FBS were infected with viruses at an MOI of 0.1 and incubated at 30°C. A549 cells in RPMI 1640 containing 2% FBS were infected with viruses at an MOI of 0.1 and incubated at 37°C. Supernatants and cells were harvested at 1, 3, 5 and 7 d post-infection. Viral titers were determined by plaque assays using the A549 cells or by real-time qPCR assays.Cell viability assayCell viability was determined using an MTS Cell Proliferation Assay (Promega) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 5×103 cells were seeded in each well in a standard 96-well plate and incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2. After overnight culture, the RPMI 1640 media was removed, and the cells were infected with virus. Infected and uninfected cells were assayed at 12, 24 and 48 h post-infection. The absorbance was determined at 490 nm using a Beckman microplate spectrophotometer.Apoptosis assayA549 cells in 96-well plates were infected with viruses at an MOI of 10 and then incubated at 37°C. Caspase-3/7 activities at 6 and 12 h post-infection were tested with an ApoTox-Glo Triplex Assay (Promega). Luminescence was detected with the plate reader SpectraMax M5 (Molecular Devices, CA, USA). The apoptosis assay was repeated four times, and uninfected cells were used as the negative control.Thermostability analysisAll viruses were incubated at 37°C for various numbers of weeks. After incubation at 37°C, the viruses were quickly cooled in ice water and stored at −80°C until titer determination. The loss of viral infectivity was determined using a standard plaque assay on A549 cells. Thermostability was calculated as the slope of the regression line. A large slope indicated that the adenovirus was less stable at the experimental temperature.Viral DNA extraction and real-time qPCRCells were homogenized, and then viral DNA was extracted using a QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The viral loads were quantified by using HAdV type-specific real-time qPCR assays and a SYBR Premix Ex Taq Kit (Takara, Dalian, China) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The following cycling conditions were used in the LightCycler 2.0 system (Roche, Penzberg, Germany): an initial denaturing cycle at 95°C for 20 s, followed by 40 cycles of amplification (95°C for 5 s and 60°C for 20 s; the fluorescence was recorded at 60°C) and then a melting curve analysis cycle (95°C for 0 s, 65°C for 15 s and 95°C for 15 s, with the temperature slowly increased by 0.1°C/s). The primers used in this study are listed in Table 1. The 10-fold serial dilutions of viruses that had been quantitated by the plaque-forming assay were used as standard samples for standard curve analysis (Figure S1).10.1371/journal.pone.0100665.t001Table 1Primers used in the real-time qPCR assay.TypePrimerSequence (5′-3′)HAdV-B55ADV55-SYBR-F
AGATGAAGAAAGTAAACCGATTT
ADV55-SYBR-R
CCATCAAGGTCAGTCCAA
HAdV-B11ADV11-SYBR-F
AGCAGCAGCAGCAATCACA
ADV11-SYBR-R
GGCAGTTGCAGTAGTTGC
HAdV-B14ADV14-SYBR-F
TTGGATAAAGGGGTTGAAACTAC
ADV14-SYBR-R
TCCCCGTCTTCATTTTGC
Statistical analysisStatistical tests were performed with GraphPad software, using Student's t-test, two-way ANOVA and the Chi-square test, as indicated in the figure legends.ResultsDistinct cell susceptibility to HAdV-B55 and its parental virusesHAdV-B55 was derived from homologous recombination between HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 [2], and the potential biological relationships between these three types of adenoviruses are therefore of great interest. Here, a series of human cell lines that are usually used for HAdV infections were initially infected with HAdV-B55 and its parental viruses, HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14. As shown in Table 2, all cells, including the A549, HeLa, HepG2, RD, HEp-2 and HEK-293 cell lines, were susceptible to infection with HAdV-B55, HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14. Complete CPEs were observed at 5 d post-infection in all cell types tested. However, the CPE induced by each HAdV varied. HAdV-B11 led to the rapid development of a complete CPE in all cell lines except the RD cells within 2 d post-infection. The CPE development of HAdV-B14 was similar to that of HAdV-B11; however, no typical CPE was observed in the HeLa cells. In contrast to HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11, the CPE development caused by HAdV-B55 in all cell lines was much slower. HAdV-B55 failed to cause a CPE in any cell type within 2 d post-infection, except mild CPE development in the 293 cells.10.1371/journal.pone.0100665.t002Table 2Differential cell-line susceptibility to HAdV-B55, HAdV-B14 or HAdV-B11 in terms of the CPE.Cell lineCPEa: 2 dpi5 dpiHAdV-B11HAdV-B14HAdV-B55HAdV-B11HAdV-B14HAdV-B55A54944N444RDNNN444HeLa4NN444HEp-244N444HepG244N444HEK-293441444a Grading of the extent of the CPE: N  =  negative, 1 = 1–25%, 2 = 26–50%, 3 = 51–75% and 4 = >75%. The data are representative of three independent experiments.In the following experiments, the replication efficiencies of the three adenoviruses were characterized in the six cell lines mentioned above (Figure 1). All adenoviruses had detectable viral loads in the supernatants. Interestingly, although no profound CPE was observed in the cells within 48 h post-infection, HAdV-B55 replicated to a titer similar to that of HAdV-B11 or HAdV-B14. The titers of the three adenoviruses released into the supernatant at 48 h post-infection were approximately 104 PFU/ml in the HeLa, HEp-2 and HepG2 cells, whereas peak titers of approximately 105 PFU/ml were determined in the A549 and HEK-293 cells. Although HAdV-B55 exhibited higher replication in the RD cells compared with that of HAdV-B11 at 48 h post-infection, there was no significant difference observed in any type of cell between HAdV-B11, HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B55 at 120 h post-infection. Moreover, the intracellular viral titers were determined by qPCR at 48 and 120 h post-infection. The three adenoviruses exhibited similar replication efficiencies in all cell types. Moreover, as shown in Figure 1, HAdV-B55, HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 all replicated at a higher rate, with titers of approximately 108 PFU/ml, in the A549 and HEp-2 cells. These results suggested that HAdV-B55 and its parental viruses have different cell susceptibilities and replication features.10.1371/journal.pone.0100665.g001Figure 1Differential cell line susceptibility to HAdV-B55, HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11.Viral titers (log10 PFU/ml) of HAdV-B11 (blue), HAdV-B14 (green) and HAdV-B55 (red) in RD, HeLa, HEp-2, HepG2 and HEK-293 cells at 2 and 5 d post-infection. Three independent experiments were performed. The data are shown as the mean ± standard deviation. The statistical significance of the results was determined using two-way ANOVA tests, *P<0.05.Viral fitness in A549 and HEp-2 cellsHere, the viral fitness of HAdV-B55, HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 in the lower-airway cell line A549 and the upper-airway cell line HEp-2 was analyzed, and growth kinetics assays were performed at different temperatures. The HEp-2 cells were infected at 30°C to simulate the environment of the upper respiratory system, whereas the A549 cells were infected at 37°C to simulate the environment of the lower respiratory system. As shown in Figure 2, there were significant differences between the three adenoviruses in terms of their growth kinetics. HAdV-B55 replicated to a peak extracellular titer of approximately 108 PFU/ml in the A549 cells and approximately 104 PFU/ml in the HEp-2 cells. These values were significantly higher than those of HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11. The viral titers of the three adenoviruses in the HEp-2 cells at a low temperature (30°C) were remarkably lower than those in the A549 cells at a slightly higher temperature (37°C) (Figure 2C). Interestingly, there was no observable difference in the growth kinetics of HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 in the A549 cells at 37°C; however, HAdV-B14 exhibited a higher growth rate than did HAdV-B11 in the HEp-2 cells at 30°C. Similar to the data on the growth characteristics, the intracellular growth kinetics of the three adenoviruses showed that HAdV-B55 had slightly higher viral loads at 120 h post-infection in the A549 cells (Figures 2B & 2D). These results indicated that HAdV-B55 has greater viral fitness in both upper and lower respiratory tract cells than do either HAdV-B11 or HAdV-B14.10.1371/journal.pone.0100665.g002Figure 2Viral growth kinetics of HAdV-B55, HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11 in A549 and HEp-2 cells.A549 (A & B) and HEp-2 (C & D) cells were infected with HAdV-B11 (blue), HAdV-B14 (green) or HAdV-B55 (red) at an MOI of 0.1, and the supernatants and cells were separately harvested at 1, 3, 5 and 7 d post-infection. The supernatants samples were titrated by a plaque assay on A549 cells. Viral titers in the cell samples were determined by qPCR. The data are shown as the mean ± standard deviation of three independent experiments. A & C, the extracellular viral loads in the supernatants. B & D, the intracellular viral loads in the cells.Cytotoxicity and apoptosis analyses in A549 cellsTo further understand the unique biological features related to pathogenesis, the differential cytotoxicity levels induced by the three human adenoviruses were compared in the A549 cells. As shown in Figure 3, HAdV-B55 was less cytotoxic in the A549 cells than was HAdV-B11 or HAdV-B14. Only in the early stage of infection (at 12 h post-infection) did HAdV-B11 exhibit similar toxicity (98.7%) to HAdV-B55 (99.8%), whereas HAdV-B14 showed slightly higher toxicity (87.4%). HAdV-B55 exhibited slight toxicity (60.1%) even in the later stages of infection, in contrast to HAdV-B11 and HAdV-14, which exhibited more significant toxicity (43.8% and 36.0%, respectively).10.1371/journal.pone.0100665.g003Figure 3Toxicity of HAdV-B55, HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11 in A549 cells.A549 cells were infected with one of the three viruses at an MOI of 10. At 12, 24 and 48-infection, the results were assessed using MTS Cell Proliferation reagent (Promega) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The resulting values (the ratio of infected to uninfected cells) are presented as the mean ± standard deviation of four replicates. These results are representative of two independent experiments. The asterisks indicate statistically significant (P<0.001) differences, as determined using two-way ANOVA tests.Furthermore, virus-induced apoptosis was analyzed by measuring caspase-3/7 activities during the early stages of infection. Our results showed that the ratio of caspase-3 to caspase-7 in the HAdV-B11-infected A549 cells was significantly higher than in the HAdV-B55-infected cells at both time points tested (Figure 4). The ratio of caspase-3 to caspase-7 in the HAdV-B55-infected cells was 1.03 at 6 h post-infection and 1.08 at 12 h post-infection, indicating that HAdV-B55 induced a low level of apoptosis in the A549 cells. These results suggested that compared with HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14, which induced severe apoptosis in the A549 cells, HAdV-B55 infection resulted in mild apoptosis during the early stages of infection. The observed low virus-induced cytotoxicity and lack of CPE development despite viral infection suggest that certain viral factors of HAdV-B55 are involved in reducing its induced cytopathology and cell death.10.1371/journal.pone.0100665.g004Figure 4Levels of apoptosis in HAdV-B55-, HAdV-B14- or HAdV-B11-infected A549 cells.A549 cells were infected with HAdV-B11, HAdV-B14 or HAdV-B55 at an MOI of 10. At 12, 24 and 48 h post-infection, the results were assessed using the ApoTox-Glo Triplex Assay (Promega) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The values of the caspase ratio (infected to uninfected) are shown as the mean ± standard deviation of four replicates from two independent experiments. Statistical significance was determined using a two-way ANOVA test. **P<0.01; *P<0.05.Thermal sensitivity analysisTemperature is known to play an important role in respiratory viral transmission [18], [19]. For this reason, the thermal stabilities of HAdV-B55, HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 were analyzed by determining their rates of infectivity at 37°C. HAdV-B55 had lost most of its infectivity after 8 weeks, with a 4.8 log10 decrease in its titer, whereas HAdV-B14 exhibited significant tolerance to heat treatment, with a 3.0 log10 decrease in its titer. HAdV-B11 was the most resistant virus, with only a 1.5 log10 decrease under the same conditions. As shown in Figure 5, the slope of the regression line for HAdV-B55 (−0.6776±0.01687 log10 PFU/week) indicated that it had lower stability than did HAdV-B11 (−0.2271±0.02226 log10 PFU/week) and HAdV-B14 (−0.4032±0.02910 log10 PFU/week). These results showed that HAdV-B55 is less thermostable than either HAdV-B11 or HAdV-B14 is under heat treatment, which may limit the ability of HAdV-B55 to be transmitted between hosts.10.1371/journal.pone.0100665.g005Figure 5The effect of heat treatment on the infectivity of HAdV-B55, HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11.The viruses were incubated for 2, 3, 4, 6 or 8 weeks at 37°C. Viral titers in heat-treated virus samples were determined by plaque assays on A549 cells. Each value represents the mean ± standard deviation of two separate experiments.DiscussionHAdV-B55 has been identified to be a recombinant adenovirus derived from HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B11 [2], [3]. The potential effect of homologous recombination on the specific tropism and pathogenicity of HAdV-B55 is not well understood and is of public health concern. In the current research, a comparison study assessing cell tropism and infectivity, viral replication, cytotoxicity, apoptosis and thermostability was performed to compare HAdV-B55 with HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14. To compare the three viruses, HAdV-B55, HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 were passaged only once in A549 cells to prepare stocks. The results of the cell tropism assay on six human cell lines from different tissues and organs showed that HAdV-B55 exhibited similar cell tropism to HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14, although the first and third infect the respiratory tract and the second infects the urinary tract, causing substantially different clinical symptoms. The data on cellular infectivity were consistent with the results of previous studies, indicating that the epithelial cell lines HEK-293 and A549 are optimal cell lines for in vitro HAdV-B14 propagation [20], [21]. Furthermore, the high viral loads recorded in the airway cell lines for all three adenoviruses revealed the viruses' potential risk of causing respiratory infectious diseases in which co-infection could lead to subsequent homologous recombination. HAdV-B55 did not produce detectable CPE development by 2 d post-infection and exhibited less toxicity. It was helpful to observe the viral replication in the early stages of infection. In the A549 cells, the similar intracellular replication of the three adenoviruses suggested that these viruses had similar replication efficiencies inside the cells. In contrast, the higher viral load of HAdV-B55 than of HAdV-B11 or HAdV-B14 3 d post-infection may have resulted from differences in the release efficiency of the virus particles. The high viral replication levels of HAdV-B55 in lower respiratory cells may be a risk factor, resulting in higher rates of viral pneumonia and hospitalization. However, the low thermostability of HAdV-B55 may limit its human-to-human transmission. Although the cultured cell lines used in the study may not resemble the original tissues and organs from which they were derived, these results still provide useful fundamental information that is important for future viral isolation and identification in virology and clinical laboratories.Previous studies revealed that HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 have similar receptors [22]–[24]. In contrast to other species of HAdV, most species of B adenoviruses use CD46 and/or desmoglein-2 (DSG-2) as their primary attachment receptor [23], [24]. The current study also provides information on the distinct infectivity of the three viruses, which may reveal differences in the cellular receptor binding of HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14. A previous study showed that HAdV-B11 and HAdV-B14 both use CD46 as their cellular attachment receptor; however, the levels of attachment of HAdV-B11 to CD46 were significantly higher than those of HAdV-B14 [24]. In a recent study, DSG-2 was identified as the primary high-affinity receptor used by adenoviruses Ad3, Ad7, Ad11 and Ad14, although DSG-2 does not completely block HAdV-B11 from approaching cells [23]. These differences highlight the complexity of the interaction between the virus particles and their cellular receptors. HAdV-B55 has the same fiber protein as HAdV-B14 does, although the cellular binding activity of HAdV-B55 was found to be significantly lower than that of HAdV-B14 (data not shown). A previous study also revealed that the fiber protein does not completely block adenovirus attachment to target host cells [22]. These findings suggest that hexon or penton genes other than that of the fiber may play a role in the interactions between the viral and the cellular receptors. Recombination in the hexon gene may also affect the attachment of HAdV-B55 to host cells. The current study also revealed that HAdV-B55 exhibited cell tropism similar to HAdV-B14 but not HAdV-B11.Although it remains unclear whether HAdV-B is primarily transmitted through the droplet, airborne or contact mode of transmission, the thermostability of human adenovirus in the environment contributes to its transmission. The effect of temperatures on viral replication was observed in the current study. We used two cell lines cultured at different temperatures to simulate the different physiological environments of the upper and lower respiratory tracts. Our results showed that HAdV-B55 and HAdV-B14 both exhibited higher replication efficiencies than did HAdV-B11, which suggests that HAdV-B14 and HAdV-B55 may be transmitted by respiratory droplets. Furthermore, the heat stability of HAdV-B55 is lower than that of HAdV-B14, which may explain why fewer HAdV-B55 infections have been reported in the population. The thermostability of a virus commonly depends on the structure of the viral proteins. Penton and hexon proteins are two very important structural proteins for the formation of the virus particle. Homologous recombination in the hexon gene may change and even destroy the conformation of the hexon protein and virus particle, thus affecting viral stability. However, our results also reflected the critical role of the penton protein in maintaining the thermostability of an adenovirus.Based on this comparison of the biological characteristics of these three distinct adenoviruses, we have learned about the differences between HAdV-B55 and HAdV-B11/14 in terms of their viral replication efficacy, cytotoxicity and apoptosis induction. These data suggest that HAdV-B55 possesses distinct biological characteristics, although it has a similar cell tropism as its parental adenoviruses. This study provides important foundational information about HAdV-B55, which is helpful for understanding this re-emergent acute respiratory pathogen. Furthermore, these findings may be helpful for understanding the molecular pathogenesis of HAdV-B55 and may contribute to the development of novel antiviral treatments for HAdV-B55 infection.Supporting InformationFigure S1
The standard curves of qPCR for HAdV-B11 (A), HAdV-B14 (B) and HAdV-B55 (C), respectively. Real-time PCR assays were performed using viral DNAs for each assay. The 10-fold serial dilutions of viruses were used as standard samples for standard curve analysis. The slope, the Y-intercept and the R2 value were determined.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Isolation and molecular characterization of Fowl adenovirus strains in Black grouse: First reported case in Poland

IntroductionFowl adenoviruses (FAdVs) belong to the Adenoviridae family (Harrach, 2012) and are divergent pathogens with a low virulence level. However, under specific conditions they can cause a variety of disorders in domestic [1–5] and wild birds [2, 6–9], including polar regions, such as Antarctica (Park, 2012). The pathogenicity of adenoviruses, which depends on the virulence, evolutionary history, and probability of host switching of a given strain, must be further investigated. FAdVs have been classified by assessing their sequence similarity to major proteins in the adenovirus genome and by mapping the characteristics of viral infection [10–12]. Wild birds provide a natural reservoir for numerous viral species and are also a central source of viral gene evolution.FAdVs are a diverse group of viruses with highly variable domains located primarily on the outside of the virion. The most divergent region in the adenovirus genome is located in the Loop L1, HVR1-4 region of the hexon gene. Further, these domains are largely responsible for antigenic variations [13, 14]. The 36000–43000 bp adenovirus genome shows similarities in its structural organization across adenovirus species dependently on type/species which has early (E) or late (L) proteins based on their expression [2, 15]. Fowl aviadenoviruses are divided into five species, FAdV(A-E), and contain twelve FAdV (1-8a-8b-11) types. Adenoviruses are highly abundant and induce inclusion body hepatitis (IBH) in chickens [2], gizzard erosion and ulceration (GEU) in broilers [2], and hydropericardium hepatitis syndrome (HPS) [2].Adenoviral infections may be asymptomatic, or they can present with complications during the course of disease [8, 16–22]. Adenoviruses in birds, as compared to adenoviruses in mammals, exhibit a distinct genome organization and contain unique transcriptional units (Harrach, Chiocca, 1996). Although adenoviruses are generally species-specific, some FAdVs have been found in multiple different species, including common buzzard (Bueto bueto) [17], black kite (Milvus migrans) [19], Tawny frogmouth (Podargus strigoides: Caprimulgiformes) [20], red-bellied parrot (Poicephalus rufiventris) [21], falcon (Falconiformes) [22], and domestic pigeon (Columba livia domestica) [23]. For example, FAdV-2/3/11/D were identified in three mute swans (Cygnus olor), one wild duck (Anas platyrhynchos), one owl (Tyto javanica stertens), one wood pigeon (Columbia livia domestica) [24], and ostrich chicks [16].Black grouse are distributed across the eastern and southern parts of Poland, with populations clustering in forests and grasslands. Caucasian black grouse are under special restrictions in Poland. These birds may act as vectors for virus dissemination and as amplifying hosts in the bird-vector-bird cycle. They may be the source of emerging viruses in cross-species transmission events, including flaviviruses like West Nile virus (WNV), which are amplified in sage grouse (Centrocercus urophasiansin) during the bird-mosquito-bird cycle [25]. In recent years, high-throughput sequencing approaches have been used to discover novel adenovirus species which impact the entire animal kingdom. The biology of adenoviruses, virus dynamics in natural hosts, disease causing viral properties, and the viral distribution and diversity across vertebrate species still needs to be explored.Materials and methodsSample collectionThe black grouse showed nonspecific signs of illness for several days, was dejected, refused to eat or drink, and failed to respond to supportive care provided by the owner. After several days of treatment, the owner decided on euthanasia, and tissue samples were collected post-mortem. Clinical samples derived from the spleen, liver, sciatic nerve, gizzard, intestines, and brain were sent to the Department of Poultry Diseases, NVRI, Poland from the Wroclaw, Lower Silesia region. Internal organs were prepared for virus isolation and molecular analysis via freezing, homogenization in phosphate buffered saline, centrifugation, and filtering through 450nm filters (Millipore, Beillerica, MA, USA). The submission/studies does not require an ethics statement".CEK culturesChick embryo kidney cell (CEK) cultures were prepared from 18 to 19 day old SPF chicken embryos (Lohman, Germany) according to the standard procedure. The growth medium consisted of Eagle’s medium (MEM) with the addition of 10% of fetal bovine serum (FBS) and a 0.1% antibiotic mixture (Antibiotic–Antimycotic, Gibco, Scotland). The maintenance medium consisted of MEM with 0.1% of antibiotic mixture. A monolayer of CEK’s culture was obtained after 18–24 hours of incubation at 37.5°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Tissue samples were prepared via homogenization, three freeze/thaw cycles, centrifugation, and filtering through a 450nm Millipore filter. CEK monolayers were inoculated with the filtered homogenate. The cultures were incubated at 37.5°C with 5% CO2 and observed under a microscope on a daily basis. Three passages were conducted for 96 h each. The third passage of each strain was kept at -20°C for the next step of the study.DNA isolationTotal DNA of reference strain 2/11/D (Charles River, US) and adenovirus strains (MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L and MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B) were extracted using a DNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Germany) according to manufacturer’s procedure. DNA was isolated directly from CEK cultures infected with field and reference 2/11/D strains as a positive control. DNA was also extracted from uninfected CEK cultures as a negative control. DNA samples were then stored at -20°C for the next step of the study.Determination of Tissue Culture Infection Doses (TCID50)The TCID50 values of field strains (MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L and MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B) and reference strain 2/11/D (Charles River, US) were determined using 24-well plates (Thermo Scientific, US) coated with CEK cultures (18–24 h). CEKs were infected with tenfold dilutions of virus stocks from 10−1.0 to 10−7.0 in triplicate for each dilution and three wells for the negative control. The plates were incubated at 37.5°C with 85% humidity in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. Cytopathic effects (CPEs) were observed using a microscope (Zeiss HXP 120, Germany) on a daily basis. After 6 to 7 days of incubation, the results were read according to the Reed and Munch model [26], and the TCID50 value was determined.Immunofluorescence Assay (IFA)CEK cultures were infected with the third passage of the field strains (MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L, and MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B) and reference strain 2/11/D (Charels River, US). When CPEs had been observed after 5–6 d.p.i., CEKs were covered with 90% acetone (POCH, Poland) and cooled to -20°C. After 30 min, the acetone was removed, and the plates were allowed to dry for the next 24 h. The CEKs were washed three times with PBS buffer (Biolab, Poland), followed by the addition of 500 μL of blocking mix: 1x PBS, 5% bovine serum, and 0.3% Triton X-100. The plates were incubated for 1 h at 18–24°C, the blocking mix was removed, and 500 μL of mouse primary FAdV antibody (Charles River, US), diluted 1:100 in PBS, was added. After incubation at 37°C for 18 h, the plates were washed three times with PBS (Biolab, Poland), and incubated with a 1:200 dilution of a secondary rabbit antibody against mouse IgG1 conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) (Serotec, Germany) at 18–24°C for 2 h in the dark. The fluid was removed and the plates were washed three times with PBS buffer. The cells were viewed using a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss, Axio Observer D1, Germany). The presence of fluorescent cells of different sizes indicated a positive result in the IFA. CPE was recorded using a camera (Axiocam MRm, Germany).Real-time PCRTo analyze the Loop L1 region of the hexon gene, the following sets of degenerate primers were used [27] for amplifying a 93 bp fragment: FAdV-FJSN (5’AATGTCACNACCGARAAGGC3’), FAdV-RJSN (5’CBGCBTRCATGTACTGGTA3’), and Taq Man probe JSNRT (5’AATCCCTACTCGAACACCCC 3’). The oligonucleotide primers and probe were designed in the Primer 3 program according to the GeneBank database (NCBI) and synthesized by Genomed, Warsaw. Real-time PCR was performed on a final volume of 25 μl. The mixture contained: 12.5 μl of SYBR Green PCR Master Mix, 1.0 μl of each primer F and R, 1.0 μl of probe, 2.0 μl of DNA template (-50ng), and 7.0 μl of deionized water. The nucleotides, Taq DNA Polymerase and buffer were included in the Quanti Tec™ SYBR Green PCR kit (Qiagen). The protocol took 138 min to obtain the results. The reaction conditions were as follows: 95°C/15 min (initial denaturation), 94°C/30 s (primer annealing), then 41 cycles of 55°C/45 s (exact denaturation), 72°C/1 min (signal acquisition). All reactions were completed in duplicate and followed by a melting curve analysis.Purification and sequencingAfter the amplification reactions, the DNA products corresponding to the Loop L1 region of the hexon gene from strains MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L and MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B were purified using a NucleoSpin Extract II (Marcherey-Nagel, France). The DNA products were sequenced using a GS FLX/Titanium sequencer (Roche, Switzerland) by Genomed, Warsaw.Phylogenetic analysisA phylogenetic tree was reconstructed by Maximum Likelihood (ML) with the use of a p-distance on 1000 bootstrapped data sets using alignments of the Loop L1 HVRs1-4 region of the hexon gene. The molecular analysis was performed via the neighbor-joining method and the ClustalW multiple alignment using MEGA7, Geneious7, and BLAST software. Sequence comparisons were performed by alignment of the nucleotide sequences of the amplified fragments originating from the hexon gene with fowl adenovirus type/species twelve reference sequences obtained from the GenBank database (NCBI).Analysis of nucleotide and amino acid sequences on overall mean distance and heterogeneityThe sequences of adenovirus field strains (MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L and MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B) were assembled using the MEGA7 program. To confirm the correctness of the assembled sequences, they were compared to adenovirus reference sequences obtained from the GenBank database (NCBI).Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU)All sequences of field and reference strains were examined under the frequencies with averages over all taxa. The values of RSCU were determined by using MEGA 7 and Genious7 [28].Analysis of codon compositionAnalysis of the codon composition of the examined strains isolated from black grouse have been indicated.ResultsThe FAdV-infected bird crouched, had ruffled feathers, and was often apathetic, somnolescent, depressed, and presented with signs of sporadic nervousness. An autopsy revealed a pale, swollen, and friable liver with petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages.CEK culturesIn the third passage, the first CPEs were observed about 24−36 hours post-infection. These infected cells were bigger, rounder, and more granulocytic than non-infected CEK cells. During the subsequent few days, the number of cells exhibiting CPEs increased and the cells formed foci. When CPE was present in 80% of the cells, supernatant was collected and added to the subsequent cell passages in order to maintain the presence of the viral strain for a total of three passages (Fig 1A–1D). Testing of the internal organ samples derived from the black grouse confirmed the presence of adenovirus, which successfully propagated in CEK cultures, causing visible CPEs characteristic of FAdV infection. CEK cultures were also tested for other agents commonly found in poultry flocks, and the obtained results were negative.10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.g001Fig 1A-D. Characterization of FAdV strain growth in CEK cells. Observations of CPE formation were observed at 96 h after inoculation (h.p.i.) with the 3rd passage of FAdVs strains. The TCID50 of the strains were between 103.5/ml to 105.0/ml in the CEK cultures. A) Negative control, non-infected CEK cultures. B) Positive control, CEK cultures infected with adenovirus strain FAdV-2/D (Charles River, US) in doses of 105.0TCID50, C) adenovirus strain MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L, 2/11/D (black grouse), and D) adenovirus strain MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B, 2/11/D (black grouse).TCID50 determinationThe TCID50 of the examined strains in CEK cultures were determined using the third passage. The TCID50 of the Grp I FAdV-2/11/D strain was 105.0 TCID50/0.1 ml, while the MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L strain had a TCID50 of 103.5 TCID50/0.1 ml.IFA Immunofluorescence effect determinationAfter CPE was observed, the strains were examined by IFA, and positive results were obtained for both the Grp I FAdV-2/11D and MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L strains. Characteristic fluorescence with different gradations, depending on the CPE changes, was observed. No fluorescence was observed in uninfected CEKs. The IFA of the MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L strain is shown in (Fig 2A–2D).10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.g002Fig 2A-D. IFA. Assay showing the cytopathic effect of adenovirus strain MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L, IIIp. at 96 h.p.i. B) Immunofluorescence in CEK cultures infected with adenovirus strain MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L, IIIp. at 96 h.p.i., with cell nuclei stained blue. C) Immunofluorescence in CEK cultures infected with adenovirus strain MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L, IIIp. at 96 h.p.i. D) CEF SPF, uninfected NC- negative control.Real-time PCRThe DNA products with characteristic curves indicating the presence of the hexon gene were sequenced and analyzed.Phylogenetic analysisAdditionally, twelve reference sequences of adenovirus strains were compared with six adenovirus sequences obtained from poultry flocks in Poland and six strain sequences obtained from black grouse. The results presented here were analyzed for correctness of sequencing. Molecular analysis was performed by aligning the nucleotide sequences of the amplified fragments from the hexon gene with the reference sequences obtained from the GenBank database (NCBI). The reference strains which were used for the analysis are as follows: (AC_000014) 1/A strain, (KC493646) 5/B 340, (HE608152) KR 5, (KT717889) C2B DNA, (KT862805) 2 strain 685, (KT862807) 3 strain SR 49, (AC_000013) D complete genome sequence, (KT862812) 11 strain 380, (KT862808) 6 strain CR 119, (KT862809), (KT862810) 7 strain YR 36, (KT862811) 8b strain 764. The phylogenetic tree is presented in (Fig 3).10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.g003Fig 3Phylogenetic analysis of the black grouse adenovirus strains.The tree is based on derived amino acid sequences of the Loop L1 region of the hexon gene. Adenovirus strains isolated from black grouse are represented using the designations JSN-G033-18-B, JSN-G033-18-L, JSN-G033-18-S, JSN-G033-18-J, JSN-G033-18-G, JSN-G033-18-K. The field strains are indicated with numbers. The tree was rooted by the reference strains, indicated by their accession numbers and type designation.Evolutionary distancesThe sequences were calculated based on the evolutionary distances and bootstrapping using 1,000 replicates. On the basis of this analysis, the relationships between the examined adenovirus strains were determined (Fig 4), as well as the heterogeneity of examined adenovirus strain sequences have been indicated in yellow (Fig 5). The sequence identity with the closest related reference strain was used for future characterization. Designed and degenerated primers were crucial to this study and have become valuable for the determination of FAdV type/species. In our study, the percentage of similarity between the reference and examined strains was 93%. The detected JSN-G033-18/D strain from several organs is closely related to the reference 2/D strain. It is significant that the virus detected in black grouse has not previously been reported in this species in Poland and, based on the molecular analysis, is strictly related/similar to poultry strains. These data indicate the possibility of interspecies transmission.10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.g004Fig 4Pair wise distance with overall mean distance designed as 2.189.10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.g005Fig 5Heterogeneity of examined adenovirus strain sequences are indicated in grey.Analysis of codon compositionAnalysis of the codon composition of the examined strains are presented in (Fig 6).10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.g006Fig 6*Analysis of codon composition of the examined strains isolated from black grouse are indicated in grey.Total—number of nucleotides of tested strain sequences, number of nucleotides in the sequences tested in the first, second and third codon positions, respectively.Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU)T (U), thymine (uracyl); C, cytosine; A, adenine; G, guanine. Nucleotide occurrence in the examined region of the L1 loop and in the first (T-1, C-1, A-1, G-1), second (T-2, C-2, A-2, G-2), and third (T-3, C-3, A-3, G-3) positions of the codon were determined and are presented in Fig 7. The Relative Synonymous Codon Usage for the examined Fowl adenovirus D species is also presented. All frequencies are averages over all taxa, with the value of average codons = 6155. Synonymous codons are indicated in colours. The colour intensity indicates how highly an amino acid is preferred in a particular position amongst examined adenovirus sequences. Deeper colours are used for the preferable codons.10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.g007Fig 7All frequencies are averages over all taxa.Average# codons = 6155. RSCU for FAdVs. Analysis of the number of successive codons and relative synonymous codon usage. Synonymous codons are indicated by. The color intensity indicates how highly an amino acid is preferred in a particular position amongst each species. More intense colors are used for the preferable codons.Tajima’s testThe quality of evolutionary rate between sequences A (MT478054, JSN-G-033-18-L) and B (MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B) was determined, with sequence C (JSN-G033-18-S) used as an outgroup, in Tajima’s relative rate test Tajima, 1993 [29]. The χ2 test statistic was 580.00 (P = 0.00000 with 1 degree of freedom). A P-value less than 0.05 is often used to reject the null hypothesis of equal rates between lineages. The analysis involved 3 nucleotide sequences. Codon positions included were 1st+2nd+3rd+Noncoding. All positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated. There were a total of 797 positions in the final dataset. Evolutionary analyses were conducted in MEGA7 [30], and are presented in Table 1. Models with the lowest Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) scores are presented in Table 2. Our findings indicate that the adenovirus strain isolated from liver, spleen, intestine, gizzard, and kidney is the same strain as (GenBank Accession number MT478054); however, the adenovirus strain isolated from the brain sample (GenBank Accession number MT478055) has some mutations, as indicated in Tajima’s test (Table 1).10.1371/journal.pone.0234532.t001Table 1Results from the Tajima’s test for 3 adenovirus black grouse sequences.ConfigurationCountIdentical sites in all three sequences217Divergent sites in all three sequences0Unique differences in Sequence A0Unique differences in Sequence B580Unique differences in Sequence C010.1371/journal.pone.0234532.t002Table 2Maximum likelihood indicated in 24 different nucleotide sequences of the examined strains, with their substitutions indicated.ModelParametersBICAICclnL(+I)(+G)Rƒ(A)ƒ(T)ƒ(C)ƒ(G)r(AT)r(AC)r(AG)r(TA)r(TC)r(TG)r(CA)R(CT)R(CG)rGArGTrGCT92+G4831659.94831290.417-15597.065n/a4.690.730.2330.2330.2670.2670.0670.0770.1130.0670.1130.0770.0670.0990.0770.0990.0670.077HKY+G5031666.27331281.358-15590.523n/a4.640.730.2330.2320.2550.2790.0670.0730.1180.0670.1080.0800.0670.0990.0800.0990.0670.073T92+G+I4931669.65231669.652-15597.0650.004.690.730.2330.2330.2670.2670.0670.0770.1130.0670.1130.0770.0670.0990.0770.0990.0670.077TN93+G5131675.77431695.774-15590.421n/a4.640.730.2320.2320.2550.2790.2670.0740.1220.0670.1050.0800.0670.0960.0800.1020.0670.074HKY+G+I5131675.97731675.977-15590.5230.004.640.730.2320.2320.2550.2790.2670.0730.1180.0670.1080.0800.0670.0990.0800.0990.0670.073TN93+G+I5231685.47931685.479-15590.4210.004.640.730.2320.2320.2550.2790.2670.0740.1220.0670.1050.0800.0670.0960.0800.1020.0670.074K2+G4731693.42031693.420-15618.653n/a4.690.720.2500.2500.2500.2500.2670.0730.1050.0730.1050.0730.0730.1050.0730.1050.0730.073GTR+G5431695.42031695.420-15585.687n/a4.500.740.2320.2320.2550.2790.0700.0570.1220.0700.1050.0950.0520.0960.0800.1020.0790.073K2+G+I4831703.12431703.124-15618.6530.004.690.720.2500.2500.2500.2500.0730.0730.1050.0730.1050.0730.0730.1050.0730.1050.0730.073GTR+G+I5531705.12531705.125-15585.6870.004.500.740.2320.2320.2550.2790.0700.0570.1220.0700.1050.0950.0520.0960.0800.1020.0790.073JC+G4631707.46531707.465-15630.528n/a5.180.500.2500.2500.2500.2500.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.083JC+G+I4731717.17031717.170-15630.5280.005.180.500.2500.2500.2500.2500.0830.0830.0830.0830.1110.0850.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.083T924731740.75231740.752-15642.319n/an/a0.710.2330.2330.2670.2670.0680.0780.1110.0680.1060.0780.0680.0970.0780.0970.0680.078HKY4931748.71031748.710-15636.594n/an/a0.710.2320.2320.2550.2790.0680.0750.1160.0680.1110.0820.0680.0960.0820.0970.0680.075T92+I4831750.46331750.463-15642.3220.00n/a0.710.2320.2330.2670.2670.0680.0780.1110.0680.1050.0780.0680.0970.0780.0970.0680.078TN935031758.37231758.372-15636.572n/an/a0.710.2320.2320.2550.2790.0680.0750.1170.0680.1060.0820.0680.0950.0820.0980.0680.075HKY+I5031758.42031758.420-15636.5960.00n/a0.700.2320.2320.2550.2790.0680.0750.1160.0680.1030.0820.0680.0960.0820.0970.0680.075TN93+I5131768.85031768.850-15636.9590.00n/a0.700.2320.2320.2550.2790.0680.0750.1160.0690.1030.0820.0690.0940.0820.0970.0680.075K24631775.04031775.040-15664.315n/an/a0.700.2500.2500.2500.2500.0740.0750.1030.0740.1050.0740.0740.1030.0740.1030.0740.074GTR5331780.20031780.200-15632.930n/an/a0.700.2320.2320.2550.2790.0660.0650.1170.0660.0830.1020.0590.0950.0760.0970.0850.069JC4531781.01731781.017-15672.156n/an/a0.500.2500.2500.2500.2500.0830.0830.0830.0830.1030.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.083K2+I4731784.76131784.761-15664.3230.00n/a0.700.2500.2500.2500.2500.0740.0740.1030.0740.1050.0740.0740.1030.0740.1030.0740.074GTR+I5431789.91931789.919-15632.9370.00n/a0.700.2320.2320.2550.2790.0660.0650.1170.0660.1050.1020.0590.0950.0760.0970.0850.069JC+I4631790.72731790.727-15672.1590.00n/a0.500.2500.2500.2500.2500.0830.0830.1030.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.0830.083Maximum likelihoodModels with the lowest BIC scores (Bayesian Information Criterion) are considered to describe best substitution pattern. For each model, AICc value (Akaike Information Criterion, corrected), Maximum Likelihood value (lnL), and the number of parameters (including branch lengths) are also presented by Nei, 2000 [27] Non-uniformity of evolutionary rates among sites may be modelled by using a discrete Gamma distribution (+G) with 5 rate categories and by assuming that a certain fraction of sites are evolutionarily invariable (+I). Whenever applicable, estimates of gamma shape parameter and/or the estimated fraction of invariant sites are shown. Assumed or estimated values of transition/transversion bias (R) are shown for each model, as well. They are followed by nucleotide frequencies (f) and rates of base substitutions (r) for each nucleotide pair. Relative values of instantaneous r should be considered when evaluating them. For simplicity, sum of r values is made equal to 1 for each model. For estimating ML values, a tree topology was automatically prepared (Fig 3). The analysis involved 24 nucleotide sequences. Codon positions included were 1st+2nd+3rd+Noncoding. All positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated. There were a total of 683 positions in the final dataset. Evolutionary analyses were conducted in MEGA7, and previously presented by Kumar, 2016 [30] and presented in Table 2.Discussion and conclusionsPrevious studies indicate that adenovirus strains have been detected in various wild bird species [19, 21, 24], suggesting that adenoviruses can easily cross the species barrier with minimal changeability and limited morbidity [16, 23, 31]. We hypothesized that some wild bird species may serve as an adenovirus reservoir in the wild, and may be well adapted to these hosts.The isolation of poultry adenovirus strains from wild birds, to which they have adapted, suggests that these strains are constantly evolving and changing at the molecular level. For example, three FAdV types (2/3/11) belonging to species Fowl adenovirus D were detected in three mute swans (Cygnus olor), three wild ducks (Anas platyrhynchos), one owl (Strigiformes), and one common wood pigeon (Columba palumbus) [24]. It is important to keep in mind that direct or indirect transmission between wild and domestic species is not common but is possible [24]. The adenovirus species D identified in this work was also identified in a previous study [24]. Further, all of the type/species strains indicated are specific to various lesions in domestic birds, and replicate prolifically. There is evidence that some types of FAdVs are more virulent than others and are able to infect different species [17, 19, 23]. Adenoviruses identified in three smooth-billed and were determined to be of genus Aviadenovirus, and had the highest pairwise amino acid sequence identity with AdV isolated from pigeons. In addition, adenoviruses identified in a tropical screech owl clustered into genus Atadenovirus, and shared 80% identity with the AdV-1 isolated from lizards [18]. The results obtained by Jejesky de Oliveira and colleagues indicate an enhanced risk of viral spread and host changes. Two novel adenovirus strains, atadenovirus and siadenovirus, were detected in the droppings of long-tailed finches (Poephila acuticauda). These results support the hypothesis that these viruses can cross the species barrier [32].Persistent infections can occur in birds with minor clinical consequences; however, immune suppression can mediate adenovirus reactivation, resulting in clinical manifestation and disease development by Yang, 2019.Novel DNA sequences identified from four of the adenovirus genera (Aviadenovirus, Atadenovirus, Siadenovirus, and Mastadenovirus) have important implications for our understanding of adenovirus history and evolution [33].The ability of avian adenoviruses to cause infection in actively shedding birds indicates that these viruses can infect a range of species and dissemination of these viruses is more extensive than previously thought. Further, it also suggests that interspecies transmission is possible and the full spectrum of species susceptible to PsAV-2 remains unknown [32].Poland has a great diversity of wildlife and is considered to be a hotspot for novel viruses. The prevalence of fowl adenoviruses in wild and domestic birds are provided. Under this hypothesis, the transmission of infectious agents between domestic and wild birds is possible, and interestingly the level of pathogenicity varies among strains and species. The full extent of FAdV diversity is still under investigation, but adenoviruses do have the ability to cause subclinical infections and exhibit extensive diversity in birds. There are many FAdV genome variants which have been isolated and sequenced. The more species that are sequenced, the more knowledge we will have about these viruses and their evolution, which will shine a light on the overall process of adenovirus evolution.Our findings support a need for further research focused on receptors, host tropism, and inter-species transmission, which are areas where knowledge is lacking. We propose that adenoviruses that have adapted in wild birds could serve as a reservoir for domestic birds. Our work may inspire a scientific debate concerning cross-species viral infection, evolution, and transmission. Full sequences of newly described FAdV type/species strains are crucial in filling the numerous gaps in our current understanding of viral diseases and their evolution. Future research will aim to replicate clinical changes in chickens infected by adenovirus strains MT 478054, JSN-G033-18-L and MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B SPF.Based on real-time PCR, CPE analysis, and IFA, the examined virus strains were identified as fowl adenoviruses. The molecular analysis indicated they belonged to the type/species 2/11/D designation, and further experiments were conducted to determine their relationship to other adenovirus field and reference strains. Similar results were obtained by Marek, et al. [34], where phylogenetic analyses and determination of G+C content support the division of the genus Aviadenovirus into the currently recognized species. Data also suggest that strain SR48 should be classified as FAdV-11 instead of FAdV-2 [34].In conclusion, our data indicate that individuals can transmit adenovirus strains, suggesting an intermediate immune response, which may differ across bird species. Future work should integrate these findings into studies of long-term survival by investigating how the viruses can interact with and adapt to the immune system. The main finding of our work is that adenovirus strains that mainly exist in poultry can also adapt in black grouse. Additionally, we examined the mode of transmission and evolution for this particular virus strain. The findings of our study suggest that the MT478054, JSN-G033-18-L and MT478055, JSN-G033-18-B strains may be reflected more broadly in adenovirus ecology. We postulate that these strains circulate within particular taxonomic groups (poultry and black grouse). This is the first identification of fowl adenovirus strains 2/11/D in black grouse in Poland. Our results indicate that reassortant viruses circulating in domestic birds may cause clinical disease in black grouse. Our investigation provides a window into the ecological dynamics of adenovirus infections, revealing that FAdV strains have the potential to circulate widely throughout wild bird species, and in particular have revealed a new taxonomic group of hosts. In the future, it will be crucial to identify new adenovirus type/species in various animal species in order to characterize new variants and their properties, variability, interspecies transmission, and evolution.Supporting informationS1 File(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Different Dynamic Distribution in Chickens and Ducks of the Hypervirulent, Novel Genotype Fowl Adenovirus Serotype 4 Recently Emerged in China

IntroductionAdenoviruses, family Adenoviridae, are non-enveloped and double-stranded DNA viruses (Stewart et al., 1993). The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (Harrach and Kaján, 2011) separates the Adenoviridae into five genera: Mastadenovirus, Aviadenovirus, Siadenovirus, Atadenovirus, and Ichtadenovirus. Fowl adenoviruses, members of the genus Aviadenovirus, are further separated into either five species (designated FAdV-A to FAdV-E) based largely on molecular criteria and restriction enzyme digest pattern or twelve serotypes (designated FAdV-1 to 8a and -8b to 11) based on the results of serum cross-neutralization tests (Hess, 2000). The FAdVs are associated with several notable diseases in chickens and other birds, such as inclusion body hepatitis (IBH), hepatitis-hydropericardium syndrome (HHS), and gizzard erosion (GE) (Domanska-Blicharz et al., 2011; Marek et al., 2012).Hydropericardium-hepatitis syndrome was first reported in Pakistan in 1987 (Khawaja et al., 1988), and subsequent outbreaks have also been reported worldwide in recent years, including in America, Mexico, Hungary, Poland, Peru, Ecuador, Chile, Japan, Korea, India, and China, resulting in significant economic losses to the poultry industry (Hess et al., 1999; Griffin and Nagy, 2011; Grgić et al., 2013; Kaján et al., 2013; Niczyporuk, 2016). HHS appears with high frequency in chickens, particularly in broilers, with a mortality that ranges from 10 to 100% (Vera-Hernández et al., 2016; Pan et al., in press). However, the disease has rarely emerged in other hosts with severe clinical signs and high mortality. Fowl adenovirus serotype 4 (FAdV-4) plays a primary role in the etiology of HHS based on epidemiological studies, and many hypervirulent strains have been isolated from cases of HHS (Vera-Hernández et al., 2016; Ye et al., 2016; Pan et al., in press). For diagnosis of FAdVs infection, several routine PCR methods have been reported based on serotype-specific hexon gene (Steer et al., 2009; Kaján et al., 2013) and a SYBR Green based real-time PCR within 52K gene was developed for detection and quantitation of all FAdV species (Günes et al., 2012). However, a sensitive serotype 4 specific quantitate PCR has not been available and urgently needed for diagnosis and deeper investigation of FAdV-4, especially the emerged novel FAdV-4.Since June 2015, severe outbreaks of HHS with high mortalities from 30 to 100% have emerged in several different areas of China. Many hypervirulent FAdV-4 strains have been isolated and identified from different cases, and a reproduction experiment revealed high mortality in SPF chickens (Zhao et al., 2015; Li H. et al., 2016; Niu et al., 2016). Given the complete genome sequence analysis, Chinese hypervirulent FAdV-4 strains show many new characters, such as the natural large deletions of ORF19 and ORF27, and are identified as a novel genotype (Li L. et al., 2016; Liu et al., 2016; Ye et al., 2016). Although many studies on chicken origin FAdV-4 have been conducted, less is known about the duck origin FAdV-4 (Chen et al., 2016). In this study, a new, FAdV-4-specific real-time PCR was developed and applied to detect the dynamic distribution of a duck origin FAdV-4 in experimentally infected SPF chickens and ducks, which revealed different replication patterns of the novel FAdV-4 between chickens and ducks, helping to further understand the pathogenicity and transmission mechanism between different hosts.Materials and MethodsEthics StatementThe animal experiments with chickens and ducks were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Harbin Veterinary Research Institute (Harbin, China) and performed in accordance with the ‘Guidelines for Experimental Animals’ of the Ministry of Science and Technology (Beijing, China). All SPF chickens and ducks were cared for in accordance with humane procedures.VirusDuck origin FAdV-4 (HLJDAd15) was isolated from the field in 2015 in Heilongjiang Province, China (Pan et al., in press), and is a novel genotype of FAdV-4 based on the complete genome sequence (GenBank No. KX538980).Animal InfectionForty of each 1-day-old specific pathogen free (SPF) chickens and ducks were purchased from the Experimental Animal Center of Harbin Veterinary Research Institute (HVRI) of the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS), China. Thirty SPF chickens and ducks were orally inoculated with 103.0 ELD50 doses of the homogenates of HLJDAd15 in 0.2 ml of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at 35 days old, whereas the 10 other SPF chickens and ducks served as negative controls. The challenged and control groups were separately housed in different negative-pressure isolators and monitored daily for 30 days.Sample CollectionAt 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, 21, 28, 35, and 42 days post infection (dpi), three infected birds and one control bird were sacrificed by intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital. Tissue samples of heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, thymus, bursa, caecal tonsi, proventriculus, and rectum were collected. The homogenates of 10 to 100 mg of tissue samples in 200 μl of PBS were subjected to DNA extraction or stored at -80°C. Three serum samples were also collected at each dpi and stored at -80°C until used for antibody assays.Viral DNA ExtractionThe viral DNA of tissue samples was extracted from the tissue homogenates using a DNeasy Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, whereas the positive DNA or proviral DNA of FAdV-1, Marek’s disease virus (MDV) (Lv et al., 2016), chicken infectious anaemia virus (CAV) (Wang et al., 2017), avian gyrovirus 2 (AGV2) (Yao et al., 2017), reticuloendotheliosis virus (REV) (Jiang et al., 2013), and avian leukosis virus subgroup A, B, and J (ALV-A, ALV-B, ALV-J) (Gao et al., 2014) were maintained in our laboratory.Routine PCRThe primers used in this study to detect the genotype of FAdV were designed based on the L1 region of the Hexon gene (FAd-F: 5′-AACTTCGACCCCATGTCGCGTCAGG-3′ and FAd-R: 5′-TGGCGAAAGGCGTACGGAAGTAAGC-3′). The PCR products were subjected to electrophoresis in a 1% (w/v) agarose gel. The PCR procedure consisted of an initial incubation for 5 min at 95°C; 35 cycles of 30 s at 95°C, annealing for 60 s at 55°C, and extension for 60 s at 72°C; and a final extension for 5 min at 72°C.Real-Time PCRReal-time PCR was performed with a LightCycler 480 real-time thermocycler (Roche Instrument Center, Switzerland). The primers were designed based on the FAdV-4 specific L1 region of the Hexon gene (Ganesh et al., 2001; Steer et al., 2009; Park et al., 2017) as follow: forward primer 5′-CAGTTCATTTCCGCCACC-3′ and reverse primer 5′-GCAGCCGTTGAGCCTTTT-3′. The relative TaqMan probe was a 23 bp oligonucleotide, 5′FAM-TCTGTCGTGACATTTCGGGTGGG-3′TAMRA, which was labeled with FAM at the 5′ end and TAMRA at the 3′ end. The reactions were conducted with a predenaturation step at 95°C for 5 min and amplification for 40 cycles at a melting temperature of 95°C for 10 s and an elongation at 65°C for 40 s (Qin et al., 2013; Gaudreault et al., 2015). The fluorescent signal was collected during the elongation step. A 341 bp fragment of the L1 region of Hexon was cloned into the pEASY-T1 vector (TransGen, Beijing, China) to prepare a standard recombinant plasmid pAD341. Serial dilutions of the standard plasmid from 1 × 101 to 1 × 1011 copies/μl were used to produce a standard curve.HistopathologyTissue samples were fixed in 10% formalin for 48 h at room temperature (RT), and then routinely processed, embedded in paraffin wax, and cut into 5-μm sections. The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and examined using light microscopy.Antibody ProductionAntisera against the viral isolate HLJFAd15 were collected from 5-week-old SPF chickens at 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, 21, 28, 35, and 42 days post infection. Serum samples were tested for FAdV-specific antibodies using a commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kit (BioChek, Scarborough, ME, United States).ResultsDevelopment of Real-Time PCRTo generate a standard curve for the real-time PCR, the standard recombinant plasmid pAD341 was serially diluted from 1 × 101 to 1 × 1011 copies/μl, and the serial-diluted plasmids were detected by the real-time PCR assay. Threshold cycle values (CT) were plotted against the known copy numbers of the standard controls. The good correlation (error = 0.085, efficiency = 2.152) between CT values and copy numbers is shown in Figure 1A.FIGURE 1Establishment of the sensitive, FAdV-4-specific real-time PCR. (A) Standard curve of the real-time PCR. The standard plasmid was serially diluted from 1 × 101 to 1 × 1011 copies/μl, and a good correlation (error = 0.085, efficiency = 2.152) between CT values and copy numbers was produced. (B) Specificity of the real-time PCR for FAdV-4. Red curves (HLJDAd15 and 11 other FAdV-4 isolates identified by routine PCR) were considered positive, and green curves (FAdV-1, MDV, CAV, AGV2, REV, ALV-A, ALV-B, and ALV-J) were considered negative. (C,D) Sensitivity of the real-time PCR. The detection limit of the real-time PCR (101 copies/μl) was at least 10-fold higher than that of routine PCR (above 102 copies/μl).Specificity of Real-Time PCRViral DNA from 11 chicken origin and 1 duck origin FAdV-4 isolates was subjected to the established real-time PCR and was well detected, whereas fluorescent signals from viral DNA of FAdV-1, MDV, CAV, and AGV2 and proviral DNA of REV, ALV-A, ALV-B, and ALV-J were not detected, indicating the specificity of the real-time PCR for FAdV-4 (Figure 1B).Sensitivity of Real-Time PCRThe sensitivity of the real-time PCR was compared with that of routine PCR. The recombinant plasmid pAD341 was used as a template. The results showed that the detection limit of the real-time PCR established in this study was fewer than 101 copies/μl (Figure 1C), whereas the detection limit of routine PCR was more than 102 copies/μl (Figure 1D), demonstrating that the sensitivity of our real-time PCR was at least 10-fold higher than that of routine PCR.Dynamic Distribution in SPF Chickens of HLJDAd15For chickens in the experimentally infected group, 1 chicken and 2 chickens died on 3 and 5 dpi, respectively. The dead chickens showed severe hydropericardium and IBH. The dynamic distributions of the duck origin FAdV-4 in different tissues of SPF chickens were detected by real-time PCR (Figure 2A). The virus DNA was detectable throughout the experiment, and the peak of virus replication appeared at 5 dpi in all tissues except in caecal tonsi with the peak at 3 dpi. After 14 dpi, the concentration of virus in all tissues decreased and remained at a low level without another replication peak until 42 dpi at the end of the experiment. The highest number of virus copies in different tissues was compared among the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, thymus, bursa, proventriculus, and rectum at 5 dpi and in the caecal tonsi at 3 dpi (Figure 2B). The virus loads in all tissues were higher than 105 copies mg-1, with the concentration in livers significantly higher (p < 0.01) than that in any other tissue. All chickens in the control group were alive and healthy at the end of the experiment, and viral DNA was not detected by either routine PCR or the real-time PCR.FIGURE 2Dynamic distribution of the novel FAdV-4 in experimentally infected SPF chickens. (A) One replication peak occurred in the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, thymus, bursa, proventriculus, and rectum at 5 dpi and in caecal tonsi at 3 dpi. (B) The peak concentration of virus replication in the liver was significantly higher than that in other tissues (∗∗p < 0.01).Histopathology in Different TissuesTissues of the heart, liver, spleen, kidney, thymus, and bursa of chickens in different groups were collected 5 days post challenge and fixed, cut into sections, and stained with HE (Figure 3). Generally, there was no significant histopathology damages presented in chickens of control group, while massive pathological damages were observed in various tissues of chickens in infection group: degeneration, vacuolar necrosis and basophilic inclusion bodies presented in liver cells (Figure 3D); large numbers of vacuolar necrosis showed in kidney cells (Figure 3J); large numbers of macrophages proliferation and cortical lymphocyte depletion appeared in thymus (Figure 3L); severe reduction and necrosis of lymphocytes showed in spleen (Figure 3F) and bursa (Figure 3N).FIGURE 3Histopathology in tissues from dead chickens inoculated with HLJDAd15. Tissues in infection and control groups were collected, fixed, cut into sections, and stained with HE. Generally, there was no significant histopathology damages presented in the heart (A), liver (C), spleen (E), lung (G), kidney (I), thymus (K), and bursa (M) of chickens in control group, while massive pathological damages were observed in various tissues of chickens in infection group: (D) degeneration, vacuolar necrosis and basophilic inclusion bodies presented in liver cells; (J) large numbers of vacuolar necrosis showed in kidney cells; (L) large numbers of macrophages proliferation and cortical lymphocyte depletion appeared in thymus; severe reduction and necrosis of lymphocytes showed in spleen (F) and bursa (N); no significant differences were observed in heart (B) and lung (H) compared with the control group.Dynamic Distribution in SPF Ducks of HLJDAd15All ducks in both experimentally infected and control groups remained alive and did not show visible clinical signs by 42 dpi at the end of the experiment. The dynamic changes of HLJDAd15 in different tissues of SPF ducks were detected by real-time PCR (Figure 4A). The virus DNA was detectable throughout the experiment, and two peaks of virus replication appeared at 7 and 21 dpi (28 dpi for spleen). The virus copy peaks at both 7 dpi (Figure 4B) and 21 dpi (Figure 4C) in the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, thymus, bursa, proventriculus, rectum and caecal tonsi were analyzed. The results showed that the virus concentrations in all tissues were between 102 and 105 copies mg-1 tissue, with the exceptions of concentrations higher than 105 in livers at 7 dpi and lower than 102 in spleens from 5 dpi. Furthermore, the trends between the two virus replication peaks in the different tissues were similar.FIGURE 4Dynamic distribution of the novel FAdV-4 in experimentally infected SPF ducks. (A) Double replication peaks occurred in the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, thymus, bursa, caecal tonsi, proventriculus, and rectum at 7 and 21 dpi. The peak concentrations of virus replication at 7 dpi (B) and 21 dpi (C) were compared, and the virus load in the spleen at both times was significantly lower than that in other tissues (∗∗p < 0.01).Comparison of Virus Concentrations between Chickens and DucksBased on the dynamic distributions of the duck origin FAdV-4, the virus replications in different tissues of SPF chickens and ducks were compared at 5 dpi (Figure 5A), 7 dpi (Figure 5B), and 21 dpi (Figure 5C), respectively. The results showed that the virus copies in different tissues of chickens were significantly higher (p < 0.01) than ducks at 5 dpi, when the unique replication peak showed in chickens. However, the virus concentrations in chickens rapidly decreased after 5 dpi and lower than ducks at 21 dpi, when the second replication peak appeared in ducks. Moreover, the peak concentrations in different tissues of different hosts were also analyzed (Figure 5D). The data showed that the virus peak concentrations in all tissues of chickens were significantly higher (p < 0.01) than those at both peaks in ducks, and particularly in the liver, heart, spleen, lung, thymus, bursa, and caecal tonsi, the virus copies were 100-fold higher in chickens than in ducks. Notably, the highest concentration of more than 108 copies mg-1 in livers was significantly higher (p < 0.01) than that in any other tissues in chickens and ducks at any other times, and the concentration of virus copies in the spleen of ducks was significantly lower (p < 0.01) than that in other tissues of ducks.FIGURE 5Comparison of Virus Peak Concentration between Chickens and Ducks. The peak concentrations of duck origin FAdV-4 showed at 5 dpi in SPF chickens and 7 and 21 dpi in SPF ducks. The comparisons of virus titres between chickens and ducks at 5 dpi (A), 7 dpi (B), and 21 dpi (C) were separately analyzed. Furthermore, the highest virus titres in chickens at 5 dpi and in ducks at 7 and 21 dpi were compared (D). The peak concentrations of FAdV-4 in all tissues of chickens were significantly higher (∗∗p < 0.01) than those in ducks. The highest concentration was in the livers of chickens (∗∗p < 0.01), whereas the lowest concentration of virus copies appeared in the spleens of ducks (∗∗p < 0.01).Antibody ProductionAn antibody response of SPF chickens and ducks against FAdV was detected at 10 different times (Figure 6) post infection. The FAdV-specific antibody response was negative in all control birds at all times. From 7 dpi, the antibody titres of chickens continued to increase until reaching a peak at 35 dpi and then began to decrease to 42 dpi. The antibody titres of ducks were completely different from those of chickens and increased from 7 dpi, with the first peak 3 weeks earlier than that of chickens at 14 dpi and the second one at 35 dpi. The peak antibody titre was almost equal between chickens and ducks.FIGURE 6Antibody responses of experimentally infected SPF chickens and ducks. The dynamic curves of antibody response showed only one peak in chickens (Blue curve) but two peaks in ducks (Red curve), and the peak in chickens occurred later than the early peak of ducks and approximately at the same time as the late peak in ducks. All birds in the control groups showed negative antibody responses.DiscussionThe HHS associated with FAdV-4 infection has emerged since 2015 and is reported in different provinces of China, inducing huge economic losses for poultry production (Li H. et al., 2016; Niu et al., 2016). The FAdV-4 that caused a recent epidemic in China was isolated and characterized as a novel genotype of FAdV-4 (Liu et al., 2016; Ye et al., 2016). Although many studies have been conducted on virus isolation, characterization and pathogenicity to chickens of the novel FAdV-4, less is known about the replicator dynamics in vivo, which is critical for enclosing the pathogenesis of the emerged novel FAdV-4. As previous reported, Several routine PCR methods have been reported based on hexon gene (Steer et al., 2009; Kaján et al., 2013) and a SYBR Green based real-time PCR within 52K gene was developed for detection and quantitation of all FAdV species (Günes et al., 2012). However, a sensitive serotype 4 specific quantitate PCR has not been available and urgently needed for diagnosis and deeper investigation of the emerged novel FAdV-4. In this study, a novel TaqMan-based, FAdV-4-specific quantitative real-time PCR within serotype-specific hexon gene was developed and applied to detect the dynamic distribution of the novel FAdV-4 not only in chickens but also in ducks. The real-time PCR showed high specificity and sensitivity for FAdV-4, providing a helpful tool for intensive study of the emerged, novel virus.Chickens were usually considered to the most susceptible natural hosts, including broilers, layers, breeder broilers, but some other hosts were also the potential infection hosts for FAdVs, such as falcons have been reported as the natural host and primary reservoir for FAdV, although the FAdV was characterized as a novel species (Oaks et al., 2005; Schrenzel et al., 2005). The novel FAdV-4 recently emerged in China is hypervirulent to chickens (Niu et al., 2016), particularly broilers, and can be transmitted from chicken to chicken. However, less is reported on the pathogenicity of the novel FAdV-4 to ducks, with the exception that an intracerebral injection induces a mortality of 15% (Chen et al., 2016), although the infection route was not one of natural transmission. Furthermore, the transmission mechanism of novel FAdV-4 between different hosts is poorly understood. Therefore, we chose a duck origin strain HLJDAd15 to evaluate the pathogenicity and potential transmission route of the novel FAdV-4. The results of our study showed that the duck origin FAdV-4 induced severe HHS and a mortality of 10% to chickens, whereas no visible clinical signs and mortality were found in ducks. Moreover, the replication patterns in chickens and ducks were completely different. The virus persisted throughout the experiment in both chickens and ducks, but only one stronger replication peak was detected in chickens, whereas two mildly peaks were observed in ducks. Given the continuous virus shedding occurred in the infected ducks without visible clinical signs, ducks might be an intermediate host or natural virus reservoir of the novel FAdV-4. Thus, a new transmission mechanism from ducks to chickens was revealed, which might aggravate the outbreak of HHS in chickens. Furthermore, the antibody titres were highly negatively correlated with the virus replication, which suggested that the antibody might play a critical role in inhibiting the proliferation of the virus in vivo and might be a key index for evaluation of vaccine development; however, the detailed functions of the antibody in virus infection require further investigation.ConclusionHepatitis-hydropericardium syndrome has been caused by outbreaks of a novel genotype FAdV-4 across China since June 2015, but little is known about this novel FAdV-4. In this study, a new, sensitive and FAdV-4-specific real-time PCR was developed and applied to detect the dynamic distribution of a duck origin FAdV-4 in chickens and ducks. The novel virus showed completely different replication patterns and antibody response in different hosts, which provide a foundation for further clarification of the pathogenesis and the epidemic transmission mechanism of the novel FAdV-4.Author ContributionsXW and HC conceived and designed the experiments. QP, YY, ZS, and LL performed the experiments. QP and YY analyzed the data. CL and YZ contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools. QP wrote the paper. XQ and YG were involved in the interpretation of the results and critically read the manuscript.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Fowl Adenovirus Serotype 1: From Gizzard Erosion to Comprehensive Insights into Genome Organization, Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Prevention

1. IntroductionAmong the twelve serotypes of Fowl Adenovirus (FAdV), Fowl Adenovirus Serotype 1 (FAdV-1) occupies a noticeable position as it has been confirmed as the etiologic agent of Adenoviral Gizzard Erosion (AGE) following the epizootic outbreak in broiler flocks reported in western Japan in 1989 and 1999 [1]. AGE is a serious disease typically characterized by erosions and ulcerations of the gizzard mucosa, reducing flock performance [2]. Understanding the structural and molecular characteristics of FAdV-1, as well as its physicochemical properties and modes of transmission, is imperative for implementing effective control strategies and developing preventive measures to protect the health and productivity of farms. This review emphasizes the critical role of FAdV-1 as the etiological agent of AGE and provides an in-depth overview of the virus’s biology, genomic organization, epidemiology, and worldwide distribution, along with insights into its pathogenesis. We also examine recent advancements in molecular and serological techniques for FAdV-1 diagnosis and compare them to classical diagnostic methods. Finally, the review delves into vaccine strategies to prevent AGE. By shedding light on the multifaceted aspects of FAdV-1, we contribute to a better understanding of the virus and its associated disease, guiding efforts to manage AGE effectively within the poultry industry.2. Classification, Structure, and Physicochemical Properties of FAdV-1Fowl Adenoviruses are non-enveloped viruses that are medium-sized, typically measuring 70–90 nm in diameter. They belong to the Aviadenovirus genus within the Adenoviridae family [3,4]. The Aviadenovirus genus is categorized into five species—Fowl Adenovirus A to Fowl Aadenovirus E (FAdV-A to -E)—based on their distinctive profiles of restriction enzyme digestion [5], and twelve serotypes (FAdV-1-8a to 8b-11) using Viral Neutralization (VN) [6]. Several impactful poultry diseases, including AGE, Hepatitis-Hydropericardium Syndrome (HHS), and Inclusion Body Hepatitis (IBH), are associated with specific FAdV serotypes. AGE is caused by FAdV-1 [1,7,8], HHS is caused by Fowl Adenovirus Serotype 4 from species C [9,10], and FAdVs associated with IBH belongs to species D and E [11,12]. FAdV-1 is one of twelve FAdV serotypes grouped within species A, which is monoserotype. The FAdV-1 particle has a buoyant density of 1.35 g cm3 in cesium chloride (CsCl) and is composed of around 17.3% DNA and 80.7% protein [13]. Like other FAdVs, FAdV-1 is composed of ten major structural proteins and eleven non-structural ones [8,14]. These proteins are surrounded by hexameric and pentameric capsomeres arranged in a pattern of icosahedral symmetry [15]. The hexameric capsomer forms the icosahedral capsid’s facets, while the pentameric capsomere caps the vertices of the capsid. The latter comprises two different types of proteins: a penton base anchored in the capsid, and a fiber protein forming a direct complex with the penton protein. Two distinct-length proteins have been identified exclusively in FAdV-1, FAdV-4, and FAdV-10, which are attached to a single penton base [16,17,18]. According to [16], the long fiber (Fiber 1) of Chicken Embryo Lethal Orphan (CELO) is composed of 793 amino acids (aa), while the short fiber (Fiber 2) consists of 410 aa. In contrast, Fiber 1 of FAdV-4 consists of 431 aa, while Fiber 2 is composed of 479 aa [19].The virus is remarkably stable in storage and is insensitive to slightly acidic conditions, as well as to lipid solvents [13]. As a result, the virus resists a variety of common disinfectants and remains infectious in the environment for a long period of time. This suggests that the type of disinfectant and the techniques employed for building and equipment disinfection are crucial, particularly when AGE outbreaks reappear on specific farms.3. Genome Organization of FAdV-1FAdVs have the largest genomes among members of Adenoviridae family [4]. This property, plus the low pathogenicity of some FAdV serotypes, makes them attractive as recombinant vaccines or gene transfer vectors [20]. Overall, FAdV-1’s genome is very similar to that of other FAdV serotypes, showing a linear genome with a double-stranded DNA molecule of 43.8 kb, which is around 8 kb longer than the genomes of Human Adenoviruses of subgenus C Ad2 and Ad5 (35.9 kb) [21]. FAdV-1’s genome size is slightly different between strains (Reference Strain/CELO (43,804 kb), Strain/W-15 (43,849 kb), Strain/JM1/1 (43,809 kb), Strain/SVA16ALD002867 (43,856 kb)) [16] (Table 1). In addition, FAdV-1’s strains are known for their genetic stability and share over 99% nucleotide similarity [22]. Genetic diversity within FAdV-1 results mainly from the progressive accumulation of point mutations and indel mutations, mainly in the tandem repeats regions [23]. However, mutations resulting in amino-acid changes in the coding regions of FAdV-1 genomes are uncommon [22,24].The genome of FAdV-1, like other FAdV serotypes, is composed of multiple distinct regions that contain both coding and non-coding elements, which are essential for its replication and genome packaging. The coding regions of the genome include various open reading frames (ORFs), each with specific functions. These ORFs are organized from 5′ to 3′ as follows: ORF 0, ORF 1 (dUTPase homologous), ORF 1A, ORF 1B, ORF 1C, ORF 2, ORF 14, ORF 13, ORF 12, IVa2, pol, pTP, 52K, pIIIaIII (penton base), pVII, PX, pVI, Hexon, Protease, DBP, 100K, 33K, 22K, pVIII, Hexon, Fiber-1, Fiber-2, ORF22, ORF20A, ORF20, ORF8, ORF17, ORF16, ORF9, ORF10, ORF11, and ORF26 [25].The central part of the FAdV-1 genome, spanning from the IVa2 gene (at 5000 nt) to the fiber genes (at 33,000 nt), follows the same organization as Mastadenoviruses [14,16]. It encodes structural proteins such Hexon, Penton base, IIIa, Fiber1, Fiber 2, pVI, pVII, pVIII, and pTP as well as non-structural proteins including 100 kDa, 52 kDa proteins, and DNA Polymerase. Studies have reported that the FAdV-1 DNA Polymerase gene offers an alternative to the hexon gene, providing an interesting option for assessing phylogenetic variability and epidemiological relationships between FAdV-1 strains [26]. Surprisingly, the CELO strain genome has 5 kb at the left end and 15 kb at the right end, with no sequence similarity to the Ad2 early regions E1, E3, and E4, or the PV and PIX proteins [16]. This could be due to a possible rearrangement or inversion of the genome ends, making the classic E1, E3, and E4 regions undetectable [3].Like other adenoviruses, the FAdV-1 genome contains several non-coding regions, including the Inverted Terminal Repeats (ITRs) and the packaging sequence [16]. These regions are vital for the virus’s replication and genome packaging processes. The ITRs, located at the extremities of the genome, play a crucial role in ensuring proper replication and packaging of the viral genome. Interestingly, the ITRs of the CELO virus are relatively short compared to those of the human adenovirus HAdV-5 (54 bp vs. 103 bp, respectively) [27].The unconventional presence of G nucleotides at positions 1, 4, and 7 of the ITRs of some FAdV-1 isolates has been reported [28]. Strikingly, while most Aviadenovirus ITR sequences begin with 5′-CATCATC, an exception exists in avian adenovirus 1 (FAdV-1). The PHELPS isolates (GenBank accession no. U46933) [16] and KUR (GenBank accession no. M57604) are unique among Adenoviruses whose genomes begin with the 5′-GATGATG sequence. However, other FAdV-1 isolates, OTE (GenBank accession: K00939 and K00940), 61/11z (GenBank accession: KX247012), and W-15 (GenBank accession: KX247011), are distinct from PHELPS and KUR as they conform to the Ads convention and begin with the sequence 5′-CATCATC [2].4. Epidemiology of Adenoviral Gizzard ErosionThe first description of AGE associated with necrotizing pancreatitis was reported by [29]. This study was conducted on a natural outbreak affecting pullets aged 60 to 70 days, using immunohistochemistry and Electron Microscopy (EM) [29]. Subsequently, adenoviral lesions of the gizzard were observed in other studies involving pullets and broiler flocks in the United States [30], as well as in an outbreak with increased mortality among Japanese broilers [31], without specifying the responsible agent. However, following an outbreak of AGE in broiler chickens reported in western Japan between 1989 and 1999, FAdV-1 was characterized by PCR/RFLP for the first time as the etiological agent of AGE [1]. Although sporadic isolates of FAdV-8a, -8b, or -4 were isolated from affected gizzards [32], the majority of subsequent AGE outbreaks could be attributed to FAdV-1 [8]. The disease is not limited to Japan as it has been reported in other countries, particularly in Asian countries, including Korea [33], China [34], Malysia [26], Iran [35], Brunei [26], and India [36]. Moreover, the disease has also been detected in European countries, such as Italy [37], Germany [38], Denmark [26], Greece [26], Sweden [8], Poland [2], Hungary [39], Belgium [40], Slovakia [41], and Great Britain [7], as well as other countries, like Egypt [38] (Table 1).On the other hand, FAdV-1 has been isolated from a collection of healthy chicken samples from different countries including Indonesia, Ukraine, Canada, Morocco, Peru, USA, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Mexico, and Romania [26]. These isolates were not associated with AGE, as the chickens showed no clinical symptoms or gizzard lesions. The rapid spread of FAdV-1 is associated with its mode of transmission. FAdV-1 can be transmitted both vertically and horizontally. Horizontal transmission of the disease was documented in an experimental study conducted on 13-day-old SPF chickens, through direct contact with chickens inoculated with a pathogenic strain (99ZH) [42]. This type of transmission is related to the stability of the virus in the environment and its tolerance to cold, acids, leavening agents, and UV light. In addition, tolerance to the global changes in rearing systems, such as replacing traditional cage rearing systems with a barn system, also play an important role in the field epidemiology as the pathogen could be more easily distributed between flocks.In addition, vertical transmission has been highlighted as an essential pathway of FAdV-1 propagation [43]. In the early 1950s, the CELO virus was isolated from chicken embryos, which indicates that it is an endogenous virus transferred from the parent bird to the embryonated egg [44]. Subsequently, FAdV-1 was isolated from uninoculated fertile eggs and the virus reappeared in cell cultures prepared from vertically infected embryos [45]. This underlines the importance of the vertical transmission of FAdV-1. Parent birds can serve as a reservoir for the virus, from which FAdV-1 may be introduced into descendant flocks via transmission from embryonated eggs. In Germany, for the first time, FAdV-1 was directly detected in gizzard embryos and offspring from a seropositive broiler breeder, even in the presence of high levels of neutralizing antibodies [43]. In contrast, in Sweden, the virus was not identified in 277 embryo samples from parent birds with high levels of neutralizing antibodies [8].Geographically, AGE disease has mainly been described in broilers from Europe and Asia, causing enormous economic loss [24]. Although mortality has been observed in some broiler flocks [46], most documented AGE outbreaks have primarily resulted in problems such as growth retardation [8]. However, AGE outbreaks in laying hen flocks are accompanied by increased mortality, suggesting a significant impact on bird health and production [2] (Table 1).vetsci-12-00378-t001_Table 1Table 1Description of Adenoviral Gizzard Erosion Outbreaks associated with FAdV-1 in some countries.CountryYearProduction TypeAgeOrganClinical Symptoms/Pathological FindingsCo-InfectionDiagnosisIsolated Strain NameGenome Size
Access Number

Reference

Japan
1998–1999Broiler51 daysGizzard mucosa-No clinical signs.-2% to 3% mortality rate.NoneAGE99ZHNRLC504224.1[1]2000BroilersNRNR-Gizzard erosion.NoneAGEJM1/143,809MF168407[23]Korea2010Layer150 daysGizzard-Dullness, anorexia, and emaciation.-0.2% mortality rate per week.NoneAGEK181NRJN181575 Hg[33]Hungary2010Layer25 weeksGizzard-Gizzard ulcer and clotted blood in esophagus, proventriculus, and gizzard. NoneAGED1504/2/10/HU43,726OP985604[26]2010Layer22 daysGizzard-Clotted blood, gizzard ulcer and erosion.NoneAGED1552/10/HU43,801OP985605[26]2014Breeder6 weeksProventriculus-Gizzard ulcer, pancreas necrosis, enlarged liver.NoneAGED2604/2/14/HU43,841OP985621[26]2019Broiler4 weeksGizzard-Gizzard erosion and ulcer.MDV-1AGED4622/2/19/HU43,840OP985634[26]Brunei2010Layer27 weeksGizzard-Black vomit (clotted blood), gizzard erosion, severe congestion at proventriculum–gizzard junction.NoneAGED1499/3/10/BN43,817OP985603[26]Malaysia2011Broiler35 daysCecal tonsil-Swollen head, enlarged liver, ascites. -8% mortality rate.ReovirusAGED1726/1/2/11/MY43,794OP985608[26]2018Broiler23 daysProventriculus-Flabby proventriculus, gizzard erosion, high mortality.NoneAGED4182/18/MY43,882OP985630[26]China2019NRNRGizzard-No clinical signs.-No mortality.NoneAGECH/HNWC/1905NRMZ435837[34]Poland2011Laying hens38 weeksGizzard-Decreased egg weight and production.-2.3% mortality rate.NoneAGEWroclaw-15(W-15).43,849KX247011[2]2008BroilersNRProventriculus, gizzards, and intestines-Uneven growth, depression, and dull feathers.-No mortality.NoneAGEPL/068/08NRGU952109 Hg[24]2013Layer25 weeksGizzards, duodenum, and livers-No clinical signs.-0.4% mortality per week.NoneAGEPL/G018/13,NRKY027457 Hg[47]2013Layer25 weeksGizzards, duodenum, and livers-No clinical signs.-0.25% mortality per week.NoneAGEPL/G026/12NRKY027456[47]Great Britain2009–2016Replacement pullets and layers41 daysGizzard-No clinical signs.-0.12–0.30% mortality per week.NoneAGENRNRNR[7]Greece2014BroilerNRGizzard-No specific symptoms. NoneAGED2563/4/14/GR43,787OP985620[26]Germany2011Broilers19 weeksGizzard-Uneven growth.-No mortality.NoneAGE11/712743,795MK572848[43]2011Broilers15 to 36 daysGastric mucosa-Reduced daily weight gain.-Reduced feed intake, and lack of uniformity in flocks.-8% mortality.NoneAGEG11-1588NRNR[46]India 2013–2014Commercial layer 4 to 12 weeks Gizzard proventriculus, liver, and pancreas-Dullness, uneven growth, and decreased feed and water intake.-10 to 30% mortality rate.CAVAGEPDRC-NZ-145-2013NRNR[36]Belgium2014Commercial broiler 21 days25 days Gizzard, liver, and pancreas.-Depression, reduced feed intake, reduced weight gain, and lack of uniformity in flocks.-No mortality.NoneAGENRNRNR[40]Denmark2016Broiler24 daysGizzard-Gizzard erosion.NoneAGED3678/2/16/DK43,788OP985628[26]Sweden2016Broiler16–19 daysGizzard, liver, and caecal tonsils.-Loss of appetite, decreased growth, uneven size.NoneAGESVA16ALD00286743,856MW054563MW054564MW054566MW054565MT133691[8]Egypt(Beheira)2020BroilerNRCloacal swabs-Gastrointestinal disorders.-Loss of weight.-Depression.-No mortality.NoneAGEAD17NRMW689188 Hg[38]Slovakia 2023Broiler15 daysLiver and gizzard-Depression, apathy, somnolence, crouched position with droopy head, fuzzy feathers, anemic combs and wattles, sporadic nervous signs, and reduced weight gain.NoneAGENRNRNR[41]Iran2019Broiler16 daysGizzard-Depression, weight loss, and lack of flock uniformity. -6% mortality rate.NoneAGEIRMGH019NRMN165288 Hg[35]Italy1995 to 2006BroilerLayers42 to 63 days Gizzard-No clinical signs.NoneAGENRNRU46933[37]Hg: Hexon gene, NR: not reported, AGE: Adenoviral Gizzard Erosion, MDV: Marek’s Disease Virus, CAV: Chicken Anemia Virus.5. Clinical Manifestations and Predisposing FactorsThe search for the underlying causes of AGE has evolved over time. Initially, research focused on factors such as dried green foods [48], feed structure and fiber [49], starvation [50], histamine ingestion [51], nutritional deficiencies in vitamin B6 [52], and high levels of fish meal [53]. Later, attention shifted to harmful substances such as gizzerosine [54] and mycotoxins [55], and eventually to infectious agents such as Clostridium perfringens [56] and FAdV-1 [1]. As shown in Table 1, AGE does not present typical clinical signs. In most cases, the disease manifests mainly as weight loss, leading to reduced flock uniformity. Occasionally, symptoms are accompanied by depression, feathering, dullness, anorexia, and decreased egg production in laying hens [40]. However, the impact on egg production remains controversial. No significant impact on egg quality or production has been reported in broiler [23] or laying flocks affected by FAdV-1 [7]. In contrast, a significant decrease in egg production, along with a reduction in egg size, has been observed during AGE outbreaks in old layers [2]. In some cases, clinical signs are accompanied by mortality rates reaching up to 8% in infected chickens [2]. This mortality has been shown to be related to deep ulcerations and perforation of the gizzard, resulting in heavy bleeding in laying hens in Poland [2]. In other cases, high mortality rates have been reported without clinical signs [7] (Table 1).Experimental infections with strains isolated during field epidemics have been reproduced in SPF laying hens, SPF broilers, and commercial broilers [57]. Most experimental studies have reported no clinical signs or only mild clinical signs following FAdV-1 infection. However, the macroscopic and histological characteristics of AGE, such as degeneration and necrosis of glandular epithelial cells accompanied by the presence of intranuclear inclusion bodies, have been described simultaneously with the detection of FAdV DNA.Several factors influencing the development of AGE have been examined in experimental studies. Clinical signs and pathological lesions were demonstrated to be dependent on the quantity of FAdV-1 inoculated into broilers and commercial chickens experimentally infected with a virulent European strain [58]. However, the influence of different diets designed to promote gizzard stimulation was excluded, as all SPF broilers experimentally infected shows gizzard lesions, regardless of their diet [59]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that immunosuppression by other FAdV serotypes, some pathogens such as Infectious Bursal Disease Virus (IBDV), and immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclophosphamide (CY) facilitate the development of gizzard erosion induced by FAdV-1 [60]. Chickens pre-treated with other pathogens have been shown to have significantly higher gizzard lesion scores than untreated birds. Domanska-Blicharz et al. described an atypical pathological development of the disease, where day-old SPF layers infected with FAdV-1 via the ocular and nasal routes showed mortality rates of up to 100% and severe gizzard erosions, while 21-day-old infected birds showed no clinical or pathomorphological signs of AGE [24]. This suggests that older birds develop a resistance against infection by FAdVs. However, other studies have excluded the influence of birds’ age at the time of inoculation on AGE development [61]. Finally, it has been shown that the development of AGE is influenced by the FAdV-1 strain itself. Strains isolated during an AGE outbreak, such as Tokushima2000/GE, 99-ZH, PA7127, and JM1/1, were able to induce pathological lesions characteristic of AGE in broilers and commercial chickens [61]. However, other strains, such as CELO and OTE (Section 4), did not induce AGE [61].6. Mechanism of InfectionThe mechanism by which FAdV-1 induces AGE remains unclear [62]. It has been documented that FAdV can bind to different molecules such as integrins (Atb3 or Atb5), CMH class I particles, proteoglycans, and other undetermined receptors in the lungs and nervous system [32]. An initial study demonstrated that FAdV-1 interacts with a protein of around 200 kDa expressed in the gizzard using Virus Overlay Protein Binding Assay (VOPBA) [63]. Subsequently, the Coxsackievirus and Adenovirus Receptor (CAR) was confirmed as a target of FAdV-1 and FAdV-4 [62]. CELO transduction, defined as the capacity of a virus to attach to a target cell, penetrate it, and regulate the expression of a transgene within that cell, was found to be approximately 100-fold higher in the presence of CAR overexpressing cells, demonstrating that CELO has a CAR-dependent transduction behavior like Ad5 [62]. Several studies have highlighted the dual role of both short and long fibers in the infectivity and pathogenicity of FAdV [64]. Recently, it has been confirmed that FAdV-1 and FAdV-4 bind to the CAR receptor via Fiber-1 [64]. This interaction occurs through the fiber-1 knob and domain 1 (D1) of CAR, as verified by confocal microscopy. The involvement of CAR domain 2 (D2) in this interaction remains to be analyzed in the case of FAdV-1 [65].7. Diagnosis7.1. Clinicopathological FeaturesAs mentioned in Section 5, chickens with AGE do not present typical clinical symptoms. Most previous cases came from gizzard examination directly on the slaughter line of flocks that did not show typical clinical signs [34]. However, since clinical signs such as weight loss and uneven growth of the flock are the most frequently observed, these signs have been proposed as indicators of AGE outbreaks [43].Macroscopically, the disease manifests as hypertrophic and dilated gizzards with moderate to severe focal erosion. The lesions are characterized by a dark discoloration indicating bleeding and detachment of the koilin layer [2]. Other studies have reported the presence of bloody fluid in the gizzard as well as in the proventricular and/or intestinal lumen [8]. However, gizzard perforation has been reported in dead birds [7]. Ylva Lindgren and her team observed, for the first time, the presence of undigested feed in the intestines of affected flock birds in which FAdV-1 was isolated [8]. This discovery raises the hypothesis that AGE may be correlated with poor food digestion due to the altered function of the gizzard, which is responsible for both food grinding and motility. This may explain the growth deficiencies observed in affected broiler flocks.7.2. Histopathological DiagnosisHistopathological examination of the gizzard is a crucial step in diagnosing FAdV-1 infection before proceeding with virus isolation or other diagnostic techniques. This examination typically involves the application of standard histological staining methods, which help to evaluate the morphological criteria and functional properties of the affected tissues. In addition, other methods are now used to enhance the performance of histopathological analyses. These include immunohistochemical methods, DNA hybridization, and In Situ Hybridization (ISH) [8].Histopathological analysis of gizzards from infected chickens often reveals moderate to severe degeneration of the mucosal layer and the koilin layer, which is typically accompanied by erythrocyte infiltration and the presence of inflammatory cells, including granulocytes, mononuclear cells, and lymphocytes in the lamina propria, submucosa, and muscle layers [36]. The presence of intranuclear inclusion bodies, a hallmark of avian adenovirus, is commonly observed during outbreaks [8]. These inclusion bodies were seen in degenerated cells in the near-surface koilin layer of broilers in Sweden as well as in the glandular epithelium of laying and replacement chickens in Britain [8]. However, the absence of inclusion bodies with typical adenoviral morphology does not rule out the presence of FAdV-1, as they can be transitional and may sometimes be difficult to identify. In this case, to confirm the presence of FAdV-1, more sensitive techniques such as EM are highly recommended, as they enable direct visualization of viral particles in icosahedral form in allantoic fluid or affected tissues [8].7.3. Virus IsolationThe isolation of FAdV is a crucial step in the investigation and diagnosis of viral infections in birds.Although this procedure is time-consuming, it remains a benchmark for confirming FAdV infection. This step is also necessary for studying the pathogenicity of the strain in SPF chickens or embryos, as well as for sequencing and characterizing the entire genome. To achieve that, various types of cell culture have been used. In the majority of studies, FAdV-1 is isolated on Chicken Embryo Liver (CEL) cells [7]. In other cases, Chicken Embryonic Kidney (CEK) cell cultures are used [66]. Alternatively, it is possible to isolate FAdV using the Chicken Hepatoma cell line (LMH) [6]. More recently, successful isolation of FAdV-1 have been carried out using embryonated SPF chicken eggs and harvesting liver homogenates [8].7.4. Serological TechniquesSeveral serological techniques have been employed for the diagnosis of FAdV, including FAdV-1. Initially, from prepared hyperimmune sera, Agar Gel Immunodiffusion (AGID) [67], Double Immunodiffusion (DID) [68], Counter-Immunoelectrophoresis [69], and AGP tests [70] have been used for FAdV detection in different tissues of infected birds. A microtiter fluorescent antibody test has also been developed for serological detection of FAdV infection in chicken [71]. This test has shown higher sensitivity than the DID test. Alternatively, an Immunocytochemical Assay using the Avidin-Biotin-Peroxidase complex has been shown to be an efficient way of detecting FAdV antigens in a variety of tissues [72]. Although these tests are cheaper, rapid, and more adapted to mass detection, they present several limitations in terms of cross-reactivity with other virus groups, indiscrimination between the 12 serotypes, and low sensitivity. In contrast, the VN test represents the gold standard due to its high sensitivity and specificity in differentiating between the 12 FAdV serotypes [73]. However, this assay presents significant trade-offs in terms of cost and time, as well as the necessity of cell culture and reference strains [74]. Because of its technical requirements, the VN test cannot be applied for mass detection.Advancements in serological techniques have mainly focused on the use of Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISA) to detect type- or serotype-specific antibodies of FAdV-1. Initially, the whole CELO virus was used as a coating antigen to establish an ELISA test for FAdV-1 and Adenovirus-Associated Viruses (A-AV) antibody detection [75]. This test has shown a sensitivity level comparable to that of the VN test. Subsequently, significant progress has been made using recombinant proteins for ELISA tests, enabling specific detection of relevant FAdV serotypes including FAdV-1. Different types of recombinant proteins have been used to reach the highest level of specificity and sensitivity. One approach involves the use of both 33 kDa and 100 kDa non-structural proteins of the CELO virus as antigens [76]. The results showed that the 100K-33K-ELISA exhibited a higher sensitivity level than the AGP test and sensitivity and specificity comparable to that of ELISA based on the whole virus. Moreover, the test can be used to distinguish acute FAdV infection from an inactivated virus-based vaccination response, making it suitable for monitoring either disease or vaccination efficacy. Furthermore, two recombinant Fiber-1 and Fiber-2 proteins specific to FAdV-1 and FAdV-4 were separately used as coating antigens to develop an ELISA test that can specifically detect these clinically important serotypes [77]. This test was demonstrated to be specific as no cross-reactions were detected using positive sera of other avian viruses. Additionally, this test displayed equal or even greater sensitivity compared to the VN test while providing advantages in terms of processing and time of analysis, making it suitable for FAdV-1 and FAdV-4 diagnosis in chicken flocks. Another new serological tool is Fluorescent Microsphere Multiplexed Immunoassay (FMIA), which uses recombinant fibers from six distinct FAdV serotypes: FAdV-1, 2, 4, 8a, 8b, and 11 [78]. With specificity comparable to that of the VN test and fiber-based ELISA, the test enabled simultaneous detection of antibodies against all six clinically relevant serotypes in one single reaction with a high-throughput setting.Early diagnosis remains a critical step in the management of Aviadenovirus infection. Traditional virological techniques including virus isolation have always been considered as the “Gold standard”, even though they are laborious and time-consuming. Other serological tests have the same disadvantages: they are laborious and time-consuming, and some of them are not very sensitive and/or not very specific. As a result, many serological tests are currently being replaced by molecular tests.7.5. Molecular-Based AssayToday, several molecular techniques have been established for FAdV detection, quantification, and genotyping. These include Restriction Endonucleases Analysis (REA), conventional PCR (cPCR) which is sometimes coupled with Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP), quantitative Real-Time PCR (qPCR), High-Resolution Melting Curve Analysis (HRM), Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP), Cross-Priming Amplification (CPA), Recombinase Polymerase Amplification (RPA), Dot Blot Assay combined with cPCR, and Amplification Refractory Mutation Systems Quantitative (PCR ARMS-qPCR). Compared to conventional tests, molecular techniques have considerably improved sensitivity, specificity, reproducibility, and analysis time with regard to FAdV diagnosis. These tests can be either universal, enabling the detection of all 12 FAdV serotypes, including FAdV-1, or specific to a single serotype, such as FAdV-1.Initially, REA was used to cluster and differentiate FAdVs isolates based on the genomic similarities of DNA digested by BamHI and HindIII restriction enzymes. A total of 12 serotypes from 17 FAdV strains were divided into 5 species (A–E) [5]. Subsequently, cPCR tests were developed based on the use of universal primers targeting conserved regions within the FAdV genome, such as certain regions of the Hexon gene [79], 52K + PIIIa [80], and DNA Polymerase [81]. Most of these universal primers contain degenerate bases including all possible variations between FAdVs serotypes. Primers such as Hexon A/Hexon B, H1/H2, H3/H4, and FAdVF JSN/FAdVR JSN, targeting a conserved region on the Hexon gene, have successfully amplified all FAdV serotypes. However, to identify the serotype, these tests are often combined with RFLP analysis, which uses repeated digestion by restriction enzymes, producing restriction profiles specific to each serotype, including FAdV-1 [79]. Nevertheless, analysis of the HVR1 region revealed numerous differences between strains of the same serotype from different countries and continents, suggesting that the region cannot be used to distinguish strains of the same serotype isolated in different regions [82]. Furthermore, sequencing of the amplified product followed by comparison of the sequence with those available on GeneBank via the Blast bioinformatics tool is often used for FAdV genotyping [82]. Although cPCR followed by sequencing is costly and time-consuming and requires qualified personnel for results analysis, it remains the reference method for FAdV diagnosis and genotyping. To improve the sensitivity and specificity of cPCR tests, a Nested PCR targeting FAdV DNA Polymerase gene has been developed [83]. This technique uses two pairs of primers for two successive PCR reactions. The first primer pair is designed to annex to sequences upstream of the second primer pair in the first PCR reaction. The resulting amplicons are then used as templates for the second primer pair in a second PCR reaction.On the other hand, specific primers have been meticulously designed to target the Hyper-Variable Region (HVR) of the Hexon gene, enabling specific amplification of FAdV-1 in chicken flocks in Japan [84]. Similarly, a duplex PCR has been developed for the specific detection of FAdV-1 and FAdV-5, where amplified product sizes differentiate between two serotypes in case of co-infection [85]. However, some studies have suggested that PCR-RFLP targeting the long fiber gene could be used to differentiate non-pathogenic from pathogenic strains of FAdV-1 involved in AGE [86]. Despite this, other research has reported similar restriction profiles of the long fiber gene from non-pathogenic (Ote and CELO) and pathogenic strains isolated from chickens with AGE [87].Alternatively, Real-Time PCR has become a widely used technique in the diagnosis of various pathogens due to its sensitivity, reproducibility, efficiency, and reduced risk of contamination. Unlike conventional PCR, qPCR allows real-time quantification using fluorescent molecules or fluorogenic probes. qPCR assays based on SYBER Green have been developed for FAdV detection and quantification [80]. Universal primers (52K-fw/52K-rv) binding to a conserved region on the 52K gene have proven to be suitable for the accurate detection and quantification of all 12 FAdV serotypes. Additionally, a universal TaqMan probe-based qPCR test has been developed [88]. These qPCR assays have considerably improved sensitivity and analytical precision, reducing the cost, time, and complexity of analysis, as well as the risk of contamination due to post-PCR manipulations. Furthermore, a qPCR test coupled with HRM analysis has been developed. The use of the primer HexL1s/hexL1, targeting a hypervariable region of the Hexon gene, allows universal amplification of the 12 serotypes [89]. Subsequently, HRM analysis of PCR products has been used as a rapid and effective tool for FAdV genotyping, facilitating clinical and epidemiological investigations [90].With the constant advances in molecular diagnosis, several isothermal techniques, such as LAMP [91], CPA [92], and RPA [88], have been successfully developed for FAdV detection, overcoming many of the limitations of traditional tests. These amplification techniques enable rapid, specific amplification at constant temperatures, eliminating the need for a thermocycler. These characteristics make these techniques ideal for point-of-care applications in resource-limited areas and emergency situations. In addition, a dot blot test based on the PCR method has been developed to overcome the sensitivity limitations of traditional techniques. This test is able to detect all 12 serotypes, with a sensitivity level that is 100 times greater than that of cPCR [93]. Furthermore, ARMS-qPCR has been established for the quantification of and differentiation between the European pathogenic strain (FAdV-1/PA7127) and the apathogenic strain CELO [61]. This method utilizes Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in the gene encoding for the short fiber protein, enabling accurate discrimination between these strains. These cutting-edge methods have significantly improved the sensitivity, specificity, and analysis time of FAdV detection, providing valuable tools for diagnosis (Table 2).8. PreventionAdenoviral Gizzard Erosion is considered as an emerging disease that is causing significant losses in the poultry industry. Unfortunately, maternal antibodies do not confer protection against infection with FAdV-1 [43]. Nevertheless, resistance to infection has been observed in chickens after a second infection with the same virulent strain, FAV-99ZH [66]. Protected chickens showed no clinical signs, necrosis, or inclusion bodies. Another study reported that the infection of broilers with the apathogenic strain (CELO) conferred complete protection after provocation with the virulent strain (FAdV-1/PA7127) [61]. However, protected chickens continue to excrete the challenge virus (FAdV-1/PA7127) in their feces. This finding is coherent with the results of a previous investigation reporting excretion of the provocation virus in birds that were clinically fully protected after vaccination with live attenuated FAdV-4 [96]. Similarly, 20-week-old SPF laying hens infected with CELO were protected after being exposed to a virulent strain of FAdV-1 [97]. Although vaccinated chickens were protected, the levels of neutralizing antibodies against FAdV-1 remained low after challenge [66]. These results suggest that, to prevent horizontal infection by FAdV-1, cellular immunity may play a more critical role than humoral immunity. Consequently, it may be concluded that the administration of inactivated and subunit vaccines, which primarily stimulate the production of humoral immune responses, could be an ineffective strategy for preventing FAdV-1 infection. However, the main reason why live vaccines are currently the only candidates against AGE is because they can be orally administered. This administration enables an appropriate local immune response to be triggered directly in the chickens’ gastrointestinal tract, which is crucial for combating the infection.On the other hand, to reduce economic losses associated with horizontal transmission of FAdV-1, rigorous preventive measures and biosafety protocols, along with surveillance, are recommended. Farmers should implement regular disinfection plans for facilities, equipment, and vehicles, as well as strict control of visitors and personnel to prevent the introduction and spread of the FAdV-1 virus.9. ConclusionsIn conclusion, Avian Gizzard Erosion caused by FAdV-1 is a major concern in many countries, particularly in Asia and Europe. The disease is especially prevalent in broilers, although it is also observed in layers. Unlike other FAdV serotypes, the mechanisms underlying FAdV-1 pathogenesis remain ambiguous. The clinical symptoms of AGE are atypical and manifest as flock disuniformity, weight loss, and sometimes a decrease in egg production, accompanied by mortality. Molecular diagnosis methods, such as conventional PCR followed by restriction enzyme digestion or sequencing, real-time PCR, and PCR followed by melting curve analysis, have greatly improved the diagnosis of FAdV-1 infections, offering advantages in terms of specificity, rapidity, sensitivity, and efficiency compared to classical techniques like the VN test. Furthermore, transcriptomic profiling of FAdV-1 infection allows the identification of the genetic and molecular pathways involved in the survival and death of infected chickens, providing new insights into its mechanisms of infection and impact on poultry populations.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HUMAN METAPNEUMOVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Human Metapneumovirus Induces Mucin 19 Which Contributes to Viral Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionHuman metapneumovirus (HMPV) is a negative sense, single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the newly formed Pneumoviridae family [1]. Although HMPV was discovered in 2001, it is believed to have been present for at least 50 years [2]. HMPV infects people of all ages, but the populations most at risk for severe illness are the elderly, the immunocompromised and children [3]. In fact, by 5 years of age, virtually all children have been infected with HMPV. Symptoms of HMPV often include those common to other respiratory illnesses: rhinorrhea, cough, or fever. Some individuals with severe disease exhibit bronchiolitis or even pneumonia, and may be hospitalized [4]. Currently, there is not an effective vaccine against HMPV [5]. The respiratory tract has several mechanisms of protection, including the mucus layer found in its mucosal surface [6], which is increased after HMPV infection in infants [7] and the same response has been reproduced in animal models [8,9]. Mucus gels have viscous and elastic properties, many of which are credited to the physical properties and structural makeup of mucin glycoproteins, specifically gel-forming mucins. Mucins are highly glycosylated, high molecular mass macromolecules that are the major components of mucus secretions [10] and play a key role in the human airways. There are at least 15 mucins in the human lung: MUC1, MUC2, MUC3, MUC4, MUC5AC, MUC5B, MUC7, MUC13, MUC15, MUC16, MUC18, MUC19, MUC20, MUC21 and MUC22 (reviewed in [11]). Among the mucins in the respiratory tract, there are four gel-forming mucins: MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B and MUC19 described so far [12]. Despite the known critical roles of mucins in the respiratory tract, their importance in respiratory viral infections remains largely unknown and further research is warranted.In this work, we investigated the profile expression of mucins in both human and mouse (MUC/Muc) experimental models, using primary human epithelial cells in vitro as well as in an experimental mouse model of HMPV infection. Based on the observation that mucin 19 was predominantly expressed upon HMPV infection, the role of Muc19 in HMPV-induced pathogenesis was investigated, using a Muc19 deficient mouse model. Our results indicate that Muc19 not only contributes to the HMPV-induced disease and lung viral titers, but also to CD4+T-cell responses. Taken together, these findings suggest that Mucin 19 contributes to HMPV-induced pathogenesis.2. Results2.1. Predominant Expression of MUC19 in Primary Human CellsWe initially explored the expression of mucins induced by HMPV in vitro, using normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE). NHBE cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3, and mucin expression was analyzed by quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) at 3, 9 and 24 h. As shown in Figure 1, compared to uninfected cells, HMPV infection induced a significant fold-increase expression of MUC1 (8.3 ± 2), MUC2 (43.4 ± 13), MUC4 (54 ± 12), MUC5ac (23.3 ± 11.5) and MUC19 (77 ± 35), while no significant induction of MUC15, MUC16 and MUC20 was observed. MUC5b was not detected. Of note, MUC19 was the most abundantly expressed in response to HMPV infection.2.2. Predominant Expression of Muc19 in the Lungs of Infected MiceNext, we characterized the mucin response ex-vivo by analyzing the mRNA expression in the lungs of HMPV-infected mice. BALB/c mice were infected with HMPV, and the expression of Muc1, Muc2, Muc4, Muc5ac, Muc5b, Muc15, Muc16, Muc19, and Muc20 were analyzed at 12, 24 and 48 h after infection. As observed in Figure 2, the expression of Muc15, Muc16 and Muc20 was almost undetectable in HMPV-infected mice. On the other hand, although not statistically significant, HMPV induced a higher expression (1.8 to 4.7 fold) of Muc1, Muc2, Muc4, Muc5ac, and Muc5b when compared to mock-infected mice. Interestingly, we observed that HMPV induced a higher fold increase in Muc19 (5.5 to 9.4 fold) when compared to the other mucins analyzed.2.3. Muc19 Contributes to Viral Replication and to an Optimal CD4+ T-cell Response in the Lung of HMPV-Infected MiceBased on the data shown in Figure 1 and Figure 2, indicating that HMPV induces a predominant induction of Mucin 19 in human (MUC19) and in mouse (Muc19) models, we further investigated the physiological relevance of Muc19 during HMPV infection. For this work, we used a previously reported Muc19 genetically engineered mutant mice [13]. All mice used in the experiments were genotyped by PCR. Genomic DNA was obtained from tail snips followed by a Touch-down PCR to define the mice genotype. The phenotype of each mouse was then defined according to the genotypes shown in the agarose gel shown in Figure 3. After validation of the Muc19 mouse model, we first quantified the release production of Muc19 in the lungs of infected mice. For that effect, Muc 19+/+ (WT) mice were infected with HMPV or were mock infected before bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples were collected at 12, 24, 48, and 72 h after infection. BAL samples were tested for Muc19 protein content by ELISA assay. In addition, lung tissue was fixed and paraffin embedded, followed by immunohistochemistry staining with anti-Muc19 antibody. The data shown in Figure 4a indicate a significant spike in Muc19 as early as 12 h p.i, while levels slowly decreased out to 72 h p.i. Expression of Muc19 was also detected in lung tissue sections at 12 h p.i., as shown in the lower right panel of Figure 4b.Using the Muc19-/- (KO) mice, we then explored the effect of this mucin on HMPV-induced pathogenesis. First, we investigated the effect of Muc19 on body weight loss and viral replication. Mice were infected with HMPV or were mock infected with PBS. Body weight was monitored daily and lung samples were collected at days 3, 4, and 8 after infection. Quantification of infectious viral particles was determined by a methylcellulose plaque assay. As shown in Figure 5a, mice lacking Muc19 lost less weight and recovered their baseline body weight faster than the wild-type ones. Moreover, we observed that the absence of Muc19 led to a modest, yet significant, reduction in lung titers at day 3 after infection. The same trend was observed at day 5. No virions were detected in any mice at day 8 after infection (not shown).During further investigation of the response to HMPV in the absence of Muc19, we initially analyzed the lung innate cellular infiltration after HMPV infection. Lung tissue was collected at day 1 after infection and digested enzymatically. Lung single cell suspensions were stained with specific combinations of antibodies to identify the frequency of innate immune cells including neutrophils (Ly6G+/CD11b+), macrophages (F4/80+/CD11b+) and NK cells (NK1.1+). As shown in Figure 5b, there was an increased infiltration of neutrophils and interstitial macrophages upon HMPV infection. However, there were no outstanding differences in cellular content between the Muc19-WT and Muc19-KO animals infected with HMPV.In order to explore the effect of Muc19 on host immune responses at a later time of infection, lung cellular infiltration was also analyzed at day 7 after infection, when T-cell recruitment is increased in the lungs of HMPV-infected mice [14]. Lung cell suspensions were stained with specific combinations of antibodies to identify CD4+ (CD3e+/CD4+), CD8+ (CD3e+/CD8a+) and γδ (γδTCR+/CD3e+) T cells. The results of these experiments indicate that there was a significant decrease in CD4+ T cells in the lungs of HMPV-infected muc19 KO mice (Figure 5c). However, that difference did not extend to γδ or CD8+ T cells (Figure 5c).Based on the observed effect of Muc19 on CD4+T cells, we investigated further changes at the same time point. The release of pro-inflammatory cytokines was determined in BAL samples collected at day 7 after infection, and concentrations of IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α were determined by multiplex immunoassay. Data shown in Figure 5d indicate that in the absence of Muc19 there was a trend in decreased production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines, although no significant differences between WT and KO infected mice were found.3. DiscussionHuman Metapneumovirus (HMPV) remains one of the most common viral causes of acute respiratory tract infections, especially in children, elderly, and immunocompromised populations. Clinical symptoms can range from mild respiratory disease to severe bronchiolitis and pneumonia, some of which require hospitalization [15,16]. Because the lungs are one of the largest mucosal surfaces in the human body and contain mucus with a vast variety of mucin proteins, further studies are necessary to define the role of these various mucins, both in normal functioning lungs, as well as injured and infected lungs. This work demonstrates that not only is Muc19 expressed in the lungs of infected mice, but it also contributes to HMPV-induced pathogenesis and infection.The primary functions of mucus include: facilitating the removal of material from the lungs to protect the epithelial surface from injury, playing a role during the pathogenesis of chronic lung diseases involving airway inflammation, and effecting the host’s susceptibility to infection. Mucus is known for its role as a passive barrier, but it also has many important functions in innate defense and regulating epithelial homeostasis [17]. Here, we observed that HMPV induced a predominant expression of MUC19 in primary normal human bronchial epithelial cells (NHBE). We have previously reported that HMPV also induced MUC19 in A549 cell line (human alveolar basal epithelial cells) [18], although no significant induction was observed in those cells. We attribute the MUC19 expression differences to the inherent nature of the cell type and origin. As reported by others, NHBE and A549 can differentially respond to stimuli [19]. In addition, the expression of Muc19 in the respiratory tract upon HMPV infection was confirmed in vivo with the mouse model. When compared to the other gel-forming mucins, MUC19 is highly understudied and this gap in knowledge is even more apparent in regards to MUC19 in the respiratory tract. To date, very limited information is known about this mucin and is only related to the regulation and some potential functional implications. MUC19 has been found in patients with Sjögren syndrome [20] and in middle ear epithelium [21]. Moreover, murine Muc19 has been reported in mouse models of allergy [22] and of mucous cell deficiency within salivary glands [23]. However, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first piece of evidence that demonstrates that Muc19 is induced in the lungs.While the primary role of mucins is to act as a surface protectant, many have secondary functions within the disease process. Here, we observed that the lack of Muc19 led to a reduced body weight loss and decreased lung viral titers, suggesting that Muc19 contributes to HMPV replication. In line with these observations, mucin glycosylation has been reported as one of the important processes to contribute to IAV replication in epithelial cells [24]. On the other hand, mucins have also shown an antiviral effect as observed in human milk mucins inhibiting rotavirus replication [25]. Likewise, HIV replication is inhibited by several purified mucins from breast milk (MUC1) [26,27]; saliva (MUC5B and MUC7) [28,29,30]; and pregnancy plug mucus (MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC and MUCB) [31]. Together, these evidences highlight the importance of mucins to inhibit or contribute to viral replication. Hence, further investigation is needed to fully understand mechanisms underlying those effects.Although mucins are generally known for their role as protective barriers in innate immunity, experimental evidence indicates that mucins can regulate both the number, as well as the type of T-cell response [32,33,34]. One of the novel findings in the current work is the observed reduced frequency of CD4+ T cells in the lungs of Muc19 KO mice infected with HMPV. This observation is important because previous work has shown the contribution of CD4+ T cells in HMPV-induced pathogenesis, where mice depleted of CD4+ T cells with moAb showed an improved disease and less inflammatory response [14]. The correlative observations in this work that Muc19 KO mice had less CD4+ T cells, less proinflammatory cytokines and less weight loss suggest that Muc19 could contribute to the HMPV-induced pathogenesis through a mechanism involving CD4+ T cells. In line with our findings, experimental evidence demonstrates that MUC1 inhibits the proliferation of human CD3+ T cells, which is attributed to its expression on both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells [35,36]. Similarly, additional work has demonstrated that MUC1 is expressed on the majority of T regulatory cells (CD4+/CD25+/Foxp3), which could provide co-stimulatory or co-inhibitory signals depending also on the number of accessory cell ratios present [37]. On the other hand, data in mice deficient of Muc2 demonstrate that the lack of this mucin increases the frequency of Th17 [38]. Overall, this experimental evidence demonstrates that mucins can regulate the adaptive immune response. However, the underlying mechanisms of these effects are not fully understood and warrant further research.4. Materials and Methods4.1. Virus StocksHMPV (strain CAN97-83) was grown and titrated in LLC-MK2 cells (ATCC) in the presence of trypsin (Worthington, Lakewood NJ, USA), and virus stocks were generated by centrifugation, as previously described [39].4.2. Cell Lines and Infection in VitroNormal Human Bronchial Epithelial (NHBE) cells were purchased from Lonza (Lonza, Houston, TX, USA). NHBE cells were propagated in BEGM™ medium and cells were not used beyond passage 3. Cells were infected with HMPV at an MOI of 3. At the indicated time points, cell lysates were collected and processed for RNA isolation and subsequent analysis.4.3. Mice and Infection ProtocolBALB/c female mice were obtained from Envigo. Muc19+/+ (WT) and Muc19−/− (KO) (NFS/N.Cg-Muc19tm2.1Culp/Mmucd), were purchased from the Mutant Mouse Resource & Research Centers (MMRRC) at U.C. Davis. Homozygous KO mice displayed no discernable physiological defects. Mice were bred and phenotype was confirmed by genotyping. Both male and female mice were used for these experiments, according to availability. All mice were housed in specific pathogen-free conditions in accordance with the Louisiana State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (protocols 15-055, 18-135, and 17-029). Five- to 8-week-old mice were used in all experiments. Under light anesthesia, mice were infected intranasally (i.n.) with 50 µL of HMPV diluted in PBS at a final administered dose of 1 × 107 PFU [9,40]. As mock treatment, mice were inoculated with an equivalent volume of PBS (herein referred as mock).4.4. Genotyping of NFS/N.Cg-Muc19tm2.1Culp/Mmucd MiceGenomic DNA from each litter was extracted from tail snips using a Qiagen DNeasy kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Mouse genotyping was done according to the protocol developed by MMRRC at U.C. Davis. Briefly, DNA was subjected to Touch-Down cycling PCR protocol using a mixture of 3 primers (36652-comF, 36652-wtR, 36652-muR) and the following cycling conditions: the first 10 cycles anneal at 65 °C decreasing in temperature by 1 °C; the next 30 cycles anneal at 55 °C. PCR products were run on 1.5% agarose gel for 90 min to identify Muc19 KO (1263 bp band) or WT (509 bp) mice.4.5. Sample CollectionMice were euthanized by combination of intraperitoneal injection of ketamine and xylazine and exsanguination via the femoral vessels. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples were obtained by inserting a cannula into the trachea and flushing 1 mL of PBS into the lungs twice. Cell-free supernatants were kept at −75 °C until further analysis. For lung cell analysis, lungs were perfused and collected on ice until further enzymatic digestion to obtain a single-cell suspension, as previously described [40]. To determine viral load, whole lungs were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −75 °C until analysis.4.6. Quantitative Real-Time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)Human and mouse samples were processed to extract RNA using an RNeasy Plus Kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA). Mucins gene expression was determined using specific primers and probes (Integrated DNA technologies, Newark, NJ, USA). Quantification of the gene expression was determined by qRT-PCR, as we previously reported [9,18]. Briefly, qRT-PCRs were run using predesigned assay primers (Integrated DNA Technologies) on a 7900HT a fast real-time PCR system following the manufacturer’s suggested cycling parameters (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA). The comparative cycle threshold (ΔΔCT) method was used to quantitate the expression of target genes that was normalized to the endogenous GAPDH expression levels. Fold expression of target genes after HMPV infection was further calculated in reference to normalized transcripts from uninfected cells or mock-infected animals.4.7. ELISALevels of murine Mucin 19 (Muc19) were determined in BAL fluid samples by ELISA (Cusabio, Houston, TX, USA), according to manufacturers’ guidelines. The range of the sensitivity of the assay is 1.56 to 100 ng/mL.4.8. Flow CytometryFlow cytometry assays were done as we have previously described [40]. Briefly, lung single-cell suspensions were incubated with anti-CD16/32 antibody at 4 °C for 30 min before staining with different combinations of specific antibodies: anti-CD8α, anti-CD3ε, anti-CD4, anti-IA/IE, anti-CD11b, anti-CD161b/161c, and anti-Ly6G, all from BD Pharmingen, and anti-F4/80 from eBioscience. After application with specific antibodies, cells were incubated for an additional 30 min, in the dark, at 4 °C before being washed with PBS/1%BSA before fixing them with 2% paraformaldehyde. Cells were analyzed using a FACScan flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and FlowJo software (v10.3, Tree Star, Ashland, OR, USA). Total numbers of lung cells were counted by trypan blue before flow cytometry analysis. The number of plotted specific cells was calculated based on the percentage obtained by flow cytometry analysis and the total number of lung cells.4.9. ImmunohistochemistryDetection of Muc19 in the lungs of infected mice was done in a multi-step staining process. First, antigen retrieval was performed by adding 200 mL 1x citrate buffer solution (Dako, Target Retrieval Solution, Ref S1699, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to Coplin jar. Then the basin of decloaker (Biocare Medical, DC2002, Pacheco, CA, USA) was filled with 500 mL of DH2O, while the Coplin jar was placed in the center. Temperatures were: SP1−125 °C for 30 s, and SP2−90 °C for 10 s. Slides were then cooled for 10 min and rinsed three times with dH2O. The whole process was then repeated again, but the Coplin jar was filled with 200 mL of 2x tris-buffered saline and tween (TwBS) (Thermo Scientific, Ref TA-999-TT, Waltham, MA, USA).After antigen retrieval, endogenous enzymes were blocked with 3% hydrogen peroxide (Vi-Jon, L0011379BA) for 10 min. Then, the sample was incubated for 30 min with normal rabbit serum (Vector Laboratories, S-5000) diluted 1:50 in TwBS. Anti-Muc19 antibody (Abcam, ab121014, Cambridge, MA, USA) was diluted 1:250 with the Dako Antibody diluent (Dako, Ref S0809, Dako-Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and incubated for 30 min. Secondary antibody was a biotinylated anti-goat IgG (Vector Laboratories, BA-5000), diluted 1:200 in TwBS, and incubated for 30 min. For Ag detection, a slide was incubated for 30 min with an avidin/biotin complex (“Vectastain ABC-HRP Kit”, PK4000, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA). The chromogen used was impact Nova Red, Peroxidase substrate kit (SK-4805, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA), incubated for 8 min, followed by a 5 min incubation of hematoxylin (Ref 812, ANATECH LTD, Battle Creek, MI, USA) for counterstaining. The tris-buffered saline and tween buffer (TwBS) was used as a rinse between each step.4.10. Cytokine ReleaseThe concentration of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α) in BAL fluid was determined with a Milliplex MAP mouse cytokine detection system (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA), following the manufacturer’s protocol. The sensitivity range of the assay is 3.2 to 10,000 pg/mL.4.11. Plaque AssayLung viral titers were determined by plaque assays as we previously reported. Briefly, whole lungs were homogenized and 2-fold serial dilutions were performed with the supernatant, which was then plated onto LLC-MK2 cells with a methylcellulose overlay. Six days later, plaques were visualized with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) staining as previously described [9].4.12. Statistical AnalysisA one-way ANOVA statistic was used to compare 3 or more sets of values, followed by a Tukey–Kramer test to correct for multiple comparisons. Dunnett’s multiple comparison post-test was applied between experimental groups against the control group. All statistics listed are reported as mean ± SEM. Statistical analyses were performed using Graph Pad InStat 3 (GraphPad Software). p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.5. ConclusionsIn conclusion, our studies demonstrate that HMPV induces Mucin 19, which contributes to disease, viral replication and CD4+ T-cell responses in the lungs of HMPV-infected mice. The results shown in this work suggest that Muc19 plays a role in the HMPV-induced pathogenesis through mechanisms that need future investigation. Defining the importance of mucins in the immune response against pathogens is critical to better understand the factors required for regulating the immune response to HMPV and other viral infections in the respiratory tract as well as to provide potential targets of clinical relevance.


Title: Human metapneumovirus - what we know now

IntroductionThe start of the twenty-first century has seen the discovery of several emerging or new respiratory pathogens causing human disease, including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus and human metapneumovirus (HMPV). The metapneumoviruses are enveloped, non-segmented, negative-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses
1. They comprise a genus of two species: avian metapneumovirus and HMPV. The metapneumoviruses belong to the order
Mononegavirales and family
Pneumoviridae, which also includes respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
2,
3.Avian metapneumovirusAvian metapneumovirus (previously known as turkey rhinotracheitis virus) was discovered in 1978 in turkeys in South Africa
4. Since then, the virus has been recognized to infect turkeys, chickens, and ducks worldwide with a significant economic impact
5. The virus has a low and variable mortality but high morbidity rate (up to 100%) and causes severe upper respiratory infections as well reproductive issues leading to decreased egg production
5. There are currently four subtypes of avian metapneumovirus based on the genetic diversity of the attachment (G) protein
6. Subtype A was first isolated in South Africa, followed by subtype B in several European countries. Subtype C was discovered in the US in 1996
7, and subtype D was identified in France in 2000
8. It is thought that wild migratory birds play a key role in the spread of avian metapneumovirus
5.Discovery of human metapneumovirusIn 2001, researchers in the Netherlands first identified HMPV from stored nasopharyngeal samples from 28 children with respiratory illness by using electron microscopy and random reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) techniques. This novel virus exhibited cytopathic effect but not hemadsorption in tertiary monkey kidney epithelial cells. The genome was most closely related to avian metapneumovirus serotype C (up to 88% homology). However the newly discovered virus replicated efficiently in monkeys but not in birds
2. Archived sera from the 1950s contained neutralizing antibodies against HMPV
2. Two retrospective Canadian studies detected HMPV in specimens collected from patients with respiratory illness between 1993 and 2001
9,
10, and a US study detected HMPV in specimens from 1976 to 2001
11. Collectively, these studies show that HMPV has been circulating undetected for many decades.Genome organization and structureHMPV is a negative-sense, non-segmented, single-stranded RNA virus. The genome is about 13,000 nucleotides in length and is composed of eight genes encoding for nine proteins: nucleoprotein (N), phosphoprotein (P), matrix protein (M), fusion protein (F), matrix-2 proteins (M2-1 and M2-2), small hydrophobic (SH) protein, glycoprotein (G), and large (L) polymerase protein (
Table 1)
12–
21. As in other paramyxoviruses, the N, L, and P proteins form the viral replication complex. Though similar in genome to RSV, both avian metapneumovirus and HMPV possess a gene order different from that of RSV and lack the non-structural proteins NS1 and NS2
1. HMPV exhibits a paramyxovirus-like morphology, ranging from 150 to 600 nm in size, enveloped with short protein spike projections
2.Table 1. Summary of human metapneumovirus proteins and function.GeneProteinAmino
acid lengthFunctionNNucleoprotein394RNA genome encapsidationPPhosphoprotein294Polymerase co-factorM Matrix protein254Aids in viral assembly and buddingFFusion protein539Virus-cell binding and membrane fusionM2M2-1 protein187RNS transcription processivity factorM2-2 protein71Regulates RNA transcription/replicationSHSmall hydrophobic protein177–183Possible viroporin or innate immune inhibitionGAttachment glycoprotein229–236Binds to cellular glycosaminoglycansLLarge polymerase protein2,005Catalytic activity for viral replicationSeveral respiratory viruses form filamentous viral particles
in vitro. A recent study demonstrated that HMPV infection led to the formation of branched viral filamentous networks and intercellular extensions in human bronchial epithelial cells
22. HMPV P protein co-localized with actin and induced the formation of the intercellular extensions. Importantly, HMPV spread directly from cell to cell even in the presence of neutralizing antibodies and in the absence of the attachment factor heparan sulfate. This direct viral spread was mediated by the actin cytoskeleton, CDc42, and Rac1
22.Viral replicationReplication of HMPV occurs in the nasal and lung tissues, and airway epithelial cells are the primary target of HMPV. HMPV is thought to attach to the target cell via G protein interactions with heparan sulfate and other glycosaminoglycans
21,
23. The HMPV F protein encodes an RGD (Arg-Gly-Asp) motif that engages RGD-binding integrins as cellular receptors
16,
24,
25 and then mediates fusion of the cell membrane and viral envelope in a pH-independent fashion, likely within endosomes
5,
26–
28. Low pH-dependent fusion is a rare occurrence in only certain lineage A F proteins
29. As with other negative-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses, HMPV negative-sense genomic RNA is transcribed to positive-sense mRNA by the RNA polymerase before translation. After translation, the viral glycoproteins are transported from the endoplasmic reticulum through the Golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane. As nascent viral proteins accumulate, the polymerase switches from transcribing monocistronic mRNA to replicating full-length positive-sense antigenome to serve as a template for progeny negative-sense genomes. Newly synthesized virions exit the host via budding from the plasma membrane, which is facilitated by the M protein
30,
31.Phylogenetic groupsThere are two major genetic lineages, A and B, further divided into the sublineages (or clades) A1, A2, B1, and B2
32–
35. All HMPV genes fall into these four clades, suggesting that genome recombination is very rare
33. Although both genotypes A and B can co-circulate, the dominant lineage may vary year by year
33,
36. Phylogenetic analyses of HMPV suggest that the human virus diverged from the avian type C 200–400 years ago
33–
35,
37. HMPV cannot productively infect birds; thus, if HMPV did arise in humans as a zoonotic infection, the virus is now adapted fully to humans
2. Evidence suggests that the different genetic lineages of metapneumovirus do not represent distinct serotypes; studies in rodents and non-human primates show a high degree of cross-neutralization and cross-protection between subgroups
38–
41.EpidemiologyHMPV has a seasonal distribution that is similar to that of other respiratory viruses and tends to peak in later months compared with RSV and influenza
11,
41–
45. Similar to other respiratory pathogens, HMPV causes most severe disease in infants and young children, the elderly, and persons with underlying chronic conditions such as asthma, emphysema, and immune compromise. Seroepidemiology studies have shown that most children worldwide are infected with HMPV by the age of 5
2,
46–
50.ChildrenRates of hospitalization of children for HMPV infection are highest in the first year of life but occur throughout early childhood. Many studies report that the peak age of hospitalization for HMPV is between 6 and 12 months of age, which is later than the peak age of hospitalization for RSV (2–3 months)
44,
51–
56. Through the course of a year, multiple subgroups of HMPV will often be in circulation. These subgroups are genetically distinct and can vary across seasons, with one lineage being more prevalent in a given season
45,
57. Despite genetic differences between the subgroups, all remain capable of causing severe infection, and the differences have not been associated consistently with the variation in severity of disease
58,
59. HMPV infection usually causes overt disease; the virus is rarely detected in asymptomatic children
11,
44,
60–
63. Studies of hospitalized and outpatient children worldwide have found HMPV to be associated with 6 to 40% of acute respiratory illness
11,
41,
44–
46,
51–
53,
64–
67.AdultsAlthough nearly all populations will experience primary HMPV infection by age 5, HMPV re-infection occurs throughout adult life. HMPV was identified in up to 13% of hospitalized adults in Rochester, New York
43. Whereas HMPV infection is typically mild in otherwise healthy younger adults, infection with HMPV leads to increased disease severity and high morbidity and mortality rates in the elderly. A retrospective Canadian study showed that 46% of HMPV
+ cases were from patients at least 65 years, and 60% of these elderly patients were hospitalized
10. A subsequent study reported that at least 50% of the HMPV
+ elderly patients infected during an outbreak in a long-term care facility developed bronchitis or pneumonia, leading to 50% mortality
68.Underlying conditionsPre-existing conditions, particularly asthma, play a role in disease severity and hospitalization. HMPV was isolated from 7% of adults hospitalized for an acute asthma exacerbation
69. Like infection with RSV, infection with HMPV within the first two years of life is a risk factor for later asthma
70. One study found that 16% of HMPV
+ patients had asthma compared with none of the RSV
+ patients
54. Another study noted a previous asthma diagnosis in 41% of HMPV
+ children between the ages of 5 and 13
42.Immunocompromised patients and those with underlying medical conditions can be severely affected by HMPV. One study found that many HMPV
+ hospitalized patients over the age of 5 had other severe diseases, such as cystic fibrosis or lymphoma
54. Another retrospective study found that of 39 immunocompromised children with HMPV, 17 developed pneumonia and four died from respiratory failure
71. In a group of patients between the age of 15 and 65 years, 67% had underlying medical conditions, such as lymphoma or lung tumors
10.Co-infections with other viral or bacterial pathogens may exacerbate symptoms and disease. Viral co-infection rates in patients with HMPV range from 6 to 23%
11,
42,
43, but viral co-infections do not seem to impact disease severity
11. However, secondary bacterial pneumonia can occur and is associated with increased mortality
72–
74.Transmission and symptomsHMPV is thought to spread through direct or close contact with infected individuals or objects (fomites)
36. Symptoms and disease presentation of HMPV are similar to those of other respiratory viruses causing both upper and lower respiratory tract infections. Symptoms can include cough, rhinorrhea, sore throat, and fever as well as lower respiratory tract symptoms such as wheezing, difficulty breathing, and hypoxia
54,
75. The clinical diagnoses most commonly associated with HMPV are bronchiolitis and pneumonia
42.Animal modelsAlthough early studies demonstrated that HMPV does not replicate or cause disease in birds
2, small animal models such as mice, cotton rats, and hamsters as well as non-human primates are semi-permissive
40. Several studies show that cotton rats are the most permissive small animal model and that peak virus titers occurred at day four post infection
76–
78. Viral lung replication and disease vary between different inbred mouse strains; most work has been published in the BALB/c model, which exhibits substantial disease symptoms
79–
88. BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice may exhibit clinical symptoms such as difficulty breathing, weight loss, and ruffled fur, partly depending on the virus strain and inoculum
80,
83,
89. Histological scoring revealed that lung pathology is most severe between days 5 and 7 but is significantly decreased by day 14. Viral replication occurs for up to 10–14 days in mice, and peak viral load is at day 5
80,
83,
89. Similar to older humans, aged mice have increased disease severity, higher viral titers, and diminished immune response compared with younger mice
90. However, unlike humans, in whom re-infection occurs throughout life, immunocompetent mice cannot be productively re-infected with HMPV. Of note, most work has been published in the BALB/c inbred strain, based on the extensive body of RSV research, but some investigators have focused on the C57BL/6 model.In contrast, cotton rats, hamsters, and ferrets infected with HMPV do not manifest observable clinical symptoms
2,
40,
83,
91. In hamsters and ferrets, there is high viral replication in the respiratory tract compared with mice
40. Both African green monkeys and rhesus macaques are permissive for HMPV infection, but neither exhibits clinical symptoms. HMPV replication and neutralizing antibody production are higher in African green monkeys compared with rhesus macaques
40,
92.Pathogenesis and immunityHumans and animals mount neutralizing antibody responses to HMPV. In mice, neutralizing antibodies are first detected five to seven days after infection, peaking between four and six weeks after infection. In mouse models, initial infection with HMPV protects against re-infection
40,
80, and antibodies alone can protect in small animal models
93–
96. In contrast, when macaques were challenged 12 weeks after primary HMPV infection, virus replication was detectable despite the presence of serum antibodies, and when challenged 8 months after primary infection, there was no protection
97. These data suggest that in primates and humans, antibody levels wane over time, facilitating re-infection. A prospective study in humans noted that baseline HMPV antibodies were lower in older adults who subsequently became infected versus those who did not become infected
98, suggesting a protective effect of antibodies.Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) contribute to clearance of HMPV infection in mice
80,
89,
99–
101. As early as day 1 post infection, there is an infiltration of lymphocytes, monocytes, and other mononuclear cells to perivascular and peribronchial areas of the lung. There is an increase in the number of total bronchoalveoloar lavage cells that starts at day 1, peaks at day 7, and returns to near normal numbers by day 21
80. The number of neutrophils and mononuclear cells increases by day 3 until day 14 post infection. CD4
+ T cells peak earlier at day 6 whereas CD8
+ T cells peak between day 8 and 10
80,
89,
100. Furthermore, the depletion of T cells leads to prolonged viral replication
80,
99,
101, and T-cell epitope vaccination alone can reduce viral titers
89,
100. The role of natural killer (NK) cells is unclear. One study depleted NK cells with anti-CD49 antibody and reported prolonged viral replication
99, whereas another depleted NK cells with the more specific antibody anti-NK1.1 and found no effect
88.Although T cells play a critical role in disease protection, they also contribute to disease severity caused by HMPV. The depletion of either CD4
+ or CD8
+ T cells led to significantly less weight loss, decreased lung inflammation, and reduced airway obstruction
80. These results collectively show that T cells, especially CD4
+ T cells, play a role in enhancing clinical disease and lung pathology.HMPV, like other respiratory viruses, dampens the immune response after infection, but the specific mechanisms remain unclear. Multiple studies demonstrate convincingly that HMPV can interfere with the type I interferon (IFN) response, but different studies have implicated various viral proteins, including G, M2-2, P, or SH, and suggested diverse mechanisms
19,
102–
105. Type I IFN receptor (IFNAR)-deficient mice infected with HMPV had higher lung viral titers than wild-type (WT) mice but less lung inflammation and airway dysfunction, highlighting the importance of the IFN pathway for HMPV clearance and disease
86. HMPV is capable of infecting human and murine dendritic cells
in vitro, leading to altered signaling, diminished cytokine production, decreased migration, and reduced capacity to activate CD4
+ T cells
106–
112. However, the contribution of these interactions to disease and protection
in vivo has not been defined.One way that HMPV evades the adaptive immune response is through the upregulation of programmed cell death-1 (PD-1), a T-cell surface receptor that plays a critical role in downregulating the immune response, leading to CD8
+ T-cell functional impairment. This phenomenon is similar to CD8
+ T-cell exhaustion described in chronic infections and cancer
113. During infection with HPMV and other acute respiratory viruses, there is an upregulation of both PD-1 and its ligand, PD-L1, in the lungs but not splenic CD8
+ T cells. Blocking PD-1 ligation prevented functional impairment of HMPV-specific CD8
+ T cells in the lung, and mice lacking PD-1 had a greater percentage of functional HMPV-specific CD8
+ T cells compared with WT mice
89. During secondary HMPV infection, lung CD8
+ T-cell effector functions were severely impaired after re-infection and PD-1 expression was high; blockade of PD-1 ligation enhanced CD8
+ T-cell function
100. These results collectively suggest that the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway plays an important role in evading the immune response during primary and secondary HMPV infections and may contribute to re-infection.DiagnosisThe standard method for HMPV diagnosis has been nucleic acid amplification tests, such as RT-PCR
114–
116. Several commercial multiplex molecular assays that include HMPV are available
117. Viral culture and serological testing are insensitive
2. One reason for the delayed discovery of HMPV is the difficulty of growing the virus in cell culture. The virus requires exogenous trypsin to replicate
in vitro and while capable of growth in other cell lines, it produces robust cytopathic effects in tertiary monkey kidney and LLC-MK2 (rhesus kidney) cells
2,
118. Furthermore, viral propagation can take 14 days or longer.Antiviral treatmentsTreatment consists of supportive care as there are no licensed antivirals against HMPV. Two potential treatments that have been investigated are ribavirin and immunoglobulin. Ribavarin is a nucleoside with activity against RNA viruses and exhibits
in vitro activity against HMPV
119 and exhibited some efficacy in mice
120. Commercial intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) contains neutralizing activity against HMPV
119, and as noted above, antibodies alone exhibit efficacy both prophylactically and therapeutically in mice
93–
96. There are anecdotal reports of human use of ribavirin and IVIG
121 but no controlled trials and no guidelines to recommend the use of these measures.Vaccine developmentThere are currently no licensed vaccines for HMPV, but numerous efforts have been made to develop a safe and effective vaccine. Early cross-challenge studies with hamsters showed that infection with subgroup A produced an immune response that protected from a subsequent challenge with subgroup B and vice versa
40.There have been several promising live-attenuated vaccines. A cold-adapted, live-attenuated HMPV vaccine provided complete protection in hamsters
122. While antibody levels were increased after immunization in cynomolgus macaques, immunization did not provide complete protection from viral replication after challenge
123. Recombinant HMPV (rHMPV) viruses lacking the G, M2-1, M2-2, or SH protein have exhibited an attenuated and immunogenic phenotype in animal models
15,
124,
125. Mutations in the methyl transferase domains of the polymerase or the integrin-binding RGD motif of the F protein were attenuated, immunogenic, and protective in cotton rats
126,
127.Vectored vaccine approaches that have been effective in animal models include chimeric rHMPV containing the avian metapneumovirus P protein
128, alphavirus-vectored HMPV F
129,
130, bovine PIV3 vectored F
39, or Sendai virus vectored F
131. The establishment of a human challenge model
132 and a successful test of a live-attenuated candidate in seropositive adults
133 provides a platform for future clinical trials.Another method of vaccination is with heat-killed or formalin-inactivated virus, but a major concern for non-replicating HMPV vaccines is the experience in the 1960s with formalin-inactivated RSV (FI-RSV) vaccines
134–
136. FI-RSV induced an aberrant immune response that failed to protect and led to enhanced respiratory disease in vaccinees upon natural RSV infection. Animal studies replicated the results of the FI-RSV clinical trials
137,
138. Similar to FI-RSV, FI-HMPV and heat-inactivated HMPV vaccines in mice, cotton rats, and macaques led to enhanced disease following viral infection and to high mortality and increased levels of cytokines and lung inflammation
139–
141. These studies show that these kinds of vaccines not only do not induce protective immunity but may lead to increased morbidity and mortality.In comparison with inactivated vaccines, subunit vaccines that contain partial or full-length viral proteins, particularly the HMPV F protein, have been more encouraging. Several studies of recombinant F protein report protective immunity without enhanced disease in cotton rats, hamsters, and non-human primates
91,
123. Another non-replicating vaccine approach is virus-like particles using HMPV M and F proteins expressed in human embryonic kidney epithelial cells
101,
123,
142 or generated using retroviral vectors
143. All of these approaches have induced neutralizing antibodies and in some cases functional T-cell responses
101,
142, leading to protection without signs of enhanced disease. Unfortunately, although subunit vaccines do induce immune responses when challenged with HMPV, the immune response may rapidly wane over time and may require multiple immunizations.CTL epitopes have been employed as peptide vaccines in mice. CTL epitope vaccines protected mice from HMPV infection by reducing viral load and lung immunopathology, generating effector and memory T-cell response, enhancing T helper 1 (Th1)-type cytokine expression, and reducing Th2-type cytokine expression
144. Other peptide vaccine approaches have induced functional memory CD8
+ T cells that were associated with reduced viral titers
89,
100,
142. A recent study constructed a multi-epitope peptide (MEP), consisting of six B-cell epitopes, four CTL epitopes, and two T helper cell epitopes. MEP caused both strong humoral immunity, as indicated by increased antibody levels, and cell-mediated immunity, as indicated by increased lymphocyte levels and activity
145.Future directionsAlthough HMPV was only discovered in 2001, there have been many advances in understanding mechanisms by which HMPV causes disease. Serologic and evolutionary studies indicate that HMPV has circulated for many years undetected. Robust animal models have been established, and candidate vaccines and antibodies have been developed. However, there is still much in the field regarding pathogenesis, immunity, antivirals, and vaccines that is yet to be discovered.


Title: Household transmission of human metapneumovirus and seasonal coronavirus

Key results
Infection of school-aged children is an important driver of respiratory virus transmission within households.As the age of an index case increases, the likelihood of human metapneumovirus transmission increases within households.As household density increases, the likelihood of seasonal coronavirus transmission increases within households.IntroductionHuman metapneumovirus (HMPV) and human coronavirus (HCOV) are RNA viruses that commonly cause seasonal acute respiratory illness (ARI). In temperate climates, HMPV and HCOV often circulate in winter and early spring and can infect individuals of all ages multiple times over the course of their lives [1–3]. The viruses primarily cause respiratory symptoms that are usually mild to moderate in healthy adolescents and adults, but can lead to severe illness in young children, the elderly, and individuals with compromised immune systems [4–10]. Since people are unlikely to seek medical attention for a mild to moderate illness and laboratory testing can be limited in clinical settings, it is difficult to assess the magnitude of outbreaks and overall disease burden. There are currently no approved treatments beyond supportive care, making prevention a crucial part of protecting at-risk populations [11].Most of what is known about HMPV and HCOV comes from clinical research focused on individual infections among patients [12]. We assessed household transmission rates for HMPV and HCOV using data collected for a community-based respiratory virus study where over 80% of participating families indicated they did not intend to seek medical care [13].MethodsThe ORegon CHild Absenteeism due to Respiratory Disease Study (ORCHARDS) is a community-based prospective study in the Oregon School District, located in southcentral Wisconsin. Students within the school district are eligible to participate if they have (1) at least two acute respiratory symptoms (rhinorrhea, nasal congestion, sneezing, sore throat, cough, fever) that began within 7 days of contacting research staff and (2) a Jackson Score of 2 or more [14–16]. The Jackson score is a symptom-scoring system commonly used to assess viral illnesses. It is calculated by summing the severity points (0 = absent, 1 = mild, 2 = moderate, 3 = severe) for eight common cold symptoms (nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sneezing, sore throat, cough, malaise, chilliness, and headache).ORCHARDS began recruiting K-12 students on 5 January 2015. The following year, starting 6 January 2016, student families could participate in an optional supplementary study examining household transmission of influenza. Families could re-enrol in ORCHARDS and the supplementary household study if new symptoms began 30 days or 7 days after previous participation, depending on whether their illness occurred outside of an influenza season or during an influenza season. Each time a family participated, they were considered a unique episode and could be counted multiple times throughout the study period.When students enrolled in ORCHARDS, research staff visited their homes to collect student demographic and illness information, a nasal swab for rapid influenza diagnostic testing, and either a nasopharyngeal (NP) or an oropharyngeal (OP) swab for reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Families who consented to the household transmission study received supplies for participating family members to collect their own nasal swabs on the day of the initial ORCHARDS visit and an additional swab 7 days later. Research staff retrieved Day 0 and Day 7 specimens from all family members (including a self-collected Day 7 swab from the ORCHARDS student) and shipped them via courier to the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene for molecular testing.DiagnosticsAll specimens from ORCHARDS students and household members were tested for influenza A and B viruses and Human Ribonuclease P using the in vitro diagnostic FDA-approved CDC Human Influenza Virus Real-time RT-PCR Diagnostic Panel (Cat.# FluiVD03) [17]. Day 0 staff-collected specimens from students were also tested for HMPV, HCOV, and other respiratory viruses using the multiplexed RT-PCR respiratory pathogen panel (Luminex NxTAG Respiratory Pathogen Panel) [18]. Aliquots of all residual specimens were archived at ≤−70 °C at the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene. Additional information on original study design can be found elsewhere [13, 19].For this analysis, we performed retrospective testing on archived specimens collected from (1) symptomatic and asymptomatic family members if the ORCHARDS student was positive for HMPV, and (2) symptomatic family members if the student was positive for coronavirus OC43 or HKU1. Coronavirus OC43 and HKU1 are beta coronaviruses, which are also responsible for severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-2002), Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome (MERS-2012), and coronavirus disease (COVID/SARS-2019). We did not distinguish between HMPV strains.Index cases for each household were determined by the first date of test positivity, or the first date of reported symptom onset if the date of tests positivity was tied. In one family instance for HMPV, a tie still existed, and both members were considered as index, using the worst symptom severity between the two, and index symptoms reported as occurring between either index.Statistical analysisWe performed individual and family-level regression models to assess factors that may be associated with HMPV and HCOV household transmission. The family-level model was a binomial regression with the outcome being the proportion of the family who tested positive for HMPV or HCOV (excluding the index case) within 7 days of the initial ORCHARDS visit. Covariates were the age of the index case, household density (number of family members divided by number of bedrooms in the household), and severity of the index case symptoms based on a scale of 1 (mild), 2 (moderate), or 3 (severe). Family size (number of non-index consenting family members) was accounted for in the model as a weight. For the individual-level model, a mixed effects binomial regression model was used, with each of the non-index case member’s HMPV or HCOV infection status (within 7 days) as the outcome, and with covariates of index case age, index case symptom severity, household density, and the age of the individual family member for the outcome observed. The family cluster was incorporated as a random intercept in the model.Secondary analyses examined specific symptoms of the index case that were present, instead of index case severity. The model structures were the same as described above for both the family and individual-level models for both viruses, except one of the five following symptoms replaced index severity: fever, cough, rhinorrhea, malaise, and nasal congestion. Due to multicollinearity concerns, severity was removed when individual symptoms were examined. For each model type and virus type (individual- and family-level; HMPV and HCOV), the p-values for the set of five symptoms were also subjected to a Benjamini–Hochberg correction controlling false discovery rate at 5% before statistical significance was determined. Statistical significance was assessed at the 5% level. All analyses were performed in R version 4.1.0 [20], with the lme4 package [21] used for fitting mixed effects models and ggplot2 [22] for graphics.Project approvalAll components of ORCHARDS were reviewed and approved by the Human Subjects Committees of the Education and Social/Behavioral Sciences Internal Review Board (IRB) and the University of Wisconsin Health Sciences IRB (initial approval on 4 September 2013; ID number: 2013–1268) and the University of Wisconsin Health Sciences-IRB (initial approval on 5 December 2013, with additional approvals as the protocol expanded and modified; ID number: 2013–1357). The study is in full compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA), and all other federally mandated human subjects.ResultsBetween 5 January 2015 and 12 March 2020, there were 1394 families who consented to the ORCHARDS household transmission study. We performed retrospective testing on samples collected from 128 families, where the Day 0 staff-collected sample from the ORCHARDS student was either positive for HMPV or HCOV (Table 1).Table 1.Participant characteristics and illness presentation resulting from human metapneumovirus (HMPV) and human coronaviruses OC43 and HKU1 (HCOV)CharacteristicsHMPVHCOVTotal participants285239Mean age (SD)23.46 (16.64)23.35 (16.94)<18 years old, n(%)150 (52.6)133 (55.6)Female, n (%)143 (50.2)107 (44.8)Family role, n (%)   Student71 (24.9)57 (23.8)   Grandparent0 (0)2 (0.8)   Other adult0 (0)1 (0.4)   Parent133 (46.7)102 (42.7)   Sibling81 (28.4)77 (32.2)Mean household density (SD)0.91 (0.29)1.05 (0.32)Virus detected, n (%)98 (34.4)89 (37.2)Secondary infection risk, % (95% CI)12.2% (8.1–17.4)19.2% (13.8–25.7)Days from symptom onset, mean (range)1.09 (0–11)1.58 (0–10)Index cases, n (%)72
a (25.3)57 (23.8)Index symptoms
a
   Rhinorrhea, n (%)61 (85.9)50 (87.7)   Nasal congestion, n (%)68 (95.8)49 (86.0)   Sore throat, n (%)53 (74.6)34 (59.6)   Cough, n (%)68 (95.8)47 (82.5)   Malaise, n (%)60 (84.5)41 (71.9)   Chills, n (%)44 (62.0)23 (40.4)   Headache, n (%)41 (57.7)29 (50.9)   Fever, n (%)47 (66.2)25 (43.9)Index illness severity, n (%)   None0 (0)1 (1.8)   Mild8 (11.3)18 (31.6)   Moderate58 (81.7)35 (61.4)   Severe5 (7.0)3 (5.3)
aIn one of the 71 HMPV families in the analyses, a tie for index case was determined (same reported positive test dates and symptom start dates), and both members were considered as index. Specific symptoms were considered as occurring in either subject, and the worst illness severity between the two was used. Thus the N for specific symptoms and severity for the index in the HMPV analyses is out of 71, not 72.Human metapneumovirusSeventy-one families comprised of 285 individuals were considered for this analysis because the ORCHARDS student tested positive for HMPV. There were 20 families with possible household transmission where at least one secondary infection of HMPV was detected. There were 72 index cases and 213 non-index cases. The index case was determined by the date of symptoms onset. For one family, we were unable to determine the index case because two family members had the same onset date.The secondary infection rate for households was 12.2% (95% CI: 8.1%–17.4%) with 26 out of 213 non-index family members contracting HMPV. The average time for transmission from an index to a secondary case (difference between symptom onset for HMPV-positive members) was 5.2 days (±3.26). The transmission assessment period was 14 days (7 days before the initial household visit and the 7 days between Day 0 and Day 7 sample collection). The minimum documented transmission time was 0 day and the maximum time was 11 days. We detected one case of asymptomatic infection of HMPV among a non-index family member.Age of index case was positively associated with testing positive for HMPV in both the individual model (OR = 1.05, p = 0.004) and family model (OR = 1.06, p = 0.016; (Table 2 and Figure 1). In the individual model, age of the non-index case was negatively associated with the likelihood of testing positive for HMPV during the 7-day monitoring period (OR = 0.97, p = 0.049). Index case severity and sleeping density were not statistically significant in either model. When we substituted individual symptoms for symptom severity, none of the five symptoms of interest (fever, cough, rhinorrhea, malaise, and nasal congestion) were significant for HMPV in either the family or individual-level models.Table 2.Human metapneumovirus household transmission regressionModelCovariateOROR CI
p-valueFamilyHousehold density2.210.60–8.20.234Index case severity1.660.56–4.980.363Index case age (years)1.051.02–1.090.004*
IndividualsHousehold density1.910.31–12.010.488Index case severity1.820.45–7.330.399Index case age (years)1.061.01–1.100.016*
At–risk / non–index subject age (years)0.970.94–1.000.049*
*
p-value ≤ 0.05.
Figure 1.Age of index case and proportion of other household members having human metapneumovirus.Human coronavirus OC43 and HKU1Fifty-seven families comprised of 239 individuals were considered for this analysis because the ORCHARDS student tested positive for either HCOV OC43 or HKU1. Twenty-one families had a possible case of household transmission where at least one secondary infection was detected. The secondary infection rate for households was 19.2% (95% CI: 13.8%–25.7%) with 35 out of 182 non-index family members contracting HCOV. The average time for transmission from index to secondary case was 4.4 days (± 3.2). The minimum documented transmission time was 0 days and the maximum time was 10 days.In the family-level regression, number of family members per bedroom was positively associated with the proportion of the family members who contracted the virus (OR = 4.81, p = 0.048; Table 3 and Figure 2). In the individual model, age of the non-index case was negatively associated with the likelihood of testing positive for HCOV (OR = 0.97, p = 0.041; Table 3). Index case severity and index case age were not statistically significant in either model, nor were individual symptoms (fever, cough, rhinorrhea, malaise, and nasal congestion) when substituted them for severity.Table 3.Human coronaviruses OC43 and HKU1 household transmission regressionModelCovariateOROR CI
p-valueFamilyHousehold density4.811.01–22.80.048*
Index case severity1.320.56–3.100.525Index case age (years)1.020.97–1.070.431IndividualsHousehold density3.680.55–24.470.178Index case severity1.020.38–2.720.968Index case age (years)1.010.96–1.070.681At–risk/non–index subject age (years)0.970.95–1.000.041*
*
p-value ≤ 0.05.
Figure 2.Household density and proportion of other family members having coronavirus.DiscussionWe assessed household transmission of HMPV and HCOV (OC43 and HKU1) and found a secondary infection rate of 12.2% and 19.2%, respectively. Using individual- and family-level regression models, we also examined possible factors that could have contributed to household transmission (age, severity of illness, individual symptoms, and household density). In both models, the age of index case was positively associated with individuals testing positive for HMPV. A positive association between household density and the proportion of family members who contracted HCOV was detected in the family-level model. The only statistically significant finding that HMPV and HCOV had in common was a negative association between the age of non-index case and the likelihood of testing positive. This association is likely the result of recruitment bias since family participation was dependent on a K-12 student being sick.Secondary infections riskThere is limited research available on secondary infection or transmission rates for HMPV in the literature for comparison. In a case report on the unexpected death of a 33-month-old infected with HMPV, health authorities found a prevalence of 36% among the 22 tested children who attended the same daycare as the child who died [12]. One study in Japan looked at HMPV infection among family members, but researchers were unable to determine the total frequency of HMPV infections within households because they were limited to testing family members who presented to paediatric outpatient clinics [23]. For the family members who visited the clinics, the average time between cases was 4–5 days, which was comparable to our findings. In the broader literature, the average timeframe is thought to be between 4 and 9 days [24].Following the COVID-19 pandemic, household studies assessing transmissibility of seasonal coronavirus and SARS-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) have become more common. Some studies reported a secondary infection rate over 50% for SARS-CoV-2 [25]. In contrast, seasonal coronavirus tends to be lower. One study reported an overall secondary infection rate of 8% and a median symptom onset of 7 days [26]. Another study found a secondary infection risk that ranged from 7.2% to 12.6%, depending on the seasonal strain [27]. Our secondary infection rate is closer to some of the SARS-CoV-2 estimates, but that may be due to differences in study design.Additionally, the methods used here assumes that non-index infections are from the index case themselves, and not from outside the family, or secondary cases in the family, which may upward bias the secondary infection estimates in this study versus reality.Factors contributing to household transmissionThe positive association found in the family-level model between index case age and likelihood of spreading HMPV to other family members should be interpreted carefully. There were only four instances where a parental figure was the index case, and this cluster could be driving the association, though having a head-of-household as the index may represent greater infection risk for the family. If an index indicator of child versus adult is used instead of index age, significant positive association is maintained between an adult index and the risk of secondary infections. However, a positive association was also detected in the individual model, where the presence of potential bias is at play. Since students are represented in the lower age cluster, we would expect some of the proportion values to be lower than they are, given that student respiratory symptoms are a pre-requisite for study inclusion. Thus, the association between index case age and likelihood of spreading HMPV is potentially stronger than what we observed. Our findings are also supported by the literature. Some studies have indicated that children younger than 5 years are the most susceptible to HMPV infection, and in some cases, younger siblings are likely to acquire HMPV infection from their older siblings [23, 28].Average household density was slightly higher among the HCOV group than the HMPV group, which might have contributed to a higher secondary infection rate. The relatively small sample size may explain why the positive association between household density and the proportion of family members contracting HCOV only showed up in the family-level model and was not seen in the HMPV models. The definition of household density is also imprecise because it is based on the number of bedrooms in a household and does not account for instances where family members share bedrooms.LimitationsThere were additional limitations in this study. Notably, if the student was not the index case in the house, the student would still be positive for HMPV or HCOV since family member specimens would not have been tested for either virus if the student had not initially tested positive. Instances where a non-student family member fails to pass HMPV or HCOV on to a student are likely underreported because the family would not meet the initial inclusion criteria of having a student in the household with respiratory symptoms. It is also possible that the true index case recovered before enrolling in the study, or an additional family member became ill after the observational period. We may catch some infections prior to the student becoming ill and qualifying for the study by asking if anyone had symptoms 7 days prior to the ORCHARDS visit, but we are unable to determine the extent of spread beyond the enrollment period. Thus, findings such as the average time for transmission may be limited due to the 14-day transmission assessment period. Alternatively, it is also possible we missed infections from days 1–6, if the individual became ill and recovered between sample collection days. However, this is less likely given the characteristics of both viruses [1, 4] and sensitivity of the RT-PCR test [18].ConclusionMost data on seasonal respiratory viruses are collected in clinic and hospital settings, which provides little insight into transmission within families and the broader community. This approach to disease surveillance can be more convenient and cost-effective, but it limits our understanding of the overall disease burden. Community studies provide a broader picture of transmission patterns, which can help inform preventative measures designed to keep people out of clinics and hospitals. HMPV and HCOV are two of the many respiratory viruses that can be acquired at school and easily spread to other family members. Age and household density may play a role in how many family members are likely to contract the virus. More research is needed to understand whether the same can be said for other common respiratory viruses.


Title: Receptors and host factors: key players in human metapneumovirus infection

IntroductionHuman metapneumovirus (hMPV) is an important cause of both upper and lower respiratory tract infections in infants and in elderly and immunocompromised patients worldwide (Falsey et al., 2003). Since its discovery in 2001, hMPV has been recognized as a major contributor to respiratory illnesses, ranging from mild upper respiratory tract disease to severe bronchiolitis and pneumonia. This results in substantial morbidity and mortality globally (van den Hoogen et al., 2001). Despite its clinical significance, there are currently no vaccines or specific antiviral treatments available for hMPV, highlighting the need for a deeper and more comprehensive understanding of the virus–host interactions that drive its pathogenesis.HMPV is an enveloped, nonsegmented, negative-sense RNA virus that belongs to the Pneumoviridae family. Two major genotypes of the virus exist, hMPV-A and hMPV-B, with further subdivisions: A1, A2 (including the A2a, A2b, and A2c lineages), B1, and B2 (comprising the B2a and B2b lineages) (Piñana et al., 2023).The hMPV genome spans approximately 13 kb and consists of eight genes arranged in the sequence 3′-N-P-M-F-M2-SH-G-L-5′ (
Figure 1
), collectively encoding nine viral proteins. The M2 gene is unique because its mRNA contains two overlapping open reading frames (ORFs), producing M2-1 (putative transcription factor) and M2-2 (RNA synthesis regulatory factor) proteins (Biacchesi et al., 2007; Zhao et al., 2022). The virus expresses three membrane proteins crucial for host cell infection: F (fusion glycoprotein), G (attachment glycoprotein), and SH (small hydrophobic glycoprotein). The remaining viral components include N (nucleoprotein), P (phosphoprotein), M (matrix protein), and L (viral polymerase) (
Figure 1
) (van den Hoogen et al., 2002).Figure 1
(A) Genomic organization of human metapneumovirus. (B) Schematic illustration of hMPV (By Figdraw).HMPV replication begins when the G and F proteins facilitate virus attachment and membrane fusion, facilitating the release of the RNA genome into the cell. The genome then undergoes transcription and replication, producing viral mRNAs and new genomes for protein synthesis. The newly synthesized viral genome combines with the P, N, L, and M2 proteins and becomes encased by the M protein. Concurrently, F, G, and SH proteins are modified in the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex. These components then assemble on the cell membrane to form new virus particles, which bud from the cell surface (Schildgen et al., 2011; Feuillet et al., 2012; Panda et al., 2014) (
Figure 2
).Figure 2Schematic representation of host cell receptors and factors essential for the hMPV life cycle.This review aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the current knowledge concerning the host factors, receptors and noncoding RNAs involved in hMPV infection. By elucidating the mechanisms by which hMPV interacts with host cells, we can contribute to the development of effective antiviral strategies and improve clinical outcomes for individuals affected by this pathogen.Receptors for hMPV infectionHMPV replicates extensively in airway epithelial cells (AECs) and persists there after completing its replication cycle (Kuiken et al., 2004; Soto et al., 2018). Previous studies revealed that infectious viruses were detectable in the lungs for up to 60 days. The most notable finding was the extraordinary persistence of viral genomic RNA, which remained detectable for as long as 180 days post infection, despite the presence of neutralizing antibodies (Alvarez et al., 2004). Although the precise mechanisms of hMPV immune evasion remain incompletely understood, multiple viral proteins have been shown to facilitate hMPV entry into host cells and evade immune responses (
Table 1
).Table 1Receptors for hMPV infection.ReceptorsBinding toFunctionsCell/tissue distributionReferencesHSPGsG protein/F proteinpromoting viral attachment and entryubiquitous expression(Thammawat et al., 2008; Chang et al., 2012)DC-SIGN/L-SIGNG proteinpromoting viral attachment and entry; mediate infection without GAGsdendritic cells and endothelial cells(Le Nouën et al., 2014; Gillespie et al., 2016)IntegrinsF proteinmediate viral fusion and entry; facilitate transcription and subsequent infectionmultiple cell types(Cseke et al., 2009; Cox et al., 2012)The G protein of hMPV plays a crucial role in the initial stages of infection by interacting with heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) (Thammawat et al., 2008; Chang et al., 2012), dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) and liver/lymph node-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin (L-SIGN) (Le Nouën et al., 2014; Gillespie et al., 2016). These interactions facilitate viral attachment and entry into host cells. The F protein of hMPV mediates viral-host membrane fusion. Notably, this protein alone can facilitate both attachment and fusion in the absence of the G protein (Biacchesi et al., 2004; Cox and Williams, 2013). Integrins (Cseke et al., 2009; Cox et al., 2012) and HSPGs (Chang et al., 2012) have been implicated in the fusion and internalization processes mediated by the F protein of hMPV. The small hydrophobic (SH) protein of hMPV also contributes to the virus ability to evade the host immune response by inhibiting apoptosis in infected cells. Among these, HSPGs are important for hMPV attachment to cell surfaces because of their widespread expression and ability to bind to viral particles. The G and F proteins are involved in modulating the host immune response, aiding the virus in more effectively infecting host cells and evading immune surveillance. These functions enable hMPV to infect host cells more efficiently and replicate successfully.Heparan sulfate proteoglycansHeparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) are widely expressed on the surface of various cell types and in the extracellular matrix (ECM). HSPGs consist of a core protein with one or more covalently attached heparan sulfate (HS) chains (Esko et al., 2009). HSPGs are multifunctional molecules that play vital roles in cell signalling, tissue organization, and disease progression. They play a significant role in viral infections by serving as an attachment and entry receptor for various viruses, such as respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) (Krusat and Streckert, 1997; Bourgeois et al., 1998), SARS-CoV-2 (De Pasquale et al., 2021), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (Bartlett and Park, 2011), and herpes simplex virus (HSV) (Shukla et al., 1999).The G protein of hMPV has specific regions rich in positively charged amino acids that bind to the negatively charged HSPGs on the host cell surface. This interaction is crucial for the initial attachment and subsequent infection of host cells by hMPV, highlighting the G protein’s role as a key factor in the virus ability to infect and propagate within the host (Thammawat et al., 2008). The F protein is responsible for the fusion of the viral envelope with the host cell membrane, facilitating the entry of the virus into the host cell. This protein undergoes conformational changes that enable it to mediate membrane fusion at the cell surface or within endosomes. The binding of the F protein to HSPGs facilitates viral attachment and enhances infectivity (Chang et al., 2012). Although these two studies yielded different results, such discrepancy may be attributed to the distinct experimental approaches employed by different research groups: Chang et al. conducted experiments using G protein-deficient recombinant viruses (Chang et al., 2012), whereas Thammawat et al. primarily focused on characterizing the binding properties of recombinant G protein (Thammawat et al., 2008).Dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin and liver/lymph node-specific ICAM-3 grabbing nonintegrinsDendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing nonintegrin (DC-SIGN) is a type II membrane protein consisting of 404 amino acids with three distinct domains (Zhou et al., 2006). Its homolog, liver/lymph node-specific ICAM-3 grabbing nonintegrin (L-SIGN or DC-SIGNR), shares 73% identity with DC-SIGN at the nucleic acid level and has a similar genomic organization (Soilleux et al., 2000). These proteins exhibit distinct tissue-specific expression patterns. DC-SIGN is predominantly expressed on dendritic cells (DCs) within lymphoid tissues, mucosal surfaces, and the dermis. In contrast, L-SIGN is mainly found on endothelial cells, specifically in lymph nodes, placenta, and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (LSECs). These distinct tissue distributions suggest different functional roles for these proteins across various anatomical sites (Lozach et al., 2007).The extracellular domain consists of a stalk that mediates tetramerization and a COOH terminal carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) that belongs to the C-type (Ca2+-dependent) lectin superfamily (Feinberg et al., 2001). This domain binds with high affinity to ICAM-3 (intercellular adhesion molecule 3), playing a role in pathogen recognition and immune response modulation (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Although macropinocytosis has been identified as the primary route for hMPV entry into monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MDDCs), DC-SIGN-mediated endocytosis also plays a significant role as a supplementary pathway for hMPV entry and infection (Le Nouën et al., 2014). A study by Gillespie et al. demonstrated that both DC-SIGN and L-SIGN act as attachment factors for hMPV, facilitating viral binding to host cells independently of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). These receptors enable hMPV infection through a calcium-dependent mechanism and a dynamin-mediated endocytosis pathway (Gillespie et al., 2016). These findings highlight the role of DC-SIGN and L-SIGN in facilitating alternative pathways for hMPV entry, broadening the understanding of viral infection mechanisms and identifying potential therapeutic targets.IntegrinsIntegrins, widely expressed across diverse cell types, are a family of cell adhesion receptors that are integral to a variety of cellular processes, including signal transduction, cell survival, proliferation, and migration. They are bidirectional signalling molecules that mediate cell–cell and cell–extracellular matrix interactions (Hynes, 2002). Integrins are heterodimers of noncovalently associated α and β subunits, each forming a single-pass type I transmembrane protein (Harburger and Calderwood, 2009). The α and β subunits have distinct domain structures, with extracellular domains from each subunit contributing to the ligand-binding site of the heterodimer. The sequence arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) was identified as a general integrin-binding motif, but individual integrins are also specific for particular protein ligands (Takada et al., 2007). These conformational shifts enable integrins to bind ligands and connect with the cytoskeleton and signalling pathways within the cell.HMPV utilizes integrin receptors to facilitate its entry into host cells. Specifically, the hMPV fusion (F) protein contains an RGD motif, enabling it to interact with multiple RGD-binding integrins, such as αVβ1, αVβ5, αVβ6, and αVβ8 (Cox et al., 2012). Integrin αVβ1 consists of the αV (alpha V) and β1 (beta 1) subunits, which are required for efficient hMPV infection. Blockade of the cell surface αVβ1 integrin inhibits hMPV infectivity. Furthermore, the introduction of αV or β1 cDNAs into nonpermissive cells conferred hMPV infectivity, whereas the siRNA-mediated reduction in αV and β1 integrin expression inhibited hMPV infection (Cseke et al., 2009).Host restriction factors for hMPV infectionHost restriction factors are cellular proteins that constitute an essential component of the innate immune system, providing the first line of defence against viral infections. These proteins inhibit viral replication and dissemination within the host by targeting various stages of the viral life cycle. Host restriction factors are characterized by the following (1): Germ-Line Encoded: Most host restriction factors are encoded in the germ line and are present in almost all cell types. This ubiquity ensures a broad and rapid defence mechanism against a variety of viral pathogens (2). Interferon-Inducible and Constitutive Expression: Many restriction factors are inducible by interferons, a subset of which is constitutively expressed, allowing for immediate antiviral responses upon viral detection (3). Targeting Conserved Viral Components: These factors often target highly conserved viral components, making them effective against a wide range of viruses. This characteristic reduces the likelihood of viral escape through mutation (4). Additional Biological Functions: Besides their role in immunity, host restriction factors often have other biological functions, including cellular regulation, which may contribute to their antiviral activities (Kluge et al., 2015).Host restriction factors are cellular proteins that inhibit viral replication and spread, playing crucial roles in antiviral defence. The key host restriction factors for hMPV include interferon-induced transmembrane proteins (IFITMs) (McMichael et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2019), retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) (Bao et al., 2008; Liao et al., 2008), and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) (Ren et al., 2012; Baños-Lara Mdel et al., 2013; Spann et al., 2014) (
Table 2
).Table 2Host factors associated with hMPV infection.Host factorsFunctionsCell/tissue distributionReferencesHost restriction factorsIFITMspreventing viral entry and membrane fusionubiquitous expression(McMichael et al., 2018; Smith et al., 2019)RIG-I/MDA5activating NF-κB and IRF transcription factorsubiquitous expression(Bao et al., 2008; Liao et al., 2008; Baños-Lara Mdel et al., 2013)Host factors required for hMPV infectionTLR4/7reducing infiltration of inflammatory cells; facilitating viral entry; altering endosomal conditionsvarious immune cells(Kolli et al., 2011; Velayutham et al., 2013; McMichael et al., 2018)PAR-1promoting viral replicationblood cells, epithelial cells and immune cells(Lê et al., 2018)TMPRSS2facilitating viral fusionepithelial cells(Shirogane et al., 2008)Interferon-induced transmembrane proteinsInterferon-induced transmembrane proteins (IFITMs) are small transmembrane proteins that are ubiquitously expressed and characterized by conserved domains, including two hydrophobic regions that enable their integration into cellular membranes (Brass et al., 2009). At least three human IFITM proteins—IFITM1, IFITM2, and IFITM3—have antiviral activity; these proteins restrict early stages of replication in RSV (Everitt et al., 2013; Zhang et al., 2015), influenza A virus (Brass et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2011), flaviviruses (Brass et al., 2009; Jiang et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2011), SARS-CoV-2 (Prelli Bozzo et al., 2021), and others by inhibiting viral entry and fusion.IFITM3 restricts endocytosed viral infections by blocking fusion and preventing viral genome entry into the cytosol, although the exact mechanism of inhibition remains unknown (Feeley et al., 2011). IFITM3 inhibits hMPV by blocking the virus fusion with host cell membranes via the hMPV F protein, and importantly, altering the level, localization, or activity of IFITM3 in cells can significantly affect hMPV infection (McMichael et al., 2018).HMPV utilizes a bifurcated cellular entry strategy, either by fusing with the plasma membrane or with the endosomal membrane following endocytosis (Cox et al., 2015). IFITM3 is located predominantly in late endosomes and lysosomes, whereas IFITM1 is expressed mainly on the plasma membrane (Bailey et al., 2014; Weston et al., 2014). IFITM1 inhibits hMPV infection by blocking the fusion of the viral envelope with the host cell membrane, preventing the virus from entering the cytoplasm and establishing infection (Smith et al., 2019).Retinoic acid-inducible gene I and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5The RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), expressed in most cell types, comprise retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), and laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 (LGP2) play major roles in sensing RNA virus infections to initiate and modulate antiviral immunity (Loo and Gale, 2011). RLRs detect viral RNA or altered self-RNA within the cytoplasm, initiating innate immune responses and inflammatory processes, while also regulating gene expression to manage and counteract infections. RIG-I detects viral RNA generated during RNA virus replication, whereas MDA5 primarily recognizes synthetic dsRNA analogues such as poly(I:C) (Kato et al., 2006). The activation of RIG-I and MDA5 leads to the production of IFN and other inflammatory cytokines.Silencing RIG-I using small interfering RNA (siRNA) or expressing dominant negative RIG-I mutants significantly decreases hMPV-induced expression of IFN-β, IL-8, and RANTES by inhibiting the activation of the NF-κB and IRF transcription factors, leading to increased viral replication (Bao et al., 2008; Liao et al., 2008). In hMPV-infected mice, the absence of MDA5 can increase the levels of CXCL1, IL-6, IL-1α, and G-CSF and lead to an increased inflammatory response and delayed recovery, as indicated by prolonged body weight loss and heightened pulmonary inflammation (Baños-Lara Mdel et al., 2013). Mitochondrial antiviral signalling protein (MAVS), also known as interferon-β promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), is crucial for the RLR pathway and facilitates the activation of NF-κB and IRF3, leading to the production of type I IFNs (Johnson and Gale, 2006; Seth et al., 2006).Host factors required for hMPV infectionHost factors can either promote or inhibit hMPV infection and replication. Several host-promoting factors facilitate hMPV infection and replication within the host. These factors increase the virus ability to infect cells, evade the immune system, and propagate within the host. Key promoting host factors have been reported for hMPV (
Table 2
): toll like receptor 4 (TLR4) (Kolli et al., 2011; Velayutham et al., 2013), toll like receptor 7 (TLR7) (McMichael et al., 2018), protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) (Lê et al., 2018) and transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) (Shirogane et al., 2008).Toll like receptors 4 and 7To date, twelve members of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family, predominantly expressed in immune cells, have been discovered in mammals. These TLRs are type I transmembrane glycoproteins that feature extracellular domains with varying numbers of leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) motifs. Additionally, they possess a cytoplasmic signalling domain known as the Toll/IL-1R homology (TIR) domain, which is similar to the domain found in the interleukin-1 receptor (IL-1R) (Bowie and O’Neill, 2000).Based on their primary sequences, Toll-like receptors (TLRs) can be categorized into various subfamilies, each of which specializes in the recognition of specific pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). TLR7, which recognizes nucleic acids, is localized within endosomes, whereas TLR4, which is capable of detecting a diverse array of ligands, is primarily found on the plasma membrane and can also localize to endosomes upon ligand binding (Akira et al., 2006; Kagan and Medzhitov, 2006).TLR4 is crucial for both activating innate immune responses and contributing to disease pathology during hMPV infection. Compared with wild-type mice, mice lacking TLR4 exhibit significantly reduced inflammation and disease severity upon hMPV infection, as evidenced by less weight loss and airway obstruction. Silencing TLR4 expression significantly blocked hMPV-induced chemokine and type I interferon expression in both monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs) and bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BM-DCs). However, the ability to replicate and clear the virus, as well as T-cell proliferation and neutralizing antibody production, were unaffected (Kolli et al., 2011; Velayutham et al., 2013).The presence of TLR7 leads to enhanced hMPV infection, revealing an unexpected role of this typically antiviral receptor. TLR7 and IFITM3 are both endosomal proteins that have opposing effects on hMPV infection, with TLR7 promoting infection and IFITM3 restricting it. Additionally, HEK293T cells coexpressing TLR7 and IFITM3 presented altered infection rates, suggesting a complex relationship in which TLR7 can modulate the host antiviral response, potentially impacting the overall dynamics of hMPV infection (McMichael et al., 2018).Protease-activated receptor 1Protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) is a member of the G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) family that is activated by proteolytic cleavage, particularly by the enzyme thrombin. This 425-amino-acid receptor contains seven transmembrane-spanning domains and a thrombin cleavage site between residues 41 and 42 (Sidhu et al., 2014). PAR-1 is widely distributed, with expression in all blood cell types as well as epithelial and immune cells (Liu et al., 2017). Upon activation, PAR-1 mediates various cellular responses, including platelet aggregation, endothelial cell activation, and inflammation (Coughlin, 2000).Inhibiting PAR-1 with the antagonist RWJ-56110 effectively reduced both viral replication and inflammation associated with hMPV infection. Specifically, the inhibition of PAR-1 led to decreased weight loss and mortality in infected mice, highlighting its detrimental role in these viral infections (Lê et al., 2018).Transmembrane protease, serine 2Transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) is a type II transmembrane protein with intracellular, LDL receptor class A (LDLRA), scavenger receptor cysteine-rich (SRCR), and serine protease domains (Paoloni-Giacobino et al., 1997). This protease is predominantly expressed in epithelial cells and shows androgen-dependent upregulation in prostate cancer (Lin et al., 1999; Afar et al., 2001). Functionally, TMPRSS2 plays a crucial role in the infection process of various respiratory viruses, such as SARS-CoV-2 (Hoffmann et al., 2020) and influenza viruses (Böttcher et al., 2006).The generation of Vero cells that constitutively express TMPRSS2 greatly enhances the cleavage and activation of the HMPV F protein, which is crucial for the fusion of the viral membrane with the host cell membrane. This efficient cleavage and activation of the F protein by TMPRSS2 significantly improves the replication and multiplication of HMPV in host cells (Shirogane et al., 2008).Noncoding RNAsNoncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) are functional RNA molecules that play regulatory roles without participating in protein synthesis. NcRNAs are categorized into two main groups on the basis of their functions: housekeeping and regulatory ncRNAs. Regulatory ncRNAs are subdivided according to their length. Short regulatory ncRNAs (sncRNAs, <200 nucleotides) include PIWI-interacting RNAs and microRNAs (miRNAs). The long ncRNAs (lncRNAs, ≥500 nucleotides) include long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs), pseudogenic RNAs (PGs), natural antisense transcripts (NATs), and circular RNAs (circRNAs) (Eddy, 2001; Poliseno et al., 2024).MiRNAs are (19–24 nucleotides) regulators found in animals, plants, and viruses. They bind to complementary sequences in the 3′ UTRs of target mRNAs to repress translation and/or trigger mRNA degradation (Skalsky and Cullen, 2010; George et al., 2024). MiRNAs can have dual effects on viral replication. Some miRNAs show inhibitory effects, such as miR-24 and miR-93, which target vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) RNA and promote antiviral defence (Otsuka et al., 2007). Others have demonstrated promotional effects, as exemplified by miR-146a, which enhances Hendra virus (HeV) replication by suppressing RNF11 (Stewart et al., 2013).Analysis of hMPV infection revealed altered cellular expression profiles, with miRNA levels increasing from 66.51% to over 86% after 15 hours. Among these changes, 142 miRNAs were upregulated, and 32 were downregulated (Deng et al., 2014). Notably, let-7f was significantly upregulated and exhibited antiviral effects: its inhibitors increased viral replication, whereas its mimics reduced it. The viral M2-2 protein regulated miRNAs such as miR-16 and miR-30a: miR-16 regulation depended on type I IFN signalling, whereas miR-30a was IFN independent, suggesting potential therapeutic targets (Wu et al., 2020).Furthermore, hsa-miR-4634 enhances viral immune evasion by inhibiting type I interferon responses and interferon-stimulated genes, increasing viral replication in macrophages and epithelial cells (Martínez-Espinoza et al., 2023).ProspectSince its discovery in 2001, hMPV has emerged as the second leading cause of bronchiolitis and pneumonia in children under 5 years of age. Despite its significant impact, no specific antiviral treatments or vaccines are currently available. Similar to the hRSV vaccine, formalin or heatinactivated hMPV vaccines led to a low induction of neutralising antibodies and enhanced immunemediated respiratory diseases in animal models (Hamelin et al., 2007; Yim et al., 2007). However, promising candidates are now in the preclinical research phase, offering hope for future prevention and treatment options. Notably, two vaccine candidates, one based on mRNAs and the other on virus-like particles, have progressed to phase I clinical trials (NCT05664334 and NCT05743881) (Guo et al., 2023). Furthermore, two additional candidates have already been evaluated in phase I clinical trials. A live attenuated vaccine (NCT01255410) was discontinued due to low infectivity and immunogenicity in seronegative children (Karron et al., 2018). Moreover, a combination mRNA vaccine (NCT03392389) targeting both hMPV and parainfluenza virus type 3 (PIV3) has shown promising safety and tolerability in healthy adults, whereas protective antibody levels for both hMPV and PIV3 are unknown (August et al., 2022). Neutralising monoclonal antibodies (nMAbs) are the core effectors of vaccines and are essential therapeutic immune drugs against infectious pathogens. The development of nMAbs against hMPV has accelerated in recent years as a result of breakthroughs in viral fusion (F) protein structural biology and experience with hRSV and other enveloped viruses (Guo et al., 2023). Among them, fully human antibodies, representing the predominant class (51%) of therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, have gained significant attention due to their low immunogenicity and excellent safety profile (Lu et al., 2020). To date, over 600 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) against hMPV have been developed, with the majority being fully human antibodies derived from approximately 50 donors. These mAbs exhibit potent binding affinity and demonstrate broad-spectrum neutralizing capabilities (Guo et al., 2023). Furthermore, a study has shown that the incorporation of RSV F protein epitopes into cold-adapted influenza vaccines provides effective protection against RSV infection (Xu et al., 2024). Considering the similar respiratory tropism and infection patterns observed between hMPV and RSV, the incorporation of hMPV F protein epitopes into cold-adapted influenza vaccine platforms may represent a rational strategy.Insufficient knowledge of how hMPV enters cells and interacts with the immune system has greatly hindered the development of vaccines and treatments for this virus. Here, we summarize the receptors, host factors and ncRNAs currently associated with hMPV infection (
Figure 2
), providing valuable insights into this significant respiratory pathogen. This information is crucial for developing targeted therapeutic strategies, improving our ability to combat hMPV, and offering prospective vaccines and treatments.Currently, despite extensive efforts by researchers, the precise mechanisms of hMPV receptor interactions and host factor functions remain incompletely understood, and their expression regulation under pathological conditions is yet to be elucidated. Among the aforementioned factors, HSPGs serve as dual-ligand attachment factors in hMPV infection, interacting with both the viral G and F proteins during entry, making them attractive therapeutic targets. The extensive presence of HSPGs across tissues indicates their possible therapeutic applications. Although modifying HSPG functions raises concerns about cell stability, molecules designed to interrupt virus–HSPG binding may represent promising treatment strategies. Comprehensive research is needed to validate this therapeutic approach.


Title: Human Metapneumovirus Infection in Wild Mountain Gorillas, Rwanda

The world’s remaining 786 mountain gorillas (Gorilla beringei beringei) live in 2 parks in Rwanda, Uganda, and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. An ecotourism industry for viewing human-habituated mountain gorillas in the wild is thriving in all 3 countries. Mountain gorilla tourism helps ensure the sustainability of the species by generating much-needed revenue and increasing global awareness of the precarious status of this species in the wild. Tourism, however, also poses a risk for disease transmission from humans to the gorillas.Habitat encroachment and poaching are threats to wildlife survival, particularly in the developing world. Mountain gorillas face an additional threat from infectious diseases. Second only to trauma, infectious diseases, primarily respiratory, account for 20% of sudden deaths (1). The close genetic relatedness of mountain gorillas and humans has led to concerns about the potential interspecies transmission of infectious agents (2,3). Although most surveillance efforts focus on risk for humans, mountain gorillas are immunologically naive and susceptible to infection with human pathogens. The parks in which mountain gorillas live are surrounded by the densest human populations in continental Africa. In addition, research and gorilla ecotourism brings thousands of persons from the local communities and from around the world into direct and indirect contact with the gorillas. The frequency and closeness of contact is particularly pronounced in Virunga National Park, where 75% of mountain gorillas are habituated to the presence of humans.To minimize the threat of disease transmission, the Rwandan, Ugandan, and Congolese governments restrict tourist numbers and proximity, and the Congolese wildlife authority mandates that masks be worn by persons visiting gorillas. Nonetheless, the frequency and severity of respiratory disease outbreaks among mountain gorillas in the Virunga Massif have recently increased. From May through August 2008, sequential respiratory outbreaks occurred in 4 groups of mountain gorillas accustomed to tourism in Rwanda. Between June 28 and August 6, 2009, a fifth outbreak occurred in 1 of these groups, Hirwa. We describe the Hirwa outbreak. Respiratory outbreaks were defined as more than one third of animals in a group exhibiting signs of respiratory disease (coughing, oculonasal discharge, and/or lethargy).The CasesThe Hirwa group consisted of 12 animals: 1 adult male, 6 adult females, 3 juveniles, and 2 infants. Moderate to severe respiratory disease (>2 characteristic signs) developed in 11 of 12 animals. Five (3 juvenile males and 2 adult females) received antimicrobial drug therapy (ceftriaxone, 50 mg/kg for adults, 100 mg/kg for infants), 4 by remote delivery and 1 while chemically immobilized. Two untreated animals (1 adult female and 1 male infant born to a symptomatic mother) died. On June 30, the adult female was first observed coughing and lethargic but still feeding. On July 3, she left her night nest in the morning but did not join her group; she exhibited severe clinical signs and was found dead on July 4 at ≈1:00 pm. The infant was 3 days old when it died on July 23. Clinical signs of respiratory illness had not been observed, although its mother showed severe clinical signs for 2–3 days before and after delivery; before delivery, she had received antimicrobial drugs by remote delivery (neither she nor her infant were handled by humans).Gross postmortem examinations revealed bronchopneumonia in the adult and unilateral pulmonary congestion and an empty stomach in the infant. Formalin-fixed (10%) postmortem tissue samples from the adult and infant were prepared in 6 μm sections for histologic studies, stained with hematoxylin and eosin according to standard methods, and examined by light microscopy. Histologically, the respiratory tract of the adult was characterized by moderate mononuclear tracheitis, laryngitis, and air sacculitis; severe pulmonary alveolar histiocytosis; multifocal severe suppurative pneumonia; and multifocal pulmonary thrombosis and hemorrhage. One section of lung from the infant showed pulmonary atelectasis, congestion, mild alveolar hemorrhage, and histiocytosis. The infant also had moderate neutrophil and macrophage infiltration of the umbilicus at the body wall; neutrophilic inflammation in the media and adventitia of 1 umbilical artery at the level of the bladder; and mild, unilateral, focal, segmental, neutrophilic glomerulitis and tubulointerstitial nephritis. Coronary groove and mesenteric fat were absent.Multiplex PCR analysis for respiratory pathogens indicated sequences of human metapneumovirus (HMPV) in serum; lung tissue; and throat, nose, anus, and vagina swabs from the adult gorilla, and in lung tissue from the infant (Table). Streptococcus pneumoniae was detected in lung tissue and in throat and nose swabs of the adult gorilla but not in the infant. Klebsiella pneumoniae was also detected in all specimens from the adult gorilla. Microbial loads were determined by quantitative PCR (Table). The sample with the highest viral load, a throat swab from the adult female (6.2 × 105 genome copies/µL), was pyrosequenced, yielding 607,484 reads comprising 3.8 kb of sequence (27.5% of the genome). Simple pairwise analysis indicated that the strain belonged to lineage B2 of HMPV (4). Bayesian analysis revealed close relationship of the gorilla virus to human isolates from South Africa (Figure). Sequence information for the reported HMPV has been deposited with GenBank under accession no. HM197719. Detailed methods are available in the Technical Appendix.TableResults of microbiologic testing of mountain gorilla tissues, Rwanda*Sample source and no.Sample typeMassTag RNA panel resultsHMPV viral load, genome copies/µLMassTag DNA panel resultsBacterial load, genome copies/µL
Streptococcus pneumoniae
KlebsiellapneumoniaeAdult 1SerumHMPV2.7 × 103
K. pneumoniae
ND3.2 × 107 2Buffy coatNegativeND
K. pneumoniae
ND4.4 × 108 3KidneyNegativeND
K. pneumoniae
ND6.2 × 108 4LungHMPV3.2 × 102
S. pneumoniae, K. pneumoniae
1.3 × 1022.0 × 107 5HeartNegativeND
K. pneumoniae
ND1.4 × 107 6SpleenNegativeND
K. pneumoniae
ND9.1 × 105 7LiverNegativeND
K. pneumoniae
ND3.1 × 105 8Throat swabHMPV6.2 × 105
S. pneumoniae, K. pneumoniae
5.5 × 1041.4 × 105 9Nasal swabHMPV2.3 × 105
S. pneumoniae, K. pneumoniae
4.3 × 1042.4 × 106 10Vaginal swabHMPV2.0 × 102
K. pneumoniae
ND6.0 × 105 11Anal swabHMPV4.0 × 102
K. pneumoniae
ND5.5 × 102 12Purulent dischargeNegativeND
K. pneumoniae
ND5.2 × 102Infant 18SpleenNegativeNDNegativeNDND 19LungHMPV<5.0 × 101NegativeNDND 20LiverNegativeNDNegativeNDND 21KidneyNegativeNDNegativeNDND*HMPV, human metapneumovirus; ND, not detected.FigureBayesian analysis of the G gene of human metapneumovirus (HMPV) isolated from an adult female mountain gorilla that died during an outbreak of respiratory disease, Rwanda. Bayesian phylogenetic analyses of sequence differences of the HPMV glycoprotein gene were conducted by using BEAST, BEAUti, and Tracer analysis software packages (http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk/Main_Page). Only lineage B HMPVs are shown. The black dot indicates the strain newly isolated from the gorilla; trees are rooted at the midpoint; scale is in years.ConclusionsExperimental infections of cynomologus macaques with HMPV have suggested that pure infection with this virus causes minimal to mild lesions in conducting airways and increased macrophages in alveoli (5). However, paramyxoviruses, including HMPV, can predispose animals to bacterial pneumonia (6–8), as appeared to be the case in the adult female mountain gorilla reported here. That HMPV can be fatal for gorillas is supported by a report of a respiratory outbreak in wild, human-habituated chimpanzees in which several chimpanzees died (2,9).We report conclusive evidence for association of a human virus with death in mountain gorillas (2,3). Viral RNA in multiple tissue samples from the adult female indicates that she was infected by an HMPV strain at the time of her death. The upper respiratory lesions were suggestive of a viral infection (9). The pulmonary lesions indicated a bacterial bronchopneumonia as the proximate cause of death, compatible with an etiologic agent such as S. pneumoniae and K. pneumoniae, the 2 organisms detected by PCR. Although the cause of death of the infant was likely inanition and acute dissemination of an umbilical infection to a kidney, detection of HMPV as the sole pathogen in the infant tissues supports the presence of this agent in the gorilla group during the respiratory disease outbreak.The source of the virus is unknown; the strain was most recently described in South Africa. The 2 HMPV-positive animals were not handled by veterinarians or park personnel during the course of their illness. Although HMPV transmission as a result of human intervention to treat sick animals in the group is possible, it does not explain HMPV in the adult female, which died early in the outbreak before any clinical interventions were conducted. Although human proximity to mountain gorillas is essential for their conservation, also crucial is minimizing the risk for human-to–great ape transmission of respiratory pathogens.Supplementary MaterialTechnical AppendixPathogens included in PCR of samples from mountain gorillas during outbreak of respiratory disease, Hirwa, Rwanda, June 28-August 6, 2009.


Title: Beyond Respiratory Syncytial Virus and Rhinovirus in the Pathogenesis and Exacerbation of Asthma

Key points

•Respiratory viruses other than rhinovirus or respiratory syncytial virus can be associated with acute wheezing illness.•Contribution to recurrent/wheezing is not well studied.•Children with human metapneumovirus lower respiratory tract infection may have increased risk of subsequent recurrent wheezing over the several years after initial infection.

With the dissemination of the use of sensitive molecular methods for viral detection, the opportunities to evaluate the role of respiratory viruses in acute and chronic respiratory illness has expanded in the past decade. Acute wheezing illnesses are common, especially in young children, and viral agents have been shown to be found in 60% to 100% of these episodes using these sensitive detection methods.1, 2, 3 Multiple viruses are associated with acute wheezing illness, including rhinovirus (RV), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), human metapneumovirus (hMPV), influenza virus, parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, human bocavirus (HBoV),1 coronavirus, and enterovirus (Table 1
). These viruses have also been shown to be associated with asthma exacerbations.4, 5 RV and RSV are the most frequently detected pathogens (see Table 1), with RSV more prevalent in younger children in winter months and RV more prevalent in older children.2 There is a large body of evidence implicating the association of RV6, 7, 8 and RSV9, 10 with the subsequent development of recurrent wheezing and/or asthma. Viruses other than RV or RSV can be detected in 50% of wheezing illnesses,1, 11, 12 but there are limited data regarding the association of these other viruses and asthma. Conducting studies to evaluate the long-term consequences of these other viruses has been challenging for several reasons. First, the detection rate of these viruses is often lower compared with RV and RSV, so a much larger cohort is required to perform a study with adequate representation of patients infected with these other viruses. The prospective study that investigated the role of hMPV infection in the development of wheezing and asthma required screening of more than 400 children infected with hMPV over a 5-year period of recruitment.13 Second, establishing appropriate animal models has been challenging and existing models may not adequately model human infection to evaluate long-term outcomes. Third, it is difficult to tease out the specific contribution of other viruses because the association of RV and RSV can confound the analysis given the high rate of coinfection with these viruses. For instance, in a community cohort of 147 children with high atopic risk, wheezy, febrile lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) during the first year of life was associated with a higher risk of persistent wheezing (odds ratio [OR], 3.5) and asthma (OR, 4.9) at age 10 years if they were atopic by age 2 years.3 Respiratory virus was detected in 62% of these patients with febrile LRTI with a large proportion (60%–70%) of the detected viruses being RV or RSV, so this observed association may be primarily caused by the effect of RV or RSV infection. However, there are data suggesting that viral infection in early life with any cause may be important in increasing the risk of asthma. In a high-risk birth cohort study in Demark, the number of respiratory episodes in the first year of life was associated with the development of asthma at age 7 years regardless of virus type.14
Table 1Frequency of viruses detected in acute wheezing illness in childrenVirusFrequency (%)RV28–76RSV16–29Enterovirus4–27Bocavirus5–18Parainfluenza virus8–9HMPV3–6Adenovirus3–7Coronavirus2–5Influenza virus2–4Data from Refs.1, 2, 3This article focuses on 3 viruses (hMPV, HBoV, and influenza virus) in which an association with wheezing illness has been most studied. It provides an aggregate of available data reviewing the current research investigating the role of these viruses in acute and chronic respiratory disease.Human bocavirushMPV is a paramyxovirus first discovered by van den Hoogen and colleagues15 in 2001. Similar to RSV, hMPV is a single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the Pneumoviridae subfamily, and causes many of the same symptoms as RSV. Typical symptoms of hMPV infection include mild, self-limiting, acute upper respiratory tract infections to more severe LRTIs, with wheezing and pneumonia. It is a frequent cause of bronchiolitis in young children.16 Cough, rhinorrhea, wheeze, and fever are commonly reported symptoms in children infected with hMPV.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22
Virtually all children have evidence of exposure to hMPV by age 5 years.15 hMPV is responsible for a significant portion (2%–12%) of respiratory tract infections16, 17, 19, 23, 24, 25, 26 and is associated with a large burden of hospitalizations and outpatient visits in younger children.18, 20 It tends to peak during the late winter and spring seasons, typically between December and April,16, 19, 22, 24 often peaking in February and March. Compared with infection with other viruses, there have been conflicting data on whether hMPV infections result in greater hypoxemia or duration of hospitalization or intensive care unit (ICU) stays.23, 24 The severity of illness is worse in those with a history of extreme prematurity.25
Although hMPV causes wheezing and lower respiratory tract symptoms, the contribution of hMPV to asthma exacerbations varies among different populations. In those with asthma exacerbations, the detection rate of hMPV is approximately 5% worldwide,4 whereas in those with hMPV LRTI a much higher proportion have a diagnosis of asthma. In a study of children with hMPV LRTIs in the United States, 14% to 33% carried a diagnosis of asthma or history of wheezing.16, 19 In a study of children with hMPV in Spain, 60.7% of those infected with hMPV alone carried a diagnosis of recurrent wheeze or asthma, which was higher than rates in RSV or adenovirus but similar to that of RV or HBoV. Children with RSV were more likely to have a diagnosis of bronchiolitis than children with hMPV.24 hMPV can cause an illness consistent with bronchiolitis, but children may be diagnosed less often with this term, given that it often is synonymous with RSV infections in young children. Nonetheless, hMPV causes wheezing in young children; can often precipitate episodes of wheezing in those prone to do so, such as asthmatics; and is an important cause of viral-induced asthma exacerbations. In children with asthma, studies have shown synergistic effects of allergic characteristics of the host (ie, immunoglobulin E level, house dust sensitization) and the severity of asthma exacerbation by RV,27, 28 but the interaction of allergy of the host and hMPV infection has not been well studied.In contrast with the large number of studies reporting the association of hMPV in early childhood with acute wheezing illnesses or asthma at the time of illness,16, 23 there are sparse data on the long-term consequences after the acute infection. One study from Garcia-Garcia and colleagues26 retrospectively identified children 2 to 5 years of age who were hospitalized with hMPV or RSV bronchiolitis in their first 24 months of life and contacted them to assess their diagnosis of asthma at the time of the study. Of 101 children with hMPV-positive bronchiolitis (without coinfection) over the course of the prior 5 years (October 2000 to June 2005), they were able to obtain follow-up on 23 children with no prior history of wheezing. They then selected a random sample of children in that same time period with RSV bronchiolitis and obtained follow-up on 32 of those children. A diagnosis of recurrent wheezing and asthma was more frequent in children with a history of hMPV bronchiolitis or RSV bronchiolitis compared with control children who were hospitalized around the same time because of rotavirus. hMPV bronchiolitis was the strongest independent risk factor for asthma (OR, 15.9; confidence interval [CI], 3.6, 70.5), followed by RSV bronchiolitis (OR, 10.1; CI, 2.5, 40.1) and allergic rhinitis (OR, 4.9; CI, 1.2, 40.1) at age 3 to 5 years. Another study prospectively followed premature infants with viral LRTI and, although it did not track wheezing or asthma status, found that airway resistance measures were increased at 1 year of age, although this study included only 4 infants with hMPV.29
Stronger evidence for the long-term effect of hMPV LTRI was found in a recent prospective study that evaluated the effects of hMPV infection on wheezing and asthma outcomes. Children less than 5 years of age hospitalized or treated in the emergency room with hMPV LRTI and no prior history of wheezing were prospectively followed along with a control group, with outcome assessment every 3 to 6 months for up to 3 years, and a final follow-up as late as 6.5 years.13 This prospective study design enabled the investigators to obtain the child’s wheezing history and capture the outcome securely in a longitudinal fashion. Follow-up data were collected on 29 children with hPMV LRTI and 27 controls. Children with hMPV LRTI had a higher likelihood of wheezing episodes during the follow-up period (hazard ratio [HR], 2.8; CI, 1.4, 5.8) than controls. In addition, children with hMPV LRTI had earlier onset of recurrent wheezing, both with and without colds, than the control children (Fig. 1
). The association with the development of asthma was not statistically significant (HR, 2.5; CI, 0.8, 8.1; P = .12), although the number of children diagnosed with asthma was larger in the hMPV group (9 of 29) than the control group (4 of 27). There is more to learn, but these studies suggest an increased risk of asthma development following hMPV infection early in life.Fig. 1Survival analysis for wheezing and asthma after hMPV LRTI. Kaplan-Meier estimates of freedom from any wheezing episodes, P = .004; hMPV LRTI subjects had wheezing earlier in follow-up compared with control subjects.(From Coverstone AM, Wilson B, Burgdorf D, et al. Recurrent wheezing in children following human metapneumovirus infection. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2018;142(1):299; with permission.)The mechanism of short-term and long-term pathologic effects of hMPV infection is not well studied compared with that of RSV. Infection with hMPV in mice was shown to lead to persistence of viral RNA, pulmonary inflammation, and airway hyperresponsiveness several months after the infection,30 suggesting long-term pathologic changes can occur after hMPV infection.Studies in both mice and humans have suggested several different molecular mechanisms of hMPV affect airway inflammation and function at the time of acute infection, often comparing these mechanisms with those of other viral causes. Alveolar macrophage activity may be augmented in hMPV infection, leading to detrimental effects on the airway, whereas alveolar macrophage depletion was seen in RSV and may provide protection against the harmful effects of the virus.31 The chemokine profile of nasal secretions was also shown to differ in hMPV, with high concentrations of interleukin (IL)-8 (neutrophil chemotactic factor) and low concentrations of RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T-cell expressed and secreted) (eosinophil chemotactic factor) in individuals infected with hMPV compared with the increased RANTES concentrations seen in RSV.17 In another study of children 1 to 14 years of age with hMPV infection, differences in measures of cell-mediated immunity distinguished hMPV from other respiratory viruses, such as RSV and influenza.22 Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) as well as IL-4 plasma levels were higher in children with wheezing and hMPV than in those without wheezing and hMPV or without wheezing and another respiratory virus. TSLP has been implicated as a mediator in the pathway of pediatric asthma, with higher plasma TSLP levels correlating with poor asthma control.32 TSLP promotes basophil production and type 2 inflammation.33 Infection of human airway epithelial cells with hMPV induced expression of TSLP, as well as leading to upregulation of IL-8 and IL-33, whereas TSLP blockade led to reduced lung inflammation,34 indicating activation of the TSLP pathway initiating airway inflammation by hMPV acute infection. These studies may suggest the involvement of the TSLP pathway as a molecular mechanism for how hMPV leads to a recurrent wheezing and asthma phenotype, although further investigation is warranted.Human bocavirusHBoV is a parvovirus that was discovered in 2005 from pooled nasopharyngeal samples by molecular screening.35 Subsequent studies have shown that HBoV genotype 1 is commonly detected in respiratory samples from children with acute wheezing.1, 12 In children with acute wheezing for the first time, HBoV was detected in 18%.12 However, it is also known that the coinfection rate of HBoV with other viruses is very high (15%–100%). In addition, detection in asymptomatic individuals is also frequent. HBoV was found to be present in 17% of healthy controls admitted to the hospital for elective surgery,36 and in participants in a household study in which symptoms and nasal samples were prospectively collected for 12 months, 50% of HBoV detection occurred in those without symptoms.37 Viral persistence is thought to be responsible for the high frequency of coinfection.37, 38 HBoV 1 is implicated to be an important respiratory pathogen by many,39, 40 but the precise pathologic contribution of HBoV in acute respiratory disease is still not accurately defined and HBoV may be both a passenger and a causative pathogen.36, 41 HBoV may interfere with RV-induced immune responses during acute wheezing. Lukkarinen and colleagues42 compared the T-helper (Th) 1, Th2, proinflammatory cytokine response profile in young children with RV, HBoV, and RV-HBoV coinfection with acute wheezing illness. Unlike RV, HBoV infection was not associated with systemic proinflammatory or Th2-type responses and the RV-HBoV coinfection resulted in a non–Th2-type immune response.Although bocavirus is frequently detected and seems to be associated with acute wheezing episodes, the data on long-term consequences after the acute infection are sparse. One retrospective study from Spain identified children who were previously hospitalized with HBoV (n = 10) or RSV bronchiolitis (n = 80) in their first 24 months of life and evaluated them to assess clinical outcomes, including a diagnosis of asthma and presence of atopy at age 5 to 7 years.43 All children in the HBoV group developed recurrent wheezing. Fifty percent in the HBoV group and 23% in the RSV group had a diagnosis of asthma at age 5 to 7 years. The proportion of those with atopy was similar among those with HBoV and RSV. Another study in children hospitalized for acute viral wheezing showed that 13 children with HBoV-associated bronchiolitis had recurrent wheezing 2 years after the initial hospitalization less often than children with RV-associated bronchiolitis (HBoV 40% vs RV 60%).42 The association of HBoV LRTI in early life and asthma is inconclusive and larger prospective studies are required to confirm these findings.Influenza virusInfluenza viruses are responsible for an average of 3.1 million annual hospitalized days, and 31.4 million outpatient visits,44 and is one of the frequently detected viruses during asthma exacerbations. It has long been identified as a precipitant of asthma exacerbations in all age groups.2, 4, 45 In people with asthma exacerbations, the detection rate of influenza virus is approximately 10% worldwide,4 but, during a flu season, the prevalence of influenza viruses can be as high as 20% in wheezing infants and 20% to 25% in adults with acute asthma exacerbations.2, 46, 47 Although involvement of influenza virus is common in asthma exacerbation, influenza virus is an infrequent cause of acute wheezing illness in younger children.1, 2, 3 The authors are not aware of any studies evaluating the role of influenza virus LRTI on the development of recurrent wheezing and/or asthma later in life.The cytokine IL-33 is implicated as an important driver for influenza-induced asthma exacerbations in animal studies.48, 49 In the influenza-infected mouse models, IL-33 expression is upregulated, shifting the balance of Th1/Th2 immunity.48, 50 A recent study has shown that IL-33 is produced by ciliated bronchial cells and type II alveolar cells on viral-induced exacerbation in human and mice and dampened innate and adaptive Th1-like and cytotoxic responses, which subsequently results in increased viral loads and enhanced airway inflammation underlying the influenza-induced asthma exacerbation.49 Meanwhile, heightened IL-33 production induces substantial IL-13 production in type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC-2), Th2 cytokine–producing cells that promote allergic inflammation in mouse models of asthma and atopic dermatitis.51 In another study, influenza A infection induced acute airway hyperreactivity that was medicated by ILC-2, suggesting the importance of the IL-33–IL-13 axis in influenza-induced acute asthma exacerbations.52
Whether asthmatics are more frequently infected by influenza virus is still a matter of debate. It has been shown that patients with asthma have reduced type 1 interferon (IFN) responses on RV infection,53, 54 but a few studies did not confirm this observation.55, 56 Human bronchial epithelial cells from patients with asthma show increased IFN-lambda 1 levels and preserved IFN-beta levels when infected with influenza A virus, although viral levels were higher in asthmatics compared with nonasthmatics.56 In a US study, children with asthma were found to be infected twice as often as nonasthmatics by H1N1 influenza when monitored by weekly nasal samples and symptoms scores during the 2009 to 2010 season.57 Regardless, it has been accepted that asthma is a risk factor of severe disease with influenza once acquired, and patients with asthma have been listed as a priority population for vaccination.58 The population studies in the 2009 H1N1 pandemic have provided interesting observations regarding this susceptibility. Having asthma was found to be a risk factor for hospitalization for H1N159, 60 and was found in 10% to 20% of the hospitalized patients worldwide.61 Nonetheless, an observation has also been made that having asthma may be protective once patients are hospitalized from influenza. Patients with asthma had decreased risk of ICU stay, mechanical ventilation, and death from H1N1, compared with other chronic conditions, such as cardiovascular diseases and obesity.62, 63, 64 The observed protective effect may be in part explained by early hospital admission and/or a favorable response to steroids.65 In mouse models, this protective effect of allergic asthma on influenza infection has been recapitulated and the increased eosinophil levels in asthmatic airways may be one of the mechanisms.66 With putative antigen-presenting functions, eosinophils enhanced influenza-specific CD8+ T cells after infection, mediating the viral clearance of influenza virus in a mouse asthma model.66 Rapid induction of type III IFNs, natural killer cells, and TGF-beta was also observed in asthmatic mice on influenza infection, indicating a potential mechanism for enhanced antiviral immunity against influenza in asthmatics.66, 67, 68
Influenza vaccine is recommended for patients with asthma in many countries, but there has not been clear evidence showing a protective benefit. The most recent Cochrane Review, in 2013, which included 18 trials across the world, concluded that inactivated influenza vaccine did not provide significant reduction in the number or duration of influenza-related asthma exacerbations.69 Safety concern was raised in an earlier study that showed a decrease in peak flow following the administration of the inactivated influenza vaccine.70 A subsequent study in the Netherlands71 and a large study in the United States72 enrolling more than 2000 patients with asthma confirmed that there is no increase in risk for adverse events including asthma exacerbation within 2 weeks following the injection. This Cochran Review also conducted a systematic review in 3 trials comparing intranasal vaccine with intramuscular infection in infants and older children and concluded that event rates for asthma exacerbation and wheezing were similar in both vaccine types.69 A more recent study in the United Kingdom evaluated the safety of intranasal live attenuated influenza vaccine in atopic children with well-defined allergy to eggs. Sixty-seven percent of children had asthma in addition to their egg allergies. There was no systemic reaction following the injections and 8 mild self-limiting symptoms after 433 doses given in 282 children, which also ensured safety.73
SummaryRespiratory viruses other than RV or RSV, especially hMPV, influenza virus, and HBoV, can be detected frequently in acute wheezing illness. The interaction of these other viruses with an allergic host, and their contribution in the development of asthma after acute infection, are not well understood, although there is evidence to suggest that children with hMPV LRTI have a higher likelihood of subsequent and recurrent wheezing over the several years after initial infection.


Title: Genetic diversity, seasonality and transmission network of human metapneumovirus: identification of a unique sub-lineage of the fusion and attachment genes

Human metapneumovirus (HMPV) is a single-stranded RNA virus classified in the Metapneumovirus genus within the Pneumovirinae sub-family of Paramyxoviridae. Since the first description of HMPV among children in the Netherlands1, the virus has emerged as one of the main causative agents of acute respiratory tract infections (RTIs) across all ages worldwide, in addition to the human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV)2345678. The clinical presentation of acute and severe RTIs due to HMPV are strikingly similar to that of HRSV which are mainly characterised by mild respiratory illnesses to severe cough, bronchiolitis, pneumonia and often accompanied by high fever, myalgia and vomiting1. In the United States for example, the annual disease burden due to HMPV in hospitalized children below 5 years of age has been estimated at 1 per 1000 children, similar to that of the influenza virus9.HMPV is classified into two main genetic lineages denoted as genotypes A and B based on the phylogenetic analysis of the fusion (F) and attachment (G) genes. Each genotype is further classified into at least two sub-lineages – A1, A2, B1 and B210. It was later reported that two additional genetic sub-lineages were described within the A2 sub-lineage, named A2a and A2b based on the phylogenetic analysis of the nucleocapsid (N) and F gene sequences in a population of paediatric patients11. Different genetic sub-lineages of HMPV also co-circulate in a temporal fashion and a shift in the predominant circulating strain is not uncommon121314.Acute respiratory infections caused by viruses such as HRSV, influenza A virus and human parainfluenza virus, amongst others are seasonally-distributed15. In temperate countries, a higher prevalence of HMPV has been reported during the months of winter and spring, with a lower seasonality than HRSV213141516. Climate also plays an important role in determining the seasonality of HMPV in tropical countries. Previous studies have described a direct correlation between the number of rainy days and the increase in the number of HMPV infections68. In addition to the number of rainy days, the effects of other important factors in a tropical climate such as the relative humidity, temperature and amount of rainfall on the prevalence of HMPV need to be investigated in order to provide a better understanding of its seasonality.Molecular epidemiological surveillance can be used to infer the dynamics of disease transmission based on the genetic relatedness of viral sequences derived from the population, as shown for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)171819, influenza virus2021, echovirus22 and ebola virus23, amongst others. Although HMPV is one of the main causative agents of RTIs worldwide, little is known about the temporal dynamics of HMPV transmission in the population. Transmission networks inferred from the analysis of viral sequences elucidate the degree of the spread of an infection in a subset of the population that allows the identification of the population at high risk of transmitting the virus amongst each other, thus enabling the implementation of effective and targeted public health preventive measures to reduce the prevalence of new infections in the population at large171824.To date, studies on the epidemiological distribution and genetic diversity of HMPV have been reported mainly among the hospitalised and outpatient children worldwide47122526. Despite the significant burden of acute RTIs due to HMPV9, information regarding the seasonal distribution, circulating genotypes and the dynamics of disease transmission of HMPV in the general population of all ages in tropical countries are currently limited6827. In this study, we aimed to investigate the genetic diversity, seasonality and transmission network of HMPV infections among outpatient adults and children in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia during a two-year period.ResultsCharacteristics of the study population and seasonality of HMPVBetween February 2012 and May 2014, a total of 3,935 nasopharyngeal samples were collected (comprising 3,706 adults and 229 children), among which 86 (2.2%) samples were tested positive for HMPV. Among the infected individuals, seven (8.1%) were co-infected with other respiratory virus, whereby six individuals were dually co-infected with either rhinovirus (n = 3), adenovirus (n = 1), influenza B (n = 1) or coronavirus (n = 1) while one individual was triply co-infected with rhinovirus and influenza A. Co-infection with HRSV was not observed. The study population was comprised predominantly of females (61.6%, 53/86). Among 86 individuals infected with HMPV, 76.7% (n = 66) were adults (median age: 34.0 years, interquartile range, IQR, 26.0–54.0 years), 18.6% (n = 16) were elderly, defined as ≥65 years old2 (median age: 72.0 years, IQR, 69.8–75.0 years) and the remaining 4.7% (n = 4) were children (median age: 14.5 years, IQR, 12.8–16.3 years). The population was ethnically diverse, comprising of Malays (46.5%, 40/86), Indians (26.7%, 23/86), Chinese (23.3%, 20/86) and other ethnic groups (3.5%, 3/86). Overall, the patients reported a median total of 4.0 days (IQR, 3.0–7.0 days) since the onset of disease symptoms. Majority of the patients reported symptoms of cough (98.8%), followed by hoarseness of voice (89.5%), nasal discharge (72.1%), sneezing (70.9%), headache (69.8%), sore throat (69.8%), nasal congestion (67.4%) and muscle ache (65.1%). During the 28-months period, a higher prevalence of HMPV infections were reported in March 2012, April and November 2013 (Fig. 1).Next, we assessed the effects of various meteorological factors in the context of a tropical climate on the prevalence of HMPV throughout the study period. The prevalence of HMPV significantly correlated with higher relative humidity (r = 0.449, P = 0.019) and number of rainy days (r = 0.440, P = 0.022). On the other hand, an inverse correlation between the prevalence of HMPV with the ground temperature (r = −0.281, P = 0.155) and particulate matter measuring 10 μm or less in diameter (PM10) (r = −0.163, P = 0.417) was observed, although the observation was statistically non-significant. The total amount of rainfall (r = 0.235, P = 0.258) was also associated with the prevalence of HMPV, although the observation was statistically non-significant.Phylogenetic analysis and genetic diversity of the F and G genesAmong the 86 samples positive for HMPV infection, the partial F and G genes were successfully amplified in 98.8% (85/86) and 95.3% (82/86) of the total samples, respectively. Phylogenetic analysis of the newly-sequenced and reference partial F and G gene sequences showed the clustering of the sequences into two main genotypes - A and B, and at least five known sub-lineages – A1, A2a, A2b, B1 and B2, in agreement with previous studies (Fig. 2A,B)101112. Within genotype A, a total of 30.2% (26/86) of the newly-generated sequences clustered within the A2b sub-lineage. Interestingly, 18.6% (16/86) of the sequences clustered with a reference strain, HMPV CN/gz01/08/A2 (accession number: GQ153651) within a previously unrecognized sub-lineage of A2, supported by a strong bootstrap value of 98–99% in the phylogenies of both F and G genes. The unique clade was provisionally assigned as a novel sub-lineage of A2. In addition to Malaysia, previously published sequences from other countries (China, Vietnam, and Cambodia) were also grouped within this clade. Both A1 and A2a sub-lineages were not detected in our study population. Similarly, within genotype B, a total of 30.2% (26/86) of the sequences clustered within the B1 sub-lineage and 20.9% (18/86) of the sequences clustered within the B2 sub-lineage. In 2012, B1 sub-lineage circulated predominantly at 39.5% (15/38) of the population and a shift in the predominant genotype towards A2b (29.4%, 10/34) was observed in 2013 (Fig. 3). Between January and May 2014, both A2b and B2 sub-lineages co-circulated at equal prevalence at 35.7% (5/14). In addition to samples collected from four children in our current study population, phylogenetic analysis of the F and G genes sequenced from 21 paediatric patients recruited between April 2010 and December 2012 (median age: 1.84 years, IQR, 1.11–3.40) revealed that 52.0% (13/25) of the sequences clustered within the novel sub-lineage of A2, followed by A2b and B1 at 20.0% (5/25) each, and A2a and B2 at 4.0% (1/25) each (Fig. 2A,B). No sequences were detected in the A1 sub-lineage.Based on the estimation of intra-genotype mean genetic distances of nucleotide and amino acid sequences of HMPV, F gene has higher sequence identities overall compared to G gene at both nucleotide (nt) and amino acid (aa) levels (F gene, nt: 88.7% and aa: 75.9% vs G gene: nt: 54.3% and aa: 27.6%, respectively) (Table 1). Sequences within the novel sub-lineage of A2 were highly identical at both nucleotide and amino acid levels in both F and G genes (F gene, nt: 99.1% and aa: 97.5% and G gene: nt: 95.7% and aa: 95.5%). Next, we estimated the inter-genotype mean genetic distances of the HMPV genotypes and sub-lineages (Table 2). Sub-lineage distances between genotypes A and B were high in both F and G genes, estimated around 17.7–19.3% and 77.8–88.3%, respectively. Sub-lineage distances within genotype were estimated around 5.9–7.5% and 22.6–26.9% in the F and G genes, respectively. Within A2, genetic distances between sub-lineages A2a and A2b were 3.8% in the F gene and 13.0% in the G gene. Notably, the genetic distances between these sub-lineages and the novel sub-lineage of A2 were similar or higher, estimated around 3.6–4.4% and 11.9–12.9% in both the F and G genes, respectively. Specific amino acid substitutions were also present within the novel sub-lineage of A2 in the G protein, but not in the F gene. In comparison with A2a and A2b sub-lineages, eleven specific amino acid substitutions in the novel sub-lineage of A2 were identified at positions 40, 59, 93, 106, 148, 164, 188, 197, 199, 216 and 227 (Table 3). Taken together, based on the phylogenetic tree topology, genetic distances and specific amino acid substitution analyses in both the F and G genes, the newly identified sub-lineage was distinct from the previously described A2a and A2b sub-lineages.HMPV transmission networkIn order to elucidate the dynamics of HMPV transmission among the adults and children population in the present study, we constructed transmission networks based on the pairwise distances using the TN93 model estimated from the newly-sequenced F and G genes. The lower 0.025 percentile of the inter-person genetic distances from database sequences, which represented the patristic distance cutoff for transmission cluster interpretation, were estimated at 0.2% and 1.2% for the F and G genes, respectively (Supplementary Table 1). In the F gene data set, 19 sequences (22.4%, 19/85) formed a total of nine clusters (comprising of eight dyads and one network) while in the G gene, 11 sequences (13.4%, 11/82) formed a total of five clusters (comprising of four dyads and one network), ranging between two and three individuals in size (Fig. 4A). Of these clusters, only two dyads and one network were concordant in both genes. Overall, more transmission clusters were observed in the A2b sub-lineage than other sub-lineages in both the F (57.9%, 11/19) and G (63.6%, 7/11) genes. A known transmission pair of two epidemiologically-linked adult and child infected with the novel A2 sub-lineage was also observed in the F (but not in the G) gene. HMPV has been reported to be highly infectious within the first 4–6 days of infection28, after which its ability to cause infection in another individual declines. Hence we proceed to estimate the difference between estimated date of infection (denoted as ΔEDI) between existing members of clusters observed in the F and G genes to evaluate the reliability of the genetic-based approach in inferring transmission network. We found that a majority of the clusters inferred in the F (8/9 clusters) and G genes (4/5 clusters) had ΔEDIs of ≤7 days which provided substantial validation of the method used in this study (Fig. 4A). Of note, the frequency of transmission clusters identified during the study period coincided with an increase in the detection of the respective HMPV sub-lineages in the population, as observed in the A2b (between September 2012 and April 2013) and B1 (between March and April 2012) sub-lineages (Fig. 4A,B).DiscussionTo date, most studies were focused on describing the molecular epidemiology of HMPV in hospitalised children47122526 and consequently, knowledge regarding the prevalence and genotypic distribution among the general population of all ages are limited629. In addition, the seasonality and dynamics of disease transmission in countries with a tropical climate have not been analysed in detail. In the present study, we reported the recent molecular epidemiology of HMPV in an outpatient population of adults and children presented with symptoms of acute URTI in Kuala Lumpur during a two-year period. From 3,935 nasopharyngeal swabs collected between 2012 and 2014, the average prevalence of HMPV in the population was fairly low at around 2%, similar to previous studies conducted across all ages6. Conversely, HMPV was more prevalent among children in the hospitalised or community setting, with a reported prevalence of over 5% particularly among the young and immunocompromised children1342530. Although the overall prevalence of HMPV infection was low in our study population, a relatively higher monthly prevalence of up to 4–5% was observed during the November–April period (Fig. 1), coincided with the northeast monsoon season which typically occurs in the region between October and March. We also showed that the prevalence of HMPV was significantly correlated with high relative humidity and the number of rainy days.Throughout the study period, both HMPV genotypes A and B, including three known sub-lineages – A2b, B1 and B2 co-circulated all year round. Meanwhile, sub-lineages A1 and A2a were not detected in our study population. Similarly, sub-lineage A1 which circulated in China31, was also not detected in the neighbouring regions including Cambodia6, Thailand8 and Singapore4; and worldwide after 2006, in Austria13, Argentina32, Australia33, Canada12, and the United States3435. On the other hand, sub-lineage A2a circulated widely at a low prevalence in other countries including Thailand8 and Canada36. Both A2b and B1 circulated predominantly in the population, with a combined prevalence of around 60% (Fig. 3). We also observed a shift in the predominant circulating genotype from sub-lineage B1 to A2b in the population between 2012 and 2013, although a longer study period with more samples may be required to provide an accurate representation. Recently, genotype A2 has been associated with a more severe disease in hospitalised children in Jordan and Cambodia637. Further studies to assess the impact of HMPV genotypes on disease severity are warranted. In addition to the known sub-lineages, a previously unreported sub-lineage of A2 was identified at a lower prevalence at around 19% in the population. Phylogenetic and pairwise distance analyses of the F and G genes sequence data including all publicly available global reference sequences confirmed the novelty of the sub-lineage which was distinct from other known sub-lineages within A2, such as A2a and A2b (Fig. 2, Table 2). More than half of the F and G sequences previously amplified among Malaysian children between 2010 and December 20127 were grouped within the novel sub-lineage of A2. Furthermore, several reference F and G gene sequences isolated from neighbouring countries including Vietnam, Cambodia and China, sampled between 2006 and 2011 also clustered with the Malaysian sequences within the novel sub-lineage of A2 and further suggesting that the novel sub-lineage of A2 might have been circulating in the region at a lower prevalence earlier (Fig. 2). Further studies however are required to estimate its time of emergence in our study population and whether the proposed novel sub-lineage of A2 is also circulating in other regions besides Southeast and East Asia. Complete genome sequencing followed by rigorous phylogenetic and genetic distance analyses of the novel sub-lineage of A2 are necessary to confirm its assignment as a distinct sub-lineage.Analysis of epidemiological data is generally useful to estimate the temporal prevalence and seasonality of a viral pathogen. However the inclusion of transmission network information could elucidate the spread and dynamics of a disease attributed to specific genotypes or sub-lineages circulating in the population that further corroborate the observation from epidemiological surveillance of a disease. Using programming language-based approach, we inferred the transmission network of HMPV in the population based on the genetic sequences of the F and G genes. To the best of our knowledge, such analysis represents the first of which the spread and dynamics of HMPV transmission in the general population was mapped. Using the estimated cutoffs for the pairwise genetic distance between HMPV sequences and the EDI between individuals, below which individuals were classified as a transmission cluster, we identified up to nine transmission clusters (in the F gene) of HMPV circulating in the cohort between 2012 and 2014 (Fig. 4A). The size of these clusters was generally small (dyads) and involved various HMPV sub-lineages, suggesting the presence of multiple sub-epidemics in the population with no apparent evidence of a major outbreak. Nonetheless, the increased frequency of transmission clusters correlated with the incidence of HMPV detection (Fig. 3B), indicating the potential roles of transmission clusters in driving the spread of respiratory infections. We were also able to estimate the directionality of viral transmission between individuals within the cluster, which allows the identification of the putative donor/recipient that may be important in facilitating efforts to minimize forward transmission18. Nevertheless, it is important to note that the transmission clusters inferred herein reflected the genetic relatedness of the viral sequences and their direction of transmission, without implying an actual (direct) viral transmission between clustered individuals181924.In order to understand the potential transmission and spread of infectious diseases such as the pandemic influenza, there has been a considerable amount of research on the role of social contact network in spreading a disease within the community. These studies used conceptualized frameworks38 or computational models39 to investigate the social contact network among schoolchildren and teenagers, and simulate how network interventions can significantly contain the spread of influenza within a community. However, most studies relied on the use of survey and contact diaries method which are laborious and often unreliable due to self-report inaccuracies, such as incomplete or illegible survey forms38 and failure to recall their network members precisely40. Therefore, our method presents a simple and unbiased approach to construct the transmission network based on the clustering of genetically-related viral strains sequenced from the infected individuals.Although the potential use of transmission cluster in understanding HMPV spread has been demonstrated here, limitation does exist in the analysis, such as the lack of vital epidemiological information and the observed discordant clustering generated by different genetic regions. Firstly, to improve the cluster resolution and minimize potential discrepancies in the analysis, estimated clusters should be interpreted in parallel with information of contact history among members of a cluster, if available41. Likewise, the suitability of a genetic region can be determined through known transmission pairs sampled from well-documented outbreaks by assessing the reproducibility of the cluster features using multiple partial and even the complete genomes. In addition, although cluster overestimation may be unlikely in our analysis where the upper distance cutoffs were set below the lower 0.025 percentile of inter-person genetic distances2442, the availability of the intra-person genetic distances will nonetheless provide a better clue on the lower distance cutoffs. Due to the interim and self-limiting nature of the infection, it is indeed a challenge to collect serial samples throughout acute illness, which will not immediately benefit the patients. Lastly, as in many other molecular epidemiological surveillance studies, only a subset of the population was recruited and analysed. Therefore, the size, frequency and structure of the transmission clusters observed could have been more accurate by increasing the sample size involving more recruitment sites (but not necessarily longer study duration).In summary, the present study characterised the recent prevalence, seasonality and genetic diversity of HMPV in a large outpatient population presented with acute respiratory tract infections in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The incorporation of transmission network analysis further demonstrated a deeper understanding of HMPV transmission dynamics in the population. Due to the epidemiological impact of HMPV in causing acute respiratory infections, continuous molecular surveillance is warranted to inform the development of therapeutic and preventive approaches, and to facilitate the monitoring of disease outbreaks in the population.Materials and MethodsEthics statementThe study was approved by the University Malaya Medical Centre (UMMC) Medical Ethics Committee. Standard, multilingual consent forms allowed by the Medical Ethics Committee were used and written consent was obtained from all study participants. All experiments were performed in accordance with approved guidelines and regulations.Study population and sample collectionNasopharyngeal swabs were collected from adults and children (aged 18 years and below) attending the primary care clinic in UMMC, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia for a period of 28 months between February 2012 and May 2014. Eligible individuals were those who experienced symptoms of acute upper RTIs (URTI) for not more than two weeks at the time of study recruitment, defined as the presence of either sneezing, nasal discharge/congestion, headache, sore throat, hoarseness of voice, muscle ache and cough, as implemented in other studies on both naturally acquired and experimental colds43444546. The estimated number of days since the development of first disease symptom (estimated days after disease onset) was recorded. Nasopharyngeal swabs were stored in universal transport medium (Copan Diagnostics, California, USA) and transported to the laboratory for immediate processing.Detection of human metapneumovirusTotal viral nucleic acid was extracted from 200 μL of specimen using the NucliSENS easyMAG automated platform (bioMerieux, Durham, North Carolina, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation. One-step multiplex PCR was performed using the xTAG Respiratory Viral Panel (RVP) FAST Assay (Luminex Molecular Diagnostics Inc., Toronto, Canada) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation47. An internal positive control (Escherichia coli phage MS2) and a positive run control (bacteriophage lambda DNA) were included to monitor the assay performance. The resulting median fluorescence intensities were analysed using the Luminex 200 IS platform (Luminex Molecular Diagnostics Inc.).Amplification and sequencing of the F and G genesViral RNA from HMPV-positive samples was reverse-transcribed to cDNA using SuperScript III RNase H− Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA) and random hexamers (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California, USA). The partial F open reading frame (ORF) (550 bp) and the complete G ORF (580–889 bp) of HMPV were amplified using primers as described previously10 using BIO-X-ACT Short DNA Polymerase enzyme (Bioline Reagents Ltd, UK) under the following thermocycling conditions: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 5 minutes, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 seconds, annealing at 55 °C for 1 minute and elongation at 72 °C for 1 minute, and a final elongation step at 72 °C for 10 minutes. Overall, two separate sets of nested primers were used to amplify the G genes. For specimens that failed to be amplified, we used the following sets of newly designed nested primers: outer primers set F1_6206, 5′-AAAACAARAAWATGGGACAAG-3′ and R1_7176, 5′-TCAGGRAGATARACATTRACAG-3′; and inner primers set F2_6258, 5′-RGCRAYWGACATGYTCAAAG-3′ and R3_7139, 5′-GATCCATTGYYATTTRTCYC-3′. Population sequencing was performed in both directions using an ABI PRISM 3730XL DNA Analyzer with BigDye terminators (Applied Biosystems). The newly-generated F and G gene sequences in this study were submitted in GenBank (accession numbers: KU254673 to KU254757 and KU320892 to KU320973).Phylogenetic and sequence analysisGlobal (n = 214) and regional (n = 170) published nucleotide sequences of HMPV F and G genes were retrieved from the GenBank database and aligned with the newly-generated sequences using the PRANK algorithm available on the GUIDANCE server4849. In addition, 21 HMPV F and G sequences amplified among paediatrics diagnosed with acute lower RTIs by our laboratory were also included in the phylogenetic analysis (GenBank accession numbers: KJ196300 to KJ1963023 and KT852792 to KT852803). These samples were collected between April 2010 and December 2012 and were laboratory-confirmed as HMPV-positive by direct fluorescent-antibody staining and/or virus culture, as described previously7. Reference strains of HMPV genotype A and B sub-lineages comprising AF371337 HMPV NL/1/00/A1, AY297749 HMPV CA/83/97/A2a, AY530095 HMPV JP/240/03/A2b, GQ153651 HMPV CN/gz01/08/A2, AY525843 HMPV NL/1/99/B1 and GQ153651 HMPV CA/75/98/B2 were included112. Phylogenetic trees were constructed by the neighbour joining method based on the Kimura two-parameter model with a transition-transversion ratio of 2.0 implemented in MEGA 5.0550. The reliability and robustness of the branching orders were analysed by bootstrap analysis of 1,000 replicates. The mean genetic distances of nucleotide and amino acid sequences within and between genotypes/sub-lineage were estimated using the Kimura two-parameter model in MEGA.HMPV transmission networkThe HMPV transmission network was inferred from the newly-sequenced F and G genes based on the Tamura-Nei 93 (TN93) pairwise distance estimates51 performed using a custom script in Python (release 3.2.6) with 1,000 bootstrap replicates. A transmission cluster is characterised by the presence of at least two individuals (represented by nodes) whose viral sequences are genetically linked (represented by edges) at a given genetic distance threshold or cutoff1819. The genetic distance cutoff values can be determined between the highest and lowest values of intra- and inter-person distances (known as the patristic distances), respectively2442. However, since HMPV is associated with acute infection, measuring intra-person viral genetic distance is often challenging and impractical due to rapid viral clearance within a host. We therefore estimated the most probable cutoff values by determining the lower 0.025 percentile of the inter-person genetic distances calculated from the global F (n = 66) and G (n = 45) reference sequences representing all known genotypes and sub-lineages. Sequences from different individuals with genetic distance falling below these cutoffs were classified as transmission cluster. Clusters were described as dyads if they contain two nodes, and network if >2 nodes19. The estimated date of infection (EDI) for each individual was predated from the number of days after disease symptoms onset as reported by the patients and the incubation period of 4–6 days for HMPV28. Difference between EDI for each individual was denoted as ΔEDI. In addition to genetic distance cutoff, adjacent nodes with a ΔEDI of less than 30 days were considered in cluster construction (viral shedding beyond 30 days following primary infection is probably uncommon, hence viral transmission may be very limited or absent). Such criterion was used for an acute infection in order to improve the analytical power of cluster determination by effectively eliminating genetically similar but epidemiologically unrelated viruses that may complicate transmission cluster interpretation. Probable direction of virus transmission within a cluster was also estimated by placing a directed edge from the putative “donor” node to the “recipient” node(s), where the EDIdonor is older than the EDIrecipient18.Statistical analysisWe analysed the effects of various climatic factors, namely the daily ground temperature, relative humidity, number of rainy days, total amount of rainfall and PM10, on the prevalence of HMPV in Kuala Lumpur during the study period. All important meteorological parameters provided by the Malaysian Meteorological Department were obtained from a weather station (coordinates: 3°06′N (latitude) and 101°39′N (longitude)) situated approximately 2 km away from UMMC52. Data was analysed using Pearson correlation coefficient and performed on the SPSS statistical package (version 21.0, IBM).Additional InformationHow to cite this article: Chow, W. Z. et al. Genetic diversity, seasonality and transmission network of human metapneumovirus: identification of a unique sub-lineage of the fusion and attachment genes. Sci. Rep.
6, 27730; doi: 10.1038/srep27730 (2016).Supplementary MaterialSupplementary Information


Title: Trypsin- and low pH-mediated fusogenicity of avian metapneumovirus fusion proteins is determined by residues at positions 100, 101 and 294

Avian metapneumovirus (aMPV) belongs to the genus Metapneumovirus in the subfamily Pneumovirinae of the family Paramyxoviridae1. aMPV causes acute rhinotracheitis in turkeys of all ages and swollen head syndrome in chickens, resulting in a major economic burden for poultry farmers2. Since aMPV was first detected in South Africa in 1978, aMPV has been reported in many countries3. Phylogenetic analyses have categorized the aMPV strains into four subtypes, termed A, B, C, and D, which are sometimes designated as aMPV/A, aMPV/B, aMPV/C, and aMPV/D, respectively4. Metapneumoviruses have recently been subclassified into two types based on phylogenetic analysis: type I metapneumoviruses, including aMPV/A, B, and D, and type II metapneumoviruses, including aMPV/C and human metapneumovirus (hMPV)5.The life cycle of enveloped viruses is initiated after binding to a specific receptor(s) on the host cell surface, followed by membrane fusion, which is mediated through one or more viral glycoproteins678. In general, the viral attachment proteins (G, H, or HN, depending on the virus) of paramyxoviruses, such as Newcastle disease virus (NDV), human parainfluenza virus type 3 (hPIV3), and human parainfluenza virus type 5 (hPIV5), cooperate with fusion (F) proteins during membrane fusogenic events9101112. aMPV, hMPV, and human respiratory syncytial virus (hRSV) have three glycoproteins, including F, small hydrophobic (SH) and G proteins; however, the SH and G proteins of aMPV, hMPV, and hRSV are not essential for viral replication or the activation of membrane fusion in cultured cells1314151617. Moreover, the expression of aMPV, hMPV, and hRSV F proteins alone results in cell-cell fusion1819202122, suggesting the fusion mechanism of these viruses might be unique among paramyxoviruses.The F protein of aMPV and hMPV is a class I viral fusion protein23242526 and is synthesized as the biologically inactive precursor, F0, which must be cleaved into F1 and F2 to become fusion competent. Viral and cell membrane fusion facilitates virus entry into the target cell, and cell-cell fusion leads to syncytium formation272829303132. Previous studies have established that trypsin is required for the in vitro propagation of hMPV strains3334353637, indicating that trypsin might be critical for the cleavage of hMPV F proteins. Nevertheless, conflicting data have shown that some hMPV strains grow in vitro, independent of trypsin19. Schickli et al. demonstrated that the amino acid substitution S101P in the putative cleavage motif of hMPV F protein is a major determinant for trypsin-independent growth in Vero cells, and the S101P mutant can be cleaved in the absence of trypsin19. Wei Y et al. reported that trypsin is required for the induction of aMPV/B F protein-mediated cell-cell fusion, but this enzyme is not crucial for the fusion mediated through aMPV/A and aMPV/C F proteins18.Viruses are generally classified into two entry categories: low pH/endocytic entry and neutral pH/plasma membrane entry38394041. Paramyxoviruses promote membrane fusion at the plasma membrane at neutral pH203842. However, numerous reports have shown that the F proteins of some strains require stringently low pH for cell-cell fusion383943. Schowalter RM et al. demonstrated that hMPV uses the low pH of the endocytic pathway; the low pH environment stimulates F protein, thereby triggering membrane fusion and syncytium formation2038. Although some hMPV F proteins require low pH for efficient fusion, low pH does not typically activate hMPV F proteins for membrane fusion39. Hence, the dependency of hMPV F proteins on low pH for membrane fusion remains controversial. Both aMPV and hMPV belong to the genus Metapneumovirus, and the fusogenic mechanism of the F proteins of these viruses is unique from those of other paramyxoviruses18.We used syncytium formation assay4445, reporter gene assay839, and biotinylation and western blot analysis3846 to characterize the fusogenicity of aMPV F proteins. The data demonstrated that the membrane fusion activities mediated through aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C F proteins are distinct when exposed to trypsin and/or low pH. In addition, the amino acid residues at positions 100, 101 and 294 were identified as major determinants of the trypsin- and pH-dependent or -independent phenotypes in the membrane fusion stimulated through aMPV F proteins.ResultsEffect of trypsin on the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteinsSyncytium formation induced in Vero cells by F proteins is typically used as an indicator of fusion to estimate the membrane fusogenic activity of F proteins19203947. The effect of trypsin on the fusogenicity of aMPV F protein was initially determined. Vero cells were transfected with aMPV/A-F, aMPV/B-F, or aMPV/C-F and subsequently treated or mock-treated with trypsin. At 48 h post-transfection, the results showed that syncytium formation was extensively observed in cells transfected with each of the three plasmids carrying the F proteins indicated above, irrespective of the presence of trypsin (Fig. 1a). In addition, no syncytium was formed in cells transfected with empty vector carrying Flag tag, regardless of treatment with trypsin (Fig. 1a). Moreover, the syncytium induced through aMPV/C F protein after trypsin treatment increased in number (data not shown) and size (Fig. 1a), but these differences were not observed in cells expressing aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins. We further investigated the impact of trypsin on the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins using a quantitative assay, and the addition of trypsin did not result in a notable difference in aMPV/A or aMPV/B F protein fusogenicity compared with the corresponding samples that did not receive trypsin treatment (Fig. 1b,c). However, the fusogenic activity mediated through aMPV/C F protein was remarkably increased in the presence of trypsin compared with that in samples without trypsin treatment (Fig. 1b,c). Overall, the results obtained from the two quantitative assays were consistent with those obtained from the syncytium formation assay described above. Based on these findings, we next determined whether aMPV F protein is cleaved under the equivalent conditions described above because previous studies have suggested that the cleavage of F protein is required to induce cell-cell fusion9394849. Thus, the expression of biotinylated aMPV F protein on the cell surface was determined through western blotting using an anti-Flag antibody, as previously described3846. As shown in Fig. 1d, the F proteins of all three aMPV subtypes were efficiently cleaved in the absence of trypsin (Fig. 1d). The addition of trypsin did not facilitate the cleavage of aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins, whereas trypsin slightly enhanced the cleavage of aMPV/C F protein (Fig. 1d). Taken together, these results showed that (i) the F proteins of all aMPV subtypes tested induced cell-cell fusion in the absence of trypsin and (ii) unlike the F proteins of aMPV/A and aMPV/B, aMPV/C F protein enhanced cell-cell fusogenic activity in the presence of trypsin, likely reflecting the efficient cleavage of aMPV/C F protein.The results also revealed that aMPV/B (VCO3/60616 strain, accession number: AB548428.1) F protein induced cell-cell fusion, independent of trypsin. This finding is inconsistent with a previous report showing that aMPV/B (Shaoxing strain, accession number: JN224985.1) F protein mediates cell-cell fusion in a trypsin-dependent manner18. Unlike the low fusogenic Shaoxing F protein18, VCO3/60616 F protein is hyper-fusogenic, inducing syncytium in the absence of trypsin (Fig. 1a). Furthermore, aMPV/B propagated in Vero cells, BHK-21 cells, and DF-1 cells in the absence of trypsin (data not shown).Results showing that the fusogenic activity of aMPV/C (Colorado strain, accession number: AY590688.1) F protein was profoundly increased upon trypsin treatment (Fig. 1b,c) are not consistent with those of Y. Wei et al., who illustrated that trypsin treatment did not enhance the cell-cell fusogenicity induced through F proteins of the same strain18. Based on previous studies1938, trypsin treatment was conducted for more than 12 h, whereas Y. Wei et al. performed trypsin digestion for 1 h. We hypothesized that the discrepancy in the results reflects these differences in the duration of trypsin treatment. To test this hypothesis, we examined the fusogenic activity induced through aMPV/C F protein at different time points after trypsin treatment. As shown in Fig. 1e and consistent with Wei Y et al.18, the fusogenic activity of aMPV/C F protein exposed to trypsin for 1 h was equivalent (in the reporter gene assay) or indistinguishable (in the syncytium formation assay) to that without trypsin. In addition, consistent with previous reports1938, aMPV/C F protein exposed to trypsin for 12 or 24 h exhibited significantly increased fusogenic activity compared with that without trypsin treatment (Fig. 1e). These results confirmed the hypothesis that this disparity reflected differences in the duration of trypsin treatment.The residues at positions 100 and 101 are determinants for aMPV F protein-mediated membrane fusion in the absence of trypsinA previous study indicated that hMPV, harboring the putative cleavage motif (99-RQSR-102), was incapable of initiating growth without exogenous trypsin; however, the S-to-P substitution (S101P) facilitated virus growth in a trypsin-independent manner, suggesting that the residue at position 101 promotes the cleavage of hMPV F protein and subsequent infection with hMPV19. In addition, the results indicated that the F proteins of all aMPV strains mediate membrane fusion in the absence of trypsin, partly because the precursor protein F0 can be cleaved without trypsin treatment (Fig. 1). Sequence alignment analyses (Fig. 2a,b) and previous studies18 have shown that the cleavage region of aMPV F protein is located at positions 99 to 102. To further define the residues in the cleavage region of aMPV F protein that might confer the distinct fusogenicity of aMPV subtypes, the F protein sequences of some representative aMPV/A, aMPV/B, aMPV/C, and hMPV strains were aligned. The results of the alignment analysis suggested that the residues at positions 100 or 101 in the putative cleavage region might be determinants for aMPV F protein-mediated cell-cell fusion in the absence of trypsin. Site-directed mutagenesis was therefore performed to replace one or both of these residues in the F proteins of aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C with 100Q or/and 101S, resulting in the plasmids indicated in Fig. 3a. Syncytium formation and reporter gene assays were conducted in the presence or absence of trypsin, as described above. The results consistently showed that single mutations at either position 100 or 101 did not lead to significant differences in the fusogenicity of aMPV F proteins in the presence of trypsin compared with that without trypsin for each aMPV subtype (Fig. 3a–c). This result suggested that single point mutations at either site (100 or 101) did not alter the trypsin-independent phenotype of aMPV F proteins. Interestingly, the substitution of both amino acids at positions 100 and 101 ablated or dramatically decreased the fusogenic activity of all F proteins, resulting in a trypsin-dependent phenotype for all aMPV subtypes (Fig. 3a–c). These results were further confirmed through biotinylation and western blot analyses (Fig. 3d), suggesting that aMPV mutant F proteins containing 100Q101S substitutions can be cleaved only after treatment with trypsin. Together, these findings demonstrated that the two residues at positions 100 and 101 in aMPV F proteins were determinants for aMPV F protein-induced membrane fusion in the absence of trypsin and that the addition of trypsin boosted the fusogenic activity of aMPV F 100Q101S mutants of all examined aMPV subtypes.Trypsin promotes the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins with 100 K101A mutationsAs described above, the results showed that trypsin enhanced the fusogenicity of aMPV/C F protein, but not aMPV/A or aMPV/B F. To determine the mechanism of the observed difference in cell-cell fusion induced through F proteins of different aMPV subtypes, we reciprocally replaced the residues at positions 100 and 101 of the aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C F proteins and examined the effect of trypsin on fusion promotion. As shown in Fig. 4a–c, in the absence of trypsin, the fusogenicity of all mutant and wild-type aMPV F proteins containing 100 K101A was lower than that of F protein harboring 100R101R or 100 K101 K. Interestingly, the fusogenic activity of all mutant and wild-type aMPV F proteins containing the motif 100 K101A, which is characteristic of aMPV/C, was considerably increased with the treatment of trypsin. In addition, the cleavability of all expressed aMPV F proteins was validated through biotinylation and western blotting, as described above. The results indicated that the cleavability of all mutant and wild-type aMPV F proteins possessing the 100 K101A mutation was reduced without trypsin treatment compared with that of the respective proteins under trypsin treatment (Fig. 4d). Thus, trypsin slightly enhanced the cleavability of aMPV F protein containing 100 K101A, which in turn resulted in the enhanced fusogenic activity of mutant F proteins of aMPV/A or aMPV/B to a level comparable to that of the aMPV/C F protein.Low pH-induced cell-cell fusion mediated through the aMPV/C F proteinFusion between the viral and endosomal membranes occurs in a low pH environment, whereas fusion with the plasma membrane is typically induced through neutral pH20384350. To examine the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins in different pH environments, Vero cells transfected with aMPV/A-F, aMPV/B-F, or aMPV/C-F were treated with PBS at pH 5.0 or pH 7.4. As shown in Fig. 5a, all aMPV F proteins induced syncytium formation at neutral pH after 48 h of transfection (Fig. 5a). In contrast, no syncytium was observed in Vero cells transfected with empty vector after neutral or low pH treatment (Fig. 5a). However, after low pH treatment, the syncytium induced through aMPV/C F protein increased in number (data not shown) and size (Fig. 5a) compared with that after neutral pH treatment. Moreover, there was no significant difference in syncytium number (data not shown) and size (Fig. 5a) between neutral and low pH treatments for aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins. Using quantitative assays, we further analyzed the effect of low pH on the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins. The results showed that the fusogenicity of aMPV/C F protein was remarkably increased after low pH treatment compared with that of neutral pH treatment, whereas low pH had no influence on the fusogenic activity of aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins (Fig. 5b,c). These results showed that, unlike aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins, aMPV/C F protein fusogenicity was induced through low pH.The results that low pH promoted the fusogenic activity of aMPV/C (Colorado strain, accession number: AY590688.1) F protein are inconsistent with the results of Wei Y et al., who demonstrated that the same strain F protein mediated membrane fusion independent of low pH18. According to published studies on the time interval between transfection and low pH treatment203839, we hypothesized that different time intervals might lead to differences in fusogenic activity. To verify this hypothesis, we treated aMPV/C F protein with low pH at 0, 12, or 24 h post-transfection. At 48 h post-transfection, we then analyzed the fusogenicity of aMPV/C F protein. Interestingly, the fusogenicity of aMPV/C F protein under low pH treatment was only significantly higher than that at neutral pH treatment at a time interval of less than 12 h. In contrast, no significant difference in the fusogenic activity was observed when the time interval was more than 12 h (Fig. 5d). When the time interval exceeded 24 h, consistent with Wei Y et al.18, the fusogenic activity of aMPV/C F protein was similar at low and neutral pH (Fig. 5d). These results partially explain the discrepancy between the results obtained in the present study and those of Wei Y et al.18.Residue 294G was the determinant for aMPV/C F protein-mediated low pH-dependent cell-cell fusionLow pH-induced cell-cell fusion mediated through aMPV F proteins was subtype-dependent (Fig. 5) and strain-dependent for hMPV F proteins39. For hMPV, residues 294E and 294G are responsible for wild-type F protein-mediated membrane fusion in low pH-independent and -dependent manner, respectively39. Interestingly, the alignment analysis of F protein sequences revealed that the aMPV/C F protein, a low pH-dependent phenotype, possesses residue 294G, whereas aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins, both low pH-independent phenotypes, did not possess a glycine (G) at position 294 (Fig. 2a,b). We therefore examined whether substitution of G294 to E was sufficient to change the low pH-dependent phenotype of aMPV/C F protein into a low pH-independent phenotype. Site-directed mutagenesis was performed to change the G residue at 294 in aMPV/C F protein to an E residue, and the fusogenic activity of mutant and wild-type aMPV/C F proteins was compared. The results demonstrated that the G294E substitution changed aMPV/C F protein into a low pH-independent phenotype (Fig. 6a–c), suggesting that 294G mediated the low pH induction of aMPV/C F protein fusogenicity.To determine whether residue 294G is also responsible for the low pH-dependent phenotype in the aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins, we mutated the 294 site of aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins into glycine (G) and detected the fusogenic activity of wild-type and mutant F proteins, as described above. As expected, the mutant aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins containing 294G, the same amino acid same as observe in aMPV/C F protein, mediated cell-cell fusion in a low pH-dependent manner (Fig. 6a–c). Taken together, these results indicated that residue 294G is a key determinant for mediating cell-cell fusion in a low pH-dependent manner for aMPV F proteins. Furthermore, we performed biotinylation and western blot analyses to exclude the possibility that the low pH environment affects the expression of aMPV F proteins, and the results showed that the expression was similar at neutral and low pH (Fig. 6d).294 site regulated the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteinsThe protonation of histidines and electrostatic interactions are important for the activation of certain F proteins383951. Previous studies have also demonstrated that residue 294G is responsible for the low pH-stimulated promotion of the fusogenic activity of hMPV F proteins through the regulation of protonation at 368H39. Because the 294 site of aMPV F protein is located near residue 368H in the three-dimensional model3952 (Fig. 7), we predicted that 294 site might also affect the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins. To examine this hypothesis, the residues at 294 were reciprocally interchanged among aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C F proteins, and the fusogenic activity of these mutants was compared with that of the wild-type F proteins. The results showed that the fusogenic activity of aMPV/B and aMPV/C F proteins was increased in the 294H derivatives compared with that of the 294 K and 294G derivatives (Fig. 8a,b). However, this result was not observed for aMPV/A F protein (Fig. 8a,b). Taken together, the 294 site was identified as an important factor that affects the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins. Furthermore, we performed biotinylation and western blot analyses to exclude the possibility that substitutions at the 294 site alter the expression of aMPV F proteins, and the results showed that the expression was similar among the 294 K, 294H, and 294G derivatives (Fig. 8c).DiscussionThe entry of aMPV into host cells requires the initial fusion of viral and cell membranes mediated through F protein1853. The dissection of the basic requirements for aMPV F protein-induced cell-cell fusion has facilitated studies on aMPV entry; however, the mechanism of aMPV F protein-mediated trypsin- and low pH-induced membrane fusion remains unclear. Here, we revealed that trypsin is not essential for the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins and that low pH-induced membrane fusion is subtype dependent. Moreover, we have provided the first evidence that the residues at positions 100, 101 and 294 affect the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins regulated through trypsin and low pH treatments, indicating that these residues might influence aMPV virulence and entry.The cleavage of precursor F protein (F0) is a prerequisite for F protein-mediated membrane fusion, which in turn mediates viral entry and infection19. In the present study, we revealed that aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C F proteins induce cell-cell fusion in the absence of trypsin. Site-specific mutagenesis and quantitative assays for fusogenic activity demonstrated that the residues at positions 100 and 101 in the putative cleavage motif were responsible for aMPV F protein-mediated cell-cell fusion without the exogenous addition of trypsin (Fig. 4). Previous studies have shown that for NDV, hPIV2, and Sendai virus in vivo, the trypsin-dependent cleavage motif is only recognized via tissue-specific proteases, whereas trypsin-independent cleavage motifs are typically recognized via nonspecific ubiquitous proteases, thus increasing host range and virulence19. In contrast with the trypsin-dependent cleavage motif, whether the trypsin-independent cleavage motif promotes aMPV infectivity and virulence in turkeys and chickens is unclear, and further studies are warranted.In general, paramyxovirus F proteins containing multibasic residues at the cleavage site are easily cleaved via intracellular proteases, whereas F proteins containing monobasic residues require exogenous trypsin for cleavage19. The putative cleavage motif of aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins comprises basic residues, while the cleavage site of aMPV/C F harbors a neutral alanine (A). Therefore, trypsin increased the fusogenic activity of aMPV/C F100K101A protein but had no effect on aMPV/A F100R101R and aMPV/B F100K101K proteins (Fig. 1).Studies investigating the mechanism of how low pH activates cell-cell fusion would greatly enhance the biophysical understanding of paramyxovirus-induced membrane fusion51. Here, we demonstrated that low pH stimulated the fusogenic activity of aMPV/C F protein in contrast to that observed with aMPV/A and aMPV/B F proteins. The reciprocal interchange between residues at position 294 in aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C F proteins demonstrated that residue 294G was responsible for the increased the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins at low pH (Fig. 6 and 8). Paramyxovirus uses a neutral pH for plasma membrane entry routes3843, whereas the results obtained in the present study suggest that residue 294G might alter the entry pathway of aMPV to that of a low pH endocytic route. Further study is needed to define the entry pathways for aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C.There was no clear explanation for why residue 294G determines the low pH-dependent phenotype of aMPV and hMPV F proteins. A previous study suggested that residue 294G induces the protonation of 368H in F proteins induced at low pH39. Additionally, aMPV/B and aMPV/C F proteins carrying residue 294H are more fusogenic than those carrying 294G and 294 K, and the same applies to hMPV (Canada 97–83 strain, accession number: AY297749.1) F proteins (data not shown) but not aMPV/A F protein (Fig. 8). The mechanism underlying the effect of position 294 on the fusogenicity of aMPV and hMPV F proteins requires further study.Sequence analyses have shown that aMPV/C is more closely related to hMPV than to aMPV/A and aMPV/B5455. Recently, aMPV/C and hMPV have been subclassified into the same type based on phylogenetic analysis, while aMPV/A and aMPV/B belong to another type5. In addition, aMPV/C has limited cross-reactivity with aMPV/A and aMPV/B in virus neutralization assays56. Furthermore, aMPV/C has closer antigenic and genetic relatedness to hMPV than to aMPV/A and aMPV/B5758. Interestingly, Wei et al. demonstrated that the behavior of aMPV/C in mice is similar to that of hMPV, suggesting that aMPV/C might emerge as a zoonotic pathogen56. We also showed that the mechanism of trypsin- or low pH-induced membrane fusion mediated through aMPV/C differs from that of aMPV/A and aMPV/B and is more similar to some hMPV strains. Because aMPV F protein-mediated membrane fusion induces viral infectivity, the distinctive fusion mechanism of aMPV/C F protein might produce different patterns of pathogenicity in aMPV/C relative to aMPV/A and aMPV/B but confer similarity to hMPV.In summary, we demonstrated that positions 100 and 101 primarily determine aMPV/A, aMPV/B, and aMPV/C F protein-mediated cell-cell fusion in the absence of trypsin and that residues 100 K101A determine the trypsin-induced fusogenic activity of aMPV/C F protein. In addition, we also demonstrated that residue 294G influences aMPV/C F protein-induced cell-cell fusion in a low pH-dependent manner. Further research on this aspect will shed light on the mechanism of aMPV F protein-mediated membrane fusion and substantially contribute to a better understanding the pathogenesis of aMPV.MethodsCells and PlasmidsVero cells and BHK-21 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Invitrogen/Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, Invitrogen/Life Technologies) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin (summus, Beijing, China). The F gene of aMPV strains LAH A strain (aMPV/A), VCO3/60616 strain (aMPV/B), and Colorado strain (aMPV/C) was amplified by RT-PCR and then subcloned into the pCAGGS mammalian expression vector by using the Kpn Ι and Xho Ι restriction sites, resulting in plasmids aMPV/A-F, aMPV/B-F, and aMPV/C-F. Flag tag fusing with F gene was introduced into each of these plasmids above for identification. All aMPV F gene mutants were created with In-Fusion® HD Cloning Kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA, USA) using aMPV/A-F, aMPV/B-F, and aMPV/C-F as template. All aMPV wild-type and mutant F genes used in this study were verified by automated DNA sequencing.Syncytium formation assayMonolayers of Vero cells in 6-well plates were transfected with 2 μg of each plasmid using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The transfected cells were incubated with or without 0.2 μg/mL TPCK (L-1-tosylamide-2-phenylethyl chloromethyl ketone)-trypsin (Sigma) for up to 24 h. After transfection, the cells were exposed to phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) at pH 5.0 (low pH) or pH 7.4 (neutral pH) for 4 min as previously described2039. This pH pulse was repeated three times at 2-h intervals. At 48 h post-transfection, the cells were observed and photographed. The areas involved in syncytium formation were selected from representative photographs of the experimental samples. These areas were subsequently compared with the total analyzed area using the Magnetic Lasso Tool and histogram function of Adobe Photoshop software, and the percentage of cells forming syncytia was calculated to evaluate the fusogenic activity as previously described4445.Reporter gene assayThe reporter gene assay was performed to evaluate the fusogenic activity of aMPV F proteins according to previous reports839. Lipofectamine 2000 was used to transfect Vero cells in 6-cm dishes with 2 μg of wild-type or mutant aMPV-F and 1 μg T7 control plasmid (Promega, Madison, WI) containing luciferase cDNA under the control of the T7 promoter. The transfected Vero cells were incubated with or without 0.2 μg/mL of trypsin for up to 24 h. The transfected Vero cells and BHK-21 cells infected with MVA-T7 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 were treated with PBS (pH 5.0 or pH 7.4) after transfection. The next day, the Vero cells were lifted, resuspended and overlaid onto infected BHK-21 cells. At 48 h post-transfection, the cell lysates were analyzed for luciferase activity using a luciferase assay system (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The luciferase activity was measured on an EnVision Multilabel Reader (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA).Biotinylation and Western blottingExpression of aMPV F proteins on the cell surface was measured by biotinylation and western blotting, as described previously3846. The transfected Vero cells were biotinylated with membrane-impermeable EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). The cells were lysed in Cell Lysis Buffer for Western and IP (Beyotime, Beijing, China) and centrifuged to collect the supernatants, which were immunoprecipitated with streptavidin beads (Thermo Scientific). The expressed proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Hybond-C Super; GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ). The nonspecific antibody-binding sites were blocked with 5% skim milk in PBS containing 1% Tween-20. Monoclonal anti-flag antibody (Sigma) diluted (1:2,000 dilution) in PBS containing 1% Tween-20 was used to react with target protein. The second antibody, IRDye 800CW goat anti-mouse IgG (H + L) (LiCor BioSciences, Bad Homburg, Germany) (1:5,000 dilution), was added, followed by incubation in a dark place at room temperature for 1 h. The nitrocellulose membranes were exposed to LI-COR ODYSSEY (LiCor BioSciences) for visualization of aMPV F proteins. The cleavage extent and expression level of F proteins were evaluated by software Gelpro32.Statistical analysisStatistical analyses were performed using SPSS 13.0 software. The data represent the means (±standard error) of at least three experiments. A P value (one-way analysis of variance, two-tail paired t-test) of <0.05 was considered significant.Additional InformationHow to cite this article: Yun, B. et al. Trypsin- and low pH-mediated fusogenicity of avian metapneu-movirus fusion proteins is determined by residues at positions 100, 101 and 294. Sci. Rep.
5, 15584; doi: 10.1038/srep15584 (2015).


Title: Human Metapneumovirus Infection in Chimpanzees, United States

Zoological facilities in North America house endangered species of great apes with annual visitation rates of >100 million persons (1). Because humans and great apes are related genetically, interspecies transmission of infectious pathogens is a concern. Consequently, procedures are instituted to limit the potential spread of infectious pathogens (2).Reports of outbreaks of human metapneumovirus (HMPV) infection with respiratory symptoms have been documented in wild great ape populations (3–5). All of these outbreaks have been attributed to exposure to humans because of the suspected HMPV-negative status of these populations. However, disease caused by HMPV has not been previously documented in North American zoo populations, despite the close proximity of humans and great apes. We report an outbreak of HMPV infection in 2009 in a troop of previously HPMV-negative chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) in Chicago, Illinois, USA, that resulted in 1 death and an illness rate of 100%.The StudyTwo chimpanzee and 2 western lowland gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla) troops were housed in separate areas within 1 building with shared airspace at a zoological facility in Chicago, Illinois, USA. Animals had periodic contact with keepers during daily feeding, cage cleaning, and training sessions. Biosecurity for staff in the great ape area included wearing gloves, dedicated footwear and clothing, handwashing, and use of footbaths when entering and exiting the facility and during movement between troops. Staff members were required to notify management if they had a confirmed or suspected respiratory infection so that they were removed from direct interaction with animals. No outside personnel were allowed direct contact; indirect contact was considered rare and only possible if visitors tossed objects into outdoor enclosures.Within 1 week before the outbreak in chimpanzees, staff members at the great ape facility had respiratory disease (coughing and nasal discharge), which coincided with peak HMPV season in the United States (Figure 1). The affected chimpanzee troop consisted of 7 chimpanzees; the initial clinical sign (coughing) on March 18, 2009, was observed in 1 adult female (Table).Figure 1Percentage of human metapneumovirus (HMPV)–positive test results, by week of report, National Respiratory and Enteric Virus Surveillance System, United States, July 2008–January 2013.TableSerologic results for IgG against HMPV in chimpanzees and gorillas at the incident zoological facility, United States, 1994–2012*Great apeAge at outbreak, y†Arrived at facilityYear1994199519961997199819992000200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012Chimpanzee troop 1 AM18.32004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNN‡PNTP AF124.62004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNNTNTNTP AF218.62004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNNTNTPNT AF315.22004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNT NNTNTNTP SAM19.22004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNN§NTNTNT SAM210.12004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNNTNNTNTPNT SAF9.52004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNNTNTPNTChimpanzee troop 2 AM50.81959NTNTPNTNTPNTPPNTNTPNTNTNTNTNTNTP AF143.41965NTPPNTNTPPPPNTPNTPNTPNTNTNTP AF244.21971PNTPNTNTPNTPPNTNTNTPNTPNTNTNTNT AF328.61980PNTPNTNTPPNTPNTNTNTPNTPPNTNTP AF443.81970PNTPNTNTNTPPPNTNTNTPPNTNTNTNTNTGorilla troop 1 AM20.11998NTNTNTNTNNTNTPNTNTNTPNTNTPNTPNTNT AF131.21978NTPPNTNTNTNTPNTNTNTNTPNTPNTNTNTNT AF220.21989NTNTNTNTNNTPNTNTNTNTNTPNTPPNTNTNT AF312.81996NTNTNTNTNTNTNTPNTNTNTNTPNTPPNTNTNT JM3.62005NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNTNTPNTGorilla troop 2 AM28.91980NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTPNTNTNTPNTPNTNTNTP AF121.71987NTNTNNNTNNTNTPNTNTPNTNTPNTNTNTP AF218.51990PNTNTPNTNTPNTPNTNTNTNTPPNTNTPNT AF316.91992NTNNTNNNTPNTPNTNTNTPNTPPNTNTNT AF412.51996NTNTNTNTNTNTNTPNTNTNTPNTPNTPNTNTNT JM15.32004NTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNTNNNTNNTNTNTNT*HPMV, human metapneumovirus; AM, adult male; NT, not tested (animal was not present at the facility; not born; died; or sampling was not performed that year); N, HMPV IgG seronegative; P, HPMV IgG HMPV seropositive; AF, adult female; SAM, subadult male; SAF, subadult female; JM, juvenile male. Gray shading indicates seroconversion or ≥4-fold increase in HMPV IgG titer, and black shading indicates death caused by HMPV.†Day of symptom onset for HMPV outbreak was March 18, 2009. ‡Serum collected January 2009 and antibody negative. §Serum collected postoutbreak on March 23 and no IgG against HMPV was detected.Within 96 hours, all 7 chimpanzees had moderate-to-severe respiratory disease (≥2 characteristic clinical signs), and their intake of oral fluids was increased. One juvenile male with pectus excavatum had marked mucopurulent rhinorrhea, coughing, lethargy, tachypnea, dyspnea, and partial anorexia; he was also given an intramuscular broad-spectrum antimicrobial drug (ceftiofur, 25 mg/kg). Within 24 hours, the condition of this animal worsened, which necessitated sedation for rehydration and diagnostic assessment. Radiographs showed marked bronchointerstitial pneumonia. An additional antimicrobial drug (cefazolin, 25 mg/kg) and fluids (0.9% NaCl, 40 mL/kg/h) were administered, but the animal died the next morning.The remaining animals in the troop were given antimicrobial drugs (cefazolin, 25 mg/kg; enrofloxacin, 5 mg/kg) and anti-inflammatory medication (flunixin meglumine, 0.25 mg/kg). Within 48 hours, all animals showed mild improvement. Antimicrobial drugs were given for 10 days. Fifteen days post-onset, clinical resolution had occurred. The other troops showed no signs of respiratory disease.Necropsy of the animal that died showed that the lungs were firm, had not collapsed, and surrounding airways were mottled red-to-purple. Histologic analysis showed that lesions were similar to those observed in humans and indicated necrotizing bronchointerstitial pneumonia with type II pneumocyte hyperplasia, abundant fibrin, and streaming mucus in airways. Cilia were absent from many bronchial epithelial cells, and rare epithelial cells lacked any identifiable cytoplasmic membrane or nuclear structure, suggestive of the smudge cells commonly found in human HMPV infection (6) (Figure 2).Figure 2A) Bronchiolar epithelium of chimpanzees infected with human metapneumovirus, United States, 2009, showing cell variation from attenuated to piled and disorganized. Epithelial cells lack cilia, and lumens contain foamy macrophages, neutrophils, and hemorrhage. Adjacent air spaces are filled with similar inflammatory cells. Scale bar = 70 μm. B) Alveoli lined with plump type II pneumocytes and fibrin. Inset: Rare, deeply basophilic, smudged nuclei are present in some areas. Scale bar = 20 μm. Hematoxylin and eosin stain.Only rare gram-positive cocci were observed, and the lack of extensive suppurative inflammation suggested that these findings were not a major contributing factor. Bacterial lung tissue cultures were negative. Lung tissue was screened for viral respiratory pathogens by real time reverse transcription PCR by using published methods (7). Sections were positive for HMPV and negative for adenoviruses, coronaviruses, influenza viruses A and B, human parainfluenza viruses 1–4, bocavirus, rhinovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus.The complete HMPV nucleoprotein gene was sequenced and deposited in GenBank (accession no. KF891365). The HMPV strain sequence showed 99% nucleotide identity with group A, subgroup A2 reference strain CAN97–83 (accession no. AY297749.1).To assess troop HMPV exposure, we conducted a serologic study by measuring IgG against HMPV in available serum samples collected at various times before and after the outbreak (Table) (8). Serum samples were usually collected opportunistically, often not during clinical illness. Unlike samples from other troops, serum samples from chimpanzee troop 1 showed that these animals were seronegative for HMPV before the outbreak; 100% seroconversion was observed 1–3 years later. Serum samples obtained before 2009 from the other troops had stable levels of IgG against HMPV, and these troops had experienced 12 episodes in which a ≥4-fold increase in titer or seroconversion were noted, indicating exposure within the testing interval. Overall, HMPV seroprevalence in the year before the outbreak for the chimpanzee and gorilla troops were 42% and 75%, respectively. Seroprevelance 3 years post-outbreak was 100% and 92%, respectively.ConclusionsWe report an outbreak of HMPV infection producing illness and death in chimpanzees in a North American zoo. Although the human source of the infection remains unknown, staff members in the great ape area had respiratory disease just before the outbreak in chimpanzees. Serologic testing of staff for respiratory viruses could not be performed. Post-outbreak, in addition to biosecurity measures already in place, all staff working with primates have been required to wear facemasks during direct primate interactions.Unlike this situation, chimpanzees experimentally infected with HMPV have shown only mild cold-like clinical signs in seronegative animals and no clinical signs in seroconverted animals (9). Seroconverted, naturally infected, captive-bred chimpanzees represented 61% of the laboratory population, which demonstrated that captive animals are readily infected with HMPV (9). Worldwide, nearly 100% of the human population has seroconverted to HMPV by 10 years of age, and most illness and death occurs in young, elderly, and immunocompromised persons, although persons in any age group can become infected (10,11). Immunity is transient, and reinfections with the same or different strains are common, but illness is reduced (10,11). Recent evidence suggests these findings are also found in captive and wild chimpanzees (9,12) and other primates (13). In this instance, the congenital thoracic defect may have affected the ability of the chimpanzee to survive. In contrast to other cases in which apes were infected with Streptococcus pneumoniae (3–5), only rare lung bacteria were observed histologically and lung bacterial cultures were negative. These findings, in combination with the absence of major suppurative inflammation, suggest that HMPV was the primary pathogen.Given the ubiquitous nature of this human virus in North America and the frequency with which it infects humans, it is notable that all members of the affected chimpanzee troop were born in captivity and had contact with humans throughout their lives, yet still remained negative for this virus until March 2009. Because HMPV is a recently discovered virus that closely resembles other respiratory viruses in its clinical course and few animal facilities specifically test for it, the degree of illness associated with this disease in the captive great ape population is unknown. Therefore, enhanced biosecurity and disease surveillance measures for HMPV should be considered for great apes. In addition to the commonly tested viral respiratory pathogens of great apes, surveillance for HMPV by serologic analysis at quarantine or preventative medical examinations would provide additional benefits. These procedures would enable management to tailor biosecurity protocols and procedures to limit the risk for exposure of HMPV-negative animals or troops, particularly during the height of the HMPV season.


Title: Epidemiology, evolution and transmission of human metapneumovirus in Guangzhou China, 2013–2017

IntroductionHuman metapneumovirus (hMPV), first identified in 2001, is a major viral respiratory pathogen that worldwide reported1. It is estimated that 4–16% of acute respiratory tract infections are caused by HMPV2,3. Retrospective serologic studies demonstrated 100% seroprevalence of hMPV antibodies among children ≤5 years of age4. Moreover, reinfection can occur throughout life5,6, further contributing to the prevalence of hMPV. Clinical features of HMPV infection are similar to those associated with human respiratory syncytial virus infection, ranging from mild respiratory illnesses to severe bronchiolitis and pneumonia4,7. Children under five years, aged adults, and patients with underlying diseases are more likely to develop severe diseases8.HMPV is a single stranded, negative sense and enveloped RNA virus. The viral RNA is approximately 13 kb in length, containing eight genes coding for nine proteins9. The fusion (F) and attachment (G) proteins are two major hMPV surface glycoproteins that have played important roles in viral replication and host immune response10 and have been largely used to study hMPV genetic variation11–13. Based on the genetic variability of the F and G genes, hMPV is classified into two main genetic groups, A and B, which are further divided into five lineages known as A1, A2a, A2b, B1, and B214,15. There may no direct association between the genotypes and the clinical courses16. However, antigenic variance is observed among different genetic lineages of hMPV in animal models and human infection cases10,17.The genetic evolution and transmission of hMPV are critical to epidemic control but have not been thoroughly studied as yet. Recently, infections of hMPV were increasingly reported in Asian countries6,18–24, with novel variants of hMPV emerging23,24, highlighting the risks of hMPV epidemics in these regions. Here, we conducted a five-year study on hMPV in Guangzhou, the most populous city in China, from January 2013 to December 2017. Through phylogeographic analyses, the spatial and evolution dynamics of hMPV were inferred by integrating the publicly available data and the newly generated sequences in this study.Materials and MethodsEthics statementThis study was approved by the Ethics Review Committee of the Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention. We confirm that all methods were performed in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations. Respiratory samples were collected for public health purposes. All patients or their guardian(s) were informed about the study before providing written consent, and data were anonymized for analysis.Clinical sample collectionGuangzhou in southern China is the country’s largest city with a population of over 13 million in 2016. Observation was conducted in a sentinel hospital in Guangzhou through a Guangdong provincial respiratory surveillance system as previously described25,26. Patients suspected of having acute respiratory tract infections were enrolled according to these criteria: acute fever (T ≥ 38 °C) and/or abnormal leukocyte count with any one respiratory symptom (such as sore throat, cough, expectoration, or dyspnoea/tachypnoea). A total of 1,460 patients were enrolled from January 2013 to December 2017. Nasopharyngeal swabs (NPSs) were collected within 24 h after admission. Specimens were stored in 3 mL viral transport medium at −70 until analysis.Detection of human metapneumovirusTotal viral nucleic acids were extracted from 140ul specimen and eluted with 60ul water by using a QIAamp Viral RNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. hMPV infection was detected by using real-time RT-PCR with a QIAGEN OneStep RT-PCR Kit. The hMPV RT-PCR primer set was used as previously described27: hMPV-F: 5′-CGTCAGCTTCAGTCAATTCAACAGA-3′, hMPV-R: 5’-ATTARGTCCAADGATATTGCTGGTGTT-3’ and hMPV-Probe: FAM-CTGCATTGTCTGAAAAYTGCCGCACAACATT-BHQ1. The thermocycling protocol was reverse transcription at 45 °C for 10 min, followed by 10 min at 95 °C, 40 cycles of 95 °C 15 s, and 55 °C 60 s.PCR amplification of the full-length F and G protein genesFor hMPV positive samples, the viral RNA was reverse transcribed into cDNA using a SuperScript™ IV First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, USA). Then the full length of F and G genes was amplified using traditional nested PCR with primers newly designed in this study. Primers used for G gene amplification were: hMPV-G-F: 5′-GAGAACATTCGRRCRATWGAYATG -3′, hMPV-G-R1:5′-AGATARACATTRACAGTRGAYTCA-3′, and hMPV-G-R2:5′-C AAYAACAGGGTTTTCYAYAGCA-3′. The primer sets for F gene were: outer primers set hMPV-F-F1-5′-CAATGCAGGTATAACACCAGCAATATC-3′ and hMPV -F-R1 5′-GCAACAATTGAACTGATCTTCAGGAAAC-3′, and inner primers set hMPV-F-F2-5′-ACATGCCAACATCTGCAGGACAAATAAAAC-3′ and hMPV-F- R2 5′- ACATGCTGTTCACCTTCAACTTTGC-3′. The PCR products were purified and sequenced using an ABI3730xl DNA Analyzer at IGE Biotech Co., Ltd. (Guangzhou, China). In total, 51 and 32 samples (out of the total 160 RT-PCR positive samples) F and G genes were sent for sequencing, respectively. Sequences generated in this study have been submitted to GenBank (accession numbers MK450165-MK450246).Sequence alignment and maximum-likelihood phylogenetic analysisThe hMPV sequences generated in this study were combined with all publicly available hMPV G and F genes sequences with known sampling dates and locations in GenBank. Partial sequences (<80%) of the G and F genes were excluded, and identical sequences collected in the same sampling location on the same date were removed to improve computation time. In total, 978 G gene sequences (568 genogroup-A and 410 genogroup-B) and 767 F gene sequences (365 genogroup-A and 402 genogroup-B) were included in the phylogenetic analysis (Table S1) with sequences generated in this study. Multiple sequence alignment was performed using ClustalW, and alignments were minimally edited by hand using Aliview28. Maximum-likelihood (ML) trees were estimated for G and F genes in RaxML29. Temporal accumulation of genetic divergence was assessed from maximum-likelihood, mid-point-rooted phylogenies using the linear regression approach implemented in TempEst (formerly Path-O-Gen)30.Phylogeographic analysisCompared to the F gene, more hMPV G gene sequences from different regions were available in the public database. Therefore, we performed the phylogeographic analysis on genogroup-A and genogroup-B G gene sequences separately to provide an outline of hMPV distribution and transmission. As previously described25,31,32, Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) phylogenetic inference was performed using BEAST under a SRD06 nucleotide substitution model and a GMRF Bayesian skyride coalescent model33. Preliminary analysis indicated high values for the coefficient of variation parameter of the molecular clock model, therefore an uncorrelated lognormal (UCLD) relaxed clock model was used in the final analysis to accommodate variation in substitution rates among branches34. Three independent MCMC runs of 1 × 108 steps were computed and 10–20% burn-in was discarded from each, resulting in a total of 2.0 × 108 total steps. Model parameters and trees were sampled every 10,000 MCMC steps. Convergence and behavior of MCMC chains was inspected using Tracer v1.6 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk). A subset of 1,000 trees was randomly drawn from the combined posterior distribution of trees and used as an empirical distribution for subsequent phylogeographic analysis35.ResultsEpidemiology of hMPV in southern chinaA total of 1,460 ARI patients (927 males and 533 females) were enrolled in Guangzhou from January 2013 to December 2017 (Fig. 1). HMPV was detected in 76 samples (5.2%), including 50 males and 26 females (1.92:1). No significant gender difference was observed (p = 0.669). The age of enrolled patients ranged from 1 month to 88 years, with the majority (82.7%) being children no more than 5 years (median age: 11 months, IQR, 0.3–3 years). HMPV positive cases were aged from 1 month to 81 years (median age: 1 year, IQR, 0.4–2.5 years). Half (52.6%) of infected individuals were children no more than 1 year. The distribution of HMPV prevalence among age groups was significantly different (P = 0.016), and children aged 1 to 2 years had the highest prevalence (9.1%, 15/164). The clinical presentations of hMPV infected cases included fever (69, 90.8%), cough (69, 90.8%), sore throat (38, 50.0%), expectoration (16, 90.8%), shortness of breath (10, 13.2%) and nasal discharge (6, 7.9%). The seasonal distribution showed that hMPV circulated predominantly in the period from December of the first year to May of the next (Fig. 1). In the years 2013–2015, the hMPV detection rate was approximately even, ranging from 3.7% to 5.1%, similar with the rate detected in central and eastern China. An apparent low frequency of circulation of hMPV in the year 2016 was observed, with a low positive rate of 1.1%. However, in the year 2017, hMPV showed a remarkable increase, viruses being detected in 31 ARI cases (11.9%).Figure 1Month distribution of acute respiratory infection cases and hMPV positive rates in Guangzhou, 2013–2017. Duration from November to the next May is highlight to show the seasonality of hMPV epidemic.Genetic divergence and lineage classification of hMPVTo understand the lineage distribution and the cause(s) for the increase of the hMPV epidemic in 2017, 32 G genes and 51 F genes from 2013 through 2017 were sequenced. The evolution of hMPV at the global level was investigated by integrating all other publicly available G gene and F gene sequences (Materials and Methods). Due to the great genetic distance observed between two genogroups of hMPV (nucleotide identity of G gene between A and B groups is less than 57%), sequences from A and B genogroups were analyzed separately (Figs 2–4).Figure 2Genetic evolution and spatial spread of the genogroup A hMPV lineages. (a) Bayesian Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree of G gene from genogroup A hMPV viruses. sequences reported in this study from Guangzhou are highlighted by orange bars. Branch colours represent the most probable ancestral locations of each branch. Four major lineages of hMPV are observed, denoted A1, A2a, A2b, and A2c. Black circles indicate posterior support >0.95 at the root node of each lineage. The clusters containing major circulating strains in Guangzhou are marked with box. These clusters are enlarged and names of strains are included in (b,c). (b) The cluster of hMPV including the 180-nt duplication novel variant (marked with light blue bars) and 110-nt duplication variants (marked with an orange bars). Guangzhou hMPV sequences are also highlighted by red bars in (b,c). (d) Heatmap of nucleotide identity matrix of hMPV strains. G genes are grouped by genetic lineages and arranged according to the isolation time.Figure 3Genetic evolution and spatial spread of the genogroup B hMPV lineages. (a) Bayesian Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree of G gene from genogroup B hMPV viruses. sequences reported in this study from Guangzhou are highlighted by red bars. Branch colours represent the most probable ancestral locations of each branch. Four major lineages of hMPV are observed, denoted B1 and B2. Black circles indicate posterior support >0.95 at the root node of each lineage. The clusters containing major circulating strains in Guangzhou are marked with box. These clusters are enlarged and names of strains are included in (b,c).Figure 4Bayesian Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree of F gene from genogroup A (a) and genogroup B (b) hMPV viruses. sequences reported in this study from Guangzhou are highlighted by red bars. The color scheme of the phylogeny was the same as Figs 2 and 3.The hMPV A genogroup can be divided into four lineages (A1, A2a, A2b, A2c) based on the phylogeny topology (Figs 2a and 4a) and genetic diversity (Fig. 2d). The heat map of identity matrix clearly showed A1 strains were divergent from all A2 lineages (identity less than 85.2%), but similar genetic distances or identities were observed among A2a, A2b, and A2c (Fig. 2d, Table 1). Therefore, A2c was named as a novel A2b lineage in a previous study23 but marked as a novel lineage in this study due to the comparable genetic identities between each pair of the A2 sub-lineages (Fig. 2d, Table 1). For instances, the pairwise nucleotide identities between strains from A2b and A2c lineages were range from 87.5–93.3% which was similar with that observed between strains from A2a and A2b (86.0–93.3%). Within lineage, the divergent patterns showed by the G genes existed according to the time, seemingly having little correlation with the isolation date (Fig. 2d).Table 1Pairwise identities (%) of G genes from strains within and between hMPV lineages at both the nucleotide and amino acid levels (in bracket).LineagesA1A2aA2bA2cA189.9–100 (81.8–100)77.6–85.2 (61.2–72.9)77.7–85.0 (59.3–72.4)77.9–84.3 (59.8–72.9)A2a—91.9–100 (86.4–100)86.0–93.3 (75.7–87.4)86.1–92.8 (75.7–86.9)A2b——91.1–100 (83.2–100)87.5–93.3 (76.2–87.4)A2c———91.1–100 (83.2–100)Global distribution of hMPV lineagesThe phylogeographic analysis of the G gene showed a spatial pattern of hMPV lineages. Strains near the root of genogroup A primarily circulated in America (Fig. 2a). Although an American origin for the genogroup A of hMPV seems the most probable (posterior probability = 1.0), this might also be caused by sampling biases. Between 1990 and 2005, hMPV infections began to be detected in other continents. Notably, regional clusters of hMPV were observed in lineages A1 and A2a (Fig. 2a), suggesting the local circulation of these hMPV viruses. However, these circulations were always temporal as the regional phylogenetic clusters in A1 and A2a lineages were only persistent during 2–3 years (Fig. 2a).In contrast, a cluster in A2b, early detected in America, dominantly circulated in Asian countries after 2005 when the hMPV surveillances started in these regions22,36,37. This cluster was persistent in Asia for more than 10 years, and the transmissions of this cluster of strains from Asia to other continents were observed. More obviously, the young lineage A2c most likely originated around 2001 (1997–2003, 95%HPD) and was well established in Asian countries. Current surveillance data showed A2c was now the major epidemic lineage in genogroup A. A similar pattern was observed for the F gene (Fig. 4). The A2c lineage of hMPV was endemic in Asia as the F gene phylogeny and introductions of A2c strains from Asia into other continents were observed after 2010 (Fig. 4a). In genogroup B, the sequences near the root of the phylogenetic tree were also mainly from America (Figs 3a and 4b). Lineages B1 and B2 of hMPV were established in Asian countries after 2010, and thereafter hMPV transmissions between Asia and Europe were frequently observed (Fig. 5).Figure 5Continental distribution of hMPV genetic lineages in year 1980–2005 and 2006–2017. The number of lineages strains and spatial distribution are calculated according to the phylogeny of G genes in Figs 2 and 3.Local transmission of hMPVThe continental-specific distribution was observed for hMPV genetic lineages (Fig. 5). Then, the next intriguing question became how hMPV circulated at a country level. In particular, the increasing epidemic of hMPV in Guangzhou in 2017 was caused by the local strains circulating in previous seasons or the strains being imported from another region. The phylogenetic analyses of hMPV strains isolated in Guangzhou 2013–2017 showed the predominant lineage was varied in different years (Figs 2a and 3a). Based on the phylogeny of F genes, 26, 1, 15, and 10 strains were classified into A2c, A2b, B1, and B2 lineages, respectively (Fig. 4). In 2017, we identified one HMPV A2c strain with 111nt-dup in the G gene (P17072_GD-CHN_110ntDup_2017, Fig. 2b). This strain is closely related with the 111nt-dup hMPV novel variant most recently identified in Japan in 201724. Notably, all these novel variants were scattered in a cluster of A2c lineage, indicating these variants were likely the result of multiple incidences of mutations rather than having evolved from a single mutation strain (Fig. 2a,b). In this scenario, the mutation leading to a duplication fragment in the G gene may easily have occurred for hMPV. In Guangzhou, hMPV infections were mainly caused by A2c, B1, and B2 lineage strains and none of the A1 and A2a lineage strains were identified in hMPV infection cases (Figs 2 and 4). Notably, in 2017, B1 lineage strains replaced the A2c and were likely the major causative strains leading to the increasing epidemiology of hMPV infections in Guangzhou (Figs 1, 3 and 4b). To trace the transmission of hMPV, we reconstructed the potential origins of Guangdong hMPV strains based on the phylogeny of the G gene. The hMPV strains isolated in Guangzhou in different years were always closely related (Figs 2b,c and 3b,c). However, the contemporary strains from Japan were always clustered together with strains of Guangzhou, highlighting the frequent transmissions among cities in China and Japan. The B1 strains causing the increasing hMPV epidemic in Guangzhou 2017 were more likely imported from Japan since closely related sequences were not found in Guangzhou but in Japan in the previous season (Fig. 3c).DiscussionDespite the first isolation in 2001, serological data suggested hMPV has been circulating globally for more than 50 years1. The great genetic distance between two genogroups (A and B) of hMPV indicates the origin of hMPV should be much earlier. To date, the molecular evolution, spatial distribution, and transmission of hMPV have not been adequately studied. Molecular surveillance will also be helpful to understand the transmission pathways and to confirm the source of infection, when it is analyzed in conjunction with standard epidemiological investigation. In this study, we performed molecular surveillance on hMPV in Guangzhou, China in 2013–2017. By integrating all publicly available data, we described the spatial dynamics of different hMPV lineages. The establishments of hMPV were identified in Asian countries after 2005. Moreover, frequent transmissions of hMPV strains and the seeding of novel variants were observed in China and Japan, highlighting the risk of an hMPV epidemic in these regions.The spatial transmission pattern of a virus is very important for epidemic control and potential vaccine design. Viruses like H3N2 seasonal influenza virus are highly transmissible, and a new adaptive variant can rapidly spread globally after its emergence38,39. Thus, in the phylogeny of H3N2, it is rare to have a genetic cluster that is persistent and limited in a specific region. A sink-source model of H3N2 viral ecology is suggested in which new variants are seeded from the tropics (mainly East and Southeast Asia) to sink populations in temperate regions39,40. In contrast, viruses like enterovirus A 71 (EVA71) are more endemic, and different genetic subtypes circulate and persist in different regions. For instance, the C4a sub-genotype of EVA71 mainly circulates in mainland China, while the C5 genotype of EVA71 is mainly detected in Vietnam41. The establishment and prevalence of the specific sub-genotype of a viral species could be determined by environment factors, population immunity, and/or the genetic background of hosts in this region. Here, we trace the global as well as local hMPV distribution and transmission by integrating publicly available sequences and newly generated sequences. We find that hMPV was endemic in America before 1990, indicating the possible origin of currently circulating hMPV lineages. Notably, this could be the case because hMPV was limited to circulating in America or could be caused by sampling bias as there were few samplings on other continents before 1990 (Fig. 5). Further retrospective study of hMPV in other continents would improve our understanding of the origin of hMPV. Between 1990 and 2000, transmissions from America to other continents were observed. However, most of these introductions were transient since the local phylogenetic clusters of hMPV were not sustained in the phylogeny, indicating hMPV was still not well established in the regions. After 2005, clusters of hMPV mainly composed by strains in A2b and A2c lineages became dominant in Asian countries. Thereafter, transmissions from Asia to other continents were frequently identified through the phylogenetic trees (Figs 2a and 4a). These results suggest the establishment of A2b and A2c lineages in Asia after 2005, and more Asian countries became epicenters for hMPV. In this scenario, it is reasonable to have novel variants of hMPV first identified in Asian regions. The 180-nt and 111-nt duplicates of hMPV in the G gene were first reported in Japan in 2016 and 2017, and these newly emerged variants caused an increasing epidemic in Japan23,24. In Guangzhou, the duplicate variant was also detected and closely related with the strains identified in Japan with nucleotide identity at 99.3% (Fig. 2b). A2c was the predominant lineage identified in hMPV epidemics in Guangzhou, China 2013–2015. However, the increasing epidemic of hMPV infection in Guangzhou in 2017 was mainly caused by the B1 strains which were closely related viruses circulating in Japan in 2016 (Fig. 3). These results suggest the predominant hMPV lineage is varied among Asian countries in the same epidemic season, and rotation of these predominant lineages may be observed among these countries due to frequent viral transmissions.Infections of hMPV were recently investigated in multiple regions of China20–22,37,42. Different seasonal patterns were observed in different climatic zones. In central China, hMPV is predominantly detected in winter and spring20. In northwest China, the annual peak of hMPV infection is observed in September through October19. However, in Guangzhou in southern China, the seasonal peaks of hMPV were detected mainly in March through May (Fig. 1). Although the temporal distribution and clinical symptoms of hMPV have been reported, the representative genetic sequences of hMPV in different regions of China are rarely investigated. Therefore, the geographic distributions and the transmission dynamics of hMPV lineages among different regions of China are still little understood. Our genetic description and analysis of hMPV viruses in southern China provide a baseline for future studies of the evolution and molecular epidemiology of this emerging virus in China.In summary, our genetic and epidemiological analyses show that hMPV displayed different distribution and transmission patterns before 1990, 1990–2005, and 2006–2017. The firm establishment and continuous evolution of hMPV is observed in Asian countries after 2005, leading to the emergence of novel variants and the global transmission of these variants. In addition, close relations are observed among hMPV strains from China and Japan through the whole phylogenies. Therefore, careful monitoring of hMPV should be conducted throughout Asian countries to illustrate virus circulation in the area and sound an alarm for global hMPV surveillance.Supplementary information
Supplementary information



================================================================================
PATHOGEN: PARAINFLUENZA VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Delineating morbillivirus entry, dissemination and airborne transmission by studying 

IntroductionMorbilliviruses are enveloped, non-segmented, negative strand RNA viruses that belong to the family Paramyxoviridae [1]. They are highly contagious, spread via the respiratory route, cause profound immune suppression but also elicit lifelong immunity in surviving hosts, and have a propensity to cause large outbreaks associated with high morbidity and mortality in previously unexposed populations. Measles virus (MV) is the prototype morbillivirus and remains a significant cause of childhood morbidity and mortality in the developing world. Measles is characterized by fever, skin rash, cough and conjunctivitis, followed by a transient immune suppression [2]. The resulting increased susceptibility to secondary infections can lead to life-threatening complications [3]. In spite of the availability of safe and effective live-attenuated MV vaccines, measles outbreaks continue to occur in the industrialized world due to inadequate vaccination coverage and importations of this highly transmissible virus from endemic regions [4, 5].The narrow host range and long incubation period of MV have restricted the characterization of its pathogenesis since patients are not recognized as having measles until onset of rash, and animal studies predominantly rely on experimental infections of non-human primates (NHPs). A surrogate model for MV pathogenesis is infection of ferrets with canine distemper virus (CDV), a morbillivirus that can infect a wide range of carnivores [6, 7]. However, CDV in carnivores is highly neurotropic and often leads to fatal disease [8–12], which is in sharp contrast to MV infection of humans and NHPs.Morbilliviruses are amongst the most contagious viruses known and are primarily transmitted by aerosols or respiratory droplets. Once inhaled, virions establish primary infection by receptor-dependent fusion at the plasma membrane [13]. Two cellular receptors involved in morbillivirus infection have been identified: signaling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 1 (SLAM/F1, or CD150), expressed by subsets of thymocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), hematopoietic stem cells, macrophages, T- and B-lymphocytes [14], and nectin cell adhesion molecule 4 (nectin-4, previously known as poliovirus receptor-related 4), expressed at the adherens junction complex of epithelial cells [15, 16]. Both receptors play a crucial role in viral pathogenesis (reviewed in [17]), with CD150-mediated infection being critical for entry and dissemination [18, 19] and nectin-4-mediated infection critical for virus transmission [20, 21].A number of aspects of morbillivirus pathogenesis remain unresolved. Studies in mice and NHPs have shown that MV initially infects alveolar macrophages and DCs in the lungs, instead of epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract [22–24]. Even though this is a possible entry route, it seems unlikely that a highly contagious virus with an R0 of 12–18 [25] and of which infection with one 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) is sufficient to cause productive infection in macaques [26], exclusively depends on infection of target cells in the alveoli. Additional routes of entry into a susceptible host have been postulated, including infection of CD150+ immune cells within the epithelium of the respiratory tract [18, 27]. As DCs are abundant within this epithelium, and DC-SIGN was previously identified as an attachment receptor for MV [28, 29], it is suggested that DCs could play a crucial role in this entry route [30]. Additionally, damage to the upper respiratory tract epithelium by mechanical injury [31] or respiratory co-infections potentially exposes nectin-4 as a cellular entry receptor. Another potential route of entry for morbilliviruses involves CD150+ and/or DC-SIGN+ cells present in the conjunctiva of the eye [32, 33]. However, direct in vivo evidence from animal models for these alternative entry strategies is lacking.Recombinant (r) viruses expressing fluorescent reporter proteins have allowed sensitive assessment of morbillivirus entry and dissemination in vivo [18, 34, 35]. Multicolored viruses have been used to demonstrate MV polyploidy [36], ribonucleoprotein trafficking [37], superinfection immunity [38], potential of segmenting the genome [39] and a cross-genomic cooperation modulating phenotype [40]. Recognizing the power of this approach for in vivo competition studies, we simultaneously administered three rCDVs expressing green (Venus), red (dTom) or blue (TagBFP) fluorescent proteins to ferrets to assess viral entry, intra-host dissemination and inter-host transmission. We show that CDV enters the host efficiently if delivered to the nose or lung, and that infection of the host through conjunctival administration, although less efficient, is also possible. In vivo competition showed that the route of entry had no influence on viral dissemination. However, exclusive single-color virus transmission of the systemically dominant virus to recipient ferrets was observed, suggesting a bottleneck during transmission.ResultsRecombinant CDVs stably express different fluorescent reporter proteinsPlasmids containing full-length CDV strain Snyder-Hill (CDVSH) antigenomes were modified to encode rCDVs expressing fluorescent reporter proteins from an additional transcription unit (ATU). Three fluorescent reporter proteins (Venus, dTom and TagBFP) were selected on basis of spectral discernibility, brightness, photo-stability, lack of oligomerization and potential to be detected by in-house flow cytometer and confocal microscope. These viruses, rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) were rescued and grown on Vero cells modified to express canine (c) CD150 (Vero-cCD150) in which they produced high levels of fluorescence in multinucleated syncytia (Fig 1A). Infection of concanavilin A (ConA)-stimulated white blood cells (WBC) isolated from CDV-naive ferrets resulted in large numbers of fluorescent cells, as detected by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, Fig 1B) and flow cytometry.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g001Fig 1In vitro validation and in vivo experimental design.(A, top panel) Three rCDVs expressing a fluorescent reporter protein as an ATU from the 6th position in the genome were generated (rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6), rCDVSHTagBFP(6)), rescued and (A, bottom panel) grown on Vero-cCD150 cells. (B) rCDVs were shown to efficiently infect ConA-stimulated ferret WBC. (C) Donor ferrets 1–6 (D1-6) were simultaneously inoculated with a low dose of the three indicated rCDVs delivered via Oc, IN and IT inoculation in different administration route combinations, divided over three sequential experiments.Simultaneous inoculation with three rCDVSHs causes lethal disease in ferretsSix donor ferrets (D1 –D6) were simultaneously inoculated in three consecutive experiments via the ocular (Oc), intra-nasal (IN) and intra-tracheal (IT) routes with a low dose of the indicated rCDVSH (3.3 x 103 TCID50/route), depositing viruses in the eyes, nose or lungs. Even though the viruses had been engineered to have identical genome lengths to prevent subtle differences in fitness impacting the outcome of the in vivo experiment, the rCDVs were alternated over the three route combinations to mitigate any unforeseen effect on pathogenesis (Fig 1C). All donor ferrets developed fever with a biphasic pattern, with temperature peaks around 5–7 and 12–14 days post-inoculation (DPI) (Fig 2A). The first fever peak corresponded with the onset of lymphopenia: peripheral lymphocyte counts were strongly reduced by the end of the first week after infection, and did not recover during the second week (Fig 2B). All donor ferrets became lethargic and were euthanized 14–16 DPI. Virus could be isolated from WBC of all ferrets from 4 DPI, with peak viremia levels observed around 6–8 DPI (Fig 2C). The decline in viral load in WBC during the second week was likely due to the virtual absence of lymphocytes in peripheral blood, resulting in exhaustion of susceptible CD150-positive cells. Virus was isolated from eye, nose, throat, and rectal swabs, in most ferrets with progressively increasing virus loads during the second week after inoculation (Fig 2D).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g002Fig 2Inoculation with rCDVs leads to systemic infection and disease.Simultaneous inoculation of donor ferrets (D1-6) via multiple administration routes with three reporter viruses resulted in systemic disease. (A) Body temperature was measured using an intra-peritoneal probe and a biphasic fever pattern was observed. (B) WBC counts measured in EDTA blood showed that animals became lymphopenic. (C) Systemic virus replication was detected by virus isolation from WBC on Vero-cCD150 cells, while (D) local virus replication was demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs.Simultaneous inoculation of ferrets with three rCDVs results in systemic replication of one or multiple virusesExpression of fluorescent proteins within WBC throughout the course of the experiment, or in single cell suspensions prepared from lymphoid tissues collected at necropsy, was assessed by flow cytometry (Fig 3A). In one ferret (D5) only one fluorescent protein was detected, in three ferrets (D1, D3, D4) a combination of two fluorescent proteins was detected and in two ferrets (D2, D6) all three inoculated viruses had initiated productive infections as shown by simultaneous detection of red, green and blue fluorescent proteins. Interestingly, in ferrets showing systemic infection with two or three viruses, all fluorescent proteins were already detectable in WBC collected at 6 DPI. This demonstrates that even though viruses were administered via multiple inoculation routes, parallel onset of viremia occurred within one week after inoculation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g003Fig 3Microscopic and macroscopic detection of fluorescence in donor ferrets.(A) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in directly inoculated (D1-6) ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. The circular inset shows which reporter virus was administered to a donor ferret via which route. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions of lymphoid tissues were determined by flow cytometry. rCDVs were detected in all lymphoid tissues (man LN: mandibular lymph node; ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; mes LN: mesenteric LN; GALT: gut-associated lymphoid tissue; PP: Peyer’s patches; BM: bone marrow; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 5/6 ferrets the IT delivered virus became dominant (D2 –D6). (B, C) Donor ferrets D1 and D2 were chosen as representative examples. Virus was isolated from WBC, BAL, CSF and throat, nose, eye and rectal swabs by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. (Left panels) Screening of virus isolations by CLSM allowed determination of the dominance of rCDVs at 8 DPI. (Centre panels) Relative contribution of the various reporter viruses to the total amount of rCDV present in the sample collected 8 DPI or at necropsy (CSF and BAL). (Right panels) Direct CLSM of various tissues at necropsy revealed fluorescence in the epithelium of the trachea (dotted line marks basement membrane, Lu marks lumen), and B-cell follicles in lymphoid tissues (delineated by dotted line). (D) Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was directly detected in live ferrets and during necropsy at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin. The inset in the second panel clearly shows that green and red foci of infected cells can be discerned (#). During necropsy, macroscopic fluorescence was detected in the tongue (arrows show tonsils), lungs and Peyer’s patches. Again, the inset in the third panel shows separate foci of green and red cells (#).rCDV uses multiple routes of entry in parallelIn all donor ferrets IT inoculation resulted in viremia, confirming that direct inoculation into the lower respiratory tract is a highly efficient entry route for morbilliviruses (Fig 3A). In five out of six donor ferrets, IN inoculation also resulted in viremia, demonstrating that morbilliviruses can also efficiently invade a host when 3300 TCID50 in a low volume (25μl/nostril) was deposited in the upper respiratory tract (Fig 3A). Finally, in two out of six ferrets the morbillivirus directly inoculated into the conjunctival sac behind the lower eyelid (again using a low volume inoculum) caused viremia, demonstrating this is a functional route for morbillivirus entry, although apparently less effective than entry through the respiratory route (Fig 3A).Multi-route delivery of rCDVs results in widespread systemic replicationNext we focused on the period between onset of viremia and euthanasia of the donor ferrets to assess morbillivirus dissemination. In one ferret (D1) the virus inoculated via the IN route became dominant, while in all other ferrets the virus given by IT inoculation became dominant. Likewise, viruses that predominated in WBC were in most cases also present at the greatest level in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues (Fig 3A).Detection of fluorescent protein expression in WBC (Fig 3A) showed a good correlation with virus isolation from WBC (Fig 3B and 3C, left panel). Ferrets D1 and D2 illustrate this since these animals represented two extremes of the study. In ferret D1 two viruses were detected systemically (rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6)), however one virus (rCDVSHdTom(6)) became dominant. In ferret D2 all three viruses replicated at comparable levels. Virus isolation from WBC in Vero-cCD150 cells resulted in predominantly red plaques for D1, and in multicolored plaques for D2. Photomicrographs in the left panels of Fig 3B and 3C show a high resolution CLSM image of a representative well, while the large pie charts show the relative color distribution produced by viruses isolated from WBC collected at 8 DPI. The smaller pie charts show the color distribution of virus isolated from other samples, including swabs of the conjunctivae, nose, throat and rectum collected at 8 DPI (see also Fig 2D), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) collected at necropsy. Interestingly, the proportion of green fluorescent virus in ferrets D1 and D2 was higher in BAL than in all other tissues, corresponding to IT inoculation of these two ferrets with rCDVSHVenus(6). In ferret D1, low systemic detection of green fluorescent cells, was contrasted by a relatively high percentage of green fluorescent cells in the tracheo-bronchial lymph node (TB LN) which drains the lungs (Fig 3A). At necropsy, CLSM analysis of respiratory tract tissues and lymph nodes of ferret D1 revealed a predominance of red fluorescent cells (Fig 3B, right panels), whereas the same tissues collected from ferret D2 contained a mixture of different colored fluorescent cells (Fig 3C, right panels).Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was imaged both in living ferrets and at necropsy. Macroscopic detection of blue fluorescence was not technically possible using the available apparatus. Both green and red fluorescence were detected in the head of ferret D2 (Fig 3D, fluorescence was detected mainly at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin). Use of the light emitting diode (LED) lamp to detect green fluorescence, allowed detection of separate green and red foci of infected cells (Fig 3D, inset in second panel at (#)). Macroscopic imaging of tissues during necropsies is illustrated by photos of the tongue, lungs and Peyer’s patches (PP) of ferret D2, again showing a clear separation of green and red fluorescent foci of infection (Fig 3D, inset in third panel at (#)).Double- and triple-rCDV-infected cells in vivo during disseminationMorbillivirus viremia is mediated by circulation of infected cells rather than cell-free virions. As a consequence, morbilliviruses predominantly disseminate by cell-to-cell spread within the host. It has been hypothesized that superinfection immunity is a significant barrier to dual infections of cells. Unexpectedly, during virus isolation procedures from WBC we not only observed green, blue or red syncytia, but also syncytia that contained two or three fluorescent proteins, pseudo-colored as yellow (Venus / dTom), purple (dTom / TagBFP), cyan (Venus / TagBFP) or white (Venus / dTom / TagBFP) following image acquisition by CLSM (Fig 4A). Since it may be possible that double- and triple-positive syncytia could have been caused by fusion of single-infected cells, thus not representing true double or triple infections of single cells, we performed direct CLSM of tissues collected during necropsy. This confirmed the presence of double-infected cells in the epithelium of the trachea (Fig 4B, upper panel, Venus / TagBFP cell shown as cyan [*] and Venus / dTom cell shown as yellow [#]) and in the spleen (Fig 4B, lower panel). In the spleen, single-infected cells were observed throughout the section in red, green and blue, whereas many double-positive cells were observed in cyan, yellow and purple. Finally, double and triple infections were confirmed by flow cytometry. As an example, WBC obtained from ferret D2 at 8 DPI were gated for positive events for a single reporter protein (Fig 4C, left panels), for which subsequently the other two reporter proteins were plotted (Fig 4C, right panels). This demonstrated the presence of single-infected cells (lower-left quadrant), but double- (lower-right and upper-left quadrant) and triple-infected (upper-right quadrant) lymphocytes were also commonly detected. Although triple-infected cells were only detected in 2/6 animals, double-infected cells were more common and were detected in 5/6 animals. To confirm these in vivo observations, we performed in vitro competition experiments in canine B-lymphoblastoma (CLBL-1) cells [41], and confirmed that double infections were also achieved in vitro (Fig 4D). Moreover, in vitro double infections were also observed when the second virus infection was performed six hours after the first infection (S1 Fig).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g004Fig 4Detection of rCDV double- and triple-infected cells.(A) Virus isolation from WBC by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells revealed syncytia that were simultaneously positive for two reporter proteins (i.e. Venus/dTom [yellow], dTom/TagBFP [purple] or Venus/TagBFP [cyan]) or all three reporter proteins (Venus/dTom/TagBFP [white]). (B, upper panel) Direct confocal analysis of the trachea from ferret D2 showed that single infected cells (Venus, dTom or TagBFP) were dominant, but sparse Venus/TagBFP and Venus/dTom double-positive cells were detected as cyan (*) or yellow (#), respectively. (B, lower panel) Direct confocal analysis of the spleen from ferret D2 revealed the presence of single-infected and all possible combinations of double-infected cells. (C) Direct flow cytometry of WBC collected from ferret D2 on 8 DPI indicated that single-, double- and triple-positive cells were present in peripheral blood. Similar results were obtained at different time-points. (C, upper panel) When Venus+ cells were selected (as indicated by red gate), dTom-/TagBFP- (single-infected cells), dTom+/TagBFP- or dTom-/TagBFP+ (double-infected cells) and dTom+/TagBFP+ (triple-infected) cells were detected. (C, middle and lower panel) Similar results were obtained when the analysis was performed by initially gating dTom+ or TagBFP+ cells. Percentages of positive cells are indicated in the plots. (D) Canine lymphoma B-cells (CLBL-1) were inoculated with rCDVSHVenus(6) and/or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) in the presence of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4. Green and blue fluorescence levels were determined 24 hours post infection by flow cytometry. Venus and TagBFP single positive cells are shown in green and blue, respectively, while double-positive cells are shown in cyan.rCDV dissemination results in widespread infection of the nasal cavity and CNSSince airborne transmission of respiratory viruses is assumed to be associated with virus shedding from the upper respiratory tract [42, 43], we assessed the distribution of CDV-infected cells in the nasal cavity of ferrets D4 (Fig 5) and D5 (S2 Fig). Since CDVSH is highly neurotropic, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of slides containing a sagittal section of the entire ferret head which permitted assessment of infected cells in both the nasal cavity and brain. CDV-infected cells were mainly detected in the nasal cavity of ferret D4 (Fig 5A), and few positive cells were observed in the meninges. Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*) (Fig 5B). Very few cells within the olfactory epithelium were CDV positive (Fig 5C), whereas the respiratory epithelium contained many CDV-infected cells (Fig 5D), including ciliated epithelial cells and macrophage-like cells (Fig 5D, macrophages indicated by arrow and shown in inset). Throughout the nasal cavity the majority of CDV-positive cells was found in the submucosa and included fibroblasts, large macrophage-like cells, and lymphocyte-like cells. In the nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT) the majority of lymphoid cells were CDV positive (Fig 5E). In addition, CDV- infected glands were occasionally observed in the nasal cavity, mainly in the tip of the nose (Fig 5F). CDV-infected squamous epithelial cells were observed in the soft palate (Fig 5G), mimicking similar observations in MV-infected macaques.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g005Fig 5rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D4.Immunohistochemistry detecting CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed abundant rCDV in the nasal turbinates (Nt, delineated by dotted line). In this ferret rCDV was only observed in few meningeal cells and not in the cerebrum (Br) and olfactory bulb (Ob). In general, CDV-positive cells were mainly found in the submucosa of the respiratory and olfactory mucosa and nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT). (B) Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*). (C) Few CDV-positive cells were detected in the olfactory epithelium, and many CDV-positive cells were present in the submucosa of the olfactory epithelium. Positive cells had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in the respiratory epithelium of the nasal turbinates, although most positive cells within the epithelium appear non-epithelial (arrows and insert). Again, CDV-positive cells were abundant in the submucosa and had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (E) Positive stretch of CDV-positive cells, including NALT with infected lymphocytes and fibroblasts. CDV-positive macrophages were also detected in the epithelial layer. (F) Submucosal nasal glands stained occasionally positive for CDV predominantly in the tip of the nose (arrow). (G) Squamous epithelium of the soft palate stained positive for rCDV.In ferret D5, rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity and CNS (S2A Fig). In the nasal cavity, the number of CDV positive cells was lower in comparison to ferret D4, and consisted predominantly of fibroblasts and macrophage-like cells in the submucosa. In the CNS, CDV-infected cells were frequently observed in the meninges, predominantly in the meninges surrounding the cerebellum. Positive ependymal cells were detected in the choroid plexus, responsible for the production of CSF (S2B Fig), which corresponds to the isolation of virus from the CSF from this ferret. In the cerebellum, meninges surrounding the cerebellum and brainstem, endothelial cells and cells adjacent to blood vessels were occasionally CDV positive (S2C Fig). This suggests hematogenous spread of CDV into the CNS. In both the olfactory bulb and cerebrum foci of CDV positive cells, including neurons and glial cells, were detected (S2D and S2E Fig). Finally, CDV-positive cells were observed within the bone marrow.rCDV infection of donor ferrets results in airborne transmission to recipient ferretsTo assess airborne transmission, CDV-naive recipient (R1 –R6) ferrets were placed in transmission cages at 2 DPI. Donor and recipient ferrets were sampled every other DPI and followed for a maximum of 16 or 22 DPI respectively (Fig 6A and 6B). Ferrets were housed in pairs, meaning that recipient ferret R1 was placed in a cage adjacent to donor ferret D1. Body temperature was measured in 4 out of 6 recipient ferrets. Fever was not observed in the recipient ferrets tested up to the time point of euthanasia (Fig 6C). However, the majority of recipient ferrets showed decreased lymphocyte counts shortly before euthanasia (Fig 6D). Airborne transmission was confirmed in all donor-recipient pairs and infectious rCDV was isolated from WBC (Fig 6E), nose, throat, eye and/or rectal swabs collected from recipient ferrets (Fig 6F). By using flow cytometry, rCDV replication was detected in WBC of 5 out of 6 ferrets (Fig 6G). For recipient ferret (R4) in which CDV-infected cells were not detected by flow cytometry, rCDVSHdTom(6) was isolated from throat and eye swabs. In all cases, only a single colored rCDV transmitted to the recipient ferret, which was also found in the lymphoid tissues at euthanasia and always was the virus that predominated in the corresponding donor animal (Fig 3A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g006Fig 6In vivo transmission of rCDV to recipient ferrets.(A, B) Susceptible recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed pairwise in neighboring cages of the donor ferret at 2 DPI. Arrows indicate airflow. All directly inoculated ferrets were euthanized at 14 to 16 DPI, whereas recipient ferrets were euthanized 21 or 22 DPI. (C) Fever was rarely detected in recipient ferrets, but these animals developed (D) lymphopenia and (E) systemic virus replication as detected by virus isolation from WBC as well as (F) local virus replication demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs. In panels E and F, grey lines represent the respective virus loads in donor ferrets (as shown in Fig 2). Transmission was detected in 6/6 animal pairs. (G) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in recipient ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues were determined. rCDV was detected in most lymphoid tissues (ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 6/6 ferrets the single-color virus dominant in the donor animal transmitted to the recipient ferret.DiscussionWe have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies in ferrets with virologically identical but spectrally distinct rCDVs administered simultaneously via multiple routes. Our aim was to study the temporal and spatial interplay of viruses during the early, intermediate and late stages of CDV infection. These “rainbow CDV” studies are the first to show that morbilliviruses can use multiple entry routes in parallel. Detection of circulating or lymphoid tissue-derived lymphocytes expressing multiple fluorescent reporter proteins was common, demonstrating that in vivo superinfection immunity is not a restrictive phenomenon. Airborne transmission to recipient ferrets was detected in all animal pairs, underpinning the highly infectious nature of morbilliviruses.Animal models of human viral diseases provide the bedrock of much of the current understanding of tropism and pathogenesis, and are essential for the development and licensure of drugs and vaccines. Ideally the human pathogen under study should not need to be adapted to the animal and the disease process should recapitulate the full clinical spectrum in people. This is challenging and oftentimes either the pathogen or host must be genetically altered to produce disease. Therefore, related animal pathogens infecting natural host species provide useful surrogates in the pathogenesis toolkit. For example, Sendai virus infection of mice [44], bovine respiratory syncytial virus infection of calves [45] and simian immunodeficiency virus infection of NHPs [46] have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of closely related human viruses. Likewise, experimental CDV infections of ferrets have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of MV and other morbilliviruses [47–50].Both measles [51] and canine distemper [47] are recognized as highly infectious diseases that are spread via the respiratory tract. The availability of rMVs expressing fluorescent proteins allowed us to identify alveolar macrophages and DCs in NHPs as early target cells following aerosol inhalation [24]. In that study, substantial numbers of MV-infected cells were not detected in the upper respiratory tract even though minuscule numbers of macrophages and DCs were detected in the deep lung at early time points after inoculation. This fitted well with our experience of IT inoculation as a highly reliable and standardized route of experimental MV infection [26]. The majority of CDV pathogenesis studies in ferrets has used IN inoculation, delivering the virus to the upper respiratory tract. Although it is important to note that IN inoculation of relatively large volumes can easily result in deposition of virus in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts [52], we also hypothesized that it was unlikely that morbilliviruses exclusively used the lower respiratory tract as a portal of entry [30]. Therefore, we simultaneously inoculated ferrets with multicolor rCDVs via the IN and IT routes, ensuring delivery to only the upper and lower respiratory tract, respectively. Since the conjunctivae have also been suggested as a portal of entry for many respiratory viruses [33], including MV [32], ocular inoculation was used as a third possible route of entry. IN and IT delivery resulted in viremia in 5 out of 6 and 6 out of 6 ferrets, respectively, within a week after inoculation. The fact that the IT-delivered virus became dominant in 5 out of 6 ferrets suggests that this is the most efficient port of entry, confirming previous observations with MV infection of NHPs [26]. This could be explained by the fact that in the lungs the potential target cells (alveolar macrophages and/or DCs) are directly accessible and not shielded by an epithelial barrier. However, since virus delivered by IN inoculation in a low volume also resulted in viremia in the majority of the ferrets, this demonstrated that multiple routes of entry can be used in parallel. Inoculation of the virus onto the conjunctivae resulted in infection in only 2 out of 6 ferrets, demonstrating that this is a legitimate, albeit less efficient entry portal. However, since there is a direct connection between the eyes and the upper respiratory tract via the nasolacrimal duct, transport of virus particles to the upper respiratory tract after conjunctival delivery cannot be excluded. Moreover, it is important to note that this study was not designed to assess statistically significant differences between these routes of entry.CDV dissemination is mediated by infected circulating and tissue-resident B- and T-lymphocytes [35], and results in lymphopenia and fever. During dissemination the infection remains highly cell-associated, and few virions are detected in plasma. Spread is mediated mostly by direct cell-to-cell transmission, e.g. by the formation of virological synapses [34, 53, 54]. Here, we show that regardless of the route of entry, all donor ferrets developed a similar course of fatal disease, and severity was independent of the number of circulating rCDVs. Interestingly, significant numbers of lymphocytes co-expressed two or three fluorescent reporter proteins, demonstrating that they were infected with viruses inoculated at different sites. Although it has been shown that morbillivirus infection induces superinfection immunity in vitro [38], the incredibly rapid dissemination of CDV (with percentages of infected WBC rising from undetectable to more than 50% within 2 days in some animals) leads to lymphocytes being double- or triple-infected. We consider serial, direct cell-to-cell transmission of rCDVs from different donor cells to single acceptor cells the most likely explanation of the existence of double or triple infections. In fact, double infection was readily reproduced in vitro by exposing a B-lymphoblastic canine cell line to two rCDVs, and was also reproduced when the second infection was performed six hours after the first.Multi-route delivery of virologically identical but phenotypically distinct viruses is a powerful approach to dissect the complex interplay in evolving pathogenesis. None of the data suggest that the expression of different fluorescent reporter proteins had an effect on virus fitness and we have done our utmost to ensure that rCDVs were genetically identical in terms of genome length and ATU design. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that genes encoding Venus, dTom and TagBFP contain secondary or tertiary RNA structures or immune-activating sequences. Alternating the rCDVs and administration routes in three subsequent experiments further mitigated this risk.Although epidemiological observations have demonstrated that CDV is a highly contagious virus, surprisingly few experimental studies have examined transmission. In 1926, Dunkin and Laidlaw meticulously described precautions taken to perform experimental CDV infections of ferrets and keep their breeding stock of animals free of canine distemper [47]. Three transmission pathways: direct contact between sick and healthy animals, housing a healthy animal in a cage from which a moribund animal had been removed several hours earlier, and airborne transmission were described [47]. The timespan between onset of disease in the donor and recipient animals was around ten days. Subsequent direct transmission studies documented a period of 6 to 11 days for development of disease in recipient animals [55] and experimental CDV outbreak studies in ferrets support a role for airborne transmission [56]. The observed time period required for CDV transmission in our experiment was in good accordance with these previous reports [47, 56].Even though we could not determine the exact tissue origin of transmitted virus due to widespread dissemination of different colored viruses throughout the donor ferrets, the dominant virus of the donor always was the only virus transmitted to the recipient. The added value of our study was that the transmission of a single color rCDV, even when two or three rCDVs were detected in donor ferrets, suggested a bottleneck event during airborne transmission: apparently only one or a few infectious units were transmitted from donor to recipient ferret. This mirrors influenza airborne transmission between ferrets, in which virus populations in recipient ferrets proved to be genetically much more homogeneous than those of the donor ferrets [43, 57, 58]. However, in this model transmission was restricted to airborne transmission, so the situation could be different for indirect and direct contact transmission. Overall, this illustrates the utility of gaining a comprehensive understanding of transmission in this important animal model, which is also being developed for Ebola virus and Nipah virus [59–61].Here, we have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies with rCDVs discernable on basis of their fluorescent reporter proteins. We believe that this model will prove its use in the future for in vivo competition studies to identify factors associated with viral fitness.Materials & methodsEthics statementAnimal experiments were conducted at Erasmus MC, in strict compliance with European guidelines (EU directive on animal testing 2010/63/EU) and Dutch legislation. The study protocol was approved by Stichting Dier Experimenten Commissie Consult (DEC Consult, permit number EMC3043), a Dutch independent animal experimentation ethics review board. The manuscript was prepared in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines [62].CDV-naive ferrets were housed in groups prior to rCDV infection, received standard feed on a daily basis and had access to water ad libitum. Cages contained several sources of environmental enrichment. During the infection and transmission studies, ferrets were housed in transmission cages [63]. Briefly, ferrets were housed individually in perspex cages, with paired donor (D) and recipient (R) ferrets being separated by two stainless steel grids. The bottom of the cages was covered with carpet and cages were not cleaned during the course of the experiment to prevent aerosolizing bodily excretions. Transmission cages were placed in HEPA-filtered, negatively pressurized biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) isolators. Animal welfare was checked on daily basis, and all animal handling was performed under light anesthesia using ketamine and medetomidine. After handling, atipamezole was administered to antagonize the effect of medetomidine.CellsVero cells stably expressing the CDV receptor canine SLAM (Vero-cCD150) (kind gift of Dr. Y. Yanagi, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan) were cultured as described previously [64]. To obtain primary ferret white blood cells (WBC), small-volume blood samples were collected from CDV-naive ferrets in Vacuette tubes (Greiner) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant. Red blood cells in blood were subsequently lysed with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 10% (V/V) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 μg/ml). The canine B-cell lymphoma cell line CLBL-1 [41] (kind gift of Dr. Barbara Rütgen, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria) was grown in complete RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% (V/V) FBS.Generation of rCDVs expressing Venus, dTom and TagBFP fluorescent proteinsRecombinant CDV strain Snyder-Hill (SH) viruses were generated as described previously [10]. Genes encoding the fluorescent reporter proteins Venus, dTom or TagBFP were added as an ATU at the sixth (6) position of the genome (between H and L) (Fig 1A). Importantly, TagBFP and dTom were modified by the addition of six (GGSGSG) and five (GSGSG) amino acids, respectively, to the carboxyl terminus to make them identical in size to Venus (239 amino acids). This ensured that the viral genome lengths were identical from the perspective of replication and transcription by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The three viruses were designated rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6). Fluorescence produced in cells infected with these viruses can be readily discerned by flow cytometry, UV epifluorescence microscopy and CLSM. Virus stocks were grown in Vero-cCD150 cells (Fig 1A) and tested negative for contamination with Mycoplasma species. Virus titers were determined by endpoint titration in Vero-cCD150 cells and expressed in TCID50/ml. Susceptibility of ferret WBC with the reporter viruses was determined in vitro. ConA stimulated ferret WBC were inoculated in quadruplicate with rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3 for 1 hour, washed and subsequently cultured for 48 hours. Susceptibility of ferret WBC was analyzed directly by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM with a LSM700 system fitted on an Axio Observer Z1 inverted microscope (Zeiss) (Fig 1B) and by flow cytometry on a FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences).In vitro double infection of CLBL-1 cellsCLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 150μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 5x104 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide) and cultured for 23 hours in 96-well flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (Fig 4D).In a second experiment, CLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 1.2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 1.2x105 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide). Five hours later (i.e. six hours after infection 1), cells were centrifuged again and a second infection was performed in the presence or absence of PHCSK4. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide), and cultured for 23 hours in 96-wells flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (S1 Fig).Animal study designTwelve CDV-seronegative ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) were used for the rCDV infection and transmission studies. A temperature probe was implanted intraperitoneally 2 weeks before the beginning of the experiments to monitor body temperature noninvasively. Six donor ferrets (randomly selected, D1-6) were inoculated with 104 TCID50 rCDV, divided in three equal parts of rCDVSHVenus(6): rCDVSHdTom(6): rCDVSHTagBFP(6) (each 3.3 x 103 TCID50). Each reporter virus was administered via a different route, which were alternated over three experiments. Ferrets D1 and D2 received rCDVSHTagBFP(6) ocularly (Oc), rCDVSHdTom(6) intra-nasally (IN) and rCDVSHVenus(6) intra-tracheally (IT); ferrets D3 and D4 received rCDVSHVenus(6) Oc, rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IN and rCDVSHdTom(6) IT; ferrets D5 and D6 received rCDVSHdTom(6) Oc, rCDVSHVenus(6) IN and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IT (Fig 1C). Oc administration was performed by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) directly onto each of the conjunctivae, IN inoculation by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) into the nostrils while the ferret was held on its back to prevent spread to the trachea and IT inoculations by direct instillation of virus suspension (1ml) into the lower respiratory tract after intubation with a flexible catheter. Following inoculation, the six donor ferrets were placed individually in purpose built cages specifically designed to allow airborne transmission over a 10 cm divide. Donor ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 14–16 DPI. Six CDV-seronegative recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed in the transmission cages (Fig 6A) at 2 DPI of the donor ferret. Recipient ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 21/22 DPI (Fig 6B). The animal protocol specified that recipient animals had to be euthanized no later than 22 days after inoculation of the donor animals, which made it impossible to assess the full spectrum of disease in the recipient ferrets.Clinical specimensSmall-volume blood samples were collected in Vacuette tubes (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant every other DPI of donor ferrets, or every other day after placement of recipient ferrets in transmission cages. Recipient ferrets were always sampled first to prevent direct contamination of recipient animals by sampling of the donor animals. Total WBC and lymphocyte counts were obtained using an automated counter (pocH-100iV; Sysmex). WBC were obtained by lysis of whole blood with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium as described above. Cells were counted using a hemocytometer and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The percentages of WBC infected by different reporter viruses were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for cytopathic effect (CPE) by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 6 days and results were expressed as the number of virus-infected cells/106 total cells. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by screening virus isolations on Vero-cCD150 cells for Venus, dTom and TagBFP expression by CLSM.Throat and rectal swabs (cytobrush plus; Medscand Medical) and nose and eye swabs (polyester-tipped minitip urethral swab; Copan) were collected every other DPI from donor ferrets, or every other day after placement from recipient ferrets, in transport medium (Eagle's minimal essential medium [EMEM] with Hanks' salts, supplemented with lactalbumin enzymatic hydrolysate, penicillin, streptomycin, polymyxin B sulfate, nystatin, gentamicin, and glycerol) and frozen at −80°C. After being thawed, samples were vortexed, the swab was removed, and the remaining transport medium was used for virus isolation. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for CPE by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 7 days and results were expressed as TCID50/ml. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by separately screening virus isolations for Venus, dTom and TagBFP by CLSM.NecropsyFerrets were euthanized by exsanguination under deep ketamine/medetomidine anesthesia. Macroscopic detection of Venus and dTom was performed with an LED lamp and the appropriate filters as described previously [10, 18]. Post-euthanasia, CSF was obtained by lumbar puncture. Virus isolation from CSF was performed by direct titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. A broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed postmortem by direct infusion of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 5 ml) into the right-hand side of the lung. BAL cells were resuspended in culture medium with supplements as described above, counted, and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The infection percentages of BAL cells were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Virus isolation was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells as previously described for MV on Vero cells expressing human CD150 [18]. During necropsy, multiple tissues including brain, trachea, primary bronchus, lungs and spleen were harvested and screened directly for expression of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM. The left lung was inflated with 2% (W/V) low-melting-point agarose before being screened, as described previously [24, 67]. After screening, non-lymphoid tissues were transferred to 10% neutral-buffered formalin (FA). From two ferrets (D4 and D5), the complete head was stored in 10% neutral-buffered FA for immunohistochemistry. Lymphoid tissues were collected in PBS for preparation of single-cell suspensions using cell strainers with a 100 μm pore size (BD Biosciences, Erembodegem, Belgium) and directly used for flow cytometry. The infection percentages of single cell suspensions by different reporter viruses were determined by flow cytometry.Histological and immunohistochemical analysisAfter fixation in 10% formalin, ferret heads were decalcified in 10% EDTA (pH 7.4) for at least a month. After decalcification heads were embedded in paraffin. CDVSH was detected using a monoclonal antibody (VMRD Inc., Pullman, WA, USA). Briefly, 3μm paraffin sections were deparaffinized and antigens were retrieved by boiling slides for 15 minutes in citric acid buffer (10mM, pH 6.0). Sections were incubated with the anti-CDV antibody for 1 hour at RT. Binding of the primary antibody was detected using a biotinylated rabbit-anti-mouse Ig (DAKO), after which tissue sections were incubated with ABComplex-HRP (DAKO) for 30 minutes. Peroxidase was revealed using 3-Amino-9-ethyl-carbazole (AEC, Sigma) resulting in a bright red precipitate. In each staining procedure an isotype control was included as a negative control.Supporting informationS1 FigIn vitro single and double infections of canine B-lymphoblastoid cell line CLBL-1.(A) Experimental design: CLBL-1 cells were infected at T = 0 and / or T = 6 hours. One hour after the infections (or incubation with culture medium as mock control), cells were washed to remove unbound virus. At T = 30 hours infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry. (B) List of the conditions (#) applied for infection 1 (I1) or 2 (I2). All infections were performed in triplicate, using a multiplicity of infection of 1, in the presence or absence of the infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [63]. (C) Infection percentages (irrespective of which reporter protein was expressed) ranged from 14.5 to 51.3% or from 64.1 to 84.8% when performed in the absence (top) or presence (bottom) of infection-enhancing lipopeptide, respectively. (D) Examples of confocal scanning laser microscopy (top) or flow cytometry (bottom) measurements of conditions 1 (mock), 2 (Venus), 3 (dTom) and 6 (Venus + dTomOM) 30 hours post-infection in the presence of PHCSK4. In the FACS plots, single positive cells are shown in green (Venus) or red (dTom), while double-positive cells are shown in yellow. (E) Distribution of single- or double-positive cells in the infected cell populations of conditions 2–8.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigrCDV was detected in the central nervous system (CNS) and nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D5.Immunohistochemistry for the detection of CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed rCDV presence in the CNS (cerebellum [Cl], cerebrum and olfactory bulb). (B) CDV-positive cells within the ependyma and choroid plexus (arrow). (C) CDV was detected in endothelial cells and cells surrounding the blood vessel, suggestive of a hematogenous spread of rCDV to the brain. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in neurons and glial cells of the olfactory bulb. (E) CDV-positive neurons and glial cells in the cerebrum.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Comparative pathogenesis of Ethiopia/Habru/2014 Lineage-IV peste des petits ruminants virus in goats and cattle

BackgroundPeste des petits ruminants (PPR), a highly contagious viral disease primarily impacting goats and sheep, was initially identified in West Africa in 1940’s [16]. It has since become widespread, affecting regions across Africa, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia [4], with a global presence in over 70 countries and territories [41]. The disease poses a significant threat to subsistence farmers, causing substantial economic losses due to its elevated morbidity and mortality rates [21]. Outbreaks of PPR not only disrupt the livelihoods of livestock owners but also have far-reaching consequences on food security and socio-economic activities, leading to a considerable disruption in affected regions [1].PPR exhibits various clinical manifestations, including peracute, acute, subacute, and subclinical forms contingent upon predisposing factors and the virulence of the infecting virus types [8, 28]. The peracute manifestation results in severe symptoms such as depression, anorexia, abortion in pregnant animals, and often leads to death [2]. The acute form is characterized by a sudden onset of symptoms like depression, pyrexia, discharge from the eyes and nose, inflammation of mucous membranes, eyelid matting, mouth inflammation, diarrhea, coughing, and foul breath, ultimately culminating in death [4, 32, 38]. Subacute cases present milder clinical signs, resulting in lower mortality rates, with animals typically recovering within 10–14 days, a pattern more prevalent in sheep [28]. Large ruminants like cattle may display a subclinical form [3, 35, 36], where the virus is eliminated without apparent clinical symptoms, accompanied by robust neutralizing antibody responses [28].In highly susceptible hosts (goats and sheep) the tissue tropism, pathogenesis and disease expression after PPRV infection is associated with infection of immune and epithelial cells via Signaling Lymphocyte Activation Molecule (SLAM) and nectin-4 receptors, respectively [7, 30, 35]. However, the role of atypical hosts, such as cattle, in PPRV infection remains a subject of debate with conflicting findings in the literature. Sen et al. [36] report that cattle may have prolonged viral presence in blood and peripheral blood monocyte cells and are a potential source of PPRV transmission [36]. In contrast, other groups classify cattle as dead-end hosts and report seroconversion and short-term low levels of PPRV RNA in oronasal swab samples [10, 35]. The inconsistency in results from field and experimental studies can be attributed to various factors, including differences in methods, strains, breeds, virus doses, and environmental conditions.Despite the global impact of PPR, there is a paucity of knowledge regarding its pathology and clinical progression, particularly in atypical host species like cattle. Questions regarding the potential role of species other than sheep and goats, particularly cattle, in PPRV persistence remain unanswered. Recognizing the importance of understanding PPRV in both target and atypical hosts, a more comprehensive examination becomes imperative to establish effective surveillance and control measures.In light of these knowledge gaps and the conflicting results reported in previous studies, the present research investigated PPRV tissue tropism, pathogenesis, shedding, clinical course, and comparative pathology in both goats and cattle. The findings provide important insights on disease progression and virus shedding patterns from various sites over intervals in both primary and atypical (cattle) hosts. These insights may be used to better guide decisions about the future development of more effective PPR surveillance and control strategies.Material and methodsExperimental design and procedureIndigenous goats (Central and Western Highland breeds) and cattle (Arsi breed), aged between one to two and a half years, were acquired from North Shoa, Ejere, and Degem animal markets, located within a 200-km radius of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. These areas are recognized for being relatively free of PPR. Selection criteria included age, apparent health, breed authenticity, and no history of vaccination against PPR. Age verification was based on dentition [40] and corroborated by information from the sellers. Beyond visual inspection and temperature measurement, no further health assessments were conducted at purchase. The animals were then transported to the Animal Health Institute’s (AHI’s) experimental facility. Upon arrival, competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (c-ELISA) testing (ID.Vet, Grabels, France) was performed to confirm their seronegative status for PPR. Following a 10 to 15-day acclimatization period, during which their health was continuously monitored, the animals were ear-tagged and divided into two groups: 16 goats (Group A) and 16 cattle (Group B). Comprehensive daily evaluations of rectal temperature and clinical signs were conducted, alongside veterinary care as detailed in Additional file (AF) Text AF1. The overall study design is elaborated in Text AF2.For the virus infection, we utilized the PPRV/Ethiopia/Habru/2014 isolate, Lineage-IV (GenBank Accession Number ON110960), cultured in Vero Dog Slam (VDS) cells at AHI. The virus strain was taken from a female goat displaying typical clinical signs of PPR in Habru area, Ethiopia. The virus was isolated and propagated up to the fourth passage using Vero Dog Slam (VDS) cells. Detail information on the strain can be found in published papers [19, 22]. The viral titer was determined to be 105.3 TCID50, (50% Tissue Culture Infective Dose) per ml at the fourth passage (P4), with its presence confirmed through real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR) and observation of cytopathic effects (CPE) in virus cell culture as described in virological analysis section. Inoculation was performed using a 3 ml syringe attached to a MAD-300 intranasal mucosal atomization device (Teleflex Incorporated, Wayne, PA, USA), delivering 2 mL of the virus suspension per cattle (1 mL per nostril) and 1 mL per goat (0.5 mL per nostril), to mimic natural transmission. Care was taken to secure the animals and elevate their heads to ensure the effective administration of the inoculum and facilitate deep inhalation.Clinical investigation and scoringFollowing inoculation, daily examinations were conducted on all animals to identify the onset and progression of clinical signs indicative of PPR as outlined by other groups [29, 31, 32]. Prior to each sampling event, a thorough clinical assessment was performed on every animal, encompassing rectal temperature measurements and the observation of ocular and nasal discharges, mucous membrane congestion, oral lesions, diarrhea, coughing, respiratory distress, among other signs. These observations were systematically scored according to previously described criteria [31] and goats and cattle exhibiting a rectal temperature of 39.5 °C or higher were classified as febrile. In this study, we adhered to humane endpoints for virus-infected animals as outlined by Pope et al. [31], which recommend euthanasia on ethical grounds when animals reach a clinical score of 20. However, none of the infected animals in our research reached this maximum score within the set timeframe, so early euthanasia was not necessary.Sampling and sample preparationFor both the goat and cattle cohorts, antemortem blood for serological analyses, swabs from the eyes, nose, and rectum, and tissue samples from sacrificed animals were systematically collected at predetermined days post-infection (dpi) to monitor for viral shedding, tissue tropism and seroconversion. Upon collection, swab samples with medium from goats and cattle were transported on ice for immediate analysis. Goats were euthanized daily, with two randomly selected starting from 1 dpi until 8 dpi, whereas two cattle were euthanized on 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 17, 24, and 28 dpi. Swabs were stored in 1 ml Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM), and postmortem tissue samples were placed in sterile falcon tubes with 5–7 ml PBS for transport, while tissues intended for histopathological examination were fixed in 10% buffered formalin.Collected tissue samples including, retropharyngeal lymph node (LN), mediastinal LN, bronchial LN, mesenteric LN, tracheal LN, lung cranial, lung caudal, colon, jejunal and ileal Peyers patch, spleen, tongue (apex), palatine tonsil, nasal mucosa, and 3rd (third) eyelid. These samples allocated for RT-qPCR and viral culture analysis were preserved in 5-7 ml phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and stored at -80 °C. These samples were homogenized upon thawing followed by centrifugation and the resultant supernatant was used for both RT-qPCR testing and culture. RT-qPCR was performed on swab and tissue samples collected during the study and specimens that were positive underwent virus isolation in VDS cells to further confirm the presence of viable virus. Concurrently, for serological assessment, 5–7 ml of blood was collected from the experimental animals into plain vacutainer tubes at predetermined intervals post-infection.Virological analysis (PCR, Ag-ELISA, virus isolation)The detection of PPRV antigen was conducted using real-time RT-qPCR and immunocapture-ELISA (Ic-ELISA) as described below. RT-qPCR positive samples were further subjected to virus isolation. Despite not being fully validated with cattle samples, the PPR Ic-ELISA was utilized to examine nasal and rectal swabs from both species.For RT-qPCR, in brief, viral RNA extraction was performed using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) per manufacturer’s protocol, and used in an RT-qPCR assay targeting the N gene of PPRV using the specific primers and probe described by [6]. The reaction mixture comprised 10 μl of Express Universal SuperScript mix, 2.0 μl of Express SuperScript enzyme mix, 0.4 μl of ROX reference dye (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific), 0.8 μl of each primer (forward and reverse), 0.4 μl of the PPR probe, 2.6 μl of RNase-free water, and 3 μl of the extracted RNA, totaling a 20 μl reaction volume. Amplification was performed using an Applied Biosystems 7500 FAST thermal cycler with reverse transcription at 50 °C for 15 min, followed by DNA polymerase activation at 95 °C for 20 s, and 45 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 3 s, and annealing/extension at 60 °C for 30 s, based on the protocol by [6].For virus isolation, VDS cells were prepared by washing with PBS and then inoculated with 100-200 μl of supernatants from ocular, nasal, and rectal swabs or processed tissue, previously homogenized and centrifuged at 1650 g for 20 min at 4 °C. These cells, with over 70% confluence in 24-well plates, underwent a pre-adsorption process, followed by an hour of incubation at 37 °C with 5% CO2 and 96% humidity, with intermittent agitation every 15 min to promote virus adsorption. After removing the inoculum and washing with serum-free DMEM, 500 μl of DMEM with 2% serum was added to each well. The cultures were then observed under an inverted microscope for non-specific reactions before a final incubation of five to seven days under the same conditions to identify CPE indicative of viral replication, in line with the protocol described by  [17].For antigen detection, we used the ID Screen® PPR Antigen Capture kit from ID.Vet (Grabels, France) following the Ic-ELISA method [23]. Results interpretation was straightforward, with a sample-to-positive (S/P%) ratio below 20% indicating negative outcomes, and ratios of 20% or higher signaling positive detections according to the manufacturer’s instruction.Serology, postmortem examination and histological analysisIn parallel, antibody responses and baseline exposure to PPRV in serum samples from goats and cattle were assessed using the ID Screen® PPR Competition kit (ID.Vet, Grabels, France). This c-ELISA kit was designed to detect anti-PPRV-N protein antibodies [24], indicative of virus exposure. The criteria for result interpretation classified samples as positive with a competition percentage (S/N%) of 50% or less, doubtful for percentages greater than 50% but at or below 60%, and negative when exceeding 60% according to the manufacturer’s instruction.In this experiment, we employed a captive bolt stunning to render the animals unconscious before euthanasia. This approach enhances animal welfare by preventing unnecessary pain and cruelty during the process and also improves safety standards. The stunning was promptly followed by effective bleeding, resulting in euthanasia. The captive bolt pistol used was the Bolt Stunner Model KS from Karl Schermer GmbH, Germany, selected for its suitability for both goats and cattle. Gross pathology and photographic documentation of any gross tissue lesions was undertaken at postmortem examination. Subsequently, a comprehensive postmortem examination was conducted on each animal to evaluate for gross pathological changes. Tissue and lymph node (LN) inspections were meticulous, focusing on areas affected by the PPR virus. This included the buccal and nasal cavities, conjunctiva, head lymph nodes (including palatine tonsils), mesenteric regions (encompassing both LNs and bowel tract), the respiratory system (lungs and associated LNs), and visceral organs such as the liver, spleen, and kidneys. Documented changes, including any deviations in structure, morphology, and color, were systematically scored to quantify the extent of the lesions, with scoring criteria detailed in Table AF1.Histopathological examination was performed on a total of 480 tissue samples to assess cellular changes induced by PPRV infection. Standard operating procedures (SOPs) of the AHI pathology laboratory were followed. In brief, formalin-fixed tissue samples were dehydrated in graded ethanol and clarified with xylene with the Shandon Citadel 1000 tissue processor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) prior to embedding in paraffin using the TEC2900 modular Tissue Embedding Centre (Histo-Line Laboratories, Milan, Italy). Tissue sections were prepared at a thickness of 4-5 μm and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin, were examined under light microscopy at 4x, 10x, and 40 × magnifications, and histopathological lesions, were scored using a grading system from 0 (no lesions) to 4 (severe lesions) as outlined in Table AF1.Data analysis and visualizationAnalysis and visualization of the dataset were conducted in R statistical software (version 4.1.3), employing the ggplot2 package for generating graphical representations. To illustrate trends within the groups of inoculated animals, local regression (LOESS) smoothed curves with corresponding 95% confidence intervals, calculated through t-based approximation, were incorporated into the plots using the stat-smooth function to provide a visual summary of the collective data trends across the study duration. Comparative analyses, focusing on tissue positivity rates and clinical scoring between goats and cattle, were performed using a non-parametric, Mann–Whitney test within GraphPad Prism (version 10.1.1). To assess the concordance between different methods of sample analysis, Cohen’s kappa coefficient was calculated using the psych package in R, offering a statistical measure of inter-rater agreement for categorical items. It was interpreted as per [26]. If value of kappa is “ < 0”, No agreement; “0–0.20”, Slight agreement; “0.21–0.40”, Fair agreement; “0.41–0.60”, Moderate agreement; “0.61–0.80”, Substantial agreement; “0.81–1.00”, Almost perfect agreement. All data and R-code are provided (https://github.com/cherz4/pprv-cattle-goat-comparative-pathology).ResultsExperimental infection with Lineage-IV PPRV/Ethiopia/Habru/2014 strain results in moderate clinical signs in goats but no obvious clinical signs in cattleGoats inoculated with Lineage-IV PPRV/Ethiopia/Habru/2014 presented no obvious clinical signs until 3 dpi. From 4 dpi, fever was noted in 3 of the 10 goats, and a peak rectal temperature of 40.5 °C was noted at 6 dpi (Fig. 1A and B). Serous nasal discharge appeared in 5 of the 10 goats at 4 dpi, increasing to 6 of the 8 remaining goats at 5 dpi (Figure AF1A). Additionally, at 5 dpi, congested mucous membranes were observed in the conjunctiva of 5 of the 8 goats (62.5%), while diarrhea was observed in a single animal (12.5%) (Figure AF1B).Fig. 1Clinical Signs and Rectal Temperature in Goats and Cattle infected with PPRV (A) Trends in daily rectal temperature in goats post-infection (B) Modified composite clinical scores in goats without rectal temperature readings. C Daily rectal temperatures in cattle post-inoculation, with all values remaining below the febrile threshold of 39.5 °C. D Composite clinical scores in cattle, indicating the absence of significant clinical signs or elevated temperatures. In all subfigures, thin lines depict individual animal data, while bold LOESS curves represent the collective pattern. The bold vertical lines in Fig. 1A, B and C denote the dpi of the peak value, while the zero value in Fig. 1D indicates no recorded clinical signs or feverBy 6 dpi, 5 of the 6 remaining goats (83.3%) continued to display serous nasal discharge, while 1 of 6 (16.7%) exhibited muco-purulent nasal discharge and diarrhea. Congested conjunctiva and coughing were noted in 2 of 6 goats. At 7 dpi, 2 of the 4 remaining goats had serous nasal discharge, and the other 2 displayed muco-purulent nasal discharge; congested conjunctiva was noted in 3 of the 4 goats.At the conclusion of the trial (8 dpi), both remaining goats showed signs of conjunctival congestion and diarrhea. One of the goats exhibited serous nasal discharge, and the other muco-purulent nasal discharge and cough. Moreover, one animal presented with distinct oral lesions, including lesions and sloughing of the oral mucosa and gums (Figure AF1C). A detailed summary of the clinical signs observed post-inoculation in the goat cohort is provided in Table AF2.In contrast, no clinical signs were observed following experimental infection of cattle with lineage-IV PPRV/Ethiopia/Habru/2014 strain. Rectal temperature ranged from 36.1 °C to 39.3° C, and clinical scores remained 0 through the trial (Fig. 1C and D). Significant differences in clinical observations were noted between the goat and cattle groups (P-value = 0.0070, Mann–Whitney test), underscoring the variability in host response to PPR virus inoculation.Serological responses of goats and cattle after experimental infection with PPRV/Ethiopia/Habru/2014 strainSeroconversion in the experimental goat cohort, as detected by c-ELISA, was observed at 6 dpi in 1 of the 6 goats (16.7%), but by 7dpi all remaining goats in the cohort had seroconverted (Fig. 2A, Table 1). In cattle, seroconversion was detected in 6 of 10 animals at 8 dpi, and in all cattle from 10 dpi (Fig. 2B, Table 1).Fig. 2Time course of seroconversion in goats and cattle inoculated with PPR Virus highlight goats seroconverting earlier than cattle. A In the goat cohort, seroconversion was detected from 6 dpi onwards. Each line represents the serological response of an individual goat, with seropositivity defined by a competition percentage below 50%. The dashed red line denotes the cutoff threshold for a positive test result. B Among cattle, seroconversion commenced from 8 dpi. Similar to goats, individual cattle responses are shown by lines, with the cutoff for seropositivity marked by a dashed red line at the competition percentage of less than 50%
Table 1Temporal dynamics of clinical scores, PPRV antigen and RNA detection and pathological scores in experimentally infected goats and cattle"DPI", days post-infection ; NasMuc - Nasal Mucosa; Tons - Tonsil; 3rdEyelid - Third Eyelid; RPLN - Retropharyngeal Lymph Node; Tongue - Tongue (Apex); TrachLN - Tracheal Lymph Node; BronchLN - Bronchial Lymph Node; LungCran - Lung Cranial; LungCaud - Lung Caudal; MediLN - Mediastinal Lymph Node; Spln - Spleen; PP - Ileal & Jejunal Peyer's Patches; Colon - Colon; MesLN - Mesenteric Lymph Node.; "-" Undetermined with RT-qPCR CT > 35 or apparently normal Gross and Histology results in tissues, or >50% threshold (negative) results in cELISA, or
<20% threshold (negative) results in AgELISA tests. “Total PCR Positive” implies the number of tissue samples out of 14 that yielded positive results for PPRV RNA at each respective time pointTemporal dynamics of PPR virus antigen and RNA detection in antemortem and post-mortem samples in goats and cattle experimentally infected with PPRV/Ethiopia/Habru/2014Within the goat cohort subjected to experimental inoculation, viral antigen in nasal swabs was first detected at 2 dpi in 1 of 14 goats. Fecal swab analyses revealed the presence of PPRV-antigen starting at 4 dpi in 1 of 10 goats. The frequency of detection in nasal swabs rose to 2 out of 12 goats by 3 dpi, escalating to 7 out of 10 goats by 4 dpi. From 5 dpi onward, nasal swabs from all goats tested positive for PPR virus antigens. The trend of antigen positivity in fecal swabs saw gradual increase from 4 dpi (1/10 goats), escalating systematically to 100% positivity by the 8th dpi (Table 1, Fig. 3).Fig. 3Kinetics of PPRV detection in experimentally inoculated goats and cattle. The left panels illustrate the sample-to-positive (S/P) ratio values from Ic-ELISA of the nasal, and rectal swabs, while the right panels show the cycle threshold (35-mean Ct) values from RT-qPCR of the ocular, nasal and rectal samples. The top row represents data from goats (teal color plots), and the bottom row from cattle (purple color plots). Each line depicts the virus antigen shedding pattern of individual goat or cattle, with antigen positivity defined by a percent positivity ratio of ≥ 20%. The dashed red line indicates the cutoff threshold for a positive test result. Bold lines represent smooth local regression (LOESS) curves encompassing all animals in both experimental groupsIn the cattle cohort, the emergence of PPR virus antigens in nasal swabs was noted as early as 2 dpi in 1 out of 14 cattle, with a progressive increase in detection rates, albeit with some fluctuations observed at various dpi benchmarks. Specifically, at 4 dpi, 3 out of 14 cattle tested positive; this positivity rate evolved to 6 out of 12 by 6 dpi, and reached 100% by 10 dpi and was, maintained through 17 dpi (6/6), 24 dpi (4/4), and 28 dpi(2/2). Fecal swabs in cattle revealed antigen detection beginning at 4dpi (1/14), at 6 dpi (1/ 12); at 8 dpi (1/10); at 10 dpi (3/8); at 17 dpi (4/ 6); at 28 dpi (1/2) (Table 1, Fig. 3).The presence of PPRV-RNA was initially detected in goats at 3 dpi, with subsequent increases observed over time. Specifically, at 4 dpi, the virus was detected in 4 of 10 goats, primarily in ocular swabs. By 5 dpi, the virus was present in 6 of 8 goats, found in both ocular and nasal swabs. This trend continued, with the virus being detected in increasing numbers of goats and in various swab types up to 8 dpi (Fig. 3, Table 1).RT-qPCR testing revealed an escalating presence of PPR virus RNA in post-mortem tissue and LN samples from inoculated goats, with no detection at 1 and 2 dpi, but a progressive increase from 3 dpi onward. Cumulative data indicated an increase in positive samples: starting with 25% at 3 dpi, it peaked at 89% by 8 dpi. Cattle, conversely, showed a singular instance of viral RNA positivity in a nasal swab at 8 dpi (eartag ID 211), with a subsequent uptick in tissue samples over time, highlighting species-specific resistance to the virus.Viral culture results from samples primarily positive for RNA in goats confirmed active viral replication based on typical characteristic CPE, with a high culture positivity rate from 5 dpi onwards in swab (Table AF5) and tissue samples (Table AF6). In contrast, for cattle, culture positivity was considerably lower, with only one nasal swab (from animal ID 211) and a limited number of tissues yielding live virus, chiefly from the head and thoracic regions at 6 dpi (from animal ID 229) (Table 2). Figures of virus-induced CPE in a culture-positive nasal swab sample (Animal ID 211), along with a comparison figure without CPE in a negative control sample are shown in Fig. 4. For the outcomes of entire cultured cattle samples, refer to (Table AF7). The significant difference in tissue positivity rates between goats and cattle (P < 0.0001, CI = 33.75–70.11) further illustrates the striking differences in patterns of disease and infection observed between the species.
Table 2Observed cytopathic effect in positive cattle tissue samplesaIDDPISample TypeCulture Day12345682296Retropharyngeal LN- +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  + 2296Mediastinal LN--- +  +  +  +  +  + nd2296Bronchial LN----- +  +  + 2296Palatine Tonsil-- +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  +  + nd2118Nasal Swab-- +  +  +  +  +  +  +  + ndndaCytopathic effect (CPE) observed in positive tissue samples from animals 229 and 211 over various culture days. Symbols indicate CPE intensity: "-" (none), " + " (mild), " +  + " (moderate), " +  +  + " (strong), and "nd" (not determined). Samples from animal 229 were collected at 6 days post-infection (DPI), and from animal 211 at 8 DPI. Only positive samples are shown; tissues and swabs collected from all other animals were negative based on culture and observed CPEFig. 4Cytopathic effects of PPRV in Vero Dog SLAM (VDS) cells. A VDS cells infected with PPRV isolated from a bovine nasal swab (Animal ID 211) at 8 days post-infection. The image shows pronounced cytopathic effects (CPE) characteristic of PPRV infection, including a large central syncytium formed by cell fusion. Surrounding the syncytium are elongated fibroblast-like cells and some rounded cells, indicating viral-induced cellular changes. B Uninfected control VDS cells showing normal monolayer morphology with typical elongated, fibroblast-like appearance and regular distribution. Images were converted from color to monochrome and minimally adjusted for brightness and contrast uniformly across the entire image using Microsoft PowerPoint. No other adjustments were made (Magnification 10x, regular tissue culture inverted microscope)The agreement between different virological analysis methods was assessed using Cohen’s kappa method and was restricted to experimental goats given the low positivity rates observed in cattle. The analysis included real-time RT-qPCR, Ic-ELISA, virus culture, and c-ELISA. The findings indicated substantial agreement between Ic-ELISA and RT-qPCR tests for PPRV, with a Cohen’s kappa score of 0.75. Additionally, virus culture and c-ELISA tests showed almost perfect agreement, with a Cohen’s kappa score of 0.82. However, the majority of the tests exhibited fair agreement, with one test suggesting slight agreement between Ic-ELISA and c-ELISA tests. Detailed test agreement results interpreted as per [26] are provided in (Table AF4).Gross and histopathological lesions associated with PPR virus infection in goats and cattleGross and histopathological lesions associated with PPR virus infection were semi-quantitatively evaluated using a prepared lesion scoring system (Table S1), which provided a comparative perspective on the clinical and pathological impacts of PPR virus in goats and cattle.In brief, gross pathology findings in goats revealed a spectrum of lesions that evolved over the course of the study. Starting from 2 dpi, there was notable swelling and edema in lymph nodes, especially retropharyngeal and bronchial, along with vascular congestion in the mesenteric region and hemorrhages in the jejunal and ileal Peyer’s patches. This pathology intensified by 4 dpi, with almost all lymph nodes exhibiting enlargement and hemorrhaging, and the lung lobes showing calcification in some cases. The spleen was often enlarged, and hemorrhagic enteritis became apparent. Lesions diversified further by 8 dpi, with more severe respiratory and GIT involvement.Cattle exhibited milder, less specific gross lesions. Early signs included lymph node swelling and palatine tonsil changes, with the addition of enteritis and lung hemorrhage by 8 dpi. More prolonged disease courses in cattle revealed spleen atrophy and lung hepatization by the later stages of the study.Histopathologically, goats displayed early lymphoid depletion and pulmonary changes, which progressed to bronchopneumonia and parenchymal necrosis in lung tissues (Figs AF2C and AF2D). By 8 dpi, severe characteristic PPRV lesions were identified, including syncytial cells and marked lymphoid depletion. Necrosis was prominent in the palatine tonsil, along with infiltrating neutrophils and syncytial cell formations, as depicted in supplemental figures (Figs AF2A and AF2B). The spleen showed hemosiderin deposits and heightened cellularity (Figs AF2E and AF2F), while broncho-interstitial pneumonia and severe hemorrhage and congestion marked the lung pathology (Figure AF2G and AF2H). Cattle, in contrast, showed more subtle histopathological changes with less frequency and severity. Lymphoid depletion was observed, but the intestinal eosinophil infiltration and mucosal necrosis noted by 10 and 24 dpi highlighted the species' distinct response to PPR virus challenge (Figs AF3A and AF3B).Together, the gross and histopathological findings underscore the stark contrast in the pathogenesis of PPRV between goats and cattle, similar to the difference observed clinical signs between the two species.DiscussionOur study was designed to provide comparative insights into the pathology of PPRV lineage-IV in goats and cattle, with a specific focus on viral shedding patterns and the potential epidemiological role of cattle. Our findings of live PPR virus recovered from bovine samples adds a new perspective to our understanding of PPRV dynamics. While these findings challenge the established notion that cattle are mere dead-end hosts, and improve our understanding of PPRV pathophysiology and epidemiology, they require further study before generalization to other lineages or geographic regions beyond the lineage-IV PPRV circulating in Ethiopia.In this study, the onset of pyrexia in goats starting from 4 days post-inoculation (dpi) is consistent with previous experimental research by [14, 29, 39], which reported similar early fever responses in caprine subjects infected with different strains of PPRV. This early fever manifestation also corresponds closely with clinical patterns documented during PPR field outbreaks as described by [32], suggesting that the experimental model may reflect natural disease progression. In contrast, the lack of noticeable clinical signs post-inoculation in cattle are consistent with findings from studies such as those by [10, 35], which also reported minimal to no clinical manifestations in bovine hosts, supporting the hypothesis that cattle may exhibit a subclinical course of PPRV infection, potentially acting as silent carriers of the virus. This has raised a concern that such asymptomatic carriers may play a critical but understudied role in the epidemiology of PPR, particularly in mixed farming systems where goats and cattle coexist, and where silent infection in cattle could go unnoticed while contributing to disease dynamics.The timelines for seroconversion observed in this study suggest an earlier immune response post-infection i.e. 6 and 8 dpi in goats and cattle respectively, when compared to prior studies [14, 34, 35] that reported sero-conversion at 7 and 10 dpi in goats and cattle, respectively. This somewhat accelerated seroconversion could be attributed to several factors including the specific PPRV strain used, which was Lineage-IV, the species of the host animals involved, and the methodical timing of the sampling schedule. Such differences highlight the complex interplay between the viral genetics and the host’s immune system, and they underline the necessity to consider these variables when designing control strategies and diagnostic approaches for PPRV.The RT-qPCR analyses performed on clinical and tissue samples from caprine and bovine hosts suggest a pronounced viral RNA shedding pattern in goats, with peak periods (5–8 dpi’s) of shedding aligning with those previously reported by [18, 29], indicating the high potential for the transmission of PPRV through excreted bodily fluids during these peak periods. More importantly, the presence of viral RNA in samples collected before the appearance of any clinical symptoms as highlighted in earlier work [9] emphasizes the critical need for early and proactive sampling in disease monitoring and outbreak management. Detecting PPRV before clinical signs manifest offers significant advantages for controlling spread, particularly in densely populated livestock areas where rapid transmission can lead to large-scale outbreaks.In cattle, the sporadic RT-qPCR positivity noted throughout the study period indicates a more contained viral presence compared to goats, with the virus tending to localize within specific tissues. This distinct pattern of viral distribution may be explained by species-specific differences in the expression of viral receptors. Previous studies [11, 25, 33] have identified that variations in the expression of PPRV receptors, namely SLAM and nectin-4, across different species and tissues, play a crucial role in determining the susceptibility and resistance to PPRV infection. In cattle, these receptors are expressed differently compared to goats, potentially contributing to the lower and more localized presence of viral RNA found in bovine tissues [33].The gross and histopathological examinations experimentally infected goats and cattle highlighted the wide range of lesions that result from infection with PPRV, with goats exhibiting a more severe and extensive range of pathology, typical of morbillivirus infections. These findings are consistent with reports from previous studies [14, 27, 31], highlighting the consistent pathological impact of PPRV in caprine hosts. In contrast, cattle inoculated with PPRV/Ethiopia/Habru/2014 presented, nonspecific mild lesions, unlike from a recent studies [35], which noted an absence of observable PPR-related pathology in cattle. These differences highlight variable pathogenic impact of the virus on different host species or might reflect variations in individual or breed-specific immunity.The use of VDS cells in our study merits further discussion. These cells, derived from the original Vero cell line, are particularly suited for PPRV propagation due to their lack of beta interferon production, which increases their susceptibility to morbilliviruses [15, 37]. While VDS cells offer exceptional virus production capabilities, it's important to note that repeated passages in cell culture can lead to genetic drift and potential attenuation of the virus. Importantly, studies on morbilliviruses, including PPRV, have shown that mutations can accumulate during serial passages in cell culture. For instance, the Rinderpest virus (RPV) isolated after 49 passages resulted in an attenuated strain that did not revert to its pathogenic form[5]. Similarly, the Nigerian strain PPRV Nig 75/1 was attenuated through serial passage in Vero cells, leading to the development of an avirulent vaccine strain [12]. Eloiflin et al. [13] further demonstrated that the PPRV vaccine strain Nigeria 75/1 undergoes genetic changes during cell culture passage, resulting in attenuation [13]. These mutations, while individually may not be fully attenuating, can cumulatively lead to complete attenuation of the virus [20]. In our study, we used the virus at the fourth passage to minimize potential genetic drift. However, we recognize that even this limited number of passages may have introduced some mutations. This consideration is important when interpreting our results, particularly in the context of virus isolation from cattle samples. Future studies could benefit from deep sequencing analysis to track any genetic changes that may occur during cell culture passage.Importantly, the successful isolation of live PPR virus from bovine samples, though limited, necessitates a reconsideration of the epidemiological role of cattle in the spread of PPRV. The isolation of the virus from a nasal swab at 8 dpi and from select tissues at 6 dpi is particularly revealing. These findings suggest that cattle may potentially act as reservoirs or silent spreaders of the infection under certain conditions, with implications for PPR control and eradication strategies..Our results both align with and contrast previous studies. Sen et al. [36] reported PPRV detection in cattle blood and PBMCs for extended periods, though not in natural secretions [36]. Conversely, Couacy-Hymann et al. [10] reported that cattle do not exhibit signs of viral replication in epithelial cells and do not excrete the virus in quantities sufficient to infect animals in close proximity [10]. While our study also showed no clinical signs of infection in cattle following PPRV exposure, we did confirm viral excretion through both RT-qPCR and virus culture.The discrepancy in results could be attributed to several factors, including differences in virus strain, route of infection, virus titer used for inoculation, sampling schedule, and cattle breed. These variables may have contributed to the recovery of live virus from natural secretions (nasal swab at 8 dpi) in our study, unlike in some previous studies.Study strengths and limitationsThis study offers several strengths, including the use of a local PPRV strain and indigenous breeds, providing regionally relevant data. Our daily postmortem examinations from 1 to 8 dpi offer a detailed temporal analysis of PPRV tissue tropism, which is not commonly reported in such granularity. Additionally, our comparative approach, studying both goats and cattle simultaneously under the same experimental conditions, provides direct insights into species-specific differences in PPRV pathogenesis.However, some limitations should be noted. Only a single lineage of PPRV (Lineage-IV) was used, limiting generalizability to other strains or regions. The use of a small number of animals, while larger than many previous studies, limits the statistical robustness of the findings. Immunohistochemistry studies were not performed due to lack of access to necessary reagents in Ethiopia, which could have provided additional insights into viral localization and tissue-specific viral dynamics.Our study did not account for potential confounding factors such as pre-existing infections or exposures, which could influence the observed disease progression and immune responses. Importantly, our findings did not confirm that the virus isolated from cattle was transmitted to susceptible animals, such as goats, through contact. However, we addressed this aspect in another study using the same local virus [19].Addressing these limitations in future research is essential for a deeper understanding of PPRV pathogenesis and for refining disease control strategies.Concluding commentsTaken together, this study presents a comprehensive comparative analysis of PPRV infection dynamics in goats and cattle. The evidence of subclinical infection and live virus shedding in cattle, compared with the moderate clinical manifestations in goats, highlights the complex interaction between PPRV and its hosts. Importantly, the results suggest that, under certain conditions, cattle might play a more active role in PPRV epidemiology than previously understood. The implications of these findings are important for the development of control strategies and diagnostic approaches for PPR in endemic regions. Overall, the findings highlight an urgent need for further experimental studies on cattle PPRV with diverse PPRV lineages in future studies to enhance our understanding of cattle's role in PPRV epidemiology, particularly in regions where the disease is endemic. Additionally, future studies should explore the effects of co-infections and induced stress in goats to better understand how these factors influence the clinical and molecular dynamics of PPRV infection.Supplementary Information
Supplementary Material 1.


Title: Mode of Parainfluenza Virus Transmission Determines the Dynamics of Primary Infection and Protection from Reinfection

IntroductionThe Paramyxoviridae family includes a number of important human pathogens that are transmitted by the respiratory route including the human parainfluenza viruses (HPIVs), human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV), human metapneumovirus (HMPV), measles virus, and mumps virus [1]. HRSV, HMPV, and the HPIVs are leading causes of acute respiratory tract infections (ARIs) and pediatric hospitalizations, yet there are no licensed vaccines available for these non-segmented, negative strand RNA viruses [2]. With respect to parainfluenza virus (PIV) infection, the focus of this study, approximately 80% of children are seropositive against HPIV1, HPIV2, and HPIV3 by age 5 [3]. The HPIVs cause of spectrum of respiratory diseases in children including rhinorrhea, cough, laryngotracheobronchitis (croup), bronchiolitis, and pneumonia [4], [5]. The majority of cases are mild upper respiratory tract (URT) infections [6]. However, the HPIVs are a leading cause of ARI hospitalization in children under 5 with HPIV1, HPIV2, and HPIV3 causing an estimated 28,900, 15,600, and 52,000 hospitalizations annually in the United States, a burden typically higher than influenza virus [7]. In the immunocompromised host, HPIV infection can be persistent [8]–[10] and cause severe lower respiratory tract disease that often leads to death [11], [12]. Currently no licensed antiviral therapeutics or immunizations are available against the PIVs. Considering these facts, an understanding of the dynamics of PIV transmission and how the mode of transmission contributes to pathogenesis and protection from reinfection would greatly aid in efforts to control pediatric infections and associated illness.Respiratory virus transmission can occur through contact with infectious fluids, either directly or indirectly through contaminated fomites, or through inhalation of airborne particles in the form of large droplets or small droplet nuclei [13]. In early experiments with highly symptomatic HRSV-infected infants, caregivers in contact with infected infants or their environment became infected with HRSV while those nearby, but not in contact, did not develop infection [14]. Furthermore, HRSV was found to survive for up to 6 hours on non-porous surfaces and up to 30 minutes on hands [15]. Based on these experiments, respiratory paramyxoviruses such as HRSV are generally believed spread through contact and large airborne droplet transmission [16]. Few studies have specifically investigated HPIV transmission. Infectious HPIV1 virus was recovered from air samples taken 60 cm away from only 1 of 30 HPIV1-infected children, making transmission by small droplet nuclei unlikely [17]. Similar to HRSV, the HPIVs can be recovered from experimentally contaminated non-porous surfaces for up to 10 hours [18]; however, HPIV-3 quickly lost infectivity when placed on the hands [19]. Beyond these studies, surprisingly little is known about HPIV transmission in humans.The study of respiratory virus transmission in humans is difficult due to ethical, safety, environmental, and budgetary considerations. For these reasons, the use of small animal models to study transmission of respiratory viruses has been widely utilized. The HPIVs poorly infect mice, and HPIV infection in cotton rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, and ferrets is usually asymptomatic with minimal or undetectable pathology [2]. As a result the murine counterpart of HPIV1, Sendai virus (SeV), has been used as a model to investigate PIV pathogenesis and transmission in its natural host [20]–[22]. SeV and HPIV1 are similar in amino-acid sequence identity [23], tissue tropism, and epidemiology [2], [20]. Both viruses elicit cross-protective immunity [24]–[26]. Early transmission experiments using SeV found that the virus readily transmits when mice are placed in direct contact with each other [27]–[30]. However, transmission was less efficient when animals are separated by as little as 2.5–10.5 cm [28]. The ability of SeV to transmit over longer distances has been unclear as there are conflicting reports on its occurrence in the literature [27], [28].To our knowledge, no previous transmission studies have measured in individual, living animals the kinetics and dynamics of respiratory virus infection and reinfection throughout the respiratory tract. Previous transmission studies have been limited to either nasal washes in living animals or endpoint experiments in which groups of animals are euthanized at defined times after exposure in order to measure viral loads in the nasal cavity, trachea, and lungs. We have developed a SeV reporter virus, rSeV-luc(M-F*), that maintains a wild-type-like phenotype in vitro and in vivo and allows for the longitudinal study of SeV infection, transmission, and reinfection in individual, living animals [21]. This previous work revealed a tissue-specific dichotomy in which robust infection in the nasopharynx and trachea (even under conditions of a low inoculated dose, an attenuated virus, or host resistance to lung infection) supports efficient contact transmission while the extent of infection in the lungs and the host response determines disease severity. Here, we used this system to gain insight into respiratory virus transmission, assessing the ability of SeV to transmit by both contact and airborne routes. Our data reveal that the mode of transmission (contact versus airborne) determines the timing of transmission, the dynamics of primary infection in the respiratory tract after transmission, and the tissue-specific magnitude of protection from delayed secondary reinfection.Materials and MethodsEthics statementAll animal studies were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital (protocol number 459) and were performed in compliance with relevant institutional policies, the Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines, the National Institutes of Health regulations, and local, state, and federal laws.Virus, animals, and inoculationsThe rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus has been described [21]. Six to eight week-old female 129X1 mice (Jackson Laboratories) were used in all studies. Mice were anesthetized using isoflurane (Baxter Health Care Corporation) and inoculated intranasally (i.n.) with 70- or 7,000-plaque forming units (PFU) rSeV-luc(M-F*) in 30 µL PBS with Ca2+ and Mg2+. Animals were monitored daily for weight loss, morbidity, and mortality. Inhaled isoflurane was selected as the method of anesthesia because pilot experiments demonstrated 129X1 mice inoculated with 7,000 PFU of virus under isoflurane anesthesia had an average weight loss of 17.5% and a mortality rate of 10%, whereas avertin-anesthetized mice suffered greater weight loss (24.5%) and mortality (80%).Bioluminescence imagingPrior to imaging, mice were injected intraperitoneally (i.p.) with luciferin (Caliper Corp.) at a dose of 150 mg/kg of body weight and anesthetized with isoflurane for 5 min. In vivo images were acquired for 1 min with a binning of 4 using the IVIS CCD camera system. Images were analyzed with Living Image 4.2 software (PerkinElmer). To quantify bioluminescence signal, square regions of interest were drawn around the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs and the total flux (photons/sec) was measured. In drawing regions of interest, demarcations between respiratory tissues was made using external reference points that were found to correspond to internal anatomy after dissection. The line of demarcation between the nasopharynx and trachea was the base of the jaw and between the trachea and lungs was just above the manubrium where the trachea bifurcates into left and right bronchi. Adjustments in definition of the regions of interest did not substantially alter the infection phenotypes (Figure S1). Bioluminescence curves were graphed over time, and the area under the curve was measured using GraphPad Prism software with zero as the baseline.Transmission experimentsAirborne transmission cages were designed with assistance from the St. Jude animal husbandry manager and constructed by the St. Jude Biomedical Engineering Department. Dimensions of the cages are (57.2 cm×40 cm) with a stainless steel, movable divider that allowed a void space of either 7.6 or 15.2 cm between the chamber housing the infected donor animals and the naïve recipient animals (Figure 1C). Air entered the cages starting in the donor chamber most distal to recipient animals (left of Figure 1C) through 4 rows of 12 holes that were 3 mm in diameter. The rows were positioned at 3, 4, 10, and 11 cm from the bottom of the cage. Air was pulled through the cages and exited from one hole in each of the recipient mouse isolation chambers (right of Figure 1C). To facilitate air flow from the direction of donor mice to recipients, the 3 holes in isolation chambers were connected to the room air-handling exhaust (5 complete room air changes/hour). The cages were sealed on top with plastic lids instead of filter tops so that the air would flow from donor to recipient animal. The movable dividers between donor mice and recipient isolation chambers were constructed of stainless steel and contained 15 rows of 28 holes that were 1-cm diameter. Food was supplied in glass bowls, and water was made available in gel form (Napa Nectar; System's Engineering). For airborne transmission experiments, ten donor animals were inoculated and placed in the cage with 3 individually isolated naïve animals. For contact transmission, donor animals were inoculated and 24 h later were placed individually into cages containing 3 naïve contact mice. For both airborne and contact transmission experiments, donor mice were inoculated i.n. with 70- or 7,000-PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*). Bioluminescence, weight loss, morbidity, and mortality were monitored daily for 14 days in all of the naïve recipient animals. All donors for contact transmission and 3 of 10 donors for airborne transmission were similarly monitored. Seventy days after the inoculation of donor mice, animals were challenged i.n. with a lethal dose of 3×106-PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*); bioluminescence, weight loss, morbidity, and mortality were measured daily. The time to detection was reported as the first day when bioluminescence signal was ≥5.5 log10 photons/sec in any respiratory tissue (nasopharynx, trachea, or lungs). Temperature and relative humidity inside each cage were measured every 30 minutes using a Hobo Data Logger that was placed in the void between donor and recipient mice for duration of transmission experiments.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g001Figure 1Schematic of experimental and transmission cage design.(A) Timeline of experiment. For airborne transmission experiments, mice were placed in cages 5 days prior to start of experiment for acclimation. Bioluminescence and weight loss were monitored daily after direct inoculation of donor mice during primary infection and rSeV-luc(M-F*) challenge on day 70 of the experiment. (B) Dimensions and number of mice per cage for contact transmission experiments. (C) Dimensions and number of mice per cage for airborne transmission experiments. In initial experiments, the separation between donor and recipient mice was 7.6 cm. For the longer-range airborne experiments, the left middle divider was moved an additional 7.6 cm to the left for a total separation of 15.2 cm. Solid lines denote solid surfaces that do not permit air flow, and dashed lines indicate stainless steel mesh barriers that permit air flow. D = donor animal, R = recipient animal, and AF = air flow.ELISA assaysSerum was collected from anesthetized animals 30 days after the inoculation of donor mice, and SeV-specific ELISAs were used to measure the level of SeV-specific antibody present. Briefly, 96-well plates were coated overnight with disrupted purified SeV particles (10 µg/ml). Plates were blocked with PBS containing 3% BSA and then incubated with 10-fold serially diluted serum samples. After incubation, plates were washed, probed with HRP-Goat anti-mouse IgG (Southern Biotechnologies) and then washed further. To quantify levels of SeV-specific antibodies present, TMB substrate buffer was added to the wells followed by stop solution and absorbance was read at a wavelength of 450 nm. GraphPad Prism non-linear regression software was used to calculate antibody titers.Statistical analysisStatistical analyses were performed with Prism software version 5.0 (GraphPad Software). Statistical significance of weight loss was performed using a two-way ANOVA. Samples were analyzed using a two-tailed unpaired Student's t-test; for samples with unequal variance a Welch's correction was performed. Correlation coefficients were calculated using linear regression analyses.ResultsDynamics of infection and reinfection in donor mice as a function of inoculated doseTo investigate how the mode of transmission influences primary infection and protection from reinfection in living mice, we used non-invasive bioluminescence imaging. Using the wild-type-like virus rSeV-luc(M-F*), which expresses the firefly luciferase reporter gene in infected cells, we previously demonstrated that the magnitude of bioluminescence in intact mice correlates with ex vivo tissue titers of infectious virus in the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs [21]. This previous work also shows wild-type SeV and rSeV-luc(M-F*) have similar replication kinetics in LLC-MK2 cells and in the nasal turbinates, trachea, and lungs of infected mice; both viruses also induced similar levels of weight loss and mortality, lymphocyte infiltration in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, and SeV-specific antibody titers. To establish a transmission model, we first investigated the dynamics of primary infection and protection from lethal challenge in donor 129X1 mice that had been inoculated intranasally with either a relatively low (70-PFU) or high (7,000-PFU) dose of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and were subsequently challenged with a lethal dose of 3×106-PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*) 70 days later (Figure 1A). Direct intranasal inoculation of donor mice with a 70-PFU dose of virus resulted in a robust primary infection in the nasopharynx and trachea but limited infection in the lungs (Figure 2A), consistent with the 70-PFU inoculated mice having no weight loss compared to uninfected animals (Figure 2D). While donor mice directly inoculated with the higher 7,000-PFU dose had similarly high levels of primary infection in the nasopharynx and trachea, the higher dose resulted in 10-fold greater infection in the lungs, delayed clearance in the lungs, and an average weight loss of approximately 20% (Figures 2B,D).10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g002Figure 2Bioluminescence and weight loss in directly inoculated mice.129X1 mice were inoculated intranasally with 70- (A) or 7,000- (B) PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*), or PBS (C) and bioluminescence in the nasopharynx (red triangles), trachea (orange circles), and lungs (blue squares) was measured for 14 days. Seventy days after the initial inoculation, the same mice were challenge with a lethal dose of 3×106-PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and bioluminescence was again measured daily. (D) Weight loss was used as a measure of morbidity and was monitored throughout the course of experiment. All numbers are reported as the means ± the standard deviation (70-PFU n = 22 and 7,000-PFU n = 48). The bottom of the y-axis is 5.5×105 photons/s, the limit of detection of bioluminescence.PBS-inoculated animals challenged with 3×106-PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*) lost up to 30% starting weight (the limit in our protocol) and had a mortality rate of 100% (10/10 mice). These mice also displayed high peak levels of bioluminescence throughout the respiratory tract (1.61×109, 1.71×108, and 5.32×108 photons/s in the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively) (Figure 2C). These maxima correspond to tissues titers of 1.43×109, 1.7×108, and 4.97×108 PFU/mL in the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively, using a previously determined titration [21]. 70 days after primary inoculation, both 70- and 7,000-PFU donor groups were protected from intranasal challenge with 3×106-PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*), suffering no significant weight loss (Figure 2D) and no mortality. Both groups did not display bioluminescence in the nasopharynx or trachea after day-70 challenge, and both groups had low levels of bioluminescence in the lungs (<107 photons/s) that was cleared after 3 or 2 days for the 70- and 7,000-PFU groups, respectively. Overall, the data showed that primary infection in the lungs of the 7,000-PFU inoculated group was 10-fold greater and was cleared later than in the 70-PFU group, yet the peak levels of primary infection in the nasopharynx and trachea and the level of protection from lethal secondary challenge were similar in both groups.URT-dominant primary infection after contact transmission protects from lethal challengeTo investigate the dynamics of infection and extent of protective immunity after contact transmission, we intranasally inoculated donor mice with 70-PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then placed one donor mouse per cage with 3 naïve recipient mice (Figure 1B). 100% of the animals in contact became infected (Table 1), as assessed by bioluminescence and seroconversion. Primary infection after contact transmission typically initiated within the upper respiratory tract and then spread to the lungs approximately 1 day later (Figure 3). A low level of infection observed in the lungs after contact transmission (peak values of approximately 1×107 photons/s, which corresponds to virus titers of approximately 9.35×106 PFU/mL) was consistent with the animals suffering no weight loss or mortality. The capacity of primary infection after contact transmission to protect from reinfection on day 70 of the experiment was assessed by intranasal challenge of 3×106-PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). A lethal challenge dosage is common in vaccination studies and was chosen for these studies in order to better discriminate protection from reinfection in individual respiratory tissues. No reinfection in the nasopharynx and trachea was detected for all 6 recipient mice, yet 5/6 recipient mice displayed a low level of reinfection in the lungs, which was cleared in 4 days or less (Figure 3). Overall, URT-dominant primary infection after contact transmission resulted in complete protection from morbidity and mortality in a lethal challenge model, complete protection from reinfection in the URT, and extensive, albeit in some cases incomplete, protection from reinfection in the lungs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g003Figure 3Dynamics of infection after contact transmission and subsequent challenge.One 129X1 mouse inoculated intranasally with 70-PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) was placed in a cage with 3 naïve mice 24 hours later. Bioluminescence in the (A) nasopharynx, (B) trachea, and (C) lungs was measured daily in the contact mice until infection was cleared (on average 14 days). Seventy days after inoculation of donor mice, the recipients were challenged with 3×106 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) so that reinfection could be monitored by bioluminescence. Each individual mouse is color-coded (n = 6). The bottom of the y-axis is 5.5×105 photons/s, the limit of detection of bioluminescence.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.t001Table 1Frequency of transmission.Direct contactAirborne transmissiond
transmissiona
7.6 cm15.2 cmExpt. #70 PFUb
70 PFU7000 PFU7000 PFUI100% (9/9)67% (2/3)33% (1/3)ndIIndc
100% (3/3)100% (6/6)ndIIInd100% (3/3)100% (3/3)ndIVndndnd100% (6/6)Vndndnd100% (6/6)Total100% (9/9)89% (8/9)83% (10/12)100% (12/12)aOne infected donor animal was introduced into a cage of 3 naïve recipient mice one day after inoculation and housed together until end of experiment. Frequencies are expressed as percentage of transmission (no. positive/total no. naïve animals).bThe contact transmission experiment was completed once using only 70 PFU direct inoculation as previously published data [21] revealed similar frequency of transmission and dynamics of infection after contact transmission regardless of direct inoculation dose.cnd = not done.dIndividual naïve recipient mice were housed in one of 3 isolation chambers per large transmission cage and were separated from the ten infected donor animals by the indicated distances. 7.6 cm = 3 inches and 15.2 cm = 6 inches. Ten infected animals were placed in transmission cage directly after inoculation for both the 7.6 and 15.2 cm experiments.Increased infection in the lungs of donor mice does not enhance short-range airborne transmissionWe previously found that increased infection in the lungs of donor mice, due to a higher inoculum, did not increase the frequency or dynamics of infection after contact transmission [21]. We hypothesized that increased virus growth in the lungs of donors would enhance airborne transmission by potentially increasing the number of airborne particles containing virus and/or the number of infectious virions per airborne particle. To test this hypothesis, ten donor mice were inoculated intranasally with either 70- or 7,000-PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and placed in a custom transmission cage that contained three individually isolated recipient mice (Figure 1C). Animal weight and bioluminescence was monitored daily, first in recipient and then in donor mice. The frequency of airborne transmission across the 7.6-cm separation was 89% (8/9) and 83% (10/12) in groups containing 70- and 7,000-PFU inoculated donor mice, respectively (Table 1). Thus, a 10-fold greater and longer-lived SeV infection in the lungs of donor mice, due to a higher-dose inoculation, did not increase the efficiency of airborne transmission. These results suggest that the load of virus in the lungs of donor mice is not the predominant factor governing short-range airborne transmission of Sendai virus.To confirm that transmission did not occur between the three individually isolated recipient mice in the airborne transmission cages, we performed duplicate lateral transmission experiments using two cages each time. In these experiments, we intranasally inoculated a mouse in the middle chamber with 70 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). None of the eight lateral naïve mice became infected, as evidenced by a lack of bioluminescence and seroconversion.Short-range airborne transmission of Sendai virus occurs later than contact transmissionWe previously found that the timing of contact transmission of SeV coincides with high viral loads in the nasal cavity (>105 PFU/mL), both of which occur approximately one day earlier when donor mice are inoculated with 7,000-PFU compared to 70-PFU [21]. In the present study, we measured the timing of transmission by contact and airborne routes. The average time for contact transmission was significantly faster (p = 0.0003) when donor animals were inoculated with 7,000-PFU (4.6 days) versus 70-PFU (5.9 days) (Figure 4A). Short-range airborne transmission occurred on the average two days later than contact transmission for a given inoculated dose in donors. Short-range airborne transmission, when it occurred, was detected approximately one day earlier on the average in groups containing 7,000-PFU inoculated donors (6.8 days) compared to groups with 70-PFU inoculated donors (7.9 days). However, the difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.15) and transmission more frequently occurred in the 70-PFU group than the 7,000-PFU group (89% efficient versus 83%, respectively). Prolonged virus shedding by donors in 7,000-PFU inoculated groups could result in later transmission to newly exposed naïve recipients as late as nine days after inoculation of donors. It is possible that the delay in transmission timing by an airborne route results from the need of a threshold amount of virus to be present in the mucus. Alternatively, virus- or immune cell-mediated epithelial cell damage and sloughing may be necessary to generate the particle sizes necessary to stably transmit virus through the air. To summarize, contact transmission of SeV occurred on average sooner than short-range airborne transmission, and a higher and longer-lived infection in the lungs of donor animals (due to a 100-fold greater inoculated dose) did not increase the frequency or timing of short-range airborne transmission.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g004Figure 4Timing of contact and airborne transmission.(A) Transmission time based on the mode of transmission and virus inoculum in donor mice. The day of transmission was recorded based on the day of experiment. Day 0 is the day donor mice were directly inoculated intranasally with either 70- or 7,000-PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). For contact transmission, naïve recipient mice were caged with donor mice 1 day after direct inoculation. For airborne transmission, naïve recipient mice were caged with infected donor mice directly after inoculation. Reported is the first day when bioluminescence signal exceeded the limit of detection (5.5 log10 photons/sec) in any respiratory tissue. (B) Time of airborne transmission based on whether the dynamics of primary infection were tracheal dominant or respiratory tract disseminated. Significance was determined by Student's t-test: *** p = 0.0003 and ** p = 0.001. n.t. on the y-axis of panel A = no transmission.Diverse dynamics of primary infection after short-range airborne transmissionA major gap in the field of respiratory virus transmission is an understanding of the dynamics of primary infection throughout the respiratory tract after airborne transmission. While primary infection after contact transmission initiated in the nasopharynx (Figure 3), we hypothesized that primary infection after airborne transmission would initiate in the trachea and/or lungs due to the inhalation of aerosolized virus-containing particles. Moreover, we expected infection initiating in the trachea or lungs would lead to more severe disease than infection initiating in the nasopharynx. For airborne transmission across a 7.6-cm separation, we found that the timing and magnitude of infection in the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs varied substantially between individual mice (Figures 5,6). The inoculated dose in donor animals (70- versus 7,000-PFU) appeared to have little, if any, influence on the dynamics of infection after short-range airborne transmission (Table 2). Based on the individual bioluminescence curves (Figure 6), we classified the phenotypes into four categories (Table 2). In one mouse (5%) seroconversion was detected after only a low level of pulmonary bioluminescence on day 11 (non-productive infection; Figure 6B). In 9 mice (43%) infection was disseminated throughout the respiratory tract (Figure 6D,E), initiating first in the nasopharyngeal cavities of 4 mice (19%) and in the trachea of the remaining 5 mice (24%). The “nasopharynx first” and “trachea first” phenotypes will collectively be referred to as respiratory disseminated infections throughout the manuscript despite differences in the initial location of infection. In 8 mice (38%) infection was dominant in the trachea and low levels or no infection was detected in the nasopharynx or lungs. Tracheal-dominant infection was typically cleared in 4 days, whereas it typically took 7 days to clear infection that disseminated throughout the respiratory tract (Figure 6). After short-range airborne transmission, none of the mice had large levels of infection in the lungs and none displayed weight loss or mortality (Figures 6,7). In summary, bioluminescence imaging in intact mice revealed that short-range airborne transmission results in multiple unique phenotypes of primary SeV infection, several of which were more prominent in the trachea than in the nasopharynx and lungs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g005Figure 5Dynamics of Sendai virus infection for representative, individual mice.Every 24: directly inoculated intranasally with 70-PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*), a contact mouse exposed to a 70-PFU directly inoculated mouse, an airborne-exposed mouse initially infected in the nasopharynx, an airborne-exposed mouse initially infected in the trachea, and an airborne-exposed mouse predominantly infected in the trachea. The data are displayed as radiance (bioluminescence intensity) on a rainbow log scale with a range of 1×106 (blue) to 1×108 (red) photons/s/cm2/steradian (inset).10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g006Figure 6Primary infection and secondary reinfection in individual mice after airborne transmission across a 7.6-cm separation.
In vivo bioluminescence was measured in individual animals after airborne exposure to donor mice that had been directly inoculated with 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). All mice were challenged on day 70 of the experiment with a lethal 3×106-PFU dose of rSeV-luc(M-F*). Mice involved in the airborne transmission experiments were categorized based on the dynamics of the resultant infection: (A) no transmission (1–3), (B) non-productive infection (4), (C) tracheal dominant (5–12), (D) respiratory disseminated with nasopharyngeal first (13–16), and (E) respiratory disseminated with tracheal first (17–21). (F) Bioluminescence curves for two representative mice infected by contact transmission are also included. The bottom of the y-axis is 5.5×105 photons/s, the limit of detection of bioluminescence.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g007Figure 7Mean percent weight change during the airborne transmission experiment with a 7.6-cm separation.For airborne transmission experiments mice were categorized based on the dynamics of infection after transmission. Duplicate contact and triplicate airborne experiments were performed.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.t002Table 2Phenotypes of primary infection after airborne transmission.# of mice (%) infectedb
7.6 cm15.2 cmCategorya
70 PFU7000 PFUTotal7000 PFUNo transmission1 (11%)2 (17%)3 (14%)0 (0%)Respiratory tract disseminated4 (44%)5 (42%)9 (43%)9 (75%)Nasopharyngeal first3 (33%)1 (8%)4 (19%)6 (50%)Tracheal first1 (11%)4 (33%)5 (24%)3 (25%)Tracheal dominant3 (33%)5 (42%)8 (38%)2 (17%)Non-productivec
1 (11%)0 (0%)1 (5%)1 (8%)Total (n)9c (100%)12 (100%)21 (100%)12 (100%)aPhenotypes were categorized selected by comparing the trends of bioluminescent signal within individual animals in each of the following tissues: nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs.bMice reported were infected through airborne exposure to donor animals inoculated with either 70 or 7000 plaque forming units of SeV.cIn two mice, bioluminescence was detected at very low levels late after co-housing and the mice seroconverted on day 30. Such an infection is characteristic of non-productive transmission.Dynamics of primary infection influences the tropism and magnitude of reinfectionGiven the diversity in phenotypes of primary infection after airborne transmission in individual animals, we hypothesized that increased infection in a given respiratory tissue would confer better protection from reinfection in that same tissue. To assess this, we performed a lethal challenge on day 70 of the experiment and monitored reinfection in individual animals using bioluminescence imaging (Figure 6). Day 70 challenge of the no transmission category resulted in high levels of infection throughout the respiratory tract (Figure 6A), up to 30% weight loss (Figure 7), and 100% mortality within 9 days. All mice that had been previously infected after airborne exposure survived challenge. The mouse with non-productive infection was reinfected to a high level (>108 photons/s) in the nasopharynx and trachea, was moderately protected from reinfection in the lungs (<107 photons/s), lost 14% of its body weight, and recovered from the challenge (Figure 6B). Mice that had a tracheal dominant primary infection suffered significant weight loss (Figure 7; p<0.001) and were protected from day 70-challenge to a greater extent in the trachea (typically <107 photons/s) than in the nasopharynx and lungs (usually >108 and >107 photons/s, respectively) (Figure 6C). Mice that had a respiratory tract disseminated infection, whether nasal or tracheal first, were protected from weight loss after day 70 challenge (Figure 7) and typically had lower levels of reinfection in the nasopharynx and lungs (Figure 6D,E) than did mice in the tracheal dominant category.In contrast to short-range airborne transmission, mice in the contact transmission group displayed little to no pulmonary reinfection when challenged on day 70 and had no detectable reinfection in the nasopharynx and trachea (Figure 6F). For both contact and airborne transmission, a trend was observed in which a larger amount of primary infection in a given respiratory tissue (nasopharynx, trachea, or lungs) correlated with a greater degree of protection from reinfection. To explore the relationship between primary infection and reinfection, for each individual we calculated the bioluminescence areas under the curve (AUC) for each respiratory tissue (Figure 8) and measured the levels of binding antibodies in peripheral blood sera animal (Figure 9). In general, mice with higher levels of primary infection had higher levels of anti-SeV serum antibody levels and greater levels of protection from reinfection during challenge with the following rank order: directly inoculated>contact transmitted>airborne disseminated>airborne tracheal dominant>no transmission. Mice in the tracheal-dominant category had relatively high levels of infection in the trachea (Figure 8B) but only a low level of serum binding antibodies (Figure 9), presumably due to a low level of infection in the nasopharynx and/or lungs (Figure 8A,C). In summary, the mode of transmission of SeV was found to determine the dynamics of primary infection in mice. The magnitude of primary infection correlated with the extent of protection from reinfection in a given respiratory tissue.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g008Figure 8Tissue-specific magnitude of Sendai virus infection in the respiratory tracts of living mice after direct inoculation and transmission.(A–C) Overall magnitude of infection of primary and challenge infections as determined by integration of daily measurements of total flux with respect to time. The areas under the curve (AUC) of bioluminescence are expressed as the total amount of photons on a log10 scale. The association between the magnitude of primary and challenge infection (AUC) in the nasopharynx (D), trachea (E), and lungs (F) was determined using linear regression analysis (r2) with GraphPad Prism software. Data for airborne transmission corresponds to experiments that had a 7.6-cm separation between donor and recipient mice. No trans. = no transmission, trach. dom. = tracheal dominant infection, rep. diss. = respiratory tract disseminated infection.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g009Figure 9Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers. Sera were collected on day 30 of the experiment.Titers were measured by reciprocal endpoint dilutions in ELISA assays and the fold change in titers over mock inoculated mouse levels was calculated. Data for airborne transmission corresponds to experiments that had a 7.6-cm separation between donor and recipient mice. Significance was determined using the Student's t-test: * p≤0.03 and ** p = 0.004. No trans. = no transmission, trach. dom. = tracheal dominant infection, rep. diss. = respiratory tract disseminated infection.Airborne transmission over a longer distance and with fewer donor animalsHaving observed transmission across a 7.6-cm separation, we next investigated if airborne transmission across a separation twice as long would alter the dynamics of primary infection. In each cage, we directly inoculated ten donor mice with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then monitored bioluminescence in three individually isolated recipient mice that were separated from donor animals by 15.2 cm. As with the shorter-range experiment, longer-range transmission with ten donor animals was efficient (Table 1) and included the four previously discovered categories of primary infection phenotypes (Table 2, Figure 10), albeit with nasopharyngeal initiated infection occurring at a higher frequency. Additional experiments would be needed to define precisely the contributions of separation distance and inoculation dose on the initial site of infection after airborne transmission. For airborne transmission across both 7.6- and 15.2-cm distances, transmission was on the average significantly quicker (p value = 0.001) for animals that progressed to a respiratory disseminated infection than for those whose infection was predominantly confined to the trachea (Figure 4B). In summary, the dynamics of primary infection after airborne transmission across 15.2 cm was similar to that across 7.6 cm.10.1371/journal.ppat.1003786.g010Figure 10Primary infection in individual mice after airborne transmission across a 15.2-cm separation.
In vivo bioluminescence was measured in individual animals after airborne exposure to donor mice that had been directly inoculated with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). Mice involved in the airborne transmission experiments were categorized based on the dynamics of the resultant infection: (A) tracheal dominant, (B) non-productive infection, (C) respiratory disseminated with nasopharyngeal first, and (D) respiratory disseminated with tracheal first. The bottom of the y-axis is 5.5×105 photons/s, the limit of detection of bioluminescence.Previous studies have shown that greater numbers of donor mice increase the efficiency of airborne transmission of SeV [27], [28], presumably due to an increase in the amount of infectious virus collectively expelled from donors. To examine the effect of the number of donor mice on the efficiency of airborne transmission, in each cage we inoculated three donor mice with either 70- or 7,000-PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*) and monitored bioluminescence and seroconversion in three individually isolated naïve mice that were separated from the donors by 15.2 cm. Under these conditions, no bioluminescence or seroconversion was observed.DiscussionWe studied the dynamics of SeV infection in individual, living mice after contact or airborne transmission. We found that increased and longer-duration infection in the lungs of donor mice, due to a 100-fold higher inoculation dose, had no apparent effect on the frequency or timing of airborne transmission or on the dynamics of infection in recipient mice. This suggests that airborne transmission is largely determined by virus growth and expulsion from the URT, similar to findings on contact transmission [21], [29]. The dynamics of infection was largely uniform after contact transmission, in most mice initiating in the URT and then spreading to the lungs approximately one day later. In contrast, infection after airborne transmission included non-productive infection, tracheal-dominant infection, and respiratory tract disseminated infection (initiating either in the nasopharynx or in the trachea). In general, the level of primary infection in a given respiratory tissue was inversely correlated with the level of reinfection in the same tissue. Mice having a primary infection that was predominantly tracheal were relatively susceptible to reinfection, suffering greater weight loss than animals that had a primary infection disseminated throughout the respiratory tract. Overall, the data suggest that the mode of transmission determines the tropism and magnitude of primary infection, which in turn influences the tropism and magnitude of reinfection.The transmission of respiratory viruses can occur through four routes: a) direct contact with infectious secretions, b) indirect contact with contaminated fomites, c) short-range large droplet airborne spread, and d) small droplet nuclei aerosolization. The relative contribution of each mode of transmission for a particular respiratory virus has been a topic of debate. For influenza virus, transmission in temperate climates appears to occur more frequently through large droplet or small droplet nuclei [31]–[34]. This does not appear to be the case in tropical regions as virus is unstable in aerosols at higher temperature and humidity [35]. In these regions it is hypothesized that contact transmission is the dominant mode. For human rhinoviruses the precise route of transmission remains controversial [36]–[41]. Transmission of HRSV is thought to occur through direct or indirect contact with contaminated secretions and large-particle droplets [14], [15], [42]. It is generally believed that HPIV transmission occurs via a similar route [4], [16], [43], [44], although there is little experimental evidence to support this notion [17], [19], [45]. Here we demonstrate that a parainfluenza virus can transmit by contact and through the air over short distances, presumably by large droplets. Our results support the limited clinical and experimental observations with HRSV and the HPIVs suggesting these viruses transmit predominantly by contact but also by large droplets over short distances.Parker et al. observed 100% seroconversion of mice in direct contact with infected donor mice but inefficient or no seroconversion when naïve and donor mice were separated by 20.32 cm [27]. In contrast, van der Veen et al. found that contact transmission occurred at a rate of approximately 50–60%, short range (2.5–10.5 cm) airborne transmission occurred at a rate of 15–22%, and long distance (1.5–1.8 meters) aerosol transmission occurred at a rate of 7–32% [28], [29]. In the present study, we observed efficient airborne transmission at distances up to 15.2 cm in cages containing ten donor mice. Discrepancies between the studies may be attributed to multiple variables including differences in cage set-up, number of infected donor mice, timing of cohousing, airflow rates, and climate control. Regardless of the route of transmission, van der Veen et al. observed increased rates of transmission at higher (60–70%) over lower (40–45%) relative humidity. In the present study, relative humidity ranged from 48–85%, largely remaining between 60 and 77% (Table S1). Given that the average measured relative humidity in the present study was comparable to the humidity levels that resulted in more efficient transmission in the van der Veen study, we speculate that the difference in transmission rates between the two studies is not a function of relative humidity alone. A major finding reported here is that the dynamics of infection and protection from reinfection after short-range airborne transmission is highly diverse. A large proportion of infections initiated in the trachea, which has been previously shown to support high levels of infection [21], [30], [46]. HPIV3 infection of cotton rats leads to laryngotracheitis [47]. In human tracheobronchial epithelial cells, HPIV1 grows more efficiently than HPIV2 and HPIV3 [48]. Taken together, it is not surprising that HPIV1 is the dominant etiologic agent in outbreaks of laryngotracheobronchitis or pediatric croup throughout the world [4], [5], [17].The mode of transmission may determine the dynamics of primary infection by dictating the site of initiation in recipient animals. Contact transmission requires the touching of mucous membranes, such as the nose or eyes, with infectious secretions [13], [49]. It follows then that direct contact between infected donor mice with high viral titers in the nasal turbinates and naïve recipient mice would more likely result in transmission of the virus to the nasal tissue of the naïve animals as opposed to deeper in the respiratory tract. Transmission of a virus through an airborne route requires an expiratory event such as coughing, sneezing, talking, or normal breathing [50]–[52]. Studies have shown these expiratory events can produce large (150 µm), intermediate (5–50 µm), and small (<5 µm) virus-containing particles [53]–[55]. Smaller-sized particles are capable of penetrating deeper into the respiratory tract [56]. Differences in the dynamics of primary infection after contact and airborne transmission described in the present study may simply be a function of the route of transmission and size of infectious particle. It is also possible that the high rate of tracheal infections observed after short-range airborne transmission are the result of particle impaction at the trachea due to the horizontal anatomy of the murine upper respiratory tract. It should be noted that in transmission experiments between intermingling mice, transmission could also occur through a short-range airborne route in addition to direct or indirect contact route.Infection with the human paramyxoviruses HRSV, HMPV, and the HPIVs can occur throughout life [16], [57]; however unlike primary infection in the very young, subsequent infections are often milder or subclinical [16]. The mechanism behind the ability of these viruses to reinfect has been attributed to the incomplete and waning immunity that develops after primary infection with specific emphasis being placed on the serum neutralizing antibody and mucosal IgA levels [57]–[61]. One potential factor influencing the magnitude, tropism, and clinical impact of reinfection may be the mode of transmission and dynamics of primary infection, as described here for SeV transmission in mice. Thus, we hypothesize that the mode of primary infection of respiratory paramyxoviruses may also influence the severity of reinfection in other species including humans. Based on the seasonal nature of HPIV infections, in the future it will be important to address the role of temperature and humidity on the transmissibility of parainfluenza viruses through an airborne route. Bioluminescence imaging of SeV infection in living mice, the natural host, has revealed several unique phenotypes of primary infection that, in turn, influence protection from reinfection. Future studies will be aimed at understanding HPIV infection and transmission in a guinea pig model because a more detailed understanding of how these viruses transmit can have broad public health implications.Supporting InformationFigure S1Definitions of regions of interest for bioluminescence data analysis. Bioluminescence curves are shown for primary infection after airborne transmission in representative animals that had (A) tracheal dominant, (B) nasopharyngeal first, and (C) tracheal first infections. In the left column, regions of interest were drawn based on correlations between external and internal anatomy as described in the Materials and Methods. In the middle column, the line of demarcation between the nasopharynx and trachea was shift up. In the right column, the line of demarcation between the trachea and lungs was shifted down. Shifting of the regions of interest did not substantial change the calculated bioluminescence phenotypes. (D) Images of regions of interest during the peak day of infection that are shown in panels A–C.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Table S1Temperature and Relative Humidity for airborne transmission experiments.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Comparison of the Pathogenicity of Nipah Virus Isolates from Bangladesh and Malaysia in the Syrian Hamster

IntroductionNipah virus is a member of the family Paramyxoviridae, genus Henipavirus, and was discovered in 1998–99 to be the etiological agent responsible for an outbreak of severe respiratory disease in pigs [1] and encephalitis in humans in Malaysia [2]. All subsequent outbreaks of Nipah virus have occurred in Bangladesh or India, beginning in 2001, and have occurred on an almost annual basis [3]. Genetic data demonstrate that the isolates from Malaysia (NiV-M) and Bangladesh (NiV-B) represent two distinct Nipah virus strains [3], [4]. Nipah virus outbreaks have case fatality rates of up to 100% and there are no approved vaccines or treatments and these viruses have been categorized as a biosafety level 4 (BSL4) agents. Nipah virus differs from other paramyxoviruses in its ability to infect a wide range of mammals including bats [5], dogs [1], [6], horses [7], pigs [1], and cats [1], [8]. Wildlife surveillance at the time of the first outbreaks, along with several subsequent studies, has identified fruit bats of the family Pteropodidae as the natural reservoir of Nipah virus [5], [9]–[11].During the first Nipah virus outbreak in Malaysia, NiV-M caused over 265 cases of encephalitis with 105 human deaths, resulting in a case fatality rate of 40% [1]. Common clinical manifestations of Nipah virus infection included fever, headache, respiratory disease, encephalitis and loss of consciousness [12], [13]. Fatal human cases of NiV-M infection were characterized by pathology involving the respiratory tract, central nervous system (CNS), heart, kidney and spleen [13]. NiV-M infection causes vasculitis characterized by destruction of the endothelium, syncytia formation, thrombosis and necrosis, with infiltration of inflammatory cells throughout affected organs. In the lungs of infected humans, pulmonary edema, alveolar hemorrhage and pneumonia were documented as well as occasional multinucleated giant cells found in alveolar space [13]. During this outbreak, the disease predominantly affected the nervous system with prominent signs of brain stem dysfunction. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brains of infected individuals showed focal lesions throughout the white matter [13]. In a study examining 94 Nipah virus-infected patients in Malaysia, only 6% showed abnormal chest radiographs, and of these, only one presented with a cough [2]. Also, cases of late onset or relapsing encephalitis were documented during the Malaysia outbreak [2]. During the Malaysian outbreak, pigs predominantly showed signs of respiratory disease and were determined to be an intermediate host [14], [15].Epidemiologically, reports of infection with NiV-B differ from that of NiV-M infection in several aspects. Clinically, NiV-B infection resulted in a higher percentage of respiratory disease and a higher case fatality rate, reaching up to 100%, compared to NiV-M infection [12]. This disparity could reflect the differences in availability of health care and in reporting [16]. Disparities, however, could also be caused by intrinsic differences in the pathogenicity of NiV-M and NiV-B. NiV-B is transmitted from bats to humans by multiple routes including the ingestion of contaminated date palm sap [17], and can subsequently be transmitted nosocomially [18], or by human-to-human transmission [19]–[22]. Common clinical signs and symptoms of NiV-B infection included fever, altered mental status, headaches, cough, and difficulty breathing [16], [23]. During the Bangladeshi outbreaks, acute respiratory distress was noted in many patients [16], [24]. Febrile neurologic illnesses were also documented in some outbreaks of NiV-B, with lesions found in the gray and white matter of the brain [23], [25], [26]. In one study looking at 92 patients, 69% had difficulty breathing and 62% had a cough [16]. Limited studies have been conducted to describe the pathology in NiV-B infected patients.In contrast to most other paramyxoviruses, Nipah virus has a broad species tropism and there are few suitable animal models that recapitulate human disease. Experimentally cats, guinea pigs, ferrets, pigs, non-human primates, and Syrian hamsters have been shown to support NiV-M viral replication resulting in clinical signs of infection [27]–[29]. The Syrian hamster is the only small rodent model that closely mimics multiple aspects of human disease [8], [27], [30], [31]. When infected intraperitoneally (i.p.) or intranasally (i.n.) with NiV-M, hamsters develop respiratory disease and/or encephalitis. The pathological changes that occur in the hamster are similar to those described in humans. The presence of vasculitis, necrosis, and inflammation is seen in both the human and hamsters. Viral antigen and disease pathology is observed in lung, kidney and heart tissue [31], [32]. Similar to human infections that lead to encephalitis, hamsters show antigen positive neurons, necrosis, and vasculitis in the CNS [31]. These similarities in infection between humans and hamsters make the Syrian hamster a suitable model for the study of Nipah virus pathogenesis.This study was designed to compare NiV-B and NiV-M infections in a hamster-derived cell line, followed by a comparison of the pathogenesis and immune responses to infection by both virus strains in the Syrian hamster. Our results demonstrated that hamster cells are permissive for infection by both virus strains, with NiV-M causing increased syncytia formation and cytopathic effect (CPE) compared to NiV-B. In vivo, NiV-B infection resulted in a delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M infection. Overall NiV-M is more cytopathic in vitro and causes an accelerated disease in vivo, compared to NiV-B.Materials and MethodsEthical statementAll work with Nipah virus, potentially infectious materials, and infected hamsters was completed in the BSL4 facility at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health. All standard operating procedures applied were approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC). All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Rocky Mountain Laboratories and performed following the guidelines of the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International (AAALAC) by certified staff in an AAALAC-approved facility.Virus propagationNiV-B and NiV-M were provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. NiV-M was isolated from a human case (cerebrum) in 1999 and passaged on Vero E6 cells a total of four times before used in experiments [33]. NiV-B was isolated from a throat swab of a lethal human infection from Bangladesh in 2004 and passaged in Vero E6 cells a total of three times [4]. Viruses were propagated on Vero E6 cells in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium (DMEM) (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM l-glutamine, 50 IU/mL penicillin and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies). Supernatants were collected and clarified by low-speed centrifugation and stored in liquid nitrogen.Virus titrationFor plaque assays, Vero C1008 (European Collection of Cell Cultures) were grown to confluency in 6-well plates. Media was replaced with 250 µL of serial 10-fold dilutions of virus in DMEM and incubated for 1 hr at 37°C, rocking every 15 min. The virus inoculum was replaced with 2 mL of a 1∶1 mixture of 2× minimal essential medium (MEM) and 1.6% low-melt agarose (Life Technologies). The cells were then incubated for 3 d at 37°C, 5% CO2 before staining with 2 mL of a 0.25% crystal violet solution in 10% formalin for 3 hr at room temperature. The stain and overlay were then removed from the wells and the plaques were enumerated.To determine the 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50), monolayers of Vero C1008 cells were grown in 96-well plates and 100 µL of serial 10-fold diluted samples in MEM containing 2% FBS, were added to the wells. Cells were then incubated for 5 d at 37°C, 5% CO2 and then scored for CPE.Cell lines and in vitro infectionsBaby hamster kidney cells (BHK-21) from the American Type Culture Collection were propagated in MEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM l-glutamine, 50 IU/mL penicillin and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies). Nipah virus infections were performed in 48-well plates when cells reached 95–100% confluency. Infections were performed by replacing medium with 250 µL of diluted virus (multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 and 0.01) in MEM, 2% FBS. After 1 hr, the inoculum was replaced with MEM supplemented with 2% FBS. Supernatants were collected at 1 hr, and 1, 2, and 3 days post infection (dpi) for virus titration. Cells were stained using the Kwik Diff Kit (Thermo scientific) to visualize syncytia according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Cells were monitored for CPE with a light microscope and images were captured using a Nikon DS-Fi1 camera.Inoculation of hamsters and sample collectionGroups of 5 to 6 week old female Syrian hamsters (Harlan) were inoculated with the indicated doses of NiV-M or NiV-B diluted in sterile DMEM and administered via the i.p. route in a total volume of 500 µL. Control animals received the equivalent volume of sterile DMEM by the same route. Two groups were inoculated i.n. with 105 TCID50 per hamster of either NiV-M or NiV-B diluted in sterile DMEM. Fifty microliters of virus preparation was delivered to each nare using a pipette. Hamsters were weighed and scored daily for clinical signs for two weeks. When signs of disease no longer existed, animals were monitored but no longer weighed. The health of animals was assessed and scored according to the following criteria: 0 = no signs of disease; 1 = ruffled fur; 2 = ruffled fur & weight loss <5%; 3 = ruffled fur, hunched posture & weight loss >5%; 4 = ruffled fur, hunched posture & weight loss >10%; 5 = ruffled fur, hunched posture, weight loss >15%, or encephalitic signs, or hemorrhagic signs, or paralytic signs or dyspnea; 6 = ruffled fur, hunched posture, weight loss >20%, or encephalitic signs, or hemorrhagic signs, or paralytic signs or dyspnea; 7 = death. Euthanasia occurred at a score of 5 and above. At the time of euthanasia, animals were bled (EDTA- and heparin-treated vacutainer tubes) via cardiac puncture. Necropsies were performed to collect lung, spleen, heart and brain tissue. Tissues were placed in lysis buffer RLT (Qiagen) for RNA extraction, or 10% formalin for histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis.RNA extraction and quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)Tissues (30 mg pieces) were homogenized in RLT buffer and removed from the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturers' instructions. Whole blood was collected and inactivated in AVL buffer and removed from the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Total RNA was extracted using QIAamp viral RNA kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturers' instructions.The RNA was quantified on a nanodrop 8000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed on a rotor-gene 6000 instrument (Corbett Life Science) using QuantiFast probe reagents (Qiagen) targeting the NiV-M or NiV-B nucleocapsid protein gene. Primers and probes used were: NiV-B sense (5′-GTTCAGGCCAGAGAAGCTAAATTT-3′), NiV-B antisense (5′-CCTCTTCGTCGACATCTTGATCA-3′), NiV-M sense (5′- GTTCAGGCTAGAGAGGCAAAATTT-3′), NiV-M antisense (5′- CCCCTTCATCGATATCTTGATCA-3″), NiV-B probe (5′-6FAM-CTGCAGGAGGTGTGCTCATCGGAGG-TAMRA-3′) and NiV-M probe (5′-6FAM-CTGCAGGAGGTGTGCTCATTGGAGG-TAMRA-3″). qRT-PCR components were used at the concentrations recommended by the manufacturer and 5 µL of RNA was added to each reaction and the following thermocycling parameters were used: 50°C for 10 min, 95°C for 5 min, and 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 s, 60°C for 10 s. Dilutions of RNA extracted from a known titer of each Nipah virus were run in triplicate to generate a standard curve from which sample TCID50 equivalents were extrapolated. Hamster immune gene expression was determined as previously described [34]. Briefly, RNA was extracted from tissues and qRT-PCR was performed as described above using gene-specific primers and probes under multiplex conditions. The fold-change in each gene was calculated by normalizing the change in CT (ΔCT) to the CT values for RPL18 (as an internal reference gene) for each sample and comparing this to the CT values of uninfected hamsters (2−ΔΔCT).Histopathology and immunohistochemistryTissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 7 d with one volume change, then transferred out of the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Tissues were then placed in cassettes and processed with a Sakura VIP-5 Tissue Tek, on a 12 hr automated schedule, using a graded series of ethanol, xylene, and ParaPlast Extra. Embedded tissues were sectioned at 5 µm and dried overnight at 42°C prior to staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).Specific Nipah virus IHC was performed using an anti-Nipah virus N protein rabbit primary antibody at a 1∶5000 dilution (kindly provided by L. Wang, CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Australia) [35]. The tissues were then processed using the Discovery XT automated processor (Ventana Medical Systems) with a DAPMap (Ventana Medical Systems) kit.StatisticsStatistical analyses were performed on the data form the TCID50 and qRT-PCR experiments using a 2-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni's post-test. To determine whether there were significant differences in the time to death between the viruses, we performed a log-rank test. The mean and SEM is represented and significance (* = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01 and *** = p<0.001) is reported where appropriate.ResultsNiV-M causes increased cytopathology in BHK-21 cells, compared to NiV-BTo determine the cellular responses and replication kinetics of the two Nipah virus strains in a hamster cell line, we infected BHK-21 cells with either NiV-M or NiV-B at MOIs of either 0.01 or 0.1. As early as 1 dpi, syncytia formation was apparent in all NiV-M-infected cultures. By 3 dpi, and at both MOIs, NiV-M-infected cells showed extensive CPE and nearly complete destruction of the cell monolayer (Figure 1A). NiV-B-infected cells showed little CPE at any of the time points sampled, regardless of the inoculation dose. At 3 dpi, NiV-B-infected cells began to form small syncytia. At both MOIs, NiV-M replicated sooner and reached higher virus titers in the supernatant at earlier time points compared to NiV-B (Figure 1B and C). At the lower MOI, NiV-M reached a titer that was 4 logs higher at 3 dpi than NiV-B (Figure 1B), whereas end titers were similar for both Nipah virus strains at the higher MOI, with a faster progression for NiV-M (Figure 1C).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g001Figure 1NiV-M replicates more efficiently and causes increased cytopathogenicity in hamster cells compared to NiV-B.To study the cytopathogenicity of these Nipah viruses, BHK-21 cells were infected with NiV-M or NiV-B at an MOI of 0.01 and stained using the Kwik Diff Kit at 1, 2, and 3 dpi (A). Arrows point to multinucleated giant cells. To examine the viral growth kinetics, BHK-21 cells were infected with Nipah virus at an MOI of 0.01 (B) or 0.1 (C). and supernatants were collected at the indicated time points. Supernatants of NiV-M at an MOI of 0.1 at 3 dpi were not collected due to extensive destruction of the cell monolayer. Virus was titrated on Vero C1008 cells and the results are expressed as the mean of three replicates and error bars indicate the SEM. The dotted line denotes limit of detection for the assay. A 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's post test was used to compare the viruses (* = p<0.05).Disease progression during NiV-B infection of hamsters is delayed compared to NiV-M infectionTo date, NiV-B infection has not been examined in an animal model. To assess the suitability of the hamster as a model for NiV-B infection, as well as to compare the two strains, hamsters were inoculated i.p. with 10-fold serial dilutions of Nipah virus from 105 to 1 TCID50 (Figure 2). Animals were evaluated for clinical signs of disease on a daily bases according to a scoring system outlined in the Materials and Methods section. Only one hamster showed abnormal clinical signs on the day prior to euthanasia, which consisted of ruffled fur. All other hamsters did not display abnormal clinical signs until the day euthanasia was necessary. Hamsters challenged with either virus strain showed clinical signs of respiratory distress and/or neurologic dysfunction leading to a score that required euthanasia. Signs of respiratory disease included labored abdominal breathing and hunched posture; neurological dysfunction included imbalance, partial paralysis and seizures. Similar to previous studies with NiV-M, respiratory distress was observed only in animals infected at the highest doses (104 and 105 TCID50/animal) [32]. The majority of animals inoculated with the lower doses of Nipah virus (100 through 103 TCID50/animal) displayed neurologic dysfunction prior to euthanasia. One animal infected with NiV-M at the highest dose (105 TCID50) and two animals infected with NiV-B (one inoculated with 104 and one with 105) presented with both respiratory and neurologic dysfunction, while the rest of animals had either respiratory or neurological signs of distress that required euthanasia. NiV-M-infected animals showing severe respiratory signs of disease were euthanized between 5–7 dpi, whereas animals displaying neurological disorders were euthanized between days 5–11. Disease progression in NiV-B-infected animals was generally slower, and animals displaying severe respiratory distress or neurological dysfunction were euthanized on 8–9 dpi or 8–14 dpi for NiV-M and NiV-B infection, respectively (Table 1). The slower disease progression in NiV-B-infected animals was reflected in the overall survival curves with 80% lethal disease outcome even at the highest dose of infection (Figure 2 and Table 1). The LD50 for NiV-M and NiV-B was 68 and 528 TCID50, respectively. At both 103 and 105 TCID50, there was a statistically significant difference in the time to death between the two virus strains, with death occurring approximately two days later for NiV-B infected animals at each dose (Table 1). To determine if the delay in survival is associated with the route of infection, we inoculated hamsters i.n. with 105 TCID50 of either NiV-M or NiV-B. The mean time to death was delayed by two days in hamsters inoculated with NiV-B compared to NiV-M (Figure S1). Both routes of inoculation showed a two-day delay in NiV-B compared to NiV-M, although the mean time to death was later in both virus groups with the i.n. compared to i.p. route.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g002Figure 2Hamsters inoculated with NiV-B show delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M-infected hamsters.Groups of 5 hamsters were inoculated i.p. with 10-fold serial dilutions of virus from 105 to 1 TCID50. The hamsters were monitored for 30 dpi for survival.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.t001Table 1Clinical signs and outcome of hamsters inoculated with NiV-M or NiV-B.InoculumDose (TCID50)Survival (%)Mean time to death (days)a
NiV-M1×100
100N/A1×101
100N/A1×102
408.7±1.71×103
07.2±1.9*
b
1×104
07±21×105
05.8±0.7**
c
NiV-B1×100
100N/A1×101
6014±01×102
100N/A1×103
409±1.4*
b
1×104
208.5±1.11×105
207.75±0.8**
c
aExcluding survivors.bSignificant difference between NiV-M and NiV-B at dose 103 TCID50,*p<0.05: Log-rank test.cSignificant difference between NiV-M and NiV-B at dose 105 TCID50,**p<0.01: Log-rank test.Both Nipah viruses replicate in hamster lung, brain and spleen tissueTo compare the pathogenesis of NiV-M to NiV-B, groups of hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of either Nipah virus and tissues were collected on 1, 3 and 5 dpi for both virus groups, and 7 dpi for NiV-B. Based on the time to death at this dose from our survival experiment, 7 dpi tissues were not collected for NiV-M-inoculated animals for this pathology experiment. Viral RNA was detected using Nipah virus N-specific qRT-PCR (Figure 3). In NiV-M-inoculated animals, replication was detected at an earlier time point than NiV-B replication. As early as 1 dpi, viral RNA was detected in lungs, brain and spleen tissue of some NiV-M-infected animals. NiV-B-infected animals had detectable levels of viral RNA at 1 dpi in lung tissue of some hamsters, and in the spleen by 3 dpi. Both strains showed an increase in viral RNA over time in the lungs, brain and spleen, with the highest overall titers in the lungs at the last time point sampled. We assessed viremia in hamsters inoculated with either virus by qRT-PCR. Levels of viral RNA were barely detectable and viral RNA was undetectable in some animals at each time point (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g003Figure 3NiV-B replication is delayed in hamster organs compared to NiV-M replication.Hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus and 9 animals/group were euthanized at 1, 3, 5, and 7 (for NiV-B only) dpi and tissues were collected. Total viral RNA was extracted and Nipah virus N-specific viral RNA was quantified by qRT-PCR. Gray bars represent NiV-B and white NiV-M. Bars represent the mean and error bars represent the SEM.Host gene expression in lung, brain and spleen tissue of hamsters is differentially regulated during Nipah virus infectionTo examine the kinetics of the host immune response to Nipah virus infection, and compare responses between NiV-M and NiV-B infections, the expression level of a subset of cytokine and chemokine mRNAs were examined by qRT-PCR in the lungs, brain and spleen (Figure 4). Throughout the infection, the largest overall response was seen in the lungs. At 1 dpi, a statistical difference in the upregulation of interleukin-4 (IL-4), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and interferon-γ (IFNγ) was observed between NiV-M and NiV-B infections, with higher expression of these genes in response to NiV-M. A similar result was measured at 3 dpi for IFNγ in the lungs (Figure 4). At 3 dpi, IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were upregulated similarly in response to both virus strains and remained upregulated throughout the course of infection. Upregulation of the gene for myxovirus resistance protein-2 (Mx2) in the lungs was detected only at the last time point for both virus strains. IFNγ-induced protein 10 (IP-10) mRNA increased starting at 1 dpi and remained upregulated in the lungs throughout the course of infection, peaking at 3 dpi in NiV-M-infected hamsters and 5 dpi in NiV-B-infected hamsters. IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were also upregulated in brain (Figure 4). There was a significant increase in Mx2 transcription in the spleens of NiV-M-infected hamsters at 3 dpi compared to NiV-B. In the brain, IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were slightly upregulated over control animals. IL-4, IL-6, TNF, and IFNγ mRNAs were downregulated in the spleen.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g004Figure 4Host gene expression in lung, brain and spleen tissue of hamsters is differentially regulated during infection with Nipah viruses.Quantitative RT-PCR for IL-4, IP-10, IL-6, Mx2, TNF and IFNγ was performed on lung, brain and spleen tissues from groups of 9 hamsters inoculated with 105 TCID50 of NiV-M (white bars) or NiV-B (gray bars) at the indicated time points. Data are shown as the fold-change of each gene over uninfected controls and normalized to an internal reference gene (RPL18). Error bars represent the SEM. A 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's post-test was used to determine statistical significance between viruses (* = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01 and *** = p<0.001).Histopathological changes occurred earlier in NiV-M-infected hamsters compared to NiV-B-infected animalsTo compare the pathology between the two strains, hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of NiV-B or NiV-M and tissues were examined histologically. Pathology was observed for both infections and was composed of a mild to moderate multifocal, subacute, bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis on 5 dpi for NiV-M and NiV-B infection (Figure 5). By 7 dpi in NiV-B-infected animals, the pneumonia progressed to marked, multifocal to coalescing, subacute bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis, necrosis, edema, and fibrin deposits. The pneumonia in both groups, on day 5 dpi for NiV-M infection and 7 dpi for NiV-B infection, was characterized by effacement of terminal bronchioles and adjacent alveoli by small to moderate numbers of macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells. Multifocal vasculitis was observed with disruption of the arterial tunica media by small numbers of neutrophils and lymphocytes. Syncytial endothelial cells were found in affected small to medium caliber vessels. Hamsters from the final time points had moderate to marked lesions in the lungs and demonstrated a loss of pulmonary architecture with replacement by cellular and karyorrhectic debris with small to moderate amounts of hemorrhage, fibrin deposits and edema. IHC revealed viral antigen in alveolar capillary endothelium, small and medium caliber arteriolar endothelium, and in mononuclear inflammatory cells starting at 3 dpi for NiV-M infection and 5 dpi for NiV-B infection (Figure 5B). The presence of viral antigen was strongly associated with areas of inflammation. No pathological changes were observed in the CNS of hamsters infected at the high dose used in the pathology study.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g005Figure 5NiV-M infection results in accelerated pathology compared to NiV-B infection in hamsters.Nipah virus inoculated hamsters were euthanized at 3, 5 and 7 dpi (for NiV-B only) and lung sections were stained with H&E (A) and for Nipah virus nucleocapsid protein (IHC) (B) Images were taken at a magnification of 100× and 400× (insets). Asterisks denote arteries with vasculitis as demonstrated by recruitment of inflammatory cells with effacement of the tunica intima and tunica media. Open arrows denote areas of acute hemorrhage and closed arrows indicate fibrin deposits.DiscussionNipah virus is a zoonotic pathogen that causes encephalitis and pulmonary disease with a high case fatality rate and is classified as a category C pathogen by the NIAID's pathogen priority list [12]. Two strains of Nipah virus, NiV-M and NiV-B, have been isolated from geographically and temporally separated outbreaks [4]. Human outbreaks caused by these strains differ in disease progression and epidemiologically [23]. The Syrian hamster has been established as a disease model for NiV-M infection [31], [32], but NiV-B infection studies have not been reported for any animal model. The goal of this study was to compare the replication, pathogenesis, and immune response to infection with NiV-M and NiV-B using in vitro and in vivo methods. BHK-21 cells infected with NiV-M showed more severe damage and supported higher virus replication compared to NiV-B-infected cells. Hamsters infected with NiV-B had a delay in disease progression and increased survival rates compared to NiV-M infected animals.
In vitro, BHK-21 cells were permissive for infection by both NiV-M and NiV-B. NiV-M replicated to higher titers in the supernatant at an earlier time point, and infection resulted in widespread syncytia formation causing extensive CPE. Widespread CPE was not observed in NiV-B-infected BHK-21 cells, although a few syncytia were present at later time points. The differences observed in virus replication and syncytia formation could be attributed to either higher viral replication causing more syncytia, or more syncytia formation resulting to higher virus load. Differences in replication efficiency including protein production, viral assembly and budding could explain the higher virus production and large number of syncytia observed in NiV-M infected cultures. Conversely, differences in fusion kinetics could account for disparate amounts of syncytia that then lead to variation in virus replication. The high amount of fusion and syncytia formation in cells could result in the infection of cells that were not initially infected at the low MOIs used in our experiments. This could lead to higher overall levels of virus production. Previous studies using paramyxoviruses have demonstrated that viral spread can occur by cell-cell fusion; the surface proteins of Nipah virus are present at the cell junctions and have been shown to initiate fusion and spread of virus [36]–[38]. Slower fusion kinetics could lead to less and slower formation of syncytia observed in NiV-B infected cells. The affinity of Nipah virus glycoprotein to its receptors, ephrin B2 and B3, as well as the ability of the glycoprotein to trigger the fusion protein could also affect fusion rates. Further experiments need to be completed to examine the relationship between replication and syncytia formation.In our experiments, we chose i.p. as the route of inoculation due to the more uniform disease progression and outcomes described in previous Nipah virus studies [31]. It is likely that i.p. inoculation would more readily allow for the detection of subtle differences between strains that may not be detectable in a less uniform infection route, such as i.n. When infected with NiV-M or NiV-B, hamsters developed clinical signs of disease similar to human infection [2], [13], [31], [39]. The onset of disease and death in hamsters was rapid and occurred between 5–14 dpi, which corresponds to human cases, where symptoms start to develop between 7–10 dpi [15], [40], [41]. We observed earlier replication of NiV-M than NiV-B in all organ types sampled, although, once NiV-B RNA was detected, it reached similar values within two days. Earlier replication of NiV-M in tissues corresponded with earlier pathologic changes and accelerated disease and death compared to NiV-B infection. In humans, CNS pathology is documented, but in our comparative pathology experiment, we did not observe pathology in the CNS. This is likely attributed to the high dose of inoculum for the pathology experiment (105 TCID50) and route of inoculation (i.p.). However, we did observe pathology in the lungs consisting of multifocal subacute bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis. The pneumonia was characterized by inflammation in the terminal bronchioles and alveoli spaces, necrosis, hemorrhage, fibrin deposits, edema and syncytia in endothelial cells. In human cases, fibrinoid necrosis, vasculitis, pulmonary edema, alveoli hemorrhaging, and syncytia were documented [13], [15], [40]. It is probable that hamsters inoculated with this high dose (105 TCID50) succumbed to infection due to inflammation, edema, and widespread vasculitis in the lungs that caused interstitial pneumonia. Even with low levels of viral antigen, pathology was severe enough to cause a fatal outcome.The typical dose that humans are infected with, as well as the route of infection is not known. In hamsters, both virus strains caused respiratory distress and/or neurological dysfunction in a dose-dependent manner. Based on previous data in hamsters, it is likely that dose and route of infection might play a role in Nipah virus outcome in humans [32]. Disease progression could be altered by the transmission route, which could include fomite [18], [42], oral ingestion [17], [43], and respiratory droplets [42], [44], [45]. In this study, inoculation of hamsters with NiV-B resulted in a delay in disease progression and the LD50 was approximately a log higher compared to NiV-M. However these data are contrary to what has been reported in humans, where NiV-B results in higher case fatality rates compared to NiV-M. Since we did not observe a difference in disease that would explain differences in the epidemiological data for the two Nipah virus strains, factors other than the intrinsic pathogenicity likely contribute to the disparities in the documented epidemiological data. The suboptimal health care, lack of supportive care and inconsistencies in reporting could account for higher documented case fatality rates and differences in disease manifestations during NiV-B outbreaks [16].Cytokine and chemokine mRNAs were quantitated in the hamsters over the course of infection and several immune genes were upregulated in the lung, brain, and spleen, although there was a slight downregulation of some genes in the spleen. NiV-M induced an earlier and more robust immune response compared to NiV-B, which eventually reached similar levels to hamsters infected with NiV-M. Early TNF activation during NiV-M infection may contribute to recruitment of inflammatory cells, as observed in the lungs of infected hamsters by histopathology. The upregulation of IP-10 in the lungs coincided with lymphocyte recruitment, appearance of vascular damage, and necrosis in the lungs. IP-10 upregulation has been documented in other Nipah virus studies, specifically focusing on endothelial cells [46], [47]. Teruya-Feldstein et al reported that high levels of IP-10 are found in necrotic tissue and in areas of vascular damage associated with Epstein-Barr virus-positive lymphoproliferative processes in mice [48]. They demonstrated a correlation between IP-10 regulation, tissue necrosis, and vascular damage during viral infection. Similarly, IP-10 is upregulated in the airways of patients with pulmonary diseases such as tuberculosis and plays a role in recruitment of activated T cells [49]. IL-6 gene expression was increased earlier in the lung in NiV-M compared to NiV-B infected hamsters. IL-6 activates T cells [50] and the recruitment of T cells likely contributed to the widespread vasculitis associated with Nipah virus infection and disease. Recruitment of lymphocytes could also be a way for Nipah virus to disseminate throughout the host, as it has recently been published that lymphocytes and monocytes can carry virus without becoming infected and release virus at distant sites from the original infection [51], [52]. In the lungs, IL-4 was also upregulated, following similar kinetics than IL-6. IL-4 promotes differentiation of B cells, and is upregulated is indicative of the activation of a Th2 response [53]. However, during disease, specific antibody production would not occur fast enough, since animals succumb to infection before significant antibody production can likely occur. Due to the use of the hamster as a model, we are limited in the amount of reagents available for a detailed examination of the immune response and future work is needed to get a more complete picture of the immune response to Nipah virus infection. In general NiV-M infection caused earlier induction of immune genes which probably corresponds to the earlier pathology observed. It is possible that the strong early immune response in Nipah virus-infected animals might contribute to disease via an immunopathogenic mechanism.In conclusion, there is a delay in NiV-B-induced disease progression compared to NiV-M, specifically in time to death, virus replication, pathology and immune responses. NiV-M is more cytopathic in vitro and more pathogenic in vivo. Viral antigen staining was low in tissues, although the pathologic changes were extensive and the inflammatory response was robust, suggesting disease progression may not only be a result of direct effects of the virus, but likely has an immunopathogenic component. The experimental data presented herein characterizes the hamster as a suitable small animal model for NiV-B infection, showing clinical signs, viral tropism, and pathologic changes similar to those observed in humans. These data are important to further the understanding of Nipah virus infection and pathogenesis. By applying the hamster model for NiV-B this allows for future studies in transmission, pathology and therapeutics, specifically focusing on the Nipah virus strain responsible for recent outbreaks.Supporting InformationFigure S1
Hamsters inoculated intranasally with NiV-B show delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M-inoculated hamsters. Groups of 5 hamsters were inoculated i.n. with 105 TCID50. The hamsters were monitored for survival. A log- rank test was used to compare survival curves (* = p<0.05). NiV-B infected animals had a mean time to death of 11.6 days and NiV-M infected animals 9.4 days.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Development of a reverse genetics system for Sosuga virus allows rapid screening of antiviral compounds

IntroductionThe Paramxyoviridae (order Mononegavirales) represent a diverse family of viruses, many of which, such as measles virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and mumps virus, are significant human pathogens [1]. Within this family, bat-borne paramyxoviruses have previously been recognized as potential novel zoonotics with the ability to spill over into the human population and cause disease [2–4]. The 2 bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses with the greatest public health impact to date are Hendra (HeV) and Nipah (NiV) viruses, which together comprise the Henipavirus genus and are vectored by fruit bats of the Pteropus genus [5]. First recognized in 1994, HeV infections in both domestic horses and humans have occurred sporadically [6,7], while NiV infections in Bangladesh, India, and Malaysia have resulted in over 600 human infections to date [8].Sosuga virus (SOSV) is a recently discovered zoonotic paramyxovirus [9]. It was first identified from a single clinical case in 2012, when a wildlife researcher who conducted a 6-week field expedition in South Sudan and Uganda presented with fever, generalized myalgia and arthralgia, neck stiffness, and a sore throat shortly upon returning to the USA [10]. The patient was hospitalized as symptoms worsened, including the development of a confluent maculopapular rash; after 14 days, all symptoms had sufficiently resolved to allow discharge. After several differential diagnoses were ruled out, sequence analysis revealed the presence of a novel rubula-like paramyxovirus in samples taken from the patient, from which the virus was later isolated. Further ecological and epidemiological investigations revealed Egyptian rousette bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus) as the likely reservoir for the virus, with this case representing a single spillover event into humans [11]. While only one case of SOSV infection has been confirmed to date, its detection in bat populations sampled over a 3-year period at multiple geographic locations in Uganda means that the possibility exists for future spillover events into the human population [11].Reverse genetics systems allow for precise manipulation of viral genomes, and the ability to modify them to suit the required application. One such application is the generation of recombinant viruses expressing reporter proteins that facilitate indirect quantification of viral replication in infected cells. However, for pathogenic viruses such as SOSV, which require manipulation under high biocontainment levels, minigenome-based assays are also valuable surrogates that recapitulate viral replication and transcriptional processes without generating infectious particles. Here we describe a reverse genetics system for SOSV that can be used to rapidly screen for compounds that inhibit viral replication. An initial minigenome screen performed under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) biocontainment was used to identify only those compounds with potential antiviral activity, which were then assessed for their ability to inhibit authentic viral replication processes using the reporter SOSV at BSL-3. As well as screening for antiviral compounds, these reverse genetics system will provide a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis in both in vitro and in vivo systems.Materials and methodsCellsHuh7 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. BSR-T7/5 (generous gifts from Klaus Conzelmann, Germany), BHK-1 (ATCC, USA), and Vero-E6 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.Reverse genetics: Minigenome assay and rescue of recombinant virusesThe SOSV minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I promoter-based plasmid (S1 Fig., Genbank #MG880223), and transfected into Huh7 cells in conjunction with Pol-II expression plasmids (pCAGGS) supplying SOSV polymerase (L), nucleoprotein (NP), and phosphoprotein (P) proteins in trans. The minigenome assay was performed in a 96-well plate on cells seeded at 2 × 104 cells per well, with the following amounts of plasmids (150 ng total) transfected per well: 75 ng minigenome, 12.5 ng L, 50 ng NP, and 12.5 ng P. Minigenome activity was based on ZsGreen1 (ZsG) fluorescence levels determined at 72 h post transfection (hpt). To rescue recombinant virus, a T7 promoter-based plasmid containing full-length anti-genomic sense SOSV (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880224) was constructed. To rescue the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG, a modified genome was constructed in which the M open reading frame (ORF) was replaced with one encoding ZsG-P2A-M, leaving the M gene start and gene end intact (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880225). Virus rescue was performed in 6-well plates seeded with BSR-T7 cells (approximately 70% confluent) transfected with genome plasmid in conjunction with the SOSV-L, -NP, and -P expression plasmids (2 μg genome, 1 μg SOSV-L, 0.5 μg SOSV-NP, and 0.25 μg SOSV-P). At 96 hpt, cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified by low-speed centrifugation, and used to infect BHK-21 cells. At 96 h post infection (hpi), cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified, and titered by tissue culture infective dose 50 (TCID50) assays in Vero-E6 cells based on crystal violet visualization of cytopathic effects [12].Antiviral compound screeningAll compounds were obtained from either Selleckchem (Houston, TX, USA) or Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA) with the exception of T-705 (BOC Sciences, Shirley, NY, USA) and 09167 (Vitas-M Laboratory, Champaign, IL, USA). For both screening assays, Huh7 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at 2 × 104 cells per well 16–20 h prior to treatment with DMSO-diluted compounds (final DMSO concentration 0.5%). For the minigenome screening assay, cells were transfected with the required plasmids using TransIT- LT-1 (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI, USA) 1 h post treatment. Total ZsG fluorescence was determined 72 hpt using a microplate reader (H1MD, BioTek Synergy, Winooski, VT, USA), with levels recorded at a height of 6 mm with 75 gain/sensitivity. ZsG levels were normalized to levels in mock-treated cells. For the reporter and wild-type screening assays, cells were infected 1 h post treatment with either rSOSV/ZsG or rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, supernatants were collected (rSOSV-infected cells) for titer determination, or total ZsG fluorescence in the infected cell monolayer determined (rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells) using a H1MD plate reader (height 6 mm; 100 gain/sensitivity). For both assays, cell viability was determined by measuring ATP content in parallel with compound-treated, mock-transfected/infected cells using CellTiter-Glo 2.0 (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). All experiments were performed in quadruplicate and repeated at least 3 times.Microscopy and high-content imagingZsG fluorescence in infected cells was imaged directly using an EVOS digital inverted microscope (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). For immunofluorescence, cells were fixed in 10% formalin for 30 min, permeabilized in PBS containing 0.1% Triton-X100 (v/v) for 10 min, and blocked with PBS 5% BSA (v/v) for 30 min. Primary antibody was rabbit α-SOSV NP (Genscript, Waltham, MA, USA), visualized with an AlexaFluor 488-labeled secondary antibody (Thermo-Fisher, #A11034). Quantification of total rSOSV protein production in Huh7 cells was performed on infected cells labeled as described above, and further stained with Nuc-Blue and Cell-Mask Red (Thermo-Fisher). Images were collected on the Operetta high-content imaging system (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA) using a 20× objective, with 16 fields per well analyzed using the Harmony software package (PerkinElmer). Total 488 fluorescence per field was determined, averaged for the well, and then normalized to values from control wells containing rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells.Data analysisZsG fluorescence values for compound-treated, rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells were normalized to those in mock-treated (DMSO only) cells, and used to fit a 4-parameter equation to semilog plots of the concentration-response data. From this, the compound concentrations inhibiting 50% of the ZsG expression (50% effective concentration, EC50) were interpolated. Cell viability was similarly calculated in compound-treated, mock-infected cells to determine the 50% cell cytotoxicity concentration (CC50) of each compound. The selectivity index (SI) was calculated by dividing the CC50 by the EC50. Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism v7. Suitability for high-throughput screening was determined using the Z prime (Z′) score, a measure of statistical effect size, with values between 0.5 and 1.0 considered acceptable [13].Accession numbersSOSV Minigenome plasmid; pSOSV MG; Genbank # MG880223Rescue plasmid for rSOSV; pSOSV FL; Genbank #MG880224Rescue plasmid for rSOSV/ZsG; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225ResultsScreening of antiviral compounds using a SOSV minigenome assayWe constructed a SOSV minigenome segment containing the parental SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for NP and the gene end sequence for L. All internal coding sequences and intergenic regions were replaced with the coding sequence for ZsGreen1 (ZsG), a green fluorescent protein (Fig 1A). Protein expression plasmids under control of the Pol-II promoter (pCAGGS) allowed in trans expression of SOSV NP, L, and P, the minimum requirement to initiate paramyxovirus replication and transcription [1]. The minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I expression plasmid in the negative orientation, meaning it has to be replicated first by the NP + L + P replication complex before transcription of ZsG mRNA can occur.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g001Fig 1Design and optimization of the Sosuga virus minigenome screening assay.a. Genome schematic representing the design of the Sosuga virus (SOSV) minigenome segment. The minigenome contains the full-length SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for nucleoprotein (NP) and the gene end sequence for the viral polymerase (L), with the parental coding and intergenic regions replaced by the coding sequence of ZsGreen1 (ZsG). Transfected into cells in conjunction with plasmids expressing SOSV L, NP, and phosphoprotein (P), this minigenome allows for expression of quantifiable ZsG. b. The minigenome assay was optimized for Huh7 cells in a 96-well plate format using different ratios of the plasmids expressing L, NP, and P with a constant amount of minigenome plasmid. Cells were transfected with 75 ng minigenome plasmid and 75 ng total of plasmids expressing L, NP, and P, with ratios of each stated underneath the bars. Relative ZsG fluorescence over control reactions with no L was calculated at 48 and 72 h post transfection (hpt). c. Dose-response curve for the optimized SOSV minigenome assay against ribavirin. Cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 hpt with the minigenome plasmids, and ZsG fluorescence was measured at 72 hpt. ZsG fluorescence (green) was normalized to mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-transfected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments.Next, the SOSV minigenome screen was optimized to achieve maximum reporter protein expression with the greatest signal-to-noise ratio in a 96-well plate format using Huh7 cells. Huh7 cells have previously proven useful for evaluating nucleoside analog activity against other viruses, and are highly permissive to SOSV infection [14–17]. Alongside a constant amount of minigenome plasmid, differing ratios of pCAGGS-L, -NP, and -P were transfected, and ZsG fluorescence was determined at both 48 and 72 hpt (Fig 1B). We determined the optimal ratio of plasmids for the assay to be 6:1:4:1 of genome, pCAGGS-L, -NP, and–P respectively, with ZsG fluorescence read at 72 hpt. To determine whether the optimized minigenome assay was suitable for screening antiviral compounds, we used the broad-spectrum antiviral ribavirin. Using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control and DMSO as the vehicle-only control, the Z′ score of the assay was 0.58. Dose-dependent reduction of ZsG fluorescence was also observed in the SOSV minigenome assay using a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin, giving an EC50 of 5.91 ± 0.85 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 1C). These data indicated that the assay was robust, and suitable for screening anti-SOSV compounds at BSL-2.As minigenome assays can be used as surrogates for measuring viral replication and transcription, we evaluated a panel of 40 compounds predicted to inhibit these processes. These were a collection of nucleoside analogs supplemented with other select compounds reported to inhibit viral replication. Compounds were initially screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content (S1 Table). Compounds inhibiting the minigenome by >50% whilst retaining >80% cell viability were then chosen for further analysis; these were 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 5-fluorouridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), and 6-azauridine. Dose-response analysis of these compounds demonstrated that both 2′-dFC and 6-azauridine inhibited minigenome activity in the absence of cell toxicity, with EC50 values of 1.31 ± 0.15 μM and 5.17 ± 1.01 μM, respectively (Fig 2). While 5-fluorouridine was not cytotoxic at the concentrations evaluated, it did not completely inhibit minigenome signal even at the highest concentrations evaluated, and was therefore dropped at this point. MPA inhibited minigenome activity at sub-micromolar concentrations, but was cytotoxic at higher concentrations. However, with an SI of 7, it was incorporated into the secondary virus screen to determine if a larger therapeutic window became apparent in the context of authentic viral replication.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g002Fig 2Dose-response curves for selected compounds using the minigenome assay.Compounds selected during the initial screen as potential SOSV antivirals were assessed by concentration-response curves using serial 2-fold dilutions of each compound. ZsG fluorescence (green) at 48 hpt was normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to those in mock-transfected cells. Graphs are representative of at least 3 independent experiments. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with errors bars indicating the standard deviation.Design and rescue of a reporter SOSV expressing a fluorescent proteinThe single-stranded, negative-sense RNA genome of SOSV encodes 6 genes to express 7 proteins, with 1 protein generated by V/P gene mRNA editing. The intergenic regions of SOSV contain transcriptional promoter and terminator sequences. We cloned the full-length SOSV genome into an expression plasmid under control of the T7 polymerase promoter. When transfected into cells and supplied with SOSV P, NP, L, and T7 polymerase in trans, this system successfully generated infectious recombinant SOSV (rSOSV). After optimizing the rSOSV rescue system, we designed another recombinant SOSV genome capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter protein in infected cells. Previous approaches to develop recombinant paramyxoviruses expressing reporter genes have included the reporter as either a separate open reading frame (ORF), or incorporated it within a parental ORF [18–22]. We employed the latter approach, and generated a SOSV genome in which the ZsG ORF was inserted upstream of the M ORF, fused to the viral protein via the self-cleaving P2A motif taken from porcine teschovirus 1 [23]. The authentic SOSV M gene start and gene end sequences therefore transcribe a single mRNA encoding the ORF for both M and ZsG, which, upon translation, results in the expression of 2 separate proteins via the P2A ribosomal skipping motif. Incorporation of this recombinant SOSV genome into the previously described SOSV rescue system (Fig 3A) resulted in the successful rescue of the reporter SOSV (rSOSV/ZsG).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g003Fig 3Optimization of an antiviral screening assay using a recombinant SOSV expressing ZsG.a. Schematic representation of the wild-type recombinant SOSV (rSOSV), and the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG (rSOSV/ZsG). The ZsG coding sequence was inserted immediately 5′ of the M coding sequence (antigenomic sense), separated from the viral protein by the P2A sequence from porcine teschovirus 1. This self-cleaving amino acid motif allows expression of both ZsG and M from a single mRNA generated by the parental SOSV M promoter and terminator sequences. b. Vero-E6 cells infected with either rSOSV or rSOSV/ZsG at 72 hpi showing formation of syncytia. In rSOSV/ZsG-infected cell monolayers, syncytia were associated with extensive ZsG expression (images taken at 4 × magnification). c. Growth curves for wild-type SOSV, rSOSV, and rSOSV/ZsG were performed in Vero-E6 cells infected at MOI 0.1. Titers (TCID50) were determined at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. d. The optimized rSOSV/ZsG antiviral screening assay was validated using ribavirin. Huh7 cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 h prior to infection at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 72 hpi and normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph representative of 3 independent experiments.Infecting Vero-E6 cells with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.1 resulted in extensive syncytia formation in the cell monolayer similar to infection with rSOSV, with strong ZsG fluorescence detectable in these infected cells (Fig 3B). To compare growth kinetics of the recombinant viruses, Vero-E6 cells were infected with rSOSV, rSOSV/ZsG, or wild-type SOSV at MOI 0.1, with titers determined by TCID50 at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. All 3 viruses grew to similar titers over the 120 h time course, with no attenuation apparent in either of the recombinant viruses compared to the wild-type (Fig 3C). This indicated that incorporation of the ZsG ORF into the SOSV genome did not negatively impact the virus phenotype. To assess whether rSOSV/ZsG could be used to confirm antiviral activity of a compound by measuring the reduction in ZsG fluorescence in treated cells, we optimized a screening assay in Huh7 cells using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control; the resultant Z′ score was 0.74, indicating a robust assay. A concentration-response curve using a 2-fold serial dilution of ribavirin demonstrated dose-dependent reduction in ZsG fluorescence in rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells, giving an EC50 of 6.10 ± 0.09 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 3D).Screening of candidate antiviral compounds with recombinant virusesTo confirm the inhibitory effect of 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, and MPA in the context of authentic viral replication, we performed counter-screening with rSOSV/ZsG. Alongside these 3 compounds, we included 09167, an antagonist of the innate immune system that was shown to inhibit NiV and other paramyxoviruses in a similar screening assay [22,24]. Huh7 cells were treated with compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at an MOI of 0.2, with ZsG fluorescence read 48 hpi. All 3 compounds reduced ZsG expression in a dose-dependent manner, with EC50 values similar to those observed during the minigenome screen (Fig 4A). 2′-dFC (EC50 = 1.48 ± 0.22 μM) and 6-azauridine (EC50 = 7.99 ± 1.32 μM) potently inhibited ZsG fluorescence without cytotoxicity at the highest compound concentrations. While MPA had an EC50 value of 0.33 ± 0.04 μM, similar to that obtained in the minigenome screen, it again had a low SI of 5 due to its cytotoxicity at higher concentrations (Table 1). The 0.67 ± 0.05 μM EC50 value of 09167 was consistent with the sub-micromolar concentrations used to inhibit other paramyxoviruses, indicating that SOSV was similarly sensitive to this compound [24].10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g004Fig 4Using SOSV/ZsG as a tool to screen antiviral compounds.a. Representative concentration-response curves of Huh7 cells treated with 2-fold serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 48 hpi and normalized to mock-treated cells. Cell viability was assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue), with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments. b. Confirmatory counter-screening of each compound with wild-type rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 2 days post infection cells were fixed, and SOSV proteins stained and quantified using immunofluorescence microscopy. Relative fluorescence (red; total fluorescence normalized to mock-treated cells) in each well was determined, with cell viability assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue). Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation. Values stated are the 50% effective concentration (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentration (CC50), and selectivity index (SI).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.t001Table 1Selected compounds’ 50% effective concentrations (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentrations (CC50), and selectivity indices (SI) determined by minigenome and reporter virus screening assays.CompoundMinigenome ScreenrSOSV/ZsG ScreenCC50Compound ClassEC50SIEC50SIRibavirin5.91 ± 0.85> 86.10 ± 0.09> 8> 50.0Nucleoside analog2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine1.31 ± 0.15> 381.48 ± 0.22> 33> 50.0Nucleoside analog5-fluorouridine0.29 ± 0.13> 172NTNT> 50.0Nucleoside analogMycophenolic acid± 0.0670.33 ± 0.0451.74 ± 0.42IMPDH inhibitor6-azauridine5.17 ± 1.01> 97.99 ± 1.32> 6> 50.0Nucleoside analog09167NTNT0.67 ± 0.05> 74>50.0Innate immune antagonistNT, not tested; IMPDH, inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase. All values in μM ± standard deviation from at least 3 independent experiments.To ensure the validity of using the ZsG-expressing virus to accurately identify specific inhibitors, we investigated whether these compounds also inhibited the replication of rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, MPA, or 09167, and infected with rSOSV (MOI = 0.2) 1 h post treatment. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and total SOSV protein production was visualized using rSOSV-specific and fluorescently labelled antibodies. Total fluorescence due to rSOSV protein staining per well (average of 16 analyzed fields per well) was normalized to rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells, allowing determination of the relative reduction in virus replication due to the inhibitory effects of each compound. All compounds tested reduced rSOSV protein production in a dose-dependent manner, indicating inhibition of viral replication and growth (Fig 4B). Direct visualization of the compound-treated rSOSV infected cell monolayers clearly demonstrated the reduction in viral protein production, and also demonstrated the ability of rSOSV to form extensive syncytia in Huh7 cells at sub-optimal concentrations of compound (Fig 5). These results indicate that inhibition caused by the compounds is indeed due to a SOSV-specific mechanism, rather than one unique to the ZsG-expressing recombinant.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g005Fig 5Immunofluorescent imaging of rSOSV infected Huh7 cells treated with selected antiviral compounds.Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of either 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 6-azauridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), or 09167 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and SOSV proteins (green) and cell nuclei (blue) visualized by immunofluorescence. Concentration of compound is shown in white text on each representative image (mM); control cells were treated with DMSO only. Images taken using a 20 × objective. White bar represents 100 μm.DiscussionThat SOSV, a previously unknown paramyxovirus vectored by bats, could cause severe disease in humans is not unexpected, given that bats are increasingly implicated as sources of novel zoonotic infections [3,25–27]. A recent study focusing on only 10% of bat species in relatively small geographic areas discovered evidence of 66 novel paramyxoviruses [28], so undiscovered pathogens with the capacity to threaten human health may yet be present in bat populations worldwide. With reverse genetics systems already developed for the highly pathogenic paramyxoviruses NiV and HeV, the establishment of SOSV reverse genetics based on similar design concepts ensures that any investigations into future outbreaks can be quickly initiated [20,21,29]. Furthermore, a common feature of paramyxoviruses appears to be that expression of reporter genes does not negatively affect the viral phenotype either in vitro or in vivo, increasing the usefulness of these systems [21,22,30,31]. The minigenome screening methods described here were successfully used to identify several compounds that inhibit SOSV replication. We were then able to confirm the antiviral activity of candidate compounds by using the reporter virus screen. While the minigenome screen is useful for identifying compounds that inhibit viral replication and transcription, the reporter virus screen can be utilized to identify other compounds, especially those that affect other viral life cycle processes, such as cell tropism, entry, budding, and transmission.The antiviral activity of 6-azauridine and its derivatives toward several viruses has been reported, including for viruses closely related to SOSV, such as NiV, measles, and human parainfluenza virus 3 [22,32,33]. In a clinical setting, the derivative 6-azauridine triacetate has been used therapeutically to treat severe psoriasis for over 40 years, with minimal side effects observed at a dosage level of 125 mg/kg/day [34,35]. Encouragingly, research also shows that at that dose, plasma concentrations in human subjects reach 100 μM or greater, with successive doses over several days maintaining this level [36]. This is far in excess of the 5.17 μM EC50 for 6-azauridine reported here, so the potential usefulness in treating SOSV even at lower and less frequent doses should be further evaluated. 2′-dFC has been shown to potently inhibit several other negative strand viruses, including influenza and hepatitis C virus [37,38], although concerns over mitochondrial toxicity have limited the therapeutic use of 2′-dFC and its derivatives to date [39]. However, the potent antiviral activity of 2′-dFC makes worthwhile to investigate whether other 2′-deoxynucleoside analogs have similar antiviral activity against SOSV in the absence of toxicity.The antiviral activity demonstrated by ribavirin was expected, and has been reported previously for NiV [22,40,41]. Ribavirin has also been used to treat human patients during a non-randomized, unblinded limited clinical trial during an NiV outbreak in Malaysia in 1998–1999; mortality was reduced by 37% in the treated group [42]. However, its effectiveness when used in NiV animal models is less clear [40,43,44]. A similar discrepancy between in vivo and in vitro potency of these compounds may exist for SOSV, although this will remain unclear until a suitable SOSV animal model is developed. Promisingly, the limiting factor to henipavirus treatment effectiveness appears to be the compound’s ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Ribavirin treatment in a non-human primate model of HeV infection reduced viral loads to levels low enough to prevent development of the respiratory signs of infection, but not to prevent spread to the central nervous system [44]. As ribavirin cannot cross the BBB, the disease then manifested as neurological signs. However, no neurological symptoms were reported from the one SOSV case to date, so nucleoside analogs such as ribavirin, 6-azauridine, and 2′-dFC may be more effective treatment options for this disease.In conclusion, we have developed a minigenome assay to investigate SOSV replication and transcriptional processes, as well as a rescue system to recover infectious recombinant virus. We used this system to rescue a recombinant SOSV capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter in infected cells with no loss of fitness compared to parental virus. A high-throughput screen using both systems identified 3 compounds that inhibited SOSV replication with acceptable SI values, providing information that may help direct therapeutic options for any future cases of SOSV. Finally, as well as being a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis, the minigenome and reporter systems may help us better understand the potential public health threats posed by bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses, and provide strategies on best combating these emerging threats.Supporting informationS1 FigPlasmids use in the SOSV minigenome assay.The SOSV minigenome (mg) segment, containing the SOSV leader sequence and gene start for the nucleoprotein ORF, the ZsGreen1 ORF (ZsG), the polymerase ORF gene end, and the SOSV trailer sequence (Genbank #MG880223). Expression is controlled RNA-polymerase I promoter (pol I prom) and a RNA-polymerase I terminator sequences (pol I term).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigPlasmids used in the rescue of rSOSV (pSOSV FL) and rSOSV/ZsG (pSOSV/ZsG FL).Red arrows represent full-length viral genome, blue arrows represent viral protein open reading frames: NP–nucleoprotein; P–phosphoprotein; V–V protein; M–matrix protein; F–fusion protein; HN–hemagglutinin-neuraminidase; L–polymerase. Green arrow represents ZsGreen1 (ZsG) open reading frame. T7 prom–T7 polymerase promoter; HDV Rz–Hepatitis D virus ribozyme; T7term–T7 polymerase terminator; P2A –nucleotide sequence encoding the self-cleaving amino acid motif from porcine teschovirus 1. Sequences available at: pSOSV FL, Genbank #MG880224; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableScreening a panel of selected compounds for inhibition of SOSV minigenome in Huh7 cells.Compounds were screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


Title: Illumination of Parainfluenza Virus Infection and Transmission in Living Animals Reveals a Tissue-Specific Dichotomy

IntroductionThe parainfluenza viruses (PIVs) are non-segmented, negative-strand RNA viruses of the family Paramyxoviridae. The paramyxoviruses include not only the PIVs but also a number of other important human pathogens transmitted via the respiratory route such as human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV), metapneumovirus, measles virus, and mumps virus [1], [2]. The human PIVs (HPIVs) consist of four serotypes (HPIV1-4), are a common cause of upper respiratory tract (URT) infections, and are a leading cause of lower respiratory tract (LRT) disease in infants and children [3]. The HPIVs are efficiently transmitted by direct contact and exposure to nasopharyngeal secretions [4], and nearly all children are infected with HPIV3 by age 2 and with HPIV1 and HPIV2 by age 5 [5], [6]. No licensed anti-PIV vaccines or drugs are available, and therefore non-pharmaceutical interventions are currently the only means of control. In view of these facts, an understanding of how PIV infection spreads within the respiratory tract, promotes pathogenesis, elicits immunity, and is transmitted to naïve hosts would greatly advance the development of novel vaccines and therapeutics.Experimental studies of HPIV infection in tissue culture and animal models have helped reveal basic replication mechanisms and evaluate preclinical vaccine candidates [7]–[9]. However, knowledge about the spread of PIV infection in individual, living animals that are fully susceptible to PIV-associated disease would allow more thorough investigations of PIV virus-host interactions and transmission. Mice are poorly permissive to infection by the HPIVs, and HPIV infection in cotton rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, and ferrets is usually asymptomatic with minimal or undetectable pathology [1]. As a result, a number of studies have used Sendai virus (SeV) infection of mice as a model to investigate pathogenesis in an experimental setting [10], [11]. SeV is the murine counterpart of HPIV1, the leading cause of laryngotracheobronchitis (pediatric croup) [12]. SeV and HPIV1 have 78% amino-acid sequence identity [13], elicit cross-protective immunity [14]–[16], and have similar tissue tropism and epidemiology [1], [11]. Moreover, SeV shows promise as a Jennerian vaccine for HPIV1 [17] and as a vaccine vector for HRSV, HPIV3, and HPIV2 [18]–[20].Although SeV and the HPIVs were first isolated in the 1950s and have been studied for more than 50 years [1], fundamental aspects of PIV infection and immunity that remain unknown are directly relevant to our understanding of pathogenesis and transmission. For example, the spatial and temporal spread of natural infection in the respiratory tract after SeV transmission remains poorly understood because of the ambiguous results (marked inter-animal variability and error) of classical experiments measuring virus titers in sacrificed mice [21], [22]. It is also unknown how HPIV and SeV infection after transmission often results in immunity without causing severe pathology. The contribution of LRT infection to transmission is unknown. Finally, while infection of the lungs and the concomitant immune response are clearly associated with disease severity [1], [11], [23], [24], many questions remain about the contribution of infection in the URT and trachea to clinical outcome and protective immunity [25], [26]. For example, we are unaware of any reports of studies investigating the effect of the dose of virus inoculum, the replicative fitness of the virus, or the genetic susceptibility of the host on the growth and clearance of SeV in the URT and trachea.To measure the dynamics of PIV infection in living animals, we generated three luciferase-expressing SeVs that allow non-invasive in vivo bioluminescence imaging in mice. Analogous systems have previously been reported for DNA and positive-strand RNA viruses [27] but have been elusive for negative-strand RNA viruses, largely due to virus attenuation [28] or genetic instability resulting from reporter gene insertion [29]. We considered SeV an ideal candidate for non-invasive imaging because (i) foreign-gene expression by paramyxovirus vectors is usually genetically stable [30], (ii) in vivo imaging of a non-replicating SeV in intact mice has been successfully demonstrated [31] and (iii) the match of SeV and the murine host allows pathogenesis studies [11]. The reporter virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) described here was found to express high levels of luciferase yet replicate and promote disease in mice similar to wild-type (WT) virus. We imaged the dynamics of SeV infection in living, intact mice after direct inoculation and after contact transmission, varying both the virus dose and mouse strain. Unexpectedly, we observed a dichotomous tissue tropism in which the URT and trachea supported robust virus growth, efficient transmission, and protective immunity even under conditions that resulted in little infection in the lungs.Results
In vitro properties of luciferase-expressing virusesTo develop a model in which PIV infection could be visualized non-invasively in living, intact mice, we generated three recombinant Sendai viruses (rSeVs) in which a firefly luciferase reporter gene was inserted into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions, respectively, of SeV (Figure 1A, Figure S1). Insertion of the firefly luciferase gene and gene junction into the SeV genome was expected to unacceptably decrease downstream viral gene expression and, consequently, virus replication [32]. To generate a luciferase-expressing SeV expected to suffer little or no attenuation, the rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus was constructed to contain both the luciferase reporter gene and a more efficient transcription start sequence AGGGTGAAAG upstream of the F gene (Figure S1). Therefore, the attenuating effects of reporter gene insertion could be counteracted by optimization of the naturally inefficient gene start sequence upstream of the F gene [33]. For the rSeV-luc(P-M) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) constructs, in which the luciferase gene was inserted into the P-M and F-HN gene junctions, respectively, the natural transcription start sequence upstream of the F gene was left intact (Figure S1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g001Figure 1
In vitro and in vivo phenotypes of luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses.(A) Recombinant Sendai viruses that contain the firefly luciferase gene (luc) inserted into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions were generated. (B) Multiple-step replication kinetics of wild-type (WT) and luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses in LLC-MK2 cell cultures infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 PFU/cell and incubated at 33°C (closed symbols) and 37°C (open symbols). (C) Kinetics of luciferase reporter gene expression in LLC-MK2 cells infected with recombinant Sendai viruses at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell, as measured by luminescence. (D) Changes in mean body weight after intranasal inoculation of Sendai viruses. (E) Percent survival after intranasal inoculation of Sendai viruses. (F) Total lymphocyte counts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) 10 days after infection. (G) Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers in sera collected 10 days after infection, as measured by reciprocal endpoint dilutions in ELISA assays. For panels D–G, groups of five 8-week-old 129/SvJ-strain mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus or phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and the experiments were performed twice. Cumulative data are shown in panels D and E, and representative data are shown in panels F and G.Multiple-step growth curves were measured at 33°C and 37°C in LLC-MK2 cells that had been infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 PFU/cell (Figure 1B). Titers of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) were similar at both temperatures and similar to SeV WT, showing that these two luciferase-expressing viruses were not substantially attenuated or temperature restricted. In contrast, the rSeV-luc(P-M) virus showed reduced growth kinetics at 33°C and grew even more slowly at 37°C. To compare luciferase reporter gene expression by the recombinant SeVs, we measured in vitro luciferase activity in LLC-MK2 cell lysates (MOI 5 PFU/cell) (Figure 1C). Upstream insertion of luciferase in rSeV-luc(P-M) resulted in greater luciferase activity than did downstream insertion in rSeV-luc(F-HN), consistent with the results of previous studies of SeVs using secreted alkaline phosphatase as the reporter gene [32]. Luciferase expression by rSeV-luc(M-F*) exceeded that of rSeV-luc(P-M) within 6 h post-infection (p.i.), showing that the enhanced gene start sequence engineered into the M-F* virus (Figure S1) increased reporter-gene transcription at later time points, perhaps due to greater downstream transcription of the L polymerase gene. To determine how the reporter gene insertions might have altered SeV protein expression, LLC-MK2 cells were infected at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell and lysates were subjected to radioimmunoprecipitation and SDS-PAGE analysis. Low levels of expression of the M, F, HN and presumably L proteins by the rSeV-luc(P-M) virus (Figure S2A) most likely contributed to the attenuation of this virus. Viral protein expression by rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) was sufficient to generate virions with WT-like compositions (Figure S2C), consistent with the in vitro growth of these two reporter viruses to levels similar to that of WT virus (Figure 1B).Virulence of the luciferase-expressing virusesAn ideal luciferase-reporter virus for non-invasive bioluminescence imaging and pathogenesis studies would express high levels of luciferase without altering virus replication and disease severity. To assess the virulence of the luciferase-expressing SeVs, 129/SvJ mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and inoculated intranasally with 30 µl containing 7,000 PFU of virus. This method of inoculation delivers ∼1/3 of the volume to the nasopharynx and ∼1/2 to the lungs [34]. Infection with SeV WT, rSeV-luc(M-F*), and rSeV-luc(F-HN) resulted in a mean weight loss of ∼25% and mean mortality rates of 80% (Figure 1D,E). Thus, these two luciferase-expressing viruses remained fully virulent at a dose of 7,000 PFU. In contrast, 129/SvJ mice inoculated with 7,000 PFU of the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus experienced only 12% weight loss and no mortality. All mice inoculated with 70,000 or 700,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(P-M) also survived (data not shown), further demonstrating that the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus is avirulent.Acute viral pneumonia by SeV induces high levels of lymphocyte infiltration that show a peak in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) at ∼10 d p.i. [35]. To compare lymphocyte influx caused by the luciferase-expressing viruses and WT virus, we sacrificed 129/SvJ mice that had been infected with 7,000 PFU at 10 d p.i. and collected BALF. Similarly large total numbers of lymphocytes, CD4+ T-lymphocytes, and CD8+ T-lymphocytes were detected in BALF after infection with WT, rSeV-luc(M-F*), or rSeV-luc(F-HN) virus (Figure 1F; Figure S3A–B), whereas mice inoculated with the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) had total lymphocyte counts only 10% as high. To determine the extents to which the reporter viruses elicited SeV- or luciferase-binding antibodies, ELISA assays were performed on sera collected at 10 d p.i. The anti-SeV antibody titers elicited by all three rSeVs were similar to that induced by WT virus (Figure 1G). The three reporter viruses also induced similar anti-luciferase antibody titers (Figure S3C). Thus, despite being attenuated and avirulent, rSeV-luc(P-M) elicited a robust antibody response. rSeV-luc(M-F*), which induced WT-like morbidity and mortality while expressing high levels of luciferase, was identified as the best suited surrogate for WT virus for use in subsequent bioluminescence imaging experiments.Dynamics of infection in living animalsIn studies to determine whether non-invasive bioluminescence accurately reflected in vivo infection, 129/SvJ mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU, imaged with a Xenogen IVIS instrument, and immediately euthanized. Respiratory tissues were promptly collected for ex vivo measurement of luminescence and viral titers. As in previous studies in immunocompetent mice [36], [37], viral titers and bioluminescence were limited to the respiratory tract. As shown in Figure S4, in vivo bioluminescence intensity levels in living animals were well correlated with ex vivo luminescence (R
2 0.878) and with viral titers in the nasopharynx (R
2 0.864), trachea (R
2 0.915), and lungs (R
2 0.961). The correspondence of these data validates the technique as a means of noninvasive measurement of infection in vivo. To determine whether the luciferase-reporter genes were genetically stable in the three rSeVs, we recovered lung tissues from 129/SvJ mice inoculated with 7,000 PFU of virus at 7 d p.i., homogenized the samples, and conducted plaque assays in LLC-MK2 cells. Five plaques of each of the three luciferase-expressing viruses were picked, amplified by one round of replication in eggs, RT-PCR transcribed, and sequenced. All of the individual viral clones contained the luciferase insert, which had no amino acid mutations, and expressed luciferase when grown in LLC-MK2 cells.We next measured the kinetics and tropism of bioluminescence in living 129/SvJ mice and compared the results to conventionally measured viral titers in dissected tissues (Figures 2 and 3). Just as rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) had in vitro replication rates and in vivo pathogenicity similar to those of WT virus, they also had WT-like titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea, and lungs. In the nasal turbinates, high virus titers (>105 PFU) were detected by day 2 p.i. and were maintained until day 9 p.i., after which rapid clearance occurred (Figure 3B). Between days 2 and 9 p.i., high levels of in vivo bioluminescence were similarly observed in the nasopharynx (>108 photons/s) of 129/SvJ mice infected with rSeV-luc(M-F); bioluminescence peaked at about 5 d p.i. (Figure 3A). In the lungs, the titers of all three luciferase-expressing viruses and of WT SeV peaked by day 5 p.i. and fell to low levels by day 9 p.i. Infection with the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) resulted in peak lung titers of ∼104 PFU (approximately 5% of the WT titer) at day 5 p.i. (Figure 3D). Similarly low levels of rSeV-luc(P-M) bioluminescence were observed in the lungs (Figure 3A), consistent with the attenuated and avirulent virus phenotype. On the other hand, rSeV-luc(P-M) reached high peak titers (∼105 PFU, similar to the WT titer) in the nasal turbinates at 7 d p.i. (Figure 3C), and high levels of bioluminescence were observed in the nasopharynx between days 3 and 7 p.i. (Figure 3A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g002Figure 2Non-invasive bioluminescence imaging of Sendai virus infection in the respiratory tracts of living mice.Eight-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(P-M), rSeV-luc(F-HN), or rSeV-luc(M-F*). Every 24 hours the mice were intraperitoneally injected with luciferin substrate, anesthetized with isoflurane, imaged with a Xenogen IVIS device, and then allowed to recover. Bioluminescence in one experiment is shown on day 2 (A) and day 7 (B) post-infection (p.i.) in 129/SvJ mice infected with rSeV-luc(P-M), rSeV-luc(F-HN), or rSeV-luc(M-F*). Bioluminescence in a second experiment is shown on day 2 (C) or day 7 (D) for 129/SvJ, DBA/2, BALB/c, or C57BL/6 mice infected with rSeV-luc(M-F*). The data are displayed as radiance (bioluminescence intensity) on a rainbow log scale with a range of 1×106 (blue) to 1×109 (red) photons/s/cm2/steradian. Red circles indicate regions of interest (ROI) used to calculate the total flux (photons/s) in the nasopharynx, and red rectangles indicate the ROI areas for the trachea and lungs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g003Figure 3Kinetics of Sendai virus spread and clearance in the respiratory tracts of 129/SvJ mice.(A) The extent of infection was determined by non-invasive bioluminescence imaging of living, anesthetized mice every 24 h. Each data point represents the mean bioluminescence of 6 mice. The total flux (photons/s) of bioluminescence intensity is calculated as the sum of radiance in the region of interest. (B–D) Viral titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea, and lungs were determined by sacrificing groups of 3 mice at the reported days and performing plaque titrations of tissue homogenates in LLC-MK2 cells. Both experiments were repeated, and representative data are shown.Tissue tropism and viral doseThe high permissivity of the URT and trachea to infection by the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus was unexpected. We next investigated whether these tissues were also highly permissive to infection by the WT-like virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) at a low inoculating dose. Our preliminary studies showed that the 50% mouse infectious dose (MID50) of rSeV-luc(M-F*) was 9 PFU and that a 70-PFU dose resulted in 100% infection, similar to results obtained for WT SeV in mice [38] and HPIV1 in humans [39]. We inoculated 129/SvJ mice intranasally with 70, 700, or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) in equal 30 µl volumes and then measured bioluminescence and viral titers. After inoculation with 70 PFU, viral titers and bioluminescence in the lungs were ∼10% of that induced by a 7,000-PFU dose (Figure 4A,B), and weight loss was far less (Figure 4C). In contrast, infection in the nasopharynx and trachea after a 70-PFU inoculation was delayed ∼1 d compared to 7,000-PFU inoculation, reached a similar level by ∼5 d p.i. (Figure 4A,B), and induced relatively high titers of SeV-specific antibodies (>105) (Figure 4D). Therefore, low-dose inoculation of the WT-like rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus resulted in preferential infection of the URT and trachea, inducing a robust antibody response without causing much weight loss.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g004Figure 4Virus replication and pathogenesis as a function of virus dose and mouse strain.After intranasal inoculation of 129/SvJ mice with 70 to 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*), the total flux of bioluminescence intensity (A) and viral titers (B) were measured as described in Figure 3. (C) Percent body weight change was measured in groups of ten 129/SvJ mice after inoculation with 70 to 7,000 PFU. The experiment was performed in duplicate; representative data are shown. (D) Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers in sera of 129/SvJ mice collected 10 days after inoculation with 70 to 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). Titers are reported as the reciprocal endpoint dilutions in ELISA assays. Five infected and two control mice were used in the experiment, which was performed in duplicate. Representative data are shown. (E) The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs after 7,000-PFU intranasal inoculation of 129/SvJ, DBA/2, BALB/c, or C57BL/6-strain mice with rSeV-luc(M-F*). Values are the mean from six animals. The experiment was performed in duplicate, and the results from a representative experiment are shown. (F) Mean percent weight change in groups of 10 mice after infection with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). The experiment was performed in duplicate; representative data are shown.Tissue tropism and host geneticsWhile it is known that 129/SvJ and DBA/2 mice are highly susceptible to lung infection by SeV and BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice are highly resistant [40]–[43], the effect of host genetics on SeV replication in the URT and trachea has not been reported. Therefore, we measured the in vivo dynamics of SeV infection in 129/SvJ, DBA/2, C57BL/6, and BALB/c strains of mice that had been intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). As expected from previous studies, the extent of pulmonary infection and weight loss correlated with each other and followed the trend C57BL/6<BALB/c<<DBA/2<129/SvJ (Figure 4). In contrast, similarly high levels of bioluminescence were observed in the URT and trachea in all four strains of mice. The titers of rSeV-luc(M-F*) in BALB/c mice correlated with bioluminescence in intact mice (Figure S5A), as they were in 129/SvJ mice. Therefore, use of the bioluminescence technique to measure respiratory tract infection in living mice was validated in both 129/SvJ and BALB/c strains.Dynamics of infection during contact transmissionSeV, the HPIVs, and HRSV are thought to be transmitted primarily via contact with respiratory secretions as opposed to long-range transmission of these secretions as small-particle aerosols [21], [22], [24], [44], [45]. It has also been shown that growth of SeV [21] and influenza virus [46] in the URT promotes transmission. Two fundamental questions about PIV transmission that have long remained unanswered are (i) how growth of virus in the lungs of donors influences transmission and (ii) how infection spreads in the respiratory tracts of contact animals after transmission. To address these fundamental questions about SeV transmission, we inoculated BALB/c or 129/SvJ donor mice with 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then at 1 d p.i. we placed 1 donor mouse in a “clean” cage with 3 naïve contact mice. We measured bioluminescence daily in inoculated and contact mice until primary infection was cleared. We then collected sera on day 60, challenged the mice with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) on day 63, and subsequently imaged the mice daily to detect reinfection (Figures 5 and 6). Transmission to every naïve contact mouse was observed by nasopharyngeal bioluminescence and seroconversion, including resistant BALB/c mice exposed to donor animals inoculated at the lower dose of 70 PFU (Figure 5). The timing of transmission was not influenced by the extent of lung infection in donors, as lung titers were ∼10 times lower in BALB/c than in 129/SvJ donor mice after 7,000-PFU inoculation (Figure S5C), yet the timing of transmission (time between detection in inoculated animals and contact animals) was similar (3.3 and 3.4 days, respectively) (Figure 6F). While LRT infection occurred in both strains of mice and may have contributed to transmission, the primary determinant of transmission appeared to be virus shedding in the URT and trachea. For example, both high-titer (>105 PFU) shedding in the nasal cavities and trachea of 129/SvJ donor mice (Figure 4A,B) and contact transmission (Figure 6E,F) occurred ∼1 day earlier after 7,000-PFU inoculation than after 70-PFU inoculation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g005Figure 5Sendai virus infection and immune response after contact transmission.Donor mice were directly inoculated with 70 PFU (A,C,E) or 7,000 PFU (B,D,F) of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then introduced into a cage with 3 naïve animals one day later. The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in the nasopharyngeal cavities of individual 129/SvJ (A–B) and BALB/c (C–D) mice are shown. Serum was collected on day 60 and contact mice were challenged with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) on day 63 to monitor for re-infection by bioluminescence. Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers were measured as reciprocal endpoint dilutions of sera collected on day 60 from mice co-housed with animals inoculated with 70 PFU (E) or 7,000 PFU (F). Open bars represent mice inoculated on day 0 and solid bars represent the contact mice. The experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ mice (3 donor and 9 contact mice) and duplicate for BALB/c mice (2 donor and 6 contact mice).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g006Figure 6Timing and tissue-tropic spread of Sendai virus infection after contact transmission.The co-housing of contact mice with mice inoculated with rSeV-luc(M-F*) is described in Figure 5. The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in individual, representative 129/SvJ (A–B) and BALB/c (C–D) mice is shown for the nasopharynx (triangles), trachea (circles), and lungs (squares). Time to detection of bioluminescence (>6 log10 photons/s) in the nasopharynx after inoculation of donors with either 70 PFU (E) or 7,000 PFU (F) of virus. Mean percent weight change in BALB/c (G) and 129/SvJ (H) mice. The contact transmission experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ mice and in duplicate for BALB/c mice. Open symbols and bars represent directly inoculated mice and solid symbols and bars represent contact mice. In panels G and H, the symbol X indicates PBS-inoculated control mice.Under all four conditions tested (129/SvJ or BALB/c donor mice infected with 70 or 7,000 PFU of virus), the tropism and magnitude of infection in contact animals was similar to that observed after direct intranasal inoculation with 70 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). After contact transmission, bioluminescence was first observed in the nasopharynx and then spread to the trachea and lungs an average of 0.8 and 1.0 days later, respectively (Figure S6A–D). Robust infection was observed in the nasopharynx and trachea after transmission (Figure 6A–D, Figure S6E–H). In contrast, low levels of infection in the lungs were observed after transmission, consistent with low weight loss (Figure 6G–H). In all four groups of mice, SeV-specific antibody titers on day 60 were similarly high (∼106) and all animals were protected from challenge on day 63 (Figure 5). After challenge, a low level of bioluminescence (<106 photons/s), but no weight loss, was detected in only 1 of the 30 contact mice; this animal had shown the lowest level of bioluminescence on days 5–12 after primary infection (Figure 5B, solid black circles). As this animal also had the lowest level of SeV-specific antibodies at day 60 before challenge, a threshold level of infection may be required to induce the highest levels of protective immunity. Overall, SeV infection after transmission was observed to be sufficiently robust in the URT and trachea, yet sufficiently limited in the lungs, to induce protective immunity without causing severe pathogenesis.DiscussionIn this study, we generated and used luciferase-reporter viruses to study the kinetics of SeV infection in living mice after direct inoculation or contact transmission. WT SeV virus and the luciferase-expressing virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) had a similar replication rate in vivo and elicited similar levels of weight loss, mortality, bronchoalveolar lymphocyte influx, and serum antibody titers. Both susceptible (129/SvJ) and resistant (BALB/c) strains of mice were intranasally inoculated with 70- and 7,000-PFU doses of rSeV-luc(M-F*), and the spread of infection was measured by both in vivo bioluminescence in intact mice and ex vivo virus titers in the tissues of sacrificed animals. The consequences of infection in the URT and trachea were found to be distinct from those of infection in the lungs. Unexpectedly, under all conditions tested, including 70-PFU inoculation of resistant BALB/c mice, the URT and trachea supported robust SeV growth, efficient contact transmission, and protective immunity independently of the extent of infection in the lungs. In contrast, the extent of infection in the lungs varied with the virus dose and mouse strain and was highly correlated with weight loss and mortality. Overall, the results reported here reveal a tissue-specific dichotomy in the respiratory tract in which robust infection in the URT and trachea supports efficient transmission while the extent of infection in the lungs and the host response determines disease severity.Here we describe for the first time the development of a non-invasive bioluminescence imaging system to visualize negative-strand RNA virus infection throughout the bodies of living animals, using the respiratory paramyxovirus SeV as a model. The development of a non-attenuated paramyxovirus that expresses sufficiently high levels of a reporter gene to allow non-invasive imaging of small animals has been challenging because of the polarized transcription mechanism of these non-segmented negative-strand RNA viruses [2]. A significant advance described here is the generation of the rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus, in which the attenuating effect of reporter-gene insertion [32] is counteracted by enhancement of the naturally occurring but suboptimal start sequence upstream of the F gene [33]. Expression of the F gene, a virulence factor [47], [48], is also downregulated by HPIV1 [49], HPIV3 [50], PIV5 [51], measles virus [52] and canine distemper virus (CDV) [47] by readthrough transcription or long untranslated regions. Therefore, we predict that other WT-like reporter paramyxoviruses that express high levels of luciferase can be engineered by inserting the reporter gene into the M-F junction and maintaining F gene expression through compensating mutations. Reporter gene expression without attenuation of SeV has also been achieved by construction of a bicistronic gene that contains an internal ribosome entry site [53], although it is not yet clear whether this approach yields sufficient luciferase expression to allow non-invasive imaging of in vivo infection.The use of the luciferase reporter gene in the present work enabled the measurement of infection throughout the entire respiratory tracts of intact animals, allowing us to measure the spread and clearance of infection after direct inoculation or transmission. eGFP-expressing reporter viruses have also been used to study the dynamics of CDV infection in ferrets [54], [55] and measles virus infection in monkeys [56], [57]. The eGFP reporter gene provides the advantage of allowing the tropism of infection to be studied at the cellular level in dissected tissues. Moreover, eGFP-expressing viruses can also be used to quantify and type infected cells in the peripheral blood, skin, and mouths of living animals. eGFP-expressing HPIV3 and Sendai viruses have been used to study the cellular tropism of PIV infection in well differentiated, primary epithelial cultures. In the case of HPIV3, infection was found to be restricted to ciliated epithelial cells and to cause little cytopathology [58]. In contrast, SeV was found to infect ciliated and non-ciliated cells, but not goblet cells, and was observed to induce ciliostasis, cell sloughing, apoptosis, and cellular degeneration [59]. It is unknown whether cell-free virus or cell-associated virus is associated with SeV transmission.A major finding reported here is that the efficiency and timing of SeV transmission are independent of the extent of pulmonary infection, clinical symptoms, and host genetics. HPIV1 transmission from asymptomatic human donors has also been observed in an experimental setting [39] and is consistent with epidemiological observations for PIV outbreaks in general [23], [24]. These observations suggest that LRT infection and the severity of clinical symptoms are poor predictors of transmission potential in surveillance and infection control efforts. As in previous work [21], [38], we observed that SeV transmission coincides with high-titer virus growth in the URT and is remarkably efficient because of the high infectivity of the virus (e.g., the MID50 of SeV is <10 PFU). HPIV1, HPIV3, and HRSV are similarly highly infectious and also transmit predominantly by direct contact or indirect exposure to nasal secretions [44], [45], [60]–[62]. In the absence of an available prophylactic drug for uninfected individuals in high-risk groups (e.g., premature infants and the immunocompromised), the results described here suggest that efforts to control PIV infection should focus on reducing URT shedding from infected individuals, disinfecting contaminated surfaces, and hand washing. In contrast to infection control, which would be best served by limiting URT infection, therapeutic antivirals would be better targeted to the LRT to control clinical manifestations of PIV-associated disease.Genetic factors have been identified that modulate viral susceptibility and disease severity in humans [63]–[65] and in the lungs of mice [40], [42], [43], [66]–[70]. Our results show for the first time that genetic factors limiting virus growth in the lungs of resistant BALB/c mice, compared to susceptible 129/SvJ mice, do not limit robust virus growth in the URT and trachea and, consequently, do not limit transmission. Furthermore, BALB/c and 129/SvJ mice showed a similarly high extent of infection in the URT and trachea and a similarly low extent of infection in the lungs after exposure to cagemates inoculated with high or low virus doses. This finding shows that host genetics do not play a major role in SeV transmission, at least in these strains of mice. These observations reinforce our inference that transmission and pathogenesis are independent consequences of URT versus LRT infection, respectively. Additional experiments are needed to delineate the mechanisms responsible for the higher permissivity of the URT and trachea than of the lungs to SeV infection. Possible mechanisms include the site of inoculation in the nasal cavity, lower temperature in the URT, tissue-specific differences in virus replication and innate immunity, and antiviral mechanisms, such as surfactant proteins in the lungs. Reduced replication in the lungs may be associated with lower levels of the secreted tryptase Clara, which is required for cleavage of the F protein to allow viral entry [71], [72].Asymptomatic infection that promotes immunity and transmission represents a balanced relationship that benefits both the virus and the host. Such has been the case in several enzootic (clinically unapparent) epidemics of SeV in which subclinical infections were maintained in mouse and hamster colonies for years with no increase in pathogenicity, causing apparent disease only occasionally in suckling and old animals [73], [74]. These epidemiological observations are reminiscent of the low virulence yet high transmissibility of the reverse-genetics engineered SeV described here, which was derived from a modified Enders strain that had been passaged in embryonated chicken eggs. Our results show that the level of virus replication in the lungs affects neither the timing nor the efficiency of transmission; thus, SeV replication in the lungs may offer no selective advantage. Instead, we suggest the following mechanism for symbiotic virus-host interplay in enzootic epidemics of SeV: natural infection after transmission is sufficiently limited in the lungs to avoid clinical signs of disease yet is sufficiently robust in the nasopharynx and trachea to promote efficient transmission and induce protective immunity.Epizootic (clinically apparent) outbreaks of SeV have caused morbidity and high rates of mortality in mouse colonies [75]–[77]. Two closely related, highly pathogenic field isolates of SeV are the Ohita and Hamamatsu strains [78], [79]. While inoculation with only a few PFU of unpassaged Hamamatsu strain SeV results in mortality in mice, the MLD50 of the virus was attenuated by as much as 400-fold after 50 passages in eggs [80]. When the highly pathogenic Ohita and Hamamatsu strains were adapted to LLC-MK2 cells and chicken eggs, they were found to have selected for mutations in the C protein and untranslated leader region, respectively, which increase replication in cultured cells but attenuate replication and pathogenesis in the lungs of mice [81]–[83]. The bioluminescence imaging system described here would be useful in determining whether the mutations that attenuate replication in the lungs also attenuate replication in the URT and trachea, thereby reducing transmission, or whether they actually promote sustained transmission by supporting nasal and tracheal shedding of virus while reducing pathogenesis in the lungs. Such experiments may also reveal whether our observations about the spread and transmission of the egg-adapted SeV extend to unpassaged, highly pathogenic field isolates.SeV is a promising Jennerian vaccine against HPIV1 [1], [13], and recombinant SeV vaccine vectors containing an envelope gene from HRSV, HPIV3, or HPIV2 inserted into the F-HN gene junction have been shown to elicit both B- and T-cell responses that lead to protection from challenge in small-animal models [18]–[20]. While SeV is pathogenic in mice, an ongoing clinical trial has demonstrated SeV to be well tolerated in humans [17]. In non-human primates, SeV has been shown to protect against HPIV1 challenge with no associated adverse events [15], [84]. This result is likely due in part to the sensitivity of SeV to human IFN-mediated innate immunity [85]. As SeV is developed further as a vaccine vector, the luciferase-expressing SeVs, imaging system, and methods described here will be useful in investigating the effect of vaccine dose, volume, and position of foreign antigen insertion in the SeV genome on tissue-specific vector growth and the immune response in small animal models. Of course, replacing the luciferase reporter gene in SeV with a vaccine antigen could alter in vivo replication of the vector. For example, three different recombinant HPIV3 vectors expressing HPIV1 HN, HPIV2 HN, or measles virus HA inserted into the P-M gene junction were found to replicate to different levels in hamsters [86].In summary, we have described the development of the non-attenuated reporter virus rSeV-luc(M-F*), which can be used to quantify tissue-specific SeV infection in living mice. Our results reveal how infection by SeV spreads in individual, living animals after direct intranasal inoculation and after transmission. Importantly, infection in the URT and trachea were found to be associated with contact transmission while infection in the lungs was found to be associated with pathogenesis. The imaging tools developed here will provide a method to study the effect of viral factors, host genetics, host age, immune status, environmental conditions, and inoculation mode on the dynamics of infection and transmission. For example, infection can be tracked non-invasively in WT and knockout mice before immune responses are measured ex vivo and then interpreted in light of the preceding infection. Methods similar to those reported here could also be developed to image infection by other paramyxoviruses in small-animal models. Overall, our model system and results suggest tissue-targeted approaches to PIV infection control and vaccine development, while our non-invasive bioluminescence imaging technique is expected to advance the preclinical testing of candidate vaccine vectors and experimental therapies.Materials and MethodsEthics statementAll animal studies were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and were performed in compliance with relevant institutional policies, the Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines, the National Institutes of Health regulations, and local, state, and federal laws.Cell cultureMonolayer cultures of LLC-MK2 cells were grown in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% L-glutamine, 1% penicillin, and 1% streptomycin at 37°C, 5% CO2.Recombinant Sendai virusesUnique NotI recognition sites were cloned into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN intergenic junctions of an Enders-based pSeV viral genome plasmid using cloning sites described previously [32]. The firefly luciferase gene was amplified by PCR using the pGL3 Basic vector (Promega) and a pair of AscI tagged primers, subcloned into a shuttle plasmid containing a SeV intergenic junction and flanking NotI restriction sites [32], and then subcloned into the unique NotI site of each of the pSeV viral genome plasmids. Within the pSeV-luc(M-F*) plasmid, the start signal upstream of the F protein was changed from AGGGATAAAG to AGGGTGAAAG by using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene Corp). The rSeVs were rescued from the pSeV genome plasmids as described previously [20].Luciferase expression in vitro
rSeV-infected LLC-MK2 cells (MOI, 5 PFU/cell) were incubated at 33°C, 5% CO2, and lysates were collected at various times p.i.. Luciferase assays were performed using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega) and expression was measured on an automated luminometer (Turner Biosystems, Inc.) as described previously [87].Viral titers and bioluminescence imagingVirus titers from multistep growth curves (MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell) and homogenized tissues were determined by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells as described previously [48]. Eight week-old female 129/SvJ mice or BALB/c mice (Jackson Laboratories) were anesthetized with isoflurane (Baxter Health Care Corp.) and inoculated intranasally (i.n.) with 30 µl of PBS or PBS containing virus. Animals were monitored daily for weight loss, morbidity, and mortality. Before imaging, mice were injected intraperitoneally with luciferin (Xenogen Corp) at a dose of 150 mg/kg of body weight and anesthetized with isoflurane for 5 min. In vivo images were acquired with a Xenogen IVIS CCD camera system (Caliper Life Sciences) and analyzed with Living Image 3.2 software (Caliper Life Sciences) using an exposure of 60s, 30s, or 5s (binning 4; f/stop 1). Pseudocolor images (representative of bioluminescence) of mice were displayed using a binning of 4 on a colorimetric scale ranging from 1×106 to 1×109 surface radiance (photons/s/cm2/steradian), which is defined as the number of photons that leave a cm2 of tissue and radiate into a solid angle of one steradian. To quantify bioluminescence, regions of interest (ROI) were defined manually and graphed data were expressed as total flux (photons/s), which is defined as the radiance within each pixel summed over the ROI area (cm2)×4π. For experiments shown in Figures 1D, 1E, 2, 3, 4E, 4F, and S4, mice were anesthetized by IP injection of 300 µl 2,2,2-Tribromoethanol (300 mg/kg) and chest hair was removed by shaving and application of a depilatory cream 3 d before inoculation.ImmunologySera and BALF were collected from euthanized animals on day 10 or day 60 p.i.. BALF samples (3 ml) were centrifuged to collect cellular material and plated in a tissue culture dish for 1 h at 37°C to remove adherent cells. Suspension cells were harvested, total lymphocytes were counted microscopically, and red blood cells were lysed. For analyses by flow cytometry, cells were stained with FITC-conjugated anti-CD4 (RM4-4) and PE-conjugated anti–CD8b (53-5.8) antibodies (BD Biosciences Pharmingen). Lymphocytes were gated based on forward and side scatter, and the percentages of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations were measured within this gate. ELISAs were used to measure the levels of SeV-specific or luciferase-specific antibodies present in the sera. Briefly, 96-well plates were coated overnight with disrupted, purified SeV (10 µg/ml) or firefly luciferase (1 µg/ml, Abcam). Plates were blocked with PBS containing 1% BSA and then incubated with 10-fold serially diluted serum samples. After incubation, plates were washed, incubated with HRP-Goat anti mouse IgG (Southern Biotechnologies) and then washed further. To quantify levels of antibodies, TMB substrate (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories) was added to the wells followed by stop solution and absorbance was read at a wavelength of 450 nm. GraphPad Prism non-linear regression software was used to calculate antibody titers.Contact transmissionDonor animals were inoculated intranasally with 30 µL of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and were individually placed into cages containing 3 naïve contact mice at 24 h p.i. Bioluminescence was monitored daily until it remained consistently at background levels (∼15 days). Sera were collected on day 60 so that SeV-specific antibody levels could be measured as described above. On day 63, mice were challenged with 7000 PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*) administered i.n. and bioluminescence was measured daily.Supporting InformationFigure S1Construction of luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses. (A) Nucleotide sequence of the firefly luciferase gene cassette. A pGEM3 cloning plasmid was engineered to contain flanking NotI restriction sites, the firefly luciferase reporter gene, gene end, and gene start sequences. (B) To insert the luciferase reporter gene cassette into three gene junctions, three pSeV genome plasmids were cloned to contain a unique NotI restriction site in each of the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions. For the pSeV-luc(M-F*) genome plasmid, the naturally occurring suboptimal start signal AGGGATAAAG was also mutated to the more efficient start signal AGGGTGAAAG to compensate for expected attenuation due to the addition of the foreign gene and additional gene junction. The firefly luciferase gene cassette (panel A) was subcloned from the pGEM3 plasmid into the pSeV genome plasmids using the NotI restriction sites. (C) Design of pSeV cDNA plasmids for the rescue of WT and recombinant Sendai viruses containing the luciferase reporter gene (luc). The locations of the Sendai virus genes nucleoprotein (N), polymerase (P), matrix (M), fusion (F), hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN), and large (L) protein are shown, as well as the T7 RNA polymerase promoter (T7) and hepatitis delta virus ribozyme sequence (ribo). Gene start sequences are shown in green and the naturally occurring, suboptimal AGGGATAAAG gene start sequence between the M and F genes of WT Sendai virus is shown in yellow. Gene end sequences are shown in red. The 3′ leader sequence upstream of the N gene and the 5′ trailer sequence downstream of the L gene are not shown for simplicity.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2Sendai virus protein expression and incorporation into virions. (A) Sendai virus protein expression in LLC-MK2 cells. Confluent monolayers of LLC-MK2 cells were infected with recombinant Sendai viruses at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell and incubated for 16 h before radiolabeling with 50 µCi [35S]Promix (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Supernatant was incubated overnight at 4°C with mouse anti- NP, P, M, F, and HN monoclonal antibodies, and immune complexes were adsorbed on protein G-Sepharose (GE Healthcare), fractionated on 12% NuPAGE bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen), and visualized with a phosphorimager. (B) Ratios of Sendai virus protein expression. Protein expression was quantified with ImageQuant 5.2 software and normalized to the expression level of the N protein. The data represent the means (+/− standard deviation) from three experiments. (C) Sendai virus composition. Recombinant Sendai viruses were inoculated into 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs. Allantoic fluid was harvested 72 h p.i. and centrifuged for 45 min at 3000 rpm to remove cellular debris. Supernatants were layered over a 60%–20% sucrose gradient and centrifuged at 24,000 rpm for 3.5 hrs to isolate virions. Isolated virions were diluted in TNE buffer and further purified by centrifugation over a 20% sucrose cushion at 24,000 rpm for 15 h. Virus pellets were resuspended in RIPA buffer and total protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Sci.). Equal quantities of protein were separated on a 4%–12% SDS-PAGE gel, stained with Blue BANDit protein stain (Amresco), and dried in a BioRad gel dryer at 60°C for 45 minutes.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S3Immune responses of mice to infection with recombinant Sendai viruses. Groups of five 8-week-old 129/SvJ mice were intranasally inoculated with 30 µl containing 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus or PBS. On day 10 p.i., serum was collected and the mice were euthanized to recover bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Experiments were performed twice with representative data shown. Each data point represents an individual animal and horizontal bars show group means. The numbers of CD4+ (A) and CD8+ (B) T cells recovered from BALF were determined by flow cytometry. (C) Luciferase-specific binding antibody titers in sera were determined by ELISA assays and are expressed as reciprocal endpoint dilutions. Firefly luciferase protein (Abcam) was used.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S4Bioluminescence and Sendai virus titers in the respiratory tracts of 129/SvJ mice. Groups of three 8-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus. (A) In vivo bioluminescence was measured for all three luciferase-expressing viruses on days 4 and 6 p.i., after which lungs were immediately harvested and homogenized so that ex vivo luciferase activity could be measured. A fit of the data with a least squares linear regression model yielded an R
2 value of 0.878. RLU denotes relative light units. (B) Comparison between light detected by the camera and viral titers of homogenates from the nasopharynx (triangles), trachea (circles), and lungs (squares). Each point represents data from a single mouse infected with rSeV-luc(M-F*) and studied on day 2, 3, 5, or 7 p.i.. Least squares linear regression yielded R
2 values of 0.864, 0.915 and 0.961 for the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S5Bioluminescence and viral titers in the respiratory tracts of BALB/c and 129/SvJ mice. Groups of three 8-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). (A) In vivo bioluminescence was measured in BALB/c mice infected with 7,000 PFU of virus on days 2, 3, 5, and 7 p.i., after which the animals were euthanized and tissues were harvested so that virus titers from tissue homogenates could be measured by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells. Correlations between virus titers in tissue homogenates and light detected by the camera were found with R
2 values of 0.928, 0.656, and 0.846 for the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively. Virus titers in homogenates from the nasopharynx (B) and lungs (C) of both BALB/c- and 129/SvJ-strain mice infected with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) were measured by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells. The data represent the mean virus titers of six mice (+/− standard deviation).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S6Tissue-specific timing and magnitude of Sendai virus spread in the respiratory tracts of intact mice after inoculation and contact transmission. In each group, one BALB/c or 129/SvJ mouse was inoculated intranasally with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and three contact animals were co-housed one day later as described in Figure 5. (A–D) Time until detection of bioluminescence in the nasopharynx (nasop.), trachea, and lungs (limit of detection: >6 log10 photons/s) after direct inoculation (open bars) and after contact transmission (solid bars). (E–H) Overall magnitude of infection after direct inoculation (open bars) and after contact transmission (solid bars) as determined by integration of daily measurements of total flux with respect to time using IgorPro software (Wavemetrics). The areas under the curve (AUC) of bioluminescence are expressed as the total amount of photons on a log10 scale. The experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ-strain mice (3 donor animals and 9 transmitted) and duplicate for BALB/c-strain mice (2 donor animals and 6 transmitted).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Susceptibility and Transmission Dynamics of Peste des Petits Ruminants Virus in Domestic and Wild Ruminants: Experimental Insights from Kazakhstan

1. IntroductionEvery nation faces the potential threat of foreign pathogens emerging during a time marked by the growth of global trade, tourism, and cultural interactions. It is crucial to maintain the vigilant protection of national territory against such threats, complemented by strong veterinary safeguards. Peste des petits ruminants (PPR) is recognized as a particularly significant threat among the various issues mentioned [1,2].PPR is an infectious viral disease that significantly impacts both domestic and wild small ruminants. The condition is attributed to a morbillivirus belonging to the Paramyxoviridae family and is classified by the World Organisation for Animal Health (WOAH) as a notifiable disease because of its significant epizootological and economic implications [3]. Clinically, PPR presents with an acute or subacute onset of fever, ulcerative stomatitis, mucopurulent rhinitis, conjunctivitis, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis, lymphoid damage, and pneumonia. The morbidity can reach as high as 100%, with mortality rates soaring up to 90% in naive populations [4,5,6,7].Initially limited to Africa [8], PPR has expanded its reach to various regions, including parts of Europe such as Turkey; Asia, with countries like China, Mongolia, and Thailand; and North Africa, encompassing Tunisia, Libya, and Algeria [9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. The socio-economic connections in these regions with Kazakhstan are robust, heightening the potential for PPRV introduction through avenues such as trade, tourism, or cross-border transhumance.From January 2019 to October 2021, there were 164 officially reported outbreaks and 13 endemic cases of PPR, with incidents occurring in Burkina Faso, China, Kenya, Libya, Mongolia, Pakistan, Thailand, and Turkey [16,17,18,19,20]. Recent outbreaks in western Turkey and China [21,22] have led to mortality rates nearing 90%, highlighting the significant threat posed by the virus to Kazakhstan.In light of this context, it is essential to assess the susceptibility of specific species, the dynamics of transmission, and the clinical and epidemiological features of PPRV in Kazakhstan. This information is essential for developing efficient surveillance, prevention, control, and potential eradication strategies customized to regional risk profiles. Creating robust, evidence-based defenses will strengthen veterinary health and protect small-ruminant industries from possible PPR incursions.Prior to 2014, PPR had not been officially recorded in Kazakhstan, and the disease was considered exotic to the area. In 2014, reports indicated the presence of epizootic foci in the Zhambyl, Kyzylorda, and Almaty regions, where affected animals displayed clinical signs characteristic of PPR [23]. Nevertheless, the instances were not officially documented in veterinary records, and Kazakhstan maintains a PPR-free status as per the World Organization for Animal Health (WOAH).While preventive vaccination initiatives using the live attenuated PPR vaccine from ARRIAH (Russian Federation) [24] are underway in the southern regions of the country, there is a lack of systematic epizootiological and serological surveillance. The absence of formal oversight prompts apprehensions regarding the possible unnoticed spread of the virus, especially in subclinical or mild instances that might escape detection.Between 2022 and 2024, Kazakhstan did not report any confirmed outbreaks of PPR. In December 2022, a simulation exercise was conducted in the Zhambyl Region aimed at evaluating and enhancing veterinary preparedness for possible incursions. Even with the lack of documented cases within the country, PPR continues to pose a significant transboundary risk. From 2024 to 2025, there were more than 1280 reported outbreaks worldwide, indicating the ongoing epidemiological pressure of the virus [25].This investigation aimed to tackle these issues by experimentally assessing the vulnerability of specific domestic animals (local sheep, local goats, calves) and wild species (saigas, ground squirrels), in addition to African Cameroon goats, to the PPR virus. The study seeks to define the clinical progression, pathological features, virus distribution, and potential for transmission of PPRV in these animals within a controlled environment. The study offers crucial insights into the disease’s epizootology by investigating variability in infection outcomes related to species, breed, and age. This includes identifying potential sources of infection and patterns of virus shedding. The results aim to enhance evidence-driven monitoring, risk evaluation, and response tactics within Kazakhstan’s veterinary framework while also contributing to wider regional and international initiatives focused on the containment and elimination of PPR.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Ethical ApprovalThe study was carried out in accordance with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki and received approval from the Institutional Review Board and Ethics Committee of the Research Institute for Biological Safety Problems, which is part of the Science Committee of the Ministry of Higher Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Permit Number 1010/22).2.2. VirusThe Nigeria 76/1 strain of PPRV was used for the purpose of animal infection. This strain was sourced from the Microorganism Collection Laboratory of the RIBSP.2.3. Experimental AnimalsThe study included a total of 185 animals, comprising Kazakh merino sheep, local coarse-wool goats, Cameroon goats, saigas, Alatau calves, and yellow ground squirrels. Animals were grouped according to species and age, with the number of individuals per group varying depending on the experimental design. Detailed information on group composition is provided in Table 1. Animals were maintained in groups specific to their species under ABSL-3 conditions, with unrestricted access to food and water. All animals were subjected to a 7-day acclimatization period before the experimental infection started.2.4. Cell Lines and Primary CulturesThe cell cultures used for virus isolation, titration, and neutralization assays included primary lamb kidney (LK) cells, primary goat kidney (GK) cells, primary saiga kidney (SK) cells, primary Siberian ibex kidney (SIBK) cells, the continuous sheep embryo kidney (SEK) cell line, and the Vero cell line derived from African green monkey kidney. All cell cultures were supplied by the Cell Biotechnology Laboratory of the RIBSP. Selection of each cell type was conducted with careful consideration of species specificity and susceptibility to morbilliviruses.2.5. Nutrient MediaThe cultivation of primary cell cultures (LK, GK, SK, and SIBK) was conducted using Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), penicillin (100 IU/mL), and streptomycin (100 µg/mL). Continuous cell lines, specifically Vero and SEK, were also cultured in DMEM with the addition of 10% FBS and the same antibiotic supplementation. All cell cultures were maintained under sterile conditions and incubated at 37 °C in a humidified environment with 5% CO2.2.6. Animal Infection MethodsExperimental animals were subjected to infection through four distinct routes: subcutaneous, oral (alimentary), aerogenous, and contact exposure. However, the results presented in this manuscript are based exclusively on the subcutaneous infection model, as this route allowed for standardized delivery of the virus and reproducibility across all experimental groups. In the case of subcutaneous infection, subjects were administered 5.0 mL of virus-containing material, which comprised EDTA-treated blood, a 10% tissue suspension, or culture-grown virus exhibiting a titer between 3.0 and 5.0 log10 TCID50/cm3. Injections were delivered in the lower third of the neck, inner thigh, or shoulder area.To induce oral infection, subjects were provided with feed that had been combined with a virus suspension (4.75 log10 TCID50/cm3) at a concentration of 1 mL of virus per 100 g of feed or remnants from infected subjects. In the context of aerogenous exposure, both infected and naïve animals were maintained in the same room under ABSL-3 conditions, yet they were kept in distinct enclosures to prevent any direct contact, as well as the sharing of food or water. To investigate contact transmission, healthy animals were placed in the same enclosure as infected animals for co-housing. Clinical observations were conducted twice each day. Rectal temperatures were recorded each morning and evening during the entire observation period.2.7. Virus Isolation2.7.1. In Vivo Virus IsolationFor in vivo virus isolation, blood and tissue samples were used to assess viral infectivity via animal bioassay. Whole blood samples were collected from the jugular vein of experimentally infected animals into EDTA-treated vacutainer tubes. Tissue specimens—including lymph nodes, spleen, liver, kidneys, lungs, mucosal scrapings from the nose, mouth, abomasum, intestines, urinary bladder, and fetuses from aborted animals—were aseptically collected and homogenized in 10% (w/v) suspensions using Hanks’ balanced salt solution after a single freeze–thaw cycle. These homogenates were used to infect susceptible animals under controlled conditions for confirmatory pathogenicity testing. The appearance of clinical signs, viral antigen presence, and subsequent seroconversion were used to evaluate successful virus replication.2.7.2. In Vitro Virus IsolationFor in vitro virus isolation, the same sample types (whole blood, tissue homogenates, nasal and ocular discharges, saliva, and feces) were also processed for virus culture in cell monolayers. Secretions and excretions were collected using sterile swabs, placed in 4 mL of Hanks’ solution, and subjected to freeze–thaw cycles. The swabs were wrung out and discarded, and the eluates were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 30 min. Supernatants (1.0 mL) were used to inoculate cell cultures.All inoculated cell cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. After a 1-h adsorption period, the inoculum was removed, cells were washed 5–6 times with Hanks’ solution, and fresh maintenance medium (DMEM with 2% FBS and antibiotics) was added.Cultures were observed daily for cytopathic effect (CPE). If no CPE developed after 7–10 days, up to three blind passages were performed using 1.0 mL of supernatant. Viral identity was confirmed by CPE pattern, virus neutralization test, and PCR using the Bio-T kit® Peste des Petits Ruminants (Biosellal, Chemin des Peupliers, Dardilly, France).2.8. Virus TitrationIn cell cultures, virus titration was conducted to ascertain the infectious titer of the material containing the virus. Tenfold serial dilutions of the viral samples were meticulously prepared in Hanks’ balanced salt solution. Next, 1.0 mL of each dilution was introduced into four wells of a culture plate that had been pre-seeded with confluent cell monolayers, following the removal of the growth medium.For the negative control, 100 μL of Hanks’ solution devoid of virus was introduced to the control wells that housed uninfected cell monolayers. Following a one-hour period of virus adsorption at 37 °C, the inoculum was discarded, and the wells underwent rinsing. The cells were subsequently overlaid with maintenance medium, followed by incubation of the plates at 37 °C in a humidified 5% CO2 environment.The maintenance medium underwent replacement every 2 to 3 days during the cultivation period. Daily observations were conducted on the plates to assess the cytopathic effect (CPE). The conclusive findings were documented on the fourteenth day. The virus titer was determined through the Reed and Muench method and presented as log10 TCID50/cm3.2.9. Virus Neutralization AssayThe virus neutralization assay was conducted in LK, SK, SEK, and Vero cell cultures to identify virus isolates and detect specific virus-neutralizing antibodies in the sera of infected animals. Blood serum samples underwent inactivation at 56 °C in a water bath for a duration of 30 min before utilization.Serial dilutions of each test serum were meticulously prepared in Hanks’ balanced salt solution, following a twofold approach. Equal volumes of diluted serum and viral suspension (containing 100–1000 TCID50/cm3) were combined and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h in a thermostat.Following the incubation period, the mixtures were introduced into wells populated with confluent monolayers of LK, SK, SEK, or Vero cells. The cultures were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 for a duration of 14 days. The nutrient medium underwent replacement at intervals of 2 to 3 days.The neutralizing antibody titer was established as the maximum serum dilution that entirely inhibited the occurrence of cytopathic effect (CPE) in a minimum of 50% of the inoculated wells.CPE was deemed specific when it appeared in cultures inoculated with non-immune serum, while it was not present in cultures inoculated with immune serum.2.10. Statistical AnalysisThe analysis of data was conducted using Microsoft Excel 365. Virus titers (log10 TCID50/cm3) were determined employing the Reed–Muench method. The findings are displayed as mean ± standard deviation. Comparisons among groups (such as species, age, or clinical forms) were assessed using the Student’s t-test or one-way ANOVA, as applicable. A p-value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.3. Results3.1. Susceptibility of Some Species of Domestic and Wild Animals to the PPRVResearchers evaluated the susceptibility of local sheep to the PPRV across various age groups of local and Cameroonian goats, calves, saigas, and ground squirrels. Experimental infection was conducted through subcutaneous administration of a virulent 10% organ–tissue suspension of the Nigeria 76/1 strain (5.0 cm3 per animal) or a cultured virus (2nd to 5th passage in LK cell culture) at doses varying from 1000 to 100,000 TCID50. The duration of observation varied between 21 and 28 days.The evaluation of susceptibility was conducted by analyzing the duration of the incubation period, clinical manifestations, disease progression, and outcomes. The specificity of PPRV infection was validated through reinfection with the homologous virus, virus isolation, PCR analysis of tissues from deceased animals, and serological assessment of paired sera from recovered animals using the virus neutralization assay.The results indicated that local sheep and goats, Cameroon goats, calves, and saigas exhibit susceptibility to PPRV, with variations observed based on species, breed, and age. The susceptibility observed in local sheep and goats exhibited a significant dependence on age.In Cameroon goats, the infection resulted in clear clinical disease in all goats and saigas. The disease manifested in a severe manner, exhibiting pronounced clinical signs, and resulted in a consistent fatal outcome.In local sheep and goats, along with calves, the disease did not consistently manifest with observable clinical signs. The greatest percentage of clinically affected animals was observed in lambs and goats that were up to 3 months old. The majority of the infected animals in this group exhibited signs that are characteristic of PPR. In older young sheep (6–12 months), the percentage of clinically ill individuals varied between 68.8% and 83.9%; for goats of the same age, this figure was 85.7%.The incidence of clinical disease in adult animals was observed to be lower, with rates of 31.8% in sheep, 60.0% in goats, and 50.0% in calves. The animals that remained in each group exhibited no apparent signs of infection throughout the entire observation period.An adverse disease outcome was noted solely in young goats. The mortality rate was observed at 33.3% in animals up to 3 months old, while it was 7.1% in goats aged 6 to 12 months. No fatalities were recorded among adult animals, including sheep, saigas, or calves.Ground squirrels infected with PPRV showed no observable clinical signs. Attempts to isolate the virus from organs and tissues collected on days 5, 7, and 14 post-infection using LK, SEK, and SK cell cultures did not yield successful results. Serum samples collected on day 30 post-infection showed no detection of virus-neutralizing antibodies, suggesting that there was no productive infection or seroconversion.3.2. Course and Clinical Signs of the DiseaseThe study focused on the susceptibility of the PPRV to local sheep and goats, Cameroonian goats, saigas, calves, and ground squirrels. Researchers determined through careful observation of infected animals and thorough assessments of disease onset, severity, and clinical sign manifestation that the infection exhibits four distinct clinical forms: acute, subacute, abortive, and latent (subclinical).The progression of infection across various animal species and age categories, as well as the associated morbidity and mortality rates, is detailed in Table 1.Table 1 illustrates that an acute course of PPR was noted in all infected Cameroon goats (100%) and in the majority of saigas (88.2%). In a study of young local goats aged 1–3 months, it was observed that 14.8% exhibited acute cases, whereas only 3.7% of lambs in the same age group developed acute symptoms.The subacute form was predominantly observed in goats aged 1–3 months (51.9%) and in lambs of the same age (22.2%). Instances of sporadic subacute forms were observed in older sheep, reaching up to 8.1%, as well as in goats, with a prevalence of up to 14.3%, and in saigas, which showed a rate of 11.8%.The abortive form was noted solely in local sheep, goats, and calves. The occurrence was noted in 62.5–75.7% of sheep, varying by age, and in 64.3% of goats within the 6–12 month age range. In calves, an abortive course was observed in 50% of the animals.The latent (subclinical) form was predominantly noted in older age groups: 68.2% of sheep over 18 months, 40.0% of goats of the same age, and 50% of calves exhibited no apparent clinical signs.No indications of illness were detected in ground squirrels, and no virus was isolated from their tissues or blood; virus-neutralizing antibodies were not present in sera collected on day 30 after infection.Table 2 provides a summary of the characteristics of clinical signs linked to each disease form.The incubation period in the acute form spanned 2 to 3 days. The onset of the disease was characterized by a significant increase in body temperature, reaching levels between 41.0 and 41.8 °C, which continued throughout the duration of the illness. On days 2 to 3 of fever, the animals displayed signs of depression, fine muscle tremors, and hyperemia in the mucous membranes of the mouth, nose, and eyes. Necrotic lesions manifested on the mucous membranes of the lips, cheeks, gums, palate, pharynx, and tongue, resulting in shallow erosions characterized by irregular borders.Salivation and a decrease in appetite were frequently observed. The conjunctiva exhibited edema, accompanied by vascular injection and crust formation resulting from purulent exudate. The nasal discharge has transitioned from a mucous consistency to a mucopurulent one. Certain animals exhibited a cough, with respiration becoming shallow and rapid, eventually leading to labored breathing accompanied by groaning in more severe instances.The onset of stomatitis in local and Cameroonian goats was associated with gastrointestinal disturbances. Severe diarrhea manifested, characterized by liquid, dark green stools that included mucus and necrotic material. Instances of tenesmus and painful defecation were commonly noted. Animals assumed a position akin to that of a seated dog. In saigas, the onset of the disease frequently presented as constipation, which was subsequently followed by diarrhea. Not all of the animals that were affected exhibited symptoms of diarrhea.In some pregnant animals, including two saigas and one Cameroon goat, spontaneous abortion occurred during the febrile stage of the infection. This was primarily due to high fever and systemic hyperthermia, which can disrupt fetal development and impair placental function. Additionally, the animals experienced significant nutritional and energy deficits caused by reduced feed intake, dehydration, and the increased metabolic demands associated with the inflammatory response. These combined stressors led to fetal death and subsequent abortion.In specific saigas, the disease advanced more swiftly, resulting in mortality occurring between days 4 and 6. In certain instances, these animals exhibited solely fever and mucosal hyperemia, lacking any other significant clinical manifestations. The fever generally reached its highest point between 41.0 and 41.6 °C on the initial day, subsequently decreasing prior to the occurrence of sudden death.The incubation period in the subacute form varied between 2 and 4 days. The body temperature increased to a range of 40.8–41.4 °C, although it was typically lower than observed in acute cases. In saigas, the fever presented as intermittent or brief episodes. Hyperthermia lasted for a duration of 5 to 8 days, with instances extending to 13 or 14 days.On days 2 to 3, the subjects exhibited mild hyperemia in the mucous membranes of the oral and nasal cavities, conjunctiva, and areas of exposed skin. Localized necrotic lesions were observed, primarily affecting the soft palate and pharynx, with occasional involvement of the gums. The lesions manifested as superficial grayish-white coatings. Salivation was observed in certain animals.Herpetic-like lesions and localized rashes were observed on the lips and skin of some lambs, typically lasting 2 to 3 days. These mucocutaneous changes were accompanied by conjunctivitis and rhinitis, though purulent nasal discharge was rare. As the febrile phase progressed, diarrhea developed in several animals, indicating gastrointestinal involvement. Goats and lambs affected by the subacute form of the disease exhibited marked weight loss, a dull and ruffled coat, and signs of mild depression. The weight loss resulted from decreased feed intake, elevated metabolic demand during fever, and systemic stress associated with viral infection.In the majority of lambs and goats, gastrointestinal symptoms persisted for 2 to 4 days, subsequently leading to a swift recovery. In certain goats, diarrhea continued for a duration of 7 to 11 days, with affected animals either recovering gradually or succumbing to the condition.The incubation period in the abortive form was observed to be between 4 and 7 days, with the duration of the disease ranging from 1 to 4 days. Affected animals exhibited mild hyperthermia, with temperatures ranging from 40.2 to 41.1 °C, alongside hyperemia of the mucous membranes. Several sheep exhibited herpetic lesions on their lips and rashes in hairless regions of their skin. No additional clinical signs were observed, and all animals made a complete recovery.3.3. Pathological ChangesExternal examination of deceased animals showed significant emaciation and unkempt fur. Purulent exudate was noted in the medial canthi of the eyes, accompanied by dried accumulations. The area around the chin exhibited moisture attributed to salivation, while the nostrils showed signs of staining from mucopurulent discharge. The tail region and the fur on the hind limbs exhibited contamination from liquid feces. In certain saiga carcasses, the presence of bloody foam in the nasal and oral cavities was observed, suggesting significant pulmonary involvement and severe respiratory distress at the time of death.The post-mortem examination of animals that succumbed to PPR infection demonstrated a comprehensive range of characteristic pathological lesions, particularly observed in goats from Cameroon and saigas. The observed animals exhibited significant and marked alterations at the organ level, characteristic of a virulent PPRV infection.The pathological changes noted in the local children were relatively milder. Adult local sheep and goats that were euthanized due to illness exhibited infrequent gross pathological lesions, which, when present, were mild and not always distinctly identifiable, suggesting a possibly attenuated infection course or a recovery phase.3.4. Pathomorphological Changes in Organs3.4.1. Digestive SystemIn Cameroon goats, goats and saigas that succumbed to PPR exhibited pronounced necrotic and inflammatory alterations in the digestive system. Erosions and ulcers of varying depth and size were observed in the oral cavity, affecting the gums, lips, soft palate, pharynx, and tongue. These lesions were frequently covered with necrotic debris and were accompanied by areas of hyperemia and edema. Local goats exhibited comparable, albeit milder, lesions—generally confined to the soft palate and pharyngeal region.The esophagus and forestomachs, including the rumen, reticulum, and omasum, exhibited a typical appearance, with moderate quantities of feed present. In certain instances, there was a noted presence of mild hyperemia in the omasal folds.The abomasal mucosa exhibited congestion and edema, particularly in the pyloric region, accompanied by small hemorrhages. In two saigas, there were deep ulcerations extending into the muscular layer.The small intestine frequently exhibited emptiness or was filled with a watery chyme. The duodenal wall showed signs of thickening, edema, and increased blood flow, accompanied by localized petechiae and areas of necrosis. In the jejunum and ileum, there were frequent observations of mucosal injection and necrotic plaques, accompanied by hemorrhages and gray-white caseous deposits. A notable lesion appeared on the ileocecal valve as a red, sharply defined hyperemic rim. In numerous saigas and certain goats, the small intestine exhibited a widespread dark red coloration as a result of significant hemorrhages.The large intestine housed unformed, frequently malodorous feces. The mucosal surfaces of the cecum and colon exhibited edema and were covered with caseous material. Notable necrotic regions, along with mucosal thinning and a range of hemorrhagic manifestations from petechiae to streaks, were prominently observed in the cecum. Conversely, the rectum typically remained unaffected.The liver exhibited a dark brown hue and congestion, characterized by a smooth surface and indications of dystrophy in certain saigas. The gallbladder exhibited distension filled with dark green bile.In adult sheep and goats that were euthanized during the disease, gastrointestinal lesions were restricted to mild mucosal hyperemia and edema observed in the duodenum and jejunum.The findings indicate that severe and systemic involvement of the digestive tract was characteristic in saigas and Cameroon goats, whereas local sheep and goats, especially adults, exhibited milder or localized changes.3.4.2. Respiratory OrgansThe nasal cavity, larynx, trachea, and bronchi displayed signs of catarrhal to catarrhal purulent inflammation. The mucosa exhibited hyperemia and was associated with mucous or mucopurulent exudate. In certain saigas and goats, the presence of bloody foam was observed, suggesting pulmonary edema.The lungs exhibited a range of colors from pink to dark red, accompanied by regions of consolidation and infiltration. In the examined section, the impacted lobes exhibited a firm texture, were moist, and demonstrated an absence of sponginess. In severe instances, gray–red hepatization along with small purulent foci was noted. Fibrinous deposits were sometimes observed on the pleura. Respiratory lesions were evident in saigas and Cameroon goats, with pneumonia being a recurring observation. The involvement of local animals exhibited variability, typically presenting a milder degree.3.4.3. Lymphoid OrgansThe prescapular, submandibular, retropharyngeal, and mesenteric lymph nodes exhibited enlargement, tension, and edema. In this section, the nodes exhibited a moist, smooth surface along with congested parenchyma. In certain instances, hemorrhages were noted, particularly within the mesenteric nodes.The spleen exhibited occasional enlargement, presenting a dark red hue and a flaccid texture, characterized by soft pulp and indistinct margins. The observed changes indicate a robust immune response and systemic inflammation, especially in saigas and goats exhibiting severe disease symptoms. The lymphoid alterations observed in adult sheep and goats were either minimal or completely absent.3.4.4. Urinary OrgansThe kidneys exhibited a dark red hue and a flaccid texture, characterized by smooth capsules that could be effortlessly detached. The delineation between the cortex and medulla was inadequate. The renal pelvis exhibited mild edema.The urinary bladder exhibited contraction and held 5–20 mL of straw-colored urine. The mucosa exhibited hyperemia. Lesions in the urinary tract were found to be nonspecific and predominantly noted in animals experiencing prolonged or systemic disease.3.4.5. Heart and VesselsThe myocardium exhibited a pale and flaccid appearance. The cardiac chambers were filled with inadequately coagulated blood. Petechial and streaked hemorrhages were commonly observed on the endocardial and epicardial surfaces, especially in the regions of the left ventricle and atria.Cardiac lesions served as indicators of widespread vascular impairment and advanced toxemia. These occurrences were observed more frequently in saigas and juvenile goats presenting with acute illness.3.5. The Role of Infected Animals in the Epizootic ProcessA study investigating PPR across different animal species revealed varying degrees of susceptibility to the disease. Nonetheless, the mere presence of susceptibility is not enough to ascertain the epidemiological importance of a species. To elucidate the role of infected animals in the epizootology of PPR, it is crucial to evaluate factors such as the presence and duration of viremia, viral localization in internal organs, the intensity and timing of viral shedding into the environment, the potential for virus carriage, and possible transmission routes.The existing literature offers a brief overview of the involvement of specific African animal species in the transmission of PPR; however, there is a notable absence of data regarding animals raised in European and Asian regions. Consequently, this investigation sought to explore these epizootological facets using susceptible animal models within regulated experimental settings.3.6. Viremia and Viral Localization in the BodyDaily blood samples were collected from infected animals over a period of 12–14 days post-infection to assess the presence and duration of viremia. This period aligned with the incubation phase, the progression of the illness, and the initial stages of recovery.Table 3 summarizes the results of viremia detection across various species and age groups.Table 3 indicates that significant viremia was predominantly observed in local goats within the age range of 1 to 3 months. The virus was predominantly identified in these animals during the period from days 4 to 9 following infection. Viral RNA was identified in one goat from day 4 through day 13. In lambs within the same age group, viremia was detected from day 3 or 4 until day 7, although not all infected lambs yielded positive test results. In older lambs and goats, the virus was identified infrequently, usually coinciding with peak hyperthermia, occurring between days 5 and 7 post-infection.No virus was detected in the blood samples of sheep older than 12 months or in Cameroon goats during the entire observation period. In saigas, viremia was transient, lasting only 1 to 3 days.To investigate the localization and accumulation of the virus in internal organs, post-mortem samples were obtained from animals that either succumbed or were euthanized during the clinical phase of the disease. Samples were collected from saigas and local goats aged 1 to 3 months during days 3 to 5 of the illness. Tissues were collected postmortem from goats in Cameroon after spontaneous death occurred. During the clinical phase of illness, specifically between the 3rd and 5th day, organ samples were collected from older sheep and goats. Detection of the virus was carried out through isolation in lamb kidney (LK) cell culture or by infecting naïve animals. The quantification of viral titers in organs was performed through cell culture titration, with identity verification achieved via PCR and virus neutralization tests using PPRV-specific serum.The results regarding viral localization and accumulation in the organs of sheep, goats, and saigas are detailed in Table 4.Table 4 illustrates that PPRV was primarily found in the organs associated with the digestive tract, respiratory system, and lymphoid tissues of the infected animals. The tissues of Cameroon goats exhibited the highest viral titers, with concentrations reaching 4.5–5.5 log10 TCID50/cm3 in the gastrointestinal mucosa, 4.24–5.0 log10 TCID50/cm3 in the nasal mucosa and lungs, 0.75–2.25 log10 TCID50/cm3 in the lymph nodes and spleen, and 0.5 log10 TCID50/cm3 in the kidneys.Saigas that were euthanized or found deceased on days 3 to 5 of illness typically had lower viral titers. The presence of the virus was identified at levels ranging from 2.50 to 3.75 log10 TCID50/cm3 in the mucosal tissues of the digestive tract, nasal passages, and lungs, with concentrations reaching up to 4.5 to 4.75 log10 TCID50/cm3 in the lymph nodes and spleen. The virus was not successfully isolated from the liver or kidneys of saigas.In local goats aged 1–3 months, the virus was detected at 0.75–1.5 log10 TCID50/cm3 in the lymph nodes, spleen, and intestinal mucosa of euthanized animals. In animals that succumbed to natural causes, the isolation of the virus was achievable solely from lymph nodes and intestinal tissues, and this was only after conducting 2–3 blind passages in LK cell culture. No viral presence was identified in the other organs of these subjects.In adult sheep and goats, the isolation of the virus was infrequent and confined to specific lymph nodes, necessitating 2–3 passages in cell culture for successful detection. The findings suggest that viremia in local sheep, goats, and saigas aligns with the clinical stage of infection, whereas viremia was not present in Cameroon goats despite significant viral accumulation in their internal organs. The virus was predominantly found in the digestive, respiratory, and lymphoid organs, with the highest concentrations observed in Cameroon goats and saigas. Conversely, in local sheep and goats, the viral load was comparatively low, with the virus being most reliably isolated from the prescapular lymph nodes.3.7. Virus Isolation and CarriageThe assessment of PPR virus (PPRV) in different secretions and excretions from infected animals was conducted to identify possible pathways for viral shedding and transmission. Samples were gathered from sheep, goats, and saigas exhibiting clinical manifestations of the disease, which included nasal and oral discharges (saliva and mucus), ocular secretions (tears), urine, and feces. Isolation of the virus was conducted using primary lamb kidney (LK) cell cultures. The findings are presented in Table 5.In local breeds, the shedding of the virus was most evident in goat kids between the ages of 1 and 3 months. PPRV was identified in the ocular and nasal secretions of these animals as early as days 1–2 of the febrile period and in oral secretions and feces within 1–2 days following that. The length of time and the amount of virus excreted were linked to the clinical presentation and severity of the illness. In instances of acute and subacute PPR, the shedding of the virus continued for a duration of 5 to 6 days, with certain cases extending to 8 or 9 days. In animals exhibiting an abortive course, the duration of virus excretion was confined to a span of 2–3 days. Virus titers in secretions varied between 0.75 and 2.5 lg TCID50/cm3.In older goats and sheep, the excretion of the virus was characterized by its intermittent nature, brevity, and occurrence at low titers. Detecting the virus in these groups necessitated the inoculation of whole samples or conducting 2–3 blind passages in cell culture. In goats aged 6 months, viral shedding was observed for a duration of 2 to 3 days through nasal, ocular, and fecal pathways. In goats exceeding 12 months of age, the virus was exclusively isolated from fecal matter. In sheep aged 6 months, the virus was identified in nasal discharge and saliva for a duration of 2 to 3 days, with less consistent detection in ocular discharge. In older sheep, PPRV was found solely in nasal secretions, with no presence in feces.The virus in saigas was identified in nasal, ocular, and oral secretions starting 2–3 days following the onset of fever. Fecal shedding was observed at a later stage. During the progression of the disease, viral titers in secretions and feces showed a gradual increase, ultimately reaching peak levels of 4.0–4.25 lg TCID50/cm3 in the terminal stages. In the final days leading up to death, there was a slight decline in titers observed in individual animals.Cameroon goats that were infected started to shed the virus by the second day of exhibiting fever, showing measurable levels in nasal, ocular, and oral secretions, in addition to feces. At the outset, titers were observed between 0.5 and 1.75 lg TCID50/cm3, experiencing a significant increase in the following days. Maximum titers were recorded in feces (up to 4.5), saliva (3.5–3.75), nasal discharge (3.5–4.75), and ocular discharge (4.0–5.25 lg TCID50/cm3). Elevated viral loads remained present until the demise of the subjects. In one individual, a decrease in body temperature (from 37.5 °C to 34 °C) three days before death was observed alongside a significant decline in virus titers in secretions, with some samples showing undetectable levels of the virus.The results demonstrate that saigas and Cameroon goats are significant shedders of PPRV, releasing the virus in high concentrations during the progression of the disease. Local goat kids aged 1 to 3 months showed viral excretion, but this occurred at reduced titers and for shorter durations. Sheep and older goats exhibited restricted viral shedding, typically occurring between days 2 and 6 of illness and at low concentrations.3.8. Assessment of Post-Recovery Virus CarriageTo assess the potential for post-recovery virus shedding, sheep and goats that had recovered from PPRV infection were monitored for 30 days. Blood, secretions, and excretions were collected regularly, and tissue samples were taken at the end of the period. All samples tested negative for viral presence in both cell culture and animal bioassays. Additionally, three goat kids inoculated with blood and tissue suspensions from recovered animals showed no clinical signs or antibody response. Four healthy animals co-housed with recovered ones for 30 days also remained clinically healthy and seronegative but became infected when later exposed to live virus. These findings indicate that recovered animals do not shed PPRV and are unlikely to contribute to transmission.4. DiscussionPPR is now acknowledged as a distinct disease entity resulting from a morbillivirus belonging to the Paramyxoviridae family. Initially identified in Côte d’Ivoire in 1942 [26,27], it stayed limited to Africa until the late 1980s, resulting in significant losses in sheep and goat farming. In Nigeria, it has been estimated that annual economic losses reach approximately USD 1.5 million [28,29].Since the 2000s, PPR has broadened its reach into Europe, Asia, and the Middle East. The initial documented case emerged in Georgia in 2016, while strains of PPRV that were closely associated with those from China were identified in Kazakhstan during the years 2014–2015 [30,31,32,33].To examine susceptibility in domestic livestock and wildlife within Kazakhstan, we conducted experimental infections on sheep, goats (both local and Cameroon breeds), calves, saigas, and ground squirrels. The findings of our studies demonstrated variation in PPRV infection dynamics that is influenced by species, breed, and age.Cameroon goats and saigas exhibited acute or subacute disease with a mortality rate of 100%, highlighting their significant susceptibility irrespective of age. This underscores their capacity to serve as enhancing hosts, especially in environments with multiple species or in zoological contexts.Local sheep and goats demonstrated a distinct susceptibility that varied with age. Goat kids under 3 months often experienced acute or subacute illnesses, with mortality rates ranging from 7.1% to 33.3%. Goats and sheep older than 12 months generally underwent abortive infections, demonstrating full recovery without fatalities—this aligns with earlier observations.Calves exhibited restricted susceptibility, frequently undergoing abortive infections without pronounced clinical symptoms, indicating a possibility of spillover yet minimal epidemiological relevance in natural settings.Ground squirrels and other tested rodents demonstrated a complete lack of susceptibility to PPRV, with no signs of infection or serologically detectable exposure observed. This reinforces the idea that PPRV exhibits a high degree of host specificity [34,35].The findings indicate that PPR shows a significant reliance on factors such as species, breed, and age-related susceptibility. This conclusion is consistent with the observations made by various authors who have investigated the disease in both endemic and epizootic regions [9,36,37]. The experimental findings broaden the recognized host range by including Kazakh merino sheep, coarse-wool goats, saigas, and calves as susceptible species, which points to the epidemiological importance of both domestic and wild ruminants in Central Asia [38,39,40].The disease presented in both typical and atypical clinical forms, with the typical forms—including acute and subacute PPR—showing clinical signs that align with those noted in previous reports: sustained hyperthermia (41.2–41.8 °C), necrotic stomatitis, mucopurulent rhinitis and conjunctivitis, and diarrhea [41,42]. The subacute form exhibited milder clinical expression and a more prolonged disease course, generally linked to partial resistance in older or previously exposed animals.The unusual presentations, including abortive and latent (subclinical) infections, were marked by mild hyperthermia (40.5–41.1 °C), transient mucosal hyperemia, occasional skin lesions, or a total lack of clinical signs. It is noteworthy that skin lesions, while not consistently observed, have been documented in milder cases of PPR and regarded as a sign of a relatively benign progression of the disease [43]. This evidence indicates that skin-related issues might signify reduced viral activity or adaptation by the host.The findings from the pathological examination exhibited a strong correlation with the severity of the clinical condition. Lesions were consistently noted in the digestive tract, respiratory system, and lymphoid organs in both acute and subacute forms, exhibiting characteristic catarrhal hemorrhagic inflammation and ulcerative necrotic changes. Conversely, abortive and latent forms often exhibited an absence of macroscopic lesions, potentially complicating diagnosis in field conditions. The observed patterns align with earlier investigations detailing the pathogenesis of PPR and its tissue tropism in small ruminants [44,45].Consequently, the clinical and pathological features of PPR identified in our investigation align with established manifestations of the disease and ought to be regarded as dependable indicators of infection in both conventional host species and non-conventional or local breeds, such as Kazakh merino sheep, coarse-wool goats, saigas, and calves. The findings enhance the overall comprehension of PPR’s epidemiology and have the potential to guide surveillance and diagnostic protocols in areas where mixed livestock and wildlife populations are present.The notable variations identified between local and African-origin breeds in the clinical progression of PPR can be attributed to species- and breed-specific susceptibility, as well as the occurrence of secondary infections in endemic regions. Field investigations have often indicated that concurrent infections—such as Pasteurella multocida, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Mycoplasma spp.—significantly worsen the severity of PPR, leading to elevated mortality rates due to bronchopneumonia and septicemia [46,47]. Under our controlled experimental conditions, similar to other studies, we found no evidence of secondary pathogens. This result underscores the possibility that coinfections may contribute to severity in natural outbreaks, despite their absence in laboratory settings.Our virological investigations provided additional evidence for variations in host susceptibility and linked these findings to the pathologic changes observed. Our findings indicate that viremia occurred alongside febrile episodes, with the highest viral loads consistently observed in tissues exhibiting visible lesions, specifically in the mucosa of the digestive and respiratory tracts as well as in lymphoid organs. This distribution corresponds with the established tissue tropism of PPRV, which shows a preference for replication in lymphoid and epithelial tissues.There was a strong correlation between virus titers and the severity of the disease:In acute instances with Cameroon goats and saigas, viral loads were observed at 4.75–5.5 log10 TCID50/cm3, suggesting systemic and high-level replication;In subacute infections, such as those affecting local goat kids and lambs, titers were recorded at lower levels—up to 1.5 log10 TCID50/cm3—indicating moderate pathogenicity;In abortive cases, the presence of low-level virus necessitated 2–3 blind passages for detection, highlighting limited replication and early containment by the host immune response.Our findings confirm a strong link between disease severity, host species, and tissue-specific viral distribution. Notably, PPRV showed preferential replication in mucosal tissues of Cameroon goats, while in saigas, lymphoid organs were the primary sites of viral accumulation. These interspecies differences in viral tropism suggest that PPRV replication is influenced by host-specific immune or cellular factors, a pattern consistent with previous observations [36,48,49].The observed viral distribution in local sheep and goats exhibited a pattern akin to that of saigas, albeit with generally lower titers, indicating a degree of partial resistance or diminished viral replication capability. A significant observation was the variation in viremia. In Cameroon goats, viremia was not detected during the febrile or clinical period, a finding that aligns with results from other studies involving highly susceptible African goat breeds [10,50].Conversely, local sheep and goats consistently exhibited detectable viremia, irrespective of the severity of clinical signs. In saigas, viremia was observed, though it was brief, generally coinciding with the febrile stage. The observed differences can be linked to the unique immune responses associated with specific breeds and species, which affect the dynamics of systemic viral dissemination.Collectively, these findings reinforce the idea that the progression of PPRV infection and the distribution pattern of the virus within tissues are significantly shaped by the host’s immune response and the vulnerability of specific target cell populations. The responses specific to the host may play a crucial role in deciding if the virus stays confined or spreads throughout the system. From a diagnostic perspective, the evidence indicates that the selection of tissue for virus detection must be customized according to the specific species involved. In Cameroon goats, respiratory and gastrointestinal tissues in goats are more likely to produce positive virological results, while lymphoid tissues may provide more insightful information in saigas.This information is especially crucial for enhancing diagnostic sensitivity, particularly when employing methods such as RT-PCR or virus isolation. This also carries important implications for investigations into outbreaks and studies of pathogenesis, underscoring the necessity for tailored approaches specific to each species in the realms of disease surveillance and control. Furthermore, the noted variations in viremia highlight the constraints of depending exclusively on blood-based diagnostics in specific species, especially in instances where the virus is rapidly sequestered in tissues.Extensive information regarding the epizootological dynamics of PPR—encompassing sources of infection, mechanisms of virus carriage, transmission pathways, and environmental resilience—continues to be scarce. Current data, primarily obtained from field observations, suggests that clinically ill animals act as the main reservoirs, with transmission taking place through close contact [12,51]. The role of wildlife in PPR epizootology is still not well understood, even though evidence from other diseases indicates that wild species can serve as reservoirs for pathogens that impact domestic animals [21,52,53].The findings from our experimental investigations indicate that infected animals, both domestic (such as sheep, local goats, and Cameroon goats) and wild (like saigas), actively excrete PPRV during the febrile and clinical phases. Viral shedding was observed through nasal and ocular discharges, saliva, and feces, with the intensity of shedding directly linked to the severity of the disease and the susceptibility of the host. During acute infections, Cameroon goats and saigas exhibited virus titers reaching 4.75 log10 TCID50/cm3 and 4.25 log10, respectively, whereas local lambs and goat kids released lower titers, peaking at 2.5 log10. In milder subacute and abortive cases, the duration and level of viral excretion were both reduced.Importantly, horizontal transmission to co-housed healthy animals was consistently noted, irrespective of species or age, validating both airborne and alimentary pathways of dissemination.The determined contagiousness index—the probability of transmission in a co-housing scenario—varied from 0.66 to 1.00 when the donor was a highly susceptible species, like a Cameroon goat or saiga, and the recipient was an unexposed sheep, goat, or saiga. Conversely, the transmission from adult local sheep and goats yielded a significantly lower index (0.12–0.37), which likely indicates their diminished viral excretion. The findings emphasize the need to consider both the intensity of viral shedding and the susceptibility of the recipient as critical factors influencing transmission dynamics.The results of our study demonstrate that direct contact and mucosal secretions play a key role in the transmission of PPR. The identification of saigas—a wild species—as both a source of virus shedding and a potential vector is especially important, providing new insight into the involvement of wildlife in the spread of this disease.Infected animals are the established source of PPRV, and the transmission of the disease occurs through close interactions in mixed-species environments, particularly when high-shedding species are present. The insights gained are essential for guiding specific control strategies, including the isolation of infected animals, improved biosecurity measures in mixed-species herds, and vaccination initiatives aimed at high-risk species to halt the transmission of infection.The data highlight that, following the introduction of PPR into a population, the disease can disseminate swiftly among highly susceptible species, saigas and Cameroon goats, which are often present in zoological collections within the country. Both species exhibited rapid disease progression and significant viral shedding, positioning them as effective amplifiers of the virus during outbreaks.Conversely, local sheep and goats exhibited a more gradual disease transmission, frequently showing mild or subclinical symptoms. The infection observed in these animals often took an abortive or latent trajectory, leading to positive outcomes. Nonetheless, this seemingly benign nature presents an epizootiological concern: the unnoticed spread of the virus among flocks could remain hidden, particularly without regular clinical and serological monitoring. As a result, PPR can subtly disseminate among populations of seemingly healthy animals, facilitating broader transmission across flocks and regions.A major challenge in managing PPR in enzootic countries is the presence of latent infections in adult sheep and goats, especially in specific breeds that do not exhibit clear symptoms of illness yet still seroconvert.Asymptomatic carriers can serve as hidden sources of infection, particularly during environmental stressors like the rainy season or animal transport—situations recognized to provoke reactivation of subclinical infections and elevate virus excretion [3,45,51].Our controlled experiments yielded no evidence of ongoing virus carriage in sheep and goats that have recovered from PPR. The absence of viral RNA in convalescent animals, as indicated by both virus isolation and PCR detection, implies that these post-recovery animals are unlikely to act as long-term reservoirs for PPRV transmission. This finding is consistent with multiple earlier studies that indicate PPRV does not create chronic infections, setting it apart from other morbilliviruses such as measles, which can occasionally persist in neural tissues [45].Nonetheless, serological surveillance remains an essential method for detecting virus-neutralizing antibodies in previously exposed populations and pinpointing areas of silent viral circulation, especially in regions where the clinical burden is minimal or sporadic. This method is essential for guiding vaccination strategies and focused disease management, particularly in mixed herds or wildlife interfaces.5. ConclusionsThe results of this investigation demonstrate that PPRV shows notable pathogenicity that varies by species, breed, and age. Local sheep and goats exhibited different levels of susceptibility influenced by age, as younger animals showed more pronounced clinical signs and higher mortality rates, whereas adults typically presented with subclinical or abortive manifestations. In contrast, Cameroon goats and saigas exhibited significant susceptibility, characterized by swift disease advancement, pronounced clinical symptoms, and a mortality rate of 100%—identifying them as high-risk amplifiers of the virus in potential outbreak situations.The detection of PPRV in secretions like nasal discharge, saliva, tears, and feces, along with its effective transmission among and between species in experimental settings, highlights the effectiveness of both airborne and alimentary transmission pathways. Nonetheless, the lack of virus detection in urine and the absence of carriage in recovered animals indicate a minimal risk of prolonged virus persistence following recovery.The complete resistance of ground squirrels to PPRV infection highlights the virus’s host specificity, effectively excluding these rodents from the epizootic chain. The findings indicate that employing clinical signs, virus isolation, and serological testing is effective for diagnosis and monitoring purposes. Considering Kazakhstan’s geographic proximity to endemic nations, this study offers crucial data for early detection, species-specific risk evaluation, and the formulation of targeted biosecurity measures to avert future PPR incursions.


Title: A Human Lung Xenograft Mouse Model of Nipah Virus Infection

IntroductionNipah virus (NiV) is a member of the genus Henipavirus (family Paramyxoviridae) that causes severe and often lethal respiratory illness and encephalitis in humans resulting in case fatality rates of up to 92% [1]. The first human cases of NiV infection were identified during an outbreak of severe febrile encephalitis in Malaysia and Singapore in 1998–1999 [2], [3]. More recently, outbreaks have occurred in Bangladesh and India almost yearly since 2001 [1], [4]. NiV can cause Acute Lung Injury (ALI) in humans, and human-to-human transmission has been observed in recent outbreaks of NiV [5], [6], [7]. Data on the histopathology of the lungs of NiV cases is limited to necropsy findings in the respiratory tract of NiV infected cases and include hemorrhage, necrosis and inflammation in the epithelium of the small airways but not in the bronchi [8].Endothelial cells have been identified as a major target for NiV and most studies have focused on the role of the endothelium in NiV pathogenesis [9], [10], [11]. However very limited data is available on the host responses following NiV infection in the human lung. While the endothelium plays an important role in the terminal stages of NiV infection, the role of the respiratory epithelium in the early stages of infection is critical; however, it remains largely unexplored. The specific sites of henipavirus infection in the human respiratory tract are still unknown as well as the molecular mechanism by which these viruses cause disease in humans. We have previously shown that NiV can efficiently infect human respiratory epithelial cells from the trachea, bronchi and small airways resulting in the induction of key inflammatory mediators that have been implicated in leukocyte recruitment and ALI [12]. Similarly, in animal models (hamster, ferret and African green monkey), NiV can replicate to high titers in the lungs of these animals and cause acute and severe respiratory distress [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. Human xenograft mouse models have previously been used to study tissue development and cancer as well as the pathogenesis of infectious agents [18], [19], [20]. The majority of viral pathogenesis studies involving human xenograft mice focus on Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) or Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) in humanized mice that have been grafted with human hematopoietic stem cells and thymus [21], [22].Here we report the first characterization of NiV infection of the human respiratory tract using a human lung xenograft model to gain further insight into the mechanisms of NiV pathogenesis in humans. Our results showed that NiV replicates to high titers in the human lung and that infection results in the induction of a robust host response.ResultsHuman lung xenograft developmentSeverely immunodeficient NSG mice served as hosts to support the successful engraftment of human lung xenografts. We implanted 6 small fragments of human fetal lung in the dorsal subcutaneous space, 3 on each side of the spine. Following transplantation, human fetal lung xenografts typically increased in size by 2–10 fold over 3 months. The human fetal lung xenografts rapidly grafted and developed mature structures similar to those seen in adult lung (Figure 1A). These mature structures included bronchi that were partially surrounded by cartilage (Figure 1B), lined with ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium (Figure 1C) and surrounded by longitudinal elastic fibers. The bronchi divide into bronchioles and terminal bronchioles lined by cuboidal to flat epithelium (Figure 1D). The distal respiratory tract comprises of primitive alveolar spaces that are lined with both cells that have flat (type 1) and larger rounded (type 2) pneumocyte morphology (Figure 1E). The alveolar walls of xenografts were thicker than those of normal adult human lungs. The human graft was well vascularized with the presence of arteries, veins, and capillaries (Figure 1F). Finally, the expression patterns of ephrin B2, the receptor of NiV, was similar to that seen in normal human lung tissue [23] (Figure 1G) with expression on bronchial epithelium, alveolar cells and vasculatures (Figure 1H).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g001Figure 1Histological characterization of human lung xenografts.Normal (A) and xenograft (B–F) human lung sections were stained with H&E as described in Experimental Procedures. Following transplantation, human lung xenografts develop mature structures (B) similar to those seen in normal human lung (A)(10× magnification). Structures include pseudostratified ciliated epithelium (C) (40× magnification), terminal bronchioles (D) (10× magnification), alveolar spaces (E)(40× magnification) and pulmonary vasculature (F)(10× magnification). Ephrin B2 expression was observed in normal human lung (red) (G) and human lung xenograft tissues (yellow) (H) with similar distribution on epithelium (10× magnification). Br = bronchi, V = pulmonary vasculature, Av = alveoli, Ca = cartilage, Ci = cilia, Pe = pseudostratified epithelium, Ef = elastic fibers, Tb = terminal bronchiole.NiV replication in human lung xenograftsNatural NiV infection involves exposure to the virus through the respiratory epithelium. To mimic this route in human lung xenografts that lack air exchange, tissues were directly injected with NiV. Following direct intragraft injection of the 3 lung tissues on the left side (primary infection) within each mouse, NSG mice did not show any signs of morbidity or mortality during our observation period of 10 days. In addition, two non-grafted NSG mice that were challenged intradermally as controls, with the same dose as xenografts, did not develop any clinical signs. Primary infection of the human lung xenografts resulted in detection of infectious NiV as early as 1 day post infection (Figure 2A) and NiV replicated to high titers (107 TCID50/gram tissue) by day 3 post infection. NiV titers remained high until the end of the experiment at 10 days post infection. Importantly, high titers of NiV were also detected in the other 3 lung tissues (on the right side of each mouse) that were not initially infected through direct intragraft injection as early as 3 days post infection. This finding clearly demonstrates that the virus can spread from infected human lung grafts to uninfected grafts in the same mouse, most likely through viremia (secondary infection; Figure 2A). The presence of viremia was further supported by the observation that infectious NiV was detected, albeit at lower levels, in several mouse tissues including lung, brain, heart, spleen and kidney at various time points post infection (Figure 2B). In fact, viremia was detected in a blood sample of 1 animal on day 10 post infection in which a low level (300 TCID50/mL) of infectious NiV was determined (Table 1). Interestingly, virus was not detected in organs from non-grafted NSG mice that were challenged intradermally with the same dose (Table 1), suggesting the NSG mouse tissues are probably not intrinsically susceptible to NiV. In order to confirm that the human lung xenografts could be infected via the hematogenous route, we next challenged 2 lung-engrafted NSG mice with NiV via the IP route. The IP challenge with NiV in this model confirmed that infection resulted in detectable viremia in 1 animal with virus spreading to the human lung xenografts in both, replicating to high titers and resulting in histopathological changes similar to those observed with intragraft challenge (Table 1). Together, these data suggest that following intragraft infection, the human lung is highly susceptible to NiV infection and results in viremia and subsequent spread to other organs in the absence of disease.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g002Figure 2Nipah virus replication in human lung xenografts.Virus replication was determined in human lung (A) and mouse (B) tissues at days 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 post infection by virus titration. Titers were determined in human lung following primary (direct injection) or secondary (infection due to viremia). Samples from three animals were assayed and analyzed and the mean titers were calculated as TCID50/gram tissue. The error bars represent the standard deviation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.t001Table 1Summary of virological and histological findings in human lung graft, mouse tissues and blood following Nipah virus challenge.Route of infectionHuman lungMouse tissue
Infectious Virus

Viral Antigen

Histopathology

Infectious Virus

Viral Antigen

Histopathology

Blood

Direct (n = 15; Primary)
+++++++++
Indirect (n = 9; Secondary)
+++++++++++; starting 5DPI in lung−+
IP
*
(n = 2)
+++++++++++; in lung−+
SC
#
(n = 2)
N/AN/AN/A−−−−N/A = Not applicable. Direct = injection into the graft, resulting in primary infection; Indirect = secondary infection resulting from virus dissemination from the direct infected lung graft. IP = Intraperitoneal challenge. SC = Subcutaneous challenge. Infectious virus was determined in human lung and mouse tiisues and whole blood by TCID50% as described in Materials & Methods. Viral antigen was detected with an anti N antibody as described in Materials & Methods. Histopathology is based on H&E stained lung sections described in Materials & Methods.* = data available on day 10 post infection only.# = for control NSG mice only.+++ = high virus titer/intense immunostaining/extensive histopathological changes. + = low virus titer/low intensity immunostaining, − = not detected.NiV induced histopathology in human lung xenograftsIn order to study the histopathological changes associated with NiV infection in the human lung, tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). No gross pathologic lesions were observed in the human lung grafts. Since NSG mice exhibit multiple defects in innate and adaptive immunity [24], NiV infection in human lung grafts did not result in significant inflammation. Histopathological changes in the human lung tissues following NiV infection were independent of the route of infection (intragraft, indirect or intraperitoneal) and included small focal areas with syncytia and necrosis as early as day 3 pi (Figure 3A). These areas rapidly expanded to large areas with hemorrhages and significant loss of architecture of the small airways by day 10 pi (Figure 3B). The main histopathological features of NiV infection in these tissues were the characteristic syncytia formation (Figure 3C) and areas of necrosis (Figure 3D). Syncytia formation could be observed in bronchial epithelium (Figure 3C), alveolar epithelium (Figure 3E) and vascular endothelium (Figure 3F). In addition, fibrinoid necrosis was observed in some of the vasculature as well as recruitment of granulocytes (Figure 3F). In agreement with the absence of clinical signs, NiV infection did not result in histopathological changes in any visceral mouse tissue (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g003Figure 3Histopathological changes during Nipah virus infection in human lung xenografts.Human lung sections were stained with H&E as described in Experimental Procedures. (A) Human lung with focal areas of necrosis and syncytia formation (black arrow) on day 3 post infection (10× magnification). (B) Human lung with extensive areas of necrosis, syncytia formation and loss of architecture on day 10 post infection (10× magnification). (C) Bronchi with syncytia formation (*) on day 3 post infection (20× magnification). (D) Loss of alveolar architecture and areas of necrosis (black arrow) on day 10 post infection (20× magnification). (E) Alveolar space with syncytial formation (*) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (F) Pulmonary vasculature with syncytial formation (*) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification), fibrinoid necrosis of the intima, and influx of granulocytes (black arrowhead). Data are representative from 6 tissues per animal, 3 animals per time point.NiV tropism in human lung xenograftsIn order to identify the cells targeted by NiV in the human lung, viral nucleocapsid protein (N) expression in human lung grafts was examined with immunohistochemistry. Expression of NiV N coincided with the focal areas of histopathological changes on day 3 pi and showed intense staining (Figure 4A). By day 10, widespread expression of NiV N was observed throughout the human lung tissues (Figure 4B). NiV primarily targeted the respiratory epithelium of the bronchi and bronchioles, interstitial mesenchymal cells (Figure 4C), and the small airways (Figure 4D). Cells targeted in the small airways were primarily cuboidal, which is consistent with type-2 pneumocyte morphology, although cells with type-1 pneumocyte morphology also showed reactivity. In addition to the respiratory epithelium, NiV replication also involved the vasculature (Figure 4E). In agreement with the observation that low levels of infectious virus were detectable in several mouse tissues, small focal areas of viral antigen primarily focused in small airway epithelium could be detected in mouse lungs (Figure 4F) but not in other organs tested (Table 1). Tropism of viral antigen in mouse lung was similar between tissues infected by direct injection or following IP challenge (data not shown).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g004Figure 4Nipah virus tropism in human lung xenografts.Lung sections were stained by immunohistochemical (IHC) detection of Nipah virus nucleoprotein as described in Experimental Procedures. An overview of viral antigen distribution is shown on day 3 (A) and day 10(B) post infection (10× magnification). (C) Bronchial epithelium positive for NiV antigen in a syncytium (black arrow) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (D) Alveolar space with NiV positive cell, primarily cuboidal morphology on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (E) Pulmonary vasculature positive for NiV antigen on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (F) Small focal area in mouse lung tissue positive for NiV antigen (red) on day 10 post infection (10× magnification)(nuclei in blue). Br = bronchi, V = pulmonary vasculature. T2 = Type 2 pneumocyte. Data are representative from 3 animals per time point.Although focal areas were generally not centered around vessels (Figure 5A) during the early stages of infection, when NiV infection involved the vasculature, CD31-positive endothelial cells were a specific target of infection (Figure 5B). Similar findings were observed in animals challenged via the IP route (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g005Figure 5Cell tropism of Nipah virus in human lung xenografts.Lung sections were stained by immunofluorescent detection of Nipah virus nucleoprotein (red), CD31 (green) and nucleus (blue) as described in Experimental Procedures. (A) Human lung showing focal area of Nipah virus distinct from pulmonary vasculature on day 3 post infection (10× magnification). (B) CD31 positive endothelium of pulmonary vasculature is positive for Nipah virus antigen (40× magnification). Data are representative from 3 animals per time point.Inflammatory responses during NiV infectionIn order to elucidate the host responses following NiV infection in the human lung, the expression of several cytokines and chemokines was determined in homogenates of human lung xenografts following direct infection with NiV (Figure 6). Since human immune cells were absent in this model, any expression of human cytokines or chemokines was primarily the result from NiV infection of human epithelial and endothelial cells. NiV infection in human lung resulted in the expression of several cytokines/chemokines, including eotaxin-1, G-CSF, GM-CSF, TNFα, VEGF, IP-10, IL-1β and IL-6 starting by day 5 pi (Figure 6). Expression of GM-CSF, TNFα, IP10 and IL-1β peaked on day 5 post infection and gradually declined over time. IL-6 and eotaxin-1 expression peaked at day 7 pi, whereas G-CSF initially peaked on day 5 but remained high throughout infection. Interestingly, VEGF expression continued to increase over time concomitant with the increased hemorrhaging and remodeling of the lung. The cytokine and chemokines profiles were similar between lung xenografts following primary (direct) or secondary (indirect) infection (data not shown).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g006Figure 6Cytokine levels in Nipah virus infected human lung xenografts.The concentrations of cytokines were determined in lung homogenates of human lung xenografts following direct infection with NiV as described in the Experimental Procedures. Concentrations are expressed as picogram (pg) cytokine per gram lung tissue. The error bars represent the standard deviation.DiscussionNipah virus is an emerging zoonotic virus that can cause severe respiratory distress and encephalitis in humans [1]. Despite intensive studies in vitro and in animal models, little is known about the mechanisms governing the development of NiV-related respiratory disease in humans; this is due to difficulties in obtaining human samples where the disease is endemic. To address this important limitation, the goal of the present study was to characterize a novel human lung xenograft model to study the pathogenesis of NiV infection in human lung in vivo.Studies on the molecular mechanisms of NiV-mediated pathogenesis have been hampered by the lack of biologically relevant in vitro models for studying the initial host responses to NiV infection in the human lung [7], [13], [15]. To fill this gap, we recently showed that NiV can efficiently replicate in primary epithelial cells from the human respiratory tract [12]. While this is an attractive model to study the early steps of NiV entry in the host, it lacks the complexity of the microenvironment in the lung. In the current model, we show that human fetal lung tissues grafted on an immunocompromised mouse develop into more mature human lung tissues within 3 months after implantation. Transplanted lung tissues rapidly vascularized and developed bronchioles, lined with columnar epithelium, and alveolar-like spaces closely resembling those seen in normal human lung tissue.The prototype strain of NiV (Malaysia) was used in this study. While the outbreaks in Malaysia and Singapore have primarily been associated with the development of severe febrile encephalitis with a case fatality rate of 38%, respiratory symptoms were observed (40% of lethal cases) [8]. Interestingly, the more recent outbreaks in Bangladesh and India are associated with a higher prevalence of respiratory disease as well as a significantly higher case fatality rate of 67% to 92% [1], [6]. It is currently unknown whether differences in respiratory involvement are due to genetic difference between the Malaysia and Bangladesh strains of NiV or whether confounding factors are involved, however both NiV strains can replicate efficiently and cause respiratory distress in animals [25], [26]. In addition, no histopathological data is available for human cases of the Bangladesh strain of NiV; therefore, the Malaysia strain was used in this study to allow for comparisons of histopathology and viral tropism. In humans, vasculitis and fibrinoid necrosis in the lungs was observed in the majority of fatal cases of NiV infection [8]. Multinucleated giant cells were occasionally observed in alveolar spaces and showed prominent immunostaining for viral antigen, along with alveolar hemorrhage, edema and pneumonia. Bronchial epithelium rarely showed histopathological changes. Nipah viral antigen could also be observed in the vasculature and rarely in bronchiolar epithelium [8]. We believe that the lack of viral antigen in the bronchial epithelium in fatal human cases is most likely due to timing of sampling. We previously showed, using a hamster model, that the bronchial epithelium is initially targeted by NiV early on during infection followed by rapid spread to the interstitium and involvement of pulmonary vessels [13].In the present model, NiV replicated to high titers following intragraft injection, and virus was found to primarily replicate in respiratory epithelium of the bronchi and small airways. This is consistent with our previous finding that human respiratory epithelium is highly susceptible to NiV infection [12]. In animal models, the lung is the primary target organ of NiV infection following intranasal challenge [13], [14]. In addition to the respiratory epithelium, NiV replication was also found in the endothelium, a type of cell that has been identified as an important target for NiV [11]. The infection of the vascular system is thought to occur in the late stages of disease and lead to systemic spread of these viruses to other organs, including brain and kidney [13], [27]. In our model, systemic spread of the virus was indicated by similar titers and replication kinetics of NiV in directly inoculated lung grafts and grafts not directly injected with virus. This suggests that following infection of the lung, NiV quickly becomes viremic and spreads to other organs. In addition, systemic infection through intraperitoneal injection with NiV also resulted in infection of the human lung grafts, thus confirming hematogenous spread of the virus.Interestingly, NiV infection in NSG mice engrafted with human lung tissues did not result in clinical signs despite evidence of replication in mouse organs, including lung and brain. Previous studies have shown that NiV infection in type I IFN receptor knock-out mice and aged mice is lethal [28], [29]. Aged mice have been shown to mount an aberrant IFN response [30]. While the NSG mice are immunocompromised, they can mount an IFN response, which seems sufficient to protect against lethal disease in our studies. Alternatively, it is possible that NSG mice are not susceptible to NiV and that the virus measured in mouse organs is only found in the blood. Also, the small foci of viral antigen detected in mouse lungs could correspond to emboli of infected human cells that slough off from the infected grafts.Several cytokines and especially IL-6, IP-10 and VEGF were upregulated during NiV infection in the human lung. Interestingly, the levels of cytokines observed in our xenograft lung model are similar to those observed in the lungs of fatal cases of influenza virus A (H1N1) [31]. Upregulation of inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α, IP-10, IL-1β and IL-6 in the lungs was previously shown to play a role in the pathogenesis of lethal NiV in hamsters [13], as well as in the development of ALI with other respiratory virus infections, including SARS-CoV and influenza virus (H5N1) [30], [32], [33]. VEGF has an important role in ALI pathogenesis by acting as a growth factor and increasing vascular permeability [34]. We previously showed that VEGF is expressed by human respiratory epithelial cells during NiV infection [12]. This suggests that VEGF may be partly responsible for the increased pulmonary hemorrhage, endothelial destruction, and alveolar remodeling in an emphysema-like phenotype as observed in our model. Since these inflammatory mediators also play an important role in the recruitment of immune cell, our data suggests that inflammation could be observed in this model when human immune cells are present.In addition to implanting human lung xenografts, the NSG mice have been used to engraft the human hematopoietic system to study hematopoiesis, immunity, inflammatory disease and human-specific pathogens. This humanized NSG mouse model routinely contains >25% human CD45+ cells in the peripheral blood 12 weeks post engraftment of hematopoietic stem cells [35]. Many of the inflammatory mediators expressed in the current study play an important role in immune cell recruitment [36], [37]. The ability to engraft human immune cells will allow us to study the effect of these mediators on specific immune cells populations. Future studies will make use of the fully humanized lung xenograft model to study the role of the inflammatory response in the pathogenesis of the different henipavirus strains in the human lung.In conclusion, these data confirm that the human lung is highly susceptible to NiV infection. NiV is capable of replicating to high titers in the human lung and targets both respiratory epithelium and endothelium. Infection results in the characteristic syncytial formation and extensive lung damage. Key inflammatory mediators such as IL-6, IP-10, G-CSF and GM-CSF are expressed during infection. This model will allow for more detailed studies of the pathogenesis of respiratory disease caused by henipavirus infection. Furthermore, these data point to several inflammatory mediators that potentially play critical roles in henipavirus pathogenesis, which may be valuable as candidates for future studies of the mechanism of henipavirus pathogenesis and as potential targets for treatment.Materials and MethodsEthics statementApproval for animal experiments was obtained from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, University of Texas Medical Branch (protocol number 0905041). Animal work was performed by certified staff in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) approved facility. Animal housing, care and experimental protocols were in accordance with NIH guidelines of the Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare. Discarded tissue from deceased human fetuses was obtained via a non-profit partner (Advanced Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA) as approved under exemption 4 in the HHS regulations (45 CFR Part 46). Need for informed consent was waived by the UTMB Institutional Review Board.Viruses and cellsNiV (Malaysia strain) was kindly provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States. The virus were propagated on Vero cells in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT), L-glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified CO2 incubator (5%). All infectious work was performed in a class II biological safety cabinet in a biosafety level 4 laboratory (BSL4) at the Galveston National Laboratory.Human lung xenograft mouse modelNOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice, also known as NOD/SCID/γcnull or NSG mice (Jackson Laboratories), 3–5 weeks of age, were housed in a sterile microisolator environment. Mice were engrafted with human lung tissue (Advanced Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA). Six fragments of human fetal lung from the same donor (15–19 weeks of age) were sutured to muscle fascia in the dorsal subcutaneous space in each mouse (∼0.5 cm from the spine, three on each side). Animals received appropriate post-surgery treatment including antibiotics and analgesics.Animal infectionTwelve weeks post-engraftment, animals were transferred to an ABSL-4 facility. Prior to infection, animals were anesthetized by chamber induction (5 Liters/min 100% O2 and 3–5% isoflurane). Three of the six lung tissues were inoculated via intragraft injection of 105 TCID50 NiV in a 50 µl volume. Animals were monitored daily for weight loss and clinical signs. Groups of 3 animals were euthanized on days 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 post infection, and samples for virus isolation and histological examination were procured from whole blood (EDTA vacutainer), human lung tissues, and mouse liver, spleen, kidney, lung, heart and brain. In a separate experiment, 2 animals were injected via the intraperitoneal route with 105 TCID50 NiV and euthanized 10 days post infection. Control groups were NSG mice without a lung xenograft and challenged via the intradermal route with 105 TCID50 NiV on the back of the mouse at the same location the human lung xenografts would be.Virus titrationsWhole blood was tested for presence of infectious virus by 10-fold diltutions as described below. Tissue samples were weighed and homogenized in 10 equivalent volumes of DMEM to generate a 10% solution. The solution was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm under aerosol containment in a table top centrifuge for 5 min to pellet insoluble parts. Virus titration was performed using a TCID50 assay on 96-well plates (1×104 Vero cells per well) with 100 µL inocula (cleared homogenate or whole blood) from 10-fold serial dilutions. Plates were incubated for 3 days at 37°C, and wells were scored for cytopathic effect (CPE). Virus concentrations were calculated as TCID50 per gram of tissue.Histopathology and immunohistochemistryAll tissue samples were immersion-fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for at least 7 days under BSL4 conditions. Prior to removal from the BSL4 laboratory, formalin was changed and specimens were processed under BSL2 conditions by conventional methods, either embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 µm thickness and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or embedded in Tissue Tek and frozen sections cut at 3–8 µm thickness and used for immunofluorescent (IF) staining. Tissues for immunohistochemistry (IHC) were stained as previously described using a rabbit anti-NiV-nucleoprotein (N) antibody (kindly provided by Dr. C. Broder, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD) [13]. Tissues for IF were stained with a rabbit anti-NiV-N antibody, a biotinylated anti-CD31 (eBioscience), anti-collagen IV labeled with Alexa 647 (eBioscience), anti ephrin B2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or ephrin B3 (R&D Systems) and Hoechst for nuclear staining. NiV N in mouse tissue could only be detected following immunofluorescent staining, likely due to the limit of detection by conventional IHC. An Alexa 546 labeled secondary antibody (Life Technologies) was used for detection of the anti NiV N antibody as well as anti ephrin B2 and B3 antibodies and an Alexa 488 conjugated streptavidin (R&D Systems) was used for detection of the anti-CD31 antibody.Milliplex analysisCytokine/chemokine concentrations in the homogenates of NiV infected human lung tissues were determined using a Milliplex Human Cytokine PREMIXED 28 Plex Immunoassay Kit (Millipore, Billerica, USA). Prior analysis, samples were inactivated on dry ice by gamma-radiation (5 MRad). The assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. The concentration of the following 28 cytokines were determined using the Bio-Plex 200 system (BioRad): Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF), Granulocyte-Colony Stimulating Factor (G-CSF), Granulocyte Macrophage-Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF), interferon (IFN)-α2, IFNγ, Interleukin (IL)-1α, IL-1ß, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12(p40), IL-12(p70), IL-13, IL-15, IL-17A, chemokine ligand 3-like 1 (CCL3L1 or MIP-1α), chemokine ligand 4 (CCL4 or MIP-1ß), chemokine ligand 10 (IP-10 or CXCL10), chemokine ligand 11 (CCL11 or Eotaxin-1), chemokine ligand 13 (CCL13 or MCP-1), Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF-α), Lymphotoxin alpha (TNFß) and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF).


Title: Camelids and Cattle Are Dead-End Hosts for Peste-des-Petits-Ruminants Virus

1. IntroductionPeste-des-petits-ruminants (PPR) is a highly contagious notifiable transboundary disease caused by PPR virus (PPRV, species: small ruminant morbillivirus [1]) that mainly affects small ruminants. Since the worldwide eradication of the closely related rinderpest virus (RPV, species: rinderpest morbillivirus) in 2011, PPRV has spread considerably across African and Asian countries, in particular lineage (L)IV of the four known PPRV lineages (LI to IV) [2]. Clinical signs in small ruminants, particularly in goats, include fever, erosions of mucosal membranes, nasal and ocular discharge, respiratory distress, diarrhea, and death [3,4]. In sheep and other wild or domestic species within the Artiodactyla order (even-toed ungulates), disease expression associated with PPRV-infection may vary between subclinical infection to severe clinical signs and death, similar to goats [5]. The high morbidity and mortality rates of up to 100% in small ruminants threatens the livelihood of the poorest people that depend on small ruminant production and results in considerable economical losses of affected countries around the globe. Therefore, the eradication of PPRV is targeted for 2030 [2,6]. For RPV, reservoir hosts including various wildlife species had been determined [7,8], while for the spread of PPRV the possible role of atypical hosts of other domestic and wild artiodactyls still remains largely unknown [5]. The identification of reservoir hosts that may contract the disease particularly by silent spread over large distances and across borders without expression of obvious clinical signs is of major concern. For example, sheep subclinically infected with PPRV are a known possible source of silent PPRV-spread [5,9]. PPRV RNA, antigen or infectious virus was detected in blood or tissue samples from different wild animal species [5,10], camels [11,12], buffaloes [13], and cattle [14], but no transmission to susceptible contact animals or shedding of infectious virus has so far been reported in any sound study for these Artiodactyla species. Additionally, due to multiple disease outbreaks in camels, which were associated with PPRV-infection with any of the lineages LII, LIII [15], or LIV, PPR has been discussed an emerging disease in camels [12,16,17,18]. El-Hakim [19] reports transmission of a PPRV LI strain from camels to goats, but the study design does not preclude natural infection with PPRV or other pathogens causing PPR-like clinical signs, because infection route, biosafety, and sanitary measures have not been described. Similar to cattle, pigs were previously considered dead-end hosts for PPRV [18]. However, PPRV transmission from pigs to a contact pig and a contact goat, and the excretion of infectious PPRV by pigs and wild boar after experimental intranasal infection with the virulent PPRV LIV strain Kurdistan/2011 showed recently that suids may indeed act as a potential source of PPRV infection [9]. Similarly, transmission of RPV to contact cattle was recorded for pigs [20], but not for camels experimentally infected with RPV, despite of using different inoculation routes (intravenous (i.v.), subcutaneous (s.c.), contact to RPV-infected cattle) and the detection of infectious PPRV in the blood of some camels [21]. Taken together the unclear host traits of various species indicates that single or multiple species together may be a potential additional source of PPRV-infection depending on various host, virus and/or environmental factors in an ecosystem. For example, stress, concurrent infections, abundance, density and behavior/interaction of host species, virulence, shedding patterns and survival of a virus strain, climate, and anthropogenic practice (e.g., transhumance, land use) [9,22,23,24,25,26,27]. In general, the basic reproductive number (R0; expected number of secondary infections caused by a typical infected individual in a susceptible population) determines whether a pathogen can cause (i) a major epidemic by sustained transmission (R0 > 1; maintenance/reservoir host), (ii) a self-limiting outbreaks (0 < R0 < 1; spillover/recipient host), or (iii) a single event of transmission (R0 = 0; dead-end spillover/recipient host) [26]. For PPRV, goats and sheep are recognized reservoir hosts that may transmit PPRV, show typical PPR disease and a similar pathogenesis after PPRV infection [2,3,4,9,28]. The host traits of other species susceptible to PPRV-infection according to serological or virological evidence is still under investigation or unknown. We therefore suggest the terms “typical” hosts for domestic small ruminants and “atypical” hosts for other susceptible host species of PPRV, similar to Bataille, et al. [29] and Abdullah, et al. [30]. Variations in receptor specificity influence host range, tissue tropism, pathogenicity and transmissibility of different viruses [31]. Morbilliviruses are negative-sense single stranded RNA viruses. The six transcriptional units of the PPRV-genome encode for six structural proteins: Nucleoprotein (N), phosphoprotein (P), matrix protein (M), the fusion (F) and hemagglutinin (H) membrane glycoproteins, and the polymerase (L). The P gene also encodes for the two non-structural proteins C and V [32,33]. Similar to PPRV, a wide host range for the other animal morbilliviruses (canine distemper virus (CDV), cetacean morbillivirus (CeMV) and RPV that infect respectively carnivores, cetaceans and artiodactyls) has been reported [7,8,32,34,35,36,37]. Attachment of morbilliviruses to cell surfaces is mediated via their H glycoprotein by direct protein–protein interaction with the two major natural host receptors involved in morbillivirus infection: CD150 (signaling lymphocyte activation molecule, SLAM) and nectin-4 [32]. Fusion activity of the F protein allows virus entry into the cell cytoplasm [32]. SLAM receptors are present on activated lymphocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells (DC) and lead to systemic morbillivirus infection, while the infection of epithelial cells via nectin-4 receptors plays an important role in disease development and virus transmission [37,38,39,40]. The tropism of morbilliviruses for immune cells and lymphoid organs may lead to immune suppression and a higher susceptibility to secondary infections and disease expression [9,39]. The limited inherent capacity for antigenic variation of morbillivirus glycoproteins [37], and the high conservation of the SLAM and nectin-4 receptors across mammalian species facilitate cross-species transmission of animal morbilliviruses between related mammalian species [35,38]. We aimed to scrutinize the contradictory reports of PPRV-infection associated with and without clinical signs in camelids and cattle and to elucidate their potential role in the epidemiology and eradication of PPRV. Furthermore, PPRV-infection of South American camelids (SAC) has never been reported. Accordingly, in light of our results from three independent transmission experiments with cattle, SAC and dromedaries using the PPRV/Kurdistan/2011 strain virulent in small ruminants and suids [3,9,41], we conducted a comprehensive literature review. The results suggest cattle and camelids are dead-end hosts for PPRV.2. Materials and Methods2.1. VirusThe small ruminant morbillivirus lineage IV (PPRV-LIV) strain Kurdistan/2011 was isolated on CHS-20 (goat-SLAM) cells [42] from a lung sample from a wild goat (bezoar ibex, Capra aegagrus) in Iraq [3,9,41] (lab submission no. BH15/11-5; Accession no. JF969755.1, KF648288, KF648287.1). The virus was passaged twice on vero.dog.slam.tag cells [43] (10^4.83 TCID50/mL, quantification cycle (Cq) value 15.01) and this virus stock (PPRV Kurdistan/2011/BH15-11_5/1CHS/2VDS 11/06/14) was used for all transmission trials as described previously [9]. The full-coding genome of the PPRV-LIV strain Kurdistan/2011 was obtained by next generation sequencing according to [44,45] and published in GenBank (Accession no. MK408669). The highest identity (98%) and alignment score of the Kurdistan/2011 strain was found with PPRV LIV strain Turkey/2000 (Accession no. AJ849636) (BLASTN 2.8.1+; http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). 2.2. Animals and Study DesignAll animal experiments conducted in Germany were approved by the competent authorities of the Federal State of Mecklenburg–Western Pomerania and are in accordance with European legislation concerning animal welfare in particular directive 2010/63/EU. The experimental protocol of the trial with dromedaries was reviewed and approved by the ethics commission at the Central Veterinary Research Laboratory (Dubai, United Arab Emirates). To investigate whether PPRV-infected cattle and camelids may transmit infectious PPRV to PPRV-naïve contact goats or animals of the same species, PPRV transmission trials were conducted with cattle, South American camelids (SAC) and dromedaries (Table 1). Prior to experimental PPRV-infection, all animals were confirmed to be free of a previous PPRV infection with cELISA, they were checked by veterinarians that declared them clinically healthy and naïve to PPRV (trials 1 to 3; Figure 1), and animals of trials 1 and 2 were dewormed. PPRV transmission trials with cattle (trial 1) and SAC (trial 2) were conducted separately in the containment facility of the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Isle of Riems, Germany. The cattle (C1–C3), alpacas (A1–A3), and llamas (L4–L6) (Table 1) were intranasally (i.n.) infected with 2 mL of approximately 10^4.5 TCID50/mL (1 mL in each nostril) using nasal atomizers (LMA MADTM 100, Wolfram Droh GmbH, Mainz, Germany). Two to three days after experimental infection (dpi), contact-control animals were added to the same enclosures of the cattle or SAC (see details in Table 1) and fed from the same feeding trough. The PPRV transmission trial with ten dromedaries (trial 3) was conducted at the Central Veterinary Research Institute, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Three young (D.6A5, D.DBO, D.54A) and three old (D.F7B, D.No2, D.No4) dromedaries (D) and one positive control (pc)-goat (G.8682) were i.n. infected using Pocket Nebulizer, Micro A-I-R, Omron, Germany (D.6A5, D.DBO, D.No4, pc-goat) or Pasteur pipette (D.54A, D.F7B, D.No2). The three experimentally infected young adult dromedaries and two young adult contact control dromedaries (D.204, D.O5E) were kept in the same enclosure outdoor (pen 1). Two contact control goats (G.9499, G.9500) were kept in a small enclosure separated by a fence from pen 1 (to avoid serious injury of the goats by aggressive behavior of the dromedaries), which allowed direct nasal contact between dromedaries and goats. In pen 2, three experimentally infected old dromedaries and two old contact control dromedaries (D.No1, D.No6) were kept. The pc-goat was completely separated from the other two pens indoor (pen 3). For all animals, rectal body temperature and clinical score was recorded daily (trials 1 and 2) or in regular intervals (trial 3) from a few days before experimental infection until the end of the experiments (Figure 1H,I). Clinical signs were evaluated using the clinical score sheet published by Pope, et al. [4] for small ruminants. For cattle [46] and camelids [47] the score sheet was adapted (Table S1a respectively Table S1b). Clinical signs were scored cumulatively (see further details in Table S1a,b) and graded as follows: None obvious (clinical score (CS) 0), mild (CS 1 to 4), moderate (CS 5 to 9), and severe (CS ≥ 10). The clinical score of the cattle and SAC was assessed by the same veterinarian, the dromedaries and goats of trial 3 by multiple veterinarians. Oronasal (cattle, SAC) or nasal (dromedaries, pc-goat), conjunctival and fecal swab samples as well as serum and EDTA-treated whole-blood samples (all animals) were collected at regular intervals (Figure 1A–E). Swab sample collection, processing and storage was conducted according to Schulz, et al. [9]. 2.3. Serological and Hematological AnalysesSerological and hematological analyses were generally conducted as described previously [9]. Briefly, serum samples collected at regular intervals (Figure 1F,G) were tested with competitive ELISA (ID Screen® PPR competition, ID.vet, France) [48] and selected samples with a standard microneutralization test against the PPRV Kurdistan/2011 isolate used for experimental infection. Low, moderate and high neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers were distinguished according to [9] (<1.5, 1.5, to 2.5 respectively >2.5 log10 ND50 (ND50: virus neutralization in 50% of the replicates [49])). Leucocytes from cattle, SAC and the respective contact animals were counted in a Neubauer counting chamber after lysis of erythrocytes by diluting whole blood 1:100 in 3% acetic acid. The full blood count from dromedary and the pc-goat whole blood samples (trial 3) was automatically analyzed using a hematological analyzer (CELL-DYN 3700, Abbott, IL, USA).2.4. Virological AnalysesVirological analyses of serum, whole-blood, swab samples collected at regular intervals (Figure 1A–E) and of tissue samples were conducted as previously described [9]. Briefly, we used NucleoMagVET kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) on a KingFisher platform (KingFisher Flex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) for extraction and the real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR) assay of Batten et al. [50] for PPRV-RNA quantification. An internal control system was used to verify proper RNA extraction and detection as described [51], as well as negative and positive controls. PPRV-RNA loads were differentiated to high (quantitative cycle value (Cq) 18-24.999), moderate (Cq 25-29.999), low (Cq 30-34.999), weak (Cq 35-42), and negative (no Cq). All samples collected in trials 1 and 2 were analyzed by RT-qPCR. Of the 6 experimentally PPRV-inoculated dromedaries, RT-PCR analysis was conducted with samples from 4 dromedaries that showed seropositive results (D.6A5, D.DBO) by cELISA or a slight transient rise in antibody levels below the cut off at 20 dpi (D.54A, D.F7B) (Figure 1F). PCR-positive samples from SAC and cattle were subjected to endpoint dilution assays for virus quantification using Vero.dog.slam.tag (green monkey) (VDS) cells [43] and CHS-20 (monkey CV1) (CHS-20) cells [42] in parallel as described [9]. All swab samples collected from all dromedaries and goats of trial 3 were proceeded to virus isolation on CHS-20 cells. An anti-PPRV-nucleoprotein (Np) purified monoclonal mouse antibody (Mab anti-PPR, concentration 1 mg/mL, 50% Glycerin, ID.vet) and Alexa 488 (goat anti-mouse) fluorophore were used for indirect immunofluorescence staining.2.5. Pathological AnalysesSelected animals were examined post-mortem for gross pathological lesions. Dromedaries were not euthanized at the end of the trial. Representative tissue samples of 24 (PCR) and 19 (IHC) organs from the three cattle as well as 29 (PCR) and 24 (IHC) organs from the seven SAC and ten (PCR) organs from the one pc-goat were processed for RT-qPCR (PCR) and/or for immunohistochemical (IHC) (see Table 2 for results of selected samples) and histopathological (HP) analyses, respectively, according to [9]. Briefly, before HP and IHC examination, tissue samples were fixed in 10% buffered formalin (4% solution of formaldehyde) and embedded in paraffin. For IHC, a primary anti-PPRV-Np purified monoclonal mouse antibody (Mab anti-PPR, stock concentration 1 mg/mL, 50% Glycerin, ID.vet) was used in a dilution of 1:100 in Tris-buffered saline. Subsequently, 3 μm sections were cut, deparaffinised and rehydrated. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked by 3% H2O2/methanol incubation and antigen was retrieved with high temperature in the microwave in citrate buffer (pH 6.0, 20 min at 600 W). As secondary antibody Mouse Envision HRP (Dako Diagnostics, Dako Deutschland GmbH, 22047 Hamburg, Germany) and as a substrate diaminobenzidine were used. All tissues (for a summary see Table 2) were investigated with a light microscope and scored according to the proportion of positive cells in the different samples: from negative (0% positive cells), weak (1–5% positive cells), mild (6–25% positive cells), moderate (26–75% positive cells) to severe (>75% positive cells).2.6. Comparison of Performance Characteristics of Different Virological MethodsFour different virological diagnostic methods were compared for their performance characteristic to detect a PPRV infection in (n = 20, whole blood, serum, swabs, tissue) from cattle and SAC (Table 3) as described previously [9] using RT-qPCR, virus isolation (VDS and CHS-20 cells) as well as antigen-capture ELISA (ag-ELISA) and lateral flow device (LFD) (see details in Table 3). Only samples positive by PPRV-PCR assay were included in this evaluation.3. Results3.1. Clinical and Hematological Results Suggest Resistance of Camelids and Cattle to PPR-Induced DiseaseWe observed no or only transient mild and unspecific clinical signs in all experimentally PPRV-infected dromedaries, SAC and cattle (peak clinical scores of 0, 1, or 2 to 3, respectively, Figure 1H), while the positive control (pc)-goat showed mild to moderate clinical signs with a peak clinical score of 5, similar as reported previously for goats [4,9]. No fever was recorded in any animal, except the pc-goat (from 5 to 7 dpi). In camelids, no clinical signs were observed, except in one alpaca (A2) that showed a mild, paste-like diarrhea at 7 dpi (PPRV-RNA negative). Mild unspecific clinical signs in the three heifers included transient mild ocular or nasal discharge at single or a few consecutive days between 3 and 13 dpi, prolonged recumbency in two cattle (C1 and C2 at 6 dpi) and thin, paste-like feces in C1 (before infection at 0 dpi and between 8 to 10 dpi). A marked transient leucocytopenia (<50% to 0 dpi) during the first or second week pi was found in one llama and the pc-goat, but in no other animal (Figure 1G).3.2. Humoral Response to PPRV Is Weak in Camelids but Pronounced in CattleIn SAC, low antibody levels and a prolonged time until seroconversion (12 to 21 dpi) were detected in all animals with the used competition ELISA (cELISA). Low neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers (1.1–1.8 log10 ND50) were detected in the three alpacas and llama (L) 6, but none in L4 and L5 at the end of the experiment (28 dpi). Of the six experimentally infected dromedaries, two young adult dromedaries (D.6A5, D.DBO) inoculated with a nebulizer seroconverted by showing low antibody levels around the cut-off values of the used cELISA between 20 dpi and the end of the experiment at 74 dpi (Figure 1F). However, the three older dromedaries inoculated with nebulizer (D.No4) or Pasteur pipette (D.F7B, D.No2) and the one young adult dromedary inoculated with Pasteur pipette (D.45A) showed no seroconversion. NAb titers were not analyzed for dromedaries. All experimentally inoculated cattle seroconverted at 10 dpi and NAb titers were moderate to high (1.95–2.56 log10 ND50) at the end of the experiment (16 dpi).No seroconversion was detected in any of the contact-control animals of the three animal trials. 3.3. Molecular Detection of PPRV-RNA in Swab Samples from Camelids and Cattle Weak to low PPRV-RNA loads (quantification cycle value [Cq] Cq ≥ 33.85) were detected in oronasal swabs in all three alpacas (A1–3) (3 to 10 dpi; Cq 39.24–33.85) and in one of three llamas (L5) (4 to 10 dpi; Cq 38.37–37.51), and weak loads in one llama fecal swab (L6 at 14 dpi; Cq 38.61) and in one whole-blood sample (Cq 37.68) from one alpaca (A3 at 8 dpi). Conjunctival swabs from all SAC were PCR-negative. No PPRV-RNA was detected in any of the serum, whole-blood or swab samples from L4 and the serum, whole-blood or swab samples from the four tested dromedaries that showed a weak serological antibody response at 20 dpi. Of the pc-goat, blood (3 to 20 dpi) and swab samples (3 until 20 dpi or euthanasia at 27 dpi) were positive by PCR (Figure 1A–E). In cattle, PPRV-RNA loads were weak to moderate in oronasal (1–9 dpi; Cq 38.37–28.22), weak to low in conjunctival (5–10 dpi; Cq 41.90–32.23) and weak in fecal swabs (7–8 dpi; Cq 38.28–35.48). Whole-blood and serum samples of C1–3 were all PCR-negative (Figure 1A–E). PPRV-RNA excretions ceased in cattle and SAC after seroconversion. No virus was isolated from any of the PCR-positive swab and tissue samples from both cattle and SAC. Similarly, PPRV was not isolated from any swab sample from the six dromedaries and two contact control goats of trial 3, but a few swab samples from the pc-goat were positive by virus isolation (Figure 1A–C). 3.4. PPRV-Antigen or RNA Detection in Lymphoreticular Tissue from SAC and Cattle3.4.1. Gross Pathological ResultsDromedaries were not euthanized at the end of the experiment. Hence, no tissue samples were available for virological analyses. In accordance with the absence of obvious clinical signs in SAC and cattle at the end of the animal trials, no gross pathological alterations or lesions typical for a PPRV infection were detectable at post-mortem examination. In SAC, gross examination revealed a tonsillitis in one llama (L4) and a severe (L5) or mild to moderate (L6) follicular hyperplasia of the tonsils in two llamas. One alpaca (A3) showed a conjunctivitis and the contact control llama (L7) showed an ecchymosis of the conjunctiva. 3.4.2. Molecular, Histopathological, and Immunohistochemical ResultsIn general, about half of the organ samples of SAC positive by PCR (24.1%, 7/29) were also positive by IHC (12.5%, 3/24) at 28 dpi. In contrast, a considerably higher proportion of organs of the infected cattle were positive by PCR (50.0%, 12/24), while no organ samples were positive by IHC (0.0%, 0/19) at 17 dpi.South American CamelidsIn general, weak to low PPRV-RNA loads were detected in tonsil (A1), head (A1 to A3, L6), lung associated lymph nodes (A1, L6), and in jejunal Peyer’s patches (A1). With IHC, weak to mild staining reactions against PPRV-ag were obtained in the tonsils of two alpacas (A2, A3) (Figure 2, Table 2). Interestingly, tonsils of the alpacas A2 and A3 showed an unspecific mild, acute, necrotizing tonsillitis, which in A2 was associated with an immunohistochemical PPRV-ag detection in crypt epithelium and lymphoreticular tissue. Although PPRV-ag in both alpacas was mainly found sub-epithelially (A2) or in the sinus (A3) in mononuclear cells, a few follicles were also IHC-positive (Figure 2A). Mild loads of PPRV-ag were found in parenchymal or lymphoreticular cells in the caecum of A2 and in the colon of A3 (Table 2). In addition, single lymphocytes and plasma cells in the intestinal mucosa (A2, A3) or submucosa (A3) were IHC-positive. In the caecum of A2, a few follicles showed IHC-positive results in lymphocytes of the germinal center. An eosinophilic enteritis associated with the detection of parasites (protozoa, nematodes) was found in all SAC (including the contact control L7). CattleWeak to low PPRV-RNA loads were detected by PCR in the lymphoreticular system: PPRV-RNA was detected in the buccal mucosa (C3), follicular area of the third eye lid, palatine tonsils, and retropharyngeal lymph nodes, head and lung associated lymph nodes and in Peyer’s patches of the small intestine (C1, C2, C3) (Table 2). The three cattle showed an eosinophilic enteritis—indicating a subclinical, mild endoparasitosis—as well as an unspecific mild, lymphohistiocytic conjunctivitis and unspecific lesions in nasal and conjunctival tissue. In accordance to the mild to absent clinical signs in cattle, no obvious evidence of a PPRV infection was found by histopathological analyses or IHC. IHC staining consistently revealed negative results for all cattle tissue examined. 3.5. RT-qPCR Is the Most Sensitive Virological Method for Diagnosis of PPRV-Infection in SAC and CattleOf the ten cattle and the ten SAC samples of different matrices (swab, tissue, blood) positive for PPRV-RNA by RT-qPCR, the antigen-capture (ag)-ELISA detected only one oronasal swab sample from one animal (cattle C1, 6 dpi; Cq 30.73) as positive (1 of 20), but another oronasal cattle sample with a higher PPRV-RNA load (cattle C3, 5 dpi; Cq 28.22) tested negative with this assay. None of the PCR positive samples were detected positive by LFD and virus isolation (Table 3). 4. DiscussionCattle are considered dead-end hosts for PPRV [2,18,52]. Furthermore, multiple disease outbreaks and fatalities in camels associated with PPRV-infection with lineages LII, LIII [15], and LIV strains [12,16,17] have suggested PPR is an emerging disease in camels [12,15,16,17]. However, clinical and virological results of field and experimental studies of PPRV-infection in camels and cattle are contradictory [11,14,17,52,53,54]. There is no scientifically sound evidence that cattle or camelids may transmit the disease to other susceptible animals and act as reservoir hosts for PPRV to our knowledge. To elucidate the potential role of cattle and camelids in the epidemiology of PPRV, we herein combine the results of the transmission trials with cattle, SAC and dromedaries with a comprehensive literature review of experimental and field studies of PPRV-infection in cattle and camelids. 4.1. Clinical Signs Associated with PPRV-InfectionWe observed no or only transient mild or unspecific clinical signs in PPRV-infected cattle and camelids using the PPRV LIV strain Kurdistan/2011 that was found virulent in wild and domestic goats and sheep and also in pigs and wild boar [3,9,41]. The positive control (pc)-goat showed mild to moderate clinical signs (Figure 1H) as reported previously for goats [4,9]. The eosinophilic enteritis in all cattle and SAC (including the contact control llama L7) indicates an association of the short transient soft feces in one cattle (C1) before (0 dpi) and after infection (8–10 dpi; 7–8 dpi weak PCR-positive; Figure 1C) and one alpaca (A2) at 7 dpi (PCR-negative) with a previous infection with endoparasites in the intestinal tract rather than by PPRV-infection. The transient and mild nasal (PCR-positive between 1 and 9 dpi) and ocular secretions (PCR-positive between 5 and 10 dpi) in cattle (between 3 and 13 dpi) as well as the histopathologically determined conjunctivitis (PCR and IHC-negative swab and tissue samples) in one alpaca (A1) and the contact control llama (Figure 1) could have been caused by repeated swab sampling. Hence, due to histopathological, IHC and PCR results (Table 2, Figure 1), an association of the mild, unspecific clinical signs with PPRV-infection cannot be determined. Furthermore, rectal body temperatures remained physiologically normal in cattle and camelids (Figure 1I), while body temperatures are often increased during the acuteness of PPRV infection in other hosts such as small ruminants and suids [4,9]. Mornet, et al. [55] described fatalities in two of six cattle after PPRV-infection with organ suspensions (by unknown inoculation route) obtained from PPRV-infected goats, but the cause of fatality of the two cattle was attributed to their poor general condition, not to PPRV-infection. The other four cattle showed no obvious PPR-like clinical signs [55]. The lack of PPR-like clinical signs in cattle reported by Mornet, et al. [55] is in accordance with our study results and previous reports by Couacy-Hymann, et al. [52] and Sen, et al. [14] about subclinical PPRV-infection in cattle experimentally s.c. infected with PPRV strains from any one of the four lineages [52] and cattle experimentally infected s.c. or by contact with PPRV-infected goats with a LIV strain [14], respectively (Table S2a). In accordance with the published [14,52,55] and our experimental study results of PPRV-infection in cattle, no clinical signs associated with PPRV infection have so far been reported or observed in cattle or buffaloes in the field (Table S2b) to the knowledge of the authors. In dromedaries, i.v. or s.c. infection with virulent PPRV field (LIV, LIII) or attenuated PPRV vaccine (LIII) strains did not result in clinical signs [54,56]. Similarly, camels experimentally infected with different RPV strains of varying degrees of virulence by different inoculation routes (s.c., i.v., contact infection by RPV-infected camels) showed no obvious clinical signs but a transient increase in body temperature in some animals as reported by Taylor [21] and Singh and Ata [57] (Table S2a).In field studies that reported disease outbreaks in camels associated with or without the detection of PPRV-infection, clinical signs described in camels varied considerably, but were generally similar to those reported in domestic and wild small ruminants. Accordingly, clinical signs in camels included sudden death, fever, respiratory distress, nasal discharge, diarrhea, and abortion [5,12,15,16,41,58,59]. On the other hand, the detection of PPRV antibodies in up to 14% of camels as well as the detection of PPRV, PPRV antigen and RNA in lung samples (see Section 4.2. PPRV-detection in camels) without the report of clinical signs in different field studies suggest that camels are susceptible to PPRV-infection but are resistance to PPRV-induced disease [11,53,60]. Clinical signs of PPR disease are generally not specific and differential diagnoses or concurrent diseases such as bluetongue (BT), food and mouth disease (FMD), contagious ecthyma (orf), contagious caprine pleuropneumonia (CCPP), pasteurellosis, heartwater, and coccidiosis have to be considered [18]. 4.2. PPRV Detection in CamelsConfusion about the impact of PPRV-infection on clinical disease expression in camels might have been caused by a sampling bias, differences in the methods used for the detection of PPRV-infection (Table S2) and the possible influence of concurrent infections. A small number of camels were tested and found positive for infectious PPRV, PPRV-RNA, or PPRV-antigen during large PPR-like disease outbreaks in camels [15,16,17,61,62] (Table S2b) that complicate the interpretation of the study results concerning the epidemiological significance. A high mortality rate (up to 70%) was associated with the isolation of PPRV LII (96 CAMEL 1) and LIII (96 CAMEL 2) from two camels and Streptococcus equi isolation from two lung samples from camels in Ethiopia [15]. PPRV LIV strains were isolated from 3/3 camel lungs [12] and 1/6 lung or lymph nodes [16] during PPR-like disease outbreaks, while Intisar, et al. [11] isolated unknown strains of PPRV from 5/10 lungs obtained from clinically healthy camels that showed lesions in their lungs upon post-mortem examination at the slaughterhouse [11]. Similarly, a low number of PPRV-RNA or antigen positive samples were reported during large PPR-like disease outbreaks by various authors: PPRV LIV strain in Iran in two camels [17], PPRV-RNA detection of a LIII strain (Kenya_PPRV_Camel_Mandera) in an unknown sample matrix from 1/25 camels with clinical signs in Kenya [61], and antigen or RNA of PPRV LIV strains in 6/6 and 5/6 lungs and lymph nodes, respectively, in camels in Sudan [16]. A higher proportion of camel samples were found positive by Kwiatek, et al. [12] who sequenced PPRV LIV-RNA from 38/49 lung, liver or spleen from 80 field samples from camels with PPR-like clinical signs in Sudan. In slaughterhouse studies, Intisar, et al. [11] found 33.6% of 220 (locally up to 48.5%) lung samples positive for PPRV antigen in clinically healthy camels with lesions in their lungs, and Saeed, et al. [53] detected PPRV antigen in 45.1% (214 of 474) lung samples showing pneumonia from clinically healthy camels. Interestingly, PPRV-antigen detection in 32/214 PPRV-antigen positive lungs was associated with the detection of antigen of one or two other respiratory viruses (bovine virus diarrhea virus, parainfluenza virus 3, respiratory syncytial virus, bovine herpes virus-1, adenovirus) in the study of Saeed, et al. [53] (Table S2b). However, whether these pathogens may also be detected in lung samples without lesions or pneumonia was not evaluated in the two slaughterhouse studies [11,53]. Nevertheless, the field studies of Roger, et al. [15], Intisar, et al. [11] and Saeed, et al. [53] demonstrated that mixed infections with different respiratory pathogens should be considered when evaluating possible causes of respiratory disease expression in PPRV-infected camels. Whether clinical signs may be reproduced in camels by experimental infection using PPRV strains isolated from camels to prove causal relationship according to Koch’s postulates, has never been investigated so far to our knowledge. Contradictory reports about the susceptibility and role of camels in RPV epidemiology are also available for RP field studies speculating about potential RP disease in camels during RP outbreaks in cattle despite the lack of diagnostic evidence [57,63]. However, RP disease could not be reproduced in camels experimentally infected with different virulent and attenuated strains of RPV [21,57]. Concurrent infections with other pathogens, general condition and nutrition status and breed may also influence the susceptibility of individual hosts of PPRV [4,9,64]. An association of a poor body condition score with a higher PPRV seroprevalence rate (poor 16.67%, fair 3.43%, and good 2.39%) was reported in a field study with 1517 camels in Nigeria [64], and PPRV-RNA (by RT-PCR and sequencing). Furthermore, PPRV-antigen detection was associated with Streptococcus equi isolation from lung samples from camels during a large disease outbreak in Ethiopia (see earlier) [15]. Immune suppression evident by severe leukocytopenia is a typical cause of infection with various morbilliviruses including PPRV [4,9,39]. Indeed, in the present study, one llama and the pc-goat showed leukocytopenia (<50% of 0 dpi) (Figure 1G), although we cannot exclude that immune suppression was caused by other factors. Differences in the susceptibility to PPRV-infection by species or breed have not been investigated so far for dromedaries and Bactrian camel species or species hybrids. Dromedaries are resistant to FMD and do not contract the disease, while Bactrian camelids show obvious clinical signs and can contract FMD [65], which might also be attributable to PPRV. Unfortunately, many studies lack information about the camel species or breed involved (Table S2). 4.3. PPRV-TransmissionSo far, no isolation of infectious PPRV or of PPRV-RNA from se- or excretions from camels or cattle has been documented: No PPRV-RNA could be detected in secretion or excretion of cattle subcutaneously (PPRV LI to IV [52]; PPRV LIV [14]) or dromedaries intravenously (PPRV LIV [54]) infected with PPRV. Also in our study, we could not isolate infectious PPRV from any of the PCR-positive swab and tissue samples from cattle and SAC. Although in cattle the highest PPRV-RNA load in an oronasal swab sample (Cq 28.22) was found below the cut-off value of Cq ≤ 31 that correlated with a successful isolation of PPRV in cell culture for samples from suids and small ruminants experimentally infected and analyzed with the same PPRV strain and PCR assay, respectively [9].Accordingly, no proof of contact transmission of PPRV from cattle (PPRV LI-IV) [52] or camels (PPRV LIV) [54] experimentally infected with PPRV to susceptible contact goats or other artiodactyls has been described in any sound experimental or field study (Table S2). El-Hakim [19] described subclinical or mild respiratory disease with cough, nasal discharge and fever associated with or without PPRV infection in some camels in Saudi Arabia and the transmission of a PPRV LI strain (of at least three tested PPRV lineages) from camels to goats. The source of PPRV infection in the camels and goats as well as biosafety and sanitary measures applied, if any, to preclude natural or concurrent infections with PPRV or especially other pathogens, remain unclear. We found no contact transmission of the virulent PPRV LIV strain from cattle to contact control goats and from SAC and dromedaries to contact control goats and a llama or dromedaries (Figure 1), respectively, confirming the results of Couacy-Hymann, et al. [52] for cattle and of Fakri, et al. [54] for camels. A possible reason for the detection of PPRV-RNA in nasal, conjunctival or fecal swab samples of cattle and SAC in the present study might be attributed to using the more natural intranasal route of infection, while Couacy-Hymann, et al. [52] and Fakri, et al. [54] used s.c. and i.v. infection, respectively. On the other hand, no PPRV-RNA was detected in swab samples collected between 0 and 14 dpi from Indian cattle that were infected by contact to PPRV-infected goats [14], and no PPRV-RNA was detected in swab samples from dromedaries that were intranasally inoculated with PPRV in the present study (Figure 1A–C). Therefore, besides the inoculation route and virus dose, the virulence of different virus strains and the susceptibility of a host may influence the pathogenesis in different animal species [26] (see also Section 4.5. Pathogenesis, virus and host factors). Subcutaneous vaccination of camels with a PPRV LIII vaccine [56], infection of cattle with a mild PPRV LII strain [52] and vaccination of camels with an RPV vaccine [57] revealed lower seroconversion rates compared to animals infected by s.c., i.v. or by contact infection using virulent PPRV (LI, LIII, LIV in cattle and LIII and LIV in dromedaries), and RPV strains [21,52,54,56,57]. This indicates that the virulence of a PPRV strain plays a more important role than the inoculation route for at least the humoral immune response. For our transmission trials, we used the same virus stock (PPRV LIV Kurdistan/2011), intranasal inoculation route, dose and volume (2 x 10^4.5 TCID50/ml) for experimental infection of both cattle and camelids—which has been proven before to be virulent in small ruminants and suids in previous experiments [3,9]. Nevertheless, in contrast to suids and small ruminants [3,9], PPRV-RNA excretion in cattle and SAC ceased after seroconversion and dromedaries (Figure 1A–C) shedded no PPRV-RNA. The considerable differences in PPRV-RNA loads in oronasal, conjunctival and, in particular, in fecal swab samples from cattle and SAC over time by animal species in comparison to recent data sets from suids and small ruminants [9] were in accordance with results of the statistical analysis using a linear mixed-effects (lme) model and independent 2-group Mann–Whitney test with Bonferroni correction (details in Table S3). Fecal shedding of PPRV-RNA over time was significantly lower by cattle than from other artiodactyls, except from SAC using the lme model. Interestingly, PPRV excretion in fecal samples from suids and small ruminants seem to be a major source of PPRV transmission [9], while the lack or short-time PPRV-RNA excretion in feces from camelids and cattle, respectively, indicate that PPRV-spread by feces is not a likely source of PPRV-infection (Table S3, Figure 1C). 4.4. PPRV Antibody Response and Performance of Diagnostic MethodsIn the present study, the time of seroconversion in cattle (10 dpi) and antibody levels as measured by competitive ELISA (cELISA) were comparable with the antibody progression reported for suids and small ruminants [9]. NAb titers in cattle were similarly moderate to high (1.95–2.56 log10 ND50) at 17 dpi than in sheep (1.76–2.56 log10 ND50) at 21 dpi but generally lower than those in suids between 16 and 30 dpi and goats at 11 to 15 dpi (2.16–2.96 log10 ND50) [9]. In SAC, low antibody levels and a prolonged time until seroconversion were detected in all animals using the cELISA (seroconversion between 12 and 21 dpi). Low NAb titers (1.1–1.8 log10 ND50) were detected in the three alpacas and L6 but no NAbs at all in L4 and L5 at 28 dpi. Of the six experimentally infected dromedaries, two young animals (D.6A5, D.DBO) seroconverted with antibody levels around the cut-off of the cELISA at 20 dpi. However, none of the other four dromedaries seroconverted showed a clear increase in antibody levels. Similarly, Fakri, et al. [54] found a prolonged seroconversion between 14 and 18 dpi in five dromedaries experimentally infected with a virulent LIV strain and low to moderate (1.02–2.46 log10 ND50) NAbs after 35 dpi.Intisar, et al. [11] reported a considerably lower seroprevalence in a field study of PPRV infection in Sudanese camels of 2.1% (41 of 1988) despite a considerably higher proportion of camel lungs detected positive for PPRV-antigen (33.6% of 220). Differences in populations of immunoglobuline G (IgG) isotypes including the additional heavy-chain antibodies found in camel blood but not in other mammals was suggested as a possible reason for the lower seroprevalence by Intisar, et al. [11]. Indeed, lower antibody levels were found in SAC compared to domestic ruminants infected with BTV, SBV, or WNV, respectively [11,66,67]. The comparison of virological test systems with swab, tissue or blood samples from cattle and SAC revealed that a validated RT-qPCR targeting the N segment of PPRV is the most sensitive method for the detection of a recent PPRV-infection in these animals until seroconversion (Table 3). In contrast, the used PPRV-antigen ELISA targeting the N protein, the LFD targeting the H gene of PPRV and endpoint dilution assays for analysis of virus titers in animal serum samples were not found suitable diagnostic methods for cattle and SAC. One likely reason is the transcription gradient resulting in higher transcription rates of the N compared to the H gene [32]. 4.5. Pathogenesis, Virus, and Host FactorsPCR-results obtained from samples taken during gross examination confirmed that a combination of different samples collected from head and lung associated lymph nodes, palatine tonsils, mesenterial lymph nodes and small intestinal Peyer’s patches is also most suitable for post-mortem PPRV-diagnosis in cattle and SAC (Table 2) as suggested for suids and small ruminants [4,9]. Albeit PPRV-RNA loads were low or not detectable in the examined tissue from cattle and SAC, the generally similar tissue distribution of PPRV-RNA in tissue of cattle and camelids compared with small ruminants and suids contrast the considerable variations particularly of virological results between cattle and camelids with the other artiodactyl species, including the lack of viremia (see earlier). Interestingly, the pathogenesis found in cattle and camelids (particularly in SAC) in the present study resembles the pathogenesis in ferrets experimentally infected with SLAM-blind CDV [37]. None of the ferrets transmitted the virus to CDV-naïve contact-control ferrets, they presented no clinical signs and no viremia, except for one ferret that showed a transient mild viremia probably due to three compensatory mutations in the H gene of the SLAM-blind virus [37]. Nevertheless, all ferrets elicited a solid humoral immune response that was attributed to low-level replication of CDV in nectin-4 expressing epithelial cells [37]. Cattle experimentally infected with PPRV also developed a rapid and solid humoral immune response, while camelids developed a prolonged and lower or no antibody response possibly due to species-specific differences in the immune response (see section humoral immune response) or a lower susceptibility, particularly of dromedaries, to PPRV-infection than cattle. Whether morbilliviruses initially infect immune cells via the SLAM-receptor and/or initially infect epithelial cells via the nectin-4 receptor has been controversially discussed [4]. Nevertheless, the results of the ferret trial with SLAM-blind CDV suggest that local replication in the respiratory epithelium may facilitate low-efficiency transmission [37]. Consequently, if PPRV infection of dead-end hosts resembles infection of typical hosts with a SLAM-blind virus, virus shedding and transmission cannot totally be excluded for dead-end hosts of PPRV, for example cattle and camelids, but is not very likely. By definition, a dead-end host is a host in which a pathogen may cause disease, but not maintain transmission, thus, the pathogen is not efficiently transmitted to other hosts [27,68,69]. In typical/maintenance hosts, morbillivirus-infection of (i) SLAM-expressing immune cells (in particular DC, activated lymphocytes, and macrophages) leads to systemic virus dissemination via blood and lymph to other lymphoid organs and (ii) infection of epithelial cells via nectin-4 receptor results in virus shedding without the need of additional exit receptors [4,33,37]. Morbillivirus-infection of immune cells may also lead to their destruction and a consequent immune suppression [4,39]. Leukocytopenia and immune suppression in animals or humans is a typical consequence of infection with different morbilliviruses, such as PPRV, CDV and measles virus (MeV, species: measles morbillivirus), respectively [4,9,39,70]. Whether the severe leucocytopenia in one llama and the pc-goat was due to PPRV-infection, remains unknown (Figure 1G). Since cattle and SAC showed a similar pathogenesis for PPRV-infection than ferrets infected with a SLAM-blind virus, infection of epithelial cells in the respiratory tract via nectin-4 appears reasonable. The SLAM receptor gene is less conserved than the nectin-4 receptor gene among species [35], further supporting the hypothesis that the H glycoprotein of PPRV is not (efficiently) binding to the cattle and camelid SLAM-receptors. PPRV-RNA detection in more distantly located lymphoid organs of cattle and SAC, such as small intestinal Peyer’s patches (Table 2), suggest that other host cell receptors are involved in PPRV uptake and dissemination—e.g., the C-type lectin dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN) receptor expressed on DC [71]. A dual role of DC was described for MeV infection since MeV may infect or is captured by DC via DC-SIGN or SLAM receptor [71]. Pope, et al. [4] suggested that tonsils and lymph nodes draining the site of PPRV-inoculation are initial sites of PPRV replication. Indeed, we found PPRV-RNA or antigen in head and lung associated lymph nodes and palatine tonsils (Tonsilla veli palatini in suids) in all animal species (goat, sheep, pig, wild boar [9], cattle, and SAC) (Table 2, Figure 2), although post-mortem examination was conducted during or after the peak of PPRV-infection (16 to 30 dpi). The IHC comparison of the palatine tonsil sections from alpaca A2 and the positive control goat (Figure 2) revealed a considerably reduced proportion of PPRV-ag in the alpaca tonsil (mild versus severe). However, the alpacas were euthanized late after experimental infection (28 dpi) in comparison to the goat (9 dpi). A mild proportion of PPRV-ag was detected in the palatine tonsil of a goat during the reconvalescence phase (15 dpi with Kurdistan/2011 strain) after showing moderate clinical signs [9]. In goats intranasally infected with a PPRV LIII strain (CI/89), clinical signs were mild, but moderate to marked proportions of PPRV-ag were detected at 7 dpi or 9 dpi in the follicle/mantel zone, germinal center, diffuse lymphoid tissue, and crypt epithelium of the palatine tonsil. Hence, PPRV-ag may be detected in similar tissue than in goats, but PPRV-ag distribution in alpaca tonsils in the early stage after infection remains to be investigated. 4.6. Possible Impact of Ecology on PPRV Infection and SpreadFor multi-host pathogens, pathogen dynamics, persistence (R0 > 1) or extinction (R0 < 1) in an ecosystem are determined by the community composition as well as the movement and behavior of hosts by space and time that affect intra- or inter-species contact and therefore pathogen transmission [26,27]. Dromedaries kept separately from PPRV-infected domestic ruminants showed no seroconversion to PPRV [59,72], while a considerable proportion of camels, cattle, and buffalo can be found seropositive where reared together with small ruminants (one epidemiological unit) [73]. No seropositive cattle was found in Turkey despite PPRV-infection detected in local small ruminant herds [74], which was attributed to a lack of infection and circulation of PPRV in cattle [74]. In field studies, seroprevalence rates were generally similar or lower in camels and cattle compared to small ruminants. This indicates spillover from PPRV-infected small ruminants to cattle and camels by contact-infection and may explain the varying seroprevalence rates in different regions (see details in Table S2b). The turnover rate of cattle (10%) and likely also of camels is considerably lower than in small ruminants (30%) [33,75,76], indicating that the overall PPRV-infection rate and, therefore, susceptibility to PPRV-infection might be even lower in cattle and camels compared to small ruminants than suggested by the relative seroprevalence rates detected in field surveys. 5. ConclusionsThe transmission trials revealed (i) absent or low PPRV-RNA loads in swab samples until seroconversion, (ii) no shedding of infectious PPRV, (iii) lack of PPRV transmission, and (iv) generally subclinical PPRV-infection in experimentally PPRV-infected cattle, SAC and dromedaries. Together with the results of the literature review, we suggest that cattle and camelids are dead-end hosts that generally do not contribute to the spread of PPRV, possibly due to species-specific physiological constraints such as differences in the major natural host cell receptors SLAM on immune cells that considerably impair the infection of cattle or camelid by PPRV. However, additional studies would be helpful to further investigate the course of disease and the capability of PPRV-transmission by cattle and camelids influenced by critical factors such as virus-host interaction, breed, stress (e.g., long desert journeys) or concurrent infections and to finally prove the impact of dead-end hosts. In addition, of all compared methods, RT-qPCR and cELISA were found most reliable to confirm PPRV-infection in cattle and camelids before and after seroconversion, respectively. An antigen-ELISA and a pen-side test (lateral flow device, LFD) that allow non-invasive sampling and PPRV-detection in the field were not suitable for PPRV-diagnosis in cattle and camelids (Table 3)—probably due to the low PPRV-RNA loads in their excretions (Figure 1A–E). 


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: NOROVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Norovirus Polymerase Fidelity Contributes to Viral Transmission 

INTRODUCTIONReplication fidelity is a major trait influencing the pathogenesis of RNA viruses. The high error rates of viral RNA polymerases during genome replication result in genetically diverse virus populations, known as quasispecies, which are extremely flexible and adaptable to dynamic host environments and selection pressures (reviewed in reference 1). Alterations in replication fidelity typically lead to reduced virus infectivity in the host (2–5). This evidence has led to studies on the development of antiviral strategies based on the manipulation of virus replication fidelity. Such strategies have involved either the use of mutagenic compounds that can drive viral extinction through increased replication error rates (lethal mutagenesis; reviewed in references 6 and 7) or the design of mutant viruses with altered fidelity causing an attenuated phenotype in vivo, which can be used for the development of live vaccine candidates (4, 8, 9).We recently demonstrated the antiviral activity of a novel mutagenic nucleoside, namely, T-705, or favipiravir, against persistent norovirus infections in vivo (10), providing the first link between norovirus polymerase fidelity and norovirus pathogenesis. Human noroviruses (HuNoVs) are considered the main cause of diarrheal episodes and foodborne gastroenteritis globally (11–13), with an estimated >500 M infections annually and >200,000 associated fatalities (13). Mortality rates are especially high in children under the age of 5 living in low-income countries, although other cohorts of vulnerable patients include elderly and immunocompromised populations (11, 14). HuNoV infections have also been linked to effects on an increasing number of other severe disorders such as exacerbation of inflammatory bowel disease, ulcerative colitis, and life-threatening chronic diarrhea (15, 16). Despite the significant impact on global health and the elevated economic losses associated with HuNoVs (11), there are no licensed vaccines or antiviral drugs available for the treatment of disease and control of outbreaks.Since 2002, a sharp increase in the global incidence of norovirus outbreaks that is associated with the emergence of genogroup II.4 (GII.4) pandemic strains has been reported (17, 18). Evidence suggests that emerging HuNoV GII.4 pandemic strains transmit from person to person more efficiently than the previously dominant genogroup I strains (19, 20). Recent studies have demonstrated that the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases from pandemic HuNoV GII.4 strains display reduced replication fidelity and increased intrahost diversity in their resulting viral populations in comparison to nonpandemic strains (21). A newly emerging HuNoV GII.17 isolate, first identified in China, seems to be outcompeting the HuNoV GII.4 in some parts of Asia, resulting in increased outbreaks since the winter season of 2014 to 2015 (22). Recent studies suggest that this novel variant may be spreading globally, which could lead to the replacement of the pandemic genotype GII.4 by GII.17 (22–26). Fitting with the hypothesis that fidelity is linked to rapid emergence of norovirus isolates, the GII.17 isolate displays evolutionary rates at least 1 order of magnitude higher than those seen with GII.4 (25). Despite this evidence, a possible relationship between the reported reduced fidelity (and greater genetic diversity) in pandemic HuNoV GII.4 and the emerging GII.17 isolates and increased transmissibility has yet to be examined.Here, we have assessed the influence of polymerase fidelity and genetic diversity on norovirus infectivity and transmission in vivo using a persistent strain of murine norovirus (MNV) as a model. MNV provides a robust surrogate system for studying HuNoV fidelity due to its high replication rates in cultured cells and to the availability of efficient reverse genetics systems and small-animal models (10, 27, 28). Here we have identified a high-fidelity MNV polymerase mutant (I391L) which shows delayed replication kinetics during the establishment of a persistent infection in vivo. Despite being able to successfully establish an infection and persist, the high-fidelity I391L mutant showed reduced mouse-to-mouse transmission compared to wild-type (WT) virus. Significantly, the transmission of a mutant with in vivo replication kinetics similar to those of the I391L mutant, but with WT-like polymerase fidelity (S313T), was unaffected, suggesting that the reduced transmission of I391L was linked to fidelity. These results support the role of genetic diversity as a significant trait influencing norovirus infectivity and transmission in vivo and provide new insight into the potential role of polymerase fidelity in the emergence of norovirus strains.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONGeneration of MNV polymerase fidelity mutant candidates.With the aim of identifying possible MNV polymerase (NS7) fidelity mutants, we carried out site-directed mutagenesis of residues previously identified as fidelity determinants in the orthologous positions of other viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases. Given the substantial amount of data available on picornavirus polymerases and their relatively close genetic relationship with caliciviruses, we designed mutations in the MNV polymerase based on previous studies with poliovirus (PV), foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), and coxsackievirus (CV) (3–5, 29–32). To date, the most paradigmatic example of viral attenuation as a result of increased fidelity is the PV polymerase (3Dpol) G64S mutation, which resulted in a loss of pathogenicity with restricted virus tissue tropism in a lethal mouse model of PV infection (3, 4). While the norovirus polymerases do not share a great degree of structural homology with the PV 3Dpol in the domain surrounding the G64S position, MNV NS7 residue R77 (R74 in HuNoV NS7) lies within this domain and similarly establishes multiple hydrogen bond interactions with residues in the active site (30, 33, 34). The G64S change in PV 3Dpol is thought to alter fidelity by changing the hydrogen bond network, indirectly leading to subtle conformational changes of catalytic site residues (8, 30). Therefore, we examined the impact of substitutions at amino acid R77 on virus replication by reverse genetics (Table 1). All the mutations studied were lethal in the context of the MNV infectious clone, suggesting that this position is critical for polymerase function (Table 1). In order to identify tolerated MNV variants in this region of NS7, we mutated several neighboring amino acids of R77 that were not predicted to establish as many direct hydrogen bonds with amino acids involved in the active site and that would be predicted to result in more-subtle rearrangements of motif A. A series of positions, including V65, L70, P72, E75, and G78, were identified as possible tolerant sites within NS7 (Table 1). We also identified homologous positions in MNV NS7 based on other fidelity variants isolated in related picornaviruses, such as CV and FMDV, namely, K174, P175, S313, and I391 (Table 1). We successfully recovered mutants encoding NS7 substitutions P72S, E75S, K174R, K174S, S313T, I391L, and I391V, whereas the remaining mutants were nonviable (Table 1). The recovery of K174S and S313T yielded lower virus titers than the MNV WT, suggesting reduced replication fitness associated with these polymerase changes (Table 1). The stability of the viable mutants was confirmed by sequencing virus populations obtained after 4 serial passages in cell culture, with no additional changes identified within the NS7-coding region for any mutant (data not shown).TABLE 1 Summary of the design and cell culture characterization of NS7 mutantsMutant in orthologous viral polymeraseaFidelity in orthologous virus polymerasebMNV NS7 mutantcMNV straindViable in MNVeReplication in cell culturefReplication in vivogPV G64SHighV65S(1)NoL70S(1)NoP72S(1, 3)YesModest increaseModest increaseE75S(1, 3)YesModest increaseWTR77A(1)NoR77K(1)NoR77N(1)NoR77S(1)NoG78S(1)NoFMDV P169S/CV S164PHigh/lowK174R(3)YesWTWTK174S(3)YesSignificantly decreasedSignificantly decreasedP175S(3)NoCV S298TLowS313T(3)YesModest decreaseSignificantly decreasedCV A372VLowI391D(3)NoI391L(3)YesWTSignificantly decreasedI391R(3)NoI391V(3)YesWTWTIsolated by passage in ribavirinT35I(3)YesWTModest decrease (viral RNA)Isolated by passage in ribavirinV330I(3)YesWTWTDesigned based on MNV V330IV330A(3)NoV330S(3)NoaSubstitutions generated in this study were based on fidelity changes found in other viruses (4, 5, 29, 31, 32): G64S in PV; P169S in FMDV; and S164P, S298T, and A372V in CV.bEffect on virus polymerase fidelity caused by substitutions shown in the first column.cMNV NS7 polymerase mutants generated based on the fidelity of the residues shown in the first column. Mutants V330I and T35I were constructed after isolation of these mutations in MNV populations treated with increasing concentrations of ribavirin (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). Other variants of position 330 (V330A or -S) were also prepared based on the isolation of V330I during ribavirin treatment. These mutants were not viable.dMNV strain. NS7 mutations were introduced in plasmids containing full MNV-1 or MNV-3 genome sequences. Hence, “(1)” denotes MNV-1, “(3)” denotes MNV-3, and “(1, 3)” denotes those mutations tested in both strains. For the experiments represented in the figures, only MNV-3 variants were used.eThe viability of NS7 mutants was assessed by reverse genetics after recovery in BHK-21 (or BHK-21-derived BSR-T7) cells followed by 3 serial passages in RAW264.7 cells as described in reference 27.fPhenotype in cell culture. “Modest increase or decrease” (in virus replication) indicates statistically significant changes in virus titers of ≤1 log10 (two-way analysis of variance [ANOVA] test) at any given time point during replication kinetics. “Significantly decreased” in virus replication (K174S) refers to statistically significant changes in virus titers of ~2 log10 at an early replication time point. In this column, “P72S” and “E75S” refer to the corresponding NS7 mutants in the MNV-3 genome context.gPhenotype in vivo. “Modest increase” (in virus replication) in vivo indicates a highly significant change in the titer of virus shed in feces (>1 log10; P < 0.001; two-way ANOVA). “Significantly decreased” indicates highly significant changes in levels of both viral RNA and infectious virus shed in feces (P < 0.001; ANOVA test). “Modest decrease (viral RNA)” indicates significantly lower RNA levels but not virus titers shed in mouse feces. In this column, “P72S” and “E75S” refer to the corresponding NS7 mutants in the MNV-3 genome context.Since the propagation of different RNA viruses in cell culture in the presence of ribavirin generally leads to the selection of fidelity mutants (e.g., PV G64S, FMDV P169S, and CV A372V, among others) (29, 31, 32), we similarly investigated whether the passage of MNV in the presence of ribavirin also selected for changes in NS7 conferring higher polymerase fidelity. We identified substitutions T35I and V330I in NS7, which emerged in two lineages of MNV that had been repeatedly passaged in the presence of ribavirin (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). No substitutions were found in the NS7 RNA polymerase of MNV passaged in parallel in the absence of the drug. These mutations were introduced in the MNV infectious cDNA clone, and viable mutants were recovered (Table 1).10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.1Figure S1 Serial passage of MNV-3 in the presence of increasing concentrations of ribavirin. Data represent results of MNV-3 serial passages in the presence (solid lines containing symbols) or absence (dashed line, no symbols) of ribavirin. Each value is the average of results of three titer determinations, with the error bars representing SEM. Increasing concentrations of ribavirin (RBV) were used as indicated by different symbol colors: 200 µM, white; 400 µM, gray; 800 µM, black. The amino acid substitutions identified in the NS7-coding region for each lineage are provided on the right side of the graph. Download Figure S1, PDF file, 0.03 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.Substitution I391L results in increased polymerase fidelity.As an indirect approach to identify any fidelity alterations in the viable MNV mutants, we tested the sensitivity of the viable mutants to the following three different nucleoside analogues with mutagenic activity against a variety of RNA viruses, including MNV: favipiravir, 5-fluoruracil, and ribavirin (3, 5, 10, 35). High-fidelity mutants are typically less sensitive to mutagenic treatment, while mutator (lower fidelity) polymerase variants are typically more sensitive (5, 29, 32). The I391L mutant had reduced sensitivity to all three mutagenic compounds, while the S313T mutant was more sensitive to 5-fluorouracil and favipiravir (Fig. 1). I391V sensitivity varied depending on the mutagenic compound, and the I391V mutant was more sensitive to 5-fluorouracil and favipiravir and less sensitive to ribavirin (see Fig. S2 in the supplemental material). The remaining mutant viruses showed no significant differences in their sensitivities to any of these mutagenic compounds compared to the WT (see Fig. S3).10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.2Figure S2 Substitution I391V in NS7 leads to altered levels of sensitivity to mutagens in MNV that are not accompanied by changes in genetic diversity. (A to C) Sensitivity of the WT and I391V strains to the following different mutagenic compounds: 5-fluorouracil (A), favipiravir (B), and ribavirin (C). The sensitivity to every mutagen is expressed as the change in virus titer relative to the value determined for infections in the absence of mutagens. Every value in the graph is the average of results of three independent infections (n = 3), with the error bars representing SEM. The absence of SEM bars in certain values indicates that the bar is smaller than the respective symbol. Sensitivity values for I391V mutant were compared with WT values. I391V curve plots above the WT curve indicate less sensitivity to drug (ribavirin), whereas a curve below the WT curve indicates greater sensitivity (favipiravir and 5-fluorouracil). Data represent results of a two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) test (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001). The dashed line in panels A to C represents the absence of change in relative virus titers. (D) Mutation frequency analysis of MNV populations obtained after 8 serial passages in RAW264.7 cells in the absence of mutagenic treatment. Viral RNA was extracted and amplified by RT followed by PCR; cDNA was ligated to PCR blunt vector, and positive colonies containing MNV insertions were sequenced as described in Materials and Methods. Statistical significance in the genetic diversity of I391V with respect to that of the WT was determined by the Mann-Whitney test as further explained in Materials and Methods (ns, not significant) and as previously described (10). Repeated mutations are taken into consideration only once for the analysis. These mutation frequencies correspond to the identification of 34 and 20 unique mutations during the sequence analysis of 127,870 and 72,242 nucleotides, respectively, for the WT and I391V populations. The total numbers of clones analyzed (n) in this study were 60 and 34 for the WT and I391L populations, respectively. Download Figure S2, PDF file, 0.04 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.3Figure S3 Effect of NS7 mutations on virus sensitivity to different mutagenic compounds. (A) Sensitivity to 5-fluorouracil (FU) and ribavirin (RBV) in different recombinant MNV strains containing the described mutations in the MNV NS7 RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; the sensitivity of each mutant was measured as the change in virus titer between infections performed in the presence and absence of drugs. For clarity, these results have been expressed relative to WT results. A positive value (above the dashed line) indicates reduced sensitivity and a negative value (below the dashed line) greater sensitivity to each corresponding drug. (B) Sensitivity of MNV NS7 mutants to different concentrations of favipiravir (expressed as the change in virus titer observed between infections in the presence and absence of drug treatment). In both panels, every value represent the average of results of three independent biological replicates (n = 3). Error bars represent SEM, with the statistical significance determined by two-way ANOVA test (**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001). Download Figure S3, PDF file, 0.05 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.FIG 1 Substitution I391L in the MNV NS7 RNA polymerase leads to restricted genetic diversity in viral populations. (A to C) Sensitivity of the WT strain and mutants I391L and S313T to different mutagenic compounds: 5-fluorouracil (A), favipiravir (B), and ribavirin (C). Sensitivity to each mutagen is expressed as the change in virus titer relative to the value for infections in the absence of mutagens. Each value is the average of results of three independent biological replicates (n = 3), with the error bars representing standard errors of the means (SEM). An apparent absence of SEM bars indicates that the bar is smaller than the respective symbol for these values. Sensitivity values for each MNV NS7 mutant were compared with WT values. Hence, those mutants with titer change curves above the WT curve were less sensitive to drug treatment, whereas those with curves below the WT curve showed greater sensitivity. Statistical analysis of relative levels of sensitivity in each NS7 mutant compared to the WT was performed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001). (D) Mutation frequency analysis of MNV populations obtained after 8 serial passages in RAW264.7 cells in the absence of mutagenic treatment. Viral RNA was extracted and amplified by RT followed by PCR as explained in Materials and Methods. Amplified cDNA molecules were ligated to PCR Blunt vector, and positive colonies containing MNV insertions were sequenced. Statistical significance in the genetic diversity of different mutant viruses (S313T and I391L) with respect to that of the WT was determined by a Mann-Whitney test, which was used to compare the ranked scores of the numbers of mutations found in individual clones grouped by population, as further explained in Materials and Methods (ns, not significant; **, P < 0.05). Repeated mutations were taken into consideration only once for the analysis, as previously described (10). These mutation frequencies correspond to the identification of 34, 23, and 10 unique mutations during the sequence analysis of 127,870, 71,844, and 117,540 nucleotides (nt) in molecular clones from WT, S313T, and I391L populations, respectively. The total numbers of clones analyzed (n) in this study were 60, 34, and 56 for the WT, S313T, and I391L populations, respectively.Given this pattern of sensitivity to different mutagenic nucleosides, substitutions I391L, I391V, and S313T were further examined for any impact on replication fidelity. Several studies have demonstrated that alterations in polymerase fidelity typically lead to changes in the genetic diversity of the resulting virus population (4, 5). With this in mind, we measured the genetic diversity in MNV NS7 mutant populations after their serial passage in cell culture in the absence of any mutagenic treatment. We found that the genetic diversity in the I391L NS7 mutant virus population was ~3-fold lower than in the WT NS7 population, suggesting that the I391L substitution results in a higher-fidelity NS7 (Fig. 1D; see also Table S1 in the supplemental material). The NS7 mutants S313T and I391V did not show any significant difference in their mutation frequencies compared to the WT, suggesting that their increased sensitivity to mutagens was not related to any impact on polymerase fidelity (Fig. 1D; see also Fig. S2D and Table S1). Hence, the S313T and I391V mutants display WT-like fidelity phenotypes.10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.8Table S1 Mutation frequency analysis of NS7 mutant virus populations. Download Table S1, DOCX file, 0.02 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.The high-fidelity I391L NS7 mutant shows delayed replication in vivo but not in cell culture.We investigated whether the increase in fidelity conferred by I391L resulted in any phenotypic alteration of norovirus replication in vivo, as previously documented for other viruses (4, 9). Prior to this, a more detailed characterization of the replication kinetics of the I391L mutant and the remaining NS7 mutants was performed in cell culture. The I391L mutant showed no significant difference from WT MNV in terms of the virus yields obtained following viral recovery by reverse genetics from a full-length cDNA construct (Fig. 2A). Similarly, no replication defect was observed at either a low multiplicity of infection (MOI) (0.01 50% tissue culture infective dose [TCID50]/cell; Fig. 2B) or a high MOI (5 to 10 TCID50/cell; Fig. 2C and D) for immortalized macrophage cells. However, I391L showed significantly delayed kinetics of replication in vivo as reflected in decreased viral RNA levels and lower titers of infectious virus secreted in the feces of the mice (Fig. 3A and B). This observation suggests that the higher replication fidelity of I391L results in reduced fitness during the establishment of a persistent infection in vivo. The early defect in I391L replication was recovered by day 3 postinfection (Fig. 3A and B) and then remained comparable to the WT level for the duration of the experiment (28 days; data not shown). Animals infected with a 10-fold-higher viral titer also showed delayed replication kinetics for I391L, although viral loads similar to the WT levels were again observed by day 2 (Fig. 3C). The observed lower virus titers and RNA levels in feces of mice infected with I391L were associated with a trend toward lower viral RNA levels in different tissues harvested at 48 h postinoculation, although the differences observed did not reach statistical significance (Fig. 3D).Taking the data together, the reduced replication kinetics of the MNV I391L NS7 mutant were apparent only in vivo and not during replication in cell culture. This is in line with observations of other reported fidelity mutants (4, 32).FIG 2 The MNV NS7 RNA polymerase mutant I391L shows WT-like replication kinetics during infection in cell culture. (A) Virus yield after reverse genetics recovery of full-length cDNA constructs containing either wild-type (WT) MNV or the polymerase mutants S313T and I391L. The values shown are the averages of results of at least three independent virus titer determinations for up to 4 independent cDNA transfections. Error bars represent SEM, with the statistical significance determined by one-way ANOVA (ns, not significant; ***, P < 0.001). (B to D) Replication kinetics of WT and mutant MNVs in RAW264.7 cells infected at the following different MOI’s: 0.01 TCID50/cell (B), 5 TCID50/cell (C), and 10 TCID50/cell (D). The values represent the averages of results of three independent biological replicates (n = 3), with the error bars representing SEM. Data were analyzed by two-way ANOVA (*, P < 0.05). The dashed line in panels A to C represents the limit of detection.FIG 3 MNV NS7 RNA polymerase mutant I391L shows delayed replication kinetics in mice. (A and B) Virus titers (A) and viral RNA levels (B) shed in the feces of animals inoculated with 3 × 102 TCID50 MNV (n = 5). Mice were inoculated with recombinant viruses generated following recovery of MNV NS7 variants in BHK-21 cells by reverse genetics followed by 4 serial infections in RAW264.7 cells, as previously described (39). The presence of the desired mutations in the viral genome was confirmed by sequencing. Data were analyzed by two-way ANOVA (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001). gRNA eq, genomic RNA equivalents. (C) Animals were infected as described for panel A, but the mice were inoculated with a dose of 3 × 103 TCID50 MNV per mouse (n = 5). Data represent results from a two-way ANOVA test (***, P < 0.001). (D) Viral RNA levels detected in various tissues collected from mice inoculated with 3 × 102 TCID50 of WT MNV or the NS7 polymerase mutants at 48 h postinfection. MLN, mesenteric lymph node (two-way ANOVA test results were nonsignificant). In all panels, the dashed line represents the detection limit. The apparent absence of SEM bars for some values in panels B and C indicates that the bar is smaller than the respective symbol.Of the remaining NS7 mutants, S313T and K174S also displayed decreases in replication in vivo to levels similar to those seen with I391L (Fig. 3A and B; see also Fig. S4 in the supplemental material). However, in contrast to I391L, both S313T and K174S also displayed small but significant replication defects in cell culture. Both the S313T and K174S mutants yielded reduced virus titers in virus recoveries by reverse genetics (Fig. 2A; see also Fig. S4A) that were typical of viruses with a replication defect. K174S also showed significantly delayed kinetics during infection in RAW264.7 cells (see Fig. S4B). In contrast, the S313T mutant displayed minimally but reproducibly lower virus titers at 16 h postinfection during kinetics assays performed with both high and low MOI’s (Fig. 2B to D). The mutants I391V and T35I exhibited modest replication defects in vivo, although to a lesser extent than I391L (see Fig. S4 and S5). Surprisingly, significantly higher numbers of genome copies were secreted in mice infected with the P72S mutant, with slightly increased replication also being observed in cell cultures (see Fig. S6), suggesting that this substitution confers a replication advantage to MNV. Given that P72S did not differ in its sensitivities to mutagenic nucleosides, we hypothesized that the observed phenotype was not due to any impact on fidelity and it was therefore not characterized in more detail.10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.4Figure S4 In
vivo and in-cell-culture replication of MNV NS7 mutants T35I, K174R, and K174S. (A) Viral titers obtained after reverse genetics recovery of MNV-3 WT and NS7 mutants following transfection of full-length cDNA constructs. The values are the average of the results of at least three independent virus titer determinations for up to 4 independent cDNA transfections (one-way ANOVA test). (B) Replication kinetics of the MNV-3 WT strain and mutants in RAW264.7 cells infected at an MOI of 5 TCID50/cell. Every value is the average of results of three independent biological replicates (n = 3). Error bars represent SEM, with the statistical significance determined by two-way ANOVA test. (C and D) Viral titers (C) and viral RNA levels (D) in the feces of mice infected with 3 × 103 TCID50 units of various MNV WT or mutant strains at 24 h postinfection. Every value represent the average of the results from five samples obtained from independent animals (n = 5), with the statistical significance determined by a two-way ANOVA test. Statistical significance is represented as follows: *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. In all the panels, the dashed line indicates the limit of detection, and the error bars represent SEM. The apparent absence of SEM bars in some values of panel B indicates that the bar is smaller than the respective symbol. Download Figure S4, PDF file, 0.1 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.5Figure S5 Replication in vivo and in cell culture of MNV NS7 mutants I391V and V330I. (A) MNV titers recovered by reverse genetics following transfection of plasmids containing the cDNA of MNV WT or MNV variants containing different mutations within the NS7 polymerase gene. Statistical significance was determined by a one-way ANOVA test; ns, not significant. Values are the average of the results of at least three independent virus titer determinations performed using virus samples obtained from up to 4 independent cDNA transfections. (B) Replication kinetics of WT and mutant MNVs in RAW264.7 cells infected at an MOI of 5 TCID50/cell. Every value in the graph represents the average of results of three independent biological replicates (n = 3). Statistical analysis by two-way ANOVA test indicated no significant differences. (C and D) Virus titers (C) and viral RNA levels (D) shed in the feces of five animals inoculated with 3 × 102 TCID50 MNV (n = 5). Viral samples inoculated in mice were obtained after recovery of genetically defined MNV NS7 variants in BHK-21 cells by reverse genetics followed by 4 serial infections in RAW264.7 cells, as previously described (39). We confirmed by sequencing analysis that the resulting populations harbored only the desired mutations in the NS7 coding gene. Statistical analysis was performed by a two-way ANOVA test (*, P < 0.05). In all panels, the dashed line represents the limit of detection in the assay, and the error bars show SEM. The apparent absence of error bars for some values of panel B denotes that the bar was smaller than the corresponding symbol. Download Figure S5, PDF file, 0.05 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.6Figure S6 Replication kinetics of MNV-3 mutants P72S and E75S during infections in RAW264.7 cells and in vivo. (A) RAW264.7 cells were infected at an MOI of 0.01 TCID50/cell and viral titers determined at different time points postinfection. Every value is the average of results of three titer determinations, with the error bars representing the SEM for each value. (B) Mice were infected with 103 TCID50, and the viral RNA levels shed in the feces were determined at different days postinfection (n = 5). In both panels, the dashed line symbolizes the limit of detection, and the statistical significance was determined using a two-way ANOVA test (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001). Download Figure S6, PDF file, 0.04 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.We subsequently investigated whether the reduced replication of I391L in mice could be rescued by a chemical expansion of the quasispecies diversity by favipiravir treatment. We have previously demonstrated that favipiravir elicits antiviral mutagenic activity associated with increased genetic diversity of the viral quasispecies in vivo (10). Treatment of mice with favipiravir resulted in decreased virus titers shed by both WT MNV and I391L MNV-infected animals (Fig. 4), suggesting that the dose of favipiravir used elicits antiviral activity against both viruses. Despite this, I391L displayed greater tolerance than the WT to favipiravir during infection in vivo, in agreement with observations in cell culture (Fig. 1B).FIG 4 MNV NS7 RNA polymerase mutant I391L is less sensitive to favipiravir treatment in vivo. Six animals were infected with 3 × 102 TCID50 MNV (n = 6). After 7 days, persistently infected mice were subjected to favipiravir treatment twice a day over a period of 4 days. Mouse feces samples were collected, and the titers (TCID50 per gram) were determined as previously described (10). The virus titer values represented are relative to the average virus titer at the day 0 time point, collected immediately before the beginning of treatment. Absolute virus titer values at day 0 were 5.80 and 5.51 log10 TCID50/g stool for the WT and the I391L mutant, respectively. Error bars represent SEM from a two-way ANOVA test (ns, not significant; *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01).The high-fidelity MNV NS7 I391L mutant is transmitted less efficiently than the WT and the S313T mutant in vivo.Several studies have found that viral genetic diversity contributes to organ and tissue tropism expansion during viral infections by facilitating avoidance of or escape from different physiological barriers (3, 4, 36). However, there is limited information on whether genetic diversity contributes to virus transmission between susceptible hosts. Recent studies suggest that reduced polymerase replication fidelity may be a significant determinant linked to the pandemic expansion of recent HuNoV GII.4 isolates (21) and that person-to-person transmission is more efficient for GII.4 pandemic strains than for nonpandemic isolates (19, 20). To determine whether the high-fidelity I391L NS7 mutant had altered transmission in vivo, we established an MNV transmission model whereby one mouse per cage was orally inoculated and transmission to five sentinel littermates was monitored by quantification of viral RNA in the feces. Since a defect in transmission could be attributed to delayed replication in I391L-infected mice, we also included the S313T mutant as it exhibits WT-like polymerase fidelity (Fig. 1D) but slower replication in vivo, to an extent similar to that seen with the I391L mutant (Fig. 3A and B). We found that transmission rates for the I391L mutant were significantly lower than those found for the WT and S313T (Fig. 5), suggesting that genetic diversity is linked to efficient virus transmission between hosts. Reduced transmission in the I391L-infected group was associated with lower viral RNA levels shed in the feces of sentinel animals (see Fig. S7 in the supplemental material). Hence, changes in polymerase fidelity may impact the rate of transmission of noroviruses within a susceptible population of naive hosts, providing additional support to recent studies indicating that the pandemic HuNoV GII.4 isolates possess polymerases with lower fidelity (21, 28).10.1128/mSphere.00279-16.7Figure S7 Viral RNA levels shed in the feces of sentinel mice in contact with orally inoculated mice. Naive mice in contact with WT-infected mice shed greater levels of viral RNA than mice in contact with S313T or I391L mice over the duration of the experiment (n = 20). The dashed line indicates the detection limit for this assay. Data represent results of a two-way ANOVA test (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01). Download Figure S7, PDF file, 0.03 MB.Copyright © 2016 Arias et al.2016Arias et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.FIG 5 MNV NS7 RNA polymerase mutant I391L shows delayed transmission in susceptible hosts. Virus transmission from infected to uninfected mice was determined as detailed in Materials and Methods. In brief, five naive mice in each cage were housed with one mouse inoculated by oral gavage with 3 × 102 TCID50 MNV-3. Every mutant was tested in 4 independent cages (n = 20). MNV transmission was determined by qPCR detection of MNV in the feces of naive mice along a series of time points. (A and B) Graphs showing the percentages of noninfected animals along a series of time points (the log rank test was used for statistical analysis). (A) WT and S313T showed no significant (ns) difference in their transmission kinetics between mice. (B) The WT strain was transmitted significantly faster than the I391L mutant (**; P < 0.01). S313T also showed significantly increased transmission compared to I391L (not shown in the figure; P < 0.05). Animals directly infected by oral-gavage inoculation are not represented. (C) Viral RNA levels found in the feces of noninoculated animals after 4 days in contact with infected mice (n = 20). The dashed line represents the limit of detection, and the numbers above the groups represent the numbers of animals shedding viral RNA at levels below the detection limit. Animals directly infected by oral-gavage inoculation are not represented. Data represent results of a two-way ANOVA test (**, 0.001 < P < 0.01).In this study, we demonstrated that a high-fidelity norovirus mutant has reduced replication in vivo accompanied by reduced rates of transmission between hosts. This report builds on our previous investigations demonstrating that norovirus replication fidelity and intrahost genetic diversity influence viral pathogenesis (10). Together, these results are highly significant in light of understanding the influence of replication fidelity on factors that affect the emergence of new norovirus variants with pandemic potential. Given the recent development of potential cell culture propagation methods for HuNoVs (37, 38), the identification of fidelity determinants in NS7 could also contribute to the design of genetically stable attenuated vaccines, as has been proposed for other viruses (8).MATERIALS AND METHODSEthics.Studies with mice were performed in the Department of Pathology Biostatistics Unit (BSU) (PCD 80/2802) after ethical review by the University of Cambridge Review Panel and subsequent approval by the United Kingdom Home Office (PPL70/7689). All animal procedures and care conformed strictly to the United Kingdom Home Office Guidelines under the Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act 1986.Animal infections and antiviral treatment.Male C57BL/6 mice (4 to 5 weeks old) were orally infected with known amounts of MNV-3 as previously described (10) and as stated in the text. Fecal samples were collected at different time points, and the presence of infectious particles and viral RNA was determined as described in reference 10. For the determination of viral RNA levels in tissues, animals were euthanized at 48 h postinfection and the cecum, colon, and mesenteric lymph node harvested.Mice infected with MNV-3 were treated with favipiravir following protocols previously described in reference 10. Briefly, 1 week after inoculation, persistently infected animals were treated twice a day by oral gavage with favipiravir (600 mg/kg of animal body weight/day) for 4 days. Fecal samples were collected at different times during the course of treatment and virus titers and RNA levels quantified.Viral transmission experiments.To determine MNV transmission in vivo, we scored the proportion of infected mice within the population of noninoculated animals in contact with mice infected by oral-gavage inoculation. One mouse was inoculated per cage and was housed with five contact uninfected sentinel mice. We determined the presence of MNV RNA in the feces of naive mice at different time points postinfection (days 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6).Cells, infections, and reverse genetics recovery of viruses.Procedures for the cultivation of cells and MNV infections have been previously described (10). RAW264.7 murine leukemia macrophage cells were used for the propagation and titration (TCID50 assay) of the MNV-1 and MNV-3 mutants used in this study. All the different cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) with 10% FCS, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 mg/ml streptomycin (complete DMEM) and were maintained at 37°C with 5% CO2.The wild-type strain and NS7 mutants MNV-1 and MNV-3 used in this study were obtained after reverse genetics recovery of infectious virus as previously described (10, 27). Briefly, BHK-21 cells were transfected with plasmids containing a T7 promoter followed by full-length genomic MNV cDNA encoding different NS7 mutants. Then, transfected cells were infected with helper fowlpox virus expressing recombinant T7 polymerase (FPV-T7) as previously described in reference 27. The resulting population was titrated and used as a passage 0 stock. All the experiments carried out in this study involved NS7 mutants in the context of an MNV-3 genome, with the exception of a limited number of NS7 mutant virus recoveries described in Table 1 that were generated in the context of an MNV-1 genome.Cell culture infections in the presence of mutagenic compounds.Experiments performed to determine levels of sensitivity to different mutagenic compounds were carried out using RAW264.7 cells. A total of 4 × 105 cells per well were seeded on 24-well plates, incubated for 3 h at 37°C and 5% CO2 to allow attachment to the plate, and then infected with different MNV mutants at an MOI of 0.01 TCID50/cell. Cells were incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 1 h; the supernatants were then removed and cells washed once with complete DMEM, before addition of 1 ml of complete DMEM containing mutagenic compounds at the indicated concentrations. Infections were harvested at 42 h and virus progeny released through 2 consecutive cycles of freeze-thawing.Viral RNA extraction, reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) amplification, quantitative PCR (qPCR), and mutation frequency analysis of virus populations.Viral RNA was extracted from 100 µl of viral samples (either supernatant from lysed infected cultures or phosphate-buffered-saline [PBS]-resuspended feces from animals) using a GenElute RNA miniprep purification system following protocols provided by the manufacturer. Viral RNA was quantified using a two-step qPCR approach following protocols described previously (27).For the calculation of mutation frequency in any virus population, we followed protocols previously described (10). We analyzed the mutation frequency of mutant and WT populations obtained after eight passages in RAW264.7 cells to allow sufficient rounds of replication and accumulation of mutations to facilitate the quantitative analysis. Briefly, 4 µl of purified RNA was subjected to reverse transcription in a 20-µl final volume using SuperScript III (Roche) as indicated by the manufacturer. cDNA (3 µl) was then PCR amplified using high-fidelity Hot Start KOD DNA polymerase (Toyobo) and primers spanning MNV-3 genomic positions 951 to 3395. Positive PCR band products were excised from an agarose gel and purified with EconoSpin columns (Epoch) and then directly ligated to plasmid PCR Blunt using a Zero Blunt PCR cloning kit (Life Technologies). Positive Escherichia coli colonies were identified by PCR screening using primers flanking the vector-cloning site and GoTaq polymerase (Promega). The resultant PCR products corresponding to individual MNV cDNA clones were sequenced, and the mutation frequency in each population was calculated.Statistical analysis.Statistical significance was examined using GraphPad Prism as described in the figure legends. For statistical analysis of mutation frequencies, a Mann-Whitney test was used that compares the ranked scores of the numbers of mutations found in individual clones grouped by population (Mann-Whitney test; 0.01 < P < 0.05, **), as previously described (5).


Title: Sources of Airborne Norovirus in Hospital Outbreaks

Norovirus (NoV) is the major cause of viral gastroenteritis worldwide, with more than 600 million cases annually [1]. NoV is efficiently transmitted due to a low infectious dose, high viral loads in feces and vomit, and high stability in the environment. Hence, it often gives rise to outbreaks, especially in semi-enclosed settings [2]. In health-care facilities, NoV outbreaks are notoriously difficult to control and cause severe workflow disruptions, substantial economic costs, and excess morbidity [3, 4].The main routes of NoV transmission are ingestion of contaminated water or food and contact with contaminated surfaces or infected persons [5], but some evidence also suggests that norovirus may be transmitted through the air. Hypothetically, infectious particles could be aerosolized from, for instance, vomit or toilet flushing, deposited in the upper respiratory tract during inhalation, and swallowed [6–9]. If this occurs at a significant scale, additional infection control measures may be required to prevent transmission effectively. A few outbreak reports have described occurrences where air was considered the most likely pathway for transfer [10–13]. Recently, 2 studies presented evidence of NoV in hospital air during outbreaks, detecting NoV RNA in dust and air samples [14, 15]. Bonifait et al [15] also showed that murine noroviruses remain infectious after aerosolization and that the concentration of airborne NoV may suffice to cause infections.None of these studies provided any information on possible sources of airborne NoV or connections to outbreaks or transmission of infections. Nor did they provide any information about the size of the aerosol particles that contain viruses. Size is important, as it is the major factor determining the residence time of the aerosol particles in air and their probability of being inhaled. Aerosol particles smaller than 10 µm can be suspended in air for several hours, be transported long distances in air currents, and easily be inhaled [16].This study aimed to investigate symptoms of gastroenteritis (ie, vomiting, diarrhea) as possible sources of airborne NoV, and to determine whether there is any connection between airborne NoV and outbreaks in hospital wards. In addition, the size of NoV-carrying particles was investigated.METHODSStudy DesignAir sampling was repeatedly performed in the proximity of hospitalized patients with symptomatic norovirus infections to investigate factors associated with the presence of airborne NoV.Setting and ParticipantsAir samples were collected at 3 hospitals in southern Sweden between March 2017 and May 2018. The samples were collected from areas close to patients who had suspected NoV gastroenteritis with ongoing symptoms (diarrhea and/or vomiting within the prior 24 hours). Only patients with laboratory-confirmed NoV infections were included in the final analysis.Clinical data on symptom onset, time since last diarrhea, and vomiting within the room were collected directly from the patients when possible, and confirmed by nursing staff or medical records. Data on outbreak development were followed by close contact with the ward staff and infection control team. We defined outbreaks as the occurrence of 2 or more patients with confirmed NoV infection at the ward, including at least 1 patient with a probable ward-acquired infection. NoV-infected patients not involved in outbreaks were defined as sporadic. The ventilation systems in the patient rooms were specified for approximately 2 total air changes per hour. Patient rooms typically had most of the exhaust air extracted from the adjacent toilet.Air SamplingFor each patient, air samples were obtained at 3 locations, in the following order: ward corridor within 5 meters from the door to the patient’s room, inside the room at a distance of 2–3 meters from the patient, and in the toilet room. All toilets were directly connected to the patient’s room. When feasible, air sampling was repeated within 24 hours. After sampling in the proximity of the patients, samples were also collected from the same building but outside the implicated wards, and used as negative controls.Air samples were collected with a high-airflow liquid cyclone, Coriolis µ (Bertin Instruments), operated at 200 L/min for 10 min, with single-use collection vials containing 15 mL of phosphate-buffered saline. The lower cutoff size (d50) for sampling with the Coriolis is ~1 µm [17].The size characterization of aerosol particles containing NoV was carried out in the ward corridors on 4 occasions during outbreaks. Size-separated particle collection was performed by a cascade impactor (Next Generation Impactor, Copley Scientific) with 8 size fractions; >8.13 µm, 4.51–8.13 µm, 2.85–4.51 µm, 1.67–2.85 µm, 0.95–1.67 µm, 0.56–0.95 µm, 0.34–0.56 µm, and 0.14–0.34 µm, at a flow rate of 60 L/min for 17–120 hours [18]. The collection plates were sprayed with grease (Collection Substrate Spray, Dekati Ltd.) to avoid particle bounce-off.Sample AnalysisNoV infections in patients were confirmed as the causative agent by reverse transcription quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) analysis of fecal or vomit samples from all patients with suspected NoV gastroenteritis.The air samples collected with the liquid cyclone (Coriolis µ) were stored at -20°C until analysis. Samples were concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 centrifugal filter units (50 kDa cutoff, Merck Millipore KGaA) to a final volume of 200 µl. The cascade impactor samples were extracted by thoroughly swabbing each of the 8 particle size–specific collection plates with a wetted flocked swab (Copan Scientific), and then were transferred to 1 mL universal transport media (Copan Scientific).Both patient samples and air samples were analyzed at the Department of Clinical Microbiology, Lund University, by RT-qPCR for the detection of NoV genogroups I and II, as described in Kageyama et al [19]. The lower limit of detection was 20 copies/mL sample.Quantification was performed by comparing RT-qPCR cycle thresholds with serial 10-fold dilutions of a standard solution of NoV genogroup II (GII) (ATCC VR-3235SD). Genotyping of positive findings was performed by semi-nested sequencing of the NoV genogroup II ORF1/ORF2 junction, using the G2FB-1, G2FB-2, G2FB-3, G2SKR, and GIIFBN primers [19–21]. The genotypes were assigned according to phylogenetic analysis (https://www.rivm.nl/mpf/typingtool/norovirus/) [22].Statistical AnalysisThe Chi-square test and Fischer’s exact test were used to assess crude differences between categorical variables for positive air samples in all samples and all patients separately. Using logistic regression, we assessed the association between positive air samples and time since last symptom of disease (vomiting and diarrhea), grouped in ordered time periods (0–3 hours, >3–6 hours, >6–24 hours, and >24 hours). A random-effects model was used to account for dependency between samples from the same individuals in all regression analyses [23]. The associations between positive air samples and other variables, including age (continuous), sex, room size, virus genogroup and time since onset of disease (grouped as 0–12 hours, 12–48 hours, >48 hours), were analyzed in univariate models. The same variables were also evaluated as potential confounders of any association between positive air and time since last symptom of disease in bivariate models (data not shown). To ascertain any association between time since a specific patient’s last symptom and the air sample, sensitivity analyses were also performed where the corridor samples were excluded.EthicsThe study was approved by the Regional Ethical Review Board (EPN Lund 2015/51).RESULTSA total of 86 air samples were obtained from the proximity of 26 patients with confirmed NoV gastroenteritis at 13 different hospital wards. NoV RNA was detected in 21 of these samples from 10 different patients (Table 1). The median number of air samples per patient was 3 (range 1–8). All 13 control samples from outside the implicated wards tested negative for NoV.Table 1.Characteristics of Patients and Air Samples (Liquid Cyclone), Including All and Positive SamplesPatients, n (%)Patients With NoV-Positive Air Sample, n (%)
P ValueAir Samples, n (%)NoV-Positive Air Samples, n (%)
P Value
Total
2610 (38%)…8621 (24%)…
Age group

 <80
133 (23%).11a407 (18%).16a
 ≥80
137 (54%)…4614 (30%)…
Sex

 Male
134 (30%).42a438 (19%).21a
 Female
136 (46%)…4313 (30%)…
Outbreak

 Yes
159 (60%).01b5217 (33%).03a
 No
111c (9%)…344c (12%)…
Norovirus genotype

 II
2510 (40%).62b8221 (26%).24a
 I
10 (0%)…40 (0%)…
Sampling site

 Corridor
215 (24%).82a275 (19%).65a
 Room
257 (28%)…3910 (26%)…
 Toilet
155 (33%)…206 (30%)…
Patients/room
d

 1
155 (33%).61b376 (16%).04a
 2
74 (57%)…168 (50%)…
 3–4
31 (33%)…62 (33%)…Abbreviation: NoV, norovirus.
aChi-square test for differences in positive air samples within categories.
bFischer’s exact test for differences in positive air samples within categories.
cNo outbreak at the time of sampling, but emerged 3 days later.
dTotal number of patients at the room of the norovirus positive patient.Positive Air Samples During Norovirus OutbreaksPositive air samples were almost exclusively found during outbreaks. Of the 26 patients, 15 were part of 12 separate outbreaks, while the remaining 11 patients were sporadic cases. At least 1 NoV-positive air sample was obtained during 9 of the 12 investigated outbreaks. Samples from the ward corridor were positive in 7 of 12 outbreak wards, including 3 collected by the cascade impactor. The outbreaks involved 2–5 patients with hospital-acquired NoV gastroenteritis. None of the air samples obtained in the proximity of the 11 sporadic NoV patients were positive, except 1 where an outbreak emerged 3 days later. Patients with a positive air sample are shown in Supplementary Table 1.Positive Air Samples in Relation to SymptomsThe detection of NoV RNA in the air was associated with a shorter period of time since the last vomiting episode (P < .01). This association remained after controlling for diarrhea during the same periods (P = .01). Of 14 air samples collected within 3 hours since the last vomiting episode, 9 (64%) were NoV positive (Figure 1). At least 1 air sample was positive from 4 of 5 patients (80%) with recent vomiting (Supplementary Table 2).Figure 1.Percent of NoV-positive air samples in relation to time since (A) last vomiting episode and (B) last diarrhea. The area of each bubble is proportional to the total number of air samples within each time interval. The values above each bubble represent the number of positive and total air samples. Abbreviation: NoV, norovirus.A vomiting episode within the last 3 hours was strongly associated with a positive air sample (odds ratio 8.1; P < .01). This was also the case in the sensitivity analysis, in which only samples from the patient’s room and toilet were included (Figure 2). No obvious associations were seen between positive air samples and time period since the last instance of diarrhea (P = .20). Controlling for age, sex, time since onset of disease, or room size had only minor effects on the associations; these variables were not considered confounders of the norovirus-time association (data not shown).Figure 2.Odds ratios for positive air samples within 3 hours from last symptom versus no symptom within 3 hours. The sensitivity analysis was performed using logistic regression with a random effects model to account for dependency between samples from the same individuals. Abbreviation: CI, confidence interval.Quantification of Airborne NorovirusThe concentration of airborne NoV RNA collected with the liquid cyclone ranged from 5–215 NoV copies/m3, with a mean of 31 copies/m3. The sample with the highest concentration was collected 25 minutes after a diaper was changed on a patient with no previous record of any vomiting in the room (Supplementary Table 1, Case 4).Size of Particles Containing Norovirus RNAThe size-separating cascade impactor results showed NoV-positive samples in 3 of 4 investigated outbreaks (Figure 3). Positive samples were found in aerosol particle size fractions >4.51 µm and <0.95 µm; however, the size fractions that were positive differed between the 3 outbreaks. No difference in virus concentrations between small and large size fractions was observed.Figure 3.Size ranges of norovirus-positive aerosol samples (dark green) from the cascade impactor during 3 different outbreaks (negative stages are colored gray). During the fourth outbreak, all stages were negative. Note that the width of the stages is on a log scale.Norovirus GenotypesOf the 26 patients included, 25 were infected by NoV genogroup II, of which 20 were genotype GII.4 Sydney and 1 was GII.6. Sequencing failed in 3 patients. There was 1 patient who was infected with NoV genogroup I. Genotyping was successful in 2 air samples obtained at 2 different wards. In both cases, genotype GII.4 Sydney was detected, with sequences identical to the patients’ fecal sample strains.DISCUSSIONThis study confirms the airborne dispersal of NoV RNA, links airborne NoV to patients’ symptoms, and provides new information on particle size, thus establishing the transmission ability of aerosol particles containing NoV. The results also suggest vomiting as the major source of airborne NoV and imply a connection between airborne NoV and outbreaks.Several case studies have suggested airborne dispersal of NoV as a cause for outbreaks [10–13], but only 2 previous studies reported evidence of NoV in the air during outbreaks in hospitals. Nenonen et al [14] detected NoV in airborne particles collected in ionizer traps and Bonifait et al [15] detected widespread airborne NoV in patient rooms and other ward areas, partially using the same air collection methodology as in the present study. Our study confirms that airborne NoV RNA is common during outbreaks, also in open ward areas.The present study also included sporadic cases with NoV infection, but almost no positive air samples were found in connection to this group. In fact, at the ward where the only sporadic case with positive air samples was treated, an outbreak emerged a few days later. This case, together with the high prevalence of positive air samples in outbreaks compared to sporadic cases, suggests that airborne dispersal could be an important factor in NoV outbreak developments in health-care settings. A previous study showed that vomiting during NoV infection is a risk factor for outbreak development [24]. The present study supplies additional evidence that vomiting may be a risk factor for further transmission and outbreaks.We found a strong association between positive air samples and time since last vomiting episode, inferring that vomiting was the major source of airborne NoV. Even if the association between time since last diarrhea episode and NoV-positive air did not reach significance in the present study, diarrhea and toilet flushing may still generate aerosols containing NoV. Interestingly, the air in the proximity of 1 of the cases was positive for NoV even though no symptom had yet occurred in the room, implying other potential sources of airborne NoV, such as emissions from contaminated clothes or exhaled air [25, 26].Norovirus is acknowledged to spread by splashing droplets that are generated from the patient, as during vomiting. During this process, large numbers of small droplets are also produced that are likely to evaporate to dry droplet nuclei, which have a low settling velocity and, thus, can stay airborne for several hours [16, 27]. Although the results from the size-separated collection varied in the 4 investigated outbreaks, an important conclusion is that airborne particles as small as <1 µm contain detectable amounts of NoV. Particles in this size range are easily inhaled and have a typical probability of 10–30% to deposit in the mouth, nose, or conducting airways, from where they are likely to be transported to the gastrointestinal tract.The concentration of airborne NoV in our study was in the same range as previously reported [15]. Theoretically, given the highest virus concentration measured, the 50% human infectious dose of 20 to 1000 copies would be reached after 10 minutes to 8 hours of normal breathing [28–30]. If the airborne genomes represent viable viruses that reach the gastrointestinal tract after inhalation, there is a high likelihood that airborne NoV can cause disease. Future studies combining environmental sampling of NoV with novel culture methods can provide decisive information regarding the infectivity of airborne NoV [31].The method of sampling directly into liquid with a cyclone is favorable, since collection is fast, the air sample volume is large (2 m3), and extraction is easily performed. There are collection methods with better recovery, but they are less practical in clinical settings [32]. Collection with a liquid cyclone sampler may carry a risk for cross-contamination within the air inlet, but since all control samples in our study were negative, significant contamination of the samples was considered unlikely. The cascade impactor sampler has a high sampling efficiency (>95%) within the defined particle size fractions; however, the equipment is bulky and noisy and, thus, could only be used in some of the outbreaks and not in the patients’ rooms.Due to the rapid course of NoV gastroenteritis, sampling shortly after the initial symptoms appear is difficult. As symptoms may cease before the NoV infection is confirmed by laboratory analysis, we mainly sampled air from suspected cases and later excluded patients without NoV infection. Sampling earlier on in the clinical course was easier during outbreaks, as more patients became ill successively. This may have biased our data to sampling sooner after symptoms during outbreaks.Even though the wards were visited within hours of confirmed or suspected disease, collecting the information about the exact time of a diarrhea and vomiting episode from patients or staff was sometimes challenging. The connection between an air sample and an individual could also be difficult in corridors and rooms with 2 or more patients. In those situations, we linked the air samples to the patient with the most recent symptom. As this primarily affected the corridor samples, statistical sensitivity analyses excluding these samples were conducted.Our study is the largest study of airborne NoV, but was still not large enough to conduct a multivariable analysis controlling for more than 1 confounding factor. Nevertheless, we believe that the main findings are valid and generalizable. Still, conclusions regarding possible sources of airborne NoV RNA are based on statistical associations and not direct evidence of causation.Face masks have since long been advocated as personal protective equipment during the care of vomiting patients [33]. The finding of airborne NoV in sufficient concentrations to cause disease raises the question of whether and how to optimize infection control efforts and personal protection equipment. Further studies are warranted before generally recommending full airborne precautions, including respirators and negative pressure rooms, during care of patients infected with NoV. In view of possible transmission by air, hospital staff and planners should take airflow and ventilation rates into consideration to better prevent this contagious virus. Closed doors would be a simple step to reduce dispersal into neighboring rooms, but this alone is not sufficient: doors were usually closed during our visits to the implicated wards. When possible, efforts to reduce vomiting can also reduce aerosolization of NoV.In conclusion, this study provides additional evidence that airborne NoV can be present in concentrations that are high enough to cause infections, and in particle size fractions that remain airborne for long periods and are easily inhaled. We present unique data indicating a strong association between vomiting and the presence of airborne NoV RNA. The observed connection between airborne NoV RNA and outbreaks supports the hypothesis that the airborne transmission route may be of importance.Supplementary DataSupplementary materials are available at Clinical Infectious Diseases online. Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the corresponding author.ciz584_suppl_Supplementary_MaterialClick here for additional data file.


Title: Advances in human norovirus research: Vaccines, genotype distribution and antiviral strategies

1Introduction of norovirus1.1Basic structure and pathologic profile of norovirusBelonging to the Caliciviridae family, norovirus is a non-enveloped, positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus (ssRNA(+) virus) that can be classified into 10 genogroups (Chhabra et al., 2019; Li et al., 2023). The norovirus was first identified in 1968 during an outbreak of acute gastroenteritis in Norwalk, Ohio, USA, where it was isolated from the feces of affected patients (Kapikian et al., 1972). Since then, this virus has been consistently detected in the fecal samples from patients with gastroenteritis worldwide. Human norovirus is widely recognized as a significant etiological agent of acute gastroenteritis (Lu et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2021), accounting for approximately 20 % of cases in children under the age of five (Hall et al., 2013). Some genogroups of norovirus infect animals like dogs,pigs and mice, while others infect humans (Chhabra et al., 2019). The primary mode of transmission is through the fecal-oral route (Rexin et al., 2024; Dolin et al., 1971), and involves ingesting contaminated food or water and person-to-person contact (Mao et al., 2023; Phattanawiboon et al., 2020; Verhoef et al., 2015; Ji et al., 2020). However, there is also evidence suggesting the norovirus can be transmitted by the airborne route (Alsved et al., 2020). In recent years, there has been a steady increase in the incidence of acute gastroenteritis associated with norovirus. Clinical manifestations often include symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, watery diarrhea, gastrointestinal spasms, etc., occasionally accompanied by fever, chills, headache and general malaise (Ku et al., 2014). Additionally, combined with the research in recent years has indicated that norovirus can induce benign seizures in conjunction with acute gastroenteritis, suggesting a potential association with the nervous system (Moreno-Valladares et al., 2022). From a clinical perspective, it has been observed that individuals who remain asymptomatic following infection demonstrate comparable transmissibility to symptomatic patients (Phattanawiboon et al., 2020). This poses a significant challenge for accurate clinical identification of norovirus.1.2The patterns of viral invasion in the hostThe primary mode of norovirus invasion into the body is through infection of macrophages and dendritic cells in the gastrointestinal tract (Karst and Tibbetts, 2016; Donaldson et al., 2008). Upon infecting humans, these viruses exhibit a preference for targeting the gastrointestinal tract, Norovirus can use M cells across the intestinal epithelial barrier and enterocytes are able to collect material from the intestinal lumen and transfer them to potential immune cells (Karst and Tibbetts, 2016). It is worth noting that most studies investigating this mechanism have primarily utilized mice or other caliciviruses due to challenges associated with successfully culturing norovirus in human cells (Thorne and Goodfellow, 2014) The invasion of norovirus is mainly divided into five steps, which are attachment, receptor binding, endocytosis, uncoating, and translation (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). According to limited reports, the attachment of murine norovirus to the HBGAs structure on the cell membrane is facilitated by various factors, including bile acids, sialic acids, and cations (Taube et al., 2009), and then norovirus binds to CD300lf (Kolawole et al., 2014). Ceramide plays an important role in the binding process. In contrast to most viruses that rely on pH value for endocytosis (Shivanna et al., 2014), norovirus mainly relies on cholesterol and dynein for endocytosis (Gerondopoulos et al., 2010). Lacking the 5 'cap structure (Emmott et al., 2017), norovirus RNA relies on the VPg protein to bind to initiation factors to initiate the translation process as showed in Fig. 1.Fig. 1Hypothetical model of norovirus infection pathogenesis based on findings from patients infected with norovirus.Fig 11.3The viral subtypeThe gene classification of norovirus is currently categorized into ten distinct genogroup (Norovirus GI to Norovirus GVX) and two unassigned gene groups (Chhabra et al., 2019; Degiuseppe et al., 2020). Through the comparison of norovirus gene sequences, researchers have further classified these gene groups into 49 distinct capsid genotypes (Cao et al., 2022) and 60 unique p types (Chen et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021), significantly enhancing our comprehension of norovirus. The GI and GII noroviruses deserve special attention due to their pandemic (Cao et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2020).The complete genome sequences of serotypes GI and GII, which possess the highest global epidemic potential, were obtained from GenBank and utilized as reference strains for phylogenetic analysis. The sequence information can be found in Supplementary Materials, Table S.1. We utilized the Align By Muscle functionality in MEGA 10.1.8 (Kakakhel et al., 2022; Pazdiora et al., 2021) to perform a comparative analysis of the downloaded sequences, and subsequently construct a Bayesian inference tree for the entire gene using MrBayes v3.2.7 (Ronquist et al., 2012; Portela et al., 2021). The obtained results unveiled numerous variants of norovirus strain GI, as showed in Fig. 2.Fig. 2Gene evolution tree in complete genome sequences of 18 global norovirus subtypes GI. The tree represents the evolutionary history of the gene family through the transmission of norovirus, as well as the phylogenetic relationships between various norovirus global epidemic strains in different regions and countries (see color legend). "0.006″ represents the scale of branch lengths, which are used to measure the distance between ancestors and descendants. Other numbers of internal nodes, also known as the support value, is used to evaluate how reliable a branch structure is. The branch is supported by more evidence the higher the value.Fig 2The numerous variants of norovirus strain GII was depicted in
Fig. 3. The ongoing variability in strains poses challenges for the development of a universal vaccine that can effectively neutralize a wide range of strains and subgenotypes. Consequently, individuals who have received full vaccination may still be susceptible to infection, particularly if the vaccine's efficacy is compromised. Therefore, there is an urgent need for novel antiviral drugs alongside advancements in vaccine research.Fig. 3Gene evolution tree in complete genome sequences of 18 global norovirus subtypes GII. The tree was generated as the methods of Fig. 2.Fig 31.4Public health strategies to prevent norovirus infectionIn the research and development of vaccines, numerous challenges exist in developing effective solutions for norovirus, including the intricate nature of human natural immune response to norovirus (Donaldson et al., 2008; Ford-Siltz et al., 2021), the genetic diversity within the viral norovirus genome, the absence of a reliable viral in vitro culture system (Ettayebi et al., 2016), and limited animal models available for vaccine testing. Consequently, an approved norovirus vaccine has yet to be established. Fortunately, several studies have reported that zebrafish can serve as a novel HuNov model, offering valuable insights for the investigation of norovirus vaccines (Zhang et al., 2021). On the other hand, for acute gastroenteritis caused by norovirus, the current primary treatment is oral rehydration therapy. This included a rehydration phase involving the intake of oral rehydration electrolytes and water, as well as a maintenance stage treatment that involved consuming electrolytes, water, and appropriate food (Bonvanie et al., 2021). Research has demonstrated that ondansetron can be used to alleviate symptoms in children experiencing vomiting (Hartman et al., 2019). Meanwhile, the public health care program should be further strengthened to effectively prevent viral infections. Additionally, measures should be implemented to enhance daily life and minimize the risk of viral infection. These measures primarily rely on consistent adherence to hand hygiene practices, meticulous attention to sanitizing environmental surfaces, and minimizing direct contact with infectious sources.2Receptors and distributionThe tissue and cell tropism of viruses is determined by numerous factors, with host cell surface receptors playing a pivotal role in this process. By investigating the surface receptors of noroviruses, we can gain insights into their invasion mechanisms and characteristics within the human body. According to the previous studies, CD300 is identified as the murine norovirus receptor (Graziano et al., 2020), which is a membrane protein containing immunoglobulin (Ig) domains. In contrast, human norovirus receptors can be mainly classified into two categories: one being carbohydrate receptors represented by histological blood group antigens (HBGAs) (Harrington et al., 2002), and the other being immune receptors represented by Toll-like receptor (TLR) (Finberg et al., 2007). The expression site and mode of action of the human norovirus receptors on the host are summarized in Table 1.Table 1The expression site and mode of action of the human norovirus receptors on the host.Table 1NameSite of expressionFunctionVirus binding modeReferencesHBGAsRespiratory tract, digestive tract, urogenital mucous epithelium; saliva and other biological fluids; red blood cellPromoting the interaction between the viral P structure and the binding pocket of HBGAs.Reconstructing HBGA binding site (HBS) through α-Fuc interaction with HBGAs and 444 mutation of VP1 to tyrosine, HBS changes through 382 mutation of VP1 and the molecular pattern of oligosaccharide binding(Jin et al., 2015; Kher et al., 2023; Kimura-Someya et al., 2022; Yu et al., 2023)TLR2Plasma, endosome, within the lysosome membraneInfect, promote inflammationDose-dependent approach of VLPs(SantisoBellón et al., 2022)TLR5Induce mucosal and systemic IgA and IgG(Enosi Tuipulotu et al., 2018; Hjelm et al., 2014)Carbohydrate binding is a prevalent mechanism employed by most viruses and microorganisms to adhere to the host cell (Zheng et al., 2020). Among these, HBGAs represent a family of carbohydrate structures that utilize the carbohydrate binding mode as their primary receptor for norovirus attachment to the host cell. The catalysis of HBGAs is facilitated by glycosyltransferases encoded by three gene families (ABO, secretor, and Lewis) (Kimura-Someya et al., 2022; Peña-Gil et al., 2021; Sharma et al., 2020; Ibaraki et al., 2023), which sequentially add monosaccharides to the precursors. HBGAs are predominantly present in the mucosal epithelium of the respiratory, alimentary, and urogenital tracts, as well as in the form of free oligosaccharides like saliva (Nordgren and Svensson, 2019; Tenge et al., 2021; Villabruna et al., 2021; Cong et al., 2023). The FUT3 enzyme facilitates the conversion of the H type 1 antigen into Lewis b (Kimura-Someya et al., 2022; Auger et al., 2023). The A and B enzymes encoded by the ABO (Villabruna et al., 2021; Marionneau et al., 2001; Liao et al., 2020) gene can enzymatically add acetylgalactosamine or galactose to the H antigen. According to the different subtypes of norovirus, strains can bind to HBGAs in various ways. The example of GII strains here is taken to illustrate their primary interaction with HBGAs through α-Fuc residues (Frenck et al., 2012). For example, the GII.17 strain enhanced its HBGA binding capacity by modifyingits HBGA binding site (HBS) through a mutation at position 444 in VP1 (Qian et al., 2019), substituting it with tyrosine (Yi et al., 2021) . Additionally, the HBS of the GII.2 BJSMQ outbreak strain underwent a mutation at position 382 in VP1 (Cong et al., 2023; Ao et al., 2018), thereby increasing its stability and binding capacity. On the other hand, the ability of viruses with low HBGA binding capacity to trigger outbreaks is attributed to alterations in the molecular patterns of oligosaccharide binding (Auger et al., 2023). Relevant studies have demonstrated that norovirus employed its own P structure for HBGAs binding (Sun et al., 2021) through a process referred to as binding bags. Both cellular and non-cellular host molecules enhanced the binding of norovirus. For instance, bile salts could induce moderate structural alterations in the P structural domain to facilitate norovirus binding (Nelson et al., 2018; Graziano et al., 2019), while ceramides might modify the conformation of antibody epitopes on cells to promote virus entry (Almand et al., 2017; Orchard et al., 2018; Creutznacher et al., 2023).The immunoreaction is a crucial antiviral defence response system that plays a pivotal role in the recognition and elimination of intracellular pathogens. Toll like receptors (TLRs), expressed in various innate immune cells and localized within the plasma, endosome, and lysosome membranes, represents a family of transmembrane receptors. The virus-like particles (VLPs) of the norovirus protein coat exhibit a dose-dependent binding to TLR2 and TLR5 (Ponterio et al., 2019) receptors on host cell surfaces, thereby eliciting an immune-mediated response. The previous studies have reported that the TLR2 pathway was implicated in viral host infection and inflammation (Cheng et al., 2017) promotion, whereas the TLR5 pathway significantly elicited mucosal and systemic IgA and IgG responses (Ibaraki et al., 2023; Verma et al., 2016; Kirby et al., 2020).In general, norovirus can enter host cells through various receptors, and the expression of these receptors varies across different tissues (Liang et al., 2021). Currently, receptor studies on norovirus primarily focus on HBGAs, which have been documented in reports dating back to December 2003 (Huang et al., 2003). Follow-up studies have revealed that multiple attachment factors played a pivotal role in facilitating the binding of norovirus to HBGAs, as well as immune receptors such as TRLs. The diverse array of receptors gradually unraveled the invasive mechanisms and characteristics of norovirus. However, there are still certain mechanisms and receptors that remain incompletely understood. Given the continuous evolution of norovirus and expansion of its genetic pool, researchers need to explore an even broader range of receptor subtypes.3Clinical observationThe most prevalent symptoms associated with norovirus infection include emesis (Alsedà et al., 2023) and diarrhea (Lin et al., 2010), occasionally accompanied by nausea (Sun et al., 2022), abdominal discomfort, cramping (Alsedà et al., 2023), anorexia (Hellysaz et al., 2023), malaise, and low-grade pyrexia (Fang et al., 2022). Common complications may encompass benign seizures (Chen et al., 2009), febrile seizures (Chan et al., 2011), convulsions (Shi et al., 2023), necrotizing enterocolitis (Turcios-Ruiz et al., 2008) as well as exacerbation of inflammatory bowel disease (Khan et al., 2009). Detection of respiratory secretions from children presenting with respiratory symptoms revealed that norovirus may also be implicated in respiratory diseases (Esposito et al., 2014). Additionally, there have been reported cases where mild meningoencephalitis (Kimura et al., 2010) can be attributed to norovirus infection based on clinical manifestations.The main symptoms associated with norovirus infection exhibited variability among individuals, with a higher prevalence observed in infants, the elderly, and immunocompromised individuals (Lopman et al., 2004). Studies have indicated that young children exhibit more severe symptoms, with the establishment of protective immunity to prevent re-infection typically occurring before the age of 2 years (Sai et al., 2013). The primary manifestations of diarrhea in infants under 1 year old include watery diarrhea (Shang et al., 2016), which can lead to dehydration, electrolyte imbalance, convulsions, and potentially fatal outcomes in severe cases.In addition, the patients with norovirus gastroenteritis accompanied by convulsions also experience transient vomiting (lasting for approximately 2 days) in the absence of fever (Chen et al., 2019). For patients with immunocompetent norovirus gastroenteritis, the incubation period of infection is typically short, usually ranging from 24 to 48 h (Lively et al., 2018). This condition is characterized by symptoms such as vomiting, nausea, abdominal cramps, and diarrhea, which generally resolve within a span of 72 h (Lewis et al., 2023).Furthermore, the various strains of the virus would exhibit distinct clinical manifestations. According to previous studies, the GII genotype is globally prevalent in human norovirus infections, while the GI genotype is only observed in a limited number of cases (Fardah Athiyyah et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2023). Considering seasonal variations, the prevalence of GI genotypes is primarily observed during spring, whereas GII genotypes are predominant during autumn (Cao et al., 2021; Chan et al., 2018; Chiu et al., 2022). Compared to other genotypes, norovirus GII infection is associated with a higher incidence of severe diarrhea and vomiting (Melhem et al., 2016). Additionally, a greater proportion of patients infected with genotype GI experienced symptoms such as nausea, diarrhea lasting less than 3 days, and increased bowel sounds (Xue et al., 2015).The comprehension of dominant strains and their correlation with clinical manifestations will facilitate the enhancement of clinical diagnosis accuracy and the development of evidence-based prevention and treatment strategies.4The structure of norovirus and the host immune response against its pathogenesisThe norovirus genome typically consisted of three open reading frames (ORFs) (Dan et al., 2020), wherein ORF1 was encoded six non-structural (NS) proteins (Belliot et al., 2003), namely p48, nucleoside triphosphatase (NTPase), p22, VPg, protease (Pro), and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp). The major structural protein of the viral capsid VP1 was encoded by ORF2, while the minor structural protein of the capsid VP2 was encoded by ORF3 (Lin et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2019).Upon binding to the cellular receptor via the P domain of the VP1 protein, the virus internalized and unshelled, releasing positive RNA (+RNA) in the cytoplasm (Tan et al., 2004). Replication was completed through the coordinated action of Pol, VPg, and NTPase proteins (Li et al., 2018). Subsequently, the VPg protein binds to the 5′ end of the RNA, recruited initiation factors, and participates in initiating viral RNA translation for producing VP1 and VP2 proteins (Olspert et al., 2016).Following successful translation, the majority of proteins encoded by norovirus ORF1 undergo proteolytic processing mediated by the viral-encoded protease (Pro/NS6), resulting in their cleavage into distinct entities: p48 (NS1/2), NTPase (NS3), p22 (NS4), VPg, Pro, and RdRp (May et al., 2014). These individual proteins possessed specific functionalities crucial for replication and infection processes. The process of norovirus entry and replication through its various structural elements was illustrated in Fig. 4.Fig. 4The significance of viral structure in the processes of replication and infection.Fig 4And the comprehensive information regarding the ORFs and their encoded proteins of norovirus, which played a pivotal role in both replication and infection processes, was summarized in Table 2.Table 2The genomic architecture of norovirus plays a crucial role in facilitating its molecular functions during replication and infection processes.Table 2ORFsProteins encoded by ORFsNomenclatureMolecular FunctionReferencesORF1NS1/2p48N-terminalThe participation in the formation of viral replication complex, induction of aberrant cellular calcium signaling, promotion of viral replication, and evasion of IFN-λ-mediated antiviral immunity are observed.(Hung et al., 2023; Lee et al., 2017)NS3NTPaseThe protein possesses NTP-dependent RNA helicase activity as well as NTP-independent RNA chaperone activity, enabling it to unwind and disrupt the structural integrity of RNA molecules.(Li et al., 2018)NS4p22The induction of vesicle structures can potentially be associated with the formation of replication vesicles induced by norovirus.(Doerflinger et al., 2017)NS5VPgThe binding of translation initiation factor elF3 participates in RNA translation and interacts with the protein cap-binding complex elF4F; It also has been shown to induce cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase.(Daughenbaugh et al., 2006; McSweeney et al., 2019; McSweeney et al., 2021)NS6Pro3CLproNS6proThe major polymerase responsible for nucleotideylation.(Medvedev et al., 2017)NS7RdRpNS7proRdRp could direct viral replication. RdRp protein may have affected the evolution of the VP1 gene/VP1 protein.(Takahashi et al., 2023; Obaid et al., 2023)ORF2VP1Viral protein 1The major structural protein of the norovirus capsid binds to human blood group antigens (HBGAs) through its p structure.(Strong et al., 2012)ORF3VP2Viral protein 2A secondary structural protein responsible for the nuclear transport of VP1.(Liu et al., 2019)The pathogenesis of norovirus is characterized by intricate host-virus interactions, wherein numerous factors play pivotal roles, including histiocyte tropism, host immune response, and bacterial microorganisms. The cytotaxis of norovirus primarily targets gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) immune cells in the distal ileum, encompassing Macrophages(Mφ), Dendritic cells(DCs), B cells, and T cells; alongside infrequent cell populations within the follicle-associated epithelium (FAE) (Grau et al., 2017).Some chemokines/cytokines have the function to suppress the virus replication. During viral infection, both type I and type II interferons can suppress the replication of replicon expression by inducing innate immune mediators, as well as impede the interaction between VPg and translation initiation factors, thereby inhibiting the translation of non-structural proteins (Neil et al., 2019; Strohmeier et al., 2023). The action of IL-4 on cluster cells enhances the immune response (Wilen et al., 2018). Additionally, the B and T cells of the adaptive immune system (Hsu et al., 2018; Malm et al., 2016) play a crucial role in effectively eliminating intestinal and enteric lymph node viruses. The outer membrane vesicles (OMV) (Grau et al., 2017; Mosby et al., 2022; Mosby et al., 2023) play a crucial role in facilitating communication between symbiotic bacteria and their hosts. Following norovirus infection, intestinal symbiotic bacteria exhibit an enhanced production of bacterial outer membrane vesicles (BEV) (Bhar et al., 2022), which contribute to the regulation of immune responses.5The administration of pharmaceuticals and immunizationsIn drug research, there are three main categories of antiviral drugs based on their mechanisms: the first category aims to prevent viruses from attaching to host cell surfaces. For example, HBGAs have been identified as important factors promoting virus adhesion and entry. Research has shown that certain caramel carbohydrates, such as citric acid salt (Ali et al., 2016), can effectively inhibit viral activity and hold great potential in antiviral drug development. The second category involves virus protease inhibitors which target the catalytic decomposition of replication-related proteins by viral proteases (Rocha-Pereira et al., 2014). Rupintrivir is a notable antiviral drug within this category, primarily used for treating human rhinovirus but also showing efficacy against other picornaviruses, coronaviruses and caliciviruses (Kim et al., 2012). The third category consists of RdRp inhibitors, with nucleoside analogues being the most representative examples. These compounds block nucleotide binding and thereby hinder viral invasion. Currently, purine nucleoside CM521 is the only approved drug for norovirus infection treatment (Santos-Ferreira et al., 2021); followed by 20-C-methylcytidine (2CMC), a popular cytidine analogue that inhibits virus polymerase activity and translation; additionally, adenosine analogues like 7-deaza-20-C-methyladenosine (7DMA)and NITD008 exhibit similar properties (Van Dycke et al., 2018).Firstly, natural products derived from plants such as black raspberry seed, laminaceous algae polysaccharide, aged green tea, grass seed asarum extract, and grape seed extract (GSE) have been investigated. GSE has been confirmed to contain over 83 % proanthocyanidins which primarily function in virus aggregation and significantly inhibit viral invasion and replication (Kudkyal et al., 2022; Oh et al., 2022). Similarly, the rhizomes of Acorus gramineus(AGR) extract along with ɑ-asarone and β-asarone from grass seed asarum exhibited notable antiviral effects by preventing viral binding to P structure (Kim et al., 2022). Similar findings were observed with pomegranate peel extract (PPE) (Živković et al., 2021). Secondly, synthetic compounds like Dasabuvir (DSB), originally developed for hepatitis C treatment (Hayashi et al., 2021) but incidentally discovered to impede norovirus development within the body (Hayashi et al., 2021; Netzler et al., 2019) represent another group of potential therapeutics.In terms of vaccines, the development of an effective norovirus vaccine is crucial for reducing norovirus-related morbidity and mortality. According to recent researches, norovirus vaccines can be categorized into two groups: VLP vaccines and P particle vaccines. Within the VLP vaccine category, there are further classifications based on the composition of the norovirus capsid protein VP1 (VLP-based) and the expression of VP1 using recombinant adenoviruses (recombinant adenovirus-based) (Verardi et al., 2020). As depicted in Table 3, existing norovirus vaccines possess distinct characteristics, advantages, and disadvantages due to their different types and sources.Table 3Overview of existing norovirus vaccines.Table 3VaccineImmunization routeClinical ProgressAdvantageShortageReferenceVLP vaccineNasal entryThe clinical stage has been reached with corresponding Phase II b clinical trials underway.The research on VLP vaccines is supported by extensive experience and experimental data.The presence of associated adverse effects necessitates further refinement.(Zhang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2020)Recombinant viral vaccineOralThe expression of the target has been demonstrated in murine models and advanced to phase Ⅰ B clinical trials.The reduction in the number of injections necessitates a single dose. The immunological response is enhanced.The development, availability, and effectiveness may be constrained by biosafety concerns and preexisting host immunity.(López et al., 2023; Panasiuk et al., 2021; Hallowell et al., 2019; Hanisch, 2022; Han et al., 2021)P-particle vaccineNAThe preclinical studies have been successfully concluded.The compound has shown improved immune responses, similar to virus-like particles (VLPs), in terms of immunogenicity and protective efficacy.Effectiveness and duration need to be enhanced.(Hallowell et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2019)In conclusion, the development of norovirus vaccines and drugs has progressed rapidly. Concurrently, more clinical trials and animal experiments are underway to further promote their advancement. Vaccine research will provide novel ideas and directions for drug development, while drug innovation will explore additional possibilities for vaccine improvement.6Future outlookNorovirus accounts for approximately 20 % of the global burden of acute gastroenteritis (Atmar et al., 2018; Cortes-Penfield et al., 2017). According to available literature, norovirus is responsible for an estimated 698.8 million cases of illness and 218,800 deaths annually across all age groups (Bartsch et al., 2016). However, limited research content and findings hinder a comprehensive understanding of norovirus.According to the correlated characteristics of norovirus, future research on antiviral drugs and vaccines could focus on inhibiting virus invasion or blocking virus binding with receptors on the surface of norovirus, such as HBGAs and TLR. Additionally, targeting specific proteins expressed by the genome of norovirus can inhibit viral replication, transcription, and translation to facilitate the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines. Furthermore, plant-derived substances or synthesized drugs can be utilized to impede viral pathogenesis for treatment and prevention purposes. Currently, numerous studies have been conducted on drugs and vaccines with some pharmaceutical companies already progressing related products through clinical experiments. It is anticipated that more effective drugs will be developed in the future leading to improved research and treatment outcomes for norovirus.Abbreviation
Fill titleAbbreviationFill titleAbbreviationNorovirusNovHistoblood group antigenHBGAsImmune globulinIgToll-like receptorsTLRHisblood group antigen binding siteHBSFucosyltransferase 2FUT2Virus-like particlesVLPsOpen reading frameORFNon-structural proteinNSPNucleoside triphosphataseNTPaseProteaseProRNA-dependent RNA polymeraseRdRpGut-associated lymphoid tissueGALTMacrophagesMφDendritic cellsDCsFollicle-associated epitheliumFAEOuter membrane vesiclesOMVBacterial outer membrane vesiclesBEVGrape seed extractGSEThe rhizomes of Acorus gramineusAGRPomegranate peel extractPPEDasabuvirDSB
Funding declarationThis work was supported financially by the 10.13039/501100001809National Natural Science Foundation of China (82101630) to Yuwei Liu.CRediT authorship contribution statementJunLi Chen: Project administration. ZhengChao Cheng: Project administration. Jing Chen: Project administration. Lingling Qian: Project administration, Supervision. Haoran Wang: Supervision, Funding acquisition. YuWei Liu: Supervision, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.


Title: Norovirus transmission mediated by asymptomatic family members in households

IntroductionHuman norovirus (NV) is a major causative agent of nonbacterial acute gastroenteritis (AGE). NV infections are observed throughout the year worldwide, and sporadic and pandemic infections of NV are a serious public health problem in both developing and developed countries [1–7]. NVs infect humans orally through direct or indirect contact with stool or vomit excreted from infected individuals [3, 8]. It has been suggested that contact with symptomatic individuals is a major route for NV transmission in a given community [9]. Outbreaks of NV often occur in semi-closed environments (e.g., nursing homes and hospitals) that facilitate viral transmission through person-to-person contacts [4, 8, 10]. Specific characteristics of NV, such as its low infectious dose and high shedding titer, have contributed to its maintenance in human communities [10, 11]. Because humans are a primary source of NV, it is assumed that NVs are retained in human communities throughout the cycle of infection and transmission.Epidemiological studies have indicated that there are two NV-infected populations: one is AGE patients, and the other is individuals without diarrheal symptoms. The latter population, called “asymptomatic carriers” (which includes both pre- and post-disease-onset cases), is common worldwide [5, 12]. The ratio of asymptomatic NV infections ranges from <1% to >30%, depending on the setting [5, 12]. Asymptomatic NV infection occurs in all age groups, including children and infants [13–21]. A comprehensive analysis of the attack rates of NV during outbreaks suggested that asymptomatic infections occur in a proportion of the population [22]. More importantly, it has been reported that some outbreaks were traceable to NV transmission from asymptomatic food-handlers [23, 24].Household contact is a risk factor for NV transmission [25, 26]. Living environments and household sizes have been proposed to affect the NV transmission rates in households [27]. Moreover, it has been reported that NVs may circulate in households via asymptomatic transmission [28]. However, little is known about the degree of the contribution of asymptomatic carriers to NV transmission among overall NV transmissions in a given community.In this study, we carried out a survey of residents in a district of Bangkok, Thailand to identify the asymptomatic infection and transmission of NV. Our results showed that a variety of NV genotypes infected a proportion of the residents without inducing diarrheal symptoms. The number of asymptomatic infections of NV varied seasonally, as do symptomatic infections. We also discuss possible cases of household transmission from individuals asymptomatically infected with NV.Materials and methodsStool sample collectionThis study was approved by the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration (Thailand) after being reviewed by the ethics committees of the Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University (Japan, approval no. 29–11) and the Research and Education Promotion Foundation (Thailand, approval no. 2017–001). Stool samples were collected from 147 residents of Klong Toei District, Bangkok, Thailand. Klong Toei District, where Thailand’s largest slum is located, is composed of 41 distinct areas. Residents of all 41 areas were invited to participate in this study and consent was obtained from residents of 12 areas. Samples were collected in these 12 areas, which included 6 areas within slums and 6 more economically developed areas, and all 12 were geographically dispersed across Klong Toei District. A consent form for sample provision was obtained from all participants following an explanation by Public Health Center 41, a public medical institution in Bangkok. Consent of minors was obtained from their parent(s) or guardian(s).Male or female residents who fulfilled all the following criteria were eligible for participation: (1) residency in the district for >1 year, (2) age 7–80 years, and (3) no symptoms of AGE (i.e., diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and fever) at the sample provision. Excretion of loose feces more than three times a day was defined as diarrhea in this study. The above inclusion criteria were applied to all surveys in this study. Samples were collected once/month for the primary survey at periods P1–P3, i.e., May 25, June 22, and July 20 2018. In the follow-up survey, samples were collected 1–3 times/month from July 11 2018 to April 11 2019 at periods F1–F16 (Table 1). A questionnaire survey on diarrhea episode(s) of participants and their families was conducted at every sample collection.10.1371/journal.pone.0236502.t001Table 1The 1-year survey of 38 participants.IDAgeFamily (size3)Area No.Type4P1P2F1P3F2F3F4F5F6F7F8F9F10F11F12F13F14F15F16May 25Jun 22Jul 11Jul 20Jul 23Jul 31Aug 21Sep 5Sep 19Oct 2Oct 17Nov 6Dec 3Dec17Jan 8Jan 24Feb 15Mar 11Apr 115681 (1)5PGI.3NAGII.4NA7482 (1)5PNANANANANANAGII.4NANANANA11503 (3)7SGII.4GII.4AGII.4AGII.412541380GII.4GII.2GII.4BGII.4BGI.324684 (15)7SGII.4NANANANA32495 (4)7SGII.21NANANANA48366 (9)3PGII.24913GII.4AGI.35020GII.4A5147GII.4A5244GI.7GII.3GII.4CGII.3GII.45339NAGI.7GI.71GI.7GII.8GII.65441NAGI.7GI.7GII.45518GII.4GI.7GII.4BGII.6GI.4, GII.85646GI.7GII.4AGII.2157247 (3)3PGII.4GI.3GII.4AGII.4BGI.75828GI.3GI.3GII.4AGII.4AGII.85928GI.3GII.4BGI.4, GII.8GII.881738 (4)1HGII.13GII.481–148GII.22GII.881–216GII.9GII.482619 (1)1HGII.4GI.5GI.5GII.8GII.4833910 (1)1HGII.4GII.172GII.17GI.3, GII.131GII.42864911 (2)1HGII.4NAGI.52NANAGII.4963212 (2)6PGI.72NA9730NA1012613 (4)6PGII.17GII.4GII.4GII.4101m58101b28GII.81093714 (5)12PGII.4A11044GII.142GII.14GII.14GII.14GII.14GII.14GII.14GII.3GII.211213NANAGII.81GII.211311GII.21NANAGII.8GII.4BGII.211735015 (1)6SGII.17NAGII.4NANANANANA1815316 (3)9HGII.4NA18210NANANAGII.4NA1839GII.17GII.4NANASample collection periods for the primary survey and the follow-up survey were indicated with P1 to P3 and F1 to F16, respectively.Empty squares indicate NV-negative.NA, not applicable because no sample was provided.1Samples provided by individuals who developed diarrhea within 1 week before sample collection.2Samples provided by individuals who developed diarrhea from 1 week to 1 month before sample collection.3Household size.4Area types: H, high-rise housing; P, public housing; S, slumWhen members of the same family were infected with distinct genome sequences from GII.4 in the same or consecutive periods, genotypes are tentatively indicated as GII.4A, GII.4B or GII.4C.Infections with the same or a closely similar strain lasting two or more consecutive periods in the same person were indicated with Italics.Infections presumed to be involved in transmission are marked with gray.Detection of NVs by RT-PCRFor the detection of NVs by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), each 10% (w/v) stool suspension was prepared by suspension in phosphate buffered saline. RNA was extracted from each 10% stool suspension by using a Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instruction. Semi-nested RT-PCR was performed to detect NV as described previously [29]: cDNA synthesis and the 1st PCR were done using the norovirus-specific primer sets COG1F and G1SKR (for GI) and COG2F and G2SKR (for GII) and the OneStep RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen). The 1st PCR product was used as the template to perform the 2nd PCR, using G1SKF and G1SKR (for GI) and G1SKF and G2SKR (for GII) and Ex Taq polymerase (Takara, Shiga, Japan). Amplified partial norovirus cDNA was detected by agarose gel electrophoresis.Determination of the NV genotypes and genogroupsThe cDNA amplified by RT-PCR was purified from agarose gel using NucleoSpin Gel and PCR Clean-up (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany). The purified cDNA was subjected to PCR reaction for sequencing by using BigDye terminator (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA). Nucleotide sequencing was done using a sequencer Model 3100 (Applied Biosystems). The genotype was determined by using Norovirus Typing Tool ver. 2.0 software [30].Measurement of the copy numberThe copy number of the NV in each stool specimen was measured by real-time PCR as described previously with some modifications [31]. The norovirus genome was reverse-transcribed using SuperScript III reverse transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and NV-specific primers. RING1-TPa and RING1-TPb were used as probes for GI genotypes and RING2-TP was used as a probe for GII genotypes. A plasmid encoding the NV genome was amplified with the use of COG1F and COG1R (for the GI genogroup) or COG2F and COG2R (for the GII genogroup) as a standard to calculate the copy number. When NV was not detected within 40 cycles of PCR, the copy number was considered undetectable. The copy number of each sample is expressed per gram of stool.Phylogenetic tree analysisThe evolutionary history was inferred by the neighbor-joining method [32]. The tree was drawn to scale, with the branch length in the same units as for the evolutionary distances used to infer the phylogenetic tree. We computed the evolutionary distances by using the maximum composite likelihood method; the distances are presented as the units of base substitutions per site. Evolutionary analysis was conducted by using MEGA7 software [33].ResultsIdentification of asymptomatic NV infectionsTo investigate asymptomatic NV infections, we initially collected stool samples from 147 residents of Bangkok's Klong Toei District. Samples were collected at approx. 1-month intervals from May to July 2018 (referred to as “the primary survey” hereafter), and 369 samples were obtained; the average recovery rate of samples was 84.2%. The distributions of age and gender of the participants are illustrated in Fig 1A and 1B. We excluded children <7 years old and adults >80 years old (who might need assistance from other family members to collect samples) to avoid an increase in the risk of NV transmission within each family.10.1371/journal.pone.0236502.g001Fig 1The primary survey of NV infections from May–July 2018.(A) Age distribution of the participants. (B) Gender distribution of the participants. (C) NV positivity in the primary survey. The numbers of NV-positive samples in each month were 2/128 (P1, collected at May 25), 12/123 (P2, collected at June 22), and 5/118 (P3, collected at July 20). (D) Diarrhea episodes among subjects providing NV-positive samples. The numbers of individuals with (black bars) and without (white bars) a diarrheal episode within 1 month prior to the sample collection among the NV-positive samples are shown. (E) The detection frequency of each genotype. The total number of samples with each genotype was counted.NVs are divided into seven genogroups (GI to GVII), of which GI, GII, and GIV infect humans [1, 34, 35]. The majority of cases of NVs detected from AGE patients are classified into the GI and GII genogroups [36, 37], which can be subdivided into genotypes. Nine genotypes of GI and 22 genotypes of GII have been identified to date [1,34]. In the present study, the two major genogroups GI and GII were detected by RT-PCR. NV was detected from a proportion of the district's residents every month: P (primary) 1 (May), P2 (June), and P3 (July) (Fig 1C). Nineteen samples were identified as NV-positive.The average positivity rate from May–July 2018 was 5.1% (19/369). Four of the 19 NV-positive samples were provided by individuals who had experienced diarrhea within 1 month before the sample collection, but the other 15 NV-positive samples were provided by individuals who had had no episode of diarrhea within 3 months before the sample collection (Fig 1D). Our sequence analysis of the 19 positive samples identified seven genotypes (GI.3, GI.7, GII.2, GII.4, GII.14, GII.17, and GII.21) (Fig 1E). GII.4 was detected in 7 samples and was the most common genotype. Co-infection of GI and GII was not detected. These results suggest that a certain number of individuals are asymptomatically infected with NV.Results of a 1-year survey of NV-positive individuals and their familiesTo obtain more details about asymptomatic NV infections in residents of the district, we carried out a follow-up survey of the individuals who were NV-positive in the primary survey from May–July 2018. In April 2018, a preliminary survey was conducted on 71 of the 147 participants. Participants ID7 (Family 2) and ID81 (Family 8) were positive for GI.5 and GII.2, respectively. Although these participants were NV-negative during the primary survey, they were recruited to the follow-up survey. Family members living with NV-positive individuals, regardless of relation, were also recruited to this survey whenever possible.NV-positive individuals were identified from 7 of the 12 areas during the preliminary and primary surveys. Thirty-eight members of 16 families (referred to as Families 1 to 16 hereafter) from the 7 areas participated in this follow-up survey (Table 1). All of the 38 members participated in this study from the primary survey (periods P1-P3). Their age and gender distributions are provided in Fig 2A and 2B. The sample collection periods, F (follow-up) 1 to F16, and dates are shown in Table 1. The follow-up survey was initiated on July 11 2018, with some overlap with the period of the primary survey, and continued until April 11 2019.10.1371/journal.pone.0236502.g002Fig 2NV infections in the 1-year survey.(A) Age distribution of the participants. (B) Gender distribution of the participants. (C) The detection frequency of each genotype. The total number of samples with each genotype was counted. (D) The genotype distribution in the 1-year survey. (E) The number of participants infected with each genotype. (F) The ratio of participants infected with each genotype among the total participants.During a 1-year survey that combined the primary survey and follow-up survey, a total of 716 samples were collected and 101 samples (14.1%) were identified as NV-positive. Eleven of the 101 NV-positive samples were provided by individuals who had developed diarrhea within 1 month before the sample collection (see Table 1), and the remaining 90 samples (89.1%) were provided by individuals with no episode of diarrhea. Fourteen genotypes were identified from the positive samples: GI.1, GI.3, GI.5, GI.7, GII.2, GII.3, GII.4, GII.6, GII.8, GII.9, GII.13, GII.14, GII.17, and GII.21. GII.4 was detected the most frequently (Fig 2C), accounting for 41% of the positive samples (Fig 2D). GII.4 infection was detected in 27 individuals, which corresponds to 71.1% of the participants (Fig 2E and 2F).NV was detected every month, and two peaks were observed in June and December (i.e., survey nos. P2 and F10) with 31.6% and 58.3% positivity, respectively (Fig 3A). However, no increase in diarrhea onset in NV-positive individuals was observed in these two months (Fig 3B). A certain proportion of participants developed diarrhea during the survey period, but the incidence of diarrhea was not significantly associated with NV infection (Fig 3C). These results suggest that (1) asymptomatic NV infection is a seasonal event, and (2) a relatively large population of NV is latent in humans without causing diarrheal symptoms.10.1371/journal.pone.0236502.g003Fig 3The monthly distribution of NV and individuals with diarrhea.(A) The monthly distribution of NV in the total samples. The NV positivity in samples collected each month is shown. (B) Diarrhea episodes of the NV-positive samples. The numbers of individuals with (black bars) or without (white bars) a diarrheal episode within 1 month prior to the sample collection are shown. (C) The monthly distribution of the incidence of diarrhea. The numbers of individuals who had an episode of diarrhea within 1 month prior to the sample collection among the NV-negative (white bars) and NV-positive individuals (black bars) in each month are shown.The excretion and copy numbers of NVNV infection typically causes symptoms of AGE in immunocompetent hosts for 1 to 3 days [4, 38]. In humans who were experimentally inoculated with NV, shedding can be first detected 18–110 hr post-inoculation, and it lasts 13–56 days [38]. The duration of NV shedding was not significantly different between symptomatic patients and asymptomatic controls [39, 40]. Virus shedding lasts weeks to years when NV chronically infects immunocompromised hosts [41].To estimate the duration of NV excretion among the participants in this survey, we analyzed the chronological changes in positivity and genotype for each individual. The data in Table 1 indicate that most of the NV-positive individuals excreted NV for approx. 1 month or less. There was no definitive difference in the duration of NV excretion between symptomatically and asymptomatically infected individuals. However, a unique case was identified (participant ID110), from whom GII.14 was excreted for nearly 3 months from May 2018 to August 2018. Our analysis of a partial NV genome sequence obtained from ID110 showed that it was the same NV strain that was excreted throughout the consecutive 3-month period (data not shown). Because ID110 developed diarrhea before weeks 1–4 of sample collection in May 2018, we suspect that ID110 had been persistently infected with the same strain of GII.14 since the disease onset.The viral loads reported in asymptomatic individuals have differed among studies [42–45]. In the present study, the copy number of NV excreted in each sample was quantified by real-time RT-PCR in order to estimate the total copy number excreted from each participant. The copy numbers in selected samples varied widely among the individual samples, ranging from below the detection limit to >1011/g stool (Table 2). There was no clear correlation between the copy number of NV and the onset of diarrhea. In the case of long-term infection of GII.14 in participant ID110, the copy number was dynamically changed, ranging from below the detection limit to 1.62 × 107/gram stool in each sample collection period. This result suggests that the viral copy number fluctuates during long-term infection.10.1371/journal.pone.0236502.t002Table 2Copy number of NV detected in the 1-year survey.IDAgeFamilyP1P2F1P3F2F3F4F5F6F7F8F9F10F11F12F13F14F15F1656813.44E+06NANDNA7482NANANANANANAUDNANANANA11503UDUDUDND12541380UDUDUDUDUD246845.44E+05NANANANA324953.94E+06NANANANA48366UD4913NDND5020UD5147ND5244UD1.07E+02UDNDNDND5339NAUDUDUDND*3.30E+055441NAUDND5518UD2.38E+06ND*UD9.21E+05 (GI), 2.37E+06 (GII)5646UDNDND57247UD1.02E+058.06E+04NDND58282.68E+095.94E+07UDND1.95E+0659288.30E+07ND5.7E+06 (GI), 5.16E+06 (GII)ND81738UDND81–1482.98E+05UDND81–2166.14E+06UD826198.10E+053.77E+04UDUD8339108.22E+058.53E+06UD1.17E+E11 (GI), UD (GII)UD8649111.06E+06NAUDNA9632121.37E+07NANA9730NA　1012613UDUD1.25E+04UD101m58101b28UD1093714ND110446.94E+067.66E+071.53E+051.62E+071.43E+05UD3.90E+06UDUD11213NANANDND113111.29E+06NANANDNDND17350151.33E+07NAUDNANANANANA1815316ND18210NANANANDNA1839UDUDNANAEmpty squares indicate NV-negative.Copy number values are shown per gram of stool.NA, not applicable because no sample was provided.UD, undetectable by real-time PCR.ND, not determined.ND*, not determined due to the sample being out-of-stock.The frequency of NV infectionWe next analyzed the frequency of NV infection in each of the 38 individuals in the 16 families. Three participants (ID12, 97, and 101m) were not infected during the survey, but the other 35 participants (92%) were infected 1 or more times per year (Fig 4A). The average frequency of infection for the 38 participants was 2.4 times/year. When the number of genotypes in each individual was counted, we observed that 12 participants (31.6%) were infected with 1 genotype and 23 participants (60.5%) were infected with ≥2 genotypes (Fig 4B). Infections of 4 and 5 distinct genotypes were observed in 3 participants (ID59, 83, 113) and 1 participant (ID55), respectively. These results suggest that the frequencies of NV infection are highly divergent from person to person.10.1371/journal.pone.0236502.g004Fig 4The NV infection frequency and the number of genotypes for each individual.(A) The frequency of NV infection. Infections of the same genotype that occurred more than 1-month interval were counted as 2 independent infections. When the same genotype was detected in consecutive periods, it was counted as one infection. Co-infection with 2 distinct genotypes during the same period was counted as 2 independent infections. The y-axis indicates the number of individuals who were infected with NV 0–5 times per year. (B) The number of genotypes detected for each individual. Infection was counted as described in panel A. The y-axis indicates the number of individuals who were infected with 0–4 genotypes per year. (C) The frequency of infection of each genotype in the same individual. Infection was counted as described in panel A. The y-axis indicates the number of individuals who were infected once 1 (white bar), 2 (gray bar), or 3 times (black bar) with each genotype. (D) The incidence of diarrhea of each genotype. The incidence of diarrhea is indicated by the percentage of samples associated with diarrhea among the total samples for each genotype.To gain insight into the relationship between the detection frequency and the infectivity of each genotype, we determined the number of infections for each genotype per person (Fig 4C). Ten genotypes infected 1 participant each, whereas GI.7, GII.3, GII.4, and GII.8 infected some of the participants 2–3 times at discontinuous periods. GI.7 infected participant ID53 in F4 and from F8 to F9 (Table 1). GII.3 infected participant ID52 in F10 and F13. GII.4 infected 6 participants (ID13, 52, 55, 82, 83, 86) 2 times and 3 participants (ID11, 57, 101) 3 times. GII.8 infected participant ID59 2 times in F12 and F15. The ability of each genotype to infect the same individual multiple times appeared to largely correlate with the detection frequency shown in Fig 2C.To investigate the relationship between the detection frequency of each genotype and the disease incidence, we analyzed the incidence of diarrhea caused by infection with each genotype. No diarrhea incidence was observed from the individuals infected with GI.4, GII.3, GII.6, GII.9, or GII.21, and the remaining 9 genotypes showed various incidences of diarrhea (Fig 4D). Infection of the most common genotype (GII.4) showed a significantly low association with the incidence of diarrhea, and 41 of the 42 GII.4-positive samples were not associated with diarrhea onset. Together these results suggest that the detection frequency of each genotype does not correlate with the incidence of diarrhea.NV transmissions in householdsTo identify NV transmission in households, we analyzed the NV infections in 8 families from which multiple members participated (Families 3, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 14, and 16). Our analysis of NV-positive periods and genotypes for each family identified 7 possible cases of household transmission from Families 3, 6, 7, and 14 (Table 1).In Family 3, participant ID11 was GII.4-positive in F9, and participant ID13 became positive in the next period, F10. The phylogenetic tree analysis performed with the 282-base pair sequence of the open reading frame (ORF)2 5' region on the GII.4 strains detected in the 1-year survey revealed that ID11 and ID13 were independently infected with GII.4 strains classified into different clusters (Fig 5). Consistent with the phylogenetic tree analysis result, an 8-nucleotide difference was observed between these strains (S1 Fig).10.1371/journal.pone.0236502.g005Fig 5The phylogenetic tree of the GII.4 strains and possible transmission routes.The evolutionary history was inferred using the neighbor-joining method. The optimal tree with the sum of branch length = 0.06918009 is shown. The percentages of replicate trees in which the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap test (1,000 replicates) are shown next to the branches. The tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the same units as those of the evolutionary distances used to infer the phylogenetic tree. Transmission routes with high probability (solid arrows) and low probability (dashed arrows) are indicated.In Family 6, 4 members (ID52, 53, 54, and 56) were GI.7-positive in F8, and another member (ID55) became GI.7-positive in the next period, F9. The comparison of genome sequences revealed that these family members were infected with the same strain (S2 Fig). Because ID53 developed diarrhea within 1 week before the sample collection in F8, GI.7 infecting ID53 appeared to be transmitted directly to ID55 or by secondary transmission through the 3 other family members (ID52, 54, and 56). In F10, this family had another infection of GII.4 in 3 members (ID50, 51, and 55), and another 3 members (ID49, 52 and 56) became GII.4-positive in the next period. The strains detected from ID50 and ID51 in period F10 showed high similarity to that from ID49 and ID56 in period F11, with differences at two nucleotide positions (Fig 5, S2 Fig), suggesting the occurrence of transmission. The differences in the genome sequence of strains observed from ID49, 50, 51, and 56 might occur during transmission processes. Other strains detected from ID55 and ID52 in periods F10 and F11, respectively, were classified into other clusters (Fig 5). These family members were thus infected with 3 strains, 1 of which was presumed to be involved in transmission, in periods F10 and F11.Family 7 showed possible transmissions of GI.3 and GII.4 from P3 to period F2 and from period F10 to F11, respectively. Since the GI.3 strains detected from ID58 and ID59 in P3 and F2 were identical (S3 Fig), we suspect that the GI.3 was transmitted from ID58 to ID59. ID57 and ID58 were infected with the identical GII.4 strain in period F10, and this strain was detected only from ID58 in the next period (S3 Fig). ID57 and ID59 were infected with another GII.4 strain in F11 (Fig 5). Therefore, the infections of GII.4 that occurred during these periods were not cases of transmission.In Family 14, participants ID109 and 113 were positive for GII.4 and GII.8, respectively in F10, and participants ID113 and 112 became positive for GII.4 and GII.8, respectively, in the next period. The GII.4 strain detected from ID109 in F10 was different from that of ID113 in F11, indicating that GII.4 infections in periods F10 and F11 occurred independently. The genome sequences of GII.8 detected from ID113 in period F10 and ID112 in F11 were identical. This suggested that GII.8 was transmitted from ID113 to ID112. Participant ID113 infected with GII.8 in F10 had no episode of diarrhea, but ID112 (who became GII.8-positive in F11) developed diarrhea.Based on these results, we speculated that the 4 cases of infection with the same strains observed in consecutive periods in the same families were caused by household transmission. Almost all of the members of the families in which the transmissions occurred participated in this study: 9 of 9 members in Family 6; 3 of 3 in Family 7; and 4 of 5 in Family 14 (Table 1). Therefore, it is likely that the 4 transmissions occurred via the routes described above. Notably, 3 of the 4 cases of transmission originated from individuals with no diarrhea symptoms. In addition, 3 of the 4 cases of transmission were observed during Thailand's winter season. These results suggest that NV may be transmitted by asymptomatic individuals in households under the influence of unknown seasonal factor(s), and that NV derived from asymptomatic individuals can occasionally induce diarrhea in another individual.DiscussionThe latency of NV through asymptomatic infections and transmissionsWe carried out a community-based survey to determine the extents of asymptomatic infection of NV and NV transmissions originating from asymptomatic individuals. Although it is well known that NV infection is associated with AGE, our present findings demonstrate that short-term sporadic infections of various genotypes of NV occur in a proportion of individuals through the year without inducing diarrheal symptoms. In the district studied in this survey, nearly 90% of the NV-positive samples analyzed in the 1-year survey were provided by individuals without a diarrhea episode. In addition, 4 possible cases of NV transmission originating from asymptomatic individuals were identified from multiple households, and 3 of the 4 possible transmission cases did not result in disease onset. These observations suggest that asymptomatic infection and transmission may be a major pathway that enables NV latency. The results of a previous study [28] also support this notion.It has been reported that NV infection is associated with approx. 24%–50% of community-based cases of sporadic gastroenteritis [7, 46]. However, the transmission routes of NV for sporadic infections have not been verified, possibly due to the difficulty in tracing the sources of NV. In the present study, we observed that participant ID112, who was infected with NV derived from an asymptomatic individual (ID113) with no episode of AGE, developed diarrhea. This suggests that asymptomatic individuals in a community could be a source of NV causing sporadic infection associated with diarrheal symptoms.This study determined whether each individual developed AGE before sample collection by examining episodes of diarrhea. However, since NV infections occasionally induce AGE without diarrhea [47], individuals who had AGE symptoms other than diarrhea might have been misclassified as asymptomatic. In addition, individuals with AGE symptoms at the sample collection were excluded from this study. These procedures might have resulted in overestimation of the contribution of asymptomatic individuals to the maintenance and transmission of NV. It is also undeniable that individuals who were prone to being asymptomatic might have been selected by selecting NV-positive individuals in the preliminary and primary surveys. However, our results suggest the necessity of further analyzing the role of asymptomatic individuals in a community. Since the frequency of asymptomatic infection varies depending on the setting [5, 12], analyses of individuals who are selected with an appropriate procedure with less bias are needed to verify the involvement of asymptomatic carriers in the latency and spreading of NV in the district and other settings.Possible mechanisms of asymptomatic infectionsOur present findings and those of the prior study [28] indicate that a relatively high population of NV exists in a community by asymptomatic infection. Therefore, there should be mechanism(s) that enable NV to infect and propagate in humans without inducing diarrhea symptoms. GII.4 is the most prevalent genotype in AGE patients worldwide [4, 37, 48]. In Thailand, GII.4 has been prevalent in AGE patients for several decades [49, 50], and recent epidemiological studies carried out in Thailand by another group [51] and by our own group (unpublished data) showed that GII.4 is the most prevalent genotype in AGE patients. Nevertheless, our present data indicate that 41 of the 42 GII.4-positive samples in the 1-year survey were not associated with disease onset. About 70% of the participants were infected with GII.4 (Fig 2F), and 9 of the 38 participants were infected with GII.4 two or three times per year (Fig 4C). Our survey also showed that GI.7, GII.3 and GII.8 infected several individuals twice. These results suggest that a certain proportion of the residents examined may be vulnerable to asymptomatic infection for particular NV genotypes.It has been shown that immunity to NV lasts ≥1 year post-infection [52]. Mucosal and cellular immune responses against NV in individuals who were pre-challenged with NV suppress the disease onset and reduce the viral load [53]. The Bangkok district examined in the present study includes slum areas, and households in some areas are settled on marshy areas where sewage is directly drained. The average household size in the slum is about 5 individuals, and the residences are densely situated. These characteristics of the residences might increase the frequency of the residents' NV exposure. Further research is necessary to explore the possibility that immunity acquired by exposure to prevalent genotypes, such as GII.4, permits asymptomatic infection and transmission.Alternatively, the genetic backgrounds of humans and the genotypes of NV have been suggested to affect the severity of clinical outcomes [8, 52]. Symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals were reported to show differences in immune response and the alteration of intestinal flora upon NV infection [40, 54]. Since our present study was conducted for members of the same families — who have similar genetic backgrounds and share a common lifestyle and living environment that could affect intestinal flora — we cannot exclude the possibility that the frequent detection of asymptomatic infections was due to a bias arising from our participant selection. Further studies of greater numbers of participants are needed to examine the mechanism(s) underlying asymptomatic infections.The frequency of asymptomatic infection and transmissionOur findings demonstrate the possibility that asymptomatic individuals transmitted NV, resulting in symptomatic infection with diarrhea of other family members in their households. Since a short-term duration of NV shedding (<2 weeks) has often been observed for asymptomatic individuals [39, 40, 55, 56], the sample collection procedure that we used in the present study might not have covered all infections and transmissions. We observed cases in which multiple members of the same family were infected with viruses with the same genome sequence at the same period in addition to the cases of transmission. Two members of Family 7 (ID57, 58) and 2 members of Family 8 (ID81, 81–2) were infected with the same GII.4 strain in each family in period S10. The GII.8 detected from 2 members of Family 7 (ID58, 59) in period S12 was the identical strain (data not shown). For Family 6 in whom NV transmission was detected, very similar GII.4 strains were detected from 2 members (ID50, 51) in S10 prior to transmission.These simultaneous infections with the same or a very similar strain in multiple family members might occur by transmission from one of the positive members, and transmission might occur more frequently than we estimated. It is necessary to collect samples at intervals of ≤1 week to clarify the precise process of NV transmission within families.The duration of NV infection in healthy individualsOur results also demonstrate that NV shedding from asymptomatic individuals lasts approx. ≤1 month in most cases. A recent follow-up study showed that NV is excreted for 1–2 weeks from asymptomatic individuals [56]. The copy numbers of NV detected in our study were significantly higher compared to that study's data [56]. Since it has been shown that viral loads correlate with the duration of excretion from diarrhea patients [57, 58], the differences in viral loads between the previous and present study might be accounted for by the differences in the duration of shedding.Long-term shedding of NV has been observed in immunocompromised patients [8,41]. We identified a case of long-term shedding of GII.14 that continued for nearly 3 months in participant ID110, who had no history of immunodeficiency during the survey. ID110 was also infected with GII.2 and GII.3, but long-term shedding was not observed for these genotypes. Long-term shedding might thus be a genotype-specific phenomenon. Since GII.14, a rare genotype in Thailand, is detected from <2% of AGE patients [59, 60], its pathogenicity and abilities of infection and transmission might be lower than those of the genotypes that are prevalent in AGE patients. This may be supported by our observation that no transmission of GII.14 to other family members of ID110 occurred.The seasonality of NV infection in ThailandA seasonal infection of NV in symptomatic patients has been observed in many countries. A meta-analysis of global NV infection demonstrated apparent seasonality of NV infections in northern-hemisphere countries, with a peak in winter months (December to February) [6]. In Thailand, NV in AGE patients is detected mainly in the rainy season (June to October) and winter season (November to February) [61, 62]. Our present findings demonstrated that asymptomatic NV infection occurs seasonally, similar to symptomatic infection (Fig 3A), although there was no association of NV positivity with the incidence of disease (Fig 3B). A community-based epidemiological study showed that asymptomatic infections peak during the winter season in England [14], where seasonal symptomatic infections occur in the winter season [63]. Similar seasonal asymptomatic NV infections have been observed in Korea [64, 65] and Nicaragua [21]. As described above, symptomatic and asymptomatic infections also have similarities to the prevalent genotypes. Taking all of these findings together, we speculate that asymptomatic infections might be concurrent with symptomatic infections under the influence of unknown seasonal factor(s).It has been reported that the distribution of genotypes detected from symptomatic children is quite different from that of asymptomatic children [21]. Simultaneous analyses of symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals of all age groups in the same settings may clarify the relationship between symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals regarding the prevalence of genotypes and their seasonal synchronicity.In conclusion, our findings provide evidence suggesting a substantial role of asymptomatic individuals as a temporal reservoir mediating the propagation and transmission of NV in households. The present results indicate that a population of NVs was latent in a specific community by asymptomatic infection throughout a year. Further studies of the mechanisms of asymptomatic infection of NV capable of persistent infections and analyses designed to clarify the routes of NV transmission from/to asymptomatic carriers are necessary to prevent endemic NV infections and AGE caused by NV.Supporting informationS1 FigComparison of GII.4 genome sequences detected from Family 3 in periods F9 and F10.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.S2 Fig(A) Comparison of GI.7 genome sequences detected from Family 6 in periods F8 and F9. (B) Comparison of GII.4 genome sequences detected from Family 6 in periods S9 and S10.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.S3 Fig(A) Comparison of GI.3 genome sequences detected from Family 7 in periods P3 and F2. (B) Comparison of GII.4 genome sequences detected from Family 7 in periods F10 and F11.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.S4 Fig(A) Comparison of GII.4 genome sequences detected from Family 14 in periods F10 and F11. (B) Comparison of GII.8 genome sequences detected from Family 14 in periods F10 and F11.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Pathogenesis of Noroviruses, Emerging RNA Viruses

1.IntroductionNoroviruses constitute a genus within the family Caliciviridae. The human pathogens within this genus cause at least 95% of nonbacterial gastroenteritis outbreaks, and 50% of all gastroenteritis outbreaks, throughout the world. It is estimated that there are approximately 23 million norovirus infections per year in the United States alone, causing 50,000 hospitalizations and 300 deaths [1]. Based on a recent review of diagnostic studies testing for norovirus infections in clinical settings, it is estimated that they cause over one million hospitalizations and 200,000 deaths in young children in developing countries annually [2]. Noroviruses are highly transmissible and can spread via exposure to contaminated food or water sources, person-to-person contact, aerosolized vomitus particles, and fomites (Figure 1A). They are considered by CDC to be the most common cause of foodborne disease outbreaks [3]. Numerous features of norovirus infections have led to their classification as Category B biodefense agents, including their high infectivity, extreme stability, resistance to common disinfectants, and ability to cause incapacitating disease. Persons of all age groups are susceptible to infection and secondary infections are common [4–6]. In recent years, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of reported norovirus outbreaks. These emerging RNA viruses have historically been very difficult to study but numerous advances in the field have begun to contribute to the overall understanding of norovirus pathogenesis.2.Clinical Disease and Epidemiology2.1.Clinical DiseaseIn immunocompetent adults, the course of norovirus infection is rapid, with an incubation period of 24–48 hours and resolution of symptoms within 12–72 hours [7]. Symptoms include vomiting and diarrhea with or without nausea and abdominal cramps. Low-grade fever and malaise can also develop. While norovirus infection typically causes an acute bout of gastroenteritis that resolves within days of the onset of symptoms, norovirus-induced disease can be much more severe and prolonged in specific risk groups. For example, infants and young children can develop more severe gastroenteritis following norovirus infection, with symptoms lasting up to six weeks [8–11]. Noroviruses have been reported to be second only to rotaviruses in causing severe childhood gastroenteritis [10,12]; considering the recent success in vaccinating infants against rotavirus infections, noroviruses will likely become the most common cause of childhood diarrheal disease in the foreseeable future. In addition, prolonged symptomatic infection has been well-documented in transplant patients and other immunosuppressed individuals, with symptoms lasting over two years [13–19]. Similarly, norovirus infection can be particularly severe in the elderly, even resulting in death [20–23]. One recent study also reported that patients with inflammatory bowel disease may present with bloody diarrhea upon norovirus infection [24].The complete scope of norovirus-induced morbidity worldwide and particularly in developing nations has been difficult to ascertain due to several factors (discussed in more detail elsewhere [20,25]). First, norovirus detection is difficult because these viruses cannot be propagated in cell culture and they are genetically variable, complicating RT-PCR-based detection assays. Second, there is a lack of reporting to health officials because of the acute nature of disease. Finally, national and international diagnostic/surveillance programs are not standardized, if present at all. Importantly though, there has recently been increased recognition of the burden of norovirus disease due to significant improvements in norovirus diagnostic assays and an increased awareness of the need for surveillance standardization. Along these lines, a global surveillance network called NoroNet (http://www.noronet.nl/noronet/) was recently established that aims to monitor norovirus epidemics in an effort to limit their scope. Continued efforts of this sort will be critical to delineate the global burden of norovirus disease.As norovirus diagnostics have improved, there have been numerous reports of norovirus associations with clinical outcomes other than gastroenteritis. For example, one case report detected norovirus RNA in the serum and cerebrospinal fluid of a child with encephalopathy [26]. In addition, during a norovirus outbreak among military personnel in Afghanistan in May 2002, three infected patients presented with gastroenteritis, diminished alertness, headache, neck stiffness, and light sensitivity; one of these patients also displayed disseminated intravascular coagulation [27]. Noroviruses have also been implicated in necrotizing enterocolitis in premature infants [28], postinfectious irritable bowel syndrome [29], and benign infantile seizures [30,31]. While these case reports provide only anecdotal evidence that norovirus infection can have varied clinical outcomes, they do suggest that noroviruses should be considered as potential etiological agents of diseases other than gastroenteritis.2.2.Genetic DiversityNoroviruses are classified in five genogroups (GI-GV), three of which (GI, GII, and GIV) contain primarily human viruses [32,33]. Multiple porcine noroviruses have been placed in GII [34,35]. Genogroup III (GIII) contains bovine noroviruses [36,37] and GV contains murine noroviruses [38–42]. The genogroups are further subdivided into 31 distinct clusters or genotypes (8 GI, 19 GII, 2 GIII, 1 GIV, and 1 GV genotypes) [4,32]. Norovirus strains are typically named after the location in which they were first identified; e.g., the Farmington Hills strain was first shown to be responsible for gastroenteritis cases in Farmington Hills, Michigan [43]. They are also commonly referred to by their genogroup and genotype; e.g., the Farmington Hills strain is a GII.4 (genogroup II, genotype 4) strain. Noroviruses display a wide degree of genetic variability – members within a genogroup differ by 45–61% in their capsid genes, members within a genotype differ by 14–44%, and strains within a genotype differ by 0–14% [32]. This amount of intra-genus variation is high even compared to genera of other plus-strand RNA virus families [32]. This high degree of variability is undoubtedly one factor that complicates protective norovirus immunity.2.3.EpidemiologyNorovirus outbreaks occur most commonly in semi-closed communities such as nursing homes, schools, hospitals, cruise ships, disaster relief/evacuation sites, and military settings (Figure 1B) [33,44–47]. Nosocomial norovirus outbreaks are one of the most common causes of hospital ward closures [48]. Outbreaks display wintertime seasonality, explaining why norovirus disease is referred to as the winter vomiting disease [49]. Several factors most likely contribute to the explosive nature of norovirus outbreaks, including the high infectivity of norovirus particles [50], the persistence of noroviruses in the environment [51–53], prolonged shedding of virus from both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals [54–56], and a lack of lasting immunity [4–6]. In 2002, a sharp rise in norovirus outbreaks worldwide was recognized which correlated with the emergence of a new virus variant, specifically a GII.4 norovirus strain [51,57]. Interestingly, researchers have determined that GII.4 strains resulted in pandemics in 1995–1996 (US95/96 strain) [33,58,59], 2002 (Farmington Hills strain) [43], 2004 (Hunter strain) [60], and 2006 (Minerva/2006b and Laurens/2006a strains) [61]. These GII.4 variants spread rapidly and globally and are thought to account for 70–80% of all norovirus outbreaks at least since 2002 [62]. A recent study demonstrates that GII.4 strains associated with severe illness were circulating as early as 1974, and that the ancestral strain most likely emerged in the 1960s [63]. It is unclear why the GII.4 norovirus strains are so predominant but possibilities include increased environmental stability, transmissibility, and virulence [64].While it is widely accepted that noroviruses cause a majority of epidemic gastroenteritis worldwide, they have not received significant attention as a cause of sporadic gastroenteritis. However, improved diagnostics has shed light on the unappreciated breadth of norovirus infection in this setting [12]. Based on numerous studies around the world, it is now recognized that noroviruses are an important cause of illness in hospitalized children (discussed in detail in several recent reviews [12,25,65]), second to or as prevalent as rotavirus infections. They are also a previously unappreciated cause of traveler’s diarrhea [66–68].3.PathophysiologyBecause of the lack of a cell culture system and the historical lack of animal models of norovirus infection, the extent of our knowledge regarding pathogenesis of norovirus infection comes primarily from physical, histological, and biochemical studies of infected human volunteers. In recent years, work in porcine, bovine, and murine models has also begun to contribute to our understanding of norovirus pathogenesis.3.1.Histological Alterations in the IntestineHistological analysis of proximal intestinal biopsy samples from human volunteers that become ill after administration of either a GI (Norwalk; GI.1) or GII (Hawaii; GII.1) norovirus demonstrate an intact intestinal mucosa with specific histological changes, including broadening and blunting of the villi, shortening of the microvilli, enlarged and pale mitochondria, increased cytoplasmic vacuolization, and intercellular edema [69–72]. While abnormalities are apparent in intestinal epithelial cells of norovirus-infected volunteers, electron microscopy analysis reveals that these cells remain intact [69,70]. Crypt cell hyperplasia has also been reported following norovirus infection [71,73]. Only proximal intestinal biopsies from infected individuals were obtained in early volunteer studies so it remains to be determined whether the distal intestine is also affected by norovirus infection. In addition to enterocyte changes, norovirus infection results in a mild inflammatory infiltration into the lamina propria that has been observed in humans infected with the Norwalk [69,71] and Hawaii viruses [70,72], gnotobiotic calves infected with the human GII.4 norovirus HS66 [74], and mice infected with murine norovirus 1 (MNV-1) [75]. A recent study also reports an increased number of intraepithelial cytotoxic T cells in the duodenum of norovirus-infected patients 0–6 days after symptom onset [73]. While specific intestinal lesions are observed during the time of norovirus illness, they completely resolve within two weeks.Several recent studies suggest that noroviruses cause apoptosis of enterocytes in humans [73], pigs [76], and mice [75]. It is unclear whether viral infection of enterocytes directly induces apoptosis or whether a viral component secreted from other cells acts upon bystander enterocytes to induce their programmed cell death. Murine noroviruses and feline caliciviruses have been demonstrated to cause apoptosis of infected macrophages and epithelial cells, respectively, in vitro through the mitochondrial pathway [77–81], suggesting that apoptosis in vivo may be due to direct effects of infection. Troeger et al. postulate that the observed influx of intraepithelial CD8+ lymphocytes during norovirus infection could cause enterocyte apoptosis upon perforin release [73]. Thus, it is possible that both direct and indirect mechanisms contribute to norovirus-induced apoptosis of enterocytes.3.2.Physical and Biochemical ManifestationsIn one human volunteer study, it was observed that norovirus infection causes a marked delay in gastric emptying thought to be related to the high incidence of vomiting episodes during norovirus infections [82]. Such a pathophysiologic outcome to infection could be caused by an alteration of gastric motor functions or inflammation of the pyloric junction between the stomach and intestine. While mice lack an emetic reflex and thus do not vomit, it has been demonstrated that STAT1−/− mice develop dramatic gastric bloating upon MNV-1 infection [75]. The recapitulation of delayed gastric emptying in a small animal model should facilitate a mechanistic dissection of the basis of this outcome of norovirus infection. A transient malabsorption of D-xylose, fat, and lactose also occurs during acute norovirus infection [71,83]. This malabsorption correlates with shortened microvilli and decreased activity of specific brush border enzymes on enterocytes, including alkaline phosphatase, sucrase, trehalase, and possibly lactase [69]. It is presently unclear whether these changes are due to direct virus-mediated damage to enterocytes, virus-induced alterations of brush border enzyme expression levels (as has been noted for rotavirus [84]), or bystander/immunopathologic effects. Moreover, it is unknown whether there is also a secretory component to norovirus-induced diarrhea.3.3.Systemic InfectionWhile it has long been assumed that norovirus infection is confined to the intestine, there is no direct proof for this claim and several recent findings suggest that this dogma be re-considered. First, a recent study detected norovirus RNA in the serum of 15% of infected individuals [85]. Second, work in animal models of norovirus infection support virus dissemination past the intestine: (i) a transient viremia was detected in 50% of gnotobiotic pigs infected with HS66 [76]; (ii) one of five HS66-infected gnotobiotic calves had detectable viral RNA in their serum [74]; and (iii) murine noroviruses are well-documented to spread to mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) that drain from the intestine [41,75,86–89] and to peripheral tissues [41,75,86,88,89]. In particular, MNV-1 replicates efficiently in the spleen and induces specific splenic histological changes, including activation of cells in the white pulp and hypertrophy of cells in the red pulp [75]. The physiological relevance of these splenic changes is unclear. The possibility that human noroviruses disseminate to peripheral sites is a clinically relevant question since mild or sporadic pathologies associated with human norovirus infection of peripheral tissues may have been missed due to the difficulties in their detection and the assumption that they are limited to the intestinal tract. Supporting this idea, there have been several recent associations between norovirus infection and extraintestinal pathologies including encephalopathy [26], disseminated intravascular coagulation [27], and benign infantile convulsions [30,31]. Interestingly, rotaviruses have also recently been confirmed to spread to peripheral tissues and cause histological changes at these sites [90–92]. The mechanism of norovirus dissemination is unknown but at least the murine noroviruses infect dendritic cells (DCs), a cell type known to actively migrate from tissues to draining lymph nodes. Thus, it is possible that noroviruses utilize DC infection to facilitate their extraintestinal spread.3.4.The Course of Norovirus InfectionNorovirus infections are typically considered to be short-lived, lasting for only a few days; however, increasing evidence points to prolonged (or perhaps persistent) infections in some scenarios. Although the symptoms caused by human norovirus infection typically resolve within several days, virus particles can be shed from asymptomatic individuals for weeks after exposure [54–56,93]. Further, symptomatic infection has been documented in immunosuppressed individuals with symptoms lasting for over 2 years [13–15] and in immunocompetent children with symptoms lasting for up to 6 weeks [9,56]. Additionally, pigtail macaques infected with a human norovirus shed virus in their feces for at least 3 weeks [94]. It is also clear that murine noroviruses can infect wild-type hosts for weeks [41,86,87]. Interestingly, virus is detected not only in fecal samples of these mice but also in MLNs and in some cases intestines and spleens. Thus, there may be mucosal and extraintestinal sites of prolonged norovirus infection. Finally, it has long been recognized that feline caliciviruses establish chronic infections in cats, with animals continuing to shed virus for at least one month following infection and some even becoming life-long carriers [95]. Because these carrier cats are contagious, they represent an important reservoir for the maintenance of feline calicivirus in the feline population [96,97]. Overall, noroviruses can infect their hosts for weeks or months even in the presence of a fully functional immune system. Similar to the situation with feline caliciviruses, it is possible that individuals experiencing prolonged human norovirus infection act as reservoirs of virus, perpetuating its spread within a population.The reason(s) for prolonged norovirus infection is currently unclear but mechanisms underlying the ability of other viruses to establish persistence may logically play a role. A fundamental feature of persistent viral infections is that the host immune response is ineffective at completely clearing infectious virus [98]. Consistent with this, adaptive immune cells are critical to limit the magnitude of norovirus infection since mice lacking B and T cells contain extremely high levels of MNV-1 within numerous tissues and feces for months following infection [39,99]. The inability to clear persistent infection with other viruses is commonly associated with viral evasion. For example, in persistent viruses such as hepatitis C virus (HCV) there is commonly an alteration of the antigenic epitopes encoded by the virus. Similarly, it has been demonstrated that the feline calicivirus genome acquires mutations in areas predicted to be important for immune recognition during chronic infection, suggesting that altered antigenicity plays a role in maintaining calicivirus persistence [100,101]. One study reports a similar accumulation of mutations within the hypervariable P2 capsid domain in a patient chronically infected with a human norovirus [15]. Interestingly, there is evidence for feline calicivirus that such progressive evolution of a single virus within a host accounts for only a minority of chronic infections; the majority appears to be instead due to cycles of sequential reinfection with either a variant of the same virus strain or with a different strain followed by a period of progressive evolution [102].Persistent viral infections are also commonly associated with impairment of the normal functioning of immune cells upon infection. Although there is currently no direct evidence that noroviruses impair immune function, it is interesting to note that murine noroviruses infect DCs [103] since many persistent viruses target this cell type and specifically impair their ability to activate T and B cells [98]. Overall, the mechanisms by which noroviruses maintain prolonged infection remain incompletely understood, but they may play a critical role in impairing adaptive immune responses such that they fail to protect from secondary challenge. It will be interesting in future studies to examine the relationship between prolonged norovirus infection and the lack of protective immunity elicited by primary infection. Prolonged virus shedding from individuals in whom symptomatic infection has resolved also surely contributes to the difficulty in controlling norovirus outbreaks.4.Cellular Determinants of Norovirus PathogenesisThe precise cell tropism of human noroviruses is unknown. When intestinal biopsy sections from volunteers infected with either a GI.1 or a GII.1 norovirus were analyzed by electron microscopy, virus particles were not observed [70,83], leading investigators to postulate that human noroviruses infect very few cells in vivo. This hypothesis is supported by work in animal models (described below). Furthermore, numerous attempts to identify a relevant cell culture system for these viruses have been unsuccessful [104]. The inability to propagate human noroviruses has long been the major obstacle to studying this virus family. However, numerous recent advances in this field offer promise of overcoming this barrier. Moreover, recent work in animal models suggests that multiple intestinal cell types including enterocytes, macrophages (Mφs), and DCs may support at least low level in vivo replication.4.1.Recent Advances of In Vitro Human Norovirus Infection ModelsExtensive efforts have failed to detect norovirus replication in intestinal epithelial cell lines [104]. There has been a single report describing human norovirus infection of a 3-dimensional model of human small intestinal epithelium [105]; however, several independent laboratories failed to detect increased viral genome in these cells during the period of noted cytotoxicity, strongly suggesting that cellular pathology was not due to viral replication [106]. Based on the tropism of murine noroviruses for DCs and Mφs [103], in vitro infections of human DCs and Mφs derived from monocytes isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), or myeloid DCs directly isolated from PBMCs, were performed with the G1.1 Norwalk virus. There was no evidence for viral replication in these cells (Lay MK, Atmar RL, Guix S, Bharadwaj U, He H, Neill FH, Sastry JK, Yao Q and Estes MK, manuscript in preparation). While these results demonstrate that at least one human norovirus does not infect peripheral DCs and Mφs in vitro, DCs and Mφs can differ significantly in pathogen susceptibility depending on their source and differentiation [107–109]; thus it remains possible that other types of DCs and Mφs (i.e., mucosal cells) are permissive to human noroviruses.Based on several recent studies, it is now clear that the block to human norovirus propagation in vitro occurs at the level of receptor binding, internalization, or genome uncoating. Specifically, Guix et al. demonstrated that transfecting norovirus RNA into Huh-7 cells results in a complete single round of viral replication culminating in progeny virion release [110]. Furthermore, transfection of nonpermissive cells with infectious norovirus clones driven by either the T7 polymerase or the host RNA polymerase II results in genome replication and virion production [111–114]. Similarly, a norovirus replicon has been generated that results in genome replication and nonstructural protein production in stably transfected cells [115]. Overall, it can be concluded that bypassing the initial steps of virus entry and uncoating overcomes the block to norovirus replication in cultured cells.4.2.Human Norovirus Cell Tropism in Animal ModelsBoth gnotobiotic pigs and gnotobiotic calves are susceptible to infection with at least one human norovirus, a GII.4 virus called HS66 [74,76]. Infected pigs and calves develop diarrhea and histopathological changes are evident in the intestines of infected calves. In HS66-infected gnotobiotic pigs, virus particles are apparent in cytoplasmic vesicles within enterocytes [76]. Moreover, viral capsid can be detected in enterocytes located at villous tips and along the sides of villi, but rarely in crypts, of the duodenum and jejunum (Figure 2A). Nonstructural protein indicative of viral replication can also be detected in a limited number of enterocytes. In HS66-infected gnotobiotic calves, viral structural protein is detectable in enterocytes (Figure 2B) and in lamina propria cells resembling Mφs along the jejunum and ileum, but not along the duodenum [74]. The discrepancy between these animal model studies and earlier studies that failed to detect virus in human intestinal sections could be due to (i) virus strain-dependent differences (GII.4 versus GI.1 and GII.1 viruses, respectively); (ii) virus dose differences; (iii) species-specific disparities in norovirus infection; or (iv) differences in assay sensitivity between studies.4.3.Murine Norovirus Cell TropismA number of murine norovirus strains have now been isolated from mouse colonies in academic research settings around the world [39–42,86]. Murine noroviruses are enteric in nature: (i) most strains were originally isolated from fecal samples or MLNs; (ii) they are infectious orally and can be detected in mucosal sites (intestines, MLNs) during infection; and (iii) they are shed in feces [39–42,75,86]. At least one murine norovirus causes decreased fecal consistency and mild intestinal inflammation in infected wild-type mice, and severe gastroenteritis in STAT1−/− mice [75,88]. Murine noroviruses are known to replicate in DCs and Mφs, but not other cell types, in vitro [39–41,86,103,116,117]. Moreover, in MNV-1-infected wild-type mice, viral nonstructural protein can be detected in lamina propria cells morphologically resembling DCs and Mφs of rare intestinal villi at 24–48 hpi (Figure 3A) [75]. The in vivo infection of DCs and Mφs by MNV-1 is further supported by the immunohistochemical detection of MNV-1 antigen in cells that resemble Mφs in the liver, and Mφs and DCs in the spleen [103]. It has also been reported that immunodeficient mice naturally infected with a murine norovirus contain viral antigen in the cytoplasm of inflammatory cells in the liver, splenic red and white pulp, intestinal lamina propria, intestinal lymphoid follicles, lung, pleural and peritoneal cavities, and MLNs [89,118]. In the absence of an intact interferon signaling pathway, MNV-1 antigen is detected more abundantly and in additional intestinal cell types of infected mice. Specifically, viral antigen can be detected in enterocytes of STAT1−/− mice at 12 hpi (Figure 3B), and lamina propria and Peyer’s patch cells at 24–48 hpi (Figure 3C) [75]. Thus, interferon may restrict the cell tropism of noroviruses, as has been shown for a number of other viruses [119–121]. If this is the case, norovirus strains with differing sensitivity to interferon responses may display disparate cell tropism.4.4.Norovirus ReceptorsHuman noroviruses recognize histo-blood group antigens (HBGAs) that are expressed on the surface of mucosal epithelial cells [122]. HBGAs are neutral carbohydrates linked to proteins or lipids on cell surfaces. The glycosyltransferases that control their synthesis are encoded by the highly polymorphic ABO, Lewis, and secretor gene families. The association of noroviruses with HBGAs has been demonstrated to be essential for certain virus strains. This is best exemplified by the strict correlation between secretor status and susceptibility to Norwalk virus infection – Norwalk virus recognizes α1,2-linked fucose residues [63] whose expression on gut epithelial cells and in body fluids is dependent on a wild-type FUT2 gene; while individuals with a wild-type FUT2 gene (∼80% of the population; referred to as secretors) are susceptible to Norwalk virus infection, individuals that contain a null FUT2 allele (∼20% of the population; referred to as nonsecretors) are completely resistant [123].A number of distinct norovirus strain-specific binding profiles have been reported [124–126]. As described recently by Tan et al., strains can be segregated generally into those that bind A/B epitopes and those that bind Lewis epitopes [127]. While GI and GII strains are contained within both binding categories, there are genogroup-specific differences in the receptor binding interface of the norovirus capsid that interacts with the HBGA. Thus, even if a GI and a GII norovirus interact with the same HBGA, the precise residues involved in this binding will most likely be different (Figure 4). In terms of the highly prevalent GII.4 noroviruses, strains circulating in 1974, 1977, and 1987 all display a common HBGA binding pattern (H type 3, LewisY, and B antigens); a strain circulating in 1997 binds the same set of HBGAs in addition to A and LewisB antigens; a strain isolated from a 2002 outbreak displays a unique HBGA pattern (LewisA, LewisX, and A antigens); and another 2002 strain in addition to strains isolated from 2004 and 2005 outbreaks fail to bind efficiently to any HBGA suggesting they may bind other carbohydrates [63,128]. Interestingly, a strain circulating in 2006 displays a similar HBGA binding profile to the 1997 pandemic strain [129]. While norovirus strains display distinct HBGA binding properties, collectively they can infect nearly all individuals due to their high genetic variability [130]. This highlights the highly adaptive nature of noroviruses and the likelihood of a long co-evolution of human noroviruses with their human host.Several animal caliciviruses also bind HBGAs, including the highly virulent rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus that segregates within the lagovirus genus [131] and the Tulane virus isolated from rhesus macaques that defines the newly proposed recovirus genus [127,132]. Conversely, other animal caliciviruses, including multiple feline calicivirus strains [133] and murine norovirus strains [134], bind sialic acid on permissive cells. Thus, carbohydrate binding appears to be conserved across the Caliciviridae family while specific members can bind neutral or negatively charged residues (Figure 5). There are examples of human noroviruses that do not bind HBGAs, including recent GII.4 pandemic strains [125,128]; it has yet to be determined whether these strains instead bind negatively charged sugars similar to feline caliciviruses and murine noroviruses. Evidence supporting this possibility is provided by studies demonstrating binding of GII noroviruses to negatively charged heparan sulfate [135] and sialylated Lewisx carbohydrate [136].Even though HBGA association is essential for in vivo Norwalk infection, it is not sufficient to overcome the block to in vitro virus propagation – cell lines expressing HBGAs are resistant to infection [104] and transfection of FUT2 into cells does not facilitate infection [110]. These observations suggest that binding to an as-yet-unidentified entry receptor is also a required event. This is supported by the identification of both JAM-A and sialic acid as receptors for feline calicivirus [133,137]. It is even possible that cells expressing HBGAs are not the true target of norovirus infection. For example, binding to HBGA expressed on the surface of enterocytes may mediate norovirus attachment to the intestinal wall while binding to an alternative receptor on a neighboring cell type (i.e., DCs and Mφs) is required to trigger entry and subsequent replication.5.Molecular Determinants of Norovirus PathogenesisUnderstanding the molecular aspects of viral replication can facilitate the development of rational therapies. In this section, we summarize recent findings of norovirus replication mechanisms that may contribute to norovirus pathogenesis and ultimately lead to the design of novel antiviral strategies.5.1.Norovirus Genomic StructuresNoroviruses have plus-stranded linear RNA genomes of 7.4–7.7 kb which are typically organized into three open reading frames (ORF1-3) (Figure 6) [138–140]. Murine noroviruses have a predicted fourth ORF overlapping ORF2 but in an alternate reading frame [41]; it has yet to be determined whether this ORF codes for a functional protein. The 5’ proximal region of the norovirus genome encodes all of the nonstructural proteins in a single ORF (ORF1) while the 3’ proximal region, transcribed into a subgenomic message, encodes the major and minor structural proteins in two separate ORFs (ORF2 and ORF3, respectively). Norovirus genomes are thought to be covalently associated with a viral protein called VPg at their 5’ ends and are polyadenlyated at their 3’ ends.Essential viral genomic structures represent putative antisense drug targets. Moreover, identification of essential RNA elements within the viral genome may facilitate the construction of viruses with a dominant inhibitory effect on the replication of wild-type virus [141]. Recent bioinformatic analyses of calicivirus genomes have identified conserved secondary structures that include: (i) two or more 5’ terminal stem-loops; (ii) a 3’ terminal hairpin; (iii) a stem-loop just upstream of the ORF1/2 junction in the antigenomic strand proposed to be a component of the subgenomic promoter; and (iv) a stem-loop at the 5’ end of the polymerase coding region with a motif characteristic of picornavirus cre elements that dictate VPg uridylylation [142,143]. Several of these structures were determined to be critical for the replication of a murine norovirus [142].5.2.Norovirus Nonstructural ProteinsNorovirus ORF1 encodes a large polyprotein that is cleaved into seven mature nonstructural proteins (NS1-NS7) [144–146]. A number of these proteins have defined activities, including an NTPase (NS3) [147], a protease (Pro; NS6) [148], and an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (Pol; NS7) [149,150]. Noroviruses also encode a VPg (NS5) that, based on work with animal caliciviruses, is presumed to be covalently attached to the 5’ ends of viral genomes in place of a typical 5’ cap structure [151–153]. The norovirus VPg can function as a primer in viral RNA replication following its uridylylation [150,154]. However, the norovirus Pol can also initiate RNA polymerization in a primer-independent manner; it has been postulated that it uses uridylylated VPg primer-mediated polymerization to replicate polyadenylated genomes and primer-independent polymerization to copy antigenomes [149,150]. The norovirus VPg also interacts with host translation initiation factors, perhaps to recruit them to the 5’ end of the RNA genome for translation initiation [155–157].A number of the norovirus nonstructural proteins do not share significant sequence homology to proteins of known function, including NS1, NS2, and NS4 [4], and their functions in viral replication are only beginning to be unraveled. While there is no information available on the role played by the most amino-terminal protein NS1 in norovirus replication, NS2 (also referred to as p48 and the N terminal protein) has been shown to co-localize with the Golgi complex in transfected cells and induce rearrangement of the Golgi membrane [158]. It also interacts with a host protein involved in regulating vesicle transport and can inhibit cell surface expression of proteins [159]. Expression of NS4 (also referred to as p22 and the 3A-like protein) in transfected cells has recently been shown to induce Golgi disruption. Moreover, NS4 contains a novel ER export signal that results in aberrant trafficking of COPII-coated vesicles and ultimately in inhibition of host protein secretion (Sharp TM, Guix S, Katayama K, Crawford SE and Estes MK, manuscript submitted). Redistribution of COPII-coated vesicles was not observed during MNV-1 infection of RAW264.7 cells [160], suggesting that human and murine noroviruses may differentially affect secretory pathways. Overall, available data suggest that norovirus NS2 and NS4 proteins both contribute to viral replication complex formation on intracellular membranes including that of the Golgi apparatus. This is supported by work with MNV-1, demonstrating that all nonstructural proteins localize to the ER, Golgi bodies, and early endosomes, but not to late endosomes or lysosomes [160]. One can postulate that NS2 and NS4 disrupt intracellular host protein trafficking, which may play an important role in the pathogenesis of norovirus infections by blocking surface expression (i.e., MHC molecules) and secretion (i.e., cytokines) of immune mediators in infected cells.Any of the essential activities encoded by norovirus nonstructural proteins could potentially be targeted with antiviral compounds for intervention. In addition, immunotherapeutic strategies based on enhancing the host cell’s normal antiviral mechanisms may be engineered to disrupt the function of one or more norovirus nonstructural proteins. For example, during MNV-1 infection of permissive cells, translation of nonstructural proteins can be inhibited by both type I and type II interferon responses [161]. A host innate immune mediator induced by interferon may thus block required interactions between norovirus VPg and translation initiation factors, representing a candidate immunotherapeutic to treat norovirus infections. Both type I and type II interferon also inhibit the replication of a human norovirus expressed from a replicon in transfected cells [115,162]; it has yet to be determined whether these responses target norovirus translation as they do in the murine system.5.3.Norovirus Structural ProteinsNoroviruses are nonenveloped icosahedral viruses between 27–30 nm in diameter. Norovirus ORF2 encodes the major structural protein called VP1 or capsid. Virions contain 180 copies, or 90 dimers, of VP1 that assemble into icosahedral particles exhibiting T = 3 symmetry [163–167]. Each capsid dimer forms an arch-like protrusion extending from the internal shell of the particle. The capsid protein itself can be divided into a conserved internal shell domain (S) and a more variable protruding domain (P) that forms the arch-like protrusions. The P domain can be further subdivided into P1 and P2 domains, with P1 forming the sides of the arches and P2 located at the exposed tops of the arches. Expression of VP1 independent of other viral components results in the self-assembly of virus-like particles (VLPs) [168], and expression of solely the P domain of VP1 results in the formation of P dimers as well as P particles composed of 12 P dimers [169]. These structures retain the binding properties of native norovirus virions, at least in terms of carbohydrate association, and have been extremely useful in binding and antigenicity studies in the absence of a cell culture system [170]. Consistent with its exposed location on the virion surface, the P2 domain of VP1 comprises a hypervariable region that is suspected to contain receptor binding and antigenic sites. Indeed, numerous structural and mutagenesis studies of VLPs and P domain structures have confirmed that the binding interface for HBGA association with norovirus particles resides in the P2 domain of capsid [169,171–175]. Furthermore, monoclonal antibodies have been demonstrated to recognize conformational epitopes located in the P2 domain [176,177]. Identifying critical determinants of norovirus receptor binding and antigenicity may be instrumental in the design of effective therapeutics and vaccines. Interestingly, a single amino acid change in the P2 domain of a murine norovirus has been associated with its in vivo attenuation [103,178].Norovirus ORF3 encodes a minor structural protein called VP2 that is present in only 1–2 copies per virion [138,179]. VP2 is small, basic, and quite divergent in both size and sequence between viruses within this family. Its function in viral replication is currently undefined but there is evidence that it increases the expression level of VP1 and that it stabilizes VLPs [180]. The basic charge of VP2 suggests that it may function in encapsidation of the viral genome.Both VP1 and VP2 are translated from a subgenomic message that is polyadenylated and, based on work with feline caliciviruses [152], is presumed to be covalently attached to VPg at its 5’ end. While expression of VP1 is presumed to occur via VPg-directed translation initiation (similar to expression of nonstructural proteins from genomic RNA), the mechanism for translation initiation of the downstream VP2 protein was unclear until recently. There is now evidence from several animal caliciviruses that translation of VP2 proceeds via a translation termination re-initiation (TTR) mechanism. In this process, posttermination ribosomes from VP1 translational events remain associated with subgenomic RNA through interactions with termination upstream ribosomal binding sites (TURBSs) in the 3’ proximal end of VP1, facilitating recruitment of translation initiation factors to the 5’ end of VP2 [181–184]. At least one of the TURBS is conserved across the Caliciviridae family, suggesting that noroviruses rely on the same mechanism for VP2 expression [181]. A recent study also suggests that TTR is used by at least one norovirus to express VP1 independent of subgenomic message production [185]; while this most likely contributes minimal amounts of capsid compared to the levels produced from translation of subgenomic RNA, the authors speculate that VP1 may play an additional nonstructural role(s) in the viral replication cycle.6.Norovirus Immunity and Vaccination6.1.ImmunityImmunity to noroviruses is complicated by the heterogeneous responses of the human population and the transient nature of immunity in some individuals. These atypical responses are best highlighted by early studies in which volunteers were repeatedly exposed to homologous virus inoculum comprised of filtered stool from norovirus outbreak patients [5,6]. In these studies, several patterns of susceptibility were noted – a proportion of volunteers were resistant to primary and subsequent infections, and a proportion of individuals were equally susceptible to primary and secondary infections when there was at least a six-month interval between challenges. One possible explanation for the continued susceptibility of a subset of individuals is that they fail to generate a virus-specific immune response upon norovirus infection. However, data gathered from many human volunteer challenge studies and natural norovirus outbreaks conclusively show that people do develop a virus-specific antibody response and that the presence of this response does not correlate with protection [5,6,93,123,186–189]. Specifically, virus-specific serum IgG is induced and persists for months following infection, while serum IgA and IgM responses are more short-lived. Mucosal IgA is induced as well but its duration has not been determined [190]. Because there is no cell culture system for human noroviruses, it has not been possible to determine whether norovirus-specific antibodies are neutralizing. However, a surrogate assay based on inhibition of VLP binding to HBGA ligands has been used to demonstrate that virus-specific serum antibodies generated during experimental and natural infections neutralize carbohydrate binding [128,129,191,192]. Moreover, traditional neutralization assays are possible for murine noroviruses because they are cultivable. MNV-1 infection of mice induces neutralizing serum antibodies [103] and one MNV-1-neutralizing monoclonal antibody has been shown to bind each of the 180 hypervariable P2 domains of native MNV-1 virions without inducing a major conformational change, suggesting that neutralization in this case is mediated by abrogation of cellular attachment [167]. Nevertheless, the duration of norovirus antibody responses has not been clearly defined, so it remains possible that waning humoral immunity is related to the susceptibility of some previously exposed individuals to repeat norovirus infections.While there have been no direct studies of T cell responses to human norovirus infection, surrogate cytokine studies suggest that virus-specific T cells are also induced in infected individuals. In one study, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from norovirus-infected volunteers at pre-challenge and post-challenge time points, incubated with norovirus VLPs, and secretion of cytokines from the PBMCs was measured [193]. The authors noted increases in the Th1 cytokines IFNγ and IL-2, as well as the Th2 cytokine IL-5. Notably though, similar increases in cytokine levels were observed when pre-challenge and post-challenge PBMCs from uninfected individuals were compared to each other, presumably indicating that controls in this study were previously exposed to natural norovirus infection. This finding highlights the difficulty of studying primary immune responses to human noroviruses where infection histories are impossible to discern. Recent studies in the gnotobiotic pig and calf models also report moderate increases in several Th1 and Th2 cytokines as well as interferon in the serum and intestinal contents of infected animals, suggestive of a T cell response upon primary challenge [74,194]. Overall, the available information on secondary human norovirus infections supports an atypical pattern of immunity in which some previously exposed individuals are susceptible to repeat infections even in the face of virus-specific memory immune responses. Another subset of individuals is resistant to infection, presumably due to genetic resistance (i.e., nonsecretors) or preexisting immunity.In the early volunteer challenge studies, it was noted that susceptible individuals were protected from disease when re-challenged soon after secondary exposure (<6 months) in contrast to a more distant re-challenge (>6 months) [5,6], suggesting that short-term norovirus immunity is elicited whereas long-term immunity is not. Studies of murine norovirus infection lend support to this explanation – a primary MNV-1 exposure results in reduced virus loads upon re-challenge when the interval between primary and secondary infections is short (Figure 7; 6-week challenge), although it is important to note that this magnitude of protection is insufficient to protect the host from disease [88]. While protective peripheral immunity in this setting is maintained over time, protective mucosal responses wane (Figure 7, 9-month challenge; Karst laboratory, unpublished data), indicating that memory immune responses at mucosal sites are not efficiently maintained. There is also evidence from the murine model of norovirus infection that repeated norovirus exposure boosts the long-term immune response – repeated exposure to high-dose MNV-1 elicits long-lasting protective immunity [99], whereas single high-dose infection does not [88]. The immunity elicited by repeated exposure to MNV-1 does appear to be lasting [99]. Interestingly, studies of murine norovirus infection also signify that lower doses of virus elicit stronger memory immune responses than high doses [88]. It has yet to be determined whether virus dose similarly displays an inverse correlation to protection upon human norovirus infection.In apparent contradiction to the results of early human volunteer studies, some investigators have recently suggested that noroviruses can elicit herd immunity [62,123,129,193]. This supposition is based on the epochal pattern of GII.4 pandemics, with emergence of a dominant virus strain for a 1–2 year period followed by a period of relative GII.4 quiescence prior to emergence of a new dominant strain (Figure 8) [62]. The emergence of new pandemic GII.4 strains is postulated to result from (i) antigenic drift-mediated altered carbohydrate usage and (ii) altered antigenicity facilitating virus escape of herd immunity [128,195]. Consistent with this, only a minimal number of amino acid changes in the capsid P domain are required to alter HBGA usage, enabling norovirus strains great flexibility in evolving to infect new populations [195]. It has also been reported in a recent human norovirus challenge study that a subset of secretor-positive volunteers were resistant to Norwalk virus infection, and these individuals displayed a modest increase in norovirus-specific salivary IgA early after infection [123]. While interesting, interpretation of these studies is complicated by several factors: the previous exposure histories of the subjects are unknown, and it is not possible to distinguish between short- and long-term immunity. Moreover, these studies do not offer an explanation for the observation that some individuals are susceptible to repeated infections with homologous virus [5,6].One explanation that would be inclusive of all norovirus immunity observations to date is that short-term herd immunity drives the evolution of emerging norovirus strains, but this immunity wanes over time such that genetically susceptible individuals can be repeatedly infected with homologous virus over the long-term. Studies of GII.4 carbohydrate usage may support this idea – while 2002–2005 strains display distinct binding profiles compared to earlier 1974–1997 strains, the binding profile of the more recent 2006 GII.4 strain is similar to those of 1974–1997 strains [63,195].6.2.Candidate Norovirus Vaccination StrategiesCurrent efforts to design human norovirus vaccines focus on expression of the norovirus capsid protein in various vectors, resulting in self-assembly of the capsid protein into immunogenic VLPs [4]. Such vaccine candidates elicit both serum IgG and mucosal IgA responses, but the duration of these responses and their protective potential have not been determined. A Phase I safety trial has been completed for a dry powder norovirus VLP vaccine delivered intranasally in conjunction with a TLR4 agonist adjuvant; the vaccine was determined to be immunogenic and was not associated with adverse side effects (http://www.ligocyte.com/downloads/Noro.pdf). Live virus challenge studies are now underway. While challenge studies following exposure to human norovirus VLPs have not been reported, results from animal models are encouraging: (i) intranasal inoculation of calves with bovine norovirus VLPs + adjuvant induces both mucosal and systemic humoral immunity, although protection from subsequent challenge is only partial and viral shedding is not prevented [196]; (ii) repeated mucosal exposure to HS66 VLPs + adjuvant elicits immune responses and protection from live HS66 in a majority of vaccinated gnotobiotic pigs [197]; (iii) footpad inoculation of mice with murine norovirus VLPs + adjuvant induces humoral immune responses and reduced virus loads, although protection from disease was not assessed in this study [198]. Additional work with murine norovirus suggests that a broad adaptive immune response including B cells, CD4 T cells, and CD8 T cells, is critical for full protection [99].While available information on norovirus VLP-based vaccines is promising, several potential obstacles require serious consideration. Feline calicivirus vaccines, either modified live vaccines or inactivated vaccines given with adjuvants, have been used for many years [95]. These vaccines induce protective immunity in cats in terms of clinical disease prevention; however, they do not prevent infection or persistence. In such a scenario, the presence of non-neutralizing immunity could actually induce the emergence of virulent strains [199]. To this end, multiple virulent feline calicivirus isolates have recently emerged that cause systemic disease associated with high mortality; vaccinated cats have been prominently affected in these outbreaks [200,201]. These data highlight the potential necessity of designing norovirus vaccination strategies that target both clinical disease and prolonged infection. Other major obstacles in designing norovirus vaccines are the genetic variability within this virus family and the replacement of pandemic strains in short time intervals (see Figure 8). These factors may require a continually evolving vaccine preparation similar to the one currently in place for influenza viruses. Moreover, multiple norovirus strains may need to be included in this preparation to elicit effective immunity to each genogroup. A final possible hindrance to a successful norovirus vaccine is the inability of natural infection to elicit lasting protection in all individuals. It will be critical to delineate the basis for this lack of immunity and to determine whether a similar phenomenon occurs upon exposure to candidate norovirus vaccines.7.ConclusionsRecent advances in the norovirus field have greatly facilitated progress in our understanding of how this emerging RNA virus family causes disease and persists worldwide. These advances include the identification and structural characterization of HBGAs as receptors, the development of animal models and a murine norovirus cell culture system, and the design of norovirus infectious clones and replicons. While much progress has been made in the human norovirus field, it is still limited by the lack of an efficient cell culture model. Designing efficacious norovirus vaccines and therapies with broad spectrum activity across the family also remains a major challenge due to several factors: (1) the extreme genetic variability within the norovirus family and within genogroups; (2) the rapid evolution of antigenically dissimilar pandemic GII.4 norovirus strains; and (3) the lack of lasting immunity upon natural exposure to noroviruses in at least a proportion of the population. Studies in the murine norovirus model suggest that immunity to natural infection does indeed wane over time but can be enhanced by repeat exposure. Moreover, the finding that the HBGA binding interface is conserved within a norovirus genogroup may facilitate the development of novel therapeutic strategies that target all members of a specific genogroup. As we continue to expand our understanding of norovirus replication strategies using newly developed in vitro models, additional novel targets for antiviral therapies will undoubtedly be revealed.


Title: Norovirus disease: changing epidemiology and host susceptibility factors

A bout of acute gastroenteritis can be debilitating, inconvenient and sometimes embarrassing. People of all ages and every walk of life suffer from infectious diarrheal disease. Viruses, bacteria and parasites can cause these acute gastrointestinal infections. One type of virus that causes acute gastroenteritis is a norovirus, previously called a ‘Norwalk-like virus’ or small round structured virus. These viruses are in the genus Norovirus within the family Caliciviridae. Noroviruses infect humans and cause symptoms of severe vomiting, watery diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, fever and general malaise [1]. The onset of symptoms is generally 15–48 hours after exposure and illness usually lasts 12–60 hours. The first recognized norovirus, Norwalk virus (NV), gained its name from an outbreak of ‘winter vomiting disease’ in 1968 at an elementary school in Norwalk, Ohio, in the USA [2]. At that time, there was no conclusive evidence that viruses were agents of acute gastroenteritis. But in 1972, Kapikian et al.
[3] demonstrated that the unidentified Norwalk agent was indeed a virus. From this time, additional viruses from other families have been recognized as causing gastroenteritis in humans, including rotaviruses, astroviruses, adenoviruses, Aichi virus (a picornavirus) and sapoviruses (from another genus in the Caliciviridae family).During the past 30 years, norovirus investigation has been fraught with challenges. The amount of virus in infected stool samples is so low that purification of native virus has not yet been achieved. These viruses do not grow in cell or organ culture and there is no small animal model for norovirus infection and gastrointestinal disease. Without an infection model, our current knowledge of NV infection and disease is derived from outbreaks and volunteer challenge studies. Data from early studies have been reviewed elsewhere [4], therefore this review focuses on new information from recent studies that have used molecular approaches to detect and study noroviruses.1Noroviruses redefined by molecular approachesThe molecular era of norovirus studies began with the successful cloning of the NV genome from stool samples [5]. This allowed the virus to be characterized as a calicivirus, containing a characteristic positive-stranded, polyadenylated RNA genome of 7.7 kilobases that is protected from the environment by a protein capsid but lacking a lipid envelope. The capsid is composed of the major capsid protein, known as viral protein 1 (VP1), and a few copies of a second small basic structural protein known as VP2 (Figure 1)
5, 6, 7. Genome sequence information and expression of norovirus proteins VP1 and VP2 to produce virus-like particles (VLPs), which are similar to virion capsids, has led to the development of genome-specific assays, such as reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR) and sensitive protein antigen solid phase immunoassays, including enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs). These sensitive assays are now being used to identify noroviruses as the cause of acute gastroenteritis in sporadic cases and also in outbreak settings. Before these sensitive norovirus-specific molecular assays were available, the cause of the majority of acute gastroenteritis cases was unknown. Because of these newer assays, disease surveillance has increased and the majority of gastroenteritis cases of ‘unknown etiology’ are now attributed to noroviruses. These viruses are currently recognized as the cause of almost all (>96%) outbreaks of non-bacterial gastroenteritis [8], particularly in Europe and Australia where there is active surveillance. Noroviruses also cause an estimated 23 million cases of gastroenteritis per year in the USA 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.Figure 1The Norwalk virus-like particle (NV VLP) structure has been solved by cryo-electron microscopic reconstruction to 22 Å (top, surface representation; bottom, cross-section) and by x-ray crystallography to 3.4 Å. The NV VLPs have 90 dimers of capsid protein (left, ribbon diagram) assembled in T=3 icosahedral symmetry. Each monomeric capsid protein (right, ribbon diagram) is divided into an N-terminal arm region (green) facing the interior of the VLP, a shell domain (S-domain, yellow) that forms the continuous surface of the VLP, and a protruding domain (P-domain) that emanates from the S-domain surface. The P-domain is further divided into subdomains, P1 and P2 (red and blue, respectively) with the P2-subdomain at the most distal surface of the VLPs. Adapted, with permission, from Refs. 6, 72.To date, RT–PCR technology has allowed many strains of noroviruses to be cloned and sequenced from stool and emesis samples. Sequence comparisons indicate that noroviruses can be classified into at least five genetic groups on the basis of similarity across highly conserved regions of the genome, such as the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) and the shell domain of the VP1 capsid protein 4, 13. Two of these genetic groups, called genogroups I and II (GI and GII), contain the majority of the human noroviruses. By phylogenetic analysis, other caliciviruses that infect cattle, pigs and mice also fall within the Norovirus genus 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. The bovine caliciviruses cluster into a proposed GIII, the members of which are most closely related to GI noroviruses 14, 15, 16. Phylogenetic analysis places at least two human noroviruses within a proposed GIV: strains Alphatron (Genbank accession number AF195847) and Ft. Lauderdale (Genbank accession number AF414426) [19]. The porcine noroviruses fall within GII [17], and the recently described murine norovirus forms a proposed GV, the members of which are closer to GII noroviruses than those of GI by sequence comparison 4, 18. In the major capsid protein VP1, human norovirus strains within the same genogroup share at least 60% amino acid sequence identity, whereas most GI strains share less than 50% amino acid identity with those in GII [4]. Noroviruses in GI and GII can be further subdivided into genetic clusters, designated I.1 to I.7 and II.1 to II.7 (or II.8), respectively (Table 1). For example, the prototype 8FIIa Norwalk virus is in genogroup I, genetic cluster 1 (GI.1). Norovirus strains within a genetic cluster share at least 80% VP1 amino acid sequence identity with the cluster's reference strain [4]. Although strains can circulate simultaneously and different strains can circulate in distinct geographic regions at different times, the GII.4 noroviruses have been the predominant circulating strains detected in the population from the 1990s 19, 20, 21. Additional epidemiological studies are needed to determine if the predominant GII.4 noroviruses have characteristics of infection that increase person-to-person transmissibility, for instance, by having an increased tendency to cause acute vomiting.Table 1Noroviruses, original outbreaks and carbohydrate-bindingaCarbohydrate-bindingbVirus NameAccession NumberGgcOutbreak SiteYearLecH1LeaLebH2LexLeyH3ABNorwalkM87661I1Norwalk, OH, USA1968o+o++o+++oHawaiiU07611II1Hawaii, USA1971ndooondndndoooSnow MountainAY134748II2Snow Mountain, CO, USA1976ndooondndndoo+sMexicoU22498II3Mexico City, Mexico1988nd+snd+sndndndnd+s+sGrimsbyAJ004864II4Grimsby, UK1995o+o++o+nd+sr+srVA387AY038600II4Virginia, USA1998nd+so+sndo+snd++MOHAF397156II5Three cities in Hungary1999nd+so+sndonnd++VA207AY038599IInaVirginia, USA1997ndo+sond+snndooaAbbreviations: G, genogroup; gc, genetic cluster; Le, Lewis; na, not assigned [4] or nominally assigned gc 8 [19]; nd, not done; o, no binding; +, binding; +sr, binding inferred by saliva and red blood cell binding assays; +s, binding inferred by saliva binding assays.bCarbohydrates listed below. Lec: H type 1 precursor, Galβ1,3GlcNAcβ-H1: H type 1, Led, Fucα1,2Galβ1,3GlcNAcβ-Lea: Galβ1,3(Fucα1,4)GlcNAcβ-Leb: Fucα1,2Galβ1,3(Fucα1,4)GlcNAcβ-H2: H type 2, Fucα1,2Galβ1,4GlcNAcβ-Lex: Galβ1,4(Fucα1,3)GlcNAcβ-Ley: Fucα1,2Galβ1,4(Fucα1,3)GlcNAcβ-H3: H type 3, Fucα1,2Galβ1,3GalNAcα-A: GalNAcα1,3(Fucα1,2)Galβ-B: Galα1,3(Fucα1,2)Galβ-2New insights into norovirus infection and diseaseReports of unusual norovirus outbreaks are becoming more frequent. For example, recent popular press reports have highlighted the rapid spread of norovirus illness among vacationing passengers and the crew aboard cruise ships, and the difficulty that has arisen during attempts to decontaminate ships following outbreaks [20]. In addition, noroviruses are now recognized as the most common cause of sporadic cases of diarrhea in the community [22]. They are the cause of acute gastroenteritis in people of all ages and in everyday settings: day care centers, schools, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, the military, catered events and recreational camps 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Interestingly, symptomatically ill children are more likely to have episodes of vomiting, whereas adults who are ill tend to have diarrhea [33]. One of the reasons these viruses are so prevalent is their low infectious dose; less than 10 virions could be enough to infect a healthy adult (C.L. Moe et al. abstract P4–6, International Workshop on Human Caliciviruses. Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 1999). Transmission has occurred following direct person-to-person contact (from the defensive team to the opposing offense during a college football game), after consumption of contaminated food (raw oysters, bakery products, fresh fruit and vegetables), after intake of water (from ice, well or bottled water and during swimming), and following exposure to contaminated environmental surfaces and to airborne vomitus droplets that contain virus 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41. Because of the debilitating nature of the disease, the explosiveness of outbreaks, the high infectivity and stability of the virus, which is more resistant to disinfection techniques than most bacteria and other viral pathogens [42], the noroviruses have been classified as class B biological pathogens.Noroviruses usually cause a short-term, self-limiting disease that can be treated with rest, oral rehydration and, if needed, intravenous replacement of electrolytes. Complications from norovirus infection are usually observed in infants and the elderly because they are generally more sensitive to volume depletion. However, new data suggest that unusual clinical presentations and complications from norovirus infection can occur in immunocompromised and physically stressed individuals. Recently, cases of chronic diarrhea in transplant recipients undergoing immunosuppressive therapy have been attributed to norovirus infection. An infant who received an intestinal transplant developed persistent diarrhea from norovirus infection, which resolved only after a reduction in immunosuppressive therapy [43]. Similarly, an adult transplant recipient suffered from a persistent norovirus infection with chronic diarrhea for more than two years [44]. For otherwise healthy adults, high stress situations could contribute to more severe norovirus disease. An unusual outbreak occurred in a military field hospital in Afghanistan, with four infected soldiers displaying unusual symptoms, such as neck stiffness, light sensitivity, confusion and in one case disseminated intravascular coagulation [45]. Dehydration and stress due to work and environmental conditions, in addition to infection-related volume loss, might have contributed to the more severe disease presentation in these soldiers.Why are noroviruses transmitted so easily? In addition to viral stability, clinical challenge studies in the 1990s discovered the existence of a group of individuals who are asymptomatically infected with NV [46]. Asymptomatic individuals shed virus and mount a NV-specific antibody response, however they have no symptoms of disease. These asymptomatic individuals, as well as those who recover from the acute symptomatic form of the disease, can shed virus particles for up to three weeks after exposure, much longer than previously realized, and these virus carriers can transmit the disease unknowingly 22, 46, 47.3Host-susceptibility factors related to carbohydrate-bindingMore than 25 years ago, the initial NV challenge studies conducted in volunteers found that a subset of individuals was repeatedly susceptible to NV infection, whereas a second subset was repeatedly resistant to infection [48]. It was hypothesized that a genetic factor, possibly a receptor, could affect a person's susceptibility to NV infection. Recently, a mechanism that explains susceptibility or resistance to NV infection has been identified; noroviruses attach to potential host cells in the gut only if the individual expresses specific, genetically determined carbohydrates [49]. This recent discovery is a breakthrough in understanding NV host-susceptibility factors. Here we summarize the existing evidence that NV carbohydrate binding is biologically relevant to NV infection and disease. Studies to date have used VLPs generated from insect or mammalian cell cultures as virus models to study potential host cell–virus interactions and to identify a cellular receptor for this virus 50, 51.Carbohydrate binding is a common method many viruses and other microorganisms use to attach to their host cells (Table 2). Commonly, viruses use the negatively charged sialic acid and heparan sulfate carbohydrates as cellular receptors, which are expressed on many types of cells and tissues. But the Norwalk virus VLPs bind to a different group of structurally related carbohydrates: the H, Lewis and A histo-blood group antigens (Table 1; Figure 2)
50, 52, 53, 54. These carbohydrates are synthetically related tri- and tetra-saccharide moieties that are located at the distal ends of carbohydrate chains on cellular glycolipids and glycoproteins found on the exterior cell surface. Unique varieties of carbohydrates are expressed by different cell types. This variety is determined by the presence or absence of specific glycotransferase enzymes as a result of a person's genetics and the developmental stage and differentiation state of the cells (Figure 2, Figure 3). These carbohydrates function in cell-to-cell interactions, self and non-self identification, and protection from the environment and pathogens. The relationship between the glycotransferases and carbohydrates discussed in this review are found in Figure 2 and reviewed elsewhere 55, 56.Table 2Microorganisms that use cellular carbohydrates for attachmentMicroorganismCarbohydrateVirusesOrthomyxovirusesSialic acidPolyomavirusesSialic acidReovirusesSialic acidCoronavirusesSialic acidParamyxovirusesSialic acidParvoviruses (murine, canine)Sialic acidAdenovirus-associated virus 2Heparan sulfateHerpes virusesHeparan sulfateFlavivirusesHeparan sulfateB19 human parvovirusP antigenCalicivirusesABH and Lewis antigensBacteriaEscherichia coli, pyelonephritogenicP antigenBacteroides thetaiotaomicronH antigenPseudomonas aeruginosaABH and P antigensStaphyloccocus aureusLeaHelicobacter pyloriLebMycoplasmaMycoplasma pneumoniaeI or i antigenProtozoaPlasmodium falciparumSialic acidFigure 2ABH and Lewis antigens are synthesized by sequential enzymatic transfer of single carbohydrate residues to specific precursor carbohydrate substrates. (a,b) H antigens are made by enzymatic addition of a fucose (Fuc) residue to the terminal galactose (Gal) residue in α1,2 linkage. (a) Secretor positive (Se+) individuals express the FUT2 gene product, a fucosyltransferase that adds Fuc to a type 1 precursor to make H type 1 (also known as Lewis(d) or Led). Eighty percent of Northern Europeans and Caucasian Americans are Se+. (b) The FUT1 fucosyltransferase adds Fuc to a type 2 precursor to make H type 2. Less than 0.002% of people throughout the world lack FUT1 expression; they also do not express H antigen on their red blood cells (histo-blood group type Bombay), which is normally expressed on type O red blood cells. Type 1 and 2 precursor substrates have different Gal to N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) linkages, (a) Galβ1,3-GlcNAcβ- and (b) Galβ1,4-GlcNAcβ-, respectively. The Lewis carbohydrate antigens are made when the FUT3 enzyme is expressed in Lewis positive (Le+) individuals. Eighty percent of Northern Europeans and Caucasian Americans individuals are Le+, independent of secretor status. (a,b)FUT3 transfers Fuc to the GlcNAc of type 1 and 2 precursors and H types 1 and 2 in α1,4 and α1,3 linkages, respectively. (c) H types 1 and 2 are the terminal moieties expressed in histo-blood group type O individuals, but in types A, B and AB individuals the H antigens are further modified by enzymes that transfer N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc, type A), Gal (type B), or either carbohydrate (type AB) to the terminal Gal residue of an H antigen in α1,3 linkage. ABH, Lewis and secretor phenotypes and enzymatic pathways are described in greater detail in other reviews 55, 56.Figure 3The small intestinal gut section shows the villi projecting into the lumen (top) with the crypts beneath the villi. Within the crypts are the progenitor stem cells of the small intestine. Crypt stem cell division supplies cells that differentiate as they are pushed down into the base of the crypt, becoming paneth cells, or up into the villus, becoming goblet cells or enterocytes. Paneth cells at the base of the crypt secrete lysozyme, goblet cells secrete mucins, undifferentiated enterocytes secrete chloride ions, and differentiated enterocytes absorb nutrients from the gut lumen until they undergo apoptosis and are sloughed off the villus. As enterocytes differentiate and travel up the villus, they express higher amounts and a greater variety of carbohydrates, including ABH and Lewis histo-blood group antigens [55]. Further description of these and other specialized intestinal cells can be found elsewhere [73].NV VLPs show the strongest level of binding when interacting with the H type 1 [also know as Lewis(d) or Led] synthetic carbohydrate antigen (Table 1; Figure 2a) 50, 52. H type 1 oligosaccharides are also best at inhibiting NV VLP binding to enterocytes, red blood cells (RBCs) and synthetic carbohydrate 50, 53. The Leb antigen differs from H type 1 only by the presence of a fucose in α1–4 linkage to the most distal N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) of a carbohydrate chain (Figure 2). The binding of NV VLPs appears to be minimally affected by this additional fucose, because Leb closely follows H type 1 in strength of binding to synthetic carbohydrates and hemagglutination inhibition 50, 52. Both H type 1 and Leb carbohydrates are found in saliva and other mucosal secretions from individuals who are Lewis-positive secretors (Figure 2). NV VLPs bind to saliva from all secretor-positive individuals, and their saliva can inhibit VLPs from binding to enterocytes and saliva 52, 53, 54. Hemagglutination and synthetic carbohydrate-binding show that H type 2 and 3 carbohydrates also bind to NV VLPs and can inhibit homologous and heterologous carbohydrate-binding 50, 52, 53. Furthermore, the heterologous inhibition between H and Lewis antigens suggests that these carbohydrates bind NV VLPs at the same site [50]. NV VLPs also bind type A and AB RBCs, and type A saliva and synthetic carbohydrate, but they do not bind B antigen synthetic carbohydrate nor do they bind the majority of type B RBCs and saliva 49, 50, 52, 54. The A carbohydrate antigen is dissimilar to the H and Lewis antigens. To date, it is unclear if the NV VLPs bind the H antigen segment of the A antigen (Figure 2) or if the A antigen interacts at a distinct site on the NV VLP. The A, but not B, trisaccharide antigens bind the VLPs, however the H disaccharide does not bind VLPs well compared with that of the H and A trisaccharides [54]. This suggests that there might be a unique A antigen-binding site on the NV VLPs.To date, the carbohydrate-binding of one GI and seven GII norovirus VLPs have been reported, with the single GI NV VLPs binding to carbohydrates being the most thoroughly studied interaction (Table 1). The GII VLPs bind to the same group of carbohydrate antigens as NV VLPs, but their binding specificities are different. In addition, the carbohydrate-binding properties of GII VLPs are varied. For example, VLPs from VA387 norovirus (GII.4, clustered with the current predominant circulating norovirus strains) binds saliva and synthetic carbohydrates of all secretors regardless of their ABO type, whereas the VLPs from Snow Mountain virus (GII.2) bind the saliva of secretors of types B and AB, but not of types O and A 52, 54. It remains to be determined if the carbohydrate-binding profiles correlate with genetic clusters within a norovirus genogroup, or if the carbohydrate-binding properties are more strain-specific. Finding the carbohydrate-binding sites on noroviruses and identifying residues that are important for binding should help predict the carbohydrate-binding characteristics of a norovirus on the basis of its amino acid sequence. However, if noroviruses are consistent with many carbohydrate-binding proteins, the three-dimensional nature of the binding pocket could complicate binding predictions based on linear sequence and antigenic properties 57, 58.From previous volunteer challenge studies, there is strong evidence that carbohydrate-binding is essential for NV infection. Individuals who are non-secretors (Se−), who do not express the FUT2 fucosyltransferase and consequently do not make H type 1 or Leb (Figure 2a), do not become infected after challenge with NV [49]. Furthermore, individuals expressing the B antigen are less likely to be infected by NV; however, when type B individuals are infected they are asymptomatic [59]. This strongly supports the hypothesis that carbohydrate-binding is crucial for NV replication, because NV VLPs show strongest binding to H type 1 and Leb carbohydrates, and minimal binding to type B RBCs and saliva 50, 52. Even though the number of people in each secretor and ABO phenotype is low, especially for type B, these associations have been subsequently confirmed by other volunteer challenge studies (A.M. Hutson et al., unpublished).Therefore, we predict that secretors of types O and A are at greatest risk of NV infection and disease. Because other noroviruses display different ABH and Lewis carbohydrate-binding profiles 52, 54, individuals resistant to NV infection could be susceptible to other norovirus strains. If carbohydrate-binding is conserved within genetic clusters, this could help explain the wide prevalence of GII.4 noroviruses, where the broad range of carbohydrates to which the VA387 virus binds increases the proportion of susceptible individuals within the population. These data also help to explain why the absence of antibodies to a norovirus strain does not necessarily predict susceptibility to infection with that virus strain. Persons without NV-specific antibodies could be completely resistant to infection because of the lack of expression of carbohydrates necessary for virus attachment to host cells. Conversely, the presence of norovirus-specific antibodies could indicate previous infection and therefore susceptibility at the virus–receptor binding level. As with many mucosal infections, a single norovirus infection does not appear to provide long-term protection [60]. Without re-exposure to a particular norovirus strain, protection wanes after six months and it has been reported that susceptible individuals have been reinfected two years after prior exposure [48]. However, multiple exposures to the virus can result in induction of protective immunity and establishes a rationale for vaccine development 60, 61. A recent study has suggested that production of NV-specific salivary IgA early in infection might be associated with protection against more severe disease [49]. These data support the development of a norovirus vaccine that generates a strong mucosal immune response.Further evidence supporting the biological relevance of NV VLP–carbohydrate interaction comes from the presence of antibodies in convalescent sera that specifically block the binding of VLP to carbohydrate. For influenza A virus, the capacity of antibodies to specifically block the virus binding to its cellular receptor (sialic acid) shows better correlation with levels of protection from influenza A challenge than the total amount of antibodies that can recognize the virus but that might not interfere with receptor-binding [62]. Therefore, if binding of NV to H antigen is essential for virus infection, then antibodies that inhibit NV receptor interactions will probably develop in response to infection. Notably, hemagglutination inhibition and antiserum blockade assays demonstrated that the convalescent phase sera of NV-infected individuals have more NV–H antigen blocking antibodies than pre-challenge serum samples 50, 52. The presence of antibodies that inhibit this binding could be associated with protection from NV infection or disease.ABH and Lewis carbohydrates are used by other mucosal pathogens. For example, the bacteria Helicobacter pylori and Staphylococcus aureus attach to cells through H and Lewis carbohydrates (Table 2). However, the ABH and Lewis carbohydrate-binding specificity has only been described for viruses in the Caliciviridae family. Rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) was the first calicivirus shown to bind H type 2 carbohydrate [63]. RHDV is distantly related to noroviruses and causes a respiratory infection in rabbits that spreads systemically with high replication in the liver, causing internal hemorrhaging and death. The H type 2 carbohydrate is expressed on rabbit lung epithelia, but its role in RHDV infection remains to be determined. Binding of H and Lewis carbohydrates could be a common theme in calicivirus–cell interactions, but such binding interactions have not been shown for viruses in the Vesivirus or Sapovirus genera. RHDV, feline calicivirus (vesivirus) and porcine enteric calicivirus (sapovirus) are systemic pathogens 64, 65, 66. For human noroviruses, replication and pathogenesis have only been described in the gut and norovirus has not been identified in the sera of infected individuals. However, because NV VLPs bind H type 2 and Lewis antigens, which are found on erythrocytes and other circulating and vascular cells, the possibility of systemic spread of NV should be reexamined with more sensitive molecular tests.In the human gut, the developmental and differentiation-dependent nature of H and Lewis antigen expression on enterocytes, combined with the uniqueness of this virus–carbohydrate interaction, suggests that noroviruses are very selective in their binding to cells and that virus replication might be cell-type dependent. This could help explain the difficulty in adapting noroviruses to growth in cell culture. Potential host cells could be transfected with glycotransferases to enable the expression of norovirus-binding carbohydrates. This has been achieved with Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, which normally do not express H antigen carbohydrates and show little binding of NV VLPs [53]. When the CHO cells were transfected with the rat FTB gene, the rat homolog to human FUT2, they expressed H type 1 and were able to bind NV VLPs [53]. However, the lack of carbohydrate expression does not explain the block to NV replication. Caco-2 cells, a human cell line that expresses markers of differentiated enterocytes that are characteristic of small intestinal cells, do express H types 1 and 2 [67]. These cells bind to rNV VLPs more efficiently than other cell lines that have been tested, but they do not support NV replication [51]. This suggests that a co-receptor could be required for sufficient norovirus entry, or that the block in viral replication in Caco-2 cells occurs at a post-binding step.In secretor-positive individuals, ABH and Lewis antigens are found on epithelial cell surfaces and secreted mucins (heavily glycosylated glycoproteins) in saliva, milk and other mucous secretions. Because NV VLPs can bind free oligosaccharides, the role of these secreted antigens, which could bind NV and potentially inhibit infection, is uncertain. Even with secreted carbohydrates potentially binding NV VLPs, secretor-positive individuals are reported to be more susceptible to NV infection [49]. One explanation for this apparent contradiction is related to the multivalent nature of carbohydrate expression on cells that interact with multiple binding sites on VLPs. As with other carbohydrate-binding proteins, the affinity of NV VLPs for free monomeric oligosaccharides appears to be low [53]. This suggests that the avidity of binding of VLP to H and Lewis carbohydrates on a cell surface is a more biologically relevant event. Furthermore, for a multivalent viral or bacterial protein the monomeric affinity between its carbohydrate ligand and the monomeric protein is generally low [68]. Too high an affinity between a virus and its cellular receptor can inhibit the dissemination and consequently the viability of the virus [69]. Therefore, the strength or weakness of the binding of a norovirus strain to cellular carbohydrates could affect susceptibility within a population, virulence within an infected person and transmissibility to others.4Questions for future norovirus researchThis new information on norovirus epidemiology and host susceptibility factors leads to many new questions about infection with these viruses. What is the nature of the norovirus carbohydrate-binding site? To date, it is known that the carbohydrate-binding epitope on NV can be found in the P domain and is conformation-dependent [50]. Additionally, all carbohydrate-binding studies have been done using VLPs. Therefore, even though the NV volunteer challenge studies indicate that similarities exist between the binding of VLP and native virus, it is unknown whether norovirus virions have the same carbohydrate-binding properties as their VLP counterparts. Knowledge of the receptor-binding site for these viruses could lead to the development of antiviral carbohydrate analogs for prophylactic use in especially sensitive situations, such as in military, hospital or nursing home settings, or for treatment of individuals who are frail or immunocompromised.What blocks norovirus replication in cultured cells? Finding potential receptor(s) for NV could aid in identifying cells or tissues that are susceptible to NV infection and could help explain one level of host tropism for this non-cultivatable virus. Because H antigens are expressed on Caco-2 cells, a lack of carbohydrate receptors is not the block in NV replication in these cells. There could be a co-receptor missing on Caco-2 and other cells, the presence of which increases NV internalization. Alternatively, other factors downstream of viral entry might be missing, or factors that interfere in NV replication could be expressed in cultured cells. Recently, a murine calicivirus was identified that is closely related to noroviruses by sequence analysis [18]. This virus infects mice orally, causing a systemic infection without gastroenteritis. Studies with this small animal model of infection are expected to provide new information about essential host and viral factors that are important for pathogenesis by making use of knockout and transgenic mice, and possibly recombinant viruses. Initial studies have indicated that immunocompromised mice become persistently infected and that the innate immune response plays an important role in the outcome of murine norovirus infection. The role of the innate immune response in human norovirus replication and pathogenesis also needs to be examined.Do cross-species norovirus infections occur naturally? GI and GII noroviruses were initially only isolated from humans. Recently, phylogenetic analysis has indicated that other caliciviruses that infect cattle, pigs and mice also fall within the Norovirus genus 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. These viruses form their own genogroups or genetic clusters within GI and GII, but the number of animal noroviruses that have been characterized remains relatively small compared with the number of human norovirus strains. The classification of animal caliciviruses within the Norovirus genus raises the question of whether zoonotic infections occur. Answering this question is important, because cross-species infections would affect the epidemiology and evolution of these viruses and complicate our ability to block transmission by vaccination or other therapy [14].How can norovirus outbreaks and sporadic infections be prevented? Currently, good personal hygiene is the best preventative action against norovirus infection. Washing hands frequently and thoroughly and disinfecting contaminated surfaces with a 5–10% solution of household bleach in water, especially after contact with persons showing norovirus symptoms, is the best defense. People who are ill should refrain from preparing food for others, and once symptoms clear, they should be aware that they could still shed virus for up to three weeks. Furthermore, steps should be taken to keep water and food supplies free from noroviruses.Currently, candidate vaccines are being tested for use in preventing norovirus disease 70, 71. Also, progress is being made to determine the location and structure of the NV-carbohydrate binding site for developing possible antivirals. These studies will help in the development of therapies to reduce norovirus illness and transmission, especially in nursing home, hospital and military settings.


Title: Recent insights into reverse genetics of norovirus

1Introduction1.1Norovirus biologyNorovirus is predominant etiological agent of non-bacterial gastroenteritis and is associated with approximately one in five cases of all gastroenteritis worldwide. Transmission of norovirus is primarily through the consumption of contaminated food or water as well as by aerosolization. Norovirus is highly contagious and individuals at all ages are vulnerable, especially in immunocompromised populations, where infection may lead to severe clinical outcomes (Mattner et al., 2006; Frange et al., 2012; Green, 2014; Ye et al., 2015; Bok et al., 2016). People infected with norovirus usually have a rapid onset of symptoms, including diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, low-grade fever and abdominal cramps. At a global level, norovirus is responsible for an estimated 685 million diarrheal episodes and 212,000 deaths every year (Lopman et al., 2016; Bányai et al., 2018; Lucero et al., 2021).Norovirus is an RNA virus in the family Caliciviridae, which is characterized by rapid transmission and frequent genome mutation. Norovirus particles are small (27–40 nm in diameter) and nonenveloped that possess a single-stranded, (+) sense genomic RNA of ∼7.5–7.7 kb in length (Fig. 1A). Its genome generally includes three open reading frames (ORFs), except for murine norovirus containing four ORFs (Fig. 1B and C). ORF1 encodes a precursor polyprotein that is then hydrolyzed and cleaved by a protease (NS6) into six non-structural proteins (NS1/2 to NS7). ORF2 encodes the major structural protein (VP1), which is responsible for the viral capsid and can exist in up to 180 copies in the viral particle. VP1 has a shell (S) domain and a protruding (P) domain, with the S domain surrounding the viral RNA and connecting to the P domain by a flexible hinge. The P domain can be subdivided into P1 and P2 subdomains (Prasad et al., 1999). P2 is the key region involved in immunogenicity, which is in the outermost layer of VP1 and enables to recognize histo-blood group antigens (HBGAs) (Tan et al., 2004; Lochridge and Hardy, 2007). As initial attachment factor, HBGAs are closely associated with genetic susceptibility for human norovirus infection, and bile acids functions as a cofactor to enhance HBGA binding for certain norovirus genotypes (Kilic et al., 2019; Tenge et al., 2021). Based on the diversity of amino acid (aa) coding sequences of VP1, norovirus is divided into 10 genogroups (GI-GX) and almost 50 genotypes. GI, GII, GIV, GVIII, and GIX are known to be the main genotypic groups infecting humans (Chhabra et al., 2019). ORF3 encodes the minor structural protein (VP2), which is located inside the virus and is involved in capsid assembly and genome encapsulation (Vongpunsawad et al., 2013).Fig. 1(A) Schematic of the structure of norovirus. The viral capsid consists of VP1, where the shell (S) domain surrounds the viral RNA, and the protruding (P) domain can be divided into P1 and P2 subdomains, and P2 can interact with HBGAs. (B-C) Schematic of the genome structure of norovirus. (B) Human norovirus has three ORFs, which encode six non-structural proteins, VP1 and VP2, respectively. (C) Murine norovirus has one more ORF4 compared to human norovirus, which can encode virulence factor 1 (VF1).Fig. 11.2Transmission and epidemiology of norovirusNorovirus is highly contagious, as even as a few particles can cause illnesses. Transmission of human norovirus occurs by the fecal-oral route, either through the consumption with contaminated food and water or through the exposure to infectious fomites in the environment. As norovirus continues to shed infectious viral particles even after symptoms have resolved, it often leads to nosocomial infections and community outbreaks. Norovirus represents a strong survival capacity and is highly stable in the environment. The persistence of the virus in a closed environment increases the risk of recurrent infections (Lopman et al., 2012). Food-borne transmission is an important route for the rapid dissemination of norovirus. Food chain globalization increases the probability of exchanging recombinants between multiple regions and bring more challenges to recognize foodborne outbreaks of norovirus (de Graaf et al., 2016). In addition to target human host, noroviruses have been detected in the stools of many mammalian species, although their roles as pathogens in those animals remain controversial (van Der Poel et al., 2000; Cheetham et al., 2006; Souza et al., 2008; Li et al., 2021).Norovirus infections occur throughout the year, generally peaking in the fall and winter. Since the first worldwide pandemic of norovirus in 1995–1996, the GII.4 genotype has been endemic and dominant worldwide, causing 50%−70% of norovirus outbreaks each year, and has led to another six pandemics due to its quick mutation (Kroneman et al., 2013; Tohma et al., 2019). However, during the winter of 2014–2015, the previously rare GII.17[P17] norovirus strain emerged and replaced GII.4 Sydney as the dominant genotype threatening many areas in Asian (Chan et al., 2015; Matsushima et al., 2015). In addition, the emergence of the GII.2[P16] variant strain in the 2016 to 2017 epidemic season also led to frequent norovirus outbreaks in various countries (Shen et al., 2020). Meanwhile, since 2015, GII.4 Sydney has been reorganized and GII.4 Sydney[P31] and GII.4 Sydney[P16] have reemerged and spread in multiple countries, with GII.4 Sydney[P31] is prevalent mainly in Asia and GII.4 Sydney[P16] is prominent in Australia and the United States (Lun et al., 2018; Barclay et al., 2019; Chuchaona et al., 2019; Fang et al., 2021b).1.3Genetic diversity of norovirusDue to the extreme diversity presented by norovirus, it can easily evade the host immune response and poses serious threat to human health. GII.4 is the predominant genotype circulating worldwide, with new variants emerging almost every 2–5 years, and the successive accumulation of mutations at antigenic sites on VP1 allows for a shift in antigenic properties, facilitating variants escape from herd immunity (Mallory et al., 2019; Kendra et al., 2021). However, there are times that GII.4 strains retain their phenotypic characteristics for over 5 years, and this is probably attributed to changes in the immune dominance of epitopes associated with neutralizing activity (Parra et al., 2017; Tohma et al., 2022).Besides the highest sequence variability in VP1, emerging dominant strains has been found containing variable motifs that are related to RdRp and other nonstructural proteins. RdRp alteration of fidelity not only affects the pathogenicity of the virus during infection, but also has an impact on virus transmission. High-fidelity polymerases may reduce transmission efficiency, contributing to the genetic diversity (Arias et al., 2016). Furthermore, there is an overlap region about 20 bp between ORF1 and ORF2, and different virulent strains tend to recombine near this overlap region. Thus, norovirus genetic diversity can also be achieved by recombination at the ORF1/ORF2 boundary through genomic exchange between different polymerases and coat proteins.Point mutations and recombination within or between genotypes are the main forms of the genetic evolution of norovirus (White, 2014). While the question of the mechanism driving norovirus evolution remains unresolved, factors such as antigenic drift under herd immune selection pressure, altered polymerase fidelity or lack of herd immunity could be responsible for norovirus evolution (Lindesmith et al., 2008; Lopman et al., 2008). Moreover, new norovirus strains may have a more potent invasive capacity and become pandemic variants owing to their antigenic drift, the emergence of point mutations, and the absence of pre-existing herd immunity (Niendorf et al., 2017).1.4Culture model of norovirusThe absence of robust cellular tissue culture models has hampered the understanding of human norovirus immunity as well as hindered the development of vaccines and antiviral drugs. Murine norovirus model is currently being used in place of human norovirus. Cell culture model of murine norovirus was first developed in 2004 to examine its tropism by culturing in macrophages and dendritic cells (Wobus et al., 2004). Mouse models of murine norovirus are abundant, especially the Stat1−/− and IFNαβγR−/− mouse models that are widely used to examine the host immune response against pathogens (Hsu et al., 2016). Despite numerous challenges in the successful propagation of human norovirus, researchers have continued to spare their efforts on human norovirus in vitro cultivation. In recent year, a cell culture system was established using human norovirus GII.4 Sydney strain to infect human B cells under the stimulating effect of intestinal bacteria and HBGAs (Jones et al., 2014). Besides, human norovirus strains were for the first time cultured in a stem cell-derived, non-transformed human intestinal enteroid (HIE), which laid the foundation for further improvement of human norovirus in vitro culture system (Ettayebi et al., 2016). Landmark achievements in the in vitro culture of human norovirus have been achieved with the application of HIE system to effectively replicate several norovirus genotypes and perform functional analysis (Costantini et al., 2018; Lin et al., 2020; Murakami et al., 2020; Hayashi et al., 2021; Ford-Siltz et al., 2022; Tohma et al., 2022). Due to the complexity of constructing a reproducible HIE model, this system only supports the replication of certain genotypes and is largely influenced by the initial virus titer (Jones et al., 2015; Bhar and Jones, 2019; Ettayebi et al., 2021). Thus, future strides are required to increase the reproducibility and infection levels of the system.1.5A review of norovirus reverse geneticsWhile significant progress has been made in norovirus cultivation, these systems are not sufficiently efficient to propagate human norovirus. The growth of human norovirus in the infection models of B-cell (Jones et al., 2015) and HIE (Ettayebi et al., 2016) were with less than 3.5 and 3.8 log increase, respectively. Development of robust and reliable culture models with desired virus yield is urgently need. The emergence of reverse genetics techniques offers and promise and may consider as a sword to break the dilemma. Reverse genetics approaches focus on genes and create mutants by artificially changing the nucleotide sequences of genes, including mutations, deletions and insertions, to make the genotypes and phenotypes with precise correlation. After decades of development, reverse genetic systems now have been successfully used to rescue various types of viruses, i.e., obtaining infectious virus particles through a series of steps such as cDNA cloning and modification of full-length fragments of the genome, construction of helper plasmids, sequence determination, co-transfection, and identification of virus offspring (Almazán et al., 2014; Schmidt and Mühlberger, 2016; Wang et al., 2021). Therefore, reverse genetic systems to rescue infectious norovirus in vitro allows for studying host pathways, pathogen interactions, and viral protein functions (Asanaka et al., 2005; Arias et al., 2012b; Oliveira et al., 2018; Ludwig-Begall et al., 2020). In this review, we describe recent advances in the study of the reverse genetic system and discuss the application and prospect of this system in norovirus, as a powerful tool for antiviral drug and vaccine development.2Reverse geneticsReverse genetics has developed as a strategy that is complementary but opposing to forward genetics. Forward genetics investigates for genetic mutations that are directly linked to the disease phenotype. This technique is often complex and cumbersome. Conversely, reverse genetics focus on genes to induce the candidate mutants into a model system by artificially altering the nucleotide sequences, including mutations, deletions and insertions, as a way of testing the associations between phenotypes and genotypes of the disease. Based on the high-throughput sequencing technology and revolutionary gene engineering tool, reverse genetics as the recent development of recombinant DNA technology, now provides a powerful platform for studying RNA viruses. The core technique of RNA virus reverse genetics is the generation of viral genomic RNA transcripts within a suitable host cell. Currently, the major recombineering strategies consist of bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC), vaccinia virus vectors and completely plasmid-based reverse genetics systems (Table 1).Table 1RNA viruses rescued using different reverse genetics systems.Table 1MethodVirusPromoterTransfected cellsReporter geneReferencesBACRSV A2-line19FT7BSR-T7/51red fluorescent protein monomeric Katushka 2, Renilla luciferase(Hotard et al., 2012)Vaccinia virus vectorsHCoV 229ET7MRC-52N.A.(Thiel et al., 2001)SARS-CoV HKU-39,849T7BHK-213Renilla luciferase(van den Worm et al., 2012)IBVT7CK4N.A.(Bickerton et al., 2017)Entirely plasmid based reverse genetics systemIAV A/WSN/33, A/PR/8/34pol IHEK293T5N.A.(Neumann et al., 1999)IAV A/WSN/33pol IVeroN.A.(Fodor et al., 1999)GVII NDVpol IIBHK-21green fluorescent protein(Wang et al., 2015)Reovirus T3DT7L9296green fluorescent protein(Kobayashi et al., 2007)Reovirus T3DT7L929, BHK-21, A5497N.A.(Komoto et al., 2014)AHSV-4T7BSR, L929N.A.(Conradie et al., 2016)simian RV strain SA11T7BHK-T78NanoLuc luciferase(Kanai et al., 2017)human RV strain OdeliaT7BHK-T7the reporter-NSP1 chimeric gene from strain SA11(Kawagishi et al., 2020)1BSR-T7/5: Baby hamster kidney cells constitutively expressing the T7 polymerase.2MRC-5: Human lung fibroblast cells.3BHK-21: Baby hamster kidney fibroblast cells.4CK: Chick kidney cells.5HEK293T: Human embryonic kidney cells.6L929: Murine L929 fibroblast cells.7A549: Human lung cancer cells.8BHK-T7: Baby hamster kidney cells constitutively expressing T7pol.2.1Bacterial artificial chromosomeBAC is a strategy by inserting a DNA fragment into a single-copy F plasmid that is stably inherited in E. coli, followed by applying a promoter for transcription. Recovery of the infectious virus is subsequently accomplished by transfecting the purified BAC DNA into appropriate cell lines (Fig. 2A). In 1997, murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) developed the first viral BAC system, one of the largest herpesviruses with a genome size of 230 kbp (Messerle et al., 1997). For many years, BAC structures have been used to recover large DNA viruses. In 2012, for the first time, the combination of BAC recombination-mediated mutations and negative-stranded RNA virus reverse genetics was achieved. A BAC-based respiratory syncytial virus rescue system was successfully established to recover recombinant virus by direct transfection of mammalian cells (Hotard et al., 2012). In a recent study, a reverse genetics system was constructed for the first time to generate a recombinant virus using a BAC-based torovirus rescue system (Ujike et al., 2022). In addition, BAC enable to combine with CRISPR/Cas9 technology for generation of precise genetic mutations in cells and animal models (Fang et al., 2021a).Fig. 2Schematic of three different strategies for reverse genetic systems. (A) The viral genomic fragment to be rescued is inserted into a BAC plasmid, and infectious cloning is accomplished under promoter control. (B) Cloning of full-length viral cDNA using vaccine virus as a vector. (C) Transfection of cDNA gene-segments into appropriate cell lines relying only on plasmids without helper viruses. After transfection, the virus was cultured, amplified, lysed, and eventually successfully rescued.Fig. 2There are several advantages for BAC vectors. BAC vectors not only facilitate the manipulation of large DNA sequences but can also site-specifically shuttle into E. coli using well-established mutagenesis techniques. High-copy vectors may contain viral sequences that are unstable or toxic to the host to some degree, while BAC tackles this problem as a promising approach capable of using single or low-copy vectors. BAC vectors provide powerful tools for viral detection and antiviral drug screening through the insertion of reporter genes (Hotard et al., 2012; Nguyen et al., 2021). Of note, a limitation of BAC cloning is the requirement of helper viruses or additional expression vectors to obtain recombinant viruses in some cases.2.2Vaccinia virus vectorsReconstruction of the recombinant virus was accomplished by using the vaccinia virus as a vector for cloning, isolating and purifying infectious in vitro RNA transcripts from the recombinant vaccinia virus, following transfection of the RNA transcripts into allowed cell lines (Fig. 2B). In 2001, a full-length cDNA copy of human coronavirus was cloned and propagated in the vaccinia virus genome, and infectious RNA transcripts were generated from this template, culminating in the successful rescue of human coronavirus (Thiel et al., 2001). The emergence of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) in 2002 caused unprecedented nosocomial outbreaks. To combat the disease, a vaccinia virus-based reverse genetic system for SARS-CoV was developed and used to produce a recombinant virus expressing a reporter gene (Renilla luciferase) for the investigation of SARS-CoV pathogenesis (van den Worm et al., 2012).The superiority of vaccinia virus is its genome that contains a wide range of non-essential regions for replication and allows the insertion of large segments of exogenous genes without loss of integrity, stability and infectivity. Secondly, the cloned cDNA inserts can be used to mediate homologous recombination by the vaccinia virus and to restore cDNAs with erroneous nucleotide changes caused by RT-PCR. Unfortunately, the vaccinia virus vector also suffers from inefficiency. The rescued virus still undergoes complex and time-consuming steps to get isolated from the vaccinia virus and may cause adverse effects on virus replication, which hampered the application of this system.2.3Entirely plasmid-based reverse genetics systemA plasmid-based reverse genetics system does not rely on helper viruses. This system only transfects plasmids containing cDNA sequences into appropriate cell lines and directly drives the transcription and replication of infectious cDNA clones within the cells, ultimately resulting in infectious daughter viruses (Fig. 2C). This system was first implemented for influenza viruses. In 1999, a recombinant influenza A virus (IAV) was rescued entirely from cDNA, driven by RNA polymerase I (pol I), in the absence of any helper virus (Fodor et al., 1999; Neumann et al., 1999). Based on this research, plasmid-only reverse genetic systems continue to be implemented in various virus rescues.In addition to utilizing pol I/II drivers, reverse genetic systems targeting reovirus commonly use the T7 RNA polymerase promoter. In 2007, an entirely plasmid-based reverse genetics system for mammalian reovirus was developed to generate infectious viruses from cloned cDNA (Kobayashi et al., 2007). With less than a decade, the process of rescuing reovirus has become simple to design. A rescue system consisting of a plasmid-encoded T7 RNA polymerase lessens its reliance on T7pol-expressing cells and theoretically provides the possibility to produce reovirus in any cell line (Komoto et al., 2014). Unfortunately, this attempt did not overcome the problem of low recovery efficiency albeit it greatly improved the flexibility of reovirus reverse genetic system. Previous reports have suggested that higher virus recovery may be obtained by improving transfection efficiency and optimizing the ratio of transfected plasmids (Kobayashi et al., 2010). Therefore, the African horse sickness virus (AHSV) reverse genetic system was simplified evaluated and expanded on this principle. AHSV-based reverse genetic system incorporates the T7 RNA polymerase into one of the plasmids and reduces plasmid quantity to improve the viral recovery (Conradie et al., 2016). In addition to this, an entirely plasmid-based reverse genetic system has been used to rescue rotavirus (RV) and to investigate the role of its nonstructural protein NSP1 in viral replication and in disrupting the host innate immune response (Kanai et al., 2017; Kawagishi et al., 2020).The major advantage of the entirely plasmid-based reverse genetic system is that it does not rely on helper viruses and therefore eliminates possible interference from heterologous viruses on viral replication and transcription. Since the viral genome is transcribed directly in the cell to ensure the quality of RNA transcription, RNA degradation can be avoided and obtained RNA transcripts that are relatively stable and infectious. The pol I/II promoter rescue system is simple to operate and has the advantages of corrective function, wide cellular adaptability, and no need for prolonged in vitro manipulation, but its transcriptional capacity is limited, transcripts are at risk of being sheared, and virus rescue efficiency is not high. In parallel, the rescue system using the T7 promoter is being optimized. Using the plasmid encoded T7 RNA polymerase, time-consuming screening tests for the selection of animal target cell lines which express stable T7 RNA polymerase can be avoided. In addition, the ability to recover mutated and recombined viruses suggest that the system could be used to generate further recombined viruses, and these viruses with any desired combination of gene fragments could be potential live attenuated vaccines.3Current status of reverse genetic research on norovirus3.1Reverse genetics of norovirus and Caliciviridae family3.1.1Human norovirusRescue human norovirus was first used a vaccinia virus encoding T7 RNA polymerase to express human norovirus GI.1 genome in mammalian cells and packaged its RNA into viral particles (Asanaka et al., 2005). Subsequently, an entirely plasmid-based reverse genetics system for human norovirus GII.3 strain was established driven by a mammalian elongation factor-1α (EF-1α) promoter, which was highly versatile and had broad applicability to other noroviruses. This system enabled to produce infectious progeny virions in multiple cell lines, with the highest viral yield in African green monkey kidney (COS7) cells up to 8.0 × 104 copies per 106 cells (Katayama et al., 2014). In addition, CMV-driven GII.4 Sydney cDNA was cloned and inserted into the replication subsystem of the green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter gene. The replicon containing GFP was then transfected into human lung cancer (Caco-2) cells and expressed viral structural proteins (Oliveira et al., 2018).3.1.2Murine norovirusVaccinia virus caused cytopathy and negatively affected murine norovirus replication, thereby switching to fowlpox virus for restoration of infectious murine norovirus. Murine norovirus transcript was then transfected into BHK-21 cells with typical yields approaching to 5 × 104 TCID50 per 35 mm dish and BSR-T7 cells with 1 × 104 TCID50/mL (Chaudhry et al., 2007; Arias et al., 2012b). Murine norovirus can also be recovered by driving cDNA expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line G2 (HepG2) cells and HEK293T cells using pol II as a promoter, but the viral titers obtained by this method were much lower than those acquired using fowlpox virus (Ward et al., 2007). Besides these strategies, norovirus reverse genetics can be achieved by in vitro transcription with T7 RNA polymerase. This approach relied on optimizing the in vitro RNA addition cap and murine macrophage cell line (RAW 264.7) electroporation conditions and provided the robust recovery of murine norovirus yield of up to 109 TCID50 per 6 × 106 cells (Yunus et al., 2010).3.1.3Caliciviridae familyIn addition to norovirus, reverse genetics systems of other viruses in the Caliciviridae family have been successfully established as well. The full-length cDNA clones synthesized with capped RNA were transcribed in vitro using T7 RNA polymerase as a promoter and transfected with Crandell-Rees feline kidney (CRFK) cells to obtain infectious feline calicivirus (FCV), and the cleavage role of proteases was clarified by site-directed mutagenesis of the capsid precursor cleavage site (Sosnovtsev et al., 1998). FCV was rescued by transfection of recombinant plasmids containing the viral genome and the EMCV IRES sequence placed upstream of it into BHK-21 and HEK293T cells expressing T7 RNA polymerase (Sandoval-Jaime et al., 2015). And the sapoviruses (both porcine sapovirus and human sapovirus) could be also recovered using the T7 RNA polymerase in vitro transcription system with a capping of the 5′ end (Lu et al., 2016; Li et al., 2022).3.2Viral genome structure and protein functionReverse genetics systems are powerful tools to propagate noroviruses in vitro and are widely applied to evaluate genome structures, protein functions, pathogenesis and antiviral therapies of different noroviruses (Table 2).Table 2Application of reverse genetics systems in norovirus-related studies.Table 2Application AreasVirusGenome ManipulationFindingsReferencesViral Genome Structure and Protein FunctionMurine NorovirusIntroduction of substitutions in the 5′ end (SL8, SL29), sgRNA (SLa5045) and 3′ end (SL7330) to generate mutantsDisruption of the 5′ end stem-loops reduced infectivity by 15 to 20-fold, but disruption of the RNA structure in the sg promoter region and at the 3′ end resulted in replication loss.(Simmonds et al., 2008)Murine Norovirus-1. CW1Using murine norovirus-1. CW1. P3 as the backbone, the valine to isoleucine mutation in NS4 (G2151A) and the lysine to glutamate mutation in VP1 (A5941G) were introduced individually or together to generate four recombinant virusesThe alteration of lysine-glutamate at amino acid position 296 in VP1 (nucleotide position 5941) resulted in progressive attenuation of viral virulence in the serial passage in RAW cells.(Bailey et al., 2008)Murine Norovirus-1. CW1Introduction of mutations in plasmids containing murine norovirus-1. CW1: I439V, T441S, A442S, K345RMurine norovirus. CW1 attachment was significantly reduced by using RAW cells depleted of terminal sialic acid, while recombinant viruses with mutations showed no significant change, indicating that all four amino acids contribute to binding to sialic acid.(Taube et al., 2012)Murine Norovirus CW3/CR6Generation of CW3 mutant: change of amino acid at position 94 from aspartic acid to glutamic acid (D94E)Generated CR6 mutant: amino acid at position 94 changed from glutamic acid to aspartic acid (E94D)The CW3D94E mutant still produced shedding after day 28 of infection and was not significantly different from CR6, indicating that this location is critical for persistent viral infection.(Nice et al., 2013)Murine Norovirus-1Introduction of three nucleotide mutations to Sla5045 (m53) and simultaneous construction of a recombinant virus with restored nucleotide substitutions (m53r) as well as the introduction of a luciferase reporter geneThe m53 mutation caused the virus to become less infectious, while the m53r mutation, which restores the stem-loop structure, restored the virus to infectivity.(Yunus et al., 2015)Murine Norovirus-3Insertion of a single stop codon by introducing mutation T5118A in ORF4Insertion of three stop codons by introducing mutations T5118A, C5198A and T5207A in ORF4Inhibition of VF1 expression by insertion of a stop codon and infection of mice revealed that VF1 deletion during the acute phase resulted in decreased viral replication and that mutations in a single stop codon produced partial recovery during infection, possibly indicating a role for VF1 in viral adaptation in vivo. Insertion of three stop codons similarly resulted in reduced viral replication in vivo, and viral fitness was maintained at consistently low levels.(Borg et al., 2021)Virus-Host Interactions and PathogenesisMurine Norovirus CW3/CR6Exchange of the NS1 genomes of CW3 and CR6 to construct chimeric virusesThe strain carrying NS1-CR6 was able to replicate and persist in IEC, whereas the strain carrying NS1-CW3 did not have this ability.(Lee et al., 2017; Peterson et al., 2019)Human NorovirusSuccessful replication of human norovirus VPg-linked RNA in human gastric tumor cells to generate human norovirus replicon cellsUsing human norovirus replicon cells, IFNLR1 overexpression was shown to result in reduced human norovirus replication, while type III interferon receptor inactivation enhanced human norovirus replication.(Arthur et al., 2019)GII.4 Human NorovirusConstruction of plasmid containing the full-length genomic cDNA of GII.4 human norovirusHuman norovirus NTPase inhibits the activation of the IFN-β promoter and the production and release of IFN-β in a dose-dependent manner.(Zheng et al., 2021)Murine Norovirus CW3/CR6Construction of CW3 chimeric virus expressing CR6 NS1By disrupting CD300lf expression on tuft cells, CR6 and CW3-NS1-CR6 chimeric viruses were found to have decreased infection in the intestine but did not affect CW3 infection.(Graziano et al., 2021)Antiviral DrugsMurine NorovirusIntroduction of mutations in NS6: A105V, I109V and A105V / I109VI109V mutation rendered the recombinant virus less susceptible to rupintrivir.(Kitano et al., 2018)Human NorovirusGenerate human norovirus replicon cellsA novel class of peptidomimetic aldehydes, 2CMC and 7DMA were shown to have antiviral activity using the human norovirus replicon.(Rocha-Pereira et al., 2013; Van Dycke et al., 2018, 2021)VaccinesMurine Norovirus CR6Construction of CR6 D121G/D131G single mutant and double mutantBoth single mutants reduced the production of NS1 and the double mutant had a stronger effect.(Lee et al., 2019)Using murine norovirus reverse genetics, the functional RNA structure in the norovirus genome and its role on norovirus replication was identified in Simmonds et al. (2008). Later, it was demonstrated that a glutamate-lysine substitution at position 296 in the VP1 P domain of murine norovirus restores virulence in vivo by using infectious cDNA cloning. This was the first time to identify molecular coding decision cluster for norovirus virulence. Using the infectious cDNA cloning of attenuated virus, differential virulence effects of residue 296 in STAT1−/− mouse strains and the presence of another determinant of lethality in the P domain were also discovered (Bailey et al., 2008; Strong et al., 2012). VP2 and NS7 mutations, on the other hand, are thought to be associated with the persistence of recombinant murine norovirus-3 in C57BL/6 mice (Arias et al., 2012a). The murine norovirus-1 capsid identified a functional glycan-binding epitope by mutagenesis. Although human norovirus and murine norovirus bind their cognate glycan receptors, the locations of their glycan-binding sites are highly similar, which provides insights into the design of improved human norovirus rescue systems (Taube et al., 2012).A wide range of murine norovirus strains exhibiting significant biological differences have been isolated and identified. Certain strains can often persist for weeks to months after the resolution of symptoms, leading to transmission of the virus in healthy population. A comparison of persistent CR6 and acute CW3 strains using a reverse genetic system to mutate amino acid (aa) at position 94 within the 5′ region of the NS1/2 reveals that alteration at this position is a genetic determinant of viral persistence and has a significant function in maintaining viral persistence (Nice et al., 2013). Additionally, a recent study has used a reverse genetic system to construct murine norovirus mutants and demonstrated that NS1/2 cleavage enhances apoptosis in Stat1−/− and Ifnlr1−/− mouse models, which is an important determinant of proliferation and persistent infection in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) (Robinson et al., 2019).Norovirus synthesizes a sub-genomic RNA shorter than the genome length, which is commonly used to regulate the expression of viral proteins. Previous analysis using bioinformatics has demonstrated the existence of a stable and conserved RNA stem-loop upstream of the Caliciviridae sub-genomic start (Simmonds et al., 2008). This stem-loop is vital for murine norovirus replication and verified through the reverse genetic systems, where disruption of the stem-loop secondary structure leads to a significant decrease in infectivity, and it was found that this stem-loop structure serves as a sub-genomic promoter core in cells and in vitro (Yunus et al., 2015). Relative to human norovirus, murine norovirus has an ORF4 that partially overlaps with ORF2 in the sub-genome, enhancing viral genome coding efficiency and assisting in encoding auxiliary proteins. The additional ORF4 of murine norovirus encodes virulence factor 1 (VF1), which is mainly localized in mitochondria. Previous studies have shown that VF1 is an innate immune antagonist and that this protein causes delayed expression of key innate immune proteins, the most significant effect of which is interferon-β (IFN-β) (McFadden et al., 2011). A recent study used a reverse genetic system to construct mutants to demonstrate that VF1 in immunologically active hosts also contributes to viral adaptation during ongoing murine norovirus infection (Borg et al., 2021). Sequence analysis suggests a similar ORF in some human sapovirus isolates, but its function remains unclear (Oka et al., 2015). To date, it is remain challenging to determine whether another protein similar to VF1 exists in human norovirus.3.3Virus-host interactions and pathogenesisHost innate immunity is critical to prevent viral replication, while viruses adapt and disrupt these defenses via a plethora of mechanisms, and the balance among them determines the rate of viral clearance. Understanding virus-host interactions and viral pathogenesis is the basis for vaccine and antiviral drug development. Reverse genetics can be used to dissect the host and viral causes of viral persistence, as well as viral pathogenesis (Table 2).There is evidence that the host IFN response to the virus is integral to murine norovirus persistence, especially for type I and III IFNs. IFN-α and IFN-β prevented systemic transmission of murine norovirus, while IFN-λ controlled persistent intestinal infections (Nice et al., 2015). Murine norovirus persists in mice whose dendritic cells lack the type I IFN receptor (Nice et al., 2016). A series of virus-host interaction mechanisms were identified through the reverse genetic system while using gene knockout mouse models. IEC serves as a reservoir for persistent murine norovirus infection in immunoreactive mouse hosts, and both cellular tropism of IEC as well as the presence and shedding of virus depend on NS1 and IFN-λ (Lee et al., 2017). It is the NS1-mediated IEC tropism that determines the IFN-λ susceptibility of murine norovirus. It has also been demonstrated that the expression of type III IFN receptor IFNLR1 on IEC is required for IFN-λ antiviral activity (Baldridge et al., 2017). On this basis, it was found that the lack of type III IFN cytokine genes Ifnl2 and Ifnl3 could indirectly lead to impaired IFNLR, thereby affecting mucosal surface antiviral resistance through IFNLR signaling (Peterson et al., 2019). Moreover, heme-oxidized IRP2 ubiquitin ligase 1 (HOIL1) is shown to be crucial for the induction of phosphorylation of type I and III IFNs and IFN regulatory factor 3 during murine norovirus infection (MacDuff et al., 2018).For human norovirus, type III IFN plays a vital role in inhibiting viral replication in vitro, and deletion of IFNLR1 increases the replication of human norovirus (Arthur et al., 2019). Human norovirus may evade host innate immune response in some cases (Qu et al., 2016). Nucleoside triphosphatase (NTPase) encoded by ORF1 and is essential in viral replication (Li et al., 2018). The 179 aa domain at the N-terminal end of human norovirus NTPase has previously been found to mediate vesicle formation, endoplasmic reticulum co-localization, and induction of apoptosis (Yen et al., 2018). A recent study using a reverse genetics system constructed for the GII.4 human norovirus clone demonstrated that the NTPase 1–179 aa domain inhibits IKKε phosphorylation through physical interactions, interrupting IFN-β production in the IRF3 signaling pathway, ultimately leading to IFN-β inhibition by human norovirus (Zheng et al., 2021).Apart from IFN, numerous studies have demonstrated that other inflammatory cytokines interact with norovirus to promote or inhibit viral infection. Signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) directly inhibits the replication of murine norovirus and human norovirus in the intestine (Mumphrey et al., 2007; Lin et al., 2020). The polypyrimidine tract binding protein (PTB), poly(C) binding protein (PCBP), La protein, and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein L (hnRNP L) interact with the ‘5’ end of the murine norovirus genome, while La protein, PTB, PCBP, and poly(A) binding protein (PABP) also bind to the ‘3’ non-coding region of murine norovirus genomic RNA, which affects viral replication and translation (Gutiérrez-Escolano et al., 2000, 2003; Bailey et al., 2010). Besides, the presence of intestinal commensal flora promotes the persistence of murine norovirus infection. Correspondingly, the use of antibiotics to clear the microbiota can hinder the persistence of murine norovirus in the intestine (Baldridge et al., 2015).The CD300 receptor family is involved in the pathogenesis of many diseases and collaborates in viral escape. CD300lf has been found to have the potential to determine murine norovirus cellular tropism as a murine norovirus receptor (Haga et al., 2016), which is an important factor in determining the pathogenesis of viruses. By observing that murine norovirus infects tuft cells but not other intestinal epithelial cells and infects Cd300lf−/− mouse models determined that researchers found that tuft cells specifically expressing CD300lf were the target cells of murine norovirus, while type 2 cytokines that induce tuft cell proliferation promoted viral infection (Wilen et al., 2018). Using murine norovirus infectious clones and a conditional knockout mouse model, researchers discovered that murine norovirus strains varies in tissue tropism. The acute CW3 strain specifically attaches to CD300lf-expressing bone marrow monocytes as the primary target cells, whereas the CR6 strain hijacks CD300lf-expressing tuft cells with the innate immunity on the host cell to mediate entry (Graziano et al., 2021). To be noted, CD300lf is not a receptor for human norovirus and the cellular tropism of human norovirus still needs to be elucidated (Graziano et al., 2020).3.4Antiviral drugsThe replication subsystem is an essential tool for the study of viral reverse genetics, which expresses proteins sufficient for self-replication but does not produce infectious viral particles, enabling efficient replication of viruses in vitro, and is a primary means of evaluating antiviral compounds and accelerating the research process of antiviral infection drugs. After constructing infectious clones of norovirus using reverse genetics, a stable replication subsystem was established by inserting the neomycin phosphotransferase gene into the VP1 coding region of the recombinant virus (Chang et al., 2006), which is widely used for the screening of norovirus antiviral drugs (Table 2).Norovirus has a 3C-like cysteine protease (3CLPro) with a Cys-His-Glu-catalytic triad that forms a typical pancreatic rennin-like fold responsible for processing the ORF1-encoded polyprotein into a mature, non-structural protein. As a viral protease critical to viral replication, 3CLpro is considered the focus of antiviral drugs. The 3C protease inhibitor rupintrivir, originally developed for human rhinovirus, was found to have the same antiviral effect in norovirus (Kim et al., 2012). Rupintrivir is a tripeptide-based compound that uses α- and β-unsaturated esters as warheads and interacts irreversibly with the 3CLPro active site Cys139 (Binford et al., 2005). A recombinant murine norovirus with isoleucine substituted valine at position 109 (I109V) was constructed using the murine norovirus reverse genetics system, and the mutant was found to have reduced susceptibility to rupintrivir, suggesting that mutations in the protease can cause the virus to develop resistance to the drug (Kitano et al., 2018). Recently, a new class of structurally related rupintrivir peptidomimetic aldehydes has been developed. This drug not only has potent antiviral activity against various genotypes of norovirus in vitro, but also inhibits GII.4 replication in animal models, especially one of the tetrapeptide inhibitors is the most efficient (Van Dycke et al., 2021).Except for 3CLPro, nucleoside polymerase is also considered an important site for antiviral therapy. The nucleoside polymerase inhibitor 2′-C-methylcytidine (2CMC) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) has been shown to inhibit murine norovirus replication in vitro (Rocha-Pereira et al., 2012). The team further demonstrated that 2CMC acts to inhibit replication of the GI.1 replicon in a mouse model and can clear replicon cells, thereby preventing norovirus from causing diarrhea and death (Rocha-Pereira et al., 2013). The analog of 2CMC, 7-deaza-2′-C-methyladenosine (7DMA), acts directly on RdRp to effectively prevent and treat viral diarrhea and inhibits many viruses, including norovirus (Van Dycke et al., 2018).Human norovirus has high mutation rate, and RdRp changes largely affect viral diversity, leading to the selection of drug-resistant strains in clinical treatment. Based on this, the design of antiviral drugs needs to consider both their effective antiviral activity and their characteristics with high resistance barriers. Antiviral drugs targeting both the norovirus protease and nucleoside polymerase meet both requirements and facilitate continued development. Effective and safe antiviral drugs not only help to reduce the severity of disease, but more importantly, they constrain the transmission of these infectious viruses and prevent severe norovirus outbreaks.3.5VaccinesThere are currently no approved vaccines to protect against human norovirus infections. The absence of robust culture system has curtailed the testing of these interventions in humans. Vaccine candidates have primarily utilized virus-like particles (VLPs), P particles, and recombinant adenovirus. Recently, some vaccine candidates have entered clinical trials with some limited results. A clinical trial using bivalent GI.1 and GII.4 VLP showed a slight but not statistically significant decrease in the severity of gastroenteritis and duration of human norovirus shedding after immunization with the vaccine (Bernstein et al., 2015). The other was the GI.1 VP1 oral vaccine using recombinant adenovirus, with 78% of participants in the high-dose group showing a ≥ 2-fold increase in titer after a single immunization (Kim et al., 2018).Reverse genetics manipulates the viral genome with fragment deletions, substitutions, and targeted mutations to determine the effects of these genetic manipulations by rescuing phenotypic changes in the virus. This leads to a more accurate determination of virulence factors and the regulation of norovirus infection by the host immune system, and forces research on attenuated viruses or vaccines and immunotherapy. The first murine norovirus NS1 vaccine was proposed for the vital role played by NS1 in murine norovirus intestinal infection and resistance to IFN-λ (Table 2) (Lee et al., 2019). NS1 vaccination provided stronger protection compared to VLP vaccination, but the low conserved nature of the NS1 genome may affect the feasibility of NS1 as a vaccine antigen. Whether the vaccine will provide durable protection against human norovirus is still unknown, and perhaps the genetically engineered loci identified in previous studies of murine norovirus may provide some insight into human norovirus vaccine research (Thorne et al., 2012).4Current limitations and future perspectivesAfter decades of efforts, reverse genetic systems have developed several methods to achieve the rescue of various types of RNA viruses. This technique performs a wide range of modifications to the RNA virus genome at DNA level. In recent years, researchers have successfully rescued infectious norovirus and achieved its proliferation in vitro, which has profoundly increased the research progress on norovirus replication cycle and the mechanisms of its pathogenicity. While most of these studies focus on murine norovirus, a few applications using reverse genetics on human norovirus, and almost all established reverse genetics systems for human norovirus recovery are less efficient compared to recovered viruses from feces or murine norovirus reverse genetics systems (Katayama et al., 2014). The application of reverse genetic system has deepened our research on norovirus genome structure, protein function, virus-host interaction, and pathogenesis, but there are still many unresolved questions, such as the detailed process of viral infection of cells and the role of adaptive immunity in resistance to norovirus infection. Since reverse genetics systems cannot perform infinite replication, how to improve rescue efficiency in a limited replication cycle will be one of the priorities of future research. The possible course of murine norovirus adaptive immunity has been reported previously, and there are differences in the induction of protective immunity by different murine norovirus strains, antibodies and CD4+ T cells are essential for the control of secondary murine norovirus infection (Zhu et al., 2013). Therefore, continued research on the role of human norovirus adaptive immunity in viral-host interactions is significant for the development of vaccines. In addition, the roles of other nonstructural proteins in the viral replication cycle, pathogenesis, and host immune response have not been elucidated in-depth compared to the in-depth studies of NS1/2. There are currently no FDA-approved antiviral drugs available against norovirus. Reverse genetic systems pave the way for the further development of screening drugs. The efficacy and safety of the available vaccine candidates are unclear, and the ability to prevent the mutant strains that cause outbreaks remains unknown, all of which need to be addressed in the future.5Concluding remarksNorovirus remains a leading cause of viral gastroenteritis and inflicts a significant health burden globally. It causes serious health problems due to its highly contagious nature and the high degree of genetic and antigenic diversity. While several promising developments of in vitro culture systems are available after dedicated research for decades, a traceable system that is both facile and robust is still needed. The reverse genetics system provides a powerful platform, allowing a rapid response to understand the host restriction to cultivation. In this review, we describe recent advances in norovirus cultivation, and provide an update on the status of reverse genetic systems in norovirus applications. Murine norovirus, as the primary model of norovirus research, has made certain progress to understand the viral structure, virus-host interaction, virus pathogenesis and other virus evolutionary process, while human norovirus has made limited breakthroughs and many concerns remain to be addressed in future studies. Future research will be critical to overcome the current obstacles and limitations of human norovirus genetic engineering. The development of improved reverse genetic systems will continue to be of great interest for routine monitoring and a deep understanding of norovirus.Author contributionsLF, YZ and QZ conceived and designed the review. QZ, SZ, XZ and LF wrote the manuscript. LS and JN assisted with reference collection. All authors have read and agreed to the final manuscript.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.


Title: Norovirus disease among older adults

IntroductionA ‘winter vomiting disease’ characterized by primary symptoms of nausea and vomiting
with a winter predilection was first described in 1929.1,2 This disease was later named
‘Norwalk virus’ after more than 50% of students and teachers of an elementary school
in Norwalk, Ohio, United States were afflicted with nausea, vomiting, and abdominal
cramps lasting 12–48 h in October 1968.3,4 A 27-nm virus-like particle
known as ‘Norwalk virus’ or ‘small round-structured virus (SRSV)’ was later
visualized in stool specimens using immune electron microscopy.5,6 Later, the genus of the virus
was formally named Norovirus after the place of the original outbreak.7
Norwalk virus is the only species within the genus as per the
International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses classification.8The Norovirus genus is a group of non-enveloped, single-stranded
positive-sense ribonucleic acid (RNA) viruses belonging to the
Caliciviridae family. The human norovirus genome contains three
open reading frames (ORFs) that encode eight viral proteins (VPs). The variable
amino acid sequence of the major capsid protein (VP1) within ORF-2 determines the
genogroup. There are 10 known genogroups (GI–GX),2,9,10 of which only genogroups GI,
GII, and GIV cause human disease.11 Initially emerging in 2012,
the GII.4 strain has become the most prevalent genotype and is implicated in
approximately 80% of norovirus outbreaks.10,12Herein, we review norovirus epidemiology, describe its pathogenesis and immunity, and
discuss norovirus transmission and its consequences for outbreaks and infection
prevention and control efforts. We review clinical symptoms of norovirus infection,
therapies and associated uncertainties, and vaccine development.EpidemiologyNorovirus is the most commonly recognized foodborne gastroenteritis pathogen globally
and is responsible for approximately 20% of all foodborne illnesses reported by the
World Health Organization. Norovirus accounted for nearly 125 million cases of a
total of 600 million cases of foodborne illnesses and 34,929 deaths globally in
2010.13 In the United States alone, norovirus is estimated to be
responsible for 19–21 million total illnesses resulting in 1.7–1.9 million
outpatient visits, 400,000 emergency room visits, 56,000–71,000 hospitalizations,
and 570–800 deaths per year.14 These numbers likely
underestimate the true incidence of norovirus gastroenteritis as not all individuals
afflicted may seek or require medical care.2There are several patterns of norovirus infections that are of importance. Although
norovirus infections are detected year-round, norovirus infection rates are highest
during the winter months peaking in February and March in the northern
hemisphere.15 Norovirus afflicts across age groups, but young children
and elderly adults are more vulnerable to severe disease and associated morbidity
and mortality. For instance, there is a notable bimodal age-related tendency of
hospitalization from norovirus infection; young children and elderly populations are
more susceptible to hospitalization compared to the other age groups (Table 1).16 Furthermore,
norovirus has been reported as the etiological agent of gastroenteritis outbreaks in
crowded, semi-closed environments, and healthcare-associated settings, such as
long-term care facilities, hospitals, cruise ships, correctional facilities,
restaurants, schools, child care centers, and parties.17 Hospitals and long-term care
facilities bear the most outbreak burden with > 50% of Norovirus outbreaks
occurring in these settings.18 Its propensity to cause
outbreaks is due to its environmental stability, low inoculum required for
infection, and the potential high volume and long period of viral
shedding.19 Hospitalizations and mortality rates due to norovirus
gastroenteritis are higher during outbreaks than during non-outbreaks. In a
comparison of hospitalization between norovirus outbreak versus
non-outbreak periods of 308 nursing homes from 2009 to 2010, there were 124
hospitalizations per nursing home-year (95% CI, 119.4–129.1) that occurred during
the norovirus outbreak periods and 109.5 hospitalizations per nursing home-year (95%
CI, 108.6–110.3) during the non-outbreak periods, resulting in an adjusted rate
ratio (RR) of 1.09 (95% CI, 1.05–1.14).20 All-cause mortality rates
during norovirus outbreaks were estimated to be 53.7 deaths per nursing home-year
(95% CI, 50.6–57.0) in contrast to 41.9 deaths per nursing home-year (95% CI,
41.4–42.4) during non-outbreak periods, with an adjusted RR of 1.11 (95% CI,
1.05–1.18).20Table 1.Seasonal mean number of hospitalizations from norovirus infection by age
groups across July 1996/June 1997 to July 2006/June 2007.16Age (years)No. of hospitalizations per 10,000 persons
(cases)0–49.45–171.118–641.065–744.775–849.2>8418.5PathogenesisGenogroup GII is responsible for most norovirus outbreaks and infections among older
adults.21 Of outbreaks occurring in long-term care facilities in the
United States from 2009 to 2018 with reported genogroups, genogroups GII and GI were
responsible for 6370 (87.3%) and 862 (11.8%) outbreaks, respectively.22 The GII.4
strain was the causative agent in 81.8% of the genogroup GII-associated outbreaks.
This strain is characterized by antigenic variation every 2–5 years predisposing the
virus to immune evasion,2,23 which confers important implications for vaccine
development.Norovirus genotypes are antigenically distinct from each other, and host immunity is
therefore genotype-specific and not cross-protective against subsequent infection by
multiple genotypes.24 The immune response against norovirus involves both
cellular and humoral responses. Histo-blood group antigen (HBGA)-blocking assays are
used as a surrogate marker of neutralization antibodies and HBGA-blocking antibodies
are suggested to be associated with disease protection and lower viral
shedding.25 Pre-existing norovirus-specific salivary immunoglobulin A (IgA)
levels are inversely correlated to severity of vomiting and diarrhea, whereas
pre-existing and post-infectious norovirus-specific fecal IgA levels are inversely
correlated to peak viral load and duration of viral shedding.26
Norovirus-specific IgG memory B cells are also associated with protection from
norovirus gastroenteritis and correlated with pre-existing serum HBGA-blocking
antibodies.26Host genetic factors and immune responses are important determinants of norovirus
susceptibility, infection severity, and degree of viral shedding. Individuals who
carry a gene-encoding alpha-1,2-fucosyltransferase (FUT2) express HBGAs on the
surface of intestinal epithelial cells and these HBGA antigens bind to VP1
facilitating norovirus attachment and entry, thus conferring susceptibility to
infection.27 Individuals who do not encode FUT2 are known as
‘non-secretors’ and are resistant to GI.1 genogroup, the original Norwalk
virus identified in 1969. However, some of the other strains, including
GII.4, infect ‘non-secretors’ and demonstrate immune evasion by means of high
antigenic variation, antibody-binding epitope blockade, and potentially binding to
non-HBGA ligands.12,28–30Knowledge of host immune responses to norovirus infections is primarily derived from
challenge studies due to the historic lack of an in vitro cell
culture model.27 Early challenge studies suggested norovirus immunity lasted
only 6 months to 2 years; however, mathematical modeling using observational
evidence of community transmission estimated the duration of norovirus immunity to
be 4.1–8.7 years.31Efforts to elucidate pathophysiology and explore vaccine and antiviral targets have
been made by studying various in vitro models. For instance, Chang
et al.32 described a norovirus replicon model in which they observed
stable expression of self-replicating norovirus RNA in human and hamster cells,
generated by transfection. The authors also reported dose-dependent reduction of RNA
expression in the model during the presence of interferon alpha, indicating the role
of innate immunity in norovirus replication. Although the replicon model is
potentially a very powerful tool in studying norovirus pathophysiology, the
replication level is reportedly low.32,33 Jones et
al.34 suggested in 2014 that human and murine norovirus were able
to infect B cells in the presence of HBGA-expressing enteric bacteria. Their
subsequent study in 2015 illustrated human norovirus replication in human B cells
in vitro.35 In contrast, Brown et
al.36 found that among pediatric patients with severe combined immune
deficiency, 60% of B cell-positive and 63% of B cell-negative patients developed
norovirus infection, suggesting that the viral replication in B cells is not
essential for human norovirus infection. More recently, Ettayebi et
al.37 used the stem-cell derived human intestinal enteroids (HIEs) as
a realistic in vitro experimental model to show replication of
several strains of human norovirus, facilitating a deeper understanding of norovirus
pathophysiology.TransmissionNorovirus is primarily transmitted fecal-orally, through person-to-person contact or
food or waterborne contamination.38 An analysis of norovirus
outbreaks in the European Network from July 2001 to June 2006 demonstrated that
person-to-person transmission is the major mode of transmission, accounting for 55%
of non-GII strain cases and 90% of GII strain cases.39 Similarly, a 10-year
surveillance study of long-term care facilities in the United States from 2009
through 2018 by Calderwood et al.22 revealed that 90.4% of the
norovirus cases occurred from person-to-person transmission, 0.7% from foodborne and
environmental transmission, and the remainder from unknown sources.Norovirus, which has a more than 30% secondary attack rate in long-term care
facilities among contacts of infected individuals,40 is one of the most frequent
causes of healthcare-associated infectious disease outbreaks because of several
characteristics: low infectious dose, effective transmission via multiple modes,
environmental stability, long duration of viral shedding, and short duration of
prior immunity. The inoculum required to cause infection is as few as 18–1000
virions.41 Although the main transmission mode is fecal-oral through
contact of infected persons or contaminated food or water and secondary attacks are
sustained via person-to-person and environmental transmission,42 norovirus
transmission also occurs through aerosolization of particles from vomitus, diarrhea,
and toilet flushing.43 Norovirus RNA has been detected in hospital dust and air
samples collected during an outbreak, primarily from recent vomiting, suggesting
this is a possible route of infection.43 Norovirus can withstand a
range of temperatures and survives on surfaces for extended periods of time. One
study estimated that norovirus particles remain infectious for up to 28 days on
stainless steel and polyvinyl chloride surfaces at 20°C.44Viral shedding is another significant contributor to transmissibility, occurring in
both asymptomatic and symptomatic individuals. Viral shedding occurs prior to
symptom onset in nearly 30% of those infected and persists for several days to weeks
depending on host age and immune status.18 In a challenge study,
norovirus was detected in stool of healthy hosts 4–8 weeks after
inoculation.45 In immunocompromised hosts, symptoms and viral shedding may
occur for 6–1004 days.21 The role of persistent viral shedding in secondary
transmission and the time necessary for an infected person to be deemed no longer
infectious are largely unknown.46 Further study is needed to
understand the relationship between norovirus infectivity and viral shedding.
In vitro experimental models using HIEs have shown
promise.47,48 For instance, Ettayebi et al.37 adopted the
HIE model on a study with GII.3 and GII.4 strains after 6 days post-infection.A notable proportion of those infected with norovirus remain asymptomatic and these
individuals play a significant role in transmission and outbreaks. Data for the
rates of asymptomatic infection come primarily from volunteer infection challenges
performed for norovirus vaccine studies and through outbreak analyses. Statistical
modeling performed by Miura et al.49 using foodborne norovirus
outbreak data from 2005 to 2006 of 55 outbreaks in Japan estimated an asymptomatic
ratio of 32.1%, similar to the 30% asymptomatic infection rate found in infection
challenge studies. Norovirus was detected in the stool of 32% of asymptomatic
individuals between 2 and 6 days after inoculation in a 1994 challenge
study50 and in all five asymptomatic participants in a 2008 challenge
study.45 Furthermore, the mean viral load detected in stool is similar
between symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals infected with Norovirus.51 This suggests
that norovirus-infected individuals who are asymptomatic or have subclinical disease
may potentiate transmission if infection prevention and control efforts are not
directed toward this population.Infection prevention and controlThe goals of infection prevention and control for norovirus gastroenteritis are to
prevent and minimize the scale of outbreaks. This is achieved by a multipronged
approach of patient isolation or cohorting, hand hygiene, personal protective
equipment for standard and contact precautions, environmental cleaning and
disinfection, diagnostics, patient transfers, consideration of unit closures as need
be, staff cohorting, and finally, visitor restrictions.52 Infection prevention and
control measures particularly pertinent for norovirus infections are mitigating
potential aerosolization of particles, optimizing duration of isolation, and
preferential hand hygiene with soap and water over alcohol-based sanitizers, owing
to the poor virucidal activity of alcohol to non-enveloped viruses.Because norovirus particles may be aerosolized, the Society of Healthcare
Epidemiology of America (SHEA) recommends the use of a surgical or procedure mask
and eye or face protection if there may be anticipated splashes to the face, such as
through vomitus. During outbreaks, contact precautions are continued for patients
for a minimum of 48 h after resolution of symptoms.52 One area of uncertainty is
the optimal duration of isolation or precautions for patients at risk for prolonged
or relapsing disease course and prolonged viral shedding. SHEA suggests a longer
period of isolation may be considered, but no specific duration has been
defined.52 Isolation for the duration of hospitalization has been proposed
for immunocompromised patients,18 but the applicability of this
to individuals residing in long-term care facilities is unclear.Although it is difficult to determine which infection prevention and control
interventions are most effective at preventing and curtailing a norovirus outbreak,
hand hygiene is the cornerstone. During norovirus outbreaks, active promotion of
hand hygiene particularly with soap and water, rather than alcohol-based hand
sanitizers are recommended. Norovirus is difficult to eradicate using alcohol-based
sanitizers because it does not have a lipid envelope. Thus, alcohol-based hand
sanitizers are not a suitable primary hand hygiene method in long-term care settings
during norovirus outbreaks.53,54 A multivariable analysis conducted by Blaney et
al.55 of norovirus outbreaks in long-term care facilities identified
that facilities in which staff were equally or more likely to use alcohol-based hand
sanitizer than soap and water was associated with a 6.06 odds ratio of a norovirus
outbreak. Liu et al.54 measured norovirus cDNA
before and after hand washing with commercial alcohol-based hand sanitizer (62%
ethyl alcohol), antimicrobial soap (0.5% triclosan), and water rinse only. Their
experiment revealed higher norovirus genomic copy reduction with antimicrobial soap
(0.67–1.20 log10) and water rinse only (0.58–1.58 log10), whereas
alcohol-based hand sanitizer resulted in reduction of 0.14–0.34 log10.54 A more recent
experimental model by Costantini et al.56 using HIEs was in agreement
with the above findings. In total, 10% fecal filtrates were treated with 70% alcohol
(ethanol or isopropyl alcohol), and the RNA count was suppressed initially, however,
recurred by the third day post infection.56Disinfection of surfaces is another key element in preventing norovirus transmission.
Liu et al.54 compared in vitro reduction of
Norwalk virus concentration using sodium hypochlorite and ethyl
alcohol in varying concentrations. The in vitro reduction was
greater for sodium hypochlorite, whereas ethyl alcohol failed to display a
concentration-dependent norovirus genome reduction.54 An in vitro
experimental model by Costantini et al.56 using HIE showed complete
suppression of norovirus GII strains in fecal specimens with as low as 50 parts per
million (ppm) of chlorine solution.56 Comparison of a
commercial-grade alcohol-based surface disinfectant (‘PSS’) containing 29.4% ethanol
(pH 12.6–12.9) with sodium hypochlorite solutions of various concentrations
(1000–5000 ppm) was performed by Escudero-Abarca et al.57
In vitro assays (suspension and soil on stainless steel surface)
consistently showed higher genome-equivalent copy number reduction for sodium
hypochlorite as opposed to PSS, although PSS showed similar efficacy comparable to
1000–5000 ppm chlorine, when 60-s contact time was applied with high soil load. The
authors suggested loss of attachment efficiency by viral particles and capsid
disintegration due to the alkaline nature of the PSS as the mechanism of antiviral
property.57 Sato et al.58 argued that the virucidal
process involves protein denaturation rather than de-lipidation. Incubation of
norovirus in alkaline solution-only, acidic solution-only, or alcohol-only did not
demonstrate significant virucidal activity compared to control. However,
acid–alcohol (1% citric acid + 70% ethanol) and alkaline–alcohol (carbonate
buffer + 70% ethanol) showed statistically significant reduction in the number of
genome copies on polymerase chain reaction (PCR).58 The Center for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) currently recommends using 1000–5000 ppm sodium
hypochlorite solution to disinfect surfaces.59 Future studies should address
the efficacy of acid–alcohol or alkaline–alcohol combinations for clinical use in
surface disinfection.Clinical manifestationsInvestigations have provided insights on the norovirus incubation period, although
exact calculations are challenging because primary and secondary cases can be
difficult to distinguish when the incubation period is brief. In the 1968 index
outbreaks occurring in Norwalk, Ohio and Columbus, Ohio (US), evaluation of
secondary cases found an average incubation period of 48 h. A 2013 meta-analysis of
2540 observations from 23 studies estimated the median incubation period for
norovirus genogroups I and II to be 1.2 days with 5% and 95% of cases exhibiting
symptoms 0.5 and 2.6 days after infection, respectively.60 This estimate, however,
included estimates from uncited sources or source estimates, of which 54% originally
drew from one or two of the same articles.60The CDC analyzed norovirus foodborne outbreaks from 1998 to 2013 reported to the
national Foodborne Disease Outbreak Surveillance System (FDOSS).61 Of the 2172
norovirus foodborne outbreaks evaluated, the median incubation time period was 32 h
with median outbreak incubation period ranges being 27–37 h (70% of outbreaks,
15th–85th percentile) and 12–47 h (95% of outbreaks, 2.5th–97.5th percentile). This
incubation time of 12–47 h can assist in differentiating norovirus from other
bacterial causes of gastroenteritis, except for Salmonella enterica
(median incubation time of 32 h, p = 0.19). The incubation periods
of Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus,
Clostridium perfringens, and Vibrio
parahaemolyticus are significantly shorter
(p < 0.0001) and the incubation periods of Shigella
species and Campylobacter species are significantly
longer (p < 0.001) compared to that of norovirus.61Mild gastrointestinal symptoms of nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain
occur following a brief incubation period.2 These symptoms may be
accompanied by fever, chills, headache, generalized malaise, and myalgias.21 Most
patients, especially healthy young adults, experience resolution of symptoms within
2–4 days.21 Complications rarely occur, although norovirus infection does
confer increased odds of post-infectious irritable bowel syndrome, dyspepsia,
constipation, and gastroesophageal reflux disease.62 Older adults residing at
long-term care facilities are at an increased risk of exposure, and if infected,
vulnerable to longer and more severe symptoms causing complications and
hospitalizations. The deterioration of host immunity, known as ‘immunosenescence’
and the presence of other medical comorbidities are thought to predispose older
individuals to a more severe and protracted disease course.21 A study of
norovirus outbreaks from 2002 to 2004 evaluated clinical characteristics and symptom
duration among hospitalized patients and nursing home residents with median ages of
81 and 87.5 years, respectively. Individuals ⩾ 85 years of age had the slowest
recovery, with 40% still symptomatic after 4 days.63 Costantini et
al.64 found similar results in a prospective study of norovirus
outbreaks in long-term care facilities with those aged ⩾ 70 years experiencing a
significantly longer illness duration (median 4 days) than those < 70 years of
age, and a higher proportion of patients ⩾ 70 years of age reporting a perceived
severe illness.In those ⩾ 65 years of age, the hospitalization and mortality rates from norovirus
infection are striking. Hospitalizations rates are estimated to be 0.5%–6%, and of
those hospitalized, 36% were admitted to intensive care units.10,65 Case fatality
rates are 0.3%–1.6% compared to 0.03 for those 18–64 years of age with 90% of deaths
from norovirus-associated illness occurring in persons ⩾ 65 years of age.65DiagnosisRapid diagnosis of norovirus infection is crucial to facilitate swift implementation
of infection control measures aimed at reducing transmission. Real-time reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), such as TaqMan-based RT-qPCR, is
the most sensitive method and can distinguish GI, GII, and GIV genotypes. It can be
performed on stool, vomitus, and food or environmental specimens and detects as few
as 10–100 virus copies, but requires specific equipment.66 The BioFire FilmArray
gastrointestinal (GI) panel, a multiplex nucleic acid test that detects bacterial,
viral, and parasitic agents of gastroenteritis, is more widely available and offers
rapid results. It only detects norovirus GI/GII genogroups and does not distinguish
between them. The FilmArray GI panel has a positive percent agreement of 94.5% and
negative percent agreement (NPA) of 98.8% compared to PCR with bidirectional
sequencing and has a limit of detection of 1 × 104 norovirus
copies/ml.67Electron microscopy assays, enzyme immunoassays (EIA), and immunochromatogenic
lateral flow assays are other diagnostic methods less commonly used because of their
notable limitations. Although electron microscopy assays can detect other viral
pathogens including norovirus based on morphological characteristics, it is
expensive, labor-intensive, has low sensitivity and specificity.66 This
technique may also not be readily available for use in clinical practice settings.
EIA and immunochromatogenic lateral flow assays which detect norovirus antigens in
stool have poor sensitivity, 50%–75% and 35%–76%, respectively, and therefore
negative results require confirmation with a second diagnostic method.2,66In the absence of or delays in diagnostic testing, diagnostic criteria are available
to assist in outbreak management. Kaplan et al.68 analyzed
symptomatology from norovirus outbreak investigation descriptions in the 1970s and
devised criteria to distinguish norovirus from other bacterial etiologies of
gastroenteritis when laboratory confirmation of norovirus cannot be obtained. The
Kaplan criteria include a short incubation period (24–60 h), a short infection
duration (12–60 h), high frequency of vomiting (⋩50%), and no enteric bacteria
found.68 If all four criteria are met, the likelihood of norovirus being
the etiologic agent is high. Subsequent analysis of the Kaplan criteria performed by
Lively et al.69 demonstrated a specificity of
99% but sensitivity of 68%. Furthermore, only 3.3% of norovirus outbreaks reported
all criteria. Re-evaluation of norovirus outbreak characteristics using
classification and regression tree modeling resulted in revised proposed criteria
that offer greater sensitivity (87.5%) and excellent specificity (92.4%). The set of
revised criteria includes a greater proportion of cases with vomiting than with
fever, bloody diarrhea in less than 10% of cases, and vomiting in greater than 25%
of cases.69
However, the criteria devised by Kaplan and Lively used analysis of outbreak
investigations and may not be fully reflective of norovirus symptomatology in
those ⩾ 65 years of age.TreatmentThe mainstay of treatment is supportive care and targeted treatments for associated
complications, such as electrolyte imbalances, dehydration, and acute kidney injury.
There are no US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved treatments for norovirus
infection including no antiviral agents, although nitazoxanide and immunoglobulins
have been used off-label in primarily immunocompromised hosts with varying efficacy
(Table 2).Table 2.Summary of norovirus-specific treatments in adults.AgentMechanism(s)EvidenceNitazoxanide- Interference of protein synthesis- Activation of host
cellular antiviral response pathwaysReduction in median time to resolution of illness (one
randomized controlled trial of immunocompetent
individuals > 12 years of age).No dedicated studies
for immunocompetent adults > 65 years of age.Case
reports/series suggesting mixed efficacy in immunocompromised
adults.Antiviral agents- Protease inhibitors- Polymerase
inhibitors- Non-nucleoside inhibitors- Host cell
viral replication proteins inhibitorsNo evidence available. Therapies currently in development.Immunoglobulins- Binds viral particles in intestine- Modulation of pro-
and anti-inflammatory cytokinesNo dedicated studies for immunocompetent adults.Case
reports/series suggesting mixed efficacy in immunocompromised
adults.NitazoxanideNitazoxanide and its active metabolite tizoxanide are thiazolide compounds with
broad anti-infective activity against bacteria, protozoa, parasites, and
viruses. Formally, it is approved by the US FDA only for the treatment of
gastroenteritis caused by Cryptosporidium parvum and
Giardia lamblia but has been shown to have in
vitro and in vivo activity against norovirus,
rotavirus, and adenovirus.70 The specific mechanism of
action against norovirus is thought to involve interference of protein synthesis
and the activation of host cellular antiviral response pathways.71 The
efficacy of nitazoxanide for the treatment of norovirus gastroenteritis in
adults has been evaluated in only one randomized controlled double-blinded
trial. In this trial, 50 persons who were at least 12 years of age with clinical
gastroenteritis and positive stool EIA testing for either norovirus, adenovirus,
or rotavirus were enrolled to receive either nitazoxanide twice daily or placebo
for 3 days.72 Of the 13 participants with norovirus detected in stool,
the median time to resolution of illness for the nitazoxanide group
(n = 6) was 1.5 days, a statistically significant reduction
compared to the median time to resolution of illness for the placebo group
(n = 7), which was 2.5 days.72For immunocompromised hosts including those with solid organ or hematopoietic
stem cell transplants (HSCT), hematological malignancies, and primary
immunodeficiencies, the use of nitazoxanide to treat norovirus infection has
been described in case reports and case series with varying success.73 Siddiq
et al.74 described a patient with
relapsed refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and allogeneic HSCT with
chronic graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), and Ghusson et
al.75 described three renal transplant recipients who were
treated with nitazoxanide for norovirus infection with resolution of diarrhea
within 4 days and 1 week, respectively. Other studies have suggested
nitazoxanide treatment in immunocompromised patients with norovirus infection
that did not result in improvement in diarrhea.76,77 These mixed reports of
clinical success likely reflect heterogeneity among the hosts, in addition to
variable concomitant immunosuppression changes and immunoglobulin use.78 In a
study of 195 solid organ transplant (SOT) recipients with norovirus infection
that accounted for changes in immunosuppression and intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) use, SOT recipients treated with nitazoxanide for 3 days reported a
significant symptom improvement (59.6%) compared to SOT recipients who were not
treated with nitazoxanide (42.3%), but there was no statistically significant
difference in median time to symptom improvement (6 versus
23 days, p = 0.170).79 An important factor to
consider in this population is incidence of chronic or relapsing norovirus
infection, the pathophysiology of which is poorly understood but nitazoxanide
treatment may not be effective. There is an ongoing double-blind,
placebo-controlled trial studying the efficacy and safety of nitazoxanide in SOT
and HSCT recipients for treatment of norovirus diarrhea.The efficacy of nitazoxanide for norovirus gastroenteritis has not been
specifically studied in older individuals (i.e. ⩾ 65 years of age), and thus,
its clinical benefit for symptom resolution or impact on transmission is
unknown. Although duration of symptoms from norovirus infection may be longer
for older adults compared to their younger counterparts, there is no evidence to
suggest that chronic or relapsing norovirus infection occurs. The role of
nitazoxanide is uncertain but warrants further study given the disproportionate
burden of norovirus infection among older adults.Other antiviral agentsThere are no licensed antiviral agents for norovirus treatment or prophylaxis,
but several potential agents are currently under study. Discovery of antiviral
therapies has been limited by the absence of in vitro cell
culture models for human norovirus.80 Murine norovirus
in vitro cell cultures have been useful surrogates, and a
norovirus replicon system, a cell line containing the human norovirus genome,
has been a tool that facilitated evaluation of antiviral targets.80,81 Current
norovirus life cycle targets under investigation are protease inhibitors,
polymerase inhibitors, and non-nucleoside inhibitors.81 Targeting host cell
proteins required for viral replication is an attractive option as norovirus, an
RNA virus, is prone to replication errors resulting in potential antiviral drug
resistance.ImmunoglobulinsEnterically administered anti-norovirus immunoglobulins are proposed to bind to
viral particles in the intestine inhibiting viral adhesion and replication and
may also modulate pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines.82,83 Its use
for norovirus treatment has only been described in small, retrospective studies
of SOT recipients and reported efficacy has been variable.83–85 In addition to uncertain
clinical benefit and preclusive cost, this therapy is limited by the lack of
standard dosing regimen for commercially prepared anti-norovirus
immunoglobulins.VaccinesThere are no FDA-approved norovirus vaccines, but there are several intranasal, oral,
and intramuscular vaccines in pre-clinical development and one vaccine in clinical
development (Table
3).86 The development of norovirus vaccines has been complicated
by the lack of in vitro cell culture models, hence precluding
detailed evaluation of viral pathogenesis and mechanisms of immunity. The HIE
in vitro model shown by Ettayebi et
al.37 may serve as an invaluable tool to evaluate the targets of
human norovirus. Most vaccines target the major capsid protein (VP1), which differs
among genogroups87 or the P-particle subunit using viral recombinant technology. A
recent study by Ford-Siltz et al.88 used an in
vitro neutralization assay using HIEs to demonstrate that norovirus
GII.4 neutralization was primarily mediated by binding the protruding (P) domain of
the major capsid protein. Another recent work by Green et
al.89 demonstrated that negative-sense of norovirus RNA was
predominantly found in intestinal epithelial cells in a study with four
immunocompromised patients. Specifically, enteroendocrine epithelial cells were
permissive targets in norovirus patients.89Table 3.Norovirus vaccines currently under investigation.SponsorPhasePopulationTargetFormulationEstimated completionVaxartPhase IIbHealthy adultsUnknownOralSeptember 2022VaxartPhase IHealthy adultsUnknownOralFebruary 2022Due to the significant genetic variation among genogroups, a vaccine against
norovirus may not be broadly protective and therefore, a multivalent vaccine against
the major genogroups implicated in human disease may be more useful.87 Frequent
genetic shifts occur within genogroups with GII.4 variants emerging every
2–4 years,87 thus a norovirus vaccine may require serial reformulation
and boosting or periodic readministration.Even after the development of an effective norovirus vaccine, the decision to adopt
the vaccine in public health programs requires analysis of potential benefits,
costs, and efforts targeted to specific populations at high risk of disease or
severe disease and high risk of transmission. Steele et
al.90 developed a model to analyze the clinical impact of
norovirus vaccination among individuals ⩾ 65 years of age using an estimated 65%
vaccine coverage with revaccination every 5 years. A low vaccine efficacy of 22%–43%
averted 430 outpatient visits, 130 emergency department (ED) visits, 61
hospitalizations, and 2 deaths per 100,000 doses. A high vaccine efficacy of 50%
averted 840 outpatient visits, 270 ED visits, 145 hospitalizations, and 4 deaths per
100,000 doses.90Norovirus vaccines in development are listed in Table 3. Notably, Kim et
al.91 studied 66 adults who received an oral (tablet formulation)
non-replicating adenoviral vector-based Norovirus vaccine and compared them against
placebo recipients, reporting substantial mucosal and systemic immune responses
along with mild-to-moderate adverse events and a generally acceptable tolerance.
Vaxart has also reported positive preliminary data from its phase Ib oral Norovirus
vaccine trial among adults 55–80 years of age, citing robust immune responses across
all doses, a dose-dependent production of IgA-secreting cells and mild-to-moderate
adverse events.92Additional analysis on the potential clinical benefits of vaccination for
individuals ⩾ 65 years of age living in high-risk settings and if vaccination
impacts viral shedding, an important mode of transmission during outbreaks would be
valuable. There are several unanswered questions regarding norovirus vaccines
including the lack of clear clinical correlates of protection, immunologic efficacy
in preventing disease or severe disease within and among genogroups, duration of
protection, influence on viral shedding, the cost and feasibility of periodic
reformulation and administration, and potential vaccine hesitancy.ConclusionFirst described in 1929 and then again in 1968, norovirus is a significant pathogen
for vulnerable populations and settings. Although norovirus gastroenteritis is
typically brief and self-limiting, older adults, young children, and
immunocompromised individuals are prone to a more severe and longer disease course
in addition to higher hospitalization and mortality rates. Its highly effective
viral transmission characteristics contribute to its propensity to cause
gastroenteritis outbreaks in healthcare settings and long-term care facilities
conferring significant infection prevention and control consequences. Advances in
the understanding of viral pathogenesis have helped to elucidate genetic and host
factors important to disease susceptibility and immune responses. Areas of continued
research and uncertainty are the role of norovirus-specific treatments, the efficacy
of norovirus vaccines, and their public health implications.


Title: Norovirus Transmission Dynamics in a Pediatric Hospital Using Full Genome Sequences

Norovirus is a leading cause of gastroenteritis worldwide, associated with large outbreaks in healthcare facilities and with substantial clinical and economic implications [1–4]. The global financial burden is estimated at $60.3 billion annually [2]. Norovirus infections are typically self-limiting, with vomiting and diarrhea lasting 1–2 days. However, in immunocompromised patients, chronic infections can develop and last for weeks to years with considerable associated morbidity such as severe weight loss and malnutrition [5, 6].Norovirus infections are primarily caused by genogroups GI and GII, each categorized into 9 and 22 genotypes, respectively (GI.1–GI.9 and GII.1–GII.22). Due to recombination between genotypes at the ORF1/ORF2 junction, norovirus has a dual typing system based on the polymerase (ORF1) and capsid (ORF2) sequences [7].Partial genome sequencing of the hypervariable region of the capsid (P2) has previously identified nosocomial norovirus outbreaks in immunocompetent patients [8]. P2 sequences in transmission events are often identical [8, 9], with a 10% probability of 1–2 nucleotide changes in samples collected 3 weeks post-infection [10]. In immunocompromised patients, however, transmission may occur after in vivo evolution; several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are observed in the capsid sequence between linked patients [11]. When the infected population includes a high proportion of immunocompromised patients, as is the case at the tertiary referral children’s hospital in which our study was conducted, whole genome sequencing (WGS) may provide increased resolution to identify routes of transmission [12].In this study we evaluated whether WGS can be used to better understand the sources of norovirus infection and transmission dynamics in a pediatric population with a high prevalence of immunocompromised patients.METHODSStudy Population and Stool SamplesThe study was carried out in a pediatric tertiary referral hospital with 350 beds, 60% of which are in single isolation rooms. There is no accident and emergency department; therefore, acute gastroenteritis is not the primary reason for admission unless it occurs in a patient already under the hospital’s care.Stools from all symptomatic (diarrhea and/or vomiting) children (inpatient or outpatient) are tested for gastrointestinal viruses using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), the methods for which are described elsewhere [13]. Norovirus-positive PCR results are reported as either norovirus GI or GII. Enhanced surveillance, with screening on admission and weekly for inpatients, is performed for all children admitted for hematopoietic stem cell transplant or congenital immunodeficiencies (symptomatic or asymptomatic). Details of the usual management of patients who are symptomatic on admission and any patients found to be norovirus positive by PCR are given in Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Methods.Norovirus infections detected less than 48 hours after admission to hospital are considered positive on admission (POA); those detected more than 2 days after admission are considered to have a nosocomial infection. Since the study hospital is a tertiary referral hospital, many patients have previously been admitted to local hospitals or had several outpatient visits prior to admission; earlier acquisition of infection in this or another healthcare facility cannot be excluded.A nosocomial outbreak (“IPC [infection prevention and control] outbreak”) is suspected when 2 or more cases of gastroenteritis or confirmed positive norovirus cases occur within 48–72 hours in patients, staff, or visitors on the same ward or when an nosocomial infection occurs on the same ward as a chronically infected patient (Supplementary Figure 1). An outbreak meeting is called and standardized IPC outbreak measures are implemented (Supplementary Figure 1 and Supplementary Methods). The index is presumed to be the person in whom norovirus was first detected, unless a point source is suspected.In this study residual specimen from the first positive sample from all norovirus-positive patients between 1 July 2014 and 17 February 2016 (19 months) was submitted for WGS. A total of 205 norovirus PCR-positive patients were identified during the study period. Ten had no residual specimens and 6 were PCR negative on re-extraction. The remaining 189 samples were whole genome sequenced. The median patient age was 2 years (range, 1 month to 16 years); 59% of patients were profoundly immunocompromised with primary immunodeficiency syndromes, solid or bone marrow transplants, or receiving chemotherapy for malignancies.Norovirus Whole Genome SequencingRNA purification, cDNA synthesis, and full genome sequencing using SureSelect target enrichment followed by de novo assembly were carried out as described previously [14]. A consensus sequence was generated. To verify correct genome assembly, open reading frames (ORF-1, ORF-2, and ORF-3) were identified for all sequences using the Find Open Reading Frames tool in CLC Genomics Workbench (v 9.0) [14].Genotyping and Phylogenetic AnalysisIn total, 184/189 samples generated greater than 90% genome coverage and >100-fold read depth. Full genome consensus sequences were submitted to the Norovirus Genotyping Tool [15] to determine the genotype.Two sequences were excluded from phylogenetic analysis as infection with a mixture of genotypes was detected and a robust consensus sequence could not be generated [14]. Phylogenies were reconstructed in CLC Genomics Workbench (v 9.0) from the remaining 182 consensus sequences, as described in Supplementary Methods.Data Mining to Establish Epidemiological Support of Sequence ClustersPatients whose norovirus genomes branched together in a phylogenetic tree from a single common ancestral node (monophyletic), with absent or short branch lengths and a high probability that the branching order was correct (high bootstrap value), were referred to as “sequence clusters.” To determine whether these could be due to nosocomial transmission, inpatient and outpatient records together with norovirus PCR laboratory result histories for each patient were retrieved. Patients within a sequence cluster were considered to be epidemiologically linked if they were norovirus positive with an inpatient or outpatient visit that overlapped by at least 24 hours; these were referred to as “epidemiologically supported clusters.” Sequence clusters that were not supported by epidemiological evidence were referred to as “epidemiologically unsupported clusters.”RESULTSNorovirus Infections and GenotypesDuring a 19-month period (1 July 2014–1 February 2016) we generated full genome sequences for 182 new norovirus episodes in a pediatric tertiary referral hospital with a high prevalence of immunocompromised patients. Of these, 84 were based on routine IPC investigations and considered to be nosocomial infections. During this period, 8 IPC outbreaks of norovirus were identified (Table 1), which accounted for only 37/84 of the nosocomial infections. To confirm whether the declared outbreaks were truly linked and to better understand the sources of infection for the remaining episodes, we reconstructed phylogenetic trees from all 182 sequenced norovirus genomes. Phylogenetic trees reconstructed from GII.4 partial capsid sequences (the hypervariable P2 region used in routine typing methods) provided insufficient information to identify 2 of the 10 sequence clusters obtained using full genomes and missed 14 of the 37 (38%) patients linked by full genome sequences (Supplementary Figure 2). Moreover, while phylogenetic analysis using full genome sequences is well supported, with 77% (55/71) of internal nodes in the whole genome tree supported by bootstrap values ≥70, maximum likelihood phylogeny using the hypervariable capsid P2 domain sequences (427 nt) generated a tree with low bootstrap support. Only 34% (24/71) of internal nodes were supported by bootstrap values ≥70 (Supplementary Figure 3). Separate phylogenies reconstructed for ORF1 and ORF2 sequences showed no difference in branching order. This suggests that recombination at the ORF1/ORF2 junction, the most frequently described breakpoint in norovirus recombination events [16, 17], did not occur within the sampled population. Therefore, all further analysis was performed using full genomes.Table 1.Sequence Clusters Identified by Maximum Likelihood Phylogeny Using Full Genome SequencesSequence Cluster NumberGenotypeNumber of PatientsDate RangeNumber of WardsNumber of Clinical Specialties InvolvedBootstrap SupportDiversity Within ClusteraIdentified by Infection Prevention and Control InvestigationSupported by Classic Epidemiologyb4GII.P7_GII.637 days111000YesYes5GII.P21_GII.3173 months631000–22PartiallyYes (16/17)6GII.P21_GII.323 days118214NoYes7GII.P21_GII.361 month32700–10PartiallyYes8GII.P21_GII.322 months1110011NoYes9GII.P21_GII.322 days1110012NoYes10GII.P21_GII.3917 months2110019–149PartiallyYes23GII.P21_GII.323 months2210029NoYes11GII.Pe_GII.48c2 months221001–24PartiallyYes12GII.Pe_GII.426 days111003NoYes13GII.Pe_GII.423 days111000NoYes14GII.Pe_GII.4411 days211001–4PartiallyYes15GII.Pe_GII.433 days111001–3YesYes16GII.P4_GII.473 months211000–35PartiallyYes17GII.P4_GII.4225 days2110014NoYes18GII.P4_GII.452.5 months32770–25NoYes19GII.P4_GII.4219 days111006NoYes1GI.P3_GI.328 months2210031NoNo2GII.P2_GII.222 months221007NoNo3GII.P7_GII.623 months2210017NoNo20GII.Pe_GII.425.5 months2210012NoNo21GII.P21_GII.334 months319517–28NoNo22GII.P21_GII.326 months229836NoNo24GII.P21_GII.323 months2110018NoNoAll GII.4 capsid genotypes are Sydney 2012. GII.4 polymerase genotypes are GII.Pe Sydney_2012 or GII.P4 New Orleans_2009.
aExpressed as the number of nucleotide differences across the whole genome.
bOverlap in norovirus-positive period and hospital attendance.
cIncluding 1 parent (NORO/51, father of NORO/52).A total of 11 capsid and 14 polymerase genotypes were identified in 17 unique combinations (Figure 1, Supplementary Figure 4).Figure 1.Maximum likelihood phylogeny of full genome sequences from norovirus episodes over a 19-month period (2014–2016) color coded by genotype (a) and color coded by sequence cluster number (b). Separate maximum likelihood phylogenies for each genotype with sequence cluster, number annotated and displaying greater resolution (b), are shown in Supplementary Figure 5.IPC Outbreaks and Sequence ClustersAll (8/8) previously identified IPC outbreaks corresponded to monophyletic sequence clusters identified by phylogenetic analysis (Supplementary Figure 5). An additional 23 patients for whom no source of infection had previously been identified were linked by phylogenetic analysis to 6 of the IPC outbreaks (Table 1). Eight of the 23 patients were norovirus POA but had had previous inpatient stays or outpatient appointments during which transmission could have occurred. Four patients previously identified as part of 3 of the outbreaks were shown to have sporadic infections with unrelated genotypes. All 4 patients had nosocomial infections of unknown origin.Phylogenetic analysis identified 16 new sequence clusters involving 36 patients that had not previously been identified by IPC investigations, including 6 patients who were norovirus POA but had had previous inpatient stays or outpatient appointments during which transmission could have occurred. In total, 24 sequence clusters were identified by phylogenetic analysis comprising 2–17 sequences (median 2) per cluster (Table 1, Supplementary Figures 5 and 6, and Supplementary Methods).Epidemiological Support for Sequence ClustersReview of inpatient and outpatient histories together with the timing of norovirus shedding identified plausible links between patients within 17 of the 24 sequence clusters (including the 8 IPC outbreaks originally identified by IPC investigations) (Supplementary Figures 6 and 7). These epidemiologically supported clusters confirm nosocomial transmission among 77/92 (84%) of the patients linked in sequence clusters, of whom only 33 had been previously identified by IPC methods (Table 2). The epidemiologically supported clusters were caused by genotypes GII.P21_GII.3 (7/17 clusters), GII.Pe_GII.4 (5/17), GII.P4_GII.4 (4/17), and by GII.P7_GII.6 (1/17). Of the 44 patients in epidemiologically supported clusters who were missed by IPC investigations, 11/44 were on the same ward but involved only 2 patients each, 7/44 were on a different ward with a shared clinical team, and 21/44 occurred over a prolonged period of time.Table 2.Comparison of Norovirus Transmission Events Identified by Phylogenetic Analysis (Epidemiologically Supported Clusters) and Classic Infection Prevention and Control (IPC) Investigations (IPC Outbreak)Part of IPC OutbreakNot Part of IPC OutbreakTotalTransmission inferred by molecular epidemiology33
44  
 a
77No transmission inferred by molecular epidemiology
3  
 b
102105Total36146182Nonitalicized text indicates patients correctly assigned by IPC investigations. Italicized text indicates patients incorrectly assigned by IPC investigations.Abbreviation: IPC, infection prevention and control.
aIncluding 1 patient who was incorrectly assigned to an outbreak by IPC investigations (cluster 11), but shown by molecular epidemiology to be a different genotype from the rest of the outbreak and linked to another patient in cluster 23.
bShown to be a different genotype from the rest of their respective IPC outbreak.For the remaining 7 (of 24) sequence clusters, none of which were identified by IPC investigations, no evidence of an epidemiological link could be found between patients in each cluster, including when the residential postcodes of patients were examined to assess whether community transmission could have occurred. These epidemiologically unsupported clusters were caused by GII.P21_GII.3 (3/7), GII.Pe_GII.4 (1/7), GI.P3_GI.3 (1/7), GII.P2_GII.2 (1/7), and GII.7_GII.6 (1/7).Sources of InfectionIn total, 103/182 patients had nosocomial infections, of whom 84 were identified based on routine IPC investigations. No source could be identified for 43/84 patients (Table 3), including 9 whose infection occurred at the beginning of the study and who therefore may have been infected by a patient not included in the study. The remaining 19/103 patients with nosocomial infection were originally classified as norovirus POA. However, all were linked by phylogenetic analysis to other patients in epidemiologically supported clusters; they were all subsequently found to have attended the hospital in the recent past. Seventy-nine patients (79/182) were norovirus POA (Table 3) and were not linked to any other sequences in the phylogenetic analysis. This included 4 patients who were index cases in subsequent onward transmissions.Table 3.
Summary of Sources of Infection at Pediatric Tertiary Referral Hospital During Study Period, July 2014–February 2016Source of InfectionNumber of Patients, n = 182 (%)Proportion of Patients Immunocompromised (%)Another patient (part of an epidemiologically supported cluster)60 (33)45/60 (75)Outside of the hospital (norovirus positive on admission)79 (43)37/79 (49)Unknown (nosocomial infection but not transmission from another patient in the studya)43 (24)27/43 (63)Epidemiologically supported clusters are sequence clusters identified by phylogenetic analysis and supported by epidemiological evidence.
aNot part of a monophyletic sequence cluster (with <38 single-nucleotide polymorphisms within cluster) and therefore not linked to any other virus sequences within the study cohort.Pairwise Distances Between Genome SequencesThe pairwise distances (Supplementary Methods) between GII.4 norovirus genomes from each patient demonstrated a distinct population of sequences with ≤38 SNPs difference (Figure 2a), which corresponds to >99.5% sequence identity across the genome and falls within the range of previously described within-host SNP diversity seen in longitudinally sampled chronically infected patients [18] (Figure 2b). This equates to the cutoff of ≤2 SNPs (99.5% identity) where the partial capsid P2 domain has been used to identify transmission events among norovirus GII.4 infections in immunocompetent patients [10, 11]. Consequently, in this study, sequence clusters were identified if groups of full genome sequences formed a monophyletic cluster with fewer than 38 pairwise SNPs between them. As controls, we included pairwise distances between sequences collected from repeatedly sampled chronically infected individuals [18].Figure 2.Pairwise distances in GII.3 and GII.4 epidemiologically supported clusters, epidemiologically unsupported clusters, and longitudinally sampled chronically infected patients. Epidemiologically unsupported clusters are those identified by phylogenetic analysis but not supported by classic epidemiological evidence. (a) Pairwise differences between local and database whole genome sequencing. (b) Pairwise differences plotted by the category of cluster (epidemiologically supported or unsupported and longitudinally sampled individuals) into which they fall. The greater pairwise differences within cluster 10 are shown. Abbreviation: SNP, single-nucleotide polymorphisms.The mean pairwise distance for 62 GII.3 and 71 GII.4 sequences comprising the majority of the epidemiologically supported clusters was 7 SNPs for the former (range, 0–22) and 12 SNPs for the latter (range, 0–35). The mean pairwise distance in the GII.3 and GII.4 epidemiologically unsupported clusters was 25 SNPs for the former (range, 17–36) and 12 SNPs for the only GII.4 epidemiologically unsupported cluster (Figure 2b). Thus, pairwise differences were significantly higher for epidemiologically unsupported compared with epidemiological supported GII.3 clusters (P < .001, mean difference 18 SNPs, 95% confidence interval of the difference 13–23 SNPs; 2-tailed T test, SPSS v24).The results were skewed by the epidemiologically supported cluster, GII.P21_GII.3 cluster 10 (Supplementary Figure 6). Sequence cluster 10 was monophyletic with strong epidemiological support but higher pairwise distances (19–149 SNPs). However, all patients were located on the same or on a linked ward, managed by the same clinical team and with overlapping admissions and norovirus shedding (Supplementary Figure 6c). The sequence cluster could not be disrupted by inclusion of all publically available GII.P21_GII.3 sequences in the phylogenetic analysis (Supplementary Figure 8), making it unlikely that this sequence cluster represents repeated introductions to the hospital from an external source. We have previously shown a linear relationship between the number of SNPs and duration of infection in chronically infected immunosuppressed patients [18]. The diversity within epidemiologically supported cluster 10 is therefore likely to have arisen due to virus evolution in this patient group, the majority (8/9) of whom were immunosuppressed and chronically infected for extended periods (38–388 days) between transmission events.DISCUSSIONInformation on the routes of norovirus transmission in a nosocomial setting is necessary for allocation of IPC resources and effective containment of infection. While capsid P2 sequencing is currently the standard method for norovirus molecular epidemiology, we show that it is not sufficiently discriminating for robust investigation of putative transmissions among immunosuppressed patients. Here, we demonstrate that WGS is superior to both P2 and IPC methods for ascertaining transmission among immunosuppressed patients, having identified 44 patients not previously known from IPC investigations to be part of transmission chains.For 60/103 nosocomial infections, phylogenetic analysis showed linkage to another patient in the study. However, for the remainder, including the index patients in 13/17 epidemiologically supported sequence clusters, the sources were unknown and potentially included unsampled staff, visitors, or patients. Within epidemiologically supported clusters, 75% of patients were profoundly immunocompromised and managed in single isolation rooms with limited or no direct contact between patients, making the route of transmission unclear. Additional sampling could help here and may also shed light on the 7/24 epidemiologically unsupported clusters, which accounted for 14 of the 93 (15%) patients identified as linked by phylogenetic analysis. Of interest for non-GII.4 norovirus genotypes that do not spread as pandemics, Parra et al [19] observed a “static” pattern of diversification, with only a few residue changes over several decades. Thus, for the unsupported non-GII.4 clusters, it is possible that due to a lack of genome variability, independent episodes of norovirus infection appear linked based on phylogenetic analysis alone. This needs additional investigation.Also, we attempted to verify sequence clusters by calculating pairwise SNPs for sequences within a monophyletic sequence cluster. While epidemiologically supported GII.4 clusters all had <38 SNPs between sequences and most epidemiologically supported GII.3 clusters had <22 SNPs, the epidemiologically supported GII.3 cluster 10 fell outside this range, probably because of within-host evolution prior to transmission among chronically infected patients. This should be noted when using genomics to manage outbreaks (Supplementary Figure 9).Norovirus is now the major cause of acute gastroenteritis worldwide [2], with morbidity and mortality seen in infants in low-income countries and the elderly and in immunosuppressed patients in middle- and high-income countries [6]. IPC is critical to managing disease, particularly in hospitals and other institutions. However, for immunosuppressed patients, in particular, the sensitivity of routine IPC investigations alone for identifying linked transmission is 44% compared with IPC plus WGS (Table 2). While 33% of new norovirus cases in this study were acquired from another patient, despite isolation nursing and stringent IPC measures, the source of infection for 43% of nosocomial infections remains unknown even with WGS, pointing to the need for wider sampling of patients, staff, visitors, and the environment. Nonetheless, WGS could be a valuable tool with which to focus IPC interventions in areas of the hospital where nosocomial acquired infections are most problematic. With ever decreasing sequencing costs and technologies that allow rapid turnaround times [14], the possibility that norovirus genome sequencing, perhaps linked to electronic patient records, could be used routinely to control nosocomial infections is now a reality.Supplementary DataSupplementary materials are available at Clinical Infectious Diseases online. Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the corresponding author.Supplementary MaterialSupplementary FiguresClick here for additional data file.Supplementary MethodsClick here for additional data file.Supplementary FigureClick here for additional data file.


Title: Fecal Viral Concentration and Diarrhea in Norovirus Gastroenteritis

Norovirus is a major cause of viral gastroenteritis worldwide, accounting for at least 28% of all foodborne outbreaks (1). However, its pathogenesis is poorly understood (2). Although the disease is usually perceived as mild and self-limiting (symptoms generally subside within 2–3 days in otherwise healthy persons) (1,2), protracted diarrhea and serious complications may develop in elderly or immunocompromised patients (2–4).We have previously shown that patients infected with norovirus genogroup GII have at least 100-fold higher fecal viral concentrations than those infected with genogroup GI (5), which may help explain the former’s global predominance (6,7). However, whether fecal viral concentration has any association with disease manifestation is unknown. In this study, we postulated that a higher viral concentration is associated with more severe symptoms. We studied potential associations in patients infected with norovirus GII.4, the predominant norovirus genotype circulating in Hong Kong during the study period (6,7).The StudyDuring a 2-year period (November 2004–November 2006), 44 adult (>16 years of age) patients at 2 regional hospitals in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region with acute gastroenteritis were shown to be infected with norovirus genogroup GII.4. Clinical records were reviewed and baseline characteristics, clinical features, and output charts were studied. Cases were included for analysis if stool samples were collected <96 hours from symptom onset. Diarrhea was defined as having >3 loose stools per day. Duration of diarrhea was defined as the number of days (inclusive) between the first and final dates of symptoms (3).Stool samples were collected from all patients when initially observed and processed immediately for RNA extraction. Diagnosis of norovirus infection and its quantitation were based on real-time reverse transcription–PCR assay of stool samples as described (5). The lower detection limit of the assay was 2 × 104 copies of cDNA/g stool. Phylogenetic studies were also performed as described (5).Associations between clinical parameters and fecal viral cDNA concentrations were determined. Univariate associations between fecal viral concentration (log10 copies cDNA/g fecal specimen), baseline characteristics, and clinical variables were examined by using the Mann-Whitney test or χ2 test as appropriate. Variables with a p value <0.1 in univariate analyses were entered into multivariate models as covariates. Stepwise backward logistic regression was performed to identify independent variables associated with prolonged diarrhea, defined as >4 days of diarrhea. This cut-off was based on the results of many observational studies (1–4) and was also above the median duration of diarrhea in this cohort. Spearman rank correlation coefficient (ρ) was used to assess correlations between viral cDNA concentration and other continuous variables. A p value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. All probabilities were 2-tailed. Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS software version 13.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).Stool samples from 40 patients were analyzed. Mean ± SD age of patients was 60.4 ± 24.3 years and 15 (37.5%) were males. Seventeen patients (42.5%) had pre-existing medical conditions, and 21 (52.5%) were hospitalized. Diarrhea was observed in 100%, whereas vomiting and fever were observed in 64.9% and 36.8%, respectively. Median duration of diarrhea was 3 days (range 2–6 days). Median fecal cDNA concentration was 8.93 log10 copies/g stool (interquartile range 8.22–10.24 log10 copies/g stool).Fecal viral cDNA concentration was examined in relation to baseline characteristics and clinical symptoms (Table). Higher viral concentrations were associated with older age (p = 0.064). Higher fecal viral concentration was significantly associated with prolonged diarrhea >4 days (2.11 log10 copies/g stool; p = 0.001, by Mann-Whitney test) than with limited diarrhea (Figure 1). Viral concentration was positively correlated with total duration of diarrhea (Spearman ρ 0.47, p = 0.004) and total frequency of vomiting (Spearman ρ 0.34, p = 0.043) during the course of illness (Appendix Figure). Fever developed more frequently in patients with prolonged diarrhea (64.3% vs. 21.7%; p = 0.010, by χ2 test). Mean total frequency of diarrhea and vomiting was 14.9 and 3.1, respectively, in inpatients with prolonged diarrhea and 11.8 and 1.2, respectively, in those with limited diarrhea. We did not observe an association between mean daily output and fecal viral concentrations in this cohort.TableFecal viral concentrations of 40 patients infected with norovirus*Comparison groups (%)Median fecal viral concentration, log10 copies cDNA/g stool (IQR)p valueAge, y<65 (47.5)8.48 (7.79–10.11)0.064
>65 (52.5)8.97 (8.54–10.70)SexMale (37.5)8.97 (7.79–10.72)0.706Female (62.5)8.88 (8.24–10.22)Pre-existing medical conditions†No (57.5)8.95 (7.86–10.26)0.520Yes (42.5)8.91 (8.31–10.14)Diarrhea duration‡Limited (62.2)8.38 (7.89–9.45)0.001Prolonged (37.8)10.49 (8.84–10.94)VomitingNo (35.1)8.71 (7.71–9.91)0.215Yes (64.9)9.10 (8.25–10.40)Fever§No (62.2)8.77 (8.15–10.17)0.380Yes (36.8)9.13 (8.23–10.75)*IQR, interquartile range.†Includes diabetes mellitus, chronic cardiovascular/pulmonary/hepatic diseases, and underlying malignancies. No patient had conditions associated with profound immunosuppression in this cohort.‡Limited (62.2%) is defined as a total duration of diarrhea of 1–3 d, including both hospitalized and nonhospitalized patients (followed up by the same hospital’s emergency departments as outpatients).Prolonged (37.8%) is defined as a total duration of diarrhea >4 d; all but 1 were hospitalized patients.§Temperature >37.5°C on >1 occasion.Figure 1Box plot of median (black horizontal bars) and interquartile range (error bars) of fecal norovirus cDNA concentrations in patients with limited and prolonged diarrhea. Limited diarrhea is defined as a total duration of diarrhea of 1–3 days, and prolonged diarrhea is defined as a total duration of diarrhea ≥4 days.To rule out possible confounding by variations in sample collection time, fecal viral cDNA concentration was also examined by sample collection day (Figure 2). In general, samples collected from patients with prolonged diarrhea had higher viral concentrations on all collection days. The mean day of sample collection was slightly later in patients with prolonged diarrhea than in those with limited symptoms (2.4 ± 1.3 days vs. 1.5 ± 1.1 days; p = 0.045, by t test).Figure 2Scatter plot showing fecal norovirus cDNA concentrations in patients with limited and prolonged diarrhea, according to sampling day. Limited diarrhea is defined as a total duration of diarrhea of 1–3 days, and prolonged diarrhea is defined as a total duration of diarrhea >4 days.Prolonged diarrhea >4 days was associated with older age and pre-existing medical conditions by univariate analyses (p<0.05 for both variables, by χ2 test) and with fecal viral concentration. Stepwise backward logistic regression analysis showed that fecal viral concentration (odds ratio [OR] 9.56, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.18–77.57 per log10 copies; p = 0.035) and age (OR 1.15, 95% CI 1.03–1.28) per year; p = 0.013) were 2 independent factors associated with prolonged diarrhea caused by norovirus genotype GII.4.ConclusionsTo our knowledge, this is the first clinical study to demonstrate that fecal viral concentration correlates with duration of illness in norovirus gastroenteritis. It has been reported that severe protracted diarrhea caused by norovirus infection can develop in hospitalized, elderly, and immunocompromised patients (3,4,8). Such patients often shed virus for prolonged periods, which probably indicates active viral replication and slow viral clearance (4,8). In an animal model, norovirus was shown to infect and possibly replicate in enterocytes, resulting in disease (9). Results of our study thus provide preliminary evidence that active viral replication determines clinical disease in norovirus gastroenteritis, as in most other viral infections (10). These findings also suggest that more stringent infection control measures need to be implemented in patients with severe diarrhea because of high fecal viral concentrations (1–4,8).This study was limited by a small sample size and fecal viral concentration, which was studied only at 1 time point for each patient. Further research on changes in fecal viral concentrations and their relationships with disease severity are warranted. Because no previous clinical studies describe temporal changes of norovirus concentration in relation to symptoms, we analyzed viral concentration data only in patients with acute diarrhea (days 0–4). Although our definition of prolonged diarrhea (>4 days, which was above the median in our cohort) seemed arbitrary, it is supported by the results of many observational studies, which show that in most patients (even elderly or hospitalized patients), acute symptoms subside within 2–3 days (1–4,8). Inclusion of only norovirus GII.4 infections in the analysis removed the possible confounder of strain variation on viral concentration (5). Whether similar correlations can be observed with other norovirus strains remains uncertain. Given that genogroup GII.4 is the predominant circulating strain in most countries with major outbreaks (6), these results have implications with regard to pathogenesis and infection control of norovirus infections.In conclusion, these results provide preliminary evidence that a high fecal viral concentration is independently associated with prolonged norovirus gastroenteritis. Further studies are needed to confirm the role of enhanced viral replication on pathogenesis and transmission of this disease. In addition, the approach of quantifying norovirus by real-time PCR can be used for future evaluation of antiviral treatment (11) and to study factors associated with delayed viral clearance (3).Supplementary MaterialAppendix FigureA) Fecal viral concentrations (log10 copies cDNA/g stool) plotted against duration of diarrhea (d). B) Fecal viral concentrations (log10 copies cDNA/g stool) plotted versus total frequency of vomiting. Black horizontal bars show medians, and error bars show interquartile ranges.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: ROTAVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Household Transmission of Rotavirus in a Community with Rotavirus Vaccination in Quininde, Ecuador

IntroductionRotavirus is the most common cause of severe pediatric gastroenteritis and is estimated to cause approximately 450,000 deaths globally per year [1]. Rotavirus vaccines have been shown to prevent severe diarrheal disease in a range of settings, although their efficacy is reduced in lower socioeconomic settings, particularly in poor populations living in the tropics [2]. Infection with rotavirus can occur throughout life, although symptomatic illness is mainly restricted to children under five with severe and life-threatening disease occurring before two years of age. [1] Almost all unvaccinated children will be infected with rotavirus in the first two years of life [3], [4]. Primary infections are protective against subsequent disease, with severe disease becoming rare in secondary and subsequent infections [4]. Viral shedding is highly correlated with severity of disease and disease severity is inversely associated with number of previous infections. By mimicking the first and one or two subsequent infections, rotavirus vaccines are particularly effective against severe disease, relative to all episodes of rotavirus gastroenteritis [5], [6]. It follows that rotavirus vaccination has the potential to reduce levels of wild virus shedding and reduce levels of environmental contamination with virus. However, rotavirus is highly transmissible, with a very low infectious dose; to reduce the probability of onward transmission, shedding may have to be reduced below some threshold level.Aside from the direct protective effects offered to children immunized against rotavirus, there may also be indirect effects of vaccination. Indeed, the magnitude of vaccine impacts in some settings suggest that vaccination may interrupt transmission and provide indirect protection [7]. Recent post-licensure studies in the United States and Australia have reported reductions of disease in unvaccinated groups, including children and adults too old to have been vaccinated [8], [9]. This suggests the prime importance of young children in rotavirus transmission. Much remains unknown about the transmission process of rotavirus and other enteric virus infections and, therefore, how vaccination could affect their transmission.It is unknown whether vaccination will reduce infectiousness and thereby interrupt transmission, and afford indirect benefits to unvaccinated individuals in vaccinated populations in developing countries. We aimed to study the transmission of rotavirus in households following the presentation of a child to health services for rotavirus gastroenteritis in a vaccinated population in rural Ecuador.MethodsRecruitment of Index Cases/ControlsFrom Feb 2011 to May 2012, children aged 6 to 59 months presenting with diarrhea to the Hospital Padre Alberto Buffoni (HPAB) in Quininde, Ecuador and surrounding family health clinics were considered for enrolment. Diarrhea was defined as three or more liquid or semi-liquid stools in 24 hours, with duration less than 14 days before consultation with the clinic/hospital. When a child presented with diarrhea, a nurse collected a fecal specimen and clinical data. Fecal specimens were tested for presence of rotavirus antigen by enzyme immunoassay (EIA). Children testing positive for rotavirus by EIA were defined as cases. Two comparison groups were recruited: (1) children who presented with diarrhea but tested negative for rotavirus by EIA (henceforth referred to as diarrhea controls) and healthy children without diarrhea, vomiting or hospitalization for any cause 14 days prior to recruitment and members of an ongoing birth cohort study who presented to the HPAB for routine follow-ups [10] (henceforth referred to as healthy controls). Both groups of controls were matched for age (+/−6 months for cases under age 3 and +/−1 year for cases aged 3 to 4 years).After cases of rotavirus were detected, fecal samples were requested from all adult and child household members of the case during a household visit. Households were visited twice. At the first visit, the head of the household was informed about the household study, given consent procedures, and specimen collection pots were left for each household member. Henceforth, we refer to the three household populations as case households, diarrhea control households, and healthy control households, based on the disease and infections status of the index case. Specimen collection was requested as the date of onset of diarrhea in the index child (case or control) +7 days or as near as possible (5 to 9 days after onset). An adult representative of the household was interviewed for information on demographics, date of specimen collection and presence of diarrhea in the 10 days before and 10 days after the onset of diarrhea in the index case. For healthy control households, specimens were taken within one day of the household visit and information was collected on any symptoms in the 10 days before the index date of recruitment.This study and consent procedures were reviewed and approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Universidad de San Francisco de Quito. All recruited household members were explained the premise of the project and were asked to provide written informed consent prior to enrollment in the study. A parent or guardian was asked to provide written consent on behalf of minors in the household.Specimens and TestingSpecimens taken following episodes of diarrhea in index cases were tested for rotavirus using the Prospect™ Rotavirus Test (Oxoid Diagnostics Ltd, United Kingdom). This test was used to initially determine if the diarrhea presentations in the clinic/hospital were cases (rotavirus-positive) or diarrhea controls (rotavirus negative). The Prospect™ kit and other validated enzyme immunoassays are calibrated to detect rotavirus at levels considered to cause disease. The majority of rotavirus infections in household members were expected to be asymptomatic. In order to detect asymptomatic infections, real time reverse transcription and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was used, due to its much greater analytic sensitivity [11]–[13]. Note that stools of all symptomatic index children (cases and diarrhea controls) were tested by RT-qPCR (following EIA), while household contact were only tested by RT-qPCR.Remaining specimens were stored at −20°C for conventional RT-PCR and genotyping. Genotyping by RT-PCR was performed on positive samples to confirm transmission within a household (i.e. to confirm that secondary cases are infected with the same type as the primary cases in the household).Diagnostic and Genotyping MethodsFor EIA or RT-qPCR confirmed positive samples, total RNA was extracted by using the MagMax Viral RNA Isolation kit (Life Technologies, New York, NY) on the automated KingFisher extraction platform (Thermo Electron Corporation, Vantaa, Finland).G-type (VP7) and P-type (VP4) genotyping were carried out following previously described 2-step amplification methods [14], [15] with modification on a GeneAMP PCR System 9700 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). VP7 and VP4 were amplified by RT-PCR using consensus primers 9Con1-L/VP7R [14] and Con3/Con2, [15] respectively. The RT-PCR step was modified to use the One-Step RT-PCR kit (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia, CA) on a GeneAMP PCR System 9700 thermocycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). In this procedure, the extracted dsRNA was denatured at 97°C for 5 min and RT-PCR was carried out using a One Step RT-PCR kit (Qiagen, Inc., Valencia, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Reverse transcription (RT) of each gene was carried out for 30 min at 42°C, followed by 15 min at 95°C to inactivate the reverse transcriptase and activate the Taq polymerase. The cDNA was then subjected to 35 cycles of PCR in a GeneAmp PCR System 9700 thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, Inc., Foster City, CA) using the following conditions: 30 sec at 94°C; 30 sec at 42°C; 45 sec at 72°C, followed by a 7 min final extension at 72°C. Genotyping PCR was performed as described previously. [14], [15] G-typing used primer 9Con1-L in combination with primers 9T1–1, 9T1-Dg, 9T-2, 9T-3P, 9T-4, and 9T-9B [14] and P-typing used primer con3 in combination with primers 1T-1, 1T1-VN, 2T-1, 3T-1, 4T-1, 5T-1, and 1T1-Wa [15]. Genotyping reactions were analyzed by electrophoresis on a 3% agarose gel using a 2∶1 ratio of NuSieve GTG: SeaPlaque (FMC Bioproducts, Rockland, ME). The G- and P-types obtained were classified according to the system described by Estes and Cohen [16]. G1 viruses were examined by specific primers to determine if they were vaccine (Rotarix) strains.Nucleotide Sequencing and Sequence AnalysisA selected number of isolates from the same household with the same genotyping results were subjected to sequencing for confirmation. The same consensus primer pair con3/con2 for VP4 gene and 9Con1-L/VP7R for VP7 gene were used to generate amplicons for the sequence reaction. Analysis of RT-PCR reactions by gel electrophoresis, amplicon purification, and DNA sequencing was carried out as described previously [17]. Forward and reverse sequences were assembled using Sequencher software versions 4.8 (Gene Codes Corporation, Inc, Ann Arbor, MI). The consensus sequences obtained were compared with existing rotavirus sequences in the GenBank database using the BLASTN program at the National Center for Biotechnology Information website (available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.gov/BLAST/).
Infection amongst household contacts was defined as rotavirus detected by RT-qPCR in stool at the time of specimen collection; disease was defined as diarrheal disease symptoms within 10 days of onset in the index case. We also report disease attack rates based on diarrheal disease symptoms and detection of rotavirus by RT-qPCR, since it is possible that some of the PCR-negative individuals were symptomatic due to something other than rotavirus. All new viral sequence data has been deposited in GenBank; strain names and accession numbers can be found in File S1. Accession numbers for submitted strains.Statistical AnalysisWe investigated potential risk factors for transmissibility (characteristics of cases) and susceptibility (characteristics of household contacts). Only household contacts of rotavirus index cases (n = 137) were included in the statistical analysis of transmission. We calculated the infection and disease attack rates and fit logistic regression models to estimate the odds ratio separately for each outcome. Initially, we attempted to fit random effects logistic regression models in order to explicitly account for correlation in outcomes with households. However, a number of bivariate models could not achieve convergence, so instead of fitting a random effects model, robust standard errors were calculated, treating each household as a cluster. First, bivariate models were fitted for each potential transmissibility and susceptibility factor. Separate models were fitted, with infection and disease as separate binary outcomes.Then, we attempted to control for confounding by developing multivariable regression models. First, two separate were constructed by inclusion of all variables with p<0.20 in univariable analysis. The first model included only case (transmissibility) variables; the second included only contact (susceptibility) variables Then, using the same criteria, final models were fit with both transmissibility and susceptibility variables. Only one of a set of highly collinear variables (e.g. vomiting duration and severity score) was retained in multivariable models. Analyses were conducted in Stata 12.0 (STATA Corp, College Station, Tx).ResultsA total of 214 children were screened for rotavirus, 40 (19%) of which were positive by EIA and were recruited as index cases. One EIA positive subject could not be confirmed by RT-PCR so was excluded from subsequent analysis. 40 (22%) of the 175 rotavirus EIA-negative children with diarrhea were recruited as diarrhea controls; 40 well-child households were recruited as healthy controls. Case, diarrhea control and healthy control index children were similar in terms of month of enrolment (chi-squared p-value = 0.48, Figure 1) and median age (23, 24 and 26 month; t-test p-values = 0.49 & 0.27, respectively).10.1371/journal.pone.0067763.g001Figure 1Calendar month distribution of index cases (n = 39) diarrhea controls (n = 40) and healthy controls (n = 40).There were 197, 158 and 163 household members in case, diarrhea control and healthy control households, 137 (70%), 130 (82%) and 137 (84%) of whom provided a stool specimen, respectively. Case households (mean = 4.9 members) were somewhat larger than diarrhea control (mean = 4.0 members; t-test p-value = 0.09) and healthy control households (mean = 4.1 members; t-test p-value = 0.15).InfectionInfection was detected by RT-qPCR in 55% (76/137) of case household contacts, 7.6% (10/130) of diarrhea control contacts and 2.2% (3/137) healthy control contacts (Figure 2).10.1371/journal.pone.0067763.g002Figure 2Infection and disease households with a rotavirus index case.Each line represents infection and disease events in one household. Index cases are plotted in black (n = 39). Other cases of rotavirus gastroenteritis in the household are plotted in red and are plotted on the time axis in terms of time of onset relative to time of onset of the index case. Household contacts with asymptomatic infection are plotted in blue (off the time scale, since we cannot know at what time they become infected) and contacts remaining uninfected are plotted in grey. The size of the points are relative to the number of individuals with a given outcome; for reference the size of the index cases (black dots) represents a single individual.The effects of index case characteristics (i.e. transmissibility) (i.e. index case characteristics) and contact characteristics (i.e. susceptibility) on infection attack rates are shown in Table 1. Regarding transmissibility, infection attack rates were non-significantly higher from younger children (67% from children 6 to 17 months compared to 53% from children ≥18 months); those who had vomiting (63% compared to 37%; OR = 2.87, p = 0.099) and those with Vesikari scores ≥10 (66% compared to 43%; OR = 2.58, p = 0.086), although these differences were of borderline statistical significance (Table 1 and Figure 3). Children with higher cycle threshold (Ct) values (indicative of lower viral load) were more likely to transmit though not at a level of statistical significance (62% with Ct <15; 40% with Ct was ≥15; OR = 0.41, p = 0.177). We did not find evidence of reduced transmissibility associated with a history of rotavirus vaccine, though study power was limited due to high vaccine coverage; 85% and 87% of index cases had one or two doses of vaccine, respectively.10.1371/journal.pone.0067763.g003Figure 3Infection (grey) and disease (red) attack rates amongst household contacts of index cases for (A) case characteristics and (B) contact characteristics.10.1371/journal.pone.0067763.t001Table 1Infection attack rates amongst household contacts by their own characteristics and index case characteristics.UnivariateMultivariate(other case or contact characteristics)Multivariate(case and contact characteristics)nInfection (%)OR (95% CI)pOR (95% CI)pOR (95% CI)p
Contact characteristics
Age (years)*0 to 93020 (67%)1.75 (0.64–4.79)0.27610 to 193519 (54%)1.04 (0.36–2.96)0.94320 to 292513 (52%)0.95 (0.32–2.85)0.924≥304524 (53%)REFSex*Male6135 (57%)1.21 (0.69–2.11)0.505Female7439 (53%)REFRelation to indexSibling4733 (70%)3.83 (1.3–11.27)0.0153.83 (1.3–11.27)0.0153.25 (1.17–9.05)0.024Parent4827 (56%)2.09 (0.71–6.11)0.1782.09 (0.71–6.11)0.1781.8 (0.69–4.67)0.226Other4216 (38%)REFREFREFShare room with indexNo5829 (50%)REFYes7947 (59%)1.47 (0.62–3.49)0.383
Index case characteristics
Age (months)6 to 173020 (67%)1.41 (0.47–4.24)0.54≥1810556 (53%)REFVomitingNo3814 (37%)REFREFREFYes9962 (63%)2.87 (0.82–10.1)0.0992.5 (0.9–6.94)0.0792.42 (0.76–7.71)0.135Vomiting episodes0 to 18442 (50%)REFMultiple5334 (64%)1.34 (0.76–2.36)0.315Duration of diarrhea (days)1228 (36%)REF25329 (55%)0.34 (0.03–3.84)0.381≥36239 (63%)0.71 (0.29–1.75)0.46Vesikari score4 to 96126 (43%)REF10 to 147650 (66%)2.58 (0.86–7.65)0.086Cycle threshold<159559 (62%)REFREF15+4217 (40%)0.41 (0.12–1.48)0.1770.49 (0.17–1.41)0.187Rotavirus vaccineNo137 (54%)REF≥112469 (56%)1.07 (0.26–4.45)0.92210059 (59%)1.23 (0.31–4.84)0.764
Household characteristics
Total residents2 to 35430 (56%)1.3 (0.34–5.06)0.743623 (64%)1.85 (0.38–8.96)0.447≥54723 (49%)REFOther children0207 (35%)0.46 (0.09–2.46)0.3715938 (64%)1.58 (0.45–5.49)0.475≥25831 (53%)REFOdds ratios, 95% confidence intervals and Wald-test p values are given for (a) univariate models, multivariate models of (b) other case or contact characteristics and (c) other case and contact characteristics.Regarding susceptibility, infection attack rates were higher amongst siblings (70%; OR = 3.83, p = 0.015) and parents (56%; OR = 2.09, p = 0.17) compared to other household members (e.g. aunts/uncles/grandparents; 38%).The higher risk of infection in siblings remained significant when controlling for other case and contact variables in multivariable models; greater transmissibility associated with vomiting was of borderline significance when accounting for other index case characteristics (OR = 2.50, p = 0.079) as well as in the full models accounting for contact characteristics (OR = 2.42, p = 0.135).DiseaseThere were no episodes of diarrhea reported in the healthy control households in the 10 days before enrolment. Five diarrhea episodes were reported in diarrhea control households (attack rate = 4%), all of which occurred within 3 days of onset in the index case. Twenty acute gastroenteritis (AGE) episodes were reported in case households (attack rate = 15%), six of which had times of onset 5 to 1 days prior to onset in the index case and 14 with onset 1 to 5 days after onset in the index case (Figure 2; Table 2). Only these 14 cases were considered as possible secondary episodes for subsequent analyses. 8 of the 14 possible secondary episodes were positive for rotavirus by RT-qPCR. All of the cases with onset prior to the index case were amongst older individuals (aged 5 to 37 years).10.1371/journal.pone.0067763.t002Table 2Disease attack rates* amongst household contacts by their own characteristics and index case characteristics.UnivariateMultivariate(other case or contact characteristics)Multivariate(case and contact characteristics)nDisease* (%)OR (95% CI)pOR (95% CI)pOR (95% CI)p
Contact characteristics
Age (years)*
0 to 9268 (31%)4.44 (1.78–11)0.0017.96 (2.97–21.3)<.00119.7 (2.23–173.6)0.0110 to 19642 (3%)0.63 (0.26–1.52)0.29920 to 29250 (0%)…≥30444 (9%)REFREFREFSex*
Male588 (14%)1.76 (0.54–5.79)0.352Female726 (8%)REFRelation to indexSibling436 (14%)1.17 (0.46–3.06)0.753Parent473 (6%)0.49 (0.17–1.39)0.182Other415 (12%)REFShare room with indexNo561 (2%)REFREFYes7513 (17%)11.5 (0.93–141.6)0.05615.67 (1.23–198)0.03443.8 (0.3–6297)0.14
Index case characteristics
Age (months)6 to 172512 (48%)48 (8.53–394)<.00145.7 (6.83–306.4)<.00192 (4.99–1696)0≥181062 (2%)REFREFREFVomitingNo381 (3%)REFYes9313 (14%)6.01 (0.46–78.4)0.171Vomiting episodes0 to 1792 (3%)REFREFREFMultiple5212 (23%)11.6 (1.25–106)0.0313.28 (1.31–8.21)0.0113.63 (1.23–10.7)0.02Duration of diarrhea (days)1220 (0%)…2482 (4%)0.17 (0.02–1.54)0.118≥36112 (20%)REFVesikari score4 to 9600 (0%)REF10 to 147114 (20%)…<0.001Cycle threshold<159314 (15%)REF15+380 (0%)…0.011Rotavirus vaccineNo121 (8%)REF≥19713 (13%)1.7 (0.13–22)0.68211913 (11%)1.34 (0.1–17.4)0.819
Household characteristics
Total residents2 to 3512 (4%)0.14 (0.01–1.46)0.14331 (3%)0.1 (0.01–1.58)0.102≥54711 (23%)REFOther children0190 (0%)…1573 (5%)0.22 (0.02–2.05)0.185≥25511 (20%)REF*There was not sufficient power to fit regression model when using the definition of disease of symptomatic and RT-qPCR positive, as only 8 contacts met this definition. However, the simple frequency tabulations with this outcome were consistent with the disease (regardless of test result) outcome analysis. Attack rates were higher from children who were younger (24% (6/25) from children <18 months compared to 2% (2/106) from children ≥18 months), had multiple episodes of vomiting (15% (8/82) compared to 0% from children with 1 or no episodes of vomiting (0/79)) and amongst contacts aged less than 10 years (27% (7/26) compared to contacts aged 10 years or older (0%; 0/91)).Odds ratios, 95% confidence intervals and Wald-test p values are given for (a) univariate models, multivariate models of (b) other case or contact characteristics and (c) other case and contact characteristics.The effects of index case characteristics (i.e. transmissibility) (i.e. index case characteristics) and contact characteristics (i.e susceptibility) on disease attack rates are shown in Table 2. Regarding transmissibility, disease attack rates were higher from children who were younger (48% from children <18 months compared to 2% from children ≥18 months) or had multiple episodes of vomiting (23% compared to 3% from children with 1 or no episodes of vomiting; OR = 11.6, p = 0.031) (Figure 3).Regarding susceptibility to disease, attack rates were higher amongst contacts aged below 10 years (31%; OR = 4.44, p = 0.001 compared to contact aged 30 years or older) and those who shared a room with the index case (17% compared with 2%; OR = 11.5, p = 0.056).There were only two instances where a household contact was younger than the index case. Both of these children were infected and one was symptomatic.In the final disease model that controlled for case and contact characteristics, children <18 months were more infectious (OR = 92, p<0.001), multiple vomiting episodes were associated with high transmission risk (OR = 3.63; p = 0.02) and children aged <10 years were most susceptible to disease (OR = 19.7, p = 0.01).Transmission from Asymptomatically Infected Individuals?Rotavirus was detected by RT-qPCR in stool from 33% (13/40) of diarrhea controls and 12% (5/40) healthy controls, all of whom were negative by EIA. Infection attack rates were 16% (7 out of 43 household members) in the diarrhea control households and 0% (out of 20 household members) in infected healthy control households. None of the household members reported diarrhea in the 10 days prior to the onset in the index healthy control, but there were 3 symptomatic cases after onset in the index diarrhea control. The Ct value of the diarrhea control was >34 in these three instances (Figure 4). Further, rotavirus was not detected in any of these three symptomatic contacts cases, suggesting that the cause of diarrhea in both the index diarrhea control and the household member was not rotavirus.10.1371/journal.pone.0067763.g004Figure 4Distribution of cycle threshold (Ct) values in (A) case households (B) diarrhea control households and (C) healthy control households.Black bars indicate index children (who were positive by ELISA in the case households and negative by ELISA in the control households, by definition. Red bars indicate symptomatic household contacts; grey bars indicate asymptomatic household contacts.GenotypingWe were able to determine genotypes from 36 of the 39 index cases. G2P [4] genotype was detected from 16 (44%) of these, and G2P [8] and G4P [4] was detected in one sample each. G9P was detected from 14 specimens, 12 of which had a P-type P [8], one with P [4] and one could not be P-typed. Four specimens were G3, two typed with P [8], and one each with P [4] and P [6].Genotyping data were available from 52 contacts in 22 case households where the genotype of the index case was also determined (Figure 5). 38 (73%) of the 52 contacts shared a G-type or P-type with the index case. However, in only seven of the 22 households (32%) was a single genotype found amongst the index case and all household contacts. In some households, there was a single household contact with a different genotype than the index case. For example, in one household the index case was G9P [8], along with 2 household contacts, while another household contact was a G1. Still in other households, there was clear evidence of circulation of multiple viruses. For example, in one household, G2P [4] was detected in the index case, G9P [8] in one contact with both viruses in another household member. In addition, P [8] was detected in the index case and G [2] was detected in the G9P [8]-infected contact, suggesting that all three individuals were infected with both viruses.10.1371/journal.pone.0067763.g005Figure 5Genotype (G- and P-type) profiles of infections amongst rotavirus index cases and household contacts.The first 2 columns represent the G and P types (respectively) of the typeable index cases (n = 35) and, with each typeable household contact (n = 57) shown to the right of the index case. Single G and P-tpye infections are color-coded; mixed infections are in black and un-typeable G- or P-types are in grey.A total of 10 G1 viruses were detected (1 healthy control, 1 diarrhea control, 2 household contact of diarrhea controls and 7 household contacts of cases). None were Rotarix vaccine strain.DiscussionOur results suggest that rotavirus is highly transmissible in household settings. Although secondary cases of disease are rare among adults, transmission of virus resulting in asymptomatic infection is exceedingly common. Overall, 55% of household contacts showed evidence of infection. Disease attack rates were approximately 30% amongst children under the age of ten years. Moreover, we have identified factors associated with transmissibility in cases (frequent vomiting/severity and being under 18 months of age) as well as susceptibility in contacts (being a sibling of or sharing a room with the index case). Infection rates were consistently high across all ages, whereas young age was a risk factor only for disease susceptibility. RT-qPCR was vital for detection of asymptomatic infection.Our inferences are strengthened by the recruitment of two groups of control households. First, we are able to confirm that presence of rotavirus is relatively rare among household members where the index child did not have rotavirus. Thus, the high prevalence of infection detected in case households cannot be explained by background levels of infection. Moreover, the data support the notion that viral load and, therefore EIA diagnostic results, are strongly associated with symptomatic disease [11]. Nearly all asymptomatic household members in case, diarrhea control and health control households had a Ct value >20.The fact that we did not detect rotavirus in stools from contacts of asymptomatically infected healthy controls suggests that symptoms are crucial for transmission of rotavirus. Interestingly, rotavirus was detected in 13% of contacts of diarrhea controls who were found to have low-level rotavirus infections (high Ct values). This suggests that rotavirus can be transmitted, even if it is not the cause of disease, when the index case is symptomatic from another cause. However, we found no instances of asymptomatic infection leading to transmission resulting in symptomatic disease. To the contrary, we found that symptoms, specifically vomiting, are associated with transmission of infection and disease.There are at least two important limitations of our study. First, we cannot be certain that the child who presented to the clinic for diarrhea was the first to be infected in the household, so we have been careful to refer to these children as index, rather than primary, cases. In most situations, the index child likely was the primary case, but amongst the 20 symptomatic episodes amongst household contact, 6 occurred prior to the index case. These 6 individuals were excluded from disease risk factor analysis. However, because we found no evidence of true asymptomatic transmission, it is highly likely that the symptomatic index cases transmitted virus to the large number of asymptomatic but infected household contacts, rather than the reverse. A second important limitation relates to the possibility of cross-contamination of specimens within the household. Because of the timing of collection and the need to get a stool from all members of a household, collection was performed by individuals themselves or a responsible adult in the case of young children. Despite clear instructions on specimen collection by trained study nurses, there remains the possibility of contamination in the household setting. While we cannot rule out that some detections of virus could be results of contamination, the elucidation of factors related to disease transmission (relationship to index, sharing a room with index, vomiting in index) argue for a genuine pattern consistent with transmission, rather than random contamination.Previous studies of rotavirus household transmission have not used genotyping data to aid in the interpretation of apparent transmission links. We hypothesized that the same virus would be detected amongst all infected household members, and thereby strengthen evidence of a transmission event. Instead, the genotyping results presented a more complicated picture. In some households, a single genotype was in fact detected amongst all infected individuals. In others, there was evidence of multiple rotavirus genotypes infecting household members. In others still, there was evidence to suggest that there was more than one introduction into the household (based on multiple viruses, but no co-infections). Apparent co-infections were more common amongst household contacts than cases. This could either be because asymptomatically infected individuals are more likely to harbor multiple rotavirus types, [18] or, that PCR-based detection methods are more likely to pick up only the most abundant virus especially in acute pediatric infections where viral load may be several orders of magnitude higher for the virus actually causing disease. Therefore, it may be that both symptomatic children and their asymptomatic contacts have the same diversity of viruses in their stools, but a single virus is more likely to be detected in robust childhood infections.Our results would suggest that either prevention of infection or severe symptoms through vaccination could also indirectly avert secondary household or community cases. Unfortunately, we were unable to directly assess the effect of vaccination on transmissibility since >85% of the age-eligible population was vaccinated.In conclusion, these results highlight the remarkable infectiousness of rotavirus, and the pathways through which transmission occurs within household settings. In the future, household transmission studies should be implemented during the roll-out of rotavirus vaccines or in partially-vaccinated populations, in order to be adequately powered to quantify the impact of vaccination on transmission.Supporting InformationFiles S1
Accession numbers for submitted strains. Strain names and accession numbers for all new viral sequence data deposited in GenBank.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Genetic Diversity of Rotaviruses Circulating in Pediatric Patients and Domestic Animals in Thailand

1. IntroductionRotavirus (RV) is the main causative agent of acute viral gastroenteritis in infants and young children worldwide and in a wide variety of animal species [1]. Globally, rotavirus infection accounts for an estimated 30–50% of childhood diarrheal hospitalizations and is associated with >200,000 deaths annually in children under five years of age, with the mortality rate being greatest in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa [2,3,4]. Rotavirus is transmitted via the fecal-oral route. Certainly, contaminated food or water, unsanitary surfaces, and poor hygiene are the risk factors for rotavirus infection [5]. The symptoms of rotavirus infection typically include diarrhea, vomiting, fever, and abdominal pain. Currently, there is no specific treatment for rotavirus infection, and in most cases, it is a self-limited disease with spontaneous recovery within three to eight days [6]. The best way to prevent rotavirus infection is vaccination. Rotavirus live-attenuated vaccines that have been prequalified by WHO and have been licensed globally/nationally are Rotarix (RV1), RotaTeq (RV5), ROTAVAC, and ROTASIL [7]. Although rotavirus vaccines for infants have been introduced in over 100 countries, rotavirus-associated mortality remains high in low-income countries [7,8]. In addition, both Rotarix and RotaTeq vaccines have been incorporated into Thailand’s national childhood immunization program since 2020 [9]. Rotavirus is classified into nine species (A, B, C, D, F, G, H, I, and J) [10]. Among these, rotavirus A (RVA) is the most widespread and medically significant species worldwide [6,11]. The genetic diversity of rotavirus is driven by interspecies transmission and genetic reassortment events, which are the important mechanisms of rotavirus evolution [12]. Humans can be infected by rotavirus of animal origins through direct transmission or by the exchange of one or more genome segments among human and animal rotaviruses [13]. Several studies have demonstrated that human rotavirus strains have originated from animal strains of independent ancestors [12]. In addition, some of the uncommon rotavirus strains that have been detected in humans are derived from viruses transmitted between humans and animals [14].In Thailand, several studies of rotavirus epidemiology have been conducted over the past four decades. The epidemiology of rotavirus infection in Thailand from 1977 to 1996 and 2000 to 2011 has been reviewed previously by Maneekarn et al. [15,16]. The present review article summarized the information on rotavirus prevalence and their genotypes, the temporal distribution patterns, and described the rotavirus interspecies transmissions among humans and animals, which were detected in Thailand from 2008 to 2020 and have not been included in the previous reviews.2. Virus Biology and Classification2.1. Rotavirus BiologyRotaviruses were first discovered in rectal swabs of monkeys and intestinal epithelium tissue biopsy of mice by electron microscopy in the 1950s and 1960s, respectively [17]. In 1973, Ruth Bishop and coworkers first described rotavirus as a human pathogen in tissue biopsy of duodenum epithelial cells and stools from nine children with acute gastroenteritis [18]. Later, rotavirus was detected in large quantities in stool samples from children hospitalized with acute non-bacterial gastroenteritis by negative staining electron microscopy [19]. Under the electron microscope, the viral particle with a wheel-like appearance of approximately 70 nm in diameter was observed and designated subsequently as rotavirus (the term rotavirus is derived from the Latin word rota, which means wheel) [20]. Rotavirus is classified into the genus Rotavirus in the family Sedoreoviridae in the order Reovirales [10]. Rotavirus is a large non-enveloped virus with a size of approximately 65 to 75 nm in diameter, which consists of three concentric icosahedral capsid structures. The outer layer is composed of two capsid proteins, VP4 and VP7. The intermediate layer is comprised of a single type of VP6 protein. The internal core consists of VP2 associated with VP1 (RNA-dependent RNA polymerase) and VP3 (viral capping enzyme). The viral genome, comprised of 11 segments of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), is packaged entirely within the internal core layer [1,21]. Each rotavirus genome segment contains one to two open reading frames with 5′- and 3′- terminal noncoding regions. The rotavirus genome encodes for six viral structural proteins (VP1-VP4, VP6, and VP7) and six nonstructural proteins (NSP1-NSP6) [1,22]. The structural proteins integrated into the virion determines host specificity and cell entry. The nonstructural proteins, constructed during infection, are involved in viral replication and pathogenesis and inhibit the innate immune response to infection [3,7]. According to the antigenicity of the intermediate layer VP6, at least nine different species of rotaviruses have been classified [10]. Among these, species A to C and H infect human and mammalian species. However, rotavirus A is the most widespread species and predominantly infects humans, especially young children [3,14].2.2. Dual Classification SystemThe rotavirus strains have been classified by a dual classification system based on antigenic and sequence differences of the two outer capsid proteins, VP7 and VP4 proteins, into G (glycosylated) and P (protease-sensitive) genotypes, respectively [21]. Although 42 G genotypes and 58 P genotypes have been described in humans and animals worldwide [23], only a few combinations of G and P genotypes are predominantly detected in humans. The most frequently detected human rotavirus genotypes are G1P[8], G2P[4], G3P[8], G4P[8], G8P[8], G9P[8], and G12P[8] [7,24].2.3. Full-Length Genome Classification System Due to the increasing of rotavirus sequence data, the Rotavirus Classification Working Group (RCWG) established a new rotavirus classification system based on the nucleotide sequence identities of each genome segment in the order of Gx-P[x]-Ix-Rx-Cx-Mx-Ax-Nx-Tx-Ex-Hx to represented the genotypes of VP7-VP4-VP6-VP1-VP2-VP3-NSP1-NSP2-NSP3-NSP4-NSP5/6 [25]. Within rotavirus A, at least 42 G genotypes, 58 P genotypes, 32 I genotypes, 28 R genotypes, 24 C genotypes, 24 M genotypes, 39 A genotypes, 28 N genotypes, 28 T genotypes, 32 E genotypes, and 28 H genotypes of rotaviruses have been identified from humans and several animal species [23].2.4. Genotype ConstellationsTwo genotype constellations of rotavirus A, I1-R1-C1-M1-A1-N1-T1-E1-H1 (Wa-like) and I2-R2-C2-M2-A2-N2-T2-E2-H2 (DS-1-like), have been shown to circulate worldwide in humans [21,26]. The Wa-like strains have been demonstrated to share a common ancestor with the porcine rotavirus, whereas DS-1-like strains have been shown to have several gene segments that have a common origin with the bovine rotavirus [27]. In addition to Wa-like and DS-1-like rotaviruses, another genotype (AU-1-like), G3-P[9]-I3-R3-C3-M3-A3-N3-T3-E3-H3 is rarely detected in humans and considered to share a common ancestor with feline and canine rotavirus strains [28]. 3. Molecular Epidemiology and Genetic DiversityRotavirus A is the main causative agent of acute gastroenteritis in infants and young children under five years of age and is the most significant pathogen associated with the mortality of children in several countries worldwide, with infection rates ranging from 30–50% [3,29]. Moreover, rotavirus infection was estimated to cause 151,714 deaths among children under five years of age in 2019, and 90% of cases were in developing or low-income countries, probably due to limited access to health care services, lack of hydration therapy, and malnutrition [3,30]. Generally, G1P[8], G2P[4], G3P[8], G4P[8], G8P[8], G9P[8], and G12P[8] are the most prevalent strains and account for over 70% of all strains circulated worldwide [13].3.1. Rotavirus Prevalence and Age DistributionIn Thailand, the surveillance of rotavirus infection has been conducted in Bangkok since 1977, and subsequently, several studies have been reported from different geographical regions of Thailand, including the North, Northeast, Eastern, Central, and South regions [15,31]. The overall infection rate of rotavirus A in children hospitalized with diarrhea in Thailand, summarized from two reviews from 1977 to 2011, ranged from 22.8% to 44.5% [15,16]. However, the studies using the specimens collected from 2008 to 2010 that were published recently and have not been included in the previous reviews are also described in this review. A map of Thailand indicates the regions and provinces where the stool samples were collected is shown in Figure 1. As shown in Table 1, the study conducted in Chiang Rai, Nakhon-Ratchasima, Surat Thani, and Phitsanulok Provinces reported the prevalence of rotavirus A infection in children with acute gastroenteritis from 2008 to 2010 at 26.8% and more than 70% of the patients were younger than two years old [32]. Likewise, children hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis in Chiang Mai Province from 2010 to 2013 were infected with rotavirus 17.8%, and a high infection rate was also observed in children younger than 24 months old [33]. The study conducted in Bangkok and Khon Kaen Provinces from 2011 to 2014 revealed the prevalence of rotavirus infection at 30% [34], whereas the prevalence in Phechabun and Sukhothai provinces in 2013 and 2014 was 24% [35]. The rotavirus surveillance in Bangkok, Udonthani, Beung Kan, Phuket, Tak, and Chanthaburi Provinces from 2014 to 2016 revealed the prevalence of rotavirus infection at 27.5% in children between the age of five to ten years old [36]. The prevalence of rotavirus infection in children with acute gastroenteritis in Chiang Rai Province (Northern Thailand) was 33.7% from 2015 to 2016 [37] and dropped to 11.5% from 2018 to 2020 [38]. In addition, the prevalence of rotavirus infection in children hospitalized with diarrhea from 2018 to 2019 in Chiang Mai (Northern Thailand) was 17.9% [39], and in Bangkok (Central Thailand) from 2016 to 2019 dropped down to 15.7% [40]. Altogether, it should be noted that the prevalence of rotavirus infection in children with acute gastroenteritis in Thailand from 2011 to 2016 ranged from 24.2 to 33.7% and dropped down to the range of 11.5–15.0% from 2016 to 2020. Furthermore, it is interesting to point out that the prevalence of rotavirus infection in children hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis in Chiang Mai Province from 2010 to 2013 and 2018 to 2019 remained the same at 17.8% and 17.9%.The global trend in the prevalence of rotavirus infection declined substantially many years ago, particularly in countries where rotavirus vaccines have been implemented [41,42,43,44]. In Thailand, RotaTeq and Rotarix vaccines were initially introduced as voluntary vaccines in 2005 and 2008, respectively [9,45]. Furthermore, in 2020, the rotavirus vaccines were incorporated into Thailand’s national childhood immunization program. Moreover, during the COVID-19 pandemic, intensive control measures on the COVID-19 pandemic have been implemented, including physical distancing, surface disinfection, and improved hand hygiene, which can potentially impact the overall occurrence of infectious diseases, including rotavirus infection [41,46]. Consequently, these factors may have influenced the prevalence of rotavirus infection among Thai children recently.3.2. Seasonal Patterns of Human Rotavirus Infection In Thailand, several studies revealed that rotavirus in children hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis could be detected year-round with peaks in the cool and dry months (November to May) [44], as summarized in Table 1. The surveillance of rotavirus in Chiang Rai, Nakhon-Ratchasima, Surat-Thani, and Phitsanulok Provinces from 2008 to 2010 revealed that rotavirus infection reached a peak from November to April [32]. Another study in Chiang Rai Province from 2015 to 2016 reported the highest rate of rotavirus detection in March [37]. Later, the study conducted in Chiang Mai Province from 2018 to 2019 revealed the high detection rate of rotavirus from January to March [39]. Recently, rotavirus A infection in Chiang Rai Province peaked from March to May of 2019 to 2020 [38]. Altogether, most diarrheal cases of rotavirus infection tend to appear in the cool or dry months of the year in Thailand.3.3. Distribution of Rotavirus A Genotypes in Pediatric PatientsA comprehensive review article describing rotavirus A prevalence in children suffering from acute gastroenteritis in Thailand between 2000 and 2007 revealed the identification of a wide range of rotavirus genotypes. These genotypes included G1P[8], G2P[4], G2P[8], G3P[3], G3P[8], G3P[9], G3P[10], G3P[19], G9P[8], G12P[6], and G12P[8]. Notably, among these genotypes, G1P[8] and G9P[8] emerged as the predominant circulating strains within this country [16]. Molecular epidemiological studies of rotavirus G and P genotypes distribution in Thailand over twelve years from 2008 to 2020 are summarized in Figure 2. The rotavirus G1P[8] genotype was still detected as the most dominant genotype in Thailand over 40% from 2008 to 2016. Then, it decreased dramatically to less than 6.1% during the study period of 2015 to 2020 [33,38]. Similarly, the trend of G2P[4] detection was also downward from 11.5–23.3% from 2008 to 2016 to 6.0–6.7% from 2016 to 2019. On the contrary, G9P[8] and G3P[8], which were the minor rotavirus genotypes detected over seven years period from 2008 to 2014, increased sharply to the most prevalent genotype from 2015 to 2019. Interestingly, G8P[8] became the most prevalent genotype from 2018 to 2020 [38]. The emergence of G8P[8] as the most predominant genotype with an exceptionally high frequency in Chiang Rai has never been observed before in this area. It is noteworthy that the predominance of G8P[8] genotypes in Chiang Rai province aligns with a study conducted in Chiang Mai province during the same period, from 2018 to 2019 [39]. These findings strongly suggest that there has been a significant change in the circulating strains of rotavirus in Thailand over time. Furthermore, the uncommon rotavirus strains, G1P[4], G1P[6], G2P[6], G2P[8], G3P[4], G3P[9], G3P[10], G4P[6], G4P[8], G5P6], G5P[19], G9P[4], G9P[6], G9P[19], G10P[14], G12P[4], G12P[6], G12P[8], were detected periodically at low frequency in Thailand. Some of these strains have been characterized and reported as animal-like rotaviruses strains, for instance, feline-like G3P[9], porcine-like G4P[6], bovine-like G8P[8], and bat-like G3P[10] human rotavirus strains [33,40].Overall, the most common rotavirus A genotypes that circulated in Thailand over twelve years period from 2008 to 2020 were G1P[8], G2P[4], G3P[8], G8P[8], and G9P[8] genotypes. The changing of rotavirus genotypes has also been observed in other countries, especially in Southeast Asian countries. The most predominant genotype has changed from G1P[8] to the G3P[8], G8P[8], and G9P[8] genotypes [44]. This phenomenon could be attributable to the acquisition of immunity previously exposed and lacking herd immunity against that genotype. In addition, rotavirus vaccines, RotaTeq and Rotarix, were licensed as optional vaccines in Thailand in 2005 and 2008, respectively, [9,45] and possibly impacted the alteration of rotavirus predominant genotypes.3.4. Prevalence and Distribution of Rotavirus A Genotypes in Animals Rotavirus A is a diarrheal pathogen that can infect a broad range of animal species, such as pigs, cows, dogs, and cats [44]. Rotavirus A genotypes that have been detected in pigs worldwide are thirteen G genotypes (G1 to G6, G8 to G12, and G26) and seventeen P genotypes (P[1] to P[8], P[11], P[13], P[19], P[23], P[26], P[27], P[32], P[34], and P[49]) [47]. The most common G genotypes in pigs are G3, G4, G5, G9, and G11, in associated with P[6], P[7], P[13], P[19], and P[23] [48]. In cattle, at least 12 G types (G1–G3, G5, G6, G8, G10, G11, G15, G17, G21, and G24) and 11 P types (P[1], P[3], P[5-7], P[11], P[14], P[17], P[21], P[29], and P[33]) have been reported. However, the most prevalent genotypes in calves are G6, G8, and G10, as well as P[1], P[5], and P[11] [12]. The most common rotavirus A genotypes in canines are G3P[3] and G3P[9], whereas G3P[3] and G3P[9] are the most prevalent genotypes in felines [49].The distribution of rotavirus in various animal species in Thailand from 2011 to 2023 is summarized in Table 2. In Thailand, few published articles on rotavirus A infection in animals exist. Most studies reported the detection of rotavirus A in bovine and porcine species from 1988 to 2010 [16]. Likewise, one study conducted the surveillance of rotavirus A in pigs in Chiang Mai and Lamphun Provinces from 2011 to 2014 [50]. It was observed that the prevalence of rotavirus A infection in piglets under four weeks old was 23.0%, and the most predominant genotype was G4P[13] (29.2%), followed by G4P[23] (14.1%), G5P[23] (11.5%), G4P[6] (9.7%), G3P[23] (7.0%), G5P[13], (6.1%), G3P[13] (4.4%), G3P[6] (2.7%), and G5P[6] (2.7%). Moreover, G3P[19], G4P[7], G9P[19], G9P[23], G9P[7], G4P[19], and G11P[13] genotypes were also detected at a low percentage. Another study conducted the surveillance of porcine rotavirus infection in diarrheic piglets across seventeen provinces in the Northeast, East, Central, West, and South of Thailand from 2011 to 2016 [51] and found that the prevalence of porcine rotavirus infection was 9.5%. Then, 24 porcine rotavirus strains from the former study were randomly identified with G and P genotypes [52]. The dominant genotype in piglets was G9P[13] (25.0%) and G9P[23] (25.0%), followed by G3P[13] (20.8%), G9P[19] (12.5%), G4P[6] (8.3%), G4P[19] (4.2%), and G5P[23] (4.2%). In addition, the prevalence of canine rotavirus infection was found at 0.7% in dogs under one-year-old in 2016 to 2019 from five provinces, including Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Bangkok, Suphan Buri, Nakhon Rachasima, and Tak, and all of them were G3P[3] genotypes [53]. Recently, the G3P[9] rotavirus strain was detected in a two-year-old female cat with severe diarrhea in Bangkok in 2021 [54]. Overall, the prevalence and predominant strains of rotavirus A in domestic animals in Thailand align with the findings from other studies [55,56,57].4. Interspecies Transmission of RotavirusesRotaviruses are constantly changing, and most of these changes are driven by interspecies transmission and reassortment of segmented rotavirus A genomes, which are important mechanisms of rotavirus evolution leading to the great diversity of human rotavirus A [12,14]. In Thailand, numerous studies reported the detection of unusual rotavirus strains bearing the gene segments derived from the rotaviruses of both human and animal origins. For evidence of interspecies transmission of porcine rotavirus to humans, the G9P[23] was detected in a ten-month-old child hospitalized with severe diarrhea, and this uncommon rotavirus strain carried non-G/P human rotavirus genome with the constellation of I5-R1-C1-M1-A8-N1-T1-E1-H1, which was similar to those of porcine rotavirus strains [58]. In addition, the surveillance of rotavirus infection in children admitted to the hospitals with diarrhea in Udon Thani and Chanthaburi provinces revealed that two G4P[6] strains exhibited a Wa-like genotype constellation, except for the NSP1 genotype of A8 that is generally found in porcine rotavirus strains [59]. Based on full genome constellation and phylogenetic analyses, two rare human G4P[6] rotavirus strains that contained the genotype constellation of porcine G4P[6] were also detected in patients with diarrhea in Chiang Mai, and they were most similar to the G4P[6] porcine rotavirus strains detected previously in the same geographical area [60]. Moreover, a rare genotype of G5P[19] was first detected in an asymptomatic patient and displayed a close genetic relationship with porcine rotavirus strains detected from 2008 to 2010 [32]. The occurrence of zoonotic transmission of a bovine rotavirus strain was also frequently identified in Thailand, such as G6P[14] and G10P[14] human rotavirus strains detected from children with diarrhea carrying the genetic backbone of I2-R2-C2-M2-A3-N2-T6-E2-H3 similar to those of bovine rotavirus strains [61,62]. Furthermore, Chieochansin et al. [34] reported the detection of several rotaviruses with unusual genotypes, including one feline-like G3P[9], one bovine-like G8P[8], and four porcine-like (G4P[6], G5P[6], G9P[8], and G12P[6]) human rotavirus strains, suggesting a great diversity of animal-like rotavirus strains circulating in children with diarrhea in Thailand.The decrease in the detection of common human rotavirus G1P[8] with Wa-like and the increase in the detection of unusual human rotavirus DS-1-like reassortant strains recently were observed in Thailand. From 2010 to 2013, G8P[8] strains with DS-1-like genotype constellation were detected at high frequency in Chiang Mai Province, Northern Thailand. The genome sequence analysis of these G8P[8] strains revealed that they were closely related to bovine rotavirus and bovine-like human rotavirus strains [33]. Moreover, G9P[19] rotavirus strains detected in children with diarrhea in Chiang Mai Province showed genome sequences closely related to those of G9P[19] porcine rotavirus strains isolated in the same area. These findings imply that interspecies transmission among porcine and human rotaviruses occurred in nature [63]. From 2013 to 2014, Tacharoenmuang et al. [64] reported the detection of novel DS-1-like G8P[8] reassortant strains which carried both human and bovine rotavirus gene segments in stool specimens of children hospitalized with severe diarrhea. The surveillance of rotavirus infection in Thailand from 2012 to 2014 revealed that the uncommon DS-1-like G1P[8] strains carrying DS-1-like human rotavirus genes (G1-P[8]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A2-N2-T2-E2-H2) were detected and G1P[8] appeared to be originated from human Wa-like G1P[8] strains through reassortment and these Thai G1P[8] strains were most similar to the Japanese DS-1-like G1P[8] [65]. The finding implied that the DS-1-like G1P[8] strains isolated from Thailand and Japan originated from the same ancestor. Rotavirus is one of the viral pathogens that infect many host species, including bats. In the last decade, the bat has been the potential source for emerging rotaviruses in humans and is considered to be the reservoir for many other emerging viruses [66,67]. In Thailand, there are sporadic reports of bat-like human rotavirus strains. Up To date, four published articles have reported the detection of G3P[10] bat-like human rotavirus strains in Thailand [39,67,68,69]. The first G3P[10] bat-like human rotavirus strain (CMH079) was isolated from a two-year-old child admitted to the hospital with diarrhea in Chiang Mai in 2005 [69]. Ten years later, in 2015, the bat-like G3P[10] (MS2015-1-0001) was detected in an eleven-month-old child hospitalized with acute gastroenteritis in Tak Province. This atypical G3 strain exhibited high nucleotide sequence identity with Thai human DS-1-like G3P[8] (PK2015-1-0037) and Chinese bat rotavirus (MYAS33) strains [67]. From 2016 to 2018, there was an additional report of the detection of two uncommon G3P[10] rotavirus strains from patients with diarrhea, and these strains were also highly similar to Chinese bat rotavirus MYAS33 and Thai bat-like human rotavirus MS2015-1-0001 strains. Interestingly, one of the G3P[10] strains in this study has a unique genome constellation (G3-P[10]-I3-R3-C3-M3-A9-N3-T3-E3-H6), which has not been reported in the literature before [68]. In 2019, the most recent study reported that the unusual G3P[10] (CMH-S015-19) rotavirus strain had been identified from a diarrheic one-year-old child in Chiang Mai [39]. Phylogenetic analysis of VP7 and VP4 genes of CMH-S015-19 strain showed a close genetic relationship with those of bat rotavirus strains (LUS12-14 and MYAS33) and also similar to the G3P[10] (CMH079) human rotavirus strain, which was isolated in the same area 15 years ago [69]. Increasing interaction between humans and wild animals such as bats leads to an elevated risk of zoonotic rotavirus transmission.5. Conclusions and Further PerspectivesIn Thailand, the accumulation of data on the prevalence, seasonal pattern, and genetic diversity of rotaviruses has been reported continuously for almost four decades. Rotavirus has been recognized as the major viral causative agent of acute gastroenteritis in children younger than five years of age. The rotavirus G1P[8] genotype was detected as the most predominant genotype and abruptly decreased from 2017 to 2020. In contrast, recently, other genotypes such as G9P[8], G3P[8], and G8P[8] have been detected as the predominant genotypes. In addition, the interspecies transmission of rotavirus strains has been occasionally detected in Thailand, such as G3P[10], G4P[6], and G9[P23]. Most recently, rotavirus vaccines were introduced as part of the national childhood immunization program in Thailand in 2020. Further epidemiological surveillance of rotavirus infection after the implementation of rotavirus vaccines is needed to be conducted to investigate the influence of rotavirus vaccines on the prevalence, seasonality, and diversity of rotavirus strains circulating in Thailand.


Title: Modeling Nosocomial Transmission of Rotavirus in Pediatric Wards

No full text body available.


Title: Rotavirus NSP1 Contributes to Intestinal Viral Replication, Pathogenesis, and Transmission

INTRODUCTIONDespite a dramatic reduction of rotavirus (RV)-associated morbidity and mortality following the introduction of multiple safe and effective RV vaccines, group A RVs remain a major cause of life-threatening gastroenteritis among young children from 1 month to 5 years old (1, 2). RV infections still result in approximately 128,500 to 215,000 deaths annually worldwide (3, 4). The RV vaccine option is also limited for immunocompromised children due to the risk of persistent shedding and diarrhea (5). Thus, there remains an urgent need to develop more effective vaccines, especially for immunosuppressed individuals.Although RV infections in mammals occur frequently (6), RV isolates from one host species generally replicate less efficiently in heterologous species. Several RV-encoded factors, including VP3, VP4, NSP1, NSP2, and NSP3, have been implicated in contributing to this host range restriction phenotype (7). Among these viral proteins, NSP1 has been identified as an interferon (IFN) antagonist with several distinct mechanisms that enhances virus replication (8–12). NSP1 from many animal RV strains binds to and promotes the proteasomal degradation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) (9, 13). NSP1 also recognizes and degrades IRF5, IRF7, and IRF9 (14, 15). NSP1 from several human and porcine RV strains binds to the host cullin-3 E3 ligase complex (16) and induces β-transduction repeat-containing protein (β-TrCP) degradation (17). In addition, NSP1 can directly target signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) phosphorylation and/or translocation into the nucleus to further block the IFN amplification pathway (10, 18). Taken together, all of these studies have established NSP1 as a potent inhibitor of the host IFN responses to facilitate RV replication.With the development of a new plasmid-based RV reverse genetics (RG) system, several groups successfully rescued recombinant simian RVs (SA11 strain), including one in which NSP1 is almost completely replaced by a NanoLuc luciferase reporter except for the first 37 amino acids at the N terminus (19, 20). The replication of this recombinant SA11 is only modestly lower than the parental SA11 strain in MA104 cells, suggesting that NSP1 is dispensable for RV infection in vitro. However, since heterologous RVs replicate and spread inefficiently in mice (21), the role of NSP1 in RV infection under physiologically relevant conditions cannot be studied using this system. To overcome this hurdle, we recently constructed and recovered a fully replication-competent, infectious, and virulent recombinant murine RV using an optimized RG system (22). In this study, we take advantage of this modified RG system and further generate a new NSP1-deficient murine RV to directly address the significance and functional relevance of the NSP1 protein in intestinal replication and pathogenesis in vivo.RESULTSA recombinant NSP1-deficient murine RV can be successfully rescued via an optimized RG system.To determine the role of NSP1 in viral replication in vivo, we utilized the recombinant D6/2 murine-like RV backbone with 2 gene segments (1 and 10) derived from the simian RV SA11 strain and the other 9 gene segments (including NSP1) from the murine RV D6/2 strain (designated here rD6/2-2g) (22). In order to generate an NSP1-deficient rD6/2-2g virus (rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null), we introduced two premature stop codons in gene segment 5 by replacing AAG and TGC at the nucleotide positions 43 to 45 and 52 to 55 with TAG and TGA, respectively, via site-directed mutagenesis (Fig. 1A). With these manipulations, the protein product of gene 5 from the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null infection is limited to the first 4 amino acids. Using the optimized RG system, we succeeded in recovering a replication-competent rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. We next extracted the viral RNA from sucrose cushion-purified RVs and performed polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) to analyze the viral genomic double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) segments. The genomic dsRNA migration patterns were identical between rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null viruses, with the genes 1 and 10 from SA11 and the remaining 9 genes from D6/2 (Fig. 1B). We also validated the NSP1-null virus by a unique enzymatic digestion site (HinfI) introduced by the second stop codon. In comparison, cDNA amplified from gene segment 5 of rD6/2-2g was resistant to HinfI digestion (Fig. 1C). Lastly, we examined IRF3 degradation as a functional readout of murine RV NSP1 expression. To that end, we performed immunoblotting analysis to examine the cell lysates of MA104 cells infected by rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. With similar protein levels of RV VP6, indicating comparable replication between rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null, the protein levels of IRF3 were undetectable in rD6/2-2g-infected MA104 cells whereas IRF3 was not degraded by rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null infection (Fig. 1D). Based on these results, we demonstrate that the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null virus was successfully rescued and did not express the NSP1 protein.FIG 1Generation of a recombinant NSP1-deficient murine RV using the optimized reverse genetics system. (A) Schematics of the plasmids used to rescue rD6/2-2g (pT7-NSP1) and NSP1-deficient rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null (pT7-NSP1-null) viruses. To generate the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null virus, AAG and TGC at the nucleotide positions 43 to 45 and 52 to 55 were replaced with two stop codons, TAG and TGA, which are indicated by the black arrowheads. UTR, untranslated region; ORF, open reading frame; aa, amino acids. (B) RNA was extracted from sucrose gradient-concentrated indicated RV strains, separated on a 4 to 15% polyacrylamide gel, and stained by ethidium bromide. Genes 1 and 10 from the SA11 strain are marked by red asterisks. (C) The stop codon introduced at nucleotide positions 52 to 55 creates a unique HinfI digestion site. The NSP1 5′-end PCR products were digested by HinfI at 37°C for 1 h and separated by a 2% agarose gel. (D) MA104 cells were infected by parental rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at an MOI of 3 for 6 h. The infected cells were lysed by RIPA buffer, and the protein levels of IRF3, VP6, and GAPDH in the cell lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting using indicated antibodies.The replication of a recombinant NSP1-deficient murine RV is comparable to the parental murine RV in multiple cell lines.To determine whether the loss of NSP1 protein negatively impacts virus replication in cell culture, we performed a multistep growth curve for rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in MA104 cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01. Both focus-forming unit (FFU) and quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR) assays did not reveal significant differences between rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null over the time course (Fig. 2A and B). The plaque sizes of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null (diameter, 2.07 ± 0.53 mm) were significantly smaller than those of rD6/2-2g (diameter, 4.53 ± 0.99 mm) in MA104 cells (Fig. 2C). We also validated the genetic stability of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null by serially passaging the virus 5 times in MA104 cells and confirming the presence of two stop codons in gene segment 5 (Fig. 2D). These results are consistent with the previous report that an intact NSP1 is not required for simian RV SA11 strain infection in MA104 cells (19, 20). To test whether the lack of NSP1 results in a minor replication defect that was not apparent in cell culture, we carried out competition experiments in MA104 cells coinfected with the same titers of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null viruses. At either low MOI (0.01) or high MOI (3), rD6/2-2g did not outgrow rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null RV at 8 and 24 h postinfection (hpi), suggesting that the replication ability of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null was comparable to rD6/2-2g (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material).FIG 2Replication kinetics of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in MA104 cells. (A) MA104 cells were infected with rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at an MOI of 0.01 (FFU/cell) for 0, 12, 24, 36, and 48 h. Infected cells were harvested by freezing and thawing 3 times. The titers of the propagated viruses at different time points were determined by an FFU assay. The data displayed are the mean ± SD for three different assays. (B) MA104 cells were infected as described above for 0, 8, and 24 h. RNA was extracted from infected cells, and RT-qPCR was used to measure RV NSP5 transcript levels in infected cells. The data shown are the mean ± SD for three different assays. (C) Plaque assays were performed for rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in MA104 cells at an MOI of 0.01, and individual plaque formation was recorded and measured at 5 dpi by a bright-field microscope. The data shown are the mean ± SD for two different assays. (D) Indicated recombinant murine RVs were serially passaged 5 times in MA104 cells. The NSP1 fragments were amplified from the viruses and analyzed by Sanger sequencing. ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant (unpaired Student’s t test).10.1128/mBio.03208-21.1FIG S1Sanger sequencing chromatograms of PCR products for the competition assay of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. MA104 cells were infected by rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at an MOI of 0.01 for 1, 8, and 24 h or at an MOI of 3 for 1 and 8 h. Total RNA was extracted, and amplified NSP1 fragments were analyzed using Sanger sequencing. Download FIG S1, TIF file, 1.3 MB.Copyright © 2021 Hou et al.2021Hou et al.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.Since NSP1 dampens the host IFN responses, which are defective in MA104 cells, we next tested whether the replication of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null is restricted in IFN-competent cell lines. We examined the growth kinetics of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in two different cell types: HEK293 and HAP1 cells, which are a human embryonic fibroblastic cell line and a human myeloid leukemia cell line, respectively. Both cell types are capable of mounting robust type I and III IFN responses to RV infection (23). However, the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null mutant still replicated comparably to rD6/2-2g in these IFN-competent cell lines (Fig. 3A and B), suggesting that NSP1 is dispensable for murine RV replication in an IFN competency-independent manner.FIG 3Growth curves of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in IFN-competent cells. HEK293 (A) and HAP1 (B) cells were infected by rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at an MOI of 0.01 for 0, 8, 24, and 48 h. The expression level of NSP5 was quantified by RT-qPCR. The data shown are the mean ± SD for three individual assays. **, P < 0.01; n.s., not significant (unpaired Student’s t test).Loss of NSP1 severely attenuates murine RV replication in 129sv suckling mice.To compare the replication, pathogenesis, and spread of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in an in vivo environment, we orally inoculated 5-day-old wild-type 129sv suckling mice with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null and monitored the diarrheal development from day 1 to 12 postinfection. While the diarrhea occurrence from the rD6/2-2g-infected group was consistently higher than 70% for the first 10 days, rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null caused minimal to no diarrhea in infected animals for the first 2 days (Fig. 4A). Starting from 3 days postinfection (dpi), rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null started to approximate the parental virus, with their curves eventually trending in a similar fashion (Fig. 4A). We also quantified the shedding of infectious RVs in the feces of mouse pups by an FFU assay. Consistent with the defects in causing diarrhea, fecal shedding of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in infected mice could not be detected at 1 and 2 dpi, whereas we observed high RV titers from the rD6/2-2g infection (Fig. 4B). The two virus shedding curves looked similar from 3 to 5 dpi, before the RV shedding in rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected pups waned again compared to that of the rD6/2-2g group (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, we also evaluated the ability of these two viruses to transmit to uninfected littermates, an important trait for viruses that spread fecal-orally. We found that virtually all the noninoculated littermates of the rD6/2-2g-infected pups developed diarrhea at 6 dpi (Fig. 4C). In comparison, the maximal percentage of diarrhea among mock-infected pups in the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null cage reached 40% and lasted only 1 day (Fig. 4C). Collectively, these results suggest that NSP1 is necessary for optimal RV infection, disease, and spread in vivo.FIG 4Characterization of diarrhea, fecal shedding, and transmission of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in wild-type 129sv mice. (A) Five-day-old 129sv mice were orally inoculated with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. Diarrheal development was recorded from days 1 to 12 postinfection. “n” indicates the number of mice used in each group. (B) Fecal shedding of the infectious RVs was monitored by an FFU assay and normalized by the weight of feces. Virus shedding within the same group on each day is shown as mean ± SEM. (C) To evaluate the transmission ability of rD6/2-2g, 2 pups were orally infected with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g, and 5 uninfected suckling littermates were cohoused with the inoculated pups in the same cage. For rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null, 2 pups in one cage and 2 in another cage were orally infected with the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null virus described above and cohoused with 6 and 4 uninoculated pups, respectively. Diarrhea was evaluated until 12 dpi as described above. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant (two-way ANOVA).To directly investigate whether NSP1 contributes to RV intestinal replication, we collected all three small intestinal segments (i.e., duodenum, jejunum, and ileum) from rD6/2-2g- and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected pups at 2 dpi and measured viral loads by RT-qPCR. The number of rD6/2-2g genome copies in the ileum was significantly (about 3 logs) higher than that of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null, despite no major differences in the duodenum and jejunum (Fig. 5A). We also found that the viral loads of rD6/2-2g in mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) were higher than those of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null, whereas no difference were observed in the blood, bile ducts, or liver (Fig. 5B to E).FIG 5Viral loads of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in the small intestines and indicated systemic sites in wild-type 129sv mice. (A) Five-day-old wild-type 129sv pups were orally infected with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. RNA was extracted from duodenum, jejunum, and ileum collected at 2 dpi, and RT-qPCR was used to detect RV NSP5 mRNA levels. (B to E) Same as panel A except that blood, MLNs, bile duct, and liver were collected instead. ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant (Mann-Whitney U test for panel A and unpaired Student’s t test for panels B to E).We next performed an in vivo time course experiment to further characterize the attenuated intestinal replication of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. With similar input virus titers throughout the small intestine at 1 hpi, the replication levels of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null were comparable at 8 hpi (approximately one replication cycle) as measured by RT-qPCR (Fig. 6A and B). In contrast, rD6/2-2g genome copies in the jejunum were significantly (more than 2 logs) higher than those of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at 24 hpi (Fig. 6C). Although not statistically significant, the viral load of rD6/2-2g in the ileum was also more than 10-fold higher than that of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null, suggesting that NSP1 was required for murine RV infection to successfully propagate in vivo by 24 hpi.FIG 6Viral loads of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in the small intestines at different time points in wild-type 129sv mice. (A) Five-day-old wild-type 129sv pups were orally infected with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. RNA was extracted from duodenum, jejunum, and ileum collected at 1 h postinoculation, and RT-qPCR was used to detect RV NSP5 mRNA levels. (B and C) Same as panel A except that duodenum, jejunum, and ileum were collected at 8 and 24 h postinoculation instead. *, P < 0.05; n.s., not significant (Mann-Whitney U test).Revertant NSP1 mutations rescued NSP1-deficient murine RV replication in mice.Notably, we noticed that 4 out of 14 mice from the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected group shed large amounts of infectious viruses in the feces at 3 dpi (Fig. 4B). This was reproducibly observed in two independent sets of experiments (6 out of 7 at 4 dpi in one experiment and 4 out of 7 at 3 dpi in the other experiment) (Fig. S2). To account for this enhanced replication, we amplified the 5′ end of gene 5 (17 to 466 nucleotides) directly from the stool samples collected from mice that had detectable RV shedding from 1 to 4 dpi and performed Sanger sequencing. While the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null RV stock used for inoculation carried the mutations (Fig. S3A), NSP1 fragments amplified from the feces of the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected mice were indistinguishable from those from rD6/2-2g infection (Fig. S3B), indicating that RV in the fecal specimens readily reverted to the wild-type sequences. While we could not detect any RV shedding from rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected mice at 1 or 2 dpi, 75% of mice that shed infectious RVs at 3 dpi had complete NSP1 reversion mutations and 25% had incomplete reversion (Fig. S3B). Six out of 14 mice infected with rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null shed virus at 4 dpi, and all 6 animals had wild-type NSP1 sequences (Fig. S3B). These data are consistent with our observation that the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected mice unexpectedly developed diarrhea starting from 3 dpi and further emphasize an indispensable role that NSP1 protein plays during virus replication in vivo.10.1128/mBio.03208-21.2FIG S2Characterization of the virus shedding of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in wild-type 129sv mice. (A) Five-day-old 129sv mice were orally inoculated with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. Viral shedding in stool samples were detected by an FFU assay and normalized by the feces weight. (B) Another two cages of suckling mice were orally infected as in panel A, and the fecal shedding was measured and normalized as described above. Virus shedding within the same group on each day is shown as mean ± SEM. ***, P < 0.001 (two-way ANOVA). Download FIG S2, TIF file, 0.1 MB.Copyright © 2021 Hou et al.2021Hou et al.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.10.1128/mBio.03208-21.3FIG S3Sanger sequencing of the RV gene 5 fragments and pie chart summary of the NSP1 reversion. (A) NSP1 fragments (17 to 466 nucleotides) were amplified from the rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null RV stocks and analyzed by Sanger sequencing. (B) Same as panel A except that feces from rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-inoculated wild-type 129sv mice at days 3 and 4 postinfection were analyzed and plotted as percentage of reversion. (C) Same as panel A except that feces from rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-inoculated Stat1 KO 129sv mice at days 1 to 4 postinfection were analyzed instead. Download FIG S3, TIF file, 0.3 MB.Copyright © 2021 Hou et al.2021Hou et al.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.The blunted replication and pathogenesis of the recombinant NSP1-deficient murine RV are only partially recovered in the Stat1 KO mice.Since NSP1 functions as a highly potent IFN antagonist in vitro, we reasoned that rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null may be attenuated in wild-type 129sv mice due to the lack of IFN-inhibitory capacity. To test this hypothesis, we orally infected 5-day-old Stat1 knockout (KO) 129sv suckling pups, unable to respond to type I, II, and III IFNs, with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. For both viruses, the overall diarrheal development patterns in infected Stat1 KO 129sv mice resembled those in wild-type mice (Fig. 7A). However, compared to rD6/2-2g-infected animals that developed 57% and 100% diarrhea at 1 and 2 dpi, respectively, there was little to no diarrhea from rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-inoculated animals (Fig. 7A). We also evaluated the fecal RV shedding in the infected mice by an FFU assay. Even in the absence of IFN signaling, at 1 and 2 dpi, RV shedding of rD6/2-2g remained >3 logs higher than that from the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null infection (Fig. 7B), suggesting that NSP1 may facilitate RV replication in an IFN-independent manner.FIG 7Characterization of diarrhea and fecal shedding of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in Stat1 KO 129sv mice. (A) Five-day-old Stat1 KO 129sv mice were orally inoculated with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. The diarrhea rate was monitored from days 1 to 12 postinfection. (B) Viral shedding in stool samples was detected by an FFU assay and normalized by the feces weight. Virus shedding within one group on each day is shown as mean ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; n.s., not significant (two-way ANOVA).Consistent with the diarrhea and fecal shedding results, we found that for all the small intestinal tissues examined, rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null was still severely attenuated compared to rD6/2-2g in Stat1 KO mice at 2 dpi (Fig. 8A). The viral loads of rD6/2-2g in the ileum were approximately 7,000-fold higher than those of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected mice (Fig. 8A). Furthermore, rD6/2-2g also had significantly more spread to systemic organs including the blood, MLNs, bile duct, and liver than rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null (Fig. 8B to E). Collectively, these data indicate that even in a host devoid of IFN signaling, the replication of a murine RV without NSP1 expression remains highly attenuated in vivo.FIG 8Viral loads of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in the small intestines and indicated extraintestinal tissues in Stat1 KO 129sv mice. (A) Five-day-old Stat1 KO 129sv pups were orally infected with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. The duodenum, jejunum, and ileum were collected at 2 dpi, and RV NSP5 mRNA levels were detected by RT-qPCR. (B to E) Same as panel A except that blood, MLNs, bile duct, and liver were collected instead. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant (Mann-Whitney U test for panel A and unpaired Student’s t test for panels B to E).Further supporting an IFN-independent role of NSP1 is the fact that rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null also reverted to the wild-type sequences in Stat1 KO mice. We surveyed over 30 fecal samples from the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected mice. Out of the 8 mice that shed infectious RVs at 1 dpi, 25% of the mice had complete NSP1 revertant mutations and 75% of the mice had incomplete reversion (Fig. S3C). At 4 dpi, 8 out of the 10 mice that had substantial fecal shedding had viruses with wild-type NSP1 sequences (Fig. S3C). Therefore, all NSP1-deficient viruses reached 100% reversion in Stat1 KO 129sv mice by 4 dpi, the same as that in the wild-type 129sv mice.The attenuated replication of the recombinant NSP1-deficient murine RV is not rescued in the Asc knockout mice.Since inflammasome signaling inhibits RV infection and RV viral loads are significantly enhanced in the small intestines of Asc KO mice (24), which lack a key inflammasome adaptor protein, we next tested whether NSP1 acts to block inflammasome signaling. We orally infected 5-day-old wild-type C57BL/6 and Asc KO suckling pups with rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null with 1.5 × 103 FFU and harvested the small intestines at 24 hpi.Historically, we have noticed that C57BL/6 mice develop less severe diarrhea than 129sv pups of the same age (25). Consistent with these findings, we observed lower levels of rD6/2-2g replication in the small intestines of C57BL/6 pups compared to 129sv pups (Fig. S4A). Importantly, the viral loads of rD6/2-2g in the jejunum were significantly higher than those of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-inoculated wild-type C57BL/6 mice (Fig. S4A), suggesting that a key function of NSP1 is required, irrespective of the mouse genetic background. Further, in Asc KO C57BL/6 mice, the viral loads of rD6/2-2g in the jejunum were still significantly higher than those of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-inoculated mice (Fig. S4B). These results indicate that the attenuated intestinal replication ability of NSP1-deficient RV may not be linked to host inflammasome signaling.10.1128/mBio.03208-21.4FIG S4Viral loads of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in the small intestines in wild-type and Asc KO C57BL/6 mice. (A) Five-day-old wild-type C57BL/6 pups were orally infected with 1.5 × 103 FFU of rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null RVs. The duodenum, jejunum, and ileum were collected at 24 hpi, and RV NSP5 mRNA levels were detected by RT-qPCR. (B) Same as panel A except that Asc KO C57BL/6 pups were used. *, P < 0.05; n.s., not significant (Mann-Whitney U test). Download FIG S4, TIF file, 0.09 MB.Copyright © 2021 Hou et al.2021Hou et al.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.The attenuated replication of the recombinant NSP1-deficient simian RV SA11 is not rescued in Stat1 KO mice.To further corroborate the unexpected finding that NSP1 is required for RV replication in Stat1 KO mice, we turned to the heterologous simian RV SA11 strain that leads to low but detectable fecal shedding when the mice are inoculated at a high dose (1 × 107 PFU) (21). We successfully rescued an NSP1-deficient SA11 strain (rSA11-NSP1-null), which was given to 5-day-old wild-type and Stat1 KO 129sv mice in direct comparison to the parental rSA11 at 1 × 107 PFU. The overall trends of diarrheal development between rSA11 and rSA11-NSP1-null in wild-type 129sv mice were similar (Fig. S5A). In Stat1 KO mice, both viruses developed less diarrhea than in the wild-type animals but the rSA11-NSP1-null seemed to be even more attenuated than rSA11 (Fig. S5A). We also quantified RV antigen shedding in the stool samples collected from rSA11- or rSA11-NSP1-null-infected mice by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). While neither virus had detectable shedding in wild-type pups, we observed that rSA11 but not rSA11-NSP1-null resulted in transient shedding between 4 and 6 dpi (Fig. S5B). Consistently, we found higher viral loads in the small intestines upon rSA11 infection than upon rSA11-NSP1-null infection of Stat1 KO mice (Fig. S5C). Taken together, these data suggest that despite limited replication ability, the heterologous simian RV SA11 strain is also attenuated without NSP1 expression in IFN-deficient animals, resembling what we observed with homologous murine RV infections.10.1128/mBio.03208-21.5FIG S5Characterization of diarrhea, fecal shedding, and replication of heterologous rSA11 and rSA11-NSP1-null in wild-type and Stat1 KO 129sv mice. (A) Five-day-old wild-type and Stat1 KO 129sv mice were orally infected with 1 × 107 PFU of rSA11 and rSA11-NSP1-null. Diarrheal development was recorded from days 0 to 11 postinoculation. (B) Stool samples were collected from 1 to 12 days postinfection, and virus shedding in feces was measured by ELISA and plotted as optical density (O.D.) values. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant (two-way ANOVA). (C) Small intestinal tissues were collected at 5 dpi. Total RNA was extracted, and RV NSP5 mRNA levels were detected by RT-qPCR. n.s., not significant (unpaired Student’s t test). Download FIG S5, TIF file, 0.2 MB.Copyright © 2021 Hou et al.2021Hou et al.https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.DISCUSSIONIn this study, we exploited a recently developed and further optimized plasmid-based RG system to examine the role of NSP1 in RV replication in vivo. Previous studies showed that naturally isolated RV SA11-5S and SA11-30-1A variants (26), and some RG-rescued recombinant RVs, albeit unable to induce IRF3 degradation, replicate efficiently in cell culture (20). However, because of the limited replication and transmission of nonmurine heterologous RVs in mice (27), until now it has been difficult to assess whether NSP1 is required for RV replication in vivo. Here, taking advantage of an optimized RG system, we rescued an NSP1-deficient murine virus-like rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null virus (Fig. 1), which replicated similarly to rD6/2-2g in MA104 cells (Fig. 2A and B). The plaques formed by rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null were, however, much smaller than those of rD6/2-2g (Fig. 2C), reminiscent of the data derived from the SA11 strain (19, 20). The smaller plaque size may reflect a defect in the efficiency of cell-cell spread.The similar growth properties of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null and rD6/2-2g in MA104 cells may be due to IFN-defective MA104 cells, which also supported comparable propagation of the parental rSA11 strain and recombinant rSA11-dC103 and rSA11-Nluc that both lack an intact NSP1 expression. The replication of rSA11-Nluc in IFN-competent cells was, however, much lower than that of rSA11 (19, 28), and this phenotype may be caused by the missing IRF3 degradation ability of rSA11-dC103 and rSA11-Nluc. Thus, in order to assess whether NSP1 was important to murine RV replication in IFN-competent cells, we examined the growth curves of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null and rD6/2-2g in HEK293 and HAP1 cells. Intriguingly, these two viruses still exhibited similar replication properties (Fig. 3). Although we observed a 3- to 4-fold-higher titer of rD6/2-2g in HAP1 cells at 48 hpi, there were no statistically significant differences at any other time points (Fig. 3). These results raise the possibilities that another RV protein may compensate for the loss of NSP1 or that the IFN-mediated antiviral activities are both cell type and virus strain specific.Recent studies have reported that the recombinant murine-like RV (rD6/2-2g) replicates robustly in the small intestines of 129sv suckling pups, that rD6/2-2g infection causes diarrheal diseases, and that the transmission efficiency of rD6/2-2g is similar to that of the original reassortant murine RV D6/2 strain (22). Here, we orally inoculated the 129sv mice with rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null. The lower percentage of diarrheal disease and lower titer of RV shedding in rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected pups at the early time points revealed that NSP1 protein is important for virus pathogenesis in vivo. However, starting on 3 dpi, the curves of diarrhea and virus shedding of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null approached those of the rD6/2-2g parental strain. This observation led us to ask whether the rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null reverted to wild-type rD6/2-2g, despite the presence of two stop codons inserted at the very beginning of the NSP1 open reading frame. To our surprise, all of the gene 5 segments amplified from rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected 129sv mice examined at 4 dpi had completely reverted to wild-type sequences (see Fig. S3B in the supplemental material). We performed the infection experiments with rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at different time points, and these data were repeated in two independent experiments (Fig. S2); thus, the reversion observed in rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-inoculated mice is unlikely to be due to the contamination by rD6/2-2g. We also amplified NSP1 from fecal specimens obtained on days 1 to 4 postinfection from Stat1 KO 129sv mice. Two out of 8 mice had complete NSP1 reversion mutations, and the remaining 6 had incomplete reversion as early as 1 dpi; meanwhile, all the 8 Stat1 KO 129sv mice had complete NSP1 reversion mutations at 4 dpi (Fig. S3C). These results emphasized the essential role of NSP1 protein during RV replication in vivo. We found significantly higher levels of rD6/2-2g in the small intestines, blood, MLNs, bile duct, and liver compared with rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null-infected Stat1 KO 129sv mice at 2 dpi (Fig. 8), although the only statistically significant differences examined in the wild-type 129sv mice at 2 dpi were in the ileum and MLNs (Fig. 5). We found that the replication of rD6/2-2g in small intestines and systemic organs in Stat1 KO 129sv mice was about 10-fold higher than in wild-type 129sv mice, but the replication of rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null in these tissues in wild-type 129sv mice was similar to that of Stat1 KO 129sv mice (Fig. 5 and 8). These data suggest that NSP1 protein contributes to virus replication but that this contribution appears to be independent of IFN signaling during RV infection in vivo. We also found that the replication levels of the heterologous rSA11-NSP1-null and rSA11 simian RVs were comparable in wild-type 129sv mice, but the replication of rSA11 was increased in Stat1 KO 129sv mice (Fig. S5). Unlike rD6/2-2g, we did not see a recovery of rSA11-NSP1-null in wild-type mice, probably because the replication level was too low to permit generation and selection of sufficient mutations by the viral polymerase.Although this study identifies an essential role of the NSP1 protein in promoting RV replication in vivo, the precise mechanisms of this promoting phenotype remain to be further explored. Our data suggest that NSP1 likely facilitates virus replication independently of the IFN and inflammasome signaling and beyond one replication cycle. Interestingly, NSP1 has been shown to be localized to the nucleus during viral infection, and this relocalization disrupted the function of promyelocytic nuclear bodies, which was related to host stress responses (29). More recently, NSP1 has been linked to the inhibition of the transcription (30) but not the translation (14) of IRF1. It will be of interest to determine whether the NSP1-IRF1 signaling pathway is involved in RV replication in vivo. In several ways, RV NSP1 resembles influenza virus NS1, another multifunctional protein that potentially targets protein kinase R (31) and autophagy (32). In this sense, several other arms of the innate immune signaling remain to be examined. Meanwhile, it is also plausible that NSP1 contributes to RV infection in ways other than the innate immune antagonism. For instance, NSP1 associates with viral RNA (33) and may facilitate viral assembly or egress beyond the replication step.In future studies, it will also be interesting to investigate the exact domains of NSP1 responsible for its proviral replication functions in vivo. In light of the perplexing finding that the replication of NSP1-null RV is not rescued in Stat1 KO mice, deletion of the IRF3 binding site in murine RV NSP1 or swapping that with the β-TrCP recognition motif could be revealing. In addition, since NSP1 is involved in RV host range restriction, one can study the NSP1 functionality in the context of a homologous virus infection by replacing the murine RV NSP1 with NSP1s derived from heterologous RV strains. With an optimized RG system and fully virulent murine RVs, we expect to uncover the physiological functions of other RV-encoded viral factors. Finally, while our studies here show that NSP1 is pivotal for rotavirus replication in vivo and represents a logical viral target for replication restriction-based attenuation, site-directed mutagenesis may not be the optimal approach to disrupt NSP1 expression due to the quick and complete reversion. Moving forward, we plan to generate recombinant RVs that lack the complete or a portion of the NSP1 coding region to prevent the reversion to virulent parental strains. We will be able to test the replication, pathogenesis, and immunogenicity of the new NSP1-truncated RVs as novel vaccine candidates against subsequent RV infections in small animal models. We anticipate that a deeper understanding of the RV-host interactions and RV pathogenesis in vivo will guide the development of novel next-generation RV vaccine candidates with improved efficacy in developing countries and higher compatibility with an immunocompromised population.MATERIALS AND METHODSCells and viruses.The rhesus monkey kidney epithelial MA104 cells were grown in medium 199 (Gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (VWR), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 0.292 mg/ml l-glutamine. The BHK-T7 cell line, a baby hamster kidney cell line stably expressing T7 RNA polymerase, was kindly gifted by Ursula Buchholz (Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, NIAID, NIH, USA) and was cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (Gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 0.292 mg/ml l-glutamine, and also 0.3 mg/ml G418 (Promega) was added to the culture medium at every other passage. MA104 cells stably expressing parainfluenza virus 5 V protein and bovine viral diarrhea virus N protease were cultured in medium 199 supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, 0.292 mg/ml l-glutamine. Blasticidin (10 μg/ml) and puromycin (10 μg/ml) were added to the medium at every other passage as described previously (22).The simian RV SA11 strain and the murine RV D6/2 strain were propagated as described previously (7, 19). Briefly, RV stock was activated with 5 μg/ml trypsin (Gibco Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) for 20 min at 37°C. The activated RVs were incubated with MA104 cells, which were washed twice with serum-free medium 199 for 1 h at 37°C. Then, the viruses were removed and the new serum-free medium 199 supplemented with 0.5 μg/ml trypsin was added to the MA104 cells. Virus titers were determined by a standard plaque assay in MA104 cells.Sequencing of the murine RV D6/2 strain.Viral particle enrichment of cell culture supernatant was performed based on the NetoVIR protocol (34). Briefly, cell culture supernatant was centrifuged for 3 min at 17,000 × g and filtered with a 0.8-μm polyethersulfone (PES) filter (Sartorius). The filtrate was treated with Benzonase (Novagen) and micrococcal nuclease (New England BioLabs) at 37°C for 2 h to remove the free-floating nucleic acids. Subsequently, samples were extracted using the QIAamp viral RNA minikit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions, without addition of carrier RNA to the lysis buffer. Reverse transcription and second-strand synthesis were performed by an adjusted version of the whole-transcriptome amplification (WTA2) protocol (Sigma-Aldrich), as described previously (35). A sequencing library was constructed with the Nextera XT library preparation kit (Illumina). The size of the library was checked with Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies) with a high-sensitivity DNA chip, and the 2 nM pooled libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 platform (2 × 150-bp paired ends).Low-quality reads, ambiguous bases, and primer and adaptor sequences were removed from the paired-end reads with Trimmomatic with default parameters (36). Trimmed reads were de novo assembled with metaSPAdes from SPAdes software using 21, 33, 55, and 77 k-mer lengths (37). The obtained contigs were annotated with DIAMOND against a nonredundant protein database (38). Contigs annotated as “rotavirus” were extracted. The obtained sequences were verified in silico by remapping the trimmed reads to the obtained contigs using BWA software (39).Construction of a T7 plasmid carrying mutant gene 5 of D6/2 or SA11.To rescue an NSP1-deficient murine-like RV, we generated a pT7-D6/2-NSP1-null virus via the QuikChange II site-directed mutagenesis kit (Agilent Technology) based on pT7-D6/2-NSP1 (22). Briefly, the AAG and TGC codons in the NSP1 open reading frame (ORF) of D6/2 were replaced with stop codons TAG and TGA at nucleotide position 43 to 45 and 52 to 55 in pT7-D6/2-NSP1. The mutant primers used were rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null forward primer, 5′-GTGTTAGCCATGGCGGCCTTTTAGGACGCGTGATTCCATTACAGAAGG-3′, and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null reverse primer, 5′-CCTTCTGTAATGGAATCACGCGTCCTAAAAGGCCGCCATGGCTAACAC-3′. To rescue the NSP1-deficient simian RV SA11, we generated the plasmid pT7-SA11-NSP1-null using the same strategies described above. The mutant primers used were SA11-NSP1-null forward primer, 5′-GCTACTTTTAAAGATGCATGCTTTTAATAGCGTAGATTAACTGCTTTAAATCGG-3′, and SA11-NSP1-null reverse primer, 5′-CCGATTTAAAGCAGTTAATCTACGCTATTAAAAGCATGCATCTTTAAAAGTAGC-3′.Generation of recombinant murine-virus-like and simian RVs.Recombinant rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null were generated according to the optimized entirely plasmid-based RG system described recently (22). Briefly, 0.4 μg of pT7-SA11-VP1, pT7-D6/2-VP2, pT7-D6/2-VP3, pT7-D6/2-VP4, pT7-D6/2-VP6, pT7-D6/2-VP7, pT7-D6/2-NSP1 (or pT7-rD6/2-NSP1-null), pT7-D6/2-NSP3, and pT7-SA11-NSP4; 1.2 μg of pT7-D6/2-NSP2 and pT7-D6/2-NSP5; 0.8 μg of the helper plasmid C3P3-G1; and 14 μl TransIT-LT1 (Mirus) transfection reagent were mixed together and transfected into BHK-T7 cells in a 12-well plate. Eighteen hours later, the transfected BHK-T7 cells were washed twice with FBS-free DMEM and then supplemented with 800 μl fresh FBS-free DMEM, and 24 h later, 1 × 105 MA104 N*V cells in 200 μl FBS-free DMEM along with 0.5 μg/ml trypsin were added to the transfected BHK-T7 cells for another 3 days. After that, mixed cells were frozen and thawed 3 times. The rescued virus was propagated for two passages in MA104 cells in a 6-well plate, and then the virus was propagated in a T75 flask to produce the virus stock.The recombinant SA11 and SA11-NSP1-null were rescued using the same protocol described above, expect that the plasmids used were pT7-SA11-VP1, pT7-SA11-VP2, pT7-SA11-VP3, pT7-SA11-VP4, pT7-SA11-VP6, pT7-SA11-VP7, pT7-SA11-NSP1 (or pT7-SA11-NSP1-null), pT7-SA11-NSP2, pT7-SA11-NSP3, pT7-SA11-NSP4, and pT-SA11-NSP5.Purification of RV particles by sucrose gradient centrifugation.RVs were concentrated by sucrose cushion as described previously (40). Briefly, RVs propagated in T75 flasks were harvested by repeating the freeze-thaw cycle three times. Then, we clarified the crude lysate of cell debris by centrifugation at 3,000 × g for 1 h at 4°C. After that, 8 ml of clarified RVs was placed into a 10-ml SW44 ultracentrifuge tube, and 2 ml 40% (wt/vol) sucrose was carefully added to the bottom of the ultracentrifuge tube and subjected to centrifugation at 35,000 rpm for 3 h at 4°C. At last, we removed the supernatant and added 200 μl FBS-free medium 199 to resuspend the concentrated RVs at 4°C overnight.Electrophoretic analysis of viral genomic dsRNAs.Viral genomic dsRNAs were extracted from sucrose cushion-concentrated viruses using TRIzol reagent (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (41). Then, the dsRNAs were mixed with gel loading dye, purple (6×) (New England Biolabs). Samples were loaded into a 4 to 15% precast polyacrylamide gel and run for 3 h at 180 V. The gel was stained for 1 h with 0.1 μg/ml ethidium bromide and visualized by the ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad).Restriction enzyme digestion and sequencing analysis.The total RNA of the recombinant rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null virus stocks and stool samples was extracted by TRIzol. Total RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using a high-capacity cDNA reverse transcription kit with RNase inhibitor (Applied Biosystems) according to the user guide. Briefly, 0.8 μg of RNA, 2 μl of 10× reverse transcription (RT) buffer, 0.8 μl of 100 mM deoxynucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) mix, 2 μl of RT random primers, 0.1 μl of RNase inhibitor, 0.1 μl of MultiScribe reverse transcriptase, and a flexible amount of nuclease-free H2O were added to the 20-μl reaction mixture. The reverse transcription thermocycling program was set at 25°C for 10 min, 37°C for 2 h, and 85°C for 5 min.NSP1 5′-end fragments were amplified by Phusion Hot Start II DNA polymerase (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s guide. The primers used for PCR were NSP1 forward primer, 5′-GTCTTGTGTTAGCCATGGC-3′, and NSP1 reverse primer, 5′-CAGCGGTTAAAGTGATCGG-3′. PCR products were gel purified using the QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen). NSP1 fragments of 0.1 μg were digested by restriction enzyme HinfI (New England Biolabs [NEB]) for 1 h at 37°C. The enzyme-digested products were separated by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis, stained by ethidium bromide, and visualized by the ChemiDoc MP imaging system (Bio-Rad). A separate set of purified NSP1 fragments were sent for Sanger sequencing.Immunoblotting.MA104 cells in a 24-well plate were infected by rD6/2-2g or rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at an MOI of 3 for 6 h. Then, uninfected and infected MA104 cells were washed twice with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; Thermo Scientific) and lysed in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1.0% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0; Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 1× protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) for 30 min at 4°C. After that, cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. Samples were resolved in precast SDS-PAGE gels (4 to 15%; Bio-Rad) and transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (0.45 μm; Bio-Rad). The membrane was incubated with blocking buffer (5% bovine serum albumin [BSA] diluted in PBS supplemented with 0.1% Tween 20) for 1 h at room temperature. Then, the membrane was incubated with anti-IRF3 rabbit monoclonal antibody (CST; catalog no. 4302; 1:1,000), anti-RV VP6 mouse monoclonal antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology; sc-101363; 1:1,000), and anti-glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) rabbit monoclonal antibody (CST; catalog no. 2118; 1:1,000), followed by incubation with anti-mouse IgG (CST; catalog no. 7076; 1:5,000) or anti-rabbit IgG (CST; catalog no. 7074; 1:5,000) horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-linked antibodies. The antigen-antibody complex was detected using Clarity Western ECL substrate (Bio-Rad) and the ChemiDoc MP imaging system according to the manufacturer’s manuals.RT-qPCR.RT-qPCR was performed using the above cDNA as described previously (23). The expression level of housekeeping gene GAPDH was quantified by 2× SYBR green master mix (Applied Biosystems), and NSP5 was measured by 2× TaqMan Fast Advanced master mix (Applied Biosystems). The primers used in this study were as follows: human GAPDH forward primer, 5′-GGAGCGAGATCCCTCCAAAAT-3′, and reverse primer, 5′-GGCTGTTGTCATACTTCTCATGG-3′; mouse GAPDH forward primer, 5′-TCTGGAAAGCTGTGCCGTG-3′, and reverse primer, 5′-CCAGTGAGCTTCCCGTTCAG-3′; and NSP5 forward primer, 5′-CTGCTTCAAACGATCCACTCAC-3′, reverse primer, 5′-TGAATCCATAGACACGCC-3′, and probe, 5′-CY5/TCAAATGCAGTTAAGACAAATGCAGACGCT/IABRQSP-3′. For the viral load measurement in the small intestinal segments and systemic organs, GAPDH levels were quantified and used to normalize the different cell numbers in the tissues harvested. The y axis stands for the percentage of NSP5 mRNA levels relative to GAPDH levels, plotted on a log10 scale.Plaque assay.The plaque assay was performed as described previously (42). Briefly, 1 × 105 MA104 cells/ml were seeded in a 6-well plate, and virus samples were serially diluted 10-fold and incubated with the confluent MA104 cells for 1 h at 37°C. Then, samples were replaced by FBS-free medium 199 with 0.1% agarose supplemented with 0.5 μg/ml trypsin and put back to 37°C. Plaques were visualized at day 3 to day 5 postinoculation by 0.0165% neutral red staining. In order to measure the size of the plaques, we recorded more than 75 plaques with the microscope (Echo) in two different experiments. Then, the diameters of the plaques were calculated with the annotation tool of the microscope.Focus-forming unit assay.The focus-forming assay was conducted as described previously (41). Briefly, 1 × 105 MA104 cells/ml were seeded in a 96-well plate, and then virus samples were serially diluted 5- or 10-fold and incubated with a monolayer of MA104 cells for 10 h or overnight at 37°C. Then, cells were fixed with 10% formalin, followed by permeabilization with 1% Tween 20. After that, cells were incubated with anti-rotavirus capsid mouse monoclonal antibody and anti-mouse HRP-linked antibodies. The foci were stained by 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole HRP substrate (Vector Laboratories) and stopped by washing twice with PBS.Virus competition assay.The virus competition assay was conducted as described previously (43). Briefly, fully confluent MA104 cells were infected by rD6/2-2g and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null at an MOI of 0.01 or 3 for 1, 8, and 24 h at 37°C. The total RNA was extracted from the infected MA104 cells, and the 5′-end fragments of NSP1 were amplified as described above. The amplified fragments were gel extracted and analyzed by Sanger sequencing.Mouse infection.Wild-type 129S1/SvImJ, Stat1 KO, wild-type C57BL/6, and Asc KO mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory and Taconic Biosciences and bred locally at the Washington University in St. Louis (WUSTL) BJC Institute of Health (BJCIH) vivarium. Five-day-old suckling pups were orally infected with rescued rD6/2-2g (1.5 × 103 FFU) and rD6/2-2g-NSP1-null (1.5 × 103 FFU) (44). Diarrhea was evaluated from day 1 to day 12 postinfection. In the meantime, feces from infected mice were also collected, and the focus-forming assay was used to titrate RV in stool samples. Briefly, 50 μl PBS with calcium and magnesium was added to the 1.5-ml Eppendorf tubes, and the weight was recorded. After we collected the feces, these tubes were weighed again, and the stool samples were homogenized before we made the serial dilution to conduct the focus-forming assay. Duodenum, jejunum, ileum, blood, mesenteric lymph node, and liver were collected from inoculated pups at day 2 postinfection, immediately placed in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −80°C until use. RNA was extracted from those tissues using the RNeasy Plus minikit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RT-qPCR was used to measure RV NSP5 expression levels, and FFU assays were used to quantify the amount of infectious virus in the stool samples as described previously (45).Statistical analysis.Bar graphs in Fig. 2A to C and Fig. 3A and B were displayed as means ± standard deviations (SD). Bar graphs in Fig. 4B, Fig. 5A to E, Fig. 6A to C, Fig. 7B, Fig. 8A to E, and Fig. S2, S4, and S5B and C in the supplemental material were displayed as means ± standard errors of means (SEM). Statistical significance in Fig. 2A to C, Fig. 3A and B, Fig. 5B to E, Fig. 8B to E, and Fig. S5C was analyzed by unpaired Student’s t test using GraphPad Prism 9.1.1. Statistical significance in Fig. 4B, Fig. 7B, and Fig. S2 and S5B was calculated by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Statistical significance in Fig. 5A, Fig. 6A to C, Fig. 8A, and Fig. S4A and B was analyzed by Mann-Whitney U test (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; n.s., not significant).


Title: Diversity in Rotavirus–Host Glycan Interactions: A “Sweet” Spectrum

SummaryRotaviruses exploit host glycans as receptors for cell attachment. The discovery that human rotaviruses bind a spectrum of host glycans provides new insights into virus pathogenesis. Glycan expression is determined genetically and regulated developmentally, which may affect susceptibility to infection and vaccination.The surfaces of cells are decorated heavily with glycans or glycoconjugates, with structures ranging from simple monosaccharides to complex sugars with many different branches, linkages, and orientations.1 Interaction with host glycans is an essential and critical step in the infectivity of most, if not all, microbial pathogens. Many pathogens exploit these glycans for initial cell recognition and attachment, and for enteric viruses such as rotaviruses and noroviruses, these interactions are frequently the first critical step for initiation of infections. Key fundamental, clinical, and epidemiologic questions on rotavirus disease have been answered through studies on the interactions of rotavirus with host glycans. The approaches exemplify multidisciplinary translational science and involve virologists, structural biologists, glycobiologists, physicians, and epidemiologists (Figure 1). For example, screens using transformative new technologies in glycobiology such as glycan arrays identified histo-blood group antigens (HBGAs) as new glycan partners for human rotaviruses. These interactions were confirmed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) using synthetic glycans, and the basis of these interactions was elucidated using x-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The biological relevance of these findings has been addressed using hemagglutination, saliva binding, and in vitro infectivity assays. Preliminary findings from cell lines now can be confirmed using physiologically relevant models of the human gut such as intestinal enteroids. Translational studies in people test if findings from the bench hold true at the bedside or at the population level. The findings from such team-science approaches not only have direct implications for our understanding of the biology of the virus, but also influence vaccine strategies, the development of therapeutics, and provide a new foundation for understanding other enteric infections. The diversity of glycans recognized by animal and human rotaviruses, insights gained into various aspects of viral pathogenesis such as interspecies transmission, host restriction, and tissue tropism, and the effect of genetic differences in glycan expression on susceptibility to infection and vaccination are reviewed here.Rotavirus Structure, Classification, and Disease BurdenRotaviruses are the leading cause of severe dehydrating gastroenteritis in children younger than 5 years of age. Globally, rotavirus infections result in approximately 453,000 deaths each year, accounting for approximately 5% of child deaths.2 The majority of these deaths occur in developing countries in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Two live-attenuated oral vaccines against rotavirus (Rotarix, GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Belgium and RotaTeq, Merck & Co Inc, Whitehouse Station, NJ) were licensed for use in 2006, and as of October 2015, have been introduced into the national immunization programs of 79 countries worldwide.3 Large clinical trials have shown that the vaccines are highly efficacious in developed countries,4, 5 and have significantly reduced the burden of rotavirus gastroenteritis in many high- and middle-income countries.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 However, the vaccines remain less efficacious in developing countries, which have the greatest burden of disease.13, 14, 15, 16 A number of factors contribute to the lower efficacy in these populations, including higher rates of malnutrition and tropical enteropathy, early infections, competing enteric infections at the time of vaccination, and interference by maternal antibodies.13 Efforts are ongoing to improve the efficacy of existing vaccines and to develop more effective next-generation vaccines, and this is critical for decreasing the disease burden in highly affected populations.Rotavirus is a member of the family Reoviridae. The viral genome consists of 11 segments of double-stranded RNA that code for 6 structural viral proteins (VP) and 6 nonstructural proteins.17 The infectious virion is a triple-layered particle consisting of a core layer made of VP2, an intermediate layer made of VP6, and an outer shell made of glycoprotein VP7. Sixty protein spikes made of a protease-sensitive protein, VP4, extend from the VP7 shell (Figure 1, iv). Similar to the classification of influenza virus into H- and N- types based on the hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins, variability in the genes encoding the 2 rotavirus outer capsid proteins (VP7 and VP4) form the basis of a dual-nomenclature system used to classify rotaviruses into G and P genotypes, respectively. To date, 27 G genotypes and 37 P genotypes (Figure 2, dendrogram) have been identified.18 As many as 70 different combinations of G and P genotypes have been described in human infections, although a vast majority are caused by G genotypes G1, G2, G3, G4, and G9, in combination with P genotypes P[4], P[6], and P[8].Rotavirus Interacts With Cellular Glycans Through the VP8* Domain of VP4Rotavirus replicates primarily in differentiated epithelial cells at the tips of the small intestinal villi. In animal models of rotavirus infection, histopathologic changes range from no or slight lesions such as enterocyte vacuolization, to major changes such as villous blunting and crypt hyperplasia.17 Pathogenesis is multifactorial. Rotavirus infection and a viral enterotoxin both alter intracellular calcium [Ca2+] signaling and stimulation of chloride [Cl-] secretion. Increased Ca2+ levels are thought to be central to stimulating Cl- secretion.17 Virus-mediated down-regulation of the expression of absorptive enzymes results in increased paracellular leakage through functional changes in the tight junctions between enterocytes.19, 20 Villous blunting also leads to decreased absorptive capacity. Furthermore, proliferation of crypt cells occurs during rotavirus infections, resulting in increased secretion. Secretion also is mediated by the activation of the enteric nervous system by the virus.17 Recently, decreased sodium (Na+) absorption by inhibition of the ion transport protein sodium-hydrogen exchanger 3 (NHE3) activity also has been shown after rotavirus infection, suggesting another mechanism of diarrhea induction used by many bacterial pathogens.21 In addition, rotavirus infection results in a decrease in brush-border enzymes, such as sucrase isomaltase, leading to an osmotic gradient that can contribute to diarrhea.22 Villous ischemia and alterations in intestinal motility also have been reported in rotavirus infections,23 with little or no evidence of inflammation.The attachment of the virus to epithelial cells is a multistep process involving the interaction of viral proteins with cellular receptors such as cell surface glycans.24 The spike protein VP4 is implicated in the initial attachment to host cell glycans. During rotavirus infection, proteolysis results in the cleavage of the spike protein VP4 (88 kilodaltons) into VP5* (60 kilodaltons) and VP8* (28 kilodaltons) fragments that remain noncovalently attached to the virion (Figure 1, iv, inset).17 The binding to cellular glycans is mediated by the VP8* domain of VP4, whereas VP5* plays a role in host cell membrane penetration.25, 26NMR and x-ray crystallography studies of VP8* from different rotavirus spike protein genotypes show that the protein exhibits a galectin-like fold with 2 twisted β-sheets separated by a shallow cleft (Figure 1, iv, inset).26, 27, 28, 29, 30 Galectins are a family of proteins that bind β-galactoside–containing oligosaccharides. VP4 is proposed to be formed by the insertion of a host-derived, galectin-like carbohydrate binding domain into a membrane interacting protein of the virus.26 The insertion of a carbohydrate-binding domain in a membrane interaction protein has been described for other viral proteins such as the influenza hemagglutinin.31 The crystal structures of VP8* from 3 animal rotavirus strains, a rhesus rotavirus strain RRV, a porcine rotavirus strain CRW-8, and a bovine rotavirus strain B223, are determined and represent the genotypes P[3], P[7], and P[11], respectively.26, 27, 29 The VP8* structures of human rotaviruses Wa, DS1, HAL1166, and N155 representing the genotypes P[8], P[4], P[14], and P[11], respectively, also are known.27, 28, 29, 30 P[8] and P[4] are the most common VP4 genotypes described in children worldwide.32 P[14] and P[11] rotaviruses are less common but both genotypes are highly interesting in that infections with these viruses appear to have resulted from interspecies transmission of animal rotaviruses into the human population.33, 34, 35 P[11] infections in human beings are almost exclusive to neonates.36, 37 Although the galectin-like fold is conserved among all of these rotavirus VP8* structures, there are differences in the width of the cleft between the 2 β-sheets among some strains and this may play a role in the differences in their glycan binding profiles.38Sialic Acid as a Key Cellular Partner for Rotavirus VP8*For more than 30 years, sialic acid (Sia) was considered the key determinant of interactions for rotavirus VP8*. This was based on early work showing that some rotavirus strains hemagglutinate red blood cells (RBCs) and that removal of terminal Sia residues by sialidase treatment of RBCs results in reduced virus binding.39, 40, 41 Furthermore, the infectivity of some animal strains is sensitive to sialidase treatment, suggesting a role for Sia in virus attachment.42, 43 X-ray crystallography studies confirm this interaction. The crystal structure of the VP8* of the sialidase-sensitive RRV strain in complex with the ligand shows Sia binding in an open-ended, shallow groove between the 2 β-sheets (Figure 2A, i), distinct from the carbohydrate binding site in galectins.26 The rim of the groove is formed by side chains of Y188 and S190 on one side and Y155 on the other side, and the floor of the groove is formed by R101, V144, K187, and Y189 side chains. Key Sia binding residues R101, Y189, and S190 are strongly conserved among other sialidase-sensitive rotavirus strains. A similar Sia binding groove is present in the VP8* of a porcine P[7] rotavirus strain CRW-8 in complex with monosialodihexosylganglioside GM3.44Although Sia binding is a common theme for the sialidase-sensitive animal rotavirus strains, there are variations in binding specificity to different members of the Sia family. The most common members of this family are N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) and N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc), which differ by the presence of an additional hydroxyl group in Neu5Gc. RRV VP8* shows greater affinity for Neu5Ac, and VP8* from bovine strain NCDV, porcine strains OSU and CRW-8, and simian strain SA11 show greater specificity for Neu5Gc.45, 46, 47 The binding preference and affinity may be influenced by the amino acid residues at positions 187 and 157 of VP8*, respectively.27, 47 The binding of VP8* from many animal strains to Neu5Gc may be significant from an evolutionary perspective, given that Neu5Gc is expressed in mammalian tissues but not in normal human tissues. Binding to Neu5Gc is not described for any human rotavirus strain and correlates with the evolutionary loss of Neu5Gc expression in human beings.48The vast majority of strains causing human infections are insensitive to sialidase treatment.49 For P genotypes that are detected in both human beings and animals, sialidase sensitivity is VP4 genotype–specific and does not segregate by species of origin.50 In the VP8* of prevalent P genotypes (P[4], P[6], and P[8] genotypes), as well as that of some other sialidase-insensitive strains, the key Sia binding residue R101 is replaced by amino acids with hydrophobic side chains that would prevent the formation of hydrogen bonds with Sia (Figure 2B).26 These results led to initial conclusions that Sia binding may not be an obligate requirement for all rotaviruses. However, NMR spectroscopy and molecular modeling of VP8* from a sialidase-insensitive human rotavirus P[8] strain (Wa) show binding to gangliosides such as GM1 using internal Sia residues.51 Infectivity assays on cells treated with sialidases showed a marginal increase in Wa titer, further suggesting a role for internal glycan residues as receptors for this virus strain. Of note, the cleft between the 2 β-sheets in the VP8* of the globally dominant human rotavirus P[4] and P[8] strains is considerably wider (Figure 2A, ii, and B) than the cleft in Sia binding animal rotavirus strains.38 Although no crystal structures are available for these human genotypes in complex with glycans, NMR and modeling studies propose that a wider cleft would allow for binding of gangliosides such as GM1 using internal Sia residues.51Taken together, these findings led to the paradigm that sialidase-sensitive strains with a narrow cleft recognize glycans such as GD1 with terminal Sia while the sialidase-insensitive strains possessing a wider cleft bind gangliosides such as GM1 that contain internal Sia residues.51 The former group comprises predominantly animal rotavirus strains while the majority of human strains fall in the latter group. However, recent studies have shown that although recognition of sialoglycans is necessary for many animal rotaviruses, Sia binding may not be an obligatory requirement for all strains. Human rotavirus strains can bind nonsialylated glycans, showing genotype-dependent variations in glycan binding that may be critical for multiple aspects of virus pathogenesis.28, 29, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57VP8* of Human Rotavirus Strains Bind Histo-Blood Group AntigensThe discovery that the VP8* of some human rotavirus strains bind HBGAs brought a paradigm shift in our understanding of rotavirus interactions with cellular glycans.28, 29, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57 HBGAs are nonsialylated glycoconjugates expressed on the surface of RBCs and epithelial cells, and are present in mucosal secretions.58 HBGAs are cellular receptors for a number of gastrointestinal pathogens such as noroviruses, Helicobacter pylori, and Campylobacter jejuni.59, 60, 61 HBGA synthesis occurs by the sequential addition of monosaccharides to precursor disaccharides by genetically coded glycosyltransferase enzymes such as the A and B transferases (ABH genes), fucosyltransferase-2 (FUT2, secretor gene) and FUT-3/4 (Lewis gene). Thus, an individual’s HBGA expression profile is genetically determined based on his/her ABH, Secretor, and Lewis genotypes. Precursor disaccharides contain the sugars galactose and N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc), linked by a β1-3 or β1-4 linkage. Based on the linkages, the glycans are categorized as type I and type II, with type I sugars containing the β1-3 linkage and type II containing the β1-4 linkage, respectively. The biosynthesis of H-type I HBGA (Figure 3) involves the addition of a fucose residue in the α1,2 position to the terminal galactose of the type I precursor by the enzyme FUT2. The modification of H antigens by A and B transferases leads to the generation of the A or B antigens of the ABO system, respectively. Lewis antigens are synthesized by the addition of a fucose residue in the α1,3 or α1,4 position to the terminal GlcNAc of the precursor structures or H-type HBGA; addition to the precursor disaccharide results in the generation of Lewis-a (Lea), whereas the addition to the terminal GlcNAc of the H-type I HBGA leads to the generation of Lewis-b (Leb). Type II HBGA synthesis occurs on the type II precursor backbone, and similarly leads to the generation of H-type II, Lewis-x (Lex), and Lewis-y (Ley) antigens. Specific mutations in FUT2 and FUT3 genes render them nonfunctional and individuals with these mutations are referred to as secretor-negative and Lewis-negative, respectively. Major findings on rotavirus–HBGA interactions are discussed in the following subsections.Discovery of VP8*-HBGA Interactions: P[14] VP8* Binds A-Type HBGAThe first evidence for human rotavirus interaction with HBGA came through studies with a P[14] rotavirus strain HAL1166.28 Human infections with P[14] viruses are thought to have resulted from interspecies transmission of P[14] strains from even-toed ungulates such as sheep and goats to human beings.34 The x-ray crystallographic structure of the VP8* of HAL1166 shows that the cleft in this strain is narrower than the VP8* cleft in other human rotavirus strains such as P[4] and P[8], and is more similar to the narrow cleft seen in Sia binding animal strains. Despite this similarity, structural changes in the cleft region are not compatible with Sia binding. A high-throughput glycan array screen comprising 511 sialylated and nonsialylated glycans unexpectedly identified A-type HBGA as a partner for P[14] VP8*. Specific binding to glycans with terminal residues characteristic of A-type HBGA was seen, although there was no binding to sialylated glycans with either internal or terminal Sia. Structural studies show that binding to A-type HBGA occurs in the same pocket where Sia binds RRV VP8* (Figure 2A, i and iii). The binding of P[14] VP8* to A-type HBGA is biologically relevant as seen by hemagglutination and infectivity assays. For example, the infectivity of HAL1166 is enhanced significantly in Chinese hamster ovary cells expressing A-type HBGA and infectivity is blocked by treatment with anti–A-type antibodies. P[14] infections in A–blood type individuals have been reported, but more epidemiologic data are needed to validate the clinical significance of this finding.Binding to A-type HBGA also was seen for VP8* from P[9] and P[25] rotaviruses, which are highly homologous to P[14] VP8* in the glycan-binding domain.28, 55 Hemagglutination, saliva binding, and infectivity assays support the biological significance of this interaction while homology modeling and mutagenesis show that the carbohydrate binding interface is shared with the Sia-binding animal rotaviruses through different amino acid residues.28, 55Binding of Neonate-Specific P[11] VP8* to Precursor Glycans: Basis of Age RestrictionClinically and epidemiologically, rotavirus infections in newborns are distinct from infections in older children.62, 63 The majority of infections in neonates are asymptomatic, although association with severe gastrointestinal symptoms such as necrotizing enterocolitis and feed intolerance also have been described. Rotavirus infections in neonates are caused by remarkably stable, unusual virus strains that appear to be geographically restricted. Strains belonging to the P[11] genotype (in combination with either G9 or G10 VP7 genotype) are associated with high rates of neonatal infections in India.37, 64 Very few cases of G9P[11] or G10P[11] infections are reported beyond the neonatal period. The basis of the predilection of these viruses for newborns was unclear until the discovery of HAL1166 VP8* binding to A-type HBGA prompted studies to identify glycan receptors for neonatal P[11] viruses.54, 56Glycan screens for P[11] VP8* using arrays of cellular and human milk glycans54, 56, 57 show that the VP8* of a neonatal P[11] virus strain N155 recognizes type I and type II precursor glycans (also referred to as lacto-N-biose and N-acetyllactosamine [LacNAc], respectively). The synthesis of precursors is constitutive in many cell types, and the addition of branches and terminal sugars is a developmentally regulated process that occurs in the postnatal period. The binding of P[11] VP8* to precursor glycans may explain the predilection of these strains for newborns. With growth and development, the P[11] viruses are likely unable to bind modified glycans in the gut and therefore unable to infect children in the older age group. This is supported by biological relevance of P[11] VP8* glycan binding: P[11] VP8* binds saliva from infants but not adults,54 hemagglutination occurs with cord blood RBCs, and infectivity of P[11] viruses is increased in the presence of HBGAs.56 Furthermore, the infectivity of a G9P[11] virus is reduced in the presence of poly-LacNAc, human milk, and infant saliva containing LacNAc, suggesting that soluble glycans in human milk can possibly act as decoy receptors for the P[11] VP8* and prevent binding to intestinal LacNAc glycans.54The crystal structures of N155 VP8* in complex with a type I tetrasaccharide lacto-N-tetraose (LNT) and type II tetrasaccharide lacto-N-neotetraose (LNnT) show that there are additional glycan binding sites in rotavirus VP8* (Figure 2A, iv and v).29 Binding to LNT and LNnT in P[11] VP8* occurs in a previously uncharacterized binding pocket, distinct from the Sia and A-type HBGA binding sites in animal and P[14] rotaviruses, respectively. The binding cleft in P[11] VP8* is noticeably wider and is more similar to the cleft observed in the globally dominant P[4], P[6], and P[8] VP8* despite sequence differences. Although the crystal structures of these common genotypes in complex with glycans are not yet described, it is tantalizing to speculate that the glycan-binding site in these strains with a wider cleft overlaps with the newly identified glycan-binding site discovered in P[11] VP8*, with specific sequence changes that correspond to their glycan specificity. Galectin-3 is also known to bind LNT and LNnT, and the crystal structure of galectin-3 in complex with these glycans show that the ligand adopts a linear conformation similar to that observed in the P[11] VP8*.65 This leads to new questions on whether these glycans can engage both galectins and VP8*, and whether galectins play a role in rotavirus entry into cells.VP8*–HBGA Interactions as a Basis for Interspecies TransmissionThe findings with P[14] and P[11] VP8*s binding to HBGA suggest a role for VP8*-HBGA interactions as a basis for interspecies transmission of rotavirus strains. The HAL1166 strain was isolated from a child in Finland66; however, this strain has its origins in even-toed ungulates.34 The VP8* of HAL1166 has a narrow cleft similar to Sia-binding animal rotaviruses, but A-type HBGA binds at the same location as Sia in the animal strains.28 This difference in binding is brought about by subtle changes in the structural framework of P[14] VP8*. Although the key Sia binding residue R101 is positionally conserved, there are differences in side-chain orientations, resulting in steric hindrance to Sia binding. An insertion in position 187 in HAL1166 allows for specific interaction with A-type HBGA (Figure 2B). Thus, comparisons of the complex structures of Sia binding animal rotavirus VP8* and human P[14] VP8* show how subtle sequence changes within the glycan-binding region results in the switch in specificity from Sia to A-type HBGA, which likely facilitates the interspecies transmission of this virus from ungulates to individuals with A-type HBGA expression.The binding of the P[11] VP8* to type I and type II precursor glycans is another striking example of interspecies transmission. The human neonatal P[11] viruses are naturally occurring bovine–human reassortant strains; these viruses have some genes of human rotavirus origin but others that have originated from bovine rotavirus strains.33, 35 In particular, the spike protein VP4 is of bovine rotavirus origin. Phylogenetic analysis of the neonatal P[11] virus shows that the VP4 gene in these strains shows approximately 86% amino acid identity to P[11] viruses isolated from cattle.33, 35 A bovine G10P[11] strain B223 shows hemagglutination properties similar to the human neonatal P[11] virus, and infectivity is enhanced with expression of H-type HBGA in Chinese hamster ovary cells.54, 56 Despite these similarities, there are differences in the glycan binding profiles between the bovine and human P[11] VP8* on a shotgun milk glycan array. Although the human neonatal P[11] VP8* binds both type I and type II glycans, the bovine P[11] VP8* only binds to type II glycans (Figure 2A, vi).57 This difference is mediated by small changes in certain loop regions such as the J–K loop in the bovine VP8*; the loop projects away in the bovine P[11] VP8* compared with the human P[11] VP8* and therefore cannot interact with the terminal sugars of type I glycans such as LNT (Figure 2A, iv–vi).29 Although little is known about differences in glycan expression between the bovine and human gut, there is evidence to suggest that bovine milk contains an abundance of type II glycans whereas human milk contains type I and type II glycans.67 Thus, the bovine strain may have achieved specificity for type II glycans in the bovine microenvironment, and through a few sequence changes, evolved to cross the species barrier by recognizing both type II and type I glycans present in human beings. This ability to bind a broader spectrum of glycans may be the basis for the zoonotic transmission of this virus from cattle to human beings.Expanded Spectrum of Glycan Binding as the Basis for Global Prevalence of Some StrainsP[14] and P[11] VP8* provide extensive insights into the interaction of human rotaviruses with HBGA; however, much less is known about P[4], P[6], and P[8], which represent the 3 most prevalent VP4 genotypes worldwide. The crystal structures of P[4] and P[8] VP8* show that these genotypes possess a wide cleft that correlates with an amino acid deletion at position 135, and a significant change from arginine to phenylalanine at position 101 (Figure 2B).29 The structure of P[6] VP8* remains to be solved, but this genotype also shows sequence changes associated with a wider cleft. Glycan binding assays using a panel of synthetic oligosaccharides show that P[4] VP8* from strain DS1 and P[8] VP8* from strain Wa bind Leb and H-type I HBGA, whereas VP8* from a neonatal P[6] strain ST-3 binds H-type I (Figure 2B).53 The binding to a type I terminal residue and an internal Lex determinant also is described for another P[6] neonatal strain RV3.57, 68 However, contradicting the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay results, no interaction between Leb or H-type I HBGA with VP8* from DS-1 or Wa was seen in saturation transfer difference NMR spectroscopy.52 The saturation transfer difference NMR data suggest that P[4] VP8* from DS1 and P[6] VP8* from RV3 interact with A-type HBGA, leading to a conclusion that A-type HBGAs are receptors for human rotaviruses. It is hypothesized that strains show variability in the ways they recognize A-type HBGA based on findings that P[14] and P[9] VP8* interact with A-type HBGA predominantly through the N-acetylgalactosamine residue, whereas P[4] and P[8] interact using the fucose moiety. The discrepancy in results obtained from the binding studies and NMR using VP8* from the same strains (DS-1, Wa, and ST3) remains to be resolved and validated through crystallography and epidemiologic studies.Genetic Basis of Strain Susceptibility and Vaccine ResponseThe expression of glycan partners for the prevalent rotavirus strains, H-type HBGA and Lewis antigens, are determined genetically; these findings stimulated several epidemiologic studies to determine if host genetics plays a role in susceptibility to specific rotavirus genotypes. Most studies focus on the genetic susceptibility to P[8] VP4 that binds H-type HBGA present only in secretor-positive individuals. The P[8] genotype not only represents one of the most prevalent VP4 types worldwide but is also a component of the Rotarix and RotaTeq vaccines. In a retrospective analysis of secretor status and rotavirus infection in 56 French children, a secretor-negative genotype was associated with resistance to symptomatic rotavirus infection.69 Another study involving 85 rotavirus-positive children in Vietnam infected predominantly with a P[8] strain found all children were HBGA secretors or partial secretors.70 A large study in the United States involving 1564 cases with gastroenteritis and 818 healthy controls found only 1 of 189 rotavirus-positive patients was a nonsecretor, compared with 23% in the control group. Overall, these data indicate that nonsecretors are protected from rotavirus infection.71 However, it is possible that there are population-specific differences because contradictory results were seen in Tunisia, where, of 32 rotavirus-positive children, P[8] infections were detected in both secretors and nonsecretors.72There is less clarity on the significance of Lewis status in susceptibility to rotavirus. Both secretor and Lewis antigen status are suggested to mediate susceptibility to rotavirus in a genotype-dependent manner in Burkina Faso and Nicaragua.73 In these populations, P[8] infections were seen exclusively in Lewis- and secretor-positive children, but P[6] infections were seen in Lewis-negative children, independent of their secretor status. This correlates with the in vitro data on P[8] binding to H-type I and Leb, and with P[6] binding to H-type I and type I precursor in the glycan binding studies.53, 57 The comparatively higher prevalence of Lewis-negative phenotype in Africa may explain the higher prevalence of P[6] infections in this population. This raises important questions on the role of host genetic status in susceptibility to vaccine strains and protection from vaccination. Because Lewis-negative children are resistant to P[8] strains, they may be less susceptible to the vaccine strains but continue to be susceptible to infections with P[6] viruses. This provocative observation may explain the reduced vaccine efficacy in these populations. However, because this observation was based on a small number of children with P[6] and P[8] infections in one region of Africa, the hypothesis remains to be validated in larger cohorts.Advancements in in vitro culture techniques now allow us to mechanistically explore these findings alongside translational studies. For example, rotavirus infections in human intestinal enteroid (HIEs) models can assess secretor status–based differences in the growth of different rotavirus strains.74 HIEs are a novel, genetically diverse, physiologically relevant model of human gut that show similar cellular and functional properties to the human gastrointestinal epithelium. Comparisons of the infectivity of P[8] strain Wa with the P[8] vaccine Rotarix indicated that the growth of Rotarix is attenuated in HIEs from different secretor-positive individuals when compared with Wa. Furthermore, Rotarix infection was attenuated consistently in an HIE from one secretor-negative individual. This novel in vitro model to study vaccine virus attenuation suggests that there is variability between individuals in susceptibility to rotavirus strains.Summary and Future DirectionsThe discovery of spike protein genotype-dependent variations in glycan binding for rotavirus strains has resulted in a new understanding of rotavirus host restriction, zoonotic transmission, and susceptibility to specific rotavirus strains. The role of host genetics in vaccine response, particularly in the context of the susceptibility of the population to different strains, is an important new consideration. Developmental regulation of glycan expression is another important consideration for age at the time of vaccination with specific strains. There is potential for the development of therapeutics through the use of soluble glycan decoys to prevent the binding of rotaviruses to cell surface glycans. These are exciting findings that open up new avenues for research on rotavirus interactions with host glycans, and can bridge the gap between the bench and bedside. Testing HIE cultures from individuals showing genetic differences in glycan expression will allow the exploration of the role of host genetics in susceptibility to rotaviruses. At this point, the clinical relevance of rotavirus–host glycan interactions is limited because there are few translational studies. Epidemiologic studies in many different populations may be required to fully understand the impact of these discoveries. An important lesson from the work on rotavirus–glycan interactions is that paradigms derived from laboratory or animal virus strains may not necessarily hold true for clinically relevant human virus strains and that applying transformative techniques from many different fields can lead to new lessons in the pathogenesis of gastrointestinal infections.


Title: Re-Examining Rotavirus Innate Immune Evasion: Potential Applications of the Reverse Genetics System

INTRODUCTION TO ROTAVIRUSGroup A rotaviruses (RVs) are among the most common causes of diarrhea-induced morbidity and mortality in infants and children under the age of 5 worldwide (1). RV typically causes severe acute dehydrating gastroenteritis, with about 1 in 65 infections leading to hospitalization and 1 in 300 infections leading to death (2). Although the global implementation of RV vaccines, which began in 2006, has reduced disease severity and deaths, RV infections remain a major cause of pediatric mortality today (3). For instance, RV caused 128,500 deaths and over 258 million episodes of diarrhea in children under 5 years old in 2016 alone (1).RV is a member of the Reoviridae family and consists of 11 double-stranded (ds)RNA segments encapsidated within a triple-layered protein shell. The RV genome encodes six structural proteins (VP1 to VP4, VP6, and VP7) and six nonstructural proteins (NSP1 to NSP6). Each gene segment encodes a single gene product, with the exception of gene segment 11, which encodes NSP5 and NSP6 in overlapping open reading frames (4, 5). The structural proteins assemble to form the viral capsid and spike structure, while the nonstructural proteins play roles in viral replication, virulence, and host immune antagonism (6). The strain-specific variation of RV gene sequences and protein functions is a major contributor to host-range restriction (HRR), a phenomenon in which RVs replicate in and best antagonize the host species from which they are originally discovered and isolated.All segmented RNA viruses, including RVs, can undergo genetic reassortment, which is the exchange of gene segments between strains. This occurs when two RV strains of the same genogroup coinfect a single cell, as the segments of one are likely to be packaged into the virion of the other. Isolation of the resulting RV reassortants has been instrumental in studying RV innate immune evasion, allowing researchers to examine the strain-specific impact of a particular RV segment. Prior to the development of a highly efficient plasmid-only reverse genetics (RG) system, researchers relied on natural selection to isolate these reassortants (7). Natural RV reassortants also provide the basis of the current and widely used Rotateq (RV5) vaccine (8). Today, a plasmid-only RV RG system enables the generation of purposefully modified reassortants, fluorescent and bioluminescent reporter viruses, and viruses with point mutations, truncations, domain swaps, and epitope tags in specific proteins, empowering the study of individual RV proteins and yielding insights into the genetic and molecular basis of immune evasion and HRR in unprecedented ways, as discussed below.In this review, we discuss the arms race between RV and host innate immune pathways and how these interactions contribute to HRR. We will discuss both what is known and not known about RV-mediated host antagonism, and how the remaining gaps can be filled using the novel plasmid-only RV RG system. By clarifying specific determinants of innate immune antagonism with RG, we can ultimately create safe and effective next-generation vaccines, and further our understanding of the biology of segmented RNA viruses and virus-host interactions.PRINCIPLES OF INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSE TO dsRNA VIRUSESThe innate immune response to infection with a dsRNA virus, as for any other pathogen, involves two major steps: sensing viral infection and responding appropriately (9, 10). Sensing of viral dsRNA occurs through cytoplasmic RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs; e.g., RIG-I, MDA5) and/or endosomal Toll-like receptors (TLRs; e.g., TLR-3, -7, and -8) (11, 12). Specifically, RV sensing occurs primarily via cytosolic RIG-I and MDA-5 (11, 12), endosomal TLRs 3 and 7 (13, 14), and the Nlrp9b inflammasome (15). These receptors activate adaptor proteins, like mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS) for RLRs and MyD88, TRAF6, and/or TRIF for TLRs, which then recruit specific transcription factors, such as interferon regulatory factors (IRFs), AP-1, and NF-κB, to drive type I/III interferon (IFN) and cytokine expression. Recognition of closely related mammalian orthoreovirus and bluetongue virus also requires RIG-I, MDA5, and MAVS (16, 17). Secreted IFNs bind to their respective receptors—IFNAR1/2 for type I IFNs and IFNRL1/IL10RB for type III IFNs—on both infected and uninfected bystander cells. Upon receptor engagement, IFN receptor-associated JAKs are activated by autophosphorylation, which in turn phosphorylate STAT1 and STAT2. Activated STAT1, STAT2, and IRF9 form an ISGF3 transcription factor complex, which initiates transcription of a large number of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) that amplify the initial antiviral response and restrict the viral life cycle. Detailed reviews regarding antiviral innate immunity are available (9, 10).HOST RANGE RESTRICTION OF ROTAVIRUS INFECTIONThe host range of a virus is defined as the breadth of species in which a virus can infect and replicate. RV can cause disease in the young of many mammals, including humans, pigs, cattle, mice, and primates (5). Host range restriction thereby describes the constraints on viral replication in a specific host, which are determined by viral and host factors. Several early studies documented this phenomenon using murine and porcine models, and although attempts have been made to identify responsible viral proteins, no consensus has yet been reached (18–21). Feng et al. (22) demonstrated that homologous murine RV EW strain replicates 1,000- to 10,000-fold more efficiently in the mouse intestine than the heterologous simian RV RRV strain does, and implicated NSP1 as a necessary, but not sufficient, determinant of this HRR. Phylogenetic analyses show that NSP1 varies among species and plays a role in HRR, as demonstrated in murine models (22–24). VP3, VP4, NSP2, and NSP3 also appear to support robust RV EW replication in the mouse gut (22). Saxena et al. (25) demonstrated that select human RV strains (e.g., Ito G3P[8]) infect human small intestinal enteroids 100- to 1000-fold more efficiently than a simian RV RRV strain. Similarly, a virulent porcine RV G9P[13] strain replicates better in porcine small intestinal enteroids than a human RV Wa strain (26). The viral determinants of robust RV infection of enteroids of respective species remain to be identified.Antagonism of host innate immunity by RV proteins likely contributes to HRR. In other words, an RV strain is adapted to the innate immune system of its native species (i.e., homologous host) but not to that of another species (i.e., heterologous host). For example, the replication of heterologous simian RRV is significantly enhanced in mice lacking type I/II IFNs or STAT1, whereas that of a homologous strain is not (27). While STAT1 knockout mice only shed 5-fold more murine RV than wild-type mice, STAT1 knockout mice shed 100-fold more heterologous simian RRV (28). In vitro studies also show that RRV replication is enhanced in human colonic epithelial HT-29 cells lacking MAVS, while the replication of the homologous human RV Wa strain is unaltered (29). Different homologous RV strains are variably affected by IFN signaling deficiencies (27). A single-cell analysis of RV-infected intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) uncovered heterogeneity in the transcription of IFNs and ISGs among different cell subsets. Results indicated that type III IFN may play a role in restricting heterologous RRV replication, but not homologous EW replication, in mice (30). Collectively, these studies demonstrate that host innate immunity influences RV replication and HRR, yet the multifactorial determinants of the host restriction have yet to be clarified.FENDING OFF THE HOST INNATE IMMUNE SYSTEM: ROTAVIRAL FACTORS AND THEIR HOST TARGETSWith a relatively small genome, many RV-encoded proteins have evolved multiple purposes in both the viral life cycle and host defense antagonism. In the following sections, we discuss key RV innate immune antagonists, including NSP1, VP3, NSP2, and NSP3, and delve into the mechanisms by which these factors interact with their host targets to promote RV infection.NSP1: the anti-host “Swiss army knife.”NSP1 is the least conserved of the RV proteins. NSP1 targets a number of host proteins and antagonizes host innate immunity (Fig. 1), yet it is dispensable for in vitro replication (31). Encoded by RV gene segment 5, NSP1 is an approximately 57-kDa protein with a conserved N-terminal RING domain and variable C-terminal domain (32). The RING domain implicates NSP1 as having potential viral E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, although this has not been experimentally proven (33–35).FIG 1Complex interactions of the arms race between rotavirus (RV)-encoded viral factors and host innate immune signaling pathways. Solid lines: proven inhibition; dotted lines: putative inhibition; pink: known RV factors that antagonize distinct pathways; orange: possible RV factors that inhibit innate immunity. Asterisks indicate viral factors and host signaling pathways whose respective targets are yet to be identified via the reverse genetics (RG) system.(a) IFN regulatory factors (IRFs). The IRF family of transcription factors includes nine members (36), and different IRFs are triggered by distinct stimuli, yet induce overlapping transcriptional programs (37). All IRFs have an N-terminal DNA binding domain that recognizes IRSE-like DNA sequences and a C-terminal domain that typically contains a nuclear export sequence and an autoinhibitory domain (36). IRFs 3, 5, and 7 contain an IRF association domain (IAD) near the C terminus that mediates IRF dimerization into an active transcriptional complex (36). IRF9 has an IAD-like region that promotes interactions with the phosphorylated STAT1/STAT2 heterodimer to form ISGF3. Dimerization is not required for IRF9 function (36).Several IRFs are targeted by RV NSP1. NSP1 was initially shown to interact with IRF3 in a yeast two-hybrid assay (38). Later studies showed that NSP1s from many bovine, murine, and simian RV strains also interact with the IADs of IRFs 3, 5, and 7 and the IAD-like region of IRF9 to induce proteosome-dependent degradation of these IRFs (36, 39, 40). NSP1-IRF interactions are mediated through the C terminus of NSP1 via a pLxIS motif, where p is a hydrophilic residue and x is any amino acid (41). The conserved pLxIS motif is also present in multiple host proteins, such as MAVS, STING, and TRIF (41, 42). Thus, RV exploits this conserved pLxIS motif for immune evasion by associating with and degrading IRFs, thereby blocking downstream signaling (41).Strain-dependent NSP1-IRF interactions highlight HRR. Generally, NSP1s from non-human strains degrade IRFs 1, 3, 5, and 7, whereas NSP1s from most human strains primarily degrade IRFs 5 and 7 (43). For example, bovine UK strain replication is IFN-restricted in mouse embryonic fibroblasts because, unlike murine EW and simian RRV strains, UK NSP1 cannot degrade murine IRF3 (44). In contrast, some bovine NSP1s can degrade human IRF3 (45). In vitro studies have found that NSP1 proteins from human, porcine, bovine, and simian backgrounds effectively caused IRF1 degradation-independent and -dependent inhibition (36, 45, 46). For instance, infection of African green monkey MA104 cells with homologous simian RRV also results in an early (12 hours post-infection) decrease in IRF1 protein levels (29). In contrast to IRF3 and IRF7, which induce type I and III IFN production downstream of mitochondrial MAVS, IRF1 seems to be primarily activated by MAVS residing on peroxisomal membranes and is key for type III IFN production (47, 48). Since type III IFNs only act on the small subset of cells expressing IFNLR1 (e.g., intestinal epithelial cells) to effectively control intestinal viral infection in vivo, inhibition of IRF1 highlights a key role for epithelial cells—rather than immune cells—in early RV control (30, 48–52). Whether the same mechanism is shared with other viral antagonists of IRFs, such as classical swine fever virus or bovine viral diarrhea virus N-terminal proteases, has not been examined (53–55).(b) β-TrCP. NF-κB signaling is critical for host antiviral, proinflammatory responses, but is inhibited by RV in an HRR-manner. NF-κB activation stimulates phosphorylation of IκB by an IκB kinase, which creates a phosphodegeron motif to mark IκB for degradation by β-TrCP, a subunit of the Skp1-Cul1-F-box ubiquitin ligase complex (56, 57). NF-κB then translocates to the nucleus, where it initiates transcription of various cytokines. RV NSP1 targets β-TrCP for proteasomal degradation to inhibit NF-κB signaling (56, 57). Of note, human, bovine, and porcine NSP1s mediate β-TrCP degradation while other animal NSP1s preferentially target IRFs, likely contributing to HRR. For example, NSP1s from human Wa and ST3 strains and porcine OSU strains degrade β-TrCP, while NSP1 from the bovine NCDV strain targets IRF3 (57). A phosphodegeron-like motif (DSGXS) in the NSP1 C terminus evidently serves as a decoy substrate for host β-TrCP recognition (58). One study demonstrated that genetic depletion or chemical inhibition of host ubiquitin ligase subunits Cul3 and the RING-box protein Rbx1 abrogates β-TrCP degradation (56). Of note, a different study showed the depletion of Cul3 using small interfering RNA (siRNA) does not hinder NSP1-mediated degradation of β-TrCP, suggesting that degradation is independent of NSP1 association with the host ubiquitin ligases (46). The discrepancy in results may arise from the use of different human RV strains (e.g., WI61 and DS-1 versus Wa and ST3), inconsistent siRNA knockdown efficiency, and the use of different cell lines (MA104 versus HEK293 cells).(c) STAT1. STAT1 is critical for amplifying the initial IFN-induced antiviral response. Single-cell transcriptional analysis of infected murine small intestinal epithelium showed that RV strain EW prevents ISG expression in both infected and bystander IECs, despite robust IFN production by gut hematopoietic cells (30). This suggests that RV inhibits the effects of hematopoietic cell-derived IFN on infected and bystander cells. Holloway et al. (59, 60) observed that RV infection prevents the nuclear accumulation of activated STAT1 independent of NSP1. However, Sen et al. (61) identified NSP1 as a direct antagonist of both STAT1 phosphorylation and activation. These contradictory results may be explained by temporal differences between the studies—16 versus 12 h postinfection—potentially a short window of time for clear inhibitory capacity. On the other hand, there could be a combination of mechanisms that inhibit the downstream STAT signaling.(d) Other host factors. There are numerous reports of interactions between NSP1 and other host proteins, which require further analysis by domain mapping and validation in the context of RV infection. TRAF2 acts as an adaptor protein downstream of various tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) superfamily members to mediate NF-κB signaling (62). The NSP1 C-terminal domain mediates TRAF2 proteosome-dependent degradation, blocking NF-κB signaling (63). NSP1 also targets different components of host apoptotic machinery. Bagchi et al. demonstrated that RV inhibits apoptosis in the host cell by activating the pro-survival PI3K/Akt pathway early in infection, and later demonstrated that early in infection, NSP1 targets p53, the classic cell stress-responsive tumor suppressor, for ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation through a PI3K-independent mechanism (64, 65). NSP1 also seems to modulate host miRNA expression (66). By suppressing p53, NSP1 dampens the expression of host miRNA-29b, a suppressor of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway, which can be triggered by various RNA viruses (66). Additional interactions with innate immune proteins are discussed in later sections.VP3, NSP2, and NSP3: a trio of partners in innate immune inhibition.Host mRNAs have 5′ caps and 3′ poly(A) tails to mark them as “self,” thereby preventing cytosolic degradation by host RNases. To survive these conditions, the RV guanyl and methyl transferase VP3 caps the 5′ end of RV transcripts, while NSP3 binds a consensus sequence at the 3′ end of each RV transcript (67–69). In addition to its role in RNA capping, VP3 N terminus also targets MAVS for degradation in a strain-specific manner (Fig. 1), which dampens the type III IFN response in vivo (29). MAVS is also a target for cleavage and/or degradation by various RNA virus-encoded proteins, including hepatitis C virus NS3/4A (70), hepatitis A virus 3AB precursor (71), and SARS-CoV-2 ORF10 (72), although studies examining sequences and functional similarities among these virus-encoded MAVS antagonists have not yet been performed (29). VP3-mediated MAVS inhibition may also effect type I and III IFN production (29, 73). A recent study also determined that VP3 antagonizes the 2′,5′-oligoadenylate (2-5A) synthetase (OAS)-RNase L pathway (74, 75). This function of VP3 was discovered due to its structural homology to the mouse hepatitis virus ns2, another protein that inhibits 2-5A accumulation (76). The contribution of VP3 to HRR is not yet clearly defined; however, phylogenetic analysis of VP3 sequences from multiple RV strains identified 3 motifs which segregate with species, potentially allowing for species-specific protein-protein interactions and serving as a genetic basis for HRR (77, 78).Competing with the host poly(A)-binding protein (PABP), NSP3 interacts with eIF4G, a component of the eIF4 ribosome recruitment complex necessary for translation (79). This protects viral RNAs from degradation, facilitating translation of viral mRNAs and inhibiting translation of host mRNAs (68, 69). NSP3 has also been found to influence the host unfolded protein response, a protective feedback mechanism that restricts translation in response to an accumulation of misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (80). Simian RRV strain can upregulate various ER stress pathways at the transcriptional level; however, NSP3 simultaneously inhibits multiple stress response genes at the translational level (81). ER stress during RV infection may also result from inhibition of translation and accumulation of viral proteins, although a portion of viral antigens are sequestered in viroplasms, of which NSP2 is a key component (81). Although the mechanisms of NSP2 and NSP3 in innate antagonism and the identities of specific host protein targets are yet-to-be-defined (Fig. 1), these viral proteins add to the complexity of RV genes that contribute to HRR (22).RV STUDIES IN THE ERA OF REVERSE GENETICSRG systems are powerful tools for determining the genotype-phenotype relationships of viral products in an otherwise constant genetic background. The recently developed plasmid-only RV RG systems allow the generation of reporter and mutant RVs that continue to provide critical insight into host-virus interactions. Such modified RVs were difficult to study prior to RG (29, 82, 83). For instance, determining the role of NSP1 in RV replication relied on comparing RV strains with naturally occurring mutations, deletions, and truncations rather than targeted alteration of specific amino acids (84–87). Plasmid-only RV RG systems will also facilitate the rational design and development of next-generation RV vaccine candidates with targeted attenuation.Brief history of plasmid-only RV RG systems.RG systems require the transfection of DNA plasmids encoding the entire or individual segments of the viral genome into a recipient cell line and subsequent recovery of viable viral progeny (88–90). Early RV RG systems relied on helper viruses (e.g., vaccinia virus, human RV KU strain) and neutralizing antibody-based selection or dual selection of temperature-sensitive mutants (88, 91–95). This contrasted with the relatively efficient plasmid-only RG systems that existed for other segmented dsRNA (e.g., birnavirus, orthoreovirus, orbivirus) (96, 97) and single-stranded RNA (e.g., influenza virus, poliovirus, hepatitis C virus) (98–101) viruses. A long-awaited, plasmid-only RG system for simian RV SA11 strain was described in 2017 by Kanai et al. (87). The system was subsequently optimized and adapted by other groups to improve recovery of additional recombinant RV strains (102–104).The RG system developed by Kanai et al. utilizes 11 plasmids each encoding a segment of the simian RV SA11 genome, three helper plasmids, and a bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase-expressing BHK-21 cell line for transfection. The helper plasmids encode a fusion-associated small transmembrane protein from Nelson Bay orthoreovirus to facilitate viral spread, and the two subunits of the vaccinia virus capping enzyme to stabilize viral RNA and ensure translation (105, 106). The Kanai system was successfully used to recover human RV Odelia and KU strains (107, 108). Providing NSP2 and NSP5 plasmids at 3-fold greater levels than any other viral gene was subsequently shown to enhance recovery, likely by facilitating early viroplasm formation (107, 109–111). The RG system developed by Sánchez-Tacuba et al., which capitalizes on a plasmid encoding a fusion protein consisting of T7 polymerase and the African swine fever virus NP868R capping enzyme, as well as an IFN-insensitive MA104 cell line, has been used to recover hard-to-culture RV strains, including simian RRV and human CDC-9; a recombinant RRV expressing EGFP; a murine RV reassortment D6/2-like virus (104); a murine RV lacking NSP1 expression (112); and a murine RV encoding a Nano-Luciferase bioluminescent reporter (113). Extensive reviews of the current plasmid-only RG systems are available elsewhere (7, 114–116).Leveraging RG to understand RV innate immune evasion.(a) RNA sensing and antagonism of type I and III IFN signaling. Upon entry into the cell, RLR-sensing of RV dsRNA activates MAVS (116, 117). Previous studies have demonstrated that RIG-I and MDA5 are independently essential for antiviral responses to RV in vitro, suggesting that RV generates RNA species recognized by both receptors, which are degraded by NSP1 (12, 118, 119). The endosomal dsRNA sensor TLR3 appears to have a negligible role in restricting RV in vitro, although the absence of TLR3 in infected mice increases viral shedding and histopathology and reduces the type I IFN response without inducing diarrhea (11, 12, 120, 121). Future studies are required to precisely probe dsRNA in intracellular compartments distinct from viroplasms and double-layered particles that shield RV from immune detection.MAVS activation leads to IFN expression mediated by transcription factors IRF-1, -3, -5, and/or -7 (117). Future studies can leverage RG to determine the molecular basis for selective targeting by NSP1 and its connection to host cell species and tissue type, RV strain, and IAD sequence, as discussed in earlier sections. Domain swapping, site-directed mutagenesis, NSP1-deletion RVs, and monoreassortant RVs in an isogenic backbone will be particularly useful in addressing these questions. Fluorescently tagged NSP1 can clarify the spatiotemporal dynamics of NSP1 during infection in relation to known targets (IRF3, β-TrCP, STAT1, and others). For instance, whether NSP1 targets substrates for degradation or whether there are several NSP1 pools dedicated to each substrate remains to be tested.RV NSP1 may also target IRF1, despite the obvious lack of an IAD (29, 45). The minimum sequence requirement for this inhibition and the connection to RV strains can be determined using the RG system. The RG system can also be used to investigate proteasome-mediated downregulation of surface type I/II/III IFN receptor expression in vitro and in vivo (122). Given that downregulation of IFN receptors is sufficient to prevent mortality from lethal endotoxin exposure in RV-infected mice, the determination of such mechanisms has relevance to other infectious diseases (122). It is important to note that the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of NSP1 is still speculative (43, 123). Mutation of key catalytic residues in the N-terminal RING-finger domain using RG and evaluation of changes in polyubiquitination will facilitate the testing of this hypothesis.With regard to VP3, refined mapping of the VP3-MAVS binding site will instruct site-directed mutagenesis to recover recombinant viruses without MAVS targeting ability. Such studies will help to determine the relative contributions of NSP1-mediated IRF degradation versus VP3-mediated MAVS inhibition in blocking IFN induction during RV infection (Fig. 1).(b) DNA sensing and antagonism of type I and III IFN signaling. The cGAS-STING pathway canonically senses and responds to DNA viruses. Following the sensing of double-stranded DNA in the cytosol by cGAS, STING activates IRF3 and NF-κB to induce type I and III IFN expression (124). Interestingly, a number of RNA viruses, including enteric viruses like murine norovirus, are restricted by the cGAS-STING pathway (125). Many also encode cGAS and/or STING antagonists (126–128). Published work and a non-peer reviewed study show that activation of the cGAS-STING pathway may be due to leaked genomic or mitochondrial DNA, which may be integrally tied to a recently discovered, non-canonical role for cGAS in mediating DNA damage responses (129–131).The role of cGAS-STING in RV pathogenesis has not been investigated; however, it is likely precisely controlled during RV infection to avoid triggering host innate immunity. Specifically, RV NSP4 is an ER-resident protein that triggers calcium flux from the ER, leading to the activation of store-operated calcium efflux by ion channel STIM1 at the ER-plasma membrane interface, subsequently inducing diarrhea (132). STIM1 typically associates with STING at the ER. However, activation permits the relocation of STING to the Golgi, where it rapidly responds to cyclic dinucleotides (133). Mislocalization of STING to the ER or Golgi via STIM1 dissociation enhances basal levels of IFN, which primes the antiviral response to DNA viruses and leads to autoinflammatory disease (133). A recent study determined that loss of cohesin complex member STAG2 increased DNA damage and activated a robust cGAS-STING-mediated antiviral response that restricted RV replication (131). RG system-based screening for candidate cGAS-STING antagonists will enable characterization of the spatial dynamics of nuclear or mitochondrial DNA damage and leakage events during RV infection.(c) Antagonism of NF-κB signaling. NF-κB activation during RV infection leads to a cytokine signature distinct from that induced by type I/III IFN signaling (134, 135). However, RV infection, at least in vivo, is not characterized by a strong inflammatory status (135, 136). NSP1 antagonizes this pathway via proteasome-mediated degradation of β-TrCP in a strain-specific manner (43, 56, 57, 123). Other viral proteins may also be involved. The N-terminal VP8* fragment of VP4 contains a conserved PXQX(T/S) sequence, which typically mediates interactions between TNF receptors and TRAF adaptor proteins (137) that can lead to NF-κB activation. Human and simian VP8* interacts with TRAF2 to promote NF-κB activation in the absence of TNF or other stimuli (137). TNF-α treatment blunts viral replication in vitro (138). Whether the contradictory effects of NSP1 and VP8* on NF-κB signaling are mutually exclusive for a given RV strain has not been determined. Site-directed mutagenesis studies with the RG system should avoid conflicting defaults in viral entry with differences in TRAF2 activation (139).Studies demonstrating direct protein-protein interactions between NSP1 or VP4 and a component of NF-κB signaling pathway, as well as increased ubiquitination of target proteins, are lacking or inconsistent. For instance, mass spectrometry-based screens determined that several members of the ubiquitin ligase complex, Cul1, Cul3, and Rbx1, are binding partners of NSP1 in a strain-specific manner (46, 56, 140). The roles of VP8*, NSP1, and other RV proteins in NF-κB signaling antagonism can now be accurately parsed using the RG system to understand protein localization, host binding partners, and critical interaction residues (Fig. 1).(d) Manipulation of host translation. Like many viruses, RV inhibits host protein synthesis upon infection, thereby halting innate antiviral and stress responses and favoring the synthesis of viral proteins (141). The utility of this mechanism in evading the host response is questionable given that type I and III IFN can escape translational arrest (142). Nonetheless, several mechanisms may explain reduced protein synthesis in RV infection (143).mRNA stability and decay. During infection, detection of dsRNA by OAS triggers production of 2-5A, activating RNase L to nonspecifically cleave host and viral transcripts to inhibit translation (144). Recent studies have shown that this can occur independent of IFN (142). VP3 2′-5′ phosphodiesterase activity cleaves 2-5A and disrupts the OAS-RNase L signaling axis (74). A recent study used the RV RG system to generate recombinant RVs with VP3 point mutations and demonstrated that VP3 phosphodiesterase activity is critical for in vitro and in vivo replication (145). However, this mechanism of translational inhibition may occur primarily in IECs. Future RG studies can dissect this tissue/cell specificity as well as the contribution of other VP3 activities, such as RNA-capping activity and disruption of OAS-RNase L signaling (67).Translation. NSP3 binds to a conserved consensus sequence in the RV 3′ untranslated regions to facilitate translation (68, 69, 146–151). NSP3 expressed from a chimeric vaccinia virus in nonhuman primate kidney cells is sufficient to reduce host translation to levels comparable to those during RV infection (68, 152, 153). NSP3 interactions with eIFG4G and ZC3H7B also induce nuclear accumulation of PABP to prevent host mRNA export to the cytoplasm (68, 154). Disrupting these interactions does not alter viral replication kinetics or translation (150, 155–158). The molecular mechanisms used by the host to avoid degradation of IFN during translational arrest possibly parallel the strategies used by RV (142).Protein-protein interactome analysis, in conjunction with the RG system, will be instrumental for identifying host and viral factors that specifically facilitate replication (159). Swapping NSP3 RNA-binding domains between RV strains and other viruses (e.g., flavivirus NS2A, vaccinia virus E3L) will reveal species- and virus-specific mechanisms of translational antagonisms (160, 161). RG can also be used to generate point and whole-gene mutants and chimeric RVs bearing heterologous NSP3. Previous studies using anti-NSP3 siRNA suggested that NSP3 is dispensable in simian RV replication (153). Use of RG should confirm or refute this theory.(e) Sequestration of viral PAMPs by viroplasms. NSP2 and NSP5—and to a lesser extent, VP2—are the main drivers of viroplasm formation during RV infection. RG studies have shown that NSP5 hyper-phosphorylation and C1Kα-dependent phosphorylation of NSP2 are critical for viroplasm formation (162, 163). These viral reproduction factories may also sequester dsRNA from host sensors with help from additional viral RNA-binding proteins (e.g., NSP3, NSP6) (163). Conversely, viroplasms sequester host antiviral factors, as demonstrated for the IKKε complex and STAT1 by bunyaviruses and MDA5 by human respiratory syncytial virus (164–166). Recent studies have also shown that RV viroplasms specifically exclude host NF-κB, stress granules, and P bodies, blocking antiviral responses (59, 156, 167). Since the dynamic process of viroplasm formation and fusion also involves rearrangement of the cytoskeleton and membranes, these structures may disrupt the trafficking of immunomodulatory host factors while facilitating assembly and trafficking of nascent virions (168, 169). It is also possible that RV viroplasms do not function in innate immunity, similar to influenza A virus cytoplasmic inclusions (170). The RG system will be useful in delineating the relationship between viroplasms, cytoskeleton, and innate immunity.(f) Pyroptosis and inflammasome signaling. Inflammasome activation was recently identified as a contributor to anti-RV host defenses (15, 171, 172). The RNA helicases DHX15 and DHX9 interact with NLRP6 and NLRP9B, respectively, to trigger inflammasome activation in RV-infected murine IECs (15, 171, 172). Blocking this pathway enhances RV replication with concomitant increase in diarrhea prevalence. Furthermore, the cytokines produced by inflammasome activation, IL-1β and IL-18, restrict RV replication and disease in mice, but are produced at low levels in infected humans (136, 173–175). The NLRC4 inflammasome may also contribute to RV restriction via the production of IL-22, a cytokine shown to attenuate RV replication in synergy with IL-18 and type III IFN (176, 177). How RV antagonizes this pathway is not known but can be examined systematically using RG. Studies of other RNA viruses and bacteria indicate antagonism could occur upstream (e.g., parainfluenza virus, Yersinia YopM) or downstream (e.g., enterovirus 71 protease 3C) of inflammasome activation (178–180). These findings will provide the foundation for potential therapeutics targeting inflammasome and pyroptosis to control intestinal inflammation and will be informative to the studies of other enteric pathogens.(g) Autophagy and xenophagy. Autophagy and xenophagy—the degradation of microbial invaders—can either inhibit or facilitate viral pathogenesis (181, 182). Autophagy generally eliminates microbes and provides antigens for lymphocyte recognition, but it can also be usurped to alter viral sensing pathways mediated by RLRs and cGAS-STING (181, 182). Initial studies with simian RV SA11-4F strain suggested that NSP4-mediated release of calcium from the ER activates autophagy via calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase and 5′ AMP-activated kinase pathways, facilitating trafficking of nascent virions (183, 184). Hijacking this pathway relies on the interaction of NSP4-containing COPII vesicles and autophagosome-associated LC3 II (185). Interestingly, autophagosomes fail to fuse with lysosomes in RV-infected cells (184); the viral protein responsible for this inhibition has yet to be identified. A study using RV strains OSU and SA11-4F suggested that autophagy facilitated viral replication (186). RV-encoded small RNAs may also promote autophagy (187, 188). How small RNAs are encoded and processed by viral or cellular factors and how RV impacts autophagy is examinable using RG and will broadly apply to other viruses that avoid lysosomal fusion (189, 190).(h) Peroxisome signaling. Peroxisomes, ubiquitous single-membrane organelles that function in lipid and reactive oxygen species metabolism and signaling, may play critical roles in RV antiviral defense (191–193). Previous studies have demonstrated that peroxisomal MAVS and IRF1-mediated type III IFN pathway restrict viral infection (48, 192–194). Infection with flaviviruses and enteroviruses reduces the number of peroxisomes, and human cytomegalovirus and human herpesvirus-1 infection impedes peroxisomal MAVS signaling (193, 195). On the other hand, peroxisome metabolism is coopted by HIV-1 to facilitate infection (196, 197).Peroxisomal MAVS alone is sufficient to stimulate robust type I and III IFN in RV-susceptible HT-29 cells (29). Interestingly, the C-terminal VP5* fragment of VP4 in many RV strains (e.g., SA11) harbors a C-terminal tripeptide CRL sequence analogous to canonical peroxisome-targeting sequences (191). Whether VP4 interacts with and impairs peroxisomal MAVS-IRF1 signaling warrants investigation with RG. The potentially redundant or complementary role of VP4 in addition to NSP1 and VP3 in blocking IFN expression should also be investigated with RG to further understanding of potential peroxisome perturbation.(i) Other mechanisms of innate immune evasion. The initial plasmid-only RG system provided the first characterization of NSP6 function in the context of RV infection (198). Previous studies demonstrated that NSP6 localizes to viroplasms and mitochondria, interacting with NSP5 as well as RNA, suggesting a role for NSP6 in RNA binding and viroplasm formation (4, 82, 199–204). Many tissue-culture adapted RV strains (e.g., lapine Alabama, porcine OSU) express truncated NSP6 or lack NSP6 expression altogether. Mattion et al. demonstrated that NSP6 is expressed at low levels in infected cells and plays an expendable role in cell culture (4). For many RNA viruses (influenza A virus NS1, Rift Valley fever virus NSs), these accessory proteins play an instrumental role in innate immune evasion in vivo (205, 206). Determining the impact of NSP6 in RV strains which encode a functional NSP6 (e.g., murine EW) will be a critical application of RG to help understand NSP6 in RV replication and pathogenesis in vivo (207–209).NSP1 may have additional IFN-independent roles. Studies using plasmid-only RG systems suggest that NSP1 is dispensable for viral replication since nearly complete replacement with a luciferase reporter negligibly affects viral replication (87, 95). A recent study generated an NSP1-null RV via RG and showed that loss of NSP1 attenuated infection in vivo but not in vitro (210). In vivo attenuation could not be fully rescued in STAT1 knockout mice, suggesting a previously unknown role for NSP1 in IFN-independent signaling. NSP1 also seems to localize to the nucleus and disrupt promyelocytic nuclear bodies (211). Dissecting the complex activities and associated domains of the multifunctional NSP1 will be challenging, but key to a complete picture of RV innate immune evasion.CONSIDERATIONS, DIRECTIONS, AND CONCLUSIONSThe RV RG system, although still in its infancy, has already greatly improved our understanding of RV replication, immunity, and pathogenesis. In this review, we summarized our current knowledge of intensively studied viral antagonists (e.g., NSP1, VP3, NSP2, NSP3) and the potential roles for the RG system in deriving new information on RV and host innate immune evasion (Fig. 1). While several VP4 and VP7 monoreassortants have been generated, including those derived from CDC-9 (G1P[8]), Hosokawa (G4P[8]), KU (G4P[8]), L26 (G12P[4]), Odelia (G4P[8]), WI61 (G9P[8]), and other circulating strains from Africa, the RG system can be leveraged to facilitate the rational design and recovery of recombinant RVs for vaccine purposes (108, 111, 212, 213). Given the low recovery of VP4 and VP7 dual reassortants, additional improvements to the RG system may be desirable. Alternatives to reassorted vaccines include viruses that encode truncated and/or mutated viral proteins, which are expected to yield attenuated strains that replicate at levels low enough to induce immunity without adverse side effects. Most recently, the RG system has been used to engineer portions of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein into a simian RV SA11 backbone, as a potential combined vaccine for children (214). In the future, a robust RG system may facilitate the creation of bi-, tri-, or multivalent RV vaccines encoding antigens from other enteric viruses (e.g., norovirus, astrovirus, enteric adenovirus), bacteria (enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, Shigella), and parasites (Cryptosporidium parvum, Entamoeba histolytica) to maximize vaccination breadth in infants and young children.The RV RG system also holds great promise and potential for insights into many aspects of basic RV biology. The roles of innate immune evasion in specific steps of RV pathogenesis, including intraintestinal replication, spread to systemic organs, and transmission to naive individuals, are yet to be defined. New and exciting technological advances in molecular biology also give rise to great opportunities to dissect RV-host interactions. Leveraging transposon or random PCR mutagenesis and next-generation sequencing-based phenotypic screens will likely yield new knowledge of how specific RV gene products function in RV replication and immune antagonism. Finally, using RG systems to recover and compare ancient and contemporary RV strains will empower parallel studies of the evolution of host innate immunity and viral innate immune evasion.


Title: Determinants of Rotavirus Transmission

Rotavirus generally infects unvaccinated children initially between 6 and 24 months of age, and nearly always before 5 years of age.1 Reinfections are generally less severe than the first episodes, with primary rotavirus infection accounting for an estimated 86% of the moderate-to-severe diarrhea associated with rotavirus.1,2 As in many countries, the infection dynamics of rotavirus in the Netherlands are characterized by predictable annual winter peaks in reported incidence that vary in height and breadth. In 2014, the pattern of rotavirus incidence in England and in the Netherlands was notably different from that of previous years.3,4 In England, the substantially lower reported incidence was attributed to the introduction of an infant rotavirus vaccine in July 2013.3 The reason for the nearly identically low reported incidence in the Netherlands is less clear because the uptake of rotavirus vaccine among Dutch infants has been negligible to date.A preliminary look at data (Figure 1) suggested two hypotheses for this observation. First, previous study has suggested that lower temperatures are associated with increased rotavirus transmission and incidence, with the effect of colder temperatures lasting for up to 1 or 4 weeks, respectively.5–10 If temperature indeed (indirectly) affects rotavirus incidence,6 then the unusually mild winter temperatures in 2014 contributed to the relatively low rotavirus incidence that year. However, it is unclear whether prior analyses corrected for residual serial correlation. Generally, for time series data, the residuals of classical regression are correlated over time. Failing to correct for these correlations violates the independent errors assumption, and generates, at least, incorrect confidence intervals that are too narrow and statistical tests that overstate the significance of the regression coefficients, and, at most, spurious associations.11–13FIGURE 1.Available time series data over the period 1999–2015 in the Netherlands. A, Reported rotavirus incidence by week for the Netherlands, weighted according to the number of the laboratories reporting in any given week. B, Maximum daily temperature recorded at the meteorological station in De Bilt, the Netherlands. C, Maximum daily absolute humidity recorded at the meteorological station in De Bilt, the Netherlands. D, Daily ultraviolet light recorded at the meteorological station in De Bilt, the Netherlands. E, Daily rainfall recorded at the meteorological station in De Bilt, the Netherlands. F, Actual number of births per day in the Netherlands 2000–2013 (black), including the simulated number of births per day for 2014–2015 (grey).Second, a lower proportion of susceptible individuals is associated with a lower incidence of infection at some future time depending on the duration of the incubation period.14 The relatively high incidence in 2013 may have left fewer individuals susceptible to primary infection, leading to a lower reported incidence in 2014.A useful metric to estimate the transmissibility of infectious diseases is the effective reproduction number, R(t) defined as the average number of secondary cases produced by any one infectious case at time t. An epidemic is under control and incidence decreases when R(t) < 1.Here, we set out to disentangle possible effects of weather factors and the proportion of susceptible individuals (factors) on the effective reproduction number of rotavirus (outcome) in the Netherlands. We assessed whether past values of a factor are more strongly associated with the current value of an outcome than the past values of the outcome itself by assessing Granger causality.15 Throughout our analyses, we applied a strict test for detecting associations by explicitly correcting the regression residuals for serial correlation using autoregressive moving average methods.METHODSWe first describe data available and the methods used to estimate required data from available data. We then present the statistical methods used to test for associations.Available DataRotavirus IncidenceData on weekly reported rotavirus detections from July 27, 1999 to December 31, 2015 were obtained from the Dutch Working Group for Clinical Virology. This database contains data on the number of individuals with stool testing positive for rotavirus from 17 to 21 virology laboratories in the Netherlands. Reported test-positive incidence data were weighted by the number of laboratories reporting per week, and were then used as a proxy for incidence of the event of interest: a primary rotavirus infection.Weather DataData on the maximum, minimum, and average daily temperature and absolute humidity, ultraviolet light, and rainfall from January 1, 1950 to December 31, 2015 were available from the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute. We used data from the meteorological station in De Bilt, located in the middle of the Netherlands and considered representative for the country.Number of BirthsData on the daily number of births in the Netherlands from January 1, 1995 to December 31, 2013 were obtained from Statistics Netherlands. For 2014–2015, only monthly birth rate data were available. Daily birth rate data for these years were estimated using the available monthly data and the daily trends from previous years. See eAppendix B (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186) for additional details.The study period that we considered in this analysis was from 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2015, providing us with a large dataset for our analyses. No ethical approval was required. Original time series data on the weighted reported rotavirus incidence, maximum daily temperature, maximum absolute humidity, ultraviolet light, rainfall, and birth rate are shown in Figure 1. Note the low reported rotavirus incidence in 2014 (Figure 1A), which coincided with a relatively mild winter (Figure 1B). In addition to the clear yearly trend observed in each time series plot, the daily number of births gradually decreased over time. We expected the temperature and the proportion of susceptible individuals to directly affect rotavirus transmission. We additionally evaluated the effect of variables for which we did not expect to observe an association, including ultraviolet light, rainfall, and absolute humidity. We did not assess the effect of school vacations because most primary infections occur before children are old enough to attend school.Estimating the Proportion of Susceptible IndividualsThe primary infection with rotavirus is the most likely to be symptomatic and severe. Therefore, in calculating the proportion of susceptible individuals from the weekly number of reported rotavirus cases, we made two assumptions: (1) the majority of cases represented in our reported rotavirus incidence data were of primary infections and (2) individuals were removed from the population at risk for severe infection after their primary infection. Sensitivity of our results to this second assumption was assessed in eAppendix E (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Because infants younger than 6 months are generally protected from rotavirus infection due possibly to maternal immunity,16–18 children older than 6 months who had never been infected constituted the susceptible population in our analysis.The infection dynamics described above are akin to a standard epidemic susceptible-infected-recovered model, common in mathematical modeling.19 The absolute number of susceptible individuals for any given week S(t) was calculated as the number of susceptible individuals at the start of follow-up (S0), plus the cumulative number of individuals older than 6 months of age (δ) from the start of our time series to week t subtracted by the cumulative number of rotavirus cases (I) from the start of our time series to week t We estimated S0 as the average expected duration in the susceptible class (9 months, discussed below) times the average daily number of new susceptible individuals in 1999.Reported rotavirus incidence data (Ir) underestimate primary rotavirus infection in the Netherlands: not all Dutch laboratories report to the database and laboratory tests are conducted on a small fraction of all individuals with rotavirus. To estimate the proportion of case ascertainment at each week α(t), we used local linear regression of births versus rotavirus cases. Because all individuals become infected with rotavirus and primary infections occur shortly after individuals become susceptible, the ratio of cases to births estimates well the case ascertainment.20 For our main analysis, we set to 9 months the average time that individuals are expected to be susceptible to primary infection. In eAppendix E (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186), we tested the sensitivity of our results to alternative average durations in the susceptible class.We adjusted the number of reported cases for under-ascertainment to arrive at a balance equation for the number of susceptible individuals:Because all children are infected with rotavirus at least once before 5 years of age, we set the time-dependent denominator of the total number of individuals in the population N(t) to be the total number of births in the Netherlands in the previous 5 years. Therefore, the proportion of susceptible individuals at week t was S(t)/N(t). In eAppendix B (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186), we show how α(t) changes over time.Estimating the Effective Reproduction Number of RotavirusThe effective reproduction number, R(t), measures the number of secondary cases infected per primary case at time t and can be calculated as21where Î(u) is the rotavirus infection incidence at time u and g(u) is the probability density of the generation interval distribution at time u, which we calculated in eAppendix B (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). The mean of the generation interval was 2.1 days (SD = 0.9), which agrees with the estimated rotavirus incubation period of 2 days.1 In eAppendix E (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186), we tested the sensitivity of our results to a longer generation interval. Because the mean of the generation interval distribution was less than 1 week, we converted weekly incidence data into daily data using a smoothing spline to estimate R(t), and then averaged R(t) by week. To reduce the impact of noise on our results during periods of low incidence, we smoothed the effective reproduction number over time using Bayesian integrated nested Laplace approximations models.22,23 (Reasoning and details are available in eAppendix B; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186.)Statistical AnalysisThroughout our analyses, we considered as outcome the log effective reproduction number of rotavirus, log(R(t)), and as factors the log proportion of susceptible individuals, ultraviolet light, rainfall, the maximum, minimum, and mean temperature and absolute humidity. Because the original reported rotavirus incidence data were aggregated by week, our analyses relied on weekly data (eFigure 15; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Here, we outline preliminary analyses used to construct methods for our main analysis, described in the rest of this subsection.Preliminary Analyses: Granger CausalityWe assessed Granger causality for each factor F using(1)for the number of lags l that optimized model fit according to the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). A factor is considered to Granger-cause log(R(t)) if at least one βi,i = 1,2,…,l is statistically different from zero. Our analyses suggested a Granger causal association between log(R(t)) and all factors considered except rainfall. Notice that because the Granger model does not account for seasonality, it may detect spurious associations.Preliminary Analyses: Simulation StudyUsing simulations, we assessed the effect of correcting for residual serial correlation (described in eAppendix A; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Our analyses demonstrated that (1) failing to account for serial correlation increased the probability of identifying an association when there was none (i.e., increased false positive rate), (2) accounting for serial correlation did not reduce the probability of detecting an association when there was one (i.e., did not increase the false negative rate), and (3) accounting for serial correlation improved the probability of correctly identify the nature of associations (e.g., whether the effect of a factor was immediate or delayed).Regression ModelFor our main analysis, we used a regression model to first assess the linear immediate and 1-week delayed association between each factor and log(R(t)). We then tested for nonlinear and delayed associations using flexible natural splines.24 We adjusted for yearly (seasonal) correlation using ms sine terms and mc cosine terms with a period of 52.2 weeks. Thus, our regression model was as follows:(2)In this equation, β0 is the underlying constant level of rotavirus transmission in the Dutch population over time, each σi represents the seasonal effect contributed by the corresponding sine or cosine term, and η(t) denotes the error terms of the regression model. The number of sine and cosine terms included in the model was selected using the AIC. f(x(t),k) denotes either a linear (immediate or delayed) effect or a time-dependent natural cubic spline x(t) of the factor with k degrees of freedom (hereafter: “functional form”). For each factor included in the regression model, the selected functional form yielded optimal model fit (lowest AIC).Accounting for Serial CorrelationAs written, the ordinary regression model (Equation 2) assumes independent residuals, which is generally an invalid assumption for time series analyses. We augmented Equation 2 to automatically correct the regression estimates for autocorrelation, such that the residuals were modeled using autoregressive moving average terms:(3)where the p autoregressive terms account for correlation between p consecutive weeks, the q moving average terms account for correlation between the regression errors between q consecutive weeks, η(t) refers to the error terms from the regression equation (Equation 2), and ε(t) denotes normally and independently distributed error terms. Note that  and . For a given (set of) factor(s) and prespecified values for ms, mc, p, q, and k, all coefficients of these regression models, Equations 2 and 3, were iteratively estimated using the Arima function in R 3.1.0 such that model fit was optimized (lowest AIC).Model SelectionAlong with analyses using one factor in the regression model (“univariate” analyses), we combined the different factors into one multivariate model to assess the combined effect. The best model was the one that had the lowest AIC and relatively low (partial) autocorrelation. We used Q–Q plots to ensure that our final model had normally distributed errors.Finally, we used a 28-week moving average of the results of the regression model (Equation 2) to suggest time periods where the model was insufficient to explain, on average, the observed trends in the effective reproduction number. Further details are provided in eAppendix B (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186).All statistical analyses were conducted in R 3.1.0, using the tseries, splines, INLA, forecast, and dlnm packages.25–29 Example code is provided in eAppendix C (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186).RESULTSEstimated Proportion of Susceptible Individuals and Effective Reproduction NumberWe estimated that approximately 150,000 individuals in the Netherlands were susceptible to rotavirus at the start of our time series. An estimate of the proportion of susceptible individuals over time (Figure 2) shows that the proportion of susceptible individuals generally peaks just before the start of a new rotavirus season when rotavirus incidence is still low (December–January) and reaches a trough at the end of the rotavirus season (April–May). An anomaly was observed in 2014, where the proportion of susceptible individuals continued to increase well into the usual epidemic months, and peaked when rotavirus incidence (mildly) peaked that year. The gradual decline was partially caused by a reduced influx of new susceptible individuals (6-month-olds) in the first half of 2014. In Figure 3, we plotted the time-dependent log effective reproduction number of rotavirus calculated using Bayesian integrated nested Laplace approximations models, which was the outcome in our analyses. Clear seasonal patterns were observed in Figures 2 and 3.FIGURE 2.Proportion of susceptible individuals over time, S(t)/N(t), calculated using an estimate of the number initially susceptible and the estimated proportion of case ascertainment.FIGURE 3.Log of the effective reproduction number, R(t), estimated using Bayesian integrated nested Laplace approximations models.Regression Modeling with Autoregressive Moving Average ErrorsUsing “univariate” regression models that accounted for seasonality and serial correlation, we found that natural cubic splines with three degrees of freedom provided the best fit for both the log proportion of susceptible individuals and minimum, maximum, and mean temperature. Optimal model fit was obtained when a delay of up to 2 weeks for temperature and when a delay of up to 3 weeks for the log proportion of susceptible individuals were included in the model (eFigure 16; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Delayed effects were also modeled using a natural cubic spline with three degrees of freedom. The effect of the proportions of susceptible individuals fluctuated from week to week. Therefore, we calculated the total current and delayed effect of each proportion of susceptible individuals. We observed that weeks with higher proportions of susceptible individuals were associated with a higher effective reproduction number (eFigure 16a; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Furthermore, the shapes of splines suggest that lower temperatures in the current and previous week were associated with a higher log(R(t)) (eFigure 16b–d; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). There was no evidence of an immediate or delayed association between ultraviolet light, rainfall, and absolute humidity and log(R(t)) (eFigure 16e–i; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186).Next, we considered multivariate models that accounted for seasonality and serial correlation. The model with the best fit, and therefore selected as our final model, included the log proportion of susceptible individuals and mean temperature, modeling their effects using a natural cubic spline with three degrees of freedom. Optimal model fit was obtained when temperature with a delay of up to 2 weeks and the log proportion of susceptible individuals with a delay of up to 3 weeks were included in the model. In eAppendix D (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186), we compare results of multivariate models with different numbers of delayed terms. Ultraviolet light, rainfall, and absolute humidity were not associated with the effective reproduction number of rotavirus. The remainder of this section presents findings based on this final model.The shapes of the splines representing the total effects of mean temperature and the proportion of susceptible individuals (Figure 4), which were nearly identical to the univariate models, suggest that higher proportions of susceptible individuals and lower temperatures were associated with a higher log(R(t)) The estimated total effect of a high current proportion of susceptible individuals (e.g. 0.27) was an increase in log(R(t)) of 0.03 relative to the average proportion of susceptible individuals (0.11) (Figure 4A). The estimated effect of low temperatures (e.g., −7°C) on log(R(t)) was an increase in log(R(t)) of 0.075 relative to the average temperature (16°C) (Figure 4B). Similar results were observed for models with different numbers of delayed terms (eFigures 19–21; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Additional results of our final model, including the estimated coefficients, are available in eAppendix D (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186).FIGURE 4.The total, immediate, and delayed effect on the effective reproduction number, R(t), of the (A) proportion of susceptible individuals S(t)/N(t) and (B) mean temperature, as estimated in our best-fitting model that corrected for serial correlation and included terms for seasonality. The black line represents the estimated effect, and the grey region indicates the 95% confidence intervals.We combined the estimated effects of the proportion of susceptible individuals and of mean temperature on the effective reproduction number to arrive at an estimated critical threshold, where R(t) = 1. Assuming a negligible effect of seasonality and serial correlation on R(t) this critical threshold suggests the proportion of susceptible individuals and the mean temperature for which an epidemic could change from increasing to decreasing incidence. The shaded region in Figure 5 shows the proportion of susceptible individuals and the mean temperature for which our model suggests this critical shift could occur. For example, a proportion of susceptible individuals equal to 0.10 may be sufficient to reduce the effective reproduction number to below one for all mean temperatures above 6.7°C (95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.5°C, 9.3°C; Figure 5).FIGURE 5.The proportion of susceptible individuals and the mean temperature for which our model suggests an increasing incidence (effective reproduction number above one; in grey) and a decreasing incidence (below one; in white), assuming the effect of the seasonality on the effective reproduction number was equal to one and the effect of serial correlation equals one. Dashed lines depict the 95% confidence interval.In the following two paragraphs, we break down the contribution of different variables in explaining log(R(t)) variability over time in the final model. Separate graphs of the explanatory value of the proportion of susceptible individuals and mean temperature in estimating log(R(t)) time trends show a clear seasonal trend (Figure 6). Together these two factors alone explain up to the total magnitude of log(R(t)) at its peak (Figure 7A). The year 2014 was an anomaly: the unusually low rotavirus incidence during the 2014 season left the highest proportion of individuals susceptible to infection at the end of the rotavirus season in the 15 years for which data were available (Figures 2 and 6A). The high proportion of susceptible individuals suggests that epidemic-level rotavirus transmission (R(t) > 1) could have continued into the summer, and perhaps through most of the year (Figure 6A). When considering this factor along with temperature, it appears as though the warmer summer weather reduced the effective reproduction number to below one.FIGURE 6.A breakdown of the effect of the variables included in our final model compared with the effective reproduction number (grey). A, The estimated effect of the log proportion of susceptible individuals. B, The estimated effect of the mean temperature.FIGURE 7.A breakdown of the effect of the variables included in our final model compared with the effective reproduction number (grey). A, The estimated effect of the log average weekly proportion of susceptible individuals and the average weekly mean temperature. B, The estimated effect of the proportion of susceptible individuals, mean temperature, and seasonality. C, The fit of the complete, best-fitting model, including serial correlation correction.The proportion of susceptible individuals, mean temperature, and seasonal effects alone did not completely capture the week-to-week variability in the effective reproduction number (Figure 7B). When we additionally considered the effects of serial correlation, we observed a closer approximation of the week-to-week variability (Figure 7C). When the estimated combined effect of the proportion of susceptible individuals, mean temperature, and seasonal factors were averaged over 28 weeks, we observed that they generally followed the peaks of the 28-week average effective reproduction number (Figure 8). Our final model overestimated the peak in 2014, which may suggest that the reduction in the effective reproduction number that year may have been caused by factors not included in our analysis.FIGURE 8.The 28-week moving average of the estimated effective reproduction number of rotavirus (grey) and the 28-week moving average of estimates of the final model that included the log average weekly proportion of susceptible individuals, the average weekly mean temperature, and the estimated effect of seasonality (black).Sensitivity AnalysesSensitivity analyses showed, first, that there were only minor changes in the results when the average duration in the susceptible class was varied from 9 months to 3, 15, and 30 months (eFigures 22–26; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Second, stronger associations for one or both factors were observed when the serial interval was delayed or lengthened (eFigures 27–29; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). Third, results were sensitive to the assumption of complete immunity, with the effect of the proportion of susceptible individuals becoming insignificant when 15% of the infected individuals are assumed to re-enter the susceptible class 6 months after infection (eFigures 30–31; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186). The results of sensitivity analyses are presented and further discussed in eAppendix E (http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186).DISCUSSIONWe investigated how the proportion of susceptible individuals and various weather factors are associated with the effective reproduction number of rotavirus in the Netherlands using regression techniques that adjust for serially correlated residuals and seasonality. We observed an association of both the proportion of susceptible individuals and temperature with the effective reproduction number of rotavirus—a larger proportion of susceptible individuals and a lower temperature increased the effective reproduction number that decreases either as the proportion of susceptible individuals decreases or as the temperature increases.Our findings align well with those of previous studies.6,8 Pitzer et al.8 showed that the timing of the annual epidemics observed in the United States can be partially explained by yearly birth rate patterns. They suggested that even a small seasonal variation in rotavirus transmission—driven, for example, by weather factors—may be sufficient to result in strong rotavirus seasonality. Atchison et al.6 demonstrated an association between temperature and rotavirus transmission, but no association with absolute humidity. Other population-based and laboratory studies have similarly shown that rotavirus incidence and virus survival are associated with temperature.7,9,30 Studies found contradictory results on the association between other weather factors (such as rainfall and relative/absolute humidity) and rotavirus incidence,6,7,9,30 which could be explained by the settings in which the studies were conducted and the variability of humidity in those settings.6,30The method that we developed for detecting determinants of seasonal rotavirus transmission by assessing nonlinear, delayed associations—distributed lag nonlinear models that account for seasonality and adjust for autoregressive moving average errors—provides an approach for investigating the determinants of (seasonal) disease transmission. Inspired by time series susceptible-infected-recovered models,20,31,32 this model allows for flexible parameter estimation and accounts for seasonal and serial correlation as in autoregressive moving average modeling, while focusing on the disease transmission process. Regression models that rely on time series data, but that fail to account for serial correlation, neglect a key assumption in regression analysis, namely, that the calculation of confidence intervals assumes that the residuals generated by a regression model are white noise. Removing seasonal and serial correlation reduces the possibility of arriving at spurious associations between two variables13 and may thereby result in a loss of significance of originally identified, logically attractive variables.12 As we showed in our simulation analyses (eAppendix A; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B186), ordinary regression analysis detects spurious associations in serially correlated data, and serial correlation correction using autoregressive moving average error terms does not hinder the ability to detect an association. Our contribution was to introduce a test on statistical footing and firmly establish that there are associations between the effective reproductive number of rotavirus and both temperature and the proportion of susceptible individuals, but not absolute humidity.A limitation of our analysis was that we relied on reconstructed data, which could have biased our results. We reconstructed the proportion of susceptible individuals by estimating the number of individuals infected in the population. Because laboratory tests are not conducted on all individuals with a primary rotavirus infection, reported weekly incidence statistics, the assumption that all individuals are infected with rotavirus,1 and an estimate of the time-varying reporting fraction were used to inform our estimate of the true weekly national incidence of rotavirus. Moreover, the ages of the reported rotavirus cases were unavailable in our dataset. Therefore, we assumed that all reported cases were of primary infections in children under 5 years of age and that the primary infection with rotavirus occurs at 15 months of age, on average.1 No data were available to further inform our model.Based on our findings, it would appear as though the relatively mild temperatures in 2014 combined with the low proportion of susceptible individuals contributed to lower rotavirus transmission in the Netherlands that same year, and, more generally, that temperature and the proportion of susceptible individuals has an impact on rotavirus transmission from year to year. However, the fact that the modeled effective reproduction number in 2014 was higher than what was estimated suggests that other factors played a role in the low rotavirus incidence that particular year. This shows that it will be difficult to attribute a decrease in rotavirus epidemic size to an intervention, such as the introduction of the rotavirus vaccination program in England. Possible candidate factors that could play a role in rotavirus transmission include strain dynamics.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe authors thank Dr. Hester Korthals Altes and three anonymous reviewers for constructive feedback that improved this study.Supplementary Material


Title: Interspecies Transmission of Animal Rotaviruses to Humans: Reassortment-Driven Adaptation

1. IntroductionThe species Rotavirus alphagastroenteritidis, more commonly called Rotavirus A, is a member of the genus Rotavirus within the family Sedoreoviridae [1,2] and will hereafter be referred to simply as rotavirus for convenience. The genome of rotavirus consists of 11 strands of double-stranded RNA, each of which encodes a single viral structural protein (VP1-VP4, VP6 and VP7) or non-structural protein (NSP1-NSP4), except for genome segment 11, which codes for NSP5/6. The RNA genome is encased in a virion with icosahedral symmetry that comprises three-layered capsid proteins (Figure 1) [3]. Rotavirus infects a wide range of hosts, including humans and various animal species. While each host is typically infected by its own host-specific (homologous) strains, rotaviruses originating from different animal hosts (heterologous strains) can occasionally infect humans and cause disease. This phenomenon underpins the concept of interspecies transmission of animal rotaviruses to humans [4,5,6,7,8]. In this review, the term animal rotaviruses is used to denote non-human animal rotaviruses.This review aims to explore and discuss how the concept of interspecies transmission has evolved over the years through methodological advancements that enable the distinction between homologous and heterologous rotavirus strains by examining the entire genome. To achieve this aim, exemplary studies were selected to contextualize their findings within the framework of the current understanding of rotavirus interspecies transmission. Consequently, the selection of papers is not exhaustive and reflects a degree of bias toward studies in which we were directly involved, allowing for re-examination of original data and unpublished background information to provide deeper interpretation.To begin, consider the following illustrative case. During the summer of 1995, a baby boy from Jerusalem—an urban area with no cattle—was visiting relatives in Petah Tikva, a city near Tel Aviv that housed several cow sheds and petting farms for children. During the visit, his mother took him to one such farm to see cows and calves for the first time. A few days later, the child developed diarrhoea and was examined by a paediatrician. Laboratory analysis of his faecal sample confirmed rotavirus infection. From this clinical history, the infection was suspected to be caused by a bovine rotavirus from the beginning. But it was 18 years later that a thorough investigation by whole-genome sequencing concluded that the child was infected with a G6P[1] bovine rotavirus [9].While this case represents a clearly documented spillover event, such direct evidence of animal contact preceding illness is exceptionally rare. In most reports based on surveillance data, the zoonotic link is inferred rather than confirmed, typically referencing generalised ecological conditions—such as human proximity to domestic or wild animals in rural regions of Asia and Africa—rather than direct, observed contact.2. Two Key Questions Regarding Interspecies Rotavirus TransmissionThe concept of interspecies transmission is straightforward, but exploring it in real-world samples requires answering two key questions. First, how can one find an animal rotavirus strain among the sheer number of human strains? It is like finding a needle in a haystack, and one needs some tool to find it like a magnet. While significant distinction lies in the minimal infectious dose, which is tens of thousands of times smaller for homologous hosts than for heterologous ones, as demonstrated in a mouse model [10,11,12], applying this criterion to clinical specimens is impractical. One realistic approach applicable to clinical samples is to leverage the lower degree of genomic RNA homology between rotavirus strains from different host species than within the same host species. It was hypothesized that genetic homology would be substantially higher among homologous strains than between heterologous ones, making such distinctions critical. However, even at the end of the twentieth century, sequencing the whole genome of a field isolate remained technically challenging. Thus, it was necessary to develop nucleic acid hybridisation assays that can demonstrate the presence of a heterologous rotavirus strain of animal origin.The second question is the extent to which interspecies transmission contributes to rotavirus evolution. If interspecies transmission is limited to the individual patient, lacking any long-term, inheritable consequences, it does not impact evolution. Here, evolution refers to the creation of genetic diversity, a rich source of variants on which selection pressures act (Mayr, 1994) [13]. Thus, the second question relates to whether interspecies transmission can serve as a driving force in shaping the genetic diversity of the rotavirus population.3. What Is a Strain of Rotavirus and How to Define It?The term “strain” of rotavirus is inherently ambiguous and has been used variably across the research community. Prior to the metagenomic era, rotavirus strain was referred to as a plaque-purified clone isolated in cell culture from a given patient. Then, the strain, often possessing distinct biological and genetic properties, was exchanged among researchers as a common practice.A rotavirus strain can be characterized by neutralisation specificity (serotype) but a serotype is dually defined by two genome segments, i.e., the VP7 and VP4 genes, independently from the other nine genome segments (Figure 1). From the early years of rotavirus research, a method to analyse the entire genome has been polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of genomic RNA [14,15]. Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis reveals the migration patterns of the virus’s 11 RNA segments, producing a unique profile known as an electropherotype (Figure 2). This technique offers a rapid and reliable means of distinguishing between strains: two distinguishable electropherotypes conclusively indicate that two samples contain genetically distinct rotavirus strains.In the previously mentioned Israeli boy’s case, polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis revealed that the electropherotype of the rotavirus isolated from the boy differed from that of NCDV, a commonly used laboratory strain of bovine rotavirus. This distinction was crucial, as it effectively ruled out the concern of laboratory contamination at an early stage of the study.Another interesting finding is the characteristic electropherotypes of avian rotaviruses, which are clearly distinguishable from those of mammalian rotaviruses (Figure 2). While this distinction is not definitive proof of avian origin, it provides strong supporting evidence that warrants further investigation.The following is a good example: When over 1400 bovine faecal specimens collected in Germany were screened, a few rotavirus strains with unusual electropherotypes were detected by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. One such strain, designated 993/83, was successfully isolated in cell culture [16]. The distinctive electropherotype of 993/83 prompted an analysis by RNA-RNA hybridisation. This analysis, further supported by neutralization assays, concluded that strain 993/83 was of avian rotavirus origin, representing the first case of rotavirus transmission across classes in vertebrates [17]. Initially, there was scepticism about whether an avian rotavirus could infect mammals; however, it was unequivocally shown that mice were experimentally infected with a pigeon rotavirus, PO-13 [18,19].While useful for defining rotavirus strains in molecular epidemiological studies, electropherotyping lacks the ability to reliably distinguish between homologous and heterologous strains, with the notable exception of the characteristic electropherotypes of avian rotaviruses (Figure 2). This discriminatory ability is crucial for investigating interspecies transmission.4. Advancement of Analysing the Whole Genome: RNA–RNA HybridisationFrom the 1980s until the advent of whole-genome sequencing technologies in the early 2000s, the primary method for analysing the whole genome of rotavirus strains was RNA–RNA hybridisation in solution [20,21]. Under high-stringency conditions, theoretically, up to 18% nucleotide mismatches were allowed to form hybrid bands [22]. This technique enabled researchers to assess genomic RNA homology which was impossible by electropherotyping. Based on the pattern of hybrid formation, wild-type human rotavirus strains were classified into three distinct groups, which we termed “genogroups”; i.e., Wa, DS-1, and AU-1 [23,24,25].Figure 3 illustrates briefly how RNA–RNA hybridisation assay in solution is performed. In the interpretation of the assay results, it deserves mention that unlike northern blot hybridisation [26], the migration of hybrid molecules formed in solution with many sequence mismatches results in slower and fainter migration on the gel. In such instances, aberrant migration precludes identification of the segment origin for each band although the intensity and the degree of aberrant migration on the gel are suggestive of the relative heterogeneity between the probe and genomic RNA.RNA–RNA hybridisation analysis to explore genetic relationships between different animal rotaviruses revealed that they largely form host-species specific genogroups [27]. This confirmed that rotaviruses tend to be genetically similar within a particular animal species whereas they differ substantially between heterologous strains. In light of this observation, RNA–RNA hybridisation analysis of interspecies transmission cases revealed two distinct hybrid patterns [4,5] (Figure 3). In the first pattern, the entire genome exhibits homology with that of animal rotaviruses, suggesting interspecies transmission as whole virions [23,28]. In the second pattern, which is more frequently encountered, only certain genome segments hybridise with one probe, while the remaining segments hybridise with a different probe, thereby indicating the occurrence of genetic reassortment [29,30,31,32,33,34].Figure 3Schematic diagram illustrating the RNA-RNA hybridisation procedure to generate an autoradiogram. (A): Genomic double-stranded RNAs are purified from the test rotavirus strain and heat-denatured. Separately, P32-labeled, positive-sense RNA probes (11 single-stranded transcripts) are generated from the reference strain by in vitro transcription, using purified double-layered particles containing the active viral RNA polymerase. The denatured test RNA and the labelled probes are mixed in a small reaction volume and incubated under high-stringency conditions (65 C for 16 h) to allow for hybridisation. Un-hybridised RNA probes are degraded during this process. The resulting RNA-RNA hybrids are recovered by ethanol precipitation and separated using polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). Then, the gel is dried and exposed to an X-ray film to produce an autoradiogram. (B): The PA151 probe forms 11 co-migrating bands in the homologous reaction. With heterologous reactions, PA151 hybridises to specific segments of AU-1 and other segments of NCDV. This segmented hybridisation pattern suggests PA151 is a reassortant formed between AU-1-like and NCDV-like parental strains. Note that the aberrant migration of hybrids precludes identification of the genome segment origin for each band. (C): The FRV64 (feline) probe yields an almost indistinguishable 11-band profile when hybridised with the genomic RNA of the human strain Ro1845 and the canine strain HCR3. This near-identical pattern indicates an extremely high sequence identity across all segments, suggesting whole-virion transmission (feline or canine) to the human child. Panel (A) was created for this article. Panels (B,C) were adapted from references [28,33], respectively with the permission of respective publishers.5. Further Advancement by Whole Genome Sequencing and Phylogeny5.1. Defining a Genotype and Genotype ConstellationA major limitation of RNA–RNA hybridisation techniques was their inability to estimate the timing of genetic reassortment events—whether they occurred at the time of spillover events or gradually evolved during sustained transmission within the new host (i.e., human) population.The ambiguity surrounding the timing of gene reassortment events has been resolved through advances in molecular phylogenetics including the coalescent model [35,36]. Nucleotide sequence data provided by whole-genome sequencing of wild-type strains have enabled researchers to distinguish between interspecies transmission as a contemporaneous event and as part of a longer-term evolutionary trajectory.In this genomic era, traditional genogroup classification by RNA–RNA hybridisation assays was superseded by genotype constellations defined by quantitative criteria [37] (Figure 1). As polymorphisms were identified across all 11 genome segments, including the two outer capsid protein-coding segments (VP7 and VP4), a standardized nomenclature was adopted to describe the full genotype constellation: Gx–P[x]–Ix–Rx–Cx–Mx–Ax–Nx–Tx–Ex–Hx, where each “x” denotes the genotype number assigned to a specific gene segment [37,38].There are two major and one minor genotype constellations among human rotaviruses; they are the Wa, DS-1, and AU-1 genotype constellations comprising G1/G3/G4/G9-P[8]-I1-R1-C1-M1-A1-N1-T1-E1-H1, G2-P[4]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A2-N2-T2-E2-H2, and G3-P[9]-I3-R3-C3-M3-A3-N3-T3-E3-H3, respectively [37,39]. The authorisation and numbering of a new genotype is carried out by the Rotavirus Classification Working Group [38]. As of this writing, 42 G, 58 P, 32 I, 24 R, 24 C, 24 M, 39 A, 28 N, 28 T, 32 E and 28 H genotypes are registered.The shift to quantitative, sequence-based genotype constellations provides invaluable insight [37]. This modern approach, which defines genotypes based on the predefined cutoff value of nucleotide sequence identity, reveals the intricate interrelationships and shared genotypes between rotaviruses from different host species. Specifically, the cutoff values for the VP1, VP2, VP3, VP4, VP6, VP7, NSP1, NSP2, NSP3, NSP4 and NSP5/6 genes are 83%, 84%, 81%, 80%, 79%, 85%, 85%, 85%, 80%, 85%, and 91%, respectively.For instance, a reference bovine rotavirus strain, NCDV, has the genotype constellation G6-P[1]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A3-N2-T6-E2-H3. In comparison, the human DS-1 strain has a constellation of G2-P[4]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A2-N2-T2-E2-H2. A direct comparison shows that these two strains share the same genotypes for six of their genome segments: VP6 (I2), VP1 (R2), VP2 (C2), VP3 (M2), NSP2 (N2), and NSP4 (E2). Based on these and related findings, Matthijnssens et al. hypothesized that DS-1-like human rotaviruses and bovine rotaviruses share a common animal origin, while Wa-like human rotaviruses are more closely related to porcine rotaviruses [37].5.2. Classification Within a Genotype: Sub-Genotype PhylogenyAlthough rotaviruses may share the same genotype, detailed analysis reveals distinct lineages across different host species. This underscores the limitations of genotype-level classification and the need for lineage-level resolution. The sub-genotype phylogeny framework proposed by Agbemabiese et al. [40] offers a powerful tool for tracing the evolutionary history of the backbone genes (the genes encoding the internal capsid proteins and non-structural protein genes) of DS-1-like strains.For example, as mentioned in the preceding section (Section 5.1), the bovine strain NCDV and the human strain DS-1 share identical genotype 2 genes for VP6 (I2), VP1 (R2), VP2 (C2), VP3 (M2), NSP2 (N2), and NSP4 (E2). This identity strongly suggests a common ancestor. However, applying the sub-genotype phylogeny framework to these six genes reveals that they belong to significantly different lineages for all six genes, contradicting the assumed recent common ancestry. Specifically, the lineages for NCDV are VP6 (I2.X), VP1 (R2.XII), VP2 (C2.X), VP3 (M2.X), NSP2 (N2.XIII), and NSP4 (E2.XXIV), whereas those of DS-1 are consistently VP6 (I2.I), VP1 (R2.I), VP2 (C2.I), VP3 (M2.I), NSP2 (N2.I), and NSP4 (E2.I). Furthermore, there is significant nucleotide divergence, ranging from 12.9% for NSP2 to 14.7% for VP1, between the two strains across these six genes.The evidence indicates that while some backbone genes of the human DS-1 strain likely originated in cattle (or other artiodactyls), these DS-1 genes have since become evolved to adapt to humans (humanised).Comparable lineage-based tools for Wa-like and AU-1-like backbone genes are essential to deepen our understanding of rotavirus evolution.6. From Spillover Event to Emerging Epidemic6.1. Need for Timely SurveillanceMany papers on interspecies transmission emphasise the importance of surveillance. However, before a major outbreak occurs, it is difficult to distinguish between a dead-end spillover event and the one resulting in an epidemic emergence. Securing samples soon after an animal rotavirus strain crosses the species boundary is therefore vital. This allows researchers to track the adaptive mutations that are essential for establishing sustained human-to-human transmission. However, this is easier said than done because there were only two emerging epidemics caused by animal-derived rotavirus strains in the last two decades: the bovine-like G8P[8] strains, which emerged in Southeast Asia around 2013 [41], and the equine-like G3P[8] strains, which emerged in Australia and Thailand in 2013 [42,43]. Nevertheless, maintaining a prepared surveillance infrastructure can increase the chances of early detection.6.2. Bovine-like G8P[8] Strains That Emerged in VIETNAM in 20146.2.1. Observations in VietnamA case in point is the strain surveillance in Vietnam which provided us with a unique opportunity of early detection [44]. Until late 2014, the distribution of rotavirus genotypes in Vietnam was unremarkable, with G1P[8] and G2P[4] accounting for over 90% and up to 10% of rotavirus-positive samples, respectively. However, in November 2014, suddenly an unusual G8P[8] strain was detected in the southern city of Nha Trang. The number of G8P[8] samples gradually increased, and by 2015, the strain had spread north to Hanoi [41]. At that point in time, we thought that we were witnessing the emergence and early spread of a novel G8P[8] rotavirus strain. We speculated that this was a bovine G8 strain that had jumped into humans, as sequencing of the VP7 gene revealed that its most recent common ancestor was shared with an Indian bovine G8 strain [41].The outbreak occurred in two distinct waves, peaking in 2016 and again in 2019–2020 [44] (Figure 4). The strain eventually ceased to circulate in late 2021. Our decade-long monitoring of the G8 strain revealed a clear picture of the adaptive mutations that had likely driven the spread of the virus. Whole genome sequencing confirmed that all samples shared a common genotype constellation: G8-P[8]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A2-N2-T2-E2-H2; i.e., bovine-like G8P[8] with a DS-1-like genetic backbone. However, at a more granular lineage level, the strains were grouped into five genetic constellations two of which were dominant ones: constellation A and constellation E [44] (Figure 4). Interestingly, the most notable difference between the two constellations was the presumed origin of their backbone genes. The earlier strains, which belonged to constellation A, possessed bovine-derived genes in the VP1, NSP2, and NSP4 genes. In contrast, the later strains from constellation E had undergone a significant change: all three bovine-derived genes were replaced with their human counterparts through a process of genetic reassortment [44].While our discussion is primarily focused on reassortment events involving VP1, NSP2, and NSP4, the successful spread needs to be understood as more granular molecular changes in these and other segments. As such, future research requires a comprehensive understanding of functional regions of each genome segment. To serve as a general resource for such studies (as discussed further in Section 11.1), we provide an overview of the known functions of each of the 11 rotavirus genome segments in Supplementary Table S1.6.2.2. Observations in Nearby CountriesTwo relevant reports from the literature deserve mention to extrapolate our observations. First, an analysis of the seven Thai G8P[8] strains such as SKT-107 detected one year earlier than the earliest Vietnamese strain RVN1149 revealed that they had the same genome as constellation A, with one important exception: their VP6 gene belonged to lineage I2.VIII (Figure 4) [45]. This I2.VIII lineage was the one carried by a Hungarian human G8P[14] strain, BP1602/04, which was wholly of artiodactyl origin [49]. In this review we designate this genotype/lineage constellation as constellation pre-A. Consequently, these constellation pre-A strains contained one more animal-derived gene than the earliest Vietnamese strain (RVN1149 in Figure 4). Thus, there were a total of five bovine (artiodactyl)-derived genes, including the G8 VP7 gene. Interestingly, all G8P[8] strains possessing constellation pre-A ceased to circulate in the following year (2014), being replaced by constellation A strains (SKT-281 in Figure 4) [45].Second, the bovine-like G8P[8] strains such as 5CR11 that was detected in Thailand from 2018–2020 had constellation E [46]. Additionally, the same constellation E was also carried by Chinese G8P[8] strains collected during the 2021/2022 winter season [47] from which all artiodactyl-derived backbone genes had been eliminated (GZ-0005 in Figure 4). We interpret that these later Thai and Chinese G8 strains as well as many Vietnamese constellation E strains were descendants of the early Thai G8 strain possessing constellation pre-A.The lesson learned here is that a long-term continuous surveillance is necessary to provide a legitimate interpretation of discrete, snapshot observations.6.2.3. Estimated Time of Jumping from an Artiodactyla to HumansA time-scaled phylogenetic analysis (using a Maximum Clade Credibility tree) of the VP7 genes estimated that the initial interspecies transmission of the presumptive bovine G8 rotavirus to humans occurred between 2008 and 2012 [44] (Figure 5). Independently, Degiuseppe et al. [50], using a distinct G8 VP7 sequence dataset, estimated that the globally circulating G8P[8] strains (VP7 lineage IV), which surged to an 18% detection rate in Argentina in 2018 [51], likely originated in Thailand around 2010. This independent conclusion concurs with our own. These converging cross-species time estimates affirm our hypothesis that we observed the adaptive process 2–6 years after the putative, ancestral bovine strain crossed the host boundary.In conclusion, evolutionary changes occur in the backbone genes of an animal rotavirus following its transmission to a new host species. Specifically, the animal-derived genes appear to be progressively replaced by cognate human-derived genes through genetic reassortment in the process of adaptation to the human host. This observation highlights a key mechanism of host adaptation in newly emerged strains.7. Do G8 Strains Endemic in Africa Reflect Repeated Introductions of Bovine-to-Human Interspecies Transmission?7.1. Unexpectedly High Prevalence of G8 in AfricaPrior to the emergence of bovine-like G8P[8] strains in Southeast Asia, G8 was an uncommon genotype in human rotaviruses, accounting for less than 1% of the strains detected globally [52,53,54]. However, more than 10% of strains were typed as G8 in Africa, including Malawi [55,56]. To examine the relationship to ordinary human rotavirus strains, we analysed Malawian G8 strains at the whole genome level by RNA-RNA hybridisation [34]. We concluded that Malawian G8 strains were most likely single VP7 gene substitution reassortants between bovine rotavirus (providing the G8 VP7 gene) and DS-1-like human rotavirus (providing the remaining 10 genes). As there would be many opportunities for animal–human contact to occur in rural Africa, including cattle and buffalo, it was inferred that such interspecies transmission would frequently occur [34]. Consequently, a high frequency of bovine rotavirus introductions was speculated to maintain the observed high G8 prevalence. The current understanding of this mechanism is discussed in the next section.7.2. Evolution of Malawi G8 During 10-Year SurveillanceTen years after our initial identification of G8 strains in Malawi, we conducted a whole-genome sequencing analysis to answer the question of whether bovine G8 virus frequently crossed the host-species boundary to infect humans, thereby maintaining the high prevalence of G8 rotavirus strains over the study years [57]. Our findings, when taken together, indicated otherwise. The Malawian G8 strains collected in a sentinel hospital, Blantyre, Malawi, during the 10-year period (1996–2007) were genetic reassortants with the DS-1-like backbone genes (I2-R2-C2-M2-A2-N2-T2-E2-H2) and a human-endemic P genotype (P[4], P[6], or P[8]). These P genotypes are classified as P genogroup [II] and have important implications in terms of host range restriction of rotaviruses [58,59]. Thus, the VP4 spike-protein genes and the backbone genes are those of typical human rotaviruses. The VP7 genes of all Malawian G8 strains formed a monophyletic cluster within lineage V with a few other strains from Kenya, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and South Africa as well as other locations in Malawi [60] (Figure 6). Within this cluster, however, there was no G8 VP7 gene of animal rotavirus origin. Furthermore, the nucleotide sequence identities of the VP7 genes of the 27 study strains were very high, ranging from 96.9% to 99.1%. Thus, we concluded that there was only a single introduction of a bovine (or some artiodactyl) rotavirus strain to humans sometime in the not-too-distant past.7.3. Incidental Observations of an Experimental Human-to-Animal TransmissionIncidentally, the VP7 phylogenetic tree includes a highly homologous G8 VP7 gene from a Kenyan simian rotavirus, KY1646 (Figure 6). This virus was not a natural isolate but a result of an experimental infection of a monkey with a human G8P[8] strain [61]. This demonstrates that if human-to-simian interspecies transmission were to occur in nature, it would present the same pattern, simian sequence nested within human sequences, in the phylogenetic tree. The implications of the G1 VP7 gene identified in a porcine rotavirus will be revisited later in this review (see Section 11.2.).7.4. G8 Strains That Ended in Spillover Events Without Inheritable ConsequencesAdah et al. [62] reported two G8P[1] strains from human (strain HMG035) and bovine (NGRbg8) samples from Nigeria. The G8 VP7 sequences belonged to lineage V, but formed a distinct sub-lineage separable from the Malawian G8 strain cluster with up to 5% divergence (Figure 6). The pair represents a case of bovine-to-human interspecies transmission that failed in wider human-to-human spread [63]. The genotype constellation of these Nigerian strains, G8-P[1]-I2-R2-C2-M2-A11-N2-T6-E2-H3, characteristic of a typical bovine rotavirus genotype supports the hypothesis that HMG035 was a bovine rotavirus itself that jumped to a human child [63].Similarly, a few sporadically identified human G8P[14] strains have been documented, which are indicative of possible zoonotic transmission from artiodactyls to humans; for instance, BP1062/04 was detected in Hungary in 2004 [49], strain 2009726790 detected in Guatemala [64], strain 12597 detected in Japan in 2014 [65], A75 in Kenya in 2000 [66], PR/1300/04 in Italy in 2004 [67]. Most of these strains exhibited the consensus genotype constellations characteristic of G8P[14] artiodactyl rotaviruses: G8-P[14]-R2/R5-C2-M2-A3/A11-N2-T6-E2/E12-H3 [68]. Thus, they can be regarded as instances of direct whole-virion transmission without subsequent human-to-human spread.These G8P[1] and G8P[14] strains of artiodactyl origin represented simple spillover events, affecting only the directly infected patients and failing to contribute to the human rotavirus gene pool or its subsequent diversification of the genome.8. What Factors Enable Animal Rotavirus Strains to Adapt to the Human Host?8.1. The Role of the VP4 Spike Protein in the Initial Binding to the Heterologous Host CellAn important question concerns the factors that enabled the bovine G8 strain—ancestral to African G8P[6], G8P[4], and G8P[8] rotaviruses with DS-1-like backbone genes—to successfully adapt to the human host, in contrast to the G8P[14] strains mentioned above, which did not achieve such adaptation.To address this question, the VP4 spike protein, more specifically, its proteolytic cleavage product VP8*, is a primary factor to consider because it is responsible for determining viral tropism and host range in rotaviruses [69,70,71]. Based on the phylogeny of the VP8* subunit, Liu et al. [58] classified 71 animal and human rotavirus strains into five P genogroups, P[I] through P[V]. P[I] includes 23 animal-associated genotypes such as P[1], P[5], P[7], etc.; P[II] includes genotypes P[4], P[6], P[8], and P[19]; and P[III] includes genotypes P[9], P[14], and P[25]. By testing recombinant VP8* molecules, Liu et al. [58] revealed a critical relationship: VP8* molecules from genogroup P[II] strains bind to the human H type 1 and Lewis b antigens, whereas VP8* molecules from genogroup P[III] strains bind to the human type A antigen. This suggests that a crucial factor for a rotavirus strain to initially cross the host species barrier and infect humans is the possession of an appropriate VP8* protein capable of binding to one of these polymorphic Histo-Blood Group Antigens (HBGAs).Therefore, the P[14] VP8* molecule (from genogroup P[III]) likely provided the G8P[14] strain with the ability to infect human cells through the binding to human type A antigen, making it one of the bovine strains capable of initial zoonotic spillover. However, since the G8P[14] strain failed to establish widespread endemic status like the African G8P[6], G8P[4], and G8P[8] strains, all of which belong to human-adapted genogroup P[II], its VP8* binding capacity alone was insufficient for the second, more critical step: establishing sustained human-to-human transmission chains.8.2. The Role of the DS-1-like Backbone Genes in Sustained TransmissionGiven that both the Wa-like and DS-1-like genotype constellations are prevalent in human rotaviruses, it is plausible that the ability to establish sustained human-to-human transmission chains following a zoonotic jump is dependent on the acquisition of one of these two established human rotavirus backbone gene constellations.In this context, it is particularly noteworthy to remind us of the successful G8 strains. Both the endemic G8 strains in Malawi and the epidemic bovine-like G8P[8] strains detected in Vietnam share the DS-1-like backbone genes in addition to human-adapted genogroup P[II] VP8 gene. This commonality suggests that the DS-1-like backbone genes carry host-range determinants essential for sustained human-to-human spread. Crucially, the Vietnamese G8P[8] strains demonstrate a clear evolutionary trend of a gradual elimination of residual bovine-derived backbone genes through successive reassortment with co-circulating human strains to achieve optimal fitness in the human host [44] (Figure 4).8.3. Bovine-like G8P[8] Strains That Failed to Spread Despite the DS-1-like Backbone GenesMedeiros et al. [48] reported a bovine-like G8P[8] strain detected in Brazil in 2017 (IAL-R193) had the same genotype/lineage constellation as what we call constellation A of the Vietnamese G8P[8] strains in addition to the same lineage IV of the G8VP7 gene (Figure 4). However, IAL-R193 and other G8 strains with DS-1-like backbone genes did not spread in the country. Medeiros et al. [48] argued by comparing the bovine-like G8 strains failing to spread with equine-like G3 causing an epidemic in Brazilian population, that bovine-like G8 strains did not achieve the fitness required to become a successful human pathogen in Brazil.In sharp contrast, Degiuseppe et al. [51] reported that lineage IV G8 strains bearing the P[8] VP4 and DS-1-like backbone genes suddenly increased their prevalence from 0% in 2017 to 18% in 2018 in Argentina, caused an epidemic spread in Argentina.These contrasting studies show that some further factors are necessary for an emerging strain to cause an epidemic rather than merely maintaining human-to-human transmission chains. Such factors may include competition among co-circulating strains carrying other genotype constellations, genetic susceptibility related to the prevalence of HBGA genes in the local population, and herd immunity formed by universal vaccination.9. Re-Evaluation of the Phylogenetic Tree Revealed the Origin of Contemporary G1 Human Rotaviruses9.1. A Super-Short Strain Was FoundThe study of a rotavirus strain with an unusual character may often provide a new insight. The isolation and characterization of the AU19 strain is a case in point. Below is a case detailing this.In 1997, a 13-month-old girl, who had undergone a successful liver transplant and was under immunosuppressive therapy, was admitted to the University hospital due to severe dehydrating diarrhoea. The rapid antigen test on her stool specimen (97A019) was positive for rotavirus. As a confirmatory backup to rule out a false-positive result often encountered with immunoassays, RNA polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was performed, revealing a “super-short” RNA pattern (Figure 7). The finding was surprising given that only a few strains with super-short RNA patterns had been reported in the world.9.2. The Strain Has a New P SerotypeThe reverse-transcription PCR genotyping assay showed that 97A019 contained a G1P[6] strain. Quite wrongly in retrospect, we thought at that time that there was nothing interesting in its G1 character. Instead, what captured our attention was its P[6] genotype, as it represented the first human rotavirus with P[6] to be found in Japan. We therefore isolated this strain in MA104 cells, plaque-purified it three times before making the seed stock and designated it AU19 for subsequent studies. Additionally, it was confirmed that AU19 had an identical electropherotype with the one present in the original stool specimen 97A019. It feels like a lifetime ago that such tedious procedures were routinely performed before the strain in question was subjected to further serological characterisation. At the time, researchers took it for granted that serological characterization using neutralization assays was essential for exploring biological significance of a strain.The neutralization test of AU19 yielded a clear result for its G serotype, confirming it as G1 with conventional hyperimmune sera as well as a G1-specific monoclonal antibody. In contrast, while the P serotype was confirmed by neutralisation assay with a P2-specific monoclonal antibody, neutralisation assay with conventional hyperimmune sera indicated a significant deviation from the known P2 serotype, leading to the conclusion that AU19 was a new subtype of P2; i.e., P2C [72]. To our knowledge then, this subtype was distinct from any human or porcine rotavirus strain, making it impossible to determine its host species origin. In the meantime, we sequenced the VP7 gene of AU19, hoping to gain any hint to its host species origin, only to find that its VP7 gene formed a lineage distinct from any human G1 rotaviruses or porcine strains that were available in the DNA databases [73].9.3. Analysis by Whole Genome SequencingFifteen years later from the isolation of AU19, we sequenced the whole genome of AU19 and found that it had a genotype constellation of G1-P[6]-I5-R1-C1-M1-A8-N1-T1-E1-H2, a pattern typical of porcine rotavirus, except for the NSP5 gene, i.e., H2b. [74]. The H2b gene was so rare and only found in human super-short RNA strains such as 69M [75] and B37 [76] both of which were isolated in Indonesia. This finding made it improbable that the parent of AU19 reassorted with a very rare human rotavirus strain at or around the time of its transmission to humans. So, even after the whole genotype constellation of AU19 was determined, the origin of the NSP5 gene remained puzzling.Prompted by the hypothesis that the original host species of AU19 was a pig, we gave a second look at its G1 VP7 gene to determine if AU19 was of porcine rotavirus origin rather than human. While abundant in human rotaviruses, G1 was rarely found in animal rotaviruses and only about 1% of porcine rotavirus strains were known to possess the G1 genotype, and they were mostly found in the 1970s–1980s [77]. In fact, recent surveillance seldom found G1 in pigs, apart from a single porcine G1 strain, P21-5, from Slovenia in 2004 [78]. Clearly, placing the AU19 G1 sequence within the porcine rotavirus G1 VP7 phylogeny required more samples from the last quarter of the 20th century. So, we sequenced the VP7 genes of three G1 porcine rotavirus strains that we were able to obtain: two isolated in 1980 [79] and one in 2001 [80].This attempt yielded a compelling phylogenetic tree, revealing that the AU19 strain was nested within two porcine rotavirus strains isolated in Japan, PRV2 and Kyusyu-14, suggesting that its G1 gene originated from a porcine rotavirus (Figure 8) [81]. Most probably, AU19 represented a porcine rotavirus strain commonly circulating in Japan at that time. The phylogenetic tree also illustrates the remarkable diversity of the porcine rotavirus G1 gene (Figure 8). For example, the S80B strain, isolated in Japan in 1980, does not belong to the same cluster as the PRV2 strain isolated in Japan in the same year. This stands in stark contrast to the human rotavirus G1 gene, where over 1000 registered strains are concentrated into a single, tightly packed cluster with more than 90% sequence identity [81] and branched into well-established lineages I to V [82]. The most recent common ancestor of these human rotavirus G1 genes dates back to 1948 (Figure 8).9.4. The Timing of the Introduction of the G1 VP7 to HumansA closer look at the P21-5 porcine rotavirus, detected in Slovenia in 2004, shows that the time to the most recent common ancestor with all human rotaviruses is 1915 (Figure 8) [81]. This suggests that sometime between 1915 and 1948, a porcine rotavirus with the G1 gene successfully crossed the species barrier and infected humans. Through subsequent genetic reassortment, this G1 gene is believed to have become a permanent part of the human rotavirus genome, by which we mean that the ancestral G1 porcine rotavirus lost the rest of 10 genes just like the bovine-like G8P[8] rotavirus did as we discussed earlier in Section 6.2, allowing it to spread from human to human. Extrapolating from the findings, all existing human rotavirus G1 genes are considered to have originated from porcine rotaviruses. In contrast, the AU19 case represents what is known as a dead-end infection. This occurred when a porcine rotavirus successfully crossed the species barrier and infected a human, but it lacked the crucial opportunity to undergo the necessary gene reassortment and adaptive mutations that were required to establish human-to-human transmission chains.9.5. The Puzzle Was SolvedMeanwhile Nagai et al. [83] published an interesting paper describing three porcine rotavirus strains found in Japan in 2014. These strains were noted for their H2b genotype in the NSP5 gene and a super-short RNA pattern on polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Nagai et al. [83] concluded that porcine rotavirus strains with the H2b genotype circulated in Japanese pigs. The new findings resolved the puzzle of how AU19—possessing an H2 gene and a super-short RNA pattern—came to be and caused an infection in a Japanese infant in 1997. It was not as we had to hypothesise in 2014 [74] but AU19 was wholly porcine rotavirus. Furthermore, much evidence to the commonality of H2b genotype of porcine rotavirus strains in Japan was published by Nagai’s group [84]. Thus, 27 years after the isolation of AU19, we concluded that the girl was infected with a G1P[6] porcine rotavirus.10. Discussion10.1. From Spillovers to EpidemicsWhile spillover events of animal rotaviruses to humans likely occur constantly, only two novel animal-rotavirus-derived strains, i.e., the bovine-like G8P[8] strains [41] and equine-like G3P[8] strains [42] have achieved global spread in the last two decades. The scarcity highlights the significant obstacles that animal rotavirus strains must overcome to successfully emerge in the human population.Despite the global detection of the bovine-derived G8P[8] strain, the patterns of its establishment have been heterogeneous. In several countries, including Vietnam [41,44], Thailand [45,46], China [47], and Argentina [50,51], the strain demonstrated clear sustained human-to-human transmission leading to epidemics. Conversely, in other countries like Brazil [48], the strain was detected only sporadically and failed to persist or become endemic. This distinction suggests that successful emergence requires more than just successful initial spillover and subsequent geographic dispersal. The progression from sporadic detection to sustained transmission is plausibly influenced by a complex interplay of local factors, including the degree of genomic adaptation of the zoonotic strain to the human host; competition with dominant, co-circulating human rotavirus strains; local host HBGA profiles, which can mediate susceptibility and transmission; and overall population immunity against the emergent G genotypes. A successful global emergent strain must therefore not only overcome the initial species barrier but also navigate a variety of ecological and immunological barriers to achieve sustained and expanded transmission networks.To better understand and analyse this complex sequence of evolutionary hurdles necessary for sustained emergence, Dennehy [85] dissected it as a three-step process.Acquisition of the ability to infect a new host’s cells.Adaptative mutations to the novel host, facilitating transmission between individuals.Epidemic emergence in the host population.These three steps are customized for rotaviruses and illustrated in Figure 9.10.1.1. AcquisitionA major constraint on the successful cross-species acquisition of an animal rotavirus is obtaining an appropriate VP4 gene. The VP8* subunit of the VP4 protein forms the globular head of the spike and mediates the initial binding of the virion to the cellular receptor (e.g., sialic acid molecules of HBGAs) [71]. For cattle or artiodactyl strains, the possession of P[14] VP4 (genogroup P[III]), which has been shown to bind to Type A antigen, appears more advantageous for human infection than P[1] VP4 (genogroup P[I]). Although P[1] is as common as P[14] in the bovine host, it exhibits significantly lower affinity for human cells. Consequently, a P[1] rotavirus likely requires a high exposure dose to infect humans, as suggested by the clinical history of the Israeli boy. Furthermore, even if a heterologous rotavirus strain successfully infects a human, the resultant small yield of progeny viruses is often insufficient for efficient human-to-human spread.10.1.2. Adaptative MutationsOur observation of bovine-like G8P[8] strains in Vietnam suggests that the replacement of animal-derived genes with their human counterparts via genetic reassortment is a critical factor in adaptation (Section 6.2). Here, genetic reassortment plays a crucial role by enabling the acquisition of necessary host-specific gene sets, offering a much faster evolutionary path than relying solely on the accumulation of point mutations in critical gene regions.While the precise molecular basis enabling efficient inter-individual transmission still requires further study, some non-structural proteins such as NSP1 and NSP3 likely play a role, as detailed in Section 11.1.10.1.3. Epidemic EmergenceThe final stage is the sustained human-to-human transmission of the novel animal-derived strain and its competitive dominance over existing, co-circulating human rotavirus strains, leading to a fully emerging epidemic. However, answering the question of how a strain achieves competitive dominance is difficult because it is not solely determined by the virus strain itself.To introduce nuance to the idea that a successful epidemic is dictated solely by a shared genetic backbone, we present a few examples from our own observations in Vietnam. In 2016, during the dominance of emerging bovine-like G8P[8] strains (the first wave in Figure 4), two feline-like G3 strains emerged locally, but independently. These G3 strains were almost completely (99.2–100%) identical to the whole genotype constellation of the dominant bovine-like G8P[8] strains (except for the VP7 gene), but they failed to spread widely [86]. Subsequently, from 2016 to 2017, when the bovine-like G8P[8] strains formed a trough in prevalence (Figure 4), Wa-like G9P[8] strains became the most prevalent, peaking in 2017. During this period, three DS-1-like G9P[8] strains emerged. These three strains shared the same G9 VP7 gene as the predominant Wa-like G9P[8] strains. They had distinct DS-1-like backbone genes, formed through independent reassortment events involving globally circulating DS-1-like G1P[8], equine-like G3P[8], and bovine-like G8P[8] strains [87]. These DS-1-like backbone genes should in theory qualify them to spread widely in the human population; nevertheless, none of them did.11. Future DirectionsSeveral key areas that warrant further investigation are highlighted.11.1. Molecular Mechanisms Enabling Successful Spread in HumansFurther studies on the detailed interaction between the VP8* molecule and HBGAs are imperative. While the VP8* subunit’s ability to bind HBGAs is necessary for initial human cell infection, the precise molecular mechanisms that enable certain animal-derived VP4 genes to successfully bridge the initial host barrier need to be fully elucidated. This includes identifying specific amino acid residues that dictate HBGA specificity for diverse animal rotavirus strains.Among non-structural proteins that are likely facilitate interspecies transmission include NSP1 and NSP3. Given that NSP1 is an interferon antagonist via degrading interferon regulatory factor 3 and that NSP3 is involved in shutting off the translation of host cell mRNAs [3], it is highly likely that these proteins help the virus to evade innate immune response. For example, unlike homologous strains which efficiently suppress interferon production, heterologous strains fail to do this, leading to robust interferon restriction and poor replication in human cells [88]. Thus, acquiring homologous (human rotavirus) NSP1 is crucial to replicate efficiently in the human host, enabling sustained human-to-human transmission. In this regard, it is noteworthy that all globally spreading, bovine-like G8P[8] strains had human-adapted NSP1 and NSP3 genes, even those detected earliest in Thailand that possessed constellation Pre-A (Figure 4).11.2. Integrated Genomic Surveillance at the Animal-Human InterfaceEnhanced rotavirus surveillance is imperative in regions characterised by frequent animal–human interface zones, particularly in Southeast Asia and Africa, where intensive contact with livestock and wildlife elevates the risk of zoonotic transmission. A central objective of such surveillance is the isolation and complete genome sequencing of rotavirus strains exhibiting a transitional genomic constellation—strains captured during the process of interspecies adaptation, prior to the complete replacement of animal-derived genes by human counterparts. Undertaking these molecular studies, however, presents considerable logistical and methodological challenges.A recent example is the co-surveillance effort by Bwogi et al. [89], who analysed rotaviruses in humans and domestic animals in Central Uganda. Their findings documented extensive genotype diversity among animal samples, with some genotypes overlapping between species. However, their molecular analyses provided no direct evidence of interspecies transmission. The authors concluded that, despite shared ecological environments and occasional genotype similarities, rotavirus strains in humans and animals appeared to be evolving independently.Conversely, in a study conducted in Vietnam, what is interesting is a mixed infection case of G4P[8] and G1P[8] in a pig [90] where the VP7 gene of a strain, RVA/Pig-wt/VNM/12070_4/VP7_c2, belongs to lineage II in the G1 phylogenetic tree (within the green triangle in Figure 8). This finding, reminiscent of experimental human-to-simian transmission of G8P[8] rotavirus in Kenya [61], strongly suggests an anthroponotic infection (reverse zoonotic infection)—where the pig was infected with a human G1P[8] rotavirus strain.These results underscore the critical need for sustained, integrated surveillance—not merely to detect zoonotic spillover events but also to rigorously confirm their absence. Such dual-purpose monitoring is essential for refining our understanding of viral ecology and the evolutionary dynamics that govern the animal–human interface.11.3. The Role of Rotavirus Genome Diversification in Vaccine Selective PressureGenomic diversification is critically important as it generates a broad array of viral variants upon which selective pressures can act. Among these pressures, vaccine-induced immunity represents the most medically relevant force shaping rotavirus evolution. Although Velazquez et al. [91] reported that global strain diversity does not significantly compromise the broad efficacy of current rotavirus vaccines, they nonetheless underscored the essential role of ongoing surveillance to monitor potential shifts in viral populations.11.4. Accelerated Viral Evolution Following Interspecies TransmissionFollowing the breach of a species barrier, viruses often encounter novel host constraints that exert significant selective pressure on the genome. A key consequence of this host shift can be a substantial increase in the evolutionary rate of functionally critical genes. Our study of a G6P[6] rotavirus strain isolated in Ghana [92] provides a telling example. When we studied an unusual human strain that featured a G6 VP7 gene and the DS-1-like backbone genes, the G6 VP7 genes from human strains exhibited a nearly five-fold faster evolutionary rate than the rate in bovine G6 strains. This discrepancy suggests an accelerated adaptive process in the new host environment.This finding aligns with observations across other viral families, such as the accelerated evolution of SARS-CoV-2 following spillover from humans to farmed minks [93]. In that instance, the virus evolved up to 13 times faster in mink populations, a rate driven by host-specific selective pressures.Collectively, these examples support the hypothesis that interspecies transmission acts as a catalyst for rapid genetic change, which is essential for facilitating the emergence and sustained transmission of novel strains in a new host.11.5. Virulence of Animal-Derived RotavirusesWhile we have not yet discussed how interspecies transmission might lead to increased virulence or altered pathogenicity in rotaviruses, this potential threat cannot be dismissed. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, no documented evidence currently exists showing that spillover rotavirus strains cause more severe disease in humans than ordinary human strains.Quantitatively measuring virulence requires validated tools like the Vesikari severity score (originally developed for assessing vaccine efficacy) [94] or a similar scoring system. Applying such a methodology to novel strains presents significant challenges, as robust case–control studies require a sufficient number of subjects, which are often difficult to quickly assemble for newly emerging genotypes. We did, however, conduct one relevant study [95]. Although the focus was not on animal-derived strains, we compared the modified Vesikari scores of patients infected with novel G1P[8] double-gene reassortant strains carrying the DS-1-like backbone genes against those infected with common G1P[8] strains. Our finding was that these novel reassortant strains did not cause more severe disease.11.6. Definition of Animal-Derived GenesAn animal-derived gene is fundamentally a gene that originated in an animal species. While it is clear that genes from a bovine rotavirus that recently crossed into a child are animal rotavirus genes, and those consistently found in children are human rotavirus genes, the line becomes blurred for genes with a longer history of circulation in humans. Consider the G8 VP7 gene found in the bovine-like G8P[8] rotavirus strains now circulating globally. Though its ancestry is clearly bovine—making it a gene of bovine origin—it may no longer be appropriate to call it a bovine rotavirus gene. This raises the question of whether, through sustained replication and adaptation within the human host population, this gene has essentially become a human gene or a humanised gene. Determining the precise moment an animal rotavirus gene transitions into a human rotavirus gene—the point at which adaptation supersedes origin—is a significant conceptual challenge in molecular phylogeny.This distinction between an animal-derived gene and a human (or humanised) gene is not merely a theoretical exercise but a frequent issue encountered in the rotavirus literature. We can cite several practical examples that highlight this ambiguity, two of which stem from our own work. First, concerning the Malawian G8 strains that circulated for over a decade, originating from a presumed single introduction of a bovine rotavirus, we ultimately designated their VP7 gene as a human G8 VP7 gene [57]. Our intent was to emphasise that the gene was not subject to repeated, ongoing introductions from the bovine reservoir. Second, in Section 11.4, we described a Ghanaian G6P[6] strain as featuring a human-derived G6 VP7 gene. This meant the gene’s immediate ancestor was not a bovine rotavirus but rather one of the novel G6 human strains isolated sporadically worldwide. A third example is found in the literature describing G8P[8] strains collected in China during the 2021/2022 winter season. The author claimed the G8 VP7 gene was of human, not bovine, origin [47]. We interpret this to mean that these Chinese G8 strains are descendants of the early Thai G8 strain, which has likely been circulating in the human population for over a decade, thus ceasing to be an animal-derived gene. In fact, prolonged human circulation has led to the accumulation of point mutations in the G8 VP7 gene, resulting in significant antigenic changes, as detailed by Chan-It et al. [46] and Hoa-Tran et al. [44].11.7. The Critical Role of Mixed Infection and Deep SequencingThe rotavirus literature, including this review, consistently highlights the critical role of genetic reassortment in driving genome diversification. Reassortment, however, requires a mixed infection, where a single cell is infected by more than one rotavirus strain. The occurrence of mixed infection has been recognized since the early days of rotavirus research, often simply noted as the presence of more than 11 genomic RNA bands on a polyacrylamide gel and generally treated as an analytical nuisance. This same recognition persists in the current era of nucleotide sequencing, but advancements in sequencing technology are beginning to change the landscape. Specifically, accurate and unbiased analysis of mixed infection cases can now yield previously inaccessible, vital information. A prime example is a whole-genome deep sequencing study of human and porcine stool samples from the same geographical region in Vietnam [90]. Among its findings, the detection of G1 and G4 strains within a single pig stool sample is particularly noteworthy. As discussed earlier (see Section 11.2), the G1 strain originated from humans. This finding identifies a precise location and time where interspecies reassortment was actively in the process of occurring, underscoring the potential for further analytical development to provide more precise and timely insights into the generation of novel strains.12. Concluding Remarks and OutlookThis review explored the topic of interspecies rotavirus transmission, revisiting key studies that have shaped our current understanding. A central focus was placed on evaluating the utility and limitations of the methods used to accurately distinguish a heterologous (animal-derived) rotavirus strain from the array of homologous (human) strains.The literature consistently highlights the critical role of gene reassortment in segmented RNA viruses [96]. This mechanism is very efficient for the incoming virus to acquire the necessary genetic diversity in its segmented RNA genome, providing a broad array of variants upon which selective pressures in the new human environment can act. The subsequent adaptation process by accumulation of favourable point mutations grants the virus the necessary fitness to establish sustained human-to-human transmission networks.Despite these advancements, this review revealed notable ambiguities and conflicting evidence regarding the precise evolutionary mechanisms that govern successful interspecies transmission and adaptative mutations. These challenging observations identify areas where further studies are required. It is anticipated that these complex, molecular-level evolutionary questions will be most effectively resolved by harnessing the precision and manipulative power of emerging reverse genetics technology in rotavirus research [97,98].


Title: Rotavirus within day care centres in Oxfordshire, UK: characterization of partial immunity

1. IntroductionRotavirus infection is the single most important cause of infectious diarrhoea and death globally in infants and young children (Offit 1998). It is highly transmissible in developed and developing countries alike and virtually all children will have experienced at least one infection by the age of 2 years (Fischer et al. 2002) and one episode of rotavirus gastroenteritis by the age of 5 years (Parashar et al. 2003). Parashar et al. (2006) estimate that each year rotavirus infection is responsible for roughly 600 000 deaths globally.Reinfection is common in children (Offit 1998; Fischer et al. 2002) and adults (Griffin et al. 2002; Anderson & Weber 2004). Intestinal secretory antibodies, whose responses are of short duration, are pivotal to protection against rotavirus reinfection (Franco & Greenberg 2001). This would suggest that (even strain specific) immunity against reinfection is short lived. There is, however, good evidence that repeated rotavirus infection cumulatively protects against infection and associated diarrhoeal disease (Velazquez et al. 1996). Furthermore, protection has been shown to correlate with serum IgA antibody titre (Velázquez et al. 2000), such that two infections (regardless of symptoms) produce a titre that protects completely against subsequent moderate-to-severe diarrhoea, less so against mild illness and least against asymptomatic infection; the duration of this effect is unknown.At the individual level, the natural history of infection has yet to be adequately characterized for the purposes of predicting population-level transmission dynamics. Relative risk of reinfection (based on the history of previous infection) was estimated by Fischer et al. (2002) using a birth cohort, but their approach did not consider the transmission dynamics of the infection. Individual-level risk depends on population-level factors, such as infection prevalence and seasonal variation in contact rates, which interact with the natural history of infection at the individual level (e.g. duration of infection and immunity).Here we combine population and individual levels using a generalized mechanistic mathematical model in conjunction with follow-up data. The model takes into account possible effects of an individual child's infection history on the risk of infection, duration of infection, infectiousness and severity of symptoms. This is performed within the dynamic context of the time-varying exposure levels arising from infection within day care centres (DCCs). Parameter estimates are obtained using a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) estimation method, which has the provision for variable intersample periods. This analysis is designed to establish the most likely natural history of infection and estimate the parameters connected with the resultant profile, thereby characterizing partial immunity.2. Materials and methods2.1 Rotavirus dataTwo cohorts of children aged 6–24 months attending Oxfordshire DCCs were enrolled over consecutive rotavirus seasons in 1998–1999 and 1999–2000 (Buttery et al. submitted). DCCs were visited twice weekly and faecal samples collected if available in the previous 24 hours. The children were prospectively followed for episodes of diarrhoea or gastroenteritis, upon which additional stool samples were collected. The samples were assayed for rotavirus by reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction detecting the rotaviral VP1 (RNA polymerase) gene. One hundred and two children from 11 DCCs participated in the 1998–1999 season, and 80 children from 10 DCCs in 1999–2000.There were 130 episodes of diarrhoea reported in 80 children. There were 68 episodes of rotavirus diarrhoea, and 244 episodes of asymptomatic carriage (ratio 1 : 3.6), representing a rate of 0.37 diarrhoeal and 1.34 asymptomatic infections per child season. The median interval between commencing DCC care and first episode of diarrhoea was 188 days (range 4–641). Most diarrhoeal episodes were mild, fewer than half of the responding families (41 out of 86, 47.6%) saw a primary care practitioner, and no child visited hospital for their illness. Fever was noted in only 17 out of 86 responses. All but four children had at least one positive rotavirus sample. Thirteen children had at least three separate episodes of infection. The raw data are in the form of 2948 sampling events from 185 children within 2 cohorts within 15 DCCs. We discounted one DCC since there were only three samples for just a single child. The data from the remaining 14 DCCs are represented on a timeline for each child (figure 1).2.2 Model structureWe use a conceptual model similar to that developed and analysed in White & Medley (1998; figure 2). At any point in time, children are either uninfected or infected. Within the uninfected population there is a distribution of susceptibility to infection that is dependent on the time since recovery from previous infection. Note that we do not know the infection history of individuals from birth, thus we cannot explicitly model those never infected. The profile of susceptibility in the uninfected population changes over time, as a result of recruitment of individuals just recovered from an infection and their changing susceptibility to infection and disease over time since recovery.The infected population comprises children with disease (an infection that involves an episode of diarrhoea is termed a symptomatic infection), and without (non-diarrhoeal infection). Upon infection there is some probability that the infection will involve symptoms, which can be dependent on the time between recovery from previous and current infections. The numbers in each of the infected categories change over time as a result of recruitment following infection of the uninfecteds.The incidence per child per unit time is the (instantaneous) rate at which uninfected children become infected. The magnitude of this incidence is related to the proportion of infected children sharing the DCC. The model framework also allows for differential infectiousness between diseased and non-diseased children. The rate (per child per unit time) by which infected children move into the uninfected class (recovery) is assumed dependent on disease state, and also related to the time since previous infection. Uninfected individuals become infected at a rate dependent on the time elapsed since their previous infection (partial, temporary immunity) and the level and type (clinical versus subclinical) of infection to which they are exposed. We also include infection by sources outside of the DCC.A family of models can be derived from this structure by making different assumptions about the dependence of susceptibility and recovery rate on disease state and/or time since previous infection. The model assumes all processes to be independent of child age, gender, the number of previous infections and the genotype of current and past infections. This mechanistic structure can be expressed in the form of a set of probability models. The number of previous infections was not measured in the study, since the children were not followed up from birth. We therefore use time since previous infection as a proxy for immunity level.We therefore have a family of models for considering the mechanisms associated with each of incidence (models 1–5) and recovery (models 6–8). Model 1 does not include the effect of time since previous infection on susceptibility and only assumes that it is dependent on the nursery-level prevalence of infection regardless of symptoms. Model 1 is extended to model 2 by including different infectiousness for symptomatic versus asymptomatic infections. Model 1 is extended to model 3 by including the effect of time since previous infection on susceptibility. Model 1 is extended to model 4 by including a differential risk of symptomatic infection compared with asymptomatic infection based on the time since previous infection. Model 5 is a combination of models 4 and 3. Model 6 does not include the effect of time since previous infection or the existence of symptoms during the infection on duration of infection. Model 6 is extended to model 7 by including different durations of infection for symptomatic versus asymptomatic infections. Model 7 is extended to model 8 by including the effect of time since previous infection on duration of infection. The models are summarized in table 1.The parameters were estimated using MCMC within WinBUGS v. 1.4.1 (Spiegelhalter et al. 2000). We assumed vague prior distributions for all parameters (i.e. a uniform distribution from zero to unity for parameters defined in that range and a uniform distribution from 0 to 1000 for the other parameters, since they were expected to have values much less than 1000; table 2).2.3 Probability modelsFor sample j of child i in DCC k, sijk=1 if the sample is positive and sijk=0 if negative for rotavirus. For each sample, we recognize three measures of time: the number of weeks since the beginning of the study, tijk; the days since the previous sample, δtijk; and the weeks since the previous infection, τijk. The proportions of the DCC experiencing symptomatic and asymptomatic infections in each week are given by yd(tijk,k) and ynd(tijk,k), respectively. The transition events of incidence and recovery are denoted as Iijk and Rijk, respectively. Table 3 summarizes the relationship between sijk and si(j−1)k and the transition indicator variables.The function mijk allows us to estimate the risk of symptoms during an infection, θ(τijk),(2.1)mijk=θ(τijk)ifinfectedwithsymptoms,=1−θ(τijk)ifinfectedwithoutsymptoms,=1ifnoinfection.}The force of infection, λijk, acting on child i in DCC k on day tijk is the hazard of becoming infected. The force of infection also includes a constant non-DCC component, λ0. Then the force of infection can be constant, if β=0, (for all DCCs or for each DCC) or, if β>0, it can be dependent on the proportion of infected children with and without diarrhoea in the DCC. Children with diarrhoea and those without are equally infectious if η=0.5. If η>0.5, children with diarrhoea are more infectious than those without and are less if η<0.5.(2.2)λijk={2β[ηyd(tijk,k)+(1−η)ynd(tijk,k)]+λ0}.The recovery rate (the inverse of the average duration of infection, δijk) of child i at time tijk without the effect of previous infection is given by(2.3)1δijk=2ρδfifsymptomatic,=2(1−ρ)δfifasymptomatic.}Children with diarrhoea and those without are assumed to have an equal duration of infection of δf if ρ=0.5. If ρ>0.5, children with diarrhoea recover more quickly than those without and more slowly if ρ<0.5.We use a survival approach (Clayton & Hills 1998) to model the transition events of incidence and recovery. The transition probabilities for incidence, Iijk, and recovery, Rijk, are given by(2.4)P(Iijk=1|si(j−1)k=0)=mijk[1−exp(−f(τijk)λijkδtijk)],and(2.5)P(Rijk=1|si(j−1)k=1)=1−exp(−δtijkg(τijk)δijk).The function mijk of θ is included in equation (2.4) to allow us to differentiate between the incidence of symptomatic and asymptomatic infections. Thus, given that incidence has occurred, the probability that it is symptomatic is given by θ.The incidence function refers only to samples from children with a previous negative sample, and thus the event of incidence (changing from negative to positive) is possible between the previous and current samples. Similarly, the recovery function refers only to samples from children with a previous positive sample.The function f(τijk) allows us to explore the effect of the time elapsed since a previous infection, τijk, on the susceptibility of child i at time tijk to further infection. The function g(τijk) allows us to explore the effect of the time elapsed since a previous infection, τijk, on the duration of the current infection. A number of choices were considered for these functions and will be discussed in §2.4.2.4 Data preparationThe time between samplings is variable (figure 3) and some intersample periods are too large to consider viable as repeated samples. That is, a child could have been reinfected a number of times during such periods. If we consider becoming infected as an event (Iijk), then the first sample (j=1) for child k is relevant only in that it informs the value of Ii2k for the second sample for the incidence dataset. Then all first sample values of Ii1k are unknown and not present in the final dataset. Also, all samples that occur too long after the last one (say Δtmax days) are discarded. If Δtmax=21 days approximately 90% of the sampling intervals are included; and if Δtmax=14 days approximately 68% are included. The proportions yd(tijk,k) and ynd(tijk,k) were calculated before the samples were excluded.If the intersample period is less than Δtmax, Iijk=1 if the current sample is positive and the prior sample negative, and Iijk=0 if the current and prior samples are negative. If the child was infected on their previous sample, then they are considered unexposed to infection and therefore the current value of Iijk would be irrelevant and therefore not present in the dataset.In order to consider the effect of low sensitivity (i.e. false negatives) of the test, we prepared two further datasets, fn14- and fn7-data, with the original dataset being fn0-data. In fn14-data, for a negative sample, if the previous and following samples are positive and are each within 14 days of the sample in question the sample was changed to positive. This occurred in 411 out of 2948 measurements. This was repeated with an interval of plus or minus 7 days to produce fn7-data. This occurred in 238 out of 2948 measurements. We report results in the text only for the fn7-data for clarity, but report results for all three datasets graphically. Table 4 gives the numbers of transitions for each dataset.The primary aim of this study was to explore the effect of time elapsed since a previous infection on the three main characteristics—risk of infection, risk of disease and duration of infection—and therefore characterize partial immunity to rotavirus infection in the children participating in the study. In order to achieve this, only uninterrupted (i.e. each sample was within 14 days of the previous sample) data sequences occurring after their first measured infection were included for each child. Then, the time since previous infection could be measured. It was categorized into five categories (0≤τ1<2, 2≤τ1<4, 4≤τ1<6, 6≤τ1<12 and 12≤τ1<16 weeks (there were no data for the final category for the recovery models)) to obtain profiles for each of the three characteristics.2.5 Model selection and convergenceFor each model, we computed the value of the deviance information criterion (DIC; Spiegelhalter et al. 2002). The model with the smallest DIC is the model that would best predict a replicate dataset of the same structure as that currently observed. We also plotted the distribution of the Pearson residuals (Green et al. 2004) to assess the validity of the models. A plot of the residuals can be obtained by arranging the predicted probabilities for each data point in ascending order with their corresponding Pearson residual, then separating them into equal sized groups and taking the sum of the residuals, SR, and the mean of the predicted probability, μP. If SR is plotted against μP, the points should be randomly distributed around the x-axis.Convergence was tested in each case using the Gelman–Rubin convergence diagnostic (Brooks & Gelman 1998) calculated within WinBUGS (Spiegelhalter et al. 2002). For each model, we ran three independent chains for 10 000 iterations following a burn in the period of 10 000 iterations (as this was sufficient to achieve convergence).3. ResultsThe parameter estimates and the DIC of the nested models applied to the fn7-data are summarized in table 5.Model 2 had a slightly higher DIC than model 1, also the confidence interval of the parameter η (altered infectiousness) included 0.5. Thus indicating that the inclusion of heterogeneous infectiousness based on symptoms does not improve the model fit. Model 6 had a higher DIC than model 7, also the confidence interval for parameter ρ (altered duration of infection) did not include 0.5. Thus indicating that the inclusion of heterogeneous duration of infection based on symptoms does improve the model fit.Model 5 had a lower DIC than both models 3 and 4. Thus indicating that the inclusion of dependence of both susceptibility and risk of symptomatic infection on time since previous infection improves the model fit. The parameter βi is the product of β and f(τijk) from equations (2.1) and (2.3). The parameter θi is θ(τijk) from equation (2.4). Except for fn0-data, when βf(τijk) is plotted against τijk, the risk of infection reaches a maximum at approximately 5 weeks since previous infection (figure 4a) and then falls. When θ(τijk) is plotted against τijk, the risk of symptoms given infection increases as time since infection increases (figure 4b).Model 8 had a lower DIC than both models 6 and 7, thus indicating that the inclusion of dependence of duration of infection on time since previous infection improves the model fit. The parameter δi is the product of δf and g(τijk) from equations (2.2) and (2.5). When the duration of infection, δfg(τijk), is plotted against τijk it decreases as time since infection increases (figure 4c).4. DiscussionThe application of models to data from repeated infections of rotavirus within children within DCCs has resulted in the estimation of basic epidemiological parameters and the development of hypotheses on the protective effect of previous infection against infection and disease. The duration of infection is estimated at approximately 15 days and appears to be highly variable even for repeated infections within the same child. Symptomatic infection was estimated to last about three times as long (23 days) as asymptomatic infection (8 days). Note, however, that the prevalence of asymptomatic children was over three times higher than of symptomatic children. The analysis indicates that children with symptomatic infection are no more infectious than those with asymptomatic infection. This seems to contradict experimental work that demonstrated higher levels of shedding in those individuals with more severe infections (Kang et al. 2004). This contradiction could be for a number of reasons: the number of asymptomatic infections may be too low to identify this effect; the definition of symptomatic as an infection involving symptoms may be too broad; the removal of children from their DCC due to symptoms could have occurred. Rotavirus reinfection within a child is dependent on the density of infection within his/her DCC with an infection coming from outside the DCC very rarely (table 5, estimates of λ0).Previous attempts at investigating the role of acquired immunity (i.e. previous infection) in rotavirus infection have failed to incorporate the transmission dynamic effects included in the model framework used here. In particular, the risk of infection of an individual is determined by both their immune status and their exposure, and not including the latter will result in inaccurate estimates. Unfortunately, information on the first infection, the total number of previous infections and their effect on subsequent infections cannot be obtained since the data are not from a birth cohort. The transmission dynamics of rotavirus repeated infections outside the high prevalence season cannot be explored using the data presented here. The transmission dynamics associated with reinfection, partial and temporary immunity are, generally, highly nonlinear (Gomes et al. 2004), and even more so if an effect of dose is included (Gomes et al. 2005). Community-based longitudinal data and their appropriate analysis are clearly required if the effect of a given vaccine and vaccination programme is to be understood.Longitudinal, individual-based data in relatively small populations are increasingly being used to study infection dynamics (Auranen et al. 2000, 2004; Eerola et al. 2003; Smith & Vounatsou 2003; Basáñez et al. 2004; Cooper & Lipsitch 2004; Melegaro et al. 2004; Liu et al. 2005). Analysis of such data presents several methodological problems. Generally, the estimates of the two processes of incidence and recovery are likely to be highly correlated. If, however, the sampling is dense and testing sufficiently sensitive, then incidence and recovery can be treated separately, as here.To consider immunity, it is necessary to have information on the history of infection in an individual. The simplest assumption is that an infection ‘resets’ the immune system to maximum. In this case only data from children with multiple infections and only their uninterrupted follow-up since their first measured infection can be used. To consider concepts such as cumulative and cross-immunity, follow-up serological and genotypic data, respectively, from a birth cohort are required.The maximum measured time since previous infection from our datasets is 119 days and cellular and serological immune responses to rotavirus infection in children have been observed to remain for a few months post infection (Makela et al. 2004), thus it should be possible to detect waning effects of previous infection with this dataset. However, the results presented here should be considered within the context of a number of confounding factors. Firstly, the results have not been corrected for age. Secondly, an individual's response to exposure could be dose dependent (if they experience multiple exposures over a short time period or are exposed to a high initial dose) and, since rotavirus is seasonal, responses at the end of the season could be different from those earlier. This effect would be correlated with time since infection. Thirdly, the sensitivity of the diagnostic test for the presence of rotavirus is not 100% and therefore there are a number of choices for the definition of a continued infection.Time since previous infection, τ, was used as a proxy for immunity in our analysis, and the functions θ, f and g of τ quantify the risk of symptomatic disease, risk of infection and duration of infection, respectively. The analysis strongly indicates that immunity to rotavirus manifests itself as a waning resistance to disease rather than infection per se. That is, if a child has recently recovered from an infection, its next infection will be less likely to involve symptoms if it occurs sooner rather than later. A schematic of partial immunity over time (figure 5) derived from the estimates for models 5 and 8 (table 4) suggests three types of partial immunity developing over different time scales. Immunity to infection (resistance to infection of any kind) is lost within a month and then regained after a few more weeks. This could represent a temporary disruption in protection against disease due to recent infection. Immunity to disease in the form of resistance to symptomatic infection is gained within a couple of weeks and is still waning after three months. Immunity to disease in the form of altered duration of infection is still being gained after two months. A challenge study in pigtailed macaques demonstrated differing profiles for IgA, IgG and IgM antibodies over time since challenge (Westerman et al. 2005). Although this occurs over a period of days rather than weeks in animals rather than humans, it does provide evidence that immune responses evolve over different time scales in vivo in response to challenge.The third plot of figure 5 (dashed line) indicates the unexpected result that the duration of infection decreases with time since previous infection. That is, higher immunity correlates with longer durations of infection. This is a counter intuitive result that has also been reported indirectly for malaria, where duration of infection was positively correlated with age (a widely accepted correlate of immunity for this disease; Smith & Vounatsou 2003). A simple exploration of the data implied that right censoring is not responsible for this result. If a series of repeated measures for an individual child ended in a positive value, this infection (a series of consecutive positive values) was excluded from the dataset. An identical analysis performed on this reduced dataset gave similar results. A possible explanation (as an alternative to the long-term development of some sort of immunity against disease) for the result is that the sensitivity of the test combined with heterogeneous shedding has resulted in continued infections being defined as series of repeated infections. Richardson et al. (1998) observed continued hospital infections of rotavirus which included consecutive negative samples. If this behaviour also occurs for non-severe and asymptomatic infections, a series of shedding events of decreasing duration would be observed—a profile that would correspond to the third profile of figure 5. Another explanation for this result could be that children who are more susceptible (and therefore become reinfected shortly after recovery) also experience longer infections; however, plots of child-level transmission against time since infection and duration of infection did not support this notion.The sensitivity of detection of rotavirus infection is a potentially significant confounding factor for the parameter estimation process. The definition of continued infection being a series of samples that end with two sequential negative samples has been used before (see Mohan & Haque 2003). If it is assumed that a negative result is indeed positive when sandwiched between two positive results within a given time period, the profile of past infection is changed for that child. For the case where additional data on the existence of current or recent infection such as antibody level are available, the use of data augmentation approaches (Eerola et al. 2003) can be used to estimate the extent of and account for measurement error. For example antibody level rather than time since previous infection could be used as a measure of immunity level within the individual.The analysis of follow-up data results in different profiles for the natural history of rotavirus reinfection (depending on the definition of a continued infection). The estimates of the transmission coefficient and the average duration of infection are robust to alternative assumptions on the nature of immunity. However, there is very high variation in these values and larger numbers of measurements per child would be necessary to determine the contribution of variation at the child level. The results suggest that there may be some protection against symptomatic infection, and that symptomatic infections have a longer duration than asymptomatic infections. It is possible that we are observing only minor changes in the immune response due to reinfection, when the most significant change would have occurred during the first infection. Only a birth cohort follow-up study would provide the necessary data to test this hypothesis.These results are of particular interest in view of the likely introduction of live attenuated rotavirus vaccines in many developed countries where DCCs are prevalent. Two candidate vaccines have completed large-scale safety and efficacy clinical trials (Rotarix, GSK Vaccines, and Rotateq, Merck Vaccines), with good safety and efficacy profiles in industrialized countries and in Latin America (Ruiz-Palacios et al. 2006; Vesikari et al. 2006; Grimwood & Buttery 2007; World Health Organization 2007). Like natural infection, vaccines do not protect against infection but do protect against disease, with repeated rotavirus exposures probable for most children post-vaccination. If the transmission dynamics of wild-type rotavirus will be influenced by the vaccine introduction, especially if a mixed immunized and non-immunized cohort exists in a high-transmission environment such as a DCC, is unclear. A further confounder is likely to be horizontal transmission of vaccine virus, documented at least in previous rotavirus vaccine trials (Jiang et al. 2002). It remains likely that the success of rotavirus vaccine at an individual host and population level relies upon the regular re-exposure of vaccine recipients to asymptomatic infection to maintain immunity, at least in the early years.


Title: Influence of birth rates and transmission rates on the global seasonality of rotavirus incidence

1.IntroductionRotavirus is one of the leading causes of severe diarrhoea in children in both developed and developing countries, and is estimated to cause over half a million deaths worldwide with much of this mortality burden concentrated in developing countries [1,2]. Two separate vaccines against rotavirus have been recently developed and licensed in many countries throughout the world. Early observations of vaccine impact in the USA, Australia and several countries in Latin America and Europe have highlighted the enormous promise such vaccines hold for preventing rotavirus-associated diarrhoea [3]. Clinical trials have estimated that vaccine recipients benefit from a 49–98% reduction in the risk of severe rotavirus diarrhoea depending on the setting, with lower efficacy being observed in low-income regions of Africa and Asia [4–10]. However, predicting the population-level impact of vaccination and the importance of herd immunity requires an understanding of the dynamics of infection. This can be achieved through mathematical modelling studies rooted in biological and epidemiological data [11–16].The spatio-temporal patterning of disease can provide important insight into the underlying transmission dynamics of infections. Using a mathematical model for the transmission dynamics of rotavirus, we have previously shown that the apparent travelling wave of rotavirus infection in the USA from southwest to northeast may be due to underlying geographical variability in birth rates [13]. This pattern is no longer apparent in the post-vaccination era, suggesting that susceptible recruitment rather than environmental factors plays a key role in determining the timing of rotavirus activity in the US [17]. The model can also explain the much diminished and delayed peak in rotavirus activity observed during the 2007–2008 season following the licensing of the RotaTeq vaccine in the US in 2006, providing an important source of model validation [13,18,19]. Furthermore, the model allows quantification of the relative importance of direct and indirect (herd immunity) protection, which is essential in determining the long-term impact of vaccination [13]. However, these results are not directly applicable to the situation of developing countries. Routine immunization against rotavirus has only been introduced in developed countries, South Africa, and a handful of developing countries in Latin America thus far. While the majority of rotavirus deaths occur in the poorest nations, the impact of vaccination in such settings remains unclear.There are several reasons why the dynamics of rotavirus infection may differ in developing countries compared with developed countries. Many developing countries are located in the tropics where traditionally rotavirus activity has been thought to lack seasonality, leading to high levels of year-round disease transmission [20]. However, recent country-level assessments of rotavirus epidemiology conducted in anticipation of rotavirus vaccination programmes suggest that this pattern may not be as universal as previously thought. Rotavirus tends to be more common in cooler, drier months in most settings, but seasonal peaks have been noted to occur year-round in different countries [21–23], and can vary over time in the same country [24]. Attempts to relate these patterns to climatic variables such as temperature, humidity and rainfall have led to conflicting results; it is possible the effect of certain climatic variables is context specific [25–28].Birth rates have been shown to be an important driver of the dynamics of rotavirus in the US [13], and are likely influential in developing countries as well. Birth rates are often considerably higher in developing countries compared with developed countries, ranging as high as 45–50 live births per 1000 persons in parts of Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, compared with 8–20 per 1000 in developed countries [29]. Crowding and poor sanitation are also expected to increase rates of rotavirus transmission [30,31]. While temperature and humidity tend to exhibit less seasonal variation in developing countries in the tropics, other factors such as precipitation, population movements and birth rates may be more seasonally variable in such settings [32,33]. Our best-fit model to rotavirus hospitalization and laboratory data in the USA indicated that small seasonal changes in the transmission rate (approx. 5% seasonal amplitude) could explain the highly seasonal pattern of outbreaks [13]. Natural oscillations resulting from the replenishment of susceptible individuals through new births and/or waning of immunity—a phenomenon known as dynamical resonance—may be a key factor in explaining the seasonality of rotavirus, as in other diseases [34,35]. Overall, the environmental and demographic factors driving seasonality in rotavirus transmission have yet to be fully elucidated and quantified.Here, we used a combination of mathematical models for rotavirus transmission and empirical data to examine how seasonal patterns of disease incidence vary with birth rates and mean transmission rates independent of variations in environmental factors. We tested the hypothesis that dynamic resonance can explain some or all of the observed geographical variation in rotavirus seasonality. By fitting our model of rotavirus transmission to the age distribution of rotavirus-associated diarrhoea cases from a variety of countries, we obtained estimates of mean transmission rates in these settings and validated predictions of rotavirus seasonality against observed data. We then explored how vaccination may impact seasonal patterns of rotavirus incidence if existing vaccines are introduced in more countries.2.Methods2.1.Epidemiological dataTo obtain estimates of mean rotavirus transmission rates in different settings, we fit our model to published age distributions of rotavirus cases less than 5 years of age (an age range in which approx. 95% of reported cases occur) from 15 countries representing eight regions of the world [11,13,36–48]. To identify rotavirus surveillance studies which included a description of the seasonal pattern and age distribution of cases, we conducted a literature search using Web of Science. We limited our analysis to those studies that were published between 2005 and 2010 and reported the number of confirmed rotavirus diarrhoea cases by month (or number of tests and per cent of tests positive for rotavirus) over a period of at least 2 years, or for which such data were available from other sources [49–51]. We also required that the studies included data on either numbers or proportions of rotavirus-positive cases of acute gastroenteritis by age, with at least six month age resolution less than 1 year of age and 1 year age resolution up to 5 years of age. We used Digitizeit software (Bormann; www.digitizeit.de) to extract data from figures when the data were not available from tables. The quality and nature of rotavirus surveillance varies from country to country and across time; some studies tracked only hospitalized rotavirus cases, while others sampled both inpatient and outpatient populations. By examining the proportion of cases in each age class, we can control for differences in surveillance, provided biases in reporting are not related to the age of cases.We obtained birth rate data from the World Population Prospects database [29] and assumed the birth rate in each country was constant over time and equal to the mean crude birth rate (CBR) for the 5 year periods prior to and including the study period. The background mortality rate was assumed to be equal to the birth rate and independent of age, so that the total population size remained constant. We ignored disease-induced mortality, which will not affect our estimates of the transmission rate provided mortality does not significantly shorten the infectious period.2.2.Transmission modelDetails of our age-structured model for the transmission dynamics of rotavirus are presented in the electronic supplementary material and have been described previously [13]. In short, we assume that susceptible individuals are infected, recover and are temporarily immune, then become susceptible again, with reduced susceptibility to infection and disease following one or more previous infections. We assume that only primary and secondary infections result in severe diarrhoea which is subsequently reported. After that, we assume individuals only experience asymptomatic (or mildly symptomatic) infections that are less infectious and not reported. After examining the age distributions of cases from different countries, we modified the model to more accurately capture the nature of maternal immunity (and/or limited exposure to rotavirus during the first 6 months of life due to social/behavioural factors). Maternal immunity appeared to be stronger than previously assumed, as indicated by a relative dearth of cases in the zero to five months age group, particularly in the lowest income countries. Thus, we split the maternal immunity compartment into six separate compartments and estimated a common duration of time spent in each compartment by fitting the model to the mean age distribution of cases from all countries combined (see the electronic supplementary material).The rotavirus transmission rate was assumed to vary sinusiodally with a period of 1 year as follows: β(t) = β0(1 + a cos(2π(t − φ))), where, β0 is the baseline transmission rate, a is the amplitude of seasonality and φ is a seasonal offset parameter. Mixing was assumed to be homogeneous, such that β0 was the same for all age groups. We examined the sensitivity of our results to this assumption in the electronic supplementary material. The sinusoidal variation in the transmission rate is presumably related to environmental factors that could influence rotavirus transmission, such as the effect of temperature or humidity on virus survival or increased population crowding during cold or rainy months. However, the factors influencing this have yet to be fully elucidated. We varied the birth rate and baseline transmission rate while holding the amplitude of seasonal variation in the transmission rate, a, constant at 5 per cent, a level similar to that estimated for the USA. This allowed us to examine seasonality in the incidence of severe rotavirus diarrhoea predicted by the model independent of environmental factors. Other dynamic models for rotavirus have estimated the amplitude of seasonal variation in the transmission rate to be similar albeit slightly higher in England and Wales (a = 9.2%) [11] and Kyrgyzstan (a = 7.9%) [12]. If seasonal variation in the transmission rate is tied to factors such as temperature and humidity, however, it might be expected to exhibit lower amplitude in the tropics. We conducted sensitivity analyses with a = 2.5 and 10%, and examined the effect of modelling seasonal variation in the transmission rate using a step function (see the electronic supplementary material).The degree of seasonal fluctuation in incidence (s) predicted by the model was measured as:where xmax is the peak number and  is the mean number of clinical rotavirus cases per week (in all age groups) over a 2 year period, to account for the possible occurrence of biennial epidemics. To quantify the observed seasonality, we first aggregated the data by month of the year then compared the mean rotavirus incidence in the three months surrounding the peak to the mean incidence for the entire 12 month period to limit the influence of stochastic variation in the number of rotavirus cases.We calculated the basic reproductive number of primary infections, R0, and used it as a measure of transmissibility (see the electronic supplementary material). We first examined the dynamics of rotavirus epidemics predicted by the model at the observed birth rate and estimated R0 for each of the 15 countries, then across CBRs ranging from five to 50 live births per 1000 and R0 ranging from 20 to 100, consistent with most of the estimated global variation in these parameters (table 1).
Table 1.Summary of model parameters and seasonal patterns for 15 countries.country (reference(s))study yearsCBR (live births per 1000)estimated R0 (95% CI)estimated seasonality, % (rank)observed seasonality, % (rank)inpatient studiesAustralia [43,50,51]1997–200713.453.9 (52.2, 55.6)54 (10)104 (10)Taiwan [48]2005–200712.023.3 (20.4, 26.2)140 (14)102 (9)USA [13]1998–200414.845.3 (44.8, 45.8)73 (12)179 (13)China [40]2003–200713.788.1 (83.4, 93.4)20 (4)98 (7)Nepal [46]2005–200727.951.3 (43.2, 61.9)25 (5)100 (8)Uzbekistan [41]2005–200621.046.7 (42.4, 51.5)40 (8)63 (5)Hong Kong SAR [44]2001–20038.452.1 (48.7, 55.4)145 (15)132 (11)Cambodia [45]2005–200725.468.5 (62.0, 76.1)16 (3)46 (4)Fiji [42]2006–200722.146.2 (36.8, 58.6)39 (7)178 (12)Lao PDR [36]2005–200728.434.3 (30.4, 38.8)49 (9)241 (15)outpatient and inpatient studiesEngland and Wales [11,49]1999–200912.054.4 (54.0, 54.8)61 (11)182 (14)Bangladesh [47]1993–200430.972.2 (68.4, 76.4)11 (2)42 (2)Malawi [39]1997–200745.1191 (137, 313)2 (1)15 (1)Nigeria [37]2002–200442.737.0 (27.5, 51.9)26 (6)46 (3)Philippines [38]2005–200625.727.9 (24.4, 31.6)110 (13)94 (6)2.3.Impact of vaccinationWe then examined the impact of vaccination on patterns of rotavirus disease incidence predicted by the model. Vaccination was assumed to confer protection comparable to that of primary infection, as in our previous model [13], resulting in an 80 per cent reduction in the risk of severe diarrhoea in previously uninfected infants. Vaccine efficacy was not an input parameter, but this level of protection is similar to that estimated during Rotarix trials in Latin America [5]. Vaccine efficacy estimates in developing countries of Asia and Africa, however, have been lower [4,6,10]; this can be considered equivalent to a lower effective coverage level in our model. We examined the impact of vaccination at coverage levels of 50, 70 and 90 per cent on the mean and peak incidence of severe diarrhoea during a 2 year period beginning 5 years after the introduction of the vaccine across the full range of birth rates and transmission rates.Finally, we examined model predictions regarding the proportion of infants infected prior to four months of age across the full range of birth rates and transmission rates and how this was impacted by vaccination. One possible explanation for the reduced efficacy of rotavirus vaccination in recent trials conducted in developing countries is the high rate of exposure to circulating virus in the placebo group prior to enrolment combined with limited immunogenicity of the vaccine in previously infected infants [6]. If vaccination mimics natural infection but does not provide any added benefit beyond the immunity generated by a primary rotavirus infection, or if recent infection interferes with vaccine-induced immunity, then it is possible that the observed vaccine effectiveness may be reduced in relation to the proportion of infants infected prior to the age of vaccine administration.3.ResultsFitting of the model to age distributions of cases from 15 countries yielded estimates of R0 ranging from 23.3 to 191 (table 1). Estimates of R0 were typically lower for more developed countries than they were for developing countries, where a high proportion of cases occurred in infants less than 1 year of age (figure 1). The degree of seasonal fluctuation in incidence observed was similar to that predicted by the model, although the magnitude of seasonal fluctuation was greater in the observed data than in the model predictions (table 1); this is not unexpected given that the stochasticity in the data will clearly affect this measure. If we increased the amplitude of seasonal forcing in the model to 10 per cent, we could better capture the observed magnitude of seasonal variation in most cases (see the electronic supplementary material, figure S3). Regardless of the amplitude of seasonal forcing, the observed and predicted seasonality ranks were significantly correlated (Spearman's correlation: ρ = 0.65, p < 0.05; table 1).
Figure 1.Fit of the model to age distributions of cases from 15 countries. The observed proportion of reported cases in the zero to five month, six to 11 month, 1, 2, 3 and 4 year old age groups are represented by the black bars, while the white bars are those predicted by the model. Developed countries are in the top line, while developing countries are in the bottom two lines. Within these groups, countries are ordered by distance from the equator (greatest to least); temperate countries are in the shaded region.The degree of seasonal fluctuation in the incidence of severe rotavirus diarrhoea predicted by the model varied substantially depending on both the birth rate and transmission rate (figure 2 contour map). Seasonality, independent of the degree of seasonal forcing, was greatest for combinations of low-to-intermediate birth rates and low-to-intermediate transmission rates. A region of strong seasonality was also noted when both birth rates and transmission rates were very low (CBR < 10 live births per 1000 and R0 < 30); further exploration revealed that epidemics occurred biennially in this parameter region. When birth rates and transmission rates were high (e.g. CBR > 30 live births per 1000 and R0 > 50), the degree of seasonal fluctuation in incidence was predicted to be low (less than 25%). The parameter regions of strong seasonality varied only slightly with the strength of seasonal forcing (a) and were not sensitive to the functional form (sinusoidal or step), while the degree of seasonal fluctuation in incidence varied proportionally with a, as expected (see the electronic supplementary material).
Figure 2.Predicted seasonal patterns of rotavirus incidence across a range of birth rates and transmission rates. The degree of seasonal fluctuation in incidence of rotavirus diarrhoea predicted by the model is indicated by the colour bar. The larger red–yellow region corresponds to strong annual epidemics, while the smaller red region in the lower left-hand corner corresponds to biennial epidemics. The estimated position for each of the 15 countries is plotted according to the symbols; note the estimated R0 for Malawi was greater than 100, but there was not much variation in the predicted seasonal pattern for this parameter region.Since vaccination roughly equates to a decline in the birth rate by reducing the recruitment of fully susceptible individuals and a reduction in the transmission rate by preventing the most infectious primary cases, we might predict from figure 2 that vaccination could increase the seasonality of epidemics under certain circumstances. Vaccination led to a decrease in the average annual incidence of severe diarrhoea predicted by the model that was comparable across all birth rates and transmission rates we explored. Under most circumstances, vaccination was also expected to decrease the peak incidence of severe diarrhoea in a typical post-vaccination year (figure 3). However, for certain combinations of birth rates and transmission rates, vaccination could indeed lead to an increase in the peak incidence of severe diarrhoea occurring at certain times of the year as the dynamics transitioned to a pattern of more seasonal epidemic disease or biennial epidemics. This is illustrated for the case of a country with an intermediate birth rate (CBR = 20 live births per 1000) and transmission rate (R0 = 35) with a vaccine coverage of 50 per cent (figure 3b). As vaccine coverage increased, the relative peak incidence tended to decrease across all combinations of birth rates and transmission rates, but countries with higher birth rates and/or transmission rates became more at risk for increased peak seasonal incidence (figure 3a). Furthermore, there may be a transition period soon after vaccine introduction in which seasonal incidence is more pronounced.
Figure 3.Predicted effect of vaccination on the seasonal incidence of rotavirus diarrhoea. (a) Relative size of peak seasonal incidence (as indicated by the colour bar) 5 years after vaccine introduction compared with peak incidence prior to vaccination for vaccine coverage levels of 50, 70 and 90 per cent of all infants at four months of age. (b,c) Weekly (blue lines) and average annual incidence (red lines) of severe rotavirus diarrhoea for a country with (b) CBR = 20 live births per 1000 and R0 = 35, and (c) CBR = 15 live births per 1000 and R0 = 25. Vaccination is introduced in year 3 at (i) 50%, (ii) 70% and (iii) 90% coverage.Those countries most at risk for increased peak incidence following the introduction of rotavirus vaccination are ones with intermediate birth rates and transmission rates. Given our estimates of R0 for the representative countries with published age distributions, this may include countries such as Uzbekistan. Countries such as Cambodia and Nepal with slightly higher birth rates and transmission rates could experience similar phenomena as vaccine coverage levels reach 90 per cent or more, with a vaccine efficacy of 80 per cent. However, it may be difficult to achieve this level of effective coverage if the vaccine is less efficacious in such settings.The proportion of infants infected prior to four months of age also showed a strong dependence on both the birth rate and the transmission rate (figure 4). At high birth rates and transmission rates, up to 12 per cent of infants may be infected with rotavirus prior to four months of age, which is the recommended age at which the second dose of rotavirus vaccine is administered in most developed countries (figure 4a). Thus, vaccination may not have as great an impact initially in such settings if vaccination is not as effective in previously infected infants. However, vaccination is expected to lead to a decrease in the force of infection (i.e. incidence rate per susceptible individual) and thus a delay in the time to infection, such that the proportion of infants infected prior to 4 months of age decreased substantially at high levels of vaccine coverage (figure 4b). This could lead to an increase in vaccine impact over time under these assumptions.
Figure 4.Predicted age of first infection with rotavirus. Proportion of infants infected with rotavirus prior to 4 months of age (indicated by the colour bar) across a range of values for the CBR and transmission rate (R0) for the periods (a) prior to vaccine introduction, and (b) 10 years after vaccine introduction with 90% coverage.4.DiscussionMuch of the promise of rotavirus vaccines lies in their ability to reduce the incidence of severe disease in developing countries, where diarrhoea is still a major cause of both morbidity and mortality [1,2]. Determining how the potential impact of vaccination may vary between developed versus developing countries requires an understanding of how the transmission dynamics of rotavirus differ in these settings. Birth rates have been shown to be an important determinant of the spatio-temporal pattern of rotavirus epidemics in the USA [13], and may also help explain why rotavirus tends to be less seasonal in developing countries, which often exhibit high birth rates and high transmission rates. Using a mathematical model fitted to epidemiological data from 15 countries, we show that geographical differences in birth and transmission rates can partially explain the observed variation in rotavirus seasonality. Our model also suggests that vaccination could have the unexpected consequence of increasing the seasonality of rotavirus disease in countries with intermediate-to-high birth rates and/or transmission rates while still reducing the mean annual incidence of disease.While the combination of birth rates and transmission rates are likely important determinants of the magnitude of seasonal variation and can affect small differences in the timing of epidemics, these factors do not explain why rotavirus tends to occur more frequently during the cool, dry season in both temperate and tropical regions [20,22,23]. Environmental factors such as temperature and/or humidity probably play a role in organizing the peak of rotavirus transmission to times when conditions are most favourable to virus survivability and transmission [25–28]. However, even small seasonal differences in the transmission rate can resonate with the epidemic clockwork to produce large seasonal epidemics evident in some countries. It should be noted that these large seasonal epidemics are not confined to temperate regions of the world, as previously thought [20]. Pronounced seasonality has been observed in subtropical and tropical countries, such as Hong Kong and Taiwan (since 2005) [44,48], as well as regions of Venezuela and Brazil [52,53]. By contrast, temperate countries such as Uzbekistan exhibit only weak seasonal variation in rotavirus incidence [41]. The combination of lower birth rates and/or lower transmission rates may help in explaining why rotavirus tends to be moderately to strongly seasonal in countries such as Hong Kong and the Lao PDR, but is only weakly seasonal in neighbouring Cambodia (table 1 and electronic supplementary material, figure S1) [36,44,45]. Our results also indicate that infection tends to occur at an earlier age when birth rates and transmission rates are high. Thus, the observed association between year-round circulation of rotavirus and a lower average age of cases may be confounded by the common causes of high birth rates and/or transmission rates rather than being indicative of a causal relationship between seasonality and age of infection [53,54].The effect of vaccination is dynamically similar to a reduction in the birth rate since the number of fully susceptible infants entering the population is decreased and a reduction in the transmission rate since it prevents the most infectious primary cases [13]. This helps explain why epidemics occurred later and with lower amplitude following the introduction of rotavirus vaccination in countries such as the USA and Mexico [18,19,55], since vaccination led to a delay in the build-up of a sufficient number of susceptible infants and highly infectious primary cases to set off an epidemic. Our model suggests vaccination may alter the dynamics of rotavirus in countries with intermediate birth rates and transmission rates, leading to a pattern of more seasonal epidemic disease. While the overall annual incidence of rotavirus diarrhoea is expected to decrease, peak seasonal incidence of rotavirus could actually increase in such settings. It is important to anticipate these changes in the dynamics, particularly if hospitals are not equipped to handle the increased number of diarrhoea admissions at the peak of the epidemic. This could also impact cost-effectiveness analyses, since the cost of hospitalization may increase, for example, if there is a shortage of beds. Finally, it will be important to evaluate the success of rotavirus vaccination in terms of the reduction in annual morbidity and mortality measures rather than comparing monthly indicators to their pre-vaccination levels. The occurrence of epidemics following the introduction of rotavirus vaccination to a country should not be considered indicative of vaccine failure. To avoid such effects, countries with intermediate birth rates and transmission rates most at risk for increased seasonal incidence may want to ensure that high levels of vaccine coverage are reached as quickly as possible after vaccine introduction.In developing countries with high birth rates and transmission rates, achieving high coverage with a fully effective vaccine may not be as feasible. In recent clinical trials, the efficacy of rotavirus vaccination was lower in some developing country settings [4,6,10]. There are a number of possible explanations for this reduced efficacy related to host and environmental factors, including higher rates of breastfeeding and higher levels of transplacental maternal antibodies, co-administration of oral polio vaccine, interference by other diarrhoeal pathogens, micronutrient malnutrition and greater diversity of rotavirus strains in developing countries [56]. Furthermore, the high transmission rate and year-round circulation of rotavirus in such settings may lead to infection prior to enrolment in vaccine trials and/or the administration of all vaccine doses, as we show here. This could contribute to lower efficacy estimates if the effect of vaccination is reduced in previously infected individuals, although it is unlikely to explain all of the observed effect. Nevertheless, even moderately efficacious vaccines can prevent considerable numbers of hospitalizations and deaths due to rotavirus in these high burden settings [4,6,10]. If vaccination is introduced in such countries at appreciable coverage levels, it is possible that the observed vaccine effectiveness may actually increase over time as the force of infection is reduced, thereby leading to a delay in the time to first infection; this is an important consequence of the ‘herd immunity’ generated by vaccination. Furthermore, if mothers in developing countries tend to have higher maternal antibody titres as a result of continual boosting by exposure to rotavirus, then this reduction in the force of infection may also decrease the neutralizing effect these maternal antibodies could be having on the vaccine when administered to infants.The fit of our model to the age distribution of cases in different countries reveals an element of added complexity in the nature of maternal immunity and protection against rotavirus. The strength and duration of maternal immunity appear to be greater than previously assumed in models of rotavirus transmission [11,13,16]. This is particularly evident in the age distributions of cases from developing countries, where the greatest proportion of cases occurs in the six to 11 months age group, but the zero to five months age group is comparatively underrepresented. It is possible that maternal immunity tends to be long-lasting in developing countries compared with developed countries because of the combination of higher rates and longer duration of breastfeeding, and possible immune boosting in mothers resulting from more recent re-infection (and/or recent infection with a greater diversity of strains). Further exploration of these differences is warranted as it could help explain the reduced efficacy of vaccination in developing countries.Surveillance studies conducted in anticipation of rotavirus vaccination have yielded descriptions of the age distribution and seasonal pattern of rotavirus-associated diarrhoea in children less than 5 years of age from a variety of different countries. We used these age distributions to estimate the transmission rate of rotavirus in these settings given the birth rate is known; our estimates range between R0 = 28 and R0 = 191. These estimates should not be over-interpreted and will probably be biased in some instances. Other factors are likely to affect the reported age distribution of rotavirus cases from which these estimates were derived, such as differences in treatment-seeking behaviour, the prevalence of co-infections which may affect rotavirus testing rates, mortality patterns and other population demographics, infant care practices, population mixing, etc. Furthermore, surveillance methods differed from study to study. While some studies only tested patients admitted to the hospital or clinic, others tested both inpatients and outpatients; there may be differences in the age distribution and reporting rate of severe rotavirus cases compared with those with more moderate diarrhoea. Greater representation of moderate diarrhoea cases in older age individuals could lead to underestimation of R0 in studies that included outpatients. The duration of surveillance also differed among studies, and the age distribution and seasonality of rotavirus diarrhoea in a given year may not be indicative of long-term patterns.Our modelling assumptions will also affect our estimates of the transmission rate. For example, we assumed mixing is homogeneous, but other population mixing assumptions may lead to lower estimates of R0 (see the electronic supplementary material). Also, we assumed that birth rates and transmission rates were constant over time when in fact they are likely to have changed. Our model is in part based on estimates of natural immunity from infection derived from a cohort study conducted in Mexico [57]. While other studies have demonstrated similar findings [58,59], the strength of natural immunity from previous rotavirus infections may not be the same in all settings, and in particular may be weaker in some developing countries. Furthermore, we assumed that disease severity is related to the number of previous infections rather than the age of infected individuals; it is very difficult to disentangle these two highly correlated effects. If rotavirus infections tend to be less severe in older children independent of the number of previous infections, then we may be overestimating the transmission rate in some settings, as well as underestimating the impact of vaccination [13].Nevertheless, the estimates of the transmission rate which we derive are useful in that they allow us to compare patterns of rotavirus seasonality predicted by the model for different settings using very limited data. More reliable estimates of the transmission rate, as well as estimates of seasonal variation in the transmission rate and underreporting factors, can and should be obtained by fitting models to age-stratified time series of rotavirus cases from specific settings. Anticipating the country-specific impact of vaccination requires an understanding of how vaccine effectiveness and the transmission dynamics of rotavirus may vary among settings and over time.Determining how and why seasonal patterns of rotavirus-associated diarrhoea differ between developed and developing countries is an important element in evaluating how the impact of vaccination observed presently in the Americas, Australia and Europe may translate to the context of developing countries [3]. The relationship we describe between birth rates, transmission rates and the degree of seasonal fluctuation in rotavirus incidence predicted by our model helps to broaden this understanding. However, other factors remain unexplained, such as what are the environmental and other sources of seasonal forcing that lead to rotavirus being more common in the cool, dry season in most parts of the world? Additionally, why is a greater diversity of rotavirus strains observed in developing countries compared with developed countries, and how will this impact vaccine effectiveness? Mathematical modelling of the transmission dynamics of rotavirus may help to address some of these questions, but further epidemiological and experimental studies are essential in improving our understanding of these issues and will help to inform future models for rotavirus dynamics.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: SAPOVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Norovirus and Sapovirus Epidemiology and Strain Characteristics among Navajo and Apache Infants

IntroductionNorovirus and sapovirus are genetically diverse genera in the family Caliciviridae. The major structural capsid protein (VP1) sequence is used to classify both norovirus and sapovirus into genogroups and genotypes. Norovirus is organized into at least seven genogroups (GI-GVII) of which GI, GII and GIV viruses are detected in humans [1]. Of the eight reported sapovirus genogroups (GI-GVIII), viruses of four (GI, GII, GIV and GV) have been detected in humans [2].In the United States (US), norovirus causes an estimated 19–21 million cases of acute gastroenteritis (AGE) resulting in 1.7–1.9 million outpatient and 400,000 emergency department visits annually [3]. In addition, norovirus causes 56,000–71,000 hospitalizations and 570–800 deaths per year in the US, the majority occurring among young children and the elderly [3]. With the application of real-time RT-PCR diagnostics, sapovirus has been increasingly implicated as the cause of outbreaks [4, 5] and sporadic AGE [6–8]. In pediatric AGE, sapovirus detection ranges from 5–17% depending upon the country [6–10].Norovirus and sapovirus are important causes of AGE among American Indian infants [11] who have historically experienced a higher burden of AGE compared to children of the general US population [12]. The aim of this analysis is to establish the prevalence and molecular characteristics of the norovirus and sapovirus genotypes circulating among American Indian infants who were selected for a case-control study of AGE etiology [11]. The infants selected for the case-control study were participants of the placebo arm of a rotavirus vaccine efficacy trial that was conducted in two American Indian communities in the Southwest US from 2002–2004 [13].Materials and MethodsThe studyStool samples from American Indian infants ≤9 months of age that had been stored at -80°C since the efficacy trial were selected for the case-control study and tested for adenovirus group F, astrovirus types 1–8, norovirus GI, GII and GIV, group A rotavirus and sapovirus GI, GII, GIV and GV [11]. Case and control inclusion criteria were described previously [11].Detection and genotyping of norovirus and sapovirus by real-time RT-PCRDetection of noroviruses and sapoviruses by real-time RT-PCR has been described in detail elsewhere [11]. Positive specimens were genotyped by conventional RT-PCR [14, 15] and PCR products of appropriate size (norovirus GI: 330 base pairs, norovirus GII: 344 base pairs, sapovirus: 434 base pairs) were gel-purified using the QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). Sanger sequencing was performed using the Big Dye Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems) and sequences (available upon request) were genotyped by comparison to norovirus and sapovirus reference strains in the database of the National Calicivirus laboratory at CDC. Phylogenetic analyses were performed using MEGA (version 6.0) and statistical analyses were performed in Stata (version 13).The Institutional Review Boards of the Navajo Nation, Phoenix Area Indian Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health approved this research, as did the Navajo and White Mountain Apache tribes. Parents provided written consented for participation of their infants in the original rotavirus vaccine trial.ResultsNorovirus or sapovirus was detected in 84 (35%) of 241 cases and in 79 (23%) of 343 controls. Co-infections of norovirus or sapovirus with another virus were common (Table 1).10.1371/journal.pone.0169491.t001Table 1Percent of enteric virus co-infections with norovirus or sapovirus.Co-infecting virusNorovirus, N (%)Sapovirus, N (%)Case (N = 76)Control* (N = 70)Case (N = 8)Control* (N = 9)Astrovirus7 (9.2)7 (10.0)0 (0)2 (22.2)Adenovirus3 (3.9)3 (4.3)2 (25.0)0 (0)Rotavirus8 (10.5)9 (12.9)3 (37.5)2 (22.2)* There was one control co-infected with norovirus and sapovirus.Norovirus GII viruses were detected in 71 (29.5%) of cases and in 62 (18.1%) of controls (p<0.001; Table 2). Between 2–3% of cases and controls were positive for norovirus GI.10.1371/journal.pone.0169491.t002Table 2Norovirus and sapovirus detected in cases and controls.VirusCases, N = 241Controls, N = 343N (%)*N not mixed (%)N (%)*N not mixed (%)Norovirus76 (31.5)**59 (24.5)**70 (20.4)50 (14.6)    GI6 (2.5)6 (2.5)10 (2.9)7 (2.0)    GII71 (29.5)**54 (22.4)**62 (18.1)44 (12.8)Sapovirus8 (3.3)4 (1.7)9 (2.6)4 (1.2)* Includes some cases or controls with mixed viral detection of Group F adenovirus, astrovirus or rotavirus.**Proportion of cases positive statistically higher than controls (p<0.001).Norovirus genotypes GII.3 and GII.4 predominated among cases (GII.3: N = 11 [14.5%], GII.4: N = 23 [30.3%]) as well as among controls (GII.3: N = 12 [17.1%], GII.4: N = 19 [27.1%]). Among GI viruses, GI.3b and GI.7 were most prevalent (Table 3).10.1371/journal.pone.0169491.t003Table 3Norovirus genotype distribution among cases and healthy controls.GenotypesFrequency (%)Cases, N = 76Controls, N = 70GI genotypes    GI.3b3 (4.0)1 (1.4)    GI.73 (4.0)6 (8.6)    Not typed—3 (4.3)GII genotypes    GII.21 (1.3)1 (1.4)    GII.311 (14.5)12 (17.1)    GII.4 Farmington Hills23 (30.3)19 (27.1)    GII.58 (10.5)9 (12.9)    GII.67 (9.2)1 (1.4)    GII.75 (6.6)5 (7.1)    GII.121 (1.3)1 (1.4)    GII.14—1 (1.4)    GII.171 (1.3)—    Not typed14 (18.4)13 (18.6)Most sapovirus strains belonged to GI (53%) or GII (41%) whereas one GIV virus was detected in a control and no GV viruses were detected (Table 4).10.1371/journal.pone.0169491.t004Table 4Sapovirus genotype distribution among cases and healthy controls.GenotypesFrequency (%)Cases, N = 8Controls, N = 9GI genotypes    GI.1*6 (75)2 (22.2)    GI.2—1 (11.1)GII genotypes    GII.1*2 (25)2 (22.2)    GII.22 (25)1 (11.1)GIV—1 (11.1)Not typed1 (12.5)4 (44.4)* Both GI.1 and GII.1 viruses were detected in samples from two cases and two controlsDiscussionWe report the prevalence and genotype distribution of norovirus and sapovirus in American Indian infants of the US Southwest from 2002–2004. The prevalence of norovirus in cases (31.5%) was approximately twice as high compared to the estimated global prevalence of 18% [16]. The high prevalence of norovirus found in healthy controls (20.4%) is within the range (4–27%) observed in other pediatric AGE studies [17, 18–21]. Prolonged viral shedding or an altered gut microbiota have been suggested as possible explanations of high detection rates among control subjects [22, 23].Norovirus GII.3 and GII.4 were the primary genotypes identified among American Indian infants. These genotypes have been reported globally but also vary geographically [17, 24–26]. Several studies from Africa suggested a higher prevalence of GII.3 viruses in children [24–26], but not in another study in young children the U.S. [17]. All GII.4 viruses detected in the American Indian children typed as GII.4 Farmington Hills, a variant that emerged in 2002 [27] and became the predominant strain globally [28].This study had several limitations. The stools from this study were collected 11–13 years ago in the context of a clinical trial for a rotavirus vaccine candidate. Therefore, the characterized genotypes may not reflect the current distribution of norovirus and sapovirus circulating among American Indian infants in the US Southwest. The high prevalence of norovirus and sapovirus in healthy controls creates difficulty in the attribution of AGE etiology and dampens the association between virus detection and disease and future studies should focus on whether prolonged shedding could explain the high percentage of positives in healthy control children.Norovirus GII.3 and GII.4 genotypes predominated among Navajo and White Mountain Apache infants in the early 2000’s as well as in norovirus outbreaks and among other populations in the U.S. around that same time [27, 29]. A similar distribution of norovirus genotypes among cases and controls suggest significant transmission within the population accompanied by asymptomatic carriage and shedding of the virus. Only a few different sapovirus genotypes were detected among American Indian infants. The frequent number of co-infections in children highlights that continued monitoring of the causes of AGE should include multi-enteric diagnostic platforms [30] to advance our understanding of the individual AGE pathogen in high-risk populations. It would be beneficial to conduct another study in this population to determine if norovirus trends and strain characteristics have changed over time.


Title: Porcine Sapovirus Protease Controls the Innate Immune Response and Targets TBK1

1. IntroductionSapoviruses (SaVs) are small non-enveloped RNA viruses belonging to the Caliciviridae family. Together with noroviruses, they are the main cause of acute gastroenteritis worldwide in both children and adults. SaVs are classified into at least 19 genogroups (GI to GXIX) [1,2], depending on their genetic diversity, and they have been found to infect various animal species and humans. SaVs have a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome ranging from 7.1 to 7.7 kbp, which is linked at the 5′ end to the virus protein genome-linked (VPg), serving as a protein primer for the viral polymerase. The SaV genome contains two open reading frames (ORFs), ORF1 and ORF2. An additional ORF (ORF3) has been predicted in several sapovirus strains. However, its function is still unknown [3]. ORF1 encodes all non-structural proteins and the major structural protein VP1 [4], and ORF2 encodes the minor structural protein VP2 [5]. ORF1 is translated to a polyprotein that undergoes proteolytic processing by the virus encoded 3C-like protease NS6. In SaVs, the protease is found as a protease–polymerase fusion protein and is not further processed into the mature NS6 protease and NS7 RNA polymerase domains [4]. This characteristic is shared with feline caliciviruses (FCVs) [6] but not observed in any other Caliciviridae member.Among the SaV strains infecting humans, genogroups GI and GII are the primary causes of gastroenteritis outbreaks as well as sporadic cases. For over 40 years following its discovery [7,8], human sapovirus (HuSaV) could not be propagated in vitro until recently [9,10,11]. Prior to these advancements, the porcine SaV (PSaV) Cowden strain (belonging to genogroup GIII) served as a valuable model for studying SaV pathogenesis and it remains the only SaV for which a robust reverse genetics system is available. The ability of this strain to replicate in porcine kidney cells in vitro [12,13] and the establishment of a reverse genetics system [14] make it an appealing model with which to uncover the basic mechanisms of SaV biology.PSaV is most likely endemic in pigs worldwide. It has been detected in the faecal samples of domestic pigs from around the world, and in wild boars in Japan [15]. Although, so far, there is no reported SaV transmission between swine and humans [15], there were concerns of potential zoonotic infections or recombination events, due to the high genetic similarity between some PSaV strains and HuSaV [16]. While there is extensive research on the interplay between noroviruses and the host immune response [17], our understanding of SaV in this context is limited. Nevertheless, it is known that SaVs exhibit sensitivity to type I interferons (IFNs) [18], indicating the involvement of innate immune pathways in controlling SaV infections, and highlighting the need to understand the potential mechanisms employed by SaVs to evade the host’s immune response.Innate immunity is the primary line of defence against viruses and other pathogens. In part, it relies on pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), such as retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs) [19], which detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). RIG-I and melanoma differentiation associated gene 5 (MDA5) are RLRs that recognise viral RNA genome and RNA replication intermediates. The recognition of these PAMPs triggers a cascade of signalling events via the activation of mitochondrial antiviral-signalling protein (MAVS) [19,20]. MAVS signals via the TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and inhibitor of nuclear factor-κB kinase ε (IKKε) proteins, leading to the activation of IRF3 and IRF7 transcriptional factors [21]. Upon their activation, these transcription factors translocate to the nucleus and induce the transcription of type I IFNs and other antiviral or immunoregulatory genes [20,22].Here, we show that PSaV Cowden strain has mechanisms to counteract the host innate immune response. Specifically, we have found that the virus protease (NS6) inhibits the type I IFN response by targeting TBK1 for proteasomal degradation in a manner dependent on its protease activity. TBK1 protein levels are significantly decreased during PSaV infection, and they were completely rescued when the proteasome was inhibited. The depletion of TBK1 from cells led to a statistically significant increase in infectious PSaV titres. This highlights the critical role of TBK1 in regulating PSaV infection and elucidates the rationale behind the targeting of TBK1 by NS6. Finally, here, for the first time, we established PSaV infection in IPEC-J2 cells, enteric epithelial cells, originally derived from the jejunum of a neonatal piglet [23]. In conclusion, our study reveals that PSaV Cowden strain, the only PSaV strain adapted to grow in vitro, possesses mechanisms to evade the host’s innate immune response. Our research shows that SaVs have mechanisms to counteract their host’s response and paves the way for further investigations into SaV–host interactions.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cell Lines and VirusHEK293T (ATCC CRL-11268) were grown in Dulbecco modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Parental LLC-PK1 (ATCC CL-101) cells and LLC-PK1 EV or KO (described in Section 2.7) were grown in Minimal Essential Medium (MEM, Gibco, Waltham, MA, USA). For all cell lines, media were supplemented with 10% (v/v) heat-inactivated Foetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (HyClone, Cytiva, Washington, DC, USA), 10 U/mL of penicillin, 100 mg/mL of streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and non-essential amino acids (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). IPEC-J2 (DSMZ ACC 701) cells were cultured in Advanced Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium/Ham’s F12 (Advanced DMEM/F12, Gibco), supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (HyClone, Cytiva, Washington, DC, USA), 10 U/mL of penicillin, 100 mg/mL of streptomycin, 2 mM L-glutamine (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 15 mM HEPES (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA), and non-essential amino acids (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The maintenance of IPEC-J2 cells was adapted from Geens M.M. and Niewold T.A., 2011, Cytotechnology [24]. All cell lines were grown at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Infectious particles of tissue-culture adapted PSaV Cowden strain were recovered from full-length infectious cDNA clone pCV4A (a kind gift from Dr. K. O. Chang, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA). The virus was propagated in LLC-PK1-NPro cells [18] and purified by sedimentation through a cushion of 30% (w/v) sucrose.2.2. Expression VectorsThe sequence of PSaV Cowden strain from the GenBank database (accession number AF182760) was used to generate protease–polymerase (ProWTPolWT) fusion constructs into an empty vector (InvivoGen, Waltham, MA, USA). Mutations of the active site in either protease, polymerase, or both, were made to produce ProMUTPolWT, ProWTPolMUT, and ProMUTPolMUT, respectively. In the protease, the Cys of the active site was mutated into Ala, and in the polymerase, the active site Gly-Asp-Asp was mutated into an Gly-Ala-Ala. The Pro-Pol fusion HA-tagged (ProWTPolWT and ProMUTPolWT) plasmids were generated using an in-house human PGK promoter-driven lentiviral vector via Gateway cloning (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). Plasmids expressing HuSaV (GI.2) and PSaV protease–polymerase fusion were generated by cloning into the XhoI and BamHI sites of pmCherry-C1 (Clontech, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan). The sequence of HuSaV (GI.2) protease–polymerase is from GenBank database, accession number LC504357. Vectors expressing RIG-I-CARD domain [25] and IRF3-5D [26] were previously described. Full-length RIG-I (pUNO-hRIG-I) used in the 5BR assay was obtained from InvivoGen (Waltham, MA, USA). To generate the FLAG-pTBK1 plasmid, full length porcine TBK1 was first synthesized by PCR using cDNA from LLC-PK1 cells as a template (forward primer: 5′-AAAAACCGGTACCATGCAGAGCACTTC-3′, reverse primer: 5′-AAAACGTACGACTAAAGACAGTCAAC-3′), digested with AgeI and BsiWI, and then ligated into an in-house human PGK promoter-driven lentiviral vector in frame with 3 tandem N-terminal FLAG tags. The FLAG-pTBK1-HA plasmid was generated by Gateway cloning (Invitrogen), using the FLAG-pTBK1 as a template for generation of the entry clone (forward primer: 5′-GGGGACAAGTTTGTACAAAAAAGCAGGCTTCACCATGGATTACAAGGATGACGAC-3′, reverse primer: 5′-GGGGACCACTTTGTACAAGAAAGCTGGGTTAAGACAGTCAACATTGCG-3′), and an in-house human PGK promoter-driven expression clone containing a gateway cassette in frame with 3 tandem C-terminal HA tags. The GFP-FLAG plasmid was a gift from Prof. Geoffrey L. Smith (University of Oxford). The IFN-β firefly luciferase reporter plasmid was from T. Taniguchi (University of Tokyo, Japan), and pTK-Renilla luciferase plasmid was from Promega (Madison, WI, USA).2.3. Transfection of Cell LinesHEK293T cells were transfected with polyethylenimine (PEI, CellnTec, 3 μL per μg of DNA for 96-well plates (wp) or 6-wp, and 5 μL per μg of DNA for 10 cm dishes), unless indicated otherwise. LLC-PK1 cells were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions.2.4. Reporter Gene AssaysHEK293T were seeded in 96-wp, and, 24 h later, cells were transfected with 70 ng per well of the firefly luciferase reporter plasmids (IFN-β), together with 10 ng per well of the pTK-Renilla luciferase plasmid and the plasmids encoding the genes of interest, or empty vector (EV). The exact amounts of expression plasmids used are included in the figure legends. To ensure consistency, EV was added to the transfection when needed, maintaining a constant final amount of transfected DNA. In instances where stimulation was carried out by transfecting another plasmid, an equivalent amount of EV was transfected to the non-stimulated (NS) control wells. Transfection was performed with PEI (CELLnTec, Bern, Switzerland, 3 μL per 1 μg DNA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DMEM supplemented with 2% (v/v) FBS was then added to achieve a volume of 100 μL per well. Cells were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h and then they were washed with 200 μL PBS per well and harvested in 100 μL per well of passive lysis buffer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Cells were freeze-thawed and 25 μL of lysate from each well was added to 25 μL of firefly luciferase reagent (Bright-Glo, Promega, Madison, WI, USA), and 10 μL of each lysate was added to 50 μL of 2 µg/mL Renilla luciferase substrate (NanoLight Technology, Pinetop, AZ, USA). Measurement of luciferase activity was carried out using a Glomax Navigator Microplate Luminometer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). In all experiments, cells were transfected in triplicate. Each firefly-luciferase reading was normalised to its corresponding Renilla luciferase reading. To calculate fold inductions, these normalised values were divided by the non-stimulated control value for each plasmid.2.5. 5BR AssayThe 5BR assay was conducted as previously described [27]. Briefly, HEK293T cells were seeded in 96-wp, and, 24 h later, they were transfected with 20 ng of IFN-β reporter, 5 ng of pTK-Renilla reporter, 0.5 ng of pUNO-hRIG-I, and 50 ng of any of the plasmids expressing ProWTPolWT, ProWTPolMUT, ProMUTPolMUT, and ProMUTPolWT. Transfections were conducted with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Where necessary, EV was used to maintain a constant amount of plasmid DNA per transfection. Four hours post-transfection, medium was changed with fresh medium containing 2 μg/mL of poly(I:C). A non-poly(I:C) control medium was included as non-stimulated (NS) condition. Luciferase activity was measured 36 h post-transfection using the Dual-Glo luciferase assay system (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and the Glomax Navigator Microplate Luminometer (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The ratios of firefly luciferase to Renilla luciferase activities were calculated for each sample, and these values were then divided by the non-stimulated EV control value to calculate fold change.2.6. Poly(I:C) Stimulation and RT-qPCRTBK1 WT (EV) and KO LLC-PK1 cells were seeded in 12-wp, and, 24 h later, they were transfected with 1 μg/mL poly(I:C) (P1530, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) with 3 μL per well of Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA). A non-transfected condition was included as a non-stimulated (NS) control. Six hours later, cells were lysed in 250 μL per well of RNA lysis buffer (4 M guanidine thiocyanate, 25 mM Tris pH 7). Total RNA extraction with an on-column DNAse treatment was performed with the GenElute Mammalian Total RNA Miniprep Kit (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. A total of 5 μL of each RNA sample were used for cDNA synthesis, which was performed with the M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase (Promega), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. qPCR was carried out using a 2× SYBR Green mastermix containing 2.5 mM MgCl2, 400 mM dNTPs, 1/10,000 SybrGreen (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA), 1 M Betaine (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 0.05 U/mL of Gold Star polymerase (Eurogentec, Seraing, Belgium), 1/5 10× Reaction buffer (750 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 200 mM [NH4]2SO4, 0.1% [v/v] Tween 20, Without MgCl2), and ROX Passive Reference buffer (Eurogentec, Seraing, Belgium), and ran on a ViiA 7 Real-Time PCR System (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), with a 15 sec 95 °C denaturation step and a 1 min 60 °C annealing/extension step for 40 cycles. The primers used were porcine IFN-β (Fwd: 5′-GGAGCAGCAATTTGGCATGT-3′; Rv: 5′-TGACGGTTTCATTCCAGCCA-3′) and porcine β-actin (Fwd: 5′-TCTACACCGCTACCAGTTCG-3′; Rv: 5′-GCTCGATGGGGTACTTGAGG-3′).2.7. CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Genome EditingGuide RNA (gRNA) for the porcine TBK1 was designed using an online software (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/gpp/public/analysis-tools/sgrna-design) (accessed on 18 January 2022) to target exon 3, which is shared by 5 out of 6 isoforms. The 6th isoform is predicted to give rise to a protein of 64 kDa size, which has not been identified in our study. The gRNA complex used in this study is 5′-CACCGACAGTGTATAAACTCCCACA-3′ and 5′-AAACTGTGGGAGTTTATACACTGTC-3′. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing was performed as described previously [28]. Briefly, the oligo complexes were annealed, phosphorylated and then ligated into the PX459 CRISPR/Cas9 vector. Plasmid with or without the gRNA sequence was transfected into LLC-PK1 cells with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) and cells were incubated for 48 h. Then, puromycin (4 μg/mL) was added for 24 h and puromycin-resistant cells were seeded in 96-wp at a density of 0.5 cell/well and were left to form colonies for 2–3 weeks. Several clones were expanded, and potential knockout clones were selected by immunoblotting and confirmed by DNA sequencing at the gRNA target site. Primers used to amplify and sequence TBK1 exon 3 are Fwd: 5′-TTTAACAAACCCCAGGTAAA-3′ and Rv: 5′-ACCTGGCTTGGATCCATGGT-3′. In the TBK1 KO cell line, both alleles were observed to have the same frameshifting, resulting in no full-length TBK1 production. The truncated form of TBK1 that will be expressed is expected to be ~25 kDa, which cannot be detected by the TBK1 antibody used in this study as it was raised against the carboxyl-terminal region of the protein. However, the truncated TBK1 is not expected to be functional.2.8. Immunoprecipitation (IP)HEK293T cells were seeded in 10 cm dishes and transfected with the indicated plasmids and amounts as described in the figure legend. After 24 h, cells were washed once with PBS and then lysed with 0.5% NP-40 in PBS supplemented with cOmplete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and Benzonase (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA, 1 μL per mL of lysis buffer). Lysates were incubated at 4 °C on an end-to-end rotor for 20 min, and then insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 21,000× g for 20 min at 4 °C and discarded. Lysates were then incubated with Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) agarose gel beads (30 μL per sample) at 4 °C on an end-to-end rotor for 4 h. Subsequently, the beads were washed 3 times with the lysis buffer, and finally they were incubated at 100 °C for 5 min in loading buffer to elute bound proteins. Cleared lysates and IP eluates were analysed by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting. Data shown are representative of at least 2 independent experiments showing similar results.2.9. SDS-PAGE and ImmunoblottingCells were lysed in 0.5% NP-40 in PBS for the IPs, or in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS) for all the other experiments. Both lysis buffers were supplemented with cOmplete Mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and Benzonase (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA, 1 μL per mL of lysis buffer). Cells in 6-wp and 10 cm dishes were lysed in 200 μL and 500 μL of lysis buffer, respectively. Lysates were incubated on an end-to-end rotor for 20 min at 4 °C and then spun down at 21,000× g for another 20 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were transferred to a new tube and the pellets were discarded. Samples were quantified using the BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations and made up to the desired concentration with lysis buffer. The samples were then mixed with loading buffer (0.6% SDS, 8% glycerol, 0.002% bromophenol blue, 25 mM Tris pH 6.8, 0.02% 2-mercaptoethanol), heated at 100 °C for 5–20 min and then were resolved by SDS-PAGE or NuPAGE (see each figure legend). Proteins were transferred to 0.45 μm nitrocellulose membranes (GVS) using a Trans-Blot semi-dry transfer unit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), for 40 min at 25 V. Membranes were blocked in 0.1% Tween PBS supplemented with 5% (w/v) skimmed milk and subjected to immunoblotting with the following primary antibodies at the indicated dilutions: TBK1 (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA [CS-3013], rabbit polyclonal, 1:500); GAPDH (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA [AM4300], mouse monoclonal, 1:5000); RIG-I (Santa Cruz, CA, USA [sc-376845], mouse monoclonal, 1:500); FLAG (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA [F3165], mouse monoclonal, 1:1000); HA (Abmart, Berkeley Heights, NJ, USA [M20003M], mouse monoclonal, 1:5000); and mCherry (Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA [CS-43590], rabbit monoclonal, 1:1000). PSaV VPg and NS6 proteins 3xHis-tagged were subcloned individually in an auto-inducible expression vector pPROEXHTc. Recombinant proteins were then purified using an Ni-NTA column. Following purification, his tags were cleaved, and each protein was dialysed and concentrated. The purified and concentrated recombinant proteins were immunised to New Zealand White rabbits to generate antisera to PSaV VPg and NS6. Primary antibodies were detected using IRDye-conjugated secondary antibodies in an Odyssey Infrared Imager (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA). All secondary antibodies were used at 1:10,000 dilution.2.10. PSaV InfectionFor detecting TBK1 levels during infection, LLC-PK1 cells in 6-wp were infected with PSaV at 5 TCID50/cell supplemented with 200 μM GCDCA. Incubation with inocula was performed for 1 h at room temperature (RT) on a shaker. Unabsorbed virus was then removed, and cells were washed once with MEM. Fresh MEM supplemented with 200 μM GCDCA was then added to the cells in the presence or absence of Z-VAD-FMK (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), NH4Cl (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), MG132 (Selleck chemicals, Houston, TX, USA), lactacystin (Cayman, Ann Arbor, MI, USA), or DMSO (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Cells were incubated at 37 °C for the time post-infection (pi) indicated in each figure legend. For measuring virus yield in TBK1 WT and KO LLC-PK1 cells, cells were infected in suspension with PSaV at 1 TCID50/cell supplemented with 200 μM GCDCA. Incubation with inocula took place for 1 h at 37 °C on an end-to-end rotor. Cells were then washed once, resuspended in fresh MEM, and seeded on 12-wp. Total virus (cells and supernatants) was then used for TCID50 analysis. For the infection of IPEC-J2 cells, cells in 6-wp were infected with PSaV at 5 TCID50/cell with or without 300 μM GCDCA. Incubation with inocula was for 3 h at RT on a shaker. Unabsorbed virus was washed, and fresh MEM supplemented with 300 μM GCDCA was added to the cells.2.11. TCID50 AssayAll TCID50s were performed in parental LLC-PK1 cells, seeded in 96-wp. Ten-fold serial dilutions of clarified virus supernatants were prepared in MEM supplemented with GCDCA (final concentration 200 μM) and aliquoted into wells of 96-wp, each in 4 replicates of 50 μL. Seven days pi, cells were assessed for cytopathic effect (CPE), and TCID50/mL was calculated using the Reed–Muench method [29].2.12. Statistical Analysis and SoftwareStatistical significance was determined using an unpaired Student’s t-test by using GraphPad Prism 9 software. All experiments were carried out at least twice, and one representative data set of each experiment is shown. Statistical analysis was performed within a single experiment, unless indicated otherwise. In all cases, ns: non-significant, * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001, and **** p ≤ 0.0001. Image Studio Lite 5.2 was used for Western blot quantification. Clustal Omega was used for all sequence alignments, and Snapgene 4.2 was used for primer design and cloning strategies. Schematics were created on BioRender.com. ChatGPT (GPT-3.5) was used for editing and proofreading.3. Results3.1. PSaV NS6 Is a Type I IFN AntagonistPSaV is sensitive to IFN response [18], and therefore we explored potential counteractive mechanisms that it might possess. There is a well-established precedent for the role of viral proteases in the regulation of the IFN response [30]. Recent studies on the human norovirus protease have indicated its capability to cleave NEMO, the regulatory subunit of the IKK complex [31], although it is unclear how this cleavage impacts the viral life cycle. In SaVs, the protease (NS6) is produced as a fusion with the polymerase (NS7). RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRps), when ectopically expressed, have been shown to generate uncapped 5′-triphosphate RNAs, which are recognized by RIG-I [32,33], therefore driving a robust type I IFN response. This capability can be used to establish a reporter readout in cells that relies on the activity of the authentic viral polymerase and has previously been described, the 5BR assay [27]. Briefly, over-expression of an RdRp, NS7 in the case of noroviruses, induces the downstream activation of signalling pathways, such as IRF3 and NF-κB. Co-transfection of a luciferase reporter where the luciferase gene is under the control of the type I IFN promoter enables the measurement of this activation (Figure 1A). To determine if NS6 is an IFN antagonist, we examined the ability of NS6 to inhibit the response driven by NS7 over-expression in this assay. We generated constructs encoding the PSaV NS6-7 fusion where one of the two, or both, were catalytically active, or inactive. We co-transfected these constructs, together with an IFN-β reporter, and we further stimulated the cells with poly(I:C) transfection or left them unstimulated (NS). Active NS7 (PolWT) induced a robust IFN-β activation, but this was only observed when NS6 was catalytically inactive (ProMUT). Active NS6 (ProWT) significantly inhibited IFN-β activation driven by either NS7 RdRp activity, or by poly(I:C) transfection (Figure 1B), indicating that it is a type I IFN antagonist. To further demonstrate that this effect was driven through RIG-I-mediated sensing, we employed reporter gene assays where IFN-β activation was achieved by the ectopic expression of RIG-I CARD domains. The IFN-β reporter and the RIG-I-CARD domains were co-expressed with increasing doses of NS6-7, where NS7 was catalytically inactive to avoid background reporter activation. NS6 restricted IFN-β activation in a dose–response and statistically significant manner (Figure 1C). Overall, these results show that NS6 strongly inhibits type I IFN activation.3.2. NS6 Restricts the Type I IFN Pathway at the Level of TBK1To further understand how NS6 antagonizes the IFN response, we sought to investigate where on the pathway the inhibitory function is exerted. For this, we again employed reporter gene assays and we stimulated IFN by over-expression of components of the pathway, such as RIG-I-CARD, TBK1, and the constitutively active IRF3-5D [26]. Ectopic expression of these proteins results in the activation of the pathway at that particular point and its subsequent activation downstream. These molecules were co-expressed together with the IFN-β reporter and the NS6-7 (Pro-Pol) fusion, where NS6 was catalytically active (WT), or inactive (MUT). In both cases, NS7 was catalytically inactive (MUT) to prevent signal transduction caused by the de novo initiation activity. We observed that only the expression of a catalytically active NS6 significantly reduced IFN-β activation downstream of both RIG-I and TBK1 over-expression (Figure 2A,B). Inhibition was not observed when activation was driven by the overexpression of IRF3 (Figure 2C), suggesting that NS6 acts at the level of TBK1 (Figure 2D).3.3. NS6 Interacts with and Modulates the Protein Levels of TBK1Our findings so far demonstrate that NS6 restricts type I IFN response at the level of TBK1 (Figure 2). To further investigate if NS6 specifically targets TBK1 for cleavage, we co-expressed HA-tagged NS6-7 fusion proteins, where NS6 is active (WT), or inactive (MUT), with FLAG-tagged porcine TBK1 (pTBK1), or GFP as a control. Although no cleavage product was observed, the total level of TBK1 protein was reduced in the presence of WT NS6, but not in the presence of a catalytically inactive NS6, while the level of GFP remained unaffected (Figure 3A). To investigate this further and determine if this was due to limitations of the TBK1 antibody to detect a cleaved product, we used a double-tagged pTBK1 construct. We cloned pTBK1 into a mammalian expression vector with a FLAG-tag on its N-terminus and an HA-tag on its C-terminus. We overexpressed the double-tagged construct with catalytically active or inactive NS6 alongside the single-tagged pTBK1 (FLAG-pTBK1) as a control. No cleavage product was detected after immunoblotting with either anti-FLAG or anti-HA antibodies (Figure 3B). Nevertheless, the reduction in TBK1 protein levels was consistent and independent of whether TBK1 was single or double tagged.Since porcine and human TBK1 share 96% amino acid identity, and sapovirus proteases have been reported to share cleavage sites [34], we sought to determine if human sapovirus (HuSaV) NS6 protease also had a similar effect on pTBK1 protein levels. To address this, we cloned wild type HuSaV (GI.2 strain) NS6-7 into a mammalian expression vector. mCherry-tagged HuSaV and PSaV NS6-7 were then overexpressed together with FLAG-tagged pTBK1, or GFP as control. The PSaV NS6-7 was used as a positive control, whereas a condition without a protease was also included. The expression of either PSaV or HuSaV NS6-7 lead to a substantial decrease in TBK1 protein levels (Figure 3C), but not of GFP (Figure 3D).Thus far, our results revealed a consistent reduction in TBK1 total protein levels, without the detection of an apparent cleavage product. To further investigate the interplay between NS6 and TBK1, and to determine if there is a physical association, we performed immunoprecipitation (IP) assays. Specifically, we overexpressed HA-tagged NS6-7, where NS6 was WT or MUT, or HA-GFP, together with FLAG-tagged pTBK1. A FLAG IP was performed, and samples were analysed by immunoblotting. TBK1 was found to interact with NS6-7, but not with GFP (Figure 3E). Consistent with our previous findings (Figure 3A–C), the presence of WT NS6 led to a reduction in TBK1, resulting in less TBK1 being pulled down compared to the other conditions. Nevertheless, traces of NS6-7 were still identified, indicating the persistence of the NS6-7/TBK1 complex. 3.4. TBK1 Protein Levels Are Reduced during PSaV InfectionTo investigate the TBK1 protein levels during infection, we infected LLC-PK1 cells with a high multiplicity of infection (MOI) of PSaV (5 TCID50/cell) and collected samples at different time points post-infection (pi). Viral protein expression was detectable by Western blot primarily from 8 h pi onwards, although some VPg precursors were observable at 4 h pi. In line with our previous results (Figure 3), we found that the levels of TBK1 were reduced from 16 h pi (Figure 4A). Quantification of the TBK1 levels, observed during PSaV infection in LLC-PK1 cells, revealed that the total TBK1 levels were reduced by at least 50% when compared to mock-infected cells (Figure 4B). To assess whether the decreased expression of TBK1 was cell-type-specific, we established PSaV infection in the IPEC-J2 cells, an enterocyte cell line originally derived from the jejunum of a neonatal piglet [23]. We found that the presence of bile acid (GCDCA) was required for efficient infection (Figure 4C), with 300 μM being the most effective concentration tested (Figure S1). High MOI infection in the IPEC-J2 cells demonstrated that TBK1 levels were reduced (Figure 4D), in agreement with our previous observations (Figure 3 and Figure 4A,B). Quantification of the TBK1 levels in PSaV-infected IPEC-J2 cells showed that the protein levels were decreased by approximately 50% when compared to uninfected cells (Figure 4E), similar to what we observed in LLC-PK1 cells (Figure 4B).3.5. NS6-Mediated Reduction in TBK1 Levels Is Proteasomal-DependentAs detailed above, we were unable to identify a TBK1 cleavage product in either infected cells or in cells overexpressing NS6-7. The use of a double-tagged protein also failed to clearly identify a cleavage product (Figure 3B). Therefore, to understand the mechanism of NS6-7-mediated TBK1 degradation, we sought to identify the cellular degradation pathway(s) that could mediate the subsequent turnover of the cleaved TBK1. We treated pTBK1 and NS6-7 co-transfected cells with increasing doses of inhibitors for cellular caspases (zVAD-FMK), lysosomal degradation (NH4Cl), or proteasomal degradation (MG132 and lactacystin). A construct encoding inactive NS6 (MUT) was also included as control. We found that TBK1 levels were unaffected in the presence of NS6 MUT, as expected, or when cells were treated with either of the proteasome inhibitors (Figure 5A), suggesting that TBK1 is cleaved by catalytically active NS6 and then targeted for rapid degradation by the proteasome. An additional protein product with a lower molecular mass was detected in lactacystin-treated cells (indicated with blue arrow). Further investigation showed that this anti-TBK1 reactive protein product was present in lactacystin-treated cells independently of the enzymatic activity of NS6 (Figure S2), suggesting that it is an unspecific protein which cross-reacts with the anti-FLAG antibody in the conditions tested.In order to assess whether cleaved TBK1 is also targeted for proteasomal degradation during the course of infection, we infected LLC-PK1 cells at high MOI (5 TCID50/cell) in the presence or absence of zVAD-FMK or MG132. TBK1 levels were reduced in both DMSO- and zVAD-FMK-treated cells upon infection (Figure 5B), which is in accordance with our previous observations (Figure 4 and Figure 5A). In contrast, MG132 treatment rescued TBK1 (Figure 5B), confirming our findings that TBK1 is targeted for degradation via the proteasome. The quantification of TBK1 levels normalised to GAPDH internal control further confirmed our observations (Figure 5C).3.6. PSaV Infection in TBK1-Deficient Cells Results in Higher Viral TitresIn order to further explore the role of TBK1 in the PSaV life cycle, we sought to examine how lack of TBK1 impacts PSaV replication in cells. For this, we generated TBK1 knockout (KO) LLC-PK1 cells by CRISPR-Cas9-mediated targeting of Tbk1 exon 3, which is conserved in all porcine TBK1 isoforms that result in the same size protein (Figure 6A). After single cell selection and clonal expansion, cells were confirmed to lack TBK1 by both genomic sequencing (Figure 6A) and immunoblotting (Figure 6B). A clone that lacked TBK1 protein expression and in which the Tbk1 open reading frame was disrupted by frameshift mutation in both alleles was selected. In parallel to the KO line, another clonal line was generated by using an empty vector (EV) (see methods for details). The EV line exhibited similar TBK1 expression to the parental line (Figure 6B), and the single clone selection did not influence PSaV replication in these cells (Figure S3). As a further validation, we transfected the EV or KO LLC-PK1 cell lines with poly(I:C) to induce the innate immune response, and we measured the IFN-β mRNA levels by RT-qPCR. The deletion of TBK1 did not affect IFN-β basal levels, but it had a profound effect on IFN-β transcription upon stimulation (Figure 6C). We then infected TBK1 WT (EV) or KO cells with PSaV at a low MOI (1 TCID50/cell), and we measured total virus production 24 h pi by TCID50. PSaV titres from TBK1-deficient cells were 0.5-Log10 more than in WT cells, corresponding to 2.6-fold higher virus titres (Figure 6D). Taken all together, TBK1 plays a crucial role in facilitating type I IFN production in LLC-PK1 cells, and its deletion has a positive effect on PSaV replication and virus yield.4. DiscussionViruses constantly evolve to circumvent the host’s IFN response in order to establish a successful infection. PSaV Cowden strain was the first SaV to successfully propagate in vitro [12,13] and to have a reverse genetic system [14]. It is surprising, therefore, that our knowledge about SaV–host interactions is currently limited. PSaV is sensitive to type I IFN [18], and thus we sought to understand which mechanisms it utilises to counteract innate immune responses. We found that the 3C-like protease (NS6) of PSaV Cowden strain is an IFN antagonist, by inhibiting the type I IFN production at the level of TBK1. We also showed that TBK1 is targeted by NS6, and, for this, the enzymatic activity of NS6 is required. Finally, the role of TBK1 in the IFN response against PSaV was confirmed in immortalised cells deficient in TBK1. PSaV infection in these cells results in a 2.6-fold increase in viral titres.Positive-sense RNA viruses encode 3C or 3C-like proteins, which are chymotrypsin-like proteases. There is compelling evidence that various viral proteases of RNA viruses function as IFN antagonists by cleaving proteins involved in the IFN response, such as MAVS [35,36], TRIF [36], and NEMO [37]. Recent studies within the Caliciviridae family have revealed that the 3C-like proteases of human norovirus and rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) counteract the host’s immune response by cleaving NEMO [31] and MAVS [38], respectively. Whether PSaV NS6 also cleaves these proteins is yet to be determined. However, our results indicate that it also employs alternative mechanisms, as we demonstrate that it targets TBK1, which is downstream of MAVS.Despite multiple experimental approaches, we did not detect any apparent NS6 cleavage product of TBK1. Notably, porcine picornavirus and poliovirus 3C proteases have been found to induce the degradation of cellular targets without the appearance of readily detectable cleavage products [39,40]. One plausible explanation for our results is that TBK1 may undergo cleavage at a proximal site, leading to rapid instability. In contrast to the porcine picornavirus and poliovirus studies detailed above, here, we have demonstrated that TBK1 is degraded via the proteasome, as MG132 and lactacystin treatments restored both ectopic and endogenous levels of TBK1. The ability of viruses to target TBK1 is not unique to PSaV, as there is evidence of other viruses to either cleave TBK1 [41] or induce its degradation [42], as a means to impair the host’s IFN response. Here, we show that PSaV infection in TBK1 deficient porcine cells led to a statistically significant 2.6-fold increase in virus titres. This aligns with observations in studies altering TBK1 levels in both human and murine cells, resulting in a comparable effect on virus proliferation [43,44]. Moreover, the absence of other restriction factors similarly leads to a modest rise in virus titres [45], underscoring the redundancy of pathways in suppressing viral infection, and highlighting the well-orchestrated defence mechanisms against virus proliferation.Our findings indicate that TBK1 is targeted during late stages of infection, and there are several potential reasons for this observation. Firstly, it is plausible that NS6 does not co-localise with TBK1 during earlier stages of the virus life cycle, or that TBK1 activation and thus its adoption of a different structural conformation [46] are necessary for their interaction to occur. Moreover, TBK1 may hold important pro-viral roles earlier during infection. A recent study demonstrated that PSaV induces RIPK1-dependent necroptosis, which promotes virus replication [47]. TBK1, along with IKK-ε and other IKKs, phosphorylates RIPK1, negatively regulating its kinase activity and ultimately promoting cell survival [48]. Therefore, it is possible that NS6 targets TBK1 at a specific time pi to finely regulate the phosphorylation and activity of RIPK1. It should be noted that although TBK1 was deleted from LLC-PK1 cells, we do not anticipate a decrease in the expression levels of IKKs. This suggests that the kinase activity of RIPK1 may still be regulated to some extent. Finally, while our study has demonstrated that TBK1 is targeted during late stages of PSaV infection, it is important to acknowledge that the virus may exhibit additional mechanisms to circumvent the innate immune response earlier in the infection process. These mechanisms have not been examined and are the subject of future investigations.While LLC-PK1 cells have been widely used as a model for propagating PSaV, they are kidney cells and likely do not represent the natural target for PSaV. In this study, we successfully established PSaV infection in IPEC-J2 cells by supplementing the culture medium with bile acids. Specifically, we tested Glycochenodeoxycholic acid (GCDCA), although it is possible that other bile acids may enhance PSaV replication to a greater extent. IPEC-J2 cells are derived from the jejunum of neonatal piglets [23], which represents one of the natural hosts for PSaV [15]. These cells exhibit striking similarities to primary intestinal epithelial cells, making them a valuable tool for investigating the interactions between the porcine gut epithelium and enteric viruses and bacteria [49,50]. To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first instance of PSaV infection in IPEC-J2 cells. Thus, we have provided a new, relevant tool for further investigations of the PSaV replication cycle, pathogenesis, and host response in the context of the porcine intestinal environment.Our study provides the first evidence of a SaV protein acting as an innate immune antagonist. Our discovery that HuSaV NS6 also targets porcine TBK1, which shares over 96% aa identity with human TBK1, could be significant for HuSaV research. Furthermore, considering the genetic similarity between some PSaVs and HuSaVs [16], our findings may suggest a similar mechanism employed by HuSaV to circumvent the type I IFN response. Recent advancements in propagating HuSaV in diverse cell lines [11] and human intestinal enteroids [9] have expanded the opportunities for studying HuSaV. Thus, our findings offer a promising avenue to deepen our understanding of the mechanisms of HuSaV infection and its interactions with its host.


Title: Human Sapovirus in Clams, Japan

Sapoviruses and noroviruses are etiologic agents of human gastroenteritis. Human noroviruses are the most important cause of outbreaks of gastroenteritis worldwide and can be transmitted by a variety of routes, including food (1). Sapovirus infections are mostly associated with sporadic gastroenteritis in young children; however, foodborne transmission routes are yet to be determined. The most widely used method of detection is reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR), which has a high sensitivity and can also be used for genetic analysis. Sapovirus strains can be divided into 5 genogroups; GI–GV infect humans; sapovirus GIII infects porcine species. Phylogenetic studies have also designated sapovirus clusters or genotypes to further describe strains.The StudyThe purpose of this study was to detect sapovirus in the clam Corbicula japonica (bivalve mollusk) and describe the genetic diversity of the strains. A total of 57 clam packages (30–60 clams per package) were collected from supermarkets or fish markets from 6 different areas in western Japan from December 8, 2005, to September 6, 2006. The samples were shucked, and the digestive diverticulum was removed by dissection and weighed. One gram of digestive diverticulum (10–15 clam/package) was homogenized with an Omini-mixer (Sorvall Inc., Newtown, CT, USA) in 10 mL phosphate-buffered saline. After centrifugation at 10,000× g for 30 min at 4°C, the supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000× g for 2 h (SW41 Rotor, Beckman Instruments, Inc., Fullerton, CA, USA). The pellet was resuspended in 140 μL distilled water and stored at –80°C until use.RNA extraction and nested RT-PCR were performed as described (2). Briefly, for the first PCR, F13, F14, R13, and R14 primers were used; for the nested PCR, F22 and R2 primers were used. All RT-PCR products were analyzed by 2% agarose gel electrophoresis and visualized by ethidium bromide staining. RT-PCR products were excised from the gel and purified by the QIAquick gel extraction kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). Nucleotide sequences were prepared with the terminator cycle sequence kit (version 3.1, Applied Biosystems, Warrington, England) and determined with the ABI 3130 Avant sequencer (ABI, Boston, MA, USA). Nucleotide sequences were aligned with ClustalX, and the distances were calculated by Kimura’s 2-parameter method, as described elsewhere (2). Nucleotide sequence data determined in this study have been deposited in GenBank under accession nos. EF104251–EF104254.Four (7%) of 57 clam packages were contaminated with sapovirus (termed Shijimi1, Shijimi2, Shijimi3, and Shijimi4). Genetic analysis of the partial capsid gene showed that these 4 sequences shared >98% nucleotide similarity and >97% amino acid identity. Phylogenetic analysis grouped these 4 sequences in the same genotype, i.e., GI/1 (Figure). Similar sequences were found on the database (Figure). Strains from this cluster likely represent the dominant genotype worldwide (3). Three of 4 sapovirus-positive clam packages were collected from different areas and at different times (Figure). The clam packages that were contaminated with Shijimi1 and Shijimi3 were collected from the same area, but 6 weeks apart, which indicates an ongoing sapovirus contamination or resistance in the natural environment. The seasonality of sapovirus infection in Japan is unknown; however, as with norovirus, sapovirus infections may also peak during winter, although further epidemiologic and environmental studies are needed.FigurePhylogenetic analysis of sapovirus capsid sequences (≈300 nt) showing the different genogroups and clusters. Numbers on each branch indicate bootstrap values for the genotype. Bootstrap values of ≥950 were considered statistically significant for the grouping. The scale represents nucleotide substitutions per site. GenBank accession nos. for the reference strains are as follows: Arg39, AY289803; C12, AY603425; Chiba/010598F, AJ412825; Chiba000496F, AJ412800; Cruise ship, AY289804; Ehime643, DQ366345; Ehime1107, DQ058829; Houston27, U95644; Manchester, X86560; Mc2, AY237419; Mc10, AY237420; Mex340, AF435812; Parkville, U73124; Cowden, AF182760; Potsdam, AF294739; Sapporo, U65427; Stockholm, AF194182; SW278, DQ125333; water samples, DQ915088–DQ915094; and Yokote, AB253740. Boldface represents sequences detected in this study.In a recent study, we detected sapovirus strains in 7 of 69 water samples, which included untreated wastewater, treated wastewater, and a river in Japan (4). Three of 7 sapovirus sequences detected in the water samples belonged to GI/1 and shared >97% nucleotide similarity with the sapovirus sequences detected in the clam packages. Additionally, sapovirus sequences belonging to GI/1 and sharing >99% nucleotide similarity, for example, Chiba/010598F strain (Figure), have been detected in stool specimens from children with sporadic gastroenteritis in Japan (5,6). The closely matching sapovirus sequences detected in the water, clams, and patients suggest that sapovirus contamination in the natural environment can lead to foodborne infections in humans, although direct evidence is lacking. More important, a recent study found animal sapovirus in oysters and suggested that coinfection with human and animal sapovirus strains could result in genomic recombination and the emergence of new strains (7). At the same time, we recently described the first human sapovirus intergenogroup recombinant strain (8). Phylogenetic analysis of the nonstructural region (i.e., genome start to capsid start) grouped this sapovirus strain in GII, while the structural region (i.e., capsid start to genome end) grouped this strain in GIV.A large number of studies have detected norovirus in oysters. In 2 recent studies, norovirus was detected in oysters (Crassosterea gigas) harvested from geographically isolated areas in Japan (9,10). We also screened the same oyster samples for sapovirus; however, all of the samples were negative for sapovirus. That sapovirus was detected in the clam samples, but not in the oyster samples, is of interest. In the past several years, increasing evidence has emerged that human noroviruses bind to histo-blood group antigens (HBGAs) (11). These carbohydrate epitopes are present in mucosal secretions and throughout many tissues of the human body, including the small intestine, and in oyster digestive tissues. A number of studies have found that different norovirus strains exhibit different binding patterns to HBGAs and oyster digestive tissues (12,13). In a recent study, we found that sapovirus GI and GV strains showed no such binding activity to HBGAs (14). These results suggest that human norovirus and sapovirus strains have different binding receptors or that human sapovirus may not concentrate in detectable levels in oysters.ConclusionsFoodborne diseases are a major problem worldwide. We report what is, to the best of our knowledge, the first account of sapovirus contamination in food destined for human consumption. The report may represent a possible food-to-human transmission link, although direct evidence is lacking. In Japan, clams are usually boiled before they are consumed in soups. However, boiling to open the clam may not inactivate the virus (15); in addition, some areas in Japan do not boil clams before eating them. Further studies are needed to determine if boiling inactivates sapovirus and if the contaminated clams are indeed infectious. In conclusion, these novel results highlight the importance of sapovirus, in particular the GI/1 strains. A new awareness of sapovirus transmission routes is necessary and may help reduce sapovirus infections.


Title: An outbreak of norovirus infection caused by ice cubes and a leaking air ventilation valve

IntroductionNorovirus is the leading cause of gastrointestinal illness in humans worldwide [1–3]. Outbreaks are common and happen through several means of transmission (food, water, person-to-person and environment); food and waterborne outbreaks occur frequently [4, 5]. They are often followed by person-to-person transmission in households [6]. Norovirus is also the culprit of large-scale person-to-person outbreaks in health care settings and other institutions [7, 8]. In food facilities, the means of transmission has been established to be either an infected, often symptomatic food handler [9, 10] or fresh produce (or a similar product) [11, 12] that has been contaminated with the irrigation water in the growing process [13, 14]. However, a number of foodborne outbreaks remain obscure in terms of the source of the infection [15]. Ice [16–18] and drinking-water [19, 20] outbreaks are also common, often involving multiple pathogens from wastewater leaking to drinking water [21–23]. Ice usually becomes contaminated through wastewater leakage to drinking water somewhere along the water distribution line [16–18]. Airborne transmission is possible through aerosols generated by vomiting or flushing the toilet [7, 24, 25]. However, although norovirus has been detected in toilet surroundings aerosols [26], spreading through aerosolisation and vaporisation of faecal waste water has been found to be relatively uncommon [27–29]. In Europe, norovirus infections were at an elevated level in Europe at the beginning of 2017 [30]. Recently circulating strains have become more resistant and increasingly human-to-human transmissible [31].A notification regarding gastroenteritis among a group of Christmas party attendees from company A was received by the City of Tampere food authorities on 12 December 2016. After the party, which took place on 9 December and was attended by 66 persons, several had experienced severe gastrointestinal illness. The party was composed of four parts: going to the cinema, an ‘amazing race’ which took place outdoors, dinner in restaurant C and further celebrations at the nightclub D. Based on the information from the party goers from company A, all participants who fell ill had attended the dinner in restaurant C; no food was served at the other functions (excluding popcorn at the cinema). Soft drinks were also served at the cinema and a 2 dl wine bottle and another alcoholic drink were offered during the outdoor activities. A request was made to restaurant C inquiring about other possible diners. A group from company B had also organised a Christmas party at restaurant C with an identical menu for 88 of its employees on 10 December 2016. Some gastrointestinal illness was also reported among company B attendees after consulting them. Non-buffet dinner was also available for other visitors and some of the non-buffet diners reported suffering from gastrointestinal illness symptoms as well, as was learned after contacting them by phone. As contacting all of them was not possible and non-buffet menus were variable, they were excluded from the study. According to local health authorities, no excess of gastrointestinal illness had been detected elsewhere in the area.The aim of this study was to determine the magnitude of this outbreak, identify and control the source and prevent further illness in the community.MethodsEpidemiologyParticipants were enrolled by contacting the companies A and B who provided a list of participants for the events. Participants were contacted by email through a company contact person. A formal, standard cohort web-based study was conducted with Christmas party attendees from companies A and B, but excluded restaurant personnel and non-buffet diners. Dose-response questions were asked to gather information on all foods and drinks consumed and how much was eaten, with a focus on fresh produce, water and ice on drinks. Dose-response on drinks was considered with increasing consumption of ice (whether separately in a drink or by a jug of water). A case was defined as a person who experienced diarrhoea, vomiting or two other symptoms following attending a Christmas dinner party with company A or B on the 9 or 10 December 2016 at restaurant C. The descriptive analysis on symptoms was done on the entire cohort. The results were analysed using LibreOffice Calc (Linux), Excel® and R (Cran) statistical programs. For the risk ratios, profile-likelihood-based confidence intervals were used.Hygienic inspections and sampling from the restaurant's kitchen premisesAn inspection was made of restaurant C on 13, 19, 22, 23 and 27 December 2016. During these inspections, hygienic practices were reviewed, and samples were taken for study. Also, buffet menus for companies A and B were confirmed as well as food on the menu for non-buffet diners those evenings. Hygienic instructions were given regarding ice cube facilities and the air ventilation valve of the sewage system located adjacent to ice cube machines (half a metre above) was checked.Patient samplesThose who reported illness symptoms were recorded by the Infectious Diseases Control Unit and requested to submit a faecal sample. Faecal samples were also requested from three kitchen personnel after the notification of the outbreak. The faecal samples were analysed for major bacterial pathogens (salmonella, campylobacter, yersinia and shigella) by culture and viral pathogens (norovirus, sapovirus) by PCR in Fimlab (local diagnostic laboratory) in Tampere and the National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL).Water, ice and environmental samplesNo leftover foods were available for sampling. Ice and water were implicated as vehicles only from the cohort study results and samples were taken subsequently. Ice samples taken on 19 and 22 December 2016 were analysed for heterotrophic total bacterial counts incubated in +22 °C, coliforms and E. coli according to standardised methods. The air ventilation valve and its outer surface were sampled for a viral analysis on 27 December 2016. The tap water samples taken on 19 December 2016 and a flush sample from the air ventilation valve cap taken on 27 December 2016 were analysed for norovirus and sapovirus. A 2 l tap water sample was obtained using the adsorption-elution method as previously described [32]. Surface samples were collected with an EnviroSwab (3 M) and swabs were eluted with 10 ml of PBS. Mengovirus was added as a process control to the water and surface samples. Viral nucleic acids were extracted from 200 µl of the water concentrate and 2.5 ml of the surface samples using the High Pure Viral RNA and High Pure Viral Nucleic Acid Kits (Roche Molecular Biochemicals Ltd), respectively. Noroviruses were detected using primer-probe sets described in Kauppinen et al. [32]. The real-time-quantitative polymerase chain reaction assay was carried out as previously described for noroviruses [33] and for sapoviruses [34].ResultsEpidemiologyAltogether 82% (54/66) of the Christmas party attendees from company A and 55% (48/88) of the attendees from company B responded to the study. A total of 91 persons were enrolled in the study after 10 persons who had been travelling abroad (outside the Nordic countries) and one duplicate was excluded. The case definition was fulfilled by 26% (24/91) of the respondents, 17 (71%) from company A and 7 (29%) from company B. One self-reported vomiting due to a hangover was excluded from cases. As the menu was the same for both parties and the ingredients used in preparing the meals were from the same batch, the statistical analyses were combined. Of the respondents, 37% (34/91) were men. The characteristic symptoms within the cohort were diarrhoea (16%, 14/90), vomiting (15%, 14/91) and fever (16%, 15/91); general symptoms of nausea (23%, 21/91) and stomach pain (22%, 20/90) were reported as well. Two cases (2%, 2/88) were reported to have bloody diarrhoea. The distribution of onset of symptoms is presented in the epicurve, in Figure 1 and the symptoms for cases in Table 1.
Fig. 1.Epidemic curve according to onset of illness.
Table 1.Distribution of symptoms in case patientsSymptomPercentage (cases/total)Diarrhoea58 (14/24)Vomiting58 (14/24)Fever58 (14/24)Nausea79 (19/24)Stomach pain79 (19/24)Bloody diarrhoea9 (2/23)All foods and common drinks were analysed, Table 2. The water and ice cubes were combined as one response and analysed by dose response (0 = no ice, no water or only water (company B)); 1 = water (company A) or ice in any drinks (company A or B); 2 = water and ice in any drinks (company A), as the water served to attendees from company A included both water and ice. Those attending the party from company B were able to drink water, ice or both. The risk of becoming ill was 6.5 times higher if water or ice was drank compared with the non-exposed. The risk further increased to being 8.2 times higher if both were consumed compared with the non-exposed. There were 17 persons not exposed to ice or water and 15 of these were from company B. Company B attendees consumed a large amount of alcohol, so it is likely that even most of these non-exposed had ice in some drinks but recall bias might have been severe. Other foods were not significant.
Table 2.Foods and drinks consumed in restaurant C during the weekend 9 and 10 December 2016 with RR (risk ratios) and respective 95% confidence intervalsFood itemRisk ratio (RR)RR 95% CIGreen salad1.10.4–5.9Penne pasta1.80.8–5.5Marinated vegetables0.90.4–2.4Beet root terrine1.00.5–2.1Tomate-onion salad1.30.6–3.6Cold beef stake0.90.4–2.0Horseradish crème1.80.8–4.0Loaf1.10.6–2.4Cream cheese1.20.6–2.5Overcooked beef cheek in port wine1.80.7–7.2Cajun salmon0.4Non-converging (ns)Grated potatoes0.80.3–2.8Grilled vegetables1.20.5–3.9Chocolate pastry0.70.4–1.6Chocolate candy1.20.6–2.6Water or ice (on a drink)6.51.5–113.0Both water and ice (on a drink)8.21.7–145.5Patient samplesFrom the patient samples, three cases of norovirus genogroup I was diagnosed. In one of these cases, both norovirus and sapovirus were detected, as was in a symptomatic family member of the patient. Norovirus genogroup I was detected in one of the asymptomatic restaurant serving staff members. However, the positive staff member was on duty only on Saturday, 10 December, drank soft drinks with implicated ice while on duty and, therefore, was considered an unlikely source of the outbreak. None of the staff members experienced gastrointestinal illness prior to or after the incident.Water, ice and environmental samplesRestaurant kitchenThe hygienic level was reasonable, but some requests on improving hygiene were made and some equipment was slightly out of date. The personnel was experienced and they had recorded notes according to standard. No clear divergences in practices were noted and some routines were updated. In the ice cube room, there were two ice cube machines, one crushed ice machine, a washing machine and a drier (for employees work clothes), a freezer, a refrigerator, two large beer tanks and barrels of alcoholic drinks, Supplementary video S1 (taken on 27 December 2016). A large amount of extra equipment was stored in the room space, however, that was not considered a direct cause of the problem. During the inspection on 19 December, when the ice cube machines were inspected for the first time, they contained plenty of ice. There were no deviations in the hygiene of the ice cube machines or devices used to pick up the ice in the visual inspection. A visually clean scoop, stored on the top of the ice machines was used to gather the ice. The washing machine and dryer situated in the same room may have contributed to air movements. According to restaurant C employees, the laundry machines were used frequently and often during the peak time of weekends. There were a regular cleaning and maintenance protocol, which had been followed. Restaurant C was found to have conducted all recommended and agreed upon construction works during subsequent inspections. The air ventilation valve pipe and its connecting ventilation sink line was transferred to another room on 28 December, an adequate cleaning and disinfection process was carried out and completed on 29 December in the ice cube room. The completion of the recommended construction was checked by the construction unit of City of Tampere on 18 January 2017.High levels of heterotrophic bacteria (estimated levels 7000 and 7500 cfu/ml, detection limit <3000 cfu/ml) were detected on ice cube samples taken on 19 December. No norovirus was detected in the tap water taken from the tap in the room that held the ice cube machines. The ice tested negative for the faecal indicators E. coli and coliformes. Based on these results further samples were taken on 22 December from the crushed ice machine (a third machine used for ice preparation). This sampling detected heterotrophic bacteria of 140 cfu/ml and the water sample from the water pipeline system used for delivering water to the ice cube machines was negative for norovirus. During the inspection on 23 December, a dysfunctioning air ventilation valve was implicated as the most likely cause of the outbreak (see Figs 2 and 3). The cover was loose and the sealant had not been properly installed. Three surface samples from the air ventilation valve tested negative for norovirus and sapovirus.
Fig. 2.The implicated white coloured air ventilation valve and its grey connecting ventilation sink behind the ice cube machine.
Fig. 3.Black smudge on the right-hand side on the neck of the valve where the valve was leaking.DiscussionThe evidence suggests that this viral gastrointestinal outbreak among Christmas party goers was caused by contaminated ice cubes at a restaurant in the Pirkanmaa region of Finland. The ice cubes were most likely contaminated by air due to a leaking air ventilation valve located in the same room. The ice cube machines were closable, clean by visual inspection and the scoop was clean, although not in the appropriate storage location. Tap water tested negative for norovirus and was in closed tube system before reaching the ice cube machines, therefore considered an unlikely source. The washing machine and drier may have contributed to the circulation of the air in the room space. The detection of two pathogens in patient samples indicated early on in the investigation that there may have been faecal contamination on food or drink. It is not common to find two or more pathogens unless there is sewage contamination.The relatively severe course of illness (fever and some bloody diarrhoeal cases) was in line with the causative agents detected. This particular season was found to have a high rate of norovirus infection overall in the UK and presumably, the same phenomenon took place all over Europe [30]. Finnish national surveillance data from THL indicated a severe season (data not shown).The cohort study clearly implicated the role of the ice cubes as a vehicle for the outbreak. This was further supported by the high levels of heterotrophic bacteria found on the tested ice cubes [35]. As the usage of ice cubes was frequent and the machinery visually clean and regularly washed and disinfected, only an outside source could explain the high counts observed. Furthermore, normal tap water was used for the preparation of the ice cubes. As there were no leaks in the water delivery system, nor construction works, an alternative source was sought. An air ventilation valve and its connecting ventilation drain were detected in the ice machine room after cleaning the cardboards away from the top of the machines that prevented visualisation during the first inspection. Even though the evidence suggests that the ice cubes were most likely contaminated by air leaking from the faulty air ventilation valve, we only have circumstantial evidence, therefore not proving causality. More outbreaks caused by similar mechanism should be described to confirm this mode of transmission on a larger scale.The role of the air ventilation valve and its connecting ventilation drain is normally to take in the air when a toilet is flushed. As the air ventilation valve was leaking air to the room, aerosols were easily released into the room space. Surprisingly, there were no odd odours observed in the ice machine room despite it being directly connected to wastewater through the sink system and toilets. According to the constructor of the water pipeline, the air ventilation valves and their connecting ventilation sinks are routinely built up to the roof. However, some construction difficulties and heavy usage of toilets prevented this form be done in this building. According to construction authorities, this is a relatively common practice if building difficulties arise, there is heavy usage of toilets or if there are cost restraints. The room space was originally used for dishwashing but had been changed over the years to function as a space for the ice machines and storage.Leaking air ventilation valve was the most probable cause of this outbreak. This represents a novel means of transmission but may not be uncommon in other settings where norovirus outbreaks are common, including food facilities, hospitals and elderly homes. Epidemiologists and other experts on the prevention and control of infectious diseases have not previously been aware of this type of possibility in the water pipelines. There are virtually no norovirus transmission references to our knowledge in the literature involving this type of mode of transmission. The norovirus genogroup I detection from case-patients further suggested the route of transmission as waterborne as genogroup I is often associated with food or waterborne transmission [36].However, the leaking air-ventilation valve mechanism resembles the mode that was described in the outbreak of SARS that occurred in the Amoy Gardens housing block in Hong Kong in 2003 [37]. Dried-up U-traps in floor drains were concluded to be the main transmission route within Block E, the most affected of the buildings. We have identified this type of air ventilation valve and the connected ventilation sinks in food facilities, albeit in acceptable, non-high hygiene areas (data not shown). We have also noticed that drains have been largely neglected in routine inspections and that leaking U-traps are a common feature in so-called high hygiene areas of food processing facilities (data not shown). There has been some modelling work done on the spread of SARS/norovirus in housing and hospital drainage systems [38, 39]. Norovirus infection can be a huge burden in a community and a major reduction in the illness may be able to be obtained if even a modest proportion of cases can be prevented. A recently published paper suggests that a salmonella outbreak spread from contaminated drains and leaking U-traps [40]. However, as the authors of that paper did not mention why cases only occurred in carvery meat eaters and did not mention the sampling of the carvery (only significant exposure in the case-control study), the source's validity remained somewhat uncertain. All food and other hygienic facilities should be checked for the location and function of air ventilation valves, especially if norovirus outbreaks are detected.


Title: The outbreak of acute gastroenteritis caused by sapovirus at a school in Shenzhen, China, 2023

IntroductionSapovirus, a member of the caliciviridae family, is an important agent in acute gastroenteritis (AGE) (1). In developing countries and regions with limited resources, it accounts for 3–17% of acute viral gastroenteritis cases (2–5). However, studies from Asian countries such as Japan identified sapovirus as the leading cause of AGE, it is the third most common virus after norovirus and rotavirus (6). Sapovirus-induced gastroenteritis is typically milder than norovirus, and severe cases and fatalities among them are rare. Nonetheless, the AGE outbreaks caused by sapovirus in childcare facilities, nursing homes, and schools remain a significant public health concern (7). Although norovirus outbreaks in public places in China are well-documented (8, 9), there is a paucity of research on sapovirus, another member of Caliciviridae family, as a cause of AGE.Fecal-oral transmission is the primary route of human-to-human sapovirus transmission. While foodborne transmission, particularly in crowded households, is common, sapovirus can also spread through contact with vomit or contaminated surfaces (5). Direct or indirect contact with contaminated water, food, objects, or environmental surfaces can facilitate transmission (10). Some studies suggest that sapovirus may be even more transmissible than norovirus, as lower infectious dose estimates indicate (11). In recent years, while some studies have suggested airborne transmission as a significant route of transmission in sapovirus outbreaks, most studies of them lack sufficient epidemiological evidence to support this claim (12, 13).Despite the frequent reporting of acute viral gastroenteritis in China, cases caused by sapovirus are relatively rare. Molecular surveillance shows that sapovirus ranks the fourth agent causing AGE in Guangdong (14), a bustling metropolis in southeastern China's Pearl River Delta with a total of 18,000,000 population. At a school in Bao'an district of Shenzhen city, from February 6 to 8, 2023, an increasing number of students showed symptoms of vomiting. Shenzhen Bao'an Center for Disease Control and Prevention (SBCDC) was invited to identify the cause of this outbreak and curb disease spread on February 9, 2023, and an outbreak investigation including a case-control study was conducted subsequently.Materials and methodsSettingThis school has seven buildings in the campus of 38,760 square meters. Five out of them are teaching buildings accommodating 68 classrooms (shown in Figure 1). It has 3,251 students including 2,111 elementary school students and 1,140 junior high school students, 273 teachers and 62 employees. There is a cafeteria next to the teachers' dormitory, which is exclusively for teachers and staff, while students rely on ready-to-eat meals delivered by external caterers. The tab water used in this school is sourced from the municipal water supply system, which is treated by a direct-drinking machine before being provided to students and staff. The direct-drinking water was tested on February 7 of 2023, and the results demonstrated that the water follows the specified standards.Figure 1The diagram of the buildings at the school, Bao'an district, Shenzhen, China. Red indicates the classroom with cases.Epidemiological investigationOne child (child X) at the third-grade class 3 reported that she had the onset of diarrhea and vomit since at 5:00 a.m. on February 6 about 12 h after eating frozen dumplings with abnormal taste bought from a supermarket. She did not take any medicine due to symptoms gradually subsiding and then went to school regularly on February 7. She went to the washing room located at the third floor of building 2 and had diarrhea twice at 9:30 am and 12:00, respectively. She was picked home at 12:30. Although she had AGE which might be caused by an infectious agent, her vomit and diarrhea were not handled as infectious excrement timely. The location of the washing room she used is indicated as Figure 1. Despite the standard operating procedures were required when handling vomitus, some cleaners and teachers fail to adhere to them, which has resulted in inconsistent cleaning quality between various classes, which included the use of emesis bags and timely cleaning and disinfection for contaminated area.We conducted a retrospective cohort study to examine the risk factors for diarrhea or vomiting. Suspected cases were defined as events involving vomiting or diarrhea among employees, students, and their respective family members since February 1, 2023. Clinical cases were defined as suspected cases exhibiting diarrhea more than 3 times within a 24-h period. The clinical cases with PCR positive for sapovirus nucleic acid were defined as confirmed cases. We administered a structured questionnaire by telephone or in person to all the employees, students and their family members, recording demographic information and characteristics of the illness. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of SBCDC.Environments inspectEach floor of the building has a single washing room that can accommodate 5 boys and 7 girls simultaneously. But the number of students and teachers in every floor exceeds 290. Every washing room has two sinks equipped with touchless sensor faucet. There is no fixed schedule for washing room disinfection and standard operation procedure for vomit disposal. Emesis bags were not always provided for sick students in classroom. Several cases described seeing vomit in various areas, such as in restrooms, hallways, and classrooms.Laboratory investigationA total of 11 stool specimens were collected from students with AGE and then sent to SBCDC laboratory. The nucleic acids of norovirus and sapovirus were tested using commercial real-time RT-PCR kit (zybio Limited company, Chongqing, China), and rotavirus using real-time RT-PCR kit (bioPerfectus technologies limited company, Taizhou, China) according to the instructions provided by the company, respectively. The nucleic acids of bacteria and toxin genes were detected using FilmArray GI panel on Biofire®FilmArray® system (bioMérieux, Marcy I'Etoile, France). The bacteria include Campylobacter (jejuni, coli and upsaliensis), Plesiomonas shigelloides, Salmonella, Yersinia enterocolitica, Vibrio (parahaemolyticus, vulnificus and chloerae), Vibrio cholera, Enteroaggregative E. coli (EAEC), Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC), Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC) It/st, Shigella/Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC), E. coli O157. Toxin genes include Shiga-like toxin genes 1 and 2 (stx1/stx2) and Clostridium difficile (Toxin A/B).Statistical analysisAttack rate was calculated as the proportion of cases among the targeted students in the school. The data sorting and drawing were conducted by Excel 2007, and the database was established by Epidata 3.1. Comparisons of categorical data were performed using Pearson's Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test and Chi-square for trend with distance from vomitus. The odds ratio (OR) was calculated. A p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed with R 3.5.3 software (R foundation for statistical computing, Vienna, Austria).ResultsDescriptive epidemiologyA total of 436 questionnaires were distributed to all the students of 9 classes on the third floor of Building 2, with 423 being returned, resulting in a response rate of 97%. Of these, 386 were valid, yielding a validity rate of 90.1%. A total of 86 suspected cases were identified in this outbreak, including 85 students and one teacher. 65.1% were male, 34.9% female. 91.9% of them were elementary school student students, 7.0% were middle school students. 70.9% of them reported vomiting, 53.5% diarrhea, 38.4% bellyache, 14.0% feel nauseous (Table 1). 46.6% of cases experienced diarrhea only, while 29.1% had vomit only. Both of vomiting and diarrhea were reported in 24.3% of cases. Among students with vomiting, 77.0% of them vomited no more than twice, 16.4% vomited three or four times. Among students with diarrhea, 69.6% of them had diarrhea no more than twice, and 26.1% had diarrhea three or four times. This outbreak lasted for 9 days with case numbers peaking at the fourth day. It peaked at 6:00 a.m. on February 9 and ended at 12:00 on February 14. 65.1% cases were reported from building 2, followed by building 5 with 11.6% cases (Table 2). A teacher had diarrhea at 8:00 p.m. on February 8th and then asked for a leave of 5 days. The corresponding number of cases at different classrooms and offices were also shown. 53.5% of cases (46/86) were from the third floor of building 2. Among cases in building 2, 82.1% (46/56)of them were from the third floor (Table 3). The first case appeared at 5:00 on February 6, the number of cases peaked between 8:00 and 12:00 on February 9. The third, fourth, and sixth class of third grade are suspended from 12:00 on February 9 to 8:00 on February 13 due to acute gastroenteritis outbreak. Afterwards, the number of reported suspected cases declined (Figure 2).Table 1The clinical symptom profile of 86 cases in this AGE outbreak in Bao'an district, Shenzhen, China, February 2023.
Symptoms

Number

Proportion (%)
Vomit6170.9
The number uun of vomit per day
 1–24777.0a 3–41016.4a 5–623.3a 7–80- 9–1023.3a
Diarrhea
The number of diarrhea per day4653.5 1–23269.6b 3–41226.1b 5–612.2b 7–812.2bAbdominal pain3338.4Sicchasia1214.0Headache55.8Abdominal distension22.3Fever22.3Megrim11.2athe proportion is calculated using the number of cases having vomit as denominator.bthe proportion is calculated using the number of cases having diarrhea as denominator.Table 2The incidence of AGE in this outbreak at various buildings at the school in Bao'an District, Shenzhen, China, February 2023.Building No.
Case

The number of student

Incidence (%)

Chi-square


P

16241711.70.0225663365.136987471428.151019111.6Table 3The incidence of AGE in this outbreak at the school in Bao'an district, Shenzhen, China, February 2023.
Floor

Case

Number of student

%

Chi-square

p-value
34616827.4361.2<0.001251483.412100242494.151512Figure 2Date of onset of acute gastroenteritis symptoms observed in a school, Bao'an district, Shenzhen, China, February 2023.Risk factors for this AGE outbreakIn the retrospective cohort study, eating food provided by school or drinking water from direct-drinking machine was not associated with the acquisition of AGE based on univariate analysis (Table 4). Went to washing room at the third floor of building 2 is also not a risk factor with AGE. The students who had passed near a spot of vomit (<2.4 m) were more likely to get AGE with a relative risk of 5.09 (95%CI: 2.58, 10.04). To confirm the impact of the distance from vomit to student when their passing near vomit, we compared the incidence of AGE between two group of students passed near vomit less than and more than 1.2 meters (Table 5). Those students with a distance <1.2 meters from vomit are more likely get AGE with RR value of 1.94 (95%CI: 1.06, 3.55; Table 5). The case number with AGE in classrooms using standard operating procedure for vomit cleanup is obviously lower than that in ones not handling vomit according to the standard procedure (RR: 0.34, 95%CI: 0.15, 0.77; Table 6).Table 4Univariate analysis of risk factors involved in this outbreak of AGE in Bao'an district, Shenzhen, China, February 2023.
Variable

Exposed

Unexposed

Incidence(%)

χ2


P


RR (95%CI)

cases

Total

cases

Total

Exposed

Unexposed
Passed near a spot of vomit (<2.4 m)321471023421.774.2728.17<0.055.09 (2.58, 0.04)Went to washing room at the third floor on building 24033224912.054.082.74>0.052.95 (0.74, 11.83)Eating food provided by school292101317113.817.603.70>0.051.82 (0.96, 3.38)Consume direct drink water201582222312.669.870.74>0.051.28 (0.73, 2.27)Table 5The contribution of passed vomitus within <1.2 meters to the onset of AGE outbreak in Bao'an district, Shenzhen, China, February 2023.
Passed vomitus within <1.2 meters

Total number

Case

Incidence (%)

χ2


P


RR (95%CI)
Yes501632.004.66<0.051.94 (1.06, 3.55)No971616.49Table 6The contribution of cleaning vomit using standard operating procedure to the onset of AGE in this outbreak at the school in Bao'an district, Shenzhen, China, February 2023.
Cleaning vomit using standard operating procedure

Student number

cases

Incidence (%)

χ2


P


RR (95%CI)
Yes43613.97.99<0.050.34 (0.15, 0.77)No411741.46Laboratory resultsFour out of 11 stool specimens were positive for sapovirus nucleic acid while negative for norovirus and rotavirus nucleic acid. None of them were positive for bacteria and toxin genes mentioned above.Control measureFirstly, three classes were suspended from the afternoon of February 9th, and one from February 10th. The suspension will last for at least 3 days. Secondly, the school enhanced the implementation of morning checks for students attending school. Students having a fever, diarrhea, or vomiting during the morning health check will be sent home to see a doctor. All other students and staff will be monitored over 1 week. All classrooms, restrooms, and stairwells were subjected to a twice-daily disinfection regimen for a week.DiscussionIn this study, our findings indicate that sapovirus was the etiological agent contributing to this acute gastroenteritis outbreak. Although sapovirus is one of the leading causes of acute viral gastroenteritis globally, second only to norovirus in some countries, AGE outbreaks caused by sapovirus in China were reported infrequently. Generally, the symptoms of AGE caused by sapovirus are milder than those by norovirus (15, 16). As in this study, the times of diarrhea and vomit and the incidence of abdominal pain were far lower compared with AGE caused by norovirus (13). Therefore, AGE caused by sapovirus may be more likely ignored. Up to now, <15 AGE outbreaks associated with sapovirus occurred in mainland China (17–19). Among them, food was determined an infectious source in only two outbreaks while it was not defined in the other outbreaks (20). Although person-to-person transmission was the major spread mode, almost account for one-third of these outbreaks, there was no strong epidemiology evidence to support these inferences, even an index case was not found in most outbreaks. In this outbreak, it is suspected that the index case acquired a viral infection from the consumption of contaminated food, and the incubation time and symptom was accordance with sapovirus AGE.The fecal-oral route, often through contaminated food or water, is the primary transmission mode for the acute gastroenteritis outbreak caused by sapovirus (10). Among secondary cases, person-to-person transmission is the most significant mode of spread (3, 10). Although only several reports suggest airborne transmission as a major route during outbreaks of acute viral gastroenteritis caused by sapovirus, most of them lack sufficient epidemiological evidence (1, 20). In this outbreak, neither eating food nor drinking water in school did not increase the risk of getting AGE. Only being near vomit was associated with a 4.09-fold increase in the risk of getting AGE (RR of 5.09, 95%CI: 2.58–10.44). A strong correlation exists between the risk of infection and the distance from vomitus. A contact distance of <1.2 meters posed a significantly higher risk of infection compared to a distance of <2.4 meters. Our results are accordance with Chen's study where the distance of <1 meter increase the risk of getting sapovirus infection (21). In general, when sharing a classroom or washing room with the students having AGE, it is difficult to keep away their excrete. But keeping an appropriate distance from excrete may be practicable for students and staff in a school.Emesis is important in terms of riding the upper gastrointestinal tract of toxins and pathogens. Previous study revealed that splashes and droplets produced during an episode of projectile vomiting can travel great distance of more than 3 meters forward spread and 2.6 meters lateral spread (22, 23). Therefore, cleaning and decontamination of surfaces contaminated with an infectious agent post-emesis is therefore an important aspect of infection control. In our study, we found that cleaning and disinfecting vomitus in time and using emesis bag during vomit decrease AGE incidence (Table 3). As an emergency measure to curb the spread of infectious diseases in schools, the suspension of face-to-face classes is an effective measure to mitigate transmission of virus infection in children (24, 25). Compared to school closure or suspension, it is easier to require school cleaning workers using disposal emesis bag during students' vomiting and clean up and disinfect vomitus and excrete immediately.There is some limitations. Despite the suspicion that the index patient's illness was caused by the dumplings he consumed, no samples from the same batch were collected for sapovirus test. During our investigation, we discovered that only the index case ate the potential contaminated dumplings while his parents had not. In this family, only index case had AGE. This supports that dumpling was the original infectious source together with incubation time of 12 h after had dumplings. In addition, we did not identify genotype of sapovirus and test the carriage rate of sapovirus among asymptomatic population.While airborne transmission has been recognized as a significant route of calicivirus spread, robust epidemiological evidence from outbreak studies remains limited. Our research further emphasizes the importance of airborne transmission in sapovirus outbreaks. Providing emesis bags to ill students and promptly and properly cleaning contaminated areas can significantly reduce the incidence of acute viral gastroenteritis. These measures should be considered crucial for schools in preventing and controlling AGE and other infectious diseases.ConclusionOur research identified that sapovirus was the causative agent of this AGE outbreak. Airborne transmission was the primary route of infection. Prompt decontamination and the use of vomit bags significantly reduce the incidence of AGE while close contact with contaminated materials increases the risk of infection. These measures should be prioritized in public health strategies for the prevention and control of viral gastroenteritis outbreaks.


Title: Genomic Analyses of Human Sapoviruses Detected over a 40-Year Period Reveal Disparate Patterns of Evolution among Genotypes and Genome Regions

1. IntroductionHuman sapovirus is a causative agent of acute gastroenteritis in people from all age-groups. A member of the family Caliciviridae, sapoviruses are non-enveloped and their viral capsid has icosahedral symmetry. Their genomes are single-stranded, positive-sense, 3’-polyadenylated RNA molecules of approximately 7.4 kb in length. The genome is organized into two open reading frames (ORFs), which are flanked by a short 5’-end and a long 3’-end non-coding regions. An ORF3 has been predicted in some sapovirus strains, but its function is still unknown [1]. The ORF1 encodes the nonstructural proteins, including the RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and the major viral capsid protein (VP1) [1,2]. Cryo-electron microscopy and homology modeling revealed that VP1 is structurally divided into a shell (S) and protruding (P) domains; the latter further divided into P1 and P2 subdomains [3]. Based on the genetic differences of the VP1-encoding sequences, human sapoviruses are phylogenetically clustered into four genogroups (GI, GII, GIV and GV), with each genogroup further clustered into multiple genotypes [1,4]. Discrepancies in the phylogenetic clustering can occur when using different genomic regions, particularly those encoding the RdRp and VP1, and this has led to the identification of intra- and inter-genogroup recombinant strains [1,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13]. Indeed, recombination has been shown to be an important mechanism of diversification for norovirus and other caliciviruses [1,14,15]. Some of the recombination events reported for sapoviruses did not clearly describe both parental strains [5,6,7,10,13], thus the “recombination signal” might be confounded by the possibility of different evolutionary diversification patterns among sapovirus genomic regions [16].Human sapovirus symptoms can include diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, stomach cramps, and myalgia. Sapovirus-related symptoms are usually mild, and can be resolved within a few days; however, severe disease has been reported in vulnerable individuals and can result in hospitalization [11,16]. Sapovirus transmission occurs by person-to-person contact and/or by consumption of contaminated water, soil, or food [1,17]. Similar to norovirus, gastroenteritis outbreaks associated to sapoviruses occur in semi-enclosed settings, such as childcare facilities, schools, nursing homes, and catering receptions [18,19].Genomic analyses for evolutionary studies [20], epidemiological investigations [21], and transmission tracking of viral infections [22] have proven beneficial to control and prevent infections and mitigate the burden on patient care [23,24]. The use of whole, versus short, genome sequences can enhance those studies, particularly in viruses that can rapidly acquire mutations [25,26]. The application of metagenomic analyses using whole genome sequencing is increasing in use in clinical settings, because of the power and potential for obtaining longer nucleotide sequence reads of a pathogen’s genome [27]. However, in most cases, the performance of these metagenomic analyses are greatly affected by the concentration of the viral contaminant and the complexity of the food and/or water matrix [28]. Different alternatives have been implemented in recent years, such as the enrichment of viral particles and random or targeted amplification of viral genomes, to improve the performance of the metagenomic approaches for viral diagnostics and outbreak investigations [29,30,31,32]. The aim of this study was to develop a simplified full-length viral genome sequencing platform for analyses of human sapovirus genomes. This new platform was used to sequence archival sapovirus-positive samples dating from the 1970s, and together with those sequences available in public databases were used to characterize the evolutionary dynamics of human sapoviruses. A better understanding of the evolutionary process that drives viral diversification could provide insights into the development of therapeutic and control strategies against these viruses.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Fecal Samples Positive for Human SapovirusFifteen human fecal samples positive for human sapovirus were tested for full-length genome PCR amplification, sequencing, and evolutionary analysis. The samples were collected as part of a study conducted by the World Health Organization in different countries during 1976–1979 [33]. The retrospective research use of the samples in this study was approved by the NIAID Institutional Review Board. Samples were de-identified, and a waiver of informed consent was granted for this use. Four additional human fecal samples obtained from the National Virus reference Laboratory-UC Dublin confirmed positive for human sapovirus, and identified as GV.1 (GenBank accession MK291480), were tested for full-length genome PCR amplification.2.2. Full-Length Viral Genome PCR and SequencingSapovirus RNA genome was extracted from 10% stool suspensions using the MagMax Viral RNA Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA). Viral RNA genome was retrotranscribed to complementary DNA (cDNA) using the Maxima Minus First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cDNA reaction was performed immediately after viral RNA extraction to reduce damage of the long viral RNA molecules by a freeze and thaw cycle. The annealing reaction (65 °C, 5 min then hold at 5 °C) contained 5 µL of extracted sample RNA, 2 µL 100 µM of the primer TX30SXN [34], 1 µL 10 mM dNTPs and volume adjusted to 14 µL final with DNase/RNase free (DNF) water. Following the annealing step, a single 6 µL mixture containing 4 µL of 5× RT first-strand synthesis buffer, 0.1 µL Max H minus Enzyme Mix and 1.9 µL DNF water was added to each annealing reaction while on ice. The RT reaction was completed by incubation at 50 °C for 1 h, 85 °C for 5 min, then held at 4 °C and/or stored at −80 °C until use in the full-length viral genome PCR reaction.The full-length viral genome amplification was performed using a similar protocol, as described for noroviruses [35]. Briefly, the SequalPrep Long PCR Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used with 5 ul of viral cDNA and 2 µL of each (10 µM) primer pSapo27 (5’ GTGATTGGTTAGTATGGCTTCCAAGCC 3’) and TX30SXN [34]. The complete PCR reaction was run in 1% agarose gel, and the resulting full-length viral genome amplicons (~7.4 kbp) were excised and purified using the Qiagen Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen, CA, USA). The recovered amplicons were quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subjected to next-generation sequencing (NGS). The library for NGS was prepared using the Nextera DNA Flex Library Prep Kit (Illumina, CA, USA), and the paired-end 2 × 150 bp sequence reads were obtained using the MiSeq system (Illumina). Reads were quality-filtered (base quality score ≥ 20) and mapped against reference genomes to reconstruct their consensus sequence using HIVE platform [36], as described previously [37]. Newly obtained nearly full-length sapovirus sequences were deposited in GenBank (accession numbers MN794205–MN794218).2.3. Sequence AnalysesTo investigate the phylogenetic relationship and evolutionary dynamics of human sapoviruses, sequences from archival samples were analyzed with publicly available sequences. A dataset of nearly full-length genome sequences (>7000 nucleotide, n = 139), the VP1-encoding nucleotide sequences (>1600 nucleotide, n = 233), and the RdRp-encoding sequences (>650 nucleotide, n = 166) from human sapovirus genotypes were obtained from GenBank on January 31, 2019 (Table S1). Sequences from each genogroup/genotype were separately aligned using MUSCLE [38]. The phylogenetic relationship of the archival strains and reference strains from GenBank was analyzed using the RdRp- and the VP1-encoding nucleotide sequences using maximum-likelihood method implemented in MEGA7 [39]. The best substitution model of each dataset was selected, as per the Bayesian information criterion. The reconstructed phylogenetic trees were visualized using FigTree v1.4.3. The clock-like signal of the RdRp- and VP1-encoding nucleotide sequences were analyzed using inferred maximum-likelihood trees using TempEst v1.5 [40]. The root-to-tip divergence plot was constructed at the genotype level and the best-fitting root option was used to minimize the sum of the squared residuals. The evolutionary rate of the RdRp- and VP1-encoding nucleotide sequences was estimated using the Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) framework, as implemented in BEAST v1.8.4 [41]. All the analyzed genotypes showed strong clock-likeness and thus, we applied the strict clock model. The SRD06 model was used for estimating the substitution process of the sequences [42]. The population size was assumed to be constant throughout their evolutionary history. The MCMC runs were performed until the convergence of all the parameters was confirmed by visual inspection and effective sample size (>200 in all parameters), using Tracer v1.6 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/tracer/). The first 10% of the logs from the MCMC runs were removed as a burn-in, before summarizing the posterior values. The posterior values of the substitution rate were summarized using GraphPad Prism v7. To investigate the pattern of accumulation of amino acid substitutions in the VP1, the pairwise amino acid differences and the timespan of detection for each paired-strain were calculated using a Python script described elsewhere [35] and visualized using GraphPad Prism v7. Shannon entropy values were calculated using the Shannon Entropy-One tool as implemented in Los Alamos National Laboratory (www.hiv.lanl.gov). Entropy values for each amino acid position on the ORF1 and 2 were plotted and subjected to one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc multiple comparison test using GraphPad Prism v7. Entropy values for each nucleotide position at the RdRp-VP1 boundaries were calculated for human sapovirus and human norovirus for comparison. For human noroviruses, 1669 (nearly) full-length genome sequences from human norovirus GI and GII strains were obtained from GenBank on August 23, 2019. Sequences were multiple-aligned using MAFFT [43], and trimmed into the VP1-encoding region or approximately 350 nucleotides of the RdRp-VP1 junction region for the entropy analyses. Finally, the recombination signal of the archival strains (GI.1/HK37/1977 and GII.4/T003/1976) was assessed using its nearly full-length genome sequences and SimPlot v3.5.1 [44]. The nucleotide similarity (window-size 200 nucleotide and step-size 20 nucleotide) was calculated using Kimura 2-parameter model and was plotted using GraphPad Prism v7. 3. Results and DiscussionThe aim of this work was to develop a simplified full-length viral genome sequencing platform for analyses of human sapovirus genomes and evolution. To minimize the cost of sequence per sample, we decided to take advantage of a PCR amplicon-based platform that we developed to sequence human noroviruses [35]. To this end, we designed a primer that annealed to the first 27 nucleotide of the 5’-end of the sapovirus genome, which is highly conserved among strains, and together with a poly-T primer, would allow full-length viral RNA genome amplification (Figure 1a,b). The amplicons generated would serve as template for NGS analyses. The system showed successful amplification in 15 out of 19 sapovirus-positive samples tested. Representative GI, GII and GV amplicons are shown in Figure 1c. We successfully sequenced 14 full-length sapovirus genome amplicons (≥ 7402 nucleotide) from the archival samples with an average depth of 6026–22516 reads per nucleotide position (Table S2, Figure 1d). The viruses sequenced presented the following genotypes: GI.1 (n = 5), GI.2 (n = 1), GII.1 (n = 7), and GII.4 (n = 1) (Figure 2). The amplified GV virus was omitted from the analyses, as it was previously sequenced (GenBank accession MK291480). One limitation of this system is the acquisition and/or selection of mutations during the RT-PCR amplification step. We have developed a similar system for noroviruses [35], and found that RT-PCR amplification of 1 × 105 genome copies of a synthesized norovirus RNA (length: 7550 nucleotide) resulted in ≤10 substitutions/indels arising at ≤12% of all reads, with a depth of coverage ≥1000 (Tohma et al. unpublished results). Despite the ≤12% false-positives derived from RT-PCR, the robustness of this system derived from the high depth of coverage, as compared with the metagenomic approaches that provides low depth of coverage [28]. Additionally, this system provides the opportunity of analyzing multiple samples per NGS run, without compromising the depth of coverage, and thus reducing the cost for large studies. This could be useful for intra-host analyses, as well as to provide accuracy for the consensus genome assembly [28,35].To gain insight into the mechanisms of sapovirus evolution, we mined all full-length (or nearly full-length) capsid (VP1), partial viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and full-length (or nearly full-length) genomes of sapoviruses available in the public repositories. We were able to retrieve over 237 sequences from unique human sapoviruses, 125 corresponding to full-length (or nearly full-length) viral genomes, 219 corresponding to VP1, and 152 corresponding to RdRp. The majority of the public sequence data corresponded to strains detected since 2005 (186/237), and only three sequences corresponded to viruses (genotype GI.1) detected in the 1980s (Table 1). Thus, the viruses sequenced in this study provided the oldest sequence information for human sapoviruses. This is very important, as the lack of sequence information on historical viruses could lead to incorrect interpretation of the data [45], e.g., that the “oldest” sapovirus strain, GIII/Cowden/1979, detected in porcine could be the common ancestor of all sapoviruses [46]. The cleavage sites and size of the proteins from full-length genome dataset were predicted based on multiple alignment with a GII.2/Mc10/00 (AY237420) strain [47]. The cleavage sites on NS1/NS2 and NS6-NS7/VP1 were completely conserved, while others presented variation by genotypes (Table 2). The size of the proteins by genotypes are summarized in Table 3. Nonstructural and VP2 proteins showed a similar number of residues, while VP1 proteins showed a difference in its size (range 549–569 amino acids). To investigate the evolutionary pattern of human sapoviruses, we conducted phylogenetic and sequence analyses from five genotypes (GI.1, GI.2, GII.1, GII.3, and GIV.1) that presented ≥20 sequences of VP1 and/or RdRp. All five genotypes showed limited intra-genotype diversification, with mean nucleotide p-distance of 0.034–0.089 (RdRp) and 0.033–0.069 (VP1), and strong clock-like signals (evidenced by root-to-tip linear regression R2 ≥ 0.56 for RdRp and R2 ≥ 0.65 for VP1, Figure 3a,b, respectively), with a rate of nucleotide evolution ranging from 1.32 × 10−3 to 3.38 × 10−3 nucleotide substitutions/site/year (Table 4). The accumulation of amino acid mutations in VP1 was detected for GI.2 and GIV.1 viruses (≤40 amino acid mutations), while minimal changes, ≤5 amino acid mutations over 20 years, were observed in VP1 from GI.1, GII.1, and GII.3 viruses (Figure 4). Despite showing accumulation of mutations, GI.2 and GIV.1 sapoviruses showed only <7% within-genotype differences in VP1 in last 20–40 years (Figure 4). Overall diversity within the VP1 protein showed that N-terminal region and P2 subdomain are the two of the most variable regions (Figure 5) [48]. This is in contrast to human noroviruses (Figure 5) and other caliciviruses [48], which present a conserved N-terminal region and a highly variable P2 subdomain.When analyzing the full-length ORFs of all the human sapovirus strains, amino acid mutations were equally distributed among the proteins, but were relatively higher at the NS1, followed by VP1 and VP2 proteins (Figure 6a, p < 0.05 in NS1 vs. all the other proteins except VP2, p < 0.05 in VP1 vs. NS1–7, and VP2 vs. NS2-7, from a one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post-hoc multiple comparison test). The ratio of sites with entropy > 0 (i.e., sites with ≥1 amino acid mutation(s)) was calculated for each protein from the five genotypes analyzed here. NS1 still presented the higher number of mutations at genotype level (Figure 6b). GI.2 and GIV.1 viruses presented a slightly higher number of mutations on VP1 as compared with other genotypes, as was expected from their evolving pattern (Figure 4), but, overall, mutations were very limited. The contrast on the evolutionary dynamics between norovirus and sapovirus is noteworthy. While different norovirus genotypes could present multiple variants [35]; sapoviruses showed limited diversification within the genotypes in both nucleotide and amino acid level (Figure 3 and Figure 4), and none of them presented defined variants [1]. In addition, noroviruses presented a single dominant genotype, GII.4, that showed the chronological-emergence of variants; however, no globally dominant genogroups/genotypes has been reported in sapoviruses [50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57]. Thus, although the sapovirus is prevailing in low- and middle-income countries [56,58], limitations on their diversification might restrict their overall prevalence in the human population, as compared to norovirus [52,57,59,60,61].Differences in the phylogenetic clustering was detected between RdRp and VP1 sequences for two of the viruses, HK37/Hong Kong/1977 and T0003/Tunisia/1976, that we sequenced (Figure 2), suggesting potential recombinant strains. We analysed the similarity across the genome of those viruses and representative strains from each of the clusters, and noticed the lack of substantial cross-similarity of the putative recombinant strains with potential parental strains (Figure 7a). We then analysed other recombinant strains reported in the literature [6,9], and found similar patterns on their similarity across the genome with the putative parental strains (Figure 7a). Thus, for example, the GIV strain Ehime1107, which was previously described as recombinant [6], shows the highest similarity (~68% in average) with GII strains at NS proteins, but major differences (0–40%) in the similarity of VP1 and VP2 with all strains (Figure 7a). Moreover, the GIII.3 strain p2, isolated from a piglet and also reported as a recombinant [9], showed high similarity with both parental strains (GIII.2/JJ59 and GIII.3/CH430) at NS proteins, but differences on the similarity at VP1 and VP2 against those parental strains (Figure 7a). Because of the recurrent lack of both parental strains, we examined the inter-genotype/genogroup nucleotide substitution differences among the two genomic regions, i.e., RdRp and VP1, and found that the VP1-encoding region presented a higher number of nucleotide differences between the different genotypes/genogroups (Figure 7b). These differences on the number of substitutions and the lack of substantial cross-over of those putative recombinant strains suggest that recombination events reported for sapoviruses might be the result of differential phylogenetic clustering. False-positives of recombination derived from discordance of tree topologies among genes were similarly addressed in the phylogeny of mammals [62], animal mitochondrial DNA [63], influenza viruses [64], as well as tick-borne encephalitis viruses [65]. Recombination between the RdRp- and VP1-encoding genes has been extensively shown for noroviruses, and proposed to play a major role in the emergence of novel strains [14,66,67]. In sapoviruses, the RdRp and VP1 proteins are encoded in the same ORF1, while in noroviruses, those proteins are encoded by two different ORFs [15]; ORF1 and ORF2, respectively. The high frequency of RdRp-VP1 recombinant norovirus strains has been explained by the fact that the ORF1/2 junction region is highly conserved across norovirus strains, which facilitates template switching between the genomic and/or sub-genomic RNA that encodes VP1 and VP2 [67]. However, while a sub-genomic RNA that includes VP1- and VP2-encoding regions has been detected for sapovirus [68], the RdRp-VP1 junction region of sapovirus showed less conservation compared to noroviruses. These differences were mostly present at the N-terminal encoding region of VP1, as the 5’ end of the sub-genomic RNA was highly conserved in both viruses (Figure 8). Although most DNA and positive-stranded RNA viruses are regarded as prone for recombination [69,70], restrictions on recombination due to differences in the replication mechanisms have been reported for different viruses. Thus, a very low signal for homologous recombination was detected for negative stranded RNA viruses [71] and some positive stranded RNA viruses, e.g., West Nile viruses and tick-borne encephalitis viruses [72]. Therefore, differences in genome organization, the less-conserved RdRp-VP1 boundary, and/or replication mechanisms could limit diversification of sapoviruses by means of RdRp-VP1 recombination. While recombinant and putative parental sapovirus strains have been reported for multiple strains [8,11,12], parental donors for viruses have not yet been detected in nature in many cases [6,7,9]. Further surveillance and phylogenetic analyses will be needed to establish whether recombination is a major driver of sapovirus evolution. This study has filled historical gaps in the sapovirus sequence database, as well as provided a genome sequencing platform that can be easily adapted and implemented toward the studies of virus evolution, intra-host dynamics in chronically infected individuals, tracking, traceback and the intervention of clinical and foodborne/waterborne outbreaks of illness due to sapovirus [74]. Sapoviruses present limited intra-genotype diversification by means of amino acid mutations over 20–40 years. Moreover, we presented evidence that human sapoviruses may be less prone to recombination at the RdRp-VP1 boundary as compared to the noroviruses. Understanding the mechanisms of human sapovirus diversification would provide valuable information on the natural history of sapovirus infection that could be used to develop better strategies of prevention and control. References.


Title: Gastro-entérites virales des animaux domestiques et zoonoses

No full text body available.


Title: Porcine sapovirus replication is restricted by the type I interferon response in cell culture

IntroductionCaliciviruses have emerged as important pathogens for both humans and animals. Within the family Caliciviridae, members of the genera Norovirus and Sapovirus are a significant cause of viral gastroenteritis in humans worldwide (Blanton et al., 2006). Despite their importance, no efficient cell culture system to study human caliciviruses has been established (Duizer et al., 2004). Due to their similarity, the study of animal caliciviruses has provided insights into the basic biology of human caliciviruses. Currently, murine norovirus (MNV) is used as a model system as it grows efficiently in immortalized macrophage cell lines and it is possible to recover infectious MNV by reverse genetics (Yunus et al., 2010). However, MNV does not typically cause diarrhoea or gastroenteritis in immunocompetent mice (Wobus et al., 2006). To date, porcine sapovirus (PSaV) is the only calicivirus that replicates in cell culture (Chang et al., 2004), is amenable to reverse genetics (Chang et al., 2005) and reproducibly causes diarrhoea in the natural immunocompetent host (Wang et al., 2006).PSaV is known to circulate in wide geographical regions including America, Europe and Asia. In the USA, PSaV has been detected in at least 62 % of pigs tested (Wang et al., 2006). This frequency is reported to be lower in Europe with a prevalence of 11.1 %, suggesting an endemic persistence of the virus across European pig farms (Reuter et al., 2010). In Asian countries such as China, Taiwan, South Korea and Japan, PSaV shows a prevalence of between 0.6 and 40 % of the pigs examined (Jeong et al., 2007; Nakamura et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2006; Yu et al., 2012). This widespread distribution indicates the importance of swine as potential sapovirus reservoirs (Thiry et al., 2012). Whilst PSaVs have limited health implications for swine, previous reports have raised public health concerns as PSaV is genetically highly related to human sapovirus and can act as an animal reservoir for viral recombination (Martella et al., 2008). Despite this potential threat, there is limited understanding of the mechanisms of virus replication.To study the molecular basis of PSaV replication and pathogenesis, the PSaV Cowden strain has been adapted to grow in a pig kidney continuous cell line (LLC-PK), but requires the presence of bile acids, specifically sodium glycochenodeoxycholate (GCDCA) (Chang et al., 2004). A reverse genetics system has also been developed, enabling virus recovery from in vitro transcribed capped PSaV RNA (Chang et al., 2005). However, when compared with the other caliciviruses for which culture systems have been established, PSaV replication is reduced, typically producing 100–1000-fold lower titres of infectious virus than MNV (Chaudhry et al., 2007).Viruses subdue the host restriction and innate immune responses to infection using various approaches (Grinde, 2013; Oldstone, 2007). In PSaV, bile acids were identified as an essential cofactors enabling virus infection in cell culture (Chang et al., 2004). Whilst the main function of bile acids in PSaV infection is unclear, previous studies suggested a role in supporting the downregulation of IFN signalling by reducing phosphorylation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT1) (Chang et al., 2004). A number of slow-growing, vaccine and WT viruses have been propagated in IFN-deficient cell lines (Young et al., 2003). A general approach to produce IFN-deficient cell lines has been achieved by ectopically expressing viral proteins known to antagonize the IFN pathway, such as NPro of bovine viral diarrhoea virus (BVDV) or the V protein of parainfluenza virus type 5 (PIV5; formerly known as simian virus type 5) (Randall et al., 2012; Sherwood et al., 2007; Young et al., 2003). NPro is a protein product of persistent strains of BVDV and functions by preventing IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) binding to DNA as well as targeting IRF-3 for polyubiquitination and degradation by the proteasome (Hilton et al., 2006; Seago et al., 2007). The PIV5 V protein binds to MDA5 (melanoma differentiation associated protein 5) preventing its binding to dsRNA and associated downstream signalling (Childs et al., 2007). In addition, it blocks IFN signalling by targeting STAT1 for proteasome-mediated degradation (Killip et al., 2011) and interacts with RNA helicase LGP2 targeting RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene I)-dependent IFN induction (Childs et al., 2007).Based on the growing body of literature on the role of innate immune responses in controlling calicivirus replication in cell culture, we examined the sensitivity of PSaV to the type I IFN response as well as the ability of BVDV NPro or PIV5 V proteins to improve the replication of PSaV. Unexpectedly, we observed that the requirement for GCDCA during PSaV infection was independent of the innate immune response.ResultsConstitutive expression of BVDV NPro and PIV5 V in porcine LLC-PK cells inhibits the PSaV-mediated IFN-mediated signalling pathwayTo examine the effect of PSaV replication on the stimulation of the type I IFN pathway, we first examined the mRNA levels of porcine IFN-β and the 2′,5′-oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS1), and the protein levels of phosphorylated (p-STAT1) and total STAT1 during PSaV infection in the currently used LLC-PK porcine kidney cell line. As shown in Fig. 1(a, b), IFN-β and OAS1 mRNAs increased over the course of PSaV infection, resulting in a 260-fold increase in IFN-β and a 2800-fold stimulation of OAS1 mRNA levels at 48 h post-infection (p.i.). To determine whether increased OAS1 gene expression was correlated with the induction of STAT1 or p-STAT1, protein levels of STAT1 and p-STAT1 were examined by Western blotting. As expected, STAT1 and p-STAT1 protein levels were increased at 24 and 48 h p.i., but not the expression level of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) used as a control. This increase was correlated with the transient phosphorylation of STAT1 observed at 24 and 48 h p.i. (Fig. 1c). These results indicated that PSaV readily stimulated the IFN pathway and this observation led us to hypothesize that the innate immune responses might be responsible for the slow establishment of PSaV infection in cell culture.Fig. 1. PSaV infection triggers innate immune responses. (a, b) LLC-PK cells were infected with PSaV at m.o.i. 0.2 TCID50 per cell, and gene expression levels of IFN-β (a) and OAS1 (b) were analysed by quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR at 0, 24 and 48 h post-infection (p.i.). All experiments were performed three independent times and results are expressed as mean±sd from triplicate samples. Statistically significant values: *P<0.05, **P<0.005 and ***P<0.0001. (c) PSaV-infected LLC-PK cells were lysed at 0, 24 and 48 p.i., and the protein expression of STAT1, p-STAT1 and GAPDH was determined by Western blotting.To test this hypothesis, we used lentiviral vectors to generate LLC-PK cells constitutively expressing either BVDV NPro or PIV5 V proteins, two well-characterized innate immune antagonists. In brief, the BVDV NPro protein was from a non-cytopathic, persistent biotype of BVDV which could effectively block IFN production by degrading IRF3, thereby preventing the activation of the innate immune system (Peterhans & Schweizer, 2013). The PIV5 V protein, however, targeted IFN production as well as antiviral signalling by targeting STAT1, MDA5 and LGP2 for proteasomal degradation (Andrus et al., 2011; Childs et al., 2007; Randall et al., 2012).To verify the ability of NPro and V proteins to inhibit IFN-β induction and signalling in porcine LLC-PK cells, transduced LLC-PK cells were transfected with polyinosinic acid : polycytidylic acid [poly(I : C)], and the levels of IFN-β and OAS1 mRNAs were quantified by quantitative real-time (qRT)-PCR. The cellular response to poly(I : C) transfection was observed 4 h post-transfection (p.t.), suggesting that LLC-PK cells were IFN competent. IFN-β and OAS1 mRNA levels were elevated in control cells transduced with the empty vector as expected (Fig. 2a, b). In striking contrast, cells expressing BVDV NPro showed significantly reduced IFN-β and OAS1 induction when compared with the levels observed in control cells (Fig. 2a, b). In the case of PIV5 V-expressing cells, whilst IFN-β mRNA was moderately upregulated, OAS1 gene expression was readily inhibited in response to poly(I : C) transfection (Fig. 2a, b). These data indicated that BVDV NPro and PIV5 V proteins could efficiently block IFN induction and signalling in LLC-PK cells, despite them being of porcine origin.Fig. 2. Transduction of BVDV NPro and PIV5 V inhibits IFN production and signalling in porcine LLC-PK cells. (a, b) LLC-PK cells transduced with the indicated constructs were transfected with poly I : C, and levels of IFN-β (a) and OAS1 (b) mRNA levels were analysed by qRT-PCR at 7 h p.t. All experiments were performed three independent times and results are expressed as mean±sd from triplicate samples. Statistically significant values: *P<0.05, **P<0.005 and ***P<0.0001. (c, d) LLC-PK cells expressing the indicated constructs were infected with PSaV at m.o.i. 0.2 TCID50 per cell, and expression levels of IFN-β (c) and OAS1 (d) mRNAs and the PSaV protease gene were analysed by qRT-PCR at 0, 24 and 48 h p.i., and then the ratio between the expression levels of IFN-β or OAS1 mRNAs and the PSaV protease gene were graphed. All experiments were performed three independent times and results are expressed as mean±sd from triplicate samples. Statistically significant values: *P<0.05, **P<0.005 and ***P<0.0001. (e) LLC-PK cells expressing the indicated constructs were infected with PSaV, and lysed at 0, 24 and 48 h p.i. Expression levels of STAT1, p-STAT1 and GAPDH were determined by Western blotting.The effect of PSaV on the innate immune response in transduced LLC-PK cells was examined following virus infection (Fig. 2c, d). As expected, IFN-β mRNA levels were increased in a time-dependent manner during the course of infection, but were significantly reduced in cells expressing NPro or V protein (Fig. 2c). Similarly, cells expressing NPro or V protein showed significantly reduced levels of OAS1 mRNA induction (Fig. 2d). To test whether PSaV-stimulated IFN-β and OAS1 genes were correlated with upregulation of STAT1 and p-STAT1, the expression levels of STAT1 and p-STAT1 were examined by Western blotting. As shown in Fig. 2(e), STAT1 and p-STAT1 protein levels were enhanced by 24 and 48 h p.i. in control and BVDV NPro-expressing cells, but not the expression level of GAPDH (Fig. 2e). As expected, however, no p-STAT1 or non-phosphorylated STAT1 was detected in PIV5 V-expressing cells, which is known to target STAT1 for proteasomal degradation (Fig. 2e).Together, these results showed that PSaV was efficiently sensed by LLC-PK cells during infection, and that the NPro and V proteins were active in cells from porcine origin.Restriction of PSaV growth is due to production of soluble factorsTo determine if soluble factors could account for the slow growth of PSaV in cell culture, LLC-PK cells transduced with BVDV NPro, PIV5 V or empty vector were infected with PSaV and viral supernatants were collected. The supernatants were then UV-treated to inactivate any virus present. These were subsequently used to pretreat parental LLC-PK cells and the effect on virus replication was examined. As a control, incubation of cells with UV-treated supernatants did not lead to the production of detectable levels of infectious virus and confirmed the efficacy of UV treatment (data not shown). Contrastingly, preincubation of LLC-PK cells with supernatants originating from control cells resulted in a virus yield 100–1000-fold lower than that obtained from cells preincubated with supernatants from BVDV NPro- or PIV5 V-expressing cell lines (Fig. 3a). It is worth noting that the virus inoculum used to initiate infections was prepared in BVDV NPro-expressing cells to minimize any soluble inhibitory factors that might have been present in the virus inoculum.Fig. 3. PSaV infection is restricted by soluble factors. (a) Either empty vector-, BVDV NPro- or PIV5 V-transduced cell lines were infected with PSaV at m.o.i. 0.2 TCID50 per cell. Cells were harvested at 48 h p.i., and frozen and thawed twice. Clarified virus supernatants were subjected to UV exposure and used to pretreat parental LLC-PK cells for 16 h. Cells were then infected and viral replication was quantified by TCID50. It is important to note that virus stock used for inoculation was prepared from NPro-expressing cells. (b) Plaque phenotypes of PSaV were examined in monolayers of transduced cells infected with PSaV at 1 or 10 p.f.u. per plate. Representative plaques for each cell line are shown. (c) Plaque sizes were measured and analysed by ImageJ v1.44i software. All experiments were performed three independent times and results are expressed as mean±sd from triplicate samples. Statistically significant values: *P<0.05, **P<0.005 and ***P<0.0001. The dashed line was used to indicate the limit of detection by TCID50.To further characterize the role of these soluble inhibitory factors, we compared the plaque morphology of PSaV in the three cell lines. Individual plaques in cells transduced with the empty vector were small and surrounded by a ring of opaque cells (Fig. 3b). The cells surrounding the region of cytopathic effect (CPE) were likely to reflect the limitation of PSaV cell-to-cell spread, thus only small-sized plaques were formed. Plaque sizes from cells transduced with BVDV NPro and PIV5 V proteins were six to seven times larger in surface area than the plaques observed in cells transduced with the empty vector (Fig. 3c). The observed increase in plaque size was consistent with the ability of virus to spread in the absence of a functional IFN pathway.Porcine IFN-β protects cells during PSaV infectionThe results described above demonstrated that IFN-mediated signalling occurred during PSaV infection (Figs 1 and 2) and that soluble factors secreted from infected cells inhibited PSaV replication (Fig. 3). To evaluate whether IFN-β was a major component of the soluble inhibitory factors secreted during PSaV infection, parental LLC-PK and transduced cell lines were treated with recombinant porcine IFN-β produced by transient expression of the porcine IFN-β gene in human 293T cells. Protection from PSaV-induced CPE was observed down as far as a 1/64000 (1000×26) dilution of the IFN-β-containing supernatant (Fig. 4a). No protection from CPE was observed in cells incubated with control supernatant (Fig. 4a).Fig. 4. Porcine IFN-β protects cells from PSaV infection. (a) LLC-PK cells were treated with either control (Ctrl) or porcine recombinant IFN-β in a twofold dilution series and incubated for 16 h prior to PSaV infection. Plates were stained with methylene blue after 48 h and cells were observed for CPE. (b, c) A similar procedure of control and porcine IFN treatment was performed in 24-well plates before and during PSaV infection. PSaV was infected at m.o.i. 0.1 TCID50 per cell, unadsorbed viruses were washed after 3 h, and OAS1 (b) and PSaV (c) mRNA levels were quantified by qRT-PCR. All experiments were performed three independent times and results are expressed as mean±sd from triplicate samples. Statistically significant values: *P<0.05, **P<0.005 and ***P<0.0001.To quantify the protection provided by IFN-β against PSaV infection, qRT-PCR analysis was performed following IFN-β treatment and virus infection. IFN-β treatment resulted in a 120-fold increase in OAS1 mRNA when compared with mock-treated samples. In PSaV-infected cells, a 620-fold increase in OAS1 mRNA was observed that was reduced to 270-fold when cells were pretreated with IFN-β (Fig. 4b). This decreased effect correlated with a >23-fold reduction in viral RNA production, confirming the IFN sensitivity of PSaV (Fig. 4c). Taken together, an IFN-mediated signalling pathway was evoked during PSaV infection in the cells.Bile acid requirement for PSaV growth is independent of the IFN responseThe replication of PSaV Cowden strain in LLC-PK cells is absolutely dependent on the presence of GCDCA – a conjugated bile acid (Chang et al., 2004). Previous studies suggested that the requirement for GCDCA may be dependent on the initial cAMP and STAT1 signalling pathways, modulating host gene expression that resulted in enhanced PSaV replication (Chang et al., 2002, 2004). However, the exact mechanism for the requirement for GCDCA remains unknown. To examine the effect of GCDCA on STAT1 and p-STAT1 during PSaV infection of naive LLC-PK cells, the expression levels of total STAT1 and p-STAT1 were analysed in the presence and absence of GCDCA with PSaV infection. The levels of STAT and p-STAT1 were enhanced upon sapovirus infection irrespective of GCDCA addition (Fig. 5a). To further investigate the role of GCDCA in relation to the IFN response, LLC-PK cells expressing either BVDV NPro, PIV5 V or transduced with the empty vector were infected with PSaV in the absence or presence of GCDCA. Bile acids dramatically increased PSaV titres in all cell lines analysed (Fig. 5b). These data suggested that the requirement of PSaV for GCDCA in cell culture is independent of IFN pathway inhibition and could be related to other cellular pathways.Fig. 5. PSaV virus yield is improved in IFN-deficient cell lines, but independent of any GCDCA requirement. (a) PSaV was inoculated into LLC-PK cells in the absence or presence of GCDCA. Cells were lysed at 24 h p.i., and protein expression levels of STAT1, p-STAT1 and GAPDH were examined by Western blotting. (b) Subsequently, an infection assay was performed in either empty vector-, BVDV NPro- or PIV5 V-transduced cell lines. Cells were infected at m.o.i. 0.2 TCID50 per cell in the absence or presence of GCDCA (200 µM) and virus yield was measured at 48 h p.i. by TCID50. (c) Multistep growth kinetics of PSaV was characterized in the three cell lines at 6, 12, 24 and 48 h p.i. All experiments were performed three independent times and results are expressed as mean±sd from triplicate samples. Statistically significant values: *P<0.05, **P<0.005 and ***P<0.0001. The dashed line was used to indicate the limit of detection by TCID50.To characterize the replication kinetics of PSaV in IFN-deficient cells, a multi-cycle growth curve analysis was performed in the transduced cell lines in the presence of GCDCA (Fig. 5c). We observed a rapid increase in virus titre from 6 to 24 h p.i. in all of the cell lines; however, in the cell line transduced with the empty vector, virus replication plateaued at 24 h p.i. In striking contrast, virus titres obtained from BVDV NPro- and PIV5 V-expressing cells continuously increased over time up to 48 h p.i., resulting in a final titre ~100-fold higher in cells expressing BVDV NPro or PIV5 V proteins (Fig. 5c, d). These data clearly showed that in cell lines where the innate immune response was attenuated, viral replication was greatly enhanced, enabling multiple cycles of reinfection.Inactivation of the IFN response in porcine cells enhances the ability to recover PSaV by reverse geneticsThe observed increased replication in PSaV growth in IFN-deficient cell lines enabled the production of high-titre virus stocks (>107 infectious units ml−1) and may, therefore, allow the replication of debilitated viruses obtained by reverse genetics. Indeed, virus recovery by reverse genetics is intrinsically limited by cellular responses that often result in suboptimal virus production and recovery (Yunus et al., 2010). To investigate whether BVDV NPro- and PIV5 V-expressing cells allowed more efficient recovery of infectious PSaV by reverse genetics, we initially examined the virus yield following transfection of VPg-linked viral RNA isolated from infected cells (Fig. 6a). The yield of infectious virus recovered from BVDV NPro- and PIV5 V-expressing cells was typically ~13-fold higher than the yield obtained from control cells (Fig. 6a). The ability to rescue recombinant PSaV from in vitro transcribed capped RNA produced from a PSaV cDNA clone was also improved (Fig. 6c). Interestingly, we observed that the presence of either BVDV NPro or PIV5 V protein significantly reduced the toxicity of RNA transfection in LLC-PK cells. We observed significant levels of CPE 15 h p.t. of capped RNA in cells containing the vector alone, whereas BVDV NPro- or PIV5 V-transduced cells displayed a normal morphology (Fig. 6b). As reported previously, transfection of LLC-PK cells with RNA resulted in the rapid appearance of toxicity that was not linked directly to viral replication (Nguyen et al., 2014). Titration of virus recovered from the initial transfection indicated that the observed CPE was not reflective of virus replication. Given that this apparent transfection-induced toxicity was not observed in either BVDV NPro- or PIV5 V-expressing cell lines (Fig. 5b), it is likely to have been a reflection of the activation of the innate immune response leading to apoptosis and cell death (Apelbaum et al., 2013; Bekisz et al., 2010). The yield of recombinant virus recovered either after the initial transfection or subsequent passage in the same cell type was significantly enhanced in either BVDV NPro- or PIV5 V-expressing lines, highlighting the utility of these lines for the improved recovery of recombinant PSaV in cell culture.Fig. 6. PSaV reverse genetics generates better infectious yield in IFN-deficient cell lines. (a) VPg-linked PSaV RNA extracted from parental LLC-PK cells was transfected into IFN-competent and -deficient cell lines. Virus yield was quantified for each cell line by TCID50. (b) Capped in vitro transcribed PSaV RNA was transfected to the same cell lines and observation of CPE-like reactions was evident after 20 h p.t. in the vector-containing cells. Bar, 10 µm. (c) Capped in vitro transcribed PSaV was transfected into IFN-competent and -deficient cell lines. Cells were harvested at 4 days p.t. and recovered infectious virus was titrated by TCID50. All experiments were performed three independent times and results are expressed as mean±sd from triplicate samples. Statistically significant values: *P<0.05, **P<0.005 and ***P<0.0001. The dashed line was used to indicate the limit of detection by TCID50.DiscussionPSaV is a prototype enteric sapovirus and is closely related to human sapoviruses that, together with human noroviruses, are well established as major causative agents of gastroenteritis outbreaks worldwide in humans (Blanton et al., 2006; Chang et al., 2005; Glass, 2013). PSaV remains the only cultivable member of the genus Sapovirus and represents therefore a useful model to understand sapovirus pathogenesis (Chang et al., 2002, 2004). However, molecular studies on PSaV remain difficult due to slow virus replication and the low viral yield obtained from reverse genetics. Therefore, we aimed to examine the mechanism behind the reduced viral growth in cell culture to enable us to better understand the molecular mechanisms of PSaV replication and pathogenesis.Although several factors may contribute to the low virus yield in immortalized cells, studies on other caliciviruses have indicated that one of the most important factors is the sensitivity to the host innate immune response (Changotra et al., 2009; McFadden et al., 2011). Thus, the control of IFN or other related restrictive factors becomes the critical determinant in obtaining higher titres of PSaV and more efficient virus recovery. Recent studies have demonstrated the critical effect of type I IFN on MNV-1 viral production, and it was demonstrated that a STAT1-dependent IFN pathway plays a key role in controlling MNV replication both in vitro and in vivo (Changotra et al., 2009; Karst, 2011). Many viruses have evolved diverse strategies to avoid or antagonize the innate immune response, yet there are a number of viruses that still have unknown or limited evasion mechanisms. In most cases, however, these viruses are particularly slow-growing or attenuated strains. Notably, viruses with this characteristic, including respiratory syncytial virus, bunyaviruses and human enteric adenovirus, are known to grow better in IFN-deficient cell lines (Sherwood et al., 2007; Young et al., 2003).To date, none of the characterized sapovirus proteins are known to antagonize the IFN response. Our observation that IFN-β and OAS1 mRNA levels are significantly increased during PSaV infection in LLC-PK cells led us to hypothesize that PSaV is restricted by the IFN-β-dependent innate immune response in cells. Our data are consistent with this hypothesis as we observed improved PSaV replication using cell lines deficient in IFN production or signalling (Figs 2 and 5). Following on from these observations, we were able to use these novel cell lines to provide a more robust cell culture system for PSaV and to improve the current reverse genetics system (Figs 3–6).Incorporation of BVDV NPro or PIV5 V proteins was chosen because they are known viral gene products that have the ability to evade the innate immune system, and have shown improvement of virus growth either in bovine and human cells (Hayman et al., 2007; Pérez-Cidoncha et al., 2014; Young et al., 2003). In particular, constructed human A549 cells constitutively expressing BVDV NPro and PIV5 V proteins enhanced replication of avian viruses compared with unmodified cells (Hayman et al., 2007). Considering these previous reports, the NPro and V proteins were used to generate pig cells deficient in their ability to induce the type I IFN response. Strikingly, these cell lines showed a 100–150-fold increase in PSaV replication (Fig. 5). To our knowledge, this is the first report showing the generation of a IFN-deficient cell line in a porcine system and this could be a useful strategy for other pig viruses as a way to curb the innate immunity restricting virus growth in cell culture.Previous studies and the findings by the current study demonstrate that transfection of LLC-PK cells with DNA or RNA rapidly results in cell death. Whilst not confirmed in the current study, given that BVDV NPro- or PIV5 V-expressing cells did not show the same response to transfection of viral RNA, we would predict that the effect is due to activation of the innate immune response leading to apoptosis, as described previously (Chattopadhyay et al., 2010). The differences in viral titres seen in Fig. 5(c) at 48 h also agree with this observation. The abrogation of the innate immune response in LLC-PK cells provides a robust system for the study of PSaV replication and an improved method to recover mutated PSaV isolates from cDNA-containing constructs. The generated IFN-deficient cell lines may underscore future studies on the significance and roles of viral and cellular proteins during PSaV replication in the host cell.Although the addition of bile acids including the GCDCA is an essential cofactor for PSaV replication in cell culture, the mechanisms of action of bile acids have yet to be fully elucidated. Previous observations suggested that at least part of the effect of bile acids is to suppress the IFN response by decreasing p-STAT1 levels (Chang & George, 2007; Chhatwal et al., 2012). Our data showed that even in the presence of GCDCA, replicating PSaV stimulated the IFN-mediated pathway, leading to induction of IFN-β, OAS1, STAT1 and p-STAT1 gene expression (Fig. 1). Moreover, PSaV growth in BVDV NPro- and PIV5 V-expressing cells remains dependent on the presence of GCDCA (Fig. 5). These data suggest that the function of GCDCA is unrelated to the IFN immune response or that it may regulate an as yet unknown aspect of the innate immune response that is unaffected by the expression of BVDV NPro or PIV5 V protein. It is important to note that PIV5 V protein degrades STAT1 and, despite this, GCDCA is still required to allow PSaV growth. Therefore, we can conclude that the previously reported effect of GCDCA on STAT1 phosphorylation is not the mechanism by which bile acids facilitate PSaV replication. This hypothesis is in agreement with a study demonstrating a role for bile acids in PSaV entry, particularly facilitating the viral release from late endosomes into the cytoplasm (Shivanna et al., 2014). Bile acids have been shown to play other roles in the life cycle of important viruses. In the case of hepatitis C virus, it has been suggested that bile acids facilitate membrane alterations that could promote RNA replication, recruitment of essential cellular cofactors or activation of viral factors (Chhatwal et al., 2012).Overall, we demonstrated that the IFN response is activated during PSaV infection in the presence of bile acids, resulting in slow growth of PSaV. The use of innate immune-deficient cells successfully facilitated the efficient replication of PSaV in cell culture, leading to improved recovery of PSaV by reverse genetics. The establishment of a more efficient cell culture system for PSaV here should greatly assist in the advancement of molecular studies on host–cell interactions and life cycle, clinical diagnosis, and future vaccine development for sapoviruses.MethodsCell lines and virus.Parental LLC-PK cells and transduced cells were grown in Eagle’s minimal essential medium (EMEM) supplemented with 10 % (v/v) FCS, 100 U penicillin ml−1 and 100 µg streptomycin ml−1 at 37 °C with 5 % CO2. Infectious particles of a tissue-culture-adapted PSaV Cowden strain were recovered from full-length infectious cDNA clone pCV4A (a kind gift from Dr K. O. Chang, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, USA) and propagated in LLC-PK cells supplemented with 200 µM GCDCA (Chang et al., 2005).Lentivirus vector particle production and transduction.Vesicular stomatitis virus G-protein-pseudotyped lentiviral particles were generated by transient transfection of 293T cells grown in 100 mm culture plates using 6 µg lentiviral vector, 6 µg psPAX2 and 3 µg pMD2.G. Parental LLC-PK cells were then transduced with lentiviral supernatants and incubated for 48 h. Transduced LLC-PK cells were selected on the basis of their resistance to puromycin at a concentration of 2 µg ml−1. PSaV infection.Parental or lentivirus-transduced LLC-PK cells were infected with PSaV at m.o.i. 0.2 TCID50 per cell in 250 µl for 3 h at 37 °C with intermittent shaking every 15 min for the first hour. Unabsorbed inoculum was then removed and cells were washed with EMEM in the presence or absence of GCDCA at 37 °C. Supernatants were harvested at 0, 6, 12, 24 and 48 h p.i., depending on the experimental setup, and titrated by TCID50.Virus inactivation from PSaV-infected cells.Lentivirus-transduced LLC-PK cells containing either empty, BVDV NPro or PIV5 V vectors were infected with PSaV as described above. Viral supernatants were harvested at 48 h p.i., frozen and thawed twice, and clarified by centrifugation at 13 400 g for 1 min. Each supernatant was then placed separately in 24-well plates to a fluid depth of 10 mm and exposed to 4000 mJ from a UV source for 12 min at 4 °C. Loss of viral infectivity due to UV exposure was confirmed by titration of inactivated virus preparations by TCID50. Inactivated virus supernatants were incubated back to parental LLC-PK cells for 16 h at 37 °C. Incubated cells were washed and inoculated with PSaV (m.o.i. 0.2 TCID50 per cell) as described above. Viruses were harvested at 48 h p.i. and titrations in different cell lines were performed using TCID50.qRT-PCR analysis.Total cellular RNA was extracted using a GenElute Mammalian Total RNA Miniprep kit (Sigma) and 100 ng was subsequently reverse transcribed using random hexamers. Primers were designed to amplify fragments of ~200 bp of IFN-β, OAS1, β-actin and PSaV, and the β-actin gene was used as an internal reference gene. Primer sequences were: IFN-β, 5′-GGAGCAGCAATTTGGCATGT-3′ (forward) and 5′-TGACGGTTTCATTCCAGCCA-3′ (reverse); OAS1, 5′-GATGGAGCTGAGGCATACCC-3′ (forward) and 5′-GGAGCCACCCTTCACAACTT-3′ (reverse); β-actin, 5′-TCTACACCGCTACCAGTTCG-3′ (forward) and 5′-GCTCGATGGGGTACTTGAGG-3′ (reverse); and PSaV, 5′-CAACAATGGCACAACAACG-3′ (forward) and 5′-ACAAGCTTCTTCACCCCACA-3′ (reverse). Standard curves were generated for all the genes measured. The values of mRNA were expressed as the quantity of the gene of interest relative to the quantity of the reference gene to obtain normalized expression values. Each sample was performed in triplicate on the same qRT-PCR plate in two independent experiments. Additional non-template and non-reverse transcriptase samples were analysed routinely as negative controls. Data were collected using a ViiA 7 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems).TCID50 assay.Ten-fold serial dilutions of clarified virus supernatants were prepared in EMEM supplemented with 200 µM GCDCA. Of these dilutions, 200 µl was inoculated to monolayers of parental LLC-PK cells grown on 96-well plates and incubated at 37 °C in a 5 % CO2 incubator. Virus titres were collected at 6 days p.i. and expressed as TCID50 ml−1 values by the Reed–Muench method (Reed & Muench, 1938).Plaque phenotype analysis.Briefly, 800 µl diluted virus stock or media alone was inoculated on LLC-PK monolayers (37 °C, 3 h) and gently shaken for the first hour every 15 min to allow virus adsorption. Cell monolayers were then washed and overlaid with 1.3 % (w/v) Avicel-containing EMEM supplemented with 2.5 % (v/v) FBS, 0.225 % (v/v) sodium bicarbonate and penicillin/streptomycin. Plates were incubated at 37 °C for 4 days. After incubation, the Avicel mixture was removed, and cells were fixed and stained with 1.6 % (w/v) methylene blue and 10 % (v/v) formaldehyde solution in 1× PBS for 30 min. Plates were washed with distilled water until the desired staining intensity was achieved. Plaque sizes were measured by capturing images using an inverted fluorescence microscopy (×4 magnification) using QCapture Pro version 5.0.1.26 (QImaging). Resulting images were analysed using ImageJ v1.44i software to the measure surface area (mm2) of individual plaques.Virus rescue from VPg-linked PSaV RNA or capped in vitro transcribed PSaV cDNA clones.LLC-PK cells containing either BVDV NPro, PIV5 V or empty vectors were seeded at a density of 1.2×105 cells per well of a 24-well plate and transfected with 0.2 µg of either mock, VPg-linked PSaV RNA or capped in vitro transcribed PSaV RNA using 0.8 µl Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). VPg-linked PSaV RNA was prepared from total RNA extracts from PSaV-infected cells. Capped in vitro transcripts were derived from the full-length PSaV cDNA clone pCV4A. Transfections were carried out for 4 h, and media was replaced with EMEM containing 2.5 % (v/v) FCS and 200 µM GCDCA. At 48 h p.t., cells were harvested, frozen and thawed twice, and then titrated by TCID50. Supernatants harvested from transfection of capped RNA transcripts were further inoculated to freshly seeded cells and harvested after the appearance of CPE. Plates were again frozen and thawed twice, and virus recovery was evaluated by TCID50.Recombinant porcine IFN-β production.A DNA fragment encoding porcine IFN-β was amplified by PCR using cDNA originated from LLC-PK. The forward primer, 5′-AAAAGGATCCGCCACCATGGCTAACAAGTGCATCCTCC-3′, and reverse primer, 5′-AAAATCTAGATTAGTTCCGGAGGTAATCTGTAAG-3′, were used. The BamHI restriction site (underlined) and Kozak sequence (bold) are indicated in the forward primer sequence, and the XbaI restriction site (underlined) is indicated in the reverse primer sequence. The PCR fragment was then cloned into pcDNA3.1 using BamHI and XbaI restriction sites. All amplified regions were verified by Sanger sequencing. The resulting pcDNA3.1 plasmid encoding the porcine IFN-β was then transfected in 293T cells using Lipofectamine 2000. Cell supernatant containing porcine IFN-β was harvested 24 h p.t. and used as IFN-β. Control IFN was obtained from supernatants collected from cells transfected with pcDNA3.1.IFN-β protection assay.Control or IFN-β supernatants were prepared at 1 : 100 dilution of the original stock and serial twofold dilutions were prepared in 96-well plates. LLC-PK cells were incubated with serial dilutions for 16 h and infected with PSaV using 400 TCID50. Control or IFN-β dilutions were left on the cells until harvest at 48 h p.i. Cells were fixed and stained with methylene blue as described earlier for plaque phenotype analysis. LLC-PK cells were seeded in 24-well plates and treated with 1/1000 dilution of IFN-β. PSaV were infected at m.o.i. 3.0 TCID50 for 3 h at 37 °C with shaking for the first hour every 15 min to allow virus adsorption. Unadsorbed viruses were washed and viral RNA was extracted at 24 h p.i. for qRT-PCR analysis.Statistical analysis and software.Statistical analyses were performed on triplicate experiments using the two-tailed Student t-test (Prism 6 version 6.04). Figures were generated using Adobe Photoshop CS3 and Prism 6 version 6.04.


Title: Incidence of human sapovirus outbreaks in Beijing, China, 2014–2021: predominance of genotypes GII.3 and GI.2

BackgroundDiarrhea is one of the major causes of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) globally, accounting for 3.2% of the total DALYs across all age groups [1]. With the development and widespread use of rotavirus vaccines, the burden of diarrhea and acute gastroenteritis (AGE) is increasingly associated with viruses in the Caliciviridae family, including norovirus and sapovirus [2,3]. Sapovirus is an important cause of AGE worldwide, leading to outbreaks and sporadic cases [4]. Reports of sapovirus outbreaks have been increasing in recent years in South Asia, Europe, and North America [5,6], with sapovirus accounting for 1.3% and 8.0% of AGE outbreaks [1,7–9]. Although sapoviruses had a lower reported incidence than noroviruses, they posed a considerable public health concern, leading to AGE outbreaks in various environments (daycare centres, schools, hospitals, nursing homes, restaurants, cruise ships, etc.) and among different age groups, with the largest reported sapovirus outbreak resulting in 665 infections [1,10]. Furthermore, sapoviruses frequently co-circulate with other enteric viruses [1].The genome of sapovirus is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA, ranging in size from 7100 to 7700 (base pairs, bp), divided into two open reading frames (ORFs) [4]. ORF1 encodes a large multi-protein and the major capsid protein VP1, and ORF2 is predicted to encode a minor structural protein VP2 [4]. Sapoviruses have been detected in several animals: pigs, mink, dogs, sea lions, and bats[1]. Human sapovirus can be divided into 17 genotypes including GI.1 to GI.7 of GI, GII.1 to GII.7 of GII, GIV.1 of GIV, and GV.1 and GV.2 of GV [11]. A recent study suggested that the history-reported “recombination events” in sapoviruses might result from differential phylogenetic clustering rather than real-recombination [12]. This phenomenon aligns with false recombination observed in other systems – such as mammals [13], influenza viruses [14], and tick-borne encephalitis viruses[15] – where discordant topologies of phylogenetic trees can lead to misinterpretations[16]. Globally, GI and GII are the predominant genogroups, with often identified genotypes comprising GI.1, GI.2, GI.3, GII.1, GII.2, GII.3, and GII.5; nevertheless, the prevalent genotypes exhibited regional variation in prior studies [16–21].As previous studies in China have predominantly concentrated on single or limited sapovirus outbreaks [22], there is an urgent need for comprehensive research across a broader range of outbreaks to elucidate the epidemiological characteristics and genetic diversity of sapovirus, thereby providing a stronger foundation for the prevention and control of sapovirus-associated acute gastroenteritis. Therefore, based on surveillance of AGE outbreaks in Beijing from 2014 to 2021, this study aims to explore the epidemiology, clinical symptoms, genotype variation, and complete genome characteristics of sapovirus outbreaks among humans in Beijing.Materials and methodsData sourceCases of AGE were defined as patients presenting with diarrhea (three or more loose stools within 24 hours) and/or vomiting (one or more episodes). An outbreak was characterized by three or more epidemiologically linked cases of AGE within three days. Most AGE outbreaks were reported to community health centres by local schools, kindergartens, and other institutions; these centres subsequently reported the outbreaks to district-level Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in Beijing, China. A limited number of outbreaks were reported directly to district-level CDCs through public complaints and hospital clinics. District-level CDCs conducted preliminary investigations within 24 hours of receiving a report, and fecal specimens were collected from cases within 48 hours of initiating the investigation. During these investigations, Norovirus and other enteric pathogens were detected. A sapovirus outbreak was confirmed if more than two AGE cases tested sapovirus positive using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR).The transmission modes of sapovirus outbreaks, including foodborne, waterborne, and person-to-person transmission, were identified using descriptive epidemiology. sapovirus-positive specimens were sent to the Beijing CDC, and 2–5 specimens per outbreak were selected for sequencing.Viral RNA extraction and sapovirus detectionFollowing the manufacturer's instruction, a QIAmp Viral RNA Mini Kit (cat no. 52906; QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was used to extract viral RNA from 140 µL of a 10% fecal suspension in phosphate-buffered saline. Approximately 60 µL of the RNA eluate was recovered in nuclease-free tubes. RNA was stored at 4 oC for immediate use or at −20 °C for long-term storage. The identification of sapovirus RNA was used by the RT-qPCR detection kit (cat no. YJC50302; Bioperfectus Medical Ltd., Taizhou, China).Genotyping of sapovirusesThe genotypes of VP1 and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) genes of sapoviruses were amplified through RT-PCR using specific primers and the One-Step RT-PCR Kit (cat no. 210212; QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) in a 50μL reaction volume [1,23]. The VP1 region was amplified using primers SLV5317/SLV5749, with SVpol’ A/SLV5749 and SVpol’ B/SLV5749 as backup primers if amplification failed[1,24]. The RdRp region was amplified using primers 289H/289I/290H/290I290J/290 K, with SR80-GI.1-3/JV33, SR80-GI.2/JV33, SR80-GII.1–2/JV33, SVS1 /SRGA, and SRGE /SRGS2A as backup primers if amplification failed [1,24,25]. The sequences of specific primers for VP1 and RdRp genes are shown in Supplementary Table 1. The thermal cycling parameters were as follows: 50°C for 30 min, 94°C for 15 min; 40 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 1 min; and a final extension at 72°C for 7 min. The PCR products were purified and sequenced directly (Sanger Biotechnology Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China), and consensus sequences were assembled using BioEdit software, version 7.0.9. The genotypes of the VP1 and RdRp genes were confirmed using both classifications (https://calicivirustypingtool.cdc.gov/Info.html) and the phylogenetic analysis.Phylogenetic analysisThe phylogenetic trees for VP1 and RdRp genes were constructed using the Beast software (version 1.10.4). The HKY substitution model was evaluated using jModelTest software (version 2.7.1), and the uncorrelated relaxed lognormal molecular clock along with the GMRF Skyride method for demographic reconstruction were chosen as coalescent parameters. Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo analysis was conducted for these iterations, with 10% discarded as burn-in and sampling occurring every 100,000 steps. All reference sequences were obtained from GenBank. The gene sequences used in this study were submitted to GenBank with accession numbers PQ30032-PQ30067 and PQ319936-PQ320108.Sequencing of the whole genome of GI.2 and GII.3 sapovirusesThe whole genome of the GI.2 and GII.3 sequences were divided into 17 and 21 fragments separately and amplified by multiplex RT-PCR with special primers in Supplementary Tables 2 and 3. The first step of amplification for GII.3 and GI.2 was conducted separately in two tubes using mixtures of odd-numbered and even-numbered primers specific to GII.3 and GI.2, respectively. Reverse transcription was performed using the LunaScript® RT SuperMix Kit (Cat. No. NEB #M3010; New England Biolabs, Massachusetts, USA) in a 10 μL reaction volume, with odd-numbered primers used individually. The thermal cycling parameters were as follows: 25°C for 5 min, 55°C for 20 min; 95°C for 1 min; and a final store at 4°C. The second step used Q5® Hot Start High-Fidelity 2X Master Mix (cat no. NEB #M0505; New England Biolabs, Massachusetts, USA) in a 25μL reaction volume. The thermal cycling parameters were as follows: 98°C for 30 s; 35 cycles of 98°C for 15 s, 65°C for 5 min; and final store at 4°C. The PCR products were subjected to second-generation sequencing, using the Nextera XT library preparation kit (cat no.FC-131-1024; Illumina, California, USA) for library construction. The library was sequenced using miniSeq, and the sequencing data was assembled and mapped using CLC Genomics Workbench 23.0. The nucleotide sequences used in this study were submitted to GenBank under accession numbers PQ320109–PQ320118.Statistical analysisThe data were analyzed with R software version 4.3.1. The socio-demographic characteristics data and laboratory results were double-entered and validated. The districts of Dongcheng, Xicheng, Haidian, Chaoyang, Fengtai, and Shiijngshan were defined as “urban,” Changping, Shunyi, Tongzhou, Mentougou, and Daxing were defined as “suburban,” and Miyun, Yanqing, Pinggu and Huairu were defined as “outer suburbs.” All variables were initially assessed for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. For data being nonnormal distribution, Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance by ranks (Kruskal-Wallis H test) was used in subsequent analyses. Kruskal-Wallis H test was used to compare the differences in duration, number of cases and attack rates, settings, and different transmission modes. Chi-square tests were applied for categorical variables to identify the difference in rates or composition ratios between different groups. Statistical significance was assumed for p < 0.05 (two-tailed).ResultsTemporal distribution of sapovirus outbreaksFrom 2014 to 2021, a total of 3,155 outbreaks of AGE were reported in Beijing. Among these, 216 (6.85%, 216) outbreaks were associated with sapovirus, making it the second most common virus cause after norovirus (48.97%, 1,545) and more frequently identified than astroviruses (1.46%, 46), enteric adenoviruses (0.67%, 21), and rotaviruses (0.41%, 13). Of the 216 sapovirus outbreaks, 195 outbreaks were solely attributed to sapovirus infection, and 21 outbreaks were mixed infections involving sapoviruses and other pathogens.The temporal distribution is shown in Figure 1. No sapovirus outbreak was reported in 2014, and the first outbreak was detected in Beijing in October 2015. The proportions of sapovirus outbreaks among all AGE outbreaks varied over the years (p < 0.05), with 0% (0/42) in 2014, 3.77% (2/53) in 2015, 4.76% (5/105) in 2016, 6.43% (44/684) in 2017, 0.59% (3/510) in 2018, 10.22% (47/460) in 2019, 2.96% (17/574) in 2020, and 13.63% (98/719) in 2021. Three peak years were observed in 2017, 2019, and 2021 with 44, 47, and 98 outbreaks, respectively, and higher peak-to-mean ratios (range: 2.38–3.58) compared with other years (range: 1.00–2.06).
Figure 1.The temporal distribution of the sapovirus outbreaks in Beijing, China between 2014 and 2021 The overall number of acute gastroenteritis outbreaks (total bars), sapovirus-associated outbreaks (blue segments), and the monthly proportion of sapovirus outbreaks (red dashed line) were shown. The x-axis indicates the surveillance timeline by month. The primary y-axis (left) represented the number of outbreaks and the secondary y-axis (right) showed the proportion of sapovirus outbreaks relative to the total outbreaks.The majority of sapovirus outbreaks (77.94%, 159) occurred during seasonal transition period, with peaks in May-June (spring-summer) and October-December (autumn-winter). No outbreaks were reported in January, February, or August each year.Regional distribution, settings and transmission modesThe sapovirus outbreaks mainly occurred in urban areas (62.96%, 136) and suburbs (35.19%, 76). There is a significant difference in duration (p = 0.04), with the outbreaks in outer suburbs lasting longer (Median: 7), but no significant difference in number of cases per outbreak or attack rates (p > 0.05).The majority of sapovirus outbreaks occurred in kindergartens (76.39%, 165) and primary schools (18.98%, 41). Several outbreaks were also reported in middle schools (2.78%, 6), comprehensive schools (1.4%, 3), or companies (0.46%, 1). There were significant differences in the attack rates in different settings (p < 0.001), with the higher attack rates occurring in comprehensive schools (Median: 21.62) and kindergarten (Median: 18.18), but no significant differences in outbreak duration or number of cases per outbreak (p > 0.05).The majority of the transmission mode was person-to-person (97.73%, 172), and the limited outbreaks were caused by foodborne transmission (2.27%, 4). Among different transmission modes, significant differences were found in outbreak duration (p = 0.035) and number of cases per outbreak (p = 0.035), with foodborne outbreaks having longer duration (Median: 10.00) and more cases (Median: 18), but no significant differences in attack rates (p > 0.05) (Table 1).
Table 1.The regional distribution, settings and transmission modes of sapovirus outbreaks in Beijing, China between 2014 and 2021. N (%)Cases/exposed populationOutbreak duration, No, Median [IQR] (d)Cases per outbreak, No, Median [IQR]Attack rate, Median [IQR] (%)Regional distribution    Urban area136 (62.96)821/56526, [5–8]7, [5–15]17.95, [14.00–25.00]Suburbs76 (35.19)590/46848, [3–9]6, [4–10]16.02, [10.71–25.71]Outer suburbs4 (1.85)39/2457, [4–13]9, [9–12]8.76, [8.14–9.37]p for Kruskal-Wallis  0.040.110.78Settings     Kindergarten165 (76.39)1053/56237, [5–8]6, [4–9]18.18, [13.51–22.72]Primary school41 (18.98)312/28598, [6–9]4, [3–10]11.43, [8.00–21.43]Middle school6 (2.78)37/3696, [5–7]8, [4–18]8.51, [8.14–23.52]Comprehensive schools3 (1.39)31/1306, [5–7]7, [3–12]21.62, [10.00–35.00]Company1 (0.46)17/16003171.06p for Kruskal-Wallis  0.060.26<0.001Mode of transmission*    Person-to-person172 (79.63)1213/85016, [5–8]6, [4–10]18.00, [14.50–21.50]Foodborne4 (1.85)35/31910, [8–13]18, [11–22]10.42 [8.14–13.37]p for Kruskal-Wallis  0.0350.0350.78Total2161450/10581///Abbreviation: d, days; IQR, Interquartile Range; N, number; * Date might not sum to total. Other 40 outbreaks were not identified the mode of transmission. The sensitivity analysis including person to person (127), foodborne (4), and other (40) showed these same results and the p-values for outbreak duration, cases per outbreak, and attack rate were 0.035, 0.035, and 0.05, respectively.Age group and clinical symptomsA total of 1,503 laboratory-confirmed cases were involved in 216 sapovirus outbreaks, with the majority of males (54.22%, 815) (p = 0.035). The median/peak age was 4 years (range: 2–59 years) with 67.47% (1,014) of cases aged ≤5 years, shown in Figure 2. The clinical symptoms included vomiting (97.27%, 1,462), diarrhea (18.44%, 277), fever (8.32%, 125), nausea (28.72%, 432), and abdominal pain (33.94%, 510). Clinical symptoms of SaV infection varied significantly by age. Children aged ≤5 years had a significantly higher incidence and frequencies of vomiting (96.94%, 983/1,014), higher incidence of abdominal pain, and lower incidence and frequencies of diarrhea compared to those aged >5 years (81.81%, 400) (p < 0.05). However, there were no statistically significant differences in fever and nausea between the two age groups (Table 2).
Figure 2.Age distribution of cases in the sapovirus outbreak. Age distribution of cases in the sapovirus outbreak was shown, with the X-axis representing age (years) and the Y-axis representing the number of outbreaks.
Table 2.The clinical characteristics of cases aged ≤5 years and aged >5 years in sapovirus outbreaks.SymptomsNumber of Outbreaks (%)Totalp for χ2≤5 years>5 yearsTotal10144891503 Vomiting (times/day)   <0.0011–3778 (76.73)350 (71.57)1128 (75.05)4–6144 (14.20)38 (7.77)182 (12.11)7–939 (3.85)5 (1.02)44 (2.93)≥1022 (2.17)7 (1.43)29 (1.93)Diarrhea (times/day)   <0.0011–394 (9.27)98 (20.04)192 (12.77)4–612 (1.18)45 (9.20)57 (3.79)≥73 (0.30)10 (2.04)13 (0.86)Fever (°C)   0.3937.3-3838 (3.75)22 (4.50)60 (3.99)38.1-3922 (2.17)15 (3.07)37 (2.46)39.1-409 (0.89)3 (0.61)12 (0.80)Nausea291 (29.07)136 (27.81)427 (28.41)0.75Abdominal pain323 (31.85)184 (37.63)507 (33.73)0.03Genotype distribution and temporal trendsAmong 216 sapovirus outbreaks, 171 (79.17%) outbreaks were identified with 8 genotypes in the VP1 region, and others (38, 20.83%) were unassigned. The predominant genotypes were GII.3 (46.78%, 80) and GI.2 (25.14%, 43), followed by GI.1 (11.70%, 20), GII.5 (6.98%, 12), GI.6 (4.09%, 7), GI.3 (2.34%, 4), GI.5 (1.74%, 3), and GII.1 (0.68%, 1). No recombinant genotypes were identified, apart from failures in amplification. The RdRp genotypes were consistent with the VP1 region, as confirmed. The predominant genotypes GII.3 and GI.2 were first identified in 2015 and 2017, respectively. GII.3 was the dominant genotype from 2016 to 2019, but GI.2 prevailed from 2020 to 2021(Figure 3).
Figure 3.The genotype distribution of sapovirus outbreaks in Beijing, China between 2014 and 2021. The genotype distribution of sapovirus outbreaks in Beijing, China between 2014 and 2021 was shown, with the X-axis representing the year and the Y-axis representing the proportion of different sapovirus outbreaks.The phylogenetic analysis in VP1 regionThe phylogenetic trees of sapovirus GI and GII genogroup were shown in Figure 4A and B, respectively. These strains detected in our study were divided into GI.1, GI.2, GI.3, GI.5, GI.6, GII.1, GII.3, and GII.5 branches. As for the predominant genotypes of GII.3 and GI.2, both of them were further subdivided into different clades: 3 clades of GI.2, and 4 clades of GII.3.
Figure 4.The phylogenetic tree of GI and GII sapoviruses in VP1 gene. (A) the phylogenetic tree of GI sapoviruses in the VP1 gene; (B) the phylogenetic tree of GII sapoviruses in the VP1 gene. The phylogenetic relationships were estimated by the Beast with the best model of HKY. The genotype, year, and strain sources were indicated with different colours of label. sapovirus strains detected in this study were marked with the label “BJ New” in the strain label.GI.2 clade 1 was first detected in 2017, 2019, and 2021, while GI.2 clades 2 and 3 emerged in 2019 and became predominant in subsequent years. GII.3 clades 1 and 3 were first detected in 2016 and were subsequently detected in later years, GII.3 clade 2 was observed only in 2017, and GII.3 clade 4 emerged in 2020 and dominated in 2021 (Figure 5).
Figure 5.The diversity of GI.2 and GII.3 sapoviruses. The proportion and prevalence of different clades of GI.2 and GII.3 sapoviruses from 2014 to 2021 were shown, with the x-axis representing the year and the y-axis representing the proportion of different clades of sapoviruses in different years.GI.2 clade 1 showed the highest sequence similarity to strains from the United States in 2016 (GenBank: MG012442), with nucleotide identities ranging from 99.20% to 99.40%. GI.2 clade 2 showed the highest sequence similarity to strains from Shenzhen, China in 2016 (GenBank: MG515479), with nucleotide identities ranging from 99.70% to 100.00%. GI.2 clade 3 had the highest similarity with strains from Japan in 2019 (GenBank: LC577823), with nucleotide identities between 99.50% and 99.70%.GII.3 clade 1 had the highest sequence similarity with strains in Russia in 2018 (GenBank: MH018131), with nucleotide identities ranging from 98.20% to 98.72%. GII.3 clade 2 was closest to strains from Shenzhen, China in 2015 (GenBank: MG515475), with nucleotide identities ranging from 98.45% to 98.73%. GII.3 clade 3 had the highest sequence similarity with strains from Japan in 2022 (GenBank: LC790162), with nucleotide identities ranging from 98.30% to 98.73%, while clade 4 had the highest sequence similarity in the United States in 2017 (GenBank: MN461476), sharing 97.53% to 97.72% nucleotide identities.The epidemiological and clinical characteristics of GI.2 and GII.3 outbreaksBoth GI.2 and GII.3 outbreaks mainly occurred in kindergarten [76.74% (33) of GI.2, 85.00% (68) of GII.3] and primary schools [33.46% (14) of GI.2 and 37.50% (30) of GII.3] in urban area [65.12% (28) of GI.2, 62.50% (50) of GII.3] and suburbs [32.56% (14) of GI.2, 37.50% (50) of GII.3], involving 7 (IQR: 5-10) or 6 (IQR: 4-9) cases per outbreak through person-to-person transmission over a duration of 6 (IQR: 5-9) or 6 (IQR: 5-8) days. No significant differences were observed between GI.2 and GII.3 outbreaks in regional distribution, type of settings, transmission modes, duration, and case number per outbreak (p > 0.05). However, significant differences were observed in age and symptoms of cases (p < 0.001). As for cases age, the IQRs were 4–7 years for GI.2 and 3–5 years for GII.3. Regarding cases symptoms, vomiting was predominantly observed in GII.3 [(88.94%, 394) of GI.2 and (95.62%, 633) of GII.3], and diarrhea was predominantly observed in GI.2 [(17.61%, 78) of GI.2 and (11.18%, 71) of GII.3] (Table 3).
Table 3.The epidemiological and clinical characteristics of GI.2 and GII.3 outbreaks. GI.2 (%)GII.3 (%)pNumber of outbreaks4380 Regional distribution   Urban area28 (65.12)50 (62.50)0.29^Suburbs14 (32.56)30 (37.50)Outer suburbs1 (2.33)0Settings   Kindergarten33 (76.74)68 (85.00)0.06^Primary school8 (18.60)12 (15.00)Middle school and above1 (2.33)0Company1 (2.33)0Mode of transmission   Person-to-person37 (86.05)70 (87.50)0.16^Foodborne1 (2.33)1 (1.25)Unknown4 (9.30)9 (11.25)Outbreak duration   Median (IQR)6 (5-9)6 (5-8)0.48#Number of cases per outbreak Median (IQR)7 (5-10)6 (4-9)0.23#Number of cases443662 Median age of cases (ranged)4 (4-7)4 (3-5)<0.001#Vomiting (times/day)394 (88.94)633 (95.62) 1–3338 (76.30)504 (76.13)<0.001^4–646 (10.38)93 (14.05)7–94 (0.90)24 (3.63)≥106 (1.35)12 (1.81)Diarrhea (times/day)78 (17.61)74 (11.18) 1–349 (11.06)60 (9.06)<0.001^4–620 (4.51)13 (1.96)≥79 (2.03)1 (0.15)Fever (°C)28 (6.32)69 (10.42) 37.3–3815 (3.38)38 (5.74)0.97^38.1–399 (2.03)22 (3.32)39.1–404 (0.90)9 (1.36)Abbreviation: IQR, Interquartile Range; # means p for Kruskal-Wallis test; ^ means p for χ2.The whole genome sequences of GI.2 and GII.3To further investigate the variation of the major circulating strains, we sequenced the whole genomes of GI.2 clades 2 and 3, and GII.3 clades 1, 3, and 4. Three whole genomes of GI.2 and seven of GII.3 were obtained with the accession number and clades of sequences presented in Supplementary Table 4. No recombination, insertion, or deletion were identified among all whole genomes of these strains, as shown in Figure 6.
Figure 6.Sequence homology among different clades of GI.2 and GII.3 sapovirus relative to their closest reference strains. (A) Sequence homology among sapovirus GI.2 clades 1 and 2 relative to their closest reference strains with Genbank accession number: MG515477.1. (B) Sequence homology among sapovirus GII.3 clades 1, 3, and 4 relative to their closest reference strains with Genbank accession number: LC790161.1. (C) Sequence homology among sapovirus GII.3 clades 1, 3, and 4 relative to their closest reference strains with Genbank accession number: MN102405.1. The X-axis represents the position of nucleotide sequence and the y-axis represents the sequence similarity in different years.The total length of the whole genome of GI.2 was 7476 bp, consisting of 6873 bp (2290 amino acids) in ORF1 and 492 bp (163 amino acids) in ORF2. GI.2 clades 2 and 3 shared sequence identities between 99.80% and 99.82% in nucleic acid and 99.63% in amino acid, with 15 nucleotides and 9 amino acids mutations, predominantly occurring in ORF1. Both GI.2 clades 2 and 3 shared the highest nucleotide sequence identities with strain detected in Shenzhen in 2015 (MG515477.1), with identities of 98.91% to 98.92% in clade 2 and 99.02% in clade 3 (Table 4).
Table 4.The whole genome analysis of GI.2 and GII.3 sapoviruses.GenotypeVariableCladeSequence regionORF1ORF2TotalGI.2Nucleotide Length (bp) 13–68856882–73737476Sequence identity (%) Internal^clade 2 vs 399.79–99.8099.7099.80–99.82MG515477.1&clade 299.06–99.0896.9598.91–98.92MG515477.1&clade 399.9797.1599.02Amino acid Length (aa)22901632453Sequence identity (%) Internal^clade 2 vs 399.9199.3899.63MG515477.1&clade 299.6998.1699.59MG515477.1&clade 399.7898.7799.71GII.3Nucleotide Length (bp)1–68466846–73467460Sequence identity (%) Internal^clade 1 vs 396.30–98.8098.10–99.0095.80–98.80LC790161.1&clade 197.60–99.6098.80–99.7097.10–99.60MN102405.1&clade 397.16–98.6798.40–99.0097.14–98.60Amino acid Length (aa) 22811662447Sequence identity (%) Internal^clade 1 vs 399.30–99.9099.4099.31–99.88LC790161.1&clade 199.74–99.8299.4099.71–99.80MN102405.1&clade 399.69–99.8699.40–100.0099.67–99.88Abbreviation: aa, amino acid; bp, base pair; ORF, Open Reading Frame.^means sequence homology among strains detected in the study.&means the homology between the strains detected in the study and the highest similarity reference.The total length of the whole genome of GII.3 was 7486 bp, comprising 6846 bp (2281 amino acids) in ORF1 and 501 bp (166 amino acids) in ORF2. GII.3 clade 1 and 3 shared sequence identities between 95.80% to 99.80% in nucleic acid and 99.31% to 99.88% in amino acid with up to 137 nucleotides and 17 amino acids mutations, predominantly located in ORF1. GII.3 clade 1 strains had the highest sequence identities with the strain detected in Japan in 2022 (LC790161.1), ranging from 97.10% to 99.60% in nucleic acid and 99.71% to 99.80% in amino acid. GII.3 clade 3 strains had the highest sequence identities with the strain detected in Taiwan, China in 2014 (MN102405.1), ranging from 97.14% to 98.60% in nucleic acid and 99.67% to 99.88% in amino acid (Table 4).DiscussionA limited number of studies had been done on sapovirus outbreaks in China before, and it was still unknown what the epidemiological and viral genetic features of the virus were. In this study, 216 AGE outbreaks linked to sapovirus were found in Beijing from 2014 to 2021, and a comprehensive analysis was conducted, including temporal and regional distribution, settings, transmission modes, and clinical symptoms of cases. Furthermore, whole genome characteristics of major genotypes were identified, revealing new clades with notable nucleic acid and amino acid variations.The AGE outbreaks surveillance system in Beijing, which employed multiplex RT-qPCR testing for norovirus, rotavirus, astrovirus, enteric adenovirus, and sapovirus, identified sapovirus as the second most prevalent pathogen following norovirus in outbreaks, underscoring its increasing significance in AGE outbreaks. This study indicates that sapovirus outbreaks predominantly occurred in urban regions and suburbs, possibly due to the impact of elevated population density and socioeconomic conditions, similar to norovirus outbreaks [26]. About 80% of sapovirus outbreaks occurred during seasonal transitions (spring-summer and fall-winter), in contrast to earlier findings indicating a significant winter-spring seasonality [26]. These differences may be attributed to climatic differences across study regions or to competitive inhibition from norovirus, which typically peaked during winter to spring months. Person-to-person transmission was the predominant mode of sapovirus spread in Beijing, consistent with findings from the National Report in the United States, which indicated that person-to-person was the primary route for most non-norovirus AGE outbreaks [7]. This situation may be related to the following factors: low environmental prevalence (such as sewage systems), rare infections among kitchen staff, etc [27–30].The previous study indicates sapovirus infections predominantly affect children aged ≤5 years, consistent with our findings that 67.38% of sapovirus-associated AGE cases occurred in this age group [6]. However, a study in Spain revealed a U-shaped age distribution for sapovirus detection, with maxima observed in children aged 0–2 years and people over 60 years [31]. In Beijing, children aged 0–2 years rarely attend kindergarten, and our surveillance does not include nursing homes and care facilities for the elderly. Consequently, the system lacks sufficient monitoring of sapovirus infections among the youngest and oldest age groups, limiting the efficient detection of outbreaks within these populations. Our surveillance revealed that norovirus outbreaks in Beijing predominantly affected school-aged children (median age: 4 years) [32], indicating distinct age-specific susceptibility patterns between different pathogens. Besides, the clinical symptoms of sapovirus infection included vomiting (97.27%), abdominal pain (33.94%), nausea (28.72%), diarrhea (18.44%), and fever (8.32%). Our research found that norovirus infection had similar incidences of vomiting (93.98%) and abdominal pain (40.34%), but demonstrated elevated rates of diarrhea (30.35%) and fever (27.94%), and no nausea symptoms [30]. Age-related differences in clinical symptoms were observed in sapovirus-associated cases: children ≤5 years showed a higher incidence of vomiting, whereas those >5 years experienced elevated rates of diarrhea and abdominal pain. This tendency aligned with norovirus infections, where vomiting decreased and diarrhea increased with age [30]. The daily frequency of vomiting (81.56%) and diarrhea (73.28%) in sapovirus-infected cases primarily ranged from 1 to 3 episodes per day, consistent with the finding in norovirus-infected cases (70.29% and 70.18%, respectively) [30]. Notably, sapovirus-infected cases presented with more vomiting than norovirus-infected cases, which may be due to the differences in gastrointestinal development in children or the pathogenicity of viruses [33]. This age-related clinical variation may occasionally be reflected by genotype-specific characteristics, as previously reported in norovirus infections [34]. The clinical differences may stem from variations in viral replication efficiency, pathogenicity, and virulence factors among distinct genotypes. As sapovirus, norovirus, and other enteric pathogens share overlapping clinical presentations, the development and use of rapid, pathogen-specific diagnostic assays are essential for accurate identification and for reducing unnecessary antibiotic use.The genomic analysis identified 8 non-recombinant sapovirus genotypes circulating in AGE outbreaks in Beijing from 2014 to 2021, with several sapovirus clades circulating, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and limited amino acid substitutions. These findings were consistent with the previous study on global sapovirus strains (GI.1, GI.2, GII.1, GII.3, and GIV.1) conducted over the past 40 years, indicating minimal intra-genotypic variation and rare recombination events [12]. These results suggest that sapoviruses exhibit markedly lower recombination frequency compared to noroviruses. Our study identified GII.3 as the predominant genotype from 2016 to 2019 following its initial detection in 2015, while GI.2 emerged as the predominant genotype in 2020, following its first identification in 2017. This also implied that vaccine development should focus on tackling genotypic alterations by examining their evolutionary patterns and interactions with population immunity [1,35]. The clinical symptoms of sapovirus outbreaks showed genotype-specific variations between GI.2 and GII.3 genotypes. GII.3-infected cases predominantly presented severe vomiting and mild diarrhea, whereas GI.2-infected cases exhibited more severe diarrhea with milder vomiting. Genotype-specific clinical differences observed for sapovirus are consistent with similar patterns previously reported for norovirus and other viral infections [36,37]. Notably, both GII.3 clade 2 and GI.2 clade 2 in our study were also detected in contemporaneous outbreaks in another region of China with the highest sequence similarity to those strains [38]. Besides, except these 2 clades, the GII.3 genotype included 3 additional clades (clade 1, 3, and 4) and GI.2 included another 2 (clade 1 and 3), each showing the highest sequence similarity to circulating strains from Russia, Japan, and the United States separately [39,40]. In addition, the emergence of new clades with SNPs discovered in complete genomes was temporally correlated with peak outbreak years, indicating that these variations may be connected with alterations in virulence, transmissibility, or immune evasion [1]. These findings highlight that Beijing, as the capital of China, possesses unique epidemiological traits and is susceptible to the effects of locally developing genotypes and imported strains, leading to the coexistence of domestic and international strains. This particular transmission dynamic poses a major challenge for sapovirus outbreak control in Beijing, requiring a dual-focus surveillance strategy to monitor strains spreading from other countries and other parts of China to inform effective public health interventions.There were several limitations included in this study. Firstly, the AGE outbreak surveillance was established in 2014 and underwent continuous enhancement until 2016, during which the reported instances of AGE outbreaks were likely substantially lower than the actual occurrences, thereby influencing the spatiotemporal distribution characteristics of sapovirus outbreaks. Secondly, surveillance mainly covers kindergarten and school children, with limited coverage of other populations, such as elderly cases and children under 2 years of age. Thirdly, although we did not find any recombination in all relevant genotypes, amplification failures in RdRp regions may lead to biased results. Fourthly, there was a lack of data on host immunity and population susceptibility, and future studies should include seroprevalence or host genetic analysis to address these gaps. Finally, this study did not analyze asymptomatic infections of the sapovirus, and thus its distribution characteristics are unknown, making it impossible to determine its role in the transmission.In conclusion, sapovirus has emerged as an important pathogen causing acute gastroenteritis outbreaks in Beijing, particularly in kindergartens, and requiring continuous monitoring and timely intervention. sapovirus infections should be included in the surveillance of sporadic and AGE outbreaks in China. Given the rise in sapovirus outbreaks and the emergence of novel evolutionary branches, genotyping and whole-genome sequencing are essential.Supplementary Material3_Supplementary Table.docx


Title: Distribution and Genetic Variability of Sapoviruses in Africa

1. IntroductionSapoviruses, whose prototype is Sapporo virus, are single stranded, non-enveloped, positive sense RNA viruses that belong to the Caliciviridae family [1,2,3]. Their genome is 7.1 to 7.7 kb in length and has a polyadenylated 3’ end that is essential for viral replication [4]. The 5’ end is linked to VPg that plays a major role in initiation of translation [5,6]. The sapovirus genome consists of two to three open reading frames (ORF) [5]. ORF-1 encodes a large polyprotein that is cleaved into nonstructural proteins and major capsid protein, VP1 [1,2]. ORF-2 encodes minor structural protein VP2 [1]. The function of ORF-3, which is found in some human and bat strains, has not yet been defined [7]. Different methods have been used for the detection of sapovirus that include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), electron microscopy, next generation sequencing and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) [3]. RT-PCR is commonly used due to its high sensitivity and specificity [3]. Molecular characterization of sapoviruses is commonly done using a partial VP1 encoding compared to the RdRp region [3,8]. However, determination of new genogroups and genotypes is based on complete VP1 sequences [6,7,9]. By using VP1 sequences, sapoviruses are classified into fifteen genogroups and four of these infect humans (GI, GII, GIV and GV) [2,4,5,10]. Other tentative groups have been identified in bats (GVII to GXVIX) [11]. The VP1 sequence also determines the antigenicity of the virus strains [3,8]. Sapovirus genogroups are further divided into 19 genotypes [6,8]. Human sapovirus genogroups GI and GII comprise of seven and eight genotypes respectively, GIV includes a single genotype and GV can be divided into two genotypes [2,12]. Strains of sapovirus with discordant grouping between the VP1 encoding region and the RdRp have been classified as recombinants [5,13,14,15]. Recombination was shown to occur most frequently in the RdRp-VP1 junction [13,16,17]. However recombination events have also been reported in the NS3-NS4 junction [17]. The RdRp-VP1 recombination can alter the pathogenicity and virulence of the resulting strains [8,14,17]. Co-infection with different sapovirus strains has been reported and represents a precondition enabling recombination to occur [14]. Sapoviruses have been detected in humans and various animals including pigs, minks, dogs, sea lions, chimpanzees, bats and rats (Table 1) [1,2,3,4,5,10,18,19,20,21]. Sapoviruses have also been detected in environmental samples (river water, wastewater and sewage) posing a risk to populations exposed to contaminated water [7,22].Sapoviruses are the causative agents of viral gastroenteritis and their most common symptoms are vomiting and diarrhea [5]. Globally, diarrhea is common among children, and it is identified as the second leading cause of death among children under 5 years with an estimated 2 million deaths occurring annually [23]. Diarrhea has been identified as the leading cause of morbidity and deaths among HIV-infected children [24,25]. The Sub-Saharan Africa region is one of the regions with the highest prevalence of HIV [26]. Other enteric viruses like rotavirus have been shown to increase the burden of viral gastroenteritis among HIV-infected children [24]. Sapoviruses have been identified in both sporadic and outbreak cases of acute gastroenteritis [2,8] and have a higher prevalence in children than in adults [2,19]. Sapovirus-related viral gastroenteritis is often self-limiting and generally resolves within 3–4 days. However, cases of individuals showing symptoms longer and with more than average severity have also been reported especially among the immune-compromised [3,8,27]. Currently vaccines against sapovirus are not available and treatment is mainly targeted at resolving symptoms [3,28].Sapovirus transmission occurs through the fecal-oral route either via contaminated food, water, surfaces or by direct contact with infected individuals [18,20]. Since sapoviruses have been detected in rivers, sewages and treated water [21], access to clean drinking water is essential for prevention and control. Shedding of the virus by asymptomatic individuals has also been documented [29], indicating that proper food handling practices are also important for prevention and control of infections.The objective of this review is to understand the distribution and molecular diversity of sapoviruses circulating in African countries among humans, animals and in the environment. In reviewing human infections, factors like age, seasonality, and co-infections were also evaluated. Where data on the HIV status of participants were available, their impact on sapovirus infection was also assessed. 2. Literature2.1. Search and Selection StrategyA systematic literature review of sapovirus studies from African countries published in peer reviewed journals was performed. Electronic databases PubMed, Medline, and Google Scholar were searched using key words “sapovirus”, “caliciviruses”, “gastroenteritis”, “Africa”, and “name of country” alone and in various combinations. To ensure that studies that do not appear in major electronic databases were not missed, Rayyan [30] and Google Search were also used. Studies from African countries published between January 2005 and March 2019 that described sapovirus infections among humans, animals and environmental samples were included in this review. Only studies where sapovirus initial detection was carried out by RT-PCR were included. For genotyping, all studies that used any region of the capsid and or polymerase were included.2.2. Data Extraction and AnalysisThe following variables were extracted from each of the selected studies where available: study reference, publication date, period and duration of the study, clinical symptoms, type of gastroenteritis (sporadic, outbreak), specimen type (human stool, animal stool, environmental sample), study population (symptomatic, asymptomatic), age group, diagnostic method used, prevalence, seasonality, co-infections, genogroups and genotypes identified. In assessing seasonality, only studies with duration of 12 months or more were included. We estimated the prevalence of sapovirus (the proportion of cases) for each study. We also estimated pooled sapovirus prevalence rates by age category and symptoms presentation with exact 95% confidence intervals (CI) using STATA version 15.1. In order to account for heterogeneity we also conducted random-effects meta-analyses to pool the prevalence of the sapovirus by age grouping and presentation of symptoms. We assessed the variability across studies using I2 statistics and assessed for heterogeneity using forest plots (with prevalence estimates with 95% intervals. I2 describes the percentage of total variation due to inter-study heterogeneity. STATA version 15.1 (SataCorp, College Park, Texas, USA) was used for the analysis. All sequences available from the reviewed studies were retrieved from National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) sequence databases. For analysis of genetic variation among isolated strains sequences from each study were used to construct phylogenetic trees using either BEAST V 1.7 [31] or MEGA V 7.0 [32]. The following strains were used as reference sequences: GI.1 (X86560, MK111630, MG012400, AY237422); GI.2 (MH541039, MN164924, AB602119, EU124657); GI.3 (AF194182, AB622459); GI.4 (AJ606693; GI.5 (KM282596, AY538716, AJ606698); GI.6 (KX866362, FJ65744); GI.7 (KT276532, AB181133); GII.1 (MG012407, AJ271056); GII.2 (KT276556, AY237420); GII.3 (MN164975, AB689808); GII.4 (AB29084, KP067444); GII.6 (MK246750); GII.7 (AB630067); GII.8 (HM590581, KT30674); GIII (AFI82760, AY425671.1); GIV.1 (DQ104357, HM214146, AF435814.1); GV.1 (AY646856); GV.2 (AB775659); GVI (KJ508818.1); GVII (KX000384.1); GVIII (KC309417.2); GIX (KC309418.3); GXI (LC215902.1); GXII (KX000385.1); GXIII (JN387134.2); GXIV (JN899075.1).3. Sapovirus in African CountriesAfter reviewing data based on the inclusion criteria, 27 studies from 14 African countries (Angola, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Gabon, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, Nigeria, South Africa, Rwanda, Tanzania and Tunisia) were included in the review. Among the 27 eligible studies, 18 (66%) were on human sapoviruses, two (7%) were on animals whereas seven (26%) were on sapoviruses in environmental samples (river water, wastewater and sewage); Figure 1, shows the map of various countries where the studies were conducted. 3.1. Distribution of Human Sapovirus InfectionsTable 2 summarizes human sapoviruses studies from the 13 countries that were reviewed [33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50]. While age groups varied among the studies, the majority, 89% (16/18), included children less than 5 years [34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50]. Relatively few sapovirus studies were conducted in Africa during the review period. However there has been an increase over the last four years, with 68% (13/19) of the studies published between 2015 and 2019 [34,36,37,38,39,41,42,43,44,48,49,50,51]. The method of detection was either real-time RT-PCR or RT-PCR with primers that targeted either the VP1 region [36,46]; RdRp region [35,40,45,47] or the RdRp-VP1 junction region [33,37,38,39,42,43,48,49,50]. The reported studies varied in sample size and duration, and the rate of detection among symptomatic individuals ranged from 0% in Nigeria to 19% in Angola [34,50]. Differences in detection rates were not only observed across countries, but also among studies conducted in different regions of the same country. For example, a study conducted in Kenya reported sapovirus detection rates of 4% in Lwak district and 6% in Kibera district [43], while the other study also conducted in Kenya reported a sapovirus detection rate of 10.8% among symptomatic individuals [42]. Differences in sapovirus detection rates were also observed over time. In Burkina Faso, a study conducted among symptomatic under-five-year-old children between 2009 and 2010 reported a sapovirus detection rate of 18% [38] and another one conducted between 2011 and 2012 reported a sapovirus detection rate of 10.3% [49].3.2. Age and Sapovirus DistributionFigure 2, shows pooled stool positivity rate by age categorization estimated with random-effects meta-analyses. It shows that substantial heterogeneity exists, and the I2 for these studies is greater than 80%. Seventeen of the 18 reviewed studies included prevalence data [33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,49,50,51], and were used to compute pooled stool positivity rate which was 4.0% (95% CI 3.0–7.0) across all ages and 5.0% (95% CI 3.0–8.0) for under-five-year-olds. Studies that did not have data that allowed for disaggregation by the under-five age category were excluded from this calculation. Three out of the four studies that reported a prevalence of greater than 10% were conducted among children less than five years old. In Angola this prevalence was 19% and two studies in Burkina Faso reported 10.3% and 18%, respectively [34,38,39]. Among symptomatic and among asymptomatic participants the estimated pooled stool positivity rates were similar at 5.0% (95% CI 3.0–7.0) and 2.0% (95% CI 1.0–3.0), respectively (Figure 3). While some studies reported only mild cases of diarrhea and vomiting, others reported more severe cases where individuals were hospitalized [35]. Only one study reported cases of bloody diarrhea associated with sapovirus/HIV co-infection [44].3.3. Sapovirus and CoinfectionsSapoviruses often occurred with other enteric bacteria like Cryptosporidium, E. coli and Shigella [36,44] and other viruses that included rotavirus, norovirus and adenovirus [49]. One study showed that children with diarrhea and sapovirus infection were likely to be infected with more than one enteric pathogen [44]. Three studies enrolled participants with known HIV status [33,42,44]. A study in Cameroon reported higher detection of enteric viruses among asymptomatic children who were HIV negative compared to asymptomatic adults who were HIV positive [33]. One study in South Africa reported that 37.5% (3/8) of children co-infected with sapovirus and HIV died [44]. These co-infected children were also likely to have bloody stools with mixed pathogen infections. A study from Kenya did not indicate any susceptibility to sapovirus infections due to an individuals’ HIV status [42].3.4. Seasonality of Human Sapovirus InfectionsSixty seven percent (12/18) of the studies conducted lasted 12 months or more and were used to assess the seasonality of the infections [35,36,37,38,40,43,44,45,46,47,48,50]. These studies were three from Southern Africa, four from East Africa, two from North Africa and three from West Africa. Most of the studies did not show any clear seasonal patterns as infections occurred all year round. However, in North Africa (Tunisia) one of the two studies showed a winter peak [45] but the overall prevalence in the study was low at 0.8%. One study conducted in Burkina Faso, West Africa, showed a peak in the cold dry season [39]. The study in Malawi, Southern Africa showed a slight peak in the rainy season [35].3.5. Genetic Characterization of Human Sapoviruses Molecular data were available for 7 out of the 18 studies conducted in six countries of Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, South Africa and Tunisia [35,38,42,45,48,49,52]. There was wide genetic diversity of human sapoviruses detected in these studies. Based on the constructed phylogenetic trees that used 240 bp sequences of the VP1 region and 183 bp of RdRp region (Figure S1) from human sapovirus studies, the sapovirus strains clustered into three genogroups of GI, GII and GIV. Genogroup GI (GI.1 to GI.7) constituted most of the infections at 48%, followed by GII (GII.1, GII.2, GII.4, GII.5, GII.6, GII.7) at 31% and GIV at 21%. GI and GII were detected in seven countries [35,38,41,42,45,48,49]. Genogroup GIV was isolated in Burkina Faso and South Africa [38,48].Nineteen genotypes were identified and GIV.1 was the most predominant at 21% followed by GI.2, GI.1 and GII.1 at 20%, 18% and 17% respectively. The RdRp-VP1 sequences were not long enough to allow for detection of recombinant strains.Nineteen genotypes were identified and GIV.1 was the most predominant at 21% followed by GI.2, GI.1 and GII.1 at 20%, 18% and 17% respectively. The RdRp-VP1 sequences were not long enough to allow for detection of recombinant strains.3.6. Sapovirus Distribution in the EnvironmentSeven studies from three countries, Kenya, South Africa, and Tunisia reported on sapovirus strains that were isolated from environmental samples, which comprised wastewater, river water and sewage [21,53,54,55,56,57,58] (Table 3).These studies were conducted between 2003 and 2010 and ranged in duration from nine to twelve months. All of the studies were conducted in countries where human sapovirus studies had also been conducted allowing comparison of genotypes isolated from the environment to those circulating in the communities. In one study, sapovirus was not detected in sewage or wastewater [57]. Primers used in this study targeted the RdRp region. However, another study showed that sapovirus detection rate was as high as 90% in rural river water and sewage [53] and these used primers that targeted the RdRp-VP1 junction. In some instances treated wastewater and river water had high concentrations of sapoviruses with prevalence reaching more than 50% [56]. The reported data showed that not only were sapoviruses detected in higher concentrations but there was a wide diversity of sapovirus strains circulating in river water and water bodies in Africa. Three studies from South Africa and two from Tunisia had molecular data available where genotyping was done using either the partial capsid or partial RdRp region [21,54,55,56,58]. Based on the phylogenetic analysis the sapovirus strains clustered in three genogroups GI (GI.1, GI.2, GI.3.GI.5, GI.6, GI.7); GII (GII.1, GII.2, GII.3, GII.4, GII.5, GII.8) and GIV, (Figure 4 and Figure S2). Genogroups GI and GII were isolated in both countries but GIV was only isolated in Tunisia. Two sapovirus strains isolated in Tunisia could not be assigned to any genotype [58] and these were identified using primers targeting partial RdRp.3.7. Animal Sapovirus InfectionsTwo animal sapoviruses studies from Ethiopia and Tanzania [52,59] were reviewed (Table 4). The animals that were studied included pigs [52], spotted hyenas, African lion and bat eared fox [59]. The detection rate of sapovirus ranged from 1.7% among pigs in Ethiopia [52] to 34.8% among spotted hyenas in Tanzania [59]. In both studies, sequencing was done using primers that target the RdRp region. In Ethiopia, one of the sapovirus strains isolated from pigs [52] was identified as genogroup GIII and another one could not be assigned (Figure S3). Sapovirus strains detected in spotted hyenas, African lions, and bat eared fox from Tanzania clustered in monophyletic group and these could be a potential new group.4. DiscussionViral gastroenteritis is a public health concern, with high morbidity and mortality particularly in the under 5 years age group [60]. Sapoviruses are recognized as one of the causative agents of viral gastroenteritis. Therefore, it is important to understand their distribution and molecular characterization in each region and country to contribute towards prevention and management strategies. There is no treatment for sapovirus disease, and prolonged shedding of the virus even after cessation of symptoms has previously been reported [20]. In this review, the pooled sapovirus prevalence among symptomatic cases, 5.0% (95% CI 3.0–8.0), and among asymptomatic, 2.0% (95% CI 1.0–3.0), were not statistically different. However, the detection rates observed in the reviewed African studies is consistent with what has been reported in other countries [9,19,60,61]. Since sapovirus has been identified as one of the causative agents of gastroenteritis [3], one would have expected rates among symptomatic individuals to be significantly higher than those among asymptomatic. One contributing factor could be the multiple causes for gastroenteritis that include bacteria and other viruses predominantly rotavirus and norovirus [61]. This was reported by one study from Nigeria that isolated rotavirus and norovirus strains and no sapovirus from symptomatic individuals [50]. In the reviewed studies, a wide range of sapovirus stool positivity rates varied from 0% in Nigeria, West Africa [50] to 19% in Angola, Southern Africa [34]. These ranges were similar to those reported in other countries outside Africa: Thailand 1.1% [19], Nicaragua 17% [29]; Peru 12.4% [2] and Philippines 7% [8]. The differences observed in sapovirus prevalence rates may also be due the sensitivity of the detection methods used in these studies. RT-PCR methods for the detection of sapoviruses have limitations even though they have higher sensitivity compared to other methods such as ELISA [3,4]. Amplification that targets the more conserved region between the polymerase and capsid has been shown to detect diverse genogroups compared to those that use either capsid or polymerase region only [3,8]. Most of the reviewed studies [38,42,49] that reported sapovirus detection rate of at least 10% were where the initial detection method used primers that targeted the conserved RdRp-VP1 region. Primers targeting the RdRp-VP1 region are able to amplify multiple sapovirus genotypes [4]. One study where primers targeting this region were used reported only six positive sapovirus cases belonging to the five sapovirus genotypes [42]. Another study in South Africa, using a similar method identified at least thirteen different sapovirus genotypes [48], indicating the sensitivity of this method in amplification of sapovirus. However, limitations were observed in some of the studies where primers targeting the partial RdRp were used to amplify the sapovirus strains [35,41,49,58,59]. This often resulted in misclassification of the sapovirus strains or inability to confidently declare new genotypes. For example, a study conducted in Malawi [35] initially identified the isolated sapovirus strain as a GIII, and further analysis classified this as a GII.1 (Figure S2). Some sapovirus studies conducted in Tunisia identified strains that did not cluster with known sapovirus genotypes [58,59]. While these could be potential new genotypes they could not be classified as such since new genotypes are normally defined based on the complete VP1 sequence [3]. These reports indicate the need for standardized and more sensitive methods for the detection of sapovirus.The coverage rate of rotavirus vaccination may also contribute to the differences in sapovirus prevalence among the reviewed African countries. It has been reported that where rotavirus vaccination coverage is high, norovirus and sapovirus infections are prominent [29] and with rotavirus vaccination coverage of greater than 95%, sapovirus infections were the second major cause of viral gastroenteritis following norovirus [29]. This information underscores the need to understand the burden of sapovirus in each country especially in countries where rotavirus vaccine coverage is high. Between 1998 and 2014 when most of the reviewed studies were conducted, rotavirus vaccination coverage among African countries ranged from 0% to more than 95% [62,63] and this can contribute to the differences in the observed sapovirus detection rates among symptomatic individuals. It was observed that detection rates of sapovirus infections also differed in regions of the same country [43], where the same factors would contribute to prevalence.Globally, gastroenteritis continues to affect many people, especially children and the elderly. The pooled prevalence on sapovirus detection among symptomatic children under 5 years was 5.0% (95% CI 3.0–8.0), which was comparable to those reported in other regions, and confirmed sapoviruses as one of the many causes of gastroenteritis among children under 5 years [8,29,60]. Though some of the studies included all age groups, data on the impact of sapovirus infections among the elderly were scarce. Gastroenteritis is also a common illness of diverse etiology among the elderly especially those in nursing homes [64]. Understanding the impact of sapovirus to this health problem can contribute to its management and prevention among this age group.The findings of generally milder symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, and dehydration that were associated with sapovirus infections [49,65] is comparable to what other studies have described in other regions outside Africa [29,60,66]. However, severe sapovirus symptoms are not uncommon, and have often been associated with GI infections [29]. A study from South Africa [44], reported more severe symptoms that included those in which bloody stool and sapovirus was detected in 11.4% (9/79) of those who died, with three of them being HIV infected. The GI.2 was also the most common strain in this cohort and could have contributed to the severe symptoms. Moreover, lack of access to sanitation was observed to increase rates of sapovirus infection especially among HIV-infected children. Control measures for the prevention of sapovirus infections should focus more on maintaining good personal, food and environmental hygiene.There is an indication that different weather conditions can affect sapovirus infection. Some studies have reported seasonal patterns of sapovirus infections with most infections from sporadic cases occurring in the cold season [3,67]. However, other studies have reported infections that occurred all year round [35,45]. The reviewed African countries fall in regions of different weather conditions and these differences are sometimes observed within a country. A study in Tunisia showed that infections peaked in winter, similar to studies in Japan and Iran [67,68]. However, another study in Tunisia did not show any seasonal patterns [47]. Furthermore, a study conducted in Burkina Faso showed infection peaks in the cold and dry season [49]. Nonetheless, this study only lasted for 10 months [49]. Prevention and management efforts that include, among others, long-term surveillance programs for all common etiological agents of gastroenteritis in each country can provide the necessary information for its control and management.Sapovirus as an RNA virus undergoes frequent mutations leading to the emergence of new strains that have altered antigenicity and can persist over time leading to more disease outbreaks [3]. Among the eight studies that conducted molecular characterization of sapoviruses, the detected genogroups, GI, GII and GIV have also been identified in outbreaks in other continents [4,67,68]. On average GIV was the most prevalent genogroup isolated mainly in South Africa between 2009 and 2013 [48]. In other regions of USA, Japan, and Europe, this strain was most prevalent in 2007 [3]. Initially, classification of sapovirus was not standardized leading to some strains being wrongly classified. An example is a study conducted in 2005 in Malawi among hospitalized children, which reported isolation of eight strains of sapovirus, and all of them were classified as GIII [35]. GIII is commonly isolated in pigs [1,18] and its presence in humans has not been reported elsewhere. Sapoviruses like most RNA viruses evolve through recombination to improve their fitness and evade the host immune system. The use of whole genome sequences or those that cover the ORF1/ORF2 junction are needed to detect the presence of recombinants. Studies that provide sapovirus whole genome analyses are needed in African countries to add to the body of knowledge in this area, especially the discovery of novel strains.Sapovirus strains have also been detected in environmental samples of river water, treated and untreated sewage and very often strains isolated in the environment reflect those circulating in the surrounding communities [69]. In these studies, sapovirus strains detected in the wastewater bodies were similar to those identified on other continents [22,54,69]. There was correlation in the frequency of sapovirus detections in the environment and the prevalence of human infections, for example, in Tunisia where human sapovirus studies reported very low detection rates of 0.8% and 1% [45,47]. Studies conducted on sewage samples did not detect any sapovirus [57]. Another study conducted in Tunisia in waste water identified potential new genotypes belonging to genogroups II [58] and similar genotypes had previously been detected among children in USA [70]. In South Africa, genotypes that were isolated in human studies were also detectable in river water, treated and untreated wastewater [48,55,56]. The stability of sapoviruses in different environmental conditions influences their transmission back into the community. In the different countries that were reviewed, living conditions such as access to clean water and cultural practices in food handling vary in different parts of a country, and can contribute to the different patterns observed in the distribution of sapoviruses.While most mammalian sapoviruses belong to particular genogroups not infecting humans, strains that genetically resemble those of humans have been identified [4]. Thus, these could possibly serve as reservoirs for human infections or vice-versa [5]. Some of the factors that have been suggested to enhance animal to human transmission include broad host range and infection of wild animals [71]. As shown in Table 1, sapoviruses have a wide host range including wild animals, making them a potential candidate for human-animal transmission.In conclusion, this review showed that human sapoviruses circulating in African countries are genetically diverse, with stool positivity rates varied from 0% to 19%. Sapovirus detection rates in environmental samples ranged from 0% to 90% while in animal studies it was 1.7% to 34.8%. Potential new sapovirus strains have also been identified and these can contribute to broader understanding of sapovirus evolution. From the reviewed data, it is evident that studies in Africa can contribute to the discovery of novel sapovirus strains especially in areas with a high population of animals. Moreover, due to emerging viruses or mutations, more studies need to be undertaken that characterize longer sections of the genome.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: ASTROVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: A Review of the Strain Diversity and Pathogenesis of Chicken Astrovirus

1. IntroductionChicken astrovirus (CAstV) is a recently emerged virus and the most recently identified member of the avian astroviruses. With a shared familial morphology and genomic arrangement, like other astroviruses CAstV is a small, round, nonenveloped virus typically <35 nm in diameter with a positive sensed, single-stranded RNA genome that, being close to 7.5 kb in length [1], is within the astrovirus family genome size range of 6.2 kb (human) to 7.7 kb (duck) [2]. Astroviruses primarily cause enteric infections and infect many animal species including humans, where they are a leading cause of infant diarrhea. Madeley and Cosgrove termed these viruses astroviruses, from the Greek word astron, meaning “stars”, due to the protruding capsid spikes that give the characteristic star-like appearance under electron microscopy [3]. Astrovirus species infecting mammals are classified into the genus Mamastrovirus. The other major group of astroviruses that have been studied are the avian astroviruses, particularly those that infect commercial flocks although they are also detected in wild birds, and are classified in the genus Avastrovirus, which along with Mamastrovirus make up the two genera of the family Astroviridae.Historically astroviruses have been named according to the species they infect, e.g., turkey astrovirus (TAstV) although species cross-over has been observed for some astroviruses, e.g., astroviruses of chickens have been detected in turkeys [4]. Officially, there are three different astrovirus species that currently comprise the Avastrovirus genus according to the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses, namely Avastrovirus 1, 2 and 3 (Table 1), in keeping with the naming of mammalian astroviruses as Mamastrovirus 1–19. Although the first report of avian disease caused by astroviruses was in ducklings in 1965 [5], the virus responsible was only recognized as an astrovirus in the mid-1980s by electron microscopy [6] and is referred to as duck hepatitis virus 2 (DHV-2) in older papers and as duck astrovirus serotype I (DAstV-1) more recently [7]. A second astrovirus of ducks, originally called DHV-3 also causes hepatitis in ducklings [8]. It is now known as DAstV-2 and is antigenically and genetically distinct from DAstV-1 [9]. Two astrovirus species were isolated from turkeys: the first was identified in the UK in 1980 and called TAstV serotype 1 (TAstV-1) [10] and the second species, TAstV-2, was reported in 2000 [11].There are two astrovirus species that infect chickens and both are associated with growth problems, enteritis and kidney lesions in young chickens. The first, avian nephritis virus (ANV), was isolated from a one week old, normal broiler chick in 1976 [12] and was originally thought to be a picornavirus [13], but later identified as an astrovirus [14]. The second astrovirus of chickens is called chicken astrovirus (CAstV) and is a separate species from ANV. Recent research has revealed that CAstV infections are highly common in broiler chickens and have strong associations with diseases of young birds and hatchery disease, that is disease which occurs prior to or during hatch, which will be discussed within this review in the context of genetic variation.2. Identification and Genomic Structure of Chicken AstrovirusIn 2004 three isolates were cultured from two submissions of broiler chicks with runting stunting syndrome (RSS) and one submission from a flock with uneven growth. The isolates were antigenically identical [15]. Genetic sequencing of a 320 base pair reverse transcription (RT)-PCR amplicon made from RNA extracted from one of the isolates showed the agent was related to TAstV and ANV but was from a separate species also identified as an astrovirus and termed “chicken astrovirus” [15]. Prior to its molecular identification in 2004, CAstV had been described as an “enterovirus-like virus” (ELV) due to sharing similar characteristics to viruses of the genus Enterovirus of the family Picornaviridae [16,17].Sequencing of the CAstV genome has shown that it shares a similar genetic organisation to other astroviruses being composed of only three open reading frames (ORF). The first two ORFs, ORF 1a and ORF 1b, code for non-structural proteins including a protease (ORF 1a) and an RNA dependent RNA polymerase (ORF 1b). In keeping with other astroviruses, CAstV contains a conserved heptameric frameshift motif at the 3′ end of ORF 1a [18] that is involved in the translation of ORF 1b in a different frame to ORF1a although possibly through a different mechanism to other astroviruses [1]. The third ORF, ORF 2, codes for the capsid protein, the most variable region of the genome, especially in the 3′ half of the ORF which codes for the outer surface of the capsid including the star-like capsid spikes which interact with the host immune system hence variability is desirable. It also contains the start of the conserved s2m motif [19], which continues into the 3’ untranslated region (UTR). A short 5′ UTR exists upstream of ORF 1a and a longer 3′ UTR after ORF 2. A polyadenylated tail is located at the extreme 3′ region completing the positive sensed, single stranded RNA genome.3. Infection, Transmission and Strain Diversity of Chicken AstrovirusCAstV is an enteric pathogen and infections often occur very early, either transmitted horizontally by the fecal–oral route, or some CAstV strains can also be vertically transmitted from naive in-lay parent birds, and chicks may hatch shedding high levels of CastV. CAstV is more resistant to disinfection and cleaning than other viruses as it is non-enveloped and may be more persistent in poultry houses where darkling beetles can act as vectors for CAstV [20]. For instance, CAstV was detected in internal tissues and in washings from the surface of darkling beetles by RT-PCR [21]. A recent investigation was carried out into CAstV carryover contamination between broiler crops in commercial broiler houses after the removal of spent litter both before and after cleaning and disinfection using proprietory disinfectants at recommended concentrations [21]. Preliminary results showed that ~1–2 log reductions in CAstV levels were typically achieved when detected by quantitative RT-PCR at ten locations in UK broiler houses including feeders, floors, sills and walls, where CAstV levels became extremely low but even when fumigation was part of the cleaning regime, newly placed chicks quickly became horizontally infected shedding moderate levels of CAstV by day 4. Although the majority of these chicks were not shedding CAstV at day 0, it is possible that CAstV horizontal infection could have occurred prior to placement in the broiler houses.CAstV infections usually occur within the first days or week of life, and, and the earlier they are contracted, especially vertical infections, may result in a worse outcome, although this will depend on the particular CAstV strain, since, as is typical of viruses with RNA genomes, they vary widely in pathogenicity. Also the viral load (dose) at the time of infection and the presence of maternal antibodies against CAstV will impact on the development of disease. Other important factors include the presence of other enteric pathogens such as ANV, which is frequently detected in co-infections with CAstV, and also avian orthoreoviruses and fowl adenoviruses, to name some of the more ubiquitous enteric viruses often found in co-infections with CAstV. In addition a flock may be infected with more than one strain of CAstV concurrently.An investigation into CAstV strain diversity from historical and circulating field strains was reported in 2012 comparing sequences of ORF 2 (capsid gene) as this is where the most hypervariable regions associated with antigenicity are located [22]. Prior to this study two distinct serogroups of CAstV had been identified [17,23] which is supported by only a minor degree of cross-reactivity with the heterologous antisera. Antibody against them is reported to be widespread [24] and the existence of these two serogroups was further supported in the genotyping study by the subsequent clustering of strains into CAstV groups A and B according to a lower level of shared amino acid identity across ORF 2 (38%–40%). The group A CAstVs comprised three subgroups, withinter-subgroup homologies from 77% to 82%. The B group CAstVs comprised two subgroups, B i and B ii, which shared inter-subgroup identities of 84%–85% [22]. Subsequent to this study new CAstV ORF 2 amino acid sequences associated with specific broiler chick diseases, namely kidney disease with visceral gout, and White Chicks, have become available and a selection have been incorporated into the CAstV ORF 2 amino acid phylogenetic tree (Figure 1) to help elucidate the association of specific strains with disease.4. Pathogenesis of Chicken Astrovirus4.1. Runting Stunting Syndrome and Uneven Flock PerformanceHistorically, CAstV has been associated with malabsorption diseases of broiler chickens such as runting stunting syndrome (RSS) and with enteritis and growth problems in flocks [25,26]. However, CAstV is one of a number of endemic, enteric viruses that have been implicated in RSS but as yet a single etiological agent has not been identified. A runted chick hatches small while a stunted bird exhibits a failure to grow, and often appears to have delayed development, where its overall appearance appears to be that of a much younger chick with down and immature feathering, yellow colouration and small comb and beak. RSS is a production disease that was originally characterised by poor weight gain in young broiler flocks, frequently observed between six and twelve days post hatch but can be evident up to three weeks [27]. This coincides with the occurrence of intestinal cysts that reduce nutrient absorption along with reduced villus size or altered villus shape. Other common symptoms include enteritis and diarrhea, leg weakness and irregular feathering [28]. Chicks may huddle for warmth and culling can be extensive due to severe growth check of >50% causing a major economic challenge.Uneven flock performance occurs when the variance in weights at slaughter is larger than expected, potentially causing carcass processing problems, and is a more common, chronic condition than RSS. Many of the same viruses, including CAstV, are present in underperforming flocks but they are often also present in the good performing flocks so the differences in factors that tip the balance of performance are likely to be subtle yet complex and probably involve co-infection with other pathogens especially other viruses, pathogen strain variation, infection timing, virus load and the presence or absence of maternal antibodies. It is also possible that early CAstV and other enteric viral infections may create an abnormal gut environment that facilitates later dysbacteriosis, an imbalance of naturally colonising bacteria, usually occurring between days 20 and 30 post hatch and which could further impair performance due to diminished nutrient digestibility and weakened intestinal barrier protection [29]. As CAstV and other enteric viruses are so common and widespread in commercial broiler flocks of all classes of performance, they may be considered as part of the normal microflora or gut virome forming a background “noise” that is present from hatch to slaughter in a similar way to the many species of bacteria that colonise poultry intestines. However, it is likely to be a dynamic virome with spatial and temporal changes of rapidly evolving RNA viruses and so infections by new strains or more pathogenic strains of viruses may tip the normal balance of the virome thereby impairing performance or in acute cases causing RSS.CAstV is one of the earliest viruses to infect chicks often in the embryo, when immunity is least developed, and in recent quantitative molecular surveys broiler chicks that have just hatched were found to be shedding very high levels of CAstV, often substantially higher than CAstV infection peaks from chicks that became infected horizontally soon after hatch [21] suggesting that age confers resistance to infection. There are many strains of CAstV in circulation for which pathogenicity is unknown and it is unknown whether all CAstV strains are able to infect vertically. Currently CAstV pathogenicity is determined empirically through challenge experiments but vertical transmission has not been examined by these means. Challenge experiments of day old commercial broiler or SPF chicks with isolated CAstV strains have resulted in varying degrees of growth suppression [17] that is typical of the wide-ranging pathogenicities of viruses with RNA genomes. Furthermore, inoculations with CAstV isolates have not caused the full growth restriction typically observed in cases of RSS when young broiler birds may be <50% of their expected weight at 2–3 weeks old suggesting that there may also be other agents or other factors involved. Pathogenicity studies in specific pathogen free (SPF) chicks of two of the 25 genotyped strains, CAstV 612, which typifies group A, and CAstV FP3, representing group B, detected both viruses in the duodenum, jejunum and ileum, as well as the colorectum [30]. Both viruses were also detected in the liver, kidney and spleen. While the effects of CAstV 612 were relatively mild, CAstV FP3 resulted in intestinal lesions at day 1 post infection (p.i.) that altered the villus to crypt ratio observed at days 3 and 6 p.i. and a prolonged infection of the kidneys from day 1 to day 8 with lesions reportedly more severe than those seen in birds inoculated with ANV-1 (ANV serogroup 1 strain G4260) in the same study [30].Co-infections of CAstV with other enteric viruses have been observed, most noticeably rotavirus [25,31] and ANV [32] and a multiplex RT-PCR test was designed to detect and distinguish CAstV, ANV and rotavirus from samples simultaneously [33]. More recently the use of viral metagenomics has demonstrated the presence of a wide range of enteric virus families in normal broilers [34] and in growth problem flocks of which Astroviridae was one of the more abundant families [35,36]. In a small set of five 3-week old broilers with RSS and two normal broilers of the same age CAstV was only detected in the RSS-affected birds [36]. This contrasts with findings from the Day study [35] where CAstV was detected in SPF control birds. These types of studies are preliminary and few in number but metagenomics is likely to be a powerful diagnostic tool for investigating RSS in the future although it will be important to sample broilers as soon as the growth problems become apparent in order to fully appreciate the role of very early viruses such as CAstV.4.2. Kidney Disease and Visceral GoutWhile CAstV is predominantly an enteric virus contracted through the fecal–oral route it is also known to infect organs outside of the enteric tract including the liver and kidneys. Severe kidney disease of young broiler chicks with outbreaks of visceral gout and up to 40% mortality were reported in India in 2012 with the causative agent being identified as a group B CAstV [37]. This particular strain of CAstV was isolated in embryonated SPF chicken eggs using homogenates from 18 CAstV positive kidney samples resulting in significant embryo stunting, liver necrosis and pale, swollen kidneys. Isolates made from clinical kidney homogenates passed through either SPF chicks or SPF eggs and inoculated into day old SPF chicks and day old broiler chicks resulted in extremely high levels of mortality (67.5%–100%) between days 5 and 10 p.i. for the SPF chicks and days 7 and 10 p.i. for the broilers. Post mortem findings showed that the chicks all had diseased kidneys and visceral gout. Molecular testing found the kidneys positive for CAstV and negative for ANV and infectious bronchitis virus [37].Phylogenetic analysis of the ORF 2 amino acid sequences from these 18 isolates indicated that there was a high degree of similarity between these strains (92%–99.2%) and that they clustered together and in a separate B subgroup from other CAstV ORF 2 amino acid sequences (Figure 1) [37]. Similarly, AFBI’s Stormont laboratory isolated three highly similar CAstV strains from broiler kidney diagnostic samples from the Middle East as part of a diagnostic investigation into high mortality problems associated with kidney disease and visceral gout in 2010 and 2012, that, when inoculated into day old SPF chicks, also caused mortality due to kidney disease and visceral gout in the first week post infection (diagnostic results). Sequencing and phylogenetic analysis of these strains placed them in the same B subgroup as the Indian strains (B iii, Figure 1). The three Middle East CAstV strains share >99% amino acid homology with each other and 96.5% to 98.8% with regional representative strains from India. Given the wide range of circulating CAstV strains detected previously in Europe and the USA [22] the detection of CAstV strains in India and the Middle East with such a high degree of capsid amino acid conservation in these cases of severe kidney disease supports the hypothesis that this particular strain of CAstV is the etiological agent. Ongoing diagnostic surveillance in 2016 indicates highly similar strains are still circulating in broiler flocks in the Middle East.4.3. White Chicks Hatchery DiseaseRecently CAstV has become associated with hatchery diseases, most noticeably “White Chicks”, reports of which have come from various Scandanavian countries, North America, Poland and Brazil [38,39,40], but also with the “clubbed down” problem, although the latter association is less clear and still to be fully determined. White chicks that hatch have pale plumage, are weak and runted and do not tend to survive very long. The symptoms and lesions observed in white chicks share characteristics with those of RSS including lesions in the kidneys and liver, runting/poor development and weakness, and also abnormal feathering. An increase in mid to late embryo deaths was noted and there is a transient but substantial reduction in hatchability, which in Finland averaged 29% in affected flocks but which reached as high as 68% on one farm, with many dead in shell embryos in which CAstV was detected [38]. In Poland, a 4%–5% hatchability decrease was observed for a single breeder flock over a 4-week period when a maximum of 1% of chicks were pale and weak [40]. These observations are indicative of a vertical virus transmission and since it was reported that affected Finnish breeder flocks only experienced the disease once during their lifetime, it seems probable that acquired immunity prevents disease recurrence and further vertical transmission. It was discovered through CAstV quantitative diagnostic testing that many chicks were shedding high loads of CAstV at hatch [38] which was a very different situation to that observed when the same assay was first applied to commercial flocks in 2010 [32]; then all chicks were negative for CAstV at day 0 in a longitudinal survey of commercial broiler flocks.Three CAstV isolates were purified from samples from Finland, Norway and Canada resulting in embryo death and runting when inoculated into SPF chick embryos [38]. Likewise the Polish PL/G059/2014 isolate caused high mortality, runting and poor hatchability when inoculated into SPF embryonated eggs [40]. When the amino acid sequences of the ORF 2 regions were compared the Scandinavian and Canadian isolates were highly similar, sharing 95%–98% identity, which is a significantly high level of conservation in the most variable CAstV ORF given the wide range of CAstV strains in circulation that can vary by more than 50% in this ORF. These strains clustered together giving rise to a new CAstV B subgroup (B iv, Figure 1) strongly suggestive that strains with highly similar capsid gene sequences could cause hatchery disease. They were also quite highly related to the CAstV strains responsible for severe kidney disease in Asia constituting subgroup B iii with shared amino acid identities ranging from 86.5% to 89.8%. By contrast, the ORF 2 amino acid sequence of the Polish strain, PL/G059/2014, places it very distant in subgroup A iii (Figure 1, marked with an asterisk). Similar symptoms were apparent from the Polish case but the clinical outcomes were less pronounced: there was no perceived egg drop; the hatchability reduction was much less severe and there were fewer white chicks observed than in the Finnish cases. Perhaps the differences in White Chicks disease severity are associated with genomic differences, although a more in-depth analysis of further cases would be necessary to establish the link between specific strain variation and disease severity.5. Immunity, Treatments and Future DevelopmentsCurrently there are no medicines to treat RSS, CAstV-associated kidney disease or White Chicks disease nor are there any vaccines to prevent transmission of CAstV to broiler chicks. Hygiene and biosecurity are the only ways in which CAstV infection risk can be minimised. It would be highly advantageous if breeder hens could supply adequate CAstV maternal antibodies to the eggs since this would prevent vertical transmission of CAstV strains and give early protection against horizontal transmission. Although it has yet to be definitively determined, the age of the chick when first infected appears to have a bearing on all of these conditions so early protection is encouraged. Breeder hens that become naturally CAstV seropositive during rear or through the use of a CAstV breeder vaccine is advocated in order to protect embryos and hatched chicks against the range of CAstV strains in circulation and prevent vertically infected hatched chicks from shedding CAstV to infect naive broiler chick housemates. While the involvement of CAstV as a key agent in cases of RSS remains to be fully elucidated, it is clear from recent evidence that certain strains of CAstV are associated with White Chicks and others with severe kidney disease and visceral gout. The development of a commercial vaccine that can protect against the strains causing these two diseases, which are not that far apart genetically and serologically is to be hoped.The use of wild-type strains of CAstV as breeder vaccine candidates that can be conveniently grown in eggs or cell culture has the advantage of cellular replication to higher titres but may be limited in effectiveness due to serological differences between strains and so a greater understanding of the relationship between circulating strain diversity and disease severity is desirable, particularly in the case of RSS. There is also the concern that an attenuated live vaccine could evolve into a more pathogenic form, although this is unlikely to unduly affect older birds. Alternative vaccine strategies may involve the use of recombinant protein technology to develop non-replicative CAstV capsid precursor proteins. Recombinant CAstV capsids have been produced by two groups using the baculovirus system, to subgroup B ii [41] and subgroup B i [42]. The recombinant CAstV B ii vaccine gave partial protection against experimental RSS challenge whereby weight restriction was significantly less pronounced in vaccinated broiler chicks [41]. Lee et al. demonstrated that the B i recombinant CAstV capsid precursor proteins consistently stimulated virus-specific antibodies in SPF chickens at 3 and 4 weeks p.i. after 2 immunizations [42]. Given that wild-type infections of breeder birds with the White Chicks strain of CAstV appear to confer lifetime immunity, it is hoped that an effective CAstV vaccine would have the same duration of effect but this can only be determined empirically.One of the limitations of working with CAstV has been a lack of convenient diagnostic tools requiring researchers to develop their own in-house tools. The baculovirus expressed recombinant CAstV capsid precursor proteins developed as vaccine candidates have both been used successfully in ELISA (enzyme linked immunosorbent assay) tests to quantify CAstV seroconversion during in vivo CAstV experiments [41,42]. The B i recombinant capsid protein has since been used as the basis of a CAstV B group ELISA test [43] that is now commercially available and suitable for screening chicken sera for the presence of CAstV B group antibodies, including those from the other B subgroups. This ELISA is useful for screening breeder flocks for seroconversion against CAstV B group strains prior to, or during lay, and can be used to pinpoint CAstV B group seroconversion by longitudinal serological surveys in cases of possible vertical transmission, e.g., White Chicks. It will not detect antibodies to CAstV A group strains as there is no serological cross reactivity of the A group and B group antibodies in the capsid precursor protein region. If further evidence appears that substantiates the involvement of CAstV A group strains in cases of White Chicks, then a similar CAstV A group ELISA would prove beneficial.


Title: Intra- and Cross-Species Transmission of Astroviruses

1. IntroductionAstroviruses (AstVs) are small, non-enveloped viruses with a single-stranded, positive sense RNA genome. AstVs are among the most common causes of gastroenteritis in children after norovirus and rotavirus infections [1]. Although primarily associated with asymptomatic or diarrheal disease in humans, central nervous system complications and more serious disease, especially in immunocompromised individuals, have been reported [2,3]. Broader disease has also been documented in non-human mammalian and avian species, including enteritis, hepatitis, nephritis, and neurological symptoms [4,5,6,7,8]. The presence of AstV in farm animals has both economic and public health implications. Asymptomatic infection allows transmission within a population, while more severe infections can result in stunted growth, decreased harvests, and death. Human interaction with infected farm animals and consumption of AstV contaminated animal products provide avenues for zoonotic transmission and are thus public health concerns.AstVs are broken into two genera, mamastroviruses (MAstVs) and avastroviruses (AAstVs), based on whether they infect mammalian or avian species, respectively. Based on nucleic acid and amino acid sequences, MAstVs and AAstVs diverged approximately 310 million years ago [9], but the structure of the genome is conserved between MAstVs and AAstVs. Ranging from 6.8 to 7.9 kilobases in length, the genome can be divided into the following components: A 5′ untranslated region (UTR), the open reading frames (ORFs), and a 3′ UTR and poly-A tail that is genomically encoded (Figure 1) [10,11]. ORF1a and ORF1b encode for the viral non-structural proteins, including the viral genome-linked protein (VpG) and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP), respectively. ORF2 encodes for the viral capsid, spike, and structural proteins and is also expressed as subgenomic RNA during replication [11]. ORF1b is the least divergent region between species and serotypes of viruses, whereas ORF2 is the most divergent and is used to determine phylogeny between viruses [12].AstVs can infect a multitude of hosts and have been detected in over 80 different avian and mammalian host species (Table 1) [8]. Among those species susceptible to AstV infection are humans, domestic animals such as pigs and turkeys, and wild animals including multiple rodent and bat species [4]. There are three divergent groups of human AstVs (HAstVs): classic, HAstV-MLB, and HAstV-VA/HMO groups (Table 1) [16]. The classical group of HAstVs, comprised of eight serotypes (HAstV1-8), can be grown in cell culture and are the most well studied. Recent discoveries have expanded the host range for AstVs, demonstrating infections in marine mammals such as bottlenose dolphins, terrestrial animals like the cheetah, and a diverse range of avian species such as the European roller and black-naped monarchs [17,18,19,20]. AstVs have also been recently found in fish. These AstV sequences do not form their own genera of AstVs, but rather are distributed throughout both MAstV and AAstV phylogenies and are currently unclassified (Table 1) [21]. This suggests a history where various AstVs jumped between avian or mammalian species and fish. Additionally, the first AstV infections in invertebrates was recently found. These astro-like viruses identified in insects were phylogenetically distinct from vertebrate AstVs [22]. The large number of recently identified and largely unclassified viruses, both in new vertebrate species as well as invertebrates, indicate there is an extremely broad AstV host range that has yet to be fully characterized and appreciated. This also suggests that there are many more AstVs yet to be discovered. This increasing diversity has created challenges in determining the classification scheme and evolutionary distance between AstVs. Since their discovery, the classification scheme has been modified numerous times [23,24]. The ninth report from The International Committee on the Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) in 2011 signaled the field is moving away from classifying MAstVs and AAstVs based solely on host species [24]. The continued discovery of new AstVs will necessitate continued updating of classification and evaluation of the evolutionary distance and relationships between AstVs.Despite the advances made recently and the improvement of sequencing technologies in characterizing and discovering AstVs, many hurdles and unknowns remain in AstV research. For example, the mechanisms of cell entry and cell tropism have not been well characterized. While some light has been shed recently on the tropism of enteric human and murine AstVs [68,69,70], the tropism for AstVs in general—especially AAstVs—remains to be determined. In this review, we summarize the current understanding of the mechanisms of transmission, mutation and recombination, cross-species transmission, and highlight areas of future research in AstV transmission.2. Mechanisms of TransmissionAstVs are primarily transmitted fecal-orally through either direct interaction with feces or the consumption of contaminated food or water. AstVs transmit efficiently in both terrestrial and aquatic environments. Both avian and mammalian species that congregate in large groups or live in highly dense populations provide highly permissive environments for AstV transmission. Avian migrations provide the opportunity for AstVs from different geographical regions to be introduced into new areas and populations of hosts. In terrestrial animals, interaction with and the inspection of feces is very common. AstVs readily transmit between coprophagic animals such as rodents. Transmission between commercially farmed animals is extremely common and compounded by persistent viral shedding from infected animals long after the date of initial infection [8,66]. This persistent viral shedding also increases the risk of spill over into farm animals of different species. In wild animals, feces serve many roles, including marking territories, attracting mates, hunting prey, and avoiding predators. These various interactions facilitate intra-species transmission as well as open the door for cross-species exposure.Unlike enveloped viruses such as coronavirus or influenza, which are sensitive to lipid solvents and changes in pH or temperature due to their lipid membranes, non-enveloped viruses like AstVs are very stable in the environment and persist long-term in water, feces, and other materials [8,71,72,73]. One study found HAstV8 was able to remain infectious in surface and ground water for two and six months, respectively [74]. Another group observed that incubation of HAstVs with bacteria and bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharides preserved virus infectivity by stabilizing the viral capsid [75]. They also observed that mucin, the major component of mucus, also stabilized the capsid of HAstVs [75]. Stabilization of the capsid allows AstVs to remain infectious for longer periods of time after shedding, increasing the likelihood that a shed virus will be able to encounter and infect new hosts. This has far reaching implications for spread of AstVs between hosts as well as cross-species transmission. For example, if AAstVs do not have increased stability in mucus it would limit their ability to replicate in and spread between mammalian species. Future research exploring the stability of additional MAstVs as well as AAstVs will be critical to determining the factors that promote or mitigate transmission.As viruses that primarily rely on fecal-oral transmission, the relationship between AstVs and the intestinal environment is an important component to AstV biology. The intestinal environment is a complex array of interactions between the host and the microbes that inhabit it, bacterial and viral alike. Several viruses, both enteric and non-enteric, have been shown to alter the intestinal microbiome during infection [76,77,78]. Initial studies indicate that AstV infection can also alter the microbiome [79]. There is evidence that AstV infection can induce both detrimental and beneficial changes in the intestinal environment. Avian AstVs have been associated with outgrowth of atypical E. coli, which causes poultry enteritis mortality syndrome [80,81]. Murine AstV, on the other hand, reduces enteropathogenic E. coli colonization by increasing the mucus barrier and mucus-associated bacteria [70]. Murine AstV also protects animals from norovirus and rotavirus infections by modulation of the host antiviral cytokine interferon (IFN) lambda [82]. These studies demonstrate that the impact of AstV infection on the intestines is highly variable between species, with some having an almost commensal effect on the host and others enhancing pathogenic bacteria and death, highlighting the need for additional research on AstV and the microflora in other species.AstVs are primarily enteric pathogens but have also been found to cause disease outside the gastrointestinal tract. Several AstVs can drive neurological symptoms in both human and non-human mammals, with virus being detectable within the brain and cerebrospinal fluid [3,5,7,40,53]. Studies with HAstVs have also reported detectable virus in the blood and the respiratory tract [3,55,83,84], and another study detected an AstV in nasal swabs from dromedary camels [43]. Whether AstVs are able to transmit from these non-gastrointestinal sites or can only disseminate to these sites from gastrointestinal infection has yet to be determined. A lack of good animal models for AstV infection has hindered the field’s ability to research dissemination and potential transmission outside the gastrointestinal tract. Developing these models will be critical to further understand the biology of neurotropic and other disseminating AstVs.Much of this review has focused on horizontal transmission, as this is the primary mode in which AstVs have been shown to transmit. However, recent evidence suggests that in avian species, vertical transmission between breeding adults and offspring is also possible. Some strains of chicken AstVs have been detected at high levels in newly hatched chicks [85], in contrast to a previous study that found chicks were negative for AstV at hatching [86]. More recently, a novel AstV in geese was detectable in the vitelline membrane, embryo, and allantoic fluid of unhatched embryos as well as newly hatched goslings [87]. The eggs were collected and incubated after laying, leaving no possibility that the AstV transmitted to the goslings after they were hatched. This, along with the presence of virus inside unhatched and dead embryos, indicates the novel goose AstV (GoAstV) was transmitting vertically. These studies indicate that although the primary mode of transmission of AstV appears to be horizontal, certain strains of AstVs in some species may be able to transmit vertically. No potential vertical transmission has been documented in a mammalian species. The difference between mammalian and avian anatomy could be one reason for this disparity. Aside from monotremes and some marsupials, mammals have separate orifices for the reproductive, urinary, and excretory systems, whereas avian species have cloacae that serve as the only orifice for all three systems. The cloaca represents a unique environment where AAstVs from the excretory system could interact with and enter the reproductive system, permitting vertical transmission. In the case of the novel GoAstV, cloacal swabs from the breeding adults were positive for the virus [87], supporting the idea that this is a site at which vertical transmission could occur. Another key difference between avian and most mammalian species is reproduction through egg laying versus live birth. Only a limited number of viruses are able to cross the placental barrier during pregnancy and infect the fetus [88], adding an additional barrier to vertical transmission. These anatomy differences could explain why there is evidence for vertical transmission in several avian species but none in mammalian species. Vertical transmission of some AAstVs could have serious implications for commercially farmed avian species. The novel GoAstV caused significantly higher rates of mortality in goslings and decreased overall hatchability of eggs from flocks infected with the virus compared to uninfected flocks [87]. Disinfecting and cleaning protocols can reduce horizontal transmission but would have no impact on vertical transmission, making it difficult to prevent or eliminate AstV infection within flocks where vertically transmitting AstVs are present.3. Mutation and RecombinationLike most other RNA viruses, the AstV RdRP is error prone and lacks proofreading capabilities, leading to nucleotide mutations during replication that contribute to genetic diversity [89]. AstVs generate around (3.7 ± 0.1) × 10−3 nucleotide substitutions per site per year [90]. Deleterious as well as beneficial mutations can affect viral transmission and evolution. Recombination between different lineages of AstVs can also contribute to viral diversity and evolution. Coinfection of multiple circulating lineages within the same host can facilitate recombination and emergence of novel AstVs within a species [41,59,66]. Although recombination in the ORF1a gene has been shown [57], the ORF1b/ORF2 junction of the AstV genome is the predominant location at which recombination events occur. Consistent with this, multiple recombinant strains of HAstVs have been reported with ORF1b and ORF2 coming from different parental viruses [57,90]. As noted earlier, ORF2 is the most variable region of the genome and encodes the proteins necessary for viruses to enter host cells. Both mutations and/or recombinations at this location have the potential to alter the virus’s ability to attach to and enter host cells. This may be relevant to viral dissemination or cross-species transmission, potentially allowing the virus to use novel cell receptors or adapt to a new species’ receptor and entry machinery. Varying the surface proteins of the virus would also allow it to escape antibody mediated neutralization, as the spike domain is the most common place for neutralizing antibodies to bind [91,92]. The existence of multiple serotypes of AstVs in mammalian and avian species suggests that antibodies drive AstV evolution to evade immunity. Mutations in the HAstV capsid spike allow for escape from neutralizing antibodies [91]. Human clinical studies have also demonstrated that people with AstV antibodies are protected from severe disease and have decreased viral shedding [93,94,95], but the presence of sequential infections in patient populations suggest a lack of heterologous immunity [96]. However, partial neutralization of some spike binding antibodies across serotypes suggests that there are potentially broadly reactive epitopes [91,92]. By acquiring mutations in the spike capsid or promoting recombination of the ORB1b/ORF2 junction, the progeny virus has the potential to increase its chance to enter new cells and avoid existing humoral immunity.4. Cross-Species TransmissionCross-species transmission to an antigenically naïve population allows for potentially rapid spread and pathogenesis within the new species. Cross-species transmission of both AAstVs and MAstVs have been characterized, with recombination events hypothesized to play a large role (Table 1) [12,18,26,27,57,59,67]. The high density of farm animals that promotes intra-species transmission also provides an environment which favors cross-species transmission of AstV at a high rate and over long periods of time. Both these factors increase the likelihood of a successful cross-species transmission event. Supporting this idea, AstVs detected in farmed guinea fowl had 84.6–100% ORF2 amino acid similarity to turkey astrovirus type 2 (TAstV-2) [35] and AstVs found circulating in domesticated ducks showed ORF1b amino acid similarities to various chicken and turkey AstVs [27]. Proximity of farmed mammalian species has also allowed neurotropic AstVs to cross species barriers. Ovine with encephalitis were infected with an AstV that had an ORF2 with 95–98% nucleotide and amino acid similarity to viruses known to cause encephalitis in bovine [40].Domestication also has brought humans in close contact with both avian and mammalian AstVs. Reports have shown that some humans who work closely with turkeys have detectable levels of TAstV-2 antibodies [97]. The human, mink, ovine-like (HMO) AstVs that infect humans (Table 1) are more closely related to mink and ovine viruses (40–45% ORF2 amino acid identity) than the classical HAstVs (23–25% ORF2 amino acid identity) [58], suggesting these viruses emerged from these animal reservoirs after close interactions with humans. There is also recent evidence indicating multiple recombination events between porcine AstVs and HAstVs (Table 1) [67]. The directionality of this transmission has been debated, indicating that transmission from humans to livestock could be occurring in addition to traditional zoonosis. It has been proposed that recombination events have also occurred between human and feline AstVs [52]. Together these data demonstrate how the close proximity of humans with other species harboring AstVs can facilitate recombination and cross-species transmission between them.Whereas other viruses often have to rely on two species being in proximity to each other in order to come into contact with new hosts, the prolonged stability of AstVs in water sources could provide a route to new hosts without them being physically near each other [98]. Studies have identified HAstVs in wastewater, groundwater, and river water [52]. This not only provides means of potential spread among humans via irrigation and domestic water, but also exposure of aquatic species to human viruses. A recently identified novel California sea lion AstV was proposed to have arisen after recombination between an existing California sea lion AstV and a HAstV (Table 1). The novel virus had a HAstV-like polymerase and sea lion AstV-like capsid spike domain, suggesting recombination at the ORF1b/ORF2 junction [18]. Further research sampling various water sources around the globe is required to better characterize both the incidence of AstVs as well as the potential for emergence of new recombinant viruses from those water sources.As more AstVs are detected and characterized, evidence for recombination events between human and non-human AstVs is increasing. Currently, most studies of AstV recombination and transmission have been identified based on similarity to previously published sequences. More complete understanding of both intra-and inter-species transmission and improved screening of potential sources of novel viruses are required to truly understand the potential for and monitoring of emerging zoonotic AstVs. This is especially critical for neurotropic AstVs, which results in more severe disease.5. Conclusions and Future Research DirectionsAdvances in deep sequencing have allowed the characterization of AstVs to grow rapidly. This includes the identification of new host species, novel strains in existing species, and the characterization of recombination and cross-species transmission events. Despite these advances, there are still questions fundamental to AstV biology that are critical to further understanding both AstV intra-and inter-species transmission.The surface receptors that are used for entry into host cells are still not understood. Studies with HAstVs indicate that different serotypes of viruses may use different receptors and co-receptors [99], further complicating our understanding of AstV entry. The cell biology of viral entry is also not fully understood for AstVs. In vitro work with HAstVs has found that virus entry is blunted by drugs affecting clathrin-mediated endocytosis [73]. Whether this is the only mechanism of entry into host cells and if this is utilized by other species of AstVs is still not known. Antibodies against the AstV spike prevent binding to cells, indicating this may be the viral receptor binding domain [91]. Identifying the host surface receptor(s) required for entry and the mechanisms involved, especially in different species of animals, is desperately needed to understand basic AstV biology, how spike mutations affect entry, and the potential for cross-species transmission of different AstVs.Another barrier to understanding AstV transmission is the lack of knowledge of the cellular tropism of these viruses. However, recent advances using intestinal enteroid cultures has shed some light on human and murine AstV tropisms. All three groups of HAstVs were found to have a multicellular tropism, able to infect mature enterocytes, goblet cells, and intestinal progenitor cells in 3D human intestinal enteroids [68]. Murine AstVs, on the other hand, fail to infect 3D murine intestinal enteroids [69]. To overcome this barrier, the authors took 3D murine enteroid cells and cultured them in 2D transwells under air–liquid interface (ALI) conditions. In this condition, murine AstVs were successfully able to infect and spread between cells apically. Both enterocytes and goblet cells were infected by murine AstV, but intestinal progenitor cells were not [69]. This difference in tropism is likely the reason that the HAstVs could infect the 3D enteroids but the murine AstVs could not. Whether this tropism is conserved across AstVs, especially those infecting avian species, has yet to be determined. Another unanswered question is whether the differences in mammalian and avian body temperature, 37 and 39 °C, respectively, impact viral tropism and the likelihood of a virus to transmit between the two genera. Finally, the tropism and dissemination of neurotropic AstVs has also yet to be well characterized. This knowledge is critical to understanding the most severe disease associated with AstV infections.Lastly, a major hindrance to AstV research is the lack of good infection models. The development of the intestinal ALI cultures from 3D enteroids has immense potential as a model to explore and better understand various AstVs. Protocols for developing 3D intestinal enteroids already exist for several species infected by AstVs, including pigs, chickens, and bats, and could be applied to the ALI system [100,101,102]. Utilization of the ALI culture from 3D enteroid technique would allow for further studies into AstV cell tropism and mechanisms of cell entry for various species of AstVs. The ALI models would also permit researchers to better study cross-species transmission beyond just comparisons of sequence similarity and phylogeny between viruses. For example, human intestinal ALI cultures could be used to screen viruses from different reservoirs such as bats for zoonotic potential. Additionally, this could allow researchers to explore how different mutations in the genome, especially in ORF2, affect viral transmission and the potential for cross-species spread. The ALI system could also be used to better understand how AstVs activate and interface with the innate immune system. Human and murine AstVs were shown to activate the type III IFN, but not type I IFN [69]. How AstVs are able to evade type I IFN activation is currently unknown. Other non-enveloped, positive-sense RNA viruses such as caliciviruses utilize viral proteins to suppress IFN mRNA production and IRF-3 activation in order to evade the host innate immune response [103]. The ALI model can be utilized to explore what AstVs viral protein(s) to inhibit innate immune activation. Understanding if and how AstVs interface with the innate immune system is critical to understanding viral spread and cross-species transmission, as the innate immune system is the first line of defense to infection.As novels strains and host species continue to be discovered, understanding AstV transmission and their zoonotic potential is essential. Disseminating HAstVs and AstVs from zoonotic reservoirs remain significant threats to public health. Future research directed at the current gaps in our understanding of AstV infection is critical to understanding how these viruses, especially those that disseminate outside the gastrointestinal tract, transmit within and between different species. Deeper understanding of fundamental AstV biology is needed for tracing and treating infections in humans as well as monitoring emerging viruses with zoonotic potential.


Title: The Immune Response to Astrovirus Infection

1. IntroductionAstroviruses (AstV) are small, nonenveloped, RNA viruses that are a major cause of gastroenteritis in infants, immunocompromised people, and the elderly, and they also cause disease in mammals and birds [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9]. Despite the disease burden, little is known about the immune response to astrovirus infection. Human clinical studies have demonstrated that an antibody-mediated response may be responsible for limiting astrovirus infection and clinical disease. Recent work using small animal models and cell culture systems have revealed an important role in the innate immune response in restricting astrovirus replication and pathogenesis. This review will summarize the current knowledge of the innate and adaptive immune responses to astrovirus infection using studies of humans, small animal models, and cell culture systems and will discuss how astroviruses evade the immune system. This review will also highlight the increasing reports of astroviruses as possible causes of central nervous system disease, especially in immunocompromised individuals. Finally, we will conclude with unanswered questions, future studies, and how the use of a newly developed mouse model can enhance our understanding of the immune response to astrovirus infection, and how these responses play a role in astrovirus-induced disease. 2. Astrovirus Infection Astrovirus infection begins by binding to an unidentified receptor(s) on epithelial cells in the intestine after fecal-oral transmission [10,11] and enters cells via clathrin-mediated endocytosis [12]. After acidification of the endosome, endosome rupture, [12] and viral uncoating, two nonstructural proteins are translated from the single stranded, positive-sense genomic RNA from open reading frames (ORFs) 1a and 1b [13,14]. These polyproteins are cleaved into the non-structural proteins required for transcription and viral replication. Negative-strand RNA is produced from the genomic strand, and transcription of the negative-strand yields the genomic and subgenomic RNA [15]. The structural proteins encoded in the third ORF (ORF2) are expressed from the subgenomic RNA [13,14]. New astrovirus particles have been observed on double membranes likely serving as the site for replication and assembly [16,17,18,19,20]. After assembly, the progeny virions exit the cell through a non-lytic mechanism promoted by caspase activation [21,22]. Although astroviruses are considered gastrointestinal pathogens, viral RNA and infectious viral particles have been recovered from extraintestinal organs in both animals and humans (Table 1). In the current small animal model, turkey poults, turkey astrovirus type 2 (TAstV2) was found in bursa, thymus, spleen, kidney, liver, skeletal muscle, marrow, pancreas and plasma by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), immunofluorescence, and virus isolation [6]. However, these tissues were negative by in situ hybridization using a riboprobe to the capsid gene, suggesting that the virus only replicates in the intestines [6,23]. Whether astrovirus localization to these extra-intestinal tissues leads to pathogenesis remains to be directly determined, and astroviruses have been implicated as a cause of neurological and other diseases. Examples in animals implicate astroviruses as the cause of hepatitis in ducks, causing encephalomyelitis in minks [24,25,26] and encephalitis in cattle [27,28,29]. Identification of astroviruses found in extra-intestinal tissues in humans will be discussed later in this review.3. Adaptive ImmunityThe innate immune response provides signals to recruit the adaptive immune response, which controls viral infection at later times during an infection. This response is pathogen specific and has a memory component that induces a more rapid and robust response following a second infection with the same pathogen. The adaptive immune response contains two arms: the humoral, or antibody-mediated/B cell response, and the cell-mediated response, which involves antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells. Although the findings between the current turkey model and the newly emerging mouse model yielded conflicting results, the reports showing the biphasic age distribution as well as immunocompromised individuals have formed a general conclusion that the adaptive immune system is a major component in controlling astrovirus disease (reviewed in [39]). Early studies in the turkey poult model found little adaptive immune responses after TAstV-2 infection [40]. Koci et al. found very low levels of IgG in the serum and IgA in the bile 21 dpi [40]. Additionally, the CD4 to CD8 T cell ratios did not change at 5, 9, and 16 dpi when comparing TAstV-2 infected poults to uninfected poults [40], demonstrating that TAstV-2 infection is a poor inducer of adaptive immune responses. Studies using the newly emerging mouse model and clinical studies in humans demonstrate that the adaptive immune response is key in controlling astrovirus infection and disease. Experimental infection of recombination activating gene 1 (rag1) gene knockout mice (Rag1−/−), which lack mature B cells or T cells [41], had higher (2 logs) levels of murine astrovirus (MuAstV) RNA shed in their feces compared to wild type mice at 14 dpi [42]. The kidneys, liver, and mesenteric lymph nodes were positive for astrovirus RNA, whereas infected wild type mice were negative for astrovirus RNA in these organs [42]. Rag1−/− mice also contained 3–4 logs higher astrovirus RNA levels in the intestines compared to wild type controls [42]. These data indicate that the adaptive immune response is important in controlling astrovirus infection. Similar to the studies with interferon (IFN)-α receptor knockout (IFNaR−/−) mice by Marvin et al., the Rag1−/− mice were positive for astrovirus prior to experimental inoculation [42]. Therefore, a complete understanding in the adaptive immune response, and how it limits astrovirus replication, cannot be determined until MuAstV-negative Rag1−/− mice are generated. Studies in immunocompetent humans also show that 70% of healthy adults have antibodies against astroviruses [43], indicating that an adaptive immune response is mounted in humans. In earlier clinical studies using human volunteers, the majority of subjects that had no or only mild clinical signs had developed anti-astrovirus antibodies [5,44]. Conversely, subjects that exhibited more severe disease did not develop anti-astrovirus antibodies [44]. Other recent studies have found astrovirus antibodies against astroviruses of other animal species in the absence of disease [45,46]. For example, humans that work closely with turkeys develop antibodies to TAstV [45].Antibodies that recognize the spike domains on the human astrovirus spike, the domain of the capsid involved in astrovirus binding [47], and neutralized virus activity have been identified [48,49]. However, the development of anti-HAstV therapies has been hampered by the gap in knowledge of neutralizing antibodies epitopes on HAstV surfaces. Bogdanoff et al. mapped the neutralizing epitopes on the HAstV-2 with a neutralizing monoclonal antibody to the spike domain, which prevented spike binding to Caco2 cells [47]. The solving of the crystal structures of HAstV-1 and HAstV-8 capsids and spike domains, and the HAstV-2 and TAstV-2 spike domains can advance our understanding of anti-astrovirus antibody binding [47,50,51,52,53]. These structures are crucial for future studies to develop vaccines and antibody therapy prevention and treatment of astrovirus disease.Increasing reports of astrovirus infection in extra-intestinal tissues in immunocompromised patients highlight the role of the adaptive immune response during astrovirus infection. Several astrovirus isolates have been identified as potential causes of encephalitis in immunocompromised human patients (Table 1). For example, astrovirus RNA was found in the central nervous system of a child with X-linked agammaglobulinemia who died of encephalitis [35], and have been thought to be the cause of encephalopathy after bone marrow or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) [36,37]. Astrovirus has also been detected in nasopharyngeal secretions and serum and plasma of severe immunodeficiency (SCID) patients after HSCT [32], and detection of astrovirus in the blood has been associated with fever [33]. As the number of reports of astrovirus detection in extra-intestinal tissues increase, how the immune systems limits spread of astrovirus to extra-intestinal tissue will be an important question for future studies.Few studies have demonstrated a role for T cell-mediated control of astrovirus infection. Molberg et al. recovered astrovirus-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells from astrovirus-stimulated biopsies taken from the duodena of patients that had histologically normal intestines [54]. Wood et al. found chronic rotavirus and astrovirus infection in two children with T cell immunodeficiency [55]. Considering the fact that CD4+ T cells are essential in B cell maturation and antibody specificity; it is reasonable to suspect that T cells play a role in the immune response to astrovirus infection. 4. Innate Immune ResponsesThe innate immune system is the first line of defense against an invading pathogen. In vitro studies in cell culture models and in vivo animal models implicate that innate immune responses may be important in controlling astrovirus infection and replication. Although knowledge of the innate immune response to astrovirus infection is still in its infancy, we will discuss the known responses, or lack of, including histological changes, nitric oxide production, and type I IFN production in astrovirus replication and pathogenesis (summarized in Figure 1).4.1. Histological ChangesUnlike other enteric pathogens, such as rotavirus and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli, which cause inflammation and cell death [56,57], astrovirus infection causes only mild histological changes. Although turkey poults infected with TAstV2 had watery diarrhea by 24 h post infection (hpi), this diarrhea was not associated with inflammation and pathology, as few lesions and little cell death were observed in the intestinal villi [4,6]. In gnotobiotic lambs and calves infected with ovine astrovirus or bovine astrovirus, only mild destruction of the villi was observed with few observations of dying enterocytes [19,58]. These animal results are similar to what is seen in humans, with little destruction of the intestinal villi after astrovirus infection [59]. 4.2. Nitric Oxide ProductionNitric oxide is a key mediator of the innate immune system and is involved in pathogenesis and the control of infectious pathogens. Studies by Koci et al. demonstrate that TAstV-2 infection stimulates nitrite production, which limits viral replication [40]. Splenocytes from infected turkey poults made more nitrite after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation after splenocytes from uninfected poults [40]. TAstV infection increased nitrite levels after in vivo infection [40] in isolated avian macrophages and a chicken macrophage cell line (HD11) [40,60]. Treatment with nitric oxide synthase (NOS) inhibitors increased TAstV-2 replication in vitro and in vivo, demonstrating for the first time a role in the innate immune system in controlling astrovirus infection [40]. Importantly, turkey inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) was shown to be turned on in intestinal epithelial cells where astrovirus replication was occurring, suggesting that these cells are capable of mounting their own defense against astrovirus infection [61].4.3. Type I IFNTwo recent, independent studies explored the type I IFN response during human astrovirus infection, providing the most comprehensive knowledge about an innate immune response to astrovirus infection to date [62,63]. Although each study used different astrovirus serotypes, both Marvin et al. (using HAstV-1) and Guix et al. (using HAstV-4) found that infection induced a small, but significant increase in IFN-β mRNA and protein levels at 24 hpi [62,63]. This increase in IFN-β mRNA levels was not seen after infection with either UV inactivation of the virus or HAstV1 recombinant capsid, indicating that this type I IFN response is dependent on viral replication [62,63]. The transcription factor IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3, which, when phosphorylated, translocates into the nucleus to promote transcription of the IFN-β promoter, was located in the cytoplasm in infected cells at 12 hpi but was localized in the nucleus at 24–48 hpi [63]. Many RNA viruses, such as coronaviruses and rotaviruses, encode IFN antagonists [64,65,66,67]. However, Guix et al. found that HAstV-4 infection did not block polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (polyI:C)-induced type I IFN levels, suggesting that HAstV-4 does not encode a protein that exhibits interferon–antagonist activity [63].To determine if type I IFN limited astrovirus infection and replication, both groups pretreated the human intestinal adenocarcinoma cell line Caco2 with recombinant type I IFN prior to astrovirus infection. Guix et al. pretreated with a single dose of IFN alpha (IFN-α) and saw a signification reduction in new capsid protein synthesis and mRNA levels at all HAstV-4 multiplicity of infection (MOIs) used [63]. They also saw a 2-fold increase in viral RNA and infectious virion levels when inhibiting TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), which lies upstream of IRF-3 [63]. Marvin et al. pretreated Caco2 cells with increasing amounts of IFN-β and saw a dose-dependent reduction in new capsid protein synthesis, and, importantly, found that the amount of IFN-β produced during astrovirus infection is sufficient to decrease infectious progeny virion levels, as treatment with an IFN-β neutralizing antibody during infection increased HAstV-1 titers by 2.5 log-units [62]. Marvin et al. also saw decreased levels of positive-strand RNA levels at 8 and 16 hpi in Caco2 cells pretreated with IFN-β [62]. This decrease was not observed at early time points (1 and 4 hpi), suggesting that IFN-β pretreatment does not decrease HAstV-1 entry [62].In addition to limiting viral replication, both studies asked if type I IFN influences astrovirus-induced barrier permeability. Astrovirus infection has been shown to increase epithelial permeability, which correlated with the disruption of tight junction proteins and sodium malabsorption [3,4,68]. Guix et al. concluded a positive correlation between IFN-β RNA production and barrier permeability during HAstV-4 infection [63]. Marvin et al. demonstrated that type I IFN may be important in protecting the epithelial barrier during HAstV-1 infection. Pretreatment of Caco2 cells with IFN-β reduced the HAstV-1-induced decrease in transepithelial electrical resistance (TER) and decreased the transmigration of an inert dye (flux) from the apical side of the cell monolayer to the basolateral side [62]. Additionally, HAstV-1 infection in the presence of an IFN-β neutralizing antibody saw increased levels of flux compared to isotype control [62]. Although the permeability studies were performed in the absence of trypsin, and therefore only one round of replication occurred, it is possible that the varying levels of unprocessed viral particles (lower levels with IFN-β pretreatment and higher levels in the presence of an IFN-β neutralizing antibody compared to control cells) could contribute to the differences in barrier permeability since astrovirus-induced barrier permeability is independent of viral replication [68].The effects of type I IFN signaling in astrovirus replication, clearance, and barrier permeability have been examined in vivo using IFNaR-/- knockout mice. Oral gavage of wild-type C57BL/6 mice with MuAstV-positive fecal filtrates results in productive infection, viral shedding, and increased intestinal permeability [62]. However, the IFNaR−/− mice used in the study were found to already be MuAstV-positive in their colony. The viral titers shed in the stool of wild-type mice peaked at 6 to 11 dpi, shedding similar levels as the IFNaR−/− mice. However, wild-type mice titers rapidly decreased after 11 dpi and cleared the infection by 53 dpi, compared to IFNaR−/− mice that shed virus at high levels (>106 copies/μg RNA) at 53 dpi. These data suggest that type I IFN signaling is important for viral clearance in vivo [62]. IFNaR−/− mice also had increased intestinal permeability compared to MuAstV-infected wild-type mice, which correlated with their in vitro observations, suggesting a role for type I IFN in protecting the epithelial barrier during infection, although MuAstV-free IFNaR−/− mice would need to be generated to definitively determine the role of type I IFN signaling in intestinal permeability [62].Overall, the studies of Guix et al. and Marvin et al. demonstrate that the type I IFN system can limit astrovirus replication in vitro and in vivo and protects against astrovirus-induced barrier permeability. How astrovirus replication induces type I IFN production, and why induction is only seen late in infection and at low levels remains unknown. Additionally, how type I IFN protects against astrovirus-induced barrier permeability remains to be resolved. 4.4. Additional Innate Immune ResponsesSeveral observations in animals have described other innate immune responses during astrovirus infection. Astroviruses have been found in macrophages of lambs and described in calves with cells around Peyer’s patches [58,69]. However, whether these cells are activated in response to astrovirus infection have yet to be determined. TAstV-2 infection induces active TGF-β, an immunosuppressive cytokine that may explain why there are limited histological changes after infection [70], in the serum of infected turkey poults [6]. Whether TGF-β levels play a role in astrovirus replication and/or suppression of the immune response has yet to be determined.Finally, a study in mice found a role for the signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) transcription factor, a factor known for controlling viral infection [71], in limiting MuAstV replication [42]. STAT1 knockout mice (STAT1−/−) shed 10-fold more viral copies in the feces 14 dpi compared to wild-type mice and had viral RNA in the spleen and the mesenteric lymph nodes, while viral RNA was not detected in those organs of wild-type mice [42]. Like type I IFN signaling, STAT1 has a role in limiting mouse astrovirus infection, but the mechanism(s) remains unknown. It is possible that type I IFN signaling leads to STAT1-mediated transcription of antiviral proteins that can inhibit astrovirus replication.5. Astrovirus Evasion and Suppression of the Immune ResponseMultiple studies have concluded that astrovirus may evade the immune system by preventing complement activation [72,73,74,75]. The complement system is a fundamental component of the immune response that detects pathogens through one of three pathways, the classical, the mannose-binding lectin (MBL) and the alternative pathways. Once activated, it can eliminate pathogens, regulate the inflammatory response, and help shape the adaptive immune response. The HAstV-1 capsid protein inhibits the classical and lectin pathways by binding to key initiator molecules C1q and MBL, preventing subsequent downstream activation [73,74,75]. Considering a critical role of complement is initiating an inflammatory response and the observations that astroviruses do not cause inflammation highly suggests that astrovirus inhibition of complement activation is a key player in evading the immune system and suppressing the inflammatory response. Indeed, Tam et al. found only low levels of complement-mediated NF-κB activation upon infection with HAstV compared to adenovirus and human papillomavirus virus-like particles, suggesting that HAstV has strategies to evade detection by complement factor C3 [72]. Tam et al. also determined that intracellular sensing of C3 activated the interferon regulatory factor 3 transcription pathways, resulting in a robust secretion of IFN-β [72]. HAstV ability to evade detection by C3, which is involved in triggering an interferon response, may be why Guix et al. and Marvin et al. detected low levels of type I IFN at later times post infection. Future studies involving HAstV mutants that do not bind complement molecules will delineate the role(s) of suppression of complement activation during astrovirus infection.Studies in turkey poults suggest that astrovirus infection suppresses the immune system, making the host more susceptible to subsequent infections [60,76]. Turkey macrophage infection in vitro reduced macrophage viability and intracellular killing of a subsequent Escherichia coli (E. coli) challenge compared to uninfected macrophages [60]. In vivo experiments showed that macrophages isolated from TAstV-infected poults had a percentage of phagocytic macrophages compared to macrophages isolated from uninfected poults [60]. These macrophages had less interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-6 activity and had fewer E. coli per macrophage compared to macrophages isolated from uninfected poults [60]. TAstV-infected poults also recruited almost half the number of Sephadex-elicited inflammatory cells to the abdominal cavity compared to uninfected poults [60]. These results correlate with an increased number of E. coli in the spleens of TAstV-infected poults [60], suggesting that TAstV infection decreases macrophage viability and function, rendering the host more susceptible to secondary bacterial, and possibly viral, infections.6. ConclusionsIn summary, although our understanding of the immune responses to astrovirus infection has progressed over the years, further studies are required to fully characterize the cellular and molecular factors that mediate the immune response to astrovirus infection, including identifying the correlates of protection that inhibit viral replication and pathogenesis. Future areas of inquiry include the absence of a potent inflammatory response following the rupture of endosomal membranes [12], as seen with other viral-induced membrane ruptures [77,78] and determination of how astrovirus particles exit cells through a non-lytic mechanism [21]. Additionally, an improved understanding of the mechanisms underlying viral inhibition of the inflammatory response and how type I IFN limits astrovirus-induced barrier permeability are critical for the development of therapeutics and treatment protocols. The development of a mouse model will be invaluable in understanding the viral replication kinetics and innate and adaptive immune responses to astrovirus infection in mammals. A full understanding of the immune response to astrovirus infection is necessary if we are to control and prevent astrovirus diseases.


Title: Astrovirus Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionInfectious diarrhea is a leading cause of childhood morbidity and mortality worldwide. Human astroviruses (HAstV)—small, non-enveloped positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses in the Astroviridae family—are a leading cause of diarrhea in children, the elderly, and immunocompromised people. They are extremely prevalent, and around 90% of the population 9 years and older has antibodies against HAstV type 1 (HAstV-1) [1,2,3]. Since the initial discovery of HAstV-1 in humans in 1975 [4,5], additional astroviruses have been described and reported in humans [6] as well as in domesticated and wild animals [7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25]. This broad host range has become increasingly evident, with the viruses divided into two main genera—Avastrovirus and Mamastrovirus—based on their ability to infect avian and mammalian species, respectively (Figure 1).Astrovirus infections were thought to be species-specific, yet turkey, chicken, and duck astroviruses share genetic features, indicating that cross-species transmission may be frequent [26]. Poultry abattoir workers were three times more likely to test positive for antibodies against turkey astrovirus than people with no contact with poultry [27], and perhaps the most compelling evidence was the detection of astrovirus strains previously shown to be limited to human infections in non-human primates (NHP) by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) [28]. These studies and others suggest that astroviruses can cross species barriers; however, whether these transmissions result in disease remains unclear.Despite the high prevalence of astrovirus [29] and the advances made in the identification of novel genotypes, there is still little known about HAstV pathogenesis—especially among the different HAstV genotypes. Previous studies demonstrated that HAstVs increase epithelial cell permeability by disrupting cellular tight junctional complexes [30]. Since the intestinal tract depends on tight junctions to separate the lumen from the basal lamina, the loss of integrity increases ion, solute, and water trafficking across the compartments, reducing the ability of the intestine to reabsorb water and nutrients, leading to diarrhea. Additionally, extra-gastrointestinal astrovirus-associated disease has been reported in animals and humans [31,32,33], which could result from the increased intestinal permeability. The definite mechanisms underlying diarrhea and systemic spread remain an area of continual research; increasing our understanding of astrovirus disease will be integral for future treatment and prevention strategies. Recently, studies in both humans and animals have helped to elucidate the molecular and cellular attributes of astrovirus disease. The following review highlights these findings, and outlines necessary and critical steps needed to further astrovirus research.2. Astrovirus DiseaseWithin the years following the discovery of HAstV, eight distinct genotypes (HAstV-1–8, also referred to as classical or canonical human clades) were identified, with infections caused by HAstV-1 shown to be the most prevalent worldwide [34,35,36,37,38]. In the late 2000s, through pathogen discovery investigations of diarrheal outbreaks, two divergent HAstV genotypes were discovered: HAstV-MLB (Melbourne) clade containing at least three strains (MLB1, MLB2, MLB3) and the HAstV-VA/HMO (Virginia/Human-Mink-Ovine-like) clade containing at least five strains (VA1, VA2, VA3, VA4, VA5). The HAstV-MLB and HAstV-VA/HMO viruses have been designated as non-canonical human genotypes. HAstV-MLB1 was initially discovered in pediatric stool samples from Australia [39,40,41], whereas HAstV-MLB2 and HAstV-MLB3 were discovered in India [42,43]. The HAstV-VA1–VA3 viruses were first discovered in an outbreak of gastroenteritis in Virginia, USA [44,45]; HAstV-VA4 in a cohort of Indian children with diarrhea [43]; and HAstV-VA5 in a cohort in Gambia [46]. The prevalence of the non-canonical viruses varies greatly according to geographic location [6], and their association with clinical disease remains somewhat of a mystery in comparison to the canonical strains.Signs of HAstV last 2 to 4 days, and consist of watery diarrhea that can be less commonly accompanied by fever, headaches, abdominal pain, and anorexia [1,47,48]. However, many of the infections in healthy children and adults tend to be asymptomatic [37]. The consequence of these asymptomatic cases on the epidemiology and transmission of the virus remain unclear. Further research is needed to understand the clinical disease associated with the different human astrovirus genotypes.Astrovirus infections are of clinical concern in the immunocompromised population due to their increased severity of symptoms and extra-gastrointestinal involvement [6]. HAstV has also been suggested to be the causative agent in encephalitis and meningitis, which was brought to light in a case report of a 15-year old boy with X-linked agammaglobulinemia by Quan et al. [33]. The patient was admitted to a psychiatric ward due to cognitive decline, became comatose, and died 71 days post admission. RNA was extracted from the patient’s biopsy and postmortem samples, and sequenced and amplified with virus-specific primers, but results were negative. As an alternative approach, next-generation sequencing (NGS) was utilized to identify the presence of HAstV in the biopsy samples. Consequently, there have now been nine cases of astrovirus-associated encephalitis and meningitis reported in predominately immunocompromised patients, although one case was in an individual without overt immunosuppression [33,49,50,51,52,53,54,55]. Interestingly, in eight out of the nine cases, a non-canonical strain was detected in patient samples. NGS identified HAstV-VA1 in a nasopharyngeal specimen from a child with an acute respiratory infection in Tanzania, but it is unclear if HAstV-VA1 was responsible for the respiratory disease [56]. These studies suggest that astroviruses have systemic potential, reiterating the importance of studying astrovirus pathogenesis of both canonical and non-canonical subtypes, especially since infections caused by non-canonical viruses do not appear to be rare in immunocompromised populations. In a cohort of immunocompromised pediatric oncology patients, while HAstV-1 was identified in 50% of samples, HAstV-VA2 and HAstV-MLB1 were also present in 21% and 13% of samples, respectively [57]. However, it was noted that the PCR screening used in this study was unable to detect other members of the HAstV-VA and HAstV-MLB clades, meaning that these genotypes may be even more prevalent than reported. With improved molecular techniques for detection and diagnosis, surveillance efforts will afford a better understanding of prevalence.There are many parallels that can be drawn between human and animal astrovirus disease, but the area remains understudied. Like humans, many of the animals infected with astrovirus exhibit diarrhea, including turkeys [22], chickens [23], calves [24], lambs [25], piglets [21], and deer [20]. However, there is a subset of animals that are asymptomatic [12,19,21,24]. Much like the human astroviruses, the impact of the asymptomatic infection on epidemiology and transmission in animal astrovirus remains unclear. Chicken astrovirus has been associated with “white chick” condition that causes a decrease in hatch-rate and an increase in chick mortality and weakness [58,59]. Along with this, there is evidence of astrovirus-associated encephalitis and meningitis in mink and cows [31,32] and respiratory disease in calves [60]. As with the human viruses, improved molecular techniques would lead to a better understanding of prevalence and genotype-specific disease.3. Cell Culture and Animal ModelsOne of the major barriers to understanding astrovirus pathogenesis is the lack of suitable cell culture systems for the majority of the genotypes. The classical HAstV strains replicate in a variety of cells lines, with human colon carcinoma cells type 2 (Caco-2) being the most widely used [61]. No cell culture systems have been identified for the non-canonical HAstV-MLB and HAstV-VA genotypes, or the majority of animal and avian viruses. Unfortunately, until astrovirus cellular receptor(s) are identified, we remain unable to create suitable cell culture systems.Numerous groups are working to identify cellular binding proteins. Crystallization of the human HAstV-8 and turkey astrovirus type 2 (TAstV-2) capsid and spike proteins [62,63,64,65,66] showed conserved polysaccharide binding motifs [65]. The addition of heparin, heparin sulfate, or dextran sulfate partially blocked HAstV-8 infectivity of Caco-2 cells [66]. However, pretreatment of Caco-2 cells with chondroitinase and heparinase did not significantly reduce HAstV-1 infection in the same cells [63], suggesting that there may be strain- and/or genotype-specific differences. Identifying the astrovirus receptor will be a key discovery, and will possibly allow the creation of transgenic animal models to further study pathogenesis and astrovirus-associated disease.In addition to the lack of cell culture systems, there is no animal model for HAstVs. To date, turkey poults remain the only well-defined “small” animal model available to study astrovirus pathogenesis in vivo. Research done using the turkey poult model has shown that—unlike other gastrointestinal viruses—astrovirus did not cause diarrhea by damaging the intestinal epithelium and/or eliciting an inflammatory response [67]. Rather, infection may lead to diarrhea by inducing sodium malabsorption [68], and possibly by disrupting the intestinal epithelial barrier [69].HAstV-1 infection of Caco-2 cells results in increased barrier permeability by disrupting tight junctions [30]. Tight junctions are highly regulated cell–cell associations that help maintain cell polarity and prevent the free passage of macromolecules and microorganisms from one side of the epithelium to the other [70]. Junctions are multiprotein domains composed of transmembrane proteins, such as occludin and claudins, which interact with cytosolic adapter proteins, like zonula occludens (ZO-1). These interactions connect the cell membrane with the actin cytoskeleton. Disruptions of the tight junction can result in altered ion and/or solute exchange, increasing fluid to the lumen of the intestine and inducing diarrhea. Astrovirus has been shown to increase epithelial cell permeability upon infection of Caco-2 cells in vitro, possibly due to a reduction in actin fibers [30], reduction of occludin from the junctional complex [30], and redistribution of e-cadherin 24 h post-infection (hpi; Figure 2).Intriguingly, this disruption of tight junctions did not require infectious virus. Recombinant HAstV-1 capsid protein also increased barrier permeability in vitro [30], and oral administration of recombinant TAstV-2 capsid protein alone induced diarrhea, caused relocalization of transporters, and disrupted intestinal permeability in turkey poults [69], suggesting that the astrovirus capsid protein may act as a type of enterotoxin. We hypothesize that binding alone (to a yet unknown receptor) or entry may trigger a signal transduction cascade, resulting in dysregulation of intestinal tight junctions. However, what this disruption means for the viral life cycle or disease pathogenesis requires more research. Studies are also underway to identify the cellular mechanisms leading to disruption as well as the region(s) of the capsid involved in activity, including the identification of cellular receptor(s).The use of the Caco-2 in vitro model also led to the discovery that HAstV infection does not induce a strong interferon (IFN) response [71], yet exogenous IFN-β effectively reduced HAstV infection [71,72], and pretreatment significantly reduced HAstV-1-increased barrier permeability [72]. Similar results of decreased infection and less barrier permeability were seen in vivo using interferon-alpha/beta receptor (IFNAR) knockout mice [72]. This indicates that type I interferons play a crucial role in protection against astrovirus replication, and potentially protect the intestinal integrity during infection.While turkey poults are the best-characterized small-animal model for astrovirus-induced gastroenteritis, they are not ideal. TAstV is a member of Avastrovirus, making it genetically distinct from human astroviruses. Thus, disease pathogenesis of the two may not be comparable. Additionally, there are few commercially available reagents (including antibodies) for most cellular proteins [69]. Given the lack of reagents, the genetic differences in avian and mammalian astroviruses, and the challenge of working with the turkey model, a mammalian model would be better suited to study astrovirus pathogenesis.In 2012, two novel murine astroviruses (MuAstV; STL1 and STL2) were identified in mice housed in a specific-pathogen-free facility at Washington University in Saint Louis, MO, USA [73]. Subsequent analysis revealed the presence of at least two additional viruses (STL3 and STL4) in this colony. Yokoyama et al. showed that MuAstV was shed at high levels in the feces of immunocompromised mice, and MuAstV genomic RNA could be detected in numerous organs [73]. The virus was highly infectious, as cohousing resulted in transmission to naïve animals. Similarly, we isolated a MuAstV strain most similar to STL4, developed purification methods, and demonstrated that oral inoculation of 3 to 6 weeks of age C57Bl/6 mice resulted in high viral titers in the feces beginning at 2 days post-infection (dpi) that continued through 53 dpi [74]. This is similar to some strains of murine norovirus, where mice exhibit low-level persistent infection with virus shed in the feces for extended periods of time and the potential to go systemic in the absence of overt disease [75,76]. Unlike TAstV-2-infected turkey poults, mice did not exhibit diarrhea as a symptom of MuAstV infection. This is unsurprising, given that colitis must be induced for diarrhea to occur in mice [74,77], and preliminary studies suggest that MuAstV infection does not cause intestinal damage. However, MuAstV did increase intestinal permeability, suggesting that increased permeability may be independent of diarrhea in the mouse model. More studies are needed to understand the correlation (if there is any) between increased permeability and diarrhea, as well as the ability of the capsid protein alone to induce clinical disease.Finally, something to consider: our group and others showed that MuAstV is not only present in many strains of commonly used laboratory mice, but is persistently shed at high levels, and may be systemic [73,78]. What does this mean for biomedical research? Does an underlying, asymptomatic MuAstV infection impact other infectious disease, immunity, or cancer studies? What about the microbiome? Our preliminary data suggests that MuAstV infection does change the microbiome, but what happens if we remove the virus? While we do not yet know the impact of endemic MuAstV infection, studies from MNV suggest that it could have broad implications on biomedical research. For example, we know that underlying MNV infection can alter the disease progression in bacterially-induced inflammatory bowel disease [79], can induce intestinal inflammation similar to Crohn’s disease in susceptible mice strains [80], and most intriguingly, may be able to replace the beneficial functions of the gut microbiome [81,82]. All of these and many other questions require answers, and therefore it is an exciting time to study astroviruses.4. ConclusionsAlthough there is still much work to be done regarding astrovirus pathogenesis, significant progress has been made in recent years. The identification of HAstV-MLB and HAstV-VA genotypes show that astrovirus infections are more common than was once thought. Along with the discovery of new astroviruses, a greater appreciation for the virus’ potential to go systemic and cause encephalitis and meningitis in immunocompromised and immunocompetent hosts has been developed. However, it has also become clear that astrovirus causes diarrhea in an unconventional way. Rather than causing inflammation and cell death in the intestinal tract, astrovirus disrupts tight junctions, allowing an influx of water, resulting in diarrhea. Along with this, we now know from a turkey poult model that the viral capsid alone is capable of invoking diarrhea in vivo. With all of this new knowledge, we still face challenges, the most prominent being the lack of a well-characterized small-animal model. As this model becomes more developed and standardized, astrovirus pathogenesis can be further elucidated and eventually used for vaccination, therapeutic studies, and furthering our knowledge on possible zoonotic transmission. A major question is whether an animal model for HAstV strains is possible. Our recent study demonstrating that non-human primates harbor human astroviruses suggest that it may be a possibility in the future [28].


Title: Astrovirus infections in humans and animals – Molecular biology, genetic diversity, and interspecies transmissions

1IntroductionAstroviruses are small, non-enveloped RNA viruses first identified in 1975 by electron microscopy (EM) in children suffering from diarrhea (Appleton and Higgins, 1975, Madeley and Cosgrove, 1975b, Matsui and Greenberg, 1996). Since then, enteric infections in humans caused by astrovirus have been reported worldwide mainly in infants and young children. Several studies suggest that astroviruses are the second most common cause of gastroenteritis in children after rotavirus infection (Matsui and Greenberg, 1996).The name astrovirus derives from the Greek word “astron” (=star) and describes the characteristic five/six pointed star-like projections detectable by negative stained EM of the virions. Although it should be pointed out that the presence of these projections is pH dependent and may only be present in less than 10% of the population (Caul and Appleton, 1982, Koci and Schultz-Cherry, 2002). In fact, in some instances the typical star-like appearance is not easily recognizable in EM preparations and astroviruses could be misidentified as enteroviruses or provisionally named astrovirus-like particles or small round viruses (SRVs) (Guy et al., 2004, Koci and Schultz-Cherry, 2002). This was probably the case of astrovirus infections in ducks, turkeys, and guinea fowl, where picornavirus or enterovirus-like particles were initially described (Cattoli et al., 2005, Guy et al., 2004, Koci and Schultz-Cherry, 2002). For this reason, the advent of more specific tools for virus detection and genome-based identification in the last ten years has allowed the discovery or the confirmation of the presence of astroviruses in a number of different hosts.Soon after the first description in human beings, astrovirus-like particles were described and reported in domesticated animals. The first reports in animals were from lambs and calves suffering from diarrhea (Snodgrass and Gray, 1977, Woode and Bridger, 1978). Based on clinical and virological observations during acute mortality cases in ducks in the 1980s, the presence of astrovirus was associated with fatal hepatitis (Gough et al., 1984). This was perhaps the first evidence of extra-intestinal localization of astroviruses. Of interest, similar acute duck hepatitis was also reported in the 1960s, one decade before the discovery of astrovirus in humans and 20 years before identification of astroviruses as the cause of hepatitis in ducks (Asplin, 1965a, Asplin, 1965b). At present, the list of animal species susceptible to astrovirus infection has expanded to include domestic, synantropic and wild animals, avian and mammalian species in the terrestrial and aquatic environments (Table 1
). In the last decade, there has been a dramatic increase in the identification of astroviruses in new animal species due to the advent of better molecular assays and pathogen discovery tools. This list is likely to be far from complete and surely more astrovirus-susceptible hosts are going to be added in the near future.Table 1Chronology of astroviruses discovered, year of first prototype detection and in vitro isolation information.SpeciesDetectionReferenceDisease associatedIsolationReferenceSubstrate for replicationHuman (Homo sapiens sapiens)1975Madeley and Cosgrove (1975a)Gastroenteritis in children1981Lee and Kurtz (1981)Human kidney epithelial (HEK) cells, CaCo2 cell line, baby hamster kidney 21 (BHK-21)Ovine (Ovis aries)1977Snodgrass and Gray (1977)Diarrhea in lambs–––Bovine (Bos taurus)1978Woode and Bridger (1978))Diarrhea in calves, asymptomatic1985Woode et al. (1985)Primary bovine embryo kidney cells (EBK), neonatal bovine kidney (NBK)Chicken (Gallus gallus)1979Yamaguchi et al. (1979)⁎Interstitial nephritis in young chicks, enteritis1979(Yamaguchi et al., 1979)Primary chicken kidney cells (CK), primary chicken embryo liver (CEL), baby hamster kidney (BHK), chicken hepatoma (LMH) cellsPig (Sus scrofa)1980Bridger (1980)Diarrhea in piglets, asymptomatic1980Shimizu et al. (1990)Embryonic swine kidney established cell line (ESK), porcine kidney-15 (PK-15)Dog (Canis lupus familiaris)1980Williams (1980)Diarrhea in pups, asymptomatic–Martella et al. (2011)Madin-Derby canine kidney cells (MDCK)Cat (Felis catus)1981Hoshino et al. (1981)Pyrexia and mild diarrhea, asymptomatic–––Red deer (Cervus elaphus)1981Tzipori et al. (1981)Diarrhea1981Tzipori et al. (1981)Primary bovine embryonic kidney cells (EBK)Duck (Anas platyrhynchos domestica)1984Gough et al. (1984)Acute hepatitis and mortality in ducklings1985Gough et al. (1985)Duck and chicken SPF embrionating eggs: via allantoic, amniotic or yolk-sac routes, LMH cellsMouse (Mus musculus)1985Kjeldsberg and Hem (1985)Diarrhea, asymptomatic–––Turkey (Meleagris meleagris)1980McNulty et al. (1980)Poult enteritis complex (PEC), poult enteritis mortality syndrome (PEMS)1991Guy and Barnes, 1991, Koci et al., 2000)SPF turkey eggs: 20 day-old via the yolk sac, or 22 day-old via the amniotic cavityMink (Neovison vison)2002Englund et al. (2002)Pre-weaning diarrhea, shaking mink syndrome–––Guinea fowl (Numida meleagris)2005Cattoli et al. (2005)Enteritis–––Insectivorous bat (⁎⁎)2008Chu et al. (2008)––––Cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus)2009Atkins et al. (2009)Lethargy and anorexia, watery diarrhea–––California sea lion (Zalophus californianus)2010Rivera et al. (2010)Pup with diarrhea adults clinically healthy–––Steller sea lion (Eumelopias jubatus)2010Rivera et al. (2010)Pup without signs of diarrhea–––Bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatos)2010Rivera et al. (2010)Clinically healthy–––Brown rat (Rattus norvegicus)2010Chu et al. (2010)––––Roe deer (Capreolus capreolus)2010Smits et al. (2010)Diarrhea–––⁎Firstly identified as enterovirus-like, was finally classified as a new member of the family Astroviridae in 2000 (Imada et al., 2000).⁎⁎Astroviruses were detected in rectal swabs collected from several species insectivorous bats, belonging to different families, namely Rhinolophidae, Vespertilionidae, Emballonuridae, Megadermatidae.In the present work, we will review the existing knowledge concerning astrovirus infections in humans and animals, with particular focus on molecular biology, interspecies transmission and zoonotic potential of this group of viruses.2Etiology and taxonomyThe family Astroviridae comprises non-enveloped, positive sense, single-stranded RNA viruses, typically 28–30 nm in diameter (Matsui and Greenberg, 1996). They have been classified into two genera, namely Mamastroviruses (MAstVs) and Avastroviruses (AAstVs) known to infect mammalian and avian species, respectively (Mendez and Arias, 2007). Few species are officially classified by the International Committee for Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV). These are: duck astrovirus 1 (DAstV-1), turkey astrovirus 1 and 2 (TAstV-1 and TAstV-2), and avian nephritis virus (ANV) as AAstVs, bovine astrovirus (BoAstV), feline astrovirus (FeAstV), human astroviruses (HAstVs 1–8), ovine astrovirus (OAstV), mink astrovirus (MiAstV), and porcine astrovirus (PoAstV) as MAstrVs.The genome length is 6.8 to 7.9 kb and includes a 5′ un-translated region (UTR), followed by three open reading frames (ORFs) namely ORF1a, ORF1b, and ORF2, a 3′ UTR and a poly-A tail. There is a frame-shift structure between ORF1a and ORF1b. ORF1 encodes both a protease and an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. ORF2 is expressed from a subgenomic RNA and encodes for the viral capsid protein (Fig. 1
). The length of each of these structures varies between species and serotypes. From a genetic point of view, ORF1b appears to be the least divergent and ORF2 the most divergent among the different ORFs (Strain et al., 2008). This is of course an expected event since the region encoding for the viral capsid protein is more subject to selective pressure if compared to regions encoding for non-structural proteins. Unfortunately, only a minimal number of complete genomic astrovirus sequences are available (Table 2
).Fig. 1Genome structure of Astroviruses. Astroviruses are single stranded positive sense RNA viruses. Though variable in length among the Astroviridae family, the genome architecture of Astroviruses is similar. For Human Astrovirus-1, the genome is 6.8 kilobases (kb) in length. It contains a 5′ untranslated region (UTR) of 85 nt, a 3′ UTR of 83 nt, and a poly(A) tail. After deposition of the viral genome into the cytoplasm ORF1a is immediately translated to produce the nonstructural proteins. Combination of a slippery (A)6C sequence and downstream structural hairpin contribute to a −1 ribosomal frame shift resulting in translation of the nonstructural polyprotein ORF1ab encoding the RNA dependent RNA polymerase. The subgenomic RNA is 2.4 kb in length and contains a 5′ UTR, 3′ UTR, a poly(A) tail and is transcribed from an internal promoter in the minus strand. ORF2 is translated from the subgenomic RNA to produce the structural proteins.Table 2Summary of the genetic sequences of human and animal astroviruses available in a public database (GenBank – http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, accessed on 11th May 2011). Prototype sequences are based on ICTV taxonomic proposals 2010.017aV and 2010.018aV or included in the present review (in italics). OAstV: ovine astrovirus; BoAstV: bovine astrovirus; PoAstV: porcine astrovirus; MiAstV: mink astrovirus; FeAstV: feline astrovirus; CaAstvV: canine astrovirus; CcAstV: roe deer astrovirus; BatAstV: bat astrovirus; RatAstV: rat astrovirus; CslAstV: California sea lion astrovirus; BdAstV: bottlenose dolphin astrovirus; HAstV: human astrovirus; Ast-MLB: astrovirus MLB; HMO-AstV: astrovirus human, mink- and ovine-like; Ast-VA: astrovirus VA; DAstV: duck astrovirus; TAstV: turkey astrovirus; CAstV: chicken astrovirus; ANV: Avian Nephritis Virus; ORF: open reading frame.AstroviridaePrototype sequence GenBank accession numberNo. of whole genome sequences availableNo. of partial sequences availableMamastrovirusOAstVY15937⁎–NC002469⁎20BoAstVJF79612602 (ORF1 and 2)PoAstVAB037272162 (ORF2) 12 (ORF1b)GU562296 (PAstV2)MiAstVAY179509311 (ORF1b)FeAstVAF05619702 (ORF2) 1 (ORF1b)CaAstVFM21333003 (ORF2)FM213331FM213332CcAstVHM44704520BatAstVFJ571067074 (ORF1) 104 (ORF1b) 14 (ORF2)EU847144FJ571066EU847145FJ571068FJ571074EU847155FJ571073FJ571069FJ571072FJ571065FJ571070FJ571071RatAstVHM45038106 (ORF1b) 2 (ORF2)CslAstVFJ89035204 (ORF1b) 4 (ORF2)FJ890351BdAstVFJ890355021 (ORF1) 21 (ORF2)HAstVDQ070852161462⁎⁎AstV-MLB-1; -2AY7208914 (MLB-1; -2)18 (MLB-1; -2)HMO-AstV -A; -B; -CDQ3440271 (HMO-A; -B; -C)8 (HMO-A; -B; -C)AF260508AstV-VA-1; -2DQ028633AB013618L13745AF141381AY720892L23513Z25771FJ402983 (MLB1)FJ222451 (MLB1)NC013443 (HMO-a)GQ415661 (HMO-b)GQ415662 (HMO-c)FJ973620 (VA-1)GQ891990 (HAstV-PS)AvastrovirusDAstVFJ43466464 (ORF1)TAstVY15936 (TAstV1)1233 (TAstV1) 382⁎⁎⁎ (TAstV2) 1 (TAstV3)EU143843 (TAstV2)AF206663 (TAstV2)CAstV-1; -2NA055ANV-1; -2AB033998 (ANV-1)165 (ORF1) 9 (ORF2)AB046864 (ANV-2)⁎Sequences obtained from the same virus.⁎⁎Including “classical” serotypes 1–8.⁎⁎⁎Including TAstV detected in guinea fowl.To date, Astroviridae taxonomy takes into account the species of origin. Serotypes have been defined on the basis of twenty-fold, or greater, two-way cross-neutralization titers. Serotypes assigned to the species are given consecutive numbers (Lee and Kurtz, 1982, Mendez and Arias, 2007). Astroviruses do not easily grow in laboratory host systems and for this reason serological classification is difficult and is generally speculated based on percentage of nucleotide and amino acid similarity of the ORF2 encoding for the capsid protein (Chu et al., 2008, Koci et al., 2000, Reuter et al., 2011). It has been reported that if two strains of HAstVs have less than 95% homology at the nucleotide level, they are serologically distinguishable (Walter et al., 2001). Few documented antigenic classifications have been attempted for animal AstVs. Serological assays confirmed by molecular characterization, suggested the existence of a putative novel serotype of turkey astrovirus, TAstV-3 (Tang and Saif, 2004, Tang et al., 2005); similarly the application of cross-virus neutralization assays indicated the presence of more undefined serotypes of bovine AstV (Woode et al., 1985).Although official classification is currently based on the species of origin of AstV, the discovery of viruses in species never implicated before and of viruses genetically unrelated to those known to infect the same species has highlighted the need to review classification of those viruses following updated guidelines. Several AstVs have recently been detected in new species, namely guinea fowl, insectivorous bats, dogs, cheetahs, marine mammals, and brown rats (Atkins et al., 2009, Cattoli et al., 2005, Chu et al., 2008, Chu et al., 2010, Rivera et al., 2010, Toffan et al., 2009, Zhu et al., 2009). In humans, eight so-called “Classic” serotypes of astroviruses genetically related are known (HAstV1-8), and new species have recently been found in stool samples from patients suffering from gastroenteritis, namely AstV-MLB1 and MLB-2 which are genetically close to rat astroviruses discovered in Hong Kong (Chu et al., 2010, Finkbeiner et al., 2008b, Finkbeiner et al., 2009a, Finkbeiner et al., 2009c), and HAstVs genetically related to MiAstVs and OAstVs, thus called human, mink-, and ovine-like, HMOAstVs A, B, and C and AstV-VA1 (Finkbeiner et al., 2009b, Kapoor et al., 2009). Based on new findings, two proposals for re-classifications of Astroviridae were submitted in 2010 by the Astroviridae Study Group (Bosch et al., 2010a, Bosch et al., 2010b). They both take into consideration genetic criteria based on the full length sequencing of ORF2 (Fig. 2
). According to the proposals, three new species of Avastroviruses and nineteen new species of Mamastroviruses have ben recognized. These include Avastrovirus GI.A (current TAstV-1), GI.B (current ANV-1 and -2) and GII.A (current TAstV-2, and DAstV). Mamastroviruses GI.A (classical HAstVs 1–8), GI-B (FeAstV), GI.C (PoAstVs), GI.D (California sea lion AstV-2), GI.E (Canine AstV), GI.F (MLB1-HAstV), GI.G (Bottlenose dolphin AstV), and Mamastroviruses GII.A (HMOAstV-A and HastV-VA2), GII.B (HMOAstVs-B and -C, and HastV-Va1), GII.C (MiAstV), GII.D (California sea lion AstV-1), GII.E (Bat AstV), GII.F (OAstV), GII.G to GII.L (both including Bat AstVs exclusively) (see Fig. 2) (Bosch et al., 2010a, Bosch et al., 2010b).Fig. 2Phylogenetic tree including Mamastrovirus and Avastrovirus prototype ORF2 aminoacid sequences of the viruses listed in Table 2. The phylogenetic tree was obtained using the Neighbor-Joining method and MEGA4 software.Generally speaking, MAstVs (except HAstV-8) have an overlap of approximately eight nucleotides (nts) between the stop codon of ORF1b and the start codon of ORF2, which is in the same frame of ORF1a. AAstVs differ from this genome structure. The start codon for ORF2 of ANV is 19 nts downstream of the stop codon of ORF1b and ORF2 is maintained at the same frame of ORF1a. For TAstV-1 and TAstV-2, the space between the ORF1b and ORF2 is 18 nts and the ORF2 is in the same frame of ORF1b. In DAstV, ORF2 is placed at a different frame than ORF1a or ORF1b, with a start codon 23 nt downstream of the stop codon of ORF1b. Another difference among astroviruses is placed at the 3′ end of ORF2 and the 3′UTR, where there is a conserved motif of 19 nts, likely encoding for a secondary structure, and which is present in most astroviruses except for TastV-2, PoAstVs belonging to group II according to Luo et al. (2011), BatAstVs and RatAstVs (Chu et al., 2008, Chu et al., 2010, Jonassen et al., 2003).3Molecular genetics and biology of astrovirusesThe difficulty of astrovirus to grow in common laboratory hosts systems prevented early characterization, but in 1981 Lee and Kurtz demonstrated productive virus growth and passaging with the addition of trypsin in human kidney epithelial (HEK) cells (Lee and Kurtz, 1981). It was not until 1990 that this technique was applied to a more representative cell line; the human colon carcinoma cell line Caco2, which has become standard (Willcocks et al., 1990). The complete genome sequence for Human Astrovirus 1 was determined in 1994 and the first infectious cDNA clone was developed in 1997 (Geigenmuller et al., 1997, Willcocks et al., 1994). Basic research of astrovirus replication and viral protein functions are expanding, but much information is inferred from the large body of work on other positive-strand viruses, including alphaviruses and picornoviruses (Racaniello, 2001, Sondra Schlesinger, 2001, Strauss and Strauss, 1994) or derived from studies of the human astroviruses.Very little is known about astrovirus attachment and entry. The receptor for virus entry is unknown. The same cell line can be permissive and refractory to different subtypes of HAstV and this suggests different receptor requirements for the various subtypes (Brinker et al., 2000). Caco2 cells support infection by HAstV1–8 subtypes, while another human colon carcinoma cell line only minimally supports infection by HAstV1. When transfected with an infectious in vitro transcribed astrovirus genomic RNA, baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells support virus replication but are refractory to infection by the whole virus, suggesting they lack the appropriate cell surface receptor (Geigenmuller et al., 1997). The variances between virus subtypes and cell lines susceptible to infection suggest there may be multiple receptor requirements.Early studies with HAstV-1 in Graham 293 cells demonstrated the presence of astrovirus particles in coated pits and later in coated vesicles, suggesting adsorptive endocytosis as a possible mechanism by which astrovirus enters the cells. This was supported by inhibition of viral entry with endocytic inhibitors (Donelli et al., 1992). Once internalized, the plus-strand genome is released into the cytoplasm by unknown mechanisms and ORF1a and 1b are immediately translated by the host machinery. ORF1a is ∼2.8 kb encoding a ∼110 kDa polypeptide (Matsui and Greenberg, 1996) (see Fig. 1). The polypeptide contains a variety of conserved motifs, including several putative transmembrane helices, coiled coil domains, an immunoreactive epitope, putative nuclear localization signal (NLS), and serine protease (Guix et al., 2004, Matsui et al., 1993). The translated polypeptide is cleaved by both cellular protease(s) and the viral protease into at least five peptides (Geigenmuller et al., 2002, Guix et al., 2005, Kiang and Matsui, 2002). The structure of the astrovirus protease has recently been solved and several unique features defined, which differentiate it from other human and viral serine proteases (Speroni et al., 2009). The function of the remaining non-structural proteins (NSP) remains largely unknown. The transmembrane domains may localize nsp1a/2 to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane to facilitate replication (Guix et al., 2004) similar to other positive-strand RNA viruses (Ahlquist, 2006, Geigenmuller et al., 2002, Guix et al., 2004, Guix et al., 2005, Kiang and Matsui, 2002, Speroni et al., 2009). One peptide, nsp1a/41a, co-localizes with the viral RNA at the ER membrane (Guix et al., 2004); mutations in nsp1a/4 correlate with increased viral titers in vitro and in vivo (Guix et al., 2005) suggesting a role for this protein in viral replication. This peptide was recently shown to contain a hypervariable region that can be phosphorylated, form oligomers and interact with the viral polymerase supporting its importance to productive viral replication (Fuentes et al., 2011). There is relatively little information on the regulation of astrovirus replication by cellular factors. One study demonstrated that the astrovirus activates the cellular extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 pathway early in infection independently of replication. Inhibition of ERK1/2 activity resulted in decreased viral replication early in the course of infection (Moser and Schultz-Cherry, 2008).The second reading frame, ORF1b, which encodes the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) (Matsui and Greenberg, 1996), overlaps ORF1a by 70 nucleotides and is translated by a frame-shift into the −1 frame and is a common mechanism, though not unique, among plus-stranded animal RNA viruses (Lewis and Matsui, 1996). It requires a highly conserved heptameric sequence (A6C) and a downstream hairpin structure (Lewis and Matsui, 1995, Lewis and Matsui, 1996, Lewis and Matsui, 1997, Marczinke et al., 1994) (see Fig. 1). This event results in an ORF1a/1b fusion peptide, which is further cleaved near the 1a/1b border and occurs between 7% (in vitro) to 25% (in vivo) of the time (Lewis and Matsui, 1997). Astrovirus polymerase is a supergroup 1 RdRp (Lewis et al., 1994), a group which utilizes a viral-encoded primer attached to the genome (VPg) to initiate transcription (Jang et al., 2010). VPg is believed to exist (Al-Mutairy et al., 2005) although this hypothesis has yet to be confirmed (Carter and Willcocks, 1996). Further, there is no evidence of a viral helicase.The expression of the RdRp results in production of a minus-strand viral template between 9 and 12 h post-infection (hpi) (Jang et al., 2010), which generates multiple copies of the plus strand genome and a poly-adenylated subgenomic RNA (sgRNA) containing short 5′ and 3′ UTRs and ORF2 (Monroe et al., 1993). ORF2, which encodes the structural or capsid protein, is in the zero frame and overlaps ORF1b slightly (see Fig. 1). Production of the capsid protein from a sgRNA restricts capsid production in the viral replication cycle and allows for an estimated 10-fold excess of capsid to the viral genome by 12 hpi. The sgRNA is about 2.4 kb and encodes the capsid precursor polypeptide of 87–90 kDa (Monroe et al., 1993). The capsid contains at least three domains including a highly conserved 5′ terminal domain, a highly divergent intermediate domain, and the 3′ variable end domain all of which can be distinguished by their sequence identity. Intracellular proteolytic processing by cellular proteases including caspases (Banos-Lara Mdel and Mendez, 2010, Mendez et al., 2002, Mendez et al., 2004) yields an ∼70–80 kDa protein, which is further extracellularly cleaved by trypsin increasing infectivity up to 105 fold, condensing the virion to approximately 28 nm, and transforming the ∼70–80 kDa capsid protein into at least three smaller peptides of approximately 34, 29, and 26 kDa (Bass and Qiu, 2000). Positive sense genomes are packaged into these viral-like particles (VLPs), likely through interactions with the first 70 amino acids of the capsid protein, which is highly basic (Carter and Willcocks, 1996).The astrovirus capsid protein has several unique biological properties. It has been shown to be a unique inhibitor of the complement pathway by binding to complement C1 and mannose-binding lectin (MBL) inhibiting the activation of the classical and lectin complement pathways, respectively (Bonaparte et al., 2008, Gronemus et al., 2010, Hair et al., 2010;). This was the first description of a non-enveloped icosahedral virus inhibiting complement. However, the importance of this finding during astrovirus infection remains unknown. Another unique feature of the astrovirus capsid protein is its potential action as an enterotoxin. Studies by Moser et al. (2007) demonstrated that astroviruses increase epithelial barrier permeability by disrupting cellular tight junction complexes (Moser et al., 2007). This increase in barrier permeability was independent from viral replication. Recombinant capsid alone was sufficient suggesting that the capsid may contribute to diarrhea in vivo.Overall, a great deal of work is still needed to understand astrovirus replication. Particularly in relation to the cellular factors required for productive replication, the role of the individual NSPs in replication and controlling cellular functions, and a better understanding of the processing of the capsid protein. One major unanswered question is how the astrovirus is released from the cell without inducing cell death.4Human astrovirusesHAstVs predominately affect children under the age of 2, elderly people and immunocompromised individuals and are thought to be involved in up to 20% of the cases of sporadic non-bacterial diarrheas and 0.5–15% of diarrheal outbreaks (Kirkwood et al., 2005, Moser and Schultz-Cherry, 2005). Upon infection, clinical symptoms normally last between 2 to 4 days and consist of watery diarrhea and less commonly vomiting, headache, fever, abdominal pain and anorexia (Glass et al., 1996, Glass et al., 2001, LeBaron et al., 1990, Mitchell et al., 1999). However, there is evidence that HAstV infections can be asymptomatic in children and adults (Mendez-Toss et al., 2004). An interesting study by Quan et al. (2010) suggested that human astroviruses may be able to go systemic when authors detected for the first time HAstV as the causative agent for encephalitis in an immunocompromised child, which has led to important new questions about this HAstV-associated disease, mainly in the immunocompromised patient (Quan et al., 2010).The prevalence of HAstV depends on the region and test settings (urban hospital versus child care center, etc.). However, most studies report a prevalence rate up to 10% in most areas (range of 2–9%) with rates as high as 30% in some developing countries (De Grazia et al., 2011, Guix et al., 2002). Several extensive epidemiological studies suggested that the maximum detection rate for HAstV was in children from 2 to 4 years of age with the highest rates of infection in the winter months in temperate climates (De Grazia et al., 2011, Guix et al., 2002), although, HAstV can be detected in the spring and summer seasons as well (Herrmann et al., 1991, Noel and Cubitt, 1994). It is not unusual to find HAstV in association with other enteric viruses. Several studies suggest that 33–65% of symptomatic HAstV infection may be associated to other enteric microbes like rotavirus and norovirus (Colomba et al., 2006, Roman et al., 2003). A study in Spain showed a slightly less incidence of co-infections with only 17% of the HAstV positive cases associated with other pathogens (Guix et al., 2002). Regardless, HAstV appears to be a significant cause of gastroenteritis, especially in young children.Until 2008, human infections were thought to be limited to eight closely related HAstV genotypes now referred to as the “Classic” human astroviruses. In several cases these genotypes were detected and initially differentiated using a set of conserved primers to the ORF1b termed Mon269 (5′ CAACTCAGGAAACAGGGTGT) and Mon270 (5′ TCAGATGCATTGTCATTGGT) (Noel et al., 1995). HAstV-1 appears to be the predominant circulating serotype worldwide followed by types 2–5 and occasionally 8 depending on the region. HAstV-6 and 7 are rarely detected (De Grazia et al., 2011, Gabbay et al., 2007, Guix et al., 2002, Liu et al., 2008, Mendez-Toss et al., 2004, Mustafa et al., 2000, Palombo and Bishop, 1996). There is a great deal of diversity within each of the different genotypes. Two studies of the beginning of year 2000 suggested that a variant could be considered a new subtype if identity was less than 95% nucleotide homology to a reference strain and >0.05 distance by phylogenetic analysis at the 3′ end of ORF2 (Jakab et al., 2003, Walter et al., 2001). Others proposed that strains showing a sequence diversity of at least 7% could be considered as new lineages (Guix et al., 2002, Medina et al., 2000). Based on these suggestions, HAstV-1 has been divided into a least six lineages, HAstV-1a–1f (Gabbay et al., 2007); HAstV-2 into at least three lineages, HAstV-2a–2c (De Grazia et al., 2011, Gabbay et al., 2007); HAstV-3 into two lineages (Belliot et al., 1997a, Belliot et al., 1997b, Liu et al., 2008); and HAstV-4 into two lineages, 4a and 4b. To date there is no information on the association between disease symptoms and HAstV genotype, except for one study which suggests that HAstV-3 may be associated to more severe gastroenteritis and higher fecal viral titers if/when compared to the other genotypes (Caballero et al., 2003). This very interesting work also demonstrated that astroviruses can result in persistent infections, some lasting up to 3 months, and described a quantitative RT-PCR assay to detect the HAstV genomes per gram of feces (Caballero et al., 2003).The advent of pyrosequencing and pathogen discovery demonstrates that the human stool contains a variety of previously unrecognized astroviruses. A seminal paper by Finkbeiner et al. (2008a) used metagenomic analysis to identify a new genotype of HAstV in the feces of a young boy from Melbourne, Australia with acute diarrhea (Finkbeiner et al., 2008a). They termed the virus MLB1 (AstV-MLB1) and went onto characterize the genome, demonstrating that AstV-MLB1 was highly divergent from any of the known astroviruses (Finkbeiner et al., 2008b). AstV-MLB1 lacks much of the conservation typically seen between HAstV 1–8 in the non-translated regions of the genome, for example in the 5′ and 3′ non-translated regions and the ORF1b/2 junction, suggesting that this is a new genogroup within the Mamastrovirus I family. Further studies have demonstrated that AstV-MLB1 is widely distributed and that, just as in the classic HAstV, there is heterogeneity within the group (Finkbeiner et al., 2009a, Finkbeiner et al., 2009c). Of great interest is the molecular dating analysis on the ORF1b region, which suggests that the newly discovered rat astrovirus may share a common ancestor with AstV-MLB1 with an estimated date of AD 1054 (Chu et al., 2010). Unfortunately, due to the lack of available sequence data, the evolutionary history of astroviruses remains unknown.By using similar pathogen discovery techniques, the same group discovered and characterized AstV-VA1 during a sporadic diarrheal disease outbreak in Virginia (Finkbeiner et al., 2009b) and demonstrated diversity within the AstV-VA1 genogroup (Finkbeiner et al., 2009c). During this time, a separate group also identified three novel human astrovirus species from adult travellers using pan-astrovirus specific primers to ORF1b that were phylogenetically related to each other with the closest genetic relatives being mink and ovine (Kapoor et al., 2009). Thus, they were named human, mink, and ovine-like HMOAstV types A, B, and C. Intriguingly, AstV-VA1 is closely related to HMOAstV-C. There AstV-VA and HMOAstV viruses are quite distinct from the classic HAstV and AstV-MLB viruses and cluster within the Mamastrovirus II family. Important for surveillance purposes, Finkbeiner et al. (2009c) developed conserved primers to the ORF1b that should detect all human astrovirus genogroups (Finkbeiner et al., 2009c).It is evident that there are at least three clades of astroviruses co-circulating in humans: Classic, MLB1-like and VA1-like. Co-infection by two different genotypes in one person provides an opportunity for recombination to occur. Indeed, there has been evidence of recombination within the classic HAstV stains (Walter et al., 2001, Wolfaardt et al., 2011).5Animal astroviruses5.1Mamastroviruses5.1.1Ovine astrovirus (OAstV)Astrovirus infection in lambs probably represents the first report confirming the occurrence of astrovirus infections in animals and was described in 1977 shortly after the description of astroviruses in humans (Snodgrass and Gray, 1977). Studies on pathogenesis of OAstV in lambs demonstrates that it replicates in the absorptive epithelial cells of the small intestine and induces mild diarrhea in gnotobiotic lambs (Gray et al., 1980, Snodgrass et al., 1979). OastV does not seem to play a crucial role in the ovine viral enteritis since no further case reports or studies have followed after the first identification. As a consequence, the epidemiology of OAstV is unknown; the same for the serological or genetic diversity and only the complete genome sequence of the original isolate is available in the public genetic database (GenBank, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov; Table 2). Nevertheless, this OAstV genome has been extensively analyzed as a prototype Mamastrovirus (Jonassen et al., 2003), and found to harbor, as most of known AstVs, a RNA motif in the 3′ end of the genome common to distinct and genetically different virus families (i.e. Coronaviruses and Picornaviruses) and supposed to be representative of a recombination event between these viruses (Jonassen et al., 1998). Recent findings concerning novel astroviruses detected in human stools and genetically closely related to OAstV and MiAstV, have suggested the possibility for these viruses to have a common ancestor, as assumed for the previously described HAstVs, FeAstVs, and PoAstVs (Finkbeiner et al., 2009b, Jonassen et al., 1998, Kapoor et al., 2009, Quan et al., 2010).5.1.2Bovine astrovirus (BoAstV)The first isolate of bovine astrovirus was reported in England in 1978 (Woode and Bridger, 1978). Astrovirus was considered to be avirulent, as experimentally infected gnotobiotic calves remained clinically normal, although pathological studies on infected calves were not performed. Subsequently, a bovine enteric virus antigenically related to the UK strain of BoAstV was isolated in Florida from a calf with diarrhea (Woode et al., 1984). Although calves experimentally infected with this astrovirus did not develop clinical disease, the virus caused cytopathology of the M cells of the dome epithelium covering the Peyer’s patches (Woode et al., 1984). Similarly to OAstV, the limited clinical significance initially attributed to BoAstV infection in cattle is probably the reason why there has been a lack of reports for more than 25 years, until 2011 (Tse et al., 2011). It was originally concluded that in natural conditions, BoAstV does not seem to be directly associated with a severe diarrheic disease in calves (Bridger et al., 1984, Tse et al., 2011, Woode and Bridger, 1978, Woode et al., 1984) and few controversial data are available on the prevalence of this infection. In 2010, a study conducted in Europe by Smits et al. (2010) described astrovirus infection in European roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) suffering from gastroenteritis (Smits et al., 2010). The virus responsible for the infection was further shown to be genetically related to BoAstV, suggesting that this virus could cross the species barrier to infect both cattle and roe deer (Tse et al., 2011). Although a previous study suggested that BoAstV could be excreted by 60–100% of calves on farms (Bridger et al., 1984), only 5 out of 209 rectal swabs (2.4%) collected from asymptomatic adult cattle were found positive for BoAstV infection (Tse et al., 2011). In bovine, two serotypes have been recognized by serological investigation, namely BoAstV-1 and BoAstV-2 (Woode et al., 1985), and recent phylogenetic analyses support classification of BoAstVs and the newly discovered AstVs in roe deer (CcAstV) under the proposed “genocluster GI” of the Mamastrovirus (Bosch et al., 2010b, Smits et al., 2010, Tse et al., 2011). The antigenic diversity detected in the earlier studies is also reflected in the more recently described genetic diversity for BoAstV. In a recent report, Tse et al. (2011) detected sequences from two different BoAstVs in 2 out of 5 positive specimens (Tse et al., 2011). This finding is in compliance with other reports on the occurrence of co-infections caused by genetically distinct astroviruses infecting the same host, as was described for pigs (Luo et al., 2011) and is a pre-requisite for recombination between different strains. In the same study, at least one recombination event was identified at the ORF2 between BoAstVs and CcAstVs (Tse et al., 2011). However, it should be noted that only two partial BoAstV sequences are available in GenBank (Table 2).5.1.3Feline astrovirus (FeAstV)Feline astrovirus was first described in cats in 1981 (Hoshino et al., 1981). To date, picornavirus-like particles as well as astroviruses from feces of domestic cats have been described in Australia, England, Germany, New Zealand and the USA (Harbour et al., 1987, Herbst and Krauss, 1989, Hoshino et al., 1981, Marshall et al., 1987, Rice et al., 1993). The impact of AstV infection in cats seems to be low as infection of specific-pathogen free kittens caused two episodes of pyrexia and mild diarrhea (Harbour et al., 1987). Similarly, in a 16-month study conducted in Australia, the occurrence of astrovirus infection was not related to the age of cats and to the presence of diarrhea (Marshall et al., 1987). Interestingly, in this study a human serum was found to react against a cat astrovirus by immune electron microscopy, implying similarity in antigenic regions between human and FeAstV (Marshall et al., 1987). To date, only partial sequences of the ORF1b and of the ORF2 have been deposited in public databases (Table 2), and feline astrovirus diversity has not been yet explored. Interestingly, a study on both AstV genome sequences and host species evolution has led to the hypothesis of a cross-species transmission likely occurred from pigs to cats and further from cats to humans, possibly involving intermediate species (Lukashov and Goudsmit, 2002). Recently, a Mamastrovirus was identified in cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus) raised in captivity showing clinical signs of gastroenteric disease, such as lethargy, anorexia, watery diarrhea and regurgitation (Atkins et al., 2009). The newly discovered virus was shown to be closely related to the FeAstV in ORF2 (88.6%, 97.1% nucleotide and amino acid identity, respectively); although comparison with ORF1b sequences was not possible due to the unavailability of FeAstVs sequences. Cheetah’s AstV clustered relatively more closely to HAstVs at the ORF2 level than at the ORF1b. This was an unexpected finding taking into account that for AstVs, the rate of change is generally higher in the capsid region (van Hemert et al., 2007b) and may indicate that a recombination event occurred between AstVs from different host species (Atkins et al., 2009). Currently it is unclear whether the cheetah AstV had crossed the species barrier from domestic cats or if it had established in cheetahs independently.5.1.4Porcine astrovirus (PoAstV)Astrovirus-like particles were first detected in pigs in the 1980s by EM (Bridger, 1980, Shirai et al., 1985). These reports were followed by the detection PoAstVs in several countries throughout the world; namely South Africa (Geyer et al., 1994), the Czech Republic (Indik et al., 2006), Hungary (Reuter et al., 2011), Quebec (Luo et al., 2011) and Colombia (Ulloa and Gutierrez, 2010), suggesting a wide geographical distribution. Although PoAstV is described as a common finding from fecal samples of apparently healthy pigs (Luo et al., 2011, Reuter et al., 2011), the clinical significance of this infection has not been completely clarified. As a matter of fact, clinical symptoms have been reported mainly in piglets, often in association with rotavirus-, coronavirus- and calicivirus-like infections (Bridger, 1980, Indik et al., 2006, Luo et al., 2011, Shimizu et al., 1990, Shirai et al., 1985). PoAstV prevalence is considered variable from 0% to 83% and 100% based on serological and virological surveillance, respectively (Luo et al., 2011, Shimizu et al., 1990). Though ICTV officially recognizes only one species of PoAstV (PoAstV-1) several reports have demonstrated the existence of multiple serotypes and subtypes. PoAstV-1 was partially characterized in 2006 (Indik et al., 2006), sharing only 86% nucleotide similarity with the previously characterized strain and clearly indicating that multiple serotypes could infect pigs (Indik et al., 2006). A putative PoAstV-2 was detected in Hungary (Reuter et al., 2011), with a low value of similarity (46% and 43% nucleotide and amino acid similarity, respectively) with PoAstV-1 at the ORF2 (Reuter et al., 2011). At the time of analysis, ORF1b sequences of PoAstV-1 were not available and authors found that partial ORF1b sequence of the putative PoAstV-2 shared 67% nucleotide similarity with HAstV-3 (Reuter et al., 2011). A more recent study in Quebec confirmed that pigs could harbor several distinct AstVs most likely derived from different ancestors (Luo et al., 2011). These PoAstVs did not cluster in a monophyletic group and three distinct PoAstV groups were identified, with the group II PoAstVs being the most prevalent (Luo et al., 2011). Group II PoAstVs harbored specific genetic patterns: for instance, they were not genetically related to other animal strains identified to date, they contained a unique insertion of three nucleotides upstream the ORF2 and they did not possess the highly conserved stem-loop-II-like (s2m) motif in the ORF2/3′UTR common to the majority of AstVs and other positive sense RNA viruses (Jonassen et al., 1998, Luo et al., 2011). These findings were similar for the putative PoAstV-2 strain (Reuter et al., 2011).Recently, there has been evidence of multiple recombination events between distinct PoAstV strains and between PoAstV and HAstV in the variable region of ORF2 (Ulloa and Gutierrez, 2010). Interestingly, authors noticed that all PoAstV-HAstV recombinant viruses emerged from the same geographical area where pigs are raised in promiscuity with human beings. Considering the evident diversity of human strains compared to PoAstVs, the authors suggested that viral transmission likely occurred from humans to pigs and not vice versa, as it had been previously hypothesized (Lukashov and Goudsmit, 2002, Ulloa and Gutierrez, 2010).5.1.5Mink astrovirus (MiAstV)In mink, AstV infection has been considered a significant risk factor for the pre-weaning diarrhea syndrome (Englund et al., 2002) and more recently a novel AstV has been discovered in brain tissue of mink developing the so-called shaking mink syndrome (SMS) (Blomstrom et al., 2010). A pre-weaning syndrome has been well described in mink farms since 1954 in Denmark (Svennekjaer, 1954). Mink farmers refer to this syndrome as “sticky”, “greasy”, or “wet” kits, due to the hyper secretion from apocrine glands in the dorsal neck region thus resulting in soiling of the neck and back (Schneider and Hunter, 1993), together with diarrhea and dehydration at various degrees (Henriksen, 1987). In 2003 the virus associated with this syndrome was entirely sequenced and characterized as a novel astrovirus with less than 67% similarity at the nucleotide level with the closest related OAstV, thus called MiAstV (Mittelholzer et al., 2003a, Mittelholzer et al., 2003b). Interestingly, sequence analysis of MiAstVs from geographically distinct Swedish and Danish farms indicated that they are rather conserved from a genetic point of view; although this observation was mainly based on a short fragment of ORF 1b and geographical clusters were revealed (Mittelholzer et al., 2003a, Mittelholzer et al., 2003b). This appears to be in contrast with the data collected for astroviruses infecting other species, such as swine, bats or turkeys, indicating a high degree of genetic variability (Cattoli et al., 2007, Luo et al., 2011, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Zhu et al., 2009). Recently, Blomstrom et al. (2010) have identified a unique astrovirus associated with SMS (Table 2), a neurological disorder of unknown etiology (Blomstrom et al., 2010, Gavier-Widen et al., 2004). The AstV associated with SMS and found in the brain tissue of mink, was very similar to MiAstV in ORF1a and ORF1b (88% and 98% homology, respectively) and had a lower identity for ORF2 (67% and 59% homology for nucleotide and amino acid sequences, respectively) (Blomstrom et al., 2010). Intriguingly, there was also low level similarity to a unique AstV associated with a neurological disorder in a child affected by X-linked a gamma-globulinemia (HAstV-PS) (Quan et al., 2010). HastV-PS is also genetically related to AstV-VA1 (Finkbeiner et al., 2009b) and to a lesser extent to MiAstVs and OAstVs, thus falling within the proposed genocluster GII of Mamastroviruses (Bosch et al., 2010b, Quan et al., 2010).5.1.6Canine astrovirus (CaAstV)Since the 1980s astrovirus-like particles have been reported in dogs with and without diarrhea (Williams, 1980, Marshall et al., 1984, Vieler and Herbst, 1995). However, infection in dogs was only recently confirmed by genetic characterization (Toffan et al., 2009, Zhu et al., 2011) and a canine astrovirus has also been recently isolated in cell culture (Martella et al., 2011) (Table 2). To date, canine astroviruses (CaAstV) or astrovirus-like particles in dogs have been reported in the USA, Germany, Austria, Italy, China and France (Grellet et al., submitted, Marshall et al., 1984, Toffan et al., 2009, Vieler and Herbst, 1995, Williams, 1980, Zhu et al., 2011). The clinical significance of CaAstV infections in dogs requires further investigation; however, CaAstV was detected from symptomatic puppies occasionally suffering from diarrhea in association with other enteric viruses, such as rotaviruses (Toffan et al., 2009) and corona- and/or parvo-like viruses (Williams, 1980, Martella et al., 2011). A recent study on the prevalence of CaAstV in Shanghai, China suggested that 12.02% (22/183) of the puppies showing clinical signs of diarrhea were positive for astrovirus by RT-PCR as compared to zero of the 138 healthy controls (Zhu et al., 2011). In a recent study conducted in Italy, 24.5% of 110 stool samples collected from symptomatic dogs and 9.3% of 75 from asymptomatic animals under survey tested positive for the presence of CaAstV RNA (Martella et al., 2011). In the same study, serologic assay indicates that 59% of 54 dogs surveyed in Italy presented specific CaAstV-antibodies, with specific antibodies detected almost exclusively in dogs aged >3 months (Martella et al., 2011). A similar prevalence was found in France where 20.9% (66/316) of the puppies in 42% (14/33) of the breeding kennels surveyed were CaAstV positive by RT-PCR (Grellet et al., submitted). In the same report, the authors noted that puppies less than 7 week-old were especially susceptible to CaAstV infection (Grellet et al., submitted).Genetic analysis of ORF2 and partial ORF1b identified the virus as a member of the genus Mamastrovirus, falling in the proposed genocluster GI comprising “classic” human, porcine and feline AstVs but genetically well distinguishable from the other Mamastroviruses (Bosch et al., 2010b, Toffan et al., 2009). Among available sequences, the closest similarity was found with HAstV-7 and HAstV-1 (22% and 59.4% nucleotide similarity for ORF2 and partial ORF1b sequences, respectively). Thus, genospecies GI.E has been further proposed as being a new species (Bosch et al., 2010b).5.1.7Bat astrovirus (BatAstV)Novel astroviruses in insectivorous bats were recently discovered in Hong Kong, mainland China and Germany (Chu et al., 2008, Drexler et al., 2011, Zhu et al., 2009). AstV in bats seems to occur as a low pathogenic asymptomatic infection, as it has been observed in relation to the reproductive success of a Myotis myotis colony under study, where AstV was detected together with Coronaviruses and Adenoviruses (Drexler et al., 2011). In this study AstV displayed different patterns of amplification during the observed three-year period (Drexler et al., 2011). In summary, for the first two years of the survey a unique peak occurred only after the formation of a colony with sufficient size and density, and only in the third year a second peak was noticed associated with parturition, similar to what observed for the entire survey period for coronavirus infection in the same colony (Drexler et al., 2011). Interestingly, the second peak was associated with the predominance of a different lineage of AstV in the bat colony, indicating the emergence of a pathogen with enhanced replication efficiency (Drexler et al., 2011). A remarkably high prevalence and genetic diversity were observed for AstVs occurrence in bats (Chu et al., 2008, Drexler et al., 2011, Zhu et al., 2009). The Hong Kong study demonstrated that 7 out of 9 sampled bat species were positive for astrovirus, with a total of 77 BatAstVs found in fecal swabs (Chu et al., 2008). Partial sequence analysis of ORF1a and analysis of the complete ORF1b indicated that bat AstVs clustered alone and fell into two subgroups according to the species of origin (Chu et al., 2008). In particular, this study identified group A and group B BatAstVs, primarily detected in Miniopterus and Myotis spp, without any bat species restriction, and a third group made of five viruses clustering separately (Chu et al., 2008). Full length sequencing of one BatAstV revealed the absence of the s2m motif, similarly to TAstV-2, RatAstV and group II PoAstVs (Chu et al., 2008, Chu et al., 2010, Jonassen et al., 1998, Jonassen et al., 2003, Luo et al., 2011). Viral diversity of BatAstVs was also observed by Zhu (Chu et al., 2008). Seven monophyletic groups (1 to 7) were identified from the ORF1b sequences of known Mamastroviruses. With the exception of group 1 specific for humans, feline and porcine AstVs, BatAstVs fell in all remaining groups, and 5 groups were completely occupied by BatAstVs (Zhu et al., 2009). Five groups revealed a varying degree of host restriction within the bat populations. These findings were confirmed by sequence analysis of the ORF2. Three viral lineages from mammalian hosts were clearly identified, namely “human/feline/porcine”, “bats only”, and a “mixed” group (Zhu et al., 2009). Interestingly, a high degree of viral diversity was confirmed by Zhu et al. (2009). More specifically, viruses belonging to different ORF1b genetic lineages (namely 2, 3 and 6) were identified from a single species in a single cave and sampled in a single day, indicating high level of circulation of different AstVs in the same host (Zhu et al., 2009). On the contrary, viruses detected from a unique species in different sites fell in the same genetic group, confirming a certain degree of host restriction (Zhu et al., 2009). In a recent three-year monitoring of a Myotis Myotis colony in Western Germany, 6 distinct Bat AstVs, as well as a coronavirus and a novel adenovirus, were detected from the fecal samples collected from the sampling site (Drexler et al., 2011). All six BatAstVs found in the German colony fell within the putative genocluster GII and clustered with other previously discovered AstVs from Myotis chinensis and Myotis ricketti in mainland China (aminaocid similarity ranging from 65–86%) (Bosch et al., 2010b, Zhu et al., 2009).5.1.8Other astroviruses infecting mammalsIn 1981, an astrovirus was associated with an outbreak of gastroenteritis in red deer (Cervus elaphus) raised in captivity. Although genetic characterization was not performed for this virus, antigenic characterization indicated that the new virus was unrelated to OAstV or BoAstV grown in cell cultures (Tzipori et al., 1981). Unfortunately, no further findings have been reported in red deer.An astrovirus-like infection was associated with an outbreak of gastroenteritis in inbred mice by EM (Kjeldsberg and Hem, 1985). In this report, astrovirus-like particles were detected in the intestinal content of 16/17 nude mice displaying diarrhea and 34/55 symptomless and in 4/10 normal apparently healthy mice (Kjeldsberg and Hem, 1985). The high prevalence in asymptomatic animals might suggest that mice could carry AstV and develop disease when immunocompromised (Kjeldsberg and Hem, 1985). The pathogenicity and genetic patterns of these viruses were not further investigated and to date no further reports in laboratory mice have been documented.Recently, novel astroviruses were identified in the feces of urban brown rats sampled in Hong Kong (Chu et al., 2010). Sequence analyses revealed a high degree of variability among RatAstVs and the absence of the 2sm motif, similarly to TAstV-2, BatAstVs, and group II PoAstV as described by Luo et al. (2011) (Chu et al., 2010, Jonassen et al., 2003, Luo et al., 2011). These viruses clustered into2 genetically related but distinct clades closely related to the human MLB1 and MLB2 AstVs; leading to the hypothesis of a putative common ancestor (Chu et al., 2010, Finkbeiner et al., 2009a, Jonassen et al., 2003, Luo et al., 2011).Five genetically distinct AstVs have recently been found in the fecal samples of three marine mammal species: a California sea lion (CslAstV-1, CslAstV-2, CslAstV-3), a Steller’s sea lion (SslAstV) and a bottlenose dolphin (BdAstV) (Rivera et al., 2010). Genetic analyses of ORF1b and ORF2 indicate that these viruses do not cluster in a monophyletic group but across the Mamastrovirus tree, as confirmed by the proposal of re-classification submitted to ICTV. Recombination analyses suggested that a recombination event may have occurred between a human strain (HAstV-4) and a CslAstV-2, possibly resulting in CslAstV-3 (Rivera et al., 2010).5.2Avian astroviruses5.2.1Duck astrovirus (DAstV)The first clinical description of a disease syndrome (duck hepatitis) presumably associated with astrovirus infection in poultry dates back to 1965 (Asplin, 1965a, Asplin, 1965b). The astrovirus-associated disease in ducklings was first described in 1984 and was based on morphology of the virions by EM (Gough et al., 1984). This virus was later definitively identified as astrovirus and we are now aware that astrovirus is the causative agent of duck hepatitis, a severe acute disease detectable in 1–2 week-old ducklings which can result up to 50% mortality (Fu et al., 2009). Livers in the affected animals displays typical multiple and widespread hemorrhagic lesions, indicating necrosis of the hepatocyte cytoplasm with the formation of much cavitations or ballooning degeneration at the histopatological investigation (Fu et al., 2009, Gough et al., 1985). Until 1984, the etiologic agent of duck fatal hepatitis was thought to be a Picornavirus. Former classification recognized three picornaviruses as duck hepatitis virus (DHV) I, II and III, based on vaccine protection. Although DHV II was classified as a DAstV, in 2009 Todd et al. (2009) genetically characterized DHV II and III ORF1b and definitely defined them as astroviruses (Todd et al., 2009a). DHV II and DHVIII share a low level of nucleotide and aminoacid identities (64 and 69%) and DHV III appears more closely related to TAstV-2 than DHV II, which is in fact more related to CAstV. However, since these findings were based on sequence analysis of only a small portion of ORF1b (∼390 nt) further characterization is required before phylogenetic and taxonomic relationships can be established. Recently Fu et al. (2009) sequenced the complete genome of a duck astrovirus associated with fatal hepatitis in Chinese ducklings (Fu et al., 2009). Sequence analysis demonstrated that the genome exhibited a classical AstV organization with two unique features; the largest poly-adenylated genome of 7722 nt, and the presence of ORF2 in a different frame than ORF1a or ORF1b, with a start codon 23 nt downstream of the stop codon of ORF1b. From a phylogenetic point of view this virus is more closely related to TAstV-2, which suggests that the duck virus may have originally transmitted from turkeys (Fu et al., 2009).5.2.2Turkey astrovirus (TAstVs)To date, two genetically distinct TAstVs have been recognized: TAstV-1 and TAstV-2. TAstV-1 was firstly detected in diseased turkey flocks in the ’80s (Reynolds and Saif, 1986, Reynolds et al., 1987, Saif et al., 1985, Saif et al., 1990). TAstV-2 was characterized in association with poult enteritis mortality syndrome (PEMS) (Koci et al., 2000) and PEMS-associated TAstV-2 has been shown to cause enteritis, thymic and bursal atrophy, and increased mortality in experimentally infected poults (Behling-Kelly et al., 2002). Field observations indicate that TAstV-2 is currently more prevalent in turkeys than TAstV-1 (Cattoli et al., 2007, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006b) and its occurrence is often associated with other enteric viruses (Jindal et al., 2010a, Jindal et al., 2010b, Reynolds et al., 1987). Nevertheless, it is one of the most commonly detected viruses from turkey poults suffering diarrhea. The exact role of TAstV-2 as the etiological agent of poult enteritis complex and PEMS is difficult to estimate since it can be easily detected in apparently healthy adult turkeys (Jindal et al., 2010b, Jindal et al., 2011). Recently, Spackman et al. (2010) have evaluated the effect of TAstV-2, turkey rotavirus and turkey reovirusco-infections in decreased weight gain in broad-breasted white turkey poults. They showed that poults exposed to all three viruses administered in combination had the lowest body weight, although the weights were not significantly different from control birds (Spackman et al., 2010). The prevalence of TAstV varies from 40 to 80% in symptomatic poults (Cattoli et al., 2007, Domanska-Blicharz et al., 2011, Jindal et al., 2010a, Reynolds et al., 1987) to less than 30% to 50% in healthy flocks (Jindal et al., 2010b, Reynolds et al., 1987). Generally speaking TAstVs are widely spread and considered as the most prevalent virus infection in 1–5 week-old poults suffering from diarrhea (Jindal et al., 2010a, Jindal et al., 2010b, Reynolds and Saif, 1986, Reynolds et al., 1987, Saif et al., 1985). Although TAstVs can be detected in adult healthy turkeys (Jindal et al., 2010b), clinical signs of disease usually develop between 1 and 3 weeks of age and generally last up to 2 weeks (Reynolds and Schultz-Cherry, 2003). Severity is usually mild to moderate and is characterized by diarrhea, listlessness, litter eating and nervousness. Although mortality rate is low, morbidity occurring as decreased growth is of great concern (Reynolds and Schultz-Cherry, 2003). Data from full genome sequencing of TAstV-1 and TAstV-2 indicate that they are genetically unrelated and likely to have originated from separate introductions and should therefore be regarded as two subtypes instead of serotypes (Jonassen et al., 2003, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Strain et al., 2008). Beyond this classification, data from genetic and antigenic analyses of field viruses detected in turkeys indicate the circulation of multiple lineages of TAstV-2. Genetic and antigenic characterization of two turkey isolates related to TAstV-2 (TAstV1987-TAstVT2001 also identified as TAstV-3) suggests that they could be virtually classified as two different serotypes (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Tang and Saif, 2004, Tang et al., 2005), similarly to strain MN/01 (Strain et al., 2008). Characterization of 23 distinct TAstVs-2 throughout the USA identified different lineages based on ORF1b and ORF2 sequence analysis with no clear geographic neither temporal derives (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006a). Molecular characterization of TAstVs revealed an unexpected variability among ORF2, on the basis of what has been reported for human viruses (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Walter et al., 2001). Such variability was related not only to nucleotide substitutions but also to insertions and deletions at several different positions (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011). There were different topologies for ORF1b and ORF2 trees confirmed by SimPlot analysis and episodes of recombination in different isolates collected in different houses of the same farm on the same day (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006a, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006b, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011). Similarly to previous findings, Cattoli et al. (2007) identified different lineages of TAstV-2 circulating in Italian flocks, based on ORF1b or ORF2 sequences, respectively. Importantly, for 29 out of 41 TAstV-2 sequences, the amplification of ORF2 was not achieved, confirming a high rate of variability between the circulating TAstVs-2 (Cattoli et al., 2007). The existence of different sublineages of TAstV-2 in turkey farms has been confirmed by field studies (Domanska-Blicharz et al., 2011, Jindal et al., 2010a, Jindal et al., 2010b, Jindal et al., 2011, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006a). Field findings are consistent with further genetic studies (Strain et al., 2008). This analysis suggested that TAstV-1 and TAstV-2 should be reconsidered as subtypes instead of serotypes and that multiple serotypes of TAstV-2 exist (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Strain et al., 2008). A total of 46 recombination events were identified, with at least one of them for each of ten analyzed TAstVs-2 (Strain et al., 2008). Results from this analysis also pointed out the need for a deep genetic analysis. In fact, a phylogenetic analysis can suggest distinct results if different parts of the genome are analyzed. It is clear that the ORF2 is the most important region to analyze when trying to determine genus and species classification, and the junction across ORF1b and ORF2, as a potential hot spot of recombination (Strain et al., 2008). Whether the currently circulating TAstV-2 sublineages have evolved as immunological escape mutants or circulate as multiple discrete sub-lineages, similar to what happens in HIV infections, is still under debate. In turkeys, antibody response against TAstV-2 is not sufficiently elicited (Koci et al., 2004) and does not seem to play a crucial role in the evolution of TAstVs-2 sublineages, which in fact do not cluster neither geographically nor historically following immunological pressure (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006b).Interestingly, an astrovirus has been found to infect and cause diarrhea in guinea fowl (Cattoli et al., 2005, Cattoli et al., 2007). The origin of this virus remains unknown, although sequence analysis suggests that interspecies transmission might have occurred between turkey and guinea fowl (Cattoli et al., 2007).5.2.3Avian nephritis virus (ANV)Avian nephritis virus (ANV) was first isolated from rectal content of apparently healthy broiler chicks (Yamaguchi et al., 1979) and experimental infections revealed that it mainly results in a sub-clinical disease, although mild growth depression and mortality have been reported for infections with ANV-1 (the strain G-4260) (Imada et al., 1979, Maeda et al., 1979, Yamaguchi et al., 1979). Like many other avian AstVs, ANV was initially classified as a picornavirus based on EM analysis (Maeda et al., 1979, Yamaguchi et al., 1979) and only after complete genome sequencing was it reclassified as a member of the Astroviridae family (Imada et al., 2000). At least two serotypes have been reported to date (Frazier et al., 1990, Imada et al., 1980, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Shirai et al., 1991). ANV typically causes histological changes in the kidneys although the viral antigen can be detected in other organs, namely liver, spleen, pancreas, jejunum and rectum (Imada et al., 1979, Imada et al., 1983, Shimizu et al., 1990, Shirai et al., 1989, Shirai et al., 1992). Young chicks are the most susceptible and become resistant to disease after the first month of life (Imada et al., 1981). Clinical disease in chicks varies from subclinical to outbreaks of runting stunting syndrome (RSS) and chick nephropathy (Frazier et al., 1990, Imada et al., 1980, Shimizu et al., 1990, Shirai et al., 1992, Takase et al., 1989, Takase et al., 1994, Yamaguchi et al., 1979). However, the impact of ANV infection on RSS is unknown. Although ANV affected body gain in specific-pathogen free chicks (Shirai et al., 1991) an experimental study on the effect of ANV and several unclassified enterovirus-like viruses (ELVs) in commercial chicks demonstrated that only one ELV analyzed among the broad panel produced clinical signs in inoculated chicks (McNulty et al., 1990). Similarly, infection of 1-day-old chicks with three different ELVs and an ANV showed that ELVs are able to induce more severe lesions in the intestine, the kidneys and the pancreas than ANV (Smyth et al., 2007).Passive and active surveys indicate that ANV is widely distributed worldwide and that serological evidence can be found in turkeys as well (Connor et al., 1987, Decaesstecker et al., 1989, Hewson et al., 2010, Imada et al., 1980, McNulty et al., 1989, Nicholas et al., 1988, Takase et al., 1989, Zhao et al., 2011). Although to date the infection has never been associated with the disease in turkeys, an ANV genetically related to ANV-1 was detected in the feces of turkeys. However, the significance of this finding requires further investigation (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006a, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011).5.2.4Chicken astrovirus (CAstV)Astrovirus-like virions were first observed in feces of chickens by EM in the 1990s (McNeilly et al., 1994, McNulty et al., 1990), but until recently little was known about their genetic and antigenic characteristics. A preliminary study on a panel of three newly isolated and characterized CAstVs revealed that 1-day-old chicks infected with one CAstV developed mild diarrhea and distension of the small intestine (Baxendale and Mebatsion, 2004). They also showed that those viruses were antigenically and genetically distinct from ANV, the only astrovirus known to infect chickens (Baxendale and Mebatsion, 2004). A small portion of ORF1 was sequenced and showed limited similarity to the non-structural proteins of TAstV-2 (62%), TAstV-1 (58%), and ANV (55%). Serological evidence of CAstV has been demonstrated in broiler flocks in the UK, the Netherlands, Spain, Australia, and the USA (Baxendale and Mebatsion, 2004) and more recently in broiler parent flocks in the UK that spread to European breeder flocks (Todd et al., 2009b), which suggests a worldwide distribution. Recently molecular and antigenic characterization of enterovirus-like viruses (ELVs), previously classified as belonging to the Picornaviridae family, demonstrated that they were distantly related to CAstVs (Todd et al., 2009a). Further studies on CAstV genetic and antigenic characteristics indicate that multiple serotypes exist (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006a, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Todd et al., 2009a, Todd et al., 2009b). In particular, sequencing of ORF2 of 32 avian astroviruses showed the circulation of at least two CAvtVs, namely CAstV-2 to 3 (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011). To date, full sequencing of CAstVs has not been done and therefore many questions remain to be answered on viral genome organization and on the origin of this putative new species of AAstV.6Genetic variability, interspecies transmission and zoonotic potential of astrovirusesGiven the nature of their RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, which is error-prone and switches from copying one RNA molecule to the next without releasing the original strand, RNA viruses have a tendency towards significant genetic variability due to the introduction of mutations and genetic recombination. Astroviruses are not an exception in this term. In fact, genetic variability has been described in almost all mama- and avastrovirus species sufficiently examined (Belliot et al., 1997a, Belliot et al., 1997b, Chu et al., 2010, De Grazia et al., 2011, Finkbeiner et al., 2009a, Finkbeiner et al., 2009b, Finkbeiner et al., 2009c, Gabbay et al., 2007, Kapoor et al., 2009, Liu et al., 2008), PoAstVs (Luo et al., 2011), BoAstVs (Tse et al., 2011), BatAstVs (Chu et al., 2008, Drexler et al., 2011, Zhu et al., 2009), RatAstVs (Chu et al., 2010), TAstVs (Cattoli et al., 2007, Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006b, Strain et al., 2008) and CAstV (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2011, Todd et al., 2009b). Genetic variability can be induced by synonymous or non-synonymous nucleotide substitutions, the latter being subjected to stronger positive or negative selection pressure. Data gathered on astroviruses suggest pressures and evolutionary constrains for different selection in different genomic regions. For example, regions of the astrovirus capside protein exposed to the immune pressure and environmental changes, such as predicted epitopes or sites interacting with host cells, are subject to positive selection and codon changes (Lukashov and Goudsmit, 2002, Strain et al., 2008, van Hemert et al., 2007a). Furthermore, there is an increasing evidence of recombination events occurring in astroviruses, which contributes to increased genetic variability. Recombination within the classic HAstV stains was among the first examples described. Walter et al. (2001) characterized a novel recombinant HAstV strain associated with diarrhea in children (Walter et al., 2001). They identified a virus containing an ORF2 region from HAstV-5 and an ORF1b region belonging to HAstV-3 that was widely circulating and stable being isolated from separate geographical regions at least one year apart. This suggested that the recombination even took place at the ORF1b-ORF2 transition region. More recently, a recombinant virus was isolated from a Kenyan child with diarrhea that contained an ORF1a clustered with HAstV-6/7, an ORF1b clustered with HAstV-3, and an ORF2 from HAstV-2 (Wolfaardt et al., 2011). Similar to the study from Walter et al. (2001), the ORF1b-ORF2 junction was identified as a recombination point with a second possible recombination point within the ORF1a region (Walter et al., 2001, Wolfaardt et al., 2011).Also, recombination events have occurred in astroviruses infecting animals. At least one has occurred during the evolution of BoAstV and CcAstV (Tse et al., 2011) and evidence of recombinations was revealed in distinct studies on TAstV-2 viruses circulating in the USA (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006b, Strain et al., 2008).A major question is whether an animal astrovirus can recombine with a HAstV leading to human disease or facilitate zoonotic transmission and the emergence and spread of novel viruses into the human or the animal population. A recent report suggests that a recombination even may have occurred between a human and a California sea lion astrovirus (Rivera et al., 2010) leading to the hypothesis of a common ancestor or to a zoonotic transmission event. Similarly, a possible recombination event between PoAstV and HAstV3 was described in another recent publication (Ulloa and Gutierrez, 2010).The wide variety of species infected the evident virus genetic diversity and the occurrence of recombination events indicate or imply the cross-species transmission and subsequent virus adaptation to new hosts and/or the co-infection of the same host with different astroviruses. An interesting study on astroviruses evolution suggests that several cross-species transmissions probably occurred during the evolutionary history of astroviruses (van Hemert et al., 2007a). After the cross-species transmission, the viruses adapted to the new hosts diversifying themselves genetically. Putative common ancestors and ancient interspecies transmissions have been suggested between avian and mammalian species and among mammalians, in more recent time, between sheep and mink, or cheetahs and cats (Atkins et al., 2009, van Hemert et al., 2007a). Cross-species transmission has also been suggested among avian species. For example, the close genetic relatedness between a novel astrovirus causing acute hepatitis in ducks and TAstV-2, and between TAstV-2 and astroviruses infecting guinea fowl suggested transmission of astroviruses between turkey and duck, or guinea fowl, respectively (Cattoli et al., 2007, Fu et al., 2009). Also, ANV-1-like astroviruses were detected in the intestinal contents of healthy turkeys in the USA (Pantin-Jackwood et al., 2006a). Although no documented zoonotic transmission of animal astroviruses to humans is documented, some scientific reports suggested the possibility of cross-species transmission of astroviruses between animals and humans and therefore the zoonotic potential of astrovirus infections. Lukashov and Goudsmit (2002), based on phylogenetic analysis, suggested the transmission of an astrovirus from pigs to cats and then to humans with unidentified intermediate hosts potentially involved (Lukashov and Goudsmit, 2002). Different conclusions were described in a more recent study, suggesting interspecies transmissions of astroviruses from humans to pigs in Canada (Luo et al., 2011). In other recent studies, the suggestion of putative common ancestors of RAstV, MiAstV and OAstV and novel astroviruses found in human stools, namely MLB-like and HMO AstVs, raised questions about the zoonotic transmission of astroviruses (Chu et al., 2010, Kapoor et al., 2009). However, these possibilities remain under investigation.7Conclusions and future perspectivesHistorically, astroviruses have been considered as species-specific viruses and this was reflected in the past taxonomical criteria for their classification based on the species of origin (Faquet et al., 2005). Considering the almost regular discoveries of novel astroviruses in humans and in animals and the parallel development of genetic and evolutionary studies, not only the capacity of astroviruses to infect a wide variety of hosts in different environments it is now evident but also their potential capability to cross species barriers and become adapted to new hosts. Therefore, the acquired host adaptation presumably does not prevent astroviruses to infect new species. The astonishing genetic diversity of Astroviridae greatly contributes to their successful colonization of/in different environments. It is likely that with increased surveillance and improved diagnostic assays the diversity will only continue to increase. This aspect also imposes alternative nomenclature and taxonomical classification for this virus family, as recently proposed by an ad hoc study group (Bosch et al., 2010a, Bosch et al., 2010b).After more than 30 years from their first description in clinical samples, there are many exciting avenues of investigation and intriguing questions that remain to be answered as regards the relatively under-studied Astroviridae family, for example those aspects related to biology and epidemiology which still remain unclear. Taking into consideration the molecular biology of astroviruses, a great deal of work is still needed to understand virus replication particularly in relation to cellular factors for productive replication, the role of the individual NSPs in replication and controlling cellular functions and a better understanding of the processing of the capsid protein. Studies on the evolutionary mechanisms of astroviruses and their phylogenetic relationships are at the start and the driving forces governing evolution and adaptation of astroviruses in different host species certainly deserve further research.In humans, astroviruses are considered among the major viral enteric pathogen; in animals they have been associated with enteric or extra-enteric diseases in some species, such as mink, turkey and duck. However, in many hosts the association between astrovirus infection and disease or clinical syndromes is still debated and under-investigation and the same is for the molecular or phenotypic viral traits potentially associated to pathogenicity and virulence. For example, the pathogenesis and the molecular mechanisms governing virus tissue tropism and the extra-intestinal infections remain largely unknown, particularly for mammalian species.Furthermore, the virus genetic diversity, the occurrence of multiple infections and recombination events, the ability to cross species barriers and the circulation of astroviruses in animals in close contacts with humans make astroviruses as potential candidates for emerging zoonotic infections.


Title: Molecular characterization and evolutionary analysis of a duck astrovirus type 3 strain

IntroductionAstroviruses are globally distributed pathogens that pose substantial threats to both human health and the poultry industry. Their high propensity for genetic recombination and mutation endows them with exceptional adaptability to diverse environments and host species, facilitating frequent cross-species transmission (Porto et al., 2023; Wildi and Seuberlich, 2021). Consequently, astroviruses have emerged as important etiological agents responsible for a range of diseases, including encephalitis in mammals, lethal hepatitis in ducklings, nephritis in chickens, and visceral gout in geese (Xue et al., 2020; Li et al., 2024). Astroviruses exhibit broad tissue tropism, are capable of infecting multiple organs simultaneously and display variable pathogenicity across host species. Since their first identification in the late 1970s, the taxonomy of astroviruses has undergone several revisions (Palomino-Tapia et al., 2020). According to the 2024 report of the International Committee on Classification of Viruses (ICTV), the family Astroviridae is divided into two genera, Mamastrovirus (MAstVs) and Avastrovirus (AAstVs). The latter includes species such as Avastrovirus galli, Avastrovirus intestini, and Avastrovirus meleagridis, whereas nineteen MAstV species (MAstV-1 to MAstV-19) have been officially recognized. In recent years, waterfowl-specific astroviruses have been identified primarily as duck astroviruses (DAstV-1 to DAstV-4) (Liao et al., 2015; Wei et al., 2022) and goose astroviruses (GAstV-1 and GAstV-2).Astrovirus particles are approximately 27-30 nm in diameter, with an icosahedral capsid that appears circular with 5-6 surface projections. Under negative staining, virions typically display a characteristic star-like appearance (York et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2022). The genomes of avian astroviruses range from 6.1 to 7.9 kb and comprise 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs), three open reading frames (ORFs), namely ORF1a, ORF1b, and ORF2, and a poly(A) tail (Xu et al., 2024). AAstVs are more prevalent in winter and spring and are primarily transmitted via the fecal-oral route, with additional potential for vertical and cross-species transmission (Liu et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2022; Wei et al., 2020). For example, avian nephritis virus (ANV) and turkey Astrovirus (TAstV-1) have been isolated from duck and goose embryos, and interspecies transmission has been observed among turkeys, guinea fowls, ducks, and minks (Bidin et al., 2012; Fu et al., 2009; Sun et al., 2014). DAstV, one of the earliest avian astroviruses identified, causes anorexia, emaciation, diarrhea, hepatic lesions in infected ducks, often followed by neurological signs such as motor disturbance and opisthotonos (Xu et al., 2024). Necropsy typically reveals hepatomegaly and renomegaly with hemorrhagic lesions (Wei et al., 2022). GAstV infection primarily leads to reduced appetite, lethargy, loose stools, dehydration, emaciation, and paralysis in geese, with clinical manifestations dominantly by visceral gout, characterized by joint swollen, growth retardation, and urate deposition in joints and visceral organs (Yang et al., 2018; Yuan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).In this study, we conducted an epidemiological survey across five provinces in China to determine the prevalence of DAstV and GAstV. GAstV was detected in diseased partridge samples, providing further evidence of the cross-species transmission potential of astroviruses. In addition, a DAstV-3 strain was isolated from a duck embryo, confirming vertical transmission. To characterize this strain, we amplified the full-length genome and performed phylogenetic analyses based on the complete genome and the three major ORFs. Homology analysis indicated that the isolate, designated TA422, belongs to the DAstV-3 cluster. Furthermore, a SYBR Green I-based qPCR assay was established to quantify viral loads in an experimental infection model, enabling analysis of TA422 strain replication dynamics and shedding patterns. To assess pathogenicity, we conducted animal challenge experiment and examined the growth and development of ducklings hatched from virus-positive embryos, thereby simulating vertical transmission. Collectively, this study clarifies the epidemiological status, genetic features and pathogenic potential of water fowl astroviruses in China. The findings provides important insights into the evolutionary dynamics, transmission pathways, and infection biology of waterfowl astroviruses, thereby informing the development of effective strategies to mitigate astrovirus-associated losses in waterfowl production.Materials and methodsSample sources and experimental animalsA total of 293 tissue samples and duck embryo samples were collected from five provinces in China, namely Shandong, Guangdong, Sichuan, Henan, and Liaoning. Nine-day-old specific pathogen free (SPF) duck embryos and 1-day-old SPF ducklings were purchased from Shandong Hengyuankang Group Co., Ltd. All animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the guidelines issued by Shandong Agricultural University Animal Care and Use Committee (Approval Number: SDAUA-2024-220).Pathogen detection of waterfowl astrovirusTotal RNA was extracted from the pathological tissues, inoculated embryos and allantoic fluid. Using Primer Premier 6.0 software, two pairs of primers targeting the conserved ORF1b region of WAstV were designed, with reference to the GAstV and DAstV CPH strain (GenBank accession: KJ020899). All reference sequences were obtained from NCBI GenBank database (Table 1). PCR was used to detect DAstV and GAstV infection, as well as other common waterfowl pathogenic viruses, including duck Tembusu virus (DTMUV), duck hepatitis virus type 1 (DHAV-1), duck hepatitis virus type 3 (DHAV-3), gosling plague virus (GPV), novel gosling plague virus (NGPV), duck circovirus, novel duck reovirus (NDRV), and avian adenovirus (FAV). All primers used for virus detection are shown in Table 1. PCR-positive samples were submitted to Shanghai Sangon Company for sequencing. Positive rates were then calculated.Table 1Primers for detection of common pathogens.Table 1PrimersPrimer sequences (5′→3′)Amplification length (bp)GAST-FATTCTTGGCTCGGTTGTC489GAST-RCCTGTGTTGCTCCTTCTCDAST-FGATTGGACACGCTTTGAT438DAST-RCTTGACCCACATACCAAATMUV-FCTGAAATAGCGGAAGCACTGA255TMUV-RCTGGAGGTGTGGCTGTCATDHAV-FATGGGGAAACACAAGGTCAG260DHAV-RCCCAACATAGTCACAACAGGNGPV-FTGCCGGGACCTAAATTCCT301NGPV-RTTCCACCCTACTCCATTCGTDUCV-FCGGGAAATGACGTAGTCGTCATG599DUCV-RGATAATGCGACCGGCGACGGPV-FGAGCATCAACTCCCGTATGTCC640GPV-RCTACTTCCTGCTCGTCCGTGANDRV-FTGAGACGCCTGACTACGATT369NDRV-RATGCTTGGAGTGAGACGACTFAV-FAAGTTCAGGCAGACGGT884FAV-RTAGTGATGCCGGGACATCAmplification of the complete genome sequence of the TA422 isolate and phylogenetic analysisClarified homogenates of infected tissue samples were filtered and then inoculated into 9-day-old SPF duck embryos for virus isolation and serial passage. RT-PCR was used to detect the virus in each passage until stable viral replication was achieved, accompanied by embryonic hemorrhages and urate crystals deposition. Strains capable of stable propagation were selected for full-genome amplification in overlapping segments using primers listed in Table S1. The amplified fragments were individually cloned into the pMD18-T vector and sequenced. SeqMan software was used to assemble overlapping sequences into a contiguous whole genome, which was then compared with other astrovirus sequences available in NCBI GenBank. Multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis conducted with MEGA11 were used to determine the evolutionary relationship between the isolated strain and other astrovirus strains. The isolate was identified as duck astrovirus type 3 and designated as strain TA422 (GenBank accession number: PX565185). The reference strains used in this study are listed in Table S2.Establishment of a SYBR green Ⅰ-based qPCR standard curveA 437 bp fragment from the conserved nucleotide sequence of DAstV TA422 in the ORF1b region was amplified and ligated into the pMD18-T vector to construct a positive plasmid. Fluorescent quantitative primers (Forward: 5′-GGC TCC CAA CGG TCA AAG AA-3′; Reverse: 5′-TCC GCG GGA TCA TAC TTC AC-3′) were designed within this conserved sequence. Following sequence verification, the positive plasmid was used to calculate the copy number using the formula: (6.02 × 10²³ copies/mol) × DNA amount (g) / [DNA length (number of base pairs) × 660 g/ (mol · base pair)], and then diluted to 1.0 × 10¹⁰ copies. Using this plasmid, a SYBR Green I dye-based fluorescent quantitative PCR was established, and the optimal primer concentration, template amount, and annealing temperature were optimized to construct a standard curve. The sensitivity of the method was evaluated by comparison with conventional PCR, while the specificity was verified using cDNAs of NDRV, DTMUV, NGPV, DHAV-1 and DHAV-3. The repeatability of the assay was evaluated through inter-assay and intra-assay replicates to verify its reliability.Pathogenicity assessment in ducklingsA total of seventy-two ducklings were randomly divided into a challenged group and a control group and housed in SPF isolators. At 3 days of age, ducklings in the challenged group were intramuscularly inoculated with 0.5 mL of bacterium-filtered duck embryo allantoic fluid containing 3.3 × 10⁶ viral RNA copies, whereas those in the control group received an intramuscular injection of 0.5 mL of sterile PBS (pH = 7.2-7.4). The husbandry conditions for both groups were maintained consistently throughout the experiment. Starting from 3 days of age, body weight in both groups were monitored every two days. After virus inoculation, anticoagulated blood and serum were collected from six ducks in each group every three days to determine white blood cell (WBC) counts, lymphocyte (LYM) counts, and other blood biochemical parameters, including alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and uric acid (UA). In addition, the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, intestine, brain, and bursa of Fabricius were collected to determine viral load and assess pathological changes. Organ samples were fixed with 10 % neutral-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned into 4-5 µm thickness using standard methods. After hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, sections were then examined under a light microscope (Nikon, ts2E, Japan). Furthermore, throat and anal swabs were collected for RNA extraction, and viral infection and shedding in ducks were assessed using qPCR.Pathogenicity assessment in duck embryosThe viral copy number in the fifth-generation duck embryo allantoic fluid was determined using the established SYBR Green Ⅰ qPCR assay. A total of 150 9-day-old SPF duck embryos were used in this experiment. Ninety duck embryos were inoculated each with 0.3 mL of sterile allantoic fluid containing 2.0 × 10⁶ viral RNA copies, while the remaining sixty duck embryos served as the control group. After virus inoculation, allantoic fluid from six duck embryos was collected every three days to detect the virus loads and observe embryonic pathological changes. The remaining duck embryos were continuously incubated until hatching.After hatching, ducklings were placed in a pathogen-free isolation unit, and the husbandry conditions for the challenged group and the control group were kept consistent. At 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35 days of age, body weight, blood cells count, and virus loads in anal and throat swabs of ducklings hatched from the inoculated duck embryos were measured. At 35 days of age, ducklings were necropsied to observe pathological changes, and virus loads in the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, intestine, brain, and bursa of Fabricius were determined.ResultsPrevalence of waterfowl astrovirus in waterfowl flocksA total of 293 samples collected from five provinces in China were tested for waterfowl astrovirus. Of these, thirteen samples tested positive, yielding an overall positivity rate of 4.44 % (Table 2). Further testing of the thirteen astrovirus-positive samples confirmed the absence of co-infection with TMUV, DHAV-1, DHAV-3, NGPV, DUCV, GPV, NDRV, or FAV (Table 3). Specifically, in Jiangmen, Guangdong, twenty-seven suspected goose gout samples were examined, of which ten were positive for GAstV, corresponding to a positive rate of 37.04 %. All affected birds were Magang goslings aged 6-10 days, indicating high susceptibility in young geese. Among fourteen partridge samples, two were positive for GAstV with a positive rate of 14.29 %, suggesting potential cross-species transmission. Among the 183 duck samples from Shandong and Henan, which comprise 58 tissue specimens and 125 dead or weak embryos, one weak embryo tested positive for waterfowl astrovirus, yielding a positivity rate of 0.55 %. This finding suggests the potential for vertical transmission and viral proliferate in duck embryos. In addition, the remaining sixty chicken and four pigeon samples all tested negative for waterfowl astrovirus.Table 2Detection of avian astrovirus in waterfowl.Table 2SpeciesSourceNumberSampling DateAge (d)Positive numberPositive rate (%)DuckShandong56Mar 2022600.00Henan2Jul 2023700.00Dead/weak duck embryoShandong125May 202216-2010.55ChickenShandong39May 2022800.00Sichuan24Apr 2023800.00Liaoning2Sep 2023800.00PigeonShandong4Aug 2022800.00GooseGuangdong27Oct 20226-101037.04PartridgeGuangdong14Oct 20228214.29Table 3Pathogen detection in clinical samples.Table 3SpeciesSourcesAgeNumberPathogen types tested and their resultsTMUVDHAVNGPVDUCVGPVNDRVFAVASTVMagang geeseliver66-----+ (1/6)+ (1/6)+ (6/6)Magang geeseliver104-------+ (4/4)Partridgeliver82-------+ (2/2)Cherry Valley duckWeak embryo71-------+ (1/1)The symbols “+” and “-” indicate positive and negative results, respectively.Genome characterization and phylogenetic analysis of DAstV-3 strain TA422The astrovirus-positive pathological samples were used for virus propagation. A stable virus strain was obtained by the fifth passage in duck embryos, which exhibited marked lesions including extensive white urate deposition, thickening and hardening of the chorioallantoic membrane, hemorrhage, and hepatomegaly. Total viral RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA, which was then used as the template for amplification. The complete genome was amplified using seven pairs of overlapping primers, and the assembled full-length genome of the DAstV TA422 strain was determined to be 7461 nt. The genome comprises a 5′ non-coding region in 19 nt length, followed by three ORFs-ORF1a (3426 nt), ORF1b (1551 nt), and ORF2 (2237 nt). Whole-genome sequence alignment was performed between the DAstV TA422 strain and twenty-six reference avian astrovirus strains. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that TA422 clustered most closely with DAstV sharing a nucleotide identity ranging from 57.7 % to 95.6 %, and formed a distinct clade with the CPH reference strain with an identity of 95.6 %, confirming its classification as a DAstV-3 strain. Meanwhile, it showed more distant genetic relationship with astrovirus isolates from geese and chickens.To further elucidate its evolutionary context, phylogenetic trees were also constructed based on each of the three ORFs (ORF1a, ORF1b, and ORF2) in comparison with the same reference strains and the resulting phylogenetic relationships were consistent with those inferred from the whole-genome analysis (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Phylogenetic analysis of DAstV TA422 and other 26 astrovirus strains. The phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the Neighbor-joining method with 1000 bootstrap replicates using MEGA 11.0 software. The DAstV TA422 strain identified in this study was marked with red dots. Analyses were performed on (A) Complete genomic nucleotide sequence, (B) ORF1a amino acid sequence, (C) ORF1b amino acid sequences, and (D) ORF2 amino acid sequences.Fig 1Development and validation of a SYBR Green Ⅰ qPCR assay for DAstV-3Based on the constructed positive plasmid, the initial copy number was calculated as 4.83 × 1010 copies/μL. The plasmid was diluted to 1.0 × 1010 copies/μL and used to optimize the reaction conditions, resulting in an annealing temperature of 60 °C, a template volume of 3.0 µL and a primer volume of 0.5 µL (100 µmol/µL). Under these optimal reaction conditions, a standard curve was generated using serial dilutions of the plasmid ranging from 1.0 × 1010 ∼ 1.0 × 101 copies/μL. The resulting standard curve equation was y = −3.1837x + 37.847, with a correlation coefficient (R2) of 0.9982, indicating a strong linear relationship between plasmid concentration and cycle threshold. The established SYBR Green Ⅰ-based qPCR assay exhibited high specificity, successfully amplifying only the DAstV TA422 target without cross-reactivity with other viruses or the negative control. It demonstrated a detection limit of 1.0 × 102 copies/μL, which was 10-fold more sensitive than conventional PCR (1.0 × 103 copies/μL). Assay reproducibility was confirmed with intra- and inter- assay coefficients of variation below 5 %. When applied to detect the viral load in fifth generation allantoic fluid, the assay measured 5.2 × 103 copies/μL.Pathogenicity effects of DAstV-3 TA422 in ducklingsOn the second day after challenge, ducklings in the challenged group exhibited depression, lethargy, reduced feed and water intake, loose stools containing abundant white urate, and severe cold intolerance, whereas the control group remained clinically normal. No mortality occurred in either group. Body weight in the challenged group was consistently lower than that in control group, and the difference in body size became more obvious from 8 days of age (Fig. 2A). Anal and throat swabs were collected from challenged ducklings every three days post-inoculation (dpi). Viral load and shedding were quantified by qPCR with results visualized in a line graph (Fig. 2B). Viral shedding peaked on day 6 dpi and then gradually declined as the ducklings aged. To investigate viral replication and tissue tropism, six ducklings were euthanized every three days post-challenge, and eight organs including the heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, brain, duodenum, and bursa of Fabricius were collected. Viral loads in these tissues were determined by the established qPCR assay (Fig. 2C). The highest viral loads were observed on day 6 across all organs, followed by a gradual decline as the virus was cleared. Notably, the kidney, intestine, and brain showed higher viral loads than other organs, suggesting that these are primary target tissues. These findings suggest that DAstV TA422 may impair renal function, growth, and metabolism in waterfowl.Fig. 2Body weight changes and viral load dynamics in infected ducklings. (A) Body weight changes in the infected group and control groups at different days post-infection. Data are represented as the means ± SD (n = 6). Asterisks indicate statistically significant differences (ns, not significant; *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, ***p ≤ 0.001, ****p ≤ 0.0001); (B) Virus copy number in throat and anal swabs of ducklings infected with DAstV-3 TA422; (C) Viral load in various organs at different time points post-infection.Fig 2Pathological examination revealed the following lesions in the challenged group: hepatic necrosis, congestion, and swelling (Fig. 3A1), renal hemorrhage and congestion (Fig. 3B1), cardiac congestion and stasis (Fig. 3C1), cerebral congestion with petechiae (Fig. 3D1), splenomegaly with a tense, dark-red capsule (Fig. 3E1), and the intestine edema and hemorrhage (Fig. 3F1). Histopathological analysis further demonstrated substantial tissue injury: the heart exhibited multifocal hemorrhages between myocardial fibers, which were swollen and fragmented; the spleen showed diffuse infiltration of inflammatory and red blood cells in the pulp; the brain displayed vascular dilation, congestion, and diffuse microglial activation; the kidney presented urate deposition, inflammatory cell aggregation, and severe tubular epithelial desquamation; the liver had swollen hepatocytes with vacuolization and fatty degeneration, accompanied by lipofuscin deposition in atrophic cells; and the intestine showed villus rupture and shedding (Fig. 4).Fig. 3Organ pathological changes in ducks infected with DAstV TA422. (A1) Liver showing necrosis, congestion and enlargement; (B1) Kidneys exhibiting hemorrhage, ecchymosis, and swelling; (C1) Cardiac congestion and ecchymosis; (D1) Meningeal congestion and hemorrhage; (E1) Spleen displaying swelling, capsular tension, and dark red discoloration; (F1) Intestinal swelling and hemorrhage; (A2-F2) Corresponding organs from the control group showing normal morphology.Fig 3Fig. 4Histopathological changes in ducks infected with DAstV TA422. (A1) Heart: hemorrhage between myocardial fibers (red arrows) and swollen, fragmented myocardial fibers (green arrows); (B1) Liver: inflammatory cell infiltration (red arrows), hepatocyte swelling and vacuolation (green arrows), and lipofuscin deposition in atrophic hepatocytes (black arrows); (C1) Spleen: inflammatory cells accumulation (red arrows) and diffuse red blood cells in the medulla(green arrows); (D1) Kidney: urate deposition (red arrow), inflammatory cell aggregation (green arrow), and severe tubular epithelial exfoliation (black arrow); (E1) Brains: vascular dilation and congestion (red arrows) and microglial proliferation (green arrows); (F1) Intestinal: villi rupture and sheddling. (A2-F2) Tissues from healthy control ducks.Fig 4Anticoagulated blood was collected every three days to monitor hematological changes. Red blood cell counts were initially lower in the challenged group but recovered to normal levels over time (Fig. 5A). White blood cell and lymphocyte counts were elevated from 9 to 12 days post-challenge, consistent with an active immune response to viral replication, and returned to baseline as the virus was cleared (Fig. 5B, 5C). Serum biochemical markers, including AST, ALT and UA, were measured to evaluate tissue injury. The levels of ALT and AST in serum began to increase at 8 dpi and peaked on 15 dpi, whereas UA reached its peak at 3 dpi and then gradually decreased. All three markers were significantly higher in the infected group than in controls at their respective peak times, suggesting myocardial and hepatic injury (AST, ALT) and impaired renal function (UA) (Fig. 5D-F).Fig. 5Hematological and serum biochemical profiles. (A) Red blood cell counts, (B) White blood cell counts, (C) Lymphocyte counts, (D) Serum AST levels, (E) Serum ALT levels, (F) Serum UA levels. Data are shown as mean ± SD (n = 6). Significance levels are indicated as follows: ns, not significant; *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001; ****p ≤ 0.0001.Fig 5Vertical transmission and embryonic pathogenicity of DAstV-3 TA422Following the inoculation of ninety 9-day-old SPF duck embryos with the virus, allantoic fluid was collected from six embryos at three-day intervals. Virus load quantification by qPCR confirmed active viral replication within the embryos, peaking on the sixth day post-inoculation and then gradually declining-a pattern potentially attributable to maternal antibodies (Fig. 6A). Among the remaining sixty inoculated duck embryos, twenty successfully hatched, yielding a hatch rate of 33.33 %. During late incubation, many embryos exhibited developmental delays and were too weak to pip, resulting in death 1-4 days prior to the expected hatching time. A comparative analysis of growth performance between these challenged hatchings and twenty normally hatched controls revealed that the challenged group displayed developmental retardation and ruffled feathers as early as one day post-hatch (Fig. 6C). The hatching weight was obviously lower and the body weight continued to lag behind the control average throughout the observation period (Fig. 6B), with a noticeable size difference evident by 35 days of age (Fig. 6D).Fig. 6Viral loads in allantoic fluid and body weight changes in duck embryos and hatched ducklings. (A) Viral loads in allantoic fluid of duck embryos inoculated with DAstV TA422 at different time points; (B) Body weight changes of ducklings hatched from virus-inoculated duck embryos; (C) Comparison of 5-day-old ducklings, challenged group (left) and control group (right); (D) Comparison of 35-day-old ducks, challenged group (left) and control group (right). Data are presented as mean ± SD (n = 6). Statistical significance: ns, not significant; *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001; ****p ≤ 0.0001.Fig 6Detailed examination of infected embryos showed characteristic lesions, including abundant white urate deposits (Fig. 7A), thickening and hardening of the chorioallantoic membrane (Fig. 7B), and subcutaneous hemorrhage (Fig. 7C). In contrast, control embryos exhibited clear allantoic fluid, a smooth and transparent chorioallantoic membrane and no hemorrhage (Fig. 7D-F). Additionally, the challenged embryos showed stunted growth (Fig. 7H) and a range of malformations (Fig. 7I), unlike the normally developed controls (Fig. 7G). Hematological analysis performed every five days showed that red blood cell counts in the challenged group were lower than controls before 15 days of age and then progressively declined thereafter (Fig. 8A). Meanwhile, the white blood cell and lymphocyte were elevated in the challenged group, peaking at 10 days of age before gradually returning to normal levels (Fig. 8B-C), suggesting transient immune activation and inflammation associated with persistent viral presence.Fig. 7Pathological changes in duck embryos inoculated with DAstV-3 TA422. (A) Urate deposition (blue arrow); (B) Thickening of the allantoic membrane; (C) Hemorrhage in the embryo; (D-F) Control embryos for comparison; (G) Normal duck embryos at 20 days of age; (H) Stunted growth in 20-day-old infected embryo; (I) Ocular deformity in 20-day-old infected embryo (orange arrow).Fig 7Fig. 8Hematological parameters and viral load in ducklings hatched from inoculated embryos. (A) Red blood cells; (B) White blood cell counts; (C) Lymphocyte changes; (D) Viral shedding in anal swabs, and (E) Viral load in organs of 35-day-old ducks. Data represent mean ± SD (n = 6). Significance levels are indicated as follows: ns, not significant; *p ≤ 0.05; **p ≤ 0.01; ***p ≤ 0.001; ****p ≤ 0.0001.Fig 8Anal and throat swabs were collected every five days, and virus loads were measured by qPCR. The results showed that viral shedding in challenged ducks was highest on the first day post-hatch and then decreased with age (Fig. 8D). By 35 days, although no evident lesions could be observed at necropsy, viral RNA could still be detected in multiple organs, with the highest loads in the kidneys and intestines (Fig. 8E), indicating sustained tissue tropism and viral persistence in the absence of overt pathology.DiscussionWaterfowl astroviruses, primarily comprising goose astrovirus (GAstV) and duck astrovirus (DAstV) (Li et al., 2024), have emerged as important pathogens in China in recent years. These viruses have now spread across multiple provinces and pose a substantial threat to the waterfowl industry (Bi et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). DAstV-1 and DAstV-2 were identified in 1984 and 1979, respectively (Gough et al., 1984; Haider et al., 1979), whereas DAstV-3 and DAstV-4 were reported more recently between 2014 and 2015 (Liu et al., 2014; Liao et al., 2015). DAstVs are associated with a spectrum of clinical outcomes, including visceral urate deposition, growth retardation in ducklings, embryo mortality (Yugo et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2011), and in severe cases, acute fatal infections (Liao et al., 2015). Similarly, outbreaks of gosling gout caused by novel GAstV from 2015 to 2017 resulted in infection rates of 80-90 % and mortality rates of 20-70 % (Zhang et al., 2018). GAstV infection primarily induces renal injury leading to renal failure and impaired urate excretion, with clinical manifestations such as depression, anorexia, white feces and acute death. Morbidity and mortality in goslings may exceed 50 % (Liu et al., 2022).To better understand the current epidemiological trends of waterfowl astroviruses, we collected 293 clinical samples from Shandong, Guangdong, Sichuan, Henan, and Liaoning provinces. The overall detection rate was 4.44 %. Notably, 37.04 % of suspected goose samples from Guangdong tested positive for GAstV. Most positive cases occurred in goslings aged 6-10 days, whereas no infections were detected in 43-day-old geese from the same flock. This age-dependent pattern suggests that young goslings are more susceptible, likely due to immaturity of the innated immunity system. The detection of GAstV in partridge samples further raises the possibility of cross-species transmission. In addition, a written questionnaire survey of 15 duck farms in Henan and 13 duck farms in Liaoning identified only two farms in each province that reported clinical signs compatible with DAstV infection. Consequently, virological detection was performed only in these four affected flocks, and the resulting data should be interpreted merely as evidence of DAstV presence in these provinces rather than as estimates of regional prevalence.A waterfowl astrovirus strain isolated from weak duck embryos in Shandong was identified as DAstV-3 based on full-genome sequencing and phylogenetic analysis, supporting the hypothesis of vertical transmission. The newly isolated DAstV-3 TA442 strain enriches the current sequence database and provides valuable information for understanding the epidemiology and evolutionary dynamics of DAstV-3. Waterfowl astroviruses also exhibit several transmission advantages. They disseminate efficiently in the environment, as infected birds shed large quantities of virus through feces, which can remain infectious for extended periods in water, bedding, and other farming substrates. Since their initial detection in China, these viruses have rapidly expanded across major waterfowl-producing regions such as Sichuan, Shandong, and Guangdong (Wang et al., 2021; Zhu et al., 2022; Zhang et al., 2022). Moreover, their broad host range increases transmission risks. Phylogenetic analyses have revealed close genetic relationships between astrovirus strains isolated from ducks and those causing visceral gout in geese, implying a potential for interspecies transmission (Chen et al., 2020). Ducks may also harbor multiple avian astroviruses, and the successful propagation of two GAstV strains in duck embryos further support their capacity for cross-host spread (Wei et al., 2020).A SYBR Green Ⅰ-based qPCR assay was developed to evaluate the in vivo viral replication dynamics. In the duckling challenge experiment, the TA422 strain caused growth retardation and significant hematological alterations. White blood cell and lymphocyte counts increased at the early stage, while red blood cell level decreased. Elevated serum AST, ALT, and UA levels indicated hepatic and renal impairment. Viral loads peaked in the kidney, intestine and brain, consistent with pathological findings of multi-organ injury, including myocardial fiber rupture, hepatocellular degeneration, renal tubular necrosis, intestinal villus atrophy, and cerebral congestion. It is worth noting that the PBS-inoculated control ducklings remained clinically normal and showed no gross lesions, we did not perform full virological testing on their tissues in accordance with the animal welfare considerations. The marked contrast in clinical signs between the challenged and control groups, together with the clear time-dependent progression of disease in the challenged group, supports the specificity of our findings. To assess the vertical transmission potential of the TA422 strain, duck embryos were inoculated with it at 9 days of embryonic age. Viral detection in allantoic fluid at successive developmental stages demonstrated persistent viral replication in embryos, resulting in weakness, malformation, and reduced hatchability. Ducklings hatched from embryos exhibited decreased body weight, continuous viral shedding and sustained post-hatching inflammation. These findings collectively demonstrate that DAstV-3 TA422 not only causes systemic disease in ducklings but also possesses strong vertical transmission potential, highlighting its significance in waterfowl health and production.ConclusionThis study presents a comprehensive epidemiological survey of waterfowl astroviruses across five provinces in China. Phylogenetic analysis of the newly identified DAstV-3 isolate provides novel insights into the genetic diversity and evolution dynamics of this genotype. In addition, animal challenge experiments in ducklings and duck embryos elucidated the pathogenic profile of the DAstV-3 TA422 strain, demonstrating its impacts on growth performance, organ function, and hematological homeostasis. These findings deepen our understanding of the pathogenic mechanisms and potential transmission pathways of waterfowl astroviruses, which can also establish a theoretical foundation for the development of effective antiviral interventions.FundingsThis work was supported by fundings of the Key R&D Program of Shandong Province (2022CXPT005), and Shandong Provincial Poultry Industry and Technology System, China (SDAIT-11-03).CRediT authorship contribution statementMingjing Han: Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Ruida Wu: Investigation, Data curation. Pengxiang Jin: Software, Resources. Jiajun Wang: Validation, Software. Chunmei Xu: Validation, Investigation. Lin Chen: Resources. Yu Meng: Supervision, Project administration, Formal analysis. Shijin Jiang: Supervision, Funding acquisition. Ruihua Zhang: Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Formal analysis, Data curation.DisclosuresThe authors declare no conflict of interest.


Title: A Review of the Emerging Poultry Visceral Gout Disease Linked to Avian Astrovirus Infection

1. Review of the Poultry Astrovirus ClassificationAstroviruses, belonging to the Astroviridae family and the genus Avastrovirus [1], are classified into two genera, including Mamastrovirus and Avastrovirus [2]. Mamastroviruses infect a wide range of animal taxa, including humans, cows, sheep, pigs, dogs, cats and rats, causing mild gastroenteritis [3,4], whereas Avastroviruses, firstly reported in 1965 [5], mainly infects turkeys, chickens, ducks, gooses, and pigeons [6,7,8,9,10]. Moreover, chicken-origin astroviruses detected in ducks are consistent with the molecular characterization of those of chicken derived sequences [9].Avastroviruses spread rapidly around the world, causing great economic losses to the poultry industry and posing a threat to human health [11,12]. The viruses are typically transmitted horizontally within flocks via the fecal–oral route; the transportation of breeding eggs in poultry breeding areas can also lead to the prevalence of astrovirus, causing nephritis in chickens, fatal hepatitis in ducklings, and visceral gout in broilers and gooses, depending on the species of the virus [13,14]. Like other RNA viruses, astrovirus polymerase has no proofreading function in the process of replication. It is easy to make mistakes in the process of virus replication, leading to an increase in the mutation rate of the virus, and high genetic diversity and recombination potential [1,4,12,15]. This recombination between different strains of astroviruses has aggravated the prevention of astrovirus infection [4,11,16].According to the International Committee of Taxonomy of viruses (ICTV) [17], Avastroviruses contain three species, including Avastrovirus 1, Avastrovirus 2, and Avastrovirus 3 (Figure 1a). Avastrovirus 1 comprises turkey astrovirus1 (TAstV-1), which was firstly detected in turkey poults suffering from diarrhea in 1980 in the United Kingdom [18], and later was found in diarrheic poults in the 1980s in the United States [7]. Avastrovirus 2 comprises avian nephritisvirus (ANV), including two different serotypes: ANV1 and ANV2. The first ANV was isolated from 1-week-old broiler chickens in 1976 [8] and was characterized as the first astrovirus of chickens based on sequence similarity in 2000 [19]. Avastrovirus 3 comprises turkey astrovirus 2 (TAstV-2) [20] and duck astrovirus 1 (DAstV-1) [21,22,23]. Besides the above-mentioned three avastrovirus species listed in ICTV, other unassigned avastroviruses, such as chicken astrovirus (CAstV) [24], DAstV-2, DAstV-3, DAstV-4, and NpAstV, are also assigned to the genus Avastrovirus [1,14,23]. Moreover, a newly reported goose astrovirus (GoAstV) [14,25] that causes visceral gout in gosling and ducking [18,26] was unassigned and most closely related to viruses classified within species Avastrovirus 3. Two distinct phylogenetic clades of GoAstV were identified, named GoAstV-1 and GoAstV-2 [27,28,29]. The classification of these unassigned avastroviruses is very necessary to promote the research of avastroviruses.Currently, there are no commercial drugs or vaccines available to treat and to prevent astroviruses in poultry. Therefore, good levels of biosecurity including accurate detection method, impeccable management system, strict quarantine and elimination will be efficient ways to control this virus. An extended interval between production cycles will help reduce the risk of the avian astrovirus infection [30]. Multiple age farming should be avoided to shed the virus, and poultry wastes should be collected and removed on a regular basis in such a way that passages within the poultry facilities are free of contamination. In addition, the prevention of renal injury is important for reducing the incidence of gout in goslings [31].1.1. Genome Structure and the Capsid Protein of the Avian AstrovirusAstroviruses are characterized as a star-shaped morphology with a size of approximately 28–30 nm in diameter [32]. They are non-enveloped, single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses with a genome of approximately 6.2–7.7 kb, containing a 5′-untranslated region (UTR), three open reading frames (ORF1a, ORF1b, and ORF2), a 3′-UTR and a poly(A) tail [1] (Figure 1b). ORF 1a and ORF 1b encode non-structural proteins including a serine protease, a viral genome-linked protein (VPg), and an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) (Figure 1b), which are required for genomic replication. ORF2 encodes capsid precursor proteins required for virion formation and is important to induce the host immune response [33]. Within the astrovirus viral genome, ORF2 was the most divergent, whereas ORF1b appeared to be the least divergent among the different ORFs [34]. In earlier work, the antigenic characterization of avian astroviruses has been limited by the absence of virus-specific antisera, and the detection and identification of CAstVs was dependent on ORF 1b sequences [35]. Later, researchers found that though the ORF 1b of CAstVs shares comparatively high identities on nucleotide sequence (>75%) and amino acid sequence (>80%), their capsid protein sequences still differ substantially [36].As a surface protein of the viral particle, the astrovirus capsid protein is likely to be the major determinant of virus antigenicity, cell tropism, immune protection and altered pathogenicity [2,36,37]. Evidence from human astrovirus studies show that the N-terminal region (residues 1 to 415) of the capsid protein is located in the inside of the capsid, while the C-terminal region (residues 416 to end) encodes for the outer surface of the capsid including the star-like capsid spikes, thereby suggesting that the C-terminal region interactions with the host cell receptors, antigenic variation and the host’s immune response [38,39].Sequence analysis of avian astrovirus capsid genes revealed extensive genetic variation and the presence of distinct genotypes of CAstV, ANV and TAstV-2 circulating in poultry [2]. Changes in capsid protein caused by mutations or recombination can affect the pathogenicity and antigenicity of the virus, which is of practical implications for virus detection, epidemiological studies and the development of potential vaccines against astrovirus infections [2]. Earlier studies on TAstV-2 and human astrovirus showed that isolates sharing as high as 85% capsid protein identity are still considered to be serotypically different [40].1.2. Pathogenicity of the Avian AstrovirusAvian astroviruses infect different avian species. CAstVs usually lead to three diseases: (1) runting stunting syndrome (RSS) and uneven flock performance, originally characterized by enteritis and poor weight gain in young broiler flocks [41]; (2) kidney disease with visceral gout causing high mortality in young broilers (up to 40%) [1], (3) “white chicks” hatchery disease or white chick syndrome (WCS) characterized by transient increase in mid to late embryo deaths and a reduction in hatchability [1,12,42]. Besides diarrhea, growth retardation, kidney and intestinal lesions, ANVs infection also causes gout, resulting in increased mortality [16,43]. GoAstVs cause growth repression, visceral urate deposition kidney swelling and gout [14,26]. Other astroviruses, such as TAstV, frequently lead to enteritis and diarrhea. TAstV-2 is shown to cause poult enteritis complex (PEC), poult enteritis mortality syndrome (PEMS), and poult enteritis syndrome (PES) [7,20]. In addition, DAstVs cause hepatitis with high morbidity and mortality in ducklings [44]. Although different astroviruses cause various diseases in poultry, some astroviruses may share similar syndromes [1,12]. For example, young chickens infected, respectively, by CAstV or ANV can both presented stunted growth, enteritis and kidney lesions [1,3,33]. In addition, CAstV infected chickens and GoAstV infected goslings, ducks and chickens can cause fatal visceral gout [1,14,26].2. Visceral Gout Caused by the Avian AstrovirusesAstrovirus has wide tissue phagocytosis and diverse pathogenicity in addition to mainly causing intestinal diseases [12,45]. Several kinds of astrovirus infections lead to kidney diseases and visceral gout, especially in different avian species [1,12,16,26] (Figure 2).2.1. CAstVCAstV is usually characterized as an enteric virus that mainly infects the host through the fecal–oral route. It has also been implicated in the severe kidney disease of young broilers with visceral gout [12,16]. In addition, CAstV were also found in turkey flocks, as well as in ducks and pigeons [9,46].Symptoms including visceral gout after CAstV infection were also reported worldwide [12,15]. Furthermore, CAstV-affected chicks showed distended ureters with uricacid deposition, and visceral and articular gout [16]. The major post-mortem findings were swollen kidneys, prominent ureters and visceral gout. CAstV-infected embryos revealed stunted growth, liver necrosis and enlarged kidney with deposition of urate crystals [15]. In 2011 and 2012, India reported a 40% mortality rate of broilers with visceral and articular gout [16], the pathogen of which was identified as India subgroup Biii CAstV [12,15]. When inoculation with CAstV-infected kidney homogenate, 1 day-old SPF chickens showed a high mortality (67.5–100%), and autopsy showed that all chickens suffered from swollen kidneys, prominent ureters, and visceral gout.2.2. ANVANV-infected young chickens presented diarrhea, growth retardation, kidney damage, interstitialnephritis, tubulonephrosis, and uricosis (gout), resulting in an increased mortality [15,16,47]. ANV was detected in broiler chicken flocks with gout symptoms in India [15], while 80 gout specimens with a percentage of 38.75% detected positive either for CAstV or ANV, 27.5% or 8.75% of which were positive for CAstV or ANV alone, respectively [15]. The rate of Avian astrovirus (AAstV)-positive samples in China was 1.40%, and the positivity rates of CAstV and ANV were 0.66% and 0.41%, suggesting that CAstV and ANV circulate in chickens in China [48]. However, whether there is an ANV strain causing chicken gout in China is unknown.In addition, ANV is also found to infect turkeys, ducks, geese and pigeons [9,46]. Investigations of the diarrhea fecal samples in a population of pigeons in Shanghai revealed a positive rate of 89% (40/45) of ANV, and one positive sample indicated a co-infection with both ANV and chicken astrovirus [6]. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the pigeon viruses detected were evolutionarily closely related to chicken ANV [46], suggesting a wide host range of these viruses. Therefore, multiple astroviruses were the most frequently identified combination in both diseased and healthy flocks.2.3. GoAstVGoAstV was detected in 2016 in goslings presented symptom of visceral gout and enlarged leg joint with urate deposits [30,49,50]. The goslings infected with GoAstV grew slowly and had significantly reduced body weight from 5 dpi [51]. Other symptoms caused by GoAstV include hemorrhage, swellings of kidneys and visceral urate deposition [30], as well as white feces, and paralysis [27]. Outbreaks of GoAstV resulted in a mortality rate of 30% [26]. Uric acid disposition on the surface of the liver, kidney, heart and in the ureter and articular cavity were also observed in dead goslings [14,51,52]. Moreover, in 2020, Muscovy ducklings infected with GoAstV presented visceral gout with a mortality rate of up to 61% [53]. GoAstV-1 and GoAstV-2 viruses have been verified to be the causative agent of goose gout [10,27,29,54,55]. In addition, GoAstV could infect chickens under experimental conditions [14]. Chickens infected with the isolated GoAstV showed similar clinical symptoms to those observed in goslings, including shedding white feces and enlarged leg joints in chickens, The necropsy showed swollen kidneys and visceral gout [14].3. Physiopathology of Viral Infection Induced Gout3.1. Lesional Pattern of Visceral Gout after Avian Astroviruses InfectionHistopathological studies revealed that urate deposits in kidneys, necrosis and degeneration of the epithelial cells of the proximal convoluted tubules with infiltration of granulocyte, lymphocytic infiltrations, and interstitial nephritis, cyst-like formation in the crypts of cystic crypt of the duodenum in CAstV infected chickens [56]. Severe congestion in heart, necrotic foci and different degrees of degenerative changes and deposition of urate crystals around the central vein in liver, and mild to moderate interstitial nephrosis in kidneys were found in dead chicken embryos [15]. In the GoAstV-infected goslings, the renal tubular epithelial cells became degenerated and necrotic, the brush border structure of the proximal convoluted tubule was destroyed; proliferation of fibrous connective tissue and slight inflammatory cell infiltration in the renal interstitium, glycogen was deposited in glomerular and thicken mesangium [28,49]. In the GoAstV-infected ducklings, necrosis and degeneration of renal epithelial cells, accompanied by interstitial lymphocyte infiltration in the kidneys, hepatocyte arrangement disorder, swelling, steatosis and infiltration of inflammatory cells in the liver were showed in histopathology [26].3.2. Gout PathogenicityIn nature, lack of uricase leads to a high incidence of gout in humans and poultry [38], poultry and humans have similar purine nucleotide metabolic pathways, and they have something in common in uric acid syntheses and metabolism. Gout pain seriously affects human health and the development of the poultry industry. Currently, there is a lack of effective and low-side-effect medicine for the treatment of gouty pain in both humans and poultry [2,20,22]. There are many studies on drugs for human gout, but few on avian gout. It is reported that adenylyl cyclase subtype 1 (AC1) is involved in the regulation of gouty pain in chickens. A selective AC1 inhibitor NB001 produces an analgesic effect (not anti-inflammatory effect) on gouty pain and may be used for the future treatment of gouty pain in both humans and poultry [57].Chicken is considered one of the ideal animal models for the study of gout. Gout is caused by the nucleation and growth of monosodium urate crystals in tissues in and around the joints, following long-standing hyperuricemia [58]. Hyperuricemia occurs as a result of excessive uric acid from hepatic metabolism or renal underexcretion [59], which is not only associated with the production of uric acid but also related to excretion from the kidneys. It is reported that reduced excretion of urate is the predominant cause of hyperuricemia in human gout [60]. Therefore, the factors causing kidney and urinary tract injury, or urine concentration and excretion disorder, can promote the formation of urate deposition. Excessive UA production and reduced excretion were also found in the pathogenesis of GoAstV-induced gout in goslings. Lesions on the liver and kidney, as well as increased expression or activity of UA-production-related enzymes, contribute to hyperuricemia and gout formation [58]. It is also reported that mammalian astroviruses could increase the permeability of epithelial cells [61]; thus, the increased permeability of kidney epithelial cells induced by astrovirus certainly might explain the development of gout [16]. If the formation rate of urate is greater than the excretion capacity of urinary organs, gout can be caused by urate deposition on the surface of viscera [62]. Visceral gout, which occurs mainly in birds, is a metabolic disease caused by impaired kidney function, followed by an accumulation of urate crystals in various organs [27].3.3. Relationship between Gout and Avian Virus InfectionIn avian species, different viruses such as IBV, ANV, CAstV and GoAstV have been reported to cause gout in different avian species [12,16,27], and a newly reported DAstV, designated as DAstV-5, which has been isolated in 5-day-old Beijing ducks, can lead to visceral urate in duckings [63]. It has been reported that within 894 kidney samples collected from gout-affected chicks, 373 (41.7%) samples were positive for CAstV alone, while 326 (36.4%) were positive for both CAstV and ANV, and 18 (2.0%) were positive for CAstV, ANV, and IBV [16,28,64]. GoAstV is believed to be the causal agent of kidney disease and visceral gout, experimental infections with GoAstV alone could not fully reproduce the disease as in the field [27], and other infectious agents together with GoAstV may collectively contribute to the development of gout in gosling [10,16,65]. The increasing severity of gout might be associated with coinfection of GoAstV and goose parvovirus (GPV) [65,66]. It is reported that collected tissue from gout-affected goslings in 12 goose farms were positive for both GPV and GoAstV by PCRs and the fluorescence mIHC staining, and both GoAstV and GPV antigens were detected in all the examined tissues [66]. Another study reported co-infection with GoAstV and GPV in goslings [65]. The clinical signs, gross and histologic lesions, and PCR testing confirmed GoAstV and GPV coinfection as the cause of death, gross lesions of tissues and organs matched lesions. Thus, the coinfection of GoAstV and GPV may provide a synergistic impact to exacerbate the severity of gout in goslings [65,66]. In addition, co-infection of GoAstV-1 with GoAstV-2 detected in gout goslings also suggests the importance of GoAstV infection in the mechanism of gout [55].There are few reports on the mechanism of gout caused by these avian virus infections. Research on avian coronavirus found that a significant increase in xanthine oxidase (XOD) activity in serum and a significant increase in serum uric acid levels were related to nephropathogenic IBV infection with increased uric acid synthesis and inhibited peroxisome functions [67]. It has been reported that the NMDAR-AC1-TRPA1 pathway may participate in the regulation of gouty pain in chickens [57]. For gout in goslings, young goslings are high-risk groups of visceral gout. They not only lack urate oxidase, which oxidizes the insoluble uric acid (UA) to water-soluble allantoin [68], resulting in the elevation of blood UA, but also have immature kidney, which is prone to injury [28,69]. The susceptibility of gosling to visceral gout may be related to the immune activation in the gut-kidney axis during the first week of life [70,71]. In addition, geese are herbivorous, thus depending on dietary fiber to perform normal activities. High-protein diets could activate the TLR4/MyD88/NFκB pathway and induce both intestinal and renal inflammation in young goslings [68]. High-protein diets have been implicated in kidney injury, and gut microbiota dysbiosis associated with gout in goslings have also been demonstrated [71].3.4. The Capsid Protein of Avian Astroviruses and Possible Relation with GoutFeatures of the capsid protein of CAstV are considered to drive the pathogenesis into different syndromes. Based on the amino acid phylogenetic tree of CAstV capsid protein, a new amino acid sequences clade of CAstV capsid protein associated with specific broiler kidney disease with visceral gout, which might help to elucidate the association of specific strains with gout disease [12]. For instance, phylogenetic analysis of capsid protein sequence of 18 India CAstV isolates revealed a high identity of 92.0 to 99.2%, which clustered these strains into a group designated as Biii subgroup CAstV associated with gout [12,15,16]. Furthermore, three CAstV strains isolated in the Middle East associated with gout were also classified into the same Biii subgroup [12]. The high degree of capsid amino acid conservation of CAstV strains, isolated in India and the Middle East, both associated with severe kidney disease and visceral gout, supports the hypothesis that this CAstV strain is an etiological agent. The study of the capsid protein gene is further required to understand the mechanism of gout after virus infection.A phylogenetic tree was constructed by comparing the amino acid sequence of capsid gene from 41 avian Astrovirus (Figure 3). The capsid protein of 41 avian Astrovirus was distributed in eight major clusters. Among them, the CAstV has been divided into two major antigen groups, Group A including Ai, Aii, and Aiii, and Group B including Bi, Bii, Biii, and Biv [12]. Capsid gene-based phylogenetic analysis revealed clustering of all the CAstV strains of gout origin into single group—the Biii CAstV antigenic group [15]. All GoAstV isolates associated with kidney disease and visceral gout were clustered into two subgroups, GoAstV-1 and GoAstV-2 (Figure 3). Though together associated with kidney disease and visceral gout, isolates in subgroup Biii and GoAstV share low amino acid sequence identity. In addition, western Canadian isolates together with CkP5/US/2016 and CC_CkAstV/US/2014, with clinical symptoms of white chick syndrome (WCS) [72], were clustered into a subgroup as Biv CAstV antigenic group.In addition, the aa sequence identities of capsid gene of the 41 avian astrovirus within subgroups (Figure 3) were high: Ai—95.1–98.6%; Aii—98.6–98.9%; Aiii—98.0–99.5%; Bi—98.6–98.7%; Bii—94.2–97.7%; Biii—97.0–99.4%; Biv—97.0–99.4%, TAstV—81.8–97.5%, DAstV—94.3%, GoAstV-1—81.0–96.7%, and GoAstV-2—97.1–99.1%. Even though subgroup Biii CAstV and GoAstV associated with kidney disease and visceral gout, they only shared 34.3–35.1% of aa identity. The capsids protein of subgroups Biii CAstV comprised 738 amino acid, subgroup GoAstV-1 comprised 704–707 amino acids and subgroup GoAstV comprised 704 amino acids. Detailed examination of the subgroup Biii CAstV isolate’s capsid protein N-terminal region (residues 1 to 415) revealed it had 98.3 to 100.0% amino acid identity, while the C-terminal region (416 to the end) shared 95.4 to 100.0% identity. However, the amino acid identity of the capsid protein N-terminal region of the GoAstV isolate is very close to the C-terminal region. Though the N-terminal region of capsid protein was conserved, and C-terminal region was variable in subgroup Biii CAstV [72], there is a conserved C-terminal region between subgroups Biii CAstV and subgroup GoAstV-1 and GoAstV-2 (Figure 4a), which corresponding to residues 680–723 of subgroup Biii CAstV. A conserved region, corresponding to residues 319–361 of subgroup Biii CAstV was also found (Figure 4b). In addition, residues 128–132, 175–179, 345–349, 409–412 and 428–431 of subgroup Biii CAstV were conserved with subgroup GoAstV (Figure 4c). Because the C-terminal region codes for the outer surface of the capsid may interacting with the host cell receptors and antigenic variation, whether these conserved C-terminal region between subgroups Biii CAstV and subgroup GoAstV-1 and GoAstV-2are related to pathogenicity remains to be studied. There seems to be a relationship between visceral gout and specific groups of the avastroviruses, and future work is required to uncover the relationship between the capsid protein and visceral gout.4. PerspectivesBelonging to the genus Avastrovirus, avastroviruses are endemic worldwide, causing significant loss to the poultry industry. Poultry flocks are susceptive to the virus, which infects a variety of avian species. Currently, there are no available drugs or vaccines to treat the virus, and high level of biosecurity is required to efficiently control the virus. Therefore, development in control measures of the virus is urgently required.Gout is due to kidney damage with several factors [12,16,66]. Though the detection and isolation of astroviruses from gout cases suggest their possible role in disease, several factors including feed nutrition, poultry house management, and the presence of pathogenic microorganisms can cause gout in avian [12,28]. Further research is required to explore the role of these factors in gout.Different avian viruses, including IBV, ANV, CAstV, etc., have been reported to cause gout. However, the mechanism underlying remains unclear. Since chicken serves as an ideal animal model to study pathogenesis of gout, CAstV- and GoAstV-infected chicken could be applied to analyze the mechanisms underlying. Phylogenetic analysis on gout related strains suggests a high similarity on amino acid sequences of the capsid proteins of these strains, suggesting the capsid protein play an important role not only in viral classification, but also in gout pathogenesis. Though with limited information according to the current research, future work exploring the function of the capsid protein would be interesting.


Title: Pathogenesis of murine astrovirus in experimentally infected mice

IntroductionAstroviruses are nonenveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses often associated with gastrointestinal diseases in mammals and poultry [1]. They were first discovered by electron microscopy in 1975 in fecal samples from a human child with diarrhea [2]. They were first described as small viruses (28–30 nm in diameter) with an icosahedral morphology, giving them a
characteristic starlike appearance, from which their name (from the Greek word astron, meaning star) was derived [3]. Astroviruses are taxonomically divided into two groups, i.e., mamastroviruses (MAstVs), which infect mammals, and avastroviruses (AAstVs), which
infect birds [1]. They infect a wide range of wild and domestic animals, including cows, sheep, pigs, turkeys, cats, dogs,
and rats, marine mammals, and birds, causing diarrhea, enteritis, or sometimes no clinical signs [4]. They may also be
associated with extra-gastrointestinal infections, such as encephalitis and meningitis [5,6,7,8]. Astroviruses cause little inflammation and cellular damage, and
diarrhea in turkeys has been shown to be caused by disruption of the cellular tight junction complex in the intestinal epithelium by the astrovirus capsid protein
[9,10,11]. Murine astrovirus (MuAstV)-like
particles were first discovered in the gut contents of nude mice by electron microscopy during an episode of collective diarrhea in a mouse colony [12]. The complete genomic sequence of MuAstV was elucidated in 2011 in a metagenomic study of wild Mus
musculus feces [13]. However, MuAstV has not been successfully cultured. MuAstV has been reported to retain
infectivity even in soiled bedding stored for 3 weeks [14], and infection with MuAstV has been reported to increase
intestinal permeability [9]. In recent years, MuAstV has been reported in laboratory mice worldwide [15, 16], and comparison of the MuAstV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) sequences showed numerous
mutations indicating ongoing viral divergence in different facilities [15]. A positive rate of 35.0% was confirmed in a
survey conducted in a laboratory animal facility in Japan in 2016 [17], and analysis of the RdRp gene in MuAstV detected in
Japanese laboratory animal mice showed high similarity to various strains, including BSRI1 and STL1, in a public database [17]. There have been no case reports of MuAstV in mice, and no symptoms or lesions were confirmed in previous reports [14, 18, 19]. Limited information is available regarding its pathogenicity
in immunodeficient mice [14, 15]. In recent years, immunodeficient mice with varying
immunological characteristics have been produced and used as experimental animals; however, the details of MuAstV pathogenicity in immunodeficient mice remain
unknown. Therefore, in this study, we examined the pathogenicity of MuAstV by experimental infection in germ-free
NOD.Cg-PrkdcscidIl2rgtm1Sug/ShiJic (NOG) mice, which are severely immunodeficient [20]. Furthermore, histopathological examinations of the intestinal tract of spontaneously infected mice were performed.Materials and MethodsExperimental infectionExperimental animals and rearing environment: Twenty-four germ-free NOG mice were used for experimental infection. NOG mice are severely immunodeficient and
easily accept heterologous cells due to a deficiency of T-, B-, NK, and interferon-producing killer dendritic cells, macrophage and dendritic cell dysfunction,
and loss of complement activity [20]. To eliminate the effects of intestinal bacteria, germ-free mice were used for
experimental infection. Germ-free mice were obtained from breeding colonies at the Central Institute for Experimental Animals (CIEA). The infected (n=12) and
control (n=12) mice were maintained in sterilized vinyl isolators. The mice were individually identified, and three mice were housed in each cage. All mice and
materials, including the sterilized feed and water, were aseptically loaded and unloaded through a sterile lock. All mice were confirmed to be MuAstV negative
by PCR of fecal samples before the experiment. A sterility test was conducted before and after the experiment to ensure that sterile conditions were maintained
throughout the experimental period.Inoculation samples: Cecal samples were collected from NOG mice subjected to testing for microbial monitoring at the CIEA ICLAS Monitoring Center between
November 2017 and December 2018, and PCR was performed to test for MuAstV. Cecal contents from 18 MuAstV-positive mice were mixed together, homogenized, and
centrifuged, and the supernatant was sterilized by filtration using a 0.2-µm filter, stored at −80°C, and used as the inoculation sample for
the experimental group. All cecal samples were collected from the same institution. According to a BLAST search for the RdRp gene, the MuAstV in all the
positive samples showed a higher homology with BSRI1 (Accession No. KC609001) than with any other strain. A homogenate of cecal contents from 16 MuAstV-negative
mice was prepared using the same methods and used as the inoculation sample for the control group. Blood agar medium was then smeared with 100
µl of MuAstV-positive and MuAstV-negative inoculation samples and incubated at 37°C for 48 h to confirm the absence of bacterial growth. In
addition, the microbiological test items listed in Table 1Table 1.Results of PCR for microbiological test items of cecal homogenatesMicroorganism testedInoculated sample of the infected groupInoculated sample of the control groupEctromelia virus ––Lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus ––Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus ––Mouse adenovirus type 1––Mouse cytomegalovirus––Mouse encephalomyelitis virus––Mouse hepatitis virus––Mouse minute virus––Murine norovirus––Mouse parvovirus––Mouse rotavirus––Pneumonia virus of mice––Polyoma virus––Reovirus type 3––Sendai virus––Clostridium piliforme––Filobacterium rodentium––Helicobacter bilis––Helicobacter hepaticus––Mycoplasma pulmonis––Pneumocystis spp.––Aspiculuris tetraptera––Syphacia obvelata––Entamoeba muris–– were confirmed to be negative by PCR [21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29].Study design for experimental infection: Twenty-four 4-week-old female mice were included in this study. They were divided into two experimental groups of 12
mice each. Mice in the infected group were inoculated with 100 µl of the MuAstV-positive inoculation sample, whereas those in the control group
were inoculated with 100 µl of the MuAstV-negative inoculation sample. Six mice from each of the two groups were euthanized by excess
inhalation of isoflurane at 4 and 28 days post inoculation (DPI). Blood samples for PCR and quantitative RT-PCR (RT-qPCR) analyses were collected from all mice
by cardiac puncture. In addition, the forestomach, glandular stomach, duodenum, upper small intestine, middle small intestine, lower small intestine, cecum,
colon, rectum, liver, spleen, and kidney were collected for PCR, RT-qPCR, and histopathological examination. A small intestine sample was also collected for
electron microscopy.Prior to PCR, the gastrointestinal tract was washed with sterile PBS to remove the contents. The prepared PCR and RT-qPCR samples were stored at −80°C until
further analysis. Samples collected for histopathological examination were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and stored at 25°C until examination. Tissue
samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were fixed in 0.1 M phosphate buffer with 2% paraformaldehyde and 2% glutaraldehyde.PCR and RT-qPCR for MuAstV: All samples were screened for MuAstV by PCR. RNA extraction and PCR conditions were as previously reported [17], and MuAstV-BF (5’ GAATTTGACTGGACACGCTTTGA 3’) and MuAstV-BR (5’ GGTTTAACCCACATGCCAAA 3’) primers, which target the RdRp gene, were used
[15, 17]. The RNA extracted from each organ was adjusted to a concentration of
50 ng/µl, and MuAstV was then quantified in the sample by RT-qPCR. MuAstV-specific RT-qPCR was performed using Brilliant III Ultra-Fast SYBR
Green RT-qPCR Master Mix (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) with MuAstV-BF and MuAstV-BR primers on a 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher
Scientific K.K., Tokyo, Japan). The RT-qPCR program was designed in our facility, and the amplification conditions were as follows: 50°C for 10 min, 95°C for 3
min, and then 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 s, 58°C for 30 s (decreasing by 0.2°C per cycle), and 72°C for 30 s. To quantify the MuAstV in the tested samples, the
copy number of the target gene was determined by software using a prepared standard, and a melting curve was generated after measurement. A negative control was
included in each reaction. The generated data was analyzed using 7500 Software v2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific K.K.).Histopathological analysis: The collected forestomach, glandular stomach, duodenum, upper small intestine, middle small intestine, lower small intestine,
cecum, colon, rectum, liver, spleen, and kidney samples were subjected to histopathological examination. Tissue samples were fixed in 10% neutral buffered
formalin, embedded in paraffin, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), according to the standard procedures. For the lower small intestine, the length and
depth of at least 3 villi and crypts, respectively, were measured per slide using the NDP.view2 image viewing software (Hamamatsu Photonics K.K., Shizuoka,
Japan). The mean villi length and crypt depth from each slide were used for statistical analysis using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Differences with a
P-value <0.05 were considered statistically significant.TEM analysis: Tissue samples for TEM were fixed in 0.1 M phosphate buffer with 2% paraformaldehyde and 2% glutaraldehyde and then postfixed in 2% osmium
tetroxide in 0.1 M phosphate buffer for 2 h in an ice bath. The specimens were then dehydrated in graded ethanol and embedded in epoxy resin. An ultramicrotome
was used to prepare ultrathin sections, which were stained with uranyl acetate for 15 min and a lead staining solution for 5 min before being subjected to TEM
(Hitachi H-7600 at 100 kV).Ethics statement: This study was conducted in strict accordance with the Regulations for Animal Experimentation of the CIEA, which are based on the Guidelines
for Proper Conduct of Animal Experiments (Science Council of Japan, 2006). The experimental protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee for Animal Experimentation of the CIEA (permit no. 18035A).Histopathological examination of spontaneously MuAstV-infected miceTo confirm the pathological condition of spontaneously MuAstV-infected mice with resident intestinal bacteria, their small intestine was subjected to
histopathological examination (November–December 2019). In total, 101 mice from 29 facilities that were subjected to microbiological monitoring tests performed
at the CIEA ICLAS Monitoring Center were surveyed. The cecum was collected for PCR and stored at −80°C until analysis. The lower small intestine samples for
histopathological examination were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and stored at 25°C until examination. The cecal samples were screened using PCR, and
samples from PCR-positive mice were histopathologically examined. The PCR and histopathological analyses were performed as described in the previous
sections.ResultsExperimental infection of MuAstVAppearance and necropsy findings: The mice were asymptomatic at both 4 and 28 DPI, and no abnormalities were observed. The results of necropsies performed at 4
and 28 DPI revealed no abnormal findings in any mice.PCR and RT-qPCR analyses of each organ: The MuAstV-positive inoculation sample (100 µl) inoculated into the infected group contained 2.9 ×
109 molecules of MuAstV RNA, as confirmed by RT-qPCR. PCR analyses performed at 4 DPI yielded positive results for samples from the liver, kidney,
and entire intestinal tract except the rectum. In addition, 4 of the 6 blood samples tested positive (Table
2Table 2.Results of the PCR analysis of tissue samples from different organs performed at 4 and 28 days post inoculation (DPI)Organ4 DPI28 DPINo. 1No. 2No. 3No. 4No. 5No. 6No. 1No. 2No. 3No. 4No. 5No. 6Forestomach++–+++++++++Glandular stomach ++––+–++–+++Duodenum++++++++++++Small intestine (upper)++++++++++++Small intestine (middle)++++++++++++Small intestine (lower)++++++++++++Cecum++++++++++++Colon++++++++++++Rectum–––––++–++++Liver++++++++–+++Kidney++++++++++++Spleen–––+––+++++–Blood++++––++++++Bone marrowNTNTNTNTNTNT++++–+BrainNTNTNTNTNTNT++–+++NT: not tested.). PCR analyses performed at 28 DPI yielded positive test results for the samples from the forestomach, kidney, blood, and entire intestinal tract
except the rectum (Table 2). All samples from the control group yielded negative PCR results. The amount of MuAstV
per ng RNA in each organ was quantified by RT-qPCR. The MuAstV concentration was highest in the lower small intestine at 4 and 28 DPI. The MuAstV concentration
in the lower small intestine exhibited an approximately 8-fold increase from 4 to 28 DPI (Fig. 1Fig. 1.Murine astrovirus (MuAstV) RNA concentration in each organ after MuAstV-positive cecal homogenate inoculation. A) 4 days post inoculation (DPI). B) 28
DPI.).Histopathological examination of major organs: No abnormalities were noted in the histopathological examination of the forestomach, glandular stomach,
duodenum, upper small intestine, middle small intestine, lower small intestine, cecum, colon, rectum, liver, spleen, and kidney (Fig. 2Fig. 2.Histopathological examination of the lower small intestine. (A) Murine astrovirus (MuAstV)-infected group at 4 days post inoculation (DPI). (B) Control
group at 4 DPI. (C) MuAstV-infected group at 28 DPI. (D) Control group at 28 DPI.Fig. 3.Villus length, crypt depth, and villus/crypt ratio in the infected and control groups. (A) Villus length, (B) crypt depth, and (C) villus/crypt ratio at
4 days post inoculation (DPI). (D) Villus length, (E) crypt depth, and (F) villus/crypt ratio at 28 DPI. No significant differences were detected between
the infected and control groups (P>0.05).). The villi length, crypt depth, and villus/crypt ratio in the lower small intestine of the infected group were not significantly different from those of
the control group at 4 and 28 DPI (P>0.05; Figs. 2 and
3).TEM analysis of the lower small intestine: Tissue samples from the lower small intestine, where the MuAstV RNA concentration was highest, were examined by TEM.
Circular virus particles of approximately 25 nm in diameter, forming electron-dense aggregates with a center-to-center distance of approximately 25 nm, were
confirmed in the cytoplasm of the epithelial cells of the lower small intestine at both 4 and 28 DPI. Electron micrographs captured at 28 DPI are shown as
representative examples (Fig. 4Fig. 4.Transmission electron microscopy of the lower small intestine. The ultrastructure of the lower small intestine of murine astrovirus (MuAstV)-infected
mice was analyzed at 4 and 28 days post inoculation (DPI). (A and B) An electron micrograph of a sample analyzed 28 DPI is presented as a representative
example. (A) Electron micrograph of the epithelial cells of a villus with viral aggregates in the cytoplasm (indicated by the white arrow) at 8,000×
magnification. (B) Enlarged view of the region indicated by the white arrow at 50,000× magnification.).Histopathological examination of the small intestine of spontaneously MuAstV-infected miceTo investigate the effect of MuAstV on the spontaneous infection of mice with resident intestinal bacteria, 101 mice from 29 facilities monitored at the CIEA
Monitoring Center were tested for MuAstV using PCR. Samples from 42 mice tested positive. Of these positive mice, 12, 6, 4, 4, 5, 8, and 3 belonged to the ICR,
BALB/c, C57BL/6J, BALB/c-nu/+, BALB/c-nu/nu, SCID-beige, and NOG strains, respectively (Table 3Table 3.Individual information of spontaneously murine astrovirus (MuAstV)-infected miceImmunocompetent miceImmunodeficient miceAge (weeks)SexAge (weeks)SexICR17FemaleBALB/c-nu/nu18FemaleICR17FemaleBALB/c-nu/nu11UnknownICR12FemaleBALB/c-nu/nu11UnknownICR17FemaleBALB/c-nu/nu30FemaleICR17FemaleBALB/c-nu/nu16FemaleICR17FemaleSCID-beige18FemaleICR17FemaleSCID-beige18FemaleICR8FemaleSCID-beige18FemaleICR13FemaleSCID-beige18FemaleICR13FemaleSCID-beige18FemaleICR13FemaleSCID-beige18FemaleICR16FemaleSCID-beige18FemaleBALB/c18MaleSCID-beige18FemaleBALB/c18MaleNOG24MaleBALB/c18MaleNOG24MaleBALB/c18MaleNOG24MaleBALB/c18MaleBALB/c18MaleC57BL/6J23MaleC57BL/6J8FemaleC57BL/6J24FemaleC57BL/6J12FemaleBALB/c-nu/+7FemaleBALB/c-nu/+24MaleBALB/c-nu/+24MaleBALB/c-nu/+30Female). A histopathological examination of the small intestine was performed for these 42 MuAstV-positive mice, and no clinical signs or abnormal
necropsy or histopathological findings were found for any of the mice.DiscussionRT-qPCR of tissue samples from each organ performed at 4 and 28 DPI revealed that the MuAstV concentration was highest in the lower small intestine, where it
exhibited an approximately 8-fold increase from 4 to 28 DPI. In a previous report, the MuAstV concentration was found to be the highest in the duodenum of
Rag1−/− mice [18]; however, the effect of MuAstV present in the intestinal contents was not described. In the
present study, the intestinal samples were tested after the removal of intestinal contents with sterile PBS. TEM examination of the lower small intestine, where
the MuAstV concentration was the highest, confirmed the presence of circular virus particles in the cytoplasm that were approximately 25 nm in diameter and
forming aggregates with a center-to-center distance of approximately 25 nm; this suggests that in mice, MuAstV proliferates in the villous epithelial cells of the
lower small intestine. Astroviruses are described as particles approximately 30 nm in diameter that are characterized by a starlike appearance [3]. However, in the present study, the particles often did not appear starlike; this observation is consistent with TEM
observations of astroviruses in other animals [2, 30,31,32]. Although further confirmation by immunostaining is required, these results are consistent with those of
previous reports on astrovirus infection in the intestinal villous epithelium of humans, pigs, lambs, and turkeys [30,
31, 33,34,35].Following experimental infection in the present study, no clinical signs or abnormalities were observed during necropsy or histopathological examination of
samples at 4 and 28 DPI. A previous study did not report any lesions in MuAstV-positive mice [14, 15, 19], which was also confirmed in the present study for more severely immunodeficient animals.
Rotavirus, which infects the intestine, induces diarrhea by destroying the villous epithelial cells, ultimately causing cell death and villous atrophy [36, 37]. However, astroviruses have been reported to not cause cell death or visible
histopathological changes [10, 19, 38], which
is consistent with our results.Enterovirus pathogenicity may be promoted or suppressed upon interaction with enterobacteria [39,40,41]. Therefore, germ-free mice were used for the infection experiment to eliminate the effects of
intestinal bacteria. In addition, 42 spontaneously MuAstV-infected mice with intestinal bacteria (both immunocompetent and immunodeficient) were selected for
histopathological examination of the intestinal tract, and no abnormal necropsy findings, histopathological abnormalities, or clinical symptoms were observed in
any of them; thus, there were no signs of promotion or suppression of MuAstV pathogenicity due to the presence or absence of intestinal bacteria.Various mutations of MuAstVs have been reported based on comparison of the RdRp gene, and it is not possible to investigate the pathogenicity of all MuAstV
strains. Therefore, in this study, BSRI1 (Accession No. KC609001), which is the most frequently detected MuAstV strain in Japan, and samples with the highest
similarity were collected and used for experimental infection. The results of this study suggest that MuAstV proliferates in the villous epithelial cells of the
lower small intestine of mice; however, it does not cause lesions, even in severely immunodeficient animals, such as NOG mice, and its pathogenicity is considered
extremely weak. The CIEA ICLAS Monitoring Center, which conducts microbial monitoring tests for quality control of laboratory animals, classifies microorganisms
into five categories (A to E) based on their pathogenicity in mice and rats [21], as follows: Category A, zoonotic and
human pathogens carried by mice or rats; Category B, indigenous mouse or rat pathogens that can cause symptomatic disease and occasional death; Category C,
microbes that usually cause asymptomatic infections accompanied by alterations in physiological functions; Category D, microbes that can cause opportunistic
infections; Category E, microbes that are usually nonpathogenic but indicate the hygiene status of the rearing environment. Because viruses proliferate inside the
cell, they are classified as Category C or higher; as a less pathogenic virus, MuAstV is considered to be in Category C. MuAstV retains infectivity for a long
period of time and is orally transmitted. It has been reported that when sentinel mice were exposed to soiled bedding that had been stored for 1, 2, or 3 weeks
before exposure, the feces of most sentinels became MuAstV positive [14]. In order to prevent MuAstV infection, as with
other microorganisms, it may be necessary to use sterilized equipment, feed, and water for mice and to assign exclusive caretakers for areas that are confirmed to
be MuAstV positive.According to Compton et al., MuAstV infection is not a confounding variable and does not affect the dextran sulfate-induced colitis model in
NLRP3-deficient mice [42]; however, innate immunity is involved in the suppression of MuAstV proliferation [18]. MuAstV increases intestinal permeability; both C57BL/6 and IFNαR mice infected with MuAstV for 3 days had greater
intestinal permeability than uninfected control mice, with IFNαR mice having a greater increase in permeability [9]. Turkey
astrovirus causes diarrhea and sodium malabsorption [43], and the HAstV-1 capsid protein of the human astrovirus has been
shown to disrupt the tight junction complex, thereby increasing barrier permeability [11]. When diarrhea occurred in a
colony of nude mice in 1985, astrovirus-like virus particles were observed in the intestinal contents, but the diarrhea episode started during a heat wave in the
summer when the temperature of the animal room was 22 to 32°C and the relative humidity varied between 25% and 70%. It has been suggested that the nude mice were
previously symptomless carriers of MuAstV and that the pathogenicity of the virus was enhanced by the breakdown of climate control or by heavy experimental stress
[12].The results of this study reveal that the pathogenicity of MuAstV is extremely weak in mice, so it is not necessary to perform regular microbiological monitoring
tests; however, it is considered that experiments related to immunity or intestinal permeability should check for MuAstV. Further studies are required to assess
the effects of MuAstV infection on experiments in mice.


Title: Bovine Astrovirus—A Comprehensive Review

1. IntroductionAstroviruses (AstV) belong to the Astroviridae family, including two genera Mamastrovirus (MAstV) which can cause diarrhea and neurological symptoms in mammals, and Avastrovirus (AAstV), which can lead to hepatitis, nephritis and diarrhea in birds [1]. Among MAstV, bovine astrovirus (BoAstV) was first reported in calf diarrhea stool samples in the United Kingdom in 1978 and subsequently in healthy and diarrheic cattle in many countries [2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11]. In recent years, it has been reported that BoAstV has been detected not only in intestinal system samples, but also in brain tissues of animals with neurological symptoms [2,12,13]. Evolutionary analyses showed that astrovirus strains from bovine brain tissue were closely related to astrovirus strains from humans, pigs, sheep and other animals with neurological symptoms, indicating that cross-species transmission may occur. Some studies have also proposed the potential pathogenic role of these viruses [2,6], but many questions remain unresolved. This review describes the current molecular epidemiology, genome structure, classification, detection methods, pathogenesis and potential cross species transmission of BoAstV.2. Discovery and EpidemiologyIn 1978, some six-pointed star pattern virus particles with a diameter of about 28 nm were detected in the fecal samples of British diarrheic calves by electron microscopy, and were named astroviruses. From limited experiments, it was concluded that these viruses could infect calves, but did not cause diarrhea or clinical illness [9]. Another study showed that the detection rate of BoAstV in healthy calves was higher than that in diarrheic calves, but the difference was not significant [8]. More recent studies showed that the overall prevalence of BoAstV in diarrheic and asymptomatic calves was 55.17% and 36.36%, respectively, indicating that there was a correlation between astrovirus infection and calf diarrhea [11].Since 1978, the virus has been reported throughout the world, as seen in Figure 1. Although BoAstV has been confirmed in many countries, its prevalence may vary depending on geographical location, age and herd management (Table 1). The first report showed that 16 of 59 blood samples and 11 of 22 herds were serologically positive to the astrovirus-like agent in the United Kingdom using the fluorescent antibody test (FA) [9]. In 1985, 28 of 1060 fecal samples of diarrhea in three-day to three-week-old calves in the USA were positive for BoAstV, with a positivity rate of 2.64% [10]. In 2011, five of 209 adult bovine fecal samples in China were positive for astrovirus by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), with a positivity rate of 2.39% [14]. In 2014, nine of 115 fecal samples were positive for BoAstV in Korea, with a positivity rate of 7.83% [6]. In 2015, 15 of 146 fecal samples were positive for BoAstV in Japan, with a positivity rate of 10.27% [15], 88 of 135 fecal samples were positive for BoAstV in the United Kingdom, with a positivity rate of 65.19% [8] and in China, 211 rectal swabs collected from cattle and buffalo calves with mild to severe diarrhea were tested for BoAstV by RT-PCR with a positivity rate of 43.6% [16]. In different Brazilian states, a prevalence of 14.34% of BoAstV in fecal samples from 272 head of cattle was detected [4]. In 2017, eight of 25 fecal samples were positive for BoAstV in Egypt, with a positivity rate of 32% [5]. In 2018, four of 127 fecal samples from diarrhea calves were positive for BoAstV in Turkey, with a positivity rate of 3.15% [17]. In 2019, 128 of 500 fecal samples from diarrheic calves were positive for BoAstV in Uruguay, with a positivity rate of 25.6% [18]. In 2021, fecal samples from 164 calves from 12 provinces in China were collected and BoAstV was detected with RT-PCR, with an overall prevalence of 46.34% [11].In recent years, in addition to frequent detection in fecal samples, including the USA [19], Switzerland [2], Germany [20], Canada [21,22], Japan [23], Uruguay [24] and Italy [25], BoAstV was also detected in the brain tissue samples of cattle with neurological symptoms. The positivity rate in retrospective analysis can be as high as 85.71% [26]. In 2015, BoAstV was detected for the first time in four bovine nasal swab samples with respiratory symptoms, with a positivity rate of 8% [27]. There are some differences in the prevalence and histotropism of BoAstV in different countries and the continuous emergence of countries with positive astrovirus infection also shows that BoAstV is spreading all over the world. However, although the virus may likely have spread in Oceania and African countries, there are no reports of positive BoAstV cases in these regions. Further analysis also confirmed that the infection rate of young cattle is higher than that of older cattle, where BoAstV is common in 74% of calves, but not in 15% of adult cattle [6,8]. In calves, maternally-derived antibodies may play a significant role in the prevention of BoAstV infection, but this hypothesis needs further investigation.viruses-14-01217-t001_Table 1Table 1The transmission of BoAstV.Sample TypeYearCountryPositive RateReferencesblood samples1978United Kingdom27.12% (16/59)[9]fecal samples1985USA2.64% (28/1060)[10]2011China2.39% (5/209)[14]2014Korea7.83% (9/115)[6]2015Japan10.27% (15/146)[15]United Kingdom65.19% (88/135)[8]China43.6% (92/211)[16]Brazil14.34% (39/272)[4]2017Egypt32% (8/25)[5]2018Turkey3.15% (4/127)[17]2019Uruguay25.6% (128/500)[18]2021China46.34% (76/164)[11]brain tissue samples2013USA12.5% (4/32)[19]2014Switzerland22.73% (5/22)[2]Germany-[20]2016Switzerland85.71% (12/14)[26]Switzerland34.02% (33/97)[7]Canada44.44% (4/9)[21,22]Japan0.67% (1/150)[23]2017Switzerland0.11% (2/1816)[12]2018Uruguay2.7% (1/37)[24]2019Italy0.36% (1/280)[25]nasal swab samples2015USA8% (4/50)[27]3. Genomic CharacteristicsThe BoAstV is a small, non-enveloped virus with a non-segmented, positive sense, single-stranded RNA genome of 6.2 to 7.7 Kb. The genome structure of BoAstV, which is similar to that of other known astroviruses, includes a 5′-untranslated region (UTR), three sequential open reading frames (ORFs) (ORF1a, ORF1b, and ORF2), 3′-UTR, and poly(A) tail [2], as seen in Figure 2. Of these, ORF1a encodes a 90 kDa non-structural protein nsp1a, that contains a conserved serine-like protease motif. ORF1a and ORF1b overlap each other, and the overlapping region between ORF1a and ORF1b contains the highly conserved “slippery heptamer” sequence 5′-AAAAAAC-3′. The ORF1b encodes an RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP) [14].The ORF2 encodes a capsid protein, which contains an N-terminal capsid core and a C-terminal spike domain. Studies have shown that the spike domain induces neutralizing antibodies [28]. In addition, the amino acid (aa) sequence of the ORF2 region is used as the basis for the classification of AstV. AstVs with aa sequence homology of the ORF2 protein greater than 75% are classified as the same species [29].4. Phylogenetics and EvolutionAstroviruses are classified within the Astroviridae family, which was initially comprised of a single genus, Astrovirus, based on virion morphology [30]. The international committee on the taxonomy of viruses (ICTV) confirmed the classification of the Astrovirus genus within the family Astroviridae in 1995. In 2004, two genera were identified, known as Mamastrovirus (MAstV) and Avastrovirus (AAstV), which infect mammalian and avian species, respectively [31]. According to the current classification system, BoAstV belongs to the Astroviridae family and Mamastrovirus genus, which have been detected in intestinal, brain and respiratory samples [2,9,27].Multiple genotypes of AstVs have been identified in other hosts, such as humans, bats and pigs [1]. Recent studies revealed that BoAstVs were composed of seven genotypes, namely, MAstV-13, MAstV 28–30 and MAstV 33–35, and the BoAstV strains were divided into five groups based on the complete genome nucleotide sequences [11]. In this study, the BoAstV reference strains (Table S1) were also divided into five groups based on the phylogenetic analysis of the full-length sequence. Most BoAstV strains from brain tissue were clustered into group 1 (G1), and strains from the intestinal tissue were clustered into group 3 (G3), group 4 (G4) and group 5 (G5). At present, only one respiratory BoAstV strain was identified as group 2 (G2), as seen in Figure 3A. Phylogenetic analysis of the ORF2 gene of global BoAstV strains also shows a similar classification as in Figure 3B. Further analysis shows that several species are closely related to the sequence classification of BoAstV. Based on phylogenetic analysis of the full-length sequence, the AstV strain from bovine (MK987099) is closely related to porcine (LC201603), while in brain tissue, the AstV strain from bovine (KT956903) is closely related to sheep (KY859988). In the ORF2 gene, the enteric AstV strain from bovine (LC047793), porcine (LC201620) and sheep (JN592482) are closely related.5. Detection MethodsElectron microscopy (EM) has long been used for the detection and diagnosis of BoAstV [9] and RT-PCR methods have been developed for rapid detection [11]. Multiplex PCR assays are also being increasingly used for the diagnosis of calf viral diarrhea, including BoAstV [32]. Nested RT-PCR was used to detect BoAstV in the feces of healthy and diarrheic calves, and the RdRp gene was amplified [8] and TaqMan-based real-time PCR (qPCR) has also been used to detect and quantify BoAstV. This method has high sensitivity and specificity, and the real time method has a detection limit of 1.31 × 102 RNA copies, which was 100-fold more sensitive than conventional PCR [33]. Random amplification and high-throughput sequencing are becoming more popular methods in discovering new viruses and solving macrogenome problems [2,19], while Italian researchers have established nanopore technology based on a macrogenome to more accurately detect astroviruses [25]. Boujon et al. (2017) developed an immunohistochemical (IHC) method to detect neurophilic BoAstV associated with bovine non suppurative encephalitis. Experiments confirmed that this method was an appropriate tool for detecting BoAstV infection [34]. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (ISH) was also used to detect BoAstV in bovine encephalitis cases [20].6. Coinfection of BoAstV with Typical Bovine Enteric, Neurotropic and Respiratory VirusesSome reports have shown that BoAstV is a potential pathogen causing enteric or neurotropic symptoms [2,9,35,36]. Although, it has been reported in the literature that BoAstV is controversial as to whether or not BoAstV causes clinical symptoms, the co-occurrence of this virus with circulating viruses has been reported since its discovery, as shown in Table 2. Among enteric pathogens, common co-infected viruses include bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV), bovine torovirus (BToV), bovine enteroviruses (BEV), bovine kobuvirus (BKV), bovine coronavirus (BcoV), bovine norovirus (BnoV), bovine rotavirus (BRV) and bovine enteric caliciviruses (BEC) [9,11,16]. Of these, BoAstV and BRV co-infection is reported most frequently, while the positivity rate of co-infection with BKV was the highest, at up to 66.67% [6,9,11]. Among the reports of co-infection involving three viruses, BoAstV with BRV and BnoV was the most common, with a positivity rate of 31.11% [16]. Among nervous system infectious pathogens, common co-infected viruses include parainfluenza virus 5 (PIV-5), bovine polyomavirus 2 (BpyV-2) and bovine herpesvirus 6 (BoHV-6), which cause bovine neurological symptoms [13,37]. In cases with respiratory symptoms, BoAstV was detected in the respiratory tract together with bovine adenovirus 3 (BadV-3), bovine rhinitis A virus (BRAV), bovine rhinitis B virus (BRBV) and influenza D virus (IDV) [27].7. Pathogenesis of BoAstVTo date, the pathogenesis of BoAstV has not been determined and the detection of astroviruses in different tissues represents a wide range of tissue tropism. It is believed that, since BoAstV is highly prevalent in cattle populations and has an elevated level of genetic diversity, its pathogenesis may be determined by direct evidence of clinical disease. It was first detected in the intestines of calves with enteritis [9], in the brain tissue with neurological symptoms [6] and it was recently detected in nasal swab samples of respiratory diseases [27]. This shows that though BoAstV has been identified from different tissues of cattle, it is not clear which cells are responsible for its proliferation and transmission.Previous reports showed that calves infected with BoAstV alone did not develop clinical disease, but when BoAstV was mixed with BRV or Breda virus 2, the calves developed severe diarrhea and more extensive astrovirus infection of the dome epithelium with associated degeneration [38,39]. Some reports showed that astrovirus may cause diarrhea in an unconventional way. Human astrovirus does not cause intestinal inflammation and cell death, but destroys tight junctions, leading to diarrhea [38]. Some studies suggested that the astrovirus capsid itself can cause diarrhea in vivo [40,41,42], and astrovirus infection alters mucus production, leading to an increase in mucus-associated bacteria [43].With the discovery of bovine encephalitis cases, the association between astrovirus induced bovine nervous system diseases was also determined, but compared with these intestinal symptoms, the neurological symptoms have a greater impact. Selimovic-Hamza et al. (2016) suggested that astroviruses were already involved in the pathogenesis of European sporadic bovine encephalitis (ESBE) several decades ago, but had gone undetected. Researchers found astrovirus RNA in the brain of ESBE cases, but not in control animals, which is the basis of association with the disease. Studies have shown that astrovirus can exist in different brain regions, affecting not only neurons, but also inflammatory cells in perivascular cuffs and glial nodes [26]. Schlottau et al. (2016) detected a high level of BoAstV in the cervical spinal cord, cerebellar hemisphere and trigeminal ganglia of cows with neurological symptoms. Histopathology showed that acute encephalitis occurred in the brainstem and trigeminal ganglionitis and neuronal necrosis occurred in the brain and ganglia [20]. Using the combination of fluorescence in situ hybridization and immunofluorescence (IF) technology, it was possible to detect viral RNA and antigen in the same cell, indicating that the virus actively replicated in infected neurons [25]. In the case of human astrovirus associated encephalitis, humans with low immune function who are simultaneously affected by viral infection or management pressure may be more likely to develop nervous system diseases when infected with the astrovirus [44]. Currently, neurophilic BoAstV has not been isolated and cultured, which has affected the study of the pathogenesis of the disease.In 2015, BoAstV was detected in nasal swab samples of bovines with respiratory diseases, but not in healthy cattle, which may indicate that it has potential respiratory pathogenicity. However, there was co-infection with other viruses in the BoAstV-positive nasal swab samples, so its pathogenicity has not been confirmed [27]. The pathogenesis of BoAstV infection may involve brain tissue, gastrointestinal tract and even respiratory tract [20,27,45], although there is evidence that astrovirus is transmitted through the fecal-oral route [44]. However, it is not clear whether there is an association between enteric, neurophilic and respiratory BoAstV and how the virus circulates in cattle. Studies have shown that neurophilic-astv (NT-AstV) may invade the central nervous system from the gastrointestinal tract retrograde along the peripheral nerves or the circulatory system, since there are cases in which NT-AstV infection induced dorsal root ganglionitis [19,20,46,47]. Recent reports also showed that neurophilic BoAstV was detected from bovine fecal samples, which also confirmed this possibility [48].Other astroviruses are frequently detected in the gastrointestinal tract, which may be an important site of allergic infection and transmission and could be an important source of the virus to other body areas, leading to subsequent disease, however, the detection of BoAstV in nasal swabs of cattle suffering from a respiratory disease indicates a second site of virus entry. At present, one of the main obstacles to understanding the pathogenesis of astrovirus is the lack of a cell culture system suitable for most genotypes. Because this virus is difficult to culture in an immortalized stable cell line and usually coexists with other circulating bovine intestinal, neural and respiratory viruses, it is difficult to study the exact role of this virus in disease progression. Establishing a cell culture system suitable for most genotypes should be the focus for determining the pathogenic mechanism of BoAstV.8. Cross Species Transmission of BoAstVAstroviruses have a wide host range and high genetic diversity. It has been considered that astroviruses were species-specific; however, recently-discovered novel astroviruses and genetic and evolutionary studies of astroviruses show that they have the potential to cross species barriers and adapt to new host species [1,35,49,50]. The phylogenetic tree based on the complete genome sequence of BoAstV showed that bovine astrovirus (MK987099) and porcine astrovirus (LC201603) are located in the same branch, as in Figure 3A. In the evolution of the ORF2 gene, bovine (LC047793), sheep (JN592482) and porcine (LC201620) astroviruses are located in the same branch, bovine astrovirus (KT956903) and sheep astrovirus (KY859988) are also located in the same branch, as seen in Figure 3B.At present, it is considered that the fecal–oral route may be the main route for the transmission of astrovirus. Feces or vomit, contaminated dust mites, transport and feed may be important sources of transmission. As AstV is a non-envelope virus, which can survive in harsh environments, studies have identified the presence of human astrovirus in groundwater and river water [51]. The long-term stability of AstV in water sources can provide a way to infect new hosts without requiring them to be physically close to each other [52]. Some reports showed that bacteria and bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharides can maintain the infectivity of human astroviruses by stabilizing the capsid, allowing continuing infectivity for a long time after abscission, which may also have a far-reaching impact on the transmission of astrovirus between hosts [53]. Recombination may be another key factor for cross species transmission of the virus and has been reported in human and sea lion astroviruses [41,54]. Tse et al. (2011) reported co-infection of different astrovirus genotypes in one cow, which is also a necessary step for recombination [14]. At present, there is no evidence that BoAstV is associated with human astrovirus, but the characteristics of frequent close contact and frequent recombination of the viral genome may provide potential conditions for cross species transmission, which deserves further study.9. Conclusions and Future Prospects for BoAstVBoAstV is prevalent in many countries around the world. The reports of BoAstV in cattle with intestinal disease, neurological symptoms and even respiratory disease indicates that it has multiple tissue tropism and may cause serious economic losses for the global cattle industry. Human, chicken and murine astrovirus researchers have made progress in cell culture and pathogenesis [55,56,57,58], but the difficulty of isolation and culture limits further research on BoAstV [14]. For a variety of problems and future research directions of BoAstV, it is worth discussing the following aspects:9.1. Establishment of a BoAstV Culture SystemAt present, BoAstV is only reported to be cultured in several primary cells, but the isolation and culture of neurogenic and respiratory BoAstV has not been reported. The difficulty of stabilizing cell line culture limits further research on BoAstV. In humans, HAstV have been replicated in a variety of cell lines, among which, human colon cancer cell type 2 (Caco-2) is the most widely used. Several cell lines have been trialed to isolate BoAstV [14], but a stable passage cell line for isolating BoAstV has not been reported. The identification of cell receptors is also needed to help understand the proliferation and culture of viruses in cells, which requires the determination of BoAstV cell receptors as soon as possible.The development of 3D enteroid cells has immense potential as a model to explore and better understand BoAstV. Protocols for developing 3D enteroid cells already exist for several species infected by AstVs, including pigs, chickens and bats [55,59,60]. Using an epithelium-only human intestinal enteroid (HIE) system, Kolawole et al. (2019) identified for the first time that HAstV infects several cell types, including intestinal progenitor cells and mature enterocytes [57]. These findings may provide future reference and insight for future studies on BoAstV.9.2. Potential Tropism of Other OrgansBoAstV has been reported in intestines, brain tissues and the respiratory tract. In many animals, astroviruses are also found in other organs. Duck astrovirus can cause duck hepatitis, goose astrovirus, chicken astrovirus and Avian nephritis virus can cause kidney disease [56,61,62]. In addition, astrovirus RNA has been detected in infected human hearts [63]. Histological results of myocarditis and epicarditis were identified from two pigs infected with porcine astrovirus [64]. It is unclear whether BoAstV can infect cells of the immune or circulatory system, whether it has tissue tropism to the liver, kidney and other organs, and whether virus infection will cause systemic diseases has not been reported. These potential tissue trends highlight the future direction for research, which can only be further evaluated by an in vivo model of astrovirus infection.9.3. Pathogenic Significance of BoAstVAlthough BoAstV has been found for decades, it has not received the same attention as other viral RNA families. This lack of interest is partly due to the assumption that astroviruses only cause self-limiting gastrointestinal diseases in humans and other vertebrates [9]. However, studies have found that BoAstV may be involved in the co pathogenic effects of other bovine enteroviruses [65] and some reports show that BoAstV may play a more significant role in nervous system diseases. BoAstV has been detected in the brain tissue of many cases of encephalitis [2,26]. Phylogenetic analysis showed that BoAstV is closely related to the neurophilic astrovirus of other species, and it is speculated that they may have similar pathogenic mechanisms and the potential for cross-species transmission. The study of BoAstV is of great significance not only for the healthy breeding of cattle, but also for the study of nervous system injury and disease transmission of astrovirus in other animals and even humans.9.4. Exploration and Future Direction of Astrovirus Infection SpectrumAstroviruses infect a wide range of hosts, and have been detected in over 80 avian and mammalian host species to date, affecting both public health systems and economic production chains [1]. According to literature data, the presence of ecotones and frequent recombination of intra-species and inter-species are likely to be key factors for cross species transmission of different host astroviruses, including BoAstV [50]. However, the exact cross species transmission mechanisms have not been determined. It is inevitable that many more different host astroviruses are likely to be discovered and more sequences determined, given the enormous advances in metagenomic and next-generation sequencing technologies. This would help the understanding of the ecological drivers that facilitate the evolution, amplification and dampening of astroviruses across interfaces. Although the receptor of astroviruses has not yet been determined, it has been shown that astroviruses infect cells through capsid protein-mediated binding to cell surface receptors. The comparative analysis of crystal structure and morphology of capsid spike domains as the primary binding site in different hosts may be beneficial to the study of potential cross species transmission between different hosts.


Title: Evidence for genetic variation in Natterer’s bats (

BackgroundWith their particular social, ecological, physiological and immunological traits, bats provide unique hosts for many viruses to co-evolve with (e.g. [1, 2]). Indeed, bats are increasingly recognized as reservoirs for a wide range of viruses, some of which carry a zoonotic potential, for example rabies and other viruses of the genus Lyssavirus, SARS-like, MERS-like and other coronaviruses [2–5]. Consequently, several studies have investigated the genetic co-variation between different bat species and their associated viruses [6, 7]. However, much less is known about genetic co-variation of viruses and different populations of the same bat species, although such information is required to gain a better understanding of the transmission dynamics within a given host species (e.g. [8, 9]).The Natterer’s bat (Myotis nattereri Kuhl 1817 sensu lato [10]) is a non-migratory vespertilionid bat that is widespread throughout Europe with the exception of the Iberian and Italian peninsula and the South of France [11]. While this species uses underground sites for hibernation during the winter months, it mostly roosts in trees and buildings during summer forming maternity colonies that consist of female bats and their juveniles as well as occasionally some males [12, 13]. Males typically roost either individually or in small groups in the vicinity of the maternity colonies [14]. Male and female Natterer’s bats have been found to exhibit philopatry even though males leave their natal colony but stay in its vicinity [13]. Mating takes place during autumn at swarming sites that are typically up to 50 km away from the summer colony [13].Recently, various viruses have been reported to be harbored by M. nattereri [15], including herpes- [16], lyssa- [17] and astroviruses (e.g. [18]). The Astroviridae form a large family of non-enveloped, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA viruses [19]. Astroviruses are mostly transmitted via the fecal-oral route [20] and may cause diarrhea in many animal species, including humans [21]. However, the route of transmission in bats has not yet been elucidated. Even though astroviruses have been detected in a variety of species [22], bats have been hypothesized to be a potential reservoir host in Europe and Asia [7, 23]. The high prevalence and diversity of astroviruses harbored by bats is remarkable [18, 21, 23] and their capability to cross species barriers and become adapted to new hosts, including spill-over to other taxa, has been suggested [24]. Due to the occurrence of astroviruses in animals in close contact to humans, e.g. livestock and also bats using human habitation as roosting, it has been argued that astroviruses should be considered as potential candidates for zoonotic infections (e.g. [24]). However, almost nothing is known about the transmission of astrovirus among different populations of their bat hosts.We studied patterns of population genetic structure and dispersal of Myotis nattereri within and among three geographic regions of Germany using both nuclear and mitochondrial microsatellite markers. The population genetic structure of M. nattereri has previously only been investigated in the United Kingdom (UK; [13]). However, the population genetic structure of bats occurring in the UK may be affected by their insular status, and some important differences between insular and continental populations have been described (e.g. [25]). Thus, our study adds new important insights into the dispersal behavior of M. nattereri in mainland Europe. Moreover, we investigated for the first time if genetic co-variation occurs between populations of a bat host and its harboured astroviruses. Fischer et al. [18] reported distinctly higher similarities in astrovirus sequences of samples collected from the same bat species in different geographic localities than between samples from different species sampled at the same locality, whereas different results were obtained in the Czech Republic for some other European bat species [26]. Because our analyses are based on the sequences found by Fischer et al. [18] in M. nattereri, we assume that, similarly to coronaviruses in Chinese bats [27], astroviruses are mostly transmitted within Natterer’s bats rather than within the local bat community as a whole. We hypothesized that if virus transmission between host populations were associated with events linked to gene flow in the bats, e.g. mating [28], genetic co-variation should be detectable between host populations and astroviruses on a larger scale (e.g. between geographic regions), even though not necessarily within a certain region.Many bat astroviruses form distinct phylogenetic clusters [21], but little is known whether astrovirus population structure matches that of their host species. As astroviruses are hypothesized to be transmitted via the fecal-oral route [20], both direct and indirect virus transmission within the breeding colonies of bats and at swarming sites during mating seem possible [8]. In comparison, for bat ectoparasites such as bat flies (Nycteribiidae) that are also transmitted both by direct body contact and indirectly through the bats’ roosts, a more efficient transmission among different bat populations has been detected at swarming sites as compared to breeding colonies [29]. As swarming sites represent the main mating sites for M. nattereri, where gene flow occurs, it is expected that if viruses are also mainly transmitted between conspecifics during that period, the transmission route of the viruses should resemble the pattern of host gene flow. Since transmission of astroviruses at swarming sites would cause viruses to be transmitted between members of different colonies visiting a given swarming site, local differentiation should not occur at the colony level but rather on a larger scale. Viral genetic patterns should therefore follow an isolation-by-distance pattern using swarming sites as stepping-stones for gene flow, as suggested for the bat host [30].MethodsStudy area and sample collectionSampling occurred between 2010 and 2014 from maternity colonies in three regions in Germany: Bavaria (BY, N = 92 adult females, one colony), North Rhine Westphalia (NRW, N = 100 adult females, five colonies) and Mecklenburg Western Pomerania (MV, N = 172 adult females, ten colonies; Fig. 1). Bats were either taken directly out of the bat boxes provided for the colonies or captured using mist nets or harp traps when leaving the colonies’ roosts. Three millimeter wing tissue samples were collected and stored in 90% ethanol until DNA extraction. In addition, between 2012 and 2014, samples of bat saliva, feces and urine were opportunistically taken within the three regions of interest (BY, N = 177; NRW, N = 74; MV, N = 19) and screened for the presence of astrovirus-related RNA (Additional file 1: Table S3).Fig. 1Outline of the study area and sampling localities of Myotis nattereri samples in Germany. The triangular markings represent the sampling areas within Bavaria (BY), Mecklenburg Western Pomerania (MV) and North Rhine Westphalia (NRW). The close-up maps for NRW on the upper left and for MV on the lower right show the exact sampling localities of the colonies. As in BY only one colony was sampled, no close-up is provided
Bat DNA extraction and amplificationGenomic DNA was extracted using an ammonium acetate precipitation method [31]. Individuals were genotyped using 19 nuclear microsatellite markers and one mitochondrial microsatellite marker. The following nuclear markers were used: EF15 [32]; b22 [33]; A2-Mluc, A13-Mluc, E5-Mluc, G6-Mluc, G30-Mluc, G31-Mluc [34], D15, H19, H23, H29 [35]; Mnatt-1, Mnatt-2 [36]; Mschreib3 [37]; Mnatt-8, Mnatt-11 [38]; FV5AP [39] and GZBYR (5′-TCCTTGTCACTATAAGCTCAGTGG-3′ (forward); 5′-CCAGGCAATAGTCTCCTAGCAC-3′ (reverse)). The 5′ end of the reverse primers FV5AP and G30-Mluc were PIG-tailed [40] with the sequence GTTT and the 5′ end of the reverse primer G31-Mluc with the sequence GTTTT to facilitate adenylation. These 19 autosomal microsatellite markers were amplified in two multiplex polymerase chain reactions (PCRs, Table 1). PCRs were carried out in 9 μl reaction volumes using the Qiagen multiplex Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Each multiplex reaction contained 1 x Qiagen Multiplex Master Mix and between 0.11 μM and 1.06 μM of each primer. After drying 1 μl of DNA (approximately 10 ng) for 15 min at 52 °C in a 96-well PCR plate (VWR), multiplex reactions were performed. The PCR amplification was carried out in a 2720 Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems), with an initial 5 min denaturation at 95 °C, followed by 30 cycles with denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C for 90 s and extension at 72 °C for 1 min. Final incubation occurred at 60 °C for 30 min.Table 1Genetic diversity at nuclear loci within Myotis nattereri populations sampled within Germany
Final concentration

[μM]

BY

NRW

MV

N

A

H
e

H
o

Ar

N

A

H
e

H
o

Ar

N

A

H
e

H
o

Ar

Multiplex 1
 
A2-Mluc
0.2292110.780.7610.93100100.630.639.72168130.820.8212.50 
b22
0.229270.750.786.9410080.780.747.7017280.790.776.99 
D15
0.2292100.870.9210.00100100.860.8610.00172110.800.8510.45 
EF15
0.449240.510.414.0010040.590.513.8617250.640.624.88 
G30-Mluc
0.2292190.880.9018.8697200.830.8019.41170220.830.7819.10 
G6-Mluc
0.229280.820.787.9410090.820.858.9617290.840.838.75 
H23
0.229290.800.838.99100110.820.8110.86172110.790.8010.49 
H29
0.569260.690.716.0010080.720.677.8417280.680.636.63 
Mnatt-1
0.119170.700.746.9410050.640.695.0017270.690.686.63 
Mnatt-11*
0.569180.830.857.9410090.810.788.70172100.850.889.47 
Mnatt-8
0.5686190.900.8819.0099250.930.8824.56172260.930.8522.31
Multiplex 2
 
A13-Mluc
0.4489160.850.9115.87100160.830.8015.58172140.880.9013.74 
E5-Mluc
1.0687100.800.7810.00100130.810.7612.70172120.810.8010.97 
FV5AP
0.229140.680.594.0010050.650.635.0017270.700.756.44 
G31-Mluc
0.229260.800.796.009980.810.817.8717280.790.797.75 
GZBYR
0.229290.780.749.00100100.830.789.86171100.830.819.86 
H19
0.3392180.870.8317.93100150.890.8814.70171170.830.7815.90 
Mnatt-2*
0.229280.830.858.00010090.810.788.7017090.850.868.97 
Mschreib3
0.2287160.900.8415.9999170.900.8516.60169210.930.8620.08
N number of samples successfully analyzed (total number of individuals: Bavaria (BY) 92, North Rhine Westphalia (NRW) 100, Mecklenburg Western Pomerania (MV) 172); A number of alleles; H
o observed heterozygosity; H
e expected heterozygosity; (AR) allelic richness based on a minimum of 74 individuals. The primers marked with an asterisk (*) appear to be linked. Forward markers were dyed as follows: 6-FAM: A13-Mluc, D15, b22, G30-Mluc, H19, H29, GZBYR, FV5AP, Mnatt-1, Mnatt-2; VIC: Mnatt-8, G31-Mluc, H23; NED: A2-Mluc, EF15, Mschreib3, E5-Mluc and PET: Mnatt-11, G6-Mluc
The mitochondrial DNA marker AT-2 [41] was amplified in a separate PCR. After drying 1 μl of DNA (approximately 10 ng) for 15 min at 52 °C in a 96-well PCR plate (VWR), this PCR was carried out in 10 μl reaction volume which contained 0.2 μM of Primer AT-2, 1.0 mM dNTPs, 0.8 mM of MgCl2, 1.0 μl 10 x Taq Buffer B1 (Solis, BioDyne, Tartu, Estonia) and 1 unit of Taq Hot FirePol® DNA Polymerase (Solis, BioDyne, Tartu, Estonia). This PCR amplification was carried out in a 2720 Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems), with an initial 15 min denaturation at 95 °C, followed by 40 cycles with denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing at 53 °C for 60 s and extension at 72 °C for 1 min. Final incubation occurred at 72 °C for 7 min.PCR products were separated using an ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) together with the internal size standard Genescan 500 liz (Applied Biosystems) and analyzed using Genemapper v 5.0 (Applied Biosystems).Data analysisBat population genetic structureSince it has been reported that the presence of closely related individuals within populations can bias Bayesian multi-locus clustering methods [42], we removed closely related individuals from the dataset before conducting population genetic structure analyses using the program Structure [43]. For this purpose, we first determined the degree of relatedness between all pairs of individuals within a population using TrioML [44], as implemented in the Coancestry 1.0.1.5 software package [45]. Relatedness densities were further plotted using R (R Core [46]) in order to determine the relatedness threshold for excluding individuals from the analyses. This threshold was selected manually by best separating the first peak of the plotted distribution (i.e. closely related individuals) from the rest (unrelated individuals). From every pair of individuals with a relatedness value exceeding the determined threshold (0.3), one individual was randomly removed, respectively. All other analyses, except for Structure, were performed on the whole data set. As uneven sampling can bias inferences on the number of clusters in the program Structure [47], efforts were made to have comparable number of individuals from the three regions investigated after the removal of closely related individuals (71 from BY, 73 from NRW and 104 from MV; cf. Results).As preliminary runs using the original Structure model showed limited population structure (Additional file 1: Figure S2), Structure [43] was run on the nuclear DNA dataset assuming admixture and correlated allele frequencies using the LOCPRIOR model that allows for the use of sample group information (here the colony) in the clustering process [48]. Thus, twenty independent runs of K = 1–10 were conducted for the whole dataset after removing closely related individuals as mentioned above. Additionally, twenty independent runs of K = 1–10 were run for each dataset within a sampling region (NRW, MV and BY), respectively. All runs used 106 iterations after a burn-in period of 105.For each of the genetically distinct populations inferred by Structure the significance of deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWG, [49]) and linkage disequilibrium between loci was tested in Genepop 4.0.7 [50]. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction method was used to deal with multiple testing [51].To assess the level of genetic diversity, the observed (H
o) and expected heterozygosity (H
ex) for each locus as well as for each population inferred by Structure for the complete data set were calculated using Genetix 4.05.2 [52]. The mean number of alleles (A) and the allelic richness (A
R) were calculated for each locus and each subpopulation using Fstat v.2.9.3 [53] (Table 1). Differences in the number of alleles per locus, allelic richness and expected and observed heterozygosities between the populations inferred by Structure were tested for significance using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test in R. MICRO-CHECKER 2.2.3 [54], set for 10 000 iterations and a 95% confidence interval, was used to test for null alleles.Population pairwise F
ST values [55] on the whole dataset including closely related individuals, were used to measure the level of genetic differentiation between the populations inferred by Structure. For both the nuclear and the mitochondrial DNA data set, a hierarchical population structure was assumed where colonies were clustered within regions. F
ST values were thus calculated using hierarchical analyses within the R-package HierFstat [56, 57]. Genetic structure was tested among colonies within sampling regions with more than 1 colony (MV and NRW) and among sampling regions. The significance of the F-statistics was tested by 10,000 permutations.Isolation-by-distance for the entire set of 17 colonies was tested via Mantel’s test [58] from the comparison of all pairwise F
ST/(1-F
ST) values with pairwise geographic distances using the R package ecodist [59] with 10,000 permutations. The test was performed for the whole dataset as well as within regions consisting of several colonies (NRW and MV).Correlation of bat and virus genetic distancesA total of 270 samples obtained from saliva, feces and urine of Myotis nattereri were screened for the presence of astroviruses by using a published hemi-nested PCR protocol [21] for the amplification of a highly conserved region of the RNA dependent RNA polymerase gene (RdRp). This PCR assay enables the detection of a variety of bat-associated astroviruses by using degenerated primers. Further details of the virus-related sampling and laboratory are presented in Fischer et al. [18]. A total 57 sequences representing 19 different astrovirus haplotypes (=sequences having 100% identity) (N1-19, Fig. 4) were identified from the screening of 270 samples. Three haplotypes were excluded from the analyses (N17-19, Fig. 4) as they were phylogenetically too distant from the remaining 16 and too rarely encountered (only once per haplotype) to make biologically meaningful inferences about their correlation to the bat host’s population genetic structure. Out of the 270 samples, Fischer et al. [18] were able to assign 73 individual sequences to a specific haplotype (N1-19, Fig. 4), whereas the remaining astrovirus positive samples were shorter than 279 nt and could therefore not be assigned to a haplotype. As in this study we only analyzed individually marked adult female bats that were clearly identifiable via their RFID-tag, in total 57 individual sequences, representing these 16 different haplotypes, were used (N1-16, Fig. 4).The genetic distances between the different astrovirus haplotypes were calculated using the Tamura-Nei model implemented in Mega 6.0 [60]. Further, the sequences were translated into amino acids and amino acid genetic distances were computed using the p-dist method implemented in Mega 6.0 [60]. This latter measure was tentatively used to differentiate viral species following the recommendation of the Astroviridae working group of the International Committee for Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV Astroviridae Working [61]), proposing that mean amino acid genetic distances (p-dist) of the full length ORF2 larger than 0.284 distinguish different species.As we found no shared identical sequences between regions (BY, MV and NRW), a permutation test was conducted using R (R Core [46]) to test how likely such a pattern would be expected by chance (Additional file 1: Database S1).Moreover, the program Poptree2 [62] was used to generate genetic distance matrices for the nuclear and mitochondrial DNA datasets based on the DA distances [63] of population microsatellite allele frequencies within a priori populations. For the astrovirus dataset, we first used the program jModeltest 2.1.7 [64] to calculate likelihood scores for substitution model selection. Genetic and amino acid distances were then calculated using Mega 6.0 [60] based on the Maximum Composite Likelihood substitution model with gamma correction for among-site rate heterogeneity and an estimated proportion of invariable sites.Associations between astrovirus and bat host genetic distances (both mitochondrial and nuclear) were first analyzed via a Mantel Test [58] using the software GenAlex 6.501 [65]. To control for the possible effect of geographic distance, we also carried out partial Mantel tests in PASSaGE v 2.0.11.6 (9999 permutations, [66]). The geographic distance matrix used was calculated from the GPS coordinates of the different sampling sites using the Create option in PASSaGE.For the genetic correlations between host and astrovirus sequences the NRW dataset was modified. Due to significant population genetic structuring on the basis of mtDNA and the fact that the sampled colonies in NRW are up to 46 km apart from each other compared to maximally 6.5 km in MV (see Fig. 1) we split the NRW data set in four separate sampling units (NRW2, NRW3, NRW5 and NRW6; Fig. 1). Here, we only used genetic data from the colonies within NRW where virus sequences were detected. Together with MV and BY, the total dataset for comparing host and virus population structures now consisted of six populations between which pairwise genetic distances were computed as mentioned above.ResultsBat population genetic structureAfter removing closely related individuals at the threshold of 0.3, the nuclear DNA dataset consisted of samples from 248 bats in total, including 71 from BY, 73 from NRW and 104 from MV. Using the 19 autosomal microsatellite loci, Structure inferred the presence of three distinct genetic clusters (Fig. 2; Additional file 1: Figure S1), splitting our data set into the three sampled regions NRW, MV and BY. No additional sub-structuring was detected by Structure within any of these three sampling regions (data not shown).Fig. 2Bar plot graph of estimated membership coefficient of Myotis nattereri from Bayesian analysis for K = 3 generated using Structure and the Locprior option. For the summary of the log-likelihood values from the 20 independent runs conducted with Structure see Additional file 1: Figure S1
The 19 autosomal microsatellite loci had between 4 and 24 alleles and an average of 10.2–11.7 alleles per each of the three genetically distinct populations inferred by the program Structure (Table 1). No significant deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium were detected in these three populations. Deviations from linkage disequilibrium at the α = 0.05 level (after FDR correction) did occur consistently in all three regions between two loci (Mnatt-2 and Mnatt-11, Table 1) but were not detected in all respective colonies (linkage occurred in BY, in three out of ten colonies in MV and in three out of five colonies in NRW). Because of the inconsistencies at the colony level, we decided to nevertheless keep both loci for further analyses. No marker with consistently appearing null alleles was found within NRW and MV, whereas in BY the two loci EF15 and FV5AP showed the presence of null alleles. However, since the estimated frequency of null alleles per locus was low (<0.1), we kept those loci.Mean expected and observed heterozygosity were globally similar across colonies and regions (Tables 1 and 2). The number of alleles found in MV was significantly higher than in BY (P = 0.0020) and NRW (P = 0.0284), but BY and NRW did not differ significantly from each other. Moreover, allelic richness was significantly higher in MV as compared to BY (P = 0.0124) but no significant differences were found between BY and NRW and between NRW and MV. The overall level of differentiation among the three regions was weak but significant (F
ST = 0.0088, P = 0.0001) based on nuclear DNA estimated using hierarchical F-statistics. Significant genetic differentiation was further identified among colonies within regions (F
ST = 0.0194, P = 0.0001). When analyzing the data obtained by the mitochondrial DNA marker AT-2, pairwise genetic differentiation was found to be much higher at both geographic scales (among regions: F
ST = 0.4979, P = 0.0001; among colonies within regions: F
ST = 0.3657, P = 0.0001).Table 2
P-values for differences in number of alleles, allelic richness and observed and expected heterozygosities
A

Ar

Ho

He
MV-NRW0.0284*0.67940.22530.3736MV-BY0.0020*0.0124*0.98430.1712NRW-BY0.05360.08940.18190.9843
*significant p-values at the 0.05 level
P-values for differences between MV, NRW and BY in number of alleles (A), allelic richness (Ar), observed heterozygosity (H
o) and expected heterozygosity (H
e) obtained using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test in R
When correlating genetic differentiation F
ST/(1-F
ST) with ln of geographic distances between all colonies within our study area, a significant pattern of isolation-by-distance was detected (Mantel r = 0.2989, P = 0.0160; Fig. 3). In contrast, the Isolation-by-distance patterns within the NRW (Mantel r = -0.2762, P = 0.7869) and the MV population (Mantel r = 0.2275, P = 0.0535) were not significant, even though in MV there was a similar trend visible as in the entire data set.Fig. 3Isolation-by-distance analysis for data from 19 nuclear microsatellite loci from Myotis nattereri within Germany. The graph displays the significant correlation between genetic differentiation and ln of geographical distance (in km) for all pairwise comparisons of colonies. Genetic distance was measured as Rousset’s F
ST/(1-F
ST) and the relationship with geographic distance was tested using a Mantel test with 1000 permutations. The line represents a linear regression of this relationship and only serves an illustrative purpose
Correlation of bat and virus genetic distancesWe found no overlap in the detected haplotypes between the three regions (Fig. 4). The permutation test revealed that the probability of having no such overlap by chance was very low (P = 0.007; 100,000 permutations). However, a closer look at the genetic relationship of the different astrovirus haplotypes (Fig. 4) revealed that sequences of high similarity occur in different geographic regions. Genetic distances in astrovirus haplotypes that cluster together (N1-3, N4-6, N7-9, N10-11, N12-15; Fig. 4) ranged between 0.0033 and 0.0313, whereas genetic distances among clusters were distinctly higher (0.2093–0.6895). As for the amino acid genetic distances (p-dist), distances ranged between 0.0221–0.0588 and 0.5732–0.6786 within and between clusters, respectively, the latter being typical of species differences. Rough estimations of divergence times using an astrovirus mutation rate of 3 × 10−3 [67] indicate that differences within clusters have occurred within 1–10 years, versus 70–230 years for between-cluster divergence time.Fig. 4Phylogenetic tree created using the Maximum likelihood method implemented in Mega 6.0 [60] displaying the phylogenetic relationship between the 19 haplotypes of astroviruses detected in Myotis nattereri [18] and the occurrence of the different astrovirus haplotypes within the three regions of interest (BY = Bavaria, MV = Mecklenburg Western Pomerania, NRW = North Rhine Westphalia). C1-6 represent the putative viral species identified. The horizontal line separates the 16 haplotypes used for further analyses from the three remaining haplotypes (N17-19)
Furthermore, the astrovirus genetic distances neither correlated with those of the host’s nuclear DNA nor with those of the host’s mitochondrial DNA. This was true both for the Mantel Tests and for the partial Mantel Test correcting for geographic distance (Table 3).Table 3Mantel Test and partial Mantel TestSubstitution modelCompared dataset
r

P-value
Mantel Test
nucDNA−0.2190.190mtDNA−0.1200.420
Partial Mantel Test
nucDNA−0.1990.518mtDNA−0.1740.462Results of the Mantel Tests and partial Mantel Tests testing for an association between astrovirus genetic distances and those of its bat host (Myotis nattereri), for both nuclear (nucDNA) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) (P-value based on 1000 permutations)
DiscussionIn this study, we analyzed the population genetic structure of M. nattereri within and among summer colonies at different geographical scales in Germany and correlated it with that of the astrovirus sequences found in the respective host colonies. Our aim was to assess whether the population structure and dispersal patterns of host populations can explain the genetic structure of astrovirus sequences and thus ultimately shed light on the virus transmission dynamics within a given bat species [8, 9].Our findings show significant population structure in M. nattereri with the detection of three genetic clusters which correspond to the three regions sampled (NRW, MV and BY). Both the results obtained using the Bayesian clustering approach and the F
ST values between the three genetic clusters show the existence of significant population genetic structure. The detection of an isolation-by-distance pattern over the whole study area combined with the continuous presence of the species across Germany suggests that the levels of gene flow are not high enough to prevent some population differentiation [68].The observed strong mitochondrial substructure and weak but significant structure at the nuclear level, likely results from differences in effective population size and female philopatry combined with male-mediated gene flow. Differences in patterns of genetic structure in mitochondrial and nuclear DNA have been reported in many European bat species and were associated with male-biased dispersal [41, 69]. According to previous studies in M. nattereri in the UK [13, 30], both sexes appear to be highly philopatric to their natal area but visit central swarming sites during autumn for mating. According to Rivers et al. [30], this pattern results in the same genetic pattern as permanent male dispersal [13].In connection with the existing overall population isolation-by-distance pattern detected and the absence of a significant pattern on a local scale, i.e. within a region, we suggest that individuals from different summer colonies meet and mate at swarming sites within each region (e.g. [13, 70]). This would result in gene flow following a stepping-stone model and would both lead to a significant isolation-by-distance over larger scales [71] and to the absence or a weak signal on a local scale [30, 33]. Within the UK, isolation-by-distance was not detected between summer colonies of M. nattereri unless distances exceeded 100 km [30]. Our results agree with those obtained by Rivers et al. [30] as we also did not detect significant genetic isolation-by-distance between summer colonies within a given region in Germany (even though there is a trend in MV), but over the study area as a whole. Therefore, we suggest that the isolation-by-distance pattern observed here is generated by swarming sites acting as stepping-stones for gene flow.In our study area, identical astrovirus haplotypes harbored by M. nattereri do not overlap between geographic regions (BY, MV and NRW, Fig. 4). Based on the partial sequence of the conserved RdRp gene analysed in this study [21], where the mean amino acid distances ranged from 0.022 to 0.059 within and 0.573–0.679 between clusters, the analyzed haplotypes form six different groups which might represent six different viral species [61] (C1-6, Fig. 4). The detection of the same putative viral species in the different regions combined with the estimated divergence times (<10 years for within species) suggests occasional transmission between host populations. Both the observed genetic population structure of M. nattereri and existing data from ringing studies in Germany [72] show that Natterer’s bats rarely if ever move over long distances (more than 100 km). Thus, it is unlikely that individual bats directly transmit a certain virus haplotype between the three geographic regions analyzed (NRW, BY and MV). Since viruses have a considerably higher mutation rate [73] compared to the bat host, mutations in the virus sequences do occur within much shorter time scales than mutation in the bats’ genome [74, 75]. As bats need to transmit the astroviruses directly, the movement of viruses across the landscape should mirror the movement of the bats and hence occur successively over large distances following the stepping stone model of the host. As a consequence, virus transmission over large distances is likely to take multiple years. In the course of these successive transmissions events, mutations will occur in the virus which will lead to viral population differentiation as we observe within the putative viral species.No association was found when correlating the genetic distances of the different astrovirus sequences with their bat host genetic distances. We had originally expected that if the transmission route of astrovirus sequences resembles the pattern of host gene flow, genetic co-variation between astroviruses and host populations should be detected, especially across regions. The reason why no such correlation was found for M. nattereri and its associated astroviruses could be due to strong differences in population size (hence genetic drift) and mutation rate between bats and viruses. In contrast to higher Eukaryotes such as the bat host, RNA viruses are subject to higher selective pressures and combined with a high mutation rate allow continuous and rapid adaptation to changing environmental conditions [73, 76, 77]. Coupled with large population sizes, virus evolution can thus already be observed within very short time scales of weeks to months [74, 75]. The frequent fluctuations in the prevalence of viral populations (e.g. bottlenecks) and hence the higher genetic drift they face might prevent these populations from showing patterns of isolation-by-distance [78]. Moreover, our virus sampling could only be performed during the summer period since only some of the autumn swarming sites are known so far. Additionally, due to logistic reasons exact sampling dates differed between the sampling localities, which could blur the signal if some haplotypes or putative viral species are more abundant in different periods (see Additional file 1: Table S1). Finally, although large from a virology perspective, the number of samples with viral material was relatively limited to perform population genetics analyses. This combined with the variations in sampling times could confound our analysis if viruses show quick temporal variation in prevalence and/or turnover. A further possible explanation for the lack of a genetic correlation between hosts and viruses is that at swarming sites bats may not only interact in ways that lead to gene flow. Multiple mating and contact between individuals that does not result in successful mating might also represent transmission opportunities for viruses that are not reflected within the host genetic pattern.ConclusionsIn summary, our findings suggest that for M. nattereri within Germany, swarming sites act as stepping-stones for gene flow, as indicated by an overall isolation-by-distance pattern and the absence of such a significant pattern on a local scale. The observed population genetic structure indicates that no apparent strong barriers to gene flow exist within our study area for the bat host. While putative viral species were mostly shared between geographic regions, no haplotypes were shared for any putative viral species. Despite the observed genetic differentiation between the three geographic regions in the bat host and to a certain extent also in the harbored astroviruses, we did not detect a correlation between host and virus genetic distances. This could potentially be due to differences in genetic drift, selective pressure, population size and mutation rate between bats and viruses. Further studies with a higher astrovirus sample size and with specific simultaneous sampling during autumn mating at swarming sites are required to shed further light on the host-virus relationship between bats and their astroviruses.Additional files
Additional file 1:Supplementary material. Figure S1. Summary of the log-likelihood values from the 20 independent runs conducted with Structure for the number of genetic clusters (K) set to a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 10. The left graph shows the log-likelihood results of the runs for each K, whereas the right graph shows Delta K plotted against K. The most likely number of genetic clusters is three using both methods. Figure S2. Comparisons of the STRUCTURE runs for K = 3 with (top) or without (bottom) the LOCPRIOR option. Table S1. Table of sampling times and associated screening for astroviruses. AstV = astrovirus, BY = Bavaria, MV = Mecklenburg Western Pomerania, NRW = North Rhine Westphalia. AstV positive samples with a length of less than 279 nt could not be assigned to a specific haplotype, but are nevertheless included in the number of AstV positive samples presented here. Database S1. R-script used for the permutation test. With this script we tested how likely it is to have no overlap in virus haplotypes across regions and whether virus haplotypes are more different between regions than expected by chance. (DOCX 318 kb)
Additional file 2:Genotype table Myotis nattereri. Table of alleles per locus for each individual bat used for the population genetic analyses on the Natterer’s bat (Myotis nattereri) determined using Genemapper v 5.0 (Applied Biosystems). (XLSX 75 kb)



================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HEPATITIS A VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Characterization of a Pathogenic Full-Length cDNA Clone and Transmission Model for Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea Virus Strain PC22A

INTRODUCTIONCoronaviruses are important emerging viruses that are capable of producing sudden pandemic disease outbreaks with high morbidity, mortality, and economic losses in animal and human populations (1). Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) is an alphacoronavirus that recently emerged in the United States and has since killed >8 million piglets, nearly 10% of all U.S. farm piglets in 2014 (2). In the United States, newly emerged strains of PEDV are highly virulent and cause mortality rates in suckling piglets of between 80 and 100% (2). Clinically, pigs infected with PEDV have severe diarrhea and vomiting, leading to death by dehydration within a few days of infection (2–4). PEDV readily spreads by fecal-oral transmission routes between swine, in swine feed, and through contaminated farming and transport equipment (5). A second newly discovered swine coronavirus in the United States, designated swine deltacoronavirus (SDCV), was discovered in Ohio and found to be closely related to coronaviruses detected in Hong Kong in 2012 (6). Porcine orthoreoviruses that are similar to strains identified in Southeast Asia have also been detected in U.S. herds (7). It is clear that new approaches are desperately needed to control pandemic outbreaks of swine respiratory and enteric viruses.Although the origins of PEDV remain obscure and early sequence studies had suggested similarity to human coronavirus NL63, more-recent studies argue that PEDV is more closely related to several bat alphacoronaviruses identified in the United States, South America, and Eurasia (8, 9). PEDV first emerged in Europe in the 1970s and spread across Europe and into Asia (10). However, it was not until late 2010 that extremely virulent forms emerged in China (11). In the United States, phylogenetic studies suggest that PEDV is most closely related to Chinese strain AH2012*, although its transmission route to the United States still remains uncertain (2, 8, 12). Since the first U.S. outbreak of PEDV in April 2013, PEDV has rapidly spread across 34 states, Canada, and Central America and has returned to devastate the swine industry in Asia (13, 14). During this ongoing outbreak, new strategies are desperately needed to understand pathogenic mechanisms and the functions of viral genes and to provide new technologies to combat this disease.PEDV appears to recognize CD13, an aminopeptidase N protein, as a receptor for entry into pig cells, as well as the sugar coreceptors heparan sulfate and N-acetylneuraminic acid (15, 16). PEDV can infect multiple cell types in vitro, including swine, human, primate, and bat cells, suggesting the possibility of adaptation and spread to other species (15). The PEDV genome is composed of 28,000 nucleotides (nt) encoding seven known open reading frames (ORFs) expressed from both genomic and subgenomic mRNAs (17). Subgenomic mRNAs are arranged in a nested fashion from the 3′ end of the genome. PEDV encodes the traditional coronavirus structural proteins: a receptor-binding spike glycoprotein (S), the envelope protein (E), the membrane glycoprotein (M), and the nucleocapsid protein (N). The spike glycoprotein is a type I membrane glycoprotein composed of S1 and S2 external domains, a transmembrane domain, a C-terminal cytoplasmic domain, and a signal peptide. The S protein plays a role in virulence, growth adaptation, receptor binding, and virus-cell membrane fusion (18, 19). E of PEDV (PEDV-E) upregulates stress pathways in the host cell, induces antiapoptotic factors, and is important for viral budding (20). PEDV-N induces cell stress and prevents apoptosis through similar pathways and prolongs the host cell’s S phase (21). Additionally, PEDV contains at least three additional ORFs: ORF1a, ORF1b, and ORF3. ORF1a and -b encode two viral proteases that process these large precursor polyproteins into 16 nonstructural proteins, including the viral replicase and associated RNA-modifying enzymes that are critical for full-length and subgenomic positive- and negative-strand RNA synthesis (22). ORF3 regulates virus production and encodes an ion channel important for viral fitness but is not required for viral replication in vitro (23, 24).In this study, we generated the first infectious cDNA clone of a virulent North American PEDV strain, PC22A (25). Parental genomic and ORF3 deletion recombinant viruses were generated using the infectious cDNA clone system; the latter was also engineered to express red fluorescent protein (RFP). Both recombinant viruses are replication competent in vitro and pathogenic in neonatal gnotobiotic (Gn) piglets. Parental and recombinant viruses were efficiently transmitted to uninoculated pigs via indirect contact, allowing for genetic studies into the molecular mechanisms regulating virus transmission and pathogenesis. The availability of an infectious clone for PEDV will allow us further opportunities to understand gene function and genetic variants in PEDV pathogenesis and transmission, leading to better-informed design of vaccines and therapeutics.RESULTSDesign of an infectious PEDV clone.We have developed molecular clones for several highly pathogenic swine and human coronaviruses, using class II restriction endonucleases, to directionally assemble a full-length cDNA viral genome from a set of sequentially designed smaller cDNAs (26–31). To develop a molecular clone for PEDV, the highly virulent PC22A strain (Fig. 1A) was sequenced and synthesized as six contiguous PEDV subclones designated A to F (Fig. 1B). Subclones A/B, B/C, C/D, and D/E are joined by unique SapI restriction endonuclease cleavage sites (at nucleotide positions 4071, 8287, 12016, and 16941, respectively) that allow for directional assembly into a full-length cDNA without alteration of the viral amino acid sequence. Subclones E and F are joined at a unique BsaI site at nucleotide position 22504. In subclone F, a single BsaI restriction site in PEDV-PC22A was removed by introducing a silent mutation at position 24337, effectively marking the recombinant genome (Fig. 1C). Thus, each fragment contains a unique set of class II restriction enzyme sites flanking the genomic sequence that allow for unique 3-nt overhangs between each fragment. This specificity allows for systematic, efficient, and directional assembly of the complete PEDV genome by in vitro ligation. The PEDV A fragment contains a T7 start site, whereas the F fragment terminates in 22 A residues, allowing for in vitro transcription and capping of a polyadenylated full-length transcript.FIG 1Schematic of the full-length PEDV genome and construction of the infectious PEDV cDNA clone and mutants. (A) PEDV genome, including ORF1a, ORF1b, and the spike (S), ORF3, envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) genes. (B) cDNA fragments comprising icPEDV. Restriction sites joining fragments are noted. (C) The BsaI site was removed from icPEDV, as indicated by the A to G nucleotide change in yellow. (D) PEDV-ΔORF3-RFP. Restriction sites were used to replace ORF3 with tomato-red and the ORF3 transcription regulatory sequence (TRS). 5′ and 3′ UTR, 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions.PEDV-ORF3 is an accessory ORF encoding a putative ion channel protein that is oftentimes deleted from some natural isolates or following in vitro passage, suggesting that it encodes nonessential functions in vitro and/or in vivo (24). To generate a fluorescently marked PEDV genome mutant, ORF3 in the PEDV F fragment was replaced with red fluorescent protein (RFP), named tomato-red (Fig. 1D). The mutant was created using native restriction enzyme recognition sequences that allowed for the preservation of the ORF3 transcription regulatory sequence (TRS), which regulates subgenomic RNA expression (Fig. 1D).Recovery of recombinant viruses.To isolate recombinant wild-type and RFP-expressing recombinant PEDVs, each plasmid fragment was digested with noted restriction enzymes, purified, and ligated to create a full-length PEDV cDNA genome. Using the T7 RNA polymerase, full-length transcripts were synthesized in vitro as previously described by our group (26, 30). As previous swine and human coronavirus infectious clones displayed improved recovery rates and replication efficiency in the presence of the supplemented N gene transcript (26, 30), capped PEDV-N gene transcripts were mixed with the full-length genomic transcripts prior to their electroporation into Vero cells. Within 24 to 48 h postelectroporation, subgenomic recombinant-virus mRNA could be detected via reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). After we isolated recombinant virus from pig intestinal contents after inoculation, wild-type and recombinant viruses replicated to titers that approached or exceeded 1 × 104 PFU/ml in Vero cells, equivalent to titers commonly reported in the literature (Fig. 2A). A recombinant infectious-clone-derived PEDV (icPEDV) produced a plaque morphology (Fig. 2B) similar to that of the parental strain and formed syncytia characteristic of PEDV in culture (Fig. 2C). Notably, icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP displayed a reduced plaque size compared to that of either PC22A or icPEDV (Fig. 2B), indicative that ORF3 may be important for in vitro growth of the virus and suggestive of possible attenuation of the ORF3 deletion mutant. At 48 and 72 h postelectroporation with icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP, fluorescent red cells were seen in cell culture, both within individual cells and within larger syncytia (Fig. 2D).FIG 2Growth of icPEDV clones isolated from in vivo small intestine samples. (A) Titers of viral stocks isolated from small intestinal contents at the noted passages, harvested 2 dpi; (B) representative plaques (arrows) of mock-infected cells and cells infected with the parental PC22A strain, icPEDV, and icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP, from left to right, at 2 dpi; (C) fluorescence microscopy of passage 0 icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP in cell culture at 1 dpi; (D) syncytium formation of passage 0 icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP.Characterization of recombinant viruses.To evaluate protein expression in our recombinant PEDV, we cloned and expressed PEDV-S and PEDV-N in Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus strain 3526 virus replicon particles (VRP) and isolated VRP-PEDV-S and VRP-PEDV-N. The VRP were inoculated into the footpads of mice, and polyclonal PEDV-N and PEDV-S antisera were collected after a day 21 boost. Using Western blot techniques, we confirmed the presence of the 180-/90- and ~50-kDa PEDV-S and PEDV-N proteins, respectively, in cells infected with icPEDV, icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP, and parental PEDV in vitro (Fig. 3A). Thus, molecularly derived viruses have protein expression phenotypes similar to those of the parental virus.FIG 3Confirmatory studies of the infectious PEDV clone. (A) Western blot for PEDV spike (PEDV-S), before (180 kDa) and after (90 kDa) cleavage with trypsin, and nucleocapsid (PEDV-N). Protein was isolated from Vero cells infected with PC22A, icPEDV, or icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP, which was harvested and sequenced 2 dpi. (B) An altered BsaI cloning site is conserved (yellow highlighting) after viral passage in piglets. (C) The transcription regulatory sequence (TRS) in the leader region of PEDV subgenomic transcripts is conserved between the wild type and icPEDV. The sequence is highlighted in yellow.To further confirm the presence of the recombinant virus postelectroporation, we reverse transcribed genomic RNA from virions in the culture media and then sequenced them to demonstrate the presence of the distinguishing BsaI cloning site in infectious-clone viruses (Fig. 3B). Additionally, we sequenced the leader-containing subgenomic mRNA transcripts to ensure that both our recombinant viruses and their parental strain shared the wild-type transcription regulatory sequence (TRS) required for normal coronavirus replication and growth kinetics (Fig. 3C). Together, these data definitively demonstrate that both recombinant clones generated replicating recombinant virus in vitro.icPEDV replication and pathogenesis in Gn piglets.PEDV PC22A is highly pathogenic in newborn piglets and is rapidly transmitted to littermates. To determine if icPEDV replicated parental PEDV PC22A in vivo pathology and transmission phenotypes, gnotobiotic (Gn) pigs were orally inoculated with icPEDV (passage 0 [P0]), icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP (P0), or PC22A (P3) and housed with uninfected indirect-contact pigs (Table 1). Challenged animals demonstrated fecal viral RNA shedding, and diarrhea started 1 to 3 days postinfection (dpi) in all three virus groups (Fig. 4A; Table 1). Importantly, uninoculated indirect-contact pigs within each group demonstrated both robust virus shedding and diarrhea, confirming the transmissibility of both PC22A and the recombinant virus (Fig. 4B). All three viruses replicated to similar peak titers (11 to 13 log10 genomic equivalents [GE]/ml). However, PC22A and icPEDV group pigs had more-severe diarrhea (highest fecal score of 3) than icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP group pigs (highest score of 2). The day of harvest for each piglet was dependent on clinical fecal scores or occurred upon the death of the piglet. Notably, days of harvest varied both between virus types and within virus groups. Because of the animal numbers in each group and because of the variation within each PEDV group, the day of harvest cannot be used as a reliable indicator of the relative degree of viral virulence or attenuation. The pathogenesis of icPEDV in Gn pigs also replicated the pathogenic phenotype of PEDV strain PC21A, which had been collected from the same swine farm on the same day as PC22A (4).TABLE 1 Summary of PEDV replication and pathogenesis in Gn pigsbGroupNo. of pigsPigAge at inoculation (days)Inoculation or contactaOnset of fecal RNA shedding/diarrhea (dpi or dpc)Highest fecal scorec/fecal RNA shedding titer (GE/ml)Age (dpi) of piglet at euthanasia (day)Jejunum VH/CD ratioicPEDV5119Inoculation2/23/12.9NDND219Contact2/43/13.224 (5)1.2 ± 0.2316Inoculation1/23/11.520 (4)1.4 ± 0.2416Inoculation1/23/12.021 (5)1.3 ± 0.2516Contact1/23/11.521 (5)3.1 ± 1.5icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP3614Inoculation1/12/11.616 (2)2.2 ± 0.1714Contact2/52/11.621 (7)1.0 ± 0.0814Inoculation1/32/10.817 (3)2.7 ± 0.4PC22A4918Inoculation1/13/13.019 (1)1.4 ± 0.31018Contact2/33/11.821 (3)1.3 ± 0.11126Inoculation1/13/11.827 (3)ND1226Contact1/23/11.1221 (7)NDMock infected111NANANA1/NA196.8 ± 0.9aPigs 2, 5, 7, and 10 were exposed by indirect contact to the pigs which were housed in the same isolator through small holes drilled into the stainless steel divider. The panel was located between the 2 pigs in the shared pig tub isolator unit.bND, not done because pig 1 was used for hyperimmune serum production; NA, not available; VH/CD, villous height/crypt depth.cFecal scores were as follows: 0, normal; 1, pasty stool; 2, semiliquid diarrhea; and 3, liquid diarrhea.FIG 4icPEDV mimics wild-type PEDV infection in gnotobiotic piglets. Gnotobiotic piglets were infected orally with 2 ml of the PEDV supernatant, and an uninoculated piglet was cohoused with them to determine transmission. All animals succumbed to illness or were euthanized due to illness at their final time points. (A) Mean RT-qPCR titers of fecal samples and fecal scores after viral inoculation. The line represents mean values, with individual piglet values shown by points. (B) RT-qPCR titers of fecal samples and fecal scores in cohoused transmission control piglets, days after contact with the inoculated piglets whose results are represented in panel A. The limit of detection in real-time (rt) RT-PCR figures (threshold cycle 37) is represented by a red line.Histopathological examination showed severe villous atrophy in PEDV PC22A- and icPEDV-inoculated pigs and moderate-to-severe villous atrophy in icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP-infected pigs (Fig. 5A). The villous height/crypt depth (VH/CD) ratio of the jejunum of a mock-inoculated pig was significantly higher than those of PC22A-, icPEDV-, and icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP-infected pigs (P < 0.05) (Table 1). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for PEDV-N confirmed the presence of recombinant virus throughout the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, and ilium) in both icPEDV- and icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP-infected pigs (Fig. 5B; Table 2). In addition, icPEDV antigens were detected in the large intestine (colon).FIG 5Histology and IHC staining of icPEDV-infected pig intestine. Gnotobiotic piglets were orally inoculated with 2 ml of PEDV. A contact control piglet was cohoused with an inoculated piglet(s) to determine transmission. All animals succumbed to illness or were euthanized due to illness at their final time points (PEDV, 1 dpi; icPEDV, 4 dpi; icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP, 7 dpi; contact control, 4 dpi). All images show representative histological slides of jejunum specimens from mock-infected or infected animals. Histology of mock-, icPEDV-, or icPEDV-ORF3-RFP-infected animals, showing H&E staining and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining (B) for PEDV nucleocapsid (N) protein using mouse anti-PEDV-N. A specimen from a contact piglet infected by icPEDV is also shown. Cell fusion and vacuolation were noted at the villus tips (arrows). IHC staining of icPEDV- or icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP-infected animals whose results are represented in panel A is shown.TABLE 2 Summary of IHC staining in infected pigsGroupPigdpiIHC signal intensity scoreaDuodenumJejunumIleumColonicPEDV250331342331451322551321icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP620110771230830220aThe IHC signal of PEDV antigen was scored as 0 to 3 according to the percentage of villous enterocytes within the section showing a positive signal. A score of 0 means that there were no positive cells, and scores of 1, 2, and 3 mean that <30%, 30 to 60%, and >60% of villous enterocytes showed a positive signal, respectively.These results indicate that the cell culture supernatants of icPEDV and icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP contained infectious recombinant virus particles that replicated well in gnotobiotic pigs. While the recombinant icPEDV replicated the clinical phenotypes of parental PC22A in vivo, icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP infection resulted in a partial attenuation in pigs based on lower diarrhea scores. The rapid infection of contact pigs suggests efficient transmission of icPEDV and icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP, replicating both parental PC22A and circulating U.S. strain transmission phenotypes.DISCUSSIONEmerging viruses pose a considerable threat to humans and society by causing morbidity and mortality in human populations or causing significant losses in important food sources and trade, leading to economic instability and loss of critical protein sources, especially in poor rural populations. Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus is a serious livestock pathogen that is causing significant economic losses in the swine industry internationally. To date, over a billion piglets have died globally. Live vaccine has been used historically to combat PEDV outbreaks in Asia; however, live vaccines available today are ineffective in preventing outbreaks of circulating pandemic strains, including U.S. outbreak strains, and have not significantly reduced the global disease burden (14). Other important nidovirus infections of swine include transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), its related respiratory variant designated porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV), and porcine reproductive and respiratory disease virus (PRRSV), which have caused major economic losses to the swine industry since the late 1980s (32–34). In addition to PEDV, an emerging coronavirus, porcine deltacoronavirus, has recently been reported in swine, demonstrating the possibility of continued emergent threats to this important food industry (6, 35). Given the apparent increase in the number of new swine viruses identified over the past 30 years, it seems clear that management practices and/or other changes in the ecosystem are providing an environmental setting that promotes the emergence of new viral pathogens for the swine industry. If so, these data document the need for the development of new, rapid-response intervention platforms for disease control in critical livestock populations that are centrally linked to human health. In this article, we describe the first molecular clone for a highly pathogenic U.S. strain of PEDV, PC22A, isolated from an outbreak in Ohio in June 2013 (25). Both the parental PEDV PC22A strain and its derivative recombinant cloned virus were genetically stable and fully pathogenic in neonatal gnotobiotic pigs, demonstrating that icPEDV provides not only a strategy that allows for the systematic evaluation of the role of viral genes in pathogenesis, tropism, and virulence but also a translational platform for the development of rationally attenuated live virus vaccines. In addition, we have constructed a recombinant PEDV that bears an indicator gene, the RFP gene, which allows for rapid evaluation of antiviral efficacy and neutralizing antibody levels by means of high-throughput cell culture systems.Recently, a molecular clone for a high-growth tissue culture variant of a 2010 Thai isolate, designated PEDVAVCT12, was reported in the literature (36). In contrast to our findings, full-length recombinant PEDVAVCT12 could not be isolated unless ORF3 expression had been ablated, either by naturally occurring deletions or by insertion of an indicator gene in this location. Interestingly, naturally occurring deletions also removed 7 amino acids from the C terminus of the S protein, similar to deletions described with other tissue culture strains, like PEDV strain CHM2013 (36). At this time, the discrepancy between the two laboratory results is intriguing and most likely is directly related to the backbone sequence of the two isolates and/or the difficulties associated with culturing clinical isolates of PEDV in vitro. Tissue culture PEDVAVCT12 replicates 2 to 3 logs more efficiently than wild-type PEDV PC22A and icPEDV in culture, and trypsin is also required to culture the latter isolates in vitro. Future studies may well reveal the emergence of similar tissue culture adaptations during serial passage of our highly virulent PEDV PC22A and icPEDV in culture. Importantly, pathogenic outcomes in vivo were not evaluated using the heavily tissue culture-adapted PEDVAVCT12 strain, so the utility of this recombinant virus in evaluating pathogenic outcomes and/or the role of tissue culture-adaptive mutations in virulence are uncertain at best. Although an exact infectious dose of our recombinant viruses was not determined from these studies, <1 PFU of PEDV PC22A is sufficient to cause disease in piglets (37).Little information is available regarding the molecular mechanisms governing efficient coronavirus pathogenesis and transmission between hosts. Importantly, icPEDV and icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP are efficiently transmitted to cohoused littermates, providing a potential platform for investigating the genetic mechanisms regulating efficient transmission between hosts. While similar studies using highly pathogenic influenza viruses in ferrets are highly controversial because of potential human-pandemic concerns (38), identifying genetic factors that attenuate transmission frequency offer a powerful tool to improve the safety and efficacy of live attenuated coronavirus vaccines, especially given the high-animal-density manufacturing approaches used in the swine industry. Such studies may also provide significant insights into the fundamental principles and genetic functions that influence the transmission efficiency of other highly pathogenic human coronaviruses, like severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV).PEDV infection is most devastating in neonatal and suckling piglets, necessitating vaccines that target lactogenic immunity through the vaccination of pregnant sows and gilts. Piglets do not attain passive immunity preparturition but instead receive IgG- and IgA-based lactogenic immunity from colostrum and milk, respectively. With both TGEV and PEDV, sows infected with live virulent virus transferred more protective immunity against viral challenge in their nursing piglets than sows infected with attenuated or inactivated virus (39). The USDA has granted conditional licenses to two PEDV manufacturers to date. The Harris vaccine uses an attenuated Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) vaccine strain replicon particle expressing the PEDV spike protein (40). The second is a parenterally killed virus vaccine made by Zoetis (41). Both are used to immunize pregnant sows and gilts. Their efficacy and ability to protect against various circulating U.S. strains are still under evaluation. We note that the VRP platform described in our paper was based on a biosafety level 2 (BSL2) nonselect agent, a VEEV strain designated 3526, which has been used in animal and human trials (42–44). In contrast to other VEEV replicon platforms, VEEV 3526 retains wild-type E1 and E2 glycoproteins, which efficiently target dendritic cells (45, 46), but lacks E3 sequences. This deletion of E3 confers an attenuated phenotype in vivo. VEEV 3526 expressing appropriate S glycoprotein genes provides robust protection against other coronaviruses, like SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and HKU5-S (47–49). Using VEEV 3526 structural genes allows for recovery of high-titer VRP encoding PEDV-S and/or -N under BSL2 conditions. It remains unclear whether the VRP 3526 platform will prove sufficiently robust to induce in sows lactogenic immunity capable of protecting suckling piglets (49). Future experiments will have to be designed and implemented to test the relative efficacies of VRP vaccines, killed-whole-virus vaccines, or future live attenuated-virus vaccines.Importantly, no live-virus vaccine is currently available in the United States, and historical live vaccines have not been effective in combating current U.S. or Asian strains (14). Robust studies using SARS-CoV have identified several viral genes, including the E protein, the ExoN nsp14 RNA proofreading machinery, and the 2-O-methyltransferase nsp16 replicase, as high-priority targets for rational attenuation of coronaviruses (50–52). Because coronaviruses undergo RNA recombination at high frequency and encode an exonuclease function (53, 54), recombination repair and reversion to wild-type virus is a pressing concern when designing live attenuated coronavirus vaccines. However, our laboratory has developed strategies to prevent recombination repair that limit the capacity of rationally designed live attenuated virus to revert to the wild-type virus sequence (55). Effective vaccines are increasingly important, as new strains are identified in the United States and circulating strains continue to devastate herds. The infectious clone platform allows for rapid construction of genetically modified PEDV variants to evaluate the function of antigenic variation on neutralization phenotypes and can be used for the rational design of a live virus vaccine. This platform also allows for incorporation of genetic changes to enhance the replication of the virus in vitro for more efficient production of attenuated vaccines. Globally, humans have experienced coronavirus outbreaks with increasing frequency, including outbreaks of two new human coronaviruses in the last 15 years, notably, SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (56). Human and animal coronaviruses share similar structural proteins and replication dynamics. Currently, no transmission model for these important human pathogens is available. The neonatal pig model described in this study can provide a surrogate transmission model for human coronaviruses. Separately, the study of coronavirus transmission in its original host in a BSL2 climate affords the opportunity to safely and accurately research a family of viruses that is devastating animal and human populations. It is possible that genetic manipulation of recombinant PEDVs will enable studies that can significantly enhance our understanding of the role of coronavirus genetics in the transmission, virulence, and pathologies that are central to both animal and human health and disease prevention.In this article, we describe a reverse-genetics platform for a highly virulent U.S. PEDV strain that causes lethal disease in newborn piglets, allowing for the future identification of attenuating mutations and virulence alleles. In parallel, we have developed indicator viruses that can be used for high-throughput neutralization assays or to evaluate the impact of antivirals. This reverse-genetics system will allow for quick and robust PEDV genetic manipulation in a clinical North American isolate, allowing for in-depth study of viral replication and pathogenesis, which are essential for the development of safe and robust live attenuated-virus vaccines.MATERIALS AND METHODSViruses and cells.The wild-type PC22A strain of PEDV (passage 4) was cultured on Vero cells, as described previously (25). Cells were grown in growth medium containing Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) (Life Technologies) supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (Life Technologies) and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Gibco). Virus was grown in Vero cells in maintenance medium, which was DMEM supplemented with 10 µg/ml trypsin (Life Technologies), 0.3% tryptose phosphate broth (Sigma), and 1% antibiotic-antimycotic (Life Technologies). Cells were kept in a humidified incubator at 37°C and 5% CO2.Assembly of full-length recombinant PEDV.The icPEDV clone was designed using six separate fragments (ordered from Bio Basic) flanked with unique flanking class II restriction sites that leave nonpalindromic overhangs. Sequences were ordered based on PC22A passage 4 sequence (GenBank accession number km392224.1). All cDNA subclones were grown in the pcXL-TOPO vector. In fragment E, a naturally occurring BsaI site was removed by introducing a silent mutation in order to prevent interference with assembly of the full-length infectious clone. All PEDV fragments were sequenced after transfection into bacterial culture to ensure sequence fidelity. The PEDV fragments were digested using restriction sites designated in Fig. 1, run on a 1% agarose gel, excised, and purified using a QIAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen). The PEDV fragments were mixed and ligated overnight at 4°C using T4 DNA ligase (Roche). Ligated fragments were phenol-chloroform extracted, and full-length T7 RNA transcripts were generated as described in the mMessage mMachine manufacturer protocol (Ambion), but we allowed the reaction to run at 30°C for 3 h and then at room temperature for 2 h. In addition, SP6 PEDV-N gene transcripts were generated from the PCR-purified PEDV-N gene sample using a 4:1 ratio of cap to GTP (Ambion).To generate the ORF3 deletion RFP construct, the tdTomato gene was amplified by PCR with flanking PEDV sequence and then inserted using native restriction sites into PEDV-F. PEDV-F-ΔORF3-RFP was cultured and sequenced to ensure seamless replacement of ORF3 with RFP containing the ORF3 TRS.In vitro transfection.Genome-length and N RNA transcripts were mixed with 800 µl of Vero-BI cells (1 × 107 cells/ml) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then added to an electroporation cuvette. Three pulses of 450 V at 50 µF were used to transfect the cells with a Gene Pulser II electroporator (Bio-Rad). The cells were allowed to recover for 10 min at room temperature and then were transferred to a 75-cm2 flask in growth medium at 37°C for 2 h, after which time the cells were washed and incubated in cell culture medium. Trypsin was added to the culture at 5 µg/ml 12 h postelectroporation to assist in virus recovery and spread.Sequence analysis identification of marker mutations.Virus harvested from small intestinal contents was grown in Vero-BI cell culture for 48 h. Virion RNA was harvested from the supernatant using the QIAamp viral RNA minikit (Qiagen). After purification, viral cDNA was generated with Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Life Technologies) as previously described by our group (26). To demonstrate the presence of the marker mutation, the icPEDV BsaI mutation site was amplified by PCR using primers 5′ TCCAAGCCATTTCTAGTTCTATT 3′ and 5′ TGACACAACAAAGATGAGAACA 3′. PCR amplicons were gel purified and then sequenced using primers 5′ TCAGGCTAGCAGGAAGTTAG 3′ and 5′ AGGTCAACTAGTGTGTTGTTGATAT 3′.Western blot and transcript analysis.Virus from infected animals was cultured in Vero-BI cell culture for 48 h and washed with PBS, and intracellular RNA was harvested from cells using NP-40 buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0) for Western blots or TRIzol (Life Technologies) for RNA analysis. cDNA from viral RNA transcripts was generated using Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Life Technologies) and PCR amplified using primer pairs from the PEDV leader sequence and nucleocapsid gene. PCR products were separated on a 1% agarose gel and visualized on a Dark Reader transilluminator (Clare Chemical Research).For Western blot analysis, protein from infected cells was denatured in 4× Laemmli buffer (Bio-Rad) at 95°C for 6 min and then separated on gradient 4 to 15% Mini-Protean precast gels (Bio-Rad) prior to electrophoretic transfer of the proteins to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Bio-Rad). To detect PEDV antigens, blots were first blocked with 5% milk in Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 (TBST) and then probed with a polyclonal mouse serum (diluted 1:200) from mice which had been immunized with Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus replicon particles (VRP) expressing PEDV nucleocapsid (N) or spike (S) glycoprotein. Blots were developed using GE Healthcare Amersham ECL Western blotting detection reagents and exposed to film for imaging.Animal studies.Four groups of 2- to 3-week-old gnotobiotic (Gn) pigs were used to examine the replication and pathogenesis of icPEDV- and icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP-derived viruses in vivo and compared with PC22A- and mock-infected positive and negative controls, respectively (Table 1). Piglets were orally inoculated with 2 ml of icPEDV or icPEDV-ΔORF3-RFP culture supernatants after transfection (P0) (<1.0 × 102 PFU/ml) or with the tissue culture-adapted PC22A strain at passage level 3 (P3) at a dose of 5.8 log10 PFU/pig. To investigate transmission, pigs 2, 5, 7, and 10 were cohoused in the same isolator as infected pigs but were separated by a stainless steel divider that contained small holes which allowed only indirect contact between the groups. Animals were monitored daily for clinical signs of disease, including diarrhea and vomiting. Rectal swabs were collected for scoring fecal denseness (scores: 0 = normal; 1 = pasty stool; 2 = semiliquid diarrhea; and 3 = liquid diarrhea) and for enumerating fecal viral RNA shedding by RT-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). Except for one pig in the icPEDV group, which was kept long term for the production of hyperimmune serum, the Gn pigs were euthanized at acute infection phase (within 5 days postinoculation [dpi] or 7 days postcontact with the inoculated pigs [dpc]) for histopathological examinations. At necropsy, small and large intestinal contents were collected and tested by RT-qPCR for viral RNA levels and for infectious virus by plaque assay. The different sections of the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, ilium) and large intestine (cecum and colon) were collected for histopathological examination and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain. The derivation and maintenance of Gn pigs, sample collection and testing, and histopathology were performed as previously described (25, 57). All the animal use protocols employed in this study were reviewed and approved by the Agricultural Animal Care and Use Committee of The Ohio State University.IHC staining.The immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining procedure was optimized as described previously (37) using the non-biotin-polymerized horseradish peroxidase (HRP) system (BioGenex Laboratories, San Ramon, CA). Briefly, intestinal tissue sections from each pig were deparaffinized and rehydrated in graded ethanol to PBS (pH 7.4). Antigen retrieval and unmasking were performed by treatment with 0.05% pronase E (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 20 min. The endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched with 3% hydrogen peroxide (Sigma) for 20 min. Then, the sections were incubated in Power Block solution (BioGenex) for 30 min at room temperature. Mouse monoclonal antibody anti-PEDV nucleocapsid protein (N) (SD6-29; a gift from E. Nelson and S. Lawson, South Dakota State University) was applied to each section at 4°C overnight. After two washes in PBS, a commercial Super Sensitive IHC detection system (BioGenex) was used. Finally, these sections were counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin (BioGenex) and dehydrated, and coverslips were added. The IHC signal of PEDV antigen was scored as 0 to 3 according to the percentage of villous enterocytes within the section showing a positive signal. Scores were as follows: 0 indicated that there were no positive cells and 1, 2, and 3 indicated that <30%, 30 to 60%, and >60% of villous enterocytes showed a positive signal, respectively.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Intercellular transmission of Seneca Valley virus mediated by exosomes

IntroductionThe Seneca Valley virus (SVV) is a single-stranded positive-strand RNA virus that belongs to the Senecavirus genus and Picornaviridae family. SVV has a typical icosahedral symmetry and a genome 7.2 kb in length [1]. SVV was first discovered in 2002 in the PER.C6 cell line in Maryland, USA [2]. SVV mainly infects pigs, newborn piglets, fattening pigs, and other pigs of all ages; neutralizing antibodies have been found in other animals, such as cattle and sheep [3, 4]. Once infected, the clinical presentation is very similar to that of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). The main symptoms are blisters and ulceration in the hoof and nose, as well as fever and anorexia [5]. In recent years, SVV has significantly affected the global pig industry due to the virus inducing blisters in pigs [6].Exosomes are small vesicles with a diameter of 40–150 nm [7]. Most model cells secrete exosomes, which contain multiple substances, including large amounts of proteins and nucleic acids, and transport substances to various cells [8–10]. The virus enters cells through endocytic pathways during the process of exosome formation and completes its assembly and release [11]. Hepatitis A (a picornavirus) and Hepatitis C viral exosomes can spread their DNA and escape the immune response [12]. Therefore, we suspect that exosomes may be an essential mediator of SVV transmission between cells.In the present study, we aimed to determine whether exosomes can mediate SVV transmission. First, we extracted exosomes from IBRS-2 cells with (SVV-exo) and without (mock-exo) SVV infection. After identification of the extracted exosomes, we introduced the extracted exosomes into 293T and IBRS-2 cells. The results suggested that SVV carried by exosomes can proliferate in these cells. We then inhibited the secretion and production of exosomes, which resulted in the inhibition of SVV proliferation. Finally, we found that SVV carried by exosomes was not blocked by SVV neutralizing antibodies. This study provides critical information regarding the pathogenesis of SVV and its antiviral mechanisms.Materials and methodsCell culture and virusesTo obtain a cell culture supernatant for exosome extraction, we used IBRS-2 cells as a model. IBRS-2 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 IU/mL penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin. The cells were cultured in an incubator maintained at 37 °C with a CO2 concentration of 5%. In January 2017, SVV strain CH-FJ-2017 (GenBank Accession number: KY74510) was isolated from Fujian, China, at our lab; this same strain was used throughout the present study. SVV-expressing green fluorescent protein (SVV-GFP) was constructed at our laboratory.Exosome isolation and purificationTo obtain exosomes secreted by SVV-infected cells, we inoculated SVV into IBRS-2 cells and collected the supernatants at specific times after infection. SVV was isolated previously, as described later in the text, and preserved at our lab (China Reference Laboratory Network for FMD) [13]. IBRS-2 cells were incubated in a 150-mm culture dish until they attained confluency (Corning, New York, USA). The culture supernatant was then discarded, the cells were washed with PBS, and FBS-free DMEM was added. SVV (0.05 TCID50) was inoculated, and PBS was used as a control. After 1 h of incubation, SVV was discarded and replaced with DMEM containing 2% exosomes-depleted FBS. The cell culture supernatant was collected after 36 h of culture. To further separate and purify the collected supernatant, we performed differential centrifugation with the collected supernatant. The following centrifugation processes were conducted at 4 °C. The collected supernatant was centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min to remove larger fragments and cells, and the supernatant was then collected and centrifuged at 2000 × g for 10 min to further remove cell debris. The collected supernatant was centrifuged at 12 000 × g for 45 min to remove cells. The large vesicles were collected and filtered through a 0.22-µm filter. Finally, the collected supernatant was centrifuged at 120 000 × g for 2 h in an ultracentrifuge (Thermo Scientific Sorvall WX100), and the precipitates were resuspended in 500 μL of PBS. To further purify the extracted exosomes, we used a CD63 antibody-labeled exosomes isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany).Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)Direct morphological observation of the characteristics of exosomes is crucial for exosome identification [14] . Therefore, we analyzed the extracted exosomes using TEM (Hitachi H-7000FA, Tokyo, Japan). After observation, we first extracted the exosomes using a TEM 200 copper mesh (EMS 80100-Cu US) and then stained the exosomes with phosphoric acid dock for 2 min. After drying under an incandescent lamp, electron microscopy was used to observe the extracted exosomes, and the observed voltage was 80 kV.Western blot analysisWestern blot (WB) analysis was performed using the following protocols. Briefly, purified exosomes were lysed with a radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA), and the cleared lysate was collected by centrifugation for protein separation on 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. After electrophoresis, the separated proteins were transferred onto 0.45-μm polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Millipore, USA). Next, the membranes were blocked for 1 h with 10% fat-free milk in Tris-buffered saline containing Tween-20 (TBST). The blots were then incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. Primary antibodies for CD63 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), CD9 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Alix (Cell Signaling Technology, Waltham, MA, USA), and SVV polyclonal antibody (prepared at our laboratory) were used. After washing three times with TBST, the membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibodies (Proteintech, Chicago, IL, USA) for 2 h at room temperature. Finally, the proteins were visualized with a clarity-enhanced chemiluminescence WB substrate (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA).Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA)The mean size and size distribution profile of exosomes that were isolated and purified from SVV-infected or control-treated IBRS-2 cell culture supernatants were analyzed as previously described [15, 16]. In brief, the samples were diluted at a ratio of 1:1000 in PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 in a total volume of 1.0 mL. Measurements were performed in triplicate using standard settings (refractive index = 1.331, viscosity = 0.89, and temperature = 25 °C). Data analysis was performed using NTA 3.2 software (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., Malvern, Worcestershire, UK), and samples were evaluated using the Nanosight NS300 (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., Malvern, Worcestershire, UK).Analysis and quantification of SVV RNAFor the PCR detection of SVV RNA, total RNA from exosomes (RNase added to purified exosomes followed by incubation for 1 h at 37 °C before RNA extraction) and cells were extracted using a total exosome RNA and protein isolation kit (Life Technologies, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA from cell culture samples were isolated with the E.Z.N.A. total RNA kit I (Omega Bio-Tek) to quantify RNA copies of SVV in SVV-infected or exosome-treated cells. Detection of the number of copies of extracted RNA was performed using the Real-Time One-Step RT-PCR reagent (Takara). The reaction system was as follows: 2X One-Step RT-PCR Buffer III 10 μL, TaKaRa Ex Taq HS (5 U/μL) 0.4 μL, Prime Script RT Enzyme Mix II 0.4 μL, PCR forward primer (10 μM) 0.4 μL, PCR reverse primer (10 μM) 0.4 μL, SVV-3D probe 0.8 μL, total RNA 2 μL, and RNase-free dH2O 5.2 μL (PCR primers and the SVV-3D probe were provided by our laboratory). The reaction times and temperatures of the PCR were 42 °C for 15 min (1 cycle) and 40 cycles of 94 °C for 10 s, 57 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s. The Applied Biosystems 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher) was used.Si-Rab27a transfection and quantification of Rab27a and Alix mRNAInterfering RNA Rab27a (100 pmol) was transfected into IBRS-2 cells using liposome 2000; at the same time, the same dose of si-scr (same bases, different base sequences) was used as a control. SVV was inoculated 24 h after transfection, and cells were harvested 24 h after SVV inoculation. Total RNA from cell samples were isolated using the E.Z.N.A. total RNA kit I (Omega Bio-Tek). Reverse transcription of RNA into cDNA was performed using Prime Script TM RT Master Mix (Takara). The reaction system was as follows: 5X PrimeScript RT Master Mix (Perfect Real Time) 2 μL, total RNA 5 μL (200 ng), and RNase-free dH2O 3 μL. The reaction temperature and time of the PCR were 37 °C for 15 min and 85 °C for 5 s (reverse transcription reaction), respectively. Using GAPDH as an internal reference gene, RT-qPCR was performed using TB Green TM Premix Ex TaqTM II (Takara). The reaction system was as follows: TB Green Premix Ex Taq II (Tli RNaseH Plus) 10 μL, PCR forward primer (10 μM) 0.8 μL, PCR reverse primer (10 μM) 0.8 μL, DNA (< 100 ng) 2 μL, and sterilized water 6.4 μL.Exosome treatment with SVV-specific neutralizing antibodyIBRS-2 cells were plated into 12-well cell culture plates, and the cells were replaced with serum-free DMEM once the cells reached 70%–80% confluency. SVV-exo and SVV were simultaneously diluted to obtain concentrations ranging from 10−1 to 10−4. The diluted SVV-exo and SVV were incubated with the SVV neutralizing antibody for 1.5 h at 37 °C and then added to the prepared IBRS-2 cells. At the same time, SVV-exo and SVV that were not incubated with the SVV neutralizing antibody were used as controls. The cells were cultured in a 5% CO2 cell culture incubator at 37 °C for 24 h. The cells and culture supernatants were used to detect the copy number of SVV.ResultsIsolation and characterization of exosomes extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cellsIBRS-2 cells were infected with SVV, and then exosomes were extracted from those infected cells (SVV-exo), as well as the non-infected cells (Mock-exo). Further purification was performed with the use of CD63-antibodies. Cup-shaped lipid bilayer vesicles of representative exosome were observed by TEM (Figure 1A). WB analysis was performed to identify exosomes (protein marker Alix, CD63, and CD9 were used). The results showed that SVV-exo contained the exosome-associated proteins Alix, CD9, and CD63 (Figure 1B). Exosome size was also evaluated, and it was found that the exosomes were mainly distributed in the range of 50–150 nm (Figure 1C). These results indicate that the morphology and particle size of the exosomes extracted in this study is consistent with that previously reported [17].Figure 1Isolation and characterization of exosomes extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells. A Transmission electron microscopic observation of SVV-exo after negative staining with phosphotungstic acid. B Exosomes were extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells, and identified by western blot with antibodies directed against Alix, CD9, and CD63. C The Zeta Sizer Nano ZS was used to measure the particle size distribution. The samples were diluted 1: 1000 in PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 to a total volume of 1.0 mL. The detection was repeated three times with the standard settings (refractive index = 1.331, viscosity = 0.89, and temperature = 25 °C). Each sample was analyzed five times, and the counts were averaged.The spread of SVV mediated by exosomes in susceptible and non-susceptible cellsThe SVV gene sequence in exosomes was detected by RT-PCR to verify whether the extracted exosomes contained SVV. SVV gene sequences were found in SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells and SVV-exo (Figure 2A). Moreover, SVV proteins were detected in exosomes by WB (Figure 2B). It is known that exosomes can mediate the spread of various pathogens [18]. To explore the role of exosomes in SVV transmission, we explored whether SVV carried by exosomes can proliferate on susceptible (IBRS-2) and non-susceptible (293T) cells. IBRS-2 cells and 293T cells were incubated with SVV-exo, and SVV was used as a positive control, mock-exo and normal cells-mock (non-treatment) were used as negative controls. The copy number of SVV was detected by RT-qPCR. According to the experimental results, the copy number of SVV in the SVV-exo group was increased in both 293T and IBRS-2 cells when compared with the negative control group, and the copy number in IBRS-2 cells was higher than that in 293T cells (Figure 2C).Figure 2Exosomes mediate the spread of SVV in susceptible and non-susceptible cells. A SVV VP1 gene was identified in SVV-exo by the RT-qPCR, at the same time, SVV, SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells (Cell-svv) was used positive control, normal IBRS-2 cells (Cell-mock), and mock-exo were used as negative controls. B SVV polyclonal antibody used to detect SVV protein levels in SVV-exo, also use cell-svv as a control. C SVV-exo were incubated with 293T and IBRS-2 cells, and at the same time, mock-exo, SVV with the same viral load as SVV-exo, and PBS were used as controls. The virus copy number was detected by RT-qPCR 24 h after incubation. D Exosomes extracted from SVV-GFP-infected cells (SVV-GFP-exo) were stained with DIL, washed twice by ultracentrifugation (Avoid light during this experiment), and incubated in 293T and IBRS-2 cells; same procedures were followed for SVV-GFP as a control. Eight hours after incubation, the nuclei were stained with DAPI, and fluorescence was observed.Whether exosomes could transport SVV into susceptible and non-susceptible cells was investigated by fluorescently labeling exosomes and SVV. Exosomes were extracted and purified from the culture supernatant of SVV-GFP infected IBRS-2 cells (SVV-GFP-exo). The DIL-stained exosomes were introduced into IBRS-2 and 293T cells, mock-exo and SVV-GFP were introduced as controls. Fluorescence signals were observed under a laser confocal microscope. The results showed that red fluorescence (DIL) was observed in both IBRS-2 and 293T cell membranes, and the GFP carried by SVV-GFP-exo co-localized with DIL. In addition, only red fluorescence was observed in the mock-exo group (Figure 2D). Henceforth, these results indicate that the spread of SVV could be mediated by exosomes in susceptible and non-susceptible cells.Inhibition of exosomes secretion suppresses the proliferation of SVVPrevious studies have found that Rab27a [19] and Rab35 [20] regulate exosome secretion. Thus, to verify whether intracellular Rab27a expression was downregulated after si-Rab27a transfection, si-Rab27a was transfected into IBRS-2 cells, and Rab27a mRNA levels were evaluated by RT-qPCR. The results showed that the mRNA expression of intracellular Rab27a was significantly downregulated in si-Rab27a-transfected cells compared with that in the control group (Figure 3A). Previous work has confirmed that the ESCRT (Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport) pathway can affect exosome secretion. Syntenin interacts directly with Alix via the LYPX (n) L motif to regulate the intraluminal budding of ILV and Alix is often used as a biological protein marker for exosomes [21]. In order to investigate whether the number of exosomes in the transfected cells did change, the mRNA expression level of the exosome protein marker Alix was evaluated. The results showed that the expression of Alix was significantly upregulated in IBRS-2 cells treated with si-Rab27a compared with that of control (IBRS-2 cells treated with si-scr that same base as si-Rab27a but different sequence) (Figure 3B). The number of exosomes in the cell culture supernatant of si-Rab27a transfected IBRS-2 cells was evaluated using the NTA method. The results showed that the number of exosomes in the cell culture supernatant decreased significantly after si-Rab27a transfection (Figure 3C).Figure 3Interfering with Rab27a inhibits secretion of exosomes and thus suppresses SVV transmission. Si-Rab27a interfering RNA (100 pmol) was transfected into IBRS-2 cells using liposome 2000. SVV was inoculated 24 h after transfection (si-Rab27a-SVV), the controls were transfected with Rab27a but not inoculated with SVV (si-Rab27a), and transfected with si-scr inoculated with SVV (si-scr-SVV), and transfected of si-scr but not inoculated with SVV(si-scr), and untreated cells-mock (non-treatment). A The expression of Rab27a mRNA in IBRS-2 cells was detected by RT-qPCR, and used GAPDH as a reference gene. B The expression of Alix mRNA in the cell was detected by RT-qPCR, and used GAPDH as a reference gene. C Exosomes were extracted from the culture supernatants of SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells, and the number of exosomes was detected by the NTA method. D The copy number of extracellular SVV in IBRS-2 cells was detected by RT-qPCR. Significance was calculated using a two-tailed t test and labeled as *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 in graphs. E IBRS-2 cells were infected with SVV for 1.5 h and then incubated with 1, 5, and 10 µmol of GW4869 for 36 h. An equal volume of DMSO was used as a control, and cells without any treatment were used as a negative control. The extracellular SVV copy number was detected using RT-qPCR.An investigation into the observed changes in the number of exosomes and whether they affected the copy number of SVV in cells was also conducted. RT-qPCR was performed to detect the copy number of SVV in the cell culture supernatant of the si-Rab27a and control group. The results showed that extracellular SVV copy number was significantly decreased compared with those in the control group (Figure 3D). GW4869 was reported to reduce exosome release carrying PLP (proteolipid protein) by inhibiting neutral sphingomyelinase (nSMase) [22]. IBRS-2 cells were infected with SIBRS-2 cells were infected with SVV; the infected cells were treated with exosomes secretion inhibitor GW4869; simultaneously, an equal volume of DMSO was used as a control. The copy number of extracellular SVV was detected by RT-qPCR. The results show that the copy number of extracellular SVV is significantly decreased after GW4869 treatment compared with the control group and is dose-dependent (Figure 3E).Exosomes promote the proliferation of SVV in susceptible cellsIn the continued attempt to elucidate whether SVV-exo promotes SVV proliferation, the protein concentration of SVV-exo and mock-exo was determined, and the exosomes (RNase was added to purify exosomes) were restored to IBRS-2 cells at two different doses, at the same time. A SVV that had the same SVV copy number as SVV-exo and mock-exo was used as a control. The SVV was re-inoculated after incubation, and untreated cells were also used as a control-mock (non-treatment). SVV RNA copy number was detected by RT-qPCR at 24 h and 48 h, respectively, after SVV inoculation. The results showed that the SVV copy number was significantly higher in mock-exo and SVV-exo groups than that of the SVV control group at 24 h after SVV infection (Figure 4A). Moreover, the SVV-exo group had more SVVs at 48 h after SVV infection compared to the other two groups (Figure 4B). Nevertheless, when the exosomes dose was 50 ng, the SVV copies in the SVV-exo group was significantly higher than that in the SVV control group, at both 24 h and 48 h after SVV infection (Figure 4C-D). The above results indicate that SVV-exo promotes SVV proliferation in IBRS-2 cells.Figure 4Exosomes promote the proliferation of SVV in IBRS-2. Exosomes were extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells and normal IBRS-2 cells separately, and the A280/A260 method was used to determine the protein concentration of SVV-exo and mock-exo. SVV-exo and mock-exo were treated with RNase for 1 h at 37 °C before they were incubated into IBRS-2 cells. Different doses of SVV-exo and mock-exo was incubated into IBRS-2 cells, SVV with the same SVV copy number as SVV-exo infected IBRS-2 cells and mock-exo, normal IBRS-2 cells as control, 8 h after incubation, the same copy number of SVV were infected again in the SVV-exo experimental group, mock-exo and SVV control groups, respectively. SVV copy number was detected using RT-qPCR at 24 h and 48 h after SVV infection. A The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 25 ng, and the viral load was measured 24 h after SVV infection. B The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 25 ng, and the viral load was measured 48 h after SVV infection. C The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 50 ng, and the viral load was measured 24 h after SVV infection. D The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 25 ng, and the viral load was measured 48 h after SVV infection. This experiment was repeated three times, all data represent mean ± SD, n = 3 for each group. Significant difference was calculated using two-tailed t-test and labeled as *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 in graphs.SVV infection mediated by exosomes is not inhibited by SVV NAbsA neutralization experiment was performed to exclude the influence of the possible appearance of SVV in the exosome suspension. SVV-exo and SVV were diluted ten times and then subsequently incubated with a SVV neutralizing antibody for 1.5 h. Exosomes and SVV were inoculated into IBRS-2 cells, and the copy number of SVV in the inoculated cells was detected by RT-qPCR (Figure 5). The results show that the proliferation of SVV in SVV-exo on IBRS-2 cells is not affected by SVV neutralizing antibodies. It suggests that SVV particles are encapsulated in the exosomes, and the SVV infection is mediated by SVV wrapped in exosomes.Figure 5Exosome-mediated SVV infection is not blocked by SVV-specific neutralizing antibodies (NAbs). Purified SVV-positive exosomes and SVV were diluted and then the diluted exosomes and SVV were incubated with SVV-specific NAbs separately (the titer of serum neutralization against SVV was > 1:1024, determined by VNT) for 1 h. Exosomes and SVV without any treatment were used as a control. Then, IBRS-2 cells were exposed to the NAbs-treated exosomes or SVV for 2 h. The exosomes or viruses were washed off with PBS at 37 °C, and the medium was replaced with fresh maintenance medium for 24 h. RT-qPCR was used to evaluate SVV replication in IBRS-2 cells.DiscussionExosomes are thought to mediate the transmission of various intracellular molecules which can influence cell function, such as proteins, RNA, and miRNA. Although, the contents of the exosomes that are secreted by infected recipient cells changed, they could still contain viral RNA, proteins, and virions which mediate virus transmission. In the current study, we found that the transmission of SVV in cultured cells could be mediated by exosomes. Although the SVV-exo was treated with RNase before inoculating cells, it was impossible to prove that all naked virions outside the exosomes were cleared. Therefore, SVV and SVV-exo were inoculated with the same SVV copy number into SVV non-susceptible cells (293T cells). The results showed that the SVV-exo group had a higher copy number on non-susceptible cells than the SVV control group, indicating that SVV-exo mediated the proliferation of SVV. Henceforth, the results suggest that exosomes can serve as delivery vectors for pathogen-associated molecules [23]. In addition, their role in viral infections is attracting more and more attention [24, 25]. Some viruses may be able to evade the immune response as they spread through the body by exosomes [26]. During the process of exosome formation, some viruses, mainly in the endocytic pathway, enter the cell through exosomes resulting in direct cell entry without the need for cell membrane receptors [12, 26, 33]. From the above results, it can be postulated that exosomes mediate the transmission of SVV. However, whether exosomes play an important role in the transmission of SVV in host cells remains to be fully elucidated.Furthermore, an investigation was conducted to explore whether the inhibition of exosome secretion affects exosome proliferation. Previous studies have shown that silencing the expression of Rab27a and Rab27b reduces exosome secretion of CD63, CD81, and MHC class II, and the downregulation of Rab27a effector Slp4 and Slac2b also inhibits exosome secretion [27, 28]. Therefore Rab27a siRNA was synthesized in the lab and transfected into IBRS-2 cells. The results showed that both the number of exosomes secreted by IBRS cells and extracellular SVV had decreased significantly. GW4869 is a neutral sphingomyelinase inhibitor that is known to inhibit the biosynthesis of ceramides and promotes exosome secretion by triggering the germination of exosomes to MVB [29]. When the secretion of IBRS-2 cell exosomes was inhibited by interfering with Rab27a and using GW4869, the amount of SVV in the cell culture supernatant decreased significantly. Therefore, the proliferation of SVV is affected by the secretion of exosomes, which further illustrates that exosomes mediate the transmission of SVV. Previous studies have shown that the formation of cellular infectious prion is significantly impaired when the HRS-ESCRT-0 subunit is silenced and that the overall secretion of exosomes is also impaired [30]. HCV secretion from host cells utilizes the Hrs-dependent exosomal pathway in which the viral assembly is also involved [31]. The findings here are consistent with those reported in the literature.There are some limitations to this work; whether there are naked virus particles in the extracted exosomes has not been shown. Further, an immunomagnetic bead method is used to purify and extract the exosomes, and the exosomes are treated with RNase. However, the exosomes, as they are a type of lipid vesicle, may rupture before entering the cell. Nonetheless, IBRS-2 cells were incubated with SVV-exo and SVV of the same copy number. They were then incubated with more SVV, and the number of SVV copies after SVV-exo incubation was significantly higher than that of the SVV control group. This further suggests that exosomes mediate SVV transmission and promote SVV proliferation. This study adds new evidence that highlights SVV is encapsulated in exosomes. Previous studies have shown that viruses carried by exosomes, such as PRRSV, HCV, and EV71, cannot be neutralized by neutralizing antibodies [16, 24, 32–35]. When SVV-exo was incubated with SVV neutralizing antibodies, the proliferation of SVV in exosomes was not affected by SVV neutralizing antibodies. This shows that SVV virus particles are encapsulated in exosomes.In conclusion, we successfully extracted, purified, and identified exosomes from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells and determined that exosomes can carry SVV, which allows the proliferation of the virus in susceptible and non-susceptible cells. The inhibition of exosome secretion and production inhibits the replication of SVV. Moreover, exosomes extracted from IBRS-2 cells promote the proliferation of SVV. SVV carried in exosomes was not blocked by SVV neutralizing antibodies. Collectively these data reveal an advanced and novel mechanism for better understanding that viral transmission through exosomes contributes to the known immune evasive properties of SVV.


Title: An Overview of Zika Virus and Zika Virus Induced Neuropathies

1. IntroductionFlaviviruses (family Flaviviridae) are small (approximately 50 nm in diameter), enveloped, icosahedral viruses that possess a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of between 9–12 kb [1,2,3,4]. The viral genome consists of a single long ORF (open reading frame) encoding around ten proteins, which are formed by co- and post-translational processing and proteolytically processed into three structural (Cap, prM, and E) and seven non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins by a complex combination of host and viral proteases [5,6,7,8]. Currently, there are about 70 members in this genus, the majority of which are transmitted by arthropods [9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. The incidence of flaviviral infections has increased dramatically in the last seven decades [17,18]. These infections are associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Factors responsible for the rapid increase in flaviviral infections are changes in the sizes and distributions of the vector arthropods that transmit the pathogens, further aggravated by climate change and a large number of potential vertebrate hosts [19,20,21,22]. Details of various neurotropic flaviviruses and their associated neuropathies are summarized in Table 1.ZIKV is a significant pathogen that poses an imminent global threat. It was first isolated from rhesus monkeys in Uganda in 1947 [53] (The genome organization of the Zika Virus is sketched in Figure 1). Later, in the 1950s, its detection continued in several other parts of Africa (Egypt, Nigeria) [54]. However, the first clinical infection in humans was not detected until 1964, when it was found that the ZIKV infection in humans is associated with mild fever and maculopapular rash [55]. From 1960 to 2000, ZIKV was detected in several countries in Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia and Pakistan) [54]. The first major ZIKV outbreak occurred in 2007 (in Yap Island), and then in March 2015, it caused a large outbreak in the Americas (particularly Brazil), and the first time was associated with severe disease and congenital illnesses such as infant microcephaly [56,57,58]. In November 2015, Brazil declared a national public health emergency, and in February 2016, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [59].The ZIKV employs multiple mechanisms to replicate (the ZIKV replication cycle is illustrated in Figure 2) and causes a variety of neurological diseases. It has been proposed that after viral entry through the crossing of the BBB (blood–brain barrier), ZIKV tends to infect the microglia, astrocytes, and endothelial cells [63,64,65]. Damage to the CNS can occur when ZIKV infects the CNS cells, and damage occurs either due to viral replication or because of a host-mediated immune (inflammatory) response [66,67,68]. Moreover, ZIKV infection is also associated with various neurological syndromes, e.g., Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), and others [69,70,71]. Multiple mechanisms are known to cause damage to the CNS, which are also discussed in detail later in this review article. Collectively, in this review, we have summarized the observations on biology, transmission, control strategies (vaccines, antivirals, and vectors), oncolytic aspects, animal and cellular models, neuropathies, and neuropathogenesis associated with ZIKV.2. Transmission of Zika VirusThe principal mode of transmission of ZIKV is through mosquitoes; however, studies have found that various other routes may play an important role in the transmission of the disease. These include venereal transmission, vertical transmission, transmission to infants through mother milk, and blood transfusion This makes it very difficult to devise an appropriate strategy for the control of disease in countries where the disease is endemic. The transmission cycle of ZIKV is illustrated in Figure 3.2.1. Vector Borne TransmissionVector-borne transmission of ZIKV occurs through mosquitoes [13,80]. In the sylvatic transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between non-human primates and mosquitoes, while in the urban transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between humans and mosquitoes. The presence of ZIKV has been reported from many species of mosquitoes in Africa and Asia (Aedes aegypti (Ae. aegypti), Ae. africanus, Ae. albopictus, Ae. apicoargenteus, Ae. furcifer, Ae. luteocephalus, Ae. opok, and Ae. vittatus) which may transmit the virus to humans [53,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90]. However, in Yap and French Polynesia, the transmission of ZIKV was suggested to be through Ae. hensilli and Ae. Polynesiensis, respectively) [91,92,93]. The extrinsic incubation period is reported to be 10 days [84]. The vector competence (the ability of the vector to transmit the virus biologically) has not been determined for ZIKV transmission in most of these species [94] and it may be the area of future research. In the urban cycle, the transmission of ZIKV is mainly through the Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. ZIKV has been detected/isolated from wild Ae. aegypti, and they have been demonstrated to be competent vectors in the laboratory where they can transmit the virus to mice and rhesus monkeys [82,86,88]. Recent studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission by Ae. albopictus as well [84,95]. Both of these mosquitoes remain active during the daytime, and they are prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions [96,97]. However, the geographical range of Ae. albopictus is further extended to the temperate regions [98,99,100]. In the USA, both of these mosquitoes have been found in southern and south-eastern states and their maximum numbers have been found from June to October [101].2.2. Sexual TransmissionMany cases of transmission of ZIKV have been observed following sexual contact. Several studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission from males to females. In most cases, the male had a travel history to ZIKV-endemic countries, and when he returned, his partner became infected [102,103,104]. ZIKV’s presence has been detected in human semen [105]. It has been found that ZIKV can persist in semen for over 6 months following infection, suggesting the possibility for prolonged sexual transmission [106,107,108]. Later studies demonstrated that sexual transmission from male to male is also possible [109]. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in urine and saliva [110,111]. Experiments conducted on lab animals have demonstrated that ZIKV is able to replicate in vaginal and rectal mucosa, thus serving as a reservoir of infection [112].2.3. Vertical TransmissionZIKV has been reported to be transferred from mother to fetus during the gestation period. Normally the placenta acts as an effective barrier to curtail transmission of infections from mother to fetus. However, ZIKV is able to bypass these barriers by unknown mechanisms [113]. Studies conducted in a mouse model demonstrated that ZIKV damages the placenta and results in fetal death [114]. In Brazil, during the ZIKV outbreak, a large increase in the number of neonates with microcephaly was reported from mothers who were infected with ZIKV [115]. ZIKV antigen and RNA have been detected in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetal brain tissue [115,116,117]. Therefore, it can be postulated that ZIKV is transmitted from mother to fetus through a damaged placenta (induced by ZIKV) and then ZIKV damages the nervous system of the fetus.2.4. Venereal Transmission in MosquitoesThe maintenance of arboviruses in nature is significantly facilitated when venereal transmission occurs alongside other modes of transmission. Venereal transmission in mosquitoes has been reported for multiple arboviruses, including ZIKV [118,119]. ZIKV is found to be transmitted in the sexual fluids of mating mosquitoes. Intrathoracically ZIKV-infected Ae. aegypti males can transmit the virus to uninfected females during mating, and Ae. aegypti females who are orally infected with ZIKV have the potential to transmit the virus to uninfected males by copulation under laboratory conditions [120]. Furthermore, Aedes mosquitoes acquire and transmit Zika virus by breeding in contaminated aquatic environments [121]. The continuous venereal transmission in mosquitoes could pose a significant public health concern by boosting infection rates and virus spread.2.5. Transmission Through Breast MilkDetection of ZIKV RNA has been observed in the breast milk of ZIKV-infected mothers [122]. This makes it possible for the transmission of ZIKV from the infected mother to the neonates. Studies have demonstrated the presence of ZIKV RNA in babies whose mother’s serum and milk were positive for ZIKV RNA [123]. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed for the flaviviruses WNV and DENV [124,125].2.6. Transmission Through Ocular Fluid/TearsResearchers have found the existence of ZIKV in tears thirty days following ZIKV infection. Their study suggests the possible transmission of ZIKV through tears [126,127]. This is possible as previously a case study revealed that transmission through tears occurred from mother to her child [128].3. Zika Virus Associated Neurological DiseasesZIKV infection has been reported to be associated with a number of neurological diseases (illustrated in Figure 4) which are described in detail below.3.1. MicrocephalyCongenital microcephaly has been previously associated with viral infections, e.g., rubella and cytomegalovirus. However, it was unknown for ZIKV until the Brazilian outbreak [129]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in the amniotic fluid of these fetuses [130]. In 2015, Brazilian authorities reported that the incidence of microcephaly was twenty times higher compared to previous years. This led to further investigations, and in two years (2015–2016), more than 8000 cases of microcephaly were reported [131]. Later on, an analysis of an outbreak in French Polynesia also demonstrated a correlation between ZIKV and microcephaly [132,133]. Further investigations showed that aborted fetuses (during 1st and 2nd trimesters) contained ZIKV RNA in the amniotic fluid, meninges, CSF, and umbilical cord of the microcephalic newborn babies [57,134]. Several studies have been performed to identify the molecular mechanism of ZIKV-associated microcephaly. Cells associated with the BBB, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, are susceptible to infection with ZIKV and their infection with ZIKV leads to upregulation of ICAM-1 and a variety of cytokines (IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-10) that causes enhanced binding and subsequently crossing of the BBB by the immune cells. The access of immune cells to the CNS is associated with neuro-inflammation which contributed to the neuro-pathogenesis of ZIKV [135]. Neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV and undergo apoptosis following infection [136]. During pregnancy, the immune response directed against ZIKV leads to the inflammation of the fetal–maternal interface, causing inflammation and disruption of barrier functions. This allows the recruitment of various immune cells to the fetal tissue, releasing TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor) and IFN-γ (interferon) that lead to neuroinflammation, resulting in the damage and destruction of NPCs required for the neural development of the fetus [137]. The CNS is susceptible to ZIKV infection during all stages of pregnancy, but earlier infection results in severe damage. CNS infection with ZIKV may result in impaired multiplication and migration of neurons, myelination, synaptogenesis, and even apoptosis that may contribute towards ZIKV-associated microcephaly [138]. In cells infected with ZIKV, mitofusion 2 (MFN-2) expression is reduced. Normal expression of MFN-2 is required for the fusion of mitochondria. Therefore, in ZIKV-infected cells, mitochondrial fragmentation occurs. This leads to the activation of apoptosis through a p53-mediated pathway in NPC cells [139,140]. Recently, Gladwyn-Ng et al. [141] have demonstrated the mechanism of apoptosis in neuronal cells infected by ZIKV in mouse embryos and neuronal stem cells (human), showing that ZIKV infections trigger unfolded proteins in cells that lead to activation of the ER stress response Subsequently, these cells migrate to the cortex and undergo apoptosis.3.2. Ophthalmological ManifestationsZIKV infection during pregnancy has been associated with congenital abnormalities in the fetal eye. Neural crest cells (NCCs) are required for normal development of the corneal and uveal stroma, the corneal epithelium, and the trabecular meshwork. They also play an important role in the closure of the optic fissure [142,143]. NCCs express AXL and thus exhibit susceptibility to ZIKV. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV results in viral replication resulting in loss of NCCs [144]. ZIKV infection can also disrupt the normal differentiation of the NCCs leading to defective development of the anterior eye segment leading to micropthalmia [142,145,146,147]. The loss of NCCs during ZIKV infection has also been found to disrupt closure of the optic fissure leading to iris coloboma and abnormal development of the lens zonules. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV can also lead to reduced thickening of the corneal stroma causing corneal ectasia [142]. It can also contribute towards impaired development of trabecular meshwork causing glaucoma [144,148,149,150]. Neuronal depletion during ZIKV infection can also contribute to thinning of the retinal ganglion layer [151,152]. Apoptosis of NCCs during ZIKV infection can also lead to defects in axonal development [145].Ocular manifestations have been reported in approximately 50% of infants who have ZIKV-induced microcephaly. ZIKV infection has been reported to involve the eyes and this represents the viral ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the blood–retinal barrier (BRB), and the blood–aqueous barrier (BAB). The first ZIKV-related eye abnormality was reported in 2016. More than sixty percent of people with ZIKV infections are reported to have conjunctivitis (the most common eye abnormality associated with ZIKV). Other abnormalities are associated with the anterior segment, the posterior segment, and the neuroophthalmic. The abnormalities associated with the anterior segment include microphthalmia, anterior uveitis (with or without raised intraocular pressure), and non-purulent conjunctivitis [153,154,155]. The posterior segment anomalies associated with ZIKV involve the retina and choroid and include maculopathy and multifocal choroiditis [153,156,157,158,159]. Neuro-ophthalmic conditions are related to the paresis of the abducens and oculomotor muscles and can cause ocular flutter, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema [156,160,161,162,163]. ZIKV infection also causes optic nerve involvement, and this includes hypoplastic disk, enhanced cup-to-disk ratio, and nerve pallor. Viral entry into eyes is facilitated by both hematogenous and retrograde transport of ZIKV through the optic nerve and optic tract [164]. Although ocular tissue is immune privileged, it is more permissive to ZIKV infection because of the higher viral load [151]. Certain cells in the retina are relatively more permissive to ZIKV infection including RPE cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells [165]. Choriocapillaris (highly fenestrated) are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and it can facilitate the ZIKV entry into the RPE cells, which are also permissive to ZIKV infection. RPE infection results in inflammation and this subsequently leads to breaking the BRB [108,166]. Normally, the immune response helps the host in eliminating the infection, however, in this case, immune-mediated injury to the eye tissue leads to pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated eye abnormality [167]. Infection of BRB with ZIKV leads to the generation of IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-α, IFN-β, TNF-α, CCL5 and CXCL-10. This leads to subsequent events that culminate in the atrophy of the retina and RPE mottling [168,169].Another mechanism of viral entry in ocular tissue is through ZIKV-infected monocytes, which possess the ability to cross the retinal microvasculature endothelium and subsequently cause retinal infection. Later on, ZIKV-infected monocytes become activated and release cytokines and chemokines that result in immune-mediated injury/damage to ocular tissue [170,171]. The cornea can also act as reservoir of ZIKV infection as it expresses RIG-1, MDA-5, and TLR 3 which facilitate the synthesis of IFN-I and III to mediate antiviral response [136,172]. Infection of the cornea with ZIKV leads to the synthesis of the IL-1β, TNF-α, CCL5, and CXCL-10 which recruits other cells of the immune system to the cornea and this promotes inflammation and damage to corneal tissue leading to keratitis [173]. Through the hematogenous route, ZIKV infects the iris and ciliary body. From here, the virus can infect BAB cells, which damages this barrier and results in viral entry into the aqueous humor [133]. From the aqueous humor, ZIKV gains entry to the trabeculae meshwork and results in the production of cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-1, IFN-α, IFN-β, CCL5, and CXCL-10. This leads to the recruitment of the other immune cells such as Th1 and CD8+ cells that secrete TNF-α and IFN-γ, damaging the trabeculae meshwork and resulting in blockage of aqueous humor outflow, leading to enhanced intraocular pressure and causing glaucoma. Persistent glaucoma can damage the optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells leading to optic neuropathy [174].3.3. Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)GBS is a condition where there is immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. The condition is characterized by the loss of reflexes and flaccid paralysis. The disease occurs in 1/100,000 persons. It has been observed that GBS typically occurs after certain infections such as Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sporadic GBS cases have also occurred following the flaviviral infections (WNV, DENV and JEV) [175]. In 2014, the first report was published about the occurrence of GBS following ZIKV infection in French Polynesia. It was reported that in ZIKV patients, 1/4000 people suffer from GBS (20 times increased incidence) [176]. In the recent ZIKV outbreak in the Americas, approximately 1500 cases were reported between 2014–2015. At the majority of locations, GBS incidence following ZIKV was reported to be 2–10 times higher than background [177]. In Colombia, more than 100 thousand cases of ZIKV were reported with 42 GBS cases/100,000 ZIKV cases. These findings indicate the possibility of the association of ZIKV with GBS [178]. Until now, no clear mechanism is known about the molecular pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated GBS. However, it is thought that the mechanism of molecular mimicry may be an important contributing factor in the pathogenesis of disease (i.e., antibodies formed against ZIKV cross-react with myelin sheath or other neural tissues). However, others have proposed that immune system dysregulation occurs (that is not directly against ZIKV) and that contributes towards its pathogenesis [176].3.4. Cerebrovascular InvolvementCertain viral diseases are associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities. Recently, ZIKV cases have also been reported to involve cerebral vascular abnormalities. A 10-month-old child infected with ZIKV was admitted to hospital with ischemic stroke and had serum positive for ZIKV [179,180,181]. The exact mechanism remains to be determined; however, it is thought that higher susceptibility of endothelial cells to be infected by ZIKV is a major factor and is responsible for cerebral vascular abnormalities [182].3.5. EncephalitisZIKV infection is considered a potential cause of encephalitis. An 81-year-old patient with a travel history to a ZIKV-affected area had reduced consciousness, limb paresis (upper right), and hemiplegia (left side). The patient was ZIKV positive by RT-PCR and viral culture and isolation. The patient was treated and survived. However, fetal cases of ZIKV-associated encephalitis have also been reported. In Brazil, a 37-year-old (y.o.) female was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of rash and joint pain. Later on, she suffered from weakness in her lower limbs, confusion, and difficulty with speech. RT-PCR was positive for ZIKV, while the serum analysis was negative. The patient later died due to brain swelling, leading to increased intracranial pressure [154]. In the Dominican Republic, a female was admitted to the hospital with complaints of neck stiffness and confusion. Her condition deteriorated, and seizures began. CSF examination revealed an increased number of WBCs (white blood cells), the majority of which were lymphocytes (80%). RT-PCR of urine was positive for ZIKV RNA (but negative in the CSF and serum). However, IgM antibodies against ZIKV were detected from CSF and serum, confirming ZIKV exposure. MRI examination revealed cortical edema, a common finding in meningoencephalitis [163]. In another study on ZIKV, subcortical hemorrhage and bilateral lesions were observed in the temporal and frontal regions [162].3.6. Myelitis and EncephalomyelitisZIKV infection has been associated with myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) and encephalomyelitis (inflammation of the brain and spinal cord), which can result in reduced consciousness, urinary retention, and paresis of lower limbs [183]. The first case of myelitis associated with ZIKV was reported in Guadeloupe in a girl (15 y.o.) who was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of headache and conjunctivitis. Later, her condition continued to deteriorate, and she suffered from left-sided weakness and urinary retention. MRI examination revealed a normal brain, whereas abnormalities were revealed in the spinal cord cervical area and thoracic region. CSF, urine, and serum were found to be positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR [184]. In another study, a 26 y.o. Brazilian male was admitted to the hospital with a major complaint of fever, malaise, and neck stiffness, CSF and urine examination revealed that the patient had a ZIKV infection. CSF analysis showed hyper-protein levels and 100 WBCs (white blood cells) per mL (95% mononuclear cells) [183]. Other studies have also indicated an association between ZIKV and myelitis/encephalomyelitis [183,184,185].4. Zika Virus Infection and Extracellular VesiclesViruses can employ extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. EVs are particles surrounded by membranes that can be released into the extracellular space by living or dying cells. Various viral components may be packed inside the EVs [186]. One of the final fates of EVs is their release into blood circulation, through which they can reach distant cells and tissues [187]. It is important to note that EVs share most of the biochemical and biophysical properties of viruses. Both EVs and viruses (naked and enveloped) use the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT) complex [188,189]. Moreover, Rab GTPases (particularly Rab11, Rab35, and Rab27A/B) are also shared during the viral replication cycle as well as EV biogenesis [190]. Many studies have indicated that EVs play a facilitating role during viral infections. These effects can be due to EVs carrying viral receptors, carrying viral particles themselves, or carrying their genome, proteins, or miRNA. Ultimately, it can lead to the priming of the recipient cells and/or inhibiting IFN pathways, apoptosis of immune cells, and the transmission of viral genome and/or proteins to distant organs and tissues [188,191,192,193]. In the case of ZIKV, NS1 protein, viral E protein (inside and outside) and viral RNA can be packed inside the EVs [194]. Interestingly, mosquito cells (C6/36 cells) infected with ZIKV are found to release EVs (containing viral RNA and protein E), which was found to infect both naïve mosquito and mammalian cells (monocytes and endothelial cells) [195].Given ZIKV’s neurotropic nature, it is important to emphasize that ZIKV-derived EVs are found to disrupt the structure of human brain microvasculature endothelial cell junctions (hcMEC/D3), facilitating ZIKV entry into cells of the human CNS [196]. ZIKV can also spread to the CNS through autophagy (a process associated with viral infections and may be regulated by EVs [197,198,199]. In the case of ZIKV, the autophagic vesicles may play an important role in crossing the placental barrier. Normally, the placenta is protected from various pathogens (aided by the autophagy process); however, ZIKV can hijack this process [200,201]. A study using a mouse model has shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine inhibits viral replication (autophagy-dependent) and also effectively prevents mother–fetal transmission of the virus [202,203].5. Models for Studying Zika Virus Infection and PathogenesisDeveloping appropriate cellular and animal models for studying ZIKV is becoming increasingly important to gain appropriate understanding of viral pathogenesis and host-related factors that aid or inhibit viral replication and to devise appropriate disease prevention and treatment strategies.5.1. Cell LinesThe cell lines are widely used to grow and study ZIKV because they provide a controlled environment for viral replication. These cell lines allow scientists to watch viral behavior, examine molecular interactions between ZIKV and host cells, and test antiviral agents. The use of cell lines is essential to virology as they provide a reliable, reproducible system for studying viral pathogenicity and mechanisms in a laboratory setting. The cells susceptible to Zika Virus infection are illustrated in Figure 5 and detailed comprehensively in Table 2.5.2. OrganoidsAlthough cell culture has been used to determine ZIKV replication and pathogenesis, this system is not without its downsides. Cells are unable to mimic in vivo conditions as they lack the cellular structure, composition, and physiology of an organ in which a virus replicates [222]. To overcome this drawback, people are now developing organ analogues in vitro where stem cells are used to generate 3D tissue structures resembling organs. These 3D models are known as organoids and are being used to model and better understand the molecular events that occur following viral invasion and replication in that organ [223]. Studies have provided confirmatory evidence of microcephaly following ZIKV infection by using organoids [224,225]. Qian et al. (2016) used a mini-bioreactor to generate brain organoids and demonstrated that ZIKV infection in brain organoids that mimic the first-trimester fetal brain resulted in ZIKV infection of NPCs, IPC, astrocytes, and neurons, while infection of brain organoids mimicking the second-trimester fetal brain exhibited ZIKV infection of the outer radial glial cells [224]. These findings are correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis providing evidence of ZIKV-associated microcephaly [136]. Yoon et al. showed that the ZIKV NS2A protein is responsible for the alteration and reduced multiplication of the radial glial cells resulting in altered neuronal positioning in the brain [226]. Another study reported that ZIKV infection of NPCs during early pregnancy was associated with the upregulation of TLR-3 receptors, leading to apoptosis of NPCs, resulting in microcephaly [227]. Recently, brain organoid models have also been used to determine the various drug targets against ZIKV [228,229,230,231]. Organoids resembling the placenta have also been developed using first-trimester human chorionic placental villi where ZIKV established infection and proliferated in Hofbauer cells, villus cytotrophoblasts (CTB), and produced the NS3 and E protein [232,233]. To summarize, organoids offer a promising approach to studying the ZIKV viral pathogenesis and also to screening compounds’ antiviral activity in a system more relevant than in vitro cell culture.5.3. Animal ModelsAnimal models have been developed to study ZIKV replication and pathogenesis in vivo.5.3.1. Non-Human Primates (NHPs)Non-Human Primates (NHPs) exhibit significant similarities with humans (pregnancy physiology, long gestation periods, and hemomonochorial placenta) and offer a promising model to study ZIKV infection, neuropathogenesis, and drug discovery. They also exhibit vertical transmission from mother to fetus similar to humans [234]. Rhesus macaques, olive baboons, marmosets, and pigtail macaques have been employed to study ZIKV pathogenesis during gestation. Olive baboons have been able to demonstrate clinical infection when infected during the gestation period. When infected during 4th month of pregnancy, they developed conjunctivitis and moderate rash, with viremia peak at 7 dpi (days post-infection). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins were also detected [235,236]. In other NHPs (i.e., rhesus macaques, marmosets, and pigtail macaques) no clinical infection occurs following ZIKV inoculation. However, in all NHPs, antibodies are formed following ZIKV infection, and placental and fetal ZIKV infection is observed. In rhesus macaques, fetal loss occurs following ZIKV infection, while marmosets and olive baboons exhibit viral RNA in amniotic fluid and placenta. Severe placental infection is observed during pregnancy in marmosets and rhesus macaques [237,238,239].5.3.2. MiceMany viral replication and pathogenesis studies involve the use of mice as animal models because they have large litter sizes and a short gestational period. However, variability in their placental structure and heterogeneity in gestation can be problematic [240]. Another complication occurs due to differences in the cell biology of mice as compared to humans. On viral entry, the viral NS5 protein is able to degrade the cellular STAT2 protein, thereby making IFN signaling ineffective, resulting in viral replication and the development of clinical disease. Degradation of STAT-2 is not observed in mouse cells infected with a virus, leading to unimpaired IFN signaling resulting in low viral titer and failure to develop clinical infection [241]. Therefore, biological modifications are needed to use mice for studying ZIKV replication and pathogenesis events. This can be achieved by using either immunocompromised mice or using alternative routes of inoculation.Immunocompromised MiceImmunocompromised mice are modified for interferon (IFN) insufficiency. This may be conducted by either creating knockout (KO) mice, e.g., interferon alpha receptor knockout (Ifnar-/-), or by using antibodies to block the IFN receptors (MARI-5A3) [242,243]. It has been found that pregnant Ifnar-/- mice exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV infection with subcutaneous inoculation and are able to produce fetal and placental abnormalities [114]. The infection is established in homozygous as well as heterozygous mice, suggesting that partial deficiency in IFN signaling is sufficient to produce fetal neuropathology. As ZIKV infection can occur through venereal transmission; therefore, models have been developed for this purpose. Intravaginal inoculation of ZIKV from 5–8 days of conception results in high levels of viral RNAs in the placenta and fetal tissues in Ifnar-/- mice [244]. ZIKV infection (intravaginal) of IFN regulator factor (IRF) KO e.g., Irf3-/- Irf7-/- mice exhibit higher vaginal and fetal titers of the virus. This implies that inhibition of IFN signaling is a key factor in establishing different mice models.Immunocompetent MiceAs discussed previously, ZIKV infection often fails in immunocompetent mice. However, some researchers have used alternative strategies to produce ZIKV infection by using higher viral titer or other routes of inoculation. A Brazilian ZIKV strain has been used to produce successful fetal infection in SJL mice. In this study, high viral inoculation (1010 to 1012 pfu/mL) was used to produce uterine and fetal infection that ultimately resulted in fetal microcephaly [245]. However, these mice showed higher levels of T cells in the blood and later on developed autoimmunity and sarcoma [246]. The intraamniotic route has also been used for ZIKV inoculation in embryos and resulted in damage to the retina and blood–brain barrier and produced neuronal death and defects in motor neurons in the fetal brain. Intrauterine infection also resulted in ZIKV infection of placental endothelial and trophoblast cells and in the fetus, the virus localizes in the microglial, endothelial, and NPCs of the fetal brain [67,247,248]. Another model has also been developed to study the postnatal CZS progression by inoculating C57BL/6 mice intraperitoneally, and it was seen that the fetus had reduced body weight and microcephaly. Later on, these mice exhibited motor and memory deterioration in adulthood [249]. These studies pave a path towards viral replication and neuropathogenesis studies in immunocompetent mice models that may be deployed for further understanding of ZIKV neuropathogenesis and drug discovery.5.3.3. Farm AnimalsAlthough less common as animal models, pregnant sheep, and pigs may be used as a model for ZIKV replication and pathogenesis. They are widely available and exhibit susceptibility to the virus [250,251]. They can also be used as a model for human pregnancy and fetal growth [252]. ZIKV infection during the first trimester in sheep resulted in placental pathology, reduced fetal growth, and fetal loss [253]. Maternal ZIKV infection during the 4th to 5th week resulted in the detection of ZIKV RNA in the PBMCs of the mother; however, clinical infection failed to occur [253]. Similarly, in pigs, intrauterine infection during pregnancy resulted in placental abnormalities as well as microcephaly in piglets [254]. It has also been seen that following intrauterine ZIKV infection, the African ZIKV lineage was found to produce a more pronounced viral infection as compared to the Asian strain [255]. These findings clearly establish the role of sheep as a possible animal model to study fetal neuropathogenesis due to ZIKV.5.3.4. RatsAs rats become immunocompromised during the final stage of gestation, similar to humans, they may also be utilized as a model to investigate ZIKV neuropathogenesis [256]. Upon subcutaneous (S/C) inoculation of ZIKV to pregnant rat females, reduced cortical and hippocampus volumes were observed in rats, although no pathological findings and viral detection were observed in the maternal counterpart [114,257].5.3.5. HamstersInfection of immunocompetent females during pregnancy was unable to produce productive viral infection; ZIKV RNA was not found in fetal or placental tissue and fetus size remained unaffected [114]. However, ZIKV infection (Malaysia Strain) in immunocompromised hamsters (8 days post-mating) resulted in ZIKV infection of placental tissue and also caused vertical transmission of the ZIKV from mother to offspring [258].5.3.6. ChickenChicken embryos have been demonstrated to support ZIKV viral growth in the chicken brain and other tissues [259]. Intraamniotic inoculation of ZIKV resulted in stunted embryo growth and microcephaly [260]. Furthermore, comparison of the Asian and African ZIKV strains showed that the African strain caused more embryonic pathologies [261].6. Treatment and Prevention Against Zika Virus and Zika Virus Associated Neuropathies6.1. Prevention from Zika Virus Through VaccinesOne of the major methods for viral disease prevention and control is vaccination. Immediately after the outbreak of ZIKV, research began to find ideal vaccine candidates to prevent future ZIKV outbreaks [262]. Several vaccine candidates have emerged; however, very few have been used in clinical trials. The various ZIKV vaccine candidates are summarized in Table 3.6.1.1. Purified Inactivated Zika Virus Vaccines (PIZIKV)Several inactivated vaccines have been developed and tested by animal models. The majority of these vaccines have been able to demonstrate higher antibody titer, reduced viremia, successful passive transfer of antibodies, and protection in mice (interferon deficient) after homologous or heterologous vaccination [263]. In India, one vaccine has entered phase I clinical trials (CTRI/2017/05/008539) [291]. Using mice and non-human primates (NHPs), an aluminum hydroxide-based inactivated ZIKV vaccine has demonstrated promising antibody titers and protection against homologous antigen challenge [265]. Another PIZIKV provided complete protection in a dose-dependent manner (0.016 to 10 ug) and was found to be effective one year following vaccination in macaques [266]. A double-blind randomized controlled trial (Phase I) was performed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of PIZIKV, and it was found that the vaccine was safe for 52 h. However, protection was not found to be effective as only a single dose was given and for better immunogenicity, a double dose may be needed [268].6.1.2. Live Attenuated Vaccines:Live-attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are known for eliciting swift and long-lasting protective immunity and represent a crucial strategy for managing flavivirus diseases [292]. These are made by modifying the virus in such a way that it may replicate within the organism and stimulate the immune system without causing disease. Since 1938, they have been used as the gold standard as they exhibit good safety and effective protection from viral infection [293]. LAVs are known to stimulate the immune system for long-lasting periods (without the need for an adjuvant or any booster). Currently, three approaches are being used for generating ZIKV LAVs, which are (i) generating chimeric strains (using the backbone of an attenuated flavivirus), (ii) codon deoptimization, and (iii) mutagenesis. One of the most important advantages of using live vaccines is their ability to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses (with a single dose of immunization); as the virus continues to multiply within the host cells, allowing continuous loading of MHC (I and II) with viral peptides. In addition, they are cost-effective (both during manufacturing as well as transportation). The past experiences of successful development of LAV against Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) and Yellow Fever Virus (YFV) have clearly shown their potential to be used as safe viral vaccines [279,293]. However, manufacturing of live vaccines usually requires eggs or cell culture and also maintaining a cold chain during transportation. In countries having warm climates, maintaining cold chain only can account for up to 80% of the total vaccine cost [294]. Another major concern associated with the use of live vaccination is inadequate attenuation (once they are at the stage of the human clinical trials [295]. A variety of LAVs have been tested against the ZIKV [292], and the selective studies are summarized in Table 3.6.1.3. Nucleic Acid VaccinesDNA and RNA-based vaccines are being developed for different infectious diseases. They offer the advantage of prolonging immune response following vaccination and induce both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (CMI) [296]. However, one major disadvantage is that DNA vaccines often fail to elicit adequate immune response or offer protection from challenge [297]. Despite these advantages, DNA vaccines may have the risk of eliciting autoimmunity (by eliciting anti-DNA antibody production) and also causing insertional mutations [298]. Another point to keep in mind is that in the case of DNA vaccines, DNA must enter inside the nucleus of the cell, and then after transcription, mRNA must travel outside the nucleus (into the cytoplasm), where it is translated into the proteins. In contrast, for RNA vaccines, RNA can directly be translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, which are then secreted from the cells (into the extracellular matrix) where they can be presented to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). mRNA vaccines have become more popular after the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is also important to note that storage of mRNA vaccine requires maintaining a cold chain, which may not be feasible in developing countries [299]. The summary of various DNA vaccines available against ZIKV is summarized in Table 3.6.1.4. Subunit VaccinesDue to their rapid production and stability, a variety of ZIKV vaccines have been developed. The majority of these vaccines have used the Envelope protein (E protein) and its different segments. These vaccines have been tested in various animal models, which are summarized in Table 3.6.1.5. Viral Vector-Based VaccinesViral vector-based vaccines are prepared by using a vector virus for the insertion of the genetic components of ZIKV, and they have been found to induce good humoral immunity. Lentovirus, adenovirus, and retroviruses are known to be good viral vectors. Various ZIKV vaccines have been developed using various viral vector systems, which have been summarized in Table 3.6.2. Zika Virus Prevention Through Vector ControlMosquitoes play a central role in the transmission of ZIKV. Therefore, reducing ZIKV transmission through vector control methods involves diverse and innovative strategies and tools designed to manage disease-spreading mosquito population. One of the most widely used strategies is the use of chemical insecticides (due to their cost-effectiveness and easy availability). However, due to the emergence of insecticide resistance and their deleterious effects on the environment, the focus is now diverted towards various other control methods [300,301]. Due to their eco-friendly nature, herbal-based control methods have now gained attention. Promising insecticide activities have been shown by extracts derived from the Illicium verum, Zanthoxylum limonella, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon winterianus, Eucalyptus citriodora, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, etc. [302,303,304,305,306,307,308]. Furthermore, nanoparticles derived from Ambrosia arborescens have also shown good larvicidal activity. However, their toxicity profile should be determined against other environment-friendly insects, animals, and humans [307]. Similarly, biological control methods are also being employed due to their minimal impact on the environment [309]. This includes the use of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Various species of entomopathogenic fungi (Metarhizium anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Aspergillus terreus) and bacteria (Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), Wolbachia) have been tested against ZIKV-transmitting mosquitoes [310,311,312,313,314,315]. Particularly, the introduction of Wolbachia in mosquitoes has demonstrated the ability to disrupt the reproductive potential of disease-transmitting vectors. Similarly, the use of various natural predators, i.e., Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, fishes, tadpoles, and copepods, have also been used against the mosquitoes and have shown varying degrees of efficacy in controlling the mosquito population [316]. Moreover, genetic engineering principles have been applied to release genetically modified mosquitoes into the environment [317]. Furthermore, the use of the sterile insect technique is also an innovative approach to control the mosquito population [318]. When used in combination, these strategies offer an integrated approach to vector control, addressing both short and long-term goals of reducing ZIKV and its induced neuropathies. A summary of vector control strategies developed so far is provided in Table 4.6.3. Treatment for Zika Virus6.3.1. Antivirals Against Zika VirusSince the outbreak of ZIKV, many compounds have been proposed to possess antiviral activity against ZIKV. However, in the majority of cases, treatment is symptomatic, and no specific antiviral has been approved for ZIKV treatment. A myriad of approaches are being adopted for searching for anti-ZIKV drugs. These strategies include the screening of different compounds for their anti-ZIKV activity or through repurposing drugs that are already being used for the treatment of other viral infections. In addition, the anti-ZIKV activity of several herbal/plant extracts is also being evaluated. Broadly, anti-ZIKV compounds have been divided into 2 major categories: (a) direct-acting antivirals, which inhibit the viral replication cycle; (b) antivirals targeting host cells [75]; both of these are summarized in Table 5. The former drugs act on the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp); NS5. Polymerase inhibitors and nucleoside analogs are included in this category. They act by targeting the catalytic domain of NS5. The other category of drugs (host-targeting antivirals) targets the host cell processes (that play an important role in viral replication). Viruses need host nucleosides for their genome replication. The host-acting antivirals can act on various steps of viral replication (host cell binding, entry, replication complex formation, viral maturation, and release from the host cell). An advantage of targeting host processes is that they are less susceptible to developing drug resistance [75].6.3.2. Medicinal Plants as Zika Virus AntiviralsModern scientific research has found numerous synthetic antiviral medications that are effective against a variety of viral infectious disorders throughout the past few decades. Unfortunately, a wide range of negative consequences associated with these synthetic medications have been documented. They may occasionally lose their potency against newly arising virus resistance strains [381]. Furthermore, people in developing nations cannot afford expensive synthetic medications for the treatment of viral infections. Medicinal plants may offer economical and efficient antiviral medications. To date, no plant-derived antiviral has been approved for clinical use against ZIKV. Various research has been conducted to identify medicinal plants possessing anti-ZIKV activity, and they have been summarized in Table 6.7. Zika Virus and Its Potential Oncolytic ActivitiesZIKV exhibits tropism for a variety of cell types including normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs/NSPs), microglial cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells [406,407,408]. Following the entry into cells, the virus disrupts growth and development, causing cell death. Studies in various animals have also supported the association between ZIKV infection and neurodegeneration. Inoculation of ZIKV in rhesus monkeys during early pregnancy has been shown to result in the aberrations of the microglial cells and also cortical plate thinning (3 weeks post-inoculation) [409,410]. Therefore, ZIKV is a promising virus that may be used as an oncolytic virus against glioblastoma as it infects the tumor cells. Particularly, in vitro studies have shown that the ZIKV NS5 protein inhibits the migration, proliferation, and invasion of glioblastoma. Studies in mice have shown that it increases the survival of C57/B6 mice with intracranial glioblastoma [411]. Another study in C57/B6 mice has shown that ZIKV increases the survival of mice with glioblastoma (with the suppression of tumor volume as well as the absence of clinical signs) [412]. Further molecular studies have revealed that ZIKV protease causes the cleavage of human cellular gasdermin D (GSDMD), which causes the activation of pyroptosis (caspase-independent) [413]. ZIKV infection in immunocompetent dogs (suffering from glioblastoma) has also been shown to decrease the tumor mass volume and ameliorate neurological signs. Further investigations revealed an increase in the number of immune cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment [414]. This increase in the numbers of immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) has also been observed in C57BL6/J mouse models (suffering from glioblastoma) infected with ZIKV. This infiltration of T cells into the tumor microenvironment provides enhanced protection to mice. ZIKV infection is associated with enhanced activation of the type I interferon signaling pathway in glioblastoma cells and increases the glioblastoma sensitivity to the PD-L1 blockade, which is an important immune checkpoint [415,416,417].8. Future Perspectives in Zika Virus ControlSince its emergence in 1947, ZIKV has only caused widespread epidemics in the last two decades. The outbreaks of ZIKV also suggest the dynamics of transmission variability of ZIKV. The outbreak of ZIKV in the Americas caused a rapid increase in studies of ZIKV pathogenesis and its control measures and treatment strategies. It is of prime importance to continue working on establishing virological and immunological diagnostics kits for ZIKV with enhanced specificity and sensitivity. Another area of focus is ZIKV pathogenesis. Finally, prevention and treatment strategies remain pivotal to curtail ZIKV-related morbidity and mortality. Currently, many vaccines are being tested on animal models, but very few have entered into clinical trials, there is a dire need to improve the quality of good vaccine candidates. Plus, the development of genetically modified mosquitoes could be a groundbreaking tool for controlling Zika virus transmission.


Title: Drugs of Abuse and Their Impact on Viral Pathogenesis

1. Drug Use Morbidity and Mortality in the USThere were over 19 million people aged 18 or older with substance use disorder (SUD) in the United States in 2019 [1]. Frequently misused substances include alcohol, cocaine, heroin, marijuana (cannabis), tobacco, methamphetamine, and opioids. Given the sharp rise in opioid-related deaths in recent years, this review focuses on opioids and their interactions with common viral pathogens, such as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV).Rates of drug overdose deaths have increased significantly in recent years [2,3]. From 2016 to 2017, more than 142,000 Emergency Department visits were suspected opioid-involved overdoses [4]. Among the 70,000+ drug overdose deaths in 2017, 67.8% involved an opioid [5]. In 2019, 70.6% of drug overdose deaths involved opioids, while 51.5% involved synthetic opioids [6]. Contributing to these increased deaths is the dramatic increase in the availability of heroin and illicitly manufactured fentanyl and fentanyl analogs [7,8,9,10,11,12].2. Drug Use and Immune FunctionSeveral commonly misused substances suppress immune responses (reviewed in [13,14]). Possible mechanisms include impaired function of natural killer cells, T cells, B cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells, and/or macrophages, altered expression of cytokines and chemokines, and the weakened integrity of the intestinal barrier, all of which contribute to decreased ability to control pathogens and limit their subsequent clearance. Evidence of the immunosuppressive effects of drug use are further supported by epidemiologic studies demonstrating an increased rate of infections amongst persons with SUD [15,16,17]. 3. Common Viral Infections Associated with Drug UseDrug use—particularly the opioid pandemic—has fueled outbreaks of several viral pathogens. Perhaps the most well-known example occurred in Scott County, Indiana, in 2015. In an area that had previously recorded approximately five new HIV cases annually, over 200 people were diagnosed with HIV in less than one year [18,19]. Most individuals lived in rural communities, were under 40 years of age, white, and nearly half were women. A total of 80% reported injection drug use. Among those, all reported dissolving and injecting oxymorphone tablets. It was subsequently reported that most individuals were also co-infected with HCV [20]. Increases in HIV and/or viral hepatitis associated with injection drug use have been noted in several other settings [21,22,23,24,25,26,27]. A meta-analysis found that 17.8% of persons who inject drugs (PWIDs) were living with HIV, 52.3% were HCV seropositive, and 9.1% were HBV surface antigen positive [28]. Thus, it is not surprising that rises in viral infections associated with injection drug use—frequently involving opioids—have been noted internationally as well [29,30,31,32,33,34].4. OpioidsThere are three main types of opioids. Natural opiates are found in plants and include morphine and codeine. Semi-synthetic opioids are those created in laboratory settings from natural opiates and include hydromorphone, hydrocodone, and oxycodone, as well as heroin, which is made from morphine. Synthetic opioids include fentanyl, fentanyl analogs, buprenorphine, methadone, and tramadol. Endogenous opioid peptides are also responsible for a plethora of physiological functions and include endorphins, enkephalins, and dynorphins.Opioid family receptors are classified as μ-opioid (MOR), δ-opioid (DOR), κ-opioid (KOR), and nociceptin/orphanin (ORL) receptors [35]. When an opioid receptor is activated, adenylyl cyclase is inhibited, leading to the activation of K+ channels and the reduced conductance of Ca2+ channels. Opioid receptors also activate mitogen-activated protein kinases and phospholipase C-mediated signaling, leading to the formation of IP3 and diacyl glycerol. The activation or inhibition of downstream signaling cascades thus facilitates the intrinsic effects of opioids [36,37].5. Opioids and HIVOpioid receptors are expressed on a variety of immune cells, such as lymphocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and monocytes [38,39]. Therefore, the interactions between opioids/opioid receptors and HIV are important to investigate (Figure 1). Endogenous opioid peptides enhance HIV expression. For instance, the β-endorphin enhanced viral protein production and long terminal repeat (LTR) activation in microglia [40]. Similarly, endomorphin-1 increased HIV expression in mixed glial/neuronal, as well as microglial, cell cultures [41], and dynorphin upregulated HIV expression in fetal brain co-cultures [42]. However, subsequent studies have not evaluated the role of endogenous opioid peptides on HIV disease progression in vivo.Squinto et al. first reported that morphine activated the HIV LTR in human neuroblastoma cells [43]. Subsequent studies showed increased HIV replication with several cell types. Morphine increased HIV expression in promonocyte/fetal brain cell co-cultures, as well as primary cultures of Kupffer cells [44,45]. Morphine also triggered viral reactivation in latently-infected lymphocytes [46]. Interestingly, Wang et al. demonstrated that morphine withdrawal also enhanced HIV replication within peripheral blood lymphocytes, as well as T cell lines in vitro [47]. The neuropeptide substance P (SP) enhanced viral replication in a dose-dependent manner, and an SP antagonist inhibited the effect of morphine withdrawal on HIV replication. HIV LTR activation was also increased in cells undergoing morphine withdrawal. The same group reported that morphine upregulated chemokine receptor expression, downregulated β chemokine production, inhibited the expression of interferons (IFNs), IFN-inducible genes, and regulators of the Janus Kinase signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK–STAT) signaling pathway, and decreased expression of anti-HIV microRNAs, while also increasing HIV expression in blood monocyte-derived macrophages and neonatal macrophages [48,49,50,51]. Morphine withdrawal also enhanced HIV expression within macrophages and inhibited expression of multiple viral inhibitory factors [52]. Additionally, Balinang et al. also demonstrated increased HIV replication in neural progenitor cells in the presence of morphine [53]. Notably, HIV proteins also synergize with morphine to increase the expression of opioid receptors, alter cell cycle regulation, and exacerbate neurotoxicity and neuroinflammation [54,55,56,57,58,59,60].Figure 1Mechanisms of virus–drug interactions that lead to increased viral replication and accelerated disease progression for HIV and HCV, and/or liver injury.Using an in vitro HIV-CD4+ T cell system, Liang et al. showed that morphine treatment induced more drug-resistant mutations under selective pressure from antiretroviral drugs and shortened the generation time for such mutations compared to controls treated with only antiretroviral drugs [61]. The inhibitory effects of antiretroviral therapies on HIV replication in primary astrocytes in vitro were also attenuated by morphine [62]. Morphine influences antiretroviral drug concentration in a drug and cell type-dependent manner [57], although the in vivo significance of these findings remains to be determined. In the simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) model, morphine alters the fecal microbiome and expression of microbial metabolites and reduces the CD4+ T cell reservoir in lymphoid tissues, while increasing the microglia/macrophage reservoir in the central nervous system [63,64]. There are no published reports on whether another natural opioid—codeine—has similar effects on HIV infection/replication.Of the semi-synthetic opioids, data on their impact on HIV pathogenesis are only available for heroin (heroin triggered HIV reactivation in latently-infected lymphocytes in vitro) [46]. Others have demonstrated that heroin enhanced HIV expression in macrophages, suppressed IFNs, and inhibited several anti-HIV microRNAs [51,65]. Altered microRNA expression was also confirmed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and/or macrophages from heroin-dependent persons [65,66]. In a large cohort study, HIV-infected PWIDs had higher plasma HIV RNA levels than non-PWIDs, and PWIDs expressed lower levels of host restriction factors such as TRIM5α, TRIM22, ABOBEC3G, and IFNs than individuals with no drug use [67].Methadone and buprenorphine are widely used for the treatment of opioid addiction. Patient-based studies investigating their impact on HIV pathogenesis are lacking. However, in vitro studies indicated that methadone enhanced HIV replication within fetal microglia and blood monocyte-derived macrophages, and increased replication in latently-infected PBMCs [68]. Methadone increased expression of CCR5 in monocyte-derived macrophages. A subsequent study by the same group found that methadone also increased HIV expression in primary macrophages and reduced expression of IFNs, IFN-stimulated genes, and several anti-HIV microRNAs [69].Retention on buprenorphine treatment was associated with maximal HIV suppression in opioid-dependent persons [70], although there are no reports on whether buprenorphine directly impacts HIV levels in vivo. A recent study found that buprenorphine resulted in more than an eight-fold increase of in vitro infection of PBMCs from uninfected individuals with an HIV reporter virus [71]. In contrast, in a murine model of HIV, viral levels were not increased, although cognitive impairment was reduced in the presence of buprenorphine [72].Despite the significant contribution of synthetic opioids such as fentanyl to the current opioid crisis, data evaluating the potential association of fentanyl or fentanyl analogs on HIV disease are limited. We recently reported preliminary data suggesting that fentanyl increases HIV replication via enhanced expression of the CCR5 and CXCR4 chemokine co-receptors in several cell types [73,74]. Nonetheless, the impacts of other synthetic opioids on HIV pathogenesis remain to be explored.6. Opioid Receptor/Chemokine Receptor InteractionsIt is well established that, like chemokines, μ-, δ-, and κ-opioids induce chemotactic responses in monocytes and neutrophils [75,76,77,78]. It has also been shown that the activation of mu- and delta-opioid receptors leads to the heterologous desensitization of chemokine receptors (reviewed in [79]). Thus, opioid receptor–chemokine receptor interactions and desensitization by opioid agonists may have important implications for HIV pathogenesis. Several groups have sought to antagonize opioid receptor–chemokine receptor interactions as a novel therapeutic strategy to limit HIV replication. Akgün et al. synthesized a bivalent MOR agonist/CCR5 antagonist that exhibited significant anti-nociception in mice [80]. This bivalent compound was around 3500 times more potent than a mixture of the MOR agonist and CCR5 antagonist monovalent ligands. Arnatt et al. developed a different bivalent compound targeting the MOR–CCR5 heterodimer [81]. Exposure to the bivalent ligand significantly reduced HIV p24 levels in PBMCs, macrophages, and primary astrocytes. This group subsequently developed a bivalent MOR–CXCR4 antagonist that is around 150 times more potent than monovalent controls at inhibiting HIV entry [82], and have recently reported additional bivalent MOR–CCR5 ligands with potent anti-HIV activity [83].7. Stimulants and HIVStimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamine may alter HIV pathogenesis and have been reviewed in detail elsewhere [84,85]. For instance, stimulant use is associated with higher HIV RNA levels and greater CD4+ T cell decline [86,87,88]. In vitro, cocaine enhances HIV transcription through the altered expression of NFκB, mitogen- and stress-activated kinase 1 (MSK1) p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK), and/or initiation and elongation factors [89,90,91]. Cocaine can directly enhance HIV expression in multiple cell types including PBMCs, macrophages, CD4+ T cells, dendritic cells, microglia, and astrocytes [89,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99]. Peterson et al. further reported that antibodies to either tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) or transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) reduced the impact of cocaine on HIV replication [94]. Cocaine can also enhance HIV neuroinvasion by remodeling microvascular endothelial cells in the brain [100]. Roth et al. noted a 100- to 300-fold increase in HIV levels after cocaine administration in a murine model of HIV infection [101,102]. The mechanism by which cocaine influences HIV pathogenesis includes increased chemokine co-receptor expression, epigenetic modifications, upregulation of dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN), differential MAPK expression, dysregulation of arachidonic acid and its metabolites, and/or downregulation of anti-HIV microRNAs [90,91,93,98,99,102,103,104,105].Methamphetamine use in the US increased 43% from 2015 to 2019 [106]. Methamphetamine use alters the immune system in a variety of ways, including altered immune cell subset number, increased pro-inflammatory cytokine production, increased CD4+ and CD8+ T cell proliferation, enhanced CD4+ T cell activation and/or exhaustion, and altered immune-related signaling pathways, as reviewed elsewhere [107,108,109,110]. Population-based studies report that methamphetamine use is associated with higher HIV viral loads, higher likelihood of having detectable HIV viral loads, and/or lower CD4+ T cell counts compared to non-users [111,112,113]. Several in vitro studies have shown that methamphetamine and the HIV tat protein interact to alter mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death [114,115]. Others have demonstrated increased HIV replication in the presence of methamphetamine in multiple cell types, including blood monocyte-derived macrophages, monocyte-derived dendritic cells, neural progenitor cells, and CD4+ T cells [116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124]. The proviral effects of methamphetamine on HIV are attributed to the enhanced expression of chemokine co-receptors, decreased expression of β chemokines, inhibition of IFNα, upregulation of T cell activation markers, altered microRNA expression, dysregulation of signal transduction pathways, inhibition of TLR9, and activation of the HIV LTR. 8. Alcohol and HIVAlcohol represents a near ubiquitous extrinsic factor that can play a role in infection, transmission, and maintenance of chronic viral infections. The World Health Organization reports that alcohol consumption contributes to 3 million deaths per year globally (WHO 2018). The 2019 National Survey on Drug Use and Health reported 139.7 million current alcohol users aged 12 and older in 2019 [125].Alcohol can impact HIV by increased risk of infection/transmission, reduced viral suppression, and increased emergence of viral resistance to antiretroviral therapies, as well as alcohol-associated immunosuppression that increases the risk of opportunistic infections and disease progression. A meta-analysis of 10 studies reported that any alcohol consumption was associated with an increased relative risk of HIV infection, while binge drinking led to an increased relative risk of 2.2 [126]. This risk is attributable in part to the link between alcohol use, unprotected sexual intercourse, multiple sexual partners, and a prior history of sexually transmitted infections [127,128]. Recreational drug use, intimate partner violence, and depression are also recognized as co-morbidities of alcohol misuse [129].Suppression of HIV with antiretroviral therapy has implications for the infected individual in terms of disease progression, and as well as HIV transmission to others. In a longitudinal study of patients in continuity care, the time spent with a viral load >1500 copies/mL was evaluated. Hazardous alcohol use, recent drug use, black race, and age were highly associated with failure to maintain an HIV <1500 copies/mL [130]. In the Women’s Interagency HIV Study, heavy drinking was associated with failure to remain virally suppressed as well [26]. The association between failure to suppress HIV and disease progression due to alcohol is well established. However, the factors that contribute to disease progression are less clear. A detailed review of this subject suggests that alcohol may affect HIV progression through alteration of the microbiome, affecting gut permeability, and systemic activation, though not all studies report an association between heavy alcohol use and markers of progression [131]. Alcohol may increase risk of infections in persons with HIV by altered immune surveillance mechanisms. Experimental models suggest that alcohol consumption increases susceptibility to pneumococcal pneumonia [132]. The presence of alcohol use disorder is associated with greater pneumonia severity as well [133]. In vitro studies suggest that HIV gp120 and alcohol increase blood-brain barrier permeability [134]. Additionally, others have demonstrated increased HIV replication in the presence of alcohol in various cell types, including T lymphocytes, monocyte-derived macrophages, monocyte-derived dendritic cells, epithelial cells, and oral keratinocytes [47,135,136,137,138,139,140]. Higher alcohol-induced levels of HIV may lead to increased risk of transmission to others. The mechanisms by which alcohol enhances HIV replication include upregulation of chemokine co-receptors and inhibition of β chemokines [137].9. Opioids and Viral HepatitisOpioid receptors are expressed in the liver where they are important mediators of liver disease progression [141,142,143,144,145,146,147]. Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are major contributors to liver fibrosis and express multiple opioid receptors [141,142,144,145,146,148]. However, less is known about the impact of opioids on HCV and liver disease (Figure 1). In vitro studies demonstrated that morphine, heroin, and methamphetamine enhance HCV replication [149,150,151,152,153]. We recently reported that fentanyl increased replication of HCV and HBV in hepatocytes [73]. The addition of fentanyl also resulted in significant apoptosis. RNA sequencing identified multiple hepatocyte genes that were differentially regulated by fentanyl, including those related to apoptosis, the antiviral interferon response, chemokine signaling, and NFκB signaling. As higher virus levels are associated with pathogenesis and virus transmission, additional research is essential to our understanding of opioid-virus pathogenesis and for the development of new and optimized treatment strategies. However, there are no data on HCV RNA levels and/or markers of liver damage in fentanyl-using populations. Similarly, there are no published reports evaluating HCV or HBV attachment or entry factors by fentanyl or other opioids. While multiple microRNAs stimulate or suppress HCV replication [154], studies of opioid HCV–miRNA interactions are absent from the literature.10. Stimulants and Viral HepatitisAs with HIV, stimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamine may alter the pathogenesis of viral hepatitis. However, data regarding the influence of cocaine on viral hepatitis in at-risk populations are sparse. While cocaine use is associated with HCV infection and the presence of HCV viremia, the impact of cocaine on HCV RNA levels or treatment response rates is less clear [155,156,157]. There are conflicting data on the impact of cocaine use on liver disease [158,159]. Similarly, there are limited studies on the impact of cocaine use on HBV-related liver disease, although amongst US veterans with HCV, cocaine and other drug use was associated with HBV co-infection [160].Ye et al. demonstrated that methamphetamine increased HCV replication and inhibited hepatic IFNα expression in vitro [149]. Population-based studies evaluating the impact of methamphetamine on HCV RNA levels and liver disease are limited. However, methamphetamine injection is an independent predictor of incident HCV infection [161,162,163], and recent methamphetamine injection is associated with phylogenetic clustering of HCV, suggesting that it plays a role in HCV transmission networks [164].11. Alcohol and Viral HepatitisAlcohol and viral hepatitis (HBV or HCV) are important contributors to liver injury and progression to cirrhosis, leading to increased morbidity and mortality. The interaction between HCV and alcohol misuse is significant and appears to be dose- and duration-dependent. For example, an analysis of National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data revealed that excessive alcohol consumption was associated with a hazard ratio for liver-related mortality of around 184 compared to around 74 for HCV-infected persons not reporting excessive alcohol consumption. Liver-related mortality was increased with moderate alcohol use, as well as when HCV was present [165]. Among those cured of HCV with directing acting agents, unhealthy alcohol use remained associated with liver-related outcomes and mortality, although low-level alcohol use was not [166]. A myriad of factors could influence liver injury and disease progression among HCV-infected persons who drink alcohol. Several studies have suggested an increased quasispecies complexity of HCV associated with alcohol use [167,168]. In vitro studies have described increased viral replication following the exposure of permissive cells to alcohol [169]. It has been reported that upregulation of the microRNA-122 that facilitates HCV replication could be involved [170]. Alcohol is also associated with HCV replication in PBMCs [171]. Liver injury is also associated with the development of steatosis and free radical oxidative stress, both of which are increased in conjunction with HCV and alcohol exposure [172].The impact of alcohol on HBV is poorly understood. Yet, alcohol consumption increases HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) and viral DNA in transgenic mice [173], supporting a previous study demonstrating increased HBsAg levels in HepG2 cells in the presence of ethanol [174]. Nonetheless, cohort-based studies evaluating the impact of alcohol on HBV-specific liver disease are lacking.12. Tobacco, Cannabis, and Viral InfectionsAmong persons with HIV, the prevalence of cigarette smoking is estimated at 40% to 70% (reviewed in [175,176]). Multiple studies have reported that cigarette smoke exposure is associated with increased HIV replication, lower CD4+ T cell counts, immune activation, oxidative stress, and/or decreased adherence or response to antiretroviral therapy (ART) [177,178,179]. Smoking/nicotine also enhances HIV replication in macrophages, T lymphocytes, and/or microglia [180,181,182,183,184]. Ranjit et al. observed a three- to four-fold increase in HIV replication in macrophages exposed to benzo(a)pyrene—a major carcinogen found in cigarettes. The impact of cannabis use on HIV is less clear with some studies reporting a reduced adherence to ART and missed clinical appointments, while others reported beneficial/no impact on virus levels [185,186,187,188,189]. Notably, given its potential anti-inflammatory properties, cannabis has been offered as a potential treatment for addiction, as well as for neuroinflammation associated with HIV [190,191].Recent reviews show cannabis use may impact liver disease [192]. While some studies have reported that cannabis use was associated with liver fibrosis, other studies showed little to no effect. Cannabis use may also be associated with reduced hepatic steatosis [193].13. Drugs of Abuse and SARS-CoV-2The ongoing SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic has raised considerable concern about its potential negative impact on persons with SUD [194,195]. Social isolation and stress increased with lockdowns during the pandemic. Addiction services and treatment options were also severely limited to align with new social distancing norms. Recent reports now confirm that drug overdose deaths increased during the COVID-19 pandemic [196,197,198,199]. Wang et al. recently reported that persons with SUD were at significantly increased risk for COVID-19 and worse outcomes [200]. Fentanyl use also increased during the COVID-19 pandemic [201,202]. COVID-19 mortality may be exacerbated in persons with SUD for several reasons, including downregulation of interferon expression, development of pulmonary edema, increased thrombotic factors, and increased expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) (reviewed in [203], although data to support these potential mechanistic interactions are quite limited currently). However, the acute nature of infection with SARS-CoV-2 may prove challenging for evaluating how drugs of abuse impact SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pathogenesis in vivo.14. Recommendations for Additional ResearchThere are multiple future research opportunities to consider related to drugs of abuse and chronic viral infections. Firstly, side-by-side comparison of multiple drugs of abuse and their impact on viral replication in vitro is essential using standardized drug doses, established timings of drug exposure, and cell types that are relevant to the viral life cycle and the overall disease progress in vivo. Secondly, polysubstance abuse is quite common in persons with substance use disorders. While this clearly complicates study design and data analysis, the impact of polysubstance abuse compared to single drugs of abuse is not commonly considered in well-characterized clinical cohorts with viral infections and co-infections. Thirdly, the opioid antagonists naloxone and naltrexone can limit the increased viral replication brought about by distinct drugs of abuse in vitro [48,50,65,153,204,205,206,207,208]. Furthermore, a recent clinical trial demonstrated that extended-release naltrexone improves HIV viral suppression, thus suggesting its potential role in the treatment of SUD in persons with chronic viral infections [209]. Similarly, high rates of HCV clearance were achieved with combined direct-acting antivirals and opioid agonist therapy in HCV-positive PWIDs [210]. Thus, increased availability and utilization of opioid antagonists may have beneficial impacts on the most vulnerable and at-risk populations. Nonetheless, the potential effects of these agents on synthetic opioid-mediated virus replication have not been evaluated to date in vitro or in at-risk patient populations. Fourthly, given their central role in HIV pathogenesis, as well as liver disease, and the possibility of opioid receptor–chemokine receptor interactions, several groups have sought to antagonize these interactions as a novel therapeutic strategy to limit HIV replication. Yet, this strategy could be extended to include liver disease caused by alcohol, HBV, and/or HCV. A more robust understanding of the complex interactions between opioids, viruses, and the chemokine system could facilitate the optimization of therapeutic options for patients with SUD and lead the to the development of novel therapeutic strategies for multiple diseases that are common in PWIDs. Fifthly, the interactions of drugs of abuse with antiretroviral therapies for HIV or direct-acting agents for HCV are largely known, as reviewed elsewhere (reviewed in [211,212,213]). However, progress towards the development of new antiviral drugs, as well as new drug formulations, and the creation of new, distinct drugs of abuse, such as fentanyl analogs, requires careful study. Moreover, the impact of viral infections on drug–drug interactions and drug metabolism must be considered. Sixthly, the human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) which infects around 10 million people globally can lead to adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and HTLV-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (reviewed in [214]). Given its routes of transmission, co-infections with HIV, HBV, and HCV are relatively common and would likely impact persons with SUD/OUD (opioid use disorder). However, there are almost no published data on the impact of drugs of abuse on HTLV-1 pathogenesis. Thus, this represents an excellent focus for future research.15. ConclusionsChronic viral infections like HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C have a significant impact on individuals, and the health of societies as a whole. Though suppressive or curative strategies are available for these infectious diseases, their efficacy and impact may be limited by the use or misuse of drugs and/or alcohol through a variety of interconnected mechanisms. These include effects on viral replication, immune-mediated clearance, and medication adherence. The outcomes of these interactions can lead to disease progression (i.e., CD4+ T cell decline, immune activation, and/or increased hepatic fibrosis/cirrhosis) and to increased risk of transmission. While virus–drug interactions have been explored for some drugs of abuse, there are limited data for others. Additional research into the complex interactions between drugs of abuse and viral pathogenesis must simultaneously occur at the level of basic research in vitro, as well as in vivo in large cohort studies that are sufficiently powered to permit the analysis of subsets of individuals experiencing these disease modifiers.


Title: Vertical Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus—An Update

1. IntroductionThe hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major public health problem that affects approximately 2 billion people worldwide. Of these, 296 million are chronically infected [1]. In 2017, the World Health Organization set the goal to eliminate viral hepatitis by 2030, which is defined as 90% reduction in incidence and 65% reduction in liver-related deaths from the 2015 baseline [2].HBV is a hepatotropic virus that belongs to the Hepadnaviridae family. The viral genome is a DNA of about 3.2 Kb that has four overlapping open reading frames (ORFs): S, X, P, and C. The S/preS ORF encodes the three form of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg): long (HBsAg-L), medium (HBsAg-M) and small (HBsAg-S). The regulatory protein X (HBx) is transcribed from X ORF; the P ORF encodes the viral DNA polymerase; and the C ORF encodes the core protein (HBcAg) and a related protein called which is the precursor of the secreted protein known as antigen e (HBeAg) [3,4]. The diagnosis of HBV infection is established by detection of the molecular and serologic markers: viral DNA, HBsAg, HBeAg, anti-HBs, anti-HBe and anti-HBc (IgM and total antibodies) (Table 1).Four routes of transmission have been described: (1) parenteral, i.e., by transfusion, re-used syringes and needles and contact of blood; (2) sexual; (3) vertical; (4) horizontal, i.e., by contact with body fluids, such as saliva, shared toothbrushes and secretory skin lesions [3]. In high endemic areas (Africa and Southeast Asia), HBV infection is acquired predominantly during the perinatal period or in early childhood [5,6]. Approximately 70–90% of infants born to HBeAg positive mothers in absence of active and passive immunization became chronically infected [6,7,8]. This risk is markedly reduced when HBV vaccine is given along with hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) in the first 12 h of life of the newborn along with antiviral therapy for the mother before delivery. Nevertheless, the immunoprophylaxis of some cases is not 100% protective; indeed, between 8% and 30% of infants can become infected [8,9,10,11]. Failures in immunoprophylaxis are related to the positivity of HBeAg and a high viral load in the mother, increasing the risk of vertical transmission.2. Epidemiology of HBV InfectionAccording to the latest estimation, approximately two billion people worldwide have evidence of past or present HBV; 296 million individuals are chronically infected and almost 820,000 result in annual deaths from HBV-related liver disease [1,12]. The overall prevalence of HBsAg is 3.9% of the human population; however, it varies from country to country and depends on the complex interplay of behavioral, environmental, economic, geopolitical and host factors. Three epidemiological patterns of HBV infection have been established according to the prevalence of HBsAg in general population: low endemicity (<2%; the United States of America (USA), Canada, Western Europe and some countries of South America), intermediate (2–7%; Middle East, Eastern Europe, Alaska, Greenland, Pacific Islands, Central America and South America) and high (≥8%; China, sub-Saharan Africa and the Amazon basin, among other regions) [6,12]. The variations in HBV endemicity are also frequently correlated with the predominant mode of transmission (Figure 1). In a highly endemic setting, most cases of hepatitis B infection are due to vertical transmission (mother-to-child infection) and horizontal transmission (exposure to infected family members) [13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. It has been estimated that 45% of the world’s population lives in endemic areas for HBV infection. In Asian and African countries, the vertical transmission is a common route as a considerable proportion of women are highly infectious at childbirth age, related to HBeAg positivity and a high viral load. Indeed, the prevalence of HBsAg among women of childbearing age in four provinces in China was higher than the national average prevalence for the same age group of women (11.8% vs. 6.6%). Moreover, HBsAg prevalence in women between 15 and 19 years of age was 5.21% (IC 4.05–6.36), and it was significantly higher (11.83%; IC 10.06–13.59) in women over the age of 40. This is probably due to the fact that older women were infected before the universal vaccination program [19]. Similar results were found in different regions of Africa, where the prevalence rank of HBsAg in pregnant women was 6.3–15.5% in western Africa, 7.7–9.2% in central Africa and 3.9–14.2% [18] in eastern and southern Africa. Given that the prevalence of HBsAg in pregnant women varies considerably from country to country, some studies suggest that the risk of perinatal infection may be lower in some African countries, and horizontal transmission would be the most frequent [15,17]. In any case, the prevalence of chronic HBV infection in women in these endemic regions represents a threat to maternal health and a risk of mother-to-child transmission. It demonstrates the conditions of vulnerability related to ethnicities, socio-economic status and education levels.The Amazon basin is also a high endemic region for HBV infection [20,21,22,23,24,25]. The causes for high HBV prevalence are not completely understood, but it is likely a multifactorial problem: earlier age of pregnancy (relating to greater likelihood of high maternal viral load among women with CHB); crowded house; feeding small children with food previously chewed by the mothers; practices eliciting blood-to-blood contact, including ritual body modification or scarification; inadequate access to timely vaccination; and absence of effective primary health care and promotion and prevention programs [26,27]. A cross-sectional study was performed in 6 out of the 42 indigenous populations settled in the Peruvian Amazon. The prevalence of HBsAg in pregnant women was 2.11% (11/522) and the prevalence of anti-HBc was 42.06% (522/1241), indicating that a significant proportion of the population was exposed to the virus [24]. On other hand, the study showed that anti-HBc positivity in pregnant women was associated with age at pregnancy, first sexual intercourse at <16 years, bisexual partners and no condom use. A study in an indigenous population inhabiting the Curuçá and Itaquaí river basins of the Javari Valley in the Brazilian Amazon region described the markers of HBV infection. A total of 180 serum samples obtained from 87 (48.3%) men and 93 (51.7%) women were analyzed. The prevalence of HBV infection according to the ORF S detection (PCR) was 50.6% (44/87) in men and 51.6% (48/93) in women. Of these women, 21.5% (20/93) were pregnant and 75% (15/20) were HBV positive, showing a statistical difference (p = 0.009) when compared to the prevalence of HBV infection in non-pregnant women (40.4% (21/52)) [23]. The prevalence of HBV molecular markers found in pregnant women confirm the importance of prevention of vertical HBV transmission in the Amazon region´s populations. An interesting analysis of HBV infection was carried out in 1275 children and 572 mothers from 37 indigenous communities in the state of Amazonas, Colombia [25]. The average age of mothers and children was 32 ± 8.3 years (range 16 and 59 years) and 5 ± 3 years (range 6 months and 11 years old), respectively. The prevalence of anti-HBc in mothers’ population was 30.9% (176/572) and 9% (52/572) were positive for both anti-HBc and HBsAg markers. While 3.6% (46/1275) of children was positive for anti-HBc marker and 0.5% (7/1275) were also positive for HBsAgThe low prevalence of HBsAg observed in children confirmed the effectiveness of the hepatitis B vaccine program in this population; however, the frequency of HBV infection is still high in people born before 1994 when universal vaccination began, as reported in these indigenous mothers. This finding could be indicative of vertical transmission risk that could be increased in the absence of complete and timely immunoprophylaxis in the children. Indeed, this study demonstrated that being born to an HBsAg positive mother increases 2.5-fold the risk of the child being HBsAg + (OR = 2.45, 95% CI 1.33–4.46). Moreover, Garcia D et al. analyzed the vaccination records of this population and reported that the children with timely vaccination (birth dose and doses at 2, 4 and 6 months) had 70% less risk of being infected with HBV when compared with those who did not (OR = 0.23, 95% CI 0.09–0.51) [28]. A recently leading-edge study demonstrated important advances in achieving the goal of hepatitis B elimination in Colombia [29]. The study evaluated the feasibility of a two-phase approach to verify mother-to-child transmission of HBV in this country. In the first phase, municipalities with the highest risk of HBV transmission were identified, considering variables such as the number of HBV infections in pregnant women per 1000 individuals, coverage with third dose of pentavalent vaccine, the percentage of births occurring in health centers and seroprevalence data. The risk of hepatitis B was increased in municipalities with hepatitis B immunization low coverage and/or <90% of births in health centers The second part of the analysis included a serological household survey of children aged 5 to 10 years in the 36 municipalities with highest risk of HBV infection. A total of 3203 children from these municipalities were screened for HBV infection marker. HBsAg was not detected in any of the 3203 samples, yielding an upper 90% confidence limit of <0.1% prevalence [29]. Importantly, the study reported that there are still populations in which vaccination coverage is low, such as home-born children and indigenous communities. This result suggests that cultural traditions and/or barriers to access the health system may contribute to the higher prevalence of hepatitis B reported in these communities. Overall, the results of this study could indicate that Colombia is possibly on the right track to eliminating mother-to-child transmission of HBV; however, there is a need to strengthen screening during pregnancy, provide access to timely vaccination, establish systems to monitor HBV infection among pregnant women and complete follow-up testing of infants born to HBsAg-positive women. In regions of intermediate endemicity, such as Western Europe, most cases of HBV infection are acquired through sexual intercourse. In Italy, Russia and Turkey, the prevalence of chronic hepatitis B ranges from 3% to 10%, and unsafe injections are a major route of HBV transmission [30,31]. Interestingly, HBsAg prevalence in pregnant women of western and southwestern Europe countries was 0.1–4.4% [32], 1.18–4.3% in Iran [33] and 0.2–3.8% in some countries of South America (Peru, Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina and Colombia). This is in agreement with the low frequency of vertical transmission in these regions [28,34,35,36]. On the other hand, injection drug users are the most infected population in regions with low overall prevalence such as Eastern Europe and North America. Other populations at increased risk if HBV infection are prisoners, men who have sex with men, sex workers and homeless [37]. Studies carried out in pregnant women reported HBsAg prevalence from 0.3% to 2.4% [38,39] in the USA, from 0.76% to 0.85% in Australia [40] and from 1.4 to 1.5% in Japan [41]. Therefore, vertical transmission in these regions does not seem relevant.3. Discovery of HBV Vertical TransmissionSaint-Vel’s 1862 report of severe hepatitis in pregnant women in Martinique laid the initial groundwork for studying the effects of HBV infection in pregnancy [42]. However, it was not until 1954 that the possibility of vertical transmission of HBV was considered based on a report of infants who developed hepatitis during the first two months of life and the evidence that some mothers were “silent carriers” of HBV; this was relevant to the problem of maternal transmission of this infection [43]. Later, a prospective study conducted in the USA and Europe revealed that in two-thirds of the infants of mothers who had acute hepatitis B at the end of pregnancy or after delivery became infected within one to six months of birth. In addition, the HBsAg was detected less frequently in newborns if maternal hepatitis occurs in the first trimester; therefore, transmission is less frequent when the mother is asymptomatic [44].In a study carried out in newborns, three interrelated factors were found to increase the risk of HBV vertical transmission: a high titer of the HBsAg in the maternal circulation, presence of this marker in the umbilical cord blood and HBsAg+ in siblings. It was suggested that if babies remain antigenemic until adulthood, vertical transmission could account for an important proportion of asymptomatic cases (carriers) in areas of HBV high prevalence [45]. On the other hand, Okada et al. [46] described the HBeAg as an important factor to vertical transmission. In serum samples from 23 HBsAg-positive pregnant women and their babies, the HBeAg was detected in 43.4% (10/23) of women and the anti-HBeAg in 30.4% (7/23). All ten babies born to mothers HBeAg positive acquired persistent HBsAg, and all 10 siblings of these newborns were HBsAg+ and asymptomatic. In contrast, seven newborns of anti-HBe positive mothers were HBsAg negative, and none of their three siblings were positive for HBsAg. Furthermore, HBsAg was not detected in the serum of any of the fathers [46]. Based on these results, it can be concluded that HBeAg and anti-HBe may be used as indicators of HBV vertical transmission risk.Although HBV transmission from infected mothers to their infants has been well documented in several studies, it is believed that in utero infection does not occur and the babies become infected by contact with maternal blood/fluids during delivery since serological signs of infection do not become evident until six weeks of age. To answer the question of whether a vertical transmission was in utero, an animal model of duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) infection, a member of the Hepadnaviridae family and closely related to the HBV, was used [47]. The DHBV DNA was detected in 30/219 in both serum and liver embryos of infected Pekin ducks, and viral replication intermediates were identified in the liver on the 12th day of embryonic life. These findings were confirmed in another infection model, the woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHBV), another virus-related HBV. The WHBV DNA was detectable in the liver of 18/24 fetuses of infected woodchucks. Viral replicative DNA and supercoiled DNA, as well as WHBV surface antigen, were demonstrated in livers of two fetuses from late gestation (fetuses 5.5–7.0 cm in length and well-differentiated hepatocytes) [48]. Although maternal transmission to offspring may be different in humans, these observations in animal models were a first approach to understand HBV vertical transmission.4. Vertical Transmission of HBVThe transmission of HBV infection from mother to child during pregnancy, delivery and/or breastfeeding is known as vertical transmission [1]. For HBV, vertical transmission is defined as positivity for HBsAg or HBV-DNA in infants at 6–12 months of life [6,49]. The presence of both HBsAg and viral DNA in serum at birth are often transient and do not always indicate newborn infection. The diagnosis of HBV infection is confirmed 6 months after birth, and if serological and molecular markers are still positive in a 1-year old baby, they indicate a chronic HBV infection. There are three possible routes for vertical transmission of HBV: (1) transplacental or intrauterine; (2) perinatal during delivery; (3) postnatal during care; (4) and/or through breast milk (Figure 2).4.1. Transplacental TransmissionTransplacental transmission occurs in a minority of the cases of vertical transmission, and the mechanisms are not fully elucidated yet. There are some hypotheses of the possibility of transplacental transmission: the HBV can cross the placental barrier infecting placental cells; a transplacental leakage of maternal blood; during amniocentesis; through infected maternal peripheral blood monocellular cells (PBMC); or through germline cell infection (Figure 2).Some studies have shown the ability of the virus to translocate through the placenta to the fetal trophoblast [10,50,51]. Thus, Chen et al. examined viral infection in 157 placental tissues obtained from infected pregnant women by detection of HBV DNA with PCR and in situ hybridization techniques and detection of HBsAg and HBcAg by immunohistochemistry assay. The HBV infection rate was higher in decidua cells (55.4%; 87/157) and in trophoblastic cells (51.0%; 80/157); compared with villous mesenchymal cells (46.5%; 73/157) and villous capillary endothelial cells (29.9%; 47/157) (p < 0.01) [10]. Similar results were reported by Xu et al [50]. In this study, the HBV infection rates on the 101 placenta samples (HBsAg, HBcAg or viral DNA) were 40.6% in trophoblastic cells, 36.6% in villous mesenchymal cells (37/101) and 18.8% in villous capillary endothelial cells. Both studies demonstrated that the HBV infection rate gradually decreases in the maternal-to-fetal placental layer. Therefore, HBV could cross the placental barrier, thus infecting and replicating in all types of placental cells before it reaches the fetus (Figure 3).Another study determined the time when transplacental HBV infection occurs [51]. The HBV infection rates of 131 placentas from first trimester, second trimester and third trimester were 4.2% (1/24), 16.7% (1/6) and 44.6% (45/101), respectively. Additionally, the risk of HBV infection was 18.46 in villous capillary endothelial cells. These results demonstrate although the HBV infection may occur since week 19, it is more likely during the third trimester of pregnancy [51]. Further investigations are necessary to describe and understand the cellular and virological mechanisms that allow transplacental HBV infection in mother-to-child transmission cases.HBV can also be transmitted to the fetus by leakage of maternal blood through the placenta into the fetal circulation. Probably during labor some placental cells are detached as a result of uterine contractions and maternal blood enters the fetal circulation, allowing viral particles from mother to establish infection in the fetus, especially in HBeAg-positive mothers and high viral load cases [52,53]. Amniocentesis is another possible mechanism of HBV transplacental transmission. This procedure may cause uterine or placental bleeding and may lead to blood exchange between mother and fetus [54]. Amniocentesis can expose the fetus to HBV via two routes: maternal-fetal blood exchange or ingestion of HBV-contaminated amniotic fluid. When the needle crosses the abdominal and uterine wall, it causes injuries to the chorionic villi and results in admixture of maternal and fetal blood. Additionally, uterine wall puncture also causes fetal–maternal bleeding through capillaries in the fetal membranes. By any of the routes, the fetus may enter in contact with virions due to the introduction of maternal infected blood into the fetal circulation or into the amniotic fluid. However, the published studies have not shown that amniocentesis significantly increases the risk of mother to infant transmission [55,56].Viral particles have also been identified to circulate in maternal PBMC [57,58]. In a study carried out in 30 HBsAg-positive pregnant women and their aborted fetuses, the role of PBMC cell transportation from mother to baby in HBV intrauterine infection was investigated [57]. In the fetuses, HBV intrauterine infection rate was 43.3% (13/30). Moreover, the HBsAg was detected in 10% (3/30)of peripheral blood, 23.3% (7/30) of serum and 33.3% (10/30) of PBMC samples. Maternal–fetal PBMC transport was positively correlated with fetal PBMC HBV-DNA (p = 0.004). This study suggested that HBV intrauterine infection was primarily due to PBMC maternal–fetal transportation. This hypothesis was confirmed by a recent case-control study that evaluated HBV serologic markers in neonates of 312 HBsAg-positive mothers. Polymorphic markers (glutathione S transferase M1 -GSTM1- and angiotensin converting enzyme -ACE-) were used to detect trafficking of PBMCs from mother to child [58]. This study showed that 45.5% (142/312) of neonates were HBV infected in utero. Of the mother–baby pairs with information of polymorphic marker, 63.0% (75/119) showed mother-to-fetus PBMC transfer; of these, 76% (57/75) of the infants were HBV-DNA positive in PBMC. In comparison, only 25.0% (11/44) of the infants without mother-to-fetus PBMC transfer were HBV infected. These data demonstrated that mother-to-infant PBMC traffic increase the risk of HBV infection in newborn infants 9.5-fold (OR, 9.5; 95% CI, 3.71–24.91; p < 0.001) and therefore PBMC infection is an important risk factor for HBV vertical transmission [58]. Another important aspect to evaluate HBV infection in PBMCs is whether the presence of specific viral variants in this cell population can modulate the risk of mother-to-child transmission. In this context, a study analyzed HBV replication status in PBMC and pre-core/basal core promotor (PC/BCP) mutants in blood samples obtained from pregnant women [59]. In total, 37 women with chronic hepatitis B were included in the study; from these, eight had started NA therapy in the third trimester of pregnancy although all patients’ samples were collected before starting NA therapy. All infants received immunoprophylaxis and were HBsAg negative at 9–12 months of age. HBV-DNA was detected in 55% of PBMC from pregnant and/or postpartum women. The viral pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) was detected in 44% and the viral covalently closed circular DNA(cccDNA in 51% of the PBMC-tested. BCP mutants (A1762T, G1764A) were identified in 36% and PC mutants (G1896A) in 4% of cases [59]. On the other hand, the detection of HBV-DNA and/or variants in PBMC was not associated with HBeAg status, HBV-DNA, genotype, pregnancy–postpartum status or risk of liver disease during the median 4-year follow-up; however, the limited size of the study must be taken into consideration. These data suggest that HBV PC/BCP mutations are not related to mother-to-child transmission risk in cases of infants with complete and timely immunoprophylaxis. However, it should be taken into consideration that mothers with viral loads above 200,000 IU/mL in the third trimester received NA therapy, which significantly reduced the risk of in utero and at birth transmission. All these studies suggest a role of PBMC in HBV mother-to-child transmission. Additional research is necessary to understand if maternal PBMC HBV infection is productive and therefore generates virions that allows the subsequent newborn liver infection or if the PBMC infection modulated cellular mechanisms of immunotolerance and apoptosis that allow the HBV persistence in neonate.The possibility of HBV intrauterine transmission via oocyte or sperm has been raised considering [49,60,61] that HBV DNA, pgRNA and HBsAg has been detected in oocytes and embryos from HBsAg-positive women during in vitro fertilization [61]. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed the presence of HBV DNA in oocytes and embryos from couples with at least one positive HBsAg [62]. Another study reported the HBV infection of infants of two cases of HBsAg positive oocytes [49]. In contrast, Jin et al. reported that babies born from in vitro fertilization using HBV positive oocytes and/or embryos were not HBV infected [63]. It is important to note that the fertilization technique had some impact on the viability of the virus in infected oocytes.Using molecular hybridization and restriction enzyme patterns, the viral genome and integrated sequences were demonstrated in sperm samples obtained from 17 Hepatitis B patients (9 cases of acute hepatitis B and 8 cases of chronic infection) [64]. Moreover, the HBV DNA was detected in seminal fluid obtained from 319 patients with acute hepatitis, and integrated viral sequences was detected in 2 spermatozoa samples; however, the viral DNA was not detected in serum samples of these patients at the time of sperm collection. In addition, no HBV DNA was detected in semen samples obtained from chronic infection cases. Qun Xi et al. evaluated the hypothesis of vertical transmission via the germ line [65]. Sperm samples were obtained from 8 cases of chronic infection and three of them were HBV-DNA positive. However, none of their infants (born to HBsAg negative mothers) were HBV infected. These results suggested that HBV transmission to the fetus via the male germline is unlikely. According to the authors, it could be related to the presence of low number of viral particles in sperm could be rapidly eliminated by the maternal immune system and therefore prevent the virus transmission; it addition, the presence of protective antibodies (anti-HBs) was demonstrated in serum and uterine tissue samples obtained from 90% of wives of HBV-carrier husbands [65].Furthermore additional studies are required to understand the role of HBV infection in germ lines in intrauterine transmission.4.2. Perinatal TransmissionPerinatal transmission is the most frequent route (30–40%) of vertical transmission. This mechanism is defined as infant contagion at the time of birth as a result of exposure to maternal vaginal secretions, epithelium cells and micro transfusion of maternal and fetal blood [66]. The presence of HBsAg in cord blood has been significantly associated with the length of labor when the first stage was more than nine hours (p < 0.03); a stronger association was found when labor lasted more than 11 h (p = 0.01) [66]. It has been reported that a high viral load (108 UI/mL) in maternal blood entering a fetal body can result in fetal infection [67]; additionally, the HBsAg was detected in 96% of the vaginal fluid obtained from mothers, 2% of the breast milk samples and 90% of gastric aspirates from the babies. On the other hand, presence of HBsAg has also been demonstrated in 55–98% of vaginal epithelial cells and 12.1% of the cervico-vaginal cells along with detectable HBV DNA [68]. Consequently, the direct contact with infected cells or vaginal secretions when crossing the birth canal is the main mechanism for HBV transmission to infants.Another topic that has been considered is the delivery mode and perinatal transmission [69,70]. In a study of 447 infants born to HBeAg- and HBsAg-positive mothers, a higher rate of infection was found in newborn delivered vaginally (24.9%, 96/385) than in delivered by caesarean (<10%, 6/62) [69]. However, no significant differences were observed in the positivity of HBsAg or anti-HBsAg among three groups of babies born to infected mothers, 144 delivered vaginally, 40 by obstetric forceps or vacuum extraction and 117 by cesarean at follow-up periods (1, 4, 7 and 12 months of age) [70]. These findings suggest that failures in immunoprophylaxis (incomplete vaccination schemes or the non-administration of HBIG, as evidenced in this study) are the cause of HBV transmission in babies independent of the delivery mode.4.3. Postnatal Transmission The HBV transmission in the postpartum period represents a less common (<7%) way of vertical transmission; however, there are some reports of high proportion (34%) of infection in postnatal period [71]. Some mechanisms have been suggested for HBV postpartum transmission related to infant contact with HBV-contaminated maternal secretions such as breastfeeding, ingestion of food previously chewed by the mother, maternal kissing in the mouths of infants and lack of effective hand hygiene among healthcare personnel involved in the postpartum care of mothers and infants (Figure 2) [72,73,74,75,76].In the early 1970s, some researchers published data on HBsAg transmission in breast milk of chronically infected mothers [73,74]. Although HBsAg, HBeAg and viral DNA have been detected in the colostrum and the breast milk, there is no evidence that breastfeeding increases the risk of mother to child transmission of HBV, as described by Chen X. et al., where HBsAg prevalence in breastfed and formula-fed children was 1.5% and 4.7%, respectively (p = 0.063) [72]. These results indicate that the risk of transmission associated with breast milk is small when compared to the risk of infection in the infant due to contact with maternal blood or fluids during the delivery.However, most of studies have neither quantified maternal viral load nor explored the correlation between the rate of vertical transmission and the duration of breastfeeding. On the other hand, experts have suggested that lesions in the breast tissue, such as cracked or bleeding nipples or lesions with serous exudates, could be an important source of infectious viral particles for the infant; however, this issue has not yet been studied. Nowadays, the HBV infection has not been considered a contraindication for breastfeeding in the infant; therefore, the WHO has recommended that all infants born to infected mothers should be breastfed for at least 4 months and ideally 6 months.5. Risk Factors for Vertical TransmissionAmong the risk factors identified for mother-to-child HBV transmission are HBeAg, maternal viral load, coinfection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), viral genotype and HBV mutants, among others (Figure 4).5.1. HBeAgHBeAg is a secretory protein of 17 kDa. After transcription of the precore/core ORF, the precore protein is translated in a product that is processed in the reticulum endoplasmic prior to secretion. Although HBeAg is not required for viral replication, this antigen has a role on the establishment of chronic infection and on the development on immunotolerance [77,78]. The marker HBeAg is strongly associated with risk of HBV vertical transmission. Indeed, in a case-control study carried out in India, HBV transmission from mother to child was reported in 65% (13/20) of infants born to HBeAg-positive and HBV DNA-positive mothers [60]. While, only 9.1% (1/11) of babies were HBV infected in born to mothers negative for both the HBeAg and viral genome but positive for HBsAg. Similarly, a study in China demonstrated that 69.7% (23/33) of infants born from HBeAg-positive mothers were HBsAg positives at birth, while none of the infants born from HBeAg-negative mothers were positive [79]. In addition, mothers whose infants were infected with HBV had higher viral loads than mothers whose infants were not infected (p = 0.04). In fact, HBeAg is a marker of high-level viral replication and risk of vertical transmission. Furthermore, fetal exposure to HBeAg during pregnancy has been reported to lead to neonatal immunotolerance to HBV proteins and, consequently, to chronic infection in infants. This is explained by the ability of the viral protein to cross the placental barrier and generate tolerance of HBV-specific T cells and macrophages to the virus in the infant [80,81].Animal models have been used to study the immunotolerance properties of HBeAg. Offspring were obtained by crossing female hemizygous HBV transgenic mice (TGD mice) to naive male mice; mouse pups exposed to maternal HBeAg were thus obtained [81]. Then, the offspring at 9 weeks were inoculated with the 1.3 mer HBV genome DNA into the liver, and HBV replication was demonstrated for 28 weeks in these animals. In contrast, inoculation of the HBV genome into mice born to HBV-negative females led to HBV elimination within 4 weeks. These results indicated that the intrauterine exposure to HBeAg establishes a persistent infection in the offspring. Interestingly, the population of INF-γ positive CD8+ T cells was 2.8% in the liver of control mice but only 0.5% in TGD mice. Additionally, CD8+ T cells in TGD mice expressed a high level of PD-1 (programmed death-1) and of PDL-1 (programmed death ligand-1) in Kupffer cells when compared with the control mice [82,83]. These interesting results suggest that HBV tolerance in the offspring of HBV-infected mothers may be due to decreased CD8 T cell responses to HBV that result from up regulation of PD-1 expression on CD8+ T cells and PD-L1 in Kupffer cells. Even though the ability of HBeAg to cross the murine placenta may not be enough evidence to prove that this also occurs in human placenta, it provided a possible mechanism to explain how the exposure to intrauterine HBeAg induces viral persistence and might favor vertical transmission. 5.2. Maternal DNA Viral LoadViral load has been identified as an important predictor and independent risk factor for HBV mother-to-child transmission. The prophylaxis effective rate of passive–active immunoprophylaxis is approximately 100% if viral load in the mother is <5.5 log 10 copies/mL before the delivery [84,85]. According to the results obtained by Singh et al. and Wiseman et al., a maternal viral load of >8 log 10 IU/mL is associated with failure of immunoprophylaxis, thus increasing the risk of mother-to-child transmission [60,86]. Moreover, a cohort study showed that infants born to HBeAg-positive mothers with viral load equal to or greater than 106 copies/mL failed immunoprophylaxis [8]. Indeed, after stratification of pre-delivery viral loads in the mothers to <106, 106–107, 107–108 and >108 copies/mL, the rates of immunoprophylaxis failure were 0%, 3.2% (3/95), 6.7% (19/282) and 7.6% (5/66), respectively (p < 0.001). These findings suggest that viral load in mothers may have a significant impact on immunoprophylaxis failure. The current clinical practice and clinical trials are adopting the HBV DNA level above 108 copies/mL as the threshold for intervention.5.3. Human Immunodeficiency Virus CoinfectionCoinfection with HIV has been also identified as a risk factor of HBV vertical transmission [87,88]. A study in South Africa reported a rate of HBV vertical transmission of 28% in HIV/HBV co-infected pregnant women; they were HBeAg positive with an average viral load of 8.3 IU/mL before delivery [89]. In contrast, in a study in Malawi, infants born to HBeAg-positive women with a viral load of >7.5 log10 IU/mL had an HBV transmission rate of 10% [88]. The mothers of these two studies never received antiretroviral treatment, thus increasing the risk for both HIV and HBV transmission. It is important to note that the risk of vertical transmission could be due to the presence of HBeAg and high viral loads in mothers (107–108 copies/mL).5.4. HBV Genotypes HBV is classified into ten main genotypes (A–J) and several subgenotypes [5,89,90].Despite a similarly high prevalence of HBV chronic carriers, the vertical transmission rate in East Asia, particularly in China (10–88%), is higher than in sub-Saharan Africa (≤8%) [91,92,93]. In East Asia, where genotypes B and C are prevalent, most infected women of gestational age are HBeAg+ with high viral load [94]. Meanwhile, in sub-Saharan Africa where HBV genotypes A1 or E are prevalent, seroconversion to anti-HBe occurs before age 15 years old; therefore, most women of gestational age are anti-HBe [95]. However, other studies are not conclusive about the association between the HBV genotype and the risk of vertical transmission [96,97]. Further studies that include other genotypes, such as E, F, G and H, are necessary to define the role of HBV genotypes in mother-to-infant HBV transmission.5.5. HBV Mutants The escape variants are non-synonymous mutations in the sequence encoding the “a” determinant of HBsAg. This is a highly conserved region overlapping with the region coding for viral polymerase, and is the major target for neutralizing antibodies against HBV. These mutations have been identified in individuals with HBV infection despite the presence of neutralizing antibodies.In a study carried out in China, 41 mothers whose children were HBsAg negative and anti-HBs positive were compared with 37 mothers whose children were HBsAg positive 1 year after HBV vaccination [96]. Interestingly, T123A and G145R mutations were observed only in failure-group mothers; no significant difference in the total mutation rate was observed between the groups. These results suggested that a high viral load and specific mutations, such as T123A and G145R, could be an important risk factors for immunization failure. However, another study described different mutation sites in the HBV pre-S/S ORF including 105 silent mutations and 5 missense mutations (A826G, C531T, T667C, C512T and C546A), but without significant differences in mutation frequencies and the risk of vertical transmission [98]. More robust association studies are needed to confirm whether escape mutants could play an important role in vertical transmission.Furthermore, A study on the presence of mutations in the precore region in sera from two infants with neonatal fulminant hepatitis B and their anti-HBe-positive mothers demonstrated the G28A mutation, which generates a stop codon in 18 HBV clones obtained from one of the mothers and in 31 clones from her infant [99]. Besides the stop codon G1896A has been described in cases of fulminant acute hepatitis B in young infants, but not in mothers. [100]. This mutation has also been observed in other studies [101,102]. These findings indicate that HBV mutants defective in the precore region in some carrier mothers are associated with fulminant hepatitis B in their babies.In a case-control study carried out in Thailand, serum samples from 14 infected infants (13 HBeAg-positive and one HBeAg-negative) who had been previously vaccinated and their respective mothers were analyzed for HBV DNA, genotypes and S and precore/core variants [103]. Additionally, 30 serum samples from HBsAg-positive mothers (15 HBeAg positive and 15 HBeAg negative) whose infants were not infected and received the complete vaccination schedule served as control. The study showed that HBeAg-positive mothers had viral DNA titers equal to or higher than those of HBeAg-negative mothers. The infants and their respective mothers had the same HBeAg status and were infected by the same HBV genotypes (B or C). Furthermore, although D144G and G145K mutations were reported in two infants, these were not found in their mothers; this result indicates that these mutations may originate or be selected under immune pressure during the infection of the infants. On the other hand, PC mutations were found in HBeAg-negative mothers, and the A1762T/G1764A double mutation was reported in two infants born to HBeAg-positive mothers; however, these mutations were not found in their mothers. Interestingly, among HBeAg-positive mothers with uninfected infants, the presence of BCP mutations/deletions was more common than in HBeAg-positive mothers whose infants were infected [103]. These results suggest that BCP mutations/deletions could act as a protective factor in the mother-to-child transmission of HBV. Although the possible mechanism by which precore/BCP mutations may protect against vertical transmission of HBV has not yet been well studied, it is possible that down regulation of precore mRNA transcription and subsequent decreased HBeAg production caused by the double mutation in BCP may contribute to decreased immunotolerance and enhanced host immune response, resulting in viral clearance after possible perinatal transmission. 6. Prevention of Vertical TransmissionThe prevention of vertical transmission is an essential step in reducing the global prevalence of chronic HBV, mainly in endemic areas where HBV infections occur mostly during infancy and early childhood. The key to eliminating the vertical transmission is screening and preventive measures both during pregnancy and after delivery. In the screening, all pregnant women should be tested for HBsAg; if the results are positive, the viral DNA must be quantified and the status of the HBeAg determined. This information is important because it indicates the risk of vertical transmission and can be established as proper clinical management.Currently two preventive measures have been established to avoid the vertical transmission of HBV: (1) immunoprophylaxis in child; (2) antiviral treatment for mother.6.1. ImmunoprophylaxisImmunoprophylaxis includes the administration of HBIG and HBV vaccine. The HBIG is commonly administered to the newborn within 24 h of birth, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The HBIG provides immediate but temporary passive immunization [38,104]. A meta-analysis showed that HBIG significantly reduced the HBV vertical transmission rate (OR 0.5, CI 0.41–0.6) as compared to the placebo when given to the newborn at birth [105]. Although the HBIG prophylaxis can reduce HBV infection in the neonate, the standard immunoprophylaxis regimen consists of administration of both HBIG and HBV vaccine simultaneously at two different sites within 24 h of delivery. The birth dose should be followed by two (1–2 months and 6–8 months of age) or three doses (2, 4 and 6 months of age) with a minimum interval of four weeks. The dosages and schedules may vary according to the national routine immunization programs established in each country [1,106].Some studies have shown that vaccination alone may be equally effective [107,108]. However, it has been demonstrated that the immunoprophylaxis using both HBV vaccine and HBIG reduce the vertical transmission from 90% to 5–10%. In the previously commented meta-analysis, children who received the HBV vaccine alone had a relative risk infection of 0.28, while adding HBIG reduced the risk to 0.08 when compared with patients who received a placebo or no intervention [105]. These findings demonstrate that adherence to the HBV immunoprophylaxis regimen in the neonate (vaccine and HBIG) prevents transmission of infection from HBeAg-positive mothers to their infants. However, immunoprophylaxis has some limitations. It is only effective against infection acquired via perinatal or postnatal transmission, and it does not protect against transplacental transmission [11,109,110]. The above-mentioned transplacental leakage or HBV-infected villous endothelial cells and infected maternal peripheral blood mononuclear cells are the possible mechanisms that explain the low protection of immunoprophylaxis in intrauterine transmission. Indeed, HBIG given to mothers in the third trimester has not been shown to be effective in reducing vertical transmission. A randomized trial of case-controls in China studying 250 HBeAg positive pregnant women (117 cases and 133 controls) and their neonates showed that there was no difference in the number of infected infants born to mothers who received three doses of HBIG in the third trimester of the pregnancy and those who did not. In addition, a high viral load and HBeAg positivity may increase the risk of immunoprophylaxis failure [109]. Another putative mechanism of failed immunoprophylaxis is escape mutants. These mutants are variants that are found in lower proportion in the viral population and are selected by immune pressure during HBV immunoprophylaxis; therefore, these strains could contribute to immunoprophylaxis failure. Although the impact that these mutations may have on the success of immunization programs has not been well elucidated, it is possible that these variants could infect previously immunized individuals. The G145R mutant located in the “a” determinant region of HBsAg is known to be the most important escape variant. Studies conducted in Taiwan to evaluate the efficacy of the vaccine and the occurrence of escape mutants have shown that the G145R mutation is the most frequent in the population since the introduction of the vaccine more than 20 years ago [111]. Similarly, the G145R mutation has been reported in a study conducted in children born to HBV-infected mothers who had the G145R mutant as a minority variant [108]. The study reported a G145R mutant frequency of 24% (6/25) in children who became infected due to the failure of immunoprophylaxis and of 10.3% (13/126) in children who had not received immunoprophylaxis. However,, the infection did not progress in any of the infants born to mothers infected with the G145R variant, despite that the mothers were HBeAg positive with high viral load [112]. Escape mutants have also been identified circulating in indigenous children and mothers in the state of Amazonas, in southeast Colombia [25]. The viral genome (S ORF) was detected in 8.3% (2/31) of serum samples obtained from anti-HBc positive children and in 3.1% (5/159) of samples from anti-HBc positive mothers. Four mutants were identified in three serum samples obtained from mothers, G145R and the two potential escape mutants L109R and G130E. Interestingly, the escape mutant W156* was identified in a sample obtained from a child having undergone the complete vaccination schedule; this mutation generates a stop codon resulting a truncated protein. Although, in this study the mutants were not detected in mother–child pairs, possibly because of minority sequences, it cannot be ruled out that they are not being transmitted from mother to child in these populations. Additional studies are necessary to elucidate the frequency and the epidemiological impact that these mutants have in vertical transmission and in the effectiveness of current vaccination strategies.6.2. Antiviral TreatmentsSome studies evaluated the efficacy of antiviral treatments in reducing the HBV vertical transmission rate [113,114,115,116,117,118,119]. A placebo-controlled study evaluated the efficacy of lamivudine in mothers with a high viral load (>1000 mEq/mL). A dose of 100 mg of lamivudine or placebo was administered from week 32 of pregnancy to week 4 postpartum to 150 mothers (149 were HBeAg-positive). The HBsAg positivity rate in infants was 18% in the lamivudine group and 39% in the placebo group [113]. The results of these studies suggest a reduction in HBV transmission in children born to mothers treated with lamivudine. Moreover, an observational study demonstrated that although treatment with lamivudine in the third trimester of pregnancy reduces viral load in women with antiviral treatment when compared with untreated women, the presence of mutants resistant to lamivudine (substitution in codons 181 and 204) can affect the response to treatment [114]. This study showed that lamivudine could have a poor antiviral effect in the third trimester, and it may generate resistant viral variants in a short time.Given the limitations of lamivudine treatment, several trials demonstrated that Telbivudine was more effective at reducing maternal viral load. In a case-control study conducted in China, the antiviral effect of telbivudine was evaluated in 135 HBeAg-positive pregnant women with viral loads of >107 copies/mL) [115]. Telbivudine treatment was started between 20 and 32 weeks of gestation and continued until 4 weeks postpartum or 28 weeks, depending on the alanine aminotransferase level. Telbivudine treatment was started between 20 and 32 weeks of gestation and continued until 4 weeks postpartum or 28 weeks, depending on the alanine aminotransferase level. In mothers who received the treatment, the viral load was reduced by an average of 2.44 ± 1.79 log10 copies/mL before delivery; the HBV genome was not detected in 33% of mothers when compared with the untreated controls. It is important to note that all babies in the study received combined prophylaxis with the HBIG/vaccine at birth. On the other hand, the HBsAg was not detected in infants born to telbivudine-treated mothers, while HBsAg positivity was 8% in infants of untreated mothers. It is important to mention that all the babies in the study received combined prophylaxis with HBIG/vaccine and none of them had birth defects in either group. The efficacy and safety of Telbivudine was also evaluated in a meta-analysis of six studies [116]. In this meta-analysis, the treatment group consisted of 306 mothers who received telbivudine in the second or third trimester of pregnancy until delivery or 1 month postpartum and a control group (270 mothers) who did not receive any antiviral treatment. Analyzes reported significantly lower HBsAg and viral genome positivity in newborns born to mothers in the telbivudine-treated group when compared to the control group; the newborns received the full regimen of immunoprophylaxis at birth. These results demonstrate that the administration of telbivudine at the end of pregnancy decreases the risk of intrauterine HBV infection without apparent adverse effects.A third antiviral Tenofovir has been shown to be effective in reducing maternal viral load. The efficacy of this antiviral was evaluated in a retrospective study conducted in the third trimester of pregnancy in 11 women with viral loads of >106 copies/mL. Interestingly, the maternal viral load decreased from 8.87 log 10 copies/mL to 5.25 log 10 copies/mL at delivery; none of the newborns were HBsAg positive and received passive/active prophylaxis. There were no complications during delivery or birth defects [117]. Similar results were obtained in a case-control study that included 45 HBeAg-positive pregnant women with high viral loads greater than 107 copies/mL, 21 of them treated with tenofovir between weeks 18–27 of gestation and 24 untreated. There was no HBsAg positivity in infants born to tenofovir-treated mothers, but it was detected in infants of untreated mothers (8.3%). All infants received the full regimen of HBV immunoprophylaxis [118]. These findings suggest that tenofovir is safe and effective for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HBV.The global recommendation is to use Tenofovir, Lamivudine and Telbivudine during pregnancy, but not Entecavir due to its questionable use. One study using a mice model demonstrates that the use of Entecavir could permeate the placental barrier and interfere with fetal development [119]. The study demonstrates that small amounts of ETV can cross the placenta in this animal model, which would indicate low fetal exposure to ETV. Finally, the use of other drugs such as interferon alpha and pegylated interferon is not indicated for vertical transmission prevention because they are not as effective in viral elimination and have many side effects on the patient.Some experts recommend continued antiviral therapy after delivery, but its implications during breastfeeding are still unknown. A study of pregnant women treated with Lamivudine showed that breast milk contained only 684 ng/mL of Lamivudine in contrast to its blood level of 1070 ng/mL [120]. No correlation was found between HBV DNA detection in breast milk and child infection. Therefore, these findings support the clinical-based recommendations of the use of post-partum antiviral therapy in HBV positive women to eliminate this residual transmission.7. ConclusionsHBV transmission from mother to infant still represents a major proportion of chronic hepatitis B cases in some regions of the world. Prevention of these infections is the key to controlling and finally eradicating HBV, fulfilling the WHO 2030 goal (an HBsAg prevalence in children of no more than 0.1%). Unfortunately, not all countries have 90% vaccination coverage and not all babies born to infected mothers receive immunoprophylaxis on time and the complete scheme. Additionally, both HBeAg positivity and high levels of viremia in mothers are factors that confer an additional risk for immunoprophylaxis failure. Therefore, it is necessary to identify HBsAg positive pregnant women and to provide optimum prophylaxis to their newborn children (vaccine combined with HBIG, with maternal antiviral drug treatment or all the three) principally in endemic areas.


Title: Mechanism of Cross-Species Transmission, Adaptive Evolution and Pathogenesis of Hepatitis E Virus

1. IntroductionHepatitis E virus (HEV) is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus that belongs to the family Hepeviridae [1]. HEV is the leading cause of acute hepatitis around the world. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that there are 20 million HEV infections worldwide with approximately 44,000 deaths in 2015 [2]. HEV is known to cause acute hepatitis, rarely leading to fulminant hepatitis. However, chronic hepatitis has increasingly been reported in immunocompromised patients, including organ transplant recipients, as well as patients with hematological malignancy and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection [3,4,5]. Besides manifesting as typical hepatitis, HEV infection can also cause extrahepatic manifestations, including neurological manifestations [6,7], kidney injury, and hematological disorders [8,9].Among the five known hepatitis viruses, HEV has unique transmission routes ranging from the fecal-oral route, as its classical mode of transmission, and the zoonotic route, to less frequent routes such as via organ transplantation, transfusion of blood or blood products, or vertical transmission from mother to fetus [3,10,11,12,13,14]. Although the overall mortality rate is low, it could reach as high as 30% in infected pregnant women entering their third trimester of pregnancy [14].HEV infection is globally distributed. In developing countries, HEV has caused multiple outbreaks where the virus is transmitted via the fecal-oral route by drinking contaminated water. Meanwhile, HEV infections in industrialized countries are mainly associated with zoonotic causes [15]. The isolation of the first HEV strain in an animal, in swine [16], opened the door to the discovery of more HEV strains and their variants in animal species. The report by the same research group in the following year showed evidence that some HEV strains recovered from patients with acute hepatitis E are closely related to swine HEV, which can cross the species barrier to infect humans [17,18], proving an HEV zoonosis event. Isolation of new HEV strains in a growing number of animal species poses a risk to zoonotic infection and has become a public health concern. Despite the inevitable risk of zoonotic infection, many questions surrounding the mechanism of the cross-species transmission in HEV infection remain unanswered and will be discussed in this review, encompassing the viral and host factors involved in the event, such as the viral adaptive evolution and host cellular factors, as some of the determinants of host species tropism. In addition, the pathogenesis of hepatitis E infection will be briefly described in this review, including special forms of the disease, such as chronic infection, extrahepatic manifestations, and the severe cases in pregnant women.2. Genome and ClassificationHEV is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus. Its genome ranges from 6.4 kilobases (kb) to 7.3 kb with three major open reading frames (ORFs; ORF1–ORF3) (Figure 1A). The genome has a short 5′ untranslated region (5′ UTR) capped at its 5′ end and a short 3′ UTR terminated by the poly(A) tract [19,20]. ORF1 is translated from genomic RNA, while ORF2 and ORF3 are translated from a subgenomic RNA strand [21,22]. ORF1 covers two-thirds of the genome, and encodes a non-structural polyprotein containing multiple functional domains involved in viral replication. However, whether the ORF1 product functions as a single polyprotein or whether it needs to be further processed into smaller units by viral or cellular proteases following translation remains to be elucidated [23,24]. Notably, however, in a recent hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged full-length HEV replicon system, only an uncleaved ~190 kDa ORF1 product was detected [25]. ORF2 encodes capsid protein, which is essential during virion assembly and viral attachment to host cells, and is a major target for neutralizing antibodies [26,27,28]. Recently, it has been reported that HEV produces three forms of ORF2 capsid proteins: the infectious/intracellular ORF2 (ORF2i), which is associated with infectious particles, as well as glycosylated ORF2 (ORF2g) and cleaved ORF2 (ORF2c), which are not associated with infectious particles [29]. Another study determined the initiation codons for the secreted form of the ORF2 product and the actual capsid protein [30]. The secreted form of the ORF2 product (ORF2s) is initiated from the previously presumed start codon (Met 1) and its N-terminal 23 amino acids are cleaved by signal peptidase, while the actual capsid protein (ORF2c) is initiated from an internal AUG (Met 16) located 16 codons downstream of the first AUG (Figure 1B). Between the two studies, functionally, the ORF2s and ORF2c may correspond to ORF2g and ORF2i, respectively, with the absence of the cleaved form ORF2c, presumably due to its lower level [29]. ORF3 encodes a multifunctional phosphoprotein required for virion egress [31,32,33] and has been reported to be a functional ion channel, as viroporin [34].Exclusively in genotype 1 HEV (HEV-1), ORF4 codes for a novel protein identified in the coding sequence of ORF1. It is synthesized only under the condition of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and is a short-lived protein. ORF4 protein is reported to enhance the replication of HEV-1 by promoting the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) activity of ORF1 [35]. A recent report demonstrated that ORF4 provided in trans enhances the viral replication of genotype 3 HEV (HEV-3) although it does not naturally encode ORF4 in its genome [36]. HEV is a member of family Hepeviridae [1], which has been identified in humans as well as a broad range of animal species [15]. This family is divided into genus Orthohepevirus which consists of HEV strains from mammals and birds, and genus Piscihepevirus with its single species, Piscihepevirus A. The genus Orthohepevirus consists of species Orthohepevirus A, Orthohepevirus B, Orthohepevirus C, and Orthohepevirus D. To date, there are eight genotypes within Orthohepevirus A species which infect humans, pigs, wild boars, rabbits, deer, camels, and other animal species. Species Orthohepevirus B is only identified in birds, species Orthohepevirus C is identified in rodents, while species Orthohepevirus D is identified in bats [1]. Orthohepevirus A has been assigned to eight distinct genotypes (HEV-1–8) [1]. While HEV-1 and HEV-2 have only been isolated in humans, HEV-3 and HEV-4 have been identified in humans as well as several animal species, including pigs, wild boars, deer, and rabbits [37,38,39,40,41,42]. HEV-5 and HEV-6 have only been detected from wild boars in Japan [43,44,45,46]. HEV-7 has been isolated in dromedary camels and a human [47,48,49]. Finally, HEV-8 has been detected in Bactrian camels [50,51]. In addition, there are many as-yet unclassified HEV strains identified from moose [52,53], tree shrew (GenBank accession number KR905549), sparrow [54], silkie fowl [55], little egret [56], hamster [57], voles [58,59], and various bats [60]. 3. Modes of TransmissionIn developing countries, HEV is mainly transmitted via the fecal–oral route and has been associated with multiple outbreaks due to poor sanitary conditions (e.g., contaminated drinking water). Meanwhile, sporadic cases and clusters in industrialized countries are often reported where the routes of transmission are more variable and are dominated by zoonotic infection [6,61,62,63,64,65]. Although less frequent than the two main transmission routes, HEV can also be transmitted through organ transplantation or the transfusion of blood or blood products where it can cause chronic HEV infection or from an infected mother to the fetus [3,10,11,12,13,14]. Zoonotic HEV is mainly transmitted via foodborne routes, such as from the consumption of undercooked meat or milk products of infected animals. Another possible route is associated with occupational risk among workers, including veterinarians, forestry workers, slaughterhouse workers, or animal farm workers [66,67,68] as they are continuously in direct contact with probably infected animals. HEV is excreted in feces where the viral particles can reach the environment and contaminate water sources and irrigated food. HEV in environmental samples can reach the food chain (e.g., in mussels and contaminated pork products, such as sausages or meat) [69]. Besides being detected in packaged sausages and liver samples from processing sites and supermarkets in Spain, Italy, and Czech Republic, HEV is also detected from environmental samples collected in production farms and processing plants and at the points of sale of items such as knives, flooring, belt surfaces, workers’ hands, and toilets [69,70]. Foods other than pork products have also been implicated, where HEV is isolated from shellfish, fruits, and vegetables [71]. This is likely due to pig slurry contaminating watercourses or being used as fertilizer [72]. Coastal water may be contaminated with HEV, leading to the accumulation of the virus in the digestive tissue of shellfish due to filter-feeding [69]. An outbreak of hepatitis E on a cruise ship was linked to the consumption of shellfish while on board [73]. HEV has also been detected in sewage and run-offs, where the virus is concentrated in waste products generated during sewage and drinking water treatment. The following land application of the waste can cause the contamination of water in aquifers, can contaminate irrigated vegetables, and can therefore be a risk factor for HEV infection [69,74,75,76]. Another transmission route that warrants further exploration is through contact with an environment contaminated with the droppings or body fluid of infected animals. 4. Pathogenesis The HEV particles in bile and those shed in the feces are non-enveloped. Meanwhile, the particles in circulating blood and culture supernatants are in membrane-associated form, which is different from classical enveloped viruses due to the absence of viral glycoproteins in the surrounding lipid bilayer in which membrane-associated HEV particles seem to be completely covered with a lipid membrane [31,77,78]. These findings have led to the designation of the membrane-associated form of HEV as quasi-enveloped HEV [79,80]. Although a primary site of HEV propagation in humans remains undetermined, it is tempting to speculate that HEV replicates primarily in the liver (not in the gut) and that the non-enveloped virions entering via the gastrointestinal tract will be neutralized by immune sera before reaching the liver via the portal vein. This can explain how humans who were immunized with a recombinant ORF2-based vaccine can be protected against infection with enterically-transmitted HEV [78,81].Previously, it was hypothesized that lipid-associated HEV is released from both infected cultured cells (in vitro) and infected hepatocytes (in vivo) as lipid-associated virions, accompanied by ORF3 protein, and that the quasi-envelope is dissociated from the virion after shedding the lipid in the bile duct, which contains detergent (deoxycholic acid), and shedding the ORF3 protein in the duodenum, which contains protease (trypsin) secreted from the pancreas [82,83,84]. In support of this hypothesis, Capelli et al. [85] utilized F2 cells (subclone of the human hepatocarcinoma cell line HepG2/C3A, which grew as a polarized monolayer culture and had better HEV production than the mother cell line) in a cell culture due to the polarized nature of hepatocytes, which have exosomal pathways (basolateral, oriented toward the blood; and apical, oriented toward the bile). In this study, they showed that irrespective of the virus form (naked or membrane-associated), and whether HEV-3 or HEV-1 is used as inoculum, the polarized cells released around 95% of the HEV RNA from their apical sides as lipid-associated particles. The ratios of infectious particles to HEV RNA copies on the apical were higher in comparison to the basolateral side, suggesting that the apical pathway is the main release route and that the majority of infectious HEV particles are released from the bile sides of hepatocytes while the small fraction released into the bloodstream could spread HEV throughout the host [85].Although most HEV infections are self-limiting, infections in immunosuppressed patients may progress into chronic disease or may cause extrahepatic manifestations [6,7,8,9,86]. The host innate immune system is the first line of defense against viral infection. Dysregulation of this system can cause severe pathogenesis. In HEV infection, host innate immunity has shown to involve an active response in experimental models and patients [87,88,89,90,91]. HEV has also developed strategies to counteract the host immune system where recent knowledge mainly outlines the interactions between HEV viral proteins with the host innate immunity, as reported for ORF1 (e.g., the papain-like cysteine protease (PCP) and X domains of ORF1 inhibit the activation of retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and TANK-binding-kinase 1 (TBK-1), as well as the phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)) [92], ORF2 (e.g., ORF2 suppresses nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) activity by blocking the ubiquitination of inhibitor (IκBα) of NF-κB alpha) [93], and ORF3 (e.g., ORF3 inhibits the phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and the expression of interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) upon HEV infection) [94].Extrahepatic manifestations reported in HEV-infected patients are possibly associated with either direct viral effects due to cytopathic tissue damage caused by extrahepatic replication in affected tissues, or with indirect effects related to the immunological processes induced by a cross-reactive host immune response to HEV [95]. Besides being detected in various tissues in vivo, the ability of HEV to cause extrahepatic manifestations has also been demonstrated in vitro, where HEV can infect a range of cell types (e.g., human lung epithelial cells, human colon epithelial cells, human neuronal-derived cells, and human placental cells) [95,96]. HEV infection is associated with a high mortality rate in pregnant women, particularly those in their third trimester of pregnancy, where the highest incidence is reported for HEV-1 [14,97,98]. The alteration of the immune system during hormonal changes in pregnancy has been reported as a potential pathogenic mechanism of HEV infection, which is related to cellular immunity [14,99]. A recent study by Gong et al. [100] indicated that HEV infection significantly inhibits the signaling pathways of cyclic adenosine 3′, 5′-monophosphate/protein kinase A/response element-binding protein (cAMP/PKA/CREB) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B/mammalian target of the rapamycin (PI3K/AKT/mTOR). The increasing estrogen levels and high activation of estrogen receptor alpha (ER-α) during pregnancy aggravates HEV replication. The exacerbation of HEV replication inhibits the expression of ER-α and suppresses the cAMP/PKA/CREB and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways [100]. Another factor that might enhance the virulence of HEV in pregnant women is the presence of the ORF4 protein, which is exclusively found in HEV-1. The ORF4 protein is only synthesized under the condition of ER stress and is essential to stimulate the RdRp of HEV-1, which causes enhanced virus replication [35]. Since pregnancy can induce ER stress and fulminant hepatitis E in pregnant women is mostly caused by HEV-1, it can be hypothesized that ER stress caused by pregnancy can induce the synthesis of ORF4, thereby causing higher viral replication (in comparison to non-pregnant patients) and consequently leading to the development of fulminant HEV infection. Most chronic HEV infections are associated with HEV-3, with a single case of HEV-1 [101] or HEV-7 [49], which to date, are only anecdotal and unique; and HEV-4, which has been described in small numbers of reports [102]. Viral and host factors are likely the determinants of the chronicity of HEV infection [103]. Viral factors, such as genotype, zoonotic potential, specificity, and adaptability to a host play important roles in the establishment of persistent infection. Meanwhile, host factors, such as the immune state and the nutritional health of the patient can also determine the course of HEV infection. The type of immunosuppressive drugs is reported to affect the progression to chronic infection, with patients treated with calcineurin inhibitors (e.g., tacrolimus, cyclosporin A) or mTOR inhibitors (e.g., everolimus, sirolimus), reported to be more prone to persistent HEV infection [3,103]. 5. Zoonotic HEV InfectionHEV infection caused by zoonotic HEV-3 or HEV-4 has increased in industrial countries, including Japan and several European countries such as France, the Netherlands, Spain, and UK [69,104,105,106]. It is also found to be endemic in the US population and circulates abundantly among North American pig herds [37,106]. Zoonotic transmission is responsible for the sporadic cases and clusters of human infection caused by HEV-3 and HEV-4, and chronic infection reported in immunocompromised patients is mostly linked to zoonotic HEV-3 [37]. Swine are the primary reservoir of HEV; in swine, infection is subclinical [107]. Most animal strains of HEV have been isolated from swine. Soon after the report of the first known zoonotic infection related to HEV [17], the number of zoonotic HEV infections continued to increase, particularly in industrialized countries. Within species Orthohepevirus A, HEV strains of five genotypes (HEV-1, -2, -3, -4, and -7) are capable of infecting humans (Table 1). While HEV-1 and HEV-2 are restricted to humans, HEV-3, -4, and -7 are capable of crossing the species barrier to cause zoonotic infection in humans. Besides HEV-3 and HEV-4 strains from pigs, wild boars, and deer, variants of HEV-3 in rabbits were also found to be capable of causing human infection [42,108].Under experimental conditions, swine HEV-3 and HEV-4 infected rhesus monkeys and, conversely, HEV-3 and HEV-4 of human origin infected pigs [17,109,110]. However, HEV-1 and HEV-2 failed to infect pigs under experimental conditions [18], indicating that HEV-1 and HEV-2 have a limited host range [111].To date, only a single case of human infection related to HEV-7 has been reported. It is a chronic case in an immunocompromised patient caused by the regular consumption of milk and meat products of dromedary camels [49]. The risk of zoonotic infection was also suggested in HEV-5 (from wild boar) and HEV-8 (from a Bactrian camel) as they were successfully transmitted to cynomolgus macaques in experimental settings [112,113,114]. Besides the members of species Orthohepevirus A, rat HEV, which is a member of species Orthohepevirus C, is also capable of infecting humans, as was recently reported in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients [115,116,117]. With growing numbers of isolated rat HEV strains from around the world [118], as well as evidence of human infection by rat HEV [115,116,117]—in limited areas—the number of cases of human infection by rat HEV may increase in the future.viruses-13-00909-t001_Table 1Table 1Reported cross-species transmission of genus Orthohepevirus.SpeciesGenotypeExperimental InfectionZoonotic Potential
Orthohepevirus A
Human HEV-1Non-human primate [119,120]NoHuman HEV-2
NoHuman HEV-3Rabbit [121]
Swine HEV-3Non-human primate [17]Yes [16,122,123,124,125,126] Wild boar HEV-3Pig [127,128]Rabbit [129]Yes [38,130,131,132]Pig [127,133] Deer HEV-3
Yes [39]Rabbit HEV-3Pig [134,135] Non-human primate [135] Yes [42,108]Human HEV-4Pig [110]
Swine HEV-4Non-human primate [109,136]Rabbit [137,138]Mongolian gerbil [139,140]Yes [123,141,142,143]Wild boar HEV-4
Yes [144,145]Wild boar HEV-5Non-human primate [112]LikelyWild boar HEV-6
UnknownDromedary camel HEV-7Non-human primate [113]Yes [49]Bactrian camel HEV-8Non-human primate [114]Likely
Orthohepevirus B
Avian HEVTurkey [146,147]Unlikely
Orthohepevirus C
Rat HEV
Yes [115,116,117]
Orthohepevirus D
Bat HEV
Unlikely6. Mechanism of Cross-Species Transmission in HEV InfectionThe key event in zoonosis is when an animal virus starts replicating in the first human subject. Here, the virus will experience the selective environment of the human body, possibly rendering viral adaptation and refinement for humans [148]. The processes responsible for cross-species transmission and the emergence of viruses in natural systems are diverse, involving ecological, evolutionary, and genetic factors. Several evolutionary mechanisms have been reported [149,150,151,152]. Among them, molecular adaptation by natural selection is an important occurrence that requires the generation and spread of beneficial mutations to increase virus fitness in a specific environment [153]. Viruses with frequent cross-species transmission events might exhibit parallel evolution (independent evolution of the same genotype or phenotype from distinct ancestors) as a result of adaptation to new host environments [153]. One of the efforts to demonstrate the broad range of HEV hosts was reported by Shukla et al. [154]. HEV-3 Kernow-C1 strain was semi-purified from the feces of a chronic hepatitis E patient co-infected with HIV [155]. Other than infecting human hepatoma cells (HepG2/C3A) and pig kidney cells (LLC-PK1), the fecal virus was surprisingly able to infect a variety of non-primate cells, including deer, cow, mouse, chicken, cat, dog, and rabbit cells. Meanwhile, the HEV-1 strains (Sar-55 and Akluj) used in this study successfully infected not only HepG2/C3A cells but also LLC-PK1 cells, albeit less efficiently. The HEV-3 Kernow-C1 strain was also serially passaged six times (p6). The p6 virus was shown to infect LLC-PK1 more efficiently than it did HepG2/C3A, suggesting that despite adaptation to grow in human HepG2/C3A cells, it still infected more pig cells than human cells [154].The precise mechanism of cross-species transmission in HEV infection is not fully understood. The establishment of cross-species transmission requires the interaction of viral determinants and host determinants. Within the past decade, progress has been made regarding the viral and host determinants involved in the cross-species transmission of HEV, among which the HEV ORFs and evolutionary events have become the most studied to date (Table 2).6.1. The HEV ORFsWhen the ORFs were analyzed separately, ORF1 and ORF3 were demonstrated to more efficiently separate the HEV strains into anthropotropic and enzootic genotypes, suggesting their evolutionary role in host species tropism [157,158,162]. Consistent with the broad host range of enzootic HEV genotypes, the HVR of ORF1 in HEV-3 and HEV-4 is around two-fold more heterogenous than that in HEV-1 [162], and the analysis of the relative synonymous codon usage values of ORF3s showed that the HEV strains were grouped into only two clusters consisting of the HEV-1 and HEV-2 strains (anthropotropic genotypes), and a cluster of the remaining strains (HEV-3–8, enzootic genotypes) [158]. On the other hand, ORF2 was previously thought to be the viral determinant of host tropism, since it encodes the capsid (the only structural protein) that possibly binds to unknown host cell receptors [141,163,164,165].To unveil the viral determinant of species tropism in HEV cross-species transmission, several research groups have been utilizing the intergenotypic chimeric virus strategy. The potential role of ORF2 in HEV cross-species infection was investigated by Feagins et al. [111] and Cordoba et al. [161]. Feagins et al. [111] constructed intergenotypic chimeric viruses by swapping the ORF2 capsid gene, either alone or in combination with its adjacent junction region (JR) and the 3′ UTR, between HEV-1 and human HEV-4, swine HEV-3 and human HEV-4, and HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 (Figure 2A). Their infectivity was tested in vitro and in pigs. Three chimeric viruses containing the JR, ORF2, and 3′ UTR of swine HEV-3 or human HEV-4 in the backbone of HEV-1 failed to infect pigs. However, the other two chimeric viruses containing the ORF2 capsid gene either alone or in combination with its adjacent 5′ JR and the 3′ UTR from human HEV-4 in the backbone of swine HEV-3 were replication-competent in Huh7 cells and infectious in both HepG2/C3A cells and pigs, suggesting that the 5′ UTR and ORF1 may be involved in cross-species transmission [111].Following this, Cordoba et al. [161] constructed four intergenotypic chimeric clones by swapping the ORF2 gene along with its JR, ORF3, and 3′ UTR between HEV-1 and HEV-4 of human origin, and HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 (Figure 2B). Only two chimeras with sequences swapped between HEV-1 and HEV-4 of human origin successfully established infection in HepG2/C3A cells. The inability of chimeras with sequences swapped between HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 to produce infectious viral particles may be due to incompatibility of viral genes from HEV-1 with those from swine HEV-3. The cDNA clone of human HEV-4 used in this study was confirmed to be capable of infecting pigs. However, none of the four chimeras were able to establish robust infection in pigs [161].It was demonstrated that ORF2 and ORF3 are not involved in HEV cross-species infection, as evidenced by the failure of host range expansion of chimeric viruses in which the ORF2 or ORF3 gene was swapped [111,161], suggesting that other genomic regions (5′ UTR and ORF1) may play a role in determining the HEV host tropism. Chattarjee et al. [156] reported the construction of 12 different HEV-1–HEV-4 chimeric full genome clones with HEV-1 as the backbone, where the structural (ORF2 and ORF3), non-structural (ORF1), or UTRs were replaced by the corresponding segments from swine HEV-4 clone (Figure 2C). Although all chimeric clones were able to replicate in S10-3 of human hepatoma cells, only two chimeric clones (HEV-1 as the backbone where the ORF1 either alone or in combination with its 5′ UTR was swapped with those of swine HEV-4) were able to replicate in PK-15 of pig kidney cells. This shows the crucial role of the ORF1 polyprotein in crossing the species barrier at the cellular level [156].Although the available evidence suggests that ORF1 may contribute in HEV cross-species transmission, the exact region within ORF1 that is essential in determining the host tropism is still unknown. Insertion and/or deletion in ORF1 have been demonstrated to affect not only virus replication but also host tropism [166,167]. The insertion of the host ribosomal protein sequence (RPS17) within the HVR of ORF1 led to expanded host adaptability, where the RPS17-inserted mutant was able to establish infection in cell lines of multiple animal origins in vitro [154,166], suggesting a potential role of ORF1, particularly HVR, in interspecies infection.To determine which viral genetic element in the ORF1 is essential in determining host tropism, Tian et al. [168] utilized genomic backbone of HEV-1 which only infects humans to construct a panel of intergenotypic chimeras in which the entire ORF1 gene or its functional domains were swapped with the corresponding regions from swine HEV-3, which infects both humans and pigs (Figure 2D). Although the chimeric HEVs were replication-competent in Huh7 (S10-3) cells (a human liver cell line) and swine HEV-3 parental clone-inoculated pigs developed viremia, the RNA transcripts subsequently inoculated intrahepatically into pigs did not confer the ability to infect pigs in the chimera; this can be partially linked to the limitation of this study, where the HEV-1 backbone used here technically has low virus replication efficiency [168]. The results from this study may also suggest that—in addition to the unidentified viral genetic element within ORF1—determinants (e.g., host factors) may play a role in host tropism, either alone or in association with the viral genetic element itself. In addition, Tian et al. [168] also investigated the role of the human ribosome protein sequence S17, which expanded the host range in cultured cells [154,166], in HEV cross-species infection. The results demonstrated that the insertion of S17 in the HVR of ORF1 did not abolish HEV replication competency in vitro and that it did not expand HEV host tropism in vivo, suggesting that S17 is not a determinant factor for HEV cross-species infection in vivo [168].Figure 2A schematic diagram of the genomic organization of HEV and its intergenotypic chimeric constructs summarized from four relevant papers. (A) Intergenotypic chimeric viruses where the ORF2 capsid gene—either alone or in combination—was swapped with its adjacent JR and 3′ UTR, between HEV-1 and human HEV-4, swine HEV-3 and human HEV-4, and HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 [111]. (B) Intergenotypic chimeric viruses where the ORF2 gene along with its JR, ORF3, and 3′ UTR were swapped between HEV-1 and human HEV-4, and between HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 [161]. (C) Twelve different HEV-1–swine HEV-4 intergenotypic chimeric viruses with HEV-1 as the backbone where ORF2, ORF3, ORF1, or UTRs were replaced by corresponding segments from swine HEV-4 [156]. (D) The genomic backbone of HEV-1 was used to construct a panel of intergenotypic chimeras in which the entire ORF1 gene or its functional domains were swapped with the corresponding regions from swine HEV-3 [168].6.2. Adaptive Evolution and the Codon Usage of HEVThe common ancestor of the modern HEV strains emerged approximately 6800 years ago, following the domestication of pigs and intensification of agriculture. Domestication caused adaptive changes in the common ancestor leading to the emergence of both human-restricted (HEV-1 and HEV-2) and zoonotic (HEV-3 and HEV-4) strains [158]. An analysis performed before the identification of the wild boar- and camel-derived genotypes (HEV-5 to HEV-8) indicated that the ancestor of all Orthohepevirus A was enzootic [169]. The same study also mentioned that the ancestors of HEV may have adapted to a succession of animal hosts, leading to humans. In contrast, a recent study suggested that the Orthohepevirus A species originated from humans and subsequently evolved into the zoonotic and human-restricted genotypes [170]. However, this study group also mentioned that their inference of an ancestral human host for extant Orthohepevirus A strains did not exclude the possibility that humans might have acquired HEV through cross-species transmission from other animals.Synonymous codon usage is the non-random selection of frequently used codons. This type of selection is limited by codon bias for different genes. Determinant factors for synonymous codon usage bias include natural selection, mutational pressure, and translational efficiency, as well as compositional constraints of the mammalian genome [160,171]. It is widely known that the synonymous codon usage in viral coding sequences serves as an important mediator in viral adaptation to the host [172]. Both restricted and broad host HEV infection can provide strong natural selection leading to the shaping of the codon usage pattern of different genotypes of HEV. Viral adaptation to the host in codon usage is a long-term evolutional feedback, which is derived from the host-range of HEV infection [159].Codon adaptation may be the essential factor in determining the viral host tropism [158]. The evolving process embodies coherent patterns of synonymous codon usage that have been established between the virus and the host. This process assists the virus in adapting to susceptible hosts and expanding the scope of zoonosis not only by specifying amino acid usage and translation dynamics but also by controlling gene expression levels [173,174].Natural selection was identified as a major factor affecting codon usage patterns in HEV ORFs that may explain the wide range of HEV hosts, while still being influenced by mutational pressure as part of the evolution process [157,158]. In a correspondence analysis based on relative synonymous codon usage data, different HEV genotypes appeared to cluster (in particular, HEV-1, and HEV-3 and HEV-4). The analysis showed that—based on ORF1—HEV-1 is clearly separated from the other groups [160]. Considering that ORF1 encodes an essential non-structural polyprotein that controls the life cycle of HEV, these results may partially reflect the fact that HEV-1 is restricted to human hosts, while the HEV-3 and HEV-4 strains were found in various animal species with the capability of cross-species transmission [160]. Factors such as natural selection and mutational pressure enabled significant adaptation changes in the ORF1 of HEV-1 to humans, rendering ORF1 the evolutionary indicator of host speciation [157,158].The genotype-specific codon usage pattern that results from the balance between mutational and natural selection provides an evolutionary pathway where HEV-1—with neutral evolution caused by synonymous mutations—is able to sustain its stable genetic characterization by strong natural selection. In contrast, the synonymous codon usage patterns of HEV-3 and HEV-4 may not be caused by neutral evolution. Obvious divergence of codon usage bias in a four-fold degenerate codon family was identified in HEV ORFs between HEV-1, and HEV-3 and HEV-4 [159]. The genotype-specific codon usage bias in HEV-1 is generally stronger than that of HEV-3 and HEV-4 [159]. Unlike the unique codon usage pattern of HEV-1, the HEV-3 and HEV-4 strains derived from either humans or swine have more diverse codon usage patterns in the ORFs. These can serve as evolutionary monuments and may explain the transmission from swine to human [159].In a study by Bouquet et al. [157], although codon preferences of humans and swine are very close, a lower codon usage bias was observed for zoonotic HEV (HEV-3 and HEV-4). The codon adaptation index (CAI) in this study was calculated with the general codon usage table of humans and swine. The index is >0.5, which indicates good adaptation of HEV to its hosts; thus, it can be assumed that the gene expression of HEV of human and zoonotic genotypes is very well adapted to the translational kinetics in humans [157]. In another study, Shukla et al. [154] inoculated Sar-55 of HEV-1 and the Kernow-C1 of HEV-3 onto deer cells to study host-range restriction. Immunofluorescence staining of ORF2 protein showed that in comparison to Kernow-C1, Sar-55 was deficient in the production of ORF2 capsid protein. The introduction of the first 29 nucleotides of Kernow-C1 at the translation initiation site increased the ORF2 production of Sar-55 in deer cells, suggesting that the modulation of translation from closely spaced codons can differ significantly according to host species, and this difference may provide one mechanism for restricting the host range [154].Synonymous codon usage patterns of HEV that are constantly modified by mutation pressure and natural selection from the host are important for the zoonotic nature of this virus. Various synonymous codon usage patterns of HEV strains may reflect the viral requirement of evolutionary adaptation to the host.6.3. Interaction between HEV and the Host CellOne of the major obstacles to interspecies virus infection is the difference between cell-receptor sequences. The primary structure of the receptor protein can affect the host susceptibility to cross-species viral infections. A virus can only adapt to a new host if the similarity between the receptor proteins present in the potential host species is high enough for them to cross the species barrier [175].Receptor differences—either quantitative or qualitative—offer an alternative explanation for differences in host range. Supporting the hypothesis of receptor-determined host range, Shukla et al. [154] reported that the fecal Kernow-C1 p6 virus maintained a higher titer in pig cells than in human cells even though it was adapted to grow in human cells [154]. They also stated that there are 54 amino acid differences in the capsid protein between Sar-55 of HEV-1 and Kernow-C1 of HEV-3, while there are only five between the fecal and p6 Kernow-C1 strains, suggesting that the adapted virus may have retained the receptor-interacting specificity of the fecal virus [154].Nguyen et al. [176] compared the ability of HEV-1 and HEV-3 to infect or transfect cultured human HepG2/C3A cells and swine LLC-PK cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that the HEV-1 isolate infected disproportionately fewer swine cells than human cells. This study group also utilized the virus replicons of HEV-1 and HEV-3 containing the Gaussia luciferase gene in place of the viral ORF2 gene and showed that the luciferase expression from the HEV-1 replicon is limited and may reflect the kidney cell origin of the swine LLC-PK cells used in the study. When a kidney cell line of rhesus macaques was used for comparison, the luciferase expression patterns demonstrated that the translation of the ORF2 capsid gene of HEV-1 is inhibited in swine kidney cells in comparison to its translation in rhesus macaque kidney or human liver cells, suggesting that this virus may produce insufficient capsid protein for optimal assembly in swine cells. The severely restricted ability of both HEV-1 and its intergenotypic chimera (consisting of 450 nucleotides encoding the putative receptor-binding region of HEV-3 in place of the corresponding region of HEV-1) to infect swine kidney cells in comparison to their ability to infect human hepatoma cells supports the notion that amino acids 456 to 605 of the virus capsid protein encompass the receptor-binding region and suggests that HEV-1 may be prevented from infecting swine cells due to the absence of a suitable cellular receptor or co-receptor [176].Although the ORF2 capsid protein was thought to play an important role in HEV attachment and entry [177], earlier studies utilizing HEV-1 as the backbone, where the ORF2 capsid gene was replaced with that of swine HEV-3 or human HEV-4, showed that HEV-1 did not acquire the ability to infect pigs [111,161]. In fact, binding to cells followed by virus entry is only the first step in virus replication. After entering the cell, the virus must interact correctly with host cellular factors to reproduce its genome and package the progeny virions [178,179,180]. Inability of the intergenotypic chimeras to infect pigs in the study by Cordoba et al. [161] showed that other than the role of viral factor itself, swine cells might lack the essential host factors required by HEV-1 to establish successful infection in pigs. Furthermore, the inability of the chimeras to infect pigs in the study by Cordoba et al. [161] may also reflect the functional importance of species-specific protein-protein interactions during HEV replication, considering that the stem-loop within the JR and 3′ UTR of HEV is known to interact with viral RdRp (and possibly with the host cellular factors) required for viral replication. In addition, the viral mechanism to counteract the host immune response can be species-specific and can partially explain the unsuccessful infection in pigs as species-specific amino acid residues that are important for evading the immune response in pigs may be absent in this setting [161]. Supporting this hypothesis, the successful replication of intergenotypic chimeras in pig kidney cells in the study by Chaterjee et al. [156] indicates that besides the importance of the interaction between ORF1 protein domains and host cell-specific factors during replication (as described above), cellular factors might play a critical role in virus establishment as a post-entry barrier.It has been demonstrated that Sar-55 and Akluj, human strains of HEV-1, can infect LLC-PK1 swine cells [154], suggesting that human and swine HEV may share at least one cell receptor. In addition, the species-specific interactions between viral and cellular proteins may be one of the determinants of the successful replication of HEV in the host [161,181]. For instance, ORF3 is known to interact with a host cellular factor, tumor susceptibility gene 101 (Tsg101), through its PSAP motif to promote virion egress [33,182] and, thus, successful viral replication. This motif is well conserved in the HEV-1–8 strains of Orthohepevirus A species (Figure 3, second PSAP). In addition to this motif, JE03-1760F of HEV-3 (used in our lab) and several other isolates of HEV-3 have one additional PSAP motif located at the N-terminal, while in other HEV-3 isolates, excluding HEV-3ra, the PXXP motif is highly conserved (Figure 3, first PSAP). Besides the highly conserved PSAP motif which interacts with the host cellular factor to facilitate virion release, the highly conserved motifs of CCC and IFI of the ORF3 in Orthohepevirus A species (Figure 3) were recently reported to promote HEV release and ion fluxes [34]. Of note, HEV-4 has CFC in place of CCC, while HEV-5 and HEV-6 have IFT or IST in place of IFI (Figure 3). Because these motifs are highly conserved, it is possible that a host cellular factor might be the other determinant of successful viral replication.The co-evolution of virus and the hosts often leads to species specificity. The presence of specific attachment proteins/receptors and availability of a complex pool of cellular factors required for viral replication can contribute to the host specificity [156].6.4. The Host Immune StatusThe immune state of the host may also be a possible determinant in HEV cross-species transmission. In most cases, humans infected with rat HEV were in an immunocompromised state [115,116]. Host adaptation after cross-species transmission is associated with rapid amino acid sequence changes of viral genes, typically those associated with receptor interactions and the evasion of innate immunity but often pervasive throughout the entire virus genome [183]. As described above, Shukla et al. [154] demonstrated the extraordinary ability of the Kernow-C1 strain to infect cells from a broad spectrum of species, ranging from rodents to primates. This probably reflects a high titer and a complex quasi-species generated during prolonged infection in an immunocompromised host. This possibility and the demonstration that HEV can acquire new information through recombination with host cell sequences leads to the conclusion that chronic HEV infection of a patient has important implications for the evolution of this emerging virus [154].7. ConclusionsKnowledge on the mechanism of HEV cross-species transmission has improved drastically within the past decade. However, several important questions remain to be clarified. Based on the available data to date, ORF1 has been demonstrated as an essential viral determinant in cross-species transmission of HEV; thus, dissection of the precise domain in ORF1 that confers the ability to cross the species barrier may answer one of these important questions. In addition, as the presence and interaction of viral and host determinants are essential to enable cross-species transmission, the discovery of HEV attachment protein and its interaction with host cellular receptors will greatly help in elucidating the mechanism of HEV cross-species infection.


Title: Avian Hepatitis E Virus: With the Trend of Genotypes and Host Expansion

IntroductionHistoryIn the early 1980s, big liver and spleen disease (BLS) was firstly characterized in chickens in Australia, and was considered to be the most significant disease affecting commercial broiler breeder flocks (Handlinger and Williams, 1988). It was clinically described as a sudden reduction in egg production, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and increased mortality (Handlinger and Williams, 1988). The causative agent of this disease, big liver and spleen virus (BLSV), was isolated in the late 1990s, and based on sequence analysis of a 523 bp nucleic acid fragment, it was found that this sequence of BLSV had a 62% homology with the helicase gene of human hepatitis E virus (HEV) (Payne et al., 1999; Zhao et al., 2017). Not long after, another disease affecting chickens, hepatitis-splenomegaly syndrome (HSS) was first described in British Columbia, Canada in 1991 and in eastern Canada and the United States in 1997 (Ritchie and Riddell, 1991; Riddell, 1997). It is characterized by pale to white combs with red edges, abdomens with red ascites, poor to moderate body condition, the regression of ovaries and oviducts, enlarged livers and spleens and increased mortality in 32-week-old broiler breeders and commercial egg laying hens (Riddell, 1997). In 2001, the HEV-related virus, named avian HEV, was characterized from HSS afflicted chickens in the United States. Based on genomic sequencing, this novel virus displayed approximately 50 and 80% nucleotide (nt) sequence identity with mammalian HEV and BLSV, respectively, suggesting that BLS and HSS are caused by variants of the same avian HEV (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Huang et al., 2002). Phylogenetic analyses indicated that avian HEV belongs to a separate floating genus within the family Hepeviridae (Meng, 2008; Yugo and Meng, 2013). In addition, in 2004, avian HEV isolated from presumed healthy flocks was shown to cluster with BLSV and form a distinct branch, which indicated these two are variant strains of the same virus (Sun et al., 2004).To date, avian HEV is considered as a major causative agent of both BLS and HSS in chickens based on these findings. Avian HEV has now been detected in chickens in a number of countries, including the United States, Hungary, Canada, Australia, Spain, China, Korea, Poland, Israel and the cross-border region Austria and Czechia (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Agunos et al., 2006; Morrow et al., 2008; Bilic et al., 2009; Peralta et al., 2009; Marek et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2010; Kwon et al., 2012; Konicek et al., 2016).ClassificationAvian HEV belongs to the Orthohepevirus B species of the family Hepeviridae (Emerson and Purcell, 2003). The family contains two genera: Orthohepevirus (all mammalian and avian HEV isolates) and Piscihepevirus (cutthroat trout virus) (Smith et al., 2014; Spahr et al., 2018). There are four species within the genus Orthohepevirus: A to D. Orthohepevirus A consists of the strains isolated from human, pig, wild boar, deer, mongoose, rabbit, moose, and camel (Li et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2011; Izopet et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2016; Meng, 2016; Spahr et al., 2018). Within Orthohepevirus A, there are eight genotypes (1 to 8). Genotypes 1 and 2 are obligate human pathogens (Meng, 2013), whereas genotypes 3 and 4 can infect both human and animals (swine, rabbits, deer and mongooses) (Sridhar et al., 2017). Genotypes 5 and 6 are isolated from wild boars (Takahashi et al., 2011), and genotypes 7 and 8 are found in dromedary and Bactrian camels (Woo et al., 2014; Sridhar et al., 2017). Orthohepevirus B includes the viruses isolated from chickens and wild birds and named avian HEV (Meng, 2016; Reuter et al., 2016). Orthohepevirus C is composed of the strains isolated from rat, greater bandicoot, Asian musk shrew, ferret and mink (Meng, 2016), and Orthohepevirus D is isolated from bat (Meng, 2016). The zoonotic characteristic of HEV has raised great public health concerns regarding cross-species transmission and new genotype discovery in recent years (Mushahwar, 2008; Meng, 2010, 2011).Within Orthohepevirus B, different avian HEV strains share approximately 73 to 100% identity to one another, and approximately 30 to 50% identity with mammalian HEVs (Huang et al., 2002). Although avian HEV only shares ∼50% identity to human and swine HEV strains, the genomic organization is relatively conserved (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Huang et al., 2004). Now, four major genotypes (1 to 4) were distinguished by genome-wide sequencing (Figure 1) and share approximately 82% identity at the nucleotide level (Syed et al., 2017). Genotype 1, was primarily isolated from BLS chickens in Australia and was also reported to cause the decrease in egg production in chickens during an outbreak in Korea (Payne et al., 1999; Kwon et al., 2012). Genotype 2, was primarily isolated from HSS chickens in the United States and was detected in BLS flocks in Central Europe and Poland, and also isolated from chickens with hepatitis-splenomegaly syndrome in Korea (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Moon et al., 2016; Matczuk et al., 2019). Genotype 3, was isolated from HSS chickens in Europe and from hens with decreased egg laying in China (Morrow et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2010). Genotype 4, was isolated from affected flocks in Hungary and from bile samples of commercial egg-layer flocks in Taiwan region, which were initially presumed to be healthy (Bányai et al., 2012; Hsu and Tsai, 2014). Recently, a new isolate from chickens suffering from hepatic rupture hemorrhage syndrome (HRHS) in China was shown to be associated with avian HEV and named avian HEV-Hebei, phylogenetic analyses constructed according to the partial helicase and partial capsid gene showed in a single branch in avian HEV groups but distinctly separate from other avian HEV strains, which may further extend the genotypes of avian HEV (Figure 1) (Su et al., 2018a, b). This isolate belongs to a single branch, distinctly separated from other reference avian HEV strains (Figure 1). While all of these genotypes tend to be geographically different, each genotype of avian HEV belongs to a single serotype (Marek et al., 2010; Meng, 2010; Zhao et al., 2015).FIGURE 1Phylogenetical tree of the current genotypes of different avian HEV strains based on the complete or near complete genomes. The tree was built by MEGA 7.0 using the neighbor-joining (NJ) method with 1000 bootstrap replicates. GenBank accession numbers represents different HEV strains. Genotype 1: AM943647 is for avian HEV strain in Australia, JN597006 and KC454286 are for avian HEV strain in Korea. Genotype 2: AY535004 and EF206691 are two U.S. avian HEV strain, KM377618 is avian HEV strain in Korea. Genotype 3: AM943646 represents European avian HEV strain and GU954430 represents Chinese avian HEV strain. Genotype 4: JN997392 is for avian HEV strain in Hungary and KF511797 is for avian HEV strain in Taiwan region. Genotype 5: MH186107 stands for the recent new type avian HEV strain which isolated in Hebei, China. MG737712 is for sparrow, KX589065 is for little egret and KU670940 is for kestrel which are all representing avian HEV strain isolated from wild birds.VirologyVirion PropertiesAvian HEV is a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA virus which is sensitive to high temperature and iodinated disinfectants, but with certain resistance to acidic and mild alkaline conditions (Meng, 2010). The virions are icosahedral and symmetrical with a diameter of approximately 30–35 nm in size (Meng, 2010). The buoyant density of avian HEV is 1.39–1.40 g/cm3 in cesium chloride (CsCL) and 1.29 g/cm3 in potassium tartrate and glycerol according to a report by Meng (2010).Genome OrganizationThe full-length genome of avian HEV is ∼6.6 kb in length, which is 600 bp shorter than mammalian HEV (Figure 2). It contains a short 5′non-coding region (NCR), followed by three open reading frames (ORFs) and a short 3′NCR terminated by a poly(A) tract (Kabrane-Lazizi et al., 1999). The ORF2 and ORF3 are partially overlapped, but neither overlaps with ORF1 (Meng, 2010). The length of the 5′NCR of avian HEV is 24 bp, which is 2–4 bp shorter than that of most human and swine HEV (Huang et al., 2004). The ORF1 (nt 25 to 4620) of avian HEV encodes a viral non-structural protein 1531 amino acids (aa) in length with multiple functional domains based on computer predictions, including a methyltransferase (Methyl, aa 56–241), papain-like cysteine protease (PLP, aa 433–593), hypervariable region (HVR, aa 673–802), helicase (Hel, aa 984–1216) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp, aa 1231–1720) (Huang et al., 2004, 2007; Bilic et al., 2009). The typical motifs I-VI of the helicase superfamily I and the motifs I-III of viral methyltransferase are found conserved throughout the alpha-like virus super-group (Huang et al., 2004).FIGURE 2A schematic diagram of comparative genomic organization of mammalian and avian HEV. The three open reading frames (ORFs) are labeled with different colors and shown as above. The avian HEV genome is approximately 600 bp smaller than the mammalian HEV. ORF1 encodes non-structural proteins with the putative functional domains. ORF2 encodes the capsid protein, and ORF3 encodes a phosphoprotein. The ORF2 and ORF3 are partially overlapped, but neither overlaps with ORF1. The genome is capped at the 5′ end and contains a poly(A) tail at the 3′ end. The open reading frame is flanked by non-coding regions (NCR) at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the genome. A junction region exists between ORF1 and ORF3 for mammalian and avian HEV, which is characterized with a stem-loop structure and a cis-reactive element (CRE). MT, methyltransferase; P, a papain-like cysteine protease; HVR, hypervariable region; Hel, helicase; RdRp, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.ORF1 accounts for the largest portion in the genome and its products play a very important role in the proper assembly and release of virus particles (Ahmad et al., 2011). The ORF2 (nt 4707 to 6527) encodes the capsid protein of 606 aa in length, sharing 48–49% aa identity with swine and human HEVs (Haqshenas et al., 2001). Six linear antigenic domains (I–VI) have been characterized in avian HEV ORF2 protein, which are located in aa 389–410, 461–492, 556–566, 583–600, 339–389, and 23–85, respectively (Dong et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014). Domains I and V contains epitopes, which are common among avian, human, and swine HEVs (Wang et al., 2015). The domains II and VI are unique to avian HEV and can induce immune responses in chickens, while domains III and IV only elicit a weak immune response (Zhao et al., 2015). Collectively, the capsid protein contains the most immunogenic epitopes capable of inducing neutralizing antibodies, which are a potential target for vaccine development (Meng, 2008). The smallest one, ORF3 (nt 4654 to 4917) encodes a protein of 87 aa (Huang et al., 2004). Three antigenic domains on ORF3 at amino acids (aa) 1–28, 55–74 and 75–88 were identified in the Chinese isolate of avian HEV (CaHEV) (Zhao et al., 2013b). The aa 75–88 region was shown to be a dominant antigenic domain which contains at least two epitopes, though the neutralizing characteristics of these three antigenic domains are still unknown (Zhao et al., 2013b). The downstream of ORF2 is the 3′NCR of avian HEV, excluding the poly(A) tail, consists of 123 nt (Bilic et al., 2009).EpidemiologyAvian HEV is considered to be the main causative agent of BLS and HSS (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Huang et al., 2002), which has been reported in Australia (Handlinger and Williams, 1988), the United States (Haqshenas et al., 2001), Canada (Ritchie and Riddell, 1991; Agunos et al., 2006) and Europe (Morrow et al., 2008). In addition, molecular epidemiologic investigations show high HEV-positive rates in chicken flocks in the United States, and that the virus can cause subclinical infections in these chickens (Sun et al., 2004). Serologic investigations show that the positive rate of chicken flocks and chickens are 71 and 30%, 57 and 28%, 95.08 and 40.57% in the United States (2002), Korea (2012) and throughout Taiwan (2013), respectively (Huang et al., 2002; Kwon et al., 2012; Hsu and Tsai, 2014). There is a 20% positive rate for anti-avian HEV antibodies in chickens from Brazil (Vitral et al., 2005), and in Spain, positive rates for farms span a wide range from 20 to 80% (Peralta et al., 2009). In China, the avian HEV seropositive rate in chicken flocks is 35.9% (Zhao et al., 2013a), while in Poland, there is a 56.1% positive rate for avian HEV genotype 2 among breeder broiler and egg laying hen flocks (Matczuk et al., 2019). In the United States between the years 2012 and 2014, 141 chickens from 10 organic layer flocks showed a 40% decrease in the rate of egg production and slightly increased mortality (up to 1% per week), avian HEV RNA was detected in 10 livers out of 141 chickens from two different affected flocks (Crespo et al., 2015). Recently, a disease known as HRHS was proven to be associated with avian HEV, and has emerged in many large-scale layers and breeding farms in China since 2016 (Su et al., 2018a). During this time, over 270,000 chickens from four farms in the Guangdong, Anhui, Hebei and Jilin provinces of China were positive for avian HEV. Those affected flocks showed several death peaks at ages 1 to 5 weeks, 17 to 20 weeks and 27 to 40 weeks. The cumulative mortality was approximately 15%, and the egg laying peak was significantly delayed with a laying rate decreased by 20% (Su et al., 2018b).Whether infections with avian HEV are age-associated or not, it’s still known of ambiguity as there have been a number of conflicting results. One study showed that 17% of chickens less than 18 weeks old and 36% of adult chickens in the United States were positive for avian HEV antibodies using a truncated recombinant ORF2 antigen (Huang et al., 2002). On the other hand, another report on commercial egg-type chicken flocks in the United States, identified avian HEV in 17-week-old chickens but no infections in 30 to 80-week-old chickens (Gerber et al., 2014). A third study showed that high antibody titers in infected chickens can be expected within the ages of 20–29 weeks (Zhao et al., 2013a). Meanwhile, 10% of chickens at 60 weeks old were also found to be avian HEV seropositive (Zhao et al., 2013a). The result is variable, the different region and flocks may contribute to this issue. Thus, a systematic artificially infection experiment should carry out to confirm age-associate result.In addition to chickens, avian HEV has also been identified in wild aquatic birds, such as the little egret in Hungary, which may represent a potential novel Orthohepevirus species (Reuter et al., 2016). An avian-like HEV from sparrow feces in the Midwestern United States has also been detected, which may also represent a novel HEV which is related to chicken and little egret HEVs (Yang et al., 2018). In both affected and presumed healthy poultry flocks across Russia and Kazakhstan, a high genetic divergence of avian HEV has also been detected (Sprygin et al., 2012). However, the avian HEV isolates from wild bird to cause chicken infection or the ones from chicken to cause wild bird infection are still uncertain (Reuter et al., 2016). Based on the phylogenetic tree, we speculate that the avian HEV strains from chicken and wild bird have an independent evolution from the same HEV ancestor. In addition, based on the comparisons between the different avian HEV isolates, they have the possible ability for cross-transmission (Meng, 2010).Co-infection is common in clinical case, avian HEV co-infected with other pathogens has also been reported (Sun et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016). For example, an epidemiology study showed that both avian HEV and avian leucosis virus subgroup J infection is endemic in those flocks with HSS in China (Sun et al., 2016). Additionally, avian HEV and Marek’s disease virus (MDV) was found to be co-prevalent in a flock of egg-type chickens in China with a double virus positive rate of ∼30% (Yang et al., 2016).Clinical PresentationIn chickens, subclinical infections of avian HEV are very common in flocks in the United States and other countries, but the morbidity and mortality associated with HSS (or BLS) and other avian HEV infections in the field are relatively low (Huang et al., 2002; Sun et al., 2004; Peralta et al., 2009). The mortality rate is between 0.3 and 1% for avian HEV genotypes 1–3 infections (Meng et al., 2008; Nikonova and Zinyakov, 2012; Yugo et al., 2016). The clinical presentation caused by the virus can be variable. Broiler breeders which have been inoculated with avian HEV genotype 1, typically show more gross ovarian and microscopic lesions than younger chickens inoculated with genotype 2, while avian HEV genotype 3 infection of laying hens can exhibit BLS or HSS, but shows decreased egg production without gross ovary and microscopic lesions (Billam et al., 2005; Park et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2017). There are several other diseases that could be caused by avian HEV, which are listed as follows (Table 1).TABLE 1Comparison of three different diseases caused by avian HEV.DiseaseClinical symptomsPathologyOutcome ResultsBLSV (Handlinger and Williams, 1988)1. pallor of the combs 2. Anorexia 3. Drowsiness 4. Pasty droppings and soiling of the vent feathers 5. Hens found dead usually have a good body condition. 6. Enlarged and mottled livers and spleens 7. Ovaries are regressing 8. Peritonitis with free yolk in the abdominal cavity 9. Petechial hemorrhage of the duodenum 10. Swollen kidney 11. Edema of the lung is rare1. There are occasional numerous small and white foci scattered among the red pulp, showing large areas of hemorrhage and necrosis in the liver and spleen. Ovaries with blood clots often present within the large, pale, flaccid follicles. 2. There are five stages of splenic and hepatic pathology according to Handlinger’s report: I. Lymphoproliferative phase. II. Pyknotic destructive phase. III. Macrophage responsive phase. IV. Late responsive phase. V. Recovered. 3. In the early stage of the disease, lymphocytes and heterophilic cells infiltrate around the portal area of the liver 4. Lymphocytes proliferate in the spleen 5. Coagulative necrosis and vasculitis occur in the liver.1. A rapid and sudden drop in egg production last for 3–4 weeks, following by a return to normal production after another 3 weeks. 2. The mortality rate increased from 0.1–1% per week. 3. The signs come out as early as 24 weeks or late than 58 weeks age, production rate decreased by 5–20%.HSS (Handlinger and Williams, 1988; Tablante et al., 1994; Huang et al., 2002; Meng, 2011)1. Ovarian degeneration 2. Abdominal redness 3. Liver is amyloid or fatty degeneration with occasionally hepatosplenomegaly.1. Subcapsular hemorrhages and slight swelling of the liver lobes. 2. The microscopic liver lesions were mainly lymphocytic, heterophilic periphlebitis and phlebitis with occasional biliary vacuolation, amorphous hypocellular eosinophilic matrixes, hemorrhages, and necrotic foci.1. 20–40% egg production rate of hens 2. Broiler breeders at 30–72 weeks (increased 1%death rate), with mortality lasting several weeks during the midproduction period. 3. Higher incidence of chickens at 40–50 weeks.HRHS (Su et al., 2018a, b)1. Severe depression with pale crest 2. Doiling of the vent feathers 3. Red fluid in the abdomen.1. Hemorrhage in the liver and spleen, while no obvious pathological changes in other organs.1. The death peak of sick flocks is at age of 1 to 5 weeks, 17 to 20 weeks and 27 to 40 weeks. 2. The mortality is approximately 15%, and the laying peak is significantly delayed with the rate drop by 20%.PathogenesisConsidering the economic losses and the increased clinical infection rates, avian HEV pathogenesis research has become a necessity. The current method to study avian HEV pathogenicity is limited since the virus cannot be efficiently propagated in cell culture, and can only proliferate within living organisms or animals. As such, the pathogenicity of avian HEV remains largely uncharacterized (Meng, 2010; Syed et al., 2017).Billam et al. (2005) infected 60-week-old specific-pathogen-free (SPF) adult chickens by a natural route, to systematically study HEV pathogenesis and replication in a homologous animal model. They found avian HEV RNA in both the bile and liver of infected chickens, indicating that the virus replicates in the liver. Billam et al. (2008) showed that viral replication initially takes place in gastrointestinal tissues including the colorectal, cecal, jejunal, ileal, duodenal, and cecal tonsil tissues prior to reaching the liver (Billam et al., 2008; Yugo et al., 2016). Based on these results, it can be inferred that the entry of avian HEV first occurs from an oral-route, and then replicates and accumulates in the digestive system. In addition to viral replication, virus attachment to host cells is considered to be another crucial step in viral infections (Schneider-Schaulies, 2000; Yugo et al., 2016). It is reported that the capsid protein region from amino acid 471 to 507 is critical for avian HEV attachment to host cells (Zhang et al., 2016) and the C-terminal region of the capsid ORF2 protein is recognized as putative binding sites for both cellular receptors and neutralizing antibodies (Ahmad et al., 2011). Wang et al. (2018) utilized Lactococcuslactis as a delivery vector expressing higher levels of ΔORF2 (avian HEV truncated ORF2 protein spanning amino acids 249–606 protein) specific IgG antibodies, in order to neutralize or bind to avian HEV and induce effective mucosal immunity, prevented the virus from invading into host cells. These results also showed effective control of avian HEV infection in chickens. Better understanding of viral pathogenesis and replication both in vivo and in vitro is crucial for controlling and diminishing avian HEV infections.TransmissionAvian HEV is believed to be transmitted mainly by the fecal-oral route through contaminated feed and water in different flocks (Haqshenas et al., 2002; Huang et al., 2002). Furthermore, another new route of transmission has been successfully identified by Billam et al. (2005) experiment in which avian HEV infection was successfully reproduced via nasal and oral route inoculation in SPF chickens. To determine whether avian HEV can be transmitted vertically, Guo et al. (2007) collected and tested embryonated eggs starting from 1 week prior to virus inoculation to 5 weeks post-infection (p.i.), but all of the hatched chicks were negative for avian HEV infection. Conversely, Troxler et al. (2014) research, demonstrated that avian HEV RNA could be detected at week 25 in chicks hatched from laid eggs, indicating the possibility of vertical transmission routes.Within the eight species of Orthohepevirus A, genotypes 1 and 2 exclusively infect humans, whereas genotypes 3, 4, 7 and 8 can cross species barriers and are denoted as zoonotic genotypes (Purcell and Emerson, 2008; Doceul et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2016; Spahr et al., 2018), and according to the very recent study, Orthohepevirus C was identified to be zoonotic (Murphy et al., 2019). However, Orthohepevirus A (genotypes 5, 6) and D have not been labeled as zoonotic diseases (Liu et al., 2018). Surprisingly, the avian HEV (a member of Orthohepevirus B) also can be transmitted across species barriers, though they do not infect rhesus monkeys or pigs (Sun et al., 2004), but has been reported to infect turkeys under experimental conditions (Sun et al., 2004) and as well as other birds under natural conditions (wild aquatic bird, little egret, song thrush, little owl, feral pigeon and common buzzard), suggesting that avian HEV may have a limited host range and may not infect humans, and that chickens are likely not a reservoir for avian HEV (Huang et al., 2004). Meanwhile, genotypes 1 and 3 are prevalent in wild birds of 4 different species (song thrush, little owl, feral pigeon and common buzzard), which indicates avian HEV transmission between chickens and wild birds (Meng, 2010; Zhang et al., 2017). The presence of HEV in wild birds indicates that wild birds might play a role as a reservoir for avian HEV (Zhang et al., 2017). In addition to wild birds and turkeys, a mixed animal group comprised of chickens, ducks, geese and rabbits also can be infected with avian HEV genotype 3, demonstrating avian HEV could be a cross-species transmission pathogen (Liu et al., 2018). Though avian HEV has not been reported to cause zoonotic infections, its expanded host range and its ability to infect across species raises additional concerns (Meng, 2010).For the mammalian HEV, it was reported that the ORF1 is considered to play an indispensable role in determining host tropism (Chatterjee et al., 2016). However, there were also some reports which HEV ORF2 and ORF3 protein, host factors, especially host immune status, may also minorly contribute to cross-species transmission of HEV (Ding et al., 2017). For avian HEV, it was also documented that more mutated amino acids in ORF1 of the avian HEV isolated from the rabbit, suggesting that ORF1 maybe also play a role in the cross-transmission of avian HEV (Liu et al., 2018). However, the underlying molecular mechanism that ORF1 plays to alter host cell tropism during HEV cross-species infection is not yet clear.DiagnosisThe diagnosis for clinical manifestation of avian HEV is based on the detection of specific viral RNA, as the clinical signs and pathologic lesions are atypical (Crespo et al., 2015). All presumptive diagnoses must rely on laboratory tests, primarily based on RT-PCR for virus detection, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for avian HEV ORF2 and ORF3 specific IgG antibody detection and electron microscope (EM) for virus particles detection (Meng, 2010). Other lesion detection markers such as serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) could possibly be used as a supplementary diagnostic method since both are shown to be increased after intravenous (i.v.) and oronasal inoculation.Avian HEV-specific RT-PCR assays have been developed for the detection of avian HEV infections in chickens (Sun et al., 2004). The nested RT-PCR assays were universally used to detect avian HEV RNA from the fecal, serum, bile, liver and spleen samples. To determine avian HEV infection in the chickens, two truncated genes (ORF1 and ORF2) were amplified by nested RT-PCR at the same time. Recently, the pair of primers designed by Sun et al. (2004) were universally detected different genotypes of avian HEV RNA. Compared with conventional RT-PCR, duplex TaqMan real-time RT-PCR assay was shown to be highly specific (Troxler et al., 2011). A SYBR Green real-time RT-PCR assay was developed for the rapid, specific, and reproducible diagnosis of avian HEV infection in chickens by Zhao et al. (2015), which can accurately detect avian HEV RNA in serum, liver, spleen, and fecal samples with more sensitivity than conventional RT-PCR.The indirect ELISA (iELISA) methods were also improved, using a newly developed truncated recombinant ORF2 antigen of avian HEV genotype 2 strain to determine avian HEV seroprevalence (Huang et al., 2002). Zhao et al. (2013b) used a truncated ORF2 protein from an avian HEV genotype 3 strain isolated in China (CaHEV) as the coating antigen, and got a sensitivity of 96.1% and a specificity of 95.8%, with 97% corresponding with Western blot results, which can be used for the detection of chicken immunoglobulin G antibodies (IgG) against avian HEV for Chinese poultry farms. The blocking enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (bELISA) had a sensitivity of 98.3% and a specificity of 93.3% with CaHEV and had no cross-reaction with other anti-avian virus antibodies which can be used for detection of antibodies against avian HEV and showed high reproducibility compared with indirect ELISA and Western blot methods (Liu et al., 2014). Furthermore, two indirect ELISAs, using the truncated capsid proteins separately from the prototype avian HEV genotype 2 and genotype 3 as coated antigens, can be used effectively for the sero-epidemiological detection (Huang et al., 2002). Generally, the C-terminal region of capsid protein (268 amino acids) expressed by bacterial system were used as the coated antigen in ELISA assay (Haqshenas et al., 2002). Four antigenic domains were identified from the region (Zhao et al., 2015). Out of which, the domain I (aa 389–410) and domain V (aa 339–389) can induce a strong immune response in chickens, so this is the optimal selected domain as an antigen for detection of antibodies against avian HEV (Zhao et al., 2014). In addition, the ORF3 protein with lower sensitivity and specificity comparing with ORF2 protein was also used as the antigen to detect antibodies against avian HEV (Syed et al., 2017).However, the specificity and consistency of the ELISA assays using the different genotypes avian HEV as coating antigen is unknown, since avian HEV isolates from different geographic regions are genetically heterogenic (Huang et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2013b). Most of these assays are based on antigens expressed by a single avian HEV genotype; these might be a limitation for detecting all other avian HEV genotypes (Zhao et al., 2013b). To efficiently detect HEV infection from different sources, the identification of conserved epitopes may facilitate the development of diagnosis kits for region-specific avian HEV detection.Prevention and ControlAvian HEV infection is common in chicken flocks, however, there is no effective measure to prevent the disease from spreading (Reuter et al., 2016). Due to the lack of effective commercial vaccines and drugs for preventing disease in chickens, blocking fecal-oral transmission should prevent the spread of virus infection, while the implementation of strict biosecurity regulations at chicken farms may limit the spread of the virus (Molaei et al., 2006; Meng, 2010; Zhao et al., 2017). From Liu et al. (2017) study, cage-free compared to caged animals showed higher positive rates for both antibodies and RNA of avian HEV. The control of chicken excrement pollution could reduce avian HEV infection while implementing a caged living/raising method can help to better prevent HEV transmission. Conversely, Sun et al. (2016) believed epidemiological investigation and elimination of infected chickens to be the only efficient methods for avian HEV prevention and control due to the subclinical and persistent infections in chickens and the lack of availability of vaccines or treatment options (Sun et al., 2016; Nimgaonkar et al., 2017). The most effective measures for avian HEV prevention and control should combine two methods in clinical work since it’s the core of biosecurity-based process.Truncated avian HEV ORF2 contains immunodominant epitopes, which can induce a protective humoral immune response (Schofield et al., 2000; Meng et al., 2001). Guo et al. (2007) showed that recombinant ORF2 epitope identification can promote the development of efficient vaccines. While the complete ORF3 proteins were evaluated for immunoprotection of chickens against CaHEV infection, Syed et al. (2017) proved the expression of ORF3 protein only provides partial immune protection.Most of these recombinant ORF2/ORF3 products depend on an Escherichia coli-bacterial expression system (Dong et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2013b), while Wang et al. (2018) utilized Lactococcuslactis as a delivery vector for truncated avian HEV ORF2 protein, and demonstrated that avian HEV ORF2 protein can induce ideal protection against hepatitis and liver injury caused by avian HEV, indicating that vaccine production using different vectors may differentially alter host immune responses.Conclusion and Future PerspectivesHEV is an important pathogen affecting both humans and animals, yet many questions remain unanswered, and more research needs to be done to better understand pathogenesis and to aid in the development of vaccines and treatments (Meng, 2010; Yugo et al., 2016). A vaccine for human use, based solely on the capsid protein of a genotype 1 HEV isolate, named Hecolin® , has been approved in China (Nan et al., 2018), but commercial vaccine for avian HEV is unavailable. Though avian HEV is not currently considered a zoonotic disease, it possesses cross-species infection ability with wide prevalence in most countries, which has aroused more attention for avian HEV prophylaxis and treatment. Vaccine development using synthetic peptides against avian HEV may help to minimize the risks of cross-species transmission and limit potential food borne transmission routes (Meng, 2010). The detection of avian HEV is based on the capsid protein (contains immunodominant epitopes and induces a protective humoral immune response) and antigenic domains for laboratory avian HEV serum antibody, but not all these antigens are commercially available (Syed et al., 2017; Nan et al., 2018). Further epitope identification can improve the accuracy of diagnosis kit and the efficacy of subunit vaccines (Nan et al., 2018). Additional pathogenesis studies on the virus could also provide new insights to combat HEV infection. With the accumulation of these fundamental works, it is promising that upcoming avian HEV vaccines will successfully protect against avian HEV, a broad cross-species virus.Author ContributionsAll authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


Title: Insights Into the Coinfections of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B Virus, Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C Virus, and Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C Virus: Prevalence, Risk Factors, Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Treatment

IntroductionThe coinfection of viruses can be a serious public health problem because most medicines are designed to control and manage a single infection. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is one of the most important and prevalent disease conditions that has been spread among humans for the last two decades (Kim et al., 2000). More than 75 million people worldwide have been infected with HIV, and approximately 37 million individuals are currently living with this infection. Hepatitis B (HB) and hepatitis C (HC) viral infections are highly prevalent among HIV-infected individuals due to sharing the same transmission routes. Hepatitis caused by both hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) leads to severe liver disorder, and morbidity and mortality are now increasing due to coinfection with HIV (Easterbrook et al., 2012). Coinfection with HIV can modify the natural characteristics of HBV by genome replication status, higher rates of chronic infection, and liver disease progression (Ndifontiayong et al., 2021). The impact of HIV on HBV is critical, as HIV can provoke chronic HBV infection, which can lead to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Maponga et al., 2020). While in HIV-HCV coinfection, HIV increases the HCV viral load and accelerates liver disease progression (Rodrigo, 2020). HIV, HBV, and HCV are transmitted via blood, shared needles, syringes, and other injection equipment, sexually, or even from pregnant mothers to babies (Pfaender et al., 2016). The hepatotropic viruses, both HBV and HCV, attack the liver cell and cause inflammation. However, HIV can attack any targeted cell in the mucosal tissue and spread through the whole lymphoid system (Siebers and Finlay, 1996). As a result of shared transmission routes, HBV, HCV, and HIV can easily cause coinfection, more pervasive than an infection caused by either HBV or HCV.On the other hand, patients dually infected with HCV and HBV carry a significantly higher risk of developing fulminant hepatic failure, liver cirrhosis, and HCC than those with HCV or HBV infection alone (Liu, 2014). A recent study showed that viral infections, such as HBV, HCV, and HIV, are the second most common cause of morbidity and mortality among patients with thalassemia (Bhuyan et al., 2021). Great attention should be paid to the stages of liver disease, virus predominance, and the presence of HIV infection and comorbidities to conduct a better treatment. Several other therapies are being assessed in these circumstances, along with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) (Zhang et al., 2014). However, proper treatment for patients suffering from dual coinfection, either with HIV, HBV, or HCV, is yet to be discovered. The current review is focused on various aspects of HIV, HBV, or HCV coinfection, with a special emphasis on prevalence, risk factors, pathogenesis, diagnostic markers, and treatment.Structure and Replication of Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Virus, and Hepatitis C VirusHuman Immunodeficiency VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus infects humans with two types of lentiviruses of the Retroviridae family. The structure of HIV is roughly spherical with a diameter of about 120 nm and covered by an outer lipid envelope membrane (de Jongh et al., 1992). The viral genome consists of two identical single-stranded RNA molecules enclosed within the core of the virus particle along with three viral enzymes-reverse transcriptases (RT/RNAse), integrase, and protease (Bodsworth et al., 1991). The initial steps of infection are dependent on protein-protein interactions, where the surface protein GP120 of the virus binds to the CD4 receptors on host cells (Xiao et al., 2008). The attachment causes a conformational change by which channels are formed. Due to its high hydrophobicity, the virus particle is engulfed by the target cell’s plasma membrane, and the reverse transcriptase enzyme transcribes the single-strand RNA genome into double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) (Ockenga et al., 1997). The dsDNA is then transported through the nucleopore complex into the nucleus and integrated within the host genome by the integrase enzyme, producing mRNA and translating it into structural and non-structural proteins (Figure 1). These proteins are then assembled to form viral progeny and finally released into the bloodstream (Yim and Lok, 2006; Miailhes et al., 2007).FIGURE 1After HIV GP120 binds with the receptors on the CD4 cell surface, the viral particle fuses with the membrane and enters the cell. The HIV genome ssRNA is reverse transcribed into the dsDNA using reverse transcriptase. The viral DNA is then integrated with the host cell DNA using integrase. The various structural and non-structural proteins are produced from the integrated DNA, and then viral particles are assembled and released from the cell.Hepatitis B VirusHepatitis B virus is a member of the Hepadnavirus family, infecting humans, whereas orthohepadnaviruses and avihepadnaviruses infect mammals and birds, respectively (Schaefer, 2007). The infectious virion is approximately 42 nm in diameter with an internal icosahedral symmetry core particle nucleocapsid. The viral genome is a double-stranded DNA around 3.2 kb in size (Ott et al., 2012). The positive strand is the incomplete inner one, and the negative strand is the completed outer one, and viral polymerase is linked to the 5′ end of the minus strand (Bosch et al., 1988; Hossain et al., 2020). The envelope is also the primary structure embedded with the surface antigens (HBsAg), which are the core components of detecting the presence of HBV infections by commercial immunoassays (Hossain and Ueda, 2017). In the first phase of infection, the virion attaches to host cells via sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) that helps itself get uncoated by fusion (Yan et al., 2012; Li, 2015). Secondly, upon infection, the rcDNA of the virus is converted into plasmid-like covalently-closed circular DNA (cccDNA) inside the host cell nucleus (Figure 2). Finally, the cccDNA templates several genomic and subgenomic RNAs transcribed by cellular RNA polymerase II. The pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) is then selectively packaged into progeny capsids, and most of the pgRNA reversely transcribed into DNA within the capsids. Then the progeny viruses are released from the cells after being enveloped in the ER-Golgi/MVB (Lee et al., 2008; Hossain et al., 2020).FIGURE 2Hepatitis B virus particle binds with the NTCP receptor, fuses with the membrane, and enters the host cell. The rcDNA is converted into cccDNA, transcribed into pgRNA, and finally packaged into the capsid. The capsid is enveloped by the ER-Golgi/MVB and released into the extracellular space.Hepatitis C VirusHepatitis C virus is an enveloped virus that is a member of the genus Hepacivirus under the family Flaviviridae. The genome of the HCV is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), around 9.6 kilobases in size (Kato, 2000). The ssRNA(+) is protected by a protein nucleocapsid and a lipid envelope membrane (Bukh et al., 1994). HCV infection into the host cells occurs by receptor-mediated endocytosis (Blanchard et al., 2006; Karangelis et al., 2010). The HCV particle binds with the hepatocyte surface molecules such as glycosaminoglycans, CD81, scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI), members of the claudin family (CLDN1, 6 and 9), and mannose-binding lectins DC-SIGN and L-SIGN (Barth et al., 2006; Helle and Dubuisson, 2008). Lipoproteins metabolism is also involved in the HCV attachment and replication steps (Grassi et al., 2016). The nucleocapsid is released in the cell cytoplasm from the virus-host cell molecule complex, and then the nucleocapsid is decapsidated to free the ssRNA(+) into the host cytoplasm. Due to its positive-sense properties, the viral RNA acts as mRNA and is directly translated by cap-dependent ribosomal machinery (El-Hage and Luo, 2003). A single polyprotein is translated from the mRNA, later processed to produce several structural and non-structural viral proteins. The six non-structural proteins are NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B, which help in functions related to viral replication and are involved in host cell pathogenesis (Bartenschlager et al., 1994; Reed et al., 1995; Egger et al., 2002). The non-structural proteins help to make ssRNA(+) by using a ssRNA(–) template that is replicated by NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase beforehand from one ssRNA(+) (Gosert et al., 2003). Finally, the assembled viral particle is incorporated with lipid droplets and released by one of the two predicted pathways such as very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) secretory pathway or endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) pathway (Figure 3; Penin et al., 2004; Syed et al., 2010; Dubuisson and Cosset, 2014).FIGURE 3Hepatitis C virus particle binds with the CD81 receptor, fuses with the membrane, and enters the host cell. Upon entering, the ssRNA(+) is translated by ribosomal machinery and produces both structural and non-structural proteins, which assemble and mature in the Golgi body and are then released into extracellular space.Prevalence of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusIt is estimated that approximately 240 million people have chronic HBV infection (Sun et al., 2014). According to WHO, 37.5 million people were estimated to be living with HIV at the end of 2020. Because of shared routes of transmission, HBV coinfection among HIV-positive persons is common. In some regions, over two-thirds of HIV-infected persons have been reported with a history of HBV infection, which means 2–4 million people have HBV-HIV coinfection (Alter, 2006). However, the prevalence varies from region to region among HIV patients with chronic HBV infection (5–10%) due to local endemicity and acquisition mode. In western countries, the prevalence of HIV-HBV coinfection is estimated to be approximately 20% due to being acquired in adulthood, either by drug injection or through sexual transmission (Nyirenda et al., 2008). However, in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, the endemicity is intermediate to high with 10–20% prevalence, acquired primarily in the perinatal period and early childhood (Lee et al., 2008; Nyirenda et al., 2008). In the United States, it is estimated that half of all patients with HIV infection have been exposed to HBV, which is 20 times higher than in the general US population. In the early 2000s, around 8% tested positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) or had detectable HBV DNA levels (Spradling et al., 2010). In a study conducted in Iran, the HIV-HBV prevalence in the general population and health care workers was very low. The highest prevalence was observed among injecting drug users at 1.88% and prisoners (0.13%) (Table 1; Bagheri Amiri et al., 2016).TABLE 1Regional prevalence of HIV-HBV, HIV-HCV, and HBV-HCV coinfection.CoinfectionRegionPrevalence of risk factors among the casesReferencesHIV-HBVGlobally2–4 million people have HBV-HIV coinfection
Alter, 2006
Western countries20% coinfection occurs due to drug injection and sexual intercourse
Nyirenda et al., 2008
Asia and Africa10–20% coinfection occurs during the perinatal period and early childhoodLee et al., 2008; Nyirenda et al., 2008United StatesHalf of the HIV infected patients are coinfected with HBV
Spradling et al., 2010
IranThe prevalence of coinfection is higher in drug users (1.88%) and prisoners (0.13%) than general people
Bagheri Amiri et al., 2016
HIV-HCVGlobally20–30% of 3.5 million HIV patients are infected with HCV
Hernandez and Sherman, 2011
The prevalence of HIV-HCV coinfection among intravenous drug users is estimated to be around 90%
Sherman et al., 2002
HBV-HCVGlobally10–15% of patients with chronic HBV infection are infected with HCVCrespo et al., 1994; Ohkawa et al., 1994; Senturk et al., 20082–10% of anti-HCV-positive patients are HBsAg positiveIndiaThe prevalence of HBV-HCV dual infection is 16%
Chakravarti et al., 2005
EgyptThe prevalence of coinfection is 0.7%
Mekky et al., 2013
United StatesThe prevalence of coinfection is 1.4%
Semnani et al., 2007
Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusGlobally 37.5 million people live with HIV infection, and approximately 20–30% are infected with HCV (Hernandez and Sherman, 2011). As mentioned above, in the same transmission route, the prevalence of HIV-HCV coinfection among intravenous drug users is estimated to be around 90% (Sherman et al., 2002). According to various reports, approximately 21% of adults with HIV tested positive with HCV infection (Yee et al., 2000). Besides percutaneous drug exposure, coinfection can also be seen in hemophiliacs who received contaminated blood without routine serological screening (Di Martino et al., 2001). HCV is estimated to have a 10-fold higher risk of transmission than HIV through percutaneous routes; hence coinfected individuals are usually first infected by HCV (Kingsley et al., 1987). HCV is spread less efficiently by sexual transmission than HIV (Thomas et al., 1995; Gupta, 2013). The number of HIV-infected people chronically infected with HCV worldwide is approximately 2.3 million (Table 1; Garg et al., 2014).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusDue to the lack of large-scale population-based studies, the exact number of HBV-HCV coinfected patients is unknown; however, some regional studies have been done. One study reported that the prevalence of HBV-HCV dual infection is 16% in India (Chakravarti et al., 2005), while another reported the prevalence of coinfection is 0.7% in Egypt (Mekky et al., 2013). Data from different regions concluded that approximately 10–15% of patients with chronic HBV infection are also infected with HCV; on the other hand, about 2–10% of anti-HCV-positive patients are HBsAg positive (Crespo et al., 1994; Ohkawa et al., 1994; Senturk et al., 2008). Tyson et al. estimated that the prevalence of HBV-HCV coinfection was 1.4% in the US (Table 1; Semnani et al., 2007).Risk Factors of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusThe risk factors for coinfection with HBV in HIV-positive individuals may vary in several aspects, including patient age, body mass index, sex, geographical location, current ART regime and duration, key population category, HIV viral load, marital status, and CD4+ T cell count. An epidemiological profile study of HBV-HIV coinfected people conducted in Nepal portrayed some risk factors, including being a spouse of a migrant laborer, a male or female sex worker, an intravenous drug user, or having an HCV-positive status (Bhattarai et al., 2018). Several studies reported that the prevalence of HIV-HBV coinfection among people who inject drugs (PWID) increases with age (Falade-Nwulia and Thio, 2011; Wing, 2017). Due to the chronic and sometimes asymptomatic nature of HIV and HBV infections, the individuals are likely at an even higher risk of chronic progression given the combined effects of age and related immune system dysfunction (Abdala et al., 2008). It is hypothesized that HIV-positive individuals are more likely to be infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) than HIV-negative individuals, possibly due to common risk factors. In addition, immunosuppression induced by HIV infection may cause reactivation or reinfection in those previously exposed to HBV (Thio et al., 2002). Other reports showed that coinfection prevalence was higher among men than women, especially in homosexual men, non-Hispanics than Hispanics, and among patients aged 35–44 than younger or older (Porras-Ramírez and Rico-Mendoza, 2020; Figure 4).FIGURE 4Major risk factors and consequences of HIV, HBV, and HCV coinfection.Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus-driven viral hepatitis exacerbates hepatic lesions and increases the transmission of HCV. Several risk factors associated with the HIV-HCV coinfection are shown in Figure 4. Some populations among HIV-positive patients worldwide have more frequent exposure to HCV infection due to engagement in high-risk behaviors, weak family and social support systems, and inadequate access to healthcare services (Health Policy Project, 2014). Coinfection risk factors also vary on epidemiological subjects such as age, marital status, sex, geographical location, HIV viral load, and CD4+ T cell count. In a Nepalese study, HIV-HCV coinfection was higher in individuals >40 years of age. It is more evident in homosexual men with multiple sexual contacts without a preservative (Götz et al., 2005). In a cohort, the incidence of HCV infection among HIV seropositive MSMs increased 10-fold (van de Laar et al., 2007). Moreover, HIV-positives with CD4+ T cell counts of >200 cells/μL were associated with a lower risk of coinfection with HCV. The study suggested that age and CD4+ T cell count may affect the risk for HIV-HCV coinfection (Bhattarai et al., 2018). Furthermore, the blood-borne transmission of the coinfection is 62–80% common among injection-drug users (Yehia et al., 2014). Several studies suggest that HIV and hepatitis transmission are associated with high-risk injection practices such as injection with a syringe previously used by another PWID (Ray Saraswati et al., 2015; Buchanan et al., 2017; Kilonzo et al., 2018). Individuals living with HIV-HCV coinfection are less likely to clear acute HCV infection and more likely to transmit the virus, particularly PWID who share used needles (Shapatava et al., 2006). In the case of mother-to-child, the risk of transmission to the fetus in coinfected women for HIV is between 5 and 25% times higher than in mothers infected by only HCV (Zanetti et al., 1999). Coinfected patients have higher HCV RNA loads and experience more rapid progression of HCV-related liver disease than those without HIV infection (Thomas et al., 2000). HIV infection was found in 13% of hemophiliacs coinfected with HIV and HCV, while HCV infection was detected in just 3% of 162 female sexual partners (Eyster et al., 1991). Other transmission routes, such as sexual intercourse or vertical transmission, have less risk of transmission than percutaneous exposures. The reported prevalence of sexual transmission of HCV-positive individuals is 2–8% and in newborn babies is 2–5%, but three times higher if the mother is HIV positive (Operskalski and Kovacs, 2011).Pathogenesis of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusThe impact of HIV infection on HBV-induced hepatitis progression is significantly different from HBV infection on HIV disease progression. Around 10–15% developed chronic hepatitis B, which is less likely to be eliminated. HIV-HBV coinfection causes several symptoms, some of which can be fatal. Mutations in the HBsAg coding sequence coinfected with HIV can accumulate HBsAg in hepatocytes and damage the host’s endoplasmic reticulum and DNA damage (Pollicino et al., 2014). With HIV-HBV coinfection, immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) is developed more profoundly (Shahani and Hamill, 2016). Acute HBV infection in 90–95% of adults can develop a broad and multispecific cellular immune response that can eliminate the virus by producing protective antibodies against HBsAg (Mahoney, 1999).Moreover, chronic HBV-infected patients can develop anti-HBe associated with aging and aminotransferase (ALT) elevation (Liaw et al., 1988; Fattovich et al., 1991). In a 10-year study of 1536 Alaskan natives with chronic hepatitis B, 70 and 7% cleared HBeAg and HBsAg, respectively (McMahon et al., 2001). However, they might remain inactive carriers with HBsAg particles with either low or undetectable levels of HBV DNA (Fattovich et al., 1986; de Jongh et al., 1992). These inert carriers can significantly reduce the mortality rate twofold, although increased ALT can lead to fibrosis progression (Fattovich et al., 1990). However, when coinfection occurs with HIV, the mortality rate increases significantly in HBV patients elevating chronic liver diseases. Among 1000 people a year, 14.2% of them suffer from several chronic liver diseases when coinfected compared with 0.8% of people with HBV infection only (Thio et al., 2002). One study suggested that HIV-infected people had a greater clearance rate of HBsAg and HBeAg due to the degree of immunosuppression (Bodsworth et al., 1991). However, other studies showed that HIV infection reactivates HBV and accelerates the loss of anti-HBs, increases levels of HBV DNA, and significantly lowers the ALT levels (Biggar et al., 1987; Gilson et al., 1997). Although lower ALT levels indicate less hepatocyte destruction, anti-HBV therapy’s effectiveness decreases in coinfected individuals. HIV coinfection has also been reported to create fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis, which leads to liver graft rejection in liver transplant recipients. An extremely high level of HBV antigen expression is observed in this specific liver disease due to a direct cytopathic effect (Davies et al., 1991; Xiao et al., 2008).Although most studies show significant evidence of HBV infection acceleration due to HIV, the impact of HBV infection in HIV patients is still quite limited. A study found that among 80 gay men, 32 anti-HBc positive men progressed to get acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) more rapidly (Eskild et al., 1992). Another study showed that HIV-HBV coinfected patients with AIDS had decreased survival than AIDS patients (Ockenga et al., 1997). The outcome of HBV infection varies according to the age and the current immune status of the host. For example, HBV infection persists in 50–90% of persons infected at birth or early childhood.In contrast, fewer than 5% of HBV infections become chronic among HIV-uninfected adults (Yim and Lok, 2006). A multicenter-AIDS-cohort study suggested that coinfected patients had a mortality rate eight times higher than those singly infected. Moreover, the mortality related to hepatopathy due to hepatitis B has increased significantly since the highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), a treatment for HIV patients (Miailhes et al., 2007). Previous studies show that coinfection causes liver-related mortality 19 times that of a single infection (Thio et al., 2002). The mortality rate increased in individuals with lower CD4+ T-cell counts for the infection (Jaroszewicz et al., 2012; Figure 4).Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus -Hepatitis C virus coinfected patients have higher HCV RNA loads and experience more rapid progression of HCV-related liver diseases than those without HIV infection (Hoofnagle and Di Bisceglie, 1991). Several studies suggested plenty of symptoms of the coinfection (Figure 4); however, these can vary over different factors, such as consumption of alcohol, age at acquisition of infection, race, sexual status, concomitant viral infection with HIV, time of illness, body mass index, and various genetic factors. HIV-HCV coinfected patients suffer from higher liver-related morbidity and mortality, non-hepatic organ dysfunction, and overall mortality than HCV single infected patients (Lo Re<suffix>III</suffix>, Kallan et al., 2014). Moreover, coinfection causes an increased rate of severe liver fibrosis and cirrhosis (Fierer et al., 2013; Kirk et al., 2013). A meta-analysis of eight separate studies found that HIV-HCV coinfected patients had approximately two times higher risk of cirrhosis diagnosed on liver biopsy and around six times higher risk of decompensated liver disease than HCV-infected patients (Thein et al., 2008; Tuyama et al., 2010). Coinfection can cause immune dysfunction, cytokine production, and cell apoptosis, leading to severe immunodeficiency (Körner et al., 2009; Kovacs et al., 2010). It causes HIV-related mitochondrial translocation-induced immune activation and causes severe liver damage (Kim and Chung, 2009; Rotman and Liang, 2009). HIV- and HCV-associated chronic inflammation leads to endothelial dysfunction (Bedimo et al., 2010). Moreover, coinfection also causes thrombocytopenia and osteoporosis (Marks et al., 2009). It is estimated that 90% of HIV patients with acute HCV will gradually develop chronic HBV, which shows a higher prevalence in coinfected patients than singly-infected (Collin et al., 2009). Other reports suggest that coinfection also increases the rate of related diseases such as cryoglobulinemia, hemophilia, diabetes mellitus, and kidney-related infections (Sulkowski, 2001). It is confirmed that HIV infection substantially impacts mortality among HCV-infected individuals, mainly due to HIV-induced immunodeficiency (Singal and Anand, 2009).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHepatitis B virus-Hepatitis C virus coinfection is more frequently found in several high-risk populations, for example, persons who inject drugs, patients on hemodialysis and undergoing organ transplantation, HIV-positive, and β-thalassemia (Pallás et al., 1999; Aroldi et al., 2005; Reddy et al., 2005). Tyson et al. stated that the independent associations with HBV coinfection compared with HCV single infection were age ≤50 years, male sex, positive HIV status, history of hemophilia, sickle cell anemia, or thalassemia, history of blood transfusion, cocaine, and other drug uses. At the same time, there was decreased risk in patients of Hispanic ethnicity (Tyson et al., 2013). With hidden hepatitis B, liver cirrhosis occurs in 33% of HCV coinfected patients and 19% of HCV carriers with undetectable HBV DNA (Fan et al., 2003). Superinfections cause the development of chronic hepatitis, for which the mortality rate is as high as 10% (Sterling and Sulkowski, 2004). Moreover, coinfection increases the rate of liver cirrhosis, chronic and fulminant hepatitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (Figure 4).Diagnosis of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusAll patients infected with HIV must be tested for HBV and HCV and vice versa, as the transmission route is the same. The HIV-negative patients, only infected with any of the hepatitis viruses, are required to test for alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), hemoglobin, white blood cell count, platelets, HBeAg, HBe antibody (anti-HBe), HBsAg antibody (anti-HBs), CD4 count, and HBV DNA quantification in the serum (Audsley et al., 2020). HBV DNA levels are a significant marker to detect coinfection (Lok and McMahon, 2009). Spontaneous sero-reversion can occur due to having a low CD4 count (<200/mm3) and is also a prime marker for HIV-HBV coinfection. Therefore, HBV serological tests should be repeated among HIV-infected patients with prior positivity for HBsAb for the reemergence of HBV infection (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2012). Anti-HBc can also be found in HIV-positive patients due to having past HBV infection (Gandhi et al., 2005). The occurrence of a past infection is often termed “Occult HBV infection,” which results in the presence of HBV DNA in the absence of HBsAg and has been reported in 2 to 10% of HIV-infected patients (Shire et al., 2007; Tsui et al., 2007). For HCC screening, coinfected patients with HBV-HIV should undergo serial liver ultrasound examinations and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) serology every 6 months (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2012). Severe conditions with HIV-HBV coinfection may require a liver biopsy. However, non-invasive measures, such as serum fibrosis markers and transient elastography, can help determine the degree of underlying fibrosis instead of biopsy (Moreno et al., 2009; Smith and Sterling, 2009). The markers suggest different parameters for detecting HIV-HBV coinfection depending on HBV infection types (Table 2).TABLE 2Serological markers of HIV-HBV, HIV-HCV, and HBV-HCV coinfection.HIV-HBV coinfection markersHIV-HCV coinfection markersHBV-HCV coinfection markersGenomic level↑ HBV DNA↑ HCV RNA↑ HBV DNAT-cell count↓ CD4 count (<200/mm3)↓ CD4 and CD8 ratio-Antigen/Antibody↑ HBsAb ↑ Anti-HBc↑Anti-HCVDelayed HBsAg ↓ HBs antigenemiaRelated infectionOccult infection: ↑HBV DNA ↓HBsAg-HCV superinfection and chronic HBV infection: ↑ HBeAg ↓ HBsAgEnzyme markers↑ alpha-fetoprotein↑ AST:APRI ↑ APRI score (>1.5) ↓ AST p-value (<0.0001)↑ biphasic alanine aminotransferaseHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusReverse transcriptase-nested polymerase chain reaction assays (RT-PCR) must be conducted for the screening of the persistent HCV 5′ untranslated region (5′ UTR) for the diagnosis of HCV RNA in HIV patients (Panigrahi et al., 1994). Liver fibrosis progression is more rapid in the context of HIV-HCV coinfection and is associated with lower CD4 cell counts (Martin et al., 1989; Puoti et al., 2001; Martinez-Sierra et al., 2003). Non-invasive measures of liver fibrosis can be a reliable diagnosis for HIV-HCV coinfection. The alanine aspartyl transferase (AST)-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) has been validated as a good predictor of significant liver fibrosis in both HCV single and coinfection when compared with liver biopsy (Wai et al., 2003; Lackner et al., 2005). One study suggested that, in coinfection, APRI score > 1.5 was 100% specific and 52% sensitive for predicting significant fibrosis (Al-Mohri et al., 2005). Forrester et al. reported that AST and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were significantly higher (P < 0.0001), and platelet counts were lower (P < 0.01) in HIV-HCV coinfected individuals than in patients infected with only HIV (Forrester et al., 2012). Other markers such as alpha-2-macroglobulin, apolipoprotein A1, haptoglobin, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and bilirubin are also screened primarily focuses on HCV patients (Table 2; Imbert-Bismut et al., 2001; Morali et al., 2007).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusLaboratory evaluation for coinfection with all possible viral causes, including HBV and HCV, is performed in patients presenting with acute hepatitis resulting from any of the two viruses. In case of superinfection of HCV or HBV, silent or occult HBV, all the necessary parameters and confirmatory tests such as HBV DNA testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) should also be performed when clinically indicated. In acute infection with HBV and HCV, patients showed delayed HBsAg appearance and a shorter HBs antigenemia than those with acute HBV alone (Mimms et al., 1993). According to an Italian investigation that showed active HBV-HCV indicators in 30 patients with HCV infection, the chronicity rates were equivalent to individuals with a single infection with either of the viruses. Biphasic alanine aminotransferase elevation was also observed in the case of HBV-HCV coinfection (Yan and Lee, 2005). Several reports have documented that de novo HCV superinfection in the setting of chronic HBV infection can result in HBeAg seroconversion and clearance of HBsAg.Moreover, fulminant hepatic failure was significantly higher among patients with underlying HBV infection than those singly infected (23 vs. 3%) (Wu et al., 1994). Hence, every marker should be adequately detected with a specific protocol. On the other hand, occult hepatitis B (OHB) is defined as the presence of HBV DNA in serum and the liver tissue without detectable HBsAg with or without anti-HBc or anti-HBs outside the pre-seroconversion window period (Table 2; Bréchot et al., 2001).Prospective TreatmentsHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B Virus CoinfectionThe most common treatment for HIV-HBV coinfection is HBV-active ART, usually tenofovir together with either lamivudine or emtricitabine. This treatment significantly decreases the rate of HBeAg and HBsAg antigens in infected individuals (Boyd et al., 2016). Drugs such as interferon alfa, peginterferon alfa, adefovir, lamivudine, entecavir, tenofovir, emtricitabine are used to prevent the coinfection (Table 3). As HIV infection can accelerate the progression of HBV-related liver disease, treatment of chronic hepatitis B is generally recommended for most HIV-infected patients with active HBV infection.TABLE 3Potential medications and their activity against HIV-HBV coinfected individuals.DrugDirect activity against HIV and HBVFor chronic HBV in HIV-infected patientsReferencesInterferon AlfaNoNo
Johnson et al., 2007
Peginterferon AlfaYesNo
Di Martino et al., 2002
LamivudineYesNoBenhamou et al., 1999; Dore et al., 1999EmtricitabineYesNoLim et al., 2006; Saag, 2006AdefovirNoNoHadziyannis et al., 2003; Thio, 2006TenofovirYesYes
Lada et al., 2004
EntecavirYesYesTenney et al., 2004; Pessôa et al., 2008Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C Virus CoinfectionGenerally, HIV-HCV coinfection treatment focuses on eliminating a single infection first by decreasing the viral load alongside treating the secondary issues. A guideline is followed to treat HCV, but there is still a lack of information about HIV and HCV disease stage and viral load, HCV genotype, degree of hepatic fibrosis, and patient’s readiness to tolerate and adhere to treatment (Soriano et al., 2007). The treatments are more likely to target the current standard pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (pegIFN + RBV) medication, predictors of the treatment response, adverse events of anti-HCV therapy, and HAART as both HIV-HCV therapeutic agents (Table 4). The most effective treatment to date for HCV infection is direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy. First-generation DAAs include the NS3/4A serine protease inhibitor telaprevir and the NS5B RNA polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir (Messina et al., 2015). Clinical trials demonstrated that using these DAAs in combination with peginterferon and ribavirin gave sustained virologic response (SVR) to HCV genotype 1 infection, up to 75% for telaprevir and 90% for sofosbuvir (Walker et al., 2015). The second-generation DAA regimens paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir, dasabuvir (3D), and sofosbuvir/ledipasvir were approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with HCV genotype 1, as these all-oral regimens showed improved efficacy, safety, and tolerability when compared to first-generation protease inhibitor regimens (Pawlotsky, 2014). However, many long-term studies have shown that patients with compensated cirrhosis who achieved SVR with interferon (IFN)-based therapy showed efficacy at first, but various side-effects and limited virological effectiveness was seen with long-term treatment. However, with DAAs, patients with compensated cirrhosis achieve SVR rates over 95% (Afdhal et al., 2014; Poordad et al., 2014; Krassenburg et al., 2021). Moreover, high rates of cure have also been observed in groups including patients with cirrhosis and HIV coinfection (Hawkins et al., 2016). Many open-labeled studies demonstrated that DAAs such as ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 12 weeks provided high rates of SVR in the patients coinfected with HIV-1 and HCV genotype 1 or 4 (Naggie et al., 2015). Another study suggested that treatment with the all-oral, interferon-free 3D-plus-ribavirin regimen resulted in high SVR rates among patients co-infected with HCV genotype one and HIV-1 (Sulkowski et al., 2015).TABLE 4Effects and side-effects of potential medications for HIV-HCV coinfected individuals.DrugsTherapeutic effectsSide effectsReferencesHAARTDecreases HIV replication in liver Decreases proinflammatory cytokines and necro-inflammatory activityIncreases Liver enzymes (LEE) and hepatotoxicityPascual-Pareja et al., 2009; Price et al., 2009Protease inhibitorsDecreases HCV replication
Toma et al., 2009
EfavirenzDecreases hepatotoxicity
Labarga et al., 2007
NNRTI + pegIFN + RBVDecreases synergistic HCV replication in vitroIncreases Mitochondrial toxicityLabarga et al., 2007; Toma et al., 2009Simeprevir (SMV) + PRDecreases hepatotoxicity
Jacobson et al., 2014
DAAs (Telaprevir/Sofosbuvir/Paritaprevir/Ritonavir/Ombitasvir)Increase sustained virologic response upto 90%Naggie et al., 2015; Wyles et al., 2015Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C Virus CoinfectionHepatitis B virus-Hepatitis C virus coinfection is more complex than a single infection with HBV or HCV alone. Hence, the general approach for treatment is first to identify the dominant virus, treat that virus as a single infection, and then monitor for reactivation of the other virus. Coinfection is typically treated with a nucleotide analog (such as lamivudine, entecavir, or tenofovir) along with PegIFN (Sulaiman, 1989). It is 35% effective in HBV and 50–60% effective in HCV when combined with ribavirin (Crockett and Keeffe, 2005). Moreover, direct-acting antiviral (DAA) is also used, which gives 90% efficacy for inhibiting HCV but no response for HBV (Calvaruso et al., 2018). It is recommended to vaccinate HBV patients because studies showed 60% efficacy to vaccinated cirrhotic patients (Roni et al., 2013). Liu et al. (2014) assessed that peg-IFN/RBV therapy is not only safe and effective but translates into significant clinical benefits such as reduction in liver-related complications and improved patient survival. However, in terms of viral dominance, it is not common to have codominance of both viruses. Hence, there is either HBV dominance, which means high HBV DNA levels and low HCV RNA levels, or HCV dominance, defined by the high HCV RNA levels and absent HBV DNA (Konstantinou and Deutsch, 2015). HBV dominance is likely to be more common in Asian patients, while HCV dominance is seen among North American coinfected and European patients (Nguyen et al., 2011). Therefore, it is suggested to diagnose the disease properly and determine the dominant side before treating a coinfected patient. An Italian study reported that 9 million IU of standard IFN 3 times weekly for 3 months could clear HCV in 31% of HCV-HBV coinfections (Villa et al., 2001). As previously mentioned, peg-IFN is one of the first-line choices for treating chronic HBV infection, and does not cause any side effects toward coinfected patients (Bihl et al., 2010). However, till present, no data have been published regarding the efficacy of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) in combination with peg-IFN plus RBV or with IFN-free regimens in treating patients with chronic HBV-HCV coinfection.Conclusion and Future DirectionsCoinfection with HBV or HCV is common among HIV-infected individuals due to their similar modes of transmission. Any coinfection can reportedly lead to an increased risk of morbidity and mortality. Overall, the prevalence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C, with HIV coinfection, is 50.3%. Among these, HIV-HBV is 8.4%, HIV-HCV is 35.4%, and HBV-HCV is 5%. The characteristics of HIV-infected individuals can differ according to the coinfecting hepatitis viruses that can change their strains over time. Therefore, frequent screening and monitoring should be performed in both coinfected and singly infected patients due to the possibility of developing another secondary infection if measurable steps are not taken. In addition, one must get tested if their partner is positive for any infection or assume any symptoms.Treatments for coinfected patients are complex due to the interaction of the two viruses and the potential for reactivation of one virus with antiviral therapy directed against only the other virus. Therefore, coinfected patients must undertake single infection treatment concurrently with dual antiviral therapy. Until today, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has been a breakthrough for treating patients with HIV, as the infection currently does not have any effective vaccination. HCV prevention is also based on direct-acting antiviral (DAA) treatments for short-term and curative measures.Vaccination is given to prevent HBV with three consecutive doses for the long term. Early remedies for acute infection are also highly encouraged. However, several preventive strategies must be followed to prevent and control these blood and fluid-borne viral diseases. It is highly advisable to avoid percutaneous exposure incidents, such as needle injuries, sharp injuries, and splashes leading to exposure of the skin or mucosa to blood. Drug abuse and sharing the same needle or syringe are also high-risk behaviors toward these diseases. Safe sex and special care for pregnant women are recommended to prevent disease occurrence. Besides conventional therapy and treatments, CRISPR-Cas9-based antiviral strategies can also be implied to avoid hepatitis coinfection due to its relative versatility, specificity, and ease of use. Vaccines against HCV and HIV should be further studied and implemented at the earliest convenience. Polyvalent vaccines for these viral coinfections can also be an escalating preventive measure for the prospective times. Although current diagnostic technologies can detect viruses, they still rely on practical labor, expensive and limited resources. However, if nanotechnology (metal/inorganic nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes) combined with microfabrication can be used in diagnostic and therapeutic settings, the healthcare systems will undergo a revolutionary shift. These technologies with miniatured sensors can be used to easily detect viruses from an ultra-low volume of blood, serum, and plasma, allowing highly accurate diagnosis. However, further extensive studies should be conducted to diagnose and treat the coinfection of these blood-borne viral diseases.Author ContributionsMGH designed and supervised the manuscript. SaS, YA, RA, PK, GS, TR, RS, and ShS searched and collected the literature. SaS and YA wrote the preliminary draft manuscript. YA and TR designed the graphs. MSI and MGH reviewed the preliminary draft manuscript. CZ and MGH edited, revised, and finalized the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s NoteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HEPATITIS E VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Natural and experimental hepatitis E virus genotype 3 - infection in European wild boar is transmissible to domestic pigs

IntroductionHepatitis E virus (HEV) is the causative agent of hepatitis E in humans and the sole member of the genus Hepevirus in the family Hepeviridae. It is a small, non-enveloped virus with a single-stranded RNA genome of positive polarity [1,2]. In many developing countries where sanitary conditions are suboptimal, hepatitis E is an important public health problem, with the virus being primarily transmitted via the fecal-oral route through contaminated food or water [3]. However, emerging cases of sporadic and autochthonous hepatitis E also occur in industrialised countries, including Japan and European countries [4-6]. HEV infections are known to be responsible for acute hepatitis, however, HEV genotype 3 was recently also identified in Europe in severely immunocompromised patients as a new causative agent of chronic hepatitis [7,8]. Four genotypes (gt) of HEV (gt1 to gt4) infecting humans have been identified. Gt1 and gt2 are restricted to humans, and gt3 and gt4 are zoonotic with wild boar, domestic pig and deer representing reservoirs [9,10]. Although a consensus classification system for HEV genotypes is currently unavailable, HEV variants from Japanese wild boar (Scrofa scrofa leucomystax) have provisionally been classified into two novel genotypes (gt5 and gt6) [11]. The identification and characterization of additional HEV strains in chicken, rabbit, different rat species, and mongoose have significantly broadened the host range and diversity of HEV [12,13]. Recently, novel HEV-related viruses were identified in carnivores such as ferret [14] and fox [15], different bat species [16], moose [17] and cutthroat trout [18]. Cross-species transmission to non-human primates and pigs have been shown experimentally for gt3 and gt4 [19]. Severe human HEV infection after ingestion of uncooked liver from wild boar S. scrofa leucomystax) was reported in Japan, whereas food -borne zoonotic transmissions in Europe have been primarily associated with domestic pigs [4,20]. Furthermore, individuals with direct contact to pigs are at higher risk of HEV infection and as previously shown, forestry workers have a higher HEV seroprevalence rate compared to blood donors [21-23]. Recent studies in Asia and Europe revealed high HEV seroprevalences and molecular evidence for HEV infection in wild boar [24-31]. In Germany, wild boar is discussed as one of the main sources of human autochthonous infections [32,33]. Moreover, phylogenetic analyses of Japanese HEV isolates indicated former transmission events from domestic pig to wild boar [34].Until now several studies in domestic pigs have been performed by intravenous or contact transmission of domestic pig-derived HEV [35-40], showing histopathological signs of a hepatitis but no clinical symptoms [37,41,42]. Conversely, little is known about the course of HEV infection in European wild boar and their role in HEV transmission to domestic pigs to date. Experimental challenge studies have not been carried out yet. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the pathogenesis of a wild boar-derived HEV gt3 strain after experimental inoculation and to reveal possible horizontal transmissions to miniature pigs (S. scrofa domestica) and European wild boar (S. scrofa scrofa).Materials and methodsInoculumThe HEV gt3 strain used in this study originated from a liver sample of a naturally infected wild boar hunted in Northern Germany (Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania) in 2010. The liver was frozen immediately at −20 °C and stored at −70 °C. For preparation of the inoculum, the liver was ground in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with a mortar and pestle (10%, w/v). The suspension was transferred to a 15 mL tube and mixed for 1 min using a vortex mixer. After centrifugation (20 min at 4000 × g at 4 °C) the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and filtered (0.22 μm MILLEX®GP filter unit, Millipore, Ireland). The suspension was aliquoted in volumes of 2.5 mL and stored at −70 °C. The inoculum contained about 2 × 104 HEV RNA copies per μL RNA.Experimental designSeven sub-adult miniature pigs of three months age, three wild boar piglets of three months age and two adult wild boar of six month age were used in the experiment under biosafety level 3** conditions. Prior to the start of the experiment all animals were tested to be negative for anti-HEV antibodies in serum and HEV RNA in faeces, respectively. The wild boar piglets used in the study were obtained from a local farmer. Miniature pigs and adult wild boar were bred in the quarantine facilities at the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Insel Riems, Germany. Following an initial clinical examination, including rectal body temperature, wild boar were allowed to accustom themselves to new surroundings for approximately 1–2 weeks prior to the initiation of experiments. The animals were fed with commercial pig feed and had access to water ad libitum. Two additional miniature pigs and one additional wild boar served as negative controls and were housed separately. Control animals remained negative for the whole experiment and were not considered further on in this manuscript. All animals were observed daily during the entire period of the experiment. In Group 1 and Group 2, four wild boar (wb93, wb95, wb10 and wb11) and four miniature pigs (mp30, mp37, mp39 and mp40) were inoculated intravenously via the vena cava cranialis with 2.0 mL liver suspension each. For the direct contact infection experiment (Group 3), one non-inoculated wild boar piglet (wb87) was kept together with the intravenously inoculated wild boar piglets (wb93 and wb95). For animal welfare reasons three miniature pigs (mp63, mp68 and mp79) were kept in an adjacent compartment. To facilitate an indirect transmission, excrements of intravenously inoculated wild boar (wb93 and wb95) were placed daily into stable of miniature pigs. Conveniently, time points of the experiment were designated as days post inoculation (dpi). An overview of the animal experiment is shown in Table 1.Table 1
Overview of the animal experiment

Group no.

Animal

Sex

Age (in months)

Clinical signs and blood chemistry*

Gross lesions

Liver histopathology

Viral antigens in liver by IHC

Grading

Distribution

Group 1. Intravenous inoculation of wild boar
wb93♀3both with reduced feed intake, mild diarrhea, BA, ALT and γGT ↑in all animals mild hyperplasia of liver lymph nodes and lymphoid tissue in large intestineboth with panlobular hepatocellular swelling, vacuolation and single cell necrosis of hepatocytes+++diffuse mainly in Kupffer cells and LSECwb95♀3++wb10♂6both with γGT ↑both with multifocal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates and hepatocellular degeneration (mainly centrilobular)+++mainly centrilobular in Kupffer cells associated with degenerated hepatocyteswb11♀6+++
Group 2. Intravenous inoculation of miniature pigs
mp30**♀3γGT ↑ (not in mp30)nematodes in gut and milk spots in liver (mp39)multifocal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates and single cell necrosis of hepatocytes (mp37 and mp39)0diffuse mainly in Kupffer cells and LSECmp37♀3+mp39♀3++mp40♀30
Group 3. Contact infection of wild boar and miniature pigs
wb87♂3reduced feed intake, mild diarrhea, BA, ALT and γGT ↑mild hyperplasia of liver and intestinal lymph nodes, altered liver consistency and milk spots, moderate splenomegalyintralobular lymphohistiocytic infiltrates and single cell necrosis of hepatocytes++mainly centrilobular in Kupffer cells and LSECmp63♀3all with γGT ↑mild hyperplasia of lymphoid tissue in large intestine, nematodes in gut and renal cyst (mp68)all with mild lymphohistiocytic infiltrates within liver lobules0-mp68♂30mp79♀30Tissues were taken on days 29 (Group 2) and 28 (Group 1, Group 3). Grades are formulated on a result of viral antigen density throughout a uniform tissue type. Sections were graded on two separate occasions, without referring to previous recorded results to help standardize the classification. Definition of immunolabelling grades as: 0 = no antigen staining seen, + = mild immunolabelling, ++ = moderate antigen staining, +++ = marked immunolabelling. LSEC = liver sinusoidal endothelial cells. *For details see Figure 1. **Sudden death at 1 dpi (after blood collection). ↑ = elevated biochemical parameter.Measurements of the body weight and rectal temperature as well as collection of blood and faecal samples were done at time points 0, 1, 3, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 21, 24, 27, 29 dpi in Group 2 and 0, 3, 7, 10, 14, 17, 21, 25, 28 dpi in Group 1 and 3. Fever was defined as a body temperature ≥40.0 °C for at least two consecutive days. Aliquots of serum samples were stored at −20 °C for antibody detection and clinical chemistry, and at −70 °C for RNA extraction. Faecal samples were diluted in isotonic saline solution (10%, w/v) and stored at −70 °C for RNA extraction. The experiment was finished after 29 dpi (Group 2) or after 28 dpi (Group 1 and 3). At necropsy, tissue samples (liver, liver lymph node, mesenteric and mandibular lymph nodes, gall bladder, small and large intestine, pancreas, kidney, spleen, tonsil, heart, brain, gonads, uterus or prostate, and quadriceps femoris muscle) were collected for virological, histopathological and immunohistochemical investigations. One part of each tissue sample was fixed immediately in 4% neutral buffered formalin for histological examination and the other part was stored at −70 °C for RNA extraction.The experiments were approved by the competent authority of the Federal State of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Germany, on the basis of national and European legislation, namely the EU council directive 86/609/EEC for the protection of animals used for experiments (LALLF M-V/TSD/7221.3-2.1.-014/10).Clinical chemistrySerum samples were analysed longitudinally by a spectrophotometric method in an automated analyzer (VetScan Chemistry Analyzer, Abaxis, Union City, USA) using special rotors (VetScan Mammalian Liver Profile reagent rotor, Abaxis) to provide quantitative determinations for alanine aminotransferase (ALT), albumin (ALB), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bile acids (BA), total bilirubin (TBIL), total cholesterol (CHOL), gamma-glutamyl transferase (γGT) and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) in serum. For the evaluation of the results, upper reference value ranges for the tested biochemical parameters were calculated. Therefore, different serum samples of the negative control wild boar and miniature pigs were analysed (for each subspecies n =13).Antibody and RNA detectionSera were tested for the presence of total anti-HEV antibodies with a species independent HEV-Ab ELISA kit (Axiom, Bürstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The ELISA uses recombinant HEV gt1 antigens for the detection of anti-HEV antibodies in serum or plasma. Values of the optical density at 450 nm (OD450) equal to or greater than 1 are prescribed as seropositive.Manual extraction of viral RNA from all serum samples and faecal suspensions was performed using the QIAamp® Viral RNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. From all tissue samples, viral RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN GmbH). For both extraction methods, an internal control RNA (IC2) was added as described previously [43]. HEV RNA was detected by a novel diagnostic quantitative real-time RT-PCR assay (RT-qPCR) using the CFX96™ Real-Time System (Bio-Rad Laboratories GmbH, München, Germany). All primer and probes used in this study are listed in Table 2. The RT-qPCR was performed using the QuantiTec Probe RT-PCR kit (QIAGEN GmbH) in 25 μL reaction volume with final concentrations of each primer with 0.8 μM, and of the probe with 0.1 μM. A volume of 5 μL RNA was added. Reverse transcription (RT) was carried out at 50 °C for 30 min, followed by denaturation/activation at 95 °C for 15 min. DNA was amplified immediately with 45 cycles at 95 °C (10 s), 55 °C (25 s) and 72 °C (25 s). The determination of the HEV copy number was carried out using a standard curve according to a synthetic external calibrator encompassing the 81 bp sequence of the RT-qPCR amplicon.Table 2
Primers and probe used in this study

Region

Primers and probe

Position

Sequence

Product length
ORF 3Forward primer1 (HEV.Fa)5278-5294GTGCCGGCGGTGGTTTC81 bpForward primer2 (HEV.Fb)5278-5296GTGCCGGCGGTGGTTTCTGReverse primer (HEV.R)5340-5359GCGAAGGGGTTGGTTGGATGProbe (HEV.P)5300-5320FAM-TGACMGGGTTGATTCTCAGCC-BHQ1ORF = open reading frame.Histopathology and immunohistochemistryFor histopathological examinations formalin fixed tissue samples were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) according to standard protocols. For immunohistochemistry (IHC) 3 μm sections were cut, deparaffinised and rehydrated. The pretreatment included a blocking step for the endogenous peroxidase using 3% H2O2/methanol for 30 min, followed by an antigen retrieval step in the microwave for 10 min at 600 W. A 1:200 diluted commercially available polyclonal rabbit anti-human CD3 antibody (Dako Deutschland GmbH, Hamburg, Germany), which is also binding to porcine CD3 antigen, was used to characterise the inflammatory response in the liver. Viral antigens were detected using a rabbit anti-HEV gt3 hyperimmune serum (rHEVgt3-HIS) in a 1:1000 dilution. For the production of this serum, a rabbit was immunised with an Escherichia coli expressed and purified His-tagged C-terminal segment of HEV gt3 capsid protein [21]. The slides were incubated with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit immunoglobulin (Vector Laboratories, LINARIS, Dossenheim, Germany) and an avidin/biotinylated enzyme complex (VECTASTAIN®ABC Reagent, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, United States of America) followed by visualisation with 3,3-Diaminobenzidine (DAB, Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Steinheim, Germany). The viral antigen density was graded as follows: 0 = no antigen staining seen; + = mild immunolabelling (<20% positive cells); ++ = moderate antigen staining (20 – 40% positive cells); +++ = marked immunolabelling (>40% positive cells). The sections were examined independently on two separate occasions.ResultsExperiments were carried out to determine i.) the pathogenesis of wild boar-derived HEV gt3 in wild boar and miniature pigs (Groups 1 and 2), and ii.) the horizontal transmissibility following such infections (Group 3).i.)Intravenous inoculation of wild boar (Group 1) and miniature pigs (Group 2) with HEV gt3 of wild boar origin:Clinical and biochemical parametersIntravenously inoculated wild boar did not develop a significant rise in their body temperatures. Only wb93 and wb95 developed moderate clinical signs such as mild depression, slight diarrhea and mild anorexia, and displayed an increase in the BA and γGT serum levels. An elevated ALT level was only observed in wb93. Increase of γGT levels were observed in all intravenously infected wild boar after 21 dpi. Interestingly, ALT and γGT serum levels returned to normal in wb93 after day 25. None of the intravenously inoculated miniature pigs showed febrile temperatures or any other clinical signs, and none of these animals had altered BA serum levels. Increased γGT levels were observed in mp39 and mp40 at 29 dpi, whereas an elevation of the ALT level was only seen in mp39. An overview of the clinical signs is given in Table 1. Figure 1 depicts the time line of serum levels of BA, ALT and γGT. Other biochemical parameters remained within normal limits (data not shown).Figure 1
Detection of bile acids (BA), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (γGT) in serum. Group 1: Intravenous inoculation of wild boar. Group 2: Intravenous inoculation of miniature pigs. Group 3: Contact infection of wild boar and miniature pigs. For the evaluation of the results, upper reference value ranges for the tested biochemical parameters were calculated. Therefore, different serum samples of the negative control wild boar and miniature pigs were analysed (for each subspecies n =13). Upper reference range limit for wild boar = grey dot-dashed line. Upper reference range limit for miniature pig = grey dot-dot-dashed line. IU = international units. * Sudden death at 1 dpi (after blood collection).Serology and HEV RNA detectionTwo of the four intravenously inoculated wild boar (wb10 and wb11) seroconverted after 17 dpi, whereas the other two (wb93 and wb93) showed no seroconversion during the observation period (28 days). In the intravenously inoculated miniature pigs antibodies were detected first time in mp37 and mp40 at 14 dpi, whereas mp39 seroconverted thirteen days later. The serological results regarding HEV antibodies are shown in Figure 2A. HEV RNA with copy numbers exceeding 10 copies per μL RNA was found in the sera of two intravenously inoculated wild boar (wb93 at 17, 25, 28 dpi and wb95 at 21 dpi). Viral RNA was detectable in faeces of all wild boar within 3 to 5 dpi at levels of up to 105 copies per μL RNA (wb93, wb95 and wb11). In the two wild boar without seroconversion (wb93 and wb95), RNA copy numbers in faeces persisted until to the end of the experiment, albeit at slightly reduced levels. The two animals which seroconverted (wb10 and wb11) showed a marked reduction of faecal HEV shedding (< 101 copies per μL RNA) eventually. Viral RNAs were detected in liver, gall bladder, caecum, colon and spleen of all intravenously inoculated wild boar. In wb95 positive signals (>20 copies per μL RNA) were also found in brain, muscle and uterus. In general, comparable RNA copy numbers in serum and faeces were found in the miniature pigs. A marked decrease of faecal HEV shedding was also observed in two miniature pigs which seroconverted within 14 dpi (mp37 and mp40). In most of the intravenously infected miniature pigs viral RNAs were also detected in liver, gall bladder, caecum, colon and spleen. Already at 1 dpi, relatively high viral RNA copy numbers were found in the liver of mp30. The results of HEV RNA in serum and faeces are shown in Figure 2B. Table 3 summarises the viral loads of selected tissue samples. Additionally, HEV RNA was found in bile of wb93, wb95, wb11 and mp39.Figure 2
Serology and HEV RNA detection. Group 1: Intravenous inoculation of wild boar. Group 2: Intravenous inoculation of miniature pigs. Group 3: Contact infection of wild boar and miniature pigs. A) Antibody responses to HEV in serum of inoculated wild boar and miniature pigs measured by a double-antigen sandwich ELISA. OD450-values ≥1 are prescribed as seropositive – this threshold is indicated as a grey-dashed line. B) HEV RNA in serum and faeces of HEV inoculated wild boar and miniature pigs estimated by RT-qPCR. * Sudden death at 1 dpi (after blood collection).Table 3
Results of RT-qPCR analysis of selected tissue samples from wild boar (wb) and miniature pigs (mp)

Tissue

CT-value

Goup 1. Intravenous inoculation of wb

Group 2. Intravenous inoculation of mp

Group 3. Contact infection of wb and mp

copies/μL RNA

wb93

wb95

wb10

wb11

mp30*

mp37

mp39

mp40

wb87

mp63

mp68

mp79

Liver
20.722.624.124.628.132.324.3No CT23.024.2No CT35.3
6521.0

2259.6

952.4

685.8

94.6

8.4

834.2

1763.9

888.8

1.5

Gall bladder
24.022.032.031.032.5No CT27.0No CT30.0No CTNo CT35.9
991.5

3137.8

9.9

17.6

7.3

175.1

31.3

1.0

Duodenum
27.627.231.4No CT34.5No CT29.1No CT31.1No CTNo CTNo CT
124.0

157.0

13.8

2.3

51.3

16.9

Jejunum
31.624.9No CTNo CT34.1No CT31.8No CT29.6No CTNo CTNo CT
12.3

577.0

3.0

11.0

40.3

Ileum
33.330.034.4No CT35.4No CT33.8No CT29.9No CTNo CTNo CT
4.8

31.7

2.6

1.4

3.5

33.1

Caecum
25.932.335.334.835.5No CT26.5No CT25.035.9No CT35.0
337.7

8.4

1.5

2.0

1.3

23.,9

557.4

1.0

1.8

Colon
34.423.731.834.4No CTNo CT28.933.825.034.2No CTNo CT
2.6

1171.8

10.8

2.4

60.7

3.6

557.4

2.7

Rectum
24.930.2No CTNo CTN. d.No CT32.6No CT33.0No CTNo CTNo CT
607.7

28.2

7.2

5.5

Pancreas
No CT34.7No CTNo CTN. d.No CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CT
2.1

Mandibular LN
No CTNo CTNo CT33.6No CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CT
3.9

Kidney
34.733.2No CTNo CTNo CTNo CT31.7No CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CT
2.0

5.0

11.6

Spleen
31.031.734.134.035.8No CT32.5No CT34.0No CTNo CTNo CT
17.6

11.7

3.0

3.1

1.1

7.4

3.1

Heart
No CT33.932.6No CTN. d.No CTNo CTNo CT34.6No CTNo CTNo CT
3.3

6.9

2.2

Brain
32.328.9No CTNo CTN. d.No CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CT
8.2

59.3

Muscle
No CT30.7No CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CT
20.7

Ovary/Testicle
No CT30.9No CTNo CTN. d.No CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CT
19.1

Uterus/Prostate
No CT30.6No CTNo CTN. d.No CT35.0No CTNo CTNo CTNo CTNo CT
22.3

1.8
Tissues were taken on days 29 (Group 2) and 28 (Group 1, Group 3). No CT ≥36.0 (= negative). Viral copy numbers in tissues were calculated from CT values determined by RT-qPCR. LN = lymph node. N. d. = not determined. *Sudden death at 1 dpi (after blood collection).PathologyNo gross pathological changes specific for viral hepatitis were seen in the livers of any of the pigs. However, macroscopic signs like mild to moderate follicular hyperplasia of lymphoid tissues in large intestine and mild hyperplasia of liver lymph nodes in intravenously inoculated wild boar were seen in some animals. Necropsy revealed also moderate intestinal nematode infestations and multifocal white spots (“milk spots”) in the liver characteristic for chronic infection with Ascaris suum. Intralobular lesions of different sizes, patterns and frequencies associated with varying distribution of viral antigens were observed in the liver of intravenously inoculated pigs, but not in the negative control animals. Mild to moderate periportal lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates and Kupffer cell proliferations were also found in the liver of all intravenously inoculated pigs. However, no viral antigens were detected in periportal fields. By immunohistochemistry, viral antigens within hepatic lobules were found mainly in Kupffer cells and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, and to a lesser extent in hepatocytes. Partially, hepatic lesions and infiltrates of CD3-positive cells were associated with viral antigens in Kupffer cells and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells. In detail, the liver of intravenously inoculated wild boar showed a more heterogeneous pattern in comparison to the miniature pigs. Two animals (wb93 and wb95) revealed a mild to moderate multifocal intralobular lymphohistiocytic infiltration with multifocal hepatocellular swelling and vacuolation, and a diffuse viral antigen distribution (Figure 3A-D). However, more severe liver lesions were observed in the two other intravenously inoculated wild boar (wb10 and wb11), with a pronounced mainly centrilobular hepatocellular degeneration associated with infiltrates of lymphocytes, plasma cells and Kupffer cells (Figure 3E and F). These lesions were clearly associated with a marked immunolabelling of viral antigens (Figure 3G and H). The liver of intravenously inoculated miniature pigs displayed diffuse mild intralobular lymphoplasmacytic infiltrations with single cell necrosis of hepatocytes and small to moderate amounts of diffusely distributed viral antigens (Figure 3I-L). In some animals, viral antigens were also found in the sub-capsular layer and follicles of distinct lymph nodes and in the germinal centre of lymphoid follicles in spleen (Figure 4A and B). In none of the other tested tissues viral antigens were found. An overview of gross lesions, histopathology and immunohistochemistry is given in Table 1. All IHC results of viral antigen detection are summarised in the Additional file 1.Figure 3
Histopathological alterations and immunohistochemistry of the liver from intravenously infected wild boar (Group 1) and miniature pigs (Group 2). A) Hepatic lobules with moderate hyperaemia of sinusoids and portal fields (wb95). B) The lobules show swelling and vacuolation of hepatocytes (wb95). C) Diffuse distribution of viral antigens within the liver lobules (wb95). D) Marked immunolabelling within a hepatic lobule, intracytoplasmatic mainly in Kupffer cells (arrows) and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (wb93). E) Multifocal hepatocellular degeneration with focus on centrilobular areas (arrows) and hyperaemic central veins (wb11). F) Centrilobular area of hepatocellular degeneration (apoptotic bodies) with infiltrates of lymphocytes, plasma cells and Kupffer cells (wb10). G) Viral antigens within the centrilobular area of a liver lobule in association with degenerated hepatocytes and inflammatory infiltrates (wb11). H) Viral antigens within an area of hepatocellular degeneration, mainly in association with Kupffer cells (arrows) and some hepatocytes (wb10). I) Hepatic lobule with mild hyperaemia of sinusoids and portal fields (mp39). J) Areas of spotty necrosis and apoptotic bodies (arrows) with slight infiltrates of lymphocytes and Kupffer cells (mp37). K) Diffuse distribution of viral antigens within the liver lobules (mp39). L) Intense immunolabelling within a hepatic lobule, mainly in association with Kupffer cells and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells (mp39). All scale bars represent 100 μm.Figure 4
Immunohistochemistry of liver lymph node and spleen from intravenously HEV inoculated wild boar (Group 1). A) Viral antigens in the subcapsular layer and in the germinal centre of secondary follicles of a liver lymph node (wb93). B) Splenic immunolabelling of viral antigens in the germinal centre of a lymphoid follicle (wb11). All scale bars represent 100 μm.ii.)Transmission of HEV gt3 from intravenously inoculated wild boar to contact wild boar and miniature pigs (Group 3).Clinical and biochemical parametersNone of the contact animals became pyrexic. Only wb87 showed moderate clinical signs characterized by mild depression, slight diarrhea and reduced feed intake in combination with elevated BA and ALT serum levels after 25 dpi. In the contact miniature pig mp79 a slight increase of BA in serum was also observed (7 to 17 dpi). All contact animals had increased γGT serum levels at different time points, most strikingly in mp68 at 7 dpi. An overview of the clinical signs is given in Table 1. Figure 1 depicts the time lines of serum levels of BA, ALT and γGT. Other tested biochemical parameters remained within normal limits (data not shown).Serology and HEV RNA detectionTwo out of four contact pigs seroconverted during the observation period (wb87 at 25 dpi and mp63 at 28 dpi), while the other two contact animals (mp68 and mp79) developed no detectable HEV antibodies during this time. Serological results are shown in Figure 2A. Only wb87 was tested positive for viral RNA in serum with over 10 copies per μL RNA at 28 dpi. Viral RNA in faecal samples was detectable in all contact pigs with over 10 copies per μL RNA after 7 dpi in wb87, and after 10 to 17 dpi in the miniature pigs. The results of HEV RNA in serum and faeces are shown in Figure 2B. Viral RNA was detected in liver, gall bladder, small and large intestine, and spleen of wb87. The livers of the contact miniature pigs were tested positive for HEV RNA as well, except for mp68. Compared to the contact miniature pigs, higher viral copy numbers were detectable in wb87. Table 3 summarises the viral loads of selected tissue samples. Viral RNA was also found in bile of mp163 and wb87.PathologyNo gross pathological changes specific for viral hepatitis were seen in the livers of any of the contact animals, but a mild follicular hyperplasia of lymphoid tissues in intestine and of liver lymph nodes were frequently seen. Additionally, moderate splenomegaly was found in the infected contact wild boar. All contact animals showed a randomly distributed multifocal mild lymphohistiocytic infiltration in the liver associated with single cell necrosis (Figure 5A). However, viral antigens were only found in the liver of the contact wild boar (Figure 5B). In the miniature pigs, viral antigens were demonstrated exclusively in the follicles of the mandibular lymph nodes. An overview of gross lesions, histopathology and immunohistochemistry is given in Table 1. All IHC results of viral antigen detection are summarised in the Additional file 1.Figure 5
Histopathological alterations and immunohistochemistry of the liver from the contact wild boar (Group 3). A) Intralobular area with inflammatory infiltrates mostly lymphocytes and histiocytes. B) Multifocal distribution of viral antigens especially in centrilobular areas (arrows). All scale bars represent 100 μm.DiscussionTo date, the food-borne zoonotic transmission of HEV gt3 in Europe is primarily associated with domestic pigs [4], while data on the pathogenicity of HEV in wild boar and their role in HEV transmission to domestic pigs are missing. HEV prevalence studies in hunted wild boar and serological studies in humans being in contact with them suggest zoonotic transmissions [21,22,27,29-31]. Several HEV transmission studies in domestic pigs were performed [35,36,38,40], but none involving wild boar. Therefore, the current study was carried out to elucidate the transmission and pathogenesis of wild boar-derived HEV gt3 in European wild boar and in miniature pigs. Compared to common domesticated swine breeds, the miniature pig offers several breeding and handling advantages. Miniature pigs have been used extensively already in several fields of biomedical research [44], but HEV infection studies have never been carried out in this pig breed.The experimental inoculation of wild boar and miniature pigs reveals an efficient HEV replication with substantial virus shedding. Following intravenous challenge of wild boar, HEV infection was successfully transmitted to contact animals. These contact animal infections resemble the natural course of the disease. Wild boar-derived HEV gt3 was detected in serum, faeces and different tissues of all intravenously inoculated pigs. Moreover, an early virus replication in the liver was observed in one intravenously infected animal already at 1 dpi. Our findings confirm that the liver is the primary location of HEV replication. Extra-hepatic replication sites have been reported [45] and in this study, HEV RNA or viral antigens were also observed in liver, spleen and different lymph nodes. Interestingly, HEV RNA was detected in the brain of two out of four intravenously inoculated wild boar. Neurotropic HEV gt3 variants in humans are under discussion and HEV RNA was detected recently in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with chronic HEV infection and neurological symptoms [46]. Of course a contamination of tissue specimens with HEV containing blood cannot be excluded completely, but is rather unlikely as the viral loads of all collected serum samples were mostly below those detected in different tissue samples. The duration of faecal HEV shedding in most intravenously inoculated pigs was similar, but higher viral loads were found in faeces of wild boar. In intravenously inoculated animals anti-HEV antibodies were first time detected 14 dpi which is in line with results obtained in previous studies [37,47]. However, seroconversion between three and eight weeks post infection were more often reported [40,48]. The ELISA system used in this study detects all classes of antibodies to HEV in serum. Therefore, the rise of antibody titres observed in the current experiment cannot be associated with a single Ig class. HEV total antibody levels might be also influenced by HEV-specific immunoglobulin (Ig) A in serum, as IgA can be detected in serum of patients with hepatitis E [49,50]. Moreover, a reduction of virus shedding in faeces was observed in the intravenously inoculated pigs which seroconverted after 14 to 17 dpi. Our findings support the hypothesis that adaptive immune responses are crucial to control HEV infection [51].The faecal-oral transmission of HEV is considered to be the main transmission route among pigs [48]. Based on a study in non-human primates, the infectious dose of HEV required for oral infection is assumed to be higher than for intravenous infection [52]. In our study, the infectious dose of the contact animals remains unknown. It can be assumed that the contact wild boar might have had a higher exposure to HEV because of their direct and permanent contact to excreta of the infected animals than the miniature pigs which were only exposed to collected faeces. As HEV RNA was detected in urine of experimentally infected domestic pigs [35], HEV might be also transmitted via urine. The reason for the lacking antibody response in two contact miniature pigs, despite elevated enzyme levels and viral shedding via faeces, remains unclear. Most probably the duration of the experiment was not long enough or the HEV infection was not systemic, as described before [39]. In a previous study it could be demonstrated that domestic pigs could be infected orally, nevertheless, not each contact pig was infected and the antibody response was less efficient as compared to the intravenous inoculation route [45].In former studies only subclinical HEV infections have been described in domestic pigs [35-37]. In the present study a clinical course of HEV infection in pigs could be proven, based on elevated γGT-levels in serum. Increased γGT-levels have also been reported for experimentally HEV-infected non-human primates [53], but not described for pigs before. Moreover, increased ALT and BA serum levels were also observed, especially in wild boar and to a lesser extent in miniature pigs. In the infected wild boar piglets the moderate clinical signs were concomitant with increasing serum levels of BA and liver enzymes. Obviously these results support laboratory findings in humans with HEV infection which are similar to other forms of viral hepatitis and characterised also by elevated serum levels of ALT and γGT [54] due to marked hepatic necrosis and cellular exhaustion of enzymes [55]. Also elevated levels of BA in serum are found in viral hepatitis in humans [56]. The inter-individual variations in these parameters may have resulted from factors such as age, sex, physical condition and unrelated co-infections.Swelling of hepatocytes with vacuolation of the cytoplasm was seen in acute liver injury of domestic pigs as a result of the HEV infection as described before [35]. Non-lipid hepatocellular vacuolation is attributed to alterations in the injured cell as a result of hydropic change, but may also reflect a beneficial cellular adaptation rather than degenerative change [51]. Especially in wild boar mild to moderate intralobular lymphoplasmacytic or lymphohistiocytic infiltrates with variable degree of hepatocellular degeneration were found histopathologically. In previous studies microscopic liver lesions with multifocal lymphoplasmacytic viral hepatitis were observed in both experimentally [35,37] and naturally [42] HEV infected domestic pigs. Our histopathological findings for hepatic lesions in the miniature pigs were comparable, but varied for wild boar ranging from diffuse moderate lesions with swelling, vacuolation and single cell necrosis of hepatocytes and multifocal moderate to severe hepatocellular degenerations.Only few immunohistochemical studies on HEV infected animals and humans have been published before [57-60]. HEV has been shown to replicate in hepatocytes and in extra-hepatic tissues such as small intestine, colon, spleen, bile duct and lymph nodes [45,61]. By immunohistochemistry, we were able to detect viral antigens mainly in Kupffer cells and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, partially associated with hepatic lesions and infiltrates of CD3-positive cells. Since Kupffer cells and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells have antigen presenting functions [62], they may also play a role in the host defense mechanisms and immunopathogenesis. Anyhow, a virus proliferation in these cells is possible, if not essential. Lymphatic tissue might also represent extra-hepatic HEV replication sites, as viral antigens were found in spleen, hepatic and mandibular lymph nodes. Interestingly, no viral antigens were detected by immunohistochemistry in intestine as described in a previous HEV infection study in gerbils [63].Host cell injury in a viral infection may be mediated by either a direct effect of the infectious agent or indirectly through the antiviral host response, or a combination of both. In this study, different patterns in the immunohistochemical detection of HEV antigens and varying lesions were seen in the liver. HEV antigens were either diffusely distributed without association to liver lesions or associated with hepatocellular degeneration, especially in centrilobular areas. As HEV itself appears to be non-cytopathic [64], an immunopathogenesis is assumed for hepatitis E in humans [65]. Previous immunohistochemical studies in liver biopsies of patients with acute hepatitis E revealed that lymphocyte infiltrates consisted mainly of CD3-positive T cells containing a predominantly cytotoxic CD8-positive cell subpopulation which probably is playing an important role in HEV-induced liver injury [66]. Interestingly, CD3-positive T cell infiltrations within liver lesions were also observed in this study. The consistent coincidence of infiltrates of lymphocytes, plasma cells and histiocytes with hepatocellular degenerations and viral antigens supports the assumption that liver damage in pigs might also be immune-mediated.Two different patterns within the course of HEV infection were observed: Animals with early anti-HEV seroconversion are able to clear the virus, while animals with lacking antibody responses suffered from prolonged HEV persistence until the end of the investigation period. Perhaps a weak cytotoxic response in pigs leads to viral persistence, yet without obvious liver damage, whereas a sufficient immune response may lead to an effective HEV clearance that is accompanied by a variable degree of hepatic damage, however. In humans the course of HEV infection can vary substantially between different individuals and chronic hepatitis E cases have been described in immunosuppressed patients [65]. Recent studies in humans were able to associate the activation of the interferon system and viral evolution with severity or chronicity of hepatitis E [37]. Studies in humans also revealed that chronic hepatitis E might be associated with impaired HEV-specific T-cell responses and enhancing adaptive cellular immunity against HEV might prevent persistent HEV infections [36]. In swine factors like virus titer, ratio of infectious to defective particles, route of infection and host factors like the immune status, age of exposure and the presence of co-infections have been discussed to modulate the clinical outcome of HEV infection [27,28]. In the study presented here, some of the experimental animals were carrying also nematodes and showed mild gastrointestinal symptoms possibly caused by other infectious agents affecting swine, but also by stress or a modified feeding regime. Wild boar piglets used in this study were obtained from a local farmer, therefore pre-existing infections with other pathogens cannot be excluded. Liver homogenates given to the experimental animals were sterile filtered to prevent parasitic and bacterial superinfections. Moreover, clinical and pathological examinations showed no indication of other infections. However, future studies should clarify the impact of co-infections on the HEV pathogenesis. Moreover, the pathomechanisms for the development of persistent HEV infections in pigs should be further assessed as this may provide an animal model for the chronic hepatitis E infection in humans.Taken together, our data underline the importance of wild boar as reservoir host and for transmission of HEV gt3 to domestic swine and reveal Kupffer cells, liver sinusoidal endothelial cells and extra-hepatic lymphatic cells as potential virus replication sites. Since large amounts of virus particles are excreted in faeces of wild boar, droppings can contaminate the environment and pose a particular risk to susceptible species. Actually, in most industrialised countries the HEV infected population of domestic swine is far larger than those of the wild boar. Accordingly, wild boar and other wildlife also can be at infection risk by using pig manure as fertilizer on agricultural land.


Title: A mouse model of peripheral nerve injury induced by Japanese encephalitis virus

IntroductionJapanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a mosquito-borne, single-stranded positive-polarity RNA virus. Japanese encephalitis (JE), caused by JEV infection, is the major cause of viral encephalitis in East and Southeast Asia [1]. Approximately 68,000 people are infected with JEV each year [2], which is a considerable threat to public health in Asia.JE exhibits a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations ranging from non-specific acute febrile illness to a life-threatening acute encephalitis syndrome. In addition, some patients experience various signs of focal neurological deficits, such as Parkinson’s disease [3], polio-like flaccid paralysis [4–6], and cranial nerve damage [7]. Five genotypes of JEV have been identified and described as G I through G V [8,9]. In the past, the primary virus genotype that caused JE was G III. Recently, G I has gradually replaced G III as the predominant pathogenic genotype [10–12]. Alterations in the predominant genotype might be the underlying cause of the observed changes in the clinical characteristics. As seen with the JE epidemic in Ningxia province of China in 2018 [13], some patients developed symptoms similar to Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), including flaccid limb paralysis and respiratory muscle paralysis. Additional studies confirmed that these patients were associated with JEV infection [14]. Sporadic clinical case reports have recently revealed an association between the two diseases [15]. However, to our knowledge, the mechanism of JEV-induced peripheral nerve injury (PNI) has not been investigated.A member of the flaviviridae family, JEV has strong neurotropic and neuroinvasive characteristics, similar to Zika, Dengue, and West Nile viruses [16]. Zika virus has been associated with GBS [17,18], and PNI has been reported to be associated with Dengue virus [19,20] and West Nile virus [21,22]. Since JEV shares a similar genomic structure with other flaviviruss, it might also cause peripheral neuropathy and GBS.Currently, there is no specific and effective therapy for JEV infections. Due to the diverse clinical manifestations induced by JEV infection and the current difficulties in treatment, finding a more effective approach to treatment has become urgent. JEV infection can be prevented through vaccination, and existing vaccines are based on the G III virus. However, the observation that G I and re-epidemic G V are gradually replacing G III has raised concerns about the effectiveness of the vaccine [23,24].We know that in vivo experiments in animal disease models are essential for viral pathogenesis studies. Different animal models for JE have been established and widely used in biological research. However, an animal model of JEV-induced PNI has not been reported. Over the past decades, considerable research has been conducted on JE and PNI. However, it has yet to be reported how JEV induces PNI. Hence, it is urgent to establish efficient animal models to study the pathogenesis. To this end, we developed a successful JEV-induced PNI mouse model utilizing a range of validated experimental methods.Materials and methodsAnimals and ethics approvalSixty-eight male SPF-grade C57BL/6 mice aged 4 to 6 weeks were purchased from Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd., and housed in the Laboratory Animal Facility at the Chinese Center for Disease Prevention and Control (China CDC). The mice were raised at standard room temperature with a 12 h alternating light/dark cycle, and food and water were freely available. All animal experiments were approved by the Ethics Committee of the National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention of the Chinese Center for Disease Prevention and Control (20201110064 and 20210429031) and carried out in strict accordance with the requirements of the ethics committee. All animal experiments were conducted under bio-safety level-2 (BSL-2).VirusThe NX1889 strain of JEV was used in this study, which was a strain from Ningxia, that was isolated from a patient’s cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Following the protocol described in one of our previous reports [14], the virus was propagated using C6/36 cells and Vero BHK-21 cells.Animal behaviorAll mice were randomly divided into two groups: a control group (n = 18) and a virus-exposed group (n = 50). The initial body weight of each mouse was determined. Mice exposed to the virus were injected subcutaneously with JEV (105 pfu, 50 μl per mouse). Mice in the control group received an equivalent volume of PBS. All mice were observed daily and assessed for glossiness of the hair, activity level, and the presence of limb paralysis [25,26]. The mouse weights were recorded daily, and each mouse was evaluated based on the virus paralysis scale (VPS) and the hanging wire test. The 15-day period was separated into four phases: 1 day post injection (dpi)-4 dpi, 5 dpi-8 dpi, 9 dpi-12 dpi, and13 dpi-15 dpi. Some mice in each group were selected for follow-up experiments on days 4, 8, 12, and 15. Mice were euthanized when their VPS score was greater than 4 points, their body weight decreased by more than 1 g, and they appeared extremely weak. Based on these criteria, some mice were euthanized prior to the designated time for the conclusion of the experiment. They will be assigned to the phase where they reside on. The bilateral sciatic nerves and brains were obtained from each mouse.Viral paralysis scale (VPS)A sensitive method was used to analyze the signs of tail and limb paralysis in mice [27]. Each mouse was placed on a table and allowed to walk freely for several minutes. The researchers scored the limb function according to the seven points of the scoring method detailed in Table 1. The score was based on four main aspects: tail position during walking, miss-step severity [28], weight-bearing, and joint movement. The severity of miss-steps was scored only in mice that could walk adequately, which was defined as a mouse that could travel three body lengths at a constant speed without turning [29].10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.t001Table 1Viral paralysis scale [27].ScoreDescriptionPerformance0NormalNormal, weight-bearing, plantar steppinga with tail up during walking passesb1Onset of symptomsTail position:Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Weight-bearing, plantar stepping with mild rotationMay be down or not fully upFoot rotated on take-off or landingWobble is present indicating weakness2Mild paresis:Tail position:Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Joint movement:Mild miss-steps (but able to bear weight)DownMild, toe-curling/dragging on the ground, foot slightly skids medially or laterallyA limp may be present indicating weaknessMay appear stiffer3Moderate paresis Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Joint movement:Moderate miss-steps (but able to bear weight)Obvious foot curling/dragging on ground foot obviously skids medially or laterallyLimb is obviously weakMay appear stiffer4Severe paresis Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Joint movement:Severe miss-steps (not bearing much weight)Limb mostly drags behind, medially or laterallyNot much, but limb still used to aid forward motionObviously decreased5ParalysisMiss-step:Weight bearing:Joint movement:No weight-bearing steps, slight joint movementNo stepping, limb only dragsNoneSlight6Complete paralysisJoint movement:No weight bearing step, no joint movementNonea Plantar stepping: Paw is placed flat on the ground during stepping. The foot does not curl or skid to one side, and the toes/feet do not curl or drag at any pointb Walking pass: The animal moves three body lengths at a consistent speed and without turningHanging wire testA transparent box was constructed with a height of 50 cm, a bottom, and an open top. The bottom was covered with a cotton cloth to prevent mice from being hurt when they fell. The top was covered with a 45 cm long and 30 cm wide wire mesh frame. The wire diameter of the grid was approximately 2 mm, and the area of the grid squares was 1 × 1 cm. The wire mesh frame just covered the top of the box. Each mouse was initially placed on the wire mesh frame and allowed to move freely. Then the frame was turned over (180°) and placed on the top of the box to observe the time the mouse stayed on the wire mesh frame [30,31]. The maximum time was 180 s, and remaining on the wire mesh frame for 180 s was considered normal. If the mouse fell during this period, the time to falling was recorded. The experiment was carried out three times, with an interval of 2 min between each experiment.The average time for the three repeated experiments was recorded [29]. After the trial, each mouse was returned to its cage.ElectromyographyElectromyography (NDI-094 Shanghai Haishen), which is used to diagnose human peripheral neuropathy was utilized to detect the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) of the mouse sciatic nerve. Briefly, each mouse was anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of 10% chloral hydrate. After anesthesia, the mice were fixed on the surgical platform in the prone position, and the bilateral sciatic nerves were passively separated. A ground wire was fixed to the skin on the back of the mouse to eliminate possible interference. A recording bipolar needle electrode was inserted into the belly of the gastrocnemius muscle of one hindlimb. Then the stimulating electrode was placed sequentially in the proximal and sciatic nerve notch [32,33]. At the beginning of stimulation, the current was increased manually, starting from 0.1 mA and increasing progressively until a maximum amplitude was produced [34]. The observed waveform was recorded, and the distance between the two stimulation points of the sciatic nerve was measured and recorded. The amplitude, end latency, and conduction velocity of the sciatic nerves were obtained for each mouse tested [35].ImmunofluorescenceUnder anesthesia, one sciatic nerve and the mouse brains were removed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. The fixed tissues were paraffin-embedded and sectioned. The sections were deparaffinized and placed in EDTA buffer (pH 8.0) for antigen retrieval. After cooling to room temperature, the sections were quenched with an autofluorescence. Non-specific binding was blocked by incubating the sections in bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 30 minutes. Then the sections were incubated with the corresponding primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. The primary antibodies included rabbit anti-MBP monoclonal antibody 1:5,000 (Abcam, UK, ab21801), rabbit anti-NF-H monoclonal antibody 1:5,000 (Abcam, UK, ab207176) [36], and mouse anti-Japanese encephalitis virus E glycoprotein monoclonal antibody 1:50 (Abcam, UK, ab41671). The next day, the primary antibody solution was removed, and secondary antibodies were added, including Alexa Fluor-488 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Servicebio, Wuhan, China, GB25303, green), Cy3 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Servicebio, Wuhan, China, GB21303, red), and Cy3 goat anti-mouse IgG (Servicebio, Wuhan, China, GB21301, red). Sections were incubated with fluorescent secondary antibodies for 50 min at room temperature. Then, nuclei were stained with DAPI for 10 min. Finally, the sections were coverslipped and sealed with an anti-fluorescence quenching sealing agent and observed under a fluorescence microscope (Nikon eclipse C1). Images were collected (Nikon da-u3), and Image J 180 software was utilized to measure the fluorescence levels. The average fluorescence intensity was calculated by dividing the total fluorescence intensity by the total fluorescent area of the cells.Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)One sciatic nerve of each mouse was placed in an electron microscopy fixation solution at 4°C for 2 to 4 hours. After rinsing in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB) (pH 7.4), the tissues were postfixed with 1% osmic acid (OsO4) in 0.1 M PB for 2 h at room temperature. After dehydration and embedding, ultrathin sections were obtained and observed using a transmission electron microscope (HITACHI HT 7700) for image acquisition and analysis [37,38].Western blot analysisSciatic nerve tissues were ground in cold lysis buffer. After incubation on ice for 30 min, the proteins were recovered by centrifugation at 12,000g at 4°C for 10 min. Total proteins was quantified using the BCA method. Then proteins were denatured and separated by SDS-PAGE. A protein marker was added for molecular labeling. Tissues obtained from mice injected with PBS were used as the control. Proteins were separated by electrophoresis and transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were blocked in a solution of 5% non-fat milk, then incubated with primary antibodies, including rabbit anti-JEV-E polygonal antibody 1:10,000 (Hsinchu Taiwan, Taiwan, China, GTX125867), rabbit anti-MBP monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab218011), rabbit anti-NF-H monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab207176); rabbit anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab283818), rabbit anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab229381), and rabbit anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab183218), at 4°C overnight. Subsequently, the membranes were incubated with corresponding secondary antibodies, goat anti-rabbit IgG 1:10,000 (Absin, China, abs20040ss). The gels were imaged using a Bio-Rad Gel Doc XR imager. The membranes were subjected to densitometry using Image J 180 software. GAPDH (1:10,000) served as an internal control, and the experiment was repeated three times.Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stainingAfter anesthesia, the mice were perfused with PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. The fixed brains were removed from the skull, embedded in paraffin, using standard protocols, sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE).StatisticsData analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 (GraphPad Prism software, La Jolla, CA, USA). All measured data were expressed as means ± standard deviation. Comparisons between the two groups were assessed using the Normality and Levene tests. If the data were determined to have a normal distribution, the t-test was used. If the data failed to pass the Levene test, the Welch t-test was used. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used for non-normal data. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare multiple groups after applying the Normality and Levene tests. The Kruskal-Wallis H test was used on data that were not normally distributed. The Dunnett t-test was used for multiple comparisons between multiple groups. A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The degree of difference was expressed as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001.ResultsMice inoculated with the virus exhibited signs of neurological diseaseTo determine the optimal volume of virus inoculation and the optimal times for disease assessment, we exposed mice to five different virus titers (102pfu, 103pfu, 104pfu, 105pfu, and 106pfu) and evaluated the inoculated mice for 20 days. Mice treated with PBS were used as controls (n = 5). Each titer was injected into five mice (n = 5). All mice inoculated with JEV were designated as the virus group (n = 25). We discovered that mice exhibited limb paralysis and general weakness in each virus titer group. The VPS scores for each titer are shown in S1A Fig. We found that the disease severity did not directly correlate with the viral titer. Furthermore, the mice that received 104pfu (p = 0.0345) and 105pfu (p = 0.0268) presented significant advantages when evaluated. From 1 dpi to 5 dpi, the VPS of the virus group exhibited scores of 0 to 2 points. From 6 dpi to 15 dpi, the scores were between 0 to 5 points, and after 15 dpi, the scores of the virus group were between 0 to 1 point (S1B Fig). These results indicated that some symptoms, such as limb paralysis and frailty, were more severe prior to 15 dpi. On the other hand, when the body weight changes were compared between the virus and control groups, we found that there was no significant difference between the two groups prior to 5 dpi. From 5 dpi to 15 dpi, the changes in body weight between the two groups became more pronounced, indicating that the body weight of the mice in the virus group increased more slowly than in the control group. After 15 dpi, the body weights of the mice in the virus group increased more rapidly (S2 Fig). These results suggested that the mice appeared to be recovering after 15dpi. Based on this information, the virus titer used in the experiment was 105pfu, the observation period was 15 days, and the time intervals were 4 dpi, 8 dpi, 12 dpi, and 15 dpi.Behavioral changes in mice were easy to observe and could be used as an initial assessment to determine whether mice were ill. Based on daily observations of the general condition of the mice, we determined that the mice in the control group presented a shiny hair coat, were active, moved freely with a steady gait, and ran quickly. However, the mice in the virus-exposed group exhibited different degrees of rough hair coats, weakness, and reduced activity. Some exposed mice also exhibited a hunched back, body tremors, limping on one or both hind limbs, and a weakened forelimb grip [39].Body weight also was a good indicator of animal health [40]. The body weights of both mouse groups were recorded daily. Viral infection can lead to decreased appetite and weight loss in mice. The body weights were expressed as means ± standard deviation. We observed that mice in both groups gained weight. However, the weights of mice in the control group increased steadily, from 20.84g ± 1.07g at the beginning of the study to 22.58g ± 1.00g at the end of the investigation. The weights of the virus-exposed mice increased more slowly, with an initial weight of 20.69g ± 1.27g and a weight of 21.66g ± 0.38g at the end of the investigation, which was approximately 1g less than in the control group. Some mice exhibited significant weight loss following virus exposure. However, before 4 dpi, no significant difference in weight was observed between the two groups. While the mean body weight in the virus group was lower than the control group from 4 dpi to 8 dpi, both groups exhibited increased body weights. The mean body weight in the control group increased significantly after 8 dpi, but only a minimal increase or even a decrease in body weight was observed in the virus-exposed mice. The increase in body weight in the virus-exposed mice improved after 12dpi (Fig 1A).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g001Fig 1Behavioral changes of mice at different time.(A) Body weight change of the mice at different time; (B) VPS scores at different time. Kruskal-Wallis H test was used (****p< 0.0001); (C) Hanging wire test at different time. Kruskal-Wallis H test was applied for statistical analysis (**p = 0.005).In addition to observing the general condition of the mice, motor function was evaluated. Based on the viral paralysis scale (VPS), the mice in the control group (n = 18) did not exhibit any stiffness or paralysis of their limbs and received a score of 0 (normal). Virus-exposed mice exhibited progressively slower movements, tail dragging, stiff joints [40], lameness while walking, and an inability to perform normal plantar stepping. In some cases, the virus-exposed mice were unable to support their weight. The VPS ranged from 0 to 6 points. A score of ≤ 2 points indicated no apparent limb paralysis. A score of 3 to 6 points indicated the presence of limb paralysis. An increasing score indicated that the degree of paralysis increased in severity [29]. Compared to the control group at 4 dpi, the VPS of mice in the virus group was ≤ 1 point (n = 7, p > 0.9999). Three mice were scored as 0-points (3/7), and four received a score of 1-point (4/7). A lower tail position and a slight sway in their gait when the mice walked were observed. Starting at 8 dpi (n = 15, ***p = 0.0006), the number of mice with VPS between 3 to 6 points increased. Of the 15 mice that were scored, 4/15 were 0-points, 4/15 were 1-point, 1/15 were 2-points, 2/15 were 3-points, 1/15 were 5-points), and 1/15 were 6-points. Considerable limb paralysis was observed at this stage, including joint stiffness, significant weakness, limb dragging, reduced joint activity, and inability to bear weight. The VPS was between 0 to 5 points at 12 dpi (n = 14, ****p < 0.0001) and 1 to 2 points at 15 dpi (n = 14, ***p = 0.0002). The VPS assessments of 14 mice at 12 dpi were 1/14 as 0-points, 1/14 as 1-point, 3/14 as 2-points, 4/14 as 3-points, 2/14 as 4-points, and 3/14 as 5-points. At 15 dpi the scores were 4/14 as 1-point and 10/14 as 2-points (Fig 1B).We conducted a hanging wire test, which was supplementary to the VPS assessment, to eliminate subjective bias. The motor function of the mouse limbs was assessed by recording the time each mouse was able to suspend its body on an inverted wire mesh. This test assessed the strength of their limbs, which was essential to keep them from falling. Mice in the control group exhibited a robust ability to grasp the wire mesh and were able to move continuously on the upside-down wire mesh frame without falling. The suspension time for the control mice reached even exceeded 180s. Numerous mice in the virus-exposed group fell more than once. The mice barely moved when hanging from the wire mesh and primarily stayed in one place. The lack of movement while suspended on the wire mesh might have helped maintain their limb strength to avoid falling. At 4 dpi (p > 0.9999), only one mouse fell once in the virus group and returned to normal when the experiment was repeated. On the other hand, starting at 8 dpi (*p = 0.0109), additional mice in the virus-exposed group fell one or more times. Some mice who fell on the first trial, occasionally stayed suspended on the wire mesh for 180s in the second or third trial of the day, but most mice fell all three times. Eight of 15 mice in the virus group spent less than 180s suspended on the wire mesh. At 12 dpi, the time the virus-exposed mice were able to suspend their bodies from the wire mesh also was significantly shorter (*p = 0.0283). Six of 14 mice fell and the time they remained suspended was less than 80s. At 15 dpi (p >0.9999), the amount of time the virus-exposed mice remained suspended on the wire mesh was longer than the average time observed at 12 dpi, and fewer mice fell (4/14) (Fig 1C).The VPS and hanging wire test results indicated that, although the virus-exposed mice exhibited considerable limb paralysis (VPS ≥ 3), many mice did not exhibit a significantly shorter time during which they were able to suspend their bodies during the hanging wire test. This may be because mice also presented symptoms such as weakness and reduced activity, which increased the VPS score. However, these factors did not significantly influence the outcome of the hanging wire test. It was consistent that symptoms exhibited by the virus-exposed mice were most prominent from 8 dpi to 12 dpi, indicating that the virus-exposed mice presented considerable limb weakness during this period. After 12 dpi, mice with a score less than 3 points did not exhibit any discernable limb weakness, and the number of mice whose scores were between 1 and 2 points increased. Furthermore, the virus-exposed mice had sufficient limb strength to allow them to remain suspended from the wire mesh. Accordingly, there was no apparent reduction in the time the mice remained suspended during the hanging wire test.Abnormal CMAP of sciatic nerves in virus-exposed miceDue to overlapping symptoms, it is often impossible to distinguish lesions of the central and peripheral nervous systems based only on behavioral observations. Electromyography (EMG) is an important assessment modality for the diagnosis of peripheral nerve diseases. It can identify various types of PNI at an early stage. We focused on the motor function of the sciatic nerve in this study and used EMGs to obtain the CMAP of mice at 4, 8, 12, and 15 dpi. The conduction function of motor nerves was determined based on analysis of the amplitude, end latency, and conduction velocity of the action potentials. We observed small differences in the results obtained with the sciatic nerves on both sides of the mice, but the differences did not reach statistical significance, which was similar to humans. These differences also were observed in the control mice, and the amplitude of the right side was typically slightly higher than the left side. Many factors can cause changes in waveforms [41]. Consequently, we only compared the results obtained on right side. The amplitude of the sciatic nerves in the virus group (n = 45) was lower than in the control group (n = 12), but the differences were relatively small from 4 dpi (n = 5, p >0.9999) to 8 dpi (n = 12, p >0.9999). The amplitude significantly decreased at 12 dpi (n = 14, *p = 0.0326) and 15 dpi (n = 14, *p = 0.0446) (Fig 2A). The latency of the sciatic nerves was not significantly prolonged (p = 0.1136). A prolonged latency was observed at some time points, but the differences were not statistically significant (Fig 2B). The conduction velocity of the sciatic nerves in the virus-exposed mice was significantly decreased at 4 dpi. The decrease was even more pronounced over time, but improved at 15 dpi (****p < 0.0001), although the differences between groups were not significant (Fig 2C). The conduction velocity, which reflected the function of the motor nerve myelin sheath, was significantly decreased in the early stage after virus exposure. In contrast, the amplitude, which represented axon function, decreased significantly only in the moderate-to-advanced stages. These results suggested that JEV infection primarily led to demyelination of the mouse sciatic nerves in the early period and mild axonal lesions appeared later.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g002Fig 2CMAP assessment of the sciatic nerve in mice.(A) Amplitude. Kruskal-Wallis H test was used (*P = 0.0173); (B) End latency. One-way ANOVA was used (P = 0.0903); (C) Conduction velocity. Statistical analysis by one-way ANOVA (****P < 0.0001).Reduction in fluorescence intensity of myelin sheaths and axons of the sciatic nerve occurred at different time pointsMyelin sheaths and axons were labeled with red and green fluorescent proteins, respectively, to understand the corresponding lesions, and the mean fluorescence intensities (MFI) were compared (Fig 3A). The MFI of MBP, a myelin-specific protein, was 157.75 ± 33.86, and NF-H, an axon-specific protein, was 94.78 ± 12.01 in the control group (n = 5). Compared with the control group, the MFI of MBP in the virus-exposed mice decreased significantly at 4 dpi (n = 3, *p = 0.0354). The expression continued to decline from 4 dpi to 12 dpi (8 dpi, n = 5, **p = 0.0066; 12 dpi, n = 6, ***p = 0.0009). However, the MBP expression was elevated at 15 dpi (n = 6, **p = 0.0433) compared with 12 dpi (Fig 3B). Although the NF-H expression levels appeared reduced from 4 dpi to 12 dpi (4 dpi, p = 0.3927; 8 dpi, p = 0.1369; 12 dpi, p = 0.4061) in the virus-exposed mice, the differences were not statistically significant. Only at 15 dpi (*p = 0.0455), the expression of NF-H was significantly decreased in the virus group compared to the control group (Fig 3C). This result indicated that myelin sheath lesions appeared in the early stage of the disease and the axonal damage appeared later in the disease.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g003Fig 3Immunofluorescence of mouse sciatic nerve at different time.One-way ANOVA was used. (A) The sciatic nerve tissue was double stained with MBP + NF-H and labeled with fluorescence. MBP was labeled in red and NF-H in green. Nuclei are stained DAPI (blue); (B) MFI of MBP (**P = 0.0015); (C) MFI of NF-H (P = 0.0666).The ultrastructure alterations of myelin and axons in the sciatic nerves appeared at different timeTEM was used to observe the pathological changes in the nerve tissue, which was a more intuitive analysis method. The sciatic nerves exhibited a complete myelin sheath (MS) around the axons in the control group. The myelin sheaths were tight, the structure of the axons (A) was intact, and no atrophy and degeneration were observed. Compared with the control group, the sciatic nerve of mice in the virus group exhibited considerable myelin swelling, looseness, and even dysmyelination beginning at 4 dpi. The nerves also exhibited Schwann cell (SC) and mitochondrial (M) edema, and reduced numbers of organelles. Unmyelinated fibers (NMN) were abundant. From 8 dpi to 12 dpi, the myelin lesions were increased and the numbers of non-myelinated nerve fibers were reduced. However, no axon lesions were observed at this stage. At 15 dpi, dysmyelination was still present, and some axons showed atrophy and degeneration (Fig 4). The number of non-myelinated nerve fibers was significantly higher than before. These results suggested that demyelination occurred early in the mouse sciatic nerve after JEV infection, but minor axonal degeneration only during the later phases.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g004Fig 4Ultrastructural of sciatic nerve of mice at different time.(A) 2000 × Magnification; (B) 5000 × Magnification. Magnified image of the arrowhead in (A). (MF) Myelinated nerve fiber, (NMN) Nonmyelinated nerve, (MS) myelin sheath, (A) axon, (SC) Schwann cells, (M) mitochondria, (RER) Endoplasmic reticulum structure.Western blot analysis of protein expression in mouse sciatic nervesThe presence and timing of myelin sheath and axonal damage following viral exposure were confirmed by assessing myelin and axon-specific protein expression in sciatic nerves using Western blots. We also detected the expression of the JEV-E protein with the same method (Fig 5A). Each experiment was repeated three times (n = 3), and the data were normalized by the control. Due to the small amount of protein obtained from a single nerve, nerves from five or six mice per group were pooled for each sample. Mice injected with PBS were used as the control. The relative JEV-E protein relative expression was significantly increased at 4 dpi (****p<0.0001) and progressively increased over time (8 dpi and 12 dpi, ****p<0.0001), but was slightly decreased at 15 dpi (****p<0.0001) (Fig 5B). The relative expression of MBP, which indicated fragment formation after myelin disintegration [42], increased from 4 dpi to 15 dpi (****p<0.0001). Numerous myelin fragments were evident in the early stage of the disease, indicating considerable myelin disintegration and loss. These changes were most apparent at 12 dpi and reduced at 15 dpi. This might be due to the large number of myelin fragments engulfed by macrophages at this stage [43] (Fig 5C). A decrease in NF-H expression was first observed at 15 dpi (*p = 0.0111), indicating that mild axonal damage appeared late in the disease course (Fig 5D).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g005Fig 5Western blot analysis of related protein expression levels.Statistical analysis by one-way ANOVA. (A) The protein expression was detected by Western blot. Using GAPDH as the reference, the changes of relative expression of different proteins at different time were compared. (B) Relative expression of JEV-E protein at different time; (C) Relative expression of MBP protein at different time; (D) Relative expression of NF-H protein at different time.These results revealed that C57BL/6 mice infected with JEV exhibited primary demyelination with subsequent mild axonal injury. However, we did not know whether the viral infection injured the nerves directly. Thus, in a follow-up experiment, we conducted a proteomic analysis and confirmed that confirmed that the demyelination was caused by an immune response [44]. Several inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α were identified using Western blots (Fig 6A). The expression of these three cytokines was significantly elevated in the virus group compared with the control group (**p = 0.0029, **p = 0.0061, ***p = 0.0003) (Fig 6B–6D). This result indicated that inflammatory injury occurred in the sciatic nerves.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g006Fig 6Western blot analysis of Inflammatory cytokines expression levels.(A) Inflammatory cytokines were determined by Western blot; (B) Relative expression of IL-1β between two groups; (C) Relative expression of IL-6 between two groups; (D) Relative expression of TNF-α between two groups.Mice exhibited inflammation in the brain after JEV infectionJEV tends to infect the brain leading to central nervous system (CNS) lesions, which also can result in limb paralysis. Therefore, we investigated the brains of the mice in this experiment. Three mice with apparent symptoms from the virus-exposed group were evaluated at each time point. Typically, the cerebral cortex is one of the earliest sites infected by JEV [45]. JEV-E protein localization was detected by immunofluorescence. The negative controls (n = 3) did not exhibit any fluorescent staining in their brains (Fig 7A and 7F), but mice developed extensive virus infection in their brains from 4 dpi to 15 dpi (Fig 7B–7E). JEV-E-positive cells were concentrated in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex, with a small number of virus-positive cells present in the white matter. The fluorescein staining for JEV-E did not decrease over time (Fig 7G–7J).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g007Fig 7Brain infection were demonstrated by Immunofluorescence.A-J: Immunofluorescence analysis of JEV-E protein of mice brains. A through E (Magnification 3x) and F through J(Magnification 30x). A and F: control group. B through E and G through J: The virus group covered different stages.HE staining was used to observe the inflammatory reactions of the brains (n = 3 for all groups). The brain tissues in the control mice displayed normal cellular architecture and no apparent inflammation (Fig 8A and 8F). Although infection in the brains was observed at 4 dpi, no significant signs of inflammation were present (Fig 8B and 8G). At 8 dpi, slight perivascular cuffing was observed (Fig 8C and 8H). This observation was particularly pronounced from 12 dpi to 15 dpi. Infiltration of inflammatory cells, with numerous lymphocytes surrounding blood vessels, was observed. Necrotic lesions and glial nodules also were present (Fig 8D, 8E, 8I and 8J). HE staining revealed that the inflammatory lesions primarily occurred in the thalamus. Although viral-positive cells were mainly found in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, inflammatory lesions were observed in the cerebral cortex only at 15 dpi. These results indicated that inflammatory response gradually increased in the late stage even though the viral infection of the brain was present at the early stage.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g008Fig 8Inflammatory were demonstrated by HE staining of the brains.A through J:HE staining of mice brains. A through E (Magnification 40x) and F through J(Magnification 80x); A and F: control group. B through E and G through J: The virus group covered different stages. No inflammatory cells infiltrated around the vessels (Yellow arrows in A and B); perivascular cuffing (Yellow arrows in C through E); necrosis lesions and glial nodules (Yellow arrows in I and J).DiscussionAcute encephalitis syndrome induced by JEV infection is a disease that severely threatens human health in Asia due to the high rates of mortality and disability that are observed [10]. Survivors may develop permanent mental and neurological dysfunction [46,47]. However, the PNI induced by JEV appears to be a new clinical feature or has been overlooked previously.In this study, after mice were inoculated with JEV, they exhibited a range of symptoms, including weakness, reduced activity, rough hair coat, a hunched back, and body tremors, which were consistent with CNS damage [25,39]. The histological analysis of HE-stained brain sections confirmed these observations. Our experimental findings revealed an inflammatory response in the mouse brains at 8 dpi after JEV inoculation, and the extent of the inflammatory response in the brains gradually increased from 8 dpi to 15 dpi. Limb paralysis was documented in the virus-exposed mice based on the assessment of paralysis and the hanging wire test. These symptoms were most severe at 8–12 dpi, but there was some recovery at 15 dpi. The CNS injury might also exhibit a similar progression, but the time course of the symptom appearance did not support that possibility. Even when the symptoms exhibited by the mice improved, the viral load and the inflammatory response in the brain did not decrease. We performed EMGs to obtain a more accurate determination of whether the limb paralysis was associated with PNI. EMGs are a more accurate method for diagnosing human peripheral neuropathy. Based on the EMG results, we determined that the sciatic nerve conduction velocity in the virus-exposed mice decreased significantly early in the disease, which indicated myelin function, but the latency was not prolonged significantly. Although most mice did not exhibit typical clinical manifestations at this early stage, the decreased nerve conduction velocity demonstrated that demyelination occurred. The amplitude only decreased in the late stage of the disease, indicating that the axon lesions appeared later and might be secondary effects. Myelin sheaths are essential for axons because they provide nutritional support and protection [48]. In addition, infection of motor neurons also can result in axonal degeneration, but we did not investigate this question. However, the EMG results supported our findings. Nerve conduction in both ends of the sciatic nerves was measured using EMG, which reflected the degree of neuropathy in the nerve and allowed the exclusion of motor neuron lesions.We observed the pathological changes in the sciatic nerves by immunofluorescence and TEM. The observed pathology confirmed that demyelination occurred in the early stage and axonal degeneration occurred only in the later stage of the disease. The MFI of MBP was significantly decreased at the early stage and was minimal at 12 dpi. However, the MFI was slightly increased at 15 dpi. The MFI of NF-H was reduced only at 15 dpi. These results were generally in agreement with the EMG results. The amplitude of sciatic nerve was reduced starting at 12 dpi, which was slightly different from the results obtained with immunofluorescence. This might indicate that dysfunction often occurs before the appearance of pathological changes. Similar results were observed with TEM. We did not find re-myelination of the injured nerve using TEM. The Western blot results suggested the reason for this observation. The MBP expression reflected the formation of myelin fragments after demyelination, and the expression significantly increased in the early stage after virus infection and decreased at 15 dpi. However, the NF-H expression decreased only in the later stage of the disease. Clearance of myelin debris by phagocytes is a critical step in the re-myelination process [49,50], but we were not able to obtain information documenting the phagocytosis of myelin debris by TEM. However, the reduced expression of MBP at 15 dpi suggested that the amount of myelin debris was reduced. The JEV infection became more pronounced from 4 dpi to 12 dpi in nerves that were infected by the virus but decreased slightly at 15 dpi. Currently, we cannot fully determine whether the virus infection directly caused the lesions. However, a subsequent proteomics study indicated that the lesions resulted from tissue damage caused by immune responses [44].We discovered that JEV could cause peripheral nerve dysfunction in addition to CNS disorders such as encephalitis. The peripheral neuropathy primarily presented as inflammatory demyelination that appeared early in the disease. Axonal lesions took place in the later stage of the disease, which might have resulted from inadequate neurotrophic factors and protection that myelin provided. This result was consistent with the AIDP subtype in GBS [51]. Although axon degeneration occurred, the mice recovered from paralysis in the late stage because the degree of axonal lesions was not severe at this stage. When phagocytes cleared the myelin debris, re-myelination was possible, which was essential for functional recovery after a demyelinating injury. Thus, symptomatic recovery took place in the virus-infected mice.When flaviviruses invade host cells, the immune response is activated rapidly and triggers inflammation to enable the host defense [52]. This was verified in our subsequent experiment. Using a proteomics analysis, we found that substantial virus-induced immune response-related proteins were up-regulated [44]. The expression of inflammatory cytokines in the sciatic nerve, such as IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, was detected. These inflammatory factors were significantly increased during the JEV infection. It is well known that excessive immune responses can cause tissue damage and harm the host. No mice died in our study, which might have occurred for several reasons: 1) We used C57BL/6 mice, which have a robust immune system [39], allowing them to generate an adequate immune response to clear or reduce the viral load. Numerous studies have utilized A129 or AG129 mice with the interferon receptor knocked out. This protocol improves the viral infection rate but also enhances mortality [53]. 2) We selected subcutaneous viral administration. Many JE studies used intra-cranial injection, which can quickly break through the blood-brain barrier and cause encephalitis [54]. However, we used a subcutaneous route of administration since our study was primarily focused on the peripheral nervous system rather than the CNS. 3) It was necessary to conduct the EMGs in live animals. When mice became very weak, exhibited a significant reduction in body weight, and the VPS was≥4 points, they were euthanized after EMG assessment. Therefore, fatalities due to the disease process were not observed. Approximately one-third of the virus-exposed mice did not exhibit any apparent symptoms or the symptoms were only mild. Because our research focused on PNI, which could develop into chronic disease sequelae or appear at a later stage, it was necessary that the mice exhibit a low mortality rate to identify peripheral neuropathy.It has been reported that JEV can induce or regulate the immune reactions that result in CNS inflammatory demyelination [55]. Despite having diverse glial cell, the CNS and the peripheral nervous system appeared to display similar types of lesions after JEV infection. This observation provides an important direction for future study.Our study confirmed that JEV caused not only CNS injury but also PNI that led to limb paralysis. This was the first demonstration that PNI could be caused by JEV infection in mice. JEV can induce immune responses in the host, leading to inflammatory demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. Our research developed a reliable animal model, which is necessary to further explore the mechanism of JEV-induced PNI.Supporting informationS1 FigBehavioral comparison of mice in different virus titer groups.(A) The VPS scores for each group, Kruskal-Wallis H test was used (*p = 0.0233); (B) The VPS scores of the two groups at different time points. Kruskal-Wallis H test was used. (**p = 0.0033).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigBody weight mean of two goups at different time.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 DataExcel spreadsheet containing, in separate sheets, the underlying numerical data for Figure panels 1A, 1B, 1C, 2A, 2B, 2C, 3B, 3C, 5B, 5C, 5D, 6B, 6C, 6D.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S2 DataExcel spreadsheet containing, in separate sheets, the underlying numerical data for supporting Figure panels S1A, S1B, S2.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Zoonotic Hepatitis E Virus: Classification, Animal Reservoirs and Transmission Routes

1. IntroductionHepatitis E virus (HEV) is a single stranded, positive RNA virus belonging to the Hepeviridae family. Its genome codes for three open reading frames (ORFs) and is 7.2 kb in length. HEV is the leading cause of enterically transmitted hepatitis worldwide. HEV infection can cause an acute hepatitis that is self-limited. However, fulminant hepatic failure can occur in patients with underlying chronic liver disease, in the elderly, and in pregnant women. Complications and extra-hepatic manifestations of hepatitis E, such as acute pancreatitis, renal failure and neurological syndromes including Guillain-Barré syndrome, neuralgic amyotrophy or encephalitis, can also occur [1]. In addition, patients with underlying liver disease and/or immune-deficiencies can develop chronic hepatitis E, exacerbation of liver diseases and cirrhosis, leading to liver transplantation [2,3].The existence of HEV was postulated for the first time during an outbreak of hepatitis in Kashmir Valley in 1978 [4]. HEV, named at that time “enterically transmitted non-A and non-B hepatitis”, was subsequently identified after a human volunteer was infected experimentally with a pooled faecal extract from affected military personnel [5]. This volunteer later developed acute hepatitis and spherical 27- to 30-nm virus-like particles (VLPs) were visualised in his stool by immune electron microscopy (IEM). In the early 1990s, the HEV genome was cloned and sequenced using samples obtained from experimentally infected macaques [6,7].Since the end of the 1990s, additional HEV-related agents have been identified in a large variety of animals ranging from domestic swine, wild boar, deer, rabbit, mongoose, ferret, rat and chicken to bat and cutthroat trout. Following the identification of these novel strains, a new classification has been proposed that divides the Hepeviridae family into two genera: Orthohepevirus and Piscihepevirus [8]. Most of the HEV strains identified so far belong to the Orthohepevirus genus that is divided into four species: Orthohepevirus
A, B, C and D (Figure 1). Four main genotypes of HEV that belong to the Orthohepevirus A species are able to infect humans (HEV-1 to -4). Genotypes 1 and 2 (HEV-1 and HEV-2) infect only humans and are associated with large waterborne epidemics in tropical and subtropical areas. Genotypes 3 and 4 (HEV-3 and HEV-4) are present in humans and other animals, and are the main cause of autochthonous cases of hepatitis E in industrialized countries.The first HEV-related agent identified in an animal was swine HEV. HEV RNA and HEV-specific antibodies were first detected in domestic swine in Nepal in 1995 [9]. Two years later, a swine strain of HEV was identified in pig herds from the United States (US) and characterised genetically [10]. Pigs inoculated intravenously with swine HEV developed viremia prior to seroconversion, had histological evidence of hepatitis, but did not display clinical symptoms [11]. Swine is the major reservoir of zoonotic HEV-3 and HEV-4 worldwide and is highly prevalent in pig herds. Indeed, anti-HEV antibodies were detected in 46%–100% of swine farms from many countries [12,13,14]. HEV-3 and HEV-4 are also able to infect wild boars, which represent, along with domestic pigs, a major reservoir of zoonotic HEV [12,13]. HEV-3 strains have also been detected in different species of deer and in the Japanese mongoose [15,16,17]. In addition, rabbit HEV-3 strains have been identified in farmed rabbits in China [18] and the US [19], in farmed and wild rabbits in France [20] and also in a pet house rabbit [21]. In the Orthohepevirus A species, two other strains of HEV, classified as genotype 5 and 6 (HEV-5 and HEV-6), have also been identified in wild boar in Japan [8,22] and more recently, HEV-7 has been detected in faecal samples from camels [23]. An HEV strain has been characterised in Swedish moose [24] but it is still not assigned to any HEV species.Additional animal species infected with HEV have also been described. However, the HEV strains detected in these animals are genetically more distant from human HEV strains and are classified as different Orthohepevirus species. Avian HEV (Orthohepevirus B) was first described in the United States, and is associated with hepatitis-splenomegaly (HS) syndrome in chickens [25], also called big liver and spleen disease [26]. Avian HEV is enzootic in chicken flocks in the US with a seroprevalence of 71% [27]. A rat strain of HEV has been identified in rats [28], with a seroprevalence rate varying from 13% to 90% in many countries [13]. Other HEV variants have been identified in ferrets in the Netherlands [29] and in mink in Denmark [30] (Orthohepevirus C). Partial sequences with the highest homology to rat HEV have also been detected in foxes [31]. Another species of HEV was identified in different bats from Central America, Africa and Europe (Orthohepevirus D) [32]. Very recently, a HEV strain that might represent a novel Orthohepevirus species has been found and characterized in kestrels and falcons in Europe [33]. Finally, a more distant strain of HEV has been discovered in the cutthroat trout in the US and assigned to the Piscihepevirus genus [34].Anti-HEV antibodies have also been detected in different animal species including goats, sheep, buffalo, work horses, cats and dogs. This suggests that these animal species have been exposed to HEV or a closely related agent. However, no HEV RNA has been identified formally in these animals yet. The design of molecular tools used to detect HEV RNA is based on known HEV sequences and might not be able to detect distantly related variants. It is then likely that other animal strains of HEV exist.In the past 20 years, new molecular tools and the use of metagenomics have highlighted the diversity of HEV strains and susceptible hosts existing. These discoveries have greatly contributed to a better phylogenetic analysis and classification of the Hepeviridae family. In parallel, animal models of HEV infection have been developed and used to study cross-species transmission of the virus and routes of transmission of zoonotic HEV have been identified. This article reviews these recent advances that have contributed to a better understanding of the origins and transmission of zoonotic hepatitis E.2. HEV PhylogenyTo date, 240 complete genomes are available in Genbank (NCBI database), compared to 49 complete genomes available in 2006, with more than 120 sequences of HEV-3. The use of full-length sequences has improved the phylogeny and classification of HEV, but trees generated previously, using shorter sequences from selected genomic regions (partial-ORF1 or partial-ORF2), show similar structures than those generated with full genomes [35].Within genotypes, a high diversity can be observed requiring further classification into subtypes or clade/group and subclade/subgroup (genotype 3, Figure 2) [35,36,37]. Thus, a methodology was recently proposed to standardise HEV subtyping. Using this method, subtypes can be redefined when novel full-sequences are added (Figure 2) [38].2.1. Piscihepevirus GenusThe Piscihepevirus genus (Figure 1) is composed of one species, Piscihepevirus A, and one member, the cutthroat trout virus (CTV) [34] that infects the salmonid fish. CTV is the genetically most distant virus within the Hepeviridae family. It shares 41% to 46% nucleotides (nt) identity and 13% to 26% amino acid (aa) identity with the Orthohepevirus genus [8,34].2.2. Orthohepevirus Genus2.2.1. Orthohepevirus AThe Orthohepevirus A is the best-characterized species sharing 52.44% to 59.11% nt identity with the other Orthohepevirus species, excluding the moose strain (64.5%).Genotypes 1 and 2These two human genotypes are genetically close with almost 76% nt identity. HEV-1 is well described and divided into six subtypes (1a to 1f) while HEV-2 is less documented and divided into 2 subtypes (2a and 2b) (Figure 1) [38]. Strains belonging to genotype 1 share 88.53% to 94.05% nt identity and are found mainly in Asia, Africa and Mexico [40]. Genotype 2 strains were isolated in Central America (Mexico) and Africa (Tchad, Nigeria) [39,41,42,43].Genotype 3HEV-3 is the best described and documented genotype in Genbank. Most sequences originate from humans, pigs and wild boars (Figure 2). HEV-3 is divided into 10 subtypes (a to j) and two clades (3abchij and 3efg) [35,36,38,44,45] (Figure 2), sharing 78.74% to 82.46% nt identity. HEV-3 includes some unassigned strains [38] and rabbit HEV for which genotyping it is still under consideration.Evolutionary studies suggest that the most recent common ancestor for genotype 3 appeared in early 19th century [46] or even in the late 18th century, considering HEV-like outbreak descriptions [47]. Phylogenetic trees are constructed with recent HEV strains using Bayesian approaches to estimate HEV evolution [46]; there are potentially recent bottlenecks through which the various genotypes have passed. A wider sampling of HEV genotypes may show that the present estimates are underestimates of the true evolutionary history of HEV.Clade 3abchij: Within this first clade, HEV strains can be separated into two subclades, 3abj and 3chi, sharing 81.16% to 85.33% nt identity (Figure 2) [35]. HEV strains that cluster in the 3chi subclade share 84.7% to 96.46% nt identity and originate from Europe (France and Germany) and Mongolia. HEV strains within the 3abj subclade share more than 83.75% nt identity. They were isolated in Asia, Europe and North America and are predominantly circulating in Asia and North America. Complete genomes of subtype 3a are from North America and evolutionary studies suggest that it came from Asia and diverged from subtype 3b to subtype 3a in the early 1920s [37,40]. In the subtype 3b, nearly 90% of the full genomes are from Japan, sharing more than 95% nt identity [35,37] (Figure 2). Studies on the origin of HEV in Japan suggest that HEV-3 was imported from Europe in the early 20th century and then diverged into the 3b subtype [37,40]. The subtype 3j was isolated from a pool of pig faecal samples in North America [48], thus, full genome sequences from single animals must be added to validate this subtype [35].Clade 3efg: This clade includes the three subtypes e, f and g, sharing 82.75%–90.57% nt identity, and 3 non-assigned subtypes. Subtypes 3e and 3f are mainly found in Asia and Europe [49,50]. Evolutionary studies have hypothesised that these HEV strains have emerged in Europe around 1871 [37]. There is only one complete sequence for the subtype 3g from Kirgizstan, which is the most divergent virus of this clade (Figure 2). The classification of the subtype 3d is based on one partial ORF2 sequence from Taiwan, it shares 86.18% and 84.87% nt identity with the subtypes 3g and 3h, respectively. Subtype 3d does not belong to any clade so far.Subtype 3ra (rabbit): These strains share 73% to 80% nt identity with other HEV-3 subtypes and form a distinct clade within genotype 3 (Figure 2). This divergence is mainly due to numerous substitutions and insertions in the rabbit HEV genome compared to the other Orthohepevirus A HEV strains [8,51]. As rabbit strains better cluster with other genotype 3 strains, they are provisionally assigned as subtype 3ra [8,38] and divided into 2 subclades [38]. This subtype includes a strain isolated from a human case of hepatitis E in France that shares 80.12% to 86.14% nt identity with the other rabbit strains [51].Genotype 4HEV-4 is mainly found in Asian countries and share between 71.79% and 77.38% nt identity with other genotypes (Figure 1). It is divided into nine subtypes (a–i) mainly isolated from pig, wild boar and human. HEV-4 was also detected in other animals such as sheep, cow and goat in China [52,53]. Nevertheless, more investigations are necessary to determine if these species are reservoirs of HEV-4 or accidental hosts.Genotypes 5 and 6Genotypes 5 and 6 were amplified from wild boars only. They are assigned as subtypes 5a and 6a (Figure 1), sharing more than 78% nt identity amongst themselves and 71.58%–77.38% nt identity with other genotypes. Up to now, there is no human infection associated with these genotypes.Genotype 7Three complete or partial sequences assigned to genotype 7 have been described. Two of them were isolated from camel (Figure 1) [23]. The third one originates from a human transplant patient and is lacking most of the ORF3 region [54]. These strains are close to each other (>86% nt identity) and share 72.55%–76.13% nt identity with other genotypes.2.2.2. Orthohepevirus BOrthohepevirus B strains were amplified from chicken and represent the shortest HEV genome (6.65 kb). This HEV species shares 51.47%–55.05% nt identity with other Orthohepevirus species. To date, there are four different genotypes described from different countries worldwide [55,56,57] (Figure 1) and sharing a low divergence (<6%) [8].2.2.3. Orthohepevirus CThe Orthohepevirus C species shares 51.68%–60.57% nt identity with other Orthohepevirus species. Two different genotypes can be distinguished: C1 and C2. Genotype C1 includes strains isolated from rat (Figure 1). However, some variants with incomplete sequences, isolated from bandicoot and Asian musk shrew, cluster also in this genotype [58,59]. The phylogeny analysis of the full genomes available shows three different clusters within this genotype that may constitute three possible subtypes (Figure 1).Genotype C2 is composed of HEV variants isolated from ferret and mink [8,30] (Figure 1). Only two full sequences of ferret are available sharing 81.9% nt identity.2.2.4. Orthohepevirus DThe Orthohepevirus D species includes only bat HEV. To date, three full genomes are available and constitute the shortest mammalian HEV genome (6.8 kb) [32]. This HEV species shares between 52.8% and 56.06% nt identity with other Orthohepevirus species (Figure 1). A phylogeny analysis with partial sequences isolated from many different countries has shown a high diversity within the Orthohepevirus D species, suggesting that several genotypes can be distinguished [32].2.2.5. Unassigned OrthohepevirusesSwedish MooseHEV strains were recently isolated from Swedish moose [60] (Figure 1). Only one partial genome with complete ORFs is available. A phylogenetic analysis with partial sequences has shown high similarities between different moose strains from the same geographic region (>91% nt identity) [24]. They form a distinct group within the Orthohepevirus genus and are close to the Orthohepevirus A species (63% nt identity).Kestrel (Falconidae)Very recently, a full HEV genome was retrieved from Kestrel [33]. This HEV strain is similar to the other HEV strains in terms of genome length and organization with 51.47%–60.57% nt identity with others Orthohepevirus species (Figure 1). This cluster could constitute a new Orthohepevirus species, close to the Orthohepevirus C species (58.65%–60.57% nt identity). Partial sequences show a low diversity (>87% nt and 99% aa identities) but broader investigations are necessary to better characterize it.Zoonotic strains of the Orthohepevirus A species are more frequently studied and better classified than non-zoonotic HEV. Additional HEV complete sequences from ferret, bat, moose or Cutthroat trout, from various origins (geographic, related host), would improve the classification [24,36,61].3. Animal models of HEV3.1. Non-Human Primates (Historical Model)A number of non-human primate species has shown susceptibility to HEV infection, including chimpanzee, rhesus monkeys, African green monkeys, owl monkey, Tamarin and squirrel monkeys [62]. Natural infection and transmission of HEV-3 has been described in a monkey facility in Japan [63]. In addition, cynomolgus and rhesus macaques can be infected experimentally with HEV-1 to HEV-4 [64,65,66,67] and have served as the primary model of HEV infection [62,68]. Experimental infection of a cynomolgus macaque with a suspension of stool from human patients led to the excretion of VLPs [5,69,70] and the development of hepatitis, characterised by liver enzyme elevations, viremia and seroconversion [69,70,71,72,73]. Moreover, the course of infection in experimentally-infected primates is similar to the one in humans with variable incubation periods. An important application of non-human primate studies was to evaluate the efficacy of potential HEV vaccines [74,75]. Non-human primates were also used to evaluate the zoonotic potential of different HEV strains. It was shown that rhesus monkeys and a chimpanzee, experimentally inoculated with swine HEV-3, developed hepatitis [76]. Inoculation of rhesus monkeys with swine HEV-4 also led to seroconversion and viremia but no significant increase in the serum level of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was observed [77]. The infection of two cynomolgus macaques with rabbit HEV led to the development of a typical hepatitis, suggesting that rabbits may be a source of human HEV infection [78]. However, attempts of cross-species transmission of avian, rat or ferret HEV to non-human primates under experimental condition were unsuccessful [55,79]. Due to limited resources, ethical concerns, and difficult and expensive experimental procedures, little has been learned about the pathogenesis of HEV using primate models.The discovery of HEV strains in different animal species has then led to the development of other naturally occurring animal models.3.2. SwineSwine HEV was identified in 1997 and was shown to be antigenically and genetically related to human HEV [10]. Swine is a natural host of HEV-3 and -4 and specific pathogen free (SPF) pigs have been successfully infected intravenously with samples recovered from patients suffering from hepatitis E infection (HEV-3 and -4) [11,76,80,81]. Infected pigs presented mild gross and microscopic liver lesions, viremia, seroconverted and excreted viable HEV in the faeces. Evidences of extrahepatic sites of HEV replication have also been demonstrated in pigs inoculated intravenously [82,83]. Cross-species transmission experiments were performed using the swine model. SPF pigs were successfully infected with two different rabbit strains of HEV, but not with rat HEV [84]. More recently, transmission of HEV from infected wild boar to wild boar and domestic pigs by contact between the animals was demonstrated [85,86]. However, pigs are resistant to experimental infection with HEV-1 and -2 [81] and swine HEV causes only subclinical infection. There is no evidence of clinical disease or elevation of the liver enzyme ALT in this model, thus limiting its usefulness in pathogenicity studies. Nevertheless, this naturally occurring swine model remains very useful for the study of HEV replication and cross-species infection.3.3. ChickensA chicken model of HEV infection has been developed that presents some advantages: first, like swine HEV, avian HEV is genetically and antigenically related to human HEV [26]. The genomic organisation is very similar to mammalian HEVs. Moreover, avian HEV can be associated with a hepatic disease (HS syndrome). However, in the field, cases of avian HEV infection are mainly subclinical and the pathogenicity linked to avian HEV does not seem to be strain-dependent [87]. SPF chickens can be readily infected by the natural faecal oral route [88] and mild gross pathological lesions and microscopic liver lesions characteristics of HS syndrome have been observed, making it a homologous animal model system to study HEV pathogenesis and replication. Extrahepatic sites of HEV replication were also identified [89]. Cross-species transmission of chicken HEV to turkeys was demonstrated [90]. Infectious cDNA clones of avian HEV were also constructed and capped RNA transcript were used to infect SPF chickens [91,92,93,94], allowing to study in vivo the role of particular regions of the HEV genome in viral replication and pathogenesis.3.4. RabbitsInfection of SPF rabbits with rabbit HEV induces virus shedding in faeces, viremia and the development of hepatitis, characterised by histopathological changes and an increase in the level of ALT in the serum [95,96,97]. In addition, chronic hepatitis, characterised by liver inflammation and some degree of fibrosis, was observed in rabbits experimentally infected with rabbit HEV [95]. HEV antigen and RNA were found in extrahepatic tissues in infected rabbits [98] and high mortality and vertical transmission of HEV in pregnant rabbits was demonstrated [99]. However, similarly to the swine model, rabbit HEV induces only a subclinical infection with little or no sign of disease. The rabbit model may be useful to study HEV infection and pathogenesis caused by the rabbit strain of HEV and for vaccine evaluation [95]. Experimental infection of rabbits with human HEV genotype 1 or 4 led to the development of hepatitis in none of the rabbits inoculated with HEV-1 and in seven out of nine rabbits inoculated with HEV-4 although most of the inoculated rabbits seroconverted [97]. Rabbits were successfully infected with swine HEV-4 [61] and SPF rabbits farmed in the same enclosed space as HEV-infected pigs seroconverted [100].3.5. RatsRodents have been widely used as animal models in scientific and medical research into parasitic, bacterial and viral diseases. Indeed, rodents are easy to handle, manipulate, house and can be used in great numbers. Infection of Wistar rats (via the intravenous or faecal–oral route) with HEV derived from wild rats, can lead to seroconversion and excretion of rat HEV in stool [101]. However, no change in weight and liver enzyme level was observed. The inoculation of Wistar rats with a human stool suspension known to contain HEV-1, led to a successful infection characterised by virus shedding in the faeces, viremia and histopathological changes in the liver, spleen and lymph nodes [102]. However, in two other reports, the injection of HEV-1, -2, -3 (swine) and -4 (wild boar) failed to induce an efficient infection in Sprague-Dawley or Wistar rats [101,103]. Rats were also inoculated with different RNA transcripts from infectious cDNA clones of rat HEV [104], HEV-4 [105] and swine HEV-3 [106] leading to successful infections. Moreover, attempts to infect Wistar and nude rats with ferret HEV failed [78]. The utility of rats as a model of HEV infection still remains to be demonstrated.3.6. FerretsVery recently, two ferrets were inoculated orally with ferret HEV [107], leading to a successful infection characterised by the detection of viral RNA in the stool and the sera, seroconversion and a significant elevation of the liver enzyme ALT. These findings indicate that ferret HEV infection can induce liver damage and ultimately acute hepatitis in ferrets. This suggests that ferrets can be used as a potential animal model to study HEV infection. However, strains naturally infecting this species are close to rat HEV and distant from viruses infecting humans and their use might not be adapted to test antivirals or vaccines.The limited availability, difficulties in handling, manipulating, housing and the cost of both primates and swine severely restrict their use in large number in research. Moreover, naturally occurring small animal models have shown limits in their use to understand HEV pathogenesis and transmission using human strains. Efforts have then been made to develop alternative small animal models that are not natural hosts of HEV.3.7. Mongolian GerbilsMongolian gerbil (Meriones unguiculatus) is a common experimental gerbil species that was also suggested as an alternative animal model to study HEV replication and pathogenesis. Indeed, Mongolian gerbils have been successfully infected via the intraperitonal route with a HEV-4 strain recovered from a swine liver sample [108,109]. In addition to viremia and faecal virus shedding, the virus was detected in the liver, kidney and spleen as well as the small intestine. Moreover, characteristic histopathological changes observed in the liver of infected gerbils were similar to those reported in humans, and the liver enzymes ALT, aspartate transaminase (AST) and bilirubin levels in the sera were significantly increased. Finally, HEV RNA was detected in the liver from seven to 42 days post infection, which is consistent with the last days of HEV RNA detection in the swine model [110], suggesting that HEV RNA replication in the Mongolian gerbil is similar to its replication in the swine model. Using this model, a study has also shown that swine HEV-4 is able to cross the blood–brain barrier and replicate in the brain and the spinal cord after experimental infection [111]. Mongolian gerbils could then be useful to study the neurological disorders associated with HEV infection. In addition, a successful infection of Mongolian gerbils with a human HEV-1 strain isolated from an acute hepatitis E patient has been obtained [112]. HEV RNA was detected in the faeces of the infected gerbils and histopathological changes in the liver, spleen and kidney were reported as well as fatigue and hair loss. Mongolian gerbils seem to be a promising model to study HEV-1 and -4 infection and pathogenesis.3.8. Human Liver Chimeric MiceMouse is a small animal model that is used as a model for many viral infections. The first attempt to infect C57BL/6 mice with HEV-1, HEV-3 and HEV-4 strains failed [113]. In another study, balb/c nude mice were inoculated with swine HEV-4 and HEV antigens were detected in the liver as well as in different extrahepatic organs. Moreover, histopathological changes in the liver and the spleen and increased levels of liver enzymes were observed [114]. However, as reported for pigs, the inoculated mice showed no clinical signs of HEV infection. Very recently, human liver chimeric mice were developed [115]. The liver of UPA/SCID mice was repopulated with primary human hepatocytes and the animals were inoculated with stool-derived virions from humans infected with HEV-1 or -3. Viremia and faecal excretion were reported. Moreover, the co-housing of an HEV-infected mouse with three naïve humanized mice led to successful HEV infection, demonstrating that HEV infection can be transmitted through the faecal oral route in humanized mice, direct physical contact or micro-injuries [115]. HEV-inoculated human liver chimeric mice were also shown to develop chronic HEV infection [116,117] and the treatment of HEV-infected humanised mice with ribavirin led to a statistically significant decrease in the level of HEV RNA in the serum and the faeces and in no more liver damage [115,116]. The human liver chimeric mouse model seems then to be a valuable tool to study the biology of chronic HEV infection and evaluate preclinical drugs. However, this model does not allow immunopathogenesis studies involving adaptive immune responses. Further refinements, such as the transfer of immune cells, may in part overcome these limitations in the future.Much effort has then been made recently to develop small animal models to study HEV pathogenesis and inter-species transmission. Mongolian gerbils seem to be a promising model that is easy to handle, cost-effective and can mimic hepatic diseases. However, more studies need to be performed to determine whether this species is susceptible to other genotypes of HEV such as HEV-3 and HEV-7. It is also not clear whether gerbils can be infected via the faecal–oral route and whether transmission studies can be performed in this model. Naturally occurring models such as ferrets could also represent a good alternative. Nevertheless, their susceptibility to human and other HEV strains from the Orthohepevirus A species remains to be determined. The identification of new strains and hosts of HEV might help in the near future to the development of a suitable naturally occurring animal model.4. Inter-Species Transmission of HEVAs described above, animal models and HEV natural reservoirs have been used to study experimentally the interspecies transmission of different HEV species and genotypes. The results obtained from these different studies are summarised in Figure 3. They clearly show that HEV-1 and HEV-2 are restricted to humans whereas HEV-3 and HEV-4 are naturally present in several animal species and can cross the species barrier. This difference raises the question of species barrier determinants. Several studies have suggested that genetic elements present in HEV ORF1 are involved in species barrier crossing [118,119,120,121].In addition, the zoonotic transmission of HEV-3 and HEV-4 from swine, wild boar and deer to human via the consumption of contaminated meat has been proven. Molecular and phylogenetic analyses of HEV-3 and HEV-4 sequences from human and pig origin have shown high identity between the two populations and the absence of species clustering [49]. This suggests that swine HEV-3 and HEV-4 may not require any adaptation to jump between these two species. A study showing that the consensus sequence of HEV-3 is identical during transmission from human to swine is in agreement with this hypothesis [122]. However, it is still unclear whether strains of HEV-3 and HEV-4 present in other animals can cross the species barrier and infect humans. For example, the ability of rabbit HEV to infect humans and its contribution to zoonotic hepatitis E infection remain to be determined. The successful infection of cynomolgus macaques with rabbit HEV suggests that inter-species transmission of rabbit HEV-3 to human is possible [78]. The identification of a human strain that is closely related to rabbit strains is also in agreement with this hypothesis [51]. Further studies are also needed to determine the risk of zoonotic transmission of other strains from the Orthohepevirus A species such as wild boar HEV-5 and HEV-6. In addition, the recent identification of a human case associated with HEV-7 strongly suggests that this genotype is transmissible from camels to humans [54]. However, the contribution of HEV-7 to zoonotic hepatitis E remains to be clarified. Since zoonotic genotypes such as HEV-3 and HEV-4 can infect multiple animal species, it is also important to determine experimentally whether HEV-7 can infect other species such as rabbit and swine. This will help to clarify whether second or new reservoirs of this potential zoonotic genotype might exist or appear through direct transmission from camels or through human intervention.5. Transmission Pathways of Zoonotic HEVSince the discovery of swine HEV in 1997 [10], the risk of zoonotic transmission of HEV has been questioned and concern for public health has been raised. The first direct evidence of zoonotic transmission of HEV to humans was provided six years later following cases of HEV infection among patients who had consumed sashimi of Sika deer [123]. HEV-3 RNA was retrieved from the left-over deer meat and its sequence was found to be identical to those from the patients (326 nt within HEV ORF1). Three case reports have then provided additional direct evidence that HEV is a zoonosis that can be transmitted via the consumption of contaminated food. In these studies, identical or near identical HEV sequences were detected in patients suffering from hepatitis E and animal products they had consumed: grilled wild boar meat in Japan [124], pig meat in Spain [125] and ficatellu sausage from Corsica [126]. Several reports in Japan, France, Spain and Australia have also linked sporadic cases or outbreaks of hepatitis E with the consumption of raw or undercooked pork or wild boar products (meat, liver, liver paté, ficatellu or liver-based stuffing) without direct proof that these food items were the source of the infection [126,127,128,129,130,131,132,133]. These data are supported by studies showing that the consumption of pork and wild-boar meat and processed products is a risk factor for autochthonous HEV infection and HEV seropositivity [129,134,135,136,137,138]. In one of these studies, consumption of offal and wild-boar meat was found to be associated with autochthonous HEV infection in Germany [134]. Eating pork meat, pork liver sausages, game meat and offal was also found as a major contributor to the presence of anti-HEV antibodies in a recent nationwide survey performed in France [135].HEV-3 and HEV-4 RNA is present throughout the pork food chain worldwide [130,133,139,140,141,142,143]. Studies have reported that 3%–11% of pig liver samples at the slaughterhouse are HEV positive in France (4%) [144], the Netherlands (6.5%) [145], Czech Republic (5%) [141], Italy (6%) [140], Spain (3%) [140], the United Kingdom (3%) [146], Japan (5%) [147] and the US (11%) [148]. HEV RNA was also found in the liver of wild boars (5.8%), deer (3.2%) and wild rabbits (5%) hunted in southwestern France [149] and in the liver of wild boars (1.9%) hunted in north-western Italy [150]. HEV RNA has also been detected in pork sausages sold in the UK (10%) [146] and in Spain (6%) [140]; in ficatelli (30%), dried salted liver (3%), quenelle and quenelle paste (25%) and dried or fresh liver sausages (29%) sold in France [139]; in raw and dry liver sausages purchased in Italy [141], in raw sausages (20%) and liver sausages (22%) sold in Germany [142]; and in pork pâté and blood sausage (36%) sold in Brazil [151].Several studies have shown that such commercially-available pork livers and pork-derived products containing raw liver can contain infectious virus and are potential sources of foodborne HEV. Pigs inoculated intravenously with homogenates from contaminated pig livers sold in grocery stores in the United States became infected with HEV [148]. Moreover, HEV was successfully cultured in human cell lines inoculated with extracts from ficatelli sausages produced in France [152] or raw porcine liver purchased from grocery stores in Japan [153].Recently, a liver-transplant patient from the Middle East who regularly consumed camel meat and milk was found to be infected with camelid HEV-7 [54]. Other animal reservoirs and genotypes of HEV might then be involved in the foodborne transmission of HEV. Milk from HEV-infected animals could also represent another source of zoonotic HEV that need to be further investigated.Other foods that are not derived from animal products can be contaminated with HEV and are possible sources of foodborne HEV transmission. For instance, HEV-3 or HEV-4 RNA has been found in mussels from Galicia (14.81%) [154] and Scotland (85%) [155]; in oysters from coastal regions in Korea (8.7%) [156]; in bivalves from Japanese rivers [157]; and in shellfish from the coastal waters of China [158]. Moreover, experimental bioaccumulation has shown that oysters, flat oysters, mussels and clams can concentrate HEV, mostly in their digestive tissues [159]. Transmission of zoonotic HEV to human via the consumption of seafood has not been proven directly yet as no identical or near identical HEV sequences have been retrieved in patients suffering from hepatitis E and the seafood they had consumed. However, the consumption of shellfish has been strongly linked to an imported case of HEV-4 infection in a Japanese patient who travelled to Vietnam [160] and to an outbreak of hepatitis E on a cruise ship (HEV-3) [161].In addition, HEV RNA has been found in strawberries in Canada [162], in frozen raspberries sold in Europe [163] and in the salad vegetable supply chain in Europe [164], suggesting that soft fruits and vegetables can also be contaminated with HEV RNA. A study has also suggested that herbs and spices can be contaminated with HEV (0.9%) [165].The presence of HEV in shellfish, vegetable and fruits is likely caused by the contamination of surface and irrigation water with animal sewage. HEV RNA has been detected in swine sewage and manure worldwide [133,166,167,168,169] and it was shown that such waste products can be infectious when inoculated experimentally to pigs [169]. Runoff or insufficient treatment of sewage water from pig farms and use of manure as soil fertiliser could then lead to the contamination of neighbouring surface water. This hypothesis is supported by studies that found HEV RNA in surface water in proximity of pig farms [170,171]. HEV sequences similar to sequences found in patients with autochthonous hepatitis E infection and in swine have also been repeatedly found in river and seawater [172,173,174]. In addition, some of the shellfish found to be HEV RNA positive in Scotland were harvested near a slaughterhouse and pork processing plant [118].The presence of HEV in food products derived from natural reservoirs of zoonotic HEV or food that are contaminated by surface and irrigation water raises concerns for public health and food safety worldwide. A subunit vaccine based on the expression of a truncated viral capsid is able to confer full protection after three doses and is licensed in China [175]. However, such vaccine has not yet been approved and commercialised in other countries. Prevention of zoonotic HEV relies mainly on avoiding raw and undercooked meat or selfish and cooking meat and meat products thoroughly. A few studies have been conducted using cell-culture [176,177] or in vivo swine experimental models [178,179] to determine the stability of HEV in the environment and in food products. Infectious viruses are still present in faecal suspension or cell-culture supernatant after heating at 56–60 °C [176,177]. Efficient inactivation of HEV in food products derived from infected pork liver was only achieved after a cooking time of at least 20 min at an internal temperature of 71 °C [178,179]. Temperatures equivalent to rare and medium-to-rare cooking are then insufficient to inactivate the virus and cooking food thoroughly and evenly is highly recommended to prevent foodborne transmission of HEV. Appropriate hygiene measures such as frequent hand and surface cleaning should also been followed when handling uncooked meat. In addition, swine waste should be properly eliminated and the use of swine manure as soil fertiliser should be regulated to reduce the risk of HEV contamination of crops and surface water.As described above, HEV RNA has been detected in diverse food products ranging from meat and seafood, to fruits and vegetables. However, it is still unclear whether infectious lived virus can be present in most of these items. To solve this issue, a robust cell culture system needs to be developed rapidly. Such model will also help to clarify whether infectious viruses can be present in pork products that contain no liver such as cured ham. Indeed, the high HEV seroprevalence in human found in some countries such as France (22.4%) [135] cannot be explained only by the consumption of products containing raw pork liver such as ficatelli. Efforts are also needed to establish standardized methods to ensure a quality control of products at risk and the HEV oral-infectious dose remained to be determined to perform risk assessment studies.In addition to foodborne routes of transmission, seroprevalence studies have suggested that direct contacts with infected animal reservoirs are risk factors for HEV exposure. Higher seroprevalence of anti-HEV antibodies was found in swine workers and veterinarians in the United States [180,181]; in swine veterinarians in France [137] and the Netherlands [145]; in swine farmers in Sweden [182], France [137] and Moldovia [183]; and in pork butchers in Burkina Faso [184]. In addition, higher HEV seroprevalence was detected among French hunters [100] and among forestry workers in France [137,185] and Germany [186]. The presence of stools from infected wild animals in forest may represent a source of contamination for this population. Interestingly, simple prevention measures such as wearing gloves and wearing boots for pig farmers, forestry workers or hunters are associated with reduced risk of HEV exposure [137,187]. A cross-sectional survey conducted in China has also found a higher anti-HEV IgG seroprevalence in seafood processing workers who have direct contacts with raw seafood [188]. Direct contacts with contaminated food and water might then represent a risk of HEV infection.Contact with pet pig might also represent a possible source of HEV infection. In one study, frequent contact with a pet pig was reported to be the most likely cause of contamination of a French patient with acute hepatitis E [189].6. ConclusionsMany novel strains of HEV have been identified in the last decades in diverse animal species. These discoveries have led to the reviewing of the Hepeviridae family classification and the ratification by the ICTV of a new taxonomic structure [8]. Nevertheless, it is very likely that additional HEV variants exist and that this classification will further evolve in the future. Available diagnostic tools are based on identified HEV strains and are probably not able to detect all the existing HEV strains. It is essential then that new molecular techniques are designed rapidly to detect a larger diversity of HEV strains and hosts. The wider use of metagenomics and deep sequencing could also contribute to the identification of HEV variants. Swine have been studied as the main HEV reservoir since its discovery in the late 1990s and HEV screenings in food have focussed mainly on pork-derived meat and meat products. However, it is possible that other animal reservoirs representing a significant risk for the zoonotic transmission of HEV exist. More studies are then clearly needed to screen a larger variety of food products derived from diverse animal species, including rabbit, camel and many others for the presence of HEV RNA and infectious virus. An exhaustive understanding of the extent of the animal reservoirs and transmission routes representing a risk for zoonotic hepatitis E infection is essential to prevent and control efficiently the disease in the future.


Title: Hepatitis E Virus Entry

1. IntroductionHepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is a common cause of acute hepatitis worldwide [1]. Each year about 20 million individuals are infected with HEV, resulting in ~44,000 deaths. In recent years, increased cases have been reported in developed countries. In addition to humans, HEV also infects a wide range of animal species [2]. At least six different HEV genotypes have been shown to be able to infect humans. Most cases in developed countries are caused by zoonotic transmission of genotype 3 HEV through consumption of contaminated pork and game meat. In addition, genotype 3 HEV infections frequently cause persistent infections in individuals with a weakened immune system resulting in an increased risk for accelerated liver cirrhosis. HEV infection-related extrahepatic manifestations including various neurologic problems have also been described [2]. Despite these public health concerns, direct antivirals are not available for HEV. Ribavirin, a broad spectrum nucleoside analog, has been used in treating patients with chronic hepatitis E [3,4], but resistance mutations have been described [5,6]. There is an HEV vaccine available in China that offers long-term protections against clinically symptomatic acute hepatitis caused by both genotype 1 and 4 HEV infections [7,8]. This vaccine is currently under evaluation in a phase 1 clinical trial in the United States (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT03827395) and in a phase 4 clinical trial in Bangladesh (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT02189603).Since its discovery in the 1980s, HEV has been considered as nonenveloped [9]. While this is true for virions in the bile and feces, it is now recognized that virions circulating in the bloodstream exist in a membrane associated, “quasienveloped” form (eHEV) [10,11]. eHEV particles are infectious, but they do not have classic envelope proteins thus infect cells via an unusual mechanism [12,13]. Elucidating the entry mechanisms for both virion types is critical for understanding the unique life cycle of HEV and its pathogenesis. Knowledge obtained from studying HEV entry may also aid in the development of antiviral drugs, which is crucial for patients with chronic hepatitis E experiencing ribavirin failure and in severe liver disease in pregnant women from developing countries. This review will begin with a discussion about the structural differences between the two HEV virion types, then discuss the current understanding regarding the entry mechanism for each virion type. 2. Two Types of Virions Naturally Exist during an HEV InfectionHEV was discovered in 1983 by Dr. Mikhail Balayan, a Russian virologist who intentionally infected himself by ingesting pooled stool samples collected from HEV-infected Russian soldiers deployed in Afghanistan [9]. He subsequently developed acute hepatitis. By examining his fecal material using electron microcopy (EM), Dr. Balayan obtained the first morphologic evidence of HEV virions, which appeared as nonenveloped icosahedral particles, 27–30 nm in diameter, with a “spiky” surface [9]. Due to its similar structural appearance to the calicivirus, HEV was initially misclassified within the Caliciviridae family. In 1990, HEV was molecularly cloned and its full genome was sequenced [14]. The significant sequence divergence of HEV from other known families of viruses led to its reclassification into a new family, Hepeviridae. The 7.2 kb single-stranded positive sense HEV RNA genome was shown to be polyadenylated and contain three open reading frames (ORFs) (Figure 1a). The 5’ two-thirds of the genome encodes ORF1, a large multi-domain polyprotein that is involved in the genomic replication. The rest of the genome encodes ORF2 and ORF3, both of which are translated from a subgenomic RNA generated during the virus replication cycle. ORF2 is the only capsid protein of HEV. The ORF3 protein is unique to HEV and plays a role in virion egress [15]. A new ORF, ORF4, was recently discovered within the coding region of ORF1, but appears to be restricted only to genotype 1 HEV [16].The ORF2 capsid protein of HEV contains 660 amino acids (a.a) that are divided into 3 structural domains: a shell (S) domain, a middle (M) domain, and a protruding (P) domain comprised of a.a. 129–319, 320–455, and 456–606, respectively [17]. Each virion consists of 90 copies of an ORF2 dimer, forming a T = 3 icosahedron. Recombinant ORF2 proteins expressed in the bacterial and insect cells can self-assemble into virus-like particles (VLPs), of which the crystal structures have been determined [17,18,19,20]. p239, a T = 1 VLP composed of a.a. 368–606 and produced in E. coli, is the main component of the vaccine Hecolin® currently marked in China. According to the 3D structure, the S domains form the base of the icosahedron, and the dimeric P domains form the “spikes” extending from the virion surface that are believed to be responsible for receptor binding and a main target for neutralizing antibodies [21]. The enteric route of transmission, EM evidence of naked virions in the feces, and the lack of coding capacity for envelope proteins all suggest that HEV is a nonenveloped virus. However, recent studies show that the virus released from infected cells and circulating in the blood adopts a membrane associated, “quasienveloped” form, named “eHEV” [10,11,22] (Figure 1b). These particles band at a much lower buoyant density (~1.10 g/cm3) in isopycnic gradient centrifugation than the traditional, nonenveloped virions (~1.25 g/cm3) [13], and are insensitive to neutralizing anti-capsid antibodies in standard neutralization assays [10]. Under EM, these particles look like enveloped viruses, with HEV capsids encased in limiting host-derived membranes [11]. Unlike naked HEV particles, the eHEV particles contain both ORF2 and ORF3 proteins. However, both of them are hidden within the host-derived membranes and can only be detected by specific antibodies upon disruption of the membrane by detergent [10]. eHEV is the only form detected in blood [23], suggesting that it mediates HEV spread within the host.The biogenesis of eHEV has been reviewed elsewhere [24,25]. The prevalent model involves viral hijacking of the cellular endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) machinery, producing an exosome-like vesicle containing the viral capsid and ORF3 protein. Usurping ESCRT components is a common mechanism for the budding of classic enveloped viruses [26]. The HEV ORF3 protein plays a key role in this process. A proline-serine-alanine-proline (PSAP) late domain motif located at the C-terminus of ORF3 specifically interacts with the cellular TSG101 (tumor susceptibility gene-1) protein, an ESCRT-I protein, which then recruits ESCRT-II and –III complexes to promote the budding of the HEV capsid into multivesicular bodies (MVB) [27]. Subsequent fusion of MVB with the plasma membrane leads to the release of single membrane-encased eHEV particles. Consistent with the biogenesis pathway for exosomes, eHEV membranes contain tetraspannins such as CD63, CD81, and CD9 [11,28]. Certain host proteins are likely copackaged during eHEV biogenesis, but their identity and roles in the HEV life cycle remain largely unexplored. A recent study used a quantitative proteomic approach to identify proteins associated with quasienveloped hepatitis A virus (eHAV) [29]. It has revealed that the eHAV particles are highly enriched for components of the endolysomal system such as CD9, DPP4 (dipeptidylpeptidase 4, CD26), ALIX, and EPCAM (epithelial cell-adhesion molecule), but lack LC-3 (an autophagosomal protein)-related peptides, consistent with an endosomal exosome-like origin of eHAV. This approach may be also useful for identifying eHEV-associated proteins.The nonenveloped HEV particles found in the feces likely originated from eHEV released through the bile canaliculi, but their membrane are stripped by the detergent action of bile [22]. The lack of lipid membrane renders the nonenveloped virions much more stable in the environment to facilitate transmission to new hosts.The production of two virion types is integral to HEV biology. Thus, it is important to understand how each virion type plays a role in the infection process. The available experimental evidence suggests that they enter and infect target cells through distinct pathways.3. Cell Entry of Naked HEVThe naked, nonenveloped HEV particles are present in the bile and feces of infected patients or experimentally infected monkeys [23,30,31]. These particles are stable in the environment and ideal for transmission to new hosts. Although HEV is primarily transmitted enterically, how it penetrates the gut barrier to reach the bloodstream remains enigmatic. No compelling evidence exists that HEV replicates in the human gut, although it is possible that HEV infects only a rare cell type in the gut, as is the case for norovirus [32]. Regardless of the origin of the first cell to be infected, whether a hepatocyte or a yet-to-be-identified cell type in the gut, naked HEV is necessary for establishing the first round of infection.Despite being highly hepatotropic in vivo, under in vitro conditions, HEV is able to infect a range of cell types other than hepatocytes, including A549 (human lung epithelial cells), Caco-2 (human colon epithelial cells), human neuronal-derived cells, and human placenta cells [33,34,35,36,37,38,39]. This widened cell tropism in vitro is not unique to HEV, as hepatitis A virus (HAV), which is known to only infect hepatocytes, can also infect many nonhepatic cell types in vitro [40]. It should be noted that cancer cell lines often bear genetic abnormalities and altered phenotypes as compared to their corresponding primary cells in vivo, thus results obtained from such cells must always be interpreted with caution. Study of the HEV life cycle has been hampered by the lack of efficient cell culture systems for HEV [41]. The particle to focus-forming unit (FFU) ratio for HEV ranges from 600 to 15,000, prohibiting the use of single particle imaging techniques to track the HEV entry process. Most published studies have used fluorescently labeled VLPs to study the early steps of cell entry including initial cell attachment and internalization. The recent development of HEV infection systems has provided the first opportunity to study the entire HEV life cycle in detail [38,39]. Below we summarize the current knowledge regarding the entry process of naked HEV particles. 3.1. Cell AttachmentThe receptor for HEV is unknown. However, a number of host factors have been shown to be involved in cell attachment and/or entry of naked HEV. These factors are summarized below.3.1.1. HSGPs (Heparan Sulfate Proteoglycans)HSGPs are glycans present on the cell surface that are involved in cell attachment of many nonenveloped and enveloped viruses. HSGPs, particularly syndecans, have been shown to play a role in the binding of HEV VLPs to human hepatoma cells [42]. Treatment of cells with heparinase reduced VLP binding and HEV infection. However, HSGPs are not essential for cell attachment and infection by eHEV particles [13].3.1.2. GRP78 (Glucose-Regulated Protein 78)GRP78, also known as BiP (binding immunoglobulin protein), is a molecular chaperone in the ER. However, presence of GRP78 on the cell surface has also been described and implicated in the attachment and entry of both enveloped and nonenveloped viruses [43,44,45,46]. GRP78 binds to p239 VLPs in both co-immunoprecipitation and a cell model [47].3.1.3. ASGPR (Asialoglycoprotein Receptor)ASGPR is a protein receptor present on the basolateral membrane of hepatocytes that binds glycoproteins that lack sialic acid modifications. A direct interaction has been shown between the ectodomain of both ASGR1 and ASGR2 and HEV ORF2 by coimmunoprecipitation, pull-down, and ELISA [48]. Ectopic expression of ASGRP in HeLa cells increased HEV binding, whereas depletion of ASGPR in PLC/PRF/5 cells lowered HEV binding but not virion release. Both anti-ASGPR antibody and purified ASGPR ectodomain also reduced HEV binding to PLC/PRF/5 cells.3.1.4. ATP5B (ATP Synthase Subunit 5β)ATP synthase is largely a mitochondrial protein, but a small fraction is expressed on the cell surface and is implicated in other viral infections [49]. ATP5B was identified as a binding partner on the p239 VLP using a pull down and mass spectrometric approach [50]. The role of ATP5B in HEV entry was validated using antibody and siRNA mediated approaches, and infectious HEV from the stool of a hepatitis E patient. 3.1.5. ITGA3 (Integrin Alpha 3)Integrin α3 was recently identified as an entry factor for HEV in PLC/PRF/5 cells [51]. HEV permissive and nonpermissive subclones of PLC/PRF/5 have been identified, and compared to each other by microarray. Overexpression of integrin α3 in nonpermissive cells rendered cells permissive for HEV, while knocking out integrin α3 in permissive cells abrogated permissiveness. For unknown reasons, none of these subclones supported infection by eHEV particles. Although these results are encouraging, independent studies will be needed to validate the role of these factors in HEV and eHEV cell attachment and entry in the context of infection, preferably in primary human hepatocytes.3.2. Internalization and Intracellular TraffickingUsing GFP- and firefly luciferase-tagged VLPs and naked HEV particles, Kapur et al. showed that HEV is internalized by cells in a clathin-, dynamin-dependent pathway [52]. An independent study using FITC-labeled VLPs subsequently confirms these results, and additionally shows that HEV-like particles initially traffic to Rab5-positive compartments, then to acidic lysosomal compartments where they are degraded [53]. The same study has also identified membrane cholesterol, the PI3K pathway, and actin as important factors for HEV internalization and infection, but low pH is not required. More recently, using naked HEV purified from cell lysates, we have shown that HEV infectivity is dependent on clathrin and dynamin 2, consistent with others. However, we found that the infectivity of naked HEV is not affected by inhibiting Rab5 and Rab7, or by lysosomotropic agents such as bafilomycin and ammonium chloride [13]. These results suggest that the uncoating of naked HEV particles occurs before reaching the Rab5+ compartment, and the co-localization of capsids to Rab5 observed by others likely represent empty capsids that remain in the endocytic pathway after genome release.3.3. UncoatingAs a cytoplasmically replicating RNA virus, HEV has to deliver its genome across the endosomal membrane to access the cytoplasm for translation and replication. How this process takes place remains poorly understood. Studies with other nonenveloped RNA viruses have demonstrated that upon receptor binding the virions undergo structural rearrangements to cause the externalization of hydrophobic peptides [54]. These hydrophobic peptides subsequently insert into the endosomal membrane, creating a channel/pore through which the genome traversed the endosomal membrane to enter the cytoplasm. Viral capsids remaining in the endosome are ultimately degraded in the lysosomes. Since naked HEV particles do not colocalize with Rab5 and Rab7, HEV capsids may undergo substantial conformational changes during the uncoating process. 4. Entry of Quasienveloped HEVThe presence of a quasienvelope raises several questions about the entry mechanism for eHEV. How does eHEV bind to cells and how is its cell tropism determined? Does eHEV entry involve membrane fusion? And does eHEV have a different uncoating mechanism from naked HEV? While there are no definitive answers for these questions, available evidence suggests that the eHEV quasienvelope is degraded by lysosomal enzymes prior to uncoating. If this model holds true, it would present a novel entry mechanism for viruses. 4.1. Cell AttachmentSince quasi-enveloped HEV particles do not have viral proteins on the surface of their envelope, they must use different attachment factors and/or cellular receptors to initiate the viral entry. As with exosomes, the eHEV membrane has phosphatidylserine, which may bind to its receptor such as TIM-1 on the target cells [55,56]. Our previous study found that the cellular uptake of the eHEV virions is less efficient than naked HEV due to inefficient cell attachment, indicating that the undetermined molecules on the eHEV surface mediate the cell attachment with slower kinetics [13]. Unlike the naked HEV virion, the attachment of eHEV to the hepatocytes does not require HSPGs [13].The less specific cell binding by eHEV may provide an explanation for the detection of HEV beyond the liver [57]. In addition, the exosome-like nature could facilitate its penetration of immunologically privileged sites such as the central nervous system. Since HEV infection has been associated with various types of extrahepatic manifestations [12], a better understanding of the tropism and replicative capacity of eHEV in relevant cells/tissues will help differentiate between virus-mediated and immune-mediated effects in these conditions and shed light on HEV pathogenesis.4.2. Internalization and Intracellular TraffickingSimilar to naked HEV particles, eHEV enters hepatocytes mainly through the clathrin- and dynamin-dependent pathway [12,52]. Following the endocytic uptake, eHEV particles are transported sequentially into Rab5+ and Rab7+ endosomal compartments, and eventually reach the lysosome, where the uncoating is thought to take place [13,53]. Treatment of cells with lysosomotropic agents such as bafilomycin A1 and NH4Cl dramatically reduces eHEV infectivity, indicating that the endosomal acidification is required for eHEV entry. However, the low pH itself is not sufficient for eHEV cell entry, since extracellular exposure to low pH did not alter the density or infectivity of eHEV [13].The study of eHAV has provided additional insights into the intracellular trafficking of quasienveloped viruses [58]. Confocal imaging experiments using fluorescently labelled eHAV particles suggests that intact eHAV is transported to the lysosome, but similarly labelled exosomes produced by uninfected cells do not colocalize with lysosomal markers. It is speculated that the eHAV membrane may contain a signal that drives its continued trafficking towards the lysosome [58]. Whether eHEV uses a similar mechanism for trafficking to the lysosome is unknown, but would be an interesting area for future investigation.4.3. UncoatingThe presence of a quasienvelope would require the HEV capsid to penetrate two layers of membranes in order to deliver the viral genome into the cytoplasm. One possible way to achieve this is through fusion of the viral membrane with the cellular membrane. However, membrane fusion would result in the intact capsid, rather than the genome, entering the cytoplasm, likely a dead end for HEV. A second, more likely scenario is by removing the quasienvelope, so that the capsid will be exposed and available for binding to a receptor. Lipid membrane degradation in lysosomes is a complex process [59]. A critical step for lipid membrane degradation is the Niemann-Pick disease type C1 (NPC1)-mediated extraction of cholesterol from lipids. Depletion of NPC1 reduced eHEV infection by 50% without significantly affecting HEV infectivity [13]. Moreover, cells pretreated with a specific inhibitor of lysosomal acid lipase (LAL), an enzyme essential in lipid metabolism because it hydrolyzes cholesteryl esters and triglycerides in lysosomes [60], displayed a dose-dependent reduction in eHEV infectivity, while no reduction was observed for non-enveloped HEV infectivity [13]. These results provide evidence that the eHEV membrane is degraded in the endolysosomes, rather than fusing with the host membrane (Figure 2). A similar requirement of NPC1 and LAL has also been described for eHAV entry [58].Once eHEV loses its membrane, the capsid would be free to interact with its receptor on the endosomal membrane. At the simplest level, the capsid binds to the same receptor for naked HEV and uncoat via the same mechanism. Many cell surface proteins cycle between the plasma membrane and endosomes, serving as attractive candidates if this is the case. Alternatively, a different receptor may be used for eHEV capsids, and it is not uncommon for viruses to switch receptors during the entry process [61,62].An unexplored question is the role of ORF3 in eHEV entry. ORF3 has been shown to interact with ORF2 [63]. Thus, the presence of ORF3 may interfere with receptor binding. In addition, ORF3 possesses an ion channel activity that is required for HEV egress [64]. It will be interesting to know whether this activity also plays a role in eHEV entry.5. SummaryThe presence of two distinct virion types has challenged our view about the fundamental biology and pathogenesis of HEV. The ability of HEV to infect its target cells both in the presence and absence of a viral membrane is a paradigm shift in virology and an exciting area for future investigations. The available evidence suggests that naked and quasienveloped HEV particles use different mechanisms for cell entry, and that entry of eHEV requires lysosomal degradation of the viral membrane. Identifying the cellular receptor for both virion types will be key to elucidating their entry mechanisms. Since eHEV is the only form detected in the bloodstream, understanding how eHEV spreads has the potential for identifying targets for intervention. With the recent development of more efficient culture systems for HEV, it is anticipated that our understanding of HEV entry will be improved within the next few years. 


Title: Hepatitis E Virus: Foodborne, Waterborne and Zoonotic Transmission

1. IntroductionHepatitis E virus (HEV), the causative agent of hepatitis E in humans, is an important public health disease in many parts of the World [1,2,3,4]. Transmission is primarily via the fecal-oral route through contaminated food or water [5]. In developing countries in Asia and Africa, poor sanitation conditions lead to outbreaks of acute hepatitis E; however, sporadic and autochthonous cases of hepatitis E also occur throughout many industrialized countries in Europe, Asia, and North America [6,7]. In humans, the mortality rate ranges from 0.5–4% for immunocompetent individuals, however, mortality in HEV-infected pregnant women can reach up to 20% and immunocompromised individuals may develop a chronic HEV infection [8,9]. In addition to humans, HEV has been identified in numerous other animal species including wild and domestic swine, deer, chicken, mongoose, rat, ferret, fish, and rabbits with an ever-expanding host range [1,7,10]. Hepatitis E is now a recognized zoonotic disease with swine and likely other animals serving as the reservoir for human infections [1,8]. Food safety associated with HEV contamination is an important public health concern with the recent identification of infectious HEV in meat and meat products and resultant sporadic cases of foodborne hepatitis E in the human population [3,11,12,13,14]. This review article discusses the public and environmental health concerns and risks associated with HEV infection with an emphasis on foodborne and zoonotic transmissions.2. HEV Classification and Biology2.1. ClassificationHEV belongs to the genus Hepevirus in the family Hepeviridae and consists of four recognized genotypes and at least two putative new genotypes [5]. Genotype 1 causes large outbreaks of acute hepatitis E in humans in Asia. Genotype 2 causes outbreaks in humans and includes one Mexican strain and several African strains. Genotype 3 is associated with sporadic, cluster, and chronic cases of hepatitis E in humans, mostly in industrialized countries. Genotype 3 HEV is known to be zoonotic and has also been isolated from domestic and wild swine, deer, mongoose, rats, and rabbits [12,15,16,17,18,19]. Genotype 4 HEV is also zoonotic and is associated with sporadic cases of hepatitis E in humans and infects wild and domestic swine and reportedly cattle and sheep [1,5].Avian HEV from chickens only shares approximately 50% nucleotide sequence identity with mammalian HEV; therefore, avian HEV likely represents a separate genus [20]. The genus Avihepevirus has recently been proposed to include all three known genotypes of avian HEV in chickens (Genotype 1 in Australia and Korea, Genotype 2 in the United States, and Genotype 3 in Europe and China) [1,21,22]. The recently-identified rat HEV shares approximately 59.9% and 49.9% sequence identities with human and avian HEV, respectively, while the ferret HEV shares the highest sequence identity with rat HEV at 72.3% [18,23]. The genus Orthohepevirushas has recently been proposed to encompass both the rat and ferret strains of HEV as well as a novel wild boar HEV strain recovered in Japan that differed from the known Genotypes 1–4 HEV isolates by 22.6–27.7% in nucleotide sequence identity [1,24]. A bat HEV was recently identified from African, Central American, and European bats, and due to high sequence diversification from known HEV isolates at 47% amino acid sequence identity, the bat HEV forms a novel phylogenetic clade [25]. The genus Chiropteranhepevirus has been proposed to include all variants of the bat HEV [1]. Finally, a strain of HEV was also identified in cutthroat trout in the United States with only 13–27% sequence homology with mammalian or avian hepeviruses leading to a proposal of another tentative genus, Piscihepevirus, within the Hepeviridae family [1,26]. The nomenclature of HEV will need to be modified in the near future as more genetically-divergent animal strains of HEV are identified.2.2. HEV BiologyThe genome of HEV is a single-stranded, positive-sense, RNA molecule of approximately 7.2 kb in size [3,4,27]. The genome consists of three open reading frames (ORFs), a 5′ non-coding region (NCR), and a 3′ NCR [10]. ORF1 encodes non-structural proteins with conserved domains functioning as a methyltransferase, helicase, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), and a papain-like cysteine protease [20,28]. In addition, a hypervariable region (HVR) within ORF1 may play a role in viral pathogenesis despite being shown to have no influence on viral infectivity [29]. ORF2 encodes the immunogenic capsid protein, which interacts with 3′ viral genomic RNA for encapsidation and contains an endoplasmic reticulum signal peptide and 3′ N-glycosylation sites [30,31]. ORF3 encodes a small phosphoprotein with incompletely understood functions; however, the association with cytoskeleton and its necessity for in vivo viral infection in rhesus macaques suggests that ORF3 plays a role in viral replication and assembly [20,32,33].Avian HEV is genetically related to mammalian HEV with conserved genomic organization and function despite a 600 bp sequence deletion [34,35,36]. The capsid protein of avian HEV contains both unique and conserved antigenic epitopes in comparison to the human and swine HEV capsid proteins [37].The HEV replication cycle is currently not well understood due to a lack of an efficient cell culture system [38]. Heparin sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs) likely act as receptors for the attachment of the viral capsid protein, and the heat shock cognate protein 70 may be involved in HEV entry into the cell [38]. Following uncoating in the cell, the HEV genomic RNA is likely utilized to translate the non-structural proteins and the viral RdRp is used to produce progeny virus [38]. Both ORF2 and ORF3 are translated from a bicistronic subgenomic RNA [32,39]. The negative-sense HEV RNA indicative of virus replication is detectable in hepatic and extrahepatic tissues of experimentally-infected rhesus macaques and swine [38,40]. Post-translational processing of proteins and mechanisms of virus assembly and release have yet to be fully elucidated, and the viral-host interactions leading to a disease state are also poorly understood [5,20,38]. Development of a robust cell culture system to efficiently propagate HEV in the future should be a priority, and will facilitate our understanding the biology of this important virus.3. HEV Pathogenesis3.1. HEV Infection in HumansIn humans, HEV causes an acute icteric disease that varies in symptoms from subclinical to fulminant hepatitis [4]. The asymptomatic patient typically clears the virus rapidly, while the symptomatic patient experiences clinical signs including anorexia, hepatomegaly, myalgia, jaundice and sometimes abdominal discomfort, nausea, vomiting, and fever [5,41]. In immunocompromised patients such as organ transplant recipients, lymphoma and leukemia patients, or patients with HIV infection, the course of disease may progress to a chronic state with cirrhosis of the liver and persistence of viral shedding [42,43,44,45,46]. Of particular concern is the ability for HEV-infected immunocompromised individuals to develop clinical disease well after the initial exposure [44,45,46,47]. Currently, chronic HEV infection in immunocompromised individuals is an emerging and significant clinical problem. Future studies are warranted to identify the immunological correlates and host factors leading to chronicity.The typical infection begins with an incubation period of 2 weeks to 2 months and a transient viremia followed by viral shedding in the feces, disappearance of viremia with the onset of clinical signs, and regression of viral shedding with potential jaundice setting in around 2–3 weeks into the infection [46]. The severity of HEV infection is considered dose-dependent and host factors such as concurrent hepatic disease or alcohol overuse may also contribute to the disease course [41]. In studies from France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States, middle-aged, elderly men were more likely to experience autochthonous HEV infection; however, the underlying host factors have not been understood [48,49,50,51]. Of major concern is the relationship between pregnancy and increased mortality rates up to 20% in HEV endemic regions; however, this relationship appears to be geographically dependent and may be associated with other underlying factors such as virus genotype or concurrent infections with other pathogens [4,20,52,53,54]. Complications with concurrent HEV infection during pregnancy include death of both the mother and fetus, abortion, premature birth, and death of the baby shortly after birth [55]. Vertical transmission from the mother to fetus was reported in 33% of cases and HEV RNA was reportedly detected in human colostrum as well [56,57]. Unfortunately it is not understood why pregnancy resulted in severe hepatitis E manifestation. Understanding the mechanisms of pregnancy-associated severe hepatitis E, especially fulminant hepatitis E, in the future will help devise effective preventive measures against this disease. Genotypes 1 and 2 HEV strains are restricted to the human population, while Genotypes 3 and 4 HEV strains infect both humans and other animals with zoonotic transmission routes. Human to human transmission of HEV is considered rare; although, blood-borne transmission has been reported via blood transfusion [20,58,59,60]. A comparative study of Genotype 3 and 4 HEV-infected individuals in Japan revealed that Genotype 4 HEV is associated with a higher level of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), higher prevalence of clinical infection, higher level of total bilirubin, higher level of viremia, more frequent fulminant hepatitis development, and overall a more aggressive hepatitis [48]. The mechanisms of cross-species HEV infection remain poorly understood. Identification of both the viral genetic elements and host factors that are important for cross-species HEV infection will be the key for devising strategies to prevent and control zoonotic HEV infections. 3.2. HEV Infection in AnimalsNatural and experimental HEV infections in swine (Genotypes 3 and 4) result in a subclinical course of infection with only mild microscopic lesions in the liver and associated lymph nodes [61,62]. Viremia lasts 1–2 weeks with fecal virus shedding lasting 3–7 weeks [7,61,62]. HEV infection in swine is age-dependent with up to 86% of the pigs infected by 18 weeks of age [63]. Additional studies from the United Kingdom, Spain, and Japan further demonstrated that the highest fecal virus shedding occurred by 10–12 weeks, 13–16 weeks, and 1–3 months of age, respectively [64,65,66]. Seroconversion to HEV antibodies in swine occurs following the typical waning in maternal antibody levels around 8–10 weeks of age first with IgM anti-HEV antibodies peaking in conjunction with fecal viral shedding followed by IgG anti-HEV antibodies peaking in conjunction with clearance of virus from the feces [20,64,65,66].Transmission between swine is fecal-oral with large amounts of infectious HEV being shed in the feces, and direct contact between animals, with other animals’ excreta, and with potentially contaminated water sources in swine facilities contributes to transmission within a herd [7,67,68,69,70]. Although HEV infection in pigs does not pose a major economical concern in swine production, the risk of zoonotic transmission to humans is an important public health concern. Therefore, development of an effective vaccine to immunize susceptible swine herds in the future will minimize the risk of zoonotic infection and improve pork safety. Avian HEV Genotypes 1–3 carry a slightly different course of infection with a high level of subclinical infection in flocks and mortality rates up to 0.3–1.0% [36,71,72]. Clinical signs may include egg drop in some flocks up to 20%, enlargement of the liver and spleen, and acute death of affected birds [73]. Post-mortem evaluations show enlarged, hemorrhagic, and focally necrotic livers, inflammatory cellular infiltrations in the liver tissue, serosanguinous abdominal fluid, and regressing ovaries in some affected birds [73,74]. It appears that avian HEV does not infect humans, and thus is not a concern for food and environmental safety. Nevertheless, more studies are needed to fully assess the potential of avian HEV cross-species infection. 4. Epidemiology of HEV InfectionHEV is considered hyperendemic in many developing countries such as India, Bangladesh, Egypt, Mexico, and China. Hyperendemic countries carry an HEV prevalence of 25% of all non-A, non-B, acute hepatitis cases or have experienced a major waterborne outbreak of hepatitis E according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [75]. HEV is considered endemic where there is a prevalence of less than 25% of all reported non-A, non-B acute hepatitis [75]. Endemic countries include much of Western Europe, the United States, New Zealand, many countries in South America, much of Asia, and the Middle East [75,76,77]. Trends throughout the World point to continued high anti-HEV seroprevalence and HEV infection likely due to increases in interest, awareness and surveillance efforts as well as increased spread among known animal reservoirs and hosts [20,75,76,77,78,79,80,81]. Seroprevalence reports vary dramatically from country to country and study to study with some studies reporting overall declines in seroprevalence over time, while other yield continued high levels of seroprevalence [80,82,83]. Prevalence of anti-HEV IgG tends to increase with age, especially in men [80,84,85,86,87]. Humans and other animals excrete a considerable amount of virus early in the acute phase of HEV infection and likely contribute to maintain the cycle of endemicity [76]. The lack of a standardized serological assay further complicated the interpretation of the sero-epidemiological data. Therefore, development of a FDA-approved diagnostic assay for HEV should be a priority in the future. 5. Environmental Contamination and Waterborne Transmission5.1. HEV Transmission from Sewage and Animal Manure Run-offHEV is typically transmitted via fecal-oral route within an animal species, from animals to humans in infectious body fluids, and from contaminated food or water sources to humans and other animals. Inadequate disposal and treatment of sewage and contamination of drinking and irrigation water lead to the many epidemics in developing countries [2,88,89]. Increased rates of human HEV infection in Turkey and certain countries in Southeast Asia are associated with utilizing untreated river water for everyday tasks such as bathing, drinking, and disposal of waste products [90,91,92,93]. Environmental catastrophes and annual flooding are also associated with elevated HEV attack rates especially in regions where river, pond, or well water use is prevalent [10,92,93,94]. In both industrialized and developing countries, raw sewage water has been shown to contain infectious HEV strains that are closely related to the strains circulating in humans (Genotypes 1 and 2) and other animals (Genotypes 3 and 4) [95,96,97,98,99]. In The Netherlands, Genotype 3 HEV RNA was detected in river water which likely originated from sewage [100]. Run-offs from animal facilities such as hog operations have been implicated in human HEV infections with the detection of infectious Genotype 3 HEV in the animal manure and wastewater [100,101].Professionals working in close proximity to swine, swine manure, or sewage may become infected with HEV during occupational activities [70,100,102,103,104]. For example, swine workers in Valencia, Spain were found to be 5.4 times more likely to be positive for anti-HEV IgG than those not exposed to swine [104]. Utilizing a Bayesian model to account for imperfections in sero-assays leading to differences in the interpretation of serology results, Bouwknegt et al. [103] found that approximately 11% of swine veterinarians, 6% of non-swine veterinarians, and 2% of the general population were positive for anti-HEV antibodies. Variation in assays, validity of serologic tests for determining HEV prevalence, the lack of standardized diagnostic tools, the potential for multiple routes of transmission, and incompletely understood transmission routes particularly in small defined populations lead to difficulty in assessing the exact risk factors for HEV infection [105,106]. For example, Vulcano et al. [107] identified male housekeepers and specific pig breeders as carrying a higher prevalence of IgG anti-HEV seropositivity than previously identified in Italy and found a 5.5% seropositivity in subjects from Rieti in comparison to 2.5% from Rome, despite an overall lack of association with swine contact. In addition, pig farmers and the general population in Sweden were found to have 13% and 9% seropositivity respectively, which was higher than previously reported for populations in Europe (1–9%) and contributes to uncertainty in our current knowledge of transmission routes and risk factors for HEV infection [108]. Again, standardized serological and molecular diagnostic tests are in critical need for the study of HEV transmission and prevalence. During natural contact routes of transmission, HEV RNA is also detectable in the urine of infected swine, which likely contributes to the ease of spread in confined swine operations and may pose as an alternate route of exposure for humans [109]. Contaminated water and sewage may serve as sources for HEV infection in both humans and other animals. Current research indicates the potential for transmission through these sources; however, further analysis of these sources in regards to all genotypes of HEV will better assess the overall public health risk.5.2. Surface Water Contamination and Transmission of HEVSurface water is easily contaminated by stable fecal-shed viruses such as HEV and acts as a public health hazard [110]. The quality of surface water directly affects populations utilizing the source since drinking water, and intensive farming practices lead to higher detection rates of viruses within these sources [110,111]. In Canada, HEV Genotype 3 detected from field-grown strawberries shared 99% nucleotide sequence identity with local swine HEV strains [112,113]. In Slovenia, Genotype 3 HEV was recovered from surface waters as well as from 20% of fecal samples in local pig farms [114]. Typical irrigation practices allow HEV and other enteric and hepatic viruses to impact surface water quality and elevate the potential for human exposure to pathogens [115,116]. Contaminated produce may serve as a source for autochthonous HEV cases in non-endemic regions [112,117]. In all cases of HEV detection in water or produce, the contamination levels were not assessed for further infectivity of humans or animals. The ability to recover infectious virus both from the local pig farms, the surface waters, and from produce receiving contaminated water would indicate that the virus is stable enough to be transmitted in these sources. Therefore, further infectivity studies should be done to assess the ability to transmit and cause infection especially in cases where the virus contamination levels are low.5.3. Coastal Water Contamination and Transmission of HEVCoastal waters may also be contaminated by HEV leading to accumulation of the virus in the digestive tissues of shellfish, which poses a risk of human infection through ingestion. Most often, mussels, cockles, and oysters are eaten raw or slightly cooked, and HEV is stable in both alkaline and acidic environments, frozen for more than 10 years, and remains infectious at up to 60 °C, suggesting that a raw, rare-cooked, or slightly steamed contaminated seafood may transmit HEV to consumers [118,119]. Shellfish have been implicated in an outbreak of HEV occurring aboard a cruise ship in European waters and HEV has been identified in commercial mussels obtained from three European countries (Finland, Greece, and Spain) [120,121]. In Scotland, 92% of bivalve mussels collected were tested positive for HEV RNA with the viral sequences clustering with Genotype 3 human and swine HEV [122]. Case reports of hepatitis E in England, Italy, and France reveal shellfish consumption as a common source risk factor for HEV infection [79,123,124]. In addition, Genotype 3 swine HEV has been detected in shellfish in Korea and Japan [125,126,127]. Travelers to hyperendemic and endemic regions of the world are at an increased risk of acquiring HEV infection from contaminated water and seafood, but industrialized countries are not exempt [77].6. Foodborne Transmission and Food SafetyThe meat products from HEV-infected reservoir animal species are capable of transmitting HEV to humans and are a public health concern [75,76,88]. HEV primarily replicates in the liver of infected animals; however, extra-hepatic sites of HEV replication have also been demonstrated in the gastrointestinal tissues, mesenteric and hepatic lymph nodes, and spleen [20]. In addition to the liver tissues, HEV RNA has been detected from the stomach, kidney, salivary glands, tonsils, lungs, and multiple muscle masses of pigs and chickens when inoculated intravenously [128,129,130]. Consumption of undercooked or raw organs or tissues from infected swine has been linked to numerous cases of hepatitis E worldwide. For example, three cases of hepatitis E in Japan were associated with the consumption of undercooked or raw pork presumably from the same barbeque restaurant [131]. Nine of ten clinical cases of hepatitis E from 2001 to 2002 had a history of consuming undercooked pork 2–8 weeks before the onset of clinical signs and 1.9% of pig livers tested from local groceries in Hokkaido, Japan were positive for Genotype 3 or 4 HEV RNA [13]. Consumption of pig liver or intestines is considered as a risk factor for HEV infection [131]. Cases of hepatitis E in Japan were also linked to the consumption of contaminated wild boar meat [132,133,134,135]. Wild boar populations in Italy and South-eastern France had detectable levels of HEV RNA in 2.5% of liver samples and 25% of bile samples, respectively [136,137]. Boar meat consumption was positively associated with HEV infection in a case-control study in Germany [138]. Cases of acute hepatitis E associated with Genotype 4 HEV have been confirmed in South Korea, presumably due to the consumption of raw wild boar bile juice [139]. Human patients with acute HEV infections in France were linked to the consumption of figatellu sausage (Corsican raw pig liver dish). The HEV sequences recovered from the figatellu products in local grocery stores were essentially indistinguishable from the viral sequences recovered from the human patients, thus providing compelling evidence for foodborne HEV transmission [11,140]. The HEV present in the pig liver sausage from manufacturers in France was shown to be infectious utilizing a 3D HEV cell-culture system [141]. Commercial pig livers tested in the United States, Germany, and The Netherlands also carried detectable levels of HEV RNA in 11%, 4%, and 6.5% of the samples tested, respectively [142,143,144]. At slaughterhouses in Bavaria, Germany, 68.6% of the serum samples and 67.6% of meat juice samples were tested seropositive for HEV antibody, indicating animal exposures to HEV prior to slaughter [145]. In Italy, an overall 87% anti-HEV seropositivity was detected in slaughterhouse swine and 64.6% were positive for HEV RNA indicating both a high level of exposure to HEV and a similarly high level of active virus infection at the time of slaughter [146]. Similar investigations of pork production chains in the Czech Republic, Spain, and the United Kingdom revealed detectable, infectious HEV at both processing locations and point of sale [147]. Genotype 4 HEV has also been identified in a small percentage of pig livers collected from markets in India and carry a 90–91% nucleotide sequence identity with the local swine HEV isolates [148]. Other reports identify Indian strains of Genotype 4 swine HEV as genetically distinct from Genotype 1 human HEV strains circulating in the region further convoluting the route of transmission [149]. Human consumption of Genotype 4 HEV-contaminated pork livers leading to disease has not yet been reported in India, which may be due to differing culinary habits [11,140]. It is likely that the Genotype 4 swine HEV in India does cause sporadic cases of acute hepatitis E in humans through zoonotic infection, although such rare and sporadic cases of Genotype 4 hepatitis E may be masked by the more prevalent and explosive form of Genotype 1 hepatitis E in India.In addition to pork, game meats such as deer have also been implicated as sources for HEV transmission to humans following the detection of near identical HEV sequences from leftover Sika deer meat and four hepatitis E patients in Japan who previously consumed the deer meat as sushi [14,20,150]. A locally caught wild deer carried a nearly identical HEV isolate that was later confirmed in local wild boar populations in Japan as well [150]. Sashimi style deer meat is usually consumed in Japan where a case-control study attributed raw deer meat as a risk factor for anti-HEV seropositivity after identifying a positive association between deer meat consumption and a previous case of hepatitis E [14,151]. Elevated risks indicate that within this defined case-control population, those who consumed raw deer meat were more likely to be positive for HEV antibodies indicating exposure to the virus, while those who did not consume the deer meat had a lower level of exposure based on seropositivity [14,151]. Consumption of game meats including wild boar, deer, and hare was independently associated with HEV infection in organ transplant recipients in France with an odds ratio of 2.32 [152]. Combined, these studies clearly identify wild and domestic pork products and game meats as sources for human HEV infection and implicate foodborne transmission as a common route for HEV infection. 7. Known and Potential Animal ReservoirsA number of animals are known to serve as the natural hosts and reservoirs for HEV. HEV has been genetically identified from rat, wild boar, domestic swine, mongoose, rabbits, chickens, ferrets, cutthroat trout, bats, and deer [17,18,19,23,25,26,34,61,139,153]. Anti-HEV antibodies have been detected in a number of other animal species including cattle, sheep, and goats with the potential to carry novel strains of HEV [1,154]. With the advance of modern molecular biology techniques such as metagenomics and pyrosequencing, it is expected that the host range of HEV will expand and novel strains of HEV will be identified from other animal species in the near future. 7.1. HEV in Avian SpeciesAvian HEV was identified as such in 2001 from chickens with Hepatitis-Splenomegaly (HS) syndrome in the United States [34]. Likewise, Big Liver and Spleen Disease virus (BLSV) in Australia presented similarly with an approximately 80% nucleotide sequence identity to avian HEV [34,73]. These two previously identified syndromes (HS and BLS) are assumed to be caused by variant strains of the same virus, avian HEV, which now encompasses three distinct, but related genotypes worldwide [24,73,155,156]. In the United States, an estimated 71% of chicken flocks and 30% of individual chickens are positive for avian HEV [36]. Avian HEV infection in chickens is age-dependent with 17% of seropositive chickens under 18 weeks of age and 36% of seropositive adult chickens [36,157]. Avian HEV has been shown to cross species barriers and infect turkeys [71]. It is currently unknown, however, whether avian HEV is capable of transmission to humans or other mammalian species; although, rhesus monkeys and mice are not susceptible to infection by avian HEV under experimental conditions [1,73].7.2. HEV in Domestic and Wild Swine SpeciesSince its discovery in domestic swine in the United States in 1997, swine HEV strains have been identified worldwide in both domestic and wild swine with widely variable prevalence [11,61]. Studies of prevalence across Japan revealed that anti-HEV antibody is present in 93% of all domestic swine farms tested and that all swine HEV isolates belong to either Genotype 3 or 4 [24,48,158,159]. Prevalence of anti-HEV antibodies in wild boars in Japan is also widely variable ranging from 4.5% to 34.3% based on geographic regions with Genotype 3 or 4 HEV RNA detection rates ranging from 1.1% to 13.3% [48]. In The Netherlands, domestic swine farms carried a prevalence of 55% for HEV RNA in the feces, while 86.2% and 47.1% of 18 week-old pigs in Canada shed HEV virus in feces and serum, respectively, with a declination as the pigs aged [63,160]. In Spain, the prevalence of anti-HEV antibodies on commercial swine farms reached 98%, while the anti-HEV prevalence in New Zealand, Laos and Brazil is 90%, 46% and 81%, respectively [20,161,162,163,164]. The anti-HEV seropositivity in wild boars varied from 17–50.3% with HEV RNA detected in up to 25% of samples in Germany, Italy, Spain, Australia, and Hungary [15,136,137,165,166,167]. In the United States, swine HEV infection in pig farms is also widespread, and the majority of pigs became seropositive to HEV antibodies at approximately 3 months of age [61]. It appears that Genotype 3 or 4 HEV infection in pigs is widespread in the pig population worldwide, thus raising a concern for zoonotic infection and pork safety.7.3. HEV in DeerDeer have been implicated both acting as animal reservoirs for HEV and acting as vehicles for human infection [12,14,20,150]. The Sika and Yezo deer in Japan carried a 3% and 35% anti-HEV seroprevalence respectively, with a positive association with HEV infection in humans and nearly identical nucleotide sequence identity with HEV strains from local wild boars [7,14,150,168]. In Hungary, the European roe deer was implicated as a reservoir species for HEV, and in The Netherlands 5% of red deer were also found positive for antibodies to HEV [165,167,169]. White-tailed deer in Northern Mexico carried a 62.7% anti-HEV seropositivity [170]. Increasing management of deer including feeding, watering, movement of groups, and fencing for hunting purposes in Mexico offers the ability for pathogens such as HEV to transfer between groups of deer and humans readily and may serve to disseminate pathogens to animals within the United States [170]. Sharing of habitats between wild boar and deer may play a role in the ability to harbor and transmit HEV to humans. However, without additional direct evidence of transmission within the deer species, it is difficult to determine whether deer acts as incidental or natural hosts to HEV infection [1,20,76].7.4. HEV in RuminantsRuminant (cattle, sheep and goat) strains of HEV have yet to be uncovered; however, multiple studies of anti-HEV seroprevalence indicated the possibility of their existence [7,165]. In Egypt, 11% of cows, 14% of buffalo, 4.4% of sheep, and 9.4% of goats were tested positive for HEV antibodies [171]. Approximately 4.4–6.9% of cows and 0% of goats in India, 1.4% of cows and 0% of sheep and goats in Brazil were reportedly tested positive for anti-HEV antibodies [172,173]. Reports of anti-HEV seropositivity from China varied drastically from 6–93% of cattle and 10–12% of sheep [174,175,176,177]. A short sequence (189 bp) of a Genotype 4 HEV has been reportedly identified in bovid species, although independent confirmation of this unsubstantiated report is still lacking [1,7,76].Despite the abundant serological evidence for an HEV-related agent in ruminants, definitive genetic identification of HEV from ruminants is still lacking. It is possible that the strain carried by ruminants is very divergent genetically from the known HEV strains thus leading to failure to genetically identify the virus based upon current techniques. The serological data from ruminants is based upon cross-reaction of the ruminant serum samples with known HEV proteins such as ORF2 [7,165,171,172]. The validity of such serological data has been questioned due to the fact that the assays may not be specific, they do not identify the actual virus, and they may allow cross-reactivity with non-viral proteins that share a certain level of sequence homology. Research in this area must continue to better address these concerns and confirm the source of anti-HEV seropositivity in ruminants. Given the wide use of cattle, sheep, and goats in the human food chain, the genetic identification of these ruminant strains of HEV would be of a potential public health concern.7.5. HEV in RatsThe rat strain of HEV was identified in wild Norway rats from Hamburg, Germany with 59.9% and 49.9% nucleotide sequence identity with known human and avian HEV strains, respectively [18]. Rats in the United States, Germany, Indonesia, China, and Japan are also tested seropositive for HEV antibodies in several studies with variable prevalence [18,178,179,180,181]. Overall, 44% of rats in Louisiana, 77% in Maryland, 90% in Hawaii, 59.7% of rats of the genus Rattus from across the United States, 32% of Norway rats in Japan, and 13% of black rats in Japan were tested positive for antibodies to HEV [178,179,182,183]. Most recently in China, 23.3% of rats were positive for anti-HEV IgG with the highest prevalence of 45.3% from rats caught at garbage dump sites [180]. In Indonesia, 18.1% of rats were tested positive for anti-HEV antibodies and 14.7% positive for HEV RNA [181]. Recently, Genotype 3 rat HEV strains have been genetically detected from wild rats in the United States, suggesting the potential for zoonotic transmission and the genetic variability of rat HEV [1,182]. Further studies are warranted to independently confirm the existence of Genotype 3 HEV in rats, especially since, under experimental conditions, laboratory rats are not susceptible to experimental infection by Genotype 3 HEV [184]. 7.6. HEV in RabbitsRabbits may serve as reservoir hosts for HEV transmission to humans given the genetic identification of zoonotic Genotype 3 strains of HEV from rabbits in China, the United States, and France [17,153,174,185]. Rabbits are susceptible to experimental infection by Genotype 4 human HEV, and the infected rabbits developed viremia, seroconversion to anti-HEV, and fecal virus shedding [153,185]. The rabbit HEV is genetically and antigenically closely related to other mammalian HEV. The capsid protein of the Genotype 3 rabbit strain of HEV was capable of cross-reacting with antibodies from other strains of HEV including rat, swine, human, and chicken [1,185,186]. The prevalence of HEV antibodies in farmed rabbits is reportedly 57% in the Gansu province in China, 54.6% in Beijing, China, and 36.5% in two rabbit farms in Virginia, USA, while HEV RNA has been identified in 7.5%, 7.0%, 16.5%, and 15.3% of the rabbits, respectively [17,153,174]. In France, HEV RNA was also identified from 7.0% of farmed rabbits, while 23.0% of wild rabbits were also positive for HEV RNA [185]. It appears that rabbits could be an important reservoir for HEV infection in humans, and in-depth studies of its ability to infect across species barriers and associated zoonotic risks in the future are needed.7.7. HEV in Other SpeciesOther known animal strains of HEV genetically identified thus far include mongoose, ferret, bat, and fish [1,23,25,26,187,188]. Wild mongoose in Okinawa, Japan carried Genotype 3 HEV strains and the prevalence of anti-HEV seropositivity varied from 8% to21% [187,188]. In The Netherlands, ferrets carried a strain of HEV that shared a 72.3% nucleotide sequence identity with that of the rat HEV [23]. The cutthroat trout in the United States also carried a unique strain of HEV with only 13% to 27% sequence identity with known mammalian and avian HEV strains [26]. The zoonotic potentials of these novel animal strains of HEV are not altogether understood, but the ever-expanding host range and high levels of anti-HEV seropositivity among mammalian species suggests transmission is common and thus may pose a potential public health concern.8. Animal Handling and Zoonotic TransmissionContact exposure to infected animals leads to an elevated risk for HEV transmission in humans. Swine veterinarians in the United States were shown to have a 27% seropositivity to Genotype 3 swine HEV in comparison to 16% of the normal blood donors [189]. Individuals from states in which swine production plays a key role were more likely to be seropositive to HEV than other non-major swine states [189]. Incidents such as needle sticks while working with swine were found to be1.9 times more likely positive for HEV antibodies in swine veterinarians [189]. Pig handlers such as veterinarians, breeders, and farmers in China, Thailand, The Netherlands, Sweden, Moldova, and the United States were also more likely seropositive to swine HEV [103,108,190,191,192]. In Sweden, 13% of pig breeders were positive for antibodies to HEV [190]. In The Netherlands, 11% of swine veterinarians were positive in comparison to 6% of non-swine veterinarians and 2% of the general population [108]. In North Carolina, swine handlers carried a 4.5 times higher rate of seropositivity in comparison to non-swine workers [191]. In Moldova, 51% of swine farmers were positive in comparison to 25% of non-swine occupations [103]. Taken together, swine are a major reservoir for HEV and occupational contact with infected swine is a risk factor for zoonotic HEV transmission in humans.Contact with swine is the most widely recognized route for occupational exposure to HEV; however, the multitude of novel strains of HEV in wildlife and other domestic animal species suggest additional mechanisms of transmission. For example, field workers at the Iowa Department of Natural Resources who work with a variety of wildlife species had a higher prevalence for HEV antibodies in comparison to normal blood donors [193]. While exposure to HEV, identified by the presence of anti-HEV antibodies in these populations does not in itself indicate a disease, it does identify a route of transmission and exposure that should be further assessed and acknowledged as a preventive measure against this important disease. Examination of these additional mechanisms is vital to understanding the full-spectrum of public health risk associated with HEV infection.9. ConclusionsThe zoonotic risk of HEV is well established; however, the ever-expanding host range and identification of new animal reservoir species poses a significant public health concern. Seroprevalence in human and other animal species varies drastically between studies and countries with no clear understanding of the overall problem, and this is largely due to the lack of an established FDA-approved serological diagnostic assay. Numerous animal species were tested seropositive for IgG anti-HEV, although HEV was not genetically identified from all seropositive animal species. Detection of HEV in sewage, water sources, coastal and surface waters, and produce poses environmental safety concerns even in industrialized countries where waterborne origins of human hepatitis E cases were previously considered rare. Foodborne cases of hepatitis E in humans are increasingly common and likely underestimated in the medical community. Sporadic and cluster cases of hepatitis E occur after consumption of undercooked or raw animal meats. Prevention of foodborne HEV transmission relies on avoiding consumption of undercooked animal meats especially when immunocompromised, following good hygiene practices, and being aware of increased risks when traveling to endemic or hyperendemic regions of the world. Despite the clear risk, prevention strategies are currently minimally implemented. A vaccine against HEV has recently become available in China but not in other countries. Surveillance, vaccination, de-contamination of sewage and water sources, and public education will help prevent current and future endemics or epidemics lowering the human burden. The development of a vaccine against the zoonotic swine HEV would reduce foodborne and swine contact cases in humans as well as diminish the spread of the virus between animal species. Control of animal waste, run-off, and decontaminated sewage is key to limiting the spread of HEV to coastal and surface waters and in turn reducing concomitant contamination of shellfish. 


Title: Vertical transmission of hepatitis E virus in pregnant rhesus macaques

IntroductionHepatitis E virus (HEV) infection is a serious public health issue that causes over 20 million infections and 7000 deaths annually1. In general populations, most HEV infections are asymptomatic and self-limited. However, HEV infection results in high mortality (> 20%) in pregnant women, especially during the third trimester of pregnancy2,3. The risk of HEV infection is substantially higher in pregnant women than in non-pregnant women1,4. Adverse pregnancy outcomes, such as fulminant hepatic failure (FHF), eclampsia, hemorrhage, abortion, and stillbirths due to HEV infection have been reported worldwide2,5. More importantly, about 46.09% of fetuses are infected by his/her mother6. However, the vertical transmission of HEV in pregnant women remains largely elusive.
HEV has eight recognized genotypes (gt) within the species Orthohepevirus A: gt1–gt8. Gt1 and gt2 HEV only infect humans and are prevalent in developing countries1. Gt3, gt4, and gt7 HEV are zoonotically transmitted from animals to humans; these genotypes are predominant in developed countries7,8. Previous studies have reported that gt1 or gt2 HEV during pregnancy causes acute liver failure and maternal death9. In China, adverse pregnancy outcomes, including preterm births, premature rupturing of membranes, and abortion, have been reported in genotype 4 HEV-infected pregnant women10,11. However, the pathogenesis of gt4 HEV in pregnant women is unclear.Pregnancy is a complex physiological process. Successful pregnancy depends on the establishment and maintenance of an adequate maternal–fetal interface and maternal immune tolerance of semiallogeneic fetuses12. The immune system is suppressed to protect the fetus from immunological recognition and rejection. The immunosuppressed state during pregnancy possibly increases the risk of pathogen infection. Innate immune responses play a crucial role in defending against viral infections13,14. Virus infection induces innate immune responses in cells mainly through pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs), including retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors and Toll-like receptors15. The trigger of PRRs by virus invasion activates downstream signal cascades and various signaling molecules to express type I interferons (IFNs)16,17. IFN induces the expression of numerous IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) via the JAK-STAT signaling pathway18; ISGs play an important role in antiviral immune responses19. However, the mechanism by which these ISGs change during pregnancy when infected by HEV is unknown.An animal model is essential in exploring the pathogenesis of HEV infection during pregnancy. Rhesus macaque is the perfect animal model for both acute and chronic HEV pathogenesis studies20,21. In the present study, pregnant rhesus macaques were used to evaluate the vertical transmission of HEV.ResultsEstablishment and characterization of HEV gt4 infection in pregnant rhesus macaquesRhesus macaque is the best animal model for HEV infection study. To explore the effects of gt4 HEV infection during pregnancy, we infected rhesus macaques in the third trimester of pregnancy with gt4 HEV (KM01 strain). Its infectivity was established in rhesus macaques and BALB/c mice in our previous studies20,22. Shedding of viruses in blood/stool samples and seroconversion are the classic diagnoses of HEV infection because asymptomatic patients are usually observed in clinical settings. Interestingly, HEV RNA was detectable in the feces at 4–7 days post-inoculation (dpi) in both HEV-infected pregnant and non-pregnant rhesus macaques. HEV RNA was negative at 49 dpi in non-pregnant rhesus macaques in both stool and serum samples (non-pregnant group, Fig. 1D), but persistently positive at over 196 dpi (more than 6 months) in pregnant rhesus macaques (196 dpi for 13102# and 224 dpi for both 13152# and 06230#) (Fig. 1A–C). Meanwhile, viremia was observed in all HEV-infected macaques. Viremia in acute hepatitis E generally persists for less than a month following symptom onset in otherwise healthy individuals. However, viruses in the serum samples of pregnant rhesus macaques lasted for 196 days, which was longer than that in non-pregnant macaques (42 days). Remarkably, viral titer in the serum samples of pregnant rhesus macaques was significantly higher than that in non-pregnant macaques at 14 dpi (425.79-fold, P = 0.04). Similarly, viral titer in the stool samples of pregnant rhesus macaques was 212.93-fold higher than that in non-pregnant macaques at 42 dpi (P = 0.01, Fig. 1D). These results were consistent with clinical observations that HEV-infected pregnant women usually bear a higher viral load than non-pregnant women2. Results strongly suggested that HEV infection successfully established in pregnant rhesus macaques. HEV replication is more violent in pregnant women than in non-pregnant women with a longer duration and a higher viral load.Figure 1Profile of pregnant rhesus macaques infected with HEV. The copy number of HEV in the serum and stool in pregnant rhesus macaques was quantified by qRT-PCR, and anti-HEV IgG and IgM antibodies were determined by ELISA (A–C) or non-pregnant rhesus macaques (Mean ± SD of three non-pregnant HEV-infected rhesus macaques) (D). Asterisk (*) shown there is a significant difference of viral titers between pregnant rhesus macaques and non-pregnant rhesus macaques in indicated time points. *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01. Arrow indicated the time of delivery. The level/activity of liver enzymes AST (E), ALT (F), ALP (G), and T-BiL (H) was determined at indicated time points.HEV infection can activate humoral responses to product HEV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. In the present study, anti-HEV IgG antibody was positive from 35 to 224 dpi (end of the experiment, Fig. 1A–D), which lasted for more than 7 months. However, only one of the infected macaques (06230#) was positive to anti-HEV IgM antibody from 7 to 42 dpi (Fig. 1C). In addition, elevated levels/activities of liver enzymes, including AST, ALT, ALP, T-BIL, D-BIL, I-BIL, GGT, TP, ALB, and GLB, were observed during HEV infection (Fig. 1E–H, Supplementary Fig. 1). Notably, relatively higher AST, ALT, ALP, T-BIL, and GGT levels were observed in non-pregnant rhesus macaques than in pregnant rhesus macaques during HEV infection.To investigate the profiles of hematological parameters during gt4 HEV infection, we determined 24 hematological parameters in HEV-infected pregnant and non-pregnant rhesus macaques. Interestingly, the hematological parameters between HEV-infected pregnant and non-pregnant rhesus macaques were quite different. The levels of WBC, RBC, HGB, BCT, MPV, MCV, MCH, MCHC, LYMPH%, EO%, BASO%, PDW, and P-LCR in non-pregnant rhesus macaques were higher than those in HEV-infected pregnant macaques. By contrast, the levels of PLT, PCT, NEUT%, MONO%, RDW-SD, and RDW-CV in HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques were lower than those in pregnant rhesus macaques (Supplementary Fig. 2).Vertical HEV transmission from mother to fetusVertical transmission is one of the main transmission routes for HEV that causes premature births and prenatal mortality9,10. Mother-to-child transmission was observed in 46.09% (59/128) of HEV IgM-positive mothers6. Placenta is an extra-hepatic site for HEV replication, which was identified using a fetal placenta organ culture system23. However, the mechanism of vertical HEV transmission remains largely unknown.In the present study, pregnant rhesus macaques were infected with HEV to determine whether genotype 4 HEV can be vertically transmitted from mother to fetus. Notably, one premature infant died immediately after delivery. Its mother (06230#) was infected with HEV 42 days before delivery. Thus, tissues were immediately collected from the dead fetus to evaluate the possibility of vertical HEV transmission. HEV RNA was detected in the liver, spleen, kidneys, and intestines of the premature fetus via qRT-PCR (Fig. 2A). Surprisingly, the intestines (9 × 109 copies/g) and spleen (4 × 109 copies/g) bore a higher viral load than the liver (3 × 106 copies/g) or kidneys (3 × 104 copies/g). This result strongly suggested that the fetus was infected with HEV before delivery. To confirm further the vertical transmission of HEV from mother to fetus, we detected HEV antigens in the liver, kidneys, spleen and intestines via IHC (Fig. 2B). Notably, positive HEV antigen signals were observed in the liver, kidneys, spleen, and intestines of the premature fetus (Fig. 2C) although these organ were yet fully developed (Fig. 2D). Considering that the fetus was immediately parted from his mother after delivery, fecal–oral routes and contact HEV transmission were excluded. The detection of HEV RNA and antigens in the replication sites of the newly born fetus strongly confirmed that HEV was vertically transmitted from the mother to the fetus.Figure 2Vertical transmission of HEV from mother to fetus. The premature dead fetus born from HEV infected pregnant rhesus (06230#) (A). The viral titer of liver, spleen, kidney, and intestine of the dead fetus were quantified by qRT-PCR (B); HEV antigens were detected in the liver, spleen, kidney and intestine of the dead fetus by IHC inoculated with PBS (up panel) or HEV ORF2 specific antibody (down panel) (C). Histopathological analysis of liver, spleen, kidney, and intestine from the dead fetus (D).Hematological parameters of the neonate were also determined from 8 to 20 weeks after birth. Unlike in the HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques, WBC, RBC, PLT, PCT, LYMPH, and LYMPH% in the neonate were higher than the reference values, but the other parameters were normal (Supplementary Fig. 3). Almost all of these liver enzymes were within normal range, except that elevated ALP and GGT levels were observed in two neonates, which were born from HEV-infected mothers (Supplementary Fig. 4).HEV infection in neonatesMore than 45% of neonates born from HEV-infected mothers are positive for HEV6. To evaluate the risk of HEV infection in neonates, we collected fecal and blood samples from the newborn rhesus macaques 8 or 12 weeks to 20 weeks after birth. HEV RNA was detected in the feces of two neonates (Fig. 3A). Moreover, viremia was observed in these two newborn macaques whose mothers were infected with gt4 HEV during the third trimester of pregnancy (Fig. 3B). Shedding of HEV viruses in the fecal samples and ongoing viremia strongly indicated active HEV infection in neonates.Figure 3HEV infection in neonates born from HEV-infected mothers. Copy number of HEV in the feces (A) or serum (B) of neonates born from HEV-infected mothers quantified by qRT-PCR. Anti-HEV IgM (C) and IgG (D) antibodies determined by ELISA.The answer to the question of how long maternally transferred antibody lasts and neutralized in neonates remains elusive. In the present study, HEV-specific IgG and IgM antibodies were determined in the two neonates. Although HEV RNA was positive in the blood and fecal samples, the HEV-specific IgM antibody was always negative (Fig. 3C). Only one of the two newborns obtained the maternally transferred antibody, but the level of this antibody sharply declined 8 weeks later and became completely negative at 20 weeks (Fig. 3D). Similarly, the maternally transferred antibody in the newborns of gt1 HEV (SAR-55)-infected rhesus macaques disappeared within 15 weeks after birth24. Therefore, the protection conferred by maternally transferred antibody was ineffective and could not neutralize HEV.Adverse pregnancy outcomes caused by HEV infectionThe female steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone play essential roles in maintaining a healthy pregnancy and ensuring a safe delivery at term25. Decline in progesterone levels may be responsible for preterm labor. In the present study, the total level of progesterone in the serum samples during pregnancy was significantly lower in 06230#, which gave birth to a preterm baby, than that in the two other HEV-infected rhesus macaques with normal delivery (Fig. 4A,B). Progesterone level decreased in HEV-infected 06230# macaques from 18 dpi to delivery (Fig. 4A). By contrast, HEV-infected 13152# and 13102# macaques with normally increasing progesterone levels underwent normal delivery. The decrease in progesterone levels might have contributed to preterm birth in HEV-infected rhesus macaques.Figure 4Adverse pregnancy outcomes caused by HEV infection. The concentration of progesterone in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques at indicated times points (A). The concentration (mean value) of progesterone during the whole pregnancy (B). The relative expressions of progesterone receptor in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques were normalized with non-pregnant rhesus macaque at indicated time points (C). The folds of progesterone receptor (mean value) during the whole pregnancy (D). The levels of IFN-γ, IL12, IL4 or IL10 were determined in these HEV infected pregnant or non-pregnant rhesus macaques (E–H). The ratio of IL4/IFN-γ using the concentration of IL4 or IFN-γ in each indicated time points (I). The ratio of IL4/IFN-γ using the mean value of IL4 or IFN-γ during the whole pregnancy (J). The ratio of IL12/IL10 using the concentration of IL12 or IL10 in each indicated time points (K). The ratio of IL12/IL10 using the mean value of IL12 or IL10 during the whole pregnancy (L). Arrow indicated the time of delivery.Progesterone binds to its receptor, progesterone receptor, to maintain the entire pregnancy. A decrease in the levels of progesterone receptor causes adverse pregnancy outcomes5. Administration of progesterone receptor antagonists, such as antiprogestine mifepristone (RU-486), induces cervical ripening, spontaneous abortion, and labor in animals and humans26. Remarkably, the expression of progesterone receptor was significantly lower in preterm birth 06230# macaques than in the two other HEV-infected rhesus macaques with normal delivery (Fig. 4C,D).Preterm birth is a syndrome attributable to multiple pathological processes, such as infection, vascular disorders, decidual senescence, uterine overdistension, and decline in progesterone action27. In addition, imbalance of Th1/Th2 cytokines plays a vital role in spontaneous abortion28. Normal pregnancy is associated with a Th2-biased cytokine profile, whereas Th1-biased immune status is prone to abortion28. Thus, the levels of Th1 cytokines (IL12 and IFN-γ) and Th2 cytokines (IL4 and IL10) were determined to evaluate the shift in Th1/Th2 cytokines in HEV infected pregnant rhesus macaques (Fig. 4E–H). Interestingly, a remarkable Th1-biased immune status was observed in HEV infected rhesus macaque with preterm birth compared with the two other HEV infected rhesus macaques with normal delivery (Fig. 4I–L). Therefore, the low progesterone concentration, decline in progesterone receptor expression, and abortion-prone Th1-biased immune status resulted in poor pregnancy outcomes.Suppressed innate immune response during pregnancy promoted HEV replicationThe innate immune responses of hosts are activated once HEV infection occurs29,30. However, the elaborate immune responses in vivo, especially during pregnancy, are largely unknown. To describe clearly the changes in host defenses induced by HEV infection during pregnancy, we determined the expression of ISGs in blood samples after HEV infection. The entire infection process was divided into three stages: acute infection during pregnancy (before 7 dpi), tolerance before delivery (8 dpi to delivery), and clearance after delivery (after delivery). The expressions of ISGs in the blood samples of each rhesus macaque collected before HEV infection were quantified and served as baseline.RIG-I, the most important PRR during virus infection, was determined after HEV infection. HEV infection induced a substantial increase in RIG-I gene expression during acute infection at the early stage from 1 to 7 dpi with an average of 17.62 ± 12.29-fold increase compared with uninfected rhesus macaques (Fig. 5A). During pregnancy, the maternal immune system is modified to accommodate the fetus. Thus, the expression of RIG-I was maintained at a low level (3.82 ± 4.13-fold higher than pre-infection, p = 0.1144) from 8 dpi to delivery. After delivery, the expression of RIG-I sharply increased (26.89 ± 20.59-fold higher than pre-infection, p = 0.3398) (Fig. 5A). By contrast, the expression of RIG-I in non-pregnant rhesus macaques persistently increased until HEV completely cleared at 49 dpi (7460.70 ± 3421.28-fold higher than pregnant rhesus macaques, p = 0.0007, Fig. 5A). Results indicated that RIG-I expressions were significantly activated during HEV infection but suppressed during pregnancy.Figure 5ISGs expressions in HEV-infected pregnant or non-pregnant rhesus macaques. The gene expression of ISGs in the plasma of HEV-infected pregnant or non-pregnant rhesus macaques. The gene expression of 12 ISGs were quantitated by qRT-PCR and normalized with pre-infection (A–L). The day of farrowing was highlighted by arrow. The relative expression of ISGs in pregnant rhesus macaques was compared with non-pregnant rhesus macaques. Heatmap was generated for the different parameters analyzed at indicated time points (M) or individuals (N).RIG-I and MDA5 are the main members of RLRs that recognize viral RNA. Similarly, MDA5 expression was highly activated in HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques than pregnant rhesus macaques (25.72 ± 32.61-fold, p = 0.0056) compared with uninfected rhesus macaques (Fig. 5B). Like RIG-I expression, MDA5 expression was activated at the acute infection stage from 1 to 7 dpi (42.69 ± 22.97-fold higher than pre-infection, p = 0.8644), inhibited during pregnancy (8 dpi to delivery, 10.85 ± 9.81-fold, p = 0.4955), and increased by 38.50 ± 51.40-fold (p = 0.4308) once the baby was born (Fig. 5B).RIG-I and/or MDA5 interact with mitochondrial antiviral signaling to initiate the transcription and production of IFNs, such as type I IFNs, IFN-α, and IFN-β. The IFN-α expression was elevated in HEV-infected pregnant and non-pregnant rhesus macaques (Fig. 5C). IFN-α exhibits efficient anti-HEV activity both in vitro and in vivo31. Thus, the higher IFN-α expression might have contributed to the lower viral titer in non-pregnant rhesus macaques than in pregnant rhesus macaques. Surprisingly, of IFN-β expression was evidently inhibited in HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques. This result was consistent with that of in vitro experiments32,33. However, a remarkable increase in IFN-β expression was induced in pregnant rhesus macaques than in non-pregnant group (11.65 ± 5.82 versus 1.14 ± 0.23, p < 0.0001). Similarly, IFN-β expression was moderately inhibited in pregnant rhesus macaques after acute infection until delivery (Fig. 5D).Persistent HEV infection does not activate IFN-I antiviral responses but upregulates IFN-III responses34. In the present study, HEV RNA was persistently positive for more than 6 months in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques, which was longer than the definition of chronic infection of 3 months (Fig. 1). The responses of type III IFN (IFN-λ1 and IFN-λ2/3) notably increased in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques by 106 ± 71.8-fold (p = 0.027) for IFN-λ1 and 1234.79 ± 955.17-fold (p < 0.0001) for IFN-λ2/3 (Fig. 5E,F). Meanwhile, almost no response was observed in HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques. Like the other ISGs, IFN-λ1 and IFN-λ2/3 were activated during HEV infection and suppression before delivery but were immediately restored after delivery.RIG-I activates two distinct ISG categories, namely, JAK-STAT-dependent and JAK-STAT-independent, which contribute to anti-HEV activity30. STAT1 expression was also determined in this study. Interestingly, STAT1 expression was evidently and highly activated during pregnancy than non-pregnant group (301.11 ± 175.67-fold versus 89.86 ± 55.14-fold, p = 0.0158) (Fig. 5G). STAT1 expression was also activated in Gt4 HEV-infected gorillas29, indicating that the JAK/STAT signal pathway was activated and played a critical role in conferring protection against HEV infection. Surprisingly, STAT1 expression was not frustrated before delivery but slightly decreased after delivery when viral titer declined.The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein, which is an IFN-I-induced gene product and a member of the tripartite motif family, modulates the transcriptional activity of viruses35. PML can inhibit HIV and HSV replication as part of the IFN-I-mediated response35,36. However, PML response to HEV infection is rarely reported. In the present study, PML was evidently activated in HEV-infected rhesus macaques, and the activation was higher in HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques than in pregnant rhesus macaques (482.52 ± 119.25-fold versus 11.42 ± 10.73-fold, p = 0.0002; Fig. 5H). PML activation was lower before delivery compared with during acute infection and after delivery .The dsRNA-activated protein kinase R (PKR) plays a major role in vertebrate host immunity against viral infection. PKR is activated by viral double-stranded RNA and subsequently phosphorylates the translation factor eukaryotic initiation factor 2α37. Interestingly, PKR was highly activated during HEV infection during pregnancy but was barely detectable in non-pregnant rhesus macaques (1377.43 ± 1293.52-fold versus 12.32 ± 1.64-fold, p = 0.0023, Fig. 5I). PKR expression in pregnant rhesus macaques increased until the end of the experiment (Fig. 5).HEV infection stimulates a high level of RANTES but a low level of TNF-α in vitro39. In HEV-infected rhesus macaques, RANTES expression was significantly activated in non-pregnant rhesus macaques (23,890.13 ± 10,611.52-fold) but was only 149.63 ± 73.46-fold in pregnant rhesus macaques (p = 0.0042, Fig. 5J). However, TNF-α expression was inhibited in HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques but significantly activated in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques (63.44 ± 28.93-fold versus 0.80 ± 0.15-fold, p = 0.0008, Fig. 5K).The expressions of the antiviral genes IFITM1 and MX1 are correlated with STAT1 expression in B cells and monocytes. Although HEV infection induces the expression of MX1 in vitro and in vivo38, no obvious effect on HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques was observed (Fig. 5L). By contrast, MX1 expression in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques was significantly activated (391.21 ± 160.76-fold, p < 0.0001). MX1 expression slightly decreased in HEV-infected rhesus macaques before delivery. Finally, the difference of ISGs expression during HEV infection was shown in Fig. 5M. Furthermore, immune tolerance with lower expression of ISGs was observed in these pregnant rhesus macaques compared with non-pregnant rhesus macaques (Fig. 5N).DiscussionHEV infection has emerged as a serious global public health issue, especially for pregnant women2. During pregnancy, the immune system is altered to protect against the mother’s immune rejection. However, the tolerant immune system is prone to pathogenic infection. Lower lymphocyte proliferation response to phytohemagglutinin (PHA) was observed in pregnant women with acute hepatitis E compared with non-pregnant patients with HEV or healthy pregnant women40. HEV infection causes adverse pregnancy outcomes, including fulminant hepatic failure, membrane rupture, spontaneous abortion, and stillbirth23,41. Althousgh genotype 4 HEV infection is more severe than genotype 3 HEV infection42, its infection in pregnant women is usually ignored.The pathogenesis of HEV infection in pregnant women remains uncertain mainly because of the lack of a suitable animal model. HEV genotype 1 in pregnant rhesus macaques and HEV-3 in gilts have failed to provide clear evidence of vertical transmission or adverse pregnancy outcomes43,44. Rhesus macaque is one of the best animal models for HEV study. Fortunately, genotype 4 HEV infected pregnant rhesus macaque models were successfully established in the present study. The successful establishment provided a valuable chance to explore the underlying mechanism of HEV infection.In this study, higher viral titers were detected in the fecal and blood samples of pregnant rhesus macaques than in non-pregnant rhesus macaque; this result was consistent with the classical clinical symptoms of HEV infection in pregnant women45. In our previous study, we confirmed estrogen-promoting HEV replication in cells when estrogen analogs are supplied (17β-estradiol or diethylstilbestrol)45. Estradiol level is positively correlated with viral titer. However, the levels of progesterone and progesterone receptor decreased in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques with premature delivery and fetal death. Substantial deregulation of progesterone receptor was also found in HEV-related FHF pregnant women5. The high estrogen and low progesterone levels caused by HEV infection during pregnancy might have contributed to the adverse pregnancy outcomes.HEV infection alters the expression of ISGs in vitro and in vivo30. IFNs are broad antiviral cytokines by transcription multiple ISGs. RIG-I is the most important anti-HEV ISG against HEV regardless of INF production. RIG-I and MDA5 over-expression effectively inhibits HEV viral RNA levels in Huh7.5.1 cells30. RIG-I expression was remarkably stimulated in HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques but frustrated in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques, especially at the tolerance stage after acute infection and before delivery. Frustrated RIG-I expression rarely produces IFN-I (IFN-α and IFN-β). Similarly, diminished, unaltered antiviral responses, or dramatically reduced cytokines were reported in pregnant women with acute hepatitis E46. Consequently, the viruses in pregnant rhesus macaques could not be efficiently and immediately eliminated, thus prolonging HEV duration. Down regulated innate immune response during pregnancy plays an important role in persistent HEV infection. HEV-persistent infection is associated with IFN-III34. IFN-III was considerably activated in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques but was barely detected in acute HEV-infected non-pregnant rhesus macaques. However, the elevated IFN-III activation was insufficient to eliminate HEV and thus the virus persisted for 6 months.Vertical HEV transmission was first reported in 199547, but its mechanism remains unclear. Kumar et al. reported high risks of mother-to-infant vertical HEV transmission in 469 pregnant women with 100% mother-to-infant transmission48. In the present study, HEV RNA and HEV antigens were detected in the liver, spleen, kidneys, and intestines of the dead fetus of an HEV-infected mother. This result directly confirmed vertical HEV transmission. The tissues were immediately collected after delivery to avoid contact transmission from the mother. Unfortunately, cord blood and neonatal samples were not obtained because of the mother’s protection.Fecal–oral transmission is the main route of HEV transmission. HEV can be transmitted from milk and cause acute infection20. Thus, fecal–oral or contact transmission could not be excluded because of positive HEV RNA signal in the serum and stool samples from 8 or 12 weeks to 20 weeks. However, acute HEV infection in newborn macaques did not evoke adaptive immunity as they were negative to IgM antibody. Anti-HEV IgG antibody decreased in one of the two newborns and completely disappeared at 20 weeks; hence, the antibody might have been acquired from the mother. Although the newborn was positive to anti-HEV IgG antibody with a high titer (S/CO = 7.22), HEV RNA was detected in the fecal and blood samples, which indicated that the maternally transferred antibody was insufficient to confer protection against HEV infection.Cytokines play important roles in regulating innate, humoral, and cellular immune responses against viral infection. A clear shift is observed in Th1:Th2 cell paradigm during pregnancy, with a definite skew toward Th2 cells. Normal human pregnancy is associated with a Th2-biased cytokine profile5. HEV-related FHF pregnant women with high fetal and maternal mortality were altered maximally toward the Th1-biased immune state5. Furthermore, the Th1-biased cytokine profile was observed in HEV-infected pregnant BALB/c mice22. In the present study, a Th1-biased immune state was found in HEV-infected pregnant rhesus macaques, and this state probably contributed to premature delivery. The remarkable alternation of Th1 and Th2 balance may partly explain the poor pregnancy outcomes.MethodsEthics statementThe animal experiment was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College. All procedures were performed under ketamine anesthesia by trained personnel under the supervision of veterinary staff. All efforts were made to ameliorate the welfare of the animals and minimize their suffering in accordance with the recommendations cited in “Weatherall report for the use of non-human primates”. Rhesus macaques were housed individually and fed with complete formula food. Details of the rearing environment are described in our previous study49. All rhesus macaques included in the present study were healthy and negative for HEV RNA or anti-HEV immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies.HEV infection protocolThree pregnant rhesus macaques (13102#, 13152#, and 06230#) in their third trimester of pregnancy were intravenously injected with gt4 HEV (KM01 strain, derived from HEV-infected swine stool, GenBank: KJ155502, 5.1 × 105 copies/mL). Three non-pregnant rhesus macaques (13131#, 13279# and 13329#) were intravenously injected with the same gt4 HEV strain and served as non-pregnant controls. The mean ± SD of all these three non-pregnant controls were present and named as non-pregnant group or 13131#. Stool samples were collected twice weekly, whereas blood samples were collected once every week. Tissue samples from dead fetus were immediately collected and stored in liquid nitrogen for RNA detection or fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin for histopathology analysis.Clinical parametersBlood was collected from HEV-infected rhesus macaques by using EDTA-K2 tubes. Hematological parameters were analyzed using an automatic hematological analyzer (XT2000i SYSMEX, Kobe, Japan): number of white blood cells (WBC), number of red blood cell (RBC), hemoglobin (HGB), hematocrit (HCT), platelets (PLT), mean platelet volume (MPV), plateletcrit (PCT), mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), neutrophil percentage (NEUT%), monocyte percentage (MONO%), eosinophil percentage (EO%), basophilic leukocyte percentage (BASO%), lymphocyte percentage (LYMPH%), neutrophil (NEUT#), lymphocyte (LYMPH#), monocyte (MONO#), eosinophil (EO#), basophil (BASO%#), red blood cell volume distribution width-SD (RDW-SD), red blood cell volume distribution width-CV (RDW-CV), plate volume distribution width (PDW), and platelet large cell ratio (P-LCR).Meanwhile, serum was separated and used to measure chemical parameters by using a serum chemistry analyzer (BS-200 Mindray, Shenzhen, China): alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), total protein (TP), albumin (ALB), globulin (GLB), total bilirubin (T-BIL), direct bilirubin (D-BIL), indirect bilirubin (I-BIL).Gene quantificationTotal RNA was extracted from the supernatant of feces, serum, blood, or tissues by using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was reverse-transcribed to cDNA by using Avian Myeloblastosis Virus (AMV) reverse transcriptase with HEV-specific or random hexamer primers. HEV titer was quantitated using SYBR Green-based quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with HEV-specific primers according previous studies20,50.The expression of ISGs, including RIG-1, MDA5, PKR, RANTES, IFN-α, IFN-β1, IFN-λ1, IFN-λ2, STAT1, TNF-α, MX1, and PML, was quantified from peripheral blood by using specific primers described in previous studies30,39 and listed in Table 1. GAPDH was used as the housekeeping control. Relative gene expression was calculated by the 2−(△Ct of gene − △Ct of GAPDH) method, where Ct is the threshold cycle.Table 1The primers used in this study.PrimersSequences (5′ to 3′)ReferencesRIG-ICACCTCAGTTGCTGATGAAGGC30GTCAGAAGGAAGCACTTGCTACCIFIH1(MDA5)GCTGAAGTAGGAGTCAAAGCCC30CCACTGTGGTAGCGATAAGCAGIFN-αTGGGCTGTGATCTGCCTCAAAC30CAGCCTTTTGGAACTGGTTGCCIFN-β1CTTGGATTCCTACAAAGAAGCAGC30TCCTCCTTCTGGAACTGCTGCAIFN-λ1GGAAGACAGGAGAGCTGCAACT30AACTGGGAAGGGCTGCCACATTIFN-λ2TCGCTTCTGCTGAAGGACTGCA30CCTCCAGAACCTTCAGCGTCAGSTAT1ATGGCAGTCTGGCGGCTGAATT30CCAAACCAGGCTGGCACAATTGPMLCCGTCATAGGAAGTGAGGTCTTC30GTTTTCGGCATCTGAGTCTTCCGPKRGAAGTGGACCTCTACGCTTTGG30TGATGCCATCCCGTAGGTCTGTMX1GGCTGTTTACCAGACTCCGACA30CACAAAGCCTGGCAGCTCTCTARANTESCCTGCTGCTTTGCCTACATTGC30ACACACTTGGCGGTTCTTTCGGTNF-αCAGAGGGAAGAGTTCCCCAGGGACC39CCTTGGTCTGGTAGGAGACGGGAPDHTGTCCCCACCCCCAATGTATC30CTCCGATGCCTGCTTCACTACCTTAnti-HEV antibodies and cytokine determinationAnti-HEV IgG and IgM antibodies were tested via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (WanTai, Beijing China) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Levels of Th1 cytokines (interleukin 12 [IL12] and interferon gamma [IFN-γ]) and Th2 cytokines (IL 4 and IL10) in the serum were determined using ELISA kits (4A Biotech, Beijing, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Histopathology and immunohistochemistry analysesTissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Specimens were cut into 3 µm serial sections. Standard hematoxylin and eosin staining was performed, and the specimens were examined under a microscope.Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed according to our previous studies22. In brief, tissues were deparaffinized, hydrated, water bath-heated for antigen retrieval, and then blocked with the addition of 3% hydrogen peroxide for 15 min. Tissue sections were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C with primary antibody (HEV ORF2, 1:250 dilution, MAB8003, Merck Millipore, German), washed with PBS, and then incubated with HRP-labelled Goat anti-mouse IgG (H + L) antibody. The paraffin sections were inoculated with PBS instead of HEV-specific antibody and served as the negative control. The reaction was visualized using DAB (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) as chromogen. The slides were sealed with neutral balsam, inspected, and photographed under a microscope (Nikon, E200, Japan).Statistical analysisAll experiments were performed three times. GraphPad Prism 5.01 software was used for statistical analysis. Student t-test was used to determine the significance of differences between two groups. A P value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.Supplementary information
Supplementary Information.


Title: Mechanism of Cross-Species Transmission, Adaptive Evolution and Pathogenesis of Hepatitis E Virus

1. IntroductionHepatitis E virus (HEV) is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus that belongs to the family Hepeviridae [1]. HEV is the leading cause of acute hepatitis around the world. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that there are 20 million HEV infections worldwide with approximately 44,000 deaths in 2015 [2]. HEV is known to cause acute hepatitis, rarely leading to fulminant hepatitis. However, chronic hepatitis has increasingly been reported in immunocompromised patients, including organ transplant recipients, as well as patients with hematological malignancy and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection [3,4,5]. Besides manifesting as typical hepatitis, HEV infection can also cause extrahepatic manifestations, including neurological manifestations [6,7], kidney injury, and hematological disorders [8,9].Among the five known hepatitis viruses, HEV has unique transmission routes ranging from the fecal-oral route, as its classical mode of transmission, and the zoonotic route, to less frequent routes such as via organ transplantation, transfusion of blood or blood products, or vertical transmission from mother to fetus [3,10,11,12,13,14]. Although the overall mortality rate is low, it could reach as high as 30% in infected pregnant women entering their third trimester of pregnancy [14].HEV infection is globally distributed. In developing countries, HEV has caused multiple outbreaks where the virus is transmitted via the fecal-oral route by drinking contaminated water. Meanwhile, HEV infections in industrialized countries are mainly associated with zoonotic causes [15]. The isolation of the first HEV strain in an animal, in swine [16], opened the door to the discovery of more HEV strains and their variants in animal species. The report by the same research group in the following year showed evidence that some HEV strains recovered from patients with acute hepatitis E are closely related to swine HEV, which can cross the species barrier to infect humans [17,18], proving an HEV zoonosis event. Isolation of new HEV strains in a growing number of animal species poses a risk to zoonotic infection and has become a public health concern. Despite the inevitable risk of zoonotic infection, many questions surrounding the mechanism of the cross-species transmission in HEV infection remain unanswered and will be discussed in this review, encompassing the viral and host factors involved in the event, such as the viral adaptive evolution and host cellular factors, as some of the determinants of host species tropism. In addition, the pathogenesis of hepatitis E infection will be briefly described in this review, including special forms of the disease, such as chronic infection, extrahepatic manifestations, and the severe cases in pregnant women.2. Genome and ClassificationHEV is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus. Its genome ranges from 6.4 kilobases (kb) to 7.3 kb with three major open reading frames (ORFs; ORF1–ORF3) (Figure 1A). The genome has a short 5′ untranslated region (5′ UTR) capped at its 5′ end and a short 3′ UTR terminated by the poly(A) tract [19,20]. ORF1 is translated from genomic RNA, while ORF2 and ORF3 are translated from a subgenomic RNA strand [21,22]. ORF1 covers two-thirds of the genome, and encodes a non-structural polyprotein containing multiple functional domains involved in viral replication. However, whether the ORF1 product functions as a single polyprotein or whether it needs to be further processed into smaller units by viral or cellular proteases following translation remains to be elucidated [23,24]. Notably, however, in a recent hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged full-length HEV replicon system, only an uncleaved ~190 kDa ORF1 product was detected [25]. ORF2 encodes capsid protein, which is essential during virion assembly and viral attachment to host cells, and is a major target for neutralizing antibodies [26,27,28]. Recently, it has been reported that HEV produces three forms of ORF2 capsid proteins: the infectious/intracellular ORF2 (ORF2i), which is associated with infectious particles, as well as glycosylated ORF2 (ORF2g) and cleaved ORF2 (ORF2c), which are not associated with infectious particles [29]. Another study determined the initiation codons for the secreted form of the ORF2 product and the actual capsid protein [30]. The secreted form of the ORF2 product (ORF2s) is initiated from the previously presumed start codon (Met 1) and its N-terminal 23 amino acids are cleaved by signal peptidase, while the actual capsid protein (ORF2c) is initiated from an internal AUG (Met 16) located 16 codons downstream of the first AUG (Figure 1B). Between the two studies, functionally, the ORF2s and ORF2c may correspond to ORF2g and ORF2i, respectively, with the absence of the cleaved form ORF2c, presumably due to its lower level [29]. ORF3 encodes a multifunctional phosphoprotein required for virion egress [31,32,33] and has been reported to be a functional ion channel, as viroporin [34].Exclusively in genotype 1 HEV (HEV-1), ORF4 codes for a novel protein identified in the coding sequence of ORF1. It is synthesized only under the condition of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and is a short-lived protein. ORF4 protein is reported to enhance the replication of HEV-1 by promoting the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) activity of ORF1 [35]. A recent report demonstrated that ORF4 provided in trans enhances the viral replication of genotype 3 HEV (HEV-3) although it does not naturally encode ORF4 in its genome [36]. HEV is a member of family Hepeviridae [1], which has been identified in humans as well as a broad range of animal species [15]. This family is divided into genus Orthohepevirus which consists of HEV strains from mammals and birds, and genus Piscihepevirus with its single species, Piscihepevirus A. The genus Orthohepevirus consists of species Orthohepevirus A, Orthohepevirus B, Orthohepevirus C, and Orthohepevirus D. To date, there are eight genotypes within Orthohepevirus A species which infect humans, pigs, wild boars, rabbits, deer, camels, and other animal species. Species Orthohepevirus B is only identified in birds, species Orthohepevirus C is identified in rodents, while species Orthohepevirus D is identified in bats [1]. Orthohepevirus A has been assigned to eight distinct genotypes (HEV-1–8) [1]. While HEV-1 and HEV-2 have only been isolated in humans, HEV-3 and HEV-4 have been identified in humans as well as several animal species, including pigs, wild boars, deer, and rabbits [37,38,39,40,41,42]. HEV-5 and HEV-6 have only been detected from wild boars in Japan [43,44,45,46]. HEV-7 has been isolated in dromedary camels and a human [47,48,49]. Finally, HEV-8 has been detected in Bactrian camels [50,51]. In addition, there are many as-yet unclassified HEV strains identified from moose [52,53], tree shrew (GenBank accession number KR905549), sparrow [54], silkie fowl [55], little egret [56], hamster [57], voles [58,59], and various bats [60]. 3. Modes of TransmissionIn developing countries, HEV is mainly transmitted via the fecal–oral route and has been associated with multiple outbreaks due to poor sanitary conditions (e.g., contaminated drinking water). Meanwhile, sporadic cases and clusters in industrialized countries are often reported where the routes of transmission are more variable and are dominated by zoonotic infection [6,61,62,63,64,65]. Although less frequent than the two main transmission routes, HEV can also be transmitted through organ transplantation or the transfusion of blood or blood products where it can cause chronic HEV infection or from an infected mother to the fetus [3,10,11,12,13,14]. Zoonotic HEV is mainly transmitted via foodborne routes, such as from the consumption of undercooked meat or milk products of infected animals. Another possible route is associated with occupational risk among workers, including veterinarians, forestry workers, slaughterhouse workers, or animal farm workers [66,67,68] as they are continuously in direct contact with probably infected animals. HEV is excreted in feces where the viral particles can reach the environment and contaminate water sources and irrigated food. HEV in environmental samples can reach the food chain (e.g., in mussels and contaminated pork products, such as sausages or meat) [69]. Besides being detected in packaged sausages and liver samples from processing sites and supermarkets in Spain, Italy, and Czech Republic, HEV is also detected from environmental samples collected in production farms and processing plants and at the points of sale of items such as knives, flooring, belt surfaces, workers’ hands, and toilets [69,70]. Foods other than pork products have also been implicated, where HEV is isolated from shellfish, fruits, and vegetables [71]. This is likely due to pig slurry contaminating watercourses or being used as fertilizer [72]. Coastal water may be contaminated with HEV, leading to the accumulation of the virus in the digestive tissue of shellfish due to filter-feeding [69]. An outbreak of hepatitis E on a cruise ship was linked to the consumption of shellfish while on board [73]. HEV has also been detected in sewage and run-offs, where the virus is concentrated in waste products generated during sewage and drinking water treatment. The following land application of the waste can cause the contamination of water in aquifers, can contaminate irrigated vegetables, and can therefore be a risk factor for HEV infection [69,74,75,76]. Another transmission route that warrants further exploration is through contact with an environment contaminated with the droppings or body fluid of infected animals. 4. Pathogenesis The HEV particles in bile and those shed in the feces are non-enveloped. Meanwhile, the particles in circulating blood and culture supernatants are in membrane-associated form, which is different from classical enveloped viruses due to the absence of viral glycoproteins in the surrounding lipid bilayer in which membrane-associated HEV particles seem to be completely covered with a lipid membrane [31,77,78]. These findings have led to the designation of the membrane-associated form of HEV as quasi-enveloped HEV [79,80]. Although a primary site of HEV propagation in humans remains undetermined, it is tempting to speculate that HEV replicates primarily in the liver (not in the gut) and that the non-enveloped virions entering via the gastrointestinal tract will be neutralized by immune sera before reaching the liver via the portal vein. This can explain how humans who were immunized with a recombinant ORF2-based vaccine can be protected against infection with enterically-transmitted HEV [78,81].Previously, it was hypothesized that lipid-associated HEV is released from both infected cultured cells (in vitro) and infected hepatocytes (in vivo) as lipid-associated virions, accompanied by ORF3 protein, and that the quasi-envelope is dissociated from the virion after shedding the lipid in the bile duct, which contains detergent (deoxycholic acid), and shedding the ORF3 protein in the duodenum, which contains protease (trypsin) secreted from the pancreas [82,83,84]. In support of this hypothesis, Capelli et al. [85] utilized F2 cells (subclone of the human hepatocarcinoma cell line HepG2/C3A, which grew as a polarized monolayer culture and had better HEV production than the mother cell line) in a cell culture due to the polarized nature of hepatocytes, which have exosomal pathways (basolateral, oriented toward the blood; and apical, oriented toward the bile). In this study, they showed that irrespective of the virus form (naked or membrane-associated), and whether HEV-3 or HEV-1 is used as inoculum, the polarized cells released around 95% of the HEV RNA from their apical sides as lipid-associated particles. The ratios of infectious particles to HEV RNA copies on the apical were higher in comparison to the basolateral side, suggesting that the apical pathway is the main release route and that the majority of infectious HEV particles are released from the bile sides of hepatocytes while the small fraction released into the bloodstream could spread HEV throughout the host [85].Although most HEV infections are self-limiting, infections in immunosuppressed patients may progress into chronic disease or may cause extrahepatic manifestations [6,7,8,9,86]. The host innate immune system is the first line of defense against viral infection. Dysregulation of this system can cause severe pathogenesis. In HEV infection, host innate immunity has shown to involve an active response in experimental models and patients [87,88,89,90,91]. HEV has also developed strategies to counteract the host immune system where recent knowledge mainly outlines the interactions between HEV viral proteins with the host innate immunity, as reported for ORF1 (e.g., the papain-like cysteine protease (PCP) and X domains of ORF1 inhibit the activation of retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and TANK-binding-kinase 1 (TBK-1), as well as the phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)) [92], ORF2 (e.g., ORF2 suppresses nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) activity by blocking the ubiquitination of inhibitor (IκBα) of NF-κB alpha) [93], and ORF3 (e.g., ORF3 inhibits the phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and the expression of interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) upon HEV infection) [94].Extrahepatic manifestations reported in HEV-infected patients are possibly associated with either direct viral effects due to cytopathic tissue damage caused by extrahepatic replication in affected tissues, or with indirect effects related to the immunological processes induced by a cross-reactive host immune response to HEV [95]. Besides being detected in various tissues in vivo, the ability of HEV to cause extrahepatic manifestations has also been demonstrated in vitro, where HEV can infect a range of cell types (e.g., human lung epithelial cells, human colon epithelial cells, human neuronal-derived cells, and human placental cells) [95,96]. HEV infection is associated with a high mortality rate in pregnant women, particularly those in their third trimester of pregnancy, where the highest incidence is reported for HEV-1 [14,97,98]. The alteration of the immune system during hormonal changes in pregnancy has been reported as a potential pathogenic mechanism of HEV infection, which is related to cellular immunity [14,99]. A recent study by Gong et al. [100] indicated that HEV infection significantly inhibits the signaling pathways of cyclic adenosine 3′, 5′-monophosphate/protein kinase A/response element-binding protein (cAMP/PKA/CREB) and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B/mammalian target of the rapamycin (PI3K/AKT/mTOR). The increasing estrogen levels and high activation of estrogen receptor alpha (ER-α) during pregnancy aggravates HEV replication. The exacerbation of HEV replication inhibits the expression of ER-α and suppresses the cAMP/PKA/CREB and PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathways [100]. Another factor that might enhance the virulence of HEV in pregnant women is the presence of the ORF4 protein, which is exclusively found in HEV-1. The ORF4 protein is only synthesized under the condition of ER stress and is essential to stimulate the RdRp of HEV-1, which causes enhanced virus replication [35]. Since pregnancy can induce ER stress and fulminant hepatitis E in pregnant women is mostly caused by HEV-1, it can be hypothesized that ER stress caused by pregnancy can induce the synthesis of ORF4, thereby causing higher viral replication (in comparison to non-pregnant patients) and consequently leading to the development of fulminant HEV infection. Most chronic HEV infections are associated with HEV-3, with a single case of HEV-1 [101] or HEV-7 [49], which to date, are only anecdotal and unique; and HEV-4, which has been described in small numbers of reports [102]. Viral and host factors are likely the determinants of the chronicity of HEV infection [103]. Viral factors, such as genotype, zoonotic potential, specificity, and adaptability to a host play important roles in the establishment of persistent infection. Meanwhile, host factors, such as the immune state and the nutritional health of the patient can also determine the course of HEV infection. The type of immunosuppressive drugs is reported to affect the progression to chronic infection, with patients treated with calcineurin inhibitors (e.g., tacrolimus, cyclosporin A) or mTOR inhibitors (e.g., everolimus, sirolimus), reported to be more prone to persistent HEV infection [3,103]. 5. Zoonotic HEV InfectionHEV infection caused by zoonotic HEV-3 or HEV-4 has increased in industrial countries, including Japan and several European countries such as France, the Netherlands, Spain, and UK [69,104,105,106]. It is also found to be endemic in the US population and circulates abundantly among North American pig herds [37,106]. Zoonotic transmission is responsible for the sporadic cases and clusters of human infection caused by HEV-3 and HEV-4, and chronic infection reported in immunocompromised patients is mostly linked to zoonotic HEV-3 [37]. Swine are the primary reservoir of HEV; in swine, infection is subclinical [107]. Most animal strains of HEV have been isolated from swine. Soon after the report of the first known zoonotic infection related to HEV [17], the number of zoonotic HEV infections continued to increase, particularly in industrialized countries. Within species Orthohepevirus A, HEV strains of five genotypes (HEV-1, -2, -3, -4, and -7) are capable of infecting humans (Table 1). While HEV-1 and HEV-2 are restricted to humans, HEV-3, -4, and -7 are capable of crossing the species barrier to cause zoonotic infection in humans. Besides HEV-3 and HEV-4 strains from pigs, wild boars, and deer, variants of HEV-3 in rabbits were also found to be capable of causing human infection [42,108].Under experimental conditions, swine HEV-3 and HEV-4 infected rhesus monkeys and, conversely, HEV-3 and HEV-4 of human origin infected pigs [17,109,110]. However, HEV-1 and HEV-2 failed to infect pigs under experimental conditions [18], indicating that HEV-1 and HEV-2 have a limited host range [111].To date, only a single case of human infection related to HEV-7 has been reported. It is a chronic case in an immunocompromised patient caused by the regular consumption of milk and meat products of dromedary camels [49]. The risk of zoonotic infection was also suggested in HEV-5 (from wild boar) and HEV-8 (from a Bactrian camel) as they were successfully transmitted to cynomolgus macaques in experimental settings [112,113,114]. Besides the members of species Orthohepevirus A, rat HEV, which is a member of species Orthohepevirus C, is also capable of infecting humans, as was recently reported in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients [115,116,117]. With growing numbers of isolated rat HEV strains from around the world [118], as well as evidence of human infection by rat HEV [115,116,117]—in limited areas—the number of cases of human infection by rat HEV may increase in the future.viruses-13-00909-t001_Table 1Table 1Reported cross-species transmission of genus Orthohepevirus.SpeciesGenotypeExperimental InfectionZoonotic Potential
Orthohepevirus A
Human HEV-1Non-human primate [119,120]NoHuman HEV-2
NoHuman HEV-3Rabbit [121]
Swine HEV-3Non-human primate [17]Yes [16,122,123,124,125,126] Wild boar HEV-3Pig [127,128]Rabbit [129]Yes [38,130,131,132]Pig [127,133] Deer HEV-3
Yes [39]Rabbit HEV-3Pig [134,135] Non-human primate [135] Yes [42,108]Human HEV-4Pig [110]
Swine HEV-4Non-human primate [109,136]Rabbit [137,138]Mongolian gerbil [139,140]Yes [123,141,142,143]Wild boar HEV-4
Yes [144,145]Wild boar HEV-5Non-human primate [112]LikelyWild boar HEV-6
UnknownDromedary camel HEV-7Non-human primate [113]Yes [49]Bactrian camel HEV-8Non-human primate [114]Likely
Orthohepevirus B
Avian HEVTurkey [146,147]Unlikely
Orthohepevirus C
Rat HEV
Yes [115,116,117]
Orthohepevirus D
Bat HEV
Unlikely6. Mechanism of Cross-Species Transmission in HEV InfectionThe key event in zoonosis is when an animal virus starts replicating in the first human subject. Here, the virus will experience the selective environment of the human body, possibly rendering viral adaptation and refinement for humans [148]. The processes responsible for cross-species transmission and the emergence of viruses in natural systems are diverse, involving ecological, evolutionary, and genetic factors. Several evolutionary mechanisms have been reported [149,150,151,152]. Among them, molecular adaptation by natural selection is an important occurrence that requires the generation and spread of beneficial mutations to increase virus fitness in a specific environment [153]. Viruses with frequent cross-species transmission events might exhibit parallel evolution (independent evolution of the same genotype or phenotype from distinct ancestors) as a result of adaptation to new host environments [153]. One of the efforts to demonstrate the broad range of HEV hosts was reported by Shukla et al. [154]. HEV-3 Kernow-C1 strain was semi-purified from the feces of a chronic hepatitis E patient co-infected with HIV [155]. Other than infecting human hepatoma cells (HepG2/C3A) and pig kidney cells (LLC-PK1), the fecal virus was surprisingly able to infect a variety of non-primate cells, including deer, cow, mouse, chicken, cat, dog, and rabbit cells. Meanwhile, the HEV-1 strains (Sar-55 and Akluj) used in this study successfully infected not only HepG2/C3A cells but also LLC-PK1 cells, albeit less efficiently. The HEV-3 Kernow-C1 strain was also serially passaged six times (p6). The p6 virus was shown to infect LLC-PK1 more efficiently than it did HepG2/C3A, suggesting that despite adaptation to grow in human HepG2/C3A cells, it still infected more pig cells than human cells [154].The precise mechanism of cross-species transmission in HEV infection is not fully understood. The establishment of cross-species transmission requires the interaction of viral determinants and host determinants. Within the past decade, progress has been made regarding the viral and host determinants involved in the cross-species transmission of HEV, among which the HEV ORFs and evolutionary events have become the most studied to date (Table 2).6.1. The HEV ORFsWhen the ORFs were analyzed separately, ORF1 and ORF3 were demonstrated to more efficiently separate the HEV strains into anthropotropic and enzootic genotypes, suggesting their evolutionary role in host species tropism [157,158,162]. Consistent with the broad host range of enzootic HEV genotypes, the HVR of ORF1 in HEV-3 and HEV-4 is around two-fold more heterogenous than that in HEV-1 [162], and the analysis of the relative synonymous codon usage values of ORF3s showed that the HEV strains were grouped into only two clusters consisting of the HEV-1 and HEV-2 strains (anthropotropic genotypes), and a cluster of the remaining strains (HEV-3–8, enzootic genotypes) [158]. On the other hand, ORF2 was previously thought to be the viral determinant of host tropism, since it encodes the capsid (the only structural protein) that possibly binds to unknown host cell receptors [141,163,164,165].To unveil the viral determinant of species tropism in HEV cross-species transmission, several research groups have been utilizing the intergenotypic chimeric virus strategy. The potential role of ORF2 in HEV cross-species infection was investigated by Feagins et al. [111] and Cordoba et al. [161]. Feagins et al. [111] constructed intergenotypic chimeric viruses by swapping the ORF2 capsid gene, either alone or in combination with its adjacent junction region (JR) and the 3′ UTR, between HEV-1 and human HEV-4, swine HEV-3 and human HEV-4, and HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 (Figure 2A). Their infectivity was tested in vitro and in pigs. Three chimeric viruses containing the JR, ORF2, and 3′ UTR of swine HEV-3 or human HEV-4 in the backbone of HEV-1 failed to infect pigs. However, the other two chimeric viruses containing the ORF2 capsid gene either alone or in combination with its adjacent 5′ JR and the 3′ UTR from human HEV-4 in the backbone of swine HEV-3 were replication-competent in Huh7 cells and infectious in both HepG2/C3A cells and pigs, suggesting that the 5′ UTR and ORF1 may be involved in cross-species transmission [111].Following this, Cordoba et al. [161] constructed four intergenotypic chimeric clones by swapping the ORF2 gene along with its JR, ORF3, and 3′ UTR between HEV-1 and HEV-4 of human origin, and HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 (Figure 2B). Only two chimeras with sequences swapped between HEV-1 and HEV-4 of human origin successfully established infection in HepG2/C3A cells. The inability of chimeras with sequences swapped between HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 to produce infectious viral particles may be due to incompatibility of viral genes from HEV-1 with those from swine HEV-3. The cDNA clone of human HEV-4 used in this study was confirmed to be capable of infecting pigs. However, none of the four chimeras were able to establish robust infection in pigs [161].It was demonstrated that ORF2 and ORF3 are not involved in HEV cross-species infection, as evidenced by the failure of host range expansion of chimeric viruses in which the ORF2 or ORF3 gene was swapped [111,161], suggesting that other genomic regions (5′ UTR and ORF1) may play a role in determining the HEV host tropism. Chattarjee et al. [156] reported the construction of 12 different HEV-1–HEV-4 chimeric full genome clones with HEV-1 as the backbone, where the structural (ORF2 and ORF3), non-structural (ORF1), or UTRs were replaced by the corresponding segments from swine HEV-4 clone (Figure 2C). Although all chimeric clones were able to replicate in S10-3 of human hepatoma cells, only two chimeric clones (HEV-1 as the backbone where the ORF1 either alone or in combination with its 5′ UTR was swapped with those of swine HEV-4) were able to replicate in PK-15 of pig kidney cells. This shows the crucial role of the ORF1 polyprotein in crossing the species barrier at the cellular level [156].Although the available evidence suggests that ORF1 may contribute in HEV cross-species transmission, the exact region within ORF1 that is essential in determining the host tropism is still unknown. Insertion and/or deletion in ORF1 have been demonstrated to affect not only virus replication but also host tropism [166,167]. The insertion of the host ribosomal protein sequence (RPS17) within the HVR of ORF1 led to expanded host adaptability, where the RPS17-inserted mutant was able to establish infection in cell lines of multiple animal origins in vitro [154,166], suggesting a potential role of ORF1, particularly HVR, in interspecies infection.To determine which viral genetic element in the ORF1 is essential in determining host tropism, Tian et al. [168] utilized genomic backbone of HEV-1 which only infects humans to construct a panel of intergenotypic chimeras in which the entire ORF1 gene or its functional domains were swapped with the corresponding regions from swine HEV-3, which infects both humans and pigs (Figure 2D). Although the chimeric HEVs were replication-competent in Huh7 (S10-3) cells (a human liver cell line) and swine HEV-3 parental clone-inoculated pigs developed viremia, the RNA transcripts subsequently inoculated intrahepatically into pigs did not confer the ability to infect pigs in the chimera; this can be partially linked to the limitation of this study, where the HEV-1 backbone used here technically has low virus replication efficiency [168]. The results from this study may also suggest that—in addition to the unidentified viral genetic element within ORF1—determinants (e.g., host factors) may play a role in host tropism, either alone or in association with the viral genetic element itself. In addition, Tian et al. [168] also investigated the role of the human ribosome protein sequence S17, which expanded the host range in cultured cells [154,166], in HEV cross-species infection. The results demonstrated that the insertion of S17 in the HVR of ORF1 did not abolish HEV replication competency in vitro and that it did not expand HEV host tropism in vivo, suggesting that S17 is not a determinant factor for HEV cross-species infection in vivo [168].Figure 2A schematic diagram of the genomic organization of HEV and its intergenotypic chimeric constructs summarized from four relevant papers. (A) Intergenotypic chimeric viruses where the ORF2 capsid gene—either alone or in combination—was swapped with its adjacent JR and 3′ UTR, between HEV-1 and human HEV-4, swine HEV-3 and human HEV-4, and HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 [111]. (B) Intergenotypic chimeric viruses where the ORF2 gene along with its JR, ORF3, and 3′ UTR were swapped between HEV-1 and human HEV-4, and between HEV-1 and swine HEV-3 [161]. (C) Twelve different HEV-1–swine HEV-4 intergenotypic chimeric viruses with HEV-1 as the backbone where ORF2, ORF3, ORF1, or UTRs were replaced by corresponding segments from swine HEV-4 [156]. (D) The genomic backbone of HEV-1 was used to construct a panel of intergenotypic chimeras in which the entire ORF1 gene or its functional domains were swapped with the corresponding regions from swine HEV-3 [168].6.2. Adaptive Evolution and the Codon Usage of HEVThe common ancestor of the modern HEV strains emerged approximately 6800 years ago, following the domestication of pigs and intensification of agriculture. Domestication caused adaptive changes in the common ancestor leading to the emergence of both human-restricted (HEV-1 and HEV-2) and zoonotic (HEV-3 and HEV-4) strains [158]. An analysis performed before the identification of the wild boar- and camel-derived genotypes (HEV-5 to HEV-8) indicated that the ancestor of all Orthohepevirus A was enzootic [169]. The same study also mentioned that the ancestors of HEV may have adapted to a succession of animal hosts, leading to humans. In contrast, a recent study suggested that the Orthohepevirus A species originated from humans and subsequently evolved into the zoonotic and human-restricted genotypes [170]. However, this study group also mentioned that their inference of an ancestral human host for extant Orthohepevirus A strains did not exclude the possibility that humans might have acquired HEV through cross-species transmission from other animals.Synonymous codon usage is the non-random selection of frequently used codons. This type of selection is limited by codon bias for different genes. Determinant factors for synonymous codon usage bias include natural selection, mutational pressure, and translational efficiency, as well as compositional constraints of the mammalian genome [160,171]. It is widely known that the synonymous codon usage in viral coding sequences serves as an important mediator in viral adaptation to the host [172]. Both restricted and broad host HEV infection can provide strong natural selection leading to the shaping of the codon usage pattern of different genotypes of HEV. Viral adaptation to the host in codon usage is a long-term evolutional feedback, which is derived from the host-range of HEV infection [159].Codon adaptation may be the essential factor in determining the viral host tropism [158]. The evolving process embodies coherent patterns of synonymous codon usage that have been established between the virus and the host. This process assists the virus in adapting to susceptible hosts and expanding the scope of zoonosis not only by specifying amino acid usage and translation dynamics but also by controlling gene expression levels [173,174].Natural selection was identified as a major factor affecting codon usage patterns in HEV ORFs that may explain the wide range of HEV hosts, while still being influenced by mutational pressure as part of the evolution process [157,158]. In a correspondence analysis based on relative synonymous codon usage data, different HEV genotypes appeared to cluster (in particular, HEV-1, and HEV-3 and HEV-4). The analysis showed that—based on ORF1—HEV-1 is clearly separated from the other groups [160]. Considering that ORF1 encodes an essential non-structural polyprotein that controls the life cycle of HEV, these results may partially reflect the fact that HEV-1 is restricted to human hosts, while the HEV-3 and HEV-4 strains were found in various animal species with the capability of cross-species transmission [160]. Factors such as natural selection and mutational pressure enabled significant adaptation changes in the ORF1 of HEV-1 to humans, rendering ORF1 the evolutionary indicator of host speciation [157,158].The genotype-specific codon usage pattern that results from the balance between mutational and natural selection provides an evolutionary pathway where HEV-1—with neutral evolution caused by synonymous mutations—is able to sustain its stable genetic characterization by strong natural selection. In contrast, the synonymous codon usage patterns of HEV-3 and HEV-4 may not be caused by neutral evolution. Obvious divergence of codon usage bias in a four-fold degenerate codon family was identified in HEV ORFs between HEV-1, and HEV-3 and HEV-4 [159]. The genotype-specific codon usage bias in HEV-1 is generally stronger than that of HEV-3 and HEV-4 [159]. Unlike the unique codon usage pattern of HEV-1, the HEV-3 and HEV-4 strains derived from either humans or swine have more diverse codon usage patterns in the ORFs. These can serve as evolutionary monuments and may explain the transmission from swine to human [159].In a study by Bouquet et al. [157], although codon preferences of humans and swine are very close, a lower codon usage bias was observed for zoonotic HEV (HEV-3 and HEV-4). The codon adaptation index (CAI) in this study was calculated with the general codon usage table of humans and swine. The index is >0.5, which indicates good adaptation of HEV to its hosts; thus, it can be assumed that the gene expression of HEV of human and zoonotic genotypes is very well adapted to the translational kinetics in humans [157]. In another study, Shukla et al. [154] inoculated Sar-55 of HEV-1 and the Kernow-C1 of HEV-3 onto deer cells to study host-range restriction. Immunofluorescence staining of ORF2 protein showed that in comparison to Kernow-C1, Sar-55 was deficient in the production of ORF2 capsid protein. The introduction of the first 29 nucleotides of Kernow-C1 at the translation initiation site increased the ORF2 production of Sar-55 in deer cells, suggesting that the modulation of translation from closely spaced codons can differ significantly according to host species, and this difference may provide one mechanism for restricting the host range [154].Synonymous codon usage patterns of HEV that are constantly modified by mutation pressure and natural selection from the host are important for the zoonotic nature of this virus. Various synonymous codon usage patterns of HEV strains may reflect the viral requirement of evolutionary adaptation to the host.6.3. Interaction between HEV and the Host CellOne of the major obstacles to interspecies virus infection is the difference between cell-receptor sequences. The primary structure of the receptor protein can affect the host susceptibility to cross-species viral infections. A virus can only adapt to a new host if the similarity between the receptor proteins present in the potential host species is high enough for them to cross the species barrier [175].Receptor differences—either quantitative or qualitative—offer an alternative explanation for differences in host range. Supporting the hypothesis of receptor-determined host range, Shukla et al. [154] reported that the fecal Kernow-C1 p6 virus maintained a higher titer in pig cells than in human cells even though it was adapted to grow in human cells [154]. They also stated that there are 54 amino acid differences in the capsid protein between Sar-55 of HEV-1 and Kernow-C1 of HEV-3, while there are only five between the fecal and p6 Kernow-C1 strains, suggesting that the adapted virus may have retained the receptor-interacting specificity of the fecal virus [154].Nguyen et al. [176] compared the ability of HEV-1 and HEV-3 to infect or transfect cultured human HepG2/C3A cells and swine LLC-PK cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that the HEV-1 isolate infected disproportionately fewer swine cells than human cells. This study group also utilized the virus replicons of HEV-1 and HEV-3 containing the Gaussia luciferase gene in place of the viral ORF2 gene and showed that the luciferase expression from the HEV-1 replicon is limited and may reflect the kidney cell origin of the swine LLC-PK cells used in the study. When a kidney cell line of rhesus macaques was used for comparison, the luciferase expression patterns demonstrated that the translation of the ORF2 capsid gene of HEV-1 is inhibited in swine kidney cells in comparison to its translation in rhesus macaque kidney or human liver cells, suggesting that this virus may produce insufficient capsid protein for optimal assembly in swine cells. The severely restricted ability of both HEV-1 and its intergenotypic chimera (consisting of 450 nucleotides encoding the putative receptor-binding region of HEV-3 in place of the corresponding region of HEV-1) to infect swine kidney cells in comparison to their ability to infect human hepatoma cells supports the notion that amino acids 456 to 605 of the virus capsid protein encompass the receptor-binding region and suggests that HEV-1 may be prevented from infecting swine cells due to the absence of a suitable cellular receptor or co-receptor [176].Although the ORF2 capsid protein was thought to play an important role in HEV attachment and entry [177], earlier studies utilizing HEV-1 as the backbone, where the ORF2 capsid gene was replaced with that of swine HEV-3 or human HEV-4, showed that HEV-1 did not acquire the ability to infect pigs [111,161]. In fact, binding to cells followed by virus entry is only the first step in virus replication. After entering the cell, the virus must interact correctly with host cellular factors to reproduce its genome and package the progeny virions [178,179,180]. Inability of the intergenotypic chimeras to infect pigs in the study by Cordoba et al. [161] showed that other than the role of viral factor itself, swine cells might lack the essential host factors required by HEV-1 to establish successful infection in pigs. Furthermore, the inability of the chimeras to infect pigs in the study by Cordoba et al. [161] may also reflect the functional importance of species-specific protein-protein interactions during HEV replication, considering that the stem-loop within the JR and 3′ UTR of HEV is known to interact with viral RdRp (and possibly with the host cellular factors) required for viral replication. In addition, the viral mechanism to counteract the host immune response can be species-specific and can partially explain the unsuccessful infection in pigs as species-specific amino acid residues that are important for evading the immune response in pigs may be absent in this setting [161]. Supporting this hypothesis, the successful replication of intergenotypic chimeras in pig kidney cells in the study by Chaterjee et al. [156] indicates that besides the importance of the interaction between ORF1 protein domains and host cell-specific factors during replication (as described above), cellular factors might play a critical role in virus establishment as a post-entry barrier.It has been demonstrated that Sar-55 and Akluj, human strains of HEV-1, can infect LLC-PK1 swine cells [154], suggesting that human and swine HEV may share at least one cell receptor. In addition, the species-specific interactions between viral and cellular proteins may be one of the determinants of the successful replication of HEV in the host [161,181]. For instance, ORF3 is known to interact with a host cellular factor, tumor susceptibility gene 101 (Tsg101), through its PSAP motif to promote virion egress [33,182] and, thus, successful viral replication. This motif is well conserved in the HEV-1–8 strains of Orthohepevirus A species (Figure 3, second PSAP). In addition to this motif, JE03-1760F of HEV-3 (used in our lab) and several other isolates of HEV-3 have one additional PSAP motif located at the N-terminal, while in other HEV-3 isolates, excluding HEV-3ra, the PXXP motif is highly conserved (Figure 3, first PSAP). Besides the highly conserved PSAP motif which interacts with the host cellular factor to facilitate virion release, the highly conserved motifs of CCC and IFI of the ORF3 in Orthohepevirus A species (Figure 3) were recently reported to promote HEV release and ion fluxes [34]. Of note, HEV-4 has CFC in place of CCC, while HEV-5 and HEV-6 have IFT or IST in place of IFI (Figure 3). Because these motifs are highly conserved, it is possible that a host cellular factor might be the other determinant of successful viral replication.The co-evolution of virus and the hosts often leads to species specificity. The presence of specific attachment proteins/receptors and availability of a complex pool of cellular factors required for viral replication can contribute to the host specificity [156].6.4. The Host Immune StatusThe immune state of the host may also be a possible determinant in HEV cross-species transmission. In most cases, humans infected with rat HEV were in an immunocompromised state [115,116]. Host adaptation after cross-species transmission is associated with rapid amino acid sequence changes of viral genes, typically those associated with receptor interactions and the evasion of innate immunity but often pervasive throughout the entire virus genome [183]. As described above, Shukla et al. [154] demonstrated the extraordinary ability of the Kernow-C1 strain to infect cells from a broad spectrum of species, ranging from rodents to primates. This probably reflects a high titer and a complex quasi-species generated during prolonged infection in an immunocompromised host. This possibility and the demonstration that HEV can acquire new information through recombination with host cell sequences leads to the conclusion that chronic HEV infection of a patient has important implications for the evolution of this emerging virus [154].7. ConclusionsKnowledge on the mechanism of HEV cross-species transmission has improved drastically within the past decade. However, several important questions remain to be clarified. Based on the available data to date, ORF1 has been demonstrated as an essential viral determinant in cross-species transmission of HEV; thus, dissection of the precise domain in ORF1 that confers the ability to cross the species barrier may answer one of these important questions. In addition, as the presence and interaction of viral and host determinants are essential to enable cross-species transmission, the discovery of HEV attachment protein and its interaction with host cellular receptors will greatly help in elucidating the mechanism of HEV cross-species infection.


Title: Avian Hepatitis E Virus: With the Trend of Genotypes and Host Expansion

IntroductionHistoryIn the early 1980s, big liver and spleen disease (BLS) was firstly characterized in chickens in Australia, and was considered to be the most significant disease affecting commercial broiler breeder flocks (Handlinger and Williams, 1988). It was clinically described as a sudden reduction in egg production, splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and increased mortality (Handlinger and Williams, 1988). The causative agent of this disease, big liver and spleen virus (BLSV), was isolated in the late 1990s, and based on sequence analysis of a 523 bp nucleic acid fragment, it was found that this sequence of BLSV had a 62% homology with the helicase gene of human hepatitis E virus (HEV) (Payne et al., 1999; Zhao et al., 2017). Not long after, another disease affecting chickens, hepatitis-splenomegaly syndrome (HSS) was first described in British Columbia, Canada in 1991 and in eastern Canada and the United States in 1997 (Ritchie and Riddell, 1991; Riddell, 1997). It is characterized by pale to white combs with red edges, abdomens with red ascites, poor to moderate body condition, the regression of ovaries and oviducts, enlarged livers and spleens and increased mortality in 32-week-old broiler breeders and commercial egg laying hens (Riddell, 1997). In 2001, the HEV-related virus, named avian HEV, was characterized from HSS afflicted chickens in the United States. Based on genomic sequencing, this novel virus displayed approximately 50 and 80% nucleotide (nt) sequence identity with mammalian HEV and BLSV, respectively, suggesting that BLS and HSS are caused by variants of the same avian HEV (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Huang et al., 2002). Phylogenetic analyses indicated that avian HEV belongs to a separate floating genus within the family Hepeviridae (Meng, 2008; Yugo and Meng, 2013). In addition, in 2004, avian HEV isolated from presumed healthy flocks was shown to cluster with BLSV and form a distinct branch, which indicated these two are variant strains of the same virus (Sun et al., 2004).To date, avian HEV is considered as a major causative agent of both BLS and HSS in chickens based on these findings. Avian HEV has now been detected in chickens in a number of countries, including the United States, Hungary, Canada, Australia, Spain, China, Korea, Poland, Israel and the cross-border region Austria and Czechia (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Agunos et al., 2006; Morrow et al., 2008; Bilic et al., 2009; Peralta et al., 2009; Marek et al., 2010; Zhao et al., 2010; Kwon et al., 2012; Konicek et al., 2016).ClassificationAvian HEV belongs to the Orthohepevirus B species of the family Hepeviridae (Emerson and Purcell, 2003). The family contains two genera: Orthohepevirus (all mammalian and avian HEV isolates) and Piscihepevirus (cutthroat trout virus) (Smith et al., 2014; Spahr et al., 2018). There are four species within the genus Orthohepevirus: A to D. Orthohepevirus A consists of the strains isolated from human, pig, wild boar, deer, mongoose, rabbit, moose, and camel (Li et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2011; Izopet et al., 2012; Lee et al., 2016; Meng, 2016; Spahr et al., 2018). Within Orthohepevirus A, there are eight genotypes (1 to 8). Genotypes 1 and 2 are obligate human pathogens (Meng, 2013), whereas genotypes 3 and 4 can infect both human and animals (swine, rabbits, deer and mongooses) (Sridhar et al., 2017). Genotypes 5 and 6 are isolated from wild boars (Takahashi et al., 2011), and genotypes 7 and 8 are found in dromedary and Bactrian camels (Woo et al., 2014; Sridhar et al., 2017). Orthohepevirus B includes the viruses isolated from chickens and wild birds and named avian HEV (Meng, 2016; Reuter et al., 2016). Orthohepevirus C is composed of the strains isolated from rat, greater bandicoot, Asian musk shrew, ferret and mink (Meng, 2016), and Orthohepevirus D is isolated from bat (Meng, 2016). The zoonotic characteristic of HEV has raised great public health concerns regarding cross-species transmission and new genotype discovery in recent years (Mushahwar, 2008; Meng, 2010, 2011).Within Orthohepevirus B, different avian HEV strains share approximately 73 to 100% identity to one another, and approximately 30 to 50% identity with mammalian HEVs (Huang et al., 2002). Although avian HEV only shares ∼50% identity to human and swine HEV strains, the genomic organization is relatively conserved (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Huang et al., 2004). Now, four major genotypes (1 to 4) were distinguished by genome-wide sequencing (Figure 1) and share approximately 82% identity at the nucleotide level (Syed et al., 2017). Genotype 1, was primarily isolated from BLS chickens in Australia and was also reported to cause the decrease in egg production in chickens during an outbreak in Korea (Payne et al., 1999; Kwon et al., 2012). Genotype 2, was primarily isolated from HSS chickens in the United States and was detected in BLS flocks in Central Europe and Poland, and also isolated from chickens with hepatitis-splenomegaly syndrome in Korea (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Moon et al., 2016; Matczuk et al., 2019). Genotype 3, was isolated from HSS chickens in Europe and from hens with decreased egg laying in China (Morrow et al., 2008; Zhao et al., 2010). Genotype 4, was isolated from affected flocks in Hungary and from bile samples of commercial egg-layer flocks in Taiwan region, which were initially presumed to be healthy (Bányai et al., 2012; Hsu and Tsai, 2014). Recently, a new isolate from chickens suffering from hepatic rupture hemorrhage syndrome (HRHS) in China was shown to be associated with avian HEV and named avian HEV-Hebei, phylogenetic analyses constructed according to the partial helicase and partial capsid gene showed in a single branch in avian HEV groups but distinctly separate from other avian HEV strains, which may further extend the genotypes of avian HEV (Figure 1) (Su et al., 2018a, b). This isolate belongs to a single branch, distinctly separated from other reference avian HEV strains (Figure 1). While all of these genotypes tend to be geographically different, each genotype of avian HEV belongs to a single serotype (Marek et al., 2010; Meng, 2010; Zhao et al., 2015).FIGURE 1Phylogenetical tree of the current genotypes of different avian HEV strains based on the complete or near complete genomes. The tree was built by MEGA 7.0 using the neighbor-joining (NJ) method with 1000 bootstrap replicates. GenBank accession numbers represents different HEV strains. Genotype 1: AM943647 is for avian HEV strain in Australia, JN597006 and KC454286 are for avian HEV strain in Korea. Genotype 2: AY535004 and EF206691 are two U.S. avian HEV strain, KM377618 is avian HEV strain in Korea. Genotype 3: AM943646 represents European avian HEV strain and GU954430 represents Chinese avian HEV strain. Genotype 4: JN997392 is for avian HEV strain in Hungary and KF511797 is for avian HEV strain in Taiwan region. Genotype 5: MH186107 stands for the recent new type avian HEV strain which isolated in Hebei, China. MG737712 is for sparrow, KX589065 is for little egret and KU670940 is for kestrel which are all representing avian HEV strain isolated from wild birds.VirologyVirion PropertiesAvian HEV is a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA virus which is sensitive to high temperature and iodinated disinfectants, but with certain resistance to acidic and mild alkaline conditions (Meng, 2010). The virions are icosahedral and symmetrical with a diameter of approximately 30–35 nm in size (Meng, 2010). The buoyant density of avian HEV is 1.39–1.40 g/cm3 in cesium chloride (CsCL) and 1.29 g/cm3 in potassium tartrate and glycerol according to a report by Meng (2010).Genome OrganizationThe full-length genome of avian HEV is ∼6.6 kb in length, which is 600 bp shorter than mammalian HEV (Figure 2). It contains a short 5′non-coding region (NCR), followed by three open reading frames (ORFs) and a short 3′NCR terminated by a poly(A) tract (Kabrane-Lazizi et al., 1999). The ORF2 and ORF3 are partially overlapped, but neither overlaps with ORF1 (Meng, 2010). The length of the 5′NCR of avian HEV is 24 bp, which is 2–4 bp shorter than that of most human and swine HEV (Huang et al., 2004). The ORF1 (nt 25 to 4620) of avian HEV encodes a viral non-structural protein 1531 amino acids (aa) in length with multiple functional domains based on computer predictions, including a methyltransferase (Methyl, aa 56–241), papain-like cysteine protease (PLP, aa 433–593), hypervariable region (HVR, aa 673–802), helicase (Hel, aa 984–1216) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp, aa 1231–1720) (Huang et al., 2004, 2007; Bilic et al., 2009). The typical motifs I-VI of the helicase superfamily I and the motifs I-III of viral methyltransferase are found conserved throughout the alpha-like virus super-group (Huang et al., 2004).FIGURE 2A schematic diagram of comparative genomic organization of mammalian and avian HEV. The three open reading frames (ORFs) are labeled with different colors and shown as above. The avian HEV genome is approximately 600 bp smaller than the mammalian HEV. ORF1 encodes non-structural proteins with the putative functional domains. ORF2 encodes the capsid protein, and ORF3 encodes a phosphoprotein. The ORF2 and ORF3 are partially overlapped, but neither overlaps with ORF1. The genome is capped at the 5′ end and contains a poly(A) tail at the 3′ end. The open reading frame is flanked by non-coding regions (NCR) at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the genome. A junction region exists between ORF1 and ORF3 for mammalian and avian HEV, which is characterized with a stem-loop structure and a cis-reactive element (CRE). MT, methyltransferase; P, a papain-like cysteine protease; HVR, hypervariable region; Hel, helicase; RdRp, RNA-dependent RNA polymerase.ORF1 accounts for the largest portion in the genome and its products play a very important role in the proper assembly and release of virus particles (Ahmad et al., 2011). The ORF2 (nt 4707 to 6527) encodes the capsid protein of 606 aa in length, sharing 48–49% aa identity with swine and human HEVs (Haqshenas et al., 2001). Six linear antigenic domains (I–VI) have been characterized in avian HEV ORF2 protein, which are located in aa 389–410, 461–492, 556–566, 583–600, 339–389, and 23–85, respectively (Dong et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014). Domains I and V contains epitopes, which are common among avian, human, and swine HEVs (Wang et al., 2015). The domains II and VI are unique to avian HEV and can induce immune responses in chickens, while domains III and IV only elicit a weak immune response (Zhao et al., 2015). Collectively, the capsid protein contains the most immunogenic epitopes capable of inducing neutralizing antibodies, which are a potential target for vaccine development (Meng, 2008). The smallest one, ORF3 (nt 4654 to 4917) encodes a protein of 87 aa (Huang et al., 2004). Three antigenic domains on ORF3 at amino acids (aa) 1–28, 55–74 and 75–88 were identified in the Chinese isolate of avian HEV (CaHEV) (Zhao et al., 2013b). The aa 75–88 region was shown to be a dominant antigenic domain which contains at least two epitopes, though the neutralizing characteristics of these three antigenic domains are still unknown (Zhao et al., 2013b). The downstream of ORF2 is the 3′NCR of avian HEV, excluding the poly(A) tail, consists of 123 nt (Bilic et al., 2009).EpidemiologyAvian HEV is considered to be the main causative agent of BLS and HSS (Haqshenas et al., 2001; Huang et al., 2002), which has been reported in Australia (Handlinger and Williams, 1988), the United States (Haqshenas et al., 2001), Canada (Ritchie and Riddell, 1991; Agunos et al., 2006) and Europe (Morrow et al., 2008). In addition, molecular epidemiologic investigations show high HEV-positive rates in chicken flocks in the United States, and that the virus can cause subclinical infections in these chickens (Sun et al., 2004). Serologic investigations show that the positive rate of chicken flocks and chickens are 71 and 30%, 57 and 28%, 95.08 and 40.57% in the United States (2002), Korea (2012) and throughout Taiwan (2013), respectively (Huang et al., 2002; Kwon et al., 2012; Hsu and Tsai, 2014). There is a 20% positive rate for anti-avian HEV antibodies in chickens from Brazil (Vitral et al., 2005), and in Spain, positive rates for farms span a wide range from 20 to 80% (Peralta et al., 2009). In China, the avian HEV seropositive rate in chicken flocks is 35.9% (Zhao et al., 2013a), while in Poland, there is a 56.1% positive rate for avian HEV genotype 2 among breeder broiler and egg laying hen flocks (Matczuk et al., 2019). In the United States between the years 2012 and 2014, 141 chickens from 10 organic layer flocks showed a 40% decrease in the rate of egg production and slightly increased mortality (up to 1% per week), avian HEV RNA was detected in 10 livers out of 141 chickens from two different affected flocks (Crespo et al., 2015). Recently, a disease known as HRHS was proven to be associated with avian HEV, and has emerged in many large-scale layers and breeding farms in China since 2016 (Su et al., 2018a). During this time, over 270,000 chickens from four farms in the Guangdong, Anhui, Hebei and Jilin provinces of China were positive for avian HEV. Those affected flocks showed several death peaks at ages 1 to 5 weeks, 17 to 20 weeks and 27 to 40 weeks. The cumulative mortality was approximately 15%, and the egg laying peak was significantly delayed with a laying rate decreased by 20% (Su et al., 2018b).Whether infections with avian HEV are age-associated or not, it’s still known of ambiguity as there have been a number of conflicting results. One study showed that 17% of chickens less than 18 weeks old and 36% of adult chickens in the United States were positive for avian HEV antibodies using a truncated recombinant ORF2 antigen (Huang et al., 2002). On the other hand, another report on commercial egg-type chicken flocks in the United States, identified avian HEV in 17-week-old chickens but no infections in 30 to 80-week-old chickens (Gerber et al., 2014). A third study showed that high antibody titers in infected chickens can be expected within the ages of 20–29 weeks (Zhao et al., 2013a). Meanwhile, 10% of chickens at 60 weeks old were also found to be avian HEV seropositive (Zhao et al., 2013a). The result is variable, the different region and flocks may contribute to this issue. Thus, a systematic artificially infection experiment should carry out to confirm age-associate result.In addition to chickens, avian HEV has also been identified in wild aquatic birds, such as the little egret in Hungary, which may represent a potential novel Orthohepevirus species (Reuter et al., 2016). An avian-like HEV from sparrow feces in the Midwestern United States has also been detected, which may also represent a novel HEV which is related to chicken and little egret HEVs (Yang et al., 2018). In both affected and presumed healthy poultry flocks across Russia and Kazakhstan, a high genetic divergence of avian HEV has also been detected (Sprygin et al., 2012). However, the avian HEV isolates from wild bird to cause chicken infection or the ones from chicken to cause wild bird infection are still uncertain (Reuter et al., 2016). Based on the phylogenetic tree, we speculate that the avian HEV strains from chicken and wild bird have an independent evolution from the same HEV ancestor. In addition, based on the comparisons between the different avian HEV isolates, they have the possible ability for cross-transmission (Meng, 2010).Co-infection is common in clinical case, avian HEV co-infected with other pathogens has also been reported (Sun et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016). For example, an epidemiology study showed that both avian HEV and avian leucosis virus subgroup J infection is endemic in those flocks with HSS in China (Sun et al., 2016). Additionally, avian HEV and Marek’s disease virus (MDV) was found to be co-prevalent in a flock of egg-type chickens in China with a double virus positive rate of ∼30% (Yang et al., 2016).Clinical PresentationIn chickens, subclinical infections of avian HEV are very common in flocks in the United States and other countries, but the morbidity and mortality associated with HSS (or BLS) and other avian HEV infections in the field are relatively low (Huang et al., 2002; Sun et al., 2004; Peralta et al., 2009). The mortality rate is between 0.3 and 1% for avian HEV genotypes 1–3 infections (Meng et al., 2008; Nikonova and Zinyakov, 2012; Yugo et al., 2016). The clinical presentation caused by the virus can be variable. Broiler breeders which have been inoculated with avian HEV genotype 1, typically show more gross ovarian and microscopic lesions than younger chickens inoculated with genotype 2, while avian HEV genotype 3 infection of laying hens can exhibit BLS or HSS, but shows decreased egg production without gross ovary and microscopic lesions (Billam et al., 2005; Park et al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2017). There are several other diseases that could be caused by avian HEV, which are listed as follows (Table 1).TABLE 1Comparison of three different diseases caused by avian HEV.DiseaseClinical symptomsPathologyOutcome ResultsBLSV (Handlinger and Williams, 1988)1. pallor of the combs 2. Anorexia 3. Drowsiness 4. Pasty droppings and soiling of the vent feathers 5. Hens found dead usually have a good body condition. 6. Enlarged and mottled livers and spleens 7. Ovaries are regressing 8. Peritonitis with free yolk in the abdominal cavity 9. Petechial hemorrhage of the duodenum 10. Swollen kidney 11. Edema of the lung is rare1. There are occasional numerous small and white foci scattered among the red pulp, showing large areas of hemorrhage and necrosis in the liver and spleen. Ovaries with blood clots often present within the large, pale, flaccid follicles. 2. There are five stages of splenic and hepatic pathology according to Handlinger’s report: I. Lymphoproliferative phase. II. Pyknotic destructive phase. III. Macrophage responsive phase. IV. Late responsive phase. V. Recovered. 3. In the early stage of the disease, lymphocytes and heterophilic cells infiltrate around the portal area of the liver 4. Lymphocytes proliferate in the spleen 5. Coagulative necrosis and vasculitis occur in the liver.1. A rapid and sudden drop in egg production last for 3–4 weeks, following by a return to normal production after another 3 weeks. 2. The mortality rate increased from 0.1–1% per week. 3. The signs come out as early as 24 weeks or late than 58 weeks age, production rate decreased by 5–20%.HSS (Handlinger and Williams, 1988; Tablante et al., 1994; Huang et al., 2002; Meng, 2011)1. Ovarian degeneration 2. Abdominal redness 3. Liver is amyloid or fatty degeneration with occasionally hepatosplenomegaly.1. Subcapsular hemorrhages and slight swelling of the liver lobes. 2. The microscopic liver lesions were mainly lymphocytic, heterophilic periphlebitis and phlebitis with occasional biliary vacuolation, amorphous hypocellular eosinophilic matrixes, hemorrhages, and necrotic foci.1. 20–40% egg production rate of hens 2. Broiler breeders at 30–72 weeks (increased 1%death rate), with mortality lasting several weeks during the midproduction period. 3. Higher incidence of chickens at 40–50 weeks.HRHS (Su et al., 2018a, b)1. Severe depression with pale crest 2. Doiling of the vent feathers 3. Red fluid in the abdomen.1. Hemorrhage in the liver and spleen, while no obvious pathological changes in other organs.1. The death peak of sick flocks is at age of 1 to 5 weeks, 17 to 20 weeks and 27 to 40 weeks. 2. The mortality is approximately 15%, and the laying peak is significantly delayed with the rate drop by 20%.PathogenesisConsidering the economic losses and the increased clinical infection rates, avian HEV pathogenesis research has become a necessity. The current method to study avian HEV pathogenicity is limited since the virus cannot be efficiently propagated in cell culture, and can only proliferate within living organisms or animals. As such, the pathogenicity of avian HEV remains largely uncharacterized (Meng, 2010; Syed et al., 2017).Billam et al. (2005) infected 60-week-old specific-pathogen-free (SPF) adult chickens by a natural route, to systematically study HEV pathogenesis and replication in a homologous animal model. They found avian HEV RNA in both the bile and liver of infected chickens, indicating that the virus replicates in the liver. Billam et al. (2008) showed that viral replication initially takes place in gastrointestinal tissues including the colorectal, cecal, jejunal, ileal, duodenal, and cecal tonsil tissues prior to reaching the liver (Billam et al., 2008; Yugo et al., 2016). Based on these results, it can be inferred that the entry of avian HEV first occurs from an oral-route, and then replicates and accumulates in the digestive system. In addition to viral replication, virus attachment to host cells is considered to be another crucial step in viral infections (Schneider-Schaulies, 2000; Yugo et al., 2016). It is reported that the capsid protein region from amino acid 471 to 507 is critical for avian HEV attachment to host cells (Zhang et al., 2016) and the C-terminal region of the capsid ORF2 protein is recognized as putative binding sites for both cellular receptors and neutralizing antibodies (Ahmad et al., 2011). Wang et al. (2018) utilized Lactococcuslactis as a delivery vector expressing higher levels of ΔORF2 (avian HEV truncated ORF2 protein spanning amino acids 249–606 protein) specific IgG antibodies, in order to neutralize or bind to avian HEV and induce effective mucosal immunity, prevented the virus from invading into host cells. These results also showed effective control of avian HEV infection in chickens. Better understanding of viral pathogenesis and replication both in vivo and in vitro is crucial for controlling and diminishing avian HEV infections.TransmissionAvian HEV is believed to be transmitted mainly by the fecal-oral route through contaminated feed and water in different flocks (Haqshenas et al., 2002; Huang et al., 2002). Furthermore, another new route of transmission has been successfully identified by Billam et al. (2005) experiment in which avian HEV infection was successfully reproduced via nasal and oral route inoculation in SPF chickens. To determine whether avian HEV can be transmitted vertically, Guo et al. (2007) collected and tested embryonated eggs starting from 1 week prior to virus inoculation to 5 weeks post-infection (p.i.), but all of the hatched chicks were negative for avian HEV infection. Conversely, Troxler et al. (2014) research, demonstrated that avian HEV RNA could be detected at week 25 in chicks hatched from laid eggs, indicating the possibility of vertical transmission routes.Within the eight species of Orthohepevirus A, genotypes 1 and 2 exclusively infect humans, whereas genotypes 3, 4, 7 and 8 can cross species barriers and are denoted as zoonotic genotypes (Purcell and Emerson, 2008; Doceul et al., 2016; Lee et al., 2016; Spahr et al., 2018), and according to the very recent study, Orthohepevirus C was identified to be zoonotic (Murphy et al., 2019). However, Orthohepevirus A (genotypes 5, 6) and D have not been labeled as zoonotic diseases (Liu et al., 2018). Surprisingly, the avian HEV (a member of Orthohepevirus B) also can be transmitted across species barriers, though they do not infect rhesus monkeys or pigs (Sun et al., 2004), but has been reported to infect turkeys under experimental conditions (Sun et al., 2004) and as well as other birds under natural conditions (wild aquatic bird, little egret, song thrush, little owl, feral pigeon and common buzzard), suggesting that avian HEV may have a limited host range and may not infect humans, and that chickens are likely not a reservoir for avian HEV (Huang et al., 2004). Meanwhile, genotypes 1 and 3 are prevalent in wild birds of 4 different species (song thrush, little owl, feral pigeon and common buzzard), which indicates avian HEV transmission between chickens and wild birds (Meng, 2010; Zhang et al., 2017). The presence of HEV in wild birds indicates that wild birds might play a role as a reservoir for avian HEV (Zhang et al., 2017). In addition to wild birds and turkeys, a mixed animal group comprised of chickens, ducks, geese and rabbits also can be infected with avian HEV genotype 3, demonstrating avian HEV could be a cross-species transmission pathogen (Liu et al., 2018). Though avian HEV has not been reported to cause zoonotic infections, its expanded host range and its ability to infect across species raises additional concerns (Meng, 2010).For the mammalian HEV, it was reported that the ORF1 is considered to play an indispensable role in determining host tropism (Chatterjee et al., 2016). However, there were also some reports which HEV ORF2 and ORF3 protein, host factors, especially host immune status, may also minorly contribute to cross-species transmission of HEV (Ding et al., 2017). For avian HEV, it was also documented that more mutated amino acids in ORF1 of the avian HEV isolated from the rabbit, suggesting that ORF1 maybe also play a role in the cross-transmission of avian HEV (Liu et al., 2018). However, the underlying molecular mechanism that ORF1 plays to alter host cell tropism during HEV cross-species infection is not yet clear.DiagnosisThe diagnosis for clinical manifestation of avian HEV is based on the detection of specific viral RNA, as the clinical signs and pathologic lesions are atypical (Crespo et al., 2015). All presumptive diagnoses must rely on laboratory tests, primarily based on RT-PCR for virus detection, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for avian HEV ORF2 and ORF3 specific IgG antibody detection and electron microscope (EM) for virus particles detection (Meng, 2010). Other lesion detection markers such as serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) could possibly be used as a supplementary diagnostic method since both are shown to be increased after intravenous (i.v.) and oronasal inoculation.Avian HEV-specific RT-PCR assays have been developed for the detection of avian HEV infections in chickens (Sun et al., 2004). The nested RT-PCR assays were universally used to detect avian HEV RNA from the fecal, serum, bile, liver and spleen samples. To determine avian HEV infection in the chickens, two truncated genes (ORF1 and ORF2) were amplified by nested RT-PCR at the same time. Recently, the pair of primers designed by Sun et al. (2004) were universally detected different genotypes of avian HEV RNA. Compared with conventional RT-PCR, duplex TaqMan real-time RT-PCR assay was shown to be highly specific (Troxler et al., 2011). A SYBR Green real-time RT-PCR assay was developed for the rapid, specific, and reproducible diagnosis of avian HEV infection in chickens by Zhao et al. (2015), which can accurately detect avian HEV RNA in serum, liver, spleen, and fecal samples with more sensitivity than conventional RT-PCR.The indirect ELISA (iELISA) methods were also improved, using a newly developed truncated recombinant ORF2 antigen of avian HEV genotype 2 strain to determine avian HEV seroprevalence (Huang et al., 2002). Zhao et al. (2013b) used a truncated ORF2 protein from an avian HEV genotype 3 strain isolated in China (CaHEV) as the coating antigen, and got a sensitivity of 96.1% and a specificity of 95.8%, with 97% corresponding with Western blot results, which can be used for the detection of chicken immunoglobulin G antibodies (IgG) against avian HEV for Chinese poultry farms. The blocking enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (bELISA) had a sensitivity of 98.3% and a specificity of 93.3% with CaHEV and had no cross-reaction with other anti-avian virus antibodies which can be used for detection of antibodies against avian HEV and showed high reproducibility compared with indirect ELISA and Western blot methods (Liu et al., 2014). Furthermore, two indirect ELISAs, using the truncated capsid proteins separately from the prototype avian HEV genotype 2 and genotype 3 as coated antigens, can be used effectively for the sero-epidemiological detection (Huang et al., 2002). Generally, the C-terminal region of capsid protein (268 amino acids) expressed by bacterial system were used as the coated antigen in ELISA assay (Haqshenas et al., 2002). Four antigenic domains were identified from the region (Zhao et al., 2015). Out of which, the domain I (aa 389–410) and domain V (aa 339–389) can induce a strong immune response in chickens, so this is the optimal selected domain as an antigen for detection of antibodies against avian HEV (Zhao et al., 2014). In addition, the ORF3 protein with lower sensitivity and specificity comparing with ORF2 protein was also used as the antigen to detect antibodies against avian HEV (Syed et al., 2017).However, the specificity and consistency of the ELISA assays using the different genotypes avian HEV as coating antigen is unknown, since avian HEV isolates from different geographic regions are genetically heterogenic (Huang et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2013b). Most of these assays are based on antigens expressed by a single avian HEV genotype; these might be a limitation for detecting all other avian HEV genotypes (Zhao et al., 2013b). To efficiently detect HEV infection from different sources, the identification of conserved epitopes may facilitate the development of diagnosis kits for region-specific avian HEV detection.Prevention and ControlAvian HEV infection is common in chicken flocks, however, there is no effective measure to prevent the disease from spreading (Reuter et al., 2016). Due to the lack of effective commercial vaccines and drugs for preventing disease in chickens, blocking fecal-oral transmission should prevent the spread of virus infection, while the implementation of strict biosecurity regulations at chicken farms may limit the spread of the virus (Molaei et al., 2006; Meng, 2010; Zhao et al., 2017). From Liu et al. (2017) study, cage-free compared to caged animals showed higher positive rates for both antibodies and RNA of avian HEV. The control of chicken excrement pollution could reduce avian HEV infection while implementing a caged living/raising method can help to better prevent HEV transmission. Conversely, Sun et al. (2016) believed epidemiological investigation and elimination of infected chickens to be the only efficient methods for avian HEV prevention and control due to the subclinical and persistent infections in chickens and the lack of availability of vaccines or treatment options (Sun et al., 2016; Nimgaonkar et al., 2017). The most effective measures for avian HEV prevention and control should combine two methods in clinical work since it’s the core of biosecurity-based process.Truncated avian HEV ORF2 contains immunodominant epitopes, which can induce a protective humoral immune response (Schofield et al., 2000; Meng et al., 2001). Guo et al. (2007) showed that recombinant ORF2 epitope identification can promote the development of efficient vaccines. While the complete ORF3 proteins were evaluated for immunoprotection of chickens against CaHEV infection, Syed et al. (2017) proved the expression of ORF3 protein only provides partial immune protection.Most of these recombinant ORF2/ORF3 products depend on an Escherichia coli-bacterial expression system (Dong et al., 2011; Zhao et al., 2013b), while Wang et al. (2018) utilized Lactococcuslactis as a delivery vector for truncated avian HEV ORF2 protein, and demonstrated that avian HEV ORF2 protein can induce ideal protection against hepatitis and liver injury caused by avian HEV, indicating that vaccine production using different vectors may differentially alter host immune responses.Conclusion and Future PerspectivesHEV is an important pathogen affecting both humans and animals, yet many questions remain unanswered, and more research needs to be done to better understand pathogenesis and to aid in the development of vaccines and treatments (Meng, 2010; Yugo et al., 2016). A vaccine for human use, based solely on the capsid protein of a genotype 1 HEV isolate, named Hecolin® , has been approved in China (Nan et al., 2018), but commercial vaccine for avian HEV is unavailable. Though avian HEV is not currently considered a zoonotic disease, it possesses cross-species infection ability with wide prevalence in most countries, which has aroused more attention for avian HEV prophylaxis and treatment. Vaccine development using synthetic peptides against avian HEV may help to minimize the risks of cross-species transmission and limit potential food borne transmission routes (Meng, 2010). The detection of avian HEV is based on the capsid protein (contains immunodominant epitopes and induces a protective humoral immune response) and antigenic domains for laboratory avian HEV serum antibody, but not all these antigens are commercially available (Syed et al., 2017; Nan et al., 2018). Further epitope identification can improve the accuracy of diagnosis kit and the efficacy of subunit vaccines (Nan et al., 2018). Additional pathogenesis studies on the virus could also provide new insights to combat HEV infection. With the accumulation of these fundamental works, it is promising that upcoming avian HEV vaccines will successfully protect against avian HEV, a broad cross-species virus.Author ContributionsAll authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Pseudorabies Virus Associations in Wild Animals: Review of Potential Reservoirs for Cross-Host Transmission

1. IntroductionBelonging to the family Herpesviridae and subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae [1], the pseudorabies virus (PRV) is the causative agent of pseudorabies (PR) or Aujeszky’s disease, which can lead to acute infection and significant economic losses in pigs and other animals. The alphaherpesvirus genomes are divided into six classes (A–F) [2] based on the arrangement of repeat sequences (inverted and tandem repeats) and unique regions (short and long). The PRV genome belongs to the D class [3] and is approximately 140 kb in length.Wild boars and pigs are the primary natural hosts of PRV and the only latent carriers [4]. PRV-related morbidity and mortality depend on various factors, such as animal health, viral strain, and infectious dose [5]. To date, PRV has been detected in various wild animals, including boars [6], rats [7], bears [8,9], raccoons [10,11], panthers [12], Iberian lynx [13], wolves [14], bats [15], and cats [16], as well as in domestic and farm animals, such as dogs [17,18,19], cattle [20,21,22], cats [23], sheep [24,25], foxes [26,27,28], and minks [29,30,31,32]. Furthermore, PRV infection is also a potential threat to humans [33,34,35,36].In this review, we provide a brief overview of the traceability, transmission, and vaccination of PRV infection in animals with the aim to strengthen PR control measures.2. Possible Transmission Route of PRV InfectionAt present, the epizootiology of PR disease is not completely understood. One hypothesis for herd-to-herd transmission is that wild animals (e.g., wild boars and Norway rats) act as disease reservoir hosts and spread the virus from one farm to another [37]. Alternatively, wild animals may become directly infected with PRV due to consumption of wild boar meat [38] or via insect-borne vectors such as winter ticks [39]. However, previous research on infected wild panthers found that the isolated PRV strain did not match that found in wild boars [12]. Thus, the origin of PRV in wild animals remains unresolved. In this review, we summarize current knowledge of PRV infection in natural and non-natural hosts (Figure 1).3. PRV Infection in Wild, Domestic, and Farm Animals3.1. PRV Infection in Wild Animals3.1.1. Wild BoarsWild boars are reservoirs for various infectious diseases in livestock and humans, including classical (CSFV) and African swine fever viruses (ASFV), porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2), porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV), porcine parvovirus (PPV), hepatitis E virus (HEV), swine influenza virus (SIV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), and torque teno virus (TTV) [6,40].PRV infection is enzootic and widespread in Eurasian wild boars [41,42], with the first cases reported in Italy, former Yugoslavia, and USA [43]. Following successful prevention and eradication programs, PRV has been largely eliminated from domestic pigs in many parts of Europe, including Austria, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, The Netherlands, and Great Britain (England, Scotland, and Wales) [41]. However, PRV infections remain widespread in many wild boar populations in the Czech Republic [44], Germany [41,45], France [46], Croatia [47], USA [48,49,50], Japan [51], Italy [16,52,53], Switzerland [52], Spain [53,54], Slovenia [55], Serbia [56], Brazil [57], Romania [58], Russia [59], Poland [60], and Belgium [61]. To date, however, there is little epidemiological information regarding PRV infection in Chinese wild boar populations. Considering that the number of wild boars in China is increasing year by year, epidemiological surveillance of PRV is urgently needed.As wild boar populations expand their range, there is increased potential risk for disease transmission that may affect healthy of humans and domestic swine, and conservation of wildlife. Based on long-term serological field studies, PRV is considered endemic in wild boar populations in the USA, including in the southern and central states (California [62], Southeast [63], Hawaii, Texas [64], Arizona [65], North Carolina [66,67]), as well as in Guam [68], Nebraska, Michigan [69], and Oklahoma [49]. Seroprevalence varies from 0.5% to 64.4% at the regional level [68,70,71]. In Europe, PRV-infected wild boar populations are present in Germany, Italy, Belgium, Croatia, the Czech Republic, former Yugoslavia, France, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovenia, Spain, and Switzerland, with average seroprevalence ranging from 0.3% to 66%. Based on 7209 samples collected from 2000 to 2011, average seroprevalence in Germany is 6.8% [45]. Based on 5000 wild boar samples collected from 2006 to 2020, average seroprevalence in Italy ranges from 3.8% to 30.9% [70,71,72,73].Characterization of PRV from wild swine is helpful to understand population diversity and could trace back the infection route [43]. In Europe, phylogenetic analysis of partial sequences of the glycoprotein C gene suggests that wild boar isolates can be differentiated into clades A and B [61,74]. Clade A isolates originate from Austria, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, and Slovakia, while clade B isolates originate from southwestern Europe, including Germany, France, and Spain [74]. Thus, the clade A and B isolates overlap geographically in central Europe, Germany, and France [74]. PRV isolated from USA was distinct from European isolates and was closely related to domestic pig isolates. It may represent a transmission from domestic to feral swine [6,75,76].3.1.2. BearsDetection of antibodies to canine distemper virus (CDV), canine herpesvirus type 1 (CHV-1), canine parvovirus type 2 (CPV-2), canine parainfluenza virus type 2 (CPIV-2), canine coronavirus (CCV), West Nile virus (WNN), and PRV is positive in European brown bears (Ursus arctos) [77]. Previous studies have reported PRV-positive blood samples in free-ranging Eurasian brown bears (Ursus arctos) in Slovakia [77] and PRV-positive tissues and antibodies in captive bears fed raw pig heads [8,9,76,77].In most cases, PR disease is fatal in bears, with death occurring within 1–3 days of clinical symptoms. Upon consuming infected pig offal or pig heads, bears can show acute and asymptomatic infections. In Himalayan bears, however, only mild clinical signs are reported, with negative neutralizing antibody tests [8].3.1.3. RaccoonsRaccoons (Procyon lotor) are considered a natural reservoir of PRV [10]. The clinical signs of PRV infection in raccoons resemble those of rabies and distemper [78]. Avirulent strain K is naturally occurring in the raccoon population [79]. Raccoons infected with virulent PRV strains (e.g., Be, S62/26, and 429) can transmit the virus to uninfected raccoons via contact. In raccoons, all virulent PRV strains are lethal, while avirulent strain K has a mortality rate of only 18% (2/11). Furthermore, when raccoons are infected with avirulent strain K, they may be re-infected with virulent strains, suggesting that virulent PRV may be circulating in raccoon populations [10,78].3.1.4. Other Wild AnimalsPRV not only infects wild boars, bears, and raccoons, but also can infect many wild animals, especially rare and endangered animals [12,53].PanthersThe Florida panther (Felis concolor coryi) is an endangered feline species [12]. Similar to the infection process in domestic cats, PRV infection is fatal in panthers [80]. Necropsies of infected panthers have detected residual swine hair in the digestive tract, confirming ingestion of wild boar meat and identifying the potential route of PRV exposure. Based on sequence analysis, the isolated panther strain has been identified as a wild-type gI+ and TK+ genotype [81].Iberian LynxThe Iberian lynx (Lynx pardinus), one of the most endangered feline species in the world [53], preys on small ungulates, birds, reptiles, and occasionally wild boar [82] and is positive for feline leukemia provirus (FeLV), feline parvovirus (FPV), and Cytauxzoon sp. by using PCR assay [13]. A previously captured lynx was found to be PRV-positive based on blood, oropharyngeal swab, and rectal swab samples, with PRV antigens also detected in the tonsils, brain, and gastric glandular epithelial cells [53]. Histopathological analysis of the central nervous system (CNS) further showed meningoencephalitis similar to that reported in domestic cats [83,84], dogs [85,86,87], foxes [88], and coyotes [89]. These results suggest that the Iberian lynx is susceptible to PRV and may be exposed to the virus via the consumption of wild boar meat [82]. Molecular and seroepidemiological analysis further confirmed the emergence of PRV in the Iberian lynx population (11.8%, 2/17) [13].CoyotesPRV infection has been reported in coyotes (Canis latrans) based on the testing of brain tissue. Clinical symptoms include anorexia, abnormal vocalizations, and nervousness [14,87,88]. PRV isolated from Belgian coyotes is similar to the Kaplan reference strain, the most common type present in European wild boars, suggesting potential infection via consumption of PRV-infected boar meat [14]. In China, a PRV strain was isolated from a coyote showing various clinical symptoms, including vomiting, dyspnea, circular movements, processed moaning, uneasy behavior, intense pruritus, paroxysmal convulsions, and quadriplegia. Sequence analysis of the Chinese PRV strain, which contained the glycoprotein E gene, indicated that it may be a field strain rather than a vaccine strain [90].3.2. PRV Infections in Domestic Animals3.2.1. DogsBecause of the recent incidents of PRV infecting people, the dog in PRV infection has aroused great concern. PRV is prevalent in dogs, including working and hunting dogs, in the USA [17,89,90], Belgium [91], Italy [19,75,92], France [93], Spain [85,94], Japan [95,96], Austria [97,98,99], China [18], Serbia [100], Argentina [101], and Germany [74], with infection via direct or indirect contact with wild boars and pigs [6,74]. Dogs with PRV infection display neurological signs, anorexia, intense muzzle itch, and respiratory distress [1,96], and usually die within 48 h of clinical symptom onset [19].3.2.2. CattlePRV infection can occur in cattle [6,20,21], especially when housed with pigs. PRV-infected cattle present with neurological symptoms and usually die within 24 h, with necropsy showing leptomeningeal hyperemia and lung consolidation [21]. Furthermore, under experimental infection, PRV has been isolated from the retropharyngeal lymph nodes [102] and pituitary, pharynx, and submaxillary lymph nodes of cattle [103].3.2.3. CatsCats can be infected with PRV under natural and experimental conditions [81,82,103]. The disease is sporadic and mainly transmits through the consumption of pig offal. Clinical symptoms include anorexia and pruritus, with death occurring within 12–48 h of clinical onset [83]. The virus is transmitted via the oral route, typically replicating in the tonsils and pharynx, then spreading through the CNS and excreted through oral and nasal secretions [83,104].3.2.4. SheepSheep in contact with pigs are also susceptible to field strains of PRV. Previous studies have reported clinical signs of lethargy, fever, pruritus, and death in sheep following PRV infection, despite vaccination with the Bartha vaccine strain [24]. Even without direct contact with pigs, sheep exhibiting CNS symptoms have been found to be PRV positive in postmortem tissue samples, with sequence analysis of the viral genome showing close identity to the Buk T-900 reference strain [105]. China has also reported outbreaks of PR in sheep following vaccination with attenuated live vaccines (i.e., Bartha-K16), resulting in clinical symptoms such as intense rubbing and licking. These results suggest that certain vaccines may be unsuitable for use in sheep [25].3.2.5. HorsesPrevious reported that horses with experimentally induced PRV infection had severe clinical signs, but no pruritus [106]. PRV antigens and DNA have also been detected in the neurons of horses presenting with neurological signs and severe meningoencephalitis, with PRV infection potentially occurring via aerosolized pig slurry [106]. While other non-porcine species typically succumb to PRV infection within 48 h, PRV-infected horses exhibit a longer course of infection (more than 7 days) without pruritus, and eventually survive [106,107].3.2.6. ChickensIn addition to infecting mammals, PRV can also infect birds such as chickens, which are susceptible to PRV infection under both experimental and natural conditions [108,109,110]. For example, Kouwenhoven (1982) isolated a PRV strain from farm chickens, which was pathogenic to 7-day-old chicks but could be neutralized by known PRV antisera and showed cross-reactivity with infectious bovine rhinotracheitis. The strain was originally derived from a PRV vaccine adapted to chicken cells and did not cause classical inclusion bodies in the neural tissue [110].3.3. PRV Infections in Farm Animals3.3.1. FoxesFoxes fed pig offal can become infected with PRV, as reported in Italy [26,28] and China [27]. Foxes with PRV infection display neurological signs, ataxia, fever, vomiting, dyspnea, intense pruritus, and frequent snarling, with death usually occurring within a few hours to three days. Studies have reported a high morbidity rate (80%; 1200/1500) in PRV-infected foxes, especially symptomatic foxes [27]. Previous epidemiological analysis of strains isolated from dead foxes found a close relationship to domestic field strains in China, rather than vaccine strains [27]. However, the epidemiological link between the isolated strain and wild animal populations or domestic pigs is unclear.3.3.2. MinksOutbreaks of PRV in minks have been reported in many countries [111,112,113,114,115]. Brain samples collected from dead minks have been identified as PRV-positive, with necropsy also showing organ hemorrhage and endotheliotropic vessels, although no neurological signs were evident before death [29,30]. In 2014, a serious outbreak of PRV was reported in a mink farm in Shandong Province, China. The minks exhibited severe clinical signs, including diarrhea, anorexia, and abdominal and facial skin scratching, and a high morbidity rate of 87% (3522/4028). Out of 566 minks, 33 tested PRV-positive by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and the isolated strain clustered with vaccine-resistant Chinese porcine PRV isolates [31,32].3.4. PRV Infections in HumansAlthough humans were previously considered a non-susceptible host for PRV infection, a PRV variant causing infectious endophthalmitis has been reported in China in recent years [36], thought to have originated from sewage containing pig excrement. In 2020, four patients with acute encephalitis were diagnosed with PRV infection and presented with respiratory dysfunction and acute neurological symptoms. The PRV strain (hSD-1/2019) isolated from the cerebrospinal fluid of one of the patients was closely related to a PRV variant known to cause high pathogenicity and acute neurological symptoms in pigs [35].4. Transmission Models and Cross-Host Transmission Routes for PRVThere are two competing models of PRV transmission in wild boars, i.e., age-dependent and sexual transmission models. The age-dependent model suggests that PRV seroprevalence differs between older and younger animals, with older boars showing significantly higher prevalence than younger individuals [16,116,117,118,119]. In contrast, preferential sexual transmission may occur under random or polygynous boar mating systems [48], whereby polygamy and mate guarding behavior may impact the seroprevalence of PRV in males and females differently. For example, under a 1:1 sex ratio, predicted seroprevalence is the same for both at-risk males and at-risk females; however, as wild boars are highly polygynous [120,121], the predicted seroprevalence is different for at-risk males and at-risk females [48].Although data on the origin and transmission of PRV field strains are limited, we suggest several possible transmission routes: (1) non-natural hosts may become infected via contact with immunized pigs [122]; (2) before succumbing to illness, PRV-infected non-natural hosts may travel within their territories, leading to transmission to other individuals; (3) due to inappropriate biosecurity measures, non-natural hosts may come into indirect contact with carcasses contaminated with PRV [9]; (4) as anthropogenic-impacted landscapes change wild animal habitat availability, frequent contact between wild animals may result in an increase in PRV infection. Thus, appropriate measures should be taken to disrupt these transmission routes and control animal infection.5. VaccinationPRV has a wide host range and can be transmitted across wild, domestic, and farm animals. The DIVA strategy (i.e., differentiating infected from vaccinated animals) has been used in various European countries and the USA based on gE- or gI-deleted vaccines [67,72]. Attenuated live vaccines (e.g., gE-gene, gE/gI/TK-gene, TK/gG-gene, gE/gI-gene, TK/gE-gene and gE/US2-gene deleted) have been used in China since the early 1990s for the control of PR in pig farms [123,124,125,126,127]. However, while these vaccines provide effective protection for pigs, they do not appear to provide full protection for all animals or species. Previous reports suggest that virulent strain DCD1 and attenuated strain HB98 can cause clinical signs and pathological lesions and induce death within 24 h of the onset of symptoms [128]. Interestingly, in transmission experiments using the Bartha-K61 vaccine, viruses with longer incubation periods and lower replication rates take longer to cause lesions in dogs than the HB98 and DCD-1 strains [128]. In addition, US7/US8/UL23-deleted recombinant PRV vaccines provide effective protection in pigs but show obvious neural symptoms and virulence in dogs [129], while the Bartha-K16 vaccine can also induce PR in sheep and goat populations [25]. Thus, commercial vaccines may not be safe for dogs or certain farm animals [129]. These findings suggest that genes deleted in commercial vaccines may be associated with replication rates and tissue tropism in vivo, resulting in changes in PRV pathogenicity [128]. In contrast, modified live PRV vaccines with gG-gE/TK deletion have been shown to induce an immune response against the virulent Shope strain and may play a role in preventing PRV transmission in raccoons [11]. In general, however, present-day vaccines used in pig farms do not provide complete protection for all farm and domestic animals. As such, novel and safe vaccines must be developed for different animals, particularly those that are endangered.6. Interspecies TransmissionPRV was previously considered to be limited to host species only. However, there are three possible pathways that have allowed cross-host transmission from wild boars and pigs to non-natural hosts, namely, positive selection, adaptive evolution, and recombination. The gB, gC, gD, and gE genes play central roles in receptor binding, pathogenicity, and induction of antibodies, with various residues shown to be under positive selection, including residues 43, 75, 848, and 922 in the gB protein, residues 59 and 194 in the gC protein, and residue 348 in gE protein [130], thus suggesting that PRV may undergo host adaptation. Further research has revealed that two sites on gB in clade 2 of PRV (929 and 934), four sites on gC in clade 1 of PRV (59, 75, 76, and 191), and two sites on gE in clade 2 of PRV (495 and 540) may be related to adaptive evolution after cross-host transmission [130]. Thus, these two pathways suggest that mutations on the PRV glycoprotein may play a role in facilitating cross-host transmission from natural to non-natural hosts (including humans). Recombination also plays a vital role in the evolution of viruses, allowing the emergence of new strains with altered virulence and immunogenicity [131]. Intraclade and interclade recombinations have occurred in the PRV genome. For example, the SC strain is thought to have recombined with PRV strains in clade 2 and the PRV ZJ01 strain is thought to have originated by recombination between clade 1 or clade 2.1 isolates [132]. These recombinations can cause enhanced virulence, failed immunity, or new genotypes [130], and may increase the probability of cross-host transmission of PRV.In addition, the receptors of PRV have been identified, including 3-O-sulfonated-heparan sulfate (3-O-S-HS) [133], the herpes virus entry mediator A (HveA, also known as HVEM), a TNF receptor-related protein [134], and three immunoglobulin superfamily members: HveB (PRR2, nectin-2) [135], HveC (PRR1, nectin-1) and HveD (PRV, CD155) [136]. Among these molecules, nectin-1 is highly conserved in mammalian animals and serves as a broadly used receptor mediating the entry of PRV [136]. Previous reports suggested that PRV infects host cells via both human and swine nectin-1, and that its gD exhibits similar binding affinities for nectin-1 of the two species [137]. These structural observations provide a systematic view on the receptor binding mechanism for cross-host transmission of PRV.7. ConclusionsIn this review, we summarize the epidemiology and pathogenesis of PRV infection in wild, domestic, and farm animals. Recently, various field strains have shown virulence against non-natural hosts, such as bears, coyotes, and panthers, with some found to be epidemiologically associated with swine isolates, wild boar isolates, and vaccine strains. Thus, novel and safe vaccines should be developed for different animals, particularly endangered species, to control cross-host transmission of PRV.


Title: Effect of Hepatitis E Virus on the Male Reproductive System: A Review of Current Evidence

1. IntroductionHepatitis E Virus (HEV) is an emerging pathogen that is considered the most common cause of acute viral hepatitis worldwide [1,2,3]. HEV, a positive sense single-strand RNA virus that infects humans and animals, is a member of the genus Paslahepevirus, subfamily Orthohepevirinae, and family Herpesviridae [4,5]. The genus Paslahepevirus includes two species: Paslahepevirus alci and Paslahepevirus balayani. Paslahepevirus balayani includes eight genotypes, and five genotypes can infect humans [4,5]. HEV genotypes 1 and 2 are fecal-orally transmitted viruses associated with outbreaks in developing countries [1,6]. HEV genotypes 3, 4, and 7 are zoonotic viruses, and pigs, wild boars, camels, and rabbits are the main reservoirs and sources of human infection, mainly through foodborne transmission [7,8,9,10,11]. Blood transfusion can be another source of HEV infection in humans [12,13,14,15]. Vertical transmission is confirmed from pregnant women to their fetuses, causing severe complications in the case of HEV genotype 1 infection [16,17] and mild infection in the case of HEV genotype 3 infection [18,19]. The genome of HEV contains three open reading frames, and the genome of HEV genotype 1 includes four open reading frames [20,21]. Open reading frame 1 (ORF1) is located at 5’ of the genome, and it encodes the proteins required for viral replication (non-structural proteins) such as RNA polymerase, helicase, and cysteine protease [21]. Open reading frame 2 (ORF2) is located at 3’ of the viral genome and includes the structural proteins required for capsid and virus assembly [22,23]. There are three different forms of ORF2 proteins; two forms are associated with non-infectious virions, and they are glycoprotein (ORF2g and ORF2c), and one form is associated with infectious virions and not linked with glycoprotein (ORF2i) [24,25,26]. Open reading frame 3 is required for viral infection, replication, and release [27]. Open reading frame 4 stimulates the RNA polymerase and activates the viral replication [20].HEV can cause acute and chronic infections. Acute HEV infection, mainly caused by HEV genotypes 1 and 2, is mostly a self-limiting disease; however, progression to acute liver failure can develop, especially among pregnant women, as well as coinfection with other hepatotropic viruses and old ages [16,28,29]. It is worth noting that HEV genotypes 1, 2, and 4 can cause acute liver failure in pregnant women, while HEV genotype 3 causes mild infection in pregnant women [17,18,30,31]. HEV can persist in the human body for more than three months, leading to chronic infection [32,33,34]. Chronic infection, caused by HEV genotypes 3, 4, and 7, is mainly developed in patients with weak immunity such as patients receiving immunosuppressant drugs after organ transplantation, patients infected with HIV, and patients with leukemia [32,33,34]. HEV genotypes 1 and 2 do not cause chronic infection [35,36]. Chronically HEV-infected patients are at risk of developing extrahepatic complications, mainly in the nervous system, kidney, placenta, bone marrow, and monocytes [37,38,39,40,41,42]. Neurological manifestations can be caused by direct replication of the virus (such as meningitis or encephalitis), immune responses against the virus such as Chronic Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyneuropathy (CIDP), or the cause of some manifestations (such as neuralgic amyotrophy and Guillain–Barré syndrome) is not clear due to the viral replication or host immune responses [42]. Additionally, the genital system is also a target for HEV replication. HEV genotypes 1, 3, and 4 have been shown in earlier research to have an impact on the reproductive system of females. In vivo animal studies demonstrate the ability of HEV genotype 4 to multiply in the ovaries and uterus, which facilitates the vertical transmission of HEV to the fetus [43,44]. HEV genotype 1 and, to a lesser extent, genotype 3 have been shown to replicate in decidual and fetal placental stromal cells as well as in organ cultures, causing significant tissue damage and altering the cytokines secreted in the surrounding microenvironment [45]. Moreover, HEV genotypes 1 and 3 can replicate efficiently in primary human endometrial stromal cells, suggesting that these cells could be an endogenous source of the infection during pregnancy [46]. The extrahepatic disorders associated with HEV infection are either mediated by direct pathogenesis and replication of the virus or indirectly through the formation of virus–antibody immunocomplexes that can precipitate in various organs and stimulate inflammatory responses [37]. Regarding the effect of HEV on the male reproductive system, the role of HEV in male infertility is a query that has not been answered. The data about this hot topic are scarce and not conclusive, probably due to the difference in the viral genotypes, experimental approaches used, source of the virus, etc.Male reproductive health can be significantly impacted by viral infections, which may result in infertility and other complications. Various viruses have been shown to adversely impact men’s reproductive health, hormonal balance, and sperm quality [47]. Several viruses, including the Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis C virus, Human immunodeficiency virus, Human papillomavirus, Human simplex virus, Human cytomegalovirus, Zika, Mumps virus, influenza, Ebola, and SARS-CoV-2 virus, have been linked to infection-induced male infertility [47,48]In this review, we will discuss the effect of HEV infections on the male reproductive system and the excretion of HEV in the semen samples, which raise concerns about the possibility of HEV transmission via sexual intercourse. We collected articles that assessed HEV in patients’ samples and in vivo and in vitro model systems used to evaluate the possibility of HEV infection in the male reproductive system as well as the infectivity of HEV particles excreted in these organs or fluids (summarized in Figure 1).2. Effect of HEV Infection on the Male Reproductive System and Excretion in Semen2.1. Studies That Include Patients’ SamplesA small number of studies conducted in various countries have examined the prevalence of HEV in semen samples and the effect of infection on the male reproductive system yielding contrasting results. However, it is not clear if this contraindication was due to the patient cohort, tested patients, virus genotype, stage of diseases, etc. These findings are discussed further in this section of the review and summarized in Table 1.2.1.1. Studies Report an Effect of HEV Infection on the Male Reproductive System and Excretion in SemenIn 2018, a study was conducted in Kunming, China, which analyzed semen samples of 185 infertile men and found a high prevalence of HEV RNA (28.1%) [54]. The viral titers in semen were comparable to those detected in urine. Phylogenetic analysis showed that it was of genotype 4 h. This isolate was highly similar to the HEV isolate circulating among pigs and ruminants in the same region [54]. Moreover, a higher HEV seroprevalence was recorded in infertile men than in the general population and pregnant women in this region [54]. Importantly, the author highlighted that HEV infection impaired semen quality, decreased motility and vitality, and increased the percentage of abnormal sperm [54]. Computer-assisted semen analysis (CASA) revealed that 97% of the sperm of HEV-infected patients were asthenospermia [54] and about 54% of the oligospermia patients were HEV RNA-positive [54]. However, future studies need to confirm these findings. Another study was performed in Germany; the authors analyzed the blood, urine, stool, and ejaculate from chronic HEV-infected patients (n = 3) and acute HEV-infected immunocompetent patients (n = 6) [52]. HEV RNA was detected in the ejaculation of two out of three chronically infected individuals in both semen and seminal plasma but not in the acute immunocompetent patients [52]. Later, the same group assessed another small cohort of immunocompromised patients (n = 6), and five out of the six patients also tested positive for HEV RNA in the patient ejaculation [51]. The isolated HEV subtypes belonged to 3c, and one isolate was not classified and assigned to 3abjk, but the isolates from the patients who tested negative for HEV in the ejaculate were 3i (n = 1) and 3c (n = 1) [51,52]. The HEV loads were higher in seminal plasma and semen (2–3 logs) than in urine [52]; the load reached 107 IU/mL in the ejaculate of three patients and the blood of one patient [51,52]. The HEV titer was 100 times higher in the ejaculate than in the serum in five patients, while the titer was lower in the ejaculate than in the serum in two patients [51]. Electron microscopy examination and density gradient approaches revealed that the HEV particles excreted in the semen were enveloped, similar to the particles excreted in the blood (enveloped) and different from the naked non-enveloped released in the patients’ feces [52]. However, by sequencing and multiple sequence alignment, the HEV particles excreted in the ejaculates were genetically different by 15 amino acids than the particles in blood or stool, mainly in the hypervariable region of ORF1 [52]. The viral particles excreted in the ejaculate did not show infectivity to HepG2/C3A cells in vitro [52] but were infectious to optimized PLC/PRF/5 cells [51]. However, HEV RNA was not detected in the semen of immunocompetent HEV-infected patients [52]. Interestingly, after ribavirin therapy, HEV could be detected in the ejaculate of one patient even after the clearance of the virus from blood and stool [52]. HEV RNA was detectable in the ejaculation of this patient after stopping ribavirin [52]. The previous findings suggest that HEV could persist in the semen for a longer period than the blood and stool, and the ribavirin could differentially affect HEV loads in different compartments. Since the findings of this study were derived from a small cohort, further studies should confirm these data.2.1.2. Studies Report No Effect of HEV Infection on Male Reproductive System and Male InfertilityHorvatits and colleagues assessed HEV RNA in the semen of infertile men (n = 87; 79 retrospective, and 8 samples were prospective), and the authors did not detect HEV RNA in any of these samples, concluding that there is no link between male infertility and HEV genotype 3, which is the common genotype circulating in Europe [53]. Likewise, Wang and colleagues prospectively analyzed the semen of infertile men (n = 1183), collected from the Department of Reproductive Medicine Centre, Peking, China (2018–2019), for the presence of HEV RNA. None of the tested patients were positive for HEV [55]. Since HEV genotype 4 is the common genotype in China [13], the authors concluded that the link between HEV genotype 4 and male infertility is weak [55]. In a parallel line, EL. Mokhtar et al. retrospectively analyzed the semen and blood of infertile patients (n = 120) for HEV markers including HEV RNA, HEV Ag, and HEV-antibodies and these patients were negative for these markers [49]. Moreover, the same study prospectively assessed HEV markers in the blood, urine, and semen of acute HEV-infected patients (n = 25), and there was no evidence of HEV markers in the semen of acute HEV-infected patients, though some makers were positive in the blood and urine of the same patients [49]. In addition, there was no difference in the level of reproductive hormones including follicle-stimulating hormones (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), testosterone, prolactin, and estradiol between the HEV-infected patients and healthy control subjects. Moreover, sperm quality was not impacted by HEV infection, and sperm motility, abnormal form, and liquefaction time were comparable in both groups [49]. Collectively, these authors concluded that HEV genotype 1 (the most prevalent genotype in Egypt [29,56]) is not harmful to the male reproductive system [49].2.2. Ex Vivo and In Vitro StudiesResearchers used human hepatoma cell lines to assess the infectivity of HEV particles in the patients’ ejaculation. Also, testes explants and primary human Sertoli cells were used to evaluate the infectivity of HEV in these organs, summarized in Table 1.2.2.1. Human Hepatoma Cell LinesHepatoma cell lines such as HepG2/C3A, PLC/PRF/5, and Huh7.5 are the most common hepatoma cell lines that support HEV replication [25,26,57]. These cell lines are permissive to stool-derived HEV preparations, plasma-derived HEV preparations, and HEV cell culture preparations [26,58]. Hepatoma cell lines were used to assess the infectivity of HEV particles excreted in the semen. Horvatits et al. used the HepG2/C3A cell line to assess the infectivity of HEV particles in the ejaculates of two immunocompromised patients; one patient underwent a heart transplant, and the second patient had chronic lymphatic leukemia [52]. Both patients were chronically infected with HEV genotype 3 subtype c. HepG2/C3A cells were not permissive to the ejaculation of the previous patients [52]. Also, stool, plasma, and urine from those two patients were not infectious to the cells [52]. Later, Schemmerer et al. used an optimized cell culture system to assess the infectivity of HEV particles in the patients’ ejaculates. This optimization includes the use of overconfluent PLC/PRF/5 cells, to which supplements were added such as amphotericin B, fetal calf serum, and distinct salt to enhance the infectivity and virus production [57]. Schemmerer et al. retested the infectivity of two patients’ samples that were not infectious to HepG2/C3A cells [51,52]. The ejaculate of the first patient (heart transplant [52]) was infectious to PLC/PRF/5 cells as the HEV RNA was increased in the culture supernatant at day 14 post-infection and the titer increased till day 70 post-infection [51]. Moreover, the extracellular HEV ORF2 antigen was detected in the culture supernatant and the level was increased with time, indicating robust infection [51]. In addition, HEV ORF2 was detected intracellularly in the infected cells by immunofluorescence [51]. Importantly, the ejaculate supernatant and ejaculate lysate are infectious to PLC/PRF/5 cells; however, the ejaculate lysate was more infectious than the ejaculate supernatant, probably due to the particles in the former one were naked particles [51]. The ejaculate of the second patient (chronic lymphatic leukemia [52]) was not infectious to overconfluent PLC/PRF/5 cells [51]. Then, Schemmerer et al. assessed the infectivity of the ejaculate of other HEV-infected patients (n = 5) using this optimized culture media, and they were infectious to the cells in vitro [51]. However, the infectivity was varied based on patients’ samples [51]. In one patient (kidney transplant, infected with HEV genotype 3 subtype c), the patient’s fecal preparation was less infectious than the ejaculate and the urine from this patient was not infectious to PLC/PRF/5 cells [51]. In another patient (Lymphoma, HEV genotype 3, unassigned subtype), the patient’s fecal preparation was more infectious than the ejaculate to PLC/PRF/5 cells [51]. The RNA load in the PLC/PRF/5 culture supernatant reached 109 copies/mL in the supernatant of cells challenged with the patient’s ejaculate, suggesting the infectivity and replicative competence of HEV from the ejaculate [51]. The difference between the infectivity of HEV particles among patients’ materials could be attributed to the difference in properties of HEV particles (naked, enveloped), viral load, patient’s medication history, storage condition, etc.2.2.2. Human Testicular Tissues (Testis Explants)Li and colleagues studied the susceptibility of stool-derived HEV genotype 3 (subtype 3b), stool-derived HEV genotype 1 (subtype 1b), and stool-derived rat HEV (HEV-C1) to testis explants isolated from healthy donors [50]. HEV genotype 3 replicates efficiently in 70% (7 out of 10 donors) of the testis explants, as indicated by the detection of HEV RNA in the culture supernatant day 1 post-infection and detection of HEV ORF2 intracellularly [50]. HEV ORF2 was detected mainly in the germ cells, Sertoli cells, and seminiferous tubules [50]. Interestingly, treatment of testis explants with immunosuppressant (tacrolimus) increased the infectivity and permissiveness of the testes to HEV genotype 3; 100% infection (10 out of 10 of donors) was attained and the viral load was significantly higher after 1–3 days in treated cells than non-treated cells [50]. The viral particles released in the culture supernatant of testis explants were infectious as they could establish the infection in gerbils [50]. In contrast, testis explants were not permissive to stool-derived HEV genotype 1 and rat HEV [50]. Finally, HEV genotype 3 infection induced damage in the testis explants, distorted germ cells, and slightly stimulated pro-inflammatory responses, except IL-18, which was highly up-regulated [50].2.2.3. Primary Human Sertoli CellsHEV genotype 3 can replicate efficiently on primary human Sertoli cells, and the RNA titer increased in the culture supernatant [50]. In contrast, HEV genotype 1 cannot replicate in these cells [50]. The addition of tacrolimus enhanced the replication of HEV genotype 1 and genotype 3. Efficient replication of HEV genotype 1 was only successful after tacrolimus treatment [50]. The efficiency of replication was higher in HEV genotype 3 compared to HEV genotype 1 as the viral load was higher in the former one with time [50]. Unlike testis explants, HEV genotype 3 infection induced significant changes in the secretome of Sertoli cells, especially in the proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and colony-stimulating factors [50]. It is worth noting that the changes in Sertoli’s cytokine microenvironment were achieved without tacrolimus [50].2.3. In Vivo Animal Model Studies on the Effect of HEV Infection on Male Reproductive SystemVarious animal models have been employed to investigate the effects of HEV infection on different aspects of the male reproductive system.2.3.1. PigsPigs are the main reservoir for HEV genotypes 3 and 4 [59,60,61]. Previous studies showed that HEV can replicate in the extrahepatic tissues in pigs such as the intestine, kidney, spleen, and lymph nodes [62]. Li and colleagues were the first study to assess HEV in pig semen (n = 26) in Shaanxi province, China [63]. In total, 1 sample out of 26 of the semen samples collected was positive for HEV RNA [63]. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that this isolate belonged to genotype 4 subtype 4i, the prevalent sub-genotype reported in the feces and bile of the pigs included in that study [63].In another study by Yadav et al., HEV was detected in the epididymis and semen of pigs experimentally infected with HEV genotype 3 (US-2 strain) [64]. HEV ORF2 protein was detected in the acrosomal region of the sperm head [64], and the sperms were infectious to hepatoma cell lines in vitro [64]. HEV RNA titers were significantly higher in sperm cell suspensions compared to seminal fluid and bile from the infected pigs [64]. Moreover, analysis of the semen from infected pigs showed that HEV infection was associated with decreased sperm motility, increased abnormal form, and sperm immobility [64]. The authors hypothesized that HEV could infect spermatogonia, impact Leydig and germ cells, damage the blood–testis barrier, and induce inflammation [64].On the other hand, Horvatits et al. examined HEV RNA in the testes of HEV-infected male pigs (n = 12). The pigs were experimentally infected with HEV genotype 3 derived from the liver of naturally infected wild boars in Germany, at different doses of 10−4 to 10−8 dilutions (equal 2.6 × 104 IU/dose-2.4 IU/dose, respectively) [52,65]. The infected pigs with doses (10−4 to 10−7 dilutions, n = 8) developed viremia (8/8, 100%) and viral excretion in stool and bile (8/8, 100%) [52,65]. Also, HEV RNA was detected in the liver of infected pigs (8/8, 100%), gall bladders (6/8, 75%), spleen (5/8, 62.5%), hepatic lymph node (6/8, 75%), and mesenteric and other lymph nodes [52,65]. However, HEV RNA was not detected in the testis of any of these pigs (0/8, 0%) [52]. In the other four pigs infected with 10−8 dilution of the viral inoculum, HEV RNA was not detectable in any organs [52,65]. The authors hypothesized that HEV was not excreted in the semen of experimental infected immunocompetent pigs [52].The discrepancy between the two studies, especially those including the HEV genotype (genotype 3) as inoculums, is not clear. One possible explanation is the origin of the virus used. Yadav et al. used the gastrointestinal-derived HEV US2 strain, which was isolated from acute hepatitis patients in the US [66,67], while the virus used in the study conducted by Horvatits et al. was derived from the liver of naturally infected wild boars in Germany [65]. Also, the inoculum doses are different in both studies, and the ages of pigs at the time of inoculation were not the same. Moreover, the time of collection of testes tissues was different. Yadav et al. collected tissues at day 84 post-inoculation, while in the other study, the collection of tissues was earlier than this time. Further studies should be conducted to assess the factors that contribute to infection with the possible effect of HEV on the male productive organs in the pig model.2.3.2. Mongolian GerbilsMongolian gerbils are used for studying the pathogenesis of HEV genotypes 1, 3, and 4 [68,69,70,71]. Mongolian gerbils were also used for studying extrahepatic disorders associated with HEV infection such as neurological manifestations [72]. Soomro et al. studied the impact of HEV infection on the structure and function of testes in the Mongolian gerbils’ model. The authors used liver homogenates of swine-derived HEV genotype 4 as inoculums [73]. HEV was detected in the sera of infected animals starting from day 7 post-inoculation till day 42, while HEV was recorded in the testes of infected animals one week later (day 14-day 42 post-inoculation) [73]. Negative strands of HEV RNA, HEV ORF2 antigen, and HEV ORF3 antigens were detected in the infected testes, suggesting replication of HEV in these organs [73]. The peak of HEV RNA titers in the testes ranged from 4.65 at day 28 post-inoculation to 6.23 at day 42 post-inoculation [73]. The serum level of testosterone was significantly lower in the infected animal compared to non-infected control animals on day 21- 42 post-inoculation [73], while the level of estradiol was comparable in both groups in all time points (day 7-day 56 post-inoculation) [73]. The diameter of seminiferous tubules and the level of abnormal sperms were notably higher in the HEV-infected animals [73]. There were clear pathological abnormalities in the testes of HEV-infected animals such as necrosis in the spermatogonia, shedding of germ cells, development of multinucleated giant cells, programmed cell death, etc. [73]. Electron microscopy examination for the infected testes revealed severe DNA fragmentation in the cells with the formation of apoptotic bodies and increased vacuolation [73]. Moreover, upregulation of apoptosis-related genes such as Fas, FasL, caspase-3, B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl-2), and Bcl-2-associated protein X (Bax) was detected in the testis of HEV-infected animals [73]. Collectively, the swine-derived HEV genotype 4 could damage the blood–testis barrier in Mongolian gerbils, causing testicular injury, distortion, necrosis, and apoptosis of several sperm cells [73].Liu and colleagues also studied if HEV genotype 3 can affect the testes. Three gerbils were challenged with fecal preparations of human-derived HEV genotype 3 subtype b (dose 8 × 106 copies/animal), and the viral load was quantified in the liver, testes, and epididymis three weeks post-infection [50]. HEV RNA was detected in the liver (3/3, 100%), epididymis (3/3, 100%), and testes (2/3, 66.7%) of the infected animals [50]. The viral load was higher in the liver than in the epididymis and testes [50].Also, gerbils were used to test if the ex vivo human testes explants can produce infectious viral particles following the HEV challenge. To this end, human testes explants (treated with tacrolimus) were challenged with fecal preparation of human-derived HEV genotype 3, and the supernatants were collected after 24 h. and used as inoculum for the animals. Gerbils challenged with the culture supernatants became HEV seropositive after 9–10 weeks (66 days post-inoculation) and HEV RNA was detected in the stool after about 5 weeks (34 days post-inoculation) [50].2.3.3. Non-Human Primates (Rhesus Monkeys)Non-human primates are the ideal model for studying HEV isolates that cause infection in humans [74]. Huang et al. used rhesus macaques to study the impact of HEV infection on the male reproductive system and male infertility [54]. Two rhesus macaques were challenged with swine-derived HEV genotype 4. HEV markers (RNA and antigens) were detected in the testes and epididymis of the infected animals, suggesting the ability of HEV to replicate in these sites [54]. Histological examination of the HEV-infected testes and epididymis revealed a loss of the seminiferous epithelium, spermatocytes, and Sertoli cells with increased infiltration of inflammatory cells leading to testis congestion [54]. Additionally, the infection disrupted the transcription factor Ets-variant gene 5 (ETV5), which mediates the function of the blood–testis barrier [75], suggesting damage in the blood–testis barrier [54,75]. Moreover, HEV infection caused a significant drop in serum testosterone levels, which is indicative of functional testicular impairment [54]. The HEV infection-induced decrease in Leydig cell counts could be a factor in lower testosterone synthesis, consistent with the dysregulated testosterone levels observed in infertile men [54].2.3.4. Balb/c MiceSome studies report that Balb/c mice cannot support the replication of HEV genotypes isolated from Europe [24,76,77,78]. On the other hand, one group reported that Balb/c is an ideal model for studying the HEV genotype 4, which is isolated from China, and the viral pathogenesis in the male reproductive system, pregnancy, and kidney [43,79,80,81]. Situ and colleagues infected Balb/c mice with a fecal preparation of human-derived HEV genotype 4 and assessed the effect of HEV infection on the male reproductive system [81]. HEV RNA was recorded in the testes after 1 week of infection and reached a maximum after 3–4 weeks of infection and was detectable in the testes longer than in the blood [81]. HEV RNA was also detected in the seminal vesicles, epididymides, and epididymal fluid [81]. The kinetics of RNA in the epididymal fluid was slower (delayed) compared to the testes, i.e., RNA appeared 1 week later in the epididymal fluid. However, the HEV load persisted longer in the epididymides and the epididymal fluid than in sera, feces, and liver (up to day 70–90 post-infection) [81]. The previous finding was probably due to a weak innate immune response stimulated by the virus in the testes compared to the blood due to the immune-privileged nature of the testes [81]. RIG-I, IFN-β, TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-10 were not activated in the testes of infected mice, while IFN-λ was activated [81]. Not only the viral RNA but also HEV ORF2 antigen was observed in the testes, seminal vesicles, and epididymides of HEV-infected mice, suggesting that these sites are permissive to HEV replication [81]. More specifically, the authors reported that testicular peritubular–myoid cells and Leydig cells support HEV replication [81]. Moreover, HEV infection caused a reduction in sperm quality, damage to the blood–testis barrier, spermatogonia decline, and hormonal changes as shown by a reduction in the level of testosterone and inhibin B, suggesting that HEV infection causes serious damage to the testis and epididymal [81]. Importantly, the level of these hormones returned to normal after the viral clearance [81]. Also, HEV-mediated male infertility can be partially reversed after the viral recovery [81].2.3.5. RabbitsRabbits are an ideal model for studying the pathogenesis of rabbit-derived HEV strains, HEV genotype 4, and some isolates of HEV genotype 3 [82,83,84]. Rabbits infected with HEV can develop chronic infection and extrahepatic manifestations in the intestine, spleen, and kidney [85,86]. Rabbits were used as a model for testing the effect of HEV infection on the female reproductive system [44]. Liu and colleagues studied the effect of HEV infection on the intratesticular transcriptome changes in the rabbit model [50]. Chronic HEV infection was successfully developed in immunocompromised rabbits (treated with tacrolimus) and challenged with a fecal preparation of rabbit HEV strain (genotype 3, HEV-3ra) [50]. HEV RNA was detected in the testes of the rabbits at week 13 post-infection. RNA sequencing analysis of the testes collected from HEV-infected immunocompromised rabbits showed downregulation of 887 genes including genes related to spermatogenesis, spermatid differentiation, sperm motility, reproduction, gamete generation, germ cell development, etc. [50].2.3.6. Other Naturally Infected AnimalsQian and colleagues investigated the presence of HEV genotype C1 (Rocahepevirus ratti, rat HEV) in the testes of naturally infected male wild rats, present in Yunnan Province, China [87]. HEV-C1 RNA and antigens were detected in 8 out of 37 (21.6%) testis samples from the wild male rats [87]. Another study by Risalde et al. tested the presence of HEV in the testes of naturally infected wild boars [88]. Wild boars are reservoirs of HEV genotypes 3 and 4 in many countries, especially European countries [89]. HEV RNA and antigens were tested in the blood, testes, liver, and lymph nodes of male wild boar. HEV RNA was detectable in the serum of four animals, with three of these confirmed to be infected with HEV genotype 3f through phylogenetic analysis [88]. Only one animal exhibited detectable viral load in its testis, where HEV-specific labeling was observed in a small number of fibroblasts and some Sertoli cells. Importantly, despite the presence of HEV in the testis, the study did not find any tissue damage associated with the infection [88].The in vivo animal models used to assess HEV infection on the male genital system are summarized in Table 2.3. Is HEV a Sexually Transmitted Pathogen?Men having sex with men (MSM) is a high-risk factor for the spread of fecal–oral infections, such as the Hepatitis A Virus (HAV), especially via the analingus route [90]. Since HAV and HEV are excreted in the feces, the transmission of HEV via the sexual route or among MSM with anal practice is therefore questionable. Moreover, the excretion of HEV in patients’ ejaculate raises concerns about the possibility of HEV transmission via sexual intercourse, specifically when the excreted particles are infectious [50,51]. It is worth noting that the infectivity of HEV particles in the ejaculate was comparable to or higher than the infectivity of HEV particles excreted in the patients’ stool and higher than the infectivity of HEV particles circulating in the blood or urine [50,51,52]. Blood transfusion is confirmed as a method of HEV transmission [12,91,92]. Blood-derived HEV particles were infectious to the human liver chimeric mouse model [58]. Also, urine-derived HEV particles were also infectious to animal models such as non-human primates [93]. Therefore, the initial expectation is the possibility of HEV transmission through sexual intercourse. However, previous studies showed that the transmission of HEV through sexual transmission is rare [94,95]. Rodríguez-Tajes and colleagues assessed HEV infection among MSM during acute HAV outbreaks in Spain [94]. HEV markers were tested among MSM (n = 83), and there was no difference in the prevalence of anti-HEV IgG between MSM and non-MSM. Moreover, all the samples tested negative for HEV RNA, and only two samples were anti-HEV IgM positive [94]. The authors concluded that the incidence of HEV transmission among MSM is very low (zero incidence) [94]. In Italy, Spada and colleagues assessed HEV markers among MSM (n = 196) during HAV outbreaks and blood donors (n = 3912) from the same geographic regions [96]. The seroprevalence of HEV was higher among blood donors than MSM, suggesting that sexual intercourse does not play a role in the transmission of HEV [96]. In France, Migueres and colleagues assessed the risk of HEV transmission among MSM who received HIV preexposure prophylaxis (n = 147) and blood donors (n = 147) of matched age, gender, and area [97]. There was no difference in the seroprevalence of HEV among both groups, and there was no evidence of HEV infection among the MSM, despite the detection of other sexual pathogens including HAV and bacterial infections [97]. Another study was conducted in France on MSM who used HIV preexposure prophylaxis, concluding that HEV infection is not commonly transmitted by sexual intercourse [95]. These findings suggest that sexual transmission of HEV is rare. One possible explanation is that the excretion of HEV in the ejaculate is high among immunocompromised patients, not immunocompetent ones [52]. Only organ transplants and patients with leukemia had positive HEV in the ejaculate [51,52], and these groups were probably not included in the tested MSM groups or the tested MSM groups had not developed chronic infection. Future studies should ascertain these points.4. Conclusions and Future PerspectivesThe excretion of HEV in the semen and its role in male infertility and sexual transmission is a hot research topic. Studies on patients’ samples revealed that the possibility of HEV excretion in the semen is high with chronicity, especially in organ transplants and patients with leukemia. However, all the published data include only a few cases. It is important to assess HEV markers in the ejaculate of a larger cohort. To date, the risk of HEV excretion in the semen of HIV-infected patients, another category of immunocompromised patients with a risk of chronic infection, is not known. The HEV particles on patients’ ejaculate seem to be infectious to in vitro optimized cell culture models and animal models. The role of HEV in male infertility has been described in animal models including testicular damage, inflammation, blood–testis barrier breakdown, etc. However, these data have not been confirmed in human samples. Still, the factors contributing to the excretion of HEV particles in the semen are not completely known. For example(a)Do the viral genotypes and subtypes affect the rate of HEV excretion in the semen?(b)What is the minimum infectious dose of HEV in the ejaculate?(c)What are the levels of male sex hormones in chronically HEV-infected patients such as organ transplants and leukemia patients?(d)Is there any observed deformity in the semen of chronically HEV-infected patients?Also, it is not known if sexual intercourse could be a natural source of infection, even if the semen is HEV-RNA positive. We believe that this topic needs a lot of investigation and research. Furthermore, understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying HEV’s impact on the male reproductive system is crucial for developing targeted therapeutic strategies.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: POLIOVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Surveillance to Track Progress Toward Polio Eradication — Worldwide, 2019–2020

When the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) was established in 1988, an estimated 350,000 poliomyelitis cases were reported worldwide. In 2020, 140 wild poliovirus (WPV) cases were confirmed, representing a 99.99% reduction since 1988. WPV type 1 transmission remains endemic in only two countries (Pakistan and Afghanistan), but outbreaks of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) occurred in 33 countries during 2019–2020 (1,2). Poliovirus transmission is detected primarily through syndromic surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) among children aged <15 years, with confirmation by laboratory testing of stool specimens. Environmental surveillance supplements AFP surveillance and plays an increasingly important role in detecting poliovirus transmission. Within 2 weeks of COVID-19 being declared a global pandemic (3), GPEI recommended continuing surveillance activities with caution and paused all polio supplementary immunization activities (4). This report summarizes surveillance performance indicators for 2019 and 2020 in 42 priority countries at high risk for poliovirus transmission and updates previous reports (5). In 2020, 48% of priority countries* in the African Region, 90% in the Eastern Mediterranean Region, and 40% in other regions met AFP surveillance performance indicators nationally. The number of priority countries rose from 40 in 2019 to 42 in 2020.† Analysis of 2019–2020 AFP surveillance data from 42 countries at high risk for poliovirus transmission indicates that national and subnational nonpolio AFP rates and stool specimen adequacy declined in many priority countries, particularly in the African Region, suggesting a decline in surveillance sensitivity and quality. The findings in this report can be used to guide improvements to restore a sensitive surveillance system that can track poliovirus transmission and provide evidence of interruption of transmission.Acute Flaccid Paralysis SurveillanceTwo key performance indicators assess AFP surveillance quality: the nonpolio AFP (NPAFP) rate§ and the collection of adequate stool specimens from AFP patients. Based on the background incidence of other acute flaccid paralytic illnesses, an NPAFP rate ≥2 per 100,000 children aged <15 years indicates that a system is sufficiently sensitive to detect circulating poliovirus. Surveillance quality is assured by collection of adequate stool specimens from ≥80% of persons with AFP.¶Surveillance performance in 42 priority countries that had recent WPV or cVDPV transmission or that were deemed at high risk for poliovirus transmission were reviewed. In the World Health Organization (WHO) African Region (AFR), the percentage of priority countries that met targets for both national NPAFP rate and stool adequacy indicators was 67% in 2019 and 48% in 2020 (Table 1). Both surveillance indicator targets were met in 61% of first subnational administrative level areas (e.g., state or province) in 2019 and 53% in 2020 (Figure). Either cVDPV2 cases or environmental isolates were detected in 14 AFR countries in 2019 and in 21 countries in 2020 (Table 1).TABLE 1National and subnational acute flaccid paralysis surveillance performance indicators and number of confirmed wild poliovirus and circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus cases, by country — 42 priority countries, World Health Organization African, Eastern Mediterranean, European, South-East Asia, and Western Pacific regions, 2019–2020*Year/WHO region/CountryNo. of AFP cases (all ages)Regional/National NPAFP rate†% Subnational areas with NPAFP rate ≥2§% Regional or national AFP cases with adequate specimens¶% Subnational areas with ≥80% adequate specimens% Population living in areas meeting both indicators**No. of confirmed WPV casesNo. of confirmed cVDPV cases††
2019

African Region

21,234

5.8

N/A

84.0

N/A

N/A

—
§§

328
Angola5782.866.774.438.914.7—138Benin3106.0100.090.683.384.9—8Burkina Faso3744.169.282.484.665.6—1Cameroon6135.780.079.850.035.9——Central African Republic2308.2100.051.70.00.0—21Chad82111.095.782.856.568.1—11Congo1958.0100.081.058.361.9——Côte d'Ivoire4203.895.078.350.048.0——Democratic Republic of the Congo3,8088.9100.070.67.77.7—88Eritrea1105.083.3100.083.373.5——Ethiopia1,2222.7100.085.390.999.6—14Ghana6485.2100.087.593.896.4—18Guinea2334.1100.087.662.559.6——Guinea-Bissau445.1100.086.477.870.5——Kenya5602.672.392.978.766.9——Liberia703.386.791.480.081.7——Madagascar6135.6100.093.086.491.9——Mali3013.290.982.163.677.8——Mauritania553.086.785.573.359.7——Mozambique5133.6100.072.327.331.5——Niger9067.7100.067.70.00.0—1Nigeria7,5098.5100.094.1100.0100.0—18Senegal1832.464.380.957.146.7——Sierra Leone1233.7100.078.950.043.5——South Sudan3997.0100.089.090.084.0——Togo1644.5100.068.950.052.2—8Zambia2322.870.081.970.036.8—2
Eastern Mediterranean Region

24,788

12.3

N/A

89.2

N/A

N/A

176

26
Afghanistan3,76823.9100.093.8100.0100.029—Egypt1,3434.092.693.488.985.0——Iran1,0705.596.897.096.898.9——Iraq1,1577.1100.094.3100.0100.0——Libya1075.985.798.1100.091.9——Pakistan15,21821.3100.086.6100.0100.014722Somalia3615.0100.095.6100.0100.0—3Sudan6083.6100.096.4100.0100.0——Syria3775.885.785.471.465.1——Yemen7796.7100.085.895.797.5—1
European Region

226

1.7

N/A

98.2

N/A

N/A

—

—
Tajikistan922.7100.095.7100.0100.0——Uzbekistan1341.414.3100.0100.09.5——
South-East Asia Region

420

3.0

N/A

90.2

N/A

N/A

—

6
Burma (Myanmar)¶¶4203.083.390.283.377.0—6
Western Pacific Region

1,075

2.5

N/A

51.6

N/A

N/A

—

17
Malaysia1832.364.374.342.927.9—3Philippines8922.525.047.00.00.0—14
2020

African Region

20,181

5.4

N/A

85.2

N/A

N/A

—

532
Angola3832.477.882.061.137.3—3Benin2775.4100.088.191.794.5—3Burkina Faso1,17811.9100.086.192.395.2—61Cameroon6055.4100.077.950.040.3—7Central African Republic2229.8100.064.428.628.2—4Chad99011.795.781.465.269.0—99Congo933.766.783.966.731.7—2Côte d'Ivoire7426.0100.074.539.432.6—60Democratic Republic of the Congo3,3037.6100.081.053.855.9—81Eritrea1567.066.799.466.761.2——Ethiopia1,3412.981.886.481.891.5—26Ghana7095.9100.085.981.278.7—12Guinea3214.6100.070.125.016.4—44Guinea-Bissau212.645.552.49.113.8——Kenya3361.629.886.970.217.4——Liberia482.373.395.8100.064.8——Madagascar6355.7100.090.495.596.4——Mali3753.490.976.045.559.9—45Mauritania170.926.764.713.30.0——Mozambique3742.672.773.536.414.6——Niger5854.8100.072.025.024.1—9Nigeria6,3307.097.394.597.397.8—8Senegal1351.750.077.028.612.2——Sierra Leone1153.280.078.340.019.3—9South Sudan4346.4100.080.470.064.3—50Togo1614.0100.062.10.00.0—9Zambia2953.680.069.810.08.5——
Eastern Mediterranean Region

20,418

9.7

N/A

87.7

N/A

N/A

140

546
Afghanistan3,97222.9100.091.997.198.456308Egypt1,0093.085.294.592.693.8——Iran6183.287.198.596.891.2——Iraq4762.984.293.394.789.0——Libya955.171.498.9100.052.9——Pakistan11,96916.4100.085.1100.0100.084135Somalia3784.985.794.281.094.8—14Sudan7333.9100.092.894.493.6—58Syria3435.392.984.578.663.6——Yemen8256.895.777.856.543.8—31
European Region

138

1.0

N/A

95.7

N/A

N/A

—

1
Tajikistan832.450.092.8100.030.6—1Uzbekistan550.50.0100.092.90.0——
South-East Asia Region

186

1.3

N/A

85.5

N/A

N/A

—

—
Burma (Myanmar)¶¶1861.322.285.572.29.0——
Western Pacific Region

980

2.3

N/A

65.3

N/A

N/A

—

2
Malaysia 1572.037.581.562.522.9—1Philippines8232.45.962.25.92.0—1Abbreviations: AFP = acute flaccid paralysis; cVDPV = circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus; N/A = not applicable; NPAFP = nonpolio AFP; WHO = World Health Organization; WPV = wild poliovirus.* Data as of April 16, 2021.† Per 100,000 persons aged <15 years per year.§ For all subnational areas regardless of population size.¶ Standard WHO target is adequate stool specimen collection from ≥80% of AFP cases, assessed by timeliness and condition. For this analysis, timeliness was defined as two specimens collected ≥24 hours apart (≥1 calendar day in this data set), both within 14 days of paralysis onset. Good condition was defined as arrival of specimens in a WHO-accredited laboratory with reverse cold chain maintained and without leakage or desiccation.** Percentage of the country’s population living in subnational areas that met both surveillance indicators (NPAFP rates ≥2 per 100,000 persons aged <15 years per year and ≥80% of AFP cases with adequate specimens).†† cVDPV was associated with at least one case of AFP with evidence of community transmission and genetically linked. Guidelines for classification of cVDPV are available. https://polioeradication.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/Reporting-and-Classification-of-VDPVs_Aug2016_EN.pdf§§ Dashes indicate that no confirmed cases were found.¶¶ For this country, MMWR uses the U.S. State Department short-form name “Burma”; WHO uses “Myanmar.”FIGURECombined performance indicators for the quality of acute flaccid paralysis surveillance* in subnational areas of 42 priority countries† — World Health Organization African, Eastern Mediterranean, South-East Asia, and Western Pacific regions, 2020Abbreviations: AFP = acute flaccid paralysis; NPAFP = nonpolio AFP; WHO = World Health Organization.* Targets: two or more NPAFP cases per 100,000 children aged <15 years per year and ≥80% of persons with AFP having two stool specimens collected ≥24 hours apart within 14 days of paralysis onset and arrival of these specimens at a WHO-accredited laboratory by reverse cold chain and in good condition.† For Burma (Myanmar), MMWR uses the U.S. State Department short-form name “Burma”; WHO uses “Myanmar.”The figure is a map illustrating the combined performance indicators for the quality of acute flaccid paralysis surveillance in subnational areas of 42 priority countries in the World Health Organization African, Eastern Mediterranean, South-East Asia, and Western Pacific regions for 2020.All 10 of the assessed priority WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) countries met targets for both indicators in 2019, and all but one (Yemen, with stool adequacy of 78%) did so in 2020. Subnational surveillance performance remained high in most EMR countries, but gaps were apparent in Yemen and Libya, where 44% and 53% of the population, respectively, lived in areas that met both surveillance indicator targets in 2020 (Figure). From 2019 to 2020, the number of WPV1 cases declined in the region; cVDPV2 cases increased in Afghanistan (from none to 308), Pakistan (from 22 to 135), Somalia (from three to 14), and Sudan (from none to 58); and in Yemen, significantly more cVDPV1 cases were confirmed in 2020 (31) than in 2019 (one).In the WHO European Region (EUR), surveillance performance was assessed in the two priority countries of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. In 2019 and 2020, only Tajikistan met both surveillance indicator targets at the national level. In both years, Uzbekistan met only the stool adequacy indicator target. Subnational surveillance performance was poor in both countries in 2020 (Figure); in Uzbekistan, no subnational area met both surveillance indicator targets. One cVDPV2 case was detected in Tajikistan in 2020, and the subsequent outbreak resulting from this case continues in 2021.Surveillance performance was assessed in Burma (Myanmar),** the single priority country in the WHO South-East Asia Region (SEAR), where, at the national level, both surveillance indicator targets were met in 2019 and only stool adequacy was met in 2020. Subnational surveillance performance declined from 2019 to 2020; in 2019, 77% of the population lived in areas that met both surveillance indicator targets whereas in 2020 only 9% lived in areas that met both surveillance targets.In the WHO Western Pacific Region (WPR), surveillance performance was assessed in Malaysia and Philippines. Both countries met the NPAFP indicator target in 2019 and 2020, and neither met the stool adequacy indicator in 2019; however, Malaysia did meet the stool adequacy indicator in 2020. During 2019–2020, approximately one quarter of Malaysia’s population and <3% of Philippines’ population lived in areas that met both indicator targets (Figure); cVDPV1 cases occurred in both countries in 2019, and one case occurred in Malaysia in 2020. Philippines reported cVDPV2 cases in both 2019 and 2020.Genomic sequence analysis identified 41 cVDPV emergences from AFP cases (39 type 2 cVDPV emergences) in 18 countries in 2019 and 34 cVDPV emergences (32 type 2 cVDPV emergences) in 25 countries in 2020. More than one half (22 of 41) of cVDPV emergences detected in 2019 continued to be detected during 2020.Environmental SurveillanceEnvironmental surveillance is the systematic testing of sewage samples to identify populations shedding polioviruses; environmental surveillance in some locations, might be more sensitive to detection of poliovirus transmission than AFP surveillance, given that paralysis occurs in <1% of poliovirus infections (6). During 2019–2020, poliovirus was isolated in a sewage sample before (or in the absence of) a confirmed AFP case in Afghanistan, Cameroon, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Egypt, Ghana, Iran, Kenya, Liberia, Senegal (all cVDPV2), Philippines (cVDPV1), and Malaysia (cVDPV1 and cVDPV2).In Nigeria, the number of cVDPV2 isolations declined from 104 isolates collected from 22 environmental sites in 2019 to 11 isolates collected from three sites in 2020. In Afghanistan and Pakistan, the number of cVDPV2 detections increased from 56 isolates in 2019 (all in Pakistan) to 599 isolates (57% in Afghanistan) resulting from two 2019 cVDPV2 emergences and seven additional new cVDPV2 emergences in 2020.In 2019, 10 WPV1 genetic clusters (isolates with ≥95% genetic relatedness) were detected in environmental sites from four provinces in Afghanistan and four provinces in Pakistan (7). During the reporting period, 30 cVDPV emergences (29 cVDPV2 and one cVDPV1) were detected in sewage samples collected in 26 countries (12 countries in 2019 and 24 countries in 2020).Global Polio Laboratory NetworkThe WHO Global Polio Laboratory Network (GPLN) is an essential component of poliovirus surveillance. It comprises 145 quality-assured poliovirus laboratories in the six WHO regions. GPLN laboratories implement standardized protocols to 1) isolate polioviruses (all laboratories); 2) conduct intratypic differentiation to identify WPV, Sabin (oral polio vaccine) polioviruses, and VDPV (134 laboratories); and 3) conduct genomic sequencing (28 laboratories). Poliovirus transmission pathways are monitored through sequence analysis of the capsid protein (VP1) coding region from isolates. The accuracy and quality of testing at GPLN laboratories are monitored through an annual accreditation program of on-site reviews and proficiency testing (8). For laboratories conducting environmental surveillance, another accreditation checklist with separate timeliness indicators is used.GPLN tested 219,049 stool specimens in 2019 and 147,582 in 2020 (Table 2), and cVDPVs were isolated from 437 AFP cases in 2019 and from 1,067 in 2020. From 2019 to 2020, the number of cVDPV isolates increased from 303 to 530 in AFR, from 50 to 533 in EMR, and from zero to two in EUR; the number decreased from 10 to zero in SEA and from 74 to two in WPR. In 2019 and 2020, all regions met the timeliness indicator for poliovirus isolation.TABLE 2Number of poliovirus isolates from stool specimens of persons with acute flaccid paralysis and timing of results, by World Health Organization region — worldwide, 2019 and 2020*WHO region/YearNo. of specimensNo. of poliovirus isolates% Poliovirus isolation results on time**% ITD results within 7 days of receipt at laboratory††% ITD results within 60 days of paralysis onsetWild†Sabin§cVDPV¶
African Region
201951,63401,207303939994202047,914033145309191NA
American Region
20191,957015080788820201,0660120818282
Eastern Mediterranean Region
201958,9243121,92750929992202040,1792451,311533966195
European Region
20193,2950520831008720202,0160242897382
South-East Asia Region
201988,73401,80710949897202044,79901,3150949590
Western Pacific Region
201914,505016474979671202011,608012429610084
Total§§

2019

219,049

312

5,172

437

95

99

96

2020

147,582

245

6,100

1,067

94

84

92
Abbreviations: AFP = acute flaccid paralysis; cVDPV = circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus; ITD = intratypic differentiation; NA = not available; WHO = World Health Organization.* 2019 data as of March 18, 2020; 2020 data as of March 25, 2021.† Number of AFP cases with WPV isolates.§ Either 1) concordant Sabin-like results in ITD test and VDPV screening, or 2) ≤1% VP1 nucleotide sequence difference compared with Sabin vaccine virus (≤0.6% for type 2).¶ For poliovirus types 1 and 3, 10 or more VP1 nucleotide differences from the respective poliovirus; for poliovirus type 2, six or more VP1 nucleotide differences from Sabin type 2 poliovirus.** Results reported within 14 days of receipt of specimen.†† Results of ITD reported within 7 days of receipt of specimen.§§ For the last three indicators, total represents weighted mean percentage of regional performance.The South Asia genotype (the only WPV1 genotype detected globally since 2016) was detected in Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2019 (176 cases) and 2020 (140 cases). Orphan isolates (those with ≤98.5% genetic identity in VP1, compared with other isolates) indicate possible gaps in AFP surveillance; in 2019, orphan isolates accounted for five of 176 (3%) WPV1 isolates from AFP patients (two in Afghanistan and three in Pakistan) and in 2020 for 18 of 140 (13%) (11 in Afghanistan and seven in Pakistan).DiscussionFrom 2019 to 2020, national NPAFP rates and stool adequacy declined overall in priority countries; subnational surveillance performance declined overall except for WPR countries. Although the total number of WPV1 cases decreased globally from 2019 to 2020, the increase in orphan WPV1 isolates between 2019 and 2020 in both countries suggests gaps in AFP surveillance. The COVID-19 pandemic substantially affected polio eradication activities in 2020 (9). In most AFR countries, polio surveillance field and laboratory staff were reemployed to support COVID-19 response efforts as recommended by GPEI (4). Surveillance staff and GPEI logistical assets supported COVID-19 surveillance, contact tracing, and data management. The virologic analyses of COVID-19 specimens increased the workload of GPLN staff, who often analyze specimens from multiple laboratory networks. During 2020, movement restrictions in many countries led to batching stool specimens and sewage samples before shipping to the national level (9). For countries with no internal WHO-accredited national polio laboratories, transport was further impeded by international travel restrictions.The findings in this report are subject to at least three limitations. First, factors including security concerns and hard-to-reach subpopulations could affect national and subnational AFP surveillance indicators and limit their interpretation. Second, high NPAFP rates do not necessarily indicate highly sensitive surveillance because some reported AFP cases might not meet the case definition, some actual AFP cases might go undetected, and apparent adequate national data can obscure wide heterogeneity in subnational AFP rates. Finally, the accuracy of stool specimen collection timeliness depends on whether the field investigator can elicit an accurate paralysis onset date.Sensitive AFP surveillance is critical to detecting poliovirus transmission and relies on timely case detection, notification, investigation, specimen transport, and laboratory testing. With adherence to proper infection control precautions, activities to restore sensitive surveillance must be pursued. Given the successful repurposing of polio resources to support COVID-19 pandemic challenges, further investments in disease surveillance could enable the program to respond to new threats. Thoughtful and planned action is needed as country Expanded Programmes on Immunization move to integrate surveillance for vaccine-preventable and other diseases.SummaryWhat is already known about this topic?Global polio eradication relies on detecting poliovirus transmission, primarily through acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) surveillance supplemented by environmental surveillance of sewage samples. What is added by this report?Analysis of 2019–2020 AFP surveillance data from 42 countries at high risk for poliovirus transmission indicated that national and subnational nonpolio AFP rates and stool specimen adequacy declined in many priority countries.What are the implications for public health practice?The findings provided in this report can help guide improvement efforts to restore timely and sensitive field surveillance activities, which were adversely affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.


Title: Characterization of environmental and clinical surveillance inputs to support prospective integrated modeling of the polio endgame

IntroductionNational, regional, and global poliovirus surveillance needs continue to expand and evolve with the development and evolution of national and regional polio elimination plans and the global polio eradication goals. Reliable surveillance data are an essential prerequisite for stopping poliovirus transmission, because success depends on knowing with high confidence where to intensify immunization efforts given that most polio cases occur in communities with low overall population immunity. In addition, formal certification of eradication of indigenous poliovirus transmission depends on achieving high confidence that no polioviruses are continuing to circulate while actively looking for them with high quality surveillance. Historically, poliovirus surveillance strategies evolved from national programs into regional and global plans.NationalNational needs and objectives for poliovirus surveillance depend primarily on two factors: the extent of poliovirus transmission and the nature of different poliovirus vaccines in use. Prior to the introduction of poliovirus vaccines, countries mainly needed clinical surveillance to identify paralytic cases attributable to endemic transmission of wild polioviruses (WPVs) to support patient care and health resource planning. Following the introduction of poliovirus vaccines, and as WPV transmission and paralytic cases decreased, countries could begin to focus on using surveillance information to reactively respond to outbreaks with immunization campaigns and to preventively increase immunization coverage in under-vaccinated communities. In the US, the introduction of inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) in the mid-1950s provided individual protection from paralysis for vaccine recipients, and polio incidence began to decline (see Fig 1 in reference [1]). With the introduction of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) in the 1960s, the use of live, attenuated vaccine strains not only conferred individual immunity, but also effectively competed with circulating WPVs in the population, resulting in population immunity to polio. As a result, the US and other countries that achieved and maintained high polio immunization coverage, locally eliminated WPV transmission. This demonstrated the potential for global poliovirus eradication, if and when all communities could contemporaneously achieve and maintain high coverage, and became the basis for the 1988 global commitment to eradicate polio by the year 2000 [2].Unfortunately, along with its benefits, OPV use also came with risks of vaccine-associated paralytic polio (VAPP) and vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs) [3,4]. In countries that stopped indigenous transmission of WPVs by achieving high coverage with OPV, rare cases of VAPP began to exceed the number of polio cases caused by WPVs and in some cases became the only reported cases. This motivated a shift in strategy to include IPV in the routine immunization schedules because IPV first (or exclusively) reduces (or can eliminate) VAPP. As countries with strong health systems achieved high routine immunization coverage and stopped poliovirus transmission and prevented VAPP cases, they began to rely on detecting and reporting rare cases of imported or locally transmitted polio through routine clinical care, such as the historical polio case workup [5] or the current acute flaccid myelitis workup in the US [6], which would detect polio as well as a variety of other paralytic illnesses.Passive detection of rare polio cases, however, did not suffice to rapidly detect signals of poliovirus transmission in many countries, necessitating a program of active clinical surveillance. The process known as acute flaccid paralysis surveillance (AFP surveillance) since the 1980’s [7] continues to be a cornerstone of polio eradication activities and involves polio-specific clinical and laboratory workup of all children presenting with an acute paralytic illness. In addition, since diseases other than polio (e.g., Guillain-Barre Syndrome) also lead to clinical presentation of AFP, comparisons between AFP sample collection rates and expected AFP baseline rates provide a means to assess the quality of the AFP surveillance system for specific populations. AFP surveillance algorithms are designed to separate polio from non-polio AFP, without further delineation of the non-polio cases.For OPV using countries that stopped WPV transmission but did not maintain high immunization coverage, the recognition of VDPVs led to expanded poliovirus surveillance through genetic analyses and other means to characterize VDPVs and to distinguish circulating VDPVs (cVDPVs, now sometimes called “variant polio”) and immunodeficiency-associated VDPVs (iVDPVs) from polio cases caused by WPVs and VAPP. Over time, some countries identified opportunities to perform environmental surveillance (ES) for polioviruses, which relies on collecting samples likely to contain human feces to test for evidence of poliovirus excretion within the population covered in the catchment area [8]. Countries develop(ed) these systems to benefit from early detection of importations from other countries and/or to monitor the die out of OPV-related polioviruses when making a national shift from using OPV to using IPV-only for routine immunization. Along with AFP surveillance, ES is now a cornerstone of polio eradication efforts.Regional and globalAs polio eradication action and strategic plans evolved (reviewed in [9]), international coordination of poliovirus surveillance emerged as a pillar for regional efforts and the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI). Prior to 1988, the Americas demonstrated the use of AFP surveillance as essential in its regional polio elimination efforts [10]. In 1988, the World Health Assembly resolution to eradicate paralytic poliomyelitis (“polio”) created the need for global poliovirus surveillance able to identify poliovirus transmission anywhere and everywhere, for which it adopted the strategy of using AFP surveillance [11]. The GPEI included support for field and laboratory activities in its annual budgets for some geographies that lacked national capacity and required external financing [9]. The reliance on a standardized tissue culture-based method to detect polioviruses isolated from stool samples of AFP patients, as well as the philosophy that not every country needed the same polio testing capabilities, led to the development of a hierarchical network of predominantly small laboratories supported by a handful of specialized laboratories collectively known as the Global Poliovirus Laboratory Network (GPLN) [12]. The GPLN facilitates the development and deployment of field and laboratory methods, standardization and quality control, technical and other resource support, and information-sharing, as required for global eradication.Following delays in achieving eradication and the global recommendation for all countries to include at least one dose of IPV in their national immunization schedules [13], the GPLN increasingly deployed and expanded ES systems to obtain additional information about poliovirus transmission in some geographies. ES relies on collecting samples likely to contain human feces to test for evidence of poliovirus excretion within the population covered in the catchment area [14,15]. The ES sample testing strategy essentially parallels AFP surveillance, and as of 2024 relies primarily on sample concentration followed by virus isolation using cell culture methods [14,15]. At the regional and global levels, ES provided an opportunity to observe and increase confidence about the absence of poliovirus transmission after successful eradication and/or the cessation of use of OPVs (e.g., [16]).Motivation for this descriptive researchIntegrated poliovirus transmission, policy, and economic modeling (henceforth referred to as “integrated modeling”) of the polio eradication endgame includes prospective assumptions about the evolution of poliovirus surveillance. Although many studies use poliovirus surveillance data to perform statistical inference about past events or interventions (i.e., retrospective assessments) with or without short-term projections, only a relatively small number of prospective studies make assumptions about the future nature and performance of poliovirus surveillance systems (reviewed in [17,18]). Assumptions about the nature and quality of surveillance information play a critical role in these models because they simulate future signals that instigate the conduct of outbreak response supplemental immunization activities (oSIAs). In spite of significant changes in the scope and extent of poliovirus surveillance over the past few years, we did not identify any updated syntheses of prospective poliovirus surveillance-related inputs in our prior reviews [17,18] or subsequently or by other groups. Given the current status of polio eradication and endgame plans, including recent development of and updates to the global polio surveillance action plans [19,20], we aim to provide a descriptive review of the available evidence to learn from prior prospective assumptions for time periods that are now in the past, and to support prospective assumptions related to poliovirus surveillance in integrated modeling for 2025–2034 considering the most recent global polio eradication strategy [21].MethodsWe use two sources of information to collect evidence about the quality and performance of poliovirus surveillance systems in recent years. These include (1) peer-reviewed literature related to the use of poliovirus surveillance information to control poliovirus transmission and certify its cessation, and (2) other literature produced by the GPEI and related entities (e.g., external advisory meeting reports, annual reports, surveillance reports and strategic plans). These collectively serve as the primary sources of observational data for this descriptive research as we seek to characterize the utilization (i.e., current and trends) of different types of poliovirus surveillance (i.e., AFP and ES) and performance of these systems.Building on prior reviews of peer-reviewed poliovirus modeling studies by all GPEI-supported and independent modeling groups [17,18], we extracted and synthesized information to characterize the evolution of information about poliovirus surveillance in integrated modeling studies. We excluded retrospective statistical analyses of surveillance data (i.e., epidemiological studies), unless they played a critical role in informing prospective poliovirus transmission modeling studies. Although all modeling groups use poliovirus surveillance data, we acknowledge that the peer-reviewed literature relevant to this analysis primarily includes our studies due to our long-standing focus on prospective integrated modeling, which contrasts with the more diverse research emphasis of other modeling teams.We extracted key poliovirus surveillance assumptions in prior prospective integrated modeling, including the time horizon, the poliovirus surveillance-related triggers used to initiate an oSIA, the time in days between the trigger and oSIA start, and the number of oSIA rounds. These surveillance-related characteristics determine programmatic performance with respect to stopping poliovirus transmission both in the field and in models. Notably, in contrast to statistical epidemiology which relies on retrospective data (and assumes that the past will reasonably represent the future for any prospective inferences), prospective integrated models use past performance as well as future plans to make prospective assumptions about performance for future time periods. Upon reaching the end of those periods, look back analyses can observe what actually occurred, learn, and motivate updates to prospective assumptions related to poliovirus surveillance for subsequent prospective model time horizons. Thus, review of successive prospective studies can document the evolution of poliovirus surveillance model inputs for integrated modeling made during a different prospective model time horizons. Importantly, we describe the inputs in prior integrated modeling that in anticipation of successful global poliovirus eradication assumed reduced requirements for financial investments for a poliovirus-specific surveillance system, transition of capacity and resources into integrated disease surveillance systems, and degradation of no longer needed surveillance quality over time. We also characterize the assumptions in peer-reviewed modeling studies that considered the anticipated quality of the information provided by poliovirus surveillance data in analyses of confidence of no circulation of poliovirus transmission to support certification of elimination and/or eradication.Using available recent poliovirus surveillance data, we perform exploratory analyses to assess trends in poliovirus surveillance system utilization and quality. We retrieved the reported number of AFP specimens examined per year by the GPLN from published surveillance reports [22–33], and used information about reported cases released by GPEI each week [34,35] for WPV and cVDPV cases with onset during 2016–2023 (as reported through July 1, 2024) to characterize the distribution of the time in weeks of the official reporting of cases for each onset year. Since the results of this analysis reflect reporting only halfway through 2024, they include pending cases from earlier years (e.g., 2022 and 2023) that may still get officially reported in the future (i.e., some potential time-related censoring of the results for later years).Since no comparable annual surveillance reports synthesize the details for ES, we extracted the annual number of ES specimens and the number of countries reporting ES from the GPEI Polio Information Systems (POLIS) as of July 1, 2024 [36]. (POLIS serves as a centralized database that includes polio case-based, environmental surveillance, and supplemental immunization activity data from all WHO regions, with limited access available under a Data Sharing Agreement.) Finally, similar to an analysis performed by Darwar et al. [37], we extracted data available from POLIS related to new emergences and the timing of associated oSIAs to analyze the time between onset of the first surveillance signal (i.e., paralysis of a case in a country without ongoing transmission of a new poliovirus strain or detection in ES) and the time in days to the implementation of the first oSIA round for emergences that occurred during each year for 2016–2023 as well as the total number of events.ResultsWe organize the results of this descriptive research into two sections. Section 1 divides our review of prior modeling publications related to poliovirus surveillance into three separate themes using subsections a through c. Section 2 presents the recent trends in AFP and ES activity, performance of reporting of surveillance detections, and characteristics of detections of new emergences and the time to the first associated oSIA based on data published by GPEI partners.Review of peer-reviewed studiesProspective integrated modeling applications.Detections of poliovirus transmission play(ed) a key role in triggering outbreak response in countries, and similarly in integrated modeling studies. As GPLN evolved over time, these triggers increased in complexity with respect to characterization of the nature (i.e., AFP, ES, iVDPV) and quality (i.e., ability to detect transmission) of surveillance information for modeling studies. Ideally, to support stratified global modeling that captures heterogeneity in immunization coverage and poliovirus transmission dynamics, model inputs should also reflect real variability in poliovirus surveillance information and its actual use for decision making. From a value of information perspective, poliovirus surveillance provides value if it improves overall outcomes (i.e., reduces expected cases by enabling earlier and/or more specific actionable insights that speed up outbreak response [38]).Modeling studies generally use assumptions about surveillance information to characterize the detection threshold to signal the need for outbreak response (i.e., to initiate oSIAs). Studies published in 2008 modeled ongoing active clinical surveillance as “perfect AFP” assuming that AFP surveillance as implemented by the GPEI would detect the first case of any outbreak, compared to passive clinical surveillance that would detect an outbreak after some delay, modeled as detection of the fifth case [39,40]. Maintaining active clinical surveillance (i.e., high quality or near-perfect AFP surveillance) after polio eradication reduced the expected cases for the polio endgame substantially (i.e., by 75%) compared to passive surveillance, depending on the scenario [39]. In a comprehensive sensitivity analysis, the results showed that while active surveillance can increase the timeliness of outbreak response, it may come at substantial cost such that maintaining AFP surveillance long-term would not represent a cost-effective option [40]. The sensitivity analysis also included consideration of a hypothetical ES system that would detect the 5,000th excretion of a given poliovirus, while noting the preliminary nature of the analysis given the absence of any ES system and lack of evidence on actual performance or costs [40]. The results of the ES analysis highlighted its expected increased value in settings that use IPV-only for immunization [40]. For example, in 2013, Israel detected local transmission of an imported WPV in its ES system, and it responded by conducting oSIAs [41].We observed changes in the specific assumptions about the poliovirus surveillance-related oSIA triggers in successive integrated modeling studies [16,39,40,42–52], which we summarize in Table 1. The first column in Table 1 shows the earliest publication date of the study(ies) and associated references. The second column gives the associated model time horizon. The third and fourth columns provide the AFP and ES triggers used, while the fifth column gives the time since the detected trigger and the start of oSIAs, and the sixth column gives the number of oSIA rounds applied in the model, all of which occur 30 days apart.10.1371/journal.pgph.0004168.t001Table 1Prospective model assumptions about the time between case detection and start of oSIAs.Date [ref]Time horizonAFP case detection trigger base case (alternatives)ES detection trigger base case (alternatives)Time in days between oSIA trigger and start base case (alternatives)Number of oSIA rounds2008 [39,40]2010–20291 (5)NA70 (45)32015 [42], 2016 [43]2013–20521NA45 (30 or 50)4 (or 6 in high-transmission subpopulations)2020–2021 [44,45,48,49]2019–2023Depends on time period and income level1970–2018: 1, 2, or 32019–2024: 3, 4, or 52025–2027: 5–132028–2058: 5–30Approach described based on [16], but not used until 2021 when ES signals began to trigger oSIAsUntil 2016: 602017–2058: 45Until 2016: 32017–2058: 22022–2023 [46,47,50,51]2022–2026 or 2035Depends on time period and income level1970–2018: 1, 2, or 32019–2024: 3, 4, or 52025–2027: 5–132028–2058: 5–30Depends on time period and income level, if ES exists in the modeled subpopulation, methods based on [16]4522024 [52]2024–20352024–2035: 3, 4, or 5Depends on time period and income level, if ES exists in the modeled subpopulation, methods based on [16]452Studies published in 2015 revisited polio eradication endgame strategies following the release of an updated polio eradication strategic plan [53]. These studies explicitly stratified the global population into heterogenous blocks and subpopulations to simulate variability in immunization policies, income levels, poliovirus transmission dynamics, risks, and surveillance assumptions [42,54]. For the run-up period (i.e., the time that precedes the prospective modeling time horizon), implementation of oSIAs occurs in the model subpopulations with approximately the same timing, number of rounds, and delay as occurred, which can occur due to the known timing of actual outbreaks and oSIA characteristics. The prospective modeling studies published in 2015 [42,54] focused on identifying strategies that would increase the probability of a successful polio endgame, including risk management of reintroduction risks from iVDPV excreters, containment breaches, and unexpected use of OPV after OPV cessation. With respect to surveillance, the modeling assumed subpopulation-specific detection thresholds of either 1, 2, or 3 polio cases (i.e., confirmed by AFP surveillance) as the trigger for outbreak response, and it did not include any degradation of AFP surveillance quality over time or consider any information from ES [42]. Additional modeling of outbreak response characteristics [43] reinforced earlier modeling results that identified the importance of rapid, high coverage, and sufficiently large and numerous oSIAs and the necessity of rapid detection [38].As the GPEI invested substantially in expanding ES into selected low-resource geographies [19,20], modeling studies began to characterize the potential for ES detections to trigger outbreak response (as well as its contribution to confidence of no circulation, as described below). A review of poliovirus ES studies published prior to 2017 identified considerable variability in system designs and uncertainties about costs and performance [55]. As a result, with respect to characterizing the potential performance of ES as supported by GPEI expansion efforts, modeling studies considered the experience with ES in Pakistan and Afghanistan to explore different detection threshold options for both AFP and ES [16].Following the observation of the actual implementation of risk management strategies after 2016, updated integrated modeling began to transition from assuming the prospective implementation of model-recommended and ideal strategies [56], to prospectively modeling outcomes based on retrospective actual performance and experience [44]. The surveillance assumptions included values for ES quality coefficients that correlated AFP detection threshold assumptions for 2018 for modeled blocks and subpopulations with ES quality (for countries with both AFP and ES) [44]. Modeling updates in 2019 [44] found that during 2016–2018, delays in oSIA responses implied the need to shift the triggers for oSIAs from occurrence of the first case (in the model) to the second or third modeled case (as indicated in Table 1). In addition, with oSIAs not occurring as aggressively as originally envisioned (i.e., not as fast, not as large in scope, or not with relatively high coverage) as required for success in polio eradication in modeling published before March 2016 [42,43]. The 2019 model update [44] also made adjustments to assume prospectively worse oSIA performance, with the retrospective implications of this shift explored in a look back analysis [57]. Based on published polio endgame plans that included transitioning away from reliance on polio-specific resources [58], the model also assumed that external support for AFP surveillance would end after OPV cessation, and that AFP surveillance quality would decline over time [44]. This modeling included updated analyses for iVDPV risks [59] and other risks (i.e., unexpected OPV use after homotypic cessation [60]), and it particularly focused on the inadequate performance of oSIAs, which failed to stop outbreaks [45].The global experience with the COVID-19 pandemic and GPEI ramp downs in financial support that occurred in some geographies between 2020–2023 also contributed to the degradation of both surveillance quality and oSIA performance. In 2020, disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic led to some delay of oSIAs, although reduced population mixing and less international travel helped to control the spread of outbreaks [48]. For 2021–2023, novel OPV2 (nOPV2) strains became available in limited quantities for oSIAs, and modeling studies identified national and regional decisions to delay oSIAs to wait for nOPV2 as a key source of delay that contributed to the longer times shown in Table 2 for these years [47,49]. Modeling studies continued to highlight the poor quality of SIAs (i.e., late, low-coverage, insufficient in scope) as a key failure mode for the polio endgame [17]. Several studies highlighted a variety of additional factors that likely contributed to these delays, including delays in shipping specimens to laboratories and in laboratory confirmation, particularly for cVDPV cases, and insufficient supply and delayed delivery of vaccines, particularly nOPV2 [37,61–66]. Reviews of the experience with the timing of oSIAs during periodic integrated model updates suggested that the prospective assumptions for 2019–2024 [44–51] led to modeling inputs consistent with observed experience. Thus, integrated modeling studies published during 2020–2023 (e.g., [46–51]) that included the 2018 assumptions about the degradation of poliovirus surveillance quality over time [44], performed reasonably well, albeit for different reasons than initially assumed (e.g., COVID-19 and programmatic defunding instead of successful polio eradication).10.1371/journal.pgph.0004168.t002Table 2Number of days until the first outbreak response supplemental immunization activity (oSIA) after the onset of paralysis for an AFP case caused by any wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) and/or circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) of any type. After 2020, positive detection of a cVDPV by environmental surveillance (ES) used as the starting date, if ES detection occurred earlier than the first AFP case or if oSIAs began based on ES detection alone (without detection of an AFP case).Signal year*Number of new outbreaks with oSIAsDays from signal to first oSIA201633320173120201897120195393202043201202132268202228188202314192*Transmission signal refers to AFP onset before 2021 or to the earlier of AFP onset or a positive ES detection for 2021 on).Recently published integrated modeling studies that explored globally coordinated cessation of bivalent OPV (bOPV) in 2027 suggested substantial increases in expected annual polio cases for 2027–2035 [46,51]. A 2024 study that revisited this analysis recognized the contribution of the surveillance assumptions in the integrated model, particularly the assumed degradation in surveillance quality after 2025, which limited the ability to control outbreaks [52]. To remove the effects of surveillance quality degradation, this study assumed any further surveillance quality degradation (relative to current surveillance quality) would only begin after the model time horizon (i.e., after 2035) [52].Actual experience with type 2 cVDPV importations demonstrated the key role that wastewater surveillance played in the detection and monitoring of transmission in 2022–2023 in the US [67,68], the United Kingdom [69], Israel [70], and Canada [71], in some cases building on systems developed for SARS-CoV-2 surveillance. The detections of sustained poliovirus transmission of cVDPVs of different types in countries that use IPV-only shows that immunization responses to these events occurred even in the absence of cases (e.g., the United Kingdom, Israel) or with detection of a single polio case (e.g., the US, Israel) [41,68,72,73].As of the end of 2024, integrated modeling assumptions reflected numerous major shifts in the polio eradication endgame relevant to the nature and quality of prospective poliovirus surveillance for 2024–2035 [52]. First, with the introduction and widespread adoption of IPV in routine immunization, the time between cases increases due to the protection of some individuals from paralysis offered by IPV, which may increase the time for starting oSIAs in subpopulations for which detection and implementation of an oSIA depends on the observation of one or more AFP cases. Second, recent experience of immunization responses to poliovirus detections in IPV-only countries shows that the assumptions related to the decline of surveillance made in prior prospective integrated modeling did not: (1) anticipate the detection of paralytic cases from poliovirus transmission in IPV-only countries and (2) unrealistically delayed response to the time of the detection any such event to the fifth case, if it ever occurred. We emphasize that relatively higher-income countries using IPV-only with high immunization coverage do not and will not likely contribute substantially to global transmission, and the earlier assumptions did not matter in the past and only matter prospectively due to unsuccessful eradication, failed OPV cessation, and increased concentration and movement of un(der)-vaccinated individuals. Third, delays in achieving the goal of polio eradication imply the need for continued poliovirus surveillance and a prolonged polio eradication endgame, with the GPEI partners continuing to discuss plans and budgeting through 2029.Economic analyses of poliovirus surveillance.Over the past two decades, several economic analyses explicitly provided insights about the value of poliovirus surveillance in supporting polio eradication and the endgame. A 2006 study of the GPLN estimated global costs of $21 million for the laboratory component of poliovirus surveillance, which represented 17% of an estimated approximately $125 million for poliovirus surveillance overall (i.e., including sample collection, management, and all non-laboratory surveillance activities) [74]. With overall expectations around that time of global incremental net benefits (INBs) of $40–50 billion (US$2002) for 2010–2029 if the world achieved polio eradication and successfully ended poliovirus vaccine use [39], surveillance represented a minor cost.More recently, a 2015 economic analysis of the best modeled potential polio eradication endgame estimated approximately 16 billion (US$2013) for INBs during 2013–2052, while highlighting uncertainty about prospective risks and their management [42]. Specific to poliovirus surveillance, a 2017 study estimated that in a world with successful risk management of cVDPVs [42], if iVDPV risks emerged as substantial and researchers succeeded in developing a highly-effective poliovirus antiviral drug, then proactive screening to identify and treat iVDPVs could provide INBs of approximately 0.7–1.5 billion (US$2013) [75]. A 2019 study surveyed the GPLN and estimated $43 million (US$2016) in laboratory costs for poliovirus surveillance [76]. In 2021, a study of poliovirus surveillance in Pakistan and Afghanistan anticipated annual resource requirements of tens of millions of dollars (US$2019) until eradication and depending on the types of surveillance includes (i.e., AFP, ES, lot quality assurance sampling (LQAS)) [77].The yet unfinished and uncertain polio eradication endgame as of mid-2024 [9], and availability of innovations in laboratory methods as potential alternative approaches to process AFP and ES samples [78–84], lead to an increasing focus on the effectiveness, health economics, and trade-offs of polio surveillance options over the next decade and beyond. Continued and expanding investments in poliovirus surveillance provide an indication of expected growth (instead of decline), which raises questions about the economic and other tradeoffs of different options and the future of poliovirus surveillance overall [20,58].Certification of eradication of indigenous poliovirus transmission applications.Poliovirus surveillance information also plays a key role in modeling the confidence that successful eradication has actually occurred. The Americas relied on a retrospective statistical analysis of surveillance data to support certification of the eradication of indigenous WPV transmission for the region in 1994 after 3 years with no detected WPV cases by active AFP surveillance [85]. However, theoretical stochastic modeling performed to support the certification deliberations also characterized the probability of silent or undetected WPV transmission as a function of time since the last case [86]. This modeling provided additional support for the 3-year period by suggesting high (i.e., 95%) confidence of no circulation given the observation of no detected cases 3 years after the last case assuming perfect AFP surveillance [86].Since 2012, multiple studies performed similar stochastic modeling to characterize the confidence of no circulation for hypothetical populations with different characteristics [87], including those with an under-vaccinated subpopulation [88], and for specific populations (i.e., Israel [41,89], Tajikistan [89], northern India [89], northern Nigeria [89,90], Pakistan and Afghanistan [16,91–93], and New York (for an outbreak caused by an imported type 2 cVDPV) [68]. Notably, the studies of specific populations explicitly considered the imperfect information provided by poliovirus surveillance and immunization activities for those countries. An August 2015 study that applied a different approach suggested very high confidence of no WPV transmission in Nigeria with perfect surveillance and slightly reduced confidence (i.e., 93% expected by the end of 2015) with 50% surveillance sensitivity [94], although Nigeria reported cases from WPV transmission shortly after its publication [90]. In addition, other studies that used another different analytical approach to develop a silent circulation statistic for a hypothetical small population [95–97] considered surveillance quality varied from perfect (100% sensitivity) as well as 75%, 50%, and 25% and highlighted the impacts of different surveillance quality assumptions. However, this approach made some unrealistic assumptions that limited the overall inference of the results [98].Trends in polio surveillance activityUtilization.While successive GPEI strategic plans anticipated that polio surveillance activities would ramp down and become integrated with other disease surveillance as polio eradication efforts succeeded [9], recent trends suggest otherwise. Fig 1 constructed based on data published in annual surveillance reports [22–33] shows that AFP testing has remained relatively stable over the past decade. During that time, with the introduction of IPV into routine immunization and ongoing poliovirus transmission, the adoption and expansion of ES led to substantial growth in laboratory processing of ES specimens (Fig 2a) and the number of countries performing and reporting ES (Fig 2b) based on data available in POLIS [36]. These trends suggest that poliovirus surveillance activities will likely continue at the current levels or potentially continue to expand (for ES) for the foreseeable future.10.1371/journal.pgph.0004168.g001Fig 1Annual number of AFP specimens reported by the GPEI.10.1371/journal.pgph.0004168.g002Fig 2(a) Annual number of ES specimens and (b) the number of countries reporting ES reported by the GPEI.Time between AFP onset and official case reporting.Using data from POLIS [36], Fig 3 summarizes the time in weeks of reported confirmed cases caused by WPV and/or cVDPV with paralysis onset in the onset year indicated by the different colors. Since polio cases occur over time throughout a year, starting with week 0, reporting of these cases can begin within a few weeks. Thus, since cases with onset during the last week of December occur in the same onset year as cases with onset in early January, we should expect the curves to extend to around 56 or 57 weeks in the context of rapid specimen collection, transport, and processing. However, Fig 3 shows that GPEI reported small percentages of confirmed cases in most recent years well after 60 weeks. The actual impact of the extended time to notification remains unclear given that GPEI officially reports cases after notification by individual countries, which follows reporting from a national or GPLN laboratory to national health leaders. Thus, countries generally know about the detections and may act on them prior to GPEI reporting. For example, the detection and reporting for a case in New York with onset in June 2022 occurred in July 2022 (i.e., within 4 weeks) and led to an emergency effort to increase immunity with IPV oSIAs [72], despite the official GPEI reporting of the confirmed case on September 13, 2022 (i.e., 12 weeks after onset). In contrast, other types of delays may substantially increase the time to action. For example, if specimen collectors store samples to ship them in large batches, or if specimen transport and/or processing takes large amounts of time, then these increase the time to response according to the length of the delay(s).10.1371/journal.pgph.0004168.g003Fig 3Cumulative distribution of polio cases (wild and circulating vaccine-derived of all types) reported each onset year by week reported since the beginning of the onset year (i.e., first epidemiological week in each calendar year counts as week 1) and extending for more than 53 weeks for cases reported in calendar years after the onset year.Time between surveillance trigger and initiation of an oSIA.For AFP cases caused by WPV1 and/or cVDPVs of any type with onset in each year between 2016–2020, Table 2 summarizes the number of distinct outbreaks as identified by GPEI with oSIAs and the average time between the onset of the first AFP case and the start of the first oSIA round. The process of deciding to conduct an oSIA in response to detected transmission includes many potential delays including specimen collection, transport, and processing, viral sequencing to identify the potential source as an importation or new emergence, confirmation of evidence of transmission, development of a formal request by national public health authorities to request stockpiled vaccine and/or financial resources (if needed), deployment of the stockpiled vaccine and/or financial resources (if needed), logistics, microplanning, communications, and other oSIA preparations. The implementation of coordinated cessation of type 2 OPV (OPV2) in mid-2016, and the associated increase in global adoption of IPV use in routine immunization, led to two subtle, yet substantial changes related to the detection of transmission. First, all detections of type 2 polioviruses required sequencing to inform decisions about circulation. As shown by modeling prior to OPV2 cessation, die out of the OPV-related viruses at the time of cessation takes time, with expected detection of some excretion and evolution and transmission of these viruses (i.e., VDPVs or ambiguous VDPVs) that may not indicate sustained transmission or emergence of a cVDPV [99–101]. Second, the introduction of IPV effectively increased the time between expected AFP cases in populations with live poliovirus transmission by providing protection from paralysis, but not effectively stopping or preventing transmission, which implied potentially longer times required for confirmation of transmission of outbreak polioviruses [100,102–104]. Increased time between AFP cases with IPV introduction provides some motivation for expansion of ES, which can potentially detect transmission in a population prior to (or in the absence of [41,105]) observing an AFP case.Given expansion of ES and following evidence of the use of ES to trigger oSIAs, for 2021–2023, the results in Table 2 show the time to the first oSIA from the earliest surveillance signal (i.e., either onset of an AFP case or first detection from ES). The results in Table 2 show an overall trend toward an increase in the time between the detected event and the start of an oSIA. Although this may seem counterintuitive, because early detection in ES can support starting an oSIA prior to observation of a case, some time is required to fully characterize the phylogenetics and to determine that the signal indicates local transmission, and even after declaration of an outbreak, delays occur related to planning and/or obtaining resources (i.e., vaccine and finances) for the oSIA.DiscussionPrior GPEI strategic plans anticipated that successful global poliovirus eradication might lead to reduced requirements for financial investments for a poliovirus-specific surveillance system, and consequent transition of poliovirus surveillance capacity and resources into integrated disease surveillance systems [106]. However, as of 2024, polio eradication remains off track, and the need for active polio surveillance will likely continue “in perpetuity” as acknowledged in the recent GPEI strategic plan [21]. Ongoing development of new poliovirus vaccines [107,108] continues to increase the need for advanced intertypic differentiation and sequencing and an expansion of surveillance. In addition, innovations in genomic sequencing technologies generally, and for poliovirus specifically, may lead to substantial changes in the nature, timing, and investments in poliovirus surveillance methods [82,109]. The development and expansion of direct detection and genetic sequencing technologies [82–84,110,111] may create new opportunities for poliovirus surveillance system designs, which could prove disruptive to the existing system. GPEI recognizes the need to evaluate and implement new methods [21], as does its Independent Monitoring Board [112]. The expected growth by the GPEI (instead of decline) of poliovirus surveillance needs as of 2024, as well as innovations in laboratory technologies, create substantial uncertainty about the tradeoffs of different options and the future of poliovirus surveillance.In contrast to the observed pattern of expansion over the past decade, we recognize that changes in policy or funding due to geopolitical movements or competing public health goals could lead to substantially decreased need and/or support for poliovirus-specific surveillance. In addition, national and global health leaders and institutions will likely continue to evaluate and make currently unforeseeable decisions about investments in poliovirus surveillance as surveillance technologies and resource availability change.Several substantial uncertainties make forecasting the future of poliovirus surveillance challenging. GPEI transition plans assumed that the responsibility for poliovirus surveillance would revert to countries and that the GPLN would transition into an integrated disease surveillance system [21,113,114]. Activities to transition and integrate poliovirus-specific surveillance into broader disease surveillance continue to move forward, and this could potentially lead to a dramatic shift in the nature, conduct, and quality of poliovirus surveillance information in the near future. In addition, containment requirements could substantially reduce the number of laboratories able or willing to process poliovirus samples. For example, following global cessation of type 2 OPV in 2016, containment requirements for type 2 led clinical laboratories to end serological testing for type 2, which limited (censored) the information available related to ongoing excretion by a chronic iVDPV excreter after 2018 as highlighted by others [115]. Alternatively, demands for poliovirus-specific surveillance could expand. For example, ES could expand to additional areas, and/or research and development on new poliovirus vaccines could increase demands for serological analyses. The contrast between these extremes implies prospective model assumptions could poorly reflect the actual future performance, and they will likely need to undergo frequent re-evaluation.A 2024 integrated modeling study assumed poliovirus surveillance will perform similarly to its current performance for the foreseeable future (2024–2035) and that high-income countries that use IPV-only will detect imported poliovirus transmission at the time of the first clinical case (if not before) [52]. These assumptions extend the timeline for degradation of surveillance quality such that it begins after the model time horizon (i.e., after 2035), pending further updating of assumptions about the nature and quality of prospective poliovirus surveillance. While IPV-only countries historically played a relatively minor role in the polio endgame, with no expected cases due to their achievement and maintenance of relatively high routine immunization coverage, but under-vaccinated subpopulations in these countries remain at risk for transmission [103,116].Our focus on the use of poliovirus surveillance information for prospectively modeling policies and decisions implicitly ignores its value for monitoring trends and performing retrospective statistical analyses. We highlight this omission as a reminder of the scope of this analysis, because poliovirus surveillance plays a critical role in monitoring trends and evaluating the validity of national immunization coverage estimates. Poliovirus surveillance evolved substantially with the polio eradication endgame, from a system that distinguished polio cases from non-polio cases, then to also characterize the specific type of poliovirus that caused cases, then to also distinguish both the type and strain of poliovirus, and finally to provide genetic sequencing of the VP1 region of the poliovirus genome for positive AFP and ES samples, and now increasingly to provide whole genome sequencing data. Future evolution of poliovirus surveillance could shift entirely to whole genome sequencing, immunocompetency assessment of infected humans, and/or new methods to effectively trace environmental surveillance samples to the source(s) of infection. In addition, whenever polio eradication efforts end, the demand for active poliovirus-specific surveillance could substantially decline or disappear altogether. Key factors that will likely determine the future of poliovirus surveillance include the demand for specific information to support national, regional, and/or global policies, and the economics and trade-offs of surveillance (i.e., costs, benefits, and availability of financing).Innovations in wastewater surveillance and ES for enteroviruses broadly (including polioviruses) could provide valuable tools for countries seeking to maintain surveillance for polioviruses, particularly as they shift away from OPV use, while also deriving greater benefit from the use of tools that offer information related to other pathogens (i.e., dual use or integrated disease surveillance systems). The expanded use of wastewater sampling to monitor SARS-CoV-2 viruses and their evolution substantially increased public demand for and recognition of population surveillance. As demonstrated by the experience with poliovirus surveillance, characterizing the health and economic benefits of expanded use of wastewater sampling and ES tools would likely benefit from health economic models that can account for the additional actionable information with respect to disease prevention and/or outbreak response that such innovations might imply.


Title: Impediments to Progress Toward Polio Eradication During 2014–2024: Effectively Addressing the Current Challenges

1. IntroductionThe World Health Organization (WHO) Member States’ delegates at the 41st World Health Assembly in 1988 resolved to eradicate poliomyelitis (polio) by 2000 and initiated the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) [1]. With substantial progress toward eradication by 2000 and steady progress after that, there were signs by 2014 that the eradication goal was “on the threshold” [2,3,4]. Since 2013, indigenous wild poliovirus (WPV) type 1 (WPV1) has been the sole serotype out of all three circulating [5,6,7]. Indigenous WPV type 2 was certified as eradicated in 2015 (last detection in 1999 in India) and indigenous WPV type 3 in 2019 (last detection in 2012 in Nigeria). With India’s last WPV1 case reported in 2011, the WHO South-East Asian Region was the fourth of six WHO regions to have certified the cessation of transmission of indigenous WPV in 2014 [8]. From 20 countries with endemic WPV in 2000, to 10 in 2001 and to 6 in 2003, only Afghanistan, Nigeria and Pakistan remained endemic in 2014 [3,9]. Certification of the WHO African Region was anticipated by 2017, with no detection of WPV1 transmission in Nigeria in 2015; however, surveillance was virtually non-existent in geographic areas under the control of insurgents [10]. WPV1 cases were again detected in Nigeria in August 2016, requiring vigorous efforts to vaccinate children in insurgent-held areas and surveil poliovirus. With sufficient surveillance data, the WHO African Region was certified WPV-free in 2020 [11].As endemic WPV1 transmission persists in Afghanistan and Pakistan, the Eastern Mediterranean is the remaining WHO region not WPV-free. Afghan authorities and insurgents have implemented multiple bans on house-to-house vaccination efforts, or any campaigns, since 1996 [12,13,14]. The program in Pakistan has had repeated challenges, particularly following changes in government, and variable program effectiveness [15,16,17]. Both countries experienced a resurgence in cases and widening of affected geographic areas in 2024 [12,18].Circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) outbreaks can emerge following prolonged transmission of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV)-related strains in low-immunity populations. The GPEI coordinated global selective withdrawal of Sabin strain OPV type 2 (OPV2) from use in 2016, i.e., “switching” from trivalent OPV (tOPV, containing Sabin strain types 1, 2, and 3) to bivalent OPV (bOPV, containing types 1 and 3) [19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26]. An additional challenge faced by the GPEI has been interrupting the multiple outbreaks and persistent transmission (>12 months) of cVDPV type 2 (cVDPV2) after the “switch” in April 2016. Monovalent Sabin strain type 2 OPV (mOPV2) was used in response campaigns to control cVDPV2 outbreaks from May 2016 [27]. However, some low-quality mOPV2 outbreak response campaigns (i.e., those ineffective in promptly stopping poliovirus transmission) seeded new cVDPV2 emergences. To mitigate seeding new cVDPV2 outbreaks, a novel OPV2 (nOPV2) was developed to be more genetically stable than Sabin strain OPV2 [28,29,30,31]. The WHO granted Emergency Use Listing of nOPV2 in November 2020 with defined criteria for its initial use [31,32]; nOPV2 outbreak response campaigns began in March 2021 [33,34].The acute phase of the SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic in 2020–2021 upended childhood vaccination services, GPEI OPV campaigns and poliovirus surveillance [35,36,37,38,39]. Unfortunately, the pandemic has had a prolonged effect on immunization activities, contributing to an apparent loss of momentum toward WPV1 eradication and in prioritizing prompt, effective cVDPV2 outbreak responses.There are several recent summaries of GPEI status and challenges [40,41,42,43]. The GPEI currently faces many long-standing and new impediments in reaching its objectives to eradicate all poliovirus transmission. Our review focuses on the details of impediments to the pace of progress toward eradication since 2014 and suggests the potential means of addressing them to attain a polio-free future. The combination of challenges may be difficult to quickly and effectively address. Our review supplements the 2023 mid-term review by the Independent Monitoring Board (IMB) (of progress under the Polio Eradication Strategy 2022–2026: Delivering on a Promise [44]) and the IMB 2024 follow-up report [45,46].2. Materials and MethodsData on poliovirus surveillance and investigations, outbreaks and supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) in endemic, outbreak and other countries are reported by Member States to the WHO. These data are stored in the WHO Polio Information System, of which all GPEI partners and their analytic collaborators have access; we sourced these data as of 27 March 2025.Confirmed polio cases are laboratory-positive paralytic cases identified by surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) and investigation. However, the <1% proportion of poliovirus (PV) infections that result in paralysis limits the value of tracking case counts over time as the best measure of progress, particularly if there are limitations in AFP surveillance performance [47,48,49]. Systematic sampling of convergent sewage with laboratory testing of those samples for PV (environmental surveillance, ES) supplements AFP surveillance and has greatly enhanced the overall sensitivity of poliovirus surveillance [50,51,52,53,54,55]. When implemented, ES can detect PV transmission within the much larger proportion of infections that are asymptomatic; progress can be monitored by the geographic extent of detection and the proportion of ES samples that are PV-positive. We monitored the number of districts (second subnational administrative entity) in Afghanistan and Pakistan with WPV1 transmission confirmed by WPV1 AFP cases and/or ES-positive samples since 2014. Transmission of cVDPV is considered “persistent” when it continues >12 months from the onset of the first identified case/first ES isolate collection date and “established” when lasting >24 months. A series of fixed-timeframe maps for 2014–2024 indicate countries and areas with cVDPV outbreaks or persistent transmission detected within the prior six months, rolling monthly, by serotype or cocirculation.Virologic testing results were obtained from the Global Poliovirus Laboratory Network (GPLN) database for January 2014–December 2024 (as of 27 March 2025). Accredited GPLN laboratories perform genomic sequencing for poliovirus isolates of the ~900 nucleotide region coding the VP1 surface protein. Analyses of the sequences provide a means of (1) linking poliovirus transmission lineages in different areas over time, indicating the outcome of population movements, including internationally; (2) grouping related WPV linages into “clusters”, groups of polioviruses sharing ≥95% VP1 sequence identity, to identify the transmission of a given lineage and track progress, where the number of identified active clusters indicates the intensity of transmission; and (3) assessing surveillance quality, as empirically low when ≤98.5% VP1 sequence identity is observed between sequences of detected viruses in a given lineage (“orphan” viruses). Independent cVDPV emergence groups are identified by unique nucleotide substitutions. Outbreaks of cVDPVs are defined by evidence of circulation by county and emergence group [56]. Evidence of circulation is defined as (1) at least one confirmed paralytic case genetically linked with other cases, ES isolations or asymptomatic infection of tested healthy children in the community, or (2) multiple independent ES isolations. Although surveillance limitations prevent precisely identifying where emergence occurred, we consider the country where an emergence group is first detected to be the most likely origin. The timepoint of cVDPV emergence from the parental Sabin OPV strain for each serotype can be inferred from the ~1.1%/year nucleotide substitution rate in the VP1 coding region of polioviruses in replication [57]. The range and median size of cVDPV type 1 and 3 (cVDPV1, cVDPV3) outbreaks and the interquartile ranges (IQRs) of cVDPV1 outbreaks have been calculated.3. Progress Toward Wild Poliovirus Eradication, 2014–20243.1. Global WPV1 OutbreaksWPV1 transmission in endemic countries has repeatedly led to international spread. During 2003–2012, there were “waves” of WPV1 transmission originating in Nigeria generally cascading in spread across borders of successive neighboring countries, but sometimes non-contiguously [9,58,59,60,61,62]. International spread during 2013–2014 was marked by five long-distance international importations (without evidence of transmission in countries geographically between evident source country and outbreak country): (1) from Nigeria into Somalia (spreading subsequently into Ethiopia and Kenya); (2) from Cameroon into Equatorial Guinea of WPV originating from Nigeria transmission; (3) from Pakistan into Syria (spreading into Iraq); (4) from Pakistan into Egypt, Israel and Occupied Palestinian Territory (West Bank and Gaza) with silent transmission detected by comprehensive ES sampling; and (5) from Equatorial Guinea into Brazil, with a single isolation from a randomly taken sewage sample. On 5 May 2014, the WHO Director-General (DG) declared the international spread of WPV a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC) under the International Health Regulations (2005) (https://www.who.int/news/item/05-05-2014-who-statement-on-the-meeting-of-the-international-health-regulations-emergency-committee-concerning-the-international-spread-of-wild-poliovirus (accessed on 4 September 2025)). The Emergency Committee recommended that all residents and long-term visitors departing from 11 countries and areas (Afghanistan, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea, Iraq, Israel and Occupied Palestinian Territories (West Bank and Gaza), Nigeria, Pakistan, Somalia and the Syrian Arab Republic) receive full OPV vaccination (or at least one dose) prior to international travel, if they had received no doses in the prior 12 months. The Emergency Committee continues to convene quarterly; after each meeting the DG has endorsed and issued updated recommendations for countries based on detection of transmission within the prior year. The Committee has extended the review and recommendations to the risks of international spread of cVDPV since the May 2015 report. The DG released the 42nd Emergency Committee recommendations in July 2025 (https://www.who.int/news/item/28-07-2025-statement-of-the-forty-second-meeting-of-the-polio-ihr-emergency-committee. All statements are available at https://www.who.int/groups/poliovirus-ihr-emergency-committee (accessed on 4 September 2025)).Ignoring cross-border lineage transmission between Afghanistan and Pakistan (in either direction), the most recent international spread from an endemic country has been WPV1 genetically linked to Pakistan, identified in ES samples taken in Iran in 2019 [63] and causing outbreaks in Malawi and Mozambique in 2021–2022 [64,65].3.2. WPV1 Transmission in Endemic Countries3.2.1. NigeriaVaccination coverage of infants with three doses of tOPV provided through routine immunization services (RI; also called essential immunization) had been low nationally in Nigeria since national surveys began, and in northern Nigerian states particularly. Polio eradication OPV SIAs in the northern states were of very low quality up to 2010, evidenced by the extent of continued WPV1 and WPV type 3 (WPV3) transmission [66]. With progress accelerating from 2012 [67,68], WPV1 transmission in 2014 was identified in only two northern states, Kano and Yobe [10]. Following ~48 months without WPV1 detection nationally, four confirmed cases were reported in the northeastern state of Borno, with paralysis onset for two each in July and August 2016. For context, Boko Haram insurgents began seizing control of northeastern Nigerian state territory in 2012. The geographic extent of insurgent-held areas peaked in 2016 in Borno and in parts of Yobe and Adamawa states and other countries bordering the Lake Chad basin [69,70]. With this, health services and disease surveillance activities were virtually stopped. Seizure of control in large areas of Borno sparked displacement of ~2 million persons into camps for internally displaced persons (IDPs) and households in secure areas. The two cases in August 2016 were children recently displaced into IDP camps [69].With the rediscovery of endemic WPV1 transmission, implementation of innovative measures in Borno began to reach the estimated 469,000 children aged <5 years who remained in insurgent-held areas. These measures included military support for liberation of settlements or the vaccination of children in some insurgent-held areas. Satellite imagery indicated compounds with likely habitation and estimated numbers of residing children; Global Position System (GPS)-enabled mobile phones and Geographic Information Systems tracked vaccination teams’ movements [71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78]. By May 2018, approximately 104,330 children aged <5 years resided in the remaining insurgent-held areas, 42% of whom had received ≥1 dose of bOPV [75]. Most unvaccinated children were located in settlement clusters in two widely separated districts [79,80]. Enhanced AFP surveillance utilized community informants within security-compromised areas who were equipped with mobile telephones [73,77,81]. Children with suspected AFP were allowed by insurgents to temporarily relocate to secure areas for investigation and collection of stool specimens [75,81]. Such intensified case-finding and investigation efforts accumulated sufficient evidence for the WHO African Region to be certified WPV-free.3.2.2. Afghanistan and PakistanThese two remaining WPV1-endemic countries constitute a single epidemiologic block, with each having unique factors affecting immunization activities and transmission [82,83]. This includes natural disasters, such as earthquakes in Afghanistan or flooding in Pakistan. Circulation in this block has been related to cross-border travels of highly migrant subpopulations transiting along established bidirectional population movement “corridors”: northern, central and southern (Figure 1) [84,85]. The northern corridor extends from the Afghanistan provinces of Nuristan, Nangarhar and Kunar in the east region to districts in northern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) province in Pakistan. The central corridor extends from Paktya, Khost and Paktika provinces of the southeast region in Afghanistan to southern KP districts in Pakistan. The southern corridor extends from Helmand and Kandahar provinces in the Afghanistan south region to Balochistan and Sindh provinces, primarily affecting districts in the Quetta block bordering Afghanistan and in Karachi, respectively.During January 2014–December 2024, the foci of WPV1 transmission along these corridors within Afghanistan were subject to voluntary back-and-forth migration and more recently the forced inward migration from Pakistan, the dynamic political changes toward Taliban control in the affected regions, and their effects on immunization activities [12,13,14,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94].Multiple operational and socio-cultural issues affect the success of the implementation of SIAs in these countries. Among the socio-cultural issues, there is major suspicion among communities against programs supported by “outsiders” [95]. This was exacerbated by false public sentiments that circulated linking the assassination of Osama bin Laden in 2011 in Pakistan with OPV campaign planning and suspecting OPV vaccinators as being agents of foreign countries (the planning was linked with a bogus hepatitis B vaccination campaign in Abbottabad) [96]. In western parts of Pakistan, this led to targeted intimidation, injury and killing of vaccination workers and their police or military escorts [96,97]. Some of these sentiments persist to date. Misconceptions related to the interpretation of Islamic tenets or the safety of OPV easily spread within communities [96]. In Pakistan, recent widespread use of social media platforms has increased the ease of disseminating misinformation, exacerbating resistance to OPV and other vaccinations among some communities in high-risk areas [98,99].During 2014–2024, the two countries reported 951 WPV1 cases, 732 (77%) of which were reported from Pakistan. The annual number of confirmed cases ranged from 5 in 2021 to 334 in 2014 (Figure 2). With 12 cases in 2023, a resurgence to 99 cases occurred in 2024; Afghanistan and Pakistan reported 25 and 74 WPV1 cases, respectively (Figure 2). WPV1 cases in Afghanistan in 2023 were detected only in the east region; in 2024, cases were also detected in the south region. In Pakistan, the first WPV1 detection outside of south KP occurred in October 2023 in Sindh province. In 2024, cases were additionally reported in Balochistan, Islamabad Capital Territory and Punjab.Both Afghanistan and Pakistan have extensive ES networks to track the transmission of polioviruses, with 43 sites in Afghanistan and 147 sites in Pakistan in 2024, increases from 11 and 31 sites in 2014, respectively. The ES WPV1-positivity proportions of samples from Afghanistan for 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024 were 1%, 2%, 13% and 23%, respectively, and for Pakistan they were 12%, 3%, 5% and 31%, respectively. Districts with WPV1-positive ES isolations during 2014–2024 are indicated in Figure 3a.In 2014, 74 districts were affected by WPV1 transmission (cases and/or ES isolations) (21 in Afghanistan and 53 in Pakistan) (Figure 3a,b). The number of affected districts during 2014–2024 was lowest in 2022, with 21 affected districts (6 in Afghanistan, 15 in Pakistan) and highest in 2024 when 119 districts were affected (29 in Afghanistan, 90 in Pakistan) (Figure 3b).During 2014–2024, 196 OPV SIAs were conducted in Afghanistan and Pakistan, including 90 national immunization days and 106 subnational immunization days in the highest risk areas (Figure 1). There also were numerous, small-scale outbreak response or mop-up campaigns. These SIAs utilized tOPV, bOPV and Sabin strain monovalent OPV type 1 (mOPV1). During January 2014–April 2016, tOPV was used for both SIAs and in RI. After the global switch from tOPV to bOPV in 2016, both countries implemented bOPV and/or mOPV1 campaigns until 2019 when first Pakistan and then Afghanistan programs detected cVDPV2 outbreaks and responded to cocirculation of WPV1 and cVDPV2 with mOPV2 and some tOPV SIAs.The quality of the SIAs is assessed by post-campaign independent monitoring [12] and lot quality assurance sampling (LQAS) surveys [100]. In the latter, the “lots” assessed in Afghanistan are districts and in Pakistan they are Union Councils (UCs; subdistricts). Of the LQAS surveys conducted during 2014–2024, an average 25% of assessed lots in Afghanistan and 20% in Pakistan failed at the 90% quality threshold. The validity of the results of these assessments is variable: in Afghanistan, this is because of the reliance on local staff to conduct LQAS surveys. In Pakistan, this is because of intermittent evidence of “false finger-marking”, i.e., children not vaccinated although marked with silver nitrate markers on their fingernails as if they had been vaccinated [17]. Despite investments in improving administrative data management in both programs, the quality of data remains unreliable: although target population sizes are inflated to seek more resources, reported administrative coverage often exceeds 100% subnationally and nationally, even after including lower coverage in security-compromised parts of the countries. The two countries reported an estimated administrative average of 2% to 5% missed children after each campaign during the review period.The two country programs have attempted to synchronize SIAs to ensure children living in border areas and those who move between the countries are reached during SIAs; however, this has been infrequent. During January 2021–December 2024, only 7 SIAs were fully synchronized among 28 SIAs conducted in Pakistan and 30 in Afghanistan.Afghanistan Country-Specific IssuesAfghanistan has eight regions divided into 34 provinces with 400 districts. Program management in Afghanistan has not been smooth since the beginning of the Taliban overthrow of the government in 1996 and in areas under their control since 2001 (Human Rights Watch Backgrounder: available at https://www.hrw.org/legacy/backgrounder/asia/afghan-bck1023.pdf (accessed on 4 September 2025)). The ruling government in Kabul was intermittently committed to the polio eradication initiative depending on the person who represented the government and the person who was leading the Emergency Operation Centre (EOC) at the time. Nonetheless, twice prior to 2018, surveillance data suggested that all local transmission of WPV1 was interrupted; indigenous transmission apparently restarted due to population movements reintroducing clusters from Pakistan [101,102].Between 2018 and 2023, three polio program team leads of UN agency offices were forced to leave the country because of disagreements on program implementation with government counterparts. The local Islamic State affiliate, ISIS Khorasan, had and has presence in the provinces of the east region with WPV1 circulation [45]. The Taliban has continuously controlled Helmand and Kandahar provinces in the south region and Farah province in the west region since 1996. With the geographic extent of control increasing from 2018, the Taliban took Kabul and deposed the government in August 2021. Pakistan intermittently attempted to restrict cross-border movements. During late 2023–early 2024, one million Afghans were forced to return from Pakistan [12]. Nonetheless, bidirectional cross-border movements continued.In 2016, the GPEI supported the establishment of a national EOC within the Ministry of Public Health in Kabul and four regional EOCs. These institutions unfortunately lacked appropriate management structures and accountability mechanisms. The EOCs’ areas of influence before 2021 were restricted to those controlled by the internationally recognized government in Kabul. In addition, there was no consensus among the Ministry and GPEI partners on the specific functions of the EOC. Ministry authorities often directed the hiring of program staff who did not meet technical qualifications. After the Taliban assumed total control of the country, all EOC technical staff were replaced with personnel deemed acceptable by the Taliban public health representative, many without experience [103].House-to-house (door-to-door) SIA implementation is a more effective means of reaching every targeted child when compared with implementation only at fixed sites at mosques, requiring caregivers to attend with their children [12,104]. Because provincial and local authorities could override central authorities’ policies, house-to-house vaccination implementation during SIAs could be highly variable. Provinces in the east and south regions intermittently stopped all SIAs for months at a time [84]. Bans on house-to-house SIA vaccination were imposed in many provinces in May 2018 and subsequently included periods of nationwide SIA bans on house-to-house delivery [90]. After the Taliban took national control in 2021, most restrictions on house-to-house vaccination were relaxed except in the south region [13]. During March 2022–July 2024, Afghanistan officials authorized an increasing extent of house-to-house SIAs implemented, essentially reaching nationwide (96–99% of districts) in June and July 2024 for the first time since early 2018, only to be banned nationwide again in August 2024 through today [12]. Kandahar city has not implemented house-to-house SIAs since the Taliban took national control and presents the biggest risk in sustaining WPV1 transmission in Afghanistan.Pakistan Country-Specific IssuesPakistan has four provinces (Balochistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Punjab and Sindh), two Government of Pakistan-administered areas (Azad-Jammu-Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan) and the Islamabad Capital Territory. Provinces are divided into administrative divisions (tehsils) that are further subdivided into a total of 159 districts and further subdivided into a total of 1710 UCs. Transmission of WPV1 from 2014 was most intense in the UCs that were security-compromised and difficult to access in districts in south KP and in the historical core reservoirs of Karachi, Peshawar and the Quetta block [105,106,107].Security issues in Pakistan are not restricted to targeted hostilities against polio field workers. In KP and Balochistan provinces, several separatist movements and tribal enmity contribute to precarious security environments. As a means of improving community engagement in some high-risk areas, the program recruited women who were trusted by their local populations to repeatedly visit households to explain the benefits of and deliver OPV and provide other health information; they were known as community-based vaccination (CBV) workers. The CBV project was introduced in a few UCs in Karachi in late 2014 and progressively expanded until the end of 2018 [105,106,107]. Focused on the UCs that were security-compromised and hard-to-reach inside Karachi, Peshawar and Quetta, this intervention appeared instrumental in vaccinating more children but was also expensive and has since been reduced (National Emergency Operations Centre, Islamabad, Pakistan. National Emergency Action Plan for Polio Eradication 2020. Available at https://polioeradication.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/Pakistan-NEAP-2020.pdf (accessed on 4 September 2025)). Although restricted access due to insecurity remains in tribal areas of south KP, the major impediment in south KP districts is overall community resistance (boycotts) to repeated OPV SIAs without the delivery of other health or community services [46,108].The national EOC (NEOC) and four provincial EOCs were established in 2015. Changes in management of the Pakistan polio program occurred after each change of government. August 2018–June 2024 was characterized by many political transitions and NEOC management turnover, resulting in suboptimal implementation of program activities and diminished oversight and accountability. In addition, from late 2019, the WHO country office, which leads in planning and overseeing SIA and surveillance operations, started to decrease the number of its international staff; this left national staff under greater influence of senior province and district government officials. Some senior officials perennially seemed to want to project programmatic progress externally. This tendency frequently deprioritized attention to key management and operational challenges that needed to be addressed. Following a national assembly vote of no confidence, the central government was disbanded and a transition government formed in April 2022, followed by two years of political instability [45]. After a new government was elected in 2024, a new NEOC coordinator was appointed, as was an influential Prime Minister Focal Point who resumed that position, having previously served in 2018.Because isolations of WPV1 decreased nationally in 2021 and all 20 polio cases in 2022 were detected in south KP districts, the required focus on the historical poliovirus reservoirs was not maintained, leading to an insufficient number and quality of SIAs to keep WPV1 circulation restricted to south KP.4. Progress Toward Ending Transmission of cVDPVs4.1. BackgroundSabin strain OPVs have a benefit of providing indirect immunization to some susceptible children in the community following shedding of poliovirus by vaccinees, particularly OPV2 in tOPV [47,109,110]. In under-vaccinated populations, however, prolonged community circulation of vaccine-related poliovirus can allow for reversion to VDPV (emergence) that has the neurovirulence and transmissibility biologically equivalent to WPV [111,112,113,114]. If transmission continues, cVDPV outbreaks of paralytic polio result.Non-WPV poliovirus isolates from specimens are grouped into two categories based on the extent of divergence in the region coding capsid protein VP1 from the corresponding parental Sabin strain OPV: (1) vaccine-derived poliovirus (VDPVs), >1% divergent for types 1 and 3 and >0.6% divergent for type 2; or (2) vaccine-related poliovirus if less divergent [114,115]. VDPVs that are not immunodeficiency-associated [116] are further categorized as (1) cVDPV when there is evidence of person-to-person transmission [56]; or (2) ambiguous VDPV (aVDPV): unique poliovirus isolates from a person with AFP with no known immunodeficiency or from an ES sample, and no evidence of transmission of genetically related virus [114,115,117,118]. Although the initial VDPV criterion for all serotypes was >1% nucleotide divergence, experience during 2006–2010 in Nigeria [115,119,120] and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) [121] indicated neurovirulence (AFP) correlating with infection with type 2 poliovirus with 0.67–1.0% substitutions. Therefore, cVDPV2 case counts for Nigeria and DRC during 2005–2012 vary depending on data source, the original vs. revised criterion on the number of substitutions (some as few as 0.5% divergence), and may include cases of aVDPV2 infection [114,117,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126].4.1.1. History of Use of Different OPV PresentationsDespite the relatively lower content in tOPV, OPV2 is the most effective of the three Sabin strain types and can interfere with seroconversion to PV types 1 and 3 (PV1, PV3) during the first doses of tOPV in a series; effective seroconversion to those two types occurs subsequently with later doses [47]. Because of the higher type-specific per-dose effectiveness against PV1 compared to tOPV [127,128], mOPV1 was introduced in India as the primary SIA vaccine in 2005 [129] to—theoretically—more effectively stop WPV1 transmission; it became the vaccine of choice for WPV1 outbreak response SIAs globally (Ad Hoc Advisory Committee for Polio Eradication, Geneva 22 April 2005. Available at https://polioeradication.org/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/2005042222_AACPE.pdf (accessed on 4 September 2025)). Following a surge in WPV3 cases in Uttar Pradesh, mOPV type 3 (mOPV3) briefly replaced mOPV1 in primary use there [129]. Ultimately, bOPV SIAs were introduced in 2010 to induce immunity against both WPV1 and 3 in India and other endemic and outbreak countries [122,130,131]. Notably, 16 cVDPV2 cases were reported in India during 2009–2010 [122]. The last detected cases of WPV3 in India occurred in 2010 (and globally, i.e., Nigeria and Pakistan, in 2012) [132]. Also beginning in 2010 in India, children of migrant workers who had been previously under-vaccinated in SIAs were specifically tracked, vaccinated and surveilled [8]. Subsequently, all WPV1 transmission was eliminated, with the last identified case occurring in March 2011 [8,133].4.1.2. The 2016 tOPV-bOPV SwitchTo decrease the risk of cVDPV2 emergence, deliberation by the WHO Strategic Group of Experts on immunization (SAGE) during 2011–2016 resulted in the decision to stop all use of OPV2 [134,135,136,137,138,139,140,141,142]. Preparation for implementation began in 2014 for a global “switch” in 2016. Based on unpublished analyses from several modeling groups indicating widening immunity gaps to PV2 in areas with low RI tOPV coverage leading up to the switch, a series of tOPV SIAs were implemented during March 2015–April 2016 in some sub-Saharan African countries to increase population PV2 immunity [143,144]. Within a ~3-week window from mid-April to early May 2016, all OPV-using countries ceased use of tOPV, instead using bOPV in RI programs (and in SIAs); all high-risk OPV-using countries had already introduced ≥1 dose of injectable, inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV, containing types 1, 2 and 3 antigens) into the childhood RI schedule at 6 months of age [19]. Upon release by the WHO DG, mOPV2 was used in response campaigns to control cVDPV2 outbreaks. To mitigate mOPV2 seeding of emergences in outbreak response SIAs, nOPV2 was developed and ultimately used in SIAs beginning in March 2021 [31,145].4.2. cVDPV Transmission, 2000–2024 (Figure 4a,b, 2014–2024)In the 1990s, the GPEI markedly expanded PV surveillance and genomic sequencing analyses. Therefore, some cVDPV outbreaks prior to 2000 may have gone undetected (see Outbreaks Prior to 2014 below). However, such outbreaks may have been few: before 2020, natural immunizing infections with WPVs may have prevented wide circulation of Sabin-related poliovirus [146]. As GPEI-supported SIAs expanded and WPV exposures decreased, RI services in many areas remained weak, which increased the risks of cVDPV emergence [146]. Additional risk factors for cVDPV emergence and spread are high diarrheal disease incidence and high birth numbers [59].Figure 4(a). Number of countries and areas with reported circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) outbreaks identified by laboratory-confirmed AFP cases and/or environmental surveillance detection, by serotype (or types) and month, 2014–2014—worldwide. (b). Countries with cVDPV cases, by serotype or serotype cocirculation, 2014–2024—worldwide.4.2.1. Reported cVDPV1 and cVDPV3 Outbreaks, 2000–2024The first reported cVDPV outbreak was cVDPV1 in Haiti and the Dominican Republic (Hispaniola) in 2000–2001 [112,147]. During 2000–2016, in countries with only RI services (i.e., without preventive SIAs), there were nine cVPDV1 outbreaks (including Hispaniola) with a range of 2–46 cases (median: 5; IQR: 2–11) [27,121,122,124,148,149,150,151]. During 2017–2024, there were 11 cVPDV1 outbreaks with a range of 1–265 cases (median: 6; IQR: 2.5–33.25) [26,34,152,153,154,155]. The most recent outbreaks were in Madagascar (2020–2023), DRC (2022–2024) and Mozambique (2022–2024). Prior to 2016, there were systematic, annual preventive SIAs implemented in DRC and West Africa to limit WPV1 outbreak risk and size that possibly also limited cVDPV1 outbreak risk and size [42,156,157]. There have been only six reported outbreaks of cVDPV3, with a range of 1–6 cases (median: 3.5), most recently in Israel (2022), French Guiana (2024) and Guinea (2024) [26,27,34,121,122,124,148,149,150,151,152,153,154,155].4.2.2. Reported cVDPV2 Outbreaks, 2000–2024 (Figure 4a,b, 2014–2024)Outbreaks Prior to 2014Retrospective sequence analysis revealed a large cVDPV2 outbreak during 1984–1993 in Egypt [158,159]. Prior to any SIA use of mOPVs, there had been two reported cVDPV2 outbreaks, in Madagascar (five cases in 2001–2002 and three in 2005) [160,161]. The relative frequency of cVDPV1 vs. cVDPV2 outbreaks over time has been affected by the OPV presentations used in RI and SIAs.A single paralytic aVDPV2 case was identified in Nigeria in 2002 [117]. The first cVDPV2 case in Nigeria was detected in 2005, confirmed retrospectively; two unrelated paralytic aVDPV2 cases were also detected in 2005, both WPV1 coinfections (reported in WHO data as cVDPV2) [119,120]. Starting in March 2006, instead of tOPV, most SIAs in Nigeria regularly used mOPV1; mOPV3 was intermittently used during 2007–2009. Beginning in 2010, bOPV was predominantly used. During March 2005–June 2014, only 11 of 34 SIAs in northern Nigeria used tOPV; SIAs implemented during October 2007–May 2009 all excluded OPV2 [119]. Ultimately, Nigeria reported 403 “cVDPV2” cases during 2005–2011 from transmission of 7 cVDPV2 emergence groups and 16 individual aVDPV2 cases [120,124]; 11 of the 403 cases were WPV-coinfected [120]. Eleven more related cVDPV2 cases from a prominent 2006 emergence group [119] were reported during 2012–2013 [124,149]. Additionally, an outbreak of four cVPDV2 cases occurred in Nigeria in 2013 following importation of 2012 Chad cVDPV2 emergence [124].During 2006–2013, there were 228 cVDPV2 cases outside of Nigeria. Niger reported cases due to cVDPV2 first detected in Nigeria. Countries reporting outbreaks included Afghanistan, DRC (multiple emergences), Chad (spread into Cameroon and Nigeria), China, India, Pakistan, Somalia (spread into Ethiopia and Kenya) and Yemen [115,121,122,124,149].cVDPV2 Outbreaks, 2014–2024Prior to the 2016 switch, there were new outbreaks in Guinea (8 cases, 2014–2015), South Sudan (2 cases, 2014) and Myanmar (2 cases, 2015) and residual transmission of prior outbreaks in Nigeria (32 cases, 2014–2016) and Pakistan (25 cases, 2014–2016) [27,150,151]. Continued cVDPV2 transmission in Borno, northeast Nigeria, that had spread from Chad went undetected in 2015 but was again detected in an ES sample taken in March 2016; genetically linked cVDPV2 was isolated from a healthy child’s stool sample taken in July [69,162]. Another ES isolate related to the predominant outbreak emergence group from 2006 to 2013 was found in a sample taken in March 2016 in another state. For both March ES samples, laboratory results were only available in late April 2016 [69,151,162]. In late 2016, immediately following the switch, new independent emergences resulted in one cVDPV2 case and several aVDPV paralytic cases that occurred in Sokoto state, northwest Nigeria [27].Post-switch, a series of outbreaks were identified, reaching a peak of 1082 cases in 2020 before annually receding into hundreds of cases; the geographic scope is indicated in Figure 4b. In Pakistan, five independent cVDVP2 emergences were identified in 2019 [154]. There apparently was inadvertent use of inappropriately retained tOPV in the initially affected areas because there were also multiple isolations of Sabin strain vaccine-related PV2, although investigations found no evidence of such tOPV use [25,154]. New emergences subsequently occurred from seeding by low-quality mOPV2 response SIAs. Transmission spread to Afghanistan in 2020 where seeding of new emergences also occurred [154]. No cVDPV2 transmission was detected in either country after June 2021.Some early cVDPV2 outbreaks in 2017 were related to emergence occurring years before the switch but were discovered after the switch, as in DRC and Somalia [27,152]. Most outbreaks resulted from emergences occurring peri- or post-switch. Substantially long and large outbreaks during 2017–2024 occurred in Algeria (2022–2024), Angola (2019–2020, 2024), Chad (2019–2020, 2022–2024), DRC (2017–2024), Ethiopia (2019–2024), Somalia (2017–2024) and Yemen (2021–2024); the post-switch outbreaks in DRC (2017–2024) had some international spread not only into Angola but also Burundi, Tanzania and Zambia [26]. Some outbreaks were smaller/more quickly controlled such as the indigenous outbreak involving the Philippines and Malaysia (2019–2020) and in Tajikistan (with extension into Ukraine, 2021) of cVPDV2 of Pakistani origin.As of 27 March 2025, there were 3733 paralytic cVDPV2 cases identified during 2014–2024 (3664 during 2017–2024, post-switch) in 45 countries (Figure 4a,b); of the total 4361 cVPDV2 cases reported during 2000–2024, 86% had onset during 2014–2024 (84% during 2017–2024). An additional 16 countries have identified transmission of cVDPV2 only by ES. A single confirmed cVDPV2 case in the United States in 2022 was related to cVDPV2 isolated by ES sampling in New York State and to vaccine-related PV in ES samples taken in New York State, Israel, the United Kingdom and Canada [155,163,164,165,166]. In 2024, during Israel’s war against Hamas in Gaza, Occupied Palestinian Territories, cVDPV2 transmission of an emergence group originating in Egypt was identified with a confirmed case and ES isolations [26,167].Because of suboptimal response SIAs, new emergences were generated in some countries following response SIAs with mOPV2 (n = 51) or nOPV2 (n = 19, reported during 2021–2024, as of 27 March 2025). A substantial number of cVDPV2 cases reported after the switch (2017–2024) resulted from cVDPV2 emergences that were of Nigerian origin (1381/3664, 38%) in outbreaks that swept west to Senegal and east to Sudan and South Sudan. Just two emergence groups from Nigeria of the 15 emerging post-switch there caused 665 (48%) of the 1381 cases in 10 countries outside Nigeria. Nine other countries identified cVDPV2 transmission of Nigerian origin by ES sampling only. Five were western European countries that isolated the predominant cVDPV2 of Nigerian origin from ES samples taken during 29 September–29 December 2024 [168]; in three countries, isolations continued from samples taken in 20 January–28 July 2025 (https://polioeradication.org/circulating-vaccine-derived-poliovirus-count/ (accessed on 4 September 2025)).5. Addressing Challenges to Polio Eradication5.1. OverviewThe programmatic prolongation of the GPEI since 2014 has resulted from the difficulties in addressing numerous challenges, some of which were evident soon after the GPEI was established 37 years ago. These challenges are similarly affecting efforts to stop cVPDV2 transmission. We review recurring and other challenges that country public health authorities and GPEI leadership currently face (see Table 1 for summary). Although individual challenges may be effectively mitigated, these challenges collectively threaten the success of polio eradication. None of the listed mitigations to address challenges are panaceas.Until 2025, the primary contemporary challenge to the success of the GPEI was poor activity implementation secondary to low government ownership of the activities and outcomes. However, decreased funding of the GPEI by international development country donors in early 2025 has become an acute challenge that could lead to all progress to date being reversed if needed operations are not implemented; field staff have already been reduced in all GPEI-supported countries. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has recently joined the GPEI partnership [169]. Other donors need be sought, including other high-income countries and high-net-worth individuals, increased funding of national activities by affected lower-middle-income countries must be sought.5.2. Recurring Challenges5.2.1. National EngagementA major recurring challenge is limited country ownership of eradication program activities, often accentuated during and after changes in government [45,46]. This is manifested by low engagement in operational accountability, poor community involvement, limited logistical support, and weak supervision. Imprudent, biased misinterpretations of data allow decisions to be made based on political expediency. Limited ownership enables corruption to be overlooked at many levels and sustains field improprieties like “false finger-marking”. When the Nigeria program established national and state EOCs in 2012, the extent of program ownership by federal, state and local government authorities grew. This did not persist after WPV-free certification of the WHO African Region as funding priorities are now set at the lowest level [46]. Discovered in Nigeria in 2023 and 2024, “false finger-marking” in areas that are not security-compromised indicates limited field team accountability and misguided vaccinators’ attitudes towards vaccine safety.MitigationsRegaining or retaining national engagement requires persistent, coordinated advocacy by high-level representatives of GPEI partner agencies, other international organizations and other internal and external stakeholders. Logistical support may require aircraft, off-road vehicles, motorcycles, watercraft and fuel. Engagement challenges may have to be met with new placement of international GPEI staff at national and subnational levels. When government leadership changes hands, changes in priorities need to be anticipated and GPEI advocacy needs to be bold. In Pakistan, the new government’s engagement and new EOC management in 2024 are conducive to improved operations.5.2.2. Limited Security and AccessBefore and since the GPEI began, there have been impediments to the immunization of children residing in areas with active conflict or that are otherwise security-compromised [170]. In Pakistan, the threat of violence directed against workers and/or against their security details remains. Al Shabab-held areas of South-Central Somalia and Houthi-held north Yemen have had severely restricted vaccination activities [45,46]. Insecurity also results from armed criminality, such as road banditry, kidnapping or fatalities of non-residents entering areas held by armed extortionist groups, functionally equivalent to an insurgency [171]. This has been occurring in a corridor across several northwest states in Nigeria, the reservoir of established cVDPV2 transmission since 2020, widening into north central states.MitigationsAddressing security-compromised access challenges requires implementing variable, innovative efforts by public health authorities [77,78,172]. This includes security personnel accompanying immunization teams or collaboration with humanitarian organizations in the countries to negotiate safe access, even if for limited time periods. Some insurgent-held areas in South-Central Somalia are allowing entry for SIAs through negotiation by humanitarian organizations offering other health services [173]. From civil wars in Latin America countries in the late 1980s up to the war in Gaza in 2024, ceasefires have been successfully negotiated to allow for SIA implementation [78,167,172,174,175]. In some uncontrollably insecure areas in Nigeria, large-scale action by state government authorities may be needed to protect civil society and shrink security-compromised areas [171].5.2.3. Other Access ImpedimentsFirst, marginalized, minority populations may not be included in the provision of health services through neglect. There are marginalized populations and underserved areas in many countries that require specific planning of active interventions to reach them with immunization services, such as families of fishermen or pastoralists [176]. For example, pastoralists were implicated in poliovirus spread within Nigeria and Lake Chad countries. These pastoralists in Nigeria were predominantly ethnic Fulani; temporary pastoralists’ camps and even settled Fulani communities were generally overlooked in microplans for SIA implementation before 2006, and this persisted in some locales until 2012 [177,178,179]. Before the simultaneous cVDPV1 and cVDPV2 outbreaks during 2019–2020 involving indigent, minority populations inhabiting and transiting between the Philippines and Malaysia, the government of Malaysia did not provide immunization services to non-citizens [180]. Second, another access problem is logistically hard-to-reach populations, such as underserved riverine communities in DRC or interior areas in Madagascar. Third, another major “access” impediment is low household and community acceptance of OPV SIAs—including outright boycotts—because they are resistant to “vaccination against one disease only, so often” without the community having access to other essential health services or community services, such as electricity or clean water. Boycotts for these reasons are particularly a problem in south KP districts in Pakistan [45,46,181,182].MitigationsThe least served subpopulations need the most consideration. Full logistical support is needed to reach hard-to-reach geographies, whether riverine or remote areas without roads. Implementing multi-antigen vaccination efforts can address some community concerns about a vaccination focus “only on polio”. Examples of adding other interventions include rehydration electrolyte packets, hand soap or anthelminthics. On a larger scale, offering “health camps” including health services for children of all ages has been a successful means of vaccinating children in resistant communities in areas in Nigeria during WPV transmission [183] and in Pakistan [45,181,184]. Organizing more camps and promoting efforts to increase the provision of clean water, electricity or other services could be considered through multisector or bilateral collaborations that might spur resource investment by governments.5.3. Selected Groups of Other Major Challenges5.3.1. Residual Effects of COVID-19 PandemicThe pandemic’s effect on the quality of poliovirus surveillance and SIAs created substantial impediments to polio eradication progress during 2020–2021 [36,38]. Planned SIAs were postponed during March–June 2020 and subsequently rescheduled SIAs were often deferred [36]. Public health workers and available financial resources were diverted to COVID-19 surveillance and community interventions, and then to the introduction of COVID-19 vaccination. Outbreak control SIAs for cVPDV2 conducted in 2021 generally were delayed and of low quality in sub-Saharan African countries. Since recovery from the acute phase of the pandemic, national authorities have frequently cited other public health threats as higher priorities to address rather than promptly implementing poliovirus outbreak response SIAs; when implemented, quality is frequently substandard, even recently.There was a major decrease in RI coverage in 2020 globally, worsening in 2021, due to a decrease in caretaker visits to immunization clinics, restricted clinic operations and a decline in outreach activities, therefore also lowering IPV coverage [185,186]. Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, began offering support in 2016 for the identification and vaccination of “zero-dose” (i.e., totally unvaccinated) children in concentrated areas, primarily with periodic intensification of RI services/outreach. However, activities were reduced during and after the acute phase of the pandemic [187]. In addition, the COVID-19 vaccination effort was unfortunately accompanied by the rapid spread of misinformation across social media and widely shared within countries—primarily from high-income countries—about the safety and efficacy of not only COVID-19 vaccines but also RI vaccines.MitigationsWith a small rebound of RI coverage in many countries in 2022 and 2023 in children 12–23 months of age, the WHO, UNICEF and Gavi organized an effort to immunize missed children in new and older cohorts (<5 years of age) during 2023–2025 [188,189]. The “Big Catch-Up” with RI antigens did not always include bOPV but included IPV (resources available at TechNet https://www.technet-21.org/en/topics/programme-management/the-big-catch-up#:~:text=Launched%20in%20April%202023%2C%20the,(MEL)%20forms%20and%20tools (accessed on 4 September 2025)). Countering vaccine misinformation requires persuasive social media messaging, increased community engagement and renewed recruitment of community opinion leaders [45]. Global RI coverage was unchanged in 2024 [190].5.3.2. Outbreak Response CapacityWith major exceptions in Nigeria and Somalia, cVDPV2 outbreaks detected in 2016–2018 that emerged pre-switch, peri-switch or seeded following mOPV2 use were more effectively controlled than outbreaks in subsequent years [191,192]. Early responses meeting WHO poliovirus outbreak standard operating procedures’ timelines [56] were few; nonetheless, the more promptly response SIAs were initiated, the more rapidly transmission was interrupted [191,193]. Limited supply of filled vials of mOPV2 and then of nOPV2 constrained the appropriate scope and timing of some response SIAs. Adequate nOPV2 supply is no longer a substantial issue; however, there continue to be delays in initiating prompt response SIAs after laboratory confirmation. International poliovirus transmission remains a PHEIC but sustaining that status has not accelerated the promptness of post-pandemic outbreak response activities. Delaying implementation of outbreak response SIAs to organize coordinated multi-country campaigns is counterproductive to timeliness but has occurred. Given the necessity to effectively interrupt ongoing transmission, it is illogical to invest resources in initiating a first or second response round six months to a year after a single cVDPV isolation. The insufficient quality of SIAs with mOPV2 and nOPV2 have not only failed to stop some active cVDPV2 transmission in countries of the WHO African Region but has also seeded new emergences into 2024 [26] (https://polioeradication.org/circulating-vaccine-derived-poliovirus-count/ (accessed on 4 September 2025)).MitigationsOutbreak responses urgently need GPEI partners and affected country authorities to resume an emergency footing to succeed. The time from outbreak confirmation to preparation for suitable response SIA implementation requires close GPEI monitoring and advocacy intervention as appropriate. WHO Regional Directors, the DG or other highly regarded individuals may need to aggressively advocate country prioritization of prompt and effective responses with ministers of health and/or heads of state. GPEI partners need to ensure prompt technical assistance and operational funds. The scope of response SIAs needs to be appropriately sized to be implemented promptly. Utilizing direct detection laboratory methods and increasing the number of accredited sequencing laboratories in the African region will ultimately assist in more rapid outbreak confirmation [194,195,196,197]. More importantly, there are still major delays in specimen handling and transportation and PV isolate transfer for characterization; these shipments can be more closely tracked and delays more promptly addressed. Locating a depot of nOPV2 doses on the African continent in a location with well-connected airline services may shorten response times by shortening the delivery intervals. Increasing coverage of first and second IPV doses, including through SIAs [127,198,199,200,201,202], can decrease the number of cVDPV2 cases in affected countries. SAGE has recommended IPV inclusion in response SIAs as early as feasible [203,204].5.3.3. Strategic Planning and Decision-MakingMajor progress toward eradication since 1988 was the result of clear policies, standardized interventions, surveillance performance indicator monitoring, program persistence applied globally and many other factors that provided valuable lessons [205]. The governance and oversight structure of the GPEI has changed substantially over time [42]. The WHO has been the guiding agency since GPEI inception, with close partner agency consultation and collaboration. In the last decade, there has been increasing focus within the WHO on transitioning to a “polio-free” world, with an emphasis on overall health system strengthening. This was accompanied by decreases in WHO and UNICEF country GPEI staff numbers who were engaged in many activities to strengthen overall health systems. Additionally, the effect of decreasing GPEI funding to some polio-free countries with weak RI and surveillance led to a need to recommit substantial resources when outbreaks occurred, such as in DRC during 2017–2024, Nigeria during 2016–2024, and recently Guinea and other West African outbreak countries once again [26]. Partners anticipated that GPEI fund-recipient lower-middle-income countries would themselves invest in strengthening essential health services as external GPEI funds were decreasing; the reality has been little self-investment. The risks and severity of cVDPV outbreaks were often under-appreciated by some WHO staff [46]. The GPEI partnership often became risk-tolerant rather than systematically evaluating risks that could have been mitigated at a much lower cost than when the risk actualized and acting as needed. An example is the large and lengthy cVDPV1 outbreak in DRC, anticipated because of very low RI coverage in many subpopulations [42]. Because of the number of outbreaks in recent years, GPEI management has unfortunately needed to spend more discussion time on budgeting for outbreak responses than on strategic issues.During 2010–2014, preventive SIAs were annually implemented following WPV outbreaks cascading west and east from Nigeria during 2003–2009 to decrease the likelihood and size of subsequent WPV outbreaks [156,206]. The number of countries conducting preventive SIAs has decreased since 2015; even with pre-switch tOPV SIAs, the decline has continued, and essentially no preventive SIAs have been implemented since 2022 [42,207]. Where RI coverage is very low (e.g., <50%) in subnational areas and communities, the risk of cVDPV1 outbreaks has risen over time [207,208].MitigationsGPEI leadership needs to continuously re-evaluate risks based on the output of several modeling groups when considering adopting or modifying risk mitigation measures. This includes taking executive actions for mitigating the underlying reasons for low-quality outbreak SIAs and ensuring improvements. Strategic planning needs to be at the forefront of GPEI management discussions, and balanced consideration of high-risk contingencies and regional autonomy with global-level policies and fund-raising/allocation is necessary. Priorities need to be set about the use of limited cVPDV2 outbreak resources (funds and nOPV2) so that newly identified outbreaks are quickly provided with the means of promptly stopping them. The GPEI Strategic Plan 2022–2026 (budget of USD 5.1B) has been extended to 2029, with a total budget of USD 6.88B [209]. As the IMB recommended, extension of the Plan may permit implementing preventive bOPV SIAs during 2025–2029 [45] in areas of countries with low national/subnational RI coverage, if funds allow. Lastly, there need to be reliable signs of reaching GPEI goals before transitioning resources.6. DiscussionAll GPEI partners and stakeholders recognize that the arc of progress toward WPV1 polio eradication since 2014 has been lengthened beyond expectations, and that stopping ongoing cVPDV2 transmission since 2017 is an additional goal with limited progress. The WHO Executive Board in February 2025 stated that emergency measures are urgently needed to stop continued WPV1 and cVDVP2 transmission and advocated that appropriate geopolitical decisions be urgently made [210]. To end all PV transmission in the near future, urgent and focused actions are needed to address the many ongoing and recent challenges. The problems of accessing children in security-compromised areas are not new and have heavily contributed to that lengthened arc of progress and cVDPV2 transmission; effectively mitigating those problems is clearly not easy [45]. However, low-quality SIAs in secure areas perpetuate transmission and international spread. A major challenge added in 2025 is an acute crisis in funding the GPEI, which requires swift global mitigation. Field staff are being released, and cash flow has been hindered.Tracking progress toward eradication by trends in WPV1 case counts can lead to overly optimistic planning of program activities. ES sampling has added immensely to poliovirus surveillance sensitivity and has been expanded many-fold [54,211,212,213]. Nonetheless, the reach of ES sampling into some areas is limited by its implementation requirements [52,53]. To end all WPV1 transmission, the GPEI and country programs need to (1) account for cyclical (biennial) WPV1 transmission patterns, (2) monitor the areas where circulation is newly detected by ES sampling to guide prompt programmatic activities and (3) avoid premature scaling-back of SIAs. Continuing to rigorously implement SIAs outside of the active reservoirs will mitigate the potential for outbreaks following population movements into other high-risk areas.The decrease in WPV1 cases in Afghanistan and Pakistan in 2021 and the cessation of 2019–2021 cVDPV2 transmission followed 2020–2021 pandemic precautions. Resumption of a schedule of SIAs during 2022–2023 was not sufficiently effective to prevent WPV1 spread across each country in 2023 and 2024. WPV1 transmission has continued in both into 2025 (https://polioeradication.org/wild-poliovirus-count/ (accessed on 4 September 2025)). Persistent indigenous WPV1 transmission can be interrupted in Afghanistan and Pakistan when the current resurgence is again reduced to the 2021 reservoir districts in each country and simultaneously by better penetrating vaccination efforts in those districts. The underlying reasons for non-vaccination in Afghanistan and Pakistan communities need to be better addressed by as many innovative tactics as possible. In Afghanistan, without resumption of national house-to-house vaccination, program reach will remain suboptimal. Combined with very weak RI services, continued SIA under-vaccination of young children limits the likelihood of interrupting WPV1 in the immediate future. House-to-house vaccination SIA implementation can only be resumed when the current authorities reevaluate. To stop all transmission in Pakistan, GPEI partner agencies would be best served if their most innovative and skilled staff are critically placed in their country offices. Ending WPV1 transmission by the end of 2026 can only be anticipated if all efforts can be implemented and sustained throughout 2025–2026 in both countries simultaneously.Ending all cVDPV2 transmission is a more complex issue with the absence of intestinal immunization with OPV2 in RI. What was projected to be a few years of responding to cVDPV2 outbreaks after the switch has extended to nearly a decade. Persistent or established transmission continues in six countries currently: Algeria, Chad, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Somalia and Yemen. In alignment with the GPEI’s stated strategic goal, eventual discontinuation of all live, attenuated poliovirus vaccines remains a key milestone in attaining a polio-free world [44]. Global analyses that relied on inferences from non-polio AFP case dose histories, many unpublished, suggested that pre-switch PV2 immunity in sub-Saharan Africa was high, particularly in most of Nigeria [144,214]. Voorman et al. in 2023 used other methods [207]. Those analyses that relied on non-polio AFP case dose histories apparently masked substantial residual pre-switch PV2 susceptibility in key subpopulations of many countries. Caretaker recall OPV dose histories taken during investigations of children with non-polio AFP have been generally useful in assessing poliovirus population immunity in Afghanistan, Pakistan and globally [37,144,214,215]. However, relying on these histories for many African countries, where such histories may be more casually obtained than elsewhere and/or based on geographically skewed AFP surveillance [119,156], perhaps overestimates PV immunity for all serotypes [144,214].The emphasis in Nigeria on implementing OPV SIAs without PV2 in the many years preceding the switch—to enhance immunity against PV1—resulted in a high proportion of those cohorts being missed by both weak RI services and the relatively few tOPV SIAs [68]. The outcome in Nigeria paralleled the experience in India, where temporary preferential use of serotype-unbalanced OPV preparations in SIAs resulted in a surge in WPV3 transmission and cVDPV2 emergence and spread. WPV1 transmission in India likely ended as a result of operationally reaching more disenfranchised subpopulations [8] rather than implementing SIAs with higher per-dose OPV type 1 effectiveness, given repeated SIAs [42]. In Nigeria, major preferential use of serotype-unbalanced OPV preparations in SIAs prior to the switch allowed for profound residual PV2 susceptibility [45]. The benefit of marginally higher per-dose bOPV type 1 effectiveness vs. tOPV was not worth the loss in pre-switch PV2 population immunity [10,74,75,76,79,216].An external evaluation of the tOPV-bOPV switch indicated that implementation was structurally strong but strategically a failure, primarily because of an inability “…to close out outbreaks and stop cVDPV2 transmission. Outbreak response scope, timing and quality have been insufficient, resulting in increased scope and magnitude of cVDPV2 transmission over time…” [25]. The reviewers listed several critical issues that contributed to that strategic failure, including not meeting all switch prerequisites such as failing to introduce IPV in all countries only using OPV in RI before the switch. IPV supply limitations prevented many lower-risk countries from introducing IPV for up to two years [25,217]. Because of substantial gaps in poliovirus surveillance sensitivity, particularly in security-compromised areas, outbreaks of cVDPV2 that were seeded well before pre-switch tOPV SIAs in DRC, Nigeria and Somalia were only detected post-switch [25,27,152]. Pre-switch tOPV SIAs in high-risk countries were not implemented with enhanced efforts to reach populations in subnational geographies with very low RI coverage and prior low-quality SIAs. The underlying strategic failures of the switch were assuming adequate subnational poliovirus surveillance in high-risk countries regarding ongoing transmission and underestimating the number and size of communities with very low PV2 immunity at the time of the switch [143,218]. These lessons are critical to note when preparing for ultimate bOPV cessation.International spread has been facilitated by (1) weak PV surveillance, (2) delays in cVDPV2 detection due to delayed investigations and/or sample shipments within countries and to laboratories and (3) delays in implementing SIA responses after laboratory confirmation. Ongoing spread after cVDPV2 importation into countries will only be limited with prompt, adequate outbreak responses. A recent analysis points to the increasing need for SIA quality with decreasing population intestinal immunity over time [219]. Suboptimal outbreak response scope and quality have allowed for the seeding of new cVDPV2 emergences. Although the use of nOPV2 for outbreak response has a lower risk of seeding new emergences than Sabin strain mOPV2 [220], the extent of that benefit is diminished when low-quality SIAs are implemented. Low-quality nOPV2 SIAs allow for prolonged circulation of vaccine-related PV, increasing the risk of subsequent non-polio enterovirus recombinations that remove key genomic modifications to reduce reversion. Subsequent reversion of attenuating sites results in nOPV-cVDPV2 (cVDPV2-n) emergence and spread [26,221,222].The stopping of all cVDPV2 transmission globally will take a concerted effort by all stakeholders—GPEI partners, national ministries of health, subnational health officers and outbreak response authorities—to act quickly and improve the effectiveness of response efforts: (1) prompt outbreak responses as befitting a PHEIC need to be much improved from the period 2021–2024; (2) the SIA scope must include geographic areas of presumptive or threatened transmission but not be so large as to tax or deplete resources or delay implementation; (3) more effective penetration/quality of SIAs in secure areas is needed; (4) more effective negotiation for vaccination access in security-compromised areas or other innovations is required; and (5) implementation of at least three nOPV2 response SIAs in new outbreak areas is needed [25,223], not in the current standard operating procedures [56]. Nigeria poses the highest risk of continuing to internationally spread cVDPV2, followed by Chad and by Ethiopia, where civil conflict continues. That risk includes spread into countries of other WHO regions where young children have no PV2 intestinal immunity and IPV coverage is suboptimal. Extensive tactical changes need to be made by the Nigeria program to prevent its established transmission reservoir from repeatedly spawning international spread and to end all transmission. Narrowing the IMB recommendations of implementing preventive nOPV2 SIAs [46], we propose an encircling corridor of nOPV2 SIAs in areas/countries around the reservoir.There remains a high risk of not stopping persistent cVDPV2 transmission by the end of 2026 in Algeria, Chad, Ethiopia, Nigeria, Somalia and Yemen, all reporting cVDPV2 isolations in 2025 (https://polioeradication.org/circulating-vaccine-derived-poliovirus-count/ (accessed on 4 September 2025)). Containing ongoing transmission in 2025 within the security-compromised reservoirs of Nigeria and Somalia and preventing wider circulation are imperative to preserve resources and direct them to these reservoirs. It may be necessary to temporarily introduce nOPV2 into the RI schedule in Nigeria or in the highest-risk areas [223]; however, that risks nOPV2-related PV transmission to other countries and its consequences. Yemen will remain an unchecked reservoir that risks serving as a source for international spread until anti-government authorities can be persuaded to implement outbreak response SIAs.Polio eradication has been modeled as vastly more cost-effective than “permanent control”, even with delays in reaching the eradication goal [224,225,226,227]. Depending on the level of “control”, the number of paralytic WPV1 cases occurring annually could return to >100,000 and increase the risk of international spread into high- and upper-middle-income countries. Over 20 million children have been spared of paralysis since 1988 due to polio eradication SIAs and strengthened RI services [41]. To reach WPV1 and cVDPV2 eradication in the near future, GPEI partners need to mobilize the resources needed both urgently and over time to address the challenges to fully interrupting transmission everywhere and very effectively regain the prior momentum of the eradication initiative.7. ConclusionsInterrupting all WPV1 transmission will depend on the sustained implementation of highly effective activities in both Afghanistan and Pakistan simultaneously. In Afghanistan, without resumption of national house-to-house vaccination, program reach will remain suboptimal. In Pakistan, the new government’s engagement and revised NEOC leadership offer promising opportunities to improve operations. Even if improvements are effectively pursued in both countries throughout 2025–2026, interruption of WPV1 transmission in 2026 remains at high risk. A key barrier to interrupting both WPV1 and cVDPV2 transmission is limited ownership/engagement. Insecurity continues to constrain access to certain subpopulations, and community resistance presents an additional obstacle to vaccination efforts. Misinformation spread across social media has exacerbated vaccine hesitancy in many communities. Addressing these challenges will require adaptive approaches that enhance access and community trust. The changes in public health priorities and practices that have lingered after the acute phase of the COVID-19 pandemic have contributed to longer-term delays in cVDPV2 outbreak response campaigns. The acute funding shortfall starting in 2025 requires renewed and expanded global support to avoid reversal of GPEI progress to date. To resume progress toward eradication, it will be important for GPEI leadership to continue addressing emerging challenges with urgency and coordination.


Title: Lessons From the Polio Endgame: Overcoming the Failure to Vaccinate and the Role of Subpopulations in Maintaining Transmission

Polio eradication continues to take longer and cost more than expected. The Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) currently hopes to interrupt wild poliovirus serotype 1 (WPV1) transmission by the end of 2017 or 2018 and stop all oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) use in 2021 or 2022 [1]. Reaching the goal of polio eradication requires all countries to achieve and maintain high population immunity to transmission as long as polioviruses circulate anywhere [2]. The delays experienced by the GPEI provide a powerful reminder that eradication represents an unforgiving goal and that achieving eradication depends on addressing the weakest links [3].As of the end of 2016, the GPEI continues to identify weak links after it is too late to prevent outbreaks. In March and August 2016, surveillance detected circulating serotype 2 vaccine-derived polioviruses (cVDPV2s) in Borno State (in northeast Nigeria) that genetically linked to a May 2014 cVDPV2 isolate from Borno that originally emerged in Chad [4]. These detections indicated that Nigeria and the GPEI failed to stop all persistent cVDPV2s prior to the globally coordinated cessation of the use of oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) containing serotype 2 (OPV2) in late April and early May 2016, despite this representing a prerequisite to OPV2 cessation [5, 6]. The significant gap in access for immunization and surveillance activities in the area due to conflict occurred despite national efforts by Nigeria to perform trivalent OPV (tOPV) campaigns to boost population immunity to transmission prior to OPV2 cessation [7]. In late 2016, Nigeria also detected an unrelated cVDPV2 isolate in Sokoto (northwest Nigeria) [8], which indicated that its tOPV intensification efforts also failed to prevent the creation of new cVDPV2s. In early August 2016, the GPEI reported the detection of 2 polio cases caused by WPV1 in the same state of Borno [8]. This news disappointed hopes that the absence of reported WPV1 cases in Nigeria since July 2014 reflected the interruption of WPV1 transmission in Africa. The Borno WPV1 cases were most closely genetically related to isolates from Borno in 2011, indicating undetected circulation for 5 years. Considered together, these events strongly suggest that the lack of access to areas of Borno and other relatively inaccessible areas in neighboring states and countries in the Lake Chad Basin resulted in major gaps in both vaccination and surveillance. With the last reported polio case caused by WPV3 reported globally in November 2012 from an area near Borno (in Yobe) in Nigeria [9], poor-quality immunization and surveillance in this area raises concerns about the potential for undetected WPV3 circulation. In December 2016, the GPEI confirmed circulation of cVPDV2 in Balochistan Province, Pakistan [10], which confirms that Pakistan failed to perform sufficient tOPV campaigns prior to OPV2 cessation to prevent cVDPV2s [7]. With ongoing transmission of WPV1 in relatively inaccessible parts of Pakistan and Afghanistan [8], these areas continue to present significant challenges.As we approach WPV eradication and manage OPV cessation, the vaccination of subpopulations emerges as critical for success. Undervaccinated subpopulations can sustain transmission and pose challenges because of a confluence of factors [11, 12] related to political circumstances (including poor program performance, low vaccination coverage, poor surveillance, and/or poor data quality), conditions that favor intense fecal-oral poliovirus transmission and correlate with low socioeconomic status (including poor sanitary and hygienic conditions, high birth rates and crowding, poor nutrition, poverty, and high exposure to pathogens that interfere with vaccine response), and/or limited access (including immigrants, displaced populations, and populations in violent, insecure, or remote areas) [13–21]. However, other subpopulations also emerge as important, including those in countries with sufficient access to vaccine who refuse immunization [22–26]. The lessons learned during the polio endgame about weak links and subpopulations should prove useful for future efforts to eradicate other vaccine-preventable diseases.METHODSWe reviewed the experience of the GPEI as of the end of 2016 to identify and model key subpopulations that delayed the achievement of polio eradication to date and that may threaten its long-term success. We performed a literature review of the Web of Science for articles published in English in peer-reviewed journals before 1 January 2017 with the key words “polio” AND “vaccine” AND “model” AND (“undervaccinated” OR “under-vaccinated” OR “subpopulation” OR “sub-population” OR “missed” OR “heterogeneity”). We also reviewed the references of these studies and considered the insights from modeling efforts that evaluated the polio endgame and long-term risks. Managing the risks of the polio endgame requires ending the use of OPV, to eliminate OPV-related risks (ie, vaccine-associated paralytic polio, which occurs in approximately 1 per million first OPV infections; cVDPVs, which can emerge in areas with low immunity and behave like WPVs; and cases involving rare individuals with primary immunodeficiencies who become infected with OPV and can excrete presumed fully transmissible and neurovirulent immunodeficiency-associated vaccine-derived poliovirus [iVDPV] for years) [27–29]. Risks after OPV cessation include the failure to use sufficient OPV before cessation or to synchronize OPV cessation globally, inadvertent use of OPV after OPV cessation, reintroduction of VDPVs (ie, cVDPVs and iVDPVs) created by exposures to OPV used prior to OPV cessation, and (un)intentional releases from vaccine manufacturing sites or laboratories [27–31]. This analysis complements work that focuses specifically on the lessons learned from globally coordinated OPV2 cessation [32].We use an existing differential equation–based poliovirus transmission and OPV evolution model [33, 34] to illustrate the interaction between the size of an undervaccinated subpopulation, its degree of isolation from a well-vaccinated general population (ie, quantified by pwithin, which we define as the proportion of contacts of people inside the undervaccinated subpopulation with other people inside this subpopulation), and the minimum routine immunization (RI) coverage with OPV required to eliminate WPV1 transmission from both subpopulations. We adapt a hypothetical population that we previously characterized to illustrate changes in population immunity to transmission during different stages of polio eradication [2] by dividing it into 2 subpopulations (ie, general and undervaccinated). For simplicity in this conceptual discussion, we do not consider supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) or partial RI coverage and instead characterize only RI coverage with exactly 3 OPV doses. If both subpopulations maintain equal coverage, then the model inputs in Table 1 would imply a theoretical threshold RI coverage with 3 OPV doses of approximately 0.92 to eliminate WPV1 transmission for this conceptual population. To characterize the well-vaccinated general population we assume that its RI coverage with 3 OPV doses remains well above this threshold at 0.95. For each combination of size of the undervaccinated subpopulation and its degree of isolation, we search for its minimum RI coverage with 3 OPV doses to eliminate WPV1, using increments of 0.01 (ie, 1% coverage), and we map the 3-way interaction. The model simulates WPV1 elimination in a subpopulation as soon as the effective (ie, infectiousness-weighted) prevalence of WPV1 infections decreases below a threshold of 5 per million people (ie, the transmission threshold), which sets the force of infection for WPV1 at 0 so that no further indigenous WPV1 transmission can occur [2]. This experimentally determined threshold and all other generic model assumptions (ie, those that do not depend on the setting) produced results consistent with the evidence in an extensive model calibration process that considered 9 diverse situations [33]. The model remains fully scalable (ie, it produces different absolute numbers of cases but the same dynamic behavior for different total population sizes) [31], and therefore we focus on the proportion of the undervaccinated subpopulation as compared to the total population, rather than its absolute size.Table 1.Setting-Specific Model Inputs for a Hypothetical Population, Using Generic Model Inputs Published Elsewhere
Model input

Value

Notes
No. of subpopulations21 undervaccinated subpopulation and 1 general populationInitial age distribution0–2 mo0.01Age groups of ≥5 y from a previously published hypothetical population [2] were split into groups of 5–15 y and ≥15 y, according to the age distribution in “less developed regions excluding China” [75], to accommodate the subsequently developed generically mixing age groups of 0–4, 5–14, and ≥15 y [33]3–59 mo0.155–14 y0.25≥15 y0.59Birth rate, births/person/y0.02Adopted from previously published hypothetical population [2]Death rate, deaths/person/y0.02Adopted from previously published hypothetical population [2] and applied equally to each age groupBasic reproduction number10Adopted from previously published hypothetical population [2]Proportion of transmission via oropharyngeal route0.3Adopted from previously published hypothetical population [2]Average per-dose OPV take rate for serotype 10.5Similar to typical values in low-income countries for bivalent OPV [33, 34]Routine immunization coverage with exactly 3 OPV doses in the general population0.95Fixed well above the theoretical threshold of 0.92 implied by the other setting-specific inputs from this tableGeneric model inputs are from reports by Duintjer Tebbens et al [33] and Thompson et al [34].Abbreviation: OPV, oral poliovirus vaccine.RESULTS
Figure 1 illustrates the interaction between the relative size of an undervaccinated subpopulation; its degree of isolation from the well-vaccinated general population, as indicated by its intensity of self-mixing (pwithin); and the minimum RI coverage in the subpopulation required to eliminate WPV1 transmission. If the undervaccinated subpopulation remains fully isolated from the general population (ie, pwithin = 1), then it essentially behaves like an island and needs to attain coverage equal to the theoretical threshold of 0.92. If the undervaccinated subpopulation mixes with the general population, then the subpopulation effectively receives some benefits from the high population immunity to transmission in the general population. As a result of the subpopulation’s mixing with the general population, which includes relatively fewer susceptible individuals owing to its assumed RI coverage of 0.95, the mixing effectively reduces the force of infection in the undervaccinated subpopulation, which can help it fall below the transmission threshold. However, even for an undervaccinated subpopulation that is 1/100th the size of the general population (ie, the smallest value represented in Figure 1), for a relatively high degree of mixing with the general population (ie, pwithin = 0.8, which means that 80% of all contacts occur with people in the same small subpopulation and, thus, that 20% of all contacts by people in the undervaccinated subpopulation occur with people in the general population), the coverage in the undervaccinated subpopulation must still reach at least 63%, or approximately 60% of that in the general population, to eliminate WPV1 transmission. For larger undervaccinated subpopulation sizes, the minimum coverage required to eliminate WPV1 transmission increases and eventually approaches the theoretical threshold of 0.92. Figure 1 suggests that, even with moderate degrees of isolation, pockets of preferentially mixing subpopulations with suboptimal but still relatively high coverage can independently sustain WPV1 transmission despite high population immunity to transmission in the general population. This conceptual behavior highlights the challenge of eradication and explains why undervaccinated subpopulations play such an important role.Figure 1.Minimum routine immunization coverage with 3 doses of OPV in the undervaccinated subpopulation required to interrupt serotype 1 wild poliovirus transmission in both subpopulations as a function of (i) the relative size of the undervaccinated subpopulation (y-axis) and (ii) the extent of preferential self-mixing (quantified by Pwithin, see legend). The model assumes that routine immunization coverage in the general population remains constant at 0.95.Our literature search identified 22 studies, 10 of which we excluded (4 reported epidemiological results; 2 were theoretical studies; 2 were studies of knowledge, attitudes, and preferences; and 2 were not about polio). We reviewed the remaining 12 studies and the references that they included. A prior analysis of polio epidemiological experience showed that >50 countries reported 1 or more annual paralytic polio cases caused by a WPV or cVDPV between 2000 and 2014, which indicated that these countries did not achieve or failed to maintain sufficient population immunity to transmission to stop or prevent transmission [35]. Looking closely at these outbreaks, we see that heterogeneity in vaccination coverage within a country allowed key subpopulations to sustain transmission, and as suggested in Figure 1, some countries with national health systems that perform well on average include undervaccinated subpopulations that can sustain transmission and challenge eradication efforts. In some cases, these weak links only become apparent after cases occur and subsequently trigger a focus of programmatic activities. The insecure areas of Borno (in Nigeria) and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (in Pakistan) provide clear examples of key subpopulations of undervaccinated individuals. Polio modeling demonstrated the need to explicitly characterize undervaccinated subpopulations in northern India [34, 36], northwest Nigeria [34, 37, 38], Israel [39], the Netherlands [33], and the United States [40] to capture the dynamics of poliovirus transmission in these populations. The strategies required to address undervaccinated subpopulations must consider the specific nature of these subpopulations, including ways to ensure effective identification, communication, and engagement, and good disease surveillance. An analysis of the role of using expanded age groups in SIAs demonstrated the importance of explicit consideration of preferentially mixing undervaccinated individuals [41], as later shown independently by 2 other studies [42, 43]. In the context of the long-term risks for polio, undervaccinated subpopulations also represent a critical focus for long-term risk management. Notably, subpopulations with poor program quality may pose higher risks of cVDPVs and/or inadvertent use of OPV-containing vaccine after homotypic OPV cessation, and inadequate surveillance in these subpopulations would delay response [7, 31].A close look at some of the outbreaks also revealed that some occurred in countries with disrupted health systems [35]. For example, war-torn areas with unstable governments (eg, Somalia) and poor countries with underserved populations (eg, Haiti) face significant challenges reaching eradication goals, and these governments require support from partners such as the GPEI to achieve goals like polio eradication. Natural disasters (eg, the flooding in Pakistan during 2010) also disrupt systems and pose a risk for outbreaks, and these events similarly require the support of an organization like the GPEI that can mobilize global resources to support action. Polio outbreaks also tragically reveal that even countries with strong health systems can become fragile and need support. For example, the Syrian health system provided immunization with high coverage, and Syria stopped poliovirus transmission prior to 2000, but the recent civil war disrupted the health system, and Syria experienced a WPV1 outbreak in 2013–2014 [44]. These results demonstrate that future efforts to eradicate vaccine-preventable diseases should expect countries with disrupted health systems to represent key subpopulations of concern.Review of the literature also demonstrated issues associated with competing GPEI objectives that effectively created undervaccinated subpopulations for different serotypes in the case of polio eradication. Although many people think of polio as a single disease, 3 serotypes exist (ie, 1, 2, and 3) that can circulate independently, and eradication requires stopping transmission of all 3 serotypes. The GPEI began to prioritize WPV1 eradication in the mid-2000s, when it encouraged the use of monovalent OPV serotype 1 (mOPV1) in SIAs, based on arguments that competition between the serotypes in tOPV led to vaccine failure for serotype 1 [45]. Unfortunately, the introduction of mOPV1 did not stop WPV1 transmission and created immunity gaps that allowed WPV3 outbreaks. The subsequent use of mOPV3 and later use of bivalent OPV (bOPV; which contains serotypes 1 and 3 OPV) in SIAs led to the apparent disruption of transmission of WPV3 [9]. However, it also effectively created undervaccinated subpopulations for serotype 2 in tOPV-using countries with insufficient RI coverage [36, 37]. The immunity gaps led to a significant increase in cVDPV2s reported after the mid-2000s [46]. These gaps led to the need to increase population immunity to serotype 2 transmission prior to OPV2 cessation by using tOPV, as demonstrated in 2014 to motivate programmatic efforts prior to OPV2 cessation [7] and as shown independently in 2016 [47]. While imperfect vaccine seroconversion implies the need to give multiple doses to successfully immunize children, the failure to vaccinate against all 3 serotypes, not vaccine failure, consistently represented the main obstacle to interrupting transmission. Given that Nigeria historically exported WPV1 to numerous countries in Africa and elsewhere that did not maintain sufficient population immunity to poliovirus transmission [48], countries with poor RI coverage remain at risk. These countries need to continue to conduct preventive SIAs, using bOPV, to keep their population immunity to transmission high and prevent any importations of the circulating WPV1 from restarting transmission and causing new outbreaks within their borders [49]. The increased use of inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV), which results in a weaker immune response at the individual level and leads to relatively lower population immunity to transmission than OPV, will not play an important role in preventing cVDPVs in OPV-using countries prior to bOPV cessation [50], substantially accelerate eradication in polio-endemic countries [36–38], or represent a cost-effective option when used in addition to OPV in outbreak response [51]. Children with only IPV-induced protection will effectively represent a different immunological subpopulation, with additional complexity arising if the immunity derives from receipt of 1 or more fractional IPV versus full IPV doses. Future efforts to eradicate vaccine-preventable diseases that use vaccines containing multiple serotypes and/or antigens will need to ensure that focusing on one component does not adversely impact other components.Finally, the literature suggests that, following OPV cessation, the potential reintroduction of live polioviruses into circulation by iVDPVs poses a threat to a successful polio endgame [27–29, 52–59]. Although effective RI with IPV and outbreak response could mitigate the risks, IPV use alone cannot eliminate the risk, and iVDPVs represent a key subpopulation for ongoing risk management [28]. Efforts to develop antiviral compounds to treat iVDPVs and to screen for iVDPVs represent important strategies to effectively reduce the risks [53]. Recognition of this key subpopulation suggests that future efforts to eradicate vaccine-preventable diseases should consider populations with chronic infections, immunological or other conditions, or other factors that may lead to the need to specifically manage the risks.DISCUSSIONIn the context of a global eradication effort, high-risk subpopulations represent the weakest links and require significant resources, while all populations must maintain high levels of immunization until global success. Our hypothetical example highlights the importance of attaining high coverage in all populations, because any missed preferentially mixing undervaccinated communities can sustain WPV1 transmission or vaccine-related transmission after OPV cessation. This finding helps to explain the observation of WPV1 and cVDPV2 in the Lake Chad Basin and the border area between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Even after finding missed children in northern India and northwest Nigeria, interrupting transmission required multiple SIAs and specific targeting of unvaccinated and undervaccinated populations, and the same efforts will need occur in northeast Nigeria and the border areas between Pakistan and Afghanistan.The global capacity created by the GPEI to manage the risks related to key subpopulations that represent weak links for polio eradication currently represents a critical global resource for polio and other infectious diseases. The global polio eradication mandate allows the GPEI to mobilize resources to respond to outbreaks anywhere in the world, including support for response to diseases other than polio. For example, when the severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak occurred, the global polio laboratory network played a key role in the early response activities and laboratory characterization of the virus. More recently, the GPEI played a critical role in outbreak response to the Ebola virus in Africa and helped contain the Ebola virus importation into Nigeria [60]. With respect to polio, the GPEI demonstrated that it can overcome the challenge of improving access in areas not controlled by the central government and in numerous war-torn areas, including Cameroon, Iraq, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Ukraine. In many outbreak situations, the GPEI coordinated the provision of other human services in addition to polio immunization. Providing these services often enabled polio vaccination to occur [61], although offering these services represents a use of GPEI resources that some may perceive as not directly supporting polio eradication. The current global capacity for providing necessary health services in response to health system disruptions represents a resource that could disappear once the GPEI gets disbanded. Our review suggests the need to maintain this type of capacity, which other efforts to eradicate vaccine-preventable diseases will likely need.With respect to managing the subpopulations created by the use of vaccine that does not contain all of the available serotypes, these issues continue to raise challenges for the GPEI. The GPEI now faces 2 significant threats, from persistent cVDPV2 and WPV1, and can no longer use tOPV as a single tool to combat both [62], despite it representing the best option if available [63]. Thus, protecting against all 3 serotypes in areas with significant fecal-oral transmission requires administration of both mOPV2 and bOPV, including potential coadministration or rapidly alternating SIAs. Clinical trials suggest that interference with OPV2, the least attenuated of the 3 OPV serotypes, leads to lower serotype 1 seroconversion in individuals after 1 dose of tOPV (and by extension mOPV2 coadministered with bOPV) than after 1 dose of bOPV [64–68]. However, these studies also show that this difference essentially disappears after the individuals receive additional doses, with uniformly individual high seroconversion rates measured for all serotypes after 3 tOPV doses in several recent studies in developing countries [65–68].Transmission depends on unvaccinated and undervaccinated individuals and not on individuals observed in clinical trials. While clinical trials are helpful for understanding individual immunity, they do not provide information about populations, which contain a heterogeneously interacting mixture of individuals who did or did not receive different poliovirus vaccines and live poliovirus exposures, leading to different types and degrees of immunity to poliovirus transmission. Population immunity determines transmission, which depends on the virus finding enough unvaccinated and undervaccinated individuals to infect such that it does not die out. Recent modeling showed almost no difference in population immunity to serotype 1 transmission in northwest Nigeria after repeated bOPV rounds as compared to repeated tOPV rounds [69]. In contrast, giving bOPV and no tOPV resulted in rapidly decreasing population immunity to serotype 2 transmission and unchecked spread of cVDPV2 [69]. For any 1 SIA, only a small fraction of doses given represent first doses, and all outbreak response activities should include a minimum of 3 SIAs [62], so any focus on a single SIA misses the SIA coverage and larger population issues, which ultimately matter because transmission occurs in populations. In the context of few opportunities to gain access to areas with missed children, some may favor the use of bOPV alone instead of coadministration of bOPV and mOPV2 (which is required to deal with the ongoing threat of the persistent cVDPV2), which ignores the population dynamics associated with repeated SIAs. However, without improved access to the undervaccinated population, neither WPV1 nor cVDPV2 will likely die out.The reality of heterogeneity makes management more complex. In addition, our understanding of subpopulations and heterogeneity remains limited by the quality of the information available and this complicates modeling. In the context of the example presented in this study, we emphasize the simplified approach we use in our deterministic model to approximate the stochastic process of virus die out [33]. In reality, die out of a poliovirus in a small population can occur by chance even with coverage below the theoretical minima presented in this study [70]. However, if this occurs then population immunity to transmission still remains insufficient to prevent imported viruses from reestablishing transmission or to prevent the emergence of indigenous cVDPVs in the event of further reductions in population immunity to transmission.Dealing with heterogeneity can prove essential to obtaining the high levels of program performance required to stop and prevent transmission [71]. While considerable attention continues to focus on strengthening health systems, a key insight emerging from polio eradication relates to the critical need to create expectations for performance [71] and maintain them [72]. Lessons learned from reaching the undervaccinated populations in India revealed the need to identify and reach migrants and nomads, and the strategies developed by the national immunization program in India to reach these individuals included the development of microplans and regular immunization activities, in some areas involving innovative strategies such as using a helicopter to supply vaccines and other health interventions to remote areas. Like Egypt [73], India incorporated surveillance for neonatal tetanus into polio surveillance [74] and translated the lessons from polio eradication into strategies to deliver vaccines and interventions that support its efforts to meet national goals for neonatal tetanus and the elimination of other vaccine-preventable diseases (eg, measles and rubella). Since even strong health systems can experience disruptions, independent of efforts to strengthen health systems, we should expect the need for some sort of global safety net.CONCLUSIONSEradication efforts for vaccine-preventable diseases need to create performance expectations for countries to identify and reach all people living within their borders with maintained high coverage with appropriate interventions.


Title: Review of Poliovirus Transmission and Economic Modeling to Support Global Polio Eradication: 2020–2024

1. IntroductionThe over 100 publications related to polio eradication modeling since 2020 [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102] provide an indication of ongoing challenges in the quest to achieve the 1988 World Health Assembly (WHA) resolution to eradicate paralytic poliomyelitis (“polio”) [103]. The WHA target of achieving polio eradication by the year 2000 led a small group of core partners to establish the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) to provide, mobilize, and coordinate the necessary planning, financial, and technical resources [104]. Although early action plans expected the achievement of polio eradication as a result of national efforts to strengthen their routine polio immunization programs and global improvements in surveillance, the strategies for meeting the year 2000 target also included immunization campaigns [105]. Over time, operational challenges and the complexity of polio eradication became increasingly apparent, with successive target deadlines for various objectives repeatedly missed [104]. Shortly before 2000, policymakers began to recognize the potential role of using insights from dynamic poliovirus transmission (e.g., [106,107,108,109]) and static health economics (e.g., [110]) modeling to support decision-making for the polio eradication endgame. These early studies helped to motivate the GPEI core partners to formally engage independent modeling groups to provide policy and decision insights, as discussed in a prior systematic review of poliovirus transmission and health economic modeling studies published in English from 2000 to 2019 [1]. Recognizing the importance of facilitating access for modelers to national, regional, and global data, the GPEI core partners developed a data sharing agreement to support polio modeling groups [1]. The prior review of 2000–2019 included documentation of all polio-related publications by the three independent modeling groups supported by GPEI core partners under the data sharing agreement as of 2019 [1]. Since 2019, however, the polio modeling landscape has evolved and expanded. While two groups, Kid Risk, Inc. (KRI, Orlando, FL, USA) and Imperial College (IC, London, UK), continued to perform independent modeling with support from GPEI partners, in 2020, the third modeling group included in the prior review [1], the Institute for Disease Modeling (IDM, Seattle, WA, USA), became part of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF). With this transition, IDM modeling went fully under the operational control of an influential GPEI core partner that presumably could rely on internal modeling results for decision-making without external peer review. In addition, with personnel moves and the expansion of the GPEI data sharing agreement to allow each core partner to support more than one independent modeling group, several other groups also became GPEI-partner-supported polio modeling groups. These include the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), the South African Centre for Epidemiological Modelling and Analysis (SACEMA), and the Georgia Institute of Technology (GIT). In addition to studies by GPEI-supported polio modeling groups (henceforth “modeling groups”), the literature continues to include some poliovirus transmission and economic modeling studies published by others.The complexity of modeling poliovirus transmission remains a challenge due to the presence of three distinct poliovirus serotypes (i.e., types 1, 2, and 3) and numerous strains of live polioviruses (LPVs), including wild polioviruses (WPVs), live attenuated oral poliovirus vaccines (OPVs), and OPV-related strains. OPV-related strains include vaccine-derived polioviruses (VDPVs) that can result in outbreaks of circulating VDPVs (cVDPVs, also referred to as “variant” polioviruses), if OPV-related viruses transmit in populations with low immunization coverage. The GPEI reports cases of WPVs and cVDPVs weekly, but not other strains. However, other OPV-related strains, including immunodeficiency-associated VDPVs (iVDPVs), which occur rarely in individuals with primary immunodeficiencies, represent an important concern for eradication because immunodeficient patients can become prolonged or chronic poliovirus excreters and potentially act as a local source for re-introduction in an otherwise polio-free population. OPV-related risks also include rare cases of vaccine-associated paralytic polio (VAPP) that can occur in OPV recipients or their close contacts. Additional challenges arise from the complex historical use of inactivated poliovirus vaccines (IPV) and OPV, including different formulations of OPV. Historically, OPVs used Sabin OPV strains, for example, trivalent OPV (tOPV, containing types 1, 2, and 3), monovalent OPV (mOPV, containing type 1, 2, or 3, and identified as mOPV1, mOPV2, or mOPV3), or bivalent OPV (bOPV, containing types 1 and 3). More recently, however, the development of a novel type 2 OPV (nOPV2) strain led to its use instead of or in addition to mOPV2 in outbreak response immunization campaigns, with novel OPV types 1 and 3 rapidly being developed. In addition, while all IPV formulations remain trivalent, licensed vaccines use either wild seed strains (Salk IPV) or Sabin OPV seed strains (Sabin IPV), and delivery of IPV can occur standalone in full or fractional dosing or in combination with other antigens. All national immunization programs deliver poliovirus vaccines in their routine immunizations (RI) according to age-based national schedules. Some countries also deliver poliovirus vaccines in supplemental immunization activities (SIAs), which target individuals within a specific age range over a short period of time, either as planned preventive SIAs (pSIAs) or reactive outbreak response SIAs (oSIAs). Poliovirus modeling studies must ideally incorporate all relevant biological, epidemiological, risk, and economic data on different poliovirus types and strains to provide value to policymakers. Since the body of literature has expanded significantly since the prior review [1], we sought to document the publications of the different modeling groups and to systematically review poliovirus transmission and economic modeling results published in English for 2020–2024.25. The prior review noted the absence of a single repository for global polio policy decisions [1], and this remains an ongoing challenge. For this update, we recognized the opportunity to review the GPEI annual reports, conclusions and recommendations of the World Health Organization Strategic Advisory Group of Experts on Immunization (SAGE) meetings, and reports of technical advisory groups to assess the impact of modeling in supporting polio policies and decisions. This review seeks to provide insights into the role and impact of modeling on national, regional, and global policies with respect to the ongoing polio endgame.2. Materials and MethodsFor each of the 102 studies that met our inclusion criteria [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102] (Figure 1), we used the same categories and hierarchy to classify the type of modeling study as in the prior review [1]: (i) integrated modeling (i.e., including both dynamic transmission and economic modeling), (ii) dynamic transmission models, subcategorized as differential-equation-based (DEB), stochastic compartmental (SC), individual-based (IB), and/or discrete event simulation (DES), (iii) economic analyses, or (iv) other. The “other” category (i.e., polio publications not reporting poliovirus transmission or health economic modeling) applies only to the modeling groups, which we categorized as: statistical analyses (further classified as risk assessment, vaccine effectiveness, or mucosal immunity studies), reviews, discussions of policy options, or perspectives/commentaries as before [1]. In this review, we provide a synopsis of all poliovirus-related publications by the six modeling groups as of early 2024 and all poliovirus transmission and economic modeling studies identified in our search and published between 2020–2024.25. We also summarize trends in the numbers and types of polio-related papers published by the modeling groups and other poliovirus transmission and economic modeling papers, for which we update the summary statistics from the prior review [1]. To appropriately discuss trends, we updated the attribution of studies published 2000–2019 [1] for 2 studies led by an LSHTM researcher (Dr. Kathleen O’Reilly) with IC coauthors [111,112] from IC to LSHTM. Assuming that the GPEI data sharing agreement with LSHTM could cover other polio researchers at LSHTM, in our analysis of trends, we changed the attribution of a 2001 transmission modeling study by Dr. Paul Fine [113] from the “other” transmission modeling group in prior review [1] to LSHTM. We also added other LSHTM polio-related publications between 2000 and 2019 (i.e., statistical analyses, vaccine effectiveness and immunology studies, reviews, and perspectives [114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126,127]), although we note the continued exclusion of poliovirus transmission modeling papers published by these LSHTM researchers prior to 2000 [106,107]. The shift of IDM into BMGF created challenges for characterizing the contributions of IDM and BMGF modelers. We searched for and included polio publications by IDM named- staff identified in the prior review still at IDM/BMGF (i.e., Drs. Guillaume Chabot-Couture, Michael Famulare, Steve Kroiss, Hil Lyons, and Kevin McCarthy) [1]. Similar to the prior review [1], which mentioned but did not include a 2017 BMGF-led statistical analysis that characterized population immunity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo [128], this updated review excludes results from serological surveys [129,130] and a statistical approach for analyzing and presenting polio surveillance data to supplement standard performance indicators [131]. In addition to characterizing trends in the numbers and types of publications, we identified papers that covered the same themes identified in the prior review [1]. We also added themes that emerged between 2020 and 2024, including nOPV, COVID-19/pandemic modeling, secondary effects of OPV, GPEI transition and integration, and containment risks. For the subset of studies that included poliovirus transmission modeling, we identified the specific population modeled.As noted in the prior review [1], no depository of polio policy or GPEI decisions exists, which undermines efforts to systematically review and document the decision-support provided by modeling. However, while national, regional, and global health leaders and the GPEI leaders make policy decisions that SAGE does not review, for this analysis, we reviewed the published conclusions and recommendations from SAGE biannual meetings from inception in 1999 through April 2024 [132]. We found that SAGE discussions occasionally referred to input from technical advisory groups, which led us to review all available reports from the Advisory Committee on Polio Eradication (ACPE), which met nine times during 2004–2009, and the SAGE polio working group (SPWG), which met 27 times since its creation in 2008 through April 2024. From SPWG meeting notes for the record, we extracted the model group affiliations for SPWG meeting attendance. SPWG membership included Dr. Kimberly Thompson from KRI (term, meetings 1–14, 2008–2017), Dr. Nicholas Grassly from IC (meetings 1–19, 2008–2020), Dr. Guillaume Chabot-Couture from IDM/BMGF (meetings 15–27, 2017–present), and Dr. Kathleen O’Reilly from LSHTM (meetings 20–27, 2020–present). We identified participation in SPWG meetings by representatives of the groups noting participation as a SPWG member (M) or guest (G), and we noted whether a representative of the modeling group presented its work during the meeting or if some other speaker presented work from the modeling group (e.g., another modeling group or a GPEI partner). Finally, we also reviewed the 1999–2022 GPEI Annual Reports [133,134,135,136,137,138,139,140,141,142,143,144,145,146,147,148,149,150,151,152,153,154,155,156]. From all of the available reports, we searched the references to the modeling groups, including citations of their studies, and we extracted the context and nature of the modeling mentioned. With changes in GPEI leadership (Dr. Bruce Aylward (before 2000–2014) [157], Dr. Hamid Jafari (2015) [158], Mr. Michel Zaffran (2016–2020) [159] and Mr. Adian O’Leary (2021–present) [159]), we observed that GPEI changed its governance structure, and we separately reported how GPEI strategies and timelines evolved over time [104]. These changes included the creation of the GPEI Strategy Committee in December 2014 [157]. From experience, we know of modeling presentations made to the GPEI Strategy Committee (e.g., KRI, IC, and IDM/BMGF all presented modeling related to responding to the global situation with type 2 outbreaks in April and May 2022), but in the absence of published meeting records or minutes, we could not report on the role of modeling input in GPEI Strategy Committee decisions. 3. ResultsThis section begins with a brief overview of each of the 102 studies identified by the search process summarized in Figure 1 [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90,91,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102]. As before [1], we organize these by modeling group (i.e., KRI, IC, LSHTM, IDM/BMGF, SACEMA, GIT), and others. We then provide summary statistics of the included publications and characterize overall trends and themes, considering these in the context of the prior review [1]. Finally, we report the apparent impact of modeling in GPEI Annual Reports and SAGE conclusions and recommendations.3.1. Studies That Met Inclusion Criteria Published 2020–2024.253.1.1. KRIIn 2020, KRI published reviews on several topics, including the prior review of modeling studies [1], potential use of vaccine patches for immunization, including IPV [2], and the performance of the United States Vaccine Injury Compensation Program (VICP): 1988–2019 [3], which highlighted VAPP risks as a key motivation for VICP establishment. KRI also published a commentary related to incentives for developing vaccine patches [4] and an economic analysis related to developing better defaults for valuing health outcomes based on health opportunity costs [5].Prior to and during the COVID-19 pandemic, KRI published several studies related to updating the inputs of its global integrated model, including 2019 updates for iVDPV risks [160] (included in the prior review [1]). Following the release of the 2019–2023 GPEI strategic plan [161] and post-cessation strategy [162], KRI updated its integrated model inputs to use retrospective immunization and epidemiology data through the end of 2018 and prospective inputs consistent with available information about recent programmatic performance and updated plans. The third special issue of the journal Risk Analysis on Global Poliovirus Risk Management and Modeling, published in February 2021 [6], included many of these studies, several of which appeared online in 2020. In January 2020 (prior to the COVID-19 pandemic), the KRI update of its integrated model reported the GPEI was off-track with respect to achieving its polio eradication goals [161] and attributed this primarily to the low quality of OPV SIAs [7]. For this integrated model update [7], KRI reflected on key differences between the optimistic and ideal risk management assumptions it used prior to 2016 [163,164] and actual performance and plans after 2016 [8]. Due to its expectation of ongoing transmission of WPV1 in Pakistan and Afghanistan [7], KRI built on its prior Pakistan and Afghanistan modeling [165,166,167,168] to update its DEB model for these countries (as a single epidemiological reservoir) and identified pSIA strategies that could end WPV1 transmission within the timeline of the 2019–2023 GPEI strategic plan [9]. KRI also developed a DEB model of poliovirus transmission for northeast Nigeria to characterize the transmission of WPV1 that occurred in Borno and Yobe in 2016 [10]. Using this DEB as the basis for an SC model, KRI characterized the confidence of no circulation or undetected WPV1 transmission as a function of time for Borno and Yobe [11], which the Africa Regional Commission for the Certification of Poliomyelitis Eradication used to support its regional certification in 2020 [169]. KRI also updated its characterization of post-OPV cessation risks related to the misuse or inadvertent use of OPV after homotypic cessation, and updated its probability estimates for the need to restart OPV2 production and use in preventive immunization [12]. To support integrated analyses, KRI published updated cost estimates for poliovirus immunization and valuations of polio health outcomes [13], including consideration of health opportunity costs [5]. With global certification of WPV3 eradication in 2019 [170] and reductions of bOPV pSIAs, in late 2020, KRI published a DEB modeling study of the expected reductions of VAPP and cVDPV cases and vaccine dose requirements for a policy of globally coordinated cessation of type 3 OPV (OPV3) before type 1 OPV (OPV1) compared to ongoing bOPV use [14]. Following the May 2020 GPEI publication of an addendum to its 2019–2023 strategic plan that emphasized the use of nOPV2 for oSIAs [171], KRI applied its global model to explore the impacts of using nOPV2 compared to Sabin mOPV2 for oSIAs and reported that even with ideal characteristics, nOPV2 would not likely end all type 2 outbreaks and transmissions [15], which it also discussed in a commentary [16]. Considering pre-COVID-19 conditions, KRI updated its 2010 integrated analysis of the health and economic benefits of the GPEI [172] based on the status of the GPEI and its plans as of 2019 [17], which included consideration of the possibility of ending WPV1 transmission in Pakistan and Afghanistan [9]. KRI also applied its integrated model to consider the health and economic impacts of IPV or tOPV in RI with or without OPV use for oSIAs for different control and eradication scenarios for 2019–2029 [18]. After the emergence of COVID-19, a high-profile suggestion to use OPV to prevent COVID-19 in the United States [173,174] motivated KRI to perform a health economic analysis that estimated VAPP risks and costs with no anticipation of expected benefits for reducing COVID-19 [19] (and associated letter [175]). KRI explored the impact of disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic on global polio eradication in a 2021 study [20], which included updating its assumptions related to long-range exportations. In 2021, KRI published two studies related to the hypothetical emergence of a novel poliovirus in 2020 to simulate a pandemic with poliovirus (instead of COVID-19) and demonstrated the consequences of policy decisions for control or eradication using nonpharmaceutical interventions [21] and vaccines [22]. KRI also updated its characterization of poliovirus transmission in Pakistan and Afghanistan post-COVID-19 to explore the impacts of different vaccine options for oSIAs (e.g., mOPV2, tOPV) in the context of the cocirculation of WPV1 and cVDPV2 [23]. A separate KRI study estimated the expected costs of poliovirus surveillance and immunization campaign quality monitoring for Pakistan and Afghanistan for 2019–2023 [24].Outbreak response emerged as a theme for several KRI publications during this period. In 2021, KRI characterized the trade-offs of different OPV2 vaccines (i.e., mOPV2 or nOPV2) for oSIAs and the consequences of delaying oSIAs to wait for nOPV2 instead of using available mOPV2 [25]. This analysis emphasized the importance of responding quickly and well with available vaccine supplies (i.e., mOPV2) and anticipated that delays in waiting for nOPV2 would likely lead to over a thousand paralytic cases and greater global cVDPV2 transmission [25]. Despite this analysis, countries in the WHO African region chose to delay oSIAs to wait for nOPV2, which increased the number and spread of reported cVDPV2 cases and motivated KRI to ask, “What kind of world do we want?” in a commentary [26]. A separate commentary raised questions about the effectiveness of a nOPV2 for oSIAs and highlighted the increasingly complicated polio endgame [27].Following up on discussions of secondary vaccine effects of OPV raised prior to the development of COVID-19 vaccines [19], KRI published a systematic review of secondary health effects of vaccines and policy insights for health economic analyses [28] and separately discussed the challenges of assessing the benefits and costs of non-polio and shared activities for polio and non-polio interventions in polio health economic analyses [29]. In 2022, following the publication of a new GPEI strategic plan for 2022–2026 [176], KRI published 2 analyses related to questions asked by GPEI partners during the development of the plan about the overall cases of polio prevented by poliovirus vaccines and GPEI [30] and the health and economic consequences of a shift to control in 2022 [31] (as an update to a 2007 KRI analysis of control vs. eradication [177]). Although KRI performed these studies in response to specific questions raised by GPEI partners, GPEI did not subsequently refer to the results of these studies. With new milestones [104] established in the new plan [176], KRI again updated its DEB model for Pakistan and Afghanistan [32]. Assuming the application of a pSIA strategy that KRI identified as successful for ending WPV1 transmission in its model [32], KRI used this analysis as the basis for an SC model to characterize the confidence of no undetected WPV1 transmission as a function of time [33]. The Global Commission for Certification of Poliomyelitis Eradication (GCC) used these results [32,33] to support a potential shortening of the time required to certify the end of indigenous WPV1 transmission after the last reported case or positive environmental sample to less than 3 years, depending on the quality of the surveillance and immunization information [178].In 2022, KRI removed its assumptions related to OPV restart as a policy option in its global integrated model for consistency with observed experience. This change implied the potential use of OPV vaccines available for oSIAs for the full model time horizon of prospective models, and ended KRI characterization of the probability of OPV restart as a metric to characterize OPV cessation failure [34]. One application of the KRI global model published in late 2022 showed the trade-offs of different OPV2 vaccine options and oSIA characteristics (i.e., scope, timeliness, quality) [34], which identified aggressive options that could potentially lead to a high probability of cVDPV2 transmission dying out by the end of the model time horizon and characterized the low chances of success for the status quo GPEI strategy and policies. A separate study applied a DEB model of a hypothetical population with cocirculation of types 1 and 2 and demonstrated the advantages of coadministration of both types (e.g., tOPV or bOPV and nOPV2) compared to sequential or alternating strategies [35]. KRI also performed a look-back analysis to learn from its prior prospective modeling of oSIAs for managing OPV2 cessation [36].In 2023, KRI explored the complexity of modeling the increase in vaccine options (i.e., nOPVs, different IPV formulations) and the dynamics of starting and/or stopping OPV in national immunization programs after OPV cessation [37]. KRI commented on polio eradication hurdles [38] and the need for updating expectations for nOPV2 [39]. KRI also reviewed the experience with the OPV2 stockpiles and discussed the challenges of forecasting vaccine demand given uncertainty about prospective national, regional, and global policies [40]. With ongoing discussions about potential global coordination of bOPV cessation, KRI also applied its global integrated model to characterize the expected outcomes of coordinated global cessation of bOPV use in 2027 without bOPV pSIAs [41], as suggested by the 2022–2026 strategic plan [176]. In addition to exploring the expected annual paralytic cases by type over time, KRI also explored the worst-case scenarios [42]. In the context of low expectations of successful bOPV cessation, a related health economic analysis anticipated a relatively low value of antiviral drugs [43].Finally, in 2023–2024, KRI published a DEB model of the cVDPV2 transmission and IPV oSIA for the imported cVDPV2 outbreak that occurred in 2022 in New York State [44]. KRI used this as the basis for an SC model analysis that explored confidence about no circulation as a function of time since the last positive surveillance signal [45], which helped to support the New York State and national leaders feel more confident about the end of the outbreak. KRI also explored the trade-offs of different poliovirus vaccine options for outbreak response in IPV-using countries, such as the US 2022 cVDPV2 outbreak, and considered a hypothetical cVDPV1 outbreak to show differences between poliovirus types [46], which supported the 2023 US decisions to offer IPV to adults [179] and deliberations by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) about the potential use of OPV in the US for oSIAs at its February 2024 meeting. This study also included a systematic review of modeling studies that included IPV use in outbreak response [46].3.1.2. ICThe studies identified for IC for 2020–2024.25 showed its continued focus on statistical analyses of existing surveillance data and data collected as part of prospective trials or challenge studies and included a new focus area related to the development of a poliovirus direct detection method. With respect to transmission modeling, IC applied an SC model to characterize the spread of serotype-2 vaccine-derived-poliovirus outbreaks in Pakistan and Afghanistan to inform outbreak control strategies in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic [47], which built on a statistical analysis that quantified movement patterns and vaccination status in high-risk mobile populations [48]. Statistical analyses published by IC included an analysis of immune predictors of OPV immunogenicity among infants in South India [49]. One IC study used poliovirus genetic sequences from GenBank and demonstrated the application of phylogenetic and phylogeospatial modeling to infer geospatial transmission patterns of poliovirus transmission during the 2010 Tajikistan outbreak [50]. Another analysis characterized the variability in the sensitivity of environmental surveillance sites in Nigeria to detect poliovirus and other enteroviruses [51]. Two IC studies focused on risk factors for cVDPV2 transmission in Africa after 2016 [52,53]. The first of these highlighted the need for larger and faster OPV2 oSIAs to stop cVDPV2 transmission [52], and the second identified risk factors for VDPV2 emergence and suggested priorities for nOPV2 use [53]. IC reported the results of several vaccine effectiveness studies, including a phase 4 clinical trial on the effect of maternal immunization with multivalent vaccines containing IPV in infants [54] and the effectiveness of nOPV2 and mOPV2 against cVDPV2s in Nigeria between 2017 and 2022 [55]. IC commented on the first Africa-based nOPV2 clinical trial [56] and contributed to perspectives related to the impacts of one billion doses and WHO prequalification of nOPV2 [57] and the use of nOPV2 for oSIAs [58].IC invested substantial effort in the research, development, and implementation of direct detection with nanopore sequencing (DDNS) for poliovirus surveillance [59,60,61,62]. This included publications that characterized rapid and sensitive direct detection and identification of poliovirus from stool and environmental surveillance samples using nanopore sequencing [59] and an analysis of the time taken to detect and respond to polio outbreaks in Africa considering the potential impact of direct molecular detection and nanopore sequencing [60]. IC also published a comparison of eleven RNA extraction methods for direct molecular detection of polioviruses from stool [61] and a prospective validation study of DDNS that reported preliminary cost estimates [62]. IC also included poliovirus surveillance in a consortium effort that it led with the goal of defining a research agenda for broad environmental wastewater surveillance of pathogens [63].Following the detection of imported cVDPV2 transmission in the UK, IC published a commentary about the detection as a wake-up call [64] and a statistical analysis of the sustained detection by enhanced environmental surveillance in London sewage between February and July 2022 [65]. IC contributed substantially (i.e., three of eight coauthors) to a review of the use of IPV for oSIAs [66] prepared at the request of the SPWG for discussion at its 24th meeting (August 2022) and the October 2022 SAGE meeting.3.1.3. LSHTMOur review identified one SC modeling study that explored the effect of population partitioning on the probability of silent poliovirus transmission, which included a coauthor affiliated with both LSHTM and SACEMA [67]. The lead author of this study [67] published several poliovirus transmission modeling studies counted as “other transmission studies” in the prior review [1], in collaboration with a polio modeler from the University of Michigan (Dr. James Koopman). This study [67] represented the only publication that met the review inclusion criteria for SACEMA, although for this review, we attributed it to LSHTM.As discussed earlier, several IC studies in the prior review included a researcher who moved to LSHTM in 2018 [1]. Not surprisingly, given prior collaboration, several LSHTM-led studies published in 2020–2024.25 included coauthors from IC [68,69,70]. One study included a coauthor from IDM/BMGF [71]. LSHTM reported statistical epidemiological analyses that characterized changes in the epidemiology of poliovirus serotype 2 following OPV2 cessation [68], which followed discussions held during a January 2020 meeting that included all of the groups. Other LSHTM studies explored the optimization of environmental surveillance to detect poliovirus importations into England and Wales [69] and characterized the epidemiology of cVDPV2 global outbreaks between 2016 and 2020 [70]. Another statistical analysis characterized the impact of surveillance and other factors on the detection of emergent and circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses [71]. We identified several LSHTM reviews related to the polio endgame [72], the accelerated roll-out of the nOPV2 vaccine [73], and challenges with achieving polio eradication given population immunity as of early 2024 [74]. LSHTM coauthors also commented on the challenges of informative wastewater sampling for SARS-CoV-2, considering lessons learned from polio eradication [75]. LSHTM also published a vaccine effectiveness study of an mOPV2 challenge dose given to IPV-vaccinated children [76], a mucosal immunity study for nOPV2 in healthy adults [77], and a review of polio mucosal immunity studies [78].3.1.4. IDM/BMGFIDM/BMGF published three poliovirus transmission modeling related studies between 2020 and 2024.25 [79,80,81]. Using an IB model, the first study incorporated the results from a mOPV2 clinical trial performed in Bangladesh, which suggested that household and community structure played an important role in limiting transmission [79]. In 2023, the second study described the development of a DEB model that endogenously included OPV2 reversion for the same population [80]. The third study applied a DEB model to revisit the role of time-varying viral shedding in modeling environmental surveillance using the 2013 poliovirus outbreak in Israel [81]. IDM/BMGF also published multiple statistical analyses. One study modeled the genetic sequences of type 2 polioviruses and identified positive selection and tight transmission bottlenecks that substantially influenced the early evolution of OPV2 [82]. Another study of disease surveillance investments and administrative data for Pakistan showed the limited value of the available information for improving surveillance quality [83]. Studies in 2023 developed a real-time prediction model of cVDPV2 outbreaks to aid oSIA decisions [84] and analyzed changes in population immunity for all three types of polioviruses since the 2016 shift from tOPV to bOPV for selected countries and regions [85]. The final IDM/BMGF publication applied a time series statistical model to estimate the vaccine effectiveness of nOPV2 in oSIAs in Nigeria, which also reported similar vaccine effectiveness of mOPV2, but substantially lower effectiveness for IPV than for either OPV2 [86].3.1.5. GITGIT published its first two poliovirus transmission modeling studies in 2024, including a peer-reviewed conference publication [87] and a related journal article [88]. Both studies described the application of a DEB model it developed to characterize cVDPV2 transmission and the impacts of interventions that aim to control outbreaks in Nigeria, and they identified the need for more aggressive oSIAs (i.e., more rounds and broader coverage, particularly in under-vaccinated communities) [87,88].3.1.6. Economic Analyses Published by Other GroupsThe search identified two other studies published in 2020 that presented game theoretic applications to polio, which we included as other economic analyses [89,90]. The first integrated a DEB model with two age classes (i.e., [180] identified in the prior review [1]) into the game theoretic model, which led us to characterize it as an integrated model [89]. The study concluded that achieving polio eradication would require a mandatory vaccination policy [89]. The second study used survey data related to perceptions of the population benefits of OPV and statistical model inputs informed by poliovirus transmission characteristics in a model that suggested that prosocial behavior to receive bOPV in Israel contributed some to the oSIA vaccine uptake after the 2013 WPV1 outbreak [90].The search found three other polio-related economic modeling studies. These include cost-effectiveness analyses of three poliovirus immunization schedules in Shanghai, China [91] and various immunization schedules with Sabin IPV in Hangzhou, China [92]. The final study assumed OPV could provide protection from COVID-19 due to secondary effects and suggested the need to prioritize clinical trials and other studies that could resolve the uncertainty about the effects of OPV on COVID and other non-poliovirus diseases [93].3.1.7. Poliovirus Transmission Modeling Studies Published by Other GroupsOur review identified nine other studies that presented DEB models of poliovirus transmission for theoretical populations using different numerical simulation methods [94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102].3.2. Trends in Characteristics of Polio Modeling StudiesTable 1 provides a high-level comparison between the numbers and types of studies included in this review compared to those in the prior review for 2000–2019 [1] (with the updates discussed above). Notably, the 102 studies identified for the 4.25 years covered in this review imply an increase in the annual rate of polio modeling papers published over time of approximately 2, 5, 9, 22, and 24 papers/year, respectively, for 2000–2004, 2005–2009, 2010–2014, 2015–2019, and 2020–2024.25. Among the modeling groups, KRI published the largest number of studies for 2020–2024.25 (46 publications), followed by IC (20 publications), and LSHTM (12 publications). Table 2 summarizes the themes explored in the included studies by all groups with publications discussed in the prior section. We identified publications by multiple groups for several key themes from the prior review [1], as well as several new themes. Given the global situation with ongoing poliovirus transmission, particularly for cVDPV2s, we identified publications by all the groups in Table 2 on: outbreak response speed (and quality), population immunity, and novel OPV, particularly nOPV2. All groups discussed changes in population immunity in multiple publications, albeit with different definitions. As in the prior review [1], outbreak response speed and quality represented a major theme, with all groups demonstrating the need for improvements in oSIAs. With the use of nOPV2 in oSIAs starting in 2021, our review identified publications by all groups related to nOPV2, many of which included analyses related to nOPV2 use in oSIAs. With respect to OPV cessation dynamics, several groups explored the evolution of OPV, which included some prospective modeling related to potential bOPV cessation. Also represented in Table 2 as related to OPV cessation dynamics, we noted multiple studies by different groups on the failure of the 2016 globally coordinated cessation of OPV2 use for preventive immunization, which included retrospective statistical analyses of epidemiological data and poliovirus transmission modeling. With substantial GPEI investments in the expansion of environmental surveillance, Table 2 also shows numerous studies by different groups related to surveillance. Notably, given multiple publications by IC related to its development of DDNS, we broadened the category from environmental surveillance to surveillance.Most of the modeling groups also published on the topic of IPV use. These publications included IPV use for oSIAs, with some studies motivated by actual experiences (e.g., the 2022 cVDPV2 outbreak in the United States). In addition, multiple groups published studies related to the role of IPV use after OPV cessation, but we did not include the studies that simply added IPV to RI consistent with the prerequisites for OPV2 cessation in Table 2. Not surprisingly, most modeling groups published studies motivated by the global experience with the COVID-19 pandemic, including many studies related to disruptions in national and GPEI immunization activities. Two groups published studies related to undetected circulation in different geographies. Only KRI published studies related to the topics of expanded age group SIAs, silent transmission on an IPV background and/or delayed detection of transmission due to IPV use, vaccine stockpile, iVDPVs, containment, secondary effects of OPV, and GPEI transition and integration. The bottom portion of Table 2 shows the geographic scope covered by 45 studies that included poliovirus transmission modeling [7,9,10,11,12,14,15,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,25,30,31,32,33,34,35,36,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,67,79,80,81,87,88,89,94,95,96,97,98,99,100,101,102]. Not surprisingly, two groups published studies on Pakistan, Afghanistan and Nigeria, which continue to represent critical geographies for polio eradication. Populations modeled by only one group include Bangladesh, Israel, and the United States, and only KRI performed global analyses.3.3. Modeling in GPEI Annual Reports or SAGE Conclusions and RecommendationsTable 3 provides excerpts of references to modeling and/or modeling groups and the sources for results reported that we identified in the GPEI Annual Reports. These discussions of modeling activities and/or references to studies and results published by the modeling groups provide some indication that GPEI broadly relied on modeling inputs. The rightmost two columns show the modeling group(s) referred to by name or by the journal of their publication, and the references to studies from which the GPEI Annual Reports included mention of specific results. Between 2005 and 2018, the GPEI Annual Reports referred to results from studies published by 4 modeling groups: LSHTM [121], KRI [172,177,181,182,183], IC [184,185,186,187], and IDM [188], and we noted multiple references to the results from older studies over time. References to the results from modeling studies occurred in 4 of 5 years for the 2005–2009, 2010–2014, and 2015–2019 time periods. In the 2020–2022 GPEI Annual Reports, only the 2022 report even alluded to the results from modeling studies by including a link to a 2022 investment case [189] that presented the results of an unpublished update of a prior study [188] and mentioned the outdated results of a 2007 publication [177]. Notably, the investment case did not mention a published 2021 updated economic analysis of the GPEI [17]. Two other relevant studies published shortly after publication of the investment case included quantification of the cases of polio prevented by polio vaccines and GPEI [30] and an update of the consequences of shifting to control in 2022 [31] (as an update for an outdated study of control vs. eradication [177]).Table 4 provides excerpts of discussions of polio modeling (and economic analyses) we identified in SAGE meeting conclusions and recommendations published in the Weekly Epidemiological Record [132]. Although every regular SAGE meeting agenda included polio eradication (annually 2000–2002 and biannually 2003–2024), Table 4 only includes meetings for which we identified discussions of polio modeling results. The third column provides references to publications specifically discussed as studies or reviews, as SAGE noted in the conclusions and recommendations. The fourth column provides references to publications we could identify in our review of available presentations to SAGE. Although we identified multiple references to modeling and/or the modeling groups, we identified only five explicit references to specific studies or reviews published by the modeling groups (i.e., KRI [172,177], IC [66,184,185]) and one acknowledgment of IC unpublished work supporting WHO. However, our review of the available presentations made to SAGE identified the inclusion of results from the modeling groups in most of its meetings. We recognized that some of the SAGE meetings included discussions of topics for which relevant modeling available at the time did not get presented (e.g., the role of older age groups in transmission, the economics of using IPV in outbreak response, trade-offs between vaccine choices for outbreak response, including in areas with cocirculation of poliovirus types 1 and 2). We identified some unpublished and not peer-reviewed (to date) modeling results presented (see notes at the bottom of Table 4), most notably predictions about the number of cVDPV2 outbreaks to expect after OPV2 cessation that did not imply any dependence on the implementation of oSIAs. We also observed multiple references to both ACPE and the SPWG. This motivated us to also review the available notes for the record from the face-to-face meetings of these groups. We know from experience that modeling groups attended and presented at some ACPE meetings, but we did not find agendas for all ACPE meetings, and we did not find specific references to the modeling publications presented in the ACPE meeting reports. Table 5 shows the representation of the modeling groups in the 27 face-to-face SPWG meetings and the dates of the meetings. The third through sixth columns show the roles for four of the modeling groups (i.e., KRI, IC, LSHTM, and IDM/BMGF) by indicating the meetings for which representatives from the group participated as a member (M), an invited external participant (P), or a rapporteur (R). The SPWG generally holds closed meetings, with participation limited to committee members and invited participants, although some representatives of some GPEI core partners also attended SPWG meetings. Representatives of the modeling groups, attended different numbers of total SPWG meetings to date: KRI (14), IC (22), LSHTM (12), and IDM/BMGF (24). As shown in Table 5, which uses an asterisk (*) to indicate a presentation, members frequently presented work from their groups and nearly all invited external participants presented work from their group while at the meeting. The seventh column shows the topic presented by modeling groups (and indicates the group). We identified some presentations that included work from modeling groups not attending the meeting. We included the topic of the presentation and added a note to indicate these presentations. This led to the inclusion of the topics of some presentations in the seventh column with no group indicated, as well as some notes showing presentations given by a group representative that included work from one or more other modeling groups in addition to their own work. As shown in the rightmost column in Table 5, between 2008 and 2014 the SPWG reports included references to specific studies by different modeling groups. However, since 2015, while some SPWG notes for the record mentioned presentations by modeling groups, they did not include references to specific studies (e.g., the IC review of IPV use for oSIAs [66]). In the absence of reviewing each presentation, we could not identify all of the modeling results presented to the SPWG.Overall, it appears that poliovirus transmission and economic modeling results played a much larger role in GPEI and SAGE discussions in earlier time periods than during 2020–2024.25, although we see a strong representation of consideration of the results of the modeling groups for 2000–2024.4. DiscussionPublications by the modeling groups since 2020 have continued to show the application of different approaches and active communication of model results to policymakers. However, we observed fewer references to modeling results in GPEI Annual Reports since 2020 than during the prior 15 years, and a decrease in the impact of the results of poliovirus transmission and economic modeling on decisions. Notably, in some cases, the reduced impact of modeling occurred despite the agreement of the multiple modeling groups. For example, although multiple modeling groups recommended a rapid response to cVDPV2 outbreaks using any available OPV2 vaccine (including mOPV2) and SAGE endorsed this recommendation, some countries in the African region delayed their responses to cVDPV2 outbreaks after 2020 to wait for nOPV2 because of its perceived higher safety profile. Multiple modeling groups also published studies that highlighted the late, small, and low quality of oSIAs in some areas as a primary reason for OPV2 cessation failure.During the past 5 years, modeling studies suggested an expected reduction in overall incremental net benefits of the global polio eradication efforts, decreased chances of a successful polio eradication endgame, expectations of increased costs of polio immunization prospectively due to the shift from OPV to IPV in RI associated with the increase in recommended IPV doses in RI, and the complexity of continued use of different formulations of OPV. However, commitment to “finishing the job” remains strong, in spite of a less favorable economic impact. Consistent with this, discussions by GPEI and SAGE trended more toward a focus on polio epidemiological studies, equity (particularly gender equity [154]), and integration of GPEI activities into national immunization programs. The increased focus on statistical analyses of polio epidemiological data reflects the reality of the increased incidence of polio cases reported since 2020 [104]. Similar to the prior review [1], we looked for areas of disagreement about recommendations from the modeling groups. We could not formally document some known differences from internal modeling group discussions because they involved unpublished results. For example, published modeling emphasized the importance of rapidly responding to cVDPV2 outbreaks using the available mOPV2 given the limited availability of nOPV2 [25,34], which unpublished modeling by one other group supported and unpublished modeling by another group did not support (it suggested that countries should wait to use nOPV2 before using mOPV2 in oSIAs). In addition, the communications to countries related to the roll out and promotion of nOPV2 in 2021 promised a better vaccine than mOPV2, which effectively disincentivized the use of mOPV2, devalued the available mOPV2 stockpile, and created challenges with respect to using any Sabin OPV in SIAs to increase and maintain population immunity. With respect to Pakistan and Afghanistan, modeling performed by KRI, IC, and IDM did not lead to the accelerated achievement of WPV1 eradication in Pakistan and Afghanistan. We could not assess the agreement between these since some of the analyses remain unpublished, but studies by KRI and IC agreed with the need to quickly restart immunization in Pakistan and Afghanistan following disruptions caused by COVID-19 [32,47]. In addition, insights from modeling did not succeed in preventing the failure of OPV2 cessation, despite repeated warnings of its likely failure as early as 2017 in Cessation Risk Task Team meetings that occurred between June 2016 and April 2021, which included all of the modeling groups along with representatives from most GPEI core partners. Modeling support of stockpile needs prior to OPV2 cessation did not account for shifts in GPEI leadership and governance and the resulting adoption of lower prioritization of SIAs [104], decentralization of decision making, or the apparent willingness to accept increased polio cases to wait for a different vaccine (i.e., nOPV2). Notably, prior to OPV2 cessation, prospective modeling assumed aggressive oSIAs with mOPV2 would either successfully stop all type 2 poliovirus transmission or countries would restart the use of tOPV in RI [36], and thus developed estimates of demand for a time-limited OPV stockpile [40]. Instead, global efforts moved toward increased use of IPV, the development and deployment of new vaccine tools, including nOPV, and the associated extension of the polio endgame. Given the current epidemiological situation, we can anticipate that future publications of polio modeling studies may support another update of the systematic review. Limitations of this review include our inability to evaluate whether and how national and regional decision makers interact with each other, GPEI, and other global health policy makers. Although we described some work by the modeling teams used by national and regional decision makers (e.g., New York modeling, the African Regional Certification Commission), these represent anecdotal examples, not the results of a systematic process to collect information from decision makers at all levels about their use of modeling results. Modeling results represent only one of the factors that may influence decisions.5. ConclusionsThe representatives from some modeling groups continued to serve as members on the SPWG and the modeling groups continue to increase and to publish their work at an increasing rate. By combining and updating results from prior review [1], for the full time period of 2000–2024.25 we identified 246 polio publications by the modeling groups KRI (124), IC (64), LSHTM (29), IDM/BMGF (27), and GIT (2), plus 46 publications by others (including 32 poliovirus transmission modeling papers and 14 economic analyses). With the initial target for achieving global polio eradication in 2000, the increasing number of modeling groups and rate of publications contrast notably with expectations of successful eradication and dissolution of the GPEI long before 2024. In spite of this, the GPEI core partners remain committed to delivering on the promise of polio eradication, and this suggests that opportunities and support for polio modeling will continue for the foreseeable future.


Title: Progress Toward Poliomyelitis Eradication — Worldwide, January 2021–March 2023

Since the World Health Assembly established the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) in 1988, two of the three wild poliovirus (WPV) serotypes (types 2 and 3) have been eradicated, and global WPV cases have decreased by more than 99.9%. Afghanistan and Pakistan remain the only countries where indigenous WPV type 1 (WPV1) transmission has not been interrupted. This report summarizes progress toward global polio eradication during January 1, 2021–March 31, 2023, and updates previous reports (1,2). In 2022, Afghanistan and Pakistan reported 22 WPV1 cases, compared with five in 2021; as of May 5, 2023, a single WPV1 case was reported in Pakistan in 2023. A WPV1 case was reported on the African continent for the first time since 2016, when officials in Malawi confirmed a WPV1 case in a child with paralysis onset in November 2021; neighboring Mozambique subsequently reported eight genetically linked cases. Outbreaks of polio caused by circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses (cVDPVs) can occur when oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) strains circulate for a prolonged time in underimmunized populations, allowing reversion to neurovirulence (3). A total of 859 cVDPV cases occurred during 2022, an increase of 23% from 698 cases in 2021. cVDPVs were detected in areas where poliovirus transmission had long been eliminated (including in Canada, Israel, the United Kingdom, and the United States). In addition, cocirculation of multiple poliovirus types occurred in multiple countries globally (including Democratic Republic of the Congo [DRC], Israel, Malawi, Mozambique, Republic of the Congo, and Yemen). The 2022–2026 GPEI strategic plan targeted the goal of detecting the last cases of WPV1 and cVDPV in 2023 (4). The current global epidemiology of poliovirus transmission makes the likelihood of meeting this target date unlikely. The detections of poliovirus (WPV1 and cVDPVs) in areas where it had been previously eliminated underscore the threat of continued poliovirus spread to any area where there is insufficient vaccination to poliovirus (3). Mass vaccination and surveillance should be further enhanced in areas of transmission to interrupt poliovirus transmission and to end the global threat of paralytic polio in children.Poliovirus VaccinationIn April 2016, trivalent OPV (tOPV), consisting of Sabin strain types 1, 2, and 3, was withdrawn from routine immunization programs and supplementary immunization activities (SIAs)* worldwide and replaced with bivalent OPV (bOPV, containing Sabin-strain types 1 and 3). Routine immunization programs worldwide provide either 3 doses of bOPV and 1–2 doses of injectable inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) or IPV alone. Seroconversion after IPV vaccination protects against disease caused by all three polio serotypes but does not protect against poliovirus transmission. Because of cocirculation of cVDPV2 and other poliovirus serotypes, GPEI authorized administration of tOPV during SIAs in Afghanistan and Pakistan during 2017–2020, in Yemen during 2021–2022, and in areas of Somalia during 2022–2023. In response to cVDPV2 outbreaks, monovalent OPV Sabin type 2 (mOPV2) is approved for outbreak response use in SIAs and has been used most recently in Somalia. Because of the risks for reversion to neurovirulence associated with Sabin-strain OPV2 in areas with low immunity, the World Health Organization (WHO) granted emergency use listing of novel OPV2 (nOPV2) in November 2020 (5); nOPV2 is more genetically stable than the Sabin strain (6) and has been used in SIAs since March 2021. Challenges of nOPV2 supply during the time of this report have resulted in delayed SIAs in response to cVDPV2 outbreaks (3).In 2021, the estimated global coverage with ≥3 doses of IPV or OPV (Pol3) among infants by age 1 year during routine immunization was 80%†; estimated coverage with 1 full dose or 2 fractional doses§ of IPV (IPV1) in OPV-using countries was 79%. Global coverage with Pol3 and IPV1 declined from 2019 values of 85% and 83%, respectively, when the COVID-19 pandemic severely disrupted health services. In Afghanistan, 2021 national Pol3 coverage was 71% and IPV1 coverage was 67%. Pakistan’s 2021 national coverage estimates were 83% for both Pol3 and IPV1. In Malawi, 2021 Pol3 and IPV1 coverage was 89% and 92%, respectively, and in Mozambique, 2021 coverage estimates for Pol3 and IPV1 were 67% and 70%, respectively (7). Immunization coverage estimates in subnational levels of these countries are often substantially lower.During January 1, 2021–March 31, 2023, GPEI supported 48 countries in implementing 219 SIAs, during which approximately 988 million bOPV, 616,000 IPV, 960,000 fractional IPV, 90 million mOPV2, 595 million nOPV2, and 100 million tOPV doses were administered. In 2022, lot quality assurance sampling (LQAS)¶ surveys after SIAs indicated performance gaps in high-risk districts in Afghanistan, Malawi, Mozambique, and Pakistan (8–10).Poliovirus SurveillancePoliovirus transmission is primarily detected through case-based syndromic surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) in persons aged <15 years, with confirmation of poliovirus by testing stool specimens at one of the 144 WHO-accredited laboratories in the Global Polio Laboratory Network in 91 countries (Table 1). In 2022, AFP surveillance reviews in 34 countries at high risk for poliovirus spread indicated that 26 (76%) countries met targets for the two primary surveillance indicators at the national level.** Because of the high proportion of asymptomatic infections, environmental surveillance (ES), the systematic sampling and testing of sewage for poliovirus, can supplement AFP surveillance to detect poliovirus transmission and improve overall surveillance sensitivity. The total number of ES samples collected in countries with poliovirus transmission increased from 8,945 samples from 36 countries in 2021 to 12,259 samples from 40 countries in 2022 (Table 2).TABLE 1Number of poliovirus cases, by country — worldwide, January 1, 2021–March 31, 2023*CountryNo. of cases20212022Jan–Mar 2022Jan–Mar 2023WPV1cVDPVWPV1cVDPVWPV1cVDPVWPV1cVDPV
Countries with WPV1 detections (cVDPV type)

Afghanistan (2)443201000Pakistan (2)182000010Malawi (1)10040000Mozambique (1,2)028261403
Countries with reported cVDPV cases (cVDPV type)

Algeria (2)00030000Benin (2)030110002Burkina Faso (2)02000000Burundi (2)00010000Cameroon (2)03030000Central African Republic (2)00050005Chad (2)000440505Côte d'Ivoire (2)00000001Democratic Republic of the Congo (1,2)0280504058031Eritrea (2)01010100Ethiopia (2)010010000Ghana (2)00030000Guinea (2)06000000Guinea-Bissau (2)03000000Indonesia (2)00010003Israel (1,3)00010101Liberia (2)03000000Madagascar (1)0130140509Mali (2)00020000Niger (2)0180150200Nigeria (2)041504802601Republic of the Congo (2)02010000Senegal (2)017000000Sierra Leone (2)05000000Somalia (2)01050201South Sudan (2)09000000Sudan (2)00010000Tajikistan (2)035000000Togo (2)00020100Ukraine (2)02000000United States (2)00010000Yemen (1,2)069016208300
Total

6

698

30

859

2

188

1

62
Abbreviations: cVDPV = circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus; WPV1 = wild poliovirus type 1.* Data are current as of May 5, 2023.TABLE 2Number of circulating wild polioviruses and circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses detected through environmental surveillance — worldwide, January 1, 2021–March 31, 2023*CountryReporting periodJan 1–Dec 31, 2021Jan 1–Dec 31, 2022Jan 1–Mar 30, 2022Jan 1–Mar 30, 2023No. of samplesNo. of positives (%)No. of samplesNo. of positives (%)No. of samplesNo. of positives (%)No. of samplesNo. of positives (%)
Countries with reported WPV1-positive samples (no. and % of isolates refer to WPV1)

Afghanistan4811 (0.2)70222 (3.1)1640 (—)17217 (9.9)Pakistan88765 (7.3)122037 (3.0)2750 (—)3623 (0.8)
Countries with reported cVDPV-positive samples (cVDPV type) (no. and % of isolates refer to cVDPVs)

Afghanistan (2)48140 (8.3)7020 (—)1640 (—)1720 (—)Algeria (2)520 (—)7618 (23.7)140 (—)338 (24.2)Benin (2)1431 (0.7)1098 (7.4)360 (—)393 (7.7)Botswana (2)00 (—)224 (18.2)00 (—)251 (4.0)Burkina Faso (2)1101 (0.9)1510 (—)380 (—)360 (—)Burundi (2)400 (—)346 (17.6)70 (—)116 (54.5)Canada (2)00 (—)582 (3.4)00 (—)120 (—)Cameroon (2)3761 (0.3)4100 (—)760 (—)1450 (—)Central African Republic (2)1421 (0.7)2128 (3.7)390 (—)420 (—)Chad (2)641 (1.6)865 (5.8)140 (—)140 (—)China (3)21 (50.0)00 (—)00 (—)00 (—)Côte d'Ivoire (2)850 (—)1573 (1.9)412 (4.9)450 (—)Democratic Republic of the Congo (2)4643 (0.6)3279 (2.8)760 (—)811 (1.2)Djibouti (2)717 (9.9)4612 (26.1)109 (90.0)120 (—)Egypt (2)90612 (1.3)6456 (0.9)2014 (2.0)1390 (—)The Gambia (2)399 (23.1)550 (—)110 (—)30 (—)Ghana (2)1890 (—)19719 (9.6)700 (—)410 (—)Guinea (2)1432 (1.4)1230 (—)300 (—)330 (—)Iran (2)711 (1.4)680 (—)170 (—)100 (—)Israel (2,3)95 (55.6)8280 (97.6)2525 (100.0)00 (—)Kenya (2)1981 (0.5)2000 (—)500 (—)510 (—)Liberia (2)9114 (15.4)430 (—)280 (—)60 (—)Madagascar (1)39331 (87.9)66896 (14.4)15819 (12.0)16924 (14.2)Malawi (2)00 (—)3530 (—)540 (—)561 (1.8)Mauritania (2)727 (9.7)820 (—)240 (—)120 (—)Niger (2)2040 (—)30114 (4.7)792 (2.5)661 (1.5)Nigeria (2)2,453303 (12.4)221882 (3.7)91346 (5.0)29410 (3.4)Pakistan (2)88735 (3.9)12200 (—)2750 (—)3620 (—)Palestinian territories (3)77 (100.0)99 (100.0)99 (100.0)00 (—)Senegal (2)2314 (60.9)2861 (0.3)920 (—)770 (—)Republic of the Congo (2)4613 (1.0)2380 (—)570 (—)630 (—)Sierra Leone (2)2149 (4.9)2040 (—)620 (—)240 (—)Somalia (2)1411 (0.7)2316 (2.6)541 (1.9)670 (—)Sudan (2)1030 (—)1601 (0.6)400 (—)550 (—)Tajikistan (2)2717 (63.0)10 (—)00 (—)00 (—)Togo (2)660 (—)872 (2.3)301 (3.3)240 (—)Uganda (2)1002 (2.0)1480 (—)330 (—)740 (—)United Kingdom (2)00 (—)266 (23.1)10 (—)00 (—)United States (2)00 (—)206847 (2.3)810 (—)9520 (—)Yemen (2)3713 (35.1)3925 (64.1)157 (46.7)50 (—)Zambia (2)810 (—)1173 (2.6)270 (—)400 (—)
Total

8,945

608 (6.8)

12,259

531 (4.3)

2,951

125 (4.2)

3,290

75 (2.3)
Abbreviations: cVDPV = circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus; WPV1 = wild poliovirus type 1.* Data are current as of May 5, 2023.Reported Polio Cases and IsolationsCountries reporting WPV cases and isolations. In 2022, the two remaining countries with endemic WPV1 transmission, Afghanistan and Pakistan, reported two and 20 WPV1 cases, respectively (Figure) (Table 1). In Afghanistan, two cases were reported from two provinces, representing a 50% decrease from the four cases reported from two provinces in 2021 (8). The 20 cases reported in Pakistan in 2022 were all from security-compromised districts in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province, representing a nineteenfold increase over the single case reported in 2021 (9). As of May 5, a single case of WPV1 was reported in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province of Pakistan in 2023. The paralysis onset dates of the latest reported WPV1 case in Afghanistan was August 29, 2022, and in Pakistan was February 20, 2023.FIGURENumber of wild poliovirus type 1 cases, by country and month of paralysis onset — worldwide, January 2021–March 2023*Abbreviation: WPV1 = wild poliovirus type 1.* Data are current as of May 5, 2023.Figure is a histogram indicating the number of worldwide wild poliovirus type 1 cases, by country and month of paralysis onset, during January 2021–March 2023.In Afghanistan, among 702 sewage samples collected in 2022, 22 (3%) yielded a WPV1 isolate, representing a 14-fold increase in the percentage of isolates from 0.2% (one WPV1 isolate detected in 473 samples) collected during 2021 (Table 2). In Pakistan, among 1,220 sewage samples collected during 2022, 37 (3%) WPV1-positive isolates were detected, a 57% decrease in the percentage of isolates from 7% (65 WPV1 isolates from 887 samples) in 2021. As of May 5, 2023, the latest WPV1 detections by ES were from samples taken on April 3, 2023, in Afghanistan and on February 21, 2023, in Pakistan.In 2021, a single paralytic WPV1 case in Malawi was genetically linked to virus circulating in Pakistan and was confirmed in February 2022. In 2022, eight WPV1 cases were detected in Mozambique, genetically linked to the Malawi case, with the latest date of paralysis in August 2022 (10).Countries reporting cVDPV cases and isolations. During January 2021–March 2023, a total of 1,619 cVDPV cases were reported from 36 countries. Six countries reported 225 cVDPV1 cases, 34 countries reported 1,393 cVDPV2 cases, and one country (Israel) reported one cVDPV3 case. DRC, Malawi, Mozambique, Republic of the Congo, and Yemen reported co-circulation of cVDPV1 and cVDPV2, and Israel reported co-circulation of cVDPV2 and cVDPV3. Global cVDPV2 cases decreased by 1.3% in 2022 (673 cases in 20 countries) compared with 2021 (682 cases in 22 countries); the 504 cVDPV cases detected in DRC represent 59% of all globally reported cVDPV cases in 2022. No cVDPV2 cases or ES detections in Afghanistan or Pakistan were reported after July 2021 (7,8). Global cVDPV1 cases increased by 1,056% (185 cases in five countries) in 2022 compared with 16 cases in two countries in 2021.DiscussionThe 2022 increase in WPV1 cases in Pakistan’s security-challenged subdistricts of southern Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and the ongoing circulation in contiguous districts of eastern Afghanistan form a narrow geographic band of indigenous WPV1 transmission. One major, ongoing challenge to reaching children with OPV in these reservoir districts is the substantial movement of a subpopulation at high risk between Afghanistan and Pakistan. In Afghanistan, an intensive schedule of SIAs conducted by local authorities during November 2021–September 2022 reached many previously inaccessible, unvaccinated children (8). However, 188,447 children residing in Afghanistan’s South Region could not be vaccinated during November 2021–September 2022 because of a regional ban on community polio SIAs. In early 2023, authorities in Afghanistan banned women from working outside the home; the ban has not substantially affected the polio program to date. In Pakistan, AFP surveillance gaps and insufficient SIA implementation quality in the areas with security issues pose substantial challenges (9). The successful interruption of cVDPV2 transmission in both countries in 2021 following outbreak response SIAs with tOPV and mOPV2 offers optimism that WPV1 transmission can be stopped in the near future. In 2022, both countries resumed cross-border coordination and synchronization of campaigns; intensifying and strengthening these efforts could help to mitigate cross-border WPV1 spread.The WHO African Region detected its first WPV1 case in >5 years in 2021 in Malawi, with subsequent limited spread in Mozambique. Genomic sequence analyses for both the isolated WPV1 and cVDPV1, which cocirculated in both countries, highlight critical surveillance gaps in the region (10). Delays in specimen transport time, as well as some ineffective ES systems and increases in sample processing time have delayed polio detection and the subsequent response. In Mozambique, suboptimal SIA performance and decreased Pol3 coverage leave children vulnerable to further WPV1 and cVDPV transmission. Simultaneous health emergencies resulting from cholera and measles outbreaks, as well as cyclone response, in both countries have challenged the poliovirus outbreak responses. Improved SIA quality is needed to reach chronically missed children, and more sensitive surveillance will be essential in confirming the interruption of poliovirus transmission.The 2022–2026 GPEI Strategic Plan (4) named the end of 2023 as the target for the last detection of both WPV1 and cVDPV2. ES detections of WPV1 transmission in Afghanistan and Pakistan and AFP detection in Pakistan in early 2023 clearly jeopardize achieving the WPV1 target. Similarly, with extensive transmission of cVDPV1 and cVDPV2 in 2023, the cVDPV detection goal is unlikely to be met by the target date. In addition, as of May 5, 2023, emergences of cVDPV2 linked to nOPV2 use had been detected in AFP cases in African countries.†† Although this finding was expected even with a vaccine with increased genetic stability, considering the number of doses administered, the finding indicates the need to implement high-quality response SIAs to raise immunity in all children, independent of the vaccine type used. The major hurdles to reaching the cVDPV2 GPEI goals in the near future are remaining gaps in surveillance, suboptimal SIA quality in many areas, and a highly limited nOPV2 vaccine supply, resulting in delayed campaigns for a number of countries (5).The detection of cVDPV transmission in regions where poliovirus transmission has long been eliminated (e.g., genetically linked cVDPV2 in Canada, Israel, the United Kingdom, and the United States) together with the importation of WPV1 genetically related to a Pakistan strain into southeastern Africa underscore the threat of continued global poliovirus spread to any area, given global migration and travel (3). Further, this risk is growing because of increased postpandemic vaccine hesitancy and pandemic disruptions in immunization services, with decreased Pol3 coverage globally. Progress toward polio eradication requires continued international commitment to strengthening routine immunization, enhancing global surveillance activities, increasing SIA quality, and implementing preventive bOPV SIAs with or without IPV in areas with chronically low routine immunization coverage.SummaryWhat is already known about this topic?Endemic transmission of wild poliovirus type 1 (WPV1) continues only in Afghanistan and Pakistan. What is added by this report?In 2022, Malawi and Mozambique reported WPV1 cases linked to a Pakistan strain, the first WPV1 cases in the African region since 2016. During 2022 and 2023, Afghanistan and Pakistan reported WPV1 cases. Circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses were detected in areas of the world where poliovirus had been eliminated. Cocirculation of more than one poliovirus type occurred in multiple countries.What are the implications for public health practice?The detections of poliovirus in areas where it had been previously eliminated underscore the threat of continued poliovirus spread to any area where the population is insufficiently vaccinated against poliovirus. 


Title: The re-emergence of wild poliovirus type 1 in Africa and the role of environmental surveillance in interrupting poliovirus transmission

1IntroductionGlobally there has been a reduction in the number of wild poliovirus (WPV) cases, with only six reported in 2021. However, the data could be misleading, because these cases were in war-ravaged Pakistan and Afghanistan, where reporting might be poor (WHO Africa, 2022a). Moreover, about 1 in 1000 WPV infections result in acute flaccid paralysis (AFP), meaning that most asymptomatic cases are not detected (Hamisu et al., 2022). Africa was declared free of indigenous WPV in August 2020, after Nigeria, which was formerly considered endemic for WPV type 1, achieved WPV-free status following 3 years of no reported cases (WHO, 2021; Ekwebelem et al., 2021). Poliovirus belongs to the Picornaviridae family and there are three types of WPV: type 2 and type 3 were eradicated in 2015 and 2019, respectively (CDC, 2020), while type 1 remains endemic in two countries, Pakistan and Afghanistan (WHO Africa, 2022a), due to people not having received all of the required polio vaccination doses to induce adequate immunity. This article discusses the re-emergence of WPV in Africa, the transmission and pathogenesis of WPV, and the role of environmental surveillance (ES).2Re-emergence of wild poliovirus type 1 in AfricaAlthough Africa was certified polio-free in 2020 by the African Regional Certification Commission after 3 years without a case (WHO, 2021), two cases of WPV type 1 have been reported in Africa this year. One of these cases occurred in Malawi in February 2022, the first WPV case in 30 years, and the other in Mozambique, where an outbreak was declared following a case in Tete Province in May 2022. Both cases were linked to the WPV type 1 strain from Pakistan. WPV type 1 is highly infectious and predominantly affects children younger than 5 years of age. Although the number of cases is low, one case is too many and constitutes an outbreak because the disease is incurable and can result in lifelong disability (WHO Africa, 2022b). A rare circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) is also affecting African countries with low immunization coverage, especially remote communities and those experiencing migration and conflict (Ming et al., 2020). WPV transmission in Africa is likely to be enabled by the continent's weak and fragile health systems, emanating from poor health governance, inadequate health infrastructure, a shortage of healthcare workers, insufficient essential medicines, and inadequate health funding (Okoroafor et al., 2022). In addition, the importation of polio infections through international travel could be substantial (Wilder-Smith et al., 2015). Conflict and migration could also contribute to the spread of the disease, as displaced people have the potential to carry the virus from one place to another. In addition, refugees are likely to be malnourished and under extreme stress, leading to low immunity against infectious diseases (Akil & Ahmad, 2016). Furthermore, refugees are usually accommodated in crowded camps with a poor water supply and inadequate sanitation, making it easy for the disease to spread (Akil & Ahmad, 2016).Conflict-affected areas in some African countries, such as Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan, Ethiopia, and Somalia, have not always achieved the desired immunization coverage. This is attributed to tense security conditions, damaged healthcare infrastructure, and depleted human resources, making it challenging to conduct immunization campaigns and provide outreach services (Grundy & Biggs, 2019). In places with poor sanitation and many unvaccinated children, the attenuated virus in the oral polio vaccine can genetically mutate. The mutating virus may recombine with other vaccine serotypes and enteroviruses, resulting in variants reacquiring the ability of the parent wild strains to cause paralytic disease. cVDPV type 2 outbreaks continue to occur due to low immunity to this cVDPV type. This low immunity results from insufficient routine immunization coverage caused by weak health infrastructure in affected countries, global vaccine supply constraints, regional migration patterns leading to missed children in vaccination campaigns, and low-quality outbreak response campaigns (Ming et al., 2020). Anecdotally, the recent emergence of outbreaks, including polio in Malawi and Mozambique and measles in the eastern highlands of Zimbabwe, have been attributed to the low routine vaccination coverage as a result of the disturbance of programs due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which has had devastating effects on health services, particularly immunization (UNICEF Zimbabwe, 2020). Following confirmation of the WPV cases in Malawi and Mozambique, a mass polio vaccination drive was launched with the aim of vaccinating more than 23 million children in five Southern African countries, namely Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and Tanzania (Santos, 2022).3Transmission and pathogenesis of poliovirusPoliovirus can spread through poor hand hygiene and contaminated food and water. The primary system for detecting poliovirus is case-based syndromic surveillance for AFP, with stool specimen confirmation (Rachlin et al., 2022). AFP surveillance comprises field surveillance and laboratory testing. In field surveillance, all cases of AFP should be notified to the health authorities, and two stool specimens should be collected from each case within 14 days of the onset of the paralysis. The stool samples should be collected 24–48 hours apart and transported on ice to reach the laboratory within 72 hours of collection. Cell culture is used in the laboratory to isolate the virus (Ntsama et al., 2021).The virus is transmitted mainly through fecal matter or less frequently through contaminated water or food. It then multiplies in the intestines (Rachlin et al., 2022). The poliovirus has an incubation period of between 2 and 35 days. The virus has a particular affinity for the cellular receptor CD135, which helps in its attachment and entry into cells, central nervous system. The cytopathic nature of the virus results in extensive damage to the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord, causing limb paralysis. The poliovirus may also spread to the posterior horn cells, the motor neurons of the thalamus, and the hypothalamus. Infected cells are phagocytosed by macrophages causing the degeneration of axons. This leads to widespread muscular atrophy, which causes flaccid paralysis. In extreme cases, respiratory paralysis may occur, leading to death. The poliovirus can cause paralysis within a few hours, especially in children under 5 years of age (Topley & Wilson, 2005). Vaccination remains the only means of preventing polio, and this can be achieved through the oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) and inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) (Global Polio Eradication Initiative, 2015).Quality AFP surveillance, laboratory, immunization, and geospatial data are crucial for monitoring the spread of WPV in communities. However, in Africa, the availability of quality data is hampered by poor collection and documentation and the inability to integrate these data sources for decision-making (Ntsama et al., 2021). AFP surveillance can be affected by pandemics such as COVID-19 and conflicts, resulting in the samples not being collected, or failing to reach the laboratory in time (Manyanga et al., 2021). The accuracy of stool specimen analysis depends on whether an accurate paralysis date was elicited, which may be challenging in cases where people delay seeking health services. Furthermore, some acute AFP cases may go undetected, especially in hard-to-access populations (Wilkinson et al., 2022). With such challenges, Africa may benefit from ES in its efforts to interrupt WPV transmission.4Role of environmental surveillance in interrupting poliovirus transmissionPoliovirus is shed in the stool for about 6 weeks during asymptomatic infection and may be detected in sewage or wastewater. Depending on the immediate conditions of the sewage or wastewater, excreted poliovirus particles remain infectious in the environment for different periods. Stool samples from AFP patients have been used to monitor the wild and mutated polioviruses (Asghar et al., 2014). ES is an additional method used to monitor the transmission of poliovirus and is more sensitive than AFP surveillance. ES permits a focused investigation of polio cases and forms a basis for further studies of the risk of poliovirus transmission in the community. However, the sensitivity of ES to detect polioviruses circulating in a specific population will depend on the nature of the sewage network, the appropriateness of the sampling site, and the quality of sample handling and laboratory processing. High sensitivity is crucial for the timely detection of outbreaks. ES involves testing sewage or wastewater samples that may contain polioviruses in human feces. ES relies on sewage collection using different methods such as bag-mediated filtration, composite sampling, virus concentration, and virus detection, usually through cell culture growth (Hamisu et al., 2022). ES can assist in identifying residual WPV transmission in endemic areas, primarily where WPV circulates among infected but asymptomatic individuals (O'Reilly et al., 2018).ES is also valuable in providing an early indication of new poliovirus importations into polio-free areas, as well as vaccine-derived poliovirus transmission, and for confirming the presence of vaccine-related viruses following vaccination campaigns involving OPV administration. ES helps link poliovirus isolates from unknown individuals to populations served by a standard wastewater collection system (Ndiaye et al., 2014). Despite the importance of ES in controlling and monitoring polioviruses, it only began in 2011 in Africa. Nigeria started ES in July 2011, followed by Kenya in May 2013. Other African countries that began ES in Africa in 2014 include Angola, Madagascar, Cameroon, Chad, Senegal, Niger, Burkina Faso, and Guinea. There are ongoing efforts to strengthen ES in Africa by initiating new sites, expanding old ones, and reviewing existing sites (Gumede et al., 2018). As of April 2022, all of the countries in the World Health Organization Africa Region except two have implemented ES . The number of samples from African countries with cVDPV detected by ES between January 2020 and April 2022 was about 14 500 (Rachlin et al., 2022).With outbreaks of WPV type 1 in Southern African countries such as Malawi and Mozambique, there is a need to strengthen polio surveillance systems in individual countries and the region. To detect potential future outbreaks in Africa, AFP surveillance and ES should be expanded. Following the case of WPV reported in Malawi in February 2022, the country managed to set up an ES system for poliovirus in 11 cities, including Lilongwe where the case was detected, by mid-April 2022 (Santos, 2022). While AFP surveillance is used to detect the physical symptoms of polio, including paralysis, ES is used to detect polioviruses in samples of wastewater and sewage. Suitable wastewater locations that will serve as ES sites should be identified, and responders at both the local and national level should be trained on collecting and packaging samples for transportation and analysis (Hamisu et al., 2022). The current Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) guidelines recommend establishing ES sites where there is a convergent sewage network and a catchment population of between 100 and 300 000 people . However, these guidelines may be challenging in African countries where some areas have informal drainage and poorly documented sewerage arrangements. Furthermore, the data on the size of the population in some catchment areas are either not readily available or unreliable (Global Polio Eradication Initiative, 2015). Since maintaining ES may be expensive, neighboring countries may need joint facilities. To increase ES sensitivity, the frequency of sampling will need to be increased. For ES to be more beneficial in polio eradication strategies, there should be an improvement in the timeliness and efficiency of detecting polioviruses in sewage samples. Laboratory and field-training curricula should be developed to ease and speed ES implementation in new areas. The effectiveness of ES should also be monitored and evaluated frequently (Wilkinson et al., 2022).The COVID-19 pandemic has reduced the sensitivity of AFP surveillance and ES. Therefore, strengthening AFP surveillance and ES is important in tracking progress in eradicating polio and documenting the absence of transmission. In addition, using both AFP and ES would improve the sensitivity of detecting WPV (Bigouette et al., 2021). Furthermore, using ES to monitor WPV circulation would also be beneficial, since it identifies isolates before they undergo a lot of genetic change and gain neurovirulence (Wilkinson et al., 2022).5ConclusionsAlthough there has been a reduction in the number of WPV cases globally, Africa has experienced a re-emergence of the disease. Malawi and Mozambique reported cases of WPV in early 2022. Conflict, migration, and low immunization coverage have been associated with cVDPV in the continent. Poliovirus invades the nervous system and may result in paralysis, other disabilities, or even death. Vaccination remains the only way of preventing polio. As poliovirus is shed in the stool during asymptomatic infection, ES can be used to investigate the risk of poliovirus transmission in communities. Although ES is more sensitive than AFP surveillance, its sensitivity depends on several factors.DeclarationsFundingThis study was not funded.Ethical approvalNot applicable.Conflict of interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.CRediT authorship contribution statementPhanuel Tawanda Gwinji: Writing – original draft. Godfrey Musuka: Writing – original draft. Grant Murewanhema: Writing – review & editing. Perseverance Moyo: Writing – review & editing. Enos Moyo: Writing – review & editing. Tafadzwa Dzinamarira: Writing – review & editing, Supervision.


Title: Genetic relationships and epidemiological links between wild type 1 poliovirus isolates in Pakistan and Afghanistan

BackgroundSince 1988 the world has come very close to eradicate polio through global polio eradication initiative [1]. The objective of this initiative was to interrupt wild PVs as soon as possible to achieve certification of Global Polio Eradication and to strengthen the routine immunization and surveillance as well. Since its inception, this initiative has made remarkable headway worldwide and number of cases of poliomyelitis dropped from 35,000 in 1988 to 1650 in 2008 [2]. However, the Indigenous transmission of wild poliovirus (WPV) has never been interrupted in Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, and Nigeria [3-5].The Polio Eradication Initiative was launched in Pakistan in 1994 with remarkable success, the number of confirmed cases declined from 1015 in 1997 to 32 wild polio cases including 19 WPV1 and 13 WPV 3 in only 18 of 120 districts of Pakistan [6,7]. In Afghanistan polio eradication activities started in 1997, [8] since then, significant progress have been made in both countries, wild type 2 poliovirus has been knocked out from Pakistan since 1997 and in Afghanistan 1999 [7,9].Despite intensified mass immunization activities, the two countries failed to interrupt poliovirus transmission. Persistent pockets of polio transmission along the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan are key epidemiological challenges due to insecurity and continued conflict [10,11].Poliovirus, the causative agent of poliomyelitis, is a human enterovirus and member of family Picornaviridae [12]. It is composed of single-stranded positive-sense RNA genome that is about 7500 nucleotides long [13]. There are three serotypes of poliovirus, PV1, PV2, and PV3; each with a slightly different outer capsid protein which define cellular receptor specificity and virus antigenicity. Therefore infection with one serotype does not prevent infection with another serotype [14,15]. PV1 is the most common type encountered in nature, however all three types are extremely infectious and can circulate independently [16,17]. Long excretion periods and low population immunity also support its rapid evolution and spread in humans [18-20]. The mutation rate in poliovirus is relatively high with a synonymous substitution rate of 1.0 × 10-2 substitutions/site/year [21,22] which creates a wide variety of mutants that are referred as different genetic strains or genotypes. Each serotype of wild poliovirus has many different genotypes that are distributed geographically and co-circulate worldwide [20,23,24]. Genetic diversity of wild polioviruses is determined by its genome sequencing that not only provide genetic relationship among wild Polioviruses as well as it helps to monitor the progress of Polio Eradication Program [25,26].In current study 111 wild type1 poliovirus isolates collected during 2005-2007 from Pakistan and Afghanistan were sequenced for complete VP1 gene to study their genetic diversity and to reveal the indigenous genotype in this region that would be helpful to track the transmission patterns in Pakistan and Afghanistan being a single epidemiological block.MethodsVirus isolation & identificationStool samples of children with AFP (Acute Flaccid Paralysis) and from apparently healthy contacts were collected as per WHO guidelines within 14 days of paralysis onset and were sent to WHO Regional Reference Laboratory for Polio Eradication Initiative, Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Islamabad, Pakistan.These samples were processed for isolation and identification of poliovirus by standard techniques as described in World Health Organization manual [27]. Briefly, 200ul of stool suspension extracted with chloroform was inoculated in culture tubes of two cell lines; RD cell line (derived from rabdomayosarcoma cells of humans) and L20B cell line (mouse lymphoma cells expressing the human poliovirus receptor) [28]. Positive samples showed a characteristic poliovirus cytopathic effect (CPE), i.e. rounded, refractive cells were serotyped by microneutralizaton using pools of antisera against polioviruses as recommended by WHO [27,29].Intratypic differentiationTo differentiate Sabin (SL1) and Wild type (NSL1) Polioviruses, PCR and ELISA were used according to WHO recommendations [30,31].Genomic sequencingThe viral RNA of wild type 1 polioviruses was extracted from 140 μl of infected tissue culture fluid using the QI Aamp viral RNA kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden) and subsequently stored in aliquots at-70°C. Reverse transcription Polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed in single step of 50 μl reaction volume. RT-PCR was used to amplify the entire VP1 capsid protein coding region of 906 nucleotides. The primers used in these reactions listed in (Table 1). PCR products were purified using the QIAquick PCR purification kit (QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden). The purified amplicons were further processed in cycle sequencing reaction using ABI Prism Big Dye Terminator cycle sequencing Ready Reaction kit (dGTP BigDye®, Applied Biosystems) with the overlapping primers (Table 1). The cycle sequencing program was 25 cycles of 20 s at 94°C, 15 s at 42°C and 4 mins at 60°C. After the completion of program, the reactions were cooled to 4°C. The purified product of sequencing reaction was suspended in deionized formamide and run in an automated Genetic Analyzer (ABI Prism, model 3100).Table 1Sequences of primers used in cDNA synthesis, PCR and sequencing in this studyPrimerLocation (nt)SequenceY72396-24185'-GGGTTTGTGTCAGCCTGTAATGA-3'Q83504-34855'-AAGAGGTCTCTRTTCCACAT-3PV1A *2954-29355'-TTIAIIGCRTGICCRTTRTT-3'PV4 S *2830-28495'-ACITAYAARGAYACIGTICA-3'* Inosine Containing Primeers, Use degenerate PCR ConditionSequence analysis softwaresSequence data was analyzed with the help of sequencher software (Gene Codes v. 4.5) which provides different methods to edit and align sequence fragments into larger structure (contigs). Phylogenetic analysis of wild type 1 polioviruses was carried out by using Molecular Evolutionary Genetic Analysis (MEGA v.4) [32]. Evolutionary distances were calculated using Kimura 2-parameter model [33] and phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbor-joining method [33,34].ResultsStudy isolatesA total of 25,965 and 4,485 AFP cases including contact cases from Pakistan and Afghanistan respectively were processed during 3 years time period and 111 wild type1 polioviruses were detected as shown in (Tables 2 and 3).Table 2Distribution of wild type1 polioviruses in Pakistan with total number of districts infected during 2005-2007200520062007MonthWild P1ProvinceNo. of infected districtsWild P1ProvinceNo. of infected districtsWild P1ProvinceNo. of infected districtsJanuary4BN, PB, SD4---2KP, SD2February---2KP, BN2---March2SD, BN2------April1PB11SD1---May3PB21BN11KP1June2PB, SD23KP, BN32KP2July2PB, SD23KP, PB2---August3KP.BN32KP, BN32SD2September2BN, SD23KP, SD32SD1October2PB, KP22KP2---November3PB, KP, BN32SD23KP, BN3December2BN, SD2---8KP, SD4Total (AFP+Contact)262519192015Table 3Distribution of wild type1 polioviruses in Afghanistan with total number of districts infected during 2005-2007200520062007MonthWild P1ProvinceNo. of infected districtsWild P1ProvinceNo. of infected districtsWild P1ProvinceNo. of infected districtsJanuary---1KANDHAR1---February---3KANDHAR2---March---2KANDHAR2---April---1KANDHAR12HEL+KAND2May---7FARAH+HEL+KAND+ORU+ZABOL51LAGHMAN1June---9FARAH+HEL+KAND+ORU101NANGARHAR1July---3KANDHAR4---August---------September2NAGARHAR13NANG+ORU3---October1HELMAND1--2---November1HELMAND11BAGHLAN1---December2HEL +KAND2---2HELMAND2Total (AFP+Contact)65333166Genetic comparison of wild type 1 polio isolatesThe sequences of VP1 gene for all 111 wild type1 poliovirus isolates were compared with each other to measure their genetic similarity by using Neighbor-Joining with Kimura 2 Parameter [33,35]. Based on pairwise distance comparison of closely related wild type 1 polioviruses, a dendogram of sequence relationship between isolates was constructed (Figure 1). In these comparisons, we followed imperative factor which defined that viruses with < 1% difference from Sabin vaccine virus are classified as Sabin-like; those with 1-15% difference as vaccine-derived polioviruses and those with > 15% difference as the wild virus [36]. The criteria for polioviruses genotypes has been defined as groups of strains that show more than 85% sequence homology in the VP1/2A region and a cluster is defined as a group of isolates showing ≥ 95% sequence similarity. A strain represents new cluster if it has > 5% nucleotide sequence divergence with previous ones [21,37].Figure 1A dendogram summarizing the sequence relationship among wild type1 polioviruses isolated in Pakistan 2005-2007 based on VP1 nucleotide sequences. Tree was constructed by Neighbor-Joining method using Kimura2-parameter model. Isolates are represented by epid no, date of onset and province codes. Codes were mentioned as PAK: Pakistan, AFG: Afghanistan, BN: Balochictan, KP: Khyber Pakhtoonkahw, PB: Punjab, SD: Sindh.As a result all 111 isolates were grouped into three major clusters A, B, & C respectively. Within these clusters, a definite pattern of virus distribution was observed representing lineages i.e., cluster A with six (a-f) corresponding lineages (Figure 2) and cluster B isolates have three (g-i) different lineages (Figure 3). While the cluster C has no further lineage because it has single wild type1 virus isolate. The true root of tree cannot be explicitly determined from the sequence data; however a potential mid root Pak 93-5218 was used to connect the sequences of all 3 years (2005-2007) isolates, represents a hypothetical genetic founder.Figure 2Dendogram of Cluster A summarizing six lineages (a-f) sequence relationship among wild type1 polioviruses isolated in Pakistan 2005-2007 based on VP1 nucleotide sequences. Tree was constructed by Neighbor-Joining method using Kimura2-parameter model. Isolates are represented by epid no, date of onset and province codes. Codes were mentioned as PAK: Pakistan, AFG: Afghanistan, BN: Balochictan, KP: Khyber Pakhtoonkahw, PB: Punjab, SD: Sindh.Figure 3Dendogram of Cluster B summarizing three lineages (g-i) sequence relationship among wild type1 polioviruses isolated in Pakistan, 2005-2007 based on VP1 nucleotide sequences. Tree was constructed by Neighbor-Joining method using Kimura2-parameter model. Isolates are indicated by epid no, date of onset and province codes. Codes were mentioned as PAK: Pakistan, AFG: Afghanistan, BN: Balochictan, KP: Khyber Pakhtoonkahw, PB: Punjab, SD: Sindh.Geographic distribution of wild type 1 polioviruses based on genetic dataCluster AThis cluster comprised of 81 wild poliovirus strains. The degree of divergence in VP1 gene sequence ranged from 0.6% to 18.7%. In this cluster the virus reservoirs were confined among the various geographical areas of both countries. Six genetic lineages a, b, c, d, e & f (Figure 2) prevail within the cluster A, some remained active over the 3 years while the others indicate successful termination through effluent control measures.Lineage 'a' (Figure 2) was observed with a higher proportion of wild polioviruses having diversified and vast geographical span in various districts of both countries (Figure 4). It also reveals that strains from same lineages remained circulating throughout 3 years time period. These strains were isolated in different districts during 2005 from Pakistan such as one district of Sindh; [Larkana (SD/51/05/007)] two districts of Balochistan; [Quetta (BN/11/05/021)] and [Pishin (BN/12/05/007)] one from district of KP [Tank (NW/63/05/006)]. On the other hand one of the isolate AFG/08/05/456 reported from District Kandhar in Afghanistan indicates the south-western circulation during 2005 between both countries. The virus descendants from the same lineage were introduced into different infected districts of Pakistan as well as Afghanistan during the next 2 years 2006 and 2007.Figure 4Geographical location of wild type1 polioviruses isolated during 2005-2007 from Pakistan-Afghanistan.A massive wild type 1 polio virus circulation was also observed in Afghanistan during 2006, such as one isolate AFG//06/06/494 from Province (Nangarhar) of district Rodat, one isolate AFG/01/06/562 from (Baghlan) district Puli Khumri, three isolates AFG/08/06/508,541,543 from (Helmand) district Bust and two isolates from this lineage AFG/08/06/461,532 from kandhar with districts SpinBoldak and Maywand. Similarly in Pakistan during same period, polio wild type 1 virus circulation was seen in Killa Abdullah and Quetta districts (Balochistan), Bajour district (KP) and Karachi Korangi district (Sindh) while in 2007, Kambar & Thatta (Sindh); Lasbela (Balochistan); Nowshera, South Waziristan & Khyber (KP) were infected. However, no strain of this lineage was observed during 2005-2007 in Punjab.The lineage 'b' (Figure 2) remained confined to Punjab province of Pakistan, infecting districts Dera Ghazi Khan and Khanewal in 2005, while in 2006 a single case of poliovirus paralysis was identified from district Muzaffargarh. At the same time, two viruses were also documented from Afghanistan (Kandhar and Zabul) that again supports an unseen intermediate region of virus circulation between two countries. During 2007 this lineage remained silent and no virus was detected from both countries.The circulation of lineage 'c' and lineage'd' (Figure 2) was observed in a very limited districts of Punjab and Sindh and also been found in only Helmand province of Afghanistan during 2005-2006 which is closely related to the virus isolated from Jaffarabad district of Balochistan province in Pakistan.The lineage 'e' (Figure 2) sustained between both countries showing diffused circulation within the Balochistan, Helmand and Kandhar with subsequent transmission to Sindh during 2006 and 2007. However the descendents of this lineage are very important for Afghanistan as most of the wild type 1 polio isolates showing wide spread circulation in Kandhar, Oruzgan, Helmand and Farah during 2006.It was also evident that adverse infection has been persisted in Killa Abdullah district of Balochistan for the three consecutive years 2005-2007 contributing to the transmission of lineage 'f' (Figure 2) during 2005 and later on spread to Dera Ismael Khan district of KP.None of the AFP case during the year 2007 matched with this lineage giving a positive indication of its successful disruption.Cluster BThis cluster contained three lineages g, h, and i (Figure 3) each one with a peculiar confined pattern of circulation in Afghanistan and Pakistan. The sequence similarity of cluster B in VP1 gene ranged from 0.1% to 9.1%. The isolates under lineage 'g' (Figure 3) has a broad geographical circulation among three provinces Punjab, Sindh and Balochistan during 2005 with no further onward transmission during 2006 and 2007.The lineage 'h' (Figure 3) remained confined only to KP province circulating in two districts Peshawar and Bajour during 2005. With the undetected circulation during 2006, the same lineage re-appeared in Peshawar during 2007 (NW/30/07/058) sharing 2.8% genetic similarity with the isolate (NW/30/05/098) reported in 2005. This isolate also showed maximum VP1 homology with two Afghanistan isolates AFG/06/07/578 (2.8%) and AFG/06/07/568 (2.9%) from district Nangarhar and Laghman reflecting the cessation of this lineage in Pakistan but sharing the same infection with Afghanistan.The genetic relationship among the viruses categorized under lineage 'i' (Figure 3) revealed its prevalence in four districts of Pakistan (Khyber, North Waziristan, Bannu and Lakki Marwat) as well as Nangarhar district of Afghanistan during 2005. But during 2006, it was restricted in district Mardan only. In 2007, no infection caused by viruses from this lineage except only one wild type1 poliovirus isolate; a case of international public health concern (NW/24/07/800) of importation to Australia by 22 years adult who acquired poliovirus infection during his visit to Swat district [38].Cluster CThis cluster comprised only one isolate from district Sanghar (Sindh) which has sequence similarity with the 2004 wild type 1 polioviruses (Figure 5). The correlation proximity of SD/32/05/001 isolate revealed a continuous unchecked low level of circulation in this district for many previous years. However, no subsequent viruses have been reported from this group during 2006-2007 (Figure 1).Figure 5Dendogram of Cluster C summarizing sequence relationship among wild type1 polioviruses isolated in Pakistan 2004-2007 based on VP1 nucleotide sequences. Tree was constructed by Neighbor-Joining method using Kimura2-parameter model. Isolates are indicated by epid no and province codes. Codes were mentioned as PAK: Pakistan, AFG: Afghanistan, BN: Balochictan, KP: Khyber Pakhtoonkahw, PB: Punjab, SD: Sindh.Orphan lineagesThe covert circulations of 11 wild orphan polioviruses (isolates with ≥ 2% sequence diversity with their closely related isolate) have been observed in several districts/provinces of both countries (Table 4). During 2005, seven orphan lineages were detected mainly from all four provinces of Pakistan. No such orphan virus has been detected during the same period from AFG. However, in 2006 two orphan lineages detected in D.I. Khan district of Pakistan and Kandhar province from Afghanistan were grouped in Cluster A. Only two orphan viruses have been detected during 2007, one from thatta district of Sindh and second from Khyber agency in KP.Table 4Orphan Poliovirus isolates with equal to or more than 2% nucleotide sequence divergence from their parent isolate reported during 2005-2007 in PakistanIsolate nameDistrict/provinceYear% DivergenceNW/63/05/006 (2608)Tank/KP20052.1%NW/30/05/001 (081)Peshawar/KP20053.2%NW/30/05/098 (5373)Peshawar/KP20052.1%BN/14/05/015 (5805)K.Abdulah/Balochistan20052.3%BN/24/05/003 (3845)Musakhel/Balochistan20052.8%SD/51/05/037 (4937)Larkana/Sindh20052.2%PB/61/05/005 (225)Multan/Punjab20052.8%NW/60/06/002 (743)D.I.Khan/KP20062.3%AFG/08/06/463 (125)Kandhar20062.8%SD/22/07/019 (4026)Thatta/Sindh20072.8%NW/34/07/036 (6212)Khyber/KP20072.4%The isolate name indicates (Province code/District code/Year of paralysis onset/Serial No. of case from the same district)DiscussionThe data presented here illustrates molecular characterization of wild type 1 polioviruses endemic in Pakistan and Afghanistan during last 3 years, 2005-2007. The sequence of VP1 gene was employed to determine the epidemiological links among the wild type 1 polioviruses circulating across the both countries. The VP1 gene comprised of 906 nucleotide bases with sufficient heterogeneous motifs that clearly discriminate between various genotypes. In 1993 Huovilianen et al., has been detected multiple genotypes of wild type 1 polioviruses in Karachi district of Sindh province in Pakistan [39]. However, in Pakistan and Afghanistan only one genotype (SOAS, South Asian) has been endemic for many previous years in contrast to African countries where endemicity of multiple genotypes have been reported [40,41].Despite this monophyletic character, distinctive reservoirs of wild type 1 polioviruses have been observed that confined to specific geographic regions in both countries. Based on sequence diversity of ≤ 5% among the VP1 nucleotide sequence, the wild type 1 polioviruses have been classified into certain groups called 'clusters'. A phylogenetic tree was reconstructed on the genetic relationship of VP1 gene sequence for the wild polioviruses detected during the 3 year period which clearly displayed the distribution of isolates among three clusters (A, B, C) (Figure 2). Within each clusters a definite pattern of virus distribution was found, representing a different lineage or transmission route in different geographic regions of Pakistan and Afghanistan that also highlights the epidemiological links during their evolution from 2005 to 007 time intervals.The molecular data obtained from this study explicitly reveals the transmission pattern of wild type 1 polioviruses circulation in Pakistan and Afghanistan as a successful tool to monitor the AFP surveillance as well as to formulate the mop-up immunization activities established as a reference standard policy to interrupt the wild poliovirus multiplicity within population. The underlying factors posing a incessant threat to achieve the polio-free country status are the areas with poor security and hard to reach children communities leaving a number of children unimmunized despite a number of supplementary immunization campaigns in the country. Furthermore, parallel circulation of some lineages/multiple chains among both countries highlights the ongoing continuous presence of wild polioviruses.The factors behind this worrisome situation are attributed to the security concerns and also to the unchecked cross-border movement as well. The similar concern has already been shown by Kew., et al. [26]. However, the synchronized immunization activities across the border will be helpful to stop the importation of wild polioviruses from each side of the border. Because immunization has been proved to be a successful approach for elimination of poliomyelitis by locating and maintaining a high level of immunity in children less than 5 years of age. Therefore extended use of type 1 monovalent oral poliovirus vaccine (mOPV1) and type 3 monovalent oral poliovirus vaccine (mOPV3) selected in areas of Pakistan and Afghanistan was adopt to knockdown the virus in 2005 and 2007 respectively [42-44]. But transmission of virus could not be stopped in Khyber, South Waziristan, and the areas due to war and armed conflict which destroyed almost all public health infrastructures and health-care workers could not safely deliver vaccine and active surveillance was very difficult to carry out.Current molecular data also explores the evolutionary pattern of wild type 1 poliovirus isolates in relation to their ancestral descent. Based on the 1% (in vivo) nucleotide evolutionary rate of VP1 gene, any wild poliovirus isolate indicating equal to or more than 2% nucleotide sequence divergence from its ancestor is recognised as an "orphan virus" [45]. Findings of this study also put emphasis on some silent multiple independent chains of transmission (orphan lineages) over a wide geographical areas involving cross-border population movement between Pakistan and Afghanistan. Regardless of the view that orphan viruses reflect some collapse of surveillance even with superfluous efforts reporting or long term circulation without causing overt cases of polio and gaps in immunization, the efforts of health care personnel working towards the Polio Eradication Initiative (PEI) under the prevalent difficult situation must be acknowledged.Moreover, epidemiological records and results of this study clearly highlights that transmission of wild type 1 polioviruses is still uncontrolled. However, significant progress has been made to localize the wild poliovirus. The number of infected districts has been significantly decreased from 2005 to 2007 (Table 2) in both countries despite of war conflicts, poor access and a number of other reasons. In order to achieve polio free status, interruption of wild poliovirus transmission is the key target. Pakistan is under strict apprehension of policy implementation constrains required for high level population immunity. A concomitant locally appropriate communications and social mobilization strategy must be pursued to improve public awareness for effective oral polio vaccine coverage to susceptible population to ensure substantial progress.ConclusionIn conclusion, this study provides requisite support to find out the locations, the extent of wild type1 poliovirus circulation in endemic areas, identify reservoir communities sustaining wild poliovirus endemicity, genetic relationships among these isolates and the source of imported wild poliovirus in Pakistan and Afghanistan. Moreover these analyses are valuable for monitoring the AFP surveillance and to target supplementary immunization activities with oral polio vaccine in order to interrupt chains of virus transmission.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsMA participated in the study conception and design, laboratory analysis, data collection, overall coordination, drafted manuscript; SS participated in the study conception and design and laboratory analysis (Molecular Analysis); MMA contributed in write-up, overall coordination; SaS contributed in data collection; AK participated in laboratory work (Virology testing); SZ participated in the study conception and design and all study was performed under his supervision. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Title: The differential impact of oral poliovirus vaccine formulation choices on serotype-specific population immunity to poliovirus transmission

BackgroundNational immunization programs and the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) continue to manage risks associated with the polio endgame, including the risks of using oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV) to end all transmission of wild polioviruses (WPVs). The GPEI currently plans to globally-coordinate cessation of all serotype-2 containing OPV (i.e., OPV2 cessation) according to an aggressive timeline with a target date of April 2016 [1]. Prior modeling studies demonstrated the need for sufficient supplemental immunization activities (SIAs) with OPV prior to globally-coordinated OPV cessation to prevent the creation of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) outbreaks after OPV cessation [2–6]. The planned addition of a single dose of inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV) given at the time of the third trivalent (tOPV) dose of routine immunization (RI) for countries currently using OPV-only for immunization [1] appears to offer only marginal benefits for areas most at risk of cVDPVs after OPV cessation [3]. While clinical trials suggest that IPV boosts intestinal immunity more than OPV in individuals with prior immunity induced by a live poliovirus (LPV, i.e., WPV, OPV, cVDPV, or any OPV-related viruses) [7, 8], models consistent with this observation at the individual level show a minimal impact of IPV on immunity to poliovirus transmission at the population level [3, 5, 6]. This occurs because while IPV protects individual vaccine recipients from developing paralysis if they become infected with an LPV, IPV use leads to relatively little impact on fecal-oral poliovirus transmission in previously susceptible individuals and therefore in populations with conditions conducive to fecal-oral poliovirus transmission. Conditions associated with relatively higher-income countries (i.e., low population density, good hygiene, relatively greater role of oropharyngeal transmission) [9] increase the relative impact of IPV on population immunity to poliovirus transmission, but the minimal conditions for IPV to provide sufficient population immunity to prevent poliovirus transmission remain uncertain. The recent experience with WPV1 transmission in Israel despite high RI coverage with IPV provided valuable context [10].Following a shift in GPEI policy that began in the mid-2000s from exclusive use of tOPV to the use of monovalent OPV (mOPV) in SIAs in endemic countries with the expectation that using mOPV serotype 1 (mOPV1) would soon stop wild poliovirus (WPV) serotype 1 (WPV1) transmission in endemic areas [11], OPV formulation vaccine choices for SIAs became an important factor in the overall population immunity to transmission for each of the three poliovirus serotypes. The GPEI and some statistical analyses [12, 13] define population immunity as vaccine-induced immunity to disease among children under 5 years of age with non-polio acute flaccid paralysis. This characterization of population immunity to disease does not account for immunity derived from exposure to LPVs in the environment and it ignores the contributions to transmission of individuals of all ages immune to disease who can still participate in asymptomatic transmission [14]. The resulting vaccine choices for SIAs focus on the premise that competition between serotypes in tOPV in individuals leads to “vaccine failure” for serotypes 1 and 3 due to relatively lower take rates for individuals receiving tOPV than for those receiving mOPV [11, 13, 15]. In contrast with this individual vaccine-induced characterization of population immunity, our characterization of population immunity to poliovirus transmission uses a dynamic disease model to characterize immunity to poliovirus transmission of all three serotypes for all individuals in the entire population based on their exposure history to vaccines and circulating LPVs and focuses on the level of population immunity needed to stop viral transmission [9, 14].Despite high expectations, the single serotype (mOPV1) strategy failed to achieve WPV1 interruption and led to outbreaks with serotype 3 WPV (WPV3), which then motivated the introduction of serotype 3 monovalent OPV (mOPV3) followed by bivalent OPV (bOPV, serotypes 1 and 3) for SIAs. Recent modeling suggested that the strategy pursued (i.e., the introduction of mOPVs then bOPV) delayed the interruption of WPVs in India [5]. Continued failures to achieve and maintain high population immunity to transmission delay eradication and allow WPV importations and cVDPV emergences and importations to cause outbreaks [16]. Despite the somewhat lower relative take rates for serotypes 1 and 3 characterized as “vaccine failure” for tOPV, the experience and models of the last endemic areas in which clusters of under-vaccinated children repeatedly miss immunizations and sustain WPV transmission suggests that “failure to vaccinate” represents the fundamental problem [4–6, 17], confirmed for Nigeria recently by a subsequent independent analysis [18]. For example, despite the large numbers of SIAs conducted each year in northwest Nigeria, between 2010 and 2014, 47 % (121/256) of all confirmed WPV1, WPV3, and cVDPV2 cases reported receipt of 2 OPV doses or fewer, which may include some heterotypic OPV doses (e.g., bOPV doses received by patients paralyzed by cVDPV2).Modeling particularly indicates the need for more tOPV SIAs to prevent serotype 2 cVDPV (cVDPV2) outbreaks after OPV2 cessation [4]. The GPEI continues to focus on achieving and ensuring interruption of WPV1 transmission and making vaccine choices that prioritize the use of bOPV for SIAs, nominally to increase population immunity to disease for serotype 1, despite an aggressive timeline for OPV2 cessation. However, achieving and maintaining polio eradication requires permanently stopping and preventing transmission, which requires a focus on population immunity to transmission, not a focus on population immunity to disease. This paper aims to explore the trade-offs in population immunity to transmission for the three poliovirus serotypes for tOPV or bOPV use in SIAs.MethodsWe use an existing differential equation-based dynamic poliovirus transmission and OPV evolution model [9] (i.e., the DEB model) to characterize the impacts of different vaccine choices for SIAs in northwest Nigeria [4, 6, 17, 19] and an integrated global model of long-term poliovirus risk management (i.e., the global model) [20] to explore the impacts of tOPV vs. bOPV vaccine choices on global population immunity to poliovirus transmission and cVDPV risks. Briefly, the DEB model dynamically tracks individuals as they move between immunity states because they acquire immunity from maternal antibodies, successful IPV vaccination, successful OPV vaccination or infection due to contact with an OPV vaccine recipient, or other LPV exposure, and lose immunity in the absence of further vaccinations or infections due to waning. We define successful vaccination as receipt of a vaccine that “takes” (i.e., typically approximated by seroconversion as measured in clinical trials), with take rates that depend on the vaccine and setting. We determined situation-specific average per-dose take rates for all available poliovirus vaccines by model calibration within ranges from the literature [9, 21]. In some cases, this included adjustments to account for study limitations (e.g., different settings and vaccines used in clinical trials than in the modeled population, possible interference with maternal antibodies or secondary OPV infections with study results). In the DEB model, cVDPVs emerge when population immunity to transmission becomes so low that OPV-related viruses introduced through RI or SIAs can sustain transmission in the population and evolve to successive reversion stages with increasingly high basic reproduction numbers (R0 values) and paralysis-to-infection ratios (PIRs). When the prevalence in the last of 20 reversion stages chosen to adequately represent the OPV evolution process [9, 22] exceeds a given transmission threshold, then fully-reverted VDPVs with assumed equal R0 and PIR as homotypic WPV circulate in the population and a cVDPV outbreak can occur.We characterize population immunity to poliovirus transmission in two different but related ways [4, 6]. The mixing-adjusted effective immunity proportion (EIPM) represents the proportion of immune individuals in a population, weighted by the relative potential contribution to transmission for their immunity state and the extent to which they mix with other age groups or connected subpopulations. If EIPM remains above its threshold EIP* = 1/(1-R0), then transmission eventually stops, while for EIPM < EIP* transmission can continue and imported viruses can establish transmission. However, because EIP* depends on R0, which changes over time and varies by serotype and setting, for this analysis we focus on the mixing-adjusted net reproduction number (Rn), which equals R0 × (1-EIP) and represents the average number of secondary infections generated by a single infectious individual, taking into account mixing between age groups and subpopulations and the relative potential contribution to transmission of all individuals in the population. The threshold (Rn*) equals 1 for any R0, serotype, setting, or point in time [4, 19], such that if Rn > 1, then each new infection generates at least one new infection and transmission of existing or imported poliovirus can continue, but if Rn < 1 for a long enough period of time then transmission eventually dies out.To explore SIA vaccine choices in the northwest Nigeria DEB model, we adopt all inputs from the most recent model update [4, 19]. This includes assumed continuation of the status quo of 9 annual SIAs until globally-coordinated cessation of serotype 1 and serotype 3-containing OPV (OPV13 cessation) on April 1, 2019. The model further assumes OPV2 cessation on April 1, 2016, which switches RI and SIAs from tOPV to bOPV. Given very low RI coverage (i.e., of 26.4 %, 22.2 %, 18.1 %, and 13.9 % with dose 0 (i.e., birth), 1, 2, and 3, respectively as of 2013) [23], uncertainty about timing, and scale of IPV use going forward, we previously demonstrated very limited impact of IPV on population immunity and cVDPV risks in settings like northwest Nigeria [3, 5, 6]. Consequently, we do not include IPV use in the northwest Nigeria DEB model, although Nigeria began introducing it in SIAs in some limited areas. We report Rn as a function of time for different options that use tOPV for between 0 and 9 of the annual SIAs between January 1, 2015 and OPV2 cessation. To spread out the impact of tOPV SIAs over the year while concentrating as many tOPV SIAs as possible in the months before OPV2 cessation on April 1, 2016, we change successive SIAs from bOPV to tOPV in the following order: March, November, August, January, May, December, June, September, April. For example, the option of 3 annual tOPV SIAs implies tOPV use during the March, November, and August SIAs.The global model divides the world into 710 subpopulations of approximately 10 million people in 2013 and uses the DEB model to track infections and population immunity to transmission in each subpopulation [20]. The global model groups each subpopulation into 9 global regions consisting of variable numbers of epidemiological blocks that in turn consist of 10 subpopulations of equal size to simulate random exportations from subpopulations to other subpopulations in the same block (i.e., representing 96 % of all exportations) or other blocks (i.e., representing 4 % of all exportations, including 3.5 % within the same region and 0.5 % elsewhere). As in the DEB model, cVDPVs can emerge endogenously if population immunity to transmission becomes low enough as long as OPV virus from immunization (including RI) or importations transmit in any subpopulation. The global model characterizes other long-term risks after OPV cessation stochastically, but given our focus on short term population immunity to transmission we ignore those risks in this analysis. The subpopulations in the global model reflect conditions related to poliovirus transmission and vaccination similar to real conditions that exist throughout the world and consistent with available global data [24], but at a more abstract level amenable to our global mixing characterization and simplification of the complex RI and SIA histories in each country [9, 20, 21]. The global model includes 4 blocks with conditions like the last 4 global reservoirs of indigenous WPV1 and WPV3 transmission, which each include an under-vaccinated subpopulation. These 4 subpopulations sustain WPV1 and WPV3 the longest in the model, and because of their very low RI coverage and poor SIA quality they also represent the highest risk areas of cVDPV emergence after OPV cessation.With respect to SIAs, the global model assumes that blocks increase the annual SIA frequency by one per year each year until they eliminate all indigenous WPV transmission. After elimination of all indigenous WPVs from a block and in the absence of any detected outbreaks, subpopulations conduct between 0 and 6 annual preventive SIAs, depending on their RI coverage with 3 or more non-birth doses (POL3) and R0 [20]. For reference, Table 1 provides the specific SIA schedule assumptions. The global model assumes that between 2010 and January 1, 2015, 2–5 annual SIAs in populations that conduct more than 1 annual SIA use bOPV and the remainder use tOPV (Table 1). We assume tOPV intensification starts on January 1, 2015 and switches between 1 and 2 annual SIAs from bOPV to tOPV until OPV2 cessation. We consider the implications of tOPV intensification on all three serotypes by reporting the Rn of all three serotypes at the time of OPV2 cessation with or without tOPV intensification.Table 1Planned, preventive (pSIA) SIA schedules used in the global model before and after OPV2 cessation in OPV-using blocks after interruption of indigenous wild poliovirus transmission in each block (based on Duintjer Tebbens et al. (2015) [20])Time periodRI coverage (POL3)SIA schedule showing: vaccine (day(s) of year)Before tOPV intensification on January 1, 20150.05 or 0.1tOPV (0, 40); bOPV (80, 140, 240, 300)0.3tOPV (0, 40); bOPV (80, 140, 240)0.6 (R0 ≤ 10)tOPV (0); bOPV (60, 120)0.6 (R0 > 10)tOPV (0, 40); bOPV (80, 140, 240)0.9tOPV (0)0.98 (R0 ≤ 10)No SIAs0.98 (R0 > 10)tOPV (0)During tOPV intensification (January 1, 2015 to April 1, 2016)0.05 or 0.1tOPV (0, 40, 80, 300); bOPV (140, 240)0.3tOPV (0, 40, 80); bOPV (140, 240)0.6 (R0 ≤ 10)tOPV (0, 60); bOPV (120)0.6 (R0 > 10)tOPV (0, 40, 80); bOPV (140, 240)0.9tOPV (0)0.98 (R0 ≤ 10)No SIAs0.98 (R0 > 10)tOPV (0)After tOPV intensification (April 1, 2016 to OPV13 cessation)0.05 or 0.1bOPV (0, 40, 80, 140, 240, 300)0.3bOPV (0, 40, 80, 140, 240)0.6 (R0 ≤ 10)bOPV (0, 60, 120)0.6 (R0 > 10)bOPV (0, 40, 80, 140, 240)0.9bOPV (0)0.98 (R0 ≤ 10)No SIAs0.98 (R0 > 10)bOPV (0)We further explore the option of simultaneously coordinating cessation of all 3 OPV serotypes (OPV123 cessation) on April 1, 2019. Specifically, we compare the Rn of each of three serotypes on April 1, 2019 for an option of continued tOPV intensification (i.e., continued use of both tOPV and bOPV for SIAs, as specified in Table 1) until OPV123 cessation with the corresponding Rn for an option of exclusive tOPV use for RI and SIAs from January 1, 2017 until OPV123 cessation. We focus the comparison on 165 subpopulations affected by tOPV intensification, which includes all subpopulations with a POL3 of less than 0.9. For all options, the global model assumes that subpopulations that used OPV-only as of 2013 add a single IPV dose co-administered with the third non-birth OPV RI dose on January 1, 2015, consistent with the current plan [1].Table 2 summarizes our assumed take rates in the DEB and global models along with data from the only published clinical trials that directly compared current bOPV and tOPV vaccines [25, 26]. The clinical trial conducted in three sites in Central and Southern India reports seroconversion rates for all three serotypes among newborn children vaccinated with tOPV or bOPV at birth and again at 30 days [25]. Table 2 reports average per-dose take rates for tOPV and bOPV, calculated from the cumulative seroconversion rates after 2 doses (CS2) as 1-(1-CS2)1/2. The seroconversion rate observed for serotype 2 in the bOPV arm of the trial may reflect a small heterologous serological response, or more likely represents secondary exposure to serotype 2 OPV virus given the intensity OPV exposure in India [27]. The study results translate into a relative reduction of approximately 35 % in the average per-dose individual take rate for tOPV compared to bOPV after two doses (both administered at an age of some partially reduced susceptibility due to maternal antibodies) [28]. However, a recent study that compared bOPV, mOPV1, and tOPV in different schedules in Bangladesh suggests that the difference becomes smaller with subsequent doses, because serotype 2-interference with serotype 1 and 3 seroconversion decreases as individuals become better protected to serotype 2 [26]. For a standard schedule of three doses at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age, the reduction in the average per-dose individual seroconversion rates for serotypes 1 and 3 (calculated from the cumulative seroconversion rates after 3 doses (CS3) assuming 1-(1-CS3)1/3) amounted to only approximately 20 % for tOPV compared to bOPV. Figure 1 summarizes the results from a 1989 Brazil tOPV seroconversion study [29] that confirms that few children seroconvert to serotypes 1 and 3 after the first dose, while more than half seroconvert to serotype 2 (Fig. 1a). However, once the majority of children acquire immunity to serotype 2 after the first dose, serotype interference diminishes, resulting in increased serotype 1 and 3 seroconversion for subsequent doses. Consequently, the differences in cumulative seroconversion rates between serotype 3 and serotype 2 decrease with each successive dose, and those between serotype 1 and serotype 2 almost disappear altogether after 4 doses (Fig. 1b). While the numerical results will differ in places other than Brazil due to environmental and other factors [30], we should similarly expect increased serotype 1 and 3 seroconversion with successive tOPV doses as children develop serotype 2 immunity. This means that for populations, which include a mixture of individuals with different ages and immunization and exposure histories, assumptions about the overall take rate of the different serotypes must recognize that only a small fraction of tOPV SIA recipients did not previously seroconvert to serotype 2. Thus, the receipt of bOPV as a first dose instead of tOPV as a first dose for bOPV SIAs only leads to serotype 1 or 3 seroconversion instead of serotype 2 seroconversion for a relatively small fraction of the population.Table 2Serotype-specific average per-dose take rates for tOPV and bOPV determined in the clinical trials that compared both vaccines, and assumed in the DEB and global modelsSettingtOPV serotypebOPV serotype123123Clinical trialsCentral and Southern India [25], 2 doses at 0 and 30 days of age0.390.700.310.620.060.49Bangladesh [26], 3-doses at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age)0.570.650.510.700.060.65Calibrated DEB model within ranges from literature [17, 21]Northwest Nigeria [4, 6, 9, 17, 19]0.450.700.350.5400.54Northern India [5, 9, 17, 19]0.350.600.270.4200.42Global model assumptions based on calibrated DEB model [20]Lowest tier (e.g., Northern India)0.350.600.270.4200.42Second tier (e.g., Northern Pakistan)0.400.650.320.5000.50Third tier (e.g., Northwest Nigeria)0.450.700.350.5400.54Fourth tier (e.g., Brazil)0.500.720.400.6000.60Fifth tier (e.g., Philippines, Turkey)0.550.730.450.7000.70Sixth tier (e.g., Russia, middle-income China)0.600.740.500.7500.75Seventh tier (e.g., upper-income China, Israel)0.650.750.550.8000.80Fig. 1tOPV response to the three serotypes, by number of doses, in a clinical trial in Brazil, 1989[30]. a Marginal seroconversion rates, defined as the incremental number of children seroconverting after each dose, divided by the number of children that did not yet seroconvert prior to the dose. b Relative cumulative tOPV seroconversion rates, defined as cumulative seroconversion rate for the given serotype after the given number of doses, divided by cumulative seroconversion rate for serotype 2 after the same number of dosesTaking into account the average effect on take of multiple tOPV doses, our model assumes closer average per-dose take rates for serotypes 1 and 3 bOPV and tOPV than observed after 2 doses for very young children in the controlled trial in India (Table 2) [25], but similar relative average per-dose take rates as found in Bangladesh after 3 bOPV vs. tOPV doses [26]. For the northwest Nigeria DEB model, the estimates in Table 2 produce serotype-specific incidence results consistent with the evidence [4, 6, 9, 17, 19]. For the integrated global model, we extrapolated from the northwest Nigeria model and models from other situations, including northern India [5, 9, 17, 19], to assign take rate tiers for different blocks. To explore the impact of differences between tOPV and bOPV serotype 1 and 3 takes rates as large as reported after 2 doses in the clinical trial in India [25], we perform a sensitivity analysis that uses the observed average per-dose rates as estimated from these data in Table 2 instead of our calibrated model estimates.ResultsFigure 2 shows population immunity to transmission of each serotype between 2015 and 2018 for different SIA vaccine choices in the northwest Nigeria model [4, 6, 9, 17, 19]. Higher Rn values indicate more potential transmission per new infection and they correspond to lower population immunity (i.e., higher risk of transmission). Despite the assumed lower average per-dose serotype 1 and 3 take rates for tOPV compared to bOPV (Table 2), the high number of SIAs containing serotype 1 and 3 OPV results in very similar population immunity to transmission for serotype 1 and 3 regardless of the number of tOPV and bOPV SIAs (note the similarity of all curves Fig. 1a, c). Consequently, as long as northwest Nigeria maintains the same quality and frequency of SIAs [4], serotype 1 and 3 population immunity to transmission remain far enough below the threshold to minimize the risk of re-established WPV transmission from imported WPV or continued undetected WPV circulation [19], regardless of the proportion of the SIAs using tOPV or bOPV. In contrast, given that bOPV does not provide any immunity against serotype 2, the number of tOPV SIAs greatly influences population immunity to serotype 2 poliovirus transmission (Fig. 1b). Specifically, for 3 or fewer annual tOPV SIAs between January 1, 2015 and the time of planned OPV2 cessation, population immunity to transmission at the time of OPV2 cessation does not become high enough to prevent cVDPV2 emergence after OPV2 cessation and/or to interrupt cVDPV2 transmission before OPV2 cessation. Due to the cVDPV2 outbreak that occurs with 3 or fewer annual tOPV SIAs, during 2017 the resulting viral circulation leads Rn to decrease (i.e., population immunity to transmission increases due to cVDPV2 transmission) despite no OPV2 use, which represents a failure associated with OPV2 cessation that will require outbreak response. With 4 or more annual tOPV SIAs, Rn continues to increase after OPV2 cessation because OPV2 use stops and all serotype 2 LPV transmission dies out during 2016. Prevention of cVDPV2s clearly represents the better option for achieving high population immunity to transmission for serotype 2 from a health perspective and in the context of managing global cVDPV2 risks, and this analysis demonstrates that tOPV vs. bOPV vaccine choices matter.Fig. 2Population immunity to transmission in northwest Nigeria for all 3 serotypes and different annual numbers of bOPV and tOPV SIAs. a Population immunity to serotype 1 poliovirus transmission. b Population immunity to serotype 2 poliovirus transmission. c Population immunity to serotype 3 poliovirus transmissionFigure 3 shows the population immunity results if the difference between average per-dose tOPV and bOPV take rates for serotypes 1 and 3 become as large as observed in the clinical trial in India after 2 doses (Table 2), thus assuming the entire population behaves like the limited population in the trial [25]. For serotype 2, the results do not change at all, because the serotype 2 tOPV take rate remains unchanged (Fig. 3b). For serotypes 1 and 3, the gap between the population immunity to transmission curves during 2015 and 2016 in Fig. 3a, c increases somewhat compared to those in Fig. 2a, c. However, the difference in population immunity to transmission remains significantly smaller than for serotype 2. Moreover, population immunity to transmission remains high enough to prevent re-established WPV1 or WPV3 transmission during 2015 and 2016. After OPV2 cessation, the curves become similar again due to bOPV-only use for all options, which prevent cVDPVs of serotypes 1 and 3 after OPV13 cessation (not shown).Fig. 3Same model result as in Fig. 2, but with tOPV and bOPV take rates calculated directly from cumulative 2-dose seroconversion estimates reported by Sutter et al. (2010)[27] (see Table 1). a Population immunity to serotype 1 poliovirus transmission. b Population immunity to serotype 2 poliovirus transmission. c Population immunity to serotype 3 poliovirus transmissionFigure 4 shows the results for different SIA vaccine choices in the global model [20]. The results confirm the observations from northwest Nigeria on a global scale. Comparison of options with more tOPV use to options with more bOPV use until OPV2 cessation (i.e., No tOPV intensification vs. tOPV intensification) shows minimal impacts on population immunity to transmission of OPV of serotypes 1 and 3, with the Rn values in all subpopulations remaining very close to the line indicating no difference between the two policies (Fig. 4a). However, for OPV serotype 2, Fig. 4a shows higher Rn values in all subpopulations without tOPV intensification, implying a higher risk of cVDPV2 outbreaks after OPV2 cessation. Without tOPV intensification, although the Rn values remain below 1 at OPV2 cessation, they increase after OPV2 cessation, allowing transmission of increasingly more transmissible OPV-related viruses. This leads to cVDPV2 outbreaks after OPV2 cessation in the global model without tOPV intensification that do not occur with tOPV intensification [20]. Fig. 4b shows that even exclusive tOPV use for all SIAs does not significantly reduce population immunity to transmission of OPV serotypes 1 and 3, while it results in a further marginal increase in population immunity to transmission of OPV serotype 2 compared to continued tOPV intensification. Figure 4b assumes hypothetical simultaneous cessation of all 3 OPV serotypes (i.e., OPV123 cessation) in 2019 and does not lead to cVDPV outbreaks of any type after OPV123 cessation for either of the options. The absence of cVDPV1 and cVDPV3 outbreaks relates to the relatively lower R0 values for OPV serotypes 1 and 3 and their slower evolution to fully-reverted VDPVs [9, 17, 22], which results in faster die-out of serotypes 1 and 3 OPV-related viruses compared to serotype 2 OPV-related viruses for any given population immunity level. However, as with OPV2 cessation, continued SIAs with OPV containing serotypes 1 and 3 up until OPV13 cessation remain necessary in populations with low RI coverage to prevent subsequent cVDPV1 and cVDPV3 outbreaks.Fig. 4Net reproduction number (Rn) for OPV of each serotype for different SIA vaccine choices in 165 subpopulations affected by tOPV intensification in the global model [21] . a Comparison of Rns at time of OPV2 cessation on April 1, 2016. b Comparison of Rns at time of hypothetical OPV123 cessation on April 1, 2019DiscussionMisplaced focus on vaccine failure and on vaccine-induced population immunity to disease [11, 13] continues to allow insufficient focus on the failure to vaccinate and the importance of managing population immunity to transmission of all three serotypes [2, 14, 16, 17]. Failing to achieve and maintain high population immunity to transmission leads to outbreaks and delays both WPV eradication and successful OPV cessation, which increases the overall costs of polio eradication. The complexity of simultaneously managing all 3 poliovirus serotypes requires sufficient use of poliovirus vaccine containing all 3 serotypes (i.e., tOPV or IPV). For countries with conditions conducive to intense transmission (e.g., high R0, relatively poor hygiene, and frequent fecal-oral contacts), even high coverage RI with IPV - only may prove insufficient to prevent transmission [10, 16]. Although the relatively lower individual take rates for serotypes 1 and 3 for tOPV compared to bOPV may suggest a benefit associated with preferentially using bOPV for SIAs [25, 26], our results demonstrate the importance of the serotype 2 component in tOPV and the relatively small impact on population immunity to transmission of using bOPV for SIAs instead of tOPV. Moreover, with repeated tOPV immunizations, recipients develop serotype 2 immunity, which reduces serotype interference and makes subsequent tOPV doses de facto bOPV doses. Immunization leaders need to focus on all three poliovirus serotypes to appropriately manage the risks of both WPV eradication and OPV cessation in the polio endgame. Our analyses suggest that all countries performing polio SIAs should use tOPV up until the time of OPV2 cessation, after which time they should continue to use the OPV vaccine formulation with all remaining serotypes until coordinated global cessation of those serotypes as they manage population immunity to transmission.While our model insights remain very robust to a range of assumptions about the differential impact of tOPV and bOPV on serotype 1 and 3 take rates, we note several limitations. First, the model does not explicitly characterize serotype interference but instead focuses on average per-dose take rates. However, using first-dose take rates instead would artificially decrease the impact of tOPV on serotype 1 and 3 poliovirus transmission, particularly in the context of frequent immunization contacts associated with either good RI coverage, or frequent SIAs, or both. The large difference associated with first-dose take rates would only apply in a situation in which children receive only one effective dose. Second, our model relies on sets of generic model inputs based on an expert literature review process [22, 28, 31] that fits the evidence across a wide range of situations [9, 17] but that does not preclude the possibility that other combinations of generic model inputs may produce results overall consistent with the evidence. For example, the kinetics of waning remain uncertain and intestinal immunity may wane more steeply after 5 or more years [32] than assumed in our model [17] based on the limited evidence [28, 31, 33], which would result in more cVDPV emergences and cases both before and after OPV2 cessation. Thus, further empirical evidence and study of model uncertainties would further help inform decisions. Using different take rates (Fig. 3) than those based on the model calibration process led to some changes in the historical fit, and we did not explore the impact of take rates that vary by dose given that this would add significant complexity to the model (i.e., stratification of the model by dose histories in addition to immunity state, reversion stage, age group, serotype, and waning stage) without good data to support dose-specific take rate estimates in different settings. Nevertheless, the insights with respect to bOPV vs. tOPV in the context of repeated SIAs proved robust to the alternative assumptions about average per-dose take rates vs. the higher serotype interference associated with the first two doses, and we likewise expect robustness of the insights to different potential combinations of generic model inputs that remain consistent with the body of evidence on poliovirus immunity and transmission [28]. Third, the situation in northwest Nigeria or elsewhere may change in the future, particularly related to the confirmed cVDPV2 case reported in May 2015 [34], which should motivate Nigeria to use tOPV for more SIAs. If SIA frequency and/or quality decrease going forward, re-emerging WPV transmission may occur, cVDPV2 transmission may not stop even with four annual tOPV SIAs, or cVDPVs could emerge after OPV cessation. Fourth, for the northwest Nigeria model, we did not model the evolving policies involving IPV SIAs, given their uncertain role in the immunization program. Studies on the impact of IPV SIAs on population immunity to poliovirus transmission of all three serotypes remains a topic of further research. Finally, all limitations associated with the models used in this analysis apply, and we refer to other publications for further discussion of those limitations [9, 20].ConclusionsUsing tOPV instead of bOPV for SIAs leads to a minimal decrease in population immunity to transmission for serotypes 1 and 3, but a significantly higher population immunity to transmission for serotype 2. Failure to use tOPV in enough SIAs results in cVDPV2 outbreaks after OPV2 cessation in both the northwest Nigeria model and the global model. Immunization leaders need to focus on all three poliovirus serotypes to appropriately manage the risks of OPV cessation in the polio endgame. Focusing on population immunity to transmission to manage pre-OPV cessation risks of cVDPVs, all countries performing poliovirus SIAs should use tOPV up until the time of OPV2 cessation, after which time they should continue to use the OPV vaccine formulation with all remaining serotypes until coordinated global cessation of those serotypes.


Title: Persistent Transmission of Circulating Vaccine-Derived Poliovirus — Somalia, January 2017–March 2024

SummaryWhat is already known about this topic?Circulating vaccine-derived polioviruses (cVDPVs), associated with oral polio vaccines, can cause paralysis among persons in areas with low population immunity to polioviruses. In Somalia, cVDPV type 2 (cVDPV2) transmission has been ongoing since 2017, highlighting considerable challenges in controlling transmission.What is added by this report?Since the 2016 global withdrawal of type 2 oral poliovirus vaccine, cVDPV2 has continued to circulate in Somalia, with 39 cases documented across multiple regions during 2017–2024. Despite extensive immunization activities, children in large portions of the country remain inaccessible, particularly in the South-Central region.What are the implications for public health practice?Focusing on innovative strategies to vaccinate children in inaccessible areas, addressing operational challenges, and ensuring quality immunization campaigns in accessible regions are critical to interrupting cVDPV2 transmission in Somalia.AbstractSince the launch of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative in 1988, substantial progress has been made in the interruption of wild poliovirus (WPV) transmission worldwide: global eradication of WPV types 2 and 3 were certified in 2015 and 2019, respectively, and endemic transmission of WPV type 1 continues only in Afghanistan and Pakistan. After the synchronized global withdrawal of all serotype 2 oral poliovirus vaccines (OPVs) in 2016, widespread outbreaks of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 (cVDPV2) have occurred, which are linked to areas with low population immunity to poliovirus. Officials in Somalia have detected ongoing cVDPV2 transmission since 2017. Polio vaccination coverage and surveillance data for Somalia were reviewed to assess this persistent transmission. During January 2017–March 2024, officials in Somalia detected 39 cVDPV2 cases in 14 of 20 regions, and transmission has spread to neighboring Ethiopia and Kenya. Since January 2021, 28 supplementary immunization activities (SIAs) targeting cVDPV2 were conducted in Somalia. Some parts of the country are security-compromised and inaccessible for vaccination campaigns. Among 1,921 children with nonpolio acute flaccid paralysis, 231 (12%) had not received OPV doses through routine immunization or SIAs, 95% of whom were from the South-Central region, and 60% of whom lived in inaccessible districts. Enhancing humanitarian negotiation measures in Somalia to enable vaccination of children in security-compromised areas and strengthening campaign quality in accessible areas will help interrupt cVDPV2 transmission.IntroductionSomalia has experienced decades of civil unrest since the 1991 fall of the central government, resulting in a complex, ongoing humanitarian emergency, population displacement, and health system collapse, especially in the South-Central region (1). Somalia’s administrative structure comprises 118 districts, 20 regions, and seven federal states, including the Banadir region (which includes the capital, Mogadishu); however, Somaliland operates autonomously in the north (2). As of December 2023, insurgents maintained partial or complete control in nearly one half of the 81 South-Central districts, obstructing house-to-house immunization activities for 17% of targeted children. Despite challenges, Somalia interrupted indigenous wild poliovirus (WPV) type 1 (WPV1) transmission in 2002 and stopped two WPV1 outbreaks resulting from importations during 2005–2007 and 2013–2014 (2,3).In 2016, following the 2015 eradication of WPV type 2 (WPV2), a global, synchronized switch from the use of trivalent oral poliovirus vaccine (tOPV) (containing Sabin vaccine strain serotypes 1, 2, and 3) to bivalent OPV (bOPV) (containing types 1 and 3) was implemented to mitigate circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus (cVDPV) type 2 (cVDPV2) emergence risks (3,4). Emergence of cVDPVs (vaccine viruses that have reverted to neurovirulence) can occur after prolonged circulation of vaccine virus in underimmunized communities (5,6). Somalia’s immunization schedule includes 4 doses of bOPV and 2 doses of injectable inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV), which contains all three serotypes. Since 2017, national 3-dose OPV coverage in Somalia among infants aged ≤12 months through routine immunization has been estimated at 47%. National coverage with 1 IPV dose has been estimated at 42% since 2018 (7). Before the switch to bOPV, Somalia successfully interrupted prolonged (2008–2013) cVDPV2 transmission. In October 2017, Somalia detected cVDPV2 transmission in Banadir, followed by detection of cVDPV type 3 (cVDPV3) 4 months later. This report describes the ongoing activities and challenges in interrupting transmission of cVDPV2 in Somalia from 2017 to the present, highlighting progress and identifying areas requiring focused intervention.MethodsReview of Somalia Polio Immunization Coverage and Vaccination Campaign DataSurveillance and supplementary immunization activity (SIA)* data during January 2017–March 2024 were provided by the World Health Organization (WHO) Somalia Country Office (WHO Somalia). Routine 2017–2022 childhood immunization data (reported through June 26, 2023) are from WHO and UNICEF estimates of national immunization coverage reports (7). To determine SIA performance quality, administrative data and postcampaign surveys, including lot quality assurance sampling (LQAS)† surveys (implemented in accessible areas only), were reviewed. Because a national census has not been conducted in >40 years, target population estimates are based on United Nations’ estimates. In 2023, WHO Somalia conducted a village accessibility survey, marking villages that were unreachable during SIAs because of insecurity as inaccessible (WHO Somalia data manager, personal communication, May 15, 2024).Review of Somalia Polio SurveillanceAcute flaccid paralysis surveillance. Acute flaccid paralysis (AFP) surveillance detects the recent onset of limb weakness among children. WHO performance indicator standards for AFP surveillance sufficiently sensitive to detect a case of polio in outbreak areas include the detection of three or more nonpolio AFP cases§ per 100,000 children aged <15 years per year and the collection of adequate stool specimens¶ from ≥80% of persons with AFP. During AFP case investigations, histories recalled by caretakers of the number of poliovirus vaccine doses received by the child are recorded.Environmental surveillance. Environmental surveillance (ES) for poliovirus in Somalia is conducted via systematic sewage sampling at 17 sites in 11 administrative regions in six states. Genomic sequence analyses of the region coding the viral capsid protein (VP1) were reviewed to determine genetic relationships among polioviruses identified in ES samples and stool specimens from AFP patients. These activities were reviewed by CDC, deemed not research, and conducted consistent with applicable federal law and CDC policy.**ResultsImmunization Activities and CoverageDuring the reporting period, 28 SIAs using OPV type 2 (OPV2) or IPV were conducted, including seven national immunization days, 12 subnational immunization days, and nine smaller, targeted campaigns.†† Twelve SIAs occurred in 2021, six in 2022, eight in 2023, and two in early 2024. Vaccines used included monovalent Sabin-strain OPV2 (mOPV2) (15 SIAs), novel OPV2 (nOPV2, further attenuated version of Sabin mOPV2 with enhanced genetic stability) (eight), tOPV (three), and IPV (two). During 2017–2020, 17 bOPV campaigns were conducted.Among 1,921 children aged 6–59 months with nonpolio AFP reported during January 2017–March 2024, caretakers reported that 730 children (38%) had received ≥3 OPV doses through routine immunization, and that 538 (28%) had received ≥1 IPV dose; 1,364 (71%) children had received ≥3 OPV doses during SIAs. Overall, 231 (12%) children with nonpolio AFP were reported to have received no OPV doses through routine immunization or SIAs (i.e., zero-dose children); among these children, 219 (95%) were from districts in the South-Central region and 139 (60%) whose accessibility status was recorded were from inaccessible districts. As of December 2023, an estimated 472,743 children (representing 17% of children in Somalia aged <5 years) remain unreached for vaccination in the South-Central region because of security reasons (Figure 1). FIGURE 1Reported cases* of polio caused by circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 and type 3, number of oral polio vaccine campaigns conducted, per district and period (A), and accessibility status (B)† among children aged <5 years — Somalia, January 2017–March 2024§Abbreviations: cVDPV = circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus; cVDPV2 = cVDPV type 2; cVDPV3 = cVDPV type 3; SIA = supplementary immunization activity; WHO = World Health Organization.* Total cVDPV2 cases by period: January 2017–March 2024 = 39; 2017–2020 = 23 (including one cVDPV2/cVDPV3 coinfection); January 2021–March 2024 = 16.† Children with poliovirus vaccine partially accessible are those from districts where parts of the district are under insurgency control, and no SIAs are conducted in those areas. Children with poliovirus vaccine accessible but under insurgency control are those from districts under complete control of insurgents but SIA operations are reportedly conducted with no verification or monitoring mechanisms in place. Children with poliovirus vaccine inaccessible are those from districts under full control of insurgents and no SIA operations are conducted.§ Data as of May 16, 2024.This figure is a set of three maps denoting reported cases of polio caused by circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 and type 3, number of oral polio vaccine campaigns conducted, per district and period (A), and accessibility status (B) among children aged <5 years in Somalia during January 2017–March 2024.Source: WHO Geographic Information System Center for Health Administrative Boundaries, WHO Somalia population under 5-year estimates, accessibility status and reported cVDPV cases.AFP SurveillanceAs of March 2024, the Somalia AFP surveillance system comprised 983 active surveillance sites and included a total of 796 village polio volunteers situated in all regions; 71% of these volunteers are in districts in the South-Central region. During 2017–2024, Somalia’s national nonpolio AFP rate consistently reached or exceeded three cases per 100,000 persons aged <15 years per year (annual range during 2021–2024 = 3.8–5.2). However, Banadir, the state reporting the highest number of cVDPV2 cases, consistently missed this target (range = 1.8–2.9) (Table).TABLEAcute flaccid paralysis surveillance performance indicators and administrative coverage, by state — Somalia, January 2021–March 2024*Country/StateAFP surveillance performance indicatorsAdministrative coverage†% vaccinated2021202220232024§No. of AFP cases(% with adequate stool specimens¶)NPAFP rate**No. of AFP cases(% with adequate stool specimens¶)NPAFP rate**No. of AFP cases(% with adequate stool specimens¶)NPAFP rate**No. of AFP cases(% with adequate stool specimens¶)NPAFP rate**2021202220232024
Somalia


350 (93)


4.1


355 (96)


3.8


431 (92)


4.6


143 (88)


5.9


93


96


96


92

Banadir21 (95)1.835 (97)2.235 (80)2.412 (92)3.598979994Galmudug36 (92)8.123 (100)4.041 (93)7.018 (72)11.497989793Hirshabelle34 (94)5.329 (97)4.031 (94)4.313 (85)6.1989910094Jubbaland60 (93)5.250 (94)4.269 (94)5.929 (93)9.392949391Puntland34 (97)2.445 (100)3.248 (96)3.418 (94)5.19398108—††Somaliland109 (94)6.7103 (95)5.9124 (94)6.936 (86)7.8929189—††Southwest56 (89)2.870 (94)3.283 (90)3.717 (94)3.093969591Abbreviations: AFP = acute flaccid paralysis; NPAFP = nonpolio acute flaccid paralysis.* Data as of May 16, 2024.† Proportion of targeted children aged <5 years who received a dose of poliovirus vaccine during a supplemental immunization activity.§ NPAFP rate annualized from AFP surveillance data through March 2024.¶ Adequate stool specimens are defined as two stool specimens of sufficient quality for laboratory analysis, collected ≥24 hours apart, both within 14 days of paralysis onset, and arriving in good condition at a World Health Organization–accredited laboratory with reverse cold chain maintained, without leakage or desiccation, and with proper documentation.** Cases per 100,000 persons aged <15 years. The surveillance performance indicator target is three or more NPAFP cases per 100,000 persons aged <15 years per year. The NPAFP rate was not calculated for regions with <100,000 persons aged <15 years. https://polioeradication.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Polio-surveillance-status-report-2019.pdf†† No administrative coverage data reported for 2024 to date.The 80% stool specimen adequacy target was met each year during 2017–2023 (annual range = 92.4%–99.1%) and in each state except Galmudug (72.2%) in the first quarter of 2024. However, the proportion of stool specimens that arrived at the WHO-accredited laboratory in Kenya within the recommended 3 days after collection decreased from 44% in 2017 to 9% in 2022 and 2023.Environmental SurveillanceDuring January 2017–March 2024, a total of 73 cVDPV2 isolates were detected across four of the six states with ES sites; Banadir state accounted for 66 (90%) detections. Collection sites in Somalia increased from four in 2017 to 17 in 2023.Epidemiology of cVDPV CasescVDPV2 cases. During 2017–2024, 39 cVDPV2 cases were reported from all seven states, including 34 (87%) from districts in the South-Central region§§ (Figure 2) (Supplementary Table, https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/157501) (Village accessibility survey, WHO Somalia, unpublished data, 2024). The remaining five cases were reported from Somaliland (four) and Puntland (one) during 2019–2020. Overall, the mean age of patients was 36 months (range = 3–108 months) and 49% were female. Among the 39 cVDPV2 patients, 20 (51%) reportedly had received zero routine immunization or SIA OPV doses.FIGURE 2Number of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 and type 3 cases, by month — Somalia, January 2017–March 2024*,†Abbreviations: cVDPV2 = circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2; cVDPV3 = circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 3; bOPV = bivalent oral poliovirus vaccine (OPV); mOPV2 = monovalent OPV type 2; NID = national immunization day; OPV = oral poliovirus vaccine; nOPV2 = novel OPV type 2; SNID = subnational immunization day; tOPV = trivalent OPV.* OPV campaigns were conducted as follows: three bOPV NIDs were conducted during 2017 (February, April, and December); three during 2018 (May, July, October, and November); two during 2019 (March and November); and three during 2020 (March, August, and December). Two mOPV2 NIDs were conducted during 2021 (June and July) and two in 2022 (March and June). Two nOPV2 NIDs were conducted during 2023 (August and November). One bOPV SNID was conducted during 2019 (April). One mOPV2 SNIDs was conducted during 2017 (December); four during 2018 (January, July, August, and September); four during 2019 (May, June, August, and September); two during 2020 (September and October); three in 2021 (February, March, and October); and three in 2022 (February, August, and October). One tOPV SNID was conducted during 2022 (November) and one in 2023 (February). Three nOPV2 SNIDs were conducted during 2023 (May, June, and July), and two during 2024 (February and March).† Data as of May 16, 2024.This figure is a bar chart illustrating the number of circulating vaccine-derived poliovirus type 2 and type 3 cases, by month in Somalia during January 2017–March 2024.cVDPV3 cases. In 2018, states Hirshabelle and Jubbaland reported five and two cVDPV3 cases, respectively (Figure 2). Among these cases, three patients had received no routine immunization or SIA OPV doses, and four had received >3 SIA doses. No cVDPV3 has been isolated since September 2018.Genomic Sequence Analysis of cVDPV IsolatesIn 2017, genomic sequence analysis of circulating cVDPV2 strains indicated protracted circulation of the SOM-BAN-1 cVDPV2 emergence occurred ≥3 years before detection. The most recent case in this emergence group was detected in Jubbaland in March 2024. During January 2021–March 2024, 17 (59%) of 29 isolates were detected in Banadir, including 10 of 16 orphan viruses,¶¶ which indicates substantial gaps in surveillance.In December 2023, a second cVDPV2 emergence (SOM-BAY-1) was identified in southern Somalia and was most recently detected in January 2024. In addition, a cVDPV2 isolated from an ES sample collected in Banadir in May 2022 was from the Yemen cVDPV2 emergence group YEM-TAI-1; no further detections have occurred in Somalia to date.DiscussionSince 2017, 39 cVDPV2 cases have been detected in 14 of Somalia’s 20 regions. Many children in regions with ongoing poliovirus transmission have been inaccessible for more than a decade. An estimated 472,743 unreachable children in Somalia’s South-Central Region in the 2023 village-level inaccessibility survey represent approximately one in six (17%) children aged <5 years in Somalia. Along with chronically low routine immunization coverage, the quality of SIAs has also been compromised, even in accessible areas. Despite numerous SIAs responding to cVPDV2 transmission, caretakers of approximately one half of patients reported that the child had received no OPV doses.Under new leadership, the Somalia polio team has undertaken several initiatives, including improving health worker training, expanding transit vaccination to reach mobile populations, enhancing SIA monitoring and postcampaign assessment, and working with humanitarian negotiators to gain temporary access to security-compromised areas. The Prime Minister of Somalia will lead a recently established Task Force on Polio Eradication and Immunization. The recent introduction of trained third-party monitors and enhanced postcampaign analysis under the new leadership in 2023 has led to a more realistic portrayal of LQAS outcomes. The decline in the percentage of districts passing LQAS assessments, from 87% in 2021 to 55% in November 2023, likely signals improved accuracy of SIA monitoring quality, indicating that inaccessibility is only one of multiple factors preventing children from being immunized. Comprehensively addressing SIA preparedness challenges and campaign implementation bottlenecks, strengthening surveillance and cross-border measures, and prioritizing humanitarian negotiation activities are critical to improving SIA implementation and interrupting cVDPV2 transmission.LimitationsThe findings in this report are subject to at least five limitations. First, SIA data were incomplete for certain years. Second, uncertainty regarding inaccessibility limits accurate assessment of both surveillance and immunization activities. Third, receipt of OPV doses reported by caretakers might be subject to recall bias that could result in over- or underestimating coverage. Fourth, data on SIA OPV doses for persons with nonpolio AFP does not distinguish OPV2 from bOPV and might obscure specific patterns of immunity linked to each vaccine type. Finally, in the absence of a recent census, estimating accurate population data for target groups in Somalia remains challenging.Implications for Public Health PracticeInterrupting cVDPV transmission in Somalia is critical to keeping the Horn of Africa polio-free and interrupting cVDPV2 transmission worldwide. Strategies to achieve this goal include focusing on innovative approaches to vaccinate children in inaccessible areas, addressing operational challenges, and ensuring quality immunization campaigns in accessible regions.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS 1 (HIV-1)
================================================================================
Title: Role of Viral Protein U (Vpu) in HIV-1 Infection and Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionHuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a lentivirus that belongs to the Retroviridae family. The HIV retrovirus contains two RNA molecules with three prototypic genes that encode group-specific antigen (gag), envelope (env), and polymerase (pol) proteins [1,2,3]. HIV isolates have been classified into two types: HIV-type 1 (HIV-1) and HIV-type 2 (HIV-2). HIV-1 is the causative agent of HIV/AIDS, while HIV-2 is constrained to some well-defined Central and Western Africa regions; relative to HIV-1, HIV-2 has weak transmission capabilities [4,5]. Based on phylogenetic analysis, HIV-1 shows substantial similarities to the virus SIVgor that infects gorillas (Gorilla gorilla) and the virus SIVcpz that infects chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes troglodytes). HIV-2 resembles the virus SIVsmm that infects sooty mangabey monkeys (Cercocebus atys). HIV-1 evolved from chimpanzees and/or gorillas by independent cross-species transmissions of SIVs [4,5].The HIV-1 virus has been subdivided into M, N, O, and P subtypes according to their origin and distribution patterns within the human population. HIV-1 M is globally distributed and is a major factor causing the pandemic disease AIDS. HIV-1 N is rare (non-major/non-outlier) and originated from chimpanzees [5]. HIV-1 O and P groups have close relationships to the virus SIVgor isolated from gorillas; geographically, the O group virus is constrained to Cameroon and surrounding countries [5]. The P group virus was discovered to come from two individuals in Cameroon. Vpu protein is encoded by all groups of HIV-1, but biological differences have been noted between the various sources of Vpu proteins. Pandemic M group viruses contain Vpu proteins that are more highly active than do other groups [5]. Clearly, one needs to understand the functions of Vpu proteins to understand their roles in controlling HIV-1 infection and HIV/AIDS disease pathogenesis.2. Vpu Gene and Its DiversificationVpu was initially characterized as an U open reading frame (ORF) product localized in the HIV-1 genome between the env and tat exons [6]. The Vpu protein is translated from bicistronic mRNA of env-vpu presumably through leaky scanning of ribosomes from the initiation codon of the vpu gene [7,8]. The vpu gene is encoded in the HIV-1 genome, but it is not present in the genomes of HIV-2 and of SIVs such as SIV from rhesus macaques (SIVmac) and SIV from sooty mangabey (SIVsmm) [4,5,9]. However, structural homologs of Vpu have been identified in SIV from chimpanzee (SIVcpz), as well as in SIV from the greater spot-nosed monkey (Cercopithecus nictitans; SIVgsn), the mona monkey (Cercopithecus mona; SIVmon), the mustached monkey (Cervicopithecus Cephus; SIVmus), Dent’s mona monkey (Cercopithecus mona denti; SIVdent), and recently in gorilla (Gorilla gorilla; SIVgor) [9,10,11,12,13].3. Vpu Protein and Its Cellular DistributionVpu is a multimeric integral membrane phosphoprotein with 81 amino acids [14,15]. It has three distinct alpha-helices: the N-terminus proximal transmembrane domain (Helix1-TMD: 6–29 residues) and two C-terminus domains, Helix 2 (32–52 residues) and Helix 3 (57–72 residues) [16,17,18,19] (Figure 1). Helix-2 is amphipathic and is hydrophobic with polar residues on the sides. The hydrophobic portion is buried in plasma membranes, while the hydrophilic region is cytoplasmic [20]. Helix-3 contains acidic amino acids interconnected by two phosphorylated Serine residues: S52 and S56 [21]. Protein kinase casein kinase 2 (CK-2) catalyzes the phosphorylation of the serines (Figure 1) and these post-translational modifications regulate associations between Helix 3 and beta-TrCP/ubiquitin ligase complexes [22,23]. Vpu once oligomerized can form pentameric pore-like structures through which selective monovalent cations can pass [24,25,26].Vpu proteins localize to the plasma membranes, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and trans-Golgi network (TGN) [27,28,29,30]. Sequence analysis of the cytosolic domain of Vpu shows the presence of putative trafficking signals that carry variations in amino acid residues among different subtypes of Vpu. These signals include YXXΦ, a conserved tyrosine-based sorting motif (where Φ represents a hydrophobic residue), and a ([D/E] XXXL [/I/V]) sorting motif consisting of acidic residue/dileucine-based sequences that are present in the hinge portion between the cytosolic domain and the TMD. The latter is involved in endocytosis and the targeting of transmembrane host proteins to lysosomes [31]. Another ([D/E] XXXL [/I/V]) motif is present in the second alpha-helix of the cytoplasmic domain [29]. Several primary isolates of HIV-1 and laboratory-adapted viruses carry polymorphisms of the vpu gene that are based on variations of putative trafficking signal sequences [32] and these polymorphisms regulate subcellular distribution patterns and biological activities of the Vpu protein.4. Role of Vpu Protein in HIV-1 PathogenesisVpu has two well-established functions in HIV-1 infection. First, through the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway, it enhances the degradation of CD4 protein produced de novo in the endoplasmic reticulum [33]. Second, Vpu augments the release of progeny virions from infected cells [23,34,35] by counteracting the effect of Tetherin, a host restriction factor. Tetherin, also known as BST-2, CD317, or HM1.24, strongly inhibits the release of virions from infected host cells [28,36,37]. In addition, Vpu also regulates the transport of host proteins from ER to Golgi [38], modulates MHC class II presentation [39], induces the stabilization of p53 [40], induces degranulation of natural killer cells (NK cells) by NTBA downmodulation, inhibits lipid antigen presentation through CD1d downmodulation [41,42], induces apoptosis, and impairs migration and chemotactic signaling within CD4+ T-cells through CCR7 downregulation [43].4.1. Role of Vpu in HIV-1-Induced CD4 Receptor DownregulationCD4 is the primary receptor through which primate lentiviruses enter target cells [44]. It is a 54 kDa type-I integral glycoprotein expressed on the surface of cells including helper T-lymphocytes, monocyte/macrophage lineage cells, and hematopoietic progenitor cells. HIV-1 infection of these cells leads to a reduction in the cell surface levels of CD4 receptors [45]. CD4 downregulation has been proposed to block the superinfection of target cells [46] and protect the infected cell from host immune responses, and favors viral replication fitness [47] (Table 1). Constitutive expression of CD4 can be harmful to productive viral replication and dissemination [48]. De novo produced CD4 molecules bind Env polyproteins with high affinity within the endoplasmic reticulum, prevent the transport and processing of Env precursor to its products gp41 and gp120 [49,50], and reduce secretion of infectious progeny virion particles from infected cells.Vpu can enhance degradation of de novo produced CD4 by retention of CD4 in the endoplasmic reticulum through interactions between Vpu and CD4 via their transmembrane domains, poly-ubiquitination of CD4, and transport to the ERAD (ER-associated degradation) pathway [33,57,58]. The integrity of the cytoplasmic domain of Vpu protein and the DSGXXS motif containing the S52/S56 phosphoserine residues are critical to proteasomal degradation of CD4; Vpu interacts directly with β-TrCP1, β-TrCP2 (β-transducin repeat-containing protein 1 or 2), two adaptor molecules (SKP1-cullin-F-Box), and the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex [59,60]. The interaction of SCF- β-TrCP with Vpu induces the poly-ubiquitination of CD4 through binding to lysine, serine, and threonine residues [58] (Figure 2). Without those residues, SCF-mediated interactions between Vpu with CD4 result in retention of the receptor in the ER. Without the ERAD complex (VCP-UFDIL-NPL4), Vpu fails to pull CD4 out of the endoplasmic reticulum and reduces proteasomal degradation [58] (Figure 2). Decreased interactions between β-TrCP/Vpu reduce proteasomal degradation by the ERAD pathway of several cellular factors including β-catenin, ATF4, and p53 [40].4.2. Role of Vpu in BST-2 Downregulation and Virus ReleaseVpu increases the release of HIV-1 from HIV-1-infected cells [15,34]. As confirmed by electron microscopy (EM), Vpu defective virion particles accumulate at the budding site on infected host cell membranes [35,61]. The role of Vpu in virus release varies between cell types. For example, the release of Vpu-defective HIV-1 particles was strongly reduced in HeLa cells, but it was not affected in COS, HEK293T, CV-1, and Vero cells [62,63,64]. The BST-2 protein was identified as a restriction factor that blocked the release of mutant viruses lacking the accessory gene vpu [28,36] that is constitutively expressed in HeLa cells, but not in permissive cell lines like HT1080 and HEK293T. The expression of BST-2 and its restrictive phenotype could only be maintained by IFN-α/β induction in permissive cells and increased in Jurkat and primary CD4+ T-cells. Moreover, the induction of BST-2 expression in HT1080 and HEK293T cells restricted the secretion of virus particles in the absence of Vpu protein [28,36] and siRNA-mediated reduction of BST-2 expression in HeLa cells led to the efficient release of Vpu defective virion particles [28,36].BST-2 can inhibit the release of almost all enveloped viruses, including retroviruses, flaviviruses, herpesviruses, arenaviruses, rhabdoviruses, and paramyxoviruses [65,66]. Therefore, BST-2 has been proven to be a critical innate immune factor for restricting viral release. Primate lentiviruses express three different proteins that counteract BST-2 antiviral activity: Vpu for HIV-1 [28,36]; Nef for SIV major isolates [51,67,68]; and Env for HIV-2, SIVagmTan, and SIVmac239Δnef isolates [69,70,71,72]. HIV-1 Vpu, HIV-2 Env, and SIV Nef all decrease cell surface levels of BST-2 from budding viral sites to favor virus release [69,70,71,72].BST-2 is a 30–36 kDa type II integral membrane protein that is expressed constitutively as well as following induction by type-I interferon or other pro-inflammatory signals [65]. It consists of a short N-terminal cytoplasmic tail inter-linked to a transmembrane domain and an extracellular domain anchored in the membrane via its glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) moiety in the C-terminal region [73]. BST-2 is distributed mainly in cholesterol-rich microdomains of the cell membrane and intracellular compartments such as the trans-Golgi-network (TGN) and endosomes [73,74].BST-2 can physically tether de novo generated virion particles at the cell membrane of infected cells, thereby decreasing virus release [75,76]. This tethering occurs following formation of homodimers via parallel disulfide-bonding and cross-linking with virions particles and plasma membranes through its membrane anchoring N-terminal domains [75,77]. BST-2 makes “axial” arrangements in which the BST-2 GPI anchors remain connected to the membrane of infected cells. Vpu downregulates BST-2 and interactions between Vpu and BST-2 utilize their respective transmembrane domains. The Ala14, Ala18, and Trp22 residues of the Vpu TMD are crucial for BST-2 downregulation from the cell membrane through direct interaction with specific residues on BST-2 (Val, Iso, Leu, and Leu) [78,79]. These residues are involved in TMD–TMD interactions, create an anti-parallel helix–helix interface [80], and maintain the interaction between these proteins [81,82]. The antagonistic effect of Vpu on BST-2 activity takes place by three sequential steps: downregulation from the cell surface, restriction of BST-2 recycling, and decline in intracellular BST-2 levels. Downregulation of BST-2 at the cell surface is mediated by clathrin-coated vesicles through direct interaction of the AP2 (clathrin adaptor complex) with a Y6XY8 motif (non-canonical dual Tyrosine residues) present in the cytoplasmic tail of BST-2 [74,83]. Vpu restricts the recycling of internalized BST-2 to the cell membrane and blocks the translocation of de novo generated BST-2 to the cell membrane [84,85,86,87].BST-2 is degraded by ubiquitination following recruitment of the SCF-β-TrCP-E3 ligase complex to the DS52GxxS56 motif that is present in the cytosolic region of Vpu [88,89] (Figure 3). Vpu enhances ubiquitination of BST-2 through lysine/serine and threonine amino acid residues present in the cytoplasmic tail of Vpu [89]. Vpu induces ubiquitination and degradation of both BST-2 and CD4 by identical molecular mechanisms, although the outcomes are different. Instead of targeting BST-2 to proteasomes, Vpu induces the β-TrCP-dependent sorting of BST-2 to lysosomes [77,84,88]. Moreover, it has been shown that the ESCRT complex and Rab7 are critical components of the endo-lysosomal trafficking involved in the degradation of BST-2 [90,91] (Figure 3).Of the four HIV-1 groups, the M group is the most highly pathogenic and transmissible because Vpu is highly active, and this increases the ability of the virus to disseminate from one cell to another by counteracting the host protein BST-2 and evading the immune system (Table 1).4.3. Immune Evasion to Virus Fitness and SurvivalInnate immune responses play a significant role in host defenses against viral infections. Innate immune cells like natural killer (NK) and dendritic cells respond to invading viruses and contribute to controlling viral infection and replication during the initial stages of infection [92,93,94]. However, Vpu stabilizes HIV-1 infection and replication by evading immune responses by CD1d and NTB-A downmodulation [42,54]. Vpu also downregulates MHCII molecules from the cell surface to inhibit antigen presentation [39]. Together, these responses help HIV-1-infected cells escape cytotoxic and natural killer cells’ ability to kill the infected cell.4.4. Cell DeathVpu protein can be cytotoxic. It induces cell stress through induction of Fas ligand, p53 stabilization, and activating JNK signaling pathways [40,95,96,97]. Oxidative stress may also contribute to cell death because Vpu induces oxidative stress by stabilization of p53 protein, increasing TGF-β protein levels and increasing the release of cytotoxic substances from HIV-1-infected cells [40,98,99,100]. NADPH oxidase plays fundamental roles in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and can induce cell death [101,102,103]. P67phox, a subunit of NADPH oxidase enzyme, has TPR repeat sequences including the Vpu-interacting partner SGTA [104,105].4.5. Regulation of Ion Channel ActivityVpu can oligomerize its transmembrane domain and form pentamer ion channel pores selective for monovalent cations [16,24,26]. Vpu ion channel activity is regulated by serine (S23) amino acids that are conserved in HIV-1 M group viruses [106,107]. TASK-1, a mammalian two-pore potassium channel protein with structural homology protein to Vpu, stabilizes cell membrane potential [108,109]. Vpu interacts with TASK-1 proteins, inhibits its ion channel activity, and depolarizes plasma membranes to enhance cellular secretions [108,109,110].4.6. Vpu Effects on HIV-1 LTR ActivityHIV-1 gene activation is dependent on host transcription factors including NF-κB, NFAT, and Ap-1 [111]. Vpu and its structural homolog TASK-1 inhibit transcription of unintegrated HIV-1 DNA in an NF-κB-dependent manner [112]. Vpu mutants (replaced transmembrane domain of Vpu with its structural homologs) also suppress virus production by reducing LTR activity by an unknown mechanism [112,113]. Thus, Vpu appears to be capable of regulating LTR activity to control virus production in infected cells possibly through the involvement of zinc finger proteins and histone deacetylase (HDAC) [114,115,116].4.7. Vpu Effects on EndolysosomesVpu protein is localized to plasma membranes, ER, TGN complex, and endosomes [27,29]. Endosomes fuse with lysosomes and generate endolysosomes, which play crucial roles in physiological and pathological conditions such as antigen presentation, membrane trafficking, metabolism, autophagy, viral infections, cancer, neurological complications, and metabolic disorders [31,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126]. Endolysosomes are highly acidic organelles and this acidity is regulated by the proton pump v-ATPase [127,128,129], BK channels [130], TRPML1 channels [130], and two-pore channels [131]. Vpu interacting protein ATP6V0C is a subunit of the v-ATPase pump and promotes intracellular aggregation of BST-2 and contributes to HIV-1 release [132]. However, much is still unclear about the effects of Vpu on v-ATPase, endolysosome acidification, endolysosomes’ regulatory functions, membrane trafficking, and autophagy.Autophagy can enhance virus release and secretions from infected macrophage or monocyte cells [133,134,135]. HIV-1 enhances autophagy, while HIV-1 Nef blocks autophagy by direct interactions with Beclin and TFEB sequestration [136,137]. However, very little is currently known about the effects of Vpu on endolysosome degradation or autophagy pathways.5. ConclusionsVpu is an HIV-1 protein that counteracts host factors crucial for disseminating virus and disease progression. The primary targets of Vpu are cell surface host proteins that promote ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation processes [138,139,140]. Vpu might be targeted therapeutically to block the formation of heterooligomeric interactions between Vpu and host proteins at the cell surface as well as to suppress the progression of HIV-1 infection [141]. Moreover, Vpu disturbs the ubiquitination of host proteins by interacting with cellular factor β-TrCP through the cytosolic DSGxxS motif [138].Hence, the transmembrane domain and DSxxSG motif in the cytosolic domain of Vpu may be targeted therapeutically against HIV-1 infection and disease progression.


Title: Exosomes: Implications in HIV-1 Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionExosomes were discovered over 30 years ago when two different research groups led by Philip Stahl [1] and Rose Johnstone [2] independently described multivesicular late endosome back fusion to reticulocyte plasma membranes resulting in release of vesicular cargo, later termed exosomes [3]. Interest in exosomes was renewed in 1996 when exosomes secreted from B lymphocytes were shown to present major histocompatibility class II—antigen complexes to T lymphocytes [4]. Furthermore, in 2007, exosomes from human and murine mast cells were discovered to contain functional mRNA and miRNA that could be donated to recipient cells and translated into heterologous or homologous proteins [5]. Exosomes are membranous nanovesicles originating as a result of inward budding of endosomal membranes within the late endosomal compartment of a multitude of cell types [6,7,8]. Exosomes are released by many cell types [9] into the extracellular environment and are found in biological fluids [biofluids], notably, blood [10], urine [11], saliva [12], breast milk [13,14], and semen [8,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24]. The molecular composition of exosomes closely follows that of the parental cells and varies between exosomes, and possibly between donors. Proteome and transcriptome studies have shed light into the cargo composition of exosomes from various sources. Functionally, exosomes have been implicated in modulation of host immune responses and microbial pathogenesis. In these roles, exosomes mediate intercellular communications [24,25,26,27], thereby providing the host with a mechanism to mount efficient immune responses against pathogens, including activation of antiviral pathways or transfer of antiviral factors between different cells [24,27,28,29]. In addition, exosomes can enable the virus to overcome host immunity by delivering viral antagonists or proviral/virulence factors to target cells [30,31].The multifunctional way that exosomes affect the host microenvironment is evident in the study of exosomes and HIV-1. Exosomes from a range of cells mediate micro-environmental changes in target cells by inducing pro- or anti- viral responses [24,32,33,34,35] during HIV-1 infection. The ability of exosomes to inhibit or enhance HIV-1 infection depends on factors including but not limited to the infection status of the exosome producer cells, the source of the exosomes (biofluid or cell culture derived), and the type of producer and recipient cells involved in exosome donation and uptake. Therefore, the role of exosomes in HIV-1 pathogenesis may be significant and underappreciated.2. Exosomes: Secreted Vesicles Loaded with Various CargosExosomes are a class of extracellular vesicles (EV) generated by living mammalian cells (humans and animals) and microorganisms, including protozoa [36], fungi [36], and bacteria [37]. Other classes of EV include (I) apoptotic bodies that are generated by plasma membrane blebbing during cell death and (II) microvesicles [also known as microparticles or ectosomes] that are assembled at and are released from eukaryotic cellular plasma membranes via ectocytosis. Comparative analyses of various EV show that exosomal cargos are distinct from the cargos of other vesicles. Exosomal proteins (membrane and luminal) are derived from the cytosol, the endocytic compartments, or the plasma membrane [24,38] and are devoid of serum proteins and protein components of intracellular compartments, including, the endoplasmic-reticulum, Golgi-apparatus, mitochondria, or nucleus. Depending on the origin, exosomes generated by different cell types contain varying levels of endosome-associated proteins, such as Rab GTPase, SNAREs, Annexins, flotillin, and Tsg101 [39]. Also enriched in exosomes are tetraspanins; CD9, CD63, CD81, CD82, CD53 and CD37 [24,40,41], lipid rafts associated proteins [glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored proteins and flotillin) [42,43], cholesterol, sphingomyelin, ceramide and phosphatidylserine, but not lysobisphosphatidic acid (LBPA) that are present in ectosomes [44]. Aside from proteomics, various investigators have utilized different analytical techniques including unbiased deep sequencing and PCR assays to show that exosomes contain different RNA species, notably mRNA and miRNA. Also present in exosomes are small noncoding RNA species, including structural RNAs, tRNA fragments, vault RNA, Y RNA, repeat sequences, RNA transcripts overlapping with protein coding regions, and small interfering RNAs [24,25,45,46]. Interestingly, differences exist between exosomal RNA content and the RNA content of the originating cells [24,46]. The reason for such variation in RNA content is unknown. However, it is speculated that RNA molecules may be selectively incorporated into exosomes. Whether or not exosomal RNA molecules are directly enwrapped within the cytosolic lumen of exosomes or co-purified as component of RNA-protein complexes associated with exosomes is unclear. As a consequence, there exist inconsistencies in the RNA cargo of exosomes. Studies involving different RNA isolation approaches, sucrose flotation gradient, and resistance to RNase digestion could shed light on the true RNA composition of exosomes. With the high interest in exosome cargo composition, various approaches have been used to determine the cargo composition of different exosomes and the results are deposited at ExoCarta [47] and Vesiclepedia [48].While it is clear that exosomes contain proteinaceous and genetic cargos, the molecular mechanisms governing cargo recruitment into exosomes as well as cargo release by exosomes are yet to be defined. However, it is believed that Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT) family members known to play a role in the formation of intraluminal vesicles (ILV) are involved in exosome biogenesis. Out of the four ESCRT complexes, ESCRT-0 plays a role in ubiquitin-dependent cargo clustering. An ESCRT-0 member HRS was shown to be required for exosome secretion from various cancer cells [49,50,51]. ESCRT-I and ESCRT-II induce bud formation and the function of ESCRT-III involves vesicle scission. The ESCRT-1 associated protein TSG101 is critical in exosomal secretion. Studies have shown that reduction in TSG101 levels results in reduced exosome secretion from cancer cells [49,52]. Additionally implicated in exosome secretion are various isoforms of CHMP4 and ESCRT-III-associated protein, Alix, which when silenced, results in decreased exosome secretion [52]. Exosomes can also be secreted independently of the ESCRT machinery. It has been demonstrated that some cells depleted of key subunits of all four ESCRT proteins secrete exosmoses using ESCRT-independent mechanisms [53]. Exosome secretion in oligodendrocytes is facilitated by lipid ceramide independently of the ESCRT machinery [54]. Proteins of the tetraspanin family have been implicated in sorting cargos for exosome secretion. Tetraspanins are enriched in ILV/exosomes within late endosomes also known as multi vesicular bodies (MVB) [52]. The tetraspanin CD63 promotes endosomal sorting of melanosomal protein [55], while CD81 allows targeting of a variety of its ligands into exosomes [56].Aside from tetraspanins, proteomic studies identified the RAB family of small GTPase proteins as exosomal cargo [38]. RAB proteins are involved in varied processes of vesicular trafficking [budding, mobility through cytoskeletal interaction, vesicle docking to target compartment] and membrane fusion and are therefore implicated in exosome release. For example, RAB11, RAB27a and RAB27b have been shown to control different steps of the exosome secretion pathway in different cells [57,58]. Screening and functional analysis of various RAB proteins following RNAi depletion, provided evidence that in cancer cells, loss of RAB5A, RAB9A, RAB2B, RAB27A, and RAB27B, efficiently decrease exosome secretion, while depletion of RAB11A or RAB7 does not affect exosome secretion [57]. The perceived involvement of the ESCRT machinery and the RAB proteins in exosome biogenesis has led to the use of ESCRT and RAB inhibition as an acceptable method for perturbing exosome secretion. However, given the role of ESCRT and ESCRT-associated proteins in plasma membrane-dependent budding of enveloped viruses [59,60,61], cytokinesis, and membrane repair, as well as the role of RAB proteins in secretion of other soluble factors; inhibition of ESCRT and RAB pathways may modulate host cellular functions unrelated to exosome formation/secretion or may alter the cargo composition of released exosomes. Therefore, caution should be applied while analyzing/using exosomes generated following such treatments. 3. HIV-1 Exploits Exosomal Machinery: HIV-1 RNA and Protein Trafficking via ExosomesThe biogenesis of exosomes and the cell types that released the exosomes determines exosomal content. The study of exosomes secreted from HIV-1 infected cells is complicated by the fact that exosomes have many features in common with HIV-1 including biophysical/molecular properties, biogenesis and uptake mechanisms. The density of exosomes range from 1.13 to 1.21 g·mL−1 [38], while HIV-1 density ranges from 1.16 to 1.18 g·mL−1 [62]. In size, HIV-1 is slightly larger than exosomes, with the diameter of the virus ranging from 100–120 nm compared to 40–100 nm diameter of exosomes [63]. In addition, it is thought that HIV-1 can be generated by the same pathway of exosome biogenesis [64]. Budding of HIV-1 involves interaction with a number of cellular factors, such as TSG101 and Alix that are also involved in exosome biogenesis [65]. The convergence of HIV-1 and exosome biogenesis suggests that HIV-1 products, including RNA and proteins may be encased within exosomes or contaminate exosome preparations from HIV-1 infected fluids. However, rigorous purification strategies, including iodixanol density gradients and immuno affinity approaches are capable of separating HIV-1 particles from exosomes [63,66]. The striking similarities between the biogenesis of exosomes and enveloped viruses in general and HIV-1 in particular, led to the Trojan exosome hypothesis of HIV-1 assembly and cell to cell spread [67], which proposes that HIV-1 evolved to utilize exosome biogenesis and uptake pathways for the formation of infectious virus and for env-independent virus entry respectively.In support of the Trojan exosome hypothesis, HIV-1 recruits components of the host ESCRT machinery to the sight of viral budding and the virus shares some similarities with shedding microvesicles/ectosomes. In addition, the interaction between HIV-1 Gag protein and tetraspanins [68] suggest that HIV-1 may utilize lipid raft micro-domains rich in tetraspanins for virus assembly. Indeed, CD81 and CD63 found on the surface of exosomes are known to be involved in HIV-1 budding, cell-to-cell spread, and infectivity [68,69,70,71]. Moreover, HIV-1 and exosomes express sialyllactose-containing gangliosides that can interact with sialic-acid-binding immunoglobulin-like lectins (Siglecs) present in mature dendritic cells (mDCs) [72]. It has been shown that Siglec-1 interacts with sialyllactose-containing ganglioside on HIV-1 [72] and exosomes [72,73], and promotes mDC capture and storage of both HIV-1 and exosomes in mDCs, thus facilitating trans infection of T cell by mDCs [74,75]. It is therefore speculated that exosome competition for binding to Siglec-1 may result in diminished trans HIV-1 infection. While the involvement of the exosomal pathway in HIV-1 entry and budding is thought provoking, the Trojan exosome hypothesis came to light during a time when terminology was limited with regard to extracellular vesicles and when the field of exosome research was just beginning to expand. Thus, the Trojan exosome hypothesis is a misnomer because HIV-1 is more aptly compared to ectosomes/microvesicles as evidence suggests that HIV-1 buds from the plasma membrane, the budding site of ectosomes and not from internal MVB membranes, which largely represents the exosome budding site.Host-derived exosomal RNA and protein cargos are trafficked from one cell type to the other. Some of these cargos are common to all exosomes while others are specific to the producer cells from which they are secreted. Some cargos present in exosomes isolated from HIV-1 infected cells are viral components, suggesting a role for exosomes in facilitating viral evasion of host immunity. There is evidence that HIV-1 infection or transduction of cells with the HIV-1 accessory protein, Nef, increases the cellular release of exosomes [34,76,77,78]. Nef interacts with intracellular vesicular sorting and trafficking pathways and directs MHC-I [79,80] and CD4 [80,81] to MVBs for lysosomal degradation of MHC-I [80,82] and CD4 [80,83,84,85]. In addition, Nef is sequestered within exosomes released from cells in vitro and within blood plasma-derived exosomes from HIV-1 seropositive individuals [34,76,77,78,86]. Although the mechanism of Nef association with exosomes is not fully understood, Nef is encased in exosomes by anchoring to exosome lipid raft micro-domains. This process involves Nef’s N-terminal myristoylation and amino acids within the alpha helix 1.Other viral proteins have also been shown to be targeted to exosomes. HIV-1 Gag is targeted to exosomes via Gag higher order oligomerization [64]. Aside from viral proteins, evidence indicates that genomic unspliced HIV-1 RNA is encased in exosomes isolated from chronically infected U937 cells [87]. The encasement of HIV-1 RNA into exosomes is mediated by the 5′ end of Gag p17 matrix open reading frame. Unlike Pegivirus RNA encased in exosomes [88], HIV-1 RNA encased in exosomes is not infectious. However, increased association of HIV-1 RNA with exosomes correlates with decreased levels of HIV-1 RNA packaging in viral particles [87]. In addition to HIV-1 RNA, HIV-1-derived miRNAs including vmiRTAR [89], vmiR88 [90], and vmiR99 [90] are packaged into exosomes derived from HIV-1-infected cultures and blood of HIV-1-seropositive patients. Exosomal vmiRTAR reduces expression of Bim and Cdk9 proteins in target cells resulting in decreased apoptosis. Since packaging of HIV-1 RNA into exosomes reduces the available viral RNA for particle assembly, it is possible that the host utilizes delivery of genomic HIV-1 RNA to exosomes as part of the defense mechanism for elimination of viral genomes. If this is proven to be true, the consequence could be host cellular modification of the HIV-1 genome to be preferentially diverted to exosomes routed for lysosomal degradation. However, HIV-1-derived vmiRTAR encased within exosomes may function to promote HIV-1 infection and increase disease pathogenesis.4. Exosomes Released by HIV-1-Infected Cultured Cells Contain HIV-1-Derived Virulence Factors and Influence Host Cell InfectionThe function of exosomes in HIV-1 pathogenesis is beginning to emerge. Accumulating data reveal that exosomes released from HIV-1 infected cells have distinct functions from exosomes released from uninfected cells and biofluid. Exosomes released from infected cells have been shown to mostly enhance infection or function as immune decoys [Figure 1]. In contrast, exosomes from uninfected cells or from HIV-1-seronegative biofluid have protective properties. For example, exosomes from HIV-1 infected macrophages sequester HIV-1 particles and have been shown to facilitate viral transfer to uninfected cells [91]. However, Kadiu and colleagues showed that HIV-1 sequestered by exosomes isolated from infected macrophages are not capable of CD4-independent infection [91]. The inability of macrophage exosomes to mediate CD4-independent HIV-1 infection support the notion that HIV-1-loaded exosomes utilize a different route such as clathrin-mediated endocytosis to gain entry into host cells [91]. Whether or not exosomes secreted from macrophages contain CD4 is unclear. However, it has been demonstrated that various types of EV mediate the transfer of HIV-1 co-receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 to co-receptor-null cells [92,93]. CCR5+ microvesicles released by CCR5+ Chinese hamster ovary cells and peripheral blood mononuclear cells transferred to CCR5− cells rendered these cells CCR5+. The transfer of CCR5 to CCR5-deficient peripheral blood mononuclear cells allowed infection of these cells with R5 tropic HIV-1 [92]. Similarly, transfer of microvesicle-derived CXCR4 to cells that lack the expression resulted in HIV-1 infection of such cells [93]. These results point to the possibility that exosomes may facilitate expression of HIV-1 entry receptors in an otherwise negative background, thus modifying viral tropism. Indeed, HIV-1 infections of cells that do not express HIV-1-entry receptors/co-receptors have been demonstrated without a clear understanding of the mechanisms governing such observations [92,93,94,95]. Furthermore, CD4 has been found on exosomes and in endocytic compartments where exosome biogenesis occurs [33,81,83,84,85,96]. It is possible that exosomes and other related EV may play a role in modulating infection of cells that do not constitutively express HIV-1 receptors and/or co-receptors, given the accumulating evidence that these structures can transfer HIV-1 entry receptors between cells.Aside from the role of exosomes in facilitating HIV-1 infection by transfer of the viral entry receptors, exosome-mediated transfer of viral proteins, such as HIV-1 Nef to host cells can modulate infection. Nef reprograms endocytosis, cytoskeletal rearrangement and organelle trafficking [97]. These Nef-mediated events increase the number of endosomes, lysosomes, MVBs, HIV-1, and exosomes released from HIV-1 infected and bystander cells [78,98,99,100]. Exosomal-Nef may play a role in HIV-1 pathogenesis by promoting CD4+ T cell depletion in HIV-1-seropositive individuals. The evidence for this assumption comes from the observation that Nef-loaded exosomes condition target cells, such as CD4+ T cells by inducing apoptosis [34,86]. Although Nef increases exosome secretion, it was shown that Nef has the ability to reduce the amounts of both CD4 and MHC-I molecules loaded into exosomes [33]. This selective and paradoxical role of Nef suggests that Nef-loaded exosomes play complex roles in HIV-1 infection and pathogenesis. Indeed, CD4-loaded exosomes efficiently inhibit HIV-1 infection, while CD4-depleted exosomes isolated from CD4+ T cells expressing Nef have a reduced capacity to inhibit HIV-1 infection [33]. These observations suggest that CD4-loaded exosomes may provide inhibitory effects on HIV-1 infectivity by virtue of exosomal CD4 binding to HIV-1 envelope proteins. However, the ability of Nef to selectively eliminate CD4 from exosomes suggests yet another mechanism by which Nef promotes HIV-1 infection. Indeed, Nef induces uploading of ADAM17 in exosomes from HIV-1 infected cells. While resting CD4+ T lymphocytes are refractory to HIV-1 infection, exposure to Nef and ADAM17 containing exosomes renders these cells permissive to HIV-1 infection [30].Figure 1Cell culture derived exosomes modulate HIV-1 infection: (1) Cell-free HIV-1 virions bind host cells via viral envelope (Env) to (2) CD4 on target cell plasma membrane followed by binding to a viral co-receptor, CXCR4 or CCR5; (3) Co-receptor binding initiates viral fusion, whereupon viral contents including (4) single stranded viral genomic RNA (gRNA); reverse transcriptase (RT) and integrase (IN] are emptied into the cellular cytoplasm. Viral gRNA is (5) reverse transcribed by HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (RT) into (6) double stranded viral copy DNA (HIV-1 DNA), which is incorporated by (7) viral IN enzyme as (8) proviral DNA within human genomic DNA (gDNA). The provirus is transcribed by host cellular machinery into (9) nascent viral RNA, which is translated by host cellular machinery into (10) HIV-1 proteins, including Nef. Viral proteins are assembled with nascent viral RNA including HIV TAR RNA sequences (vmiRTAR) into (11) budding progeny virions. During the budding process viral protease initiates cleavage of viral proteins in budding progeny. Budding progeny break free from the cell as (12) immature progeny within the extracellular milieu, which undergo maturation with the completion of viral protease-mediated processing into (13) mature progeny capable of propagating productive HIV-1 infection in neighboring and distal cells; (14) Inward budding of the cellular plasma membrane during endocytosis generates endosomes; (15) Inward budding of the endosome membrane generates exosomes with cellular cytosol derived proteins and nucleotides sequestered within the exosome lumen, including HIV Nef and vmiRTAR; (16) Back fusion of the endosome containing exosomes (multivesicular body) to the cellular plasma membrane releases exosomes into the extracellular milieu. Exosomes derived from HIV-1 infected cell cultures may enhance infection through the following mechanisms: (17) transferring viral binding and entry receptors to HIV-1 susceptible cells, thereby increasing the expression of viral binding sites on the surface of the host cellular plasma membrane. (18) Nef-mediated internalization and degradation of CD4 molecules and Nef-mediated reduction of CD4 expression on the surface of exosomes and (19) suppression of Bim and Cdk9 expression and apoptosis by viral miRNA generated from vmiRTAR. The protective roles of cell culture derived exosomes from uninfected cells may be mediated by: (20) Apobec3G enwrapped within exosomes and (21) exosomal CD4 binding to HIV-1 Env.Contrary to evidence demonstrating that HIV-1 mediated hijacking of exosomal machinery enhances infection and thwarts host defense, there is evidence in support of the role of exosomes in inhibiting viral infections. It has been shown that exosomes and related EV have the capability to sample viral antigens and present these antigens to the relevant immune cells, with resultant stimulation of antiviral response in the host [4,8,101]. Exosome-like structures secreted by airway epithelial cells in culture possess anti-viral properties against influenza virus [102]. With respect to HIV-1, exosomes derived from the T lymphocyte H9 cell line possess anti-HIV-1 activity that was attributed to the presence of the cytidine deaminase Apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing, enzyme-catalytic, polypeptide-like 3G (Apobec3G) enwrapped in the exosomes [103]. Since Apobec3G is an anti-HIV-1 host factor, this finding suggest that exosomes may contribute to host innate immune defense mechanisms by enwrapping and transferring anti-viral factors to target cells. 5. The Function of Biofluid Exosomes is Distinct from Cell Culture-Derived Exosomes: Intrinsic Protection from HIV-1Unlike biofluid exosomes generated by a multitude of cell types in vivo, cell culture exosomes originate from homogeneous and often times transformed cells that hardly recapitulate the in vivo microenvironment. Indeed, exosomes derived from tumor cells cultured in vitro differ from exosomes isolated from tumor cells grown in vivo [104]. The anti-viral properties of cell culture derived exosomes pales in comparison to that observed in biofluid derived exosomes. Early studies on exosome functions in the late 1990 and early 2000 revealed that constituents of human semen could impair bacterial growth and can neutralize measles virus [105,106], illustrating the potential protective properties of semen. Thus far, exosomes isolated from two types of biofluid from HIV-1-seronegative donors have been shown to inhibit HIV-1 infection (Figure 2). Exosomes purified from breast milk inhibit HIV-1 trans infection mediated by dendritic cells (DC) by binding DC-SIGN and blocking DC-mediated viral transfer to CD+ T cells [29]. The binding of DC-SIGN by milk exosomes signify potential competition between milk exosomes and HIV-1 for binding to DC-SIGN.Figure 2Model of biofluid exosome antiviral functions within the HIV-1 life cycle: (1–13) HIV-1 life cycle as defined in Figure 1 legend. Biofluid exosomes may interact with free HIV-1 and (14) sequester free viral particles within exosome aggregates thereby inhibiting HIV-1 infection by preventing virus from binding to target cells. Biofluid exosomes that present CD4 molecules on the exosome surface may (15) compete for viral Env binding to CD4 on the host cell plasma membrane, thereby inhibiting HIV-1 infection by preventing virus from binding to target cells. Competition may also occur via binding of exosome ligands/receptors to other receptors/ligands on the viral envelope (e.g., phosphatidylserine/annexin interaction). Exosomes are taken up by cells via direct fusion with the plasma membrane or by endocytosis into endosomes that may subsequently fuse with lysosomes. Exosomal interaction with HIV-1 may lead to entry of the virus into the cell via endocytosis, leading to (16) exosomal delivery of virus into lysosomes for degradation, subsequently inhibiting HIV-1 infection. (17) HIV-1 gRNA may be degraded or otherwise rendered non-functional by exosomal antiviral proteins including Apobec3g, or following translation of exosomal antiviral mRNA into antiviral proteins including Apobec3g, or by antiviral exosomal miRNA. Exosomal antiviral protein, mRNA or miRNA may (18) inhibit viral RT and reverse transcription processes by blocking RT activity, blocking RT binding to RNA or facilitating degradation of RT. In the event that exosomes fuse with the cellular plasma membrane, they may enrich the cell surface with proteins that may function to (19) tether budding progeny virions to the plasma membrane (e.g., BST-2/tetherin, PS/Annexin), preventing them from diffusing into the extracellular milieu and subsequently preventing HIV-1 propagation.In sharp contrast to milk exosomes, blood-derived exosomes from plasma of HIV-1-seronegative donors do not inhibit HIV-1 infection [29]. The inability of blood-derived exosome to inhibit HIV-1 infection was later confirmed in a different study by our research group [24]. However, we discovered that exosomes purified from semen of HIV-1-seronegative donors inhibit infection of various cell types by different strains of HIV-1 (Lab adapted and transmitted founder viruses) irrespective of co-receptor usage [24]. Internalization of semen-derived exosomes into target cells, namely human vaginal epithelial cells occurs mostly by endocytosis and partly by direct fusion with the cellular plasma membrane [27]. Upon internalization, semen-derived exosomes potently block cell to cell and trans HIV-1 infection from vaginal epithelial cells to monocytic and lymphocytic cell lineages, as well as peripheral blood leukocytes (PBLs) [27]. The anti-viral activity of semen-derived exosomes extends to other retroviruses and was observed in vivo. Semen-derived exosomes block intravaginal replication of murine AIDS (mAIDS) virus complex and restrict lymphatic mAIDS dissemination in mice [27]. While semen-derived exosomes potently block HIV-1 infection, both semen and blood-derived exosomes have no effect on replication of Herpes simplex virus (HSV) types 1 and 2 [24]. These observations signify that the antiviral activity of semen-derived exosomes is specific for HIV-1 and murine retroviruses. Although the exact mechanism of action of semen-derived exosomes is yet to be determined, we found that semen-derived exosomes exert a post-entry block on HIV-1 replication by orchestrating deleterious effects on virion-associated reverse transcriptase (RT) activity, thereby impairing particle infectivity [24]. While semen-derived exosomes inhibit viral RT activity, viral progeny generated in the presence of these exosomes have equivalent amount of p24 but diminished viral RNA (Gag) compared to progeny generated in the absence of semen-derived exosomes. It is surprising that the same amount of p24 is detected by ELISA and immunoblot analysis of HIV-1 progeny generated in the presence or absence of semen-derived exosomes, yet the fitness of the progeny generated in the presence of semen-derived exosomes is ablated. Intact progeny p24 in the face of diminished Gag RNA and reduced RT activity indicates that either (i) steady-state p24 from incoming virus is sufficient for incorporation into progeny virions; (ii) the threshold of Gag mRNA needed to generate p24 CA protein is established and, thus, p24 packaging into progeny is unaffected by semen-derived exosomes or (iii) p24 can be incorporated into exosomes as previously observed [64].HIV-1 reverse transcription is integral to synthesis of nascent viral copy DNA required for establishing productive infection and semen-derived exosomes impair this process. Therefore, it appears that semen-derived exosomes have early post entry effects on HIV-1. If the effect of semen-derived exosomes on HIV-1 is solely on the RT process, then semen-derived exosome-mediated deleterious effects on HIV-1 observed at later time points past reverse transcription may be downstream effects of a cascade of events initiated during reverse transcription. It is also possible that semen-derived exosomes may affect HIV-1 at different stages in the viral life cycle. Further studies are needed to investigate these propositions. Additionally, additional studies are required to understand the effect of breast milk and semen-derived exosomes purified from HIV-1-seropositive donors on virus replication.Not only do semen-derived exosomes have innate antiviral properties, these exosomes have natural anti-inflammatory functions. Various investigators implicated semen and its constituents in varied processes relating to spermatozoa function and protection from the female reproductive tract (FRT) immune responses [106,107,108,109,110,111,112,113,114,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123]. Semen is thought to have both immuno-stimulatory and -suppressive properties. The cell-free component of semen, seminal plasma, contains signaling molecules (cytokines, chemokines, and prostaglandins). Interaction between these molecules and the female genital epithelial cells may induce an inflammatory cascade that includes recruitment and activation of cells. In contrast, exosomes in semen are speculated to be immunosuppressive [124]. Such speculation was later supported by a preliminary study from the Hladik lab showing that exposure of cells (DCs and PBMCs) to semen-derived exosomes results in impaired production of TNFα and IFNγ, co-stimulatory capacity of antigen-presenting cells, and antigen-specific T cell responses [125]. While immunosuppression mediated by semen-derived exosomes may exacerbate some disease outcomes; for viruses that thrive in an immune activated state, such as HIV-1, the anti-inflammatory function of semen-derived exosomes may be beneficial to the host. For example, semen-derived exosomes could suppress HIV-1-induced inflammation, cell activation, cytokine/chemokine synthesis, and immune cell homing to the site of infection. All of these have the potential to diminish virus spread, especially in the mucosa, thereby preventing sexual transmission of HIV-1.6. Exosome-Associated HIV-1 Host Restriction Factors, Cytokines, and miRNAsExosomes exert their biological functions by direct interactions with recipient cells, or through the transfer of their cargo following membrane fusion with or endocytosis into target cells. Because various molecules are recruited into exosomes, it is has been suggested that exosomes can simultaneously transfer multiple effector molecules to target cells. This unique ability makes exosomes superior vehicles for cargo shuttling compared to other classical secretion mechanisms such as those used by cytokines, chemokines and hormones. Various reports have shown that exosomes from different sources can transfer pro- and anti- viral factors to target cells with resultant modulation of host cell responses [28,89,103]. Exosomal bio-physical and -chemical properties, cargo composition and functions differ depending on a range of factors including but not limited to the source of the exosomes and infection status of donors. For cell culture derived exosomes, variability in morphology, size and composition could be managed to an extent. However, as biofluid exosomes are generated from a diverse array of cell types within the host, it is plausible that donor dependent variability affects the cargo composition of exosomes isolated from the same biofluid but from different individuals; although, the antiviral activity of semen-derived exosomes from different donors is not significantly different [24,27]. Given the anti-HIV-1 activity of exosomes from milk and semen, it is conceivable that these exosomes are loaded with molecules that are known to restrict HIV-1 infection. It is also possible that exosomes from these sources elicit signaling events that consequently block HIV-1 infection. Indeed, semen-derived exosomes have been shown to be enriched in mRNA encoding an array of host restriction factors (HRF) including Apobec3 family members and BST-2/tetherin [24]. Donor variability was observed in some Apobec3 and BST-2 mRNA. Apobec3C, Apobec3D/E, Apobec3F, and Apobec3G mRNA were uniformly present in semen-derived exosomes from all donors examined. However, donor variability was observed in mRNA expression of Apobec3A, Apobec3B, Apobec3H and BST-2 in semen-derived exosomes. While semen-derived exosomes uniformly contain Apobec3C, Apobec3D/E, Apobec3F, and Apobec3G mRNA, blood-derived exosomes from all donors examined were completely devoid of Apobec3B, Apobec3C, Apobec3D/E, Apobec3H and BST-2 mRNA. While these observations are interesting, it is cautioned that these exosomes were not autologous. Therefore, it is necessary to profile HRF cargos from autologous semen and blood -derived exosomes during cargo composition and comparison studies. Additionally, the mRNA cargo of human semen-derived exosomes is transferable to mice. Apobec3G mRNA in exosomes isolated from human semen was transferred to mice following intravaginal inoculation of mice with these exosomes. In these mice, human Apobec3G mRNA was detected in vaginal cells [27]. This finding supports the premise that semen-derived exosomes transfer genetic material between heterologous species. Interestingly, not all HRF mRNA present in semen-derived exosomes were transferred to murine vaginal cells, suggesting the involvement of a possible specific requirement for heterologous cargo shuttling. It is unclear whether any of the HRFs contained in semen-derived exosomes participate in HIV-1 inhibition. Because HIV-1 counteracts the activity of the various HRFs loaded into exosomes, it is of interest to know whether differences exists in HRF composition of semen-derived exosomes derived from HIV-1-seronegative and HIV-1-seropositive donors. Going by current literature that showed that exosomes protect Apobec3G from HIV-1 Vif [103], it is speculated that HRF repertoire in exosomes from HIV-1-seropositive donors will be intact. Aside from the exosomal HRF mRNA cargo, exosomes isolated from blood of HIV-1-seropositive donors are enriched with proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines compared to seronegative plasma controls. In addition, cell surface expression of CD38 activation marker is increased on naive and central memory CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells in the presence of HIV-1-seropositive blood-derived exosomes compared to HIV-1-seronegative exosomes [126]. Therefore, it is possible that unlike semen-derived exosomes which have immunosuppressive properties, blood-derived exosomes may have immunostimulatory and cell activation effects. The presence of inflammatory molecules in blood-derived exosomes from HIV-1-seropositive individuals may facilitate HIV-1 propagation in the host by promoting inflammatory response, immune activation, chemotactic signaling, and massive supply of HIV-1-susceptible leukocytes to sites of infection. Indeed, we and others have observed that exosomes purified from HIV-1-seronegative blood donors have no effect on HIV-1 infectivity in vitro [24,29]. The role of exosomes from HIV-1-seropositive donors on HIV-1 infection of target cells is yet to be determined.Additionally present in exosomes are miRNAs that have been shown to be protective against HIV-1. These include miR-28 [127,128], miR-29a [129,130], miR-29b [129], miR-125b [128,131], miR-149 [129], miR-150 [127,128], miR-198 [132], miR-223 [127], miR-324 [129], miR-378 [129], and miR-382 [127]. The level and roles of these miRNAs in the different types of exosomes are undetermined. For example, miR-382 is an anti-HIV-1 miRNA [127] that is packaged into semen [25,133] and blood [133] exosomes. Because semen-derived exosomes inhibit HIV-1 infection [24,27] but blood-derived exosomes do not [24,29], it appears that exosome associated miR-382 may not function as anti-HIV-1. If this logic is proven to be true, then anti-HIV-1 miRNA targeted to exosomes may have different functions unrelated to HIV-1. In addition, HIV-1-derived miRNA, including vmiRTAR [89], vmiR88 [90], and vmiR99 [90] are present in exosomes isolated from HIV-1 infected cultured cells and blood of HIV-1-seropositive patients. While vmiRTAR enhanced infection, vmiR88, and vmiR99 may function as chronic immune activators. The summary of HIV-1-relevant miRNA found in exosomes is presented in Table 1.viruses-07-02810-t001_Table 1Table 1HIV-1-relevant miRNA found in exosomes.miRNAExosome SourceReferencesmiR-28Dendritic cells, J77 T cells, semen, blood [133,134]miR-29aBreast milk, semen, dendritic cells [25,133]miR-29bSemen, blood[25,133]miR-125bDendritic cells semen, blood [25,133,134]miR-149Breast milk, semen dendritic cells, blood [25,133]miR-150J77 T cells, breast milk, blood, semen [133]miR-198Dendritic cells [133]miR-223Dendritic cells, serum, breast milk, blood, semen [133,134]miR-324Semen, blood, dendritic cells,[25,133]miR-378Breast milk, semen, blood, dendritic cells,[25,133]miR-382Semen, blood [25,133]vmiR88Primary alveolar macrophages, serum [90]vmiR99Primary alveolar macrophages, serum [90]vmiRTARJ1.1 cells [89]7. Exosomes and Their Promise for Diagnostic and Therapeutic ApplicationsAs stated earlier, exosomes loaded with host or pathogen derived RNA molecules, proteins and lipids are released by cells into their surrounding environment. The presence of large numbers of exosomes containing various molecules in several biofluids indicate that (i) in vivo, host cells can tolerate exosomes and their contents; (ii) exosomes serve as a vehicle to shuttle RNA molecules, proteins and lipids between cells over short and long distances; and (iii) the host could use exosomes as a channel for elimination of antigens. For instance, cancer patients have high concentrations of exosomes loaded with tumor-specific molecules. In these patients, exosomes can be used and is being evaluated for their potential use as cancer biomarkers. As biofluid exosomes carry and transport specific proteins and various RNA species derived from multiple organs, biofluid exosomes may be associated with a given disease or carry protective molecules [24,27,29,135]. The use of exosomes as biomarkers for therapeutic purposes for cancer has gathered momentum. However, the field of HIV-1 study is still in its infancy with regards to exosomes. Exosomes could potentially be used as biomarkers and as therapeutic tools for HIV-1. The detection of exosomes in blood of HIV-1-seropositive patients and the identification of HIV-1 proteins and RNAs in exosomes isolated from the blood of HIV-1-seropositive patients emphasizes the potential utility of exosomes and their contents as biomarkers for HIV-1. The demonstrations that HIV-1 RNA and protein are packaged into blood-derived exosomes suggest that in HIV-1-seropositive people, the body could clear viral factors by secreting them into exosomes. Blood-derived exosomes could therefore be harnessed as diagnostic and prognostic HIV-1 biomarkers by (i) stimulating the release of exosomes containing the HIV-1 genome to rid the body of viral factors; and (ii) efficiently targeting the HIV-1 genome to exosomes that have been engineered for efficient degradation. The presence of the HIV-1 genome in blood-derived exosomes could also be used as a tool to assess the efficacy of treatment. This could be done by evaluating the presence of specific viral molecules in exosomes as a means of assessing treatment efficacy with respect to suppression of viral load or disease progression.Based on recent observations that exosomes derived from human breast milk [29] and from human semen [24,27] control HIV-1 infection of cells in culture (Figure 3), the anti-HIV effectors in biofluid exosomes or biofluid exosome based synthetic nanoparticle delivery systems can potentially be used as therapeutics in HIV-1 prevention and/or treatment. Furthermore, exosomes derived from human semen inhibit intravaginal replication of mAIDS virus when they were administered into the mouse vagina simultaneously with the virus [27] as would occur in human vaginal mucosa exposed to semen of HIV-1-seropositive individuals during sexual transmission. Systemic virus spread was reduced in mice that received the virus/exosome complex and plasma viremia was decreased. These observations suggest a positive therapeutic effect of semen-derived exosomes on mucosal HIV-1 transmission and systemic virus dissemination [27]. It is tempting to speculate that milk and semen-derived exosomes are endowed with intrinsic protective properties that limit the vertical [milk-borne) and horizontal (sexual) transmission of HIV-1. The beneficial roles of these exosomes are known but the mediators have yet to be identified. Upon identification of the mediators, several potential approaches for their use in therapeutic applications for HIV-1 include (i) engineering exosomes containing specific protective molecules; (ii) designing small molecule drug exosome mimics and delivering them to the targets, and (iii) delivery of semen-derived exosomes themselves to the mucosa as natural carriers of anti-HIV-1 molecules.Furthermore, nanoparticle delivery systems mimicking semen-derived exosomes may have significant contribution in vaginal mucosal drug delivery based on the fact that semen-derived exosomes are more efficiently internalized than blood-derived exosomes and at least one cationic liposome formulation [27]. It is also plausible that nanoparticle delivery systems mimicking semen-derived exosomes may serve as a better delivery system because semen-derived exosomes can naturally overcome mucosal barriers that other artificially created vesicles are unable to surmount.8. Conclusions and PerspectivesIn order to achieve an HIV-1/AIDS-free world, we are in need of discovery and design of efficacious and affordable treatments. As this review outlines, discovering that exosomes mediate important cell-to-cell communication through the delivery of HIV-1 and host molecules has underlined particular interest for the use of exosomes from various sources as potential HIV-1 biomarkers and therapeutic tools. However, although significant advances have been made, many questions remain about the role of exosomes in general and biofluid exosomes in particular in intercellular communication, immune modulation, and immune surveillance. Additionally, little is known about the precise molecular mechanisms of biofluid exosome biogenesis, release, targeting, and interactions with target cells within the organs where they are released. Biofluid exosomes are heterogenous vesicles derived from different cell types and, as a result, they are likely to perform specific functions in their cognate environment. This issue remains to be clarified. For biofluid exosomes to be a reliable diagnostic and therapeutic tool, robust isolation systems that will purify exosomes of interest from total EV populations must emerge. Because exosomes encase HIV-1-derived or host-derived factors, these factors constitute a network of communication that may act in a specific context or in association with many other players. The consequence is eventual conditioning of host cells. Studies that will elucidate the physiological roles of biofluid exosomes in HIV-1 infection and transmission are imperative before exosomes themselves or biofluid-derived exosome-based synthetic nanoparticles can be used diagnostically and therapeutically. Currently, many questions such as (i) which cell types release and internalize biofluid exosomes in vivo; (ii) what is the half-life of biofluid exosomes in vivo; and (iii) what is the mechanism of exosomal internalization in vivo, remain unanswered. Identifying the answers to these questions will fundamentally push the frontiers of our understanding of the roles exosomes play in HIV-1 pathogenesis. Figure 3Biofluid derived exosomes modulate HIV-1 infection: (1–6) HIV-1 life cycle as defined in Figure 1 legend. Exosomes derived from human semen inhibit direct, trans and cell-to-cell transmission of HIV in human PBL, T cells and monocytes by (7) mediating deleterious effects on HIV reverse transcriptase and reverse transcription processes. Exosomes derived from human blood plasma or blood serum have no effect on HIV infectivity. Exosomes derived from human breast milk inhibit cell-to-cell transmission of HIV from monocyte-derived dendritic cells (MDDC) to CD4+ T cells by (8) competing for binding of HIV to DC-SIGN on MDDC. Biofluid derived exosomes may also inhibit HIV infectivity by (9) exosomal donation or transfer of antiviral cargo to recipient cells; (10) inhibition of cellular signaling or molecules required for HIV replication or (11) induction of cellular signaling or donation of exosomal factors resulting in enhancement of expression of molecules responsible for host protection against HIV.


Title: Insights into the HIV-1 Latent Reservoir and Strategies to Cure HIV-1 Infection

1. IntroductionOver 70 million people have been infected with human immunodeficiency virus 1 (HIV-1) so far since the first outbreak of the HIV-1 epidemic [1] in 1981, and since then, millions of survivors have lived with HIV-1 who are the beneficiaries of antiretroviral therapy (ART). The 2019 UNAIDS Report and World Health Organization both estimate that there are 38~70 million people living with HIV-1 infection. Of those individuals, almost 25 million have access to antiretroviral therapy (ART). Various studies have shown the half-life of the HIV-1 reservoir can range somewhere between 44 months and 13 years, and in some cohorts, no decay was observed at all. Thus, lifelong ART is required to maintain viral suppression and achieve the best health outcomes in the majority of individuals [2]. Nowadays, a number of evidence has pointed out that the risk of recurrence is related to the latent reservoir (LR) of HIV-1, also known as HIV latency, which is a pool of resting CD4+ T cells infected with replication-competent proviruses in patients treated with ART. These infected cells have stopped generating new viral particles temporally or for a long time since the treatment. Nonetheless, these infected memory CD4+ T cells which permit HIV-1 to escape from immune surveillance are the main obstacle to HIV elimination. Thus, using ART treatment to eliminate HIV is currently unrealistic.At present, the eradication of HIV is still in need of accurate quantification of the HIV-1 LR. Although a barrage of improved assays for measuring the HIV reservoir size has been developed, there is no broad consensus on the methodology yet. Despite more than three decades of efforts, the understanding of the HIV-1 latent reservoir is not enough, and to have more understanding of it is the priority before thorough elimination of it can be achieved (a cure) and plasma viremia can be persistently inhibited after ART withdrawal (a functional cure) (Figure 1). In this review, the definition, establishment, and maintenance of the HIV-1 LR are elucidated, and standard and state-of-the-art approaches to quantify reservoir size are reviewed. Finally, current progress of the elimination of the HIV LR is highlighted.On the left is the ART intervention on HIV-1 virus with recurrent infection after HIV-1 LR measurement to eliminate HIV-1. On the right is the strategy of eliminating HIV-1 LR carried out by persistence in long-lived memory T cell and homeostatic promotion of T cells.2. Definition of HIV-1 LRThe HIV-1 LR is defined as a small pool of latently infected cells that persist for decades in people living with HIV (PLWH) who have received ART [3]. These cells harbor integrated and intact proviruses that do not actively produce infectious virions but can do so upon stimulation [4]. Although such cells are extremely rare (around 1 in 1 million resting CD4+ T cells), the reservoir is long-lived, with an estimated half-life of 44 months [5]. This indicates that ART alone will not eradicate the reservoir in a lifetime.The precise nature of the HIV-1 LR remains unclear. The assessment of the transcriptional and translational status of persistent HIV proviruses in virally suppressed individuals challenges our definition of HIV latency. Whereas viral latency is often associated with transcriptional latency (i.e., the lack of transcription from the HIV promoter), an increasing number of studies have indicated that complete silencing of the HIV promoter is a rare event. Therefore, a relatively large fraction and possibly the majority of latently infected cells (cells that do not produce viral particles) may express low levels of short viral transcripts [6]. Although these abortive transcripts are frequently produced, they rarely elongate enough to generate complete or spliced transcripts [7]. Accordingly, the production of viral proteins by latently infected cells appears to be rare [8].2.1. Establishment of the HIV-1 LR: When, Where, and How2.1.1. WhenThe current consensus is that the reservoir is established in individuals immediately after HIV-1 infection and even on early ART [9]. Animal experiments show that HIV-1 LR stays in lymph nodes (LNs) and gut-associated lymphoid tissues (GALTs) within the first 72 h of mucosal simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection [10]. Also, the HIV-1 LR was established in less than 10 days in a unique case who initiated preexposure prophylaxis/ART as long as 10 days after infection, and he experienced viral rebound 225 days after ART withdrawal [11]. The exact time of HIV-1 LR establishment in humans remains unclear.2.1.2. WhereIn the case where ART is not administered, the stimulated CD4+ T cells serve as the main target of HIV infection and die rapidly [12]. Only a minute fraction of these infected cells survive and become a long-lived reservoir of latently infected cells [13]. However, peripheral T cells only account for less than 2% of the total cells infected, so circulating T cells are not a unique site of HIV replication and are unlikely to represent the most favorable environment for the establishment of HIV latency. In the presence of ART, these reservoirs are particularly spread in GALTs and LNs [14] relative to the spleen, liver, lung, central nervous system, and bone marrow [15]. Lymphoid tissues may especially represent a favorable environment for the establishment of viral latency. It is not surprising that HIV-infected cells are found in multiple tissues after years of ART [16].Currently, imaging the persistent tissue reservoir in living people on ART is not possible. Recently, a study of tissues collected from 6 postmortem PLHIV patients revealed that HIV proviruses existed in all 28 tissues examined wherein the blood and the lymphoid system serve as the main vectors for virus dissemination throughout the body [16]. Besides, HIV-1 DNA is highly enriched in CD4+ tissue-resident memory T (TRM) cells in the female genital tract (particularly the cervix) [17] and the male genital tract which may be a tissue reservoir where macrophages are enriched [18]. Macrophages enriched in these tissues may serve as potential viral sanctuaries. However, whether reproductive tracts are tissue reservoirs remains poorly understood.2.1.3. HowThere are two models for the establishment of the HIV-1 LR. First, as CD4+ TRM cells are the predominant population [12], the activation-to-quiescence transition using a defined cocktail of cytokines, including tumor growth factor-beta (TGF-β), interleukin-10 (IL-10), and IL-8, probably provides an opportunity for the establishment of HIV latency and allows the persistence of latently infected cells [19]. In the immune microenvironment, checkpoint molecules expressed on T cells are the immunosuppressive factors that significantly repress T cell activation and contribute to HIV-1 latency, of which PD-1, LAG-3, and TIGIT are the known markers to block HIV-1 persistence during ART [20–22]. More studies have explained the active role of PD-1 that blocks HIV transcription [23, 24]. Of note, the coculture of monocytes or myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) with activated HIV-infected T cells augments the transition to a postactivation state of latency, indicating the potential cell-to-cell contact during the establishment of HIV latency [25, 26].The two means for the establishment of viral latency consist of direct infections in CD4+ TRM cells and cell-to-cell transmission between infected and uninfected CD4+ TRM cells. Although the inefficient infection in CD4+ TRM cells can be blocked during the HIV replication cycle, the indirect cell-to-cell transmission gives way to HIV-1 latency [27]. Besides, soluble factors are also contributors to HIV-1 latency in resting CD4+ T cells. For instance, IL-7, for T cell homeostasis, regulates the activity of the restriction factor SAMHD1 and exacerbates the vulnerability of CD4+ TRM cells to HIV-1 [28, 29]. Similarly, the chemokines CCL19 and CCL20 participating in cell trafficking from other tissues to LNs and GALTs may increase the possibility of HIV infection in CD4+ TRM cells via modifying the actin cytoskeleton to allow the nucleus of HIV-1 DNA to enter a LR of quiescent integrated HIV-1 DNA [30]. The sites of CD4+ TRM cell recruitment may impact HIV-1 susceptibility: CD4+ T cells derived from lymphoid organs (the spleen and tonsil), subjected to moderate-level activation, benefit from the establishment of the HIV LR [31].3. Maintenance of the HIV-1 LRSeveral studies over the past decade have reported that such clonal expansions of latently infected cells—the duplication of partial and near-full-length HIV genomes and/or integration sites—are the key mechanism of maintenance of the HIV reservoir [32–34]. The infected cells in clones in samples of patients undergoing ART may differ from each other [35]. The following mechanisms explain the heterogeneity [36]: (a) antigen-driven clonal proliferation of infected cells [37], (b) homeostatic proliferation of infected cells [38], and (c) HIV integration-induced cell proliferation [39]. Although the first mechanism is a major driver of the maintenance of the HIV reservoir as confirmed by most researchers, the effect of the coexistence of the other two mechanisms cannot be excluded [36, 40]. Therefore, clonal expansion of latently infected cells contributes to the maintenance of the HIV-1 LR.4. Measurement of the HIV-1 LRDespite clinically efficacious ART, replication-competent HIV-1 persists as latent proviral DNA capable of rekindling viral replication after ceasing ART. Therapies to eliminate latent HIV-1 are being developed for a complete cure. Accurate assays to quantify intact or rebound-competent HIV-1 are critical to this effort. Four challenges obstruct the precise quantification of the HIV-1 LR. The gravest one is that in ART-treated PLWH with mutations and/or deletions, HIV-1 proviruses produce defective mutants which are unable to replicate. However, not all intact genomes (without defective mutations or deletions) can produce virions after induction. It is more of an occasional incidence of latently infected cells. Finally, most HIV reservoirs that reside in tissues cannot be accurately sampled with current specimen-collection approaches [41–44].The conventional quantification of HIV, the gold standard VOA assay, can merely detect the transcribed replicates of totiviruses; therefore, this technique underestimates reservoir levels. However, PCR analysis for total HIV DNA or Alu-Gag PCR also quantitates a large amount of defective HIV DNA fragments and thereby overestimates reservoir levels. Bruner et al. developed a new method, the intact proviral DNA assay (IPDA), to amplify HIV ψ fragments and the Env gene using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). HIV DNAs used for the amplification of ψ are limited to those whose 3′ ends are defective, and only the DNAs used for the amplification of Env have defective 5′ ends. Double-positive HIV DNA amplified using IPDA is intact HIV DNA, which not only corroborates the results from the VOA assay but also compensates for the flaw of the PCR assay that can yield false-positive results due to defective viral fragments. Based on these studies, reservoirs of potential intact HIV DNA and those of defective HIV DNA hold completely different traits and effectively overcome the three challenges mentioned above (the fourth challenge is an objective existence).IPDA for HIV DNA quantification using ddPCR targets multiply regions of proviral DNA to exclude deleted and hypermutated proviruses. The ddPCR is the third-generation PCR technique, which partitions samples into 20,000 droplets, and each droplet contains an independent reaction system and tremendously reduces interference from background nucleic acid molecules during PCR amplification. Therefore, it is competent in the quantification of low-copy nucleic acid molecules of interest. The ddPCR technique uses the ratio of positive to negative droplets among the 20,000 droplets to calculate the copy number of target nucleic acid molecules, without the use of standard substances for standard curves. Here is the specific principle: an amplicon is added at the packaging signal and the conserved site in the env sequence, respectively, excluding 90% of deficiency; at the same time, a mutant protein is added to bind to the amplified loci of env, excluding 95% of most frequent mutations. As a result, double-positive DNA fragments can be identified as intact proviral DNA. Meanwhile, two amplicons with the same distance as that of the reference RPP30 gene in another hole are designed for shearing, control (the strand break of DNA between two amplicons during DNA extraction will reduce the double-positive number detected and there by the results could be underestimated), and cell quantification. By this means, the size of reservoirs can be calculated.IPDA is optimal for high-throughput analysis in large interventional or observational clinical studies. For instance, a recent longitudinal cohort analysis has evaluated the decay rate of intact and defective proviruses in a large number of patients by using this technique [45]. Another study using this measurement found no relationship between heroin or cocaine use and the reservoir size [46]. This technique offers competitive advantages of 97% elimination of defective proviruses, only about 1.5-fold overestimation of the LR size, simpler operation, lower cost, and greater speed than traditional QVOA. Nonetheless, sequence polymorphisms in some patients, the requirement for alternative primers or proteins, and within-clade diversity dependence obstruct the efficient amplification so the provirus inducibility cannot be accurately quantified.5. Elimination of the HIV-1 LR5.1. Strategies Targeting the HIV-1 Replication Cycle5.1.1. Early ARTEarly initiation of ART is aimed at reducing virus diversification since the diagnosis of HIV infection can prevent damage of immune function as much as possible, minimize HIV-related complications in treated individuals, and prevent human-to-human transmission by lowering viremia [47]. Early ART initiation currently cannot achieve an HIV cure in adults or mothers; however, the infants can be the beneficiaries of the early interventions. As these early interventions reshape the association between the virus and the immune system, HIV infection can be ultimately controlled after ART withdrawal in a certain proportion of patients that have received ART at an early stage. This population accounts for approximately 5–10% of all HIV-infected individuals, who become posttreatment controllers achieving ART-free viral remission [48, 49].During long-term ART, much of the reservoir derive from the cells that are infected just before treatment initiation. It is arguable that in the preintervention period, the putative reservoir is unstable [50, 51]. This implies that during early ART, the rapidly changing immune environment shifts the balance toward a state in which HIV latency can be achieved. Presumably, the massive reduction in HIV-1-associated inflammation and T cell activation reduces the turnover of the reservoir, leading to the generation of longer-lived cells harboring intact genomes. Immune stimulation under the cover of ART (preferably with the coadministration of a therapy that induces the killing of infected cells) might work best during this window of opportunity.5.1.2. TransplantationThere are two studies of two patients (from Berlin and London) who underwent allogeneic stem cell transplantations from CCR5132/132 donors who achieved an HIV-1 cure. After monitoring their plasma viremia for 10 and 2 years, respectively, negative results were found after ART withdrawal [52, 53]. These studies reported the depletion of the HIV-1 LR during pretransplant conditioning, and the reservoirs were replaced with donor cells with Delta 32 CCR5 deletion to confer resistance to R5-tropic HIV-1 infection [54]. As there are a lack of CCR5132/132 donors, diagnosis delay of HIV infection in most cases, and massive expenditure, HIV cure for most patients is unrealistic. Therefore, silencing, the basic principle of HIV-1 cured, or HIV-1 LR elimination is the priority.5.1.3. Gene EditingRecent years have seen the emergence of several gene editing tools, such as CRISPR Cas9 and zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN). These techniques are potent in enhancing host resistance or disrupting viral latency through the silencing of integrated provirus in the host, which paves the way for an HIV-1 cure. These strategies offer the precise correction of sequences in a genome. Different from LRAs, they can produce desired outcomes without a physiological impact throughout the body. Notably, as several studies reported off-target effect, the safety of these methods must be evaluated before the clinical application. [55] So far, the only clinical study has achieved Delta 32 CCR5 deletion using ZFN-targeted editing to help patients gain partial genetic resistance to R5-tropic HIV-1 infection [56]. Most studies focus on the efficacy of CRISPR-Cas9 because of its simple operation. Some studies have performed CCR5 or CXCR4 ablation in CD4+ TRM cells using CRISPR-Cas9 to protect cells against CCR5 or CXCR4 tropic HIV-1 infection [57–59]. To specifically knockout or silence the HIV-1 proviral genome, which is the premise of HIV-1 LR elimination, is feasible with CRISPR Cas9 therapy [60, 61]. Besides, by targeting other domains of the HIV-1 proviral genome, the resultant indels in these domains introduced by NHEJ-mediated repair can result in frameshift mutations to deactivate the provirus [62, 63]. This strategy, in combination with a novel drug delivery system, was successfully performed in mouse models [64]. During the viral replication cycle, though multiple editable sites can be targeted in the HIV-1 proviral genome using a CRISPR-Cas9 strategy, therefore, more options for quasispecies diversity are provided; the lack of adequate viral vectors or lipid compounds is a barrier to effective delivery [65]. Considering that there is a substantial number of LNs, GALTs, and other tissues with HIV-1 LR, the elimination of the reservoirs is a project that has to be exerted with such great effort that current strategies can hardly make it.5.1.4. Shock and KillThe shock and kill strategy was put forward by Siliciano and Deeks in 2012. It is a combination strategy using latency-reversing agents (LRAs) in immunotherapeutic treatment (e.g., T cell vaccines) to shock and kill intervention activated cells via reactivating them, thereby reducing the size of the LR and preventing viremia rebound [66, 67]. Since the single use of either constituent merely shows limited clinical benefit, the combination strategy is yet to be tested, leaving its efficacy to be in doubt. However, its flaws are currently known as toxic side effects and systemic immune response alongside HIV-1 latency reversal.The commonly used LRAs can be assigned to six groups by pharmacological mechanisms: histone posttranslational modification modulators, nonhistone chromatin modulators, NF-κB stimulators, TLR agonists, extracellular stimulators, and a miscellaneous category of unique cellular mechanisms [68]. The nonspecific histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) characterized to acetylate the histone of integrated proviral promoters in vitro are the most prominent at present. Clinical trials for the promising HDACI candidates, including vorinostat, disulfiram, and romidepsin, reported that these HDACIs effectively induced viral replication and killed activated cells harboring HIV once the immune system was activated [69–71].Inspired by a current finding that some of the latently infected CD4+ T cells are HIV-specific, efforts have been made to develop cost-effective and safe HIV-specific vaccines to reverse HIV latency [72, 73]. HIV vaccines reactivate HIV-specific latently infected cells to eliminate them via stimulated cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) [74], thus offering a near-complete representation of viral quasispecies and an enhanced killing effect of the shock and kill strategy [67]. The shock effect can be enhanced using a latency-reversing intervention with the involvement of other immune cells. For instance, GS-9620 (a TLR-7 agonist) can reactivate HIV-infected CD4+ TRM cells probably through IFN-γ release from plasmacytoid dendritic cells [75]. Despite those reported effective results, some studies had inconsistent results and reported that these strategies have nonsignificant effect on diminishing the size of the HIV reservoir in patients [76, 77]. Some studies even reported adverse effect on immune response after the administration of these strategies [78, 79]. Some scholars from the University of Pennsylvania proposed that the research and development of COVID-19 vaccine will help promote the research and development of HIV vaccine. These undesirable results may be ascribed to insufficient killing effect, so extensive studies using strategies with improved killing effects are being developed, including employing broadly neutralizing antibodies and immune checkpoint inhibitors [80], as shown in the details below.5.1.5. Block and LockThere are some data indicating that the HIV genome that becomes preferentially enriched in intergenic regions becomes hypermethylated over time through multiple mechanisms, resulting in less HIV expression [31]. This evolution of proviral distribution reflects the survival of cells with defective HIV viruses and that of the viruses in regions of the genome that promotes “deep latency.” A relatively novel cure strategy, namely, block and lock, by contrast, aimed at reinforcing latency (“block”) rather than inducing latency reversal, has been proposed to prevent viremia rebound following ART discontinuance [81, 82]. To illustrate it in detail, transcriptional gene silencing (TGS) by promoter targeting small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) can rapidly recruit chromatin remodelers to repress HIV-1 transcription [81]. To enhance or maintain the HIV-1 latency, the targeted inhibition of the HIV-1 positive regulator Tat is employed so that the viral replication cycle can be blocked (“lock”) at the transcriptional level [82]. Clinical studies about other potential HIV-silencing techniques are in progress. Among the potential candidates, inhibitors of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) have been justified as effective [83]. Their therapeutic efficacy and safety have been validated in clinical studies.Though the efficacy of “shock and kill” approach is uncertain, evidence has pointed out that it can remarkably diminish the LR size and is expected to achieve ART-free HIV remission.5.1.6. Strategies That Target the Immunity
(1) Therapeutic Vaccination. Therapeutic vaccination enhances the host immune response to HIV-1, thus eradicating the HIV-1 LR or diminishing viremia rebound as a cure. This way leverages vaccine inoculation during sustained ART-mediated viral suppression. During ART interruption, the time to viral rebound, the size of the LR, and the profile of the host immune response are detected to confirm the efficacy of HIV-1 vaccination.HIV-1 vaccines only trigger narrow CTL response to specific HIV-1 proteins (e.g., gag) after inoculation. CTL escape mutants can be enhanced due to a weaker efficacy since the mutation happens during primary infection [84, 85]. Therefore, HIV-1 vaccine is seemingly more reliable as it triggers a broader anti-HIV-1 immune response. Some researchers stated that they would fabricate dendritic cell- (DC-) based vaccines using autologous DCs cocultured or transfected with inactivated HIV-1 to stimulate CD4+ TRM cells to boost immune responses [86, 87]. Interestingly, a study reported that a combination of HIV-1 vaccines and Tat-based immunization, a “block and lock” strategy, continually suppressed the proviral reservoir followed by the recovery of immune function. This suggests that therapeutic vaccination can boost the immune response in HIV-1 infection clearances [88].Currently, HIV-1 vaccines have not yet induced sustained HIV-1 remission. Among these studies, a study by Davenport et al. expressed their concern that although the most efficacious vaccines could block 80% of viral reactivation, viremia rebound could quickly occur in these patients in less than five weeks after ART withdrawal [89]. This indicates that HIV-1 vaccination cannot thoroughly eliminate the latent HIV-1 reservoir, which means it is insufficient to overcome viral rebound and further cure HIV-1 infection. To make up for this shortcoming, in contrast to using HIV-1 vaccination separately, a proper combination of strategies, such as shock and kill, targeted to suppress viral rebound can be more effective in the treatment. Two clinical studies have adopted and validated this combination protocol (gag-based vaccination followed by HDCAI latency reversal); however, plasma viremia has been redetected in less than two weeks after that [90, 91].5.1.7. Broadly Neutralizing Antibodies (bNAbs)Immunotherapies are popular as the HIV antagonists directly target cells expressing the HIV envelop proteins that interact with the lymphocyte cell-surface molecule CD4 so the latent HIV reservoir can be eliminated. Some studies reported that bNAbs targeting specific envelope glycoproteins probably suppress virus replication in vivo [92, 93] by blocking the entry and spreading of virus. Theoretically, bNAbs can trigger host-mediated cytotoxicity by binding themselves to envelope proteins expressed on the surface of infected immune cells that have already been stimulated, thereby reducing the active reservoir. Whether the infected cells are killed in vivo remains unproven, though indirect evidence suggests that it may have some effect [94].Some early proof-of-concept studies about several strategies aimed at enhancing PTC were being completed. Even if bNAbs cannot directly clear the latent cellular reservoirs of HIV infection, it has been postulated that they achieve this for highly immunogenic antibody-antigen response and thus might stimulate potent HIV-specific immune response and achieve post-ART control [95].Hindered by the barriers to HIV-1 vaccine development and HIV-1 eradication and remission, passive transfer of monoclonal HIV-1 neutralizing antibodies is another option. The small-molecule drugs bNAbs featuring longer half-lives currently being used not only have an attractive price but also stimulate the immune response directly and exert a robust killing effect on the latently infected cells. By this means, the course of HIV-1 infection can be shortened. As of now, several clinical trials have used various bNAbs and successfully verified the efficacy of suppressing and controlling viremia rebound [96].5.1.8. Chimeric Antigen Receptor T (CAR-T) CellsCAR-T cell therapy has been employed to treat B cell malignancies [97–99], and there is evidence that reveals its potential in treating HIV-1 infection. For eliminating latently infected cells, autologous T cells can be engineered to express a unique CAR to confer HIV-1 antigen specificity. Patients who receive CAR-T cell therapy can directly raise the CTL response to cells expressing the disease epitope [100], so CAR-T cell therapy can eliminate latently infected cells with HIV-1-associated antigen through the killing effect of CTLs, aiding in the control of the virus without ART. Some in vitro experiments using CAR-T cell therapy have ascertained a satisfactory efficacy of anti-HIV-1 CAR-T cells [101, 102]. An animal experiment based on mouse models where the mouse cells were infected with HIV-1 showed the effective eradication of HIV-1 infected cells [103]. Notably, preclinical studies ascertained that bNAb-based CAR-modified CD8+ T cell therapy is possible as a cure; however, it needs to be validated by high-quality clinical studies. At present, CAR T-cell therapy is flawed with CAR T cell expansion, persistence, off-target effect, and severe cytokine release syndrome (sCRS). More work is needed to address these issues.5.1.9. Immune Checkpoint BlockersThe definition of immune checkpoints is a large sum of regulatory pathways that potently suppress the immune activity, particularly the T cell activity; the associations between immune checkpoints, immune exhaustion, and impaired function have been proven (reviewed by Wykes and Lewin) [104]. CD4+ T cells in the peripheral circulation and lymphoid tissues express high levels of immune checkpoint markers, including programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1), cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4), and other markers that adhere to the membrane to exert the killing effect on HIV once activated [22, 105, 106]. Expressions of immune checkpoints are upregulated in HIV-specific CD4+ and CD8+ T cells when HIV-specific immunity is activated in untreated and treated cases and ex vivo. The single or combined use of antibodies against these markers can enhance the upregulation [21]. In this way, the HIV LR can be reduced [104]. The upregulated checkpoints in latently infected T cells incorporate PD1/PD-L1 and CTLA-4 as the main components. These markers are worthy of research on drug delivery or HIV-1 clearance [107–109]. In vitro studies on the efficacy of immune checkpoint blockers claimed that the HIV-1 LR could be inhibited via the IC-mediated manner, and in vivo studies also confirmed its effect of promoted latency reversal. These results show the anti-HIV-1 potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors [23, 24, 110].6. Combination Therapy for HIV-1 InfectionAt present, no single treatment can eliminate HIV-1 LRs, nor even remission. Combination strategies can minimize the LR level with the host immune system defending against latent infection efficiently after treatment. Most ongoing studies on HIV-1 cures designed to assess their safety and relevant mechanism remain in preclinical and transitional phases. Clinical trials for assessment of combination approaches are getting more and more attention [111], and more efficacious combination strategies are expected to achieve a complete cure or remission [91, 112].7. ConclusionsSome progress in HIV-1 cure development has been made, such as reduced HIV-1 mortality and HIV-1 LR measurement. But there is still a long way to go for the research and development of HIV-1 elimination and remission as preexisting measurement cannot guarantee 100% accurate quantitation of the HIV-1 LR at each stage, and current therapies cannot achieve complete clearance due to the persistent LR.The past decade has witnessed many strategies proposed as a cure, among which the shock and kill therapy is the most promising. Validation studies of the shock and kill strategy reported neither decrease nor increase in the time to viral rebound, and the virus reactivation still existed in vivo. Hence, the enhancement of the killing effect against the HIV-1 LR and alternative methods, such as therapeutic vaccination and immune boosters against HIV-1 infection via augmenting immune-mediated control of HIV-1 after ART withdrawal, is required. Regarding novel methods, such as immune checkpoint inhibitors, gene editing tools, and CAR-T cell therapy, their efficacy needs to be verified in more clinical studies. These approaches have renewed hope for an HIV-1 cure. Posttreatment complications, such as adverse effects weakening immune response, pose challenges in patient compliance and precise assessments of the therapeutic efficacy. The complexity of LR quantification is associated with the inherent variability of the HIV-1 genome, the low incidence of latently infected cells, and the abundance of defective proviruses.Instead of emphasizing on single-agent strategies, the combined use of synergistic anti-HIV-1 agents (e.g., LRAs plus HIV-1 vaccination) is more likely to remarkably reverse the HIV-1 LR and achieve the ultimate goal of long-term ART-free viral remission.


Title: Tetherin does not significantly restrict dendritic cell-mediated HIV-1 transmission and its expression is upregulated by newly synthesized HIV-1 Nef

BackgroundDendritic cells (DCs) are professional antigen presenting cells that bridge innate and adaptive immunity. DCs play an important role in innate immune recognition and activation during HIV infection [1,2]. HIV-1 hijacks DCs to promote viral infection and dissemination [2,3]. Immature dendritic cells (iDCs) in the mucosa are one of the first cells that encounter HIV-1 during initial infection [4,5]. Immature DCs allow productive HIV-1 replication and long-term viral dissemination [6-8]. Depending on the stimulus, maturation of DCs has differential effects on HIV-1 replication and cell-to-cell transmission to CD4+ T cells [6,9-13]. DC-mediated dissemination of HIV-1 occurs through the dissociable processes of trans- and cis-infection, depending on whether productive viral infection is initiated in DCs [6]. Productive HIV-1 infection of DCs can induce DC maturation and trigger antiviral innate immunity through type I IFN responses [14].The major DC subtypes include myeloid DCs and plasmacytoid DCs (pDC) [2,3]. pDCs produce type I IFN upon sensing HIV-1 RNA and envelope protein through Toll-like receptor 7 and other intracellular sensors [15,16]. Type I IFNs are antiviral cytokines produced as part of the innate immune response to an infection to limit virus dissemination and regulate adaptive immune responses to clear the virus and protect against re-infection [17]. As a type I IFN, IFNα can inhibit HIV-1 replication in CD4+ T cells and macrophages in vitro [18,19]. A recent study indicated that IFNα partially inhibits the cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1 between CD4+ T cells [20]. However, it is unknown whether IFNα can block HIV-1 replication in DCs or DC-mediated cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1.Type I IFNs can induce the expression of HIV-1 restriction factors [21], in particular, APOBEC3 family proteins [22-24], Trim5α [25] and tetherin (BST-2 or CD317) [26,27]. Tetherin is a host transmembrane protein [26,27] and is expressed by a wide-range of human and animal cells [28,29]. Mouse and human pDCs [30,31] and human monocyte-derived DCs (MDDCs) [29] express endogenous tetherin, though its function is not fully understood. Tetherin has been suggested as a component of the innate immune responses [32]. It has been shown that human pDCs express an orphan receptor called immunoglobulin-like transcript 7 (ILT7), which binds to tetherin and down-regulates the IFN responses of pDCs [31]. This study suggested that type I IFN produced by pDCs during viral infection may stimulate neighboring cells to express tetherin, which interacts with ILT7 on pDCs to down-modulate IFN and cytokine responses.Tetherin restricts release of various enveloped viruses, including a number of retroviruses and several viral proteins function as antagonists of tetherin (reviewed in [32-36]). Tetherin acts as an HIV-1 restriction factor by directly tethering HIV-1 virions to the surface of an HIV-producing cell [27,37], but its effect on incoming HIV-1 virions during cell-to-cell transmission has not been documented. The HIV-1 protein Vpu antagonizes tetherin by causing the degradation [38-41] and the sequestration of tetherin into a perinuclear compartment away from the site of virus assembly [42]. Moreover, Nef and envelope proteins from some simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIV) [43-46] and HIV-2 envelope proteins [42,47] function as antagonists of tetherin in a species-specific manner.It is unknown whether tetherin plays a role in DC-mediated HIV-1 infection and transmission. Recent studies suggest different roles of tetherin in the cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1 mediated by CD4+ T cells [48-50]. Casartelli et al. reported that tetherin impairs cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1 in several cell lines and primary CD4+ T cells, and transmission of Vpu-defective HIV-1 to target CD4+ T cells is less efficient than that of wild-type (WT) HIV-1 [49]. By contrast, Jolly et al. suggested that tetherin can enhance HIV-1 cell-to-cell transmission, and Vpu-defective HIV-1 is disseminated more efficiently compared with WT HIV-1 in CD4+ Jurkat T cells [48]. Using tetherin-inducible Sup-T1 cells, Kuhl et al. recently reported that tetherin expressed on target cells promotes HIV-1 cell-to-cell transfer, while tetherin expressed on donor cells inhibits viral transmission [50]. The discrepancy between these studies may be due to cell-type-dependent variation in tetherin expression levels [49,50], which remains to be confirmed using other primary HIV-1 target cells, such as DCs or macrophages.In this study, we investigated the role of IFNα and tetherin in MDDC-mediated HIV-1 infection and transmission. We demonstrated that IFNα treatment of DCs restricted DC-mediated HIV-1 infection and transmission to CD4+ T cells. We observed that tetherin expression was transiently upregulated in LPS- or IFNα-matured DCs and knockdown of induced tetherin modestly enhanced mature DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission, but had no significant effect on WT HIV-1 replication in mature DCs. Intriguingly, we found that tetherin was induced by HIV-1 infection of iDCs in a Nef-dependent manner, suggesting that tetherin upregulation is an innate immune response of DCs to HIV-1 infection.ResultsIFNα induces DC maturation but does not alter the expression level of HIV-1 receptorsTo examine the role of type I IFN in DC-mediated HIV-1 infection and transmission, human monocyte-derived iDCs were activated with IFNα to generate mature DCs (mDC-IFNα) and LPS-induced mature DCs (mDC-LPS) were used as positive controls. DCs were separately stained for surface CD86 as a marker of maturation [6,11,14,51], for the HIV-1 receptors CD4 and CCR5, and for the HIV-1 attachment factor DC-SIGN (DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3 grabbing non-integrin). Maturation of DCs with either LPS or IFNα caused significant upregulation of CD86 expression on the cell surface by 6- to 7-fold (Figure 1), indicating that both mature DC types developed a mature DC phenotype. Compared with iDCs, mDC-IFNα did not show any significant differences in the expression of CD4, CCR5 or DC-SIGN, while mDC-LPS showed decreased levels of both CD4 and DC-SIGN (Figure 1). Surface CCR5 was equally expressed at low levels on all DC types (Figure 1). Thus, IFNα-induced maturation of DCs does not significantly affect the expression of HIV-1 receptors.Figure 1IFNα induces DC maturation but does not alter the expression of HIV-1 receptors. iDC, mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα were stained for cell surface expression of CD4, CCR5, DC-SIGN and CD86. On each histogram, the filled peaks are the controls of isotype or secondary antibody alone and the black peaks represent the staining of specific markers. Top and bottom numbers shown in plots are % positive and the geometric mean values of fluorescence intensity, respectively. Results shown are from DCs from a single donor representative of two independent experiments on DCs from different donors.IFNα-induced mature DCs do not mediate efficient HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cellsTo assess the effect of IFNα on DC-mediated transmission of HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells, HIV-1-pulsed mDC-IFNα were co-cultured with Hut/CCR5 cells in viral transmission assays. Single-cycle, R5-tropic luciferase reporter HIV-1 was used and viral transmission was determined by measuring luciferase activity in cell lysates of co-cultures [52]. HIV-1-pulsed DCs alone were used as a control for background replication. mDC-LPS showed a 16-fold increase in viral transmission compared with iDC-mediated moderate transmission of HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells (Figure 2A). By contrast, mDC-IFNα failed to enhance single-cycle HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells (Figure 2A).Figure 2Transmission and replication of HIV-1 is restricted in mDC-IFNα. Transmission of HIV-1 by DCs was assessed by incubating DCs with either the single-cycle luciferase reporter HIV-1 or replication-competent HIV-1 NL(AD8) for 2 h, then co-cultured with Hut/CCR5 target cells for 3 or 2 days, respectively; transmission was assessed by whole-cell luciferase assay or release of p24 in supernatants. (A) mDC-IFNα do not enhance transmission of the single-cycle luciferase reporter virus to CD4+ T cells over iDC transmission levels. cps, counts per second. Mock, mock infected iDCs. Data represent mean ± SEM of three independent experiments performed on DCs from three different donors. U.D., undetectable (lower than detection limit). (B) mDC-IFNα do not enhance transmission of HIV-1 NL(AD8) to CD4+ T cells at 2 dpi (days post-infection) relative to iDC transmission levels. Graph represents mean data ± SEM from three independent experiments performed with DCs from three different donors. DCs were infected with WT NL(AD8) and p24 production in the cell lysates (C) or supernatants (D) was monitored after 2 h or 3-7 dpi using a p24 ELISA. AZT was used to assess productive HIV-1 infection. Data are from one experiment and representative of at least two independent experiments.It has been established that there are two distinct phases in DC-mediated HIV-1 transfer to CD4+ T cells [8]. In the first phase (within 24 hr after infection), incoming HIV-1 is transferred, whereas in the second phase (24-72 hr after infection), newly synthesized HIV-1 can be transmitted [8]. To examine the two-phase HIV-1 transfer, DC-mediated transmission of replication-competent R5-tropic HIV-1 NL(AD8) was assessed by p24 release in supernatants from the co-cultures of HIV-1-pulsed DCs and Hut/CCR5 cells 2 days later. Compared with iDC-mediated HIV-1 transmission, mDC-LPS transmitted HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells 5-fold more efficiently, while mDC-IFNα transmitted HIV-1 only 2-fold more efficiently (Figure 2B). Together, these data indicate that mDC-IFNα do not mediate efficient HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells.Productive HIV-1 replication is restricted in IFNα-induced mature DCsTo understand the mechanism by which IFNα treatment restricts DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission, the kinetics of HIV-1 uptake, degradation and replication in mDC-IFNα were assessed. The reverse transcriptase inhibitor azidothymidine (AZT) was used to confirm productive HIV-1 replication in DCs. HIV-1 enters DCs mainly through endocytosis, but productive HIV-1 infection of DCs is dependent upon fusion-mediated viral entry [6,53], therefore, cell-associated p24 can be indicative of either HIV-1 entry pathway in DCs and supernatant p24 represents productive viral replication and/or viral release.After 2 h incubation of DCs with HIV-1 NL(AD8), cells were washed extensively, aliquoted and cultured for up to 7 days. The amount of HIV-1 uptake by DCs was quantified by measuring the cell-associated p24 at 2 h post-infection. Compared with iDCs, mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα captured 2-fold more HIV-1 (Figure 2C). Over the time course, iDCs showed increases of both cell-associated p24 (Figure 2C) and released virus (Figure 2D), which were efficiently blocked by AZT, consistent with productive HIV-1 replication. The HIV-1 captured by mDC-LPS were degraded (Figure 2C), or otherwise released into the media over time in a largely replication independent manner (Figure 2D). HIV-1 in mDC-IFNα was rapidly degraded, as the cell-associated p24 reached very low levels at 3 days post-infection (dpi) (Figure 2C). Low levels of HIV-1 release from mDC-IFNα was observed at 5 and 7 dpi, which was significantly reduced in the presence of AZT (Figure 2D), indicating delayed viral replication in mDC-IFNα. These data suggest that IFNα maturation of DCs blocks HIV-1 replication.Pro-inflammatory stimuli upregulate tetherin expression in DCsThe above results indicated that HIV-1 replication and release were restricted in IFNα and LPS-induced mature DCs relative to iDCs, which might be attributed to the induction of HIV-1 restriction factors in mature DCs, such as tetherin. We have reported that pro-inflammatory stimuli (such as LPS) induce DC maturation and modulate the efficiency of DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission [6]. To examine whether pro-inflammatory stimuli upregulate tetherin expression in DCs, DCs from different donors were treated with IFNα and LPS and analyzed for tetherin expression on the surface and in whole cell lysates by flow cytometry and immunoblotting, respectively. Cell surface tetherin in iDCs was low or undetectable (Figure 3A, donor 1 and 2, respectively), which correlated well with the levels of tetherin detected in whole cell lysates (Figure 3B). By contrast, high levels of surface tetherin were detected in mDC-LPS (Figure 3A), which correlated well with high levels of tetherin observed in whole cell lysates (Figure 3B). Although the surface tetherin was low or undetectable in mDC-IFNα, indicating donor variation of tetherin expression in DCs (Figure 3A), high levels of tetherin were detected in whole cell lysates (Figure 3B), suggesting that the tetherin localization in mDC-IFNα is mainly intracellular.Figure 3Pro-inflammatory stimuli upregulate tetherin expression in DCs. Tetherin expression on iDCs, mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα from two different donors was assessed by (A) flow cytometry and (B) immunoblotting. (C) TNF-α treatment of DCs modestly upregulates tetherin expression compared with mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα. Tetherin expression was detected by immunoblotting. (D) HEK293T and HeLa cells were used as negative and positive controls, respectively. Numbers shown in flow cytometry plots are % positive (top) and the geometric mean values of fluorescence intensity (bottom) for each histogram.To examine whether other pro-inflammatory factors could induce tetherin expression, iDCs were treated with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), which has been shown to potently induce DC maturation in our previous study [6]. TNF-α treatment of MDDCs modestly upregulated tetherin expression (Figure 3C). The specificity of the tetherin antibody was confirmed using tetherin-negative 293T cells and tetherin-positive HeLa cells (Figure 3D). Thus, treatment of DCs with pro-inflammatory stimuli causes upregulation of tetherin, but sub-cellular localization of tetherin can be dependent upon the type of stimulus.HIV-1 co-localizes with tetherin in mature DCsTetherin can show variable sub-cellular localization [27,28,42,54,55] and the localization of tetherin within a cell is critical for its antiviral function [54]. To examine the localization of HIV-1 with tetherin in mature DCs, confocal microscopy was used after a 2 h HIV-1 infection of DCs. GFP-Vpr-tagged replication-competent HIV-1 (HIV-GFP-Vpr) [56] was used to visualize the localization of HIV-1 in mature DCs. Previous studies have shown that in mDC-LPS, HIV-1 strongly concentrates in an intense patch [10] and co-localizes with the tetraspanin CD81 [12,57,58], but not with lysosomal associated membrane protein-1 (LAMP-1) [58]. Therefore, DCs were stained for CD81, LAMP-1, and tetherin to determine the sub-cellular localization of HIV-1.Consistent with previous reports [12,57,58], HIV-GFP-Vpr localized into an intense patch with CD81 and did not co-localize with LAMP-1 in mDC-LPS (Figure 4A), which was confirmed by the correlation analysis of co-localization (Figure 4B). Furthermore, the intense patch of HIV-1 observed in mDC-LPS co-localized with tetherin (Figure 4A) and the correlation analysis confirmed the co-localization (Figure 4B). In mDC-IFNα, HIV-GFP-Vpr localized into smaller patches near the plasma membrane (Figure 4C) and showed co-localization with CD81 (Figure 4C), with the correlation coefficient being similar to that observed in mDC-LPS (Figure 4B and 4D). HIV-Vpr-GFP did not co-localize with LAMP-1 in mDC-IFNα (Figure 4C) and the correlation coefficient was very low (Figure 4D). The punctate patches of HIV-1 in mDC-IFNα appeared to localize with tetherin (Figure 4C and 4D). These data indicate that in mDC-IFNα and mDC-LPS, HIV-1 localizes into distinct patches that co-localize with CD81 and tetherin but not with LAMP-1. These results suggest that LPS- and IFNα-induced tetherin expression may affect HIV-1 trafficking and transmission in mature DCs.Figure 4HIV-1 localizes with CD81 and tetherin in mature DCs. Localization of HIV-1 with cellular markers within mature DCs was assessed by confocal microscopy. (A) Representative confocal images of localization characteristics of HIV-GFP-Vpr in mDC-LPS; HIV-GFP-Vpr co-localizes with CD81 and tetherin, but not LAMP-1 in mDC-LPS. (B) Pearson's correlation coefficient analysis of mDC-LPS images. (C) Representative confocal images of localization characteristics of HIV-GFP-Vpr in mDC-IFNα; HIV-GFP-Vpr co-localizes with CD81 and tetherin, but not LAMP-1 in mDC- IFNα. (D) Pearson's correlation coefficient analysis of mDC-IFNα images. Numbers on graphic bars indicate the number of cells analyzed. Data presented are the mean ± SEM. Scale bars are 10 μm.Tetherin knockdown in mature DCs modestly enhances HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cellsTo examine the role of tetherin in mature DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells, tetherin expression in mature DCs was silenced with specific siRNA. To achieve efficient knockdown, iDCs were nucleofected with tetherin-specific or control siRNA and matured with LPS or IFNα. Analyses of tetherin expression at 2 days post nucleofection confirmed efficient knockdown of surface tetherin in mDC-LPS (Figure 5A) and total tetherin in mDC-IFNα (Figure 5C). To assess DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission, tetherin-silenced DCs were pulsed with the single-cycle luciferase reporter HIV-1 and co-cultured with the target Hut/CCR5 cells. Tetherin-silenced mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα showed a modest 30-50% increase over the scramble siRNA controls in transmission of HIV-1 to Hut/CCR5 cells (Figure 5B and 5D), though the differences were statistically significant (P < 0.01). These data suggest that high levels of tetherin induced in mature DCs can modestly impair DC-mediated transmission of HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells.Figure 5Tetherin knockdown in mature DCs modestly enhances HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells. Due to the differential localization of tetherin in matured DCs (Figure 3), tetherin knockdown was verified in (A) mDC-LPS by flow cytometry and in (C) mDC-IFNα by immunoblotting. Each plot is representative of three independent experiments performed. NS, non-silencing scramble siRNA control; KD, knockdown using tetherin siRNA. Tetherin knockdown in (B) mDC-LPS and (D) mDC-IFNα significantly enhanced transmission of single-cycle luciferase HIV-1 to Hut/CCR5 cells. Each graph represents mean results ± SEM of two independent experiments performed on DCs from different donors.Induced tetherin in mature DCs has different effects on WT and Vpu-deleted HIV-1 replication and DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cellsTo further examine the role of induced tetherin in replication-competent HIV-1 infection and transmission mediated by DCs, we assessed the effect of tetherin knockdown on the release of WT and Vpu-deleted (ΔVpu) HIV-1 from infected mature DCs and on DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to Hut/CCR5 cells. Efficient tetherin knockdown was achieved in mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα (Figure 5A,C and data not shown). Tetherin-silenced mature DCs were infected with WT NL(AD8) or ΔVpu NL(AD8) and HIV-1 p24 in the supernatants was assessed at 5 dpi, which was generally the peak of HIV-1 replication in iDCs (Figure 2D). Tetherin knockdown in mDC-LPS had no significant effect on the release of WT HIV-1, while the release of ΔVpu HIV-1 was inhibited 2-fold upon tetherin knockdown (Figure 6A). By contrast, the release of WT and ΔVpu HIV-1 from mDC-IFNα was enhanced by 38% and 2-fold upon tetherin knockdown, respectively (Figure 6B). HIV-1 infections of tetherin-silenced mature DCs were performed three times with different donors' cells and there was no statistically significant difference in WT HIV-1 release. Thus, induced tetherin expression in mature DCs does not play a major role in restriction of WT HIV-1 replication.Figure 6Induced tetherin in mature DCs has different effects on WT and Vpu-deleted HIV-1 replication and DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells. (A and B) The effect of tetherin on HIV-1 replication in mature DCs was assessed by tetherin knockdown and infection with WT NL(AD8) or NL(AD8)ΔVpu. Supernatant p24 in mDC-LPS (A) or mDC-IFNα (B) nucleofected with tetherin-specific siRNA or a non-silencing (NS) scramble siRNA control were assessed by p24 ELISA at 5 days post-infection. (C and D) The effect of tetherin on cell-to-cell transmission of WT NL(AD8) or NL(AD8)ΔVpu from tetherin-specific or NS siRNA nucleofected mDC-LPS (C) or mDC-IFNα (D) to Hut/CCR5 cells. Supernatants were collected after 2 days of co-culture and p24 concentration was assessed by ELISA. Graphs represent data from one donor representative of at least two experiments performed on DCs from different donors. Data are presented as mean ± SEM of duplicate samples.We next assessed the effect of tetherin knockdown on WT and ΔVpu HIV-1 transmission from mature DCs to CD4+ T cells. Upon tetherin knockdown in mDC-LPS, transmission of WT and ΔVpu HIV-1 was inhibited by 25% and 2-fold, respectively (Figure 6C). By contrast, upon tetherin knockdown in mDC-IFNα, transmission of WT HIV-1 was enhanced 2-fold, while transmission of ΔVpu HIV-1 was not significantly affected (Figure 6D). As a background control of HIV-1 transmission assays, there were low levels of HIV-1 release from HIV-1-infected DC alone samples (Figure 6C and 6D). Together, these results suggest that induced tetherin in mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα has different effects on ΔVpu HIV-1 replication and transmission, which might be due to the distinct tetherin localization in these cells.HIV-1 replication in iDCs upregulates tetherin independently of VpuTo examine the role of Vpu and tetherin interactions in HIV-1 infection of DCs, DCs were separately infected with WT NL(AD8) and ΔVpu HIV-1, and viral replication was assessed by p24 production in the supernatants over a time course. There was no significant defect in p24 production from infected iDCs and mDC-IFNα when Vpu was absent (Figure 7A). A 40% decrease of p24 release was observed from mDC-LPS at 7 dpi in the absence of Vpu (Figure 7A), suggesting that Vpu could partially counteract tetherin-mediated restriction of HIV-1 release.Figure 7HIV-1 replication in iDCs upregulates tetherin independently of Vpu. (A) Supernatants from DCs infected with WT HIV-1 NL(AD8) or NL(AD8)ΔVpu were assessed for p24 concentration to quantify HIV-1 release. Cell lysates from iDC (B), mDC-LPS (C), and mDC-IFNα (D) infected with HIV-1 or mock infected were detected by immunoblotting for the expression of HIV-1 Gag (p55 and p24), tetherin, and GAPDH at 2 h, 3, 5 and 7 days post-infection (dpi). M, mock infection; W, WT NL(AD8); Δ, NL(AD8)ΔVpu. (E) Flow cytometry analyses of cell surface tetherin expression in iDCs infected with WT NL(AD8), NL(AD8)ΔVpu or mock infected at 3 and 5 dpi. Similar results have been observed in at least three independent experiments using DCs from different donors.HIV-1 infection of certain cell types can modulate tetherin surface expression [28,59,60]. However, no study has examined the effect of HIV-1 infection on tetherin expression in DCs. To assess whether HIV-1 infection affects the level of tetherin expression in DCs, iDCs, mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα were separately infected with WT NL(AD8) and ΔVpu, and the expression of tetherin and HIV-1 Gag in DCs at 2 h and 3-7 days post-infection were assessed by immunoblotting. The p24 bands detected in all DC types at 2 h post-infection were from input HIV-1 associated with DCs (Figure 7B-D), and mDC-LPS efficiently endocytosed HIV-1 (Figure 7C). In iDCs infected with WT and ΔVpu HIV-1, there was a clear emergence of Gag p55 and p24, indicative of virus replication, and there was a corresponding induction of tetherin expression at 3 dpi (Figure 7B). Tetherin expression in HIV-1 infected iDCs appeared to diminish over time in a Vpu-independent manner (Figure 7B). These results suggest that HIV-1 infection of iDCs induces significant tetherin expression despite Vpu expression. In mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα, high levels of DC maturation-induced tetherin were detected at 2 h post-infection, but the levels of tetherin in the mock-infected controls diminished after 3 dpi (Figure 7C and 7D). HIV-1-infected mature DCs showed consistently higher tetherin expression than mock infected controls, which also diminished over time in a Vpu-independent manner (Figure 7C and 7D). Notably, in mDC-IFNα, when low levels of HIV-1 productive replication were observed at 7 dpi (Figure 2D and 7D), there was a slight increase in tetherin expression (Figure 7D), suggesting that HIV-1 replication can induce tetherin expression in DCs. Furthermore, we compared cell surface levels of tetherin expression in WT and ΔVpu HIV-1 infected iDCs. Flow cytometry analysis confirmed that WT HIV-1 and ΔVpu-infected iDC similarly upregulated tetherin surface expression at 3 and 5 dpi compared with mock-infected cells (Figure 7E).HIV-1 replication in iDCs upregulates tetherin in a Nef-dependent mannerA previous study suggested that the upregulation of tetherin surface expression by HIV-1 infection in macrophages appears to be Nef-dependent [59]. To investigate whether tetherin induction by HIV-1 in DCs was dependent on Nef synthesized during viral infection, iDCs were separately infected with WT NL(AD8) and Nef-deleted mutant (ΔNef) in the presence or absence of AZT. The expression of tetherin and HIV-1 Gag in DCs was assessed by immunoblotting at 5 dpi, which represented the peak of HIV-1 replication in iDCs (Figure 2D). WT HIV-1 infection of iDCs induced tetherin expression at 5 dpi, which could be abolished by AZT treatment (Figure 8A). The ΔNef HIV-1 mutant failed to induce tetherin, despite similar Gag production relative to WT HIV-1 infection (Figure 8A). Furthermore, flow cytometry analysis of tetherin expression in infected DCs confirmed that WT HIV-1 but not ΔNef mutant induced tetherin surface expression (Figure 8B). Thus, HIV-1 replication in iDCs induces transient upregulation of tetherin expression due to the production of Nef.Figure 8HIV-1 replication in iDCs upregulates tetherin in a Nef-dependent manner. (A) Cell lysates from iDCs infected with WT NL(AD8), NL(AD8)ΔNef with (+) or without (-) AZT or mock infected were evaluated at 5 dpi for the expression of HIV-1 Gag (p55 and p24), tetherin and GAPDH by immunoblotting. (B) Flow cytometry analysis of surface tetherin expression in infected DCs at 5 dpi. M, Mock infection; WT, wild-type NL(AD8); ΔNef, NL(AD8)ΔNef. One representative experiment out of three is shown.Nef enhances the expression levels of mRNA encoding IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 1 (IFIT-1) in HIV-1-infected iDCsTo explore the underlying mechanisms of Nef-dependent tetherin induction in HIV-1-infected iDCs, we quantified mRNA levels of IFIT-1, an IFN stimulated gene (ISG), in WT HIV-1 NL(AD8) or ΔNef-infected iDCs using real-time RT-PCR. Compared with mock infection, WT and ΔNef HIV-1 infections in iDCs resulted in a 5-fold increase of IFIT1 mRNA levels at 6 hr post-infection (Figure 9). At 16 and 48 hr post-infection, WT HIV-1 increased IFIT1 mRNA levels in infected iDCs 44- and 40-fold, respectively, relative to mock infection. By contrast, ΔNef HIV-1 infection in iDCs increased IFIT1 mRNA levels 13- and 27-fold at 16 and 48 hr post-infection, respectively, compared with mock infection (Figure 9). These data suggest that HIV-1 infection of iDCs induces ISG mRNA expression as an innate immune response, and that Nef plays an important role in this process.Figure 9Nef enhances the expression levels of IFIT-1 mRNA in HIV-1-infected iDCs. The levels of IFIT-1 mRNA in iDCs mock infected or infected with WT NL(AD8) or NL(AD8)ΔNef were quantified using real-time RT-PCR. The IFIT-1 expression levels were normalized by the relative GAPDH expression levels. The results of mock-infected controls were assigned as 1 and the fold enhancement of IFIT-1 expression in HIV-1 infected iDCs is shown. WT, wild-type NL(AD8); ΔNef, NL(AD8)ΔNef. One representative experiment out of three is presented.DiscussionPrevious studies indicated that IFNα treatment partially inhibits post-entry HIV-1 replication and cell-to-cell transmission in CD4+ T cells and macrophages [18-20], suggesting type I IFN-mediated anti-HIV responses. Compared with iDCs, mDC-LPS do not support productive HIV-1 replication, but mediate highly efficient cell-to-cell transmission [2,6,9,11]. To better understand the innate immune response of DCs to HIV-1 infection, we investigated the effect of IFNα on HIV-1 replication and cell-to-cell transmission using primary human DCs. We found that DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission and viral replication were impaired in mDC-IFNα. IFNα induced DC maturation but did not affect overall expression levels of HIV-1 receptors and the attachment factor DC-SIGN, suggesting that mDC-IFNα can mediate HIV-1 binding and entry. Compared with mDC-LPS, mDC-IFNα-mediated transmission of HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells was significantly lower. Our data suggest that IFNα treatment of DCs induces an antiviral response to block HIV-1 replication and cell-to-cell transmission.IFNα is a major inducer of tetherin expression [27,61], and other pathogenic stimuli have been suggested to stimulate tetherin expression as part of the innate immune response [32]. We thus evaluated any link between tetherin and the inhibition of HIV-1 replication and cell-to-cell transmission in DCs by assessing the levels of tetherin expression in iDCs and mature DCs. We observed that iDCs were extremely low or negative for tetherin expression, while mDC-LPS showed high levels of tetherin expression at the cell membrane. By contrast, mDC-IFNα were negative, or expressed very low levels of surface tetherin despite high levels of whole cell tetherin expression, indicating that IFNα-induced tetherin is mainly confined to the intracellular compartment in mDC-IFNα. Given the different expression levels and apparent sub-cellular localization patterns of tetherin within DCs, we therefore investigated any link between the high levels of tetherin induced in mature DCs and the HIV-1 replication and cell-to-cell transmission phenotypes observed in these cells.Tetherin localization and co-localization with HIV-1 is vital to its restriction function, as it must tether the newly formed HIV-1 virions to the cell membrane [37,49,54,55,61]. The localization of HIV-1 in mDC-IFNα may contribute to restricted HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells. HIV-1 and CD81 strongly co-localized in mDC-LPS, with clear evidence of concentration of CD81 at the site of HIV-1 binding, as expected [12,57,58]. Co-localization of HIV-1 and CD81 was also observed in mDC-IFNα, but there was no evidence of a concentration of CD81 at the sites of HIV-1 binding, suggesting that the localization of HIV-1 is distinct from that observed in mDC-LPS. The lack of co-localization between HIV-1 and LAMP-1 in mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα indicates that HIV-1 did not traffic to the lysosome for degradation in either cell type at 2 h post-infection. In both mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα, co-localization of tetherin and HIV-GFP-Vpr was observed, which raises questions about whether tetherin affects incoming HIV-1 captured by mature DCs.We sought to investigate the direct effect of tetherin on the replication and DC-mediated transmission of HIV-1 by silencing tetherin in mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα. Recent studies of the tetherin function in HIV-1 cell-to-cell spread have focused on viral transmission from infected CD4+ T cells to uninfected cells [48-50]. However, in DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission, DC-captured virus is concentrated at, or near, the cell surface and can be transmitted to CD4+ T cells without productive replication in DCs [2,6,9-12,62]. Furthermore, the major role of tetherin is to prevent the release of fully formed HIV-1 virions from the cell surface [27,37,55], rather than affecting incoming virions. In a single-cycle HIV-1 transmission assay, tetherin knockdown in mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα resulted in a modest increase of viral transmission to CD4+ T cells, suggesting that high levels of induced tetherin in mature DCs may partially impair DC-mediated transmission of incoming HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells. It is possible that tetherin siRNA may have potential off-target effect, which should be considered in transient tetherin downregulation in primary DCs. Recent studies indicated that tetherin knockdown in CD4+ T cells reduces the formation of the virological synapse and HIV-1 cell-to-cell transmission [48,49]. Whether tetherin knockdown affects the formation of the virological synapse between DCs and CD4+ T cells remains to be established.A recent study indicated that tetherin expressed on target Sup-T1 cells can promote HIV-1 cell-cell transmission [50]. In this study, we focused on the role of tetherin in donor DCs and used Hut/CCR5 T cells as targets in DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission assays. Hut/CCR5 cells express high levels of endogenous tetherin (data not shown), while primary human CD4+ T cells express variable levels of tetherin [49,63]. Using Hut/CCR5 cells avoided donor variations of tetherin expression in primary CD4+ T cells. However, it remains to be investigated whether tetherin expressed in CD4+ T cell targets affects DC-mediated HIV-1 transfer.Tetherin inhibits HIV-1 release from cells, and its function is antagonized by Vpu [27,37]. We investigated HIV-1 replication and release in mature DCs using tetherin knockdown and a Vpu-defective mutant. The effect of tetherin knockdown on HIV-1 release from mature DCs appears to be dependent upon the maturation stimulus used and on the expression of Vpu by the virus. Our data demonstrate that tetherin expression alone is not responsible for restriction of WT HIV-1 replication in mature DCs. Indeed, previous work has identified other mechanisms responsible for post-entry restriction of HIV-1 replication in mDC-LPS [6]. The restriction of HIV-1 replication in mDC-IFNα may be due to multiple restriction factors. For example, APOBEC3G can block HIV-1 infection in DCs, and its expression is upregulated by IFNα and LPS [24,64].In iDCs, which do not express high levels of endogenous tetherin, there was a significant increase in tetherin expression in response to the infection with WT and ΔVpu HIV-1. This is consistent with earlier studies that endogenous tetherin in macrophages can be upregulated by HIV-1 infection [59]. When mDC-LPS and mDC-IFNα were infected with WT or ΔVpu HIV-1, tetherin expression was maintained longer than that in mock-infected controls, which is presumably due to stabilization of tetherin or replenishment by tetherin induction. The maintenance of tetherin expression within mature DCs does not appear to be affected by Vpu expression.Upregulation of surface tetherin in macrophages by HIV-1 infection appears to be induced by Nef [59], and HIV-1 replication in a human CD4+ cell line causes tetherin induction after an initial down-modulation of tetherin [28]. Thus, we investigated the role of both HIV-1 replication and Nef protein in the transient induction of tetherin in iDCs. AZT treatment and deletion of Nef blocked the HIV-1-mediated tetherin upregulation in iDCs. These data suggest a role of newly synthesized Nef in the transient upregulation of tetherin in iDCs. HIV-1 Nef can cause induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines from human DCs and macrophages [65,66], so it is possible that these cytokines act in an autocrine manner to induce transient tetherin expression in DCs as part of an innate immune response to HIV-1 infection. Moreover, an increase in cellular content of tetherin may reflect its stabilization or a slow turn-over upon HIV-1 infection and expression of Nef. The mechanisms by which Nef induces tetherin expression in DCs remain to be elucidated.Of note, a recent study indicated that HIV-1 infection of MDDCs undermines the IFN induction pathway via interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) and blocks type I IFN production, although HIV-1 infection in DCs induces a subset of ISGs [67]. In agreement with this report, we were not able to detect the release of IFNα or IFNβ in the supernatants from HIV-1-infected iDCs at 1 to 5 dpi despite significant increases of IFIT-1 mRNA expression.It is unclear as to why HIV-1 has not evolved a mechanism to block Nef-dependent induction of tetherin in DCs in addition to expressing Vpu as an antagonist of tetherin. Given the apparent transient nature of the Nef-induced tetherin expression in DCs, it is possible that as the tetherin level naturally diminishes over time, it does not affect HIV-1 release at time points of significance. HIV-1-induced tetherin expression also has the potential to ensure that HIV-1 remains in close association with the cell. In the case of DCs, this may allow HIV-1 to stay in close association with the cells during trafficking to the lymph node and subsequent transmission to CD4+ T cells at late time points, as is suggested to occur in vivo [2,5].In summary, we have investigated the role of IFNα and tetherin in DC-mediated HIV-1 infection and transmission. Our data suggest that tetherin is not a major restriction factor for WT HIV-1 replication in DCs or DC-mediated cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells. Interestingly, we found that HIV-1 infection of iDCs induces Nef-dependent tetherin expression, suggesting an intrinsic antiviral mechanism in DCs triggered by productive HIV-1 infection and the pathogenic factor Nef. Further studies of this mechanism in DCs will provide a better understanding of the innate immune response against HIV-1 infection.ConclusionsThe restriction of HIV-1 replication and transmission in IFNα-induced mature DCs indicates a potent anti-HIV-1 response; however, high levels of tetherin induced in mature DCs cannot significantly restrict WT HIV-1 release and DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission. Nef-dependent tetherin induction in HIV-1-infected immature DCs suggests an innate immune response of DCs to HIV-1 infection.MethodsPlasmids and HIV-1 stocksSingle-cycle luciferase reporter HIV-1 was generated by co-transfection of HEK293T cells with pLai3ΔenvLuc2 (a kind gift from Michael Emerman) and an expression plasmid for R5-tropic HIV-1JRFL envelope protein as described [68]. The infectivity of viral stocks was assessed by limiting dilution in GHOST/R5 cells as described [69]. R5-tropic, replication-competent HIV-1 strain NL(AD8) and its derivates, NL(AD8)ΔVpu, and NL(AD8)ΔNef were generated by transfection of HEK293T cells separately with pNL(AD8) [70] (a kind gift from Eric Freed), pNL(AD8)ΔVpu [71] (a kind gift from Klaus Strebel) or pNL(AD8)ΔNef [72] (a kind gift from Olivier Schwartz) as described [68]. HIV-GFP-Vpr was generated by co-transfection of HEK293T cells with pNL(AD8) and a Vpr-GFP expression vector pGFP-Vpr (a kind gift from David McDonald) as described [56]. Gag p24 concentrations of viral stocks were measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; The AIDS Vaccine Program, SAIC, Frederick, MD).Cell cultureMonocytes were isolated from buffy coats (American Red Cross Blood Service, Columbus, Ohio) by Histopaque and Percoll (Sigma-Aldrich) gradient centrifugation as described [68]. All DCs utilized in this study were in culture for 7 days post-monocyte isolation. iDCs were generated by incubation of the monocytes in the presence of interleukin 4 and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor for 7 days as described [68]. LPS-induced mature DCs (mDC-LPS) were generated by addition of 10 ng/ml LPS (Escherichia coli strain O55:B5; Sigma-Aldrich) to day 5 iDCs and subsequently cultured for an additional 2 days. IFN-α matured DCs (mDC-IFN-α) were generated by addition of 2,000 IU/ml of recombinant IFN-α-A/D (Sigma-Aldrich) to day 6 iDCs and subsequently cultured for an additional one day. iDCs were treated with TNF-α (PeproTech) at the indicated concentrations and cultured for 24 hr before immunoblotting analysis of tetherin expression. HEK293T and HeLa cell lines were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, L-glutamine and penicillin and streptomycin. Hut/CCR5 cells (kind gift from Vineet KewalRamani) were grown in selective media as previously described [52].Flow cytometry analysis of surface marker expressionDCs were stained with phycoerythrin (PE)- or fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated antibodies to CD4 (clone number S3.5; Invitrogen), DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN, clone number 120507; R&D Systems) or CD86 (clone number BU63; Invitrogen). Negative controls were antibodies matched for isotype and fluorescent conjugates: mouse IgG2a (PE conjugate; BD Biosciences), mouse IgG2 (FITC conjugate; BD Biosciences) or mouse IgG1 (FITC conjugate; Invitrogen). For CCR5 staining, DCs were stained with a purified antibody to CCR5 (clone number 3A9; BD Biosciences), followed by a FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (Caltag) as described [53]. Cells were stained for surface tetherin expression using a rabbit serum against tetherin [55] in conjunction with a PE-conjugated goat anti-rabbit Fab fragment (BD Biosciences). Stained cells were analyzed on a Guava EasyCyte Mini (Millipore) flow cytometer and data were processed using the FlowJo software (Tree Star). Statistics for percentage positive cells were established by setting up a histogram gate equivalent to 1% on the relevant negative control cells and utilizing the same gate on stained cells.ImmunoblottingCell lysates were prepared using a Cell Lysis Buffer (Cell Signaling) supplemented with the Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Following protein quantification using a BCA kit (Pierce), 10 μg of each lysate was run on an 8%:13% SDS-polyacrylamide gel or a 12.5% Criterion pre-cast gel (Bio-Rad) and transferred to polyvinylidine fluoride membrane (Millipore) using an Electrophoretic Transfer Cell or Semi-Dry Elecrophoretic Transfer Cell (Bio-Rad). Blots were stained with either the anti-tetherin rabbit serum [55], an anti-HIV-1 p24 (clone number 24-2, the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program), or an anti-GAPDH (Imgenex), followed by a relevant horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary (anti-rabbit or anti-mouse, Promega). Blots were stripped for subsequent probes using Western Blot Stripping Buffer (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Blots were visualized using West Pico chemiluminescent substrates (Thermo Scientific) and a FujiQuick imager (FujiFilm).Confocal microscopyDCs (2 × 105) were pulsed with HIV-Vpr-GFP (20 ng of p24) for 2 h, then washed once with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and prepared for confocal microscopy [57]. Cells were adhered to a poly-L-lysine coated slide, fixed and permeabilized as described [68]. Cells were labeled using antibodies to CD86 (clone number IT2.2, BD Pharmingen), LAMP-1 (clone number H4A3, BD Pharmingen), and tetherin followed by Alexi-Fluor-568 conjugated anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (both from Invitrogen). Slides were sealed with Gold anti-fade reagent (Invitrogen) and analyzed on an FV100-Spectral or FV100-Filter confocal microscope (Olympus). Images were processed and co-localization analyses were performed using the FV10-ASW 2.0 Viewer (Olympus).siRNA knockdown of tetherin in matured DCsIt has been shown that iDCs are far more receptive to nucleofection than mDC-LPS [6]. To efficiently knockdown tetherin in mature DCs, iDCs were nucleofected with a specific siRNA pool against tetherin and subsequently matured with LPS as described [62]. Amaxa nucleofector and a DC-specific nucleofection kit (Lonza) were used to nucleofect iDCs, according to the manufacturer's instruction. iDCs (2 × 106) were nucleofected with 3 μg of a nonspecific siRNA control or a specific siRNA (siGENOME SMARTPOOL) targeting BST-2 (Dharmacon). Nucleofected cells were subsequently cultured for 1 day in DC culture media, and then activated with 100 ng/ml of LPS or 2,000 U/ml of IFN-α for 1 day to generate mature DCs.HIV-1 infection and transmission assaysDCs (2 × 105) at day 7 of culture were challenged with HIV-1 (20 ng of p24) for 2 h as described [11]. HIV-1 infected DCs were washed once with PBS to remove unbound virions and subsequently cultured for indicated times. Cell lysates and supernatants were collected at indicated times for assessment of p24 concentration by ELISA. Samples were lysed using 1% Triton X-100 for 1 h at 37°C. Where indicated, cells were treated with 1 μM of AZT (NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program) for the duration of HIV-1 infection and subsequent culture. DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission assays (4 ng of p24 equivalent HIV-1 input) were performed using the Hut/CCR5 cells as target cells as described [6].RT-PCR quantification of IFIT-1 expression in HIV-1-infected iDCsiDCs (2.5 × 106) were mock infected or infected with HIV-1 NLAD8 or NLAD8ΔNef for 2 hr, washed with PBS and subsequently cultured for 6, 16 and 48 hr. At each indicated time point, cells were harvested and total cellular RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen) and treated with RNase-free DNase (Ambion). cDNA was synthesized using the SuperScript III first-strand synthesis system (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instruction. The relative levels of cDNA were assessed for spliced glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) using specific primers (forward, 5'-GGA AGG TGA AGG TCG GAG TCA ACG G-3'; reverse, 5'-CTG TTG TCA TAC TTC TCA TGG TTC AC-3'), and for IFIT-1 using specific primers (forward, 5'-CAA CCA TGA GTA CAA ATG GTG-3'; reverse, 5'-CTC ACA TTT GCT TGG TTG TC-3'). Real-time PCR was performed with the iQ SYBER Green kit (Bio-Rad) using the CFX96 real-time system as previously described [6].Statistical analysisData were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA test and Bonferroni post-test. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsLW conceived the study, designed the experiments and participated in data analyses. CMC performed all the experiments and participated in the experimental design. PS contributed to some experiment design and data analyses and provided tetherin anti-serum. CMC and LW wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Title: The infectious synapse formed between mature dendritic cells and CD4

BackgroundDendritic cells (DC) play a key role in the initiation of primary T-cell-mediated immune responses in vivo, as they are the most potent antigen-presenting cells (APC) in the immune system, especially upon maturation [1]. Interactions between DC and T cells can occur in the presence or absence of cognate antigen, both leading to various T-cell responses [2-4]. The initial stages of DC-CD4+ T-cell conjugate formation are antigen-independent, suggesting that DC-T cell adhesion precedes antigen recognition [3,4]. Although antigen-independent interactions do not induce full activation of T cells—as occurs in antigen-dependent interactions—they do maintain the homeostasis of naïve T cells [2,3,5]. Adaptive immune responses are initiated by the interaction of the appropriate peptide-major histocompatibility complex (pMHC) molecular complex on the APC with the T-cell receptor (TcR), which constitutes the basis of the immunological synapse. The immunological synapse provides sustained T-cell signaling, leading to T-cell priming and TcR downregulation [6,7]. This specialized synapse consists of a highly stable and organized area of contact between the APC and the T cell, where the pMHC-TcR interaction, adhesion molecules, and co-stimulatory molecules play a major role [8,9].Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) preferentially infects CD4+ T lymphocytes through the interaction of the gp120 subunit of the viral envelope glycoprotein (Env) with the CD4 receptor and an appropriate co-receptor on the surface of the T cell [10]. The classical model of HIV-1 spread involves binding of cell-free virions to permissive target cells. However, HIV-1 can subvert existing cellular communication pathways to enhance and potentiate viral propagation [11-14]. Direct cell-to-cell transmission provides advantages for retroviruses, by allowing them to obviate the dilution in the extracellular space that limits viral attachment [15,16]. Cell-to-cell propagation could play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of HIV-1, since cell-mediated HIV-1 transmission is estimated to be 100 to 1,000 times more efficient than cell-free virus spread [17]. Indeed, mathematical models have predicted that cell-to-cell transmission of HIV-1 accounts for ~90% of new infection events in lymphoid tissue [18].Cell-mediated infection of a target cell by HIV-1 can occur via the formation of virological synapses with productively infected cells [11,19,20] or through infectious synapses with non-infected DC harboring HIV-1 [12,21]. Although the virological synapse has been extensively studied in the context of T cell-T cell viral transmission [11,20,22], infected immature DC or macrophages can act alternatively as effector cells [23-26], while uninfected DC can also act as target cells [25,27]. Cell adhesion in virological synapses is driven by the engagement of the CD4 molecule on the target cell with the viral Env on the surface of HIV-1-infected donor cells, which increases conjugate formation and favors viral transfer [11,20,22,27]. Other authors have also suggested a role for leukocyte function-associated antigen (LFA-1), intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), and intercellular adhesion molecule 3 (ICAM-3) in this kind of cell contacts [28]. Unlike the virological synapse, the infectious synapse does not rely on productive infection of DC, but also allows for viral transmission to target CD4+ T cells [29]. In this mechanism, known as trans-infection, DC capture HIV-1 and confine viruses in a non-degrading compartment, thus preserving their infectivity. After interaction with CD4+ T cells, mature DC (mDC) release the virions on the contact zone, which enables infection of the target cell [12,30-32]. Furthermore, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) concentrations, which are significantly increased in chronically HIV-1-infected individuals as a result of microbial translocation [33], and other activation signals [34,35] mature DC and trigger their co-stimulatory capacity and their efficiency to capture and trans-infect HIV-1 [31,32,34,36,37]. Although the involvement of the DC-specific ICAM-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN) [29,38], ICAM-1, and LFA-1 [34,37,39,40] is well documented, the cell-surface molecules that contribute to the formation of the infectious synapses have not been fully identified. In addition, little is known about the role of HIV-1 Env during the cell-to-cell interaction at the infectious synapse.Interestingly, the infectious synapse was first characterized in mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates in the absence of antigen-specific signaling [12]. Upon contact between DC and T cells, the CD4, CCR5, and CXCR4 receptors on the T cell and the HIV-1 harbored by the DC are recruited to the contact interface, thus facilitating HIV-1 transmission [12]. Since DC are present in peripheral tissue, such as mucosa, they are thought to be among the first cells to encounter HIV-1 during sexual transmission [41-43]. Consequently, DC scavenge for HIV-1 in peripheral tissue before moving on to lymphoid tissue, where HIV-1 gains access to CD4+ T lymphocytes, the main targets of infection [35,43-45]. Thus, DC-T cell interactions, which are crucial for the generation of specific immune responses, can be hijacked by HIV-1 to bypass immune control and amplify viral replication [21,31,46,47].In this study, we explored the contribution of HIV-1 Env during conjugate formation at the infectious synapse and analyzed its role in combination with adhesion molecules in the context of antigen presentation. Our data showed that, in contrast with the virological synapse, HIV-1 did not modulate the formation of the infectious synapse between mDC harboring HIV-1 and uninfected CD4+ T cells. On the contrary, the main driving force behind formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates and HIV-1 trans-infection of CD4+ T cells was the interaction between ICAM-1 and LFA-1. In addition, antigen recognition or sustained MHC-TcR interaction did not enhance conjugate formation, but significantly boosted productive DC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection. Consistently, antigen recognition also significantly increased T-cell activation and proliferation after conjugation with mDC. Our results suggest a determinant role of contact between mDC and CD4+ T cells in immune activation and viral dissemination, which likely contribute to the pathogenesis of HIV-1 infection.ResultsmDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugate formation is HIV-1-independentThe interaction between the viral Env on the surface of the HIV-1-infected cell and its primary receptor, CD4, on the target cell is one of the determinants in the formation of the virological synapse, as we and other authors have reported [11,20,22,27]. Moreover, the dependence of the virological synapse on Env increases the frequency of stable cell conjugates comprising HIV-1-infected and uninfected T cells, thus facilitating the transfer of virus to target cells [11,20,22,27]. However, the role of HIV-1 Env in the cell-to-cell interaction at the infectious synapse between uninfected DC harboring HIV-1 and target CD4+ T lymphocytes has not yet been addressed. Since mDC capture large amounts of HIV-1 particles [31,34], and polarizes the HIV-1-containing intracellular compartment to the contact zone with target cells (Figure 1A) [12,32,48], the Env of trapped virions could guide the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates.Figure 1Conjugate formation between mDC harboring HIV-1 and primary CD4+ T cells is independent of the presence of HIV-1. A. Confocal microscopy analysis of a HIV-1-pulsed mDC-CD4+ T-cell synapse, showing the polarization of the HIV-1-containing intracellular compartment in mDC to the contact zone. Merge of the bright field and the fluorescence of an x-y plane (scale bar: 5 μm). B. Experimental procedure for quantification of cellular conjugates between mDC and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells by flow cytometry. Events with similar morphology to mDC (SSC) but simultaneously positive for the CMRA were considered stable cellular conjugates between mDC and primary CD4+ T cells (green). Events corresponding to mDC are in orange, and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells are in blue. C. Comparative quantification of cellular conjugates between mDC and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells in the presence or absence of HIV-1 after 2 hours of autologous (red) or allogeneic (blue) co-culture. D. Representative experiment of quantification of cellular conjugates between mDC preloaded with different HIV-1 strains and non-activated CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells by flow cytometry; cellular conjugates (green), mDC (orange), and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells (blue). E. Comparative quantification of cellular conjugates between MOLT cell lines chronically infected with X4- (MOLTNL4-3) or R5-tropic (MOLTBaL) HIV-1 and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells after 2 hours of co-culture. F. Representative experiment of quantification of cellular conjugates between HIV-1-infected MOLT cells and non-activated CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells by flow cytometry; cellular conjugates (black), MOLT cells (red), and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T (blue). G. and H. Kinetics of conjugate formation in autologous (G) or allogeneic (H) mDC-CD4+ T-cell co-cultures in the presence or absence of HIV-1. Asterisks indicate significant differences compared with co-cultures in the absence of HIV-1 (p < 0.05). Data are expressed as mean and SEM from three independent experiments including cells from six different donors.In order to evaluate whether the presence of HIV-1 drives the formation of conjugates comprising mDC harboring HIV-1 and uninfected CD4+ T cells, we used a previously described flow cytometry method [20] to quantify cellular conjugates between CMRA-labeled uninfected CD4+ T cells and mDC pulsed or not with viral particles. This approach enabled us to identify cellular conjugates as those events with a similar morphology to mDC (defined by SSC values) and high levels of fluorescence from the CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells (Figure 1B). In addition, we also assessed the contribution of antigen recognition during conjugate formation. To that end, we used autologous and allogeneic co-cultures of mDC and non-activated CD4+ T cells in the presence or absence of HIV-1 to evaluate antigen-independent and antigen-dependent interactions, respectively. Although alloreactivity does not involve an antigen-specific response, allorecognition is characterized by a stable MHC-TcR interaction that elicits an exceptionally vigorous T-cell response [49]. Besides, as many as 1–10% of T lymphocytes can respond to allogeneic MHC molecules [50,51]; this frequency is several orders of magnitude above the frequency of specific T cells for any single foreign antigen presented by self-MHC [49,52].Unlike the virological synapse, the presence of HIV-1 did not increase the formation of conjugates between mDC harboring HIV-1 and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells. Thus, unpulsed mDC or mDC pulsed with X4-tropic HIVNL4-3, R5-tropic HIVNFN-SX, or Env-deficient HIVNL4-3ΔENV displayed the same percentage of cellular conjugates (within a range of 15.8–19.9%) with non-activated CD4+ T cells (Figure 1C and D), revealing that viral tropism or even the HIV-1 Env itself had no effect on the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates. As previously described [53], limitation of cell contacts by continuous shaking significantly inhibited the formation of cellular conjugates (within a range of 3.7–5.3%) (p < 0.05) (Figure 1C and D). Neither the presence of HIV-1 nor the capture and internalization of virus by mDC impacted the conjugate formation with non-activated CD4+ T cells. This finding contrasts somewhat with the T cell-T cell virological synapses formed between productively infected cells and uninfected primary CD4+ T cells [20,22]. We analyzed this by using uninfected primary CD4+ T cells in co-culture with the T-lymphoblastoid MOLT cell lines chronically infected with X4-tropic (MOLTNL4-3) HIV-1 or R5-tropic (MOLTBaL) HIV-1 and observed a higher frequency of cellular conjugates with the HIV-1-infected T cells (both 9.2%) than with uninfected MOLT cells (2.6%) (Figure 1E and F). In addition, the virological synapses were inhibited by blocking gp120 binding to CD4 using the α-CD4 Leu3a monoclonal antibody (mAb), reaching levels similar to those observed between uninfected MOLT cells and primary CD4+ T cells (p < 0.5, Figure 1E and F).Surprisingly, autologous and allogeneic co-cultures between mDC and CD4+ T cells displayed a comparable percentage of cell conjugates (Figure 1C and D), indicating that sustained MHC-TcR recognition at the contact zone did not affect the number of conjugates detected. In addition, the frequency of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates increased over time in both autologous and allogeneic co-cultures (Figure 1G and H), regardless of the presence or absence of HIV-1 (Figure 1G and H). These findings indicated that, contrary to the virological synapse, the presence of HIV-1 did not modulate the formation of conjugates comprising mDC harboring HIV-1 and uninfected primary CD4+ T cells.Blocking of ICAM-1 and LFA-1 impairs the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugatesSince we observed that HIV-1 and antigen recognition appeared to exercise albeit minimal control over the interaction between mDC and CD4+ T cells, we analyzed the role of adhesion molecules during formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates (Figure 2A). Engagement of ICAM-1 and LFA-1 is considered essential for the formation of DC-T cell immunological synapses [54] and the infiltration of lymphocytes into sites of inflammation [55]. Therefore, we specifically evaluated the role of these adhesion molecules in the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates by using blocking mAb against these adhesion molecules. We observed that treatment of both mDC and CD4+ T cells with α-LFA-1 (mAb 68.5A5) reduced the frequency of cellular conjugates by 45% (p < 0.05, Figure 2B), whereas blocking of ICAM-1 with mAb RM3A5 inhibited the formation of autologous and allogeneic conjugates by 60% (p < 0.05, Figure 2B). However, we did not observe a synergistic effect when ICAM-1 on mDC and LFA-1 on CD4+ T cells were blocked, and vice versa (p < 0.05, Figure 2B). Moreover, the addition of blocking α-ICAM-3 mAb to both mDC and CD4+ T cells failed to inhibit the formation of cellular conjugates (Figure 2B). Despite the relevance of the CD4 receptor in the formation of the virological synapse (Figure 1E) [11,20,22], the blockade of the CD4 molecule with mAb Leu3a did not have any significant impact on the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates (Figure 2B).Figure 2Blocking of ICAM-1 and LFA-1 impairs conjugate formation between mDC and primary CD4+ T cells. A.Left. Experimental procedure for quantification of cell conjugates between mDC and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells in the presence or absence of several reagents. Cell conjugates were analyzed by flow cytometry as in Figure 1B. Right. Phenotype of mDC-CD4+ T cell contact by confocal microscopy. HLA-DR and CD3 molecules were stained to unequivocally identify the mDC and the CD4+ T cell, respectively. Confocal Z-stacks were acquired every 0.25 μm steps and processed with Volocity 6.1 software (improvision, PerkinElmer) using the maximum fluorescent intensity projection for HLA-DR and CD3 stainings and the isosurface modeling for DAPI-stained nucleus (scale bar: 5 μm). B. Comparative quantification of cellular conjugates after 2 hours of autologous (red bars) or allogeneic co-cultures (blue bars) between mDC and non-activated CD4+ T cells. Blocking of LFA-1 and ICAM-1 significantly inhibited the formation of autologous and allogeneic conjugates. Both autologous and allogeneic conjugates were equally affected by the blocking reagents. No differences were detected between autologous and allogeneic co-cultures. The α-ICAM-1 + α-LFA-1 condition represents separate pre-incubation of mDC with α-ICAM-1 mAb and CD4+ T cells with α-LFA-1 mAb, before launching co-culture, while the α-LFA-1 + α-ICAM-1 condition designates separate pre-incubation of mDC with α-LFA-1 mAb and CD4+ T cells with α-ICAM-1 mAb. Asterisks indicate significant differences compared with negative controls (p < 0.05); mAb conditions were compared with an isotype control, whereas SEA and cytochalasin D were compared with medium. Data are expressed as mean and SEM from at least three independent experiments including cells from at least six different donors.Engagement of CD4 by Env at the virological synapse between infected and uninfected CD4+ T cells triggers actin-dependent recruitment of HIV-1 receptors and adhesion molecules to the contact interface, thus stabilizing the adhesive interactions and enabling the final transfer of HIV-1 to the target cell [11,22,56]. Consequently, we analyzed whether the cytoskeleton was necessary for the establishment of the mDC-T-cell interaction. Addition of cytochalasin D effectively blocked the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates (p < 0.05) (Figure 2B), indicating that this process requires an active actin cytoskeleton to rearrange receptors towards the interface of the mDC-T-cell contact. Conversely, the presence of bacterial superantigen (SEA) in the co-culture did not increase the percentage of cellular conjugates (Figure 2B), probably because the SEA induced long-lasting interactions between mDC and T cells, thus enabling the formation of more stable conjugates and the subsequent functional maturation of the immunological synapse [57]. As shown in Figure 1, both autologous and allogeneic co-cultures yielded similar percentages of cellular conjugates and were equally susceptible to the blocking reagents used in these experiments (Figure 2B), thus confirming that neither antigen recognition nor sustained MHC-TcR interaction alone enhanced conjugate formation. Taken together, these data suggest that the adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and LFA-1 are the main driving force in modulating the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates and could play a key role in transmission of HIV-1 across the infectious synapse.mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of primary CD4+ T cells is dependent on the interaction between ICAM-1 and LFA-1 and is enhanced by antigen recognitionOnce we confirmed that ICAM-1 and LFA-1 and not HIV-1 or antigen recognition modulate the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates, we investigated the role of these factors in mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of primary CD4+ T cells. We performed both autologous and allogeneic co-cultures of mDC pulsed with the reporter virus HIVNL4-3Ren and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells in the presence of several blocking reagents (Figure 3A). In this set of experiments, a co-culture performed with the protease inhibitor saquinavir (SQV) allowed us to confirm net trans-infection, thus avoiding re-infection events between T cells (Figure 3), while a control co-culture with azidothymidine (AZT), which completely blocked luciferase activity, confirmed productive HIV-1 replication in co-cultures.Figure 3mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection to primary CD4+ T cells is dependent on the interaction between ICAM-1-LFA-1 and is enhanced by antigen recognition. A. Experimental procedure for quantification of mDC-mediated trans-infection of the infectious reporter virus HIVNL4-3Ren to non-activated CD4+ T cells in the presence of several reagents. B. Comparative HIV-1 mDC-mediated trans-infection of non-activated CD4+ T cells in autologous or allogeneic co-cultures in the presence of several reagents. Allogeneic co-cultures (blue bars) led to a three-fold increase in productive HIV-1 replication compared with autologous co-cultures (red bars) (p < 0.05). Blocking ICAM-1 and LFA-1 with mAb significantly inhibited the mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection. The α-ICAM-1 + α-LFA-1 condition represents separate pre-incubation of mDC with α-ICAM-1 mAb and CD4+ T cells with α-LFA-1 mAb, before launching co-culture, whereas the α-LFA-1 + α-ICAM-1 condition designates separate pre-incubation of mDC with α-LFA-1 mAb and CD4+ T cells with α-ICAM-1 mAb. Asterisks indicate significant differences compared with negative controls (p < 0.05); mAb conditions were compared with the isotype control, whereas AZT, SQV, SEA and cytochalasin D were compared with medium. Data are expressed as mean and SEM from three independent experiments including cells from at least six different donors. RLU, relative light units. C. Fold increase of conjugate formation and mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection in autologous and allogeneic mDC-CD4+ T cell co-cultures in the presence or absence of SEA. All conditions were compared to autologous co-cultures without SEA, shown as unity in the plot.Allogeneic conjugates between HIV-1-pulsed mDC and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells led to a three-fold greater increase in viral replication than autologous co-cultures (p < 0.05, Figure 3B and C). This observation suggests a role for antigen recognition in HIV-1 replication in CD4+ T lymphocytes, probably because of an increase in cell activation mediated by contact with mDC. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed a dramatic increase in HIV-1 replication as a result of mDC-mediated trans-infection when MHC-TcR interactions were stabilized with SEA (p < 0.05, Figure 3B and C), which corresponds to one viral replication cycle (Additional file 1 A). Interestingly, direct infection of non-activated primary CD4+ T cells by free HIV-1 was almost null, even under α-CD3 (mAb OKT3) or SEA activation conditions (Additional file 1 B). This could be explained because SEA needs to simultaneously bind to MHC class II molecule on the APC and to the TcR on the CD4+ T cell to lead a non-specific stimulation of T lymphocytes [58,59]. Meanwhile, activation of T cells via CD3 needs costimulatory signaling provided by APC. Therefore, the activation and subsequent HIV-1 infection of CD4+ T cell cultured with SEA and α-CD3 depends on the presence of an APC, in this case mDC, which provides MHC or costimulatory signaling. Consequently, the increase in the mDC-mediated trans-infection, either in autologous or allogeneic co-cultures, in α-CD3 and SEA conditions is dependent of the presence of mDC.Some reports have already illustrated the importance of the interaction between ICAM-1 and LFA-1 in facilitating transmission of HIV-1 between DC and target cells [34,37,40]. Furthermore, ICAM-1 is the main force driving formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates (Figure 2). As expected, blockade of ICAM-1 with the mAb RM3A5 not only inhibited the formation of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates (Figure 2B), but also impaired the mDC-mediated trans-infection of HIV-1 to CD4+ T lymphocytes by 60% to 70% (p < 0.05, Figure 3B). Productive infection of CD4+ T cells was also significantly abrogated by 45 to 50% when cells were treated with the mAb α-LFA-1 68.5A5 (p < 0.05, Figure 3B). In addition, when both ICAM-1 and LFA-1 were simultaneously blocked, inhibition of mDC-mediated trans-infection of HIV-1 to primary CD4+ T cells reached 75% to 90% in both autologous and allogeneic co-cultures (p < 0.05, Figure 3B). Consequently, blocking of ICAM-1-LFA-1 interactions between mDC and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells substantially reduced the productive mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of CD4+ T cells. In addition, treatment with α-ICAM-3 did not reduce viral replication in target cells (Figure 3B), thus confirming ICAM-3-independent mDC-mediated transmission of HIV-1 to primary CD4+ T cells [37]. On the other hand, although blocking the CD4 receptor did not affect the formation of cellular conjugates (Figure 2B), the addition of α-CD4 mAb Leu3a successfully inhibited productive infection of CD4+ T cells through mDC-mediated trans-infection of HIV-1 by hampering binding of HIV-1 Env to the CD4 molecule in target cells (p < 0.05, Figure 3B). In addition, we confirmed that DC-mediated transmission of HIV-1 to primary CD4+ T cells was also dependent on the integrity of the actin cytoskeleton, since cytochalasin D impaired recruitment of receptors to the infectious synapse (p < 0.05, Figure 3B). Taken together, these findings indicate that the interactions between ICAM-1 and LFA-1 in mDC and primary CD4+ T cells, as well as a functional actin cytoskeleton, were necessary for efficient mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection in an antigen-dependent and antigen-independent manner across the infectious synapse. Importantly, our data suggest that the role of antigen recognition in trans-infection of HIV-1 is restricted to late synaptic events, since cellular conjugation is unaffected by allogeneic or SEA stimulation, whereas productive infection of T cells is greatly enhanced (Figure 3C).Antigen-recognition, but not HIV-1, enhances CD4+ T-cell activation and proliferationHIV-1 replication is highly dependent on the activation status of target cells, since highly activated T lymphocytes are the main target for viral spread and consequent cell destruction [60,61]. To elucidate the level of activation in primary CD4+ T cells after antigen-dependent and antigen-independent contacts with mDC, we evaluated surface expression of the activation markers CD69 and CD25 after 16 hours and 5 days of autologous and allogeneic co-cultures. We also monitored the T-cell proliferation induced after 5 days of co-culture using a flow cytometry assay based on carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFDA-SE). Simultaneously, we assessed the effect on these parameters induced by the presence of HIV-1 in the co-culture. CD4+ T cells were distinguished from mDC in co-cultures by gating cellular singlets and selecting the CD2-positive, CD11c-negative population; surface activation markers and proliferation were then analyzed within lymphocytes (Figure 4A). As positive controls, SEA or mAb α-CD3 OKT3 were added to mDC-CD4+ T-cell co-cultures.Figure 4CD4+ T-cell activation and proliferation is enhanced by antigen recognition but not by the presence of HIV-1. A. Gating strategy for the analysis of CD4+ T-cell activation and proliferation after co-culture with mDC. CD69, CD25, and proliferation parameters were analyzed in cells within the CD2-positive, CD11c-negative singlet gate. As positive controls, CD4+ T cells alone or with mDC were cultured in the presence of SEA or α-CD3. B. CD69 expression in CD4+ T cells after co-culture for 16 hours or 5 days with autologous mDC (red bars) or allogeneic mDC (blue bars) in the presence or absence of HIV-1. Expression of CD69 surface marker was higher in CD4+ T cells co-cultured with allogeneic mDC. No differences were observed in the presence of HIV-1 compared with control co-cultures without virus. C. CD25 expression in CD4+ T cells after co-culture for 16 hours or 5 days with autologous mDC (red bars) or allogeneic mDC (blue bars) in the presence or absence of HIV-1. Stimulation with allogeneic mDC induced higher levels of CD25 expression in CD4+ T lymphocytes (p < 0.05). The presence of HIV-1 did not exert a detectable effect on CD25 expression. D. and E. Percentage of CD4+ T cells divided (D) and proliferation index of CD4+ T cells (number of cell divisions/number of divided cells) (E) after co-culture for 5 days with autologous mDC (red bars) or allogeneic mDC (blue bars) in the presence or absence of HIV-1. Allogeneic co-cultures exhibited more CD4+ T-cell proliferation than autologous co-cultures, although no significant differences were observed with regard to the presence or absence of HIV-1. Positive controls consisting of co-cultures with SEA or α-CD3 are shown. Data are expressed as mean and SEM from three independent experiments including cells from at least six different donors. Asterisks denote significant differences (p < 0.05).Expression levels of CD69 and CD25 increased over time in CD4+ T cells cultured with allogeneic mDC, as compared with autologous co-cultures (p < 0.05, Figure 4B and C). Consequently, the antigen-dependent HIV-1 infection and virus replication we observed in Figure 3B could be associated with the higher immune activation of CD4+ T cells mediated by allogeneic mDC. Interestingly, similar levels of CD69 and CD25 expression were detected in CD4+ T cells cultured with HIV-1-pulsed or -unpulsed mDC, both in autologous and in allogeneic co-cultures (Figure 4B and C). This finding contrasts with the results of other studies that reveal a substantial Nef-dependent increase in CD69 expression in T cells co-cultured with HIV-1-infected immature DC [62]. Since the HIVNL4-3Ren used in our experiments lacks the gene nef, the CD4+ T-cell activation in our experimental setting should be driven by the contacts with mDC. Furthermore, in our experiments we used LPS-matured DC expressing high levels of MHC and co-stimulatory molecules at the cell membrane [36], with competence to stimulate T cells and poor ability to support viral replication [46].After 5 days of co-culture, we examined the T-cell proliferation induced by the autologous and allogeneic contacts with mDC in the presence or absence of HIV-1 by analyzing the percentage of the CD4+ T cells divided (Figure 4D) and the average number of divisions in the responding cells (proliferation index, Figure 4E). More CD4+ T cells from allogeneic co-cultures than from autologous co-cultures divided at least once in the presence of HIV-1 (p < 0.05, Figure 4D), although this trend was also observed in the absence of HIV-1. However, the responding T lymphocytes from autologous and allogeneic co-cultures underwent the same number of proliferation cycles, independently of HIV-1 (Figure 4E). Consequently, the mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) between allogeneic mDC and CD4+ T cells activated more lymphocytes to proliferate, but responding cells supported the same number of cell divisions. These data strongly suggest that immune activation of T cells mediated by mDC can provide an environment to facilitate HIV-1 transmission and replication. A more sustained MHC-TcR interaction due to antigen-dependent contacts between APC and T cells allows higher lymphocyte activation and, consequently, increased susceptibility to infection of target cells. Therefore, this observation is consistent with the findings that antigen-specific CD4+ T cells are preferentially infected by HIV-1 in vivo, resulting in depletion of responding CD4+ T lymphocytes and loss of immunological control of HIV-1 replication [63-65].DiscussionImmune cells communicate with each other through cell-to-cell contacts. Viruses such as HIV-1 can take advantage of these contacts to amplify viral infection. By hijacking the existing pathways of cell-to-cell communication, HIV-1 can evade certain stages of the humoral immune response [16] and reach the final target of infection, namely, CD4+ T lymphocytes. It has been predicted that the vast majority of HIV-1-infected cells in lymphoid tissue are infected through cell-to-cell transmission [18], since cell-mediated HIV-1 infection is much more efficient than infection by cell-free virus [17]. DC, which are professional APC, are constantly scavenging for pathogens in peripheral tissue and interacting with other immune cells. In addition, mDC provide a perfect microenvironment for potentiating viral dissemination, because they can trans-infect HIV-1 by retaining and transmitting infectious virions without becoming infected [12,29-32,34,36]. Here, we characterized the molecular interactions at the infectious synapse between mDC harboring HIV-1 and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells where trans-infection takes place. We evaluated the contribution of HIV-1, adhesion molecules, and antigen recognition in conjugate formation, viral transmission, and cellular activation and proliferation.We showed that, unlike virological synapses between productively HIV-1-infected cells and uninfected target cells [20,22,28], infectious synapses between DC harboring HIV-1 and uninfected CD4+ T cells did not rely on Env-CD4 interactions (Figure 5). Therefore, the measurement of cellular contacts by flow cytometry showed that uninfected CD4+ T cells established the same percentage of conjugates with mDC, independently of the presence or absence of HIV-1. Although the virological synapse between HIV-1-infected and uninfected T cells could be modulated by adhesion molecules [28], in the infectious synapse, adhesion molecules are important for the establishment of cellular contacts between mDC and CD4+ T lymphocytes. We showed that specific mAb against ICAM-1 and LFA-1 blocked mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugation. This reduction in cell-to-cell adhesion also resulted in a marked decrease in the productive mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of primary CD4+ T cells (Figure 5). Although ICAM-3 contribute to the initial scanning of T lymphocytes and APC before antigen-specific recognition [66], blockade of ICAM-3 did not impact conjugate formation. Furthermore, specific mAb against ICAM-3 did not affect the transmission of HIV-1 between mDC and CD4+ T cells. This observation is consistent with the findings of other authors, who have demonstrated the relevance of ICAM-1 and LFA-1 [34,37], but not of ICAM-3 [37], in the DC-mediated transmission of HIV-1 across the infectious synapse. As with the virological synapse [11,56], and according to the results of other authors [67], we confirmed that the formation of the infectious synapse was an actin-dependent process. Remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton not only enables recruitment of receptors to the interface between mDC and CD4+ T cells to facilitate transmission of HIV-1 [12], but it also enables HIV-1 polarization and sac-like compartment formation in mDC upon viral capture [27,32].Figure 5Comparison between the formation of virological, infectious, and immunological synapses. Different molecules are involved in the formation of these synapses, although they all enable infection of CD4+ T lymphocytes by HIV-1. The virological synapse relies on engagement between the Env on the surface of an HIV-1-infected cell with the CD4 molecule in the uninfected target cell and on adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1, LFA-1 and ICAM-3. On the other hand, the initial contact between a mDC and a CD4+ T cell is dependent on the adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and LFA-1. If cognate pMHC-TcR recognition occurs, contact between mDC and T cells stabilizes, thus constituting a mature immunological synapse. This antigen-specific signaling also involves co-stimulatory receptors and adhesion molecules and induces strong T-cell activation. When mDC harbor HIV-1, contacts between mDC and T cells would become infectious synapses, since HIV-1 could exploit the pre-existing cell-to-cell interactions to gain access to the target cells without modulating conjugate formation. Therefore, in the context of antigen-specific recognition between mDC harboring HIV-1 and T lymphocytes, immunological synapses would turn into potent infectious synapses by increasing the susceptibility of CD4+ T cells to productive HIV-1 infection. For simplicity, additional DC-T-cell interactions are not depicted.Mature immunological synapses between mDC and T lymphocytes form as a result of robust cognate pMHC-TcR interaction, co-stimulatory receptors, and adhesion molecules, all of which leads to T-cell activation. Nevertheless, DC and T cells can also establish antigen-independent contacts [2], which, in the same way as the immunological synapses, are initiated by means of adhesion molecules[3,4]. Engagement between ICAM-1 and LFA-1 facilitates the pMHC-TcR interactions in immunological synapses [54], providing and consolidating positional stability to enhance T-cell sensitivity to antigen [68]. In the absence of antigen-specific recognition, these interactions result in the recruitment of molecules involved in the immunological synapse (eg, the HIV-1 receptors CD4, CXCR4, and CCR5 on the T cell) to the contact zone and in low levels of signaling in the T cell [2,12]. Moreover, in the presence of HIV-1, these contacts lead to polarization of the HIV-1-containing compartment in DC, thus facilitating viral transmission through the infectious synapse [12,21]. We confirmed that ICAM-1 and LFA-1 play a significant role in the infectious synapse, given that the blockade of these adhesion molecules equally affected autologous and allogeneic mDC-CD4+ T-cell co-cultures. However, the MLR in allogeneic co-cultures or the presence of SEA did not increase the percentage of cellular contacts compared to autologous co-cultures, indicating that MHC-TcR recognition did not increase the number of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates. In contrast to the minor role in cell conjugation, the sustained MHC-TcR binding in allogeneic co-cultures and the presence of SEA boosted the productive DC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of CD4+ T cells through the infectious synapse by a mechanism that is strongly associated with the immune activation mediated by mDC through TcR signaling and co-stimulation.Although the decisive factor for efficient HIV-1 transmission is co-receptor expression in the different T-cell subsets [69], the presence of DC enhances susceptibility to HIV-1 infection and replication in target cells [31,32,34,37,69]. The activation status and proliferation of T cells can have a considerable effect on the infectivity and replication of HIV-1. Antigen recognition, such as in alloantigen- or nominal antigen-specific interactions between DC and CD4+ T lymphocytes, induces full T-cell activation and proliferation through TcR and co-stimulatory signaling [2,54]. Nevertheless, contact between DC and CD4+ T cells in the absence of cognate antigen can also lead to a series of T-cell responses, such as weak proliferation and long-term survival, which are crucial for maintenance of homeostasis in the naïve T-cell pool in vivo[2]. In our experiments, mDC were able to trans-infect HIV-1 to autologous non-activated primary CD4+ T cells in the absence of nominal antigen, thus inducing lower levels of T-cell activation and proliferation. Consequently, HIV-1 could take advantage of labile mDC-CD4+ T-cell contacts, without antigen-specific recognition, to infect CD4+ T cells and potentially contribute to viral dissemination and HIV-1 latency. On the other hand, we have shown that allogeneic co-culture of mDC and CD4+ T lymphocytes induced higher levels of CD69 and CD25 expression and proliferation, independently of the presence of HIV-1, and that it resulted in higher viral trans-infection and replication in CD4+ T cells. Thus, stable cellular conjugates of DC and CD4+ T cells, such as those found in alloantigen or antigen-specific contacts, would enhance viral transmission across the synapse by increasing the susceptibility of target cells.In summary (Figure 5), the initial stages of contact between mDC and CD4+ T cells are dependent on the adhesion molecules ICAM-1 and LFA-1. These interactions facilitate the recruitment of MHC, TcR, CD4, CXCR4, CCR5, and other molecules to the contact zone. Then, if cognate pMHC-TcR recognition occurs, cellular interactions consolidate into a mature immunological synapse, providing vigorous TcR and co-stimulatory signaling. When mDC harbor HIV-1, the virus could exploit these pre-existing cellular contacts to infect CD4+ T cells without perturbing the formation of cell conjugates. Consequently, either the contact between mDC and CD4+ T cells or the mature immunological synapse become infectious synapses. Furthermore, antigen-specific recognition would increase T-cell activation and, as a result, the susceptibility of CD4+ T cells to productive HIV-1 infection. Therefore, immunological synapses turn into potent infectious synapses, thus explaining why HIV-1 preferentially infects antigen-specific CD4+ T cells [63-65].ConclusionsThe formation of infectious synapses between mDC and primary CD4+ T cells is independent of the presence of the HIV-1 Env. On the contrary, binding of ICAM-1 to LFA-1 is necessary for both the interaction between mDC and primary CD4+ T cells and efficient mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection. Conversely, antigen recognition or sustained MHC-TcR interaction itself does not mediate cellular conjugation, but boosts productive DC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of primary CD4+ T lymphocytes by promoting T-cell activation and proliferation. Our results suggest a determinant role of immune activation driven by mDC-CD4+ T-cell contacts in viral dissemination, which likely contribute to the pathogenesis of HIV-1 infection.MethodsCellsPeripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from HIV-1-seronegative donors were purchased from the Banc de Sang i de Teixits (BST) after approval from the Ethics Committee of the University Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol. Purified monocyte populations were isolated with CD14+ positive selection magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec) and cultured with RPMI (Invitrogen) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Invitrogen), 1000 U/ml of granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and interleukin-4 (IL-4) (both from R&D) for 5 days. On days 2 and 5 of DC differentiation, culture medium containing GM-CSF and IL-4 was replaced, and on day 5, DC were matured by adding 100 ng/ml of lipopolysaccharide (LPS; SigmaAldrich). The remaining PBMC from the negative fraction of monocyte isolation were kept frozen. When needed, CD14-depleted PBMC were thawed, and CD4+ T cells were purified by negative immunomagnetic selection (Miltenyi Biotec). Cells were then cultured with RPMI containing 10% FBS without stimuli.Monocytes, after isolation from PBMC, and mature DC (mDC), at day 7, were immunophenotyped by flow cytometry (FACSCalibur Flow Cytometer; BD Biosciences). The monoclonal antibodies (mAb) used for cell immunophenotyping were: CD14-FITC (clone M5E2; BD Pharmingen), DC-SIGN-PE (clone DCN45; BD Pharmingen), CD4-PerCP (clone SK3; BD Biosciences), HLA-A,B,C-PE (clone G46-2.6; BD Pharmingen), HLA-DR-PerCP (clone L243; BD Biosciences), CD86-FITC (clone 2331; BD Biosciences), CD83-PE (clone HB15e; BD Biosciences), and CD80-PE-Cy5 (clone L307.4; BD Pharmingen).The T-lymphoblastoid MOLT-4/CCR5 (MOLT) cell line (National Institutes of Health [NIH] AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program: from Dr. Masanori Baba, Dr. Hiroshi Miyake, Dr. Yuji Iizawa) [70] and the derivative cell lines chronically infected with X4-tropic (MOLTNL4-3) or R5-tropic (MOLTBaL) HIV-1 [71,72] were cultured in RPMI containing 10% FBS. TZM-bl (National Institutes of Health [NIH] AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program: from J.C. Kappes and X.Wu, and from Tranzyme) and HEK-293 T (ATCC-LGC) cell lines were maintained in DMEM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 10% FBS. All media contained 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen).Viral stocks and plasmidsViral stocks of HIVNL4-3, HIVNFN-SX, Env-deficient HIVNL4-3ΔENV, and HIVNL4-3Ren were generated by transfecting the proviral construct pNL4-3, pNFN-SX, pNL4-3Luc+Rev–Env-, and pNL4-3Ren, respectively, to HEK-293 T cells. HIVNL4-3-Cherry was obtained following co-transfection of pCHIV and pCHIV mCherry in a 1:1 ratio [73]. The proviral vectors pNL4-3 and pNL4-3Luc+Rev–Env– were obtained through the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program, pNFN-SX[74] was kindly provided by Dr. W. A. O’Brien, and pNL4-3Ren[75], which contained the Renilla luciferase gene reporter, was a gift from Dr. S. Sánchez-Palomino. Briefly, HEK-293 T cells were transfected with calcium phosphate (CalPhos; Clontech) and supernatants containing virus were collected 48 hours later, filtered (Millex HV, 0.45 μm; Millipore), and frozen at −80°C until use. The HIVNL4-3Ren stock was concentrated using the Lenti-X Concentrator kit (Clontech) after collection, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.The p24Gag content of all viral stocks was measured using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kit (PerkinElmer). Titers of all viruses were determined using the TZM-bl reporter cell line [76]. Cells were assayed for luciferase activity 48 hours after infection (Bright-Glo Luciferase Assay System; Promega) in a Fluoroskan Ascent FL Luminometer.Measuring cellular conjugatesCellular conjugates comprising uninfected or HIV-1-infected MOLT cells and primary target cells were quantified as previously described [20]. To analyze the formation of conjugates between mDC and autologous or allogeneic non-activated primary CD4+ T cells, we proceeded as follows. Purified CD4+ T cells were labeled with 15 μM of Orange CMRA fluorescent probe (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen) for 20 minutes at 37°C, washed twice with PBS and left overnight at 37°C in 5% CO2 in RPMI containing 10% FBS. Before performing the assays, labeled cells were washed again and resuspended in RPMI with 10% FBS. For those experiments performed in the presence of HIV-1, mDC were incubated with HIVNL4-3, HIVNFN-SX, or HIVNL4-3ΔENV (50 ng p24Gag per 1.5 × 105 mDC) for 4 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2. To remove uncaptured viral particles, mDC were extensively washed with PBS. For blocking assays, mDC and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells were separately preincubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in the presence or absence of different mAb and reagents: α-LFA-1 (10 μg/ml, clone 68.5A5), α-ICAM-1 (10 μg/ml, clone RM3A5), α-ICAM-3 (10 μg/ml, clone 101.1D2) (all three kindly provided by Dr. R. Vilella, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain), α-CD4 Leu3a (10 μg/ml, clone SK3, BD Biosciences), isotype control antibody (10 μg/ml, eBioscience), staphylococcal enterotoxin A from Staphylococcus aureus (SEA) (10 μg/ml, SigmaAldrich), and cytochalasin D (5 μM, SigmaAldrich). Then, 75,000 mDC were co-cultured with 75,000 autologous or allogeneic CMRA+ CD4+ T cells for different incubation periods depending on the experiment (0 min, 30 min, 1 h, 2 h or 24 h) at 37°C in 5% CO2 in a final volume of 200 μl of RPMI containing 10% FBS on a 96-well flat-bottom plate, with and without shaking. Afterwards, 50 μl of formaldehyde 2% was added to the culture without perturbing cellular conjugates, and samples were analyzed in an LSR II flow cytometer equipped with a plate loader (BS Bioscience). All events with similar morphology to mDC (SSC) but simultaneously positive for the cell tracker CMRA were considered stable cellular conjugates of mDC and primary CD4+ T lymphocytes. Gating strategy for quantification of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates is shown in Additional file 2 A. The percentage of cellular conjugates was calculated as follows: [conjugates/total CD4 CMRA+ cells]*100. Controls consisting of CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells cultured alone were performed in each experiment to quantify the background levels of T-cell-T-cell conjugates, which was less than 0.01% (Additional file 2 B). Control co-cultures between DDAO-labeled mDC (CellTrace Far Red DDAO-SE, Molecular Proves, Invitrogen) and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells were performed to assess that the SSC-CMRA gating strategy unequivocally quantified mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates (Additional file 2 B). Similar percentages of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates were obtained in both SSC-CMRA and DDAO-CMRA dot plot analyses.mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection of non-activated primary CD4± T cellsTransmission of HIV-1 from mDC to CD4+ T cells was assessed by co-culturing 1 × 105 virus-pulsed mDC with 1.5 × 105 autologous or allogeneic non-activated primary CD4+ T cells for 48 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2. First, mDC were incubated with HIVNL4-3Ren at MOI = 0.1 (based on HIV-1 titration in TZM-bl cells) for 5 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2, and then cells were extensively washed with PBS to remove uncaptured viral particles. Subsequently, mDC and CD4+ T cells were separately pre-incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature in the presence or absence of the same mAb and reagents used to evaluate the cellular conjugates or with azidothymidine (AZT) (5 μM, NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program), or saquinavir (SQV) (0.5 μM, NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program). Then, HIV-1-pulsed mDC and autologous or allogeneic non-activated primary CD4+ T cells were co-cultured in a final volume of 200 μl of RPMI containing 10% FBS on a 96-well U-bottom plate in the presence of the indicated blocking reagents. After 48 hours of co-culture, luciferase activity was assayed with the Renilla-Glo Luciferase Assay System (Promega) using a 96-well plate Fluoroskan Ascent FL Luminometer. To specifically show the infection of CD4+ T cells in co-cultures, background values based on HIV-1-exposed mDC cultured alone were subtracted for each co-culture condition, although luminescence values of HIV-1-pulsed mDC were comparable to those of unpulsed mDC.mDC-mediated activation and proliferation of primary CD4± T cellsActivation and proliferation of non-activated primary CD4+ T cells induced by mDC were analyzed after autologous or allogeneic co-culture. In brief, non-activated CD4+ T cells were stained with 0.35 μM of carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFDA-SE) (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen) in PBS with 1% FBS for 6 minutes at room temperature, washed in PBS with 10% FBS and left for 30 minutes in RPMI containing 10% FBS at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells were washed with PBS twice and finally resuspended in RPMI with 10% FBS. Then, 75,000 CFDA-SE-labeled CD4+ T cells were co-cultured with 75,000 autologous or allogeneic mDC at 37°C in 5% CO2 in a final volume of 250 μl of RPMI containing 10% FBS on a 96-well U-bottom plate. Previously, some mDC were incubated with HIVNL4-3Ren at MOI = 0.1 (based on HIV-1 titration in TZM-bl cells) for 5 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2, and then cells were extensively washed with PBS to remove uncaptured viral particles. As positive controls, CD4+ T cells alone or with mDC were cultured in the presence of SEA or α-CD3 (clone OKT3, eBioscience). Negative controls based on CD4+ T cells cultured alone in the absence of any stimuli were used to set the basal levels of T-cell activation which were then used to analyze the flow cytometry data of mDC-CD4+ T cell co-cultures. After 16 hours or 5 days of co-culture, CD4+ T-cell activation and proliferation were evaluated by staining the cells with the following mAb: CD2-PerCP/Cy5.5 (clone RPA-2.10, BD Pharmingen), CD69-APC (clone FN50, BD Pharmingen), CD11c-APC/Cy7 (clone Bu15, BioLegend), and CD25 V450 (clone M-A251, BD Horizon). Cells within the CD2-positive CD11c-negative singlet gate were analyzed. Samples were acquired on an LSR II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) and data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Tree Star) with a built-in proliferation platform.Confocal microscopymDC and non-activated primary CD4+ T cells were co-cultured for 2 hours at 37°C in 5 CO2. To unequivocally identify mDC and CD4+ T cells, co-cultures were stained with α-HLA-DR-AlexaFluor 647 (clone L243, BioLegend) and α-CD3-PE (clone HIT3a, BioLegend), respectively. To determine the polarization of the HIV-1-containing intracellular compartment in mDC to the contact zone between mDC and CD4+ T cells, mDC were previously pulsed with HIVNL4-3Cherry for 4 hours, extensively washed, and co-cultured with CD4+ T cells. After co-culture, cells were fixed, cytospun onto glass slides and mounted with Fluoroshield with DAPI mounting medium (Sigma-Aldrich). Spinning disk confocal microscopy was performed on a PerkinElmer Ultraview ERS. Confocal Z-stacks were acquired at 0.25 μm steps using a 63× objective, and processed with Volocity 6.1 software (Improvision, PerkinElmer) using the maximum fluorescent intensity projection.Statistical analysisStatistical analysis was performed using the Wilcoxon matched-pairs test in GraphPad software Prism v.5. p values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.AbbreviationsAPC: Antigen-presenting cells; AZT: Azidothymidine; CFDA-SE: Carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester; DC: Dendritic cell; DC-SIGN: DC-specific ICAM-3-grabbing non-integrin; Env: Viral envelope glycoprotein; HIV-1: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1; ICAM-1: Intercellular adhesion molecule 1; ICAM-3: Intercellular adhesion molecule 3; LFA-1: Leukocyte function-associated antigen 1; LPS: Lipopolysaccharide; mAb: Monoclonal antibody; mDC: Mature dendritic cell; MLR: Mixed lymphocyte reaction; PBMC: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells; pMHC: Peptide-major histocompatibility complex; SEA: Superantigen; staphylococcal enterotoxin A from Staphylococcus aureus; SQV: Saquinavir; SSC: Side scatter chanel; TcR: T-cell receptor.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors’ contributionsMTR-P designed and performed research, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript; IP designed and performed research and analyzed data; NI-U, MCP, JC, and IE provided technical assistance and analyzed data; BC designed research; JB and JM-P designed research, analyzed data, and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.Supplementary MaterialAdditional file 1A. mDC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection experiments were designed at 48 hours to evaluate a single cycle of HIV-1 infection. Control experiment consisting of SEA-treated mDC-CD4+ T-cell co-cultures in the presence of SQV confirmed that HIV-1 infection came from one cycle of viral replication, even in the presence of the SEA activating stimulus. RLU, relative light units. B. Evaluation of direct infection by free virus of non-activated primary CD4+ T cells and mDC cultured alone compared with HIV-1 mDC-mediated trans-infection to CD4+ T cells (autologous and allogeneic co-cultures). Cells were incubated with HIVNL4-3Ren for 5 hours at 37°C in 5% CO2 at MOI = 0.1 (based on HIV-1 titration in TZM-bl cells) or equivalent effective MOI. Then, cells were washed to remove excess of HIV-1 and cultured in the presence or absence of α-CD3 (mAb OKT3) and SEA activation conditions. Infection was evaluated 48 hours after. RLU, relative light units.Click here for fileAdditional file 2A. Gating strategy for quantification of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates by flow cytometry. CD4+ T cells were CMRA-labeled and mDC were defined based on their morphology. Live cells were first gated in FSC-SSC dot plots to discard cell debris. Then, cellular conjugates were identified within this gate and quantified in a gate including CMRA positive events. Conjugates were those events with similar morphology to mDC (SSC) but simultaneously positive for the cell tracker CMRA coming from CD4+ T cells. Events corresponding to mDC are shown in orange, CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells are shown in blue, and cellular conjugates between mDC and CD4+ T cells are in green. B. Quantification of background levels of T-cell-T-cell conjugates. Controls consisting of CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells cultured alone yielded less than 0.01% of cellular conjugates, thus confirming that the gating strategy used for quantification of mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates did not consider two CD4+ T cells in contact. C. To confirm that the gating strategy shown in panel A (SSC-CMRA) unequivocally quantified mDC-CD4+ T-cell conjugates, control co-cultures between DDAO-labeled mDC and CMRA-labeled CD4+ T cells were performed. Co-cultures were analyzed by the gating strategy SSC-CMRA or considering conjugates as those events simultaneously positive for the cell tackers DDAO coming from mDC and CMRA coming from CD4+ T cells (DDAO-CMRA). Both quantification analyses yielded similar results.Click here for file


Title: The utility of the new generation of humanized mice to study HIV-1 infection: transmission, prevention, pathogenesis, and treatment

ReviewIntroduction to humanized miceHumanized mice have allowed for extensive study of the development and function of the human immune system. Soon after their inception, the SCID-hu thy/liv [1] and SCID-hu-PBL [2] models (pioneered by McCune and Mosier, respectively) were shown to support infection of pathogens that replicate in human immune cells. In particular, Human Immunodeficiency Virus Type 1 (HIV-1) infection has been studied in great detail for over two decades in humanized mice, largely due to the expense involved with the use of non-human primates and key differences between HIV-1 infection in humans and chimpanzees. HIV-1 infection of humanized mice has yielded valuable data ranging from the fields of in vivo pathogenesis to drug efficacy and passive immunity. However, there are caveats in the original humanized mouse models: only a limited hematopoietic repertoire was engrafted which varied by model, HIV-1 infections were often short-term, and no primary adaptive immune response was mounted against HIV-1 [3-6]. Thus, these models provided data on acute HIV-1 infection of limited cell types and virtually unopposed by a host immune response.Recent advances in the production of profoundly immunodeficient mouse strains have resulted in improved human cell engraftment relative to the original SCID-hu thy/liv and SCID-hu-PBL models [1,2]. The C.B-17 SCID mouse (Prkdc mutation) used in the original humanized mouse models can spontaneously generate murine T and B cells as animals age (leakiness) and has high levels of natural killer (NK) cell activity, both of which prevent efficient/prolonged xenoengraftment [7]. Improvements in the available immunodeficient mouse strains and the use of human CD34+ hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) have resulted in improved, long-term engraftment of a variety of human hematopoietic cell types as well as the ability to generate primary human immune responses [8].Mice deficient in the recombinase activating genes 1 and 2 (Rag1 and Rag2, respectively) do not exhibit leaky production of T and B lymphocytes. The immune phenotypes in Rag1-/- and Rag2-/- strains are similar [9,10]. However, Rag-deficient animals produce normal levels of NK cells, and thus additional mutations are required in order to produce animals better suited for xenoengraftment studies. The non-obese diabetic (NOD) SCID mouse is commonly used because the Prkdc mutation prevents formation of mature T and B lymphocytes while the NOD mutation results in a reduction of NK cell activity [11]. However, it should be noted that a major disadvantage of the NOD strain is a high incidence of spontaneous thymic lymphomas which results in a shortened lifespan [12]. The common gamma chain receptor (γc, also referred to as the IL-2 receptor gamma chain) is a component of the IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15, and IL-21 receptors and is the gene involved in X-linked SCID [13]. The addition of the γc mutation to the Rag1, Rag2, and NOD/SCID backgrounds further blocks T and B cell development due to a lack of IL-2 signaling and also prevents maturation and expansion of NK cells via a lack of IL-15 signaling [14,15]. Since Prkdc-/- (SCID) animals can experience leaky production of T and B cells, the γc mutation is useful as a secondary means to block maturation of these cells. Nearly all current humanized mouse models use γc-/- animals, with the exception being NOD/SCID animals which are used for either HSC engraftment or to produce the BLT model (see below). It should be noted that there are two different γc mutations commonly in use for production of humanized mice. One is a null mutation [16], and the other is a truncation of the cytoplasmic signaling domain [14]. It is currently unclear if there are functional differences between these two mutations, since both are expected to block signaling. In combination with the NOD/SCID mutation, these mouse strains are commonly referred to as NOG (truncation) and NSG (knockout) mice.Combinations of the above mutations thus far analyzed for human hematopoietic stem cell engraftment have included such strains as Rag2-/-γc-/-, NOD/SCID, NOD/SCIDγc-/-, Rag1-/-γc-/-, NOD/Rag1-/-γc-/-, and NOD/SCIDβ2 m-/- mice [17-23]. When engrafted with hematopoietic stem cells, these immunocompromised strains have shown the most effective xenoengraftment observed to date, in terms of the spectrum of human cells produced, the penetration of human cells into various organs, the duration of engraftment, and the ability to generate primary human adaptive immune responses [8]. All of the major HIV-1 target cells, including human CD4+ T cells, monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells are readily detected in these humanized mice. A detailed review of how to generate humanized Rag2-/-γc-/- mice is available [24], and methods to prepare humanized NOD/SCIDγc-/- mice and humanized Rag1-/-γc-/- mice are very similar. It should be noted that the methods used to prepare human HSCs and to inject animals with grafts are relatively straightforward and in many cases require a simple, intrahepatic or intravenous injection. The BLT model (bone marrow, liver, thymus) engrafts NOD/SCID or NOD/SCIDγc-/- mice with a combination of human fetal liver and thymic tissue (the SCID-hu thy/liv model) followed by a CD34+ cell graft. As a result of the relatively simple techniques needed to generate humanized mice, many new laboratories are adopting these models.Viral infections in humanized miceImproved and prolonged human cell engraftment has generated renewed interest in the study of human pathogens of the immune system in the hopes that previous problems have been solved (see first paragraph). To date, the newer humanized mouse models have been examined for infection by a variety of human viruses including the retroviruses HIV-1 (subject of this review) and HTLV-1 [25]; the herpesviruses EBV [17,26-30], KSHV [31,32], hCMV [33], and HSV-2 [34]; Dengue virus [35,36]; and recombinant adenovirus [37]. An adaptation using human liver transplants has also been described [38,39] which can be infected with HBV and HCV [40,41]. A summary of all viral pathogens and other immunogens studied thus far in the new generation of humanized mice is provided in Table 1.Table 1Viruses and other immunogens studied in the new generation of humanized miceInfecting AgentHumanized mouse modelReferencesViruses:HIV-1Rag2-/-γc-/-[44,46,48-51,55-61,63-65]HIV-1NOD/SCIDγc-/- (hNOG)[43,66,67,72,73]HIV-1NOD/SCIDγc-/- (hNSG)[68-71,74-76]HIV-1NOD/SCID BLT[42,45,77-79]HIV-1NOD/SCIDγc-/- (hNSG) BLT[42,81]HIV-1Rag1-/-γc-/-[23]HTLVNOD/SCID[25]EBVRag2-/-γc-/-[17,122]EBVNOD/SCIDγc-/- (hNOG)[27,28]EBVNOD/SCIDγc-/- (hNSG)[29]EBVNOD/SCID BLT[30]EBVNOD/SCID[26]KSHVNOD/SCID[31,32]Dengue VirusRag2-/-γc-/-[35]Dengue VirusNOD/SCID[36]HSV-2Rag2-/-γc-/-[34]rAd-HCVNOD/SCIDγc-/- (hNSG)[37]hCMVNOD/SCIDγc-/- (hNSG)[33]HCVRag2-/-γc-/-Fah-/-[40]HBVRag2-/-γc-/-Fah-/-[40]HBVRag2-/-γc-/-uPa-/-[123]Bacteria:Salmonella typhiRag2-/-γc-/-[124]Non-infectious agents:Tetanus toxoidRag2-/-γc-/-[17,97]Haemophilus influenza B conjugate vaccineRag2-/-γc-/-[46]Hepatitis B surface antigen vaccineRag2-/-γc-/-[97]Toxic shock syndrome toxin 1NOD/SCID BLT[30]2,4-dinitrophenyl hapten-keyhole limpet hemocyaninNOD/SCID BLT[47]One of the most exciting developments for the new generation of humanized mice is the generation of primary human adaptive immune responses following infection or immunization with a variety of pathogens. T cell responses have been demonstrated against HIV-1, EBV, toxic shock syndrome toxin 1, and a recombinant adenoviral vector expressing HCV proteins [17,28-30,37,42], while B cell responses have been documented against HIV-1, Dengue virus, tetanus toxoid, KSHV, HSV-2, and the haemophilus influenzae B conjugate vaccine [17,32,34,35,42-46]. Antigen-specific antibody class-switching and detection of neutralizing antibody responses following Dengue virus infection illustrates the potency of the human adaptive immune response generated in these new and improved models [35,47].Humanized mouse models and HIV-1 strains used to infect themTo date, six different mouse strains humanized with human HSCs have been analyzed for HIV-1 infection, including Balb/c Rag2-/-γc-/- mice (RAG-hu) humanized with purified CD34+ HSCs derived from umbilical cord blood [44,48-53], from fetal liver [48,49,54-64] or from a non-specified source [65]; NOD/SCID γc-/- (hNOG or hNSG) mice humanized with cord blood derived CD34+ cells [43,66-75]; hNOG or hNSG mice humanized with fetal liver derived CD34+ cells [76]; NOD/SCID BLT mice [42,45,77-80], hNSG BLT mice [42,81], and Balb/c Rag1-/-γc-/- mice humanized with purified CD34+ HSCs from human fetal liver [23]. One report has shown successful engraftment and HIV-1 infection in C57BL/10 Rag2-/-γc-/- mice engrafted with non-purified human fetal liver cells [64], although another report has shown an inability to achieve usable engraftment in the related C57BL/6 Rag2-/-γc-/- strain [34]. Two reports examining RNA interference strategies against HIV-1 have used ex vivo infections of humanized mouse-derived cells [60,79].A large variety of HIV-1 isolates have been examined for infection in the new humanized mouse strains, although most work has been performed with molecular clones of the virus. The following CCR5 tropic strains have been reported: JR-CSF [42,43,48,49,52,53,59,64-68,72,77,78], BaL-1 [23,55,57,62,69,70,74], YU-2 [44,48,51], ADA [46,71,75,76], NFN-SX(SL9) [58,79], 1157 [46], a vif-deficient strain of JR-CSF [73], and the NL4-3 strain but with the env gene replaced with the BaL-1 env sequence [70]. The following CXCR4 tropic strains have been studied: NL4-3 [23,44,48,49,54,55,57,67,72,79], LAI [45], MNp [67], a variant of NL4-3 with GFP inserted (NLENG1-IRES) [57], and LAI with a V38E mutation in gp41 [80]. The following dual-tropic strains have additionally been analyzed for infection: HIV-R3A [49,61,63] and 89.6 [48]. One study has used a chimeric Simian Immunodeficiency Virus encoding the envelope gene from the dual-tropic HIV-1 strain 89.6 (SHIV-C2/1) [43]. Finally, primary isolates (not molecular clones) from subtype B (strain UG 209A) and subtype C (strain 1157) have also been examined in RAG-hu mice, although UG 209A was only tested in mice humanized with human PBLs. It is clear from the results that HSC-humanized mice are susceptible to a broad variety of HIV-1 strains. Further work should involve diverse primary isolates of HIV-1, especially when the efficacy of vaccination is under examination. Since virus stocks derived from molecular clones are identical or nearly identical in genomic sequence, the ability to block viral transmission is predicted to be much simpler as compared to the natural scenario in humans where exposure is to multiple genetically distinct isolates [82]. Additionally, little work has been done using mutant strains of HIV-1 to discover the contribution of various genes to pathogenesis, although the few reports to do so are summarized herein.We are not aware of any studies that have examined the minimum level of human cell engraftment required to achieve consistent HIV-1 infection, although in our hands we have found that an animal with as low as 5% peripheral blood engraftment (5% hCD45+, 95% mCD45+) can be infected by intraperitoneal injection [57]. A minimal dose of virus required to infect humanized mice has also not been established, although unsuccessful infections using direct injection routes with low doses of HIV-1 (100-500 TCID50) have been reported [46,58]. 1 ng of p24 was sufficient to infect all RAG-hu animals in two studies from the same group [49,61]. For nearly all studies the goal has been to achieve successful viral replication in vivo and the impact (if any) of the infectious dose has not been explored, despite a large range of doses studied ranging from 102 TCID50 [46] or 1 ng p24 [49,61] to 2 × 106 TCID50 or 400 ng p24. Mucosal transmission has been achieved with a dose as low as 156 TCID50 in RAG-hu mice or 170 ng p24 in BLT mice. When molecular clones of the virus are used for infections, the impact of the infectious dose may not be as critical to many experiments as compared to a highly diverse population. Since engraftment levels vary from one animal to another and infection routes differ by study, it is not anticipated that a uniform minimal dose will apply to all animals or to all engraftment models.Routes of viral infectionVarious routes of viral exposure have been tested in humanized mice. Direct routes such as intravenous [43,49,59,61,64,65,67,78], intraperitoneal [42,44,50,51,57,58,64,66,69,71,72] and intrasplenic [64] injections have been used extensively and result in a very high efficiency of infection. In addition, mucosal engraftment of human HIV-1 target cells has been documented; also, mucosal transmission of CCR5 tropic viruses across an intact epithelium has been found in both the BLT and RAG-hu models. Abrasions have been used for rectal transmission in BLT mice [45,78], possibly to mimic rectal intercourse, but abrasions are not required for rectal transmission in RAG-hu mice [55]. Abrasions are not necessary for vaginal transmission in BLT mice [77], RAG-hu mice [55], or humanized Rag1-/-γc-/- mice [23]. We have previously shown successful mucosal transmission in RAG-hu mice for both CCR5 tropic and CXCR4 tropic strains introduced both vaginally and rectally, although a lower rate of infection was observed with CXCR4 strains which are not effectively transmitted sexually in humans [55].It should be noted that poor intestinal engraftment and only rare HIV-1 rectal transmission in RAG-hu mice were reported by Hofer et al. [48]. Additional reports have shown mucosal engraftment in RAG-hu mice [34,59] and HSC-engrafted hNSG mice [74]. These findings indicate that simple HSC engraftment is sufficient to achieve mucosal engraftment as compared to the thymic implants required for the BLT model. In addition, HIV-1 nucleic acids were detected in the rectum, small intestine, and uterus of infected hNOG mice [67], although it is not clear if this is due to the presence of blood cells in non-perfused mice. Other reports have shown successful vaginal HIV-1 transmission in RAG-hu mice without examining mucosal engraftment [62,83]. Finally, in our recent work with humanized Rag1-/-γc-/- mice we have also detected successful vaginal transmission of HIV-1 [23]. These data indicate that mucosal engraftment and HIV-1 transmission are possible in a wide variety of mouse strains, and that simple HSC implants are sufficient (as compared to thymic implants plus HSC implants in BLT mice).The reasons for the discrepancy in detection of human cell engraftment in the mucosa of humanized mice and/or differences in HIV-1 transmission rates are still unclear. However, several variables between the various experiments could suggest possible explanations for differing results. These include the source of cells (fetal liver vs. cord blood), the strains of mice used, cytokine-mediated expansion of HSCs, analysis of vaginal vs. rectal engraftment/transmission, and the use of antibiotics for mouse maintenance. First, some papers that have analyzed mucosal engraftment and/or HIV-1 transmission have used cord blood [34,67,74] and others have used fetal livers [23,45,55,59,62,77,78,83] as sources of HSCs; two papers have examined both types of cells [48,59]. Since fetal liver cells are more primitive than cord blood cells (they are taken from pre-term samples and cord blood is taken from full-term samples), it is possible that they have a greater capacity for repopulation, differentiation, and organ penetration. It is clear that the use of fetal liver cells results in mucosal engraftment [45,55,77] and mucosal HIV-1 transmission [23,55,62,77,78,83]. The data for cord blood cells are not as clear. Holt et al. used cord blood cells in hNOG mice and frequently detected human cell engraftment in the large and small intestines (including CD4+ T cells) but did not attempt mucosal transmission [74]. It is important to note that Holt et al. used cytokines to mediate HSC expansion in preparation for nucleofection. It has been suggested that cytokine-mediated expansion of HSCs may explain the differing levels of mucosal engraftment [59]. The putative mechanism of this hypothesis is that the use of cytokines modifies the properties of HSCs, thereby giving them an increased potential for differentiation and penetration into mucosal tissues. The report by Hofer et al. analyzed rectal and intestinal tissues and used either fetal liver or cord blood cells as HSCs, but detected little engraftment and only rarely achieved rectal transmission [48]. No cytokines were used to expand either type of cell. The use of cytokines to expand HSCs is thus a critical difference between the methods used by Hofer et al. and others. Choudhary et al. used fetal liver cells and also cultured HSCs in the presence of cytokines and detected significant intestinal engraftment in 2 of 6 mice [59]. Papers from the Akkina group have all used fetal liver cells and cytokine expansion [23,55,62,83]. Kwant-Mitchell et al. used cord blood cells that were not expanded with cytokines and only detected mucosal engraftment after vaccination with attenuated HSV-2 [34]. A recent study indicates that engraftment of the peripheral blood, lymph nodes, spleen, and bone marrow of RAG-hu mice is significantly higher after culturing HSCs in the presence of cytokines versus immediate transplantation of uncultured cells [84]. Serum IgG levels are also significantly higher, although IgM levels were not [84]. This study supports the hypothesis that culturing HSCs in the presence of cytokines prior to engraftment leads to significantly better engraftment as assessed by multiple endpoints, but no analysis was made of mucosal engraftment. Thus, it appears that the use of cytokines to expand HSCs may be critical to achieving mucosal engraftment, even more so than the use of fetal liver cells.The mouse strain used does not appear to make a difference in the ability to achieve mucosal engraftment or HIV-1 mucosal transmission with the data currently available. Mucosal engraftment has been detected in NOD/SCID BLT mice [45,77], Rag2-/-γc-/- mice [34,55,59], and hNOG mice [74] while HIV-1 mucosal transmission has been detected in NOD/SCID BLT mice [45,77,78], Rag2-/-γc-/- mice [55,62,83], and Rag1-/-γc-/- mice [23]. Interpretations of mucosal engraftment and susceptibility to infection should also recognize that vaginal and rectal/intestinal engraftment cannot be directly compared. Hofer et al. focused their study on rectal engraftment in RAG-hu mice and did not examine vaginal engraftment and transmission. Of the studies to emerge from the Akkina lab, only one examined rectal engraftment and transmission [55] while most studies have focused on vaginal transmission [23,55,62,83] with a single report that evaluated vaginal engraftment [55]. While we are confident in our ability to achieve rectal engraftment and transmission, the sample size of our vaginal challenge experiments is much higher and vaginal engraftment and transmission were not examined by Hofer et al.A final point to consider is the status of the normal microbial flora of the humanized mouse rectum and intestinal tract. Humanized mice are sometimes housed on a regimen of antibiotics in their drinking water in order to prevent bacterial infections that are common in highly immunodeficient mice. It is possible that various mouse colonies are maintained with different antibiotics and/or concentrations of antibiotics, or no antibiotics at all, thus leading to differences in the bacteria present in the gut. The flora present (or lacking) in various colonies may influence the ability and/or tendency of human immune cells to traffic to mucosal sites.HIV-1 viremiaViremia in HSC-humanized mice is usually detectable by 1 week post-infection, which often represents the first time point analyzed. The most sensitive means to detective viremia is quantitative PCR (Q-PCR), since comparable studies using p24 ELISA have shown an inability to detect viremia at various time points post-infection [46,50,58] whereas Q-PCR shows consistent detection [44,56]. The mean peak viremia for CXCR4 virus is approaching 107 viral genomes per ml of plasma while the mean peak viremia for CCR5 virus is around 106 viral genomes per ml of plasma [43-45,50,53,55,56,67,72,75,77,78]. Peak viremia typically occurs in the range of 1-2 months post-infection [23,44,45,53,55,56,67,72,74]; however, CD4+ T cell loss in the blood is more severe with CXCR4 virus and the decrease in target cells is accompanied by a decrease in viremia [23,44,56]. CCR5 tropic virus maintains a higher level of viremia for sustained periods which correlates with decreased levels of target cell loss over time. The peak level of viremia, both in terms of kinetics and levels, is similar for all routes of infection and no significant differences are apparent by humanized mouse model. The impact of viral dose on subsequent viral loads is still unclear due to the presence of multiple variables between experiments, including methods used to titer virus stocks. However, animals infected by mucosal transmission tend to show sporadic detection of viremia for the first weeks of infection [23,45,77,78]. We have shown that HIV-1 infection in RAG-hu mice can be sustained for over a year post-infection with either CCR5 tropic or CXCR4 tropic virus. We detected viremia for up to 63 weeks and HIV-1 RNA by in situ hybridization for up to 67 weeks post-infection [56]. Some groups have reported a drop to undetectable levels of viral load for multiple time points, but this is a rare finding occurring in few mice [44,72]. Most reports consistently detect all infected animals to be positive [23,55-57,67,78,85]. Thus, not only is human cell engraftment a life-long condition in HSC-humanized mice, but productive HIV-1 infection is also maintained for the same period. Since many HIV-1-associated diseases take time to develop, it is important that these models sustain long-term infections.Sites of virus replicationThe distribution of HIV-1 replication in humanized mice has been analyzed by many independent groups using immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization techniques to detect HIV-1 proteins and genomes/gene expression, respectively. The most prominent organs that feature HIV-1 replication in humans are also highly positive for HIV-1 replication in humanized mice, namely the spleen [42-46,49,52,55,57,72,77,78], lymph nodes [42-46,49,55,56,71,72,77], and thymus [44,49,55,57]. The thymic organoid graft of BLT mice is also highly positive for viral replication [45,77,78]. In addition, the level of human cell engraftment in other organs is also sufficient to sustain detectable HIV-1 replication, including the bone marrow [56,67,72], lungs [43,45,67,77], small intestines [45,55,67], large intestines [45,78], male reproductive tract [45], and female reproductive tract [45,67,77]. One recent study has shown that human macrophages can be detected in hNSG brains and that systemic infection with HIV-1 leads to detection of p24+ cells in the hNSG brain [75]. The distribution of engrafted cells and HIV-1 replication in HSC-engrafted humanized mice is impressive and indicates that these models are superior to the previous SCID-hu thy/liv and SCID-hu PBL models in terms of penetration of the graft into various tissues, accompanied by the ability of HIV-1 to traffic to and replicate in various sites. As expected, CCR5 tropic strains are largely unable to replicate in the humanized mouse thymus due to the immature, CCR5-negative status of human thymocytes [44,86]. When the identity of p24+ cells has been analyzed, most cells have been shown to be CD4+ T cells although infected CD68+ macrophages have also been detected [44,72].CD4+ T cell loss occurs in blood, lymphoid organs, and gut-associated lymphoid tissueCD4+ T cell loss in the blood occurs in every HSC-engrafted model and with nearly every virus strain analyzed to date. Loss occurs regardless of the route of infection, including mucosal transmission. In one case, CCR5-tropic HIV-1 failed to deplete in the hNOG model through 6 weeks of infection [43], but all other studies using strain JR-CSF have shown successful loss [42,45,49,51,59] unless antiviral strategies were employed. Gorantla et al. showed a lack of CD4+ T cell loss with a CCR5 tropic primary isolate (subtype C strain 1157), but it is unclear what time point was analyzed, and if animals were monitored long enough to detect loss with a CCR5-using strain [46]. It is also possible that CD4+ T cell rebound (see below) had occurred at the time point analyzed.Some reports with mutated virus strains have shown an inability to deplete helper T cells levels. However, the study of mutant viral strains in humanized mice is still underdeveloped when the large body of mutant viruses examined in tissue culture is considered. Our first report in RAG-hu mice showed a lack of CD4+ T cell loss in the blood through 24 weeks of infection with NLENG1-IRES, a reporter strain of HIV-1 that expresses GFP and places the nef gene under the control of an IRES element in the background of the CXCR4-tropic strain NL4-3 [87]. In this virus, nef gene expression is not under the control of the native viral promoter, and gene function may be attenuated. Two mice were reported [57], but follow-up work with an additional 3 mice gave the same result (unpublished). Viremia was readily detectable in these mice, but the lack of T cell loss may indicate that attenuation of nef gene expression in HIV-1 is able to prevent viral pathogenesis and AIDS. Interestingly, no differences in viremia have been noted between animals infected with NL4-3 and NLENG1-IRES, suggesting that viral replication occurs in similar fashion regardless of nef gene status, but that patterns of CD4+ T cell loss in the blood may be different.Another study with a lethal vif mutation in the CCR5 tropic JR-CSF background showed an inability to replicate or to cause CD4+ T cell depletion in hNOG mice; this finding was likely due to increased susceptibility of the virus to human APOBEC proteins which are normally targeted for degradation by vif [73]. HIV-1 vif is known to promote destruction of human APOBEC3G in vitro, but in vivo studies were needed to confirm the relevance. hNOG mice were infected with either wild-type virus or a vif-deficient strain and hypermutations induced by the cytosine deaminase activity of human APOBEC proteins were detected specifically in cells infected by the vif-deficient strain. Together, these reports provide evidence that targeting of specific HIV-1 proteins for mutation or silencing can either block virus replication or virus-induced pathogenesis.As mentioned above, CD4+ T cell loss in blood is both more rapid and more severe with CXCR4-virus or dual-tropic virus. However, CD4+ T cell rebound has been shown to occur in some studies, with CCR5-virus [23,43,44,53,55,57,58] or CXCR4-virus [23,44,55,57] or dual-tropic virus [49]. Other reports have failed to detect CD4+ T cell rebound, with most using CCR5-virus [46,67,74,77,78] and two using CXCR4-virus [45,67]. The mechanism for CD4+ T cell rebound is currently unclear, but this rebound has been seen in some studies that track infection for at least several months. Immune responses are one possible reason, but murine adaptive immunity is absent, and human anti-HIV-1 adaptive immunity is not thought to be very strong in most HSC-engrafted models (see below). The drop in CD4+ T cells is accompanied by a drop in viremia, and this decrease in total virus levels may explain the ability of helper T cells to rebound. Direct routes of infection (intraperitoneal or intravenous) give similar results for CD4+ T cell loss, while limited data on mucosal transmission indicate that slower and less severe loss occurs [45,55,77].CD4+ T cell loss in the blood and lymphoid organs do not always correlate with one another. Several groups have examined CD4+ T cell levels in primary and secondary lymphoid organs of HSC-humanized mice in order to determine the extent of CD4+ T cell loss. Zhang et al. showed loss of CD4+ T cells by FACS analysis in the lymph nodes and thymus of RAG-hu mice infected with dual-tropic virus by FACS staining, with CCR5 tropic virus unable to deplete CD4+ thymocytes. Severe loss of CD4+CD8+ thymocytes was seen with dual-tropic virus [49]. Jiang et al. reported that regulatory helper T cells are specifically depleted in spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes relative to other types of helper T cells early during infection of RAG-hu mice by FACS analysis [61]. Our group showed that CD4+ thymocytes are depleted in large areas of the RAG-hu thymus following infection by CXCR4-tropic virus by immuno-staining [57]. Sun et al. showed intrarectal HIV-1 transmission which was accompanied by an overall decrease in hematoxylin and eosin-stained cells in the thymic organoid and small and large intestines in mice infected with a CXCR4-tropic strain [45]. They also used FACS staining to show CD4+ T cell loss in the bone marrow, thymic organoid, spleen, peripheral and mesenteric lymph nodes, liver, lung, and small and large intestines with either CXCR4-virus [45] or CCR5-virus [77]. The extensive loss of helper T cells in the gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) is comparable to human AIDS patients and indicates that BLT mice, and possibly other strains of HSC-humanized mice, are a useful model to study HIV-1 pathogenesis associated with GALT infection.Mechanisms of HIV-1 pathogenesisDue to the lack of appropriate in vivo models required to study HIV-1-mediated pathogenesis, there are still many unanswered questions about how HIV-1 infection leads to AIDS. Several research groups have begun to analyze the mechanisms of HIV-1-mediated pathogenesis in HSC-humanized mice, and it is clear that at least some mechanisms proposed to take place in humans also occur in HSC-humanized mice [51,61,63,72,75,76,80]. A summary of mechanisms of HIV-1 pathogenesis explored to date in humanized mice is found in Table 2.Table 2Mechanisms of HIV-1 pathogenesis in the new generation of humanized miceMouse Model/HIV-1 strainFindingReferenceRAG-hu mice; R5 tropic JR-CSF and dual-tropic R3ACD4+FoxP3+ T regulatory cells are preferentially infected and depleted in spleen and lymph nodes; depletion occurs via apoptosis.[61]hNOG mice; R5 tropic JR-CSF or X4 tropic NL4-3X4 tropic virus depletes both naïve and memory T cells, while R5 tropic virus selectively depletes effector memory T cells (CD45RO+CD45RA-).[72]BLT mice; R5 tropic JR-CSFR5 tropic virus depletes CD4+ effector memory T cells (CD45RA-CD27-) in small intestines[77]RAG-hu mice; R5 tropic YU-2R5 tropic virus leads to translocation of LPS to the plasma, resulting in CD8 T cell activation, lower CD4 T cell ratios, and higher viral loads.[51]hNOG mice; R5 tropic ADAHuman macrophages, microglia, and dendritic cells are engrafted in the meninges and perivascular spaces in the hNOG brain. p24+ cells can be detected in the brain following intraperitoneal infection. Human immune cells infiltrate regions of viral replication in the brain, and CD8 T cell depletion leads to meningitis and encephalitis.[75]hNOG mice;R5 tropic ADAHIV-1 infection leads to structural changes in brain architecture, leading to loss of neuronal integrity.[76]RAG-hu mice; dual-tropic R3APlasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) are productively infected and activated during early HIV infection, leading to CD4 T cell activation and apoptosis. pDC levels were stable, but function was impaired in the spleen and bone marrow.[63]BLT mice; NL4-3 backbone with LAI env geneVirus with a single amino acid substitution in env (V38E) has similar viral load to virus with wild-type env, but is attenuated for CD4 T cell depletion due to a defect in caspase-dependent bystander apoptosis.[80]A hallmark of AIDS is chronic immune activation, and specific infection and depletion of regulatory T cells (T-regs), which normally suppress chronic immune cell activation, could play a critical role in this process. Jiang et al. reported that CD4+FoxP3+ T-regs develop in RAG-hu mice. These T-regs migrate to all lymphoid organs and are functional in that they can suppress proliferation of other T cells. T-regs are preferentially infected and depleted in vivo in RAG-hu mice as compared to other types of human T cells; both the CCR5 tropic JR-CSF and the dual-tropic HIV-R3A exhibited the increased rate of infection. Specific depletion of T-regs was largely due to apoptosis. Depletion of T-regs by administration of denileukin diftitox led to reduced viral replication as measured by viral load and presence of p24+ cells [61].Depletion of effector memory T cells may lead to exhaustion of the central memory T cell pool, which has been postulated to play a role in progression to AIDS [88]. Nie et al. examined the effects of HIV-1 infection on memory T cell populations in hNOG mice [72]. They showed that while CXCR4 tropic HIV-1 is able to deplete both naïve and memory T cells in hNOG mice, CCR5 tropic HIV-1 selectively depletes effector memory T cells. Similar findings with CCR5 tropic virus were seen in the small intestines in infected BLT mice [77]. Infected effector memory T cells in humanized mice are predominantly activated and proliferating [72,77], similar to findings in human AIDS patients [89,90] and SIV+ non-human primates [91,92]. Brainard et al. similarly found an increase in activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells (Ki-67+ or CD27-) in HIV-1-infected BLT mice [42]. While central memory T cells are CCR5- and are not infected by CCR5-tropic HIV-1, these cells serve as an important reservoir for replenishment of both the central memory and effector memory T cell populations [93].Pathogenesis of HIV-1 has been implicated to be due to immune depletion in the GALT, and increased translocation of bacteria or bacterial products such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) may lead to enhanced immune activation and AIDS. HIV-1+ humans and SIV+ sooty mangabeys have higher levels of LPS in the bloodstream than uninfected controls, and it was hypothesized that LPS translocated across the gut [94]. HIV-1+ RAG-hu mice also exhibit increased levels of bacterial LPS in the bloodstream [51]. This was shown to be specific to HIV-1 infection, since treatment with a chemical that induces intestinal permeability did not result in higher LPS in the blood [51]. These experiments illustrate the utility of humanized mice to further investigate preliminary findings in humans and non-human primates. In addition, HIV-1+ RAG-hu mice showed increased levels of activated CD8+ T cells whether or not high levels of LPS were detected in the plasma [51]. Increased numbers of activated CD8+ T cells in HIV-1+ mice were correlated with enhanced CD4+ T cell inversion [51].Two studies have shown that CD8+ T cells respond to HIV-1 infection in similar fashion as seen in humans. Sato et al. showed that in HIV-1-infected hNOG mice the memory CD8+ population preferentially expands while the naïve population remains constant [66]. Sun et al. demonstrated that in HIV-1+ BLT mice, the frequency of CD8+CXCR4+ cells in the mesenteric lymph nodes and GALT decreased while the CD8+CCR5+ population expanded. Overall, CD8+ T cells expanded in the GALT and mesenteric lymph nodes and most of these cells had an effector memory phenotype (CD27-CD45RA-) [45]. Taken together, these findings indicate that HIV-1 induces a state of generalized immune activation in the gut lymphoid tissues, similar to findings in humans [89].Human macrophages can be detected in the hNSG brain at 26 weeks post-engraftment after intrahepatic injection of human HSCs into newborns [75]. Animals were not perfused in this report, and this makes interpretation of these findings difficult, since blood cells may be detected in perivascular spaces. However, subsequent work by the same group showed limited histological data from perfused animals providing evidence for human cell engraftment in the meninges and perivascular spaces [76]. Further, intraperitoneal injection of CCR5 tropic HIV-1 leads to detection of low numbers of p24+ cells in the hNSG brain (non-perfused samples) [75], possibly due to similar mechanisms of HIV-1 entry into the human brain which is thought to take place via trafficking of infected monocytes [95]. Meningitis, meningoencephalitis, and neuroinflammation were detected in a subset of animals [75]. The frequency and severity of these symptoms were increased in animals depleted of human CD8+ T cells, indicating that the human immune response may be able to at least partially control neuro-invasion or neuropathogenesis in humanized mice [75]. Follow-up work by the same group has shown detection of brain abnormalities specifically in HIV-1+ humanized mice as detected by live animal imaging and post-mortem immuno-staining [76]. They concluded that systemic HIV-1 infection leads to a disruption of the normal humanized mouse brain architecture [76]. As methods to improve mouse humanization continue to evolve, we expect that penetration of human immune cells to the brain will also likely increase; accompanied by higher levels of neuro-pathogenesis. Thus, humanized mice show promise for studies of the mode of viral penetration of the brain as well as pathologies associated with HIV-1 brain infection, and may additionally be useful to develop new methods to block neuro-invasion by HIV-1.Zhang et al. recently showed that productive HIV-1 infection leads to activation of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) in the spleen and bone marrow of RAG-hu mice [63]. Activation of pDCs was followed by an increased rate of activation and apoptosis in CD4+ T cell populations. Normal pDC levels were maintained despite infection of these cells, but the functionality of these cells was impaired as measured by IFN-α production and the ability to respond to TLR7 and TLR9 agonists [63].The mechanisms by which HIV-1 induces CD4+ T cell depletion and AIDS are not fully understood [93]. Garg et al. have recently shown that a point mutation in HIV-1 gp41 (V38E) that alters cell-to-cell fusion activity of HIV-1 envelope has no effect on the ability of the virus to replicate in BLT mice, as measured by plasma antigenemia [80]. However, CD4+ T cell depletion was significantly reduced in mice infected with the V38E strain at later time points. The authors present evidence that caspase-dependent bystander apoptosis was efficient with wild-type virus, but attenuated in V38E virus.An area of viral pathogenesis that has yet to be explored in humanized mice is the effect of secondary infections by bacterial, viral, and fungal pathogens which contribute frequently to AIDS-related mortality. Some pathogens associated with complications in AIDS patients, such as the herpesviruses EBV, KSHV and CMV as well as hepatitis B and C viruses have already been characterized for infection in humanized mice. A summary of these agents, as well as the humanized mouse models they have been studied in and appropriate references is found in Table 1.In summary, HSC-humanized mice produce a large variety of human T cell types, and HIV-1 targets various subpopulations of these cells similarly to what is seen in humans. Further, HIV-1 is able to penetrate into the GALT and possibly into the brain, which are major sites of AIDS pathogenesis. The ability to produce large numbers of humanized mice and at a relatively inexpensive cost will allow for further expansion of our understanding of how HIV-1 penetrates these organs and how organ function is compromised by infection. While we are still in an exploratory phase of determining whether or not humanized mice truly recapitulate human AIDS pathogenesis, we look forward to the future when novel discoveries will be made in humanized mice and then confirmed in human patients.Human immune responses against HIV-1 in humanized miceOne of the most exciting developments of HSC-humanized mice is the capacity to develop human primary immune responses against specific agents. However, human adaptive immune responses in HSC-engrafted mice directed towards HIV-1 have been somewhat disappointing thus far; the reasons for this finding are not well understood. It appears that the ability to generate immune responses against HIV-1 may be fundamentally different than against other agents, because human immune responses against other antigens tend to be readily detectable in terms of both frequency and potency, such as after challenge with EBV [17,27-30], KSHV [32], HSV-2 [34], or Dengue virus [35,96] or after vaccination with H. influenzae B conjugate vaccine [46], tetanus toxin [17,97], or Hepatitis B Virus surface antigen [97]. This is generally not the case for HIV-1 (see below). Following is a summary of what has been reported in the literature in regards to human immune responses to HIV-1 in humanized mice.Baenziger et al. reported a frequency of only 1 in 25 RAG-hu mice with detectable human antibodies against HIV-1 [44], Gorantla et al. reported 0 of 17 in RAG-hu mice [46], and our unpublished results were similar (0 of 16 in RAG-hu). Sango et al. reported detection of human IgG specific to HIV-1 gp120 and Gag in RAG-hu mice, but the frequency was not reported [64]. Watanabe et al. demonstrated human antibody responses against HIV-1 in 3 of 14 hNOG mice [43], and Sato et al. found the same in 2 of 7 hNOG mice [66]. The Watanabe report showed that antibodies targeted either gp120 or p24 antigens [43]. In contrast, Brainard et al. reported that 9 of 9 BLT mice had detectable anti-HIV-1 human antibodies after 12 weeks of infection. It is interesting to note that no responses were detected in BLT until after 5 weeks post-infection, and that 10 weeks were required for a majority to seroconvert [42]. A separate report showed detection of human IgG specific to HIV-1 proteins by western blot in 3 of 4 intrarectally-infected BLT mice [45]. A slow humoral response has also been shown against Dengue viral infection of RAG-hu mice, wherein the earliest humoral responses were detected at 2 weeks (1 of 10 animals assayed), 3 of 8 were positive by 6 weeks, and all 8 of 8 were positive by 8 weeks [35]. Baenziger et al. mentioned that testing was only performed on samples that were at least 3 weeks post-infection, and that the lone positive sample was from 6 weeks post-infection. Thus, it is possible that testing was performed too early to detect animals that would later become positive. However, our own unpublished ELISA testing has included at least 6 RAG-hu animals through 21 weeks (all negative) and so a slowly developing response is not likely the difference between the RAG-hu and BLT models. However, these results should be viewed in light of many variables that exist between the above studies, including the use of cord blood or fetal liver samples for transplants, the various mouse strains, the virus strains used to infect animals, the time points after engraftment at which infection took place and when samples were collected for serology, and the methodologies used to detect antibody responses. We feel that the amount of data currently available is insufficient to make definite conclusions about which models may be superior (if any) for analyzing anti-HIV-1 antibody responses.Follow-up work with Dengue virus in RAG-hu mice has shown that ~40-60% of RAG-hu animals produce human anti-Dengue antibodies, depending upon the experiment (n > 50 infected animals). Thus, it is likely that there are fundamental differences in the antibody responses to different agents in humanized mice and that more rapid and profound T cell depletion associated with HIV-1 infection in humanized mice likely plays a role in weak antibody responses against HIV-1 as compared to more robust responses seen in humans and in humanized mice to other antigens. Interestingly, Sango et al. reported detection of gp120- and Gag-specific IgM and IgG in RAG-hu mice and evidence is presented that intrasplenic injection of HIV-1 results in an increased frequency of anti-HIV-1 antibody responses as compared to intravenous or intraperitoneal infection [64]. Since only the mean O.D. reading of an ELISA test is reported, the frequency of these responses is unclear, and additionally the sample sizes were small for this experiment (n = 6 for intrasplenic injection, but only n = 2 for intravenous and intraperitoneal injection as controls). However, there was a clear correlation between the number of infected splenocytes and enhanced anti-HIV-1 antibody production. Nevertheless, these data are promising that RAG-hu mice are capable of producing strong anti-HIV-1 antibody responses, and we look forward to seeing if anti-HIV-1 T cell responses will also be detectable after intrasplenic infection.Brainard et al. reported in the BLT model that ELISPOT assays could detect human IFN-γ production from T cells in response to HIV-1 peptides in 4 of 6 mice, representing two different human tissue donors. No in vivo responses were detected earlier than 9 weeks post-infection, and gag and nef peptides were common targets, as seen in humans [98]. Intracellular cytokine staining assays further confirmed the ELISPOT results and showed that both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells reacted to produce IFN-γ [42]. A similar report by Gorantla et al. showed specific T cell responses by both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells to gag (but only weak, if at all, to env) in hNSG mice [71]. These reports mark the best evidence to date that HSC-engrafted mice can produce T cell responses against HIV-1, although as mentioned above these models can be used to study T cell responses against a variety of other viral pathogens. A similar study conducted by An et al. in RAG-hu mice failed to detect T cell responses using a similar ELISPOT assay for detection of responses against gag and nef [58]. Anti-HIV-1 T cell responses have not been reported to date in the RAG-hu model, although 4 animals were also tested by Baenziger et al. [44]. The mechanisms for any true differences seen in human immune responses between different humanized mouse models are not yet clear, but it has been hypothesized that the presence of human thymic tissue grafts in BLT mice may provide a more appropriate stromal environment for human T cell selection [42] and the available data support this idea for HIV-1 infections. However, detection of anti-HIV-1 T cell responses in other models that lack human thymic stromal cells (hNSG, hNOG, and RAG-hu mice) to EBV, HCV, and other immunogens [17,28,29,37,47] would argue that a stromal environment is not necessary to generate human T cell responses in general in humanized mice, suggesting a unique property of HIV-1.HIV-1 vaccines have yet to be tested in humanized mice. A major advantage of this system is that animals can be exposed to virus by various routes and then tested for sterilizing immunity to the virus. However, since human adaptive immune responses to the virus are weak it is likely that improvements in the potency of the immune system against HIV-1 will need to be made before vaccine efficacy studies will be plausible. However, if the mechanism for weak immune responses is in fact due to rapid helper T cell loss, then it is possible that vaccines may elicit stronger responses than the live virus itself due to presentation of antigen without accompanying helper T cell loss.A recent report by O'Connell et al. has shown that human T cells can be expanded in RAG-hu mice by introduction of hIL-7 via lentiviral gene transfer. T cells formed a larger percentage of human leukocytes, and similar proportions of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were found in hIL-7 expressing mice as compared to control animals. Although it is possible that hIL-7 administration may lead to enhanced cellular immunity, the functionality of T cell responses were not examined in this report. Total serum IgM levels increased in hIL-7 treated animals, although the capacity to mount specific antibody responses to ovalbumin or HIV-1 did not change. Although levels of viremia were not statistically different in hIL-7 expressing mice, the total number of human T cells remained high in the spleen despite systemic HIV-1 infection [52]. These data indicate that IL-7 should be further explored as a possible mechanism to restore T cell levels in HIV-1 patients without increasing viral load. These interesting results may also lead to an improved model of humanized mice, possibly one in which anti-HIV-1 T cell responses will be more robust.Another area yet to be examined is HIV-1 latency in humanized mice. The virus uses many mechanisms to hide in the host, but integrated provirus in a transcriptionally repressed state in resting memory T cells (reviewed in [99]) and extracellular virions tethered to the surface of follicular dendritic cells [100] contribute extensively to the latent reservoir. These models could be useful to discover new ways to induce an exit from latency as we move towards finding a cure for HIV-1.Anti-HIV-1 drug testing in humanized miceSeveral anti-HIV-1 drugs have been tested for efficacy in HSC-engrafted mice, using both the RAG-hu and BLT models. In some reports, the effects of targeted drugs on a previously established HIV-1 infection were studied and in other reports the ability of antiviral drugs to prevent infection were analyzed. Some studies have employed FDA-approved drugs such as emtricitabine + tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (RT inhibitors) or AZT + lamivudine + indinavir (2 RT inhibitors + protease inhibitor, respectively) [77,78], or emtricitabine + tenofovir disoproxil fumarate plus an experimental strand transfer inhibitor (L-870812) [59]. The most recent study to examine the effects of drugs on a pre-existing infection has employed an experimental TAT peptide inhibitor which blocks the interaction of cellular cdk2 with the TAR element [50] and is currently being studied in humans [101].Denton et al. have published two reports on pre-exposure prophylaxis in BLT mice using vaginal [77], rectal [78], or intravenous [78] exposure to HIV-1. In the vaginal challenge report, emtricitabine + tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (RT inhibitors) were administered orally 2 days prior to challenge, 3 hours prior to challenge, and 4 days post-challenge. 5 of 5 animals receiving drugs were entirely protected from infection with a CCR5 tropic strain, while 7 of 8 control animals became infected [77]. Successful HIV-1 replication in challenged mice in both of the Denton et al. reports was assayed by a wide variety of parameters including plasma viral load, proviral DNA amplification, plasma antigenemia, FACS staining to detect CD4+ T cell loss, and in situ hybridization. Thus, this initial study has provided evidence that clinicians should administer anti-retrovirals to women who are at a high risk of HIV-1 infection via vaginal intercourse. In the second Denton et al. report, the ability of RT inhibitors to prevent rectal and intravenous transmission was examined [78]. In this study the same RT inhibitors were used; in this case the drugs were administered for seven consecutive days and with exposure to HIV-1 on the third day. 9 of 9 animals rectally exposed receiving drugs were entirely protected from infection with a CCR5 tropic strain, while 12 of 19 control animals became infected. This experiment is similar in nature to a recent clinical trial testing these same drugs (Truvada) as a pre-exposure regimen designed to test for protection against HIV-1 transmission in men who have sex with men or transgender women who have sex with men. That study showed that oral administration of Truvada resulted in a 44% reduction in HIV-1 transmission [102]. Although Denton et al. used intraperitoneal injection of Truvada versus oral administration in the clinical trial, the results are very promising that humanized mice can be useful to perform pre-clinical testing. The reasons for the differences in protection rates between the two studies are not clear, but the increased levels of human target cells in mucosal tissues in humans vs. humanized mice and the possible presence of other sexually transmitted diseases in human patients may contribute to lower protection rates in humans. Intravenous challenge with HIV-1 was performed in an identical time frame as in the rectal and vaginal challenge experiments outlined above. In this case, 7 of 8 mice administered drugs were protected from infection, while 6 of 6 control mice were infected. The lone animal to become infected did not exhibit RT mutations that would explain enhanced susceptibility to the virus. In addition, when 4 animals were infected intravenously followed by a 7-day regimen of drugs beginning 24 hours after exposure, all animals became infected but with delayed kinetics [78].Neff et al. have shown that oral administration of either raltegravir (integrase inhibitor) or maraviroc (CCR5 entry inhibitor) prevents vaginal transmission of HIV-1 in RAG-hu mice. Protection rates were measured by attempts to detect viral RNA or DNA in the blood and by monitoring of CD4+ T cell counts in the peripheral blood. 6 of 6 RAG-hu mice were protected from transmission with each drug, while 8 of 8 control mice were infected [62]. Taken together, these reports are very promising for effective prevention of HIV-1 transmission in humans for various routes of viral exposure.In the other three reports, the effects of anti-HIV-1 drugs on a previously established infection were analyzed. Choudhary et al. showed that a combination of the RT inhibitors emtricitabine, tenofovir disoproxil fumarate, and an experimental strand transfer inhibitor (L-870812) was able to both reduce viral load as well as to rescue from CD4+ T cell loss when administration was begun 10-20 days after intravenous infection of RAG-hu mice with JR-CSF (dose of virus not reported). Although limited numbers of animals were used in these experiments, it is notable that viremia was still detectable at most time points during the drug administration phase. Upon discontinuation of the drugs, viremia rebounded, and CD4+ T cell levels once again dropped [59]. This finding demonstrates that viable virus was indeed present despite administration of antiviral drugs for 2-3 months. Interestingly, emergence of known resistance mutations developed in 2 of 6 mice and viral rebound occurred; this finding is discussed further in the section of viral evolution (see below).Sango et al. administered a classical HAART cocktail of AZT + lamivudine + indinavir beginning 1 week after intrasplenic infection (dose range of 800 to 8000 TCID50) of RAG-hu mice with strain JR-CSF [64]. They found a nearly 300-fold reduction in the number of infected splenocytes which was accompanied by a 300-fold decrease in viremia. CD4+ T cell loss was almost entirely prevented as well. The Choudhary et al. and Sango et al. reports clearly demonstrate that administration of anti-retroviral drugs in RAG-hu mice results in a decrease in viral load and prevention of [64] or rescue from [59] CD4+ T cell loss. However, it is important to note that both studies have utilized time points of drug administration that are considerably earlier than those used in humans, where detection of seroconversion rarely happens in the range of 7-20 days.Van Duyne et al. studied the effects of cdk2 inhibitors that prevent interaction with the TAR element in RAG-hu mice [50]. Their data showed that some experimental peptide inhibitors were able to lower viremia to levels comparable to those achieved by AZT. It is interesting to note that proviral DNA copy number appeared to be substantially higher in peptide inhibitor-treated mice as compared to AZT-treated mice (about 6 × higher) and somewhat higher even than untreated HIV+ mice (nearly 2 × higher). However, no statistical analysis was provided and only single time points were analyzed, so it is unclear if the difference was significant. The ramifications of possibly increasing proviral load due to inhibition of viral gene expression are not clear. This type of study shows the utility of humanized mice to identify potential complications before use in humans and to explore the mechanisms and possible side effects.Luo et al. have recently shown that administration of the highly neutralizing human monoclonal antibody 2G12 is effective at reducing viremia in HIV-infected RAG-hu mice. This report also showed that an engineered 2G12 dimer was more stable and had greater viral inhibition than the monomeric form [53]. Antibodies were either administered in purified form, or via "backpack tumors" into CD34-engrafted mice. While intravenous challenge with HIV-1 in immunized mice still resulted in successful viral transmission, viral loads were suppressed. The mechanism of action of these antibodies has not yet been examined, but subtle aspects of humanized mouse engraftment are important to consider. RAG-hu mice are not expected to produce human complement since production predominantly takes place in liver cells; human liver cells are not present in RAG-hu mice. Human NK cells are also not effectively produced in humanized mice unless human IL-15 is administered [103,104]. Complement-mediated lysis of virions and complement and NK cell-mediated lysis of infected cells may thus be defective in this system when human antibodies are administered. These studies would indicate that human monoclonal antibodies may be another option for administration to HIV+ patients to prevent progression to AIDS, especially since many patients fail to develop neutralizing antibodies on their own.Taken together, these studies show that both FDA-approved and experimental treatments can be effective at blocking HIV-1 replication and helper T cell loss in humanized mice. In addition, the rationale for administration of anti-HIV-1 drugs to humans who are at high risk for HIV-1 exposure has been strengthened. Thus, humanized mice represent an important model to test unproven anti-HIV-1 drugs and proven drugs for new applications.Anti-HIV-1 gene therapy testing in humanized miceGene therapy represents a novel method to prevent and/or treat HIV-1 infections at multiple levels of the viral life cycle [104,105]. Current work in the anti-HIV-1 gene therapy field includes such strategies as blocking viral entry, blocking viral gene expression or expression of host cell factors needed for entry or replication by RNA interference [106], production of neutralizing antibodies against HIV-1, introduction of specific antiviral genes such as the APOBEC family of cytosine deaminases [107] and TRIM5α [108], and the targeting of these potential therapies to specific cell types and/or to hematopoietic stem cells [109]. Lentiviral vectors, ironically based upon the HIV-1 genome itself, have been extensively studied as gene delivery vehicles to human hematopoietic cells including HSCs [110]. These vectors are capable of genomic integration and long-term gene delivery, and do not appear to be accompanied by the leukemic events that can occur with oncoretroviruses [111]. A host of clinical trials are already underway to test various novel gene therapeutic strategies to control HIV-1 infection [112].Gene therapy of HSCs holds high promise for a lifelong infection such as with HIV-1 because gene-modified stem cells have the potential to produce HIV-1-resistant progeny cells for long periods after initiation of therapy. Continual production of HIV-1-resistant progeny cells has the potential to provide a selective event wherein a reservoir of resistant helper T cells are maintained; thus development of AIDS may be indefinitely delayed [113]. Since HSCs are used to engraft the latest generation of humanized mice, it is only natural that several reports have emerged in which the human HSCs have been gene-modified prior to engraftment. However, there is also a certain level of concern that stem cell gene therapy poses a greater risk due to previous experience with oncoretroviral gene therapy of humans with SCID, as noted above. Thus, many efforts are also directed at modification of mature human T cells and monocytes despite the fact that these modified cells will naturally deplete during the lifetime of a patient. A summary of strategies tested thus far in the new generation of humanized mice is found in Table 3.Table 3Gene therapeutic strategies used to control HIV-1 infection in the new generation of humanized miceHumanized mouse modelStrategyFindingsReferenceRAG-hu miceLentiviral vector transduction of HSCs with anti-nef shRNA constructLentivirally-transduced HSCs can engraft in RAG-hu mice. Ex vivo challenge with HIV-1 showed preferential protection of transduced cells.[60]hNOG miceLentiviral vector transduction of HSCs with gene encoding neutralizing human antibody to HIV-1 (2G12)Lentivirally-transduced HSCs can engraft in hNOG mice. Antibody was produced; viremia was ~70-fold reduced and number of infected splenocytes was reduced ~200-fold.[68]hNOG miceDisrupt CCR5 gene in HSCs by zinc finger nucleases~17% of all alleles in the HSC population were gene modified; engraftment was still successful. Gene-modified cells were positively selected during HIV-1 infection.[74]BLT miceTargeted delivery of an anti-CCR5 siRNA to human lymphocytes in vivoCCR5 expression was silenced and plasma viral load was decreased ~30-fold relative to controls. No CD4 T cell depletion noted through 55 days.[81]BLT miceLentiviral transduction of HSCs with anti-CCR5 shRNA constructCCR5 expression was silenced in a variety of cell types and tissue sites. Protection against infection was measured ex vivo.[79]RAG-hu miceRNA-based aptamers used to neutralize virus and/or to deliver anti-tat/rev siRNA to infected cellsViral load decreased relative to controls; helper T cell depletion blocked. Combination therapy more effective than aptamer alone.[54]hNOG miceTargeting of siRNAs to block expression of CD4, CCR5, or viral RNAs to mature human T cellsViral load was lower after treatment, despite a moderate and transient effect on receptor knockdown. CD4 T cell levels preserved.[69]hNOG miceLentiviral vector transduction of HSCs to express antisense RNA to envOnly a low percentage of cells were transduced (4-11%); no effect on viral load; virus mutated targeted env sequences.[70]hNOG miceLentiviral transduction of mature CD4 T cells to produce viral entry inhibitorTransduced cells expressing entry inhibitor expanded relative to non-transduced or control transduced cells, indicating protection.[125]In 2008, Ter Brake et al. used an established lentiviral vector to express an shRNA targeting the nef gene sequence by transducing HSCs prior to engraftment to produce RAG-hu mice [60]. While no in vivo challenges were performed in this study, they did show that gene-modified HSCs can still engraft in immunodeficient mice and that multi-lineage hematopoiesis still occurs. It is interesting to note that while transduction efficiencies were similar between the shRNA vector and a control vector only expressing GFP, the level of engrafted cells containing the shRNA vector was significantly lower than cells containing the control vector. This finding indicates that high level expression of shRNAs in human HSCs may interfere with engraftment and/or hematopoiesis. When RAG-hu derived cells were infected ex vivo, substantial protection from HIV-1 infection was noted preferentially in cells receiving the shRNA vector. Taken together with our results with NLENG1-IRES (see above) [57], these findings suggest that nef is a candidate target to block viral replication and cell death.Joseph et al. used a lentiviral vector to deliver the gene encoding a highly neutralizing anti-HIV-1 human monoclonal antibody (2G12) into HSCs, followed by engraftment into hNOG mice [68]. They also found successful engraftment, followed by secretion of the 2G12 antibody. Upon challenge with HIV-1, viremia in gene therapy-treated hNOG mice was found to be 70-fold lower as compared to untreated animals and the number of HIV+ splenocytes was reduced 200-fold. Since many HIV+ patients fail to produce neutralizing antibodies this method may be useful to boost immunity in those already infected.Recent success with possibly curing a human patient of HIV-1 infection via a bone marrow transplantation using homozygous CCR5Δ32 donor cells [114] has generated renewed interest in finding ways to interfere with CCR5 expression, especially since no known immunological defects are associated with the Δ32 allele. Various gene therapy strategies are currently being investigated as a novel method to treat HIV+ patients by manipulating cells to downregulate CCR5 expression in order to possibly prevent progression to AIDS by protecting cells that would normally be susceptible to the virus. Such a strategy was employed by Holt et al. using zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN) to target the CCR5 gene in human HSCs, followed by transplantation into hNOG mice [74]. Transplantation efficiency was not affected by ZFN treatment, and genetically modified cells were positively selected after HIV-1 challenge, despite a relatively low level of successful gene targeting (estimated at 17% of total CCR5 alleles disrupted, with a lower level of cells having biallelic disruption). Viremia levels were lower and human T cells persisted at higher levels, indicating that the strategy was effective. Shimizu, et al reported that the BLT model can also be used to produce gene-modified cells using a lentiviral vector to transduce HSCs [79]. Their strategy was to target the cellular co-receptor CCR5 by delivery of a construct encoding a shRNA, and they showed successful knockdown of the cellular gene in T cells and monocytes/macrophages and in a variety of lymphoid tissues and also the GALT. Protection against HIV-1 challenge was again shown, but only ex vivo. CCR5 represents an excellent target for HIV-1 gene therapy because while viral genes can readily mutate to escape from therapy, cellular genes do not readily mutate.Neff et al. recently reported on testing a novel anti-HIV-1 drug in RAG-hu mice [54]. They used RNA-based aptamers to target HIV-1 gp120, either alone or conjugated to an anti-tat/rev siRNA designed to block early viral gene expression in infected cells. The aptamer binds to gp120 on virions and neutralizes infectivity of particles, but can also bind to gp120 on the surface of infected cells. In conjunction with the antiviral siRNA the aptamer can be used to target delivery of the siRNA payload directly to infected cells. Their results showed that use of the aptamer alone or the aptamer-siRNA combination resulted in a drop in HIV-1 viremia by multiple logs, and that helper T cell levels were preserved. Further, the aptamer-siRNA combination provided a longer effect as compared to the aptamer alone, indicating that viral replication was inhibited.Some studies have been performed wherein gene therapy was performed on mature human blood cells in humanized mice. Kim et al. targeted nanoparticles to a lymphocyte-specific marker in BLT mice; nanoparticles carried an anti-CCR5 siRNA which was accompanied by silencing of CCR5 expression for at least 10 days [81]. Although treated mice still developed a productive infection with HIV-1, the mean plasma viral load was decreased about 30-fold relative to control vector-transduced mice and no CD4+ T cell loss was noted in treated mice for up to 55 days while CD4+ T cell loss was detected with the control vector.Kumar et al. delivered siRNAs to mature T cells in hNOG mice using a single-chain antibody to target CD7+ cells [69]. siRNA targets included either CD4, CCR5, a combination of siRNAs to HIV-1 vif and tat, or a combination targeting CCR5+vif+tat. Using PBLs for transplantation, they showed that CD4 could be effectively downregulated by siRNA targeting. This resulted in lower levels of detectable HIV-1 p24 following ex vivo infection. Targeting of CCR5 was highly effective at reducing p24 levels in the blood in PBL-engrafted mice at day 5 post-infection, while p24 levels rose to within 1 log of the control vector by 13 days post-infection indicating that CCR5 downregulation was transient. CD4+ T cell loss in treated animals was mild compared to animals receiving the control siRNA. The triple combination of CCR5+vif+tat siRNAs was highly effective at blocking virus replication for both days 5 and 13. CD4 knockdown was moderate after intravenous injection of the siRNA (~50% by FACS staining) and CCR5 knockdown was also moderate (~66% by Q-RT-PCR). Ex vivo infection of cells with CCR5 knockdown exhibited HIV-1 replication at about 50% levels as compared to the control vector. Viremia was highly suppressed by siRNAs against vif and tat, and CD4+ T cell loss was largely prevented by the same.HIV-1 evolution in humanized miceEvolution of HIV-1 in vivo allows the virus to escape from selective pressures including antiviral drugs and host immune responses. In addition, evolution of the env gene to change from the use of CCR5 as a co-receptor to use of CXCR4 is correlated with faster progression to AIDS [115,116]. The ability to recapitulate the process of viral evolution in humanized mice would allow for development of models that could potentially predict what would take place in humans. Choudhary et al. examined the effects of a combination of anti-HIV-1 drugs targeting reverse transcriptase (tenofovir disoproxil fumarate and emtricitabine) and the strand transfer inhibitor L-870812 in HIV-infected RAG-hu mice [59]. They found that 2 of 6 animals developed known resistance mutations in reverse transcriptase or integrase, with resistance becoming detectable as early as 1 month post-infection. Two animals died prematurely; so the incidence of drug resistance mutations may be higher.A recent study has focused on human APOBEC proteins and their ability to induce hypermutations in the HIV-1 genome in hNOG mice [73]. Animals were infected with the molecular clones JR-CSF or vif-deficient JR-CSF, however vif-deficient virus was unable to replicate as assessed by undetectable RNA viral load, provirus, and p24+ cells in spleen. Subsequently, sequencing analysis focused on the pol region were performed on samples obtained from animals infected with wild-type virus. It was found that G-to-A mutations in proviral DNA were significantly more common than other types of mutations in the HIV-1 genomes of infected humanized mice, indicating that APOBEC proteins are active in vivo against wild-type HIV-1. By way of contrast, G-to-A mutations were less common in plasma RNA sequences as compared to proviral sequences, indicating that hypermutated genomes were less fit for replication.RAG-hu mice were infected with the CCR5 tropic molecular clone JR-CSF and analyzed for mutations in the env gene for up to 44 weeks post-infection without selective pressures from drugs or RNA silencing [65]. As mentioned above, anti-HIV-1 immune responses in RAG-hu mice have been low to undetectable and thus the selective pressure of the host immune response was likely weak in this study. Nonetheless, the mean rate of divergence of HIV-1 in RAG-hu mice was found to be similar to what was seen in human cohorts during a similar time period [117,118]. Several mutations were found in common across the group of infected mice, and included the loss of glycosylation sites and substitutions in the CD4 binding site. One animal developed env variants that exhibited the ability to use CXCR4 as a co-receptor, despite being infected with a molecular clone known to use CCR5 as a co-receptor. This data provide evidence that the transition from usage of CCR5 to CXCR4 is indeed as a result of viral mutation and not due to transmission of CXCR4-using viruses which can emerge later during infection [118].The SCID-hu-PBL mouse model was used extensively to test anti-HIV-1 strategies and yielded much data [119]. A recent report using hNOG mice similarly humanized with mature human PBMCs analyzed a strategy currently under investigation in humans in which an antisense payload targeting env is introduced via adoptive T-cell therapy [70]. Previous reports have shown that HIV-1 can readily escape from RNA silencing [120], and this was found to be the case in humanized mice when env is targeted [70].In a similar adaptation of the SCID-hu-PBL model, Mukherjee et al. performed an experiment to parallel a clinical trial experiment wherein an anti-HIV-1 env antisense RNA was introduced into PBMC-humanized hNOG mice via a lentiviral vector [70]. However, HIV-1 had already been shown to mutate in response to this antisense RNA and so the purpose of these experiments was more to examine development of these mutations in an animal system. Human T cells were transduced with the vector prior to engraftment, although only moderate levels of transduced cells were used (~4-11%) in order to mirror the clinical trial where only a low transduction efficiency is currently feasible. Animals were then challenged with one of two HIV-1 strains; NL4-3 (CXCR4 tropic) with a 100% match with the env target sequence and an NL4-3 derivative expressing the BaL envelope (CCR5 tropic) and hence a mismatched env target sequence. As expected, no differences in viral titer were detected since only a low percentage of T cells were transduced. Pyrosequencing of individual viral genomes was performed and sequences were analyzed relative to input viral sequences. Enriched A-to-G transitions were detected in the env target sequence region in animals receiving the antisense payload, as were viral genomic deletions in the same region. These findings were in accordance with previous work done using the same vector in a human T cell line in tissue culture [121]. G-to-A transitions also occurred at a high rate, but these changes were likely due to APOBEC-induced mutations (see below). Interestingly, for reasons which are still unclear the increase in env mutations was only noted in animals challenged with the CCR5-tropic envelope strain, despite the antisense RNA being imperfectly matched with the target sequence.ConclusionsThere are many areas of HIV-1 biology that are still poorly understood, including the mechanisms by which HIV-1 causes AIDS and why some patients fail to develop AIDS. We have yet to produce a vaccine that can effectively prevent infection; nor do we have antiviral drugs that can cure an infection or that are fully refractory to viral resistance. The major roadblock to most of these unresolved problems has been the lack of suitable animal models in which to study them. The new generation of humanized mice is the most physiologically relevant system to date that allows for direct studies of HIV-1 itself as it interacts with human hemato-lymphoid cells in a complex three-dimensional environment. Humanized mice are relatively inexpensive to produce, can be worked with under conditions that are available at many institutions, and produce many aspects of HIV-induced pathogenesis directly on human cells; none of these factors apply to non-human primate research. The biggest hurdle yet to be overcome is to refine the models so that human adaptive immune responses are more robust so that vaccine efficacy experiments can be performed. Nevertheless, the data that have been generated in less than five years since the initial reports of HIV-1 infection in these new models provide much optimism that humanized mice will be useful to answer many of these unsolved questions and problems.List of abbreviations usedAIDS: acquired immunodeficiency syndrome; BLT: bone marrow-liver-thymus; CCR5: C-C chemokine receptor type 5; CXCR4: C-X-C chemokine receptor type 4; EBV: Epstein-Barr virus; FACS: fluorescence activated cell sorting; GALT: gut-associated lymphoid tissue; γc: common gamma chain receptor; HAART: highly active anti-retroviral therapy; HBV: hepatitis b virus; hCMV: human cytomegalovirus; HCV: hepatitis c virus; HIV-1: human immunodeficiency virus type 1; HSC: hematopoietic stem cell; HSV-2: herpes simplex virus type 2; HTLV-1: human T cell leukemia virus type 1; KSHV: Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus; NOD: non-obese diabetic; PBL: peripheral blood leukocyte; Prkdc: protein kinase DNA catalytic; Rag: recombinase activating gene; SCID: severe combined immunodeficiency; shRNA: short hairpin ribonucleic acid; siRNA: short interfering ribonucleic acid; TCID50 : tissue culture infectious dose required to infect 50%Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsMRR is a former BS student at Brigham Young University. MRR conducted extensive literature reviews and wrote the sections on antivirals and immune responses. BKB wrote the remaining portions of the manuscript. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Title: Epidemiology and interactions of Human Immunodeficiency Virus – 1 and 

Multilingual abstractsPlease see Additional file 1 for translations of the abstract into the six official working languages of the United Nations.ReviewIntroductionWorldwide, HIV-1 infections remain a major public health problem. In 2010, over 31 million adult individuals (>15 years) were living with the disease and new cases of the disease were estimated to be at 2.7 million individuals [1]. The sub-Saharan African region continues to carry the largest proportion of the global disease burden [1]. In 2010, over 68% of global cases of HIV were in sub-Saharan Africa [1]. In this region, an estimated 1.9 million individuals were newly infected with HIV during 2010, comprising about 70% of all new cases of the disease worldwide [1]. However, in the East African region, the HIV epidemic has started to decline and has stabilized in some areas [2]. The national prevalence of HIV varies among countries in the region, from 3% in Rwanda, 5.8% in Tanzania, 6% in Kenya to 6-7% in Uganda [2,3]. The risk factors for HIV transmission in sub-Saharan Africa vary dramatically across sub-populations with different demographic characteristics [4,5]. The key risk factors for heterosexual transmission of HIV in Africa are commercial sex (prostitution), high population mobility, concurrent or multiple partners or number of lifetime sexual partners, residential location (rural versus urban), history of active or passive sexually-transmitted disease and lack of male circumcision [4,5]. Several epidemiological studies have reported vulnerable groups such as female bar workers [6], female commercial sex workers, long-distance truck drivers and their partners [7]. Fishing communities remain at higher risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV, and play a key role in the spread of HIV and in the maintenance of the HIV infection levels in the population [8,9].Schistosomiasis is a chronic, water-borne helminth disease, endemic in Africa for many centuries [10-12]. The current global estimate indicates that 779 million people in 76 countries are at risk for schistosomiasis and that 207 millions are infected [13]. Approximately 120 million people have schistosomiasis-related symptoms and 20 million suffer from the chronic form of the disease [14]. In Africa, urogenital schistosomiasis, caused by infection with Schistosoma haematobium, and intestinal schistosomiasis caused by S. intercalatum and S. mansoni, are highly endemic [13]. However, S. haematobium and S. mansoni are the most widely distributed causing the greatest burden of mortality. A recent meta-analysis of existing data suggests that up to 280,000 deaths annually are related to schistosomiasis (both urogenital and intestinal) in sub-Saharan Africa [15,16]. The disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) lost due to schistosomiasis are estimated at 4.5 million [16]. However, not all authors agree with this estimate, some arguing that it is an underestimation of the real impact of schistosomiasis [15,17]. There is a real risk that, despite effort to control schistosomiasis, the global prevalence of schistosomiasis may still increase due to the effects of increasing numbers of agricultural irrigation schemes, constructions of dams and man-made lakes for hydroelectric power generation, as well as civil wars, which contribute to increased human population movements [13,18].In established endemic areas, S. mansoni affects individuals of all age groups, but the prevalence and infection intensity is usually seen to peak among children under 15 years of age [19,20]. This age-pattern of infection intensity has been reported to develop within 2 years amongst immigrants newly exposed to infection on migration into S. mansoni endemic areas [21]. Although age-specific behavioral patterns, with high water contact and exposure to infection, often favour greater childhood infection intensities, the slow development of a partial immunity in endemic area residents may contribute to the lower infection intensities observed in adults [22,23]. However, high occupational exposure, associated with fishing for example, can result in maintenance of high intensities of infection into adulthood [24].Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 and S. mansoni infections are co-endemic in Sub-Saharan Africa and co-infection occurs in highly endemic areas (Figure 1) [25,26]. In the early 1990s, it was hypothesized that helminth infections in sub-Saharan Africa were associated with a high transmission of HIV [25,26] and a faster progression of HIV to AIDS [27-42]. In HIV co-infected individuals, helminth infections may cause general immune activation and affect the pattern of cytokine secretions [25-42]. Further effects observed in HIV-1 – helminth co-infected individuals included the modulation of the immune response against helminths [28,29,43], an impaired schistosome egg excretion [27,31] and increased HIV-1 viral loads after chemotherapeutic deworming [32-42]. The immunological effects and morbidities associated with helminth infections observed in HIV-1 positives individuals vary with the species of helminth involved. Some effects are common to all helminths, others are specific to particular helminth species such as schistosomes. Of the schistosomes that infect man in sub-Saharan Africa, S. haematobium, causing urogenital schistosomiasis, presents a distinct and potentially important specific risk factor for the acquisition of HIV-1/AIDS via urogenital tract lesions, and this has been reviewed elsewhere [44-46]. In contrast, S. mansoni, which is the focus of this review, rarely causes genital lesions but may still act as a risk factor for HIV-1 transmission and progression of the disease through within-host interactions with HIV-1. Thus, here we review the evidence for biological causal effects of HIV-1/AIDS and S. mansoni in human hosts. Specifically, we focus on immunological interactions (bi-directional effects in causing morbidities), the efficacy of anti-schistosome chemotherapy, and its effect on HIV-1 related parameters (such as HIV-1 viral loads and CD4+ lymphocytes) in HIV-1- S. mansoni co-infected individuals. Figure 1Distribution of helminths and HIV-1 in Africa [26].MethodologyData for this review were collected by searches in NCBI PubMed, EMBASE, Global Health and from the references of published manuscripts, relevant articles and doctoral theses. For computerized databases, the search strategy included only permutations of key terms, which were relevant to the study. Initially, all searches began with the text string “schistosom*” and specified keywords in permutations related to co-infection, including “HIV”, “HIV/AIDS”, “Viral loads”, “co-infection”, “deworming”, “treatment”, “intestinal schistosomiasis”, “Schistosoma mansoni”, “Schistosoma haematobium”, “urinary schistosomiasis”, “soil-transmitted helminths” and “filarial”. In addition, we reviewed the past and current available publications on WHO, UNAIDS and UNICEF websites, which were relevant to our review.Characteristics of the immune response to helminth infectionsMost of the human parasitic nematodes and trematodes that occur in sub-Saharan Africa have complex multi-stage lifecycles involving one or two host species and a complex immune modulation response in their hosts [46-50]. The available evidence indicates that the immune responses of various hosts (both natural infections and experimental models) to helminth infection are similar, being commonly characterized by type 2 T-helper lymphocytes with production of significant quantities of interleukin-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-10 and IL-13 [46-50]. The increased level of Th2 interleukins are accompanied by an increased production of immunoglobulin E (IgE), eosinophils and mast cells responses [47,48]. In early helminth infections, the infectious larval stages induce the production of either Th1 or Th2 cytokines response from T-lymphocytes and other immune cells [49]. In S. mansoni infections, the cercaria infective stage stimulates Th1 immune responses during the early phase of the infection in mouse models. In chronic human and experimental infections, Schistosoma mansoni, like all helminth infections, induces a predominantly Th2 immune response, characterized by interleukin-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-10 and IL-13, antibody (IgE and IgG4), eosinophils and mast cells. However, these responses are tightly regulated to produce a modified Th2 immune environment. The down-regulatory mechanisms involved not only down-regulate Th2, but also the Th1 mediated responses that have been observed, in both mice [47,48] and humans [49,50] when exposed to heavy, primary, schistosome infections.Immunological interactions of Human Immunodeficiency-1 and Schistosoma mansoniPotential immunological interactionsThe major hallmark of HIV-1 infections includes the destruction or depletion of the total body of helper CD4+ T-lymphocytes, both naïve (CD45RA+) and memory cells (CD4RO+), and a subsequent loss of immune competence [26,51]. Studies have indicated that destruction of the CD4+ cell pool increases susceptibility of the host to other infectious diseases [26]. Earlier studies demonstrated a correlation of maintaining the Th1 (CD8+- T-lymphocytes) immune profile and slow progression of the HIV-1 infections [52-56]. During this phase, uncontrolled replication of the HIV-1 infections leads to activations of the CD8+ T-lymphocytes (those expressing CD38, CD45RO and HLA-DR) [57-60] and increased concentration of cytokines such as IFN-α, TNF-γ and IL-1β [52,57-60]. A switch of the immune response from Th1 (CD8+ T-lymphocytes) to Th2 (CD4+ T-lymphocytes) with subsequent production of its associated cytokines are related to fast progression of the disease and chronic activation of the immune responses [52,55]. The proliferations of the Th2-CD4+ is also associated with the proliferations of other related CD4+ regulatory subsets such as CD4+ CD25+ (CD4+ Treg) which have been shown to express Cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated antigen 4 (CTLA-4) that exerts an inhibitory effect on T cell proliferation by secreting immunosuppressive cytokines such as TGF-β and IL-10 [60-65]. The TFG-β plays a pivotal role in CD4+ T-cell regulation by inhibiting its proliferation and acquisition of the effectors function by the naïve T-cells [66]. Increased CTLA- 4 expression correlates with markers of HIV disease progression and the up-regulation of the CTLA- 4 also increases CCR5 expression on the surfaces of CD4+ T-lymphocytes which enhance the susceptibility of these cells to HIV-1 infections and cell to cell HIV transmission [67]. Studies have indicated that destruction of the CD4+ cell pool by HIV-1 infection increases susceptibility of the host to other infectious diseases [26]. These immune characteristics of HIV-1 and S. mansoni infections clearly give rise to the potential for a number of immunological one-way and two-way modulating interactions between them in co-infected populations.The CD4+ T-helper lymphocytes responses are central to the development of immunopathology in S. mansoni infections [68]. The chronic phase, which is characterized by the production of soluble egg antigens (SEA), the inflammatory cytokines response to SEA are significantly reduced and the Th2 response is characterized by up-regulation of IL-10 and TGF-β which down-regulates the production and effectors functions of the Th1 response [69,70]. The release of these cytokines leads to the productions of the IgG4, suppressed parasites-specific T cell proliferation, reduced level of Th2 and Th1 cytokines [71]. At this stage only few S. mansoni infected individuals develop severe hepatosplenic disease characterized with development of granulomas [71-74]. The resulting T- dependent granulomas protect host tissues from egg-produced antigens [75]. The granulomas around the trapped eggs are composed of collagen fibers and inflammatory cells of Th2 origins, including eosinophils, macrophages and CD4+ T-cells [74]. In addition, the mechanisms responsible for granuloma formation are also involved in the process of S. mansoni eggs excretion [76]. In fact, individuals with chronic S. mansoni pathologies express high level of Th1 and Th17 responses which lead to inflammation and fibrosis around the deposited schistosomes eggs in tissues [71].Effects of HIV-1 on Schistosoma mansoniThe destruction of helper CD4+ T-lymphocytes by the HIV-1 virus in co-infected individuals could affect granuloma formation, and alter egg excretion efficiency. Studies on immuno-suppression animal models have demonstrated that the excretion of S. mansoni eggs is immune dependent, and that T-cells, specifically the anti-egg Th2 responses [77] are necessary for the transposition and excretion of eggs from the host blood stream into the intestinal lumen [78,79] as well as the development of granuloma [80,81]. In Kenya, Karanja et al.[82] demonstrated that HIV infected individuals had a reduced eggs excretion of S. mansoni, correlated with decreased CD4+ T lymphocytes counts [82]. Similar observations on the reduced eggs excretion were reported in HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni and S. haematobium in Ethiopia, Zambia and Congo [25,82,83]. In rural Zimbabwe, although the study was limited by low infection intensities of S. mansoni, no association was demonstrated between the HIV-1 status or CD4+ T lymphocytes counts and the eggs excretion efficiency [27]. Based on these observations on the CD4+ T-lymphocytes response during S. mansoni infection in multiple animal models and human studies, could lead to greater numbers of eggs retained in the host’s affected body organs. If this hypothesis is correct, then HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni might have altered morbidity (i.e. less fibrous material formation at the granuloma area, or inability to contain the egg released antigens) than individuals infected with S. mansoni alone. This could have a significant bearing on the parasitological diagnosis of the infection, which is dependent on detection of excreted parasite eggs [30].The potential for HIV to affect S. mansoni egg excretion not only potentially affects parasitic diagnosis of infection, but also co-infection studies, this makes the detection of circulating schistosome antigens released by in situ worms particularly important in detecting and, to some extent quantifying, these infections. Circulating Cathodic Antigens (CCA) and Circulating Anodic Antigen (CAA) are S. mansoni related gut antigens which are regurgitated by the adult and juveniles stages with the by-products of host red blood cell digestion. CCA can now be detected by antibody-based rapid diagnostic tests in urine samples [42,84]. Such antigen-detection tests have many advantages, including demonstration of active infections of S. mansoni in the absence of detectable egg excretion, the effects of treatment and in term of diagnosis it has high specificity [42,84]. When CAA/CCA positivity has been employed as a diagnostic criterion for S. mansoni infection after praziquantel treatment in HIV-1 and S. mansoni co-infected individuals compared with those with only S. mansoni infections. The result showed a lower clearance rate of the adult worms in treated HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni[41]. This observation was inconsistent with the results of Karanja et al.[40], who identified equally decreased levels of CCA following praziquantel therapy in individuals who were HIV-1 positive and co-infected with S. mansoni as compared to individuals with S. mansoni infection only [41]. It was argued that the difference in S. mansoni intensity of infection between the two study populations and the dominance of S. haematobium in the study of Kallestrup et al.[41] could have contributed to the discordance between those studies’ results. The discrepancy observed between these studies calls for further studies to elucidate efficacy of praziquantel in HIV-1 infected individuals co-infected with S. mansoni.Granuloma formation in S. mansoni infection is a CD4+ dependent process and earlier studies have hypothesized that the destruction of helper CD4+ T-lymphocytes (Th2) by HIV-1, coupled with the significant importance of CD4+ cells in the formation of granuloma, may lead to a decreased ability of the Th2 arm to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1, IL-13 which are responsible for stimulating the inflammatory cells responsible for fibrogenesis, and hence lead to severe hepatic morbidity [78,85]. Immunological studies have demonstrated that, T-cells from the peripheral blood of HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni responded to egg antigens by producing less IL-4 and IL-10 and a lower amount of IFN-γ as compared to those from individuals infected with S. mansoni alone, indicating immune skewing from Th2 to Th1[78]. Supportive evidence from animal models indicates that, granuloma formation is severely restricted in immuno-deficiency mouse models [80,81]. It is possible that granuloma formation may help to contain hepatotoxins (omega-1-ribonuclease and IPSE/alpha-1) that are released from S. mansoni eggs trapped in the liver [86-88] which may increase the risk of liver parenchyma damage and cause severe necrosis [75,76,89].A community-based study in fishing communities in northwest Tanzania, showed that there were no differences in the distribution of S. mansoni related morbidities, as detected by ultrasonography, between HIV co-infected individuals with S. mansoni and those with single infection of S. mansoni[79]. This study though did not measure the CD4+ counts of the HIV-1+ positive study participants co-infected with S. mansoni. Similarly, in Kenya, there were no significant differences in the distribution of ultrasound-detectable pathology (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, hepatic fibrosis, periportal fibrosis and gallbladder wall thickness) in HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni as compared with HIV-1 negative individuals infected with S. mansoni[43]. The study demonstrated that hepatic fibrosis, in the absence of severe hepatosplenomegaly, was associated with a significant decrease in CD4+ T-lymphocytes in HIV-1 negative individuals infected with S. mansoni, and that the decrease correlated with increasing grade of liver fibrosis [43]. In HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni, reduced CD4+ T-cells counts levels did not necessarily imply the development of severe hepatic morbidities or altered patterns of hepatic fibrosis due to the effects of hepatotoxins [43]. In addition, there was no difference in the level of measurable fibrosis and the level of liver parenchyma damage as measured by the levels of circulating liver enzymes (glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase and aspartate aminotransferase) in individuals with HIV-1 co-infection as compared with HIV-1 negative individuals infected with S. mansoni[43]. Importantly, there were no significant correlations between CD4+ T cells count and circulating liver enzyme levels in HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni or in HIV-1 negative individuals infected with S. mansoni[43]. However, it is worth noting that the passive transfer of specific anti-omega 1 antibody is sufficient to completely prevent hepatocyte damage in S. mansoni infected immunosuppressed mice that have severely impaired anti-egg granuloma [90]. Anti-omega 1 antibodies were not assayed in the human studies [43]. The observation that hepatic fibrosis is associated with reduced CD4+ T-lymphocytes in HIV-1 positive and negative individuals implies that S. mansoni associated liver pathologies could speed up the progression of HIV to AIDS through the depletion of CD4+ T cells in co-infected individuals [43]. It could also be speculated that, the hyporesponsiveness of the T-cells due to chronic activations of the immune system and differentiations of the Tregs and released of TGF-β and IL-10 could in part explains the low CD4+ counts observed in HIV-1 positive and HIV-1 negative individuals infected with S. mansoni. However, this observation calls for further studies to confirm the observation.Effects of Schistosoma mansoni on HIV-1Schistosoma mansoni infections induce an immune modulation, which shifts from T-helper 1 to predominant T-helper 2 cytokines [69,70,91]. The cytokines associated with T-helper 2 lymphocytes down-regulate the cytotoxic effects of T-cytotoxic (CD8+) lymphocytes which are essential for the initial control of viral replication [69,70,81,91]. In animal studies, mice co-infected with S. mansoni and vaccinia virus expressing the HIV envelope displayed a shift towards a Th2 response which down-regulated Th1 cytokines production and impaired the cytotoxic effects of CD8+ on the virus [81,82]. In addition, an increase in viral replication and the alteration of T-cells subsets have been observed in Rhesus Macaque monkeys co-infected with S. mansoni[92]. In human studies, HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni in western Kenya demonstrated an alteration of the immune response to S. mansoni characterized by a low level of IL-4 and IL-10 production [78].In vitro studies on human peripheral blood mononuclear cells from individuals infected with schistosomiasis have shown an increased susceptibility of these cells to HIV-1 as compared to helminth free individuals [31]. The expression of the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 on the surfaces of CD4+ T-lymphocytes, which have been stimulated by Th2 cytokines, make these cells more susceptible to HIV-1 infection [31,32]. In fact, these receptors serve as co-receptors for HIV-1 entry into the cells [31,32]. In Kenya, individuals infected with schistosomiasis expressed higher cell surface densities of these receptors as compared to individuals cured of the disease [31]. These observations imply that HIV-1 replication proceeds more rapidly in activated T cells, especially in those with Th2 or Th0 phenotypes [32].Individuals co-infected with HIV-1 and S. mansoni may have reduced ability to mount potent protective immune responses against a number of viral infections. Similarly, individuals co-infected with chronic Hepatitis C virus (HCV) and S. mansoni demonstrated a decreased HCV- specific CD4+ T cell proliferative response as compared with individuals with HCV alone [33]. In Uganda, concomitant infections of S. mansoni and HIV-1 was associated with decreased Gag-specific cytolytic (CD8+) responses, showing an alteration of the effectors functions of HIV infection attributed to schistosomiasis [34]. Moreover, the detection of Gag-specific positive CD8+ T cells in co-infected individuals shows that S. mansoni may be responsible for the modulation of the cellular immune response to HIV [34]. T-regulatory cells are an important component of regulation of T cell activation. It has been reported that an expansion in T-regulatory cells (T-reg) occurs during the chronic phase of HIV infection. There is some debate as to whether the expansion of T-reg numbers is detrimental, due to suppression of cellular mediated immunity, or beneficial, due to limiting cellular activation, and therefore co-receptor expression and targets for HIV-1 infection [93]. Schistosoma mansoni infection was found to expand the proportion of circulating CD25hi CD4+ cells, a significant proportion of which are likely to be FoxP3+ve T-reg cells, amongst sand-harvesters in Kisumu, Kenya [94]. However, no significant difference in the proportion of CD4+CD25hi cells was observed between individuals who were sero-positive and negative for HIV-1 [94]. As the role of T-regs in HIV infection is clarified [52,53], further studies using a wider range of T-reg markers such as FoxP3+ve and CD127lo [95,96] will be required to determine whether this important sub-type is affected by co-infection with S. mansoni.Evidence suggests that the expression of the co-receptors on activated CD4+ T lymphocytes increases the susceptibility of these cells to HIV infection in HIV-uninfected populations, and may also speed up the progression of HIV to AIDS by increasing plasma viral loads and decreasing CD4+ T-lymphocytes in co-infected individuals [31,32]. Increased HIV plasma viral loads determine disease progression and risk for HIV transmission in between partners [35]. However, most cross-sectional and other observational studies have failed to provide evidence that decreased CD4+ T cells and increased HIV-1 viral loads is associated with heavy helminth infections [29,36,37]. Previous authors have suggested that helminth infection intensity could in part contribute to decreased CD4+ T cell counts or speed up the progression of HIV-1 to AIDS, meaning that HIV-1 positive individuals with higher S. mansoni infection intensity could have reduced CD4+ T cells counts and higher HIV-1 viral loads. Similar findings on the other helminth species have been reported [83]. There is however no evidence on the linear relationship between S. mansoni infection intensity and HIV-1 viral loads in co-infected individuals and this calls for further studies.Efficacy of praziquantel treatment of Schistosoma mansoni in HIV-1 co-infected individualsIn the last three decades, praziquantel has been the drug of choice for treatment of schistosomiasis, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, because of its high level of efficacy against all schistosome species, its ease of administration and lack of serious adverse effects [97]. A single dose of 40mg/kg body weight is reported to result into human schistosomiasis cure rates that vary widely (60% - 90%) between different studies, but which consistently result in reductions of infection intensity of more than 95% [23,98]. The efficacy of praziquantel depends to some extend on its synergy with an intact immune response, studies in immunodeficient animal models have demonstrated reduced efficacy of praziquantel [98-101]. In addition, praziquantel efficacy can be increased by pre-immunization of mice with schistosome antigens, whereby the generated parasite-specific antibodies increase praziquantel efficacy [78,79]. Several studies have been carried out in HIV-1 positive individuals to test whether or not the efficacy of praziquantel has an immune dependent component in human-S. mansoni infections, as this has been reported in mice [40-42].In western Kenya, a study was carried out involving male car-washers (>18 years) in which 15 individuals were co-infected with S. mansoni and HIV-1 and 32 individuals had S. mansoni infection alone [40]. Majority of these individuals had heavy infections of S. mansoni. The results of that study indicated that HIV-1 sero-positivity status did not affect the efficacy of praziquantel. In the treated groups (HIV-1 positive co-infected with S. mansoni versus HIV-1 negative infected with S. mansoni), a single dose of praziquantel resulted in a >93% reduction in S. mansoni infection intensity regardless of HIV-1 serostatus and percentage of CD4+ T- cell [40]. Similarly, a prospective cohort study in Zambia which included individuals aged 10 – 55 years, in which 47 were co-infected with HIV-1 and S. haematobium and 335 HIV-1 negative individuals infected with S. haematobium demonstrated that praziquantel treatment resulted in 99.81% reduction in average infection intensity, despite a concurrent HIV-1 infection [42].Effects of praziquantel treatment of S. mansoni on HIV-1 viral loads and CD4+ T-lymphocytes levels in co-infected individualsThe individual immunological interactions between these two common pathogens suggest that increased expression of Th2 cytokines caused by S. mansoni, raising the possibly that co-infection may increase HIV replication and cell-to-cell transmission, as well as increase the rate of HIV progression, as measured by reduced CD4+ T lymphocyte counts [102]. If so, then deworming of HIV positive individuals living in endemic areas may reduce the HIV-1 viral loads and increase both the CD4+ T lymphocyte counts immune responsiveness of the T-cells to both HIV-1 and S. mansoni infections [103-107].Recent data from randomized control trials and observational studies have highlighted decreased HIV-1 viral loads, decreased expression of co-receptors CCR5 and CXCR4 on the surface of CD4+ T lymphocytes and improved CD4+ T lymphocytes counts, following the treatment of various species of helminths [31,103-106,108-111]. Praziquantel treatment in S. mansoni infected Kenyan car washers resulted in a drop of CCR5 and CXCR4 levels expressed on the CD4+ T lymphocytes in both HIV-1 infected and un-infected individuals, suggesting that the treatment of individuals infected with S. mansoni alone, or co-infected with HIV-1 and S. mansoni, could decrease the risk of HIV transmission to individuals with schistosomiasis, or intercellular transmission in HIV-1 infected individuals [31]. In rural Zimbabwe, praziquantel treatment of HIV-1 co-infected individuals resulted in the decline of HIV-1 viral loads in the group that received immediate treatment as compared with those who received treatment three months later [109]. In addition, despite an observed increase in HIV-1 viral loads after three months, the mean HIV-1 viral loads in the early treatment group was lower than in the delayed treatment group [109]. However, subsequent studies did not observe any impact of anthelminthic treatment and decline in HIV-1 viral loads, lower CD4+ T lymphocytes or faster progression to AIDS [37,39,110]. In Uganda, a significant transient increase in HIV-1 viral loads and a decrease in CD4+ T lymphocytes were observed one month post-praziquantel treatment in HIV-1- S. mansoni co-infected individuals [37,111]. The mechanisms that might favour increased viral loads and decreased CD4+ T lymphocytes remain unclear and open up a number of interpretations. It is possible that the adult worm death following praziquantel treatment provides an antigenic stimulation that increases Th2 activation and hence increases HIV-1 replication [31,102,112,113]. Alternatively, anthelminthic treatment may suppress the production of inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines that are maintained by chronic helminth infections [113].Increased levels of CD4+ T lymphocytes in HIV-1 positive individuals co-infected with S. mansoni have been reported after praziquantel treatment [109]. In rural Zimbabwe, a randomized control trial reported increased CD4+ T lymphocyte counts in those receiving praziquantel treatments, as compared to those treated three months later [108]. However, this observation contrasted with other similar studies that reported decreased CD4+ T lymphocyte counts after praziquantel treatment [36,37,39,110]. The lack of consistency between these studies calls for further studies to clear the observed discrepancies.Effects of praziquantel treatment on hepatic morbidities in co-infected individualsThe intestinal form of schistosomiasis mansoni is characterized by abdominal pain, diarrhea, bloody stool, nausea, fatigue and drowsiness. S. mansoni eggs that do not penetrate the gut wall can pass via the portal vein to be trapped in the liver tissues where they provoke vascular, inflammatory and granulomatous changes [114]. In severe advanced cases, this can lead to hepatosplenomegaly and portal hypertension, which can lead to development of oesophageal varices, ascites and risk of haematemesis [114]. Autopsy studies have associated severe hepatosplenic disease and portal hypertension with gross hepatic periportal fibrosis [115,116].The impact of praziquantel treatment on S. mansoni is not only evaluated in terms of reduction in the infection intensity but also in terms of the reversibility of hepatosplenic morbidities after treatment [97,117-121]. Not all S. mansoni associated hepatosplenic morbidities reverse after treatment, mild or low grade periportal fibrosis can be seen to reverse 12 months after treatment, but advanced periportal fibrosis is considered to be irreversible and studies have reported the progression of organomegaly (hepatomegaly or splenomegaly to hepatosplenomegaly) after treatment [121,122].Based on the reduced anti-egg granulomatous response and fibrosis [75,76,89] and the reduced efficacy of praziquantel treatment, reported in immunosuppressed mice [98-101], it is possible that human HIV-1 infection could impact on co-infecting schistosome morbidity, including regression or progression of hepatic morbidity after praziquantel treatment. As yet, only one human ultrasound study of HIV-1 and S. mansoni co-infection hepatic morbidity has been reported [43]. To date, no single study has evaluated the impact of praziquantel treatment on hepatic and splenic morbidities in individuals co-infected with S. mansoni and HIV-1. This calls for further studies on large sample sizes to understand the liver and spleen morbidities in individuals co-infected with HIV-1 and S. mansoni.Possible implications of HIV-1 and S. mansoni co-infection on Mass Drug AdministrationBased on the evidence above on the interactions between HIV-1 and S. mansoni in sub-Saharan Africa and the fact that the two infections are highly prevalent, co-infections with the two diseases in high risk groups such as fishing communities are possibly high and their interactions could be the cause of the severe morbidities observed and high prevalence of HIV-1. Despite the potential risks related to co-infection, little is known of the interaction between these infections in high-risk communities [70]. In the sub-Saharan Africa, the control of schistosomiasis focuses mainly on the reduction of morbidities and mainly targets groups at risk [97]. Control approaches often involve Mass Drug Administration (MDA) of praziquantel to treat schistosomiasis, combined with albendazole to treat nematode infections, to schoolchildren or through child health clinics [97]. Occasionally, MDA is preceded by mass screening of schistosomiasis before treatment for the purpose of monitoring the impact of MDA on targeted infections [97]. Evidence from clinical studies suggests that de-worming of HIV-infected individuals reverses the immune response to normal, leads to a decline in HIV-1 viral loads and the expression on the surface of CD4+ T lymphocytes of co-receptors responsible for cell to cell transmission of HIV-1, and an increase in CD4+ T lymphocyte numbers [103-106,123-127]. Thus, identification of individuals co-infected with HIV-1 and S. mansoni at very early stages for early de-worming, even if it only results in small reductions in viral load, may have benefits in delaying the progression or decrease the spread of the disease and importantly, may delay an individual’s need to begin anti-retroviral treatment (ARV) [126].Despite the evidence that praziquantel has effects on some of the HIV-1 outcome parameters, there are still a number of issues that remain unsolved and will require further studies to investigate the exact mechanism of interaction between helminth and HIV-1 infections and the impact of anthelminthic treatment. The majority of the previous studies on this topic, were almost all cross-sectional in design, and some had significant limitations, including the interpretation of the results, the lack of comparison groups, short follow-up periods and small population sample sizes [91]. These limitations could in part be the cause of discrepancies between results: while some studies agree with the hypothesis that anthelminthic treatment either with albendazole (for gut nematodes), diethylcarbamazine (for filarial worms) or praziquantel, have positive effects on HIV-1 parameters, other studies do not agree with this observation. As yet, there is insufficient data to show clearly that de-worming of HIV-1 co-infected individuals has a beneficial effect on HIV-1 viral loads and CD4+ lymphocytes. As suggested by other authors, longitudinal studies exploring the interactions of HIV-1 and S. mansoni infections are warranted. These studies should focus on understanding the effects of the intensity of S. mansoni infection on HVI-1 viral loads and CD4+ T lymphocytes and on the development of hepatosplenic pathologies in co-infected individuals. The assessment of the impact of anthelminthic treatment on HIV-1 parameters should be made a priority.ConclusionIn Sub-Saharan Africa, HIV-1 and S. mansoni infections are co-endemic and co-infection occurs in highly endemic areas. There is evidence to support the occurrence of interactions between the two infections in a single co-infected human host. Furthermore, published data supports the hypothesis that helminth infections can influence important parameters of HIV infection such as CD4+ lymphocyte counts and HIV viral loads. Thus, in areas of co-endemicity, it is important to integrate control programmes for HIV-1 and schistosomiasis to give an opportunity for early identification of co-infected individuals and provide an opportunity for early deworming to reduce the fast progression and transmission of HIV-1.Lastly, the available evidence on the interactions of HIV-1 and S. mansoni and the impact of praziquantel treatment on CD4+ lymphocytes and HIV-1 viral loads remains inconclusive and does call for further field studies to resolve discrepancies. Large randomized controlled trials with longer follow-up periods are required in order to assess the interactions between S. mansoni and HIV-1 and the impact of deworming cycles on the HIV-1 progression in populations constantly exposed to S. mansoni infection and at high risk of HIV infection.Competing interestHDM is supported by the Training Health Researchers into Vocational Excellence in East Africa (THRiVE) Programme funded by Wellcome Trust, grant number 087540. The authors declare that there have no competing interest.Authors’ contributionsHDM designed the study, searched for literature and prepared the first draft of the manuscript, FN, SW, SMK, DM, RW, JH and DWD critically reviewed the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.Supplementary MaterialAdditional file 1Multilingual abstracts in the six official working languages of the United Nations.Click here for file


Title: HIV-1 Nef Enhances Dendritic Cell-Mediated Viral Transmission to CD4

IntroductionDendritic cells (DCs) are among the first cells that encounter HIV-1 at the mucosa, and play a critical role in HIV-1 infection [1], [2], [3], [4]. Immature DCs allow productive HIV-1 replication and long-term viral dissemination [5], [6], [7], [8], [9]. DC-SIGN (DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule 3 grabbing non-integrin) is a C-type lectin that enhances HIV-1 trans-infection [10]. DC-SIGN-expressing immature DCs from human rectal mucosa efficiently bind and transfer HIV-1 to CD4+ T cells [11]. Although DC-SIGN+ cells comprise only 1–5% of total mucosal mononuclear cells, they account for greater than 90% of HIV-1 binding, since DC-SIGN antibodies block 90% of this binding [11]. Previous studies have suggested that DC-SIGN partially contributes to immature DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission and that DC maturation enhances HIV-1 transmission efficiency [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22]. However, the precise mechanisms underlying DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cell remain to be defined.The Nef protein of HIV-1 and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) is a pathogenic factor in vivo
[23], [24], [25], [26], and contributes to many aspects of primate lentiviral immunopathogenesis through its interactions with host proteins [27], [28], [29], [30], [31]. HIV-1 Nef is required for efficient viral replication in co-cultures of DCs and activated CD4+ T cells or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) [9], [32], [33]. HIV-1 Nef up-regulates DC-SIGN expression of infected DCs, increases clustering of DCs with CD4+ T cells, and modulates DC and CD4+ T cell activation [9], [34], [35], [36]. Immunoactivation facilitates HIV-1 replication and leads to CD4+ T cell depletion and AIDS pathogenesis [37], but it is unclear whether Nef expression in HIV-1 infected DCs plays a role in activating CD4+ T cells and enhancing cell-to-cell transmission. Previous studies have indicated inconsistent functions of HIV-1 Nef in CD4+ T cell activation [29], which need to be clarified using wild-type (WT) HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses of primary resting CD4+ T cells. Moreover, HIV-1 Nef down-regulates surface CD4 expression on infected DCs and CD4+ T cells [9], [38]. We have reported that CD4 co-expression with DC-SIGN blocks DC-SIGN-mediated transmission of HIV-1 [9]. However, it remains unclear whether the effects of Nef on the expression of CD4 and DC-SIGN affect DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells.In this study, we investigated the role of HIV-1 Nef in DC-mediated viral transmission and HIV-1 infection of primary CD4+ T cells using WT HIV-1 and HIV-1 expressing mutated Nef proteins. We show that Nef promotes DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to activated CD4+ T cells, and that Nef expression promotes activation and proliferation of resting CD4+ T cells to enhance HIV-1 infection of these cells. Our results suggest an important role of Nef in DC-mediated transmission of HIV-1 to activated CD4+ T cells and in the activation and proliferation of resting CD4+ T cells, which likely contribute to viral pathogenesis.ResultsHIV-1 Nef enhances DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells and modulates CD4 expression of DCsTo examine whether Nef expression in DCs can modulate DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells, immature monocyte-derived DCs (MDDCs) were transduced with a vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSV-G)-pseudotyped, Nef-expressing lentiviral vector and then tested for the ability to transmit single-cycle HIV-1 to CD4+ Hut/CCR5 T cells. A VSV-G-pseudotyped Nef-deleted lentiviral vector was used as a negative control. These HIV-1-derived lentiviral vectors are defective for vif, vpr, vpu, and env genes [39]. Nef expression in the transduced MDDCs was confirmed by immunoblotting (Fig. 1A). The vector-transduced cells were pulsed with R5-tropic, Nef-defective, single-cycle luciferase HIV-1 [12], and co-cultured with CD4+ Hut/CCR5 T cells. Nef expression in DCs enhanced HIV-1 transmission by 6- to 8-fold (P<0.01) relative to the control vector-transduced DCs (Fig. 1B and 1C). These results indicate that Nef expression in DCs can promote DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells.10.1371/journal.pone.0034521.g001Figure 1HIV-1 Nef enhances DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to Hut/CCR5 T cells and modulates CD4 expression of DCs.Immature DCs were generated from purified monocytes by treatment with GM-CSF and IL-4 for 5 days. Immature DCs were transduced with a Nef-expressing lentiviral vector (Nef+) or a negative control vector (Nef−). (A) Nef expression in vector-transduced DCs was detected at five days post-transduction by immunoblotting. HIV-1 p24 was used a positive control. (B and C) Nef expression in DCs promotes HIV-1 transmission. DC-mediated transfer of single-cycle, Nef-defective, R5-tropic luciferase HIV-1 to CD4+ Hut/CCR5 cells was measured at 2 days post-infection (dpi). The data show the mean ± SD of triplicate samples of cells from two different donors. (A–C) One representative experiment out of four is shown. cps, counts per second. (D and E) Transduced DCs were analyzed by flow cytometry for the positive percentage (D) and the mean intensity (E) of DC-SIGN, CD4 and CD86 expression at 5 days post-transduction. The data show the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. (B–E) *, Significant differences compared with the Nef-negative controls (P<0.05).To examine the effect of HIV-1 Nef expression on DC-SIGN and CD4 levels and DC maturation of the infected DCs, cell-surface DC-SIGN, CD4 and the DC maturation marker CD86 were measured by flow cytometry. Nef expression in transduced DCs significantly decreased CD4 expression by at least 43% (Fig. 1D and 1E). The expression of DC-SIGN and CD86 was not significantly modulated by Nef expression (Fig. 1D and 1E), suggesting DC maturation was not affected by Nef expression in transduced DCs. Thus, Nef expression in MDDCs can efficiently enhance HIV-1 transmission and down-regulate CD4 expression.Effects of Nef on HIV-1 infection and maturation of DCsOur previous studies using replication-competent HIV-1 suggested that Nef facilitates DC-mediated viral transmission to co-cultured CD4+ T cells [40]. To better understand Nef-dependent enhancement of HIV transmission by DCs, replication-competent HIV-1 expressing mutated Nef proteins were compared with WT HIV-1 for their effects on HIV-1 infection and maturation of DCs during a time-course up to 7 days post-infection (dpi). Mutation of the Nef myristoylation motif (glycine to arginine, G2A) or a conserved dileucine motif [L164L/AA (LL/AA)] confers distinct defects on Nef function [41]. The G2A mutant blocks Nef localization to the plasma membrane and the LL/AA mutant disrupts Nef interactions with the clathrin endocytosis machinery [30], [41]. R5-tropic HIV-1NLAD8 and derived Nef-inactivated virus were used because DCs are more susceptible to R5 HIV-1 than to X4 HIV-1 infection [40], [42].The Nef expression of these viruses was confirmed by immunoblotting (Fig. 2A). HIV-1 infection of DCs was comparable between WT HIV-1 and the Nef-mutated viruses when p24 production was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Fig. 2B). Compared with the mock-infected DCs, HIV-1 infected DCs showed decreased DC-SIGN surface levels over the time course of infection. At 7 dpi, WT HIV-1 infected DCs maintained higher levels of DC-SIGN relative to DCs infected with Nef-mutated viruses [Fig. 2C (P<0.05) and 2F]. Consistent with our previous results [9], WT HIV-1 infection efficiently decreased (P<0.05) surface CD4 expression in DCs relative to DCs infected with Nef-mutated viruses at 5 dpi (Fig. 2D). Surface CD4 levels of HIV-1 infected DCs were significantly decreased (P<0.01) compared with mock-infected DCs and no significant difference (P>0.05) between WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses was observed at 7 dpi (Fig. 2D and 2G), perhaps because WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses encode functional Vpu, which can also efficiently down-regulate CD4 expression [43]. Surface CD86 expression in HIV-1 infected DCs increased at 5 and 7 dpi compared with that of mock-infected DCs (Fig. 2E and 2H), suggesting that HIV-1 infection induced DC maturation. The CD86 levels of DCs infected with ΔNef HIV-1 were similar to or slightly higher than those infected with WT and other Nef-mutated viruses (Fig. 2E and 2H). Similar results were obtained when DCs from two additional donors were examined. Together, our results suggest that replication-competent HIV-1 infection of DCs can down-regulate DC-SIGN and CD4 expression and facilitate DC maturation in a largely Nef-independent manner.10.1371/journal.pone.0034521.g002Figure 2Effects of Nef on HIV-1 infection and maturation of DCs.(A) Nef expression of wild-type (WT) HIV-1NLAD8 and Nef-mutated viruses (ΔNef, G2A, and LL/AA). HEK293T cells transfected with proviral DNA were subjected to immunoblotting at two days post-transfection. HIV-1 p24 was used as a positive control for viral protein expression and actin was a loading control. (B) Comparable infection of DCs with HIV-1NLAD8 WT and Nef-mutated viruses. Immature DCs were generated from purified monocytes by treatment with GM-CSF and IL-4 for 5 days. DCs were infected with HIV-1 for 16 h and cells were washed thoroughly and cultured for the indicated time course. Cell-free supernatants from the infected DCs were measured for HIV-1 p24 by ELISA at the indicated times. Error bars represent the standard deviation of the mean of triplicate samples. HIV-1 infected DCs were analyzed by flow cytometry for the positive percentage and the mean intensity of DC-SIGN (C and F), CD4 (D and G) and CD86 expression (E and H). The data shown represents one of three independent experiments using cells from three different donors.Nef enhances HIV-1 infection of activated peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and facilitates DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to activated autologous PBLsTo examine the effects of HIV-1 Nef expression on viral replication and transmission in a physiologically relevant system, HIV-1 infection of activated PBLs and DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to autologous PBLs was compared using the WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses. Compared with WT HIV-1, the replication of ΔNef and Nef (LL/AA) HIV-1 was 4- to 5-fold lower in activated PBLs, while the replication of Nef (G2A) mutant was 1.4-fold lower at 5 and 7 dpi (Fig. 3A). All three Nef-mutated viruses showed impaired DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to activated PBLs, which was 2- to 4-fold lower (P<0.05) relative to WT HIV-1 infection (Fig. 3B). At 3 dpi, although comparable HIV-1 replication of WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses was observed in activated PBLs (Fig. 3A), WT HIV-1 infected DCs enhanced viral spread 3-fold more efficiently relative to Nef-mutated viruses in DC-PBL cocultures (Fig. 3B). These results suggest that Nef is important for efficient HIV-1 replication in activated PBLs and DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to activated PBLs.10.1371/journal.pone.0034521.g003Figure 3Nef enhances HIV-1 infection of activated PBLs and DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to activated autologous PBLs.(A) Nef enhances HIV-1 replication in activated PBLs. HIV p24 in the cell supernatants of DCs infected with WT HIV-1NLAD8 or Nef-mutated viruses was measured by ELISA. (B) Nef promotes DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to activated PBLs. Immature DCs were generated from purified monocytes by treatment with GM-CSF and IL-4 for 5 days. DCs infected with WT HIV-1NLAD8 or Nef-mutated viruses were co-cultured with PHA-activated autologous PBLs and HIV p24 in the cell supernatants was measured. (A and B) The data show the mean ± SD of triplicate samples. The data shown represents one of four independent experiments using cells from four different donors.HIV-1 Nef activates primary resting CD4+ T cells, resulting in increased viral infection and T-cell proliferationIn the early stages of HIV-1 infection, the majority of CD4+ T cells are naïve and resting, and can be latently infected by HIV-1 [44], [45]. Previous studies have indicated that wild-type Nef plays an important role in HIV-1 infection and activation of CD4+ T cells [46], [47]. To better understand the role of Nef in HIV-1 infection of resting CD4+ T cells, we investigated the effect of WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses on the activation of resting CD4+ T cells and viral replication using cells from three different donors. The expression levels of CD69, an early marker of CD4+ T cell activation [48], in WT HIV-1 infected cells were increased compared to mock-infected control cells at 3 dpi (Fig. 4A), indicating that HIV-1 infection activates resting CD4+ T cells. By contrast, all Nef-mutated viruses showed reduced or baseline levels of CD69 expression compared to WT HIV-1-infected cells (Fig. 4A), suggesting that functional Nef protein is required for the activation of resting CD4+ T cells. This trend correlated with the levels of p24 in the supernatants, with the WT infected cells showing increased p24 production over the Nef-mutated viruses at 3 dpi (Fig. 4B).10.1371/journal.pone.0034521.g004Figure 4HIV-1 Nef activates primary resting CD4+ T cells, resulting in increased T-cell proliferation and viral infection.(A) HIV-1 Nef increases the expression of the transient T-cell activation marker CD69 in resting CD4+ T cells infected with replication-competent WT or Nef-mutated HIV-1 at 3 dpi. Mock-infected cells were used as background controls for CD69 staining and flow cytometry. Resting CD4+ T cells were isolated from PBMCs using immunomagnetic particles and were cultured in the presence of IL-2 before and during HIV-1 infection. Resting CD4+ T cells were cultured for 8 days, infected with 5 ng p24 of HIV-1 or a media control for 2 hours, washed and then cultured for an additional 3 days. The data shown represents three independent experiments using cells from three different donors. (B) WT Nef increases p24 production in the supernatants of HIV-1-infected resting CD4+ T cells at 3 dpi. Mock-infected cells were used as negative controls (undetectable p24). Data from three different donors are shown, which are matched to those in (A). Data displayed are the mean ± SEM of duplicate samples for each infection except the results of donor 1, which show the p24 values from a single sample.CD69 is a transient phenotypic marker of CD4+ T cell activation [49]. To functionally assess the effect of Nef expression on resting CD4+ T cell activation, we performed a flow cytometry based T-cell proliferation assay using carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) labeling and also measured p24 production over a period of 7 days of infection. We assessed p24 production by HIV-1-infected resting CD4+ T cells from two healthy donors. The p24 levels in the supernatants of WT HIV-1-infected resting CD4+ T cells were 6-fold higher (5 and 7 dpi, P<0.02) than those of Nef-mutated HIV-1 infected T cells (Fig. 5A). A similar trend was observed when the average results of two donors were combined (Fig. 5B), suggesting that HIV-1 replication in resting CD4+ T cells occurs in a Nef-dependent manner. Furthermore, the reverse transcriptase inhibitor azidothymidine was able to completely block p24 production in the supernatants, confirming productive HIV-1 replication in resting CD4+ cells (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pone.0034521.g005Figure 5Nef promotion of HIV-1 replication in primary resting CD4+ T cells is associated with T cell proliferation.Resting CD4+ T cells were isolated from PBMCs using immunomagnetic particles and were cultured in the presence of IL-2 before and during HIV-1 infection. (A) Resting CD4+ T cells were cultured for 8 days and then infected with 5 ng p24 of replication-competent WT or Nef-mutated HIV-1. HIV-1 p24 production in the supernatants was measured at the times indicated. Representative data from one donor are shown. (B) Resting CD4+ T cells were cultured for 8 days and then infected with 5 ng p24 of WT HIV-1 or Nef-mutated viruses. HIV-1 p24 production in the supernatant was measured at the times indicated. Mean values of two independent experiments on different donors are shown. (C) CFSE-labeled resting CD4+ T cells (cultured for 8 days in the presence of IL-2) were mock infected or infected with 5 ng p24 of WT or Nef-mutated HIV-1. CD4+ T cell proliferation was measured by flow cytometry at the indicated times. Data represent three independent experiments using cells from three different donors. Each symbol in the plots represents a single experiment result and the horizontal bars in the plots indicate the mean values of three independent experiments. There is no statistically significant difference in T-cell proliferation among WT and Nef-mutated HIV-1 infected CD4+ T cells.We then investigated whether the effect of Nef on HIV-1 infection of resting CD4+ T cells correlated with Nef-dependent T-cell proliferation. To evaluate the overall effect of Nef expression on proliferation in resting CD4+ T cells, data derived from three different donors' cells were combined (Fig. 5C). Whilst there was large donor-to-donor variability, WT HIV-1 infected CD4+ T cells showed consistently higher T-cell proliferation at 5 dpi than mock-infected and Nef-mutated HIV-1 infected cells (Fig. 5C). However, there was no statistically significant difference in T-cell proliferation among WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated HIV-1 infected CD4+ T cells (Fig. 5C).An increase in proliferation over time is consistent with active T cell proliferation and survival of each subsequent generation, whilst decreases in T cell proliferation are likely due to activation induced CD4+ T cell apoptosis or HIV-1-induced T cell death. These results suggest that Nef facilitates resting CD4+ T cell activation and proliferation, thus providing an environment to facilitate HIV-1 replication. It is also important to consider that the resting CD4+ T cells used in all of these experiments (Fig. 4, 5, 6) were in culture for 8 days in the presence of IL-2 (see experiment procedures indicated in Fig. 6A); therefore, it is possible that there is a degree of background activation in the resting CD4+ T cells. The decreases in the percentage of T cells divided over time (Fig. 5C mock infected controls) were likely due to activation-induced T cell death. Together, these results indicate that Nef enhances the activation and proliferation of HIV-1-infected resting CD4+ T cells and viral replication in these cells.10.1371/journal.pone.0034521.g006Figure 6HIV-1-infected DCs cannot significantly increase resting CD4+ T cell proliferation in DC-T cell co-cultures.(A) Schematic representation of the experiment procedures. Primary MDDCs and autologous resting CD4+ T cells were used. (B) DCs infected with replication-competent WT or Nef-mutated HIV-1 were co-cultured with uninfected resting CD4+ T cells and HIV-1 p24 production in the supernatants was measured at the indicated times of co-cultures. Immature DCs were generated from purified monocytes by treatment with GM-CSF and IL-4 for 5 days. Resting CD4+ T cells were isolated from PBMCs using immunomagnetic particles and were cultured in the presence of IL-2 for 8 days. (C) Co-culture with HIV-1-infected DCs increases the surface expression of the transient T-cell activation marker CD69 on resting CD4+ T cells. CD69 expression was assessed at 3 days of co-cultures by flow cytometry. Mock-infected cells were used as background controls. These data are donor matched to Figure 6B. (D) CD4+ T cell proliferation in the co-cultures of HIV-1 infected DCs. DCs were mock infected or infected with WT or Nef-mutated HIV-1 for 3 days prior to co-culture with CFSE-labeled, uninfected resting CD4+ T cells. T cell proliferation was measured by flow cytometry at the indicated times of co-cultures. Data represent five independent experiments using cells from five different donors. Each symbol in the plots represents a single experiment result and the horizontal bars in the plots indicate the mean values of five independent experiments.HIV-1-infected DCs cannot significantly increase resting CD4+ T cell proliferation in DC-T cell co-culturesTo understand the potential role of Nef in the co-cultures of HIV-1-infected DCs and CD4+ T cells, we next investigated the effect of Nef expression in DCs on the activation of co-cultured resting CD4+ T cells and on HIV-1 production. MDDCs were infected with HIV-1 and the Nef-mutated viruses for 3 days to allow productive infection to occur. At this point, autologous resting CD4+ T cells that had been cultured in media containing interleukin-2 for the duration of the DC generation were added to HIV-1-infected DCs at a cell number ratio of 1∶1. Co-cultured cells and the culture supernatants were collected and analyzed 3, 5, and 7 days later (Fig. 6A).WT HIV-1 appeared to replicate more efficiently than all of the Nef-mutated viruses at 3 and 5 days of co-culture, as assessed by p24 production in the supernatants (Fig. 6B). For instance, significant enhancement in WT HIV-1 replication observed was a 6.6-fold and a 2.4-fold increase in p24 production over the Nef (LL/AA) mutant at 3 and 5 days of co-cultures, respectively (Fig. 6B), which were reproducible across three different donors. Moreover, azidothymidine was able to completely block p24 production in the supernatants, confirming productive HIV-1 replication in co-cultures (data not shown).To assess the role of CD4+ T cell activation and proliferation in the enhancement of HIV-1 production, CD69 staining and T-cell proliferation assays were performed. To differentiate the T cells from the DCs in the co-cultures, cells were additionally stained for CD3, a general marker for T cells. At 3 days of co-culture, there was a 2- to 3-fold increase of CD69 expression by CD3+ T cells in co-culture with HIV-1-infected DCs infected over the mock-infected controls (Fig. 6C), while there were no significant differences between WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses infected cells (Fig. 6C). These data were also reproducible across three different donors (not shown). When the T-cell proliferation data from DC-T-cell co-cultures of five different donors were combined, there was no consistent trend for Nef-dependent proliferation of CD4+ T cells (Fig. 6D). There was no statistically significant difference in T-cell proliferation among WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses infected CD4+ T cells (Fig. 6D). These results suggest that Nef-mediated enhancement of HIV-1 replication in DC-T-cell co-cultures is not directly attributable to CD4+ T cell activation and proliferation.DiscussionIn addition to DC-mediated HIV-1 trans-infection, long-term viral transfer to CD4+ T cells by DCs depends on HIV-1 production from infected DCs [6], [7], [50], [51]. Thus, we examined Nef modulation of DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission through de novo production of virus. WT and Nef-mutated HIV-1 replicated with similar kinetics in immature MDDCs. Nef expressing HIV-1-infected DCs promoted viral transmission to co-cultured CD4+ T cells. Nef modulation of DC-SIGN and CD4 expression was observed, though levels of DC-SIGN upregulation were limited in lentiviral vector transduced DCs. Our time-course analysis of DCs infected with replication-competent WT HIV-1 and Nef-mutated viruses suggest that HIV-1 infection of DCs can down-regulate DC-SIGN and CD4 expression in a largely Nef-independent manner. By contrast, a previous study using immunofluorescence microscopy showed that DC-SIGN surface levels are upregulated in HIV-1-infected DCs at 4 dpi in a Nef-dependent manner, which increases clustering of DCs with T lymphocytes and HIV-1 transmission [34]. Although different experimental approaches might result in the discrepancy of the results, Nef-mediated DC-SIGN upregulation may not fully explain DC-enhanced HIV-1 transmission to CD4+ T cells. Previous studies indicated that DC-SIGN only partially accounts for or plays very little role in DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission [12], [20], [52]. Of note, differential modulation of CD86 and DC-SIGN expression in DCs was observed between lentiviral transduction and WT HIV-1 infection (Fig. 1 and 2). The data in Fig. 1 represent a situation in which Nef was expressed in trans, in the absence of other HIV-1 accessory proteins. The results in Fig. 2 provide a model for what could occur during WT HIV-1 infection, with all HIV-1 accessory genes intact.HIV-1 transmission efficiency can be enhanced by maturation of DCs [22], [53]. To exclude the possibility that Nef-promoted HIV-1 transmission results from Nef-induced DC maturation, the maturation marker CD86 was compared between WT and ΔNef HIV-1-infected DCs, and no Nef-induced upregulation of the maturation marker was observed. Similarly, adenovirus vector-expressed HIV-1 Nef in immature DCs triggers cytokine and chemokine production, and Nef-expressing DCs stimulate CD4+ T cell activation; but without up-regulation of DC maturation markers [36]. Thus, Nef may facilitate DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission by promoting DC-T cell interactions.Nef-mediated suppression of T cell activation is a critical feature of non-pathogenic primate lentiviruses and HIV-2, whereas HIV-1 Nef induces T cell activation and contributes to viral pathogenicity [54]. In addition to the modulation of CD4 and DC-SIGN expression, HIV-1 Nef also down-regulates cell surface expression of MHC class I, CCR5 and CD28 [55], [56], [57], but upregulates surface expression of the invariant chain of MHC class II, TNF and the related LIGHT cytokines [58], [59]. Although there is no evidence that these modulations, other than CD4 and DC-SIGN expression, can affect DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission, Nef-mediated modulation of T cell function also contributes to viral transmission in vivo.HIV-1 Nef plays a multifaceted role in viral infection and pathogenesis [29]. It has been previously shown that deletion of Nef and specific mutations in important Nef motifs, including the Nef (G2A) and Nef (LL/AA) mutants utilized in these experiments, causes attenuated HIV-1 replication in activated CD4+ T cells [60]. Previous studies have also suggested that Nef stimulates HIV-1 replication in primary CD4+ T cells by enhancing virion-associated gp120 levels of infected cells [61]. Moreover, Nef stimulates HIV-1 proviral DNA synthesis [62], and enhances HIV-1 infectivity resulting from inter-virion fusion [63]. It has been shown that Nef can be transferred from HIV-1-infected CD4+ cells to bystander cells upon cell-to-cell contact and contribute to the detrimental effect on bystander cells in viral infection [64]. Here we demonstrate that during direct infection of resting CD4+ T cells, HIV-1 is capable of causing activation and proliferation of resting CD4+ T cells in vitro, while deletion of Nef and mutations within Nef can reduce this effect. Enhanced infection of CD4+ T cells by the WT HIV-1 was observed by p24 quantification, indicating that HIV-1 is capable of facilitating its own replication by causing resting CD4+ T cell activation and proliferation, and that functional Nef protein plays a significant role in this activation process.In DC-T-cell co-culture experiments, Nef expression by infected DCs did not appear to significantly enhance CD69 expression or proliferation of co-cultured CD4+ T cells above background activation caused by the co-culture itself. Nevertheless, Nef-mutated HIV-1 do not replicate as efficiently in these co-cultures as WT HIV-1 and are transmitted less efficiently than WT HIV-1. DCs are refractory to productive HIV-1 infection [3], which may explain the lack of significant activation of CD4+ T cells in cocultures. HIV-1 can efficiently induce DC maturation and activation of cocultured CD4+ T cells when the HIV-1 restriction in DCs is circumvented by SIV Vpx [65]. Recent studies have identified SAMHD1 as the DC- and myeloid-cell-specific HIV-1 restriction factor, which can be antagonized by Vpx proteins from sooty mangabey SIV or HIV-2 [66], [67]. Further investigation of the mechanisms underlying SAMHD1-mediated HIV-1 restriction in DCs and myeloid cells can aid in the understanding of viral pathogenesis [68].In summary, we demonstrated that HIV-1 Nef enhances DC-mediated HIV-1 transmission to activated CD4+ T cells. HIV-1 Nef contributes to the activation and proliferation of infected resting CD4+ T cells. By contrast, Nef expression in infected DCs does not significantly affect DC-mediated CD4+ T cell activation or proliferation. These results provide new information in understanding the function of Nef as a viral pathogenic factor.Materials and MethodsPlasmidsHIV-1 proviral vector pNL-Luc-E−R− contains a firefly luciferase reporter gene [69]. The R5-tropic HIV-1JRFL envelope (Env) expression plasmid pJRFL has been previously described [9]. HIV-1-based expression vectors pH 131 and pH 132 were kind gifts from Dr. Derya Unutmaz (New York University). These vectors with vif, vpr, vpu, and env deletions were derived from the HIV-1-eGFP construct [39]. The control vector, pH 131, has the encephalomyocarditis virus internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) and mouse heat stable antigen (HSA) in place of nef, pH 132 has a nef-IRES-HSA cassette and expresses full-length WT HIV-1 Nef. WT HIV-1 proviral vector pNLAD8 (R5-tropic) was a kind gift from Eric Freed [70] (National Cancer Institute-Frederick). HIV-1 nef-inactivated proviral vector pNLAD8ΔNef was a kind gift from Olivier Schwartz (Pasteur Institute). Proviral DNA expressing Nef (G2A) and Nef (LL/AA) mutants in the pNLAD8 backbone were generated as described [32] and confirmed by DNA sequencing.Cell cultureHuman PBMCs were isolated from the buffy coat of healthy donors (American Red Cross Blood Service, Columbus, Ohio) as previously described [9]. Human primary CD14+ monocytes and CD4+ T cells were isolated from PBMCs using gradient centrifugation and immunomagnetic particles as described [9]. Immature DCs were generated from purified monocytes by treatment with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and interleukin 4 (IL-4) (50 ng/ml, R&D Systems) for 5 days as described [71]. Primary resting CD4+ T cells were cultured in the presence of 20 IU/ml of recombinant interleukin-2 (IL-2) (the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program) and activated by phytohemagglutinin (PHA, 5 µg/ml) for 2 days as previously described [9]. PHA-activated PBLs were generated as previously described [9]. DCs and CD4+ T cells were more than 98% pure by flow cytometry analysis of surface markers as described [5]. Human embryonic kidney cell line HEK293T, human T cell line Hut/CCR5, and HIV-1 indicator cell line GHOST/X4/R5 (kind gifts from Dr. Vineet KewalRamani, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, Maryland, USA) have been previously described [20], [71], [72].HIV-1 stocksThe single-cycle infectious HIV-1 stocks were generated by calcium phosphate cotransfection of HEK293T cells with the pNL-Luc-E−R− and an expression plasmid for HIV-1JRFL Env as described [20]. Replication-competent WT and Nef-mutated HIV-1 stocks were generated separately by transfection of HEK293T cells [20] with proviral vectors pNLAD8, pNLAD8ΔNef, pNLAD8Nef (LL/AA), or pNLAD8Nef (G2A) as described [9]. All virus stocks were harvested 2 days post-transfection. The infectious units of virus stocks were evaluated by limiting dilution on GHOST/X4/R5 cells [20] as described [20]. HIV-1 p24 concentrations of viral stocks were measured by ELISA (SAIC-Frederick) as described [5].Cell transduction with the H131 and H132 vectorsNef-expressing vector H132 and the control vector H131 were generated by co-transfection of HEK293T cells with pH 132 or pH 131 and the VSV-G expressing construct pVSV-G as described [20]. Immature DCs (2×106) were incubated separately with VSV-G-pesudotyped H131 and H132 vectors for 2 hours in the presence of DEAE-dextran (10 µg/ml) as described [9]. Transduced DCs were washed and cultured for 5 days before immunoblotting and flow cytometry analyses.ImmunoblottingThe H131 and H132 vector-transduced DCs and HEK293T cells that were transfected separately with pH 131, pH 132, or HIV-1 proviral DNA were lysed with 1% Triton X-100 supplemented with the presence of the protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Cell lysates were subjected to 15% SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting as described [8]. Anti-Nef (1∶500) and human HIV-1 immunoglobulin (1∶3,000, both from the NIH Research and Reference AIDS Reagent Program) were used as primary antibodies. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (1∶5,000, Promega) or anti-human IgG (1∶25,000, Promega) were used as secondary antibodies respectively. Restore Western blot stripping buffer (Pierce) was used to strip antibodies from probed membranes. Super-Signal chemiluminescence substrates (Pierce) were used to detect secondary antibodies.Flow cytometryCells (1×105) were stained with specific monoclonal antibodies or isotype-matched IgG controls (2 µg/ml) as previously described [9]. Phycoerythrin (PE)- or fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated mouse anti-human monoclonal antibodies against the following molecules were used in immunostaining: CD4 (clone S3.5; Caltag Laboratories), DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN, clone number 120507; R&D Systems), CD86 (clone number BU63; Invitrogen). Negative controls were antibodies matched for isotype and fluorescent conjugation: mouse IgG2a (PE-conjugate; BD Biosciences), mouse IgG2 (FITC-conjugate; BD Biosciences) or mouse IgG1 (FITC-conjugate; Invitrogen) respectively. Stained cells were analyzed using a FACSCalibur or a Guava EasyCyte flow cytometer (Millipore) and data was analyzed using the CellQuest program (Becton Dickinson) or FlowJo software (Tree Star) as previously described [12].HIV-1 infection and transmission assaysHIV-1 transmission and infection assays using luciferase viruses were performed as described previously [20]. Cell lysates were obtained 2 days after infection and analyzed for luciferase activity with a commercially available kit (Promega). For DC infection and transmission assays using replication-competent HIV-1, DCs (2.5×105) were incubated separately with WT and Nef-mutated HIV-1 (50 ng p24) for 16 h. Cells were then washed thoroughly and cultured for the indicated time course. Cell-free supernatants from the HIV-1-infected DCs were harvested for Gag p24 quantification by ELISA at the indicated times post-infection. Resting CD4+ T cells (3×105) were infected with 5 ng p24 of HIV-1NLAD8 WT or Nef-mutated viruses, or a media control, for 2 hours at 37°C, washed once in PBS and then cultured for 3, 5 or 7 days. CD4+ T cells were resuspended at 5×105 cells/ml and added directly to the infected DCs at a ratio of 1∶1. HIV-1 p24 levels in the supernatants of infected cells were measured by ELISA at the indicated times.Assessment of CD69 expression as a marker of CD4+ T cell activationCells were harvested 3 dpi and fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde for 1 hour at 4°C. The fixed cells were stained with a PE-conjugated antibody to CD69 (clone number FN51; BD Biosciences) and a FITC-conjugated antibody to CD3 (clone number HIT3a; BD Biosciences). Cells were assessed by flow cytometry using a Guava EasyCyte Mini and the percentage cells CD69 positive was measured. In DC-T cell co-cultures, cells were first analyzed for CD3 expression, then the highly CD3-positive T cells were gated and analyzed for CD69 expression.CD4+ T cell proliferation assayPurified resting CD4+ T cells were labeled with CFSE according to the manufacturer's instructions (Molecular Probes), infected and cultured or co-cultured with DCs as described above. At indicated time points, cells were harvested from culture and fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde for 1 hour at 4°C. Cells were assessed by flow cytometry using a Guava EasyCyte mini and proliferation was quantified using the proliferation analysis platform of the FLowJo flow cytometry software (Tree Star).Statistical analysisData were analyzed using a two-way ANOVA test and Bonferroni post-test or non-parametric ANOVA. Statistical significance was defined as P<0.05.


Title: HIV Infection and Spread between Th

1. IntroductionHuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is a global public health concern and the etiological agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). There is no known cure for HIV infection to date, and the demand for an HIV cure is on the rise, given its associated costs, adverse events, stigma, as well as lifelong treatments using antiretroviral therapy (ART) [1]. Worldwide, about 37.7 million people were living with HIV by the end of 2020, with an estimated 27.5 million people able to access ART during the same year [2,3,4]. Although new HIV infections are decreasing globally, a devastating estimated 1.5 million people became newly infected in 2020 [4].The exact HIV pandemic origin is unknown; however, it is well documented that HIV infection spread from non-human primates to humans around the 1900s [5,6]. HIV is a complex retrovirus of the lentivirus family [7]. Retroviruses are characterized by the fact that they carry their genetic material as single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) along with the necessary components to hijack the genetic machinery of a target cell to replicate itself. The main types of HIV infection include HIV-1 and HIV-2, which present differences in replication and pathogenicity but share similarities in genetic and biological properties [8]. Most HIV infections correspond to HIV-1 which is also documented to be more pathogenic than HIV-2 [8,9]. If left untreated, HIV-1’s mortality rate is over 95% [8,9]. HIV-1 is an enveloped retrovirus with two copies of an ssRNA genome, which enters the host primarily through mucosal surfaces, where it replicates after the integration of the newly retro-transcribed double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) [5,10,11]. Predominant routes of HIV-1 transmission include sexual contact, percutaneous (through contaminated needles and blood products), and perinatal [5,10,12]. Worldwide, about 90% of new HIV infections are attributed to sexual transmission, with most infected people being women [13,14,15].One of the hallmarks of HIV-1 is that it selectively infects and depletes CD4+ T cells, disrupting T cell homeostasis [8,16]. As a result, HIV patients develop a rapid drop in T cell counts, a ramp-up phase of viremia, and impaired immunity [8,16]. The problem is complex, since as soon as HIV-1 infection initiates, reservoirs may also establish within resting memory CD4+ T cells and other cells [17]. HIV is well-versed in hiding from the immune system and persisting regardless of a lifetime under suppressive ART [17,18]. ART can inhibit new rounds of viral replication, reduce plasma viral load below clinical detection limits (20 to 50 RNA copies/mL), and interrupt disease progression [17,18]; however, some HIV-infected cells survive as persistent and latently infected cells [19]. Although early initiation of ART has brought improved life expectancy to patients, it has its limitations, and the different treatment regimens are unable to deplete latent reservoirs, prevent infection establishment, and efficiently suppress new infections [16,18]. HIV-1 latent reservoirs persist undetectable regardless of ART, annihilating all chances for ART to eradicate HIV infection. Current proposed strategies to eliminate latent HIV-1 reservoirs include “shock and kill”, “block and lock”, and “lock in and apoptosis” [17]. The “shock and kill” approach aims to “shock” or reactivate the latent virus using latency-reversing agents (LRAs) such as toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists and histone deacetylases (HDACs), and then “kill” infected cells or eliminate the latent reservoir via targeted cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response [17,20]. The “block and lock” approach aims to enhance the latent virus state by “blocking” HIV transcription and “locking” the HIV promoter in a deep or super latent state using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or trans-activator of transcription (Tat) inhibitors to disrupt epigenetic regulators or viral replication [17,20]. Moreover, the “lock in and apoptosis” approach aims to block virus budding from the cell using LRAs, and Pr55Gag HIV-1 protease inhibitor [17]. Alternative approaches to target latent HIV reservoirs involve gene therapy via stem cell transplantation or via gene editing using CRISPR/Cas9 and zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN) [17,20]. Still, an effective strategy to eliminate HIV infection remains elusive.Remarkable research efforts have led to a better understanding of HIV target cells (mainly CD4+ T cells), and HIV cellular reservoirs, including naïve CD4+ T cells (TN), stem cell-like memory (TSCM), central memory (TCM), transitional memory (TTM), effector memory CD4+ T cells (TEM), T helper 1, 2, 17, 9 (Th1, Th2, Th17, Th9) cells, regulatory T cells (Treg), follicular T helper cells (Tfh), astrocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), and tissue-resident macrophages which establish in different tissues soon after acquiring infection [21,22]. In light that current approaches including ART are unable to prevent acute mucosal CD4+ T cell depletion after first exposure to the virus, gaining a better understanding of permissive cell types, mechanisms of transmission, and cellular reservoirs could be beneficial to devise new approaches for HIV eradication efforts. For instance, Th17 antiviral function of HIV infection is not completely understood; however, Th17 cells are key to HIV pathogenesis and represent potential targets to help prevent or reduce HIV transmission. Here, we review important insights and recent findings of the role of Th17 cells during HIV pathogenesis in mucosal surfaces, and the mechanisms of HIV-1 infection spread among T cells in tissues (Figure 1).2. Mucosa HIV-1 Pathogenesis and the Role of Th17 CellsMucosal surfaces are crucial to HIV-1 transmission, as these constitute the boundary between the host and the environment [21,22]. The mucosal immune system (commonly described as the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue or MALT) is the largest epithelial surface consisting of lymph nodes (LNs) and lymphoid tissues present in submucosal layers of the gastrointestinal (GI), respiratory, urinary, and genital tracts, in addition to eyes, tonsils, thyroid, breasts and salivary glands [10,23]. The gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) is part of the MALT and includes Peyer’s patches in the small intestine and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) [21,22]. The GI mucosa represents a cardinal site of HIV-1 pathogenesis due to its role as a portal of entry and as a site of infection dissemination to lymphoid tissues [24,25]. During mucosal viral exposure, HIV-1 targets CD4+ T cells, macrophages, Hofbauer cells (HCs or placental macrophages), Kupffer cells (KCs or liver macrophages), DCs, DC-SIGN+ DCs, Langerhans cells (LCs), and mast cells (MCs) located in the epithelial layer or within the vicinity, which can be responsible for residual replication [9,26,27,28,29,30]. It is well established that HIV-1 induces a progressive and steady loss of CD4+ T cell count, leading to the impossibility of containing HIV infection, which is characteristic of HIV pathogenesis and culminates in AIDS progression [9,26,27,28,29,30].The three recognized stages of HIV infection, acute infection, chronic infection, and AIDS, are defined by viral load, CD4+ T cell count, as well as clinical progression; however, prior to the appearance of acute infection symptoms, there is an initial eclipse phase (up to 10 days) in which infection is established at the exposure site, while viral load has not yet reached detectable levels in the circulation [31]. The acute or primary infection phase of HIV is recognized as the time from acquisition until seroconversion (up to 4 weeks from first exposure) [9]. Acute infection is characterized by “flu-like” symptoms along with high levels of viremia (up to 107 or more copies of viral RNA per mL of blood), a substantial drop in both peripheral and lymph nodes CD4+ T cell counts, and an increase in overall CD8+ T cells [9,31,32]. The chronic phase of infection or clinical latency (1 to 20 years after acute infection) is characterized as an asymptomatic phase with a continued decline of CD4+ T cells, usually correlating with AIDS progression along with the level of immune activation, presenting with constant or slow levels of viremia (in the order of 1 to 100,000 copies/mL) [33,34]. AIDS is the final stage of HIV infection, when CD4+ T cells abruptly decline (below 200 cells per mm3, in contrast to the normal range between 500 and 1500 cells per mm3), at this point, HIV-1 infection control is lost, viremia rises, and opportunistic infections also rise as a result of CD4+ T cells depletion. This stage often culminates in death [9,33,35]. Mucosal CD4+ T cell recovery during chronic infection is often used to predict the clinical outcome with no recovery in rapid progressors, and only transient recovery in normal and long-term progressors [24]. Unfortunately, undetectable plasma viral loads are no guarantee of viral particles’ absence. In fact, HIV RNA and DNA have been identified in GALT despite ART and undetectable viral loads in plasma [36]. Furthermore, most individuals under ART with plasma HIV-1 RNA suppressed below the limits of detection (20 to 40 copies/mL) as per commercial assays, still show detectable HIV-1 RNA in plasma (1 to 3 copies/mL) by RT-qPCR [37].Prior to dissemination and latency, HIV-1 establishes infection by a single viral particle infecting a single cell, mainly a CD4+ T cell [9,38,39]. CD4+ T cells represent most cells residing within the GI tract, LNs, and other lymphatic tissues [40]. GALT is recognized as the primary site of HIV replication where CD4+ T cells are massively and rapidly depleted during primary infection; however, and contrary to older beliefs, the activation state of target cells is not required for acquiring HIV infection [36,41,42,43]. Macal et al. demonstrated that a good number of CD4+ T cells in GALT of HIV-infected patients are not activated [36,41]. HIV-1 entry into target cells requires the engagement of the surface subunit gp120 of the viral envelope glycoprotein (Env) to host CD4, and C-C motif chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) and/or C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) serving as HIV co-receptors in the host cell membrane [11,44]. Viruses using CCR5 co-receptors (also known as R5 viruses/R5-tropic strains) are responsible for viral transmission and establishment of infection, while viruses using CXCR4 (also known as X4 viruses/X4-tropic strains), or both co-receptors (also R5X4 viruses/dual-tropic strains) have been identified at later time points during disease progression [38]. Both HIV-1 and the lab SIVmac model preferentially infect T cells expressing CCR5 co-receptors [39,45,46]. Indeed, CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells have been reported to constitute most CD4+ T cells present in MALT as opposed to CCR5− CD4+ T cells mostly present in peripheral blood and LNs [33].Once HIV-1 infects a CD4+ T cell, it integrates its genetic material into the host cell’s DNA to either initiate a cycle of replication or remain inactive [47]. After integration, the HIV-1 genome resides within the DNA of the infected CD4+ T cell, acquiring lifelong persistence [33,36]. Once a replication cycle is completed, mature HIV-1 virions are released into the extracellular space ready to spread and infect other host-permissive CD4+ T cells. CD4+ T cells participate in orchestrated cascades of immune responses against acute and chronic viral infections, and they serve as mediators between innate and adaptive immunity [8,34,48]. One peculiarity of CD4+ T cells is that they can differentiate into different T cell subsets responsible for mounting specific adaptive immune responses [49]. By the same token, different subsets of CD4+ T cells possess different levels of susceptibility and permissiveness to HIV infection [42]. Among CD4+ T cells, Th17 cells represent a major T cell lineage at mucosal sites known to be highly susceptible and permissive to HIV/SIV entry, and capable of supporting intracellular viral replication [26,33,42,50,51,52]. Th17 cells are primarily enriched in the intestinal lamina propria (LP) and vaginal cervix mucosa [33,49,53,54,55].Th17 cells were identified in 2005 [56,57,58,59]. Th17 cells (CCR4+ CCR6+ CXCR3− CD161+) derive from CD161+ precursors and constitutively express CCR4 and CCR6, but not CXCR3 [59]. Established T cell lineages are commonly characterized through canonical sets of cytokines and transcription factors [60]. For instance, Th17 cells are defined by the expression of a transcription factor profile including retinoic acid-related orphan receptor gamma t (RORγt), RAR-related orphan receptor alpha (RORα), and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), and by the secretion of cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-8, -17A, -17F, -21, -22, -26, as well as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), and C-C motif chemokine ligand 20 (CCL20, also MIP-3α) [61]. Th17 differentiation requires cytokines such as transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) and IL-6 [60,62,63]. Low doses of TGF-β, along with IL-6, induce STAT3 and RORγt expression, which promotes Th17 development [51,63,64,65]. In contrast, high doses of TGF-β inhibit RORγt while promoting the generation of inducible Treg (iTreg) cells [51,64,65]. IL-21 is a required survival factor involved in Th17 expansion [51]. IL-1β contributes to Th17 differentiation and expansion [51,60,63]. IL-23 is a requirement for pathogenicity in Th17 [51]. Together, IL-1β and IL-23 are vital to complete Th17 lineage commitment program by repressing IL-10 and inducing B lymphocyte maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1) expression in Th17 cells [51,63].In contrast to Th1 and Th2 cells, which are considered as stable lineages, Th17 cells are more plastic and less terminally differentiated cells capable to undergo lineage reprogramming and transdifferentiate into Th1, Th2, Tfh, or Treg like subsets, particularly under lymphopenic or inflammatory conditions [51,63,64,65,66]. Contingent upon the microenvironment, Th17 cells have the potential to acquire new effector features and convert toward other lineage subsets [51,66]. Th17 cells generated either in vitro or in vivo can retain the Th17 phenotype or can acquire new effector characteristics upon secondary stimulation [65]. Th17 cells may shift toward Th1Th17 cells during autoimmunity, cancer, and infections or toward Th2Th17 cells during asthma [66]. For instance, Th17 cells in the presence of IL-12 or IL-23 and in the absence of TGF-β convert toward Th1Th17 cells (IFN-γ secreting) [51,65]. Lymphopenic conditions also shift Th17 cells toward pathogenic IFN-γ secreting cells in models of diabetes mellitus [65]. And TNF-α has been reported to shift Th17 cells toward Th1Th17 subsets [51]. On the other hand, Th17 cells exposed to IL-4 acquire the ability to produce Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-5 while expressing IL-17A, IL-21, and IL-22 [51]. These Th2Th17 cells have been detected in the peripheral blood of patients with chronic asthma [51]. In the context of autoimmune diseases or infections, Th17 cells may also convert toward Treg cells [66]. Intestinal Th17 cells can reprogram toward IL-10 producing Treg cells under pro-inflammatory conditions in the gut involving Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and TGF-β signaling or upon high levels of TGF-β and retinoid acid [51,64]. Some reports indicate that Th17 cells transdifferentiate into Treg cells naturally during the resolution of inflammation [51]. Finally, Th17 cells reprogram toward Tfh and contribute to the development of IgA-secreting germinal center B cells [51,66].The dual activity of Th17 cells is extensively documented. Th17 cells are beneficial in maintaining mucosal barrier integrity and homeostasis [33,49,51,52,53,54,67,68], while the role of Th17 cells in maintaining gut integrity is crucial against fungal and bacterial infections [24,51]. One of the mechanisms of Th17 cells to maintain epithelial barrier integrity involves CCR6 expression to be recruited to the skin and to the small intestine in response to CCL20 (the ligand for CCR6) where they stabilize by IL-23 [26,53,59,69]. Mucosal epithelial cells secrete CCL20 in response to inflammatory stimuli, including pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-1α and TNFα) and bacteria [69]. Then, Th17-derived IL-17 and IFN-γ stimulate keratinocytes and APCs to produce more IL-1α, IL-23, and CCL20, resulting in a feedback loop for keratinocyte proliferation and pro-inflammatory cytokines, production and secretion [26,53,59,69]. Conversely, Th17 cells are also inducers of inflammation (by recruiting neutrophils, inducing chemokine expression, and releasing inflammatory cytokines) as well as contributors to autoimmune disorders (i.e., multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, and asthma) [33,49,51,52,53,54,67]. Furthermore, Th17 cells are recognized as vital effector cells in adaptive immunity able to recruit epithelial cells, neutrophils, and B cells, in addition to directly responding to infections by pathogens including fungi (i.e., Candida albicans), mycobacteria (i.e., Mycobacterium tuberculosis), and extracellular bacteria (i.e., Klebsiella pneumoniae) [33,49]. Recent reports by Agak et al. identified a subpopulation of Th17 cells capable of capturing and killing extracellular bacteria by secreting antimicrobial proteins and T cell extracellular traps (TETs) in cell culture systems [60].Observations from several groups suggest that HIV infection of T cells is enhanced under conditions containing Th17 polarizing cytokines (i.e., IL-1β, TGF-β, IL-6, and IL-23) in culture systems; furthermore, Th17 cells are preferentially depleted from GALT during acute HIV/SIV infection in vivo [52,70]. Current evidence has led to wonder what are the features that make Th17 cells susceptible to HIV/SIV infection and depletion. There is still no consensus to answer this question, but several proposals are considered.3. Mechanisms That Contribute to the Preferential Loss of Th17 Cells during HIV-1 InfectionThe rapid loss of Th17 cells is documented to be key to HIV/SIV pathogenesis [33,42,51,52]. Maek et al. pioneered reports highlighting increased IL-17 production by circulating T cells, and the role of Th17 cells during HIV infection [71]. It is recognized that Th17 cells are susceptible to HIV/SIV entry, then after successful virus internalization, Th17 cells can support virus replication and production [52]; however, there is evidence that Th17 cells play inhibitory effects against HIV replication and amplification [72]. Mechanisms contributing to the preferential depletion of Th17 cells during HIV/SIV infection in vivo remain mainly unknown since most analyses have been generated from culture systems using purified Th17 cells from either sorted human peripheral blood or from T cells skewed to Th17 [73]. Some of the proposed mechanisms explaining the preferential loss of Th17 cells include: (a) overexpression of factors inhibiting Th17 differentiation, (b) depletion of naïve Th17 precursors, (c) deficient expression of cytokines such as IL-21, (d) high expression of HIV binding receptors, (e) low expression of macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β is an HIV inhibitory chemokine, also known as CCL4), (f) AIDS-associated opportunistic infections, (g) chronic immune activation, (h) low expression of HIV-suppressive RNase 6, (i) susceptibility and permissiveness to HIV/SIV infection, and (j) expression of co-receptors and integrins (such as CD4, CXCR3, CXCR4, CCR4, CCR5, CCR6, and α4β7 integrin) among others [42,51,52,69,74]. Here, we only focus on Th17 susceptibility and permissiveness to HIV/SIV infection, and Th17 expression of co-receptors and integrins, both of which represent mechanisms targeting Th17 cells for preferential infection and depletion.It is thought that high levels of CCR5 expressed by Th17 cells facilitate virus entry [26]. In support of this notion, CCR5+ Th17 cells are found depleted from the GI tract of HIV-infected patients [51]. Some CCR6+ cells have also been documented to express higher levels of CCR5, as compared to CCR5− cells [42]. Further, co-expression of CCR6 and CCR5 in Th17 cells correlates to their depletion from the blood of HIV-infected patients [51]. Planas et al. demonstrated that Th17 polarized CCR6+CD4+ T cells are highly permissive to infection [69]. Although the CCR6+ CD4 T cell population is inclusive of all Th17 cells, not all CCR6+ cells are capable of secreting IL-17 [26,69]. Subsets of CD4+ T cells are commonly defined by their functional properties [69]. Similarly, signature cytokines production is used to characterize these subsets, and their expression of chemokine receptors are used to identify functionally polarized CD4+ T cell subsets such as Th1 (CXCR3+/CCR4−/CCR6−), Th2 (CXCR3−/CCR4+/CCR6−), Th17 (CXCR3−/CCR4+/ CCR6+), and Th1/Th17 cells (CXCR3+/CCR4−/CCR6+) [19]. Wacleche et al. described four IL-17A producing Th17 subsets in humans based on their CCR4 and CXCR3 expression including Th17 (CCR4+ CXCR3−), Th1Th17 (CCR4− CXCR3+), and two Th17 polarized subsets designated as CCR6+DN (CCR4− CXCR3−) and CCR6+DP (CCR4+ CXCR3+) both, in vitro and in ART-treated patients where each subset is thought to play a specific role during HIV pathogenesis [51]. Preferential loss of CCR6+ CD161+ CD4+ T cells from the blood of SIV-infected rhesus macaques (but not in sooty mangabeys, a natural SIV host) correlates to disrupted homeostasis and contributes to disease progression due to redistribution to the gut mucosa [69]. Analyses from a vaginal challenge model in rhesus macaques detected that SIV selectively targeted CCR6+ CD4+ T cells corresponding to the Th17 lineage as confirmed by RORγt expression [26]. Th17 cells were highly susceptible to SIV and selectively depleted from the female reproductive tract (FRT) early within 48 h post-infection [26]. Several studies in SIV-infected rhesus macaques indicate that Th17 cells are preferentially depleted from the GI tract during the acute phase of infection as compared to blood Th17 cells; moreover, Th17 cells are preserved during non-pathogenic infection [43,51]. Additionally, a variety of publications indicate preferential depletion of Th17 cells from HIV-infected patients. In a cross-sectional study from a South African cohort, Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific Th17 cells were preferentially depleted in HIV-infected patients [74].In HIV patients with progressive disease, Th17 frequency is lower during the chronic phase [43]. Lower frequencies of peripheral blood CCR4+ CCR6+ Th17 and CXCR3+ CCR6+ Th1Th17 cells have been reported in chronic HIV-infected patients under ART when compared to uninfected patients [51]. Nevertheless, Th17 cells are preserved under slow disease progression or during non-pathogenic infection [43,75]. For instance, sooty mangabeys which do not progress to AIDS preserve healthy mucosal function as well as Th17 levels post-SIV infection [42]. In contrast, in HIV-infected long-term non-progressors, the frequency of Th17 cells is preserved [51]. While the frequency of Th17 cells negatively correlates with plasma viral load, it positively correlates with CD4+ T cell counts [43,51,76]. Assessments regarding Th17 frequency may vary in the literature due to the use of diverse methods of characterization and identification (i.e., surface markers vs. intracellular production of cytokines) [73]. In summary, Th17 depletion induce enhanced mucosal permeability and bacterial translocation leading to chronic immune activation (driver of changes in the frequency of different T cell subsets such as an increase in effector or fully differentiated T cells and a decrease in naïve T cells) and AIDS progression [43,51,76]. Depletion of Th17 cells in the blood and gut has been identified in both humans and macaques with HIV or SIV infection, and it is a predictor of disease progression [75,77]; however, blood Th17 depletion analyses are still filled with questions, as Th17 cells function mainly at the mucosa and not in circulation [77].Th17 and Treg subsets derive from a common progenitor and differentiate based on IL-6 and TGF-β levels; however, they have quite opposite functions, and their ratios are directly associated with HIV progression [43,72,78]. While Th17 cells’ primary function is to mount immune responses to invading pathogens via pro-inflammatory responses and perhaps promote autoimmunity, Treg cells have an immunosuppressive function and help maintain self-tolerance, control activation, and expansion of autoreactive CD4+ T effector cells via anti-inflammatory responses [43,72,78]. Normally, Th17/Treg ratios are stable; however, inflammation and other immune conditions, including multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and HIV/SIV infections drive generalized immune activation and disturb their balance [72,79]. During acute HIV infection, Treg cells may be beneficial to the host, as prior to full activation of HIV-specific immune responses, Treg cells inhibit T cell activation and limit the number of target cells for HIV spread [80]; however, during chronic HIV infection, increased Treg cell frequency is detrimental to antiviral immune responses [80]. Changes in the absolute numbers of Treg and Th17 cells lead to imbalanced Th17/Treg ratios, which contribute to the breakdown of mucosal integrity, resulting in microbial translocation and systemic immune activation [79]. Falivene et al. found reduced Th17/Treg ratio in HIV-infected patients as compared to healthy donors, and higher Th17 levels correlating with stronger CD8+ T cell responses against the infection which led them to suggest that Th17 cells have potential prognostic value for HIV-specific T cell responses [77]. Thus, a progressive increase in Treg frequency along with a progressive loss of Th17 drive Th17/Treg ratios to drop as HIV infection progresses [72,80]. Moreover, high frequency of both Th17 and Th17/Treg ratios are reported in HIV elite controllers when compared to HIV patients [43]. To date, we have a better understanding of the role of Th17 cells in HIV-1 infection control; however, the main mechanisms of HIV-1 transmission in Th17 cells remain unclear. Hot topics of research include whether HIV-1 spread takes place mainly via cell-free viral particles and/or via cell-to-cell direct contact [81].4. Cell-to-Cell versus Cell-Free HIV-1 SpreadAfter the assembly of infectious virus particles, HIV-1 is proposed to infect and replicate in target cells via multiple mechanisms [82]. The two main modes of HIV-1 spread among permissive cells are direct cell-to-cell infection and cell-free infection [82,83,84,85,86]. Although the release of cell-free viral particles has been considered as the primary mode of HIV-1 infection transmission, cell-to-cell and cell-free modes are not mutually exclusive and the precise contribution of either mode of virus transmission in vivo is not yet clear [87,88]. HIV-1 Env spike supports both cell-free and cell-to-cell infection of CD4+ T cells [44]. HIV-1 Env spike is a trimeric glycoprotein comprised of three gp120-gp41 heterodimers which mediate viral attachment, fusion, and entry into CD4+ T cells during cell-free and/or direct cell-to-cell infection [44,89]; however, it has been proposed that only cell-to-cell HIV-1 transmission can overcome deficiencies of viral Env incorporation [44].Direct transfer between one donor cell and a target cell by cell-to-cell spread has been extensively characterized in cell culture systems using T cells from peripheral blood lymphocytes [11,82]. The first description of direct cell-to-cell HIV transfer was reported between DCs and T cells [90]. Nevertheless, cell-to-cell HIV transfer takes place between a number of immune cells such as macrophages and LCs, which are known to help establish HIV reservoirs in different host tissues and play important roles early during transmission and dissemination [81]. Direct contact between infected and uninfected cells contributes to viral spread through well-described structures such as the virological synapse (or VS, described as interactions engaging the Env glycoproteins expressed in the infected cells and receptor in the target cells), filipodia, and nanotubes in addition to phagocytosis, and cell-cell fusion modes of transmission [11,81,85,90]. Galloway et al. proposed that infected cells in lymphoid tissues are the main source of HIV spread via direct cell-to-cell infection [83]. It is speculated that infected T cells in LNs possessing migratory potential contribute to cell-to-cell transmission and spread in vivo [81]; however, HIV transmission either by cell-to-cell or by cell-free modes has been commonly assessed in vitro [82]. The challenge to quantitatively discriminate the effectiveness of each HIV-1 transmission strategy individually rests on technical difficulties to exclusively analyze cell-free infection without cell-to-cell infection taking place in parallel, and vice versa, since these are not mutually exclusive mechanisms [82].Cell-to-cell transmission has been regarded as an efficient strategy implicated in HIV-1 pathogenesis [83,85]. Multiple studies have suggested that a virus associated with a cell is more infectious than a cell-free virus [91]. Experimental and mathematical models allowed for the quantification of the sole dynamics behind cell-to-cell infection, leading to the finding that cell-to-cell infection predominates 60% of total viral infection [84]. Chen et al. reported that in vitro cell-associated infection is 18,000-fold more efficient in transferring viral particles into target cells than cell-free infection [90]. Cell-to-cell transmission has been found to reduce the generation time of viruses by 0.9 times while increasing viral fitness by 3.9 times [84]. Furthermore, it has been argued that cell-to-cell contact through the VS may protect HIV-1 from antiviral factors such as antibodies while also enabling disseminating [90,91]. Numerous studies indicate that gp120-directed and gp41-directed broadly neutralizing antibodies halt virus transmission in rhesus macaques upon topical or intravenous challenge of cell-free virus [92,93]. Although spread via cell-free particles has been challenged as the main transmission model, there is evidence in the literature for its support. After comparing HIV and human T lymphotropic virus (HTLV) transmission, HIV spread was proposed to take place mainly via cell-free mode [94]. A big challenge to cell-free HIV-1 transmission implies that during transcytosis via mucosal epithelial cells, only 0.01% to 0.05% of virions from the initial inoculum may translocate across epithelial cells [95,96]. It is documented that more than 90% of virions internalized in tonsil, cervical and foreskin epithelial cells do not cross the epithelium; instead, virions are retained in endosomal compartments, such as multivesicular bodies and vacuoles for several days [96]. Sequestered virions in the epithelium maintain infectivity for about nine days and can be released through cell-to-cell interaction of epithelial cells containing the virus with activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and CD4+ T lymphocytes [96]; however, Sufiawati et al. reported that HIV-1 cell-free virions along with tat and gp120 proteins are key for the disruption of adherens and tight junction proteins leading to the impaired mucosal barrier and spread of the virus within target cells, as seen in ex vivo tonsil tissue explants [95]. In addition, HIV-1 and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) coinfection of tonsils act synergistically to promote and facilitate both viral infections [95].The infectivity of retroviruses, including HIV-1, either in plasma or cultured media, has been reported to be less than 0.1%, arguing potentially large numbers of defective virions in a virus pool and limiting the infectivity of HIV virions [97]. Nonetheless, Josefsson et al. demonstrated that in peripheral blood CD4+ T cells from patients, the majority of infected cells contain only one copy of HIV-1 DNA as compared to the high proviral HIV content present in tissues and co-cultures which may correlate to transmission by cell-free particles [98,99]. Despite the fact that HIV-1 infects antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to a lesser extent than T cells, a major pathogenic process in HIV-1 infection is the uptake of HIV-1 by APCs followed by transfer of virus to CD4+ T cells, leading to explosive levels of virus replication within T cells [100]. Nonetheless, DCs express both CD4 and CCR5 HIV-1 co-receptors where DC-mediated cell-free HIV-1 trans-infection of T cells is well documented [101]. Additionally, three nonexclusive pathways are described for cell-free viruses to enter DCs including clathrin-rich endosomes, lipid rafts in the presence of DC-SIGN (pathway which favors productive infection), or via lipid rafts in the absence of DC-SIGN (pathway which may prevent viral replication) [101].The debate on which mode of transmission is more efficient is still ongoing, with no concrete conclusion yet. Most of the available evidence has been obtained from in vitro systems examining virus transmission; however, the actual interactions and conditions in vivo are not fully understood. Notwithstanding, infected breast milk, semen, and vaginal secretions contain a mix of both cell-free viral particles and infected cells [82,93]. Current evidence indicates that the field is not plain when making comparisons between cell-to-cell and cell-free HIV-1 transmission modes, as cell-free viral particles might also contribute to cell-associated infection. HIV likely takes advantage of both modes of transmission to spread. Moreover, no single cell type has been linked to a preferential mode of transmission, and it is widely unknown what the preferential mode of transmission in cells typically found in the mucosae such as Th17 lymphocytes is. The next difficult question is how latent HIV-1 reservoirs replenish?5. Virus Free Seeding New Reservoirs in Distant Places and LatencyART regimens are unable to halt chronic immune activation, inflammation, and immune dysfunction, all of which may contribute to the establishment of reservoirs harboring latent HIV-1 [102]. Thus, it is likely that the cure for HIV-1 is a reservoir away. Previously, the rapid loss of CD4+ T cells was associated with apoptosis, but it was found that about 95% of quiescent CD4+ T cells die via caspase 1-mediated pyroptosis and which correlates with chronic inflammation in HIV pathogenesis [103]. Later, Galloway et al. went on to show in cell culture that, unlike cell-free HIV-1 particles, cell-to-cell contact predominantly through the VS is key to trigger innate immune responses leading to the depletion of non-permissive CD4+ T cells via caspase 1-dependent pyroptosis [83]. In contrast, highly permissive cells in HIV-1 infection, such as activated peripheral blood lymphocytes die via caspase 3-mediated apoptosis [83]; however, not all infected cells die, and many HIV-infected cells remain as a latent reservoir. Memory CD4+ T cells represent the primary HIV reservoir in tissues [104]. The seeding of free HIV virions to distant places is subject to the limits of diffusion between tissues and restricted by not just anatomical barriers, but by soluble immune factors as well (i.e., complement factors and antibodies) [105]. In contrast, cell-to-cell transmission in LNs with high local density of target cells may contribute to the spread of infected cells given the migratory potential of T cells which might transport HIV to remote tissues [105]. Moreover, cell-to-cell transfer represents a mechanism for HIV to hide and escape from the immune system and ART, contributing to the establishment of new virus reservoirs and latency in distant host tissues [81]. Thus, the cell-to-cell spread of HIV is likely promoted in lymphoid tissues with a high abundance of target cells in proximity, along with reduced ART penetration [106].Data from latent reservoirs in patients on ART exhibit a very slow decay rate (t1/2 = 3.7 years) which translates to about 73 years to eradicate a reservoir of 106 cells, making cure unlikely even under ART [18]. Additionally, infected CD4+ T cells are long-lived cells capable of living for decades; however, these can potentially revert to resting memory CD4+ T cells and further contribute to latent HIV reservoirs [18,36]. CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells constitute most CD4+ T cells in MALT as opposed to CCR5− T cells mostly present in peripheral blood and LNs [33]. Most CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells are preferentially depleted during early HIV/SIV infection [70]. In fact, memory CD4+ T cells have been reported to be more permissive to HIV compared to naïve T cells [70]. CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells have been identified as specific targets of HIV replication and infection [33]. Monteiro et al. suggested CCR6 as a marker for memory T cells imprinted with a transcriptional program permissive to HIV replication [70]. Importantly, CCR6+ T cells also express integrin β7 and CCR5, which possess superior capabilities to disseminate HIV from the entry site since integrin β7 can regulate cell migration into the GALT and bind to HIV-gp120 [70].Studies by Meås et al. using a cell-to-cell transmission model show that toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8) activates human T cells and triggers inflammatory responses favoring both HIV-1 replication and reversal of latency [11]. Reversion of latency was also observed in patient-derived latently infected CD4+ T cells by TLR8 stimulation [11]. Moreover, TLR8 stimulation promoted differentiation towards pro-inflammatory Th17 cells by upregulating IL-17 production [11]. Furthermore, Hsiao et al. found that CCR5-tropic HIV could not enter naïve CD4+ T cells but gained entry to all subsets of memory CD4+ T cells including tonsillar memory cells expressing the IL-7 receptor alpha chain or CD127+ tissue memory (TM) cells that preferentially support latent HIV-1 infection as demonstrated by HIV DNA integration but not HIV gene expression [104]. The authors propose that these CD127+ TM cells represent a superior alternative to in vitro tissue models of HIV latency based on blood-derived cells which present with early post-entry by SAM domain and HD domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1) restriction [104]. Moreover, T cell latent HIV-1 reservoir include infected cells in diverse locations including, but not limited to peripheral blood, LNs, central nervous system (CNS), GALT and tissues such as lungs.6. ConclusionsThere are multiple challenges in the field. First, we know that ART does not cure HIV and that HIV reservoirs and latent infection are in part to blame. Moreover, HIV can accumulate genetic diversity over time during infection on a given individual, making the clearance of the virus on an infected patient unfeasible [9]. Another challenge is the absence of a good animal model for HIV. Commonly, non-human primates and SIV or chimera simian/HIV (SHIV) are used, but they differ from HIV-1. Alternatively, humanized mice (mice with a reconstituted human immune system) allow for features that correlate better with HIV-1 transmission in humans [107]. Furthermore, tissue environments may have a direct impact on virus spread, as well as the modes of viral transmission; however, this remains to be established [88]. A better understanding of the mechanisms promoting and supporting latency in tissue cells could help devise innovative approaches to identify and eliminate latent reservoirs of infected cells in order to devise new strategies to cure HIV/AIDS [104].


Title: Characterization of HIV-1 envelope gp41 genetic diversity and functional domains following perinatal transmission

BackgroundPerinatal transmission occurs at a rate of approximately 30% and accounts for approximately 90% of all HIV-1 infections in children [1]. The infection can occur antepartum (before childbirth; during pregnancy); intrapartum (during childbirth), or postpartum (through breastfeeding). Data from well-performed studies suggest strongly that regimens, including those that substitute oral for intravenous therapy during labor and delivery, can be expected to reduce the risk of vertical transmission of up to 50% [2,3]. However, transmission of antiretroviral therapy (ART) resistant mutants from mother-to-infant has been reported [4]. Genetic analysis of HIV-1 sequences, including gag p17 [5], env V3 [6], reverse transcriptase [7], gag NC [8], tat [9], rev [10], vif[11], vpr [12], vpu [13] and nef[14] from infected mother-infant pairs following perinatal transmission suggest a high conservation of functional domains of these genes and a close relationship between epidemiologically linked mother-infant pairs. In addition, analysis of HIV-1 env [15], vif and vpr [16] and gag p17 [17] regions from infected mothers who failed to transmit the virus to their infants in the absence of antiretroviral therapy (non-transmitters) showed a limited heterogeneity of the sequences and low conservation of functional domains. However, other regions of HIV-1 may also play a critical role in transmission and pathogenesis.One such gene product, gp41, is present on the surface of HIV-1 non-covalently bound to gp120, is responsible for fusion of viral envelope to the plasma membrane of the host cell and is essential for HIV-1 entry and replication. The Env gp41 is comprised of an extraviral domain (ectodomain), a membrane spanning region and an unusually long endodomain within the virus. The ectodomain of gp41 consists of an amino-terminal fusion domain and N- and C-terminal heptad repeats (HR-1 and HR-2, respectively). The gp41 amino terminus is a highly hydrophobic region bearing the FLG motif called fusion peptide (FP), which makes the initial contact with the target membrane and can fuse biological membranes by itself. The two heptad repeat regions self-assemble into a thermostable six-helix bundle, consisting of a trimeric coiled-coil interior (HR-1) with three exterior helices (HR-2) packed in the grooves of the trimer in an antiparallel manner, which represents the fusion-active conformation of gp41 [18].The endomain of gp41 encodes a Tyr-based motif that interacts with the AP-2 clathrin adaptor protein [19] and is required for optimal viral infectivity [20]. Two lentivirus lytic peptides (LLPs) in this domain which are capable of binding and disturbing lipid bilayers, interact with calmodulin and inhibits Ca2+-dependent T-cell activation [21]. There are four sites in gp41 for N-linked glycosylation that promote efficient Env-mediated cell-to-cell fusion [22] but are largely dispensable for viral replication [23]. Although extensive mutational studies have been performed to evaluate the functional domains of gp41 in viral replication, information on the molecular properties of gp41 associated with perinatal transmission and pathogenesis is lacking. Therefore, we have analyzed the gp41 sequences from five HIV-1 infected mother-infant pairs in an effort to understand the molecular properties of gp41 that may be associated with perinatal transmission.Here we show that the open reading frame of envelope gp41 was highly conserved in the mother-infant pairs' sequences. In addition, there was a low degree of heterogeneity and high conservation of functional domains essential for gp41 activity. These findings may be helpful in the understanding of molecular mechanisms of HIV-1 perinatal transmission and identifying new targets for developing intervention strategies.ResultsPhylogenetic analysis of env gp41 sequences from mother-infant pairsWe performed multiple independent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) DNA of 5 mother-infant pairs by limit end dilution method. Ten to twenty clones from each patient were obtained and sequenced. Phylogenetic analysis was first performed on the sequences by constructing a neighbor-joining tree of the 157 env gp41 sequences from the five mother-infant pairs and the reference strain NL4-3 (subtype-B) as shown in Fig. 1. The neighbor-joining tree was based on the distances calculated between the nucleotide sequences from the five mother-infant pairs and generated by incorporating a best-fit model of evolution into PAUP* [24]. Each terminal node represents one gp41 sequence. The validity of the tree was assessed by bootstrapping the data sets for 1000 times. Phylogenetic reconstructions of the mothers' viral sequences showed distinct clusters corresponding to their respective mother-infant pair and from the NL4-3 control strain, indicating absence of PCR product contamination. The tree also established epidemiological linkage between the transmitting mother and her infant. The mother and infant sequences were generally separated in distinct sub-clusters except for pair B and pair F, where the mother and infant sequences were intermingled. The separation of mother and infant sequences in most pairs indicate that the recipient variant still retained identity to the one or few transmitting variants found in the mothers. The distinct clustering of mother-infant pair sequences and confinement within subtrees also indicate that epidemiologically linked sequences were closer than epidemiologically unlinked sequences. The phylogenetic analysis was strongly supported by high bootstrap values.Figure 1Phylogenetic analysis of 157 envelope gp41 sequences from five mother-infant pairs following perinatal transmission. The neighbor-joining tree is based on the distances calculated between the nucleotide sequences from the five mother-infant pairs. Each terminal node represents one gp41 sequence. The numbers on the branch points indicate the percent occurrences of the branches over 1000 bootstrap resamplings of the data set. The sequences from each mother formed distinct clusters and are well discriminated and in confined subtrees, indicating that variants from the same mother are closer to each other than to other mothers' sequences and that there was no PCR cross contamination. These data were strongly supported by the high bootstrap values indicated on the branch points.Analysis of coding potential of env gp41 sequences from mother-infant pairsThe multiple alignments of the deduced amino acid sequences of HIV-1 env gp41 gene isolated from the PBMC DNA from the five mother-infant pairs following perinatal transmission is shown in Figs. 2 to 6. The alignment was done in reference to HIV-1 consensus B (consB) sequence. In the alignment, the top sequence is reference consensus B sequence and pairs B, D, E, F, and G represent the five mother-infant pairs. M indicates mother sequences and I indicate infant sequences. Dots represent amino acids identical to consB sequence, dashes indicate gaps, substitutions are shown by single letter codes for the changed amino acid and asterisks represent stop codons. Of the 157-gp41 clones analyzed, 133 contained intact gp41 open reading frames, which correlate to 84.17% frequency of intact open reading frames. The mothers and infants sets showed frequencies of 82.93% and 86.67% intact open reading frames, respectively. We found that 9 clones had one or more stop codons. The gp41 sequences were derived from PBMC DNA that represents both replicating and non-replicating forms of proviral DNA. It is noteworthy that each mother-infant pair gp41 sequences displayed pair-specific amino acid patterns that were not seen in epidemiologically unlinked pairs. In addition, there were several common signature motifs seen in all mother-infant pairs' sequences, including Asp634→Glu, His645→Tyr and Asn676→Asp.Figure 2Multiple sequence alignment of the deduced amino acids encoded by envelope gp41 gene of HIV-1 from mother-infant pair B following perinatal transmission. The sequences of pair B are aligned to consensus B (cons B) on top. Each line refers to a clone identified by a clone number preceded by MB (for mother B sequences) and IB (for infant B sequences). Dots indicate amino acid agreement with cons B, dashes represent gaps, and asterisks represent stop codons. The functional motifs of gp41 are indicated above the alignment.Figure 3Multiple sequence alignment of the deduced amino acids encoded by envelope gp41 gene of HIV-1 from mother-infant pair D following perinatal transmission. Each line refers to a clone identified by a clone number preceded by MD (for mother D sequences) and ID (for infant D sequences). The sequences of pair D are aligned to consensus B (cons B) on top. Dots indicate amino acid agreement with cons B, dashes represent gaps, and asterisks represent stop codons. The functional motifs of gp41 are indicated above the alignment.Figure 4Multiple sequence alignment of the deduced amino acids encoded by envelope gp41 gene of HIV-1 from mother-infant pair E after perinatal transmission. Each line refers to a clone identified by a clone number preceded by ME (for mother E sequences) and IE (for infant E sequences). The sequences of pair E are aligned to consensus B (cons B) on top. Dots indicate amino acid agreement with cons B, dashes represent gaps, and asterisks represent stop codons. The functional motifs of gp41 are indicated above the alignment.Figure 5Multiple sequence alignment of the deduced amino acids encoded by envelope gp41 gene of HIV-1 from mother-infant pair F after perinatal transmission. Each line refers to a clone identified by a clone number preceded by MF (for mother F sequences) and IF (for infant F sequences). The sequences of pair F are aligned to consensus B (cons B) on top. Dots indicate amino acid agreement with cons B, dashes represent gaps, and asterisks represent stop codons. The functional motifs of gp41 are indicated above the alignment.Figure 6Multiple sequence alignment of the deduced amino acids encoded by envelope gp41 gene of HIV-1 from mother-infant pair G after perinatal transmission. Each line refers to a clone identified by a clone number preceded by MG (for mother G sequences) and IG (for infant G sequences). The sequences of pair G are aligned to consensus B (cons B) on top. Dots indicate amino acid agreement with cons B, dashes represent gaps, and asterisks represent stop codons. The functional motifs of gp41 are indicated above the alignment.Variability of env gp41 sequences of epidemiologically linked mother-infant pairsThe degree of genetic variability of the env gp41 sequences from five mother-infant pairs was determined on the basis of pairwise comparison of the nucleotide and deduced amino acid sequences. The minimum, median and maximum nucleotide and deduced amino acid distances are shown in Table 2. The nucleotide distances ranged between 0% and 5.2% with a median of 0.97% for mothers, 0% to 4.8% with a median of 1.26% for infants. The amino acid distances ranged from 0% to 5.96% with a median of 1.16% for mothers and from 0% to 6.89% with a median of 2.04% for infants. The nucleotide and amino acid distances of gp41 sequences between epidemiologically unlinked individuals were also determined. Epidemiologically unlinked individuals had a median nucleotide distance of 9.01% with a maximum of 15.91% and a median amino acid distance of 13.65% with a maximum distance of 40.2%, respectively. These distances are significantly higher than epidemiologically linked mother-infant pairs, which ranged from 0% to 6.07% with a median of 1.85% (nucleotides) and 0% to 6.89% with a median of 3.23% (amino acids). Some of the hypermutated and severely defective clones were not included in the distance calculation. These sequences are frequently seen in pol and env regions of HIV-1 genome [25] and inclusion of these clones gives an incorrect picture of viral heterogeneity. We also investigated if the low variability of gp41 sequences seen in our mother-infant pair isolates was due to errors made by TaKaRa LA Taq polymerase used in this study. We did not find any errors when a known HIV-1 env gp41 sequence from NL4-3 was used for PCR amplifications and DNA sequencing using TaKaRa LA Taq polymerase.Table 1Patient demographic, clinical, and laboratory parameters of HIV-1 infected mother-infant pairs.PatientAgeSexCD4+ cells/mm3Length of infectionbAntiviral drugClinical evaluationcMothersB28 yr50911 moNoneAsymptomaticD31 yr4802 yr 6 moNoneAsymptomaticE26 yr3952 yrZDVdSymptomatic AIDSF23 yr6922 yr 10 moNoneAsymptomaticG23 yr48010 moNoneAsymptomaticInfantsB4.75 moM19424.75 moNoneAsymptomatic, P-1AD28 moM4628 moddCeSymptomatic AIDS, P-2A, B, F, failed ZDV therapyE34 moM58834 moZDVdSymptomatic AIDS, P-2AF1 wkM29531 wkZDVdAsymptomatic, P-1AG24 moF437924 moZDVdAsymptomatic, P-1Bb Length of infection: The closest time of infection that we could document was the first positive HIV-1 serology date or the first visit of the patient to the AIDS treatment center where all the HIV-1 positive patients were referred to as soon as an HIV-1 test was positive. As a result, these dates may not reflect the exact dates of infection.Mother and infant samples for each pair were collected at the same time.c Evaluation for infants is based on CDC criteria [65]dZDV: ZidovudineeddC: ZalcitabineTable 2Distances in the envelope gp41 sequences within mother sets, within infant sets and between mother-infant pair setsPatientWithin mothersWithin infantsBetween mother-infantsNucleotidesMinMedianMaxMinMedianMaxMinMedianMaxB01.865.200.382.1301.765.2D01.723.9902.053.6501.823.99E01.362.6502.554.802.656.07F01.172.0501.312.3501.662.35G00.561.2300.971.4601.442.78Total00.975.201.264.801.856.07Ammo acidsMinMedianMaxMinMedianMaxMinMedianMaxB02.345.0400.584.4402.045.04D00.875.9603.536.8903.236.89E02.044.4402.045.6602.645.66F02.344.1302.033.5302.344.13G00.291.7501.752.9402.194.44Total01.165.9602.046.8903.236.89Distances are expressed as percent nucleotides (for nucleotide sequences) or percent amino acids (for amino acid sequences). Totals were calculated for all pairs taken together.Dynamics of env gp41 sequence evolution in mother-infant pairsWe next examined the population genetic parameters using the Watterson model and the program COALESCE assuming a constant population size using a Kimura two-parameter model of sequence evolution [26,27]. The genealogical structure of a sample from a population contains information about that population's history. The mathematical theory relating a genealogy to the structure of its underlying population is called coalescent theory. The genetic diversity parameter, θ, estimated as nucleotide substitutions per site per generation for each patient's HIV-1 population is shown in Table 3. The levels of genetic diversity among mother sets, as estimated by Watterson and Coalesce methods, ranged from 0.01 to 0.02 and 0.01 to 0.03, respectively. Among infant sets, the levels of genetic diversity ranged from 0.01 to 0.03 when estimated by both Watterson and Coalesce methods. The HIV-1 populations found in the mothers displayed overall same genetic diversity (0.02) when compared to HIV-1 populations found in the infants (0.02).Table 3Estimates of genetic diversity of envelope gp41 sequences within mother sets and within infant setsPatientMother setsInfant setsNθwθcNθwθcB140.020.03140.010.01D140.020.03200.030.03E130.020.03130.010.01F170.010.0180.010.01G200.010.02150.010.02Total780.020.02700.010.02N = Number of gp41 clones sequencedθw = genetic diversity estimated by the method of Wattersonθc = genetic diversity estimated by CoalesceTotals were calculated as averages of all valuesRates of accumulation of non-synonymous and synonymous substitutionsNatural selection is assumed to operate mainly at the amino acid sequence level because most of the important biological functions in the organisms seem to be performed mainly by proteins. The rate of synonymous substitutions (dS) may be more or less similar to mutation rate, whereas the rate of nonsynonymous substitutions (dN) may vary according to the type and strength of natural selection. If positive selection occurs, dN will be expected to be faster than dS and the opposite can be expected in case of negative selection. Although several methods have been proposed to calculate the rate of dN and dS, these models assume that all sites in the sequence are under the same selection pressure. It is likely that since different sites in a protein have varying functional and structural roles, the selection pressure acting on them might not be uniform. We have used a maximum likelihood model modified by Nielson and Yang [28] to analyze evolutionary processes acting on env gp41 gene, considering the codon instead of the nucleotide as unit of evolution. The viral population in all the patient pairs studied showed a dN/dS ratio of more than 1, which is indicative of positive selection pressure (Table 4). Interestingly, the viral population in infants consistently showed more selection pressure than their respective mothers indicating that adaptive evolution in these patients was probably influenced not only by the immune system but also the fact that most of these infants were under antiretroviral therapy (Table 1).Table 4dN/dS ratios in the envelope gp41 sequences within mother sets and within infant sets.Mother setsInfant setsPairNP1P2P3dN/dSPairNP1P2P3dN/dSB1485.240.014.766.04B1469.6621.079.2713.02D1478.0620.281.657.88D2055.3340.104.5721.97E1355.72044.276.77E1315.7370.4413.835.36F17096.23.71.93F865.530.034.473.79G2095.713.291.003.85G15099.580.4116.21Total7862.9523.9513.085.29Total7041.2553.1312.5112.07N = Number of gp41 clones sequenced; P1 = proportion of conserved codons as a percent; P2 = proportion of neutral codons as a percent; P3 = proportion of positively selected codons as a percent; dN/dS = dN/dS ratio at P3 sites. Totals were calculated as the average of all values.Analysis of functional domains of env gp41 in mother-infant isolatesThe domain structure of gp41 can be divided into an ectodomain, a membrane spanning region and an endodomain. The N-terminus of the ectodomain is a highly hydrophobic region called the fusion peptide (FP), which makes the initial contact of the glycoprotein with the target membrane and can fuse the virus to the plasma membrane. Mutations including Val513→Glu, Leu520→Arg, Ala526→Glu, Leu538→Arg, Gln541→Leu have been shown to completely abolish syncytium-inducing ability and production of infectious virus [29]. Examination of the five mother-infant pairs' gp41 sequences in our study showed a change of Val513→Gln (some clones of pair B) (Fig. 2), Val513→Ser (some clones of infant D) (Fig. 3), and Val 513→Met (some clones of pair E) (fig. 4). All the other critical residues in this important motif were highly conserved. While non-conservative mutations in the leucine/isoleucine backbone Ile574→Asp of HR1 abrogate viral infectivity; expression, oligomerization, and localization of the fusion protein complexes remains unaffected [30-32]. None of the sequences analyzed harbored Ile574→Asp mutation. Mutational studies have revealed other changes that can affect fusion activity including Val571→Glu, and Gln576→Glu [33]. All the clones analyzed here showed conservation of the above-described residues, although some changes were observed in the flanking regions (Figs. 2 to 6). The changes in HR1 motif include Asn554→Ser and Arg558→Lys in (pair D), Gln544→Leu (pair B, infant E, pairs F and G), His565→Arg and Lys589→Arg (pair B), Lys589→Gln (pair G). The changes in HR2 motif include Asn625→Asp (all pairs except F), Asp633→Glu (all pairs), Asn637→Gly/Ser (pair B, D and G).It has been shown that N-linked glycosylation can serve to modulate the exposure of HIV-1 proteins to immune surveillance in patients [34,35]. There are three to four N-glycan attachment sites (residues 612–642) in the C-terminal half of the ectodomain. We examined our sequences for substitutions in these glycosylation sites and found that there was a relatively high degree of conservation, except for the following changes: mother D (Asn612→Ser), pair E (Ala613→Thr), pair G (Lys618→Arg and Ser619→Thr), pair F (Thr640→Ser and Thr640→Pro). A recent report noted the presence of Ala613→Thr change in env genes derived from brains of AIDS patients [36].Next the membrane-spanning domain (MSD) of gp41 that anchors Env on the lipid bilayer was examined. Several studies have indicated that the MSD is involved in membrane fusion as the glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored Env of HIV-1, which lacks the MSD and endodomain could not induce syncytia [37,38]. A recent report [39] found that the well-conserved glycine residues that form the GXXXG motif (where G, glycine; X, any amino acid) found at the helix-helix interface of MSD α-helix, tolerated mutations without affecting fusion function. The mother-infant sequences in this study showed a high conservation of the GXXXG motif except in all clones of mother G where there was a Gly693→Ser change (Fig. 6).Further, important motifs in the endodomain of gp41 were analyzed. A dileucine (amino acids 856–857) motif critical for association with AP-1 clathrin adaptor and transport of Env precursors through the trans-Golgi network to the cell surface is found at the C-terminal end of gp41 [40]. This dileucine motif is preceded by an acidic amino acid (Glu 853) which is thought to expose the motif allowing it to be recognized by adapters [41]. The sequences from five HIV-1 infected mother-infant pairs show a high degree of conservation in both the dileucine motif and the preceding acidic amino acid (Glu 853) indicating that Env trafficking in these clones were not affected. Piller et al. [42] performed a comprehensive mutational analysis of the conserved domains in the endodomain and found that there was a pronounced reduction of glycoprotein incorporation upon deletion of the conserved region of P(846)RRIR(850) or replacement of the central RR with KK. While our mother-infant pairs' sequences did not have any of these changes, several substitutions including Arg846→Val (pair D), and Arg846→Thr (pair E and G) were seen. The α-helical motifs of LLP-1 and LLP-2 have been implicated in virus-mediated cytopathicity by binding to calmodulin, a critical mediator of cytoplasmic signal transduction cascades in T-cells [43]. Upon analyzing the five mother-infant pairs' sequences (Figs. 2 to 6), changes were observed in these motifs including, Ser768→Gly (pair D), Leu775→Phe and Thr780→Ala (pair E), Val783→Leu and Ala837→Thr (pair F), Ala836→Arg (all pairs), Ala837→Ile in pairs B and D.Analysis of motifs targeted by HIV-1 fusion inhibitors in mother-infant gp41 sequencesAlthough none of our patients were on fusion inhibitor (T-20), we analyzed the target motifs for T-20 as well as naturally occurring T20 resistant mutants. T20 (enfuvirtide), a 36-mer synthetic peptide fusion inhibitor, corresponding to the overlapping regions within HR2 [44] exerts its antiviral activity by interacting with a target sequence in HR1 that inhibits association with native HR2. The T20 sensitive region lies between positions 548–550 (amino acids Gly, Ile, Val) and selection of resistant viruses have been found during serial in vitro passages in the presence of T20 [45]. Examination of all our mother-infant clones showed a sensitive motif to T20, except two clones in infant D (ID) that have a Val550→Ala (ID 10, 11) or Ile549→Thr (ID15) (Fig. 2). Poveda et al [46], studied the evolution of genotypic and phenotypic resistance to T20 in HIV-infected patients and found that there was a clear relationship between selection of single changes at the GIVQQQNNLL motif and loss of susceptibility to T20. Some clones in infant E (IE12-16) had an Asn554→Ser and two clones in infant F (IF9 and 10) an Asn554→Gln change due to a frame shift, indicating that these patients might be resistant to T20 treatment. A Leu556→Met variation present in the HR-1 domain has been associated with the development of clinical resistance but is generally found in combination with additional changes [47]. Of all the 157 clones we analyzed, only two clones in the present study (IF9 and IF10) had a Leu556→Met change. A recent study found that NeoR6, an aminoglycoside-arginine conjugate, inhibits HIV-1 replication by interfering with the fusion step and that the resistant isolates had a Ser669→Arg and a Phe671→Tyr change in the HR2 region [48]. Most of our gp41 sequences showed no change, except for pairs D and F sequences that had a Ser669→Asn substitution.Human monoclonal anti-gp41 antibodies, 2F5 and 4E10, are known to prevent membrane fusion and neutralizes a broad range of HIV-1 primary isolates [49,50]. The 2F5 epitope on gp41 includes the sequence ELDKWA, with the core residues, DKW, being critical for antibody binding while 4E10 targets the adjacent WFNI sequence. A high degree of conservation of these epitopes was found in the five mother-infant pairs' sequences, except pair G that had a Glu663→Ala change, suggesting susceptibility of these clones to neutralization by 2F5 and 4E10.Analysis of immunologically relevant mutations in the CTL epitopes of gp41 sequencesEvasion of the host cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTL) response through mutation of key epitopes is a major challenge for both natural and vaccine-induced immune control of HIV-1. Immunodominant responses generally are effective but HIV-1 generates variants that expose CTL to a large pool of mutants impairing immune responsiveness [51]. Escape from CTL control is indicated by a mutation that occurs in the T-cell epitope and becomes fixed in the virus population, resulting in an in vivo competitive advantage for the virus with reduction of the T-cell response to the wild-type epitope. Escape mutants can arise early or late in HIV-1 infection [51,52], and can also be transmitted [53]. Geels et al [54] have described two epitope clusters (residues 770–780 and 835–843) in HIV-1 infected patients over a period of 80 months that showed non-fixation of mutations. In the epitope encompassing residues 770–780, variant residues (Ile777→Val and Val778→Ile) were seen late (49 months) in infection, whereas in the other epitope (835–843), Ala836→Thr and Tyr838→Phe occurred early in infection. In the clones that were analyzed from five HIV-1 infected mother-infant pairs, Ile777 and Val778 were conserved across the board. However, several changes were observed, including a Cys838→Leu (pair B), a Cys838→Gly/Trp (pair D), a Cys838→Phe (pair E), or Cys838→Gly (pair F). These changes in the mother and infant clones suggest that these escape variants evolved to escape immune responses and influence transmission. In another study, infected mothers were found to transmit HIV-1 to their infants despite a strong CTL response to epitope 557–565 (RAIEAQQHL), suggesting generation of escape variants in the mothers [55]. Mother-infant sequences in the current investigation showed a high conservation of this epitope with few substitutions in pair B (His564→Arg) and in pair D (Arg557→Lys).DiscussionWe provide evidence that a high frequency of intact envelope gp41 ORF and functional domains required for gp41 activity were maintained in five mother-infant pairs following perinatal transmission. In addition, there was a low degree of viral heterogeneity and estimates of genetic diversity and a positive selection pressure on gp41 sequences from mother-infant pairs. Although gp41 plays an important role in viral replication and pathogenesis, no systematic study has been performed that analyzed the functional domains, evolutionary dynamics and the effect of adaptive evolution of gp41 involved in perinatal transmission. As such, our analysis of gp41 sequences on five mother-infant pairs support the notion that gp41 plays an important role in HIV-1 infection, replication and pathogenesis in infected mothers and their perinatally infected infants.In the analysis of gp41 sequences from five mother-infant pairs, we found the maintenance of intact gp41 open reading frames with a high frequency in mothers, of 82.93%, and in infants, of 86.67%, following perinatal transmission. This is comparable with other regions of HIV-1 genome from same mother-infant pairs, including gag p17MA (86.2%), reverse transcriptase (87.2%), vif (89.8%), vpr (92.1%), vpu (90.3%), nef (86.7%), tat (90.9%) and rev (96.6%) [5,7,9-14]. The maintenance of gp41 ORF confirms the importance of this protein in the viral life cycle and its role in perinatal transmission of HIV-1. The phylogenetic analysis showed distinct clusters corresponding to their respective mother-infant pair and from the NL4-3 control strain, indicating absence of PCR product contamination as shown in Figure 1. This analysis was supported by high bootstrap values. The separation of mother and infant sequences in most pairs indicate that the recipient variant still retained identity to the one or few transmitting variants found in the mothers. Similar conclusions were reached upon analysis of env gp120 V3 region [6]. Moreover, this distinct clustering of mother-infant pair sequences and confinement within subtrees also indicate that epidemiologically linked sequences were closer than epidemiologically unlinked sequences.Analysis of genetic variability, measured as nucleotide and amino acid distances, showed a low degree of variability in most mother-infant pairs (Table 2) and are comparable to sequence distances for other conserved genes such as gag [5], reverse transcriptase [7], vif[11], and vpr [12], but lower than env gp120 V3 [6], vpu [13] and rev [10] from the same mother-infant pairs. Similar results were obtained for the estimates of genetic diversity. Consistent with the critical role of gp41 in HIV-1 pathogenesis [56], it was found that there was a positive selection pressure (dN/dS) on the gp41 sequences to change (Table 4) but maintain the functional motifs (Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). These values are comparable to other HIV-1 genes from infected patients, including env gp120 V3, gag, reverse transcriptase, tat, vif and vpr [5-7,9,11,12]. Further analysis of the dN/dS values show that the viral population in infants experienced more selective pressure than their respective mothers, suggesting that adaptive evolution in these infants was probably influenced both by the host immune response and by antiretroviral therapy. However, a low degree of genetic diversity and the increased selection pressure could be indicative of the fact that the virus was rapidly evolving to a more stable variant.The functional domains and motifs required for gp41 activity in the deduced amino acid sequences, including hydrophobic fusion peptide (FP), HR1, HR2, precursor (gp160) cleavage, and cell signaling were mostly conserved in our mother-infant pairs sequences. Mutations in the FLG motif of FP region that completely abolished syncytium-inducing ability and infectious virus production [29] were found to be highly conserved in most of our mother-infant pairs' sequences. In addition, none of our gp41 sequences harbored mutations in the leucine/isoleucine backbone of HR region which have been shown to affect viral infectivity [18]. Furthermore, no other mutations or substitutions were found in our mother-infant gp41 sequences that may affect (i) hydrophobic cavities in the HR1 region, (ii) membrane fusion activity by destabilizing the trimer of hairpin structures, (iii) packing interactions between the amino and carboxy terminal helices of gp41, and (iv) the structural integrity of the trimer of hairpins [57].HIV-1 gp41 typically contains three or four sites for N-glycan (N-X-S/T) attachment located at the C-terminal of the ectodomain, which may serve to modulate the exposure of HIV-1 proteins to immune surveillance in patients [34,35]. We found that there was a relatively a high degree of conservation of the four-glycosylation sites in the sequences analyzed with some changes in few sequences. Interestingly, a substitution of Ala613→Thr was seen in our gp41 sequences (pair E) that has been previously shown to be derived from brain of patients with AIDS [36]. This suggests that the variants in patient E have the potential to be neurotropic and may cause CNS disorders, which are commonly seen in infected infants [58]. In the other three-glycosylation sites some changes were seen that do not affect the consensus motif. The membrane spanning domain (MSD) that is critical for functional integrity [39] was highly conserved in our gp41 sequences, except in all sequences of mother G (Gly690→Ser). As serine residues also have a stabilizing effect on the helix structure, it is possible that this substitution observed in mother G sequences might not compromise the functional activity. The endodomain encodes two lentivirus lytic peptides (LLPs) which inhibit Ca2+-dependent T-cell activation [21] and a leucine zipper motif between LLP-1 and LLP-2 that plays an important role in HIV-1 replication and pathogenesis [59]. The gp41 sequences analyzed in our study showed a high degree of conservation of essential residues in this leucine zipper motif.With respect to T20 target motifs, most of the clones analyzed in this study showed a high degree of conservation, which was expected because these patients were never treated with T20 inhibitors. In pair D sequences, four sequences in infant E (Asn554→Ser), and two sequences in infant F (Asn554→Gln) substitutions were found, suggesting that mutants naturally occurred in these patients and might be resistant to T20. A wide range of susceptibility to T-20 has been described in fusion peptide naive virus isolates from patients [60]. Recent studies [61,62] have concluded that the susceptibility to T20 was influenced by coreceptor usage but not by polymorphisms in the gp41 N helix. These studies demonstrated that viruses containing a CCR5-utilizing V3 loop were four- to eightfold less susceptible to T20 than the CXCR4-utilizing parent strains. We and others have shown that CCR5 utilizing macrophage-tropic (R5) viruses are transmitted from mother to infant [63,64], suggesting that T20 might help reduce viral load and may prevent perinatal transmission.Evasion of the CTL and neutralizing antibody responses through mutation of key epitopes is a major challenge for both natural and vaccine-induced immune control of HIV-1 [55]. CTL escape mutants can arise early or late in HIV-1 infection [51,52], and can also be transmitted [53]. Although CTL are HLA restricted, we analyzed several CTL epitopes recognized by different HLA types in our gp41 sequences. Several substitutions were seen in our gp41 sequences and some of these mutations in the terminal residues could affect peptide processing. Several substitutions were seen in the flanking regions of both functional domains and CTL epitopes. While the relevance of these changes is not clear at this time, biological studies using the gp41 clones obtained in this study could give a better picture of their effects. It would also be interesting to characterize the gp41 region in HIV-1 infected mothers who failed to transmit the virus to their infants in the absence of therapy and perform a comparative study.Although perinatal transmission of HIV-1 is a multifactorial processes, the results presented in this study not only underscores the importance of gp41 in HIV-1 perinatal transmission but also provides an understanding of the functional and immunological motifs that can be used to develop therapeutic interventions in blocking virus entry.ConclusionWe have demonstrated that an intact and functional envelope gp41 gene was maintained in infected mother-infant pairs following perinatal transmission. In addition, there was a low degree of viral heterogeneity and estimates of genetic diversity in epidemiologically linked mother-infant pairs as compared to epidemiologically unlinked individuals. Several amino acid motifs were found as a signature sequences in each mother-infant pair. We also found that the functional motifs of envelope gp41 responsible for fusion, gp160 processing and cytopathogenicity were highly conserved in mother-infant sequences. These findings support the notion that envelope gp41 is essential for HIV-1 infection and pathogenesis in mothers and their perinatally infected infants.MethodsPatient population and sample collectionBlood samples were collected from five HIV-1 infected mothers and their respective vertically infected infants between 1990 and 1995. The children of these mothers were evaluated and found to be infected by repeated testing following guidelines published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [65]. The demographic, clinical and laboratory findings of the HIV-1 infected study subjects are summarized in Table 1. The Human Subjects Committee of the University of Arizona and the Institutional Review Board of the Children's Hospital medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA, approved this study, and written consent was obtained from the participants of the study (mothers for their infants).PCR amplification, cloning, and nucleotide sequencingDNA was isolated from uncultured PBMC of HIV-1 infected individuals according to a modified procedure described before [6]. The HIV-1 env gp41 gene from infected patients' PBMC DNA was amplified using the following primers: Gp41-6 (+) (AGTAAAAATTGAACCATT AGGAGTAGCA, 7678 to 7705, sense), Gp41-7 (-) (CTTTCCCTTACAGCAGGCCATCCAATCAC, 8815 to 8836, anti-sense) as outer primers, and Gp41-8 (+) (CAAGGCAAAGAGAAGAGTGGTT-GCA, 7711 to 7734, sense), Gp41-9 (-) (TACTTTTTGACCACTTGCCACCCAT, 8786 to 8811, anti-sense) as inner primers based on NL4-3 sequence [66]. An equal amount of HIV-1 PBMC DNA (25 to 50 copies, minimum) was used from each patient as determined by end-point dilution and multiple (6 to 8) independent PCRs were performed to obtain clones that were then sequenced and analyzed. PCRs were performed according to the modified procedure described by Ahmad et al. [6] using 2.5 U of TaKaRa LA Taq polymerase (Chemicon International) in accordance to manufacturer's protocol. The first reaction was carried out at 94°C for 30 s, 50°C for 45 s and 72°C for 1 min for 35 cycles, with 8 minutes of additional polymerization time in the last cycle. After the first round of PCR, 4 to 8 μl of the above- described amplified product was used for nested PCR, using the inner primers and the same concentrations of other ingredients at 94°C for 30 s, 55°C for 45 s and 72°C for 1 min for 35 cycles, with 8 min of additional polymerization time in the last cycle. PCR was also performed on HIV-1 NL4-3, of which the sequence is known (GenBank accession number M19921) [66], to assess any errors made by the TaKaRa LA Taq polymerase. The PCR products were directly cloned in the pCR2.1 TOPO TA cloning vector, version K2 (Invitrogen). Bacterial colonies were screened for the presence of inserts by restriction enzyme digestion of recombinant plasmid DNA. The positive clones were selected and propagated for DNA isolation followed by nucleotide sequencing of 10 to 20 clones from each patient. Sequencing was performed using the Thermosequenase Cycle sequencing protocol (USB) using Gp41-8 (+) primer. DNA from clones which were positive for gp41 when compared with NL4-3 reference sequence were sent to the core facility (University of Arizona) for sequencing on an ABI PRISM ® 370 DNA automated sequencing system (Applied Biosystems). As the reliability of the sequencing was only up to 600 bases, we designed a primer Gp41-5 (+) (5' CAGACCCACCTCCCAATCCCGAGGGGA 3', 8366 to 8392, sense) overlapping the region around 550 bases to walk the entire gp41 sequence. The two sets of sequences were manually joined to generate the complete full-length sequences of HIV-1 gp41 clones. These full-length clones were then used to perform sequence analysis. The sequences were handled with the Wisconsin package, version 10.1 (Genetics Computer Group).Sequence analysisThe nucleotide sequences of the gp41 clones were aligned using Clustal X [67] adjusted by hand and then translated into corresponding amino acid sequences. A model of evolution was optimized for the entire nucleotide sequence data set using the Huelsenbeck and Crandall approach [68]. Likelihood scores for different models of evolution were calculated using PAUP*, and a chi square (χ2) test was performed by Modeltest 3.06 [69]. The model of choice was incorporated into PAUP* to estimate a neighbor-joining tree. Bootstrap values were based on 1000 neighbor-joining searches. The tree was generated for the nucleotide sequences from the six mother-infant pairs, and the reference HIV-1 sequence, NL4-3, was used as an out-group for the tree display (Fig. 1). Using Modeltest and the Akaike Information Criterion [70], all the null hypotheses were rejected except likelihood settings from best-fit model, transversion model with invariable sites and gamma distribution (TVM+I+G) selected by AIC in Modeltest Version 3.06. The base frequencies were as follows: freq A = 0.3073, freq C = 0.1940, freq G = 0.2653, freq T = 0.2334. The six rate categories were as follows: R (A-C) = 1.4514, R (A-G) = 4.5534, R (A-T) = 0.8671, R (C-G) = 1.3081, R (C-T) = 4.5534, R (G-T) = 1.0. The proportion of invariable sites (I) was 0.1561. The rate heterogeneity was taken into account using a gamma distribution with a shape parameter (a) of the distribution estimated from the data via maximum likelihood. The gamma distribution shape parameter had a value of a = 0.7961 for gp41. Similarly, a model of evolution was optimized for the data set from each pair. These models were used to estimate corrected pairwise nucleotide distances for the data sets from each pair using PAUP* [24]. Mean character amino acid distances were also determined using the Jukes-Cantor model in the Wisconsin Package version 10.1 of GCG. The minimum, maximum and median nucleotide and amino acid distances were calculated for each patient as well as for linked and unlinked patient pairs. The dynamics of HIV-1 evolution was assessed using techniques of population genetics. The genealogical structure of a sample from a population contains information about that population's history. The mathematical theory relating a genealogy to the structure of its underlying population is called coalescent theory [27]. The distribution of coalescence times, that is the times at which two of the sampled individuals have a common ancestor, depends on the effective population size. In population genetics, genetic diversity is defined as θ = 2Neμ, where Ne is the effective population size and μ is the per nucleotide mutation rate per generation. The differences in genetic diversity was examined using the Watterson estimate based on segregating sites and Kuhner estimate assuming variable population size, using the program Coalesce which is part of the Lamarc software package [26,71]. To analyze the evolutionary processes acting upon the gp41 gene, we estimated the ratio of nonsynonymous (dN) to synonymous (dS) substitutions by a maximum likelihood model using codeML, which is part of the PAML package [72]. The Nielsen and Yang model [28] considers the codon instead of the nucleotide as the unit of evolution and thus incorporates three distinct categories of sites. The first category represents the sites that are invariable or conserved (p1, dN/dS = 0); the second category represents sites that are neutral (p2, dN/dS = 1), at which dN and dS are fixed at the same rate; and the third category represents sites that are under positive selection, where dn has a higher fixation rate than ds (p3, dN/dS > 1). The dN/dS was estimated for each patient using both neutral and positive selection models in codeML.Nucleotide sequence accession numbersThe sequences have been submitted to GenBank with accession numbers AY880686-AY880842.Competing interestsThe author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsRR, RM and TD carried out the PCR, cloning, and sequencing. RR, VS, and NA performed the sequence analysis by computer programs. RR and NA participated in the experimental design, data interpretation, and writing of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS 2 (HIV-2)
================================================================================
Title: Epidemic characteristics of local HIV-2 transmission across Hunan province, China

1IntroductionThe Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) consists of two primary types: HIV type 1 (HIV-1) and HIV type 2 (HIV-2), exhibiting genetic homology of approximately 40 % to 60 %.Globally, HIV-2 continues to be overlooked as a significant public health issue. Approximately two million individuals are known to be infected with HIV-2, with the majority residing in West Africa. (Gottlieb et al., 2018; Gottlieb et al., 2008; Menéndez-Arias and Alvarez, 2014) HIV-2 was first isolated in 1985 from sex workers and AIDS patients in West Africa before subsequently disseminating to other regions worldwide. (Clavel et al., 1986; Kanki et al., 1986; RS Gurjar et al., 2009; Valadas et al., 2009; Torian et al., 2010) Co-infections of HIV-1 and HIV-2 are prevalent in West Africa, representing 0.3 % to 1 % of all HIV infections. (Nsagha et al., 2012; Popper et al., 2000) Currently HIV-2 is divided into 7 main groups (groups A-F, H2_01_AB) (Ceccarelli et al., 2021). In comparison to HIV-1, HIV-2 exhibits weaker pathogenicity, lower transmission efficiency, and slower progression post-infection. (Kanki et al., 1994; Marlink et al., 1994; Gottlieb et al., 2002; Whittle et al., 1994; Andersson et al., 2000) Only 20 % to 30 % of individuals infected with HIV-2 ultimately progress to develop acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). (Andersson et al., 2000; Jagodzinski et al., 2020) HIV-1 constitutes the predominant HIV epidemic in China, comprising over 10 recognized subtypes, the main subtypes being CRF07_BC and CRF01_AE (Bbosa et al., 2019). However, occurrences of HIV-2 are rare in China.The first reported case of HIV-2 infection in China occurred in 1998.Subsequent sporadic cases of imported HIV-2 infections via sexual contact have been documented in provinces including Fujian, Guangzhou, Ningxia, Hubei, Shanghai, and others. (Su et al., 2019) In 2017, two cases of local HIV-2 infection were diagnosed in Hunan Province, marking the first report of locally acquired HIV-2 cases in China. (Peng et al., 2018) Subsequent studies by Peng et al. indicated covert, long-term local transmission of HIV-2 in Hunan Province. (Peng et al., 2021) Nevertheless, the molecular and epidemic characteristics of this local HIV-2 transmission in Hunan Province, China, remain unknown, necessitating comprehensive investigation to provide crucial insights for HIV-2 disease management in the nation.2Materials and methods2.1Ethics statementThe research protocol, approved by the relevant institutional review boards or independent ethics committees, was conducted in accordance with standards ensuring patient safety and welfare, adhering to Good Clinical Practices, and following the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and its amendments.Verbal informed consent was obtained from the physicians responsible for the AIDS patients at clinical sites, and patient identities were documented with the physicians’ signatures. The study and verbal consent procedure were approved by the Ethical Committee of Hunan Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention (ethical approval number: Hunan CDC IRB-PJ2022(022)). Informed consent was obtained from all participants.2.2PatientsFrom 2017 to 2023, all 14 patients diagnosed with HIV-2 infections were included in the study. They resided in Xiangtan City, Hunan Province, China. HIV-2 infections were confirmed using a recomLine HIV-1 & HIV-2 IgG serologic test (Mikrogen Diagnostik, Germany). Each patient provided 10 mL of peripheral blood collected in EDTA anticoagulant tubes. The blood plasma was separated within 6 h and stored at −70 °C for further analysis.2.3Nucleic acid extraction and PCR testingHIV-2 RNA was extracted from plasma using QIAamp Viral RNA mini kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Approximately 453 bp gag gene fragment (HXB2 positions 620–1072) of the conserved region of HIV-2 virus were amplified by nested reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (nested RT-PCR) with in-house primers: H1 (5′- AGAGGCTGGCAGATTGAGC-3 −3′), H2 (5′- CAAGACGGAGTTTCTCGCG-3′) and H4 (5′- TAGGAGCACTCGTCGTGGT −3′). The 1st round PCR was performed with a one-step RT PCR kit (Promega, USA) and the cycling procedure were as follows: incubation at 50 °C for 30 min, 94 °C for 5 min, 35 cycles of 94 °C for 10 s, 55 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s, 72 °C for 7 min. The 2nd round PCR was performed using a Taq PCR Master mix (Tiangen, Beijing, China), with the procedure of: 94 °C for 5 min, 30 cycles of 94 °C for 10 s, 55 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 7 min. The PCR products were purified and sequenced by the General Biology System (Anhui) Co., Ltd. The sequencing result was compared with the HIV-2 gag gene reference sequence (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) by BLASTN 2.13.0+.2.4HIV-2 gene sequencing and sequence analysisHIV-2 env(GP36) (HXB2: 7758 - 8795), gag (HXB2:790 - 2292), pol (integrase, INHXB2:4230 - 5096) and pol (reverse transcriptase, RTHXB2: 2550 - 3870) regions were amplified by using in-house designed primers (Table 1). These primers were based on HIV-2/SIVSM/SIVMAC consensus sequences. (Myers et al., 1993; Fisher et al., 2010)Table 1Primers designed in-house to amplify and sequence the gene of the HIV-2 isolate.Table 1PrimerSequenceLocationFragment size(bp)Genomic regionOuter pairenvA5′-GCTAGGGTTCTTGGGTTTTCTCGCGACAGCAGG-3′7691–7723453env(GP36)envB5′-CAAGAGGCGTATCAGCTGGCGGATCAGGAA-3′8415–8444Inner pairenvC5′-GGGATACTGCAGCAACAGCAACAGCTGTTG-3′7782–7811envD5′-GGGAGGGGAAGAGAATTCTGGCCTATA-3′8265–8291Outer pairgagA5′-AGGTTACGGCCCGGCGGAAAGAAAA-3′603–627708gaggagB5′-CCTACTCCCTGACAGGCCGTCAGCATTTCTTC-3′1581–1612Inner pairgagC5′-AGTACATGTTAAAACATGTAGTATGGGC-3′628–655gagD5′-CCTTAAGCTTTTGTAGAATCTATCTACATA-3′1437–1466Outer pairRTC5′-ATGACAGGGGATCCCCCAArCAATATTTTTG-3′2309–2339995pol (RT)RT25′-GAAGTCCCAGTCTGGGATCCATGTCACTTGCCA-3′3593–3526Inner pairRT35′-GAGGCATTAAAAGAGATCTGTGAAAAAATGG-3′2474–2504RT45′-TCCCCAAATGACTAGTGCTTCTTTTTCCTAT-3′3500–3529Sequences were cleaned with the Chromas software version 1.62 (www.technelysium.com.au/chromas.html), and edited with BioEdit (7.0.2). The Vector NTI Suite 6 software was then employed to assemble a ContigExpress Project. Screening and tree-building analysis of aligned sequences for optimal base substitution models in a maximum-likelihood system using Mega 7.0.14, The best substitution models required for the phylogenetic tree of pol region, gag region, and gp36 were HKY+G, HKY+G + I, HKY+G. All reference sequences that underwent a BLAST search for closely related HIV-2 sequences were downloaded from the Los Alamos database. The pairwise genetic distances were calculated by the Kimura 2-parameter method using MEGA 7.0.14. The amino acid p-distance model in MEGA 7.0.14 was used to find the distance of the translated amino acid sequences. Phylogenetic trees were constructed using complete gene sequences of env (GP36), gag and pol that were available in the GenBank.3Results3.1Demographic characteristicsAll 14 subjects were infected through heterosexual contact. 64.28 % (9/14) were either married or in sexual partnerships, with 50.00 % (7/14) being male. The age ranged from 37 to 76 years, with a median of 58 years.Four cases were diagnosed in 2017, one in 2018, three in 2019, two in 2021, one in 2022 and three in 2023 and one in 2024.3.2Phylogenetic analysisGene sequencing was performed on 14 subjects for LTR, pol(RT), gag, and env(GP36).Gene distances between the pol, gag, and env(GP36) genome sequences were calculated separately in this study.Phylogenetic analysis of the pol gene indicated that all samples clustered together, closely resembling the reference strain A.GM.Using a genetic distance threshold of 1.5 %, molecular propagation network analysis revealed that eight samples were included in the network (Fig. 3).HN002 and HN004 were identified as the core nodes of the molecular transmission network.3.3Phylogenetic analysisGene sequencing was conducted for LTR, pol(RT), gag, and env(GP36) genes in all 14 subjects.HIV Blast analysis of the LTR gene indicated that all samples belonged to HIV-2 strains.Amplification of pol(RT), gag, and env(GP36) genes was successful in 12, 9, and 5 samples, respectively.Gene distances between pol, gag, and env(GP36) genome sequences were calculated separately in this study.Results revealed that distances between pol(RT) genes ranged from 0.000 to 0.025, with an average of 0.015.Distances between gag genes ranged from 0.007 to 0.043, with an average of 0.024.env(GP36) gene distances ranged from 0.019 to 0.072, with an average of 0.052.env(GP36) exhibited the highest degree of variation, followed by pol, with gag showing the least variation.Phylogenetic analysis of the study sequences, along with reference sequences, could ascertain the classification of HIV-2 groups or detect novel groups if the sequences did not align with any established groups.The phylogenetic analysis of pol, gag, and GP36 genes showed that all 14 subjects were infected with HIV-2 group A and clustered with reference sequences from the Gambia (GM) and Senegal (SN) regions of West Africa. This finding was corroborated by a maximum likelihood analysis with a bootstrap value of 100 (Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3).Fig. 1Phylogenetic tree analysis of 12 HIV-2 positive infects (pol RT gene).Fig 1Fig. 2Phylogenetic tree analysis of 9 HIV-2 positive infects (gag gene).Fig 2Fig. 3Phylogenetic tree analysis of 5 HIV-2 positive infects (GP36).Fig 33.4HIV-2 molecular propagation network analysisThe phylogenetic analysis of the pol gene revealed that all samples formed a single cluster closely resembling the reference strain A.GM. J04498 (Human immunodeficiency virus type 2, isolate SBLISY, complete genome), prevalent in Gambia, Africa. (SR Gurjar et al., 2009) This cluster further subdivided into five smaller clusters. Among these, HN001&HN013, HN010&HN011, and HN008&HN009 represented sexual partners or couples, while HN001&HN004 and HN005&HN004 engaged in commercial sex. The contact history of HN006&HN012 remained unknown and requires further investigation (Fig. 4).Epidemiological investigation of social communication networks revealed that HN001, HN003, HN005 (no sequence available), HN007 (no sequence available), HN008, and HN010 engaged in commercial sex at the same location. Additionally, HN004 offered paid sexual services at this site, while HN002/HN013, HN006, HN009, and HN011 were spouses of HN001, HN007, HN008, and HN010, respectively. HN004 served as the central node in the social communication network.Using a genetic distance threshold of 1.5 %, the analysis of the molecular propagation network revealed that eight samples were integrated into the network (Fig. 4). HN002 and HN004 were identified as the core nodes of the molecular transmission network.Fig. 4Social communication and Molecular transmission network of 14 HIV-2 Infected Patients.Fig 44DiscussionThe emergence of HIV-2, previously rare and mostly confined to West Africa, has now become a considerable concern, particularly in China. Despite limited reports of imported infectious diseases due to restricted overseas residency, documentation of local HIV-2 infections among Chinese nationals remains conspicuously scarce. (Franchini et al., 1989; Kumar et al., 1990) Noteworthy is the recent identification of fourteen cases of HIV-2 infection in Hunan Province spanning the period 2017–2023. Previous research has predominantly associated HIV-2 infections in China with overseas residency, emphasizing the importance of detecting local instances in Hunan Province. This revelation underscores the challenges of globalization, where international travel and migration facilitate the spread of viruses, underscoring the urgent necessity for global health collaboration and surveillance.Phylogenetic analysis in this study unveiled that all HIV-2 cases in Hunan Province belonged to HIV-2 Group A, prevalent worldwide, particularly in regions like Africa, Portugal, Spain, France, the United Kingdom, the United States, Korea, and India, with India contributing around 95 % of Asian HIV-2 infections. (Yan et al., 1999; Chen et al., 2003) Despite their recent identification in Hunan, these cases exhibit significant genetic similarity to global HIV-2 strains, hinting at potential involvement in international transmission routes, necessitating thorough exploration of their origins and transmission pathways.This study employed phylogenetic analysis covering pol, gag, and gp36 regions to elucidate the genetic characteristics of HIV-2 strains in Hunan Province. Remarkably, all strains showed tight clustering with Bootstrap values exceeding 95, suggesting a common origin of infection and robust communication among sequences. Evaluation of genetic distances across pol(RT), gag, and env(GP36) genes revealed varying degrees of variability, with env(GP36) exhibiting the highest variability, followed by pol(RT), and gag displaying the least variability. This intrinsic variability in HIV-2 underscores diverse selective pressures and evolutionary constraints among gene regions, crucial for understanding HIV-2 evolution and drug resistance mechanisms, potentially impacting biological traits and transmission dynamics, warranting further investigation.Integration of phylogenetic tree and molecular transmission network analyses provided insights into the transmission dynamics of HIV-2 cases in Hunan Province. Initially, a social network epidemiological survey revealed that all HIV-2-infected individuals resided within the same geographic locale and contracted the infection through familial transmission. Subsequent phylogenetic analysis of the pol gene revealed that all 14 samples formed a coherent cluster resembling reference strains from Gambia (A.GM), implying a shared source of infection or transmission network among these cases. Significantly, a high bootstrap value of 100 in the maximum likelihood analysis reinforced the robustness of this clustering, further validating the classification of HIV-2 Group A.Additionally, the molecular transmission network analysis unveiled that nine identified strains formed a substantial cluster, with a critical node termed HN004. Designated as a female sex worker (FSW), HN004 participated in commercial sexual activities with two male or more individuals, while the other four females were either partners or spouses of these infected males. This signifies a localized HIV-2 epidemic driven by commercial sexual interactions and transmission within partnerships, deeply rooted in the regional context. It emphasizes the pivotal role of commercial sexual activities in HIV-2 transmission, particularly within specific clusters. Moreover, HN004 emerged as a central node in the transmission network, highlighting the essential contribution of sex workers to viral dissemination. Importantly, the analysis underscores the significant involvement of commercial sex work in distinct clusters, as evidenced by the connection between individuals HN001 and HN004, with HN004 identified as a key player in this transmission network. This emphasizes the substantial role of commercial sex work in driving HIV-2 transmission within specific communities, with HN004 acting as a crucial component for viral spread within the cluster. The identification of transmission clusters and pivotal nodes like HN004 carries profound implications for HIV-2 prevention and intervention strategies. A nuanced comprehension of transmission dynamics within specific networks empowers public health authorities to devise more targeted interventions, especially tailored for sex workers and their clients, as well as individuals in sexual partnerships.This study has several notable limitations. Firstly, the sample size utilized was inadequate, potentially compromising the generalizability of findings concerning disease progression and antiviral therapy efficacy, particularly regarding local HIV-2 strains. Further investigation is necessary to confirm the representativeness of these findings. Secondly, while network analysis provides valuable insights, it highlights the complex nature of HIV-2 transmission dynamics. Uncertainties persist in the relationships and contact histories among cases, as evidenced by the unclear connection between HN012 and HN014. Additional epidemiological research is essential to comprehensively elucidate these associations. The identification of transmission clusters and pivotal nodes such as HN004 carries significant implications for HIV-2 prevention and intervention strategies (Table 2).Table 214 patients with HIV-2 infection progress of disease and antiviral therapy.Table 2No.GenderAgeDiagnostic TimeMarital StatusThe baseline CD4 (cells/ml)Social transmission networkStatusHN001Male572017Married131Had intercourse with the sex workersRefuse to follow upHN002Female542017Married2527The sexual partner of HN001Refuse to follow upHN003Male752017Divorced395Had intercourse with the sex workersDeadHN004Female612017Divorced56the sex workersIn treatmentHN005Male372018Married938Had intercourse with the sex workersUntreatedHN006Female662019Married28The wife of HN007In treatmentHN007Male692019Married204Had intercourse with the sex workersDeadHN008Female532019Divorced186Had intercourse with the sex workersIn treatmentHN009Female542021Divorced262The sexual partner of HN008In treatmentHN010Male532021Married688Had intercourse with the sex workersIn treatmentHN011Female532022Married665The sexual partner of HN001In treatmentHN012Male572023Married//DeadHN013Female612023Divorced82Had intercourse with the sex workersIn treatmentHN014Female732023Married238/In treatment5ConclusionBetween 2017 and 2023, Hunan Province recorded more than fourteen cases of HIV-2, all belonging to subtype A and interconnected, indicating a potentially persistent local prevalence. These cases primarily stemmed from local transmission, particularly through heterosexual commercial sex and intra-family contact, underscoring the urgent need for effective prevention and control measures. The increasing local prevalence resulted in three fatalities, highlighting the gravity of the situation. This research elucidates the molecular characteristics and transmission dynamics of HIV-2 in Hunan Province, providing vital insights for developing enhanced prevention strategies and understanding the local epidemic context. Future studies should prioritize enlarging sample sizes, investigating the impact of commercial sexual activities and partner relationships on HIV-2 transmission, and developing targeted public health interventions to mitigate transmission risks, especially among sex workers and their clients. These efforts are crucial for curtailing HIV-2 transmission in Hunan Province and improving the well-being of affected individuals.FundingThis study was funded by Scientific Research Project of Hunan Provincial Health Committee (B202312056006) and Hunan Provincial Health and Health High-level Talent support Program (2023-32)Availability of data and materialThe datasets during and/or analyzed during the current study available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.CRediT authorship contribution statementXiaobai Zou: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Formal analysis. Jianmei He: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis. Xiaojun Li: Writing – review & editing, Formal analysis. Jun Zheng: Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Xiaolin Su: Investigation, Data curation. Jie Chen: Investigation, Formal analysis. Xi Chen: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Resources.Declaration of competing interestThe authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Title: Conservation of Nef function across highly diverse lineages of SIVsmm

BackgroundTo date primate lentiviruses have been detected in about 40 African non-human primate species [1,2]. Two of these viruses, SIVcpz from chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes troglodytes) and SIVsmm from sooty mangabeys (SMs) (Cercocebus atys) have been transmitted to humans and generated the human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) types 1 and 2, respectively [3,4]. SIVcpz strains are known to have crossed the species barrier on three occasions, generating HIV-1 groups M, N and O. In contrast, SIVsmm has been transmitted to humans no fewer than eight times [5,6]. Nonetheless, HIV-2 is much less prevalent than HIV-1, with only two transmissions (leading to HIV-2 groups A and B) resulting in significant secondary spread in the human population [7-9]. The remaining transmissions appear to have caused dead-end infections affecting only a handful of individuals [9-11]. SIVsmm was also inadvertently transmitted to captive macaques, generating SIVmac. Currently, experimental infection of macaques with SIVmac is commonly used as a model for studies of AIDS pathogenesis and vaccines [12].SIVsmm exhibits a prevalence of about 60% in the wild [6] and comprises a genetically highly diverse group of viruses [13]. Previous studies suggest that different SIVsmm strains may differ in their fitness and pathogenic features after cross-species transmission. As mentioned above, only groups A and B of HIV-2 resulted in epidemics. Furthermore, SIVmac strains differ substantially in their ability to persist efficiently and to cause disease in infected rhesus macaques [14,15]. It has been shown that serial passage of SIVsmm in macaques increases viral pathogenicity in this experimental host [16,17]. Thus, differences in viral adaptation to human or macaque hosts may play a role in the ability of this virus to persist and cause disease after cross-species transmission [18-20]. However, intrinsic differences in viral properties may also exist. For example, it has recently been suggested that different SIVsmm lineages vary in their ability to cause a significant loss of CD4+ T cells [21] that is observed in about 10 to 15% of the naturally infected SMs [22]. Lineage-specific differences in viral fitness may also have contributed to the differential spread of the various groups of HIV-2 in the human population.One viral factor that plays an important role in the efficiency of primate lentiviral persistence and transmission is the Nef protein. Nef performs multiple activities, such as modulation of cell surface expression of CD4, CD28, class I MHC (MHC-II) and the invariant chain (Ii) associated with immature MHC-II molecules, as well as enhancement of viral infectivity and replication [23-29]. In addition, most SIV and HIV-2 Nefs also down-modulate CD3, a key component of the T cell receptor (TCR) complex from the cell surface [30]. It is well established that differences in Nef function affect the virological, immunological and clinical outcome of HIV and SIV infection [31]. Perhaps most importantly, the lack of a functional nef gene is associated with very low viral loads and an attenuated clinical course in HIV-1-infected humans [32-34] and SIVmac-infected rhesus macaques [35]. Some HIV-1 and SIVmac strains that contain naturally occurring point mutations or small deletions in Nef are less virulent [36-39], while other alterations in Nef are associated with acutely fatal disease in SIV-infected macaques [40,41]. Recently, it has been shown that inefficient Nef-mediated down-modulation of CD3 and MHC-I correlates with low CD4+ T cell counts in SIVsmm-infected SMs [42].It has been shown that primary SIVsmm nef alleles are functionally active in human-derived cells [42,43]. It is currently unknown, however, whether SIVsmm shows lineage-specific differences in Nef function that may affect virus replication or pathogenicity. To address this question we performed a comprehensive functional analysis of nef alleles derived from five different lineages of SIVsmm. We found that all nef alleles were capable of modulating cell surface expression of human CD4, CD28, CD3, MHC-I and Ii molecules. Furthermore, they enhanced virion infectivity, promoted viral replication and suppressed the responsiveness of virally infected T cells to activation. Although the magnitude of these various Nef functions varied, we did not find significant lineage-specific differences.MethodsAnimalsBlood samples were collected from seven naturally infected SMs housed at the Tulane National Primate Research Center (TNPRC), which represented five different SIVsmm lineages (Ls) based on previous analyses: L1 (M919, M923), L2 (M926, M946), L3 (M949, M951) and L4 (G932) (summarized in Table 1). One L5 SIVsmm strain was isolated on SM PBMC from an animal (FTq) housed at the Yerkes National Primate Research Center (YNPRC) of Emory University. We also included data derived from 22 naturally SIVsmm-infected SMs with differential CD4+ T cell counts housed at the YNPRC [42]. All SMs were maintained in accordance with NIH guidelines. The identification and characterization of the different lineages of SIVsmm has been described [13,21].Nef alleles and proviral constructsSIVsmm nef alleles were amplified by RT-PCR from the plasma of seven naturally infected SMs or the supernatant of an SIVsmm FTq infected SM PBMC culture as described previously [42]. Splice-overlap-extension PCR was used to replace the NL4-3 nef gene of HIV-1 (NL4-3 based) proviral constructs carrying functional nef genes followed by an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) [30] with the bulks of SIVsmm nef genes [42]. Cloning and transformation efficiencies were determined and the integrity of all PCR-derived inserts was confirmed by sequence analysis as reported previously [42]. For comparison, we also sequenced the nef coding region of three individual clones from each of the proviral plasmids expressing bulk SIVsmm nef alleles. The control HIV-1 NL4-3-IRES-eGFP constructs expressing the NL4-3, NA7 and SIVmac239 Nefs or containing a disrupted nef gene (nef-) and the amplification and functional analysis of nef alleles from 22 naturally SIVsmm-infected SMs housed at the YNPRC have been reported previously [42].Cell culture and virus stocksJurkat and 293T cells were cultured as described previously [30]. Briefly, 293T cells were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum. PBMC from healthy human donors were isolated using lymphocyte separation medium (Biocoll Separating Solution, Biochrom), stimulated for 3 days with PHA (1 μg/ml) and cultured in RPMI1640 medium with 10% FCS and 10 ng/ml IL-2 prior to infection. To generate viral stocks, 293T cells were transfected either with the proviral HIV-1 constructs alone (to measure viral infectivity or replication) or cotransfected with a plasmid (pHIT-G) expressing the Vesicular Stomatitis Virus G protein (VSG-G) for flow cytometric analyses [44]. The medium was changed after overnight incubation and the virus was harvested 24 h later. Residual cells in the supernatants were pelleted and the supernatants were stored at -70°C. Virus stocks were quantified using a p24 antigen capture assay provided by the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program.Transduction and flow cytometryJurkat T cells or PBMC were transduced with HIV-1 (NL4-3) constructs coexpressing eGFP and various nef alleles and CD4, TCR-CD3, MHC-I, CD28, CD25, CD69 and eGFP expression was measured as described [30,42]. For quantification of Nef-mediated modulation of specific surface molecules, the levels of receptor expression (red fluorescence) were determined for cells expressing a specific range of eGFP. The extent of down-modulation (n-fold) was calculated by dividing the MFI obtained for cells infected with the nef-minus NL4-3 control viruses by the corresponding values obtained for cells infected with viruses coexpressing Nef and eGFP.NFAT assayJurkat cells stably transfected with an NFAT-dependent reporter gene vector [45] were either left uninfected or transduced with HIV-1 Nef/eGFP constructs expressing various nef alleles. Except for those cells used as controls, cultures were treated with PHA (1 μg/ml; Murex). Luciferase activity was measured and n-fold induction determined by calculating the ratio between measured relative light units of treated samples over untreated samples as described previously [30].Viral infectivityVirus infectivity was determined using P4-CCR5, TZM-bl and CEM-M7 cells as described [46]. Briefly, the cells were sown out in 96-well-dishes in a volume of 100 μ1 and infected after overnight incubation with virus stocks containing 1 ng of p24 antigen produced by transiently transfected 293T cells. Two days post-infection viral infectivity was detected using the Gal screen kit from TROPIX as recommended by the manufacturer. β-galactosidase activities were quantified as relative light units per second (RLU/s) using the Orion Microplate Luminometer.Virus spread in PBMCsTo assess the ability of Nef to promote viral spread, 2 × 105 pre-stimulated PBMC per well were sown out in 48-well dishes and infected with 293T cell derived virus stocks containing one 1 ng of p24 antigen. Aliquots of the cells were obtained at 3, 5 and 7 days post-infection and the number of virally infected GFP+ cells was determined by flow cytometric analysis.Phylogenetic analysisThe nef sequences derived from the different lineages of SIVsmm analyzed in the present were compared to published SIVsmm nef sequences (accession numbers AF334679, DQ408682 to DQ408725 and EU636907 to EU636923). They were aligned using ClustalW [47]. The tree in Fig. 1 was inferred by the Bayesian method [48] in MrBayes [49] using 10 million generations and the HKY model [50] with gamma distributed rates at sites [51] and burn in of 25%. Average standard deviation of split frequencies (< 0.003) was checked to see that a sufficient number of generations had been run.Figure 1Evolutionary relationships among HIV-2 and SIVsmm Nef sequences. SIVsmm nef alleles newly analyzed in the present study and the SIVmac239 nef are highlighted by yellow and orange boxes, respectively. The tree in was inferred by the Bayesian method [48] MrBayes [49] using 10 million generations and the HKY model [50] with gamma distributed rates at sites [51] and burn in of 25%. Numbers on branches are percentage estimated posterior probabilities. Only those 95% and above are shown.Statistical methodsThe activities of nef alleles were compared using a two-tailed Student's t test. The PRISM package version 4.0 (Abacus Concepts, Berkeley, CA) was used for all calculations.GenBank accession numbersThe GenBank accession numbers for the SIVsmm nef sequences are FJ943640 to FJ943647.ResultsGeneration of viral constructs coexpressing Nefs from different SIVsmm lineages and eGFPExtensive studies of SIVsmm diversity identified no less than nine different phylogenetic lineages of this virus in the animal cohorts housed at the Yerkes and Tulane National Primate Research Centers [13,21]. To assess whether SIVsmm shows lineage-specific differences in Nef function, we cloned nef alleles from 8 animals known to belong to five different clades based on the analysis of their gag, pol and env sequences [13,21] in bulk into an HIV-1 NL4-3-based IRES-eGFP proviral vector co-expressing Nef and eGFP from a bi-cistronic RNA. To generate these proviral constructs, the 3' end of the HIV-1 env gene and the SIVsmm nef alleles were fused by splice-overlap-extension (SOE) PCR using outer primers containing unique HpaI and MluI restriction sites and overlapping inner primers and cloned in bulk into the proviral constructs. As summarized in Table 1, the nef alleles represented SIVsmm lineages 1 (M919, M923), 2 (M926, M946), 3 (M949, M951) and 4 (G932). Nef genes from an L5 SIVsmm strain (FTq) were amplified from the supernatant of an infected SM PBMC culture. We found that sequences obtained by direct analysis of the PCR products and bulk inserts in the NL4-3-based IRES-eGFP vector were indistinguishable (data not shown). As further control, we sequenced three individuals' proviral clones for each of the eight animal samples. We found that all 24 proviral constructs encoded intact nef open reading frames and that these sequences were closely related to those obtained by direct sequencing of the corresponding PCR fragments and formed animal-specific clades for each of the eight SIVsmm strains. These results verified the accuracy of the proviral constructs and showed that the frequency of defective nef alleles is low.SIVsmm nef sequence and phylogenetic analysisPhylogenetic analyses showed that the proviral NL4-3 IRES/eGFP plasmid preparations contained highly divergent nef alleles that belonged to distinct clusters (Fig. 1). Importantly, this analysis demonstrated that all sequences were animal specific, thus confirming the authenticity of the amplified nef genes and excluding cross-sample PCR contaminations. Closer examination of the amplified sequences showed that all nef genes predicted full-length proteins of 265 or 267 amino acid residues (Fig. 2). The N- and C-termini of the SIVsmm Nef amino acid sequences were highly variable, whereas the central core region was well conserved. Some domains and protein interaction sites known to be relevant for HIV-1 function [52], such as the N-terminal myristoylation signal, an N-proximal basic region involved in membrane targeting, an acidic region, a di-arginine motif, a "di-leucine-based" (EXXXLM/V) adaptor-protein interaction site in the C-proximal flexible loop and a di-acidic putative V1H binding site were preserved in all SIVsmm Nef sequences (Fig. 2). In contrast, N-proximal Y residues, proposed to represent endocytosis signals [53,54], and the "proline-rich" region, which is highly conserved and involved in the interaction with cellular kinases in HIV-1 Nefs [55], differed in several SIVsmm Nef sequences. In contrast, Y223, which is critical for MHC-I down-modulation by SIVmac Nef [56,57] and residues P73A74 and D204, critical for CD4 down-modulation and efficient replication of SIVmac239 [58], were generally conserved at the corresponding position. Altogether, the examination of the nef sequences from the different clades of SIVsmm did not reveal any peculiar abnormalities.Figure 2Alignment of SIV and HIV-2 Nef sequences. The SIVmac239 sequence is shown in the upper panel for comparison. Some conserved sequence elements in Nef, including the N-terminal myristoylation signal, N-proximal tyrosines (52–54), PA residues known to be critical for CD4 down-modulation by 239 wt Nef (58), the acidic and proline-rich regions, a diarginine motif, a C-proximal adaptor-protein (AP) interaction site (52), a diacidic putative VlH binding site and a Y residue involved in MHC-I down-regulation (52, 56,57) are indicated schematically. Dots indicate identity with the 239 wt Nef sequence and dashes gaps introduced to optimize the alignment.Nef alleles from different clades of SIVsmm modulate human receptorsTo compare the potency of nef alleles from different SIVsmm lineages in down-modulating CD3, CD4, CD28 and MHC-I, and in up-regulating Ii, we transduced human PBMC with the proviral constructs and analyzed them by flow cytometry (Fig. 3A). As reported previously [30], the proviral NL4-3 Nef/eGFP constructs have the advantage that infected cells co-express Nef and eGFP from single bicistronic RNAs, thus allowing to correlate Nef and receptor expression levels (Fig. 3A). To ensure that the nef alleles were representative for each of the eight infected SMs investigated, they were cloned in bulk into the proviral vector and viral stocks were derived from ≥50 independent transformants (data not shown). For comparison, we also analyzed clones expressing an individual primary SIVsmm nef allele from each animal. The results confirmed the data obtained from the analyses of Nef function in bulk (data not shown). As expected, the control HIV-1 NL4-3 construct containing a disrupted nef gene only affected CD4, since Vpu and Env also reduce its expression at the surface of infected T cells (Fig. 3, column 2). In agreement with published data [30], the NL4-3 Nef did not down-modulate TCR-CD3 (Fig. 3A, column 3). In contrast, the 239 wt and the eight SIVsmm Nefs modulated the surface expression of all four receptors investigated (Fig. 3A, columns 4–12). Quantitative analyses demonstrated that Nefs from all five lineages of SIVsmm showed similar potency in down-modulating CD3, CD4, MHC-I and CD28 (Fig. 3B). Notably, the 239 wt Nef was more active than all SIVsmm Nefs in receptor modulation. This difference was particularly striking in Nef functions involved in T cell receptor (TCR) signalling. SIVsmm Nefs generally reduced CD3 cell surface expression about 3-fold, whereas the 239 wt Nef caused 6-fold down-modulation. The functional difference in down-modulation of the co-stimulatory factor CD28 was even more pronounced: all SIVsmm Nef alleles caused only about 2-fold lower levels of CD28 surface expression, whereas the 239 wt Nef reduced it by 6-fold (Fig. 3B). We also examined the effect of the SIVsmm nef alleles on CXCR4, which is down-modulated by many SIV and (to a lesser extend) HIV-1 Nefs to inhibit T cell migration [59]. This analysis was performed in Jurkat cells (Fig. 4A) instead of PBMCs because the latter express very low levels of CXCR4 upon PHA stimulation precluding the meaningful analysis of the Nef function (data not shown). We found that the 239 wt Nef down-modulated CXCR4 by 7.6-fold, whereas all SIVsmm Nefs had only 3.0- to 4.5-fold effects (Fig. 4B). Thus, nef alleles from all five lineages of SIVsmm modulate human receptors involved in TCR signalling and T cell migration, albeit generally with lower efficiency than the 239 wt Nef. Unfortunately, no SIVsmm-specific Nef antibodies are available. Thus, the Nef expression levels could not be determined, although the fact that all nef alleles were functionally active implies that they are efficiently expressed.Figure 3Modulation of receptor expressed by human PBMC by SIVsmm nef alleles. (A) PBMCs (panels A-D) were transduced with HIV-1 NL4-3 constructs coexpressing the indicated nef alleles and GFP and assayed for surface expression of CD4, CD3, CD28 and MHC-I. The ranges of eGFP expression used to calculate receptor modulation are indicated. (B) Quantitative assessment of SIVsmm Nef-mediated down-modulation of the indicated cellular receptors. The animal specifications and SIVsmm lineages are indicated and the activities obtained using the SIVmac Nef are shown for comparison. Values give averages ± SD derived from three independent experiments. The asterisks denote a statistical significance (P < 0.05) between SIVmac239 and SIVsmm Nef activity. All SIV nef alleles were significantly (P < 0.001) more active than that of HIV-1 in modulating CD3, whereas the HIV-1 nef was more active (P < 0.05) than all SIVsmm nefs in down-regulation of MHC-I.Figure 4Modulation of CXCR4 and the MHC-II associated invariant chain. (A) Jurkat T cells were transduced with HIV-1 NL4-3 Nef/eGFP constructs and assayed for surface expression of CXCR4. The range of eGFP expression used to calculate CXCR4 modulation is indicated. (B) Quantitative assessment of down-modulation of CXCR4 by the indicated Nef proteins. (C) THP-1 cells were transduced with HIV-1 NL4-3 constructs coexpressing the indicated nef alleles and GFP and assayed for surface expression of Ii. The ranges of eGFP expression used to calculate receptor modulation are indicated. (D) Quantitative assessment of SIVsmm Nef-mediated down-modulation of Ii. Values give averages ± SD derived from five independent experiments. The asterisks denote a statistical significance (P < 0.05) between HIV-1 and SIV Nef activity.It has been previously shown that HIV and SIV Nefs up-regulate Ii, most likely to impair MHC-II antigen presentation [29,60]. We transduced the human monocytic leukemia THP-1 cell line with the NL4-3 Nef-IRES/eGFP constructs to study Ii up-modulation because it shares many properties with human monocyte-derived macrophages [61] and expresses high levels of MHC-I and MHC-II. As expected [60], THP-1 cells infected with the HIV-1 construct expressing the NL4-3 nef allele showed strongly enhanced levels of Ii surface expression (Fig. 4C). The SIVsmm Nefs varied substantially in their ability to up-modulate Ii. Those from M949 (L3) and G932 (L4) up-regulated Ii cell surface expression about 4-fold, whereas the M919 (L1) and FTq (L5) nef alleles caused less than 2-fold effects (Fig. 4D). Notably, the HIV-1 NL4-3 Nef was about 2-fold more effective than all SIV Nefs in up-modulating Ii. Taken together, these data demonstrate that the ability of Nef to modulate various human receptors involved in TCR signalling and MHC antigen presentation is conserved between the different lineages of SIVsmm. Our results also strongly suggest that the SIVmac239 Nef became more effective in some of these functions during its adaptation to rhesus macaques.SIVsmm Nefs suppress T cell activationWe next examined the effect of the various SIVsmm nef alleles on the responsiveness of virally infected T cells to activation. It has been previously shown that Nefs that down-modulate TCR-CD3 to suppress the responsiveness of infected T cells to stimulation, whereas those that do not perform this function have little inhibitory effect or even render the cells hyper-responsive to stimulation [30,43,45,62,63]. In agreement with these previous results, the about 5-fold increase in the expression levels of the early T cell activation marker CD69 upon PHA stimulation was blocked in PBMC infected with the HIV-1 construct expressing the 239 wt Nef but not in those expressing the HIV-1 NL4-3 or NA7 Nef proteins (Fig. 5A, panels 2–4). Consistent with their lower activity in CD3 down-modulation, the SIVsmm Nefs suppressed the induction of CD69 expression less efficiently than the 239 wt Nef (Fig. 5B, left). Nonetheless, they interfered with early T cell activation substantially more severely than those of HIV-1. In comparison, the SIVsmm Nefs had only weak inhibitory effects on the induction of CD25 at 2 days post-stimulation, whereas PBMC expressing the 239 wt Nef showed markedly (about 2.5-fold) reduced surface levels of this late T cell activation marker (Fig. 5B, right).Figure 5Modulation of T activation by SIVsmm nef alleles. (A) PBMCs were transduced with replication-competent VSV G pseudotyped HIV-1 particles expressing either GFP alone (panel 1) or together with the HIV-1 NL4-3 and NA7 (panels 2 and 3), 239 wt (panel 4) or SIVsmm nef alleles (panels 5 to 12) and stained for CD69 and CD25 expression. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments. (B) CD69 and CD25 expression levels on PBMCs infected with HIV-1 constructs coexpressing eGFP and the indicated nef alleles are shown relative to those measured on T cells transduced with the nef defective control virus (100%). Values give averages ± SD derived from three independent experiments. The asterisks denote a statistical significance (P < 0.05) between HIV-1 and SIV Nef activity.Activation of the nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) plays a key role in T cell activation and regulates the transcription of many cellular genes, including that encoding for IL-2. It has been established that primate lentiviral Nef proteins differ fundamentally in their effect on the induction of NFAT [30,45]. To assess the effect of nef alleles from different lineages of SlVsmm on NFAT activation in virally infected cells, we transduced Jurkat T cells stably transfected with the luciferase reporter gene under the control of an NFAT-dependent promoter [45], with the proviral HIV-1 eGFP/Nef constructs and examined their responsiveness to activation. T cells infected with nef defective HIV-1 construct showed about 5-fold enhanced levels of NFAT activity upon PHA stimulation compared to mock infected cells (Fig. 6). As expected from previous studies [30,45], this increase was further enhanced by expression of the HIV-1 NL4-3 and NA7 Nefs but entirely blocked by the 239 wt Nef. Despite their reduced potency in CD3 and CD28 down-modulation, all SIVsmm Nefs suppressed the induction of NFAT-dependent luciferase activity almost as efficiently as the 239 wt Nef (Fig. 6). Compared to T cells infected with viral constructs containing HIV-1 nef alleles they expressed about 5- to 10-fold lower levels of NFAT-dependent luciferase activity. Thus, nef alleles from all five lineages of SIVsmm suppress the responsiveness of infected T cells to stimulation, albeit with lower potency than that of SIVmac239.Figure 6SIVsmm nef alleles inhibit NFAT induction. Analysis of Jurkat cells stably transfected with an NFAT-dependent reporter gene following transduction with the indicated HIV-1 Nef/eGFP constructs and subsequent stimulation with PHA. Levels of NFAT-dependent luciferase reporter activity are the average (± SD) of triple infections. The asterisks denote a statistical significance (P < 0.01) between HIV-1 and SIV Nef activity. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments.SIVsmm Nefs enhance viral infectivity and replicationThe proviral HIV-1 IRES/eGFP constructs are replication-competent and hence allow to measure the ability of Nef to promote viral infectivity and replication. To assess the ability of the SIVsmm Nefs to enhance virion infectivity we infected P4-CCR5 [64], TZM-bl [65,66] and CEMx174 5.25 M7 (CEMx-M7) indicator cells with virus stocks containing 1 ng of p24 antigen derived from 293T cells transiently transfected with the different proviral constructs. We found that the control NL4-3 and 239 wt Nef proteins enhanced virion infectivity 4.0- and 5.6-fold, respectively, in P4-CCR5 cells (Fig. 7A) but had little if any enhancing effects in TZM-bl and CEM-M7 cells (Fig. 7B and data not shown). All eight SIVsmm nef alleles analyzed also enhanced viral infectivity in P4-CCR5 cells (Fig. 7A). However, although they showed similar potency in down-modulating CD3, CD4, CD28 and MHC-I (Fig. 3) and in suppressing T cell activation (Figs. 5 and 6) they varied substantially in their ability to promote virion infectivity (Fig. 7). The L1 and L2 M919, M923, M926 and M946 Nefs were more effective than the NL4-3 and 239 wt Nefs and increased virus infection between 10.0- and 17.4-fold (Fig. 7A). In comparison, the L4 G932 Nef was poorly active in enhancing virion infectivity (2.4-fold enhancement) and the remaining L3 and L5 Nefs showed an intermediate phenotype. Next, we investigated whether the eight SIVsmm bulk nef alleles promote viral spread in human PBMC cultures. We found that all SIVsmm Nefs enhanced viral replication with 239wt-like efficiency (Fig. 8A). In contrast to their differential effects on virion infectivity in P4-CCR5 cells, the eight SIVsmm nef alleles did not differ significantly in their ability to promote viral spread in human PBMC (Fig. 8B). This is consistent with previous results showing that the efficiency of HIV-1 replication does not correlate with the ability of Nef to enhance the infectivity of progeny virions [67,68]. Thus, nef alleles from all five lineages of SIVsmm are capable to promote viral spread and infectivity in human cells without adaptive changes.Figure 7SIVsmm nef alleles enhance viral infectivity. Infectivity of HIV-1 NL4-3 variants containing the indicated nef alleles. (A) P4-CCR5 or (B) TZM-bl reporter cells were infected with HIV-1 NL4-3 IRES-eGFP constructs containing the indicated HIV and SIVsmm nef genes or a disrupted nef allele. Infections were performed in triplicate with two different virus stocks containing 1 ng p24 antigen. RLU/s, relative light units per second. All nef alleles (except G932) significantly (P < 0.05) enhanced virion infectivity in P4-CCR5 but not in CEM-M7 cells.Figure 8Enhancement of viral replication by SIVsmm nef alleles. (A) Replication kinetics of recombinant NL4-3 variants containing the indicated nef alleles in PBMCs are shown. Infections were performed using virus stocks containing 1 ng p24 antigen. The numbers of virally infected GFP+ cells was measured by flow cytometric analysis. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments (B) Cumulative numbers of HIV-1-infected GFP+ cells detected in PBMC cultures at days 3, 5 and 7 post-infection. Shown are averages ± SD derived from three independent infections. All nef alleles significantly (P < 0.05) enhanced the number of HIV-1-infected cells compared to the nef-defective control virus.Subgroup-specific analysis of previously investigated SIVsmm NefsThe data described above show that Nefs from different lineages of SIVsmm are basically capable to modulate various receptors and to enhance viral infectivity and replication in human-derived cells. As a first step to elucidate whether different lineages of SIVsmm show quantitative differences in Nef function, we re-analyzed data derived from the functional analysis of 22 nef alleles from 14 naturally infected SMs with low (<500/μl) and eight animals with high (>500/μ1) CD4+ T cell counts [42]. This study showed that inefficient down-modulation of CD3 and MHC-I by Nef is associated with low CD4+ T cell counts in this natural simian host of SIV but did not assess whether these SIVsmm Nefs show lineage-specific differences in Nef function. Phylogenetic analyses showed that two of the 22 nef sequences clustered with the L5 FTq sequence and four with the L3 M951 and M949 sequences (Fig. 1). These L3 and L5 nef sequences formed two distinct clusters. In comparison, the remaining 16 SIVsmm nef sequences were more closely related to those derived from the more common SIVsmm L1 and L2 strains (Fig. 1). These nef sequences showed a high degree of genetic diversity and L2 nef alleles fell within the L1 cluster. Therefore, we grouped them together and refer to them herein after as L1/2 Nefs. Examination of the functional data showed that, on average, L1/2, L3 and L5 SIVsmm Nefs showed similar activities in down-modulating CD4 and CD3 (Fig. 9A, B). All 22 SIVsmm nef alleles had only weak effects on CD28, although those derived from L3 were usually a little more active than others (Fig. 9C). These lineages of SIVsmm did also not show a significant differences in Nef-mediated modulation of MHC-I (Fig. 9D). In agreement with the results shown in Fig. 8, L1/2 nef alleles were, on average, more potent in enhancing virion infectivity than L3 Nefs (Fig. 9E). As reported previously [42], Nef alleles from a single SIVsmm-infected SM with very low numbers of CD4+ T cells rendered T cells hyper-responsive to activation, similarly to those of HIV-1 (Fig. 9F). The remaining SIVsmm Nefs all suppressed NFAT induction and did not show significant lineage-specific differences in this activity (Fig. 9F). Altogether, these results demonstrate that SIVsmm nef alleles from SMs with different numbers of CD4+ helper T cells show substantially functional differences but these are strain rather than lineage dependent.Figure 9SIVsmm nef alleles derived from SMs with high or low CD4+ T cell counts do not show significant lineage-specific differences in Nef function. (A-D) Modulation of cellular receptors by primary nef alleles derived from different lineages of SIVsmm. Each symbol represents n-fold down-modulation of the indicated receptor molecule by one of the 22 NL4-3 recombinants expressing primary bulk SIVsmm nef alleles analyzed. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments. L1 and L2 nef alleles were combined since they did not form two distinct clusters (Fig. 1). (E) Enhancement of virion infectivity by SIVsmm nef alleles. P4-CCR5 indicator cells were infected with HIV-1 NL4-3 IRES-eGFP constructs containing the indicated SIVsmm nef genes or a defective nef allele. Infections were performed in triplicate with two different virus stocks containing 1 ng p24 antigen. Each symbol represents the average value of the 6 measurements compared to the infectivity of the virus expressing the SIVmac239 Nef (100%). (F) Levels of NFAT-dependent luciferase reporter activity in Jurkat T cell cultures infected with HIV-1 variants expressing nef alleles from SIVsmm-infected SMs compared to the nef defective control. The luciferase reporter activities represent the average (± SD) of triple infections. Similar results were obtained in two independent experiments. For clarity animal FYb was excluded from the analysis in the right panel.DiscussionIn the present study, we show that nef alleles from different lineages of SIVsmm modulate the surface expression of human CD4, CD3, CD28, MHC-I and Ii molecules, suppress T cell activation and enhance viral spread and infectivity. This result is in agreement with our previous findings showing that SIVsmm and SIVcpz nef alleles [43,69] but also those derived from SIVs that have not been found in humans [30] do not require adaptive changes to be functionally active in human cells. We did not find any significant lineage-specific differences in SIVsmm Nef function. Thus, although a larger number of nef alleles from all clades of SIVsmm must be analyzed to definitely exclude this possibility, our results suggest that lineage-specific differences in SIVsmm Nef function do not play a major role in the virological and immunological features of natural SIVsmm infection in SMs. In comparison, strain-dependent differences in Nefs ability to facilitate viral immune evasion and to promote viral spread may significantly affect the fitness and pathogenicity of SIVsmm in its natural SM, human and experimental macaque hosts.One remarkable observation was that SIVsmm nef alleles were generally less potent in down-modulating various human receptors and in suppressing T cell activation than that of SIVmac239. This difference was not due to the fact that the bulk nef preparations contained a high frequency of inactivating point mutations, since all 24 individual proviral constructs encoded intact nef open reading frames and because the activity of the individual nef alleles recapitulated that of the bulks. Altogether, SIVsmm nef alleles from about 40 different SMs and belonging to five different lineages have been functionally analyzed to date [42,43]. The fact that SIVsmm Nefs are generally less active in modulating CD3, CD28 and CXCR4 than that of SIVmac239 suggests that the latter evolved to become more active in suppressing the migration and activation of infected T cells during its adaptation to rhesus macaques. At first view this may seem counterintuitive since SIVmac239 infection of rhesus macaques is associated with high levels of chronic T cell activation and rapid loss of CD4+ T cell loss and progression to simian AIDS [35]. It is conceivable, however, that for effective viral persistence in their respective hosts, HIV and SIV must balance the activation of virally infected T cells to levels that are high enough to ensure efficient proviral transcription but also so low that they do not cause apoptosis before the viral replication cycle is completed. The necessity to carefully adjust the responsiveness of virally infected T cells to activation to achieve this balance most likely explains why primary SIVsmm Nefs show only moderate activity in functions affecting the interaction and stimulation of T cells by APCs. The experimental macaque host reacts with much higher levels of immune activation and T cell activation to SIV infection than the natural SM host [70]. It is thus plausible that SIVsmm/SIVmac may have evolved not only to persist efficiently at high levels but also to become more active in suppressing T cell activation in macaques to compensate for the aggravated immune response in this new host.One limitation of the present study is that the data on SIVsmm Nef function were derived using an HIV-1-based proviral construct in human derived cells. We have previously shown, however, that HIV-1, SIVmac and SIVagm derived proviral constructs expressing various HIV and SIV nef alleles exhibited the same phenotype in human and SM PBMC [30]. Thus, the effect of Nef on receptor modulation and T cell activation is independent of the proviral context and conserved in target cells from divergent primate species. Moreover, one goal of the present study was to assess whether lineage-dependent differences in Nef function in human cells may have affected the fitness and hence the subsequent spread of SIVsmm/HIV-2 in the new human host. Lack of Nef function could potentially play a relevant role because Nef is required for effective viral persistence [32-35] and the efficiency of sexual viral transmission correlates with the viral load. Our finding that nef alleles from all five lineages of SIVsmm analyzed modulated various human receptors, suppressed T cell activation and promoted viral infectivity in human-derived cells suggests that this was most likely not the case. However, larger numbers of nef alleles from the different lineages of SIVsmm need to functionally to exclude the possibility that some (perhaps subtle) functional differences do exist. For example, L1 and L2 nef alleles usually enhanced virion infectivity more efficiently than those derived from L3. Whether or not it is just coincidence that SIVsmm L1 and L2 are more widespread and associated with higher viral loads compared to L3 in the animal cohorts housed at the YNPRC and TNPRC [21] remains to be determined. Previous results in the SIVmac/macaque model suggest that Nef-mediated enhancement of virion infectivity contributes to efficient viral replication in vivo [58,70], although the fact that the nef alleles used in these studies also differed in other functional aspects precludes definitive conclusions.Another issue that warrants further study is the previous finding that 3 out of 4 SMs infected with L5 SIVsmm strains showed a significant loss of CD4+ T cells, whereas this only observed in about 10–15% of animals infected with SIVsmm lineages 1, 2 and 3 [21,22]. Since inefficient Nef-mediated downmodulation of CD3 and MHC-I correlates with numbers of CD4+ T cells in natural SIVsmm infection [42] it was tempting to speculate that L5 Nefs may be poorly active in these functions. In the present study we did not observe a particularly low activity of L5 Nef in modulating CD3 or MHC-I. However, only three L5 nef alleles were available for functional analyses. Furthermore, the FTq nef that has not been analyzed in the previous study [42] was derived from the only SIVsmm L5 infected SM with normal CD4+ T cell counts (~850/μl) and no plasma sample was available from the animals with the lowest number of CD4+ T cells. Finally, the comparison of the functional activity of the remaining two L5 Nefs with those derived from other lineages shown in Fig. 9 is not suitable to address the question because SIVsmm L1, L2 and L3 infected SMs with low CD4+ T cell counts are strongly over-represented in this set of nef alleles [42]. The fact, that these previously examined nef alleles were derived from SMs selected based on their different CD4+ T cell counts may also explain why they are functionally more divergent than the newly analyzed nef alleles.The fact that primary nef alleles from all lineages of SIVsmm analyzed are functional in human-derived cells suggests that Nef facilitated HIV-2 to maintain high viral loads and spread in the new human host without requiring adaptive changes. In contrast to natural SIVsmm infection, HIV-2 is associated with AIDS in a significant number of infected individuals, although it causes lower levels of immune activation and is substantially less pathogenic than HIV-1 [71,72]. Furthermore, in strict contrast to natural SIV infections, non-progressing HIV-2 infections are typically associated with low viral loads [73,74] and hence most likely also with ineffective virus transmission. In fact, HIV-2 has spread substantially less efficiently in the human population than HIV-1 and recent findings suggest that the HIV-2 epidemic is now declining [75]. Currently, too little information is available to assess how SIVsmm/HIV-2 Nef function evolved in the new human host. Preliminary data suggest, however, that the prevalence of defective nef genes may be higher in HIV-2 than in SIVsmm and HIV-1 infections [42,43,76]. Furthermore, HIV-2 Nefs are usually less active in enhancing viral replication in vitro than both HIV-1 and SIVsmm Nefs [43] and HIV-2 isolates show lower replicative fitness compared to HIV-1 isolates in infected PBMC cultures [77]. To obtain further insights into the evolution of SIVsmm/HIV-2 Nef function after zoonotic transmission and its role in HIV-2 replication and pathogenesis it will be interesting to perform a systematic and comprehensive analysis of primary HIV-2 nef alleles from infected individual who are clinically well characterized. Taken together, our current knowledge shows that SIV and HIV nef alleles are usually functionally active in cells of a new host species, such as humans or macaques. However, the fine-tuning of Nef function to allow effective viral replication and spread without causing harm to the infected host is obviously difficult to achieve.ConclusionOur analysis of nef alleles from different clades of SIVsmm shows that they are all capable to modulate the surface expression of various receptors and to enhance viral infectivity and replication in human derived cells. These results suggest that lack of these Nef functions was not the reason why only two of eight zoonotic transmission of SIVsmm from SMs to humans resulted in significant spread in the human population. Our finding that primary SIVsmm Nefs are generally only moderately active in functions that affect the migration of T cells and their responsiveness to stimulation most likely reflects the necessity for SIVsmm to curb T cell activation to levels that warrant effective viral replication without damaging the host immune system. Together with the results of previous studies [30,42,43,46,69], the present data show that SIV nef alleles from African non-human primate species are usually functional in human or macaque derived cells. Obviously, however, the fine-tuning of various Nef (and possibly other) functions to establish an elaborative well-balanced virus-host relationship similarly to that found in some natural SIV infections is also dependent on various host factors and seems difficult to achieve. Further studies with well characterized molecular SIVclones differing in the repertoire (e.g. the presence of vpr, vpx, vpu and nef gene) or function of their accessory genes in adapted and non-adapted monkey hosts are needed to achieve a better understanding of these complex virus-host interactions.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsConceived and designed the experiments: GS BHH CA FK. Performed the experiments: JS HL MS. Analyzed the data: JS HL CA FK. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: GS BHH CA FK. Wrote the paper: FK.


Title: Cell-to-Cell Transmission of HIV-1 and HIV-2 from Infected Macrophages and Dendritic Cells to CD4+ T Lymphocytes

1. IntroductionThe human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is the causative agent of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The syndrome was first recognized in 1981 and has since become one of the world’s major public health problems, particularly in developing countries.HIV infects cells of the immune system, specifically CD4+ T lymphocytes, monocytes/macrophages, and dendritic cells. HIV transmission to a new host occurs through intact mucous membranes, eczematous or damaged skin or mucosa, and parenteral inoculation. The establishment of chronic infection requires that the transmitted virus productively infect its target cells: CD4+ T lymphocytes [1,2], monocytes [3], and dendritic cells [4,5,6].During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelial cell lining of the mucosa to gain access to the subepithelial layer. During this process, the virus interacts with cells present in the mucosa, such as the dendritic cells (including Langerhans cells) and macrophages.Infection of CD4+ T lymphocytes (TCD4+) is a critical step in HIV transmission and appears to occur via a two-step mechanism [7]. The first is by trans-infection from dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages (Mø). These cells, after being challenged with transmitted viral particles, could take up the incoming virus into non-degradative cytoplasmic compartments and transport it to regional lymph nodes, where it can be transferred to CD4+ T lymphocytes. The interaction of HIV with DCs is complex and multifaceted and strongly depends on the maturation state of the DC [8]. However, several reports have indicated that HIV binding to DCs appears to be mediated by the interaction of the viral envelope glycoprotein (gp120) with C-type lectin receptors, such as DC-specific ICAM3-grabbing non-integrin—DC-SIGN, Langerin, DC immunoreceptor—DCIR, and syndecan-3 [9,10,11,12]. The second mechanism is called cis-infection, which involves productive infection of DCs and Mø with de novo production of viral particles that infect surrounding CD4+ T lymphocytes. In this case, HIV infects target cells through the interaction between gp120 and the specific receptors present on the cell membrane: CD4 and a chemokine receptor such as CCR5, CXCR4, and CCR8, among others [13,14,15,16].In both cis- and trans-infection, HIV particles are transferred from donor cells (DCs or Mø) to receptor cells (CD4+ T lymphocytes) by a cell-to-cell synapse-induced mechanism [17,18,19]. This mechanism mimics that observed during the immunological antigen presentation process, where CD4+ T lymphocytes must interact with antigen-presenting cells (APC) such as DCs and Mø. During this process, the coordinated recruitment of adhesion molecules and HIV receptors, together with the polarization of viral assembly and budding, enables an efficient strategy exploited by HIV and other enveloped viruses for intercellular transfer [20,21].After these initial steps, HIV can be detected in regional lymphoid tissue one to two days after infection [22] and in regional lymph nodes within 5–6 days. By 10–14 days post-infection, HIV has disseminated and can be detected in various body compartments, including peripheral blood, lymphoid tissues, the genital tract, and the central nervous system [23]. In these compartments, HIV either establishes a productive infection with the production of new virions or establishes a lifelong cellular reservoir as a result of its ability to integrate proviral DNA into the host cell chromosome. In these cell populations, the HIV genome is maintained in a latent state (i.e., without the production of viral particles) that is neither detected by the host immune response nor affected by antiretroviral drugs, thus contributing to long-lasting infection and the failure of curative therapy of HIV infection.Although CD4+ T lymphocytes are the primary targets of HIV infection and the most extensively studied latent reservoir [24,25], other cells, such as monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and microglial cells can also maintain HIV in a latent state [26,27]. By definition, once infected, these cells harbor an integrated, fully competent provirus that could be transcribed once the cell is activated with the production of new virions [28]. All mechanisms of HIV transmission and spread are determined by viral phenotype, such as the ability to use the CCR5 chemokine receptor together with CD4 to enter cells (R5 strains), a higher Env protein content/virion, improved dendritic cell interaction, and resistance to interferon [29,30,31].Here, we analyzed the efficiency with which HIV-1 and HIV-2 primary isolates are able to interact with Mø, DCs, and CD4+ T lymphocytes in either cis- or trans-infection. Our results show that infected Mø and DCs spread the virus to TCD4+ via cell-free viral particles in addition to other alternative pathways. We demonstrate that the production of infectious viral particles is induced by the co-culture of different cell populations, indicating that the contribution of cell signaling driven by cell-to-cell contact is a trigger for viral replication. These results may help to further elucidate the cell-to-cell spread of HIV and its importance in HIV pathogenesis. Ultimately, this knowledge is critical for new therapeutic and vaccine approaches.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cells Isolation and CulturePeripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were obtained from a mixture of 3 buffy coats of healthy donors provided by the National Blood and Transplantation Institute (Instituto Português do Sangue e da Transplantação, Lisbon, Portugal). Briefly, PBMCs were first isolated by density gradient centrifugation using Ficoll–Paque Plus (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA). The PBMC fraction was incubated with anti-CD14 magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotech), and the CD14+ monocytes were isolated using magnetic-activated cell separation (MACS) columns. Monocyte differentiation to Mø was induced by allowing them to adhere to 24-well plates at 3 × 105 cells per well, for 2 h at 37 °C, 5% CO2, in an RPMI-1640 medium, GlutaMAX supplement, HEPES (Gibco, Billings, MT, USA). Following adherence, the medium was supplemented to achieve a final concentration of 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone, GE Healthcare), 1 mM of sodium pyruvate (Hyclone, GE Healthcare), 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol (Gibco), and 20 ng/mL of the recombinant human M-CSF (BioLegend). The cell culture medium was renewed every three to four days until day seven of differentiation.To obtain immature monocyte-derived DC (imDCs), monocytes were cultured in 24-well plates at 4 × 105 cells per well in an RPMI-1640 medium, GlutaMAX supplement, HEPES (Gibco) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Hyclone, GE Healthcare), 1 mM of sodium pyruvate (Hyclone, GE Healthcare), 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol (Gibco), 10 ng/mL of recombinant human GM-CSF (BioLegend) and 20 ng/mL of IL-4. The maturation of imDCs was induced by culturing them with the described cytokines supplemented with interferon-gamma (IFN-γ).Autologous CD4+ T lymphocytes were obtained from healthy donors according to the isolation protocol described above. Negative selection of the CD4+ T lymphocytes was performed using CD4+ T Cell isolation kit II (Miltenyi Biotech, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). Isolated lymphocytes were stimulated with 3 µg/mL of PHA-L for three days and further cultured in a 75 cm2 flask at 2 × 106 cells per mL in an RPMI-1640 medium (Hyclone, GE Healthcare) supplemented with 15% (v/v) FBS (Hyclone, GE Healthcare), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), 50 µg/mL gentamicin, 2.5 µg/mL amphotericin B, and 20 UI/mL of human recombinant interleukin-2 (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA).2.2. HIV IsolatesAll primary HIV-1 and HIV-2 were isolated by coculturing PBMCs obtained from infected patients with PBMCs from uninfected individuals as described [14]. After isolation, viral stocks were established from low-passaged supernatants of infected PBMC and stored at −80 °C until further use.Viral replication was assessed by reverse transcriptase activity in culture supernatants by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (Lenti-RT kit, Caviditech, Uppsala, Sweden). The 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) of the viruses was determined in a one-round viral infectivity assay using a luciferase reporter gene assay in TZM-bl cells and calculated using the statistical method of Reed and Muench [32].Strains were selected from the viral library of the Host–Pathogen Interaction Unit (HPIU) of iMed.ULisboa, [14], according to the following criteria: (i) co-receptor usage profile (CCR5 vs. CXCR4), and (ii) clinical stage of infection (symptomatic vs. asymptomatic). 2.3. Cis-Infection of CD4+ T Lymphocytes, Mø, and DCsCD4+ T-lymphocytes, Mø, imDCs, and mDCs were infected with 1000 TCID50/mL of different HIV-1 and HIV-2 primary isolates or left uninfected as controls. In cis-infection, viruses were added and incubated for 3 h in the presence of 3 µg/mL of polybrene (Sigma–Aldrich, MO, USA). Cells were then washed with PBS to remove unadsorbed virus particles and cultured in an appropriate medium (500 μL/well). Culture supernatants were collected at time 0 (immediately after inoculum removal and cell washing), day 3, 6, 9, and 12, and quantified by RT concentration until day 12 post-infection [14].2.4. HIV-1 and HIV-2 LTR Genomic Region AmplificationTo detect HIV proviral DNA integration, DNA was extracted from exposed cells at day 12 post-infection and used in a nested PCR protocol targeting the viral LTR. The first round of PCR amplification was performed using an Alu-specific sense primer in combination with a gag antisense (HIV-1 or HIV-2) specific primer. The PCR products were subjected to a second PCR assay targeting the R/U5 region of the LTR (HIV-1 or HIV-2). As a negative control, we used chromosomal DNA extracted from uninfected cells. The nucleotide sequences and target sequence of each primer are shown in Table 1 and Table 2.2.5. Trans-Infection of CD4+ T Lymphocytes by HIV-Infected Mø and DCsPeripheral blood mononuclear cells were obtained from healthy donors as described [14]. Mø, imDCs, mDCs, and TCD4+ were obtained as described above.Mø, imDCs, and mDCs were infected with different primary HIV isolates for 60 min at 37 °C or left uninfected as controls. The cells were then washed with PBS to remove unadsorbed viral particles and co-cultured with autologous activated TCD4+ at donor:target cell ratios of 1:1 and 1:4. Since Mø, imDCs, and mDCs are cultured adherent to plastic in contrast to TCD4+, we were able to separate the donor from the target cells 15 h after infection, leaving only the target cells (non-adherent) in culture. As a control, HIV-infected DCs or Mø were co-cultured with TCD4+ separated by a transwell (Transwell with 0.4 µm pore polyester membrane cell culture inserts, Corning) to prevent cell–cell contact.The efficiency with which HIV was transferred from exposed donor cells to target cells was assessed by analyzing the production of new progeny virions by target cells (TCD4+) by measuring the RT concentration. In parallel, we also analyzed the efficiency of cis-infection of Mø imDCs, and mDCs by measuring the RT concentration in culture supernatants.2.6. Statistical AnalysisEach experiment was performed in triplicate and independently repeated three times. The statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software version 29.0.0.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The univariate analysis was tested using χ2 and 2-tailed Fisher’s exact test in case of a small sample size. Statistical significance was assumed when p < 0.05.3. Results3.1. CD4 + T Lymphocytes, Macrophages, Immature, and Mature DC Cis-Infection by HIVFirst, we selected a set of 14 primary isolates from the viral library of HPIU of the iMed.Ulisboa [14] (Table 3 and Table 4), of which seven were HIV-1 strains, and seven were HIV-2 strains. The selection of these primary isolates was based on the following criteria: (i) they were obtained from individuals at different stages of infection; (ii) with different co-receptor usage profiles; and (iii) with minimal in vitro passages to avoid the selection of HIV variants due to culture conditions.We then analyzed the efficiency of cis-infection of TCD4+, Mø, and DCs by HIV-1 and HIV-2 primary isolates. We expected to observe different capacities to infect Mø and DCs among different isolates and aimed to correlate these with viral biotypes and patient clinical and immunological data.As shown in Figure 1, Mø infection by HIV-2 isolates revealed that four isolates (UCFL2072, UCFL2073, ALI, and UCFL2074) were able to perform productive infection (assessed by RT concentration in culture supernatants), while the other three (UCFL2017, UCFL2032, and UCFL2037) did not show quantifiable productive infection during the 12 days of infection. Regarding HIV-2 infection of imDCs and mDCs, only two isolates showed de novo virus production: UCFL2073 and ALI.For HIV-1, all isolates except UCFL1029 were able to productively infect TCD4+, while in Mø, only one isolate, UCFL1032, showed productive infection on days 6 and 9 of infection (Figure 2).In imDCs infected with HIV-1, viral production was detected for isolate UCFL1032 at days 9 and 12. Regarding isolates UCFL1014 and UCFL1028, despite the concentration of RT being below 10 pg/mL, we found the results interesting because we observed an increase of 2 to 5-fold between days 6 and 12, which leads us to believe that imDC is probably susceptible to infection by these strains. This is reinforced by the fact that, for these two isolates, the RT concentrations were generally low in all cell populations compared to the other isolates. In contrast, in mDCs, no isolates revealed increased levels of RT concentration.Statistical analysis of the data obtained from triplicates of three independent experiments is summarized in Table 5 and indicates that differential usage of CCR5, CXCR4, or CCR8 by HIV-1 and HIV-2 is not correlated (data not shown but always p > 0.05) with productive infection of Mø, imDCs, mDCs, and TCD4+. p-values ranged from 0.062 to 1.311.3.2. HIV-1 and HIV-2 Integration into Host Cell DNAIn the group of HIV isolates where no productive infection was detected, we further analyzed whether the virus was able to enter the cell, reverse transcribe its genome, and integrate the proviral DNA into the host cell chromosomes. To do this, we performed a nested PCR targeting the cell genome (Alu regions) and the LTR of the integrated provirus (Figure 3). The results of this assay, summarized in Table 6 and Table 7, show that all HIV-1 and HIV-2 isolates are positive for PCR amplification, except for imDC and mDC exposed to HIV-2UCFL2037. Overall, the results indicate that the vast majority of viruses were able to enter, reverse transcribe, and integrate their genome into host cell DNA. The absence of de novo viral production, as indicated by the absence of viral-associated RT in the culture supernatants, suggests that in these cases, the block in the replicative cycle occurred after integration and is not related to the use of different co-receptors (a situation that could ultimately hinder viral entry).3.3. Trans-Infection of CD4+ T Lymphocytes by HIV-Infected Mø and DCsThe analysis of the results obtained in cis infection assay demonstrates that HIV-2 isolates were a more heterogeneous group, with different characteristics regarding their ability to infect Mø, imDCs, and mDCs. This observation, combined with the high incidence of HIV-2 infection in Europe and a small number of studies compared to HIV-1 infection, led us to select four primary HIV-2 isolates to evaluate the efficiency of transmission from Mø, imDCs, and mDCs to CD4+ T lymphocytes, using the HIV-1Ba-L strain (UCFL1034) as a control. Based on this rationale, we included two isolates that showed productive infection in Mø, imDCs, and mDCs (ALI and UCFL2073) and two others (UCFL2017 and UCFL2032) that, although they did not show quantifiable productive infection, were able to enter, reverse transcribe, and integrate the proviral DNA (Table 8).Regarding the efficiency of HIV-2 spread from infected Mø and DCs to autologous CD4+ T lymphocytes by trans-infection (assessed by productive infection of the latter), we observed that when Mø were used as donor cells, two viral isolates, UCFL2017 and UCFL2073, were transferred and productively infected CD4+ T lymphocytes. This was observed in three assay conditions: (i) cell–cell contact, allowing donor and target cells to be in co-culture throughout the experiment; (ii) donor and target cells separated by a transwell to prevent cell–cell contact; and (iii) donor and target cells separated 15 h after co-culture. The rationale for these three different culture conditions was to try to mimic some of the in vivo conditions under which donor/infected and target/uninfected cells might interact: no contact between cells, transient contact, or prolonged contact. Interestingly, the UCFL2017 isolate was unable to replicate in Mø, imDCs, and mDCs when these cells were directly exposed to the virus (cis-infection experiments). This, together with the results obtained in the donor–target cell co-culture experiments, suggests that viral transmission is not only dependent on exposure to infectious viral particles, as demonstrated in the condition where donor and target cells were separated by a transwell but are influenced by contact between target cells and infected donor cells (cell-to-cell transmission). The same set of results was observed for the control HIV-1 strain, UCFL1034.Remarkably, we were also able to detect the presence of RT for the viral isolate UCFL2032 when the donor and target cells were maintained in contact, although no viral replication was detected in cis-infection, suggesting a mechanism involving cell-to-cell interaction required for efficient viral transmission between these cells.For HIV-2ALI trans-infection of imDCs, viral production was detected under all conditions, as well as for HIV-1 UCFL1034. However, UCFL2073 replication occurred only when donor and target cells were in contact or separated by a transwell, suggesting that viral particle production is likely induced by the co-culture of donor and target cells. Similar to the results of Mø, UCFL2017 could be efficiently transferred to target cells both when donor and target cells were in contact and when they were separated 15 h after the beginning of coinfection.Finally, when trans-infections were performed using mDCs as donor cells, we verified that there was viral production in the three conditions for isolate UCFL2073; in contrast, for isolates UCFL2017 and UCFL2032, we detected the presence of RT when donor and target cells were in contact and when they were separated by a transwell. Since no viral production was observed during the cis-infection of mDCs with these strains, our results suggest that the production of infectious viral particles is induced by the co-culture of mDCs with CD4+ T lymphocytes. Only one HIV-2 isolates, ALI, and the HIV-1 control, UCFL1034, showed productive infection both in cell-to-cell contact and when the cells were separated 15 h after infection. The overall results of trans-infection of CD4+ T lymphocytes by Mø, imDCs, and mDCs infected with HIV-1 and HIV-2 isolates are summarized in Table 9. From these, we can see that in several cases, an increase in virus transmission was observed when we used a 1:4 ratio, especially when donor and target cells were separated by a transwell. However, this is not a clear and general pattern and appears to be a strain-specific effect.4. DiscussionMø and DCs, together with CD4+ T cells, are the major cell targets of HIV infection in vivo and clearly play important and well-established roles in multiple aspects of HIV pathogenesis. They act in vivo as vehicles for the spread of HIV, but they also act as cellular reservoirs for the virus, representing a major obstacle to viral eradication [33]. Therefore, studies of the interactions between HIV-infected Mø and DCs with CD4+ T lymphocytes are important to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the interactions leading to viral infection of these cells. The use of clinically relevant HIV-1 and HIV-2 isolates is essential for such studies. In the experiments included in this report, we used viral isolates that were minimally passaged in PBMCs to reduce the selection of mutants that are better adapted to in vitro conditions and potentially less able to replicate in vivo events. In this report, we used Mø, immature and mature DCs, and analyzed the efficiency of cis- and trans-infection by distinct HIV-1 and HIV-2 clinical isolates. We investigate the ability of these cells to be directly infected and/or to transfer infectious virions to T-CD4+ lymphocytes. The existence of an extensive viral library in our Research Unit allows us to use a number of viral isolates with unique characteristics in terms of viral biotypes [14]. Our results reinforce the notion that Mø and DC infection play a particularly important role in contributing to HIV spread to CD4+ T lymphocytes and also as persistently infected cellular reservoirs.The analysis of the efficiency of cis-infection of CD4+ T lymphocytes, Mø, and DCs by our panel of HIV-1 and HIV-2 primary isolates led us to conclude that the ability to productively infect Mø and DCs (i.e., to complete the viral replication cycle, allowing de novo production of viral particles) is independent of co-receptor usage (namely, CCR5, CXCR4, or CCR8). In general, the co-receptor usage profile of a given strain is used to define its cellular tropism [13]; for example, the ability to use the CCR5 co-receptor (R5 strains) is usually considered a prerequisite for Mø infection (M-tropic strains). Despite this association, several studies have shown that some R5 isolates are unable to infect Mø [34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41], and conversely, some CXCR4-using strains (X4) are M-tropic [15,39,42]. These observations led to a redefinition of the HIV tropism classification (reviewed in [43]). Infection of DCs can also occur independently of the HIV co-receptor usage profile [44,45,46]. In this study, we further show that productive viral infection of Mø and mature dendritic cells (mDCs) is more frequently observed in cells inoculated with HIV-2 isolates than with HIV-1. To reinforce this notion, none of the HIV-1 isolates were able to replicate in mDCs, and only one (out of a total of seven isolates tested) was replicated in Mø. Our group and others have shown that HIV-1 and HIV-2 infections have different characteristics. The lower virulence and transmissibility observed in vivo or the ability to infect a broader range of cells in vitro, dictated by entry pathways mediated by different cell receptors, are clear examples of the different interactions that HIV-1 and HIV-2 establish with target cells and the human host [14,47,48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57].Interestingly, despite the differences observed in productive infection, early events of the HIV replication cycle (i.e., adsorption, fusion, reverse transcription, and integration) occur even in those cases where de novo viral production was not detected (except for the UCFL1032 isolate). These data suggest that the abortive replication cycle is due to a blockage at some event after the integration of the provirus into the target cell genome. Alternatively, the lack of viral detection in supernatants of exposed cells may reflect a low-level viral replication in Mø and DCs. This lower viral replication is certainly strain-dependent and could be the result of the production of poorly infectious viral particles that accumulate in intracellular structures called virus-containing compartments (VCCs) [58,59,60]. Regarding HIV transfer from infected Mø and DCs to uninfected CD4+ T lymphocytes, our data show that virus spread is not only dependent on the exposure to cell-free virus produced by infected cells but is also influenced by the co-culture between target cells and infected donor cells. These culture conditions can induce the formation of a specialized structure, called the virological synapse, between the infected donor cell and the target cell [20]. The virological synapse facilitates the spread of HIV between cells allowing the virus to overcome some of the barriers present during cell-free viral infection [61,62]. For example, infection by cell-free viral particles is mechanistically more difficult because, during cis-infection, the virus must encounter a target cell by diffusion in the culture fluid phase. In fact, some technical improvements, such as spinoculation, were designed to increase the number of viral particles deposited on the target cell membrane, thereby facilitating viral adsorption to the CD4 receptor [63].In contrast, the cell-to-cell spread of HIV is much more efficient, either because donor/infected and receptor/susceptible cells are in close contact avoiding this long-distance diffusion; or because contact between donor and receptor cells allows HIV to overcome cell barriers, thus leading to an increased viral replication in the latter. The cell–cell contact during co-culture between Mø or DCs with CD4+ T-lymphocytes could favor the concentration of viral particles in a limited area of the donor cell membrane locally, increasing the multiplicity of infection [64]. In addition, the formation of the virological synapse not only concentrates virions in a restricted area of contact between the donor and target cell but also: (i) triggers the remodeling of filamentous actin, facilitating the entry of the cell-free virus into the target cell [17,65]; (ii) induces recruitment of HIV cell receptors to the cell–cell junction [66]; (iii) allows the virus to evade the negative effect of some antiviral cellular factors, such as tetherin and TRIM5α [64,67,68]; and (iv) cell signaling driven by cell–cell contact creates a more favorable cellular environment for HIV replication [69]. The cell-to-cell contact observed in co-culture between infected immature DCs and CD4+ T cells may even allow viral replication to occur in less susceptible cells, such as resting T-lymphocytes [70].In conclusion, our results show that (i) HIV-1 and HIV-2 have distinct abilities to infect Mø and DCs; (ii) the infection of these cells is independent of the co-receptor usage profile of the infecting virus; (iii) cell-to-cell contact facilitates HIV transfer from Mø or DCs to T-lymphocytes, regardless of viral phenotype; and (iv) in some cases, the cis-infection of Mø and DCs leads to an abortive replication cycle after proviral genome integration. This in vitro observation may provide a mechanism by which HIV establishes latently infected cells, which is particularly important for viral pathogenesis [71].


Title: Intra-Patient Evolution of HIV-2 Molecular Properties

1. IntroductionHuman immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and 2 (HIV-2) are both causative agents of AIDS, although the progression to AIDS is slower in HIV-2 compared with HIV-1 infection [1,2]. The rate of CD4+ T-cell decline and disease progression is also slower in HIV-2 compared with HIV-1 infection, accompanied by a lower level of immune activation and more preserved and polyfunctional CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell responses [2,3]. Viral DNA load [4] and the plasma viral RNA load at comparable CD4+ T-cell counts are significantly lower in HIV-2 compared with HIV-1 infections [5,6,7]. This suggests that HIV-2 has a lower replication rate [8,9] or is more susceptible to immune control [3].Both HIV-1 and HIV-2 diversity has been reported to increase over the course of infection [10,11,12], and the diversity rate to be positively correlated with the rates of CD4+ T-cell decline [11]. HIV-1 disease progression has also been shown to correlate with the evolution of coreceptor use and with glycosylation patterns, as well as the charge and length of Env regions [13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. Similar to HIV-1 infections, viruses with CXCR4 use have been isolated from HIV-2-infected individuals with low CD4+ T-cell counts or clinical symptoms of AIDS [20,21,22,23,24,25]. The V2 length and Env glycosylation density have been shown to increase during the asymptomatic phase of HIV-1 infection, likely as an attempt to escape the immune response [15,17,26,27,28]. Much less is known about the role of Env molecular properties in HIV-2 infection. However, since virus variants that have escaped neutralizing antibodies seem to be rare in HIV-2 infection [23,29,30], the evolution of Env may be less pronounced in HIV-2 compared with HIV-1 infection. Indeed, no clear trends for changes in potential N-linked glycosylation sites (PNGS) in Env over time have been reported for HIV-2 [11,23], but the V1–V2 regions have been suggested to be longer in patients with less advanced HIV-2 disease progression [23].In a previous study, we stratified 16 HIV-2 infected individuals as faster or slower progressors based on longitudinal CD4+ T-cell dynamics and investigated the relationship between HIV-2 evolutionary rate in env and disease progression [31]. Faster disease progression, as determined by the level of CD4%, was found to be associated with an almost twice as high evolutionary rate compared with slower disease progression. In the present study, we investigated the intra-patient evolution of molecular properties during the asymptomatic, treatment-naïve phase of HIV-2 infection, using the same set of longitudinally obtained Env sequences as described above. We also investigated the evolution of molecular properties in relation to disease progression using the previous definition of HIV-2 progressor groups [31].2. Materials and Methods2.1. Study PopulationThe dataset in this study has been described in detail elsewhere [31] and was obtained from a large cohort of police officers in Guinea-Bissau, West Africa (described in detail in Supplementary File S1 Material and methods, and [32,33]). The cohort was formed in 1990 and closed in 2011, but selected participants were asked to participate in a special sampling round, including a clinical examination and collection of a blood sample, in September 2013. A national antiretroviral therapy (ART) program was introduced to Guinea-Bissau in 2005, and the police cohort was included in early 2006. All participants had a clinical examination and the collection of a blood sample at each follow-up visit. Follow-up visits were scheduled every 12–18 months, but the actual average time between visits ranged between 15–32 months for the individuals included in this study (Table S1).In brief, 53 plasma samples from 16 longitudinally sampled HIV-2 infected individuals (two women and 14 men) were included and analyzed in this study. The inclusion criteria are presented in Supplementary File S1 Material and methods and Table S1. For the individuals included in this study, the median observation time from inclusion in the cohort until the last registered visit was 19.2 years (IQR: 15.0–20.8) and the median time from the first to the last amplified sample was 7.9 years (IQR: 5.2–14.0) [31]. The date of infection, defined as the midpoint between the last HIV-2 seronegative and the first seropositive sample, was known for seven individuals. The main objective of this study was to investigate the intra-patient evolution of HIV-2 during the asymptomatic, treatment-naïve phase of infection. However, seven samples from 5 individuals and 2 samples from 2 other individuals were collected after the individual had developed AIDS or initiated ART, respectively (Table 1). All AIDS cases were defined based on a CD4% < 14 or a CD4+ T-cell count < 200 cells/µL. No individual presented with clinical symptoms of AIDS.The 16 HIV-2 infected individuals were previously stratified as faster or slower progressors using three different parameters [31] based on longitudinal CD4+ T-cell dynamics. CD4%, rather than CD4+ T-cell counts, was used in these studies as it was previously found to be more suitable in resource-limited settings due to a lower variability and sensitivity to specimen handling, age of individual and time of sampling [34,35,36]. Stratifications were based on: the CD4% decline rate, CD4% level and a combined coefficient (Table 1, Supplementary File S1 Material and methods, and [31]). For each stratification, the mean of all HIV-2-infected individuals with two or more CD4% measurements in the cohort (n = 192) was determined, and faster and slower progression was determined based on a value above or below the mean [31]. The CD4% level and the combined coefficient stratifications resulted in identical groups (six slow progressors and 10 fast progressors, Table 1) but with different internal rankings. The CD4% decline rate stratification resulted in seven slow progressors and nine fast progressors. The median age at the first HIV-2 positive sample did not differ between groups (data not shown).2.2. Amplification and Sequence AnalysisDetails on amplification and sequence analysis are found in Supplementary File S1 Material and methods, and [31]. In brief, plasma viral RNA was extracted, amplified, cloned, sequenced and manually edited. The analyzed regions were chosen based on their previous inclusion in studies on molecular properties in HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection [15,17,23,28,37]. Diversity analyses require aligned sequences, and regions that were difficult to align were, therefore, codon-stripped. The resulting fragment was 774 nucleotides long and spanned the last 30 nucleotides in the 3′ end of the C1 region, the entire V1–C3 regions and the first 6 nucleotides in the 5′ end of the V4 region. By contrast, analyses of PNGS, charge and length variation were performed using the full length of the translated amino acid sequences. Sub-regions of env were defined as follows (positions relative to HIV-2 reference sequence BEN, GenBank accession number M30502): V1–V2 = pos. 7040–7318; C2 = pos. 7319–7615; V3 = pos. 7616–7717; C3 = pos. 7718–7891. Analyses of PNGS, charge and length were performed using an in-house Perl script with PNGS defined as in N-glycosite [38]. The net charge of sequences was determined based on each lysine and arginine contributing +1 and each aspartic acid and glutamic acid contributing −1. Coreceptor tropism was predicted using the four major determinants method of dual/CXCR4 coreceptor use (L18Z, V19K/R, V3 net charge >+6, insertions at position 24), described previously [39,40]. CXCR4 use was considered when at least one of the criteria was fulfilled. Coreceptor tropism was also predicted using Geno2Pheno[coreceptor-hiv2] [41] with a false positive rate of 10%.2.3. Phylogenetic AnalysisNucleotide sequences were aligned with reference sequences of the major HIV-2 groups (downloaded from the Los Alamos Sequence Database [42]) in MEGA5 [43] using the Clustal algorithm, and a maximum-likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree was reconstructed using Garli v2.0 [44] (using the inferred GTR+I+G substitution model). All sequences were of HIV-2 group A and displayed patient-specific clustering. The ML-based approximate likelihood ratio test (aLRT) Shimodaira-Hasegawa (SH)-like branch support was used to assess statistical support for internal branches, as implemented in PhyML 3.0 [45]. SH-values above 0.9 were considered statistically significant [46]. To investigate the temporal structure in HIV-2 evolution, ML phylogenetic trees were also reconstructed for each individual dataset separately and analyzed in Tempest (v 1.5.3, http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/pathogen, accessed on 22 June 2021 [47]) as described in [48].2.4. Diversity AnalysisThe diversity at each sample time-point was calculated by averaging the pairwise tree distance between all nucleotide sequences obtained from that time-point. We reconstructed 1000 bootstrap alignments and ML phylogenies in Garli v2.0 (GTR+I+G) [44], and the median diversity of the 1000 average pairwise diversity for each time-point was used in further analysis. Time points with less than three clones were excluded from the analysis (n = 2) since the uncertainty of diversity estimates is large on a small number of data points.2.5. Statistical AnalysisTo model the evolution of molecular properties (diversity, fragment length, fragment charge, and number of PNGS) over the course of infection and to test for differences between faster and slower progressors, we used linear mixed models. CD4% was used as a surrogate marker for disease progression because the time of infection could only be estimated for 7 of 12 patients. Each dependent variable (molecular property) was modeled as a function of CD4% as a continuous fixed effect and the progressor group (faster and slower progressors) as a categorical fixed effect. The interaction term between CD4% and the progressor group was included to allow for a different relationship between each dependent variable and CD4% in faster and slower progressors. Patient was included as a random effect, with both level (intercept) and effect of CD4% (slope) on the dependent variable allowed to vary between patients to model variance resulting from random differences in the evolution of molecular properties between virus population samples from different patients. If the model did not converge, a simpler random intercept model was used, excluding the patient random effect of CD4% (i.e., slope).To investigate if there was a difference in the evolution of a molecular property (the mean slope or change in property) with a change in CD4% between progressor groups, we tested for the interaction of main effects (progressor group × CD4%). The main effect of the progressor group, i.e., the difference in mean intercept, is not biologically relevant in itself as the intercept represents the mean value of the molecular property at a CD4% of zero. Instead, we used the model to estimate and test for differences in mean values of each property at CD4% values corresponding to the time of infection (35%) and at AIDS onset (14%). The CD4% at the time of infection was conservatively estimated as the lower bound of the 95% confidence interval for the first available CD4% measurement for all HIV-negative individuals in the cohort (mean: 38.2%; confidence interval: 35.0–41.4%; n: 360; measurements from both negative controls and individuals subsequently infected; age at inclusions did not differ between controls and individuals include in this study). In addition to the main effects, we also tested if there was a significant effect of CD4% within each progressor group by testing if the model slope differed from 0. Due to a lack of variation between samples and individuals, mixed model analyses were not performed for C2 length, V3 length, V3 PNGS and C3 length.We also modeled the evolution of the same molecular properties against the sampling date using mixed models. However, here we did not test for differences in the intercept or any other estimated means since the timing of sampling in relation to disease progression was not aligned between patients.The distribution of PNGS over the different HIV-2 Env sequence regions was compared using Friedman’s test, followed by the Bonferroni corrected Wilcoxon signed rank test for pairwise comparisons of regions.All statistical analyses were performed in IBM SPSS Statistics 21 (https://www.ibm.com/products/spss-statistics, accessed on 21 October 2021).3. Results3.1. Study Cohort and Stratification as Faster and Slower Disease ProgressorsIn this study, we included 409 HIV-2 V1–C3 Env sequences derived from 53 plasma samples of 16 longitudinally sampled HIV-2 infected individuals (two to five samples per individual), described in detail previously [31]. To study if the evolution of HIV-2 differed between disease progressor groups, individuals were stratified as faster or slower progressors according to the CD4% dynamics as previously described [31] (Table 1). Faster and slower progressors were defined based on three different stratifications; CD4% decline rate, CD4% level and a combined coefficient (Table 1, Supplementary File S1 Material and methods, and [31]). Previously, we found a strong association between the evolutionary rate and the CD4% level and the combined coefficient stratifications but not with the CD4% decline rate [31]. Therefore, we present the results for the CD4% level and the combined coefficient (which resulted in identical groups) in the main manuscript. Results for the CD4% decline rate stratification are presented in Supplementary File S1 Results.3.2. Phylogenetic Analyses and Genetic Diversity of the Env V1–C3 RegionsWe investigated the temporal structure and sample-specific clustering of HIV-2 nucleotide sequences. A temporal structure was identified in all 16 individuals. In seven individuals, sequences from different time points formed segregated clusters (Figure S1). By contrast, in the remaining nine individuals, sequences from two or more time points were inter-mixed and did not form segregated clusters.We found no difference in the rate of change in nucleotide sequence diversity with a change in CD4% between faster and slower progressors (p = 0.876, Table 2). Therefore, we simplified the model by assuming a common rate of change in both groups and excluded the interaction term. In the simplified model, we found no significant difference in the level of diversity between progressor groups (p = 0.822) and also no significant change in diversity with CD4% (p = 0.364).Next, we analyzed the relationship between nucleotide sequence diversity and time. Faster and slower progressors differed significantly in the rate of change in diversity with time (p = 0.009, Table 3, Figure S2). For faster progressors, diversity increased significantly (p = 0.003), while for slower progressors, there was no significant change in diversity with time (p = 0.439).3.3. Potential N-Linked Glycosylation Sites in the Env V1–C3 RegionsWe investigated the PNGS pattern, i.e., the number and positions of aligned PNGS in the analyzed HIV-2 Env amino acid sequences. The V1–C3 regions had a median of 18 PNGS (IQR: 17–19), which were concentrated to the V1–V2 and C2 regions compared to V3 and C3 (p = 1.55 × 10−9, Friedmans test; pairwise comparisons between regions are presented in Table S2). The median number of PNGS in the V1–V2 regions was seven (IQR: 6–8). Due to difficulties aligning the V1–V2 regions, the degree of conservation could not be reliably estimated. The C2 and V3 regions contained eight and one highly conserved PNGS, respectively (Table 1). The C3 region was the most variable region, both between and within individuals, with PNGS identified at 12 different sites, of which only one was conserved among sequences (Table 1). Although there were small variations in PNGS distribution within individuals, we did not, by visual inspection, observe any apparent patterns of evolution of PNGS distribution over time or with the development of AIDS or initiation of ART. Furthermore, faster and slower progressors could not be visually differentiated by the location of PNGS in the C2–C3 Env fragment.Faster and slower progressors differed significantly in the rate of change in PNGS with a change in CD4% in the complete V1–C3 region (p = 0.033, Table 2, Figure S3). For slower progressors, the number of PNGS decreased significantly (p = 0.007), while for faster progressors, there was no significant change with decreasing CD4% (p = 0.822). Analyzing the component sub-regions separately, we found a significant difference in the rate of change in PNGS with CD4% in V1–V2 (p = 0.026) but not in C2 (p = 0.978) or C3 (p = 0.976). The V3 region was not analyzed due to the limited number and variability of PNGS between samples (Table 1). Within V1–V2, the pattern of change was the same as for the complete V1–C3 region; that is, for slower progressors, the number of PNGS decreased significantly (p = 0.005), while for faster progressors, there was no significant change with decreasing CD4% (p = 0.822, Figure 1 and Figure S4). For the C2 and C3 regions, there was no significant change in the number of PNGS with decreasing CD4% (p = 0.997 and p = 0.718, respectively) after removing the interaction term and analyzing the progressor groups jointly. Similar effect sizes were obtained when analyses for V1–C3 and V1–V2 were repeated, excluding samples collected after the onset of AIDS or initiation of ART, although statistical significance was not reached (Table 2).We found no difference in the rate of change in PNGS with time (sampling date) between faster and slower progressors in the complete V1–C3 region (p = 0.273, Table 3). However, analyzing the component sub-regions separately, we did find a significant difference in the rate of change in PNGS with time for C3 (p = 0.003) but not for any of the other analyzed regions. For slower progressors, the number of PNGS in the C3 region increased significantly (p = 0.021), while for faster progressors, the number decreased significantly with time (p = 0.037).3.4. Length and Charge Variation of the Env V1–C3 RegionsWe also investigated the evolution of length and charge of the different sub-regions of Env V1–C3 amino acid sequences. As expected, V1–V2 demonstrated the largest variation in length both between and within individuals, and between time points, with a median of 94 amino acids, an IQR of 91–97 and a range of 74–120. Minor variations in length were also observed in C3, but only between individuals (median = 58 amino acids, IQR: 58–58, range: 56–61). The length of C2 and V3 was conserved at 99 and 34 amino acids, respectively, in all 409 sequences.Faster and slower progressors did not differ significantly in the rate of change in length with change in CD4% for the complete V1–C3 region (p = 0.112, Table 2) or for the V1–V2 sub-region (p = 0.119). In a simplified model, excluding the interaction term, there was no significant change in length with a change in CD4% and no significant difference in mean length between progressor groups for V1–C3 or for V1–V2 (Table 2). The C2, V3 and C3 sub-regions were not analyzed because of limited variation (see above). Similarly, we found no significant difference in the rate of change of length with time between the progressor groups or, after excluding the interaction term, any significant change in fragment length with time for the complete V1–C3 region or for any of the analyzed sub-regions (Table 3).Next, we investigated the estimated charge of the fragments. We found no difference between progressor groups in the rate of change in charge with CD4% for the complete V1–C3 region or for any of the sub-regions (Table 2). In the simplified model with the interaction term removed, the charge of the complete V1–C3 region did not change significantly with CD4% (p = 0.178). However, the V1–V2 sub-region did show a significant increase in charge with decreasing CD4% (p = 0.017, Table 2). For the other regions, the charge did not change significantly with CD4%, and there was no significant difference in the mean charge between faster and slower progressors for any analyzed region (Table 2). Finally, we found no significant difference in the rate of change of charge with time between faster and slower progressors, or, when the interaction term was removed, any significant change in charge with time for the complete V1–C3 region or for any of the analyzed sub-regions (Table 3).3.5. Predicted Coreceptor UseWe predicted coreceptor use based on the viral sequences included in this study using two different methods: the four major determinants method of dual/CXCR4 use (L18Z, V19K/R, V3 net charge >+6, insertions at position 24) [39,40]; and Geno2Pheno[coreceptor-hiv2] [41]. Both methods predicted that the vast majority of the V3 sequences derived from viruses using CCR5, and not CXCR4, and only one and eight sequences were predicted to derive from viruses using CXCR4 by the Geno2Pheno and the four major determinants method, respectively (Table 4). The seven sequences where viruses were predicted to use CXCR4 by the four major determinants method and not by Geno2Pheno, were still reported to possibly use CXCR4 by Geno2Pheno due to the net charge of +7, although this criterion itself is not sufficient for CXCR4 prediction by Geno2Pheno. The eight sequences from viruses predicted to use CXCR4 came from four different samples, each from a different individual (Table 4). All four samples also included sequences where viruses were predicted to use CCR5, and for three of the samples, a minority of sequences were predicted to use CXCR4 (Table 4). The only sample from which the majority of sequences were from viruses predicted to use CXCR4 (four of five sequences) was from an individual that developed AIDS (CD4+ T-cell count = 138 cells/µL, CD4% = 17) at the time-point when this sample was taken. However, CXCR4 use was not identified from later time points in any of the four individuals, including the individual who had developed AIDS and later presented with very low T-cell levels (CD4+ T-cell count = 60 cells/µL, CD4% = 6). The individuals with viruses predicted to use CXCR4 were from both progressor groups.4. DiscussionIn a previous study, we stratified 16 treatment-naïve individuals into faster and slower progressors based on the level of CD4% and found a strong association between the evolutionary rate and the CD4% level [31]. In the present study, we used the same stratification to investigate the evolution of molecular properties of HIV-2 Env regions (V1–C3) over the asymptomatic phase of infection.Faster and slower progressors differed significantly in the rate of change in the number of PNGS in V1–C3 with decreasing CD4%. The difference was significant for V1–V2 but not for other sub-regions, indicating that PNGS in V1–V2 may be driving the divergent patterns. On average, the number of PNGS decreased in slower progressors, whereas faster progressors maintained a near-constant level with decreasing CD4%. This finding is in contrast to what has been observed during HIV-1 infection, where Env has been shown to evolve towards a denser glycan shield during the asymptomatic phase of the infection [17,26,27,28], only to lose glycans in end-stage disease [13]. For HIV-1, loss of PNGS has been associated with increased virus infectivity but also with increased neutralization sensitivity [13,27,49,50]. Thus, accumulation of PNGS may represent a way for the virus to evade the immune system at the cost of virus infectivity. The observed difference in PNGS evolution between HIV-2 faster and slower progressors could possibly relate to differences in the level of antigen stimulation, i.e., virus replication, which in turn influences the magnitude of the virus-specific immune response. HIV-1 elite controllers, a group that in large resembles the majority of HIV-2 infected individuals in terms of plasma viral load and level of immune activation, have been reported to have fewer glycans in Env compared with chronic HIV-1 progressors or ART-treated individuals [51]. Together, these findings may suggest that slower progressor groups (e.g., HIV-1 elite controllers and HIV-2 slower progressors) do not exert an immune pressure sufficient to drive the selection of viral variants with increased levels of PNGS.We also performed analyses of HIV-2 nucleotide sequence diversity and segregation. Similar to previous reports of HIV-2 [10,11], we found that both segregated clusters and the intermixing of sequences from earlier and later time points were common. HIV-2 diversity has been suggested to increase from earlier to later time points [10,11,52,53]. Indeed, we found that diversity increased over time in faster progressors. However, in slower progressors, diversity did not change significantly with time, and the estimated mean even showed a slight decrease, possibly indicating a lower viral turnover in slower compared to faster progressors. Investigations on the association between diversity and viral load would be interesting. However, viral load measurements have not been included as a standard procedure in the study cohort in Guinea-Bissau. The generally low viral load in HIV-2-infected individuals presents a large technical challenge, especially in the analysis of sequences obtained from plasma viral RNA. The low viral load also poses a potential risk of generating few viral clones and possibly undersampling of quasispecies. In addition, while we address differences between relatively faster and slower HIV-2 progressors, aviremic individuals could not be included in this study based on plasma viral RNA. Still, the low detection limit of our assay (12 RNA copies/mL plasma [31]) allowed for the inclusion of individuals with very low RNA levels. Furthermore, the analysis of viral RNA from plasma allowed us to study the actively replicating virus populations, which may not be detected in analysis based on proviral DNA, or RNA propagated in the virus.In this study, we used CD4% as a surrogate marker of disease progression since the estimated date of infection was only known for seven of the individuals. However, we also investigated the evolution of HIV-2 over time during the asymptomatic phase of infection. Compared to HIV-1 infection, the CD4% has been shown to be higher in early HIV-2 infection with a slower subsequent decline in CD4 [2]. In addition, HIV-2-infected individuals have been shown to develop clinical AIDS at a higher CD4% compared with HIV-1-infected individuals [2]. We found that some of the evolutionary signatures differed when we analyzed the HIV-2 molecular properties in relation to CD4% decline (i.e., disease progression) and in relation to time (sampling date). Notably, the number of PNGS in the V1–V2 and V1–C3 regions and the charge of the V1–V2 regions were associated with disease progression (i.e., CD4%), while the number of PNGS in the C3 region and diversity showed associations with time. We have previously shown that HIV-2 env is under overall negative selection [31], which in part may explain the increased diversity over time as neutral variation is allowed to accumulate. In contrast, the evolution of PNGS in the V1–V2 regions and the entire V1–C3 fragment may represent adaptations associated with CD4% decline and disease progression. As the immune pressure differs at different stages of disease progression, it is possible that the PNGS will adjust accordingly to maintain the balance between preventing immune system recognition while still enabling efficient binding to and infection of target cells [27,50]. Thus, we speculate that certain traits, such as the evolution of PNGS, may be adaptively associated with disease progression, whereas other traits, such as diversity, largely represents accrued neutral variation in a region under negative selection.The associations identified in this study, with time as well as with CD4%, were found to be located in the V1–V2 and C3 regions. Furthermore, several non-conserved PNGS were identified in the C3 region. Our results support observations from previous studies, suggesting that the majority of genotypic and phenotypic evolution of the V1–C3 regions are accounted for by the V1–V2 and C3 regions [10,31,37]. Both the C2 and C3 regions have previously been found to be well exposed, while the V3 region is concealed within the envelope complex [37]. We confirmed the location of six conserved PNGS in HIV-2 Env (four in C2, one in V3 and one in C3 [10,37]), and due to the inclusion of the complete C2 region in this study, we identified four additional conserved PNGS in the N-terminal part of the C2 region. A deeper understanding of the evolutionary constraints of the different regions could provide important clues that may guide future vaccine development. In this regard, it would be valuable to expand the coverage of the analyzed regions. We investigated the C1–V3 region but important genetic and phenotypic traits linked to evolution and disease progression may also localize to other parts of the genome and thus be missed in this study.Although our results are in line with previous studies reporting a relatively low evolution of HIV-2 molecular properties [10,11,23], with few differences identified between faster and slower progressors, the lack of statistical power poses an important limitation of this study. The lack of identified associations and differences between progressor groups may, in part, be a reflection of the limited size of the dataset. Still, with the longitudinal sampling of 16 HIV-2 infected individuals over a median of 7.9 years, this is, to the best of our knowledge, the most comprehensive study on the evolution of molecular properties in HIV-2 infected treatment-naïve individuals. To draw definitive conclusions regarding the evolution of HIV-2 molecular properties in general and between specific progressor groups, a larger study population would likely be required. In this study, we included a few samples collected after the individual had developed AIDS or initiated ART. While we verify that the effect differences we find between progressor groups remain when these samples are excluded, the statistical significance is lost. This illustrates a limitation of our relatively small dataset, and the validation of our data should focus on samples collected during the asymptomatic stage of infection. Future studies should preferably also cover a larger fragment of the genome, as regions outside of the V1–C3 region of env included here may provide additional information about genotypic and phenotypic evolution in relation to disease progression. Still, our data point towards a relatively slow evolution of diversity, fragment length, fragment charge and PNGS over time and with declining levels of CD4% in the V1–C3 regions of HIV-2. Despite the limitations, we identify differences between faster and slower progressors in terms of diversity and the number of PNGS. The stratification of HIV-2-infected individuals into different progressor groups in the study of the evolution of molecular properties has not been previously reported. As such, our findings bring new insights to the understanding of the attenuated pathogenesis of HIV-2.We predicted the coreceptor tropism of the viruses, from which sequences were derived in this study, using two different prediction methods [39,40,41]. Only eight virus sequences were predicted to use CXCR4, with no differences between progressor groups. The low frequency of CXCR4 use was not surprising as virus CXCR4 use has previously only been reported from HIV-2 infected individuals with clinical symptoms of AIDS or low CD4+ T-cell counts [20,21,22,23,24,25]. However, our results present the first observation, based on longitudinal plasma viral RNA samples, that sequences predicting virus CXCR4 use are rare during the asymptomatic phase of HIV-2 infection. Notably, the few sequences that predicted viruses with CXCR4 use appeared merely as transient viruses that did not subsequently emerge as a dominating viral population. In this study, we did not validate our predictions using functional assays, which would be valuable in future studies. It would also be interesting to follow a larger number of HIV-2-infected individuals throughout the entire disease course to see if and when a progressive switch in coreceptor use can be identified in the circulating virus population.5. ConclusionsWe investigated HIV-2 intra-patient evolution of Env molecular properties using sequences obtained from plasma viral RNA of 16 study participants with long follow-up over the asymptomatic, treatment-naïve phase of the infection. Our results suggest a generally limited evolution of molecular properties over time and with declining CD4%, with a few differences identified between faster and slower disease progressors. Diversity increased with time in faster progressors, while no such change was observed in slower progressors, and the number of PNGS in V1–V2 decreased with declining CD4% in slower progressors, whereas faster progressors showed no such change. Our results support previous work suggesting that the HIV-2 Env V1–V2 and C3 regions are more immunologically exposed than other regions [10,31,54]. Furthermore, the emergence of viruses using CXCR4 was rare. Studies of larger sample sizes are warranted to confirm our results and elucidate the role of molecular properties in HIV-2 disease progression. Our findings provide new insights into HIV-2 evolution, and studies building on these data could reveal important predictors of HIV-2 disease progression and enhance our understanding of HIV-2 pathogenesis.


Title: Nonhuman Primate IFITM Proteins Are Potent Inhibitors of HIV and SIV

IntroductionFollowing detection of pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), cells produce and secrete interferon [1, 2]. Interferons are cytokines that upregulate the expression of hundreds of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and represent one of the cells first lines of defense against viruses [3]. Several ISGs have been characterized with antiviral activity, including Tetherin, TRIM5α, APOBEC3G, SAMHD1, and MxB [4–11]. The interferon-induced transmembrane (IFITM) proteins are a subset of ISGs known to restrict several enveloped viruses including, but not limited to, influenza A virus (IAV), dengue virus, Ebola virus, SARS coronavirus, hepatitis C virus (HCV), Jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus (JSRV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [12–19].In humans, five IFITM isoforms have been discovered thus far [20]. IFITM5 is found in osteoblasts and functions in bone mineralization while IFITM10 has an unknown function [21, 22]. The remaining three members (IFITM1, 2, and 3) have been characterized with antiviral activity [20, 23]. The IFITM proteins are localized to both the plasma membrane and the endosomal membranes where they are thought to restrict viral entry by directly modulating cell membranes or antagonizing components of the viral structure [19, 24–29]. While the exact topology of IFITMs remains unclear, studies have suggested that the IFITMs have full or partial membrane-spanning regions, with the N-terminus and a conserved central region on the cytosolic side and the C-terminus being extracellular [26, 30, 31]. The N-terminus of human IFITM2 and IFITM3 contain an additional 20 or 21 amino acids, respectively, compared to IFITM1. This extended N-terminal region contains a tyrosine residue (Y20) that is important for IFITM localization and their antiviral activity [32–34]. Recently, the PPxY motif of IFITM3 was discovered to interact with the NEDD4 E3 ligase that causes IFITM3 ubiquitination [35]. Cysteine residues C71, C72, and C105 in IFITM3, which are also conserved in IFITM1 and IFITM2, are palmitoylated and contribute to its antiviral function [24, 31]. Two phenylalanine residues (F75 and F78) in IFITM3 mediate interaction amongst the IFITMs, increasing IFITM3 antiviral properties [36]. Interestingly, IFITM proteins have also been shown to promote infection or replication of some viruses, although the underlying mechanisms remain to be defined [37, 38].HIV-1 and HIV-2 are the results of zoonotic transmission of SIV into humans from chimpanzee and sooty mangabey, respectively [39, 40]. Adaptation into new hosts often requires viruses to evolve countermeasures to evade new host defenses. For example, TRIM5α from rhesus monkey (TRIM5αrh) is highly effective at restricting HIV-1 [5]. However, TRIM5αrh does not restrict viruses that naturally infect Old World monkeys (SIVmac). These observations were attributed to changes in the sequence of viral capsid from SIV to HIV [5]. Similarly, human Tetherin is less effective restricting HIV when compared to that of SIV and vice versa [41]. The decreased inhibitory effects of human TRIM5α and Tetherin on HIV-1 account for efficient spread and pathogenesis of HIV-1 in humans [42].Canonically, restriction factors are characterized by their ability to restrict viruses in non-natural hosts and have undergone positive selection due to viral antagonism. We find here that while nonhuman primate IFITM proteins are in general more potent to restrict HIV-1, they are still highly effective against some strains of SIVs derived from their own natural hosts. Moreover, phylogenetic analysis shows that primate IFITM proteins have been undergoing purifying selection, suggesting that the primary amino acid sequences of IFITMs are essential for their structure and functions, which is atypical for restriction factors.Materials and MethodsCells, plasmids, and reagentsSupT1 (NIH AIDS Reagent Program) and Jurkat-inGLuc (gift from Walther Mothes) cells were maintained in Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI-1640) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. HeLa-TZM-bl (NIH AIDS Reagent Program) and HEK293T (ATCC) cells were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin. Nonhuman primate fibroblasts were obtained from Coriell Institute cell repositories (Camden, NJ). Fibroblasts were either maintained in DMEM and/or Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) with 10–15% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin according to Coriell’s specimen specifications. All cell lines were incubated in a 5% CO2 atmosphere at 37˚C.All IFITMs were cloned into the retroviral vector pQCXIP containing an N-terminal Flag tag. The following proviral DNAs were obtained from NIH AIDS Reagent Program: HIV-1-NL4.3 (#114), HIV-1 BH10 (#90), HIV-2-ROD1 (#207), SIVcpzTAN2.69 (#11497), SIVagmTAN (#3444), and SIVmac239 (#210). The pCMV-BlaM-Vpr construct was purchased from Addgene (#21950) (described in [43]). Lentiviral vectors containing control-shRNA or IFITM3-shRNA were purchased from Sigma. The anti-FLAG beads (F2426), anti-FLAG (F3165) and anti-β-tubulin (T8328) antibodies were purchased from Sigma. Anti-IFITM3 antibody was purchased from Proteintech (11714-1-AP). The following antibodies were obtained from NIH AIDS Reagent Program: anti-HIV-1 gp120 (#288), anti-HIV-1 gp41 (#1475), and anti-HIV-1 p24 (#1513).Cloning and DNA sequencingNonhuman primate IFITM genes were obtained from the following primate cell lines (Coriell Institute, Camdem, NJ): gorillia (Gorilla gorilla gorilla), L’Hoest’s monkey (Cercopithecus lhoesti), moustached monkey (Cercopithecus cephus cephus), red-capped mangabey (Cercocebus torquatus torquatus), mandrill (Mandrillus sphinx), Syke’s monkey (Cercopithecus albogularis), and guereza (Colobus guereza). Briefly, the total RNAs were extracted from these non-human primate cell lines using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Reverse transcription was carried out by using 1μg of total RNA, plus random primer (Thermal Fisher Scientific) and Superscript III (Invitrogen) following manufacturer’s instructions. IFITM genes were PCR amplified from cDNAs using primers IFITM1 forward/reverse (CAACAGGGGAAAGCAGGGCTC/ CTGTATCTAGGGGCAGGACCAAG) and IFITM3 forward/reverse (CAACACTTCTTTCCCCAAAGCCAG/ TTGTGGACAGGTGTGTGGG). PCR products were cloned into PCR2.1 vector, and 3–5 clones from each species were sequenced. A Flag tag was introduced to the N termini of primate IFITMs by PCR, and the insert IFITM genes in PCR2.1 were subcloned into pQCXIP vector at BamHI and EcoRI sites. All IFITM genes on pQCXIP vector were confirmed by DNA sequencing.Stable cell linesSupT1 and Jurkat-inGLuc cell lines stably expressing IFITMs were produced by transduction of cells with pQCXIP-IFITM constructs [19, 29]. Briefly, HEK293T cells were seeded in 35 mm dishes and transfected with 1 μg pQCXIP-flag-IFITM, 1 μg pCMV-gag-pol-MLV, and 0.1 μg pVSV-G using calcium phosphate method. Viral supernatants were harvested over 72 hours and clarified via centrifugation. Retroviral particles were used to infect SupT1 or Jurkat-inGLuc cells in the presence of 4 μg/ml polybrene by spinoculation at 1,850 x g for 1 hour at 4˚C. Stably transduced cells were selected for with 1 μg/ml puromycin.To knockdown IFITM3 in gorilla fibroblasts (Cat #), HEK293T cells were cotransfected with pHIV-Δ8.2-Gag-Pol, lentiviral shRNA (Sigma), and VSV-G. Produced virions were used to infect gorilla fibroblast. Transduced fibroblasts were selected for with 1 μg/ml puromycin.Viral replication assayFor HIV-1 long-term replication, 5 X 105 SupT1 cells were challenged with appropriate volumes of the wild type NL4.3 viral stock; unbound virus was removed 6 hours after the initiation of infection and cells were incubated with fresh RPMI-1640 medium. Supernatants containing newly produced virions were collected every 2 days until a complete cell death was observed. Supernatants were measured for viral production by performing reverse transcriptase (RT) assay (see below) and for infectivity by infecting HeLa-TZM-bl cells.RT assayThe experiments were performed as previously described [15]. Briefly, 10 μL virions containing culture supernatants were incubated with 40 μL of reaction mixture at 37°C for 3 h. The mixture contains 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.9, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.05% Triton X-100, 2% (V/V) ethylene glycol, 150 mM KCL, 5 mM DTT, 0.3 mM GSH (reduced glutathione), 0.5 U/mL poly (rA) oligo (dT), and 0.1 μCi/μL 3H dTTP (Perkin-Elmer). The reaction was stopped by adding 10% (V/V) cold Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) at 4°C for 30 min, and the mixture was transferred to Millipore MultiScreen Glass Fiber FC plate. After being washed twice with cold 10% (V/V) TCA and cold ethanol, the membranes were inserted into Beta Gamma vials and read in Microbeta counter (Beckman Coulter).Infectivity assaySupT1 cells were seeded at 4 X105 cells/ml in 12-well dishes. Infectious virus was added in the presence of 4 μg/ml polybrene with spinoculation at 1,850 X g for 1 hour at 4˚C and then incubated at 37˚C for 6 hours. SupT1 cells were then refed and incubated for an additional 48 hours. Viral supernatants were used to infect HeLa-TZM-bl cells. Forty-eight hours post-infection, HeLa-TZM-bl cells were harvested in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100). HeLa-TZM-bl lysates were mixed at a 1:1 ratio with assay buffer (200 mM Tris pH 7.8, 250 mM MgCl2, 7.5 mM ATP, 25 mM CoA, 0.2 mg/ml D-Luciferin) and measured for luciferase activity using a Perkin Elmer plate reader.Immunoprecipitation and western blotHEK293T cells were cotransfected with HIV-1-NL4.3 and increasing amounts of IFITM plasmids. pQCXIP-empty was used as a control and to ensure all transfections had an equivalent amount of total plasmid during transfection. At 48 hours post-transfection, HEK293T cells were harvested in RIPA buffer (containing 0.05% SDS). Cell debris was removed by centrifugation. A fraction of the lysate was used for total input analysis by Western blot while the rest was subjected to immunoprecipitation using anti-FLAG beads. Immunoprecipitations were incubated overnight at 4˚C with rotation. Beads were centrifuged and washed three times with cold lysis buffer. All samples were boiled in sample buffer prior to resolving by SDS-PAGE. The gels were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes and blocked in blocking solution (5% non-fat milk in PBS 0.1% Tween-20) for 1 hour at room temperature. Membranes were washed (PBS with 0.1% Tween-20) three times followed by overnight incubation with the primary antibody in blocking solution overnight at 4˚C. The membranes were washed three times and incubated with secondary antibodies conjugated to HRP for 1 hour at room temperature. The blots were incubated with HRP substrate (Millipore # WBLUR0100) and bands were visualized using a Fuji Imager.Virion fusion assay and flow cytometryThe fusion assay was performed as previously described [43]. HEK293T cells were seeded onto 60 mm plates and cotransfected with 3 μg of HIV-1-NL4.3 and 1 μg of pCMV-BlaM-Vpr; virions were harvested 48–72 h post-transfection. SupT1 cells were incubated with virus and spinoculated at 4˚C for 1 hour and then further incubated at 37˚C for 3 hours. SupT1 cells were resuspended in CO2-independent media and loaded with CCF2 dye according to manufacturer’s recommendations (Invitrogen). Cells were washed and incubated in CO2-independent media with 10% FBS and 0.5 μM probenecid for 16 hours at room temperature. Samples were fixed in 2% formaldehyde, washed, and resuspended in PBS. Uncleaved CCF2-AM dye was detected at Ex409/Em518 and cleaved CCF2 was detected at Ex409/Em447 using a BD Fortessa flow cytometer.Cell-to-cell infectionFor cell-to-cell infection, we followed a system previously described in [29]. Briefly, Jurkat-inGLuc cells, expressing IFITMs or not expressing IFITMs, were spinoculated at 1,850 X g with infectious virus for 1 hour at 4˚C followed by incubation at 37˚C for 4 hours. Cells were then treated with 10 nM phorbol myristate acetate (PMA) for 4 hours. The Jurkat-inGLuc cells were then washed and refed for 18 hours at 37˚C. The infected Jurkat-inGLuc donor cells were split in half for either cell-free or cell-to-cell infection. For cell-free infection, Jurkat-inGLuc cells were incubated for 48 hours at 37˚C. Newly generated virus was used to infect SupT1 target cells for 48 hours. Media from SupT1 target cells was assayed for guassia Luciferase activity. For cell-to-cell infection, Jurkat-inGLuc cells were incubated with an equivalent number of SupT1 cells expressing or not expressing IFITMs. At 48 hours post-coculture, supernatants were assayed for guassia Luciferase activity using a Perkin Elmer plate reader.DNA sequence alignment and selection analysisFor this study, 14 new nonhuman primate IFITM sequences were used (see under Cloning and DNA Sequencing), among which 13 are unique sequences (6 IFITM1 and 7 IFITM3) at the nucleotide level and 11 are unique sequences (4 IFITM1 and 7 IFITM3) at the amino acid level. A total of 18 nucleotide sequences were used for IFITM analysis within Datamonkey online interface (http://www.datamonkey.org/dataupload.php) and MEGA6 software [44]. Sequences were aligned using ClustalW and a phylogeny of IFITM was constructed by the Neighbor-joining method [45, 46]. Evolutionary distances were estimated using the Jukes Cantor method [47]. Confidence levels were determined using the bootstrap method with 1000 replicates and selection was determined using the Nei-Gojobori method [48].GenBank accession numbersThe GenBank accession numbers for the cloned nonhuman primate IFITMs are KU570002-KU570015.ResultsNonhuman primate IFITMs differentially restrict HIVHIV has adapted various mechanisms to escape host restriction [42]. While it was previously shown that IFITMs from African green monkey (AGM) are capable of restricting both HIV-1 and SIVagm to varying degrees [49], we further sought to know if the IFITMs from additional nonhuman primates are capable of restricting HIV. To do so, we cloned IFITM1 and IFITM3 from 8 nonhuman primate cell lines belonging to the families Cercopithecidae (old world monkey; OWM) and Hominidae (hominoids), stably expressed them in the CD4+ T cell line SupT1, and tested their ability to restrict HIV (Table 1, Fig 1). SupT1 cells were infected with HIV-1 (NL4.3 or BH10) or HIV-2 bearing VSV-G in order to achieve efficient infection, and newly produced virus was harvested 48 hours later. Infectivity of newly generated virus was measured using the indicator cell line HeLa-TZM-bl (TZM-bl), which is susceptible to both CXCR4 and CCR5 tropic viruses. Against HIV-1 NL4.3, we found that both human IFITM1 and IFITM3 had less than a two-fold reduction in infectivity, similar to our previous results [50], while we found up to an approximate 5- and 10-fold reduction in infectivity for the majority of nonhuman primate IFITM1 and IFITM3 tested (Fig 1A). Against HIV-1-BH10, human IFITM1 resulted in an approximate 4-fold reduction in infectivity while human IFITM3 caused less than a 2-fold reduction (Fig 1B), again paralleling our previous reports [15, 51]. Notably, nonhuman primate IFITM1 and IFITM3 reduced HIV-1 BH10 infectivity up to 10- and 6-fold, respectively (Fig 1B). Interestingly, against HIV-2, we found only a two-fold reduction in infectivity against almost all species of IFITMs (Fig 1C). Similar to human IFITMs [29, 32], nonhuman primate IFITMs did not significantly inhibit release of HIV-1 and HIV-2 from viral producer cells based on their RT activities (data not shown). Western blotting analysis showed that the expression levels of these nonhuman primate IFITMs were approximately comparable to their human counterparts (Fig 1D). Altogether, these results suggest that HIV-1 is strongly, but differentially, restricted by IFITMs of nonhuman primate species.10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.g001Fig 1Nonhuman primate IFITM proteins restrict HIV-1 and HIV-2.Stably transduced SupT1 cells not expressing or expressing IFITM proteins were infected with the indicated starins of HIV pseudotyped by VSV-G. At 48 hours post-infection, the infectivity of newly generated infectious viral particles was determined by infecting the indicator cell line HeLa-TZM-bl. Relative infectivity to the empty vector control is shown. Standard errors were determined from 3–7 independent experiments (* indicates a p-value < 0.05). The expressions of IFITM proteins in SupT1 cells are shown in (D).10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.t001Table 1Primate IFITMs used in this study.FamilyaTaxonomicbCommon namecHominidaeHomo sapiensHumanHominidaeGorillaWestern lowland gorillaCercopithecidaeCercopithecus lhoestiL'Hoest's monkeyCercopithecidaeCercopithecus cephusRed-tailed moustached monkeyCercopithecidaeCercocebus torquatusRed-capped mangabeyCercopithecidaeMandrillus sphinxMandrillCercopithecidaeCercopithecus albogularisSyke's monkeyCercopithecidaeColobus guerezaGuerezaCercopithecidaeChlorocebus aethiopsAfrican green monkeya Family name (Hominidae or Cercopithecidae)b Organismal classificationc Common name associated with each primateNonhuman primate IFITMs restrict different strains of SIVHIV-1 resulted from zoonotic transmission of SIVcpz from chimpanzee (Pan troglydytes; CPZ) to humans while HIV-2 arose from SIVsm of sooty mangabey (Cercocebus atys; SM) [39, 40, 52]. We therefore tested whether or not nonhuman primate IFITMs could also restrict different strains of SIV in SupT1 cells stably expressing individual IFITM proteins. We found that, while some nonhuman primate IFITM1 and IFITM3 (such as Gorilla, L'Hoest's and Moustached) caused an approximate 2 to 3-fold reduction in infectivity of SIVcpz, others showed activity similar to that of humans (less than 2-fold) (Fig 2A). Against SIVmac, human IFITM1 and IFITM3 caused roughly a 2-fold reduction in infectivity while nonhuman primate IFITM1 and IFITM3 resulted in up to a 7- and 10-fold reduction, respectively (Fig 2B). The most striking differences between human and nonhuman primate IFITM restriction of SIV was found against SIVagm. While human IFITMs caused an approximate 2- to 3-fold reduction in infectivity, nonhuman primate IFITM1 and IFITM3 restricted SIVagm by up to15 to 40-fold in infectivity (Fig 2C). Of note, the antiviral activities of IFITM1 derived from Sykes and Guereza, as well as IFITM3 derived from Mandrill, Guereza, and Mangabey, were much weaker against both SIVmac and SIVagm than IFITMs of other species, again highlighting the species-dependent antiviral activities of IFITMs.10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.g002Fig 2Nonhuman primate IFITM proteins restrict SIVs.SupT1 cells not expressing or stably expressing IFITM proteins were infected with the indicated SIV strains bearing VSV-G. At 48 hours post-infection, the infectivity of newly generated infectious viral particles was determined by infecting HeLa-TZM-bl indicator cells. Relative infectivity to the empty vector control is shown. Standard errors were determined from 3–10 independent experiments (* indicates a p-value < 0.05).On the basis of the degrees of inhibition, we ranked the ability of nonhuman primate IFITMs to inhibit the primate lentiviruses as SIVagm > SIVmac, HIV-1 BH10, HIV-1 NL4.3 > SIVcpz > HIV-2. Overall, IFITMs derived from Gorilla, L'Hoest's, Moustached, and Sykes exhibit stronger inhibition as compared to those from Mandrill, Guereza, and Mangabey. These results collectively suggest that HIV/SIV restriction is conserved across primate IFITMs, yet in a highly virus-strain and IFITM-species dependent manner.Nonhuman primate IFITM proteins interact with HIV envelopeRecently, our lab demonstrated that human IFITM proteins contribute to HIV-1 restriction by antagonizing envelope protein (Env), thereby impairing viral fusion, infectivity and cell-to-cell infection [29]. We sought to ask if association of human IFITM with HIV-1 Env is conserved in OWM IFITMs. Because of its strong inhibition of HIV-1 infectivity (Fig 1), we chose L'Hoest's IFITMs to represent OWM. We co-transfected 293T cells with HIV-1 NL4.3 and flag-tagged human or L'Hoest's IFITMs, followed by immunoprecipitation using anti-flag beads. Both human and OWM IFITM3 proteins were capable of interacting with HIV-1 Env in a dose-dependent manner, showing that IFITM-envelope interaction has been evolutionarily conserved (Fig 3A). When we compared the band intensity ratios between immunoprecipitated HIV-1 Env gp41 and flag-IFITM3, we found an approximate 20% increase in OWM IFITM3 interaction with HIV-1 Env compared to that with human IFITM3 (Fig 3B); this was despite the relatively low levels of Env expression in the OWM IFITM3-expressing cells as compared to cells expressing human IFITM3 (Fig 3A; see gp120 and gp41 blots). Human IFITM1 had no significant interaction HIV-1 Env (Fig 3A). Both human and OWM IFITM3 proteins inhibited the processing of Env precursor into gp120 and gp41 (Fig 3A, top panel), whereas the IFITM1 protein downregulated the expression of HIV-1 Env and Gag at higher doses of transfection (Fig 3A; see gp41 and p24 blots) similar to our recent study [29]. These results demonstrate that Env interaction with IFITMs, as well as their effects on Env processing, are evolutionarily conserved among human and nonhuman primates species and that the increased interaction between L'Hoest's IFITM3 and HIV-1 Env somewhat correlates with the enhanced antiviral effect.10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.g003Fig 3Nonhuman primate IFITM3 interacts with HIV-1 envelope.293T cells were transfected with expression plasmids encoding HIV-1 NL4.3 without or with increasing amounts of the indicated IFITM plasmids. At 48 hours post-transfection, 293T cells were harvested in RIPA buffer and clarified of cell debris. Flag-IFITM was immunoprecipitated from 293T lysates using anti-Flag-beads. Immunoprecipitated products were washed three times and harvested in sample buffer. (a) Cell lysates and immunoprecipitated products were detected via Western blot using indicated antibodies. (b) The band intensities for immunoprecipitated gp41 and flag-IFITM bands were measured using Multigauge software (shown below each band). The averaged ratio of gp41/flag-IFITM is shown (confirmed from two independent experiments). About a 20% increase in binding efficiency for L’Hoest’s IFITM3 with gp41 is seen when compared to that of human IFITM3. Measurements for IFITM1 were not determined due to lack of detection of coimmunoprecipitated gp41.Nonhuman primate IFITM proteins inhibit virion-cell fusion of HIV-1Entry of HIV-1 has previously been shown to be restricted by human IFITM proteins in target cells [15, 53]. We asked if this function was conserved in OWM IFITM. To analyze entry of HIV-1 in SupT1 cells stably expressing various primate IFITMs, we utilized the ß-lactamase-Vpr (BlaM-Vpr) virion fusion assay described in [43]. HIV-1 virions were generated by cotransfecting HEK293T cells with BlaM-Vpr and HIV-1-NL4.3. Purified virus particles were used to infect SupT1 cells loaded with the BlaM-specific fluorescent substrate CCF2. Successful HIV-1 virion entry was detected by measuring BlaM cleavage of CCF2, which shifts CCF2 fluorescence emission from 520 nm (green) to 447 nm (blue) (Fig 4A). The virion fusion assay results demonstrate that the ability of IFITM to restrict HIV-1 entry is conserved in nonhuman primate IFITMs, particularly IFITM3 (Fig 4A and 4B).10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.g004Fig 4Nonhuman primate IFITM proteins restrict HIV-1 entry.Stably transduced SupT1 cells expressing the indicated IFITM proteins were infected with HIV-1 NL4.3-BlaM-Vpr for two hours. Cells were then loaded with the BlaM substrate CCF2. (a) The percent of successful HIV-1 NL4.3-BlaM-Vpr entries (cleaved CCF2) is shown relative to SupT1-Empty control. (b) Relative entry of HIV-1 NL4.3-BlaM-Vpr is summarized from three independent experiments.Nonhuman primate IFITM proteins potently restrict HIV cell-to-cell spread and replicationHuman IFITM proteins have previously been reported to restrict HIV cell-to-cell spread and replication [28, 29]. We next asked if there were any differences between primate IFITM restriction of cell-to-cell spread of HIV-1 (Fig 5). This was important, because HIV-1 entry appeared not to be dramatically affected by the various IFITMs tested (Fig 4). We utilized a method previously described in [54] that relies on an intron-regulated guassia luciferase (inGLuc) reporter gene that is expressed upon successful HIV infection of target cells [55]. Note that this assay measures only one-round of HIV-1 infection because it is based on an HIV-1 NL4.3 lentiviral vector. Donor Jurkat-inGLuc cells, either expressing or not expressing IFITMs, were infected with HIV-1 NL4.3 bearing VSV-G; 12 h post-infection, half of the cells were used to produce virus for cell-free infection while the other half were used for co-culture with target SupT1 cells expressing or not expressing IFITMs. Human IFITMs showed the greatest restriction (7-fold decrease for IFITM3) of HIV-1 cell-to-cell spread when human IFITM was expressed in both the target and donor cells (Fig 5A–5C) [28, 29, 53]. Notably, while a similar trend was seen for nonhuman primate IFITMs (Fig 5A–5C), there was a 21-fold decrease in HIV-1 cell-to-cell spread when both donor and target cells expressed OWM IFITM3 (3-fold greater compared to human IFITM3) (Fig 5A). These results show that nonhuman primate IFITMs share similar, perhaps modestly enhanced, cell-to-cell restriction of HIV-1 infection as those of human IFITMs.10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.g005Fig 5Nonhuman primate IFITM proteins restrict cell-to-cell transmission.(a, b and c) For cell-to-cell infectivity studies, Jurkat-F3-gLuc donor cells stably expressing or not expressing IFITM were infected with HIV-1 NL4.3-VSV-G. Infected Jurkat cells were cocultured with SupT1 cells stably expressing or not expressing IFITM for 48 hours. Supernatants containing guassia luciferase were assayed for activity as a measure of cell-to-cell infectivity. Average means and standard errors were determined from three independent experiments (* indicates a p-value < 0.05). (d and e) Prolonged HIV-1 replication in SupT1 cells expressing different IFITM1 or IFITM3. Supernatants were harvested every 2 days until cell death occurred, and RT activities were measured at each time point.We next examined the effects of primate IFITMs on HIV-1 replication by performing long-term replication assays using infectious WT NL4.3. Supernatants from cell culture were harvested every two days and quantified for viral production using reverse transcriptase (RT) assay. As shown in Fig 5D, the NL4.3 replication peaked on day 10 in both empty vector and human IFITM1-expressing SupT1 cells, whereas two nonhuman primate IFITM1 delayed the peak to day 14. Of note, human IFITM1 exhibited roughly half the viral production of empty vector control, consistent with the notion that its inhibitory effect on HIV-1 NL4.3 replication is modest [29]. We also found that the L’Hoest’s OWM IFITM1 had a lower peak value compared to the gorilla counterpart (Fig 5D). When IFITM3 protein was compared, we observed a peak shift of viral replication from day 10 to day 14 for both human and gorilla IFITM3 (Fig 5E). Strikingly, HIV-1 replication in L’Hoest’s OWM IFITM3-expressing cells did not peak even after day 18 (Fig 5E). Overall, our results demonstrate that IFITM inhibition of HIV-1 replication is evolutionarily conserved, and that nonhuman primate IFITMs are more potent to inhibit HIV-1 replication than that those of human counterparts.Knockdown of endogenous IFITM3 in gorilla fibroblasts promotes HIV-1 replicationTo ensure that endogenous IFITM3 of nonhuman primate cell origin contributed to the restriction of HIV-1, we knocked down IFITM3 in gorilla fibroblasts and examined the effect on HIV-1 short-term replication (Fig 6). Gorilla IFITM3 was knocked down using a lentiviral small hairpin RNA against IFITM3. Expression of gorilla IFITM3 was reduced compared to that of a non-specific control shRNA (Fig 6A). Gorilla cells were infected with HIV-1 NL4.3 psuedotyped with VSV-G to ensure entry. After a single round of replication, supernatants containing newly generated virus were harvested and examined for RT activity and by infecting HeLa-TZM-bl cells (Fig 6B and 6C, respectively). There was more than a 2-fold increase in RT activity of viral supernatants from IFITM3 knockdown cells (Fig 6B). Consistently, the infectivity of produced virus was also increased when gorilla IFITM3 was knocked down (Fig 6C). These results support the conclusion that the ability of endogenous nonhuman primate IFITMs to restrict lentiviruses is ancestrally conserved.10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.g006Fig 6Knockdown of IFITM3 in gorilla fibroblasts decreases HIV-1 restriction.(a) Gorilla fibroblasts were transduced with a lentiviral vector containing a small hairpin RNA (shRNA) against IFITM3 or a control shRNA (non-specific). Knockdown efficiency of IFITM3 was determined by Western blot. Tubulin was used as a loading control and IFITM3 was detected using αnti-IFITM3. (b and c) Gorilla fibroblasts containing shRNAs were infected with HIV-1 NL4.3-VSV-G. At 48 hours post-infection, newly produced viral supernatants were measured for infectious particles by infecting HeLa-TZM-bl indicator cells (b) or measured for reverse transcriptase activity (c). Averages and standard errors were determined from three independent experiments (* indicates a p-value < 0.05).IFITM proteins are under purifying selectionAnalysis of protein-coding nucleotide substitutions can provide insight into the type of selective pressure on proteins over time [56]. Nucleotide substitutions that result in a change in the amino acid sequence are referred to as nonsynonymous (dN) while silent changes are considered synonymous (dS). A ratio of nonsynonymous over synonymous substitutions (dN/dS) can be used to detect for positive, neutral, or purifying selection (also referred to as negative selection) [56]. To infer what type of selective pressure the IFITM proteins were under, we analyzed 9 primate IFITM1 or 9 primate IFITM3 sequences, including those of AGM we recently described [49] using Datamonkey [57–59] (Table 2) and MEGA6 software [44] (S1 Fig). In both cases, analysis of nucleotide sequences from IFITM1 and IFITM3 showed that the values of dN were much less than dS. Expanding the primate IFITM sequences to include additional IFITMs of other species from GenBank yielded similar results (data not shown), suggesting that IFITM proteins are under purifying selection (Table 2 and S1 Fig). Taken together, these results suggest that the primary amino acid sequence of the IFITM proteins are crucial for their biological functions and that most nonsynonymous changes could be deleterious to IFITMs.10.1371/journal.pone.0156739.t002Table 2IFITM proteins undergo purifying selection.CodonE[dS]E[dN]E[dN-dS]Posterior Pr{dN>dS}Bayes Factor {dN>dS}Posterior Pr{dN<dS}Bayes Factor {dN<dS}IFITM152.480.22-2.260012196.8962.480.22-2.260012535.8972.480.22-2.260019062.38152.480.47-2.010011669.77192.480.22-2.2600114377.9262.480.22-2.2600110249.7512.480.22-2.260013188.27562.480.22-2.27001121576000602.480.22-2.2600116899.5712.480.22-2.2600117067.2752.480.22-2.2700116899812.480.22-2.2700117727.4982.480.22-2.26001259176001022.480.23-2.2500111536.91052.480.22-2.260013956.291062.480.22-2.260011851.161182.440.46-1.980.020.010.9880.48IFITM3142.050.09-1.9600.011108.21172.020.1-1.9200.02159.42292.050.1-1.9500.011101.33772.030.09-1.9500.01184.3Evidence of purifying selection in the primate IFITM proteins using the random-effects likelihood (REL) method assessed through the DataMonkey server (http://www.datamonkey.org). Only purifying selected sites are shown; no positive selected sites were detected. Purifying selected sites for IFITM1 and IFITM3 are indicated. A Bayes factors larger than 50 was considered significant. Codon: Indicates amino acid residue; E[dS]: Posterior mean of the synonymous substitution rate; E[dN]: Posterior mean of the non-synonymous substitution rate. E[dN-dS]: Posterior mean of the dN-dS difference; Posterior Pr{dN>ds}: Posterior probability for positive selection (dN>dS); Bayes Factor {dN>dS}: Bayes Factor (posterior odds/prior odds) for positive selection (dN>dS); Posterior Pr{dN>ds}: Posterior probability for negative selection (dN<dS); Bayes Factor {dN>dS}: Bayes Factor (posterior odds/prior odds) for negative selection (dN<dS).DiscussionIn general, restriction factors are characterized with antiviral activity, are interferon inducible, targeted by viral antagonists, and undergo positive selection. Positive selection of restriction factors results from continual virus-host competition that occurs during infection. This effect is described by the Red Queen hypothesis, which results in an excess of non-synonymous mutations over time in both the virus and host restriction factors improving their overall fitness (positive selection). For example, the restriction factors TRIM5α, Tehterin, APOBEC3G, SAMHD1, and Viperin are all interferon inducible, restrict lentiviruses, and have undergone positive selection as a result of competing with viral antagonists [60–64].IFITM proteins have been characterized as restriction factors as they are interferon inducible and restrict many enveloped viruses. Herein, we show that primate IFITMs have undergone purifying or negative selection suggesting that primate IFITMs are atypical restriction factors that are not directly antagonized by viruses. In this study, we determined the sequence for 14 new nonhuman primate IFITMs from Gorilla, L’Hoest’s, Moustached, Sykes, Mangabey, Mandrill, and Guereza and demonstrated that primate IFITMs have undergone purifying selection rather than positive selection. Negative selection of primate IFITMs would suggest they have not been highly antagonized by viruses; to date there are no known viral antagonists that directly target the IFITMs. These results may suggest that the primate IFITMs contain an ancient primary function that is not involved in viral restriction. Indeed, IFITMs have been implicated in several cellular functions including immunity, germ cell development, cell adhesion, oncogenesis, bone mineralization, proliferation and cell death [21, 65–68]. Furthermore, in the absence of IFN, IFITM proteins have been shown to be basally expressed in cells (including gorilla fibroblasts, Fig 6A) [65].To determine if nonhuman primates conserved viral restriction, we tested their ability to restrict the primate lentiviruses HIV and SIV. Our observations show that nonhuman primate IFITMs are capable of restricting both HIV and SIV. Interestingly, some nonhuman primate IFITMs derived from OWMs appeared to be more efficient restricting both HIV and SIV compared to that of their human counterparts. For instance, IFITM3agm was more restrictive against SIVagm and HIV compared to human IFITM3, and this could be related to the conserved yet differential interactions between IFITM3 and primate lentivirus envelope proteins. These trends may imply that some adaptions of the primate lentiviruses have occurred although it is unclear whether these are direct or indirect methods of escape. Alternatively, IFITMs have been shown to contain additional functions such as altering membrane fluidity [19]. It may be that an alternative primary function of the IFITMs indirectly affects viral entry.When challenged against two strains of HIV-1 (NL4.3 and BH10), human IFITM1 only marginally restricted HIV-1 NL4.3 (less than 2-fold) while it had a greater restriction against HIV-1 BH10 (greater than 3-fold). These observations are in close agreement with some earlier studies [15, 50]. Furthermore, we observed that nonhuman primate IFITM1 was capable of restricting both NL4.3 and BH10 (about 5- and 6-fold reductions, respectively, Fig 1), although they did not have interaction with HIV-1 Env (Fig 3). Interestingly, we found that IFTIM restriction against HIV-2 was nearly equivalent across all species of IFITM tested (about 2-fold reduction). This could suggest that certain strains of HIV-1 and HIV-2 have evolved to partially escape human IFITM restriction, though the mechanism(s) remain to be fully understood.The IFITM proteins are capable of restricting viruses at various stages of infection [12, 13, 19, 29, 69]. We sought to determine if there was a particular stage during the HIV-1 life cycle in which nonhuman primate IFITMs inhibit HIV-1 compared to that of human IFITMs. Previously, our lab determined that human IFITMs restrict HIV-1 in part by antagonizing HIV-1 envelope [29]. In this work we found that interaction of envelope with OWM (L’Hoest’s) IFITM3 was conserved (Fig 3). However, only a slight increase (about 20%) in binding efficiency between OWM IFITM3 and HIV-1 envelope was observed (Fig 3). However, cell-to-cell transmission data clearly demonstrated that OWM IFITM3 is more efficient than human IFITM3 to reduce HIV-1 cell-to-cell spread and prolonged viral replication (Fig 5). These results together suggest that the main step of IFITM mediated restriction of HIV-1 occurs in the viral producer cells and is during cell-to-cell spread. It should be noted that the efficiency of HIV-1 cell-to-cell infection and replication in the presence of IFITMs are sometimes cell-type dependent [29].While the various primate IFITMs are closely related and share a high degree of homology, there are several differences at the amino acid level that could account for stronger restrictive properties of some nonhuman primate IFITMs (S2 Fig). During purifying selection, changes that are deleterious to the gene function are removed from a population. In contrast, rare polymorphisms that present advantages to the population can occur and be preserved [70]. Though further investigation is needed, it is likely that polymorphisms in the IFITMs are responsible for their varying degrees of viral restriction [36, 71, 72]. It may also be that HIV/SIV Env has undergone positive selection that allows it to partially escape IFITM restriction to varying degrees [29, 51]. To date, no known viral accessory gene(s) have been identified to specifically antagonize the IFITM proteins [50], which could explain why primate IFITMs are under purifying selection. Hence, it is likely that the differential restrictions of IFITMs lie in the functional interactions between IFITM and primate lentivirus Env proteins. Indeed, we show here that human IFITMs are capable of interacting with HIV-1 envelope and that this interaction is evolutionarily conserved for OWM IFITM3 (Fig 3). More work is needed to elucidate the detailed mechanism(s) of IFITM restriction as well as viral countermeasures.Supporting InformationS1 FigIFITM proteins are under purifying selection.(a and b) Phylogenetic trees of IFITM1 and IFITM3 genes were constructed using the Neighbor-Joining method and evolutionary distances were estimated using the Jukes-Cantor method. Bootstrap test percentages of 1000 replicates are shown next to the branches. (c and d) Selection analysis using the Nei-Gojobori method is shown. The probability of rejecting the null hypothesis dN = dS or rejecting dN = dS in favor of an alternative hypothesis is indicated. The test static is shown where the number of nonsynonymous and synonymous changes per site is represented by dN and dS, respectively. The bootstrap method using 1000 replicates was used to determine values. Analyses were conducted using MEGA6.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigAmino acid sequence alignment of human and nonhuman primate IFITM proteins used in this study.Alignment of IFITM1 proteins (left) and IFITM3 proteins (right) is shown. Sequences were aligned using ClustalW.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Role of Viral Protein U (Vpu) in HIV-1 Infection and Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionHuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a lentivirus that belongs to the Retroviridae family. The HIV retrovirus contains two RNA molecules with three prototypic genes that encode group-specific antigen (gag), envelope (env), and polymerase (pol) proteins [1,2,3]. HIV isolates have been classified into two types: HIV-type 1 (HIV-1) and HIV-type 2 (HIV-2). HIV-1 is the causative agent of HIV/AIDS, while HIV-2 is constrained to some well-defined Central and Western Africa regions; relative to HIV-1, HIV-2 has weak transmission capabilities [4,5]. Based on phylogenetic analysis, HIV-1 shows substantial similarities to the virus SIVgor that infects gorillas (Gorilla gorilla) and the virus SIVcpz that infects chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes troglodytes). HIV-2 resembles the virus SIVsmm that infects sooty mangabey monkeys (Cercocebus atys). HIV-1 evolved from chimpanzees and/or gorillas by independent cross-species transmissions of SIVs [4,5].The HIV-1 virus has been subdivided into M, N, O, and P subtypes according to their origin and distribution patterns within the human population. HIV-1 M is globally distributed and is a major factor causing the pandemic disease AIDS. HIV-1 N is rare (non-major/non-outlier) and originated from chimpanzees [5]. HIV-1 O and P groups have close relationships to the virus SIVgor isolated from gorillas; geographically, the O group virus is constrained to Cameroon and surrounding countries [5]. The P group virus was discovered to come from two individuals in Cameroon. Vpu protein is encoded by all groups of HIV-1, but biological differences have been noted between the various sources of Vpu proteins. Pandemic M group viruses contain Vpu proteins that are more highly active than do other groups [5]. Clearly, one needs to understand the functions of Vpu proteins to understand their roles in controlling HIV-1 infection and HIV/AIDS disease pathogenesis.2. Vpu Gene and Its DiversificationVpu was initially characterized as an U open reading frame (ORF) product localized in the HIV-1 genome between the env and tat exons [6]. The Vpu protein is translated from bicistronic mRNA of env-vpu presumably through leaky scanning of ribosomes from the initiation codon of the vpu gene [7,8]. The vpu gene is encoded in the HIV-1 genome, but it is not present in the genomes of HIV-2 and of SIVs such as SIV from rhesus macaques (SIVmac) and SIV from sooty mangabey (SIVsmm) [4,5,9]. However, structural homologs of Vpu have been identified in SIV from chimpanzee (SIVcpz), as well as in SIV from the greater spot-nosed monkey (Cercopithecus nictitans; SIVgsn), the mona monkey (Cercopithecus mona; SIVmon), the mustached monkey (Cervicopithecus Cephus; SIVmus), Dent’s mona monkey (Cercopithecus mona denti; SIVdent), and recently in gorilla (Gorilla gorilla; SIVgor) [9,10,11,12,13].3. Vpu Protein and Its Cellular DistributionVpu is a multimeric integral membrane phosphoprotein with 81 amino acids [14,15]. It has three distinct alpha-helices: the N-terminus proximal transmembrane domain (Helix1-TMD: 6–29 residues) and two C-terminus domains, Helix 2 (32–52 residues) and Helix 3 (57–72 residues) [16,17,18,19] (Figure 1). Helix-2 is amphipathic and is hydrophobic with polar residues on the sides. The hydrophobic portion is buried in plasma membranes, while the hydrophilic region is cytoplasmic [20]. Helix-3 contains acidic amino acids interconnected by two phosphorylated Serine residues: S52 and S56 [21]. Protein kinase casein kinase 2 (CK-2) catalyzes the phosphorylation of the serines (Figure 1) and these post-translational modifications regulate associations between Helix 3 and beta-TrCP/ubiquitin ligase complexes [22,23]. Vpu once oligomerized can form pentameric pore-like structures through which selective monovalent cations can pass [24,25,26].Vpu proteins localize to the plasma membranes, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and trans-Golgi network (TGN) [27,28,29,30]. Sequence analysis of the cytosolic domain of Vpu shows the presence of putative trafficking signals that carry variations in amino acid residues among different subtypes of Vpu. These signals include YXXΦ, a conserved tyrosine-based sorting motif (where Φ represents a hydrophobic residue), and a ([D/E] XXXL [/I/V]) sorting motif consisting of acidic residue/dileucine-based sequences that are present in the hinge portion between the cytosolic domain and the TMD. The latter is involved in endocytosis and the targeting of transmembrane host proteins to lysosomes [31]. Another ([D/E] XXXL [/I/V]) motif is present in the second alpha-helix of the cytoplasmic domain [29]. Several primary isolates of HIV-1 and laboratory-adapted viruses carry polymorphisms of the vpu gene that are based on variations of putative trafficking signal sequences [32] and these polymorphisms regulate subcellular distribution patterns and biological activities of the Vpu protein.4. Role of Vpu Protein in HIV-1 PathogenesisVpu has two well-established functions in HIV-1 infection. First, through the ubiquitin-proteasomal pathway, it enhances the degradation of CD4 protein produced de novo in the endoplasmic reticulum [33]. Second, Vpu augments the release of progeny virions from infected cells [23,34,35] by counteracting the effect of Tetherin, a host restriction factor. Tetherin, also known as BST-2, CD317, or HM1.24, strongly inhibits the release of virions from infected host cells [28,36,37]. In addition, Vpu also regulates the transport of host proteins from ER to Golgi [38], modulates MHC class II presentation [39], induces the stabilization of p53 [40], induces degranulation of natural killer cells (NK cells) by NTBA downmodulation, inhibits lipid antigen presentation through CD1d downmodulation [41,42], induces apoptosis, and impairs migration and chemotactic signaling within CD4+ T-cells through CCR7 downregulation [43].4.1. Role of Vpu in HIV-1-Induced CD4 Receptor DownregulationCD4 is the primary receptor through which primate lentiviruses enter target cells [44]. It is a 54 kDa type-I integral glycoprotein expressed on the surface of cells including helper T-lymphocytes, monocyte/macrophage lineage cells, and hematopoietic progenitor cells. HIV-1 infection of these cells leads to a reduction in the cell surface levels of CD4 receptors [45]. CD4 downregulation has been proposed to block the superinfection of target cells [46] and protect the infected cell from host immune responses, and favors viral replication fitness [47] (Table 1). Constitutive expression of CD4 can be harmful to productive viral replication and dissemination [48]. De novo produced CD4 molecules bind Env polyproteins with high affinity within the endoplasmic reticulum, prevent the transport and processing of Env precursor to its products gp41 and gp120 [49,50], and reduce secretion of infectious progeny virion particles from infected cells.Vpu can enhance degradation of de novo produced CD4 by retention of CD4 in the endoplasmic reticulum through interactions between Vpu and CD4 via their transmembrane domains, poly-ubiquitination of CD4, and transport to the ERAD (ER-associated degradation) pathway [33,57,58]. The integrity of the cytoplasmic domain of Vpu protein and the DSGXXS motif containing the S52/S56 phosphoserine residues are critical to proteasomal degradation of CD4; Vpu interacts directly with β-TrCP1, β-TrCP2 (β-transducin repeat-containing protein 1 or 2), two adaptor molecules (SKP1-cullin-F-Box), and the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex [59,60]. The interaction of SCF- β-TrCP with Vpu induces the poly-ubiquitination of CD4 through binding to lysine, serine, and threonine residues [58] (Figure 2). Without those residues, SCF-mediated interactions between Vpu with CD4 result in retention of the receptor in the ER. Without the ERAD complex (VCP-UFDIL-NPL4), Vpu fails to pull CD4 out of the endoplasmic reticulum and reduces proteasomal degradation [58] (Figure 2). Decreased interactions between β-TrCP/Vpu reduce proteasomal degradation by the ERAD pathway of several cellular factors including β-catenin, ATF4, and p53 [40].4.2. Role of Vpu in BST-2 Downregulation and Virus ReleaseVpu increases the release of HIV-1 from HIV-1-infected cells [15,34]. As confirmed by electron microscopy (EM), Vpu defective virion particles accumulate at the budding site on infected host cell membranes [35,61]. The role of Vpu in virus release varies between cell types. For example, the release of Vpu-defective HIV-1 particles was strongly reduced in HeLa cells, but it was not affected in COS, HEK293T, CV-1, and Vero cells [62,63,64]. The BST-2 protein was identified as a restriction factor that blocked the release of mutant viruses lacking the accessory gene vpu [28,36] that is constitutively expressed in HeLa cells, but not in permissive cell lines like HT1080 and HEK293T. The expression of BST-2 and its restrictive phenotype could only be maintained by IFN-α/β induction in permissive cells and increased in Jurkat and primary CD4+ T-cells. Moreover, the induction of BST-2 expression in HT1080 and HEK293T cells restricted the secretion of virus particles in the absence of Vpu protein [28,36] and siRNA-mediated reduction of BST-2 expression in HeLa cells led to the efficient release of Vpu defective virion particles [28,36].BST-2 can inhibit the release of almost all enveloped viruses, including retroviruses, flaviviruses, herpesviruses, arenaviruses, rhabdoviruses, and paramyxoviruses [65,66]. Therefore, BST-2 has been proven to be a critical innate immune factor for restricting viral release. Primate lentiviruses express three different proteins that counteract BST-2 antiviral activity: Vpu for HIV-1 [28,36]; Nef for SIV major isolates [51,67,68]; and Env for HIV-2, SIVagmTan, and SIVmac239Δnef isolates [69,70,71,72]. HIV-1 Vpu, HIV-2 Env, and SIV Nef all decrease cell surface levels of BST-2 from budding viral sites to favor virus release [69,70,71,72].BST-2 is a 30–36 kDa type II integral membrane protein that is expressed constitutively as well as following induction by type-I interferon or other pro-inflammatory signals [65]. It consists of a short N-terminal cytoplasmic tail inter-linked to a transmembrane domain and an extracellular domain anchored in the membrane via its glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) moiety in the C-terminal region [73]. BST-2 is distributed mainly in cholesterol-rich microdomains of the cell membrane and intracellular compartments such as the trans-Golgi-network (TGN) and endosomes [73,74].BST-2 can physically tether de novo generated virion particles at the cell membrane of infected cells, thereby decreasing virus release [75,76]. This tethering occurs following formation of homodimers via parallel disulfide-bonding and cross-linking with virions particles and plasma membranes through its membrane anchoring N-terminal domains [75,77]. BST-2 makes “axial” arrangements in which the BST-2 GPI anchors remain connected to the membrane of infected cells. Vpu downregulates BST-2 and interactions between Vpu and BST-2 utilize their respective transmembrane domains. The Ala14, Ala18, and Trp22 residues of the Vpu TMD are crucial for BST-2 downregulation from the cell membrane through direct interaction with specific residues on BST-2 (Val, Iso, Leu, and Leu) [78,79]. These residues are involved in TMD–TMD interactions, create an anti-parallel helix–helix interface [80], and maintain the interaction between these proteins [81,82]. The antagonistic effect of Vpu on BST-2 activity takes place by three sequential steps: downregulation from the cell surface, restriction of BST-2 recycling, and decline in intracellular BST-2 levels. Downregulation of BST-2 at the cell surface is mediated by clathrin-coated vesicles through direct interaction of the AP2 (clathrin adaptor complex) with a Y6XY8 motif (non-canonical dual Tyrosine residues) present in the cytoplasmic tail of BST-2 [74,83]. Vpu restricts the recycling of internalized BST-2 to the cell membrane and blocks the translocation of de novo generated BST-2 to the cell membrane [84,85,86,87].BST-2 is degraded by ubiquitination following recruitment of the SCF-β-TrCP-E3 ligase complex to the DS52GxxS56 motif that is present in the cytosolic region of Vpu [88,89] (Figure 3). Vpu enhances ubiquitination of BST-2 through lysine/serine and threonine amino acid residues present in the cytoplasmic tail of Vpu [89]. Vpu induces ubiquitination and degradation of both BST-2 and CD4 by identical molecular mechanisms, although the outcomes are different. Instead of targeting BST-2 to proteasomes, Vpu induces the β-TrCP-dependent sorting of BST-2 to lysosomes [77,84,88]. Moreover, it has been shown that the ESCRT complex and Rab7 are critical components of the endo-lysosomal trafficking involved in the degradation of BST-2 [90,91] (Figure 3).Of the four HIV-1 groups, the M group is the most highly pathogenic and transmissible because Vpu is highly active, and this increases the ability of the virus to disseminate from one cell to another by counteracting the host protein BST-2 and evading the immune system (Table 1).4.3. Immune Evasion to Virus Fitness and SurvivalInnate immune responses play a significant role in host defenses against viral infections. Innate immune cells like natural killer (NK) and dendritic cells respond to invading viruses and contribute to controlling viral infection and replication during the initial stages of infection [92,93,94]. However, Vpu stabilizes HIV-1 infection and replication by evading immune responses by CD1d and NTB-A downmodulation [42,54]. Vpu also downregulates MHCII molecules from the cell surface to inhibit antigen presentation [39]. Together, these responses help HIV-1-infected cells escape cytotoxic and natural killer cells’ ability to kill the infected cell.4.4. Cell DeathVpu protein can be cytotoxic. It induces cell stress through induction of Fas ligand, p53 stabilization, and activating JNK signaling pathways [40,95,96,97]. Oxidative stress may also contribute to cell death because Vpu induces oxidative stress by stabilization of p53 protein, increasing TGF-β protein levels and increasing the release of cytotoxic substances from HIV-1-infected cells [40,98,99,100]. NADPH oxidase plays fundamental roles in the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and can induce cell death [101,102,103]. P67phox, a subunit of NADPH oxidase enzyme, has TPR repeat sequences including the Vpu-interacting partner SGTA [104,105].4.5. Regulation of Ion Channel ActivityVpu can oligomerize its transmembrane domain and form pentamer ion channel pores selective for monovalent cations [16,24,26]. Vpu ion channel activity is regulated by serine (S23) amino acids that are conserved in HIV-1 M group viruses [106,107]. TASK-1, a mammalian two-pore potassium channel protein with structural homology protein to Vpu, stabilizes cell membrane potential [108,109]. Vpu interacts with TASK-1 proteins, inhibits its ion channel activity, and depolarizes plasma membranes to enhance cellular secretions [108,109,110].4.6. Vpu Effects on HIV-1 LTR ActivityHIV-1 gene activation is dependent on host transcription factors including NF-κB, NFAT, and Ap-1 [111]. Vpu and its structural homolog TASK-1 inhibit transcription of unintegrated HIV-1 DNA in an NF-κB-dependent manner [112]. Vpu mutants (replaced transmembrane domain of Vpu with its structural homologs) also suppress virus production by reducing LTR activity by an unknown mechanism [112,113]. Thus, Vpu appears to be capable of regulating LTR activity to control virus production in infected cells possibly through the involvement of zinc finger proteins and histone deacetylase (HDAC) [114,115,116].4.7. Vpu Effects on EndolysosomesVpu protein is localized to plasma membranes, ER, TGN complex, and endosomes [27,29]. Endosomes fuse with lysosomes and generate endolysosomes, which play crucial roles in physiological and pathological conditions such as antigen presentation, membrane trafficking, metabolism, autophagy, viral infections, cancer, neurological complications, and metabolic disorders [31,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124,125,126]. Endolysosomes are highly acidic organelles and this acidity is regulated by the proton pump v-ATPase [127,128,129], BK channels [130], TRPML1 channels [130], and two-pore channels [131]. Vpu interacting protein ATP6V0C is a subunit of the v-ATPase pump and promotes intracellular aggregation of BST-2 and contributes to HIV-1 release [132]. However, much is still unclear about the effects of Vpu on v-ATPase, endolysosome acidification, endolysosomes’ regulatory functions, membrane trafficking, and autophagy.Autophagy can enhance virus release and secretions from infected macrophage or monocyte cells [133,134,135]. HIV-1 enhances autophagy, while HIV-1 Nef blocks autophagy by direct interactions with Beclin and TFEB sequestration [136,137]. However, very little is currently known about the effects of Vpu on endolysosome degradation or autophagy pathways.5. ConclusionsVpu is an HIV-1 protein that counteracts host factors crucial for disseminating virus and disease progression. The primary targets of Vpu are cell surface host proteins that promote ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation processes [138,139,140]. Vpu might be targeted therapeutically to block the formation of heterooligomeric interactions between Vpu and host proteins at the cell surface as well as to suppress the progression of HIV-1 infection [141]. Moreover, Vpu disturbs the ubiquitination of host proteins by interacting with cellular factor β-TrCP through the cytosolic DSGxxS motif [138].Hence, the transmembrane domain and DSxxSG motif in the cytosolic domain of Vpu may be targeted therapeutically against HIV-1 infection and disease progression.


Title: Evolution of the human immunodeficiency virus type 2 envelope in the first years of infection is associated with the dynamics of the neutralizing antibody response

BackgroundInfection with human immunodeficiency virus type 2 (HIV-2) affects 1-2 million individuals mostly living in West Africa, India and Europe [1,2]. Eight different HIV-2 groups named A through H have been reported but only viruses from groups A and B are known to cause human epidemics [3,4]. Among those, viruses from group A are responsible for the vast majority of HIV-2 infections worldwide.Even though HIV-1 and HIV-2 are closely related viruses and share a high degree of similarity, infections by these viruses lead to very different immunological and clinical outcomes. HIV-2 infection eventually leads to CD4 depletion, AIDS and death [5-7]. However, differently from HIV-1, HIV-2 disease progression usually takes decades without antiretroviral therapy and the majority of HIV-2 infected individuals survive as elite controllers with normal CD4+ T cell counts and low or undetectable plasma viral load [8-16]. Understanding of the factors involved in the effective control of viral replication and disease progression in HIV-2 infected individuals might prove crucial to devise the best strategy to prevent and treat HIV-1.Enhanced immune control could explain the mild outcome of most HIV-2 infections. Unlike HIV-1 infected patients, most HIV-2 patients in chronic stage produce potent and broad neutralizing antibodies [17-21]. Recent evidence has shown that the viruses isolated from HIV-2 infected patients with advanced disease are characterized by increased resistance to entry inhibitors, including the CCR5-antagonist maraviroc [22] and neutralizing antibodies [23], and by a remarkably high evolutionary rate [24,25]. These results suggest that neutralizing antibodies play a central role in HIV-2 evolution and pathogenesis. However, in contrast to HIV-1, still nothing is known about the neutralizing antibody response and the molecular and phenotypic features of HIV-2 in acute/early infection because HIV-2 patients are usually diagnosed many years after seroconversion.Most neutralizing epitopes in the HIV-2 envelope glycoprotein complex are located in the surface gp125 glycoprotein. They have been identified in V1, V2, V3, V4 and C5 regions, and in the CD4-binding site [19,21,23,26-29]. These epitopes are well exposed in the envelope complex of CCR5-using isolates that are usually highly sensitive to antibody neutralization [21,27]. However, X4 isolates that emerge in late stage infection in some HIV-2 patients when C2V3C3-specific neutralizing antibodies wane are highly resistant to antibody neutralization [23]. The V3 loop sequence, size and conformation of the X4 isolates are markedly different from those of R5-neutralization sensitive isolates supporting a direct role of this region in escape from neutralization and a direct role of the neutralizing antibodies in shaping the evolution of V3 in progressive HIV-2 infection. The neutralizing domains expressed in the envelope glycoproteins in acute/early infection and the role of the neutralizing antibodies and neutralization escape in shaping the evolution of the HIV-2 envelope in this period remains to be determined.Perinatal transmission of HIV-2 is a rare event that in Europe has only been documented in Portugal [30-34] and France [35]. Vertical transmission cases constitute a unique opportunity to study the phenotypic and molecular evolution of HIV-2 Env in acute and early infection as well as the role of Nabs in this process. Our objective was to characterize the evolution of the Nab response in two children infected with HIV-2 at birth in association with the molecular and phenotypic evolution of the virus. We show that broad and potent Nabs can be elicited very early after infection and that HIV-2 Env evolves at a very high rate in the first years of infection, this rate being directly associated to the potency of the Nab response. R5-to-X4 tropism change, increased diversity in V1 and V3, and selected changes in V3 conformation were associated with escape from antibody neutralization. The data suggests that the rapid molecular and phenotypic evolution of the HIV-2 envelope in the first years of infection is related with the selective pressure imposed by the neutralizing antibodies.ResultsClinical and virological progression is very fast in the first years of infectionChild 1 infection was diagnosed with HIV-2 infection by PCR and virus isolation in the first month of life in 1998. To confirm the vertical transmission event and characterize the initial infecting virus population, 8 clonal full-length env gene sequences were obtained from samples collected in 1998, 2000 and 2003 (in total 24 env sequences) and from his mother (mother 1-PTHCC20) in 2000 and 2003 (16 env gene sequences). We were unable to obtain 1998 samples from the mother.Child 2 infection was diagnosed in 1992 at day 39 after birth by PCR and virus isolation, and vertical transmission was confirmed by phylogenetic analysis of partial env sequences from the mother and the child [31,32]. Eight new clonal full-length env sequences were obtained from samples collected in 1992, 1997 and 2001 (in total 24 env sequences).Phylogenetic analysis showed that all sequences belonged to HIV-2 group A and that mother and child sequences shared a common ancestor, being more closely related to each other than to any other sequences, which confirms the two vertical transmission events (Figure 1). The sequences showed patient-specific clustering, forming sub-clusters corresponding to each year of infection. The sequences from the first sample from both children segregated into one (child 2) or two (child 1) sub-clusters supported by high bootstrap values indicating that one or two virus variants were transmitted from the mothers to the children (Figure 1).Figure 1Evolutionary relationships between mother and child env sequences. A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was constructed using alignments of clonal env sequences obtained from the children in successive years and from their mothers with reference sequences from HIV-2 groups A, B and G. The bootstrap values supporting the internal branches are shown as follows: * bootstrap >70, ** bootstrap >90. The scale bar represents evolutionary distance in number of substitutions per site. Sequences from child 1 (PTHDECT) are represented by red ircles, with each year of sample collection in orange (1998), red (2000) and dark red (2003); sequences from mother 1 (PTHCC20) are represented by green circles, with each of sample collection in light green (2000) and dark green (2003); sequences from child 2 (PTHDESC) are represented by blue squares with each year of sample collection in light blue (1992), blue (1997) and dark blue (2001); sequence from mother 2 has been published before [32] and is represented by a pink square. The tropism of the viruses is indicated to the right of each cluster.Child 1 was born with normal CD4 percentage (47%) which was sustained until age 3 without ART. The initial infecting virus was CCR5-tropic according to V3 loop sequence analysis of env gene clones obtained in 1998 and to phenotypic analysis of virus isolated in 2000 (Table 1 and Figure 1). At age 5, in 2003, CD4 levels decreased to 27%, plasma viral load increased significantly and the virus changed to CXCR4-tropic as determined by phenotypic analysis [22]. Antiretroviral therapy (ART) was initiated at that time leading to a decrease in viral load to undetectable levels and to an increase in CD4+ T cells to normal levels. Presently, this child is clinically and immunologically stable and remains asymptomatic.Table 1Virological and immunological characterization of the patientsPatientSampling yearAge (Years)Viral load (RNA copies/ml plasma)Viral tropism
a
Number of CD4
+ 
T cells/μl (%)Drug regimenDisease stage
b
Child 119980.11c<200R55342 (47)-N19991<200nd2992 (50)-N200021355R52919 (43)-A120013ndnd3253 (51)-A12003520968X4595 (27)d4T + 3TC + LPV/RTVB220068<200nd1895 (55)d4T + 3TC + LPV/RTVA1201012<40nd1878 (54)3TC + ABC + LPV/RTVA1Child 219920.07d<200R5e1670 (52)AZTC119975<200X41050 (25)AZTC11999713883nd127 (15)AZTC1200191250X444 (5)AZT + 3TCC3 (death)aAs determined phenotypically in TZMbl cells [22] or genotypically based on V3 loop sequence patterns [36]; bAccording to the CDC revised classification system for HIV infection in children; cFirst blood collection was at day 39 after birth; dFirst blood collection was at day 27 after birth; eIsolate obtained at birth was syncytium inducing as determined in PBMCs and several cell lines [32]; d4T–stavudine, 3TC–lamivudine, LPV–lopinavir, RTV–ritonavir, ABC–abacavir, AZT–zidovudine; nd–not determined.Child 2 was born with encephalopathy (CDC clinical stage C1) but with normal CD4+ T cell percentage (52%) and undetectable viral load [31,32] (Table 1). The initial infecting virus was CCR5-tropic, as determined by our V3 loop sequence analysis, but induced syncytia formation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells [31,32].At age 5, CD4 percentage decreased to 25% and the virus changed to CXCR4-tropic, as determined by V3 loop sequence analysis. AZT therapy (1992 up to 1997) and AZT + 3TC therapy (in 2001) did not prevent increase in viral load and further CD4+ T cell decline and the child died of AIDS at age 9.Potent neutralizing antibodies are produced since the first year of infection especially against R5 isolatesPlasma samples were available from day 27 of birth until the age of 12 for child 1, and from age 5 until age 9 (death) for child 2. Neutralizing activity of these samples was tested against autologous virus isolates obtained at age 2 (R5 isolate, CT00) and at age 5 (X4 isolate, CT03) for child 1, and at age 9 for child 2 (X4 isolate, SC01) (Figure 2). For child 1, the most notorious findings were the steep increase in Nab titers against the initial R5 isolate (CT00) during the first 5 years of infection and the high Nab titers still present at age 12 against this isolate. However, Nabs produced during the initial infection period and during later periods were significantly less potent against the X4 isolate that emerged in 2003 at age 5 (CT03) [median (range) of reciprocal log10 IC50 neutralization titers against CT00 and CT03 were 4.6 (3.7-5.4) and 4.1 (3.2-4.4), respectively, P = 0.0472, Mann–Whitney test]. This difference in susceptibility to neutralization of the two isolates was particularly evident from age 5 onwards when the X4 virus emerged in the child. The close associations between rates of Nab escape and R5-to-X4 phenotypic switching suggests that phenotype transition in this infant is directly related with the Nab pressure.Figure 2Evolution of the autologous neutralizing antibody response in the children over the course of infection. The neutralizing activity present in patients plasma was analyzed against their primary virus isolates using a luciferase reporter gene assay in TZM-bl cells; plasma from child 1 from years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2003, 2006 and 2010 were tested against autologous viruses from 2000 [CT00 (R5 tropism)–pink circles] and 2003 [CT03 (X4 tropism)–green circles] and plasma from child 2 from years 1997, 1998, 1999 and 2001 were tested against autologous virus from 2001 [SC01 (X4 tropism)–blue diamonds]. Nab titers are presented as median (symbols) and interquartile range (shades) for each serum/virus. Open symbols signal the neutralization of the contemporaneous isolate. In child 1, straight lines represent neutralization of the virus present at that time of infection and dotted lines represent neutralization of virus not present at that time of infection. The F test was used to compare IC50 values obtained for CT00 (R5) and CT03 (X4) isolates. ***P = 0.0008, ****P < 0.0001.Notably, child 1 also produced neutralizing antibodies that potently neutralized several heterologous primary HIV-2 isolates. Again, the heterologous Nabs were significantly more effective against R5 strains than against X4 strains [median (range) of reciprocal log10 IC50 neutralization titers against R5 and X4 isolates were 3.5 (1.6-4.0) and 2.5 (1.6-4.0), respectively, P = 0.0041] (Figure 3).Figure 3Neutralizing antibody response against heterologous primary isolates in child 1 over the course of infection. A) A heat map of the reciprocal log-transformed IC50 value of each plasma sample from child 1 (left) against a panel of five heterologous primary virus isolates with respective tropism (top) is shown. The reciprocal log10 IC50 value is colour-coded. The darkest colour indicates that neutralization above 50% was still detected with the highest plasma dilution tested (1/5120). The lightest colour indicates that there was no detectable neutralization above 50% with the lowest plasma dilution tested (1/40). n.d.–not done (due to lack of plasma); B) Dot-plot graphic showing the mean and standard deviation of the reciprocal log10 IC50 values obtained against R5 and X4 isolates indicated in A. Mann–Whitney U test was used to compare the median log10 reciprocal IC50 values.In child 2 we could only analyse the evolution of Nab response against the autologous X4-isolate (SC01) from age 5 onwards. Comparing Nab response at age 5 in both patients (the only age-matched data point), we found that it was significantly weaker in child 2 than in child 1 [median (range) of reciprocal log10 IC50 neutralization titer of child 2 against SC01 was 3.5 (3.4-3.6), and those of child 1 against autologous CT00 and CT03 isolates were 5.3 (5.0-5.5) and 4.2 (4.0-4.4), respectively, P < 0.001] (Figure 2). Moreover, in contrast to child 1, Nab titer decreased steadily with infection time as viral load increased and disease progressed to AIDS and death at age 9 (Figure 2 and Table 1). Considering all time points together, average Nab titers were lower than those of child 1 against the age-matched X4 isolate CT03 [median (range) of reciprocal log10 IC50 neutralization titer against isolates SC01 and CT03 were 3.3 (3.0-3.5) and 4.1 (3.2-4.4), respectively, P = 0.057] and against the R5 isolate CT00 [median (range) of reciprocal log10 IC50 neutralization titer against isolates SC01 and CT00 were 3.3 (3.0-3.5) and 4.6 (3.7-5.4), respectively, P = 0.0106].HIV-negative plasmas failed to neutralize HIV-2 strains and HIV-2 plasmas failed to neutralize HIV-1SG3.1 or viruses pseudotyped with VSV envelope indicating the absence of nonspecific inhibitory activities in these samples.Overall, the results obtained with child 1 demonstrate that potent neutralizing antibodies (autologous and heterologous) can be elicited very rapidly after HIV-2 vertical infection. Nabs are highly effective against the transmitted R5 isolates but seem to rapidly select for X4 isolates that escape neutralization. In the absence of effective antiretroviral therapy, as was the case of child 2, increased replication of the Nab-resistant X4 isolates likely contributed to rapid CD4+ T cell depletion and progression to AIDS.HIV-2 Env evolution in acute/early and late infectionAt birth, nucleotide diversity in child 1 was twice that of child 2 in env and five times in C2V3C3 region (Table 2). At age 5, nucleotide diversity increased 2-fold in env and C2V3C3 in child 1 while in child 2 it only increased in C2V3C3 (2-fold) leading to an even higher difference in env and C3V3C3 diversity (3-and 6-fold, respectively). Interestingly, in child 2, diversity increased significantly from age 5 onward, both in env (4-fold when compared to diversity at age 5) and C2V3C3 (11-fold) exceeding that of child 1 at age 5. However, in contrast to the first years of infection, most substitutions occurring in this period were of a synonymous nature as indicated by the sharp decrease in the ω value both in env and C2V3C3.Table 2Nucleotide diversity and divergence rates in the 
env 
gene and C2V3C3 regionPatientSampling yearAge (years)ω
a
Nucleotide diversity
b 
(SD)Evolutionary rate
c 
(95% HPD)envC2V3C3envC2-V3-C3envC2V3C3Child 119980.110.961.520.013 (0.0061)0.014 (0.0063)0.0141 (0.0075, 0.0211)0.0142 (0.0082, 0.0208)200020.885.780.027 (0.0047)0.015 (0.0074)200350.650.500.027 (0.0057)0.031 (0.0118)Child 219920.071.150.380.007 (0.0022)0.003 (0.0026)0.0073 (0.0036, 0.0115)0.0105 (0.0053, 0.0174)199750.992.600.008 (0.0025)0.005 (0.0026)200190.660.620.035 (0.0122)0.055 (0.0157)aRatio of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution rates; bWithin-patient genetic distances and standard deviation (SD) as determined by averaging pairwise tree distances over all the sequences obtained for each patient at each time point; cNucleotide substitutions per site per year (HPD, highest posterior density).The evolutionary rate of env was significantly higher in child 1 than in child 2 (0.0141 vs 0.0073 substitutions/site/year, posterior probability (PP) value <5%) (Table 2). When focusing on the C2V3C3 region, the evolutionary rates were not significantly different (0.0142 vs 0.0105 substitutions/site/year, PP=20%). There was a trend towards positive selection in child 1 (non-synonymous rate: env, 0.0143 and V3, 0.0152; synonymous rate: env, 0.0137 and V3, 0.0124 substitutions/site/year) and purifying selection in child 2 (non-synonymous rate: env, 0.0069 and V3, 0.0092; synonymous rate: env, 0.0082 and V3, 0.0132 substitutions/site/year) in both env and V3.We also analysed the evolution of amino acid diversity, as determined by the sum of Shannon’s entropy, in variable regions of gp125 which contains most of the neutralizing domains [19,21,26,27]. At birth, amino acid diversity was higher in child 1 than in child 2 (Table 3). At age 5, amino acid diversity increased significantly only in V1 and V3 in both patients, this being much more pronounced in child 1. In child 2, from age 5 to age 9 (death), amino acid diversity increased in V1 (9.3-fold), V3 (2.1-fold) and V4 (1.6-fold), though never reaching the level of diversity observed in child 1 at age 5. Amino acid changes observed after the first year in V1 and V3 are shown in Figure 4. In V1 there was no clear pattern of change except for the 2-4 amino acids deletion detected at year 5 in both patients. This deletion was maintained along the full course of infection in child 2. In child 1, three mutations occurring at age 3 were fixed (were kept in year 5) and 4 mutations reversed back to the original residue suggesting that these changes affected viral fitness; in child 2, ten mutations were fixed over the course of infection and there were no reversions suggesting that the mutations did not reduce the fitness of the virus or that compensatory mutations occurred in other regions. Three of the fixed mutations in child 2 were located in a previously described neutralizing epitope [26]. Likewise, in child 1 two mutations of a potentially disruptive nature emerged in this neutralizing epitope (N to K and T to E/G).Figure 4Evolution of V1 and V3 regions. Clonal V1 and V3 amino acid sequences obtained over the course of infection from child 1 (panel A) and child 2 (panel B) were aligned against consensus sequences from the initial infecting isolate. Dots in the alignments indicate sequence identity to the consensus; dashes indicate deletions. Potential N-linked glycans (occurring at NXT/S) are represented in open boxes. Amino acids highlighted in light grey are involved in tropism change [36]. Blue boxes in the consensus sequence represent published linear neutralizing epitopes in V1 [28] and V3 [26]; red boxes in the consensus sequence represent a conformational epitope in V3 [26]. Viral tropism is indicated at the right of the alignment as determined phenotypically or genotypically based on V3 loop sequence patterns. Black arrows signal fixed mutations.Table 3Evolution of amino acid diversity in variable Env regions in the first five years of infectionPatientVariable regionsSum of entropyFold increaseyear of birthyear 5child 1V11.3248.6576.5V201.885naV30.7543.6144.8V40.9390.662naV503.402naV1-V53.01718.226.0child 2V10.3770.7542.0V21.1310.377naV30.3771.1313.0V401.316naV50.3770naV1-V52.2623.5781.6na- not applicable.In V3, mutations occurred almost exclusively within previously described neutralizing epitopes [26], and at residues 18, 19 and 27 that have been associated with R5 and X4 tropism [36-38]. One amino acid insertion occurred in the same position in both children and involved a hydrophobic residue (V in child 1; I in child 2). This type of insertion has also been associated to R5-to-X4 tropism switch [36,37].Env adaptation to Nab pressure is usually associated with positive selection of specific amino acids that might be located in neutralizing domains [39]. At year 5 of infection there were 10 positively selected sites in Env of child 1 (seven in gp125) (Table 4). Most sites (6 out of 10) were located in confirmed neutralizing domains (V2, V3 and C5 in gp125 and MPER in gp36) [27]. In contrast, positively selected sites were absent in child 2 at year 5 of infection and there were only 2 selected sites in the final year of infection. These results reveal a much better adaptation to Nab pressure in child 1 compared to child 2.Table 4Positive selective pressure on the Env glycoproteins in both children over the course of infectionEnv glycoproteinCodons under selective pressure (location)
1
Child 1Child 2Year of birthYear 2Year 5Year of birthYear 5Year 9gp125none5, 7 (in SP)178 (V2), 255, 259 (C2), 320 (V3), 459 (V5), 467, 471 (C5)nonenone395 (C3)gp36nonenone552 (HR1), 672, 673 (MPER)nonenone562 (HR1)1Codons identified as being significantly (P <0.05) under selective pressure are indicated; SP, signal peptide; V2, variable region 2; C2, conserved region 2; C3, conserved region 3; V3, variable region 3; V5, variable region 5; C5, conserved region 5; HR1, helical region 1; MPER, membrane proximal external region.In all, these results show that HIV-2 env can evolve and diversify very rapidly in the first years of infection. The positive correlation between the rate of Env evolution, in terms of nucleotide divergence from the initial virus, nucleotide diversity, amino acid diversity, and positive selection, and the rate of Nab response and escape indicates that Nabs likely have a major impact on HIV-2 Env evolution in the first years of infection.Tropism and susceptibility to antibody neutralization are closely associated with V3 structureIn long-term HIV-2 infected individuals the envelope V3 region adopts a significantly different structure in Nab-resistant isolates as compared to Nab-sensitive isolates, supporting a direct role of V3 conformation in the different susceptibility of these viruses to antibody neutralization [23]. To gain some insight into the structural evolution of the V3 region in the first years of HIV-2 infection and try to relate it to tropism and susceptibility to antibody neutralization, model structures of C2-V3-C3 regions from both children were generated by homology modelling using the three-dimensional structure of an unliganded SIV gp120 envelope glycoprotein as template. Remarkably, the V3 loop, which was characterized by a high content of irregular secondary structure in the first year of infection, converged to an similar β-hairpin structure at year five of infection in both infants and remained in this conformation until the last year of infection in child 2 (Figure 5 and Additional file 1: Table S1). The rate of acquisition of the β-hairpin conformation fully correlated with the rate of R5-to-X4 tropism transition and with the rate of escape from antibody neutralization.Figure 5Evolution of the structure of C2-V3-C3 envelope region. Three-dimensional structures of C2-V3-C3 amino acid sequences from child 1 and 2 were generated by homology modelling using the three-dimensional structure of an unliganded SIV gp120 envelope glycoprotein as template. A) Superimposition of the structures of C2-V3-C3 of child 1 in 1998 (yellow), 2000 (blue) and 2003 (pale red); B) Superimposition of the structures of C2-V3-C3 of child 2 in 1992 (yellow), 1997 (blue) and 2001 (pale red). V3 loop and C2 and C3 stretches are indicated in the figures. C) Three-dimensional structures of C2-V3-C3 from child 1 (CT) in 2003 (blue) and child 2 (SC) in1997 (red). At this time both viruses were X4 and showed resistance to Nabs.DiscussionThere is limited knowledge on the natural history of HIV-2 infection and on the molecular and phenotypic evolutionary dynamics of HIV-2 because no study has investigated the full course of infection from the time of seroconversion. The current study is the first characterization of the Nab response and molecular and phenotypic evolution of HIV-2 followed from acute infection to late stage infection. Our studies were based on two children infected by vertical transmission and spanned the first 12 years of infection in one case and the complete infection period in the other (9 years). We show that a potent Nab response is raised very early after infection and that the rate and pattern of molecular and phenotypic evolution of the HIV-2 Env are closely associated to the rate of Nab escape.Child 2 was born severely ill despite the normal CD4+ T cell percentage [31,32] whereas child 1 was born asymptomatic and with normal CD4 levels. Despite the contrasting clinical conditions at birth, major CD4 depletion and disease progression occurred in both children in the first 5 years of infection. This fast disease course is typical of HIV-1 infected children in the absence of antiretroviral treatment [40] but is highly unusual in HIV-2 infected individuals [10,34,41,42]. Both patients were infected with R5 strains but transitions to X4 tropism occurred rapidly, being detected after only 5 years of infection. This is the first time that a full R5-to-X4 tropism switch is observed in HIV-2 infected patients and it was unexpected to find it in paediatric patients. Like in some adult HIV-2 patients with advanced disease [23,37,43], the emergence of X4 viruses in our patients was associated with high viral load, marked CD4 depletion and disease progression. Hence, the rapid disease course in the two infants may have been determined by the early emergence of X4 isolates.At birth, HIV-2 nucleotide diversity in child 1 was 2-fold higher than in child 2 both in env and C2V3C3. Nucleotide diversity in child 1 was also 2-fold higher than in HIV-1 infected children in the first weeks after birth [44-46] and in HIV-1 adult patients during seroconversion [47]. Envelope diversity also increased more significantly, both at the nucleotide and amino acid levels, in child 1 than in child 2 in the first 5 years of infection. Consistently, the evolutionary rate of the env gene in child 1 was almost two times higher than child 2 and similar to that found in chronic HIV-2 infected patients under ART (0.0102 substitutions/site/year) [24]. These results reveal a remarkably high rate of molecular evolution of the HIV-2 envelope in child 1 during the first 5 years of infection and a moderate rate of evolution in child 2. The evolutionary rate in child 2 was similar to that in HIV-1 patients who, when untreated, have a disease progression generally similar to that of child 2. Thus, the higher rate in child 1 is consistent with the better immune control.Previously, we have shown that production of gp36-specific and gp125-specific antibodies occurred during the first year of age in child 1 and that, at age 2, levels of binding antibodies to these glycoproteins were already similar to those found in HIV-2 infected patients in the chronic stage of disease [16]. In child 2, although gp36-specific antibodies were produced to near normal levels, there was a remarkably weak production of gp125-specific binding antibodies. Consistently, in this work we found that child 1 produced a much stronger Nab response than child 2. In child 1 autologous neutralizing antibodies appeared within the first year of infection, increased over time to levels that were similar to chronically infected patients [18,19,21], and were sustained until at least the age of 12. Moreover, child 1 also produced a potent Nab response against several heterologous virus isolates. As for child 2, the autologous Nab titer was significantly lower compared to child 1 at age 5 and decreased continuously to very low titers following the rapid decline of CD4 cells and progression to AIDS and death at age 9. Similar findings have been reported in late stage disease adult patients in whom Nab titers decrease in direct association with CD4+ T cell depletion [23]. Overall, these results suggest that a potent Nab response during the acute/early phase of infection might contribute to control HIV-2 disease progression. Further investigation of the relationship between Nab response and disease progression in the acute and early stages of HIV-2 infection of adult patients is required as this might provide new insights into the benign course of most HIV-2 infections.The differences in Nab response between the two children also correlate well with the magnitude and rate of envelope evolution in the infants which suggest a close association between the neutralizing antibody response and the evolution of the HIV-2 envelope in these patients. Several lines of evidence further suggest that escape from Nab response is a major determinant of the evolution of the HIV-2 envelope in these infants, especially in child 1. First, complete replacement of virus quasispecies was noted in phylogenetic analysis of env sequences produced at the different time points which is compatible with a situation of ongoing viral escape from antibody neutralization [48]. Second, amino acid diversity increased significantly with infection time, especially in V1 and V3 which are major neutralizing domains in HIV-2. This is a major HIV escape mechanism as a single polymorphism can alter epitope sequence and/or conformation and reduce recognition and/or binding affinity by neutralizing antibodies [39,48-52]. Third, increase in dN/dS ratio and positive selection in the envelope were closely related to rate of Nab escape in child 1 [39,51]. Finally, the similar gain of secondary structure in V3 in both patients fully correlated with the rate of escape from antibody neutralization. This has been recently associated to HIV-2 resistance to antibody neutralization in chronic HIV-2 infected patients [23].Nabs were significantly more potent against R5 isolates than against X4 isolates (autologous and heterologous) confirming the inherent resistance of X4 viruses to antibody neutralization [23,53]. More importantly, increase in Nab resistance in child 1 preceded the emergence of X4 variant suggesting that tropism switch may have been driven by the neutralizing antibodies. Given the immunodominance of the V3 region in HIV-2 infected patients [54], the location of two of the three amino acid residues that are associated to R5 and X4 tropism (positions 18 and 19) [36-38] within the first neutralizing epitope in V3 [26] and the major difference in V3 conformation of R5 and X4 strains [23], the close association between HIV-2 susceptibility to antibody neutralization and tropism seen in these infants is not surprising.The main limitations of this study are the small number of patients and the inexistence of viral isolates from all time points in both children. However, worldwide it has been impossible to find individuals acutely infected with HIV-2. Moreover, due to the low or absent viral load it is often impossible to isolate virus from HIV-2 infected patients. Notwithstanding these limitations, we believe that our results are a major contribution to our understanding of the natural history of HIV-2 infection and of the role of the immune system in controlling and shaping HIV-2 evolution.ConclusionsIn conclusion, we show that a potent Nab response is elicited very early after HIV-2 infection and that the HIV-2 envelope evolves at a high rate in the first years of infection, this rate being directly correlated to the potency of the Nab response. R5-to-X4 tropism switch, increased nucleotide and amino acid diversity in V1 and V3, and convergence of V3 to a β-hairpin structure were closely associated with escape from the Nab response suggesting that Nabs have a major impact on the rapid molecular and phenotypic evolution of the viral envelope in acute and early in HIV-2 infection. Our studies provide further support to a model of HIV-2 pathogenesis in which Nabs play a central role.MethodsStudy subjects and ethicsTwo children infected by vertical transmission were studied. Blood samples were collected from child 1 (patient PT.HDE.CT), 39 days after birth in 1998, in 1999, 2000, 2001, 2003, 2006 and 2010, and from child 2 (patient PT.HDE.SC), 27 days after birth in 1992, in 1997 and 2001. Clinical and immunological characteristics of the patients are shown in Table 1. Child 1 started ART (stavudine + lamivudine + lopinavir/ritonavir) in November 2003. Presently, the child is taking lamivudine + abacavir + lopinavir/ritonavir; his viral load is undetectable and he is clinically and immunologically stable. Child 2 started ART with zidovudine immediately after birth and lamivudine was added in 2001. In 2001, viral load increased slightly and CD4+ T cells decreased sharply leading to the child’s death. Ethical approval was obtained from the Ethics Committee of Hospital Curry Cabral and written informed consent was obtained from the children's parents before entry into the study.HIV-2 env gene PCR amplification, cloning and sequencingChromossomal DNA was extracted from infected PBMC’s using Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit (Promega) according to the manufacturer recommendations. A 2600 bp fragment encompassing the entire env gene was amplified by nested Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) using the Expand Long Template PCR Systemkit (Roche) and newly designed primers (Additional file 2: Table S2). The PCR protocol consisted of denaturation at 95°C for 5 min, 35 amplification cycles of 15 sec at 94°C, 30 sec at 59°C and 3 min at 68°C with 5 sec increments and a final elongation step at 68°C for 30 min. 5 μl of PCR product was used as the template for nested PCR. The amplification profile of the nested PCR was identical to the first PCR, except for annealing temperature and extension time (61°C and 2 min respectively). PCR amplicons were purified with a JETQUICK Gel Extraction Spin Kit (Genomed). For each sample, PCR products were cloned into the pcDNA3.1/V5-His-TOPO vector (Invitrogen), using the TOPO TA Expression Kit (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. At least eight clones from each patient/year were sequenced using the BigDye Terminator V3.1 Cycle sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems); sequencing primers are displayed in Additional file 2: Table S2. Sequencing was performed on an ABI 3100–Avant Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).Sequence analysisClustal × 2.1 [55] software was used to construct alignments of HIV-2 env sequences. Reference HIV-2 sequences were obtained from the Los Alamos National Laboratory HIV sequence database [56]. Maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses were performed using the best-fit model of molecular evolution estimated in PAUP by Modeltest using likelihood ratio tests [57]. The chosen model was GTR + I + G. Tree searches were conducted in PAUP using nearest-neighbour interchange (NNI) and tree-bisection plus reconnection (TBR) heuristic search strategies [58], and bootstrap resampling with 1000 replicates [59]. The genetic distances between sequences were calculated by averaging pairwise tree distances using all sequences obtained for each patient at each time point, as previously described [60]. Putative recombinants were identified using the Phi-statistic [61] available in SplitsTree version 4.10 [62] by performing 10 randomized reductions of putative recombinants. Putative recombinant sequences were removed before doing the evolutionary rate analyses. These were: 00PTHDECT_9, 00PTHDECT_16, 00PTHDECT_22, 00PTHDECT_6, 00PTHDECT_24, 00PTHDECT_19, 00PTHDECT_8, 00PTHDECT_12, 03PTHDECT_17, 03PTHDECT_33, 03PTHDECT_21, 01PTHDESC_13, 01PTHDESC_6 and 01PTHDESC_14.Selective pressure on the HIV-2 Env was examined with the DATAMONKEY web-server [63], after removing all positions containing gaps and missing data from the dataset. All estimations were performed using the MG94 codon substitution model [64] crossed with the nucleotide substitution model GTR, previously selected with Modeltest (see above). The single-likelihood ancestor counting (SLAC) method was used to infer the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous nucleotide substitutions (dN/dS) averaged over all codon positions of the alignment. To identify individual codons under selective pressure, site-specific dN/dS rates were estimated by the relaxed-effects likelihood (REL) method, with a cut-off value for the Bayes factor of 50 [65].The Bayesian program BEAST was used to estimate the nucleotide evolutionary rates [66]. The SRD06 model [67] of substitution was used and two different clock models were used, relaxed lognormal and strict clock. A constant parametric demographic model as well as the non-parametric Skyline plot with 3 groups was tested. The MCMC chains were chosen so that the effective sample size for all parameters exceeded 300 and convergence was assessed by inspecting the traces in the program Tracer [68]. Appropriate demographic and molecular clock models were chosen by examining the marginal posterior distributions of relevant parameters.Potential N-linked glycosylation sites were identified using the N-Glycosite software [69] and the entropy at each position in protein alignment was measured with Shannon’s entropy [70], both available at the Los Alamos National Laboratory HIV sequence database [56].Virus isolation and tropism characterizationPrimary virus isolates were obtained from both patients using the co-cultivation method as described previously [32]. Viral tropism (CCR5 and/or CXCR4 usage) was determined in TZM-bl cells in the presence of CCR5 or CXCR4 antagonists as described previously [22]. Tropism was also determined genetically using the V3 loop clonal sequences and the algorithm described by Visseuxet al[36] which is based in the sequence, size and charge of the V3 loop.Neutralization assayThe neutralizing activity present in patients serum was analyzed against autologous and heterologous primary virus isolates using a luciferase reporter gene assay in TZM-bl cells, as described previously [2,53,71]. Briefly, the cells [10,000 cells in 100 μl of complete growth medium (GM) that consists of DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS)], were added to each well of 96-well flat-bottom culture plates (Nunc) and allowed to adhere overnight. One hundred μl of each virus (corresponding to 200 TCID50) were incubated for 1 h at 37°C with 2-fold serial dilutions of heat-inactivated patients sera in a total volume of 200 μl of GM containing DEAE-Dextran (20 μg/ml). The lowest serum dilution used in the assays was 1:80. Forty-eight hours later, plates were analyzed for luciferase activity on a luminometer (TECAN) using the One-Glow Luciferase Assay System (Promega, Madison, WI). Medium only control wells were measured as background, and virus-only control wells were included as 100% infection. Neutralization titers were expressed as the reciprocal of the plasma dilution that inhibited virus infection by 50% (IC50). IC50 was estimated by the sigmoidal dose–response (variable slope) equation in Prism version 5.0 [72]. Nonspecific inhibition was assessed by testing all HIV-2 isolates against HIV-negative plasma and all plasma s∆env as backbone).Structural modelsStructural models of the C2-V3-C3 domain in gp125 were produced with SWISS-MODEL homology modelling server in automated mode, using PDB file 2BF1 (SIV) as template [73,74]. Accelrys Discovery Studio 2.1 (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, USA, 2008) was used to produce three dimensional images of the obtained models and perform the secondary structure analysis of the V3 loop.Statistical analysisStatistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 5.0 [72] with a level of significance of 5%. F test was used to compare best fit values of IC50 slopes obtained with CT00 and CT03 isolates from child 1. Non parametric Mann Whitney test was used to compare autologous Nab responses (mean IC50s) between child 1 and child 2. To compare evolutionary rates we computed the posterior probability (PP) that one rate exceeded the other and the probability was determined numerically by randomly sampling from the empirical posterior distributions [24]. Kruskal-Wallis test was used to compare mean Shannon’s entropies between variable Env regions of both patients.GenBank accession numbersFull-length envelope sequences generated in this study are available from GenBank under the following accession numbers: GU983917-GU983940 and JX219591-JX219614.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors’ contributionsNT and TL designed the study; CR, HS, TL, AQ and NT analysed the data and wrote the paper; CR performed the experiments; CR, HS and TL, performed the evolutionary analysis;,CR, RC, PB, JMM, IB and HB provided analytical reagents and nucleotide sequences; CR, PB and NT performed the statistical analysis; CF and AQ performed the structural analysis; PG performed the viral load assays; LR and PCS contributed clinical data from the patients. The final text was read and approved for submission by all authors.Supplementary MaterialAdditional file 1: Table S1Percentage of major secondary structure motifs present in the V3 loop of HIV-2 isolates obtained from child 1 and 2.Click here for fileAdditional file 2: Table S2PCR and sequencing primers for the HIV-2 env gene. aOuter PCR primer; bInner PCR primer; cSequencing primer.Click here for file


Title: HIV Infection and Spread between Th

1. IntroductionHuman immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection is a global public health concern and the etiological agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). There is no known cure for HIV infection to date, and the demand for an HIV cure is on the rise, given its associated costs, adverse events, stigma, as well as lifelong treatments using antiretroviral therapy (ART) [1]. Worldwide, about 37.7 million people were living with HIV by the end of 2020, with an estimated 27.5 million people able to access ART during the same year [2,3,4]. Although new HIV infections are decreasing globally, a devastating estimated 1.5 million people became newly infected in 2020 [4].The exact HIV pandemic origin is unknown; however, it is well documented that HIV infection spread from non-human primates to humans around the 1900s [5,6]. HIV is a complex retrovirus of the lentivirus family [7]. Retroviruses are characterized by the fact that they carry their genetic material as single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) along with the necessary components to hijack the genetic machinery of a target cell to replicate itself. The main types of HIV infection include HIV-1 and HIV-2, which present differences in replication and pathogenicity but share similarities in genetic and biological properties [8]. Most HIV infections correspond to HIV-1 which is also documented to be more pathogenic than HIV-2 [8,9]. If left untreated, HIV-1’s mortality rate is over 95% [8,9]. HIV-1 is an enveloped retrovirus with two copies of an ssRNA genome, which enters the host primarily through mucosal surfaces, where it replicates after the integration of the newly retro-transcribed double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) [5,10,11]. Predominant routes of HIV-1 transmission include sexual contact, percutaneous (through contaminated needles and blood products), and perinatal [5,10,12]. Worldwide, about 90% of new HIV infections are attributed to sexual transmission, with most infected people being women [13,14,15].One of the hallmarks of HIV-1 is that it selectively infects and depletes CD4+ T cells, disrupting T cell homeostasis [8,16]. As a result, HIV patients develop a rapid drop in T cell counts, a ramp-up phase of viremia, and impaired immunity [8,16]. The problem is complex, since as soon as HIV-1 infection initiates, reservoirs may also establish within resting memory CD4+ T cells and other cells [17]. HIV is well-versed in hiding from the immune system and persisting regardless of a lifetime under suppressive ART [17,18]. ART can inhibit new rounds of viral replication, reduce plasma viral load below clinical detection limits (20 to 50 RNA copies/mL), and interrupt disease progression [17,18]; however, some HIV-infected cells survive as persistent and latently infected cells [19]. Although early initiation of ART has brought improved life expectancy to patients, it has its limitations, and the different treatment regimens are unable to deplete latent reservoirs, prevent infection establishment, and efficiently suppress new infections [16,18]. HIV-1 latent reservoirs persist undetectable regardless of ART, annihilating all chances for ART to eradicate HIV infection. Current proposed strategies to eliminate latent HIV-1 reservoirs include “shock and kill”, “block and lock”, and “lock in and apoptosis” [17]. The “shock and kill” approach aims to “shock” or reactivate the latent virus using latency-reversing agents (LRAs) such as toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists and histone deacetylases (HDACs), and then “kill” infected cells or eliminate the latent reservoir via targeted cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response [17,20]. The “block and lock” approach aims to enhance the latent virus state by “blocking” HIV transcription and “locking” the HIV promoter in a deep or super latent state using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) or trans-activator of transcription (Tat) inhibitors to disrupt epigenetic regulators or viral replication [17,20]. Moreover, the “lock in and apoptosis” approach aims to block virus budding from the cell using LRAs, and Pr55Gag HIV-1 protease inhibitor [17]. Alternative approaches to target latent HIV reservoirs involve gene therapy via stem cell transplantation or via gene editing using CRISPR/Cas9 and zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN) [17,20]. Still, an effective strategy to eliminate HIV infection remains elusive.Remarkable research efforts have led to a better understanding of HIV target cells (mainly CD4+ T cells), and HIV cellular reservoirs, including naïve CD4+ T cells (TN), stem cell-like memory (TSCM), central memory (TCM), transitional memory (TTM), effector memory CD4+ T cells (TEM), T helper 1, 2, 17, 9 (Th1, Th2, Th17, Th9) cells, regulatory T cells (Treg), follicular T helper cells (Tfh), astrocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), and tissue-resident macrophages which establish in different tissues soon after acquiring infection [21,22]. In light that current approaches including ART are unable to prevent acute mucosal CD4+ T cell depletion after first exposure to the virus, gaining a better understanding of permissive cell types, mechanisms of transmission, and cellular reservoirs could be beneficial to devise new approaches for HIV eradication efforts. For instance, Th17 antiviral function of HIV infection is not completely understood; however, Th17 cells are key to HIV pathogenesis and represent potential targets to help prevent or reduce HIV transmission. Here, we review important insights and recent findings of the role of Th17 cells during HIV pathogenesis in mucosal surfaces, and the mechanisms of HIV-1 infection spread among T cells in tissues (Figure 1).2. Mucosa HIV-1 Pathogenesis and the Role of Th17 CellsMucosal surfaces are crucial to HIV-1 transmission, as these constitute the boundary between the host and the environment [21,22]. The mucosal immune system (commonly described as the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue or MALT) is the largest epithelial surface consisting of lymph nodes (LNs) and lymphoid tissues present in submucosal layers of the gastrointestinal (GI), respiratory, urinary, and genital tracts, in addition to eyes, tonsils, thyroid, breasts and salivary glands [10,23]. The gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) is part of the MALT and includes Peyer’s patches in the small intestine and mesenteric lymph nodes (MLNs) [21,22]. The GI mucosa represents a cardinal site of HIV-1 pathogenesis due to its role as a portal of entry and as a site of infection dissemination to lymphoid tissues [24,25]. During mucosal viral exposure, HIV-1 targets CD4+ T cells, macrophages, Hofbauer cells (HCs or placental macrophages), Kupffer cells (KCs or liver macrophages), DCs, DC-SIGN+ DCs, Langerhans cells (LCs), and mast cells (MCs) located in the epithelial layer or within the vicinity, which can be responsible for residual replication [9,26,27,28,29,30]. It is well established that HIV-1 induces a progressive and steady loss of CD4+ T cell count, leading to the impossibility of containing HIV infection, which is characteristic of HIV pathogenesis and culminates in AIDS progression [9,26,27,28,29,30].The three recognized stages of HIV infection, acute infection, chronic infection, and AIDS, are defined by viral load, CD4+ T cell count, as well as clinical progression; however, prior to the appearance of acute infection symptoms, there is an initial eclipse phase (up to 10 days) in which infection is established at the exposure site, while viral load has not yet reached detectable levels in the circulation [31]. The acute or primary infection phase of HIV is recognized as the time from acquisition until seroconversion (up to 4 weeks from first exposure) [9]. Acute infection is characterized by “flu-like” symptoms along with high levels of viremia (up to 107 or more copies of viral RNA per mL of blood), a substantial drop in both peripheral and lymph nodes CD4+ T cell counts, and an increase in overall CD8+ T cells [9,31,32]. The chronic phase of infection or clinical latency (1 to 20 years after acute infection) is characterized as an asymptomatic phase with a continued decline of CD4+ T cells, usually correlating with AIDS progression along with the level of immune activation, presenting with constant or slow levels of viremia (in the order of 1 to 100,000 copies/mL) [33,34]. AIDS is the final stage of HIV infection, when CD4+ T cells abruptly decline (below 200 cells per mm3, in contrast to the normal range between 500 and 1500 cells per mm3), at this point, HIV-1 infection control is lost, viremia rises, and opportunistic infections also rise as a result of CD4+ T cells depletion. This stage often culminates in death [9,33,35]. Mucosal CD4+ T cell recovery during chronic infection is often used to predict the clinical outcome with no recovery in rapid progressors, and only transient recovery in normal and long-term progressors [24]. Unfortunately, undetectable plasma viral loads are no guarantee of viral particles’ absence. In fact, HIV RNA and DNA have been identified in GALT despite ART and undetectable viral loads in plasma [36]. Furthermore, most individuals under ART with plasma HIV-1 RNA suppressed below the limits of detection (20 to 40 copies/mL) as per commercial assays, still show detectable HIV-1 RNA in plasma (1 to 3 copies/mL) by RT-qPCR [37].Prior to dissemination and latency, HIV-1 establishes infection by a single viral particle infecting a single cell, mainly a CD4+ T cell [9,38,39]. CD4+ T cells represent most cells residing within the GI tract, LNs, and other lymphatic tissues [40]. GALT is recognized as the primary site of HIV replication where CD4+ T cells are massively and rapidly depleted during primary infection; however, and contrary to older beliefs, the activation state of target cells is not required for acquiring HIV infection [36,41,42,43]. Macal et al. demonstrated that a good number of CD4+ T cells in GALT of HIV-infected patients are not activated [36,41]. HIV-1 entry into target cells requires the engagement of the surface subunit gp120 of the viral envelope glycoprotein (Env) to host CD4, and C-C motif chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) and/or C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) serving as HIV co-receptors in the host cell membrane [11,44]. Viruses using CCR5 co-receptors (also known as R5 viruses/R5-tropic strains) are responsible for viral transmission and establishment of infection, while viruses using CXCR4 (also known as X4 viruses/X4-tropic strains), or both co-receptors (also R5X4 viruses/dual-tropic strains) have been identified at later time points during disease progression [38]. Both HIV-1 and the lab SIVmac model preferentially infect T cells expressing CCR5 co-receptors [39,45,46]. Indeed, CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells have been reported to constitute most CD4+ T cells present in MALT as opposed to CCR5− CD4+ T cells mostly present in peripheral blood and LNs [33].Once HIV-1 infects a CD4+ T cell, it integrates its genetic material into the host cell’s DNA to either initiate a cycle of replication or remain inactive [47]. After integration, the HIV-1 genome resides within the DNA of the infected CD4+ T cell, acquiring lifelong persistence [33,36]. Once a replication cycle is completed, mature HIV-1 virions are released into the extracellular space ready to spread and infect other host-permissive CD4+ T cells. CD4+ T cells participate in orchestrated cascades of immune responses against acute and chronic viral infections, and they serve as mediators between innate and adaptive immunity [8,34,48]. One peculiarity of CD4+ T cells is that they can differentiate into different T cell subsets responsible for mounting specific adaptive immune responses [49]. By the same token, different subsets of CD4+ T cells possess different levels of susceptibility and permissiveness to HIV infection [42]. Among CD4+ T cells, Th17 cells represent a major T cell lineage at mucosal sites known to be highly susceptible and permissive to HIV/SIV entry, and capable of supporting intracellular viral replication [26,33,42,50,51,52]. Th17 cells are primarily enriched in the intestinal lamina propria (LP) and vaginal cervix mucosa [33,49,53,54,55].Th17 cells were identified in 2005 [56,57,58,59]. Th17 cells (CCR4+ CCR6+ CXCR3− CD161+) derive from CD161+ precursors and constitutively express CCR4 and CCR6, but not CXCR3 [59]. Established T cell lineages are commonly characterized through canonical sets of cytokines and transcription factors [60]. For instance, Th17 cells are defined by the expression of a transcription factor profile including retinoic acid-related orphan receptor gamma t (RORγt), RAR-related orphan receptor alpha (RORα), and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3), and by the secretion of cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-8, -17A, -17F, -21, -22, -26, as well as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), and C-C motif chemokine ligand 20 (CCL20, also MIP-3α) [61]. Th17 differentiation requires cytokines such as transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-β) and IL-6 [60,62,63]. Low doses of TGF-β, along with IL-6, induce STAT3 and RORγt expression, which promotes Th17 development [51,63,64,65]. In contrast, high doses of TGF-β inhibit RORγt while promoting the generation of inducible Treg (iTreg) cells [51,64,65]. IL-21 is a required survival factor involved in Th17 expansion [51]. IL-1β contributes to Th17 differentiation and expansion [51,60,63]. IL-23 is a requirement for pathogenicity in Th17 [51]. Together, IL-1β and IL-23 are vital to complete Th17 lineage commitment program by repressing IL-10 and inducing B lymphocyte maturation protein-1 (Blimp-1) expression in Th17 cells [51,63].In contrast to Th1 and Th2 cells, which are considered as stable lineages, Th17 cells are more plastic and less terminally differentiated cells capable to undergo lineage reprogramming and transdifferentiate into Th1, Th2, Tfh, or Treg like subsets, particularly under lymphopenic or inflammatory conditions [51,63,64,65,66]. Contingent upon the microenvironment, Th17 cells have the potential to acquire new effector features and convert toward other lineage subsets [51,66]. Th17 cells generated either in vitro or in vivo can retain the Th17 phenotype or can acquire new effector characteristics upon secondary stimulation [65]. Th17 cells may shift toward Th1Th17 cells during autoimmunity, cancer, and infections or toward Th2Th17 cells during asthma [66]. For instance, Th17 cells in the presence of IL-12 or IL-23 and in the absence of TGF-β convert toward Th1Th17 cells (IFN-γ secreting) [51,65]. Lymphopenic conditions also shift Th17 cells toward pathogenic IFN-γ secreting cells in models of diabetes mellitus [65]. And TNF-α has been reported to shift Th17 cells toward Th1Th17 subsets [51]. On the other hand, Th17 cells exposed to IL-4 acquire the ability to produce Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-5 while expressing IL-17A, IL-21, and IL-22 [51]. These Th2Th17 cells have been detected in the peripheral blood of patients with chronic asthma [51]. In the context of autoimmune diseases or infections, Th17 cells may also convert toward Treg cells [66]. Intestinal Th17 cells can reprogram toward IL-10 producing Treg cells under pro-inflammatory conditions in the gut involving Aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and TGF-β signaling or upon high levels of TGF-β and retinoid acid [51,64]. Some reports indicate that Th17 cells transdifferentiate into Treg cells naturally during the resolution of inflammation [51]. Finally, Th17 cells reprogram toward Tfh and contribute to the development of IgA-secreting germinal center B cells [51,66].The dual activity of Th17 cells is extensively documented. Th17 cells are beneficial in maintaining mucosal barrier integrity and homeostasis [33,49,51,52,53,54,67,68], while the role of Th17 cells in maintaining gut integrity is crucial against fungal and bacterial infections [24,51]. One of the mechanisms of Th17 cells to maintain epithelial barrier integrity involves CCR6 expression to be recruited to the skin and to the small intestine in response to CCL20 (the ligand for CCR6) where they stabilize by IL-23 [26,53,59,69]. Mucosal epithelial cells secrete CCL20 in response to inflammatory stimuli, including pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-1α and TNFα) and bacteria [69]. Then, Th17-derived IL-17 and IFN-γ stimulate keratinocytes and APCs to produce more IL-1α, IL-23, and CCL20, resulting in a feedback loop for keratinocyte proliferation and pro-inflammatory cytokines, production and secretion [26,53,59,69]. Conversely, Th17 cells are also inducers of inflammation (by recruiting neutrophils, inducing chemokine expression, and releasing inflammatory cytokines) as well as contributors to autoimmune disorders (i.e., multiple sclerosis, psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, and asthma) [33,49,51,52,53,54,67]. Furthermore, Th17 cells are recognized as vital effector cells in adaptive immunity able to recruit epithelial cells, neutrophils, and B cells, in addition to directly responding to infections by pathogens including fungi (i.e., Candida albicans), mycobacteria (i.e., Mycobacterium tuberculosis), and extracellular bacteria (i.e., Klebsiella pneumoniae) [33,49]. Recent reports by Agak et al. identified a subpopulation of Th17 cells capable of capturing and killing extracellular bacteria by secreting antimicrobial proteins and T cell extracellular traps (TETs) in cell culture systems [60].Observations from several groups suggest that HIV infection of T cells is enhanced under conditions containing Th17 polarizing cytokines (i.e., IL-1β, TGF-β, IL-6, and IL-23) in culture systems; furthermore, Th17 cells are preferentially depleted from GALT during acute HIV/SIV infection in vivo [52,70]. Current evidence has led to wonder what are the features that make Th17 cells susceptible to HIV/SIV infection and depletion. There is still no consensus to answer this question, but several proposals are considered.3. Mechanisms That Contribute to the Preferential Loss of Th17 Cells during HIV-1 InfectionThe rapid loss of Th17 cells is documented to be key to HIV/SIV pathogenesis [33,42,51,52]. Maek et al. pioneered reports highlighting increased IL-17 production by circulating T cells, and the role of Th17 cells during HIV infection [71]. It is recognized that Th17 cells are susceptible to HIV/SIV entry, then after successful virus internalization, Th17 cells can support virus replication and production [52]; however, there is evidence that Th17 cells play inhibitory effects against HIV replication and amplification [72]. Mechanisms contributing to the preferential depletion of Th17 cells during HIV/SIV infection in vivo remain mainly unknown since most analyses have been generated from culture systems using purified Th17 cells from either sorted human peripheral blood or from T cells skewed to Th17 [73]. Some of the proposed mechanisms explaining the preferential loss of Th17 cells include: (a) overexpression of factors inhibiting Th17 differentiation, (b) depletion of naïve Th17 precursors, (c) deficient expression of cytokines such as IL-21, (d) high expression of HIV binding receptors, (e) low expression of macrophage inflammatory protein-1β (MIP-1β is an HIV inhibitory chemokine, also known as CCL4), (f) AIDS-associated opportunistic infections, (g) chronic immune activation, (h) low expression of HIV-suppressive RNase 6, (i) susceptibility and permissiveness to HIV/SIV infection, and (j) expression of co-receptors and integrins (such as CD4, CXCR3, CXCR4, CCR4, CCR5, CCR6, and α4β7 integrin) among others [42,51,52,69,74]. Here, we only focus on Th17 susceptibility and permissiveness to HIV/SIV infection, and Th17 expression of co-receptors and integrins, both of which represent mechanisms targeting Th17 cells for preferential infection and depletion.It is thought that high levels of CCR5 expressed by Th17 cells facilitate virus entry [26]. In support of this notion, CCR5+ Th17 cells are found depleted from the GI tract of HIV-infected patients [51]. Some CCR6+ cells have also been documented to express higher levels of CCR5, as compared to CCR5− cells [42]. Further, co-expression of CCR6 and CCR5 in Th17 cells correlates to their depletion from the blood of HIV-infected patients [51]. Planas et al. demonstrated that Th17 polarized CCR6+CD4+ T cells are highly permissive to infection [69]. Although the CCR6+ CD4 T cell population is inclusive of all Th17 cells, not all CCR6+ cells are capable of secreting IL-17 [26,69]. Subsets of CD4+ T cells are commonly defined by their functional properties [69]. Similarly, signature cytokines production is used to characterize these subsets, and their expression of chemokine receptors are used to identify functionally polarized CD4+ T cell subsets such as Th1 (CXCR3+/CCR4−/CCR6−), Th2 (CXCR3−/CCR4+/CCR6−), Th17 (CXCR3−/CCR4+/ CCR6+), and Th1/Th17 cells (CXCR3+/CCR4−/CCR6+) [19]. Wacleche et al. described four IL-17A producing Th17 subsets in humans based on their CCR4 and CXCR3 expression including Th17 (CCR4+ CXCR3−), Th1Th17 (CCR4− CXCR3+), and two Th17 polarized subsets designated as CCR6+DN (CCR4− CXCR3−) and CCR6+DP (CCR4+ CXCR3+) both, in vitro and in ART-treated patients where each subset is thought to play a specific role during HIV pathogenesis [51]. Preferential loss of CCR6+ CD161+ CD4+ T cells from the blood of SIV-infected rhesus macaques (but not in sooty mangabeys, a natural SIV host) correlates to disrupted homeostasis and contributes to disease progression due to redistribution to the gut mucosa [69]. Analyses from a vaginal challenge model in rhesus macaques detected that SIV selectively targeted CCR6+ CD4+ T cells corresponding to the Th17 lineage as confirmed by RORγt expression [26]. Th17 cells were highly susceptible to SIV and selectively depleted from the female reproductive tract (FRT) early within 48 h post-infection [26]. Several studies in SIV-infected rhesus macaques indicate that Th17 cells are preferentially depleted from the GI tract during the acute phase of infection as compared to blood Th17 cells; moreover, Th17 cells are preserved during non-pathogenic infection [43,51]. Additionally, a variety of publications indicate preferential depletion of Th17 cells from HIV-infected patients. In a cross-sectional study from a South African cohort, Mycobacterium tuberculosis-specific Th17 cells were preferentially depleted in HIV-infected patients [74].In HIV patients with progressive disease, Th17 frequency is lower during the chronic phase [43]. Lower frequencies of peripheral blood CCR4+ CCR6+ Th17 and CXCR3+ CCR6+ Th1Th17 cells have been reported in chronic HIV-infected patients under ART when compared to uninfected patients [51]. Nevertheless, Th17 cells are preserved under slow disease progression or during non-pathogenic infection [43,75]. For instance, sooty mangabeys which do not progress to AIDS preserve healthy mucosal function as well as Th17 levels post-SIV infection [42]. In contrast, in HIV-infected long-term non-progressors, the frequency of Th17 cells is preserved [51]. While the frequency of Th17 cells negatively correlates with plasma viral load, it positively correlates with CD4+ T cell counts [43,51,76]. Assessments regarding Th17 frequency may vary in the literature due to the use of diverse methods of characterization and identification (i.e., surface markers vs. intracellular production of cytokines) [73]. In summary, Th17 depletion induce enhanced mucosal permeability and bacterial translocation leading to chronic immune activation (driver of changes in the frequency of different T cell subsets such as an increase in effector or fully differentiated T cells and a decrease in naïve T cells) and AIDS progression [43,51,76]. Depletion of Th17 cells in the blood and gut has been identified in both humans and macaques with HIV or SIV infection, and it is a predictor of disease progression [75,77]; however, blood Th17 depletion analyses are still filled with questions, as Th17 cells function mainly at the mucosa and not in circulation [77].Th17 and Treg subsets derive from a common progenitor and differentiate based on IL-6 and TGF-β levels; however, they have quite opposite functions, and their ratios are directly associated with HIV progression [43,72,78]. While Th17 cells’ primary function is to mount immune responses to invading pathogens via pro-inflammatory responses and perhaps promote autoimmunity, Treg cells have an immunosuppressive function and help maintain self-tolerance, control activation, and expansion of autoreactive CD4+ T effector cells via anti-inflammatory responses [43,72,78]. Normally, Th17/Treg ratios are stable; however, inflammation and other immune conditions, including multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and HIV/SIV infections drive generalized immune activation and disturb their balance [72,79]. During acute HIV infection, Treg cells may be beneficial to the host, as prior to full activation of HIV-specific immune responses, Treg cells inhibit T cell activation and limit the number of target cells for HIV spread [80]; however, during chronic HIV infection, increased Treg cell frequency is detrimental to antiviral immune responses [80]. Changes in the absolute numbers of Treg and Th17 cells lead to imbalanced Th17/Treg ratios, which contribute to the breakdown of mucosal integrity, resulting in microbial translocation and systemic immune activation [79]. Falivene et al. found reduced Th17/Treg ratio in HIV-infected patients as compared to healthy donors, and higher Th17 levels correlating with stronger CD8+ T cell responses against the infection which led them to suggest that Th17 cells have potential prognostic value for HIV-specific T cell responses [77]. Thus, a progressive increase in Treg frequency along with a progressive loss of Th17 drive Th17/Treg ratios to drop as HIV infection progresses [72,80]. Moreover, high frequency of both Th17 and Th17/Treg ratios are reported in HIV elite controllers when compared to HIV patients [43]. To date, we have a better understanding of the role of Th17 cells in HIV-1 infection control; however, the main mechanisms of HIV-1 transmission in Th17 cells remain unclear. Hot topics of research include whether HIV-1 spread takes place mainly via cell-free viral particles and/or via cell-to-cell direct contact [81].4. Cell-to-Cell versus Cell-Free HIV-1 SpreadAfter the assembly of infectious virus particles, HIV-1 is proposed to infect and replicate in target cells via multiple mechanisms [82]. The two main modes of HIV-1 spread among permissive cells are direct cell-to-cell infection and cell-free infection [82,83,84,85,86]. Although the release of cell-free viral particles has been considered as the primary mode of HIV-1 infection transmission, cell-to-cell and cell-free modes are not mutually exclusive and the precise contribution of either mode of virus transmission in vivo is not yet clear [87,88]. HIV-1 Env spike supports both cell-free and cell-to-cell infection of CD4+ T cells [44]. HIV-1 Env spike is a trimeric glycoprotein comprised of three gp120-gp41 heterodimers which mediate viral attachment, fusion, and entry into CD4+ T cells during cell-free and/or direct cell-to-cell infection [44,89]; however, it has been proposed that only cell-to-cell HIV-1 transmission can overcome deficiencies of viral Env incorporation [44].Direct transfer between one donor cell and a target cell by cell-to-cell spread has been extensively characterized in cell culture systems using T cells from peripheral blood lymphocytes [11,82]. The first description of direct cell-to-cell HIV transfer was reported between DCs and T cells [90]. Nevertheless, cell-to-cell HIV transfer takes place between a number of immune cells such as macrophages and LCs, which are known to help establish HIV reservoirs in different host tissues and play important roles early during transmission and dissemination [81]. Direct contact between infected and uninfected cells contributes to viral spread through well-described structures such as the virological synapse (or VS, described as interactions engaging the Env glycoproteins expressed in the infected cells and receptor in the target cells), filipodia, and nanotubes in addition to phagocytosis, and cell-cell fusion modes of transmission [11,81,85,90]. Galloway et al. proposed that infected cells in lymphoid tissues are the main source of HIV spread via direct cell-to-cell infection [83]. It is speculated that infected T cells in LNs possessing migratory potential contribute to cell-to-cell transmission and spread in vivo [81]; however, HIV transmission either by cell-to-cell or by cell-free modes has been commonly assessed in vitro [82]. The challenge to quantitatively discriminate the effectiveness of each HIV-1 transmission strategy individually rests on technical difficulties to exclusively analyze cell-free infection without cell-to-cell infection taking place in parallel, and vice versa, since these are not mutually exclusive mechanisms [82].Cell-to-cell transmission has been regarded as an efficient strategy implicated in HIV-1 pathogenesis [83,85]. Multiple studies have suggested that a virus associated with a cell is more infectious than a cell-free virus [91]. Experimental and mathematical models allowed for the quantification of the sole dynamics behind cell-to-cell infection, leading to the finding that cell-to-cell infection predominates 60% of total viral infection [84]. Chen et al. reported that in vitro cell-associated infection is 18,000-fold more efficient in transferring viral particles into target cells than cell-free infection [90]. Cell-to-cell transmission has been found to reduce the generation time of viruses by 0.9 times while increasing viral fitness by 3.9 times [84]. Furthermore, it has been argued that cell-to-cell contact through the VS may protect HIV-1 from antiviral factors such as antibodies while also enabling disseminating [90,91]. Numerous studies indicate that gp120-directed and gp41-directed broadly neutralizing antibodies halt virus transmission in rhesus macaques upon topical or intravenous challenge of cell-free virus [92,93]. Although spread via cell-free particles has been challenged as the main transmission model, there is evidence in the literature for its support. After comparing HIV and human T lymphotropic virus (HTLV) transmission, HIV spread was proposed to take place mainly via cell-free mode [94]. A big challenge to cell-free HIV-1 transmission implies that during transcytosis via mucosal epithelial cells, only 0.01% to 0.05% of virions from the initial inoculum may translocate across epithelial cells [95,96]. It is documented that more than 90% of virions internalized in tonsil, cervical and foreskin epithelial cells do not cross the epithelium; instead, virions are retained in endosomal compartments, such as multivesicular bodies and vacuoles for several days [96]. Sequestered virions in the epithelium maintain infectivity for about nine days and can be released through cell-to-cell interaction of epithelial cells containing the virus with activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and CD4+ T lymphocytes [96]; however, Sufiawati et al. reported that HIV-1 cell-free virions along with tat and gp120 proteins are key for the disruption of adherens and tight junction proteins leading to the impaired mucosal barrier and spread of the virus within target cells, as seen in ex vivo tonsil tissue explants [95]. In addition, HIV-1 and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) coinfection of tonsils act synergistically to promote and facilitate both viral infections [95].The infectivity of retroviruses, including HIV-1, either in plasma or cultured media, has been reported to be less than 0.1%, arguing potentially large numbers of defective virions in a virus pool and limiting the infectivity of HIV virions [97]. Nonetheless, Josefsson et al. demonstrated that in peripheral blood CD4+ T cells from patients, the majority of infected cells contain only one copy of HIV-1 DNA as compared to the high proviral HIV content present in tissues and co-cultures which may correlate to transmission by cell-free particles [98,99]. Despite the fact that HIV-1 infects antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to a lesser extent than T cells, a major pathogenic process in HIV-1 infection is the uptake of HIV-1 by APCs followed by transfer of virus to CD4+ T cells, leading to explosive levels of virus replication within T cells [100]. Nonetheless, DCs express both CD4 and CCR5 HIV-1 co-receptors where DC-mediated cell-free HIV-1 trans-infection of T cells is well documented [101]. Additionally, three nonexclusive pathways are described for cell-free viruses to enter DCs including clathrin-rich endosomes, lipid rafts in the presence of DC-SIGN (pathway which favors productive infection), or via lipid rafts in the absence of DC-SIGN (pathway which may prevent viral replication) [101].The debate on which mode of transmission is more efficient is still ongoing, with no concrete conclusion yet. Most of the available evidence has been obtained from in vitro systems examining virus transmission; however, the actual interactions and conditions in vivo are not fully understood. Notwithstanding, infected breast milk, semen, and vaginal secretions contain a mix of both cell-free viral particles and infected cells [82,93]. Current evidence indicates that the field is not plain when making comparisons between cell-to-cell and cell-free HIV-1 transmission modes, as cell-free viral particles might also contribute to cell-associated infection. HIV likely takes advantage of both modes of transmission to spread. Moreover, no single cell type has been linked to a preferential mode of transmission, and it is widely unknown what the preferential mode of transmission in cells typically found in the mucosae such as Th17 lymphocytes is. The next difficult question is how latent HIV-1 reservoirs replenish?5. Virus Free Seeding New Reservoirs in Distant Places and LatencyART regimens are unable to halt chronic immune activation, inflammation, and immune dysfunction, all of which may contribute to the establishment of reservoirs harboring latent HIV-1 [102]. Thus, it is likely that the cure for HIV-1 is a reservoir away. Previously, the rapid loss of CD4+ T cells was associated with apoptosis, but it was found that about 95% of quiescent CD4+ T cells die via caspase 1-mediated pyroptosis and which correlates with chronic inflammation in HIV pathogenesis [103]. Later, Galloway et al. went on to show in cell culture that, unlike cell-free HIV-1 particles, cell-to-cell contact predominantly through the VS is key to trigger innate immune responses leading to the depletion of non-permissive CD4+ T cells via caspase 1-dependent pyroptosis [83]. In contrast, highly permissive cells in HIV-1 infection, such as activated peripheral blood lymphocytes die via caspase 3-mediated apoptosis [83]; however, not all infected cells die, and many HIV-infected cells remain as a latent reservoir. Memory CD4+ T cells represent the primary HIV reservoir in tissues [104]. The seeding of free HIV virions to distant places is subject to the limits of diffusion between tissues and restricted by not just anatomical barriers, but by soluble immune factors as well (i.e., complement factors and antibodies) [105]. In contrast, cell-to-cell transmission in LNs with high local density of target cells may contribute to the spread of infected cells given the migratory potential of T cells which might transport HIV to remote tissues [105]. Moreover, cell-to-cell transfer represents a mechanism for HIV to hide and escape from the immune system and ART, contributing to the establishment of new virus reservoirs and latency in distant host tissues [81]. Thus, the cell-to-cell spread of HIV is likely promoted in lymphoid tissues with a high abundance of target cells in proximity, along with reduced ART penetration [106].Data from latent reservoirs in patients on ART exhibit a very slow decay rate (t1/2 = 3.7 years) which translates to about 73 years to eradicate a reservoir of 106 cells, making cure unlikely even under ART [18]. Additionally, infected CD4+ T cells are long-lived cells capable of living for decades; however, these can potentially revert to resting memory CD4+ T cells and further contribute to latent HIV reservoirs [18,36]. CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells constitute most CD4+ T cells in MALT as opposed to CCR5− T cells mostly present in peripheral blood and LNs [33]. Most CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells are preferentially depleted during early HIV/SIV infection [70]. In fact, memory CD4+ T cells have been reported to be more permissive to HIV compared to naïve T cells [70]. CCR5+ CD4+ memory T cells have been identified as specific targets of HIV replication and infection [33]. Monteiro et al. suggested CCR6 as a marker for memory T cells imprinted with a transcriptional program permissive to HIV replication [70]. Importantly, CCR6+ T cells also express integrin β7 and CCR5, which possess superior capabilities to disseminate HIV from the entry site since integrin β7 can regulate cell migration into the GALT and bind to HIV-gp120 [70].Studies by Meås et al. using a cell-to-cell transmission model show that toll-like receptor 8 (TLR8) activates human T cells and triggers inflammatory responses favoring both HIV-1 replication and reversal of latency [11]. Reversion of latency was also observed in patient-derived latently infected CD4+ T cells by TLR8 stimulation [11]. Moreover, TLR8 stimulation promoted differentiation towards pro-inflammatory Th17 cells by upregulating IL-17 production [11]. Furthermore, Hsiao et al. found that CCR5-tropic HIV could not enter naïve CD4+ T cells but gained entry to all subsets of memory CD4+ T cells including tonsillar memory cells expressing the IL-7 receptor alpha chain or CD127+ tissue memory (TM) cells that preferentially support latent HIV-1 infection as demonstrated by HIV DNA integration but not HIV gene expression [104]. The authors propose that these CD127+ TM cells represent a superior alternative to in vitro tissue models of HIV latency based on blood-derived cells which present with early post-entry by SAM domain and HD domain-containing protein 1 (SAMHD1) restriction [104]. Moreover, T cell latent HIV-1 reservoir include infected cells in diverse locations including, but not limited to peripheral blood, LNs, central nervous system (CNS), GALT and tissues such as lungs.6. ConclusionsThere are multiple challenges in the field. First, we know that ART does not cure HIV and that HIV reservoirs and latent infection are in part to blame. Moreover, HIV can accumulate genetic diversity over time during infection on a given individual, making the clearance of the virus on an infected patient unfeasible [9]. Another challenge is the absence of a good animal model for HIV. Commonly, non-human primates and SIV or chimera simian/HIV (SHIV) are used, but they differ from HIV-1. Alternatively, humanized mice (mice with a reconstituted human immune system) allow for features that correlate better with HIV-1 transmission in humans [107]. Furthermore, tissue environments may have a direct impact on virus spread, as well as the modes of viral transmission; however, this remains to be established [88]. A better understanding of the mechanisms promoting and supporting latency in tissue cells could help devise innovative approaches to identify and eliminate latent reservoirs of infected cells in order to devise new strategies to cure HIV/AIDS [104].


Title: Molecular epidemiology in the HIV and SARS-CoV-2 pandemics

INTRODUCTIONThe principal goal of epidemiology is to identify the causative and correlative factors that drive a disease to enable a rational basis for infection prevention and disease control. This includes addressing the basic questions of what is the causative agent, how is it spread, who is at risk, where is it prevalent, when is it a threat, and why does it cause disease? At the beginning of the HIV pandemic, these questions were addressed through the use of contact tracing, case finding, and well executed case–control studies, the basic tools of infectious disease epidemiologic investigation. With advances in molecular biology, most notably PCR and gene sequencing, new molecular-based approaches to perform epidemiological investigations were developed, oftentimes directly in response to the HIV epidemic itself. Today, molecular epidemiology is indispensable to the investigation of a new disease or disease outbreak. Indeed, these approaches were deployed very early in the SARS-like coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) epidemic to inform urgent outstanding questions of cause, origin, transmission, and risk. Despite these successes, several limitations to these approaches have been exposed by these two different epidemics, especially in regards to implementation. Here, we discuss some of the tools of molecular epidemiology, their use and limitations as applied to the HIV epidemic, and lessons we have learned so far in applying these approaches to SARS-CoV-2. Box 1no caption availableMolecular diagnostics: antibody and PCR-based testingOne of the first challenges faced by clinicians, public health experts, and epidemiologists during a new epidemic is the need for accurate and sensitive diagnostic tools. Traditionally, diagnostic procedures were heavily dependent on clinical symptom tracking, history of exposure, and standard microbiology practices to isolate infectious agents. Although often sufficient for extracting population level trends, these tools alone are often complicated by variability in clinical presentation, incomplete medical histories, insufficient resources or inadequate protocols for microbial isolation, and high rates of overall uncertainty [1–3]. The development of molecular diagnostic tools for the detection of specific pathogens, or an immune response to specific pathogens, revolutionized our capacity to diagnose infectious diseases accurately within large populations. Although the sensitivity of these tests is still largely dependent on the quality and timing of sample collection relative to the infection time course, their specificity is generally high when properly controlled [1–3].The first molecular diagnostic tool for HIV was an IgG antibody test developed in 1985, just 2 years after the isolation and discovery of the virus as the causative agent of AIDS [4–6]. This first-generation test was an ELISA that used HIV-1 infected cell lysates as the fixed antigen over which patient serum would be applied. Anti-HIV antibodies would stick to the HIV antigens for detection with IgG-specific secondary antibodies that could be quantified by a chemiluminescence readout. In order to rule out false-positive tests (due to pregnancy, autoimmune disease, and other undetermined reasons) and further differentiate HIV-1 from HIV-2, a subsequent validation of these results was required by immunoblotting or immunoflourescence [7,8]. This two-part testing algorithm (serology with secondary confirmation) would be refined in the second and third generations to improve the breadth of HIV subtypes that could be detected and to standardize the antigens used as bait for mass production. Although these algorithms had high sensitivity and specificity, their reliance on antibody detection dictated a significant lag time between exposure and diagnosis. In other words, due to the time it takes for the body to mount a specific antibody response detectable in the blood (i.e. the time to seroconversion), these tests were not be able to detect infection for 3–12 weeks following exposure [9–11]. To narrow this negative window, fourth-generation tests that incorporated direct antigen detection were developed, first becoming available in 1997 (Fig. 1a). These tests similarly relied on ELISA methodology, but for detection of both HIV p24 antigen as well as anti-HIV antibodies [9,12]. Fifth-generation tests that included separate readouts for antigens and antibodies were developed in 2015. These tests are usually effective at detecting HIV infection within 18–45 days following exposure. These later tests also allowed for more rapid and improved differentiation between HIV-1 and HIV-2 infection [13].FIGURE 1Evolution of HIV diagnostic algorithms. (a) This cartoon depicts the abundance of HIV diagnostic substrates in the serum of a figurative patient during the first several weeks following infection. Although first-generation HIV tests that relied on detection of anti-HIV IgG antibodies in patient serum had a large ‘negative window’ between infection and detection, each successive generation of tests reduced this gap. Nucleic acid tests are primarily used for medical management of disease, but are used for diagnostic/screening purposes in some algorithms. (b) The current HIV testing algorithm based on guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control.Serological tests for diagnostic purposes are relatively cheap, have a low barrier to entry and can be readily adapted to rapid, at-home or point-of-care testing platforms [14,15]. These ‘rapid’ tests generally rely on immunochromatography wherein differences in antibody movement in the presence or absence of its antigen can be detected by laminar flow. Rapid tests generally have lower specificity than the traditional ELISA-based tests, and so require result confirmation, but enable outreach and testing to a much broader population than otherwise would be accessible [14,15]. There is currently one FDA-approved rapid self-test for HIV in the United States (OraQuick), which detects anti-HIV antibodies from an oral swab. Rapid, point-of-care tests are also available that use a single drop of blood from a fingertip (i.e. Alere Determine, among others) [14–16].Although serological assays are the recommended diagnostic tests for HIV, PCR-based testing is also a helpful adjunct in certain diagnostic situations. Rather than detecting the virus-specific antibodies or viral proteins, these tests rely on detection of viral nucleic acids [17–19]. In these tests, viral RNA is extracted from blood samples, converted into complementary DNA (cDNA), and amplified with HIV-specific oligonucleotide primers. If done in a quantifiable way, these assays can also be used to determine viral load, which can be an important determinant of transmission and pathogenesis [20–24]. Although these tests are generally more expensive, more prone to false positivity than the current antibody testing algorithms, and can be subject to longer turnaround times, they can be used to detect HIV infection within 3–14 days following exposure, often prior to the appearance of quantifiable p24 antigen or anti-HIV antibodies in the blood [17–19]. PCR-based assays are primarily used as a diagnostic adjunct in cases wherein acute infection is suspected very soon after a high-risk exposure (with follow-up antibody algorithm confirmation) [18], for the detection of mother-to-child transmission (to differentiate infant infection given the passive transfer of antibody in utero) [25], and for surveillance of blood donations [26]. Following acute infection, some individuals may have viral set points below the limit of detection for PCR-based assays, so serological tests are often preferred at time points beyond the immediate post-exposure period. As such, PCR assays for plasma HIV RNA are primarily used for medical management and not generally recommended as a stand alone diagniostic.The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's (CDC's) current HIV testing algorithm calls for primary screening with a fourth or fifth-generation HIV-1/2 antigen/antibody immunoassay (Fig. 1b) [27]. A majority of these tests, such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Abbott Architect HIV Ag/Ab test or the GS Combo Ag/Ab EIA test, have been extensively evaluated with reported sensitivity and specificity ranging from 99.7 to 100% [27–29]. Due to the high sensitivity, a follow-up test is not recommended, unless an exposure event is suspected within the test's negative window (roughly within the previous 2–4 weeks), in which case a PCR-based nucleic acid test is suggested. If the initial assay gives a positive result, a follow-up immunoassay to confirm diagnosis and differentiate between HIV-1 and HIV-2 is required. If a negative result is obtained in follow-up, a PCR-based nucleic acid test is again suggested to test for acute infection in the negative window. If a preliminary positive result is obtained from a rapid, point-of-care test, result confirmation using this algorithm in a certified clinical laboratory is required.The type of diagnostic test that is most effective is highly dependent on the nature of the virus and the goal of the test. HIV establishes a chronic infection throughout the lifetime of an individual, so while early diagnosis is optimal, diagnostic tools that are effective at any stage of disease are useful for protecting patient health and for controlling future spread [20,21,30▪▪]. Viruses that do not establish chronic infections, however, afford only a small window in which diagnostic tests can be used to inform treatment and prevent spread. By the time serological responses are developed against SARS-CoV-2, for example, a majority of people have already cleared the virus and cannot transmit the infection. Thus, although serological tests that indicate prior exposure to SARS-CoV-2 may be informative for transmission models, such results are of limited benefit for determining if there is a current risk of further transmission [31,32▪]. Given this limitation, PCR-based testing has emerged as the primary diagnostic test for detecting SARS-CoV-2 infection in the clinic. There are a large variety of these tests available, most of which rely on amplification of a portion of the viral nucleocapsid (N) or RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) genes [31,33▪,34].When properly controlled, the specificity of PCR-based diagnostic tests can be near perfect in high prevalence symptomatic populations given their dependency on unique sequences of nucleic acids. The sensitivity of PCR-based testing, however, may be substantially lower dependent on the timing of the sample, sample source, and sample collection quality [34]. For example, the sensitivity and specificity of most nucleic acid tests for HIV are greater than 99.5%, but the sensitivity of these assays drop if the specimen is collected too early or late relative to acute infection, if the specimen used is from an oral swab or dried blood spot as opposed to serum, or if the specimen is processed outside a certified clinical laboratory [27,35]. Variation in the sensitivity of PCR-based SARS-CoV-2 testing is similarly dependent on timing, specimen collection and sample processing. To avoid these issues, best practices include amplification of a housekeeping gene within each specimen to validate sample quality, repeat testing after possible exposure to validate negative results (especially in cases shortly after exposure) and limitation of testing to certified clinical labortaories with trained personnel [36]. Even when using best practices, however, initial studies estimate that the sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 PCR-based testing for COVID-19 pneumonia may be as low as 70% [37▪▪]. The relatively low sensitivity of these tests and the subsequently higher probabilities of false negatives emphasize the need for additional surveillance mechanisms (contact tracing, symptom monitoring and so on) as well as for careful adherence to public health guidelines (social distancing, wear masks in public spaces, wash hands regularly and so on). More studies are needed to determine the true sensitivity of the various tests currently being employed in clinical versus population-based settings and to determine how much sensitivity varies in symptomatic versus asymptomatic people [37▪▪].Given the frequency and scale with which SARS-CoV-2 testing is needed for diagnosis, surveillance and monitoring, additional innovations in diagnostic testing strategies are required. The development of point-of-care testing strategies that either enable more reliable self-sampling (i.e. through oral rinsates), faster turn around times (i.e. rapid tests such as the Abbott ID NOW or Cepheid Xpert Xpress) or less reliance on specialized equipment are being explored [38–40]. Much like with the development of rapid HIV tests, these are not meant to serve as a stand-in for clinical testing, but rather as a means to broaden capacity and outreach, link potential pateints to clinical care sites, and inform potentially contagious individuals of steps to limit transmission. Beyond changing the test procedure itself, assorted pooling strategies are being explored to better enable bulk testing [41,42]. Orginally developed as a way to increase the throughput of blood borne pathogen testing in the blood supply, these strategies rely on pooling a given number of patient samples prior to testing [26,43]. Individual specimens that compose negative pools are presumed negative, while individual specimens that compose positive pools are then routed to individual testing. The number of samples in each pool is dictated by both the local positivity rate and the overall sensitivity of the assay. Many of these strategies and others are being developed with support from the National Institutes of Health Rapid Acceleration of Diagnostics (RADx) programme [40,44].In sum, molecular diagnostics have become a vital tool in epidemic management to link people to care, monitor transmission, enact preventative measures and answer the most basic of epidemiological questions: who is being or has been infected? Although these tests may seem definitive, the sensitivity and specificity of the test, its implementation, and the exact nature of the readout dictate the strengths and weaknesses of each approach. As such, they are best leveraged in the context of complete clinical care and health surveillance that includes symptom monitoring, contact tracing, and risk communication. Improved study of the limitations of these tests in clinical practice and improved communication of these limitations to health providers and patients will go a long way towards optimal implementation of molecular diagnostics in the context of an ongoing epidemic.Virus genome sequencingAlthough molecular diagnostics have become vital tools for infectious disease surveillance, genetic sequencing approaches have likewise matured to become important tools for understanding disease cause and transmission. The genetic information obtained from viral sequences is a high-resolution source of information that can be used not only for studying biological properties of pathogenic viruses, but also for understanding critical elements of viral spread that inform and direct public health policies [45–48]. The extraordinary development of sequencing technologies and analysis methods even within the last decade have accelerated these trends in recent years. In addition, the establishment of publicly available sequence databases such as the Los Alamos HIV sequence database, HIV sequence compendium, GenBank, and GISAID have provided scientists with rapid access to global viral sequences for an increased analysis power and much faster response for monitoring epidemic trends.The first HIV genomic sequences were described in a series of papers in 1985 [49,50]. Due to the relatively low abundance of viral DNA in patient tissues, these viruses were first passaged in tissue culture cells prior to molecular cloning and sequencing using dideoxynucleotide chain termination. Eventually, methods were developed to sequence clinical specimens directly [51]. It quickly became clear that HIV genetic diversity was not only remarkably high, but also critically important for defining the biological nature of the disease as well as the clinical efficacy of early antiviral drugs [52–54]. Indeed, as sequencing of clinical isolates became cheaper and easier, and the clinical significance of antiviral drug resistance became clear, sequencing of patient HIV plasma RNA became a standard of care in order to check for known antiviral resistance mutations and inform the use of appropriate therapeutics [55,56]. Later, these same results began to inform public health departments of potential risk networks (see Molecularly assisted Contact Tracing below). For the clinical purposes of drug resistance and coreceptor tropism prediction, high-throughput sequencing methods that target selected regions of the HIV genome (most commonly the HIV polymerase gene, pol) are effective [57–61], though more recent whole-genome sequencing methods have been developed for other applications such as global and within-host evolutionary analyses of HIV [62–64].Experience with sequencing HIV and other viruses has resulted in three major approaches to viral whole-genome sequencing: metagenomic, PCR amplicon, or target enrichment (reviewed in [65]). Each sequencing approach begins with extraction of total nucleic acids from the clinical specimen. When sequencing RNA viruses such as HIV or SARS-CoV-2, a reverse transcription step is first undertaken to convert RNA to cDNA. In metagenomic sequencing approaches, total cDNA obtained from the specimen is used to generate a platform-specific sequencing library for shotgun sequencing. The resulting sequence reads are then filtered to remove sequences of human host origin prior to being assembled and/or aligned to a reference genome sequence. Metagenomic sequencing has the advantage of being the fastest and most direct of the sequencing methods, requiring the fewest intermediate steps and, by minimizing PCR cycles, presents fewer opportunities for the introduction of PCR bias into the results. Metagenomic sequencing has the greatest potential for novel viral pathogen discovery and was the method used, in conjunction with targeted PCR, to first identify the SARS-CoV-2 virus sequence from a patient with COVID-19 symptoms at the beginning of the pandemic [66▪▪]. These advantages are offset, however, by the higher cost and lower sensitivity of the metagenomic approach, as considerably deeper sequencing is often required to obtain sufficient sequence relative to the large proportion of contaminating host or commensal organism nucleic acids.In PCR amplicon sequencing, the viral genome is amplified directly from the clinical specimen using PCR primers against the viral genome sequence to generate a library of tiled and overlapping amplicons. Sequence reads are aligned to a reference viral genome sequence to identify variants. PCR amplicon sequencing approaches were quickly developed and implemented for SARS-CoV-2, and have been crucial for several early discoveries [67,68▪]. This approach has the advantage of being able to selectively enrich the viral genome prior to sequencing, minimizing the amount of contaminating DNA or RNA being sequenced. This both decreases the cost of sequencing and increases the efficiency and throughput of clinical investigations as many isolates can be indexed and sequenced simultaneously. The amplification step also improves the sensitivity for detecting viruses in low abundance in the clinical specimen. Limitations of this approach include increased complexity of the library preparation and the possibility that viral variability could result in primer mismatches and incomplete sequencing. Relative to HIV, however, the low mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 somewhat tempers these concerns [69,70].Target enrichment, also known as pull-down, bait, or capture assays, involve DNA or RNA probes complementary to the viral sequence bound to a solid phase such as magnetic beads or others. After library preparation from the clinical specimen, viral genomes are allowed to hybridize to leader sequences on the bead-bound probes. The captured nucleic acids then undergo a limited number of PCR amplification cycles and sequencing. Multiple target enrichment probe sets were quickly developed for SARS-CoV-2 [71,72]. This approach can include multiple probes against the same virus such that a mutation in any one region does not disrupt sequencing or get replaced with primer or probe sequence. In addition, as there are fewer PCR amplification steps, there is less risk of introducing mutations into the genome sequence not found in the host.Several platforms for high throughput whole genome sequencing of viruses using these library preparation approaches are available. These include the short-read sequencing technologies such as Illumina's MiniSeq, MiSeq or NextSeq platforms with maximum read lengths of 300 bp and long-read platforms such as the Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) Sequel II or Oxford Nanopore MinION or GridION systems, which can each produce reads averaging several thousand bases in length. These platforms differ also in read accuracy with read sequences from short read platforms having error rates often below 1% compared with the approximately 5–15% error rate of the PacBio and Nanopore platforms [73]. The higher error rates of sequences produced on long-read platforms can complicate the resolution of HIV quasispecies in clinical specimens, which can result from prolonged chronic infection in the setting of high rates of both mutation and replication of the virus [74]. Hence, short read sequencing is currently more favoured for high throughput targeted or whole genome sequencing of HIV [75,76]. In contrast, the low mutation rate and limited infection duration of SARS-CoV-2 allow for either short or long-read sequencing platforms to be used to elucidate the sole or dominant variant in clinical specimens.Phylogenetic and phylodynamic methodsMost viruses, especially RNA viruses, accumulate variability at very high rates due to their elevated mutation rates, high progeny production, and short replication cycles [77–81]. This variability is affected by transmission patterns, host population structure and selective processes operating on the viral population, such as immune responses or antiviral therapies [74,82–85]. Due to the effect of these factors on the viral genetic variability, we can study the viral sequences and their variability patterns to infer the different processes the viral populations have gone through. Although the high mutation rates of other viruses such as HIV (inter-host substitution rate of ∼5x10−3 substitutions/site/year [70]) or influenza virus (∼4x10−3 substitutions/site/year [86]) allow for robust variability analysis based on targeted sequencing of selected genes or genome regions, the relatively low mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2 (estimated substitution rate of ∼8x10−4 substitutions/site/year [69,87]) mandates complete viral genome sequencing to enable variability analyses.Generally, the first step in variation analysis is to reconstruct a phylogenetic tree with a representative set of sequences by applying nucleotide substitution models that best fit the data (i.e. the model that best explains the observed rates at which each nucleotide is substituted by another) [88]. The most commonly used methods for viral phylogenetic tree reconstruction are Maximum Likelihood [89–91] and Bayesian approaches [92,93]. The inclusion of specimens from different time points allows for evolutionary rate calculation by including a temporal parameter in the tree reconstruction and assuming a time-dependent accumulation of mutations (i.e. a molecular clock) [94,95]. The inferred phylogeny will depict the genetic relationships between the viral sequences along the reconstructed branches of the tree (Fig. 2a). Using these phylogenies, analytical methods can be used to surmise epidemiological processes using both traditional phylogenetic and newly developed phylodynamic methods.FIGURE 2Phylodynamic methods for measuring epidemiological parameters. (a) A hypothetical, temporal phylodynamic tree with geographical information (indicated by colors) where the x-axis represents the time of sample isolation. The combination of genetic distance and spatiotemporal metadata allows for the visualization of outbreaks over time and for estimation of viral evolutionary rates, selective pressures, diversification patterns and migration events, among other parameters. (b) These same phylogenies can be used to estimate viral population sizes of the outbreak at different times. (c) The degree of genetic diversification over time, as shown by the number of lineages over time, in relation to population size changes and other inferred evolutionary dynamics, can help estimate epidemiological parameters like spread or transmission.Traditional phylogenetic methods use molecular evolution and population genetics to infer characteristics of the viral populations being analysed, such as the most likely path of viral evolution and the origin of different viral lineages by statistical reconstruction of the most-probable ancestors of the sampled sequences along the phylogenetic tree [96,97]; the selective processes operating in the population by comparison of the rates of synonymous and nonsynonymous mutations [98–100]; and the viral population structure by measurement of the degree of compartmentalization [101,102] or neutrality [103] throughout the tree. Newer phylodynamic methods merge classic epidemiological models, such as the Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR) model, with traditional phylogenetic methods to more directly study viral epidemics [74,83,104,105]. These methods allow the extraction of epidemiological parameters from the genetic information including viral origins, transmission networks, viral population size changes and risk factors (Fig. 2b,c). Moreover, these models allow the inclusion of geographical information in the analyses to study spatiotemporal dynamics of the viral populations using phylogeography [106]. Phylodynamic approaches have already been successfully applied in the study of multiple viral pathogens, including HIV-1 transmission networks [107▪,108–110,111▪▪] and epidemiological studies [105,112–114], influenza pandemics [115–117], Ebolavirus outbreaks [118–121] and hepatitis C virus studies [122,123], among others. More recently, phylodynamic analyses are being widely utilized to understand the new SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and inform public health measures [69,87,124,125].Although traditional epidemiological studies based on surveys, detailed contact tracing, and mathematical modeling are instrumental for studying epidemics, they require careful examination of confounding factors, are limited by missing or misclassified clinical care data, and can be prone to sampling issues [126]. Likewise, molecular-based methods for estimating key epidemiological parameters face a number of limitations due to evolutionary complexities, recombination, sampling bias and incorrect rooting of the phylogenies (i.e. incorrect assumption of the most recent common ancestor) [127]. The lower mutation rate of SARS-CoV-2, in particular, necessitates a careful adaptation of some of the phylogenetic assumptions previously optimized for studying RNA viruses with higher mutation rates. However, when used properly, these methods can provide confident and precise estimates of epidemiological parameters with reasonable predictive power that is difficult to achieve through traditional approaches alone [47,104,126,128].These types of molecular surveillance methods have already been implemented to help understand and track HIV spread in both research and public health settings. Phylogenetics were used in a landmark HIV prevention clinical trial to determine if participants on antiretroviral therapy (ART) were the source of new infections [129,130] and by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) to help stop an outbreak of HIV among needle sharing partners [131]. Phylodynamic approaches have also enabled identification of gaps in current HIV prevention, care and treatment programmes that can improve detection, monitoring and control of chronic, local HIV subepidemics [132,133]. In this case, molecular surveillance by sampling a large statewide repository of HIV-1 sequence data identified steady onward propagation over years of certain sequences, uncovering previously unrecognized characteristics of those local subepidemics [132]. Another report assessed sources of transmission among recently infected MSM in the Netherlands, finding that the majority of recent infections could have been prevented with a public health approach informed by phylogenetic analyses [134]. Likewise, these methods have been used to describe the likely origin of the SARS-CoV-2 outbreaks around the world, identify newly emergent variants of the virus associated with higher viral loads in patient airways and define the potential for re-infection.Molecularly assisted contact tracingAlthough retrospective genetic variation analyses, such as those highlighted above, have been unquestionably valuable, real-time use of molecular surveillance may be more relevant for public health control of both HIV and SARS-CoV-2 spread. Unfortunately, the application of genome sequencing approaches and their analysis is both time and cost intensive, while public health agencies have been, and are now, resource-constrained. They generally do not have the time, analytical expertise or necessary resources to learn and apply the computationally intensive phylogenetic and phylodynamic methods above, which therefore now seem to have greater potential for real-time viral surveillance in the research setting than in public health organizations. Towards this end, another analytic methodology, HIV TRAnsmission Cluster Engine (HIVTRACE), has enabled frontline public health personnel to perform near real-time HIV molecular surveillance [111▪▪]. This method uses pairwise comparisons of genetic distances between sequences, without constructing phylogenetic trees, to identify ‘molecular clusters’ of HIV sequences. HIVTRACE has been deployed (with security measures) in recent years by the CDC to many state and city health departments across the USA [111▪▪]. This has been enabled by laws in a majority of states that mandate diagnostic laboratories to report full nucleotide sequences of a short, subgenomic region of HIV-1 (the pol gene, most commonly). These sequences are determined from plasma virion RNA as part of routine HIV care to guide selection of antiretrovirals to which an individual patient's virus is not resistant due to viral pol gene mutations. The CDC has used HIV pol sequence comparisons on a national level to bring large intra and inter-state molecular clusters to attention of relevant local jurisdictions for investigations aimed at interdicting further spread.At state and city health departments, research is ongoing to determine how HIVTRACE analyses may further augment HIV contact tracing. Large-scale contact tracing for sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) began during World War II, and local public health agencies evolved this effort in response to the HIV epidemic into what is now called ‘partner elicitation services’. This involves a public health worker interviewing a person newly diagnosed with HIV and/or recently entering HIV care to identify all their sexual and drug-use partners (within a certain time frame). The health department then reaches out to these reported contacts privately and confidentially to determine what, if any, services would benefit them and help curtail further HIV transmission. This includes HIV testing for those who are not diagnosed with HIV. Linkage to care is arranged with the goal of enabling ART-mediated viral suppression to prevent further spread for those newly testing positive. Named partners who test negative for HIV are considered for pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) if they meet indications based on ongoing behavioral risk for HIV acquisition. Viremia suppression and possibly engagement (or re-engagement) to care are services provided to named partners who are already known to have HIV.In many communities with high HIV incidences, timely access to partner services can be challenging. Ongoing research leveraging HIVTRACE is seeking to determine best practices for molecular surveillance with the goal of increasing the efficiency of partner services while maximally interdicting further HIV spread. The concept is that molecular clusters may include some individuals with related sequences who were not named as partners by the index case. In addition, the ‘riskiest’ molecular clusters might be prioritized, so that partner services workers can prioritize identifying the larger ‘transmission clusters’ that may be more problematic for public health. HIV-infected persons who lack sequences in the database because they were either not diagnosed or did not have HIV pol genotyping results reported to the health department would be added to relevant clusters by contact tracing. This, in turn, could facilitate further public health outreach to the larger ‘risk network’ that includes both HIV-infected persons (with and without HIV sequences) as well as uninfected persons who are at-risk via reported contact with those infected person(s) (Fig. 3).FIGURE 3Interpretation of molecular clusters in an epidemiological outbreak. Molecular clusters identified by viral sequencing and phylogenetics represent a subset of individuals within a transmission cluster who are linked by direct or indirect transmission events. These individuals are a further subset of people in an overall risk network who may or may not have already been exposed to a disease. Determining how representative a molecular cluster is of a risk network depends on a combination of molecular surveillance, contact tracing, and community engagement.Research applying a phylodynamic-like approach used HIVTRACE in combination with annual numbers of new diagnoses to determine that the molecular clusters with the most rapid and recent growth in the prior few years are at greatest risk for future cluster growth [110,135,136]. To define a growing cluster, the CDC now uses a tight genetic distance threshold (0.5%), a short time window for querying surveillance sequence databases (3 years), and any number above a small number of new infections (five new diagnoses) joining the molecular cluster within the most recent 12-month period [110]. However, more research is needed to define the optimal metric to monitor growing clusters and guide efforts to control further spread [137]. This includes developing more effective means to identify larger HIV transmission and risk networks from initial molecular clusters, for example, through iterative name elicitation or by using social network strategies [138–140].How well these emerging lessons in HIV molecular surveillance might apply to SARS-CoV-2 is not yet clear. Differences in droplet/aerosol/contact route of transmission versus sexual transmission, as well as the shorter duration of infectivity of SARS-CoV-2, may make elicitation of names of potential contacts more difficult for those diagnosed with, or exposed to, SARS-CoV-2 than HIV. This could increase the potential benefits of adding molecular surveillance to public health epidemiological investigations. That being said, decreased SARS-CoV-2 genetic diversity, relative to HIV, may or may not be countered by using full genome sequences for clustering, complicating the interpretation of molecular clusters. Furthermore, the scale and pace of SARS-CoV-2 spread outstrips that of HIV, raising the possibility that sequence cluster assessments may be much more challenging to apply to COVID-19 control.One critical lesson from these efforts for HIV is that molecular surveillance may complement, but not replace, current contact tracing that relies on elicitation of names of close contacts. It is important to note that there is far from complete concordance between partners named by an index case in a partner services interview and those persons with HIV sequences that molecularly cluster with that same index case. One report found that 48% of named partners had genetically closely related viruses, and that persons with genetically similar HIV sequences comprised 53% of named partners [141]. Persons diagnosed with HIV (female and male) who reported high-risk heterosexual contact were more likely to name at least one partner with a genetically similar virus than those reporting their HIV risk was via more stigmatized/unlawful behaviors, such as injection drug use or sex between men [141]. It is speculated that the latter HIV risk behaviours involve anonymity of partners, more partners or unwillingness to disclose names for multiple reasons; stigma and marginalization associated with those behavioral risks for HIV acquisition remain pervasive. Although only a subset of those undergoing contact tracing for SARS-CoV-2 exposure may face such repercussions for reporting (i.e. potentially based on immigration status, race, or adverse consequences enforced by educational or professional institutions), this highlights the importance of community engagement for successful control of viral spread by contact tracing. Indeed, the extensive literature on many persisting ethical issues raised by HIV molecular surveillance that still require work should inform the cautions and safeguards appropriate for research on potentially advancing molecular surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 [133,142–148].Electronic medical record dataAlthough the approaches above focus on the who, what, where and when of epidemiological investigation, understanding how infectious diseases are spread and why certain people may be more at risk usually depend on the cultivation and maintenance of clinical care data that track patient demographics, spatiotemporal variables, symptoms, behaviours, medical history, exposure, timing, etc. In conjunction with molecular information, including diagnostics, viral load, viral sequence and even patient genotypic information, these datasets can yield an epidemiological goldmine of information that shed light on transmission dynamics, pathogenesis, risk factors, and treatment outcomes. Traditionally, these data had to be manually curated from medical records and case files, which was not only time consuming, but exceptionally laborious. Today, much of this information can be extracted from electronic medical record (EMR) systems, though several challenges with these types of data persist.The AIDS pandemic began in an era without EMR systems and was first described by the CDC through standard epidemiological practices, including contact tracing, case finding and well executed case--control studies. This was done well before any laboratory had identified or sequenced HIV and this sentinel work defined routes of transmission and high-risk populations that continue to hold true today [149]. As EMR systems became popular and an essential part of medical care throughout the early to mid-2000s, HIV researchers have harnessed the power of EMRs to study real-world shifts in disease as individuals with HIV are aging and care has moved from in-hospital treatment of opportunistic infections to outpatient chronic management [150–153]. Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, EMR systems helped investigators quickly describe the clinical syndrome of hospitalized patients, define risk for poor outcomes and assess therapeutic interventions [154,155,156▪▪,157–159]. As we study the epidemiology of long-term complications of COVID-19 and of milder disease managed in the outpatient setting, we can expect to face several of the challenges we are currently facing in the use of EMR data to inform HIV research.These global pandemics have highlighted the need for rapid, reliable and comprehensive clinical information to help inform the evolving epidemiology of old and new health problems. EMR systems can fill this role, but we must remember that they were originally developed not to serve as an epidemiological research database, but rather for documentation of clinical care, managing day to day care of patients and for billing payers of medical services. Generally, public health and epidemiological based research have been an afterthought with EMR generated data analysed in a retrospective fashion. As such, EMR datasets are often complicated by missing information, inconsistencies, subjectivity and mixtures of longitudinal and static information. Thus, although EMR-based researchers often have the power of ‘Big Data’, they are ultimately at the mercy of clinical care providers for the type and timing of data generated. EMR research requires advanced statistical methods and careful consideration of clinical data management and standardization across data systems. At times, this requires clinician case review of individual EMRs to verify information, understand the completeness of electronic data capture and minimize misclassification of critical disease outcomes [160–162].The Centers for AIDS Research Network of Integrated Clinical Systems (CNICS; https://sites.uab.edu/cnics/) has been notably successful in harnessing the power of multi-site EMR data for HIV research and should serve as a model for how we move COVID-19 EMR-based research into the next phase of epidemiological and translational research [163–165]. This group consists of eight HIV clinical care sites throughout the USA with diverse demographics and geography. Each site is responsible for curating clinical data on HIV patients in care from the EMR and periodically submitting to the data management centre (DMC) at the University of Washington where quality checks, reconciliation and data standardization is a critical component of creating useful and rich research datasets [163,166▪]. Each site locally collects and stores biological samples (plasma and cells) annually on a subset of participants and CNICS has a centralized process to quickly identify research samples paired with clinical data. One of the unique strengths of CNICS is their approach of performing patient-reported outcome (PRO) assessments within the context of routine clinical care for in-depth longitudinal evaluations of substance/alcohol abuse, tobacco consumption, mental health, sexual behaviour and neurocognitive performance [167]. Finally, CNICS has an organized and efficient process to quickly perform research feasibility assessments, review research concept proposals, obtain letters for grant applications, give expert feedback and mentorship to investigators, and provide large research datasets. In addition to collaborative research across the network, CNICS sites have utilized their data to understand local HIV epidemics and identify potential participants for other observational or interventional HIV clinical studies.Future COVID-19 research on the evolution of viral genetics, long-term outcomes, reinfection, immune dysfunction, immunity and risk for end organ disease will require a similar approach with a central process for standardization and verification of EMR data, robust biological sample collection, and thoughtful participant centered evaluations. A much larger national network of clinical care sites each contributing COVID-19 (and comparator) clinical data from EMRs for research analyses has rapidly been developed (https://ncats.nih.gov/n3c), providing the potential for even more powerful data analyses for COVID-19 given these lessons can be learned and applied.As shown throughout this review, our understanding of disease diagnosis, pathogenesis and relevant outcomes will change with advancements in research and technology. At the same time, EMR systems must be flexible and evolve to play a bigger better role in providing high-quality information for public health surveillance and epidemiology research. In this way, we hope that lessons learned from years of HIV/AIDS EMR-based research can lead the path forward for COVID-19.CONCLUSIONIn the past few decades, major advances in molecular biology have revolutionized the ways in which we study and understand human health and disease. New technologies in serology, PCR, gene sequencing and computational modelling have revealed new methods to understand and identify the causative and correlative factors that drive disease. Molecular epidemiology approaches are providing new means for diagnosis, for tracking transmission and for understanding pathogenesis. These techniques, often developed in response to and optimized in conjunction with the ongoing HIV epidemic, are now being applied to the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in force. Although the advantages of these approaches are real, they also face several limitations and challenges, particularly in regards to implementation, that must be overcome by further research to reach their full potential. In any case, these approaches have been found to complement and enhance, but not supplant, traditional means of epidemiological study. Moving forward, we should take this opportunity to advance and employ new, blended methods of traditional and molecular epidemiology to improve both our understanding and management of current and future epidemics.AcknowledgementsNone.Financial support and sponsorshipThis work was supported by the Gilead Sciences Research Scholars Program in HIV (JFH), NIH grant K22 AI136691 (JFH), NIH grant R01 AI150998 (JFH), the NIH-supported Third Coast CFAR P30 AI117943 (RLR, JFH, CJA, RTD), a supplement from the NIH-sponsored HARC Center P50 GM082250 (JFH), NIH grant R01 AI 136056 (RTD), the NIH National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences grant UL1 TR001422 (RTD), a CTSA supplement to NCATS UL1 TR002389 (JFH), the generous support of the Dixon Family Foundation (JFH, EAO), a supplement to the Northwestern University Cancer Center P30 CA060553 (JFH), as well as through a generous contribution from the Walder Foundation (JFH, EAO). The funding sources had no role in the study design, data collection, analysis, interpretation or writing of the report.Conflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.REFERENCES AND RECOMMENDED READINGPapers of particular interest, published within the annual period of review, have been highlighted as:▪ of special interest▪▪ of outstanding interest


Title: One Protein to Rule them All: Modulation of Cell Surface Receptors and Molecules by HIV Nef

INTRODUCTIONReceptor down-modulation is a strategy broadly used by many viruses to escape the immune system and establish the best environment for their replication and spread [1-5]. HIV-1 seems to have evolved to master the art of receptor modulation to perfection. Infection with the virus causes the differential expression of several receptors from the surface of T cells and antigen presenting cells such as dendritic cells and macrophages. These receptors are CD4 (reviewed in [6] and [7]), CD3 [8], CXCR4 [9], CCR5 [10], CCR3 [11], CD1 [12], MHC-I [13], CD8β [14], CD80 and CD86 [15], CD28 [16] and MHC-II [17] and DC-SIGN [18], and in general their down-regulation (or up-regulation, in the case of DC-SIGN) leads to enhanced virus release, reduced superinfection and disruption of immunological responses, thus creating the perfect environment for viral replication.The small genome of HIV-1, encoding only three structural genes and six regulatory/accessory proteins [19], necessitates optimal use of the limited coding capacity to perform all viral functions. It is therefore not surprising that multifunctional proteins arose, such as Nef that determines most of the receptor down-regulation phenomena occurring during HIV-1 infection. This protein is considered important for HIV-1 infectivity and pathogenicity. The structure, reviewed by Geyer, Fackler and Peterlin [20] in 2001, and some functions of Nef have already been clarified in part, while for other functions only hypothetical mechanistic models have been proposed. In the massive amount of literature that has been produced on Nef over the years, contradictory results on the receptor modulation mechanisms have been published, probably in part due to the use of different experimental systems, including less relevant cell lines. An example of this contradiction can be found in two very recent works [21, 22]. The use of relevant cell lines, and especially of primary cells, is key to gain relevant consistent evidence and more insights in the exact ways of action and functions of the Nef protein. Here we review the biological relevance and the importance of the different receptor expression modulation processes provoked by Nef. Our hope is that the knowledge gained until now will help to better direct the efforts in the study of these mechanisms in the future.The down-modulation of surface receptors and molecules is considered one of the most important and conserved functions of the HIV-1 Nef protein, with relevance for pathogenicity. The down-regulation of each receptor leads to specific biological consequences and all together they contribute to create a synergy necessary for the efficient replication and infection of HIV. It is believed that the down-modulation of MHC-I, CD8β, CD4, CD1a, CD28, MHC-II and CXCR4 are fundamental to ensure an efficient immune evasion [23]. The down-regulation of CD4, one of the hallmarks of HIV-1 infection, leads to the efficient assembly of viral particles, to the disruption of CD4-based immune responses and contributes to avoid superinfection [7]. Finally, the down-regulation of CD80 and CD86 is believed to interfere with naïve T cell activation [15]. All together, these phenomena lead to a perfect environment for optimal fitness and propagation of the virus and will be discussed in detail in the following paragraphs.HIV-1 NEF DOWN-MODULATES CELL SURFACE RECEPTORS TO HIJACK AND ESCAPE THE IMMUNE SYSTEMThe Nef protein, produced during the early stages of infection, plays a crucial role in creating the perfect environment for viral replication and reduces the ability of the infected cells to induce an immune response, leaving them isolated from any possible immune reaction that could kill it or interfere with the virus production [6]. Here, we discuss the contribution of the down-modulation of each of these molecules to the effective viral escape from the immune system.CD4CD4 is the co-receptor of the T Cell Receptor (TCR) of CD4 positive T cells and also the main receptor for HIV-1: binding with the viral envelope protein Env determines a series of conformational changes that result in the eventual fusion of the viral and cellular membranes and the entry of the virus into the host cell [24]. In the early stages of infection, Nef acts in order to eliminate the CD4 receptor from the surface. It is now clear that Nef binds to CD4 and the clathrin adaptor AP-2 and uses this interaction to recruit clathrin molecules to the membrane and therefore accelerates the endocytosis of CD4 through clathrin-coated vescicles [14, 25]. It has been shown that Nef interaction with β-COP might be important to direct the endocytosed receptors to the endosomal pathways that lead to degradation [26], a finding that has been validated recently also for CD8 and CD28 down-regulation [21]. In 2009 Bonifacino et al. showed, in HeLa cells stably expressing the CD4 receptor and in JM T cells, that Nef has also the ability of targeting CD4 to the Multivesicular Body Pathway (MVP) for lysosomal degradation with a separated system from surface down-modulation that involves the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT) [27]. This finding has revived a question ongoing for many years: are there other proteins, apart from AP-2 and β-COP, involved in the down-modulation of CD4? Which is the exact pathway? It is clear that these questions need to be answered if we want to really understand this important function of the Nef protein and its effects on HIV infection. Moreover, based on research from others and our own unpublished results, we believe that validation of all these findings should be done in primary T cells, given the variability and the difference in protein trafficking between different cell lines. In addition to Nef, also two other viral proteins act to ensure an efficient down-modulation of the receptor: Env (gp160), which retains newly synthesized CD4 molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum and Vpu, which links the gp160-bound CD4 molecules to the SCF ubiquitin ligase for degradation [28]. The CD4 co-receptor is necessary for T cell activation upon recognition of the MHC-II:antigen complex and is required for productive signaling that leads to the immune response to pathogen infection [29]. Kitchen et al. demonstrated in mice [30] and humans [31] that the expression of the CD4 molecule on cytotoxic lymphocytes has a functional role in antiviral response in vivo: CD4 on highly activated CD8+ lymphocytes serves as a chemotactic receptor for IL-16, which attracts the lymphocytes to the site of inflammation, and the binding of CD4 to MHC-II is also able to up-regulate the expression of IFN-γ and FasL. HIV might use the CD4 receptor expressed on cytotoxic T lymphocytes to enter this type of cells and immediately down-regulate it from the cell surface upon entry, dysregulating FasL induction, IFN-γ production and IL-16 binding, thus reducing the efficiency of the cytotoxic response against antigen.CD4 down-modulation does not only have consequences on the immune response, but as the HIV receptor, viral infectivity and replication are also affected, as discussed in the following paragraphs of this review.Major Histocompatibility Complex, Class I (MHCI)To escape from lysis of infected cells, HIV must evade the action of cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) which, in normal conditions, function to destroy virally infected cells. CTLs can recognize infected targets via the TCR that together with CD8, recognizes the MHC-I molecule presenting the pathogen antigen on the surface of the infected cells. Nef is known to down-modulate MHC-I from the cell surface in order to successfully avoid recognition of CTLs and thus contribute to the escape of the virus from the immune system [13]. After the discovery of this function of Nef, many studies have tried to characterize the mechanism behind it. A study of Roeth et al. reported that Nef first binds to the cytoplasmic tail of MHC-I early in the secretory compartment, in contrast to CD4 down-regulation which happens when CD4 is already present on the surface [32]. subsequently, the Nef-MHC-I complex recruits AP-1 using a binding site that is created when the Nef-MHC-I complex is formed and stabilized thanks to the acidic and polyproline domains of Nef [32, 33]. The formation of this complex diverts MHC-I trafficking in a way that the protein is directed to lysosomes for degradation instead of being expressed on the cell surface. In a following study by the same group, the mechanism is further characterized by the validation of the role of β-COP in the trafficking of MHC-I to the degradative compartment: knock-down of β-COP hampers both CD4 and MHC-I degradation. This suggests a model in which CD4 and MHC-I are first escorted to endosomal compartments via the interaction with AP-2 and AP-1 respectively, and then led to degradation by a common pathway involving the interaction with β-COP [26]. A recent study by the same group validated these findings and added further insights by comparing the down-modulation of the MHC-I molecule with the down-modulation of other cell surface receptors and molecules by Nef. Interestingly, the study reports that the interaction between Nef and AP-1 needed to mediate the down-regulation of CD28 and CD8β requires the tyrosine binding pocket in the μ subunit of AP-1, different from the Nef-AP1 interaction that permits down-modulation of MHC-I, which is dependent on the dileucine motif within Nef. Moreover, the role of β-COP in the degradation of internalized CD4, CD8 and MHC-I is further validated [21]. It can be speculated that Nef acts predominantly in the elimination of nascent MHC-I molecules, and not on the ones already expressed on the cell surface, because only the newly synthesized molecules would harbor viral antigens, while the ones already present on the cell-surface prior to infection wouldn’t trigger an anti-HIV CTLs response and rather inhibit NK activation.Major Histocompatibility Complex, Class II (MHCII)In order to impair the host immune response to viral infections, antigen presentation in the context of MHC-II is another target for viral immune subversion. MHC-II is expressed on antigen-presenting cells (APCs) such as macrophages and dendritic cells and binds to the T cell and CD4 receptors present on T-helper lymphocytes to play a fundamental role in the immune response. Loss of functional MHC-II molecules on APCs surface hampers antigen presentation and therefore leads to an absent or defective T-helper lymphocyte-mediated immune response.Studies in HeLa cells stably transfected with CIITA (that induces the expression of genes necessary for MHC-II presentation, i.e. Ii, HLA-DM, HLA-DR) determined that not only the levels of mature MHC-II on the cell surface are reduced in the presence of Nef, but also that the expression of an immature MHC-II molecule, containing the invariant chain Ii, is increased and this function appears to be specific for the Nef protein, since it is not observed during infection with Nef-deleted viruses. Mechanistic studies revealed that Nef impairs the transport of the internalized invariant chain Ii to the lysosomes, where it is normally degraded. This effect was shown to be sensitive to the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor LY294002, suggesting that Nef could stimulate PI3K activation, possibly leading to recycling of the Ii chain to the cellular surface [34-37]. Taken together these data confirm the hypothesis that Nef can hamper antigen presentation by avoiding the maturation of the MHC-II complexes. In contrast, the down-regulation of mature MHC-II from the surface is determined by a completely different pathway and requires other molecular effectors. The first insights in the molecular pathway involved, came from Chaudry et al., who used both murine and human monocytic-derived cell lines but also human peripheral blood mononuclear cells [17]. They showed that despite the MHC-II down-regulation from the cellular surface the total amount of MHC-II remains constant. This must be due to an intracellular accumulation and thus demonstrates that Nef retains the internalized MHC-II molecules in the endocytic vesicles, hampering their recycling and expression on the cell surface. The internalized MHC-II molecules co-localize with markers of the endosomes and lysosomes and the process seems to be dependent on cholesterol presence in the plasma membrane, Rab5 and PI3K but independent of clathrin, dynamin and other cytoskeleton proteins involved in the Nef mediated down-regulation of other surface molecules. Taken together, these studies show that Nef induces the reduction of surface mature MHC-II expression by inducing its re-localization to the lysosomes for degradation.A study of Schindler et al. validated the fact that the MHC-II down-regulation/Ii-chain up-regulation function of Nef is conserved among different strains (HIV-1 Na7, HIV-1 NL4.3, SIVmac239 and HIV-2 Ben) [36]. The conservation of this function, not only among alleles of HIV-1 Nef but also in SIV and HIV-2, suggests that it is a very important function for the virus. This study confirmed the previous results and added some important observations: these effects on MHC-II expression are observed with primary isolates from HIV-1 infected patients that show progression to AIDS, while in Long Term Non Progressors (LNTPs) these functions seems to be absent. This suggests an important role of mature MHC-II down-regulation for the progression of the disease. The study of Schindler et al. also determined the Nef motives involved in the process: the acidic domain (EEEE) appears to be necessary for MHC-II down-regulation but dispensable for Ii chain up-regulation while the acidic residues of the C-terminal proximal loop appear to be important for the up-regulation of the Ii chain and dispensable for MHC-II down-regulation. The dileucine motif, also important in Nef-mediated CD4 down-modulation, seems important for the up-regulation of the Ii chain while the residues Pro72 and Pro75 of the PxxP motif were important for mature MHC-II down-modulation. So far, all these functions have been detected in cell lines only: the group of Schindler et al. performed preliminary experiments in PBMCs but could not validate the findings obtained in cell lines [36]. Once again, most mechanisms were researched in cell lines but only some of these aspects were confirmed in part in primary cells [37, 38]: given the importance of the MHC-II molecule in the immune response and the conservation of the MHC-II down-modulation function among a wide range Nef alleles, it is of great importance to define the mechanism in primary monocytes and dendritic cells, in order to have a clearer and more relevant view on the process.CD8The transmembrane glycoprotein CD8, is a co-receptor of the TCR and can be found on intestinal T cells, CD8+ T cells, thymic T cell precursors and Natural Killer cells as an αα-homodimer and on thymocytes and peripheral T cells as an αβ-heterodimer [39, 40]. The latter was reported to be strongly down-modulated by HIV-1, HIV-2 and SIVmac239 Nef in T cell precursors and CD4+T cell lines [14, 21]. Results indicate that HIV-1 Nef induces the rapid internalization of the β chain of the receptor by clathrin-mediated endocytosis, recruiting the AP-2 adaptor complex to the cell surface in order to facilitate the receptor internalization. This mechanism reveals a similarity between the CD8 and the CD4 down-modulation processes [14]. The effect on the covalently linked α chain appears much more modest compared to the β chain, suggesting CD8αβ down-modulation is mediated mainly by its effect on the β chain. Recently, Leonard et al. found that AP-1 recruitment to the cell surface and the interaction of Nef with β-COP are necessary for CD8β down-modulation and subsequent degradation [21]. However, they couldn’t confirm the need for AP-2 in CD8β nor CD4 down-modulation by knock-down of AP-2 α while several previous reports convincingly showed the opposite by knock-down of AP-2 μ2 [14, 25] Although there is some evidence for dysfunctional antiviral CD8 T cell responses in HIV infection (for review see reference [41]), further research has to be done on whether Nef impairs infected CD8+ T cell function. The role of CD8 molecules in the recognition of antigens in association with MHC-I molecules is very important and since CD8 positive T cells can become infected in transit through a CD4/CD8 double positive state, it is possible that Nef-dependent CD8 down-regulation provides a mechanism to avoid antigen recognition and cytotoxic responses to pathogens, therefore playing an important role in the subversion of the immune system during HIV infection.CD80 and CD86CD80 and CD86 are two major co-stimulatory proteins of the B7 family, present on antigen presenting cells (APCs) such as dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages and provide a co-stimulatory signal necessary for T cell activation and survival [42]. Different studies showed CD80 and CD86 down-regulation from the cell surface in macrophage cell lines of human and murine origin as well as in human PBL-derived macrophages after HIV-1 infection [42-44]. However, a recent study from Leonard et al. could not show CD80 and CD86 down-regulation in primary APCs derived from human peripheral blood mononuclear cells or in human monocytic cell lines [21]. The two-pronged mechanism involved in the Nef mediated down-regulation of CD80/CD86, described by the group of Chaudry, involves both a direct binding of Nef to CD80/CD86 to mark the molecules for Rac-mediated endocytosis and the activation of the PKC-Src-TIAM-Rac pathway to trigger Rac-mediated endocytosis. Both actions are mediated by separate Nef domains based on the evidence that a point mutation in Nef was still able to activate Src and Rac but unable to bind to the cytosolic tail of CD80/CD86 and induce internalization [44, 15]. Given the role of these two molecules, it has been speculated that Nef’s ability to reduce CD80 and CD86 surface expression in infected cells can prevent the activation of naïve T cells, necessary for an efficient recognition and elimination of the target cells. T cell activation assays showed unaffected presentation of APC endogenous antigen to both MHC-II and MHC-I restricted T cell hybridomas in the presence of Nef. This activation study was conducted in a time frame in which CD80 and CD86 appeared to be already down-regulated from the cell surface but MHC-I down-regulation still had to occur and therefore the contribution of CD80 and CD86 absence on the cells could be measured in a more precise way. The same APCs were demonstrated to be extremely poor activators of naïve primary CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, consistent with loss of co-stimulatory function mediated by Nef [15]. The results of Chaudry et al. [15, 44] would propose an important role for Nef-mediated loss of co-stimulatory signals during HIV infection dependent on CD80 and CD86 down-regulation. However, on the other hand the evidence gathered in primary cells by Leonard et al. [21] questions this hypothesis and suggests indeed a role of Nef in the loss of co-stimulatory signaling, but not necessarily through modulation of CD80 and CD86. Further experiments in primary cells are therefore needed to validate the role of CD80 and CD86 down-regulation in this context.CD28The CD28 molecule is expressed on T cells and is the receptor for two other clusters of differentiation expressed in APCs, i.e. CD80 and CD86. It therefore plays a role together with these two proteins in efficient co-stimulation for the activation of T cells. In 2001 Swigut T. et al. demonstrated that Nef down-modulates CD28 from the cell surface via a mechanism similar to the one involved in CD4 down-modulation [16]. This work showed, in the Jurkat T cell line, that CD28 is removed from the cell surface by both SIV (SIVmac239) and HIV-1 (NA7) alleles via accelerated endocytosis, most likely by a mechanism that involves clathrin coated pits, with the assistance of AP-2. A recent study adds more insight in the mechanism, showing that Nef cooperates with AP-1 and β-COP to down-modulate CD28 from the cell surface [21]. Although interesting, these findings are based on SupT1 T cell line transfected with chimeras of various surface markers (CD4, CD28, CD8β, CD80, CD28, CD1d) consisting of the cytoplasmic tail of the receptor and the extracellular part of HLA-A2. It would be interesting to validate these findings in primary cells that stably and consitutively express the native receptor, in order to obtain the most relevant data.CD1CD1 molecules are non-polymorphic β2-microglobulin-associated trans-membrane proteins, structurally related to MHC-I. They are capable of restricting T cells to antigens but in contrast to MHC-I, specialized in presenting lipid and glycolipid antigens [45]. Five genes coding for CD1 molecules are found in humans, and can be classified into two groups according to sequence homology: group I, consisting of CD1a, CD1b and CD1c molecules, group II consists of CD1d and homologues. Both CD1a and CD1d have been shown to be down-regulated by Nef [46, 47].CD1a is an isoform of CD1 expressed on many professional antigen presenting cells such as B cells, activated monocytes, immature dentritic cells (iDCs) and Langerhans cells [48]. This receptor has been shown to be significantly down-modulated in iDCs and in CD1a stably transfected JY cells infected with HIV-1. The internalized CD1a molecules were found to co-localize with Nef in intracellular compartments, suggesting that the endocytosis process is Nef-mediated [12]. It is believed that CD1a is important in mucosal immunity, as it can bind and efficiently present antigens to T cells [49].CD1d, a non polymorphic MHC class-I molecule, presents lipid antigens to Natural Killer T cells (NKT) and has been shown to be down-regulated by HIV-1 Nef in Jurkat T cells and CD4/CD1d expressing HeLa cells by accelerated endocytosis from the cell membrane and retention in the trans-Golgi network [46, 47]. It is believed that as HIV-1 reduces its visibility to MHC-I restricted T cells by down-regulating MHC-I molecules from the surface of infected cells, it also reduces its visibility to CD1d restricted NKT cells by Nef-induced down-regulation of CD1d, both cell-types being critical for controlling the virus spread in HIV-1 infection [46]. Furthermore, the down-regulation of CD1d molecules on the cell surface of infected cells could be responsible for the loss of NKT cells-mediated immune response and impaired NKT cell activation following infection [46]. The loss of CD1a instead, is believed to be responsible for the disruption of mucosal immune responses.MODULATION OF CD3 AND CD28 TO BALANCE THE ACTIVITY OF THE INFECTED T CELLSThe activation of CD4+ T cells requires two signals in order to happen efficiently: the interaction of the TCR-CD3 complex with the MHC class I complex presenting antigen-specific peptides and a CD28/B7-mediated co-stimulation. Efficient HIV and SIV proliferation in vitro requires mitogenic activation or engagement of the T cell receptor [50]; however, replication in purified T cells, PBLs or PBMCs can be measured in the absence of any exogenous stimulation. It is well established that HIV-1/2 and SIV Nef promote T cell activation in order to establish efficient infection of the target cell. Based on the measurement of IL-2 synthesis and NFAT and NFkB activity, it has been shown that HIV-1 Nef increases T cell activation induced by TCR or CD28 engagement [51-54]. Moreover, gene expression profiling revealed that Nef triggers a transcriptional program in T cells which is almost identical to that of anti-CD3 T cell activation [55] which favors HIV-1 replication by up-regulating transcription factors recruited to the LTR [56].Induction of T cell activation is beneficial for viral infection, yet it can be detrimental for the infected T cell, since repeated stimulation of the TCR results in T cell apoptosis (a process called Activation Induced Cell Death; AICD). To protect T cells from AICD, primate lentiviruses have evolved the ability to down-regulate the TCR, which might decrease T cell activation to an optimal level, able to favor viral infection without reaching AICD. Nef alleles from HIV-2, SIVsm and SIVmac efficiently down-regulate cell surface CD3 and show impaired TCR-induced NFAT activation, a function which is lacking in HIV-1 and its SIVcpz precursor [57, 58]. Although CD3 down-regulation by Nef is not fully characterized, a direct interaction between SIVmac Nef and CD3 has been demonstrated to be surely involved in the process [59, 16].THE ROLE OF SURFACE RECEPTOR DOWN-MODULATION IN THE PREVENTION OF SUPER-INFECTIONHIV superinfection is deleterious for the viability of the infected cell and hence the likelihood for efficient viral replication [60, 61]. Avoidance of this phenomenon by the virus was in the beginning considered to depend solely on the down-modulation of CD4. However, this topic has generated a continuous debate over the years and more recently the discovery of the down-modulation of HIV co-receptors has highlighted that also the elimination of other molecules from the cell surface may contribute to the prevention of superinfection.Nef has been reported to modulate the surface expression of CCR5, CCR3, which function as co-receptors especially in macrophages, T helper 2 cells and microglial cells, and CXCR4, which functions as co-receptor mainly in T cells. A study from Michel et al. demonstrates the surface down-regulation of these co-receptors by FACS analysis in CHO cells transfected with NefSF2 [11]. Additionally the study proved that also CCR1, CCR4, CCR2, CXCR1, CCR3 and CXCR2 are down-modulated when Nef is expressed in the cell. The study has also demonstrated that the down-modulation of these chemokines receptors is a conserved function among HIV-1 (SF2, NL4-3, NA7), HIV-2 (NEP) and SIV (Mac239) alleles [11] but the actual mechanism by which HIV Nef down-regulates the surface expression of the viral co-receptors is controversial. SIV Nef is dependent on clathrin mediated endocytosis for down-modulation of CXCR4 [58], while HIV-1 Nef proteins depend on an intact acidic cluster and proline rich motif for CXCR4 internalization [11, 62]. The differential mechanism used by SIV and HIV-1 Nef may account for the differential efficiency of CXCR4 down-regulation between both Nef species. SIV Nef proteins down-modulate the surface expression of CXCR4 very efficiently, while HIV Nef proteins have a less pronounced effect on CXCR4 surface expression, with HIV-2 Nef proteins being more potent than HIV-1 [62]. Receptor mutagenesis demonstrated that the cytoplasmic tail of CCR5 and CXCR4, which is critical for ligand-mediated endocytosis, was completely dispensable for this Nef activity but mutation of the highly conserved DRY motif in the second intracellular loop of these chemokine receptors abolished the Nef-mediated down-regulation of CXCR4 [11]. Depending on the cell type and the virus tropism, the presence of CCR5, CCR3 or CXCR4 is necessary for the viral entry together with an optimal expression of CD4 on the surface of the target cell. The fact that upon its entry in the cells the virus efficiently down-regulates all these receptors present on the cell surface suggests that this might happen in order to prevent the entry of other viral particles: an accumulation of proviral DNA in fact would likely cause toxicity and cell death, a condition that is not desirable for the virus to efficiently fulfill its life cycle.Similar to other viruses [63], the importance of down-modulation of the primary receptor by HIV is a controversial topic. There are studies that support this theory, for instance it has been shown that HIV-1 infected cells, as well as SIV-Nef expressing cells, are resistant to HIV-2 superinfection. However, questions have been raised, mainly due to the kinetics of the down-regulation: in T cells, this process starts only two days after infection, shortly before cells are committed to die. This means that there is only a short time span in which CD4 down-modulation would confer resistance to superinfection. Juan Lama in his extensive review [6] proposes that, due to these kinetic observations, even if superinfection occurs, it is unlikely that this event would affect the final output of viral production and gives arguments concerning viral selection and evolutionary reasons that would justify superinfection observed in a part of HIV-infected individuals. We think that, although there are good arguments to question the exclusive importance of CD4 down-modulation in the avoidance of superinfection, the experimental evidences available today are not enough to support a theory in which superinfection is considered beneficial for the virus in terms of evolution and fitness, as hypothesized by Lama in his review [6]. The effort that HIV puts in down-modulating not only the CD4 receptor but also the CCR5, CCR3 and CXCR4 co-receptors and the subsequent effects on superinfection illustrates that the virus does care to avoid it. Michel et al. provide a very good characterization of the effect of receptor down-modulation on superinfection [10]. In this study, TZM cells expressing wild type Nef or Nef mutants defective for CD4 down-modulation were infected with HIV-1 R5 YU-2. The cells not expressing Nef were productively infected, while the ones containing Nef were almost totally protected from infection. Interestingly a Nef EDAA mutant, lacking the CD4 down-regulation function, was still showing residual protection from superinfection because it retained the CCR5 down-modulation activity. Indeed, a collaborative effect of the down-modulation of the CD4 receptor and CCR5 co-receptor is suggested by the fact that also cells expressing a Nef mutant lacking CCR5 down-modulation are protected from HIV infection, although to a smaller extent than cells expressing native Nef [10]. The authors of this study propose that the avoidance of superinfection, necessary for the effective virus replication, coexists with the need for a certain level of superinfection, necessary for an optimal recombination, selection and thus evolution of the virus. Primate lentiviruses appear to have evolved time frames during which permission or avoidance of superinfection is regulated by gene expression: only immediately after infection, but before HIV gene expression starts, superinfection could readily occur to allow generation of recombinants. A more recent study has demonstrated that Nef synthesized from unintegrated viral DNA is able to down-modulate the expression of the HIV co-receptors CXCR4 and CCR5 [64] in addition to CD4, highlighting the possibility that soon after infection Nef is produced at functionally relevant levels to induce the down-regulation of the cell receptor used for viral entry. It can be speculated that the purpose of this action is to prevent superinfection from the very early stages of infection, but additional superinfection experiments, especially on primary cells, are needed in order to confirm this hypothesis.THE ROLE OF SURFACE RECEPTOR MODULATION IN VIRAL REPLICATION AND VIRUS SPREADIt is widely known and accepted that Nef can enhance viral replication through its CD4 down-modulation function. Here we will briefly review the mechanism involved in this process and the contribution of the up-regulation of the DC-SIGN molecule to viral spread. Among the first relevant results showing the effect of CD4 down-modulation on viral replication in CD4+ primary T cells is a study from Lundquist et al. [65], in which T cells were infected with an array of HIV-1 viruses containing point mutations to Nef residues previously shown to selectively impair each of Nef known activities [65]. Interestingly, the six Nef point mutants that exhibited the strongest impairment in CD4 down-regulation were also the ones inducing most delayed replication. Later on, a study of Pham et al. [66] evaluated the infection of various cell lines and primary cells expressing truncated CD4 molecules resistant to down-modulation: the infection proceeded normally and virions were released in normal amounts, however the infectivity of progeny virions was reduced of around 1000-fold [66]. Further studies of Lundquist et al. [67] determined that Nef seems to enhance infectivity and replication of HIV-1 by the stabilization of gp120 and gp41 at the cell surface. Moreover, the conclusions of this study led to the hypothesis that the removal of CD4 from the membrane would stabilize gp120 into the nascent virions while leaving them free of CD4 molecules. This possibility was already speculated by Lama et al. [68, 6] but the study of Lundquist provides relevant characterization and validation as it is performed in primary blood T lymphocytes.The type II trans-membrane lectin DC-SIGN is expressed at the surface of both immature and mature dendritic cells (DCs). The function of this molecule is to mediate the transmigration of DCs through the vascular and lymphoid endothelium (via the binding with the ICAM-2 ligand) and the adhesion of DCs to T cells in the antigen presentation process to the TCR (via the ICAM-3 ligand present on the surface of T cells). In the context of HIV infection, cells expressing DC-SIGN are able to retain attached virions in an infectious state for several days and transmit them to T cells [69]. A study of Sol-Foulon et al. demonstrated that Nef up-regulates the levels of DC-SIGN on the surface of DCs by inhibiting its endocytosis, and that this stabilization of the lectin on the cell membrane dramatically increases the ability of DCs to cluster with lymphocytes and transmit the virus [18]. In order to determine how this happens, HeLa cells expressing Nef were used. Nef expression was shown to increase DC-SIGN levels on the cell surface and mutational analysis on the viral protein revealed that mutation of the dileucine motif in the C-terminus of Nef, also crucial for CD4 down-modulation, abolished the effects on DC-SIGN. In contrast, the mutation of the polyproline motif, important for the interaction with proteins carrying the SH3 domain and necessary for MHC-I down-modulation, did not impair the ability of Nef to modulate surface levels of DC-SIGN. The study also evaluates the functional consequences of the up-regulation of DC-SIGN in HIV infected cells. Microscopic analysis revealed a dramatic increase in the formation of clusters between HIV wild type infected DCs and activated primary T cells, while cells infected with Nef deleted viruses showed a pattern of clustering much more similar to that of non infected cells [18].These results help to clarify an additional receptor modulation function of Nef, which seems to be important for the Nef-mediated increase of viral spread and transmission to T cells. It can be speculated that the enhanced DC-T cell clustering due to DC-SIGN up-regulation might have effects on the activation of T cells, thus contributing to the state of hyper-activation typical of HIV infection. The validation of this hypothesis by experimental evidence would add another mechanism to the already complex array of functions through which HIV Nef manipulates the immune system for the benefit of the virus. CONCLUSIONSThe modulation of surface receptors by the HIV Nef protein creates a synergy necessary for the efficient replication, infection and pathogenesis of HIV.Several studies over the years have investigated the mechanisms underlying these processes and partially characterized the protein-protein interactions involved. The efforts made up to date permit to gain insight in many of Nef receptor-modulating activities. However further studies in primary cells are needed to validate the state of the art of knowledge, since often results obtained in different cell lines have been shown to be contradictory. A better and physiologically relevant comprehension of the modulation mechanism of each receptor, crucial for optimal outcome of HIV infection, will hopefully lead to the design of new therapeutic targets and strategies.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HEPATITIS B VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Evidence of Mpox clade IIb infection in primary human alveolar epithelium

IntroductionSince its identification in monkeys in 1958 and the first human case in 1970, monkeypox (Mpox) has been known for its dermatological symptoms particularly lymphadenopathy and rash lesions which concentrated on the face, distal extremities, and sexual organs [1]. Mpox belongs to the Poxviridae family and the Orthopoxvirus genus and currently has been classified into two clades. Clade I and Clade II, each subdivided into subclades Ia, Ib, IIa, and IIb [2]. While Clade Ia and IIa remain endemic in Africa with exclusively zoonotic transmission, clade IIb emerged from the West African lineage and has become the 2022 pandemic and linked to the recent global pandemic of Mpox virus [3,4]. Furthermore, a recently identified subclade Ib has been located outside of Africa, with instances recorded in Thailand, Sweden, Germany, and the UK [5–7], raising further concerns within the global health community, as clade I was proven to be more fatal and virulent than clade II [8]. As of Oct 15, 2024, 110,570 cases have been identified and 237 death cases have been reported worldwide [9].Several in vitro and in vivo models have been used for studying Mpox susceptibility [10–12]. Although skin is the primary target [11], infectivity reports in animal models demonstrated transmission via intranasal and inhalation suggesting possible airborne transmission [12]. Therefore, concern on Mpox infectivity in human lung and its potential respiratory pathology has been raised. Recent clinical evidence came from patients who had positive PCR results of the nasal swabs and autopsy which accompanied by respiratory symptoms including cough, sore throat, dyspnea nasal congestion [13] and the evidence from the autopsy, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT), and chest X-ray which were pulmonary nodules, nodular consolidations, pleural effusion and reticular opacities, particularly in immunocompromised patients [14–18]. However, there is no evidence confirming the infectivity of the Mpox virus clade IIb in the human distal lung particularly at the airliquid alveolar epithelium layer – the first-line target of airborne transmission pathogens. Consequently, the current evidence of Clade IIb Mpox infection in human alveoli solely has relied on the A549 cell line which may not simulate the authentic phenotype of alveolar epithelial cells because of its deficiencies of the important identities such as lung surfactants and surfactant protein secretion [19,20]. Although stem cell-derived hAECs are regularly available, the derived hAECs cannot accurately replicate the function of isolated primary hAECs [21] that play a decisive role against pathogen infection [22]. Human alveoli are occupied by alveolar epithelial type 1 cells (hAEC1), alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (hAEC2), and alveolar macrophages (AMs). The hAEC1 inhabits ∼95% of the alveolar surface area and helps with gas exchange [23], while the hAEC2 inhabits the remaining ∼ 5% of the alveolar surface area and secretes lung surfactant to protect against lung collapse [24,25]. AMs involve in body homeostasis by removing foreign particles and microorganisms from the lungs. Neither of the previous studies have focused on Mpox tropism nor pathology within the human alveoli [8,26,27]. Therefore, it is crucially important to develop a robust patient-derived air-liquid epithelium model fabricated from hAEC to decipher this mystery. This result will help us to understand the persistence of the Mpox virus within the respiratory zone in human lungs as well as its potential to cause pulmonary complications.This work is aimed to confirm if the Mpox has the ability to infect human distal lungs or not using patient derived ALE model and to explore its inflammatory consequences after the infection. Isolated hAECs have been employed to develop ALE model to resemble the actual alveolar architecture. Our pioneered work demonstrated that the developed ALE model robustly provides solid evidence of Mpox clade IIb virus infection and its pathogenesis in human alveoli, as well as potential use of the developed model for antiviral drug screening and exploring the interactome between pathogens and human alveolar cells.MethodsIsolation, characterization, and fabrication of patient-derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium using primary hAECsProcedure for tissue collection was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital (approval number: MURA2021/620). All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Primary hAECs were isolated based on our previous protocol [28]. Cells were divided into 2 sets. The first set of ∼50,000 cells were diluted in DCCM-1 media (Sartorius, Germany) containing 10% (v/v) serum, 4 µM GlutaMAX™, and 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Gibco, US) and were seeded onto an apical side of the collagencoated transwellTM for 1–3 days at 37°C and 5% CO2 until hAECs attached and covered all surface area of the cell culture membrane (90-95% confluence). Complete DCCM-1 media was filled in both sides of Transwell™ during the culture period. After cell attachment, the media were discarded from the apical chamber to establish an airliquid interface (ALI) culture before viral infection in BSL-3 on day 7. The media in the basolateral side was replaced every 3 days.The second set of cells isolated from human lungs was cultured in a similar way as described for the first set, but the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay kit (Abcam, US) was used to characterize hAEC type 2 (hAEC2) and their transdifferentiation kinetics for the quality control process. Generally, the isolated cells are presented as hAEC2. As human progenitor cells, once they are attached to the membrane in an apical chamber of the transwellTM; they can transform into hAEC1. This in-house control set of cells was employed to confirm the ratio between hAEC1 and hAEC2 population (50%:50%) during the infection period. The ALP protocol of the assay kit is based on the manufacturer’s instructions. The presence of cell transdifferentiation was routinely measured before the Mpox virus inoculation. Briefly, isolated hAEC2 from individual donors was aimed to culture for 16 days in DCCM-1 media in the same condition as mentioned above. The percentage of alkaline phosphatase positive (ALP+) cells was assessed every 2 days until day 16 of the culture period. After fixing with 2.5% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in DPBS solution, equal volumes of the staining solution A and the staining solution B were mixed together and stained on the hAEC layer for 30 minutes incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2. The supernatant was discarded, and the cells were washed again with 1X DPBS two times and the sample was mounted using glycerol onto the microscope slides. The images were taken at 10x magnification using Olympus CKX53SF inverted microscope (Olympus, Japan).Mpox virus isolation, collection, infection, and viral titre analysisThe Mpox virus specimen was obtained from a leftover nasopharyngeal swab of a confirmed patient at Ramathibodi Hospital, Thailand, in late 2023, with ethical approval granted by the Human Research Ethics Committee (approval number: hMpxV/THA/V241-0053/2023). All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. A leftover swab underwent isolation procedures beginning with filtration through a 0.45 µm filter. The filtrate sample was then cultured in Vero cells (ATCC, USA) in MEM containing 2% FBS, 100 units/mL, penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin as previously described. By day 3, cytopathic effects were observed, leading to cell harvest and three freeze-thaw cycles [29]. Post-centrifugation, the supernatant was again filtered (0.45 µm) and propagated for three passages in Vero cells. Titration of the virus stock utilized plaque assays in Vero cells under a 1% agarose overlay in MEM with 2% FBS and 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin, visualizing plaques using crystal violet staining at day 6 post-infection. All procedures involving the live Mpox virus were performed in a certified biosafety level 3 facility, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University.At 48 h post-infection (hpi), cell culture was observed for cytopathic effect under Nikon TS100 inverted microscope (Nikon, Japan) before cells and cell supernatants were collected for the viral titre analysis. Initially, hAECs were washed once with DPBS and then trypsinized for 10 minutes. The cell suspension was washed with PBS, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 100 µL/well before storing at – 80°C. Vero cells were used to determine viral titres, and they were plated in a 96-well plate and maintained at 37°C in the incubator with 5% CO2 overnight. The frozen hAEC samples were, then, thawed and subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles, as mentioned previously to release the virus from the infected cells [29]. The samples were then four-fold serially diluted in duplicated wells of a 96-well plate and allowed to be absorbed onto the Vero cell monolayer for 1 hour at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. After absorption, the cell monolayer was washed once with 1X DPBS and then supplemented with MEM, 2% FBS, and antibiotics. The plate was further incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 6 days. The virus titre, expressed as the 50% Tissue Culture Infectious Dose (TCID50), was determined by observing CPE on day 6. TCID50/mL was calculated with a TCID50 calculator based on the Reed-Munch method [30].Statistical analysisExperiments with the isolated hAECs on ALE models were done independently using tissues from 11 different donors. The difference between infected and uninfected samples was analysed by the paired t-test for samples that passed the normality test, and the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test for samples that failed the normality test. Viral titres from different compartments of Transwell™ were analysed by a repeated measures ANOVA test applying Greenhouse-Geisser correction to account for potential violations of sphericity, followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test. On the other hand, viral titres from the same compartment but compared between an infected sample and a control sample were analysed by Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test. hAEC transdifferentiation kinetics were analysed by Friedman test followed by the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli for multiple comparisons, controlling the desired false discovery rate set at 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 9.0.0. Statistical difference was considered at P < 0.05.Details of other methodsDue to word limitation, detail of other methods used in this experiment include Mpox viral sequencing and phylogenetic analysis, immunofluorescence imaging, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay for determining transdifferentiation kinetic of hAEC2, western blot, real-time PCR, assessment of innate immune response and inflammatory cytokines using Milliplex and ELISA, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis, and transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) were described in the supplementary material.ResultsFabrication of patient derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium using primary hAECA model of patient-derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium model using primary hAEC cells has been successfully developed. This model allowed customization of the populations of hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells. Although, in the normal human lung, the ratio between the number of hAEC1 and hAEC2 is 1:1–1:2 [31,32]; we therefore selected a ratio at 1:1 (hAEC1:hAEC2) to provide an equal probability of Mpox infection for both cell types. The study of the in-house culture (quality control set) established the transdifferentiation kinetic of the hAEC2 into hAEC1 in the developed ALE model as showed by the significant decrease in ALP positive cells (n = 5, Figure 1(A–I)) at the longer culture period. The behaviour paralleled the significant decline in pro-surfactant protein C (Pro-SFTPC) expression (Figure S1(A–C)), whereas a significant increase in expression of caveolin-1 was observed suggesting the presence of hAEC1 in the model (Figure S1(D–F)). The major advantages of the developed model are the customization of cell population between hAEC1 and hAEC2 from the same donor, and the presence of a lung surfactant layer at the air-liquid interface within the model which genuinely replicates in vivo condition.
Figure 1.Transdifferentiation kinetic of hAEC2. Visualization of ALP positive cells by inverted light microscope at 10x magnification from Day 2 to Day 16 (A–H). Pinkstained represents ALP expression. Bar plot visualization of the percentages of ALPexpressed cells over 16 days (I). Data represents a mean percentage of ALP positive cells ± SEM, n = 5.Confirmed evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox clade IIb and pathogenesisThe consensus sequence of the Mpox culture isolates from nasal left-over specimen of a confirmed patient showed 100% genome coverage with an average coverage depth of 17,113.3x. Phylogenetic result of the Mpox genome revealed that the isolated virus used in the current study was within Lineage C.1, in clade IIb, which corresponds to the globally circulating clade IIb at the time of the sample collection (indicated with red lettering in Figure S1).The confirmed evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox was analysed on a developed ALE model following 48 hours of viral inoculation. Baseline information of all donors was addressed in Table S1 comprising 7 females and 4 males and a mean age of 68 years old. The first 5 donor samples (no.1-5, Table S1) were employed for determining hAEC2 transdifferentiation kinetics. The rest (no.6-11, Table S1) were used for Mpox infection analysis. The results revealed a clear exhibition of cytopathic effect (CPE) across a layer of hAECs, characterized by cell rounding morphology, cell detachment, and cell death using light microscopy (Figure 2(A)). The evidence of Mpox infection and replication was also confirmed by western blot of protein A29 (Figure 2(B)) and rt-PCR of Mpox TNF gene at 2 and 48 hours (Figure 2(C, D)).
Figure 2.Confirm evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox in patient-derived ALE model at 2 and 48 hpi. (A) Cytopathic effect of Mpox on hAECs morphology. (B) Western blot of patient-derived ALE model infected with Mpox virus Clade IIb at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (C) Ct value of Mpox TNF receptor normalized with GADPH as a housekeeping gene at 2 and 48 hpi. (D) Log2 fold change of Mpox TNF receptor at 2 and 48 hpi.For the analysis of Mpox pathogenesis, 42.82 ± 6.88% of hAECs were infected compared with the control (Figure 3(A)). Additionally, the formation of syncytia characteristics in hAECs had simultaneously been observed in Mpox-infected samples where the infected cells were agglomerating and enlarging. High content analysis results illustrated a significant increase in cell surface area from 942.63 ± 80.03 µm2 (noninfected cells) to 1366.17 ± 54.55 µm2 (infected cells, Figure 3(B)). Within 42.82% of the infected cells, 45.13 ± 1.06% of these cells were found to exhibit multinucleated character or “syncytia structure” (Figure 3(C, D)) while this structure was not observed in the control (Figure 3(E)). We also found that the cell nuclei of the infected cells appeared to lose their intact shape and formed an unusual structure. Overall examination of the entire epithelium layer revealed a disruption of the monolayer identified by the leakage of cell culture media from the basolateral side towards the apical surface.
Figure 3.Mpox pathogenesis and Mpox tropism in patient-derived ALE model at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Mpox infectivity, (B) cell size comparison between infected and non-infected cells, (C) percentages of multinucleated cells observed in infected and non-infected cells, (D-E) immunofluorescent imaging of A29-positive cells in infected and control samples, (F) colocalization analysis of A29 against RAGE or SFTPC, (G) high content imaging analysis of A29+RAGE+ cells or A29+pro-SFTPC+ cells. Data represents a mean percentage of cell population ± SEM from 16 individual images of cells on the Transwell™ at 10x magnification. (H-I) Immunostaining images of A29 against RAGE or pro-SFTPC. A29 (Mpox; Green), RAGE or pro-SFTPC (hAEC1 and hAEC2 marker, respectively; Orange), and DAPI (Nuclei, Blue). The image was taken at 63x Magnification, scale bar at the bottom.To determine the tropism of the Mpox virus in alveolar epithelial cells, the colocalization analysis was utilized to investigate the spatial association between the viral A29 protein and cellular markers of hAEC1 (RAGE) /hAEC2 (SFTPC). Pearson's coefficients indicated substantial colocalization for both A29-RAGE (0.6636) and A29SFTPC (0.6140). However, no significant difference between these Pearson's coefficients was observed (p = 0.2854) (Figure 3(F)). Analysis from high-content screening also revealed a high degree of colocalization between the A29 and both markers, suggesting that both cell types have comparable infection levels (61.10% vs 62.19%, Figure 3(G)). This result corresponds to the observation from the immunofluorescent analysis in Figure 2(H, I), indicating that the Mpox virus exhibited no preference for infection between hAEC1 and hAEC2.Ultrastructure analysis inside hAECFurther insights were gained through TEM analysis, which delineated the biogenesis of the Mpox lifecycle within 24 h infected period including (i) Crescent Structure – the earliest identifiable viral structure that self-assembles into a crescent-shaped membrane (Figure 4(A1, A2)); (ii) Immature Virion – the previous crescent structure gradually transformed into a full spherical shape (Figure 4(A3)) before the viral DNA becomes more concentrated within the enclosed area and forming a visible nucleoid (Figure 4(A4)); (iii) Mature Virion – the stage where the viral genome is tightly condensed into brick or dumbbell structures in the core and flanked by two lateral bodies (Figure 4(A5)); and (iv) Wrapped Virion – one of the mature virion forms that has been wrapped at the Golgi compartment (Figure 4(A6)). The intracellular Mpox particles found were essential for cell-to-cell transmission. These stages involved early replication sites, maturation sites, and enveloped virions providing an in-depth understanding of the virus-host intracellular behaviour and lifecycle progression within both hAEC1 and hAEC2. Since the developed ALE model helped to preserve authentic features of hAECs and their interconnection and communication, we found all stages of Mpox particles distributed throughout the cytosol (Figure 4(B–G)). Figure 4(H–J) illustrated that the wrapped virion of Mpox virus could enter the cell by fusion through cellular membranes, facilitating the delivery of viral genetic material into the hAECs. Similar trends of Mpox infection were observed in both types of hAECs using TEM. This finding supports the previous evidence from immunofluorescence imaging that Mpox can infect both cell types with no selectivity (Figure 4(K–M)). This implied a broad cellular tropism for Mpox in distal human lungs. Furthermore, cell syncytium between hAEC type 1 and type 2 cells was shown as the formation of a fusion site between two cells as depicted in Figure 4(N–P). Tight junction was reduced in the infected sample and the forming of a fusion pore that allowed the transportation of Mpox virus between each cell was observed.
Figure 4.TEM image analysis of Mpox biogenesis in primary human air-liquid alveolar epithelium constructed from hAECs. (A) TEM images visualized different forms of Mpox virus showing Mpox biogenesis in hAEC at 5 MOI, 48 hpi: (A1, A2) Mpox’s crescent structure, (A3) immature virion, (A4) the immature virion with visible nucleoid, (A5) the mature virion with a brick-shaped core and (A6) the wrapped virion with a double layer of a lipid bilayer. The scale bar at the top in Figure 4(A) is 200 nm. (B) Different regions of Mpox tropism at low magnification. (C) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(B) represents hAEC2 infected cell and (D) the higher magnification of the purple square in Figure 4(C). (E-G) Mpox tropism within human alveolar epithelial. The green, turquoise, and yellow squares in Figure 4(D) highlight the presence of the mature and wrapped virions (E–G) as well as the crescent structure and the immature virion (F) in hAEC2 cell. (H) Mpox virus fusion with the host cell plasma membrane was clearly observed and (I) the high magnification of the yellow square in Figure 4(H) shows the viral and host cell membrane fusion process. (J) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(H) shows intracellular Mpox virions at mature status. (K) Mpox tropism within hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells. (L) High magnification of the yellow square in Figure 4(K) shows the ultrastructure of lamellar bodies and the area of the viral factory in hAEC2. (M) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(K) shows mature Mpox virions. (N) Syncytium formation between infected hAEC1 and infected hAEC2. (O) Selected regions at higher magnification from Figure 3(N) revealed a fusion site between hAEC1 cell and microvilli of hAEC2 cell where the tight junction (P) was observed. Scale bars between 200 nm–2 µm. Cre = Crescent Structure. IV = immature virion. MV = mature virion. WV = wrapped virion. LB = lamellar body. TJ = tight junction. We also depicted the illustration of Mpox life cycle through our developed patient-derived air-liquid epithelium (ALE) model as can be seen in Figure S3.Viral titre and cytokine responseViral titre analysis from 3 sampling positions of the TranswellTM demonstrated the highest number of viral particles inside the cell followed by the viral particles in the apical and basolateral sides, respectively (Figure 5(A)). This result suggested that Mpox cloud robustly replicates inside the cell more than being released into the extracellular space and preferentially budding into the apical side rather than the basolateral side. Although the Mpox titre was established, there were no significant differences (p > 0.05) in the levels of inflammatory mediators including IL-6, MIP-1α, TNF-α, and galectin-9 between infected and control cultures (Figure 5(B–F)). However, significant was observed with the level of IL-1β. Therefore, these findings suggested that Mpox clade IIb infection in patient-derived ALE model may not trigger a broad pro-inflammatory cytokine response as measured by IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α, although IL-1β were subtly elevated (mean difference = 3.310 pg/mL, p = 0.0174). Galectin-9 levels, which can be potentially involved in an immune response against viral infection, also did not show a significant change upon Mpox virus infection.
Figure 5.Mpox titre and cytokines, chemokines, and galectin-9 from apical chamber of the Transwell™ in Mpox-infected and control ALE model at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Mpox titre, (B) IL-1β, (C) IL-6, (D) MIP-1α, (E) TNF-α and (F) Galectin-9. Data represents a mean Log10(TCID50/mL + 1) ± SEM for viral titre and represents a mean concentration (pg/mL) ± SEM for the level of cytokines and chemokines, six replicates (n = 6).Compromising of alveolar barrier integrity during Mpox infectionMpox infection decreased the expression of ZO-1 at the tight junctions (yellow in Figure 6(A, B)) along with the disruption of the alveolar epithelium layer as evident in Figure 6(A) compared with the control non-infected sample in Figure 6(B). This led to a weakening of the barrier of human alveoli. In addition, the TEER analysis provided insight into the integrity and permeability of cell monolayers in the air-liquid human alveolar epithelium model. Initially, both Mpox infected, and control non-treated samples exhibited similar TEER values of 132–137 Ω·cm², indicating healthy and intact epithelium barriers. Over the course of the infection for 48 hours, a significant decline of TEER values was observed in the Mpox-infected samples, the TEER was dropped to 24.22 ± 4.37 Ω·cm². In contrast, the control samples maintained a TEER value of around 88.56 ± 8.59 Ω·cm² (n = 5), indicating that the integrity of the epithelial barrier remained largely intact in the absence of viral infection (Figure 6(C)). The decrease in TEER by 82.25% in the infected samples from 136.49 Ω·cm² is a direct consequence of viral pathogenicity. In summary, here we provide systematic observation of immunostaining, western blot, TEM and TEER analysis indicates that Mpox virus infection may lead to damage at the air-liquid alveolar epithelium barrier.
Figure 6.Alveolar epithelial barrier analysis in hAEC ALI culture at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Immunostaining images of Mpox-infected sample (B) and control sample. A29 (Mpox; Green), ZO-1 (Tight junction; Yellow and DAPI (Nuclei, Blue). The image was taken at 63x Magnification, scale bar at the bottom. Red arrows indicate the TNTs between cells. Yellow arrows indicate cell syncytium character. TEER analysis comparing Mpox-infected sample and control sample (C). Data are presented as means of TEER value (Ω·cm2) ± SEM with five replicates (n = 5).Our experiment also observed the unique behaviour of the infected hAECs, where they appear to extend towards the neighbour cells and create tunnelling nanotubes (TNTs, red arrow in Figure 6(A)). We found that TNTs can facilitate cell-to-cell transmission of the intercellular Mpox virions, as visualized by the fluorescent A29 protein along these interconnections in Figure 6(A) (yellow arrows). Nonetheless, TNT is absent in the control non-treated group. This is the first time we observed TNT formation in the hAECs initiated by Mpox virus infection.DiscussionMost of the previous in vitro human distal lung models recruited human lung cancer cells to study host-pathogen interactions. However, the limitation of this approach lies in the genotype disparity between the human lung cancer cell lines and the isolated patient-derived hAECs [20]. The approach of using the induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) to derive alveolar epithelial cells (iAECs) needs to be standardized and provides mature alveolar epithelial cells at the desired number. In fact, when comparing barrier function and expression of alveolar epithelial cell markers between cultured iAEC and hAEC, the hAEC exhibited a greater degree of alveolar maturity than iAEC. This is making hAECs a reliable model for studying alveolar epithelium pathology [33]. In addition, since hAEC2s can transdifferentiate into hAEC1s in vitro, we revealed the transdifferentiating kinetics over a 16-day culture period to find a point where both cell types were present in relatively equal proportions. This was important for our Mpox infection experiments, as hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells may have different susceptibility to the virus and found that hAEC on around 8 days offered an equal proportion of both cell types. We, therefore, selected this time point for studying the Mpox infection in the patient-derived ALE model. Importantly, the environment of the developed ALE model could initiate in vivo physiological conditions than that of the previous 2D and 3D models [34]. Furthermore, the developed ALE model can offer a tight junction barrier, lung surfactant layer [19], and a stable alveolar maturity at the comparable level to in vivo conditions where the apical side is exposed to air and the basolateral side is exposed to the liquid medium. Our study clearly demonstrated that patient-derived ALE model can be used to study the transmission, and pathogenesis of Mpox virus by observing cytopathic characteristics (e.g. cell rounding, detachment, syncytium, and death). These findings were confirmed by both light microscopy, confocal microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. The presence of the Mpox virus was qualitatively and quantitatively analysed by qPCR, western blot, and TEM. Results also supported the potential transmission via the airborne through the presence of viable Mpox virus in the saliva droplets or the aerosols in the air by recent studies from the UK and Spain [35–37] and from the primate models [38–40]. Moreover, our results also illustrated the risk of alveolar layer disruption by Mpox infection.In human alveoli, hAEC1 and hAEC2 play different key roles. The hAEC1 acts as a gas exchanger and prevents the leakage of fluid from blood vessels and interstitial space into the alveolar sac. The hAEC2, on the other hand, acts as a lung surfactant factory which is extremely crucial for maintaining surface tension at the air-liquid interface, as well as, preventing fluid accumulation in the alveoli. Interestingly, hAECs displayed a low Mpox infection rate, suggesting that hAECs may possess some level of innate immunity protective role for Mpox infection. The presence of body homeostasis, including the secretion of lung surfactants and the production of surfactant proteins by hAEC2 may be one of the reasons for the low level of Mpox infection [22]. This finding emphasizes the importance of using relevant cell models, the patient-derived ALE model, to accurately assess Mpox infectivity and pathogenesis. We, next, explored Mpox tropism inside human alveoli by comparing hAEC1 and hAEC2 derived from the same donor, and we found no specific preference between both cells. Connecting the dots, our finding aligns with the clinical observations from autopsy [14], CT, and chest X-ray [15,18] of fatal Mpox patients and may potentially help explain the mechanisms. The death was reported to be initiated by extensive cell death and disruption of the alveolar epithelium layer together with the disruption of adjacent blood capillaries which led to exudative pleural effusion. Cell death and syncytium formation in human alveoli could increase permeability as evidenced by a significant reduction of TEER value and the loss of tight junction protein, allowing fluid accumulation within the alveolar sacs, and potentially contributing to alveolar oedema as a last resort (Figure 7).
Figure 7.Proposed pathogenesis of Mpox-related alveolar oedema. Healthy State (Panel 1): The alveolar structure remains in a healthy state. Early Infection State (Panel 2): The Mpox begins to infect the alveolar epithelial cells without any noticeable disruption in gas exchange. Moderate Damage State (Panel 3): The infection progresses to moderate damage within the human alveoli. The presence of multinucleated cells, an indicative of viral-induced syncytium, and exudates start to accumulate in the alveolar space with a noticeable impairment in the gas exchange. Severe Damage State (Panel 4): Accumulated alveolar-resident cell death results in the formation of alveolar gaps and extensive pleural effusion, causing critical respiratory failure.Results revealed significantly higher viral titre within the infected cells compared to both the apical and basolateral supernatants. This data implied that the Mpox virus replicates robustly intracellularly, with less efficient release into the surrounding media. The apical supernatant exhibited the second-greatest viral titre, indicating that the virus was preferentially released towards the airway surface. This is consistent with the behaviour of many respiratory viruses, which infect and shed from the apical surface of airway epithelial cells, allowing airborne transmission by coughing or sneezing [41,42].However, our findings showed no significant change in pro-inflammatory cytokine levels (IL-6, MIP-1α, TNF-α, and Galactin-9) in Mpox-infected cells compared to controls. Only the IL-1β was subtly increased. The lack of cytokine response points to the potential to evade early immune defenses in the distal lung of the Mpox virus. This immune evasion could challenge the diagnosis and hinder the event of Mpox-related alveoli damage. However, this evidence is contradictory to the previous studies that reported significant elevation of IL-6, MIP-1α, and TNF-α after the Mpox infection. This discrepancy might be attributed to the differences in the clade of the Mpox virus and the source of materials used for cytokine measurement where our study utilized cell supernatants from hAEC ALI cultures, and the previous research groups employed patient serum samples [43,44]. Moreover, we hypothesize that the indifferent levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines between the control and infected cells could be a direct consequence of multiple cell-to-cell transmission mechanisms that Mpox utilized for immune evasion.Our results clearly demonstrated that the Mpox virions could cumulatively replicate within the infected cell and infect the nearby cells in human alveoli by releasing mature virion only from the disrupted infected cell or by the budding wrapped virion from the host cell. These can minimize their exposure time to the extracellular environment, as the mature virion will quickly infect adjacent cells, and the wrapped virion can be disguised in the host-derived additional membrane. Importantly, the genome and proteins of Mpox virion can be transported between each cell through the TNT. Intracellular Mpox contents that transport across this projection can evade the immune response by circumventing the immune system in the extracellular environment. This ultrastructure, therefore, offers two additional advantages to viruses. Firstly, this structure may allow the virus to easily infect the non – or less-permissive cells as demonstrated before with SARs-CoV-2, HIV, and influenza by circumventing the receptor-mediated entry.Secondly, TNTs may also facilitate the spread of viruses in the presence of drugs and neutralizing antibodies [45,46]. The new finding mechanism is that the occurrence of syncytium formation may promote cell-to-cell or transcellular infection. Unlike TNTs, the typical syncytium process could fuse cells into a single entity accelerating viral infection. This process involves fusogenic proteins on the surface of the infected cells binding to receptors on adjacent uninfected cells. Upon receptor binding, the fusogenic proteins can undergo a conformational change and bring the membranes of the infected and target cells into proximity. Such a process destabilizes the membrane bilayers and facilitates cell fusion [47]. Although the result from cell syncytium formation by Mpox virus has not yet been fully understood, we hypothesized that Mpox virus may initialize this phenomenon for the energy distribution among the fused cells. This could create a more favourable environment for robust viral replication and potentially prepare the virus for extrapulmonary invasion. Further study on the presence of syncytium and TNTs in Mpox-infected cells may provide the reason why Mpox expresses no specific favourite to infect a specific type of hAEC. However, our study is limited by a number of the obtained isolated cells which did not allow us to perform the time-course analysis nor the cocultured immune response analysis. Thus, additional study on these subjects will help us to understand Mpox replication kinetics in hAECs as well as the protection against Mpox on hAEC.In conclusion, we developed a robust model of primary human air-liquid alveolar epithelium model for Mpox pathological study and tropism. Our findings provide strong evidence supporting the potential respiratory transmission of Mpox virus clade IIb beyond the skin and traditional sexual transmission routes using patient-derived ALE model. Additionally, this study also sparks a discussion on how the evolution of the Mpox virus could alter its pathogenesis and enhance its transmission globally [48]. Recent evidence supported such evolution including the report of the sexual transmission of Mpox Clade Ib which was once believed to be initiated only by Clade IIb [49]. Further research is warranted. Exploration of the Mpox infection and shedding in different lung compartments and Mpox aerosol stability will be important in refining our understanding of the Mpox respiratory transmission dynamic.Supplementary MaterialFigure S3.tifSupplementary.pdfFigure S1.tifFigure S2.tif


Title: An Overview of Zika Virus and Zika Virus Induced Neuropathies

1. IntroductionFlaviviruses (family Flaviviridae) are small (approximately 50 nm in diameter), enveloped, icosahedral viruses that possess a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of between 9–12 kb [1,2,3,4]. The viral genome consists of a single long ORF (open reading frame) encoding around ten proteins, which are formed by co- and post-translational processing and proteolytically processed into three structural (Cap, prM, and E) and seven non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins by a complex combination of host and viral proteases [5,6,7,8]. Currently, there are about 70 members in this genus, the majority of which are transmitted by arthropods [9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. The incidence of flaviviral infections has increased dramatically in the last seven decades [17,18]. These infections are associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Factors responsible for the rapid increase in flaviviral infections are changes in the sizes and distributions of the vector arthropods that transmit the pathogens, further aggravated by climate change and a large number of potential vertebrate hosts [19,20,21,22]. Details of various neurotropic flaviviruses and their associated neuropathies are summarized in Table 1.ZIKV is a significant pathogen that poses an imminent global threat. It was first isolated from rhesus monkeys in Uganda in 1947 [53] (The genome organization of the Zika Virus is sketched in Figure 1). Later, in the 1950s, its detection continued in several other parts of Africa (Egypt, Nigeria) [54]. However, the first clinical infection in humans was not detected until 1964, when it was found that the ZIKV infection in humans is associated with mild fever and maculopapular rash [55]. From 1960 to 2000, ZIKV was detected in several countries in Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia and Pakistan) [54]. The first major ZIKV outbreak occurred in 2007 (in Yap Island), and then in March 2015, it caused a large outbreak in the Americas (particularly Brazil), and the first time was associated with severe disease and congenital illnesses such as infant microcephaly [56,57,58]. In November 2015, Brazil declared a national public health emergency, and in February 2016, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [59].The ZIKV employs multiple mechanisms to replicate (the ZIKV replication cycle is illustrated in Figure 2) and causes a variety of neurological diseases. It has been proposed that after viral entry through the crossing of the BBB (blood–brain barrier), ZIKV tends to infect the microglia, astrocytes, and endothelial cells [63,64,65]. Damage to the CNS can occur when ZIKV infects the CNS cells, and damage occurs either due to viral replication or because of a host-mediated immune (inflammatory) response [66,67,68]. Moreover, ZIKV infection is also associated with various neurological syndromes, e.g., Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), and others [69,70,71]. Multiple mechanisms are known to cause damage to the CNS, which are also discussed in detail later in this review article. Collectively, in this review, we have summarized the observations on biology, transmission, control strategies (vaccines, antivirals, and vectors), oncolytic aspects, animal and cellular models, neuropathies, and neuropathogenesis associated with ZIKV.2. Transmission of Zika VirusThe principal mode of transmission of ZIKV is through mosquitoes; however, studies have found that various other routes may play an important role in the transmission of the disease. These include venereal transmission, vertical transmission, transmission to infants through mother milk, and blood transfusion This makes it very difficult to devise an appropriate strategy for the control of disease in countries where the disease is endemic. The transmission cycle of ZIKV is illustrated in Figure 3.2.1. Vector Borne TransmissionVector-borne transmission of ZIKV occurs through mosquitoes [13,80]. In the sylvatic transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between non-human primates and mosquitoes, while in the urban transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between humans and mosquitoes. The presence of ZIKV has been reported from many species of mosquitoes in Africa and Asia (Aedes aegypti (Ae. aegypti), Ae. africanus, Ae. albopictus, Ae. apicoargenteus, Ae. furcifer, Ae. luteocephalus, Ae. opok, and Ae. vittatus) which may transmit the virus to humans [53,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90]. However, in Yap and French Polynesia, the transmission of ZIKV was suggested to be through Ae. hensilli and Ae. Polynesiensis, respectively) [91,92,93]. The extrinsic incubation period is reported to be 10 days [84]. The vector competence (the ability of the vector to transmit the virus biologically) has not been determined for ZIKV transmission in most of these species [94] and it may be the area of future research. In the urban cycle, the transmission of ZIKV is mainly through the Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. ZIKV has been detected/isolated from wild Ae. aegypti, and they have been demonstrated to be competent vectors in the laboratory where they can transmit the virus to mice and rhesus monkeys [82,86,88]. Recent studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission by Ae. albopictus as well [84,95]. Both of these mosquitoes remain active during the daytime, and they are prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions [96,97]. However, the geographical range of Ae. albopictus is further extended to the temperate regions [98,99,100]. In the USA, both of these mosquitoes have been found in southern and south-eastern states and their maximum numbers have been found from June to October [101].2.2. Sexual TransmissionMany cases of transmission of ZIKV have been observed following sexual contact. Several studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission from males to females. In most cases, the male had a travel history to ZIKV-endemic countries, and when he returned, his partner became infected [102,103,104]. ZIKV’s presence has been detected in human semen [105]. It has been found that ZIKV can persist in semen for over 6 months following infection, suggesting the possibility for prolonged sexual transmission [106,107,108]. Later studies demonstrated that sexual transmission from male to male is also possible [109]. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in urine and saliva [110,111]. Experiments conducted on lab animals have demonstrated that ZIKV is able to replicate in vaginal and rectal mucosa, thus serving as a reservoir of infection [112].2.3. Vertical TransmissionZIKV has been reported to be transferred from mother to fetus during the gestation period. Normally the placenta acts as an effective barrier to curtail transmission of infections from mother to fetus. However, ZIKV is able to bypass these barriers by unknown mechanisms [113]. Studies conducted in a mouse model demonstrated that ZIKV damages the placenta and results in fetal death [114]. In Brazil, during the ZIKV outbreak, a large increase in the number of neonates with microcephaly was reported from mothers who were infected with ZIKV [115]. ZIKV antigen and RNA have been detected in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetal brain tissue [115,116,117]. Therefore, it can be postulated that ZIKV is transmitted from mother to fetus through a damaged placenta (induced by ZIKV) and then ZIKV damages the nervous system of the fetus.2.4. Venereal Transmission in MosquitoesThe maintenance of arboviruses in nature is significantly facilitated when venereal transmission occurs alongside other modes of transmission. Venereal transmission in mosquitoes has been reported for multiple arboviruses, including ZIKV [118,119]. ZIKV is found to be transmitted in the sexual fluids of mating mosquitoes. Intrathoracically ZIKV-infected Ae. aegypti males can transmit the virus to uninfected females during mating, and Ae. aegypti females who are orally infected with ZIKV have the potential to transmit the virus to uninfected males by copulation under laboratory conditions [120]. Furthermore, Aedes mosquitoes acquire and transmit Zika virus by breeding in contaminated aquatic environments [121]. The continuous venereal transmission in mosquitoes could pose a significant public health concern by boosting infection rates and virus spread.2.5. Transmission Through Breast MilkDetection of ZIKV RNA has been observed in the breast milk of ZIKV-infected mothers [122]. This makes it possible for the transmission of ZIKV from the infected mother to the neonates. Studies have demonstrated the presence of ZIKV RNA in babies whose mother’s serum and milk were positive for ZIKV RNA [123]. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed for the flaviviruses WNV and DENV [124,125].2.6. Transmission Through Ocular Fluid/TearsResearchers have found the existence of ZIKV in tears thirty days following ZIKV infection. Their study suggests the possible transmission of ZIKV through tears [126,127]. This is possible as previously a case study revealed that transmission through tears occurred from mother to her child [128].3. Zika Virus Associated Neurological DiseasesZIKV infection has been reported to be associated with a number of neurological diseases (illustrated in Figure 4) which are described in detail below.3.1. MicrocephalyCongenital microcephaly has been previously associated with viral infections, e.g., rubella and cytomegalovirus. However, it was unknown for ZIKV until the Brazilian outbreak [129]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in the amniotic fluid of these fetuses [130]. In 2015, Brazilian authorities reported that the incidence of microcephaly was twenty times higher compared to previous years. This led to further investigations, and in two years (2015–2016), more than 8000 cases of microcephaly were reported [131]. Later on, an analysis of an outbreak in French Polynesia also demonstrated a correlation between ZIKV and microcephaly [132,133]. Further investigations showed that aborted fetuses (during 1st and 2nd trimesters) contained ZIKV RNA in the amniotic fluid, meninges, CSF, and umbilical cord of the microcephalic newborn babies [57,134]. Several studies have been performed to identify the molecular mechanism of ZIKV-associated microcephaly. Cells associated with the BBB, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, are susceptible to infection with ZIKV and their infection with ZIKV leads to upregulation of ICAM-1 and a variety of cytokines (IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-10) that causes enhanced binding and subsequently crossing of the BBB by the immune cells. The access of immune cells to the CNS is associated with neuro-inflammation which contributed to the neuro-pathogenesis of ZIKV [135]. Neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV and undergo apoptosis following infection [136]. During pregnancy, the immune response directed against ZIKV leads to the inflammation of the fetal–maternal interface, causing inflammation and disruption of barrier functions. This allows the recruitment of various immune cells to the fetal tissue, releasing TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor) and IFN-γ (interferon) that lead to neuroinflammation, resulting in the damage and destruction of NPCs required for the neural development of the fetus [137]. The CNS is susceptible to ZIKV infection during all stages of pregnancy, but earlier infection results in severe damage. CNS infection with ZIKV may result in impaired multiplication and migration of neurons, myelination, synaptogenesis, and even apoptosis that may contribute towards ZIKV-associated microcephaly [138]. In cells infected with ZIKV, mitofusion 2 (MFN-2) expression is reduced. Normal expression of MFN-2 is required for the fusion of mitochondria. Therefore, in ZIKV-infected cells, mitochondrial fragmentation occurs. This leads to the activation of apoptosis through a p53-mediated pathway in NPC cells [139,140]. Recently, Gladwyn-Ng et al. [141] have demonstrated the mechanism of apoptosis in neuronal cells infected by ZIKV in mouse embryos and neuronal stem cells (human), showing that ZIKV infections trigger unfolded proteins in cells that lead to activation of the ER stress response Subsequently, these cells migrate to the cortex and undergo apoptosis.3.2. Ophthalmological ManifestationsZIKV infection during pregnancy has been associated with congenital abnormalities in the fetal eye. Neural crest cells (NCCs) are required for normal development of the corneal and uveal stroma, the corneal epithelium, and the trabecular meshwork. They also play an important role in the closure of the optic fissure [142,143]. NCCs express AXL and thus exhibit susceptibility to ZIKV. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV results in viral replication resulting in loss of NCCs [144]. ZIKV infection can also disrupt the normal differentiation of the NCCs leading to defective development of the anterior eye segment leading to micropthalmia [142,145,146,147]. The loss of NCCs during ZIKV infection has also been found to disrupt closure of the optic fissure leading to iris coloboma and abnormal development of the lens zonules. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV can also lead to reduced thickening of the corneal stroma causing corneal ectasia [142]. It can also contribute towards impaired development of trabecular meshwork causing glaucoma [144,148,149,150]. Neuronal depletion during ZIKV infection can also contribute to thinning of the retinal ganglion layer [151,152]. Apoptosis of NCCs during ZIKV infection can also lead to defects in axonal development [145].Ocular manifestations have been reported in approximately 50% of infants who have ZIKV-induced microcephaly. ZIKV infection has been reported to involve the eyes and this represents the viral ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the blood–retinal barrier (BRB), and the blood–aqueous barrier (BAB). The first ZIKV-related eye abnormality was reported in 2016. More than sixty percent of people with ZIKV infections are reported to have conjunctivitis (the most common eye abnormality associated with ZIKV). Other abnormalities are associated with the anterior segment, the posterior segment, and the neuroophthalmic. The abnormalities associated with the anterior segment include microphthalmia, anterior uveitis (with or without raised intraocular pressure), and non-purulent conjunctivitis [153,154,155]. The posterior segment anomalies associated with ZIKV involve the retina and choroid and include maculopathy and multifocal choroiditis [153,156,157,158,159]. Neuro-ophthalmic conditions are related to the paresis of the abducens and oculomotor muscles and can cause ocular flutter, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema [156,160,161,162,163]. ZIKV infection also causes optic nerve involvement, and this includes hypoplastic disk, enhanced cup-to-disk ratio, and nerve pallor. Viral entry into eyes is facilitated by both hematogenous and retrograde transport of ZIKV through the optic nerve and optic tract [164]. Although ocular tissue is immune privileged, it is more permissive to ZIKV infection because of the higher viral load [151]. Certain cells in the retina are relatively more permissive to ZIKV infection including RPE cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells [165]. Choriocapillaris (highly fenestrated) are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and it can facilitate the ZIKV entry into the RPE cells, which are also permissive to ZIKV infection. RPE infection results in inflammation and this subsequently leads to breaking the BRB [108,166]. Normally, the immune response helps the host in eliminating the infection, however, in this case, immune-mediated injury to the eye tissue leads to pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated eye abnormality [167]. Infection of BRB with ZIKV leads to the generation of IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-α, IFN-β, TNF-α, CCL5 and CXCL-10. This leads to subsequent events that culminate in the atrophy of the retina and RPE mottling [168,169].Another mechanism of viral entry in ocular tissue is through ZIKV-infected monocytes, which possess the ability to cross the retinal microvasculature endothelium and subsequently cause retinal infection. Later on, ZIKV-infected monocytes become activated and release cytokines and chemokines that result in immune-mediated injury/damage to ocular tissue [170,171]. The cornea can also act as reservoir of ZIKV infection as it expresses RIG-1, MDA-5, and TLR 3 which facilitate the synthesis of IFN-I and III to mediate antiviral response [136,172]. Infection of the cornea with ZIKV leads to the synthesis of the IL-1β, TNF-α, CCL5, and CXCL-10 which recruits other cells of the immune system to the cornea and this promotes inflammation and damage to corneal tissue leading to keratitis [173]. Through the hematogenous route, ZIKV infects the iris and ciliary body. From here, the virus can infect BAB cells, which damages this barrier and results in viral entry into the aqueous humor [133]. From the aqueous humor, ZIKV gains entry to the trabeculae meshwork and results in the production of cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-1, IFN-α, IFN-β, CCL5, and CXCL-10. This leads to the recruitment of the other immune cells such as Th1 and CD8+ cells that secrete TNF-α and IFN-γ, damaging the trabeculae meshwork and resulting in blockage of aqueous humor outflow, leading to enhanced intraocular pressure and causing glaucoma. Persistent glaucoma can damage the optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells leading to optic neuropathy [174].3.3. Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)GBS is a condition where there is immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. The condition is characterized by the loss of reflexes and flaccid paralysis. The disease occurs in 1/100,000 persons. It has been observed that GBS typically occurs after certain infections such as Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sporadic GBS cases have also occurred following the flaviviral infections (WNV, DENV and JEV) [175]. In 2014, the first report was published about the occurrence of GBS following ZIKV infection in French Polynesia. It was reported that in ZIKV patients, 1/4000 people suffer from GBS (20 times increased incidence) [176]. In the recent ZIKV outbreak in the Americas, approximately 1500 cases were reported between 2014–2015. At the majority of locations, GBS incidence following ZIKV was reported to be 2–10 times higher than background [177]. In Colombia, more than 100 thousand cases of ZIKV were reported with 42 GBS cases/100,000 ZIKV cases. These findings indicate the possibility of the association of ZIKV with GBS [178]. Until now, no clear mechanism is known about the molecular pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated GBS. However, it is thought that the mechanism of molecular mimicry may be an important contributing factor in the pathogenesis of disease (i.e., antibodies formed against ZIKV cross-react with myelin sheath or other neural tissues). However, others have proposed that immune system dysregulation occurs (that is not directly against ZIKV) and that contributes towards its pathogenesis [176].3.4. Cerebrovascular InvolvementCertain viral diseases are associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities. Recently, ZIKV cases have also been reported to involve cerebral vascular abnormalities. A 10-month-old child infected with ZIKV was admitted to hospital with ischemic stroke and had serum positive for ZIKV [179,180,181]. The exact mechanism remains to be determined; however, it is thought that higher susceptibility of endothelial cells to be infected by ZIKV is a major factor and is responsible for cerebral vascular abnormalities [182].3.5. EncephalitisZIKV infection is considered a potential cause of encephalitis. An 81-year-old patient with a travel history to a ZIKV-affected area had reduced consciousness, limb paresis (upper right), and hemiplegia (left side). The patient was ZIKV positive by RT-PCR and viral culture and isolation. The patient was treated and survived. However, fetal cases of ZIKV-associated encephalitis have also been reported. In Brazil, a 37-year-old (y.o.) female was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of rash and joint pain. Later on, she suffered from weakness in her lower limbs, confusion, and difficulty with speech. RT-PCR was positive for ZIKV, while the serum analysis was negative. The patient later died due to brain swelling, leading to increased intracranial pressure [154]. In the Dominican Republic, a female was admitted to the hospital with complaints of neck stiffness and confusion. Her condition deteriorated, and seizures began. CSF examination revealed an increased number of WBCs (white blood cells), the majority of which were lymphocytes (80%). RT-PCR of urine was positive for ZIKV RNA (but negative in the CSF and serum). However, IgM antibodies against ZIKV were detected from CSF and serum, confirming ZIKV exposure. MRI examination revealed cortical edema, a common finding in meningoencephalitis [163]. In another study on ZIKV, subcortical hemorrhage and bilateral lesions were observed in the temporal and frontal regions [162].3.6. Myelitis and EncephalomyelitisZIKV infection has been associated with myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) and encephalomyelitis (inflammation of the brain and spinal cord), which can result in reduced consciousness, urinary retention, and paresis of lower limbs [183]. The first case of myelitis associated with ZIKV was reported in Guadeloupe in a girl (15 y.o.) who was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of headache and conjunctivitis. Later, her condition continued to deteriorate, and she suffered from left-sided weakness and urinary retention. MRI examination revealed a normal brain, whereas abnormalities were revealed in the spinal cord cervical area and thoracic region. CSF, urine, and serum were found to be positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR [184]. In another study, a 26 y.o. Brazilian male was admitted to the hospital with a major complaint of fever, malaise, and neck stiffness, CSF and urine examination revealed that the patient had a ZIKV infection. CSF analysis showed hyper-protein levels and 100 WBCs (white blood cells) per mL (95% mononuclear cells) [183]. Other studies have also indicated an association between ZIKV and myelitis/encephalomyelitis [183,184,185].4. Zika Virus Infection and Extracellular VesiclesViruses can employ extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. EVs are particles surrounded by membranes that can be released into the extracellular space by living or dying cells. Various viral components may be packed inside the EVs [186]. One of the final fates of EVs is their release into blood circulation, through which they can reach distant cells and tissues [187]. It is important to note that EVs share most of the biochemical and biophysical properties of viruses. Both EVs and viruses (naked and enveloped) use the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT) complex [188,189]. Moreover, Rab GTPases (particularly Rab11, Rab35, and Rab27A/B) are also shared during the viral replication cycle as well as EV biogenesis [190]. Many studies have indicated that EVs play a facilitating role during viral infections. These effects can be due to EVs carrying viral receptors, carrying viral particles themselves, or carrying their genome, proteins, or miRNA. Ultimately, it can lead to the priming of the recipient cells and/or inhibiting IFN pathways, apoptosis of immune cells, and the transmission of viral genome and/or proteins to distant organs and tissues [188,191,192,193]. In the case of ZIKV, NS1 protein, viral E protein (inside and outside) and viral RNA can be packed inside the EVs [194]. Interestingly, mosquito cells (C6/36 cells) infected with ZIKV are found to release EVs (containing viral RNA and protein E), which was found to infect both naïve mosquito and mammalian cells (monocytes and endothelial cells) [195].Given ZIKV’s neurotropic nature, it is important to emphasize that ZIKV-derived EVs are found to disrupt the structure of human brain microvasculature endothelial cell junctions (hcMEC/D3), facilitating ZIKV entry into cells of the human CNS [196]. ZIKV can also spread to the CNS through autophagy (a process associated with viral infections and may be regulated by EVs [197,198,199]. In the case of ZIKV, the autophagic vesicles may play an important role in crossing the placental barrier. Normally, the placenta is protected from various pathogens (aided by the autophagy process); however, ZIKV can hijack this process [200,201]. A study using a mouse model has shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine inhibits viral replication (autophagy-dependent) and also effectively prevents mother–fetal transmission of the virus [202,203].5. Models for Studying Zika Virus Infection and PathogenesisDeveloping appropriate cellular and animal models for studying ZIKV is becoming increasingly important to gain appropriate understanding of viral pathogenesis and host-related factors that aid or inhibit viral replication and to devise appropriate disease prevention and treatment strategies.5.1. Cell LinesThe cell lines are widely used to grow and study ZIKV because they provide a controlled environment for viral replication. These cell lines allow scientists to watch viral behavior, examine molecular interactions between ZIKV and host cells, and test antiviral agents. The use of cell lines is essential to virology as they provide a reliable, reproducible system for studying viral pathogenicity and mechanisms in a laboratory setting. The cells susceptible to Zika Virus infection are illustrated in Figure 5 and detailed comprehensively in Table 2.5.2. OrganoidsAlthough cell culture has been used to determine ZIKV replication and pathogenesis, this system is not without its downsides. Cells are unable to mimic in vivo conditions as they lack the cellular structure, composition, and physiology of an organ in which a virus replicates [222]. To overcome this drawback, people are now developing organ analogues in vitro where stem cells are used to generate 3D tissue structures resembling organs. These 3D models are known as organoids and are being used to model and better understand the molecular events that occur following viral invasion and replication in that organ [223]. Studies have provided confirmatory evidence of microcephaly following ZIKV infection by using organoids [224,225]. Qian et al. (2016) used a mini-bioreactor to generate brain organoids and demonstrated that ZIKV infection in brain organoids that mimic the first-trimester fetal brain resulted in ZIKV infection of NPCs, IPC, astrocytes, and neurons, while infection of brain organoids mimicking the second-trimester fetal brain exhibited ZIKV infection of the outer radial glial cells [224]. These findings are correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis providing evidence of ZIKV-associated microcephaly [136]. Yoon et al. showed that the ZIKV NS2A protein is responsible for the alteration and reduced multiplication of the radial glial cells resulting in altered neuronal positioning in the brain [226]. Another study reported that ZIKV infection of NPCs during early pregnancy was associated with the upregulation of TLR-3 receptors, leading to apoptosis of NPCs, resulting in microcephaly [227]. Recently, brain organoid models have also been used to determine the various drug targets against ZIKV [228,229,230,231]. Organoids resembling the placenta have also been developed using first-trimester human chorionic placental villi where ZIKV established infection and proliferated in Hofbauer cells, villus cytotrophoblasts (CTB), and produced the NS3 and E protein [232,233]. To summarize, organoids offer a promising approach to studying the ZIKV viral pathogenesis and also to screening compounds’ antiviral activity in a system more relevant than in vitro cell culture.5.3. Animal ModelsAnimal models have been developed to study ZIKV replication and pathogenesis in vivo.5.3.1. Non-Human Primates (NHPs)Non-Human Primates (NHPs) exhibit significant similarities with humans (pregnancy physiology, long gestation periods, and hemomonochorial placenta) and offer a promising model to study ZIKV infection, neuropathogenesis, and drug discovery. They also exhibit vertical transmission from mother to fetus similar to humans [234]. Rhesus macaques, olive baboons, marmosets, and pigtail macaques have been employed to study ZIKV pathogenesis during gestation. Olive baboons have been able to demonstrate clinical infection when infected during the gestation period. When infected during 4th month of pregnancy, they developed conjunctivitis and moderate rash, with viremia peak at 7 dpi (days post-infection). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins were also detected [235,236]. In other NHPs (i.e., rhesus macaques, marmosets, and pigtail macaques) no clinical infection occurs following ZIKV inoculation. However, in all NHPs, antibodies are formed following ZIKV infection, and placental and fetal ZIKV infection is observed. In rhesus macaques, fetal loss occurs following ZIKV infection, while marmosets and olive baboons exhibit viral RNA in amniotic fluid and placenta. Severe placental infection is observed during pregnancy in marmosets and rhesus macaques [237,238,239].5.3.2. MiceMany viral replication and pathogenesis studies involve the use of mice as animal models because they have large litter sizes and a short gestational period. However, variability in their placental structure and heterogeneity in gestation can be problematic [240]. Another complication occurs due to differences in the cell biology of mice as compared to humans. On viral entry, the viral NS5 protein is able to degrade the cellular STAT2 protein, thereby making IFN signaling ineffective, resulting in viral replication and the development of clinical disease. Degradation of STAT-2 is not observed in mouse cells infected with a virus, leading to unimpaired IFN signaling resulting in low viral titer and failure to develop clinical infection [241]. Therefore, biological modifications are needed to use mice for studying ZIKV replication and pathogenesis events. This can be achieved by using either immunocompromised mice or using alternative routes of inoculation.Immunocompromised MiceImmunocompromised mice are modified for interferon (IFN) insufficiency. This may be conducted by either creating knockout (KO) mice, e.g., interferon alpha receptor knockout (Ifnar-/-), or by using antibodies to block the IFN receptors (MARI-5A3) [242,243]. It has been found that pregnant Ifnar-/- mice exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV infection with subcutaneous inoculation and are able to produce fetal and placental abnormalities [114]. The infection is established in homozygous as well as heterozygous mice, suggesting that partial deficiency in IFN signaling is sufficient to produce fetal neuropathology. As ZIKV infection can occur through venereal transmission; therefore, models have been developed for this purpose. Intravaginal inoculation of ZIKV from 5–8 days of conception results in high levels of viral RNAs in the placenta and fetal tissues in Ifnar-/- mice [244]. ZIKV infection (intravaginal) of IFN regulator factor (IRF) KO e.g., Irf3-/- Irf7-/- mice exhibit higher vaginal and fetal titers of the virus. This implies that inhibition of IFN signaling is a key factor in establishing different mice models.Immunocompetent MiceAs discussed previously, ZIKV infection often fails in immunocompetent mice. However, some researchers have used alternative strategies to produce ZIKV infection by using higher viral titer or other routes of inoculation. A Brazilian ZIKV strain has been used to produce successful fetal infection in SJL mice. In this study, high viral inoculation (1010 to 1012 pfu/mL) was used to produce uterine and fetal infection that ultimately resulted in fetal microcephaly [245]. However, these mice showed higher levels of T cells in the blood and later on developed autoimmunity and sarcoma [246]. The intraamniotic route has also been used for ZIKV inoculation in embryos and resulted in damage to the retina and blood–brain barrier and produced neuronal death and defects in motor neurons in the fetal brain. Intrauterine infection also resulted in ZIKV infection of placental endothelial and trophoblast cells and in the fetus, the virus localizes in the microglial, endothelial, and NPCs of the fetal brain [67,247,248]. Another model has also been developed to study the postnatal CZS progression by inoculating C57BL/6 mice intraperitoneally, and it was seen that the fetus had reduced body weight and microcephaly. Later on, these mice exhibited motor and memory deterioration in adulthood [249]. These studies pave a path towards viral replication and neuropathogenesis studies in immunocompetent mice models that may be deployed for further understanding of ZIKV neuropathogenesis and drug discovery.5.3.3. Farm AnimalsAlthough less common as animal models, pregnant sheep, and pigs may be used as a model for ZIKV replication and pathogenesis. They are widely available and exhibit susceptibility to the virus [250,251]. They can also be used as a model for human pregnancy and fetal growth [252]. ZIKV infection during the first trimester in sheep resulted in placental pathology, reduced fetal growth, and fetal loss [253]. Maternal ZIKV infection during the 4th to 5th week resulted in the detection of ZIKV RNA in the PBMCs of the mother; however, clinical infection failed to occur [253]. Similarly, in pigs, intrauterine infection during pregnancy resulted in placental abnormalities as well as microcephaly in piglets [254]. It has also been seen that following intrauterine ZIKV infection, the African ZIKV lineage was found to produce a more pronounced viral infection as compared to the Asian strain [255]. These findings clearly establish the role of sheep as a possible animal model to study fetal neuropathogenesis due to ZIKV.5.3.4. RatsAs rats become immunocompromised during the final stage of gestation, similar to humans, they may also be utilized as a model to investigate ZIKV neuropathogenesis [256]. Upon subcutaneous (S/C) inoculation of ZIKV to pregnant rat females, reduced cortical and hippocampus volumes were observed in rats, although no pathological findings and viral detection were observed in the maternal counterpart [114,257].5.3.5. HamstersInfection of immunocompetent females during pregnancy was unable to produce productive viral infection; ZIKV RNA was not found in fetal or placental tissue and fetus size remained unaffected [114]. However, ZIKV infection (Malaysia Strain) in immunocompromised hamsters (8 days post-mating) resulted in ZIKV infection of placental tissue and also caused vertical transmission of the ZIKV from mother to offspring [258].5.3.6. ChickenChicken embryos have been demonstrated to support ZIKV viral growth in the chicken brain and other tissues [259]. Intraamniotic inoculation of ZIKV resulted in stunted embryo growth and microcephaly [260]. Furthermore, comparison of the Asian and African ZIKV strains showed that the African strain caused more embryonic pathologies [261].6. Treatment and Prevention Against Zika Virus and Zika Virus Associated Neuropathies6.1. Prevention from Zika Virus Through VaccinesOne of the major methods for viral disease prevention and control is vaccination. Immediately after the outbreak of ZIKV, research began to find ideal vaccine candidates to prevent future ZIKV outbreaks [262]. Several vaccine candidates have emerged; however, very few have been used in clinical trials. The various ZIKV vaccine candidates are summarized in Table 3.6.1.1. Purified Inactivated Zika Virus Vaccines (PIZIKV)Several inactivated vaccines have been developed and tested by animal models. The majority of these vaccines have been able to demonstrate higher antibody titer, reduced viremia, successful passive transfer of antibodies, and protection in mice (interferon deficient) after homologous or heterologous vaccination [263]. In India, one vaccine has entered phase I clinical trials (CTRI/2017/05/008539) [291]. Using mice and non-human primates (NHPs), an aluminum hydroxide-based inactivated ZIKV vaccine has demonstrated promising antibody titers and protection against homologous antigen challenge [265]. Another PIZIKV provided complete protection in a dose-dependent manner (0.016 to 10 ug) and was found to be effective one year following vaccination in macaques [266]. A double-blind randomized controlled trial (Phase I) was performed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of PIZIKV, and it was found that the vaccine was safe for 52 h. However, protection was not found to be effective as only a single dose was given and for better immunogenicity, a double dose may be needed [268].6.1.2. Live Attenuated Vaccines:Live-attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are known for eliciting swift and long-lasting protective immunity and represent a crucial strategy for managing flavivirus diseases [292]. These are made by modifying the virus in such a way that it may replicate within the organism and stimulate the immune system without causing disease. Since 1938, they have been used as the gold standard as they exhibit good safety and effective protection from viral infection [293]. LAVs are known to stimulate the immune system for long-lasting periods (without the need for an adjuvant or any booster). Currently, three approaches are being used for generating ZIKV LAVs, which are (i) generating chimeric strains (using the backbone of an attenuated flavivirus), (ii) codon deoptimization, and (iii) mutagenesis. One of the most important advantages of using live vaccines is their ability to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses (with a single dose of immunization); as the virus continues to multiply within the host cells, allowing continuous loading of MHC (I and II) with viral peptides. In addition, they are cost-effective (both during manufacturing as well as transportation). The past experiences of successful development of LAV against Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) and Yellow Fever Virus (YFV) have clearly shown their potential to be used as safe viral vaccines [279,293]. However, manufacturing of live vaccines usually requires eggs or cell culture and also maintaining a cold chain during transportation. In countries having warm climates, maintaining cold chain only can account for up to 80% of the total vaccine cost [294]. Another major concern associated with the use of live vaccination is inadequate attenuation (once they are at the stage of the human clinical trials [295]. A variety of LAVs have been tested against the ZIKV [292], and the selective studies are summarized in Table 3.6.1.3. Nucleic Acid VaccinesDNA and RNA-based vaccines are being developed for different infectious diseases. They offer the advantage of prolonging immune response following vaccination and induce both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (CMI) [296]. However, one major disadvantage is that DNA vaccines often fail to elicit adequate immune response or offer protection from challenge [297]. Despite these advantages, DNA vaccines may have the risk of eliciting autoimmunity (by eliciting anti-DNA antibody production) and also causing insertional mutations [298]. Another point to keep in mind is that in the case of DNA vaccines, DNA must enter inside the nucleus of the cell, and then after transcription, mRNA must travel outside the nucleus (into the cytoplasm), where it is translated into the proteins. In contrast, for RNA vaccines, RNA can directly be translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, which are then secreted from the cells (into the extracellular matrix) where they can be presented to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). mRNA vaccines have become more popular after the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is also important to note that storage of mRNA vaccine requires maintaining a cold chain, which may not be feasible in developing countries [299]. The summary of various DNA vaccines available against ZIKV is summarized in Table 3.6.1.4. Subunit VaccinesDue to their rapid production and stability, a variety of ZIKV vaccines have been developed. The majority of these vaccines have used the Envelope protein (E protein) and its different segments. These vaccines have been tested in various animal models, which are summarized in Table 3.6.1.5. Viral Vector-Based VaccinesViral vector-based vaccines are prepared by using a vector virus for the insertion of the genetic components of ZIKV, and they have been found to induce good humoral immunity. Lentovirus, adenovirus, and retroviruses are known to be good viral vectors. Various ZIKV vaccines have been developed using various viral vector systems, which have been summarized in Table 3.6.2. Zika Virus Prevention Through Vector ControlMosquitoes play a central role in the transmission of ZIKV. Therefore, reducing ZIKV transmission through vector control methods involves diverse and innovative strategies and tools designed to manage disease-spreading mosquito population. One of the most widely used strategies is the use of chemical insecticides (due to their cost-effectiveness and easy availability). However, due to the emergence of insecticide resistance and their deleterious effects on the environment, the focus is now diverted towards various other control methods [300,301]. Due to their eco-friendly nature, herbal-based control methods have now gained attention. Promising insecticide activities have been shown by extracts derived from the Illicium verum, Zanthoxylum limonella, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon winterianus, Eucalyptus citriodora, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, etc. [302,303,304,305,306,307,308]. Furthermore, nanoparticles derived from Ambrosia arborescens have also shown good larvicidal activity. However, their toxicity profile should be determined against other environment-friendly insects, animals, and humans [307]. Similarly, biological control methods are also being employed due to their minimal impact on the environment [309]. This includes the use of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Various species of entomopathogenic fungi (Metarhizium anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Aspergillus terreus) and bacteria (Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), Wolbachia) have been tested against ZIKV-transmitting mosquitoes [310,311,312,313,314,315]. Particularly, the introduction of Wolbachia in mosquitoes has demonstrated the ability to disrupt the reproductive potential of disease-transmitting vectors. Similarly, the use of various natural predators, i.e., Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, fishes, tadpoles, and copepods, have also been used against the mosquitoes and have shown varying degrees of efficacy in controlling the mosquito population [316]. Moreover, genetic engineering principles have been applied to release genetically modified mosquitoes into the environment [317]. Furthermore, the use of the sterile insect technique is also an innovative approach to control the mosquito population [318]. When used in combination, these strategies offer an integrated approach to vector control, addressing both short and long-term goals of reducing ZIKV and its induced neuropathies. A summary of vector control strategies developed so far is provided in Table 4.6.3. Treatment for Zika Virus6.3.1. Antivirals Against Zika VirusSince the outbreak of ZIKV, many compounds have been proposed to possess antiviral activity against ZIKV. However, in the majority of cases, treatment is symptomatic, and no specific antiviral has been approved for ZIKV treatment. A myriad of approaches are being adopted for searching for anti-ZIKV drugs. These strategies include the screening of different compounds for their anti-ZIKV activity or through repurposing drugs that are already being used for the treatment of other viral infections. In addition, the anti-ZIKV activity of several herbal/plant extracts is also being evaluated. Broadly, anti-ZIKV compounds have been divided into 2 major categories: (a) direct-acting antivirals, which inhibit the viral replication cycle; (b) antivirals targeting host cells [75]; both of these are summarized in Table 5. The former drugs act on the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp); NS5. Polymerase inhibitors and nucleoside analogs are included in this category. They act by targeting the catalytic domain of NS5. The other category of drugs (host-targeting antivirals) targets the host cell processes (that play an important role in viral replication). Viruses need host nucleosides for their genome replication. The host-acting antivirals can act on various steps of viral replication (host cell binding, entry, replication complex formation, viral maturation, and release from the host cell). An advantage of targeting host processes is that they are less susceptible to developing drug resistance [75].6.3.2. Medicinal Plants as Zika Virus AntiviralsModern scientific research has found numerous synthetic antiviral medications that are effective against a variety of viral infectious disorders throughout the past few decades. Unfortunately, a wide range of negative consequences associated with these synthetic medications have been documented. They may occasionally lose their potency against newly arising virus resistance strains [381]. Furthermore, people in developing nations cannot afford expensive synthetic medications for the treatment of viral infections. Medicinal plants may offer economical and efficient antiviral medications. To date, no plant-derived antiviral has been approved for clinical use against ZIKV. Various research has been conducted to identify medicinal plants possessing anti-ZIKV activity, and they have been summarized in Table 6.7. Zika Virus and Its Potential Oncolytic ActivitiesZIKV exhibits tropism for a variety of cell types including normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs/NSPs), microglial cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells [406,407,408]. Following the entry into cells, the virus disrupts growth and development, causing cell death. Studies in various animals have also supported the association between ZIKV infection and neurodegeneration. Inoculation of ZIKV in rhesus monkeys during early pregnancy has been shown to result in the aberrations of the microglial cells and also cortical plate thinning (3 weeks post-inoculation) [409,410]. Therefore, ZIKV is a promising virus that may be used as an oncolytic virus against glioblastoma as it infects the tumor cells. Particularly, in vitro studies have shown that the ZIKV NS5 protein inhibits the migration, proliferation, and invasion of glioblastoma. Studies in mice have shown that it increases the survival of C57/B6 mice with intracranial glioblastoma [411]. Another study in C57/B6 mice has shown that ZIKV increases the survival of mice with glioblastoma (with the suppression of tumor volume as well as the absence of clinical signs) [412]. Further molecular studies have revealed that ZIKV protease causes the cleavage of human cellular gasdermin D (GSDMD), which causes the activation of pyroptosis (caspase-independent) [413]. ZIKV infection in immunocompetent dogs (suffering from glioblastoma) has also been shown to decrease the tumor mass volume and ameliorate neurological signs. Further investigations revealed an increase in the number of immune cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment [414]. This increase in the numbers of immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) has also been observed in C57BL6/J mouse models (suffering from glioblastoma) infected with ZIKV. This infiltration of T cells into the tumor microenvironment provides enhanced protection to mice. ZIKV infection is associated with enhanced activation of the type I interferon signaling pathway in glioblastoma cells and increases the glioblastoma sensitivity to the PD-L1 blockade, which is an important immune checkpoint [415,416,417].8. Future Perspectives in Zika Virus ControlSince its emergence in 1947, ZIKV has only caused widespread epidemics in the last two decades. The outbreaks of ZIKV also suggest the dynamics of transmission variability of ZIKV. The outbreak of ZIKV in the Americas caused a rapid increase in studies of ZIKV pathogenesis and its control measures and treatment strategies. It is of prime importance to continue working on establishing virological and immunological diagnostics kits for ZIKV with enhanced specificity and sensitivity. Another area of focus is ZIKV pathogenesis. Finally, prevention and treatment strategies remain pivotal to curtail ZIKV-related morbidity and mortality. Currently, many vaccines are being tested on animal models, but very few have entered into clinical trials, there is a dire need to improve the quality of good vaccine candidates. Plus, the development of genetically modified mosquitoes could be a groundbreaking tool for controlling Zika virus transmission.


Title: The Dual Role of the Immune Response in Reproductive Organs During Zika Virus Infection

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV) is a health risk worldwide that is disseminated primarily by insect vectors. Tracking the outbreak of Zika in the Americas in 2015 showed that the virus had been circulating in several countries in Africa and Asia. It is primarily transmitted through Aedes aegypti mosquito bites (1, 2). Infection may cause several health complications including microcephaly and congenital Zika syndrome that are associated with vertical transmission (3). This led the World Health Organization to declare the ZIKV outbreak a public health emergency of international concern in 2016 (4). This problem became even more relevant when it was shown that transmission of the pathogen was not exclusive to mosquito bites, similar to that for other flaviviruses. Clinical evidence shows that ZIKV has the potential for human-to-human transmission through sexual routes, including male-to-female, female-to-male, and male-to-male transmission (5–7).Additionally, ZIKV infiltrates several biological fluids including breastmilk, urine, tears, and saliva (8–10). Thus, it is possible that ZIKV can spread via multiple routes of infection. Several reports suggest that tropism of ZIKV to sexual organs could be a bridge for sexual transmission similar to that employed by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) or human papilloma virus (HPV) (11, 12). Interestingly, the immune response in the male and female reproductive organs could play a role in the spread, persistence, and clearance of ZIKV infection. In this mini-review, we collect the current evidence supporting a dual role of the immune response in the reproductive system organs during ZIKV infection as a promoter of viral dissemination in males and having protective roles in females.Clinical ReportsFoy et al. reported for the first time that ZIKV might be sexually transmissible. The virus was identified in a woman that had not traveled to an area endemic for ZIKV transmission. She developed symptoms of the disease after sexual contact with her husband in the days after he returned from a trip to Senegal (13). Since this initial finding, several studies have been published indicating sexual transmission of ZIKV in other areas not endemic for mosquito transmission, such as Europe and North America (14, 15). Additionally, these reports show that male-to-female transmission is more frequent than female-to-male transmission (16–18). Interestingly, studies that have reported shedding of ZIKV in genital fluids to suggest a more robust presence in semen, compared to that in vaginal fluids, and a clear persistence of ZIKV for at least 188 days following symptom onset (19). Moreover, the only study focused on detecting the ZIKV in vaginal secretions showed that the virus could persist for 60–180 days after the onset of symptoms (20). However, the assays determining the ZIKV viability were not conducted, in contrast to the studies on semen samples that determined the production of infective virus in Vero cells (21). Additionally, a similar behavior was observed in studies with other viral sexual transmission such as Hepatitis C, Ebola, HIV-1, and Herpes identifying high viral loads in seminal fluid samples (22–25). The studies also showed greater transmission from male-to-female and the viral load was evaluated in vaginal fluids, but the test to detect viral viability in these samples was not performed. Altogether, these data suggest that cells residing in the male reproductive system are highly susceptible to viral infection or that the female reproductive system presents a more effective defense against the pathogen. These hypotheses need to be addressed adequately through further research.Tropism of ZIKV to Sexual OrgansThe male reproductive tract (MRT) constitutes the testis, epididymis, deferens tubules, prostate, seminal vesicle, bulbourethral glands, and penile urethra. These structures are required for the production, maturation, and protection of spermatozoa from immunoreaction and infectious agents (26, 27). The female reproductive tract (FRT) is organized into two functional compartments associated with fetal development (upper FRT) and the external environment (lower FRT). The vagina and ectocervix constitute the lower FRT and are organized by a keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. The endocervix, uterus, and fallopian tubes comprise the upper FRT and consist of a single layer of columnar epithelium (28). Implementation of animal models has been essential to identify the cellular targets of ZIKV within reproductive tracts (29). Results from these models have shown that ZIKV has high tropism in the MRT, infecting cell types that include spermatogonia, primary spermatocytes, Sertoli cells, peritubular myoid cells, Leydig cells, and epithelial cells of the lumen (30). In contrast, in human testis ex vivo, ZIKV can infect and replicate in a range of somatic and germ cells, such as testicular macrophages, peritubular cells, Leydig, and Sertoli cells. However, the infection was weaker in human cells than that observed in the mouse model (31). Finally, ZIKV was also found in the spermatozoa from ZIKV-infected men, suggesting that ZIKV could infect the zygote and cause fetal congenital diseases. We propose that the immune response could help ZIKV gain access to spermatozoa in the MRT (32).In the case of cells within the FRT, few reports have evaluated their susceptibility to ZIKV infection. The experimental evidence from animal model mosquito bite inoculates suggests that ZIKV is present in reproductive tract tissues such as the cervix and vagina (33). Additionally, studies on immunocompetent mice showed that vaginal inoculation of ZIKV lead to productive replication of the virus within the vaginal mucosa and ovarian follicles. Additionally, ZIKV replication in the vaginal tissue of a pregnant mouse was followed by infection of the fetal brain, suggesting vertical transmission (34). Cellular models in vitro have shown that human endometrial stromal cells are permissive to ZIKV infection and replication. Interestingly, in vitro decidualization of this cellular model increased the replication of ZIKV, suggesting that endometrial cells have an important role during sexual transmission of ZIKV. They might provide a viral reservoir for infection of cells at the maternal-fetal interface during pregnancy (35). Finally, current studies that focus on the use of human tissues or primary cultures of FRT cells need to be performed to evaluate if the behavior of ZIKV infection in animal models is similar to that in humans. The establishment of vaginal and cervical epithelial cells could be an exciting model as they have been used for the study of HIV-1 and Herpes simplex virus (36, 37).Role of the Immune System in Sexual Transmission of ZIKVViral evolution requires development of a mechanism to evade the host immune response and manipulate cells for their own replication, allowing it to spread to other cells (38). ZIKV evades the immune system (IS) by regulating the type I interferon response with its encoded NS5 protein (39). Mice lacking components of IFN pathway are more susceptible to ZIKV infection, highlighting the importance of the IS for the control of the virus (40).Among flaviviruses, sexual transmission is unique to ZIKV, marking an unusual potential for human-to-human transmission. The immune privileged nature of the testis protects germ cells from immune attack that occurs during infection. While clinical reports clearly identified persistence of viral RNA in seminal fluid, little is known about how ZIKV passes from blood to the MRT, nor how it persists in the testis. The mechanism seems to involve different cell types, including immune system cells, for transport to target tissues. For example, ZIKV was preferentially found in the cell fraction of blood samples from humans exposed to an endemic area, suggesting that ZIKV could use this mechanism for transport before crossing tissue barriers in the male body (41, 42).ZIKV seems uses a conserved arboviral strategy for primary infection. Semliki Forest virus (SFV) is an alphavirus that is a close relative to the Chikungunya virus. It was shown that a cutaneous innate immune response involuntarily facilitated viral infection. The mechanism involved neutrophil-dependent inflammation at mosquito bite sites that promoted the recruitment of myeloid cells that are permissive to the virus. These then released new infectious viral particles targeting new cellular targets (43). We hypothesize that the same mechanism may be used by ZIKV to spread its infection. In support of this possibility, human in vitro-generated dendritic cells (DCs) are permissive to ZIKV infection (44). Additionally, using a pigtail macaque model it was shown that male animals were more susceptible to ZIKV persistence in peripheral lymph nodes and dissemination to mucosal tissues. The mechanism involves two steps: an inflammatory response that follows ZIKV infection that drives the recruitment of innate cells as early targets of the virus. The infected cells are myeloid DCs, non-classic monocytes, and natural killer (NK) cells. Unlike SFV, the recruitment of cells is driven by plasmocytoid DCs in a MCP-1 dependent manner, which also supports the dissemination and persistence of ZIKV (45). Altogether, these data show that IS inadvertently plays a role in viral tropism, persistence, and pathogenesis of ZIKV.In general, we consider that there are two routes to reach spermatids in the seminiferous tubules. One is that ZIKV uses the IS to reach the testis and manipulate the antiviral mechanism to disrupt the blood testicular barrier (BTB) junctions. The other possibility is that ZIKV proteins directly destroy the junctions to cross the barrier. We believe these processes are not exclusive, as both are supported by evidence in the literature (45–47). Once ZIKV reaches the testicles, we assume that the virus gains access to germinal cells by three mechanisms. (1) ZIKV can infect or alter the endothelium and pass to the interstitial space, (2) infection of different cells elicits disruption of junctional adhesions in a manner that is dependent on IS antiviral activity or a direct function of ZIKV protein, and (3) direct transmigration of infected immune cells from the blood to the seminiferous tubules.A recent study supported endothelial passage, showing that ZIKV NS1 protein bound specifically to endothelial cells including human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs), causing a decrease in their permeability. The mechanism implies degradation of the endothelial glycocalyx layer by the activation of sialidase and cathepsin L-heparanase both in vitro and in vivo (48). Another piece of evidence is indirect but concordant with endothelial passage. ZIKV could persistently infect and replicates in primary HBMECs. Moreover, ZIKV was delivered from both apical and basolateral surfaces suggesting a direct mechanism to cross the blood brain barrier (49). In addition, it was shown that the Sertoli cells that constitute the BTB were highly susceptible to ZIKV infection suggesting that ZIKV may be able to utilize this crossing mechanism directly (46). Finally, a study using the bluetongue virus in a ram model showed testicular damage due to viral replication in the endothelial cells of the peritubular area in the testis, resulting in the destruction of the Sertoli cell barrier associated with type I interferon response raising the possibility that ZIKV may use a similar mechanism of this related arbovirus in humans (50). Overall, these studies suggest that ZIKV can infect and alter endothelial barriers to facilitate virus dissemination into target organs facing other target cells, such as Sertoli cells, and macrophages in the interstitial space. In parallel, the extravasation of fluids can induce inflammation that also helps the virus to disrupt other barriers, such as BTB, to enhance viral infection. However, studies describing this mechanism in human or mouse endothelial testicular cells are lacking and need to be tested.For the second mechanism, using an in vitro BTB model with human Sertoli cells it was observed that ZIKV could infect these cells for a long term without induction of cell death, and that Sertoli cells can mount a robust antiviral response. The virus did not directly alter tight or adherent junctions, but induced the expression of VCAM-1 that provides the interaction for the transmigration of monocytes across the epithelial cell model. More importantly, the inflammatory cytokine TNF-α released from ZIKV-infected macrophages affected the permeability of the BTB by degrading ZO-1 protein suggesting that IS can help ZIKV gain access to developing germ cells (46). Similar results were obtained with the use of a 3-D model of HBMECs. This experiment showed that apical junctions restrict the infection capability of several RNA viruses. However, treatment of the 3-D cultures with TNF-α disrupted the formation of cell-cell junctions and correlated with an increase in ZIKV viral RNA and infectious titers (51). Another study using RNAseq analysis of ZIKV-infected Sertoli cells showed that these cells responded to ZIKV with a diversity of innate antiviral mechanism. Importantly the analysis of upregulated genes on interferon, antigen presentation, and cross-talk between DC and NK signaling pathways correlated with the downregulation of genes involved in adherent junctions, tubulin α/β complex, and 14-3-3 signaling pathways (52). Interestingly, a clear correlation exists between the peak of the immune response and the downregulation of genes that control cell cycle progression. These data suggest that ZIKV could modulate the change from an immunosuppressive microenvironment in Sertoli cells to a strong antiviral response that alters the permeability of BTB with a concomitant delay in proliferation. This would prolong the time for viral progeny production, ensure persistence, and allow dissemination via sexual transmission.Direct evidence of the disruption of cell junctions by ZIKV came from the use of the NS2A protein in mouse radial glial cells and human brain organoids. NS2A interacted directly with adherent junction components, such as ZO-1, β-catenin, SMAD7, and NUMBL, targeting them for lysosomal degradation and inducing aberrant cortical layer formation. We hypothesize that the same mechanism could be used by ZIKV in the testis to gain access to seminiferous tubules, but this needs to be tested (47).Finally, evidence for the third mechanism was shown using 3-D culture HBMECs in transwell assays. ZIKV-infected monocytes crossed the epithelial barrier and infected primary human astrocytes plated in the basolateral chamber (51). Using a similar approach with Sertoli cells it was observed that ZIKV-infected macrophages interacted with and induced the permeability of the cells, suggesting that after induction the leakiness of the barrier allowed infiltration to the lumen of the seminiferous tubules and probably infection of germ cells (46). These studies suggest that the IS, when attempting to control viral infection, actually assists the entry of ZIKV to this immune-privileged site, causing persistence that allows sexual transmission (Figure 1).Figure 1The dissemination process of ZIKV in male reproductive tract. In the male reproductive tract, Immune system mechanism might promote ZIKV dissemination. (1) ZIKV travel in infected immune cells such as Dendritic cells to testis; ZIKV NS1 protein increase the permeability of endothelial cells to allow virus access toward interstitial space, (2) ZIKV infect Leydig cells increase the production of viruses in the zone, (3) ZIKV can infect Sertoli cells and change the immunosuppressive microenvironment to a robust antiviral response. Activated macrophages secrete TNF-α that disrupt the Blood Testicular Barrier by degradation of tight junction proteins such as ZO-1 allowing ZIKV reach and infect germ cells, (4) In parallel, is possible that on infected Sertoli cells the NS2A protein target to degradation proteins of tight junction complexes helping also to reach germ cells, (5) Finally, through adhesion molecules such as VCAM-1 ZIKV infected macrophages can interact with Sertoli cells (6) and direct infiltrate the lumen of seminiferous tubules and ZIKV could infect eventually germinal cells.On the other hand, within the human FRT, protection against sexually transmitted infection is opposed to biological fertility (53). The role of the FRT during ZIKV infection and sexual transmission has not been extensively evaluated. However, the mucosal immune system is the first line of defense against pathogens. The innate and adaptive elements of the mucosal immune system have evolved to meet the special challenges that are associated with the FRT (54). Interestingly, in contrast to that in males, the IS mechanism against ZIKV correlates with protection of the FRT. For example, interferon (IFN)-ε is constitutively expressed by epithelial cells in the FRT and protects against herpes simplex virus-2 infection. This protective role of the IFN-ε may also be prohibitive for ZIKV infection, but this needs to be tested (55). Protection via IFN response was shown by the administration of recombinant IFN-β/λ in primary human vaginal/cervical epithelial cells. This restricted ZIKV replication by induction of canonical IFN-stimulated genes (56). In agreement with this study, the induction of a strong IFN response is necessary to prevent vaginal ZIKV infection in mice because the virus elicits minimal induction of IFN response and seems to regulate the activation of antigen presenting cells (57).Additionally, it is necessary to consider the regulation of the immune system by sex hormones when evaluating ZIKV infection of the FRT. For example, estradiol and progesterone coordinate unique patterns of epithelial cells, stromal fibroblast, and immune cell functions that optimize the conditions for fetal survival and maternal protection (58). This is supported by the analysis of an immunocompetent animal model infected with ZIKV. Hormonal treatments in the FRT promoted the transmission and replication of virus. This study suggested that women establish correct innate and cellular antiviral mechanisms and hormonal regulation to control the infection (59). In mice, subcutaneous ZIKV inoculation elicited a cellular and humoral response that protected subsequent intravaginal inoculation (60). These studies suggest that in females a robust immune response protects against sexual exposure instead of helping the viral establishment and persistence. In conclusion, these data show that antiviral IS mechanisms in the FRT correlate with protection, the opposite of the response mechanism in the MRT. This is in agreement with clinical data indicating that the female-to-male route of sexual transmission is less frequent than the male-to-female route is. However, is important to consider other factors associated with the sexual transmission of the ZIKV. For example, it was reported that the microtrauma in the epithelial barrier of FTR during intercourse promotes the sexual transmission of HIV-1 or HVB (61, 62). In addition, relevant future studies are needed to understand the role of hormones that regulated the menstrual cycle and the effect on sexual transmission of ZIKV in the FRT. Recently, it has been suggested that estradiol is associated with activation of the innate immune mechanism and initiation of the antiviral responses, and that the modulation by sexual hormones results in alteration of a woman's susceptibility to HIV-1 and other infections (61, 63). The understanding about the role of hormones in different stages of menstrual cycle or pregnancy may help to resolve question on the mechanism of ZIKV to persist in the FRT (Figure 2).Figure 2The protection process of ZIKV in female reproductive tract. Immune system mechanism protects against ZIKV infection in female reproductive tract. (1) ZIKV infect vaginal epithelial cells, (2) infected cells produce IFN-α,β,γ, and possibly IFN-ε which initiates the intracellular antiviral state (3) immune cells increases antigen presentation leading to T and B cell activation, (4) effector B cells secrete ZIKV-specific antibodies and effector cytotoxic T cells kill ZIKV infected cells; (5) Finally, the IS mechanism control and protect against ZIKV.Finally, whether sexual transmission (STx) has any influence on vertical transmission (Vtx) of ZIKV is yet unanswered. Until now, the literature shows that the mechanisms of immune response in FRT can control ZIKV infection via STx, and in humans, to our knowledge, data indicating Vtx after sexual transmission does not exist. However, a mouse model with suppressed IFN response showed that males have infectious viruses in the testicles and can transmit sexually to females during the early phase of infection. Importantly, in the few cases of pregnancy with STx of ZIKV, there was only evidence of infection in cells of the uterus and placenta, but there was no clear evidence of Vtx in the fetuses. In contrast, Vtx was clear after peripheral ZIKV infection, since 26% of brains of the fetuses/pups were positive for ZIKV RNA (64).In the context of peripheral infection, the mechanisms described to alter BTB could be used by ZIKV to infect the placenta. A study shows that placental macrophages can be infected by ZIKV and respond to the infection by inflammatory and antiviral signaling pathways. The authors propose that placental macrophages support efficient ZIKV replication, and this may result in the subsequent infection of neural progenitor cells (65). However, a report showing Vtx without breakdown of the placental barrier also exists. The discordance in these studies show the complexity of the ZIKV infection and argue that these mechanisms may have a role during the Vtx, but more studies are needed to evaluate them correctly.ConclusionsZIKV can infect and regulate different cells, including immune system cells, to ensure survival and persistence. In the MRT, the activation of different immunological events in response to ZIKV infection correlate with viral persistence that, conversely, in females, are necessary to inhibit the virus and control the infection. We highlight some important aspects of the immune system that assist ZIKV dissemination into the reproductive organs, thus showing that IS can have a dual role in the pathogenesis of sexual transmission. However, the molecular mechanism used by ZIKV in human cells to guarantee infection has not been investigated thoroughly. Understanding the molecular mechanisms utilized by the virus for dissemination will be invaluable to develop new targets for therapeutic intervention.Author ContributionsML and HA designed the concept and completed the final editing of the manuscript. All authors contributed to writing of the manuscript. MV and TV prepared the figures. All authors read approved the manuscript for publication.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Characterization and Involvement of Exosomes Originating from Chikungunya Virus-Infected Epithelial Cells in the Transmission of Infectious Viral Elements

1. IntroductionThe Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), a positive-sense and single-stranded RNA virus, is classified as an alphavirus in the family Togaviridae [1]. CHIKV is the pathogen causing chikungunya fever, a self-limited acute viral illness causing extreme joint pain. CHIKV infection has become a significant global health problem [2] not only related to re-emergence with numerous outbreaks but also with chronic clinical complications, such as persistent arthralgia [3,4]. Since chikungunya arthritis treatment is not specific, and prevention by vaccines is not available, it is important to understand the mechanisms of pathogenesis and development of chronic arthritis following CHIKV infection [5,6]. Many previous studies have explained the mechanism of post-CHIKV arthritis as a persistent infection with recruitment and activation of macrophages [7,8] as well as increases of many inflammatory mediators [9,10] together with the persistence of virus or viral products in the synovial tissue [11]. However, whether associated with a proinflammatory mediator, e.g., granzyme A [12], or autoimmune processes, the exact mechanism of post-CHIKV arthritis is still unclear [13,14].Many studies have emphasized the potential role of extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes involved in the pathogenic mechanisms of various pathogens. EVs are generally referred to as microparticles which can be secreted from various cells [15]. EVs are enriched in markers such as tetraspanins (CD63, CD9, CD81, and more) and other exosomal biogenesis proteins such as heat shock protein 70 and small GTPases [16]. However, the presence of protein markers was verified at different concentrations among different subtypes of EVs. In addition, the small EVs—exosomes can also interact via receptor-ligand, direct menbrance integration, or even via endocytosis internalization, which refers to a novel cell–cell transmission path way [17]. Since their discovery, several functions of EVs have been proposed, such as providing a mechanism for cell-to-cell communication [16] or involvement in tumorigenesis, antigen-specific immune responses, immune evasion, immune suppression, and immune tolerance [17,18]. Therefore, EVs can be a potential biomarker for diagnosing many diseases and play a prospective role in treatments. On other hand, choosing a proper method for the isolation of purified EVs plays a crucial role in EVs research and therapeutic analysis. Many recommended isolation methods are: differential centrifugation, density gradient ultracentrifugation, filtration, and immunoaffinity capture-based techniques [19,20]. Together with many traditional techniques, antibody-coated magnetic beads seem to be a promising and most effective specific method for the isolation and characterization of EVs [17,21,22].Interestingly, since the budding process of EVs is similar to viral budding, RNA viruses can exploit EVs as a vehicle to transfer some viral particles or even naked viral genomes to infectious host cells [23,24]. For example, a kind of EVs called exosomes emanating from cells infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) contained viral transactivation response elements, microRNAs, or unspliced HIV-1 species. Similarly, exosomes derived from hepatitis C virus (HCV) infected cells contained replication-competent viral RNA and even the complete HCV genome [25,26]. Although studies on exosomes derived from flavivirus-infected cells are limited, there is evidence that exosomes are involved in viral infection and transmission. Extracellular vesicles were also involved in dengue virus serotype 2 (DENV2)’s transmission from arthropod to mammalian cells mediated by interactions with an arthropod EV-enriched marker Tsp29Fb [27]. There are few studies on CHIKV intracellular replication by host endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) [28] or by enhancement of antibody-mediated CHIKV infection which showed the infectious development and exacerbation of disease severity [29]. Additionally, a novel infectious mechanism of CHIKV has been described in which the virus is concealed in apoptotic blebs assisting in the invasion and infection of neighboring host cells as well as evading host responses [30].We have limited documentation of any reports on the potential contribution of EVs to the pathogenesis of CHIKV. Therefore, our study aimed to characterize extracellular microvesicles such as exosomes secreted from CHIKV-infected epithelial cells and determine their role in CHIKV infection and transmission.2. Results2.1. Susceptibility Profiles of the Established Epithelial Cell Lines to CHIKV InfectionAlthough the muscle satellite cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages have been permissive to CHIKV infection, several studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of various epithelial cells to CHIKV infection [31,32,33,34]. To this end, we firstly evaluated the sensibility of Vero cell lines, which are continuous tissue culture cell lines derived from African green monkey kidney epithelial cells for the infection of the clinical CHIKV ROSS C6D4 strain. Moreover, the kinetics of CHIKV growth was perceived in HeLa cell lines, which is an HPV18-positive human cervical cancer cell lines and generic permissive arthropod cell lines, C6/36. As demonstrated in Figure 1, CHIKV at the multiplicity of infection (MOI) 5 facilely infected the Vero cell line with significantly increased transmembrane glycoproteins E1 mRNA loads at 72 h and 96 h post-infection (h.p.i.) in comparison with 48 h.p.i. (Figure 1A). The highest CHIKV loads have arisen between 12 h.p.i. to 24 h.p.i. in C6/36 (Figure 1B), while HeLa cells were observed at 48 h.p.i. (Figure 1C). Taken together, the three cell lines are progressively susceptible to CHIKV ROSS C6D4 strains and exhibit strain-specific differences in a time-dependent manner and an enormity of infectious viral load levels.2.2. CHIKV Specifically Facilitates the EV PopulationTo investigate whether epithelial cells secrete EVs, including exosomes, and if mosquito-borne alphaviruses use those exosomes as one of the pathways of their transmission, we next characterized the exosomes that were isolated from CHIKV-infected epithelial cells and analyzed the existence of viral genomic material and their related proteins. Interestingly, Vero cell-derived exosomes carried CHIKV transmembrane glycoproteins E1 mRNA loads in a manner of time, with progressively increased viral mRNA levels at 72 h.p.i. when infected with 5 MOI of CHIKV, compared with the early experimented time points of 24 and 48 h.p.i. (Figure 2A). Depending on the increased viral loads, we, therefore, selected the time point at 72 h.p.i. for the isolation of exosomes from CHIKV-infected Vero cell lines.Much of the exosomes were purified using a commercially available exosome isolation reagent and we further sequestered the small vesicle subset with an anti-CD63 Dynabeads™ method. Detailed protocols for exosome isolation in this study are shown as schematics in Supplementary Figure S1. Using a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) technique, we performed the negative staining on Vero cell-derived CD63+ exosomes originating from both the CHIKV infection and the parental cells revealing the occurrence of those EVs subset with the distributed size from 30–250 nm in diameter (Figure 2B), which were similar to exosomes that were quarantined from other mammalian epithelial cells, including human epithelial cells [35,36,37]. Calculating the total number of isolated exosomes from uninfected cells exhibited no significant differences in comparison with the 5 MOI CHIKV infection at 72 h.p.i. (Figure 2C). In addition, we quantifiably analyzed the population of the isolated heterogeneous Vero-derived exosomes and indicated that the size range of 50 and 100 nm (in diameter) was found to be the exalted population in both the uninfected and the CHIKV-infected groups (Figure 2D,E). Nevertheless, the small EVs originating from CHIKV-infected Vero cells with the 50–100 nm and 100–150 nm sizes had progressively increased and tended to decrease population percentage in the uninfected control (Figure 2D,E). Consequently, a lower population of the large Evs, in the size range of 200–350 nm, was also observed in CHIKV infection in comparison with the uninfected group, implying that the production of smaller-sized Evs might be stimulated by CHIKV (Figure 2D,E).Since the physical transmission electron microscope (TEM) and Dynamic light scattering (DLS) characterization indicated the high pure quality of the exosomes, we, therefore, estimated the total amount of proteins of those Evs by Bradford protein assay (BCA). The purified small Evs had the total amount of proteins in a manner of cell numbers plating, with linear increase concentration at the indicated time point (Figure 2F,G). Remarkably, the concentrations of total protein from the CHIKV-infected cells were not significantly different in comparison with the uninfected controls (Figure 2F,G), correlating with the data on the total number of small EVs between the CHIKV-infected and the uninfected groups (Figure 2C).To further exemplify these EV subgroups, we then determined the expression of CD63 and CD9 which are the well characterized EV biogenesis markers. Our immunoblotting revealed both CD63 and CD9 signals were detailed in exosomes that were isolated from Vero cells with or without CHIKV infection (Figure 2H). We also corroborated that cellular cytochrome-C was not captured in these exosomes (Figure 2H), reminding us of no contamination from other types of EVs.Collectively, these data suggested that CHIKV specifically mediated the excretion and cargo of the EVs’ population consistent with the features of those EVs’ subsets.2.3. CHIKV RNA Elements Are Encapsulated by Secreted Exosomes and Are InfectiousBecause we demonstrated that discrete exosomes might be mediated by CHIKV infection, we subsequently evaluated whether these vesicles contain the infectious viral genomic element. To this end, a reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) method described by Stapleford et al. in 2016 [38] was utilized to verify the full length of the CHIKV genome. As we expected, the RT-PCR detection documented the overlapped oligonucleotide amplicons that consisted of the entire CHIKV genome sequence in Vero cell-derived exosomes (Figure 3A). Using the quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), we also illustrated both CHIKV E1 mRNA in exosomes derived from MOI 5 infected Vero cells at 72 h.p.i. (Figure 3B). We subsequently determined whether these exosome-contained viral genomic elements are infectious and if CHIKV might be transmitted to neighboring cells via exosomes. We detected the cytopathic effects (CPEs) and the progressively increasing trend of CHIKV loads in a time-dependent manner in the naïve Vero cells that were exposed to the exosomes from the CHIKV-infected Vero cell lines (Figure 3C,D). In addition, in the calculation of the plaque-forming unit (PFU), we were able to demonstrate the high CHIKV titer (Figure 3E) and CHIKV particles in the cell culture medium (Figure 3F) in the exosomes-exposed naïve Vero cells but not observed in the exposure of exosomes from the CHIKV-uninfected group.As demonstrated, small EVs containing genomic material of CHIKV are infectious. How do they internalize a cell? We might not rule out the possibility of some viral particles being coexistent either outside or inside of those EVs. Because no CHIKV virions were detected either inside or outside of these isolated EV parts (Figure 2B), therefore, we suppose this to be inconsequential, suggesting that viral RNA was feasibly appropriate to temper the infection of naïve recipient cells. Altogether, we certified that an infection of CHIKV might be transmitted by those small EVs which could be distinct from true virions.2.4. CHIKV RNA Elements and Proteins Are Securely Contained Inside the ExosomesSince viral RNA could be extracellularly originated in a non-exosome-encapsulated form, so we aimed to address whether this viral genomic material was encompassed within Vero cell-derived small EVs. To assess this assumption, we examined if CHIKV genomic RNA was attaching to the exosome outside and could then be conveyed to the naïve recipient cells. We did not obtain significant differences in CHIKV loads of naïve Vero cells that were incubated with exosome formulated from 5 MOI CHIKV infection at 72 h.p.i. and/or RNase A treatment. Naïve Vero cells incubated with exosomes derived from CHIKV-uninfected cells and RNase A were used as the model of an internal-based line control (Figure 4A). As the deep inside of the viral genome and the inability of RNase A to be accessible in the CHIKV envelope, only RNase A treatments might not be strong enough to verify our hypothesis. Thus, we include the Triton X-100 reagent in the RNase A treatment assay. The incubation of Triton-X before RNase A treatment on these exosomes also yielded an undetectable CHIKV RNA in the naïve Vero cells (Figure 4B). In addition, we performed another RNase A-treatment assay, independently using MOI 5 of laboratory CHIKV stocks accompanied by infectious exosomes for comparison. As would be anticipated of the encapsulated CHIKV genomes, we achieved imitated outcomes with no differences in viral loads in naïve Vero cells after incubation with exosomes or CHIKV stocks prepared from RNase A-treated or untreated groups (Figure 4C).To test if the viral proteins were also carried inside the Vero-derived EVs, that were not found in the PBS suspensions, we further performed and fabricated neutralizing antibodies against the CHIKV assay in order to confirm that some viral proteins were not organizing outside of the exosome as a contaminant. As demonstrated in Figure 4D, no significant differences were perceived in CHIKV loads between the treatment of exosomes derived from 5 MOI CHIKV-infected Vero at 72 h.p.i. with either anti-CHIKV IgG from patient plasma or with relevant isotype control and the untreated controls (Figure 4D). We also verified the MOI 5 of laboratory CHIKV strains as a control and exhibited a reduction of CHIKV loads in Vero cells in comparison with the isotype antibody-treated or untreated controls (Figure 4E). This information supported a positive effect for the small group and suggested that some CHIKV proteins were securely contained inside the CHIKV-derived exosomes.To corroborate that those viral antigenic proteins were contained inside the small EVs, we performed ELISA with anti-CHIKV IgG, where higher loads of CHIKV were detected when exosomes were permeabilized with Triton X-100 in comparison with the untreated group. The inside viral protein was released upon lysis of the exosome lipid bilayer, thereby occasioning in augmented detection of CHIKV protein with the Triton X-100 permeabilized treatment (Figure 4F). Overall, our experimental data indicate that CHIKV RNA and proteins were securely contained inside the epithelial-derived exosomes.2.5. CHIKV Infectious Elements Are Transmitted to Neighboring Cells through ExosomesTo further understand the influential role of infectious exosomes in the infection, replication, and transmission of CHIKV, we, therefore, performed the inhibiting assay of exosome biogenesis. Dihydrochloride hydrate substance, GW4869, is a selective cell-permeable neutral sphingomyelinase inhibitor, affecting the biogenesis and releasing of exosomes from the cells used in this experiment. Treatment of Vero cells with GW4869 at various concentrations (10, 15, and 20 μM) followed by CHIKV infection at MOI 5, for 72 h.p.i. significantly decreased CHIKV loads in the small EV fraction in comparison with the DMSO control (Figure 5A). At 72 h.p.i. of incubation of naïve Vero cells with exosomes, 5 MOI CHIKV-infected Vero cells treated with 15 μM of GW4869 disclose not only a decrease in CHIKV viral replication but also CHIKV transmission to naïve Vero cell in comparison with the DMSO treatment (Figure 5B). We consequently performed a transwell assay on exosomes- (derived from 5 MOI CHIKV-infected Vero cells at 72 h.p.i) infected Vero cells that were incubated with or without treatment of 20 μM of GW4869 inhibitor (the upper chamber) and naïve Vero cells (the lower chamber). Similar results were obtained and showed that the newly produced exosomes were able to transmigrate and infect naïve Vero cells in the lower chamber (Figure 5C). Taken together, these data implied that the direct participation of exosomes with genomic elements and proteins of CHIKV was not only involved in CHIKV infection in the mammalian host cells but was also necessary for the transmission of infectious viral elements to the neighboring cells.3. DiscussionCurrently, studies of CHIKV’s pathogenic mechanism mainly focus on the interaction between the host and viral particles. Among those theories, the role of extracellular vesicles has only been investigated in host–pathogen relationships [26,39]. As far as we know, the present study is the first to characterize EVs derived from CHIKV-infected Vero cells.Firstly, we found that the CHIKV infection stimulated the release of EVs which ranged from 50 nm to 250 nm Under TEM, the vesicles collected after purification by Invitrogen™ Dynabeads™ Exosome-Human CD63 isolation kit were completely clear and easy to identify, compared with indiscriminate objects from the pellets without the purification steps. We also confirmed the presence of these purified small EVs by CD63 exosomal marker and no cellular contamination by cytochrome C marker. These results showed the effective purification of the CD63 antibody-coated Dynabeads in helping to separate the viral particles from EVs. There are few studies on the infectious mechanisms by which CHIKV utilizes apoptotic blebs and infects macrophages [30]. During CHIKV replication, various host ESCRT factors accumulated via hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HGS), involving replicating CHIKV genomic RNA and post-translation processes [28]. However, no data on the connection between CHIKV and EVs have been reported. By observing heterogeneous vesicles, we investigated the presence of some kinds of subtypes of EVs (50 nm to 250 nm) in the pellets isolated from CHIKV-infected cells. The isolation of different subtypes of EVs was also reported from some recent flaviviruses in which the EVs could be classified as large (90–120 nm) or small (60–80 nm) [40]. In addition, a study on the potential ability of the Zika virus to use the EV tracking pathway showed increased production of small EVs from a Zika-infected Vero cell line [41].Next, we tried to find properties of those small EVs which could contribute to the pathogenesis of CHIKV. We found genomic CHIKV RNA in the purified exosomes RNAse A-treated but not in the exosomes from the CHIKV-uninfected samples. The detection of CHIKV genes from the exosome pellets isolated from the CHIKV-infected Vero cells indicated that the exosomes could contain viral RNA. This phenomenon was easily explained by the budding biogenesis pattern of EVs, as it occurs when the virus is released from an infected cell [16,42]. Besides, the large size of the isolated vesicles (from 50 nm to 250 nm) could be a good vehicle for the internalized CHIKV and used as a mechanical way for transmission to other cells. These data suggested that exosomes released from infected cells may contain some parts of CHIKV’s full-length genome. Moreover, the time point that we optimized for exosome isolation at 72 h.p.i. was supposed to be the CHIKV life cycle. The stage, ranging from 8–18 h post-entry, was able to be observed in vitro when the CHIKV’s infected cells started to show cytopathic effects and found viral particles in many parts of the host cells. This optimal time also showed mature viral virion budding from the host cell’s membrane [43,44]. Therefore, the exosomes securely contained the genetic parts of CHIKV, helping replicate future CHIKV-exosomes in target cells. Our findings shared the same ideas and result in terms of localizing viral nucleic acid in exosomes from cells infected by several viruses, including hepatitis C [45], hepatitis B [46], respiratory viruses species [47,48], herpes simplex virus 1 [39], and even many viruses in the Flaviviridae family such as dengue virus [27] or Zika virus [49].Another finding was that exosomes from CHIKV-infected cells showed neutralizing activity in CHIKV-positive human IgG plasma. Our ELISA assay results showed the same neutralizing pattern and the concentration-dependent effect between isolated exosomes and the free CHIKV ROSS strain. The above information emphasized the impact of CHIKV-positive IgG plasma, which might influence the immunogenic parts of CHIKV internalized in exosomes during the virus’ replication cycle in the host cell. Previous studies have shown that parts of CHIKV could be involved in the immunogenic and neutralizing processes. Thus, the modification of the nsP2 protein could reduce CHIKV replication [50], while the depletion of the capsid protein did not affect the assembly of infectious CHIKV particles [51]. Therefore, the role of envelope proteins E1 and E2 was not only involved in fusion and binding [52] but was also influenced by the host’s immune response [52,53,54,55,56,57]. Our above results demonstrated the presence of both nonstructural and envelope proteins, especially the E1 protein inside the exosome. Therefore, we once again can conclude that the isolated exosomes contain at least the E1 part of envelope CHIKV proteins that the anti-CHIKV human IgG antibodies could mediate. Since the anti-CHIKV human IgG antibodies’ titer was not high enough, we saw incomplete neutralizing activity in both exosomes and the CHIKV ROSS strain. Even though EVs could be affected by the human immune response, the internalized envelope protein might enhance the binding and fusion of exosomes to adjacent cells, thereby facilitating the spread of infection. The same phenomena could also be seen in the Newcastle disease virus-producing exosomes containing the viral NP protein promoting its infection [58] or shedding EVs from herpes simplex virus 1, which shields the virus from neutralizing antibodies [39]. Our follow-up experiments will assess whether the E2 protein is presented in the EVs since this protein is immunodominant [52] and interacts with human-neutralizing antibodies [56,57]. We assumed that the exosomes were indeed derived from CHIKV-infected Vero cells despite the above limitation. Besides, those exosomes internalized some parts of CHIKV or maybe the whole virus during endocytosis.Since transmission through small EVs has been established in the hepatitis virus [45,46], the herpes simplex viruses [39], and the dengue virus [27], the following experiment confirmed the isolated small EVs’ infectivity in susceptible neighboring cells. Our results indicated the transfer of CHIKV to uninfected Vero cells through the presence of a cytopathic effect as well as the ability to establish productive infections. In addition, the high titer of the virus released from the infection assay of the exosome, suggests its infectious capacity could equal that of the free CHIKV ROSS strain. Furthermore, our embedded TEM found intact CHIKV virions in the supernatant and the cell lysate. This information confirmed that the small EVs brought infectious viral particles that produced new mature virions in other cells.A question arising during our study was the relative importance of small EVs in the acute and chronic phases of the infection. It is known that the acute phase of CHIKV infection is defined as not less than 3 months after the onset of the disease [6]. This phase is consistent with strong host antiviral type I interferon (IFN) response, IgM antibodies, and neutralizing IgG antibodies in the second week of infection [6,59]. In addition, the acute phase is also represented by the recruitment of NK cells, macrophages, and monocytes at the site of infection [59,60]. Under the various immune mechanisms of viral clearance, small EVs can survive by internalizing inside those immune cells. After that, these EV-infected immune cells then migrate to other parts of the host body or even to the privileged site such as the synovial tissue. Therefore, EVs can play a role in spreading CHIKV and the persistence of the virus in synovial tissues that can induce the localized inflammation of chronically infected patients. On the other hand, in the case of a weak immune response, our PRNT assay showed an incomplete neutralizing activity of EVs (data not shown). We have some explanations for this observation. The first is related to the low titer of neutralizing antibodies obtained from our human plasma samples. The second is the ability of small EVs to escape from the immune response by distinct mechanisms such as modifying the binding epitopes of the antibodies on CHIKV envelope glycoproteins. In addition, exosomes can act as enhancement factors that lead to antibody enhancement, promoting entry into susceptible host cells and increasing virus replication. However, further experiments are needed to confirm such theories.4. Materials and Methods4.1. Cell Lines and CulturesThree kinds of established epithelial cell lines, including mammalian and insect cells, were used in this study. Vero cells [61]—a common continuous tissue culture cell line derived from African green monkey kidney epithelial cells (a kind gift from Prof. Pilaipan Puthavathana, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand) and the cervical cancer-derived human papillomavirus- (HPV18) positive cell lines, HeLa [62], were grown in high glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (GIBCO™; Life Technology, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cells [63] were cultivated in Leibovitz’s L-15 Medium (GIBCO™; Life Technology, Carlsbad, CA, USA). All cell lines were supplemented with 10% inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (GIBCO™; Life Technology, Carlsbad, CA, USA) together with a standard prepared mixture concentration of antibiotic gentamicin (40 µg/mL), streptomycin (100 µg/mL), penicillin (100 U/mL), and fluconazole (5 ng/mL) in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C.4.2. Preparation of Extracellular Vesicle-Depleted FBSEV-depleted FBS was used in all experiments on the isolation of EVs, including exosomes. FBS was centrifuged at 100,000× g for 16 h in a 70Ti fixed-angle titanium rotor (Beckman, Fullerton, CA, USA) and then filtered through a 0.22-µm filter.4.3. Propagation of Laboratory CHIKV StockAll experiments were performed using the CHIKV ROSS C6D4 strain [64]. Viral stocks were performed in Vero cells and plaque assays were used to determine the titers of the harvested virus. To produce, harvest, and enumerate CHIKV stocks, we followed the protocol previously described by Chalaem et al. in 2016 [65].4.4. Infection of CHIKV to Vero Cell LineVero cells at a density of 1 × 105 cells were grown in each well of 12-well plates for 24 h before CHIKV infection. The cells were infected with CHIKV at 5 of the Multiplicity of Infection (MOI 5). The infected cells were collected at various time points, including 24, 48, 72, and 96 h post-infection (h.p.i.) and processed for RNA extractions. There were increased CHIKV loads at 72 h.p.i., in Vero cells, we, therefore, considered this time point for all downstream experiments.4.5. Exosomes Isolation and EnrichmentTo prevent the contamination of the isolated EVs with other extracellular vesicles originating from FBS, EV-depleted FBS was used in this experiment. A total of 30 mL of conditioned culture medium was collected and centrifuged at 300× g at 4 °C for 10 min to eliminate cell pellets. The collected supernatant was centrifuged at 2000× g at 4 °C for 30 min to eliminate cell debris and dead cells. The EVs, including exosomes, were isolated by using a Total Exosome Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Briefly, the prepared medium was homogeneously mixed with the 0.5 volume of total exosome isolation reagent and was incubated at 4 °C overnight. The mixture was then centrifuged at 10,000× g at 4 °C for 60 min. The pellet was resuspended with 1X PBS buffer. For further experiments, the enriched exosomes were divided into small aliquots and frozen at −80 °C.4.6. Exosome PurificationFor further exosome purification, Invitrogen™ Dynabeads™ Exosome-Human CD63 isolation kit (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to separate small EV subpopulations following the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the Dynabeads magnetic beads, coated with the primary monoclonal antibody specific for the CD63 membrane antigen, were incubated with samples overnight, and captured exosomes were magnetically separated for downstream applications. The purified exosomes were now ready for physical characterization, RNA, and protein extraction as well as the downstream infection experiments.4.7. Physical Characterization of Isolated ExosomesTo determine the size and number of the purified exosomes, we explored the distribution of exosome particles with Dynamic light scattering (DLS) instruments (Zetasizer Nano ZS; Malvern Panalytical, Worcestershire, UK). The data outputs were then analyzed using Zetasizer software version 7.13 (https://www.malvernpanalytical.com/; accessed on 22 August 2018).For the visualization of small EVs and viral particles, the transmission electron microscope (TEM) was performed. As modified by Hurwitz et al. in 2017 [66] described, the carbon-coated copper electron microscope grids (Ted Pella, Redding, CA, USA) were adsorbed with a 10 µL of exosomes solution that contained 1X PBS for 2 min at room temperature (RT). Following the incubation, the excess solution was carefully removed using Whatman paper by touching only the grid’s outer ring before being stained with 10 µL of 4% uranyl acetate for 1 min. The stained grid was air-dried at room temperature until completely dry before the examination at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV under TEM (TECNAi G2; FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA). The CHIKV virion was observed in the samples for five times on five different grids.For CHIKV virion visualization, the supernatant and cell pellets collected from the EV-infected assay were fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde on ice and stored overnight in a refrigerator. The samples were washed four times with buffered solution, for 15 min each time, before being subjected to postfix with osmium tetraoxide for 2 h. Samples were washed an additional two times with buffer solution for 15 min and then each and all osmium tetraoxide debris was removed. The samples then went through four dehydration steps using ethyl alcohol concentrations of 30%, 50%, 70%, and 95%. Finally, the samples were covered with propylene for 10 min before embedding with propylene overnight and observed under the TEM as described above.The visualization procedure under TEM was developed and performed at Electron Microscopy Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University.4.8. Determination of Exosomes Markers by ImmunoblottingTo avoid any interfering reagents that could affect the captured exosome pellets, the freeze–thaw method was used for total exosome protein extraction. The extraction process consisted of two or three repetitions, quickly freezing the pellet with liquid nitrogen for 5 min and thawing combined with 5 min vortexing. After 10 min of centrifugation at 10,000× g, the obtained clear supernatant was used for protein measurement and exosomal marker detection by immunoblotting technique.As described by Burassakarn et al. in 2021 [67], CD63 and CD9 proteins were used as exosomal markers and cytochrome C was used as a marker for cellular contamination control. The primary antibody used included purified mouse anti-human CD63 (ab59479, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) or rabbit anti-CD9 (D8O1A, Cell Signaling Technology; Danvers, MA, USA) was diluted at a 1:1000 ratio, and the purified mouse anti-Cytochrome C (6H2.B4; BD Biosciences, Berkshire, United Kingdom; diluted at a 1:250 ratio) under reducing conditions as recommended by the manufacturer was used in this study. An equal number of exosomes were mixed with loading dye, incubated at 95 °C for 5 min, and cooled down at room temperature for 5–10 min before loading on an SDS/PAGE gel.Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was performed. Proteins on the gel were transferred to a nitrocellulose blotting membrane (Amersham Protran, Little Chalfont, UK) and the protein-transferred membrane was blocked by shaking in 5% skim milk in 0.1% Tween 20/1X PBS for 60 min at RT. A primary antibody diluted in 5% skim milk/1X PBS was added to the membrane and incubated at 4°C overnight. Then, the membrane was washed three times with a washing solution containing 0.1% tween 20 in 1X PBS for 15 min at RT. Goat anti-mouse IgG antibody, horse-radish peroxidase (HRP) conjugate (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany), diluted 1:1000 in 5% skim milk/1X PBS was used as a secondary antibody. The membrane was incubated with the secondary antibody for 1 h at RT and washed three times with a washing solution for 10 min at room temperature. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, signal detection was performed using Enhanced Chemiluminescence (ECL) prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent (Amersham, Little Chalfont, UK). Signal detection was imaged by using the image Quant™ LAS 600 instrument (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA). The membrane was exposed for 5–10 min.4.9. Detection of CHIKV Genomic Materials in the Cells and ExosomesTo remove all the excess contaminated nucleic acid during purification steps, an additional RNase A treatment step was performed using 5 μg/mL RNAse A (stock 4 mg/mL) (Omega, Life Science, CO, USA) at 37 °C for 1 h.According to the manufacturer’s guidelines, the total RNA of exosomes from either CHIKV-uninfected cells or exosome-derived CHIKV-infected cells were extracted using TRIzolTM LS reagent (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) protocol. The RNA pellet was resuspended in 20 µL of RNAse-free water. Then the quality of the isolated RNA was analyzed using the NanoDrop™ 2000/2000c spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Thereafter, total RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using 1 µL random hexamer primers and SuperScript™ III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA), following product instructions. The cDNA was stored at −20 °C until further analysis. Following cDNA synthesis, the entire CHIKV genome was amplified by specific primers set (Supplementary Table S1) using the standard reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay [38]. The PCR reaction was carried out using 0.625 U/µL of Phusion™ High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 0.1 mM dNTPs, 1X 10X PCR buffer, 1.25 mM MgCl2 and 10 µM of each forward and reverse primer, and 4 µL of cDNA in total 25 µL reactions. The RT-PCR reaction was performed using a Bio-Rad C1000 thermal cycler (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Five microliters of PCR product were subjected to 1% agarose gel electrophoresis, stained with ethidium bromide, and visualized under an ultraviolet Gel Doc transilluminator (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).4.10. Triton X-100 Treatment of Small EVsExosomes were treated with RNase A (5 μg/mL) either with or without Triton X-100 (0.1%) for 15 min. After adding RNase inhibitor, total RNAs were isolated by TRIzolTM LS reagent (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) protocol, and CHIKV RNA was quantified by qRT-PCR as described below.4.11. Exosomes Infectious AssayVero cells were seeded on a 24-well plate at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/well. The prepared Vero cells were inoculated with 200 µL of each exosome from either the no-infection or CHIKV-infected cells. The plate was incubated inside the biosafety cabinet at the indicated time allowing exosome absorption. Then, the excess medium was removed and replaced with a fresh maintenance medium with 2% exosome-depleted FBS before incubation for 2 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. The plate was observed for the presence of cytopathic effect (CPE) and supernatant and cell lysates were collected for virion detection by TEM and determination of viral infectious titer using standard plaque-forming unit assay (PFU).4.12. Analysis of EV Transfer CHIKV RNA Elements and ProteinsTo determine the CHIKV mRNA loads in both cells and exosomes, the qRT-PCR was performed. We used the designed specific primers to detect the CHIKV E1 gene (Supplementary Table S1). The β-actin primers were used in the qRT-PCR normalization. The rate of CHIKV infection in each tested group was indicated by the ratio index of the CHIKV E1 gene divided by the β-actin gene. The normalization of total RNA loads was performed in the case of some experiments with undetectable amounts of β-actin in exosome experiments. qRT-PCR was performed using the SsoAdvanced™ Universal SYBR® Green Supermix (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). A 10-fold serial dilution starting from the known quantities’ plasmid of the CHIKV E1 gene or the β-actin gene fragments was used in the establishment of a standard curve.A PFU assay on Vero cells was performed to determine the infectious titer and capacity of CHIKV replication as well as the formation of infectious plaques in suspected CHIKV-derived small EVs. The PFU assay was based on a previous protocol with some modifications [68]. Briefly, Vero cells were seeded at 2 × 105 cells/well, then cells were grown in 24-well tissue culture plates until reaching 80–90% confluent monolayer within 24 h. The culture medium was removed and the cells were inoculated with 200 µL of exosome containing unknown PFU of CHIKV viral genome culture supernatant, prepared at 10-fold serial dilutions in DMEM medium. After incubating cells at 37 °C for 2 h allowing for virus adsorption by plate and virus mixing every 30 min, cells in each well were gently overlaid with 500 µL pre-warmed 1.5% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) (Sigma, Chicago, MO, USA) mixed with DMEM. The plates were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 and checked daily for CPE or plaque formation. After 48 h, the plate was fixed and stained with a mixture of crystal violet staining solution in ethanol and formaldehyde [69]. Plaques were counted and calculated to determine CHIKV viral titer in PFU/mL. All experiments were undertaken independently in a duplicate assay of titer.To determine the neutralizing activity of antibodies against CHIKV and a small EV fraction from the CHIKV-infected Vero cells, we used plasma samples that presented a high titer of CHIKV-positive human immunoglobulin G (IgG) plasma and IgG-negative control samples from patients as an isotype control. CHIKV ROSS strain C6D4 was also used as the positive control. The titer of small EVs collected from supernatants of CHIKV-infected cells and the CHIKV ROSS strain was adjusted with MOI 5. The human plasma was mixed and incubated with an equal volume of small EVs or CHIKV ROSS strain at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 1 h. Isotype controls using confirmed IgG human serum samples were also included. Thereafter, the mixture was layered on a 24-well plate containing 80–90% confluent monolayer Vero cell 2 × 105 cell/well. After allowing the virus’ adsorption for 2 h, the inoculum was removed and replaced with a new complete medium. The plate was incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 72 h. Until the CPEs were observed, Vero cells were harvested and further processed for the detection of CHIK loads.To determine the CHIKV proteins in the isolated exosomes, ELISA was performed. The equal amount of total proteins (estimated by BCA method) either from 0.1% Triton-X-100-treated or untreated samples derived CHIKV-infected or -uninfected Vero cells were coated in MaxiSorp™ flat-bottom 96-well plates (Nunc™, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for overnight at 4 °C. Bovine serum albumins (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) were used in the sample blocking step before being incubated with a high titer of CHIKV-positive human immunoglobulin G (IgG) plasma from our previous study [70] for 1 h. The secondary antibody, an HRP-conjugated mouse monoclonal anti-human IgG (HP-6017, dilution = 1:10,000; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) was applied to the reaction and incubated for 1 h. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, SureBlue™ TMB 1-Component Microwell Peroxidase Substrate (SeraCare, Milford, MA, USA) was added to the well followed by the TMB Stop Solution (KPL; SeraCare, Milford, MA, USA). Using an absorbance microplate reader (Tecan™, Männedorf, Switzerland), optical density at 450 nm was measured and then analyzed with Magellan™ software (Tecan™, Männedorf, Switzerland) from triplicated samples in three independent experiments.4.13. Inhibition of Exosome Production by GW4869 InhibitorFor studies of exosome inhibition, we used a commercial selective cell-permeable GW4869 inhibitor for the Neutral Sphingomyelinase (N-SMase) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Vero at the density of 2 × 105 cells were seeded in a complete DMEM medium for 24 h. The day after, the GW4869 inhibitor with indicated doses of 5, 10, 15, or 20 μM was treated with the Vero for 4 h, followed by 5 MOI CHIKV infection for 72 h and 24 h in case of viral mRNA loads and immunoblotting analysis, respectively. A similar volume of DMSO treatment was used in the control groups. For analysis of the viral kinetics infection of infectious exosomes, Vero cells were treated with CHIKV-derived exosomes isolated from Vero cells treated with 15 μM of such inhibitor. DMSO was used as vehicle control. At 48 h.p.i., viral loads were determined from the cell lines by the qRT-PCR method.4.14. Transwell AssayTo analyze the transmigration of infectious small EVs released from infected Vero cells to naïve Vero cells, transwell assays were performed. Sterile, 12 mm insert size polycarbonate transwell® inserts with 0.4 μm microporous membrane pore size (Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA) were used. Naïve Vero cells were seeded in 12-well plates (lower chamber) at the density of 2 × 105 cells accompanied by the plated Vero cells at the density of 2 × 105 in the inserts (upper chamber). At 24 h post-cultivation, Vero cells were either infected with CHIKV-derived exosomes or with laboratory CHIIKV stock prepared from cultured Vero cells supernatants (14 days post-infection). Following the 24 h post-infection either with exosomes or CHIKV stock, the inserts were transferred to naïve Vero cells in 12-well plates. Exosomes containing CHIKV RNA and proteins originating from Vero cells were authorized to migrate and infect naïve Vero cells. Subsequently, at 48 h.p.i, the Vero cells in the lower chamber were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and processed for another experiment. For the inhibition of exosome production, 20 μM of GW4869 inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), were also treated in this assay.4.15. Statistical AnalysesGraphPad Prism version 8.0.2 for macOS (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) was used for analyses of the statistically significant differences examined in the data sets. For a comparison of the two means of the entire data, the two-tail Student t-test of non-paired assumption was performed. All experiments were represented with Error bars indicating mean ± SD and p values. The p values of <0.05 were noted for the significance of statistical tests.5. ConclusionsThis is the first study to describe the characterization of secreted extracellular vesicles, including exosomes from CHIKV-infected epithelial cells, and their role in CHIKV transmission. The secreted vesicles from CHIKV-infected cells encapsulated CHIKV genomic RNA and any immunogenic parts of the virus. These EVs then played a role in producing infectious virions in other epithelial cells. These results might suggest the ability of EVs in the dissemination of CHIKV throughout host organs and further involvement in immune evasion inducing persistent arthritis (Figure 6).


Title: Drugs of Abuse and Their Impact on Viral Pathogenesis

1. Drug Use Morbidity and Mortality in the USThere were over 19 million people aged 18 or older with substance use disorder (SUD) in the United States in 2019 [1]. Frequently misused substances include alcohol, cocaine, heroin, marijuana (cannabis), tobacco, methamphetamine, and opioids. Given the sharp rise in opioid-related deaths in recent years, this review focuses on opioids and their interactions with common viral pathogens, such as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV).Rates of drug overdose deaths have increased significantly in recent years [2,3]. From 2016 to 2017, more than 142,000 Emergency Department visits were suspected opioid-involved overdoses [4]. Among the 70,000+ drug overdose deaths in 2017, 67.8% involved an opioid [5]. In 2019, 70.6% of drug overdose deaths involved opioids, while 51.5% involved synthetic opioids [6]. Contributing to these increased deaths is the dramatic increase in the availability of heroin and illicitly manufactured fentanyl and fentanyl analogs [7,8,9,10,11,12].2. Drug Use and Immune FunctionSeveral commonly misused substances suppress immune responses (reviewed in [13,14]). Possible mechanisms include impaired function of natural killer cells, T cells, B cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells, and/or macrophages, altered expression of cytokines and chemokines, and the weakened integrity of the intestinal barrier, all of which contribute to decreased ability to control pathogens and limit their subsequent clearance. Evidence of the immunosuppressive effects of drug use are further supported by epidemiologic studies demonstrating an increased rate of infections amongst persons with SUD [15,16,17]. 3. Common Viral Infections Associated with Drug UseDrug use—particularly the opioid pandemic—has fueled outbreaks of several viral pathogens. Perhaps the most well-known example occurred in Scott County, Indiana, in 2015. In an area that had previously recorded approximately five new HIV cases annually, over 200 people were diagnosed with HIV in less than one year [18,19]. Most individuals lived in rural communities, were under 40 years of age, white, and nearly half were women. A total of 80% reported injection drug use. Among those, all reported dissolving and injecting oxymorphone tablets. It was subsequently reported that most individuals were also co-infected with HCV [20]. Increases in HIV and/or viral hepatitis associated with injection drug use have been noted in several other settings [21,22,23,24,25,26,27]. A meta-analysis found that 17.8% of persons who inject drugs (PWIDs) were living with HIV, 52.3% were HCV seropositive, and 9.1% were HBV surface antigen positive [28]. Thus, it is not surprising that rises in viral infections associated with injection drug use—frequently involving opioids—have been noted internationally as well [29,30,31,32,33,34].4. OpioidsThere are three main types of opioids. Natural opiates are found in plants and include morphine and codeine. Semi-synthetic opioids are those created in laboratory settings from natural opiates and include hydromorphone, hydrocodone, and oxycodone, as well as heroin, which is made from morphine. Synthetic opioids include fentanyl, fentanyl analogs, buprenorphine, methadone, and tramadol. Endogenous opioid peptides are also responsible for a plethora of physiological functions and include endorphins, enkephalins, and dynorphins.Opioid family receptors are classified as μ-opioid (MOR), δ-opioid (DOR), κ-opioid (KOR), and nociceptin/orphanin (ORL) receptors [35]. When an opioid receptor is activated, adenylyl cyclase is inhibited, leading to the activation of K+ channels and the reduced conductance of Ca2+ channels. Opioid receptors also activate mitogen-activated protein kinases and phospholipase C-mediated signaling, leading to the formation of IP3 and diacyl glycerol. The activation or inhibition of downstream signaling cascades thus facilitates the intrinsic effects of opioids [36,37].5. Opioids and HIVOpioid receptors are expressed on a variety of immune cells, such as lymphocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, and monocytes [38,39]. Therefore, the interactions between opioids/opioid receptors and HIV are important to investigate (Figure 1). Endogenous opioid peptides enhance HIV expression. For instance, the β-endorphin enhanced viral protein production and long terminal repeat (LTR) activation in microglia [40]. Similarly, endomorphin-1 increased HIV expression in mixed glial/neuronal, as well as microglial, cell cultures [41], and dynorphin upregulated HIV expression in fetal brain co-cultures [42]. However, subsequent studies have not evaluated the role of endogenous opioid peptides on HIV disease progression in vivo.Squinto et al. first reported that morphine activated the HIV LTR in human neuroblastoma cells [43]. Subsequent studies showed increased HIV replication with several cell types. Morphine increased HIV expression in promonocyte/fetal brain cell co-cultures, as well as primary cultures of Kupffer cells [44,45]. Morphine also triggered viral reactivation in latently-infected lymphocytes [46]. Interestingly, Wang et al. demonstrated that morphine withdrawal also enhanced HIV replication within peripheral blood lymphocytes, as well as T cell lines in vitro [47]. The neuropeptide substance P (SP) enhanced viral replication in a dose-dependent manner, and an SP antagonist inhibited the effect of morphine withdrawal on HIV replication. HIV LTR activation was also increased in cells undergoing morphine withdrawal. The same group reported that morphine upregulated chemokine receptor expression, downregulated β chemokine production, inhibited the expression of interferons (IFNs), IFN-inducible genes, and regulators of the Janus Kinase signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK–STAT) signaling pathway, and decreased expression of anti-HIV microRNAs, while also increasing HIV expression in blood monocyte-derived macrophages and neonatal macrophages [48,49,50,51]. Morphine withdrawal also enhanced HIV expression within macrophages and inhibited expression of multiple viral inhibitory factors [52]. Additionally, Balinang et al. also demonstrated increased HIV replication in neural progenitor cells in the presence of morphine [53]. Notably, HIV proteins also synergize with morphine to increase the expression of opioid receptors, alter cell cycle regulation, and exacerbate neurotoxicity and neuroinflammation [54,55,56,57,58,59,60].Figure 1Mechanisms of virus–drug interactions that lead to increased viral replication and accelerated disease progression for HIV and HCV, and/or liver injury.Using an in vitro HIV-CD4+ T cell system, Liang et al. showed that morphine treatment induced more drug-resistant mutations under selective pressure from antiretroviral drugs and shortened the generation time for such mutations compared to controls treated with only antiretroviral drugs [61]. The inhibitory effects of antiretroviral therapies on HIV replication in primary astrocytes in vitro were also attenuated by morphine [62]. Morphine influences antiretroviral drug concentration in a drug and cell type-dependent manner [57], although the in vivo significance of these findings remains to be determined. In the simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) model, morphine alters the fecal microbiome and expression of microbial metabolites and reduces the CD4+ T cell reservoir in lymphoid tissues, while increasing the microglia/macrophage reservoir in the central nervous system [63,64]. There are no published reports on whether another natural opioid—codeine—has similar effects on HIV infection/replication.Of the semi-synthetic opioids, data on their impact on HIV pathogenesis are only available for heroin (heroin triggered HIV reactivation in latently-infected lymphocytes in vitro) [46]. Others have demonstrated that heroin enhanced HIV expression in macrophages, suppressed IFNs, and inhibited several anti-HIV microRNAs [51,65]. Altered microRNA expression was also confirmed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and/or macrophages from heroin-dependent persons [65,66]. In a large cohort study, HIV-infected PWIDs had higher plasma HIV RNA levels than non-PWIDs, and PWIDs expressed lower levels of host restriction factors such as TRIM5α, TRIM22, ABOBEC3G, and IFNs than individuals with no drug use [67].Methadone and buprenorphine are widely used for the treatment of opioid addiction. Patient-based studies investigating their impact on HIV pathogenesis are lacking. However, in vitro studies indicated that methadone enhanced HIV replication within fetal microglia and blood monocyte-derived macrophages, and increased replication in latently-infected PBMCs [68]. Methadone increased expression of CCR5 in monocyte-derived macrophages. A subsequent study by the same group found that methadone also increased HIV expression in primary macrophages and reduced expression of IFNs, IFN-stimulated genes, and several anti-HIV microRNAs [69].Retention on buprenorphine treatment was associated with maximal HIV suppression in opioid-dependent persons [70], although there are no reports on whether buprenorphine directly impacts HIV levels in vivo. A recent study found that buprenorphine resulted in more than an eight-fold increase of in vitro infection of PBMCs from uninfected individuals with an HIV reporter virus [71]. In contrast, in a murine model of HIV, viral levels were not increased, although cognitive impairment was reduced in the presence of buprenorphine [72].Despite the significant contribution of synthetic opioids such as fentanyl to the current opioid crisis, data evaluating the potential association of fentanyl or fentanyl analogs on HIV disease are limited. We recently reported preliminary data suggesting that fentanyl increases HIV replication via enhanced expression of the CCR5 and CXCR4 chemokine co-receptors in several cell types [73,74]. Nonetheless, the impacts of other synthetic opioids on HIV pathogenesis remain to be explored.6. Opioid Receptor/Chemokine Receptor InteractionsIt is well established that, like chemokines, μ-, δ-, and κ-opioids induce chemotactic responses in monocytes and neutrophils [75,76,77,78]. It has also been shown that the activation of mu- and delta-opioid receptors leads to the heterologous desensitization of chemokine receptors (reviewed in [79]). Thus, opioid receptor–chemokine receptor interactions and desensitization by opioid agonists may have important implications for HIV pathogenesis. Several groups have sought to antagonize opioid receptor–chemokine receptor interactions as a novel therapeutic strategy to limit HIV replication. Akgün et al. synthesized a bivalent MOR agonist/CCR5 antagonist that exhibited significant anti-nociception in mice [80]. This bivalent compound was around 3500 times more potent than a mixture of the MOR agonist and CCR5 antagonist monovalent ligands. Arnatt et al. developed a different bivalent compound targeting the MOR–CCR5 heterodimer [81]. Exposure to the bivalent ligand significantly reduced HIV p24 levels in PBMCs, macrophages, and primary astrocytes. This group subsequently developed a bivalent MOR–CXCR4 antagonist that is around 150 times more potent than monovalent controls at inhibiting HIV entry [82], and have recently reported additional bivalent MOR–CCR5 ligands with potent anti-HIV activity [83].7. Stimulants and HIVStimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamine may alter HIV pathogenesis and have been reviewed in detail elsewhere [84,85]. For instance, stimulant use is associated with higher HIV RNA levels and greater CD4+ T cell decline [86,87,88]. In vitro, cocaine enhances HIV transcription through the altered expression of NFκB, mitogen- and stress-activated kinase 1 (MSK1) p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK), and/or initiation and elongation factors [89,90,91]. Cocaine can directly enhance HIV expression in multiple cell types including PBMCs, macrophages, CD4+ T cells, dendritic cells, microglia, and astrocytes [89,92,93,94,95,96,97,98,99]. Peterson et al. further reported that antibodies to either tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) or transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) reduced the impact of cocaine on HIV replication [94]. Cocaine can also enhance HIV neuroinvasion by remodeling microvascular endothelial cells in the brain [100]. Roth et al. noted a 100- to 300-fold increase in HIV levels after cocaine administration in a murine model of HIV infection [101,102]. The mechanism by which cocaine influences HIV pathogenesis includes increased chemokine co-receptor expression, epigenetic modifications, upregulation of dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN), differential MAPK expression, dysregulation of arachidonic acid and its metabolites, and/or downregulation of anti-HIV microRNAs [90,91,93,98,99,102,103,104,105].Methamphetamine use in the US increased 43% from 2015 to 2019 [106]. Methamphetamine use alters the immune system in a variety of ways, including altered immune cell subset number, increased pro-inflammatory cytokine production, increased CD4+ and CD8+ T cell proliferation, enhanced CD4+ T cell activation and/or exhaustion, and altered immune-related signaling pathways, as reviewed elsewhere [107,108,109,110]. Population-based studies report that methamphetamine use is associated with higher HIV viral loads, higher likelihood of having detectable HIV viral loads, and/or lower CD4+ T cell counts compared to non-users [111,112,113]. Several in vitro studies have shown that methamphetamine and the HIV tat protein interact to alter mitochondrial dysfunction and cell death [114,115]. Others have demonstrated increased HIV replication in the presence of methamphetamine in multiple cell types, including blood monocyte-derived macrophages, monocyte-derived dendritic cells, neural progenitor cells, and CD4+ T cells [116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123,124]. The proviral effects of methamphetamine on HIV are attributed to the enhanced expression of chemokine co-receptors, decreased expression of β chemokines, inhibition of IFNα, upregulation of T cell activation markers, altered microRNA expression, dysregulation of signal transduction pathways, inhibition of TLR9, and activation of the HIV LTR. 8. Alcohol and HIVAlcohol represents a near ubiquitous extrinsic factor that can play a role in infection, transmission, and maintenance of chronic viral infections. The World Health Organization reports that alcohol consumption contributes to 3 million deaths per year globally (WHO 2018). The 2019 National Survey on Drug Use and Health reported 139.7 million current alcohol users aged 12 and older in 2019 [125].Alcohol can impact HIV by increased risk of infection/transmission, reduced viral suppression, and increased emergence of viral resistance to antiretroviral therapies, as well as alcohol-associated immunosuppression that increases the risk of opportunistic infections and disease progression. A meta-analysis of 10 studies reported that any alcohol consumption was associated with an increased relative risk of HIV infection, while binge drinking led to an increased relative risk of 2.2 [126]. This risk is attributable in part to the link between alcohol use, unprotected sexual intercourse, multiple sexual partners, and a prior history of sexually transmitted infections [127,128]. Recreational drug use, intimate partner violence, and depression are also recognized as co-morbidities of alcohol misuse [129].Suppression of HIV with antiretroviral therapy has implications for the infected individual in terms of disease progression, and as well as HIV transmission to others. In a longitudinal study of patients in continuity care, the time spent with a viral load >1500 copies/mL was evaluated. Hazardous alcohol use, recent drug use, black race, and age were highly associated with failure to maintain an HIV <1500 copies/mL [130]. In the Women’s Interagency HIV Study, heavy drinking was associated with failure to remain virally suppressed as well [26]. The association between failure to suppress HIV and disease progression due to alcohol is well established. However, the factors that contribute to disease progression are less clear. A detailed review of this subject suggests that alcohol may affect HIV progression through alteration of the microbiome, affecting gut permeability, and systemic activation, though not all studies report an association between heavy alcohol use and markers of progression [131]. Alcohol may increase risk of infections in persons with HIV by altered immune surveillance mechanisms. Experimental models suggest that alcohol consumption increases susceptibility to pneumococcal pneumonia [132]. The presence of alcohol use disorder is associated with greater pneumonia severity as well [133]. In vitro studies suggest that HIV gp120 and alcohol increase blood-brain barrier permeability [134]. Additionally, others have demonstrated increased HIV replication in the presence of alcohol in various cell types, including T lymphocytes, monocyte-derived macrophages, monocyte-derived dendritic cells, epithelial cells, and oral keratinocytes [47,135,136,137,138,139,140]. Higher alcohol-induced levels of HIV may lead to increased risk of transmission to others. The mechanisms by which alcohol enhances HIV replication include upregulation of chemokine co-receptors and inhibition of β chemokines [137].9. Opioids and Viral HepatitisOpioid receptors are expressed in the liver where they are important mediators of liver disease progression [141,142,143,144,145,146,147]. Hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) are major contributors to liver fibrosis and express multiple opioid receptors [141,142,144,145,146,148]. However, less is known about the impact of opioids on HCV and liver disease (Figure 1). In vitro studies demonstrated that morphine, heroin, and methamphetamine enhance HCV replication [149,150,151,152,153]. We recently reported that fentanyl increased replication of HCV and HBV in hepatocytes [73]. The addition of fentanyl also resulted in significant apoptosis. RNA sequencing identified multiple hepatocyte genes that were differentially regulated by fentanyl, including those related to apoptosis, the antiviral interferon response, chemokine signaling, and NFκB signaling. As higher virus levels are associated with pathogenesis and virus transmission, additional research is essential to our understanding of opioid-virus pathogenesis and for the development of new and optimized treatment strategies. However, there are no data on HCV RNA levels and/or markers of liver damage in fentanyl-using populations. Similarly, there are no published reports evaluating HCV or HBV attachment or entry factors by fentanyl or other opioids. While multiple microRNAs stimulate or suppress HCV replication [154], studies of opioid HCV–miRNA interactions are absent from the literature.10. Stimulants and Viral HepatitisAs with HIV, stimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamine may alter the pathogenesis of viral hepatitis. However, data regarding the influence of cocaine on viral hepatitis in at-risk populations are sparse. While cocaine use is associated with HCV infection and the presence of HCV viremia, the impact of cocaine on HCV RNA levels or treatment response rates is less clear [155,156,157]. There are conflicting data on the impact of cocaine use on liver disease [158,159]. Similarly, there are limited studies on the impact of cocaine use on HBV-related liver disease, although amongst US veterans with HCV, cocaine and other drug use was associated with HBV co-infection [160].Ye et al. demonstrated that methamphetamine increased HCV replication and inhibited hepatic IFNα expression in vitro [149]. Population-based studies evaluating the impact of methamphetamine on HCV RNA levels and liver disease are limited. However, methamphetamine injection is an independent predictor of incident HCV infection [161,162,163], and recent methamphetamine injection is associated with phylogenetic clustering of HCV, suggesting that it plays a role in HCV transmission networks [164].11. Alcohol and Viral HepatitisAlcohol and viral hepatitis (HBV or HCV) are important contributors to liver injury and progression to cirrhosis, leading to increased morbidity and mortality. The interaction between HCV and alcohol misuse is significant and appears to be dose- and duration-dependent. For example, an analysis of National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data revealed that excessive alcohol consumption was associated with a hazard ratio for liver-related mortality of around 184 compared to around 74 for HCV-infected persons not reporting excessive alcohol consumption. Liver-related mortality was increased with moderate alcohol use, as well as when HCV was present [165]. Among those cured of HCV with directing acting agents, unhealthy alcohol use remained associated with liver-related outcomes and mortality, although low-level alcohol use was not [166]. A myriad of factors could influence liver injury and disease progression among HCV-infected persons who drink alcohol. Several studies have suggested an increased quasispecies complexity of HCV associated with alcohol use [167,168]. In vitro studies have described increased viral replication following the exposure of permissive cells to alcohol [169]. It has been reported that upregulation of the microRNA-122 that facilitates HCV replication could be involved [170]. Alcohol is also associated with HCV replication in PBMCs [171]. Liver injury is also associated with the development of steatosis and free radical oxidative stress, both of which are increased in conjunction with HCV and alcohol exposure [172].The impact of alcohol on HBV is poorly understood. Yet, alcohol consumption increases HBV surface antigen (HBsAg) and viral DNA in transgenic mice [173], supporting a previous study demonstrating increased HBsAg levels in HepG2 cells in the presence of ethanol [174]. Nonetheless, cohort-based studies evaluating the impact of alcohol on HBV-specific liver disease are lacking.12. Tobacco, Cannabis, and Viral InfectionsAmong persons with HIV, the prevalence of cigarette smoking is estimated at 40% to 70% (reviewed in [175,176]). Multiple studies have reported that cigarette smoke exposure is associated with increased HIV replication, lower CD4+ T cell counts, immune activation, oxidative stress, and/or decreased adherence or response to antiretroviral therapy (ART) [177,178,179]. Smoking/nicotine also enhances HIV replication in macrophages, T lymphocytes, and/or microglia [180,181,182,183,184]. Ranjit et al. observed a three- to four-fold increase in HIV replication in macrophages exposed to benzo(a)pyrene—a major carcinogen found in cigarettes. The impact of cannabis use on HIV is less clear with some studies reporting a reduced adherence to ART and missed clinical appointments, while others reported beneficial/no impact on virus levels [185,186,187,188,189]. Notably, given its potential anti-inflammatory properties, cannabis has been offered as a potential treatment for addiction, as well as for neuroinflammation associated with HIV [190,191].Recent reviews show cannabis use may impact liver disease [192]. While some studies have reported that cannabis use was associated with liver fibrosis, other studies showed little to no effect. Cannabis use may also be associated with reduced hepatic steatosis [193].13. Drugs of Abuse and SARS-CoV-2The ongoing SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic has raised considerable concern about its potential negative impact on persons with SUD [194,195]. Social isolation and stress increased with lockdowns during the pandemic. Addiction services and treatment options were also severely limited to align with new social distancing norms. Recent reports now confirm that drug overdose deaths increased during the COVID-19 pandemic [196,197,198,199]. Wang et al. recently reported that persons with SUD were at significantly increased risk for COVID-19 and worse outcomes [200]. Fentanyl use also increased during the COVID-19 pandemic [201,202]. COVID-19 mortality may be exacerbated in persons with SUD for several reasons, including downregulation of interferon expression, development of pulmonary edema, increased thrombotic factors, and increased expression of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) (reviewed in [203], although data to support these potential mechanistic interactions are quite limited currently). However, the acute nature of infection with SARS-CoV-2 may prove challenging for evaluating how drugs of abuse impact SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 pathogenesis in vivo.14. Recommendations for Additional ResearchThere are multiple future research opportunities to consider related to drugs of abuse and chronic viral infections. Firstly, side-by-side comparison of multiple drugs of abuse and their impact on viral replication in vitro is essential using standardized drug doses, established timings of drug exposure, and cell types that are relevant to the viral life cycle and the overall disease progress in vivo. Secondly, polysubstance abuse is quite common in persons with substance use disorders. While this clearly complicates study design and data analysis, the impact of polysubstance abuse compared to single drugs of abuse is not commonly considered in well-characterized clinical cohorts with viral infections and co-infections. Thirdly, the opioid antagonists naloxone and naltrexone can limit the increased viral replication brought about by distinct drugs of abuse in vitro [48,50,65,153,204,205,206,207,208]. Furthermore, a recent clinical trial demonstrated that extended-release naltrexone improves HIV viral suppression, thus suggesting its potential role in the treatment of SUD in persons with chronic viral infections [209]. Similarly, high rates of HCV clearance were achieved with combined direct-acting antivirals and opioid agonist therapy in HCV-positive PWIDs [210]. Thus, increased availability and utilization of opioid antagonists may have beneficial impacts on the most vulnerable and at-risk populations. Nonetheless, the potential effects of these agents on synthetic opioid-mediated virus replication have not been evaluated to date in vitro or in at-risk patient populations. Fourthly, given their central role in HIV pathogenesis, as well as liver disease, and the possibility of opioid receptor–chemokine receptor interactions, several groups have sought to antagonize these interactions as a novel therapeutic strategy to limit HIV replication. Yet, this strategy could be extended to include liver disease caused by alcohol, HBV, and/or HCV. A more robust understanding of the complex interactions between opioids, viruses, and the chemokine system could facilitate the optimization of therapeutic options for patients with SUD and lead the to the development of novel therapeutic strategies for multiple diseases that are common in PWIDs. Fifthly, the interactions of drugs of abuse with antiretroviral therapies for HIV or direct-acting agents for HCV are largely known, as reviewed elsewhere (reviewed in [211,212,213]). However, progress towards the development of new antiviral drugs, as well as new drug formulations, and the creation of new, distinct drugs of abuse, such as fentanyl analogs, requires careful study. Moreover, the impact of viral infections on drug–drug interactions and drug metabolism must be considered. Sixthly, the human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) which infects around 10 million people globally can lead to adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma and HTLV-associated myelopathy/tropical spastic paraparesis (reviewed in [214]). Given its routes of transmission, co-infections with HIV, HBV, and HCV are relatively common and would likely impact persons with SUD/OUD (opioid use disorder). However, there are almost no published data on the impact of drugs of abuse on HTLV-1 pathogenesis. Thus, this represents an excellent focus for future research.15. ConclusionsChronic viral infections like HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C have a significant impact on individuals, and the health of societies as a whole. Though suppressive or curative strategies are available for these infectious diseases, their efficacy and impact may be limited by the use or misuse of drugs and/or alcohol through a variety of interconnected mechanisms. These include effects on viral replication, immune-mediated clearance, and medication adherence. The outcomes of these interactions can lead to disease progression (i.e., CD4+ T cell decline, immune activation, and/or increased hepatic fibrosis/cirrhosis) and to increased risk of transmission. While virus–drug interactions have been explored for some drugs of abuse, there are limited data for others. Additional research into the complex interactions between drugs of abuse and viral pathogenesis must simultaneously occur at the level of basic research in vitro, as well as in vivo in large cohort studies that are sufficiently powered to permit the analysis of subsets of individuals experiencing these disease modifiers.


Title: Insights Into the Coinfections of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B Virus, Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C Virus, and Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C Virus: Prevalence, Risk Factors, Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Treatment

IntroductionThe coinfection of viruses can be a serious public health problem because most medicines are designed to control and manage a single infection. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is one of the most important and prevalent disease conditions that has been spread among humans for the last two decades (Kim et al., 2000). More than 75 million people worldwide have been infected with HIV, and approximately 37 million individuals are currently living with this infection. Hepatitis B (HB) and hepatitis C (HC) viral infections are highly prevalent among HIV-infected individuals due to sharing the same transmission routes. Hepatitis caused by both hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) leads to severe liver disorder, and morbidity and mortality are now increasing due to coinfection with HIV (Easterbrook et al., 2012). Coinfection with HIV can modify the natural characteristics of HBV by genome replication status, higher rates of chronic infection, and liver disease progression (Ndifontiayong et al., 2021). The impact of HIV on HBV is critical, as HIV can provoke chronic HBV infection, which can lead to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Maponga et al., 2020). While in HIV-HCV coinfection, HIV increases the HCV viral load and accelerates liver disease progression (Rodrigo, 2020). HIV, HBV, and HCV are transmitted via blood, shared needles, syringes, and other injection equipment, sexually, or even from pregnant mothers to babies (Pfaender et al., 2016). The hepatotropic viruses, both HBV and HCV, attack the liver cell and cause inflammation. However, HIV can attack any targeted cell in the mucosal tissue and spread through the whole lymphoid system (Siebers and Finlay, 1996). As a result of shared transmission routes, HBV, HCV, and HIV can easily cause coinfection, more pervasive than an infection caused by either HBV or HCV.On the other hand, patients dually infected with HCV and HBV carry a significantly higher risk of developing fulminant hepatic failure, liver cirrhosis, and HCC than those with HCV or HBV infection alone (Liu, 2014). A recent study showed that viral infections, such as HBV, HCV, and HIV, are the second most common cause of morbidity and mortality among patients with thalassemia (Bhuyan et al., 2021). Great attention should be paid to the stages of liver disease, virus predominance, and the presence of HIV infection and comorbidities to conduct a better treatment. Several other therapies are being assessed in these circumstances, along with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) (Zhang et al., 2014). However, proper treatment for patients suffering from dual coinfection, either with HIV, HBV, or HCV, is yet to be discovered. The current review is focused on various aspects of HIV, HBV, or HCV coinfection, with a special emphasis on prevalence, risk factors, pathogenesis, diagnostic markers, and treatment.Structure and Replication of Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Virus, and Hepatitis C VirusHuman Immunodeficiency VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus infects humans with two types of lentiviruses of the Retroviridae family. The structure of HIV is roughly spherical with a diameter of about 120 nm and covered by an outer lipid envelope membrane (de Jongh et al., 1992). The viral genome consists of two identical single-stranded RNA molecules enclosed within the core of the virus particle along with three viral enzymes-reverse transcriptases (RT/RNAse), integrase, and protease (Bodsworth et al., 1991). The initial steps of infection are dependent on protein-protein interactions, where the surface protein GP120 of the virus binds to the CD4 receptors on host cells (Xiao et al., 2008). The attachment causes a conformational change by which channels are formed. Due to its high hydrophobicity, the virus particle is engulfed by the target cell’s plasma membrane, and the reverse transcriptase enzyme transcribes the single-strand RNA genome into double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) (Ockenga et al., 1997). The dsDNA is then transported through the nucleopore complex into the nucleus and integrated within the host genome by the integrase enzyme, producing mRNA and translating it into structural and non-structural proteins (Figure 1). These proteins are then assembled to form viral progeny and finally released into the bloodstream (Yim and Lok, 2006; Miailhes et al., 2007).FIGURE 1After HIV GP120 binds with the receptors on the CD4 cell surface, the viral particle fuses with the membrane and enters the cell. The HIV genome ssRNA is reverse transcribed into the dsDNA using reverse transcriptase. The viral DNA is then integrated with the host cell DNA using integrase. The various structural and non-structural proteins are produced from the integrated DNA, and then viral particles are assembled and released from the cell.Hepatitis B VirusHepatitis B virus is a member of the Hepadnavirus family, infecting humans, whereas orthohepadnaviruses and avihepadnaviruses infect mammals and birds, respectively (Schaefer, 2007). The infectious virion is approximately 42 nm in diameter with an internal icosahedral symmetry core particle nucleocapsid. The viral genome is a double-stranded DNA around 3.2 kb in size (Ott et al., 2012). The positive strand is the incomplete inner one, and the negative strand is the completed outer one, and viral polymerase is linked to the 5′ end of the minus strand (Bosch et al., 1988; Hossain et al., 2020). The envelope is also the primary structure embedded with the surface antigens (HBsAg), which are the core components of detecting the presence of HBV infections by commercial immunoassays (Hossain and Ueda, 2017). In the first phase of infection, the virion attaches to host cells via sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) that helps itself get uncoated by fusion (Yan et al., 2012; Li, 2015). Secondly, upon infection, the rcDNA of the virus is converted into plasmid-like covalently-closed circular DNA (cccDNA) inside the host cell nucleus (Figure 2). Finally, the cccDNA templates several genomic and subgenomic RNAs transcribed by cellular RNA polymerase II. The pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) is then selectively packaged into progeny capsids, and most of the pgRNA reversely transcribed into DNA within the capsids. Then the progeny viruses are released from the cells after being enveloped in the ER-Golgi/MVB (Lee et al., 2008; Hossain et al., 2020).FIGURE 2Hepatitis B virus particle binds with the NTCP receptor, fuses with the membrane, and enters the host cell. The rcDNA is converted into cccDNA, transcribed into pgRNA, and finally packaged into the capsid. The capsid is enveloped by the ER-Golgi/MVB and released into the extracellular space.Hepatitis C VirusHepatitis C virus is an enveloped virus that is a member of the genus Hepacivirus under the family Flaviviridae. The genome of the HCV is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), around 9.6 kilobases in size (Kato, 2000). The ssRNA(+) is protected by a protein nucleocapsid and a lipid envelope membrane (Bukh et al., 1994). HCV infection into the host cells occurs by receptor-mediated endocytosis (Blanchard et al., 2006; Karangelis et al., 2010). The HCV particle binds with the hepatocyte surface molecules such as glycosaminoglycans, CD81, scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI), members of the claudin family (CLDN1, 6 and 9), and mannose-binding lectins DC-SIGN and L-SIGN (Barth et al., 2006; Helle and Dubuisson, 2008). Lipoproteins metabolism is also involved in the HCV attachment and replication steps (Grassi et al., 2016). The nucleocapsid is released in the cell cytoplasm from the virus-host cell molecule complex, and then the nucleocapsid is decapsidated to free the ssRNA(+) into the host cytoplasm. Due to its positive-sense properties, the viral RNA acts as mRNA and is directly translated by cap-dependent ribosomal machinery (El-Hage and Luo, 2003). A single polyprotein is translated from the mRNA, later processed to produce several structural and non-structural viral proteins. The six non-structural proteins are NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B, which help in functions related to viral replication and are involved in host cell pathogenesis (Bartenschlager et al., 1994; Reed et al., 1995; Egger et al., 2002). The non-structural proteins help to make ssRNA(+) by using a ssRNA(–) template that is replicated by NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase beforehand from one ssRNA(+) (Gosert et al., 2003). Finally, the assembled viral particle is incorporated with lipid droplets and released by one of the two predicted pathways such as very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) secretory pathway or endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) pathway (Figure 3; Penin et al., 2004; Syed et al., 2010; Dubuisson and Cosset, 2014).FIGURE 3Hepatitis C virus particle binds with the CD81 receptor, fuses with the membrane, and enters the host cell. Upon entering, the ssRNA(+) is translated by ribosomal machinery and produces both structural and non-structural proteins, which assemble and mature in the Golgi body and are then released into extracellular space.Prevalence of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusIt is estimated that approximately 240 million people have chronic HBV infection (Sun et al., 2014). According to WHO, 37.5 million people were estimated to be living with HIV at the end of 2020. Because of shared routes of transmission, HBV coinfection among HIV-positive persons is common. In some regions, over two-thirds of HIV-infected persons have been reported with a history of HBV infection, which means 2–4 million people have HBV-HIV coinfection (Alter, 2006). However, the prevalence varies from region to region among HIV patients with chronic HBV infection (5–10%) due to local endemicity and acquisition mode. In western countries, the prevalence of HIV-HBV coinfection is estimated to be approximately 20% due to being acquired in adulthood, either by drug injection or through sexual transmission (Nyirenda et al., 2008). However, in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, the endemicity is intermediate to high with 10–20% prevalence, acquired primarily in the perinatal period and early childhood (Lee et al., 2008; Nyirenda et al., 2008). In the United States, it is estimated that half of all patients with HIV infection have been exposed to HBV, which is 20 times higher than in the general US population. In the early 2000s, around 8% tested positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) or had detectable HBV DNA levels (Spradling et al., 2010). In a study conducted in Iran, the HIV-HBV prevalence in the general population and health care workers was very low. The highest prevalence was observed among injecting drug users at 1.88% and prisoners (0.13%) (Table 1; Bagheri Amiri et al., 2016).TABLE 1Regional prevalence of HIV-HBV, HIV-HCV, and HBV-HCV coinfection.CoinfectionRegionPrevalence of risk factors among the casesReferencesHIV-HBVGlobally2–4 million people have HBV-HIV coinfection
Alter, 2006
Western countries20% coinfection occurs due to drug injection and sexual intercourse
Nyirenda et al., 2008
Asia and Africa10–20% coinfection occurs during the perinatal period and early childhoodLee et al., 2008; Nyirenda et al., 2008United StatesHalf of the HIV infected patients are coinfected with HBV
Spradling et al., 2010
IranThe prevalence of coinfection is higher in drug users (1.88%) and prisoners (0.13%) than general people
Bagheri Amiri et al., 2016
HIV-HCVGlobally20–30% of 3.5 million HIV patients are infected with HCV
Hernandez and Sherman, 2011
The prevalence of HIV-HCV coinfection among intravenous drug users is estimated to be around 90%
Sherman et al., 2002
HBV-HCVGlobally10–15% of patients with chronic HBV infection are infected with HCVCrespo et al., 1994; Ohkawa et al., 1994; Senturk et al., 20082–10% of anti-HCV-positive patients are HBsAg positiveIndiaThe prevalence of HBV-HCV dual infection is 16%
Chakravarti et al., 2005
EgyptThe prevalence of coinfection is 0.7%
Mekky et al., 2013
United StatesThe prevalence of coinfection is 1.4%
Semnani et al., 2007
Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusGlobally 37.5 million people live with HIV infection, and approximately 20–30% are infected with HCV (Hernandez and Sherman, 2011). As mentioned above, in the same transmission route, the prevalence of HIV-HCV coinfection among intravenous drug users is estimated to be around 90% (Sherman et al., 2002). According to various reports, approximately 21% of adults with HIV tested positive with HCV infection (Yee et al., 2000). Besides percutaneous drug exposure, coinfection can also be seen in hemophiliacs who received contaminated blood without routine serological screening (Di Martino et al., 2001). HCV is estimated to have a 10-fold higher risk of transmission than HIV through percutaneous routes; hence coinfected individuals are usually first infected by HCV (Kingsley et al., 1987). HCV is spread less efficiently by sexual transmission than HIV (Thomas et al., 1995; Gupta, 2013). The number of HIV-infected people chronically infected with HCV worldwide is approximately 2.3 million (Table 1; Garg et al., 2014).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusDue to the lack of large-scale population-based studies, the exact number of HBV-HCV coinfected patients is unknown; however, some regional studies have been done. One study reported that the prevalence of HBV-HCV dual infection is 16% in India (Chakravarti et al., 2005), while another reported the prevalence of coinfection is 0.7% in Egypt (Mekky et al., 2013). Data from different regions concluded that approximately 10–15% of patients with chronic HBV infection are also infected with HCV; on the other hand, about 2–10% of anti-HCV-positive patients are HBsAg positive (Crespo et al., 1994; Ohkawa et al., 1994; Senturk et al., 2008). Tyson et al. estimated that the prevalence of HBV-HCV coinfection was 1.4% in the US (Table 1; Semnani et al., 2007).Risk Factors of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusThe risk factors for coinfection with HBV in HIV-positive individuals may vary in several aspects, including patient age, body mass index, sex, geographical location, current ART regime and duration, key population category, HIV viral load, marital status, and CD4+ T cell count. An epidemiological profile study of HBV-HIV coinfected people conducted in Nepal portrayed some risk factors, including being a spouse of a migrant laborer, a male or female sex worker, an intravenous drug user, or having an HCV-positive status (Bhattarai et al., 2018). Several studies reported that the prevalence of HIV-HBV coinfection among people who inject drugs (PWID) increases with age (Falade-Nwulia and Thio, 2011; Wing, 2017). Due to the chronic and sometimes asymptomatic nature of HIV and HBV infections, the individuals are likely at an even higher risk of chronic progression given the combined effects of age and related immune system dysfunction (Abdala et al., 2008). It is hypothesized that HIV-positive individuals are more likely to be infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) than HIV-negative individuals, possibly due to common risk factors. In addition, immunosuppression induced by HIV infection may cause reactivation or reinfection in those previously exposed to HBV (Thio et al., 2002). Other reports showed that coinfection prevalence was higher among men than women, especially in homosexual men, non-Hispanics than Hispanics, and among patients aged 35–44 than younger or older (Porras-Ramírez and Rico-Mendoza, 2020; Figure 4).FIGURE 4Major risk factors and consequences of HIV, HBV, and HCV coinfection.Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus-driven viral hepatitis exacerbates hepatic lesions and increases the transmission of HCV. Several risk factors associated with the HIV-HCV coinfection are shown in Figure 4. Some populations among HIV-positive patients worldwide have more frequent exposure to HCV infection due to engagement in high-risk behaviors, weak family and social support systems, and inadequate access to healthcare services (Health Policy Project, 2014). Coinfection risk factors also vary on epidemiological subjects such as age, marital status, sex, geographical location, HIV viral load, and CD4+ T cell count. In a Nepalese study, HIV-HCV coinfection was higher in individuals >40 years of age. It is more evident in homosexual men with multiple sexual contacts without a preservative (Götz et al., 2005). In a cohort, the incidence of HCV infection among HIV seropositive MSMs increased 10-fold (van de Laar et al., 2007). Moreover, HIV-positives with CD4+ T cell counts of >200 cells/μL were associated with a lower risk of coinfection with HCV. The study suggested that age and CD4+ T cell count may affect the risk for HIV-HCV coinfection (Bhattarai et al., 2018). Furthermore, the blood-borne transmission of the coinfection is 62–80% common among injection-drug users (Yehia et al., 2014). Several studies suggest that HIV and hepatitis transmission are associated with high-risk injection practices such as injection with a syringe previously used by another PWID (Ray Saraswati et al., 2015; Buchanan et al., 2017; Kilonzo et al., 2018). Individuals living with HIV-HCV coinfection are less likely to clear acute HCV infection and more likely to transmit the virus, particularly PWID who share used needles (Shapatava et al., 2006). In the case of mother-to-child, the risk of transmission to the fetus in coinfected women for HIV is between 5 and 25% times higher than in mothers infected by only HCV (Zanetti et al., 1999). Coinfected patients have higher HCV RNA loads and experience more rapid progression of HCV-related liver disease than those without HIV infection (Thomas et al., 2000). HIV infection was found in 13% of hemophiliacs coinfected with HIV and HCV, while HCV infection was detected in just 3% of 162 female sexual partners (Eyster et al., 1991). Other transmission routes, such as sexual intercourse or vertical transmission, have less risk of transmission than percutaneous exposures. The reported prevalence of sexual transmission of HCV-positive individuals is 2–8% and in newborn babies is 2–5%, but three times higher if the mother is HIV positive (Operskalski and Kovacs, 2011).Pathogenesis of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusThe impact of HIV infection on HBV-induced hepatitis progression is significantly different from HBV infection on HIV disease progression. Around 10–15% developed chronic hepatitis B, which is less likely to be eliminated. HIV-HBV coinfection causes several symptoms, some of which can be fatal. Mutations in the HBsAg coding sequence coinfected with HIV can accumulate HBsAg in hepatocytes and damage the host’s endoplasmic reticulum and DNA damage (Pollicino et al., 2014). With HIV-HBV coinfection, immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) is developed more profoundly (Shahani and Hamill, 2016). Acute HBV infection in 90–95% of adults can develop a broad and multispecific cellular immune response that can eliminate the virus by producing protective antibodies against HBsAg (Mahoney, 1999).Moreover, chronic HBV-infected patients can develop anti-HBe associated with aging and aminotransferase (ALT) elevation (Liaw et al., 1988; Fattovich et al., 1991). In a 10-year study of 1536 Alaskan natives with chronic hepatitis B, 70 and 7% cleared HBeAg and HBsAg, respectively (McMahon et al., 2001). However, they might remain inactive carriers with HBsAg particles with either low or undetectable levels of HBV DNA (Fattovich et al., 1986; de Jongh et al., 1992). These inert carriers can significantly reduce the mortality rate twofold, although increased ALT can lead to fibrosis progression (Fattovich et al., 1990). However, when coinfection occurs with HIV, the mortality rate increases significantly in HBV patients elevating chronic liver diseases. Among 1000 people a year, 14.2% of them suffer from several chronic liver diseases when coinfected compared with 0.8% of people with HBV infection only (Thio et al., 2002). One study suggested that HIV-infected people had a greater clearance rate of HBsAg and HBeAg due to the degree of immunosuppression (Bodsworth et al., 1991). However, other studies showed that HIV infection reactivates HBV and accelerates the loss of anti-HBs, increases levels of HBV DNA, and significantly lowers the ALT levels (Biggar et al., 1987; Gilson et al., 1997). Although lower ALT levels indicate less hepatocyte destruction, anti-HBV therapy’s effectiveness decreases in coinfected individuals. HIV coinfection has also been reported to create fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis, which leads to liver graft rejection in liver transplant recipients. An extremely high level of HBV antigen expression is observed in this specific liver disease due to a direct cytopathic effect (Davies et al., 1991; Xiao et al., 2008).Although most studies show significant evidence of HBV infection acceleration due to HIV, the impact of HBV infection in HIV patients is still quite limited. A study found that among 80 gay men, 32 anti-HBc positive men progressed to get acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) more rapidly (Eskild et al., 1992). Another study showed that HIV-HBV coinfected patients with AIDS had decreased survival than AIDS patients (Ockenga et al., 1997). The outcome of HBV infection varies according to the age and the current immune status of the host. For example, HBV infection persists in 50–90% of persons infected at birth or early childhood.In contrast, fewer than 5% of HBV infections become chronic among HIV-uninfected adults (Yim and Lok, 2006). A multicenter-AIDS-cohort study suggested that coinfected patients had a mortality rate eight times higher than those singly infected. Moreover, the mortality related to hepatopathy due to hepatitis B has increased significantly since the highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), a treatment for HIV patients (Miailhes et al., 2007). Previous studies show that coinfection causes liver-related mortality 19 times that of a single infection (Thio et al., 2002). The mortality rate increased in individuals with lower CD4+ T-cell counts for the infection (Jaroszewicz et al., 2012; Figure 4).Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus -Hepatitis C virus coinfected patients have higher HCV RNA loads and experience more rapid progression of HCV-related liver diseases than those without HIV infection (Hoofnagle and Di Bisceglie, 1991). Several studies suggested plenty of symptoms of the coinfection (Figure 4); however, these can vary over different factors, such as consumption of alcohol, age at acquisition of infection, race, sexual status, concomitant viral infection with HIV, time of illness, body mass index, and various genetic factors. HIV-HCV coinfected patients suffer from higher liver-related morbidity and mortality, non-hepatic organ dysfunction, and overall mortality than HCV single infected patients (Lo Re<suffix>III</suffix>, Kallan et al., 2014). Moreover, coinfection causes an increased rate of severe liver fibrosis and cirrhosis (Fierer et al., 2013; Kirk et al., 2013). A meta-analysis of eight separate studies found that HIV-HCV coinfected patients had approximately two times higher risk of cirrhosis diagnosed on liver biopsy and around six times higher risk of decompensated liver disease than HCV-infected patients (Thein et al., 2008; Tuyama et al., 2010). Coinfection can cause immune dysfunction, cytokine production, and cell apoptosis, leading to severe immunodeficiency (Körner et al., 2009; Kovacs et al., 2010). It causes HIV-related mitochondrial translocation-induced immune activation and causes severe liver damage (Kim and Chung, 2009; Rotman and Liang, 2009). HIV- and HCV-associated chronic inflammation leads to endothelial dysfunction (Bedimo et al., 2010). Moreover, coinfection also causes thrombocytopenia and osteoporosis (Marks et al., 2009). It is estimated that 90% of HIV patients with acute HCV will gradually develop chronic HBV, which shows a higher prevalence in coinfected patients than singly-infected (Collin et al., 2009). Other reports suggest that coinfection also increases the rate of related diseases such as cryoglobulinemia, hemophilia, diabetes mellitus, and kidney-related infections (Sulkowski, 2001). It is confirmed that HIV infection substantially impacts mortality among HCV-infected individuals, mainly due to HIV-induced immunodeficiency (Singal and Anand, 2009).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHepatitis B virus-Hepatitis C virus coinfection is more frequently found in several high-risk populations, for example, persons who inject drugs, patients on hemodialysis and undergoing organ transplantation, HIV-positive, and β-thalassemia (Pallás et al., 1999; Aroldi et al., 2005; Reddy et al., 2005). Tyson et al. stated that the independent associations with HBV coinfection compared with HCV single infection were age ≤50 years, male sex, positive HIV status, history of hemophilia, sickle cell anemia, or thalassemia, history of blood transfusion, cocaine, and other drug uses. At the same time, there was decreased risk in patients of Hispanic ethnicity (Tyson et al., 2013). With hidden hepatitis B, liver cirrhosis occurs in 33% of HCV coinfected patients and 19% of HCV carriers with undetectable HBV DNA (Fan et al., 2003). Superinfections cause the development of chronic hepatitis, for which the mortality rate is as high as 10% (Sterling and Sulkowski, 2004). Moreover, coinfection increases the rate of liver cirrhosis, chronic and fulminant hepatitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (Figure 4).Diagnosis of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusAll patients infected with HIV must be tested for HBV and HCV and vice versa, as the transmission route is the same. The HIV-negative patients, only infected with any of the hepatitis viruses, are required to test for alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), hemoglobin, white blood cell count, platelets, HBeAg, HBe antibody (anti-HBe), HBsAg antibody (anti-HBs), CD4 count, and HBV DNA quantification in the serum (Audsley et al., 2020). HBV DNA levels are a significant marker to detect coinfection (Lok and McMahon, 2009). Spontaneous sero-reversion can occur due to having a low CD4 count (<200/mm3) and is also a prime marker for HIV-HBV coinfection. Therefore, HBV serological tests should be repeated among HIV-infected patients with prior positivity for HBsAb for the reemergence of HBV infection (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2012). Anti-HBc can also be found in HIV-positive patients due to having past HBV infection (Gandhi et al., 2005). The occurrence of a past infection is often termed “Occult HBV infection,” which results in the presence of HBV DNA in the absence of HBsAg and has been reported in 2 to 10% of HIV-infected patients (Shire et al., 2007; Tsui et al., 2007). For HCC screening, coinfected patients with HBV-HIV should undergo serial liver ultrasound examinations and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) serology every 6 months (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2012). Severe conditions with HIV-HBV coinfection may require a liver biopsy. However, non-invasive measures, such as serum fibrosis markers and transient elastography, can help determine the degree of underlying fibrosis instead of biopsy (Moreno et al., 2009; Smith and Sterling, 2009). The markers suggest different parameters for detecting HIV-HBV coinfection depending on HBV infection types (Table 2).TABLE 2Serological markers of HIV-HBV, HIV-HCV, and HBV-HCV coinfection.HIV-HBV coinfection markersHIV-HCV coinfection markersHBV-HCV coinfection markersGenomic level↑ HBV DNA↑ HCV RNA↑ HBV DNAT-cell count↓ CD4 count (<200/mm3)↓ CD4 and CD8 ratio-Antigen/Antibody↑ HBsAb ↑ Anti-HBc↑Anti-HCVDelayed HBsAg ↓ HBs antigenemiaRelated infectionOccult infection: ↑HBV DNA ↓HBsAg-HCV superinfection and chronic HBV infection: ↑ HBeAg ↓ HBsAgEnzyme markers↑ alpha-fetoprotein↑ AST:APRI ↑ APRI score (>1.5) ↓ AST p-value (<0.0001)↑ biphasic alanine aminotransferaseHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusReverse transcriptase-nested polymerase chain reaction assays (RT-PCR) must be conducted for the screening of the persistent HCV 5′ untranslated region (5′ UTR) for the diagnosis of HCV RNA in HIV patients (Panigrahi et al., 1994). Liver fibrosis progression is more rapid in the context of HIV-HCV coinfection and is associated with lower CD4 cell counts (Martin et al., 1989; Puoti et al., 2001; Martinez-Sierra et al., 2003). Non-invasive measures of liver fibrosis can be a reliable diagnosis for HIV-HCV coinfection. The alanine aspartyl transferase (AST)-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) has been validated as a good predictor of significant liver fibrosis in both HCV single and coinfection when compared with liver biopsy (Wai et al., 2003; Lackner et al., 2005). One study suggested that, in coinfection, APRI score > 1.5 was 100% specific and 52% sensitive for predicting significant fibrosis (Al-Mohri et al., 2005). Forrester et al. reported that AST and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were significantly higher (P < 0.0001), and platelet counts were lower (P < 0.01) in HIV-HCV coinfected individuals than in patients infected with only HIV (Forrester et al., 2012). Other markers such as alpha-2-macroglobulin, apolipoprotein A1, haptoglobin, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and bilirubin are also screened primarily focuses on HCV patients (Table 2; Imbert-Bismut et al., 2001; Morali et al., 2007).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusLaboratory evaluation for coinfection with all possible viral causes, including HBV and HCV, is performed in patients presenting with acute hepatitis resulting from any of the two viruses. In case of superinfection of HCV or HBV, silent or occult HBV, all the necessary parameters and confirmatory tests such as HBV DNA testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) should also be performed when clinically indicated. In acute infection with HBV and HCV, patients showed delayed HBsAg appearance and a shorter HBs antigenemia than those with acute HBV alone (Mimms et al., 1993). According to an Italian investigation that showed active HBV-HCV indicators in 30 patients with HCV infection, the chronicity rates were equivalent to individuals with a single infection with either of the viruses. Biphasic alanine aminotransferase elevation was also observed in the case of HBV-HCV coinfection (Yan and Lee, 2005). Several reports have documented that de novo HCV superinfection in the setting of chronic HBV infection can result in HBeAg seroconversion and clearance of HBsAg.Moreover, fulminant hepatic failure was significantly higher among patients with underlying HBV infection than those singly infected (23 vs. 3%) (Wu et al., 1994). Hence, every marker should be adequately detected with a specific protocol. On the other hand, occult hepatitis B (OHB) is defined as the presence of HBV DNA in serum and the liver tissue without detectable HBsAg with or without anti-HBc or anti-HBs outside the pre-seroconversion window period (Table 2; Bréchot et al., 2001).Prospective TreatmentsHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B Virus CoinfectionThe most common treatment for HIV-HBV coinfection is HBV-active ART, usually tenofovir together with either lamivudine or emtricitabine. This treatment significantly decreases the rate of HBeAg and HBsAg antigens in infected individuals (Boyd et al., 2016). Drugs such as interferon alfa, peginterferon alfa, adefovir, lamivudine, entecavir, tenofovir, emtricitabine are used to prevent the coinfection (Table 3). As HIV infection can accelerate the progression of HBV-related liver disease, treatment of chronic hepatitis B is generally recommended for most HIV-infected patients with active HBV infection.TABLE 3Potential medications and their activity against HIV-HBV coinfected individuals.DrugDirect activity against HIV and HBVFor chronic HBV in HIV-infected patientsReferencesInterferon AlfaNoNo
Johnson et al., 2007
Peginterferon AlfaYesNo
Di Martino et al., 2002
LamivudineYesNoBenhamou et al., 1999; Dore et al., 1999EmtricitabineYesNoLim et al., 2006; Saag, 2006AdefovirNoNoHadziyannis et al., 2003; Thio, 2006TenofovirYesYes
Lada et al., 2004
EntecavirYesYesTenney et al., 2004; Pessôa et al., 2008Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C Virus CoinfectionGenerally, HIV-HCV coinfection treatment focuses on eliminating a single infection first by decreasing the viral load alongside treating the secondary issues. A guideline is followed to treat HCV, but there is still a lack of information about HIV and HCV disease stage and viral load, HCV genotype, degree of hepatic fibrosis, and patient’s readiness to tolerate and adhere to treatment (Soriano et al., 2007). The treatments are more likely to target the current standard pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (pegIFN + RBV) medication, predictors of the treatment response, adverse events of anti-HCV therapy, and HAART as both HIV-HCV therapeutic agents (Table 4). The most effective treatment to date for HCV infection is direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy. First-generation DAAs include the NS3/4A serine protease inhibitor telaprevir and the NS5B RNA polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir (Messina et al., 2015). Clinical trials demonstrated that using these DAAs in combination with peginterferon and ribavirin gave sustained virologic response (SVR) to HCV genotype 1 infection, up to 75% for telaprevir and 90% for sofosbuvir (Walker et al., 2015). The second-generation DAA regimens paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir, dasabuvir (3D), and sofosbuvir/ledipasvir were approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with HCV genotype 1, as these all-oral regimens showed improved efficacy, safety, and tolerability when compared to first-generation protease inhibitor regimens (Pawlotsky, 2014). However, many long-term studies have shown that patients with compensated cirrhosis who achieved SVR with interferon (IFN)-based therapy showed efficacy at first, but various side-effects and limited virological effectiveness was seen with long-term treatment. However, with DAAs, patients with compensated cirrhosis achieve SVR rates over 95% (Afdhal et al., 2014; Poordad et al., 2014; Krassenburg et al., 2021). Moreover, high rates of cure have also been observed in groups including patients with cirrhosis and HIV coinfection (Hawkins et al., 2016). Many open-labeled studies demonstrated that DAAs such as ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 12 weeks provided high rates of SVR in the patients coinfected with HIV-1 and HCV genotype 1 or 4 (Naggie et al., 2015). Another study suggested that treatment with the all-oral, interferon-free 3D-plus-ribavirin regimen resulted in high SVR rates among patients co-infected with HCV genotype one and HIV-1 (Sulkowski et al., 2015).TABLE 4Effects and side-effects of potential medications for HIV-HCV coinfected individuals.DrugsTherapeutic effectsSide effectsReferencesHAARTDecreases HIV replication in liver Decreases proinflammatory cytokines and necro-inflammatory activityIncreases Liver enzymes (LEE) and hepatotoxicityPascual-Pareja et al., 2009; Price et al., 2009Protease inhibitorsDecreases HCV replication
Toma et al., 2009
EfavirenzDecreases hepatotoxicity
Labarga et al., 2007
NNRTI + pegIFN + RBVDecreases synergistic HCV replication in vitroIncreases Mitochondrial toxicityLabarga et al., 2007; Toma et al., 2009Simeprevir (SMV) + PRDecreases hepatotoxicity
Jacobson et al., 2014
DAAs (Telaprevir/Sofosbuvir/Paritaprevir/Ritonavir/Ombitasvir)Increase sustained virologic response upto 90%Naggie et al., 2015; Wyles et al., 2015Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C Virus CoinfectionHepatitis B virus-Hepatitis C virus coinfection is more complex than a single infection with HBV or HCV alone. Hence, the general approach for treatment is first to identify the dominant virus, treat that virus as a single infection, and then monitor for reactivation of the other virus. Coinfection is typically treated with a nucleotide analog (such as lamivudine, entecavir, or tenofovir) along with PegIFN (Sulaiman, 1989). It is 35% effective in HBV and 50–60% effective in HCV when combined with ribavirin (Crockett and Keeffe, 2005). Moreover, direct-acting antiviral (DAA) is also used, which gives 90% efficacy for inhibiting HCV but no response for HBV (Calvaruso et al., 2018). It is recommended to vaccinate HBV patients because studies showed 60% efficacy to vaccinated cirrhotic patients (Roni et al., 2013). Liu et al. (2014) assessed that peg-IFN/RBV therapy is not only safe and effective but translates into significant clinical benefits such as reduction in liver-related complications and improved patient survival. However, in terms of viral dominance, it is not common to have codominance of both viruses. Hence, there is either HBV dominance, which means high HBV DNA levels and low HCV RNA levels, or HCV dominance, defined by the high HCV RNA levels and absent HBV DNA (Konstantinou and Deutsch, 2015). HBV dominance is likely to be more common in Asian patients, while HCV dominance is seen among North American coinfected and European patients (Nguyen et al., 2011). Therefore, it is suggested to diagnose the disease properly and determine the dominant side before treating a coinfected patient. An Italian study reported that 9 million IU of standard IFN 3 times weekly for 3 months could clear HCV in 31% of HCV-HBV coinfections (Villa et al., 2001). As previously mentioned, peg-IFN is one of the first-line choices for treating chronic HBV infection, and does not cause any side effects toward coinfected patients (Bihl et al., 2010). However, till present, no data have been published regarding the efficacy of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) in combination with peg-IFN plus RBV or with IFN-free regimens in treating patients with chronic HBV-HCV coinfection.Conclusion and Future DirectionsCoinfection with HBV or HCV is common among HIV-infected individuals due to their similar modes of transmission. Any coinfection can reportedly lead to an increased risk of morbidity and mortality. Overall, the prevalence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C, with HIV coinfection, is 50.3%. Among these, HIV-HBV is 8.4%, HIV-HCV is 35.4%, and HBV-HCV is 5%. The characteristics of HIV-infected individuals can differ according to the coinfecting hepatitis viruses that can change their strains over time. Therefore, frequent screening and monitoring should be performed in both coinfected and singly infected patients due to the possibility of developing another secondary infection if measurable steps are not taken. In addition, one must get tested if their partner is positive for any infection or assume any symptoms.Treatments for coinfected patients are complex due to the interaction of the two viruses and the potential for reactivation of one virus with antiviral therapy directed against only the other virus. Therefore, coinfected patients must undertake single infection treatment concurrently with dual antiviral therapy. Until today, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has been a breakthrough for treating patients with HIV, as the infection currently does not have any effective vaccination. HCV prevention is also based on direct-acting antiviral (DAA) treatments for short-term and curative measures.Vaccination is given to prevent HBV with three consecutive doses for the long term. Early remedies for acute infection are also highly encouraged. However, several preventive strategies must be followed to prevent and control these blood and fluid-borne viral diseases. It is highly advisable to avoid percutaneous exposure incidents, such as needle injuries, sharp injuries, and splashes leading to exposure of the skin or mucosa to blood. Drug abuse and sharing the same needle or syringe are also high-risk behaviors toward these diseases. Safe sex and special care for pregnant women are recommended to prevent disease occurrence. Besides conventional therapy and treatments, CRISPR-Cas9-based antiviral strategies can also be implied to avoid hepatitis coinfection due to its relative versatility, specificity, and ease of use. Vaccines against HCV and HIV should be further studied and implemented at the earliest convenience. Polyvalent vaccines for these viral coinfections can also be an escalating preventive measure for the prospective times. Although current diagnostic technologies can detect viruses, they still rely on practical labor, expensive and limited resources. However, if nanotechnology (metal/inorganic nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes) combined with microfabrication can be used in diagnostic and therapeutic settings, the healthcare systems will undergo a revolutionary shift. These technologies with miniatured sensors can be used to easily detect viruses from an ultra-low volume of blood, serum, and plasma, allowing highly accurate diagnosis. However, further extensive studies should be conducted to diagnose and treat the coinfection of these blood-borne viral diseases.Author ContributionsMGH designed and supervised the manuscript. SaS, YA, RA, PK, GS, TR, RS, and ShS searched and collected the literature. SaS and YA wrote the preliminary draft manuscript. YA and TR designed the graphs. MSI and MGH reviewed the preliminary draft manuscript. CZ and MGH edited, revised, and finalized the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s NoteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.


Title: HDV Pathogenesis: Unravelling Ariadne’s Thread

1. IntroductionHepatitis Delta virus (HDV) is a defective virus and an obligate satellite of hepatitis B virus (HBV), necessitating its helper virus envelope proteins (HBsAg) to form its viral particles. Humans are the only natural reservoir of HDV, but other mammalian hosts have been identified capable of supporting the HDV life cycle, including chimpanzees and tree shrews (with the HBV as a helper virus), as well as woodchucks (with the woodchuck hepatitis virus as helper virus) (reviewed in [1]). While its genome replication and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) formation are independent of HBV, HDV egress requires HBV envelope proteins [2,3].Despite forty years of epidemiological studies, the global number of HDV patients still remains elusive. The widespread implementation of HBV vaccination in high-income countries has limited the number of HBsAg susceptible persons, and subsequently, the number of HDV patients. In these countries, the epidemiology of HDV is dual, with an ageing cohort of local patients with advanced liver fibrosis and a younger generation from endemic countries that represents the incoming new infections [4]. Based on the literature published during the decade of 1980–1990, a recent meta-analysis estimated that the global number of HDV patients should reach 12 million in 2020 [5]. However, selection biases, technical limitations, inadequate screenings for anti-HDV in HBsAg-positive patients that represent the sole reliable source of HDV infection [6], and lack of HDV RNA testing to confirm ongoing viral replication can flaw the appraisal of the prevalence and health burden of HDV (reviewed in [4]). Contrary to HBV, HDV transmission from mother to offspring, and among homosexuals, has been rarely reported [6]. Therefore, epidemiological data of HDV prevalence and disease progression are not available in these groups and especially in babies, where the infection of HBV at birth will lead to chronic hepatitis B development. Of note, in Europe, up to 40% of anti-HDV-positive persons do not harbour detectable HDV replication [7].The available antiviral therapies against chronic hepatitis D (CHD) lies on the administration of the pegylated (PEG) form of IFN-α with, however, low response rate and high frequency of adverse effects (reviewed in [1]). The administration of an entry inhibitor (Bulevirtide) has recently been the object of a conditional authorization by the European Medicines Agency (but not by other regulatory authorities) for chronically HDV infected patients with compensated liver disease [8]. The future role of combination therapies is still elusive and requires further investigation, as the therapeutic management of HDV remains unsatisfactory [4].HDV pathogenesis can vary from asymptomatic cases to acute liver failure and CHD, which is associated with a faster progression towards cirrhosis, liver decompensation, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) compared to HBV monoinfection. CHD is considered as the most aggressive form of chronic viral hepatitis posing major clinical challenges, especially in high endemic countries [9]. In the following chapter, we will describe the three different modalities of HDV infection and their respective pathogenesis.2. The Three Moirai of HDV Infection and Their Clinical Outcome: From HDV-HBV Co- or Super-Infection to HDV Mono-InfectionGiven its obligatory dependence on HBV to sustain its life cycle, HDV infection occurs via two modalities, i.e., as a simultaneous infection or co-infection with both HBV and HDV, or as an HDV super-infection of a chronic HBV carrier (Figure 1). The third modality of HDV infection refers to HDV monoinfection of the hepatocytes in the absence of HBV infection, which is non-productive but can be rescued by the helper virus at a later stage. All the pathologic changes of HDV infection are limited to the liver, as the virus requires the expression of the sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) entry receptor, which is located at the basolateral membrane of differentiated hepatocytes [10].2.1. HDV-HBV Co-InfectionCo-infection of HDV and HBV leads to acute hepatitis, whose symptoms are indistinguishable from a typical acute hepatitis B and can range from mild to severe and even acute liver failure, which is characterized by a massive hepatocyte necrosis. A study from Yurdaydin and colleagues demonstrated that 17% of the HBV-HDV co-infected patients developed severe hepatitis [11]. A minority of co-infected patients may progress even to acute liver failure [11,12]. Without liver transplantation, the mortality of these patients may reach 80% [13]. However, when patients with acute liver failure associated with HBV monoinfection are age-matched to patients with HBV/HDV co-infection, the difference in mortality cannot be observed anymore [14].Acute hepatitis occurs after an incubation period of 3–7 weeks with a preicteric and icteric phase that is not always observed [15]. During the preicteric phase, several nonspecific symptoms including fatigue, lethargy, anorexia or nausea, and biochemical markers, such as elevated serum ALT and AST levels are observed. Acute HDV-HBV co-infection can present either with a single peak, or with two distinct peaks, of liver enzyme elevations, mostly separated by 2–5 weeks [16] (Figure 2). This re-increase of serum ALT and AST levels, also called biphasic hepatitis, emerges after a first period of improvement and is thought to be caused by sequential spreading of HBV followed by HDV [17]. Typically, HBV-related peak is associated with markers of primary HBV infection, e.g., HBsAg, HBV DNA and anti-HBc IgM, and precedes HDV-related peak, where increasing titers of anti-HDV IgM and IgG are detected. An inverse pattern has been reported, especially in animal models [18], and attributed to the relative titers of HBV and HDV infection.The majority of the co-infected and immunocompetent patients (90–95%) will resolve both viral infections. HDV RNA, an early and sensitive marker of HDV replication in acute HDV infection [19], and the presence of anti-HDV IgM and IgG will disappear during early convalescence [6]. HDV diagnosis relies almost exclusively in the detection of total levels of anti-HDV antibodies, and is subsequently confirmed by the detection of HDV RNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) [20]. Serum HDV antigen (HDAg) appears early upon HDV-HBV co-infection, but it disappears quickly, therefore requiring repeated testing [21]. Serum HDAg is not a suitable tool for HDV diagnosis, as it cannot be directly detected by enzyme immunoassay or radioimmunoassay, due to antigen sequestration in immune complexes with high tittered circulating antibodies [22], and requires the application of immunoblot assay under denaturating conditions, a technique which is difficult to apply for routine detection [22]. The appearance of anti-HBs antibodies will indicate HBV viral clearance (Figure 2).A small proportion of HDV-HBV co-infected patients (less than 5%) will progress to chronic infection [16] with the risk of developing liver cirrhosis and HCC (Figure 1). Explicit information about CHD and its clinical outcomes are detailed in the following section.2.2. HDV-HBV Super-InfectionAlternatively, HDV can super-infect a chronic HBV carrier and progress to an acute or a chronic HDV infection [23] with various clinical outcomes, including patients with unspecific symptoms [15]. The pre-existing HBV infection provides the ultimate virologic background for a rapid HDV spread that will exacerbate the pre-existing liver disease [24]. Acute hepatitis D due to super-infection can be mistakenly considered either as a hepatitis B reactivation or an acute HBV hepatitis in a previously non-diagnosed HBsAg carrier [11,25]. In HDV super-infected patients, the risk of severe hepatitis is higher than in HBV mono-infected patients [12], with frequent evolution towards an acute liver failure requiring liver transplantation. The original multicentre report from 7 European centres included 532 patients with acute benign hepatitis B from Italy, 111 patients with acute liver failure from Italy, France and England, and 18 patients with acute hepatitis D that lacked anti-HBc IgM [12]. The investigators suggested that, in these patients, the associated liver failure was most likely associated with an HDV super-infection event [12]. In an Italian series, 70% of patients with CHD recalled an episode of acute hepatitis in their history [26].In the course of HDV super-infection, HBsAg positivity precedes the detection of HDV RNA, due to the already pre-established HBV chronic infection characterized by the absence of anti-HBc IgM antibodies (Figure 3). Upon the appearance of HDV RNA, HBsAg levels will fluctuate in patients’ serum. During the acute phase of HDV super-infection, HBV DNA level decreases to rebound after HDV clearance, although this is not always systematic [27] (Figure 3A). The resolution of HDV infection coincides with the decline of anti-HDV IgM and IgG immunoglobulins, and the normalization of ALT levels (Figure 3A).While a low rate (less than 5–10%) of HBsAg super-infected carriers may undergo a self-limited hepatitis leading to HBV clearance [28,29] (Figure 1), the vast majority of HDV super-infected patients (more than 90%) will progress to chronic infection with both HBV and HDV viruses [11,13,16]. Active replication of HBV and/or HDV remains a threatening factor towards liver decompensation during chronic HDV infection [30]. The evolution towards chronic infection is associated with the persistence of HDV RNA and IgM and IgG anti-HDV (Figure 3B) [15]. ALT and AST levels are persistently elevated in most of the patients [15]. IgM antibodies are also detectable in primary infection and persist with progression to chronicity, although they may be absent in some patients from Africa [31].CHD is considered the most severe form of chronic viral hepatitis, burdened with major clinical outcomes [32]. Like all immune-mediated disorders, a wide variability in the severity has been reported. A particularly aggressive course was observed among intravenous drug users since early studies [26]. The rapid spread from one to the next susceptible patient may have favoured the selection of more virulent strains, similarly to what was suggested by a chimpanzee study, where the severity of serially passaged HDV was associated with shortened incubation time and increased severity of acute hepatitis, irrespective of HDV replication levels [33]. Histological analysis demonstrates a severe hepatitis with advanced fibrosis in super-infected HDV patients [26,34,35], that undergo accelerated progression to cirrhosis [26,36,37,38], an increased risk of hepatic decompensation, and HCC leading to death [9,13,39], when compared to HBV monoinfected patients. Progression towards cirrhosis can be rapid [26,38] but also indolent [23]. In an early study of 75 patients with chronic hepatitis (HBsAg carriers with intrahepatic delta antigen) at enrolment, 39% developed cirrhosis or liver failure after a follow up (FU) of up to 6 years [26]. The same cohort was later followed for an average of 12 years [40], and the proportion of cirrhosis increased with the duration of follow-up, i.e., 23%, 41%, and 77% in the first, second, and third decade of disease, respectively. The progression to cirrhosis after an average 20-year follow-up was somehow less (42%) in another more recent, retrospective, large series from Italy [39]. Overall, the risk of developing cirrhosis in patients co-infected with HBV and HDV seems two-fold higher compared to patients infected with HBV alone [41]. In a small series from Turin [30], 85 chronic HBsAg and anti-HDV carriers were followed for an average time of 10 years. Unfavourable clinical outcomes (HCC, ascites, or liver failure) occurred in 77% of the patients with detectable levels of both HDV RNA and HBV DNA in their serum, whereas 21% of patients with HDV RNA and undetectable HBV RNA were diagnosed with ascites [30]. These results were echoed by a larger study from Taiwan, where the simultaneous presence of serum HBV DNA and HDV RNA was associated with a lower remission rate vs. those negative for both viruses (21.7% vs. 69.2%; p < 0.001), whereas the difference was only numerically lower than that observed among patients positive only for HBV DNA (26.4%) or HDV RNA (24.3%). However, the cumulative survival rate at 15 years was 57.6% among patients with HBV DNA vs. 78.3% among HBV negative patients [42].The impact of HDV infection on the rate of HCC development in HBV-positive patients has been a subject of controversy, as despite the high rate of progression to cirrhosis, not all the studies demonstrate an increased rate of HCC [30]. Some studies suggest that the major complication of CHD is decompensated cirrhosis, rather than HCC [43,44], implying that liver failure and liver-related death precede HCC development. In a landmark retrospective European study enrolling 200 patients with compensated cirrhosis [9], the presence of anti-HDV antibodies induced a 3-fold increase of HCC and a two-fold increase of mortality compared to HBV monoinfection. Several adjustments and stratification, according to the presence of anti-HDV and HBeAg, highlighted that the patients who were anti-HDV positive/HBeAg negative had an estimated 5-year risk of HCC of 13%, compared to 4 and 2% among anti-HDV negative/HBeAg negative and anti-HDV negative/HBeAg positive patients, respectively. No difference in terms of mortality was reported. In a large study from the Swiss HIV Cohort, where HBV replication was presumably suppressed by antiretrovirals, HDV infection was independently associated with mortality and liver-related events, including HCC [7]. HDV replication is a major determinant of HCC development relatively to HBV [45,46]. A recent systematic review of the literature and meta-analysis of the available data from our group highlighted an association of CHD with an increased risk of developing HCC, compared to HBV monoinfection [47]. This analysis of 93 studies, despite an important study heterogeneity, showed a significantly increased risk of HCC in patients with CHD, with pooled OR of 1.28; 95% CI 1.05–1.57; I2 = 67.0%. The association was stronger considering only prospective cohort studies (pooled OR 2.77; 95% CI 1.79–4.28), those with HIV-infected patients (pooled OR 7.13; 95% CI 2.83–17.92) where heterogeneity was less, and in general, in studies with well-defined inclusion criteria and adjustments for confounders, hinting at the importance of a robust study design. This was also evident considering that the strength of the association decreased, or became insignificant, in studies with high risk of bias, or in studies carried out before 2010. Regarding the geographical origin of patients, interestingly, the association was confirmed in Asian studies, but not in studies originating elsewhere. Lack of data prevented the analysis of the respective contribution of HBV and HDV genotypes.2.3. HDV Replication in the Absence of HBVThe third modality of HDV infection refers to the monoinfection of susceptible hepatocytes by HDV in the absence of a helper Hepadnavirus, and has been the apple of discord over the years for its potential impact on liver transplantation. In this case, a “helper independent HDV infection” or “latent” HDV infection has been suggested as markers of HDV replication have been identified in the liver and serum of the patients in the absence of HBV markers [48]. In an early series of patients undergoing liver transplantation and receiving robust anti-HBV immunoprophylaxis [48], HDV infection of the grafted liver recurred early without signs of liver damage or HBV reactivation. As soon as HBV recurred, hepatitis flared associated with serological markers of both HDV and HBV. A similar finding was reported in at least one patient transplanted in a series from Paris [49]. In an attempt to reproduce this model in susceptible animals, woodchucks never exposed to the WHV were infected with serum from an acutely infected animal, where the HDV titer was about 1700-fold higher that of WHV. This led to the expression of HDAg in scattered (~1%) hepatocytes in the absence of a productive infection, implying a very infrequent, if not absent, co-infection of hepatocytes by HDV and WHV [50]. A second challenge, this time with WHV, resulted in a productive HDV infection up to 33 days after HDV monoinfection. The persistence of HDV in the absence of HBV was also tested in the chimpanzee [51], but here, among the two animals first inoculated with HDV alone, only the one exposed to HBV one week later developed a dual HDV/HBV infection, whereas HDV infection could not be rescued when the HBV was inoculated 4 weeks later. The same authors analysed, in detail, the dynamic of HDV infection early after liver transplantation in humans, showing that, using sensitive PCR-based assays for HDV and HBV, both viruses were invariably detected in serum, albeit with very low levels of HBV replication, following the early post-liver transplantation incubation period, suggesting that some degree of co-infection was occurring despite the absence of detectable HBsAg in serum due to the effective immunoprophylaxis. The above re-evaluation of viral titers ruled out the possibility of an isolated HDV infection [51]. Thus, these findings showed that HDV does not seem to undergo a bona fide latent infection early after liver transplantation. However, in a subsequent retrospective analysis of patients transplanted at Hannover [52], HDAg was detectable in transplanted livers of 6/26 patients in the complete absence of liver HBV DNA, cccDNA, serum HBsAg, and HDV RNA for up to 19 months from transplant. The intrahepatic HDV replication in the complete absence of HBV was also elegantly proven in a humanized mice model infected with cell culture-derived HDV particles or with a serum sample from an entecavir-treated HBV/HDV co-infected patient with undetectable HBV viremia [53]. This so-called latent HDV infection, occurring in a small minority of hepatocytes (~1.5%), was not associated with liver damage (assessed by detection of hepatocyte apoptosis by a TUNEL assay) but was rescued by a super-infection with HBV 3 and 6 weeks later. The question about whether this model of infection may have relevance in transplanted patients remains debated. The persistence of HDV in the liver for at least 6 weeks in the absence of HBV [53] raised the question of whether hepatic viruses, other than HBV, could trigger its propagation. A recent study from Vargas et al., [54] demonstrated the ability of HDV to use glycoproteins from other viruses, such as vesiculovirus, flavivirus and hepacivirus by applying an in vitro expression system, or by co-infecting the cells with hepatitis C virus (HCV) or dengue virus. The formation of infectious HDV particles with unconventional glycoproteins could occur as an efficient packaging of HDV RNPs and viral egress was reported in the extracellular medium of the co-infected cells. Those particles were able to efficiently enter into cells expressing the relevant receptors. Importantly enough, the researchers demonstrated that HDV propagation could be mediated by HCV in the liver of experimentally co-infected humanized mice for several months.A recent analysis of serum from 160 HCV infected patients that were under treatment with a combination of PEG-IFN-α and ribavirin, revealed the presence of anti-HDV antibodies in the sera from two patients. Interestingly enough, these patients were negative for all serological or molecular markers of HBV infection, such as HBsAg, anti-HBc antibodies and HBV DNA, as assessed by two different types of PCR (qPCR and droplet digital PCR-ddPCR). This is the first study in patients that describes the presence of HDV infection, as shown by the detection of HDV antibodies, in chronically HCV infected patients without the evidence of ongoing or past HBV infection [55]. The above studies suggest the in vivo ability of HCV to act as a helper virus of HDV in the absence of HBV. Additional studies including larger cohorts, with no previous HBV exposure, are required to explicitly investigate the aforementioned observations.3. Mechanisms of HDV Induced PathogenesisHDV hepatotropism limits its pathologic changes to the liver with the clinical sequelae to be extremely variable, ranging from acute liver failure to asymptomatic carrier state and chronic infection. The exact mechanisms of HDV induced liver damage are still barely identified, and the severity of the clinical course is influenced by several factors. Some studies suggest that HDV can cause direct cytopathic damage during acute infection, whereas immune-mediated damage predominates during chronic infection [56]. Other studies claim that HDV, like other hepatic viruses, is not directly cytopathic to infected hepatocytes, and it is mostly the innate and adaptive immune responses that contribute to the liver immunopathogenesis [57].HDV pathogenesis is orchestrated by a breadth of different factors including HDV and/or HBV and/or host-associated factors (Figure 4). Some of these factors possess a clear causality effect with HDV pathogenesis, whereas, for others, a more correlative effect is proposed, therefore necessitating additional investigations. In the following sections, we will discuss in detail their role on HDV pathogenesis.3.1. HDV Associated Factors3.1.1. HDV GenotypeThe role of HDV genotypes has been associated with HDV pathogenesis as specific clinical features seem to cluster in different geographical areas [58,59,60]. However, since the 8 genotypes of HDV are largely distributed in well-defined areas of the world, it is difficult to disentangle the effect due to genotypes from that potentially linked to ethnicity.Most natural history studies have been carried out in the Western world, where genotype 1 prevails [61,62] and has been associated with a more severe course of HDV pathogenesis. Genotype 1 is also predominant in low-to middle-income countries, such as Mongolia, which is highly endemic for HDV infection [63,64]. Genotype 2 is prevalent in the Far East, where acute liver failure due to HDV seems less frequent, and progression to end-stage liver disease appears slower [42,59,65,66], although a genotype 2 variant isolated from Japanese patients (the Miyako strain) [67] has been reported to be associated with a faster progression towards cirrhosis. Genotype 3 is mostly found in South America and has been associated with a severe form of hepatitis. Here, acute liver failure has been, consistently and frequently, reported in severe outbreaks of acute hepatitis D affecting isolated communities of the Yukpa people of Venezuela [68,69], the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta in Colombia [70], and the Western Amazon basin [58,71].Five additional HDV genotypes have been described upon the classification of the previously assigned genotype 2b as genotype 4, and the classification of African sequences into the genotypes 5 to 8 [62,72]. The disease features of these genotypes remain poorly characterized so far.In their recent paper, Le Gal et al. highlighted the classification of HDV genotypes to one or four subgenotypes per genotype according to their intersubgenotype similarity over the whole genome sequence [73]. HDV-1a and HDV-1b subgenotypes were restricted to Africa and Madagascar, HDV-1c to the Oceania islands and HDV-1d to the Middle East, eastern and western Europe, Asia, and North America. HDV-2a circulated to Taiwan and Japan, and HDV-2b to Siberia. HDV-4a and HDV-4b circulated in the Far East, and HDV-7a and HDV-7b were detected in Cameroonian patients. HDV-5 and HDV-8 genotypes segregated into at least two subgenotypes without well-defined geographical specificity and no distinct information about HDV-3 subgenotypes are available so far [73]. Further studies are required to identify the association between HDV subgenotypes and viral pathogenesis.Mixed infection with different genotypes, and even super-infection, have been reported, especially in patients with high risk for multiple exposures to HDV. In this case, there is a sole dominant genotype, whereas the minor one represents approximately 10 percent of the total viral population [74].3.1.2. HDAg ExpressionHDAg expression coincides with HDV replication, is quite robust within an infected hepatocyte, and was demonstrated to be barely influenced by mutations that have been identified in several HDV isolates. In 1986, the CAR HDV isolate was linked with an acute liver failure outbreak in the region of Central African Republic (CAR) [75]. The CAR HDV isolate, which was successfully transmitted and isolated from the liver of woodchuck upon their inoculation with sera from patients with acute liver failure, showed a highly specific liver pathogenicity, including spongiocytic hepatitis in both woodchucks and humans. This isolate bared a mutation (T to A) at nucleotide 1013 of the antigenomic RNA, which converted the amber stop codon (TAG) to a codon for lysine (AAG) that produced a unique HDAg species of 28kDa size [76], which was identified in the livers and sera of the infected hosts [77]. Of note, the reference HDV isolate bears a U to C modification on the genomic RNA at nucleotide 1012 and will give rise to the small (24kDa) and large (27kDa) HDAg [78]. Sequencing analysis of the CAR HDV isolate and its comparison with the American, Japanese, Taiwanese, French, Italian, and Nauru HDV isolates, revealed a variability of 1.7 to 21.5% at the nucleic acid level and of 1.9 to 28.7% at the amino acid level [76]. CAR HDV isolate was most closely related to the Italian HDV isolate, demonstrated an extremely low genome replication, and its HDAg shared common biological functions with the prototype L-HDAg, including the replication inhibition of HDV RNA [79]. There is no additional information about the prevalence of this isolate and no recent data are available so far.The liver pathology hallmark, based on initial animal studies, is an eosinophilic degeneration of hepatocytes [80]. Additionally, early in vitro studies suggested a direct cytopathic effect of HDV [81,82]. However, these observations failed to be reproduced in transgenic mice expressing either L-HDAg or S-HDAg, therefore suggesting no association between HDAg expression and liver damage [83].No correlation between HDV replication levels and any histological feature was identified in an international study with 80 HDV chronically infected patients at different stages of fibrosis [84]. However, in the same study, Zachou et al. demonstrated a weak correlation between the serum levels of HBsAg and the histological activity of the liver. In another clinical study, Negro et al. demonstrated a significant positive correlation between the number of HDAg-positive cells and the extent of portal inflammation, upon analysis of the intrahepatic expression of HDAg, the morphologic features of HDV hepatitis, and the outcome of liver disease in 101 patients. HDV elimination reduced the degree of inflammation and intrahepatic HDAg expression, while the initial morphologic lesion of the liver did not impact on HDV disease. The results of this study suggested that the immune response plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of HDV hepatitis [40].3.1.3. HDV Persistent ReplicationPersistent HDV replication, as assessed by HDV RNA detection in the serum, has a major impact on the progression towards CHD and was suggested to be the only predictor of liver related mortality [39]. HDV RNA levels were independently associated with progression to cirrhosis (OR = 1.60, 95% CI 1.20–2.12, p = 0.007) and development of HCC (OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.11–3.19, p = 0.019) in a FU study on 105 non-cirrhotic patients [45]. These results are consistent with early observations from the Turin cohort, where, despite the initial rapid progression to cirrhosis, some patients may experience a reduction of HDV replication with time, which is associated with a pattern of inactive cirrhosis, characterized by reduced necroinflammation, stable for years [40,66,85]. A relative stability—even at the cirrhotic stage—has been also reported in children [86]. Roulot et al. recently highlighted that persistent HDV replication was one of the critical determinants of HDV severity, as it was associated with significantly increased risk of hepatic complications, including liver decompensation, HCC, and death in a large French cohort [87].3.2. Host-Associated Factors3.2.1. Interaction with the Cell MachineryPrevious studies demonstrated an interaction of HDV RNA, and its proteins S and L-HDAg, with the cell machinery [88,89]. Only a part of these interactions has been elucidated. HDV proteins interact with numerous cell factors that are involved in HDV transcription, replication and even pathogenesis [3]. A cell proteome analysis in human embryonic kidney HEK-293 identified that HDV replication altered the expression of 89 out of 3000 proteins that were quantified [90]. The majority of these proteins was associated with pyruvate metabolism (Figure 5C1) and cell cycle regulation (Figure 5A). The expression of p53 was downregulated, and the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint was highly affected, therefore implicating a potential role of these pathways in HDV associated HCC. Additional experimentations demonstrated that HDV can induce cell cycle arrest [91], cell death [81], and impair cell proliferation [92].HDV was shown to increase histone H3 acetylation within the clusterin promoter that enhanced its expression (Figure 5B) [93]. The above epigenetic regulation along with the fact that clusterin was overexpressed in 89% of human HCC cases [94], strongly suggests that HDV can induce carcinogenesis.HDV can also promote oxidative stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of hepatic cell lines by interacting with the NADPH oxidase (Nox) family (Figure 5C2). L-HDAg interacts with NOX-4 inducing the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) which in turn activate the signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT-3) and the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) pathway (Figure 5C2) [95]. This effect was dramatically decreased in the presence of antioxidants or calcium inhibitors.HDV may induce intrahepatic inflammation via the activation of NF-kB signalling. In vitro studies revealed that only L-HDAg can activate the tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) induced NF-κB signalling, despite the fact that both HDAg isoforms can interact with the TNF receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2). NF-κB activation by L-HDAg is independent of L-HDAg farnesylation, is mediated through the death receptor TNFR1 (tumour necrosis factor receptor 1) signalling cascade and induces the expression levels of Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) (Figure 5C4) [96]. L-HDAg farnesylation is a post-translational modification, where a farnesyl lipid group (C211XXQ box) is covalently linked by a cellular farnesyltransferase to the cysteine at position 211 of L-HDAg [97]. ER stress and NF-κB activation was shown to be activated by the translocation of L-HDAg to the ER, during the viral assembly with the residing HBV glycoproteins [98].L-HDAg interacts with various signalling pathways implicated in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) [99], wound healing, and fibrosis [100]. The transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) pathway is involved in liver regeneration and in the fibrotic to cirrhotic transformation upon viral infection. Choi et al. demonstrated that only L-HDAg, induced the signal cascades of TGF-β, c-Jun-induced pathway and enhanced the protein expression level of TGF-β–induced plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (Figure 5C3) [100]. L-HDAg farnesylation, had a critical role in the activation of these signaling cascades. Additionally, the synergistic interaction of L-HDAg and HBx (HBV X protein) activated TGF-β and the activator protein-1 (AP-1) pathway of transcription factors by binding to Smad3, STAT3 and inducing c-Jun pathway (Figure 4) [100]. Therefore, TGF-β signalling regulation via L-HDAg farnesylation might represent an alternative mechanism of HDV pathogenesis [100].Goto et al. showed that only L-HDAg could activate the serum response factor (SRF)-associated transcription pathway, as opposed to the small isoform S-HDAg (Figure 5) [101]. SRF is a transcription factor that binds to the serum response element (SRE) and mediates serum and growth factor induced transcription from the c-Fos proto-oncogene (Figure 5C4) [102]. The same group later demonstrated the synergistic activation of the SRE-dependent pathway upon the interaction of L-HDAg with the HBx protein [103]. Further experimental studies are required to elucidate the implication of this pathway on HDV pathogenesis.The expression of glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1), a tumour suppressor gene, is typically downregulated in liver samples from patients infected with hepatotropic viruses. The inhibition of GSTP1 expression has been well studied in HCC tumorigenesis [104]. S-HDAg was shown to bind directly and downregulate GSTP1 in a human foetal hepatocyte cell line in vitro. This led to accumulation of cellular ROS, induction of apoptosis and selective pressure for malignant transformation (Figure 5C5) [105]. Therefore, the inhibition of GSTP1 expression by S-HDAg represents a novel potential mechanism of HDV pathogenesis.3.2.2. Innate Immune ResponseImmune-mediated liver damage upon HDV infection is an important factor of HDV pathogenesis. A strong or a dysregulated innate immune response to a viral infection can lead to severe immunopathogenesis [106]. Up to date, the factors that mediate the interaction between HDV and host innate immune system have not been explicitly characterized. While HBV has been classically considered to be poorly recognized by the innate immune system [107], HDV can induce the expression of interferon (IFN)-β and IFN-λ, of pro-inflammatory cytokines and interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) in vitro [108,109,110,111] and in vivo [112,113] (Figure 6). IFN-λs or type III interferons are endogenous antiviral cytokines, functionally similar to type I interferons, that activate the intracellular JAK-STAT pathway and regulate the transcription of ISGs. In vitro, L-HDAg was shown to inhibit HBV replication by trans-activating the IFN-inducible MxA (myxovirus resistance protein A) gene [109] and HDV RNA accumulation induced a strong type I IFN response by stimulating the expression of RSAD2 (Radical S-Adenosyl Methionine Domain Containing 2) and MxA genes [108]. Finally, the misfolded HDV ribozyme sequence was found to induce protein kinase R [110]. HDV is sensed by the RIG-I-like receptor (RLR) group and more precisely by MDA5 [114]. Zhang et al. demonstrated that active replication is required for innate sensing, without, however, pointing out the pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) of HDV which is recognised by the MDA5 [114].Despite the intact innate immune response mediated by HDV, IFN-α failed to inhibit HDV in vitro [110]. A previous in vitro study demonstrated that HDV replication inhibited the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK kinase Tyk2, thereby impairing the activation and translocation of STAT1 and STAT2 to the hepatocyte nucleus and inhibiting the antiviral cell response to IFN-α [115].Natural killer (NK) cells are innate effector cells representing 30–40% of all intrahepatic lymphocytes [116,117] with a crucial role in antiviral defence against HBV and HCV infection [118,119,120]. Importantly enough, NK cells drive liver pathology in chronic HBV infection [121]. The role of NK cells in the peripheral blood of chronically infected HDV patients was recently investigated [122]. The researchers assessed the frequency and differentiation phenotype of NK cells prior to and upon IFN-α treatment in chronically infected HDV, or HBV patients and healthy controls. While untreated HDV patients showed an increased frequency of NK cells with unaltered phenotypic differentiation status, those that have been long-term treated with IFN-α demonstrated a loss of terminally differentiated NK cells and an enrichment in immature NK cell subsets (Figure 6). The NK cell differentiation profile has not been so far associated with HDV liver pathogenesis progression and therefore more studies are required to fully elucidate their role.3.2.3. Adaptive Immune ResponseHDV adaptive immune response has been highlighted by the presence of specific T cell response to HDAg in the peripheral blood of chronically infected HDV patients. The presence of specific anti-HDV T cells is inversely correlated with HDV-induced liver disease activity [123]. A comparative study of 76 patients chronically infected with hepatitis B, C, or D viruses demonstrated that patients with CHD had the highest frequency of CD4+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (p = 0.04 vs. HBV and HCV patients) [124]. These cytotoxic CD4+ T cells differ from the helper CD4+ T cells as they are perforin positive and share common features with CD8+ T cells, therefore being able to kill virus-infected cells (no information about the expression of granzymes in these cells was provided). The increased number of cytotoxic CD4+ T cells in patients with more advanced liver disease is considered as one important factor for the more severe course of viral hepatitis in the elderly (Figure 7) [124].The role of CD8+ T cells in chronic HDV infection was only recently studied following the identification of an extensive set of CD8+ T cell epitopes [125,126]. HDV-specific CD8+ T cells against HDV peptides were detected upon the administration of an HDV DNA vaccine to mice and were also reported in two patients that cleared HDV infection. The above suggests that appropriate T cell response seems to be tightly correlated with HDV clearance [127].In another study, Kefalakes et al. isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 28 patients chronically infected with HDV and HBV and identified HDV specific CD8+ T cell epitopes, underlining the high immunogenicity of HDV, despite its small size and physicochemical properties (hydrophobic amino acid sequence) [126]. They also demonstrated that HDV specific CD8+ T cells were as frequent as HBV CD8+ T cells, less frequent than those of Epstein–Barr Virus, cytomegalovirus, or influenza virus and the least exhausted as they were not expressing the terminally differentiated CD57 marker [126]. This subset of activated HDV-specific CD8+ T cells could target HDV conserved epitopes and contribute to disease progression. On the other hand, the subset of memory-like HDV-specific CD8+ T cells was associated with escape variants with less human leukocyte antigen (HLA) binding and less T cell activation, therefore being unable to clear HDV infection (Figure 7). This study requires more investigations to unravel the exact role of HDV-specific CD8+ T cells, as the researchers did not study the role of CD8+ tissue-resident memory T cells and therefore conclusions must be drawn with caution.The role of mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells on HDV infection has not been extensively studied so far [128]. MAIT cells are unique innate-like T cells that comprise up to 50% of the intrahepatic immune cell population (even in the healthy liver), secrete inflammatory cytokines (IFN-γ and TNF) and can act cytotoxically against infected cells. In the liver, MAIT cell function is regulated by interleukin-7 (IL-7), which is secreted from the hepatocytes under inflammatory conditions [129]. MAIT cells can promote mitogenic and proinflammatory functions of fibrogenic cells [130] and contribute to tissue remodelling [131]. In vivo, MAIT cell deficient mice were resistant to liver fibrosis, whereas MAIT cell enriched mice demonstrated increased liver fibrosis [130]. MAIT cell activation in the liver was also correlated with tumour growth, as they produced IL-17 that promoted macrophage differentiation into the inflammatory M2 subtype and stimulated the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mediated angiogenesis (reviewed in [132]). In chronically infected HDV patients, the population of circulating and liver resident MAIT cells was dramatically decreased, as opposed to the population of MAIT cells in HBV monoinfected patients. The remaining population of MAIT cells exhibited a functionally impaired responsiveness in chronically infected HDV patients. Increased levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-12 and IL-18 that could promote MAIT cell death, as well as monocyte activation, were reported in HDV patients, suggesting that upon HDV infection, the normally abundant MAIT cells in the peripheral blood and the liver are activated, become functionally impaired, and at a later stage, are depleted (Figure 7) [128]. The above studies do not show any potential contribution of MAIT cells on HDV pathogenesis. However, additional studies highlighting the causality behind the severe depletion of this cell population during chronic HDV infection might unravel other properties of these cells that could be associated with HDV liver disease pathogenesis.The adaptive immune response against chronically infected HDV patients seems to be insufficient to resolve HDV infection, therefore suggesting that the innate immunity may have a more critical role to limit HDV infection [133,134,135].3.2.4. Patients’ Risk ProfileThe usual predictive factors that define the patients’ risk profile and their correlation with the adverse clinical outcome apply to CHD as well. Male sex [136], older age [137,138], and co-infection with HIV [139] have been reported to correlate with liver disease progression and clinical outcomes.The presence of genetic polymorphisms in the gene of IL28B (Interleukin 28B) is also implicated in HDV infection and pathogenesis. IL28B gene encodes for IFN-λ3. Polymorphisms in the IL28B gene were initially associated with the spontaneous or treatment induced clearance of HCV [140,141,142,143]. Up to date, the SNP rs12979860 represents the strongest genetic association with any chronic viral infection and its treatment response. The same polymorphisms in the IL28B gene were reported for both HBV and/or HDV persistence [144].3.3. Helper Virus Associated Factors3.3.1. HBV GenotypeHBV genotypes also appear to affect the clinical outcomes of CHD, although data is scarce. A prospective study analysed 194 dually infected patients from Taiwan (mostly infected with genotypes B and C of HBV) [42]. Although, at enrolment, there were no differences in the relative proportion of chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, HCC, or remission cases among those with genotypes B vs. C, after a median FU of 135 months, HBV genotype C was associated with a significantly lower remission rate (0 vs. 32.1%), higher incidence of cirrhosis (34.8% vs. 8.9%) and adverse clinical outcomes (including cirrhosis, HCC, and mortality due to hepatic failure; 70.0% vs. 33.9%) than genotype B. By multivariate analysis, age, HBV genotype C (besides HDV genotype 1) were independent factors for unfavourable clinical outcome [42]. In a smaller, cross-sectional study from Brazil, HDV viral load was lower in HBV genotype A patients compared to patients with genotype D or F, although this difference did not match the clinical outcome, probably affected by the low number of HDV patients [145]. These data require further studies to confirm their clinical significance.3.3.2. HBV ReplicationActive HBV replication has a critical role in deteriorating liver damage in patients with chronic HDV infection, an observation that is in line with HDV dependency on its helper virus [146]. However, the typical consequence upon HDV super-infection and the acute phase of HDV replication is the suppression of HBV DNA [24], that has been reported in both liver and serum of humans, animal, and in vitro models [146,147,148]. The mechanisms of HDV and HBV interference still remain poorly characterized, although in vitro studies demonstrated that S-HDAg strongly inhibits HBV mRNA synthesis or stability [148], while both isoforms of HDAg can activate the innate immune response (IFN-α inducible MxA gene) and repress HBV enhancers 1 and 2 [109]. In the above cases, with minimum HBV replication, the liver damage of chronically infected HDV patients, is mostly attributed to HDV rather than HBV. HBV replication suppression, might also be a cause of multiple co-infections with viruses other than HDV, that are present in the patients [3]. Interestingly, in a Chinese study, a late HBV DNA reactivation was reported, which, according to the researchers, may impact the progression to end-stage liver disease [149].4. ConclusionsHDV, the satellite virus of HBV, with million carriers worldwide, remains a fascinating and unique virus with many unravelled steps of its life cycle. HDV infection can only be achieved in the presence of its helper virus, HBV. An HBV-HDV simultaneous infection (or co-infection) will, in the vast majority, be self-limited and lead to viral clearance, while an HDV super-infection of chronically infected HBV carriers will almost universally lead to chronic HDV infection. Chronic HDV infection is considered as the most severe form of viral hepatitis that is associated with faster progression towards end stage liver diseases, including cirrhosis, liver decompensation and HCC. More than one factors seem to be involved in the pathogenesis of HDV hepatitis and end stage liver diseases, implicating HDV, HBV, and host associated factors, underlining the complexity of this multifaceted disease. A more explicit and in-depth knowledge of the HDV life cycle will provide critical information to better understand the mechanisms of HDV pathogenesis and give new insights in the development of new therapies with improved tolerance and efficiency.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Vertical Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus—An Update

1. IntroductionThe hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major public health problem that affects approximately 2 billion people worldwide. Of these, 296 million are chronically infected [1]. In 2017, the World Health Organization set the goal to eliminate viral hepatitis by 2030, which is defined as 90% reduction in incidence and 65% reduction in liver-related deaths from the 2015 baseline [2].HBV is a hepatotropic virus that belongs to the Hepadnaviridae family. The viral genome is a DNA of about 3.2 Kb that has four overlapping open reading frames (ORFs): S, X, P, and C. The S/preS ORF encodes the three form of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg): long (HBsAg-L), medium (HBsAg-M) and small (HBsAg-S). The regulatory protein X (HBx) is transcribed from X ORF; the P ORF encodes the viral DNA polymerase; and the C ORF encodes the core protein (HBcAg) and a related protein called which is the precursor of the secreted protein known as antigen e (HBeAg) [3,4]. The diagnosis of HBV infection is established by detection of the molecular and serologic markers: viral DNA, HBsAg, HBeAg, anti-HBs, anti-HBe and anti-HBc (IgM and total antibodies) (Table 1).Four routes of transmission have been described: (1) parenteral, i.e., by transfusion, re-used syringes and needles and contact of blood; (2) sexual; (3) vertical; (4) horizontal, i.e., by contact with body fluids, such as saliva, shared toothbrushes and secretory skin lesions [3]. In high endemic areas (Africa and Southeast Asia), HBV infection is acquired predominantly during the perinatal period or in early childhood [5,6]. Approximately 70–90% of infants born to HBeAg positive mothers in absence of active and passive immunization became chronically infected [6,7,8]. This risk is markedly reduced when HBV vaccine is given along with hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) in the first 12 h of life of the newborn along with antiviral therapy for the mother before delivery. Nevertheless, the immunoprophylaxis of some cases is not 100% protective; indeed, between 8% and 30% of infants can become infected [8,9,10,11]. Failures in immunoprophylaxis are related to the positivity of HBeAg and a high viral load in the mother, increasing the risk of vertical transmission.2. Epidemiology of HBV InfectionAccording to the latest estimation, approximately two billion people worldwide have evidence of past or present HBV; 296 million individuals are chronically infected and almost 820,000 result in annual deaths from HBV-related liver disease [1,12]. The overall prevalence of HBsAg is 3.9% of the human population; however, it varies from country to country and depends on the complex interplay of behavioral, environmental, economic, geopolitical and host factors. Three epidemiological patterns of HBV infection have been established according to the prevalence of HBsAg in general population: low endemicity (<2%; the United States of America (USA), Canada, Western Europe and some countries of South America), intermediate (2–7%; Middle East, Eastern Europe, Alaska, Greenland, Pacific Islands, Central America and South America) and high (≥8%; China, sub-Saharan Africa and the Amazon basin, among other regions) [6,12]. The variations in HBV endemicity are also frequently correlated with the predominant mode of transmission (Figure 1). In a highly endemic setting, most cases of hepatitis B infection are due to vertical transmission (mother-to-child infection) and horizontal transmission (exposure to infected family members) [13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. It has been estimated that 45% of the world’s population lives in endemic areas for HBV infection. In Asian and African countries, the vertical transmission is a common route as a considerable proportion of women are highly infectious at childbirth age, related to HBeAg positivity and a high viral load. Indeed, the prevalence of HBsAg among women of childbearing age in four provinces in China was higher than the national average prevalence for the same age group of women (11.8% vs. 6.6%). Moreover, HBsAg prevalence in women between 15 and 19 years of age was 5.21% (IC 4.05–6.36), and it was significantly higher (11.83%; IC 10.06–13.59) in women over the age of 40. This is probably due to the fact that older women were infected before the universal vaccination program [19]. Similar results were found in different regions of Africa, where the prevalence rank of HBsAg in pregnant women was 6.3–15.5% in western Africa, 7.7–9.2% in central Africa and 3.9–14.2% [18] in eastern and southern Africa. Given that the prevalence of HBsAg in pregnant women varies considerably from country to country, some studies suggest that the risk of perinatal infection may be lower in some African countries, and horizontal transmission would be the most frequent [15,17]. In any case, the prevalence of chronic HBV infection in women in these endemic regions represents a threat to maternal health and a risk of mother-to-child transmission. It demonstrates the conditions of vulnerability related to ethnicities, socio-economic status and education levels.The Amazon basin is also a high endemic region for HBV infection [20,21,22,23,24,25]. The causes for high HBV prevalence are not completely understood, but it is likely a multifactorial problem: earlier age of pregnancy (relating to greater likelihood of high maternal viral load among women with CHB); crowded house; feeding small children with food previously chewed by the mothers; practices eliciting blood-to-blood contact, including ritual body modification or scarification; inadequate access to timely vaccination; and absence of effective primary health care and promotion and prevention programs [26,27]. A cross-sectional study was performed in 6 out of the 42 indigenous populations settled in the Peruvian Amazon. The prevalence of HBsAg in pregnant women was 2.11% (11/522) and the prevalence of anti-HBc was 42.06% (522/1241), indicating that a significant proportion of the population was exposed to the virus [24]. On other hand, the study showed that anti-HBc positivity in pregnant women was associated with age at pregnancy, first sexual intercourse at <16 years, bisexual partners and no condom use. A study in an indigenous population inhabiting the Curuçá and Itaquaí river basins of the Javari Valley in the Brazilian Amazon region described the markers of HBV infection. A total of 180 serum samples obtained from 87 (48.3%) men and 93 (51.7%) women were analyzed. The prevalence of HBV infection according to the ORF S detection (PCR) was 50.6% (44/87) in men and 51.6% (48/93) in women. Of these women, 21.5% (20/93) were pregnant and 75% (15/20) were HBV positive, showing a statistical difference (p = 0.009) when compared to the prevalence of HBV infection in non-pregnant women (40.4% (21/52)) [23]. The prevalence of HBV molecular markers found in pregnant women confirm the importance of prevention of vertical HBV transmission in the Amazon region´s populations. An interesting analysis of HBV infection was carried out in 1275 children and 572 mothers from 37 indigenous communities in the state of Amazonas, Colombia [25]. The average age of mothers and children was 32 ± 8.3 years (range 16 and 59 years) and 5 ± 3 years (range 6 months and 11 years old), respectively. The prevalence of anti-HBc in mothers’ population was 30.9% (176/572) and 9% (52/572) were positive for both anti-HBc and HBsAg markers. While 3.6% (46/1275) of children was positive for anti-HBc marker and 0.5% (7/1275) were also positive for HBsAgThe low prevalence of HBsAg observed in children confirmed the effectiveness of the hepatitis B vaccine program in this population; however, the frequency of HBV infection is still high in people born before 1994 when universal vaccination began, as reported in these indigenous mothers. This finding could be indicative of vertical transmission risk that could be increased in the absence of complete and timely immunoprophylaxis in the children. Indeed, this study demonstrated that being born to an HBsAg positive mother increases 2.5-fold the risk of the child being HBsAg + (OR = 2.45, 95% CI 1.33–4.46). Moreover, Garcia D et al. analyzed the vaccination records of this population and reported that the children with timely vaccination (birth dose and doses at 2, 4 and 6 months) had 70% less risk of being infected with HBV when compared with those who did not (OR = 0.23, 95% CI 0.09–0.51) [28]. A recently leading-edge study demonstrated important advances in achieving the goal of hepatitis B elimination in Colombia [29]. The study evaluated the feasibility of a two-phase approach to verify mother-to-child transmission of HBV in this country. In the first phase, municipalities with the highest risk of HBV transmission were identified, considering variables such as the number of HBV infections in pregnant women per 1000 individuals, coverage with third dose of pentavalent vaccine, the percentage of births occurring in health centers and seroprevalence data. The risk of hepatitis B was increased in municipalities with hepatitis B immunization low coverage and/or <90% of births in health centers The second part of the analysis included a serological household survey of children aged 5 to 10 years in the 36 municipalities with highest risk of HBV infection. A total of 3203 children from these municipalities were screened for HBV infection marker. HBsAg was not detected in any of the 3203 samples, yielding an upper 90% confidence limit of <0.1% prevalence [29]. Importantly, the study reported that there are still populations in which vaccination coverage is low, such as home-born children and indigenous communities. This result suggests that cultural traditions and/or barriers to access the health system may contribute to the higher prevalence of hepatitis B reported in these communities. Overall, the results of this study could indicate that Colombia is possibly on the right track to eliminating mother-to-child transmission of HBV; however, there is a need to strengthen screening during pregnancy, provide access to timely vaccination, establish systems to monitor HBV infection among pregnant women and complete follow-up testing of infants born to HBsAg-positive women. In regions of intermediate endemicity, such as Western Europe, most cases of HBV infection are acquired through sexual intercourse. In Italy, Russia and Turkey, the prevalence of chronic hepatitis B ranges from 3% to 10%, and unsafe injections are a major route of HBV transmission [30,31]. Interestingly, HBsAg prevalence in pregnant women of western and southwestern Europe countries was 0.1–4.4% [32], 1.18–4.3% in Iran [33] and 0.2–3.8% in some countries of South America (Peru, Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina and Colombia). This is in agreement with the low frequency of vertical transmission in these regions [28,34,35,36]. On the other hand, injection drug users are the most infected population in regions with low overall prevalence such as Eastern Europe and North America. Other populations at increased risk if HBV infection are prisoners, men who have sex with men, sex workers and homeless [37]. Studies carried out in pregnant women reported HBsAg prevalence from 0.3% to 2.4% [38,39] in the USA, from 0.76% to 0.85% in Australia [40] and from 1.4 to 1.5% in Japan [41]. Therefore, vertical transmission in these regions does not seem relevant.3. Discovery of HBV Vertical TransmissionSaint-Vel’s 1862 report of severe hepatitis in pregnant women in Martinique laid the initial groundwork for studying the effects of HBV infection in pregnancy [42]. However, it was not until 1954 that the possibility of vertical transmission of HBV was considered based on a report of infants who developed hepatitis during the first two months of life and the evidence that some mothers were “silent carriers” of HBV; this was relevant to the problem of maternal transmission of this infection [43]. Later, a prospective study conducted in the USA and Europe revealed that in two-thirds of the infants of mothers who had acute hepatitis B at the end of pregnancy or after delivery became infected within one to six months of birth. In addition, the HBsAg was detected less frequently in newborns if maternal hepatitis occurs in the first trimester; therefore, transmission is less frequent when the mother is asymptomatic [44].In a study carried out in newborns, three interrelated factors were found to increase the risk of HBV vertical transmission: a high titer of the HBsAg in the maternal circulation, presence of this marker in the umbilical cord blood and HBsAg+ in siblings. It was suggested that if babies remain antigenemic until adulthood, vertical transmission could account for an important proportion of asymptomatic cases (carriers) in areas of HBV high prevalence [45]. On the other hand, Okada et al. [46] described the HBeAg as an important factor to vertical transmission. In serum samples from 23 HBsAg-positive pregnant women and their babies, the HBeAg was detected in 43.4% (10/23) of women and the anti-HBeAg in 30.4% (7/23). All ten babies born to mothers HBeAg positive acquired persistent HBsAg, and all 10 siblings of these newborns were HBsAg+ and asymptomatic. In contrast, seven newborns of anti-HBe positive mothers were HBsAg negative, and none of their three siblings were positive for HBsAg. Furthermore, HBsAg was not detected in the serum of any of the fathers [46]. Based on these results, it can be concluded that HBeAg and anti-HBe may be used as indicators of HBV vertical transmission risk.Although HBV transmission from infected mothers to their infants has been well documented in several studies, it is believed that in utero infection does not occur and the babies become infected by contact with maternal blood/fluids during delivery since serological signs of infection do not become evident until six weeks of age. To answer the question of whether a vertical transmission was in utero, an animal model of duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) infection, a member of the Hepadnaviridae family and closely related to the HBV, was used [47]. The DHBV DNA was detected in 30/219 in both serum and liver embryos of infected Pekin ducks, and viral replication intermediates were identified in the liver on the 12th day of embryonic life. These findings were confirmed in another infection model, the woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHBV), another virus-related HBV. The WHBV DNA was detectable in the liver of 18/24 fetuses of infected woodchucks. Viral replicative DNA and supercoiled DNA, as well as WHBV surface antigen, were demonstrated in livers of two fetuses from late gestation (fetuses 5.5–7.0 cm in length and well-differentiated hepatocytes) [48]. Although maternal transmission to offspring may be different in humans, these observations in animal models were a first approach to understand HBV vertical transmission.4. Vertical Transmission of HBVThe transmission of HBV infection from mother to child during pregnancy, delivery and/or breastfeeding is known as vertical transmission [1]. For HBV, vertical transmission is defined as positivity for HBsAg or HBV-DNA in infants at 6–12 months of life [6,49]. The presence of both HBsAg and viral DNA in serum at birth are often transient and do not always indicate newborn infection. The diagnosis of HBV infection is confirmed 6 months after birth, and if serological and molecular markers are still positive in a 1-year old baby, they indicate a chronic HBV infection. There are three possible routes for vertical transmission of HBV: (1) transplacental or intrauterine; (2) perinatal during delivery; (3) postnatal during care; (4) and/or through breast milk (Figure 2).4.1. Transplacental TransmissionTransplacental transmission occurs in a minority of the cases of vertical transmission, and the mechanisms are not fully elucidated yet. There are some hypotheses of the possibility of transplacental transmission: the HBV can cross the placental barrier infecting placental cells; a transplacental leakage of maternal blood; during amniocentesis; through infected maternal peripheral blood monocellular cells (PBMC); or through germline cell infection (Figure 2).Some studies have shown the ability of the virus to translocate through the placenta to the fetal trophoblast [10,50,51]. Thus, Chen et al. examined viral infection in 157 placental tissues obtained from infected pregnant women by detection of HBV DNA with PCR and in situ hybridization techniques and detection of HBsAg and HBcAg by immunohistochemistry assay. The HBV infection rate was higher in decidua cells (55.4%; 87/157) and in trophoblastic cells (51.0%; 80/157); compared with villous mesenchymal cells (46.5%; 73/157) and villous capillary endothelial cells (29.9%; 47/157) (p < 0.01) [10]. Similar results were reported by Xu et al [50]. In this study, the HBV infection rates on the 101 placenta samples (HBsAg, HBcAg or viral DNA) were 40.6% in trophoblastic cells, 36.6% in villous mesenchymal cells (37/101) and 18.8% in villous capillary endothelial cells. Both studies demonstrated that the HBV infection rate gradually decreases in the maternal-to-fetal placental layer. Therefore, HBV could cross the placental barrier, thus infecting and replicating in all types of placental cells before it reaches the fetus (Figure 3).Another study determined the time when transplacental HBV infection occurs [51]. The HBV infection rates of 131 placentas from first trimester, second trimester and third trimester were 4.2% (1/24), 16.7% (1/6) and 44.6% (45/101), respectively. Additionally, the risk of HBV infection was 18.46 in villous capillary endothelial cells. These results demonstrate although the HBV infection may occur since week 19, it is more likely during the third trimester of pregnancy [51]. Further investigations are necessary to describe and understand the cellular and virological mechanisms that allow transplacental HBV infection in mother-to-child transmission cases.HBV can also be transmitted to the fetus by leakage of maternal blood through the placenta into the fetal circulation. Probably during labor some placental cells are detached as a result of uterine contractions and maternal blood enters the fetal circulation, allowing viral particles from mother to establish infection in the fetus, especially in HBeAg-positive mothers and high viral load cases [52,53]. Amniocentesis is another possible mechanism of HBV transplacental transmission. This procedure may cause uterine or placental bleeding and may lead to blood exchange between mother and fetus [54]. Amniocentesis can expose the fetus to HBV via two routes: maternal-fetal blood exchange or ingestion of HBV-contaminated amniotic fluid. When the needle crosses the abdominal and uterine wall, it causes injuries to the chorionic villi and results in admixture of maternal and fetal blood. Additionally, uterine wall puncture also causes fetal–maternal bleeding through capillaries in the fetal membranes. By any of the routes, the fetus may enter in contact with virions due to the introduction of maternal infected blood into the fetal circulation or into the amniotic fluid. However, the published studies have not shown that amniocentesis significantly increases the risk of mother to infant transmission [55,56].Viral particles have also been identified to circulate in maternal PBMC [57,58]. In a study carried out in 30 HBsAg-positive pregnant women and their aborted fetuses, the role of PBMC cell transportation from mother to baby in HBV intrauterine infection was investigated [57]. In the fetuses, HBV intrauterine infection rate was 43.3% (13/30). Moreover, the HBsAg was detected in 10% (3/30)of peripheral blood, 23.3% (7/30) of serum and 33.3% (10/30) of PBMC samples. Maternal–fetal PBMC transport was positively correlated with fetal PBMC HBV-DNA (p = 0.004). This study suggested that HBV intrauterine infection was primarily due to PBMC maternal–fetal transportation. This hypothesis was confirmed by a recent case-control study that evaluated HBV serologic markers in neonates of 312 HBsAg-positive mothers. Polymorphic markers (glutathione S transferase M1 -GSTM1- and angiotensin converting enzyme -ACE-) were used to detect trafficking of PBMCs from mother to child [58]. This study showed that 45.5% (142/312) of neonates were HBV infected in utero. Of the mother–baby pairs with information of polymorphic marker, 63.0% (75/119) showed mother-to-fetus PBMC transfer; of these, 76% (57/75) of the infants were HBV-DNA positive in PBMC. In comparison, only 25.0% (11/44) of the infants without mother-to-fetus PBMC transfer were HBV infected. These data demonstrated that mother-to-infant PBMC traffic increase the risk of HBV infection in newborn infants 9.5-fold (OR, 9.5; 95% CI, 3.71–24.91; p < 0.001) and therefore PBMC infection is an important risk factor for HBV vertical transmission [58]. Another important aspect to evaluate HBV infection in PBMCs is whether the presence of specific viral variants in this cell population can modulate the risk of mother-to-child transmission. In this context, a study analyzed HBV replication status in PBMC and pre-core/basal core promotor (PC/BCP) mutants in blood samples obtained from pregnant women [59]. In total, 37 women with chronic hepatitis B were included in the study; from these, eight had started NA therapy in the third trimester of pregnancy although all patients’ samples were collected before starting NA therapy. All infants received immunoprophylaxis and were HBsAg negative at 9–12 months of age. HBV-DNA was detected in 55% of PBMC from pregnant and/or postpartum women. The viral pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) was detected in 44% and the viral covalently closed circular DNA(cccDNA in 51% of the PBMC-tested. BCP mutants (A1762T, G1764A) were identified in 36% and PC mutants (G1896A) in 4% of cases [59]. On the other hand, the detection of HBV-DNA and/or variants in PBMC was not associated with HBeAg status, HBV-DNA, genotype, pregnancy–postpartum status or risk of liver disease during the median 4-year follow-up; however, the limited size of the study must be taken into consideration. These data suggest that HBV PC/BCP mutations are not related to mother-to-child transmission risk in cases of infants with complete and timely immunoprophylaxis. However, it should be taken into consideration that mothers with viral loads above 200,000 IU/mL in the third trimester received NA therapy, which significantly reduced the risk of in utero and at birth transmission. All these studies suggest a role of PBMC in HBV mother-to-child transmission. Additional research is necessary to understand if maternal PBMC HBV infection is productive and therefore generates virions that allows the subsequent newborn liver infection or if the PBMC infection modulated cellular mechanisms of immunotolerance and apoptosis that allow the HBV persistence in neonate.The possibility of HBV intrauterine transmission via oocyte or sperm has been raised considering [49,60,61] that HBV DNA, pgRNA and HBsAg has been detected in oocytes and embryos from HBsAg-positive women during in vitro fertilization [61]. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed the presence of HBV DNA in oocytes and embryos from couples with at least one positive HBsAg [62]. Another study reported the HBV infection of infants of two cases of HBsAg positive oocytes [49]. In contrast, Jin et al. reported that babies born from in vitro fertilization using HBV positive oocytes and/or embryos were not HBV infected [63]. It is important to note that the fertilization technique had some impact on the viability of the virus in infected oocytes.Using molecular hybridization and restriction enzyme patterns, the viral genome and integrated sequences were demonstrated in sperm samples obtained from 17 Hepatitis B patients (9 cases of acute hepatitis B and 8 cases of chronic infection) [64]. Moreover, the HBV DNA was detected in seminal fluid obtained from 319 patients with acute hepatitis, and integrated viral sequences was detected in 2 spermatozoa samples; however, the viral DNA was not detected in serum samples of these patients at the time of sperm collection. In addition, no HBV DNA was detected in semen samples obtained from chronic infection cases. Qun Xi et al. evaluated the hypothesis of vertical transmission via the germ line [65]. Sperm samples were obtained from 8 cases of chronic infection and three of them were HBV-DNA positive. However, none of their infants (born to HBsAg negative mothers) were HBV infected. These results suggested that HBV transmission to the fetus via the male germline is unlikely. According to the authors, it could be related to the presence of low number of viral particles in sperm could be rapidly eliminated by the maternal immune system and therefore prevent the virus transmission; it addition, the presence of protective antibodies (anti-HBs) was demonstrated in serum and uterine tissue samples obtained from 90% of wives of HBV-carrier husbands [65].Furthermore additional studies are required to understand the role of HBV infection in germ lines in intrauterine transmission.4.2. Perinatal TransmissionPerinatal transmission is the most frequent route (30–40%) of vertical transmission. This mechanism is defined as infant contagion at the time of birth as a result of exposure to maternal vaginal secretions, epithelium cells and micro transfusion of maternal and fetal blood [66]. The presence of HBsAg in cord blood has been significantly associated with the length of labor when the first stage was more than nine hours (p < 0.03); a stronger association was found when labor lasted more than 11 h (p = 0.01) [66]. It has been reported that a high viral load (108 UI/mL) in maternal blood entering a fetal body can result in fetal infection [67]; additionally, the HBsAg was detected in 96% of the vaginal fluid obtained from mothers, 2% of the breast milk samples and 90% of gastric aspirates from the babies. On the other hand, presence of HBsAg has also been demonstrated in 55–98% of vaginal epithelial cells and 12.1% of the cervico-vaginal cells along with detectable HBV DNA [68]. Consequently, the direct contact with infected cells or vaginal secretions when crossing the birth canal is the main mechanism for HBV transmission to infants.Another topic that has been considered is the delivery mode and perinatal transmission [69,70]. In a study of 447 infants born to HBeAg- and HBsAg-positive mothers, a higher rate of infection was found in newborn delivered vaginally (24.9%, 96/385) than in delivered by caesarean (<10%, 6/62) [69]. However, no significant differences were observed in the positivity of HBsAg or anti-HBsAg among three groups of babies born to infected mothers, 144 delivered vaginally, 40 by obstetric forceps or vacuum extraction and 117 by cesarean at follow-up periods (1, 4, 7 and 12 months of age) [70]. These findings suggest that failures in immunoprophylaxis (incomplete vaccination schemes or the non-administration of HBIG, as evidenced in this study) are the cause of HBV transmission in babies independent of the delivery mode.4.3. Postnatal Transmission The HBV transmission in the postpartum period represents a less common (<7%) way of vertical transmission; however, there are some reports of high proportion (34%) of infection in postnatal period [71]. Some mechanisms have been suggested for HBV postpartum transmission related to infant contact with HBV-contaminated maternal secretions such as breastfeeding, ingestion of food previously chewed by the mother, maternal kissing in the mouths of infants and lack of effective hand hygiene among healthcare personnel involved in the postpartum care of mothers and infants (Figure 2) [72,73,74,75,76].In the early 1970s, some researchers published data on HBsAg transmission in breast milk of chronically infected mothers [73,74]. Although HBsAg, HBeAg and viral DNA have been detected in the colostrum and the breast milk, there is no evidence that breastfeeding increases the risk of mother to child transmission of HBV, as described by Chen X. et al., where HBsAg prevalence in breastfed and formula-fed children was 1.5% and 4.7%, respectively (p = 0.063) [72]. These results indicate that the risk of transmission associated with breast milk is small when compared to the risk of infection in the infant due to contact with maternal blood or fluids during the delivery.However, most of studies have neither quantified maternal viral load nor explored the correlation between the rate of vertical transmission and the duration of breastfeeding. On the other hand, experts have suggested that lesions in the breast tissue, such as cracked or bleeding nipples or lesions with serous exudates, could be an important source of infectious viral particles for the infant; however, this issue has not yet been studied. Nowadays, the HBV infection has not been considered a contraindication for breastfeeding in the infant; therefore, the WHO has recommended that all infants born to infected mothers should be breastfed for at least 4 months and ideally 6 months.5. Risk Factors for Vertical TransmissionAmong the risk factors identified for mother-to-child HBV transmission are HBeAg, maternal viral load, coinfection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), viral genotype and HBV mutants, among others (Figure 4).5.1. HBeAgHBeAg is a secretory protein of 17 kDa. After transcription of the precore/core ORF, the precore protein is translated in a product that is processed in the reticulum endoplasmic prior to secretion. Although HBeAg is not required for viral replication, this antigen has a role on the establishment of chronic infection and on the development on immunotolerance [77,78]. The marker HBeAg is strongly associated with risk of HBV vertical transmission. Indeed, in a case-control study carried out in India, HBV transmission from mother to child was reported in 65% (13/20) of infants born to HBeAg-positive and HBV DNA-positive mothers [60]. While, only 9.1% (1/11) of babies were HBV infected in born to mothers negative for both the HBeAg and viral genome but positive for HBsAg. Similarly, a study in China demonstrated that 69.7% (23/33) of infants born from HBeAg-positive mothers were HBsAg positives at birth, while none of the infants born from HBeAg-negative mothers were positive [79]. In addition, mothers whose infants were infected with HBV had higher viral loads than mothers whose infants were not infected (p = 0.04). In fact, HBeAg is a marker of high-level viral replication and risk of vertical transmission. Furthermore, fetal exposure to HBeAg during pregnancy has been reported to lead to neonatal immunotolerance to HBV proteins and, consequently, to chronic infection in infants. This is explained by the ability of the viral protein to cross the placental barrier and generate tolerance of HBV-specific T cells and macrophages to the virus in the infant [80,81].Animal models have been used to study the immunotolerance properties of HBeAg. Offspring were obtained by crossing female hemizygous HBV transgenic mice (TGD mice) to naive male mice; mouse pups exposed to maternal HBeAg were thus obtained [81]. Then, the offspring at 9 weeks were inoculated with the 1.3 mer HBV genome DNA into the liver, and HBV replication was demonstrated for 28 weeks in these animals. In contrast, inoculation of the HBV genome into mice born to HBV-negative females led to HBV elimination within 4 weeks. These results indicated that the intrauterine exposure to HBeAg establishes a persistent infection in the offspring. Interestingly, the population of INF-γ positive CD8+ T cells was 2.8% in the liver of control mice but only 0.5% in TGD mice. Additionally, CD8+ T cells in TGD mice expressed a high level of PD-1 (programmed death-1) and of PDL-1 (programmed death ligand-1) in Kupffer cells when compared with the control mice [82,83]. These interesting results suggest that HBV tolerance in the offspring of HBV-infected mothers may be due to decreased CD8 T cell responses to HBV that result from up regulation of PD-1 expression on CD8+ T cells and PD-L1 in Kupffer cells. Even though the ability of HBeAg to cross the murine placenta may not be enough evidence to prove that this also occurs in human placenta, it provided a possible mechanism to explain how the exposure to intrauterine HBeAg induces viral persistence and might favor vertical transmission. 5.2. Maternal DNA Viral LoadViral load has been identified as an important predictor and independent risk factor for HBV mother-to-child transmission. The prophylaxis effective rate of passive–active immunoprophylaxis is approximately 100% if viral load in the mother is <5.5 log 10 copies/mL before the delivery [84,85]. According to the results obtained by Singh et al. and Wiseman et al., a maternal viral load of >8 log 10 IU/mL is associated with failure of immunoprophylaxis, thus increasing the risk of mother-to-child transmission [60,86]. Moreover, a cohort study showed that infants born to HBeAg-positive mothers with viral load equal to or greater than 106 copies/mL failed immunoprophylaxis [8]. Indeed, after stratification of pre-delivery viral loads in the mothers to <106, 106–107, 107–108 and >108 copies/mL, the rates of immunoprophylaxis failure were 0%, 3.2% (3/95), 6.7% (19/282) and 7.6% (5/66), respectively (p < 0.001). These findings suggest that viral load in mothers may have a significant impact on immunoprophylaxis failure. The current clinical practice and clinical trials are adopting the HBV DNA level above 108 copies/mL as the threshold for intervention.5.3. Human Immunodeficiency Virus CoinfectionCoinfection with HIV has been also identified as a risk factor of HBV vertical transmission [87,88]. A study in South Africa reported a rate of HBV vertical transmission of 28% in HIV/HBV co-infected pregnant women; they were HBeAg positive with an average viral load of 8.3 IU/mL before delivery [89]. In contrast, in a study in Malawi, infants born to HBeAg-positive women with a viral load of >7.5 log10 IU/mL had an HBV transmission rate of 10% [88]. The mothers of these two studies never received antiretroviral treatment, thus increasing the risk for both HIV and HBV transmission. It is important to note that the risk of vertical transmission could be due to the presence of HBeAg and high viral loads in mothers (107–108 copies/mL).5.4. HBV Genotypes HBV is classified into ten main genotypes (A–J) and several subgenotypes [5,89,90].Despite a similarly high prevalence of HBV chronic carriers, the vertical transmission rate in East Asia, particularly in China (10–88%), is higher than in sub-Saharan Africa (≤8%) [91,92,93]. In East Asia, where genotypes B and C are prevalent, most infected women of gestational age are HBeAg+ with high viral load [94]. Meanwhile, in sub-Saharan Africa where HBV genotypes A1 or E are prevalent, seroconversion to anti-HBe occurs before age 15 years old; therefore, most women of gestational age are anti-HBe [95]. However, other studies are not conclusive about the association between the HBV genotype and the risk of vertical transmission [96,97]. Further studies that include other genotypes, such as E, F, G and H, are necessary to define the role of HBV genotypes in mother-to-infant HBV transmission.5.5. HBV Mutants The escape variants are non-synonymous mutations in the sequence encoding the “a” determinant of HBsAg. This is a highly conserved region overlapping with the region coding for viral polymerase, and is the major target for neutralizing antibodies against HBV. These mutations have been identified in individuals with HBV infection despite the presence of neutralizing antibodies.In a study carried out in China, 41 mothers whose children were HBsAg negative and anti-HBs positive were compared with 37 mothers whose children were HBsAg positive 1 year after HBV vaccination [96]. Interestingly, T123A and G145R mutations were observed only in failure-group mothers; no significant difference in the total mutation rate was observed between the groups. These results suggested that a high viral load and specific mutations, such as T123A and G145R, could be an important risk factors for immunization failure. However, another study described different mutation sites in the HBV pre-S/S ORF including 105 silent mutations and 5 missense mutations (A826G, C531T, T667C, C512T and C546A), but without significant differences in mutation frequencies and the risk of vertical transmission [98]. More robust association studies are needed to confirm whether escape mutants could play an important role in vertical transmission.Furthermore, A study on the presence of mutations in the precore region in sera from two infants with neonatal fulminant hepatitis B and their anti-HBe-positive mothers demonstrated the G28A mutation, which generates a stop codon in 18 HBV clones obtained from one of the mothers and in 31 clones from her infant [99]. Besides the stop codon G1896A has been described in cases of fulminant acute hepatitis B in young infants, but not in mothers. [100]. This mutation has also been observed in other studies [101,102]. These findings indicate that HBV mutants defective in the precore region in some carrier mothers are associated with fulminant hepatitis B in their babies.In a case-control study carried out in Thailand, serum samples from 14 infected infants (13 HBeAg-positive and one HBeAg-negative) who had been previously vaccinated and their respective mothers were analyzed for HBV DNA, genotypes and S and precore/core variants [103]. Additionally, 30 serum samples from HBsAg-positive mothers (15 HBeAg positive and 15 HBeAg negative) whose infants were not infected and received the complete vaccination schedule served as control. The study showed that HBeAg-positive mothers had viral DNA titers equal to or higher than those of HBeAg-negative mothers. The infants and their respective mothers had the same HBeAg status and were infected by the same HBV genotypes (B or C). Furthermore, although D144G and G145K mutations were reported in two infants, these were not found in their mothers; this result indicates that these mutations may originate or be selected under immune pressure during the infection of the infants. On the other hand, PC mutations were found in HBeAg-negative mothers, and the A1762T/G1764A double mutation was reported in two infants born to HBeAg-positive mothers; however, these mutations were not found in their mothers. Interestingly, among HBeAg-positive mothers with uninfected infants, the presence of BCP mutations/deletions was more common than in HBeAg-positive mothers whose infants were infected [103]. These results suggest that BCP mutations/deletions could act as a protective factor in the mother-to-child transmission of HBV. Although the possible mechanism by which precore/BCP mutations may protect against vertical transmission of HBV has not yet been well studied, it is possible that down regulation of precore mRNA transcription and subsequent decreased HBeAg production caused by the double mutation in BCP may contribute to decreased immunotolerance and enhanced host immune response, resulting in viral clearance after possible perinatal transmission. 6. Prevention of Vertical TransmissionThe prevention of vertical transmission is an essential step in reducing the global prevalence of chronic HBV, mainly in endemic areas where HBV infections occur mostly during infancy and early childhood. The key to eliminating the vertical transmission is screening and preventive measures both during pregnancy and after delivery. In the screening, all pregnant women should be tested for HBsAg; if the results are positive, the viral DNA must be quantified and the status of the HBeAg determined. This information is important because it indicates the risk of vertical transmission and can be established as proper clinical management.Currently two preventive measures have been established to avoid the vertical transmission of HBV: (1) immunoprophylaxis in child; (2) antiviral treatment for mother.6.1. ImmunoprophylaxisImmunoprophylaxis includes the administration of HBIG and HBV vaccine. The HBIG is commonly administered to the newborn within 24 h of birth, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The HBIG provides immediate but temporary passive immunization [38,104]. A meta-analysis showed that HBIG significantly reduced the HBV vertical transmission rate (OR 0.5, CI 0.41–0.6) as compared to the placebo when given to the newborn at birth [105]. Although the HBIG prophylaxis can reduce HBV infection in the neonate, the standard immunoprophylaxis regimen consists of administration of both HBIG and HBV vaccine simultaneously at two different sites within 24 h of delivery. The birth dose should be followed by two (1–2 months and 6–8 months of age) or three doses (2, 4 and 6 months of age) with a minimum interval of four weeks. The dosages and schedules may vary according to the national routine immunization programs established in each country [1,106].Some studies have shown that vaccination alone may be equally effective [107,108]. However, it has been demonstrated that the immunoprophylaxis using both HBV vaccine and HBIG reduce the vertical transmission from 90% to 5–10%. In the previously commented meta-analysis, children who received the HBV vaccine alone had a relative risk infection of 0.28, while adding HBIG reduced the risk to 0.08 when compared with patients who received a placebo or no intervention [105]. These findings demonstrate that adherence to the HBV immunoprophylaxis regimen in the neonate (vaccine and HBIG) prevents transmission of infection from HBeAg-positive mothers to their infants. However, immunoprophylaxis has some limitations. It is only effective against infection acquired via perinatal or postnatal transmission, and it does not protect against transplacental transmission [11,109,110]. The above-mentioned transplacental leakage or HBV-infected villous endothelial cells and infected maternal peripheral blood mononuclear cells are the possible mechanisms that explain the low protection of immunoprophylaxis in intrauterine transmission. Indeed, HBIG given to mothers in the third trimester has not been shown to be effective in reducing vertical transmission. A randomized trial of case-controls in China studying 250 HBeAg positive pregnant women (117 cases and 133 controls) and their neonates showed that there was no difference in the number of infected infants born to mothers who received three doses of HBIG in the third trimester of the pregnancy and those who did not. In addition, a high viral load and HBeAg positivity may increase the risk of immunoprophylaxis failure [109]. Another putative mechanism of failed immunoprophylaxis is escape mutants. These mutants are variants that are found in lower proportion in the viral population and are selected by immune pressure during HBV immunoprophylaxis; therefore, these strains could contribute to immunoprophylaxis failure. Although the impact that these mutations may have on the success of immunization programs has not been well elucidated, it is possible that these variants could infect previously immunized individuals. The G145R mutant located in the “a” determinant region of HBsAg is known to be the most important escape variant. Studies conducted in Taiwan to evaluate the efficacy of the vaccine and the occurrence of escape mutants have shown that the G145R mutation is the most frequent in the population since the introduction of the vaccine more than 20 years ago [111]. Similarly, the G145R mutation has been reported in a study conducted in children born to HBV-infected mothers who had the G145R mutant as a minority variant [108]. The study reported a G145R mutant frequency of 24% (6/25) in children who became infected due to the failure of immunoprophylaxis and of 10.3% (13/126) in children who had not received immunoprophylaxis. However,, the infection did not progress in any of the infants born to mothers infected with the G145R variant, despite that the mothers were HBeAg positive with high viral load [112]. Escape mutants have also been identified circulating in indigenous children and mothers in the state of Amazonas, in southeast Colombia [25]. The viral genome (S ORF) was detected in 8.3% (2/31) of serum samples obtained from anti-HBc positive children and in 3.1% (5/159) of samples from anti-HBc positive mothers. Four mutants were identified in three serum samples obtained from mothers, G145R and the two potential escape mutants L109R and G130E. Interestingly, the escape mutant W156* was identified in a sample obtained from a child having undergone the complete vaccination schedule; this mutation generates a stop codon resulting a truncated protein. Although, in this study the mutants were not detected in mother–child pairs, possibly because of minority sequences, it cannot be ruled out that they are not being transmitted from mother to child in these populations. Additional studies are necessary to elucidate the frequency and the epidemiological impact that these mutants have in vertical transmission and in the effectiveness of current vaccination strategies.6.2. Antiviral TreatmentsSome studies evaluated the efficacy of antiviral treatments in reducing the HBV vertical transmission rate [113,114,115,116,117,118,119]. A placebo-controlled study evaluated the efficacy of lamivudine in mothers with a high viral load (>1000 mEq/mL). A dose of 100 mg of lamivudine or placebo was administered from week 32 of pregnancy to week 4 postpartum to 150 mothers (149 were HBeAg-positive). The HBsAg positivity rate in infants was 18% in the lamivudine group and 39% in the placebo group [113]. The results of these studies suggest a reduction in HBV transmission in children born to mothers treated with lamivudine. Moreover, an observational study demonstrated that although treatment with lamivudine in the third trimester of pregnancy reduces viral load in women with antiviral treatment when compared with untreated women, the presence of mutants resistant to lamivudine (substitution in codons 181 and 204) can affect the response to treatment [114]. This study showed that lamivudine could have a poor antiviral effect in the third trimester, and it may generate resistant viral variants in a short time.Given the limitations of lamivudine treatment, several trials demonstrated that Telbivudine was more effective at reducing maternal viral load. In a case-control study conducted in China, the antiviral effect of telbivudine was evaluated in 135 HBeAg-positive pregnant women with viral loads of >107 copies/mL) [115]. Telbivudine treatment was started between 20 and 32 weeks of gestation and continued until 4 weeks postpartum or 28 weeks, depending on the alanine aminotransferase level. Telbivudine treatment was started between 20 and 32 weeks of gestation and continued until 4 weeks postpartum or 28 weeks, depending on the alanine aminotransferase level. In mothers who received the treatment, the viral load was reduced by an average of 2.44 ± 1.79 log10 copies/mL before delivery; the HBV genome was not detected in 33% of mothers when compared with the untreated controls. It is important to note that all babies in the study received combined prophylaxis with the HBIG/vaccine at birth. On the other hand, the HBsAg was not detected in infants born to telbivudine-treated mothers, while HBsAg positivity was 8% in infants of untreated mothers. It is important to mention that all the babies in the study received combined prophylaxis with HBIG/vaccine and none of them had birth defects in either group. The efficacy and safety of Telbivudine was also evaluated in a meta-analysis of six studies [116]. In this meta-analysis, the treatment group consisted of 306 mothers who received telbivudine in the second or third trimester of pregnancy until delivery or 1 month postpartum and a control group (270 mothers) who did not receive any antiviral treatment. Analyzes reported significantly lower HBsAg and viral genome positivity in newborns born to mothers in the telbivudine-treated group when compared to the control group; the newborns received the full regimen of immunoprophylaxis at birth. These results demonstrate that the administration of telbivudine at the end of pregnancy decreases the risk of intrauterine HBV infection without apparent adverse effects.A third antiviral Tenofovir has been shown to be effective in reducing maternal viral load. The efficacy of this antiviral was evaluated in a retrospective study conducted in the third trimester of pregnancy in 11 women with viral loads of >106 copies/mL. Interestingly, the maternal viral load decreased from 8.87 log 10 copies/mL to 5.25 log 10 copies/mL at delivery; none of the newborns were HBsAg positive and received passive/active prophylaxis. There were no complications during delivery or birth defects [117]. Similar results were obtained in a case-control study that included 45 HBeAg-positive pregnant women with high viral loads greater than 107 copies/mL, 21 of them treated with tenofovir between weeks 18–27 of gestation and 24 untreated. There was no HBsAg positivity in infants born to tenofovir-treated mothers, but it was detected in infants of untreated mothers (8.3%). All infants received the full regimen of HBV immunoprophylaxis [118]. These findings suggest that tenofovir is safe and effective for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HBV.The global recommendation is to use Tenofovir, Lamivudine and Telbivudine during pregnancy, but not Entecavir due to its questionable use. One study using a mice model demonstrates that the use of Entecavir could permeate the placental barrier and interfere with fetal development [119]. The study demonstrates that small amounts of ETV can cross the placenta in this animal model, which would indicate low fetal exposure to ETV. Finally, the use of other drugs such as interferon alpha and pegylated interferon is not indicated for vertical transmission prevention because they are not as effective in viral elimination and have many side effects on the patient.Some experts recommend continued antiviral therapy after delivery, but its implications during breastfeeding are still unknown. A study of pregnant women treated with Lamivudine showed that breast milk contained only 684 ng/mL of Lamivudine in contrast to its blood level of 1070 ng/mL [120]. No correlation was found between HBV DNA detection in breast milk and child infection. Therefore, these findings support the clinical-based recommendations of the use of post-partum antiviral therapy in HBV positive women to eliminate this residual transmission.7. ConclusionsHBV transmission from mother to infant still represents a major proportion of chronic hepatitis B cases in some regions of the world. Prevention of these infections is the key to controlling and finally eradicating HBV, fulfilling the WHO 2030 goal (an HBsAg prevalence in children of no more than 0.1%). Unfortunately, not all countries have 90% vaccination coverage and not all babies born to infected mothers receive immunoprophylaxis on time and the complete scheme. Additionally, both HBeAg positivity and high levels of viremia in mothers are factors that confer an additional risk for immunoprophylaxis failure. Therefore, it is necessary to identify HBsAg positive pregnant women and to provide optimum prophylaxis to their newborn children (vaccine combined with HBIG, with maternal antiviral drug treatment or all the three) principally in endemic areas.


Title: The Impact of Drugs and Substance Abuse on Viral Pathogenesis—A South African Perspective

1. Illicit Drugs of Abuse and Viral InfectionsGlobally, the use of illicit drugs has a significant negative impact on society, resulting in years of premature death or disability [1]. Substance use disorder (SUD) can be attributed to social pressure, peer pressure, dysfunctional families, genetic factors, emotional problems, mental health problems, loss of respect, trauma experience, loss of livelihood, and prior substance exposure [2,3]. People who use drugs (PWUDs) have high mortality rates compared to the general population globally [4,5]. SUD continues to be a major obstacle in combating the global pandemic of viral infections. According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, PWUDs who engage in risky drug-related behaviours experience elevated risk of becoming infected with or transmitting viral infections such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and viral hepatitis [hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV)] [6]. There are two primary ways in which these viral infections can be acquired in this population: (1) when people inject drugs and share contaminated needles or other drug equipment, and (2) when drugs impair judgment and people engage in unprotected sexual activities with an infected partner [6]. Drug use and addiction have been associated with HIV/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) since its first recognition. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), injecting drug use contributed to almost 20% of documented male HIV cases and 21% of female HIV cases in 2016 [7]. A global meta-analysis reported that 18% of people who inject drugs (PWIDs) were living with HIV, 52% were HCV-seropositive, and 9% were HBV surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive [8]. Table 1 shows a summary of studies conducted worldwide on drugs of abuse, such as prescription opioids, heroin, methamphetamine or amphetamine-type stimulants (ATSs), cocaine, crack cocaine, tranquilizers, stimulants, sedatives, tramadol, and pethidine, and their association with high-risk exposure to blood-borne viruses (BBVs) in PWIDs [9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. PWIDs experience a significant burden of BBVs compared to the general population. The aim of this review is to (1) highlight what is known about the prevalence of BBVs in SUD and drug abuse, and to (2) address the significant impact of abused addictive drugs and polysubstance use on viral replication and transmission with a specific focus on nyaope—a novel psychoactive drug that is on the rise in South African settings.2. Substance Abuse in AfricaAfrican countries experience different levels of drug abuse, with some regions experiencing higher rates than others. Multiple factors contribute to drug abuse, including poverty, unemployment, social inequality, and lack of access to education and healthcare [3,16]. The abuse of illicit drugs such as cocaine, methamphetamine, and heroin is a major problem in many urban areas worldwide, including South Africa [17]. Therefore, in many parts of the world, substance abuse among young people remains a significant public health concern. Commonly abused substances include alcohol, cocaine, heroin, marijuana (cannabis), tobacco, methamphetamine, and opioids (see Table 1). Recent studies conducted in Africa demonstrate that substance abuse is highly prevalent among young people, which results in physical and psychological problems such as fighting, vandalism, theft, engaging in unprotected sex, medical problems, personal injury, and impaired relationships [18,19,20]. Moreover, using more than one substance is common among substance users. In Africa, illicit substances such as cannabis (the most commonly used substance, present in West and Central Africa between 5.2% and 13.5%), amphetamine stimulants, and benzodiazepines are on the rise [21]. Additionally, alcohol, tobacco, cannabis, heroin, and Khat (Catha edulis) are the most common drugs abused by young people in sub-Saharan Africa [22,23]. As a result, Africa has been recognised in the last decade as a consumer and destination for illicit drugs [24,25]. A systematic review reported the overall prevalence of any substance use among adolescents in sub-Saharan Africa to be 42% and 56% in Central Africa [23]. Alcohol and tobacco are the most prevalent substances across the continent at 41% and 46%, respectively [23]. The use of illicit drugs is associated with a high risk of contracting or transmitting viral illnesses such as HIV, HBV, and HCV among PWID/UDs3. Substance Abuse and Associated BBVs in South AfricaSouth Africa has the highest rate of drug consumption in Africa and is nearly twice that of the rest of the world [26]. According to the South African national estimates, 10% of the adult population (ages 15 years and older) consume harmful amounts of alcohol (17% of men and 5% of women) and 9% (13% of men and 4% of women) use illicit drugs [27]. In a study conducted in five cities across four South African provinces [Gauteng (from sites in Centurion, Pretoria, and Johannesburg), KwaZulu-Natal (from sites in Durban), and Western Cape Province (from sites in Cape Town)], 14% of PWIDs were infected with HIV in 2013 [9]. However, there is limited research on HBV and HCV among PWIDs in South Africa (Table 1). Most South African studies about PWIDs are limited to programmatic data and small, single-site studies. A study conducted in Cape Town reported an HCV seroprevalence of 27% among men who have sex with men (MSM) who use drugs, of which 80% injected heroin or methamphetamine in the previous 3 months [11]. Although there are limited data, the number of PWIDs in South Africa exceeds 75,000, and this key population accounts for ~1% of new HIV infections according to the South African National AIDS Council’s mid-term report for 2019 [28]. According to reports by Scheibe et al., Tshwane has the highest HCV prevalence (55%) among PWIDs, the highest HIV prevalence (21%), and a 5% HBV prevalence, primarily from homeless black men from the three major South African cities [10]. Therefore, it is not surprising that an increase in viral infections is associated with intravenous drug use as observed in other studies worldwide [12,13,14,15,29,30,31,32]. In South Africa, substance abuse is a serious and complex problem, with varying substances being abused, such as illicit street drug cocktails known as nyaope.4. Nyaope—A Highly Addictive Novel Psychoactive Drug in South AfricaNyaope is the street name that is commonly used in South African settings to describe a heroin-based powder mixture that is mostly commonly smoked with cannabis [33,34,35,36,37]. Media reports suggest that nyaope has been used as early as 2000 [38], although there is a lack of empirical evidence to support or refute this timeline. Instead, from 2006 and later, papers were published that provided concrete evidence of recreational nyaope use [17,39,40,41]. In South Africa, nyaope has emerged as a new illicit drug that is highly addictive, very potent, and commonly abused by young people and mostly from poor backgrounds, predominately from black townships (ranging between the ages of 15 and 64 years) [34,42,43]. Fifteen percent of South African youth engage in drug use, and the chances of encountering nyaope are higher [44]. In response to the country’s growing use of nyaope, the South African government criminalised the possession and distribution of nyaope in 2014 [36]. In addition, the sale of nyaope carries a potential 25-year prison term [36].Nyaope is almost exclusively found in South Africa. It is most commonly used by young and unemployed black people from poor socioeconomic backgrounds due to its low cost (±ZAR 30 as of April 2018 per joint), and is the most common form of heroin used among black South Africans [34]. Nyaope is highly addictive, and once one becomes dependent on the drug, it is difficult to quit [34]. This has been shown by users who suffer from severe withdrawal symptoms (severe unbearable cramps) when they try to quit on their own [17,45,46]. Nyaope is an extremely potent narcotic drug compared to other well-known drugs; nevertheless, the chemical composition of nyaope has changed over time [47]. It frequently contains compounds including antiretrovirals (ARVs), cannabis, heroin, rat poison, and detergent [48,49,50]. Recreational drug mixtures containing ARVs may also contain harmful substances such as rat poison, household cleaning supplies, milk powder, pool cleaner, and bicarbonate of soda [51,52]. Chemical profiling of the compounds present in nyaope mixtures is limited to a small number of studies [17,38,39,40,41,49,52,53,54,55] (see Table 2). This drug cocktail is commonly referred to as nyaope [17,34,35,36,39,41,43,44,46,47,52,54,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72]. According to prior media reports and studies, this drug cocktail has also been referred to by other names, including whoonga [38,39,41,46,49,52,54,59,62,63,64,68,70,71,73], wunga [46,62,64], plazana [53], kataza [40,52,68], unga [17,53,70], BoMkon [41,53], and sugars or pinch [35,68,70]. Whoonga, also known as wunga in isiZulu, was the subject of multiple news stories in 2010 [74]. According to many reports, it was purported to be a combination of illegal substances like methamphetamine, heroin, and/or marijuana, as well as ARVs (efavirenz) [75,76]. All of these names refer to cocktails containing heroin and cannabis in some form and are introduced to disguise the illegal drugs from law enforcement. The complete characteristics of the studies that have studied the impact of nyaope are summarised in Table 2.5. The Transition of Using Nyaope from Smoking to Injecting NyaopePreviously, nyaope concoctions have been known to be smoked with cannabis; however, recent reports now suggest the injection of nyaope either intravenously and via subcutaneous administration (e.g., dissolving nyaope powder in water and injecting it directly into the user’s veins) [33,37,43,56]. Nyaope users are commonly exposed to blood through the sharing of blood products via illicit and unsafe contaminated injections, needles, and syringes. In South Africa, this pattern of practice is known as “Bluetooth”, and it entails sharing of drugs by injecting a syringe full of blood directly into another person immediately after the initial injection. This pattern has also been identified in HIV-positive injecting drug users (IDUs) in Tanzania, where it is known as “Flashblood” [78,79]. According to media reports, “Bluetooth” is a new habit that has recently developed among IDUs which is a very dangerous practice of sharing blood that exacerbates the transmission of blood-borne viruses (BBVs) [80,81]. It is believed that the process of transitioning from smoking to injecting is a way to cope with a variety of resource constraints, as well as to satisfy curiosity and pleasure [82]. According to the media report, the “Bluetooth” sharing of drugs occurs when nyaope addicts and their peers do not have money to buy the drug and tend to share blood from an already drugged user as a way to feed each other’s cravings [83,84]. Therefore, the drug powder will be first mixed with water and drawn into a syringe. Thereafter, the first person will inject the drug into his veins and immediately after injection withdraw the blood and share it with the next person [83,84]. According to users, injecting the drug is more potent than smoking it [83,84]. Currently, injecting nyaope is on the rise in most regions of South Africa [73]. Other studies about drugs of abuse and their association with BBVs besides nyaope have been conducted worldwide (see Table 1). A study conducted in the United States of America (USA) in patients with opioid use disorder and injected drugs found that these patients are at an increased risk of HIV and HCV infections compared to the general population, with prevalence rates of 53% vs. 3% and 6% vs. 2%, respectively [13]. Another study by Cai and colleagues reported 11% HIV, 78% HBV, and 71% HCV infections among people who reported having used methamphetamine, cocaine, or heroin at some point in their lives [14]. To date, South Africa has limited data available on the dangers of using nyaope and its association with BBVs. Therefore, the abuse of illicit drugs via injection has a high risk of exposure to BBVs in PWIDs. 6. Risk Factors Associated with Using NyaopeBBVs such as HIV, HBV, and HCV are the most common viral infections in PWIDs because of the common route of transmission [10,82]. Hence, high-risk practices of sharing contaminated needles, syringes, and other drug-injection equipment put PWIDs at a high risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV, HBV, and HCV infections [10,13]. In addition, nyaope use in South Africa is growing at an alarming rate and becoming a public health concern. Most data about nyaope abuse are derived from public media reports. According to the media publication, approximately 45% of individuals who abuse nyaope via “Bluetooth” are HIV-infected [80]. In another recent study of individuals who practiced the “Bluetooth” method of sharing drugs, 35% were HIV-positive [81]. Thus, the “Bluetooth” sharing of nyaope exacerbates the transmission of viral infections. A wide range of clinical manifestations has been observed in nyaope users, including diarrhoea, facial swelling, vomiting, stomach cramps, erectile dysfunction, vein damage, right heart failure, and cortical atrophy [46,47,58,70]. Recently, two studies included nyaope users who used the drug cocktail while pregnant in South Africa (see Table 2) [59,65]. Among pregnant nyaope users, one infant died, whose cause of death was associated with the mother’s nyaope usage [59]. Other infants born to mothers who used nyaope suffered from septic shock, respiratory distress, seizures, multi-organ dysfunction, and retinopathy of prematurity [59,65].7. Drugs of Abuse and the Immune SystemUnregulated/illicit drugs of abuse impair immune system functions, causing the immune system to be more vulnerable to infectious diseases when illicit drugs are added to cells of the immune system in vitro [85,86]. There is growing evidence that drugs such as methamphetamine, cocaine, opioids, and marijuana increase HIV, HBV, and HCV replication both in vitro and in animal models [87,88,89]. Several mechanisms contribute to the decreased ability to control pathogens and limit their subsequent clearance, including the impaired function of natural killer cells, T-cells, B-cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells, macrophages, the altered expression of cytokines and chemokines, as well as weak intestinal barrier integrity [86,90]. Drugs of abuse can impair immune system functions, affecting both innate and adaptive immunity. An array of mechanisms contributes to the immunomodulatory effects of drugs of abuse, including direct cellular toxicity, the dysregulation of immune signalling pathways, and alterations in inflammatory responses, as reviewed by [86,90]. 8. Impact of HIV on Cells of the Immune SystemIn vitro studies from various laboratories have also provided direct evidence that opiates (such as morphine) promote the HIV infection of HIV target cells [87,88,89]. Morphine has been shown to stimulate HIV replication within human monocytes/macrophages [91,92,93], T lymphocytes [94,95], Kupffer cells [96], human neuroblastoma cells [97], and human brain cells [98,99]. Dr. Blackard’s research group has also shown that the synthetic opioid fentanyl enhances HIV replication in several cell types through the enhanced expression of the CCR5 and CXCR4 chemokine receptors [88,89]. Therefore, these studies are paving the way for a better understanding of drug use and HIV/AIDS comorbidities. However, there are no data regarding the impact of nyaope on viral pathogenesis to date.9. Drugs of Abuse and HIV InfectionGlobally, South Africa carries the highest prevalence of HIV infection, and this is due to a variety of biological, socio-behavioural, contextual, and structural factors [100,101,102,103]. Increasing access to HIV treatment has been the country’s priority in recent years. As a result of antiretroviral therapy (ART), mortality and morbidity have decreased, and lifespans have increased among people living with HIV. Adherence to HIV treatment is an important determinant for achieving the suppression of the virus and preventing drug-resistant strains from occurring. However, adherence to the daily intake of HIV treatment remains a challenge [104]. The South African National Department of Health implemented an effective programme in 2010 to provide free ARVs to HIV-infected South Africans [105]. In 2014, The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) launched the 95-95-95 goals. The goal was to diagnose 95% of all HIV-positive individuals, provide ART to 95% of those diagnosed, and achieve viral suppression for 95% of those treated by 2030 [106]. Because of ARVs being widely available, South Africa has been experiencing a rise in the recreational use of ARVs.The recreational use of ARVs other than for the treatment of HIV infection has raised concerns, and understanding this phenomenon requires an examination of the physiological effects of these drugs. While not all ARVs have neuropsychiatric effects, one prominent drug in HIV treatment, efavirenz (EFV), possesses similar psychoactive properties to the hallucinogenic drug lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), leading to symptoms such as mania and psychosis [62,107]. Additionally, both EFV and ritonavir (RTV) produce euphoric effects when combined with substances such as methamphetamine, ecstasy, heroin, tobacco, and cannabis [53,108,109]. ARVs may potentially be diverted for “alternative” uses, such as the “breast enhancement” recorded in Nigeria with Combivir [lamivudine (3TC) and zidovudine (ZDV)] [110]. Another study by Inciardi et al. reported the recreational use of EFV and RTV in clubs and street populations [111]. In South Africa, the recreational use of ARTs is referred to as whoonga or nyaope. Certain nyaope mixtures have also been reported to contain HIV ARVs such as EFV, RTV, and nevirapine (NVP) [17,38,45,49,50,51,54,60,76] (Table 3). As a result of the misuse of ARVs, the development of resistance to ARVs can occur. Therefore, with the rise of drug abuse in South Africa and other countries, there is limited data on drug–drug interactions and their impact on ART adherence. In these situations, prospective patients frequently disregard the recommended course of treatment. A recent systemic review by Varshney et al. investigated the risks and consequences associated with the usage of nyaope and the recreational use of ARVs in South Africa [112]. Findings from this review documented that, due to the inclusion of ARVs in nyaope, poor adherence to ARV treatment occurs in HIV-infected individuals who are nyaope users, and that users are often at risk for hepatitis B and C, tuberculosis, and infective endocarditis infections [43,46,64]. HIV-positive nyaope users were more likely to engage in high-risk behaviours and to have high viral loads [46]. Furthermore, HIV-positive nyaope users were involved in transactional sex to finance their nyaope use [60], injected drug cocktails [60,64], and had poor adherence to ARV treatments [46]. Therefore, the inclusion of ARVs in some nyaope mixtures could lead to the emergence of drug resistance and ultimately lead to poor response to HIV treatment. This may potentially lead to an increase in the development of drug-resistant strains in those who use these drugs outside of the prescribed instructions, and may also potentiate pre-treatment drug resistance in those that have not started treatment, especially those that do not know their HIV status. The complexity of ARV abuse highlights the need for additional investigation and treatment interventions to address the potential hazards and negative effects associated with the non-medical use of these medications. Table 3 shows a summary of studies that have investigated the recreational use of ARVs worldwide.10. Impact of Substance Abuse in HIV-Infected PopulationsAlcohol and substance use are commonly believed to impact HIV viral control by affecting the nonadherence to ARV medications [113,114,115,116,117]. As ARTs have become widely available, active alcohol and substance use negatively affect the goal of achieving and maintaining an undetectable HIV plasma viral load. According to some studies, substance use (methamphetamine, cocaine, opioids, and cannabis) may directly impact immune activation pathways and facilitate HIV replication [118,119,120,121,122]. In addition, drug abuse is associated with increased HIV infection, neurocognitive impairment, HIV replication, morbidity, and mortality when compared to HIV-uninfected drug users and HIV-infected non-drug users [123,124]. Cannabis, cocaine, morphine, methamphetamine, heroin, and amphetamine are the most commonly abused illicit drugs in HIV-infected populations worldwide. HIV-infected individuals receive ART to suppress viral replication and control disease progression. However, with the increasing incidence of SUD among HIV-infected individuals, several factors, such as the decreased adherence to ART treatment, uncontrolled viraemia, and increased chronic inflammatory disease, are possible causes of reduced CD4+ T-cell reconstitution in this population group [125,126]. The use of drugs such as methamphetamine also increases the risk of HIV infection worldwide [127,128]. Among other addictive drugs, methamphetamine has been revealed as a highly addictive stimulant that increases sexual desire, self-confidence, and which provides sustained energy as well as decreasing inhibitions [129]. As a result of these physiological effects, methamphetamine users may be more likely to engage in high-risk behaviours of HIV transmission, such as having multiple partners, not using condoms, and trading sex for money or drugs [130]. Evidence from other South African studies about risky behaviours associated with methamphetamine use exists even among users of other substances [131,132]. Adherence to ARTs can be negatively impacted by substance addiction, especially alcohol and drug dependence. Drug users who are HIV-infected can find it difficult to stick to their prescribed medications, which could result in inadequate viral suppression and a higher chance of disease progression.11. Impact of Drug Abuse on Drug MetabolismIt has also been established that substance abuse, such as of alcohol, tobacco, and methamphetamine, decrease the adherence to ART treatment in HIV-infected individuals [133]. Therefore, drugs of abuse may potentially interfere with the ART drug metabolism in HIV-infected individuals. A review by Kumar et al. proposed that common metabolic enzymes involved in the metabolism of ART and alcohol (CYP2E1 and CYP3A4), nicotine (CYP1A1, CYP2A6, and CYP3A4), methamphetamine (CYP2D6 and CYP3A4), cocaine/opioids (CYP3A4), and marijuana/tetrahydrocannabinol (CYP2C9) may result in an altered bioavailability of ART drugs (the ability of a drug or other substance to be absorbed and used by the body) [134]. Subsequently, drug–drug interactions between drugs of abuse and ART drugs mediated by CYP enzymes may result in the decreased adherence to ART, leading to an increased HIV replication in HIV-infected individuals [134]. Although highly active ART has been a great success, new challenges have arisen that could lead to the failure of the treatment [135,136]. One of these challenges is the appearance of interactions between ART drugs and medications or illicit drugs taken concurrently [135,136]. Consequently, as some nyaope cocktails contain ARVs, nyaope use could also lead to the poor adherence to ART drugs. Currently, no studies have evaluated how nyaope mixtures—especially those containing antiretrovirals—affect virus replication, drug interactions, and/or cellular cytotoxicity. Therefore, it is crucial to study the effects of nyaope and drug interactions on the viral replication of the BBVs that are prevalent in nyaope users.12. Alcohol and HIV InfectionStudies have been conducted on the impact of alcohol and viral infections. HIV infection and transmission can be worsened by alcohol, reducing viral suppression, increasing the emergence of viral resistance to ARV therapies, and opportunistic infections and progression that can be exacerbated by alcohol-associated immunosuppression [137,138]. In vitro, HIV gp120 and alcohol increase the permeability of the blood–brain barrier [139]. Other studies have found that alcohol increased HIV replication in cells such as T lymphocytes, monocyte-derived macrophages, monocyte-derived dendritic cells, epithelial cells, and oral keratinocytes [116,140]. Based on the 2008 population-based survey report in South Africa, hazardous, harmful, and dependent alcohol use was 9.0% among women, 17.0% among men, and 2.9% among individuals 15 years and older [141]. In 2015, alcohol was reported to be the fifth leading cause of death and disability [142], which is, therefore, the leading cause of sexually transmitted infections, unemployment, criminal activities, and interpersonal violence in South Africa [143,144]. A study conducted in Tshwane Metropole in South Africa established that 53% of individuals heavily consume alcohol (70% men and 30% women) [145]. The Tshwane Metropole, as well as other areas in South Africa, has also been reported to have a high prevalence of substance abuse by various media reports and research studies [69,146,147].13. Drugs of Abuse and Viral Hepatitis (HBV and HCV)PWIDs are at risk of contracting HBV and HCV infection. PWIDs frequently share needles, which is the main route of transmission of HBV and HCV [148,149]. Although HBV is vaccine-preventable, it remains the main leading cause of death worldwide. According to a global systematic review of HBV infection conducted across 161 countries, HBsAg prevalence was estimated at 4%, with the highest endemicity in Africa (a total of 9%) and the Western Pacific (a total of 5%) [150]. In observational studies of the general population, healthcare workers, and pregnant women, the seroprevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) was estimated to be 7%, indicating a high intermediate endemicity, with an estimated 3.5 million chronically infected individuals, and ~70% are infected with the HBV subgenotype A1 in South Africa [151]. In South Africa, the seroprevalence of HCV and identifiable risk factors are still poorly understood and are being characterised. The prevalence of HCV is estimated to be <1%, which indicates that 600,000 people are infected with the virus based on HCV antibody (anti-HCV) status [152]. South Africa has limited data on HBV and HCV infections in PWIDs, with the latest data from a study that was performed in three South African cities. According to Scheibe et al., HBV and HCV prevalence rates in South African PWIDs are 5% and 55%, respectively [10]. Infection with chronic HBV and HCV causes significant liver-related morbidity and mortality worldwide. However, HCV can be cured by new direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapies, leading to a sustained viral response. An HBV cure remains a challenge due to persistent covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) in the liver, which is the major barrier to eliminating chronic hepatitis B infection [153]. According to a global systemic review conducted by Degenhardt and colleagues, PWUDs are more likely to have a high HCV burden than other people, with over 50% prevalence estimates among them [8]. Opioids and other drugs of abuse have also been found to increase HBV replication in vitro. Evidence shows that opioid receptors are expressed in the liver, where they are important mediators of liver disease [154,155,156]. Furthermore, it has been established that multiple opioid receptors are expressed by hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), which ultimately contribute to liver fibrosis [154,155,156]. In addition, morphine, heroin, and methamphetamine have been shown to increase HCV replication in vitro [157,158,159]. A recent report by Dr. Blackard’s group from the USA demonstrated that fentanyl increases HCV and HBV replication in Huh7.5JFH1 and HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell lines and leads to significant apoptosis of hepatocyte cell lines [88]. Therefore, the abuse of drugs and other substances may ultimately have an impact on viral hepatitis and liver disease progression.14. Alcohol and Viral Hepatitis (HBV and HCV)Globally, HBV, HCV, as well as excessive alcohol use causes liver injury. Since the liver is a primary site for both HBV and HCV replication and ethanol metabolism, the ethanol metabolism is often associated with viral hepatitis. An alcohol-related liver disease accompanied by hepatitis virus accelerates the disease’s progression to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [160]. Existing evidence from the literature reported that alcohol consumption contributes to apoptosis, oxidative stress, immune dysfunction (lower cytotoxic T-cell and helper T-cell activity and decreased cytokine production), increased HCV viral load, and increased HCV quasispecies; however, the mechanisms by which alcohol alters HCV replication and disease are largely unknown [161,162,163]. Studies have reported that a synergistic hepatotoxic effect of alcohol and HCV infection increased the risk of advanced liver disease, the rapid progression of fibrosis, and a higher prevalence of liver cancer (HCC) [164,165]. In vitro studies have also reported an increased viral replication of HCV following the exposure of permissive cells to alcohol [166]. Additionally, individuals who are HBV-infected are at greater risk of fibrosis as a result of alcohol abuse [167], as well as enhancing liver necroinflammation changes in HBsAg-positive patients [168]. A study by Larkin et al. described alcohol consumption to increase HBsAg and viral DNA in transgenic mice [169]. In addition, another study demonstrated increased HBsAg levels in HepG2 cells in the presence of ethanol [170]. Nevertheless, the mechanisms by which alcohol impacts HBV replication and disease are not well studied.15. RecommendationsEven though nyaope is becoming more prevalent through smoking and injections in South Africa, the South African government has not fully embraced the harm reduction that accompanies nyaope use [60]. South Africa has a limited number of harm-reduction programmes, with only the City of Tshwane Municipality sponsoring the Community-Oriented Substance Use Programme (COSUP), which is South Africa’s first publicly funded harm-reduction intervention for unregulated drugs [72,146]. The Ivan Toms Centre for Men’s Health (ITCMH), operating under the Anova Health Institute in Cape Town, provides MSM primary healthcare services on sexual health [11]. These services include HIV testing, antiretroviral therapy, STI diagnosis and treatment, and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) [11]. In 2012, the institution established an MSM-targeted drug harm-reduction programme, including a needle exchange and without opioid-substitution therapy, funded by the AIDS Fonds, Mainline, the Netherlands, to offer harm-reduction services to MSM who are drug users [11]. Yet, during this period, it was established that 27% of the MSM participants tested positive for antibodies to HCV. This shows that BBV infections continue to predominate in MSM who are also IDUs. Therefore, future research should evaluate the effectiveness of alternative therapies and antiviral medications for treating BBVs among IDUs. As a result, treatment approaches could be identified and treatment outcomes could be improved.Without accessible harm-reduction programmes, PWIDs are at high risk for BBVs (HIV, HBV, and HCV). The coverage of needle, syringe, and opioid substitution therapy (OST) services in South Africa is below the global recommendations, and no hepatitis services currently exist for PWIDs [10], which requires strong intervention for harm reduction in drug users. South Africa is considered to be one of the most endemic countries worldwide, with high rates of SUD, despite the limited data available on BBVs among drug users. Nyaope is a commonly abused drug in many parts, if not all areas, in South Africa, and appears to be the most abused drug among the youth. It continues to cause detrimental effects on the health and well-being of individuals that abuse it. As a result, it is not surprising that injecting nyaope increases the risk of the transmission of BBVs, as with other abused drugs. In addition, nyaope is thought to be exceptionally potent when compared to other substances, with serious health effects and addiction. A worrying component of nyaope mixtures is the presence of ARVs, which are drugs used for the treatment of HIV infection. It is believed that this practice stems from the belief that ARVs can enhance the effects of nyaope. However, the misuse of ARVs in this manner poses significant risks to individuals, as these medications are designed for specific medical purposes and should only be taken under professional guidance. In addition to ARVs, nyaope often contains other substances commonly associated with drug abuse, such as cannabis and heroin. The inclusion of rat poison and detergent further highlights the hazardous nature of this drug. These substances are not intended for human consumption and can have severe toxic effects on the body. It is worth noting that the chemical composition of nyaope is not consistent and can vary over time. The variability of these components adds to the unpredictability and dangers associated with nyaope, making it even more challenging to address from a health and law enforcement perspective. Given how potent nyaope is and how its chemical composition is constantly changing, it is crucial to increase public awareness about its risks and implement effective strategies to combat its production, distribution, and usage. To address the complexities and dangers associated with nyaope and to protect individuals from its detrimental effects, significant effort needs to be made to identify effective prevention and treatment strategies that address the complex social and environmental factors that contribute to viral infections among drug users, such as public health measures, law enforcement actions, and educational campaigns. Hence, more studies of drugs of abuse like nyaope and viral diseases are warranted. Studies, such as in vitro studies, are also essential to evaluate the impact of nyaope on HIV, HBV, and HCV replication and biomarkers of disease progression. In addition, cohort studies of nyaope users to understand the overall burden of HIV, HBV, and HCV, as well as the impact of nyaope use on immune dysfunction and viral levels, as well as the biomarkers of disease progression, are needed. Previous studies have demonstrated that opioids increase HIV and/or HCV replication in vitro and in vivo [88,89,171]. Moreover, higher viral loads have also been associated with increased transmission as well as accelerated disease progression [46,125]. Therefore, more research is required to determine effective ways of preventing viral infections in PWID/UDs. This may involve developing new interventions or assessing existing programs to identify effective ones, such as harm-reduction programmes and OST services, as well as developing vaccination and treatment programs for hepatitis B and C infection.16. ConclusionsThe use of nyaope is on the rise in South Africa, especially among young people, and it has become a growing public health concern. Nyaope continues to cause detrimental effects on the health and well-being of individuals who abuse it. As a result, it is not surprising that injecting nyaope increases the risk of transmission of BBVs, as with other abused drugs. With evidence that opioid receptors are expressed in multiple cell types that are relevant to HIV and/or HBV/HCV pathogenesis, we expect nyaope to interact with opioid receptors as well as cannabinoid receptors. Therefore, it is crucial to examine the interaction between drugs of abuse, such as nyaope, and viral infections, as well as their impact on viral pathogenesis in vitro and in vivo for the development of effective treatment strategies specifically for PWID/UDs.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HEPATITIS C VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Canine hepacivirus is not associated with chronic liver disease in dogs

AbbreviationsCHChronic hepatitisCHVCanine hepacivirusGBV‐BGB virus BHAIHistology activity indexHCVHepatitis C virusLIPSLuciferase immunoprecipitation systemLULight unitNPHVNon‐primate hepacivirusSDStandard deviationUTRUntranslated regionCanine hepacivirus (CHV), recently identified in respiratory tract samples from dogs with respiratory illness in the USA, was also detected in liver tissue from dogs with unexplained gastrointestinal illness 1. In situ hybridisation confirmed the presence of viral RNA predominantly in cytoplasm of hepatocytes. Molecular characterization of CHV suggested its genome is at least 9195 nucleotides and encodes a 2942 amino acid polyprotein and a short 5′ untranslated region (UTR) 1. Among hepaciviruses, CHV was found to be more similar throughout the genome to HCV than to GB virus B (GBV‐B) 1. Comparative phylogenetic analysis of CHV confirmed it to be the closest genetic relative of HCV described to date 1.An estimated three per cent of the world's population is chronically infected with HCV, with and more than 350 000 people dying from HCV‐related liver diseases every year 3. However, efforts to understand human HCV infection have been hampered by the absence of suitable animal models other than the chimpanzee and, until recently, its inability to replicate in cell culture 4. Despite CHV being identified in low levels in canine liver tissue, it is unclear if this virus is hepatotrophic. If CHV is associated with liver disease in dogs, the ability to study hepacivirus pathogenesis, immunity and treatment in a more tractable animal model would dramatically alter the progress of HCV research 2.Chronic hepatitis (CH) is the most frequently reported canine liver disease and has a postmortem prevalence in the UK of 12% 9. As the aetiology of most cases of canine CH remains unknown 10, and the disease shares histologically features with that of HCV infection in humans 12, CHV is a candidate aetiological agent of CH. Studies have failed to identify HCV in canine CH 10; however, to date, no study has reported CHV in dogs with CH.Following the initial identification of CHV in dogs 1, several nonprimate animal species have since been screened for the presence of anti‐CHV antibodies 16. A sensitive luciferase immunoprecipitation system (LIPS) assay 17 was used with the evolutionary conversed CHV helicase protein as the target antigen. Samples of 36 from 103 horses were immunoreactive, and viral genomic RNA was present in eight seropositive animals and none of the seronegatives. Complete genome sequence analysis revealed 14% (range 6.4–17.2%) nucleotide sequence divergence, with most changes occurring at synonymous sites 16. These viruses have been named nonprimate hepaciviruses (NPHV 1–8). Interestingly, in this same study, none of 80 serum samples from dogs were seropositive, although the health status of these animals was not known.The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that CHV is the aetiological agent of canine CH by detecting viral RNA in affected liver tissue and/or demonstrating the presence of anti‐CHV antibodies. To achieve this aim, we used two nested PCRs to amplify CHV in liver tissue from a large cohort of dogs with CH, and also a LIPS assay to determine whether dogs with CH have anti‐CHV antibodies.Materials and MethodsSample detailsLiver and blood samples were obtained from 100 dogs with a histological diagnosis of CH according to established criteria 14. To maximize the likelihood of detecting CHV, cases were selected where liver histology demonstrated changes particularly suggestive of a viral aetiology, primarily the presence of a lymphocyte‐rich inflammatory cell infiltrate 12. All dogs were resident in the UK. There were a total of twenty different pedigree breeds and also crossbreed dogs, with eight represented by five or more dogs including the Labrador retriever (n = 12), English springer spaniel (n = 11), crossbreed (n = 11), English cocker spaniel (n = 8), Dobermann pinscher (n = 7), American cocker spaniel (n = 5), Cairn terrier (n = 5) and Yorkshire terrier (n = 5). No dog had received immunosuppressive or antiviral therapy within the preceding 4 weeks. Liver tissue was obtained when dogs underwent a liver biopsy as part of their investigations, and blood samples consisted of that remaining after routine diagnostic testing. All samples were collected with written and informed owner consent and with the approval from the Institutional Ethics and Welfare Committee. Liver tissue was immediately frozen at −80 °C, or collected into RNAlater (Life Technologies Ltd, Paisley, Renfrewshire, UK), stored at 4 °C for up to 24 h then frozen at −80 °C. Blood samples were collected without anticoagulant, separated within 6 h of collection, and the serum frozen at −80 °C within 48 h.Nested PCRTotal RNA was extracted from 100 mg of liver tissue using TRIzol reagent (Life Technologies Ltd) according to the manufacturer's instructions. After reverse transcription using random primers, resulting cDNA was used in two separate nested PCRs for detection of the helicase domain of CHV NS3. Each pair of PCR primers was optimized for primer annealing temperature.The first PCR used previously published primers targeting nucleotide positions 4186–4636 of CHV (GenBank accession number JF744991.1) 1, with primer for the first round (Chcv‐0F1: 5′‐TCCACCTATGGTAAGTTCTTAGC‐3′ and Chcv‐0R1: 5′‐ACCCTGTCATAAGGGCGTC‐3) and the second round (Chcv‐0F2: 5′‐CCTATGGTAAGTTCTTAGCTGAC‐3′ and Chcv‐0R2: 5′‐CCTGTCATAAGGGCGTCCGT‐3′). First‐round amplification consisted of 30 cycles of 95 °C for 20 s, 58 °C for 20 s and 72 °C for 40 s in an automated thermal cycler (Bio‐Rad iCycler, Bio‐Rad Laboratories, Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, UK). Second‐round amplification using real‐time PCR and SYBR green chemistry (Platinum SYBR green qPCR supermix‐UDG; Life Technologies Ltd) consisted of 45 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s, 58 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 15 s in an automated thermal cycler (Rotor‐Gene 6000, Corbett Life Science/Qiagen, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, UK). Positive controls for first‐ and second‐round amplification consisted of a 450 base synthetic oligonucleotide (GeneART; Life Technologies Ltd) containing the region of the CHV genome amplified by the outer primers. The gene was cloned into the vector pMA‐T with plasmid DNA used as the template for PCR and also sequenced to confirm identity. The sensitivity of each nested PCR was calculated using triplicate ten‐fold dilutions of positive control from 1x108 to 1x100 genome copies per reaction, while observing the lowest dilution which produced fluorescence above background followed by an exponential increase in fluorescence. Standard precautions were taken to avoid PCR contamination, and no false positives were observed in negative controls.The second PCR was a consensus PCR using primers designed by aligning conserved regions of all available CHV sequences in the GenBank database (NCBI, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, accession JF744991.1 to JF744996.1), with primers for the first round (Chv‐NS3F1: 5′‐ GCCATAGCACAGACTCCACA‐3′ and Chv‐NS3R1: 5′‐ AAGGGTATGTCACCGCTCTG‐3′) and second round (Chv‐NS3F2: 5′‐CCTATGGTAAGTTCTTAGCTGAC‐3′ and Chv‐NS3R2: 5′‐CGATGTTAGGATGAGGGACAG‐3′). PCR conditions for first‐ and second‐round amplification were as described previously, with the exception of annealing temperature of 61 °C. The positive control consisted of a 171 base synthetic oligonucleotide synthesized as previously described and sequenced to confirm identity.LIPS assayA LIPS assay was used to screen serum sample from dogs with CH for the presence of anti‐CHV antibodies. To produce the Renilla luciferase (Ruc)‐CHV helicase antigen fusion construct, a template for the NS3 helicase‐coding sequence of CHV was generated from a respiratory sample of a dog as previously described 16. The primer adapter sequences used to clone the CHV protein fragment were as follows: 5′‐GAGGGATCCATACACTTCGCAGATATG‐3′ and 5′‐GAGCTCGAGTCAGGTGTTACAGTCAGTAAC‐3′. The protein fragment was subcloned downstream of Ruc using the pREN2 vector 18. DNA sequencing was used to confirm the integrity of the DNA construct. Plasmid DNA was prepared, and following transfection of mammalian expression vectors, crude protein extract was obtained as described for use as antigen 19. Canine sera were processed in a 96‐well format at room temperature as previously described 19. Light units (LUs) were measured in a Berthold LB 960 Centro microplate luminometer (Berthold Technologies, Oak ridge, TN, USA) using coelenterazine substrate mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). All LU data were obtained from the average of two separate experiments. GraphPad Prism software (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA) was used for statistical analysis of LIPS data. As positive controls, serum sample from four horses previously determined to have low (n = 2), medium (n = 1) and high levels (n = 1) of anti‐CHV NS3 helicase antibodies where analysed in parallel to the canine samples. To classify samples as positive, a cut‐off limit derived from the combined value of the mean value plus three standard deviations (SD) of the replica negative control samples containing only buffer, Ruc‐extract and protein A/G beads was used.ResultsNested PCR for detection of CHV in canine liver tissueRNA extracted from liver tissue of 100 dogs with histologically confirmed CH was converted to cDNA and used as a template in two nested PCRs targeting regions of the helicase domain of CHV NS3. Samples from all 100 dogs were negative for CHV in both nested PCRs. The sensitivity of the first (Fig. 1) and second PCRs (Fig. 2) was ten genome copies per reaction.Figure 1Results of real‐time PCR to determine the sensitivity of the first nested PCR. The triplicate dilutions of the positive control, in copies per reaction, are depicted. Y‐axis, normalized fluorescence; X‐axis, cycle number.imageFigure 2Results of real‐time PCR to determine the sensitivity of the second nested PCR. The triplicate dilutions of the positive control, in copies per reaction, are depicted. Y‐axis, normalized fluorescence; X‐axis, cycle number.imageLIPS assayThe median LU from horses previously determined to have low, medium and high levels of anti‐CHV helicase antibodies was 102 503 (range 26 757–278 974). A cut‐off limit of 17 520 LU was used to classify samples as positive. Serum samples from 100 dogs with histologically confirmed CH were tested, and all were negative (median 4306; range 1445–11 916 LU) (Fig. 3).Figure 3Box and whiskers plot showing the mean results of an LIPS assay for the detection of anti‐NS3 CHV antibodies in 100 dogs with chronic hepatitis (canine samples) and from known positive equine samples (positive controls). The Y‐axis depicts the antibody titres in light units (LU) on a log10 scale. The boxes represent the interquartile intervals from the 25th to 75th percentiles, and the solid horizontal bars through the boxes represent the medians. The capped vertical bars represent the minimum and maximum of all data. The horizontal dotted line shows the cut‐off limit derived from the combined value of the mean value plus 3 standard deviations (SD) of negative control samples.imageDiscussionThis is the first study which aimed to determine whether there is an association of CHV RNA and anti‐CHV antibodies in dogs with CH. Canine CH, a common liver disease in the UK 9, shares histologically features with that of HCV infection in humans 12. The aetiology of the majority of cases remains unknown 10, despite demonstration of a transmissible agent capable of causing CH in dogs in the UK more than 25 years ago 24. Studies using a candidate virus approach to identify such an agent, including HCV, have been repeatedly unsuccessful 10.Despite the previous report of low levels of CHV RNA in liver tissue of dogs with unexplained gastrointestinal illness, and the detection of virus in canine hepatocytes by in situ hybridisation 1, we were unable to demonstrate CHV in liver tissue from any of 100 dogs with CH. It is not clear if the dogs in this initial report also had respiratory tract disease, and if so, it is possible that viral antigen was ingested in sputum, passed across a compromised gastrointestinal tract and transported to the liver in the hepatic portal vein. CHV may be an innocent bystander, as was the case for GBV‐C, initially proposed as a unique hepatitis virus in humans 28. Indeed, the application of new sequence‐independent amplification strategies and sequencing technologies has lead to the discovery of numerous new viruses, which may or not have disease relevance 29. Future studies are required to define the pathogenesis of CHV before it can be adopted as a surrogate model for HCV‐induced liver disease in this species. For HCV, the ability to cause viral hepatitis was only definitively proven by inoculating primates with RNA transcripts from synthetic DNA recombinants 30. Similar inoculation experiments may be necessary in dogs before the pathogenesis of CHV can be elucidated. Our failure to detect CHV may also reflect sequence divergence that confounds PCR. Having said that CHV sequences identified to date have shown relatively little genetic diversity 1. The publication of additional CHV genomes may enable alternative regions of sequence conservation to be selected for primer design. Moreover, the sequence of CHV circulating among dogs in the UK may be distinct from that present in the USA.For viral detection, we employed two nested PCRs, one of which used previously published primers to amplify a region of the helicase domain of CHV NS3 1. To date, the sequences of one full and five partial CHV genomes have been published, and only the full genome contains the region amplified by these primers. Despite the apparent limited genetic diversity of CHV 1, sequence variation in the primer binding region could possibly have excluded PCR amplification of CHV sequences in the cohort of dogs we tested herein. For this reason, a second nested consensus PCR was designed to amplify a conserved region of all published CHV sequences, also located in the helicase domain of the NS3 gene. To maximize the likelihood of detecting CHV, cases were selected where liver histology demonstrated changes, which, particularly suggestive of a viral aetiology 12. In humans with HCV‐induced CH, increased levels of intrahepatic virus are associated with a higher histology activity index (HAI) score 32; therefore, canine cases with a higher HAI score were also chosen. Despite a sensitivity of 10 viral copies per reaction, we were not able to detect CHV in any liver sample. This high sensitivity is likely due to the fact that the PCR assays were designed to amplify a single sequence, with this sequence then used as the positive control. It cannot be excluded that CHV provokes acute liver damage, is cleared, but immunopathologically provokes a self‐perpetuating chronic liver disease. Therefore, further studies using tissues from dogs with acute disease are warranted. In human HCV infection, liver tissue contains a substantially higher titre of viral transcripts compared with blood 35, and so we did not attempt to amplify CHV in canine blood samples.To further study the role of CHV in canine liver disease, we also employed a recently developed LIPS assay 16, to determine whether dogs with CH had anti‐CHV antibodies. Serology is more tolerant of sequence divergence and has the additional benefit of detecting resolved as well as acute or active infections. Due to the possibility that different CHV variants would be genetically diverse, an antigen from the helicase domain of NS3 was used, as this is the most conserved viral protein and one that shows documented antigenicity in HCV 38. However, we were unable to detect anti‐CHV antibodies in any of the 100 dogs tested, suggesting a lack of previous exposure to this virus. These results are consistent with those of a previous study which also failed to detect anti‐CHV antibodies in 80 dogs 16, although the health status of these animals was unknown. As the duration of immunity following CHV infection has not been studied, it is, however, possible that dogs clear CHV relatively rapidly and also become seronegative.Important differences exist between CHV and HCV, which may have biological significance and explain potential differences in pathogenicity. Most notably, these include the apparent absence of certain micro(mi)RNA‐binding sequences in CHV 1. The 5′UTR of HCV contains two miR‐122‐binding sites that are highly conserved among all genotypes and facilitate replication in liver cells 39. Dogs encode identical miR‐122s, and these are highly expressed in the liver, but the absence of the binding site of miR‐122 in CHV suggests that the interaction may not be a feature of CHV infection. It remains to be determined whether the unique RNA structure in CHV allows the virus to replicate in a manner independent of miR‐122 and/or influences tissue tropism.In conclusion, the data obtained in the present study do not support the role of CHV in the aetiology of canine CH. However, the absence of CHV infection in dogs from the UK might not represent the global ecology of the virus. Moreover, no studies to date have attempted to identify CHV in dogs with respiratory disease in the UK. Additional work must be performed to determine the role, if any, of the virus in different geographical locations and to confirm whether the virus is an endemic canine pathogen. Despite high sequence similarities in their envelope proteins, CHV and HCV may bind to different host cell receptors, resulting in very different tissue targets‐one in the respiratory tract and the other in the liver. This does, however, provide a unique opportunity to compare the molecular and cellular basis for those differences. Additional work must be carried out to understand the biology and pathogenesis of CHV in canids and to determine whether it has a role as a surrogate model system for HCV infection in humans.Conflict of InterestThis study was funded by a Wellcome Trust Research Training Fellowship to Nicholas H. Bexfield, grant number WT088619MA.


Title: Intercellular transmission of Seneca Valley virus mediated by exosomes

IntroductionThe Seneca Valley virus (SVV) is a single-stranded positive-strand RNA virus that belongs to the Senecavirus genus and Picornaviridae family. SVV has a typical icosahedral symmetry and a genome 7.2 kb in length [1]. SVV was first discovered in 2002 in the PER.C6 cell line in Maryland, USA [2]. SVV mainly infects pigs, newborn piglets, fattening pigs, and other pigs of all ages; neutralizing antibodies have been found in other animals, such as cattle and sheep [3, 4]. Once infected, the clinical presentation is very similar to that of foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). The main symptoms are blisters and ulceration in the hoof and nose, as well as fever and anorexia [5]. In recent years, SVV has significantly affected the global pig industry due to the virus inducing blisters in pigs [6].Exosomes are small vesicles with a diameter of 40–150 nm [7]. Most model cells secrete exosomes, which contain multiple substances, including large amounts of proteins and nucleic acids, and transport substances to various cells [8–10]. The virus enters cells through endocytic pathways during the process of exosome formation and completes its assembly and release [11]. Hepatitis A (a picornavirus) and Hepatitis C viral exosomes can spread their DNA and escape the immune response [12]. Therefore, we suspect that exosomes may be an essential mediator of SVV transmission between cells.In the present study, we aimed to determine whether exosomes can mediate SVV transmission. First, we extracted exosomes from IBRS-2 cells with (SVV-exo) and without (mock-exo) SVV infection. After identification of the extracted exosomes, we introduced the extracted exosomes into 293T and IBRS-2 cells. The results suggested that SVV carried by exosomes can proliferate in these cells. We then inhibited the secretion and production of exosomes, which resulted in the inhibition of SVV proliferation. Finally, we found that SVV carried by exosomes was not blocked by SVV neutralizing antibodies. This study provides critical information regarding the pathogenesis of SVV and its antiviral mechanisms.Materials and methodsCell culture and virusesTo obtain a cell culture supernatant for exosome extraction, we used IBRS-2 cells as a model. IBRS-2 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 IU/mL penicillin, and 100 mg/mL streptomycin. The cells were cultured in an incubator maintained at 37 °C with a CO2 concentration of 5%. In January 2017, SVV strain CH-FJ-2017 (GenBank Accession number: KY74510) was isolated from Fujian, China, at our lab; this same strain was used throughout the present study. SVV-expressing green fluorescent protein (SVV-GFP) was constructed at our laboratory.Exosome isolation and purificationTo obtain exosomes secreted by SVV-infected cells, we inoculated SVV into IBRS-2 cells and collected the supernatants at specific times after infection. SVV was isolated previously, as described later in the text, and preserved at our lab (China Reference Laboratory Network for FMD) [13]. IBRS-2 cells were incubated in a 150-mm culture dish until they attained confluency (Corning, New York, USA). The culture supernatant was then discarded, the cells were washed with PBS, and FBS-free DMEM was added. SVV (0.05 TCID50) was inoculated, and PBS was used as a control. After 1 h of incubation, SVV was discarded and replaced with DMEM containing 2% exosomes-depleted FBS. The cell culture supernatant was collected after 36 h of culture. To further separate and purify the collected supernatant, we performed differential centrifugation with the collected supernatant. The following centrifugation processes were conducted at 4 °C. The collected supernatant was centrifuged at 500 × g for 5 min to remove larger fragments and cells, and the supernatant was then collected and centrifuged at 2000 × g for 10 min to further remove cell debris. The collected supernatant was centrifuged at 12 000 × g for 45 min to remove cells. The large vesicles were collected and filtered through a 0.22-µm filter. Finally, the collected supernatant was centrifuged at 120 000 × g for 2 h in an ultracentrifuge (Thermo Scientific Sorvall WX100), and the precipitates were resuspended in 500 μL of PBS. To further purify the extracted exosomes, we used a CD63 antibody-labeled exosomes isolation kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany).Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)Direct morphological observation of the characteristics of exosomes is crucial for exosome identification [14] . Therefore, we analyzed the extracted exosomes using TEM (Hitachi H-7000FA, Tokyo, Japan). After observation, we first extracted the exosomes using a TEM 200 copper mesh (EMS 80100-Cu US) and then stained the exosomes with phosphoric acid dock for 2 min. After drying under an incandescent lamp, electron microscopy was used to observe the extracted exosomes, and the observed voltage was 80 kV.Western blot analysisWestern blot (WB) analysis was performed using the following protocols. Briefly, purified exosomes were lysed with a radio-immunoprecipitation assay buffer (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA), and the cleared lysate was collected by centrifugation for protein separation on 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. After electrophoresis, the separated proteins were transferred onto 0.45-μm polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Millipore, USA). Next, the membranes were blocked for 1 h with 10% fat-free milk in Tris-buffered saline containing Tween-20 (TBST). The blots were then incubated with primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight. Primary antibodies for CD63 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), CD9 (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), Alix (Cell Signaling Technology, Waltham, MA, USA), and SVV polyclonal antibody (prepared at our laboratory) were used. After washing three times with TBST, the membranes were incubated with horseradish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibodies (Proteintech, Chicago, IL, USA) for 2 h at room temperature. Finally, the proteins were visualized with a clarity-enhanced chemiluminescence WB substrate (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA).Nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA)The mean size and size distribution profile of exosomes that were isolated and purified from SVV-infected or control-treated IBRS-2 cell culture supernatants were analyzed as previously described [15, 16]. In brief, the samples were diluted at a ratio of 1:1000 in PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 in a total volume of 1.0 mL. Measurements were performed in triplicate using standard settings (refractive index = 1.331, viscosity = 0.89, and temperature = 25 °C). Data analysis was performed using NTA 3.2 software (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., Malvern, Worcestershire, UK), and samples were evaluated using the Nanosight NS300 (Malvern Panalytical Ltd., Malvern, Worcestershire, UK).Analysis and quantification of SVV RNAFor the PCR detection of SVV RNA, total RNA from exosomes (RNase added to purified exosomes followed by incubation for 1 h at 37 °C before RNA extraction) and cells were extracted using a total exosome RNA and protein isolation kit (Life Technologies, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Total RNA from cell culture samples were isolated with the E.Z.N.A. total RNA kit I (Omega Bio-Tek) to quantify RNA copies of SVV in SVV-infected or exosome-treated cells. Detection of the number of copies of extracted RNA was performed using the Real-Time One-Step RT-PCR reagent (Takara). The reaction system was as follows: 2X One-Step RT-PCR Buffer III 10 μL, TaKaRa Ex Taq HS (5 U/μL) 0.4 μL, Prime Script RT Enzyme Mix II 0.4 μL, PCR forward primer (10 μM) 0.4 μL, PCR reverse primer (10 μM) 0.4 μL, SVV-3D probe 0.8 μL, total RNA 2 μL, and RNase-free dH2O 5.2 μL (PCR primers and the SVV-3D probe were provided by our laboratory). The reaction times and temperatures of the PCR were 42 °C for 15 min (1 cycle) and 40 cycles of 94 °C for 10 s, 57 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 30 s. The Applied Biosystems 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher) was used.Si-Rab27a transfection and quantification of Rab27a and Alix mRNAInterfering RNA Rab27a (100 pmol) was transfected into IBRS-2 cells using liposome 2000; at the same time, the same dose of si-scr (same bases, different base sequences) was used as a control. SVV was inoculated 24 h after transfection, and cells were harvested 24 h after SVV inoculation. Total RNA from cell samples were isolated using the E.Z.N.A. total RNA kit I (Omega Bio-Tek). Reverse transcription of RNA into cDNA was performed using Prime Script TM RT Master Mix (Takara). The reaction system was as follows: 5X PrimeScript RT Master Mix (Perfect Real Time) 2 μL, total RNA 5 μL (200 ng), and RNase-free dH2O 3 μL. The reaction temperature and time of the PCR were 37 °C for 15 min and 85 °C for 5 s (reverse transcription reaction), respectively. Using GAPDH as an internal reference gene, RT-qPCR was performed using TB Green TM Premix Ex TaqTM II (Takara). The reaction system was as follows: TB Green Premix Ex Taq II (Tli RNaseH Plus) 10 μL, PCR forward primer (10 μM) 0.8 μL, PCR reverse primer (10 μM) 0.8 μL, DNA (< 100 ng) 2 μL, and sterilized water 6.4 μL.Exosome treatment with SVV-specific neutralizing antibodyIBRS-2 cells were plated into 12-well cell culture plates, and the cells were replaced with serum-free DMEM once the cells reached 70%–80% confluency. SVV-exo and SVV were simultaneously diluted to obtain concentrations ranging from 10−1 to 10−4. The diluted SVV-exo and SVV were incubated with the SVV neutralizing antibody for 1.5 h at 37 °C and then added to the prepared IBRS-2 cells. At the same time, SVV-exo and SVV that were not incubated with the SVV neutralizing antibody were used as controls. The cells were cultured in a 5% CO2 cell culture incubator at 37 °C for 24 h. The cells and culture supernatants were used to detect the copy number of SVV.ResultsIsolation and characterization of exosomes extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cellsIBRS-2 cells were infected with SVV, and then exosomes were extracted from those infected cells (SVV-exo), as well as the non-infected cells (Mock-exo). Further purification was performed with the use of CD63-antibodies. Cup-shaped lipid bilayer vesicles of representative exosome were observed by TEM (Figure 1A). WB analysis was performed to identify exosomes (protein marker Alix, CD63, and CD9 were used). The results showed that SVV-exo contained the exosome-associated proteins Alix, CD9, and CD63 (Figure 1B). Exosome size was also evaluated, and it was found that the exosomes were mainly distributed in the range of 50–150 nm (Figure 1C). These results indicate that the morphology and particle size of the exosomes extracted in this study is consistent with that previously reported [17].Figure 1Isolation and characterization of exosomes extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells. A Transmission electron microscopic observation of SVV-exo after negative staining with phosphotungstic acid. B Exosomes were extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells, and identified by western blot with antibodies directed against Alix, CD9, and CD63. C The Zeta Sizer Nano ZS was used to measure the particle size distribution. The samples were diluted 1: 1000 in PBS containing 0.05% Tween-20 to a total volume of 1.0 mL. The detection was repeated three times with the standard settings (refractive index = 1.331, viscosity = 0.89, and temperature = 25 °C). Each sample was analyzed five times, and the counts were averaged.The spread of SVV mediated by exosomes in susceptible and non-susceptible cellsThe SVV gene sequence in exosomes was detected by RT-PCR to verify whether the extracted exosomes contained SVV. SVV gene sequences were found in SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells and SVV-exo (Figure 2A). Moreover, SVV proteins were detected in exosomes by WB (Figure 2B). It is known that exosomes can mediate the spread of various pathogens [18]. To explore the role of exosomes in SVV transmission, we explored whether SVV carried by exosomes can proliferate on susceptible (IBRS-2) and non-susceptible (293T) cells. IBRS-2 cells and 293T cells were incubated with SVV-exo, and SVV was used as a positive control, mock-exo and normal cells-mock (non-treatment) were used as negative controls. The copy number of SVV was detected by RT-qPCR. According to the experimental results, the copy number of SVV in the SVV-exo group was increased in both 293T and IBRS-2 cells when compared with the negative control group, and the copy number in IBRS-2 cells was higher than that in 293T cells (Figure 2C).Figure 2Exosomes mediate the spread of SVV in susceptible and non-susceptible cells. A SVV VP1 gene was identified in SVV-exo by the RT-qPCR, at the same time, SVV, SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells (Cell-svv) was used positive control, normal IBRS-2 cells (Cell-mock), and mock-exo were used as negative controls. B SVV polyclonal antibody used to detect SVV protein levels in SVV-exo, also use cell-svv as a control. C SVV-exo were incubated with 293T and IBRS-2 cells, and at the same time, mock-exo, SVV with the same viral load as SVV-exo, and PBS were used as controls. The virus copy number was detected by RT-qPCR 24 h after incubation. D Exosomes extracted from SVV-GFP-infected cells (SVV-GFP-exo) were stained with DIL, washed twice by ultracentrifugation (Avoid light during this experiment), and incubated in 293T and IBRS-2 cells; same procedures were followed for SVV-GFP as a control. Eight hours after incubation, the nuclei were stained with DAPI, and fluorescence was observed.Whether exosomes could transport SVV into susceptible and non-susceptible cells was investigated by fluorescently labeling exosomes and SVV. Exosomes were extracted and purified from the culture supernatant of SVV-GFP infected IBRS-2 cells (SVV-GFP-exo). The DIL-stained exosomes were introduced into IBRS-2 and 293T cells, mock-exo and SVV-GFP were introduced as controls. Fluorescence signals were observed under a laser confocal microscope. The results showed that red fluorescence (DIL) was observed in both IBRS-2 and 293T cell membranes, and the GFP carried by SVV-GFP-exo co-localized with DIL. In addition, only red fluorescence was observed in the mock-exo group (Figure 2D). Henceforth, these results indicate that the spread of SVV could be mediated by exosomes in susceptible and non-susceptible cells.Inhibition of exosomes secretion suppresses the proliferation of SVVPrevious studies have found that Rab27a [19] and Rab35 [20] regulate exosome secretion. Thus, to verify whether intracellular Rab27a expression was downregulated after si-Rab27a transfection, si-Rab27a was transfected into IBRS-2 cells, and Rab27a mRNA levels were evaluated by RT-qPCR. The results showed that the mRNA expression of intracellular Rab27a was significantly downregulated in si-Rab27a-transfected cells compared with that in the control group (Figure 3A). Previous work has confirmed that the ESCRT (Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport) pathway can affect exosome secretion. Syntenin interacts directly with Alix via the LYPX (n) L motif to regulate the intraluminal budding of ILV and Alix is often used as a biological protein marker for exosomes [21]. In order to investigate whether the number of exosomes in the transfected cells did change, the mRNA expression level of the exosome protein marker Alix was evaluated. The results showed that the expression of Alix was significantly upregulated in IBRS-2 cells treated with si-Rab27a compared with that of control (IBRS-2 cells treated with si-scr that same base as si-Rab27a but different sequence) (Figure 3B). The number of exosomes in the cell culture supernatant of si-Rab27a transfected IBRS-2 cells was evaluated using the NTA method. The results showed that the number of exosomes in the cell culture supernatant decreased significantly after si-Rab27a transfection (Figure 3C).Figure 3Interfering with Rab27a inhibits secretion of exosomes and thus suppresses SVV transmission. Si-Rab27a interfering RNA (100 pmol) was transfected into IBRS-2 cells using liposome 2000. SVV was inoculated 24 h after transfection (si-Rab27a-SVV), the controls were transfected with Rab27a but not inoculated with SVV (si-Rab27a), and transfected with si-scr inoculated with SVV (si-scr-SVV), and transfected of si-scr but not inoculated with SVV(si-scr), and untreated cells-mock (non-treatment). A The expression of Rab27a mRNA in IBRS-2 cells was detected by RT-qPCR, and used GAPDH as a reference gene. B The expression of Alix mRNA in the cell was detected by RT-qPCR, and used GAPDH as a reference gene. C Exosomes were extracted from the culture supernatants of SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells, and the number of exosomes was detected by the NTA method. D The copy number of extracellular SVV in IBRS-2 cells was detected by RT-qPCR. Significance was calculated using a two-tailed t test and labeled as *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 in graphs. E IBRS-2 cells were infected with SVV for 1.5 h and then incubated with 1, 5, and 10 µmol of GW4869 for 36 h. An equal volume of DMSO was used as a control, and cells without any treatment were used as a negative control. The extracellular SVV copy number was detected using RT-qPCR.An investigation into the observed changes in the number of exosomes and whether they affected the copy number of SVV in cells was also conducted. RT-qPCR was performed to detect the copy number of SVV in the cell culture supernatant of the si-Rab27a and control group. The results showed that extracellular SVV copy number was significantly decreased compared with those in the control group (Figure 3D). GW4869 was reported to reduce exosome release carrying PLP (proteolipid protein) by inhibiting neutral sphingomyelinase (nSMase) [22]. IBRS-2 cells were infected with SIBRS-2 cells were infected with SVV; the infected cells were treated with exosomes secretion inhibitor GW4869; simultaneously, an equal volume of DMSO was used as a control. The copy number of extracellular SVV was detected by RT-qPCR. The results show that the copy number of extracellular SVV is significantly decreased after GW4869 treatment compared with the control group and is dose-dependent (Figure 3E).Exosomes promote the proliferation of SVV in susceptible cellsIn the continued attempt to elucidate whether SVV-exo promotes SVV proliferation, the protein concentration of SVV-exo and mock-exo was determined, and the exosomes (RNase was added to purify exosomes) were restored to IBRS-2 cells at two different doses, at the same time. A SVV that had the same SVV copy number as SVV-exo and mock-exo was used as a control. The SVV was re-inoculated after incubation, and untreated cells were also used as a control-mock (non-treatment). SVV RNA copy number was detected by RT-qPCR at 24 h and 48 h, respectively, after SVV inoculation. The results showed that the SVV copy number was significantly higher in mock-exo and SVV-exo groups than that of the SVV control group at 24 h after SVV infection (Figure 4A). Moreover, the SVV-exo group had more SVVs at 48 h after SVV infection compared to the other two groups (Figure 4B). Nevertheless, when the exosomes dose was 50 ng, the SVV copies in the SVV-exo group was significantly higher than that in the SVV control group, at both 24 h and 48 h after SVV infection (Figure 4C-D). The above results indicate that SVV-exo promotes SVV proliferation in IBRS-2 cells.Figure 4Exosomes promote the proliferation of SVV in IBRS-2. Exosomes were extracted from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells and normal IBRS-2 cells separately, and the A280/A260 method was used to determine the protein concentration of SVV-exo and mock-exo. SVV-exo and mock-exo were treated with RNase for 1 h at 37 °C before they were incubated into IBRS-2 cells. Different doses of SVV-exo and mock-exo was incubated into IBRS-2 cells, SVV with the same SVV copy number as SVV-exo infected IBRS-2 cells and mock-exo, normal IBRS-2 cells as control, 8 h after incubation, the same copy number of SVV were infected again in the SVV-exo experimental group, mock-exo and SVV control groups, respectively. SVV copy number was detected using RT-qPCR at 24 h and 48 h after SVV infection. A The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 25 ng, and the viral load was measured 24 h after SVV infection. B The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 25 ng, and the viral load was measured 48 h after SVV infection. C The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 50 ng, and the viral load was measured 24 h after SVV infection. D The exosome protein concentration was inoculated at a dose of 25 ng, and the viral load was measured 48 h after SVV infection. This experiment was repeated three times, all data represent mean ± SD, n = 3 for each group. Significant difference was calculated using two-tailed t-test and labeled as *P < 0.05 and **P < 0.01 in graphs.SVV infection mediated by exosomes is not inhibited by SVV NAbsA neutralization experiment was performed to exclude the influence of the possible appearance of SVV in the exosome suspension. SVV-exo and SVV were diluted ten times and then subsequently incubated with a SVV neutralizing antibody for 1.5 h. Exosomes and SVV were inoculated into IBRS-2 cells, and the copy number of SVV in the inoculated cells was detected by RT-qPCR (Figure 5). The results show that the proliferation of SVV in SVV-exo on IBRS-2 cells is not affected by SVV neutralizing antibodies. It suggests that SVV particles are encapsulated in the exosomes, and the SVV infection is mediated by SVV wrapped in exosomes.Figure 5Exosome-mediated SVV infection is not blocked by SVV-specific neutralizing antibodies (NAbs). Purified SVV-positive exosomes and SVV were diluted and then the diluted exosomes and SVV were incubated with SVV-specific NAbs separately (the titer of serum neutralization against SVV was > 1:1024, determined by VNT) for 1 h. Exosomes and SVV without any treatment were used as a control. Then, IBRS-2 cells were exposed to the NAbs-treated exosomes or SVV for 2 h. The exosomes or viruses were washed off with PBS at 37 °C, and the medium was replaced with fresh maintenance medium for 24 h. RT-qPCR was used to evaluate SVV replication in IBRS-2 cells.DiscussionExosomes are thought to mediate the transmission of various intracellular molecules which can influence cell function, such as proteins, RNA, and miRNA. Although, the contents of the exosomes that are secreted by infected recipient cells changed, they could still contain viral RNA, proteins, and virions which mediate virus transmission. In the current study, we found that the transmission of SVV in cultured cells could be mediated by exosomes. Although the SVV-exo was treated with RNase before inoculating cells, it was impossible to prove that all naked virions outside the exosomes were cleared. Therefore, SVV and SVV-exo were inoculated with the same SVV copy number into SVV non-susceptible cells (293T cells). The results showed that the SVV-exo group had a higher copy number on non-susceptible cells than the SVV control group, indicating that SVV-exo mediated the proliferation of SVV. Henceforth, the results suggest that exosomes can serve as delivery vectors for pathogen-associated molecules [23]. In addition, their role in viral infections is attracting more and more attention [24, 25]. Some viruses may be able to evade the immune response as they spread through the body by exosomes [26]. During the process of exosome formation, some viruses, mainly in the endocytic pathway, enter the cell through exosomes resulting in direct cell entry without the need for cell membrane receptors [12, 26, 33]. From the above results, it can be postulated that exosomes mediate the transmission of SVV. However, whether exosomes play an important role in the transmission of SVV in host cells remains to be fully elucidated.Furthermore, an investigation was conducted to explore whether the inhibition of exosome secretion affects exosome proliferation. Previous studies have shown that silencing the expression of Rab27a and Rab27b reduces exosome secretion of CD63, CD81, and MHC class II, and the downregulation of Rab27a effector Slp4 and Slac2b also inhibits exosome secretion [27, 28]. Therefore Rab27a siRNA was synthesized in the lab and transfected into IBRS-2 cells. The results showed that both the number of exosomes secreted by IBRS cells and extracellular SVV had decreased significantly. GW4869 is a neutral sphingomyelinase inhibitor that is known to inhibit the biosynthesis of ceramides and promotes exosome secretion by triggering the germination of exosomes to MVB [29]. When the secretion of IBRS-2 cell exosomes was inhibited by interfering with Rab27a and using GW4869, the amount of SVV in the cell culture supernatant decreased significantly. Therefore, the proliferation of SVV is affected by the secretion of exosomes, which further illustrates that exosomes mediate the transmission of SVV. Previous studies have shown that the formation of cellular infectious prion is significantly impaired when the HRS-ESCRT-0 subunit is silenced and that the overall secretion of exosomes is also impaired [30]. HCV secretion from host cells utilizes the Hrs-dependent exosomal pathway in which the viral assembly is also involved [31]. The findings here are consistent with those reported in the literature.There are some limitations to this work; whether there are naked virus particles in the extracted exosomes has not been shown. Further, an immunomagnetic bead method is used to purify and extract the exosomes, and the exosomes are treated with RNase. However, the exosomes, as they are a type of lipid vesicle, may rupture before entering the cell. Nonetheless, IBRS-2 cells were incubated with SVV-exo and SVV of the same copy number. They were then incubated with more SVV, and the number of SVV copies after SVV-exo incubation was significantly higher than that of the SVV control group. This further suggests that exosomes mediate SVV transmission and promote SVV proliferation. This study adds new evidence that highlights SVV is encapsulated in exosomes. Previous studies have shown that viruses carried by exosomes, such as PRRSV, HCV, and EV71, cannot be neutralized by neutralizing antibodies [16, 24, 32–35]. When SVV-exo was incubated with SVV neutralizing antibodies, the proliferation of SVV in exosomes was not affected by SVV neutralizing antibodies. This shows that SVV virus particles are encapsulated in exosomes.In conclusion, we successfully extracted, purified, and identified exosomes from SVV-infected IBRS-2 cells and determined that exosomes can carry SVV, which allows the proliferation of the virus in susceptible and non-susceptible cells. The inhibition of exosome secretion and production inhibits the replication of SVV. Moreover, exosomes extracted from IBRS-2 cells promote the proliferation of SVV. SVV carried in exosomes was not blocked by SVV neutralizing antibodies. Collectively these data reveal an advanced and novel mechanism for better understanding that viral transmission through exosomes contributes to the known immune evasive properties of SVV.


Title: The synthetic opioid fentanyl enhances viral replication 

IntroductionThe US is experience a major opioid crisis [1], and the harmful effects of opioid use disorder (OUD) continue unabated despite the availability of harm reduction and prevention strategies. From 2013 to 2019, the number of synthetic opioid-involved deaths increased over 1,000% from 3,105 to 36,359 [2]. Recent data demonstrate that approximately 90% of unintentional overdoses involved fentanyl or fentanyl analogs [3–6].Opioids comprise both endogenous and exogenous or synthetic compounds that function by activating several opioid receptors. Opioid receptors are expressed on a variety of immune cells including lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils [7–9]. They are also expressed in the liver–including in hepatocytes and hepatic stellate cells–and are important mediators of liver disease progression [10–16]. Among persons with OUD, there is considerable risk of transmitting viral infections such as the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV). An association between HIV infection and fentanyl use has been reported in several settings [17, 18]. Drugs of abuse are known to promote viral replication and virus-mediated pathology (reviewed in [8, 19]). Nonetheless, to date, there are no published reports on the effects of fentanyl, fentanyl analogs, or fentanyl metabolites on virus replication despite their widespread recreational use. Because a robust understanding of opioid-host and opioid-virus interactions is essential for the development of new and optimized treatment and harm reduction strategies, we evaluated the impact of fentanyl on hepatic viral replication in vitro.MethodsCell lines and reagentsHepG2.2.15 cell line contains two copies of stably integrated HBV and produces high levels of hepatitis B e antigen and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) [20]. The Huh7.5JFH1 cell line–which produces infectious HCV genotype 2a virions–was provided by Dr. Guangxiang Luo [21] and maintained in DMEM high glucose medium supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin (100 U/mL), and streptomycin (100 mg/mL). Huh7.5 cells were provided by Apath LLC (St. Louis, MO). SH-SY5Y is a human neuroblastoma cell line with robust expression of the mu opioid receptor [22, 23] and was obtained from ATCC. For experiments with infectious HCV, virions were harvested from the supernatants of Huh7.5JFH1 cells, filtered, spun at high speed to pellet cellular debris, and stored at −80°C prior to use as described previously [24]. Naïve Huh7.5 cells were infected for 1 hour with 0.5 TCID50 of virus. Virus was then removed, and cells were washed with PBS multiple times to remove unbound virus prior to drug exposure.Fentanyl and carfentanil oxalate were obtained from Cerilliant (Round Rock, TX). Per the manufacturer’s certificate of analysis, these reagents are suitable for the in vitro identification, calibration, and quantification of analytes in analytical and R&D applications. Fentanyl represents a μ-opioid receptor agonist that was approved in the US as an intravenous anesthetic in 1972 and is approximately 50–100 times more potent than morphine [25]. Carfentanil is a synthetic fentanyl analogue approved for veterinary use with an analgesic potency that is 20–30 times that of fentanyl and approximately 10,000 times that of morphine [26]. Fentanyl and carfentanil are metabolized by the CYP3A4 pathway in the liver.Mu opioid receptor quantificationMu opioid receptor expression was quantified in several hepatocyte-derived cell lines, as well as the SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line as a positive control. 2 x 106 cells were resuspended in lysis buffer and diluted 1:2. 100 uL of cell/lysis suspension was used in the human opioid receptor mu 1 (OPRM1) ELISA (MyBioSource; San Diego, CA).Viral protein quantificationHBV HBsAg protein was measured in culture supernatants by the QuickTiter Hepatitis B Core Antigen ELISA Kit (Cell Biolabs, Inc.; San Diego, CA) with a lower limit of detection (LLD) of 1 ng/mL. HCV core protein was quantified in cell culture supernatants using the QuickTiter Hepatitis C Core Antigen ELISA Kit (Cell Biolabs, Inc.; San Diego, CA) with an LLD of 1 ng/mL.Drug exposureThe Huh7.5JFH1 and HepG2.2.15 cell lines were seeded at 500,000 cells per well. Fentanyl or carfentanil was added to culture medium after 24 hours. After 24 hours of incubation with drug, HCV core (ng/mL), or HBsAg (ng/mL) was quantified in culture supernatants.Cell viability500,000 cells were seeded per well in 96-well format. Drug was added to culture medium after 24 hours. After 24 hours of incubation with drug, the potential toxicity was evaluated by the MTT Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Abcam; Cambridge, MA).HCV replicative fitnessHCV replicative fitness was measuring using patient-derived NS5B sequences inserted into an NS5B shuttle vector. As reported previously, the shuttle vector included the non-structural genes NS3, NS4A, NS5B and the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) derived from the genotype 1a strain H77, as well as several cell culture adapting mutations and a firefly luciferase reporter gene [27]. Full-length NS5B sequences were amplified from two patients with chronic HCV, and patient-specific plasmids and RNA were synthesized and used for transient replication assays in Huh7 hepatocytes. Transfected cells were plated in 96-well plates. At 4 hours post-transfection, the wells from one plate were harvested for luciferase quantification to normalize for transfection efficiency. The remaining plate was incubated at 37°C for 4 days, and luciferase activity was quantified to measure patient-specific replicative fitness.Hepatic apoptosisCells were seeded at 500,000 per well. Fentanyl was added to culture medium after 24 hours. After 3 days of incubation with drug, M30 (units/mL) was quantified in culture supernatants using the M30 Apoptosense ELISA (TECOmedical Group) with an LLD of 20 U/L.RNAseq analysisThe NEBNext Poly (A) mRNA Magnetic Isolation Module (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) was utilized for polyA RNA purification with a total of 300 ng total RNA as input. A PrepX mRNA Library kit (WaferGen) combined with Apollo 324 NGS automated library prep system was used for library preparation. Sample-specific indices were added to each adaptor-ligated cDNA sample, using the universal and index-specific primer with a limited PCR cycle number, and the amplified library was cleaned by AMPure XP beads in the Apollo 324 system with a final elution volume of 16 μl. To confirm the quality and yield of the purified library, 1 μl was analyzed by Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) using a DNA high sensitivity chip. To accurately quantify the library concentration for clustering, the library was diluted 1:104 in dilution buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 with 0.05% Tween 20), and qPCR was performed with the Kapa Library Quantification kit (Kapabiosystem, Woburn, MA) using ABI’s 9700HT real-time PCR system (Thermo Fisher). Individually indexed and compatible libraries were proportionally pooled (~25 million reads per sample in general) for clustering in cBot system (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Libraries at a final concentration of 15 pM were clustered onto a single read flow cell using the Illumina TruSeq SR Cluster kit v3, and sequenced to 50 bp using the TruSeq SBS kit and the Illumina HiSeq system.Following the removal of primers and barcodes, raw reads were aligned to the Hg38 genome using Kallisto, which employs pseudoalignment to rapidly and accurately determine compatibility of reads with genomic targets. Annotations were provided by UCSC, with output of transcripts per million (TPM). Raw data were log2-tranformed, normalized with a 75th percentile shift, and baselined to the median of all samples. Further, transcripts were filtered to include only those with TPM > 3 in 100% of samples in at least one experimental condition (N = 11,891). Differential expression was assessed using moderated t-tests with a cutoff of p < 0.05 and fold change > 1.25. Transcripts meeting significance criteria were submitted to ToppGene and ToppCluster for ontological analyses.Candidate gene sets were generated using Gataca (https://gataca.cchmc.org/gataca/) and ToppGene (https://toppgene.cchmc.org) and submitted to principal component analysis, which creates comprehensive variables through linear combinations of numerous related variables. Thus, expression of multiple candidate genes was distilled into principal components. Samples were plotted according to values of principal components 1 and 2 to determine sample distribution according to candidate gene expression. RNAseq data are available through GEO using accession number GSE167922.Statistical analysisTechnical duplicates were performed for each experimental condition, and data were converted to fold change from the “no drug” condition with error bars representing the standard deviation of the duplicate measures. ANOVA was used to evaluate statistical significance (p < 0.05) compared to the “no drug” condition.ResultsHepatocyte cells lines expression mu opioid receptorMu opioid receptor expression was quantified by ELISA in several hepatocyte-derived cell lines, including Huh7.5JFH1 (HCV-infected), the parental / uninfected Huh7.5, and HepG2.2.15 (HBV-infected). The SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cell line was included as a positive control. As shown in Fig 1, all hepatocyte-derived cell lines expresses mu opioid receptor at or above the levels present in the SH-SY5Y cell line. Mu opioid receptor expression was minimal in DMEM and PBS, indicating minimal background signal.10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g001Fig 1Mu opioid receptor expression was quantified ELISA in 2 x 106 cells resuspended in lysis buffer and diluted 1:2.DMEM = Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM); PBS = phosphate buffered saline.Opioids enhance viral replicationThe impact of two synthetic opioids–fentanyl and carfentanil–were evaluated utilizing in vitro systems that replicate infectious HCV or HBV. As shown in Fig 2, at 24 hours post-drug exposure, low dose (1 ng) fentanyl had no impact on HCV replication in hepatocytes. However, higher doses (100 ng and 10 ug) significantly enhanced HCV replication (187.6% to 193.8% of the no drug condition). Carfentanil increased HCV replication at the low dose of 1 ng (168.1% compared to the no drug condition), although this increase was not maintained at higher doses (107.6% and 66.2% of the no drug condition). A complementary experiment was performed in the parental Huh7.5 cell line that was then exposed to infectious HCV in the presence of fentanyl. As shown in Fig 3, fentanyl resulted in significantly elevated levels of HCV replication in a dose-dependent manner (125.0% to 191.3%) compared to the no drug condition. We next utilized a non-infectious replication model by inserting two distinct patient-derived NS5B sequences inserted into a shuttle vector as described previously [27]. A dose-dependent increase in HCV replicative fitness–as measured by fold change in luciferase activity–was observed for patients JB35 and JB55 in the presence of fentanyl (Fig 4).10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g002Fig 2The Huh7.5JFH1 hepatocyte cell line–which constitutively expresses infectious HCV–was seeded at 500,000 cells per well.Fentanyl or carfentanil was added to culture medium after 24 hours. After 24 hours of incubation with drug, HCV core protein (ng/mL) was quantified in culture supernatants. ANOVA for dose effect: p = 0.0007 for fentanyl and p = 0.041 for carfentanil.10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g003Fig 3The parental Huh7.5 hepatocyte cell line was seeded at 500,000 cells per well.Infectious HCV (the JFH1 isolate from the Huh7.5JFH1 cell line) was added at TCID50 of 0.5 for 1 hour. Fentanyl was added to culture medium. After 24 hours of incubation with drug, HCV core protein (ng/mL) was quantified in culture supernatants. ANOVA for dose effect: p < 0.0001.10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g004Fig 4HCV replicative fitness as measured by patient-specific NS5B shuttle vectors expressing luciferase for patients JB35 (left) and JB55 (right). ANOVA for dose effect: p = 0.0002 for JB35 and p = 0.0002 for JB55.To determine if this proviral effect was virus-specific, the HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell line which constitutively expresses infectious HBV was evaluated in the presence/absence of fentanyl or carfentanil. As shown in Fig 5, there was a dose-dependent increase in HBV in the presence of fentanyl– 119.9%, 137.9%, and 172.6% at the 3 doses compared to the no drug condition.Addition of carfentanil led to a modest increase in HBV replication at the low dose (112.8% compared to the no drug condition), although decreased HBV replication was observed at higher doses (51.9% and 41.6% of the no drug condition).10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g005Fig 5The HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell line–which constitutively expresses infectious HBV–was seeded at 500,000 cells per well.Fentanyl or carfentanil was added to culture medium after 24 hours. After 24 hours of incubation with drug, HBsAg protein (ng/mL) was quantified in culture supernatants. ANOVA for dose effect: p = 0.0012 for fentanyl and p = 0.0002 for carfentanil.Opioids increase hepatic apoptosis and decrease cell viabilityThe impact of fentanyl on hepatic apoptosis was then evaluated. As shown in Fig 6, exposure to fentanyl resulted in a dose-dependent accumulation of soluble caspase-cleaved keratin 18 (M30)–a product of apoptosis–in two hepatocyte cell lines. At the high fentanyl dose, fold change in apoptosis compared to the no drug condition was 451.5% and 501.7% in the Huh7.5JFH1 and HepG2.2.15 cell lines, respectively.10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g006Fig 6The Huh7.5JFH1 or HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell lines were seeded at 500,000 cells per well.Fentanyl was added to culture medium after 24 hours. After 3 days of incubation with drug, M30 (units/mL) was quantified in culture supernatants. ANOVA for dose effect: p = 0.0018 for Huh7.5JFH1 and p = 0.0003 for HepG2.2.15.As drug exposure may impact cell viability, cell proliferation was quantified for Huh7.5JFH1 cells in the presence of fentanyl or carfentanil using the MTT Cell Proliferation Assay (Fig 7). A modest decrease in cell number was observed for the low and medium doses of fentanyl (92.9% to 86.4% compared to the no drug condition) and carfentanil (92.9% to 83.6% compared to the no drug condition). At the high drug dose, decreased cell number was more pronounced (76.4% and 68.2% for fentanyl and carfentanil, respectively).10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g007Fig 7The Huh7.5JFH1 hepatocyte cell line was seeded at 500,000 cells per well.Fentanyl or carfentanil was added to culture medium after 24 hours. After 24 hours of incubation with drug, the potential toxicity was evaluated by the MTT Cell Proliferation Assay Kit. ANOVA for dose effect: p = 0.044 for fentanyl and p = 0.028 for carfentanil.Opioids alter the hepatocyte transcriptomeGiven the significant impact of fentanyl on viral replication and apoptosis in the Huh7.5JFH1 and HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell lines, we evaluated further the impact of fentanyl on mRNA expression. After 3 days of incubation with drug, RNAseq identified a number of genes related to apoptosis, viral gene expression, hepatocarcinogenesis, and the NFκB response that were up or down regulated (S1 and S2 Figs). Principal component analysis was then employed for a more detailed exploration of genes related to the antiviral response, cell death, chemokine signaling, the interferon response, and NFκB signaling. As shown in Fig 8, genes clustered by cell type (Huh7.5JFH1 versus HepG2.2.15). For most gene families, the data also clustered based on fentanyl treatment status. As shown in Fig 8A, differentially expressed antiviral genes included MBL2, C19orf66, MX1, SRPK1, OAS3, and OAS1, although none achieved statistical significance in either cell line. In contrast, 8 cell death genes (HIST1H1E, KPNA1, TP53BP2, OPA1, DAPK2, APC, DAPK1, and PAK2) were differentially regulated in both cell lines, although these fold changes were only statistically significant in the HepG2.2.15 cell line (Fig 8B). Thus, fentanyl augments cell death processes in Hep2.2.15 but not Huh7.5JFH1 cells. Eight genes involved in chemokine signaling were statistically differentially regulated in the Huh7.5JFH1 (CXCL16, ADCY3, and GNG10) and/or HepG2.2.15 cell lines (SOS1, MAPK1, PIK3CB, PIK3R1, ADCY3, and NFKB1A) as shown in Fig 8C. Interferon genes were differentially regulated in either the Huh7.5JFH1 (HLA-C and OAS1) or HepG2.2.15 (IRF2, MX1, OAS3, and JAK1) cell lines, indicating that fentanyl augments different components of interferon signaling depending upon the cell type (Fig 8D). Finally, 8 genes involved in NFκB signaling were differentially regulated in either the Huh7.5JFH1 (CXCL16 and DDR1) or HepG2.2.15 (GADD45B, SLC6A12, RAP2C, CREB1, SOX5, and ALG6) cell lines, suggesting that fentanyl augments different elements of NFκB signaling depending upon the cell type (Fig 8E).10.1371/journal.pone.0249581.g008Fig 8Principle component analysis of mRNA expression data from the Huh7.5JFH1 and HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell lines in the presence / absence of fentanyl.(A) Antiviral, (B) cell death, (C) chemokine, (D) interferon, and (E) NFκB signaling genes sorted by cell line (red = Huh7.5JFH1 and blue = HepG2.2.15) and drug treatment (square = no fentanyl and triangle = fentanyl treated). Statistically significant fold changes are highlighted in red.DiscussionDrugs of abuse are able to promote viral replication and virus-mediated pathology [8]. Currently, the majority of unintentional overdoses in the United States involve fentanyl or fentanyl analogs [3–6]. Nonetheless, it is not known how synthetic opioids may impact viral replication and pathogenesis. As reviewed elsewhere, several distinct opioids promote HIV replication in immune cells [19]. Potential mechanisms include enhanced chemokine receptor expression, inhibition of β chemokines, antagonism of innate antiviral responses, and altered microRNA (miRNA) expression. Even less is known about the potential impact of opioids on viral hepatitis and liver disease. In vitro studies demonstrate that morphine, heroin, and methamphetamine can enhance HCV replication [28–32]. In vivo, HCV RNA levels are significantly higher among heroin users compared to non-heroin users [30]. Expression of microRNAs that enhance HCV replication are also elevated in heroin users with HCV infection. Morphine treatment inhibits IFNα and increases HCV expression in a dose-dependent manner in vitro [29, 31]. Methamphetamine inhibits the antiviral effects of IFNα and promotes viral replication in hepatocytes in vitro [28]. Nonetheless, the impact of individual synthetic opioids on HCV expression and dysregulation of host cellular pathways has not been evaluated prior to the current study.Data presented here demonstrate that fentanyl has a proviral effect on two hepatotropic viruses (HBV and HCV). To our knowledge, this is the first study to show an effect of fentanyl on replication of any virus. As well, despite its transmissibility by IDU, very little is known about the effects of any drugs of abuse–including synthetic opioids–on HBV replication in vitro or in HBV-infected individuals with opioid use. While the exact mechanism(s) underlying the proviral effect of fentanyl are not yet known, the RNAseq analyses (Fig 8; S1 and S2 Figs) provide several possibilities, including genes related to the antiviral/interferon response, cell death, chemokine signaling, and NFκB signaling. These findings are supported by previous studies in non-viral systems demonstrating that fentanyl induces apoptosis, alters NFκB signaling, and exerts immunosuppressive effects. For instance, peripheral blood lymphocytes and human umbilical cord mononuclear cells cultured in the presence of fentanyl experience increased apoptosis [33, 34]. Ma et al. reported that fentanyl induced apoptosis of activated CD4+ T cells and inhibited their secretion of IFNγ, IL-2, and IL-4 [34]. Others have reported increased apoptosis and/or expression of apoptosis-related genes in non-hepatic cell lines [35–39]. Additionally, several studies have observed suppressed activation of NFκB in the presence of fentanyl [34–36, 39, 40].Of note, Huh7.5JFH1 cells expressed higher levels of mu opioid receptor than the parental, uninfected Huh7.5 cells. Mu opioid receptor gene expression is dependent upon several transcription factors, including activator protein 1 (AP-1) and NFκB and can be altered by multiple cytokines [9, 41–44]. There are limited data on mu opioid receptor expression in the context of viral infection. Chakass et al. reported lower mu opioid receptor mRNA expression in liver biopsies and peripheral blood from individuals with untreated chronic HCV infection compared to controls [45]. In vitro studies suggest that the HIV proteins may upregulate mu opioid receptor expression [46–48]. However, whether HCV or HBV regulate mu opioid receptor expression in the replication systems evaluated in the current study requires additional investigation.Interestingly, carfentanil led to increased replication of HBV and HCV replication at the low dose but not at intermediate/high drug doses. Despite similar chemical structures, molecular docking models and radioligand displacement assays highlight distinct binding affinities of fentanyl and carfentanil for the mu opioid receptor [49, 50]. Carfentanil is approved for veterinary use only, and because of its extremely high potency, human studies assessing the metabolism of carfentanil have not been performed to date [26, 51]. Similarly, the impact of carfentanil on cellular gene expression remains poorly explored. Thus, additional investigation is required to determine the exact nature of this drug-specific response in viral replication.Several caveats to the current study design should be considered. First, in vitro drug exposure was short-term. While this may reflect acute drug exposure, it may not adequately reflect long-term drug exposure. Thus, the impact of opioids on cell viability, cell signaling, and/or apoptosis may vary be dose or timing of drug exposure. As well, recreational users likely encounter fentanyl on a more continuous, daily basis that could lead to sustained increases in viral replication. Fentanyl exposure may also co-occur with exposure to other opioids and/or other substances (e.g., methamphetamine, cocaine, etc.). As higher viral loads are often associated with increased likelihood of transmission to others and/or pathogenic consequences, in vivo studies conducted in individuals with viral hepatitis and opioid use are needed. Second, while physiologically relevant concentrations of fentanyl are poorly characterized, a limited number of studies suggest that concentrations of 10-12M to 10-4M are reasonable for the described experiments [52–58]. Third, many fentanyl analogs exist that have similar chemical structure to fentanyl. However, their specific impact on viral replication have not been evaluated here. Fourth, these are in vitro interactions that have not be evaluated in clinically relevant populations yet and in vivo studies, as well as complementary evaluation in primary hepatocytes and/or liver organoid systems is warranted. Nonetheless, these findings highlight the need to carefully study virus-opioid interactions for the myriad of opioids and opioid derivatives that are now detected in IDU populations, as well as characterize the various mechanisms in a virus- and drug-dependent manner.In summary, there is an urgent public health need to address the linked opioid and viral hepatitis epidemics, particularly in regions with high prevalence of opioid use disorder and synthetic opioids. Rigorous characterization of the interactions among HCV and its treatments, fentanyl, and host cells will improve clinical management paradigms for difficult-to-treat populations, facilitate rational public health policies given severely strained resources, and reveal additional pathways for novel target-specific therapeutic interventions.Supporting informationS1 FigRNAseq analysis of genes that are upregulated (red) or downregulated (blue) in the Huh7.5JFH1 hepatocyte cell line in the presence / absence of fentanyl.(TIFF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigRNAseq analysis of genes that are upregulated (red) or downregulated (blue) in the HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell line in the presence / absence of fentanyl.(TIFF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: An overview of Triple infection with Hepatitis B, C and D viruses

IntroductionHepatitis is a Latin word which means inflammation of liver. At the present time viral hepatitis is a major health problem worldwide, particularly in Asian countries [1]. Hepatitis is caused by different hepatic viruses and it leads to liver related morbidity [2-4]. Mostly hepatic infection is caused by single hepatic virus but sometime infection with multiple viruses may occur and it leads to different management problems. These different problems include higher incidence of morbidity and mortality [5].As hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis D virus (HDV) are transmitted via similar routes that is through blood or blood products so as a result, dual infection and even triple infection can occur in some patients [1,6-10] at the same time. A condition in which all three viruses (Hepatitis B, C and D) occur together in the same patient is called Triple infection [1].Viral hepatitis is one of the major health issues these days [11,12]. HBV is a partially double stranded, enveloped DNA virus that belongs to the Hepadnaviridae family and Orthohepadnavirus genus. Its size ranges from 40 to 42 nm, replicates in the liver and causes hepatic abnormalities [13,14]. It damages liver through immune mediated mechanisms [15,16]. HBV is the 9th leading cause of death worldwide. There are about 400 million people worldwide who are HCV carriers [17]. It causes cirrhosis, liver failure and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [18]. Annually one million people die due to HBV [19,20]. It has worldwide distribution and is also well documented in Pakistan [21,22].HCV is a single stranded RNA, enveloped virus that belongs to Flaviviridae family [23]. More than 170 million people are infected with HCV in the world [24]. Like HBV, it replicates in the liver and causes liver abnormalities. Like HBV, it also leads to many serious complications including cirrhosis, liver injury and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [25,26]. These two (HBV and HCV) are the main causes of chronic hepatitis [2,4]. HBV and HCV infection are common in those areas where these two viruses are endemic [27-31].Hepatitis D virus (HDV) or delta virus is a defective virus. It requires the help of another virus that is hepatitis B virus for its multiplication. It always occur with HBV either in the form of co-infection or super-infection. It is very rare but most severe form of the viral hepatitis [32]. This virus cannot replicate or multiply in the absence of HBV [9]. So we can say that HDV is the result of HBV [33,34]. Worldwide 15 million people positive for hepatitis B are also infected with hepatitis D [35]. Like HBV and HCV, it also plays a significant role in liver abnormalities. It also has oncogenic abnormalities [36,37].Literature SearchEpidemiology of triple viral infectionCases of triple viral infections and multiple viral infections had been reported from different regions of the world [5,10,38,39]. Mongolia is a country which is highly endemic for triple hepatitis viruses (with HBV, HCV, and HDV). Consequently many cases of triple infection are reported from here. It is also been reported that in Mongolia there is high prevalence of HBV, HCV and HDV [5,38,40-42]. There are also other regions of the world from where triple viral hepatitis infections had been reported including India and China [43,44]. Taiwan is another country which was previously reported as HBV and HCV endemic area but recent studies showed that now it is also endemic for HDV. Many cases of triple infection of hepatitis viruses are also reported from this region. Among the triple hepatitis patients in Taiwan, the prevalence of HBV is 12.6%, HCV is 41.6% and that of HDV is 15.3% [1]. Up to now, there is no report on triple infection caused by hepatitis viruses from Pakistani population [38].PathogenesisThere are many controversies about the role of triple hepatic infection in the pathogenesis of liver disease. It has been reported that triple viral infection does not cause the development of HCC but only one virus that dominate other two viruses in triple viral infection causes this condition of HCC [43].Transmission routesHBV, HCV and HDV viruses are not only biologically different but their life cycles and modes of gene expression are also totally different from each other. Despite of all these differences, they share same routes of transmission [45]. These three viruses (HBV, HCV, and HDV) are the major causes of chronic liver disease. All three viruses (HBV, HCV, and HDV) are transmitted due to direct or indirect exposure to infected blood or body fluids that contain infected blood. Common routes for transmission of these viruses are infected blood transfusion, contaminated syringes, injecting, tattoo and skin piercing with infected instruments, infected household contacts, through infected mother to her baby, by sexual contact with infected person, and via sharing of needles contaminated by infected drug users etc [46]. It is not unusual to find a patient who is co-infected with HBV and HCV or HBV and HDV or with all three viruses (HBV, HCV, and HDV) [1,5-8,47,48].SymptomsViral hepatitis is of major concern as it leads to morbidity and mortality. Whatever its cause is, all types of viral hepatitis affect liver cells. As a result, many signs and symptoms of various types of hepatitis are almost similar and these are not specific to the viral agent that causes them. Most common symptoms are yellowed eyes or skin (jaundice), fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, joint pain, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, dark urine and flu-like symptoms. Some patients may experience few or no symptoms [49-52].DiagnosisDiagnosis of hepatic viral infection is carried out by studying biochemical, virological and histological parameters. Liver function tests (LFT) and serologic assays are also used for detection of antigens and antibodies. As all hepatitis viral infections have same sign and symptoms so it is very difficult to diagnose triple viral infection. A liver function test is available but the pattern of abnormality for acute infection is similar for all types of viral hepatitis. Individually each infection (HBV, HCV and HDV) is confirmed by the presence of the serum surface antigen, hepatitis B, C and D envelope antigen and specific antibodies to the hepatitis B, C and D core. Moreover polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and enzyme linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA) are also used for confirmation [53]. Diagnosis of HCV infection is done by detecting anti-HCV antibody by ELISA method or HCV RNA by PCR method in the serum. HDV is diagnosed by the presence of anti-HDV antibody in the serum using specific ELISA assay. Diagnosis of multiple hepatitis viral infections using one assay is not possible to date. It may be due to low level of awareness among physicians and availability of simple diagnostic tests. But recently scientists used a single integrated protein micro-array for diagnosing multiple viral infections. It can determine two viral antigens (HBsAg, HBeAg) and seven viral antibodies (HBsAb, HBcAb, HBeAb, HCVAb, HDVAb, HEVAb, HGVAb) of human hepatitis viruses in human sera just within 20 minutes [38,54]. However this is very expensive and available in developed countries only.Replication status of viruses in triple infectionAlthough the replication pathway of HBV, HCV and HDV are different but one interesting virological aspect in case of triple infection is that up to what extent each virus affects the replication pathway of other virus and which one is responsible for the pathogenesis of liver disease. The reciprocal influence of HBV, HCV and HDV is still not clear [47,55]. In triple infection with HBV, HCV and HDV, there is interference between the viruses. In such situation one virus might suppresses the effect of others. As some studies have shown that HCV suppresses the effect of HBV and HDV and in some cases it causes sero-clearance of HBV antigens. Similarly there are studies which reported that HBV and HDV suppress HCV effect [48].Several studies have shown that HDV act as a dominant virus in triple infection and it inhibits the replication of both HBV and HCV [47,48,56-59]. Some studies have also shown that HCV is cleared when patient is super-infected with HBV and HDV [60]. The reason for this could be the inhibition of markers required for their replication [47,58]. Actually large delta antigen of HDV inhibits the host DNA dependent RNA polymerase II which is involved in HBV replication [58,61]. However, some studies reported that HCV act as a dominant virus in triple infection. A study conducted on triple infection of HBV, HCV and HDV by Liaw and colleagues showed that newcomer virus suppress existent viruses [62]. Another study in Australia showed that in patients infected with HBV, HCV and HDV, replication of HBV is suppressed [63]. A study done by Mathurin showed that in Western countries dominant virus is HDV and there is no replication of HCV and HBV in patients with triple infection. Such discrepancies between the studies can be explained as the time of infection and host immune status are different in different parts of the world as a result of which different viruses are dominant in triple infection in different parts of the world [47].Disease outcomeAs in triple infection all the three viruses are present so scientists are of the view that there are more complications in the early appearance of this disease [64]. A study conducted by Liaw et al on the disease outcome of triple infection with HBV, HCV and HDV reported that this disease is more severe in the acute super-infection stage [62]. Other studies also suggested that infection with HBV, HCV and HDV increases the risk of fulminant hepatitis which is severe impairment of hepatic functions or severe necrosis of hepatocytes [65,66]. Patients with triple infection of HBV, HCV and HDV suffer from more severe liver lesions. They show a high tendency for cirrhosis. They also show increased risk for progression to HCC [63,67-69].TreatmentVirological response in case of triple infection varies widely and show many different profiles. As a result of this, level of viruses varies during the therapy and follow-up period. For a proper treatment of triple infection, patient should be followed up yearly and the viral load should be determined which tells us which one virus is gone to be dominant and then we can treat it accordingly [70]. Patients with triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV show severe and progressive liver disease. Many studies have shown that when patients with triple infection are treated with interferon therapy, they show resistance to interferon therapy whereas patients having a single viral infection respond to his therapy [48]. Weltman et al., also reported that when seven patients having triple infection were treated with interferon-alpha, six show no response and there is only one patient who normalized serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) during treatment. So they provide a proof that triple infection show less response to interferon therapy [63].When patients with triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV are treated with lamivudine alone and lamivudine in combination with interferon, they have not shown positive results [71,72]. Another option for patients with triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV is liver transplantation. Risk of recurrence of HBV and HCV is decreased in transplanted liver which otherwise may occur due to viral interference phenomenon [73]. Treatment options for triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV are very limited. There is no optimal treatment for this up to now [73]. For selecting most appropriate antiviral treatment of triple infection, patient should be monitored carefully and virological assessment should be carried out to determine dominant virus.Preventive measuresThere are a lot of preventive measures which should be carried out in order to avoid development of triple infection. Some of these are [74]:1. Screening of donated blood and plasma2. Routine immunization for infants and high-risk individuals3. Practicing safe sex4. Cleaning up blood spills promptly with bleach5. Avoiding sharing razors, syringes, tooth brushes, nail clippers, or needles, when getting a manicure, a tattoo, or having any body part pierced [74].Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsMR searched the literature, organized the data. MR wrote the manuscript. HK and FK helped MR in literature review. MI revised the manuscript. All the authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.


Title: The Dual Role of Exosomes in Hepatitis A and C Virus Transmission and Viral Immune Activation

1. IntroductionExosomes, believed to be nothing more than expelled cellular waste containers after their discovery in the early 1980s [1,2,3], have since been found to act as important intercellular messengers carrying functional RNAs, proteins and lipids that can induce phenotypic changes in recipient cells [4]. Exosomes are created by invagination of the endosomal membrane leading to the formation of multivesicular bodies (MVBs) [5,6]. Many proteins have been found to be involved in exosome/MVB biogenesis and chief among those are the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRTs) although ESCRT independent mechanisms for MVB formation have been described [7,8,9]. It is not clear whether different subpopulations of exosomes are created via different mechanisms of MVB biogenesis or whether incorporation of specific exosomal proteins leads to distinct classes of exosome-like vesicles. Machinery known to be involved in viral exosome biogenesis in the context of Hepatitis A and C infection will be discussed below. When an MVB fuses with the plasma membrane its exosomes are released and can travel over short or long distances to eventually bind to target cells and deliver their cargo. What causes an MVB to fuse with the plasma membrane rather than be degraded in the lysosome is not known but certain membrane trafficking machinery such as Rab35 have been shown to be important in exosome release [10]. Exosomes are secreted by almost all cell types and can be found in all bodily fluids but the exact mechanisms of exosomal targeting to specific cell types (if this occurs in vivo) and cargo release remain to be elucidated [11,12,13].2. Exosomes Emerge as Important Players in Viral PathogenesisHepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major blood borne human pathogen chronically infecting 130 to 170 million people worldwide [14,15]. HCV infection persists in the majority of exposed individuals and can cause severe liver disease if left untreated. The virus has evolved mechanisms to blunt the innate immune response in infected hepatocytes by cleaving a key intermediate in innate immune signaling via its NS3/4A protease [16,17,18]. None the less, HCV induces type I interferon responses in the infected liver and it has been shown that this occurs via activation of liver-resident plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), which produce type I interferon when in contact with HCV infected hepatocytes [19]. Further, it has been shown that pDC sensing of infected cells depends on exosomal transfer of HCV RNA from infected hepatocytes to pDCs [20]. This could explain the previously confusing finding that interferon and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) are present in HCV infected livers despite the inability of infected cells to produce type-I interferon due to viral escape mechanisms. Recent findings have also shown that HCV induces type-III interferons in infected livers, which leads to expression of the same ISG pattern as type-I interferons and could explain the presence of antiviral responses in infected patients. It is not clear, however, which cell type produces the bulk of the type-III interferons. Although pDCs can produce interferon-III other cells such as type-2 myeloid dendritic cells (mDC2) may be the main source [21,22,23,24]. It is not known whether HCV-exosomes can induce type-III interferons as well as type-I interferons and future work should elucidate this, and, more broadly, the role of type-III interferons in HCV infection.Subsequent studies could also show evidence of virion-independent exosomal transmission of viral RNA and de novo infection of naïve cells [25,26,27,28]. It remains to be elucidated, which process predominates in vivo.Figure 1Full-length infectious Hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA or assembled Hepatitis A virus (HAV) virions can be incorporated into exosomes in infected cells and are secreted into the extracellular milieu. From there viral exosomes can infect other susceptible cells or be internalized by resident pDCs leading to type I interferon production that is dependent on viral RNA recognition by TLR7. Interestingly, while HCV virus particles (or non-enveloped HAV virions) do not activate type-I interferons in pDCs, it has been shown that HVC virions can impair pDC function in infected patients, most likely though viral proteins [29,30,31]. While pDCs are abundant in the HCV infected liver their numbers are much less during HAV infection, which may explain the near absence of type I interferon-stimulated gene expression in HAV infected humans and primates. IFNα, interferon-alpha; TLR7, toll-like receptor 7; N, nucleus; pDC, plasmacytoid dendritic cell; MVB, multivesicular body.Like HCV, Hepatitis A virus (HAV) is a hepatotropic positive-strand RNA virus that employs similar strategies to inhibit innate immune responses using protease mediated cleavage of innate immune adaptors [32,33,34]. Unlike HCV though, HAV causes moderate to severe acute liver inflammation but is unable to establish persistent infection. HAV is cleared after 3–4 weeks accompanied by the appearance of virus specific antibodies [35,36,37]. HAV has been traditionally described as a non-enveloped RNA virus belonging to the Picornaviridae family (as opposed to HCV, which is an enveloped virus of the Flaviviridae family) but recent studies have found that the virus particles can be engulfed by host membranes that resemble exosomes and as such are secreted from infected cells in a way that protects the virus from antibody-mediated immune responses [38]. This may explain the previously unsolved finding that both anti-HAV and inactivated virus could prevent disease even when administered after virus replication had been well established [39]. As with HCV, however, these viral exosomes or enveloped HAV particles (eHAV) can also be transmitted to pDCs where a comparable activation of the type I interferon response occurs [40] (Figure 1).3. Exosomal Transport of Infectious Viral Agents and Activation of the Interferon ResponseAs outlined above, it has been shown that full length HCV RNA can be incorporated into exosomes in infected cells. Although the exact mechanism for RNA incorporation is unknown, this seems to be an active process since HCV RNA is more than a 1000-fold enriched compared to GAPDH mRNA. Since these experiments were done using HCV subgenomic replicon cells that replicate HCV RNA lacking the viral structural proteins core (which forms the viral capsid) and E1/E2 glycoproteins this process does not require full virus assembly [20,41,42]. This indicates that HCV exosomes do not need any viral structural proteins to be transferred to pDCs or infect other hepatocytes. In support of this, it was found that anti-HCV-receptor antibodies that block virus entry and infection such as anti-CD81, anti-SRB1 and anti-ApoE did not inhibit exosomal HCV transmission [26]. What is needed for HCV exosome release, however, are the ESCRT proteins chromatin-modifying protein 4B (CHMP4B) and tumour susceptibility gene 101 (TSG101) as well as the membrane trafficking regulator Annexin A2 (ANXA2), which are all part of the canonical machinery involved in MVB biogenesis and exosome secretion [20]. It is not known how exosomes are taken up by pDCs or how the HCV RNA is released to engage with endosomal TLR7, which is essential for interferon production by the pDCs but close cell-to-cell contact between infected cells and pDCs is essential for efficient innate immune activation. This latter point seems to be a common theme across different viruses although it is not clear how cell-cell contacts between pDCs and infected cells are established in each case. This is reviewed in more detail by Assil et al. [43].In contrast, for HAV it has been shown that exosomally packaged virions termed eHAV and not viral RNA exosomes are responsible for pDC activation and spread of infection. Similar to HCV RNA, HAV virion incorporation into exosomes requires certain components of the ESCRT machinery although they differ slightly between the two viruses. eHAV packaging and release was shown to be dependent on the ESCRT proteins Alix and VPS4B but not on other components like TSG101, HRS, CHMP4A, CHMP4B, and CHMP4C [38,40]. This is particularly interesting since CHMP4B and TSG101 were shown to be essential for exosomal HCV RNA release and further studies should elucidate exact exosome incorporation mechanisms for different viral species. Assuming that HCV RNA and HAV virions are packaged via specific signals and not randomly into exosomes it would be interesting to unravel the different mechanisms responsible for RNA vs. virion targeting to MVBs. Interestingly, it has been shown that HCV relies on the ESCRT protein HRS for export of its nucleocapsids, which was dispensable for eHAV release suggesting that while many viruses hijack the ESCRT machinery for their export there are mechanistic differences [44,45].Both concentrated HCV (which is enveloped) and HAV (which is not enveloped) particles fail to activate pDCs. In both cases, close contact of pDCs with infected hepatocytes or highly concentrated viral exosomes were necessary for induction of interferon-alpha production [20,40]. This suggests that exosomal uptake and cargo delivery, of which we know little, is essential for pDC activation and such mechanisms may play a role in many different viral infections as they are universal to mammalian exosome biology. Activation of pDCs by both types of viral exosomes relies on recognition of the viral RNA by endosomal TLR7 but in either case it is not known how the RNA is released from the exosome (and the HAV capsid) to reach endosomal TLR7. In fact, our knowledge of how exosomes deliver any kind of cargo such as proteins or RNAs to the cytoplasm or to endosomal compartments is incremental at best and further studies are needed to elucidate theses mechanisms, which are important in various diseases as well as viral infections. eHAV is taken up by pDCs via an endocytic mechanism that is facilitated by phosphatidylserine receptors and requires acidification of the endosomes as interferon production was ablated in the presence of chloroquine or bafilomycin A1, which is consistent with our current limited knowledge of non-viral exosome uptake [46,47,48,49,50,51,52]. It is not known how or if HAV RNA is unpackaged from its capsid to reach TLR7 or whether “naked” HAV RNA is co-packaged with HAV virions into exosomes.It is likely that both HCV and HAV exosomes are taken up by pDCs via an endocytic mechanism involving exosomal surface proteins although such mechanisms have been poorly defined for any kind of exosomes in vivo or in vitro. It is not clear whether HCV or HAV (non-enveloped) virions are taken up by pDCs via viral or other receptors although it is clear that neither virus can replicate in pDCs nor do they activate interferon. The fact that HCV virus particles can impair pDC function in infected patients suggests that an interaction does occur but why this does not lead to viral RNA uptake and recognition by TLRs in the pDCs is a question that future studies should address.4. Viral Exosomes as Immune Evasive Infectious ParticlesDespite the ability of HCV and HAV exosomes to activate innate immune signaling in pDCs both types of vesicles can also infect naïve hepatocytes. In the case of HCV this can be achieved via exosomes containing just the positive-sense viral RNA genome as it can occur in the absence of viral structural proteins [25,27,53]. Although it is difficult to separate HCV viral particles from HCV exosomes due to their similar biophysical properties some experiments suggest that core and E2 proteins can be incorporated into viral exosomes but it is not clear whether this is an active process or happens passively during exosome biogenesis in infected cells and it is certainly not a pre-requisite for exosomal viral transmission. In fact, exosomal transmission of HCV was shown to be independent of canonical viral entry receptors engaged by E1/E2 viral glycoproteins [26]. HCV exosome transmission was also partially resistant to antibody neutralisation using patient derived IgG suggesting that viral exosomes can escape humoral immunity. Interestingly, studies using exosomes purified from HCV infected cells, suggest that mir-122 together with Ago2 and HSP90 are associated with exosomal HCV RNA. This could increase viral exosome infectivity since mir-122, Ago2 and HSP90 have been shown to be important cellular co-factors for HCV replication [26,54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61]. It remains to be seen whether all viral exosomes contain those co-factors or not and whether that may predispose an exosome to be infectious rather than activate a pDC. Finally, Bukong et al., have also found that HCV negative-sense RNA, a replication intermediate, can be found in exosomes of treatment non-responders although the significance of this remains to be elucidated.HAV exosomes, or eHAV, have also been shown to be highly infectious circulating particles. In fact, eHAVs and not non-enveloped HAVs seem to be the predominant form of circulating viral particles in infected humans and chimpanzees. Unlike HAV, eHAV particles are resistant to neutralizing antibodies, which may explain the late appearance of virus-specific antibodies in infected patients [36]. Non-enveloped virus can be found in feces, which may be due to stripping of the membrane during passage through the biliary tract from the liver to the gut. These findings raise questions about broadly categorizing viruses into enveloped and non-enveloped species and it will be interesting what future research can tell us about hijacking of exosomes by various viruses.5. DiscussionThe role of viral exosomes in HCV and HAV infection seems paradoxical since, on the one hand, these exosomes activate the innate immune response via pDCs, and on the other hand they mask infectious viral RNA or particles from antibody-mediated immune responses. It is possible that exosomes evolved as a defense mechanism to activate innate immunity despite viral strategies to block these pathways in infected cells. However, the viruses may have co-evolved to use exosomes to spread undetected by the adaptive immune response. In the case of HAV, the latter certainly seems to be the principal mechanism in vivo since eHAV is the predominant form found in the blood of infected patients and chimpanzees and is fully infectious, whereas non-enveloped, classical HAV is found in the feces of infected animals or humans [38]. Furthermore, the disappearance of pDCs from HAV infected livers prior to inflammation suggests that the former is not a major contributor to anti-HAV immune responses during the peak of infection, which is not accompanied by strong type I interferon regulated responses.HCV infection on the other hand leads to sustained inflammation of the liver characterized by induction of type I and type-III interferons and an abundance of pDCs. Cell culture experiments using subgenomic replicon cells suggest that exosomal HCV infection is inefficient compared to free virus infection [25]. The contribution of exosomal HCV vs. free virus infection in vivo is difficult to determine since, unlike HAV, the viral particles exhibit a similar size and density to viral exosomes and contamination of exosome preparations with free virus is difficult to exclude. However, using an immune-isolation protocol to try and largely separate virus from viral exosomes Bukong et al., show that HCV-exosomes can be found in the circulation of infected patients and that these vesicles are infectious and largely resistant to neutralization by anti-HCV-E2 antibodies [26,27]. It is possible that these HCV-exosomes constitute an immune-protected viral reservoir that allows the virus to persist after antiviral treatment or liver transplantation whereas the main spread of infection in the liver occurs via free HCV virus.It is not known how HCV (or eHAV) exosomes are internalized by pDCs but several well described HCV entry receptors have been found to be dispensable for exosomal HCV transmission to hepatocytes. Never the less, exosomal HCV spread (like HCV viral spread) seems to retain exclusive tropism for hepatocytes. There are several possible explanations for these findings that should be addressed in future investigations. Strong post-entry restrictions may prevent viral replication and release in cells other than hepatocytes. Alternatively, the very low infectivity of HCV exosomes compared to HCV virus (at least in vitro) may prevent infection of cell types other than hepatocytes, which represent the natural, and therefore likely the optimal host cell type of HCV. Lastly, it is also possible that HCV exosomes only exhibit auto- or paracrine transfer mechanisms although they can be found in the blood stream of infected individuals.It is becoming increasingly clear that exosomes play an important role in many viral infections [11]. In the case of HCV and HAV infections, we know now that viral exosomes can contribute to both viral immune evasion by masking viral particles or genomes, as well as activation of pDCs and innate immune responses. Full-length HCV RNA without viral proteins or complete HAV viral particles are incorporated into exosomes using the standard cellular exosome machinery and secreted to the extracellular space. From there, the viral exosomes are either taken up by pDCs or susceptible hepatocytes leading to innate immune activation or de novo infection, respectively. In the case of HAV infection the latter seems to be more important since pDCs largely disappear from infected livers at the peak of infection, whereas in the case of HCV infection pDC activation characterized by type I interferon production may be a major contributor to liver inflammation and disease progression. Although type I interferons are generally considered to be a major first line of host defense after viral infection recent studies suggest that sustained interferon production may in some way contribute to viral persistence [62,63,64]. HAV and HCV infections seem to support this paradoxical idea since the former is not accompanied by type I interferon responses and never persists in infected individuals whereas the latter becomes chronic in most patients and is characterized by strong induction of type I and type III interferons. It will be interesting to see what mechanistic insight future studies can give us about these observations and how these observations extend to other viruses. For example, similarly to HCV, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) can persist in the presence of antiviral immune responses characterized by type I interferon induction, which is mediated by pDC uptake of viral exosomes containing LCMV RNA [65]. For other viruses, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the role of exosomes may be equally complex as evidence suggests that exosomes facilitate both enhancement and inhibition of viral spread depending on the cell type of origin [11]. TLR7 dependent pDC activation by HIV infected lymphocytes has been demonstrated and it will be interesting to investigate the role of exosomes in this process [66]. Taken together, these findings certainly warrant further investigation into the role of viral exosomes in innate immunity and immune evasion.


Title: Insights Into the Coinfections of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B Virus, Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C Virus, and Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C Virus: Prevalence, Risk Factors, Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Treatment

IntroductionThe coinfection of viruses can be a serious public health problem because most medicines are designed to control and manage a single infection. Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is one of the most important and prevalent disease conditions that has been spread among humans for the last two decades (Kim et al., 2000). More than 75 million people worldwide have been infected with HIV, and approximately 37 million individuals are currently living with this infection. Hepatitis B (HB) and hepatitis C (HC) viral infections are highly prevalent among HIV-infected individuals due to sharing the same transmission routes. Hepatitis caused by both hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) leads to severe liver disorder, and morbidity and mortality are now increasing due to coinfection with HIV (Easterbrook et al., 2012). Coinfection with HIV can modify the natural characteristics of HBV by genome replication status, higher rates of chronic infection, and liver disease progression (Ndifontiayong et al., 2021). The impact of HIV on HBV is critical, as HIV can provoke chronic HBV infection, which can lead to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (Maponga et al., 2020). While in HIV-HCV coinfection, HIV increases the HCV viral load and accelerates liver disease progression (Rodrigo, 2020). HIV, HBV, and HCV are transmitted via blood, shared needles, syringes, and other injection equipment, sexually, or even from pregnant mothers to babies (Pfaender et al., 2016). The hepatotropic viruses, both HBV and HCV, attack the liver cell and cause inflammation. However, HIV can attack any targeted cell in the mucosal tissue and spread through the whole lymphoid system (Siebers and Finlay, 1996). As a result of shared transmission routes, HBV, HCV, and HIV can easily cause coinfection, more pervasive than an infection caused by either HBV or HCV.On the other hand, patients dually infected with HCV and HBV carry a significantly higher risk of developing fulminant hepatic failure, liver cirrhosis, and HCC than those with HCV or HBV infection alone (Liu, 2014). A recent study showed that viral infections, such as HBV, HCV, and HIV, are the second most common cause of morbidity and mortality among patients with thalassemia (Bhuyan et al., 2021). Great attention should be paid to the stages of liver disease, virus predominance, and the presence of HIV infection and comorbidities to conduct a better treatment. Several other therapies are being assessed in these circumstances, along with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) (Zhang et al., 2014). However, proper treatment for patients suffering from dual coinfection, either with HIV, HBV, or HCV, is yet to be discovered. The current review is focused on various aspects of HIV, HBV, or HCV coinfection, with a special emphasis on prevalence, risk factors, pathogenesis, diagnostic markers, and treatment.Structure and Replication of Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Hepatitis B Virus, and Hepatitis C VirusHuman Immunodeficiency VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus infects humans with two types of lentiviruses of the Retroviridae family. The structure of HIV is roughly spherical with a diameter of about 120 nm and covered by an outer lipid envelope membrane (de Jongh et al., 1992). The viral genome consists of two identical single-stranded RNA molecules enclosed within the core of the virus particle along with three viral enzymes-reverse transcriptases (RT/RNAse), integrase, and protease (Bodsworth et al., 1991). The initial steps of infection are dependent on protein-protein interactions, where the surface protein GP120 of the virus binds to the CD4 receptors on host cells (Xiao et al., 2008). The attachment causes a conformational change by which channels are formed. Due to its high hydrophobicity, the virus particle is engulfed by the target cell’s plasma membrane, and the reverse transcriptase enzyme transcribes the single-strand RNA genome into double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) (Ockenga et al., 1997). The dsDNA is then transported through the nucleopore complex into the nucleus and integrated within the host genome by the integrase enzyme, producing mRNA and translating it into structural and non-structural proteins (Figure 1). These proteins are then assembled to form viral progeny and finally released into the bloodstream (Yim and Lok, 2006; Miailhes et al., 2007).FIGURE 1After HIV GP120 binds with the receptors on the CD4 cell surface, the viral particle fuses with the membrane and enters the cell. The HIV genome ssRNA is reverse transcribed into the dsDNA using reverse transcriptase. The viral DNA is then integrated with the host cell DNA using integrase. The various structural and non-structural proteins are produced from the integrated DNA, and then viral particles are assembled and released from the cell.Hepatitis B VirusHepatitis B virus is a member of the Hepadnavirus family, infecting humans, whereas orthohepadnaviruses and avihepadnaviruses infect mammals and birds, respectively (Schaefer, 2007). The infectious virion is approximately 42 nm in diameter with an internal icosahedral symmetry core particle nucleocapsid. The viral genome is a double-stranded DNA around 3.2 kb in size (Ott et al., 2012). The positive strand is the incomplete inner one, and the negative strand is the completed outer one, and viral polymerase is linked to the 5′ end of the minus strand (Bosch et al., 1988; Hossain et al., 2020). The envelope is also the primary structure embedded with the surface antigens (HBsAg), which are the core components of detecting the presence of HBV infections by commercial immunoassays (Hossain and Ueda, 2017). In the first phase of infection, the virion attaches to host cells via sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) that helps itself get uncoated by fusion (Yan et al., 2012; Li, 2015). Secondly, upon infection, the rcDNA of the virus is converted into plasmid-like covalently-closed circular DNA (cccDNA) inside the host cell nucleus (Figure 2). Finally, the cccDNA templates several genomic and subgenomic RNAs transcribed by cellular RNA polymerase II. The pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) is then selectively packaged into progeny capsids, and most of the pgRNA reversely transcribed into DNA within the capsids. Then the progeny viruses are released from the cells after being enveloped in the ER-Golgi/MVB (Lee et al., 2008; Hossain et al., 2020).FIGURE 2Hepatitis B virus particle binds with the NTCP receptor, fuses with the membrane, and enters the host cell. The rcDNA is converted into cccDNA, transcribed into pgRNA, and finally packaged into the capsid. The capsid is enveloped by the ER-Golgi/MVB and released into the extracellular space.Hepatitis C VirusHepatitis C virus is an enveloped virus that is a member of the genus Hepacivirus under the family Flaviviridae. The genome of the HCV is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA (ssRNA), around 9.6 kilobases in size (Kato, 2000). The ssRNA(+) is protected by a protein nucleocapsid and a lipid envelope membrane (Bukh et al., 1994). HCV infection into the host cells occurs by receptor-mediated endocytosis (Blanchard et al., 2006; Karangelis et al., 2010). The HCV particle binds with the hepatocyte surface molecules such as glycosaminoglycans, CD81, scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI), members of the claudin family (CLDN1, 6 and 9), and mannose-binding lectins DC-SIGN and L-SIGN (Barth et al., 2006; Helle and Dubuisson, 2008). Lipoproteins metabolism is also involved in the HCV attachment and replication steps (Grassi et al., 2016). The nucleocapsid is released in the cell cytoplasm from the virus-host cell molecule complex, and then the nucleocapsid is decapsidated to free the ssRNA(+) into the host cytoplasm. Due to its positive-sense properties, the viral RNA acts as mRNA and is directly translated by cap-dependent ribosomal machinery (El-Hage and Luo, 2003). A single polyprotein is translated from the mRNA, later processed to produce several structural and non-structural viral proteins. The six non-structural proteins are NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B, which help in functions related to viral replication and are involved in host cell pathogenesis (Bartenschlager et al., 1994; Reed et al., 1995; Egger et al., 2002). The non-structural proteins help to make ssRNA(+) by using a ssRNA(–) template that is replicated by NS5B RNA-dependent RNA polymerase beforehand from one ssRNA(+) (Gosert et al., 2003). Finally, the assembled viral particle is incorporated with lipid droplets and released by one of the two predicted pathways such as very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) secretory pathway or endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) pathway (Figure 3; Penin et al., 2004; Syed et al., 2010; Dubuisson and Cosset, 2014).FIGURE 3Hepatitis C virus particle binds with the CD81 receptor, fuses with the membrane, and enters the host cell. Upon entering, the ssRNA(+) is translated by ribosomal machinery and produces both structural and non-structural proteins, which assemble and mature in the Golgi body and are then released into extracellular space.Prevalence of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusIt is estimated that approximately 240 million people have chronic HBV infection (Sun et al., 2014). According to WHO, 37.5 million people were estimated to be living with HIV at the end of 2020. Because of shared routes of transmission, HBV coinfection among HIV-positive persons is common. In some regions, over two-thirds of HIV-infected persons have been reported with a history of HBV infection, which means 2–4 million people have HBV-HIV coinfection (Alter, 2006). However, the prevalence varies from region to region among HIV patients with chronic HBV infection (5–10%) due to local endemicity and acquisition mode. In western countries, the prevalence of HIV-HBV coinfection is estimated to be approximately 20% due to being acquired in adulthood, either by drug injection or through sexual transmission (Nyirenda et al., 2008). However, in Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, the endemicity is intermediate to high with 10–20% prevalence, acquired primarily in the perinatal period and early childhood (Lee et al., 2008; Nyirenda et al., 2008). In the United States, it is estimated that half of all patients with HIV infection have been exposed to HBV, which is 20 times higher than in the general US population. In the early 2000s, around 8% tested positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) or had detectable HBV DNA levels (Spradling et al., 2010). In a study conducted in Iran, the HIV-HBV prevalence in the general population and health care workers was very low. The highest prevalence was observed among injecting drug users at 1.88% and prisoners (0.13%) (Table 1; Bagheri Amiri et al., 2016).TABLE 1Regional prevalence of HIV-HBV, HIV-HCV, and HBV-HCV coinfection.CoinfectionRegionPrevalence of risk factors among the casesReferencesHIV-HBVGlobally2–4 million people have HBV-HIV coinfection
Alter, 2006
Western countries20% coinfection occurs due to drug injection and sexual intercourse
Nyirenda et al., 2008
Asia and Africa10–20% coinfection occurs during the perinatal period and early childhoodLee et al., 2008; Nyirenda et al., 2008United StatesHalf of the HIV infected patients are coinfected with HBV
Spradling et al., 2010
IranThe prevalence of coinfection is higher in drug users (1.88%) and prisoners (0.13%) than general people
Bagheri Amiri et al., 2016
HIV-HCVGlobally20–30% of 3.5 million HIV patients are infected with HCV
Hernandez and Sherman, 2011
The prevalence of HIV-HCV coinfection among intravenous drug users is estimated to be around 90%
Sherman et al., 2002
HBV-HCVGlobally10–15% of patients with chronic HBV infection are infected with HCVCrespo et al., 1994; Ohkawa et al., 1994; Senturk et al., 20082–10% of anti-HCV-positive patients are HBsAg positiveIndiaThe prevalence of HBV-HCV dual infection is 16%
Chakravarti et al., 2005
EgyptThe prevalence of coinfection is 0.7%
Mekky et al., 2013
United StatesThe prevalence of coinfection is 1.4%
Semnani et al., 2007
Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusGlobally 37.5 million people live with HIV infection, and approximately 20–30% are infected with HCV (Hernandez and Sherman, 2011). As mentioned above, in the same transmission route, the prevalence of HIV-HCV coinfection among intravenous drug users is estimated to be around 90% (Sherman et al., 2002). According to various reports, approximately 21% of adults with HIV tested positive with HCV infection (Yee et al., 2000). Besides percutaneous drug exposure, coinfection can also be seen in hemophiliacs who received contaminated blood without routine serological screening (Di Martino et al., 2001). HCV is estimated to have a 10-fold higher risk of transmission than HIV through percutaneous routes; hence coinfected individuals are usually first infected by HCV (Kingsley et al., 1987). HCV is spread less efficiently by sexual transmission than HIV (Thomas et al., 1995; Gupta, 2013). The number of HIV-infected people chronically infected with HCV worldwide is approximately 2.3 million (Table 1; Garg et al., 2014).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusDue to the lack of large-scale population-based studies, the exact number of HBV-HCV coinfected patients is unknown; however, some regional studies have been done. One study reported that the prevalence of HBV-HCV dual infection is 16% in India (Chakravarti et al., 2005), while another reported the prevalence of coinfection is 0.7% in Egypt (Mekky et al., 2013). Data from different regions concluded that approximately 10–15% of patients with chronic HBV infection are also infected with HCV; on the other hand, about 2–10% of anti-HCV-positive patients are HBsAg positive (Crespo et al., 1994; Ohkawa et al., 1994; Senturk et al., 2008). Tyson et al. estimated that the prevalence of HBV-HCV coinfection was 1.4% in the US (Table 1; Semnani et al., 2007).Risk Factors of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusThe risk factors for coinfection with HBV in HIV-positive individuals may vary in several aspects, including patient age, body mass index, sex, geographical location, current ART regime and duration, key population category, HIV viral load, marital status, and CD4+ T cell count. An epidemiological profile study of HBV-HIV coinfected people conducted in Nepal portrayed some risk factors, including being a spouse of a migrant laborer, a male or female sex worker, an intravenous drug user, or having an HCV-positive status (Bhattarai et al., 2018). Several studies reported that the prevalence of HIV-HBV coinfection among people who inject drugs (PWID) increases with age (Falade-Nwulia and Thio, 2011; Wing, 2017). Due to the chronic and sometimes asymptomatic nature of HIV and HBV infections, the individuals are likely at an even higher risk of chronic progression given the combined effects of age and related immune system dysfunction (Abdala et al., 2008). It is hypothesized that HIV-positive individuals are more likely to be infected with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) than HIV-negative individuals, possibly due to common risk factors. In addition, immunosuppression induced by HIV infection may cause reactivation or reinfection in those previously exposed to HBV (Thio et al., 2002). Other reports showed that coinfection prevalence was higher among men than women, especially in homosexual men, non-Hispanics than Hispanics, and among patients aged 35–44 than younger or older (Porras-Ramírez and Rico-Mendoza, 2020; Figure 4).FIGURE 4Major risk factors and consequences of HIV, HBV, and HCV coinfection.Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus-driven viral hepatitis exacerbates hepatic lesions and increases the transmission of HCV. Several risk factors associated with the HIV-HCV coinfection are shown in Figure 4. Some populations among HIV-positive patients worldwide have more frequent exposure to HCV infection due to engagement in high-risk behaviors, weak family and social support systems, and inadequate access to healthcare services (Health Policy Project, 2014). Coinfection risk factors also vary on epidemiological subjects such as age, marital status, sex, geographical location, HIV viral load, and CD4+ T cell count. In a Nepalese study, HIV-HCV coinfection was higher in individuals >40 years of age. It is more evident in homosexual men with multiple sexual contacts without a preservative (Götz et al., 2005). In a cohort, the incidence of HCV infection among HIV seropositive MSMs increased 10-fold (van de Laar et al., 2007). Moreover, HIV-positives with CD4+ T cell counts of >200 cells/μL were associated with a lower risk of coinfection with HCV. The study suggested that age and CD4+ T cell count may affect the risk for HIV-HCV coinfection (Bhattarai et al., 2018). Furthermore, the blood-borne transmission of the coinfection is 62–80% common among injection-drug users (Yehia et al., 2014). Several studies suggest that HIV and hepatitis transmission are associated with high-risk injection practices such as injection with a syringe previously used by another PWID (Ray Saraswati et al., 2015; Buchanan et al., 2017; Kilonzo et al., 2018). Individuals living with HIV-HCV coinfection are less likely to clear acute HCV infection and more likely to transmit the virus, particularly PWID who share used needles (Shapatava et al., 2006). In the case of mother-to-child, the risk of transmission to the fetus in coinfected women for HIV is between 5 and 25% times higher than in mothers infected by only HCV (Zanetti et al., 1999). Coinfected patients have higher HCV RNA loads and experience more rapid progression of HCV-related liver disease than those without HIV infection (Thomas et al., 2000). HIV infection was found in 13% of hemophiliacs coinfected with HIV and HCV, while HCV infection was detected in just 3% of 162 female sexual partners (Eyster et al., 1991). Other transmission routes, such as sexual intercourse or vertical transmission, have less risk of transmission than percutaneous exposures. The reported prevalence of sexual transmission of HCV-positive individuals is 2–8% and in newborn babies is 2–5%, but three times higher if the mother is HIV positive (Operskalski and Kovacs, 2011).Pathogenesis of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusThe impact of HIV infection on HBV-induced hepatitis progression is significantly different from HBV infection on HIV disease progression. Around 10–15% developed chronic hepatitis B, which is less likely to be eliminated. HIV-HBV coinfection causes several symptoms, some of which can be fatal. Mutations in the HBsAg coding sequence coinfected with HIV can accumulate HBsAg in hepatocytes and damage the host’s endoplasmic reticulum and DNA damage (Pollicino et al., 2014). With HIV-HBV coinfection, immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) is developed more profoundly (Shahani and Hamill, 2016). Acute HBV infection in 90–95% of adults can develop a broad and multispecific cellular immune response that can eliminate the virus by producing protective antibodies against HBsAg (Mahoney, 1999).Moreover, chronic HBV-infected patients can develop anti-HBe associated with aging and aminotransferase (ALT) elevation (Liaw et al., 1988; Fattovich et al., 1991). In a 10-year study of 1536 Alaskan natives with chronic hepatitis B, 70 and 7% cleared HBeAg and HBsAg, respectively (McMahon et al., 2001). However, they might remain inactive carriers with HBsAg particles with either low or undetectable levels of HBV DNA (Fattovich et al., 1986; de Jongh et al., 1992). These inert carriers can significantly reduce the mortality rate twofold, although increased ALT can lead to fibrosis progression (Fattovich et al., 1990). However, when coinfection occurs with HIV, the mortality rate increases significantly in HBV patients elevating chronic liver diseases. Among 1000 people a year, 14.2% of them suffer from several chronic liver diseases when coinfected compared with 0.8% of people with HBV infection only (Thio et al., 2002). One study suggested that HIV-infected people had a greater clearance rate of HBsAg and HBeAg due to the degree of immunosuppression (Bodsworth et al., 1991). However, other studies showed that HIV infection reactivates HBV and accelerates the loss of anti-HBs, increases levels of HBV DNA, and significantly lowers the ALT levels (Biggar et al., 1987; Gilson et al., 1997). Although lower ALT levels indicate less hepatocyte destruction, anti-HBV therapy’s effectiveness decreases in coinfected individuals. HIV coinfection has also been reported to create fibrosing cholestatic hepatitis, which leads to liver graft rejection in liver transplant recipients. An extremely high level of HBV antigen expression is observed in this specific liver disease due to a direct cytopathic effect (Davies et al., 1991; Xiao et al., 2008).Although most studies show significant evidence of HBV infection acceleration due to HIV, the impact of HBV infection in HIV patients is still quite limited. A study found that among 80 gay men, 32 anti-HBc positive men progressed to get acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) more rapidly (Eskild et al., 1992). Another study showed that HIV-HBV coinfected patients with AIDS had decreased survival than AIDS patients (Ockenga et al., 1997). The outcome of HBV infection varies according to the age and the current immune status of the host. For example, HBV infection persists in 50–90% of persons infected at birth or early childhood.In contrast, fewer than 5% of HBV infections become chronic among HIV-uninfected adults (Yim and Lok, 2006). A multicenter-AIDS-cohort study suggested that coinfected patients had a mortality rate eight times higher than those singly infected. Moreover, the mortality related to hepatopathy due to hepatitis B has increased significantly since the highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), a treatment for HIV patients (Miailhes et al., 2007). Previous studies show that coinfection causes liver-related mortality 19 times that of a single infection (Thio et al., 2002). The mortality rate increased in individuals with lower CD4+ T-cell counts for the infection (Jaroszewicz et al., 2012; Figure 4).Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHuman immunodeficiency virus -Hepatitis C virus coinfected patients have higher HCV RNA loads and experience more rapid progression of HCV-related liver diseases than those without HIV infection (Hoofnagle and Di Bisceglie, 1991). Several studies suggested plenty of symptoms of the coinfection (Figure 4); however, these can vary over different factors, such as consumption of alcohol, age at acquisition of infection, race, sexual status, concomitant viral infection with HIV, time of illness, body mass index, and various genetic factors. HIV-HCV coinfected patients suffer from higher liver-related morbidity and mortality, non-hepatic organ dysfunction, and overall mortality than HCV single infected patients (Lo Re<suffix>III</suffix>, Kallan et al., 2014). Moreover, coinfection causes an increased rate of severe liver fibrosis and cirrhosis (Fierer et al., 2013; Kirk et al., 2013). A meta-analysis of eight separate studies found that HIV-HCV coinfected patients had approximately two times higher risk of cirrhosis diagnosed on liver biopsy and around six times higher risk of decompensated liver disease than HCV-infected patients (Thein et al., 2008; Tuyama et al., 2010). Coinfection can cause immune dysfunction, cytokine production, and cell apoptosis, leading to severe immunodeficiency (Körner et al., 2009; Kovacs et al., 2010). It causes HIV-related mitochondrial translocation-induced immune activation and causes severe liver damage (Kim and Chung, 2009; Rotman and Liang, 2009). HIV- and HCV-associated chronic inflammation leads to endothelial dysfunction (Bedimo et al., 2010). Moreover, coinfection also causes thrombocytopenia and osteoporosis (Marks et al., 2009). It is estimated that 90% of HIV patients with acute HCV will gradually develop chronic HBV, which shows a higher prevalence in coinfected patients than singly-infected (Collin et al., 2009). Other reports suggest that coinfection also increases the rate of related diseases such as cryoglobulinemia, hemophilia, diabetes mellitus, and kidney-related infections (Sulkowski, 2001). It is confirmed that HIV infection substantially impacts mortality among HCV-infected individuals, mainly due to HIV-induced immunodeficiency (Singal and Anand, 2009).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusHepatitis B virus-Hepatitis C virus coinfection is more frequently found in several high-risk populations, for example, persons who inject drugs, patients on hemodialysis and undergoing organ transplantation, HIV-positive, and β-thalassemia (Pallás et al., 1999; Aroldi et al., 2005; Reddy et al., 2005). Tyson et al. stated that the independent associations with HBV coinfection compared with HCV single infection were age ≤50 years, male sex, positive HIV status, history of hemophilia, sickle cell anemia, or thalassemia, history of blood transfusion, cocaine, and other drug uses. At the same time, there was decreased risk in patients of Hispanic ethnicity (Tyson et al., 2013). With hidden hepatitis B, liver cirrhosis occurs in 33% of HCV coinfected patients and 19% of HCV carriers with undetectable HBV DNA (Fan et al., 2003). Superinfections cause the development of chronic hepatitis, for which the mortality rate is as high as 10% (Sterling and Sulkowski, 2004). Moreover, coinfection increases the rate of liver cirrhosis, chronic and fulminant hepatitis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (Figure 4).Diagnosis of CoinfectionHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B VirusAll patients infected with HIV must be tested for HBV and HCV and vice versa, as the transmission route is the same. The HIV-negative patients, only infected with any of the hepatitis viruses, are required to test for alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), hemoglobin, white blood cell count, platelets, HBeAg, HBe antibody (anti-HBe), HBsAg antibody (anti-HBs), CD4 count, and HBV DNA quantification in the serum (Audsley et al., 2020). HBV DNA levels are a significant marker to detect coinfection (Lok and McMahon, 2009). Spontaneous sero-reversion can occur due to having a low CD4 count (<200/mm3) and is also a prime marker for HIV-HBV coinfection. Therefore, HBV serological tests should be repeated among HIV-infected patients with prior positivity for HBsAb for the reemergence of HBV infection (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2012). Anti-HBc can also be found in HIV-positive patients due to having past HBV infection (Gandhi et al., 2005). The occurrence of a past infection is often termed “Occult HBV infection,” which results in the presence of HBV DNA in the absence of HBsAg and has been reported in 2 to 10% of HIV-infected patients (Shire et al., 2007; Tsui et al., 2007). For HCC screening, coinfected patients with HBV-HIV should undergo serial liver ultrasound examinations and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) serology every 6 months (European Association for the Study of the Liver, 2012). Severe conditions with HIV-HBV coinfection may require a liver biopsy. However, non-invasive measures, such as serum fibrosis markers and transient elastography, can help determine the degree of underlying fibrosis instead of biopsy (Moreno et al., 2009; Smith and Sterling, 2009). The markers suggest different parameters for detecting HIV-HBV coinfection depending on HBV infection types (Table 2).TABLE 2Serological markers of HIV-HBV, HIV-HCV, and HBV-HCV coinfection.HIV-HBV coinfection markersHIV-HCV coinfection markersHBV-HCV coinfection markersGenomic level↑ HBV DNA↑ HCV RNA↑ HBV DNAT-cell count↓ CD4 count (<200/mm3)↓ CD4 and CD8 ratio-Antigen/Antibody↑ HBsAb ↑ Anti-HBc↑Anti-HCVDelayed HBsAg ↓ HBs antigenemiaRelated infectionOccult infection: ↑HBV DNA ↓HBsAg-HCV superinfection and chronic HBV infection: ↑ HBeAg ↓ HBsAgEnzyme markers↑ alpha-fetoprotein↑ AST:APRI ↑ APRI score (>1.5) ↓ AST p-value (<0.0001)↑ biphasic alanine aminotransferaseHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C VirusReverse transcriptase-nested polymerase chain reaction assays (RT-PCR) must be conducted for the screening of the persistent HCV 5′ untranslated region (5′ UTR) for the diagnosis of HCV RNA in HIV patients (Panigrahi et al., 1994). Liver fibrosis progression is more rapid in the context of HIV-HCV coinfection and is associated with lower CD4 cell counts (Martin et al., 1989; Puoti et al., 2001; Martinez-Sierra et al., 2003). Non-invasive measures of liver fibrosis can be a reliable diagnosis for HIV-HCV coinfection. The alanine aspartyl transferase (AST)-to-platelet ratio index (APRI) has been validated as a good predictor of significant liver fibrosis in both HCV single and coinfection when compared with liver biopsy (Wai et al., 2003; Lackner et al., 2005). One study suggested that, in coinfection, APRI score > 1.5 was 100% specific and 52% sensitive for predicting significant fibrosis (Al-Mohri et al., 2005). Forrester et al. reported that AST and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels were significantly higher (P < 0.0001), and platelet counts were lower (P < 0.01) in HIV-HCV coinfected individuals than in patients infected with only HIV (Forrester et al., 2012). Other markers such as alpha-2-macroglobulin, apolipoprotein A1, haptoglobin, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT), and bilirubin are also screened primarily focuses on HCV patients (Table 2; Imbert-Bismut et al., 2001; Morali et al., 2007).Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C VirusLaboratory evaluation for coinfection with all possible viral causes, including HBV and HCV, is performed in patients presenting with acute hepatitis resulting from any of the two viruses. In case of superinfection of HCV or HBV, silent or occult HBV, all the necessary parameters and confirmatory tests such as HBV DNA testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) should also be performed when clinically indicated. In acute infection with HBV and HCV, patients showed delayed HBsAg appearance and a shorter HBs antigenemia than those with acute HBV alone (Mimms et al., 1993). According to an Italian investigation that showed active HBV-HCV indicators in 30 patients with HCV infection, the chronicity rates were equivalent to individuals with a single infection with either of the viruses. Biphasic alanine aminotransferase elevation was also observed in the case of HBV-HCV coinfection (Yan and Lee, 2005). Several reports have documented that de novo HCV superinfection in the setting of chronic HBV infection can result in HBeAg seroconversion and clearance of HBsAg.Moreover, fulminant hepatic failure was significantly higher among patients with underlying HBV infection than those singly infected (23 vs. 3%) (Wu et al., 1994). Hence, every marker should be adequately detected with a specific protocol. On the other hand, occult hepatitis B (OHB) is defined as the presence of HBV DNA in serum and the liver tissue without detectable HBsAg with or without anti-HBc or anti-HBs outside the pre-seroconversion window period (Table 2; Bréchot et al., 2001).Prospective TreatmentsHuman Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis B Virus CoinfectionThe most common treatment for HIV-HBV coinfection is HBV-active ART, usually tenofovir together with either lamivudine or emtricitabine. This treatment significantly decreases the rate of HBeAg and HBsAg antigens in infected individuals (Boyd et al., 2016). Drugs such as interferon alfa, peginterferon alfa, adefovir, lamivudine, entecavir, tenofovir, emtricitabine are used to prevent the coinfection (Table 3). As HIV infection can accelerate the progression of HBV-related liver disease, treatment of chronic hepatitis B is generally recommended for most HIV-infected patients with active HBV infection.TABLE 3Potential medications and their activity against HIV-HBV coinfected individuals.DrugDirect activity against HIV and HBVFor chronic HBV in HIV-infected patientsReferencesInterferon AlfaNoNo
Johnson et al., 2007
Peginterferon AlfaYesNo
Di Martino et al., 2002
LamivudineYesNoBenhamou et al., 1999; Dore et al., 1999EmtricitabineYesNoLim et al., 2006; Saag, 2006AdefovirNoNoHadziyannis et al., 2003; Thio, 2006TenofovirYesYes
Lada et al., 2004
EntecavirYesYesTenney et al., 2004; Pessôa et al., 2008Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Hepatitis C Virus CoinfectionGenerally, HIV-HCV coinfection treatment focuses on eliminating a single infection first by decreasing the viral load alongside treating the secondary issues. A guideline is followed to treat HCV, but there is still a lack of information about HIV and HCV disease stage and viral load, HCV genotype, degree of hepatic fibrosis, and patient’s readiness to tolerate and adhere to treatment (Soriano et al., 2007). The treatments are more likely to target the current standard pegylated interferon plus ribavirin (pegIFN + RBV) medication, predictors of the treatment response, adverse events of anti-HCV therapy, and HAART as both HIV-HCV therapeutic agents (Table 4). The most effective treatment to date for HCV infection is direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapy. First-generation DAAs include the NS3/4A serine protease inhibitor telaprevir and the NS5B RNA polymerase inhibitor sofosbuvir (Messina et al., 2015). Clinical trials demonstrated that using these DAAs in combination with peginterferon and ribavirin gave sustained virologic response (SVR) to HCV genotype 1 infection, up to 75% for telaprevir and 90% for sofosbuvir (Walker et al., 2015). The second-generation DAA regimens paritaprevir/ritonavir/ombitasvir, dasabuvir (3D), and sofosbuvir/ledipasvir were approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for patients with HCV genotype 1, as these all-oral regimens showed improved efficacy, safety, and tolerability when compared to first-generation protease inhibitor regimens (Pawlotsky, 2014). However, many long-term studies have shown that patients with compensated cirrhosis who achieved SVR with interferon (IFN)-based therapy showed efficacy at first, but various side-effects and limited virological effectiveness was seen with long-term treatment. However, with DAAs, patients with compensated cirrhosis achieve SVR rates over 95% (Afdhal et al., 2014; Poordad et al., 2014; Krassenburg et al., 2021). Moreover, high rates of cure have also been observed in groups including patients with cirrhosis and HIV coinfection (Hawkins et al., 2016). Many open-labeled studies demonstrated that DAAs such as ledipasvir and sofosbuvir for 12 weeks provided high rates of SVR in the patients coinfected with HIV-1 and HCV genotype 1 or 4 (Naggie et al., 2015). Another study suggested that treatment with the all-oral, interferon-free 3D-plus-ribavirin regimen resulted in high SVR rates among patients co-infected with HCV genotype one and HIV-1 (Sulkowski et al., 2015).TABLE 4Effects and side-effects of potential medications for HIV-HCV coinfected individuals.DrugsTherapeutic effectsSide effectsReferencesHAARTDecreases HIV replication in liver Decreases proinflammatory cytokines and necro-inflammatory activityIncreases Liver enzymes (LEE) and hepatotoxicityPascual-Pareja et al., 2009; Price et al., 2009Protease inhibitorsDecreases HCV replication
Toma et al., 2009
EfavirenzDecreases hepatotoxicity
Labarga et al., 2007
NNRTI + pegIFN + RBVDecreases synergistic HCV replication in vitroIncreases Mitochondrial toxicityLabarga et al., 2007; Toma et al., 2009Simeprevir (SMV) + PRDecreases hepatotoxicity
Jacobson et al., 2014
DAAs (Telaprevir/Sofosbuvir/Paritaprevir/Ritonavir/Ombitasvir)Increase sustained virologic response upto 90%Naggie et al., 2015; Wyles et al., 2015Hepatitis B Virus-Hepatitis C Virus CoinfectionHepatitis B virus-Hepatitis C virus coinfection is more complex than a single infection with HBV or HCV alone. Hence, the general approach for treatment is first to identify the dominant virus, treat that virus as a single infection, and then monitor for reactivation of the other virus. Coinfection is typically treated with a nucleotide analog (such as lamivudine, entecavir, or tenofovir) along with PegIFN (Sulaiman, 1989). It is 35% effective in HBV and 50–60% effective in HCV when combined with ribavirin (Crockett and Keeffe, 2005). Moreover, direct-acting antiviral (DAA) is also used, which gives 90% efficacy for inhibiting HCV but no response for HBV (Calvaruso et al., 2018). It is recommended to vaccinate HBV patients because studies showed 60% efficacy to vaccinated cirrhotic patients (Roni et al., 2013). Liu et al. (2014) assessed that peg-IFN/RBV therapy is not only safe and effective but translates into significant clinical benefits such as reduction in liver-related complications and improved patient survival. However, in terms of viral dominance, it is not common to have codominance of both viruses. Hence, there is either HBV dominance, which means high HBV DNA levels and low HCV RNA levels, or HCV dominance, defined by the high HCV RNA levels and absent HBV DNA (Konstantinou and Deutsch, 2015). HBV dominance is likely to be more common in Asian patients, while HCV dominance is seen among North American coinfected and European patients (Nguyen et al., 2011). Therefore, it is suggested to diagnose the disease properly and determine the dominant side before treating a coinfected patient. An Italian study reported that 9 million IU of standard IFN 3 times weekly for 3 months could clear HCV in 31% of HCV-HBV coinfections (Villa et al., 2001). As previously mentioned, peg-IFN is one of the first-line choices for treating chronic HBV infection, and does not cause any side effects toward coinfected patients (Bihl et al., 2010). However, till present, no data have been published regarding the efficacy of direct-acting antivirals (DAAs) in combination with peg-IFN plus RBV or with IFN-free regimens in treating patients with chronic HBV-HCV coinfection.Conclusion and Future DirectionsCoinfection with HBV or HCV is common among HIV-infected individuals due to their similar modes of transmission. Any coinfection can reportedly lead to an increased risk of morbidity and mortality. Overall, the prevalence of hepatitis B and hepatitis C, with HIV coinfection, is 50.3%. Among these, HIV-HBV is 8.4%, HIV-HCV is 35.4%, and HBV-HCV is 5%. The characteristics of HIV-infected individuals can differ according to the coinfecting hepatitis viruses that can change their strains over time. Therefore, frequent screening and monitoring should be performed in both coinfected and singly infected patients due to the possibility of developing another secondary infection if measurable steps are not taken. In addition, one must get tested if their partner is positive for any infection or assume any symptoms.Treatments for coinfected patients are complex due to the interaction of the two viruses and the potential for reactivation of one virus with antiviral therapy directed against only the other virus. Therefore, coinfected patients must undertake single infection treatment concurrently with dual antiviral therapy. Until today, highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) has been a breakthrough for treating patients with HIV, as the infection currently does not have any effective vaccination. HCV prevention is also based on direct-acting antiviral (DAA) treatments for short-term and curative measures.Vaccination is given to prevent HBV with three consecutive doses for the long term. Early remedies for acute infection are also highly encouraged. However, several preventive strategies must be followed to prevent and control these blood and fluid-borne viral diseases. It is highly advisable to avoid percutaneous exposure incidents, such as needle injuries, sharp injuries, and splashes leading to exposure of the skin or mucosa to blood. Drug abuse and sharing the same needle or syringe are also high-risk behaviors toward these diseases. Safe sex and special care for pregnant women are recommended to prevent disease occurrence. Besides conventional therapy and treatments, CRISPR-Cas9-based antiviral strategies can also be implied to avoid hepatitis coinfection due to its relative versatility, specificity, and ease of use. Vaccines against HCV and HIV should be further studied and implemented at the earliest convenience. Polyvalent vaccines for these viral coinfections can also be an escalating preventive measure for the prospective times. Although current diagnostic technologies can detect viruses, they still rely on practical labor, expensive and limited resources. However, if nanotechnology (metal/inorganic nanoparticles, carbon nanotubes) combined with microfabrication can be used in diagnostic and therapeutic settings, the healthcare systems will undergo a revolutionary shift. These technologies with miniatured sensors can be used to easily detect viruses from an ultra-low volume of blood, serum, and plasma, allowing highly accurate diagnosis. However, further extensive studies should be conducted to diagnose and treat the coinfection of these blood-borne viral diseases.Author ContributionsMGH designed and supervised the manuscript. SaS, YA, RA, PK, GS, TR, RS, and ShS searched and collected the literature. SaS and YA wrote the preliminary draft manuscript. YA and TR designed the graphs. MSI and MGH reviewed the preliminary draft manuscript. CZ and MGH edited, revised, and finalized the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s NoteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.


Title: Transmission of human hepatitis C virus from patients in secondary cells for long term culture

IntroductionThe global public health impact of chronic HCV infection and consequent liver disease continues to grow in numbers. It has been estimated that there are over 170 million carriers of HCV worldwide, with an increasing incidence of new infections [1]. In the United States, an estimated 1% to 5% of the 2.7 million individuals that are currently chronically infected will die due to the HCV infection [2].Although HCV has proven to be very difficult to grow in vitro, HCV-RNA has been detected in cell cultures of a variety of cell types, the presence of positive-strand HCV-RNA persists for periods ranging from a few days to several months, albeit with no evidence of infectious virus [3-6]. The recent creation of HCV-RNA replicons has contributed to a better understanding of some of the molecular events, particularly gene expression [7-9]. However, studies using parts of a virus can only give limited insights about the infectious process and pathogenesis of a specific genotype. For the development of effective rational therapies and the production of protective vaccines, a reproducible in vitro system for the isolation and replication of HCV from patients is critical.We report here that the isolation and long-term replication of HCV in vitro. Since this is the first experience with actively replicating HCV in vitro, some of the results shown here may not fit the current concepts using systems that do not replicate infectious virus.Materials and MethodsInfection of cultured cells with sera from HCV infected patientsHCV infected patient serum (minimum of 104 genome equivalents/ml) was filtered through 0.45 μ filters (Fisher Scientific) and frozen in 1 ml aliquots at -70°C. A fresh vial of frozen serum was used for every new transmission experiment. The cells were infected using 500 μl of thawed donor serum [10,11].Generation of macrophagesMacrophages were generated from human cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMCs) by treating with Phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA, 5 ng/ml in complete medium) [12]. A majority of the cells that adhered to the plastic were positive for non-specific esterase and phagocytosis, which are established markers for all macrophages. Multiple flasks (Falcon 3108 and 3109) were prepared in all cases to be used separately either for infection with HCV sera or for coculture with the infected patient's peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). The non-adherent cells contained approximately 60% CD19 and CD20 positive B-cells, with T-cells and monocytes accounting for the remainder. The cells that did not stain for macrophage-specific markers or phagocytosis were designated as non-committed lymphoid cells, and then infected either with HCV using 500 μl sera or cocultured with PBMC from the same patient.Infection of macrophages with HCVThe macrophages were first treated overnight with polybrene (5 ng/ml) and then infected either with 500 μl of sera or cocultured with the PBMC from the same patient (Fig. 1A). These infected macrophages were incubated overnight at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Media were changed and the cultures were continued for another six days with change of media on day four.Figure 1Isolation of HCV from human patients. (A) Isolation scheme for the replication of HCV in vitro. (B) History of transmission of the specimen donated from HCV infected patient #081. Fresh macrophages were infected by using cell-free serum or cocultured with HCV infected PBMC from the blood of patient #081. Human T-cells (112 A), B-cells (112 B) or the non-committed lymphoid cells (112 AB) were then either infected by cell-free transmission of HCV from cell culture supernatant from macrophages or cocultured with HCV infected macrophages. Similarly freshly transformed cord blood B-cells (PCLB 1°) were infected by cell free transmission from previously infected B-cell (112 B) culture supernatant. Uninfected transformed B-cells (PCLB T1-T4) were infected by serial, cell-free transmission from filtered PCLB 1° culture supernatant. Neuronal precursor cells were infected by cell free transmission of HCV from filtered #081 culture supernatant.Generation of immortalized B-cellsTo create immortalized B-cells, cord blood mononuclear cells (CBMC) were stimulated with pokeweed mitogen (PWM, 5 μg/ml in complete culture medium), and then infected with transforming Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). These immortalized B-cells did not produce EBV [13,14].Preparation of cell culture supernatantsMedia taken from the cultures of infected macrophages were centrifuged at 500 × g for 10 minutes. The supernatants were then filtered through a 0.45 μ filter to remove extraneous material. The filtered supernatant is referred to as the cell culture supernatant.Cell free transmission of HCVThe target cells were pretreated overnight with polybrene (5 ng/ml). A 500 μl aliquot of cell culture supernatant was used for infecting each of the target cells.Design of positive- and negative-strand primersIn order to identify HCV-RNA, nested primers for each strand from the 5' untranslated region (UTR) were designed by CIMM using the default parameters of the DNASTAR PrimerSelect program (Table 1).Table 1Primers used to analyze HCVPrimerStrandSequence (5' to 3')1HCV 9.1positivegac act cca cca tag atc act cHCV 9.2positivecat gat gca cgc tct acg aga cHCV 10.1positivectg tga gga act act gtc ttc acg cagHCV 10.2positivecac tcg caa cca ccc tat cagHCV 1negativeact gtc ttc acg cag aag cgt cta gcc atHCV 2negativecga gac ctc ccg ggg cac tcg caa gca cccHCV 3negativeacg cag aaa gcg tct agc cat ggc gtt agtHCV 4negativetcc cgg ggc act cgc aag cac cct atc aggHutLA2positiveggg ccg ggc atg aga cac gct gtg ata aat gtc1The primers were designed with the program PrimerSelect (DNASTAR) using conserved HCV sequences downloaded from GenBank.Detection of positive- and negative-strand HCV-RNA by nested RT-PCR assayTotal RNA was extracted from infected cell culture supernatants harvested 5 days after a change of media (Tri Reagent LS, Molecular Research Center Inc. Cincinnati, OH). A 269 base pair region was amplified by nested RT-PCR from the highly conserved 5'-UTR of the HCV genome.The positive strand assay was performed using a 10 μl aliquot of the total extracted RNA was reverse transcribed using the primer HCV 9.2 with the MMLV Reverse Transcriptase (Promega Corp. Madison, WI) or with the Sensiscript Reverse Transcriptase (Qiagen Inc. Valencia, CA) according to the manufacturers' instructions. A 5 μl aliquot of the cDNA was then amplified by nested PCR using HCV 9.1 and HCV 9.2 as the outside primers, followed by amplification of 5 μl of the first PCR product using HCV 10.1 and HCV 10.2 as the inner primers.The negative strand assay was performed by using the Oligotex Direct mRNA purification kit (Qiagen Inc.) to extract RNA from the cells. A 10 μl aliquot of the RNA was reverse transcribed using the HCV1 primer with the Thermoscript Reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer's instructions. Nested PCR amplification was then carried out on a 5 μl aliquot of the cDNA using HCV1 and HCV2 as the outer primers, followed by amplification of 5 μl of the first PCR product using the HCV3 and HCV4 as the nested primers under standard PCR conditions.For each PCR, forty cycles of amplification were performed with the following temperature profiles: 94°C for 1 min, 55°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min for the outer primer set and 94°C for 1 min, 60°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min for the inner primer set.Detection of positive-strand HCV-RNA by Real-time RT-PCRThe total extracted RNA was solubilized in 10 μl of RNase-free water and then reverse transcribed using the primer HCV 10.2 with the MMLV Reverse Transcriptase. A 5 μl aliquot of the cDNA was then amplified by real-time PCR, using HCV 10.1 and HCV 10.2 primers on the Rotor-Gene 200 amplification system (Corbett Research, Australia) and the SYBR Green I fluorescent dye (BioWhittaker Molecular Applications, Rockland, ME), using the manufacturers' instructions. An in vitro transcribed RNA from the HCV 5'-UTR was utilized as the standard. Forty cycles of amplification were performed with the following temperature profile: 94°C for 1 min, 55°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min.Detection of HCV-RNA by in situ hybridizationApproximately 6 × 104 cells were centrifuged (Cytospin II, Shandon, Pittsburgh, PA) onto RNase-free Poly-L-lysine coated slides (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA), forming a uniform well spread monolayer of cells. These cells were fixed and desiccated with ethanol. Cells were then rehydrated with 1× SSC buffer and treated for protein digestion with proteinase K (Fisher) for permeation and retention. Hybridization of the probes to the cells was performed overnight at 56°C. After overnight hybridization, to minimize the amount of unhybridized probes, cells were washed three times with formamide followed by one wash with RNAse A, and then one wash with RNAse-free buffer. Depending upon the batch of reagents, the slides were coated with liquid emulsion (K5 Liquid Emulsion, Ilford Imaging, UK) and exposed for 10–15 days. After exposure, the slides were developed with Kodak D19 developer (Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, NY) and fixed using the Ilford Hypam Fixer (Ilford Imaging, UK). The developed slides were then stained with Wright-Gimsa Stain (EM Diagnostics Systems, Gibbstown NJ) and mounted with permount. The probes, used for in situ hybridizations, were prepared by cloning a DNA sequence corresponding to the 5' untranslated region (5'-UTR), nucleotides 55–308, of HCV RNA into pGEM-T Easy vector (Promega Corp. Madison, WI). S35-labeled probes, complementary to the positive- or negative-strand of HCV-RNA, were generated by in vitro transcription in the presence of a 35S rUTP (Amersham Biosciences, England) using the appropriate RNA polymerases as supplied by the manufacturer (Promega Corp. Madison, WI) and purified through Sephadex G50 [11].Detection of HCV-RNA by fluorescence microscopyAn indirect immunofluorescence (IF) assay was used [11]. Cells were washed for 10 minutes three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), resuspended in PBS, deposited on Teflon-coated slides, air-dried, and fixed in cold acetone for 10 minutes. Patients' heat-inactivated sera (56°C for 30 minutes and then clarified by centrifugation) was added to the fixed cells, and incubated at 37°C for 40 minutes. They were then washed with PBS, air-dried, and stained with FITC-conjugated anti-human IgG for 40 minutes. The cells were again washed, air-dried, counter-stained with Evans Blue for 5 minutes and mounted with IF mounting solution.Kinetics of HCV production in vitro to determine the optimum day for harvesting positive-strand CIMM-HCV RNAOn day zero, a CIMM-HCV cell culture was taken out of liquid nitrogen, resuspended, separated into seven flasks of approximately 106 cells each, and fresh media was added to each flask. The initial concentration of the virus in the media therefore starts at zero viral particles. For each of the next seven days, one flask was harvested and assayed for the positive- and negative-strands of HCV-RNA using nested RT-PCR.Genotyping of CIMM-HCV RNARNA from cell culture supernatants was amplified via nested RT-PCR using the positive-strand RT-PCR assay primer set as described before. Products of the RT-PCR were cloned into the PCR 4.1 cloning vector (Invitrogen Corp. Carlsbad, CA). Plasmid DNA was isolated from individual clones and sequenced on an ABI 377 automated DNA sequencer using a Dye Terminator Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA).Purification of Immunoglobulin (IgG) from HCV infected patient seraSerum from patient #081 was applied to an Affi-Gel II Protein A column (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA), and the IgG fraction was eluted. Purified IgG were concentrated by Microcon 50 columns (Millipore Corp., Billerica, MA) and stored at -20°C.Extraction of viral proteins from cell culture supernatantsTotal proteins were precipitated from 1 ml of cell culture supernatant or patient serum with the TRI REAGENT (Molecular Research Center, Inc. Cincinnati, OH). The ethanol washed protein pellet was solubilized into 200–500 μl of 1% SDS by incubating at 55°C for 10 minutes. Any remaining insoluble subcellular particles were removed by centrifugation at 14000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Proteins were quantified using the Bradford Protein Assay (Sigma-Aldrich Corp. St. Louis, MO) and frozen (-20°C).Dot-blot and Western blot analysesFor the dot-blot assay, 2 μl of various protein samples (undiluted to 10-3) were diluted to 25 μl using TBS and were dot blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane (0.22 μ, Micron Separations Inc. Westboro, MA). For the Western analysis, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE under non-reducing conditions and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (Bio-Rad Labs). The membranes were blocked with 2% non-fat milk in 20 mM TBS, 500 mM NaCl, 0.02% Tween 20 for 1 hour. The samples were then incubated with purified IgG (1:1000 dilution) for 2–4 hours at room temperature. Antibody binding was detected by incubation with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-human antibodies followed by color development (Bio-Rad) [15].Accession numbers of HCV sequences used for genotypingThe 5' UTR sequence was obtained using the 10.1 and 10.2 primers (Table 1), and has the accession number DQ010313. The partial sequence of the NS5B region was obtained using the C-anti and the reverse complement of C1A primers, and has the accession number DQ010314.ResultsNine years ago, we undertook to isolate infectious HCV from patients and to grow such isolates in vitro. Our initial experiments to develop an in vitro system of HCV replication were performed as previously reported by many investigators using a large variety of established cell lines comprising of various cell types [16]. These included human transformed liver cells in addition to Hela, CEM, H9, Jurkat, Molt 3, Molt 4, U937, P3HR1, Raji, Daudi, human foreskin fibroblast (ATCC, Bethesda, MD). All of these cell types could be infected by the reported methods, with the exception of human foreskin fibroblasts, which was uninfectable (Table 2). Results from these efforts did not prove to be reproducible for the sustained replication of HCV. Although we were able to detect positive and negative-strand (replicative) RNA for HCV in a few B-cells, liver cells, and monocytoid cells, none of these standard cell lines produced infectious HCV that could be transmitted into uninfected cells. These freshly infected cell cultures eventually became negative for HCV-RNA, while the uninfected cells grew. We now know from our experience that HCV behaves as a lytic virus, with up to 20% cell death in infected cultured cells. Infected B-cells form enlarged cells which eventually die without further replication (Fig. 2C). Cell line U937, despite its monocytic nature and the presence of detectable positive- and negative-strand HCV-RNA, had very low levels of viral RNA expression.Table 2Summary of HCV transmission experiments with various hematopoetic and liver cellsShort termLong termA. T-cells1+-B. B-cells2++C. Monocytes/macrophages3+-D. Neuronal precursors4++E. Liver cells5 Kupffer's cells+- Hepatocyte++/-1T-cells isolated from human fetal chord blood.2B-cells immortalized by infection with transforming EBV.3Monocyte/Macrophages, adherent cells stimulated with PMA.4Recently isolated neuronal cells from fetal human brain.5Freshly isolated liver cells from liver biopsies. Kupffer's cells are liver macrophages and Hepatocytes are liver endothelial cells.Figure 2In vitro propagation of HCV in cultured cells. Morphology of neuronal precursor cells infected with HCV. (A) T (telencephalon, suspension cells that grow in clumps and also can adhere to plastic), and (B) M (metencephalon, primarily adherent cells that develop neuronal processes). (C) Freshly transformed B-cells co-cultured with HCV infected macrophages. None of these cells have definitive cytopathic effects when compared with uninfected cells.Because our initial experiments provided no significant improvement over the previously reported findings, we used a different approach for HCV isolation. We noted higher levels of HCV-RNA in infected macrophages compared to other infected cells. This was analogous to the infection of similar cells with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) [17]. Therefore, we initiated the use of freshly isolated macrophages and other cells. We tested a variety of cell types from different origins for infectivity with HCV: endothelial cells from fresh fetal umbilical cord, mononuclear cells from fetal cord blood, CBMC, PBMC, and Kupffer's cells and hepatocytes from fresh liver biopsies. These freshly obtained cells were infectable and expressed both the positive- and the negative-strands of HCV-RNA.Further experiments were designed that used macrophages as the intermediate host. The results from macrophage cultures were most encouraging. A number of researchers have previously used B-cells as a target [4,6]. Therefore, we decided to combine the macrophages with B-cells into one system. It also became apparent that in order to carry the transmitted virus for an extended period of time in vitro, long-lived B-cells were required. We opted in favor of freshly immortalized B-cells because they were free of various adventitious agents such as mycoplasma and other cellular contamination. Retransmissions were achieved by using the culture supernatants obtained from the macrophages and the B-cells prepared in our laboratories.Transmission of HCV isolatesIn order to show that our system could be used to grow HCV for extended periods, we tested each isolate at regular intervals by RT-PCR and retransmission into fresh cells (Table 3). Due to the large number of samples that were tested, HCV isolation and long term replication were carried out in several phases: short term cultures (positive for HCV up to 10 weeks), medium term cultures (positive for 10–23 weeks), or extended term cultures (positive for over 23 weeks). Experiments using either human patient sera or PBMC were equally able to infect macrophages that could be used in cell-free transmission of HCV. We did not compare the levels of virus produced by these two methods. An example of a long term positive cell culture is isolate #081. This isolate was obtained from similarly numbered serum from donor #081. Isolate #081 has been maintained in culture for over one hundred thirty weeks. This is designated as the index isolate: CIMM-HCV. This isolate has been propagated in different cell types such as enriched B-cells, T-cells, and non-committed lymphoid cells obtained from fresh blood by both co-culture and cell-free methods. Serial transmissions to freshly transformed B-cells were performed by cell-free methods for further analysis (Figure 1B). The first transfer of HCV from macrophages to target cells is designated as T1. A transfer from the T1 culture to fresh target cells is designated T2. Transfers of isolates have been carried out as many as four times (T4), such as isolate PCLBT4. Cell culture supernatants were harvested at least every month and assayed for positive-strand HCV-RNA by nested RT-PCR analysis (Table 3). Nested PCR has been used as a diagnostic method by many researchers [18-20], and was used in order to eliminate false positives. Due to the consistently positive nested PCR and sequential biological transmission assays over a period of many months, the isolated HCV was considered to be replicating and infectious virus.Table 3History of HCV positivity for CIMM-HCV isolates1SampleMonth#081112 A112 B112 ABPCLB T41-2-3+4+--5+++6ND++7ND++-8ND+++-9ND++++10NDNDNDND-11ND--ND-12ND++ND+13ND++ND+14ND++ND+15ND++-+16ND++++17ND++++18ND++++19ND++++20ND++++21ND++++22ND++++23ND++++24ND++++25-NDNDNDND26+NDNDNDND27+NDNDNDND28+NDNDNDND29+NDNDNDND30+NDND--31+NDND++1Each sample represents a monthly harvest of cell culture supernatants that were tested for the presence of human HCV positive-strand RNA and the cell free transmission to fresh target cells. Each individual sample was stored in liquid nitrogen at various time points throughout our testing. CIMM-HCV has been carried for over 12 months as a primary culture and over 31 months as a transmitted virus into other cell types including T-Cells (112A), B-Cells (112B), non-committed lymphoid cells (112AB) and 4th serial transmission into immortalized cord B-cells (PCLB T4). Primary cells are the first B-cells infected with HCV isolated from the macrophages.Our results suggest that there is no significant difference between using patient sera or PBMC as a source of the infectious agent, but there were no attempts made to quantitate the levels of infectious virus in the primary samples (serum or cells). Since only one cell producing infective virus can be enough to achieve transmission, both methods can be used to successfully culture HCV.Host range of HCV isolatesCIMM-HCV is maintained in one cell type: freshly transformed B-cells. In order to establish the host range of this isolate, a large number of cell types were tested for HCV propagation as described before. In addition to B-cells and macrophages, neuronal precursors could also be infected. These neuronal cells are very similar to macrophages, and they became a significant producer of infectious HCV (Table 4). Neuronal T cells grow in large non-adherent and adherent clumps and the M cells are generally adherent and form neuronal cell-like processes. They survived HCV infection better than B-cells in terms of cell viability (Figs. 2A and 2B). Cell-free CIMM-HCV was transmitted to our two neuronal cell types, T (telencephalon) and M (metencephalon), which subsequently showed replication of transmissible infectious virus (experiment 244). Virus from these cells was subsequently transmitted to fresh T and M neuronal cell cultures in experiment 248 and from 248 to 260 (Table 4). These retransmissions were similar to the ones performed for B-cells (Table 3). Infections of neuronal cells were repeated several times with similar results with respect to HCV production. We have since transmitted this HCV from experiments 260 to 273 and 273 to 277 (data not shown).Table 4Transmission of human HCV in neuronal precursor cells1MonthSample1234567#081+++++++244 M-++++++244 T-++++++248 M-++++++248 T-++++++260 M+++++++260 T+++++++1The neuronal precursor cells were isolated from human fetal brain by Dr. Olag Kopyov (see acknowledgment). They were designated T (telencephalon, suspension cells) and M (metencephalon, adherent cells). Each sample represents a monthly harvest of cell culture supernatant that were tested for the presence of positive-strand HCV RNA.Testing the HCV isolation system using additional patientsIn order to take advantage of the system developed in our laboratories, we obtained 156 samples from patients who volunteered to donate their blood. Of these, 151 were peripheral blood specimens from HCV infected patients and 5 were from uninfected controls. All specimens were acquired with the approval of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) and donors' informed consent. The HCV-infected specimens were obtained from 109 Caucasians, 37 Hispanics and 5 African Americans. The uninfected controls were from 2 Caucasians, 2 Hispanics, and 1 African-American. The participants included 108 males and 48 females. All specimens were freshly processed within an hour of blood drawing. Repeat samples were obtained from 77 of the original patients in order to confirm our initial results. Thirty-three of these 151 HCV-infected patients were co-infected with HIV-1, and the remainder of the donors had hematological malignancies or other cancers. HCV was isolated with 75% efficiency from these 151 specimens. In the case of co-infected patients, the failure to isolate HCV was commonly due to rapid cell death. No HCV was ever isolated from the 5 uninfected controls. This high rate of isolation of HCV shows that this system is useful in obtaining HCV from a variety of individual patients for further analysis.Determination of optimum day for harvesting HCV for RNA extractionIn order to determine the optimum day for harvesting the highest accumulation of positive-strand RNA, the kinetics of HCV production was measured using nested PCR. For each of the next seven days, flasks were harvested and assayed for the positive- and negative-strands of HCV-RNA using nested PCR. An example of our results is shown in Fig. 3A. While day 5 showed the greatest accumulation of positive-strand of HCV-RNA, the levels of the negative-strand inside the cells on all seven days remained unchanged (Fig 3A). There was no significant increase in cell numbers during the experiment.Figure 3Detection of positive- and negative-strand HCV-RNA in infected cell cultures via RT-PCR. Posititve strands were assayed using the cell culture supernatant while the negative strands were assayed using total RNA purified from the cells. (A) Determining the optimum day to harvest HCV for RNA extraction and analysis. Approximately one million cells of culture #081 were divided into seven flasks and incubated. One flask was harvested on each of the following days and assayed for positive and negative strand RNA. (B) Quantitation of molecules of positive-strand HCV-RNA per ml of cell culture supernatant via real-time RT-PCR. (C) Positive- and negative-strand HCV-RNA in different cells infected with CIMM-HCV. Lane 1 CIMM-HCV, lane 2 T-cells (112 A), lane 3 B-cells (112 B), lane 4 non-committed lymphoid cells (112 AB), lane 5 the 4th serial transmission into immortalized cord B-cells (PCLB T4), lane 6 T-cells (200 A), lane 7 B-cells (200 B), lane 8 uninfected B-cells, lane 9 HCV infected patient serum, and lane 10 negative PCR control.In an experiment performed simultaneously, the positive-strand HCV-RNA in the cell culture supernatants was analyzed quantitatively by real-time RT-PCR. As expected, on day zero there was no measurable HCV-RNA. On day one, the measurable number of copies of HCV-RNA was 3,200, which increased during the experiment to approximately 27,000 copies per ml on day 5 and then decreased from thereon (Fig. 3B). This data was consistent with the pattern obtained using the nested RT-PCR assay shown in Fig. 3A. Note that the data for Figures 3A and 3B are from using the same samples. The optimum day of harvesting this isolate of HCV was on day 5. Other isolates have produced similar growth curves (data not shown).Seven isolates were tested by nested RT-PCR to show that the results from Figure 3A were reproducible. The presence of the expected PCR products demonstrated that on day 5, both positive- and negative-strands of HCV-RNA were present in our system (Figure 3C). This experiment shows both replication and extracellular production of the virus. This indicates that harvesting RNA on day 5 will permit reproducible results.Detection of HCV-RNA by in situ hybridizationWe analyzed our HCV infected cells by performing in situ hybridizations to visualize the percentage of infected cells and the locations of the HCV-specific strands [21]. The uninfected cells used as a control did not hybridize to either negative or positive strand probes (Figs. 4C and 4D). In all cases, the numbers of background grains were light. Hybridization with the probe for the positive-strand produced a halo-like appearance around the periphery of the infected cells (Fig. 4E). A strong signal for the negative strands of HCV-RNA was seen confined within the cells, possibly in the cytoplasm (Figs. 4A and 4B). Fluorescence microscopy of infected cell cultures showed a similar result (Fig. 4F). Although approximately 5% of the cells appeared strongly positive, this may have been an underestimate due to: (1) cell lysis of infected cells in culture; and (2) the loss of cells that attach to the filter cards used in preparing the cytospin slides. Hybridization to both the positive- and negative-strands of HCV-RNA suggests replication and production of HCV. Since most of the cells do not appear positive, the positivitity that was observed is not just a result of non-specific staining of cells. Results of the in situ hybridizations are consistent with the nested RT-PCR assay described above. A majority of the infected cells appear to be large; however, there were a significant number of smaller cells that also gave positive signals above background. By comparison, neither the enlarged cells nor the small ones in the control population showed any positive signal (Fig. 4C and 4D). We believe that the small, infected cells produce virus and probably progressively enlarge and die, as trypan blue dye exclusion tests showed that these cells eventually died. Similar phenomena are observed in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and HHV-6 infected cell cultures [22].Figure 4Detection of HCV RNA in cultured cells by in situ hybridization with S35-labeled RNA probes and detection of HCV protein by fluorescence microscopy. (A, B) Infected B-cells hybridized with labeled positive-strand RNA probe. (C) Freshly transformed uninfected B-cells showing no significant hybridization. (D) Picture of freshly transformed uninfected B-cells showing no significant hybridization and having a wider field of view than (C). (E) Infected B-cells hybridized with labeled negative-strand RNA probe. (F) HCV infected cells: PCLBT4 treated with human polyclonal IgG purified from the serum of patient 081 and stained with goat anti-human IgG conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC). PCLBT4 is the fourth consecutive transfer of HCV to freshly immortalized B-cells.Genotyping of the CIMM-HCV isolateBased on sequence analysis, HCV has been classified into six major genotypes and a series of subtypes [23]. The highly conserved 5' untranslated region (5'-UTR), routinely used for RT-PCR detection of HCV-RNA, exhibits considerable genetic heterogeneity [24] and shows polymorphism between types and subtypes. This genetic heterogeneity of the 5'-UTR has been utilized for the genotyping of HCV [19,25-29], therefore, the 5'-UTR of CIMM-HCV was cloned and sequenced. Based on sequence homology searches, CIMM-HCV was similar to genotype 1a.In order to spot check the genome of CIMM-HCV, we tested most of the previously published primers [30-33]. We, however, found that many of these primers did not lead to RT-PCR products from our isolate, including CD 2.10 [31], CD 5.10 [31], CD 5.20 [31], A5310 [33], and A6306 [33]. This may be due to the heterogeneity of HCV RNA [18]. It is also possible that parts of our isolate may differ significantly from the previously reported sequences. We have included here the sequence from part of the NS5B gene of CIMM-HCV, which is located near the 3' end of the genome. This sequence is most similar to HCV of genotype 1a/2a.Although the culture system described here is capable of isolating HCV from approximately 75% of infected patients, this process may select more competent and infectious virus. Our analysis of sequences from the 5' UTR region shows in one case that the blood of a patient and the isolate in culture are both of type 1b. There were no significant differences in the sequences of the patient and the isolate in this region (Revie, Alberti, and Salahuddin, manuscript in preparation).Reactivity of the polyclonal IgG purified from infected patient seraTo determine the reactivity of the purified polyclonal IgG, various dilutions of the total protein preparations from cell culture supernatants were analyzed. A positive reaction was noted with homologous serum proteins using CIMM-HCV obtained from the B-cell supernatant, supernatants from neuronal cells (from transmission experiment 260), and commercially available HCV core antigen (ViroGen Corp. Watertown, MA) (Fig. 5A). There was no reaction with NS4 as well as the uninfected cell culture supernatants. These results show that IgG purified from patient's sera specifically detects HCV virion proteins, particularly Core antigen, and that the virus grown in culture reacts with antibodies from patient's sera.Figure 5Dot blot analysis of HCV proteins binding to IgG from patient sera. HCV proteins were obtained from tissue culture fluid. Protein preparations were serially diluted (1, 10-1, 10-2, 10-3) and were dot blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane. These blots were then treated with patient antibodies. The figure shows (A) Reactions of patient IgG against dilutions of IgG depleted patient sera, CIMM-HIV cell culture supernatants from different cell lines (HCV infected B-cells, HCV infected human neuronal precursor T and M cells), or commercial antigens (NS4 and Core antigen), or uninfected B-cells. (B) Reactions of patient IgG against dilutions of various HCV isolates grown in vitro as described before. All HCV isolates were from the first transfer to fresh B cells (T1) except for isolates 314T2 (second transfer) and PCLBT4 (fourth transfer). These infected cells have been in culture for varying periods of time, including over three years for PCLBT4.Six different independent HCV isolates (081T1, 112T1, 238T1, 313T1, 314T2, and PCLBT4) were tested against polyclonal antibodies from patient 238 using a dot blot (Figure 5B). This was performed in order to determine if these isolates reacted similarly to the previous experiment shown in Figure 5A. The patient antibodies reacted with all of these isolates, as well as to commercial Core antigen and NS4. The amount of undiluted NS4 used here was 2 μg. This shows that all of these HCV isolates are producing HCV proteins, and that even a fourth transfer (T4) of one isolate into freshly transformed B-cells still produces reactive HCV proteins (PCLBT4). Each of these isolates has been passaged in culture many times.Analysis of HCV proteinsThe HCV genome encodes a polyprotein which is subsequently processed into a number of mature structural and nonstructural moieties [34]. In order to determine whether the replicating CIMM-HCV was producing major HCV proteins, Western blot analyses using non-reducing conditions were performed. The polyclonal IgG detected a series of proteins (i) in the HCV positive patient sera and (ii) in the infected cell culture supernatant (Figs. 6A and 6B). Proteins of 140, 75, 50, 37, 32, 27 and 25 kDa were detected in these samples. The polyclonal IgG also gave a positive reaction with the commercially obtained recombinant core antigen (lane 5, Fig 6A). This core antigen has β-galactosidase fused at the N-terminus and is thus approximately 140 kDa in size, as reported by the manufacturer.Figure 6Western blot analysis of HCV proteins under non-reducing conditions. Proteins were isolated from cell culture supernatants. (A) Analysis of large molecular weight proteins from the cell culture supernatants of CIMM-HCV in various cell lines. Lane 1 uninfected transformed B-cells, lane 2 transformed B-cells infected with HCV, lane 3 neuronal precursor cells derived from the metencephalon infected with HCV, lane 4 total protein from HCV positive sera and lane 5 commercially engineered HCV core antigen (ViroGen). Other smaller bands in the Core antigen may be due to breakdown products or other contaminating proteins. (B) Analysis of low molecular weight proteins of CIMM-HCV cultured in various cell lines. Lane 1 total protein from HCV positive sera, lane 2 transformed B-cells infected with HCV, lane 3 neuronal precursor cells derived from the metencephalon infected with HCV, and lane 4 uninfected transformed B-cells.There are two highly glycosylated envelope proteins, E1 (32 and 35 kDa) and E2 (70 kDa) [35-39]. A band at approximately ~ 140 kDa was seen in all of the HCV isolates (Fig. 6A). This band has been seen by other researchers [40,41], and may have resulted from the multimerization of core, E1 and E2, or homodimerization of E2. The E1 and E2 proteins are known to form non-covalently linked heterodimers under non-reducing conditions [36,40,42]. The Core and E1 proteins also bind to each other [43,44], and. possibly form HCV protein and host cellular protein complexes as well.Proteins in the 32 and 37 kDa range were also detected in the Western blots (Fig. 6B). These bands are consistent with the known sizes of E1. An approximately 75 kDa protein was also detected in all of the infected samples that were analyzed (Fig. 6A). This protein corresponds to the known molecular weight of E2.In all the HCV isolates that were tested, a major protein band of approximately 50 kDa was seen (Fig. 6B). This was perhaps due to the incomplete processing of the precursor polyprotein [45]. Since the band was present only when protein purified from infected cell culture supernatants were used for the analyses, the band is therefore related to HCV proteins.Bands of approximately 25 and 27 kDa were also detected on the Western blots (Fig. 6B). The host cell signal peptidases cleave the N-terminal region of the precursor polypeptide to produce the HCV core protein [37,46,47]. The HCV core protein is reported to range between 16 and 25 kDa in size. However, it is possible that the size differences that have been previously reported may be due to differences in processing of the HCV core protein [37,45,48,49]. We believe that the Core antigen, as expressed by our isolates of HCV, may be larger than has been previously described.CIMM-HCV grown in three different cell lines produced the same pattern of bands. Although we were using polyclonal IgG extracted from patient sera, we detected HCV proteins that have been reported by other researchers.DiscussionOur cell culture system comprises freshly prepared macrophages and immortalized B-cells for the isolation of HCV. The isolations are performed using both co-cultures and cell-free methods. Freshly prepared macrophages in our system are essential as an intermediate host for HCV isolation. We have not explored the mechanism of infection or replication of HCV, but macrophages from a variety of sources appear to have a positive role in this process. It is possible that macrophages either concentrate the HCV particles or modify the HCV sufficiently to enable them to infect other cell types. For example, changes in the glycosylated envelope proteins E1 and E2 [36,38,39] could affect the infectious capability of the progeny virus, as well as define its host range. In bacteria, infecting phage can have their DNA modified by the host modification system. This allows the phage to escape the restriction system, thus enabling better infection of new hosts. It is therefore not too difficult to imagine that various types of animal cells could produce modified versions of infecting viruses. These viruses may preferentially infect different cell types. It is also possible that the macrophages reduce or eliminate defective HCV that are found in the patient's blood that may interfere with starting a productive culture system. The macrophages would thus be acting as a gatekeeper, only allowing intact HCV to be cultured and disallowing defective ones that could interfere with the culturing.As stated before, we discovered that neuronal precursor cells can be infected with CIMM-HCV and, in turn, are significant producers of infectious virus. We have repeatedly transmitted several HCV isolates into these neuronal cells. These cells are similar to other macrophages both in staining characteristics and in functional assays. They are growth factor dependent and grow well in vitro, and have been in culture for over two years. Macrophages from other sources, e.g. Kupffer's cells from liver, get infected, but after a few weeks gradually lose virus production. HCV-RNA, however, can be detected for several weeks. This loss of virus production may be related to the maturation, cytostasis, and eventual death of Kupffer's cells. Similar experiments were performed with freshly cultured endothelial cells obtained from human umbilical cord, because these are related to hepatocytes from liver, which are also endothelial cells. The results from these cells also showed a pattern of virus production similar to Kupffer's cells.For almost all human viruses, there is a well-observed phenomenon of asynchrony of expression, with a few notable exceptions such as HIV. For human Herpes viruses, no matter which host cell they use, only a minority of cells produce replicating viruses [50,51]. We do not know why less than 5% of the cells in our system are productive. Human immunodeficiency viruses such as HIV-1 show active replication in less than 20% of infected T-cells if freshly isolated leukocytes are used [52]. The system we have described uses all freshly isolated cells. It is very likely that a specific receptor may be the limiting factor in determining the number of infectable cells.We determined that the amount of HCV-RNA in the cell culture supernatant rises until day 5, then gradually declines. Therefore, the fifth day after subculturing is optimum for harvesting of HCV-RNA. As shown in Figure 3C, harvesting RNA on day 5 allows reproducible detection of HCV-RNA. Changes in the overall levels of HCV-RNA may reflect the sum of the RNA production and RNA destruction in culture. This observed periodicity in the positive-strand therefore, may be due to: (1) slowing of the replication process of the infected cells or from production of an inhibitor in situ; or (2) lysis of infected cells causing destruction of the virus and its RNA, e.g. by released proteases and ribonucleases, or (3) both of the above mentioned possibilities. The measured level of the negative strand in the cells remained stable. Since the number of cells and the percentage of cells that are infected don't change during the culturing of the virus, the observed stability of the negative-strand inside the cells is understandable.Although the majority of patient samples described above are of type 1b, our analysis of CIMM-HCV sequences show it is type 1a. In the 5'UTR region there is very little sequence difference between types 1a and 1b. Changing of one base can cause the sequence to more closely resemble type 1b. It is possible that only a small subset of HCV in a patient is actually infectious, and therefore our system best typed it as type 1a. A complete sequence of the CIMM-HCV genome will reveal its identity. It is possible that a chronic infection in patients may develop mutants that resemble another type. However, we have additional isolates that are consistent with other genotypes such as 1b (data not shown). The sequences that we have reported here indicate that both ends of the viral genome are present in our cultures. We are currently in the process of sequencing the entire CIMM-HCV genome in order to better determine its genotype as well as to compare it to the currently published HCV genomes.Since this is the first in vitro system for culturing HCV, we have been able to make initial observations regarding replication of the virus. Further studies related to HCV replication and pathogenesis are in progress. The in situ hybridization results seen in Figure 4 suggest that the positive strand of HCV is synthesized at or migrates to the plasma membrane and that the negative strand remains in the cytoplasm. This observation can only be made in a dynamic system with actively replicating virus. This suggestion is supported by recent reports that RNA-dependent RNA polymerase contains a transmembrane segment which is anchored in the membrane [53]. Non-structural proteins and positive strand RNA have also been found associated with the plasma membranes [54]. These results suggest that the site where HCV is fully assembled is probably in or near the plasma membrane of the infected cells. Probably HCV-RNA is synthesized in the cytoplasm and migrates to the plasma membrane for the final assembly. The completed virion is then released into the extracellular space.We believe that a chronically infected patient makes antibodies to their own virus. Hence, the polyclonal IgG is specific for that virus. This is confirmed by our dot blot analysis of several different HCV isolates. Since these isolates had undergone as many as four separate transfers into fresh cells and many serial passages, the system that we describe here maintains stable isolates in culture, producing HCV-specific protein.Similarly, data from Western blot analysis of the HCV proteins in the cell culture supernatants show that all of the expected major structural proteins are present. No specific antibody bindings were seen in the samples from uninfected cell culture supernatants. Taken together, these results suggest that there is production of HCV specific proteins in CIMM-HCV infected cell cultures. This data shows that the virus that was grown in culture contains epitopes of all of the major structural proteins that react with antibodies purified from the patient. This is strong evidence that the virus grown in culture is not significantly different from the HCV growing in the patient. In addition, one isolate that was cultured in several different cells lines showed a consistent pattern of bands on Western blots. This is additional and strong evidence that the bands result from HCV proteins. We have concluded that the replicating HCV is a stable virus.In addition to the molecular analysis which establishes that our cells are producing HCV virions, the serial transmission of HCV to fresh uninfected cells via cell-free culture supernatants establishes biological evidence of infectious virus (Figure 1B: PCLBT1-PCLBT4). Since this virus is infectious in vitro and all of the major proteins appear to be present, the virus that has been grown in culture most likely contains the entire genome. We do not believe that there is a large amount of defective HCV present in our system. Although our standard assay is to amplify the 5' UTR region, we have been able to obtain sequences from other regions of the genome. This, coupled with the evidence for the presence of the major HCV structural proteins, is strong evidence that the entire genome is present. In addition, we have been able to use the HutLA2 primer (Table 1), which is complementary to a region near the 3' end of the positive strand, to produce cDNA. Using our standard primers from the 5' UTR region to amplify the cDNA, we were able to detect HCV positive-strand RNA (data not shown). This suggests that a significant proportion of the RNA present contains both the 3' and 5' ends of the genome. In addition, work in progress suggests that a representative virus population grows in this system, suggesting that a particular genotype is not selected (Revie, Alberti, and Salahuddin, manuscript in preparation).Our system has allowed us to reproducibly isolate HCV from a majority of patients and in a few cases these cell cultures have been carried for over 130 weeks. Our ability to detect HCV for these extended periods shows that we are not just detecting virus that has been diluted from the initial sample. For the initial infection, 50 μl of serum was added to 2 ml of media, and then the media was changed once a week for months. A conservative estimate of the dilution of the virus at 130 weeks would be over 10130-fold. The amount of HCV produced from this system was sufficient to conduct biological, molecular, and immunological investigations. We are continuing to pursue other investigations in this field.The analogy between macrophage-initiated in vitro propagation of HIV and HCV is rather remarkable. The dendritic cell-specific ICAM-grabbing non-integrins (DC-SIGN) can bind HIV, and protect it for protracted periods to concentrate and deliver the virions to cause infection of T-cells in trans with high efficiency [55,56]. The structural basis for selective recognition of oligosaccharides on virion envelope proteins by DC-SIGN and DC-SIGR may indeed be a common pattern by which HIV and HCV are concentrated for in vitro transmission to their respective susceptible cells [57,58]. Unlike CD4 for HIV, the HCV receptor CD81 is currently a subject of serious discussions [58-61].We would like to point out that our system allows us to produce significant quantities of HCV, which made these studies possible. Having a reliable and long-term growth system for HCV in cell culture will facilitate in vitro studies and also aid in the production of rational drugs and vaccines. This culture system will, therefore, allow researchers in the field of HCV and liver disease to perform a wide variety of further analyses that can help in understanding the life cycle of HCV and the mechanisms of pathologies induced in human hosts.Declaration of Competing InterestsAll intellectual rights are reserved by the California Institute of Molecular Medicine (CIMM), and all aspects of this work were performed by CIMM. There are no competing interests between California Lutheran University or any other body and CIMM.Authors' contributionsSZS and RK performed the biological work and the isolations, transmissions, and retransmissions of HCV. JGP, ASK, CG and RR performed the clinical work, recruitment of patients, and procurement of specimens. DR, RSB, DB, and NC performed the molecular work.


Title: Identification of Rodent Homologs of Hepatitis C Virus and Pegiviruses

IntroductionHepatitis C virus (HCV) and human pegiviruses (HPgVs) infect an estimated 2% and 5% of the world’s population, respectively. HCV, HPgV (formerly referred to as GB virus C [GBV-C] or hepatitis G virus), and other genetically related viruses belong to two genera in the Flaviviridae family, Hepacivirus and Pegivirus, respectively (1). HCV is hepatotropic and can trigger liver damage characterized by fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (2). HPgV is lymphotropic (3), but its pathogenicity for humans, if any, is unknown. HPgV is more prevalent in people with blood-borne or sexually transmitted infections than in the general population. Up to 40% of HIV-infected individuals have HPgV viremia (1, 4, 5). Viruses genetically most similar to human HCV include GBV-B and the recently discovered nonprimate hepaciviruses (NPHVs) (6). These viruses show extensive gene homology and conserved genomic elements with HCV, as well as genus-specific features (1) that include a core protein, a type IV internal ribosomal entry site (IRES), and hepatotropism. Horses are the natural host for NPHVs (6, 7). The origin and natural host of GBV-B are unknown. Pegiviruses infect a wide range of mammals, including chimpanzees, New World primates (GBV-A or simian PgV [SPgV]), horses (equine PgV [EPgV] [A. Kapoor, et al., submitted for publication]), and bats (GBV-D or bat PgV [BPgV]) (1, 8, 9).Despite differences in their pathogenic potentials, HCV and HPgVs share many biological properties, including similar structural and genomic organizations, high inter- and intrahost genetic diversity, and, frequently, persistent infection of their natural hosts. Studies of HCV and HPgV in nonhuman primates have led to important advances in our understanding of their biology and pathogenesis (1, 10–13). However, basic questions regarding virulence determinants, organ tropism, systemic host responses, viral dynamics, and mechanisms of disease induction remain unanswered (10, 14). The currently characterized hepaciviruses and pegiviruses have narrow host ranges. HCV infects only humans and chimpanzees. Pegiviruses infecting humans, Old World primates, and New World primates are species-specific. Small-animal models often supply the extensive genetic and immunologic tools required to evaluate viral pathogenesis and immunity. The lack of such a model has impeded research on this important group of viruses (10). To address this challenge, we initiated a methodical search for such viruses in several species of wild rodents.RESULTSIdentification and genetic characterization of new rodent viruses.Plasma samples of >400 wild-caught rodents, predominantly deer mice, were screened using two degenerate sets of primers targeting conserved virus helicase motifs of hepaciviruses and PgVs. Sequencing of PCR products confirmed the presence of hepaciviruses and PgVs in 18 samples of rodents belonging to four species: hispid pocket mice (Chaetodipus hispidus), deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus), desert wood rats (Neotoma lepida), and white-throated wood rats (Neotoma albigula). The majority of samples were from these rodent species, which may have induced sampling bias. Although the sequencing of PCR products provided only 300-nucleotide (nt)-long viral fragments, the highly conserved nature of the sequenced helicase region allowed accurate phylogenetic classification of all new viruses (Fig. 1). Appropriate classification of well-characterized viruses using the corresponding sequence region validated our analysis (1, 6, 7). Moreover, the phylogenetic tree constructed with the complete protein sequences of new rodent viruses shows clustering concordant with that obtained using partial helicase sequences (Fig. 1 and 2). Following the International Committee for Taxonomy of Viruses guidelines of using host names to describe hepaciviruses and pegiviruses (1, 6, 7), we tentatively named these new viruses rodent hepacivirus (RHV) and rodent pegivirus (RPgV). We refrained from naming viruses on the basis of host species, given that their natural host and species tropism requires further investigation (7).FIG 1 Phylogenetic analysis of new rodent viruses using the partial helicase sequences generated by generic PCR. Bootstrap resampling was used to determine the robustness of branches; values of ≥70% (from 1,000 replicates) are shown. Host origins of newly reported viral sequences are indicated by red and yellow circles (see the key) and for previously described hepaciviruses (blue circles) and pegiviruses (green circles).FIG 2 Phylogenetic analysis of conserved regions in the helicase (motifs I to VI) (A) and RdRp (B) genes of rodent hepaciviruses and pegiviruses aligned with representative members of the Hepacivirus, Pegivirus, Pestivirus, and Flavivirus genera. Trees were constructed by neighbor joining of pairwise amino acid distances with the program MEGA5 (according to the distance scale provided). Bootstrap resampling was used to determine the robustness of branches; values of ≥70% (from 1,000 replicates) are shown. Regions compared corresponded to positions 3667 to 4470 (helicase domain of NS3) and 7711 to 8550 (RdRp in NS5B; numbered according to the AF011751 HCV genotype 1a reference sequence).Despite their high genetic diversity, all new rodent virus sequences fell into the hepacivirus or pegivirus clade, supporting their provisional assignment to these genera of the family Flaviviridae (1). Based on the phylogenetic analyses of partial helicase sequences and intraspecies genetic distances of known viruses (HCV and NPHV), the RHV sequences identified in our study can be tentatively classified as five new virus species. Of these, three new RHV species were found in a single host species, deer mice. Two new RHV species were found in desert wood rats and hispid pocket mice. Despite our limited sampling of host animals, one of the new RHV species showed intraspecies genetic diversity (RHV-pm4144, RHV-pm4062, RHV-pm3243, RHV-pm3252, RHV-pm5198, RHV-pm4109, and RHV-pm5263) that was equivalent to that reported among different HCV subtypes (Fig. 1). Our analysis also showed that the observed genetic diversity of RHV species exceeded that reported for all known hepaciviruses. The natural host of GBV-B remains obscure, and noticeably, GBV-B fell within the genetic diversity of RHV species.We found two new species of pegiviruses in rodents, one in white-throated wood rats (RPgV-cc61) and the other in deer mice (RPgV-pm5226, RPgV-pm6197, RPgV-pm6073, RPgV-pm6041, and RPgV-pm6087). All of the 5 RPgV variants found in deer mice clustered together, indicating a single genetically diverse RPgV species (Fig. 1). The latter variants from deer mice clustered together, with divergence between different variants comparable to the diversity observed between genotypes of human pegiviruses (Fig. 1).Genetic analysis of rodent RHVs.We acquired the complete genome of RHV-339 (8,879 nt) and the nearly complete genome of RHV-089 (8,252 nt), which were found in plasma samples of two different deer mice. As with HCV, the RHV genome is predicted to encode a long polyprotein flanked by 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs). In the open reading frame (ORF), 8% synonymous (dS) and <1% nonsynonymous (dN) mutations existed between the genomes of the two variants, indicative of strong purifying selection. The first in-frame polyprotein initiation codon was found at nucleotide position 403 of the RHV-339 genome and at the corresponding position in RHV-089. Although the proposed start codon did not include a classical Kozak consensus sequence (ccaCttATGG), an even-less-favorable Kozak context is found in GBV-B (tagCaaATGC) (where lowercase bases indicate variable positions), consistent with ribosomal positioning and translation initiation by a type IV internal ribosome entry site (IRES). The 5′ UTR region of RHV-089 and the corresponding region of RHV-339 showed homology to other hepacivirus sequences in the 200-nt region adjacent to the start of the polyprotein initiation codon (Fig. 3). The remaining 5′ UTR returned no matches from BLAST searching against the full GenBank sequence database, although a miR-122 seed site (UACACUCC) was found in the RHV-339 5′ UTR at nt 7 to 14, which may indicate the hepatotropic potential of these rodent hepaciviruses. Although convincing alignments on which to base structure predictions could not be achieved, the positioning and occurrence of covariant changes in sequences homologous to those of other hepaciviruses allowed us to establish a partial structural model of the IRES in the region corresponding to domain III of the type IV HCV IRES, which included each of the IIIa to IIIf stem-loops and the pseudoknot (IIIf) region sequences (Fig. 3). The region 5′ to the start of stem-loop III was shorter than corresponding sequences of HCV, GBV-B, and NPHV. Downstream of the polyprotein stop codon, we identified a 3′ UTR of 230 nt consisting of a structured region, potentially equivalent to the HCV 3′ variable region, a poly(C) tract of around 10 nt, and a 3′ X region of 158 nt, which is predicted to fold into 4 stem-loop structures (Fig. 3B). The structural elements of the 3′ UTR resembled those of HCV, with a short poly(C) tract replacing the long HCV poly(U/C) tract, and a longer 3′ X region. The RHV 3′ UTR shared no sequence homology with HCV or other database sequences.FIG 3 Predicted structures in the RHV-339 and RPgV-cc61 UTRs. (A) RHV-339 5′ UTR structure predictions were made by homology searching and structural alignment within domain III. Bases conserved in all hepaciviruses (HCV, NPHV, and GBV-B) are highlighted with blue circles. (B) Structure prediction of the RHV 3′ UTR using Mfold. The ORF stop codon is boxed, and a putative variable region equivalent to that of HCV is indicated. A poly(C) tract of around 10 nt separates this from the downstream 3′ X region, which was predicted to fold into four stem-loops (3′SL1 to -4). (C) Predicted structure of the RPgV 3′ UTR. The black bar cartoon of the 3′ UTR (475 nt) was drawn to scale, with poly(C) tracts indicated in blue. Strong stem-loop structures immediately downstream of the ORF stop codon (boxed) and at the very end of the genome are indicated. RSEs, potentially folding into similar stem-loop structures, are outlined in red. The structure prediction of the RPgV 3′ UTR was done using Mfold.The RHV open reading frame is predicted to encode a polyprotein of 2,748 amino acids (aa), shorter than those of HCV-1a (3,011 aa), NPHV (2,942 aa), and GBV-B (2,854 aa). Comparative genetic analysis predicts that the RHV-339 polyprotein contains three structural (core, E1, E2) and seven nonstructural (NS) (p7, NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B) proteins (Fig. 4). Cleavage sites in the RHV polyprotein and in other hepaciviruses were predicted by alignment and homology to sites previously identified in HCV (15). Because of sequence variability around cleavage sites in structural proteins, the motifs for RHV and NPHV were independently predicted using the SignalP 4.1 server (16) and inferred from the cleavage motifs that aligned with those in HCV. Structural and nonstructural RHV proteins were similar in predicted size to those of HCV and other hepaciviruses (Fig. 4C), including a predicted 63-aa p7 transmembrane protein (Fig. 4C). However, the core protein was shorter than for HCV (168 versus 191 aa), as was E2 (279 versus 383 aa). The E1 and E2 proteins contained 2 and 4 predicted N-linked glycosylation sites, respectively, fewer than those found in the homologous glycoproteins of HCV (6 and 11, respectively), NPHV (4 and 10, respectively), and GBV-B (3 and 6, respectively). The region encoding the putative core protein lacked an alternative open reading frame equivalent to the proposed HCV alternative reading frame protein (17).FIG 4 (A) Amino acid sequence divergence between RHV and human virus (HCV), equine virus (NPHV), and GBV-B using 300-nt fragments by 15-nt increments across the sequence alignment (the midpoint is plotted on the y axis). Within-species distances for human and equine hepaciviruses are included for comparison. (B, C) Genome diagram of RHV showing predicted N-linked glycosylation sites (downward-pointing arrows) and proposed cleavage sites of cellular peptidase (black triangles), NS2-3 protease (white triangle), and NS3-4A protease (gray triangles) (sequence positions were numbered using the RHV sequence).Despite the similarity in organization and structural features in the hepacivirus genomes, sequences were extraordinarily divergent from each other at the nucleotide and amino acid levels. Coding sequences were aligned, and pairwise distances between structural and nonstructural genome regions were computed (Table 1). RHV-339 showed mean amino acid divergences ranging from 67% to 77% in the structural region and from 65% to 70% in the NS regions, similar to the divergences between HCV and GBV-B and substantially greater than those between HCV and NPHV. Genetic divergence between the entire genome of RHV-339 and the known hepaciviruses (HCV, GBV-B, and NPHV) was analyzed using a scanning window of 300 nt in 15-nt increments (Fig. 4). As observed for NPHV (6, 7), the most-conserved regions within viruses of the Hepacivirus genus were the NS3 and NS5B genes. High sequence divergence was observed in the E1 and E2 glycoproteins and NS4B; there was no apparent homology to other sequences in GenBank in extended regions of NS4A and NS5A. Sequence comparisons were extended to include homologous sequences from the other members of the Flaviviridae located in the NS3 and NS5B regions, and these sequences could be aligned (Fig. 2). Phylogenetic trees from the two genomic regions were topologically equivalent but different in relative branch lengths. The analysis confirmed the separate grouping of RHV-339 and RHV-89 from all other hepaciviruses (Fig. 2A and B), although hepaciviruses collectively formed a separate bootstrap that differentiated them from pegiviruses. RNA folding analysis of the RHV genome revealed that the minimum folding energy difference (MFED) value of RHV was 4.6%, which is well below the 8 to 9% determined for HCV and 9% for GBV-B. This suggested a less structured RHV genome.TABLE 1 Amino acid and nucleotide (shaded) sequence divergence of structural genes (core, E1, and E2) and nonstructural genes (NS2 to NS5B) between RHV and other hepacivirusesGenetic analysis of rodent pegivirus.The complete genome (11,279 nt) of the rodent pegivirus (RPgV-cc61) found in a white-throated wood rat included a 5′ UTR (349 nt), a polyprotein coding region (10,452 nt; 3,484 aa) and a 3′ UTR (475 nt). The RPgV-cc61 5′ UTR showed no significant similarity with any known pegivirus sequence; therefore, prediction of its secondary RNA structure was problematic in the absence of a structural alignment or covariance data. The first initiating codon in frame with the predicted encoded polyprotein was located at position 350. The 3′ UTR sequence contained two internal poly(C) tracts of around 9 nt, and stable stem-loop structures could be predicted immediately downstream of the stop codon and at the very 3′ end of the genome (Fig. 3C). Surprisingly, two repeat sequence elements (RSEs), potentially folding into similar stem-loop structures, were exact copies of a 24-nt region from the 5′ UTRs of human enterovirus, coxsackievirus, echovirus, and swine vesicular disease virus. No other homology to known viral sequences was found in the RPgV 3′ UTR.Cleavage sites in the RPgV polyprotein were predicted by alignment and homology to sites previously predicted between nonstructural proteins in simian and bat pegiviruses (GBV-A [18]; GBV-D [8]; sites NS3/NS4A, NS4A/NS4B, NS4B/NS5A, and NS5A/NS5B) and by comparison to predicted signalase sites between structural proteins of RPgV and other pegiviruses. This analysis identified homologous cleavage sites that aligned with those in BPgV, including the boundaries of the proposed novel X protein (Fig. 5). Our analysis indicated that the RPgV-cc61 genome might harbor an additional signalase site after nt 1015 and before a coding sequence that was clearly homologous to E1 of other pegiviruses. The presence of a hydrophobic sequence of 31 aa at the beginning of the polyprotein possibly functions as a signal peptide that leads to translocation of a predicted 223-aa protein (labeled “Y” in Fig. 5) into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (which is analogous to E1 processing for other pegiviruses). The presence of two N-linked glycosylation sites in this coding sequence suggests a possible fourth glycoprotein (in addition to E1, E2, and X) in the RPgV envelope. Alignment of the RPgV sequence with simian and bat pegiviruses allowed prediction of cleavage sites of the nonstructural proteins NS2, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, NS5A, and NS5B. Each was comparable in size to homologs from other pegiviruses.FIG 5 (A) Amino acid sequence divergence between RPgV and HPgV, New World primate PgV (SPgV), equine PgV (EPgV), and bat PgV (BPgV) using 300-base fragments by 15-base increments across the sequence alignment (the midpoint is plotted on the y axis). Within-species distances for human and simian pegiviruses (from New World primates [GBV-A]) are included for comparison. The divergence scan commenced at the predicted signalase cleavage site at the start of the E1-encoding genes (position 1016). (B, C) Genome diagram of RPgV showing predicted N-linked glycosylation sites (downward-pointing arrows) and proposed cleavage sites of cellular peptidase (black triangles), NS2-3 protease (white triangle), and NS3-4A protease (gray triangles) (sequence positions were numbered using the RPgV sequence).The genetic relatedness of RPgV-cc61 to other pegiviruses was assessed by alignment of coding sequences and calculations of pairwise distances between structural and nonstructural genome regions (Table 2). RPgV-cc61 was substantially divergent from HPgV, SPgV, BPgV, and EPgV sequences, with amino acid divergence ranging from 78% to 81% in the structural proteins and 54% to 56% in the NS region (Table 2). The degree of genetic divergence across the genome of RPgV-cc61 from those of other pegiviruses was analyzed as described for RHV (Fig. 5). Consistently with previous analyses (6, 7), the most-conserved regions within viruses of the genus Pegivirus were the NS3 and NS5B genes, with high sequence divergence in the E1 and E2 glycoproteins and NS4B and no apparent homology to other sequences in GenBank in extended regions of X, NS4A, and NS5A (Fig. 5). Phylogenetic analysis of the NS3 and NS5B regions confirmed the separate grouping of RPgV-cc61 from all other pegiviruses (Fig. 2A and B). RNA folding analysis of the RPgV genome revealed that the MFED value of the RPgV genome was 9.7%, an observation consistent with the presence of a genome-scale, ordered RNA structure (7). This MFED value was similar to those of human (mean, 12.8% [11.7% to 13.3%]), simian (mean, 13.3% [12.7% to 13.8%]), bat (9.7% and 10.7%), and equine (10.7%) pegiviruses (6).TABLE 2 Amino acid and nucleotide (shaded) sequence divergence of structural genes (E1, E2, and X) and nonstructural genes (NS2 to NS5B) between RPgV and other pegivirusesDISCUSSIONThe identification and characterization of animal virus homologs can provide insights into the pathogenesis of human viruses and, in some instances, in vivo models for investigating methods for the prevention and treatment of human disease (19). Examples where well-characterized animal viruses have provided such insights include simian immunodeficiency virus, animal poxviruses, herpesviruses, murine norovirus, and woodchuck hepatitis virus (20). HCV, in contrast, has no satisfactory homolog (6, 21), and only chimpanzees can be experimentally infected with HCV (22–25). Even before the recent U.S. Institute of Medicine recommendations to restrict the use of chimpanzees for biomedical research, limited access to these animals was a challenge for HCV research. NPHV and GBV-B are the most genetically similar to HCV (6) and could therefore be used as surrogate models of HCV infection. The natural host of NPHV is the horse (6, 7, 17), in which high frequencies of viremia (from 3 to 8%) have been reported in separate studies (17). GBV-B was initially detected in a laboratory tamarin (New World monkeys of the family Callitrichidae). However, subsequent attempts to identify its natural host that concentrated primarily on the screening of New World primates have been unsuccessful. Nonetheless, GBV-B-infected tamarins and marmosets have been used as surrogate models for HCV pathogenesis. The identification of rodent hepaciviruses may finally provide a promising small-animal model for the study of hepaciviruses, with possible relevance to HCV.Here we identified several lineages of RHV in deer mice that are as highly divergent from each other as are HCV and GBV-B. In light of the recent finding of hepaciviruses infecting horses and dogs (6, 7, 17), which are considerably more similar to HCV than GBV-B or RHV, it is unlikely that hepaciviruses coevolved with their hosts. The basal radiation of three different lineages of hepaciviruses infecting deer mice (Fig. 1) means either that the variants diversified within this host species and subsequently infected another rodent species (Neotoma lepida) and ultimately a tamarin (GBV-B) or that deer mice became infected with highly genetically distinct hepaciviruses from other host species. Either explanation requires the occurrence of multiple cross-species events that cannot be dated a priori. Thus, without a chronological anchor, we did not attempt to estimate the evolutionary rates of hepacivirus lineages and their divergence times. The hepaciviruses identified by us in this and previous studies (7) may have cross-species transmission potential. The high genetic diversity observed among RHV species raises the possibility that hepaciviruses (HCV, NPHV, and GBV-B) may have actually originated in rodents. Serology-enabled approaches, such as the one we recently used to study the host tropism of NPHV (7), will be very useful in determining the host range and cross-species transmission potential of these novel rodent viruses and in identifying related viruses that infect other animal species.Viruses genetically related to HPgV include its primate homologs (SPgV), an uncharacterized virus from bats (BPgV) (8), and a recently identified distinct variant infecting horses (EPgV [Kapoor et al., submitted]). Studies thus far indicate a narrow host range for these viruses, with HPgV being found only in humans and chimpanzees, SPgV being found in New World monkeys, and BPgV and EPgV being found only in bats and horses, respectively (1). These findings are consistent with the phylogenetic relationships between pegiviruses infecting rodents and other mammalian species (Fig. 1). Indeed, the two lineages of RPgVs infecting deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) and white-throated wood rats (Neotoma albigula) are more similar to each other than to pegiviruses found in other mammalian species, an observation that is consistent with virus-host cospeciation. However, further investigation of pegiviruses infecting other rodents and mammalian species will be required to solidify or refute the hypothesis that pegiviruses are species specific and have codiverged with the evolution of mammals.The deduced genome organizations of rodent hepaciviruses and RPgV were similar to those of other members of these genera (1). The 5′ UTRs of RHV and RPgV are long, consistent with the presence of IRES elements found in other hepaci- and pegiviruses. In the case of RHV, we were able to model an RNA structure based on the structurally conserved domains III found in other hepaciviruses, providing support for this structure’s function as a type IV IRES. Interestingly, the RHV 3′ UTR elements, but not the primary sequence, resembled that of HCV, with a putative variable region immediately downstream of the ORF, followed by a polypyrimidine tract and a 3′ X region. However, a short poly(C) tract replaced the longer poly(U⋅C) tracts found in HCV isolates. The RPgV 3′ UTR did not have homology to other pegiviruses but, surprisingly, contained repeat sequence elements (RSEs) identical to 5′ UTR sequences from human enterovirus, coxsackievirus, echovirus, and swine vesicular disease virus. It is as yet unclear how RPgV acquired these sequence elements and what function they might have.Analysis of the RPgV polyprotein sequences revealed both similarities and differences from previously identified pegivirus isolates. Unlike hepaciviruses, pegiviruses typically do not encode a core (nucleocapsid) protein (26, 27). Nonetheless, biophysical characterization of HPgV particles suggests the presence of a nucleocapsid, although its origin and composition remain a mystery (27). The RPgV sequence also lacks a convincing capsid protein sequence in either the polyprotein-coding or alternative open reading frames. Rather, the pegivirus polyprotein typically initiates with a signal peptide immediately downstream of the initiation codon that translocates E1 into the ER (position 17 or 21 in human pegiviruses) (28). For RPgV, this is also the case, but RPgV-cc61 also possessed an additional 223-residue Y protein preceding E1, which may be targeted to the ER and glycosylated. Following the E2 homolog, the RPgV sequence encoded a predicted, 249-residue-long acidic X protein (Fig. 5), potentially homologous to, although highly divergent from, those predicted in EPgV and BPgV (8). RPgV also possesses an additional predicted signalase site between E2 and NS2 (position 736) that could give rise to yet another glycosylated membrane protein.Much of our current knowledge of the replication, host interactions, immune responses, and pathogenesis of HCV and pegiviruses comes from experimental infection of primates or cell culture systems. In vitro models have proven valuable for investigating virus replication (13), yet these systems fail to mimic the endogenous milieu of the target organ (liver) and may not accurately recapitulate life cycle events, such as polarized cell entry. Finally, cell culture systems cannot reproduce the interaction between virus and immune system, nor do they allow for studies of pathogenesis (12). The identification and genetic characterization of RHV and RPgV reported here provide a unique opportunity to develop tractable-animal models to study the infection, transmission, immunity, and pathogenesis of hepaciviruses and pegiviruses. Although the current study design precluded direct examination of tissues of infected rodents, it is interesting that the 5′ UTR of RHV contains an miR-122 binding site. These have been previously described in the HCV 5′ UTR (two miR-122 seed sites) as highly conserved among all genotypes and functionally required for replication in hepatocytes (29). Similarly, we recently reported the presence of one miR-122 site in NPHV (7), while the GBV-B 5′ UTR contains sites at positions 8 and 23. Tissue-specific expression of miR-122 in the liver of vertebrates (including rodents) is consistent with potential hepatotropism of all hepaciviruses identified to date, including RHV. It will be interesting to define the sites of RHV replication in rodents and NPHV in horses in future investigations. If RHV does indeed resemble HCV in its tissue tropism and pathogenesis, rodents could prove to be a very useful small-animal model. A rodent model for pegivirus infections is also important for studies focused on the viral and host factors underlying virus persistence. Estimates suggest that >20% of the world population has been exposed to GBV-C, with chronic infection established in 1 to 5% of healthy adults (4, 5, 30). Studying RPgV infections in a natural host amenable to genetic manipulation should provide a powerful approach for unraveling mechanisms favoring resolved infection versus persistence.Rodent models also provide an opportunity to investigate routes of transmission for RPgV and RHV and how this might relate to HCV transmission, which is due largely to blood-borne routes of exposure. Such studies performed in rodents, including deer mice, have been extremely valuable for understanding hantavirus transmission (31, 32). Comparative genetic analysis and functional characterization of viral entry may help to unravel the determinants of host specificity and tissue tropism and provide insight into possible routes of cross-species transmission (29, 33). In addition, defining the natural history of RHV infection, the rate of chronicity, the immune determinants of clearance and protection, and possible disease association holds promise for establishing a highly relevant preclinical model for the development of HCV vaccine strategies and interventions to prevent or reverse virus-associated liver disease.MATERIALS AND METHODSRodent samples.Plasma samples from rodents of eight species were collected for a program in hantavirus ecology from sites in the southwestern United States during the period of 2007 to 2009. Samples were stored at −80°C until nucleic acid (NA) extraction. Residual plasma samples were used in this study and included 43 hispid pocket mice (Chaetodipus hispidus), 9 black-tailed prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus), 9 prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster), 9 wood rats (Neotoma cinerea), 4 desert wood rats (Neotoma lepida), 342 deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus), 58 white-throated wood rats (Neotoma albigula), 10 western harvest mice (Reithrodontomys megalotis), and 9 yellow-pine chipmunks (Tamias amoenus).High-throughput sequencing (HTS) and generic PCR assays for hepaciviruses and pegiviruses.Plasma samples were treated with nucleases to digest free NAs for enrichment of viral NA (34–36) and then extracted in NucliSens buffer using the automated easyMAG system (bioMérieux, United States). NAs were reverse transcribed using Superscript II reverse transcriptase and converted to double-stranded DNA using the Klenow fragment (NEB; catalog no. M0212S). Double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) was fragmented using an Ion Shear Plus reagent kit (catalog no. 4471248). Fragmented dsDNA products were ligated to Ion Xpress adapters and unique Ion Xpress bar codes (catalog no. 4471250). Bar-coded libraries were amplified using the Ion Plus fragment library kit (catalog no. 4471252) and the Ion OneTouch system using the Ion OneTouch 200 template kit (v2, catalog no. 4478316). Sequencing was done with the Ion Personal Genome Machine (PGM) system by using the Ion PGM 200 sequencing kit (catalog no. 4474004). Two highly degenerate nested-PCR assays were designed to amplify genetically diverse viruses related to HCV and HPgV. All PCR mixtures used AmpliTaq gold 360 master mix (Applied Biosystems; catalog no. 4398881) and 3 µl of cDNA. The first degenerate PCR assay used primer pair HGLV-ak1 (5′-TACGCIACNGCIACNCCICC-3′) and HGLV-ak2 (5′-TCGAAGTTCCCIGTRTANCCIGT-3′) in the first round of PCR and HGLV-ak3 (5′-GACIGCGACICCICCIGG-3′) and HGLV-ak4 (5′-TCGAAGTTCCCIGTRTAICCIGT-3′) in the second round of PCR. For the first round, the PCR cycle included 8 min of denaturation at 95°C, 10 cycles of 95°C for 40 s, 60°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 40 s, 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 55°C for 45 s, and 72°C for 40 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 5 min. For the second round, PCR conditions included 8 min of denaturation at 95°C, 10 cycles of 95°C for 40 s, 64°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 40 s, 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 57°C for 45 s, and 72°C for 40 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 5 min. The second degenerate PCR assay used primer pair AK4340F1 (5′-GTACTTGCTACTGCNACNCC-3′) and AK4630R1 (5′-TACCCTGTCATAAGGGCRTC-3′) for the first round of PCR. Primers AK4340F2 (5′-CTTGCTACTGCNACNCCWCC-3′) and AK4630R2 (5′-TACCCTGTCATAAGGGCRTCNGT-3′) were used in second round. For the first round, the PCR cycle included 8 min of denaturation at 95°C, 10 cycles of 95°C for 40 s, 60°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 40 s, 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 56°C for 45 s, and 72°C for 40 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min. For the second round, PCR conditions included 8 min of denaturation at 95°C, 10 cycles of 95°C for 40 s, 64°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 40 s, 30 cycles of 95°C for 30 s, 58°C for 45 s, and 72°C for 40 s, and a final extension at 72°C for 10 min 
[6]). 5′ UTRs were determined using rapid identification of 5′ cDNA ends (5′ RACE) (36). 3′ UTRs were determined by poly(A), -(G), or -(U) tailing of viral RNA using poly(A) polymerase (USB Affymetrix), followed by reverse transcription using adaptor-containing primers and subsequent PCR amplification. Thereafter, sequence validity was tested with 4-fold genome coverage by classical dideoxy Sanger sequencing.Phylogenetic and RNA secondary-structure analysis.Nucleotide sequences (5′ UTRs) and translated protein sequences (coding regions) were aligned using the program MUSCLE as implemented in the SSE package (37). Sequence divergence scans were performed and summary values for different genome regions were generated by the program Sequence Distance in the SSE package. Bootstrapped maximum likelihood trees for the NS3 helicase region of hepaciviruses and pegiviruses were generated using RAxML with the PROTGAMMA model (gamma distribution for rates over sites and Dayhoff amino acid similarity matrix with all model parameters estimated by RAxML) and 100 bootstraps (11). NS3 and NS5B trees for members of all four genera of flaviviruses (Flavivirus, Pestivirus, Hepacivirus, and Pegivirus) were generated by neighbor joining of Poisson-corrected pairwise distances.RNA structures were predicted by Mfold and by homology searching and structural alignment with bases conserved in other hepaciviruses. Reliable structure prediction for the pseudoknot region in HCV (IIIf) and homologous pairings in other hepaciviruses cannot be predicted by Mfold or other conventional RNA secondary-structure prediction algorithms. Structure predictions were not attempted upstream of stem-loop III in the absence of detectable homology to other hepacivirus sequences or comparative sequence data from other RHV variants to support covariance or phylogenetic conservation analysis. Labeling of the predicted structures in the 5′ UTR followed the numbering used for reported homologous structures in HCV, GBV-B, and NPHV (7). We were unable to predict the structure the RPgV 5′ UTR due to insufficient data for structural alignment. Cleavage sites in the RHV polyprotein sequence were predicted for RHV at sites homologous to those of HCV that have been experimentally determined. Signalase sites between structural proteins were highly divergent between different hepaciviruses and could not be aligned, therefore those for RHV and NPHV were independently predicted using the SignalP version 4.1 program (16) and concordant with positions predicted from the sequence alignment. RPgV cleavage sites were similarly predicted by alignment of the NS3/4A, NS4A/4B, NS4B/5A, and NS5A/5B sites previously proposed for simian pegiviruses (18) and comparison of SignalP version 4.1 predictions for structural proteins of RPgV and the NS2/NS3 cleavage site of BPgV (8).All complete genome sequences were examined for recombination using the programs Genetic Algorithm Recombination Detection (GARD) in the DataMonkey package, which provides an interface to the HyPhy program (38, 39). Default parameters were used with a Hasegawa, Kishino, and Yano (HKY) substitution model and a gamma distribution of 6 discrete rate steps. Rodent virus genome sequences were analyzed for evidence of genome-ordered RNA structures (GORS) by comparing folding energies of consecutive fragments of nucleotide sequence with random sequence order controls using the program’s MFED scan in the SEE package (37). Minimum folding energies (MFEs) of rodent virus genomes were calculated by using the default setting in the program Zipfold. MFE results were expressed as MFEDs, i.e., the percentage difference between the MFE of the native sequence from that of the mean value of the 50 sequence order-randomized controls (32).Nucleotide sequence accession numbers.The nucleotide compositions of viruses were determined using EMBOSS compseq (http://emboss.bioinformatics.nl/cgi-bin/emboss/compseq). All sequences generated in this study were submitted to GenBank under accession no. KC815310 to KC815327.


Title: The Impact of Drugs and Substance Abuse on Viral Pathogenesis—A South African Perspective

1. Illicit Drugs of Abuse and Viral InfectionsGlobally, the use of illicit drugs has a significant negative impact on society, resulting in years of premature death or disability [1]. Substance use disorder (SUD) can be attributed to social pressure, peer pressure, dysfunctional families, genetic factors, emotional problems, mental health problems, loss of respect, trauma experience, loss of livelihood, and prior substance exposure [2,3]. People who use drugs (PWUDs) have high mortality rates compared to the general population globally [4,5]. SUD continues to be a major obstacle in combating the global pandemic of viral infections. According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, PWUDs who engage in risky drug-related behaviours experience elevated risk of becoming infected with or transmitting viral infections such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and viral hepatitis [hepatitis B virus (HBV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV)] [6]. There are two primary ways in which these viral infections can be acquired in this population: (1) when people inject drugs and share contaminated needles or other drug equipment, and (2) when drugs impair judgment and people engage in unprotected sexual activities with an infected partner [6]. Drug use and addiction have been associated with HIV/acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) since its first recognition. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), injecting drug use contributed to almost 20% of documented male HIV cases and 21% of female HIV cases in 2016 [7]. A global meta-analysis reported that 18% of people who inject drugs (PWIDs) were living with HIV, 52% were HCV-seropositive, and 9% were HBV surface antigen (HBsAg)-positive [8]. Table 1 shows a summary of studies conducted worldwide on drugs of abuse, such as prescription opioids, heroin, methamphetamine or amphetamine-type stimulants (ATSs), cocaine, crack cocaine, tranquilizers, stimulants, sedatives, tramadol, and pethidine, and their association with high-risk exposure to blood-borne viruses (BBVs) in PWIDs [9,10,11,12,13,14,15]. PWIDs experience a significant burden of BBVs compared to the general population. The aim of this review is to (1) highlight what is known about the prevalence of BBVs in SUD and drug abuse, and to (2) address the significant impact of abused addictive drugs and polysubstance use on viral replication and transmission with a specific focus on nyaope—a novel psychoactive drug that is on the rise in South African settings.2. Substance Abuse in AfricaAfrican countries experience different levels of drug abuse, with some regions experiencing higher rates than others. Multiple factors contribute to drug abuse, including poverty, unemployment, social inequality, and lack of access to education and healthcare [3,16]. The abuse of illicit drugs such as cocaine, methamphetamine, and heroin is a major problem in many urban areas worldwide, including South Africa [17]. Therefore, in many parts of the world, substance abuse among young people remains a significant public health concern. Commonly abused substances include alcohol, cocaine, heroin, marijuana (cannabis), tobacco, methamphetamine, and opioids (see Table 1). Recent studies conducted in Africa demonstrate that substance abuse is highly prevalent among young people, which results in physical and psychological problems such as fighting, vandalism, theft, engaging in unprotected sex, medical problems, personal injury, and impaired relationships [18,19,20]. Moreover, using more than one substance is common among substance users. In Africa, illicit substances such as cannabis (the most commonly used substance, present in West and Central Africa between 5.2% and 13.5%), amphetamine stimulants, and benzodiazepines are on the rise [21]. Additionally, alcohol, tobacco, cannabis, heroin, and Khat (Catha edulis) are the most common drugs abused by young people in sub-Saharan Africa [22,23]. As a result, Africa has been recognised in the last decade as a consumer and destination for illicit drugs [24,25]. A systematic review reported the overall prevalence of any substance use among adolescents in sub-Saharan Africa to be 42% and 56% in Central Africa [23]. Alcohol and tobacco are the most prevalent substances across the continent at 41% and 46%, respectively [23]. The use of illicit drugs is associated with a high risk of contracting or transmitting viral illnesses such as HIV, HBV, and HCV among PWID/UDs3. Substance Abuse and Associated BBVs in South AfricaSouth Africa has the highest rate of drug consumption in Africa and is nearly twice that of the rest of the world [26]. According to the South African national estimates, 10% of the adult population (ages 15 years and older) consume harmful amounts of alcohol (17% of men and 5% of women) and 9% (13% of men and 4% of women) use illicit drugs [27]. In a study conducted in five cities across four South African provinces [Gauteng (from sites in Centurion, Pretoria, and Johannesburg), KwaZulu-Natal (from sites in Durban), and Western Cape Province (from sites in Cape Town)], 14% of PWIDs were infected with HIV in 2013 [9]. However, there is limited research on HBV and HCV among PWIDs in South Africa (Table 1). Most South African studies about PWIDs are limited to programmatic data and small, single-site studies. A study conducted in Cape Town reported an HCV seroprevalence of 27% among men who have sex with men (MSM) who use drugs, of which 80% injected heroin or methamphetamine in the previous 3 months [11]. Although there are limited data, the number of PWIDs in South Africa exceeds 75,000, and this key population accounts for ~1% of new HIV infections according to the South African National AIDS Council’s mid-term report for 2019 [28]. According to reports by Scheibe et al., Tshwane has the highest HCV prevalence (55%) among PWIDs, the highest HIV prevalence (21%), and a 5% HBV prevalence, primarily from homeless black men from the three major South African cities [10]. Therefore, it is not surprising that an increase in viral infections is associated with intravenous drug use as observed in other studies worldwide [12,13,14,15,29,30,31,32]. In South Africa, substance abuse is a serious and complex problem, with varying substances being abused, such as illicit street drug cocktails known as nyaope.4. Nyaope—A Highly Addictive Novel Psychoactive Drug in South AfricaNyaope is the street name that is commonly used in South African settings to describe a heroin-based powder mixture that is mostly commonly smoked with cannabis [33,34,35,36,37]. Media reports suggest that nyaope has been used as early as 2000 [38], although there is a lack of empirical evidence to support or refute this timeline. Instead, from 2006 and later, papers were published that provided concrete evidence of recreational nyaope use [17,39,40,41]. In South Africa, nyaope has emerged as a new illicit drug that is highly addictive, very potent, and commonly abused by young people and mostly from poor backgrounds, predominately from black townships (ranging between the ages of 15 and 64 years) [34,42,43]. Fifteen percent of South African youth engage in drug use, and the chances of encountering nyaope are higher [44]. In response to the country’s growing use of nyaope, the South African government criminalised the possession and distribution of nyaope in 2014 [36]. In addition, the sale of nyaope carries a potential 25-year prison term [36].Nyaope is almost exclusively found in South Africa. It is most commonly used by young and unemployed black people from poor socioeconomic backgrounds due to its low cost (±ZAR 30 as of April 2018 per joint), and is the most common form of heroin used among black South Africans [34]. Nyaope is highly addictive, and once one becomes dependent on the drug, it is difficult to quit [34]. This has been shown by users who suffer from severe withdrawal symptoms (severe unbearable cramps) when they try to quit on their own [17,45,46]. Nyaope is an extremely potent narcotic drug compared to other well-known drugs; nevertheless, the chemical composition of nyaope has changed over time [47]. It frequently contains compounds including antiretrovirals (ARVs), cannabis, heroin, rat poison, and detergent [48,49,50]. Recreational drug mixtures containing ARVs may also contain harmful substances such as rat poison, household cleaning supplies, milk powder, pool cleaner, and bicarbonate of soda [51,52]. Chemical profiling of the compounds present in nyaope mixtures is limited to a small number of studies [17,38,39,40,41,49,52,53,54,55] (see Table 2). This drug cocktail is commonly referred to as nyaope [17,34,35,36,39,41,43,44,46,47,52,54,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,68,69,70,71,72]. According to prior media reports and studies, this drug cocktail has also been referred to by other names, including whoonga [38,39,41,46,49,52,54,59,62,63,64,68,70,71,73], wunga [46,62,64], plazana [53], kataza [40,52,68], unga [17,53,70], BoMkon [41,53], and sugars or pinch [35,68,70]. Whoonga, also known as wunga in isiZulu, was the subject of multiple news stories in 2010 [74]. According to many reports, it was purported to be a combination of illegal substances like methamphetamine, heroin, and/or marijuana, as well as ARVs (efavirenz) [75,76]. All of these names refer to cocktails containing heroin and cannabis in some form and are introduced to disguise the illegal drugs from law enforcement. The complete characteristics of the studies that have studied the impact of nyaope are summarised in Table 2.5. The Transition of Using Nyaope from Smoking to Injecting NyaopePreviously, nyaope concoctions have been known to be smoked with cannabis; however, recent reports now suggest the injection of nyaope either intravenously and via subcutaneous administration (e.g., dissolving nyaope powder in water and injecting it directly into the user’s veins) [33,37,43,56]. Nyaope users are commonly exposed to blood through the sharing of blood products via illicit and unsafe contaminated injections, needles, and syringes. In South Africa, this pattern of practice is known as “Bluetooth”, and it entails sharing of drugs by injecting a syringe full of blood directly into another person immediately after the initial injection. This pattern has also been identified in HIV-positive injecting drug users (IDUs) in Tanzania, where it is known as “Flashblood” [78,79]. According to media reports, “Bluetooth” is a new habit that has recently developed among IDUs which is a very dangerous practice of sharing blood that exacerbates the transmission of blood-borne viruses (BBVs) [80,81]. It is believed that the process of transitioning from smoking to injecting is a way to cope with a variety of resource constraints, as well as to satisfy curiosity and pleasure [82]. According to the media report, the “Bluetooth” sharing of drugs occurs when nyaope addicts and their peers do not have money to buy the drug and tend to share blood from an already drugged user as a way to feed each other’s cravings [83,84]. Therefore, the drug powder will be first mixed with water and drawn into a syringe. Thereafter, the first person will inject the drug into his veins and immediately after injection withdraw the blood and share it with the next person [83,84]. According to users, injecting the drug is more potent than smoking it [83,84]. Currently, injecting nyaope is on the rise in most regions of South Africa [73]. Other studies about drugs of abuse and their association with BBVs besides nyaope have been conducted worldwide (see Table 1). A study conducted in the United States of America (USA) in patients with opioid use disorder and injected drugs found that these patients are at an increased risk of HIV and HCV infections compared to the general population, with prevalence rates of 53% vs. 3% and 6% vs. 2%, respectively [13]. Another study by Cai and colleagues reported 11% HIV, 78% HBV, and 71% HCV infections among people who reported having used methamphetamine, cocaine, or heroin at some point in their lives [14]. To date, South Africa has limited data available on the dangers of using nyaope and its association with BBVs. Therefore, the abuse of illicit drugs via injection has a high risk of exposure to BBVs in PWIDs. 6. Risk Factors Associated with Using NyaopeBBVs such as HIV, HBV, and HCV are the most common viral infections in PWIDs because of the common route of transmission [10,82]. Hence, high-risk practices of sharing contaminated needles, syringes, and other drug-injection equipment put PWIDs at a high risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV, HBV, and HCV infections [10,13]. In addition, nyaope use in South Africa is growing at an alarming rate and becoming a public health concern. Most data about nyaope abuse are derived from public media reports. According to the media publication, approximately 45% of individuals who abuse nyaope via “Bluetooth” are HIV-infected [80]. In another recent study of individuals who practiced the “Bluetooth” method of sharing drugs, 35% were HIV-positive [81]. Thus, the “Bluetooth” sharing of nyaope exacerbates the transmission of viral infections. A wide range of clinical manifestations has been observed in nyaope users, including diarrhoea, facial swelling, vomiting, stomach cramps, erectile dysfunction, vein damage, right heart failure, and cortical atrophy [46,47,58,70]. Recently, two studies included nyaope users who used the drug cocktail while pregnant in South Africa (see Table 2) [59,65]. Among pregnant nyaope users, one infant died, whose cause of death was associated with the mother’s nyaope usage [59]. Other infants born to mothers who used nyaope suffered from septic shock, respiratory distress, seizures, multi-organ dysfunction, and retinopathy of prematurity [59,65].7. Drugs of Abuse and the Immune SystemUnregulated/illicit drugs of abuse impair immune system functions, causing the immune system to be more vulnerable to infectious diseases when illicit drugs are added to cells of the immune system in vitro [85,86]. There is growing evidence that drugs such as methamphetamine, cocaine, opioids, and marijuana increase HIV, HBV, and HCV replication both in vitro and in animal models [87,88,89]. Several mechanisms contribute to the decreased ability to control pathogens and limit their subsequent clearance, including the impaired function of natural killer cells, T-cells, B-cells, neutrophils, dendritic cells, macrophages, the altered expression of cytokines and chemokines, as well as weak intestinal barrier integrity [86,90]. Drugs of abuse can impair immune system functions, affecting both innate and adaptive immunity. An array of mechanisms contributes to the immunomodulatory effects of drugs of abuse, including direct cellular toxicity, the dysregulation of immune signalling pathways, and alterations in inflammatory responses, as reviewed by [86,90]. 8. Impact of HIV on Cells of the Immune SystemIn vitro studies from various laboratories have also provided direct evidence that opiates (such as morphine) promote the HIV infection of HIV target cells [87,88,89]. Morphine has been shown to stimulate HIV replication within human monocytes/macrophages [91,92,93], T lymphocytes [94,95], Kupffer cells [96], human neuroblastoma cells [97], and human brain cells [98,99]. Dr. Blackard’s research group has also shown that the synthetic opioid fentanyl enhances HIV replication in several cell types through the enhanced expression of the CCR5 and CXCR4 chemokine receptors [88,89]. Therefore, these studies are paving the way for a better understanding of drug use and HIV/AIDS comorbidities. However, there are no data regarding the impact of nyaope on viral pathogenesis to date.9. Drugs of Abuse and HIV InfectionGlobally, South Africa carries the highest prevalence of HIV infection, and this is due to a variety of biological, socio-behavioural, contextual, and structural factors [100,101,102,103]. Increasing access to HIV treatment has been the country’s priority in recent years. As a result of antiretroviral therapy (ART), mortality and morbidity have decreased, and lifespans have increased among people living with HIV. Adherence to HIV treatment is an important determinant for achieving the suppression of the virus and preventing drug-resistant strains from occurring. However, adherence to the daily intake of HIV treatment remains a challenge [104]. The South African National Department of Health implemented an effective programme in 2010 to provide free ARVs to HIV-infected South Africans [105]. In 2014, The Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) launched the 95-95-95 goals. The goal was to diagnose 95% of all HIV-positive individuals, provide ART to 95% of those diagnosed, and achieve viral suppression for 95% of those treated by 2030 [106]. Because of ARVs being widely available, South Africa has been experiencing a rise in the recreational use of ARVs.The recreational use of ARVs other than for the treatment of HIV infection has raised concerns, and understanding this phenomenon requires an examination of the physiological effects of these drugs. While not all ARVs have neuropsychiatric effects, one prominent drug in HIV treatment, efavirenz (EFV), possesses similar psychoactive properties to the hallucinogenic drug lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), leading to symptoms such as mania and psychosis [62,107]. Additionally, both EFV and ritonavir (RTV) produce euphoric effects when combined with substances such as methamphetamine, ecstasy, heroin, tobacco, and cannabis [53,108,109]. ARVs may potentially be diverted for “alternative” uses, such as the “breast enhancement” recorded in Nigeria with Combivir [lamivudine (3TC) and zidovudine (ZDV)] [110]. Another study by Inciardi et al. reported the recreational use of EFV and RTV in clubs and street populations [111]. In South Africa, the recreational use of ARTs is referred to as whoonga or nyaope. Certain nyaope mixtures have also been reported to contain HIV ARVs such as EFV, RTV, and nevirapine (NVP) [17,38,45,49,50,51,54,60,76] (Table 3). As a result of the misuse of ARVs, the development of resistance to ARVs can occur. Therefore, with the rise of drug abuse in South Africa and other countries, there is limited data on drug–drug interactions and their impact on ART adherence. In these situations, prospective patients frequently disregard the recommended course of treatment. A recent systemic review by Varshney et al. investigated the risks and consequences associated with the usage of nyaope and the recreational use of ARVs in South Africa [112]. Findings from this review documented that, due to the inclusion of ARVs in nyaope, poor adherence to ARV treatment occurs in HIV-infected individuals who are nyaope users, and that users are often at risk for hepatitis B and C, tuberculosis, and infective endocarditis infections [43,46,64]. HIV-positive nyaope users were more likely to engage in high-risk behaviours and to have high viral loads [46]. Furthermore, HIV-positive nyaope users were involved in transactional sex to finance their nyaope use [60], injected drug cocktails [60,64], and had poor adherence to ARV treatments [46]. Therefore, the inclusion of ARVs in some nyaope mixtures could lead to the emergence of drug resistance and ultimately lead to poor response to HIV treatment. This may potentially lead to an increase in the development of drug-resistant strains in those who use these drugs outside of the prescribed instructions, and may also potentiate pre-treatment drug resistance in those that have not started treatment, especially those that do not know their HIV status. The complexity of ARV abuse highlights the need for additional investigation and treatment interventions to address the potential hazards and negative effects associated with the non-medical use of these medications. Table 3 shows a summary of studies that have investigated the recreational use of ARVs worldwide.10. Impact of Substance Abuse in HIV-Infected PopulationsAlcohol and substance use are commonly believed to impact HIV viral control by affecting the nonadherence to ARV medications [113,114,115,116,117]. As ARTs have become widely available, active alcohol and substance use negatively affect the goal of achieving and maintaining an undetectable HIV plasma viral load. According to some studies, substance use (methamphetamine, cocaine, opioids, and cannabis) may directly impact immune activation pathways and facilitate HIV replication [118,119,120,121,122]. In addition, drug abuse is associated with increased HIV infection, neurocognitive impairment, HIV replication, morbidity, and mortality when compared to HIV-uninfected drug users and HIV-infected non-drug users [123,124]. Cannabis, cocaine, morphine, methamphetamine, heroin, and amphetamine are the most commonly abused illicit drugs in HIV-infected populations worldwide. HIV-infected individuals receive ART to suppress viral replication and control disease progression. However, with the increasing incidence of SUD among HIV-infected individuals, several factors, such as the decreased adherence to ART treatment, uncontrolled viraemia, and increased chronic inflammatory disease, are possible causes of reduced CD4+ T-cell reconstitution in this population group [125,126]. The use of drugs such as methamphetamine also increases the risk of HIV infection worldwide [127,128]. Among other addictive drugs, methamphetamine has been revealed as a highly addictive stimulant that increases sexual desire, self-confidence, and which provides sustained energy as well as decreasing inhibitions [129]. As a result of these physiological effects, methamphetamine users may be more likely to engage in high-risk behaviours of HIV transmission, such as having multiple partners, not using condoms, and trading sex for money or drugs [130]. Evidence from other South African studies about risky behaviours associated with methamphetamine use exists even among users of other substances [131,132]. Adherence to ARTs can be negatively impacted by substance addiction, especially alcohol and drug dependence. Drug users who are HIV-infected can find it difficult to stick to their prescribed medications, which could result in inadequate viral suppression and a higher chance of disease progression.11. Impact of Drug Abuse on Drug MetabolismIt has also been established that substance abuse, such as of alcohol, tobacco, and methamphetamine, decrease the adherence to ART treatment in HIV-infected individuals [133]. Therefore, drugs of abuse may potentially interfere with the ART drug metabolism in HIV-infected individuals. A review by Kumar et al. proposed that common metabolic enzymes involved in the metabolism of ART and alcohol (CYP2E1 and CYP3A4), nicotine (CYP1A1, CYP2A6, and CYP3A4), methamphetamine (CYP2D6 and CYP3A4), cocaine/opioids (CYP3A4), and marijuana/tetrahydrocannabinol (CYP2C9) may result in an altered bioavailability of ART drugs (the ability of a drug or other substance to be absorbed and used by the body) [134]. Subsequently, drug–drug interactions between drugs of abuse and ART drugs mediated by CYP enzymes may result in the decreased adherence to ART, leading to an increased HIV replication in HIV-infected individuals [134]. Although highly active ART has been a great success, new challenges have arisen that could lead to the failure of the treatment [135,136]. One of these challenges is the appearance of interactions between ART drugs and medications or illicit drugs taken concurrently [135,136]. Consequently, as some nyaope cocktails contain ARVs, nyaope use could also lead to the poor adherence to ART drugs. Currently, no studies have evaluated how nyaope mixtures—especially those containing antiretrovirals—affect virus replication, drug interactions, and/or cellular cytotoxicity. Therefore, it is crucial to study the effects of nyaope and drug interactions on the viral replication of the BBVs that are prevalent in nyaope users.12. Alcohol and HIV InfectionStudies have been conducted on the impact of alcohol and viral infections. HIV infection and transmission can be worsened by alcohol, reducing viral suppression, increasing the emergence of viral resistance to ARV therapies, and opportunistic infections and progression that can be exacerbated by alcohol-associated immunosuppression [137,138]. In vitro, HIV gp120 and alcohol increase the permeability of the blood–brain barrier [139]. Other studies have found that alcohol increased HIV replication in cells such as T lymphocytes, monocyte-derived macrophages, monocyte-derived dendritic cells, epithelial cells, and oral keratinocytes [116,140]. Based on the 2008 population-based survey report in South Africa, hazardous, harmful, and dependent alcohol use was 9.0% among women, 17.0% among men, and 2.9% among individuals 15 years and older [141]. In 2015, alcohol was reported to be the fifth leading cause of death and disability [142], which is, therefore, the leading cause of sexually transmitted infections, unemployment, criminal activities, and interpersonal violence in South Africa [143,144]. A study conducted in Tshwane Metropole in South Africa established that 53% of individuals heavily consume alcohol (70% men and 30% women) [145]. The Tshwane Metropole, as well as other areas in South Africa, has also been reported to have a high prevalence of substance abuse by various media reports and research studies [69,146,147].13. Drugs of Abuse and Viral Hepatitis (HBV and HCV)PWIDs are at risk of contracting HBV and HCV infection. PWIDs frequently share needles, which is the main route of transmission of HBV and HCV [148,149]. Although HBV is vaccine-preventable, it remains the main leading cause of death worldwide. According to a global systematic review of HBV infection conducted across 161 countries, HBsAg prevalence was estimated at 4%, with the highest endemicity in Africa (a total of 9%) and the Western Pacific (a total of 5%) [150]. In observational studies of the general population, healthcare workers, and pregnant women, the seroprevalence of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) was estimated to be 7%, indicating a high intermediate endemicity, with an estimated 3.5 million chronically infected individuals, and ~70% are infected with the HBV subgenotype A1 in South Africa [151]. In South Africa, the seroprevalence of HCV and identifiable risk factors are still poorly understood and are being characterised. The prevalence of HCV is estimated to be <1%, which indicates that 600,000 people are infected with the virus based on HCV antibody (anti-HCV) status [152]. South Africa has limited data on HBV and HCV infections in PWIDs, with the latest data from a study that was performed in three South African cities. According to Scheibe et al., HBV and HCV prevalence rates in South African PWIDs are 5% and 55%, respectively [10]. Infection with chronic HBV and HCV causes significant liver-related morbidity and mortality worldwide. However, HCV can be cured by new direct-acting antiviral (DAA) therapies, leading to a sustained viral response. An HBV cure remains a challenge due to persistent covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) in the liver, which is the major barrier to eliminating chronic hepatitis B infection [153]. According to a global systemic review conducted by Degenhardt and colleagues, PWUDs are more likely to have a high HCV burden than other people, with over 50% prevalence estimates among them [8]. Opioids and other drugs of abuse have also been found to increase HBV replication in vitro. Evidence shows that opioid receptors are expressed in the liver, where they are important mediators of liver disease [154,155,156]. Furthermore, it has been established that multiple opioid receptors are expressed by hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), which ultimately contribute to liver fibrosis [154,155,156]. In addition, morphine, heroin, and methamphetamine have been shown to increase HCV replication in vitro [157,158,159]. A recent report by Dr. Blackard’s group from the USA demonstrated that fentanyl increases HCV and HBV replication in Huh7.5JFH1 and HepG2.2.15 hepatocyte cell lines and leads to significant apoptosis of hepatocyte cell lines [88]. Therefore, the abuse of drugs and other substances may ultimately have an impact on viral hepatitis and liver disease progression.14. Alcohol and Viral Hepatitis (HBV and HCV)Globally, HBV, HCV, as well as excessive alcohol use causes liver injury. Since the liver is a primary site for both HBV and HCV replication and ethanol metabolism, the ethanol metabolism is often associated with viral hepatitis. An alcohol-related liver disease accompanied by hepatitis virus accelerates the disease’s progression to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [160]. Existing evidence from the literature reported that alcohol consumption contributes to apoptosis, oxidative stress, immune dysfunction (lower cytotoxic T-cell and helper T-cell activity and decreased cytokine production), increased HCV viral load, and increased HCV quasispecies; however, the mechanisms by which alcohol alters HCV replication and disease are largely unknown [161,162,163]. Studies have reported that a synergistic hepatotoxic effect of alcohol and HCV infection increased the risk of advanced liver disease, the rapid progression of fibrosis, and a higher prevalence of liver cancer (HCC) [164,165]. In vitro studies have also reported an increased viral replication of HCV following the exposure of permissive cells to alcohol [166]. Additionally, individuals who are HBV-infected are at greater risk of fibrosis as a result of alcohol abuse [167], as well as enhancing liver necroinflammation changes in HBsAg-positive patients [168]. A study by Larkin et al. described alcohol consumption to increase HBsAg and viral DNA in transgenic mice [169]. In addition, another study demonstrated increased HBsAg levels in HepG2 cells in the presence of ethanol [170]. Nevertheless, the mechanisms by which alcohol impacts HBV replication and disease are not well studied.15. RecommendationsEven though nyaope is becoming more prevalent through smoking and injections in South Africa, the South African government has not fully embraced the harm reduction that accompanies nyaope use [60]. South Africa has a limited number of harm-reduction programmes, with only the City of Tshwane Municipality sponsoring the Community-Oriented Substance Use Programme (COSUP), which is South Africa’s first publicly funded harm-reduction intervention for unregulated drugs [72,146]. The Ivan Toms Centre for Men’s Health (ITCMH), operating under the Anova Health Institute in Cape Town, provides MSM primary healthcare services on sexual health [11]. These services include HIV testing, antiretroviral therapy, STI diagnosis and treatment, and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) and pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) [11]. In 2012, the institution established an MSM-targeted drug harm-reduction programme, including a needle exchange and without opioid-substitution therapy, funded by the AIDS Fonds, Mainline, the Netherlands, to offer harm-reduction services to MSM who are drug users [11]. Yet, during this period, it was established that 27% of the MSM participants tested positive for antibodies to HCV. This shows that BBV infections continue to predominate in MSM who are also IDUs. Therefore, future research should evaluate the effectiveness of alternative therapies and antiviral medications for treating BBVs among IDUs. As a result, treatment approaches could be identified and treatment outcomes could be improved.Without accessible harm-reduction programmes, PWIDs are at high risk for BBVs (HIV, HBV, and HCV). The coverage of needle, syringe, and opioid substitution therapy (OST) services in South Africa is below the global recommendations, and no hepatitis services currently exist for PWIDs [10], which requires strong intervention for harm reduction in drug users. South Africa is considered to be one of the most endemic countries worldwide, with high rates of SUD, despite the limited data available on BBVs among drug users. Nyaope is a commonly abused drug in many parts, if not all areas, in South Africa, and appears to be the most abused drug among the youth. It continues to cause detrimental effects on the health and well-being of individuals that abuse it. As a result, it is not surprising that injecting nyaope increases the risk of the transmission of BBVs, as with other abused drugs. In addition, nyaope is thought to be exceptionally potent when compared to other substances, with serious health effects and addiction. A worrying component of nyaope mixtures is the presence of ARVs, which are drugs used for the treatment of HIV infection. It is believed that this practice stems from the belief that ARVs can enhance the effects of nyaope. However, the misuse of ARVs in this manner poses significant risks to individuals, as these medications are designed for specific medical purposes and should only be taken under professional guidance. In addition to ARVs, nyaope often contains other substances commonly associated with drug abuse, such as cannabis and heroin. The inclusion of rat poison and detergent further highlights the hazardous nature of this drug. These substances are not intended for human consumption and can have severe toxic effects on the body. It is worth noting that the chemical composition of nyaope is not consistent and can vary over time. The variability of these components adds to the unpredictability and dangers associated with nyaope, making it even more challenging to address from a health and law enforcement perspective. Given how potent nyaope is and how its chemical composition is constantly changing, it is crucial to increase public awareness about its risks and implement effective strategies to combat its production, distribution, and usage. To address the complexities and dangers associated with nyaope and to protect individuals from its detrimental effects, significant effort needs to be made to identify effective prevention and treatment strategies that address the complex social and environmental factors that contribute to viral infections among drug users, such as public health measures, law enforcement actions, and educational campaigns. Hence, more studies of drugs of abuse like nyaope and viral diseases are warranted. Studies, such as in vitro studies, are also essential to evaluate the impact of nyaope on HIV, HBV, and HCV replication and biomarkers of disease progression. In addition, cohort studies of nyaope users to understand the overall burden of HIV, HBV, and HCV, as well as the impact of nyaope use on immune dysfunction and viral levels, as well as the biomarkers of disease progression, are needed. Previous studies have demonstrated that opioids increase HIV and/or HCV replication in vitro and in vivo [88,89,171]. Moreover, higher viral loads have also been associated with increased transmission as well as accelerated disease progression [46,125]. Therefore, more research is required to determine effective ways of preventing viral infections in PWID/UDs. This may involve developing new interventions or assessing existing programs to identify effective ones, such as harm-reduction programmes and OST services, as well as developing vaccination and treatment programs for hepatitis B and C infection.16. ConclusionsThe use of nyaope is on the rise in South Africa, especially among young people, and it has become a growing public health concern. Nyaope continues to cause detrimental effects on the health and well-being of individuals who abuse it. As a result, it is not surprising that injecting nyaope increases the risk of transmission of BBVs, as with other abused drugs. With evidence that opioid receptors are expressed in multiple cell types that are relevant to HIV and/or HBV/HCV pathogenesis, we expect nyaope to interact with opioid receptors as well as cannabinoid receptors. Therefore, it is crucial to examine the interaction between drugs of abuse, such as nyaope, and viral infections, as well as their impact on viral pathogenesis in vitro and in vivo for the development of effective treatment strategies specifically for PWID/UDs.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HEPATITIS D VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Current perspectives of viral hepatitis


Core Tip: Viral hepatitis represents a major danger to public health, and is a globally leading cause of death. In 2016, the World Health Organization released its plan to eliminate viral hepatitis as a public health threat by 2030, alongside a discussion of current gaps and prospects for regional and global eradication of viral hepatitis. Today, treatment is sufficiently able to prevent the disease from reaching advanced phases. Moreover, a better understanding of pathogenesis will prove beneficial in the development of potential treatment strategies targeting infections by viral hepatitis. This review aims to summarize current knowledge on each type of viral hepatitis, together with major innovations.INTRODUCTIONViral hepatitis represents a major danger to public health, and is a globally leading cause of death[1,2]. The five liver-specific viruses: Hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis D virus (HDV), and hepatitis E virus (HEV), each have their own unique epidemiology, structural biology, transmission, endemic patterns, risk of liver complications, and response to antiviral therapies. These viruses represent a significant worldwide public health danger, especially in places where they remains prevalent[3-5]. These are known as “hepatotropic” viruses, and are the causes of the majority of hepatitis in both the pregnant and non-pregnant populations[5]. Global viral hepatitis prevalence is very high, and appears to be continuing to rise over time[5]. Of these viruses, blood-borne hepatitis in particular, including HBV and HCV, is the global cause of significant morbidity and mortality[6].Due to the highly effective prevention measures and treatments available, the elimination of viral hepatitis worldwide represents a realistic goal, and has been endorsed by all member states of the World Health Organization (WHO)[1]. The WHO’s ambitious targets call for a 65% reduction worldwide in hepatitis-related mortality, a 90% reduction in new infections, and access to key treatment services increasing to 80% of the population by 2030[1,2]. In addition to additional measures to increase availability of vaccinations and treatment, there is a need for more emphasis on increasing access to affordable, high-quality diagnostics, if testing is to reach the levels necessary in order to achieve goals related to the elimination of these viruses[1].It is important to collect specific details regarding exposure to viral hepatitis, including travel, food preferences, drug use, and sexual activity[7]. Needlestick injuries can cause transmission of blood-borne pathogens, such as HBV, HCV, and HIV[8]. Viral hepatitis is a leading cause of liver tissue inflammation (hepatitis), and hepatitis has been demonstrated in the long term to lead to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cirrhosis[9]. HBV and HCV are indirectly correlated with carcinogenesis, due to the way they can cause chronic inflammation in organs that have been infected[10]. In addition, the tumor microenvironment contains various immune cells, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts, as well as a number of growth factors, cytokines, and other tumor-secreted molecules that play key roles in the growth, progression, and migration of tumors, and these have a close interrelation with the virus[10]. Within the tumor microenvironment, the presence of T-regulatory cells and B-regulatory cells serves an important purpose in the anti-tumor immune reaction[10]. The immune microenvironments of tumors vary for each type of cancer, and are dependent on viral infection[10]. In cases involving pregnancy, it is vital to consider the mother’s liver health, the influence of pregnancy on the clinical course of the viral infection, and any effects the virus or the liver disease could have on the developing fetus[3]. Although all hepatitis viruses have the potential to harm both mother and child, acute HAV or HEV infections during pregnancy pose the greatest risk to maternal and, consequently, fetal health[3]. On the other hand, the primary risks for HBV, HCV, and HDV are related to the severity of underlying liver disease in the mother, and the risk of HBV or HCV being transmitted from mother to child[3].Viral hepatitis is known for a wide spectrum of clinical presentations, ranging from a benign form that has few or even no symptoms, all the way to acute liver failure or death[11]. In addition, most cases of viral hepatitis during pregnancy are detected through related signs and symptoms (such as fatigue, abdominal discomfort, jaundice, or scleral icterus), or incidentally noted transaminitis on routine lab examinations[7]. Important principles for management of viral hepatitis include high levels of clinical suspicion, medical history reviews, and awareness of risk factors for acquisition of infection[7,12]. Survival rates following liver transplantation (LT) have increased dramatically over time, with significant post-LT survival improvements due to improvements in surgical techniques, peri-operative care, and optimal immunosuppressive therapy, as well as the availability of highly effective antiviral drugs[13]. Hospitalization is necessary for the majority of LT recipients, and this population has a mortality rate of approximately 20%[13]. Optimizing immunosuppression is an important step in reducing the severity of allograft damage when treating post-transplant viral infections, and early initiation of high-potency antiviral therapy can help achieve viral clearance or control[13].Unfortunately, there are still few treatment options available, despite liver disease due to viral hepatitis becoming increasingly common[14]. In addition, managing these kinds of viral hepatitis has significant health-economic costs, and reducing their prevalence requires following prevention measures like vaccination programs, and improving hygienic conditions[4]. Pregnancy and interpregnancy care can offer chances to prevent hepatitis infections and transmission[15].In order for metabolic factors to be identified as HCC risk factors in chronic liver disease patients with infections such as HBV or HCV, there should be strong synergistic interactions between the metabolic factors’ carcinogenic mechanisms and the chronic liver disease[16,17]. As a result, chronic viral hepatitis is a leading global cause of liver-related morbidity and mortality, despite effective treatments being available that can reduce or prevent most patients’ complications[18].The characteristics of hepatitis viruses are shown in Table 1. This review aims to summarize the current knowledge on each type of viral hepatitis, including general information, epidemiology, etiology, mechanism, symptoms, examination, diagnosis, treatment, management, complications, and prognosis, together with major innovations, and detailed information is provided in the following section.Table 1Characteristics of hepatitis viruses
Virus


Hepatitis A


Hepatitis B


Hepatitis C


Hepatitis D


Hepatitis E

FamilyPicornaviridaeHepadnaviridaeFlaviviridaeDeltaviridaeCalciviridaeNucleic acid structurePositive sense, single-stranded RNACircular, double-stranded DNA with single-stranded portionsPositive sense, single-stranded RNANegative-stranded circular RNAPositive sense, single-stranded RNAGenome size (kb)7-93-410-121.7 7-8EnvelopeNoYesYesYesNoEpidemicsYesNoNoNoYesRoute of infectionFecal-oral, sexual, and parenteralBlood, sexual, and parenteralBlood, sexual, and parenteralBlood, sexual, and parenteralFecal-oral, parenteral, and zoonoticExaminationsAnti-HAV IgM in blood and stoolHBs antigenAnti-HCV IgM, anti-HCV IgGAnti-HDV IgM, delta antigenAnti-HEV IgMCourse in pregnancyBenign and self-limitingAcute and chronic infectionsAcute and chronic infectionsRequires HBV coinfection for propagationAcuteRisk of VTProbable and rareYes, 30%, related to maternal VTYes, 3%-10%, related to maternal VTExceptionalYes, 46%Preventing VTAvoid infection by public hygienic measuresAntenatal antiviral therapy; active and passive immunization to neonateReducing maternal VT with therapyReducing HBV VTAvoid infection by public hygienic measuresBreastfeedingYes, safeYes, safeYes, safeYesNot safe in acute phaseInfant follow-upNot neededSerology 3 months after completing vaccination course, usually at age 9 monthsAnti-HCV testing at 12-18 months to clear passively transferred maternal antibodiesNot neededIntensive monitoring of consequences for VT, if occursVaccineYesYesNoNoTwo vaccines are in trialVT: Vertical transmission; HAV: Hepatitis A virus; HBV: Hepatitis B virus; HCV: Hepatitis C virus; HDV: Hepatitis D virus; HEV: Hepatitis E virus.HAVGlobally, HAV is the most common cause of acute viral hepatitis[19]. Ironically, in areas with rapidly improving sanitary conditions, more and more adults lack immunity for HAV from early childhood, and as a result adults lacking this immunity are exposed to risks like symptomatic disease and large society-wide outbreaks[20]. Though hepatitis A has greater rates of spontaneous remission, there have been recent outbreaks attributable to vaccine shortages in dense urban areas with insufficient affordable housing, as well as a lack of access to sanitation, and changes in the epidemiology of viral strains, resulting in more and more hospitalizations and deaths[21].Infection incidence is strongly correlated with low socioeconomic conditions and poor sanitary conditions[19]. A total of 53% of all outbreaks have been traced back to food handlers who were themselves infected, and food contaminated with HAV is responsible for 2%-7% of all HAV outbreaks internationally[22,23]. The extent of liver damage caused by HAV can range from mild illnesses to fulminant hepatic failure, and in fact HAV is responsible for 0.35% of all fulminant liver failure cases[21].HAV transmission generally occurs through ingesting contaminated food or water[24]. Water matrices could prove an important route of HAV transmission even in industrialized countries, despite the lower prevalence than in less industrialized countries and the availability of advanced water management systems in these industrialized countries[24].Acute hepatitis A has a broad clinical spectrum, ranging from mild cases with no noticeable symptoms, to acute liver failure leading to mortality in particularly severe cases[20,25]. Generally, HAV infections are asymptomatic or have only mild symptoms, and the disease ordinarily has a benign course with a spontaneous resolution[26]. In many developing countries, a majority of the population experiences infections during early childhood, without significant symptoms[20]. In addition, typical cases of acute hepatitis can be complicated by intrahepatic and rarer extrahepatic manifestations[26]. It can also present as acute hepatitis during pregnancy, during which it remains self-limiting[5,12].Polyvalent immunoglobulins derived from pooled blood donations can be used for post-exposure prophylaxis, as one aspect of public health management related to hepatitis A[27]. Significant advances in HAV treatment have been developed, with improvements due to vaccination[28]. Preventive vaccines for hepatitis A, that are established as being safe for pregnancy, are recommended for women who are at risk of infection[7]. The post-exposure prophylaxis for hepatitis A is a single dose of immunoglobulin; in the event that immunoglobulin G is unavailable, a vaccination can be administered[7]. In addition, breastfeeding is regarded as safe in mothers with hepatitis A[7]. Based on recent findings, newly designed flavonoid hybrids may show promise as lead compounds for a novel anti-HAV drug candidate[29].In order to limit environmental HAV circulation, developing countries need more effective treatment strategies for water and wastewater[24]. Prevention and hygiene measures to make foodborne virus outbreaks less common should focus on food workers and site of food production[23]. Pivotal strategies, such as proper investigation, surveillance, and reports on foodborne viral illnesses, are necessary for the development of measures to identify the presence and pathogenesis of viral infections with greater accuracy[23].HBVHBV is a virus based on deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), and a member of the Hepadnaviridae family, which comprises ten genotypes (A-J); the virus can cause liver disease and increased HCC risk in those infected, as it replicates within the hepatocytes and interacts with several cellular proteins[30-32]. It constitutes a quiet public health threat worldwide[31]. More specifically, ageing with a chronic HBV infection is becoming an emerging public health priority[33]. In addition, people in prison run a greater risk of preventable mortality from HBV and other diseases, compared to the greater community as a whole[34]. Furthermore, the high prevalence of HIV infections amplifies replication of HBV, predisposes patients to chronicity, and complicates infection management[35]. On the other hand, recipient and donor hepatitis B infections in renal transplants are no longer regarded as relative contraindications[36].Chronic hepatitis B (CHB) viral infections present a major global health threat, in spite of vaccinations and antiviral treatments[37]. As obesity and metabolic syndrome have increased in prevalence in recent years, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has become more common in patients with CHB[37]. Both diseases have the potential to lead to liver fibrosis and even HCC; however, the risk of dual etiology and the outcome of CHB combined with NAFLD have yet to be fully elucidated[37]. In addition, individuals with CHB virus infections who are at substantial risk of HIV infections benefit from pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) using antiviral therapy based on tenofovir[38]. On the other hand, peculiarities related to the course of pediatric CHB could present important medical and social problems in healthcare, despite the presence of modern treatment and prevention protocols[39]. Pathogenetic mechanisms of HBV infections’ development and progression, the existence of occult poorly diagnosed forms, the unfeasibility of complete elimination of the virus, and the specificity of the pediatric immune response pose scientific questions that have yet to be fully resolved[39].HBV is a highly prevalent virus estimated to have infected approximately 300 million people globally, and HBV infections present major global public health issues associated with significant morbidity and mortality; despite the existence of an effective vaccine, HBV remains the world’s seventh leading cause of mortality[35,40-44]. Due to worldwide population aging, HBV infections will become increasingly prevalent in elderly populations[41]. Furthermore, there has also been an increased worldwide prevalence of metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease, both among the general population and among CHB patients[45]. On the other hand, HBV is still the leading HCC risk factor, with a slight decline seen in most Asian countries, which has been attributed largely to HBV vaccinations of newborns, and chronic hepatitis treatment[46]. Approximately 7% of people living with HIV experience HBV infections, though there is substantial regional variation, and a greater prevalence among users of intravenous drugs[47]. HBV diagnoses increased from 2% to 14% between 2015 and 2019, but initiation of treatment increased from less than 1% to only 2%[48].One unfortunate recent trend has been the 2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and its interruption of the overall trend towards the eradication of HBV[49]. During the COVID-19 pandemic, many chronic HBV carriers living in rural areas lost access to healthcare facilities for screening, diagnosis, clinical management, and nucleo(t)side analogue therapy, mainly due to worries about becoming infected with COVID-19, restrictions on movement, and reduced income due to loss of employment[49].Early stages of HBV infection general involve hepatic inflammation[50]. A type of cellular stress called endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress always occurs when unfolded or misfolded proteins accumulate in the ER, exceeding the protein folding capacity[51]. Viral infections represent a risk factor for ER stress, due to the demand for post-HBV-infection rapid viral protein synthesis[51]. The hepatocyte is a cell with a large, well-developed ER, and hepatitis virus infections are widespread population-wide, suggesting that the interaction between hepatitis viruses and ER stress may have some significance for the management of liver diseases[51]. On the other hand, hepatic steatosis may suppress HBV viral activity, which could in turn lead to attenuated liver injury[45]. In contrast, diabetes mellitus, obesity, or other associated comorbidities could potentially increase the risk of adverse liver outcomes[45]. These findings suggest that the components of metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease could potentially have diverse effects on CHB’s clinical manifestations[45].Hepatitis caused by HBV reactivation, while preventable, can also prove serious and potentially fatal[52]. HBV reactivation has most commonly been reported in patients experiencing strong immunosuppressive effects such as chemotherapy, especially patients undergoing rituximab-containing therapy for hematological malignancies, and stem cell transplant patients[52,53]. For patients with inactive and even resolved HBV infection, HBV genomes still persist in the liver[52]. The immune system controls the expression of these silent genomes[52]. When immune cells, most importantly B cells, are suppressed or ablated, this can lead to a seemingly resolved HBV infection being reactivated[52]. A low titer of hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb), or lack of HBsAb entirely, is a risk factor for HBV reactivation[53]. However, HBV reactivation cannot be predicted by HBsAb titers at baseline, or by changes over time[53]. Therefore, clinicians should bear in mind that every immunosuppressive therapy brings with it a risk of reactivation, irrespective of its mode of action[53].Serologic testing is beneficial for diagnosis with molecular testing as indicated to guide hepatitis B management[7]. The primary roles of markers include HCC risk prediction, partial cure risk stratification cure (defined as off-therapy virological control), and functional cure [defined as HBs antigen (HBsAg) seroclearance plus undetectable serum HBV DNA for at least 6 months, which are associated with improved clinical outcomes][43,54]. Viral translational products, such as hepatitis e antigen, quantitative HBsAg, and hepatitis B core-related (HBcr) Ag, can be reduced through treatment that includes nucleos(t)ide analogues (NAs) and pegylated interferon α (peg-IFNα)[54]. These are valuable for defining the disease phase, delineating the endpoints of treatment, and predicting clinical outcomes, including risk of HCC and partial/functional cure[54]. At present, biomarker-based HBV infection detection systems are highly polarized[55]. One is a measurement system that is both fully automated and very sensitive, while the other is a simple system intended for point-of-care testing in areas with limited resources[55]. Recently, a fully automated, novel high-sensitivity HBcrAg assay (iTACT-HBcrAg, cut-off value: 2.1 LogIU/mL) has been developed[55]. It reflects intrahepatic covalently closed circular DNA, as well as serum HBV DNA[55]. This could make it useful as an alternative to HBV DNA for monitoring HBV reactivation and predicting the occurrence of HCC[55]. Even in patients who have undetectable serum HBV DNA or HBsAg loss, HBcrAg could potentially remain detectable[55]. Lower HBcrAg levels are associated with decreased occurrence of HCC in CHB[55]. Therefore, monitoring HBcrAg may prove suitable for determining therapeutic effectiveness, both for approved drugs and for novel drugs currently in development[55]. At present, the international guideline recommendation is anti-HBV prophylaxis for pregnant women who have high viral loads, in order to prevent mother-to-child transmission of HBV[55]. However, the vast majority (> 95%) of individuals infected with HBV live in countries without access to HBV DNA quantification[55]. Consequently, a rapid, easy HBcrAg assay would prove valuable as a point-of-care test[55]. Unfortunately, due to the lack of effect on covalently closed circular DNA, the template of viral transcription, and genome replication, this end point is rarely achieved through the current therapy[43]. At the same time, diagnosis remains below 10% worldwide, in spite of the existence of inexpensive laboratory tests for diagnosis and management, established decades ago[56]. Novel assays that provide more flexible approaches to determining patient health status have been developed with the goal of improving linkage to care[56].At present, HBV infection management relies on constant and appropriate monitoring of viral activity, the progression of the disease, and the treatment response[57]. Quantitation of HBV core Ab (qAnti-HBc) can serve as a new non-invasive biomarker, which can help address multiple diagnostic issues[57]. It has been demonstrated to have meaningful correlations with phases of infection, the level of hepatic inflammation and fibrosis, exacerbation during chronic infections, and the presence of occult infections[57]. Further, qAnti-HBc levels have been recognized as being predictive of spontaneous or therapy-induced seroclearance of hepatitis B e-Ag (HBeAg) and HBsAg, relapse after therapy cessation, re-infection after LT, and viral reactivation upon immunosuppression[57]. However, qAnti-HBc should not be treated as a single “one size fits all” diagnostic test, and significant improvements to its diagnostic and prognostic value can be achieved by combining it with other diagnostic biomarkers like HBV DNA, HBeAg, quantitative HBsAg, and HBsAb[57]. Additionally, commercial qAnti-HBc diagnostic kits still need improved availability[57].Early hepatic fibrosis diagnosis is a critical part of controlling the disease’s progression and decreasing the burden of end-stage liver cancer[50]. Fibrosis staging, through the current gold standard of liver biopsy, leads to improved patient outcomes, but brings with it an invasive clinical procedure, with post-procedural complications that can be unpleasant[50]. Routine blood test markers have promise as a diagnostic, for a biopsy-free means of early liver disease detection[50]. Many candidate routine blood test markers that have gone through phases of biomarker validation show much promise, but at present, their limitations include issues like predictive ability being restricted to only a few stages of fibrosis[50].New viral biomarkers (HBV RNA, hepatitis B core Ag, small, middle, large HBs isoforms) are currently making their way through validation steps in clinical studies, while immunological biomarkers effectively do not exist outside of clinical assays for Abs to HBs, HBc, and HBe[58].To control the progression of disease and decrease end-stage liver cancer burden, timely clinical management is vital[30,50]. Crucially, properly providing HBV birth-dose vaccinations, treating of chronic viral hepatitis, and providing harm reduction services makes risk factors both preventable and manageable[59]. In addition, HBV reactivation episodes are generally preventable, and the majority of HBV reactivation cases are manageable[60,61]. Furthermore, HCC can be detected, and with the appropriate training of medical personnel, curative management is possible if it is detected at an early stage, even in countries with limited resources, suggesting the need for effective screening and surveillance programs with recall policies[59]. Knowledge of the complete patient HBV serostatus is a key factor when deciding whether to pursue treatment, prophylaxis, or a pre-emptive approach[62]. Guidelines published in recent years encourage treatment with high barrier molecules in all chronic HBV patients, but long-lasting prophylaxis for patients who have inactive or resolved infections[62]. To date, there remain no drugs capable of curing hepatitis B beyond viral suppression; however, antiviral drugs targeting HBV (immunomodulatory therapies and gene silencing technologies) show promise as new approaches to hopefully eradicate this virus[28].Currently available treatments are rarely able to cure CHB[63]. On the other hand, there has been remarkable progress in identifying new CHB treatment targets, being developed in the hopes of functionally curing patients who otherwise would need NA treatment for the rest of their lives[58]. Many of these new investigational therapies either target the immune system directly, or show promise in indirect impacts to immunity by modulating the viral lifecycle and Ag production[58].The therapy available today is effective for viral suppression, but only on-treatment, and not off-treatment[43]. Guidelines currently recommend HBV screenings for any patients expected to undergo immunosuppressive therapy[64]. Following this, prophylactic antiviral therapy is to be administered to patients who test positive for HBsAg[52]. For patients who have resolved HBV infections, there are two main approaches[52]. The first of these is preemptive therapy guided by serial HBV DNA monitoring, and immediate antiviral therapy treatment once the HBV DNA can be detected[52]. The second approach is prophylactic antiviral therapy, particularly for patients who are undergoing high-risk therapies, especially anti-cluster of differentiation 20 monoclonal Ab or hematopoietic stem cell transplants[52]. The antivirals of choice are entecavir and tenofovir[52]. Though evidence is limited when it comes to guiding the optimal preventive measures, antiviral prophylaxis is recommended for HBsAg-positive patients who are undergoing novel treatments, including bruton tyrosine kinase inhibitors, B-cell lymphoma 2 inhibitors, and chimeric antigen receptor-T cell therapy[52].Though NAs are commonly used as HBV infection treatments, they cannot hope to eradicate the virus, and the duration of treatment can prove to be lifelong if the endpoint for it is set at HBsAg seroclearance[65]. One proposed alternative is finite NA therapy without the requirement of HBsAg seroclearance, to allow patients with sustained undetectable HBV viremia for two to three years to cease treatment[65]. Unfortunately, NA withdrawal is almost inevitably followed by the reactivation of viral replication[65]. HBV reactivation might facilitate HBsAg seroclearance in some patients, but it could also cause serious acute flare-ups among a certain percentage of patients[65]. There are various factors surrounding the host, virus, and treatment that can complicate the occurrence and consequences of NA withdrawal flare-ups[65]. To ensure patient safety, it is crucial to accurately predict risks for severe flare-ups following cessation of NA[65]. On the other hand, NA therapy leads to low rates of recurrence and excellent outcomes after LT, both with and without hepatitis B immunoglobulin[13,66]. Given that tenofovir, which is one NA, is a potent inhibitor of HBV, providing PrEP to HBV patients is effectively tantamount to treatment of the HBV infection[38]. However, unknown risks of HBV reactivation, hepatitis, and acute liver failure during periods of antiviral cessation can cause some clinicians to be reluctant to initiate PrEP in chronic HBV patients[38]. Emerging data on antiviral cessation’s risks and benefits in chronic HBV patients suggest that it is safe to initiate PrEP, regardless of risks associated with non-adherence or discontinuation[38]. CHB patients who stop PrEP should be closely monitored for reactivation of HBV and flare-ups of hepatitis after ceasing administration of antiviral drugs[38].HBV reactivation risk assessments are based on patient serological status and the immunosuppressive drug regimen planned[64]. For patients considered low-risk for HBV reactivation, management is a matter of serological monitoring for HBV reactivation, and, in the event of HBV reactivation, immediate preemptive antiviral therapy[64]. For patients considered intermediate- or high-risk for HBV reactivation, antiviral prophylaxis is to be initiated alongside immunosuppressive therapy, continuing for up to 18 months following termination of the immunosuppressive regimen[64,67]. Patients with past HBV infections run less of a risk of HBV reactivation compared to patients with chronic HBV infections, and antiviral prophylaxis could be initiated or patients could be monitored with the intent to initiate antiviral therapy on demand[67]. Patient management can also be improved through screening and management programs, and decision support tools based on these guidelines[64].HBV-associated kidney disease (polyarteritis nodosa or membranous nephropathy) may necessitate immunosuppression when there is evidence of severe immune-mediated injury, weighed against potential viral activation risks[68]. Most HBV antiviral agents require dose adjustments for chronic kidney disease (CKD) patients, or end-stage kidney disease patients who need dialysis, and drug-drug interactions must be carefully evaluated in kidney transplant patients[68]. On the other hand, dental management in active hepatitis B consists of stabilizing patients until their active liver infections subside, with any dental treatment to be deferred until after recovery[69].HBV transmissions can be prevented through vaccination; significant advances in HBV treatment have developed, and vaccination rates have improved[2,28]. There are effective universal vaccination programs, but they generally focus on younger populations, leaving the elderly population at a continued risk of a greater disease burden[41]. On the other hand, hepatitis B is the most prevalent form of the virus, and it is one of the targets of the ante-natal screening program[5,7]. Preventive vaccines for hepatitis B, for which pregnancy-safety has been established, are recommended for women who are at risk of infection[7]. In pregnant women who have active hepatitis B and an elevated viral load (> 200000 IU/mL) during the third trimester, antiviral tenofovir disoproxil fumarate treatment is recommended as prophylaxis against vertical transmission[5,7]. Neonates exposed to hepatitis B at birth should be given immunoglobulin G and a monovalent birth dose vaccine within 12 h, followed by a complete three-dosage vaccine series[5,7]. According to a report published by the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region, regional hepatitis B vaccination coverage for infants was 82% for the third dose and 33% for the timely birth dose, as of 2019[48].CHB can lead progressively to cirrhosis of the liver, an independent HCC risk factor[30,32]. Unlike in Western countries, chronic HBV infection is the main HCC etiology in many Asian countries other than Japan[70]. Recent, there has been mounting evidence pointing to the increasing importance of RNA methylation (m6A modification) in viral replication, immune escape, and carcinogenesis[32]. For patients with past HBV exposure who are undergoing immunosuppressive therapy, HBV reactivation represents a complication that could potentially prove fatal[64]. It can occur both in patients with chronic HBV infections, and in patients who have resolved HBV infections[64].The available data provide evidence that, as a result of both direct and indirect mechanisms that promote hepatocarcinogenesis, HBV infection is associated with risks of developing HCC, with or without underlying cirrhosis of the liver[30]. There has been extensive continuous study of HBV-HCC’s molecular profile; it is known to be the result of altered molecular pathways, modifying the microenvironment and causing damage to the DNA[30]. HBV produces HBx, a protein that plays a key role in the oncogenetic process[30]. Furthermore, despite the obligatory dependence of HDV on HBV, HBV-HCC’s molecular profile has recently been discerned from that of HDV-HCC[30].HBV is a common infection among HIV-positive people, due to the shared viral transmission methods[71]. Compared to individuals who have only HBV infections, people coinfected with both HIV and HBV experience accelerated liver disease progression, and face increased risks of HCC, liver-related mortality, and all-cause mortality[71]. Therefore, it is crucial for people with HIV to undergo HBV screenings and appropriate treatment[71]. On the other hand, acute HBV flare-ups following the start of antiretroviral HIV therapy have been reported in 20%-25% of coinfected cases, of whom only 1%-5% go on to develop clinical hepatitis[72]. This serves to underscore the significance of early recognition and management of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome-HBV flares, after antiretroviral therapy is initiated in coinfected patients[72]. In addition to this, antiretroviral therapy should continue to be administered, directed against both viruses[72].HBV can lead to serious hepatic diseases, including cirrhosis, fulminant hepatitis, and HCC, and is a significant cause of mortality worldwide[2,40,43]. In addition, early studies on the natural history of HIV/HBV coinfection have shown that CHB progresses more rapidly in coinfected patients than in HBV-monoinfected patients, leading to HCC and other end-stage liver disease complications[47]. Furthermore, cancer patients with HBV infections face a high viral reactivation risk following cancer treatment[73]. On the other hand, there have been reports of good clinical outcomes following transplants from HBV-infected donors, because of the effectiveness and high tolerance levels of the treatments[66]. In summary, antiviral drugs can control the burden of advanced liver disease due to HBV, but short-term eradication remains unfeasible[74,75].HCVHCV is the sole member of the genus Hepacivirus within the Flaviviridae family, encoding a single-stranded positive-sense RNA genome that translates into a single large polypeptide, which is then proteolytically processed to yield the individual viral proteins, all of which are crucial for optimal infection by the virus[76]. HCV infection is a global health problem that can result in cirrhosis, HCC, or even death[2,59,77]. Hepatitis C infections are transmitted through blood[7]. It is often found as a chronic infection, in both the pregnant and non-pregnant populations[5,12]. Pregnant women can transmit HCV to the infant in utero or during the peripartum period; infection during pregnancy is associated with increased adverse fetal outcome risks, including restricted fetal growth and low birth weights[78]. In endemic areas, HCV/HBV coinfections are common, and coinfected patients run a greater risk of developing HCC, liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, and other liver diseases[79].At the start of 2020, the estimated number of HCV infections worldwide was 56.8 million: A reduction compared to 2015[80]. Epidemiological data from the United States shows an increasing prevalence of hepatitis C in women of reproductive age; it is estimated that 1%-4% of pregnant women are infected with HCV, which in turn presents a transmission risk from mother to infant of approximately 5%[7,78]. In addition, chronic hepatitis C (CHC) is believed to affect some 2.4 million people[76]. However, HCV infections are 3- to 20-fold more prevalent among patients with severe mental illnesses, such as major depressive disorder, personality disorder, bipolar disorder, or schizophrenia, compared to populations without these illnesses[77]. It is also well established that HCV infections are disproportionately more common among prisoners than among the general population[81].HCV remains prevalent among users of intravenous drugs, and transmission is generally associated with risk behaviors of injection[82]. Therefore, it appears to be prevalent among some blood donor populations, with high rates of HCV coinfection[5]. It has high rates of mother-to-child-transmission, but because it causes minimal or even no illness in infected infants, there is no need for antenatal screening[5].Type-I IFN and other forms of cellular innate immunity will thwart the replication of viruses and other pathogens, forming the basis for use of conjugated IFNα in CHC management[76]. HCV suppresses this form of immunity as a countermeasure, through the enlistment of various gene products such as HCV protease(s), the main role of which is processing the large viral polyprotein into individual proteins with specific functions[76].In HCV/HBV coinfections, HCV predominates, and suppresses replication of HBV[79]. The HCV core proteins and the IFN activated by HCV serve to suppress HBV[79]. Immunosuppression has also been observed in patients coinfected with HCV and HBV[79]. Decreased HCV-neutralizing antibody response and circulation of Th1-like T follicular helper cells is seen in patients coinfected with HCV and HBV[79].Serologic testing can assist with diagnoses, using molecular testing as indicated in order to guide hepatitis management C[7]. However, due to insidious progression and the lack of any significant early-stage clinical symptoms, CHC is often diagnosed only after cirrhosis and HCC develop[83].Progress toward curing HCV has been slow ever since it was discovered in 1989, and treatment options were previously based on peg-IFNα, which is associated with adverse events of a neuropsychiatric nature; consequently, this led patients with severe mental illness to be excluded from HCV treatment, elimination programs, and clinical trials[77,84]. However, there have been significant advances in HCV treatment, including the advent of curative therapies[28,84,85]. Since 2014, the approval of safe, well-tolerated oral direct-acting antiviral (DAA) agents has led to a paradigm shift in the treatment of HCV infections, and these DAAs can even eradicate HCV infections. For the first-choice HCV therapy, recent guidelines recommend pan-genotypic drugs (i.e., drugs effective across all HCV genotypes)[2,77,85-89]. DAA regimens promise cured HCV with 8-12 wk of a well-tolerated, once-daily therapy[88]. The high effectiveness and low drug resistance of DAAs have made a CHC cure possible, leading the WHO to propose a program for the global elimination of viral hepatitis[83,90]. Numerous countries have adopted initiatives to eliminate HCV, to the extent that the elimination of HCV is now a matter of healthcare delivery[85,90]. DAA therapy for post-LT recurrent hepatitis C infections is associated with a sustained virological response (SVR) of nearly 100%, regardless of genotype[13]. In addition, this therapy is feasible for patients who have CKD or end-stage kidney disease requiring dialysis, and has high cure rates with no need for dose adjustments[68,87,89]. DAA therapy alone can treat HCV-associated cryoglobulinemic glomerulonephritis, while concurrent antiviral and immunosuppressive therapy is necessary in cases involving severe, organ-threatening manifestations of cryoglobulinemia[68]. On the other hand, despite the high rate of successful HCV eradication, the risk of liver-related events remains even after the HCV cure, such as HCC, which is the major complication of HCV infections; patients at risk of HCC should be placed under continuous HCC surveillance[89]. DAA agents have been safely administered in hematological settings[62]. They should be considered for use as a first-line single treatment in indolent lymphomas, combined with chemotherapy in aggressive cases[62]. Treating active pediatric HCV infections (HCV-RNA positive) is now simple and straightforward, as various DAA regimens have been approved for children above three years of age[91]. Screening for hepatitis C during pregnancy, and the subsequent management thereof, remains an unsettled matter, but the introduction of DAA drugs could be revolutionary if their safety during pregnancy can be established[5,7]. Breastfeeding is also regarded as safe for women with hepatitis C[7].Regarding DAA regimens, real-life studies suggest that the SVR of sofosbuvir (SOF)/daclatasvir (DCV) is acceptable, and that these can be used for the successful management of HCV[92]. Nonetheless, utilization of SOF/DCV has been limited by the longer duration of treatment in genotype-3 patients, as well as the need for ribavirin (RBV) in treatment-experienced patients, which leads to greater odds of adverse effects[92]. DCV is likely to remain in therapeutic use as an option for resource-limited-setting management of genotype-1, genotype-2, and genotype-4 patients, while genotype-3 patients are more likely to benefit from RBV-free DAA combinations such as a 12-wk regimen of velpatasvir (VEL)/SOF, or an 8-wk regimen of glecaprevir/pibrentasvir (GLE/PIB)[92]. In 98% of patients, GLE/PIB, VEL/SOF, and other DAA combination therapies have been found to succeed in eradicating the virus, even in cases where previous treatments had failed or where there are resistance-associated substitutions[84,92,93]. There is currently debate focusing on hepatitis C, and expectations for use of the newly approved HCV pan-genotypic once-daily oral DAAs, GLE/PIB, and SOF/VEL/voxilaprevir[93]. On the other hand, management of difficult-to-cure HCV patients has included individuals who had failed prior DAAs, intravenous drug users, and patients with decompensated cirrhosis or renal insufficiency[93].Adverse events during DAA treatment are rare or mild, and patients who have comorbidities such as compensated cirrhosis are generally eligible for treatment[84]. However, even after retreatment, a small percentage of patients fail to eradicate the virus[84]. This failure is usually mainly due to NS5A P32 deletion mutants emerging after initial DAA therapy in genotype-1b patients, though the reason for failure remains unknown for some patients[84]. In these patients, alternative therapies such as SOF plus RBV, that do not rely on NS5A inhibitors, can be attempted[84]. Scaled-up treatment efforts present a challenge, and part of the issue is that many viral carriers are simply not aware that they are infected[84]. This can result in irreversible long-term liver damage, and if patients are not diagnosed in time, they could go on to develop HCC or liver failure even after the virus is eliminated[84]. DAA therapy is partially offset by the increasing abuse of intravenous drugs[75]. On the other hand, DAA therapy must be personalized for decompensated patients, with consideration given to current and proposed guidelines of associations such as the European Association for the Study of the Liver, or the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases[94].In HCV/HBV coinfections, both viruses interact in the liver; treating these coinfections is genotype-based and complex, due to interactions between the viruses[79]. Treatment of HCV-dominant cases uses DAA drugs and peg-IFN plus RBV, with continuous monitoring of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT)[79]. Treatment of the less-common HBV-dominant cases uses peg-IFN and NUC, with monitoring of AST and ALT[79]. The SVR rate in HCV/HBV coinfections is higher than for monoinfections when treated with DAA drugs, but there is a risk that HBV could reactivate during or after therapy[79]. Reactivation is less common in patients treated with DAA drugs than in patients treated with peg-IFN plus RBV[79]. HBcrAg, HBV DNA, HBV pregenomic RNA, and other HBV biomarkers are not effective for predicting HBV reactivation; only the HBsAg titer serves as an effective biomarker for HBV reactivation[79]. HCV can also be reactive, but has only been seen in very rare instances in which HBV was present and treated first[79]. In addition, much like HBV, HCV-infected cancer patients run a high risk of viral reactivation following cancer treatment[73]. However, there remains very little data regarding HCV reactivation in cancer patients who have been treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors and other newer anticancer drugs[73].As of this writing, a CHC vaccine remains under study[83]. Therefore, minimizing sources of infections is an important step toward eliminating CHC beyond cutting off transmission routes, which would require the screening, diagnosis, and treatment of as much of the population as possible[83]. Hospital-based screening strategies have proven cost-effective in CHC screening management, as reported both domestically and internationally[83]. In addition, LT is the only ultimate solution warranted for HCV-induced decompensated cirrhosis[94]. On the other hand, for CKD patients, HCV infections have adverse liver, kidney, and cardiovascular consequences, including for patients undergoing dialysis therapy or who have kidney transplants[95].HDVHDV, or hepatitis delta virus, is the smallest virus able to causing disease in humans[96]. HDV was discovered in 1977 and represents a significant cause of mortality worldwide; it is the most severe form of chronic hepatitis, with rapid development of cirrhosis, hepatic failure, and HCC[40,97-100]. HDV infections in humans require establishment of hepatitis B, with infection replication and propagation relying on HBsAg and host cellular machinery[40,96,99-101].Hepatitis D is generally encountered as a chronic infection in both the pregnant and non-pregnant populations[5,12]. The distinctive clinical characteristic of chronic hepatitis D (CHD) in endemic countries, observed in Europe in the 1980s, are accelerated progression to cirrhosis and HCC[102].Compared to chronic HBV monoinfections, HDV accelerates liver fibrosis, increases HCC risk, and increases the pace of hepatic decompensation[99]. Therefore, coinfection with both HBV and HDV often results in increased disease severity compared to HBV on its own, with greater likelihoods of cirrhosis, liver failure, and HCC[40,96]. In addition, there are distinct clinical courses for hepatitis D coinfections and superinfections; the latter is more likely to result in chronic infection[11]. On the other hand, HDV infections have been found to increase hepatic decompensation risk and HCC risk among patients who are coinfected with HIV and HBV[103].HDV is highly prevalent, infecting an estimated 12-72 million people worldwide[40]. In addition, chronic HDV infections affect approximately 12 million people worldwide[101]. However, there is only limited data regarding the prevalence, determinants, and outcomes of HDV infections for people who are coinfected with HIV and HBV[103].The recommendation from the Chronic Liver Disease Foundation is that all HBsAg-positive patients should be screened for HDC[99]. Initial screenings should use an assay to detect Ab generated against HDV, and patients who test positive for anti-HDV immunoglobulin G Ab should then undergo quantitative testing for HDV RNA[99]. At present, the gold standard for staging of this rapidly progressive and particularly severe variety of CHD remains a liver biopsy[100]. On the other hand, there remains an unmet need for clinical CHD infection monitoring for managing progressive disease, as a result of which there is ongoing investigation into the utility of non-invasive fibrosis markers in hepatitis D[100].Despite recent progress in this realm, the treatment options that are currently approved remain very limited, in terms of both availability and efficacy; some patients are non-responders to these existing therapies, and in most cases, currently available drugs are unable to cure HDV[96,101,102]. As a result, HDV management presents a challenge for physicians, alongside the urgent necessity of new drugs development[96,101].HDV still tends to be underdiagnosed, with no standardized management having been developed to date[97]. Though alternative treatments have been developed, peg-IFNα seems likely to continue playing an important role in hepatitis D management, either on its own or in combination[104]. Peg-IFNα has been available for 30 years now, and is recommended by guidelines, though not approved, with low efficacy and poor tolerability; the result is sustained virologic response in no more than 25% of patients[98,101,103-105].Among the new treatment strategies currently being clinically evaluated, the entry inhibitor bulevirtide (BLV) is the only one thus far to have received conditional European Medicines Agency approval. Approval was granted in July 2020, for a 2 mg daily dose to treat adult patients with compensated CHD[105]. BLV has successfully been used as a long-term monotherapy to treat advanced compensated cirrhosis patients[105]. Until new anti-HBV and anti-HDV drugs eventually become available for combination studies, BLV treatment remains the only available anti-HDV therapeutic option that could improve long-term prognoses in difficult-to-manage CHD patients[105].Liver decompensation, HCC, and other complications can impact the survival of HBV patients, and concurrent HDV infections lead to worse courses of disease[30]. The hepatitis D disease burden appears roughly 10-20 years after infection[9]. The most severe form of viral hepatitis is CHD, which is characterized by causing the largest risk increases for cirrhosis and HCC[101,105]. To date, there is only limited data regarding HDV’s epidemiology, natural history, and treatment for patients coinfected with HIV and HBV[103]. There is still a need for further research to fill in knowledge gaps, for improved management of HDV coinfections in cases involving HIV/HBV coinfections[28].HEVHEV, the causative agent of hepatitis E, is a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA virus[106,107]. This virus is part of the genus Orthohepevirus in the family Hepeviridae, which has four major genotypes considered closely human-related[106,108]. Genotypes 1 and 2 of HEV exclusively infect humans, through fecal-oral transmission, leading to acute, self-limited hepatitis[107,109]. Genotypes 3 and 4 are harbored in a broad variety of animal species around the world, and can be transmitted zoonotically to humans by means of fecal matter, direct contact, or ingestion of contaminated meat products; these genotypes primarily affect immunosuppressed populations, leading to chronic HEV infections[106,107,109-112]. HEV infection has distinct features, but these vary by both genotype and geographical region[110]. Today, it is considered a threat to worldwide health, in developing and industrialized countries alike[113]. Studies have increasingly noted that HEV could be classified as a re-emerging virus in developed countries, and that tracking incident case numbers (i.e., number of new acute infections) would be valuable for public health[9,114,115]. HEV generally affects younger populations and is self-limiting, but it can also develop into severe illness, particularly among adults and pregnant women, or as a chronic infection in immunocompromised patients, especially recipients of solid organ transplants[9,109-111,113,115-117]. Epidemics caused specifically by genotype 1 of HEV (but not any other genotype of Orthohepevirus A) demonstrate an adverse relationship with pregnancy in humans[108]. At present, this association’s complex pathogenesis is not well understood[108]. It is conceivable that there are multiple factors at play in the severe liver disease experienced by pregnant women, including infection and damage to the maternal-fetal interface caused by HEV genotype 1, severe fetal/neonatal hepatitis caused by vertical transmission of HEV to the fetus, and viral replication promoted by a diverse combination of viral and hormone-related immune dysfunctions in pregnant women[108].Despite WHO estimates suggesting annual HEV infection numbers around 20 million people, its epidemiology remains unclear[109]. The disease is associated with higher prevalence, and lower morbidity and mortality[5,110,111,113,117]. However, infections can be severe in pregnant women: it is associated mortality of as much as 30% during the third trimester, with special attention needed in endemic areas[5,113].HEV is mainly transmitted by means of the fecal-oral route (ingestion of tainted water or food), through contact with infected animals and/or raw meat products from these animals, and through blood transfusions[5,7,11,107,113,115]. Some animals are natural HEV reservoirs, including pigs, wild boars, sheep, goats, rabbits, camels, and rats; as a result, people who come into close contact with these animals face an increased risk of contracting HEV[115]. Until fairly recently, HEV was regarded as being the main cause of acute hepatitis epidemics in developing regions, due to drinking water supplies being contaminated with human fecal matter[112,114]. However, there has been a paradigm shift in the past several years in the general understanding of HEV’s epidemiology and clinical features[118]. In the past, HEV was described as an acute form of hepatitis associated with waterborne outbreaks in areas with poor sanitation, but today, it is known to be endemic even in certain industrialized areas, including some regions of Europe, and is considered likely to be zoonotic in origin[112,118].Initially, HEV was believed to exclusively lead to acute hepatitis[25,115]. However, HEV infections can also cause chronic hepatitis, and even extrahepatic manifestations like neurological and renal diseases; in fact, it is the world’s most common cause of acute viral hepatitis[112]. The severity of the disease may also be affected by altered immune status, hormonal levels, and viral factors[113]. HEV infections during pregnancy are associated with high rates of preterm labor, as well as vertical transmission[113]. In 2000, an association was discovered between preceding HEV infection and Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS), though HEV-associated GBS remains poorly understood[119]. In the Netherlands, 5% of GBS patients had a preceding acute HEV infection; in Bangladesh, where HEV is endemic, a higher rate of 11% was found[119]. The in-serum presence of antiganglioside GM1 or GM2 antibodies in some HEV-associated GBS patients would suggest that HEV infections could trigger GBS through the activation of an autoimmune response that mistakenly aims to destroy myelin or axon[119]. There is no obvious difference between management of HEV-associated and non-HEV-associated GBS[119].To date, diagnosis and prevention continue to be difficult in various clinical settings[109]. At present, HEV infections are diagnosed through measurement of anti-HEV Ab, HEV RNA, or viral capsid Ag in blood or stool[112]. Preventative efforts are necessary as a key part of managing this disease, to reduce overall incidence of both acute and chronic hepatitis E, in both non-endemic and endemic countries[115]. Post-HEV-infection management is multidisciplinary, requiring close monitoring for development and management of acute liver failure[108]. There is still no completely defined optimal therapy for hepatitis E virus in transplantation[66]. Acute hepatitis E does not require any specific treatment, as it is generally self-limiting[112]. However, due to the existing risk of chronic HEV infections, immunocompromised patients should undergo serum HEV-RNA screenings in the event of any signs or symptoms that suggest[62]. In addition, management of immunocompromised individuals involves lowered immunosuppressive drug dosages, and/or treatment with RBV, an antiviral agent[62,112]. It remains the only specific treatment currently recommended for HEV infection, as it is efficient in most, though not all cases[120].Management of HEV-associated GBS consists largely of supportive therapy and immunotherapy[119]. Most reported cases used intravenous immunoglobulin or plasma exchange, which is the main clinical treatment strategy for HEV-associated GBS[119]. However, a key question in need of further investigation is whether antiviral therapy could serve as an additional strategy beyond the routine therapy, to help reduce the course of disease[119]. The expert commentary for HEV genotype-1 or genotype-2 infections during pregnancy is to administer mainly supportive treatment, with diligent monitoring and intensive care[110]. The literature available does not endorse therapeutic termination of pregnancy[110]. Early LT should be considered a possibility for these patients, though LT indications and timing remain controversial[110]. Significant advances in HEV treatment have been developed, and vaccination rates have improved[28]. There is a recombinant HEV vaccine, but as of this writing only China and Pakistan have approved it for use and commercial availability[5,112,115]. On the other hand, there is currently no established treatment available for HEV in pregnant women[12,113].Regarding prognosis, chronic HEV infections can exist and rapidly progress to liver fibrosis, liver cirrhosis, and decompensation in immunosuppressed patients, including recipients of solid organ transplants[111,117]. In addition, genotype-1 or genotype-2 HEV infections during pregnancy, especially during the third trimester, can develop into severe illness and fulminant liver failure; likewise, there have been reports of poor outcomes for both mothers and fetuses[110].MAJOR INNOVATIONSThere have been several major innovations related to this topic brought about by recent research. First, clinicopathological studies have demonstrated that HAV is primarily the cause of acute infections, and this is, to a certain extent, associated with HCC[121]. Regarding HBV, activation of the Stat3 gene is an essential component in mice models for the onset of hepatic inflammation, and in chronic carriers of HBV, it serves as a novel early-stage immune activation indicator[122]. Additionally, HBV X protein gene mutations have a strong association with HCC incidence[121]. Consequently, one potential innovation for accelerating diagnostics and therapy could be mapping the microRNA (miRNA) responsive to HBV and HBV-specific proteins, including HBV X protein, to potentially aid against infections and associated diseases[123]. Transcription of HBV’s covalently closed circular DNA is subject to dual regulation, both by viral proteins and host factors[124]. This miRNA can regulate target genes’ expression at the post-transcriptional level, thus potentially playing a crucial role in these pathologies[123,124]. More specifically, miR-3188 is a key miRNA, which targets the host protein Bcl-2 to regulate transcription of HBV[124]. This realization provides further insight into how covalently closed circular DNA transcription is regulated, implying new anti-HBV treatment targets[124]. Another study found that the interferon pathway is regulated by the sterol regulatory element-binding protein cleavage-activating protein (SCAP), through the sterol regulatory element-binding protein, and that the HBV lifecycle is affected by this[125]. In addition, SCAP deficiency contributes to suppressing HBV by activating IFN and expressing IFN-stimulated genes within cells[125]. Therefore, given that SCAP involves regulating HBV infections, these results could prove valuable in the development of novel antiviral approaches to treating HBV[125]. For HCV, HCV core protein expression contributes to the accumulation of hepatocellular lipids, which in turn promotes tumorigenesis[121]. For HDV, the Janus kinase 1 gene may prove to be a key host factor for viral replication, as well as a potential new antiviral treatment target[126]. As for HEV, there were enhanced surveillance and molecular characterization studies performed in Japan from 2014 through 2021, revealing that 3a and 3b were the most prevalent genotypes[127]. In addition, there have been more and more chronic infections of late, particularly in patients who are immunocompromised and in patients who have received organ transplants, which could lead to increased risk of progressing to cirrhosis and onset of HCC[121]. Finally, successful implementation of telementorship across both high and low-to-middle-income countries could lead to improved provider knowledge and experience when it comes to managing viral hepatitis[128]. Telementorship presents a valuable opportunity to further expand upon existing experience, to provide support for non-specialist healthcare workers and to work toward eliminate viral hepatitis[128].CONCLUSIONIn 2016, the WHO released a plan to eliminate viral hepatitis as a public health threat by 2030, and existing gaps and prospects for both regional and worldwide eradication of viral hepatitis were discussed in light of the WHO roadmap to that point[94,123]. Today, patients can be sufficiently treated before the disease advances to a more progressed phase, but the biggest challenge remains linking patients to care and therapy. However, future therapies must be extremely safe, and ideally limit the required treatment period. In addition, a better understanding of the pathogenesis will help in developing potential treatment strategies targeting viral hepatitis infections.


Title: An overview of Triple infection with Hepatitis B, C and D viruses

IntroductionHepatitis is a Latin word which means inflammation of liver. At the present time viral hepatitis is a major health problem worldwide, particularly in Asian countries [1]. Hepatitis is caused by different hepatic viruses and it leads to liver related morbidity [2-4]. Mostly hepatic infection is caused by single hepatic virus but sometime infection with multiple viruses may occur and it leads to different management problems. These different problems include higher incidence of morbidity and mortality [5].As hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis D virus (HDV) are transmitted via similar routes that is through blood or blood products so as a result, dual infection and even triple infection can occur in some patients [1,6-10] at the same time. A condition in which all three viruses (Hepatitis B, C and D) occur together in the same patient is called Triple infection [1].Viral hepatitis is one of the major health issues these days [11,12]. HBV is a partially double stranded, enveloped DNA virus that belongs to the Hepadnaviridae family and Orthohepadnavirus genus. Its size ranges from 40 to 42 nm, replicates in the liver and causes hepatic abnormalities [13,14]. It damages liver through immune mediated mechanisms [15,16]. HBV is the 9th leading cause of death worldwide. There are about 400 million people worldwide who are HCV carriers [17]. It causes cirrhosis, liver failure and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [18]. Annually one million people die due to HBV [19,20]. It has worldwide distribution and is also well documented in Pakistan [21,22].HCV is a single stranded RNA, enveloped virus that belongs to Flaviviridae family [23]. More than 170 million people are infected with HCV in the world [24]. Like HBV, it replicates in the liver and causes liver abnormalities. Like HBV, it also leads to many serious complications including cirrhosis, liver injury and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [25,26]. These two (HBV and HCV) are the main causes of chronic hepatitis [2,4]. HBV and HCV infection are common in those areas where these two viruses are endemic [27-31].Hepatitis D virus (HDV) or delta virus is a defective virus. It requires the help of another virus that is hepatitis B virus for its multiplication. It always occur with HBV either in the form of co-infection or super-infection. It is very rare but most severe form of the viral hepatitis [32]. This virus cannot replicate or multiply in the absence of HBV [9]. So we can say that HDV is the result of HBV [33,34]. Worldwide 15 million people positive for hepatitis B are also infected with hepatitis D [35]. Like HBV and HCV, it also plays a significant role in liver abnormalities. It also has oncogenic abnormalities [36,37].Literature SearchEpidemiology of triple viral infectionCases of triple viral infections and multiple viral infections had been reported from different regions of the world [5,10,38,39]. Mongolia is a country which is highly endemic for triple hepatitis viruses (with HBV, HCV, and HDV). Consequently many cases of triple infection are reported from here. It is also been reported that in Mongolia there is high prevalence of HBV, HCV and HDV [5,38,40-42]. There are also other regions of the world from where triple viral hepatitis infections had been reported including India and China [43,44]. Taiwan is another country which was previously reported as HBV and HCV endemic area but recent studies showed that now it is also endemic for HDV. Many cases of triple infection of hepatitis viruses are also reported from this region. Among the triple hepatitis patients in Taiwan, the prevalence of HBV is 12.6%, HCV is 41.6% and that of HDV is 15.3% [1]. Up to now, there is no report on triple infection caused by hepatitis viruses from Pakistani population [38].PathogenesisThere are many controversies about the role of triple hepatic infection in the pathogenesis of liver disease. It has been reported that triple viral infection does not cause the development of HCC but only one virus that dominate other two viruses in triple viral infection causes this condition of HCC [43].Transmission routesHBV, HCV and HDV viruses are not only biologically different but their life cycles and modes of gene expression are also totally different from each other. Despite of all these differences, they share same routes of transmission [45]. These three viruses (HBV, HCV, and HDV) are the major causes of chronic liver disease. All three viruses (HBV, HCV, and HDV) are transmitted due to direct or indirect exposure to infected blood or body fluids that contain infected blood. Common routes for transmission of these viruses are infected blood transfusion, contaminated syringes, injecting, tattoo and skin piercing with infected instruments, infected household contacts, through infected mother to her baby, by sexual contact with infected person, and via sharing of needles contaminated by infected drug users etc [46]. It is not unusual to find a patient who is co-infected with HBV and HCV or HBV and HDV or with all three viruses (HBV, HCV, and HDV) [1,5-8,47,48].SymptomsViral hepatitis is of major concern as it leads to morbidity and mortality. Whatever its cause is, all types of viral hepatitis affect liver cells. As a result, many signs and symptoms of various types of hepatitis are almost similar and these are not specific to the viral agent that causes them. Most common symptoms are yellowed eyes or skin (jaundice), fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, joint pain, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, dark urine and flu-like symptoms. Some patients may experience few or no symptoms [49-52].DiagnosisDiagnosis of hepatic viral infection is carried out by studying biochemical, virological and histological parameters. Liver function tests (LFT) and serologic assays are also used for detection of antigens and antibodies. As all hepatitis viral infections have same sign and symptoms so it is very difficult to diagnose triple viral infection. A liver function test is available but the pattern of abnormality for acute infection is similar for all types of viral hepatitis. Individually each infection (HBV, HCV and HDV) is confirmed by the presence of the serum surface antigen, hepatitis B, C and D envelope antigen and specific antibodies to the hepatitis B, C and D core. Moreover polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and enzyme linked immunosorbant assay (ELISA) are also used for confirmation [53]. Diagnosis of HCV infection is done by detecting anti-HCV antibody by ELISA method or HCV RNA by PCR method in the serum. HDV is diagnosed by the presence of anti-HDV antibody in the serum using specific ELISA assay. Diagnosis of multiple hepatitis viral infections using one assay is not possible to date. It may be due to low level of awareness among physicians and availability of simple diagnostic tests. But recently scientists used a single integrated protein micro-array for diagnosing multiple viral infections. It can determine two viral antigens (HBsAg, HBeAg) and seven viral antibodies (HBsAb, HBcAb, HBeAb, HCVAb, HDVAb, HEVAb, HGVAb) of human hepatitis viruses in human sera just within 20 minutes [38,54]. However this is very expensive and available in developed countries only.Replication status of viruses in triple infectionAlthough the replication pathway of HBV, HCV and HDV are different but one interesting virological aspect in case of triple infection is that up to what extent each virus affects the replication pathway of other virus and which one is responsible for the pathogenesis of liver disease. The reciprocal influence of HBV, HCV and HDV is still not clear [47,55]. In triple infection with HBV, HCV and HDV, there is interference between the viruses. In such situation one virus might suppresses the effect of others. As some studies have shown that HCV suppresses the effect of HBV and HDV and in some cases it causes sero-clearance of HBV antigens. Similarly there are studies which reported that HBV and HDV suppress HCV effect [48].Several studies have shown that HDV act as a dominant virus in triple infection and it inhibits the replication of both HBV and HCV [47,48,56-59]. Some studies have also shown that HCV is cleared when patient is super-infected with HBV and HDV [60]. The reason for this could be the inhibition of markers required for their replication [47,58]. Actually large delta antigen of HDV inhibits the host DNA dependent RNA polymerase II which is involved in HBV replication [58,61]. However, some studies reported that HCV act as a dominant virus in triple infection. A study conducted on triple infection of HBV, HCV and HDV by Liaw and colleagues showed that newcomer virus suppress existent viruses [62]. Another study in Australia showed that in patients infected with HBV, HCV and HDV, replication of HBV is suppressed [63]. A study done by Mathurin showed that in Western countries dominant virus is HDV and there is no replication of HCV and HBV in patients with triple infection. Such discrepancies between the studies can be explained as the time of infection and host immune status are different in different parts of the world as a result of which different viruses are dominant in triple infection in different parts of the world [47].Disease outcomeAs in triple infection all the three viruses are present so scientists are of the view that there are more complications in the early appearance of this disease [64]. A study conducted by Liaw et al on the disease outcome of triple infection with HBV, HCV and HDV reported that this disease is more severe in the acute super-infection stage [62]. Other studies also suggested that infection with HBV, HCV and HDV increases the risk of fulminant hepatitis which is severe impairment of hepatic functions or severe necrosis of hepatocytes [65,66]. Patients with triple infection of HBV, HCV and HDV suffer from more severe liver lesions. They show a high tendency for cirrhosis. They also show increased risk for progression to HCC [63,67-69].TreatmentVirological response in case of triple infection varies widely and show many different profiles. As a result of this, level of viruses varies during the therapy and follow-up period. For a proper treatment of triple infection, patient should be followed up yearly and the viral load should be determined which tells us which one virus is gone to be dominant and then we can treat it accordingly [70]. Patients with triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV show severe and progressive liver disease. Many studies have shown that when patients with triple infection are treated with interferon therapy, they show resistance to interferon therapy whereas patients having a single viral infection respond to his therapy [48]. Weltman et al., also reported that when seven patients having triple infection were treated with interferon-alpha, six show no response and there is only one patient who normalized serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) during treatment. So they provide a proof that triple infection show less response to interferon therapy [63].When patients with triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV are treated with lamivudine alone and lamivudine in combination with interferon, they have not shown positive results [71,72]. Another option for patients with triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV is liver transplantation. Risk of recurrence of HBV and HCV is decreased in transplanted liver which otherwise may occur due to viral interference phenomenon [73]. Treatment options for triple infection involving HBV, HCV and HDV are very limited. There is no optimal treatment for this up to now [73]. For selecting most appropriate antiviral treatment of triple infection, patient should be monitored carefully and virological assessment should be carried out to determine dominant virus.Preventive measuresThere are a lot of preventive measures which should be carried out in order to avoid development of triple infection. Some of these are [74]:1. Screening of donated blood and plasma2. Routine immunization for infants and high-risk individuals3. Practicing safe sex4. Cleaning up blood spills promptly with bleach5. Avoiding sharing razors, syringes, tooth brushes, nail clippers, or needles, when getting a manicure, a tattoo, or having any body part pierced [74].Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsMR searched the literature, organized the data. MR wrote the manuscript. HK and FK helped MR in literature review. MI revised the manuscript. All the authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript.


Title: Forthcoming Developments
in Models to Study the Hepatitis
B Virus Replication Cycle, Pathogenesis, and Pharmacological Advancements

IntroductionThe hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a member
of the hepadnaviridae family,
which has a short genome (size 3.2 kilobases) of partially double-stranded
DNA. In an extremely species-specific manner, it enters human hepatocytes
through a coupling between a viral envelope protein and human sodium
taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP).1−5 After viral entry, the HBV core particle is released
into the cytoplasm and transported to the nucleoplasm. The DNA is
released and repaired by cellular factors to the covalently closed
circular DNA (cccDNA).6 The cccDNA serves
as a template for pregenomic RNA (pg RNA) transcription and other
mRNAs that encode at least seven different proteins and then uses
a transcription–reverse transcription mechanism to replicate
its genome. The cccDNA persistence is responsible for the failure
of viral clearance, the absence of a functional cure, and in particular
relapses after treatment termination.7 The
pregenomic RNA for the viral core and polymerase serves not only as
a messenger but also as a reverse transcription template which involves
the use of polymerase to produce core particles (Figure 1).Figure 1HBV replication cycle
and potential targets. HBV replication cycle:
Binding and attachment, penetration or ingress, biosynthesis, nucleocapsid
assembly, and secretion. Different treatments targets: inhibitors
of entry point (virus binding receptors NTCP and HSPG), cccDNA inhibitors
(impeding cccDNA genesis), epi-drugs (suppressing the synthesis of
viral RNA), inhibitors of the endoplasmic reticulum (blocking viral
capsid assembly), and secretory protein inhibitors (impeding secretion
of HBV virions).8,9 Adapted and modified with permission
from Bhat et al., 2022.The hepatitis B virus is a hepatotropic virus that
affects the
liver with specific host and tissue tropism.10 HBV is considered to be a noncytopathic virus whose pathogenesis
is mostly attributed to liver injury caused by the host immunological
response. Virus components such as the HBV e antigen (HBeAg), HBx,
and the three HBV surface antigens (HBsAg) suppress the host immune
response, leading to HBV chronic infection.11 Though HBV vaccination is available as a preventative measure, hundreds
of millions of people globally are chronically infected with HBV,
and due to the refractory nature of the HBV intracellular replication
intermediate cccDNA, amalgamation therapies using interferon in blending
with nucleos(t)ide analogs hardly achieve infection elimination or
a functional cure, i.e., the permanent inactivation of the virus in
HBV infected cells.12Furthermore,
there is proof of virological relapse in patients
who have stopped using antiviral drugs for treatment13 and hepatitis flares during and following termination of
antiviral therapies14 including lamivudine
resistance.15 This indicates that chronic
hepatitis B (CHB) patients may require longer treatment because of
the refractory HBV nature, and extremely effective antiviral therapies
against HBV may need to be adopted in amalgamation with current treatments
to support and restore the immune system, like checkpoint inhibitors
or adoptively transferred chimeric antigen receptor T cells, in the
future.7,16Chronic HBV infection can lead to
many liver diseases, including
fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma. Despite significant
advancements in the prevention and therapeutic approaches to HBV disease,
over 0.24 billion individuals worldwide are infected with the virus,
and the global mortality rate is 650,000 annually.8,17 To
further minimize these figures, novel ways of therapy that can cure
chronic infection are required, in addition to expanding HBV vaccination
coverage.The constant development of cell culture and various
animal models
for CHB diseases has been critical in gaining a better understanding
of a virus’ replication cycle and the generation of anti-HBV
drugs. Since the discovery of the “Australian antigen”
(Au), a number of models have been established.18 Their pros and cons are discussed. There are also suggestions
for future improvements to meet the basic requirements of an HBV treatment.Cell Culture ModelsTumor-derived cell lines, like
those used for other viruses, have helped us learn more about viral
hepatitis.19 General molecular biology
approaches have been used to overexpress viral proteins and establish
cell lines that persistently express the hepatitis viral genome. HBV
DNA genomes and viral protein-coding plasmids have been transported
intracellularly using different methods of transfection and systems
for viral transduction. Besides, screenings of small molecules have
also been performed using cell lines that carry viral genomes in order
to discover compounds that could inhibit viral replication.20 Broadly, the usage of cell lines that have been
transformed has relied on the fact that a few of them have typically
failed in natural innate immune antiviral pathways in cells that would
usually inhibit viral genomes and proteins from being expressed.21 Although dysfunctional, these cell lines allowed
researchers to study these viruses without being hampered by host
defense signaling pathways. A successful strategy for HBV was determined
by using the wide range of cell lines that stably integrated into
the genome of the HBV DNA in several loci of the chromosome.22 A number of cell culture systems have been used
to study HBV replication. What are the advantages and disadvantages
of each of these systems? No system is ideal for all studies, but
findings from different systems can be complementary.Table 1 and Figure 3 show a list of experimentally
transformed liver cell line models used to investigate HBV disease.Table 1Various in Vitro Experimental
Models of Cell Culture Frequently Used for Studying Persistent HBV
InfectionCell BiologyHepG2
cell lineHuH-7 cell lineHepaRG linePrimary human hepatocytes (PHHs)Hepatocyte derived from stem cellsFunctional Innate immunityMinimal
SlightAverageEntirely functionalEntirely functionalEntirely functionalLength of propagationIndefiniteIndefiniteIndefiniteLess than 30 daysLess than 30 daysPolarized propertyNoYesYesYesYesTransformedYesYesNoNoNoAvailabilityExtremeExtremeAverageLessLessLot variability*NegligibleNegligibleSlightSlightHighFavors chronic disease HBVNo, needs NTCP receptorNo, needs NTCP receptorYes needs differentiationYesYesHuH-7 CellsThe cell line HuH-7 was developed in 1982
from a hepatocellular carcinoma tumor, extracted from a 57-year-old
Japanese man who underwent a liver resection for the tumor.23 This cell line was proved to be beneficial in
HBV research24 though it has been more
frequently used as in vitro experimental cell culture
models to investigate the hepatitis C virus (HCV). This cell line
was primarily doing well in multiplying luciferase-harboring subgenomic
mutants that exclusively encoded HCV nonstructural proteins.25 As a result, this cell line was utilized as
the major substrate for developing a replicon that would constantly
express and replicate the HCVRNA genome, without the integration of
DNA intermediate into the cellular genome.The HuH-7 cell line
has been proved effective in HBV-related research, but it has played
a less important role than it has in HCV research. This cell line
like HCV was developed to overexpress the viral proteins from the
HBV genome.24 The linear, full-length HBV
cDNA transfection into HuH-7 cells was one of the most important uses
of this cell line for studying HBV.26 During
the HBV replication cycle, this model allowed for the formation of
cccDNA. It was used to investigate more difficult facets of HBV biology,
such as HBV episomal DNA and epigenetic alteration.27 In 2012, with the discovery of the putative entry receptor,
HBV NTCP, encoding a sodium/bile acid cotransporter also called SLC10A1
(the solute carrier family 10 member 1), stably expressing this gene
in a HuH-7 cell line was used as an experimental in vitro model to favor chronic HBV infection.1HepG2 CellsA different cell line that has been developed
to explore viral hepatitis agents is the HepG2 cell line. The pathophysiology
of HBV infection has been studied using human hepatoma cell lines
(HepG2 cell line). This cell line was established from the hepatic
tissue of a 15-year-old Caucasian white male patient who had a well-differentiated
hepatoblastoma. As a hepatocyte surrogate model, the cell line is
commonly used. These hepatoma cells are transiently transfected with
replication-competent HBV DNA to commence the viral replication cycle
within the host and generate the HBV particles secretion.28−30In contrast to the HuH-7 cell line, the HepG2 cell line is
polarized and has proved to be extremely beneficial for studying HBV
compared to HCV. The HBV genome could be continuously expressed in
HepG2 cells, which led to early advancements in HBV research. In selection
media, this feat was achieved by growing HepG2 cells stably transfected
with the HBV genome.29,31 Although these transfected cells
were capable of the HBV replication and the cccDNA formation, albeit
at a low level production, they were incapable of being infected by
HBV virions, which is now understood to be due to the lack of NTCP
gene expression. (HepG2-NTCPsec+) cells, a novel HepG2 cell clone,
successfully favor the entire replication cycle, prolonged viral transmission,
and HBV amplification obtained from patients or cell culture, reflecting
the important properties of HBV-infected individuals.32Similar approaches have been used to generate HepG2
H1.3 and HepAD38
cell lines, which were selected for harboring the HBV genome.33,34 These cell lines are persistently used to examine aspects of the
HBV replication cycle, the primary steps of viral entry, and hepatocyte
trafficking, as well as later steps of the HBV replication and cccDNA
clearance by host defense pathways.35 Besides,
HepAD3834 and HepG2.2.1531 being a stable replicating system, these cells are fascinating
models for evaluating the antiviral compounds.36 These cells were most frequently used as a source of infectious
HBV virions for performing infection assays, as these were produced
by a stable transfection incorporated with the HBV genome.28,37,38HepG2.2.15 cells favor
not only HBV DNA replication but also packaging
and Dane particle release. This cell line can be passaged for a prolonged
period because it was developed from liver cells. Since this cell
line has been developed as a useful in vitro culture
model for investigating the structure, activity, and gene expression,
it regulates HBV DNA replication as well as the in vitro assessment of antiviral drugs against HBV. This cell line also has
several drawbacks, which are as follows. (1) It does not mimic a natural
infection since the HBV DNA is integrated into the host cell genome,
which allows it to reproduce the viral replication but not the process
of virus invasion into cells. (2) Because of the absence of NTCP,
a bonafide receptor responsible for HBV infection, this cell line
is insensitive to direct infection with serum containing HBV.39 (3) HBV adsorption, cellular entrance, and viral
uncoating are impossible to examine using HepG2.2.15 cells. (4) HepG2.2.15
cells are descendants of HepG2 cells and are unable to be used to
investigate the HBV carcinogenicity.Another cell line called
the HepAD38 cell line generates larger
quantities of HBV than HepG2.2.15 cells and may precisely control
the onset of viral replication. The HepAD38 cell line, unlike HepG2.2.15
cells, has a disadvantage; i.e., it is not appropriate for examining
the interaction between the virus and host cells in the initial stage
of HBV disease.34 The HepAD38 cell harbors
1.1 copies of the HBV genome, and its expression is regulated by the
inducible cytomegalovirus immediate-early (CMV-IE promoter). The HepAD38
cell line generates roughly 11-fold more HBV DNA than HepG2.2.15 cells.
Tetracycline can be used to regulate the HBV replication in the HepAD38
cell line.34 HBV cannot be developed when
tetracycline is present in the medium, as the synthesis of pgRNA is
suppressed. The cells instantly express pgRNA, cccDNA, and HBV the
moment tetracycline is removed. This HBV cell culture system is ideal
for understanding the HBV replication and testing anti-HBV drugs.34Baculovirus and adenovirus constructs
were used to transduce HepG2
cells and used as a vehicle for delivery to efficiently express the
HBV genome in these cells, according to a new model established afterward.40,41 These transduction models outperformed transiently transfected or
stable cell lines, and they are extremely reproducible compared to
transfected cells because the replication and HBV genes expression
highly predominated those of HepG2.2.15. The adenovirus system is
without species restriction and has the potential to replicate HBV
in the liver cells of any nonspecific host. Unfortunately, due to
its substantial cytotoxicity, this approach limits its further use.
It is not appropriate to evaluate the anti-HBV effects of drugs, for
example, because of the inadequacy of the enhanced vector dosage to
boost the antigen development.39The HBV baculovirus system when compared with HepG2.2.15 cells
has about a 100-fold larger rate of HBV replication. The potential
of the recombinant HBV baculovirus/HepG2 approach to monitor the replicative
intermediates such as rcDNA and cccDNA is a distinctive feature; as
a result, the system may be used to assess the impact of anti-HBV
drugs on HBV DNA. It also has the potential to study the HBV resistance
to nucleoside analogs (NAs) and interferons.39 The HBV baculovirus has its limitations which restrict its wide
use. (1) Instead of using a receptor-mediated approach, baculovirus
reaches mammalian cells by a nonspecific process of the endosomes
uptake.42 (2) Gene transfer through baculovirus
is limited to a few species. (3) Baculovirus vectors are not appropriate
models to exploit them in animal research because the complementary
system quickly deactivates them.43NTCP-expressing HepG2 cells are now used to study HBV disease with
infectious virions, due to the discovery of the putative HBV receptor
(NTCP).44 The systematic and efficient
investigation of the full replication cycle in a sustainable in vitro cell culture system has been made possible by this
approach.HepG2 cells have become increasingly useful for HCV
research due
to advancements in the past decade. HepG2 cells had been observed
to lack miRNA 122 (miR-122), which is important to support the HCV
replication cycle. Specifically, miR-122 might support the HCV RNA
stability, replication, and protein synthesis via several distinct
mechanisms, by directly binding homologous regions in the virus genome’s
untranslated region.41,45 Furthermore, HepG2 cells have
a relatively poor CD81 expression (a known entry factor for HCV).40,46 Therefore, it was shown that HepG2 cells are selected to express
that both the CD81 receptor and miR-122 can be infected by HCV and
support viral replication.47 This model
has proven to be very beneficial in the research of host defense mechanisms
and to validate findings derived in primary human hepatocytes (PHH),
based on disparities in antiviral innate immunity in this cell line
when compared with HuH-7 cells. In response to HCV infection, the
genetically modified cell line was capable of producing large amounts
of type III IFNλ which has also been observed in primary human
hepatocytes.48HepaRG Cell LineFor studies of both HBV (Gripon, Rumin
et al. 2002) and HCV,49 an additional cell
line has proven to be useful to the HepaRG cell line. This cell line
was developed from cells obtained from a resection of tumor from
an HCV-infected individual with liver cancer, although the infection
was not sustained in vitro after isolation of these
cells. HepaRG cells serve as hepatic progenitor cells that are bipotent
and can proliferate indefinitely. These cells develop into both biliary
and hepatocyte-like cells.50 In order to
support complete HBV infection, these cells must also be exposed to
dimethyl sulfoxide to foster further development into more specialized
cells like hepatocytes. According to head-to-head comparisons, HepaRG
cells are similar to PHHs, which are regarded as the gold standard
for hepatocyte studies in vitro studies in terms
of drug metabolism and the ability to support infection by HBV.51,52 Intially, it was shown that this cell line could favor HBV infection
and replication.50 Regrettably, polyethylene
glycol (PEG) is required to promote viral entry by supporting HBV
binding to HepaRG. It develops the interaction with heparan sulfate
proteoglycans, resulting in augmented infection efficiency.53 Generally, infection rates are modest, and the
virus transmission from cell to cell is minimal.53 Thereafter, researchers were competent enough to use this
cell line as a substrate for HCV infection.49 In this study,49 the investigators were
able to utilize serum-derived HCV genotype 3 to validate susceptibility
to HCV infection.54HepaRG cells,
in comparison to other cells originating from hepatic cancer, retain
many physiological properties associated with the liver and more accurately
show a similar transcriptomic profile close to that of hepatocytes.
Surprisingly, cytochrome P450 expression level and innate element
expression displayed that of PHH.55,56 Particularly,
they are widely employed for drug metabolism and toxicology studies.52 It is the first cell line that is suitable 
for a cell culture system for infection studies.50 This is the only available cell line infected so far. It
is evident that HepaRG cells favor both viral entry and cccDNA formation57 and are therefore a relevant model for investigating
the HBV replication cycle.A study was conducted by Schulze
and colleagues in 200753 that explained
the significance of HSPGs in
the HepaRG cell line which triggers HBV entry. It was evident that
the heparin sulfate binding region of the HBV envelope protein in
the antigenic loop plays a vital role in HBV and HDV infection.58 Despite being useful in many ways as summarized
above, the use of the HepaRG model remained limited, especially in
cases when the cell needs a complete differentiation procedure which
is cumbersome and may influence the repeatability of experiments.
This disadvantage associated with this in vitro culture
model further limits its use for high-throughput studies.NTCP-Overexpressing Hepatoma CellThis is another in vitro cell culture model to study HBV infection. This
cell line was developed after the discovery of an NTCP receptor in
2012. NTCP is a carrier of bile acid expressed primarily at the basolateral
surface of the hepatocyte membrane.59 Notably,
both the HuH7 and HepG2 cells fail to express NTCP molecules,60 illustrating their incompetence to mediate viral
infection. Human NTCP receptors in hepatoma cells were exogenously
expressed to make them prone to HBV and HDV infection,37,60 forming the first vigorous in vitro model to study
the complete viral replication cycles and to explore the underlying
mechanism of the virus–host interaction. Interestingly, HepG2-NTCP
cells seem to be more highly prone to HBV infection than HuH7-NTCP
cells, indicating that many more studies are needed to obtain a full
viral replication cycle.37 The hepatoma
cell lines overexpressing NTCP have also been used to check cell entry
inhibitors (Verrier et al., 2016). These robust cell culture systems
provide useful information for a better understanding of HBV pathogenesis.
The disadvantage related to this cell line is that these are well-defined
from hepatocytes with respect to chromosomal abnormalities, mutations,
fluctuating gene expression, and metabolic characteristics.61Primary Human Hepatocytes (PHHs)Primary human hepatocytes
(PHHs) are an extremely crucial model for the study of the hepatitis
B virus disease. These normal cells are extracted from the exterior
margin of the tumor in a patient that underwent liver resection (generally
for a tumor of the liver). PHHs can also be reliably formed from aborted
fetal liver embryos and used as a substrate for infection.62PHHs, unlike HepaRG cells, do not multiply
once plated, and their tissue culture survival is limited, usually
between 1 and 2 weeks; however, fetal hepatocytes can last for several
weeks.63In vitro, these
cells quickly dedifferentiate, down regulating biological characteristics
related with mature hepatocytes at the same time.64 According to various studies, PHHs have also been successfully
infected with serum-derived antigens and HBV developed through a cell
culture.65,66 From other species, such as chimpanzees
and Tupaia, primary hepatocytes have also been demonstrated to support
HBV disease and associated hepadnaviruses that infect ducks and woodchucks
(Dandri, Burda et al. 2001, Nair, Arathy et al. 2011).They
are widely accepted as the “gold standard” of
liver functions because they possess all the vital elements required
for the studies of hepatotoxicity, drug discovery, development, cellular
metabolism, drug-induced liver injury (DILI), and hepatitis B virus
infection.67 There are limitations of PHH
which restrict its use in clinical research for understanding HBV
biology: donor-to-donor diversity, little availability of the best
quality donors, expensive to isolate and purchase, and extremely tough
to grow its culture for a long time (lack of continuous passages)
and grow it in vitro.68 Additionally, the study of potential genetic variants in a functionally
suitable model has hampered the result that there is always failure
to get best the PHH from patients with liver disease. For both HBV
and HDV, they are complete hosts. The PHHs are the only relevant in vitro experimental cell culture model for the HBV investigation.66 Besides, HBV’s infectivity for PHH after
their plating declines immediately, with the result that depletion
of hepatocyte polarization occurs under standard culture conditions.66 In addition to their shortcomings to date, the
primary culture of hepatocytes is a highly suitable in vitro model for HBV and HDV infection, displaying exemplary features of
the natural host of these viruses, like polarization of hepatocytes
and the complete support of host factors of liver. They show a complete
functional innate immune system that enables the antiviral response
to HBV infection to be studied.55,69 They are extensively
used to support host HBV/HDV-associated factors and to validate the
efficacy of antiviral agents.28,60,70Hui’s study was published in Cell Stem Cell conducted by ref (71) and was considered a milestone in primary human hepatocyte in vitro cultivation. They documented that the most difficult
problem has been sorted out for PHH in vitro culture
by developing a novel culture system for primary human hepatocytes.
PHHs are cultivated in an in vitro culture when grown
in human hepatocyte (HM) media. Wnt3a is believed to be critical in
triggering the HH maturation. Wnt3a (a signaling protein also known
as a Wnt/β-catenin canonical pathway important for normal embryonic
development, cell fate) has been supplemented with HM media and elimination
of Rspo1 (a secreted protein promoter of the canonical Wnt signaling
pathway by functioning as a ligand for receptors of LGR-6). Noggin
(NOG) is important in embryonic cell development, and forskolin is
a widely used as a laboratory substance to improve the concentration
of cyclic Amp, in which immortalizing human hepatocytes (HHs) can
be split to obtain a 10,000-times cultivation. They have further observed
that proliferating human hepatocytes (ProliHHs) grown in this system
retain a biphenotypic central tendency between mature hepatocytes
and liver progenitor cells (LPCs) (Figure 2). This biphenotypic feature facilitates
ProliHHs to work more similar to PHHs both in vitro and in vivo than liver progenitor cells. After
the 3D culture, ProliHHs mature and display relatively uniform gene
expression and cell activity compared to primary hepatocytes. When
grafted into the liver of immune-deficient Fah knockout mice, they
also are proliferated (Figure 2). Surely, this will impart a suitable model system for studying
disease modeling like hepatotropism, along with drug safety assessment,
analysis, and evaluation of cytotoxicity in vitro. This will open the door for patients of liver disease via hepatocyte
transplantation therapy in the forthcoming days.72 The dearth and herculean to culture PHH have motivated
researchers to investigate other cell sources, for example, liver
cell lines HepG2, HUH-7, etc. and stem cells that are pluriopotent.Figure 2Schematic
representation of the in vitro culture
of PHHs under standard conditions.72 Adapted
and modified with permission from Feng et al., 2016.Primary human hepatocytes generated from chimeric
mice offer a
reliable in vitro infection model that can fully
sustain the HBV replication cycle.73Stem CellsProgress in the propagation of stem cells
in cell culture has resulted in some promising models for studying
viral hepatitis. Methods are now available to differentiate stem cells
toward the endodermal lineage and then forward to foster development
into mature hepatocytes. Stems cells of embryonic origin are more
controversial source because of the need to derive these cells from
discarded embryos and because of the possibility of long-term biomedical
applications (including cloning).74 Induced
pluriopotent stem cells (iPSCs) are a newly developed source of hepatocyte
that can be used for studies on viral hepatitis. Once developed, these
cells can be transformed into fully mature hepatocytes. The potential
to receive an abundant amount of primary hepatocytes and the notion
that these cells are less fluctuating than PHHs derived from two donors,
who can differ by sex, age, contact to medications and/or chemicals,
genetic polymorphisms, and the occurrence or lack of a primary liver
ailment, are all major benefits of hepatocytes derived from stem cells
over PHHs.75 HBV infection has been effectively
supported using a peculiar strategy.76 Regrettably,
hepatocytes produced from stem cells do not develop into fully functional
adult hepatocytes, although different methods have been used to counteract
functional obstacles and other limitations of this model, such as
the applications of tiny molecules that encourage differentiation
and exploitation of the microenvironment used in in vitro culturing settings.76,77The application of stem
cells to generate vascularized and functional human liver in vitro has also provided an interesting promise for this
field of research.77 This model might offer
oppurtunties to study the hepatitis virus in a three-dimensional system
with a functional vasculature.Other Cell LinesPH5CH8 and Hep3B cells are two more
cell lines that have been used in the studies of viral hepatitis.
A mutation in the P53 gene in Hep3B cells makes the protein inactive.
Therefore, it is used to investigate how p53 interacts with HBV in
the setting of a nonfunctional p53 protein.78,79 Additional research has been conducted using PH5CH8 cell lines,
which contain active Toll-like receptor 3 systems (required for identifying
double-stranded RNA involved in various viral infections) that exist
in PHHs but are missing in HepG2 and HuH-7 cells.79,80In nutshell, all the above cell culture models have broadened
our understanding of virus–host interaction. It is noteworthy
that all the models favor the important stages of viral infection
from the viral entry to cccDNA formation, replication, and finally
virions assembly. Moreover, viral transmission was cumbersome to monitor
in these models.81 Similarly, the cccDNA
concentration formed in these cells is remarkably in a reduced amount.7 This is a disadvantage of all the infectious
model systems, i.e., a small quantity of cccDNA formation.81 Since cccDNA has a predominant use in the HBV
replication and the development of chronic viral liver infection.
CccDNA, a replicative intermediate, becomes an important therapeutic
for the establishment of novel anti-HBV drugs.7 The existing literature on cccDNA biology is limited and not clearly
understood, and much comprehensive knowledge of cccDNA production
and stubborness will be essential to assess its potential therapeutic
target for HBV treatment. Surprisingly, the establishment of in vitro cell culture models producing significant levels
of cccDNA as a result of chronic disease becomes obligatory.It is believed that progress in the structure of these models,
for instance by enhancing their robustness, increasing the cccDNA
formation, and facilitating viral transmission, will eventually support
the exploration of innovative therapeutic approaches expected to treat
chronic viral infection. Additionally, cutting edge technologies may
provide suitable culture systems. The hepatocyte-like cells obtained
from stem cells are the prominent examples which favor chronic HBV
infection,82 or liver organoid cultures83 may serve as a few fascinating and powerful
tools for the ample understanding of chronic HBV disease. All the
limitations of HBV models become mandatory to take into consideration
for future perspectives. The above cell culture models have a predominant
use in elucidating the mechanisms responsible for the HBV replication
cycle as well as HBV pathogenesis (Figure 3).Figure 3Evolving cell culture
models for understanding the HBV replication
cycle and pathogenesis. Infectious systems such as primary human hepatocytes
(PHHs) and hepatocyte cells derived from stem cells with efficient
innate antiviral responses in cells have replaced cell systems that
largely depended on cell lines developed from hepatoma and DNA genomes
that have been transfected or virally transduced. NTCP, sodium/bile
acid cotransporter.84 NTCP, sodium taurocholate
cotransporting polypeptide or sodium/cotransporter of bile acid (also
called SLC10A1). *Lot variability is vulnerability headed for fluctuation
in investigational findings collected among various laboratories.84 Adapted and modified with permission from Thomas
et al., 2016.Animal ModelsStudy of HBV biology has been extremely
difficult due to a dearth of animal models that favor hepatitis B
virus replication. This is possibly due to the absence of receptor
molecules required for viral replication in animal hepatic cells.
The discovery of an SLC10A1 or NTCP receptor molecule60 on human hepatocytes was a major breakthrough in HBV science,
and its identification in the cell culture systems enables us to study
various mechanisms like hepatotropism, species tropism, binding, and
cccDNA formation. Multidisciplinary approaches are used to gain more
insights in HBV infection by using different animal models.85 The HBV research is stucked because of its highly
narrow host range, high cost, unavailability, ethical issues, large
size, and incompatibility of proper experimental models prone to HBV
infection.86 This restriction has greatly
hampered functional studies and established the importance of suitable
animal models in HBV study.87In
the present review, different categories of animal models, used for
examining hepatitis B virus infection, are reviewed. Both pros and
cons associated with animal models in studying hepatitis B virus infection
are also addressed in this review (Table 2) (Figure 4).88Figure 4Evolving animal models
for understanding the HBV replication cycle
and pathogenesis. The use of animal models has shifted from mostly
humans and primates to new organisms such as Tupaia, woodchucks (WHBV),
and duck (DHBV) hepatitis viruses. Xenotransplantation in mouse models
has more recently been developed with animals that are susecptible
to HBV infection.84 Adapted and modified
with permission from Thomas et al., 2016.Table 2Animal Models Used for Understanding
the HBV PathogenesisAnimal modelsHepadnavirusViral entryGenesis
of cccDNAStatus of immune responseInbred/outbredAntiHBV investigationVaccine testingAvailabilityref.ChimpanzeeHBVYesYesImmunocompetentNoYesYesVery low(146)TupiaHBVYesYesImmunocompetentNoYesNoLow(147)WoodchuckWHBVYesYesImmunocompetentNoYesYesLow(148)DuckDHBVYesYesImmunocompetentNoYesYesReadily(149)Woolly monkeyWMHBVYesYesImmunocompetentNoYesYesLow(5)HBV transgenic mouse modelHBVNoNoImmunotolerantYesYesNoModerate(150)Human liver chimeric mouse modelHBVYesYesImmunodeficientYesYesYesModerate(151)Woodchuck Hepatitis B VirusWoodchuck hepatitis virus
(WHBV), a hepatitis B-like virus, was discovered that affected Eastern
woodchucks (Marmota monax) in the Philadelphia Zoo.89 It paves the path for new ways to investigate in vivo host responses to hepadnaviruses. WHBV is similar
to HBV not just in terms of virological properties such as genome
size, organization, nucleotide sequence (60–70% similarity),
and protein expression but also in terms of the immunological responses,
both innate and adaptive, that develop in the host during viral infection.90 Because woodchucks are extremely susceptible
to WHBV, two types of woodchucks with known liver and spleen transcriptomes
have been established and used as animal models for HBV-related research.
The American woodchuck (Marmota monax), for example,
has a high risk of chronic hepatitis and HCC after contracting WHBV,91 while another is the Chinese woodchuck (Marmota himalayana), for which breeding colonies have been
well-known.92 In comparison to HBV infections
in humans, woodchucks infected with WHBV have a common natural history
of infection, pathogenesis, and liver disease progression from chronic
hepatitis to HCC. As a result, the woodchuck model has become frequently
used in preclinical drug testing and HBV-related HCC studies. Woodchucks
have been used as preclinical models for antiviral medications like
nucleos(t)ide analogs but not limited to lamivudine,93 entecavir,94 and tenofovir.95,95 Moreover, experimental infection of newborn woodchucks frequently
results in chronic illness, whereas adult woodchucks usually suffer
from acute hepatitis, indicating that the immunological response to
viral infection is comparable to that of humans. This discovery increased
the use of this animal model for testing prophylactic vaccinations
and immunological therapeutic strategies against HBV infection, like
programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1) antagonists and toll-like receptor
(TLR)7 agonists.96,97New WHBV-targeting approaches
are being studied further. For instance, it has been shown that after
injection into WHBV-infected woodchucks a cationic liposome carrying
JVRS-100 (complexes of cationic liposomes and noncoding DNA) prevented
new tumor growth in the liver.95 Another
group recently administered nanoparticles into HCC-bearing woodchucks
as a potential way to deliver antiviral medications to the diseased
liver, finding that the nanoparticles aggregated in macrophages and
localized in the liver and spleen.98 However,
it must be highlighted that there are still a number of obstacles
to using the woodchuck model in HBV studies. They are tough to work
with, and there are not many reagents for studying the immunological
response to viral infection. Furthermore, the HBV carcinogenesis
and WHBV may differ because WHBV DNA quite often integrates into the
Myc proto-oncogene, resulting in approximately all neonatally infected
woodchucks developing HCC, whereas HBV DNA prefers to integrate into
the TERT, MLL4, and CTNNB1 genes.97 As
a result, both viral and host-related variances represent significant
obstacles that must be considered when evaluating the efficacy of
HBV treatment and vaccine candidates.The woodchuck is a member
of the hepadnaviridae family and is closely
linked with HBV in terms of genome organization and morphology. Despite
that this model has been intensively studied for evaluating the antiviral
potential of different compounds, its limitations need to be taken
into account: distinction between the virus and host species; maintenance
is cumbersome (hibernation); insufficient molecular reagents and assays;
elementary understanding of woodchuck genetics; and molecular biology
and immunology. Recently, the genome of woodchuck has been sequenced.92,99Duck Hepatitis B VirusDHBV was first discovered in
the serum of domestic ducks in 1980, and it has since become an important
model for studying the hepadnavirus replication cycle.100 This model was crucial in studying the mechanisms
of viral replication, including viral capsid assembly, initiation
of reverse transcription, and finally rcDNA synthesis, due to the
availability of duck hepatocyte cultures and ducklings.96,101,102 The steps for cccDNA production
were also examined using this model, increasing our actual understanding
of the generation of cccDNA pools and their method of refilling within
the nucleus.102,103 Duck models with chronic DHBV
infection have been utilized to test antiretroviral medicines, nucleocapsid
assembly inhibitors, and combination therapy regimens.104 DHBV and duck models, however, differ significantly
from HBV and humans in the following areas: only 40% homology exists
between DHBV and human HBV,105 the carboxypeptidase
D entry receptor is used by DHBV,106 and
drug toxicity may have considerable consequences on ducks.106,107 As a result of the viral and host discrepancies, drug screening
and mechanistic research from this system may require additional validation.Woolly Monkey Hepatitis B VirusAnother HBV-like virus
that infects its native host is the woolly monkey hepatitis B virus
(WMHBV) (Lagothrix lagotricha).108 This is an exciting discovery since woolly monkeys are
a host intermediate between humans and rodents that can be used to
test antiviral treatments for hepadnavirus infection. Woolly monkeys
are endangered, despite the fact that they give an additional arm
for investigating HBV-like viruses in animal models;101 as a result, there has been little research on the animals
themselves. WMHBV, on the other hand, has been successfully used in
a number of spider monkey studies (Ateles geoffroyi) and squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus). In order
to study WMHBV in spider monkey models, a WMHBV infectious clone was
established,101 leading to viremia of moderate
severity (10E4–10E6 GE/mL), and immune-mediated clearance occurs
8 weeks after inoculation. However, spider monkeys are also endangered.109 As a result, they are not widely available
for HBV-related studies. Immunocompromised liver damage mice engrafted
with primary hepatocytes from squirrel monkeys were specifically vulnerable
to WMHBV rather than HBV.64 Nevertheless,
this nonhuman primate model could be useful; squirrel monkeys infected
with WMHBV developed acute and, in some cases, persistent infections
after receiving WMHBV by adeno-associated virus (AAV) delivery.64Hepadnavirus Infections in TupaiasTupaias, sometimes
known as tree shrews, are small nonprimate animals with a genetic
relationship to primates rather than rodents.110 Tupaias have been shown to be experimentally sensitive
to HBV and HCV, making them a well-developed nonprimate animal model
in recent decades.111 Tree shrews, like
other species, have a higher tendency for chronicity when infected
as neonates, and their liver histological lesions are analogous to
those seen in HBV-infected humans.112 Tupaia
primary hepatocytes are frequently used, to study HBV and WMHBV infections
due to their widespread availability.60,113 Tupaias’
applicability as an animal model is currently limited by a number
of factors, along with their genetic heterogeneity as an outbred species
(which may be useful for representing real-world situations but is
not ideal for large-scale animal experiments), overall low viral titers in vivo, and a limited supply of research tools and materials
for this species. Tupaia hepatocytes are still useful, as evidenced
by their implantation into chimeric mice which resulted in effective
HBV infection.114HBV-Susceptible Primate ModelsChimpanzeesThe best model for HBV infection is the
chimpanzee. The chimpanzee is the only immunocompetent nonhuman primate
model known to be entirely susceptible to human HBV (Table 2), and it can effectively imitate
the pathophysiology and disease development caused by HBV in individuals.115 Even one genome equivalent (GE) of HBV DNA
was considered adequate to productively infect chimpanzees.116 Chimpanzees can get acute and chronic HBV infection
after being inoculated with HBV obtained from chronic hepatitis B
(CHB) patients, with immune response profiles and inflammation analogous
to those seen in HBV-infected individuals.117 The chimpanzee animal model was used extensively in the HBV research
to evaluate the safety and efficiency of HBV vaccine candidates. The
first-generation (plasma-derived) HBV vaccine and the later-developed
vaccine incorporating HBsAg from yeast were both tested in chimpanzees.118 In recent years, the chimpanzee model has also
been used to assess the efficacy of modified recombinant vaccinations,
vaccines against antiviral drug-resistant HBV mutations, and some
therapeutic vaccination investigations.119 Although chimpanzees were formerly the most important animal model
for HBV research, their use as an experimental model has been limited
due to a lack of availability, high related expenses, and considerable
ethical issues. They are susceptible to both acute and chronic HBV
infection and immune response that correspond to those in humans.120 Their use is highly limited, expensive, large,
and not easily accessible for HBV research as mentioned above, making
them irrelevant models. Research on chimpanzees is not permissible
in the United States and many other countries. Therefore, there are
few efforts to adopt primate models for anti-HBV research.HBV Transgenic MiceTwo different research groups produced
the first HBV transgenic mice by microinjecting the entire or overextended
genome of HBV into zygotes.117,121 Furthermore, viral
replication and protein expression were found exclusively in a few
organs of a couple of transgenic mice, and only some developed particles
of the virion were isolated from the serum. Remarkably, a rat hepatoma
cell line was transfected with a tandem dimer HBV genome, and infectious
HBV virions could be developed.122 Guidotti
and colleagues in 1995 developed transgenic mice with competent HBV
replications using a genome vector construct that was terminally repetitive
(1.3 X the HBV genome length).123 With
no signs of cytopathology, the transgenic mice lines of HBV (lineages
1.3.32 and 1.3.46) developed all of the HBV secretory proteins and
mRNA transcripts at levels analogous to those found in a normally
human infected liver. HBV replication was accomplished in the mice,
as well as production of rcDNA, RNA synthesis, virions assembly, and
finally discharge of the mature virus. This particular model has been
used as the cornerstone for HBV research in small animals. The model
was used to evaluate a number of anti-HBV drugs and provided substantial
understanding of the HBV host–virus interaction.105,124 Furthermore, in the HBV transgenic animals, the integrated HBV genome
maintains viral replication, gene expression, and untimely onset of
viral infection phases such as viral entrance as well as viral dissemination
and reinfection is absent. Interestingly, cccDNA, the template of
virus transcription throughout spontaneous HBV infection, is not found
in these mice for unknown reasons.125 As
HBV transgenic mice are inherently immunotolerant to HBV, immunological
pathology studies in these models are not possible.126HBV Plasmid DNA Hydrodynamic Injection ModelsYang
et al. established the hydrodynamic injection of the HBV mouse model
by hydrodynamically applying a high dose of salt water (equal to 8–10%
of the body weight of the mouse (v/w)) with a plasmid harboring a
1.3 X genome of HBV DNA into the tail vein of the mouse for a small
duration (5–8 s).127 HBV DNA is
mechanically squeezed into hepatocytes by transient hydrodynamic force,
resulting in transient replication of HBV and translation. By day
7, immunologically competent B10.D2 mice’s blood contains antiviral
antibodies and antiviral CD8+ T cells, whereas liver transcripts of
HBV and replicative intermediates are eliminated by day 15 after transfection,
corresponding with the advent of antiviral antibodies and CD8+ T cells.
In NOD/SCID mice devoid of active T, B, or natural killer (NK) cells,
HBV gene expression and replication can continue for greater than
81 days, suggesting that an immune response of the host, especially
a CTL response that is virus specific, may contribute to the elimination
of HBV in the animal. The result produced by hydrodynamic injection
is largely determined by the plasmid backbone and the genetic background
of mice.90,128,129 The hydrodynamic
injection model is simple to implement and can be used to investigate
various HBV genotypes, variations, or mutations. In this model, the
viral genome does not become part of the host genome which provides
chances to study the HBV stubbornness, immunological responses, and
disease pathogenesis. The hydrodynamic process causes considerable
liver damage, making it difficult to interpret research findings,
particularly in the areas of immunological responses and pathogenesis.130 Furthermore, the model’s utility is
limited by its poor rate of transfection (5–10%) and small
period.131HBV cccDNA Surrogate Mice ModelsTo imitate the functions
of cccDNA, different approaches have been used in hepatocytes to incorporate
molecules similar to HBV cccDNA. Site-specific recombination from
a precursor plasmid facilitated by Cre/loxP harboring a HBV genome
that is monomeric can be used to make recombinant cccDNA (rcccDNA) in vitro or in immunocompetent mice.132 In immunocompetent mice, rcccDNA administered hydrodynamically
could cause a slight (approximately 5–7 weeks) HBV antigenemia,
analogous to severe resolving HBV disease. A recombinant adenovirus
with a replication fault was recently employed to transport rcccDNA
into the livers of Cre transgenic mice, and the rcccDNA resulted in
significant stubbornness of HBV for over 62 weeks.133,134 In the investigation, the mice liver showed a prolonged necroinflammatory
response, fibrosis, and dysplastic changes, which are identical with
the pathogenesis of symptomatic chronic HBV. One more investigation
found that injecting immunocompetent C3H mice with a recombinant minicircle
cccDNA hydrodynamically resulted in sustained and significant HBV
concentrations in the serum (>1 year). The surrogate models of
cccDNA
can be applied to analyze the response of the immune system and pathophysiology
of CHB disease as well as to evaluate antiviral treatments that target
cccDNA.135Human Liver Chimeric MiceTo studying the natural HBV
disease, mice with PHH are excellent models. The production of humanized
mice through xenotransplantation of PHHs is one strategy that has
proven effective in conquering this species-specific obstacle. PHHs
can be delivered into a mouse using this procedure, and the mouse
liver can then be repopulated. To make this strategy effective, the
mouse must be immunodeficient so that the transplanted human hepatocytes
do not reject them, and the hepatocytes of normal mice must be substituted.
Hepatocytes from mice can be used to substitute human hepatocytes,
performed particularly by genetically causing a disease of the liver
in the mouse, enabling the engrafted human hepatocytes a growth advantage.
The SCID (severe combined immunodeficiency) mice harboring a urokinase
plasminogen activator transgene triggered by a promoter of liver-specific
albumin were the first to successfully use this method (Alb-uPA).136 Following transgenic expression, acute hepatotoxicity
develops, which can be alleviated by engraftment of PHHs delivered,
which subsequently serve as an HCV disease substrate. Regrettably,
due to the fragility of these mice, their utility has been restricted.Despite the fact that this method has been effective in the investigations
of the metabolism of drugs and hepatitis caused by viruses, their
utility for many applications is limited due to high mortality, a
restricted transplantation window, low reproductive efficacy, and
kidney problems in repopulated mice. To conquer the limitations of
the original Alb-uPA model, researchers developed a better and extremely
strong model of animals (MUP-uPA) by using a promoter that is triggered
later in mouse maturation like the major urinary protein (MUP) promoter.137The knockout mice fumaryl acetoacetate
hydrolase (Fah), NOD-FRG,
and NRG-FAH are the second most extensively utilized liver humanized
mouse models.133,138 FAH is the final enzyme in the
catabolism of tyrosine, and its loss causes a deposition of harmful
metabolic intermediates of tyrosine in the liver, which kills mouse
hepatocytes and provides transplanted human cells a selective growth
advantage.139 The chemical 2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzyl)-1,3-cyclohexanedione
(NTBC) can inhibit the buildup of hepatotoxic metabolites by blocking
the upstream enzyme of FAH. NTBC administration and cessation cycles
could be regulated to ensure a significant regeneration of human hepatocytes
transplanted in the liver of the recipient.139Grompe and colleagues first effectively transplanted human
hepatocytes
into triple mutant mice (FRG) to circumvent the majority of the problems
of the uPA mouse model. These mice were produced by breeding fumarylacetoacetate
hydroxalse (FAH)−/– mice with mice containing
a recombinant activation gene 2 (RAG2–/–)
and interleukin 2 receptor gamma (IL2Rγ)−/– immunodeficient environment.140In some aspects, the humanized mouse model developed by FRG outperforms
the uPA model. For instance, mice are usually stronger and quicker
to treat; transplantation can be performed at several stages, and
continuous transplantation is a viable option.141 The delivery and removal of NTBC can be used to manage
the severity of the liver injury and selective pressure.133,142 On the other hand, FRG mice have some drawbacks: to promote human
hepatocyte transplantation, further preconditioning of Fah mice with
an adenovirus-expressing uPA may be needed.Fah mice generate
liver carcinomas frequently as a result of their
type I tyrosinemia and need recurrent rounds of NTBC treatment to
stop liver cancer from growing from the hepatocytes of the remnant
mouse.Another human liver injury model that can be developed
for human
hepatocyte transplantation is the TK-NOG mouse model, which was established
by an albumin promoter stimulating liver-specific expression of a
herpes simplex virus type 1 thymidine kinase (HSVtk) in NOG mice with
severe immunodeficiency.143 The fact is
that the sterility of male TK-NOG mice is a limitation to the model.144Humanized Mouse NTCP or Mouse Expressing the NTCP of HumansBecause NTCP was discovered to be the cellular receptor for HBV,
researchers hope that exogenous production of NTCP of humans in mice
would make them prone to HBV disease. Meanwhile, attempts to infect
these models with HBV have so far failed.Transgenic and Knock-in Mice Expressing Human NTCPThe first hNTCP-Tg (human NTCP transgenic C57BL/6 mice) animal model
was developed by He et al.2 Although the
model does not favor HBV disease, it does bolster acute infection
of HDV, with approximately 3% of infected hepatocytes.New HBV Animal ModelsUndoubtedly, new animal models
are urgently needed for the establishment of therapeutic rationale
in chronic hepatitis B virus disease.86 The HBV receptor’s high-sequence homology, the Na+/taurocholate
cotransporting peptide (NTCP), between humans and squirrel monkeys
is used by researchers to assess HBV infection in squirrel monkeys.
The ability of the HBV PreS1 peptide to interact with human and squirrel
monkey NTCP was investigated. HBV or woolly monkey HBV (WMHBV) was
tested in immune-deficient Fah/NOD and Rag1/Il2Rgnull (FNRG) mice
engrafted with human or squirrel monkey hepatocytes. Adult squirrel
monkeys were also infected with HBV, WMHBV, AAV-HBV, AAV-WMHBV, and
an adeno-associated virus harboring an infectious HBV genome (AAV-HBV).
Furthermore, neonatal squirrel monkeys were examined for the possibility
of persistent WMHBV infection. The PreS1 peptide was linked to NTCP
in humans and squirrel monkeys but not in mice or capuchins. WMHBV
infection was found in FNRG mice engrafted with squirrel monkey hepatocytes
but not in human HBV-infected mice. Adult squirrel monkeys were prone
to WMHBV but not to human HBV; however, chimeric mice engrafted with
human hepatocytes were vulnerable to HBV but not to WMHBV. Squirrel
monkeys infected with AAV-WMHBV developed viremia of 108 genomes/mL, with a quantifiable virus for up to 8 months. Surprisingly,
the livers of these animals were reported to have covalently closed
circular DNA. WMHBV viremia lasted 6–8 months in both adult
and newborn squirrel monkeys. This is more than twice as long as other
nonhuman primates’ viremia lasts, implying that squirrel monkeys
could be a good model for testing chronic HBV treatments.5Another new model is macaque primary hepatocytes.145 With the help of these new models, curative
treatment is possible. The attempts are hampered, with the dearth
of a physiologically appropriate, animal model of chronic HBV disease.
It has been demonstrated that entry receptor expression of the HBV,
the human sodium-taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (hNTCP),
on macaque primary hepatocytes promotes in vitro chronic
HBV infection, where all replicative intermediates as well as cccDNA
are present. Additionally, in vivo expression of hNTCP on liver cells
by viral vectors makes rhesus macaques susceptible to chronic HBV
infection. Longitudinal HBV DNA in serum and measurement of HBV DNA,
RNA, and HBcAg in hepatocytes define these in vivo macaque chronic
HBV infections. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that expression
of hNTCP on hepatocytes of macaque makes them vulnerable to chronic
HBV disease, thus developing a physiologically suitable model of chronic
HBV infection to examine immune-mediated clearance, test therapeutic,
and preventive strategies.4In addition,
the above models are not inbred and not readily available.
These animals are big and cumbersome to handle and thus not very accessible,
and distinct animal models like mice are compulsory. It is believed
that all animal models have their own limitations.152,153 Hence, it is herculean to investigate the HBV replication cycle
in animal models. Therefore, it is critically important to develop
an in vitro culture system to demonstrate the mechanisms
attained by the HBV for its replication.NTCP and Its Expression Are Important for HBV Infection in Most
Cell Culture and Animal ModelsNTCP is a functional receptor
molecule for the HBV virus and is located on the sinusoidal/basolateral
side of the parenchymal cells of the hepatocytes.154 It is a membrane-localized protein synthesized in the liver,
and its principal role is characterized by its peculiar expression.155 In liver cells, NTCP serves as a transporter.
It is highly expressed on the sinusoidal/basolateral membrane and
is important for the sodium-dependent import of bile acids into liver
cells via the sinusoidal/basolateral cell membrane.155 The spectrum of bile acid molecules carried by NTCP is
extensive, and it contains cholic acid, chenodeoxycholic acid, deoxycholic
acid, sarcosine cholic acid, ursodeoxycholic acid, glycocholic acid,
glycochenodeoxycholic acid, glycodeoxycholic acid, etc.156 All essential physiologically pertinent glycine-
and taurine-conjugated bile acids are believed to be transported via
NTCP.Post-translational modifications (PTMs) regulate NTCP’s
membrane expression and localization. Because of the significant level
of expression of NTCP in hepatocytes’ sinusoidal membranes
and its strong affinity for conjugated bile acids, NTCP effectively
removes them from the portal blood and in this manner regulates enterohepatic
circulation (EHC) of bile acids.157 NTCP-mediated
bile acid transport across the hepatic cell membrane can be impeded
or severely affected by a number of inhibitors already in clinical
use. Cyclosporine A, ketoconazole, furosemide, propranolol, glibenclamide,
ritonavir, bosentan, efavirenz, rifamycin, gemfibrozil, and saquinavir
are the important inhibitors reported so far.158The identification of hNTCP as a limiting host factor
for HBV and
HDV infection in human hepatoma cells sparked hopes of establishing
hNTCP transgenic animals that are totally prone to HBV. Such mice
feebly favor HDV infection;2,159 however, they are
still at risk of contracting HBV. The unique species specificity of
HBV and HDV is linked to hNTCP-dependent and hNTCP-independent stages
in both viruses’ early infection events, according to a growing
body of evidence. HBV-transgenic mice are completely capable of generating
infectious virions.123 Myrcludex B (MyrB),
the HBV/HDV entry inhibitor,160 is a synthetic l-protein-derived lipopeptide that binds with hNTCP and thus
hampers the development of a functional receptor complex.161 We have demonstrated earlier that HBV/HDV can
interact with hepatic hNTCP from some nonsusceptible species (such
as the mouse, rat, and dog). Interestingly, MyrB and therefore HBV/HDV
are incapable to bind with some types of NTCP, for example. that from
cynomolgus macaques, rhesus macaques, and pigs.162 These unique binding features could be mapped to different
sequence elements within the NTCP homologues in humans, mice, and
macaques; NTCP from mice but not from cynomolgus macaques interacts
with MyrB due to an important sequence element localized at positions
157–165.37,60 Nevertheless, mouse NTCP cannot
arbitrate effective virus entry because of sequence fluctuation within
amino acids 84–87 (Ni et al. 2014; Yan et al. 2013). Only the
human homologue, hNTCP, is capable of both binding and infection.
When hNTCP is expressed in murine cell lines, the cells become HDV
prone to a small extent but are largely HBV resistant.163 These limitations can be conquered through
amalgamation of mouse cells expressing hNTCP with nonsusceptible human
HepG2 hepatoma cells, representing a missing host factor in murine
cells (Lempp et al. 2016). To study hNTCP-mediated species constraints
in laboratory animals that could be used as candidates for an immunocompetent
HBV/HDV model, the researchers tested the potential of hNTCP to sustain
HBV replication in primary hepatocytes from mice, rats, dogs, cynomolgus
macaques, rhesus macaques, and pigs. They demonstrated that hepatocytes
from macaques and pigs are fully prone to both HDV and HBV, implying
that endogenous NTCP homologues are the sole element preventing HBV
replication. Expression of NTCP is highly dependent on the differentiation
and thus rapid disappears in explanted hepatocytes and absent in hepatoma
cells.Viruses use several host components to mediate the stepwise
entry
process and obtain efficient entry into host cells. Hepatitis B virus
(HBV) internalization requires more than the sodium taurocholate cotransporting
polypeptide (NTCP) expression. The epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) is recognized as a host factor that binds with NTCP to facilitate
HBV internalization. The viral internalization and infection were
reduced when the NTCP–EGFR relationship was disrupted or when
EGFR was functionally depleted. The findings indicate that HBV uses
an endogenous NTCP–EGFR combination as a driving mechanism
to penetrate human hepatocytes. Consequently, EGFR serves as a missing
link between the cell-surface HBV–NTCP attachment and viral
invasion. As a result, EGFR is a necessary cofactor for HBV infection
in the human hepatocytes.164Future DirectionsThere is no ideal blueprint for the
study of HBV or drug formulations.
More work is required to establish suitable models. Cell culture methods
that directly match natural humans hepatocytes but are extremely efficient,
less costly, have a limitless supply or are more easily available,
enable more efficient infection and spread amplification would be
extremely useful. The optimization of iHep cells and parameters for
primary human hepatocyte culture should be upgraded which is of great
significance. Our knowledge of the antiviral immunological response
and the progression of different liver diseases has increased through
animal models of HBV infection. Moreover, mice that are completely
susceptible to HBV disease, as well as the formation and cccDNA amplification,
are desperately required, potentially beginning with mice to facilitate
the NTCP transgene expressed in the liver. Such a model could emerge
when more essential elements for virus entrance, replication, and
spread are discovered. This information may be used in macaque or
Tupaia animal models to produce alternate nonprimate or primate drug
development models. These methods can be used for drug development
as well as studying the persistent HBV infection. Reporter systems
that can rapidly detect modifications in particular aspects of the
replication cycle of HBV could help in the design of novel antiviral
agents. Building systems for finding therapeutic molecules that target
cccDNA can aid in the discovery of a novel treatment for CHB disease.165ConclusionsThe surrogate, nonhuman primate, and mouse
models described here
have provided a wealth of information about the HBV replication cycle,
pathogeneses, and host immune responses of virus. Considering the
decline in the use of chimpanzees and the challenges of dealing with
woodchuck, duck, tree shrew, and woolly monkey models, a mouse model
for HBV is required for future prospective in HBV studies. In acute
infections, we still do not know how the immune system attacks the
virus, and in chronic infections, we do not know how HBV may circumvent
the immune system. Our understanding of which immunological components
are involved in acute and chronic HBV infections has considerably
benefited from the use of mouse noninfection models and humanized
xenotransplantation models. Humanized mouse models can be accurately
generated for future HBV investigations in pharmacological treatments
and for producing a functional cure with persistent attempts to replicate
an immunological response analogous to that of humans. There are various
drawbacks in animal models that hamper their applicability. It is
important to emphasize that all HBV animal models have contributed
a better knowledge in the existing literature of the disease and have
suggested potential pharmaceutical targets for cure.The in vitro cell culture model of HBV is useful
for testing antiviral drugs against HBV, examining HBV’s biological
features, and studying virus–host relationships. We reviewed
and analyzed the benefits and drawbacks of each cell culture model
(displayed in Table 1). The accessibility to a robust and efficient in vitro cell culture model for HBV investigations is a major component influencing
the understanding of the HBV action mechanism due to the host specificity
and HBV organ specificity.The established cell culture systems
of HBV have significantly
assisted in studies on the biological features, process of infection,
and HBV etiology, including the development of antiviral drugs against
HBV, vaccines, etc. Typically the in vitro cell culture
system of HBV failed to infect with an HBV-positive serum because
inhibitory factors are present in the blood serum of humans. Because
the genome of HBV has been integrated into the HepG2.2.15 and HepAD38
cell lines, they can release viral particles indefinitely. HepAD38
cells release 11-fold greater viruses than HepG2.2.15 cells, are frequently
utilized as a reservoir of virus for HBV disease in in vitro cell culture models, and are broadly used in similar investigations.
Various laboratories have employed HepG2.2.15 cells to evaluate antiviral
medicines against HBV. The discovery of the HBV NTCP receptor has
accelerated work into the action mechanism of HBV disease. Certain
HBV-infected liver carcinoma cell lines turned vulnerable to HBV after
NTCP overexpression, while cell lines that could be infected with
HBV, like the HepaRG cell line, developed greater vulnerability to
HBV. On the other hand, cell culture model organisms that demonstrated
overexpression of NTCP still do not produce a significant level of
cell-to-cell transmission and are unable to mimic the spontaneous
processes of HBV disease. This finding also implies that NTCP is not
the sole element regulating the host’s HBV infection, and carcinoma
cell lines may not display the factors involved in HBV disease and
replication. Primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) are the most suitable in vitro cell culture experimental model for understanding
the underlying HBV infection mechanism. Furthermore, because of the
shortage of the source and the difficulties to culture them in vitro for extended time durations, their application
is hampered. A 3D culture technique is being widely employed to improve
the application of primary human hepatocytes (PHHs). It has its own
merits and limitations. It is expected that in the forthcoming days
the optimization of the in vitro cell culture system
will take it to new heights.


Title: Present and future management of viral hepatitis


Core Tip: The various types of viral hepatitis have resulted in important morbidity and mortality for many years. Greater understanding of the pathogenesis as well as the development of new, highly efficient potent drugs mean that we are now faced with a new scenario in the approach to this disease. The spectacular advances in the treatment of hepatitis C virus suggest that we can now envisage its eradication, as put forward by the World Health Organization in its objectives for 2030. In this review we comment on the current situation, recent advances and future perspectives in the approach to viral hepatitis.INTRODUCTIONThe different types of viral hepatitis have resulted in great morbidity and mortality for many years, due to their high prevalence and incidence. Over 250 million persons are estimated to be infected with the chronic form of hepatitis B virus (HBV)[1] and more than 70 million with hepatitis C virus (HCV) in the world[2], with over 1.5 million cases of hepatitis A virus (HAV) annually[3], resulting largely from lack of understanding of the pathogenesis and the absence of efficient treatment. Fortunately, recent years have seen important advances, impacting very positively on the management of viral hepatitis, particularly HBV and HCV, though not so much on HAV and hepatitis E virus (HEV). The most significant advances in these latter types have occurred in aspects related to the epidemiology and pathogenesis of the disease rather than in therapy. Studies have shown new pathways of contagion, especially relevant in certain population groups, such as patients with previous liver disease or immunosuppressed patients where the disease can have an important impact on morbidity and mortality.Advances in understanding the viral pathogenesis of HBV have mainly led to the development of new drugs. The first significant leap occurred in the early 2000s, with the appearance of the first nucleotide/nucleoside analogs (NAs), like lamivudine and adefovir dipivoxil. This enabled oral treatment, with great efficacy, safety and tolerability, though limited by the development of resistance that was overcome later with entecavir (ETV) and tenofovir (TDF), which have a high genetic barrier to the development of resistance[4,5]. Nevertheless, limitations still exist, such as the need to administer the drugs for prolonged periods of time, even indefinitely, and they are unable to inhibit the initial formation of covalently closed circular (ccc)DNA in newly infected hepatocytes[6]. This has resulted in current research aimed at developing drugs to inhibit viral replication, acting on any of the various phases of the virus replication cycle[7]. Indirectly, all these advances can have a positive impact on the management of hepatitis D virus (HDV), which whilst being a defective virus that needs the presence of the B virus for reproduction, can nevertheless cause important morbidity and mortality. The first drug for the specific treatment of HDV, bulevirtide, has recently been commercialized in Europe[8].It is, though, in HCV where the most significant advances have been made, with a major impact on improving health over recent years. The efficacy, safety, tolerability and ease of use in clinical practice of direct-acting antivirals (DAA) have led to the rarely seen possibility of eradicating HCV by 2030, an objective set by the World Health Organization[9]. This requires establishing such strategies as micro-elimination based on the active search for cases, simplification of the diagnosis and treatment and prevention measures. HEPATITIS AThe classic transmission of HAV and HEV is the fecal-oral route, more prevalent in underdeveloped countries. However, new pathways of infection are leading to changes in the epidemiology of these infections. This, perhaps, is the main novelty.HAV is one of the most common infectious etiologies of acute hepatitis worldwide. Transmission is fecal-oral via contaminated food or water, either person-to-person or through consumption of contaminated products. Globally, an estimated 1.5 million cases occur each year[3]. There are areas of high, intermediate, low and very low HAV endemicity. In low- and middle-income countries, where sanitation and hygiene practices are poor, infection is common, and most children (90%) have it before the age of 10, very often without presenting symptoms[10]. Epidemics are rare because older children and adults are usually immunized. In these areas, morbidity rates are low, and epidemic outbreaks rarely occur. In developed countries with good sanitation and hygiene, infection rates are low. This translates into an increase in the number of adults who have never been infected and who lack immunity. This increased vulnerability in older age groups can increase morbidity rates and lead to large epidemic outbreaks. The disease can appear in adolescents and adults from high-risk groups, such as injection drug users, men who have homosexual relationships and people who travel to high-endemic areas[11]. Because of the epidemiological features, vaccination is recommended for persons at increased risk of exposure or those liable to fulminant disease[12].Infection with HAV has a mild or asymptomatic course, although it may be fulminant in < 1% of cases[13], especially in patients with chronic hepatitis[14]. Other atypical presentations of acute hepatitis A include renal insufficiency and relapsing hepatitis, which are usually present in children. Some individuals experience a prolonged hepatitis (5.8%)[15] or cholestasis (6.8%), especially in the presence of HBV[16]. HAV accounts for 0.35% of cases of acute liver failure. HAV-related acute liver failure has a spontaneous resolution rate of 70%, with the remaining 30% requiring a liver transplant[17]. Several studies have concluded that acute HAV infection superimposed on chronic liver disease is associated with greater disease severity and a higher case fatality rate, though a review of the literature failed to delineate a relationship between nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and HAV-induced liver failure[18].Regarding the prevention of hepatitis A, in addition to improving hygiene and sanitation measures, the vaccine is a very effective tool, already being included in the vaccination calendar from childhood in many countries. Nonvaccinated persons traveling to HAV endemic regions should receive a single vaccine dose before departure[19]. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020 Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends vaccination for all children aged 1 year and older, men who have sex with men and people who use injection and noninjection drugs, have occupational risk factors for infection, travel to high-endemicity areas or those who have an increased risk for complications from hepatitis A (e.g., chronic liver disease, HIV infection and pregnancy, if at risk for infection)[12]. There are currently two single-antigen inactivated vaccines: HavrixTM (GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals, Rixenstar, Belgium) and VaqtaTM (Merck and Co. Inc., West Point, PA, United States)[20,21]. A live-attenuated vaccine is licensed in China and has been used extensively there[22]. A combination HAV-HBV vaccine (TwinrixTM; GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals) has been available since 1996[23]. Havrix and Vaqta vaccines are given in a two-dose schedule 6 mo apart and Twinrix requires three doses. The efficacy of both live-attenuated and inactivated vaccines has been well established in a large review[24]. A special population concerns HIV-positive individuals who are susceptible to HAV infection, especially because of low adherence to recommended HAV vaccination. In this group a double dose of HAV vaccination is recommended as an additional dose of the HAV vaccine may improve serological responses and durability of seroprotection. Immunoglobulin is used for both pre-exposure and postexposure prophylaxis of HAV. Children younger than 12-mo-old, adults with chronic liver disease, adults older than 40 years of age and immunocompromised individuals should receive a single dose of intramuscular HAV immunoglobulin (0.1 mL/kg) in addition to the vaccine, unless either is contraindicated.HEPATITIS EInfection with HEV, traditionally considered a disease almost exclusive to developing countries, has now become a worldwide health problem and is endemic in most developed countries, behaving largely as a zoonosis[25]. HEV infection has a greater clinical impact in populations that are especially vulnerable, such as immunosuppressed patients, pregnant women and patients with underlying liver disease. Thus, the World Health Organization places it as one of the leading causes of death from acute viral hepatitis worldwide[26].HEV is divided into four species (A–D). Genotypes 1 and 2 of species A are strains that infect humans, whereas genotypes 3 and 4 are zoonoses transmitted via meat consumption or direct contact with affected animals, mainly pigs or wild boar, or through contaminated blood products[25]. In recent years, particularly in Eastern China, genotype 1 has become much less common, and genotype 4 is now the most common genotype found in human cases[27]. Person-to-person transmission (direct contact) of HEV is very inefficient; study of close contacts of a case with documented HEV infection is not recommended, unless they share exposure to the source of infection. Blood transfusion is another route of transmission of HEV. The European Association for the Study of the Liver (EASL) recommends that blood donor services screen blood donors for HEV, given the results of local risk-assessment and cost-effectiveness studies[25].In most cases, contact with HEV produces an asymptomatic infection, mainly in women and young people, followed by spontaneous clearance of the virus[28]. HEV infection during pregnancy (particularly during the third trimester) has been associated with a poorer prognosis compared to other types of viral hepatitis[29-31]. Maternal mortality rates of up to 30% have been observed in different outbreaks of hepatitis due to HEV in pregnant women[32]. The mortality associated with HEV infection during pregnancy is usually associated with infections caused by genotypes 1 and 2, though cases caused by other genotypes have been reported[33,34].Although the development of acute liver failure in the course of HEV infection is rare (0.5%-4.0%)[35], in some series, like that of Crossan et al[36], HEV accounts for 5.0% of all cases of acute liver failure. Those most at risk of developing acute liver failure in the course of HEV are pregnant women and patients with underlying chronic liver disease[37,38]. Because of this, all patients with acute hepatitis, acute liver failure or patients with decompensation of chronic liver disease should be screened for HEV infection. Although isolated cases of chronic HEV infection have been reported in immunocompetent patients[39,40], chronic HEV infection occurs primarily in immunocompromised patients, such as solid organ transplant recipients. In transplant patients, HEV infection may progress to chronicity in up to 2/3 of cases, with rapid progression of fibrosis and development of liver cirrhosis in up to 10% of patients[41,42]. Cases have even been reported of retransplantation in liver transplant recipients due to acute liver failure from HEV[43]. Extrahepatic clinical manifestations have been described in 2%-5% of patients with HEV infection[44]. In most of these the liver manifestations of the infection are mild or absent. The EASL recommends HEV testing, irrespective of liver function test results, in patients presenting with neuralgic amyotrophy or Guillain-Barré syndrome and suggests HEV testing for patients with encephalitis/myelitis. Patients with proteinuria should also be tested[25]. Currently, screening for HEV is advisable in all cases of acute hepatitis, including those with suspected drug-induced liver injury, particularly if patients have higher levels of transaminases, in which case acute HEV must be excluded systematically[45,46].The diagnosis of HEV is based on a combination of serology and nucleic acid amplification techniques. Serological techniques measure anti-HEV immunoglobulin (Ig)M antibodies, which appear approximately 4 wk after contact and may be detected up to 6 mo later, and IgG antibodies, which appear at about the same time as the IgM antibodies but can last for years. The presence of anti-HEV IgM indicates recent or acute infection while anti-HEV IgG antibodies indicate recent or past infection. HEV-RNA can be detected in blood or stool 3 wk after infection and a short time before the appearance of symptoms and constitute the gold standard for the diagnosis of active infection[47]. The combination of serological studies and the determination of HEV-RNA increases the diagnostic specificity and sensitivity, though it is necessary to bear in mind the immune-competence status of the patient. The World Health Organization recommends first determining the presence of anti-HEV IgM antibodies and then determining the viral RNA. In immunocompromised patients, the antibodies may be negative despite HEV infection, and it is necessary to determine the viral load in all cases[48]. Current recommendations for the management of HEV infectionAcute HEV infection does not usually require antiviral therapy. In almost all cases HEV infection clears spontaneously. Nevertheless, early therapy of acute hepatitis E may shorten the course of the disease and reduce overall morbidity. Ribavirin treatment may be considered in cases of severe acute hepatitis E or acute-on-chronic liver failure. Corticosteroids have been used in individual cases of acute liver failure, with improvement of liver function parameters. However, there is currently insufficient evidence to support general corticosteroid treatment in this group of patients[25]. The group of transplant patients deserves special mention. The EASL recommends decreasing immunosuppression at diagnosis of chronic HEV infection in solid organ transplant recipients, if possible. In patients with persisting HEV replication 3 mo after detection of HEV RNA, the EASL recommends ribavirin monotherapy for a duration of 12 wk. Trials have been attempted with other treatments, such as sofosbuvir in single therapy, which showed antiviral activity in vitro but was unable to inhibit viral replication in a phase II pilot trial[49].Future directionsAs no efficient therapy exists for HEV and bearing in mind it can cause severe symptoms of liver disease, efforts should be focused on both prevention and research.Preventive measures should be enhanced in immunosuppressed patients and pregnant women; indeed, screening for HEV should be recommended in pregnant women in endemic areas like Sub-Saharan Africa or South Asia, assessing the risk individually[47]. A few European countries are starting to include HEV-RNA detection in all blood donor samples, although certain aspects remain to be clarified, such as the most cost-effective technique for detection, the viral load considered infectious or the characteristics of the recipient that may influence transmission of the disease, such as the immunological status[50].Currently only one vaccine against HEV is available (Helicon®). It has only received approval in China, though other vaccines are under development. The availability of an effective vaccine would constitute the main tool for prevention of HEV infection[51].HEPATITIS BThe discovery of the Australia antigen in 1965 represented a starting point for the identification of the virus of hepatitis B, and for many it was the beginning of the study of viral hepatitis. Infection with HBV is now a public health problem worldwide, with some 257 million persons with chronic infection. HBV is endemic in the western Pacific and Africa, with over 6% of the population infected[1]. In Europe and the United States the prevalence is < 2%, mostly related with immigration[52]. HBV is the leading cause of morbidity and mortality of hepatic origin in the world, despite the availability of an efficient vaccine. Vaccination programs, control of blood donations, serologic evaluation in pregnant women or persons at risk and activities aimed at limiting invasive procedures in unsafe conditions have all reduced the incidence of acute HBV hepatitis and the prevalence of the disease. Although population screening is not indicated, screening is recommended in risk groups, partners of infected patients and before receiving oncologic or immunosuppressive therapy[1].The spectrum of the disease varies greatly, from inactive carriers to others with hepatic cirrhosis and hepatocarcinoma. The natural history of hepatitis B is a dynamic process, traditionally differentiated into five phases depending on virus and host factors, like the state of immune competence, age or the duration of the infection[53]. They are classified according to liver inflammation data (alanine aminotransferase), determination of hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) and quantification of the HBV-DNA viral load[54] as well as estimation of the degree of hepatic fibrosis, usually by elastography[1] as serologic indices of fibrosis have proven less precise in HBV infection[55]. These phases have traditionally been called: immune-tolerant phase, immune-elimination phase, immune-reactive phase, asymptomatic carrier and hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)-negative phase[56]. However, these phases have recently been grouped into two large spectra of chronic forms of hepatitis B with a new nomenclature: infection, encompassing the phases of immune tolerance and inactive carrier, both HBeAg positive and negative vs hepatitis, which refers to the phases in which there exists liver damage, the immune-reactive and the immune-elimination phases[57].Awareness of the particular phase in which the patient is and its clinical context is important to identify the need to start treatment and the choice of the most suitable antiviral agent. Evolution of antiviral treatment: Nucleos(t)ide analogsInitially it was thought that a depressed immune response was involved in the development of HBV infection. Thus, in 1986 the first clinical trial of interferon (IFN) alpha was published, though the findings showed a poor and transitory response[58]. Currently, in its pegylated form it is still considered a treatment option, with PEGα2a being easier to use and having greater efficacy and tolerance[59]. The duration of treatment with this drug is usually finite and the loss of HBsAg and conversion of HBeAg is relevant, although the drug has to be injected and is contraindicated in patients with decompensated cirrhosis, autoimmune disorders, pregnant women and severe depression or psychosis[59].Later studies on the lifecycle of HBV found that the virus uses an inverse transcriptase for replication. Accordingly, the use of drugs already available for another virus (HIV), NAs with an inhibitory action on this polymerase, were considered[60]. In 1998 the Food and Drug Administration approved the use of lamivudine for the treatment of HBV, controlling viral replication with oral treatment[61]. Lamivudine was the sole oral treatment available until 2002, when other NAs have become available: adefovir dipivoxil, ETV, telbivudine, TDF in 2008[4] and tenofovir alafenamide in 2016, though the latter is not available in all countries. All these analogs reduce the pool of cccDNA in infected hepatocytes, inhibiting recycling of the nucleocapsids, although they are unable to inhibit the initial formation of cccDNA in newly infected hepatocytes[5]. The main advantages of NAs are that they can be given orally, they have great efficacy in inhibition of HBV replication (very similar among all of them), their long-term safety and the possibility of being used in any situation, including decompensated cirrhosis and liver transplant or even during pregnancy in the case of TDF. They achieve a virological and biochemical response greater than 95%, for both positive and negative HBeAg[62,63]. The main inconvenience is that they require continued administration over time, even indefinitely, in order to maintain inhibition of viral replication and their efficacy can be affected by the development of drug-resistant HBV mutations, sometimes with cross-resistance between them, partly related with lack of adherence to treatments that have to be taken for such long periods. Lamivudine is the drug that has shown the greatest risk for development of resistance as compared with the other antiviral agents currently available, particularly ETV and TDF[64]. The main clinical practice guidelines therefore recommend treatment with ETV, TDF and tenofovir alafenami given their great antiviral potency and high resistance barrier[65]. The choice of one over the other treatment strategy depends of the stage of liver fibrosis, virological factors and the comorbidity profile of the patient, in addition to personal preferences[14]. Tenofovir alafenami is a prodrug that reaches higher levels of TDF than TDF in the hepatocytes with lower doses. Lower exposure to the drug is related with less worsening of renal function and less loss of bone mineral density[66].Recent studies have shown that combined NA treatment with Peg-IFN, simultaneously or sequentially, increases the probability of HBsAg loss, but the benefits are restricted to just a small group of patients with low HBsAg levels. Further studies are therefore needed before it can be recommended[67]. Recent studies have examined whether TDF vs ETV could impact the risk of developing hepatocarcinoma. Though this would condition the choice of one over the other, neither has yet been found superior in this respect. Some studies have suggested the benefit of TDF, though the differences were not statistically significant[68]. Retrospective analyses of different series have reported contradictory results, with some showing no difference between the drugs[69] whilst others have found benefits for TDF vs ETV in the prevention of hepatocarcinoma[70], a benefit confirmed in a recent meta-analysis[71]. Randomized trials are needed to establish this association.Nucleos(t)ide analogs and liver transplantationPatients who required a liver transplant due to HBV initially had a very high risk of recurrence of the infection in the graft. This was particularly so for patients who received their transplant having a high viral load, which in addition was usually a severe, rapidly progressive hepatitis, so much so that HBV infection became considered a contraindication for liver transplantation[1]. With the advent of anti-hepatitis B hyperimmune gammaglobulin during the 1990s, and particularly of the NAs, the perspective changed. The post-transplant results were similar to those of other etiologies. Now that we have potent NAs and a high resistance barrier, the tendency is to use hepatitis B immune globulin for a short time and at lower doses than before and even regimens without hepatitis B immune globulin with NAs in single therapy maintained indefinitely[67]. These advances have thus allowed for an individualized prophylaxis based on the individual risk profile of each patient[72] as well as the use of anti-hepatitis B core positive donors. Treatment objectives: New definitions of cureThe final aim of antiviral therapy is cure of the infection, eliminating all potential forms of HBV replication[59]. Sustained loss of HBsAg and eradication of the HBV-DNA, including the cccDNA[6], though this is hardly feasible with currently available drugs, is the sterilizing cure. As a result, the American Association of the Study of Liver Diseases and EASL agreed to the definition of functional cure, defined as the sustained loss of HBsAg and HBV-DNA in serum with or without the development of anti-HBs. These two situations are those that allow treatment to be suspended safely and with little risk of relapse. However, they are very rarely achieved. Another concept, partial cure, refers to the persistence of HBsAg but with negativization of HBeAg, with or without seroconversion to anti-HBe, normalization of alanine aminotransferase and a low or undetectable viral load, simulating a phase of inactive carrier and thus susceptible to interruption of treatment[6]. Current guidelines[57,73] recommend that treatment can be suspended with NAs for patients with positive HBsAg but without cirrhosis if there is seroconversion to anti-HBe after 1 year of consolidation. For negative HBeAg, treatment can be suspended for patients whose HBsAg clears and who have had viral suppression for over 2-3 years, requiring strict follow-up[74]. Quantified HBsAg is determined by enzyme immunoassay and reflects the amount and transcriptional activity of the cccDNA. It is very useful in untreated patients with negative HBeAg, with HBV-DNA < 2000 IU/mL, in whom values of quantified HBsAg < 1000 IU/mL are indicative of inactive carrier with a low risk of disease progression and appearance of hepatocarcinoma. Although no cut-off value has yet been established, a level < 100 IU/mL seems to predict this sustained response[1]. Among the new markers is the antigen related with the HBV core that correlates with the transcriptional activity of cccDNA, especially in the negative HBeAg patient, and it could be superior to quantified HBsAg for the identification of inactive carrier patients and to predict viral relapse after suspending treatment[75].Future directionsGiven that treatment with NAs has little impact on the cccDNA, which in addition can be replaced with no need for the entry of new virus[6], numerous studies are in place to develop new drugs that act at the level of the different stages of the life cycle of HBV, about which more and more is being learnt, or that modulate the host immune response. These drugs are at various stages of clinical trials, with up-to-date information available from: http://www.hepb.org/treatment-and-management/drug-watch[7] (Table 1).Table 1Main drugs under development for the treatment of hepatitis B virus (with effect from phase II)
Treatment


Mechanism of action


Country


Phase 

BulevirtideInhibitor of HBV entry into the hepatocyteGermanyPhase IIVIR-2218Silencers: Interfere and destroy viral RNA United StatesPhase IIJNJ-3989United StatesPhase IIIONIS-HBVRx (GSK3228836)Antisense molecules: Bind to mRNA to prevent passage by viral proteinUnited StatesPhase IIVebicorvirCapsid inhibitorsUnited StatesPhase II/IIIMorphothiadinChinaPhase IIJNJ 56136379IrelandPhase IIABI-H2158United StatesPhase IIREP 2139HBsAg inhibitors CanadaPhase IIREP 2165CanadaPhase IINASVACTHERAPEUTIC VACCINES: Use stimulation of the immune system as treatmentCubaPhase IIIGS-4774United StatesPhase IIHepTcellUnited StatesPhase IIGS9688 (TLR-8 agonist)TLRUnited StatesPhase IIGC1102Monoclonal antibodiesKoreaPhase IIASC22: Inhibitor PDL1Checkpoint inhibitors: Stimulate specific T lymphocytesChinaPhase IIIMC-I109VOther immune modulatorsT-cell receptorUnited StatesPhase IITaken from Hepatitis B Foundation[7], Available from: https://www.hepb.org/treatment-and-management/drug-watch/. TLR: Toll-like receptor; HBV: Hepatitis B virus; HBsAg: Hepatitis B surface antigen.The main drugs under development and their therapeutic targets are described below: Blocking entry of HBV into the hepatocyte: The sodium taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide receptor is a transmembrane protein that cotransports bile acids and participates in the entry of HBV and HDV into hepatocytes[76]. Bulevirtide couples to this receptor and blocks fixation of the preS1 domain on the coat of HBV, inhibiting entry of the virus. Although this does not directly interfere with the formation of the cccDNA, inhibiting virus entry can block the infection of new hepatocytes. It has also been proposed as an option to prevent reinfection in the transplanted liver[77]. It is currently in phase II[7].Silencers: These are drugs designed to interfere and destroy viral RNA. The process involves small molecules of RNA producing interference in the transcription of viral RNA. They are short non-encoding sequences present in the cells that regulate the post-transcriptional expression of certain genes, resulting in a reduction in the production of multiple viral antigens[77,78]. There are several studies in various phases: preclinical, I and II. HBsAg release inhibitors: HBsAg is the most abundant circulating viral antigen. It contributes to T-cell tolerance and attenuation of the host immune response. Its inhibition may enable immune regulators to restore the immune response. There are currently two phase II studies with results that need to be validated.Capsid assembly modulators: As the nucleocapsid contains the viral DNA necessary for replication, inhibiting its formation is an interesting strategy that can prevent the formation of cccDNA during de novo infection[79]. There are currently several studies in various phases, preclinical, I and II and one with vebicorvir in phase II/III. Antisense molecules: These bind to messenger RNA inhibiting the formation of viral proteins. There is currently one phase II study in the United States. New NAs: Besifovir has been approved in Korea, with antiviral efficacy comparable to that of TDF after 48 wk of treatment, with effects lasting 96 wk and a better safety profile than TDF in terms of bone and kidney results[80], though further studies are needed. Still in the preclinical phase are studies of drugs against HBV-cccDNA. They work via degradation of the lymphotoxin beta receptor using specific antibodies or with cccDNA excision enzymes.Immunotherapy: Immunological dysfunction due to “exhaustion,” a phenomenon characterized by lack or absence of specific T cells against HBV associated with poor cytotoxic activity, worsening cytokine production and an increased expression of T-cell inhibitor receptors[81], has resulted in various immunotherapeutic strategies aimed at modulating the innate or adaptive immune response, or both, in an attempt to restore a competent immune response against the virus and infected hepatocytes[59]. New modulatory agents of immunity in clinical development include:Pattern recognition receptor (PRR) agonists. PRR are proteins that detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns and are present in various cell groups, like hepatocytes and cells of the innate immune system. Among the main PRR are the Toll-like receptors[82]. HBV is recognized by the PRR as it provokes a cytokine-mediated response. The aim of therapy with PRR agonists is to enhance the antiviral response of the cytokines to achieve an adaptive immune response with activation of natural killer cells and T lymphocytes[83]. Agonists of Toll-like receptor-7 and Toll-like receptor-8 are under development and appear to stimulate the immune response satisfactorily.Molecules to revert the exhausted T lymphocytes by blocking immunoinhibitory signals, mainly programmed cell death protein-1, will be the subject of future studies[59]. There is currently one phase II trial in China (ASC22).Therapeutic vaccines. Stimulation of specific HBV B and T lymphocytes by vaccines is a way of overcoming immune tolerance in patients with chronic HBV. Several categories exist, based on proteins, DNA and vectors. They are all being studied in clinical trials in combination with current antivirals[84] as, so far, on their own they have been unable to control infection. In summary, interaction at each stage of the life cycle of HBV may be the therapeutic aim to achieve elimination of the cccDNA, though it is also necessary to standardize the method to measure this. As therapeutic research in HBV advances new compounds appear, with data on efficacy, although with complex profiles and multiple pharmacological interactions. Given that, the consensus agrees that cure of HBV means clearance of the HBsAg. Clinical studies should demonstrate that this is possible in a high proportion of treated patients. Future studies should include long-term safety results, interactions with common drugs and the pharmacokinetics in special populations[85]. Additionally, the drugs should be safe and easy to administer, as are current NAs, and moreover the clearance of the HBsAg must be sustained after interrupting treatment.Figure 1 shows the main therapeutic targets and the drugs under development.Figure 1
The main therapeutic targets and the drugs under development for hepatitis B. HBV: Hepatitis B virus; HBsAg: Hepatitis B surface antigen; HBeAg: Hepatitis B e antigen; cccDNA: Covalently closed circular DNA.HEPATITIS DHDV was discovered by Rizzetto et al[86] in 1977 in patients infected by HBV who had severe hepatitis. Despite being an incomplete virus that requires the presence of HBV it can nevertheless cause severe progressive hepatitis[87]. Progression to cirrhosis may occur in 80% of patients at 10 years[88], and HBV-HDV coinfection increases the risk of hepatocarcinoma compared to infection with just HBV alone[89]. HDV has a worldwide distribution, though with great variations in prevalence (higher in Latin America and eastern Europe but lower in western Europe, Japan and North America, where better socioeconomic conditions and HBV vaccination mean it is virtually restricted to injection-drug users). At least 5% of HBV carries in the world are thought to be infected with HDV, though it is probably even higher as there is no homogenous screening protocol and due to the impossibility of performing diagnostic tests in endemic areas. The clinical course of HDV infection depends on its mode of transmission[87]. Coinfection with HBV can mean a severe clinical course in up to 15% of persons, though limited courses are more common with cure and immunity. Superinfection (HDV infection in a chronic HBV carrier) is more often associated with chronic hepatitis D that can advance to cirrhosis and liver failure[90]. Accordingly, differentiation between coinfection and superinfection is important in the management and prognosis of liver disease.HDV infection should be investigated in all cases of acute or chronic hepatitis with a positive HBsAg[57], as any patient with HBV infection can be a carrier of HDV, especially in areas of moderate or high prevalence. HDV infection should also be investigated in patients with chronic HBV infection who present a peak of hypertransaminasemia.No treatment for acute hepatitis due to HDV has proven useful, the disease being managed with support measures and liver transplant in fulminant cases. The only drug approved to date for the treatment of chronic hepatitis due to HDV is IFNα, which produces a modest response in 23%-57% of those treated[91,92]. NAs are not recommended for the treatment of HDV, although sustained suppression of active HBV infection with NAs can reduce the quantification of HBsAg and thus have a beneficial effect on coinfection with HDV[67]. Several new treatments are being tried aimed at blocking the viral cycle at different points: inhibitors of virus entry into the hepatocyte, assembly and other new strategies based on immune stimulation with cytokines and agonists of the receptors (Table 2):Table 2Main drugs under development for the treatment of hepatitis D virus (with effect from phase II)
Bulevirtide


Entry inhibitor


Germany


Approved in Europe

LonafarnibPrenylation inhibitorUnited StatesPhase IIIREP 2139HBsAg inhibitorCanadaPhase IIEzetimibeNTCP inhibitorPakistanPhase IITaken from Hepatitis B Foundation[7], Available from: https://www.hepb.org/treatment-and-management/drug-watch/. NTCP: Sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide; HBsAg: Hepatitis B surface antigen.Bulevirtide is the first drug to be approved by the European Commission specifically for hepatitis D. It acts by blocking entry by binding to the receptor that HBV uses to enter the liver cells (sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide), thereby interfering in the life cycle of HBV and, consequently, preventing replication of HDV. Ezetimibe also acts by blocking entry and is being studied in a trial that is currently in phase II. Inhibitors of HDV assembly: Lonafarnib is an inhibitor of farnesyl transferase, an enzyme that catalyzes prenylation, which is essential for HDV assembly. It significantly reduces the viral load when compared with placebo[93].Inhibitor of HBsAg: A study in phase II for REP 2139 shows promising results.As an immune modulator, IFN lambda binds to a single receptor much expressed on hepatocytes and little on hematopoietic and central nervous system cells. It is therefore well tolerated like IFNα, with a similar effect. In conclusion, HDV, despite being minor, is in fact an important health problem in many areas of the world, being independently associated with long-term complications[94]. Standardization of diagnostic tests to detect HDV-RNA is needed. Although no specific treatment yet exists, bulevirtide has been approved by the European Commission, and other drugs are currently being developed whose efficacy and safety will need to be determined. HEPATITIS CHCV, an RNA virus with seven genotypes, was discovered in 1989, before which it was referred to as non-A non-B[95]. HCV infection is the type that has undergone most changes over the last 10 years. From a chronic disease with few treatment options, based on IFN ± ribavirin, it has become a curable disease, even before liver damage is produced, as a result of DAA. This has led to a revolution in HCV, impacting the disease and its complications, liver transplant waiting lists and the incidence of HCV-associated hepatocarcinoma as well as the epidemiological and economic situation. In addition, the availability of an efficient therapy, limited in time and with excellent tolerance, has enabled objectives to be established for worldwide elimination of the disease. Nonetheless, HCV is still considered a prevalent disease, with healthcare repercussions and susceptible to management strategies.The worldwide prevalence of HCV has fallen from 170 million carriers in 1999[96] to 71 million infected persons according to estimates in 2015[2], corresponding to 1% of the population, mainly due to prevention of nosocomial infection and the progressive access to efficient antiviral agents. Previously, most infections were related with transfusions of blood products, persons born between 1945 and 1965 (the so-called “baby boomer generation”), hemodialysis and hemophilia, and a high percentage of patients had advanced or decompensated disease and failure of prior therapy. More recently, infection has been associated with the use of intravenous drugs, sexual risk-practices like men who have sex with men or chemsex (Party and Play) and certain risk groups such as prisoners or those with severe mental disorders who were not treated during the era of IFN[97], with most being treatment-naïve, having little fibrosis and very often scarce awareness of their condition.Although hepatitis C is present all over the world, China, Pakistan, India, Egypt, Russia and the United States account for more than 50% of all cases of infection in the world[98], data to be considered with migratory movements. Despite the reduction in the incidence, approximately 400000 persons die each year from causes related to HCV, mainly cirrhosis and its complications and the development of hepatocarcinoma[2].Evolution of antiviral therapy and management of chronic hepatitis C from the past to the present: Direct acting antiviralsIn 1991 the Food and Drug Administration approved treatment with IFN alpha for HCV infection but with a very low response rate, around 16%, a long treatment period, a parenteral route and important side effects[99]. During the 1990s ribavirin was added, slightly increasing the efficacy though again with more side effects[100]. IFN was later modified to its pegylated form, thus reducing the need for injectable doses, slightly improving tolerability. The combination of pegylated IFN and ribavirin, with cure rates up to 41% in genotype 1 and almost 75% in other genotypes[101], was the only treatment available until 2011 but with important limitations due to its multiple contraindications and frequent important secondary effects.Better understanding of the life cycle and identification of the structural and non-structural proteins of HCV led to the development of antivirals acting directly on certain targets. The first of these were the protease inhibitors, boceprevir and telaprevir, which are oral antivirals approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2011 for treatment of HCV genotype 1 both in naïve and pretreated patients in combination with the previous dual therapy[102,103]. This triple therapy increased the success of treatment in patients with genotype 1, but at the same time it also increased the toxicity and pharmacological interactions, the costs and the risk of decompensation of the liver disease in more advanced stages[104] as well as still requiring parenteral administration over long periods.The real revolution in antiviral treatment arose with effect from 2013 with the successive approval of molecules having different mechanisms of action, mainly inhibition of the proteases NS3/NS4 or the polymerase replication complex NS5A. These drugs provided multiple advantages over the earlier drugs, such as oral administration, high efficacy, good tolerance and the possibility of shorter periods of treatment. The different combinations of “the new antivirals” offered multiple treatment lines depending on the clinical setting[105]. Most were IFN-free, which enabled treatment of populations that had previously been considered difficult to treat, such as the psychiatric population, persons with drug addictions or on replacement therapy, patients with kidney failure or solid organ transplant recipients[106]. The main protagonist of this change was sofosbuvir, a polymerase NS5B inhibitor acting on genotypes 1, 2, 3 and 4, though associated with other antivirals or traditional therapy. Soon after came simeprevir, a protease inhibitor with pan-genotype action[107] and daclatasvir, able to inhibit the non-structural protein NS5A and acting on genotypes 1, 3 and 4[108]. Combinations of antivirals were also produced, with different mechanisms of action, like sofosbuvir/ledipasvir[109], ombitasvir paritaprevir/ritonavir and dasabuvir[110] or grazoprevir/elbasvir[111], each with preferences for certain genotypes and different treatment durations. All of these strategies clearly increased cure rates, increasing sustained viral response (SVR) rates globally above 95% in all genotypes and around 85% in patients with advanced cirrhosis[112,113]. However, in these early IFN-free years the clinical management of HCV became increasingly complex. Before choosing the best treatment option in each case it was necessary to identify the genotype as well as the stage of the liver disease and the particular degree of fibrosis, as the drugs did not have a pan-genotype action and their duration and combination were conditioned by these factors. This situation was reflected in the clinical guidelines of the time from the main scientific societies, showing multiple complex tables of recommendations for usual clinical practice[114-117]. The initial high costs also conditioned the slow access to treatment, such that many countries drew up specific protocols for the progressive approach to patients with hepatitis C, with the first patients to be treated being those with more advanced liver disease or in special situations[118]. This, together with the high risk of drug interactions and the outlines for these new therapies necessitated an exhaustive follow-up of the patient during antiviral treatment, with regular measurements of laboratory values and even excessive determinations of the HCV viral load, despite the lack of general rules concerning stopping treatment[119]. A qualitative leap occurred in 2016 with the advent of antiviral therapy with pan-genotypic and pan-fibrotic action plus their universal access. Combinations of sofosbuvir/velpatasvir[120,121] and glecaprevir/pibrentasvir[122] in single tablets have pan-genotypic and pan-fibrotic action in short-duration treatments of just 12 wk or 8 wk with the latter combination[123] and with SVR rates above 97% in practically all clinical contexts. With these two lines, plus the already available association of grazoprevir / elbasvir, also pan-genotypic, the approach is much more simplified for patients who now need treatment. This latter combination is indicated in all cases of active infection, the choice depending on certain determinants or conditioning factors, such as the renal function, which may limit the use of sofosbuvir, decompensated cirrhosis, which discourages protease inhibitors, or individual drug interactions, though these are much less common with the latest DAA compared to the earlier antiviral agents[124]. The pan-genotypic action, the high efficacy and the wide safety margin of currently available strategies have all led to simplification of the requirements to start antiviral therapy. These can be limited to determining the existence of viral replication (presence of RNA or HCV antigens), whether there is cirrhosis, which can be estimated with non-invasive methods like the APRI or FIB-4 indexes and ruling out possible interactions[125]. At the same time, monitoring during treatment has also become simpler, with the general recommendation (but not essential) of just determining the viral load 12 wk after completing treatment to confirm the SVR, with earlier safety controls when necessary due to a particular circumstance, like the cirrhotic patient[125]. An additional advantage of the current panorama is the existence of rescue therapy for the few cases that fail to achieve an SVR. The association of sosfosbuvir / velapatasvir / voxilaprevir is indicated for patients who fail with DAA therapy, with a high SVR rate in all genotypes[126].This radical change over recent years in the setting of antiviral therapy has enabled a high percentage of the HCV population to be treated, often resulting in the patient being discharged if the degree of fibrosis is only mild and there is no comorbidity. Nevertheless, although eradication of the virus is associated with a reduction in mortality due to hepatic and extrahepatic causes related with HCV and improvement in liver function (and even a reduction in the degree of fibrosis), those patients who already had advanced fibrosis still have a risk for complications of the liver disease or the development of hepatocarcinoma and should therefore undergo regular follow-up, even if they have an SVR[127,128]. Direct acting antivirals and the current approach to acute hepatitis C DAAs have not only had an impact on the management of chronic hepatitis C, but the approach to cases of acute HCV infection has also changed. Historically, acute hepatitis C, defined as the first 6 mo after contact, was not generally susceptible to treatment, and pegylated IFN was used in some patients if viral replication continued for longer than 12 wk[129]. During the early phase of infection, DAAs have proven effective and beneficial, especially to eliminate the disease and particularly in such risk groups as injection drug users, men who have sex with men, persons who undertake sex practices of risk, patients with HIV or nosocomial infection. In these groups, DAAs reduce morbidity and mortality and the risk of transmission during the period waiting for the criteria of chronicity to be fulfilled before starting treatment[130,131]. Based on the available evidence the EASL recommends sofosbuvir/velpatasvir or glecaprevir/ pibrentasvir for 8 wk for what is now referred to as recently acquired hepatitis C[125]. During the era of DAA post-exposure prophylaxis is still not recommended without documented transmission of HCV[125,132].Figure 2 shows the timeline of antiviral treatment for HCV.Figure 2
Shows the timeline of antiviral treatment for hepatitis C virus. HCV: Hepatitis C virus; IFN: Interferon; RBV: Ribavirin; Peg: Pegylated; DAA: Direct-acting antiviral; WHO: World Health Organization.Impact of direct acting antivirals on liver transplantation The efficacy of DAA has impacted two great aspects of liver transplantation. First, it has clearly reduced the indication for liver transplant due to HCV, as shown in different series analyzing the current situation of liver transplant waiting lists[133-135]. Even so, the indication for a liver transplant still exists, mainly due to the development of HCV-associated hepatocarcinoma. Second, DAAs have enabled the majority of patients to reach liver transplantation with no viral replication. This, therefore, eliminates the risk of recurrence of hepatitis C in the graft. Additionally, when necessary, DAA can be used safely after transplantation, with little risk of graft rejection and high efficacy, unlike earlier IFN-based treatments[105,136]. This efficacy and safety have been confirmed in recipients of other solid organ transplants, such as kidney transplant patients with chronic hepatitis C[137], thereby endorsing their use in the transplant population.Impact of direct acting antivirals on solid organ donationOrgan donation from patients with active HCV infection remains controversial, especially for seronegative recipients, but the safety and efficacy of DAAs in solid organ recipients nevertheless allows this option to be contemplated. Different series have shown good results in lung, heart[138] and kidney transplantation. Even in liver transplants[139], provided the benefit of the transplant exceeded the risk of death on the waiting list, and early access to DAA treatment is guaranteed[140,141].Future directionsThe World Health Organization established the objective of elimination of hepatitis C by 2030, defined as a reduction of 80% in cases of de novo infection and a reduction of 65% in death due to HCV[9]. Besides currently available efficient treatment, this objective also requires first making the population aware by means of information campaigns, second, rescuing patients who have already been diagnosed but not treated and third, simplifying the whole diagnostic process and treatment access when necessary in order to guarantee diagnosis and treatment of the greatest number of cases possible. The active search for already diagnosed patients is one of the main and most feasible strategies for micro-elimination as it permits cases to be rescued for treatment[142].Reflex testing[143], as well as points of care, will enable diagnosis to be externalized, reaching risk groups with little contact with the healthcare system, like migrants or prisoners[144]. The diagnosis of hepatitis C should be directly linked to starting treatment (test and treat) so that in certain populations it will also be necessary to externalize treatment in the near future. For this, pilot projects have been designed with treatment administered by non-specialized healthcare personnel, like nurses[145], prison doctors, addiction physicians and primary care physicians[146], which has achieved a cost-effective elimination in the groups attended.Populations still remain in which treatment needs further study, like pregnant women, in whom it is not recommended given the lack of safety data. It may, though, be the optimal time for screening in this group as it is sometimes the only contact they have with healthcare systems[113]. Notwithstanding the above, these emerging models of care of the hepatitis C patient and micro-elimination must not detract from the importance of preventive measures, which necessitate adequate information for the population, particularly the already-mentioned risk groups.The elimination of hepatitis C is associated with a significant reduction in complications due to liver disease, a reduction in mortality due to liver disease and the risk of developing hepatocarcinoma, in both patients with mild fibrosis and in those with advanced fibrosis[127]. In addition, suppression of viral replication is associated with a reduction in systemic symptoms, mainly diabetes and vascular events, which in turn is associated with a reduction in mortality due to extrahepatic causes[147].The impact of SVR on portal hypertension and its complications may result in a discrete reduction in pressure gradients in the hepatic veins, particularly in the year of reaching SVR[148]. However, as not all studies have associated an SVR with regression of portal hypertension or regression of esophageal varices[149], the Baveno VI consensus recommends the same cut points for screening of varices in patients with SVR[150]. Several cohort studies have shown that the risk of hepatocarcinoma is reduced after SVR[127], but it does not disappear. Patients with advanced fibrosis and cirrhosis should continue to be screened for hepatocarcinoma as its annual global incidence is 2.5%-4.5%, even with SVR[151]. In patients with mild fibrosis, continued screening for other risk factors, like diabetes, metabolic liver disease, low albumin levels or thrombocytopenia, for the development of hepatocarcinoma should be contemplated[127]. Figure 3 shows the main recommendations for elimination of hepatitis C.Figure 3
Proposals for the management of hepatitis C. MSM: Men who have sex with men; SMD: Severe mental disorder; Ag: Antigen; HCV: Hepatitis C virus; NGO: Non-governmental organization.CONCLUSIONAlthough the various types of viral hepatitis still represent a great public health problem, the great advances over recent years are very positively impacting their management and prognosis. Nevertheless, it is still necessary to persist with, and even boost studies designed to find efficient new therapies, though without forgetting the implementation of preventive measures, as a basis of achieving advances in minimizing the impact of this disease on health.


Title: Identification of a Novel Deltavirus in Boa Constrictors

OBSERVATIONHepatitis D virus (HDV) forms and is the sole member of the genus Deltavirus so far (1). Until the very recent finding of HDV-like sequences in ducks (2), HDV had been found only in humans, and it is represented by eight distinct genotypes (1, 3). In fact, HDV is hypothesized to have evolved within the human host (4). HDV has a negative-sense single-stranded circular RNA genome of 1,672 to 1,697 nucleotides which is highly self-complementary (3, 5). Processing (autocatalytic cleavage of multimeric genomic and antigenomic RNAs and ligation of monomers) of the genome is mediated by genomic and antigenomic ribozymes (3, 6). HDV encodes only two proteins, the small and large hepatitis delta antigens (S- and L-HDAg), which are identical in amino acid sequence except that the L-HDAg contains 19 additional amino acid residues at its C terminus (7). The S-HDAg is needed for RNA replication, and the L-HDAg is involved in virus assembly (7). The virus requires hepatitis B virus (HBV) for egress and formation of infectious particles comprising a ribonucleoprotein formed of the circular RNA genome and HDAgs within an envelope decorated with HBV S antigen (3, 8). HDV replicates in the nucleus, and the evidence suggests that cellular DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II mediates HDV RNA replication (7). Patients with chronic HBV and HDV coinfection are at great risk of developing liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma, particularly in the case of superinfection with HDV in a chronically HBV-infected patient (3). The HDV prevalence among HBV carriers is estimated to be around 5% (3); however, it varies greatly depending on geographical area and viral genotype (9). Very recently, sequence data showing the presence of a divergent HDV-like agent was reported in ducks, without any traces of duck orthohepadnavirus (2). This prompted us to report our findings of an HDV-like agent which we discovered in snakes in early 2018.The animals included in this study were boa constrictor snakes submitted to the Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Zurich, Switzerland for euthanasia due to suspected boid inclusion body disease (BIBD) and subsequent diagnostic postmortem examination upon the owner’s request. We applied the Animals Scientific Procedures Act 1986 (ASPA), schedule 1 (http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1986/14/schedule/1) procedure to euthanize the snakes. Euthanasia and diagnosis-motivated necropsies are both routine veterinary procedures, and thus, ethical permissions were not required. The blood samples used in the study were collected for diagnostic purposes.The animals carrying the snake HDV (sHDV) were a Boa constrictor sabogae breeding pair with their joint offspring (F2 and F3) and a water python (Liasis mackloti savuensis) from the same colony. The parental animals (animals 1 and 3) had originally been imported from Panama to Italy, from where they were sold to a private owner in Switzerland. All snakes had shown mild neurological signs, which were suspected to be associated with BIBD. Confirmation of BIBD was achieved by examination of blood smears. After euthanasia, the diagnosis was confirmed in both snakes by histological examination of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples of brain and other tissues. Apart from the water python, which suffered from chronic hepatitis, none of the snakes exhibited other histopathological changes. We prepared next-generation sequencing (NGS) libraries using RNA extracted from the brain, liver, and blood of the parental animals (animals 1 and 3), both as described previously (10). The sequencing by the Illumina MiSeq platform with MiSeq Reagent kit v3 (Illumina) 2 × 300 cycles yielded 825,933 paired end reads for the brain sample of the father (animal 1), and removal of reads matching the snake genome (Python bivitattus) reduced the number of paired end reads to 401,141. We performed de novo assembly using MIRA version 4.9.5 (http://mira-assembler.sourceforge.net/) on CSC (IT Center for Science Ltd., Finland) Taito supercluster. One of the contigs with high coverage (130,902 reads in total, corresponding to 7.92% of all reads) appeared to be circular. The contig contained three repeats of a 1,711-nt sequence (GenBank accession no. MH988742) with two open reading frames (ORFs), one in the sense orientation and the other in the antisense orientation. The genome of the newly identified sHDV and the sequencing coverage are shown in Fig. 1A. High numbers of reads matching the same virus were found in the NGS libraries prepared from the brain, blood, and liver from both animals (animals 1 and 3). To look for accompanying hepadnaviruses, we collected 50 to 100 contigs with the highest coverage (reptarenaviruses, hartmaniviruses, snake genome, and bacterial sequences) for each sample, used them as bait to remove the uninteresting reads, and performed de novo assembly using MIRA version 4.9.5. After five cleaning rounds, we had approximately 40,000 contigs, which we analyzed using BLASTX (on CSC Taito supercluster) against hepadnavirus sequences in nr database, the contigs with matches (approximately 250) were reanalyzed using BLASTX against the entire nr database, and after removal of uninteresting contigs (snake and bacterial genomes), we analyzed the remaining reads using nucleotide BLAST at the NCBI website. With this approach, we could not detect hepadnavirus-like reads/contigs in any of the samples. However, based on the results, we cannot rule out the presence of an accompanying, previously unknown, hepadnavirus.FIG 1Genome organization, sequencing coverage, schematic ribozyme structure, and phylogenetic analysis of snake HDV. (A) Schematic presentation of circular RNA genome and sequencing coverage for snake HDV. The genome shows two open reading frames (ORFs). The ORF in the antigenomic orientation spanning nucleotide residues 1028 to 1627 encodes a 199-amino-acid protein which by BLAST analysis represents the HDAg. ORF2 is in the genomic orientation and spans residues 1389 to 211 and encodes a 177-amino-acid protein, which by BLAST analysis did not yield significant hits (35% identity over 66 amino acids (E value of 5) to ferritin-like protein from “Candidatus Nitrososphaera evergladensis” SR1, NCBI protein accession no. AIF82718.1). SMART (Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool available at http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/) analysis showed the putative protein to have two transmembrane helices, and a DUF3343 (domain of unknown function) domain with an E value of 0.013. The genomic and antigenomic ribozymes identified by sequence alignments to known HDVs are located at nt 687 to 744 and 830 to 918, respectively. The graph shows sequencing coverage (on the y axis) in respect to each nucleotide position (on the x axis) of snake HDV from the original brain sample, and coverage ranges from 7,368 (at nt position 729) to 26,304-fold. (B) Models for the secondary structures of the genomic and antigenomic ribozymes identified in snake HDV. The presentation format is adopted from a review by Webb and Luptak (20) which was also used by Wille et al. (2). Paired regions (P), joining regions (J), and loops (L) are shown. Both genomic and antigenomic ribozymes are structurally close to their human HDV counterparts described in reference 20, and they are identical at the following regions: active site, P1.1, and P3. Cleavage by the ribozyme occurs at the 5′ end. (C) Phylogenetic analysis of human, avian, and reptile HDAgs. The phylogenetic analysis was done using Bayesian MCMC method implemented in MrBayes 3.1.2 (21) with the JTT model of substitution with gamma distributed rate variation among sites. HDV genotype 1 (black), HDV genotype 2 (blue), HDV genotype 3 (green), avian HDV-like sequence (cyan), and snake HDV (red) are indicated. (D) RT-PCR results of snake tissues. The gel on the left shows RT-PCR products obtained for snake 1 (Fig. 2H) from different tissues: brain (br), blood (bl), and liver (liv). NTC, nontemplate control, M is DNA ladder. The gel on the right shows RT-PCR products obtained from liver samples, the animal numbering is according to Fig. 2H, and animal 1 serves as a positive control. (E) Western blot of liver and brain homogenates and serum from sHDV RT-PCR negative-control animal (animal 7 [Fig. 2H]) and sHDV RT-PCR-positive animals (animals 1 and 3 [Fig. 2H]). The panel on the left shows total protein staining by Ponceau S, and the panel on the right shows staining with anti-sHDAg (1:40,000) antiserum using IRDye 800CW-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit IgG (LI-COR Biosciences). The signal for Western blot was read with Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences).By BLAST analysis (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi), the other ORF of 199 amino acids was identified as snake HDAg (sHDAg) with 55% amino acid identity to small hHDAg (S-hHDAg, NCBI protein accession no. AWI66689.1) and 37% to avian HDAg (AYC81245.1); sequence alignment and identities are presented in Fig. S1 in the supplemental material. The large hHDAg (L-hHDAg) is produced by dsRNA-adenosine deaminase-mediated editing of the UAG stop codon to yield UGG (tryptophan), thus yielding 19 additional amino acid residues (11). Also, the sHDAg ORF terminates with UAG, and similar editing would yield L-sHDAG with 22 additional residues. The putative L-sHDAg sequence is included in Fig. S1. The hHDAg locates almost exclusively to the nucleus, and by prediction (ELM [12] and NLStradamus [13]) also, sHDAg harbors several nuclear localization signals (NLSs) (Fig. S1). ORF2 contains a stretch resembling the DUF3343 (domain of unknown function) by HMMER3 search in SMART (Simple Modular Architecture Research Tool available at http://smart.embl-heidelberg.de/), but with no apparent other homologies to known proteins. The secondary structure of the genome generated using the RNAstructure webserver (14) shows 73% self-complementarity, which is close to the 74% reported for known hHDVs (3). By GC content (53.3%), the sHDV lies between the newly reported avian HDV-like sequence (51%) (2) and human HDV (hHDV) (60%) (5).10.1128/mBio.00014-19.1FIG S1Amino acid identities between snake, human, and avian HDAgs. Amino acid alignment of the HDAg is shown at the top. Identical residues are indicated by dark gray shading. The table below the amino acid alignment shows the amino acid identities between the S-HDAgs. Below the table, the amino acid sequence of a putative large sHDAg is shown. The italic residues represent the NLS (nuclear localization signal) by Viterbi prediction in NLStradamus (13). The purple residues represent NLSs as predicted by ELM (eukaryotic linear motif search [12]). The underlined residues together with the blue residues represent NLSs by posterior prediction in NLStradamus (13). The tryptophan residue that results from the putative UAG→UGG codon edit (11) is shown in red. The red residue is a result of the genome editing, in which a stop codon changes to W. As a result of the editing, the protein synthesis continues additional 22 residues (which are marked in bold) to yield large sHDAg (L-sHDAg). The bold residues represent the additional residues required to make L-sHDAg. ProtParam (https://web.expasy.org/protparam/) analysis results for S- and L-sHDAg are shown below the putative L-sHDAg sequence. At the bottom of the figure, a prediction of cellular localization for human and snake S-HDAg by WoLF PSORT (18) is presented. The prediction results are shown below the respective sequences: nucl, nuclear localization; extr, extracellular localization; cyto, cytoplasmic localization; mito, mitochondrial localization; cyto_nucl, cytoplasmic and nuclear localization, i.e., dual localization. Download FIG S1, PDF file, 0.1 MB.Copyright © 2019 Hetzel et al.2019Hetzel et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.By aligning the nucleotide sequence of sHDV with those of hHDVs, we were able to locate the genomic and antigenomic ribozymes (Fig. 1B). The ribozymes share several features with the hHDV counterparts, including the active site and surrounding nucleotide residues. The phylogenetic analysis of amino acid sequences of hHDAgs shows that the sHDV and avian HDV-like agents (2) are divergent from the hHDV. sHDAg forms a sister clade to hHDAgs, whereas HDAg of the avian HDV-like agent forms an outgroup for these (Fig. 1C).RT-PCR targeting the nucleotide region 1139 to 1374 was set up using the 5′-GGATTGTCCCTCCAGAGGGTTC-3′ (fwd) and 5′-GCTCGAGGCTACCACCGAAAG-3 (rev) primer pair. We performed conventional RT-PCR as described in reference 10 using RNA extracted from freshly frozen liver samples as the template as described in reference 15. We found the parental animals and four of their seven offspring as well as the water python (animal 4) to be sHDV infected (Fig. 1D and 2H). The latter animal had been housed in the same room as the boa breeding pair for several years, similar to an adult B. constrictor constrictor (animal 7) that tested negative for sHDV. A Madagascar tree boa (Sanzinia madagascariensis) without BIBD from a different breeder was equally negative (Fig. 2F). Additionally, we studied 20 blood samples from snakes from a third breeder and found that three of the snakes were positive for sHDV RNA; these results together with Sanger sequencing results of the RT-PCR products are shown in Fig. S2.FIG 2Immunohistology for sHDAg in NGS- and RT-PCR-positive (animals 1 and 3 [A to F]) and negative (animal 7 [G]) animals, and a table of animals included in the study. (A) Brain. Viral antigen is expressed in the nucleus, cytoplasm, and cell processes of numerous neurons. (B) Liver. Individual hepatocytes (large arrows) are strongly positive, and macrophages (arrowheads) and endothelial cells (small arrows) are found to also express viral antigen. (C) Liver. A closer view shows that a substantial proportion of hepatocytes exhibit both cytoplasmic and nuclear (arrowheads) sHDAg expression. On the right, there is also one individual hepatocyte with an exclusively nuclear reaction (arrow). (D) Kidney. In a group of tubules (T), the majority of epithelial cells exhibit variably intense viral antigen expression. Occasional leukocytes in the interstitium (arrowhead) are also positive. (E) Lung. There are several individual positive epithelial cells (arrows); some subepithelial leukocytes are also found to express viral antigen (arrowhead). (F) Spleen. There is extensive viral antigen expression. Positive cells often have the morphology of macrophages (arrowheads). (G) RT-PCR-negative animal (animal 7), liver immunohistology for sHDAg. There is no evidence of sHDAg expression. Horseradish peroxidase method, hematoxylin counterstain. Note that the finely granular brownish staining in some Kupffer cells and hepatocytes in panels C and G is due to bile pigment and/or hemosiderin. (H) Table of animals included in the study.10.1128/mBio.00014-19.2FIG S2Snake HDV RT-PCR of samples from 20 random snakes from a third breeder. The RT-PCR products were separated on agarose gel, stained using GelRed (Biotium), and visualized under UV light. The strong band in “Pos. CTRL” (positive control) (animal 1 [Fig. 2H]) represents the expected 236-bp RT-PCR product. “Neg. CTRL” (negative control) is nontemplate control. The RT-PCR products from “Snake No. 2,” “Snake No. 4,” and “Snake No. 6” were purified and Sanger sequenced (DNA Sequencing and Genomics, Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki). The Sanger sequencing reads aligned to snake HDV are shown below. Download FIG S2, PDF file, 0.5 MB.Copyright © 2019 Hetzel et al.2019Hetzel et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.To produce an antibody against the sHDAg, we used Champion pET101 Directional TOPO Expression kit (Thermo Scientific) to clone and express the recombinant sHDAg with a C-terminal hexahistidine tag. We designed primers (5′-CACCATGGAAACTCCATCCAAGAAGC-3′ [fwd] and 5′-CGGGAACATTTTGTCACCCCTCAC-3′ [rev]) according to the manufacturer’s instructions to PCR amplify sHDAg ORF from the brain sample used for NGS library preparation. We did the protein expression similarly as described in reference 15 but performed the purification under native conditions using Ni-NTA agarose (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Rabbit antiserum against the recombinant protein was prepared by BioGenes GmbH as described previously (15). We tested the anti-sHDAg antiserum by Western blotting brain and liver homogenates (prepared as described in reference 16) from the parental animals (animals 1 and 3) and an RT-PCR-negative snake, along with serum samples. At 1:40,000 dilution, using protocols described previously (16, 17), the antiserum detected two bands with estimated molecular weights of 20 kDa and 27 kDa in the liver samples of the infected snakes (Fig. 1E). The bands detected likely represent the S- and L-sHDAg, which have estimated molecular weights of 22.7 kDa and 25.6 kDa, respectively (Fig. S1). The samples of sHDV RT-PCR-negative snakes showed very little background staining. Curiously, only the large ∼27-kDa form of the sHDAg was detected in the brain samples. The serum samples showed huge background, probably due to the presence of snake immunoglobulins. Immunohistology then served to detect sHDAg expression in the formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues (brain, liver, lung, kidney, and spleen) of the snakes examined, using the anti-sHDAg antiserum. We used the EnVision HRP detection system (Dako) as described previously (15), citrate buffer (pH 6.0 at 98°C, 10 min) for antigen retrieval, and anti-sHDAg serum at 1:10,000 dilution in Dako dilution buffer. Consecutive sections incubated with the preimmune serum instead of the specific primary antibody and tissues from RT-PCR-negative snakes served as negative controls.In both parental boas, we found sHDAg to be intensely expressed within the cell body and processes of numerous neurons in all brain regions (Fig. 2A), in individual hepatocytes in the liver (Fig. 2B and C), in a proportion of tubular epithelial cells in the kidney (Fig. 2D), in occasional epithelial cells in the lung (Fig. 2E), and in leukocytes (mainly consistent with macrophages) in the spleen (Fig. 2F). In addition to the cytoplasmic reaction, nuclear staining was seen in a proportion of hepatocytes, and some exhibited solely a nuclear reaction (Fig. 2C). All tissues also showed evidence of viral antigen expression in occasional vascular endothelial cells and some leukocytes (Fig. 2). These findings together with the Western blotting results (Fig. 1E) suggest active sHDV replication in various tissues. Of the seven juvenile offspring tested, we found the four RT-PCR-positive animals to also be positive by immunohistology, though mainly with a more limited expression (Fig. 2H). The RT-PCR-positive water python exhibited patchy sHDAg expression in the liver. The three RT-PCR-negative boa offspring and the RT-PCR negative-control animal (animal 7 [Fig. 2H]) were also negative by immunohistology (Fig. 2G). Because we were surprised by the prominent cytoplasmic staining of sHDAg, we used WoLF pSORT (18) to compare the predicted localization of hHDAg versus sHDAg. The prediction results (Fig. S1) corroborate our observations of prominent sHDAg localization in both cytoplasm and nucleus, despite the predicted NLSs. The localization of hHDAg shifts from nuclear to cytoplasmic as a result of HBV S-antigen coexpression (19), and thus, the prominent cytoplasmic localization of sHDAg could be explained by coexpression of glycoproteins of the yet unidentified accompanying enveloped virus.Herein we provide the first evidence of actively replicating deltavirus in species other than humans. Together with the recent report by Wille et al. (2), our study also suggests that deltaviruses are in fact likely present in several taxa. Evidence of replication in the present study includes the following. (i) Viral RNA is found in variable amounts in tissues and individuals. (ii) The virus is found in some but not all offspring (<100% vertical transmission). (iii) sHDAg expression varies in its extent in positive cells and is not observed in every cell. (iv) L- and S-HDAg are both present in the liver, but only L-sHDAg is found in the brain. Our immunohistological examination shows that the tropism of sHDV is broad and not limited to liver and blood. In fact, the detection of sHDAg in the renal tubular epithelium and lung epithelial cells indicates that the virus can be shed with secretions. We could not associate the infection with cytopathic changes; further studies are required to assess the sHDV-related pathogenesis. The fact that we, like Wille et al. (2), could not detect accompanying hepadnavirus challenges the current understanding of a strict hepadnavirus-deltavirus association. It would seem plausible that the newly found deltaviruses use arenavirus (in the case of snakes) and influenza virus (in the case of birds) coinfection to obtain the lipid envelope to make infectious particles. The ultimate proof of viral replication would require experimental infection of snakes; however, this would ideally use pure components, i.e., sHDV and the so far unknown helper virus. Alternatively, homogenates of different sHDV-infected tissues could be used. Such an approach could provide clues regarding the potential helper virus and could help to reveal the nature of sHDV particles and to identify the potential pathogenicity of sHDV. The present findings open up a multitude of avenues in deltavirus research.


Title: Exosomes as Conduits: Facilitating Hepatitis B Virus-Independent Hepatitis D Virus Transmission and Propagation in Hepatocytes

1. IntroductionExosomes are nano-sized extracellular vesicles (50 nm to 150 nm) that are secreted by most cells [1,2,3]. They originate from the endosomal pathway and correspond to the intraluminal vesicles forming the multivesicular body (MVB) [4]. Originally, it was thought that exosomes were waste products released via the shedding of the plasma membrane [5]. Recently, several key roles of exosomes were demonstrated, such as cellular homeostasis [2], inflammation [6,7], and antigen presentation [8], ensuring, at least in part, cell-to-cell communication [9,10]. Indeed, it has been demonstrated that exosomes contain proteins, lipids but also a variety of nucleic acids (double-stranded DNA, mRNAs, microRNAs, and long noncoding RNAs) and that the contents of exosomes can be transferred to recipient cells and influence their functions [1,11]. Hence, exosomes mediate the transfer of bio-macromolecules, functional proteins, and nucleic acids between cells [4]. In addition to host components, exosomes can harbour pathogen-derived elements [12,13]. Interestingly, viruses have the ability to use the exosomal secretory pathways to promote virus spread and disease pathogenesis, like the human papillomavirus (HPV) [14], the human herpes virus 6 (HHV-6) [15], the herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) [16], and the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) [17,18]. Moreover, several publications have shown that other viruses, like the hepatitis C virus (HCV), hepatitis A virus (HAV) [19], hepatitis E virus (HEV) [20], and hepatitis B virus (HBV) [21], can be transmitted in a receptor-independent manner, via extracellular vesicles including exosomes [13,21,22]. Recently, the presence of hepatitis delta RNA in extracellular vesicles was reported [23], but their involvement in HDV transmission was not assessed.Hepatitis delta is a severe form of chronic viral hepatitis [24], affecting between 12 and 72 million people worldwide [25,26,27]. It is caused by the hepatitis delta virus (HDV), a defective virus that needs the envelope protein from the HBV to form mature infectious virions [24]. Hepatitis B envelope proteins (HBsAg) occur as three isoforms: the small envelope protein (S-HBsAg), the medium (M-HBsAg), and the large (L-HBsAg). These isoforms are coded by either the S-domain only (S-HBsAg), the S-domain and an extension coded by the PreS2-domain (M-HBsAg), or the S, PreS2, and PreS1 domain (L-HBsAg) [28,29,30]. The HDV genome is a negative-strand RNA that contains one ORF, which encodes for the hepatitis delta antigen (HDAg). This protein is expressed as two isoforms: a small and a large HDAg. The 24 KDa small-HDAg (S-HDAg) is expressed early in the infection process and is important for the replication of the viral genome [31]. At a later stage of the infection, the edition of the amber stop codon of the S-HDAg to a tryptophane by the host double-stranded RNA adenosine deaminase (ADAR1) results in the addition of 19 amino acids and allows for the expression of the large isoform (27 KDa) of the protein (L-HDAg) [32]. L-HDAg is characterized by the presence of a nuclear export signal (NES) and of a CXXX motif within the 19 amino acid extension, allowing for its nuclear export and prenylation, respectively [33,34]. These signals are important for the formation and secretion of infectious viral particles [35]. Since they share a similar envelope, HBV and HDV use the same receptors to enter hepatocytes [36]. Indeed, they depend on the specific interaction of the PreS1 domain of L-HBsAg with the sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP), a multiple transmembrane transporter, expressed mainly in the liver [37]. HDV assembly relies on the specific interaction between the prenylated N-terminus of L-HDAg and the S-domain of HBsAg [35,38,39].Recently, it was demonstrated that HDV could use other helper enveloped viruses, distinct from HBV, like HCV or Dengue virus, to egress from hepatocytes [40], suggesting that HDV could use unconventional cell transmission strategies and could be associated with different envelope glycoproteins. Since a recent study has confirmed that extracellular vesicles harbour HDV RNA [23], our current hypothesis is that HDV can also be transmitted by extracellular vesicles, including exosomes. We also postulated that this mechanism occurs in a receptor- and HBV-independent manner.In this study, we showed that exosomes that were isolated from the supernatant of cells expressing HDV contain the two isoforms of HDAg, along with viral HDV RNA. We further observed that HDV components can be in vitro transmitted to non-infected hepatocytes in the absence of HBV or other helper viruses. We, therefore, suggest that HDV can be transmitted between cells through the exosomes.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cell Culture, Reagents, and AntibodiesHuh7 cells were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco) and supplemented with 10% v/v fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco). FBS Exosome-Depleted was purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Exoquick-TC reagent (EXOTC10A-1) was purchased from System Biosciences. UNC7938 was a generous gift from Dr. Juliano [41] and was used as previously described [42,43,44].Rabbit polyclonal anti-TSG101 was purchased from MyBioSource (MBS9201535), and mouse monoclonal anti-CD81 was purchased from Santa Cruz (sc-23962). Rabbit polyclonal anti-Calnexin (2679T) was bought from Cell Signaling. Anti-HDAg antibody-positive human serum was a gift from Dr. Sureau [38].2.2. Plasmids and TransfectionHDV recombinant plasmid pSVLD3 was used for the replication of HDV RNA and production of HDV ribonucleoprotein (RNP). It contains three head-to-tail copies of full-length HDV cDNA [38]. The plasmids pCIHD24 and pCIHD27 were used for the expression of S-HDAg and L-HDAg, respectively, as previously described [38,45]. pCIneo and peGFP were purchased from Promega and Clontech, respectively. pcDNA3 mRuby2 (named in Section 3 pmRuby2) plasmid is from Addgene [46].2.3. Exosome Isolation and QuantificationSupernatants from transfected cells cultured in DMEM supplemented with 5% exosome-depleted serum were collected and clarified. Then, supernatants were transferred into centrifugal Filter Units (Amicon Ultra centrifugal Filters, MilliporeSigma, Oakville, ON, Canada) and were centrifuged at 3500× g for 20 min. After serial filtrations of supernatants, the concentrated culture supernatants were mixed with the appropriate volume of Exoquick for exosome isolation according to the manufacturers’ specifications. The isolated exosomes were resuspended in 1X phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then either lysed with the appropriate lysis buffer, depending on the application, or conserved at −20 °C for further applications. Supernatants from transfected cells cultured in DMEM supplemented with 5% exosome-depleted serum were collected, clarified, and diluted in PBS to a final volume of 1 mL and analyzed with NANOSIGHT NS300. The purified exosomes were also quantified with NANOSIGHT NS300.2.4. Flow Cytometry (FACS)Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 10 min. Then, they were permeabilized with 0.5% TritonX-100 and washed with FACS buffer with saponin (2% BSA, 0.1% sodium azide, 0.3% saponin). Cells were stained with anti-HDAg antibody-positive human serum at 1:1000 dilution for 1 h at 4 °C and incubated with the corresponding secondary Alexa fluor antibody for 1 h at 4 °C. Finally, samples were analyzed with Flow cytometry FACSDiva Version 6.2. The results were analyzed with FlowJo Version 10.6.2.2.5. Quantitative Real-Time PCRIntracellular RNA was extracted using an Aurum total RNA mini kit (BioRad, St-Laurent, QC, Canada), and reverse transcription was performed with iScript SELECT cDNA (BioRad). The quantification of HDV RNA was determined using SYBR Green real-time PCR. The primers used were as follows: forward HDV-F 5′-GGGATTTTCGTCCTCTATCTTC-3′, reverse HDV-R 5′-AGAGAAGAGATCCTCGAGCAG-3′.2.6. Confocal MicroscopyHuh7 cells were transfected with the different plasmids as specified in the figure legend. Cells were grown on glass coverslips and fixed with 4% PFA. They were permeabilized with 0.2% TritonX-100 for 30 min and incubated with a blocking solution for 30 min (PBS, 3% bovine serum albumin, 10% FBS) at room temperature (RT). Coverslips were then incubated with anti-HDAg antibody-positive human serum at 1:1000 dilution for 1 h at RT, followed by incubation with the corresponding secondary Alexa fluor™ antibody for 1 h at RT. The nucleus was stained with DAPI for 15 min at RT and mounted on glass slides with ProLong Gold Antifade mountant (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher, St-Laurent, QC, Canada). The coverslips were analyzed using confocal microscopy (Zeiss LSM 780, Dorval, QC, Canada).2.7. Western BlottingCells or isolated exosomes were lysed in Pierce lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol) and supplemented with protease inhibitor (Roche, Laval, PQ, Canada). The BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher, St-Laurent, Canada) was used to normalize the total protein content in the different lysates (cellular extract and exosome extract). Equivalent amounts of protein were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (BioRad). The membranes were blocked for 30 min at RT with PBS-5% milk and then incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies in PBS-0.1% BSA. Membranes were washed with 0.4% Tween 20 in PBS and were incubated for 1 h at RT with the corresponding secondary antibody conjugated to horseradish peroxidase in PBS-5% milk. Proteins’ bands were visualized with the Clarity western ECL (BioRad) using ChemiDoc XRS+ System (BioRad).2.8. Statistical AnalysisThe values were expressed as the mean ± the standard error of the mean of at least three independent experiments. The results were analyzed using either a two-tailed unpaired t test or one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparisons tests. p-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001; **** p < 0.0001). Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 10.3. Results3.1. HBV-Independent Spreading of S-HDAg and L-HDAg In VitroAlthough HDV is a defective virus relying on the HBV envelope protein to form infectious particles, and it can replicate its genome independently [47]. The replication of HDV RNA results in the production of the two isoforms of HDAg. Interestingly, after the co-transfection of Huh7 cells with plasmid coding for GFP and L-HDAg (pCIHD27), we observed a significant proportion of Huh7 cells positive for L-HDAg but not GFP (Figure 1). This indicates that transfected cells were able to transfer L-HDAg independently from GFP to naïve cells independently of a full viral structure. The same observation was made in Huh7 cells co-transfected with plasmids coding the GFP and the S-HDAg (pCIHD24) (Figure 2). Moreover, the propagation of S-HDAg and L-HDAg to the surrounding cells increases over time (Figure 1 and Figure 2). As shown in Figure 1, L-HDAg can be detected in surrounding cells at 24 h post co-transfection and the propagation of L-HDAg is intensified at 48 h and 72 h. Consequently, for Figure 2, we only evaluated the propagation of S-HDAg at 24 h and 72 h. Of note, the assessed propagation of the HDAg was not affected by any unspecific background since we did not detect any staining against HDAg in cells co-transfected with peGFP and pCIneo (negative control).To confirm that this observation is biologically significant and not due to a technical artifact, we transfected the Huh7 cells separately with either peGFP, pmRuby2, pSVLD3, pCIHD24, or pCIHD27 plasmids. We co-cultured the different transfected cells with GFP-expressing cells for 72 h and analyzed protein expression using FACS (Figure 3A) and confocal microscopy (Figure 4). Our hypothesis was that HDAg produced by cells transfected with pSVLD3, pCIHD24, or pCIHD27 plasmids would spread to GFP-positive Huh7 cells and give rise to a double-positive population (GFP+, HDAg+). GFP-transfected cells co-cultured with pmRuby2-transfected cells were used as negative control. The results depicted in Figure 3 and Figure 4 clearly demonstrate that HDAg from pSVLD3-transfected cells and pCIHD24-transfected cells can significantly propagate to the GFP-transfected cells compared with the negative control (peGFP and pmRuby2 co-cultures). However, the propagation of L-HDAg was less pronounced in this experiment when compared to S-HDAg (Figure 3A). The percentage of double-positive cells detected upon the co-culture of GFP-transfected cells with pmRuby2-transfected cells (negative control) was low, which indicates that the ability to propagate is specific to HDAg. These results demonstrate that HDAg can propagate in the absence of HBV envelope proteins and HDV virions. Interestingly, the proportion of double-positive cells was significantly higher upon pSVLD3 transfection when compared to pCIHD24 and pCIHD27 transfection. This was somehow surprising since the expression level from pCIHD24 and pCIHD27 is from a CMV promoter that leads to higher expression compared with pSVLD3 expression, as observed using western blotting on day 2 post-transfection (Figure 3B, left). In pSVLD3-transfected cells, the replication of the HDV genome occurs along with the synthesis of the HDAg isoforms, assembling into a ribonucleoprotein structure. We hypothesized from our results that this structure promotes the spreading of HDV components in a more efficient manner than S- or L-HDAg alone. Furthermore, the S-HDAg isoform was more efficient in propagating than L-HDAg, even though their expression level were similar (Figure 3A,B). The results of confocal microscopy, using the same experimental setting, also showed the apparition of double-positive cells expressing HDAg and GFP (Figure 4A–C). These observations were maintained for cells expressing the HDV RNP (Figure 4C). Interestingly, we observed that the propagation of the S-HDAg gives rise to both the nuclear and cytoplasmic localization of the protein (Figure 4A), whereas mostly cytoplasmic localization was observed for L-HDAg (Figure 4B). Of note is the propagation of HDV RNP in GFP-expressing cells, which resulted in HDAg, localizing mostly in the nucleus (Figure 4C).3.2. HDAg Expression Increases Extracellular Vesicle SecretionThe exosomes are nano-sized (50–150 nm) extracellular vesicles (EVs). To investigate the concentration and the size distribution of extracellular vesicles secreted in the supernatant of Huh7 cells upon transfection with pCIneo, pCIHD24, pCIHD27, or pSVLD3, we used the NANOSIGHT NS300 (Figure 5A). We note that when transfected with pSVLD3 (expressing HDV RNP), cells secreted significantly more EVs compared with pCIneo-transfected cells (Figure 5B and Figure 5D, respectively). In addition, the size distribution of EVs secreted from pSVLD3-transfected cells was different compared with EVs secreted from pCIneo-transfected cells: for pSVLD3, the size was 100–150 nm, while it is less than 100 nm for pCIneo (Figure 5B). This suggests that the composition of EVs from pSVLD3-transfected cells is different compared with that of EVs from pCIneo-transfected cells. The size distribution of EVs from pCIHD24-(S-HDAg) and pCIHD27-(L-HDAg) transfected cells was similar; however, only the concentration of EVs from pCIHD24-transfected cells (S-HDAg) was significantly higher than that of EVs from pCIneo-transfected cells (Figure 5C,E). Interestingly, the concentration of EVs secreted from cells transfected with pSVLD3 was higher than cells transfected with only pCIHD24 or pCIHD27 (Figure 5D,E), consistent with the previous observation from Figure 3A suggesting a higher propagation of HDV when both S- and L-HDAg are present.3.3. HDV S-HDAg and L-HDAg Are Present in ExosomesWe then sought to explore the possibility that the HDAg might be present specifically in the exosomes. To this end, we purified exosomes from supernatant of Huh7 cells transfected with pCIneo, pCIHD24, pCIHD27, or pSVLD3 and cultured in exosome-free FBS media to avoid contamination with bovine exosomes. Moreover, HDV virions are not secreted from the transfected cells due to the absence of HBV envelope protein expression in our setting. Notably, the exosomes from pSVLD3-transfected cells were collected 8 days post-transfection, a time point at which the edition process of the HDV RNA has occurred, leading to the expression of both S-HDAg and L-HDAg and to the production of mature RNPs containing both HDAg isoforms. Some proteins, such as TSG101 (an ESCRT-I component) and tetraspanins (CD81, CD9), are enriched in exosomes and are, therefore, commonly used as markers to characterize exosomes [48,49,50]. Samples were analyzed using western blotting, and TSG101 and CD81 were used to identify exosomes. As a control for purification, we monitored the presence of the ER-resident protein calnexin [50,51], which is expected to be absent from exosome preparations. Equal protein amounts of extracts prepared from cells or exosomes were subjected to western blotting analysis (Figure 6). As expected, calnexin was detected in cellular extracts but was absent from the exosome preparations (Figure 6A–C). These results demonstrate that the exosome preparation was not contaminated with material derived from other cellular compartments. Importantly, we detected a clear enrichment of exosomal proteins (TSG101 and CD81) in our preparations (Figure 6A–C), supporting the postulate that the purified vesicles are indeed exosomes [51]. Exosomes derived from pCIHD24- and pCIHD27-transfected cells contain S-HDAg and L-HDAg, respectively (Figure 6A,B), demonstrating that incorporation of the isoforms of HDAg in the exosomes does not require the HDV viral genome. Additionally, the exosomes isolated from pSVLD3-transfected cells contain both HDAg isoforms (Figure 6C). These results confirm the presence of HDAg proteins in exosomes.3.4. Exosomes Harbour HDV RNAFollowing the detection of HDAg within exosomes and knowing that these vesicles mediate cell-to-cell communication [3] and receptor-independent transmission of viruses [13], we sought to evaluate the ability of the exosomes derived from pSVLD3-transfected cells to transfer their content (HDAg and/or viral RNA) to naïve hepatocytes cells. To this end, we exposed naïve Huh7 cells to purified exosomes from pSVLD3- or pCIneo-transfected cells. Cells were then stained using an anti-HDAg antibody and analyzed using confocal fluorescence microscopy at days 3 and 7 post-exposure (Figure 7A). On day 3, the staining appeared to localize in a cytoplasmic subcellular compartment (likely endosomes), while on day 7, more intense puncta could be observed in addition to the structures observed on day 3 (Figure 7A). Although it cannot be completely ruled out, neosynthesized HDAg on day 7 should result in stronger nuclear staining [52]. At this stage, it seems more likely that the HDV components (HDAg and genome) remain trapped in endosomal and lysosomal structures. It is known that, in vitro, nucleic acids cannot be released in the cytoplasm and remain trapped in late endosomes [41,53]. Interestingly, the UNC7938 compound has been shown to release oligonucleotides from endosomes in vitro [41,42,53]. Based on the observation of punctuated staining of HDAg in cells, likely resulting from endosomal/lysosomal sequestration, we sought to investigate the ability of UNC7938 to release HDV components and to initiate the novo HDV RNA replication (Figure 7B). On day 7 post-inoculation, cells were analyzed for their HDV RNA content using RT-qPCR. The results show a significant increase in signal intensity in exosome-treated cells in the presence as compared to the absence of UNC7938 treatment (Figure 7C). Importantly, total RNA was also subjected to a mock reverse transcription prior to qPCR to ascertain the absence of plasmid contamination. The increase in total cellular HDV-RNA upon treatment with UNC7938 strongly suggests that the released viral RNA was able to replicate. Altogether, these findings demonstrate that exosomes contain HDV RNA and further suggest the ability of the released viral RNA (upon UNC7938 treatment) to replicate in the target cell.4. DiscussionInfection by HDV usually leads to the aggravation of liver dysfunction and higher risks of severe liver disease [25,54] as compared to HBV mono-infected patients. Originally known as an HBV satellite virus, a recent publication suggested that HDV can exploit other enveloped viruses unrelated to HBV to complete its life cycle and propagate to naïve cells [40]. Moreover, the receptor-independent transmission of viruses through exosomes has been demonstrated for many viruses, including HIV, HCV, HAV, and HBV [13,19,21,22,55,56,57]. However, the transmission of HDV via exosomes secreted from hepatocytes has never been reported. Recently, it was demonstrated that extracellular vesicles from HDV-infected cells harbour viral HDV RNA and induce a proinflammatory cytokine response in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and macrophages [23]. Such studies are important for gaining a better understanding of how viruses hijack the membrane trafficking of the host cell machinery to spread to neighbouring and distant cells and to modulate the host immune response.Our first observations have shown that HDAg expressed from Huh7-transfected cells can be detected in the surrounding non-transfected cells. Accordingly, we have investigated and verified whether the HDAg was transferred from transfected to non-transfected cells. The initial observations were confirmed in a model of co-culture of peGFP-transfected cells and HDAg-transfected cells. Interestingly, in Figure 1 and Figure 2, as well as in Figure 4A,B, the localization of L-HDAg in the surrounding cells and double-positive cells is mostly cytoplasmic. Furthermore, the localization of S-HDAg in the surrounding cells and double-positive cells can be either nuclear or cytoplasmic. As well, the percentage of double-positive cells in cells expressing S-HDAg was significantly higher compared to cells expressing L-HDAg only. These results together suggest that the propagation of S-HDAg can be either caused by cell-to-cell transmission through direct cellular contact or by transmission between distant cells mediated by extracellular vesicles. Conversely, L-HDAg propagation is mostly due to cell-to-cell transmission by direct cellular contact. However, we cannot ignore the fact that L-HDAg can still propagate through its incorporation into exosomes, as demonstrated by the confocal microscopy and the western blotting results.It has been demonstrated that different hepatitis viruses exploit the exosomes either to be engulfed, like HEV [20] and HAV [58], or to transmit the infection to other hepatocytes, like HBV and HCV [21,22,59]. Therefore, we hypothesized that exosomes might be involved in a virion-free propagation of HDV components. In this study, we demonstrated that the expression of RNP significantly increases the concentration of secreted extracellular vesicles. Most of these vesicles have a size that ranges approximately between 100 nm and 150 nm, the typical size of exosomes (50–150 nm) [3], suggesting that the extracellular vesicles quantified might be mostly exosomes. In addition, we showed that the size distribution of extracellular vesicles from cells expressing RNP was different compared to extracellular vesicles derived from pCIneo-transfected cells, suggesting a modification in the composition of extracellular vesicles upon expression of the HDV RNP. This possibility should be investigated in future work. Interestingly, recent publications have demonstrated the ability of the HBx protein of HBV to increase the secretion of extracellular vesicles, including exosomes [60], and that the composition of exosomes can be modified in infected HBV cells compared with uninfected cells [61], corroborant with our observation with HDV.Further, our molecular characterization of secreted EVs using western blotting shows clearly that these EVs are enriched with exosomal protein markers (TSG101 and CD81), confirming that these EVs are exosomes. Moreover, they do not express ER-resident protein calnexin, thereby confirming that the exosome preparation was not contaminated with material derived from other cellular compartments. Isolated exosomes from pSVLD3 transfected Huh7 supernatant contains HDAg (Figure 6B–D), as well as HDV RNA (Figure 7C). Therefore, we speculate that these components could be internalized into exosomes as a structured HDV RNP. This hypothesis is reinforced by the enhanced propagation of HDAg observed upon transfection with pSVLD3 as compared to HDAg (p24 or p27 only) expressing plasmids (Figure 3B). Indeed, while the HDV promoter in pSVLD3 was weaker and produced less HDAg (Figure 3B) than pCIHD24 or pCIHD27, which harbour a CMV promoter, more HDAg was observed in the neighbouring cells transfected with pSVLD3 (Figure 3A). These observations could also be explained by the fact that the pSVLD3 promoter launches a rolling circle replication of the RNA, increasing the production of HDAg over time. This amplification process was not present on pCIHD24 and pCIHD27 plasmids. Also, when cells transfected with pSVLD3 were co-cultured with peGFP-transfected cells, we observed the presence of double-positive cells with mostly nuclear localization of HDAg (Figure 4D). However, when Huh7 cells were cultured with purified exosomes from pSVLD3-transfected cells, we observed a cytoplasmic localization of HDAg (Figure 7A). These results suggest that there may be two different mechanisms of RNP transmission between cells: cell-to-cell by direct contact between neighbouring cells, which is reflected by nuclear localization, or mediated by extracellular vesicles, including exosomes. The cytoplasmic localization of HDAg seems more likely due to the entrapment of the HDV components (HDAg and genome) in endosomal and lysosomal structures. Our study shows that endosomal release, using UNC7938, significantly increases the quantity of the viral genome detected in cells exposed to exosomes. It is known that in vitro, it is challenging for the oligonucleotides to escape the endosomal pathway and reach their targets [62]. Likewise, in the absence of an endosome-disrupting agent, HDV components (including the genome) remain trapped in endosomal structures. However, when treated with UNC7938, cells exhibit a significantly increased level of HDV RNA, strongly suggesting the occurrence of de novo viral genome replication.Our results suggest that exosomes contribute to the propagation of HDV infection. However, a deeper analysis of the virus-free propagation of the HDV genome and additional analysis of the rolling-circle replication re-initialization in naïve cells is warranted. The propagation of HDV by the endosomal pathway could be to the advantage of the virus through its escape from the immune response or to adversely enhance the innate immune response and trigger the activation of immune cells. It has been demonstrated for HBV that exosomes secreted from hepatocytes deliver viral proteins to recipient cells, like monocytes, macrophages, and NK cells, so as to regulate the immune response [21,61,63]. Furthermore, it has been recently shown that extracellular vesicles derived from HDV-infected cells induce a proinflammatory cytokine response in macrophages and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells [23]. We assume that exosomes containing HDV components may modulate the immune response and thereby explain the observation; in contrast to mono-infection with HBV, HBV–HDV co-infection leads to a high level of activation of the innate immune system [64]. Exosome-containing HDV components may also explain the observation that HDV can persist in cells for weeks in the absence of HBV and for months after liver transplantation [65]. Recently, it has been shown that exosomes derived from HCV-infected hepatocytes are internalized within the hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) and increase the expression of profibrotic markers by the activated HSCs. Therefore, the HCV exosomes may be implicated in the induction of liver fibrosis [66]. It is also known that the presence of HDV in the liver accelerates the pathogenesis of liver diseases, including fibrosis [67]. The causes of this rapid progression are not well known, but the strong induction of exosome secretion by HDV replicating cells may contribute to the pathogenesis and fibrosis caused by HDV, as observed with HCV [66]. This possibility should be evaluated in future work.In summary, we have shown that HDV viral components are present in exosomes and are able to enter naïve hepatocytes. These exosomes mediate the transfer of HDAg and the viral RNA between hepatocytes in vitro, independently of HBV. Endosomal disruption experiments further suggest that cells exposed to HDV-containing exosomes can initiate de novo replication. Therefore, exosomes are likely involved in the propagation of HDV to other hepatocytes in the absence of HBV, contributing to its persistence in the liver. Therefore, additional studies will be required to analyze the contribution of exosomes in the maintenance of HDV in the liver of patients during clinical treatment targeting HBV replication or HBsAg production.


Title: Development of a reverse genetics system for Sosuga virus allows rapid screening of antiviral compounds

IntroductionThe Paramxyoviridae (order Mononegavirales) represent a diverse family of viruses, many of which, such as measles virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and mumps virus, are significant human pathogens [1]. Within this family, bat-borne paramyxoviruses have previously been recognized as potential novel zoonotics with the ability to spill over into the human population and cause disease [2–4]. The 2 bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses with the greatest public health impact to date are Hendra (HeV) and Nipah (NiV) viruses, which together comprise the Henipavirus genus and are vectored by fruit bats of the Pteropus genus [5]. First recognized in 1994, HeV infections in both domestic horses and humans have occurred sporadically [6,7], while NiV infections in Bangladesh, India, and Malaysia have resulted in over 600 human infections to date [8].Sosuga virus (SOSV) is a recently discovered zoonotic paramyxovirus [9]. It was first identified from a single clinical case in 2012, when a wildlife researcher who conducted a 6-week field expedition in South Sudan and Uganda presented with fever, generalized myalgia and arthralgia, neck stiffness, and a sore throat shortly upon returning to the USA [10]. The patient was hospitalized as symptoms worsened, including the development of a confluent maculopapular rash; after 14 days, all symptoms had sufficiently resolved to allow discharge. After several differential diagnoses were ruled out, sequence analysis revealed the presence of a novel rubula-like paramyxovirus in samples taken from the patient, from which the virus was later isolated. Further ecological and epidemiological investigations revealed Egyptian rousette bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus) as the likely reservoir for the virus, with this case representing a single spillover event into humans [11]. While only one case of SOSV infection has been confirmed to date, its detection in bat populations sampled over a 3-year period at multiple geographic locations in Uganda means that the possibility exists for future spillover events into the human population [11].Reverse genetics systems allow for precise manipulation of viral genomes, and the ability to modify them to suit the required application. One such application is the generation of recombinant viruses expressing reporter proteins that facilitate indirect quantification of viral replication in infected cells. However, for pathogenic viruses such as SOSV, which require manipulation under high biocontainment levels, minigenome-based assays are also valuable surrogates that recapitulate viral replication and transcriptional processes without generating infectious particles. Here we describe a reverse genetics system for SOSV that can be used to rapidly screen for compounds that inhibit viral replication. An initial minigenome screen performed under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) biocontainment was used to identify only those compounds with potential antiviral activity, which were then assessed for their ability to inhibit authentic viral replication processes using the reporter SOSV at BSL-3. As well as screening for antiviral compounds, these reverse genetics system will provide a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis in both in vitro and in vivo systems.Materials and methodsCellsHuh7 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. BSR-T7/5 (generous gifts from Klaus Conzelmann, Germany), BHK-1 (ATCC, USA), and Vero-E6 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.Reverse genetics: Minigenome assay and rescue of recombinant virusesThe SOSV minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I promoter-based plasmid (S1 Fig., Genbank #MG880223), and transfected into Huh7 cells in conjunction with Pol-II expression plasmids (pCAGGS) supplying SOSV polymerase (L), nucleoprotein (NP), and phosphoprotein (P) proteins in trans. The minigenome assay was performed in a 96-well plate on cells seeded at 2 × 104 cells per well, with the following amounts of plasmids (150 ng total) transfected per well: 75 ng minigenome, 12.5 ng L, 50 ng NP, and 12.5 ng P. Minigenome activity was based on ZsGreen1 (ZsG) fluorescence levels determined at 72 h post transfection (hpt). To rescue recombinant virus, a T7 promoter-based plasmid containing full-length anti-genomic sense SOSV (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880224) was constructed. To rescue the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG, a modified genome was constructed in which the M open reading frame (ORF) was replaced with one encoding ZsG-P2A-M, leaving the M gene start and gene end intact (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880225). Virus rescue was performed in 6-well plates seeded with BSR-T7 cells (approximately 70% confluent) transfected with genome plasmid in conjunction with the SOSV-L, -NP, and -P expression plasmids (2 μg genome, 1 μg SOSV-L, 0.5 μg SOSV-NP, and 0.25 μg SOSV-P). At 96 hpt, cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified by low-speed centrifugation, and used to infect BHK-21 cells. At 96 h post infection (hpi), cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified, and titered by tissue culture infective dose 50 (TCID50) assays in Vero-E6 cells based on crystal violet visualization of cytopathic effects [12].Antiviral compound screeningAll compounds were obtained from either Selleckchem (Houston, TX, USA) or Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA) with the exception of T-705 (BOC Sciences, Shirley, NY, USA) and 09167 (Vitas-M Laboratory, Champaign, IL, USA). For both screening assays, Huh7 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at 2 × 104 cells per well 16–20 h prior to treatment with DMSO-diluted compounds (final DMSO concentration 0.5%). For the minigenome screening assay, cells were transfected with the required plasmids using TransIT- LT-1 (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI, USA) 1 h post treatment. Total ZsG fluorescence was determined 72 hpt using a microplate reader (H1MD, BioTek Synergy, Winooski, VT, USA), with levels recorded at a height of 6 mm with 75 gain/sensitivity. ZsG levels were normalized to levels in mock-treated cells. For the reporter and wild-type screening assays, cells were infected 1 h post treatment with either rSOSV/ZsG or rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, supernatants were collected (rSOSV-infected cells) for titer determination, or total ZsG fluorescence in the infected cell monolayer determined (rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells) using a H1MD plate reader (height 6 mm; 100 gain/sensitivity). For both assays, cell viability was determined by measuring ATP content in parallel with compound-treated, mock-transfected/infected cells using CellTiter-Glo 2.0 (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). All experiments were performed in quadruplicate and repeated at least 3 times.Microscopy and high-content imagingZsG fluorescence in infected cells was imaged directly using an EVOS digital inverted microscope (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). For immunofluorescence, cells were fixed in 10% formalin for 30 min, permeabilized in PBS containing 0.1% Triton-X100 (v/v) for 10 min, and blocked with PBS 5% BSA (v/v) for 30 min. Primary antibody was rabbit α-SOSV NP (Genscript, Waltham, MA, USA), visualized with an AlexaFluor 488-labeled secondary antibody (Thermo-Fisher, #A11034). Quantification of total rSOSV protein production in Huh7 cells was performed on infected cells labeled as described above, and further stained with Nuc-Blue and Cell-Mask Red (Thermo-Fisher). Images were collected on the Operetta high-content imaging system (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA) using a 20× objective, with 16 fields per well analyzed using the Harmony software package (PerkinElmer). Total 488 fluorescence per field was determined, averaged for the well, and then normalized to values from control wells containing rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells.Data analysisZsG fluorescence values for compound-treated, rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells were normalized to those in mock-treated (DMSO only) cells, and used to fit a 4-parameter equation to semilog plots of the concentration-response data. From this, the compound concentrations inhibiting 50% of the ZsG expression (50% effective concentration, EC50) were interpolated. Cell viability was similarly calculated in compound-treated, mock-infected cells to determine the 50% cell cytotoxicity concentration (CC50) of each compound. The selectivity index (SI) was calculated by dividing the CC50 by the EC50. Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism v7. Suitability for high-throughput screening was determined using the Z prime (Z′) score, a measure of statistical effect size, with values between 0.5 and 1.0 considered acceptable [13].Accession numbersSOSV Minigenome plasmid; pSOSV MG; Genbank # MG880223Rescue plasmid for rSOSV; pSOSV FL; Genbank #MG880224Rescue plasmid for rSOSV/ZsG; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225ResultsScreening of antiviral compounds using a SOSV minigenome assayWe constructed a SOSV minigenome segment containing the parental SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for NP and the gene end sequence for L. All internal coding sequences and intergenic regions were replaced with the coding sequence for ZsGreen1 (ZsG), a green fluorescent protein (Fig 1A). Protein expression plasmids under control of the Pol-II promoter (pCAGGS) allowed in trans expression of SOSV NP, L, and P, the minimum requirement to initiate paramyxovirus replication and transcription [1]. The minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I expression plasmid in the negative orientation, meaning it has to be replicated first by the NP + L + P replication complex before transcription of ZsG mRNA can occur.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g001Fig 1Design and optimization of the Sosuga virus minigenome screening assay.a. Genome schematic representing the design of the Sosuga virus (SOSV) minigenome segment. The minigenome contains the full-length SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for nucleoprotein (NP) and the gene end sequence for the viral polymerase (L), with the parental coding and intergenic regions replaced by the coding sequence of ZsGreen1 (ZsG). Transfected into cells in conjunction with plasmids expressing SOSV L, NP, and phosphoprotein (P), this minigenome allows for expression of quantifiable ZsG. b. The minigenome assay was optimized for Huh7 cells in a 96-well plate format using different ratios of the plasmids expressing L, NP, and P with a constant amount of minigenome plasmid. Cells were transfected with 75 ng minigenome plasmid and 75 ng total of plasmids expressing L, NP, and P, with ratios of each stated underneath the bars. Relative ZsG fluorescence over control reactions with no L was calculated at 48 and 72 h post transfection (hpt). c. Dose-response curve for the optimized SOSV minigenome assay against ribavirin. Cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 hpt with the minigenome plasmids, and ZsG fluorescence was measured at 72 hpt. ZsG fluorescence (green) was normalized to mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-transfected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments.Next, the SOSV minigenome screen was optimized to achieve maximum reporter protein expression with the greatest signal-to-noise ratio in a 96-well plate format using Huh7 cells. Huh7 cells have previously proven useful for evaluating nucleoside analog activity against other viruses, and are highly permissive to SOSV infection [14–17]. Alongside a constant amount of minigenome plasmid, differing ratios of pCAGGS-L, -NP, and -P were transfected, and ZsG fluorescence was determined at both 48 and 72 hpt (Fig 1B). We determined the optimal ratio of plasmids for the assay to be 6:1:4:1 of genome, pCAGGS-L, -NP, and–P respectively, with ZsG fluorescence read at 72 hpt. To determine whether the optimized minigenome assay was suitable for screening antiviral compounds, we used the broad-spectrum antiviral ribavirin. Using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control and DMSO as the vehicle-only control, the Z′ score of the assay was 0.58. Dose-dependent reduction of ZsG fluorescence was also observed in the SOSV minigenome assay using a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin, giving an EC50 of 5.91 ± 0.85 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 1C). These data indicated that the assay was robust, and suitable for screening anti-SOSV compounds at BSL-2.As minigenome assays can be used as surrogates for measuring viral replication and transcription, we evaluated a panel of 40 compounds predicted to inhibit these processes. These were a collection of nucleoside analogs supplemented with other select compounds reported to inhibit viral replication. Compounds were initially screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content (S1 Table). Compounds inhibiting the minigenome by >50% whilst retaining >80% cell viability were then chosen for further analysis; these were 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 5-fluorouridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), and 6-azauridine. Dose-response analysis of these compounds demonstrated that both 2′-dFC and 6-azauridine inhibited minigenome activity in the absence of cell toxicity, with EC50 values of 1.31 ± 0.15 μM and 5.17 ± 1.01 μM, respectively (Fig 2). While 5-fluorouridine was not cytotoxic at the concentrations evaluated, it did not completely inhibit minigenome signal even at the highest concentrations evaluated, and was therefore dropped at this point. MPA inhibited minigenome activity at sub-micromolar concentrations, but was cytotoxic at higher concentrations. However, with an SI of 7, it was incorporated into the secondary virus screen to determine if a larger therapeutic window became apparent in the context of authentic viral replication.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g002Fig 2Dose-response curves for selected compounds using the minigenome assay.Compounds selected during the initial screen as potential SOSV antivirals were assessed by concentration-response curves using serial 2-fold dilutions of each compound. ZsG fluorescence (green) at 48 hpt was normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to those in mock-transfected cells. Graphs are representative of at least 3 independent experiments. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with errors bars indicating the standard deviation.Design and rescue of a reporter SOSV expressing a fluorescent proteinThe single-stranded, negative-sense RNA genome of SOSV encodes 6 genes to express 7 proteins, with 1 protein generated by V/P gene mRNA editing. The intergenic regions of SOSV contain transcriptional promoter and terminator sequences. We cloned the full-length SOSV genome into an expression plasmid under control of the T7 polymerase promoter. When transfected into cells and supplied with SOSV P, NP, L, and T7 polymerase in trans, this system successfully generated infectious recombinant SOSV (rSOSV). After optimizing the rSOSV rescue system, we designed another recombinant SOSV genome capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter protein in infected cells. Previous approaches to develop recombinant paramyxoviruses expressing reporter genes have included the reporter as either a separate open reading frame (ORF), or incorporated it within a parental ORF [18–22]. We employed the latter approach, and generated a SOSV genome in which the ZsG ORF was inserted upstream of the M ORF, fused to the viral protein via the self-cleaving P2A motif taken from porcine teschovirus 1 [23]. The authentic SOSV M gene start and gene end sequences therefore transcribe a single mRNA encoding the ORF for both M and ZsG, which, upon translation, results in the expression of 2 separate proteins via the P2A ribosomal skipping motif. Incorporation of this recombinant SOSV genome into the previously described SOSV rescue system (Fig 3A) resulted in the successful rescue of the reporter SOSV (rSOSV/ZsG).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g003Fig 3Optimization of an antiviral screening assay using a recombinant SOSV expressing ZsG.a. Schematic representation of the wild-type recombinant SOSV (rSOSV), and the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG (rSOSV/ZsG). The ZsG coding sequence was inserted immediately 5′ of the M coding sequence (antigenomic sense), separated from the viral protein by the P2A sequence from porcine teschovirus 1. This self-cleaving amino acid motif allows expression of both ZsG and M from a single mRNA generated by the parental SOSV M promoter and terminator sequences. b. Vero-E6 cells infected with either rSOSV or rSOSV/ZsG at 72 hpi showing formation of syncytia. In rSOSV/ZsG-infected cell monolayers, syncytia were associated with extensive ZsG expression (images taken at 4 × magnification). c. Growth curves for wild-type SOSV, rSOSV, and rSOSV/ZsG were performed in Vero-E6 cells infected at MOI 0.1. Titers (TCID50) were determined at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. d. The optimized rSOSV/ZsG antiviral screening assay was validated using ribavirin. Huh7 cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 h prior to infection at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 72 hpi and normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph representative of 3 independent experiments.Infecting Vero-E6 cells with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.1 resulted in extensive syncytia formation in the cell monolayer similar to infection with rSOSV, with strong ZsG fluorescence detectable in these infected cells (Fig 3B). To compare growth kinetics of the recombinant viruses, Vero-E6 cells were infected with rSOSV, rSOSV/ZsG, or wild-type SOSV at MOI 0.1, with titers determined by TCID50 at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. All 3 viruses grew to similar titers over the 120 h time course, with no attenuation apparent in either of the recombinant viruses compared to the wild-type (Fig 3C). This indicated that incorporation of the ZsG ORF into the SOSV genome did not negatively impact the virus phenotype. To assess whether rSOSV/ZsG could be used to confirm antiviral activity of a compound by measuring the reduction in ZsG fluorescence in treated cells, we optimized a screening assay in Huh7 cells using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control; the resultant Z′ score was 0.74, indicating a robust assay. A concentration-response curve using a 2-fold serial dilution of ribavirin demonstrated dose-dependent reduction in ZsG fluorescence in rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells, giving an EC50 of 6.10 ± 0.09 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 3D).Screening of candidate antiviral compounds with recombinant virusesTo confirm the inhibitory effect of 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, and MPA in the context of authentic viral replication, we performed counter-screening with rSOSV/ZsG. Alongside these 3 compounds, we included 09167, an antagonist of the innate immune system that was shown to inhibit NiV and other paramyxoviruses in a similar screening assay [22,24]. Huh7 cells were treated with compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at an MOI of 0.2, with ZsG fluorescence read 48 hpi. All 3 compounds reduced ZsG expression in a dose-dependent manner, with EC50 values similar to those observed during the minigenome screen (Fig 4A). 2′-dFC (EC50 = 1.48 ± 0.22 μM) and 6-azauridine (EC50 = 7.99 ± 1.32 μM) potently inhibited ZsG fluorescence without cytotoxicity at the highest compound concentrations. While MPA had an EC50 value of 0.33 ± 0.04 μM, similar to that obtained in the minigenome screen, it again had a low SI of 5 due to its cytotoxicity at higher concentrations (Table 1). The 0.67 ± 0.05 μM EC50 value of 09167 was consistent with the sub-micromolar concentrations used to inhibit other paramyxoviruses, indicating that SOSV was similarly sensitive to this compound [24].10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g004Fig 4Using SOSV/ZsG as a tool to screen antiviral compounds.a. Representative concentration-response curves of Huh7 cells treated with 2-fold serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 48 hpi and normalized to mock-treated cells. Cell viability was assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue), with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments. b. Confirmatory counter-screening of each compound with wild-type rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 2 days post infection cells were fixed, and SOSV proteins stained and quantified using immunofluorescence microscopy. Relative fluorescence (red; total fluorescence normalized to mock-treated cells) in each well was determined, with cell viability assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue). Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation. Values stated are the 50% effective concentration (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentration (CC50), and selectivity index (SI).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.t001Table 1Selected compounds’ 50% effective concentrations (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentrations (CC50), and selectivity indices (SI) determined by minigenome and reporter virus screening assays.CompoundMinigenome ScreenrSOSV/ZsG ScreenCC50Compound ClassEC50SIEC50SIRibavirin5.91 ± 0.85> 86.10 ± 0.09> 8> 50.0Nucleoside analog2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine1.31 ± 0.15> 381.48 ± 0.22> 33> 50.0Nucleoside analog5-fluorouridine0.29 ± 0.13> 172NTNT> 50.0Nucleoside analogMycophenolic acid± 0.0670.33 ± 0.0451.74 ± 0.42IMPDH inhibitor6-azauridine5.17 ± 1.01> 97.99 ± 1.32> 6> 50.0Nucleoside analog09167NTNT0.67 ± 0.05> 74>50.0Innate immune antagonistNT, not tested; IMPDH, inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase. All values in μM ± standard deviation from at least 3 independent experiments.To ensure the validity of using the ZsG-expressing virus to accurately identify specific inhibitors, we investigated whether these compounds also inhibited the replication of rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, MPA, or 09167, and infected with rSOSV (MOI = 0.2) 1 h post treatment. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and total SOSV protein production was visualized using rSOSV-specific and fluorescently labelled antibodies. Total fluorescence due to rSOSV protein staining per well (average of 16 analyzed fields per well) was normalized to rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells, allowing determination of the relative reduction in virus replication due to the inhibitory effects of each compound. All compounds tested reduced rSOSV protein production in a dose-dependent manner, indicating inhibition of viral replication and growth (Fig 4B). Direct visualization of the compound-treated rSOSV infected cell monolayers clearly demonstrated the reduction in viral protein production, and also demonstrated the ability of rSOSV to form extensive syncytia in Huh7 cells at sub-optimal concentrations of compound (Fig 5). These results indicate that inhibition caused by the compounds is indeed due to a SOSV-specific mechanism, rather than one unique to the ZsG-expressing recombinant.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g005Fig 5Immunofluorescent imaging of rSOSV infected Huh7 cells treated with selected antiviral compounds.Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of either 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 6-azauridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), or 09167 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and SOSV proteins (green) and cell nuclei (blue) visualized by immunofluorescence. Concentration of compound is shown in white text on each representative image (mM); control cells were treated with DMSO only. Images taken using a 20 × objective. White bar represents 100 μm.DiscussionThat SOSV, a previously unknown paramyxovirus vectored by bats, could cause severe disease in humans is not unexpected, given that bats are increasingly implicated as sources of novel zoonotic infections [3,25–27]. A recent study focusing on only 10% of bat species in relatively small geographic areas discovered evidence of 66 novel paramyxoviruses [28], so undiscovered pathogens with the capacity to threaten human health may yet be present in bat populations worldwide. With reverse genetics systems already developed for the highly pathogenic paramyxoviruses NiV and HeV, the establishment of SOSV reverse genetics based on similar design concepts ensures that any investigations into future outbreaks can be quickly initiated [20,21,29]. Furthermore, a common feature of paramyxoviruses appears to be that expression of reporter genes does not negatively affect the viral phenotype either in vitro or in vivo, increasing the usefulness of these systems [21,22,30,31]. The minigenome screening methods described here were successfully used to identify several compounds that inhibit SOSV replication. We were then able to confirm the antiviral activity of candidate compounds by using the reporter virus screen. While the minigenome screen is useful for identifying compounds that inhibit viral replication and transcription, the reporter virus screen can be utilized to identify other compounds, especially those that affect other viral life cycle processes, such as cell tropism, entry, budding, and transmission.The antiviral activity of 6-azauridine and its derivatives toward several viruses has been reported, including for viruses closely related to SOSV, such as NiV, measles, and human parainfluenza virus 3 [22,32,33]. In a clinical setting, the derivative 6-azauridine triacetate has been used therapeutically to treat severe psoriasis for over 40 years, with minimal side effects observed at a dosage level of 125 mg/kg/day [34,35]. Encouragingly, research also shows that at that dose, plasma concentrations in human subjects reach 100 μM or greater, with successive doses over several days maintaining this level [36]. This is far in excess of the 5.17 μM EC50 for 6-azauridine reported here, so the potential usefulness in treating SOSV even at lower and less frequent doses should be further evaluated. 2′-dFC has been shown to potently inhibit several other negative strand viruses, including influenza and hepatitis C virus [37,38], although concerns over mitochondrial toxicity have limited the therapeutic use of 2′-dFC and its derivatives to date [39]. However, the potent antiviral activity of 2′-dFC makes worthwhile to investigate whether other 2′-deoxynucleoside analogs have similar antiviral activity against SOSV in the absence of toxicity.The antiviral activity demonstrated by ribavirin was expected, and has been reported previously for NiV [22,40,41]. Ribavirin has also been used to treat human patients during a non-randomized, unblinded limited clinical trial during an NiV outbreak in Malaysia in 1998–1999; mortality was reduced by 37% in the treated group [42]. However, its effectiveness when used in NiV animal models is less clear [40,43,44]. A similar discrepancy between in vivo and in vitro potency of these compounds may exist for SOSV, although this will remain unclear until a suitable SOSV animal model is developed. Promisingly, the limiting factor to henipavirus treatment effectiveness appears to be the compound’s ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Ribavirin treatment in a non-human primate model of HeV infection reduced viral loads to levels low enough to prevent development of the respiratory signs of infection, but not to prevent spread to the central nervous system [44]. As ribavirin cannot cross the BBB, the disease then manifested as neurological signs. However, no neurological symptoms were reported from the one SOSV case to date, so nucleoside analogs such as ribavirin, 6-azauridine, and 2′-dFC may be more effective treatment options for this disease.In conclusion, we have developed a minigenome assay to investigate SOSV replication and transcriptional processes, as well as a rescue system to recover infectious recombinant virus. We used this system to rescue a recombinant SOSV capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter in infected cells with no loss of fitness compared to parental virus. A high-throughput screen using both systems identified 3 compounds that inhibited SOSV replication with acceptable SI values, providing information that may help direct therapeutic options for any future cases of SOSV. Finally, as well as being a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis, the minigenome and reporter systems may help us better understand the potential public health threats posed by bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses, and provide strategies on best combating these emerging threats.Supporting informationS1 FigPlasmids use in the SOSV minigenome assay.The SOSV minigenome (mg) segment, containing the SOSV leader sequence and gene start for the nucleoprotein ORF, the ZsGreen1 ORF (ZsG), the polymerase ORF gene end, and the SOSV trailer sequence (Genbank #MG880223). Expression is controlled RNA-polymerase I promoter (pol I prom) and a RNA-polymerase I terminator sequences (pol I term).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigPlasmids used in the rescue of rSOSV (pSOSV FL) and rSOSV/ZsG (pSOSV/ZsG FL).Red arrows represent full-length viral genome, blue arrows represent viral protein open reading frames: NP–nucleoprotein; P–phosphoprotein; V–V protein; M–matrix protein; F–fusion protein; HN–hemagglutinin-neuraminidase; L–polymerase. Green arrow represents ZsGreen1 (ZsG) open reading frame. T7 prom–T7 polymerase promoter; HDV Rz–Hepatitis D virus ribozyme; T7term–T7 polymerase terminator; P2A –nucleotide sequence encoding the self-cleaving amino acid motif from porcine teschovirus 1. Sequences available at: pSOSV FL, Genbank #MG880224; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableScreening a panel of selected compounds for inhibition of SOSV minigenome in Huh7 cells.Compounds were screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Deletion of the Envelope gene attenuates SARS-CoV-2 infection by altered Spike localization and increased cell-to-cell transmission

IntroductionSevere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the third deadly coronavirus (CoV) to emerge in humans from zoonotic sources (1), preceded by SARS-CoV in 2002 (2) and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) in 2012 (3). Infection with SARS-CoV-2 causes COVID-19, an acute respiratory infection that presents with mild to moderate symptoms in most individuals, which can result in severe pneumonia, multisystem inflammatory syndrome, multiple organ failure, and death (4–9). Since the start of the global pandemic in late 2019, there have been over 777 million cases of COVID-19 and over 7 million deaths reported worldwide as of January 2025 (10, 11). Post-acute sequelae are prominent with COVID-19, with over 10% of infected individuals developing Long COVID, consisting of over 200 identified symptoms, including long-term metabolic, cardiovascular, and neurological morbidities (12, 13).Achievements in preventing and treating COVID-19 were rapidly developed to combat the pandemic. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines have been successful in preventing COVID-19, though protection conferred by either vaccines or natural infection lack long-term durability (14, 15). This is confounded by the rapid development of SARS-CoV-2 variants that evade immunity, requiring development and administration of vaccine boosters that target circulating variants, similar to seasonal influenza viruses (16–18). Most current treatments for COVID-19 in the U.S. are high-titer convalescent plasma or nonspecific small molecule antivirals that consist of repurposed inhibitors targeting viral enzymes common across multiple RNA viruses (19). Improved SARS-CoV-2 therapeutics are needed for higher specificity and efficacy, ideally against conserved CoV proteins that may offer pan-coronaviral protection.SARS-CoV-2 is a β-coronavirus that is primarily transmitted via respiratory droplets and aerosols (20, 21), infecting cells expressing the ACE2 receptor, most commonly epithelial cells within the upper airways and the gastrointestinal tract (22–25). The viral Spike (S) glycoprotein binds to ACE2 and is primed by the host protease furin and subsequently activated for fusion and entry primarily by the host protease TMPRSS2 or, alternatively, Cathepsin B/L (26–28). Cytoplasmic release of the 30 kb single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viral genome results in ribosomal translation of the ORF1a/b open reading frame into the pp1a and pp1ab polyproteins, which are cleaved by two virally encoded proteases into the 16 nonstructural proteins (Nsps) comprising the viral replicase machinery (29, 30). Interaction of Nsps with host factors results in the formation of double membrane vesicles, in which the viral genome is both replicated and used as a template for discontinuous transcription of nested, co-terminal subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs) that are translated into the viral structural and accessory proteins (29, 30). The membrane-bound S, Envelope (E), and Membrane (M) structural proteins along with the Nucleocapsid (N)-coated viral RNA genome are assembled into nascent virions within the endoplasmic reticulum/Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) and released from the cell via vesicles (29, 30).E is the smallest structural protein with only 75 amino acids, consisting of a short, luminal N-terminal domain (NTD); a transmembrane domain (TMD) that forms a calcium-selective channel in the lipid bilayer of the ERGIC membrane; and a cytosolic C-terminal domain (CTD) containing a PDZ-binding motif (PBM) that enables interaction with PDZ-containing host proteins (31–34). Expression of recombinant SARS-CoV E by transfection or during infection of cells results in colocalization with ERGIC proteins and it is not found in the ER or at the plasma membrane (35). E is conserved across CoVs and has three demonstrated roles in CoV replication: virus assembly, virus release, and host pathogenesis (36–40). However, the details for these roles are not completely understood.While important for nascent virus particle assembly and release, the requirement of E for replication varies significantly between CoVs. Deletion of the E gene from transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV), human coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43), and MERS-CoV prevents viral propagation (41–43), whereas murine hepatitis virus (MHV) and SARS-CoV are only attenuated in the absence of E via an unknown mechanism (44, 45). Deleting the ORF3a and E genes from SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 eliminates viral propagation (46, 47). However, the effects of deleting only E from SARS-CoV-2 have not been reported.Here we describe the development of a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) encoding SARS-CoV-2 with nanoluciferase (nLuc) in place of ORF7a/b to produce infectious reporter virus. We used this BAC system with the E gene deleted from the viral genome, ΔE SARS-CoV-2, which resulted in attenuated viral replication. Virus particles produced in the absence of E incorporated less S and were impaired for cell-free transmission. Trans-complementation of E partially rescued S incorporation and infection via virus particle spread. The primary mechanism of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 transmission was through cell fusion, which permitted evasion of antibody neutralization. ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection resulted in greater cell surface expression of S and reorganization of the ERGIC.ResultsDesign and construction of a BAC-based SARS-CoV-2 virus production systemWe designed a reverse genetics platform for production of SARS-CoV-2 based on a mammalian-expression BAC encoding the complete virus genome (Fig S1A), similar to what has been reported with SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (43, 48). The ORF7a/b gene was replaced with the codon-optimized nLuc reporter gene (SARS-CoV-2-nLuc). The CopyControl™ pCC1BAC vector was chosen due to its dual origin of replication that optimizes insert stability under normal bacteria propagation conditions but also permits higher DNA plasmid yield under chemical induction (49). As pCC1BAC is not designed for mammalian expression, we synthesized a mammalian expression cassette (MEC) containing the necessary cis-acting elements to regulate expression of the SARS-CoV-2 genome upon transfection of the BAC into mammalian cells, and to alternatively promote in vitro RNA synthesis from the BAC for transfection of genomic viral RNA into mammalian cells. Specifically, the human cytomegalovirus (CMV) immediate early promoter and bacteriophage T7 RNA polymerase promoter were engineered upstream of the insert site and a polyA(29) tail, the hepatitis D virus (HDV) antigenomic ribozyme, and bovine growth hormone (bGH) polyadenylation signal were engineered downstream of the insert site.SARS-CoV-2 BAC system produces infectious virusProduction of SARS-CoV-2 was performed by transfection of the BAC into BHK cells, which are highly transfectable but not permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection (Fig S1B). The transfected BHK cells were overlayed onto Vero E6 cells stably expressing human ACE2 and TMPRSS2 (Vero E6-hAT cells), which amplified virus production. SARS-CoV-2 was also produced by using the BAC as the template for in vitro RNA synthesis and transfecting the full-length, capped viral RNA into BHK cells (data not shown).Vero E6-hAT cells infected with SARS-CoV-2-nLuc produced from the BAC exhibited cytopathic effects (CPE), viral plaques, and infectious titer typically observed with SARS-CoV-2 infection (Fig 1A–B). Genomic RNA copies were detected in both infected cells and viral supernatant (Fig 1C–D). Similarly, nLuc expression was detected in infected cells (Fig 1E). To confirm that viral replication was occurring, RNA was isolated from infected Vero E6-hAT cells and amplified by RT-PCR using a forward primer specific to the common 5’-UTR leader sequence and reverse primers specific to each sgRNA. Agarose gel electrophoresis demonstrated that all sgRNAs were produced in cells infected with SARS-CoV-2-nLuc (Fig 1F). Negative stain electron microscopy (EM) and cryogenic EM (cryo-EM) of SARS-CoV-2-nLuc supernatant showed prototypical coronavirus particles of approximately 125 nm diameter and decorated with S glycoprotein trimers (Fig 1G). Altogether, these results demonstrate that the SARS-CoV-2 BAC system produces infectious virus particles that replicate in permissive cells.Construction of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 BAC and E trans-complementation cell linesTo examine the role of E in SARS-CoV-2 infection, the E gene was deleted in the SARS-CoV-2 BAC. Specifically, the transcription regulatory sequence (TRS) upstream of the E gene, which is responsible for the production of the E sgRNA, and the first 186 bp of E were deleted (Fig S2A). The remaining 42 bp of E were left intact to preserve expression of the downstream M gene by ensuring that the M gene TRS and surrounding RNA sequence were unaltered.To permit complementation of the deleted E gene in trans, stable expression BHK and Vero E6-hAT cell lines were engineered to inducibly express E. To minimize the likelihood of recombination of the trans-complemented E mRNA with the ΔE SARS-CoV-2 viral genome, the E gene was codon-optimized (coE), which removed sequence homology. To facilitate identification of cells expressing E, the codon-optimized mRuby3 fluorescent protein was linked to the N-terminus of coE by the 2A self-cleaving peptide from Thosea asigna virus (T2A), permitting co-expression of mRuby3 and coE (Fig S2B). The mRuby3-T2A-coE construct was cloned into doxycycline-inducible lentiviral vectors and transduced into BHK and Vero E6-hAT cells. Prior to each use, the cell lines were induced with doxycycline for 48h and visually confirmed by microscopy to express mRuby3, and therefore also coE (Fig S2B).ΔE SARS-CoV-2 is replication competent but attenuated compared to wild-type virusΔE SARS-CoV-2 was produced from the BAC as described for wild-type (WT) SARS-CoV-2 to produce virus lacking E. In addition, the ΔE SARS-CoV-2 BAC was transfected into induced BHK-coE cells that were overlaid onto induced Vero E6-hAT-coE cells to produce ΔE SARS-CoV-2 trans-complemented with E protein (Fig S2C). A multi-passage workflow was developed to characterize ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity and replication (Fig S2D). The initial passages (P1) of WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2-nLuc viruses (the latter with and without E trans-complementation) were inoculated onto fresh Vero E6-hAT and Vero E6-hAT-coE cells (P2), which were subsequently passaged a third time (P3). For each passage, both the virus supernatant and the producer cells were collected and characterized.Plaque titration revealed ΔE SARS-CoV-2 without E trans-complementation produced moderate virus titers (104 to 105 pfu/mL) in Vero E6-hAT cells, which were attenuated 2- to 3-log compared to WT SARS-CoV-2 (Fig 2A). Similarly, quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) of genomic RNA copies in viral supernatant showed 2- to 4-log lower levels (Fig 2B). Infecting fresh Vero E6-hAT cells with each virus further demonstrated a 3- to 4-log reduction in nLuc activity for ΔE SARS-CoV-2 compared to WT (Fig 2C). However, complementing E in trans did not significantly increase infectivity, genomic RNA abundance, or nLuc activity (Fig 2A–C).As Vero E6-hAT cells artificially express human ACE2 and TMPRSS2, they do not represent a biologically relevant target cell of SARS-CoV-2 infection. To determine whether the observed attenuated phenotype of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 is cell type specific and to examine infection in more relevant cells, human epithelial colorectal Caco-2 cells and human respiratory epithelial Calu-3 and 16HBE cells were infected with WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 and assayed for nLuc activity. A similar 1.5- to 3-log reduction in infectivity was observed for ΔE SARS-CoV-2 compared to WT in Vero E6, Caco-2, and Calu-3 cells as was observed in Vero E6-hAT cells (Fig 2D).Surprisingly, while ΔE SARS-CoV-2 had similar infectivity in 16HBE cells as in the other cell lines, WT SARS-CoV-2 infectivity was about 1-log lower than ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity (Fig 2D). To investigate whether 16HBE cells had lower expression of ACE2, all of the cell lines were stained for human ACE2 and imaged for immunofluorescence (Fig 2E). Vero E6-hAT cells, as expected, showed a high level of ACE2 expression, commensurate with the observed infectivity of SARS-CoV-2. The human cell lines showed lower levels of ACE2 expression than Vero E6-hAT cells, with 16HBE cells having the least ACE2 expression. Parental Vero E6 cells, which had relatively high WT SARS-CoV-2 infectivity, showed low surface expression of ACE2.To determine if increased ACE2 expression could rescue WT SARS-CoV-2 infectivity in 16HBE cells, they were transduced with a lentiviral vector encoding human ACE2, resulting in a similar level of ACE2 cell surface expression as in Vero E6-hAT cells (Fig 2E). Both WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 showed increased infectivity in 16HBE-ACE2 cells compared with parental 16HBE cells (Fig 2D); however, while ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity was about 1-log higher in 16HBE-ACE2 cells, WT SARS-CoV-2 infectivity was enhanced 3.5-log in 16HBE-ACE2 cells. Collectively, these data demonstrate that deletion of E from SARS-CoV-2 results in attenuated viral infectivity across multiple cell types.ΔE SARS-CoV-2 virus infection produces expected sgRNAs and does not recombine with trans-complemented coEAttenuation rather than loss of infectivity of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 could be explained by restoration of E gene expression, compensatory mutations, or a lack of expression of other viral genes due to the E gene deletion. To confirm that the ΔE SARS-CoV-2 genome had not been altered through passaging, RNA was isolated from passage 3 (P3) virus and sequenced. The E gene deletion confirmed in the ΔE SARS-CoV-2 BAC was also observed in P3 virus, and no additional mutations were observed in the sequenced region, which spanned from the last 437 bp of S through the end of ORF6.To confirm that all sgRNAs except E are produced by ΔE SARS-CoV-2, RNA from infected cells was isolated, RT-PCR amplified with sgRNA-specific primers, and visualized by agarose gel electrophoresis. For each virus, the amount of cDNA added to each RT-PCR reaction was normalized to the relative abundance of ORF1a compared to WT virus. All sgRNAs except E were detected in ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infected cells with similar relative abundance as for WT SARS-CoV-2, with and without coE trans-complementation (Fig 3A). E sgRNA was not detected after ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection with or without coE. To further confirm a lack of E expression during ΔE SARS-CoV-2 replication, RNA isolated from producer cells and supernatants from all three passages of WT SARS-CoV-2 or ΔE SARS-CoV-2 with and without coE was examined by qRT-PCR. While WT SARS-CoV-2 infection produced E sgRNA in cells and virus, no E sgRNA was detected with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection with or without coE (Fig 3B).The lack of appreciable rescue of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity by coE trans-complementation could be due to a lack of coE expression, despite mRuby3 expression in induced coE cells. Enumeration of coE copies by qRT-PCR demonstrated that coE was expressed across all three passages in trans-complemented cells, albeit at a level 2- to 4-log lower than endogenous E detected during WT SARS-CoV-2 infection (Fig 3C, left). To determine if the level of coE mRNA expression was influenced by SARS-CoV-2 infection, coE copies were enumerated in RNA isolated from induced Vero E6-hAT-coE cells that were mock infected or infected with WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2. The expression level of coE was similar in induced Vero E6-hAT-coE cells without infection or with infection by WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2 (Fig S3). Importantly, coE was not detected in ΔE SARS-CoV-2 virus produced in coE-expressing cells (Fig 3C, right), further confirming a lack of recombination of coE mRNA with the ΔE SARS-CoV-2 viral genome.ΔE SARS-CoV-2 is defective for virus production and spread and is partially rescued by E trans-complementationWhile ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity was not significantly rescued by coE trans-complementation (Fig 2A–C), other characteristics of this mutant virus were rescued by E expression. While performing plaque titration of the viruses, we observed that ΔE SARS-CoV-2 generated small, pinprick-like plaques compared to large, distinct WT plaques (Fig 4A). In contrast, titration in cells expressing E resulted in ΔE SARS-CoV-2 plaques that matched WT plaques regardless of whether they were produced in cells expressing E. Of note, it did not matter if ΔE SARS-CoV-2 was originally produced in cells expressing E, as all ΔE SARS-CoV-2 viruses produced small plaques when inoculated onto cells lacking E. Similarly, infecting Vero E6-hAT cells (lacking E expression) with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 produced in cells with or without E expression showed no appreciable difference in infectivity (Fig S4A). Conversely, ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection of Vero E6-hAT cells expressing E resulted in a 20-fold increased infectivity compared with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection of Vero E6-hAT cells without E (Fig S4B). Thus, rescue of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity is dependent upon the presence of E in target cells, not in producer cells.In addition to ΔE SARS-CoV-2 having reduced virus particle production (Fig 2B), the particles themselves differ from WT SARS-CoV-2 virus particles. While most WT virions visualized by negative stain EM and cryo-EM were broadly decorated with S trimers, most ΔE SARS-CoV-2 virions displayed little or no S and often appeared misshapen (Fig 4B). Production of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 in cells expressing E resulted in a mixed phenotype, with some WT-like particles but also a population of defective particles similar to those produced in cells without E expression. A Western blot of purified viruses showed less incorporation of S in ΔE SARS-CoV-2 virions compared to WT virions (Fig 4C).Examining nLuc expression of cells infected with WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2 virus by immunofluorescence microscopy revealed that WT and ΔE viruses propagate differently. Cells infected with WT SARS-CoV-2 showed some contiguous patches of nLuc-expressing cells that were suggestive of cell-to-cell spread, as has been previously reported (50, 51), but predominantly consisted of scattered individual cells or small numbers of cells expressing nLuc that were consistent with particle-based spread (Fig 4D). In contrast, cells infected with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 showed little evidence of particle-based spread but instead contained large islands of nLuc-expressing cells that appeared to be syncytia. Interestingly, nuclear staining of these islands of nLuc-expressing cells showed a distinct “eye of the hurricane” pattern of aggregated nuclei with an empty center, which was not observed with WT SARS-CoV-2 infection. ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection of E-expressing cells produced an increase in particle-based spread but also appreciably enhanced cell-to-cell transmission (Fig 4E). Similarly, WT SARS-CoV-2 infection of cells expressing E also showed an increase in cell-to-cell spread. Collectively these data demonstrate that ΔE SARS-CoV-2 is defective for virus particle production and particle-based spread, is transmitted primarily cell-to-cell, and is partially rescued by E trans-complementation.S neutralizing antibody inhibits SARS-CoV-2 virus particle spread but not cell-to-cell transmissionNeutralizing antibodies (NAbs) directed against S can effectively inhibit SARS-CoV-2 infection (52, 53). Protection of viral infections by NAbs appears to be predominantly based on inhibiting cell-free virus spread and targeting surface-exposed antigen on infected cells (53), which is circumvented by cell-to-cell virus transmission (51, 54–56) Since ΔE SARS-CoV-2 appears to spread primarily cell-to-cell, we examined whether a NAb could prevent ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection. The LY-CoV555 (bamlanivimab) NAb was effective at neutralizing USA-WA1/2020 SARS-CoV-2 (57–59) with an effective concentration to reduce infection by 50% (EC50) of 0.01 μg/mL in Vero E6-hAT cells (59). Vero E6-hAT cells were infected with WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2-nLuc that had been pre-incubated for 1 h with NAb at the reported EC50, EC90, or 10 times the EC90 dose or left untreated. After 24 h the cells were assayed for nLuc activity (Fig 5A). The lowest dose of NAb was sufficient to reduce WT SARS-CoV-2 infectivity 10-fold, with no nLuc activity detected at the higher doses. In comparison, ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity was reduced only 2-fold at the lowest dose and nLuc activity was still detectable at the higher doses, albeit reduced 100- and 500-fold (Fig 5A).To directly compare WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 cell-to-cell transmission, a method was needed to permit initial infection of cells but to inhibit subsequent cell-free infection while allowing cell-to-cell spread. Thus, Vero E6-hAT cells were infected with WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2-nLuc for 1 h before treatment with NAb and assayed for nLuc activity after 24 h (Fig 5B). As the EC50 dose of NAb did not inhibit WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2 when applied post-inoculation (data not shown), only the EC90 and 10 times EC90 doses were used. Like what was observed with NAb pre-treatment, WT SARS-CoV-2 infectivity was reduced 10- and 100-fold compared to no NAb treatment, whereas ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity was only reduced 1.5- and 3-fold (Fig 5B).We hypothesized that the difference in NAb efficacy at inhibiting WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity after virus challenge was due to the relative contribution of virus particle spread to overall infectivity for each virus but that both viruses retained the ability to transmit cell-to-cell. To confirm this, nLuc expression was visualized in cells with and without NAb pre-treatment and infected with viruses (Fig 5C). Without NAb treatment, both WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 exhibited similar patterns of cell-to-cell and cell-free spread as shown in Fig 4D. Treating with increasing doses of NAb inhibited particle-based spread but preserved cell-to-cell spread by both WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 (Fig 5C). At the highest dose of NAb (1.0 μg/mL, 10 times EC90) no particle-based spread was apparent for either WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2. Altogether, these results demonstrate that NAb treatment inhibits SARS-CoV-2 virus particle spread but not cell-to-cell transmission and that ΔE SARS-CoV-2 is transmitted primarily cell-to-cell.SARS-CoV-2-mediated cell fusion is enhanced by E expression in infected target cellsInhibiting SARS-CoV-2 virus particle spread while preserving cell-to-cell spread through high dose NAb treatment affords the ability to directly compare WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 cell-to-cell transmission without the confounding effects of potentially unequal virus particle spread. While the pattern of infected cells during high dose NAb treatment suggests transmission is occurring cell-to-cell via syncytia formation (Fig 5C), it is also possible that localized virus particle spread without cell fusion occurs. To determine whether SARS-CoV-2 transmission with high NAb concentrations occurs through syncytia formation, we employed a bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC) cell fusion reporter system, in which the linked Renilla luciferase (rLuc) and enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) genes are split into N- and C-terminal fragments, NrLuc-eGFP and rLuc-eGFPC (60). Stable expression of either the NrLuc-eGFP or rLuc-eGFPC fragment was accomplished by transducing Vero E6-hAT cells with a lentiviral vector encoding one of the fragments, generating Vero E6-hAT-N and Vero E6-hAT-C cell lines. Both lines were co-cultured 1:1, infected with SARS-CoV-2-nLuc at a low multiplicity of infection (MOI=0.01) for 1 h, and treated with NAb for 24 h. Then the cells were fixed and imaged for nLuc expression by fluorescence microscopy (Fig S5A). Fusion of adjacent Vero E6-hAT-N and Vero E6-hAT-C cells resulted in the reconstitution of rLuc and eGFP and produced green fluorescence. Infected cells, which were positive for nLuc expression, were also positive for reconstituted eGFP expression, indicating that SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the presence of a high NAb concentration occurs through cell fusion (Fig S5B).To compare cell fusion induced by WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2, Vero E6-hAT cells with or without E expression were infected with WT or ΔE virus for 1 h, treated with NAb for 24h, fixed, and stained for nLuc expression (Fig 6A). Infection with WT SARS-CoV-2 resulted in larger syncytia than ΔE SARS-CoV-2 in Vero E6-hAT cells (Figs 6B, S5B). Syncytia size was enhanced for both viruses in Vero E6-hAT-coE cells expressing E. Interestingly, the “eye of the hurricane” aggregated nuclei structures observed with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection without NAb treatment (Fig 4D) were also present during WT SARS-CoV-2 infection with NAb treatment (Fig 6A). Collectively, these data suggest virus-mediated cell fusion is enhanced by E expression in infected target cells.Lack of E during SARS-CoV-2 infection results in greater S cell surface expression and ERGIC reorganizationPrior work has demonstrated that expression of SARS-CoV-2 S protein in cells results in its expression on the cell surface (38, 61). Co-expressing E with S causes S to be predominantly retained within the ERGIC to facilitate virus particle assembly (38). Given our observation that fewer S trimers were incorporated into ΔE SARS-CoV-2 virus particles compared with WT particles (Fig 4B), we hypothesized that the lack of E expression with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection results in less S retention within the ERGIC and increased expression at the cell surface. To examine S localization during WT and ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection, Vero E6-hAT cells were infected with WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2 and fixed after 24 h. The cells were stained prior to permeabilization with anti-S primary and red fluorescent secondary antibodies to detect cell surface expression. After permeabilization, the cells were stained with anti-S primary and green fluorescent secondary antibodies to detect total (surface and internal) expression. After imaging via confocal microscopy, green fluorescence that co-localized with red fluorescence (representing cell surface expressed S that was labeled with both sets of antibodies) was masked to visualize distinct populations of surface (red) and internal (green) S (Fig 7A). Infection with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 resulted in increased S surface expression compared with WT virus (Fig 7B). While a high degree of variability was observed in the proportion of surface-expressed S in ΔE SARS-CoV-2-infected cells resulting in a lack of statistical significance, there was nonetheless a trend for higher S surface expression in some cells infected with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 compared to WT virus.Different localization patterns of internal S in cells infected with WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2 were observed (Fig 7A). While most internal S in cells infected with WT SARS-CoV-2 appeared in centralized, perinuclear structures consistent with ERGIC localization, S inside ΔE SARS-CoV-2-infected cells was more diffuse, raising the question of whether S in cells infected with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 was retained within the ERGIC. To test this, Vero E6-hAT cells were infected with WT or ΔE SARS-CoV-2 for 24 h and stained for S and the canonical ERGIC marker protein ERGIC-53 (Fig 8A). Cells infected with WT virus exhibited the same ERGIC-53 staining pattern as uninfected cells, with S co-localizing with ERGIC-53. In contrast, cells infected with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 also exhibited strong co-localization of S and ERGIC-53, but the ERGIC structure was reorganized, appearing more diffuse compared to uninfected cells or cells infected with WT virus. Within ΔE virus-mediated syncytia, the center of the “eye of the hurricane” aggregated nuclei structure was filled with diffuse ERGIC-53 co-localized with S. To determine if this altered ERGIC organization was due to SARS-CoV-2-induced syncytia or specific to ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection, WT and ΔE syncytia were directly compared (Fig 8B). Unlike the diffuse ERGIC observed with ΔE SARS-CoV-2 syncytia, WT virus syncytia retained multiple dense ERGIC structures. Altogether, these data demonstrate that a lack of E during SARS-CoV-2 infection results in greater S cell surface expression and reorganization of the ERGIC.DiscussionPrevious studies have shown that TGEV, HCoV-OC43, and MERS-CoV lacking E are unable to replicate (41–43). In contrast, MHV and SARS-CoV are attenuated without E (44, 45), which we also observed for ΔE SARS-CoV-2 in Vero-E6-hAT cells and multiple human epithelial cell lines. We showed that ΔE SARS-CoV-2 attenuation was due to reduced infectious particle production and increased cell-to-cell transmission (Fig 9). Plaque titration of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 demonstrated fewer and much smaller plaques compared to the large, distinct plaques observed with WT virus, which was also observed for MHV and SARS-CoV (44, 45). Increased cell surface expression of S was observed for ΔE SARS-CoV-2, which led to significantly reduced virus production and release from the ERGIC pathway and any virions that were produced had little incorporation of S. This was expected given the previously reported roles of CoV E in virion assembly and release (36–38). In addition, transfection studies showed that SARS-CoV-2 E expression slows down the secretory pathway, inducing retention of glycoproteins in the ERGIC, including S (38). We hypothesized that a lack of intracellular S expression could lead to its expression at the cell surface, which was true to an extent, but surface S localization was variable. Unexpectedly, ΔE SARS-CoV-2 led to changes in ERGIC morphology.ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity and virus particle production and transmission by trans-complementation of E was partially rescued. A primary factor in this limited rescue is likely the expression level of trans-complemented E, which had 2–3-log lower mRNA abundance in infected cells versus endogenous E sgRNA during WT virus infection. While SARS-CoV-2 has been shown to inhibit host protein synthesis during translation and mRNA nuclear export (62–64), the abundance of trans-complemented E mRNA was similar in uninfected and infected cells, suggesting that the virus did not inhibit mRNA production or stability. However, cells trans-complemented with E had lower mRuby3 protein expression after SARS-CoV-2 infection, suggesting virus-induced host protein inhibition reduced trans-complemented E protein expression levels. Optimization of the trans-complementation system to overcome these limitations should improve rescue.The variability in E dependency across CoVs suggests E performs multiple roles in virus assembly and release (65), some of which are crucial and others that may be dispensable or that can be substituted for by other viral proteins (66). We confirmed that attenuation of ΔE SARS-CoV-2 was authentic and not due to reconstitution of the E gene or emergence of compensatory mutations. Examining production of sgRNAs by ΔE virus with and without E trans-complementation showed that all sgRNAs except E sgRNA are produced with similar abundance to WT. This demonstrates that attenuated ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infectivity is not due to a defect in viral RNA synthesis but suggests the replication defect occurs after RNA synthesis. While deleting either the E gene or the ORF3 gene in SARS-CoV reduced but did not eliminate viral titers, deletion of both E and ORF3a abrogated SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 replication, indicating that ORF3a can substitute for some functionality of E (46, 47). This would make both viral proteins potential candidates for compensatory mutations to overcome replication defects introduced by the deletion of E. However, no mutations were observed after three passages of ΔE SARS-CoV-2.While higher surface expression of S during ΔE SARS-CoV-2 infection was anticipated to promote increased cell fusion compared to WT infection, we also observed that trans-complementation of E enhanced cell fusion, including with WT SARS-CoV-2 infection. The C-terminus of E contains a PSD-95/Dlg/ZO-1 (PDZ)-binding motif, facilitating interactions of E with various PDZ-containing host proteins, including Zona Occludens-1 (ZO1) and Proteins Associated with Lin Seven 1 (PALS1), which are key regulators of tight junction (TJ) formation and epithelial monolayer integrity (67, 68). Further, E expression has been shown to downregulate expression of TJ proteins Occludin and Claudin-4 (69). Disruption of TJs and epithelial monolayer integrity could facilitate cell fusion. Alternatively, the viroporin activity of E, by altering Ca2+ homeostasis, could promote syncytia formation, which has been shown to be dependent upon Ca2+ oscillations (70–72). Further studies are needed to elucidate how E expression enhances virus-induced cell fusion.It is generally agreed that CoV assembly occurs in or near the ERGIC but trafficking of nascent virions from the ERGIC to extracellular space is less certain. Different pathways may be utilized and/or altered by different CoVs, including the Golgi secretory pathway, the endosome recycling compartment, or lysosomal exocytosis (73–76). Fragmentation of the Golgi and its translocation to the center of virus-induced syncytia was previously observed with MHV (77). Fluorescence imaging also noted Golgi fragmentation during late SARS-CoV-2 infection, when M, S, and E proteins were expressed and after recruitment of the lysosomal marker LAMP1 to the Golgi/ERGIC, likely due to fusion of lysosomes with ERGIC membranes (78). However, we only observed ERGIC fragmentation after infection with ΔE SARS-CoV-2, suggesting that this phenomenon is transient during late SARS-CoV-2 infection and is enhanced if E is not present.SARS-CoV-2 infection has been shown to result in an accumulation of autophagosomes but inhibition of cargo degradation through reduced autophagic flux, processes which involve E and M and which may lead to virus particle release (79, 80). The localization of M to ERGIC-derived autophagosomes is dependent upon expression of E, without which M localizes to the Golgi (81–83). It could be envisioned that without E, accumulation of M – and perhaps nascent virions – in the Golgi/ERGIC could promote the observed fragmentation and translocation, as well as alter the pathway through which virions are released. As E has been described in slowing down the secretory pathway (38), its absence could accelerate virus-induced processes within the secretory compartments. Additional studies investigating SARS-CoV-2 virus particle assembly and trafficking are needed to examine how the presence or absence of E alters these processes as well as the cellular secretory system.Materials and MethodsBiosafety statementAll SARS-CoV-2 virus production and infections were performed at biosafety level 3 in the Regional Biocontainment Laboratory at the University of Pittsburgh Center for Vaccine Research.SARS-CoV-2 BACThe SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 viral genome was obtained as 7 individual cDNA fragments cloned within pUC57 or pCC1BAC via a Materials Transfer Agreement from the University of Texas Medical Branch (84), with and without replacement of the ORF7a/b gene by the mNeonGreen (mNeon) reporter gene. The mNeon reporter gene in fragment 7 was replaced via Gibson cloning with the codon-optimized nLuc gene from a reporter lentiviral genome (pNL4-nLucCO-6ATRi-BAL) that we had previously produced (85).SARS-CoV-2 genome fragments 1–4 and fragments 5–7 were each assembled using the Golden Gate Assembly kit per the manufacturer’s instructions (NEB), with type IIB restriction enzymes BsaI-HFv2 and Esp3I, respectively. A MEC was produced via gene synthesis (GenScript), consisting of the CMV and T7 promoters upstream of the first 351 bp of the SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 genome (from the start of the 5’ UTR up to the unique BsiWI restriction site within the nsp1 gene) and the last 1,398 bp of the viral genome (from the unique XhoI restriction site within the nucleocapsid gene through the end of the 3’ UTR) followed by a polyA(29) tail, HDV ribozyme, and bovine growth hormone polyadenylation signal sequence. This MEC was cloned into pCC1BAC via NotI/BamHI restriction cloning to produce a mammalian expression BAC (pBAC), which was subsequently digested with BsiWI and XhoI and incubated with digested fragments 1–4 (BsiWI restriction enzyme) and fragments 5–7 (XhoI restriction enzyme) together with T4 DNA ligase to produce the full SARS-CoV-2 genome with and without an nLuc reporter. To facilitate assembly of the full-length SARS-CoV-2 genome into the BAC, the 5’ end (the first 351 bp of the genome consisting of the 5’-UTR and the N-terminal of the nsp1 gene through the unique BsiWI restriction site) and the 3’ end (the last 1,398 bp of the genome from the unique XhoI restriction site in nucleocapsid through the 3’-UTR) of the viral genome were synthesized as part of the MEC. The full SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence within the BAC was verified by Sanger sequencing.ΔE SARS-CoV-2 BACThe E TRS and the first 186 bp of the E gene were deleted from the SARS-CoV-2 genome to produce ΔE SARS-CoV-2 that lacked expression of E but preserved the expression of the downstream M gene and all subsequent genes. Briefly, portions of fragments 6 and 7 from UTMB were PCR amplified and Topo cloned into pCR2.1-TOPO (ThermoFisher Scientific). Deletion of E was performed by Gibson cloning. The fragments were then assembled as described above. The full ΔE SARS-CoV-2 genome sequence within the BAC was verified by Sanger sequencing.Inducible SARS-CoV-2 E expression constructspLVX-TetOne-Puro-mRuby3co-T2A-coE was produced by gene synthesis (GenScript) of the codon-optimized versions of mRuby3 and the SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 E gene linked by the T2A peptide, which was cloned by EcoRI/AgeI restriction cloning into the pLVX-TetOne-Puro-hAXL plasmid (Addgene). A variation replacing the puromycin resistance gene in the pLVX-TetOne-Puro vector with the NeoR/KanR/G418 resistance gene from pIRES (Takara Bio) via Gibson cloning produced pLVX-TetOne-G418-mRuby3co-T2A-coE.Cell fusion/syncytia reporter constructsThe N- and C-terminal fragments of the split renilla luciferase and enhanced green fluorescent protein fusion (Split-rLuc-eGFP) BiFC reporter were cloned from pCG-NrLuc-eGFP and pCG-rLuc-eGFPC, respectively (60), into the XbaI/SalI digested pLenti-CMV-Hygro-ACE2 plasmid (Addgene) via Gibson cloning to produce pLenti-CMV-Hygro-NrLuc-eGFP and pLenti-CMV-Hygro-rLuc-eGFPC.CellsVero E6 cells are AGM (Cercopithecus aethiops) kidney cells (ATCC), BHK cells are Syrian hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) kidney cells, HEK 293T and 293F cells are human epithelial cells, Calu-3 cells are human lung adenocarcinoma cells, Caco-2 cells are human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells, and 16HBE14o- cells (16HBE) are human bronchial epithelial cells. These cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) containing 10% or 20% (Caco-2) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Atlanta Biologicals), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100μg/ml streptomycin, and 2 mM L-glutamine (PSG; ThermoFisher Scientific), termed DMEM-10 medium, at 37° C and 5% CO2. 293F cells were maintained at 37° C with 5% CO2 in FreeStyle 293 Expression Medium (Thermo Fisher) supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin (Gibco). Vero E6-hAT cells were obtained from BEI Resources and grown in DMEM-10 supplemented with 10 μg/ml puromycin (Invivogen).16HBE-ACE2 cells were produced by stable transduction of 16HBE cells with pLenti-CMV-Hygro-ACE2 lentivirus and maintained in DMEM-10 supplemented with 500 μg/ml hygromycin (Invitrogen). Vero E6-hAT-NrLuc-eGFP (Vero E6-hAT-N) and Vero E6-hAT-rLuc-eGFPC (Vero E6-hAT-C) cells were produced by stable transduction of Vero E6-hAT cells with pLenti-CMV-Hygro lentivirus encoding the N-terminal or C-terminal fragment of the Split-rLuc-eGFP fusion reporter gene, respectively, and maintained in DMEM-10 supplemented with 10 μg/ml puromycin and 500 μg/ml hygromycin.BHK-coE cells were produced by stable transduction of BHK cells with pLVX-TetOne-Puro lentivirus encoding mRuby3-T2A-coE and maintained in DMEM-10 supplemented with 3 μg/ml puromycin. Vero E6-hAT-coE cells were produced by stable transduction of Vero E6-hAT cells with pLVX-TetOne-G418-mRuby3-T2A-coE lentivirus and maintained in DMEM-10 supplemented with 10 μg/ml puromycin and 500 μg/ml G418 (Gibco). Vero E6-hAT-N-coE and Vero E6-hAT-C-coE cells were produced by stable transduction of Vero E6-hAT-N and Vero E6-hAT-C cells, respectively, with pLVX-TetOne-G418-mRuby3-T2A-coE lentivirus and maintained in DMEM-10 supplemented with 10 μg/mL puromycin, 500 μg/ml hygromycin, and 500 μg/ml G418. TetOne-mediated expression of mRuby3-T2A-coE was induced with 100 ng/ml doxycycline (Thermo Scientific) for 48 h prior to use, which was maintained throughout the course of the experiment. Expression of mRuby3-T2A-coE was visually confirmed by widefield epifluorescence microscopy prior to use.Production of lentivirusespLenti and pLVX viruses were produced by Lipofectamine 2000 (ThermoFisher Scientific) transfection in 293T cells with the pCAGGS-PAX2 lentiviral packaging plasmid and the pL-VSV-G plasmid. Virus was harvested 48 h later, centrifuged at 2000 × g for 20 m, filtered through a 0.45 μm polyethersulfone (PES) filter (Millipore), aliquoted, and frozen at −80° C.Production of SARS-CoV-2 virionsTransfection of 20 μg viral cDNA into 4 × 106 BHK cells in a 100 mm dish was performed with Lipofectamine 2000. The medium was removed after 24 h and the cells were split 1:2, overlaid onto two 100 mm dishes each of 5 × 106 Vero E6-hAT cells, and incubated for 3 days. Supernatants were centrifuged at 2000 × g for 20 m, filtered through a 0.45 μm PES filter, and aliquoted frozen at −80° C or lysed in TRIzol-LS (ThermoFisher Scientific). For ΔE SARS-CoV-2 virus production, transfections were also performed in BHK-coE and Vero E6-hAT-coE cells induced with doxycycline.nLuc assaynLuc from transfected or infected cells was measured by lysing cells in Nano-Glo Luciferase Assay Buffer (Promega), incubation with Nano-Glo Luciferase Assay Substrate (Promega), and detection on a BioTek Synergy2 Multi-Detection Microplate Reader.RT-PCRRNA was isolated from TRIzol-LS-treated virus or TRIzol-treated cell lysates as previously described (86). RT-PCRs were performed using primers shown in Table 1 and PCR reactions were run on an agarose gel for visualization. Quantitative RT-PCRs were performed using primers and probes listed in Table 1 with plasmids used as standards and run on a Bio-Rad CFX96 Real-Time PCR System.Plaque assayVero E6-hAT cells were plated at 1 × 106 cells/well overnight in 6-well plates. Virus was diluted in 10-fold serial dilutions in OptiMEM medium (ThermoFisher Scientific) + 2% FBS. Medium was removed from cells and 200 μl virus dilutions were added in duplicate to wells and incubated at 37° C, 5% CO2 for 1 h, with plates tilted every 15 m. The virus was removed from all wells and cells were washed once with phosphate buffered saline (PBS, Gibco) before overlay with 3 ml of 1.25% Avicel (Millipore Sigma) in EMEM medium (Quality Biological) with 10% FBS, PSG, and Non-Essential Amino Acids (Gibco). Plates were incubated 2–5 days and the Avicel was removed in PBS. Cells were fixed in 10% formalin for 24 h at room temperature (RT). Wells were washed with PBS and stained with 0.2% crystal violet in 25% methanol for 15 m at RT. Stained plates were washed in water to remove excess stain and allowed to air dry overnight. Plaques were imaged on a flatbed scanner and counted.EMSARS-CoV-2 virions were fixed in equal volume 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) with 10 mM HEPES for 48 h at 4° C, ultracentrifuged through a 20% sucrose cushion in NTE buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.6) for 2.5 h, 4° C at 117,250 × g, and resuspended in NTE buffer. For negative stain EM, 3 μL of sample was applied to a freshly glow-discharged continuous carbon copper grid and stained with 1% uranyl acetate solution. The grids were then inserted into a Tecnai TF20 electron microscope (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), equipped with a field emission gun and images captured using an XF416 CMOS camera (TVIPS GmbH, Gilching, Germany) to assess particle assembly and presence of Spike. For cryo-EM, 3 μL of sample was applied to a freshly glow-discharged Quantifoil R2/1 grid (Quantifoil Micro Tools GmbH, Großlöbicha, Germany) and then blotted and plunge-frozen with a Vitrobot Mk 4 (TFS). Grids were mounted on a Krios 3Gi cryo-electron microscope operating at 300 kV and equipped with a Falcon 4i direct electron detecting camera (TFS). Images were collected in electron counting mode under the control of the TFS EPU software using a total dose of ~30 e/Å2. A magnification of 85,000x was used, correspond to 1.51 Å per pixel at the sample.Western blotVero E6-hAT cells were seeded at 15 × 106 cells/dish overnight in 150 mm dishes and infected with virus (MOI=0.05). After 24 h, supernatants were centrifuged at 2000 × g for 20 m, filtered through a 0.45 μm PES filter, supplemented with 10 mM HEPES, ultracentrifuged through a 20% sucrose cushion in NTE buffer for 2 h, 4° C at 117,250 g, resuspended overnight at 4° C in 300 μl RIPA buffer (Boston BioProducts) supplemented with complete protease inhibitor (Roche), aliquoted, and frozen at −20° C. Concentrated supernatants were combined with 4X Laemmli sample buffer (Bio-Rad) and 355 mM 2-Mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich), and denatured at 95° C for 5 m. Samples were loaded onto a pre-cast 4–15% gradient TGX polyacrylamide gel (Bio-Rad) at equal amount of total protein as determined by Lowry assay (Bio-Rad) and subjected to SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis at 150 V for 1 h. Proteins were transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore) using a wet-electroblotting transfer chamber (Bio-Rad) in Towbin buffer containing 20% methanol and 0.4% SDS (Boston BioProducts) at 75 V, 4° C for 1 h. Membranes were washed in Tris-buffered saline (TBS, Boston BioProducts), blocked in Intercept TBS blocking buffer (LI-COR) for 1 h at RT, and incubated with primary antibodies against S (mouse α-S GTX632604, Genetex, 1:1000) and N (rabbit α-N 200–401-A50, Rockland, 1:3000) diluted in Intercept TBS blocking buffer supplemented with 0.2% Tween-20 (T-20 diluent) overnight at 4° C. Membranes were washed 4 times for 5 m with TBS supplemented with 0.2% Tween-20 (TBS-T), incubated with secondary antibodies (donkey α-mouse IRDye 680LT and donkey α-rabbit IRDye 800CW, LI-COR, 1:20,000) diluted in T-20 diluent for 1 h at RT, washed 4 times for 5 m with TBS-T, and rinsed with TBS. Membranes were developed on a LI-COR Odyssey Clx imager with ImageStudio software using default acquisition settings and quantified with Fiji/ImageJ (87).Neutralizing antibody assaysDNA encoding SARS-CoV-2 S NAb LY-CoV555 heavy- and light-chain variable domain genes were synthesized by IDT and cloned into a modified pVRC to produce full length human IgG1 antibodies as previously described (88). Recombinant LY-COV555 was produced by polyethylenimine (PEI) facilitated, transient transfection of 293F cells that were maintained in FreeStyle 293 Expression Medium. Transfection complexes were prepared in OptiMEM and added to cells. Five days post-transfection supernatants were harvested, clarified by low-speed centrifugation, and incubated overnight with Protein Agarose Resin (GoldBio). The resin was collected in a chromatography column, washed with a column volume of 10 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane-HCl (TRIS), 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.5, and eluted in 0.1M Glycine (pH 2.5) which was immediately neutralized by 1M TRIS, (pH 8.5). Antibodies were then dialyzed against PBS (pH 7.4). Vero E6-hAT cells were plated at 1.25 × 105 cells/well overnight in 24-well plates. In one set of experiments, virus was pre-treated with NAb for 1 h at 37° C prior to infecting cells in duplicate wells for 24 h. In a second set of experiments, cells were infected with virus for 1 h before virus was removed from all wells and cells were washed once with PBS, fed with DMEM-10 supplemented with NAb, and incubated for 24 h. For both sets of experiments infection was measured by nLuc assay.Immunofluorescence microscopyUnless otherwise indicated below for specific experiments, standard immunofluorescence microscopy sample preparation was as follows: Cells were seeded into 35 mm glass-bottom dishes (MatTek) and incubated until near confluence, overnight to 48 h. Cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 24 h at 4° C, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 (ThermoFisher Scientific) for 15 m at RT, blocked with 5% normal goat serum (Invitrogen) for 1 h at RT, incubated with primary antibody for 1 h at RT, incubated with secondary antibody for 1 h at RT, counterstained with Hoechst 33342 (1:2000, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 15 m at RT, and mounted with 1.5 glass coverslips. Blocking and immunofluorescence staining/wash buffers contained 0.5% bovine serum albumin (ThermoFisher Scientific) and 1% glycine (Millipore Sigma) in PBS.For ACE2 cell surface expression, cells were counterstained with Hoechst 33342 prior to fixation with 2% PFA for 20 m at RT. No permeabilization was performed. Primary antibody (mouse α-ACE2 MAB9332, R&D Systems, 1:100) was incubated for 24 h at 4° C. Secondary antibody (goat α-mouse-AlexaFluor488, Invitrogen, 1:500) was incubated for 1 h at RT. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed with a Nikon A1 microscope equipped with a motorized piezo Z stage and images were analyzed with Nikon Elements.For nLuc expression, Vero E6-hAT and induced Vero E6-hAT-coE cells were seeded at 3 × 105 cells/well overnight into either 6-well plates or MatTek dishes, infected with virus for 1 h, washed with PBS, and fed with DMEM-10, which in some experiments was supplemented with NAb. After 24 h, cells were fixed and prepared according to the above standard protocol with primary (mouse α-nLuc MAB10026, R&D Systems, 1:500) and secondary (goat α-mouse-AlexaFluor488, 1:500) antibodies. Widefield epifluorescence microscopy was performed on a Motic inverted fluorescence microscope and images were analyzed with Fiji/ImageJ.For ERGIC-53 and S expression, Vero E6-hAT cells were seeded at 1.5 × 105 cells/dish overnight into MatTek dishes, infected with virus (MOI=0.01) for 1 h, washed with PBS, and fed with DMEM-10. After 24 h, cells were fixed and prepared according to the above standard protocol with primary (mouse α-ERGIC-53 C-6, Santa Cruz, 1:100 and rabbit α-S 40150-R007 Sino Biological, 1:500) and secondary (goat α-mouse-AlexFluor488, 1:500 and goat α-rabbit-AlexaFluor568, Invitrogen, 1:500) antibodies. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed with a Nikon A1 microscope equipped with a motorized piezo Z stage and images were analyzed with Nikon Elements.Cell fusion assayVero E6-hAT and induced Vero E6-hAT-coE cells were seeded at 1 × 106 cells/dish overnight in MatTek dishes, infected with virus (MOI=0.01) for 1 h, washed with PBS, and fed with DMEM-10 supplemented with NAb (1 μg/ml). After 24 h, cells were fixed and prepared according to the above standard protocol with primary (mouse α-nLuc MAB10026, 1:500) and secondary (goat α-mouse-AlexaFluor647, Invitrogen, 1:500) antibodies. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed with a Nikon A1 microscope, with single focal plane images taken of 9–10 fields on average for four independent experiments. Images were analyzed and total area of each syncytium (as indicated by nLuc expression) was determined with Nikon Elements software.Split-eGFP BiFC syncytia assayVero E6-hAT-N and Vero E6-hAT-C cells with and without induced expression of coE were co-cultured 1:1 at 1 × 106 total cells/dish overnight in MatTek dishes, infected with virus (MOI=0.01) for 1 h, washed with PBS, and fed with DMEM-10 supplemented with NAb (1 μg/ml). After 24 h, cells were fixed and prepared according to the above standard protocol with primary (mouse α-nLuc MAB10026, 1:500) and secondary (goat α-mouse-AlexFluor647, 1:500) antibodies. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed with a Nikon A1 microscope, with single focal plane images taken of 6 fields each for two independent experiments. Images were analyzed with Nikon Elements software.S localization assayVero E6-hAT cells were seeded at 1.5 × 105 cells/dish overnight in MatTek dishes, infected with virus (MOI=0.01) for 1 h, washed with PBS, and fed with DMEM-10. After 24 h, cells were fixed with 4% PFA for 24 h at 4° C, blocked with normal goat serum, incubated with primary (rabbit α-S 40150-R007, 1:500), and secondary (goat α-rabbit-AlexaFluor568, 1:500) surface antibodies, permeabilized, re-blocked, incubated with primary (rabbit α-S 40150-R007, 1:500) and secondary (goat α-rabbit-AlexaFluor488, Invitrogen 1:500) surface/intracellular antibodies, and counterstained with Hoechst 33342. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed with a Nikon A1 microscope equipped with a motorized piezo Z stage, with 4–6 Z-stacks taken for each of two independent experiments. Images were analyzed with Nikon Elements software.StatisticsResults were analyzed for statistical significance by two-sided student t test with Prism software (GraphPad). A p-value of less than or equal to 0.05 was used to indicate statistical significance.Supplementary MaterialSupplement 1


Title: HDV Pathogenesis: Unravelling Ariadne’s Thread

1. IntroductionHepatitis Delta virus (HDV) is a defective virus and an obligate satellite of hepatitis B virus (HBV), necessitating its helper virus envelope proteins (HBsAg) to form its viral particles. Humans are the only natural reservoir of HDV, but other mammalian hosts have been identified capable of supporting the HDV life cycle, including chimpanzees and tree shrews (with the HBV as a helper virus), as well as woodchucks (with the woodchuck hepatitis virus as helper virus) (reviewed in [1]). While its genome replication and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) formation are independent of HBV, HDV egress requires HBV envelope proteins [2,3].Despite forty years of epidemiological studies, the global number of HDV patients still remains elusive. The widespread implementation of HBV vaccination in high-income countries has limited the number of HBsAg susceptible persons, and subsequently, the number of HDV patients. In these countries, the epidemiology of HDV is dual, with an ageing cohort of local patients with advanced liver fibrosis and a younger generation from endemic countries that represents the incoming new infections [4]. Based on the literature published during the decade of 1980–1990, a recent meta-analysis estimated that the global number of HDV patients should reach 12 million in 2020 [5]. However, selection biases, technical limitations, inadequate screenings for anti-HDV in HBsAg-positive patients that represent the sole reliable source of HDV infection [6], and lack of HDV RNA testing to confirm ongoing viral replication can flaw the appraisal of the prevalence and health burden of HDV (reviewed in [4]). Contrary to HBV, HDV transmission from mother to offspring, and among homosexuals, has been rarely reported [6]. Therefore, epidemiological data of HDV prevalence and disease progression are not available in these groups and especially in babies, where the infection of HBV at birth will lead to chronic hepatitis B development. Of note, in Europe, up to 40% of anti-HDV-positive persons do not harbour detectable HDV replication [7].The available antiviral therapies against chronic hepatitis D (CHD) lies on the administration of the pegylated (PEG) form of IFN-α with, however, low response rate and high frequency of adverse effects (reviewed in [1]). The administration of an entry inhibitor (Bulevirtide) has recently been the object of a conditional authorization by the European Medicines Agency (but not by other regulatory authorities) for chronically HDV infected patients with compensated liver disease [8]. The future role of combination therapies is still elusive and requires further investigation, as the therapeutic management of HDV remains unsatisfactory [4].HDV pathogenesis can vary from asymptomatic cases to acute liver failure and CHD, which is associated with a faster progression towards cirrhosis, liver decompensation, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) compared to HBV monoinfection. CHD is considered as the most aggressive form of chronic viral hepatitis posing major clinical challenges, especially in high endemic countries [9]. In the following chapter, we will describe the three different modalities of HDV infection and their respective pathogenesis.2. The Three Moirai of HDV Infection and Their Clinical Outcome: From HDV-HBV Co- or Super-Infection to HDV Mono-InfectionGiven its obligatory dependence on HBV to sustain its life cycle, HDV infection occurs via two modalities, i.e., as a simultaneous infection or co-infection with both HBV and HDV, or as an HDV super-infection of a chronic HBV carrier (Figure 1). The third modality of HDV infection refers to HDV monoinfection of the hepatocytes in the absence of HBV infection, which is non-productive but can be rescued by the helper virus at a later stage. All the pathologic changes of HDV infection are limited to the liver, as the virus requires the expression of the sodium taurocholate co-transporting polypeptide (NTCP) entry receptor, which is located at the basolateral membrane of differentiated hepatocytes [10].2.1. HDV-HBV Co-InfectionCo-infection of HDV and HBV leads to acute hepatitis, whose symptoms are indistinguishable from a typical acute hepatitis B and can range from mild to severe and even acute liver failure, which is characterized by a massive hepatocyte necrosis. A study from Yurdaydin and colleagues demonstrated that 17% of the HBV-HDV co-infected patients developed severe hepatitis [11]. A minority of co-infected patients may progress even to acute liver failure [11,12]. Without liver transplantation, the mortality of these patients may reach 80% [13]. However, when patients with acute liver failure associated with HBV monoinfection are age-matched to patients with HBV/HDV co-infection, the difference in mortality cannot be observed anymore [14].Acute hepatitis occurs after an incubation period of 3–7 weeks with a preicteric and icteric phase that is not always observed [15]. During the preicteric phase, several nonspecific symptoms including fatigue, lethargy, anorexia or nausea, and biochemical markers, such as elevated serum ALT and AST levels are observed. Acute HDV-HBV co-infection can present either with a single peak, or with two distinct peaks, of liver enzyme elevations, mostly separated by 2–5 weeks [16] (Figure 2). This re-increase of serum ALT and AST levels, also called biphasic hepatitis, emerges after a first period of improvement and is thought to be caused by sequential spreading of HBV followed by HDV [17]. Typically, HBV-related peak is associated with markers of primary HBV infection, e.g., HBsAg, HBV DNA and anti-HBc IgM, and precedes HDV-related peak, where increasing titers of anti-HDV IgM and IgG are detected. An inverse pattern has been reported, especially in animal models [18], and attributed to the relative titers of HBV and HDV infection.The majority of the co-infected and immunocompetent patients (90–95%) will resolve both viral infections. HDV RNA, an early and sensitive marker of HDV replication in acute HDV infection [19], and the presence of anti-HDV IgM and IgG will disappear during early convalescence [6]. HDV diagnosis relies almost exclusively in the detection of total levels of anti-HDV antibodies, and is subsequently confirmed by the detection of HDV RNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) [20]. Serum HDV antigen (HDAg) appears early upon HDV-HBV co-infection, but it disappears quickly, therefore requiring repeated testing [21]. Serum HDAg is not a suitable tool for HDV diagnosis, as it cannot be directly detected by enzyme immunoassay or radioimmunoassay, due to antigen sequestration in immune complexes with high tittered circulating antibodies [22], and requires the application of immunoblot assay under denaturating conditions, a technique which is difficult to apply for routine detection [22]. The appearance of anti-HBs antibodies will indicate HBV viral clearance (Figure 2).A small proportion of HDV-HBV co-infected patients (less than 5%) will progress to chronic infection [16] with the risk of developing liver cirrhosis and HCC (Figure 1). Explicit information about CHD and its clinical outcomes are detailed in the following section.2.2. HDV-HBV Super-InfectionAlternatively, HDV can super-infect a chronic HBV carrier and progress to an acute or a chronic HDV infection [23] with various clinical outcomes, including patients with unspecific symptoms [15]. The pre-existing HBV infection provides the ultimate virologic background for a rapid HDV spread that will exacerbate the pre-existing liver disease [24]. Acute hepatitis D due to super-infection can be mistakenly considered either as a hepatitis B reactivation or an acute HBV hepatitis in a previously non-diagnosed HBsAg carrier [11,25]. In HDV super-infected patients, the risk of severe hepatitis is higher than in HBV mono-infected patients [12], with frequent evolution towards an acute liver failure requiring liver transplantation. The original multicentre report from 7 European centres included 532 patients with acute benign hepatitis B from Italy, 111 patients with acute liver failure from Italy, France and England, and 18 patients with acute hepatitis D that lacked anti-HBc IgM [12]. The investigators suggested that, in these patients, the associated liver failure was most likely associated with an HDV super-infection event [12]. In an Italian series, 70% of patients with CHD recalled an episode of acute hepatitis in their history [26].In the course of HDV super-infection, HBsAg positivity precedes the detection of HDV RNA, due to the already pre-established HBV chronic infection characterized by the absence of anti-HBc IgM antibodies (Figure 3). Upon the appearance of HDV RNA, HBsAg levels will fluctuate in patients’ serum. During the acute phase of HDV super-infection, HBV DNA level decreases to rebound after HDV clearance, although this is not always systematic [27] (Figure 3A). The resolution of HDV infection coincides with the decline of anti-HDV IgM and IgG immunoglobulins, and the normalization of ALT levels (Figure 3A).While a low rate (less than 5–10%) of HBsAg super-infected carriers may undergo a self-limited hepatitis leading to HBV clearance [28,29] (Figure 1), the vast majority of HDV super-infected patients (more than 90%) will progress to chronic infection with both HBV and HDV viruses [11,13,16]. Active replication of HBV and/or HDV remains a threatening factor towards liver decompensation during chronic HDV infection [30]. The evolution towards chronic infection is associated with the persistence of HDV RNA and IgM and IgG anti-HDV (Figure 3B) [15]. ALT and AST levels are persistently elevated in most of the patients [15]. IgM antibodies are also detectable in primary infection and persist with progression to chronicity, although they may be absent in some patients from Africa [31].CHD is considered the most severe form of chronic viral hepatitis, burdened with major clinical outcomes [32]. Like all immune-mediated disorders, a wide variability in the severity has been reported. A particularly aggressive course was observed among intravenous drug users since early studies [26]. The rapid spread from one to the next susceptible patient may have favoured the selection of more virulent strains, similarly to what was suggested by a chimpanzee study, where the severity of serially passaged HDV was associated with shortened incubation time and increased severity of acute hepatitis, irrespective of HDV replication levels [33]. Histological analysis demonstrates a severe hepatitis with advanced fibrosis in super-infected HDV patients [26,34,35], that undergo accelerated progression to cirrhosis [26,36,37,38], an increased risk of hepatic decompensation, and HCC leading to death [9,13,39], when compared to HBV monoinfected patients. Progression towards cirrhosis can be rapid [26,38] but also indolent [23]. In an early study of 75 patients with chronic hepatitis (HBsAg carriers with intrahepatic delta antigen) at enrolment, 39% developed cirrhosis or liver failure after a follow up (FU) of up to 6 years [26]. The same cohort was later followed for an average of 12 years [40], and the proportion of cirrhosis increased with the duration of follow-up, i.e., 23%, 41%, and 77% in the first, second, and third decade of disease, respectively. The progression to cirrhosis after an average 20-year follow-up was somehow less (42%) in another more recent, retrospective, large series from Italy [39]. Overall, the risk of developing cirrhosis in patients co-infected with HBV and HDV seems two-fold higher compared to patients infected with HBV alone [41]. In a small series from Turin [30], 85 chronic HBsAg and anti-HDV carriers were followed for an average time of 10 years. Unfavourable clinical outcomes (HCC, ascites, or liver failure) occurred in 77% of the patients with detectable levels of both HDV RNA and HBV DNA in their serum, whereas 21% of patients with HDV RNA and undetectable HBV RNA were diagnosed with ascites [30]. These results were echoed by a larger study from Taiwan, where the simultaneous presence of serum HBV DNA and HDV RNA was associated with a lower remission rate vs. those negative for both viruses (21.7% vs. 69.2%; p < 0.001), whereas the difference was only numerically lower than that observed among patients positive only for HBV DNA (26.4%) or HDV RNA (24.3%). However, the cumulative survival rate at 15 years was 57.6% among patients with HBV DNA vs. 78.3% among HBV negative patients [42].The impact of HDV infection on the rate of HCC development in HBV-positive patients has been a subject of controversy, as despite the high rate of progression to cirrhosis, not all the studies demonstrate an increased rate of HCC [30]. Some studies suggest that the major complication of CHD is decompensated cirrhosis, rather than HCC [43,44], implying that liver failure and liver-related death precede HCC development. In a landmark retrospective European study enrolling 200 patients with compensated cirrhosis [9], the presence of anti-HDV antibodies induced a 3-fold increase of HCC and a two-fold increase of mortality compared to HBV monoinfection. Several adjustments and stratification, according to the presence of anti-HDV and HBeAg, highlighted that the patients who were anti-HDV positive/HBeAg negative had an estimated 5-year risk of HCC of 13%, compared to 4 and 2% among anti-HDV negative/HBeAg negative and anti-HDV negative/HBeAg positive patients, respectively. No difference in terms of mortality was reported. In a large study from the Swiss HIV Cohort, where HBV replication was presumably suppressed by antiretrovirals, HDV infection was independently associated with mortality and liver-related events, including HCC [7]. HDV replication is a major determinant of HCC development relatively to HBV [45,46]. A recent systematic review of the literature and meta-analysis of the available data from our group highlighted an association of CHD with an increased risk of developing HCC, compared to HBV monoinfection [47]. This analysis of 93 studies, despite an important study heterogeneity, showed a significantly increased risk of HCC in patients with CHD, with pooled OR of 1.28; 95% CI 1.05–1.57; I2 = 67.0%. The association was stronger considering only prospective cohort studies (pooled OR 2.77; 95% CI 1.79–4.28), those with HIV-infected patients (pooled OR 7.13; 95% CI 2.83–17.92) where heterogeneity was less, and in general, in studies with well-defined inclusion criteria and adjustments for confounders, hinting at the importance of a robust study design. This was also evident considering that the strength of the association decreased, or became insignificant, in studies with high risk of bias, or in studies carried out before 2010. Regarding the geographical origin of patients, interestingly, the association was confirmed in Asian studies, but not in studies originating elsewhere. Lack of data prevented the analysis of the respective contribution of HBV and HDV genotypes.2.3. HDV Replication in the Absence of HBVThe third modality of HDV infection refers to the monoinfection of susceptible hepatocytes by HDV in the absence of a helper Hepadnavirus, and has been the apple of discord over the years for its potential impact on liver transplantation. In this case, a “helper independent HDV infection” or “latent” HDV infection has been suggested as markers of HDV replication have been identified in the liver and serum of the patients in the absence of HBV markers [48]. In an early series of patients undergoing liver transplantation and receiving robust anti-HBV immunoprophylaxis [48], HDV infection of the grafted liver recurred early without signs of liver damage or HBV reactivation. As soon as HBV recurred, hepatitis flared associated with serological markers of both HDV and HBV. A similar finding was reported in at least one patient transplanted in a series from Paris [49]. In an attempt to reproduce this model in susceptible animals, woodchucks never exposed to the WHV were infected with serum from an acutely infected animal, where the HDV titer was about 1700-fold higher that of WHV. This led to the expression of HDAg in scattered (~1%) hepatocytes in the absence of a productive infection, implying a very infrequent, if not absent, co-infection of hepatocytes by HDV and WHV [50]. A second challenge, this time with WHV, resulted in a productive HDV infection up to 33 days after HDV monoinfection. The persistence of HDV in the absence of HBV was also tested in the chimpanzee [51], but here, among the two animals first inoculated with HDV alone, only the one exposed to HBV one week later developed a dual HDV/HBV infection, whereas HDV infection could not be rescued when the HBV was inoculated 4 weeks later. The same authors analysed, in detail, the dynamic of HDV infection early after liver transplantation in humans, showing that, using sensitive PCR-based assays for HDV and HBV, both viruses were invariably detected in serum, albeit with very low levels of HBV replication, following the early post-liver transplantation incubation period, suggesting that some degree of co-infection was occurring despite the absence of detectable HBsAg in serum due to the effective immunoprophylaxis. The above re-evaluation of viral titers ruled out the possibility of an isolated HDV infection [51]. Thus, these findings showed that HDV does not seem to undergo a bona fide latent infection early after liver transplantation. However, in a subsequent retrospective analysis of patients transplanted at Hannover [52], HDAg was detectable in transplanted livers of 6/26 patients in the complete absence of liver HBV DNA, cccDNA, serum HBsAg, and HDV RNA for up to 19 months from transplant. The intrahepatic HDV replication in the complete absence of HBV was also elegantly proven in a humanized mice model infected with cell culture-derived HDV particles or with a serum sample from an entecavir-treated HBV/HDV co-infected patient with undetectable HBV viremia [53]. This so-called latent HDV infection, occurring in a small minority of hepatocytes (~1.5%), was not associated with liver damage (assessed by detection of hepatocyte apoptosis by a TUNEL assay) but was rescued by a super-infection with HBV 3 and 6 weeks later. The question about whether this model of infection may have relevance in transplanted patients remains debated. The persistence of HDV in the liver for at least 6 weeks in the absence of HBV [53] raised the question of whether hepatic viruses, other than HBV, could trigger its propagation. A recent study from Vargas et al., [54] demonstrated the ability of HDV to use glycoproteins from other viruses, such as vesiculovirus, flavivirus and hepacivirus by applying an in vitro expression system, or by co-infecting the cells with hepatitis C virus (HCV) or dengue virus. The formation of infectious HDV particles with unconventional glycoproteins could occur as an efficient packaging of HDV RNPs and viral egress was reported in the extracellular medium of the co-infected cells. Those particles were able to efficiently enter into cells expressing the relevant receptors. Importantly enough, the researchers demonstrated that HDV propagation could be mediated by HCV in the liver of experimentally co-infected humanized mice for several months.A recent analysis of serum from 160 HCV infected patients that were under treatment with a combination of PEG-IFN-α and ribavirin, revealed the presence of anti-HDV antibodies in the sera from two patients. Interestingly enough, these patients were negative for all serological or molecular markers of HBV infection, such as HBsAg, anti-HBc antibodies and HBV DNA, as assessed by two different types of PCR (qPCR and droplet digital PCR-ddPCR). This is the first study in patients that describes the presence of HDV infection, as shown by the detection of HDV antibodies, in chronically HCV infected patients without the evidence of ongoing or past HBV infection [55]. The above studies suggest the in vivo ability of HCV to act as a helper virus of HDV in the absence of HBV. Additional studies including larger cohorts, with no previous HBV exposure, are required to explicitly investigate the aforementioned observations.3. Mechanisms of HDV Induced PathogenesisHDV hepatotropism limits its pathologic changes to the liver with the clinical sequelae to be extremely variable, ranging from acute liver failure to asymptomatic carrier state and chronic infection. The exact mechanisms of HDV induced liver damage are still barely identified, and the severity of the clinical course is influenced by several factors. Some studies suggest that HDV can cause direct cytopathic damage during acute infection, whereas immune-mediated damage predominates during chronic infection [56]. Other studies claim that HDV, like other hepatic viruses, is not directly cytopathic to infected hepatocytes, and it is mostly the innate and adaptive immune responses that contribute to the liver immunopathogenesis [57].HDV pathogenesis is orchestrated by a breadth of different factors including HDV and/or HBV and/or host-associated factors (Figure 4). Some of these factors possess a clear causality effect with HDV pathogenesis, whereas, for others, a more correlative effect is proposed, therefore necessitating additional investigations. In the following sections, we will discuss in detail their role on HDV pathogenesis.3.1. HDV Associated Factors3.1.1. HDV GenotypeThe role of HDV genotypes has been associated with HDV pathogenesis as specific clinical features seem to cluster in different geographical areas [58,59,60]. However, since the 8 genotypes of HDV are largely distributed in well-defined areas of the world, it is difficult to disentangle the effect due to genotypes from that potentially linked to ethnicity.Most natural history studies have been carried out in the Western world, where genotype 1 prevails [61,62] and has been associated with a more severe course of HDV pathogenesis. Genotype 1 is also predominant in low-to middle-income countries, such as Mongolia, which is highly endemic for HDV infection [63,64]. Genotype 2 is prevalent in the Far East, where acute liver failure due to HDV seems less frequent, and progression to end-stage liver disease appears slower [42,59,65,66], although a genotype 2 variant isolated from Japanese patients (the Miyako strain) [67] has been reported to be associated with a faster progression towards cirrhosis. Genotype 3 is mostly found in South America and has been associated with a severe form of hepatitis. Here, acute liver failure has been, consistently and frequently, reported in severe outbreaks of acute hepatitis D affecting isolated communities of the Yukpa people of Venezuela [68,69], the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta in Colombia [70], and the Western Amazon basin [58,71].Five additional HDV genotypes have been described upon the classification of the previously assigned genotype 2b as genotype 4, and the classification of African sequences into the genotypes 5 to 8 [62,72]. The disease features of these genotypes remain poorly characterized so far.In their recent paper, Le Gal et al. highlighted the classification of HDV genotypes to one or four subgenotypes per genotype according to their intersubgenotype similarity over the whole genome sequence [73]. HDV-1a and HDV-1b subgenotypes were restricted to Africa and Madagascar, HDV-1c to the Oceania islands and HDV-1d to the Middle East, eastern and western Europe, Asia, and North America. HDV-2a circulated to Taiwan and Japan, and HDV-2b to Siberia. HDV-4a and HDV-4b circulated in the Far East, and HDV-7a and HDV-7b were detected in Cameroonian patients. HDV-5 and HDV-8 genotypes segregated into at least two subgenotypes without well-defined geographical specificity and no distinct information about HDV-3 subgenotypes are available so far [73]. Further studies are required to identify the association between HDV subgenotypes and viral pathogenesis.Mixed infection with different genotypes, and even super-infection, have been reported, especially in patients with high risk for multiple exposures to HDV. In this case, there is a sole dominant genotype, whereas the minor one represents approximately 10 percent of the total viral population [74].3.1.2. HDAg ExpressionHDAg expression coincides with HDV replication, is quite robust within an infected hepatocyte, and was demonstrated to be barely influenced by mutations that have been identified in several HDV isolates. In 1986, the CAR HDV isolate was linked with an acute liver failure outbreak in the region of Central African Republic (CAR) [75]. The CAR HDV isolate, which was successfully transmitted and isolated from the liver of woodchuck upon their inoculation with sera from patients with acute liver failure, showed a highly specific liver pathogenicity, including spongiocytic hepatitis in both woodchucks and humans. This isolate bared a mutation (T to A) at nucleotide 1013 of the antigenomic RNA, which converted the amber stop codon (TAG) to a codon for lysine (AAG) that produced a unique HDAg species of 28kDa size [76], which was identified in the livers and sera of the infected hosts [77]. Of note, the reference HDV isolate bears a U to C modification on the genomic RNA at nucleotide 1012 and will give rise to the small (24kDa) and large (27kDa) HDAg [78]. Sequencing analysis of the CAR HDV isolate and its comparison with the American, Japanese, Taiwanese, French, Italian, and Nauru HDV isolates, revealed a variability of 1.7 to 21.5% at the nucleic acid level and of 1.9 to 28.7% at the amino acid level [76]. CAR HDV isolate was most closely related to the Italian HDV isolate, demonstrated an extremely low genome replication, and its HDAg shared common biological functions with the prototype L-HDAg, including the replication inhibition of HDV RNA [79]. There is no additional information about the prevalence of this isolate and no recent data are available so far.The liver pathology hallmark, based on initial animal studies, is an eosinophilic degeneration of hepatocytes [80]. Additionally, early in vitro studies suggested a direct cytopathic effect of HDV [81,82]. However, these observations failed to be reproduced in transgenic mice expressing either L-HDAg or S-HDAg, therefore suggesting no association between HDAg expression and liver damage [83].No correlation between HDV replication levels and any histological feature was identified in an international study with 80 HDV chronically infected patients at different stages of fibrosis [84]. However, in the same study, Zachou et al. demonstrated a weak correlation between the serum levels of HBsAg and the histological activity of the liver. In another clinical study, Negro et al. demonstrated a significant positive correlation between the number of HDAg-positive cells and the extent of portal inflammation, upon analysis of the intrahepatic expression of HDAg, the morphologic features of HDV hepatitis, and the outcome of liver disease in 101 patients. HDV elimination reduced the degree of inflammation and intrahepatic HDAg expression, while the initial morphologic lesion of the liver did not impact on HDV disease. The results of this study suggested that the immune response plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of HDV hepatitis [40].3.1.3. HDV Persistent ReplicationPersistent HDV replication, as assessed by HDV RNA detection in the serum, has a major impact on the progression towards CHD and was suggested to be the only predictor of liver related mortality [39]. HDV RNA levels were independently associated with progression to cirrhosis (OR = 1.60, 95% CI 1.20–2.12, p = 0.007) and development of HCC (OR = 1.88, 95% CI 1.11–3.19, p = 0.019) in a FU study on 105 non-cirrhotic patients [45]. These results are consistent with early observations from the Turin cohort, where, despite the initial rapid progression to cirrhosis, some patients may experience a reduction of HDV replication with time, which is associated with a pattern of inactive cirrhosis, characterized by reduced necroinflammation, stable for years [40,66,85]. A relative stability—even at the cirrhotic stage—has been also reported in children [86]. Roulot et al. recently highlighted that persistent HDV replication was one of the critical determinants of HDV severity, as it was associated with significantly increased risk of hepatic complications, including liver decompensation, HCC, and death in a large French cohort [87].3.2. Host-Associated Factors3.2.1. Interaction with the Cell MachineryPrevious studies demonstrated an interaction of HDV RNA, and its proteins S and L-HDAg, with the cell machinery [88,89]. Only a part of these interactions has been elucidated. HDV proteins interact with numerous cell factors that are involved in HDV transcription, replication and even pathogenesis [3]. A cell proteome analysis in human embryonic kidney HEK-293 identified that HDV replication altered the expression of 89 out of 3000 proteins that were quantified [90]. The majority of these proteins was associated with pyruvate metabolism (Figure 5C1) and cell cycle regulation (Figure 5A). The expression of p53 was downregulated, and the G2/M DNA damage checkpoint was highly affected, therefore implicating a potential role of these pathways in HDV associated HCC. Additional experimentations demonstrated that HDV can induce cell cycle arrest [91], cell death [81], and impair cell proliferation [92].HDV was shown to increase histone H3 acetylation within the clusterin promoter that enhanced its expression (Figure 5B) [93]. The above epigenetic regulation along with the fact that clusterin was overexpressed in 89% of human HCC cases [94], strongly suggests that HDV can induce carcinogenesis.HDV can also promote oxidative stress in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of hepatic cell lines by interacting with the NADPH oxidase (Nox) family (Figure 5C2). L-HDAg interacts with NOX-4 inducing the release of reactive oxygen species (ROS) which in turn activate the signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT-3) and the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) pathway (Figure 5C2) [95]. This effect was dramatically decreased in the presence of antioxidants or calcium inhibitors.HDV may induce intrahepatic inflammation via the activation of NF-kB signalling. In vitro studies revealed that only L-HDAg can activate the tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) induced NF-κB signalling, despite the fact that both HDAg isoforms can interact with the TNF receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2). NF-κB activation by L-HDAg is independent of L-HDAg farnesylation, is mediated through the death receptor TNFR1 (tumour necrosis factor receptor 1) signalling cascade and induces the expression levels of Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) (Figure 5C4) [96]. L-HDAg farnesylation is a post-translational modification, where a farnesyl lipid group (C211XXQ box) is covalently linked by a cellular farnesyltransferase to the cysteine at position 211 of L-HDAg [97]. ER stress and NF-κB activation was shown to be activated by the translocation of L-HDAg to the ER, during the viral assembly with the residing HBV glycoproteins [98].L-HDAg interacts with various signalling pathways implicated in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) [99], wound healing, and fibrosis [100]. The transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) pathway is involved in liver regeneration and in the fibrotic to cirrhotic transformation upon viral infection. Choi et al. demonstrated that only L-HDAg, induced the signal cascades of TGF-β, c-Jun-induced pathway and enhanced the protein expression level of TGF-β–induced plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (Figure 5C3) [100]. L-HDAg farnesylation, had a critical role in the activation of these signaling cascades. Additionally, the synergistic interaction of L-HDAg and HBx (HBV X protein) activated TGF-β and the activator protein-1 (AP-1) pathway of transcription factors by binding to Smad3, STAT3 and inducing c-Jun pathway (Figure 4) [100]. Therefore, TGF-β signalling regulation via L-HDAg farnesylation might represent an alternative mechanism of HDV pathogenesis [100].Goto et al. showed that only L-HDAg could activate the serum response factor (SRF)-associated transcription pathway, as opposed to the small isoform S-HDAg (Figure 5) [101]. SRF is a transcription factor that binds to the serum response element (SRE) and mediates serum and growth factor induced transcription from the c-Fos proto-oncogene (Figure 5C4) [102]. The same group later demonstrated the synergistic activation of the SRE-dependent pathway upon the interaction of L-HDAg with the HBx protein [103]. Further experimental studies are required to elucidate the implication of this pathway on HDV pathogenesis.The expression of glutathione S-transferase P1 (GSTP1), a tumour suppressor gene, is typically downregulated in liver samples from patients infected with hepatotropic viruses. The inhibition of GSTP1 expression has been well studied in HCC tumorigenesis [104]. S-HDAg was shown to bind directly and downregulate GSTP1 in a human foetal hepatocyte cell line in vitro. This led to accumulation of cellular ROS, induction of apoptosis and selective pressure for malignant transformation (Figure 5C5) [105]. Therefore, the inhibition of GSTP1 expression by S-HDAg represents a novel potential mechanism of HDV pathogenesis.3.2.2. Innate Immune ResponseImmune-mediated liver damage upon HDV infection is an important factor of HDV pathogenesis. A strong or a dysregulated innate immune response to a viral infection can lead to severe immunopathogenesis [106]. Up to date, the factors that mediate the interaction between HDV and host innate immune system have not been explicitly characterized. While HBV has been classically considered to be poorly recognized by the innate immune system [107], HDV can induce the expression of interferon (IFN)-β and IFN-λ, of pro-inflammatory cytokines and interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) in vitro [108,109,110,111] and in vivo [112,113] (Figure 6). IFN-λs or type III interferons are endogenous antiviral cytokines, functionally similar to type I interferons, that activate the intracellular JAK-STAT pathway and regulate the transcription of ISGs. In vitro, L-HDAg was shown to inhibit HBV replication by trans-activating the IFN-inducible MxA (myxovirus resistance protein A) gene [109] and HDV RNA accumulation induced a strong type I IFN response by stimulating the expression of RSAD2 (Radical S-Adenosyl Methionine Domain Containing 2) and MxA genes [108]. Finally, the misfolded HDV ribozyme sequence was found to induce protein kinase R [110]. HDV is sensed by the RIG-I-like receptor (RLR) group and more precisely by MDA5 [114]. Zhang et al. demonstrated that active replication is required for innate sensing, without, however, pointing out the pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) of HDV which is recognised by the MDA5 [114].Despite the intact innate immune response mediated by HDV, IFN-α failed to inhibit HDV in vitro [110]. A previous in vitro study demonstrated that HDV replication inhibited the tyrosine phosphorylation of JAK kinase Tyk2, thereby impairing the activation and translocation of STAT1 and STAT2 to the hepatocyte nucleus and inhibiting the antiviral cell response to IFN-α [115].Natural killer (NK) cells are innate effector cells representing 30–40% of all intrahepatic lymphocytes [116,117] with a crucial role in antiviral defence against HBV and HCV infection [118,119,120]. Importantly enough, NK cells drive liver pathology in chronic HBV infection [121]. The role of NK cells in the peripheral blood of chronically infected HDV patients was recently investigated [122]. The researchers assessed the frequency and differentiation phenotype of NK cells prior to and upon IFN-α treatment in chronically infected HDV, or HBV patients and healthy controls. While untreated HDV patients showed an increased frequency of NK cells with unaltered phenotypic differentiation status, those that have been long-term treated with IFN-α demonstrated a loss of terminally differentiated NK cells and an enrichment in immature NK cell subsets (Figure 6). The NK cell differentiation profile has not been so far associated with HDV liver pathogenesis progression and therefore more studies are required to fully elucidate their role.3.2.3. Adaptive Immune ResponseHDV adaptive immune response has been highlighted by the presence of specific T cell response to HDAg in the peripheral blood of chronically infected HDV patients. The presence of specific anti-HDV T cells is inversely correlated with HDV-induced liver disease activity [123]. A comparative study of 76 patients chronically infected with hepatitis B, C, or D viruses demonstrated that patients with CHD had the highest frequency of CD4+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (p = 0.04 vs. HBV and HCV patients) [124]. These cytotoxic CD4+ T cells differ from the helper CD4+ T cells as they are perforin positive and share common features with CD8+ T cells, therefore being able to kill virus-infected cells (no information about the expression of granzymes in these cells was provided). The increased number of cytotoxic CD4+ T cells in patients with more advanced liver disease is considered as one important factor for the more severe course of viral hepatitis in the elderly (Figure 7) [124].The role of CD8+ T cells in chronic HDV infection was only recently studied following the identification of an extensive set of CD8+ T cell epitopes [125,126]. HDV-specific CD8+ T cells against HDV peptides were detected upon the administration of an HDV DNA vaccine to mice and were also reported in two patients that cleared HDV infection. The above suggests that appropriate T cell response seems to be tightly correlated with HDV clearance [127].In another study, Kefalakes et al. isolated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 28 patients chronically infected with HDV and HBV and identified HDV specific CD8+ T cell epitopes, underlining the high immunogenicity of HDV, despite its small size and physicochemical properties (hydrophobic amino acid sequence) [126]. They also demonstrated that HDV specific CD8+ T cells were as frequent as HBV CD8+ T cells, less frequent than those of Epstein–Barr Virus, cytomegalovirus, or influenza virus and the least exhausted as they were not expressing the terminally differentiated CD57 marker [126]. This subset of activated HDV-specific CD8+ T cells could target HDV conserved epitopes and contribute to disease progression. On the other hand, the subset of memory-like HDV-specific CD8+ T cells was associated with escape variants with less human leukocyte antigen (HLA) binding and less T cell activation, therefore being unable to clear HDV infection (Figure 7). This study requires more investigations to unravel the exact role of HDV-specific CD8+ T cells, as the researchers did not study the role of CD8+ tissue-resident memory T cells and therefore conclusions must be drawn with caution.The role of mucosa-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells on HDV infection has not been extensively studied so far [128]. MAIT cells are unique innate-like T cells that comprise up to 50% of the intrahepatic immune cell population (even in the healthy liver), secrete inflammatory cytokines (IFN-γ and TNF) and can act cytotoxically against infected cells. In the liver, MAIT cell function is regulated by interleukin-7 (IL-7), which is secreted from the hepatocytes under inflammatory conditions [129]. MAIT cells can promote mitogenic and proinflammatory functions of fibrogenic cells [130] and contribute to tissue remodelling [131]. In vivo, MAIT cell deficient mice were resistant to liver fibrosis, whereas MAIT cell enriched mice demonstrated increased liver fibrosis [130]. MAIT cell activation in the liver was also correlated with tumour growth, as they produced IL-17 that promoted macrophage differentiation into the inflammatory M2 subtype and stimulated the vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-mediated angiogenesis (reviewed in [132]). In chronically infected HDV patients, the population of circulating and liver resident MAIT cells was dramatically decreased, as opposed to the population of MAIT cells in HBV monoinfected patients. The remaining population of MAIT cells exhibited a functionally impaired responsiveness in chronically infected HDV patients. Increased levels of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-12 and IL-18 that could promote MAIT cell death, as well as monocyte activation, were reported in HDV patients, suggesting that upon HDV infection, the normally abundant MAIT cells in the peripheral blood and the liver are activated, become functionally impaired, and at a later stage, are depleted (Figure 7) [128]. The above studies do not show any potential contribution of MAIT cells on HDV pathogenesis. However, additional studies highlighting the causality behind the severe depletion of this cell population during chronic HDV infection might unravel other properties of these cells that could be associated with HDV liver disease pathogenesis.The adaptive immune response against chronically infected HDV patients seems to be insufficient to resolve HDV infection, therefore suggesting that the innate immunity may have a more critical role to limit HDV infection [133,134,135].3.2.4. Patients’ Risk ProfileThe usual predictive factors that define the patients’ risk profile and their correlation with the adverse clinical outcome apply to CHD as well. Male sex [136], older age [137,138], and co-infection with HIV [139] have been reported to correlate with liver disease progression and clinical outcomes.The presence of genetic polymorphisms in the gene of IL28B (Interleukin 28B) is also implicated in HDV infection and pathogenesis. IL28B gene encodes for IFN-λ3. Polymorphisms in the IL28B gene were initially associated with the spontaneous or treatment induced clearance of HCV [140,141,142,143]. Up to date, the SNP rs12979860 represents the strongest genetic association with any chronic viral infection and its treatment response. The same polymorphisms in the IL28B gene were reported for both HBV and/or HDV persistence [144].3.3. Helper Virus Associated Factors3.3.1. HBV GenotypeHBV genotypes also appear to affect the clinical outcomes of CHD, although data is scarce. A prospective study analysed 194 dually infected patients from Taiwan (mostly infected with genotypes B and C of HBV) [42]. Although, at enrolment, there were no differences in the relative proportion of chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, HCC, or remission cases among those with genotypes B vs. C, after a median FU of 135 months, HBV genotype C was associated with a significantly lower remission rate (0 vs. 32.1%), higher incidence of cirrhosis (34.8% vs. 8.9%) and adverse clinical outcomes (including cirrhosis, HCC, and mortality due to hepatic failure; 70.0% vs. 33.9%) than genotype B. By multivariate analysis, age, HBV genotype C (besides HDV genotype 1) were independent factors for unfavourable clinical outcome [42]. In a smaller, cross-sectional study from Brazil, HDV viral load was lower in HBV genotype A patients compared to patients with genotype D or F, although this difference did not match the clinical outcome, probably affected by the low number of HDV patients [145]. These data require further studies to confirm their clinical significance.3.3.2. HBV ReplicationActive HBV replication has a critical role in deteriorating liver damage in patients with chronic HDV infection, an observation that is in line with HDV dependency on its helper virus [146]. However, the typical consequence upon HDV super-infection and the acute phase of HDV replication is the suppression of HBV DNA [24], that has been reported in both liver and serum of humans, animal, and in vitro models [146,147,148]. The mechanisms of HDV and HBV interference still remain poorly characterized, although in vitro studies demonstrated that S-HDAg strongly inhibits HBV mRNA synthesis or stability [148], while both isoforms of HDAg can activate the innate immune response (IFN-α inducible MxA gene) and repress HBV enhancers 1 and 2 [109]. In the above cases, with minimum HBV replication, the liver damage of chronically infected HDV patients, is mostly attributed to HDV rather than HBV. HBV replication suppression, might also be a cause of multiple co-infections with viruses other than HDV, that are present in the patients [3]. Interestingly, in a Chinese study, a late HBV DNA reactivation was reported, which, according to the researchers, may impact the progression to end-stage liver disease [149].4. ConclusionsHDV, the satellite virus of HBV, with million carriers worldwide, remains a fascinating and unique virus with many unravelled steps of its life cycle. HDV infection can only be achieved in the presence of its helper virus, HBV. An HBV-HDV simultaneous infection (or co-infection) will, in the vast majority, be self-limited and lead to viral clearance, while an HDV super-infection of chronically infected HBV carriers will almost universally lead to chronic HDV infection. Chronic HDV infection is considered as the most severe form of viral hepatitis that is associated with faster progression towards end stage liver diseases, including cirrhosis, liver decompensation and HCC. More than one factors seem to be involved in the pathogenesis of HDV hepatitis and end stage liver diseases, implicating HDV, HBV, and host associated factors, underlining the complexity of this multifaceted disease. A more explicit and in-depth knowledge of the HDV life cycle will provide critical information to better understand the mechanisms of HDV pathogenesis and give new insights in the development of new therapies with improved tolerance and efficiency.


Title: Vertical Transmission of Hepatitis B Virus—An Update

1. IntroductionThe hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a major public health problem that affects approximately 2 billion people worldwide. Of these, 296 million are chronically infected [1]. In 2017, the World Health Organization set the goal to eliminate viral hepatitis by 2030, which is defined as 90% reduction in incidence and 65% reduction in liver-related deaths from the 2015 baseline [2].HBV is a hepatotropic virus that belongs to the Hepadnaviridae family. The viral genome is a DNA of about 3.2 Kb that has four overlapping open reading frames (ORFs): S, X, P, and C. The S/preS ORF encodes the three form of hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg): long (HBsAg-L), medium (HBsAg-M) and small (HBsAg-S). The regulatory protein X (HBx) is transcribed from X ORF; the P ORF encodes the viral DNA polymerase; and the C ORF encodes the core protein (HBcAg) and a related protein called which is the precursor of the secreted protein known as antigen e (HBeAg) [3,4]. The diagnosis of HBV infection is established by detection of the molecular and serologic markers: viral DNA, HBsAg, HBeAg, anti-HBs, anti-HBe and anti-HBc (IgM and total antibodies) (Table 1).Four routes of transmission have been described: (1) parenteral, i.e., by transfusion, re-used syringes and needles and contact of blood; (2) sexual; (3) vertical; (4) horizontal, i.e., by contact with body fluids, such as saliva, shared toothbrushes and secretory skin lesions [3]. In high endemic areas (Africa and Southeast Asia), HBV infection is acquired predominantly during the perinatal period or in early childhood [5,6]. Approximately 70–90% of infants born to HBeAg positive mothers in absence of active and passive immunization became chronically infected [6,7,8]. This risk is markedly reduced when HBV vaccine is given along with hepatitis B immune globulin (HBIG) in the first 12 h of life of the newborn along with antiviral therapy for the mother before delivery. Nevertheless, the immunoprophylaxis of some cases is not 100% protective; indeed, between 8% and 30% of infants can become infected [8,9,10,11]. Failures in immunoprophylaxis are related to the positivity of HBeAg and a high viral load in the mother, increasing the risk of vertical transmission.2. Epidemiology of HBV InfectionAccording to the latest estimation, approximately two billion people worldwide have evidence of past or present HBV; 296 million individuals are chronically infected and almost 820,000 result in annual deaths from HBV-related liver disease [1,12]. The overall prevalence of HBsAg is 3.9% of the human population; however, it varies from country to country and depends on the complex interplay of behavioral, environmental, economic, geopolitical and host factors. Three epidemiological patterns of HBV infection have been established according to the prevalence of HBsAg in general population: low endemicity (<2%; the United States of America (USA), Canada, Western Europe and some countries of South America), intermediate (2–7%; Middle East, Eastern Europe, Alaska, Greenland, Pacific Islands, Central America and South America) and high (≥8%; China, sub-Saharan Africa and the Amazon basin, among other regions) [6,12]. The variations in HBV endemicity are also frequently correlated with the predominant mode of transmission (Figure 1). In a highly endemic setting, most cases of hepatitis B infection are due to vertical transmission (mother-to-child infection) and horizontal transmission (exposure to infected family members) [13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. It has been estimated that 45% of the world’s population lives in endemic areas for HBV infection. In Asian and African countries, the vertical transmission is a common route as a considerable proportion of women are highly infectious at childbirth age, related to HBeAg positivity and a high viral load. Indeed, the prevalence of HBsAg among women of childbearing age in four provinces in China was higher than the national average prevalence for the same age group of women (11.8% vs. 6.6%). Moreover, HBsAg prevalence in women between 15 and 19 years of age was 5.21% (IC 4.05–6.36), and it was significantly higher (11.83%; IC 10.06–13.59) in women over the age of 40. This is probably due to the fact that older women were infected before the universal vaccination program [19]. Similar results were found in different regions of Africa, where the prevalence rank of HBsAg in pregnant women was 6.3–15.5% in western Africa, 7.7–9.2% in central Africa and 3.9–14.2% [18] in eastern and southern Africa. Given that the prevalence of HBsAg in pregnant women varies considerably from country to country, some studies suggest that the risk of perinatal infection may be lower in some African countries, and horizontal transmission would be the most frequent [15,17]. In any case, the prevalence of chronic HBV infection in women in these endemic regions represents a threat to maternal health and a risk of mother-to-child transmission. It demonstrates the conditions of vulnerability related to ethnicities, socio-economic status and education levels.The Amazon basin is also a high endemic region for HBV infection [20,21,22,23,24,25]. The causes for high HBV prevalence are not completely understood, but it is likely a multifactorial problem: earlier age of pregnancy (relating to greater likelihood of high maternal viral load among women with CHB); crowded house; feeding small children with food previously chewed by the mothers; practices eliciting blood-to-blood contact, including ritual body modification or scarification; inadequate access to timely vaccination; and absence of effective primary health care and promotion and prevention programs [26,27]. A cross-sectional study was performed in 6 out of the 42 indigenous populations settled in the Peruvian Amazon. The prevalence of HBsAg in pregnant women was 2.11% (11/522) and the prevalence of anti-HBc was 42.06% (522/1241), indicating that a significant proportion of the population was exposed to the virus [24]. On other hand, the study showed that anti-HBc positivity in pregnant women was associated with age at pregnancy, first sexual intercourse at <16 years, bisexual partners and no condom use. A study in an indigenous population inhabiting the Curuçá and Itaquaí river basins of the Javari Valley in the Brazilian Amazon region described the markers of HBV infection. A total of 180 serum samples obtained from 87 (48.3%) men and 93 (51.7%) women were analyzed. The prevalence of HBV infection according to the ORF S detection (PCR) was 50.6% (44/87) in men and 51.6% (48/93) in women. Of these women, 21.5% (20/93) were pregnant and 75% (15/20) were HBV positive, showing a statistical difference (p = 0.009) when compared to the prevalence of HBV infection in non-pregnant women (40.4% (21/52)) [23]. The prevalence of HBV molecular markers found in pregnant women confirm the importance of prevention of vertical HBV transmission in the Amazon region´s populations. An interesting analysis of HBV infection was carried out in 1275 children and 572 mothers from 37 indigenous communities in the state of Amazonas, Colombia [25]. The average age of mothers and children was 32 ± 8.3 years (range 16 and 59 years) and 5 ± 3 years (range 6 months and 11 years old), respectively. The prevalence of anti-HBc in mothers’ population was 30.9% (176/572) and 9% (52/572) were positive for both anti-HBc and HBsAg markers. While 3.6% (46/1275) of children was positive for anti-HBc marker and 0.5% (7/1275) were also positive for HBsAgThe low prevalence of HBsAg observed in children confirmed the effectiveness of the hepatitis B vaccine program in this population; however, the frequency of HBV infection is still high in people born before 1994 when universal vaccination began, as reported in these indigenous mothers. This finding could be indicative of vertical transmission risk that could be increased in the absence of complete and timely immunoprophylaxis in the children. Indeed, this study demonstrated that being born to an HBsAg positive mother increases 2.5-fold the risk of the child being HBsAg + (OR = 2.45, 95% CI 1.33–4.46). Moreover, Garcia D et al. analyzed the vaccination records of this population and reported that the children with timely vaccination (birth dose and doses at 2, 4 and 6 months) had 70% less risk of being infected with HBV when compared with those who did not (OR = 0.23, 95% CI 0.09–0.51) [28]. A recently leading-edge study demonstrated important advances in achieving the goal of hepatitis B elimination in Colombia [29]. The study evaluated the feasibility of a two-phase approach to verify mother-to-child transmission of HBV in this country. In the first phase, municipalities with the highest risk of HBV transmission were identified, considering variables such as the number of HBV infections in pregnant women per 1000 individuals, coverage with third dose of pentavalent vaccine, the percentage of births occurring in health centers and seroprevalence data. The risk of hepatitis B was increased in municipalities with hepatitis B immunization low coverage and/or <90% of births in health centers The second part of the analysis included a serological household survey of children aged 5 to 10 years in the 36 municipalities with highest risk of HBV infection. A total of 3203 children from these municipalities were screened for HBV infection marker. HBsAg was not detected in any of the 3203 samples, yielding an upper 90% confidence limit of <0.1% prevalence [29]. Importantly, the study reported that there are still populations in which vaccination coverage is low, such as home-born children and indigenous communities. This result suggests that cultural traditions and/or barriers to access the health system may contribute to the higher prevalence of hepatitis B reported in these communities. Overall, the results of this study could indicate that Colombia is possibly on the right track to eliminating mother-to-child transmission of HBV; however, there is a need to strengthen screening during pregnancy, provide access to timely vaccination, establish systems to monitor HBV infection among pregnant women and complete follow-up testing of infants born to HBsAg-positive women. In regions of intermediate endemicity, such as Western Europe, most cases of HBV infection are acquired through sexual intercourse. In Italy, Russia and Turkey, the prevalence of chronic hepatitis B ranges from 3% to 10%, and unsafe injections are a major route of HBV transmission [30,31]. Interestingly, HBsAg prevalence in pregnant women of western and southwestern Europe countries was 0.1–4.4% [32], 1.18–4.3% in Iran [33] and 0.2–3.8% in some countries of South America (Peru, Venezuela, Brazil, Argentina and Colombia). This is in agreement with the low frequency of vertical transmission in these regions [28,34,35,36]. On the other hand, injection drug users are the most infected population in regions with low overall prevalence such as Eastern Europe and North America. Other populations at increased risk if HBV infection are prisoners, men who have sex with men, sex workers and homeless [37]. Studies carried out in pregnant women reported HBsAg prevalence from 0.3% to 2.4% [38,39] in the USA, from 0.76% to 0.85% in Australia [40] and from 1.4 to 1.5% in Japan [41]. Therefore, vertical transmission in these regions does not seem relevant.3. Discovery of HBV Vertical TransmissionSaint-Vel’s 1862 report of severe hepatitis in pregnant women in Martinique laid the initial groundwork for studying the effects of HBV infection in pregnancy [42]. However, it was not until 1954 that the possibility of vertical transmission of HBV was considered based on a report of infants who developed hepatitis during the first two months of life and the evidence that some mothers were “silent carriers” of HBV; this was relevant to the problem of maternal transmission of this infection [43]. Later, a prospective study conducted in the USA and Europe revealed that in two-thirds of the infants of mothers who had acute hepatitis B at the end of pregnancy or after delivery became infected within one to six months of birth. In addition, the HBsAg was detected less frequently in newborns if maternal hepatitis occurs in the first trimester; therefore, transmission is less frequent when the mother is asymptomatic [44].In a study carried out in newborns, three interrelated factors were found to increase the risk of HBV vertical transmission: a high titer of the HBsAg in the maternal circulation, presence of this marker in the umbilical cord blood and HBsAg+ in siblings. It was suggested that if babies remain antigenemic until adulthood, vertical transmission could account for an important proportion of asymptomatic cases (carriers) in areas of HBV high prevalence [45]. On the other hand, Okada et al. [46] described the HBeAg as an important factor to vertical transmission. In serum samples from 23 HBsAg-positive pregnant women and their babies, the HBeAg was detected in 43.4% (10/23) of women and the anti-HBeAg in 30.4% (7/23). All ten babies born to mothers HBeAg positive acquired persistent HBsAg, and all 10 siblings of these newborns were HBsAg+ and asymptomatic. In contrast, seven newborns of anti-HBe positive mothers were HBsAg negative, and none of their three siblings were positive for HBsAg. Furthermore, HBsAg was not detected in the serum of any of the fathers [46]. Based on these results, it can be concluded that HBeAg and anti-HBe may be used as indicators of HBV vertical transmission risk.Although HBV transmission from infected mothers to their infants has been well documented in several studies, it is believed that in utero infection does not occur and the babies become infected by contact with maternal blood/fluids during delivery since serological signs of infection do not become evident until six weeks of age. To answer the question of whether a vertical transmission was in utero, an animal model of duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) infection, a member of the Hepadnaviridae family and closely related to the HBV, was used [47]. The DHBV DNA was detected in 30/219 in both serum and liver embryos of infected Pekin ducks, and viral replication intermediates were identified in the liver on the 12th day of embryonic life. These findings were confirmed in another infection model, the woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHBV), another virus-related HBV. The WHBV DNA was detectable in the liver of 18/24 fetuses of infected woodchucks. Viral replicative DNA and supercoiled DNA, as well as WHBV surface antigen, were demonstrated in livers of two fetuses from late gestation (fetuses 5.5–7.0 cm in length and well-differentiated hepatocytes) [48]. Although maternal transmission to offspring may be different in humans, these observations in animal models were a first approach to understand HBV vertical transmission.4. Vertical Transmission of HBVThe transmission of HBV infection from mother to child during pregnancy, delivery and/or breastfeeding is known as vertical transmission [1]. For HBV, vertical transmission is defined as positivity for HBsAg or HBV-DNA in infants at 6–12 months of life [6,49]. The presence of both HBsAg and viral DNA in serum at birth are often transient and do not always indicate newborn infection. The diagnosis of HBV infection is confirmed 6 months after birth, and if serological and molecular markers are still positive in a 1-year old baby, they indicate a chronic HBV infection. There are three possible routes for vertical transmission of HBV: (1) transplacental or intrauterine; (2) perinatal during delivery; (3) postnatal during care; (4) and/or through breast milk (Figure 2).4.1. Transplacental TransmissionTransplacental transmission occurs in a minority of the cases of vertical transmission, and the mechanisms are not fully elucidated yet. There are some hypotheses of the possibility of transplacental transmission: the HBV can cross the placental barrier infecting placental cells; a transplacental leakage of maternal blood; during amniocentesis; through infected maternal peripheral blood monocellular cells (PBMC); or through germline cell infection (Figure 2).Some studies have shown the ability of the virus to translocate through the placenta to the fetal trophoblast [10,50,51]. Thus, Chen et al. examined viral infection in 157 placental tissues obtained from infected pregnant women by detection of HBV DNA with PCR and in situ hybridization techniques and detection of HBsAg and HBcAg by immunohistochemistry assay. The HBV infection rate was higher in decidua cells (55.4%; 87/157) and in trophoblastic cells (51.0%; 80/157); compared with villous mesenchymal cells (46.5%; 73/157) and villous capillary endothelial cells (29.9%; 47/157) (p < 0.01) [10]. Similar results were reported by Xu et al [50]. In this study, the HBV infection rates on the 101 placenta samples (HBsAg, HBcAg or viral DNA) were 40.6% in trophoblastic cells, 36.6% in villous mesenchymal cells (37/101) and 18.8% in villous capillary endothelial cells. Both studies demonstrated that the HBV infection rate gradually decreases in the maternal-to-fetal placental layer. Therefore, HBV could cross the placental barrier, thus infecting and replicating in all types of placental cells before it reaches the fetus (Figure 3).Another study determined the time when transplacental HBV infection occurs [51]. The HBV infection rates of 131 placentas from first trimester, second trimester and third trimester were 4.2% (1/24), 16.7% (1/6) and 44.6% (45/101), respectively. Additionally, the risk of HBV infection was 18.46 in villous capillary endothelial cells. These results demonstrate although the HBV infection may occur since week 19, it is more likely during the third trimester of pregnancy [51]. Further investigations are necessary to describe and understand the cellular and virological mechanisms that allow transplacental HBV infection in mother-to-child transmission cases.HBV can also be transmitted to the fetus by leakage of maternal blood through the placenta into the fetal circulation. Probably during labor some placental cells are detached as a result of uterine contractions and maternal blood enters the fetal circulation, allowing viral particles from mother to establish infection in the fetus, especially in HBeAg-positive mothers and high viral load cases [52,53]. Amniocentesis is another possible mechanism of HBV transplacental transmission. This procedure may cause uterine or placental bleeding and may lead to blood exchange between mother and fetus [54]. Amniocentesis can expose the fetus to HBV via two routes: maternal-fetal blood exchange or ingestion of HBV-contaminated amniotic fluid. When the needle crosses the abdominal and uterine wall, it causes injuries to the chorionic villi and results in admixture of maternal and fetal blood. Additionally, uterine wall puncture also causes fetal–maternal bleeding through capillaries in the fetal membranes. By any of the routes, the fetus may enter in contact with virions due to the introduction of maternal infected blood into the fetal circulation or into the amniotic fluid. However, the published studies have not shown that amniocentesis significantly increases the risk of mother to infant transmission [55,56].Viral particles have also been identified to circulate in maternal PBMC [57,58]. In a study carried out in 30 HBsAg-positive pregnant women and their aborted fetuses, the role of PBMC cell transportation from mother to baby in HBV intrauterine infection was investigated [57]. In the fetuses, HBV intrauterine infection rate was 43.3% (13/30). Moreover, the HBsAg was detected in 10% (3/30)of peripheral blood, 23.3% (7/30) of serum and 33.3% (10/30) of PBMC samples. Maternal–fetal PBMC transport was positively correlated with fetal PBMC HBV-DNA (p = 0.004). This study suggested that HBV intrauterine infection was primarily due to PBMC maternal–fetal transportation. This hypothesis was confirmed by a recent case-control study that evaluated HBV serologic markers in neonates of 312 HBsAg-positive mothers. Polymorphic markers (glutathione S transferase M1 -GSTM1- and angiotensin converting enzyme -ACE-) were used to detect trafficking of PBMCs from mother to child [58]. This study showed that 45.5% (142/312) of neonates were HBV infected in utero. Of the mother–baby pairs with information of polymorphic marker, 63.0% (75/119) showed mother-to-fetus PBMC transfer; of these, 76% (57/75) of the infants were HBV-DNA positive in PBMC. In comparison, only 25.0% (11/44) of the infants without mother-to-fetus PBMC transfer were HBV infected. These data demonstrated that mother-to-infant PBMC traffic increase the risk of HBV infection in newborn infants 9.5-fold (OR, 9.5; 95% CI, 3.71–24.91; p < 0.001) and therefore PBMC infection is an important risk factor for HBV vertical transmission [58]. Another important aspect to evaluate HBV infection in PBMCs is whether the presence of specific viral variants in this cell population can modulate the risk of mother-to-child transmission. In this context, a study analyzed HBV replication status in PBMC and pre-core/basal core promotor (PC/BCP) mutants in blood samples obtained from pregnant women [59]. In total, 37 women with chronic hepatitis B were included in the study; from these, eight had started NA therapy in the third trimester of pregnancy although all patients’ samples were collected before starting NA therapy. All infants received immunoprophylaxis and were HBsAg negative at 9–12 months of age. HBV-DNA was detected in 55% of PBMC from pregnant and/or postpartum women. The viral pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) was detected in 44% and the viral covalently closed circular DNA(cccDNA in 51% of the PBMC-tested. BCP mutants (A1762T, G1764A) were identified in 36% and PC mutants (G1896A) in 4% of cases [59]. On the other hand, the detection of HBV-DNA and/or variants in PBMC was not associated with HBeAg status, HBV-DNA, genotype, pregnancy–postpartum status or risk of liver disease during the median 4-year follow-up; however, the limited size of the study must be taken into consideration. These data suggest that HBV PC/BCP mutations are not related to mother-to-child transmission risk in cases of infants with complete and timely immunoprophylaxis. However, it should be taken into consideration that mothers with viral loads above 200,000 IU/mL in the third trimester received NA therapy, which significantly reduced the risk of in utero and at birth transmission. All these studies suggest a role of PBMC in HBV mother-to-child transmission. Additional research is necessary to understand if maternal PBMC HBV infection is productive and therefore generates virions that allows the subsequent newborn liver infection or if the PBMC infection modulated cellular mechanisms of immunotolerance and apoptosis that allow the HBV persistence in neonate.The possibility of HBV intrauterine transmission via oocyte or sperm has been raised considering [49,60,61] that HBV DNA, pgRNA and HBsAg has been detected in oocytes and embryos from HBsAg-positive women during in vitro fertilization [61]. In addition, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed the presence of HBV DNA in oocytes and embryos from couples with at least one positive HBsAg [62]. Another study reported the HBV infection of infants of two cases of HBsAg positive oocytes [49]. In contrast, Jin et al. reported that babies born from in vitro fertilization using HBV positive oocytes and/or embryos were not HBV infected [63]. It is important to note that the fertilization technique had some impact on the viability of the virus in infected oocytes.Using molecular hybridization and restriction enzyme patterns, the viral genome and integrated sequences were demonstrated in sperm samples obtained from 17 Hepatitis B patients (9 cases of acute hepatitis B and 8 cases of chronic infection) [64]. Moreover, the HBV DNA was detected in seminal fluid obtained from 319 patients with acute hepatitis, and integrated viral sequences was detected in 2 spermatozoa samples; however, the viral DNA was not detected in serum samples of these patients at the time of sperm collection. In addition, no HBV DNA was detected in semen samples obtained from chronic infection cases. Qun Xi et al. evaluated the hypothesis of vertical transmission via the germ line [65]. Sperm samples were obtained from 8 cases of chronic infection and three of them were HBV-DNA positive. However, none of their infants (born to HBsAg negative mothers) were HBV infected. These results suggested that HBV transmission to the fetus via the male germline is unlikely. According to the authors, it could be related to the presence of low number of viral particles in sperm could be rapidly eliminated by the maternal immune system and therefore prevent the virus transmission; it addition, the presence of protective antibodies (anti-HBs) was demonstrated in serum and uterine tissue samples obtained from 90% of wives of HBV-carrier husbands [65].Furthermore additional studies are required to understand the role of HBV infection in germ lines in intrauterine transmission.4.2. Perinatal TransmissionPerinatal transmission is the most frequent route (30–40%) of vertical transmission. This mechanism is defined as infant contagion at the time of birth as a result of exposure to maternal vaginal secretions, epithelium cells and micro transfusion of maternal and fetal blood [66]. The presence of HBsAg in cord blood has been significantly associated with the length of labor when the first stage was more than nine hours (p < 0.03); a stronger association was found when labor lasted more than 11 h (p = 0.01) [66]. It has been reported that a high viral load (108 UI/mL) in maternal blood entering a fetal body can result in fetal infection [67]; additionally, the HBsAg was detected in 96% of the vaginal fluid obtained from mothers, 2% of the breast milk samples and 90% of gastric aspirates from the babies. On the other hand, presence of HBsAg has also been demonstrated in 55–98% of vaginal epithelial cells and 12.1% of the cervico-vaginal cells along with detectable HBV DNA [68]. Consequently, the direct contact with infected cells or vaginal secretions when crossing the birth canal is the main mechanism for HBV transmission to infants.Another topic that has been considered is the delivery mode and perinatal transmission [69,70]. In a study of 447 infants born to HBeAg- and HBsAg-positive mothers, a higher rate of infection was found in newborn delivered vaginally (24.9%, 96/385) than in delivered by caesarean (<10%, 6/62) [69]. However, no significant differences were observed in the positivity of HBsAg or anti-HBsAg among three groups of babies born to infected mothers, 144 delivered vaginally, 40 by obstetric forceps or vacuum extraction and 117 by cesarean at follow-up periods (1, 4, 7 and 12 months of age) [70]. These findings suggest that failures in immunoprophylaxis (incomplete vaccination schemes or the non-administration of HBIG, as evidenced in this study) are the cause of HBV transmission in babies independent of the delivery mode.4.3. Postnatal Transmission The HBV transmission in the postpartum period represents a less common (<7%) way of vertical transmission; however, there are some reports of high proportion (34%) of infection in postnatal period [71]. Some mechanisms have been suggested for HBV postpartum transmission related to infant contact with HBV-contaminated maternal secretions such as breastfeeding, ingestion of food previously chewed by the mother, maternal kissing in the mouths of infants and lack of effective hand hygiene among healthcare personnel involved in the postpartum care of mothers and infants (Figure 2) [72,73,74,75,76].In the early 1970s, some researchers published data on HBsAg transmission in breast milk of chronically infected mothers [73,74]. Although HBsAg, HBeAg and viral DNA have been detected in the colostrum and the breast milk, there is no evidence that breastfeeding increases the risk of mother to child transmission of HBV, as described by Chen X. et al., where HBsAg prevalence in breastfed and formula-fed children was 1.5% and 4.7%, respectively (p = 0.063) [72]. These results indicate that the risk of transmission associated with breast milk is small when compared to the risk of infection in the infant due to contact with maternal blood or fluids during the delivery.However, most of studies have neither quantified maternal viral load nor explored the correlation between the rate of vertical transmission and the duration of breastfeeding. On the other hand, experts have suggested that lesions in the breast tissue, such as cracked or bleeding nipples or lesions with serous exudates, could be an important source of infectious viral particles for the infant; however, this issue has not yet been studied. Nowadays, the HBV infection has not been considered a contraindication for breastfeeding in the infant; therefore, the WHO has recommended that all infants born to infected mothers should be breastfed for at least 4 months and ideally 6 months.5. Risk Factors for Vertical TransmissionAmong the risk factors identified for mother-to-child HBV transmission are HBeAg, maternal viral load, coinfection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), viral genotype and HBV mutants, among others (Figure 4).5.1. HBeAgHBeAg is a secretory protein of 17 kDa. After transcription of the precore/core ORF, the precore protein is translated in a product that is processed in the reticulum endoplasmic prior to secretion. Although HBeAg is not required for viral replication, this antigen has a role on the establishment of chronic infection and on the development on immunotolerance [77,78]. The marker HBeAg is strongly associated with risk of HBV vertical transmission. Indeed, in a case-control study carried out in India, HBV transmission from mother to child was reported in 65% (13/20) of infants born to HBeAg-positive and HBV DNA-positive mothers [60]. While, only 9.1% (1/11) of babies were HBV infected in born to mothers negative for both the HBeAg and viral genome but positive for HBsAg. Similarly, a study in China demonstrated that 69.7% (23/33) of infants born from HBeAg-positive mothers were HBsAg positives at birth, while none of the infants born from HBeAg-negative mothers were positive [79]. In addition, mothers whose infants were infected with HBV had higher viral loads than mothers whose infants were not infected (p = 0.04). In fact, HBeAg is a marker of high-level viral replication and risk of vertical transmission. Furthermore, fetal exposure to HBeAg during pregnancy has been reported to lead to neonatal immunotolerance to HBV proteins and, consequently, to chronic infection in infants. This is explained by the ability of the viral protein to cross the placental barrier and generate tolerance of HBV-specific T cells and macrophages to the virus in the infant [80,81].Animal models have been used to study the immunotolerance properties of HBeAg. Offspring were obtained by crossing female hemizygous HBV transgenic mice (TGD mice) to naive male mice; mouse pups exposed to maternal HBeAg were thus obtained [81]. Then, the offspring at 9 weeks were inoculated with the 1.3 mer HBV genome DNA into the liver, and HBV replication was demonstrated for 28 weeks in these animals. In contrast, inoculation of the HBV genome into mice born to HBV-negative females led to HBV elimination within 4 weeks. These results indicated that the intrauterine exposure to HBeAg establishes a persistent infection in the offspring. Interestingly, the population of INF-γ positive CD8+ T cells was 2.8% in the liver of control mice but only 0.5% in TGD mice. Additionally, CD8+ T cells in TGD mice expressed a high level of PD-1 (programmed death-1) and of PDL-1 (programmed death ligand-1) in Kupffer cells when compared with the control mice [82,83]. These interesting results suggest that HBV tolerance in the offspring of HBV-infected mothers may be due to decreased CD8 T cell responses to HBV that result from up regulation of PD-1 expression on CD8+ T cells and PD-L1 in Kupffer cells. Even though the ability of HBeAg to cross the murine placenta may not be enough evidence to prove that this also occurs in human placenta, it provided a possible mechanism to explain how the exposure to intrauterine HBeAg induces viral persistence and might favor vertical transmission. 5.2. Maternal DNA Viral LoadViral load has been identified as an important predictor and independent risk factor for HBV mother-to-child transmission. The prophylaxis effective rate of passive–active immunoprophylaxis is approximately 100% if viral load in the mother is <5.5 log 10 copies/mL before the delivery [84,85]. According to the results obtained by Singh et al. and Wiseman et al., a maternal viral load of >8 log 10 IU/mL is associated with failure of immunoprophylaxis, thus increasing the risk of mother-to-child transmission [60,86]. Moreover, a cohort study showed that infants born to HBeAg-positive mothers with viral load equal to or greater than 106 copies/mL failed immunoprophylaxis [8]. Indeed, after stratification of pre-delivery viral loads in the mothers to <106, 106–107, 107–108 and >108 copies/mL, the rates of immunoprophylaxis failure were 0%, 3.2% (3/95), 6.7% (19/282) and 7.6% (5/66), respectively (p < 0.001). These findings suggest that viral load in mothers may have a significant impact on immunoprophylaxis failure. The current clinical practice and clinical trials are adopting the HBV DNA level above 108 copies/mL as the threshold for intervention.5.3. Human Immunodeficiency Virus CoinfectionCoinfection with HIV has been also identified as a risk factor of HBV vertical transmission [87,88]. A study in South Africa reported a rate of HBV vertical transmission of 28% in HIV/HBV co-infected pregnant women; they were HBeAg positive with an average viral load of 8.3 IU/mL before delivery [89]. In contrast, in a study in Malawi, infants born to HBeAg-positive women with a viral load of >7.5 log10 IU/mL had an HBV transmission rate of 10% [88]. The mothers of these two studies never received antiretroviral treatment, thus increasing the risk for both HIV and HBV transmission. It is important to note that the risk of vertical transmission could be due to the presence of HBeAg and high viral loads in mothers (107–108 copies/mL).5.4. HBV Genotypes HBV is classified into ten main genotypes (A–J) and several subgenotypes [5,89,90].Despite a similarly high prevalence of HBV chronic carriers, the vertical transmission rate in East Asia, particularly in China (10–88%), is higher than in sub-Saharan Africa (≤8%) [91,92,93]. In East Asia, where genotypes B and C are prevalent, most infected women of gestational age are HBeAg+ with high viral load [94]. Meanwhile, in sub-Saharan Africa where HBV genotypes A1 or E are prevalent, seroconversion to anti-HBe occurs before age 15 years old; therefore, most women of gestational age are anti-HBe [95]. However, other studies are not conclusive about the association between the HBV genotype and the risk of vertical transmission [96,97]. Further studies that include other genotypes, such as E, F, G and H, are necessary to define the role of HBV genotypes in mother-to-infant HBV transmission.5.5. HBV Mutants The escape variants are non-synonymous mutations in the sequence encoding the “a” determinant of HBsAg. This is a highly conserved region overlapping with the region coding for viral polymerase, and is the major target for neutralizing antibodies against HBV. These mutations have been identified in individuals with HBV infection despite the presence of neutralizing antibodies.In a study carried out in China, 41 mothers whose children were HBsAg negative and anti-HBs positive were compared with 37 mothers whose children were HBsAg positive 1 year after HBV vaccination [96]. Interestingly, T123A and G145R mutations were observed only in failure-group mothers; no significant difference in the total mutation rate was observed between the groups. These results suggested that a high viral load and specific mutations, such as T123A and G145R, could be an important risk factors for immunization failure. However, another study described different mutation sites in the HBV pre-S/S ORF including 105 silent mutations and 5 missense mutations (A826G, C531T, T667C, C512T and C546A), but without significant differences in mutation frequencies and the risk of vertical transmission [98]. More robust association studies are needed to confirm whether escape mutants could play an important role in vertical transmission.Furthermore, A study on the presence of mutations in the precore region in sera from two infants with neonatal fulminant hepatitis B and their anti-HBe-positive mothers demonstrated the G28A mutation, which generates a stop codon in 18 HBV clones obtained from one of the mothers and in 31 clones from her infant [99]. Besides the stop codon G1896A has been described in cases of fulminant acute hepatitis B in young infants, but not in mothers. [100]. This mutation has also been observed in other studies [101,102]. These findings indicate that HBV mutants defective in the precore region in some carrier mothers are associated with fulminant hepatitis B in their babies.In a case-control study carried out in Thailand, serum samples from 14 infected infants (13 HBeAg-positive and one HBeAg-negative) who had been previously vaccinated and their respective mothers were analyzed for HBV DNA, genotypes and S and precore/core variants [103]. Additionally, 30 serum samples from HBsAg-positive mothers (15 HBeAg positive and 15 HBeAg negative) whose infants were not infected and received the complete vaccination schedule served as control. The study showed that HBeAg-positive mothers had viral DNA titers equal to or higher than those of HBeAg-negative mothers. The infants and their respective mothers had the same HBeAg status and were infected by the same HBV genotypes (B or C). Furthermore, although D144G and G145K mutations were reported in two infants, these were not found in their mothers; this result indicates that these mutations may originate or be selected under immune pressure during the infection of the infants. On the other hand, PC mutations were found in HBeAg-negative mothers, and the A1762T/G1764A double mutation was reported in two infants born to HBeAg-positive mothers; however, these mutations were not found in their mothers. Interestingly, among HBeAg-positive mothers with uninfected infants, the presence of BCP mutations/deletions was more common than in HBeAg-positive mothers whose infants were infected [103]. These results suggest that BCP mutations/deletions could act as a protective factor in the mother-to-child transmission of HBV. Although the possible mechanism by which precore/BCP mutations may protect against vertical transmission of HBV has not yet been well studied, it is possible that down regulation of precore mRNA transcription and subsequent decreased HBeAg production caused by the double mutation in BCP may contribute to decreased immunotolerance and enhanced host immune response, resulting in viral clearance after possible perinatal transmission. 6. Prevention of Vertical TransmissionThe prevention of vertical transmission is an essential step in reducing the global prevalence of chronic HBV, mainly in endemic areas where HBV infections occur mostly during infancy and early childhood. The key to eliminating the vertical transmission is screening and preventive measures both during pregnancy and after delivery. In the screening, all pregnant women should be tested for HBsAg; if the results are positive, the viral DNA must be quantified and the status of the HBeAg determined. This information is important because it indicates the risk of vertical transmission and can be established as proper clinical management.Currently two preventive measures have been established to avoid the vertical transmission of HBV: (1) immunoprophylaxis in child; (2) antiviral treatment for mother.6.1. ImmunoprophylaxisImmunoprophylaxis includes the administration of HBIG and HBV vaccine. The HBIG is commonly administered to the newborn within 24 h of birth, as recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The HBIG provides immediate but temporary passive immunization [38,104]. A meta-analysis showed that HBIG significantly reduced the HBV vertical transmission rate (OR 0.5, CI 0.41–0.6) as compared to the placebo when given to the newborn at birth [105]. Although the HBIG prophylaxis can reduce HBV infection in the neonate, the standard immunoprophylaxis regimen consists of administration of both HBIG and HBV vaccine simultaneously at two different sites within 24 h of delivery. The birth dose should be followed by two (1–2 months and 6–8 months of age) or three doses (2, 4 and 6 months of age) with a minimum interval of four weeks. The dosages and schedules may vary according to the national routine immunization programs established in each country [1,106].Some studies have shown that vaccination alone may be equally effective [107,108]. However, it has been demonstrated that the immunoprophylaxis using both HBV vaccine and HBIG reduce the vertical transmission from 90% to 5–10%. In the previously commented meta-analysis, children who received the HBV vaccine alone had a relative risk infection of 0.28, while adding HBIG reduced the risk to 0.08 when compared with patients who received a placebo or no intervention [105]. These findings demonstrate that adherence to the HBV immunoprophylaxis regimen in the neonate (vaccine and HBIG) prevents transmission of infection from HBeAg-positive mothers to their infants. However, immunoprophylaxis has some limitations. It is only effective against infection acquired via perinatal or postnatal transmission, and it does not protect against transplacental transmission [11,109,110]. The above-mentioned transplacental leakage or HBV-infected villous endothelial cells and infected maternal peripheral blood mononuclear cells are the possible mechanisms that explain the low protection of immunoprophylaxis in intrauterine transmission. Indeed, HBIG given to mothers in the third trimester has not been shown to be effective in reducing vertical transmission. A randomized trial of case-controls in China studying 250 HBeAg positive pregnant women (117 cases and 133 controls) and their neonates showed that there was no difference in the number of infected infants born to mothers who received three doses of HBIG in the third trimester of the pregnancy and those who did not. In addition, a high viral load and HBeAg positivity may increase the risk of immunoprophylaxis failure [109]. Another putative mechanism of failed immunoprophylaxis is escape mutants. These mutants are variants that are found in lower proportion in the viral population and are selected by immune pressure during HBV immunoprophylaxis; therefore, these strains could contribute to immunoprophylaxis failure. Although the impact that these mutations may have on the success of immunization programs has not been well elucidated, it is possible that these variants could infect previously immunized individuals. The G145R mutant located in the “a” determinant region of HBsAg is known to be the most important escape variant. Studies conducted in Taiwan to evaluate the efficacy of the vaccine and the occurrence of escape mutants have shown that the G145R mutation is the most frequent in the population since the introduction of the vaccine more than 20 years ago [111]. Similarly, the G145R mutation has been reported in a study conducted in children born to HBV-infected mothers who had the G145R mutant as a minority variant [108]. The study reported a G145R mutant frequency of 24% (6/25) in children who became infected due to the failure of immunoprophylaxis and of 10.3% (13/126) in children who had not received immunoprophylaxis. However,, the infection did not progress in any of the infants born to mothers infected with the G145R variant, despite that the mothers were HBeAg positive with high viral load [112]. Escape mutants have also been identified circulating in indigenous children and mothers in the state of Amazonas, in southeast Colombia [25]. The viral genome (S ORF) was detected in 8.3% (2/31) of serum samples obtained from anti-HBc positive children and in 3.1% (5/159) of samples from anti-HBc positive mothers. Four mutants were identified in three serum samples obtained from mothers, G145R and the two potential escape mutants L109R and G130E. Interestingly, the escape mutant W156* was identified in a sample obtained from a child having undergone the complete vaccination schedule; this mutation generates a stop codon resulting a truncated protein. Although, in this study the mutants were not detected in mother–child pairs, possibly because of minority sequences, it cannot be ruled out that they are not being transmitted from mother to child in these populations. Additional studies are necessary to elucidate the frequency and the epidemiological impact that these mutants have in vertical transmission and in the effectiveness of current vaccination strategies.6.2. Antiviral TreatmentsSome studies evaluated the efficacy of antiviral treatments in reducing the HBV vertical transmission rate [113,114,115,116,117,118,119]. A placebo-controlled study evaluated the efficacy of lamivudine in mothers with a high viral load (>1000 mEq/mL). A dose of 100 mg of lamivudine or placebo was administered from week 32 of pregnancy to week 4 postpartum to 150 mothers (149 were HBeAg-positive). The HBsAg positivity rate in infants was 18% in the lamivudine group and 39% in the placebo group [113]. The results of these studies suggest a reduction in HBV transmission in children born to mothers treated with lamivudine. Moreover, an observational study demonstrated that although treatment with lamivudine in the third trimester of pregnancy reduces viral load in women with antiviral treatment when compared with untreated women, the presence of mutants resistant to lamivudine (substitution in codons 181 and 204) can affect the response to treatment [114]. This study showed that lamivudine could have a poor antiviral effect in the third trimester, and it may generate resistant viral variants in a short time.Given the limitations of lamivudine treatment, several trials demonstrated that Telbivudine was more effective at reducing maternal viral load. In a case-control study conducted in China, the antiviral effect of telbivudine was evaluated in 135 HBeAg-positive pregnant women with viral loads of >107 copies/mL) [115]. Telbivudine treatment was started between 20 and 32 weeks of gestation and continued until 4 weeks postpartum or 28 weeks, depending on the alanine aminotransferase level. Telbivudine treatment was started between 20 and 32 weeks of gestation and continued until 4 weeks postpartum or 28 weeks, depending on the alanine aminotransferase level. In mothers who received the treatment, the viral load was reduced by an average of 2.44 ± 1.79 log10 copies/mL before delivery; the HBV genome was not detected in 33% of mothers when compared with the untreated controls. It is important to note that all babies in the study received combined prophylaxis with the HBIG/vaccine at birth. On the other hand, the HBsAg was not detected in infants born to telbivudine-treated mothers, while HBsAg positivity was 8% in infants of untreated mothers. It is important to mention that all the babies in the study received combined prophylaxis with HBIG/vaccine and none of them had birth defects in either group. The efficacy and safety of Telbivudine was also evaluated in a meta-analysis of six studies [116]. In this meta-analysis, the treatment group consisted of 306 mothers who received telbivudine in the second or third trimester of pregnancy until delivery or 1 month postpartum and a control group (270 mothers) who did not receive any antiviral treatment. Analyzes reported significantly lower HBsAg and viral genome positivity in newborns born to mothers in the telbivudine-treated group when compared to the control group; the newborns received the full regimen of immunoprophylaxis at birth. These results demonstrate that the administration of telbivudine at the end of pregnancy decreases the risk of intrauterine HBV infection without apparent adverse effects.A third antiviral Tenofovir has been shown to be effective in reducing maternal viral load. The efficacy of this antiviral was evaluated in a retrospective study conducted in the third trimester of pregnancy in 11 women with viral loads of >106 copies/mL. Interestingly, the maternal viral load decreased from 8.87 log 10 copies/mL to 5.25 log 10 copies/mL at delivery; none of the newborns were HBsAg positive and received passive/active prophylaxis. There were no complications during delivery or birth defects [117]. Similar results were obtained in a case-control study that included 45 HBeAg-positive pregnant women with high viral loads greater than 107 copies/mL, 21 of them treated with tenofovir between weeks 18–27 of gestation and 24 untreated. There was no HBsAg positivity in infants born to tenofovir-treated mothers, but it was detected in infants of untreated mothers (8.3%). All infants received the full regimen of HBV immunoprophylaxis [118]. These findings suggest that tenofovir is safe and effective for the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of HBV.The global recommendation is to use Tenofovir, Lamivudine and Telbivudine during pregnancy, but not Entecavir due to its questionable use. One study using a mice model demonstrates that the use of Entecavir could permeate the placental barrier and interfere with fetal development [119]. The study demonstrates that small amounts of ETV can cross the placenta in this animal model, which would indicate low fetal exposure to ETV. Finally, the use of other drugs such as interferon alpha and pegylated interferon is not indicated for vertical transmission prevention because they are not as effective in viral elimination and have many side effects on the patient.Some experts recommend continued antiviral therapy after delivery, but its implications during breastfeeding are still unknown. A study of pregnant women treated with Lamivudine showed that breast milk contained only 684 ng/mL of Lamivudine in contrast to its blood level of 1070 ng/mL [120]. No correlation was found between HBV DNA detection in breast milk and child infection. Therefore, these findings support the clinical-based recommendations of the use of post-partum antiviral therapy in HBV positive women to eliminate this residual transmission.7. ConclusionsHBV transmission from mother to infant still represents a major proportion of chronic hepatitis B cases in some regions of the world. Prevention of these infections is the key to controlling and finally eradicating HBV, fulfilling the WHO 2030 goal (an HBsAg prevalence in children of no more than 0.1%). Unfortunately, not all countries have 90% vaccination coverage and not all babies born to infected mothers receive immunoprophylaxis on time and the complete scheme. Additionally, both HBeAg positivity and high levels of viremia in mothers are factors that confer an additional risk for immunoprophylaxis failure. Therefore, it is necessary to identify HBsAg positive pregnant women and to provide optimum prophylaxis to their newborn children (vaccine combined with HBIG, with maternal antiviral drug treatment or all the three) principally in endemic areas.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS (HPV)
================================================================================
Title: Human Papillomavirus Persistence, Recurrence, and Incidence in Early Childhood

Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection is the most widespread sexually transmitted infection in the world and is a necessary cause of cervical cancer [1]. Many studies have been carried out to help us understand the harmful effects of HPV. However, these studies have been extensively focused on adults, whereas relatively little is known about the impact of vertical transmission of HPV and the risk of persistence and recurrence of HPV in children. Since the prevalence of HPV is highest among young people, the most fertile age group, pregnant women are at high risk of HPV infection [2]. Vertical and horizontal HPV transmissions are known to occur [3]. Vertical transmission may occur during conception, in utero, or during childbirth [4–6]. Horizontal transmission through nonsexual means, such as auto-inoculation, hetero-inoculation, or contact with contaminated objects, is also possible [7]. Although HPV infection in children is mostly asymptomatic, it can lead to various types of lesions, such as anogenital warts [8] and recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, a rare but highly morbid disease in children [9]. Previous studies estimated the risk of vertical transmission from an HPV-positive mother to a child at around 10% [2, 10, 11]. In adults, most HPV infections do not persist more than 1–2 years, but little is known about the natural history of HPV in children [2, 4]. A study suggests that HPV can persist for several years in children [12]. Further study on the risk of vertical transmission of HPV and on the dynamic of HPV among children is needed. Our objective was to determine the risk of HPV recurrence, persistence, and incidence over 2 years of age among children born to HPV-positive mothers.MATERIALS AND METHODSThe HERITAGE (Human Papillomavirus perinatal transmission and risk of HPV persistence among children) study, a multicenter cohort, was set up to study different outcomes related to HPV infection during pregnancy. The design, methods, and some results have previously been published [11, 13–18]. In brief, 1051 pregnant women of at least 18 years of age were enrolled between 2010 and 2016 during the first trimester of their pregnancies (between 6 and 14 weeks of gestation) from 3 academic hospitals in Montreal, Canada (Centre hospitalier universitaire Sainte-Justine, Centre hospitalier universitaire de l’Université de Montréal, and Saint-Mary's Hospital) or affiliated clinics. Women were included if they had no human immunodeficiency virus infection, planned to deliver at the participating hospitals, and spoke French or English. The institutional ethics and research review boards of the participating hospitals approved the study protocol, and all participants signed an informed consent form. This analysis includes the 422 pregnant women with HPV infection at baseline. Supplementary Figure 1 provides the flow diagram of participants into this analysis.At first (baseline) and third (between 32 and 35 weeks of gestation) trimesters of pregnancy, women provided self-collected vaginal samples using a dry Dacron swab (Copan Italia S.p.A.) for HPV DNA testing. After birth, placental biopsies and swabs were also taken on both the maternal and fetal sides of the placenta for HPV DNA testing as previously described [13]. Children born to women with HPV at baseline were followed every 3–6 months from birth until 2 years of age. Samples were collected in children at every visit in eyes (conjunctival sample using FLOQSwabs, Copan Flock Technologies), mouth (oral sample, Dacron swab), throat (pharyngeal sample, Dacron swab), and genital surface (labia or prepuce and scrotum and anal region sample, Dacron swab). Children born to the first 75 women with HPV recruited in the cohort were also followed with additional visits at 3, 4 and 5 years old. Data on lifestyle, medical, and sociodemographic information were collected by means of questionnaires filled out by the mothers during the recruitment and follow-up visits and by a review of the medical records.Sample Processing and HPV TestingSwabs collected from mothers and children were directly rinsed into liquid-based cytology vial (PerservCyt) and kept at room temperature pending transfer to laboratory for HPV DNA testing. The biopsies were stored in cryogenic tubes at −70°C until HPV DNA testing. Genotyping of the different HPV genotypes was carried out using the Roche Diagnostic Linear Array Test that detected 36 genotypes comprising high-risk HPV (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68, 73, and 82) and low-risk HPV (6, 11, 26, 34, 40, 42, 44, 53, 54, 61, 62, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 81, 83, 84, and 89) [19].Statistical AnalysisCharacteristics of the mothers and children were described using proportions, mean (standard deviation [SD]), and median (interquartile range [IQR]). Detection of HPV in children was described for all sites (conjunctival, oral, pharyngeal, and genital samples), for all visits from birth to 24 months. The probability of transmission of HPV among children born to mothers with HPV was estimated as the detection of HPV found in children at birth or at 3 months divided by the total number of mothers with HPV for individual sites and all sites combined. The proportion of concordance between the genotypes found in the mother (during pregnancy or in the placenta) and those found in the children was estimated.We also estimated the risk of recurrence, persistence, and incidence of new genotypes in children during follow-up and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Recurrent HPV was defined as the redetection of a same genotype that was detected at least at 1 visit (between birth and 24 months), cleared for at least 1 visit, and then was redetected at a subsequent visit. Persistent HPV was defined as a specific HPV genotype that was detected in children for at least 2 consecutive visits (between birth and 24 months). Incident HPV in children was defined as the detection of a new genotype during the follow-up (until 24 months) that was not detected at birth and/or at the 3-month visit. The median (IQR) and mean (95% CI) time to clear genotype-specific HPV episodes in children was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier technique.RESULTSAmong the 422 women with HPV during pregnancy, 390 carried their pregnancy to term, 2 children were stillbirths, and 395 children were born alive including twin and triplet pregnancies (Supplementary Figure 1). Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of the mothers and their children in the cohort. The mean age of the mothers was 30.7 years (SD, 4.7 years). Most of the children were born vaginally (71.8%) and 28.2% were born by cesarean delivery. Of all mothers, 10.9% were single and 89.1% had a regular partner at baseline. Globally, we tested 7301 samples for HPV DNA among mothers and their children.Table 1.Characteristics of the 422 Pregnant Women With Human Papillomavirus Infection in the HERITAGE StudyCharacteristicVariableValueAt baseline Age, yMean ± SD30.7 ± 4.7Median (IQR)30 (27–34)Range19–47 No. of years of schoolingMean ± SD15.8 ± 0.16Median (IQR)16 (14–18)Range7–28 Relationship statusSingle46 (10.9)Regular partner376 (89.1) No. of lifetime sexual partners<226 (7.0)2–473 (19.6)5–9171 (45.8)≥10103 (27.6)Missing49 No. of new sexual partners during the last year0401 (95.2)117.0 (4.0)≥23 (0.8)Missing1 Received at least 1 dose of an HPV vaccineNo350 (88.8)Yes44 (11.2)Missing28 EthnicityWhite329 (77.9)Native African37 (8.7)African American3 (0.7)East Asian4 (0.9)Arab/West Asian18 (4.3)Latin American25 (5.9)Native/Aboriginal People1 (0.2)Othera5 (1.2) Current smokingNo357 (84.6)Yes65 (15.4) Cytology resultNormal376 (90.2)ASCUS26 (6.2)LSIL7 (1.7)HSIL8 (1.9)Missing5 HPV infection during pregnancyHR-HPV (at least 1 genotype)304 (72.0)LR-HPV (at least 1 genotype)292 (69.2)During pregnancy Pregnancy-induced hypertensive disordersNo407 (96.7)Yes14 (3.3)Missing1 Gestational diabetesNo339 (87.8)Yes47 (12.2)Missing36 Urinary or genital infectionNo399 (97.3)Yes11 (2.7)Missing12 Pregnancy typeSingle pregnancy417 (98.8)Multiple pregnancy, twins3 (0.7)Multiple pregnancy, triplets2 (0.5) Pregnancy outcomeLive birthb395 (95.2)Spontaneous abortions9 (2.2)Molar pregnancy2 (0.5)Pregnancy termination7 (1.7)Stillbirth2 (0.5)Missing12 Gestational age at delivery, wk (n = 390)Mean ± SD39.1 ± 2.3Median (IQR)39.4 (38.4–40.4)Range20–42<28 wk2 (0.5)28–31 wk3 (0.8)32–36 wk26 (6.7)≥37 wk357 (92.0)Loss to follow-up2 Delivery mode (n = 390)Vaginal277 (71.9)Cesarean delivery108 (28.1)Missing5Children (n = 395b) Birth weight, g Mean ± SD3298.9 ± 539.2Median (IQR)3298.9 (2685–3310)Range415–4640<2500 g25 (8.5)≥2500 g369 (91.5)Missing1 Child sexMale197 (50)Female197 (50)Missing1Data are presented as No. (%) unless otherwise indicated.Abbreviations: ASCUS, atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; HPV, human papillomavirus; HR-HPV, high-risk human papillomavirus; HSIL, high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; IQR, interquartile range; LR-HPV, low-risk human papillomavirus; LSIL, low-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; Missing, missing data; SD, standard deviation.
aOther ethnicity includes 4 individuals from Haiti and 1 from the French Caribbean.
bn = 395 live births, including 3 twins and 1 triplet out of 390 pregnancies.
Table 2 presents the detection of genotype-specific HPV in children during follow-up. Overall, HPV was detected in 51 of the 373 (13.7%) children with at least 1 sample tested for HPV during the entire follow-up. Multiple genotypes were detected in 17 of these children. A total of 91 HPV detections was observed in all samples and visits combined in children. Most of the genotypes detected in children were high-risk HPV. The most prevalent genotype found was HPV-66 (3.2% [95% CI, 1.8%–5.5%]), followed by HPV-51 (2.4% [95% CI, 1.3%–4.5%]) and HPV-62 (2.1%, [95% CI, 1.1%–4.2%]). No HPV-11 was detected in the children, and the detection of HPV-6, HPV-16, and HPV-18 was 0.5% (95% CI, .1%–1.9%), 0.8% (95% CI, .3%–2.3%), and 0.8% (95% CI, .3%–2.3%), respectively.Table 2.Detection of Human Papillomavirus in Children (n = 373a) During Follow-up in All Sites CombinedGenotypeNo. (%)95% CIHPV-62 (0.5).1–1.9HPV-110 (0)NAHPV-163 (0.8).3–2.3HPV-183 (0.8).3–2.3HPV-260 (0)NAHPV-315 (1.3).6–3.1HPV-333 (0.8).3–2.3HPV-340 (0)NAHPV-352 (0.5).1–1.9HPV-396 (1.6).7–3.5HPV-401 (0.3).1–1.5HPV-423 (0.8).3–2.3HPV-442 (0.5).1–1.9HPV-450 (0)NAHPV-519 (2.4)1.3–4.5HPV-523 (0.8).3–2.3HPV-532 (0.5).1–1.9HPV-540 (0)NAHPV-560 (0)NAHPV-583 (0.8).3–2.3HPV-590 (0)NAHPV-611 (0.3).1–1.5HPV-628 (2.1)1.1–4.2HPV-6612 (3.2)1.8–5.5HPV-670 (0)NAHPV-680 (0)NAHPV-690 (0)NAHPV-700 (0)NAHPV-710 (0)NAHPV-725 (1.3).6–3.1HPV-731 (0.3).1–1.5HPV-810 (0)NAHPV-824 (1.1).4–2.7HPV-831 (0.3).1–1.5HPV-847 (1.9).9–3.8HPV-895 (1.3).6–3.1No. of children with single HPV genotype34 (9.1)6.6–12.5No. of children with multiple HPV genotype17 (4.6)2.8–7.2No. of children with HPV detection51 (13.7)10.5–17.6Total HR-HPV detected54 (14.5)11.3–18.4Total LR-HPV37 (9.9)7.3–13.4Total HPV detected91 (24.4)20.3–29.0Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; HPV, human papillomavirus; HR-HPV, high-risk human papillomavirus; LR-HPV, low-risk human papillomavirus; NA, not applicable.
an = 373 children with at least 1 valid HPV test during follow-up.
Table 3 displays data on HPV detection in children according to individual sites and visits during follow-up. HPV was detected among 27 of 372 children with valid HPV testing at birth and/or 3-month visit. Based on these data, the probability of transmission of HPV for all sites combined was 7.3% (95% CI, 5.0%–10.4%). If we consider data on HPV detected only at birth (not including that of the 3-month visit), the probability of vertical transmission at all sites combined was 6% (95% CI, 4.0%–8.9%). The conjunctiva was the most important site of HPV detection in children with 13 cases at birth and/or 3-month visit (3.5% [95% CI, 2.0%–5.9%]). The percentage of HPV detection in oral, pharyngeal, and genital sites was 3.0% (95% CI, 1.6%–5.3%), 0.8% (95% CI, .3%–2.5%), and 2.7% (95% CI, 1.4%–4.9%), respectively. Among the children followed until 5 years of age (4 children tested at 3 years, 11 at 4 years, and 5 at 5 years of follow-up), no HPV was detected at any sites.Table 3.Number of Children With Detection of Human Papillomavirus, by Site, During Follow-upVisitConjunctivalOralPharyngealGenitalAll Sites CombinedBirth (n = 366)11 (3)6 (1.6)3 (0.8)9 (2.5)22 (6.0)1.7–5.3.8–3.5.3–2.41.3–4.74.0–8.93 mo (n = 218)3 (1.4)5 (2.3)0 (0)1 (0.5)6 (2.7).4–4.2.9–5.4NA.07–3.21.2–6.0Birth and/or 3-mo visit combined (n = 372a)13 (3.5)11 (3.0)3 (0.8)10 (2.7)27 (7.3)2.0–5.91.6–5.3.3–2.51.4–4.95.0–10.46 mo (n = 198)3 (1.5)3 (1.5)0 (0)3 (1.5)8 (4.0).5–4.6.5–4.6NA.5–4.62.0–7.99 mo (n = 210)1 (0.5)0 (0)1 (0.5)2 (1.0)3 (1.4).1–3.3NA.1–3.3.2–3.8.5–4.412 mo (n = 222)5 (2.3)2 (0.9)2 (0.9)1 (0.5)6 (2.7).9–5.3.2–3.2.2–3.2.1–3.21.2–5.918 mo (n = 211)2 (0.9)4 (1.9)1 (0.5)2 (0.9)8 (3.8).2–3.7.7–5.0.1–3.3.2–3.71.9–7.424 mo (n = 200)4 (2.0)0 (0)1 (0.5)1 (0.5)6 (3.0).7–5.2NA.1–3.5.1–3.51.3–6.4Data are presented as No. (%) and 95% confidence interval.Abbreviations: HPV, human papillomavirus; NA, not applicable.
an = 372: total number of children include those with valid HPV testing at birth and/or at 3 months (includes 366 children with HPV testing at birth and 6 children with only HPV testing at the 3-month visit).Data on recurrence, persistence, and incidence of HPV in children are presented in Table 4. Among the 44 children tested at least for 3 consecutive visits, 2 (4.5% [95% CI, 1.3%–15.1%]) had recurrent HPV (genotype detected that cleared and was redetected in a subsequent visit). The first child was infected with HPV-72 in the conjunctiva and the other child with HPV-31 in the mouth (oral site). The risk of persistence was also very low. Among the 48 children tested at least with 2 consecutive visits, 1 child (2.1% [95% CI, .4%–10.4%]) had a persistent HPV with genotype 72 at the conjunctival site. Among the 270 children with valid HPV testing at birth and/or at 3-month visit and with at least 1 test between 6 and 24 months, 26 (9.6%) children had an incident genotype during follow-up (at least 1 genotype not detected at birth or 3-month visit that was newly detected after that) for a total of 43 incident detections accounting for multiple HPV. The site with most new HPV detections was the conjunctiva, with 16 (5.9%) incident cases, follow by oral (4.1%), genital (3.7%), and pharyngeal (2.2%) sites.Table 4.Recurrent, Persistent, and Incident Human Papillomavirus Detection in ChildrenDetectionConjunctivalOralPharyngealGenitalAll SitesCombinedRecurrent HPV detection (n = 44a) No. (%)1 (2.3)1 (2.3)0 (0)0 (0)2 (4.5) 95% CI.4–11.8.4–11.8NANA1.3–15.1Persistent HPV detection (n = 48b) No. (%)1 (2.1)0 (0)0 (0)0 (0)1 (2.1) 95% CI.4–10.4NANANA.4–10.4Incident HPV detection (n = 270c) No. (%)16 (5.9)11 (4.1)6 (2.2)10 (3.7)43 (15.9) 95% CI3.7–9.42.3–7.11.0–4.82.0–6.712.4–20.8Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; HPV, human papillomavirus; NA, not applicable.
aAnalysis based on 44 children who had at least 3 consecutive visits with valid HPV testing (among the 51 children detected with HPV); 2 recurrent detections (numbers 9 and 47 in Supplementary Table 1).
bAnalysis based on 48 children who had at least 2 consecutive visits with valid HPV testing (among the 51 children detected with HPV); 1 case of persistent detection (number 47 in Supplementary Table 1).
cAnalysis based on 270 children with at least 1 visit with valid HPV testing between 6 months and 24 months and who were HPV negative for a specific genotype at birth and/or 3-month visit; we observed 43 incident HPV detection considering multiple detection among 26 children (numbers 25–51 in Supplementary Table 1, except for number 43 because of invalid HPV testing at birth and/or 3-month visit).
Supplementary Table 1 describes the detection of genotype-specific HPV among women and their children by sites and visits for all children in whom HPV was detected at some point during follow-up. Among the 27 children with HPV detection at birth and/or 3-month visit, 23 had similar HPV genotypes to their mother. Therefore, the proportion of concordance between mother during pregnancy and children at birth and/or 3-month visit was 85.2% (95% CI, 65.4%–94.6%). However, concordance decreases to 33.3% (95% CI, 17.8%–53.6%) when considering genotypes detected between 6 and 24 months, with only 9 of 27 children who had genotype concordance with their mother. One child (number 43 in Supplementary Table 1) had missing data at birth and the 3-month visit; this child showed HPV-53 at 18 months at the genital site, and the genotype was not concordant with the mother. The concordance was 62.7% (95% CI, 48.5%–75.1%) when considering all HPV detected during the entire follow-up (32/51 children).
Figure 1 presents data on HPV clearance for any HPV detected in children during the entire follow-up. The Kaplan-Meier curves rely on 90 HPV episodes detected on all sites (90 transient HPVs and 1 persistent HPV). The mean and median clearance times for any HPV episodes for all sites combined were 3.9 months (95% CI, 3.6–4.2 months) and 3.0 months (95% CI, 3.0–3.0 months), respectively. Time to clearance was similar when individual sites were considered with a mean time to clear in conjunctiva of 3.9 months (95% CI, 3.4–4.6 months), in mouth of 3.6 months (95% CI, 3.1–4.0 months), in pharynx of 4.5 months (95% CI, 3.5–5.5 months), and in genitals of 3.6 months (95% CI, 3.1–4.1 months).Figure 1.Clearance of genotype-specific human papillomavirus (HPV) episodes detected during follow-up. Data are based on the 90 genotype-specific HPV episodes (out of the 91 HPV detections, only 1 episode was persistent at the conjunctiva; the total number of episodes was therefore 90). Recurrent detections were all considered independently as unique infections that have cleared after a negative visit. Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; HPV, human papillomavirus; IQR, interquartile range.Alt text: A set of Kaplan-Meier survival curves showing the cumulative incidence of HPV clearance over time in different anatomical sites among infants (n = 90). The top graph represents all sites combined, while the 4 lower graphs display clearance times for conjunctival (n = 33), oral (n = 24), pharyngeal (n = 9), and genital (n = 24) HPV infections. Mean and median clearance times (in months) are provided for each site, with confidence intervals.DISCUSSIONThe probability of vertical transmission of HPV considering all mucosal sites combined was 7.3% (95% CI, 5.0%–10.4%). Of the genotypes detected in children at birth and/or at the 3-month visit, 85.2% were concordant with genotypes found in mothers during pregnancy. These data are consistent with previous studies on HPV vertical transmission [10, 20–23]. A meta-analysis published in 2005 estimated the probability of HPV vertical transmission at 6.5% (95% CI, 5.0%–8.0%) [2]. Other studies such as Smith et al showed a probability of transmission of 5.1% (5/99) considering both oral and genital sites in children, with a concordance between mothers and newborns of 71% [24]. Castellsagué et al reported a probability of HPV vertical transmission of 9.4% (5/53) with oral samples in children, although only 1 child (1/5) had a concordant genotype with their mother [10]. However, Park et al and Hahn et al, who tested children at the oral site, have reported a higher percentage of vertical transmission (18.2% and 20.8%, respectively), with a concordance of 100% in both studies [23, 25]. These percentages were similar in the Finnish Family HPV Study where 22.8% of the 331 children had an HPV-positive oral sample at birth [12]. Differences in methodology such as the sites tested, HPV DNA detection method, or the duration of follow-up might explain differences between studies. For example, most of the studies have tested 1 or 2 sites in children (oral and genital samples). Only 2 studies describe the presence of HPV in the conjunctiva. In our study, we found that 3.2% of conjunctival samples at birth or the 3-month visit were positive for HPV. This is consistent with Balbi et al, who followed 71 mothers with HPV during pregnancy and their children over a 2-year period and showed that 3.2% of conjunctival samples of children were positive [26]. In our study, we calculated a probability of vertical transmission by combining birth and 3-month visits to consider the fact that some children did not have valid tests at birth and to consider a delay of a few weeks to allow HPV detection. With this definition, we estimated a probability of transmission across all sites of 7.3% (95% CI, 5.0%–10.4%) instead of 6.0% (95% CI, 4.0%–8.9%) when considering HPV detected at birth only. However, despite some variations in definition and methodology between studies, all of the results suggest that vertical transmission of HPV to several mucosa (eye, mouth, throat, genitals) does happen.The occurrence of new genotypes detected during follow-up (not detected at birth or 3 months) was also not rare in our study. Among the 270 children with a valid HPV testing at birth and/or 3-month visit and with a valid HPV test between 6 and 24 months, 26 children (9.6%) acquired at least 1 new genotype during follow-up, totaling 43 new genotypes among these children accounting for multiple genotypes. We observed a decrease in the probability of concordance (33.3%) when considering new detections between 6 and 24 months of age while the concordance was 85.2% for HPV detected in the perinatal period (birth to 3 months). This may suggest that incident HPV detected between 6 and 24 months might be more likely to occur from horizontal transmission from the mother, other family members, or caregivers through, for example, hand contact. However, it is also possible that we missed genotypes during pregnancy because we only collected vaginal and placental samples and not oral and anal samples. It is also possible that HPV comes from the father, as some studies have shown [6, 27]. Only a very few pediatric studies described HPV detection from birth to later in life. In our study, among the subsample of children with 5 years follow-up, incident HPV was not detected after 2 years of life, suggesting a low risk of HPV incidence during childhood. However, few children were followed and tested beyond 2 years of age in our study. It is therefore difficult to draw a clear picture of the long-term dynamics of HPV. Another study has shown a higher risk of HPV during childhood such as an increase in oral HPV detection in children at 6 years of age [12]. All these results suggest that the incidence of HPV during childhood is not rare. One question that remained is whether HPV can persist or reactivate in children.Among all HPV detections in children during the follow-up, only 2 were recurrent (cleared and reappeared at subsequent visit) and 1 was persistent (detected for at least 2 consecutive visits). It is important to highlight that in all cases of recurrence or persistence, HPV genotypes of both mothers and children were concordant. This may suggest that HPV was vertically transmitted, was causing a low-copy-number infection, and reactivated at multiple sites in children at subsequent visits. Although the definitions of recurrence and persistence are challenging because it is difficult to really distinguish between new detection from reactivation/recurrence or whether HPV is really cleared, the results of this study suggest that most HPV infections detected in children do not persist. This adds to most studies that show that HPV detected during the perinatal period generally does not persist into the first months of life [23, 25, 28]. In the study of Watts et al including 151 infants tested for HPV at birth and at the ages of 6 weeks and 6, 12, 18, 24, and 36 months, an overall prevalence of HPV of 1.5% was found in genital samples, 1.2% in anal samples, and 0% in oral or nasopharyngeal samples, with all positive samples preceded or followed by a negative HPV sample, suggesting absence of persistence [28]. Tenti et al also found similar results after an analysis of 711 mother–newborn pairs. These authors detected HPV in the oropharyngeal mucosa of 11 newborns from 37 women who had HPV-positive vaginal samples at delivery (vertical transmission estimated at 30%), but no HPV was detected in these 11 infants tested 5 weeks after delivery [29]. The study of Park et al, involving 291 pregnant women, showed that although 3.4% (10/291) of newborns had HPV DNA detected in oral samples at birth, none showed HPV positivity 6 months after delivery [23]. In the study by Hahn et al of 469 pregnant women, 15 newborns (3.2%) had HPV DNA detected in oral samples at birth without detection at 2 months postpartum [25]. However, some HPV persistence in children has been observed. In the Finnish cohort study, a total of 48 of the 323 (14.9%) children followed until 6 years of age had persistent oral HPV infection. Interestingly, 4 children positive for HPV-6 at birth still had this genotype detected at their 6-year follow-up visit [12]. Other studies have also shown a certain HPV persistency in children but mainly concern mothers with history of abnormal smears or genital warts, which may cause a problem of generalization [22, 30]. It is therefore important to note that although perinatally acquired HPV persistence is possible, current evidence suggests that it is rare. It is unclear, however, whether HPV infections no longer detected in newborns are really cleared or if some HPV remained undetected in basal cells or are present at low copy number and could reactivate later in childhood. Large cohort studies with a long follow-up from birth until adulthood are needed to answer these questions.Our study estimated time to HPV clearance among infants. Overall, most children in whom HPV was detected had transient HPV and cleared rapidly. Most genotypes detected in children were cleared with a mean time of 3.9 months (95% CI, 3.6–4.2 months). This estimate is, however, influenced by the time between follow-up visits. It may represent an overestimate because most of the HPV detections observed in our study were transient (occurred in only 1 visit), while their elimination could have occurred several weeks before the subsequent visit where the negative test was observed. These estimates could also be underestimates because we considered the 2 recurrent detections to be independent infections that were eliminated, whereas they could be the same infections that persisted.Our study has strengths and limitations. HERITAGE is a large cohort study with HPV detection among pregnant mothers and longitudinal follow-up of children with multiple testing to at least 2 years of age. Samples for HPV testing were collected twice during pregnancy and in the placenta as well as in 4 different sites in children (conjunctival, oral, pharyngeal, and genital). HPV DNA was tested using the Roche Linear Array genotyping assay, a well-established method known for its robustness, specificity, and sensitivity in identifying 36 individual HPV genotypes. However, our research also has limitations. Some participants were lost to follow-up or had missing data. This has reduced precision of our estimates. Additionally, only vaginal samples were tested on mothers during pregnancy without follow-up HPV testing after birth, and fathers and other members of the family were not tested. For example, recent studies suggest that paternal HPV infection may contribute to HPV transmission to children [6, 27]. Finally, although follow-up of children in our cohort was at least 2 years, a longer follow-up is important to study recurrence and persistence in children.CONCLUSIONSThe findings of our study suggest that vertical transmission of HPV to different mucosa (conjunctival, oral, pharyngeal, and genital) of newborns occurs, but rarely results in persistent infection. Considering that HPV testing is increasingly used for cervical cancer screening, it is expected that an increasing number of pregnant women will be aware that they are infected with HPV and be worried about the implication for their child. Our results showing that the risk of HPV recurrence or persistence is very low in children should be reassuring.Supplementary Materialjiaf213_Supplementary_Data


Title: Toward an Understanding of the Lack of Transmission of Facts About Human Papillomavirus: Qualitative Case Study

IntroductionCervical cancer is the fourth most common cancer among women worldwide [1] and the eighth most common among women Saudi in Arabia aged 14 to 44 years [2]. In Saudi Arabia, the age-standardized rate of cervical cancer is relatively low at 2.2 per 100,000, yet the disease carries a 35% fatality rate [2]. Notably, >99% of cervical cancer cases are attributed to human papillomavirus (HPV) infections [3], making HPV knowledge a critical component of prevention. Despite the availability of information about HPV, such as that provided by authoritative sources such as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website [4], many women remain unaware of the health consequences of HPV [5]. For instance, a study among female university students in Saudi Arabia revealed that 95% demonstrated poor knowledge of cervical cancer and its link to HPV [6], while another study in Jazan City reported a mean knowledge score of only 1.99 out of 10 [7].This persistent knowledge gap is not due to an absence of information but rather reflects barriers to effective information seeking and transmission. Factors such as social stigma surrounding sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including HPV, constrain women’s willingness and ability to search for and internalize sexual health knowledge [8]. Poor awareness has been associated with delayed health care–seeking behaviors for STDs [9], further compounding public health challenges. For instance, one national survey of 755 women in Saudi Arabia found that only about 21% of them showed adequate knowledge about cervical cancer and HPV [10].To address this gap, we previously developed the HPV facts transmission model (Figure 1 [5]), a conceptual framework grounded in the health action process approach [11], which categorizes the barriers and resources influencing women’s access to, understanding of, and engagement with HPV-related information. The model emphasizes individual and social factors across preintentional (motivation), intentional (planning), and action phases. It proposes that motivation to seek knowledge is shaped by perceived risk, outcome expectancy, and self-efficacy. Once motivated, women enter an action planning phase, determining how and when to acquire information. This process culminates in the actual seeking and internalizing of HPV facts—what the model refers to as action and action control [5].Figure 1HPV Facts Transmission Model, including barriers and resources propositions. HPV: human papillomavirus.In this study, we build upon our previous work by empirically testing the motivation phase of the model through a qualitative investigation. Specifically, we explore how the model’s barrier and resource propositions influence women’s intentions to seek and acquire HPV-related knowledge. By doing so, we aim to validate the relevance of the HPV facts transmission model in real-world settings and to inform culturally sensitive strategies to enhance HPV awareness and education.MethodsOverviewIn our previous work, we developed and proposed the HPV facts transmission model [5] to explore the mechanisms influencing the dissemination of HPV-related information. This study builds upon that foundation by qualitatively examining the factors identified in the model, with a specific focus on the intention to seek and acquire knowledge about HPV. The HPV facts transmission model suggests that various factors can either facilitate or hinder the transmission of HPV-related information in Saudi Arabia, as outlined earlier in this paper. To investigate these factors, we use a qualitative case study design [12], which includes the following elements: questions and propositions, units of analysis, logic to link data to propositions, and interpretation of findings. This paper adheres to the COREQ (Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research) checklist, ensuring comprehensive and transparent reporting of qualitative methodologies (Multimedia Appendix 1 [13]). The researchers, all female, have extensive expertise in qualitative studies, which informed the design, execution, and analysis of this research.Ethical ConsiderationsThis study was reviewed and approved by the institutional review board (IRB) of Claremont Graduate University (3101). Ethics approval was obtained to ensure compliance with human participant research guidelines and to protect their rights and well-being throughout the research process. Before participation, all participants provided written informed consent after being informed about the study’s objectives, procedures, and their rights, including the right to withdraw at any time without consequences. Given the sensitivity of the topic, verbal consent was also reaffirmed before each interview. To protect participant confidentiality, no personally identifiable information was collected. Participants were assigned unique codes (eg, P1 and P2) to anonymize their responses, and all data were securely stored and accessible only to the research team. In addition, interviews were not audio-recorded to allow participants to speak freely, with detailed notes taken instead. Participants were not financially compensated for their involvement to minimize potential coercion and ensure unbiased participation.Question and PropositionsThis study aimed to answer the following question: What factors influence the intention to transmit HPV-related facts? As part of our previously developed HPV facts transmission model (illustrated in Figure 1), we identified 11 propositions related to factors that may either block or promote the transmission of HPV facts to women in Saudi Arabia. These propositions were originally conceptualized in our prior work based on theoretical frameworks and background literature. In this qualitative study, we empirically examined these propositions to determine their relevance and assess their role in influencing HPV knowledge–seeking behaviors.The propositions for the individual level are as follows:Individual qualities affect the intention to transmit HPV facts.Personal need to learn affects the intention to transmit HPV facts.Language barriers affect the intention to transmit HPV facts.Technology use affects the intention to transmit HPV facts.Stigma affects the intention to transmit HPV facts.The propositions for the social level are as follows:Social structure affects the intention to transmit HPV facts.Suppression structure affects the intention to transmit HPV facts.Culture and tradition affect the intention to transmit HPV facts.Social promotion affects the intention to transmit HPV facts.Social support affects the intention to transmit HPV facts.Interaction and collaboration affect the intention to transmit HPV facts.Data CollectionSemistructured interviews were used as a primary data collection technique. Interviews were conducted between April and June 2017. Questions about the 11 propositions were developed (Figure 1). When possible, questions were based on existing instruments. When not possible, background literature was searched to create questions. For example, the proposition personal need to learn—defined as the willingness to accept new knowledge [14]—was connected to the research objective, and the following interview question was generated: “If you know the health risks for any STDs such as HPV, are you intending to search for and learn about HPV? Why?” This example illustrates how each proposition informed the specific research questions used during data collection (Multimedia Appendix 2). Table 1 summarizes the methods used in developing the interview questions.Table 1Methods used in instrument development.PropositionsMethodsReferences
Individual level


Individual qualitiesExisting validated instruments (Curiosity and Exploration Inventory) and background literature[3,15-18]

Personal need to learnBackground literature[14]

Language barriersBackground literature[19]

Technology useBackground literature[19-21]

StigmaBackground literature[22]
Social level


Social structureBackground literature[23]

Suppression structureBackground literature[24]

Cultural and traditionBackground literature[25]

Social promotionBackground literature[26,27]

Social supportExisting validated instrument (Social Support Questionnaire-Short Form)[28]

Interactions and collaborationExisting validated instrument: the Interactions and Collaboration section from the Online Student Connectedness Survey[29]All interviews were conducted in Arabic by the corresponding author, who was a doctoral student at the time of the study. At the time of the study, no prior relationship had been established between the researcher and the participants to minimize bias and ensure objectivity. Participants were informed about the general purpose of the study but were not given detailed insights into the researcher’s personal goals or assumptions to prevent response bias. To further minimize bias, the interviewer remained aware of potential assumptions throughout the research process, particularly regarding knowledge transmission and health information–seeking behaviors. The researcher team’s interest in the topic stemmed from prior work on HPV information dissemination and a commitment to understanding the barriers and facilitators influencing women’s access to HPV-related knowledge.All interviews were conducted via phone calls, each lasting between 20 and 60 minutes. Interviews were not audio-recorded due to the sensitivity of the topic, allowing participants to speak freely. Instead, detailed field notes were taken during and immediately after each interview, capturing participant responses, key themes, and nonverbal cues. To ensure linguistic and cultural accuracy, the interview questions were developed as follows: (1) the first author wrote the questions in English and then translated them into Arabic; (2) an independent Arabic expert checked them for grammar and clarity; (3) a third bilingual person reviewed the questions in both languages; and (4) finally, the first author reviewed all questions once more.SampleAll participants were women in Saudi Arabia aged ≥20 years, recruited from the community. The age criterion was selected based on prior research indicating that HPV infrequently affects women aged <20 years [30]. Participants were recruited using convenience and snowball sampling, a widely used approach for sensitive research topics [31], after obtaining IRB approval. Initial participants were approached through personal and professional networks via WhatsApp, and they subsequently referred other eligible participants. Study invitations containing a brief description of the research purpose, eligibility criteria, and contact information were circulated through existing WhatsApp groups and direct messages within educational, health, and professional circles. Interested women were asked to privately respond directly via WhatsApp or email to express their interest in participating. Those who responded were subsequently provided with detailed study information and an explanation of the informed consent process. Recruitment continued until data saturation was reached, ensuring diverse perspectives from women.Before data collection, the first author pilot-tested the interview questions with 3 women in Saudi Arabia (aged 30-40 years) recruited via snowball sampling. Each participant was interviewed separately, and following each interview, questions were modified and calibrated to improve clarity. No interviews were repeated.Data Analysis: Pattern MatchingThis study used pattern matching as its primary analytic technique. According to Bitektine [32], this method requires “a theoretical pattern of expected outcomes,” as well as “an observed pattern of effects,” and then making “an attempt to match the two.” The researchers used pattern matching to make sense of the participants’ perceptions and opinions regarding the lack of HPV information transmission [16].The researchers examined the data to determine whether the propositions block or promote the transfer of HPV facts, focusing only on the intention mechanism. During the analysis, the definitions and explanations of each proposition were used to assess how well they matched participant responses. For example, the proposition concerning culture and tradition suggests that single (unmarried) women in Saudi Arabia are often more hesitant to discuss sexual health topics compared to married women. This aligns with findings by Al-Saggaf [33], who reported that searching for and discussing sexual health topics is culturally sensitive for unmarried women in Saudi Arabia. Throughout the analysis, we used this framework to determine whether the suggested proposition matched the participants’ responses. Analysis was conducted manually by the authors.Positionality of the Research TeamThe research team consisted of female researchers with expertise in qualitative research and public health, providing a culturally informed perspective on HPV knowledge–seeking behaviors. The corresponding author, who conducted the interviews, had no prior relationship with the participants, ensuring minimal bias in data collection. To further enhance trustworthiness, reflexivity was maintained by critically examining how the researchers’ perspectives, cultural backgrounds, and assumptions might shape data interpretation. This helped ensure that the findings were grounded in participant experiences rather than researcher bias.ResultsHPV Facts Transmission Model ExaminationA total of 20 women aged between 23 and 42 years were interviewed; of these, 13 (65%) were married and 7 (35%) were single women. The women were from different regions of Saudi Arabia: 15% (3/20) each from the East, South, Center, and North, and 40% (8/20) from the West. The interviews each lasted between 20 and 60 minutes.Of the 11 propositions, 8 (73%) were found to match the data well, while 3 (27%) did not. The individual-level factors include the personal stigma, the need to learn, language barriers, technology use, and individual qualities. The social-level factors include social promotion, culture and tradition, and social support. These 2 levels of factors can be arranged, as illustrated in Figure 2, into barriers and resources. Factors can be classified as either barriers or resources, based on how they impact women’s intention to search for and learn about HPV.The subsequent subsections provide a detailed elaboration of the analysis for the matched and mismatched propositions.Figure 2HPV Facts Transmission Model, including barriers and resources after analysis. HPV: human papillomavirus.Matched Propositions: Each Factor’s Effects on IntentionThe analyses show that, with respect to the effects of women’s searching and learning behaviors on their personal knowledge, 4 factors act as barriers, 5 factors act as resources, and 1 factor acts as both.Culture and TraditionSome participants asserted that culture and tradition can block the transfer of the facts about HPV. When the researchers asked the participants about their ability to talk about and discuss STDs such as HPV with others, a single woman answered as follows:This topic is not easy to talk and discuss.P6In contrast, a married woman responded as follows:I can talk, discuss with anyone, I do not care, but for single and divorced women, it is not appropriate.P8According to single women, talking about and discussing STDs such as HPV is not easy, as illustrated by P6, who claimed “I am shy.” All the married women interviewed for this study claimed not to care about what others may say about them. This reflects the findings by Al-Saggaf [33] regarding culture and tradition in Saudi Arabia. The predicted pattern matches the empirical pattern as follows:Empirical pattern—culture and traditioncan deter the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“culture and tradition affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”Language BarriersLanguage barriers are a factor that can block the transfer of facts about HPV. As all the participants speak Arabic as their first—and in some cases only—language, they search for and learn about health information in Arabic. One example of this was a quote from a participant who stated the following:I search and learn using the Arabic Language even though there are not a lot of materials in Arabic.P10The lack of educational materials about HPV available in Arabic can serve to block information seeking.Some participants reported that if there were no Arabic materials available, they would stop their attempts to search for and learn about this type of information. A participant stated the following:The only obstacle that I may face is the language barriers.P4Therefore, language is a barrier that can affect women’s acquisition of knowledge when searching for and learning about HPV. The predicted pattern matches the empirical pattern as follows:Empirical pattern—language barriers can deter the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“language barriers affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”StigmaStigma results in bad feelings that affect personal and social relationships [25], which also can affect searching and learning behaviors regarding HPV. Most participants interviewed in this study search and learn secretly without telling anyone. A participant said the following:If I could not get the information that I need regarding HPV, I may...ask someone whom I trust, but not a close one, such as my auntie because I am shy.P6Another participant responded the following:...everything in my phone is hidden, where nobody can find it, not even my husband...In my society, if the husband knows that his wife is searching and learning about any sexual topics, he may divorce her.P5Stigma leads some women in Saudi Arabia to avoid talking about HPV with their close family members. Participants’ responses touched on their tendency to stop searching for and learning about HPV as well as avoid seeking answers from close family members due to fear of being marked with the stigma of HPV.Empirical pattern—stigma can deter the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“stigma affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”Personal Need to LearnPersonal need to learn is a factor that can promote the transfer of HPV facts. Gaining the knowledge that a link exists between HPV and cervical cancer seems to lead women to ask questions about HPV infection. A participant stated the following:Knowing the health risk of HPV really increased my intent to search and learn more about it; the nearer the distance between an individual and the risk, the more cautious an individual will be.P4A family history of cancer appears to intensify the influence of personal need on women’s health information–seeking and learning behaviors. A participant stated the following:Since HPV causes cervical cancer, I may search and learn about this infection more because I have a family history of cancer.P1According to Duggan and Banwell [14], personal need to learn affects information dissemination or transmission. When women understand the serious health risks they face, they are more likely to seek out new knowledge to reduce those risks.Therefore, personal need to learn also matches the predicted pattern:Empirical pattern—personal need to learn can promote and facilitate the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“personal need to learn affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”Technology UseThe participants use technology in their daily lives, particularly smartphones. They use their smart devices to contact others, play games, search for information, and learn. One interviewee responded as follows:Using technology is the easiest way to get information faster.P3Another interviewee said the following:Technology is usually available to use anytime and anywhere.P20This factor is another resource at the individual level that participants use to obtain knowledge regarding any topics, including HPV. The women who were interviewed enjoy using technology because they can access information easily, quickly, anytime, anywhere, and anonymously. The empirical pattern matches the predicted pattern:Empirical pattern—technology use can promote and facilitate the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“technology use affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”Social SupportSocial support is defined as acquiring support (eg, help, information, or encouragement) from family, friends, and other sources [34]. Participants stated that if they were unable to obtain the information they needed through technology, they would seek it from trusted sources such as sisters, friends, or physicians. Thus, women in Saudi Arabia generally receive support from society.This factor of social support was reflected in the participants’ responses. A participant reported the following:I do not think that somebody will support me, but I do not care. I usually search secretly; nobody knows since I am using my laptop.P6Another participant stated the following:No one will support me to search and learn about HPV, but I can ask my sisters, friends, and physicians if I need more information.P1These quotes suggest that, in the absence of support, the interviewed women may use technology to search for and learn about STDs. However, if they need additional information, they may seek assistance from others by asking specific questions.The analysis results indicate that the social support factor promotes the intention to transfer HPV facts to women in Saudi Arabia who may benefit from such information, which thus matches the predicted pattern:Empirical pattern—social support can promote and facilitate the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“social support affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”Social PromotionAll participants agreed that education programs may assist in increasing women’s personal knowledge of HPV infection. When the researchers asked about the effectiveness of education programs, a participant replied as follows:Yes, I think having some education programs will help increase women’s awareness about STDs such as HPV and will educate them about it...this is considered as an easy way to get information.P1Another participant said the following:Yes, this is a very good way to increase women’s sexual knowledge, but in an appropriate environment.P20These quotes suggest that education programs can provide women with easy access to accurate information, which is a supportive way to educate them on HPV.As a result, social promotion through, for example, education programs can be considered a resource that promotes the transfer of HPV facts. This matched the predicted pattern:Empirical pattern—social promotion can promote and facilitate the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“social promotion affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”Individual QualitiesIndividualqualities can either facilitate or hinder the transfer of information about HPV, affecting women’s personal knowledge. Individual qualities consist of several characteristics, including curiosity, creativity, and willingness to change [4]. Moreover, the researchers observed that curiosity was the most influential factor affecting women’s knowledge. The more curious women are, the more willing they are to search for and learn about STDs. For example, when the researchers asked a participant about when she could search for and learn about STDs, she responded as follows:I search and learn about some of the STDs such as HIV, but only if I am curious about it, and I will not search and learn about any topic that I am not interested in.P9Most participants agreed that if women are neither curious nor interested in HPV, they will neither search for nor learn about it. A participant said the following:I do like to find new information and increase my knowledge if I think the topic is interesting.P11These 2 variables—women’s curiosity and their interest in the topic—are important elements that differ among women. These elements affect the searching and learning behaviors regarding STDs that enhance personal knowledge, which matches the predicted pattern:Empirical pattern—individual qualities can promote and facilitate the intention to transfer HPV facts.Predicted pattern—“individual qualities affects the intention to transfer HPV facts.”Mismatched PropositionsAfter analyzing the interview transcripts, the researchers removed 3 mismatched propositions, as described in the subsequent sections.Social StructureSocial structure is defined as the social rules people follow in a society [26]. Participants agreed that searching for, learning about, talking about, and discussing HPV to increase women’s personal knowledge do not disobey society’s rules. A participant reported the following:I do not think that searching and learning about STDs such as HPV is against the society’s rule...because knowing this information is similar to any other information that I may know, and it is not against the Islamic rules.P1Another participant reported the following:I do not think that searching and learning about STDs such as HPV is against society’s rules; people now change. They want to educate themselves, especially if it is a disease.P7Saudi society seems to be changing, and the societal rules women in Saudi Arabia follow do not seem to have a strong effect on the transmission of HPV facts. The proposition concerning social structure does not manifest in promoting or blocking women in Saudi Arabia from searching for and learning about HPV. Social structure does not appear to be a factor in the HPV facts transmission model, as the interviewed Saudi women seem to engage in searching and learning activities with little concern for societal rules.Suppression StructureSuppression structure refers to how powerful individuals or groups may stop other individuals or groups from continuing their actions or activities [28]. The analysis result indicates that this proposition neither promotes nor blocks the transfer of the facts about HPV to women in Saudi Arabia who wish to enhance their knowledge.When the researchers asked participants how they would react if someone in a position of power, such as a father or husband, forced them to stop their searching for and learning about HPV, a responded as follows:No one can stop me because this is my personal choice...and this is my life, and I can do what I want.P2However, a single woman reported the following:My mom may stop me, but not because searching and learning about HPV is against the society’s rules or anything else. She will stop me because I have an obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) and she is worried about me.P6These quotes suggest that suppression structure is likely not a factor that might affect the HPV facts transmission model.Interactions and CollaborationAccording to Barab et al [31], the proposition interactions and collaboration opens the opportunity to share experience and leverage a web-based interactive education program. Nonetheless, all participants classified HPV as a stigmatized disease, citing this stigma as the reason they prefer to search for and learn about this infection privately.When the researchers asked them about their preference to search and learn about STDs, such as HPV, 1 participant stated the following:I prefer to search and learn about HPV alone by myself because the way people think is different (not as me), and it is comfier to me (to search and learn by myself).P1This quote suggests that the interviewed women prefer to search for information about STDs, such as HPV, alone, as they feel more comfortable doing so.Consequently, interactions and collaboration is likely not a factor that affects the HPV facts transmission model. This proposition will not create an opportunity to share experiences or facilitate online interactive discussions because HPV is a stigmatized disease.DiscussionPrincipal FindingsThis study examined the factors influencing HPV fact transmission among women in Saudi Arabia, using the HPV facts transmission model as a guiding framework. The initial model proposed 11 factors, but the qualitative analysis identified only 8 that shaped participants’ intention to seek and acquire HPV-related knowledge. These included 5 individual-level factors (personal need to learn, language barriers, stigma, technology use, and individual qualities) and 3 social-level factors (social promotion, social support, and cultural norms).The findings reveal that personal need to learn and technology use were the strongest facilitators, enabling women to seek HPV-related information actively. In contrast, language barriers, stigma, and cultural norms emerged as key barriers, limiting knowledge transmission. Interestingly, social support played a dual role, acting as both a facilitator and a barrier, depending on the nature and source of support. These findings contribute to understanding the complex interplay between individual motivations, cultural norms, and technological influences in shaping women’s HPV knowledge–seeking behaviors.Comparison to Prior WorkThe personal need to learn was identified as a key motivating factor, consistent with prior research on health information–seeking behaviors. Our findings align with those of Barbour et al [12], who argued that individuals actively seek health information when they recognize potential risks to their well-being. Similarly, the gratification theory by Wilson [35] states that “people are active seekers of information to gratify their needs.”Technology use emerged as another important facilitator of HPV fact transmission. Participants emphasized the potential of digital platforms for overcoming barriers to information seeking, particularly through anonymized access to educational resources. This finding aligns with research by Hansen and Johnson [20], who introduced the concept of “veiled viral marketing”—a strategy that enables the dissemination of health information while preserving user anonymity [20]. Similarly, recent studies have highlighted the effectiveness of gamified mobile apps in enhancing users’ engagement with health information and empowering them to make informed health decisions [36,37].Barriers to HPV knowledge transmission in this study also align with global research on stigma and language limitations. Participants reported a lack of Arabic-language educational materials, which restricted their ability to access reliable HPV-related information. Similar findings have been reported in Latinx communities in the United States, where language barriers negatively impact health care access and patient outcomes [38]. Our study suggests that localized, culturally relevant digital health interventions, such as Arabic-language eHealth platforms, could help mitigate these barriers and expand HPV awareness among women in Saudi Arabia.Stigma was another major barrier, preventing women from openly discussing HPV or actively seeking information. This aligns with prior studies on STD-related stigma, which demonstrate that fear of judgment and cultural taboos affect women’s health care–seeking and decision-making behavior [39]. Similarly, our study found that women in Saudi Arabia tend to search for HPV information privately, avoiding discussions with family members or peers. Efforts to reduce health-related stigma in Saudi Arabia have been successful in other domains. For instance, the National Mental Health Program has effectively used community education campaigns to improve mental health literacy and normalize discussions about psychological well-being [40,41]. Similar awareness strategies could be applied to HPV education, focusing on reducing stigma, increasing public awareness, and normalizing sexual health discussions. However, as with mental health advocacy, HPV-related interventions will need to navigate cultural sensitivities carefully and ensure that educational campaigns respect social norms while promoting open dialogue.Individual qualities are the final factor at the individual level that may promote or block women’s searching and learning behaviors to enhance their personal health knowledge. Among the various characteristic of this factor, curiosity emerged as particularly substantial. Participants expressed a greater inclination to search for and learn about HPV when they found the topic personally relevant or intriguing. This aligns with the Gratification Theory by Wilson [35], which suggests that individuals actively seek information to fulfill their personal knowledge needs. Wilson [35] further describes the concept of selective exposure, where individuals tend to seek out information that matches their interests and preexisting beliefs. This was evident in this study, where women who perceived HPV as a serious health risk were more likely to seek information, whereas those with less personal curiosity demonstrated lower engagement in knowledge acquisition.At the social level, 3 factors—social promotion, social support, and cultural traditions—emerged as key influencers in HPV fact transmission. Social promotion, particularly in the form of educational programs, was identified as an effective method for enhancing HPV awareness among participants. Kirby et al [26] demonstrated that STD education programs positively influenced participants’ sexual health knowledge and behaviors, reinforcing the importance of structured, targeted awareness campaigns. However, some participants in this study emphasized that the effectiveness of social promotion depends on access to appropriate educational environments, indicating the need for well-designed interventions that are both culturally appropriate and widely accessible.Social support was also found to be a major factor influencing HPV fact transmission, with trusted family members and friends playing a major role in facilitating or hindering knowledge sharing. The importance of social support in health education has been well documented. For example, Pratt’s study on hygiene education in 1905 found that socially supported individuals exhibited better health outcomes compared to those without support [42]. This aligns with the findings of this study that women who had access to supportive social networks were more likely to engage in HPV-related discussions and seek further knowledge. Conversely, participants who lacked support or feared judgment were less likely to openly discuss HPV or seek information.In contrast, cultural traditions were identified as a barrier to HPV knowledge transmission, particularly for single women. Participants reported that searching for, discussing, talking about, and becoming educated on sexual topics are generally perceived as challenging tasks for single women, while these tasks typically do not bother married women. This finding aligns with the research conducted by Fageeh [43], which identified a lack of sexual health awareness as a primary factor contributing to STD transmission between couples in Saudi Arabia. The cultural discouragement of discussions surrounding sexual health continues to hinder information dissemination, suggesting the need for culturally sensitive awareness initiatives that respect social norms while promoting accurate health education.In addition, 3 social-level propositions—social structure, suppression structure, and interactions or collaboration—were not supported by participant responses and were therefore eliminated from the final model. Participants largely agreed that learning about HPV does not violate societal norms, indicating that women in Saudi Arabia are increasingly educated and empowered to seek health information. For example, the campaign by Fageeh [43] on STD awareness was successfully launched in Saudi Arabia, suggesting that societal changes are making health education more accessible. If social structure affected the ability to disseminate HPV facts, then launching a campaign would have been impossible.Finally, the proposition interactions and collaboration was eliminated due to mismatching. Although interactive health education programs have been effective in other contexts [44], participants in this study preferred private, self-directed learning rather than collaborative discussions about HPV. This highlights the importance of confidential educational approaches, such as digital health tools, to accommodate women’s preferences for privacy while seeking health information.Theoretical and Practical ContributionsThis study makes significant contributions to both theory and practice by deepening our understanding of HPV knowledge transmission and offering insights for health interventions. Theoretically, this study provides an exemplar for the theory of the problem by Markus [41], which states that a research article should explain how and why a problem occurs, supported by qualitative data or other empirical evidence. By identifying the barriers and facilitators influencing HPV fact transmission, this study establishes a theory of the problem, offering a structured explanation of why HPV knowledge remains inadequately disseminated among women in Saudi Arabia. The refined HPV facts transmission model meets the standards for problem-driven theoretical contributions by Markus [41], as it is concrete, contextually specific, and focused on a real-world phenomenon. From a practical perspective, this research provides actionable insights for public health practitioners, educators, and policy makers. The study identifies 8 key factors that act as barriers, resources, or both in HPV fact transmission. These findings can inform the design of targeted interventions aimed at enhancing HPV awareness and education in Saudi Arabia.Specifically, this study highlights the importance of the following:Leveraging digital health solutions such as mobile apps, social media campaigns, and online educational platforms to address language barriers and stigma while ensuring confidential access to HPV-related informationEnhancing social support networks and encouraging trusted sources of information, such as health care providers, community leaders, and family networks, to facilitate accurate HPV knowledge sharingImplementing culturally sensitive educational programs and ensuring that awareness campaigns respect social norms while promoting factual, accessible health informationBy validating and refining the HPV facts transmission model, this study provides a conceptual framework that can be used to inform public health initiatives, guide future research, and enhance HPV-related interventions. These findings emphasize the need for culturally appropriate, evidence-based strategies to improve HPV knowledge transmission, ultimately supporting cervical cancer prevention efforts in Saudi Arabia and similar contexts.Limitations and Future DirectionsThe study has some limitations that should be considered when interpreting the findings. First, it is important to note that the data were collected 8 years ago. Since then, the modes and speed of health information transmission, particularly digital platforms and social media, have evolved substantially. While the insights remain valuable for understanding cultural and structural influences on HPV-related information seeking, the findings should be interpreted within the temporal context of the study. Future research should examine how technological advances and shifts in public health communication strategies have reshaped information access and behaviors in more recent years. Second, participant personal experiences with HPV, such as having tested positive for the virus or having received the HPV vaccine, were not collected. These factors could have influenced participants’ decision to take part in the study as well as their motivation to seek information about HPV, potentially shaping the perspectives they shared during the interviews. Third, participants were not given the opportunity to review their interview transcripts or the results of the thematic analysis. Although reflexive and iterative coding processes were used to enhance analytical rigor, member checking might have strengthened the credibility and accuracy of the findings by allowing participants to clarify or expand on their perspectives. Fourth, as in all qualitative research, the potential for researcher bias exists and may influence the data collection, analysis, and interpretation. Although we used strategies such as peer debriefing and maintained detailed reflexive notes to enhance trustworthiness, complete objectivity in qualitative interpretation cannot be assumed. Fifth, the use of snowball and convenience sampling means that our findings are specific to the study participants and may not be transferable to the broader population. However, the aim was not to draw wider inferences but rather to gain a profound understanding of the factors influencing HPV facts transmission within the specific sample, and efforts were made to include women from various regions to capture diverse perspectives. Sixth, the voluntary nature of participation may have introduced selection bias. While we cannot eliminate selection bias entirely, we minimized its potential impact by inviting all interested women, regardless of their knowledge or opinions, to participate. Seventh, the focus was primarily on women’s marital status in relation to cultural influences, without fully exploring other potential cultural variations. Regional differences could significantly impact individuals’ experiences and behaviors related to sexual health education. To mitigate this, we made an effort to include women from different regions of Saudi Arabia in our sample. However, we acknowledge that a more in-depth exploration of other cultural factors, including regional nuances, would be necessary in future research to provide a more comprehensive understanding of how cultural context shapes HPV-related knowledge-seeking behavior across different parts of the country.Despite these limitations, this study provides a valuable foundation for future research. Future studies could explore the development and testing of digital interventions, such as IT- or information system–based tools, to improve the accessibility and effectiveness of HPV information dissemination. In addition, incorporating other qualitative data-gathering techniques, such as focus groups, could provide richer insights into participants’ experiences and further inform intervention strategies. Future research could also explore the role of organizational social support in facilitating knowledge sharing about stigmatized health conditions, such as HPV. Assessing how organizations can provide support for individuals in seeking information and reducing stigma could offer valuable insights into the development of effective interventions. By understanding the factors that promote or block the transmission of HPV-related information among women in Saudi Arabia, strategies can be devised to enhance knowledge dissemination and support informed health-related decisions, ultimately contributing to improved women’s health.ConclusionsHPV is the primary cause of cervical cancer worldwide; however, despite the availability of factual information, many women remain uninformed or misinformed, limiting their ability to take preventative measures against infection. This study examined the factors that facilitate or hinder the transmission of HPV-related knowledge among women in Saudi Arabia, offering insights into the barriers and enablers that shape health information–seeking behaviors. The findings identified 8 key factors that impact HPV fact transmission, categorized into individual-level and social-level influences. The study’s findings underscore the importance of addressing these barriers through culturally appropriate interventions. Public health strategies should focus on leveraging digital health resources, fostering supportive social networks, and implementing targeted educational programs to improve HPV awareness. By addressing sociocultural constraints and structural limitations, these interventions can help enhance knowledge dissemination and promote informed decision-making among women in Saudi Arabia.


Title: Niche adaptation and viral transmission of human papillomaviruses from archaic hominins to modern humans

IntroductionPapillomaviruses (PVs) are ubiquitous, non-enveloped, small double-stranded circular DNA viruses that cause proliferation of epithelial cells in a wide range of vertebrate host species, from reptiles to mammals [1, 2]. Currently, over 200 PVs infecting primate hosts (human and non-human) have been characterized and shown to group predominantly within 3 highly divergent genera—Alphapapillomavirus, Betapapillomavirus, and Gammapapillomavirus [3]. All oncogenic PVs associated with the development of cervical carcinoma, including human PV (HPV) types 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, and 59 and Macaca fascicularis PV type 3 (MfPV3), share a common ancestor within the Alphapapillomavirus [4–7]. Among these oncogenic types, which are sexually transmitted primarily through intercourse [8, 9], HPV16 is globally the most prevalent HPV type detected, suggesting an increased fitness [10–12]. Moreover, HPV16 is also the most common HPV type detected in cervical cancer, which is the fourth most common cancer among women worldwide [13]. Nevertheless, most exposures to HPV types are transient, and many PVs appear to be more commensal than pathogenic [14].Strict coevolution of a host and its pathogen is more likely if the pathogen is transmitted vertically and there is little or no cross-species acquisition. Persistent infection by pathogens generally indicates that they are well adapted to their host and that extinction will be rare so long as the host survives. Hence, in scenarios of coevolution, the evolutionary history of a pathogen should mirror that of its host, both in divergence times and phylogenic history (Fahrenholz’s rule) [15, 16]. These criteria have been shown to hold for feline PVs within the genus Lambdapapillomavirus isolated from oral lesions [17]. On the other hand, horizontal transmission of pathogens through host switching without restricted species specificity will produce a very different evolutionary history between host and pathogen. In hosts harboring many different types of PVs (e.g., bovines, humans, and macaques), the selection pressure exerted by PVs on their hosts appears negligible in comparison with what the hosts exert on the PV pathogens. Within human populations, for example, the ancient dispersal of HPV variants (e.g., HPV16 and HPV58) challenges a simple evolutionary pattern of viruses migrating with modern Homo sapiens [18], and instead indicates codivergence of viruses with archaic hominins and transmission to modern humans [19, 20]. The genetic heterogeneity of PVs implies a complex evolutionary history with many interacting factors, including but not limited to virus-host codivergence, tissue tropism, lineage sorting, transmission, recombination, and natural selection [21, 22]. Understanding the capacity for, and history of, viral adaptation to host ecological environments is essential for understanding the genetic basis of HPV carcinogenicity [23]. However, the origin and evolution of oncogenic PVs remains poorly understood.In this report, we estimate the divergence times of HPV16 and other oncogenic HPV types using a well-established Bayesian molecular clock model with newly characterized primate PV genomes that validate the divergence times of primate HPVs within niche-specific clades. Our analyses of the evolutionary dynamics of primate PVs, including specific focus on HPV16 variants, provide novel insights into the complex phylodynamic interactions between viruses and hosts and their pathologic outcomes.ResultsGenomic characterization of novel non-human primate papillomavirusesIn an effort to study the diversity of non-human primate PVs (NHP-PVs) to better understand the evolution of oncogenic HPVs, we screened cervicovaginal specimens from 10 adult female squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus), and the paired oral, perianal, and genital samples from 8 adult rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta) (4 females and 4 males). Three novel Saimiri sciureus PV types (SscPV1, 2 and 3) and three novel Macaca mulatta PV types (MmPV2, 3 and 4) were isolated and characterized and had genomes ranging in size from 7424 bp to 8051 bp (S1 Table). All genomes contained five early genes (E6, E7, E1, E2, and E4), two late genes (L2 and L1), and an upstream regulatory region (URR) between L1 and E6 genes. Phylogenetic trees based on the nucleotide sequence alignment of the concatenated four open reading frames (ORFs) (E1, E2, L2, and L1) (Fig 1 and S1 Fig) or individual genes, e. g., E1 or L1 ORFs (S2 Fig, S3 Fig and S4 Fig) support a monophyletic clade grouping SscPV1/2/3 and howler monkey Alouatta guariba PV 1 (AgPV1, KP861980) [24] within the genus Dyoomikronpapillomavirus. MmPV2 and MmPV3 cluster into the genus Alphapapillomavirus, with the closest HPVs being HPV54 (within the species Alpha-13) and HPV117 (within the species Alpha-2), respectively. MmPV4 shares <70% of L1 ORF similarity with members of the species Gamma-10 (e.g., HPV121 and HPV130) and may represent a novel species within the genus Gammapapillomavirus.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g001Fig 1Phylogeny of primate papillomaviruses.A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was inferred from the concatenated nucleotide sequence alignment of 4 open reading frames (E1-E2-L1-L2) of 141 papillomavirus types representing 132 species (see PV list with hosts in S2 Table). The majority of analyzed primate papillomaviruses cluster into three distinct clades, Alpha-, Beta- and Gamma-PV genera, corresponding predominately to the anatomical sites (e.g., mucosal vs. cutaneous epithelium) where the viruses were originally isolated, rather than to the distinct host species. The branches represented by non-human primate papillomaviruses are highlighted in red. Non-primate papillomaviruses are collapsed and joined by grey lines (see comprehensive tree in S1 Fig). The dot sizes are proportional to the bootstrap percentage supports from RAxML.Intrahost divergence of primate papillomavirusesWe focused on HPV16 because it is the most prevalent and potent carcinogen among the oncogenic HPVs [5]. To interrogate HPV16 evolution using a molecular clock, we utilized HPVs and NHP-PVs characterized in our labs and by others where the host species separation times have been well established [25, 26]. This step is essential in order to validate a vertical mutation rate model suitable for HPV variants. This model estimates the mutation rate for infectious PVs over long periods of time and might differ from horizontal mutation rates not measured in this study.Papillomaviruses have been identified in a wide range of NHP species, including Old World monkeys and apes (e.g., macaque, chimpanzee) and New World monkeys (e.g., squirrel monkey, brown howler) [24, 27–33]. Using a maximal likelihood algorithm and a nucleotide sequence alignment of the concatenated E1-E2-L2-L1 ORFs for 141 PV types representing each species or unique host (S2 Table), we found that the majority of primate PVs phylogenetically clustered into Alphapapillomavirus, Betapapillomavirus, or Gammapapillomavirus genera, corresponding predominantly to the anatomical sites where the viruses were originally isolated (e.g., mucosal or cutaneous epithelium), which was independent of the host species (Fig 1, S1 Fig and S2 Table). For example, MmPV1 is a rhesus macaque PV type (within the species Alpha-12) isolated from cervicovaginal cells that shares a most recent common ancestor (MRCA) with oncogenic mucosal HPV16 (within the species Alpha-9) but is distantly related to MmPV4 (within the genus Gammapapillomavirus), which was also isolated from a rhesus macaque. Since topological incongruence has been noted in the phylogenies of HPVs when trees are constructed with either late or early regions of the viral genomes [22, 34], we also examined the topologies of such trees. Although there was some incongruence, the majority of the primate PVs maintained their topological positions (see S2 Fig, S3 Fig and S4 Fig).Fahrenholz’s proposal for strict codivergence of host and parasites states that the “parasite phylogeny mirrors that of its host,” indicating that specific pathogens isolated from an individual host species should be monophyletic to the exclusion of viruses from other host species (reviewed in de Vienne et al.) [35] (Fig 2). In the case of primate PVs, however, viruses infecting a given host species do not always cluster together, implying an ancient viral divergence model in which viral ancestors may have first split into separated viral clades corresponding to niche adaptation to specific host ecosystems (i.e., tissue tropism). Following host ancestor speciation, distinct but homophyletic viruses were transmitted to similar ecosystems (e.g., mucosal or cutaneous sites) between closely related host animals, resulting in the radiation observed in the extant primate PV tree where viruses sort by tissue tropism and not host species. This prediction was evaluated with a permutational multivariate analysis of variance (PERMANOVA) test [36] using primate PV nucleotide sequence pairwise distances, which revealed that tissue tropism (here defined by different genera) contributed to more of the variability of viral divergence (accounting for 26% of the total variance, p<0.001) than that of the host (6%, p<0.001) (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g002Fig 2Schematic model of virus-host codivergence.Strict virus-host codivergence requires the evolutionary history of the pathogen to mirror that of its hosts. Clustering of viruses according to the host from which they were isolated should be observed. In addition, the divergence times of hosts and parasites should be similar (different colors highlight viruses infecting different primate host ancestors). Intrahost divergence can be defined according to specific phylogenetic criteria, such as niche-adaptation prior to coevolution in primate papillomaviruses, as opposed to clustering by hosts.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.t001Table 1Permutational multivariate analysis of variance using primate papillomavirus pairwise distance.4ORF ntDfSums of SquaresMean of SquarsF ModelR2Pr (>F)Host 110.35320.35324.57440.0606<0.001Genus 241.53960.38494.98540.2641<0.001Residuals513.93750.0772 0.6754 1 Host was grouped as "Human" and "Non-human primates (NHP)".2 Genus was grouped as "Alpha_Human", "Alpha_NHP", "Beta_Human", "Beta_NHP", "Gamma_Human" and "Gamma_NHP".Co-divergence between human and non-human primate papillomavirusesTo estimate the divergence times of primate PVs from their MRCAs, we used a Bayesian statistical framework employing previously established PV evolution rates [17]. Infectious PVs have been shown to have a slow mutation rate based on the observations that these double-stranded DNA viruses use the host cell DNA replication machinery, characterized by high fidelity, proofreading capacity, and post-replication repair mechanisms [37]. Since primate PVs, taken together, do not follow strict viral-host codivergence, each genus was evaluated separately to estimate divergence times. A combination of relaxed lognormal molecular clock and coalescent constant population models provided the best performance using the phylogenetic tree as shown in Fig 3A. The Alphapapillomavirus–Dyoomikronpapillomavirus split from a MRCA around 39.9 million years ago (mya) (95% highest posterior density (HPD), 36.4–43.7 mya) (Fig 3A, S2 Fig and Table 2) is consistent with the time frame of the split between New World and Old World primate ancestors [26].10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g003Fig 3Divergence time estimation of primate papillomaviruses to their most recent common ancestors (MRCAs).A Bayesian MCMC method was used to estimate divergence times as described in the methods. Times were calculated separately for each genus, Alpha- (A), Beta- (B) and Gamma-PVs (C). Branch lengths are proportional to divergence times. The branches in red refer to non-human primate papillomaviruses. Numbers above the nodes with circles are the mean estimated divergence time in million years (M) between human and non-human papillomavirus clades. The bars in grey represent the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) interval for the divergence times (see details in S5 Fig, S6 Fig and S7 Fig, respectively). Panels B and C show time on the Y-axis and phylogeny on the X axis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.t002Table 2Divergence time estimation of Alphapapillomavirus and Dyoomikronpapillomavirus types.CalibrationClock ModelTree PriorAICM valueAICM differenceLog marginal likelihoodMRCA (million years ago, mya)Alpha vs Dyoomega (mean)95% HPD Intervalα9/11 vs α12 (mean)95% HPD IntervalHPV54 vs MmPV2 (mean)95% HPD Intervalα2 vs MmPV3 (mean)95% HPD Intervalα14 vs CgPV1 (mean)95% HPD IntervalHPV13 vs PpPV1 (mean)95% HPD Interval3 Cali.RelaxedBayesian71943747-359153.0539.7[36.2, 43.5]27.2[25.2, 29.3]22.5[19.0, 26.1]23.8[21.2, 26.4]17.7[15.7, 19.8]6.1[5.4, 6.8]3 Cali.#RelaxedConstant719391--359153.1039.9[36.4, 43.7]27.3[25.3, 29.4]22.3[19.1, 25.7]23.7[21.4, 26.1]17.6[15.6, 19.8]6.1[5.5, 6.8]3 Cali.RelaxedYule7193998-359153.3039.6[36.1, 43.2]27.2[25.1, 29.2]22.2[19.0, 25.6]23.6[21.3, 26.1]17.6[15.7, 19.7]6.2[5.5, 6.8]3 Cali.StrictBayesian7210721681-360478.6735.6[32.7, 38.3]25.9[23.9, 27.8]17.8[16.3, 19.5]21.1[19.3, 23.0]15.6[14.3, 17.0]5.3[4.8, 5.7]3 Cali.StrictConstant7210741684-360478.9235.7[32.9, 38.5]25.9[24.0, 27.9]17.9[16.3, 19.5]21.1[19.4, 23.0]15.6[14.3, 17.0]5.2[4.8, 5.7]3 Cali.StrictYule7210731682-360478.7835.5[32.9, 38.5]25.8[24.0, 27.8]17.8[16.2, 19.4]21.1[19.4, 22.9]15.5[14.3, 16.9]5.2[4.8, 5.7]NoRelaxedBayesian719633242-359275.5233.3[30.4, 36.1]25.0[23.4, 26.6]16.9[14.7, 19.3]18.9[17.5, 20.4]13.8[12.6, 15.1]4.7[4.1, 5.4]NoRelaxedConstant719681290-359270.5934.2[31.6, 37.1]24.2[22.7, 25.7]15.4[13.5, 17.3]21.0[19.1, 22.7]15.0[13.5, 16.5]4.5[3.8, 5.2]NoRelaxedYule719636246-359274.6433.2[30.5, 36.3]25.1[23.5, 26.8]17.0[14.9, 19.2]18.9[17.5, 20.5]13.9[12.5, 15.2]4.6[3.9, 5.4]NoStrictBayesian7210381647-360471.1031.0[29.6, 32.3]22.5[21.7, 23.4]15.6[14.7, 16.6]18.5[17.6, 19.5]13.6[12.9, 14.3]4.4[4.1, 4.8]NoStrictConstant7210371646-360471.2131.0[29.7, 32.4]22.6[21.7, 23.4]15.6[14.7, 16.6]18.5[17.5, 19.4]13.6[12.9, 14.3]4.4[4.1, 4.7]NoStrictYule7210391648-360471.2431.0[29.6, 32.3]22.6[21.7, 23.5]15.6[14.6, 16.6]18.5[17.5, 19.4]13.6[12.9, 14.3]4.4[4.1, 4.7]# The best models determined by the AICM test are highlighted in bold.Similar virus-host codivergence events were observed between Old World monkey PVs and their closest HPV relatives, and were estimated to approximately 14–31 mya (Fig 3, S5 Fig, S6 Fig and S7 Fig). For example, the species Alpha-12 (PVs mainly isolated from genital lesions of macaques) split from a MRCA with the species Alpha-9 (represented by oncogenic genital HPV16) around 27 mya coincided with the time span of the speciation between macaques and apes/humans that occurred approximately 25 mya [38, 39]. An enigmatic observation in these data is the clustering of macaque PVs (e.g., MfPV3) and baboon PV (Papio hamadryas PV 1, PhPV1) within the species Alpha-12 group, suggesting either a recent viral transmission between macaque and baboon monkeys, or a more complex phylogeny of the sub-family Cercopithecinae. The majority of distinct human PV types arose during the end of the Miocene and/or the beginning of the Pliocene epoch coincident with the divergence of humans and chimpanzees occurring around 6–8 mya (Fig 3) [40].The divergence times and tree topologies support a model of intrahost divergence of primate PVs in which ancient viruses diverged and adapted to specific host ecosystems (e.g., tissue tropism or different types of epithelial cells) within an ancestral host animal lineage (e.g., the MRCA of primate animals) (Fig 4). Following periods of host speciation, continuing intrahost viral divergence events occurred as distinct but phylogenetically related viral types were transmitted to similar host ecosystems by the closely related host animals. This pattern of ancient viral divergence coupled to niche adaptation may explain, for example, the differences in the prevalence of HPV16 and HPV18 between squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas of the cervix [41]. This difference might represent the emergence of further viral adaptation to different ecological niches within the cervix, one dominated by stratified squamous epithelium the other by columnar epithelium, respectively [42]. The fact that we do not observe similar or parallel diversity of NHP-PVs compared to HPVs (broken lines in right panel of Fig 4B) could be due, in part, to reduced sampling effort, limited population size of NHPs, bottlenecks of viral transmission, and/or restricted host migration.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g004Fig 4Schematic model of virus-host codivergence of primate papillomaviruses.(A) A schematic topology of representative primate papillomaviruses. The branch colors represent viruses with specific host niche adaptation (brown–isolated from mucosal tissues, blue–isolated from cutaneous tissue). (B) Model of phylogeny and divergence of primate papillomaviruses. In this model, one or more primate papillomavirus ancestors evolved to colonize distinct host ecosystems prior to the speciation of a primate ancestor. A process of further viral adaptation to colonize more specific host ecosystems (represented by black circles at the nodes) may have followed upon host speciation, resulting in the radiation observed in the extant primate papillomavirus tree. The broken lines in grey (starting from open circles) represent clades for which specific HPV species lack detectable non-human primate counterparts. The 3-dimentional structure represent host phylogeny.Molecular evolution and geographic distribution of HPV16 variantsNext, we constructed a phylogenetic tree of HPV16 variants based on 212 complete genomes to classify variant lineages and sublineages (S3 Table). The tree topology shows two deeply separated clades corresponding to the previously classified Eurasian and African lineages (S8 Fig), with a mean nucleotide sequence difference of 1.72% ± 0.09% (S4 Table). The African lineage variants were more than twice as diverse (intragroup mean difference of 0.77% ± 0.04%) as the Eurasian variants (0.32% ± 0.02%). Since geographic nomenclature systems suffer from sampling biases and preconceived notions about virus ancestry, we utilized an agnostic alphanumeric nomenclature based on HPV16 phylogeny and complete genome nucleotide differences to assign HPV16 variants into four lineages designated A, B, C, and D. Each lineage could be divided into four sublineages (A1-4, B1-4, C1-4, and D1-4), based on previously described criteria (S9 Fig) [43]. The previously named Asian (As) and North American 1 (NA1) variants are designated sublineages A4 and D1, respectively [44]. The maximum pairwise difference between the most diverse isolates, from sublineages A1 and D3, was 2.23%.Based on single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) patterns and phylogenetic tree topologies, we assigned 3256 HPV16 partial sequences from 22 countries/studies into variant lineages and sublineages using maximum likelihood methods (Table 3). As shown in the summarized charts of HPV16 phylogeography (Fig 5A), isolates from Asians and Caucasians (Australians/Europeans, and North Americans) were predominantly represented by A variants, with abundances of 92% and 83%, respectively. The majority of A4 variants (352/357, 99%) were from Asian individuals. Within the African population, 90% of HPV16 infections were B and C lineages. HPV16 variants in South/Central Americans were equally assigned as A1-3 (50%) and D (48%). Using a weighted UniFrac algorithm, variants were well clustered into groups (African, Eurasian, and South/Central American) corresponding to the geographic origin of the isolates (Fig 5B). Globally, A1-3 sublineages were the most widespread; whereas, the D lineages were detectable at low prevalences in many populations outside of South/Central Americans, such as in Caucasian (11%), African (7%), and Asian (6%) individuals (Fig 5C). In contrast, A4 and B/C lineages were rarely found outside of Asian and African populations, respectively.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g005Fig 5Geographic distribution of HPV16 variants.(A) A total of 3256 HPV16 variants with known geographic origin from 22 countries/regions (see details in Table 3) were assigned into lineage/sublineage and summarized by geographic group in the pie charts. (B) Principle component analysis using a weighted UniFrac algorithm clustered different study cohorts into three distinct groups, namely African, Eurasian (Asian and Caucasian) and South/Central American, mainly associated with a predominant population from which viruses were sampled. (C) Relative frequency of HPV16 lineages/sublineages distribute into four major geographic populations (African, Asian, Caucasian, and South/Central American).10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.t003Table 3HPV16 variant assignment with known geographic origin.CountryGeographic/ethnic originTotalA1-3A4BCDReferencesBurkina FasoAfrican16004111[100]NigeriaAfrican21001290[101]RwandaAfrican20001064[102]UgandanAfrican500500[103]ZambiaAfrican21201441[104]ChinaAsian3611481972113[105–107]IndiaAsian48842770054[108, 109]JapanAsian573125001[110]KoreaAsian56938018[111]ThailandAsian21411485078[112, 113]AustraliaCaucasian34284002[132]CanadaCaucasian32250511GenBank#Costa RicaCaucasian69360411285[9]GermanyCaucasian24240000[114]ItalyCaucasian197143018432[115–117]NetherlandsCaucasian67590314[119, 120]PortugalCaucasian187139022818[121]RussiaCaucasian50480002[122]SpainCaucasian755903112[123]United KingdomCaucasian56460550[124]BrazilSouth/Central American20098031089[125–127]MexicoSouth/Central American382190000192[128–131]Total-3256219435710781517# GenBank/NCBI accession numbers of GQ465877 to GQ465902, and GQ479006 to GQ479011.Divergence time estimation of HPV16 variants and other oncogenic HPV type variantsThe molecular clock models used to estimate the divergence times of primate PVs support a scenario of virus-host codivergence after the virus has adapted to a specific host ecosystem. Using a similar Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) framework, we initially applied six combinations of clock models to estimate the divergence of HPV16 variants from their MRCA, without any prior assumption of virus-host codivergence (Table 4, no calibration). Interestingly, a combination of the relaxed lognormal molecular clock and coalescent Bayesian skyline models indicated that HPV16 A and BCD had divided around 618.5 thousand years ago (kya) (95% HPD: 331.5–996.1). This estimation is within the time span of the separation between Homo sapiens and archaic hominins (e.g., Neanderthal/Denisova) but around two-five times longer than the estimated modern Homo sapiens divergence time (ca. 150–200 kya) [45] indicative of an ancient divergence of HPV16 variants prior to the emergence of modern human ancestors. Based on the geographic distribution of HPV16 variants above, we then used an archaic hominin-host-switch (HHS) scenario to calibrate the divergence time between HPV16 A and non-A variants (500 kya, 95% HPD: 400–600), and a modern-out-of-Africa (MOA) scenario between BC and D variants (90 kya, 95% HPD: 60–120). When time calibrations were introduced into the phylogenetic tree, the HHS scenario showed the strongest support for time inference and estimated an initial divergence of HPV16 variants at approximately 489 kya (95% HPD: 394–581), predating the out-of-Africa migration of modern humans (ca. 60–120 kya) (Fig 6 and S10 Fig) [46, 47]. In addition, the demographic model of the Bayesian skyline plot for the population function through time showed a recent exponential expansion of the effective population size of present-day HPV16 occurring in the last 25 kya, lagging behind the growth of modern human populations (starting from the last 40–50 kya) (see the top panel of Fig 6). This plot most likely reflects the concurring increase and mobility of modern human populations and present-day virus populations in the last epoch.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g006Fig 6Divergence time estimation of HPV16 complete genome variants.A Bayesian MCMC method was used to calculate the divergence times of HPV16 complete genome variants from their most recent common ancestors, as described in the methods. The nodes highlighted with red circles indicate divergence times of the split between HPV16 A and non-A lineages, between A1-3 and A4 sublineages, and between C and D lineages. Branch lengths are proportional to divergence times scaled in thousands of years (K). Grey bars indicate the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) for the corresponding divergence age (see details in S10 Fig). Colors in branches represent distinct HPV16 variant lineages/sublineages. The plot on top of the tree is a Bayesian skyline estimation based on 311 present-day human mtDNA sequences (without the loop region) from geographically diverse populations and 212 HPV16 complete genome variants with a similar geographical distribution. The median posterior estimates (the product of the effective population size Ne and the generation length g in years) throughout the given time period are illustrated with lines in black. The dark blue (humans) and dark red (HPV16) areas give the 95% HPD interval of these estimates.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.t004Table 4Divergence time estimation of HPV16 variant lineages.CalibrationClock ModelTree PriorAICM valueAICM differenceLog marginal likelihoodMRCA (thousand years ago, kya)A vs BCD (mean)95% HPD IntervalA1/3 vs A4 (mean)95% HPD IntervalB vs C/D (mean)95% HPD IntervalC vs D (mean)95% HPD IntervalNoRelaxedBayesian476412-23609.43618.5[331.5, 996.1]199.9[122.8, 306.4]401.0[250.1, 584.0]260.0[161.9, 381.3]NoRelaxedConstant476444-23606.091025.0[450.4, 1843.4]360.3[172.0, 600.3]667.8[302.9, 1140.2]439.3[217.5, 715.0]NoRelaxedYule4765516-23613.10337.2[226.0, 460.0]187.4[127.1, 259.5]286.9[195.9, 385.3]219.8[141.2, 305.3]NoStrictBayesian47886247-23784.30519.3[387.8, 663.1]177.1[126.8, 235.1]335.0[246.6, 432.5]213.1[157.7, 277.8]NoStrictConstant47852213-23777.28539.8[409.0, 686.4]195.4[139.4, 255.3]353.1[263.9, 456.3]227.1[168.8, 293.3]NoStrictYule47829190-23772.25472.5[355.6, 604.0]176.4[128.6, 230.9]312.5[235.2, 405.2]204.0[153.5, 264.3]2 Cali.#RelaxedBayesian47639--23609.83488.9[394.2, 581.0]172.7[106.6, 255.8]266.1[164.1, 386.8]125.5[104.8, 147.2]2 Cali.RelaxedConstant4765111-23610.23513.1[421.0, 601.5]259.7[153.3, 383.0]341.9[220.2, 496.2]132.8[111.1, 154.2]2 Cali.RelaxedYule4767132-23613.98403.7[316.1, 493.8]183.0[128.0, 253.1]234.1[166.8, 314.9]130.9[110.8, 151.5]2 Cali.StrictBayesian47900261-23787.00440.1[384.4, 495.1]150.9[119.8, 184.4]255.5[213.7, 296.9]142.6[125.1, 160.7]2 Cali.StrictConstant47854215-23779.58449.2[397.0, 506.4]165.0[133.9, 198.3]264.7[222.4, 305.0]147.6[130.8, 165.8]2 Cali.StrictYule47824185-23774.85413.6[362.4, 469.7]153.3[124.5, 184.8]246.4[208.3, 286.7]143.1[126.5, 160.4]# The best models determined by the AICM test are highlighted in bold.We observed a similar divergence timeframe for other HPV variants, splitting from their MRCAs approximately 300–600 kya and showing a strong correlation between evolution times and genomic diversities (Fig 7, Table 5). In all cases, the deep separation between HPV16 variant lineages A and BCD (and the deepest lineage separations of other HPV variants) suggests an ancient virus-host codivergence, coinciding with the split between archaic Neanderthal/Denisova and modern human ancestors from their MRCA (Fig 8). Neanderthals spread out over Eurasia with at least two populations splitting approximately 77–114 kya from each other based on analysis of archaic genomes from Vindija, Mezmaiskaya (Caucasus), and Denisova (Siberia) [48]. This time period corresponds to the diversion of HPV16 A sublineages and in particular the split of A4 from A1/2/3 and the emergence of HPV16 A4 in Asia, likely representing independent transmission of A4 from archaic hominins to modern humans in the east.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g007Fig 7Ancient HPV variant codivergence with archaic hominins.The plot shows the correlation between divergence time (X-axis) of HPV variants from the most recent common ancestors and genomic diversity (Y-axis) of HPV variants. The Alpha-3 (HPV61), Alpha-5 (HPV26, 51, 69, 82), Alpha-6 (HPV30, 53, 56, 66), Alpha-7 (HPV18, 39, 45, 59, 68, 70, 85, 97), Alpha-9 (HPV16, 31, 33, 35, 52, 58, 67), Alpha-10 (HPV6, 11), Alpha-11 (HPV34, 73), and Alpha-13 (HPV54) variants from previous publications were included. The adjusted R2 value indicating the correlation between sequence diversity and divergence time of HPV type variants was calculated using the linear model (lm) function in R.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.g008Fig 8Schematic illustration of HPV16 codivergence with archaic hominins.The model was based on HPV16 variant divergence time estimation, phylogenetic topology, and geographic distribution that superimposes an ancestral viral transmission between Neanderthals/Denisovans and modern human populations. The early divergence event among deeply separated HPV16 variant lineages (A vs. BCD) suggests ancient virus-host codivergence following the speciation of modern humans and archaic hominins (e.g., Neanderthals and Denisovans) from their most recent common ancestors. The gene flow through host interbreeding between archaic hominins allowed viral transmission from Neanderthals/Denisovans to modern humans. th-n/d denotes the splitting time between Neanderthals/Denisovans and modern humans, th represents the speciation of modern humans. taf indicates the era of population expansion of modern humans walking out-of-Africa. tg indicates the time of gene flow (f) that may have occurred between modern humans and Neanderthals/Denisovans. tn estimates the extinction of Neanderthals/Denisovans. The arrows indicate the out-of-Africa migration events of archaic and modern human populations. The broken lines indicate potential extinction of viral variants. Branch lengths and widths are not drawn to scale.10.1371/journal.ppat.1007352.t005Table 5Estimation of divergence time (thousand years ago, kya) of HPV variants from the most recent common ancestor (MRCA).HPVNumberMRCA divergene (kya)Estimated Rate (10x-8)Maximum nuc. differenceVariant lineage/Deepesttypeof isolatesMean95% HPD IntervalMean95% HPD IntervalMeans.d.sublineageseparated cladesHPV6110640.2[280.9, 1101.7]1.77[0.94, 2.60]2.27%0.17%A1-2, B, CA/B vs CHPV16212618.5[331.5, 996.1]2.09[1.85, 2.31]2.23%0.16%A1-4, B1-4, C1-4, D1-4A vs B/C/DHPV1846552.1[428.5, 704.6]1.80[1.61, 1.96]2.11%0.16%A1-5, B1-3, CA vs B/CHPV3016521.5[340.4, 717.7]1.79[1.43, 2.12]1.89%0.17%A1-5, BA vs BHPV52150506.7[203.7, 989.6]1.84[1.41, 2.26]2.16%0.17%A1-2, B1-3, C1-2, DA/B/C vs DHPV5327476.7[404.8, 549.7]1.84[1.73, 1.92]1.79%0.13%A, B, C, D1-4A/B vs C/DHPV68CDEF15474.6[356.6, 614.4]1.86[1.38, 2.34]1.88%0.12%C1-2, D1-2, E, F1-2C/F vs D/EHPV58138465.4[315.4, 659.8]1.74[1.53, 1.95]1.70%0.17%A1-3, B1-2, C, D1-2A vs B/C/DHPV709451.5[336.7, 572.7]1.82[1.51, 2.09]1.64%0.12%A, BA vs BHPV6614448.4[257.7, 638.7]1.83[1.36, 2.30]1.75%0.14%A, B1-2A vs BHPV54BC5445.8[162.9, 845.7]1.88[0.84, 3.12]1.27%0.13%B, C1-2B vs CHPV6190445.3[366.0, 528.4]1.84[1.80, 1.88]1.58%0.13%A, B1-5A vs BHPV4533428.0[288.3, 577.8]1.77[1.47, 2.07]1.67%0.15%A1-3, B1-3A vs BHPV1178384.2[279.2, 483.3]1.85[1.67, 2.02]1.40%0.15%A1-4, BA vs BHPV3188368.8[230.9, 541.3]1.76[1.55, 1.96]1.36%0.14%A1-2, B1-2, C1-4A/B vs CHPV7316363.6[175.9, 596.6]1.77[1.08, 2.41]1.43%0.12%A1-2, BA vs BHPV34AB8346.9[270.2, 421.5]1.84[1.65, 2.03]1.24%0.11%A1-2, BA vs BHPV598336.5[259.8, 413.6]1.83[1.61, 2.05]1.30%0.13%A1-3, BA vs BHPV5129333.8[242.9, 429.1]1.82[1.56, 2.04]1.28%0.12%A1-4, B1-2A vs BHPV3322319.7[211.3, 441.4]1.81[1.44, 2.13]1.24%0.12%A1-2, B, CA vs B/CHPV3920293.6[219.3, 374.2]1.83[1.61, 2.02]1.11%0.11%A1-2, BA vs BHPV678283.5[219.2, 350.1]1.83[1.64, 2.00]1.06%0.11%A1-2, BA vs BHPV82AB11283.3[202.2, 369.3]1.89[1.37, 2.47]1.13%0.10%A1-3, B1-2A vs BHPV5612266.1[177.5, 354.9]1.80[1.44, 2.13]0.99%0.11%A1-2, BA vs BHPV697231.3[173.9, 294.7]1.81[1.45, 2.07]0.93%0.10%A1-4A1/2 vs A3/4HPV3524133.8[98.0, 173.9]1.81[1.61, 1.99]0.60%0.07%A1-2A1 vs A2Time was estimated using uncorrelated lognormal distribution molecular clock and coalescent Bayesian skyline models without calibration.DiscussionIn this work, we used a Bayesian MCMC framework to estimate the divergence times of primate PVs and propose an early ancient intrahost viral divergence model (i.e., niche adaptation) followed by viral-host coevolution. This form of viral evolution has been documented for polyomaviruses [49], herpesviruses [50], and some retrovirus genera [51]. With the assumption of host niche adaptation as a fundamental process, the estimation of primate PV divergence times within niche-specific clades mirrors that of the primate host evolutionary history (Fig 4). It is clear that the evolutionary history of these well adapted, slowly evolving PVs may be significantly more complex than previously appreciated [37]. The implication of host niche adaptation of primate PVs preceding virus-host codivergence suggests a critical role for viral genetic heterogeneity and natural selection. The origin of viral genetic determinants of cervical niche adaptation further supports the hypothesis that a group of well-evolved viral genotypes also contain the determinants for cervical cancer, since this phenotype cannot exert selective pressure, as it does not support the production of infectious virus. It may also explain why a large set of cervicovaginal macaque PVs (within the species Alpha-12) associated with cervical neoplasia shares a common origin with the high-risk clade of human PVs (e.g., Alpha-9) (Fig 3A) [6, 27]. Our findings provide a framework for studying the past evolution of primate PVs infecting the genital tract niche and support a molecular clock based on phylogeny, since the generation time of PVs can only be extrapolated from empiric data based on coevolution models [17, 52].We used this well-supported molecular clock model to estimate the divergence times of HPV16 variants. HPV16 is the most common oncogenic HPV type and shows diversity in persistence and carcinogenicity [53–55], suggesting further biological differences between variant lineages. We observed specific geographic/ethnic dispersals of HPV16 variants, such as A4 predominance in Asian populations and BC predominance in African populations. The estimated divergence times between HPV16 A and BCD variants largely predated that of the out-of-Africa migration of modern human populations, consistent with a previously reported archaic hominin-host-switch scenario [19, 20]. One interpretation of the data implies that the present-day Eurasian HPV16 A variants were probably the products of multiple interactions between Neanderthals/Denisovans and modern Homo sapiens established during sexual contact after a long period of separation (e.g., 400–600 kya). This notion of viral sexual transmission between groups is reflected in the recent genetic admixture (e.g., 80 kya) between groups [48, 56–59], with evidence of 2–4% of nuclear DNA in Eurasians that can be traced to Neanderthals [48, 58]. This assumption is likely ubiquitous in a number of Alpha-HPV variants (Fig 7, Table 5), although their pathogenesis, evolution, and epidemiology warrant further study.Recent evidence indicates that Neanderthals spread out over the Eurasian continent and also admixed with ancestors of the present-day East Asian population [60, 61]. Since HPV16 A4 lineage is exclusively found in East Asians (approximately 40% of HPV16) and presents a higher risk of cervix cancers in Asian populations [62, 63], we speculate that a subset of Neanderthals heading east into Asia over more than 100 thousand years of existence in Eurasia could have interbred with East Asian modern humans and transmitted the HPV16 A4 sublineage and introgressed specific gene alleles that provided a selective advantage to the HPV variants coevolving with them [59, 64]. Overall, HPV16 BCD variants have higher genomic diversity than A isolates (see S4 Table), which may imply a potential population bottleneck of horizontal transmission reducing the diversity of current day A lineage isolates. In contrast, BCD variants have accumulated more genetic mutations, consistent with the observations that African populations and their pathogens have deeper origins reflected in greater diversity [65]. This idea supports one theory that both HPV16 BCD and modern humans arose in Africa (Fig 8). Following a relatively recent out-of-Africa migration, the modern humans acquired the A variant from sex with archaic hominins and possibly carried D variants into Eurasia under conditions of a small population size. The ancestors of East Asian people crossed the Bering Strait and were early populators of the Americas (based on historical records and genetic relatedness) [66]. Surprisingly, the D lineage is phylogenetically rooted in the African clade, but we did not find a major reservoir of the D lineage in the present-day African populations. This interesting observation suggests either an advantage of niche colonization and expansion of HPV16 D variants in Native Americans or a bottleneck of HPV16 variants present in people populating the Americans. Alternatively, the lack of A4 and the high proportion of D lineages in the Americans could be the result of an early colonization of the Americas by an unknown group from Africa. More data is needed to sort out the evolutionary history of the HPV16 D lineage and might provide clues to new features of the populating of the Americas.Sexual interactions between archaic hominins and modern human ancestors likely occurred over multiple time- and space-scales. For example, viral transmission might have also occurred from modern humans to Neanderthals/Denisovans, based on the evidence of ancient gene flow from early modern humans into Eastern Neanderthals [57]. Since PVs usually establish infections at the basal layer of epithelial cells, it will be impossible to detect viruses from fossil bones of archaic hominins and document the presence of HPVs in archaic hominin populations [20]. The evolutionary histories and origins of modern H. sapiens are undergoing dramatic revisions with the introduction of advanced sequencing techniques and methods to analyze genomic samples from archaic hominin specimens [67–69]. Since the reproductive success per copulation between H. sapiens and archaic hominins is predicted to have lower viability than that of modern human reproductive events, high levels of sexual interaction were likely present facilitating HPV transmission, in addition to genetic introgression observed in modern non-African populations [70]. For example, the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) B*07:02 and C*07:02 alleles associated with increased risk in cervix cancers appear to be introgressed regions in present-day Eurasians and Melanesians from Neanderthals or Denisovans [71–73]. This also suggests that adaptive introgression of modern humans from archaic hominins influences the pathogenic outcome of these infections by as yet unknown mechanisms [70, 74]. However, it can be speculated that introgressed genes providing some selective advantage to hybrid human-archaic hominin offsprings could also make them more susceptible to HPV variants adapted to archaic hominins over hundreds of thousands of years of coevolution. The introgressed genes are most likely related to immunity against infections, whatever the pathogens might be and HPV was along for the ride, since HPV is not known to affect reproductive fitness of the host.This study has its strengths and limitations. We expand the current understanding of HPV16 evolution beyond the recent description of HPV transmission between archaic and modern humans that used existing data [20] in important ways. We have expanded the understanding of HPV16 in the context of human and non-human primate PV evolution by characterizing additional New World and Old World monkey PVs and using the known divergence times of specific primate species to establish a valid molecular clock. This approach was used to establish the times of Neanderthal divergences [48]. We demonstrate that niche adaption had to proceed viral-host coevolution, and suggest that subsequent niche adaptation might underlie the difference in prevalence of HPV16 and HPV18 in cervical squamous and glandular lesions. We have identified and characterized additional HPV16 variants enabling us to establish the HPV16 variant taxonomy that includes subvariants that have unique biological characteristics [53]. Moreover, we propose that evolution of HPV16 A in Neanderthals over time led to allopatric emergence of the HPV16 A4 lineage as Neanderthals moved east and interbred with modern humans in Asia. We have also expanded the number of HPV16 isolates from around the world to establish the global distribution of HPV16 variants. Lastly, we provide new interpretations and questions on the HPV16 D lineage that is part of the African clade, but is highly prevalent in South/Central America. Nevertheless, there are also limitations to the current study and interpretations. The understanding of human evolution is constantly being challenged with new data and it is possible the models of human evolution used in this study will change [75]. We have not sampled every population and it is possible that additional HPV16 isolate data could change our interpretations. The data obtained on the geographic locations of the HPV partial sequences could be incorrect resulting in underestimating the true associations between variants and historic origins. Lastly, it is possible that very low population sizes of humans migrating out of Africa carried HPV16 A lineage variants leaving no traces in Africa, but expanding throughout Eurasia. This unlikely possibility would influence the interpretations of both our work and that of previous studies analyzing the evolution of HPV16 [20].In conclusion, the biology and natural life cycle of oncogenic HPVs that results in infectious viral particles (i.e., vegetative virus life cycle) is highly adapted to the differentiation program of epithelial cells [76]. Poorly differentiated precancerous and cancerous cells in the cervix do not support the HPV vegetative life cycle, and thus viral-associated transformation does not contribute to the fitness of HPVs. Viral phenotypes that serve to adapt to a specific ecological niche, evade host immune mechanisms, and support persistent viral production, however, should contribute to viral fitness. Therefore, further investigations of viral-host interactions and the underlying mechanisms of viral oncogenicity, should continue to focus on features of viral evolution and niche adaptation that contribute to fitness, since the oncogenic outcome of HPV infections appear to be “collateral damage” affecting host morbidity and mortality. The current data provides a framework to unravel the mysteries of oncogenic HPV genomes as we expand our understanding of viral-host evolution.Materials and methodsEthics statementThe studies providing human cellular samples have been approved by the Institution Review Board of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, and the Joint Chinese University of Hong Kong-New Territories East Cluster Clinical Research Ethics Committee. All human subjects were older than 18 years of age and samples were anonymized without individual identifying information. Written informed consent was obtained from each participant.The animal use protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Albert Einstein College of Medicine (protocol number 20060908). All procedures involving animals were conducted in compliance with applicable state and federal laws, guidelines established by the Animal Care and Use Committees of the respective institutions, and standards of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, including the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. The programs for animal care and welfare at Albert Einstein College of Medicine has been fully accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC). The Animal Welfare Assurance (A3312-01) is on file with the Office for Laboratory Animal Welfare.Saimiri sciureus and Macaca mulatta papillomavirus isolates and complete genome characterizationThe Saimiri sciureus PV DNA was isolated from exfoliated cervical cells of two adult female squirrel monkeys screened using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based MY09/11 and FAP59/64 primer systems [77, 78]. Sequences from the PCR products were compared with a PV database maintained in the Burk lab using a Blastn search and shown to have < 90% similarities to previously characterized PV types. The whole genomes were PCR-amplified as two overlapping fragments using degenerate primer sets designed on available L1 gene sequences and consensus E1 alignments, and subsequently Sanger sequenced using primer walking in the Einstein Sequencing Facility, New York [33]. Geneious R9.1.7 was used to assemble segmented sequences into the complete genome sequences and identify ORFs [79].The Macaca mulatta PV DNA was purified from exfoliated cervical cells of one adult female rhesus monkey and swabs from the penis surface of one adult male rhesus monkey. The viral DNA was initially detected using multiplexed next-generation sequencing (NGS) assays targeting two small fragments (136 bp and 83 bp, respectively) within the L1 ORF [80, 81]. Sequences of a Blastn search against a PV database showed < 90% similarities to characterized PV types. The total DNA underwent a metagenomic sequencing on an Illumina HiSeq4000 at Weill Cornell Medicine Genomics Resources Core Facility, New York, using paired-end 100 bp reads. The short reads were filtered for host genome contamination and assembled de novo using Megahit v1.0.6 to build contigs with long length [82]. The whole genomes of novel Macaca mulatta PVs were validated using type-specific PCR in three overlapping fragments and Sanger sequencing using a primer walking strategy.The complete genome sequences of SscPV1/2/3 and MmPV2/3/4 have been submitted to NCBI/GenBank database, with access numbers of JF304765 to JF304767 and MG837557 to MG837559, respectively.Human papillomavirus type 16 complete genome sequencingIn our previous work, we sequenced the complete genomes of 78 HPV16 isolates (see HPV16 list in S3 Table) [83, 84]. In the current study, 122 cervicovaginal samples containing HPV16 DNA were randomly chosen from the Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC)-NCI HPV Persistence and Progression (PaP) cohort study [85] and a population-based HPV prevalence survey coordinated by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) [63]. The complete genomes were characterized using nested overlapping PCR and Sanger sequencing as previously reported [86]. The PaP study samples were also sequenced using Ion PGM platform [87]. In addition, 12 HPV16 complete genomes sequenced by others were included in this study [88–92].Phylogenetic analyses and tree constructionTo evaluate the phylogenetic relationships of PVs, the concatenated nucleotide sequences of four open reading frames (ORFs) of the E1, E2, L2, and L1 genes of 141 PV types representing 132 species and unique hosts were used (see PV list in S2 Table, column labelled “Selected type” marked yes). Because all known PVs contain these four core ORFs, the concatenated partitions provide a comprehensive evaluation of the evolutionary history of Papillomaviridae. In addition, the highly conserved E1 early gene and L1 late gene were used to characterize phylogenetic incongruence. The nucleotide sequences of each coding region were aligned based on the corresponding amino acid sequences previously aligned using MUSCLE v3.8.31 [93] in Geneious R9.1.7. For HPV16 lineage/sublineage classification and phylogenetic analyses, all 212 complete genome nucleotide sequences (see HPV16 list in S3 Table) were linearized at the ATG of the E1 ORF and aligned using MAFFT v7.221 [94].Maximum likelihood (ML) trees were constructed using RAxML MPI v8.2.3 [95] and PhyML MPI v3.1 [96] with optimized parameters based on the aligned complete genome nucleotide sequences. Data were bootstrap resampled 1,000 times in RAxML and PhyML. MrBayes v3.1.2 [97] with 10,000,000 cycles for the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm was used to generate Bayesian trees. A 10% discarded burn-in was set to eliminate iterations at the beginning of the MCMC run. The average standard deviation of split frequencies was checked to confirm the independent analyses approach stationarity when the convergence diagnostic approached <0.001 as runs converge. For Bayesian tree construction, the computer program ModelTest v3.7 [98] was used to identify the best evolutionary model; the identified General Time Reversible (GTR) model was set for among-site rate variation and allowed substitution rates of aligned sequences to be different. The CIPRES Science Gateway [99] was accessed to facilitate RAxML and MrBayes high-performance computation.Permutational multivariate analysis of variance was performed using the adonis function in R’s package ‘vegan’ and the pairwise distance based on 220 primate papillomavirus E1-E2-L2-L1 nucleotide sequences (S2 Table).Geographic dispersal of HPV16 variants worldwideA dataset of 3256 partial sequences spanning variable genes/regions of HPV16 was obtained from GenBank that included the geographic source of the sequences mainly from indigenous ethnicities and/or local communities including 22 countries/regions throughout the world. These included, in Africa: Burkina Faso [100], Nigeria [101], Rwanda [102], Uganda [103], and Zambia [104]; in Asia: China [105–107], India [108, 109], Japan [110], Korea [111], and Thailand [112, 113]; in Europe: Germany [114], Italy [115–118], Netherland [119, 120], Portugal [121], Russian [122], Spain [123], and United Kingdom [124]; in North America: Canada (GenBank, see details in Table 3), Costa Rica [9]; in South/Central America: Bazile [125–127] and Mexico [128–131]; and Australia [132] (see Table 3). We used a maximum phylogenetic likelihood algorithm in pplacer v1.1.alpha17 [133] to place partial sequences on a reference tree inferred from an alignment composed of the 212 HPV16 variant complete genomes described in this study. A cutoff value of maximum likelihood ≥ 0.8 was set as confident assignment of HPV16 isolates into lineages and sublineages. The abundance of each lineage from the same country was combined and normalized using a percentage. According to the geographic patterns of HPV16 variants [44], four ethnical groups, namely African, Asian, Caucasian, and South/Central American, were summarized; for each HPV16 (sub)lineage, its frequency in each group was calculated based on the summary of individual percent abundance divided by the summary of total percent abundance. We used a weighted UniFrac method in R’s package ‘GUniFrac’ [134] to calculate the pairwise distances between geographic locations, based on which a principle component analysis (PCoA) was performed to visualize the clustering of geographic groups of HPV16 variants using the betadisper function in R’s package ‘vegan’.Estimation of divergence timesWe used a Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method implemented by BEAST v2.4.5 [135] and the previously published PV evolutionary rates [17] to estimate the divergence times of primate PVs from their most recent common ancestors (MRCAs). Times were calculated separately for Alphapapillomavirus (n = 85), Betapapillomavirus (n = 54), and Gammapapillomavirus (n = 81) (S2 Table), given that primate PVs, taken together, do not follow strict virus-host codivergence. Three tree priors were estimated using the following demographic models: (1) coalescent constant population, (2) Yule model, and (3) coalescent Bayesian skyline, with assumptions that (1) the PV genome has a strict mutation rate or (2) there is an uncorrelated lognormal distribution (UCLD) molecular clock model of rate variation among branches, resulting in six combinations of models. In addition, we chose the GTR sequence revolution model with the gamma-distributed rate heterogeneity among sites and a proportion of invariant sites (GTR + G + I) determined by the best-fit model approach of Modeltest v3.7 [98]. The concatenated nucleotide sequence partitions of six ORFs (E6, E7, E1, E2, L2, and L1) with variable rates of substitution over time were used: 2.39 × 10−8 (95% confidence interval 1.70–3.26 × 10−8) substitutions per site per year for the E6 gene, 1.44 × 10−8 (0.97–2.00 × 10−8) for the E7 gene, 1.76 × 10−8 (95% CI: 1.20–2.31 × 10−8) for the E1 gene, 2.11 × 10−8 (95% CI: 1.52–2.81 × 10−8) for the E2 gene, 2.13 × 10−8 (95% CI: 1.46–2.76 × 10−8) for the L2 gene, and 1.84 × 10−8 (95% CI: 1.27–2.35 × 10−8) for the L1 gene, as previously described [17]. In order to calibrate the divergence times, we introduced three time points inside and at the root of the Alphapapillomavirus tree, with assumptions of codivergence histories between primate PVs and their hosts: (1) the node between HPV13 and chimpanzee PpPV1 (Pan paniscus PV 1) at 7 mya (95% CI, 6–8 mya) matching the split between hominin and chimpanzee ancestors; (2) the node between the species Alpha-12 (represented by Macaca mulatta PV 1) and Alpha-9/11 (represented by HPV16) at 28 mya (25–31 mya) matching the speciation between hominin and macaque ancestors; and (3) the node between Alphapapillomavirus and Dyoomikronpapillomavirus (represented by Saimiri sciureus PV 1) at 49 mya (41–58 mya) matching the divergence between Old World and New World monkey ancestors [26]. For Betapapillomavirus and Gammapapillomavirus trees, the calibration time point(s) was set between macaque PVs and their closet HPV relatives.To estimate divergence times of HPV16 complete genome variants, a Hominin-host-switch (HHS) model assuming there was an ancestral viral transmission between archaic and modern human populations [20] was applied by setting two evolutionary time points to calibrate the HPV16 variant phylogenetic tree: (1) the archaic divergence of modern humans and Neanderthals/Denisovans around 500 thousand years ago (kya) (95% CI, 400–600 kya) [136] matching the split between HPV16 Eurasian (A) and African variants (BCD), and (2) the modern human out-of-Africa migration at 90 kya (95% CI, 60–120 kya) [45, 137], locating the era when HPV16 D variants diverged from their most recent common ancestor (MRCA). A HPV16 variant substitution rate was used for validation of a uniform prior rate: 1.84 x 10−8 (95% CI, 1.43–2.21 x 10−8) [20], with combinations of three tree priors and two clock models as described above. Due to the lack of geographic/ethnic dispersal information of other HPV type variants, we estimated the youngest divergence events splitting from their MRCA using complete genome alignments and HPV16 variant substitution rate without time point calibration.To compare the population dynamics of HPV16 variants and the modern human host, Bayesian skyline plots were created using BEAST. A total of 311 globally sampled present-day human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences, excluding the 1120 bp non-coding D-loop (that evolves at a higher rate) to give an alignment of 15,471 bp in length [138], were analyzed using a strict clock model and a coalescent Bayesian skyline, with an estimated rate of 2.47 x 10−8 (95% CI, 2.16–3.16 x 10−8) substitutions per site per year [139], as these sequences have been shown to evolve in a roughly clock-like manner [140, 141]. Two evolutionary time points were used to calibrate the modern human mtDNA tree: (1) the age of the MRCA between the maximum distanced modern humans, estimated to be 171,500 ± 50,000 years ago, and (2) the age of the MRCA of the youngest clade that contains both African and non-African lineages, approximately 52,000 ± 27,500 years ago [140].The MCMC analysis was run for 100,000,000 steps, with subsampling every 10,000 generations. A discarded burn-in of the first 10% steps was set to refine trees and log-files for further analysis. Effective sample sizes (ESS) of all parameters are >300 (Alphapapillomavirus tree) and >2000 (HPV variant trees of each type), indicating that all Bayesian chains were well sampled and have converged. Best model estimates were selected using a posterior simulation-based analogue of Akaike's Information Criterion for MCMC samples (AICM) [142], as implemented in Tracer v.1.6. The lower AICM values indicated a better model fit. A consensus tree was inferred using TreeAnnotater v.2.4.5 and visualized using scripts developed in-house in R. The linear model (lm) function in R was used to estimate the correlation between sequence diversity and divergence time of HPV types and variants.Supporting informationS1 FigPhylogeny of papillomaviruses inferred from concatenated E1, E2, L2 and L1 genes.A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree inferred from the concatenated nucleotide sequence alignment of 4 open reading frames (E1-E2-L1-L2) of 141 papillomavirus types representing 132 species (see PV list in S2 Table, column of “Selected type”). The main clades containing the majority of primate papillomavirus species are highlighted in grey.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigPhylogenetic incongruence of papillomaviruses.Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were inferred from the nucleotide sequence alignment of E1 (left) and L1 ORFs (right) of 141 papillomavirus types representing 132 species (see PV list with hosts in S2 Table). Although phylogenetic incongruence was observed between trees based on individual genes, the classification of the majority of characterized primate PVs largely corresponds to the grouping based on tissue tropism and biological characteristics.The branches represented by non-human primate papillomaviruses are highlighted in red. Non-primate papillomaviruses are collapsed and joined by grey lines (see comprehensive tree in S3 Fig and S4 Fig). The dot sizes are proportional to the bootstrap percentage supports from RAxML.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigPhylogeny of papillomaviruses inferred from E1 gene.A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree inferred from the nucleotide sequence alignment of E1 gene of 141 papillomavirus types representing 132 species (see PV list in S2 Table, column of “Selected type”). The main clades containing the majority of primate papillomavirus species are highlighted in grey.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 FigPhylogeny of papillomaviruses inferred from L1 gene.A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree inferred from the nucleotide sequence alignment of L1 gene of 141 papillomavirus types representing 132 species (see PV list in S2 Table, column of “Selected types”). The main clades containing the majority of primate papillomavirus species are highlighted in grey.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigDivergence time estimation of Alphapapillomaviruses and Dyoomikronpapillomavirus to their most recent common ancestors (MRCAs).A Bayesian MCMC method was used to estimate divergence times as described in the methods. Branch lengths are proportional to divergence times. The branches in red refer to non-human primate papillomaviruses. Numbers above the nodes with circles are the mean estimated divergence times in millions of years (M) between human and non-human papillomavirus clades. The bars in grey represent the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) interval for the divergence times. The viral genomes included can be found in S2 Table.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S6 FigDivergence time estimation of Betapapillomaviruses to their most recent common ancestors (MRCAs).A Bayesian MCMC method was used to estimate divergence times as described in the methods. Branch lengths are proportional to divergence times. The branches in red refer to non-human primate papillomaviruses. Numbers above the nodes with circles are the mean estimated divergence times in millions of years (M) between human and non-human papillomavirus clades. The bars in grey represent the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) interval for the divergence times. The viral genomes included can be found in S2 Table.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S7 FigDivergence time estimation of Gammapapillomaviruses to their most recent common ancestors (MRCAs).A Bayesian MCMC method was used to estimate divergence times as described in the methods. Branch lengths are proportional to divergence times. The branches in red refer to non-human primate papillomaviruses. Numbers above the nodes with circles are the mean estimated divergence times in millions of years (M) between human and non-human papillomavirus clades. The bars in grey represent the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) interval for the divergence times. The viral genomes included can be found in S2 Table.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S8 FigHPV16 complete genome tree topology.Maximum likelihood trees of HPV16 variant isolates inferred from 212 complete genomes listed in S3 Table. Variant lineages (e.g., termed A and B, etc.) and sublineages (e.g., termed A1 and A2, etc.) are named using an alphanumeric nomenclature system. Inter-sublineage bootstrap supports by PhyML and RAxML are labeled at the key nodes. Colors represent different HPV16 lineages. The bar indicates the nucleotide substitution of unit changes per site.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S9 FigHeatmap of HPV16 complete genome pairwise diversity.Pairwise sequence identity based on the nucleotide sequence alignment of 212 HPV16 complete genomes was measured and represented as a heatmap and scaled such that the maximum inter-sequence identity differences (2.23%) are displayed as red and the minimum inter-sequence identity differences (0.00%) as blue.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S10 FigDivergence time estimation of HPV16 complete genome variants.A Bayesian MCMC method was used to calculate the divergence times of HPV16 complete genome variants from their most recent common ancestors as described in the methods. A previously published HPV16 variant substitution rate and two human evolutionary time points of calibration (red circles) were set. Branch lengths are proportional to the times and are scaled in millions of years (M). Grey bars indicate the 95% highest posterior density (HPD) for the corresponding divergence age. Colors in branches represent distinct HPV16 variant lineages.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableNovel papillomavirses isolated from squirrel monkeys (Saimiri sciureus) and rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta).(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableList of papillomavirus types used in this study.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S3 TableList of 212 HPV16 complete genome variants.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S4 TableNucleotide sequence mean difference (± standard error) of HPV16 complete genome variants between and within lineages/sublineages.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Molecular Detection of Bovine Papillomavirus DNA in the Placenta and Blood of Healthy Mares and Respective Foals

1. IntroductionPapillomaviruses (PVs) are small double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses capable of infecting all amniotes. Strict species specificity is characteristic of all PVs, however, the bovine papillomavirus (BPV) types 1, 2, and 13 (BPV-1, -2, -13) can cause cross-species infection in equids, where they cause sarcoids [1,2,3]. Sarcoids are locally invasive fibroblastic skin tumors that represent the most common dermatological neoplasm worldwide in horses and can seriously compromise the welfare of affected equids and cause substantial economic losses. BPV DNA has not only been detected in sarcoid lesions but also in the normal skin and blood of horses with and without equine sarcoid [4,5,6,7,8]. Nevertheless, the mode of BPV transmission within equid populations and the presence of latent infections are still controversial: direct and indirect transmission via body contact, contaminated material, and habitual surroundings [4], as well as flies [6], have been implicated. Thus far, vertical transmission has been suggested in equids by evidence of BPV gene expression in the blood and semen of healthy horses [9].Our study aimed at obtaining information about the possible vertical transmission of BPV DNA from mares to foals, starting with the evidence that BPV DNA has been frequently detected in the blood of healthy horses [6,10]. Studies on the transmission via blood lymphocytes and the placenta are of particular interest due to their implications in the prevention of infection.2. Materials and MethodsTwelve pregnant mares, admitted to the Equine Perinatology Unit of the Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences of the University of Bologna between March 2011 and January 2018, were included in the study (Table 1), based on the absence of clinical signs and anamnestic history of sarcoid lesions but found to be BPV positive in the blood. Immediately after delivery, 3 mL of blood was collected in K3EDTA containing tubes both from the mother and from the foal before suckling. The placenta was also sampled, avoiding environmental contamination, and immediately stored at −70 °C. The peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were separated with Ficoll® from whole blood, frozen, and kept at −70 °C. DNA was extracted from the placental tissue and PBMCs with a commercial kit (MN, NucleoSpin Tissue, Macherey Nagel, Düren, Germany). Parallel, BPV DNA negative skin biopsies obtained from sheep were extracted as a negative control. In order to check the DNA integrity, the horse β-actin housekeeping gene was amplified in each sample. PCR with consensus primers (5′B1/2-L1: GCTAAGCAACAACAGATTCTGTTGC; 3′B1/2-L1: TCAGCCATTTTGAGGTAGTCTGG) targeting a 266 bp region of the major capsid gene L1 of BPV-1 and -2 [11] were used to determine the presence of viral DNA. Amplicons of positive samples were sequenced using both forward and reverse primer on an ABI Prism 3100 Genetic Analyzer (Perkin-Elmer Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA).3. ResultsPositivity to amplification with the primers for the horse β-actin gene demonstrated the viability of the genomic DNA in all the tested samples. As expected, no amplification was obtained from the skin biopsies of the sheep, while BPV DNA was amplified from the placenta, PBMCs of mares, and PBMCs of respective foals in seven out of twelve couples.Alignment of the sequenced amplicons showed the presence of a different percentage of identity (Table 1). Within couples, 100% of nucleotide identity among the three matrices was identified only in one case (couple N. 4), while in the remaining cases, the identity percentage between maternal blood and respective foal varied between 93.8% and 98.8%. In four cases, the sequence obtained from the placenta showed 100% identity to the sequence obtained from the foal blood sample (N. 1, 3, 6, and 7). The results obtained from the BLAST® for each sample suggested the presence of viral DNA referable to BPV-1, BPV-2, and BPV-1 EqSarc.4. DiscussionDifferent tissues and fluids, such as peripheral blood [12,13], blood plasma [14], milk [15], ovaries, uterus, semen, and spermatozoa [16,17,18] were found positive for BPV-1/-2 DNA in cattle. In equids, DNA and gene expression of BPV have been demonstrated in the peripheral blood and skin of sarcoid and non-sarcoid baring horses, showing that the virus can cause asymptomatic infections, with BPV remaining latent in its episomal form [18,19]. Trans-placental infection of the fetus is not without controversy, but HPV DNA has also been identified in the amniotic fluid [20], placenta, and umbilical cord [21], leading to speculate that infection might take place during pregnancy in the female [22]. In addition, vertical transmission has been documented in cattle [14,16,17,23] and water buffalo [24]. In our study, the detection of BPV DNA in the placenta and blood of newborn foals suggested that the peripheral blood of the mother could be argued as being a vehicle of viral DNA dissemination. The presence of BPV DNA in the blood and placenta could provide hints for the vertical transmission of the virus, although clinical consequences need to be further investigated. Vertical transmission has also been recently suggested in sheep, another Delta-BPV cross-infected species [25]. The authors reported the detection of Bovine δPV-2 and δPV-13 in the congenital neoplastic lesions of lambs and in the blood of their mothers, pointing out that haematogenous transplacental transmission can occur also in sheep.Sequencing results showed a high genetic heterogeneity among the three matrices within couples. In particular, the lack of sequence concordance between the maternal blood and placenta revealed a high degree of L1 genetic variability as already shown for the BPV E5 gene in the blood of healthy horses [10]. Since only a small segment of the genome was sequenced, it was not possible to classify the BPV type with confidence, but the sequence alignments suggested the presence of both BPV-1 and BPV-2 even in different matrices within the same couple. In analogy to our findings, non-concordance of the viral type has been described for HPV infection in women [26,27,28] and has been justified by a previous vertical transmission at other times during pregnancy when maternal sampling was not performed. In fact, as we collected maternal samples for BPV DNA detection at only one point in time during pregnancy, we may have missed the critical maternal infection responsible for the vertical transmission. Additionally, Sanger sequencing lacks resolution when compared to next-generation sequencing (NGS), since only the major variant driving the infection can be reliably determined [29]. In this context, it could be assumed that the mare may be infected by different viral variants or types, and either only one was able to trans pass the placental barrier or all types can do it but only one can be detected. Nevertheless, infection could be also ascribable to the oocyte fecundation, as already suggested in humans [30] since gene expression of E5 BPV has been detected in the semen of healthy stallions [9]. Prophylactic implications could also be considered when subjects are intended for reproduction; in fact, even though the significance of BPV DNA in healthy horses has not been elucidated yet, trophoblasts are the target of HPV and BPV infections in women and cattle respectively [31,32]. Taken all together, our data illustrated the need for a better understanding of the clinical significance of BPV DNA in non-epithelial tissues of horses and, in particular, in healthy mares, where implications in reproduction have never been considered.


Title: High risk human papillomavirus and Epstein Barr virus in human breast milk

High risk human papillomavirus (HPV) is primarily considered as a sexually transmitted infection [1]. However, a range of other means of transmission have been documented. These include white blood cells [2] oral mucosa [3] intrauterine, placenta and cord blood [4]. High risk HPV type 16 has been identified in 4 to 8% of human milk samples [5,6]. On the other hand, in a recent study Mammas et al [7] did not identify any high risk HPV sequences in human milk from Greek women. Other means of HPV transmission in addition to sexually transmitted infections are important factors to be considered in the context of primary prevention of HPV by vaccines. We have become aware of recent, but unpublished experimental findings, that Epstein Barr virus (EBV) has the capacity to enhance the oncogenicity of HPV associated cervical cancer cells [8]. For this reason, in addition to HPV, we also investigated the presence of EBV in human milk samples.Here we report the identification of high risk HPV types 16 and 18 plus Epstein Barr virus (EBV) in milk from normal lactating Australian women. These findings have in part, been previously reported [9].MethodsThis project was formally approved by the University of New South Wales, Australia, Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC 05163). All participants gave written, informed, prior consent.Samples of human breast milk were collected from 40 lactating Australian women. None of these women had a history of breast cancer. The milk was expressed into sterile 50ml falcon tubes. To prevent contamination, the milk samples were then transferred into 1.5ml eppendorf tubes using filtered tips for all procedures. The 1.5ml tubes were centrifuged at 2,000 rpm for 10 minutes. The whey and fat were removed and the pellet was washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS). The pellet was then resuspended in 200μl of PBS. 10μl 1M Tris pH8 and 10μl of 0.5M ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) were added to 100ul of the PBS based solution, the mixture vortexed and 2μl 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and 1μl proteinase K (10mg per ml) added. The tubes were heated at 55oC for 1-3 hours, after which a phenol extraction followed by 2 chloroform washes were performed before an alcohol precipitation. The DNA pellet was resuspended in Tris-EDTA (TE) and checked with a β -globin PCR analysis. A reagent blank of bovine skim milk was used for each set of milk extractions.DNA integrity was confirmed by standard PCR using β-globin primers G073 (5′-GAAGAGCCAAGGACAGGTAC-3′) and G074 (5′-CAACTTCATCCACGTTCACC-3′). HPV screening used nested PCR with outer primers, PGMY, and inner primers GP as per Heng et al [10]. For EBV screening nested primers (EB3 5’-AAGGAGGGTGGTTTGGAAAG, EB4 5’-AGACAATGGACTCCCTTAGC) and (EB1 5’-ATCGTGGTCAAGGAGGTTCC, EB2 5’-ACTCAATGGTGTAAGACGAC) were used as per Cinque et al [11]. The cycling conditions for the above PCRs were 95°C for 3 min; followed by 35 cycles at 95°C for 30 seconds; 55°C for 30 seconds; 72°C for one minute and a final extension at 72°C for five minutes.In situ PCR was attempted on a different set of milk samples. To prepare the milk samples for in-situ PCR, drops of the resuspended cell pellet in PBS were dried on glass slides followed by fixation in ice cold methanol for 5 minutes. An H&E stain of the slides identified the milk samples which contained cells. Selected samples were treated with 0.1% triton X digestion for 10 minutes at room temperature. The primers used for HPV in situ PCR were the outer primers used for the HPV screening. 75 μL of PCR mixture was prepared for each slide with the concentration of the reagents as follows: 7.5 μL 10X PCR buffer (Roche Diagnostics), 0.375 μL dNTP mixture (dATP, dGTP, dCTP; 25 mM/ml each), 0.33 μL digoxigenin (DIG) – 11 – dUTP (25 nM, Roche Diagnostics), 6 μL MgSO4 (100 mM, Roche Diagnostics), 1 μL (10pM) forward primer and 1 μL (10pM) reverse primer, 1 μL Taq Polymerase (Roche Diagnostics) and sterilized water. The thermocycling conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 95°C for three minutes; 35 cycles at 95°C for one minute, 55°C for one minute and 72°C for one minute and a final extension at 72°C for five minutes.FindingsSix of the forty milk samples (15%) were positive for HPV. Sequencing of four samples showed three were positive for HPV type 16 and one was positive for HPV 18 (Figures 1 and 2). Some variations in the HPV 16 sequences were present. While mutations at bases 6689 and 6715 are common, the mutation at base 6657, although reported before in AF548851 to be Y, has not been found to be an A. The HPV 18 sequence was identical to AY 262282.Figure 1 Outcomes of standard liquid PCR using HPV primers. 2% agarose gel of Nested PCR products from breast milk samples. M = Puc Hinf 1 size standard (1,419 bp, 517 bp plus 396 bp, 214 bp, 75/65 bp). 1-40 = samples (only 1-16 shown). RB = reagent blank. B1 = no DNA PCR blank after 2 round. B2 = no DNA PCR blank after 1 round. + = positive control (HeLa DNA).Figure 2 Sequencing results. Three HPV positive samples A,B,C compared to HPV 16 (FJ610151- bases 6627 to 6740) with differences shown in red, and one positive HPV sample D, compared to HPV 18 (AY262282). Samples C and D were only sequenced from one direction. Also sequences for two EBV positive samples D and E compared to V01555- (bases 109391- 109543) . Note that Sample D was positive for HPV and EBV. Primer sequences have been omitted.Fourteen of the 40 milk samples (33%) were positive for EBV. Sequencing of two samples showed identical sequences to an EBNA 1 region of EBV strain B95-8. One of these samples was also positive for HPV 18.In-situ PCR on a centrifuged milk sample showed high risk HPV in the nuclei of epithelial cells (Figure 3). There were differing amounts of cellular debris in each sample. Some appeared to contain no intact cells. The number of whole cells was very low and some were seen as clumps. The HPV positive cells seen in Figure 3 are from approximately 5% of the volume of a 1.5 ml milk pellet. There were approximately 10 HPV positive cells in the whole milk sample, no negative cells were observed. In-situ PCR was not performed on all the milk samples because of the low copy number of cells and large amounts of debris which were seen on the H&E. In-situ PCR for EBV was not performed.Figure 3 HPV positive epithelial cell located in human milk by in situ PCR. The images on the right have been cropped to show cells only. Some cells can be seen as groups. Dark blue colour indicates the incorporation of Dig dUTP in the PCR. The negative control with no primers added (not shown) had no blue colour in the cells.DiscussionWe have demonstrated that both high risk HPVs and EBV may be present in the milk of a minority of normal lactating women, none of whom have had prior breast cancer. These findings are very similar to those of Sarkola et al [5] in Finland and Cazzaniga et al [6] in Italy and are in contrast to the negative findings of Mammas et al [7] in Greece.Other viruses including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), mouse mammary tumour virus and Epstein Barr virus have previously been identified in human milk [12-14]. Transmission of each of these viruses by human milk to newborn infants is a possibility. Mother-to-child transmission of HIV-1 infection during exclusive breastfeeding in the first 6 months of life is a common occurrence in Africa [12]. It is also known that HPV can be transmitted from infected mothers to their newborn babies with persistence of the virus into childhood [15]. It is not known whether HPV transmission can be from infected human milk.High risk HPVs have been identified in both normal breast tissues and breast tumours of Australian women [10]. Therefore it is possible that HPV positive normal breast epithelial cells can be shed into the milk of normal lactating women.The identification of viral sequences does not prove that these viruses are biologically active. The identification of HPV viral transcripts in human milk would be of future value. With respect to HPV such identification can indicate whether the HPV E6:L1 mRNA expression ratio is high (high E6 low L1) which is an indication that HPV is integrated and probably transforming, that is, the HPV is biologically active within the breast milk epithelial cells.It is not known whether HPVs have long latency periods [16]. It is also unknown whether ingested HPVs can survive passage into the gut. HPVs are known to collaborate with Epstein Barr viruses which can have prolonged latency periods [8]. Therefore there are no current answers to the question whether HPVs and EBV ingested in infancy can lead to later oncogenicity.AbbreviationsEDTA: Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; H & E: Haematoxylin and eosin; HPV: Human papilloma virus; HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus; PBS: Phosphate buffered saline; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; SDS: Sodium dodecyl sulfate; TE: Tris-EDTA.Competing interestsThere are no conflicts of interest for any of the authors.Author’s contributionsWKG: collection of milk samples, conduct of standard and in situ PCR, preparation of the manuscript. NJW: supervision and quality assurance of the laboratory work, preparation of the manuscript. JSL: conceptualisation, collection of milk samples, analysis of data, manuscript preparation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Title: Human Papillomavirus Concordance Between Parents and Their Newborn Offspring: Results From the Finnish Family Human Papillomavirus Study

Evidence from the past 30 years supports the view that mucosal human papillomaviruses (HPVs) have multiple modes of transmission including both sexual and nonsexual transmission [1–5]. Among children, 1 route of transmission is vertical transmission from the mother or possibly from the father to the offspring [4, 6]. Perinatal transmission from mother to newborn is considered to result mainly from a close contact of infected birth canal during delivery [7], although HPV has also been detected in newborns born by cesarean delivery [8, 9]. Other possible HPV transmission modes from the mother to their offspring include intrauterine transmission as HPV has been detected in amniotic fluid [10, 11], placenta [10, 12–14], cord blood [10, 12, 14], and aborted products of conception [15].Fathers’ role in prenatal HPV transmission remains unclear, and literature on the topic is scant. HPV has been widely detected in semen samples [16], suggesting possibility for periconceptual transmission (transmission at time around fertilization) from father to embryo [7]. One study has shown that in vitro artificially HPV infected sperm can be transmitted to the oocyte and that HPV genes can be actively transcribed by the penetrated oocyte [17].To shed more light on the HPV transmission at prenatal period and at birth, our objective was to describe HPV genotype distribution among mothers and/or fathers and HPV concordance with their newborns using data from the Finnish Family HPV study.METHODSFinnish Family HPV StudyThe Finnish Family HPV Study (FFHPV) is a prospective cohort study that was conducted at Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Finland. Originally a total of 329 families with mothers, fathers, and their newborn offspring were recruited in the third trimester of pregnancy between 1998 and 2002. They were followed up with regular visits (including HPV testing in every visit and questionnaire at baseline and end of follow-up) for 6 years to elucidate the natural history of HPV infection between family members as previously described [18–20]. Participants’ earlier history of anogenital or oral lesions or warts did not affect study recruitment. History of possible HPV-related lesions was asked in detail in the baseline questionnaire of the study.The study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The study protocol and its amendment (numbers 3/1998, 2/2006, and 45/180/2010) were approved by the Ethics Committee of Turku University Hospital. Written informed consent to participate was obtained from all adult participants. Written informed consent for children's participation was obtained from both parents of each child.Sample CollectionThe sample collection is described in detail in previous publications of the FFHPV study [12, 19, 20]. In brief, scraping samples for HPV testing from newborns, mothers, and fathers were collected using a cytobrush (MedScand, Malmö, Sweden). Mothers’ oral and cervical samples collected at baseline (36 weeks of pregnancy) were included in the present study. From the father, urethral, oral, and semen samples collected at baseline (36 weeks of pregnancy of their spouses) were also included; fathers’ urethral sample was defined as fathers’ genital sample. Oral and genital scraping samples were collected from newborns immediately after birth as well as placental and umbilical cord blood samples [12]. From the placenta, 2 representative samples covering all tissue layers were taken. Umbilical venous cord blood sample was taken while the placenta was still in situ. Oral samples from all participants were collected with the cytobrush from the buccal mucosa of both cheeks and from the upper and lower vestibular area. Genital brush samples were taken from the labia/prepuce and scrotum of the newborn, the cervical mucosa of the mother, and the distal part of the urethral mucosa of the father using a cytobrush. Cervical samples were placed in phosphate-buffered saline with 100 µg of gentamycin, and all other brush samples were placed in 70% ethanol, as described in detail elsewhere [20]. Semen collection and analyses were done by the guidelines of the Nordic Association for Andrology. Semen samples were taken into a plastic container by masturbation using gloves after at least 2 days of abstinence. If taken at home, the sample was transferred to the laboratory within 2 hours after ejaculation. Samples were centrifuged in a Sorval MC12V (Zurich, Switzerland) at 3500 rpm for 15 minutes. Seminal plasma and semen cells were stored separately, first at −20°C and afterward at −70°C.HPV Detection and GenotypingDuring DNA extraction, contamination was carefully monitored by simultaneous DNA extraction from cultured human fibroblasts or HPV-negative immortalized human gingival keratinocytes, which served as negative controls for contamination during DNA extraction. Only 8 study samples were processed at the same time. For each set of 8 samples, 1 fibroblast-negative control and 1 HPV-16–positive control (Siha cell lines, human cervical epithelial carcinoma, HTB-35, American Type Culture Collection) were used.HPV amplification was done by nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (MY09/MY11 external primers and GP05+/bioGP06+ internal primers) [18]. Contamination during HPV amplification was carefully controlled. In addition to the negative and positive controls described above, we also included 1 no-DNA sample for each set of 8 study samples to be processed for HPV amplification. DNA extraction, master mix for PCR, and addition of target DNA in the reaction mixture were all done in separate rooms that were exchanged regularly in the MediCity Research Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Turku, Finland. In these research rooms, neither any clinical samples nor HPV-positive cell lines were used.HPV genotyping was done using a Luminex-based Multimetrix kit (Progen Biotechnik GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany), which identifies 24 different low-risk (LR) and high-risk (HR) HPV genotypes (LR-HPV: genotypes 6, 11, 42, 43, and 44; HR-HPV: genotypes 16, 18, 26, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68, 70, 73, and 82) as described earlier [21]. All HPV-16–positive samples were retested from the original samples using nested PCR and the Luminex-based assay for HPV-16 genotyping to rule out contamination during HPV amplification as these 2 methods shared only the DNA extracted from the original sample. Importantly, the samples collected from the family members were never analyzed at the same time including DNA extraction or HPV amplification. In addition, samples were stored in separate boxes.Statistical AnalysesFrom the original FFHPV study, we included 321 mothers, 134 fathers, and 321 of their newborn offspring comprising 321 mother–newborn and 134 father–newborn pairs. All included mothers and fathers had an HPV genotyping result available from the oral and/or genital mucosa before the birth of their offspring. Missing HPV data of fathers were included and modeled as unknown group. When HPV prevalence at any anatomic site was calculated, the person counted as HPV positive if his/her HPV sample was positive at least at 1 anatomic site. The distribution of HPV genotypes among family members was described as numbers with proportions (%) of HPV-positive newborns, mothers, and fathers.The genotype-specific HPV concordance was defined when both parent and newborn tested positive for the specific HPV genotype. Vertical transmission rate was calculated for mother–newborn and father–newborn pairs. The proportion of mothers and fathers having concordant HPV genotype with her/his offspring was calculated by each HPV genotype as well. Associations of type-specific HPV presence between mother–newborn and father–newborn pairs were determined by using univariable logistic regression analysis and reporting results by odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The reference category for the specific HPV genotype positivity was the negativity for that HPV genotype. Concordance between mothers’/fathers’ and newborns’ genotype-specific HPV status was also assessed by using Cohen kappa (κ) method. The following benchmark scale for interpreting the κ statistics by Landis and Koch [22] was used to describe the degree of agreement (HPV concordance) between mother–newborn and father–newborn pairs: <0.00, poor; 0.00–0.20, slight; 0.21–0.40, fair; 0.41–0.60, moderate; 0.61–0.80, substantial; and 0.81–1.00, almost perfect degree of agreement.HPV genotypes were grouped to LR- and HR-HPV groups. Associations of newborns’ LR- and HR-HPV presence with mothers’ and fathers’ corresponding LR- and HR-HPV presence were determined by using univariable and another-parent adjusted (mothers’ HPV adjusted by fathers’ HPV and vice versa) multinomial (LR- and HR-HPV types) logistic regression analyses and reporting results by ORs and another-parent adjusted odds ratios (aORs) with 95% CI. The reference category for LR- and HR-HPV was HPV negative. IBM SPSS Statistics version 26.0 for Windows software (IBM SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois) was used for statistical analyses. All tests were 2-sided and P values<.05 were considered statistically significant.RESULTSMean age of mothers was 25.5 years (standard deviation [SD], 3.4; range, 18–46) and mean age of fathers was 28.8 years (SD, 5.0; range, 19–46). The frequencies of different HPV genotypes in newborns’ (n = 321), mothers’ (n = 321), and fathers’ (n = 134) samples are shown in Table 1. Detailed HPV type distributions by the different anatomic sites are shown in Supplementary Table 1. Among newborns, mothers, and fathers, HPV prevalence at any anatomic site was 31.2% (n = 100), 31.2% (n = 100), and 45.5% (n = 61), respectively. HPV-16 was the most common HPV genotype identified in all groups (newborns, mothers, fathers), followed by HPV-6. Among newborns, HPV-16 and HPV-6 were found in 15.9% (n = 51) and 4.7% (n = 15) of samples, respectively. HPV-16 accounted for 20.9% (n = 67) of mothers’ and 23.9% (n = 32) of fathers’ HPV infections, whereas HPV-6 was found in 4.7% (n = 15) of mothers’ samples and in 9.7% (n = 13) of fathers’ samples. Newborns’ oral HPV prevalence was 23.0% (n = 74) and genital HPV prevalence was 10.0% (n = 32). For the HPV genotype distribution, multiple-type infections were sorted as individual HPV genotypes. Two or more different HPV genotypes detected in the same sample was defined as a multiple infection, which accounted for 5.9% (n = 19) of newborns’ HPV infections, 10.3% (n = 33) of mothers’ HPV infections, and 18.2% (n = 24) of fathers’ HPV infections.Table 1.Distribution of Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Genotypes Among the Family Members of the Finnish Family HPV StudyHPV GenotypeNewborn (n = 321)Mother (n = 321)Father (n = 134)No.(%)No.(%)No.(%)HPV negative221(68.8)221(68.8)73(54.5)Any HPV100(31.2)100(31.2)61(45.5)615(4.7)15(4.7)13(9.7)111(0.3)6(1.9)5(3.7)1651(15.9)67(20.9)32(23.9)187(2.2)9(2.8)4(3.0)313(0.9)3(0.9)3(2.2)3313(4.0)3(0.9)10(7.5)350…2(0.6)0…394(1.2)1(0.3)0…420…4(1.2)0…430…2(0.6)2(1.5)452(0.6)5(1.6)1(0.7)510…2(0.6)2(1.5)520…1(0.3)0…531(0.3)0…4(3.0)565(1.6)6(1.9)2(1.5)582(0.6)8(2.5)0…595(1.6)4(1.2)1(0.7)669(2.8)9(2.8)2(1.5)681(0.3)0…0…702(0.6)2(0.6)5(3.7)731(0.3)0…0…821(0.3)1(0.3)5(3.7)Multiple-type HPV19(5.9)33(10.3)24(18.2)The proportions (%) of HPV genotypes in newborns’ (oral/genital/umbilical cord blood/placenta) samples collected at birth, and mothers’ (oral/genital) and fathers’ (oral/genital/semen) samples collected at baseline (ie, before birth) are shown. Multiple-type HPV infections were sorted as individual HPV genotypes. No. indicates number of HPV types found. HPV types missing for father: n = 187.Abbreviation: HPV, human papillomavirus.Rate of vertical transmission with any HPV type was 37.0% (37/100) and 35.1% (33/94) from mothers’ any anatomic site to newborns’ any anatomic site, and mothers’ genital site to newborns’ any anatomic site, respectively. From fathers’ any anatomic site to newborns’ any anatomic site, vertical transmission rate was shown to be 19.7% (12/61). Type-specific HPV prevalence was then further utilized to calculate newborns’ risk for infection by each HPV genotype separately (Table 2). At first, we looked for HPV presence at all anatomic sites pooled together and evaluated genotype-specific HPV concordances between mother–newborn pairs and father–newborn pairs. Mother–newborn genotype-specific HPV concordances were statistically significant with HPV-6, -16, -18, -31, and -56, with ORs ranging from 3.41 (95% CI, 1.80–6.48) for HPV-16 to 634 (95% CI, 28.5–14 087) for HPV-31. Father–newborn HPV concordances were statistically significant with HPV-6 (OR, 4.89 [95% CI, 1.09–21.9]) and HPV-31 (OR, 65.0 [95% CI, 2.92–1448]). A total of 60% (9/15), 31% (21/67), 22% (2/9), 67% (2/3), and 50% (3/6) of HPV-6–, HPV-16–, HPV-18–, HPV-31–, and HPV-56–positive mothers, respectively, had concordant HPV genotype with their newborn. Of HPV-6– and HPV-31–positive fathers, 23% (3/13) and 33% (1/3), respectively, had concordant HPV genotype with their newborn. HPV concordances between newborns’ and mothers’ genotype-specific HPV status was substantial with HPV-31 (κ = 0.66) and moderate both with HPV-6 (κ = 0.58) and HPV-56 (κ = 0.54), as seen in Table 2.Table 2.Associations of Type-Specific Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Presence and Degree of HPV Concordance Between Mother–Newborn and Father–Newborn Pairs Among Family Members of the Finnish Family HPV StudyHPV TypeNewborn and Mother (n = 321)Newborn HPV due to Mother (n = 321)Newborn and Father (n = 134)Newborn HPV due to Father (n = 134)Both NegativeChild PositiveMother PositiveBoth Positive%κOR
(95% CI)Both NegativeChild PositiveFather PositiveBoth Positive%κOR(95% CI)630066960
0.58

75.0

(20.2–278)
1147103230.19
4.89

(1.09–21.9)
1131416012814016224304621310.21
3.41

(1.80–6.48)
8616248250.101.79(.67–4.69)18307572220.23
17.5

(2.89–106)
1300403131711267
0.66

634

(28.5–14 087)
130121330.39
65.0

(2.92–1448)
33305133012131003931730113310045314250132110533201001291405631323350
0.54

157

(18.8–1304)
13202058313062133100593125401330106630399012842068320100136000703172201290507332010013600082319110128150% indicates proportions of mothers/fathers with concordant HPV genotype with their offspring. Cohen kappa (κ) shows the degree of HPV concordance between mothers/fathers and their newborns for each HPV genotype.The following benchmark scale describes the degree of agreement (HPV concordance): <0.00, poor; 0.00–0.20, slight; 0.21–0.40, fair; 0.41–0.60, moderate; 0.61–0.80, substantial; 0.81–1.00, almost perfect degree of agreement.Association of type-specific HPV presence between mothers/fathers and their newborns was determined by using unadjusted logistic regression analysis. Results are shown by ORs with 95% CIs. The reference category for specific HPV genotype positivity was the negativity for that HPV genotype. Moderate or higher degree of agreement (κ ≥ 0.41) and statistically significant ORs (P < .05) are shown in bold. Empty cells indicate results that cannot be computed due to zero frequencies.Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; HPV, human papillomavirus; OR, odds ratio.Newborns had a clearly increased risk for 5 different HPV genotype in our first evaluations, which led us to assess which anatomic site would have the most impact on these results. For these evaluations, we grouped the HPV genotypes by LR- and HR-HPV. In Supplementary Table 2 we show the associations of the presence of newborns’ LR- and HR-HPV at any anatomic site with their mother’s or father’s corresponding LR- and HR-HPV at specific anatomic sites. Mothers’ oral HR-HPV infection appeared to increase the risk of newborns’ any anatomic site HR-HPV infection both in univariable and father-adjusted models. Furthermore, mothers’ multiple-site (HPV detected at least 2 different anatomic site) LR- and HR-HPV infections were associated with newborns’ any anatomic site LR- and HR-HPV presence; these associations stayed statistically significant also in the father-adjusted model.The impact on newborns’ site-specific HPV prevalence was further evaluated. First, we investigated the associations of the presence of newborns’ oral LR- and HR-HPV with the mother’s or father’s corresponding LR- and HR-HPV at specific anatomic sites (oral, genital, semen, multiple sites) as seen in Table 3. When the impact of parents’ oral HPV on newborns’ oral HPV infection were analyzed, both LR- and HR-HPV detected at the mother's oral site was related to newborns’ oral LR- and HR-HPV, whereas at the father's oral site, only HR-HPV was associated with newborns’ oral HR-HPV. These associations stayed also statistically significant in the another parent-adjusted model. The presence of fathers’ genital LR-HPV was related to newborns’ oral LR-HPV infection, and the association was seen also in the mother-adjusted model. There was no association between mothers’ genital LR- or HR-HPV infection and newborns’ oral LR- or HR-HPV infection.Table 3.Association of Newborns’ Oral Low-Risk and High-Risk Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Presence With Their Mothers’ and Fathers’ Corresponding Low-Risk and High-Risk HPV Presence at Specific Anatomic Sites Among Family Members of the Finnish Family HPV StudyParent and SiteNewborns’ Oral HPV Prevalence at BirthUnivariable ModelAdjusted ModelaHPV Negative(n = 247)LR-HPVb(n = 12)HR-HPVb(n = 62)LR-HPVbHR-HPVbLR-HPVbHR-HPVbNo. (%)No. (%)No. (%)OR (95% CI)OR (95% CI)aOR (95% CI)aOR (95% CI)Mother Negative184 (74.5)5 (41.7)32 (51.6)1.001.001.001.00 Oral23 (9.3)3 (25.0)17 (27.4)
4.80 (1.08–21.4)

4.25 (2.05–8.83)

7.12 (1.44–35.1)

4.87 (2.29–10.4)
 Genital36 (14.6)2 (16.7)7 (11.3)2.04 (.38–11.0)1.12 (.46–2.73)2.76 (.48–15.7)1.16 (.47–2.90) Multiple sites4 (1.6)2 (16.7)6 (9.7)
18.4 (2.71–126)

8.63 (2.30–32.3)

10.4 (1.30–82.9)

8.28 (2.12–32.3)
Father Negative60 (24.3)3 (25.0)10 (16.1)1.001.001.001.00 Oral7 (2.8)1 (8.3)7 (11.3)2.86 (.26–31.3)
6.00 (1.73–20.8)
3.89 (.33–45.9)
7.72 (2.10–28.3)
 Genital9 (3.6)3 (25.0)3 (4.8)
6.67 (1.16–38.2)
2.00 (.46–8.68)
7.93 (1.12–56.1)
2.10 (.43–10.2) Semen12 (4.9)02 (3.2)…1.00 (.19–5.15)…1.29 (.24–6.98) Multiple sites14 (5.7)03 (4.8)…1.29 (.31–5.29)…1.34 (.30–5.87) Unknown145 (58.7)5 (4.7)37 (59.7)0.69 (.16–2.98)1.53 (.72–3.28)0.72 (.17–3.29)1.63 (.74–3.63)Newborns’ (n = 321) oral HPV prevalence at birth is shown with their mothers’ and fathers’ baseline HPV status at specific anatomic sites. Associations of newborns' oral LR- and HR-HPV presence with their mothers' and fathers' corresponding LR- and HR-HPV presence at specific anatomic sites were calculated by using univariable and another-parent adjusted multinomial logistic regression analyses. Results are shown by ORs and another-parent aORs with 95% CIs. Reference category for HPV positive was HPV negative. Statistically significant results (P < .05) are shown in bold.Abbreviations: aOR, another-parent adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; HPV, human papillomavirus; HR, high-risk; LR, low-risk; OR, odds ratio.
aMothers' HPV adjusted by fathers' HPV and vice versa.
bLR-HPV genotypes: 6, 11, 42, 43, 44; HR-HPV genotypes: 16, 18, 26, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68, 70, 73, 82.Last we evaluated the influence of mothers’ and fathers’ HPV status on newborns’ genital HPV infection as described in Table 4. Only mothers’ genital HR-HPV infection showed to be the significant risk factor for newborns’ genital HR-HPV infection, which strengthened in father-adjusted analysis.Table 4.Association of Newborns' Genital Low-Risk and High-Risk Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Presence With Their Mothers' and Fathers' Corresponding Low-Risk and High-Risk HPV Presence at Specific Anatomic Sites Among the Family Members of the Finnish Family HPV StudyParent and SitesNewborns' Genital HPV Prevalence at BirthUnivariable ModelAdjusted ModelaHPV Negative(n = 289)LR-HPVb(n = 3)HR-HPVb(n = 29)LR-HPVbHR-HPVbLR-HPVbHR-HPVbNo. (%)No. (%)No. (%)OR (95% CI)OR (95% CI)aOR (95% CI)aOR (95% CI)Mother Negative204 (70.6)017 (58.6)1.001.001.001.00 Oral41 (14.2)02 (6.9)0.59 (.13–2.63)0.63 (.14–2.87) Genital34 (11.8)2 (66.7)9 (31.0)
3.18 (1.31–7.70)

3.34 (1.35–8.30)
 Multiple sites10 (3.5)1 (33.3)1 (3.4)1.20 (.14–9.94)1.06 (.12–9.18)Father Negative66 (22.8)07 (24.1)1.001.001.001.00 Oral13 (4.5)1 (33.3)1 (3.4)0.73 (.08–6.40)0.74 (.08–6.71) Genital12 (4.2)1 (33.3)2 (6.9)1.57 (.29–8.50)1.70 (.30–9.67) Semen11 (3.8)03 (10.3)2.57 (.58–11.5)2.03 (.43–9.55) Multiple sites17 (5.9)00 Unknown170 (58.8)1 (33.3)16 (55.2)0.89 (.35–2.56)0.87 (.34–2.24)Newborns' (n = 321) genital HPV prevalence at birth is shown with their mothers' and fathers' baseline HPV status at specific anatomic sites. Associations of newborns' genital LR- and HR-HPV presence with their mothers' and fathers' corresponding LR- and HR-HPV presence at specific anatomic sites were calculated by using univariable and another-parent adjusted multinomial logistic regression analyses. Results are shown by ORs and another-parent aORs with 95% CIs. Reference category for HPV positive was HPV negative. Statistically significant results (P < .05) are shown in bold.Abbreviations: aOR, another-parent adjusted odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; HPV, human papillomavirus; HR, high-risk; LR, low-risk; OR, odds ratio.
aMothers' HPV adjusted by fathers' HPV and vice versa.
bLR-HPV genotypes: 6, 11, 42, 43, 44; HR-HPV genotypes: 16, 18, 26, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 53, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68, 70, 73, 82.DISCUSSIONWe discovered that there is a genotype-specific HPV concordance between newborns and their mother and/or father, which indicates the likelihood of vertical HPV transmission between the parents and their newborn offspring. Furthermore, parents’ oral HR-HPV presence seems to impact more on the newborn's oral HR-HPV infection risk than parents’ genital HR-HPV presence. On the other hand, newborns’ genital HR-HPV risk was only predicted by the mother's HR-HPV presence before delivery.According to 1 meta-analysis [23], vertical transmission solely from mothers (genital sample) to newborns (oral/genital sample) is estimated to be 6.5% with a wide range between 1.5% and 46.6%. Fewer studies have evaluated vertical transmission based on genotype-specific mother–newborn HPV concordance [8, 9, 24–30]. To date, only 1 meta-analysis [31] of type-specific intrauterine vertical transmission has been published, suggesting an intrauterine transmission rate of 4.9%, but the rate of transmission in selected studies varied between 0% and 46.7%. We observed a transmission rate of 37.0% (37/100) from mothers’ any anatomic site to newborns’ any anatomic site, and transmission rate of 35.1% (33/94) from mothers’ genital site to newborns’ any anatomic site.A previous study [32] that investigated the co-occurrence of HPV-16/18 infection between 146 Polish parental couples and their newborns showed that mothers’ any anatomic site and genital and oral combined HPV-16/18 infection, as well as fathers’ oral HPV-16/18 infection, increased the risk of newborns’ oral HPV-16/18 infection at birth. These results are in line with our finding, as we showed that mothers’ and fathers’ oral HR-HPV infections increase the risk of newborns’ oral HR-HPV infection at birth. Another study [28] investigated the vertical genotype-specific HPV transmission from both parents to the newborns with a US population in Iowa; 574 mothers and newborns and 68 fathers participated in the study. In contradiction, only 1 mother–newborn pair and no father–newborn pairs showed HPV genotype-specific concordance, suggesting that vertical transmission from parents to newborn is rare (<1%) [28]. However, this study had a slightly different study setting from ours, as HPV samples from fathers’ oral site and newborns’ oral and genital sites were taken 65 hours after birth.We observed an HPV prevalence of 31.2%, 23.0%, and 10.0% in newborns’ any anatomic, oral, and genital sites, respectively, which is higher than the previously reported prevalence among newborns [8, 24, 26, 28, 29, 33]. Two studies reported HPV prevalence of 22.4% (11/49) and 23.5% (55/233) at any anatomic site [8, 24]. Similar to our study, prevalence was based on at least 2 different anatomic sample sites. Moreover, several studies have reported oral prevalence of ≤4% [26, 28, 29]. The differences in HPV prevalence can be explained by the sensitivity of the methods used for HPV testing and differences of sample size as well as timing of sampling after birth. We used accurate nested PCR in HPV testing, and the possibility of false-positive results due to contamination was minimized by using a negative control in every eighth sample during isolation and PCR. We selected nested PCR for HPV testing from the very beginning as the collection of sufficient amounts of nucleated epithelial cells from newborns’ oral or genital mucosa is demanding and viral copies in these cells is estimated to be low.HPV-16 was the most common HR-HPV type detected in all sites of mothers and newborns, which is consistent with other reports [8, 25, 26, 29, 30]. However, the possible consequences of early-life HR-HPV infection are still not known due to the lack of long-term follow-up studies. The second most detected HPV type in newborns was HPV-6, which is known to cause severe juvenile-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis [34]. Our results suggest that HPV genotypes 6, 16, 18, 31, and 56 appear to be transmitted from mother to the newborn. This result is in line with a previous study in which the most frequent HPV type occurring in both newborns’ nasopharyngeal aspirates and mothers’ cervical samples was HPV-16 (10 pairs) [9]. The concordant HPV types except HPV-56 found in our present study could be vaccinated against with 9-valent vaccine, which we should bear in mind when adjusting vaccination strategies (ie, optimal age to vaccinate children). As maternal HPV immunoglobulin G antibodies are transferred to offspring [35], a future mode to prevent perinatal HPV infection could be HPV vaccination of potential parents. On the other hand, debate continues regarding whether newborns’ HPV infections at birth and during the perinatal period represent a true infection or contamination of the mother's birth canal. Even though a majority of the HPV infections detected at birth are shown to clear during the first months of life [24, 26, 29, 36, 37], our recent study showed that oral HPV infection detected at birth can persist a mean duration of 20.6 months [37]. Moreover, we have showed seroconversion of HPV-6, -11, -16, and -18 antibodies among children born to HPV-seronegative mothers, which indicates that a child may create the immune response to HPV in early infancy [35]. This current study now strengthens the assumption that the mother may not be the only source of HPV in newborns’ prenatal HPV infection.Our study has several strengths, which first include evaluation of genotype-specific HPV concordance between both parents and their offspring. We acknowledge that genotype-specific concordance between mothers’ or fathers’ HPV status and newborns’ HPV status at birth most likely represents vertical transmission, including possibility for intrauterine transmission. Second, as the majority of previous studies have focused on evaluation of vertical transmission only between the mother and the newborn, we also included fathers to elucidate the possible role of periconceptual transmission, which remains mostly unexplored. Interestingly, we showed HPV-6 and HPV-31 genotype-specific concordance between fathers’ baseline HPV status and newborns’ HPV status at birth, which suggests fathers’ possible role in periconceptual HPV transmission. Our final strength is our sampling performance as we determined HPV status on multiple anatomical sites including cord blood and placenta, which enabled us to observe accurately the signs of intrauterine transmission.Some limitations should also be considered. Our cohort had a lower number of fathers (n = 134) than mothers (n = 321), due to fathers’ unwillingness to participate in the study. In addition, parental samples were collected only at 36 weeks of pregnancy. The most precise information of different modes of vertical transmission, including periconceptual transmission, could be better shown with multiple consecutive sampling of both parents from before fertilization to the end of pregnancy. Another limitation is that we could not stratify analysis by HPV genotype when evaluating in which anatomic site parental HPV positivity most affects the likelihood of newborns’ HPV infection. In our analysis, we had to group HPV types into LR and HR groups because HPV sample counts at different anatomic sites were too low for genotype-specific analyses; therefore, results should be validated further by larger studies in the future. Although we showed HPV concordance between fathers and newborns, it does not justify direct father-to-newborn transmission. Alternative to direct father-to-newborn transmission, the transmission to the newborn might have been vertical from the mother as mother and father are expected to share same HPV genotypes through sexual transmission. Even if the mother's HPV sample is negative, it might be a false-negative result. However, as we used accurate nested PCR for HPV detection, the possibility of false-negative results is low, particularly in mothers’ cervical samples in which viral load is supposed to be high. Another matter of debate is whether HPV DNA detected in newborns represents a true infection or passive contamination/passage, most importantly from the infected maternal genital tract or delivery room. In this study, transcriptionally active HPV was not examined, and thus the state of HPV infection as such could not be verified. In addition, we do not have information on the type-specific HPV variant via sequencing, which would provide more proof of the transmission between family members and should be taken into account in future studies.In summary, we showed the HPV concordance between newborns’ HPV status at birth and their mother’s and father’s HPV status, the results of which suggest that parents’ HPV infection may play an important role in newborns’ susceptibility to gain perinatal HPV infection. However, the father's role as a transmitter remains more uncertain. The role of periconceptional transmission from the parent to the newborn and the consequences of perinatal HPV infection later in individuals’ life will need further investigations.Supplementary Data
Supplementary materials are available at The Journal of Infectious Diseases online. Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the corresponding author.Supplementary Materialjiad330_Supplementary_DataClick here for additional data file.


Title: Viral Load of Human Papillomavirus (HPV) During Pregnancy and Its Association With HPV Vertical Transmission

1IntroductionHuman papillomavirus (HPV) predominantly affects young adults such as women of childbearing age [1]. Several studies have documented that the prevalence of HPV among pregnant women was at least 30% [2, 3, 4]. Studies on vertical transmission of HPV estimate that the risk of HPV‐positive women transmitting HPV to their children is about 10% [5, 6]. Despite evidence of the detection of HPV in children born to HPV‐positive mothers, risk factors associated with vertical transmission are not well documented. Risk factors that have been proposed include the young age of the mothers, the persistence of HPV infection during pregnancy, vaginal delivery, and the premature rupture of the amniotic membrane [5, 7, 8, 9, 10]. Few studies have analysed the role of HPV viral load as a risk factor for HPV vertical transmission [11, 12, 13, 14]. High viral load during pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of perinatal transmission of different viruses such as human immunodeficiency virus and hepatitis [15, 16]. HPV viral load has also recently been associated with pregnancy complications, such as preterm birth and alteration of trophoblast leading to early abortion [17, 18, 19]. The objective was to describe the dynamics of HPV viral load during pregnancy and to measure its association with HPV vertical transmission.2MethodsData from the HERITAGE cohort was used. The design and methods of the study have been previously published [20]. Briefly, 1050 pregnant women were recruited between 2010 and 2016 in outpatient obstetric clinics catering to the local community at three academic health centres in Montreal, Canada. Women aged 18 and above, without HIV infection, and in their first trimester of pregnancy (between 6 and 14 weeks of gestation) were eligible. All participants signed an informed consent form. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of CHU Sainte‐Justine (protocol code: 2010‐265, date of approval: 2010‐03‐12, renewed ever year).This study included 287 mothers who tested positive for the 13 most common HPV genotypes during pregnancy including HPV 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 39, 42, 45, 51, 52, 58, and 89. These genotypes are derived from the Family Papillomaviridae, subfamily Firstpapillomavirinae, genus Alphapapillomavirus, and species Alpha‐10 (HPV 6, HPV 11), Alpha‐9 (HPV 16, HPV 31, HPV 33, HPV 52, HPV 58), Alpha‐7 (HPV 18, HPV 39, HPV 45), Alpha‐1 (HPV 42), Alpha‐5 (HPV 51) and Alpha‐3 (HPV 89) [21]. Figure 1 described the flow chart of cohort study participants.Figure 1Study flow diagram of the cohort population included in the study. HPV, Human papillomavirus; HERITAGE: Human Papillomavirus (HPV) perinatal transmission and risk of HPV persistence among children.In the first and third trimester (32–35 weeks of gestation), a self‐collected vaginal swab (dry Dacron swabs—Copan Italia S.p.A) was provided from the mothers for HPV DNA testing. After birth, swabs were also collected for the purpose of HPV DNA testing. Four sites were sampled in children (conjunctival, oral, pharyngeal, and genital) at birth (after 24 to 48 h) and/or at 3 months of age for HPV DNA testing. Samples were obtained using a Dacron dry swab (Copan Italia S.p.A) from the genital, oral, and pharyngeal mucosa, and a soft swab (FLOQSwabs—Copan Flock Technologies) for the conjunctiva. DNA was purified for the vaginal and children's samples and subsequently stored at—70°C until testing [20]. Medical, social, and demographic characteristics were collected through questionnaires and a review of the medical records.2.1HPV Testing and GenotypingHPV detection and genotyping were conducted using the Linear Array genotyping assay (LA‐HP; Roche Molecular Systems) as previously described [20]. HPV DNA and Beta‐globin were detected in each sample (2 µL). Thirty‐six HPV genotypes were detected (HPV6, 11, 16, 18, 26, 31, 33, 34, 35, 39, 40, 42, 44, 45, 51, 52, 53, 54, 56, 58, 59, 61, 62, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 81, 82, 83, 84, and 89).2.2HPV Quantification of Viral LoadHPV quantification was conducted for HPV genotypes 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 39, 42, 45, 51, 52, 58, and 89 using real‐time PCR assays as described in previous work [22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27]. Sequences for primers and probe are described in the references above except for HPV39 (primer E6‐F 5′‐AAC CGA GGT ATA TGA ATT TG‐3′, primer E6‐R 5′‐CCG AGT CCG AGT AAT ATC‐3′ and probe FAM/CAC TAG CTG CAT GCC AAT CAT GTA‐3′, amplification protocol: 95°C × 10 min followed by 50 cycles with steps at 95°C × 15 s and 50°C × 30 s), HPV58 (primer 58‐E7‐F 5′ ATG AAA TAG GCT TGG ACG G‐3′, primer 58‐E7‐R 5′‐ GCA CAC AAT GGT ACA TGT GC‐3′, probe 58‐FAM/TGT TAC ACT TGT GGC ACC ACG GT‐3′, amplification protocol: 95°C × 10 min followed by 50 cycles with steps at 95°C × 15 s and 55°C × 30 s) and HPV89 primers (primer 89‐E7‐R 5′‐CAC GAT AGC ACA CAC CAC AC‐3′ and primer 89‐E7‐F 5′‐CTA CAA TGT GAG GAA GAA ATG C‐3′, amplification protocol: 95°C × 10 min followed by 50 cycles with steps at 95°C × 15 s and 60°C × 30 s). Briefly, HPV‐positive samples for each of the genotypes above were first assessed for the presence of PCR inhibitors by amplification of an internal control [22]. All samples were shown to be free of inhibitor activity. For each genotype individually, cycle thresholds obtained for each sample were compared to those of a titration curve obtained by serial 10‐fold dilutions of HPV DNA plasmid of the specific genotype evaluated in 75 ng of human genomic DNA (Roche Diagnostics) in 10 mM Tris‐HCl (pH 8.2). To estimate cell content, processed samples were also assessed for β‐globin DNA as reported previously [22]. Viral loads were determined by dividing the HPV DNA copies by the estimated total cell count based on β‐globin copy numbers. Results were recorded as copy numbers per cell and per sample.2.3Statistical AnalysisDescriptive analysis was conducted to determine the characteristics of the mothers and children using means (SD), medians, quartiles, and proportions. The description of viral load measures in mothers in terms of number of copies per cell (mean and median) was done for each HPV genotype detected in the first and third trimesters of pregnancy separately.For women infected with persistent genotypes (HPV‐positive for the same genotype from the first to the third trimester), median differences in viral load detected at third and first trimester were estimated and compared using Wilcoxon Signed‐rank test. The viral loads for every genotype‐specific HPV episode detected in the first and third trimesters of pregnancy of each of these women were also plotted in a line graph.The description of viral load measures was also done for each genotype detected in children during the perinatal period (birth to 3 months) (using the mean viral load for genotype presents at birth and/or 3‐month visits). Mean and median differences in viral load detected in children during the perinatal period and their respective mother during pregnancy (combining the first and the third trimester) were compared using the Wilcoxon signed‐rank test.Logistic regression was used to estimate the crude and adjusted odd ratios (aOR) with their 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) for the association between viral load during pregnancy (measured either at first, third, or both trimesters combined) and vertical transmission. This analysis was restricted to the 253 children born alive with valid HPV testing and their mother. Perinatal transmission of HPV was defined as the detection of HPV found in children at birth and/or 3‐month visit for all sites combined. Analysis was done for all genotypes combined as well as specifically for HPV‐16. Viral load was first analysed as continuous and second as categorized based on several cut‐offs including percentiles (25% and 75%) and more than 1 or 2 copies per cell of HPV. The groups of women in the lowest category were always used as the referent in all models. Adjustment was done for the age of the mothers in all models. All tests were two‐sided, and p‐values were considered statistical at p < 0.05. Stata/SE version 14.0 (Stata‐Corp) was used for all analysis.3ResultsFrom the 422 HPV‐positive women in the cohort, 287 mothers were infected with at least one of the genotypes evaluated for viral load quantification (HPV‐6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 39, 42, 45, 51, 52, 58, and 89). Table 1 summarizes the differences in the characteristics of the participants who tested positive for any HPV genotype tested during pregnancy in HERITAGE cohort and those within the subgroup with viral load quantification. Overall, the two groups were similar. Most mothers in this study delivered vaginally (73.3%), were nulliparous (49.1%) and almost 50% had rupture of membranes less than 6 h before birth. Globally, among the 287 mothers of this study, 267 had HPV at first trimester and 186 at third trimester. Persistent genotype‐specific HPV infection (same genotype detected in both trimesters) was found in 166 women, transient infection was detected in the first trimester of pregnancy in 101 and new genotype at the third trimester was detected in 20 women. Among the subgroup of 253 women who had children born alive with valid HPV testing during the perinatal period, 15 (5.9%; 95% CI: 3.6%–9.6%) had offspring who also tested positive for HPV. Table 2 provides a description of the viral loads detected for these children and their mother. HPV16 was detected in 3 of these children (6.4%: 95% CI: 2.0–18.5) who were born out of the 47 mothers positive for HPV‐16 during their pregnancy. It is important to note that two children have been found with genotype that were not present in the mother during pregnancy. Viral loads for each individual genotype detected during pregnancy in the mother and in the perinatal period in children are presented in Supporting Information (Table S1).Table 1Characteristics of HPV‐positive women during pregnancy in the HERITAGE study.Women characteristicsAll HPV‐positive women at baseline N = 422HPV‐positive women for HPV 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 39, 42, 45, 51, 52, 58, 89 during pregnancy N = 287At baselineAge, in yearsMean (± SD)30.7 (± 4.8)30.2 (± 4.8)Median (quartiles 25th and 75th)30 (27–34)30 (27–34)Range19–4719–47Ethnicity, n (%)White329 (77.9)224 (78.0)Native African37 (8.8)25 (8.7)African American3 (0.7)0 (0.0)East Asian4 (1.0)4 (1.4)Arab‐West Asian18 (4.3)11 (3.8)Latin American25 (5.9)18 (6.3)Native‐Aboriginal People1 (0.2)1 (0.4)Other5 (1.2)4 (1.4)Parity, n (%),Nulliparous172 (50.3)109 (49.1)Primiparous116 (33.9)75 (33.8)Multiparous54 (15.8)38 (17.1)Missing8065Cytology, n (%)Normal376 (90.2)247 (87.3)ASCUS26 (6.2)22 (7.7)LSIL7 (1.7)7 (2.5)HSIL8 (1.9)7 (2.5)Missing54Gestational age at enrollment, in weeksMean (± SD)11.0 (± 1.5)11.0 (± 1.5)Median (quartiles 25th and 75th)11 (10–12)11 (10–12)Range7–147–14Vaccinationa, n (%)Yes44 (11.2)34 (12.8)No350 (88.8)232 (87.2)Missing2821During pregnancyPregnancy types, n (%)Single pregnancy417 (98.8)282 (98.3)Multiple pregnancy—twins3 (0.7)3 (1.0)Multiple pregnancy—triplets2 (0.5)2 (0.7)Pregnancy outcomes, n (%)Live births395 (95.2) c
270 (94.7) d
Spontaneous abortions9 (2.2)7 (2.5)Elective abortions2 (0.5)1 (0.4)Pregnancy termination7 (1.7)5 (1.8)Stillbirths2 (0.5)2 (0.7)Missingb
127Delivery mode for live births, e
n (%)Vaginal277 (71.9)192 (73.3)Cesarean section108 (28.1)70 (26.7)Missing53Abbreviations: ASCUS, atypical squamous cells of undetermined significance; HPV, human papillomavirus; HSIL, high‐grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; LSIL, low‐grade squamous intraepithelial lesion; N, number of participants; Other, includes 1 French and 4 Haitians, SD, standard deviation.aAll women were vaccinated with 4vHPV (Gardasil®4); but the vaccine type was unknown for 6 vaccinated women in each group.bIncluding 2 children from a triplet with missing data.c
N = 395 children born alive including 3 twins and 1 triplet out of 390 pregnancies.d
N = 270 children born alive including 3 twins and 1 triplet out of 265 pregnancies.eAll twins and triplets born by the same delivery mode.John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Table 2HPV viral load for the 15 children in whom HPV was detected during the perinatal period and their mothers.idMotherChildrenViral loada (copy per cell)HPV genotypes detected during pregnancyViral loada (copy per cell)HPV genotypes detectedSitesb
Birth 24/48 h3‐months13.949890.017.89O2251.58731, 35, 42, 51, 53, 58, 840.16339, 42.O‐P‐G317.14831, 34, 590.011.31C‐O‐G40.21931, 40, 45, 54, 59, 67, 81, 83, 890.000.89O50.0056, 390.0196.C60.61431, 39, 59, 660.00631, 66.C70.005180.00018.O8181.070510.42651.C‐G96.92616, 35, 42, 520.93716, 35, 52.G100.51016, 18, 45, 53, 820.00016, 53.O113.53718, 510.39618.C‐G120.07335, 44, 52, 56, 890.0214452C130.04953, 59, 890.17251n.tC1415.72916, 62, 810.00016, 62n.tC‐O‐G150.00251, 840.000.51O
Note: “.”: negative; “n.t”: not tested/invalid sample.aMean viral load of all genotypes detected for multiples and persistent genotypes.bSites where HPV was found among children: C (conjunctival), O (oral), P (pharyngeal), G (genital).John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Table 3 summarizes data on HPV viral load detected in mothers during pregnancy and in children during the perinatal period. Overall, mean and median HPV viral loads were lower in the third trimester compared to the first trimester of pregnancy; the mean difference was −0.0492 copies/cell (mean difference = 1.0366−1.0858) and the median difference was −0.0001 copies/cell (median difference = 0.0007−0.0008). Among women with persistent infection, we observed a decrease in viral load detected at third trimester compared to the first trimester for most genotypes that was statistically significant for all genotypes taken together (decreases in the median viral load of −0.0002 copies/cell, p‐value: 0.0186). Interestingly, the decreases in median viral load considering all infections were mostly explained by genotype present in single infection (−0.0005 copies/cell, p‐value: 0.0024) rather than in multiple infections (> −0.0001 copies/cell, p‐value = 0.8027). A statistically significant difference was also observed specifically for HPV‐16 (median difference = −0.0100, p‐value: 0.0478). Figure 2 illustrates the variation in viral load measured throughout trimesters where each line represents a genotype‐specific HPV episode detected in each mother from which we can observe the tendency toward a reduction of viral load from the first to the third trimester.Table 3HPV viral load measures in mothers during pregnancy and in children during the perinatal period.GenotypeViral load (copy per cell) in mothers during pregnancyViral load (copy per cell) in children during the perinatal periodFirst trimesterThird trimesterPersistent infection (HPV‐positive women at both trimesters)Both trimesters combineda
Birth to 3 monthsb

n
MeanMedian
n
MeanMedian
n
Mean at first trimesterMedian at first trimesterMedian difference (third‐first trimester)
p‐valuec

n
MeanMedian
n
MeanMedianMedian difference (children–mother) d

p‐valuea
HPV 6164.82200.0017106.97070.000960.54910.0042+0.00090.7532205.51780.001010.01900.0190+0.01460.3173HPV 110
—

—
10.00290.00290
—

—

—

—
10.00290.00290
—

—

—

—
HPV 16531.49850.0101370.38690.0109362.18440.0375−0.0100
0.0478
540.87500.009730.45940.0004−1.27450.1088HPV 18232.50290.0047111.82350.0044105.58820.0180−0.00710.3329241.61720.003430.39650.3965−2.92450.1797HPV 31251.99660.0116200.37110.0043152.15570.0084−0.00260.0535301.24510.009840.01300.0130−8.86770.1797HPV 33131.30000.000270.03220.008162.81610.0132−0.00810.1159140.61160.00010
—

—

—

—
HPV 392920.84640.0424262.55720.01812128.75590.0424−0.00100.5901349.87580.050210.00650.0065——HPV 423176.51880.63572292.88171.358915121.15403.5673−0.23310.69093858.211190.527130.53110.5311−987.83530.3173HPV 45210.32480.0037180.54860.0015120.56240.0282+0.00240.4802270.30920.00140
—

—

—

—
HPV 51429.54650.0018272.54360.00392019.80910.0296−0.0233
0.0228
494.84070.000940.30270.3345−90.26520.1797HPV 52312.94810.0169296.17030.0019214.28650.0362−0.01050.2172393.48320.006020.25930.2593−7.18420.1797HPV 58270.01800.0008140.00920.0013130.02700.0052−0.00120.4631280.01320.00150
—

—

—

—
HPV 89430.27170.0011241.13590.0008160.63220.0252−0.00030.9176510.38520.000520.00880.0088−1.96590.6547All genotypes combinede
Multiple infection682.74200.0128502.85100.0083672.16890.0037> −0.00010.8027878.29000.0547100.02380.0033−0.05660.0593Single infection1990.51990.00041360.36960.0003990.95350.0018−0.0005
0.0024
2005.13950.003850.48260.5412−17.12800.0431All infection2671.08580.00081861.03660.00071661.44400.0027−0.0002
0.0186
287f
6.09450.0060150.17670.0190−0.4249

0.0038

Note: HPV: human papillomavirus; n = number of HPV detected; “—”: not applicable. Bold p‐values statistically significant.
a
The mean viral load for the first and third trimesters combined was calculated from the mean viral load of genotypes detected at both trimesters for women with persistent genotypes, and from the viral load of genotypes detected at first trimester or third trimester only for women with transient genotypes.
b
The mean viral load among children (n = 15) was estimated by the mean viral load of genotypes detected at both birth and at 3‐month visits or from the viral load detected at birth or at 3 months only. If a child had the detection of a genotype detected at multiple sites at the same visit, the highest viral load was used to calculate the mean viral load.
c

p‐value: estimated using the Wilcoxon Signed‐Rank Test to test the difference between paired viral load at the first and third trimester in woman with persistent infection during pregnancy or to test the difference between the paired viral load detected in mothers (both trimesters combined) and in children.
d
Difference estimated by the median viral load of the 15 children with HPV minus the median viral load measured at both trimesters combined in their mother.
e
The mean viral load was estimated with the mean viral load of every genotype detected in each participant.
f
287 women with viral load testing at both trimesters combined (including women with transient genotypes at first trimester only (n = 101) or at the third trimester only (n = 20), or with a persistent genotype at both trimesters (n = 166).John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Figure 2Variation in viral load of specific HPV genotypes between the first and the third trimester of pregnancy. HPV, human papillomavirus; n = number of HPV infections. (a) Includes 191 persistent genotypes specific HPV episode. (b) Includes 36 persistent HPV‐16 episode.HPV detection in children during the perinatal period is presented in Table 3. Overall, viral load was significantly lower in the 15 children with perinatal HPV compared to their respective mothers. Considering all genotypes detected, the median difference in viral load between children and mother was of −0.4249 copies/cell (p‐value: 0.0038).The measures of association between genotype‐specific HPV viral load during pregnancy and vertical transmission are presented in Table 4. Viral load (considered as a continuous variable) measured in the first, third or both trimesters combined, were significantly associated with vertical transmission for all genotypes, and for HPV‐16. For any genotypes and for HPV‐16 detected in the first trimester, each unit increase of viral load was associated with an increased risk of vertical transmission of 5% (aOR [95% CI]: 1.05 [1.00–1.09]) and of 14% (aOR [95% CI]: 1.14 [1.00–1.29]), respectively. The same trend was observed when considering the third and both trimesters combined. We also observed strong associations when viral load was categorized with different cut‐offs. For any genotypes and for HPV‐16 detected at first trimester, women with more than two copies per cell had a significantly higher risk of vertical transmission compared to women with two copies per cell or less (aORs = 6.41 [95% CI: 1.10–37.34] for any genotypes and 17.17 [95% CI: 1.18–250.28] for HPV‐16). Similar results were obtained for the different categorization and times when viral load was measured during pregnancy although not always significant. Moreover, when considering HPV‐16 viral load for the first and third trimesters combined, some models were not estimable because all cases of vertical transmission occurred in women in the higher categories of viral load. We also observed that the variation in viral load between third and first trimester was also associated with vertical transmission. The risk of transmission among women who had an increase in viral load between third and first trimester was higher than among those who had a decrease or similar viral load between third and first trimester (aORs = 4.51 [95% CI: 0.41–49.11] for all genotypes combined and 42.45 [95% CI: 0.89–2030.79] for HPV‐16, data not shown).Table 4Association between viral load during pregnancy and vertical transmission.Viral loadHPV 6, 11, 16, 18, 31, 33, 39, 42, 45, 51, 52, 58, & 89HPV 6 onlyFirst trimesterFirst trimester
n/N
a
Crude OR (95% CI)Adjusted OR, (95% CI) b
n/NCrude OR (95% CI)Adjusted OR, (95% CI) b
Viral load continuous15/253
1.05 (1.00–1.09)

1.05 (1.01–1.09)
3/47
1.14 (1.01–1.29)

1.14 (1.01–1.29)
Low viral load (≤ 75 percentile)6/192111/3411High viral load ( > 25 percentile)9/61
5.37 (1.83–15.76)

5.21 (1.77–15.37)
2/136.00 (0.49–72.77)6.03 (0.50–73.34)Low viral load (≤ 1 copy per cell)10/235111/3811High viral load ( > 1 copy per cell)5/18
8.65 (2.58–29.03)

8.10 (2.38–27.60)
2/910.57 (0.84–133.07)10.83 (0.84–139.56)Low viral load (≤ 2 copies per cell)13/246111/4011High viral load ( > 2 copies per cell)2/7
7.17 (1.27–40.53)

6.41 (1.10–37.34)
2/7
15.60 (1.19–204.78)

17.17 (1.18–250.28)
Third trimesterThird trimesterViral load continuous15/2531.06 (0.99–1.13)1.06 (0.98–1.14)3/47
2.06 (1.01–4.22)
2.27 (0.98–5.24)Low viral load (≤ 75 percentile)6/187111/3311High viral load ( > 25 percentile)9/66
4.76 (1.63–13.96)

4.53 (1.53–13.41)
2/145.33 (0.44–64.36)5.32 (0.44–64.29)Low viral load (≤ 1 copy per cell)12/244111/4311High viral load ( > 1 copy per cell)3/9
9.67 (2.15–43.43)

9.06 (1.98–41.36)
2/46.83 (0.47–98.81)7.43 (0.48–116.10)Low viral load (≤ 2 copies per cell)11/240112/4511High viral load ( > 2 copies per cell)4/13
9.25 (2.46–34.78)

8.82 (2.32–33.56)
1/221.50 (0.96–483.67)42.45 (0.89–2030.79)First and third trimester combinedFirst and third trimester combinedViral load continuous15/253
1.06 (1.01–1.12)

1.06 (1.00–1.12)
3/47
1.35 (1.04–1.77)

1.35 (1.04–1.76)
Low viral load (≤ 75 percentile)6/190110/35NENEHigh viral load ( > 25 percentile)9/63
5.11 (1.74–15.00)

4.89 (1.65–14.46)

3/12

NE

NE
Low viral load (≤ 1 copy per cell)11/238110/38NENEHigh viral load ( > 1 copy per cell)4/15
7.50 (2.06–27.38)

7.01 (1.89–25.98)

3/9

NE

NE
Low viral load (≤ 2 copies per cell)13/242111/4111High viral load ( > 2 copies per cell)2/113.91 (0.77–20.00)3.64 (0.70–18.89)2/6
20.00 (1.47–272.32)

20.42 (1.48–281.87)

Note: Bold values are statistically significant.Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; HPV, human papillomavirus; n, number of children with vertical transmission; N, number of HPV‐positive mothers during pregnancy, “NE”, not estimable; OR, odd ratio.a
N = 253 because from 287 women with HPV detections during pregnancy we excluded 34 children with no valid HPV testing during the perinatal period.bModels were adjusted for the mother's age.John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.4DiscussionThis study provides a description of the dynamics of viral load of HPV during pregnancy and analysed the potential role of this viral load as a risk factor for HPV vertical transmission. Viral load of HPV decreased during pregnancy (from the first to the third trimester). Viral load detected in children was globally lower than the viral load measured in their respective mother. Importantly, viral load during pregnancy was strongly associated with vertical transmission of HPV.We found two studies that have analysed the role of viral load during pregnancy as a risk factor for vertical transmission. In the study of Kaye et al., the mean HPV‐16 viral load observed during pregnancy in eight HPV‐16 positive mothers of the children born with HPV‐16 was 4.35 (SD ± 2.84) unit/PCR compared to 1.83 (± 1.12) unit/PCR for seven HPV‐16 positive mothers who did not transmit the virus [11]. The difference between the groups was, however, not statistically significant. Hahn et al. who have followed 72 HPV‐positive women during pregnancy, observed that the mean viral load measured in the 15 mothers who transmitted the virus to their infant was 0.30 (± 0.88) copy per cell compared to 0.35 (± 1.92) copy per cell among the 57 women who did not transmit HPV, but the difference was not statistically significant [12].Two studies analysed the risk of vertical transmission according to HPV persistency during pregnancy. Alberico et al. who studied 23 women with HPV during pregnancy showed that the probability of vertical transmission was 57.1% among mothers with persistent infection (four children born with HPV out of the seven mothers with HPV detected at three visits during pregnancy) compared to 6.3% among those with no persistent infection (1 child out of the 16 mothers who had HPV detection at two visits or less) although they did not show whether the difference was statistically significant [13]. Castellsagué et al. who studied 66 HPV‐positive women during pregnancy observed that when the mothers had persistent HPV during pregnancy, they were more likely to transmit HPV to their children with an adjusted OR = 4.8 [95% CI: 1.4–16.9] [14]. Even if these last two studies do not directly relate to the effect of viral load, they nevertheless show a certain consistency with the results of this study since persistence could be correlated with viral load.The literature on HPV viral load has focused on HPV‐16 or HPV‐18 among the general population of women and some have shown that viral load for these genotypes was associated with clinical outcomes such as precancerous lesions or cancer [21, 22]. Among pregnant women, viral load has been associated with higher risk of negative pregnancy outcomes [16, 17]. In a case‐control study composed of 116 women, Bruno et al. observed a higher risk of early abortion and preterm birth among women with high viral load detected in trophoblast compared to those with low levels [17]. Khayargoli et al. have also observed a strong association between HPV‐16 viral load during pregnancy and preterm birth [16] with adjusted ORs of 14 [95% CI: 1.3–153.5] and 15 [95% CI: 1.8–129.3], respectively for mothers with more than one copy per cell of HPV at first or third trimester compared to those below this threshold. We observed in this study a strong association between viral load and HPV vertical transmission. Although, the specific biological mechanisms that explain this potential association remains unknown, it is likely that higher levels of viral load could reflect higher viral replication that may predispose to a higher risk of vertical transmission.It is also important to note that we also showed a reduction in viral load in pregnant women during pregnancy. It has been suggested that immunosuppression occurring during pregnancy in order not to reject the fetus might also lead to a greater susceptibility to viral pathogens [28]. It has also been suggested that HPV transcription in responses to growth factors and hormones, such as estrogen, progesterone and glucocorticoid, during pregnancy may increase viral load [29, 30]. The results of this study argue against these possibilities for HPV, since we observed the opposite in this cohort of pregnant women.This study has several strengths. HERITAGE cohort is composed of a large sample of women with frequent HPV detection among mothers and children. HPV DNA genotyping and quantification were also done by real‐time PCR and the Roche Linear Array assay, known as robust methods, with high specificity and sensitivity [31]. However, this study also has limitations. Quantification of HPV viral load was obtained for 13 genotypes, representing the most common genotypes in the cohort but not all genotypes detected. Moreover, we cannot exclude the possibility that a negative HPV result rules out the presence of a latent infection in the basal epithelial cells. An HPV infection in mother may also have been missed as testing was done at only two‐time points during pregnancy. Children who had genotype detected at birth that was not detected among their mother (n = 2) are probably more likely related to an undetected/missed HPV during pregnancy and not to horizontal transmission. The precision of estimations may also be affected due to missing data (missed visits, invalid HPV testing or loss to follow‐up). The estimates regarding HPV16 particularly suffer from precision as only three cases of HPV16 vertical transmission were observed. Moreover, the ORs were adjusted for age of the mother but residual confounding bias is possible. We only adjusted for age of the mother because it is the only variable that we can think of associated with both viral load and vertical transmission. However, in a multivariable sensitivity analysis, we also included other variables possibly associated with vertical transmission only such as cytology (HSIL, LSIL, and ASCUS), type of delivery and rupture of membranes. The adjusted estimates were similar than the one obtained with the adjustment for age only (data not shown). Although residual confounding is possible, it is believed that it remains unlikely. Finally, external validity may also be affected as participants were recruited only in mostly tertiary hospital including HPV‐positive mothers at the first trimester of pregnancy.5ConclusionThe findings suggest that, although HPV viral load generally decreases during pregnancy, vertical transmission was strongly associated with high HPV viral load. Although, the detailed biological mechanism by which viral load is linked to vertical transmission remains to be explained, it may serve as a biomarker for the risk of vertical transmission.Author ContributionsAll authors have directly contributed to the conception and design (H.T., M.H.M., F.C., F.A., A.M.C., J.L., F.C., J.N., L.L.) or acquisition of data (J.N., L.L., H.T., M.H.M., F.C.) or analysis and interpretation (E.A.B., H.T., M.H.M., F.C.) of the study. E.A.B., H.T., and A.M.C. wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors have subsequently read, revised, and approved the version that is being submitted. H.T. is responsible for the overall content as the guarantor and had the full responsibility for the work and/or the conduct of the study, had access to the data, and controlled the decision to publish.The HERITAGE Study GroupMarie‐Hélène Mayrand, François Coutlée, Patricia Monnier, Louise Laporte, Joseph Niyibizi, Monica Zahreddine, Ana Maria Carceller, Paul Brassard, Jacques Lacroix, Diane Francoeur, Marie‐Josée Bédard, Isabelle Girard, François Audibert, William Fraser, and Helen Trottier (principal investigator).Conflicts of InterestF.C. has received funds to evaluate novel HPV detection tests through his institution, the research centre of the CHUM, from Becton‐Dickson and Roche Molecular systems. H.T. has received occasional lecture fees from Merck and unrestricted grants form ViiV Healthcare. All other co‐authors have no conflicts of interest.Supporting informationSupporting information.


Title: Transmission and clearance of human papillomavirus infection in the oral cavity and its role in oropharyngeal carcinoma – A review

AbbreviationsDNAdeoxyribonucleic acidHIVhuman immunodeficiency virusHPVhuman papilloma virusHPV‐OPChuman papilloma virus associated oropharyngeal carcinomaHR‐HPVhigh‐risk human papilloma virusLR‐HPVlow‐risk human papilloma virusMHCmajor histocompatibility complexMMP‐8matrix metallo‐proteinase‐8OPCoropharyngeal carcinomaRRPrecurrent respiratory papilloma1INTRODUCTIONThis article will review the known pathways of transmission and clearance of oral human papilloma virus (HPV) infection. The problem of orogenital transmission concerns very sensitive personal spheres of life and is therefore often unexplored in literature. Furthermore, the literature data on the upper airway clearance mechanisms are still scarce and scattered. In this article we describe the risk of HPV transmission to the oropharynx per pathway (autoinoculation, perinatal transmission, inter‐site transmission between individuals) as well as the prevalence of simultaneous occurrence of the same type of HPV in different anatomical sites in sexual partners (concordance).A significant proportion of mucosal squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck, particularly of the oropharynx, are directly attributable to the HPV.
1
, 
2
 HPV infection is considered the most common sexually transmitted disease among both males and females.
3
 The increase in the incidence of HPV‐related tumors has been postulated to be due to changing sexual practices. However, the mode of HPV transmission to the oral cavity is still poorly understood.
4
 There is need of a review of potential pathways of transmission of HPV between anatomical sites and between individuals.
5

HPV infections are often asymptomatic and unrecognized. The majority of sexually active individuals becomes infected with HPV at least once in their lifetime,
6
 often without being aware and not presenting any symptoms. Prevalence of HPV acquisition, persistence, and infection are correlated with sexual behaviour, viral load, anatomical site, local immunity and clearance. With age, the incidence of new infections decreases, while persistence increases.
7
 This phenomenon may result from changing sexual habits and age‐related immune senescence affecting HPV clearance.2TRANSMISSION OF HUMAN PAPILLOMA VIRUS TO THE ORAL MUCOSAThere are multiple pathways for HPV transmission across different mucosal sites. They include autoinoculation within one host, and transmission between individuals. Interindividual transmission includes perinatal transmission, sexual transmission by various techniques of orogenital sex, deep kissing (French kissing, involving extensive or intensive contact of the inner lips, tongue, and teeth especially with prolonged or rhythmic tongue‐to‐tongue contact) and indirect transmission through contact with hands.Contemporary HPV transmission models are based on established paradigms of multi‐site transmission and natural immunity, that differ for every mucosal site.
8
, 
9
, 
10
, 
11
 The multi‐site model represents the following transmission pathways: (1) extragenital → extragenital, (2) extragenital → genital, (3) genital → genital and (4) genital → extragenital. The extragenital site can either be the oral or anal site. Each pathway has its own probability of transmission, which is modeled per sexual partnership, duration of sexual partnerships, the specific number of different acts within a partnership or transmission probabilities per act.
9
 All separate pathways will be discussed in the following paragraphs. An illustration of the most common sources of HPV infection, the infected, its pathway and relevant details are visualized in an infographic (Figure 1).FIGURE 1Infographic demonstrating the most common sources of human papilloma virus (HPV) infection, the infected, its pathway and relevant details2.1AutoinoculationAutoinoculation between the genital and oral or anal sites could occur through intermediate contact with the hands or through virus shedding in the anogenital region.
12
, 
13
 There are some discrepancies in literature concerning oral HPV prevalence in women with cervical HPV infection. Auto‐infection among women with cervical HPV infection has been the subject of debate.
14
, 
15
, 
16
 Women with proven cervical HPV infection, cervical dysplasia or invasive cancer have a higher prevalence of HPV in oral samples, indicating a relationship between such infections.
17
 According to other authors, however, the correlation between cervical and oral colonisation by HPV is low.
18
, 
19
 Therefore simultaneous testing of oropharyngeal and cervical HPV infection does not seem promising as future screening strategy.
19
 Patients with genital HPV infection are at risk for oral infection and, consequently, for the development of oropharyngeal carcinoma (OPC).
20
, 
21
, 
22

2.2Perinatal transmissionHigh prevalence (44.9%) of HPV at prenatal testing in young pregnant women was followed by frequently detected HPV in placenta samples (14%) and in newborns (11.2%).
23
 Although the exact mode of transmission is not well understood, oral HPV prevalence ranged from 10% to 30% among newborns born to HPV‐positive mothers.
13
, 
18
, 
19
, 
22
, 
24
, 
25
, 
26
, 
27
, 
28

HPV infection can be acquired in utero via the placenta or umbilical cord blood, perinatally or through breast milk.
29
 Vertical transmission may occur in utero through ascending infection (transplacental transmission), during vaginal delivery, at caesarean section or in periconceptual transmission from the male sexual partner. HPV can be transmitted vertically to neonates through breast feeding.
30
 Transmission just after delivery can occur via body to body contacts. High carriage rates of HPV DNA detected in oral samples from newborns decrease gradually during the first 3 years of life.
24
 Perinatal transmission of LR‐HPV to neonates at birth has been confirmed to be associated with recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) development.
31

LR‐HPV related diseases such as RRP can occur in neonates and children.
32
 These have been transmitted in utero, as a transplacental or ascending infection or during the passage through an infected birth canal.
33
, 
34
 Caesarean deliveries do not completely protect neonates against HPV.
35
 HPVs, including high‐risk types 16 and 18, have also been detected in tonsillar or adenoid samples from children with tonsillar or adenoid hyperplasia, chronic tonsillitis and normal mucosa.
36
 Children may represent a reservoir of ‘silent’ high‐risk HPV types that may be the key to HPV persistence and related carcinogenesis in adulthood.
37
, 
38

2.3Inter‐site transmission between individualsInter‐site transmission between individuals occurs in modes including oral sex, anal sex, or indirect transmission through contact with hands. HPV acquisition at each anatomical site can occur independently through an infected partner, but it is difficult to distinguish which sexual behaviours are responsible for HPV transmission from the genital tract to the mouth. Deep kissing and rimming (i.e. oral‐anal contact) have also been associated with prevalent oral HPV infection.
39
 Mouth‐to‐mouth transmission, through deep kissing, still remains a possible source of the viruses.
8
, 
15
, 
40
 Non‐genital sources of virus present under fingernails could potentially provide an alternate reservoir for future infection.
41

Orogenital transmission was proven to be the best documented route for oral HPV infection. For genotype‐concordant vaginal and oral HPV infections, recent oral sexual exposure was a more important risk factor than cumulative sexual exposure.
38

In women aged 18–69 years, with available oral and vaginal HPV DNA screening data, vaginal HPV infection was present in 45.2%, oral HPV infection in 4.1%, dual infection in 3.0%, and concordant infection in 1.1%. Having a new sexual partner was positively associated with dual infection. Having more than two oral sex partners in the past year was positively associated with concordant infection.
38

Almost half of USA men have penile HPV infection.
42
, 
43
, 
44
 High burden of penile HPV infection was associated with oral HPV infection.
45
 Incidental oral HPV infection was associated with recent frequency of performing oral sex, current infection with the same HPV type in the genitals, hyponychium,
46
 and recent anal sex with men.
47
, 
48

For having sex with only one homosexual partner, the risk of oral HR‐HPV infection was 19.3% if the partner had a genital infection.
49
 This increased to 22.2% if oral sex was performed with two or more homosexual partners.
49
 The incidence of oral HPV among young heterosexual men was lower than in homosexual relationships. However, the incidence of oral HPV infection increased by a larger number of partners (17.9%), having oral sex (28.6%) and partners with oral or genital infection (11.5%).
50
, 
51
 Moreover, prevalence increased with frequency of oral sex among men whose partner had a genital infection with the same HPV type, supporting the evidence that oral HPV may be transmitted through either oral‐oral or oral‐genital routes.
50

Couples in which one of the partners has a documented HPV infection are particularly noteworthy regarding transmission and concordance of HPV types.
52
, 
53
 Husbands of women with cervical cancer had an increased standardized incidence ratio of 2.7:1 of developing tonsillar or tongue cancer, while husbands of women with cervical intraepithelial neoplasia had a ratio of 2.4:1.
52
 However, the risk of HPV transmission between OPC patients and their sexual partners shows divergent results: oral HPV16 DNA was detected among patients with OPC at diagnosis, but not among their partners.
39

Many patients with cervical cancer and their partners have anxiety about HPV transmission and collinear cancer risk.
54
 Diagnosis and treatment of oral squamous cell carcinomas are associated with significant declines in the frequency of vaginal and oral sex, regardless of tumor HPV status.
55
 Both in HPV positive and negative OPC patients there is a decline in sexual behaviour. Risk of transmission seems not to be the only reason for this decline. It was shown that diagnosis and treatment of OPC were associated with significant declines in the frequency of vaginal and oral sex, regardless of tumor HPV status. The highly similar decline in the frequency of sexual behaviours in HPV‐positive and HPV‐negative patients argue against knowledge and concern about HPV transmission through sex as the sole underlying reason for changes in sexual behaviour.
55

Timing, lifetime number, and type of sexual partners suggest additional nuances of how and why some individuals develop HPV‐OPC. Younger age at first oral sex and oral sex intensity remained associated with significantly increased odds of HPV‐OPC.
56
 Type of sexual partner (older partner when a case was younger) or partners having extramarital sex was also associated with HPV‐OPC.
56
 Obviously, sexual abstinence is the most reliable method of protection against HPV, but it cannot be considered as panacea for the prevention of HPV and all other sexually transmitted infections.
57
 Therefore, a careful attitude to sexual practices is the most important recommendation. A low number of lifetime sexual partners and consistent and correct use of condoms, although not offering complete protection, can decrease or reduce the exposure to HPV.
58

3CONCORDANCE OF HUMAN PAPILLOMA VIRUS INFECTIONS BETWEEN PARTNERS AND ANATOMIC SITESOral HPV concordance is defined as the simultaneous occurrence of the same type of HPV in different anatomical sites or sharing the infection in sexual partners.
59
 HPV transmission and genotype concordance among heterosexual partners showed HPV‐DNA concordance in 87.5% couples.
60
 The prevalence of oral HPV infections with concomitant cervical HPV infection show contradictory results: high by some authors,
61
, 
62
 but not showed by others.
63

Both the presence of cervical pathology and the presence of oral HPV are related to sexual habits.
64
 Long time (over 24 months) positivity of cervical high‐risk HPV can induce an increased incidence of oral HPV persistence.
62
 Oral HPV16 DNA is commonly detected among patients with HPV‐OPC at diagnosis, but prevalence rate among their partners is confusing.
65
, 
66
 The prevalence rate of oral HPV in partners of OPC patients was rated as approximately 15% and a concordance for their HPV genotype was 49%.
65
 The fact that husbands of women with cervical cancer have approximately a two‐fold increased risk of tonsillar cancer supports the concept of oral HPV transmission by performing orogenital sex.
66
 HPV‐related oropharyngeal carcinoma in couples, although rare, suggests transmission of HPV16.
67

The transmission and compatibility of viral genotypes also has psycho‐social implications and requires answering very personal questions. Diagnosis and treatment of OPC sometimes are associated with significant declines in the frequency of vaginal and oral sex.
55
 These restrictions of sexual activity seem to be unnecessary because of two reasons. First, persistence of the virus over a long period of time can lead to neoplastic transformation, in which viral load is modified from a balance between acquisition and clearance. Second, OPC development through HPV transmission from an OPC positive partner is very rare.
67

There is yet another aspect in favour of not having to give up sexual behaviours in a relation with a OPC positive patient: there is still discrepancy about moderate type‐specific HPV concordance between genital and oral HPV types.
61
 Low overall prevalence of genotype specific concordance between anatomic sites may be explained by site variation in susceptibility to HPV infection, differential exposure characteristics, and differences in natural history at each mucosal site.
68
, 
69
 What's more, there are other carriers of infection. Fingers have been described as a source of transmission or autoinoculation of β‐HPVs to the oral cavity.
70
 Oral HPV infection in men is significantly correlated with urinary HPV infection, with HPV16 as the most common type.
71
 Also, the majority of patients present concordant oral and urinary HPV types.
71

Men and women with genital wart‐like lesions are a high‐risk population. HPV types associated with an increased risk of dysplasia were detected in 64.6% of patients with condylomata acuminata.
72
 The vast majority of patients had HPV6 DNA detected at the wart site and in another site as well.
73
 Oral HPV was simultaneously identified in 10.4% of subjects and high concordance was found between oral and anal HPV types.
74

Altogether, HPV transmission and HPV concordance are influenced by all configurations of couples, all clinical situations and all possible sex configurations and the lifetime number of sexual partners. Consistent use of condoms reduces the risk of HPV acquisition.
60
 However, this does not apply to household members or friends with whom they do not have a direct sexual relationship. The risk of spread by droplets or by aerosols, analogous to many other viruses seems very small as synchronous (or simultaneous) infection between relatives has never been described. However, the statement that saliva or deep kissing is likely irrelevant to oral HPV transmission is opposed by multiple previously published studies.
50

4CLEARANCE OF HUMAN PAPILLOMA VIRUSThe viral load in particular anatomical sites results from a balance between acquisition and clearance.
75
, 
76
 Persistence of the virus can lead to neoplastic transformation.
17
, 
77
, 
78
, 
79
 The turning point on the cross road between clearance and carcinogenesis is the interplay of the viral proteins with different elements of the antioxidant and DNA damage response systems, emphasising the processes that might be required for the viral life cycle.
80

Most of our knowledge about HPV epidemiology relates to the cervix, where HPV acquisition occurs shortly after sexual debut, most infections clear within 1–2 years, and where infections at older ages are uncommon. Most of infections are transient, but persistent HR‐HPV infection is the major cause for development of cervical cancer.
81

Acquisition of oral oncogenic HPV infection is rarer than acquisition of genital infection, although infections at both sites seem to clear at roughly the same rate.
51
, 
82
 Numerous groups report that clearance of oral HPV infection is similar to that of anogenital HPV infections in healthy populations.
51
, 
83
, 
84
, 
85
 Increasing oral viral load was associated with reduced clearance of infection, consistent with the cervical cancer literature.
86

In a female cohort, with positive cervical and oral samples of HPV16, natural clearance correlated with HPV antibody titers.
87
 Duration of HPV persistence longer than 12 months led to an increased risk for disease progression in cervical and oral neoplasia.
88
 The cut‐off point for neoplastic transformation was the persistence of HPV infection longer than 6 months
89
 Similarly, newly acquired oral oncogenic HPV infections in healthy middle aged men were cleared within 1 year, with a median duration of 6.9 months
51
 In a group of sexually active male university students it was cleared within approximately 4 months
46
 These are higher rates of clearance than observed in a spouses study,
24
 and studies which included older married men.
84
, 
90
, 
91
 Data from the HPV Infection in Men study which followed participants >7 years revealed that 18% of HPV16 infections persisted beyond 24 months, potentially conferring higher risk of HPV‐OPC. Oral HPV16 persistence was positively associated with baseline HPV16 L1 antibody status, 6 months' persistence with age and gingivitis, while 12 months' persistence was inversely associated with lifetime number of sexual partners.
7
 In a study including both genders (all positive subjects having active sexual life), prevalence of oral transient HPV infection was 6.9% and the virus was eliminated in 6 months,
20
 up to maximally 2 years in a few cases.
82
 A prospective cohort study assessing the dynamics of HPV infections in parents and their infants, reported HPV genotype distribution and virus persistence in oral mucosa of the mothers in 17%. One‐third of them had persistent oral HPV infections but use of oral contraceptives and a second pregnancy protected against oral HPV persistence.
92

As emphasised in the previous paragraphs, contamination time is of paramount importance, which is the reverse of the cleansing potential. The longer the duration of an HPV infection, the higher the likelihood of continued persistence, and the higher the probability of detecting HPV DNA at any time point.
75

Clearance rates also vary by the virus type. LR‐HPV genotypes cleared from the oral mucosa more rapidly than HR‐HPV genotypes.
88
 The most persistent is HPV16
93
: it has been identified as the most frequent type to persist at the oral cavity,
92
 with longer persistence observed among men (22 months) than among women (19 months).
94

The viral load determined by the balance between acquisition and clearance is a derivative not only of sexual habits, recurrent episodes of contamination but also of an individual's immune status. Papillomaviruses have developed a variety of strategies to escape host innate and adaptive immunity.
95
, 
96
 Failure of immune control and detection is caused mainly by the lack of inflammatory reaction during the various stages of infection. HPV infections is confined to epithelial tissues and is highly localized. Viral proteins involved in immune escape are to enlist. E5 down‐regulate MHC class I and other key molecules in the antigen‐presentation pathways, E6 and E7 suppress host interferon pathways, activate the DNA‐damage pathways, and induce immune suppression via activation of suppressive cytokines and Tregs.
97
, 
98

Higher HPV prevalence in HIV positive participants may be due to an increased persistence of HPV infection due to compromised immunity, or to a high incidence of new HPV infections as a consequence of sexual behaviour.
99
 In a rehabilitation community for substance abusers' complete HPV clearance was observed in 1 year which could be related to adoption of healthier lifestyles of program participants. Nevertheless, new HPV infections were detected in these ex‐abusers even in the absence of the recognized and declared behavioural risk factors, suggesting a re‐expression from a latent infection.
99

Persistent oral HPV infection was associated with a low salivary matrix metallo‐proteinase‐8 (MMP‐8) concentration indicating eventually a failure in oral anti‐inflammatory defence.
100
 Unfortunately, a reliable correlate of protective immunity or immunologic frailty to HPV currently does not exist. Previous HPV transmission models were based on a single site transmission paradigm, but it is important to assess the data of multi‐site transmission and site‐specific natural immunity.
9

However, it is unclear whether antibody response is synonymous with systemic protection against subsequent infections at other sites. Furthermore, the role of local immunity, either humoural or cell‐mediated, in protecting against subsequent infections is currently not well understood. Hence, there could be site‐specific differences in immune response and vulnerability to subsequent infections.5CONCLUSIONGiven the lack of primary source data (i.e. no prospective studies on this topic, which require extrapolation of data from different studies to perform the analyses), it is difficult to reach to conclusions and recommendations. However, we believe that our review allows us to draw the following conclusions.Orogenital transmission was proven to be the best documented route for oral HPV infection. Patients with cervical cancer and their partners have anxiety about HPV transmission and its consequent cancer risk. The risk of transmission depends on different clinical and life situations: having oral on anal sex, presence of a local HPV infection in one of the partners, having oral contact with a partner with OPC or having heterosexual sex with a woman with cervical carcinoma.Transmission of HPV to the oral cavity (autoinoculation with fingers or transmission through saliva in deep kissing) is probably of limited importance.Careful attitude to sexual practices and use of condoms in sexual behavior outside prolonged relationships is the most important recommendation for HPV cancer survivors and their partners, but there is no justification for advising discontinuation of sexual activity. Transmission of HPV particles through saliva has not been proven and daily living activities are not a documented source of HPV infection.CONFLICT OF INTERESTNo conflict of interest declared.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSConceptualisation: Małgorzata Wierzbicka. Writing original draft: all authors. Writing review: all authors. Visualization: Michel R. M. San Giorgi. Editing: Frederik G. Dikkers. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Title: Molecular Pathogenesis of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Associated Disease of Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium

1. IntroductionFour decades ago, the HIV/AIDS pandemic began. Global spread led to 75 million infections and 32 million deaths. Today, highly effective prevention strategies are available to reduce the likelihood of HIV transmission via sexual intercourse. Furthermore, antiretroviral therapy for people living with HIV/AIDS can reduce viral loads to levels that cannot be detected or transmitted. However, despite the availability of these highly effective agents, HIV/AIDS continues to be a lethal disease. HIV/AIDS was responsible for one death each minute in 2021; every two minutes, a young woman becomes newly infected with HIV. Likewise, approximately 200,000 cases of mother-to-child transmission are reported each year. Thus, HIV/AIDS remains an unsolved problem; additional new knowledge may help improve treatment and prophylaxis.The surface of the oropharyngeal cavity is covered with a multilayer stratified squamous epithelium supported by the lamina propria, which is a layer of fibrous connective tissue [1,2]. Stratified oropharyngeal epithelial cells from the parabasal to the granulosum layers have well-developed lateral adherens and tight junctions, indicating a polarized organization [3,4,5,6]. The lateral localization of adherens and tight junctions between neighboring cells of oral epithelium contribute to a physical barrier that protects the body from penetration by viruses and other pathogens [4,5]. The oropharyngeal mucosa also contains a broad population of adaptive and innate immune cells, including T and B cells, macrophages, dendritic/Langerhans cells (DC/LCs), and natural killer (NK) cells that are distributed within the epithelium and lamina propria [2,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Intraepithelial DC/LCs and macrophages in the oral mucosa are critical components of the innate immune system. These cells defend against pathogens that enter the body via the oral cavity [2,13,14,16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. Intraepithelial macrophages and DC/LCs are also antigen-presenting cells that are capable of activating an adaptive immune response. Thus, these cells may serve as “bridges” between the innate and adaptive immune systems [2,14,23,24,25]. In addition, oral mucosal epithelial cells express toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9, which are critical facilitators of innate immune responses against numerous pathogens [26,27]. Intraepithelial oral mucosal DC/LC and macrophages originate from peripheral blood CD14+ monocytes [28,29]. Recruitment of circulating monocytes into the mucosal epithelium is mediated by monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), MCP-2, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α), and MIP-1β [30,31,32]. Expression and secretion of these mediators in the mucosal epithelium are modulated by multiple chemokine/cytokines, including interferon-ɣ (IFN-ɣ), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interleukins (ILs), including IL-1, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL10, IL-13, and IL-15 [14,32,33,34,35,36]. MCP-1 is secreted from the basolateral membranes of polarized epithelial cells [37,38]; the polarized release of MCP-1 may generate a gradient toward blood vessels that serve to recruit monocytes into the epithelium. Once they have transited across the endothelial layer, monocytes differentiate into macrophages and DC/LCs [11]. Further traffic of monocytes/macrophages, DCs, and T lymphocytes within the mucosal epithelium is coordinated by the formation of transient tight junctions between immune and epithelial cells [39,40,41,42]. Migrating immune cells, particularly DC/LCs, express the tight junction proteins known as claudin-1 and occludin. Transient association of these proteins with cell junctions promotes the migration of immune cells without disrupting epithelial barrier functions [39,41,43,44]. This allows DC/LCs to reach the mucosal surface [39,43]. The absence of epithelial junctions may reduce the efficiency of epithelial–lymphocyte interactions, thereby leading to dysfunction (i.e., little to no retention of interepithelial lymphocytes and DC/LCs and thus their depletion) [45,46,47]. Interactions of polarized mucosal epithelial cells with DC/LCs and other cells of the adaptive and innate immune systems are critical for maintaining oral mucosal immune homeostasis.The oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium and its intraepithelial and subepithelial adaptive and innate immune cells play critical roles in promoting protection against numerous pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and fungi. However, in HIV/AIDS, various chronic disorders can develop with a significant impact on the oral mucosal epithelium. These include inflammation, necrotizing mucosal ulcers, and malignant and nonmalignant lesions that may impair the barrier as well as the innate and acquired immune functions of the oral mucosa [48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55].Systemic HIV/AIDS is accompanied by the spread of cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 in the oral mucosal environment. There are several reports of viral DNA/RNA, cell-free HIV-1 virions, and tat and gp120 proteins isolated from oral mucosal tissue and saliva of HIV/AIDS patients [6,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64]. HIV-infected DC/LCs, lymphocytes, and macrophages were also detected in the mucosal and submucosal layers of the oropharyngeal epithelium [6,56,57,62,63,65]. Electron microscopy revealed that HIV virions could be found within the tight junctions of the oral epithelium [62]. The presence of both cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 both around and within oropharyngeal mucosa may result in numerous changes that impair its innate immune and barrier functions. 2. Role of Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium in HIV-1 Transmission in Adults and ChildrenOral HIV-1 transmission in the adult population may occur during oral sex, in newborn children and infants during delivery and breastfeeding [66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73]. The rate of adult oral HIV-1 transmission has been estimated at ~0.004% per exposure (i.e., not a highly efficient process) [66,67,68]. By contrast, the rate of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HIV-1 in the absence of antiretroviral therapy (ART) may be as high as 15% in Europe and 25–30% in Asian and African countries [74,75,76]. The oropharyngeal and tonsillar mucosal epithelium may express one or more co-receptors or non-canonical HIV-1 receptors that may facilitate virus binding and entry, including CC chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5), CXC chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4), heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), mannose receptor, galactosylceramide (GalCer), and T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 (TIM-1) [3,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84]. Results of studies featuring ex vivo adult and fetal/infant tissue explants revealed that HIV-1 transmission through the adult oral epithelium was less efficient than fetal/infant epithelial tissues, which supported rapid viral transmigration through the mucosal epithelium and infection of virus-susceptible intraepithelial and subepithelial cells [3,85]. The resistance provided by the adult tissues was primarily due to the presence of multiple epithelial layers and tissue stratification (20–30) with highly-effective tight junctions (Figure 1). The highly stratified adult oral epithelial cells limit viral penetration more efficiently than the less stratified fetal/neonatal/infant counterparts (i.e., with 3–5 layers) [3].Furthermore, adult oral epithelial cells express high levels of anti-HIV-1 innate proteins, including human beta-defensin (hBD)2 and hBD3. These cells also express secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor that inactivates intraepithelial virions and reduces oral transmission of HIV-1 [79,82,85]. By contrast, fetal/infant oral epithelial cells do not express high levels of these proteins, which may be among the factors contributing to the comparatively high rate of HIV-1 MTCT [79,82,85]. HBDs tagged with the HIV-1 protein transduction domain known as Tat were delivered to HIV-1-infected infant tonsillar epithelial cells, which facilitated efficient penetration and virus inactivation [85]. PTD-mediated internalization of these proteins in infant tonsillar epithelial cells was followed by their penetration into MVBs and vacuoles containing HIV-1. PTD also promoted the fusion of HIV-containing vesicles with lysosomes which led to the degradation of gp120 and p24 and viral inactivation [85]. Ex vivo PTD-mediated internalization of hBD2 and hBD3 into tonsillar tissue explants from infants also reduced virus spread from epithelial cells to CD68+ macrophages, CD4+ T lymphocytes, and CD1c+ DCs [85].HIV-1 internalization through the apical surface into infant tonsillar epithelial cells can be initiated by multiple entry pathways, including micropinocytosis as well as clathrin and caveolin/lipid raft-associated endocytosis [83]. An evaluation of HIV-1 transmission through polarized tonsillar epithelial cells revealed that approximately 0.05% of inoculated virions underwent transcytosis across the epithelium [86]. More than 90% of the internalized virions were sequestered in epithelial endosomes that included multivesicular bodies (MVBs) and vacuoles. Sequestration of HIV-1 in the endosomal compartment of tonsillar epithelial cells was observed both in the single layer of polarized cells as well as ex vivo in explants of tonsillar epithelial tissue [83,85,86]. Intraepithelial HIV-1 remained infectious for several days, although no virion release was observed [86]. Interactions of HIV-1-containing epithelial cells with activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and CD4+ T lymphocytes led to the disruption of epithelial cortical actin and the spread of the virus from epithelial cells to the lymphocytes. IFN-ɣ and TNF-α treatment of tonsillar epithelial cells also induced reorganization of cortical actin and intracellular virion release [86]. The release of HIV-1 from oropharyngeal mucosal epithelial cells may result in the virus spreading into intraepithelial and subepithelial macrophages, DC/LCs, and CD4 T+ lymphocytes. This is the first step in establishing systemic HIV-1 infection. Mucosal macrophages, DC/LCs, and intraepithelial T lymphocytes, DC/LCs may then transmit HIV-1 across the mucosal epithelium into regional lymph nodes [87,88,89,90,91,92]. Oral transmission of HIV-1 may also result from paracellular virus penetration if the integrity of the oral mucosal epithelium is impaired. HIV-1 gp120 binding to GalCer can result in elevated levels of intracellular calcium and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and PI3K signaling [93,94,95]. In addition, HIV-1 envelope protein gp120-induced activation of MAPK and NF-κB signaling reduced the expression of ZO-1, occludin, and claudin-1 in oral epithelial cells, leading to the disruption of tight junctions [96,97,98]; this may facilitate paracellular penetration of HIV-1 virions. HIV/AIDS-associated production and release of proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α and IFN-γ, may also disrupt tight junctions of oral epithelial cells and lead to paracellular penetration of HIV-1 [4,5].Oral epithelial cells may also support non-replicative HIV-1 infection and virus transfer to CD4+ T lymphocytes [99] and immobilize the infectious virions on their surfaces to facilitate their transfer to permissive cells [100]. Likewise, ex vivo HIV-1 infection of tonsillar explants can lead to a productive infection of intraepithelial and submucosal macrophages and lymphocytes [65,96,101,102].3. Manifestations of HIV/AIDS in the Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium3.1. HIV/AIDS Reactivates Opportunistic Infections of the Oral Mucosa The oral cavity of a healthy individual maintains abundant flora, including many commensal and potentially opportunistic organisms. Inflammatory lesions and opportunistic infections are relatively infrequent, suggesting that the oral mucosa has highly efficient biological and immunological barrier functions [14,16,103,104]. The innate immune and barrier functions of the oral mucosal epithelium may become severely impaired in individuals with HIV/AIDS, which will permit the development of opportunistic infections. Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) are common oral pathogens that can lead to various chronic disorders in the oral mucosal epithelium, including necrotizing mucosal ulcers and nonmalignant lesions [48,49,50,51,52,53,105]. All three of these viruses can infect children early in life via the oral mucosa and persist throughout their lifetimes [106,107,108]. Reactivation of EBV, HSV-1, and HCMV in individuals diagnosed with HIV/AIDS leads to viral shedding into various body fluids, including saliva and cervicovaginal secretions [55,109,110,111,112]. Numerous human herpes viruses (including EBV, HSV-1, and HCMV) were detected in the saliva of HIV-infected individuals despite the availability of ART [109]. These viruses can be transmitted to neonates and infants through maternal saliva and/or breast milk [106,113,114,115,116,117]. Oropharyngeal shedding of HSV and HCMV was also reported in HIV-infected children [118,119].3.1.1. Synergistic Contributions of HIV-1 and EBV to the Nonmalignant Oral Lesion, Hairy LeukoplakiaWhite epithelial lesions on the side of the tongue, a condition known as hairy leukoplakia (HL), are well-known oral mucosal manifestations of HIV/AIDS. These lesions, which feature epithelial acanthosis and hyperkeratosis without inflammation [120,121,122], are associated with high-level replication of EBV [120,121,122]. HL lesions consistently demonstrate severe depletion of intraepithelial LCs, suggesting the critical role of these cells in disease pathogenesis [123,124,125]. Ex vivo experiments targeting buccal explants and tongue tissue revealed that EBV infection occurs first in submucosal CD14+ monocytes. The virus then spreads via migration to the epithelium. This series of events will initiate a productive EBV infection within terminally-differentiated cells of the spinosum and granulosum layers [126]. Exposure of EBV-infected oral explants or EBV-infected monocytes with specific antibodies that target CC chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) and MCP-1 prevented monocyte entry and blocked keratinocytes infection. Interestingly, EBV-infected B-lymphocytes played only a small role in EBV spread to keratinocytes in an ex vivo oral tissue explant model [126]. However, co-cultivation experiments performed in vitro revealed that infected B-lymphocytes may promote EBV spread to previously uninfected monocytes. Circulating EBV-positive monocytes are present in most HIV-infected individuals. This finding is consistent with a pathway in which EBV spreads from B-lymphocytes to monocytes. Infected monocytes entering the epithelium will then differentiate into macrophages and/or LCs. These cells will elicit a productive keratinocyte infection and thus promote the development of the characteristic HL lesions [126] (Figure 2). It is also possible that CD14-negative precursors of LCs may disseminate EBV within oral mucosal epithelial cells [127].Both EBV and HIV-1 can infect macrophages, monocytes, and DCs [65,128,129,130,131,132,133,134]. Circulating monocytes serve as reservoirs for HIV-1 infection [135]. Circulating monocytes in patients undergoing highly active ART (HAART) may harbor replication-competent, non-latent HIV-1 [128]. EBV-infected macrophages were also detected in healthy asymptomatic individuals. This finding suggested that macrophages may be a reservoir for this opportunistic pathogen [136].HIV-1 infection of monocytes may increase the surface transport of adhesion molecules and integrins, including the α5β1 and αvβ3 integrins [137,138,139,140,141]. The EBV envelope protein BMRF-2 uses β1 and α5β1 integrins as receptors to infect polarized oral epithelial cells [142,143]. EBV entry into monocytes may also be mediated by an EBV BMRF-2– integrin interaction because monocytes do not express the primary EBV receptor, CD21 [144]. Thus, HIV/AIDS-associated activation of surface integrin expression in peripheral blood monocytes may facilitate their infection by EBV. In addition, the HIV tat protein induces endothelial cell expression of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule (E-selectin) [145]. The synergy between HIV tat protein and TNF-α detected in elevated levels in association with HIV/AIDS increases β2 integrin expression in monocytes; these responses may lead to active translocation of monocytes from the circulation into tissue sites where they differentiate into LCs [146,147]. This may lead to the migration of HIV-1 and/or EBV-infected monocytes from the circulation into mucosal sites, thereby initiating EBV spread from LCs to differentiated epithelial cells capable of supporting productive virus replication [126,127]. EBV BMRF-2/BDLF-2 facilitates virus spread between oral epithelial cells and establishes foci of virus-infected epithelial tissue [148,149]. This may promote epithelial cell proliferation and lead to the development of HL. EBV BHRF-1 delays or inhibits apoptosis of cells in the differentiated granulosum layers, which may permit enhanced proliferation of epithelial cells, thereby increasing the thickness and hyperplasia characteristic of the HL epithelium [150].HIV-1 infection of monocytes/macrophages and DC/LCs may impair their critical functions, including activation, maturation, antigen presentation, and interactions with T cells [151,152,153,154,155]. HIV and/or EBV infection of DC/LCs may ultimately result in their dysfunction. This may lead to the depletion of oral mucosal intraepithelial LCs, as has been shown for HIV/AIDS-associated HL lesions [123,124,125,156]. HIV-1 gp120 and tat proteins are also capable of disrupting epithelial adherens and tight junctions [96,97,98]. This may reduce the intraepithelial retention of LCs and lead to local depletion [39,41,43,44,157].ART for HIV-1 and treatments effective against EBV typically lead to the resolution of HL in most patients [124,158]. These findings indicate the synergistic roles of HIV and EBV in the development of HL. However, although the introduction of ART has reduced the frequency of HL, this lesion has not been completely eliminated [159,160]. This suggests that residual HIV-associated mechanisms may contribute to HL development. 3.1.2. HIV-Induced Disruption of Tight and Adherens Junctions of Oral Epithelial Cells Facilitates the Spread of HSV-1Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 and HSV type 2 are both opportunistic infections that are frequently associated with HIV/AIDS [105]. HSV-1 reactivates and replicates in the oral epithelium of HIV/AIDS-associated immunocompromised individuals and can lead to oral ulcers, gingivitis, and necrotic lesions [55]. HSV-1 reactivation may occur despite ongoing HAART [161,162]. Although the increased risk of developing HSV infection may be mediated in part by HIV-induced immune dysfunction, they may also be associated with direct and/or indirect molecular interactions between these two viruses. HIV-infected LC/DCs, CD4+ T lymphocytes, and macrophages infiltrating the mucosal epithelium can release virions as well as the viral proteins, gp120 and tat. Interactions of virions and viral proteins with one or more HIV-coreceptors (i.e., CXCR4, CCR5, HSPG, and/or GalCer), TLR-2/4, integrins, and/or mannose receptors on epithelial cells induces the activation of PI3K, MAPK, TLR, and NF-κB signaling pathways, resulting in the expression of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IFN-ɣ, IL-1, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-13), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs-2 and -9), and caspases (caspase-3 and -6) [6,98,163,164,165]. In addition, activation of these pathways will downregulate the expression and/or promote aberrant internalization and degradation of epithelial adherens and tight junctions.Prolonged interactions of polarized epithelial cells from the oral cavity with tat and gp120 can lead to the disruption of adherens and tight junctions via activation of the MAPK signaling pathway [97]. HIV-associated activation of MAPK leads to upregulation of MMP-9 and NF-κB which induces the disruption of adherens and tight junctions [98]. Furthermore, HIV-induced disruption of oral epithelial junctions facilitates the paracellular spread of HSV-1 [97] (Figure 3). The HSV-1 envelope glycoprotein gD binds to nectin-1, which is a cell adhesion protein [166] sequestered within the intercellular junctions and limits HSV access to mucosal epithelial cells [167]. HIV-mediated disruption of adherens junctions will liberate nectin-1, thereby promoting HSV-1 binding to gD. HSV-1 infection is substantially increased in epithelial cells whose junctions have been disrupted compared to those with junctions that remain intact [97]. Exposure of nectin-1 due to disruptions in adherens junctions may also accelerate the cell-to-cell spread of HSV-1 from oral epithelial cells infected to those uninfected. Exposure to anti-nectin-1 and anti-HSV-1 gD antibodies will result in a substantial reduction in the extent of HSV-1 infection as well as cell-to-cell spread. Collectively, these findings suggest that HIV-1-mediated HSV spread and ongoing infection are facilitated by HSV gD interactions with exposed nectin-1 [97]. HSV is latent in sensory neurons in healthy individuals with intact immune function [168]. HIV/AIDS may induce HSV reactivation in neurons, thereby leading to the development of mucosal disorders [161]. In addition, HIV-mediated release of nectin-1 from cells with disrupted adherens junctions may also promote the spread of HSV-1 from neurons to epithelial cells (Figure 3). Thus, HIV-mediated disruption of intercellular junctions potentiates HSV-1 infection as well as cell-to-cell and paracellular spread within the oral mucosal epithelium. This mechanism may contribute to the rapid development of HSV-associated oral lesions in HIV-infected individuals.3.1.3. HIV-1 and HCMV Mother-to-Child Transmission (MTCT) through the Infant tonsillar Epithelium Synergistically Promote the Spread of Both HIV-1 and HCMVDespite the availability of effective ART, 100,000–240,000 cases of MTCT of HIV-1 are reported each year [76,169,170,171,172]. Most cases of MTCT (40–50%) result from breastfeeding [76]. Breast milk may contain cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 [69,70,71,72,73], which may initiate mucosal transmission of the virus via the child’s oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal mucosae [3,6,79,173]. Breast milk may also contain HCMV that has been activated in response to HIV/AIDS [174], which can promote the development of oral mucosal lesions, retinitis, hepatitis, esophagitis, pneumonia, encephalopathy, and/or gastrointestinal inflammation [175,176,177,178,179]. Nearly all HIV-infected individuals, including pregnant women, exhibit HCMV co-infection [108,180]. MTCT of HCMV can occur in utero via the placenta and during labor by exposure to secretions from the cervix and the vagina [119,181]. However, most HCMV MTCT is observed postpartum by virion transfer in infected breast milk and transmission through the oral and/or gut mucosal epithelium [119,181,182]. Almost all cases of HCMV activation in HCMV-seropositive, HIV-uninfected women occur secondary to lactation [183]. The virus can be found in breast milk for only a few weeks postpartum [184,185]. By contrast, HCMV shedding into breast milk of HIV-infected women may increase significantly during the postpartum period and can last for six months or longer. Persistent viral shedding can facilitate MTCT via the infant’s oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal mucosal epithelium [186]. Low maternal CD4+ T cell counts and high levels of HIV RNA in breast milk correlate with comparatively high levels of HCMV genomic DNA in breast milk [186,187]. HCMV transmission (perinatal and postnatal) may occur in as many as 90% of children who acquire the virus during early childhood [119,176,188,189]. Primary HCMV infection or disease reactivation in HIV-infected pregnant women may also contribute to the MTCT of HIV-1. Several groups have shown that elevated levels of HCMV in breast milk are associated with an increased risk of postpartum MTCT of HIV-1 [186,189,190,191]. Exposure to cell-free forms of HIV-1 or HIV-1 proteins gp120 and tat will lead to the disruption of the tight junctions characteristic of epithelial cells from the tonsils. This will also increase paracellular transfer through polarized epithelial cells from infant tonsils as well as ex vivo tissue explants. This will also facilitate HCMV spread within the tonsil epithelial cells [96]. Furthermore, HIV-1 gp120 and tat-induced activation of NF-κB and MAPK signaling in these cells increases the extent of HCMV infection. NF-κB activation is a requirement for transactivation of the major immediate early HCMV promoter and promotes the expression of viral IE proteins [192,193,194]. By contrast, MAPK activation is required for HCMV replication and the generation of viral progeny [195].HCMV infection of epithelial cells from human tonsils may also result in the disruption of tight junctions. This will increase paracellular transfer and thus facilitate HIV-1 spread into the mucosal layers [96] (Figure 4). HCMV-induced paracellular spread of HIV-1 in tonsil tissue also enhances virus access to macrophages, dendritic cells, and CD4+ T lymphocytes. In addition, HIV-1-enhanced HCMV infection via paracellular spread to epithelial cells will also lead to HCMV infection of tonsillar DCs and macrophages. Thus, HIV-1- and HCMV-mediated disruption of the tight junctions of the infant tonsillar mucosal epithelial cell tight junctions may impair their barrier function, thereby facilitating paracellular penetration and the initiation of MTCT (Figure 4). HIV-1- and HCMV-co-infected tonsillar explant tissues showed higher levels of target cell infection with both viruses than was observed in tissues infected independently with either virus alone [96]. These results highlight the synergistic effects of both HIV-1 and HCMV with respect to promoting infection. This synergism may result in critical contributions to HIV-1 and HCMV transmission via breast milk when both viruses are present [186,187] and can interact simultaneously with the infant/newborn oral mucosa.4. HIV-1 Proteins gp120 and Tat Promote Invasiveness of Both Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-Positive and HPV-Negative Neoplastic Oral and Genital Epithelial Cells HIV/AIDS may increase the risk of developing cancer. Results from recent studies have revealed that the incidence of HPV-associated oropharyngeal, cervical, and anal cancer is 6, 22, and 80 times higher, respectively, in HIV-infected compared to HIV-uninfected individuals [196,197,198]. HPV is the etiological agent of most oral-genital epithelial carcinomas [199,200]. Although anti-HPV vaccination strategies are effective in preventing virus infection, the value of this approach is limited in people living with HIV (PLWH) because most of these individuals have experienced multiple HPV exposures. HIV-1 may also be a risk factor associated with head and neck as well as HPV-negative oral cancer [201,202,203,204,205]. HIV may increase the risk of developing HPV-associated cancers by attenuating local and systemic immune responses. Moreover, HIV-associated epithelial disruption may promote HPV infection of oral and genital epithelial cells [6]. The addition of HPV-16 pseudovirions (PsVs) to the mucosal surfaces of disrupted tissues led to their paracellular penetration into the epithelium [6]. HPV-16 PsV entry into the basal/parabasal cells (i.e., the site of initiation of the HPV life cycle) was observed. These findings suggest that HIV-associated disruption of mucosal epithelial junctions facilitates paracellular spread by oncogenic HPV virions through strata spinosum and granulosum layers, leading to the infection of basal/parabasal cells. Initiation of this infection can lead to HPV-associated neoplasia. HIV-1-induced disruptions of the tight and adherens junctions in mucosal epithelial cells may also lead to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [206]. EMT, which is a physiologic process, regulates the development of cell lineage identity and cell differentiation associated with embryonic development [207]. EMT also promotes neoplasia, including the growth and metastasis of invasive epithelial cancers [208]. EMT associated with the development of epithelial cell cancer involves multiple steps, beginning with the loss of apicobasal polarity. This event may be followed by loss of adherens and tight junctions as well as critical cell-adhesive properties. Cells in transition develop a spindle cell-type shape. During the final stages of EMT, these cells will also express mesenchymal markers [209,210,211,212,213,214]. While in the intermediate stages of EMT, the cells may express both mesenchymal (i.e., vimentin) and epithelial (i.e., E-cadherin) markers, which are critical factors contributing to cancer cell invasiveness [209,210,211,212,213,214]. The dominant network involving the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling pathway regulates EMT leading to cancer [215]. The mature form of TGF-β binds to TGFβ−R2 and promotes a signaling cascade leading to Smad family transcription factor complex activation. These events lead to the activation of several specific transcriptional regulators, including Slug, Twist1, and Snail. Activation will be followed by the upregulation of N-cadherin, fibronectin, and vimentin and the downregulation of E-cadherin [216,217]. Prolonged interactions (five to seven days) with HPV-16-immortalized anal AKC-2 and cervical CaSki epithelial cells with cell-free-HIV-1 virions and/or viral proteins gp120 and tat leads to the development of increased invasiveness and EMT [218] (Figure 5). Furthermore, adding these viral proteins to cultures of oral epithelial cells, including HPV-16-infected SCC-47 and HPV-16-negative HSC-3 cells, resulted in similar responses. While gp120- and tat-induced EMT resulted in the detachment of poorly-adherent cells, these same cells could undergo reattachment under appropriate conditions. Reattached cells co-expressed vimentin and E-cadherin. This result suggested that these cells had reached the intermediate stage of EMT [218]. Reattached cells also expressed stem cell markers CD44 and CD133 that may contribute to cancer-associated metastasis and invasion. Once E-cadherin expression was restored, and vimentin expression was inhibited, the HIV-induced EMT was reduced, as well as the invasiveness of HPV-16 immortalized anal epithelial and cervical cells [218]. Taken together, these results suggest that direct interactions of extracellular HIV-1 virions and/or gp120 and tat with neoplastic genital or oral mucosal epithelial cells may lead to the development of an EMT phenotype that accelerates the development of HPV-associated malignancies (Figure 5). Recent findings also suggest that the HIV-1 tat protein contributes to the induction of EMT and the increased invasiveness of HPV-negative cancer cells derived from the lung epithelium [219]. In addition, other studies have highlighted the impact of HIV-associated reductions in adherens and tight junction protein expression in both lung and intestinal epithelial cells [220,221]. Collectively, these results suggest that HIV-1 infection may promote the development of malignancy in both HPV-negative and HPV-infected neoplastic epithelial cells. 5. ConclusionsThe multi-layer adult oral mucosal epithelium expresses high levels of anti-HIV innate immune proteins hBD2, hBD3, and secretory leukocyte protease inhibitors that inactivate the virus and thus reduce the rate of oral transmission. By contrast, the oral mucosal epithelia of newborns and infants cannot efficiently prevent HIV-1 penetration because of its minimal stratification and inability to produce sufficient innate immune proteins. HIV-1 infection leads to EBV infection of circulating monocytes, followed by their migration into the oral mucosal epithelium and differentiation into DC/LCs. The spread of EBV from macrophages and LCs into differentiated oral epithelial cells may lead to productive viral replication and extensive cell-to-cell spread of virus progeny within the stratum granulosum of the oral mucosal epithelium, thereby initiating the development of HL. MAPK activation in oral epithelial cells by HIV-1 gp120 and tat leads to the upregulation of NF-κB and MMP-9, thereby disrupting tight and adherens junctions and facilitating HSV-1 paracellular spread. In addition, HIV-induced disruption of epithelial junctions also liberates sequestered nectin-1 and thus facilitates its binding to HSV-1 gD, which promotes HSV-1 spread within the epithelial cells. Disruption of infant tonsil epithelial tight junctions by HIV-1 and HCMV may impair the barrier function of mucosal epithelium and permit paracellular penetration of both viruses and the initiation of MTCT. Extended interactions between HIV-1 cell-free virions or the HIV-1 proteins gp120 and tat with HPV-positive and -negative oral neoplastic epithelial cells increase their EMT phenotype and invasiveness. Altogether, these studies show the molecular mechanism of the interaction between HIV-1 and other pathogens, including EBV, HCMV, HSV-1, and HPV, in the oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium. These interactions impair the barrier and innate immune functions of oropharyngeal epithelium, leading to the increased spread of these viruses within the oral mucosal environment and the progression of existing neoplastic processes of epithelial cells. Additional research may help improve treatment and prophylaxis for HIV/AIDS infection. New approaches could eliminate/reduce the reactivation and spread of opportunistic infections in the oral cavity and maintain the barrier and innate immune functions of the oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium


Title: Epidemiological Trends in the Characterization of Human Papillomavirus Virus-Related Oropharyngeal Cancer: A Global Perspective

IntroductionThe worldwide incidence of human papillomavirus (HPV)-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma has risen dramatically in recent years reaching epidemic-like proportions in developed countries. With the increased recognition of the role that HPV infection plays in the oncogenesis of oropharyngeal cancer, significant advances have been made over the last several decades in the understanding of this disease. Most strikingly, it is now firmly established that HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer represents a clinically and biologically distinct entity from HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer. From a practical standpoint, the background from which HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer emerges, as well as the risk factors for its development is uniquely different and leads to new questions regarding its prevention and diagnosis.Main TextGlobal IncidenceThe incidence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal (throat) cancer has been shown to vary across the world, where it is more common in developed, industrialized countries and in Western societies. These discrepancies may be due to differing social norms, particularly with regard to sexual activity. In the United States, approximately 20,000 new cases are diagnosed annually, and current projections estimate a steep upward trend for the next decade with greater than 30,000 annual cases by year 2029 [1]. The overall incidence rate is approximately 5 cases per 100,000 in the United States with most new cases arising in white males aged 65 and younger, where it represents the sixth most common non-cutaneous solid cancer. Notably, the incidence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer has increased dramatically over the past two decades – with studies demonstrating a three-fold increase between 2000 and 2017 [2]. Furthermore, using a national tissue repository maintained by the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results program in the United States, Chaturvedi et al. showed that the percentage of all oropharyngeal cancer cases staining positive for HPV as determined by polymerase chain reaction increased dramatically from 16% during 1984 to 1989 to 72% during 2000 to 2004 [1]. In fact, oropharyngeal cancer has now eclipsed cervical cancer as the most neoplasm associated with HPV infection.Epidemiologic data from Europe also has confirmed that the incidence of oropharyngeal cancer is on the rise in Western countries in particular. While the proportion of cases directly attributable to HPV has generally been lower than in the United States and believed to be due to higher smoking rates, the evidence is nonetheless provocative. Data from the United Kingdom has shown that between 2002 and 2011, the incidence of oropharyngeal caner increased by 101% [2]. Notably, the relative proportions of HPV-positive and negative cases remained stable over time at approximately 50% suggesting that both increased exposure of HPV in the general population as well as increasing smoking rates may underlie this observation [3]. Similarly, registry data from Denmark showed that the age-adjusted incidence rate per 100,000 increased from 1.8 in 2000 to 5.1 in 2017 with the prevalence of HPV-positive cases rising by 10% [4]. Another study from Germany showed that the proportion of newly diagnosed oropharyngeal cancer attributed to HPV has more than doubled from 2000 to 2017 [5].In contrast, a systematic review including 3,850 patients with head and neck cancer from sub-Saharan Africa showed that only 20% of oropharyngeal cancer cases was related to HPV [6]. Another study of 266 oropharyngeal cancer patients diagnosed between 2007 and 2017 in South Africa showed that the proportion of cases harboring high-risk HPV was only 5% [7]. In another study, investigators from Nigeria reviewed the tumor specimens of 149 head and neck cancer cases and were unable to detect HPV in any of the samples [8]. Indeed, research from countries such as Mozambique and Cameroon have suggested that the relatively lower rates of HPV infection observed might reflect differing acceptances of sexual norms in those parts of the world [9, 10]. Similarly, the prevalence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer in South American is also low. For instance, studies have generally reported a prevalence of between 5 and 20% for populations in Brazil [11, 12]. Data from Mexico has also suggested that the rates of HPV-positive disease are intermediate between that of Western countries and those in the developing world [13].Epidemiological data has suggested that the prevalence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer might possibly vary depending on the socioeconomic status of the country [14]. For instance, the incidence appears to be increasing in Japan, similar to Western countries [15]. Saito reported that the prevalence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma cases more than doubled between 2000 and 2003 and 2008–2011 from 15 to 33%, respectively [16]. Epidemiological data from China has shown similar trends [17]. For instance, findings from a population-based registry from Hong Kong showed that the proportion of oropharyngeal cancer cases related to HPV rose from 40 to 65% from 2010 to 2015 to 2016–2020 [18]. Another study from Singapore showed the prevalence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer was approximately 40% [19]. In other less affluent countries such as Thailand, for instance, the rates tend to be lower. Saiya et al. reported that the proportion of oropharyngeal cancer cases that were HPV-positive between 2009 and 2020 was 15% and had stayed relatively steady over time [20]. Another study from Malaysia showed that while the prevalence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer in that country was not as high as in developed nations, it was still on an upward trend [21]. Notably, in more remote countries, the incidence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer has stayed low. For instance, one study from inner Mongolia showed that the prevalence of HPV-positivity was only 7% [22].Risk FactorsWhile the global variation in the prevalence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer seems to be driven by socioeconomic factors and those related to sexual practices, it must be recognized that differences within the United States also exist based on demographics. For instance, the incidence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer differs not only by sex but also by age and race. For instance, a higher prevalence of this disease has consistently been observed in white men than in any other subgroup. Furthermore, patients with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer have been shown to be younger and healthier compared to HPV-negative patients [23]. While smokers can definitely get HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer, many patients with this disease have never smoked. In parallel with the increased incidence in white men in the United States, higher socioeconomic status has also been associated with an increased incidence [24]. For instance, one population-based registry study showed that higher levels of educational attainment and higher income were both independently associated with an increased risk of developing HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer [25]. In short, an epidemic appears to have developed affecting younger middle-aged men of professional, educated classes. In contrast to patients with HPV-negative head and neck cancer, which has always been strongly linked with the traditional risk factors of tobacco and alcohol use, HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer patients have a notably distinct risk profile that generally reflects sexual behavior that is considered high-risk. It is thus believed that fundamental differences between how cancer arises in the setting of virally mediated versus smoking mediated disease underlies the differing response patterns to treatment associated with each. Table 1 outlines some of the general differences between HPV-positive and HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer with respect to patient characteristics.
Table 1Generalized profiles for oropharyngeal cancer patients based on HPV statusHPV-negativeHPV-positiveAgeOlder (> 60 years)Younger/middle-ageRisk-factorsTobacco/AlcoholOral sexEtiologyMutation-drivenVirus-drivenP53 geneAlteredWild-typeMale: female ratio1–2:15:1Ethnic predilectionAllWhite/CaucasianCo-morbiditiesCommonRareEducation levelLowHighIncidenceDecreasingIncreasing
The difference between the pathogenesis of HPV-positive and HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer is due to the fact that the former is a sexually transmitted disease. Oral HPV is transmitted to the mouth by oral sex, or possibly in other ways. While many people are exposed to oral HPV in their life, only a small minority of these will develop cancer. Population-based data has shown that approximately 10% of men and 4% of women carry the oral HPV virus asymptomatically at any given time [26]. Although nearly all people clear the virus within 1 to 2 years, HPV infection can persist in some placing them at higher risk for cancer [27]. Although it is generally believed that HPV-related oropharyngeal cancer is strongly associated with oral sex and the number of oral sex partners, investigators recently showed that a higher number of casual sex partners, younger age at first oral sex, and extramarital sex also significantly raised the risk of HPV-associated oropharyngeal cancer [28]. Additionally, these same researchers described a new metric of quantifying risk exposure as a measure of sexual intensity (sex-years) based on the number of oral sex partners per 10 years across different ages. Their data conclusively demonstrated a strong correlation between increasing sex-years with the development of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer, even after adjusting for cumulative number of oral sex partners. For subjects with greater than 5 sex-years, for instance, the odds of developing HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer were nearly 3 times that of those with less than 5 sex-years exposure. How the differences in sexual norms across the world contributes to the variation in prevalence of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer remains an area of active investigation but has significant public health implications [29].Future ResearchThe role of HPV vaccination, while generally accepted to confer a benefit with respect to decreasing the incidence of cervical cancer in women and genital warts in men, is still uncertain in the setting of oropharyngeal cancer. In the United States, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention currently recommends routine vaccination against HPV of boys and girls at the age of 11–12 years [30]. For children who receive their first dose before the age of 15, only two doses are necessary. Teens and young adults who start the series later, at ages 15 through 26 years, need three doses of HPV vaccine. Notably, HPV vaccination is not recommended for anybody older than age 26 years because the likelihood of being exposed to HPV is extremely high. Vaccination is generally protective against all HPV-associated cancers including possibly those of the oropharynx. Notably, vaccination can prevent cancer, but it cannot treat. In other words, it does not work against established HPV infections or against cells that have been transformed by HPV and are on their way to forming tumors.Although research is ongoing regarding the potential utility of screening for oropharyngeal cancer in high-risk populations, there is currently no evidence demonstrating a benefit. Notably, screening is complicated by the lack of a reliable pre-invasive state as well as a paucity of robust techniques. While HPV-DNA as well as antibodies to HPV can be detected in bodily fluids including the blood and saliva of patients with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer, there is currently no established role for the screening of asymptomatic patients for the purpose of early detection [31, 32]. This is due to the lack of any studies demonstrating a benefit to screening. As such, questions regarding the sensitivity and specificity of any proposed methods will need to be fully vetted before the implementation of any screening modality. Unlike the case in cervical cancer in which a routine Pap smear can alert patients to the presence of pathological characteristics including HPV which could place them at higher risk for the development of cancer, no such assay exists in the setting of oropharyngeal cancer. Notably, the HPV subtypes typically associated with the development of oropharyngeal cancer (i.e. HPV-16 and HPV-18) are the same as the case for cervical cancer which suggests that analogies could be drawn with respect to the natural history of the oncogenesis of the diseases [33]. Notably, targeted screening might be particularly beneficial for populations in which resources are lacking. For instance, patients from developing countries may present with more severe symptoms due to the relative scarcity of health services as well as constraints related to education and awareness compared to those residing in developed parts of the world. In these situations, in which the tumor is diagnosed at more advanced stages, the treatment options are generally deemed to be more intensive [34]. Additionally, treatment can be complicated by logistical barriers as well as social determinants related to income, transportation, education, housing, and nutrition, among others. Given the rigorous nature of treatment for head and neck cancer, the importance of a robust support network has also been shown [35].While evidence has now firmly established that HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer is a unique entity with distinct clinical and molecular characteristics compared to HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer, treatment is still variable [36]. However, data has accumulated demonstrating that patients with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer have a significantly improved prognosis as a result of their exquisite sensitivity to radiation compared to their HPV-negative counterparts [37]. From a practical standpoint, these tumors have been shown to shrink briskly and robustly in both the laboratory and in actual patients. Moreover, given the strong link between HPV and radiation response, the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) created a new staging system in 2016 specifically for patients diagnosed with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer (through p16, a widely accepted surrogate for HPV) to reflect its favorable prognosis compared to those with HPV-negative disease [38]. Notably, many HPV-positive tumors that had been previously categorized as stage IV in the prior AJCC system were significantly “down-staged” to stage II or even stage I cancers. Sharma et al. analyzed 621 patients using criteria from the most recent (eighth) AJCC staging system in comparison to that of the prior (seventh) version. Using the seventh edition, only 8% of patients were classified as having stage I or II disease. In contrast, with the most recent system, this percentage rose to 63% [39]. This new staging system has prompted many investigators to question historical treatment paradigms, which were developed and based on information that is now considered obsolete. Indeed, given that a higher proportion of patients are being diagnosed with earlier stage disease simply with the transition to a more updated classification system, the implications with respect to treatment might be significant. For instance, current options include surgery, radiation, chemoradiation, or a combined approach using more than one modality. Moreover, studies have shown that the efficacy of treatment is diluted in HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer patients with a smoking history, which might influence decision-making in certain situations [40]. This is particularly true given the differences in tobacco consumption across the world [41]. Thus, due to the variability of treatment patterns across the globe, efforts of promoting standardized, evidence-based approaches are clearly warranted [42].ConclusionThe recognition that HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer represents a uniquely different disease has ushered in a new era in the evaluation and management of patients with this diagnosis. Given its potential for patient counseling and treatment decision-making, staining for HPV is now standardly conducted on all oropharyngeal cancer specimens across the world. However, dramatic variations in the epidemiology of this disease exist with respect to prevalence, risk factors, and treatment. Based on the emerging evidence, as well as on the explosion in interest from patients and physicians alike, well-designed clinical trials with associated translational studies are urgently needed to better understand the natural history of this disease in relation to its different pattens of origination. Given the increasing incidence of this disease across a large part of the globe, the importance of this research cannot be overstated.Key References
1. Chaturvedi AK, Engels EA, Pfeiffer RM, et al. Human papillomavirus and rising oropharyngeal cancer incidence in the United States. J Clin Oncol 2023; 41: 3081–3088.
**This is an important epidemiologic study demonstrating increasing rates of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer in the United States.
14. Lu Y, Xie Z, Luo G, et al. Global burden of oropharyngeal cancer attributable to human papillomavirus by anatomical subsite and geographic region. Cancer Epidemiol 2022; 78: 103,140.
*Assessment of HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer impact across the world.
23. Hess CB, Rash DL, Daly ME, et al. Competing causes of death and medical comorbidities among patients with human papillomavirus-positive vs. human papillomavirus-negative oropharyngeal carcinoma and impact on adherence to radiotherapy. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2014; 140: 312–316.
*An analysis of causes of mortality in patients with HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer.
26. Gillison ML, Broutian T, Pickard RK, et al. Prevalence of oral HPV infection in the United States, 2009–2010. JAMA 2012; 307; 693–703.
**Prospective study evaluating the prevalence of oral HPV infection in the general population.
27. Kreimer AR, Campbell CM, Lin HY, et al. Incidence and clearance of oral human papillomavirus infection in men: the HIM cohort study. Lancet 2013; 382: 877–887. **Prospective study evaluating the prevalence of oral HPV infection in the general population.
**Prospective study evaluating the prevalence of oral HPV infection in the general population.




================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS 1 (HSV-1)
================================================================================
Title: Personalized viral genomic investigation of herpes simplex virus 1 perinatal viremic transmission with dual fatality

INTRODUCTIONHuman herpesvirus, also known as herpes simplex virus (HSV), is a large double-stranded DNA virus (Simplexvirus, Alphaherpesvirinae, Herpesviridae) that is prevalent all over the world, with >60% of people infected with HSV type 1 (HSV-1) (Looker et al. 2015a). HSV type 2 (HSV-2) is less prevalent, but still affects ∼19% of the global population (Looker et al. 2015b). The viral life cycle of HSV includes entry and amplification of viral progeny at the epithelial mucosa, which typically results in the formation of oral or genital lesions. The virus is also able to enter innervating axonal nerve endings, whereupon it establishes a persistent infection in sensory or sympathetic neuronal nuclei of the peripheral nervous system. In these peripheral neurons, the virus is able to evade the host immune system as it is silently maintained, undergoing no viral replication during this latent phase (Roizman et al. 2013).In addition to the painful oral and genital lesions that HSV can cause, it can also result in the development of infectious blindness because of herpes keratitis (Streilein et al. 1997; Farooq and Shukla 2012). In rare cases, adults can develop encephalitis that results in death or extreme neurological disease (Whitley 2006). Another sequela that may develop because of HSV infection is viremia, or a systemic infection in which the virus is present in the bloodstream. HSV viremia in adults has been documented and is usually associated with severe primary orofacial or genital symptoms in immune-competent patients and occasionally with reactivations in immunocompromised patients (Johnston et al. 2008; Berrington et al. 2009). HSV viremia is more common during viral infection of neonates (Kimura et al. 1991).Neonatal HSV is typically defined as the acquisition of viral infection within 28 d of birth (Corey and Wald 2009). The predicted burden of neonatal HSV disease in the Americas is ∼1 case per 5000 live births (Looker et al. 2017). The majority of neonatal HSV infections are acquired during birth (Whitley 1986; Grose 1994; Kimberlin 2007; Corey and Wald 2009). Less common routes of neonate infection include viral transmission in utero and postnatal acquisition from exposure to HSV via family members or caregivers. Neonatal HSV infections can be classified into three categories based on the initial disease presentation: skin, eye, and mouth (SEM); disseminated disease; or central nervous system (CNS) disease (Whitley 1986; Kimberlin 2007; Corey and Wald 2009). Disseminated neonatal HSV infections have the highest rates of mortality (∼85%), whereas CNS disease results in ∼50% mortality, if left untreated (Corey and Wald 2009). Newborns with diagnosed HSV infection are typically treated with intravenous acyclovir for 3 wk at a dose of 60 mg/kg/d (Kimberlin et al. 2001a,b). There are several factors that may contribute to an increased probability of neonatal transmission in HSV-infected individuals. These include first-episode genital HSV disease in the mother, asymptomatic viral shedding at the time of delivery, and route of delivery (Brown et al. 2003). Cesarean section performed when a risk of vaginal transmission is inferred typically lowers the chances of neonatal HSV acquisition during delivery (Brown et al. 2003).This report focuses on a specific case of perinatal HSV-1 transmission that was accompanied by dual mortality. The HSV etiology and subsequent transmission event were unanticipated because they occurred on the same day that the HerpeSelect HSV-1/HSV-2 IgG antibody titer of the pregnant female was returned with a negative result. These data provide the first-ever genomic insights into the scope of viral genetic diversity transmitted from mother to neonate during a viremic infection.RESULTSPatient History and Clinical PresentationThe adult woman was a 41-yr-old female in week 30 of gestation. She had been transferred from an outside hospital with a diagnosis of severe preeclampsia and underwent an emergency cesarean section. Because of signs of hepatitis, she also had screening laboratory tests for HSV-1, HSV-2, cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), parvovirus, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. The results of an HSV-1/HSV-2 antibody test were returned within 4 h and showed no IgG antibody present (HerpeSelect, Focus Diagnostics). The patient died later on the day of admission with hepatic and kidney failure. An HSV-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was requested on the patient's blood and processed by an outside reference laboratory, producing a positive HSV-1 result 4 d later (Fig. 1A). There were no comorbidities detected; the screening laboratory tests were positive only for hepatitis B antibody, from prior exposure to the hepatitis B vaccine.Figure 1.Timeline of clinical symptoms, HSV-1 detection, and dual fatality for mother and neonate. (A) The mother was admitted to the hospital with severe preeclampsia. An emergency cesarean section was performed, with the neonate at 30 wk gestation. A blood sample was collected for laboratory tests screening for HSV-1, HSV-2, cytomegalovirus (CMV), varicella zoster virus (VZV), parvovirus, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. The HerpeSelect IgG antibody test for HSV was negative. The mother died within 24 h. A PCR test on the mother's blood sample sent to a reference laboratory was returned with a positive HSV-1 result 4 d postmortem. (B) The neonate was delivered at 30 wk by emergency cesarean section and had a normal physical examination including normal skin appearance. When the mother's positive HSV-1 PCR result was returned on day 4, the neonate was immediately put on intravenous acyclovir therapy. At the time of acyclovir initiation, skin swab and blood samples were taken from the neonate for downstream testing. The neonate died the following day. The samples that were obtained from the neonate later tested positive for HSV-1 DNA by PCR. Note that boxes and arrows are not drawn to scale within each day but rather have been spaced out for legibility of text.The newborn, although premature, had a standard physical inspection for week 30, including a normal skin examination—there were no visible lesions present on the neonate's skin. Following birth, the neonate was put on ampicillin/gentamicin treatment. Antibiotic treatment was stopped after 4 d, when bacterial cultures of the neonate's blood came back negative. When the mother's HSV-positive blood PCR test result was reported on day 4 of the infant's life, intravenous acyclovir therapy was initiated. A skin swab of the neonate's face and mouth and a blood sample collected at the time of acyclovir initiation tested positive in an HSV-specific PCR test. The infant died within a day of initiating acyclovir therapy (Fig. 1B). The neonate had severe liver failure at the time of death but never developed a skin rash. This dual mortality and availability of diagnostic specimens motivated a personalized viral genomics approach to investigate any potential viral features that may have contributed to this untimely outcome.Near-Perfect Transmission of HSV-1 between Mother and Neonate at the Consensus LevelViral genomic analysis was performed using a targeted genomic enrichment strategy that used oligonucleotide baits designed to capture viral DNA present in samples of the mother's blood, neonate's skin swab, and neonate's blood. Following next-generation sequencing (NGS) and viral genome assembly, we confirmed that both the mother and child were infected with HSV-1 (see Supplemental Table S1 for sequencing statistics). In comparing the viral populations present in the mother and the child, we observed that the HSV-1 genomes from each patient were nearly identical at the consensus level, with an average pairwise nucleotide identity of 98%, thus providing high confidence in the inferred route of transmission (Fig. 2). When we performed a pairwise comparison with each viral genome presented in this work, we found that the mother's HSV-1 and neonate's skin HSV-1 genomes were 98.9% identical, the mother's HSV-1 and neonate's blood HSV-1 genomes were 96.8% identical, and the neonate's skin and neonate's blood HSV-1 genomes were 97.4% identical at the consensus level. We identified 17 sites of genomic difference between the three clinical virus genomes at the consensus level. The majority of these variations were insertions or deletions (indels) that occurred in either noncoding regions of genes (US1 and US5), in the large structural repeat regions of the genome, or in intergenic regions. There were no single-nucleotide differences or variants (SNVs) detected between the three viral consensus genomes presented here. The remaining disagreements were uncalled bases or “Ns” present in repetitive areas of the genome. These data suggested that at the consensus level, the HSV-1 genomes from mother and neonate were nearly identical.Figure 2.Nearly identical viral genomes exist in the mother and child at the consensus level. (A) Diagram of the HSV-1 genome and its genes. Overlapping genes are shown below the main diagram (arrows depict forward- vs. reverse-strand encoded genes), and highlighted genes (green) represent those that encode amino acid variants unique to these patient samples (see Table 2 for full list). Names of these genes are listed in an inset below B. Black dashed vertical lines indicate the terminal repeat regions that were excluded (or trimmed) for downstream genomic analyses (see Methods). (B) A histogram showing percent identity of a DNA alignment of viral genomes derived from the three clinical samples from mother and neonate. In the histogram, nucleotide identity is color-coded: 100% identity is gray, ≤99% identity is yellow, and ≤25% identity is red. To illustrate the genome-specific locations of these nonidentical sites, each genome is depicted as a horizontal gray bar (bottom), with gaps in the alignment of the three genomes (indels) shown as vertical or horizontal black bars. (UL) Unique long region, (US) unique short region, (TRL/IRL) terminal or internal repeat of the long region, (TRS/IRS) terminal or internal repeat of the short region, (a,a’) cleavage/packaging signal. Identity graph was generated using Geneious.Transmission of Minor Variants in the Viral Population Is Highly Conserved between Mother and ChildUsing the extremely deep sequencing coverage of these genomes (3000×–7500×; see Supplemental Table S1), we next examined the genetic diversity within each viral population that was sampled. To do this we examined the sequence read data for any alternative alleles in each viral population. Minor variants (MVs) are alternative alleles that exist at low frequencies (between 2% and 50% of the sequence reads at a given locus, or a frequency of ≥0.02 and <0.50) below the consensus level in the viral population. We sought to detect whether any MVs were present, and if any of these alternative alleles were conserved following viral transmission (Fig. 3). We identified 39 MVs present in the viral population of the mother's blood. Eight of these MVs occurred in genes and caused nonsynonymous, synonymous, or frameshift mutations (insertion or deletion variants) (see Supplemental Table S2 for a full list). The remaining 31 MVs in the viral population of the mother's blood were all intergenic and mostly occurred in the repetitive regions of the genome (Fig. 3A). The viral population derived from the neonate's skin swab had a total of 42 MVs, of which 13 occurred in genes and 29 were intergenic (Supplemental Table S2). The viral population derived from the neonate's blood had the fewest number of MVs (28 total), of which eight occurred in genic regions of the genome.Figure 3.HSV-1 minor variants (MVs) are highly conserved between mother and neonate following perinatal transmission. (A) MVs identified in each of the three viral populations are plotted based on their location within the HSV-1 genome and frequency at each position. The average sequencing coverage depth of these MV loci is 2708×. Shaded areas on each graph indicate the large structural repeat regions (IRL and IRS)—see Figure 2A for greater detail. A small schematic of the trimmed HSV-1 genome is shown below A for reference. See Supplemental Table S2 for the classification of each MV shown here as nonsynonymous (genic), synonymous (genic), or intergenic. (B) Scatterplots depict the relative frequency of each matched MV detected in the mother's blood, the neonate's skin, and the neonate's blood (see Methods for details). Matching MVs in two viral populations are compared, with the frequency of each MV in the “donor” population shown on the x-axis and the frequency of each MV in the recipient population shown on the y-axis. Points in purple indicate “transmitted” MVs that were present in both the donor and the recipient viral genome populations at frequencies ≥2% (0.02). Points in red indicate potentially “nontransmitted” MVs that were present in the donor at ≥2% (0.02), but were below this threshold in the recipient viral genome populations. Points in blue indicate potentially “de novo” MVs in the recipient viral genome populations; these were not detectable at the 2% (0.02) threshold in the donor viral genome populations. Spearman correlation analysis on the “transmitted” MVs (purple points) was performed in GraphPad Prism to obtain a correlation coefficient (rs) and corresponding significance value (P), shown in the center of each graph. Gray dashed lines show the MV detection threshold of 2% (0.02). (C) Model of perinatal transmission between mother and neonate, with highlighted examples of each class of MV identified in the three viral populations sampled here (Table 1). Transmitted variants (32 total) refer to MVs that were detected in both the mother's blood HSV-1 sample and the neonate's skin and/or blood HSV-1 samples (at frequencies ≥2% or 0.02). Nontransmitted variants (seven total) refer to MVs that were detected only in the mother's blood HSV-1 sample (at frequencies ≥2% or 0.02). De novo variants (23 total) refer to MVs that were detected at frequencies ≥2% (0.02) only in one or both of the neonate's viral populations. The example shown in the UL6 gene would result in a nonsynonymous mutation of glycine to tryptophan in the neonate's skin HSV-1 (see Fig. 4 for more details). Disseminated variants (23 total) refer to MVs that appear to have spread from the neonate's skin into the blood (at frequencies ≥2% or 0.02). The example shown is a deletion variant in the US7 gene that codes for glycoprotein I, which results in a frameshift at AA position K337. Sequence motifs illustrate the penetrance of major and minor alleles at the highlighted (colored) nucleotide position, with surrounding nucleotides shown in gray. The nucleotide position and frequency of each MV example are given. Note that frequency values in this figure are depicted as percentages, in which the minimum variant allele frequency is ≥2% (0.02). Data for this figure are a filtered set of high-confidence MVs that are a subset of all those detected—see Methods for details and Supplemental Table S2 for a full list of MVs.To investigate whether perinatal transmission includes a bottleneck, we compared the nucleotide positions and frequencies of each MV found in the three viral populations using the mother's blood HSV-1 genome as an initial reference point (i.e., the donor population). The majority of the viral genetic diversity (77% of MVs) detected in the mother's viral population was transmitted to the neonate's skin, with the frequency of each MV being highly correlated in both mother and neonate (Fig. 3B). Slightly less of the mother's viral population diversity (59% of MVs) was found in the neonate's blood, although the MV frequencies were still highly correlated (Fig. 3B). Based on one possible route of infection from maternal blood to neonate's skin, and then into the neonate's blood, we also compared the potential transmission of viral genetic diversity from neonate's skin to blood. In this comparison, we found that 54.8% of MVs present in the neonate's skin viral population appeared in the neonate's blood, again with highly correlated frequencies (Fig. 3B). However in each comparison, we found several MVs that appeared not to be transmitted between the two hosts, as well as others that appeared to have arisen de novo (Table 1; Fig. 3B,C). Specifically, we observed 23 total MVs in both viral populations from the neonate that were not present in the mother's viral genome—the hypothesized donor population—at frequencies ≥2% (0.02). These included a nonsynonymous G486W MV in the UL6 gene at a frequency of 9% (0.09) (Table 1; Fig. 4), synonymous MVs present in UL29 and UL36, many intergenic variants, and multiple disruptive frameshift mutations in UL28, UL46, UL50, UL54, and UL55. However, when we lowered the threshold (≥0.2% or 0.002) for MV detection to search for the presence of any of these apparently de novo MVs in the mother's blood HSV-1 population, we found that 14 of the 23 potentially de novo MVs actually existed in the mother's viral population at very low frequencies (≥0.2% but <2%) (Supplemental Table S2). Although distinguishing between biological MVs and sequencing artifacts is difficult at <1%, the existence of these MVs in the neonate's viral populations at increased frequencies suggested that they were transmitted from the mother's viral population rather than appearing de novo. Only ∼10% of both viral populations in the neonate were made up of MVs that appeared to be de novo, including the nonsynonymous UL6 MV, which is not detectable in the mother's viral population even at our lowest threshold of detection. Analysis of the viral populations present in the mother and neonate suggested that at the level of MVs, viral diversity was highly conserved between hosts, as well as between body compartments of the neonate (skin and blood).Figure 4.De novo minor variant (MV) in the UL6 portal protein of the neonate's skin HSV-1 genome. (A) Diagram of the UL6 portal protein of HSV-1 (676 amino acids). This graphic details the location of the UL6 MV detected in the neonate's skin viral population at amino acid position 486, which results in a nonsynonymous mutation of glycine (G) to tryptophan (W). Predicted domains of the UL6 portal protein based on prior works are also highlighted (Newcomb et al. 2001; Nellissery et al. 2007; Liu et al. 2019). (B) The UL6 portal protein displays variable amino acid conservation across 10 virus species from the Simplexvirus genus, with an average pairwise identity of 62%. Specifically, amino acid position 486 (red box) is divergent across the Simplexvirus species. Amino acid positions that are 100% conserved across the 10 species are highlighted in purple and are denoted by a black asterisk above each position in the alignment. The histogram below the alignment plots the variable conservation across the protein alignment at each amino acid position. The amino acid positions shown for each species are listed to the right of the alignment. (C) The UL6 MV encoding the G486W variant is highlighted at the nucleotide level of the neonate's skin viral population. A small subset of sequence reads that map to nucleotide position 7373 are shown, with the consensus level nucleotide sequence and its encoded amino acids at the top. The minor allele thymidine (T) at this position is present at a frequency of 9% (0.09), whereas the major allele guanine (G) is present at a frequency of 91% (0.91) (Table 1). Both forward (green) and reverse (blue) reads are shown to illustrate the bidirectional read support observed for both alleles.Table 1.Details of minor variants (MVs) in the HSV-1 genomes obtained from mother and neonate that are shown in Figures 3C, 4, and 5IsolateGenome positionMajor alleleMinor alleleaMinor allele frequencyType of variationGeneAmino acidMV conservationNeonate's skin7,373GT9.09%NonsynonymousUL6G486WDe novoMother's blood23,780GC2.13%NonsynonymousUL17I167MNontransmittedMother's blood56,884GGC2.08%FrameshiftUL30A1109Transmitted (to neonate's skin and blood)Neonate's skin56,884GGC2.10%FrameshiftUL30A1109TransmittedNeonate's blood56,884GGC2.68%FrameshiftUL30A1109TransmittedMother's blood110,565AG5.96%Intergenic--Transmitted (to neonate's skin only)Neonate's skin110,446AG8.40%Intergenic--TransmittedMother's blood131,527ACA3.12%FrameshiftUS7K337Transmitted (to neonate's skin and blood)Neonate's skin130,736ACA3.13%FrameshiftUS7K337TransmittedNeonate's blood131,394ACA2.96%FrameshiftUS7K337TransmittedaAdditional details for these and all other MVs detected in the HSV-1 genomes obtained from mother and neonate are included in Supplemental Table S2.Several of the MVs described above that were detected in all three viral populations have the potential to impact protein-coding functions of HSV-1. Specifically, all three virus populations from the mother and neonate contained genic MVs with ≥2% (0.02) frequency in UL30 and US7 (Table 1). These shared MVs were indel variants that induce a frameshift in a protein-coding region. The indel MV that appeared most intriguing based on known protein functions was a frameshift in UL30, which codes for the viral polymerase subunit. This single-nucleotide insertion MV occurred in a C8 homopolymer at A1109 (nucleotide position 56,884 in mother's blood-derived HSV-1 genome) (Table 1; Fig. 5). Another notable MV occurred in US7, which codes for glycoprotein I, one of the major glycoproteins involved in cell-to-cell spread of the virus and immune evasion (Crute and Lehman 1989; Dingwell et al. 1994, 1995; Bell et al. 1990). This US7 variant is a frameshift caused by a deletion at K337 (nucleotide position 131,527 in mother's blood-derived HSV-1 genome) (Table 1; Fig. 3C). The untimely loss of both infected individuals precludes our ability to detect whether or how these variants may have impacted virus functions in the viral population in vivo.Figure 5.Unique variants in the UL30 viral polymerase enzyme are shared between all three clinical HSV-1 genomes from mother and neonate. (A) Protein diagram of the viral polymerase enzyme (1235 amino acids) encoded by the UL30 gene of HSV-1, with highlighted domains of interest based on prior work (Andrei et al. 2000). This schematic details the location of the amino acid (AA) variant L279R that is found at the consensus level of all three viral genomes from mother and neonate and has never been observed before in any previously published HSV-1 isolates. The protein diagram also includes an MV insertion allele at A1109, which causes a frameshift mutation in the viral polymerase at a frequency of 2% in all three viral populations (Table 1). (B) Crystal structure ribbon diagram of the viral polymerase from HSV-1 strain KOS (Liu et al. 2006), with highlighted domains as follows: palm domain (AAs 701–766 and 826–956) in orange, fingers (AAs 767–825) in green, and thumb (AAs 957–1197) in blue. Colors match those shown on the carboxyl terminus of the UL30 diagram in A. Two sites of interest to the mother's and neonate's HSV-1 samples presented in this work are shown as magenta spheres. (C) 180° rotation across the vertical plane and zoom-in of the L279R AA variant (magenta) that is unique to the mother's and neonate's HSV-1 genomes. This variant occurs in the amino-terminal domain of the viral polymerase and is also highlighted in Tables 1 and 2. (D) 180° rotation across the vertical plane and zoom-in of the A1109 position (magenta), in which a subset of the sequencing reads encode a frameshift because of the presence of a single-nucleotide insertion. This MV occurs in the thumb domain of the viral polymerase. Parts of the structure that are colored cyan in B and D indicate amino acids that are downstream from A1109 and are thus most likely to be impacted by the frameshift variant. (E) The UL30 MV encoding a frameshift insertion in all three viral populations is highlighted at the nucleotide level. Data shown here are from the mother's blood HSV-1 genome population. A small subset of sequence reads that map to nucleotide position 56,884 are shown, with the consensus level nucleotide sequence and its encoded AAs at the top. The insertion of a “C” nucleotide occurs at a C8 homopolymer and is present at a frequency of 2% (0.02), whereas the major allele guanine (G) is present at a frequency of 98% (0.98) (Table 1). Both forward (green) and reverse (blue) reads are shown to illustrate the bidirectional read support observed for both alleles.Mother's and Neonate's HSV-1 Genomes Had North American/European Phylogeny with Distinct Mutations at the Protein-Coding LevelTo determine how the three viral genomes involved in this case compared to other previously described strains of HSV-1, we performed a consensus level multiple sequence AA alignment with 48 other genomes representing the known global diversity of HSV-1 (see Supplemental Table S3 for published HSV-1 genomes, GenBank accession numbers, geographic origins of each strain, and related references). From this alignment, we identified 19 unique amino acid (AA) variants present in 13 viral proteins in the mother's and child's HSV-1 genomes. These AA variations have not been previously identified in any other known HSV-1 strains (Table 2). Based on BLOcks SUbstitution Matrix (BLOSUM) calculations, several of these unique AA variant substitutions have a low probability of occurrence, making their existence more intriguing. The BLOSUM score is based on odds ratios of all possible AA substitutions, calculated using conserved regions of sequence alignments from multiple protein families (Henikoff and Henikoff 1992). Examples of these unique AA variants include those in glycoprotein H (UL22; R229I), which is required for viral fusion and entry into the host cell (Atanasiu et al. 2010), the single-stranded DNA binding protein called infected-cell protein 8 or ICP8 (UL29; F214S), and the viral DNA polymerase (UL30; L279R) (see Fig. 5).Table 2.Unique amino acid (AA) variants found in all three clinical genomes from the mother and neonate that are not present in 48 other published strains of HSV-1GeneGene productAA alignment positionWild-type alleleaMother and neonate alleleBLOSUM80 scorebUL8DNA helicase/primase41NT0480MI1UL9Origin-binding protein, DNA replication270PQ−2UL10Glycoprotein M (gM)232DN1456GE−3UL20Membrane protein18AT0UL22Glycoprotein H (gH)229RI−3UL27Glycoprotein B (gB)79K/P/TQ1/−2/−1UL29ssDNA binding protein ICP8214FS−3UL30DNA polymerase279LR−3UL36VP1/2, tegument protein491LI1UL40Ribonucleotide reductase, small subunit114LI1UL47VP13/14–binds RNA95DN1100QH1114RS−1278TP−2279SN0RL1ICP34.5, neurovirulence factor84DN1US11Tegument-associated phosphoprotein, posttranscriptional regulation18YS−2aWild-type allele is found in all 48 other HSV-1 strains at each AA position.bBLOSUM80 identity score is the likelihood of AA substitution between protein sequences that have >80% identity (Altschul 1991; Henikoff and Henikoff 1992). More negative scores are less likely/frequently observed.We also examined the genetic relatedness of these three viral genomes to the other 48 HSV-1 genomes included in Supplemental Table S3 by creating a SplitsTree phylogenetic network using a whole-genome nucleotide alignment. We found that the mother's and neonate's HSV-1 genomes clustered with other viral genomes in the North American/European geographical clade, consistent with their isolation from individuals in the United States (Fig. 6). Specifically, these clinical samples clustered on their own branch between HSV-1 McKrae (origin: Gainesville, Florida) (Williams et al. 1965) and HSV-1 strain 17 (origin: Glasgow, Scotland) (McGeoch et al. 1986, 1988). The deep-branch phylogeny of these three viral genomes suggested that they were either historically separated strains that had not been subject to any recent mixing or recombination, or that they had a unique geographic origin compared to the rest of the North American/European HSV-1 isolates that have been sampled and published thus far. A larger nucleotide alignment involving all available HSV-1 strains in GenBank (both partial and complete) produced similar results (data not shown).Figure 6.Network graph demonstrating the North American phylogeny of the mother's and neonate's HSV-1 genomes. The three clinical samples presented in this work are highlighted in red and fall within the North American/European phylogenetic clade (green). This graph-based network was generated by aligning the consensus sequences of the three viral genomes from mother and neonate with 48 published viral genomes that encompass the known global genetic diversity of HSV-1 (see Methods section and Supplemental Table S3 for names, accession numbers, and geographic origins of each strain). The Φ statistical test for recombination in SplitsTree4 reported P = 0.0, suggesting that recombination contributes to the phylogenetic network. Other geographical clades include Asian (brown) and African (blue). The scale bar represents 0.1% nucleotide divergence. N-7 and R-13 (upper left) are a pair of genomes from a previously reported case of familial transmission between a father and toddler son (Pandey et al. 2017).DISCUSSIONAfter a thorough review of the literature, we were unable to find another report of HSV-1 transmission that occurred when the transmitting host was negative for HSV-1 IgG antibody by the sensitive HerpeSelect test but positive for HSV-1 DNA in the blood (viremia) on the same day. The goal of this study was to use both deep sequencing technology and comparative genomics to thoroughly investigate whether viral genomic features may have contributed to the severity of disease and the untimely demise of these patients, as has been done previously with other clinical HSV and varicella zoster virus cases (Santos et al. 1998; Wirgart et al. 2006; Depledge et al. 2016). Here, we present a report detailing the transmission of HSV-1 from a mother with viremia to her newborn child, which ended in a dual fatality (Fig. 1). The pregnant female interacted frequently with young children, potentially enabling a late-stage exposure to oral HSV-1 infection from a child. It is highly likely that the woman's primary HSV-1 infection acquired so late in pregnancy exacerbated the probability of neonatal transmission and severe infection (Brown et al. 2003). The mother's primary HSV-1 infection most likely occurred within the 2 weeks prior to her emergency cesarean section, because of the lack of HSV-1 IgG antibody detected. The maternal-to-neonate transmission event is presumed to have occurred at the time of the cesarean section. However, we cannot rule out a possible in utero transmission event during the few days before cesarean section. Although estimating the time of the transmission event using the inferred mutation rate of HSV-1 was a possibility, there are multiple rates that have been reported in the literature, ranging from 1 × 10−8 mutations per base per infectious cycle to 1 × 10−4 mutations per base per year (Hall and Almy 1982; Drake and Hwang 2005; Firth et al. 2010). With these inconsistencies in mind, we did not endeavor to estimate the time of transmission in this case.Through NGS analysis of uncultured viral genomes obtained from the mother's blood, neonate's skin, and neonate's blood, we determined that HSV-1 transmission was nearly perfect at the level of the viral consensus genome (Fig. 2). The three viral consensus genomes were highly identical, with a few variations present in the large structural repeat regions of the genome or in noncoding regions of genes (i.e., US1 and US5). This level of genome conservation might have been facilitated by the shared genetic background of the mother and child, as suggested by a recent study of the father-to-son transmission of HSV-1 (Pandey et al. 2017). Furthermore, the potential exposure to a large pool of virus, enabled by the mother's viremia and neonatal exposure to maternal blood during the emergency cesarean section, could have facilitated transmission and conservation of the majority of the viral population.Although highly alike to one another at the consensus level, these HSV-1 genomes obtained from mother and child were found to have numerous unique AA variants present in key viral proteins (Table 2). Several of these mutations were considered to be rare or unlikely to occur based on BLOSUM calculations (Altschul 1991; Henikoff and Henikoff 1992). These included variants in glycoproteins M (gM, UL10) and H (gH, UL22), as well as in the single-stranded DNA binding protein ICP8 (UL29) and the viral polymerase subunit UL30 (Table 2; see Fig. 5 for UL30 variants). Glycoprotein H (gH) forms a heterodimer with glycoprotein L (gL), which in addition to being required for fusion and viral entry into the host cell (Hutchinson et al. 1992; Atanasiu et al. 2010) is also a target of anti-HSV antibodies (Peng et al. 1998). Although gH AA position 229 has not yet been reported as a site of viral escape from antibody recognition (Gompels 1991), the loss of positive charge due to the R229I mutation present in the mother's and child's HSV-1 genomes may well influence gH protein conformation, antibody epitope specificity, and subsequent viral escape (Table 2). The UL29 gene encodes infected-cell protein 8 (ICP8), a single-stranded DNA binding protein that, together with host proteins, forms replication compartments and is imperative for viral DNA synthesis (Weller and Coen 2012). Although ICP8 AA position 214—which lies in the shoulder domain of the protein between β11 and α5—is not predicted to be critical for cooperative DNA binding based on the crystal structure (Mapelli et al. 2005), sites 206–214 are a predicted MHC supertype A24 epitope (FSRVIAEPF) (Pickett et al. 2012). This suggests that the F214S mutation present in the mother's and child's HSV-1 genomes may contribute to immune evasion through ablation of MHC recognition of this predicted immune epitope (Table 2). Despite the many interesting viral variants identified, we present only speculations regarding how these mutations may have influenced the overall pathogenicity of the virus in these individuals. To achieve predictive power of the effects that individual mutations have on virulence and disease outcomes, we must strive to obtain both phenotypic and genotypic data from HSV isolates, as well as improve our characterization of understudied viral proteins (Kolb et al. 2016; Akhtar et al. 2019).Prior studies have demonstrated how MVs can have an effect on the fitness and evolution of multiple species of viruses including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), influenza, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), and varicella zoster virus (VZV) (Santos et al. 2000; Grose et al. 2004; Fischer et al. 2010; Renzette et al. 2013; Depledge et al. 2014; Bordería et al. 2015; Leonard et al. 2017). With the unusual case presented here, we wanted to determine whether a bottleneck in the viral population occurred during the perinatal transmission event. We used a conservative cutoff of ≥2% (0.02 frequency) to detect with high confidence any MVs in the three viral genome populations sampled in the mother and neonate (Renzette et al. 2013; Depledge et al. 2014). When we examined the MVs that were present in each of the viral populations presented here, we found that most of the MVs from the mother's blood HSV-1 genome were transmitted to the neonate. We found that a similar group of MVs were conserved between the neonate's skin and blood compartment sites (Fig. 3B,C). These data suggested that there was strong conservation of the viral population between mother and child following the perinatal transmission event. Finally, we detected high conservation of MVs between the neonate's skin and blood, suggesting a lack of compartmentalization—at least over this short time frame—that is distinct from what occurs during congenital HCMV transmission (Renzette et al. 2013). This suggests that HSV-1 did not undergo a bottleneck during dissemination from the skin into the blood, at least in this particular neonate. Our findings could be influenced by the inferred high viral load present in the neonate following transmission, among the other unique factors associated with this particular case. With this data, we cannot determine whether this conclusion holds true for other routes of HSV-1 dissemination and/or viral spread (i.e., skin epithelium into the peripheral or central nervous system).Several MVs were undetectable in the mother's HSV-1 genome, but appeared at detectable frequencies (de novo) in the neonate's viral genomes. One intriguing de novo MV was detected in the UL6 gene of the HSV-1 genome derived from the neonate's skin (Table 1; Figs. 3C and 4). This gene encodes the portal protein, which forms a dodecameric ring at one apex of each procapsid and enables entry and packaging of newly synthesized viral DNA in a left-handed spool formation (Newcomb et al. 2001; Rochat et al. 2011; McElwee et al. 2018; Liu et al. 2019). The minor allele (thymidine) at this position causes a nonsynonymous mutation of glycine to tryptophan (G486W), a much bulkier and more hydrophobic residue with altered peptide backbone φ-ψ-torsion angles. There was extremely high AA conservation (99.3%) of UL6 across all 48 HSV-1 strains (data not shown) included in the phylogenetic network of Figure 6. However, the conservation of the portal protein was more varied when compared across 10 different species of the Simplexvirus genus (62.2% pairwise identity; Fig. 4B). The presence of this G486W variant at an AA position that was not well conserved across Simplexvirus species (Fig. 4B) suggested that this G486W change might be a functionally tolerable mutation for the virus present in the neonate's skin. If the low-level UL6 variant were to become fixed in the viral population, it could impact DNA packaging of the virus and subsequent pathogenesis or virulence. The de novo appearance of this MV in the neonate's virus population suggests that immune pressures—or lack thereof in the neonate—shape viral evolution within a host over time (Baz et al. 2006; Bull et al. 2012; Vega et al. 2014).The UL30 gene, which encodes the crucial viral DNA polymerase, contained two variants of interest that were detected in all three samples—a low-frequency MV frameshift, and a unique variation in the overall consensus-level AA sequence (Table 1; Fig. 5A). The viral DNA polymerase enzyme is 1235 amino acids in length, with eight conserved regions present in the catalytic domain of the protein (Andrei et al. 2000). Of these two sites, the low-frequency MV in UL30 causes a frameshift in the thumb domain of the enzyme (A1109) (Fig. 5B,D,E). Based on literature from the related bacteriophage RB69 polymerase, the thumb domain is hypothesized to interact directly with the DNA duplex during viral replication and editing (Liu et al. 2006). A frameshift mutation at A1109 in the viral polymerase would result in a 126-AA alternative tail, potentially altering enzyme function and/or eliminating the UL42 processivity factor's binding domain at the extreme carboxyl terminus of UL30.The second, consensus-level AA variant in UL30 was detected in all three viral genomes and has not been documented in any previously published work (Table 2). Specifically, this variant occurred at the amino terminus of the enzyme, within the amino-terminal domain (AAs 141–362) (Fig. 5A–C; Liu et al. 2006). This region from AA 201–298 in the amino-terminal domain encodes a βαββαβ fold, which is predicted to be an RNA-binding motif that contains a cluster of positively charged arginine and aromatic tyrosine residues (Burd and Dreyfuss 1994; Liu et al. 2006). In the published UL30 structure, L279R is present in an α helix that is buried within the hydrophobic core of the protein domain. The mutation to arginine at this position may be hypothesized to affect binding of RNA to the amino-terminal domain of the viral polymerase through interference with domain folding.Reports in the literature suggest that the majority of pregnant women who are infected with HSV prior to labor do not experience severe symptoms themselves, and that the main risk lies in acquisition of the virus in the late stages of pregnancy, near the time of labor, in which the probability of virus transmission to the fetus is greatly increased (Brown et al. 1997; Stephenson-Famy and Gardella 2014). Transmission of HSV between hosts is not well-characterized at the molecular or virus population level. The presence of a bottleneck at the point of transmission has been identified in other viruses, including HIV and influenza A virus, but has not yet been investigated for HSV-1 (Fischer et al. 2010; Masharsky et al. 2010; Frise et al. 2016; Leonard et al. 2017). From this case study it can be concluded that in the presence of maternal viremia, transmission of perinatal HSV-1 resulted in the transfer of the majority of the maternal viral population to the neonate. With no vaccine currently available for this virus and maternal–neonate transmission frequently occurring without maternal awareness of infection, an improved understanding of viral transmission events between human hosts is more critical than ever (Saral et al. 1981; Elion 1982; Gnann et al. 1983; Kimberlin 2001; Corey et al. 2004).METHODSClinical SpecimensBecause of the patient deaths involved in the case described here, the hospital laboratory decided to pursue complete viral genomic sequencing to determine if there were unexpected mutations in the HSV-1 samples from these individuals. Specimens from the pathology laboratory included already-isolated DNA from the mother's blood, already-isolated DNA from the neonate's skin swab, and a neonatal blood sample. These samples were the remainder of the specimens used in the diagnostic process. Both the isolated DNA samples were used directly for sample library prep and Illumina NGS, following HSV-specific quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and total DNA quantitation by Qubit 2.0 fluorimeter (Life Technologies-Invitrogen) at Pennsylvania State University. DNA was extracted from the neonate's blood for downstream library prep and NGS as detailed below.DNA Extraction and HSV qPCRDNA was extracted from the neonate's blood sample using phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol in a ratio of 25:24:1 as previously described (Sambrook and Russell 2001). Extracted DNA was quantified using a Qubit 2.0 fluorimeter. Inert carrier in the form of linear polyacrylamide (10 µg) was added to each sample. Viral DNA was quantified using qPCR to detect the type-common region of HSV glycoprotein B gene UL27 as previously described (Ryncarz et al. 1999; Johnston et al. 2014). This value was used to infer the number of gB copies and, by inference, the number of HSV genome copies in each sample.Sample Library Prep, Illumina Sequencing, and Viral AssemblyTotal DNA was sheared into ∼800-base pair (bp) fragments using a Covaris sonicator with settings as follows: 10% duty, power 60, 200 cycles/burst for 60 sec at 4°C. Sheared DNA was processed using the KAPA LTP Library Preparation Kit compatible with Illumina platform reagents (KK8230). After ligation of SeqCap library adapters, a single postligation cleanup was performed before library DNA was amplified in the precapture ligation-mediated PCR (LM-PCR) step. The bait library was a custom Roche/Nimblegen SeqCap target enrichment platform designed and validated by the Bloom laboratory (A Dhummakupt, A Morse, and J Fear, unpubl.). The bait library included custom biotinylated DNA fragments that bind specifically to the DNA of HSV-1 strain 17 (GenBank JN555585.1), as well as to sequences of VZV strain Dumas (NC_001348.1), Epstein–Barr virus strain Akata (KC207813.1), and mouse gammaherpesvirus-68 strain WUMS (U97553.2). The probes ranged in length from 50 to 100 bp, with an average length of 75 bp. The depth of coverage for the targets was uniform across the entire capture space, with ∼30% overlap. As part of the oligo-bait design process, any proposed sequences with homology with the mouse, human, or rabbit genomes were excluded. Each sample library was hybridized for 72 h at 47°C with the oligonucleotide probes, after which the baits and attached captured viral DNA were isolated using magnetic beads. Following enrichment, a postcapture PCR step was performed before sequencing each barcoded library on an Illumina MiSeq (v.3 chemistry) to obtain 300-bp paired-end sequence reads.Prior to genome assembly, the sequence reads were passed through a series of quality control filters to remove Illumina primers and adapters and to trim low-quality terminal bases from each read (Szpara et al. 2010, 2011). A BLAST database consisting of all known HSV-1 and HSV-2 genomes was constructed, and sequence reads with an e-value < 10−2 were used to build consensus genomes. Consensus HSV-1 genomes were obtained using a de novo viral genome assembly (VirGA) pipeline (Parsons et al. 2015). Briefly, eight SSAKE de novo assemblies were generated using varied parameters and combined into a draft genome for each sample using Celera and GapFiller (Myers et al. 2000; Warren et al. 2007; Boetzer and Pirovano 2012). We transferred annotations from the HSV-1 reference genome (strain 17; GenBank ID JN555585) to each new genome based on sequence homology. Sequencing statistics for the three clinical genomes generated in this work are listed in Supplemental Table S1.Consensus Genome Comparison and Phylogenetic AnalysisTrimmed versions of viral genomes (lacking the terminal repeats) were used for consensus genome comparison, to avoid overrepresentation of the internal and terminal repeats (see Fig. 2A for illustration) (Szpara et al. 2014). MAFFT was used to construct pairwise global nucleotide alignments between whole-genome sequences (Katoh et al. 2002). ClustalW2 was used for pairwise AA alignments between open reading frames (Larkin et al. 2007). Custom Python scripts were used to calculate protein-coding differences and DNA variation between samples. Phylogenetic networks were constructed with SplitsTree4, using the uncorrected P distance and ignoring all gaps (Huson 1998). The identity graph shown in Figure 2 was generated using Geneious software R11 (version 11.03) (Kearse et al. 2012). See Supplemental Table S3 for GenBank IDs and references for HSV-1 isolates used to construct the phylogenetic network.Intrastrain Minor Variant Detection and ValidationEach consensus genome was analyzed for the presence of MV loci including single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and indels. VarScan v2.2.11 was used to detect variants and indels in each consensus genome (Koboldt et al. 2012). Multiple parameters were applied to differentiate true MVs (SNPs and indels) from technical artifacts (Depledge et al. 2014): minimum variant allele frequency ≥2% (0.02); base call quality ≥20; read depth at the position ≥100; independent reads supporting minor allele ≥5. Polymorphisms with directional strand bias of ≥90% were excluded. As noted in the text, the minimum variant allele frequency was set to a lower threshold of 0.2% (0.002) for selected analyses. SnpEff and SnpSift were used to map the MVs back to the consensus genomes and identify their distribution and potential mutational impact (Cingolani et al. 2012a, 2012b). All MVs were visually inspected using the Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) v2.3.97 to verify raw sequence read support for the VarScan output, and only MVs of high confidence were included and depicted in Figure 3. These data excluded clustered MVs with waning coverage (<1000×), typically found in highly repetitive regions of the genome. Of the MV calls included in Figure 3, 85% had sequence read coverage of >500×, with an average coverage of >2000×. See Supplemental Table S2 and ScholarSphere site (https://doi.org/10.18113/S15M08) for all MV data.For transmission analysis of MVs from mother to child, we used a “donor” reference genome to track MVs from the donor virus population to the recipient's virus population using a minimum variant allele frequency of ≥2% (0.02) (Fig. 3B), akin to the approach used by Hage et al. (2017) for longitudinal samples from a single individual. For transmitted variants, the mother's blood-derived viral genome was used as the reference or “donor” genome to detect MVs in both the neonate's skin- and blood-derived viral genome populations, respectively (Fig. 3B). Analysis of disseminated MVs in the neonate was performed using the neonate's skin-derived viral genome as the reference “donor” genome to detect MVs in the neonate's blood-derived viral genome population (Fig. 3B).To determine how conserved the UL6 protein was across a subset of nine Simplexvirus species, protein sequences were obtained from GenBank, and an AA alignment was created in Geneious software R11 (version 11.03) (Kearse et al. 2012). The AA alignment was visualized using Jalview v2.10.3b1 (Fig. 4B; Waterhouse et al. 2009).Crystal Structure Modeling and VisualizationThe crystal structure of the viral polymerase enzyme (UL30) from HSV-1 strain KOS (Liu et al. 2006) was visualized and manipulated using the PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, version 2.1.1, Schrödinger, LLC. In addition to the unique AA residue (L279R) shown in Figure 5 and highlighted in Tables 1 and 2, the UL30 protein from the mother's and neonate's HSV-1 genomes differs from that of the UL30 protein from KOS at A566T, in which the Ala is shared with 45 out of 48 other strains listed in Supplemental Table S3, and at V905M, where 11 other strains also have Val present at this position.ADDITIONAL INFORMATIONData Deposition and AccessGenBank accession numbers for the three viral genomes are as follows: Mother viremic blood HSV-1, MK952185; Neonate disseminated skin HSV-1, MK952183; and Neonate disseminated blood HSV-1, MK952184. Genomes, annotations, and Supplemental tables for the three HSV-1 genomes presented in this work are also archived in a ScholarSphere data repository: https://doi.org/10.18113/S15M08.Ethics StatementThis case report was approved by the University of Iowa Institutional Review Board (No. 201903815).AcknowledgmentsThe authors acknowledge support for the project’s intellectual development from members of the Szpara lab and colleagues.Author ContributionsM.M.S. isolated viral DNA and prepared samples for targeted genomic enrichment and NGS. D.W.R. assembled full-length viral genomes and performed computational analyses. U.P. performed MV analyses. M.M.S. analyzed computational data output and generated all figures. D.C.B. contributed HSV oligonucleotide probes for targeted genomic enrichment. C.G., B.F., and M.L.S. conceptualized this work after a systematic review of the case reports. M.M.S. and M.L.S. wrote the manuscript, and all authors contributed to its completion.FundingThis project was funded, in part, by support from the Eberly College of Science and the Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences at Pennsylvania State University, as well as the National Institutes of Health (NIH) grant R21 AI140443 (M.L.S., PI; C.G. Contributor). This project was also funded, in part, under a grant with the Pennsylvania Department of Health using Commonwealth Universal Research Enhancement Program (CURE) funds (M.L.S.). D.C.B. acknowledges funding for the oligonucleotide enrichment probes from R01 AI048633.Competing Interest StatementThe authors have declared no competing interest.Supplementary MaterialSupplemental Material


Title: Inferred father-to-son transmission of herpes simplex virus results in near-perfect preservation of viral genome identity and 

IntroductionHerpes simplex viruses (HSV) are widespread human pathogens. HSV-1 and HSV-2 together have ~90% incidence worldwide1. HSV infections are a major public health concern, causing mucocutaneous and systemic diseases2. In the USA, HSV-1 is the leading cause of sporadic necrotizing encephalitis and infectious blindness3,4. HSV infection remains a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in neonates, with an incidence of approximately 1 per 3,200 deliveries in the United States5,6. HSV-2, which has 70% genomic similarity to HSV-1, is associated with higher HIV/AIDS acquisition in developing countries7–9. Traditionally, epidemiologically related strains of HSV-1 or HSV-2 have been identified by comparing restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) patterns or using targeted Sanger sequencing of selected genes or loci10–13. Although RFLPs were crucial to establish our overall understanding of HSV transmission, the limited number of nucleotides assayed by changes in RFLP pattern obscured variation at the level of single nucleotide variations (SNVs) and small insertions or deletions (in/dels). Advancements in high-throughput sequencing (HTS) have now made it possible to study the full extent of genetic variation in the viral population being transmitted between different hosts.A transmission event has the potential to create a bottleneck that reduces genetic variation, if only a limited number of founder viruses are transmitted to the next host14–18. Viral genetic diversity may be created de novo through replication, recombination, and/or selection in the new host, leading to a viral population that is genetically distinct from the founder population. Most transmission studies have focused on RNA viruses, which have a larger amount of standing variation in the population19,20. Less is known about bottlenecks or expansion of variation during transmission of large DNA viruses. The transmission bottleneck has been shown to be more restrictive for RNA viruses than for DNA viruses17,18. In the case of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV), it is estimated that as few as 1–5 virions may be transmitted between hosts to establish infection14–16. In contrast, the founder population for human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), a β-herpesvirus, was estimated to be in the tens to hundreds of virions for maternal-to-fetal transmission17. While the conservation of genetic diversity is thought to be more likely during transmission of DNA viruses, data on viral genetic diversity during human-to-human transmission of HSV-1 has thus far been lacking.Here we present the genetic and phenotypic characterization of HSV-1 isolates obtained from a father and his son. These isolates were obtained from oral lesions of each host, nearly two decades after the inferred transmission and primary infection of the son. We investigated the pathogenicity of these isolates in a mouse ocular model of infection, and found a similar level of replication at the site of inoculation, and a similar level of neuroinvasiveness. The viral isolates were also alike in their ability to establish latency and their rate of reactivation in both in vivo and in vitro models. We subjected the viral population of each cultured viral isolate to HTS, and found that the genomes were nearly identical at the consensus level. A small number of minority variants were found in each isolate, most of which result from length variations in homopolymeric tracts or short sequence repeats (SSRs). In the light of recent studies showing extensive intra-host variation and rapid evolution during transmission of HCMV17,21, the extent of conservation we observed between the isolates was exceptional. This study presents the first example of comprehensive characterization of founder and transmitted HSV-1 isolates using HTS and in vivo models of pathogenesis.ResultsFamilial transmission and viral culture characteristicsThe likely timing of horizontal transmission from father to son, and the collection of the virus isolates from each, is shown schematically in Fig. 1. Both the father and the son experience recurrences 6–8 times per year. The father harbored the virus for 24 years before the likely transmission to the son. The timing of transmission is inferred from the son’s primary episode of gingivostomatitis. The mother was seronegative, and the child had no contact with other caregivers or siblings before this time. Virus was isolated from a recurrence in the father 43 years after his primary infection (isolate R-13), and from a recurrence in the son 17 years after the primary infection. The isolates from father and son were collected on independent occasions, two years apart. No differences in plaque size or morphology were noted between the isolates upon culturing. Both virus isolates were found to replicate with equivalent efficiency. RFLPs were examined in a series of Southern blots on DNA cleaved with several different restriction enzymes, utilizing diverse simple probes (~1 kb) or complex cosmid probes of 27 to 45 kb in length that spanned the entire viral genome (see Supplementary Fig. 1 for a representative example). At this level of resolution, no genetic differences were evident between the two isolates.Figure 1Timing of father to son transmission of HSV and viral isolate acquisition. HSV-1 isolate R-13 was acquired during an orolabial recurrence from a father with lifelong chronic infection, characterized by oral lesion recurrences 6–8 times per year. The father acquired his primary infection at age 3, more than four decades prior. At age 27, the father is inferred to have transmitted HSV-1 to his 2-year old son, who experienced gingivostomatitis with high fever. After resolution of the primary infection, the son likewise experienced recurrent orolabial lesions at a frequency of 6–8 episodes/year. Isolate N-7 was acquired during an orolabial recurrence from the son 17 years after his primary infection. The isolates were obtained on separate occasions, two years apart.
Acute replication kinetics and mortality of HSV-1 isolates R-13 and N-7The in vivo pathogenesis properties of the isolates were examined in the mouse ocular model of infection. Groups of outbred male Swiss Webster mice were infected via the cornea with 2 × 105 PFU of father and son isolates R-13 and N-7, the unrelated clinical isolate CI-37, or the HSV-1 reference strain 17syn+ (see Methods for details). At two day intervals over a 10 day period, tissues were harvested from three mice in each group and the virus content quantified by standard plaque titration assays. Replication kinetic curves are shown in Fig. 2A–C. There was no significant difference in peripheral replication on the eye between the father-son viral isolates or HSV-1 17syn+, however the viral titer for CI-37 was significantly higher (Fig. 2A) (p ≤ 0.05; see Fig. 2 for summed value of each area under the curve (AUC)). Likewise, virus replication in trigeminal ganglia (TG) was not significantly different between R-13, N-7 and 17syn + , but was significantly higher for isolate CI-37 (Fig. 2B) (p ≤ 0.01; see Fig. 2 for AUC values). In the ocular model of infection, the central nervous system (CNS) is infected by retrograde transport of the virus from infected neurons in the TG to the trigeminal nucleus in the hindbrain. From there, replicating virus is transported toward the front of the brain through time. To capture some of this process, brain tissue was divided into four roughly equal parts for assay (rear, mid rear, mid front, front) as detailed previously22. No significant differences were observed between the father and son viral isolates or HSV-1 17syn + in any of the brain regions, whereas CI-37 had a significantly higher titer in all four brain regions (Fig. 2C) (p ≤ 0.01 for rear and mid rear regions, p ≤ 0.05 for mid front and front regions; see Fig. 2 for AUC values). The amount of virus detected in the brain for R-13 and N-7 was low, reaching just 100 PFU in the rear portion of the brain and less in the front portions. In contrast, the viral isolate CI-37 reached much higher titers of 104 to 105 PFU in each brain region, while 17syn + had an intermediate phenotype. These data were consistent with the 100% survival observed with both R-13 (n = 35) and N-7 (n = 34), the complete mortality of CI-37 (n = 5), and the 81% survival of 17syn + (n = 16) (Supplementary Fig. 2). No signs of encephalitis in either R-13 or N-7 infected groups were observed, although moderate to severe blepharitis did occur.Figure 2Quantification of replication and latency phenotypes of R-13 and N-7 during infection in vivo. Swiss Webster mice (male) were infected on scarified corneas with 2 × 105 pfu of the clinical isolate R-13 or N-7. At the indicated times post-infection, tissues collected from each of three mice per group were assayed for infectious virus using a standard plaque assay (see Methods for details). Replication in eyes (A) and TG (B) revealed that infectious virus generated in these tissues during the acute stage of infection was not significantly different between R-13, N-7, or 17syn+ , whereas the levels for CI-37 were significantly higher (Student’s t test, *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, for peak titer on day 4; AUC = area under the curve) (C) The replication kinetics and regional distribution of isolates in the brain was determined by cutting each brain into 4 coronal sections. The levels of infectious virus were not significantly different between R-13, N-7, or 17syn+, whereas the levels for CI-37 were significantly higher (Student’s t test, *p ≤ 0.05, **p ≤ 0.01, for peak titer on day 6). This low level of infectious virus for R-13 and N-7 in the brain (≤100 PFU) is consistent with the 100% survival observed for both isolates under these infection conditions, whereas CI-37 induced complete mortality (Supplementary Fig. 2). (D,E) Quantification of latent viral genomes. At 40 days post infection, the TG and brains from R-13 (n = 4) and N-7 (n = 4) latently infected mice were assayed for viral genome copies using real time qPCR. Viral genome copy numbers per 50 ng mouse DNA detected in R-13 and N-7 were not significantly different (Student’s t test) (D). Brains were cut into four coronal sections prior to isolating DNA and the number of viral genomes copies was determined in each section. Viral genome copies in the brains were not significantly different (ANOVA; on box and whisker plot, +indicates mean, bar indicates median) (E).
Since survival rates were high for the father-son isolates R-13 and N-7, additional mice were maintained for 40 days post-infection (p.i.) and TG and brain tissues were analyzed for the presence of the latent viral genomes by quantitative PCR (see Methods for details). There was no significant difference in the number of viral genomes detected in mouse TG that were latently infected with either R-13 or N-7 (Fig. 2D). Likewise, no significant difference in the amount of latent viral DNA present in the four regions of the brain was detected (Fig. 2E). These results were consistent with the prior observation that the isolates replicated equivalently in these tissues.The remaining latently-infected mice were employed to test the ability of the isolates to reactivate from latency. Reactivation was tested after explantation of TG into culture in vitro
23 or after hyperthermic stress (HS) in vivo
24–26. No infectious virus was detected in any of six TG tested at 0 hours post-explant in either group, demonstrating that persistent infection or frequent spontaneous reactivation events were absent for both R-13 and N-727 (Fig. 3A and D). After three days in culture all TG samples were positive for virus (Fig. 3A). We conclude from this that latent virus capable of reactivating was present in all TG tested. Whole ganglion immunohistochemical (IHC)28,29 detection of viral proteins revealed regions of virus spread within the TG at this time (Fig. 3E). Two separate experiments showed similar efficiency of viral reactivation in vivo in TG 22 hrs. post HS, with 50% of the TG examined in both groups containing detectable infectious virus (Fig. 3B). A similar number of TG neurons were found to be expressing viral proteins at 22 hrs. post HS, as detected by whole ganglion IHC (Fig. 3C and F,G). Combined with the finding above that similar numbers of latent viral genomes were present in these TG, we concluded that the relative efficiency of reactivation from latency in vivo was also similar between the father-son isolates R-13 and N-7.Figure 3Explant and In vivo reactivation in Swiss Webster mice latently infected with R-13 and N-7. R-13 and N-7 were compared for reactivation from latency (>40 days pi) using in vitro and in vivo reactivation assays. (A) In a standard TG explant assay, no difference between R-13 and N-7 reactivation frequency was observed (p = 0.99, Student’s t test) although the difference between virus recovered at time 0 and 3 days post explant was significant in both groups (p = 0.0003, ANOVA). (B) The in vivo reactivation frequency (percentage of mice with infectious virus detected in TG) was also not different between R-13 and N-7 at 22 hrs. post hyperthermic stress (Student’s t test, expt. 1 p = 0.89, expt. 2 p = 0.83) and (C) the number of neurons exiting latency was also not different (expt. 1 p = 0.39, expt. 2 p = 0.86). Latently infected TG were subjected to whole ganglion immunohistochemistry to detect viral protein at 0 hrs. (D), and 3 days (E) post explant. Viral protein-expressing neurons (black arrows) and tracts (white arrowheads) mark the range of viral spread. Viral protein-expressing neurons (black arrows) are detectable in TG from N-7 (F) and R-13 (G), which reactivated from latently infected TG, at 22 hrs. after hyperthermic stress in vivo.
Nearly identical genomes of father and son HSV-1 isolatesTo further test the observation of overall genomic and phenotypic similarity of the HSV-1 isolates from father (R-13) and son (N-7), we used HTS and de novo assembly approaches to construct a full-length genome sequence for each viral isolate. Viral nucleocapsid DNA was used as the starting point for Illumina paired-end sequencing, with de novo assembly and genome annotation carried out using a recently described open-source viral genome assembly (VirGA) workflow30 (Table 1) (see Methods for details). At the level of consensus genomes, HSV-1 isolates R-13 and N-7 are 98.9% identical in their DNA sequence (Table 2). This level of identity between samples has previously only been seen in the case of sub-clones picked or isolated from a common parental virus stock30–32.Table 1Sequencing statistics for R-13 and N-7 strains of HSV-1.HSV-1 strainPaired-end read lengthRaw readsUsed for assemblyGenome lengthAverage depth (X-fold)GenBank AccessionR-13300 bp3.1 × 106
2.4 × 106
151,6367,626KY922718N-7300 bp4.3 × 106
3.6 × 106
151,76511,640KY922719.
Table 2Pair-wise DNA identity and variant proteins between HSV-1 consensus genomes.Comparisons between strainsDNA identityIntergenicGenicin/dels (# events)SNVsin/dels (# events)Synonymous SNVsNon-synonymous SNVsN-7 vs. R-1398.9%1622*00
*54 bp insertion in VP1/2 (UL36) and a 6 bp insertion in ICP4 (RS1) in N-7, relative to R-13.
For the 1.1% of the genome that did differ between HSV-1 isolates R-13 and N-7, we categorized these differences as genic (coding) vs. intergenic, and grouped insertions or deletions (in/dels) vs. single-nucleotide variations (SNVs) (Table 2). We found no SNVs in any coding sequence, and only two in intergenic regions. For the in/dels, we calculated the minimum number of insertion or deletions events that could have led to the observed differences. For instance, a three base pair insertion was counted as one in/del event. There were a total of 18 in/del events, of which only two occurred in coding regions. These included an 54 base pair (18 amino acid (AA)) in/del in the gene encoding the ubiquitin-specific protease, VP1/2 (UL36), and a 6 base pair (2 AA) in/del in the transcriptional regulator protein, ICP4 (RS1) (Table 2). The insertion in VP1/2 is present in the C-terminal region of the protein, which contains an extended array of ‘PQ’ tandem repeats. Sequence length fluctuation in this region has been documented in HSV and other alphaherpesviruses such as varicella zoster virus (VZV), Marek’s disease virus (MDV), and pseudorabies virus (PRV)33–37. Similarly, the insertion observed in ICP4 is also present in a short sequence repeat in a functionally uncharacterized domain of the protein38. In both cases, the N-7 viral genome from the son contains the longer sequence (i.e. has an insertion) relative to the R-13 (father’s) genome.Comparison of father and son isolates to other HSV-1 strainsTo place the HSV-1 isolates from father (R-13) and son (N-7) in the context of previously sequenced HSV-1 isolates, we compared full-length genomes of R-13 and N-7 to all available HSV-1 genomes in GenBank (46 total; see Methods for full list). We investigated the relatedness of the genomes by constructing a network graph using SplitsTree (Supplementary Fig. S3). We observed that the father-son isolates R-13 and N-7 form a separate branch compared to all previously sequenced genomes, but are positioned in the tree graph between other Asian, European and African isolates. The phylogenetic separation of isolates based on geography has been previously described31.To put the protein-coding features of HSV-1 isolates R-13 and N-7 in the context of prior work, we compared all protein (AA) sequences of these isolates to those encoded by 46 fully-sequenced HSV-1 strains. In this comparison, we found a total of 34 viral proteins containing AA variations in R-13 and N-7 that had never been observed before (see Supplementary Table 1 for a complete list). This large number of unique residues may reflect the position of these isolates in the phylogenetic network, where they lie on a branch separate from other known strains. We also found 54 proteins with AA variations that differ from the HSV-1 reference genome (strain 17syn + , Genbank ID JN555585), but that have been observed previously in one or more of the other sequenced strains.Intra-strain variation: Detection of minority variants within each HSV-1 genomeComparison of the consensus genomes of the HSV-1 isolates from father (R-13) and son (N-7) provided a global view of the overall identity of these viral isolates. However as observed for HCMV and VZV17,21,39, intra-strain variation can exist within a viral population, or within a local niche or lesion of a given host. To assess the extent of genetic diversity within each viral isolate, we investigated whether the consensus genome of either R-13 or N-7 contained any minority variants, or nucleotide positions where HTS data indicated more than one possible allele. This allowed us to detect specific nucleotide bases (loci) for which another allele was present; these minor differences would otherwise be missed in a comparison of the majority-genotype (consensus level genome) as seen in Table 2. We observed 59 minority variants in the R-13 genome and 48 in the N-7 genome (Supplementary Table 2). Most of the minor alleles observed in R-7 and N-13 genomes occurred at a low frequency or/and were intergenic. These minority variants were neutral and unlikely to have a major effect on viral fitness. These results are consistent with recent findings in HCMV, where it was shown that the vast majority of these minority variants observed were neutral40. Although rare, the minority variants that occurred in coding regions were non-synonymous, but with very low frequency alleles. The N-7 isolate harbored a 3.39% frequency of a non-synonymous variant in UL14 (Fig. 4), and another at 2.4% frequency in US6. The minority allele for UL14 encodes a valine to methionine change at residue 109 (V109M), which exists as the dominant allele in several independent isolates of HSV-1 (strains F (USA), CR38 (China), and R62 (South Korea))31. Most of the observed minority variants in each genome were present in intergenic regions, and adjoined tandem repeats or homopolymers (Supplementary Fig. 4). Length variations at tandem repeats and homopolymers are common between strains of HSV-131,41,42, and have been documented in select coding regions as well (e.g. UL30 polymerase and TK)43.Figure 4Intra-strain variation observed at a polymorphic locus in N-7 (son’s) viral genome, in the gene UL14. A low frequency non-synonymous variation was observed in the N-7 (son’s) viral genome at position 19,370, in the tegument protein UL14. This site has an A present in 3% of the viral sequence reads instead of the majority G allele (97%). The minority allele for UL14 encodes a valine to methionine change at residue 109; Met109 exists as the dominant allele in several independent isolates of HSV-1 (see text for details). While the UL14 coding sequence is encoded on the reverse strand of the reference genome for HSV-1, it is depicted here in forward orientation to enable codon reading from left to right. Actual read depth of each variant is indicated above. A subset of the alignment of Illumina sequencing reads to the N-7 consensus genome is shown here, with the position and consensus sequence shown in the top row. Sequence read orientation is depicted as aqua and green, with directional arrows. Areas with no letter shown have 100% agreement with the consensus nucleotide; the letters are left out for clarity.
DiscussionHere we provide the first-ever insights on viral inter- and intra-strain variation during familial transmission of HSV-1. These viruses appear indistinguishable in their phenotypes in culture and in an animal model of pathogenesis. Their clinical course in the infected father and son were similar, with both experiencing relatively severe gingivostomatitis at the time of initial infection (as noted by each mother), followed by six to eight recurrences per year thereafter. The randomly selected HSV-1 isolates from each individual were nearly identical to each other at the genomic level, despite being separated by over four decades, a horizontal transmission event, and multiple rounds of latency and reactivation. This exceptional level of genomic identity contrasts with that observed for in utero transmission of HCMV, which was found to include both a bottleneck and a subsequent expansion of viral diversity17,18,21,44. However, HCMV and HSV-1 differ in their pathogenesis. HCMV is known to infect wider range of cell types, host organs, and undergo widespread viral dissemination in vivo as compared to HSV-145. Furthermore, HCMV latency occurs in hematopoietic cells that undergo cell division, whereas the latent reservoir of HSV-1 in neurons does not undergo cell division. These distinctions may contribute to the observed differences in their level of intra-host variation.The observation of nearly-perfect preservation of these viral genomes during familial transmission leaves open the question of where the observed diversity between clinical isolates of HSV-1 arises. One possibility (i) is that inter-strain diversity is the result of a slow mutation rate and variations that have accumulated over millions of years, with millions of clades of virus circulating around the planet. In this case the minority variants detected in the N-7 (son’s) viral genome may represent the fodder for evolutionary selection. Similarities in HSV-1 isolates from the same geographic regions suggests that selection for fitness adaptations to the local human populations may have occurred. However these geographic patterns could also be the result of founder effects and sequestration of human movement in early millennia.Another possible explanation (ii) for the observed inter-strain diversity of HSV-1 isolates is that horizontal transmission between unrelated hosts may induce greater selection for mutations than familial transmission. Sexual partners are unlikely to have matched immune selection for a newly transmitted HSV-1 isolate, and MHC alleles have been found to influence symptoms and severity of HSV disease46,47. This hypothesis suggests that if a population of viruses are transmitted to a new unrelated host, then immune pressure over time in the new host could select for a viral population that differs from the one found in the original source.Yet another possibility (iii) is that hosts with multiple HSV-1 infections or exposures may provide an opportunity for recombination to occur, with a concomitant rise in resulting variation of viruses shed by these individuals. Although rare, variations in the HSV-1 population(s) within an infected individual have been documented previously32,48,49. Analyses of HSV-1 genomes by RFLP or full genome comparison suggests that recombination between viral genomes has been rampant over historical time31,50–54. Finally, it is possible (iv) that different modes of transmission may affect the amount of variation transferred from a source individual, thus impacting the subsequent selection and fixation of these variants. For instance, it has been observed that shedding from lesion sites is associated with a high copy number of detectable viral genomes, whereas asymptomatic shedding has far fewer detectable genomes55,56. This suggests that asymptomatic shedding, which is a recognized source of transmission between individuals57,58, may represent a greater genetic bottleneck than transmission via contact with lesions.In summary, using an animal model and HTS, we have shown that HSV-1 preserves its genetic and phenotypic characteristics during familial transmission. These approaches serve as a framework for future transmission studies using clinical isolates of HSV-1. Analysis of additional transmission events — particularly between unrelated individuals — will be necessary to assess how and where HSV-1 diversity arises.MethodsIsolate acquisition and stock generationHuman Subjects were not recruited as part of this study. The samples described here were obtained through a virology laboratory at the Cincinnati Children’s Hospital Medical Center. Informed consent was obtained from individuals contributing the viral samples. Once cultured, the viruses were coded and non-identifiable, and were not human tissues. HSV-1 isolates were collected from the father and the son on separate occasions, two years apart. For each isolate acquisition, a sterile swab was used to obtain virus from a lip vesicle during a recurrence. The swab was placed in sterile media and transported on ice to the laboratory, where a portion of the virus containing media was directly absorbed onto a rabbit skin cell (RSC) monolayer. This first passage was aliquoted and used to generate a “Pass 2” stock that was utilized for all phenotypic studies. These new isolates were named according to recent recommendations, as outlined by Kuhn et al. (23). We use shortened forms of these names, R-13 (father) and N-7 (son) throughout the manuscript. The full names for these isolates are HSV-1/Cincinnati, USA/1995/R-13 and HSV-1/Cincinnati, USA/1993/N-7.Animal studiesAll procedures in mice were performed as approved by the Children’s Hospital Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol# IACUC2013-0162) and were in compliance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Animals were housed in American Association for Laboratory Animal Care-approved quarters. Male outbred Swiss Webster mice (22–25 grams in weight) obtained from Harlan Laboratories (now Envigo) were used for these studies. Prior to infection, mice were anaesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of sodium pentobarbital (50 mg/kg of body weight). A 10 μL drop containing 2 × 105 PFU was placed onto each scarified corneal surface as detailed previously29.Virus replication in vivoAt the indicated times post infection (pi) infected mice were euthanized and tissues, including eyes, trigeminal ganglia (TG), and brains from three mice from each inoculation group were individually assayed for virus as previously detailed24. Isolation and quantification of total DNA from TG and quantification of total viral genomes by real time PCR using primers to the thymidine kinase region was performed as detailed previously59.Reactivation studiesLatent HSV was induced to reactivate in the ganglia of mice in vivo using hyperthermic stress (HS) (22). At 22 hours post induction, TG were assayed for infectious virus as detailed previously24,25. For in vitro explant reactivation studies, latently infected ganglia were aseptically removed and placed into MEM supplemented with 5% newborn calf serum. These were incubated at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. At the indicated times post explant, ganglia were homogenized and assayed for infectious virus as for reactivation in vivo
60.Antibodies and ImmunohistochemistryWhole TG were fixed in 0.5% formaldehyde for 2 hours, rinsed in PBS and post fixed in DENT’s fixative (80% methanol, 20% dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)). Whole ganglia immunohistochemistry utilized a primary rabbit anti-HSV (AXL237, Accurate) at a 1:1000 dilution, and a secondary HRP-labeled goat anti-rabbit (Vector), at a 1:750 dilution. These methods have been detailed extensively in previous reports26,27,59,61,62.Virus culture and DNA isolation for HTSMaster stocks of the virus were prepared by infecting MRC-5 (ATCC®, CCL-171) human fetal lung fibroblast cells grown in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Media (EMEM:Sigma-Aldrich) at an MOI of 0.1. Viral stocks were harvested when significant cytopathic effect (CPE) was observed. Master stocks were tittered by limiting dilution assay on Vero cells (ATCC®, CCL-171) to calculate plaque-forming units (PFU) for each stock. For isolation of viral DNA, MRC-5 cell cultures were infected at an multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 and viral genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated using previously described methods for the isolation of viral nucleocapsid DNA63.Southern blotThe genomic structures of the clinical isolates were analyzed by DNA (Southern) blot analysis64,65 and compared to four commonly-used HSV-1 strains (17syn + , McKrae, KOS(M), and F) and 10 unrelated clinical isolates. Genomic DNA was cleaved with BamHI, transferred to 0.8% agarose gels, blotted, and probed with a cosmid clone insert that was 32P-labeled using a Rediprime kit from Amersham. The cosmid clone insert matches the HSV-1 strain 17 genome from positions 24,698 to 64,405 (~40 kb). Blots were developed and analyzed on a Storm phosphorimager and quantified with GelQuantNet software.Illumina high-throughput sequencingSequencing libraries for each of the isolates were prepared using the Illumina TruSeq Nano DNA Sample Prep Kit, according to the manufacturer’s recommended protocol for sequencing of genomic DNA. The target DNA fragment size selected for library construction was 550 base pairs (bp). All the samples were sequenced on an in-house Illumina MiSeq using version 3 chemistry to obtain paired-end sequence fragments of 300 × 300 bp. Base calling and image analysis was performed with the MiSeq Control Software (MCS) version 2.3.0.De novo assembly of consensus genomesHSV-1 genomes were assembled using a recently described viral genome assembly (VirGA) workflow30. Briefly, VirGA combines quality control preprocessing of reads, de novo assembly, genome linearization and annotation, and post-assembly quality assessments. HSV-1 strain 17 (GenBank Accession: JN555585) was used as comparator for the reference-guided portion of viral genome assembly in VirGA. GenBank accessions are listed in Table 1.Consensus genome comparison and phylogenetic analysisTrimmed versions of the genomes lacking the terminal repeats were used for consensus genome comparison and for intra-strain polymorphism detection (below). We used the trimmed format of the genome to avoid over representation of the repeat regions during comparison. Clustalw2 (43) was used to construct pairwise global nucleotide alignments between whole genome sequences, and pairwise global amino acid alignments between open reading frames. These alignments were utilized by downstream custom Python scripts to calculate percent identity, protein differences, and genomic DNA variation between samples. Phylogenetic networks were constructed using SplitsTree466 using the uncorrected_P distance, and all gaps were ignored. GenBank accession numbers and publications describing previously sequenced isolates are as follows: 17 (JN555585, NC_001806)12,13; F (GU734771)36,67; H129 (GU734772)36,68; KOS (JQ673480, JQ780693)69,70; McKrae (JQ730035,JX142173)37,71,72; HF10 (DQ889502)73; KOS63 (KT425110), KOS79 (KT425109)32; India (KJ847330); L2 (KT780616), SC1674; MacIntyre (KM222720)75; CJ970 (JN420341.1), CJ311 (JN420338.1), 134 (JN4000093.1)76; RE (KF498959); 160/1982 (LT594192), 132/1998 (LT594457), 1319/2005 (LT594108), 1394/2005 (LT594111), 66/2007 (LT594110), 20/2007 (LT594109), 369/2007 (LT594112), 2158/2007 (LT594106), 3083/2008 (LT594107), 172/2010 (LT594105)77; CR38 (HM585508), EO3 (HM585509), E06 (HM585496), E07 (HM585497), E08 (HM585498), E10 (HM585499), E11 (HM585500), E12 (HM585501), E13 (HM585502), E14 (HM585510), E15 (HM585503), E19 (HM585511), E22 (HM585504), E23 (HM585505), E25 (HM585506), E35 (HM585507), R11 (HM585514), R62 (HM585515), S23 (HM585512), S25 (HM585513)31.Intra-strain minority-variant detectionMinority variant loci or polymorphic positions within each consensus genome were detected using parameters that aimed to distinguish truly polymorphic sites from errors produced during sequencing or during de novo assembly of these genomes. VarScan v2.2.1178 was used to detect variants present within each consensus genome. To aid in differentiating true variants from potential sequencing errors79, the following variant calling parameters39 were used: minimum variant allele frequency ≥0.02; base call quality ≥20; read depth at the position ≥100; independent reads supporting minor allele ≥5. Polymorphisms with directional strand bias ≥90% were excluded. The variants obtained from VarScan were then mapped back to the genome to understand their distribution and mutational impact using SnpEff and SnpSift80,81. Polymorphic positions were visually assessed and hand-curated (Supplementary Table 1) to label those that bordered homopolymeric tracts or short sequence repeats (tandem repeats), since both can induce local mis-alignment of reads and lead to imprecise local polymorphism detection.Data AvailabilityViral genomes sequenced during this study are included in GenBank under the following Accessions: KY922718, R-13 (full name: HSV-1/Cincinnati, USA/1995/R-13; KY922719, N-7 (full name: HSV-1/Cincinnati, USA/1993/N-7). All other data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article (and its Supplementary Information files).Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary Figures and Table S1
Supplementary Table S2



Title: A Herpes Simplex Virus 1 (McKrae) Mutant Lacking the Glycoprotein K Gene Is Unable To Infect via Neuronal Axons and Egress from Neuronal Cell Bodies

IntroductionHerpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is an important human pathogen that typically causes mucocutaneous lesions in facial and genital epithelial/mucosal surfaces. The hallmark of the HSV-1 life cycle is infection of sensory neurons, where the virus establishes a latent infection for the life of the host (1). HSV-1 neuronal infection can occasionally cause acute encephalitis (2), while ocular HSV-associated disease is one of the most common infectious causes of blindness in developed countries (3, 4).HSV-1 enters neuronal cells via a pH-independent fusion of the viral envelope with neuronal plasma membranes (5, 6), while it can enter a wide range of nonneuronal cells via either pH-independent or pH-dependent endocytosis (7). Virus entry into all cells involves the coordinated functions of the glycoproteins gD, gB, gH, gL, and gC (8). Fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes causes deposition of the viral capsid into the cytoplasm, which is subsequently transported to the cell nucleus. This retrograde transport of capsids to the neurons is highly dependent on the cellular microtubule network and is most likely mediated via direct interactions by one or more tegument and capsid proteins with the dynein motor and the dynein cofactor dynactin (reviewed in references 9 to 11).Infectious virus production is initiated in the nucleus of cells, where capsids assemble. The virus acquires an initial viral envelope by budding of capsids into perinuclear spaces. Fusion of the viral envelope with the outer nuclear membrane is thought to deliver partially tegumented capsids into the cytoplasm. These capsids acquire additional tegument proteins before acquiring their final envelopes by budding into intracellular vesicles, most likely originating from the trans-Golgi network (TGN). Fully matured virions are finally released through an exocytosis process that appears to involve the kinesin family of microtubular network-associated motors (reviewed in references 9 to 11).The mechanism of anterograde transport of alphaherpesvirus in neuronal cells is highly controversial, to a large extent because of disparate results obtained with pseudorabies virus (PRV) and HSV-1. Two principal mechanisms of axonal transport have been proposed: (i) independent axonal transport of viral glycoproteins and capsids and assembly of the enveloped virions in the plasma membrane and (ii) transport of fully enveloped virions that have formed via budding of capsids into TGN-derived membranes. A number of viral glycoproteins have been implicated in efficient egress of virions from infected nonneuronal cells (reviewed in reference 10).HSV-1 gK is a structural component of the virion particle and functions in virus entry into epithelial cells (12, 13), cytoplasmic virion envelopment, virion egress, and virus-induced cell fusion (14). Recently, we showed that HSV-1 gK and UL20 physically bind to gB and gH and modulate gB-mediated membrane fusion (15, 16). Also, we reported that gK was essential for virus spread in the cornea of mice, neuroinvasiveness, and establishment of latency in ganglionic neurons (17). In this work, we utilized a microfluidic chamber to show that gK is required for infection of neuronal axons and anterograde transport in neurons.RESULTSReplication characteristics of recombinant viruses on rat dorsal root ganglionic neurons.We have previously described the construction of recombinant HSV-1 (McKrae) viruses constitutively expressing the enhanced green fluorescence protein (GFP) under the human cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter (HCMV-IE) (17). To determine the role of glycoprotein K (gK) in neuronal replication, a set of recombinant viruses with intact or deleted gK genes was constructed and studied. This set of viruses included the following: (i) the wild-type McKrae strain, compared to a mutant virus lacking the gK gene (ΔgK/GFP−) and a virus in which the deleted gK gene was rescued to wild type (R/GFP−) (Fig. 1A to C, respectively); and (ii) a set of McKrae-derived viruses that have an HCMV-IE-GFP gene cassette replacing the gK gene sequence (ΔgK/GFP+) and a derivative virus in which the missing gK gene is replaced, placing the HCMV-IE-GFP gene cassette adjacent to the gK gene (R/GFP+) (Fig. 1D and E, respectively).FIG 1 Schematic representation of mutant viruses. The top line represents the prototypic arrangement of the HSV-1 genome with the unique long (UL) and unique short (US) regions flanked by the terminal repeat (TR) and internal repeat (IR) regions. (A) McKrae wild type. (B) McKrae parental strain with deletion mutation of gK and without the GFP cassette (ΔgK/GFP−). (C) Rescue of the gK deletion in the virus in part B without the GFP cassette (R/GFP−). (D) McKrae parental strain with deletion of the gK gene by replacement with a GFP cassette (ΔgK/GFP+). (E) Rescue of the virus in part D with preservation of the GFP (R/GFP+).All wild-type-like viruses (wild-type and gK-rescued virus) produced on average similar-size plaques on both Vero and VK302 cells (Fig. 2) (17). In contrast, gK-null viruses prepared in either Vero or VK302 cells produced on average drastically smaller viral plaques on Vero cells. The gK-null defects were complemented on VK302 cells, which express the HSV-1 (KOS) gK gene (Fig. 2) (17, 18). Examination of individual viral plaques by fluorescence microscopy revealed that all viruses containing the GFP gene cassette readily expressed GFP (Fig. 2).FIG 2 Representative plaque morphologies of the HSV-1 (McKrae) strain and mutants on Vero and VK302 cells. Confluent Vero or gK-complementing VK302 cells monolayers were infected with the R/GFP+, ΔgK/GFP+ (Vero), ΔgK/GFP+ (VK302), R/GFP−, ΔgK/GFP− (Vero), or ΔgK/GFP− (VK302) virus at an MOI of approximately 0.001. Viral plaques were visualized by immunohistochemistry at 72 hpi using rabbit anti-HSV-1 developed with Nova Red (Vector Labs) with contrast microscopy. Fluorescent plaques from viruses with GFP were observed using a fluorescence microscope at 72 hpi. Plaques shown are representative of average plaque sizes observed. All images were taken at a magnification of ×100.Infection of rat dorsal root ganglionic neurons with wild-type McKrae virus resulted in rapid cytopathic effects exhibited as early as 12 h postinfection (hpi). Typically, neurons appeared rounded up and swollen, while the overall number and length of axons present before infection appeared to be markedly reduced at early times after infection (not shown). Ganglionic neurons were infected with each of the viruses, and growth was compared in viruses containing GFP (Fig.  3A) and those without GFP (Fig. 3B). The parental strain is included in both graphs for a baseline comparison. Wild-type HSV-1 (McKrae) virus and virus produced after rescue of the deleted gK gene replicated with approximately equal efficiencies in the presence (Fig. 3A) or absence (Fig. 3B) of the GFP gene. However, mutant viruses lacking the gK gene whether stocks were prepared on either Vero or the gK complementing cell line, VK302, replicated 1 to 2 logs less efficiently than the parental McKrae viruses at late times postinfection on rat neurons (Fig. 3A and B). Similar results were obtained for gK-null virus replication in Vero in comparison to those for the wild-type virus (17). Specifically, titers for the ΔgK viruses approached maximum titers ranging from 4 × 104 to 7 × 104 PFU, while the rescued viruses approached maximum titers of 4 × 105 to 5 × 105 PFU. In addition, gK-null virus titers appeared to decrease during an apparent eclipse phase of viral replication before increasing again at later times postinfection. These results show that infectious gK-null viruses were clearly produced in neurons.FIG 3 Growth curves of McKrae strain virus and mutants on DRG neurons. Approximately 175,000 ganglionic cells plated in 24-well plates were infected with the parental McKrae strain or R/GFP+, ΔgK/GFP+ (Vero), ΔgK/GFP+ (VK302), R/GFP−, ΔgK/GFP− (Vero), or ΔgK/GFP− (VK302) virus at an MOI of approximately 0.1. Viral titers were obtained at indicated time points postinfection by standard titration plaque assay on Vero or VK302 cells. (A) GFP-containing viruses ([astc]/GFP+) and the McKrae parental strain for comparison. (B) Viruses that do not have GFP ([astc]/GFP−) and the McKrae parental strain for a baseline comparison. Plaque-forming unit totals represent the means of data from triplicate experiments, and error bars represent the standard errors.Microfluidic multichamber device for neuronal transport studies.A commercially available microfluidic device was utilized for neuronal transport studies (see Materials and Methods). This device enables the physical separation of neuronal somata and axon termini under virion-impermeable conditions (Fig. 4A). To ensure that virions could not be passively transmitted from one chamber to the other, control experiments were performed as follows: Vero cells were plated in wells on both sides of the microfluidic chamber. Wells of one side were infected with R/GFP+ virus at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10. A hydrostatic pressure differential between the infected and uninfected chambers was maintained by ensuring that the uninfected fluid levels were substantially higher than those in the infected wells. The infected cells exhibited extensive cytopathicity and expression of GFP at 48 hpi. In contrast, the uninfected cells did not exhibit any cytopathic effects or fluorescence at 5 days postinfection, suggesting that virions were not able to passively leak from the infected into the uninfected wells (Fig. 4B).FIG 4 Microfluidic neuron device system. (A) Photograph of the neuron device (Xona Microfluidics) that maintains a fluid pressure (left panel). The virus-impermeable barrier containing axons (middle panel) is shown. A side-view schematic shows wells, main central channel, and a microgroove barrier showing the maintenance of a fluid pressure gradient (right panel). (B) Control experiment to test for system integrity. Phase contrast and GFP fluorescence of infected Vero cells at 3 days postinfection and uninfected Vero cells at 5 days postinfection are shown. During all 5 days, the uninfected side wells were maintained at a higher fluid level than the infected side wells.Infections of axonal termini.Microfluidic chambers were seeded with rat dorsal root ganglionic neurons. Neurons were allowed to propagate axons across the microgroove barrier for 10 to 15 days, or until axons and neuronal endings were visibly present across the barrier and the apposed chamber, respectively (see Materials and Methods). The neuronal ending chambers were infected with R/GFP+ and ΔgK/GFP+ viruses at an MOI of 5. Progression of infection on the neuronal soma side of the microfluidic device was monitored daily using a fluorescence microscope to detect GFP expression. GFP expression was readily detected as early as 24 hpi for the R/GFP+ virus, while infection with the ΔgK/GFP+ virus failed to produce any GFP expression as late as 5 days postinfection (Fig. 5A to E). Surprisingly, ΔgK/GFP+ virus grown on the VK302, gK-complementing, cells failed to be efficiently transmitted to the neuronal soma side of the microfluidic device, as evidenced by an occasional fluorescent cell detected in the neuronal soma chambers (Fig. 5F). In a second series of experiments, axonal compartments were coplated with a monolayer of VK302 cells prior to infection. Similarly, the R/GFP+ virus was efficiently transmitted to the soma chamber when axonal compartments containing VK302 cells were infected (Fig. 5G to J). In contrast, there was only occasional fluorescence detected in the soma chamber infected with the ΔgK/GFP+ virus despite strong replication and spread within the VK302 cell monolayer, evidenced by the level and extent of GFP-emitted fluorescence (Fig. 5K to N).FIG 5 Infection of neuron cell bodies (Soma) via retrograde transport. Retrograde infection via direct infection of axons (A to F) was analyzed. Phase contrast (A to C) and GFP fluorescence (D to F) of neurons are shown. Axonal sides of chambers (not shown) were infected with ΔgK/GFP+ (VK302), ΔgK/GFP+ (Vero), and R/GFP+ (Vero) virus. Neurons potentially infected with ΔgK/GFP+ (VK302 or Vero) were photographed, using phase and fluorescence microscopy, at 5 days postinfection (dpi) to allow ample time for retrograde transport. Neurons infected with R/GFP+ were photographed, using phase and fluorescence microscopy, at 2 dpi due to the presence of ample infected neurons. Retrograde infection via infection of VK302 cells coplated on axons using phase and fluorescence microscopy (G to N) is shown. Axonal sides of chambers were infected with ΔgK/GFP+ (Vero) or R/GFP+ virus. R/GFP+ infection of neurons (G and H) and axons with VK302 cells (I and J) was photographed at 3 dpi. For ΔgK/GFP+ virus, grown in Vero cells, infection of few neurons (K and L) and infection of axons with VK302 cells (M and N) were photographed at 3 dpi. All images were taken at a magnification of ×100.To determine whether infectious virions and/or viral DNA was transported in a retrograde manner, neuronal terminus chambers were infected with an MOI of approximately 5. The number of viral genomes was obtained by quantitative PCR, while the presence of infectious virus was assessed by determining viral titers on VK302 cells as detailed in Materials and Methods. For all three infections, there was little difference in DNA levels on the axon side over a 72-h period (Fig. 6). Examination of the number of viral genomes and PFU obtained from samples derived from the soma side of the devices revealed that the R/GFP+ virus efficiently transported and replicated in soma chambers, producing maximum viral genomes and PFU at 72 hpi. In contrast, both the ΔgK/GFP+ virus grown on Vero cells and ΔgK/GFP+ virus grown on VK302 cells failed either to enter neurite ends or to be transported through axons and subsequently replicate in soma chambers at 72 hpi (Fig. 6B, D, and F).FIG 6 Determination of PFU and viral genomes recovered in retrograde virus transport experiments. Viral DNA copy number, determined by QPCR, and PFU, determined by serial titration plaque assay, are shown for samples recovered from the axon and soma sides of devices infected in a retrograde manner. Bars represent the means for 6 (DNA) or 4 (PFU) samples taken from devices at 2, 48, and 72 hpi, as well as corresponding volume samples of inocula taken at the time of infection (input). (A and B) R/GFP+ infected. (C and D) ΔgK/GFP+ (Vero) infected. (E and F) ΔgK/GFP+ (VK302) infected. Input bars are black. Bars representing the axon side (white) and soma side (gray) are shaded to correspond to the sides in the schematic. The minimum level of QPCR detection was approximately 40 genomes. A baseline threshold of 0 was set at approximately 100 genomes, since samples containing less than 100 genomes exhibited high variability among the triplicate samples.Neuronal cell body infection and anterograde transport of virions.For anterograde studies, after seeding of microfluidic chambers and propagation of axons, axonal side wells were coplated with a monolayer of VK302 cells. Then, the neuronal somata were infected as described for the neurite-only side in the retrograde studies. Infection of the neuronal soma side of the microfluidic chambers was also monitored daily by visualizing GFP fluorescence. All three viruses, R/GFP+, ΔgK/GFP+ (Vero), and ΔgK/GFP+ (VK302), infected neuronal somata efficiently, as evidenced by the strong GFP fluorescence (Fig. 7A). However, only the R/GFP+ virus was transported in an anterograde manner to the VK302 reporter cells on the microfluidic chambers (Fig. 7A). Similar virus axonal transport experiments were performed, but this time the cells within the soma and reporter sides of the microfluidic chambers were fixed and immune stained with antibodies specific for viral gC and neurofilament (neuron-specific stain), and viruses not expressing GFP were utilized (to allow multicolor immunofluorescence). Cells in both the soma and reporter sides of the chambers expressed relatively high levels of gC only when infected with the R/GFP− virus, while both ΔgK/GFP− (Vero) and ΔgK/GFP− (VK302) viruses expressed gC in cells in the soma side of the chambers, while no gC expression was detected on the reporter side of the chambers (Fig. 7B).FIG 7 Anterograde infection and transmission. (A) Anterograde infection and transmission demonstrated by phase and fluorescence microscopy of the infected neuronal side and the uninfected reporter cell/axon side. Only the rescued virus was observed spreading in the anterograde direction to reporter cells. (B) Anterograde infection and transmission demonstrated by fluorescent antibodies. Images are stained with antineurofilament antibody with Alexa Fluor 488 secondary (green), anti-HSV-1 gC with Alexa Fluor 594 secondary (red), and DAPI (blue). The neuron sides of the microfluidic devices were infected with R/GFP−, ΔgK/GFP− (Vero), and ΔgK/GFP− (VK302) virus.Anterograde transport of virions was also monitored by determining the number of infectious viruses produced on the reporter side of the microfluidic chamber after infection of the neuronal soma sides, as well as determining the number of viral genomes transmitted axonally to the reporter sides using quantitative PCR (QPCR). Infectious virions were retrieved only in infections with the R/GFP+ virus from the reporter cell side, while both R/GFP+ and ΔgK/GFP+ viruses were recovered from somata. In agreement with these results, viral DNA was recovered for all viruses in somata but only for R/GFP+ in the reporter cell side (Fig. 8).FIG 8 Determination of PFU and viral genomes recovered in anterograde virus transport experiments. Viral genome and PFU numbers from the axon/reporter cell and soma sides of devices infected in the anterograde manner. Bars represent the means for 6 (DNA) or 4 (PFU) samples taken from devices at 72 hpi, as well as corresponding volume samples of inocula taken at the time of infection (input). (A and B) R/GFP+ infected. (C and D) ΔgK/GFP+ (Vero) infected. (E and F) ΔgK/GFP+ (VK302) infected. Input bars are black. Bars representing the soma side (white) and reporter cell side (gray) are shaded to correspond to the sides in the schematic. The minimum level of QPCR detection was approximately 40 genomes. A baseline threshold of 0 was set at approximately 100 genomes, since samples containing less than 100 genomes exhibited high variability among the triplicate samples.DISCUSSIONHSV-1 gK functions as a protein complex with the membrane protein UL20 in membrane fusion phenomena during virus entry and virus-induced cell fusion, enabling virions to enter into cells and spread into adjacent uninfected cells, respectively (13, 15, 16, 19–21). Previously, we showed that the lack of gK prevented corneal spread in mice, transmission of the gK-null virions to the central nervous system, and establishment of latency. Here we have shown that gK is essential for infection of neuronal axons in rat dorsal root ganglionic neurons in culture, in agreement with the previous in vivo studies (17). Moreover, consistent with the role of gK in cytoplasmic envelopment and egress, gK-null virions were unable to be transported in an anterograde manner.Herein, we have chosen to work with the HSV-1 McKrae strain because this virus was isolated from a human ocular herpes infection (22) and shown to be highly virulent in mice and rabbits (23–25). In these studies, we utilized a set of recombinant viruses lacking gK gene expression in the presence or absence of GFP expression for comparative purposes, because constitutive expression of the GFP gene may alter viral replication characteristics (26). Wild-type-like viruses replicated to similar levels in the presence or absence of GFP expression in ganglionic neurons. In contrast, gK-null virions reached maximum viral titers that were 1 to 2 logs lower than those of their corresponding wild-type-like viruses, while GFP expression did not adversely affect viral growth. These experiments indicated that GFP expression did not alter replication characteristics of these viruses. The relative size of viral plaques is an indication of the ability of the virus to spread from infected to uninfected cells. Consistent with previous findings, the lack of gK caused the production of substantially smaller viral plaques, indicating a severe defect in virus spread. GFP expression did not have any effect on the gK-null defect in virus spread.Microfluidic devices separating axonal termini from neuronal somata have been extensively used in herpesvirus experiments to investigate the contribution of individual genes in retrograde and anterograde axonal transport (27–30). We utilized a commercially available microfluidic device (Xona Microfluidics, LLC) originally developed from a collaboration between Lynn Enquist’s laboratory (Princeton University) and No Li Jeon’s laboratory (University of California—Irvine) (29). It is particularly important in all studies using these devices that control experiments are performed carefully to ensure that there is no leakage of fluids between the device and the coverslip on which the device is placed. Therefore, methods utilized in these studies were validated for obtaining appropriate sealed chambers prior to the onset of each experiment. Furthermore, chambers were inspected to ensure that axons were exclusively appearing within the device microgrooves.Infections of chambers containing axonal termini showed that the wild-type-like virus (R/GFP+) was readily transported to the soma-containing chamber, while the gK-null ΔgK/GFP+ virus failed to infect neurons via their axons whether stocks were grown in Vero cells or the gK-complementing VK302 cells line. Additionally, when the ΔgK/GFP+ virus was used to infect VK302 cells cocultured with axonal endings, there was a low level of neuronal infection and transport to the somata (as demonstrated by GFP fluorescence). However, this was strikingly lower than the soma infection observed with the rescued virus, especially when considered in light of the similar and profound extent of infection of the coplated VK302 cells with either the rescued or gK-null viruses. In these experiments, GFP expression was driven by the constitutive HCMV-IE promoter, requiring entry of the viral genome into neuronal nuclei and transcription/translation of the GFP gene. Therefore, these experiments cannot differentiate whether virions entered neurons but were subsequently unable to be either transported or replicated within somata. In an attempt to address this issue, the total viral genomes and infectious virions remaining within the axonal terminus-containing chambers were determined. Viral genome numbers did not decrease in the gK-null virus, unlike the wild-type-like (rescued) infections of neurites, suggesting that the gK-null virions were unable to enter axons. This result was not corroborated by the PFU counts, most likely because of the natural decay of infectious virions with prolonged incubation at 37°C. Despite the consistent detection of few cells expressing GFP in the retrograde infections with the ΔgK/GFP+ virus within somata, there were no infectious virions recovered from these chambers even at 72 hpi. Collectively, these results indicate that the observed low levels of GFP expression may be due to transport of viral DNA fragments containing the GFP gene cassette. These gene fragments may exist in the original virus stocks used for infections or produced after degradation of endocytosed virions into neurons.Surprisingly, ΔgK/GFP+ virus grown on the complementing cell line VK302 was also largely unable to infect neurons via their axons. This result suggests that expression of the HSV-1 (KOS) gK gene in VK302 cells may complement for infectious virus production in Vero cells; however, virions produced in VK302 cells may not be able to efficiently infect neuronal axons. We have shown that the amino terminus of gK interacts with the amino terminus of gB, most likely affecting the ability of gB to mediate fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes during virus entry (13, 15, 16). Furthermore, lack of gK prevented entry via fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes (31). Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequences of KOS and McKrae gB and gK reveal a number of amino acid differences, including amino acid changes within the amino termini of gB and gK. Thus, it is conceivable that KOS gK cannot efficiently complement the McKrae gK-null virus for entry into axons, because of altered interactions between KOS gK and McKrae gB. Moreover, KOS gK provided by the VK302 cells may not be efficiently incorporated into virions, causing reduction in neuronal infectivity.UL20 and gK are required for cytoplasmic virion envelopment and egress in epithelial cells (14, 19, 20). Furthermore, direct comparison of the role of gK and UL20 in cytoplasmic envelopment, virion egress, and infectious virus production with similar functions provided by the carboxyl terminus of gD, gE, UL11, or gM has revealed that gK and UL20 are more important than each of these proteins alone or in combination (32). Lack of gK drastically inhibited transmission of virus in an anterograde manner. Neurons, unlike epithelial cells or fibroblasts, have an intricate distribution of cytoplasmic organelles within somata and axons. Specifically, TGN-derived membrane vesicles migrate to synapses and play important roles in synapse formation among neurons (33). Therefore, it is conceivable that cytoplasmic envelopment of virions occurs both within somata and via budding into TGN-derived vesicles proximal to synaptic membranes.ΔgK virions grown on Vero or VK302 cells appeared to infect somata with approximately similar efficiencies, indicating that a lack of gK does not substantially alter entry of the gK-null virions via infection of neuronal cell bodies. Neurons are known to express nectin-1, which binds gD and functions in virus entry (34, 35). In agreement with these published results, we readily detected nectin-1 expression in neuronal termini, axons, and somata (not shown). Thus, altered distribution of nectin-1 between axons and somata is probably not responsible for the lack of gK-null virus infection of neuronal termini. Nectin-1 is known to primarily mediate endocytosis of virions rather than fusion of the viral envelope with cellular membranes (7). Thus, it is possible that virions enter axons primarily via membrane fusion, suggesting that gK functions in virus-cell membrane fusion utilizing cellular receptors other than nectin-1.Herpes simplex virus virions have evolved a highly complex system for optimum infection of neurons, the ultimate destination of the virus in the human host. It is conceivable that virus entry into neuronal synapses requires the presence of gK. We hypothesize that gK, known to interact with the amino terminus of gB, may modulate fusogenic activity of gB via specific gB cellular receptors. A lack of gK may result in a loss of critical regulatory functions provided by gK on gB to mediate fusion of the viral envelope with synaptic membranes, resulting in inability to enter axons. Alternatively, virions may enter but rapidly degrade within lysosomal compartments. Direct visualization of fluorescent virions may resolve these issues, which will be addressed in future experiments.MATERIALS AND METHODSCells and viruses.African green monkey kidney (Vero) cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD) and grown and propagated in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) supplemented with 7% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and antibiotics. The gK-complementing VK302 cell line (generously provided by David Johnson, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, OR) was maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and antibiotics. The clinical ocular isolate and neuroinvasive strain of HSV-1 (the parental wild type), McKrae strain, was obtained from J. M. Hill (Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA) (Fig. 1A).Construction of recombinant viruses.The construction methodology for mutant viruses for this experiment is essentially similar to the techniques that were previously described for creating KOS strain mutants (17, 19, 36, 37). McKrae virus with a deleted UL53 (gK) gene (ΔgK) (Fig. 1B) was constructed using the ICP27-null (d27-1) virus and plasmid pSJ1724, as described previously for the HSV-1 (KOS) ΔgK virus (19). The ICP27-null virus has 1,627 bp of UL54 gene deleted but contains a complete UL53 gene. Plasmid pSJ1724 has a 1,068-bp deletion in UL53 but has an intact UL54. Recombination between homologous regions of d27-1 virus and plasmid pSJ1724 resulted in the ΔgK virus. This virus does not contain a GFP cassette and is here designated ΔgK/GFP−. This ΔgK virus was rescued (R/GFP−) (Fig. 1C) by transfecting Vero cells with PCR-amplified fragments of the UL53 gene from the wild-type HSV-1 (KOS) strain, followed by infection with the ΔgK virus (19). The unique long (UL) UL53 (gK) gene of HSV-1 McKrae was replaced with an enhanced GFP gene cassette under the control of the human cytomegalovirus immediate-early gene promoter (HCMV-GFP) (36). Briefly, The HCMV-GFP cassette was cloned into the plasmid pSJ1723 to create the plasmid pTF9201, as described previously (17, 36). Plasmid PTF9201 contains a GFP gene cassette under the human cytomegalovirus immediate-early promoter control (HCMV-IE) within a DNA fragment spanning the UL52–UL54 genomic region that lacks the UL53 gene. Plasmid PTF9201 was used in transfection, followed by infection with HSV-1 (McKrae), to isolate the McKrae ΔgK/GFP virus (Fig. 1D), designated ΔgK/GFP+, appearing as small fluorescent viral plaques under the fluorescence microscope (17, 36). The McKrae ΔgK/GFP virus was rescued using plasmid pTF9105, which contains a complete UL53 gene from the HSV-1 (KOS) strain, creating the virus designated R/GFP+ (Fig. 1E) (37).Animals.Adult female Sprague-Dawley rats, 15 to 18 days pregnant, were used (Charles River, Wilmington, MA). All procedures were approved by the Louisiana State University School of Veterinary Medicine Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.Dorsal root ganglion primary neuron culture.Dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons were cultured under conditions that were adapted from those described previously for culturing sympathetic superior cervical ganglion-derived neurons (29). Additional modifications were adapted from previously described culture conditions for dorsal root ganglia (38, 39). Specifically, ganglia were dissected from fetal Sprague-Dawley rats at embryonic days 15 to 18. DRG were incubated at 37°C for 30 min in 250 µg/ml of trypsin (Worthington Biochemical Corp., Lakewood, NJ). Trypsin was neutralized by incubating ganglia in neuron culture medium with 10% FBS and 1 mg/ml trypsin inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 2 min. Ganglia were rinsed with fresh neuron culture medium, and ganglionic neurons were gently triturated into a single-cell suspension using a pulled-glass Pasteur pipette. Then, cells were plated into one side of the microfluidic neuron devices (catalog no. SND450; Xona Microfluidics, LLC, Temecula, CA) adhered to glass coverslips or the surface of 35-mm plastic petri dishes. Neuron devices were assembled by placing a standard neuron microfluidic device firmly on the coverslip or petri dish to ensure a sealed barrier. Maintenance neuron culture medium consisted of neural basal medium with B-27 supplement, at the manufacturer’s recommended concentration (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY). Medium was supplemented with 50 ng/ml neural growth factor 2.5s (Invitrogen), 2% normal rat serum (Invitrogen), 1× GlutaMAX (Invitrogen), and 0.2% Primocin (InvivoGen, San Diego, CA). To eliminate nonneuronal cells, 1 and 3 days postplating, neuronal cultures were treated with 4 µM cytosine β-d-arabinofuranoside (CAB) (Sigma-Aldrich) in neuronal medium for 24 h.Infection of neuron devices.Neurons were allowed to grow for 10 to 14 days postplating until robust axonal processes with abundant branching were observed on the axon side of neuron devices. Once these were present, the neuron devices were prepared for infection. For retrograde infections, medium was completely depleted from the wells of the axon side of microfluidic devices. Then, on the neuron soma side of the devices, wells were filled to maximum fluid capacity. After establishment of the fluid pressure gradient, axon-side wells were inoculated with the virus and concentration indicated in Results. Then, approximately 100 µl of neuron culture medium was placed in the infected wells to ensure mixing of the virus into the central chamber containing the axons. Once the fluid pressure gradient had been established, medium was added to the soma side only if necessary to combat dehydration and maintain an obvious fluid level difference. In the case of anterograde neuronal infection studies and a retrograde experiment (specified in Results), the axonal side was coplated with a monolayer of VK302 or Vero cells.Viral replication kinetics on neurons.To determine the kinetics of viral replication on ganglionic neurons, 24-well plastic plates were plated with 175,000 ganglionic cells using the above-described harvesting protocol. Ganglionic neurons were infected at approximately a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 with each of the viruses. Plates were prepared in triplicate, and infections were halted by freezing at 0, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hpi. Plates were frozen and thawed, and viral titers were determined for each time point by standard plaque assay on VK302 cells (for the ΔgK viruses) or Vero cells (for the parental and rescue strains). Plaques were stained with crystal violet and visualized with a dissecting microscope. Growth curves show the result of the average for the triplicate plates.Plaque morphology.For fluorescent plaque morphology, confluent monolayers of Vero and VK302 cells were infected at an MOI of 0.001 with the indicated viruses. GFP fluorescence of representative plaques was visualized and photographed at 72 h postinfection (hpi) with a fluorescence microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). For immunohistochemical plaque morphology, cells were fixed with 10% formalin at 72 hpi (17, 40). Immunohistochemistry was performed with primary rabbit anti-HSV antibodies (1:1,000) (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) and goat anti-rabbit horseradish peroxidase-labeled antibody (1:1,000) (Dako, Carpinteria, CA), and the reactions were developed using the NovaRed substrate (VectorLabs; Burlingame, CA). Images were taken with an inverted light microscope (Olympus) using relief contrast.Visualization of retrograde and anterograde infections.For direct observation by phase-contrast of the viral infection, neuronal soma sides and axon/reporter cell sides of devices were observed and imaged using an inverted microscope (Olympus) using relief contrast. GFP fluorescence was observed using the same inverted microscope set for fluorescence. For immunofluorescent antibody analysis of anterograde infections, microfluidic devices were fixed with cold 10% formalin. Then, the devices were incubated with blocking buffer (PBS containing 4% bovine serum albumin [BSA] and 2% goat serum) for 1 h at room temperature. Next, the primary antibodies were added, and devices were incubated overnight at 4°C. Primary antibodies used were mouse monoclonal anti-HSV-1 glycoprotein C IgG2a (Virusys Corp., Taneytown, MD), diluted 1:3,000, and mouse monoclonal antineurofilament IgG1 (Invitrogen), diluted 1:1,000. Next, secondary antibodies, goat anti-mouse IgG1 conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488, and goat anti-mouse IgG2a conjugated to Alexa Fluor 594 (Invitrogen), both diluted to 1:1,000, were applied. All antibodies were diluted in PBS containing 2% BSA and 1% goat serum. After 30 min, devices were washed 5 times with PBS. The microfluidic neuron devices were placed on ice and removed from the glass coverslips (per the manufacturer’s instructions). ProLong Gold antifade reagent with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Invitrogen) was added to the coverslips, and cells were imaged with an inverted fluorescence microscope.Sample collection for PFU and quantitative PCR (QPCR) studies.For studies of viral DNA transmission and virus/viral DNA production, neuron devices were sampled in the following manner. The low side (axon side in retrograde studies and soma side in anterograde studies) was always aspirated first. At the appropriate time points, the medium present in the low-side wells was aspirated and collected. Then, the sampled side was flushed with a small amount of medium. Following that, medium from the higher side was collected, and that side was flushed with a small amount of medium. Subsequently, the high-side wells were filled with medium, and the devices were frozen overnight. Devices were then thawed, the low side was flushed with a small amount of medium, and this medium was collected. Finally, the high side was flushed and collected. This procedure allowed for maintenance of the fluid pressure gradient by always keeping the gradient and allowed for collection of cell-associated virus as well as any free virus in the medium. At this point, all samples were frozen. Later these samples were thawed and used for analysis of PFU or viral DNA.Detection of PFU from anterograde and retrograde infections.Samples of medium collected from the neuron devices were thawed and plated in serial dilutions. The number of infectious virions in the medium was determined by plaque assay on appropriate (Vero or VK302) monolayers visualized using the immunohistochemical technique described for plaque morphology.QPCR.For quantitative PCR, once thawed, samples were processed using the Qiagen DNeasy blood and tissue kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) per the manufacturer’s instructions to isolate DNA. QPCR was performed as described previously for Kaposi’s sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) (41, 42). Specifically, the primers and probe (6-carboxytetramethylrhodamine [TAMRA]) for the real-time PCR were designed to detect HSV-1 US6 (gD). Equal volumes of viral DNA were used for TaqMan PCR 196 analysis. Purified plasmid containing the gD gene was initially used to generate the standard curve. Samples were also tested and genome numbers were determined using validated standards provided by the Path-HSV-1-genesig real-time PCR detection kit for human herpesvirus 1 (herpes simplex type 1) (PrimerDesign, Ltd., South Hampton, United Kingdom).


Title: A Comprehensive Overview of Epidemiology, Pathogenesis and the Management of Herpes Labialis

1. IntroductionHerpes labialis is an infection with herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) with initial episodes presenting as asymptomatic or symptomatic small blisters or sores on the skin near the site of infection. When the initial infection heals, the virus spreads to sensory nerve cells, where it remains dormant until reactivation occurs [1]. Recurrence of labial HSV is typically triggered by factors such as stress, trauma from surgery, menstruation or hormonal shifts in women, hyperthermia or infectious febrile ailments, sunlight or ultraviolet rays, and certain drugs, such as corticosteroids, with substantial psychosocial consequences to patients enduring persistent outbreaks [2].The regularity of these recurrent outbreaks varies from one individual to another where the infection is generally contagious during times of active replication, but can also spread when symptoms are absent [1]. The disease progression in recurrent herpes simplex labialis (HSL) typically incorporates multiple stages. During the precursor stage, perceptions of pain, tingling, or burning may transpire in the affected area, followed by the development of vesicles. Rupturing of the vesicle leads to soft scab formation which is subsequently replaced by a hard scab. Periodically, the scab abates and falls off, allowing the lesion to completely heal without scarring. Throughout this healing process, symptoms such as pain and discomfort ensue, and complete healing may require seven to ten days [1,2,3,4].2. EpidemiologyOral HSV-1 infection continually remains exceedingly prevalent and is one of the most common human viral infections throughout the world. According to WHO, an estimated 3.7 billion people under age 50 (67%) have HSV-1 infection globally [5]. In the United States of America (USA), HSV-1 affects 57% to 80% of adults [6], while in Asia, the numbers are essentially high for adults (75%) especially those from low socioeconomic standings, and children (50%) due to epidemiological shifts, showing decreased seroprevalence in the young cohorts [7]. A reported estimate in 2016 revealed that around 3.583 billion were infected with oral HSV totaling a prevalence of 63.6% (95% uncertainty interval (UI): UI: 59.0–66.0) and the majority come from Southeast Asia region followed by the Western Pacific region [8]. It has been reported that recurrent herpes labialis (RHL) affects about one-third of the population in the USA and presents as inflamed/painful oral lesions with conditional distress. Some patients usually encounter up to six episodes per year which can be troublesome for patients and their families [6,9]. Overall, the average incidence of RHL is about 1.6 per 1000 patients each year with a prevalence of 2.5 per 1000 patients but varies significantly between countries and different communities, including more frequency in females where an estimated one-third of all affected patients experience at least one relapse per year [9]. In a similar study in Sweden, the lifetime encounters with symptomatic herpes labialis among 3597 participants were about 40% [10]. A cross-sectional survey among American college students reported HSV-1 antibodies’ prevalence of 37.2% in fresh graduates and 46.1% in final-year students, implicating a reduction in seroprevalence of HSV-1 from 62.0% (1988 to 1994) to 57.7% (1999 to 2004) [11] due to awareness.3. Viral Pathogenesis3.1. Pathogenetic or Symbiotic?The natural history of oral herpes is described as human–virus symbiosis which converts reversibly from mutualism to parasitism in a balanced way and this co-existence occurs between superiorly co-evolved microorganisms with humans [12,13,14,15]. While symbiosis implies close acquaintance between two species that mutually provide benefits to both, the sophisticated nature of the virus to invade the host and evade the immune-responsive defense thus inflicting chronic infections suggests a “war-metaphor” which connotes more to a parasitic association where only the microorganism is provided with the benefit. Depending on the risk factors involved in the recurrence of HSV-1 oral infections, it is crucial to understand that there are no pure parasitic or mutualistic relationships between humans and HSV-1 [12].3.2. Transmission & InfectionThe majority of the primary infections result from direct exposure to bodily fluids such as saliva or exudates of progressive lesions, and proximate contact with lesions of infected individuals [16]. In addition, the transmission of the virus can also occur via kissing or sharing of towels/utensils. Usually, the primary infection emerges between 2 to 20 days following contact [5]. Approximately 2–10% of these infections also involve asymptomatic patients who periodically undergo HSV shedding in their saliva which is profound in immunocompromised individuals with an estimate of 38–40% [4,5,7,16]. Extensively, the asymptomatic HSV shedding is primarily reflected throughout the prodrome phase after infection, and 60% of these patients may not proceed to vesicle development even with the common symptoms of fever and pain [17].At the contact site, HSV-1 primary infections are initiated after penetration of the tissue by the viruses and fusion of the viral envelope with the epidermal and dermal skin membranes (cellular and mucosal) [16]. Infection of the skin or the mucosa is accompanied by inflammation and tissue damage, causing the characteristic herpes blisters. Following efficient replication in epithelial cells, HSV reaches nerve endings of peripheral neurons and undergoes retrograde transport to the neuronal cell body [18]. Due to the breach of the immune system, the host cell’s retaliation to this viral suppression is disrupted, consequently evading immune responses with the complex reciprocation of the virion protein also known as “virion host shutoff” [16].3.3. Latency and ReactivationHSV often results in either lytic or latent infection. There is minimal gene expression and no viral particle generation during latency. The viral genome is capable of reactivation, which results in the creation of infectious virions in response to the right stimuli [19,20,21]. Sensory neurons harboring the virus contain nuclear transcripts known as latency-associated transcripts (LATs), responsible for modifying viral genome chromatins which generate a stable but reversible silencing of the HSV genome [21,22,23]. LATs are approximately 8.3 kb long noncoding RNA that expresses in the nucleus of latently infected cells [21,22,23,24,25]. Under latent conditions, LATs remain highly expressed and silence the immediate early (IE) gene expression, which are major genes in the lytic cycle [24,25,26]. LATs have a role in protecting the latently infected neurons from undergoing apoptosis in the epigenetic modification of histones to regulate the expression of the latent genes [27].The HSV infection in the body of neurons usually results in infectious viral particles, while infection at the axons fails to produce infectious particles, especially when the infectious titer is low. However, it has been shown that axonal infection can lead to the production of an infectious virus if the cell body area is added with a helper virus with VP16, a tegument protein [28,29]. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that low levels of tegument proteins VP16 and ICP0 might lead to incompetent expression of genes leading to latency in neurons [29]. ICP0 also affects modifications of histone as well as expression of several viral genes and thus may play a significant role in latency [30,31]. Another interesting concept states that dividing the HSV stages of infection into latent and lytic cycles is not completely true, as intermediate stages with variable levels of gene expression have been recorded by few studies [29,32].Epigenetic modifications have also been shown to regulate the latency and reactivation. The naïve HSV DNA lacks histones and once it enters the host cell, histone modifications occur on the HSV genome, thus restricting important gene expressions [33]. During replication, some viral proteins have been shown to decrease heterochromatin levels and increase euchromatin to help in gene expression, whereas, in latency, the HSV genome shows constitutive heterochromatin marks [34,35].Although silenced, this reservoir can be stimulated from the trigeminal sensory ganglia and cause subsequent recurrent clinical outbreaks as reactivation occurs via common stimuli such as stress, ultraviolet (UV) radiation, temperature fluctuations, surgical trauma or dental procedures, immunotherapy, light/laser therapy, or even hormonal changes [20]. New infectious virus particles are created during reactivation in these neurons. These particles move anterogradely to the skin or mucosa, generating classic herpes sores. The virus may potentially enter the CNS, including the brain, and produce encephalitis or meningitis in immunosuppressive patients [20,21,22,23,24]. Recent studies have demonstrated that HSV-2 reactivation is very common in the vaginal mucosa of asymptomatic patients [36,37]. Many investigations have supported the idea that the HSV 1 regularly reactivates in the trigeminal ganglia after events such as immunosuppression, peripheral infection, and even stress. An increasing body of research suggests that asymptomatic infections occur often, followed by latency in neurons, and such recurring “mild” HSV-1 infections in the brain are associated with persistent neuroinflammation [38,39]. Microglia play an important role in the immune response to neuronal infection in the brain. Microglial cells endure an abortive infection after HSV-1 infection, proceeded by a burst of pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine release, which activates other glial cells within the CNS and recruits immune cells including NK cells, DC cells, and T lymphocytes to the brain [38,39,40]. HSV-1-infected microglial cells have also been demonstrated to produce reactive oxygen species which are directly responsible for damage to neurons [38,39,40]. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that microglia continued in an active state in the brain of HSV1-infected mice until thirty days after infection, despite the absence of active replication [38,39,40]. However, whether the microglia have any role in the reactivation of herpes labialis is not yet known.3.4. Immune Response to HSV-1The intrinsic and innate immune responses are quite effective at controlling HSV reactivation after latency and primary infection [41,42,43,44]. Additionally, they provide a powerful immune system response against HSV. Reactivation nonetheless happens and is extremely common in some people which is most likely as a result of a combination of viral evasion mechanisms and insufficient immunological control. IFNs, one of the primary cytokine families that inhibit HSV, are expressed as a result of the majority of the signaling cascades that toll-like receptors (TLRs) initiate upon recognizing HSV [41,42,43,44,45]. Mammals have 13 TLRs that have been identified, and the main ones that sense HSV are TLR2, 3, and 9 [41,42,43,44,45]. When HSV binds or fuses, TLR2 detects viral glycoproteins, TLR3 senses dsRNA produced as a consequence of HSV replication, and TLR9 detects HSV DNA [41,42,43,44,45]. Other cytoplasmic and nuclear sensors also find intermediates of HSV DNA and RNA. To control the virus, it is essential to detect HSV nucleic acids. Severe HSE is more common in those with defects in DNA sensors, the RNA sensor TLR3, or downstream signaling pathways [41,42,43,44,45].During the early stages of infection, adaptive immune responses are also crucial [45,46,47,48,49,50,51]. Since HSV-specific T cells are seen in both active and healed lesions in patients as well as in infected sensory human ganglia, the role of T cells is very important. Immunocompetent people have a low level of HSV-specific T cells in their blood after the acute infection has cleared up [46,47,48,49,50]. When exposed to viral antigens, blood CD8 T lymphocytes specific for HSV produce plenty of cytolytic molecules and release IFNs [46,47,48,49,50]. Around 22 HSV-1 proteins, including enzymes and structural proteins, are recognized by human CD4 and CD8 T cells, respectively [47]. HSV-specific CD4 T cells express cytokines that are similar to T helper type 1 (Th1) and Th0 and are capable of cytolysis [48,49,50]. The adaptive immune response also controls latent HSV and the depletion of CD 8 T results in higher reactivation [45].4. Clinical ManifestationsClinical manifestations appear as cold sores and oral lesions are distinctly characterized [52]. The initial stage of RHL generally commences with prodromal symptoms such as stinging pain, tingling or burning sensations, chilling tenderness of the skin, and itchiness at reactivation sites [53]. This occurs up to 6 h in 46–60% of patients caused by abrupt viral duplication at sensory neuron terminals of the epidermis or mucosal layers [17]. Hence, antiviral treatment is favorably given at this early stage before lesions develop to a greater extent, due to the narrow therapeutic window of most antiviral drugs [53,54,55,56]. Vesicle ruptures form scalloped patterned ulcers with surrounding erythema [55,56]. Around 25% of facial recurrences stay at the papular stage with common prodromal symptoms [17]. The disease usually resolves within 10 to 14 days and occurs naturally [17]. If untreated, further complications and morbidity ensue, such as the development of ocular blemishes, encephalitis, and subsequent severity may lead to mortality [53,53].5. Triggers and Risk FactorsOne of the foremost common triggers for RHL is fever, and this led RHL to be named herpes febrilis due to its characteristics. RHL occurs three times more frequently in patients with febrile conditions compared to those without so. Feverish patients with herpes labialis developed blisters with triple effect [16,57]. In addition, the frequency of the recurrence could also coincide with the expression of numerous candidate genes, namely human chromosome-21 (C21) or the Cold Sore Susceptibility Gene-1 (CSSG-1) [58]. Previous studies revealed a total of 6 candidate genes influencing herpes susceptibility and highlighted C21 or CSSG-1 to actively link to symptoms such as fever and the development of blisters via an unknown mechanism [56,59].Sunlight or UV light in particular also presents a major and common trigger factor for RHL. Prone individuals such as swimmers, fishermen, farmers or skiers have prolonged exposure to sunlight and typically present with lesions and vesicles at the vermillion border of lips after 3 to 5 days [16]. Spruance et al. demonstrated that intentional exposure to controlled dosages of UV radiation resulted in the development of lower lip lesions in 60% of HSV-1 seropositive [60]. Moreover, administration of prophylactic acyclovir into HSV-1 seropositive skiers eventually prevented reactivation of latent HSV-1 compared to those on placebo [61]. Ultraviolet-B-susceptible individuals have also been more prone to experience recurrent infections of herpes labialis [62].The lack of healthy zinc levels in HSV-1 individuals was also found to cause prolonged periods of lesion episodes, as this particular element has consequential effects in aiding recovery and healing of viral lesions [63]. As an essential mineral component in driving the natural processes of cells, tissues, and organs, zinc plays a major role in wound healing by coordinating the regenerative processes of the human body such as membrane reparation, inflammation reduction, immunity-boosting, oxidative stress decrement, cell epithelialization, and the formation of fibroids or scars [64]. The defense system in boosting immunity involves the T-cell lymphocyte response, providing a stimulated but controlled cellular immunity to viruses, fungal, or pathogenic infections, and certain autoimmune or immunocompromised diseases. The presence of zinc drastically improves the number of effector and helper T-cells, subsequently forming antibody precursors and contributing to the suppressive functions of responsible cells [65,66]. Kamakura et al. observed that the upregulation of the zinc finger transcription cell protein called insulinoma-associated-1 factor showed an increase in immunity-driven phagocytic activities to halt viral duplication and strengthen the local immunity system [67]. As such, zinc supplementation is proven to show benefits to individuals suffering from herpes and impaired T-cell functioning due to zinc deficiency [65]. Topical treatments of zinc oxide creams combined with glycine can produce considerable facial and circumoral appearances of herpes infections with or without inversed side effects [64]. Additional crucial element is vitamin D which exerts similar immunomodulatory properties to zinc and low serum levels have been shown to be coincidental with the recurrence of cold sores; additional research is needed to discover the actual mechanism [68].Another major contributor to triggering virus reactivation is the elevated levels of psychosocial stress [69,70]. A meta-analysis covering multiple psychosocial and emotional assessments reported reliable positive correlations between chronic stress and recurrence of HSV-1 infections with clinical symptoms [71]. It is believed that immune system suppression, which enables viruses to evade immune monitoring, is the mechanism through which these stress factors affect the severity and recurrences of HSV disease [71,72,73,74]. However, the many HSV-infected neuronal types, including sensory and autonomic neurons, express the receptors for the two main stress hormones, adrenaline, and cortisol, in a selective manner [73,74]. It is possible that autonomic neurons play a unique role in the stress-induced modulation of productive HSV infection because the stress hormones epinephrine and corticosterone have different effects on HSV DNA replication and the release of infectious virus progeny [73,74]. However, the exact mechanism is not yet known. CD8+ T cells have been shown to play an integral role in the suppression of modulated immune functions caused by psychological stress and in preventing latent virus reactivation [72].Immunocompromised hosts have a longer duration of episodes and are prone to contagious spread and comorbidities at higher rates, especially those undergoing bone marrow or organ transplants, chemotherapy, or dialysis. Although herpetic keratitis or encephalitis occurs rarely, these complications result from severe or untreated HSV-1 infections [56]. The white blood cell (WBC) differential variable is particularly used to predict the severity of immunosuppression although a direct association with herpes virus reactivation is yet to be confirmed. In one study of Caucasian ethnicity, the decreased lymphocyte count was found to have an association with herpes labialis, suggesting that modifications in WBC differential values account for risks of HSV-1 reactivation [75]. In addition, HSV-1 infection is considered “atypical” in immunocompromised individuals as they exhibit a larger extent of damage and aggression compared to immunocompetent patients, slower recovery (median time to healing up to 28 days), and a higher degree of pain. Moreover, co-infections with CMV and other viruses are common in immunocompromised patients [76]. Very little is known about the existence of viruses responsible for infections in the oral cavity and their interactions with each other.In terms of the significance of HSV-1 trigger factors instrumental to herpes symptoms, the patient’s age, sex, the environment of residency, or inappropriate lifestyle affecting health such as smoking, consuming alcohol, or taking illicit drugs were less likely to contribute when compared to perceived elevated levels of stress. There were unclear occurrences in multivariate study models and cross-sectional studies, with no conclusive evidence of the apparent association between these putative risk factors and RHL [69]. The commonly reported trigger factors are listed as Table 1.6. Management Strategies6.1. Conventional TherapiesOne of the earliest “home remedy” and long-standing treatments effectively used by RHL patients is cryotherapy, where self-treatment using ice cubes provides instant relief from prodromal symptoms, including burning/tingling sensations, itchiness, and pain [77]. Lip moisturizers and balms were introduced to counter humidity, and rough environments with fluctuating temperature changes which affect sufficient lip hydration [78] as these trigger factors are very likely experienced in most populations exposed to extreme weather and long exposure under the sun. Sunscreens, especially for lips, were also popularized not only for moisturizing but to block UV radiation from sunlight in seasonal weather [78,79,80,81,82].Natural remedies, including the use of aloe vera leaf extract to produce a topical therapeutic effect with anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial, and antiviral properties, have been tried as well. Rezazadeh et al. showed that aloe vera in gel form inhibited significant growth of HSV-1 at infection sites without any toxic side effects, indicating a convenient and safe choice to treat itchy and painful HSV-1 blisters and lesions [81]. Furthermore, the use of silica gel as an alternative gained approval as it was effective in the treatment of RHL with fewer side effects and had faster onset of action [82].Another early drug used was levamisole due to its parasitic and antiviral properties. Although few studies showed mild effectiveness, it was proven to be lacking substantial evidence in a double-blind controlled trial by Russell et al., which did not find any significant differences in reducing frequency or severity between groups taking levamisole and the control group [83]. When it comes to targeting the pain barrier and feverish symptoms, anti-inflammatory drugs, analgesics, and antipyretics, such as paracetamol, ibuprofen, as well as mefenamic acid, were considered as there was an apparent connection between anti-inflammatory mechanisms and viral inhibitory effects of the drugs. Experimental studies found inhibition of viral duplications, in addition to antiphlogistic and anti-rheumatic properties of these drugs, but to a lesser degree [84]. One potent non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) studied was piroxicam which exerts antipyretic effects as well as exerts a directly active antiviral response on the HSV-1 infection due to its lipophilicity, thus making this agent suitable as a topical form of treatment for herpes virus infections [85]. Even local anesthetics, such as tetracaine and lignocaine, have been prescribed to relieve the pain and itchiness arising from cold sores and fever blisters [86].Internal supplementations were also believed to have some prophylactic effects in RHL individuals. Some of the earliest studies included L-lysine monohydrochloride in 1000 mg daily doses. A double-blinded, placebo-controlled crossover study by Milman et al. that evaluated 65 patients with RHL showed no apparent effect on the healing rate in the lysine group of patients but showed significant improvements in being recurrence-free [87]. However, several other studies provided data suggesting lysine monohydrochloride salts were largely ineffective in treating acute cutaneous HSV-1 infections [88]. On the other hand, Thein and Hurt’s study evaluating the long-term success and prophylactic efficacy of lysine showed a significant reduction in recurrence rates at high serum lysine levels (more than 165 nmol/mL) [89]. Additionally, high doses of lysine monohydrochloride, 1000 to 3000 mg/day, were found to reduce the recurrence rate in a study by Szapary and Cirigliano, which also specified the cost-effectiveness and safety when compared to oral antiviral drugs [90]. A combination of lysine–arginine supplementations also showed good control in managing RHL even when the lysine content is increased without affecting the balance of the original compound, suggesting the safety of supplementation even at higher doses [91].Zinc ions have been reported to disrupt viral multiplication, with oral concentrations of zinc gluconate providing approximately ten-fold zinc serum levels in immunocompromised individuals [65,92]. Contrastingly, a recent meta-analysis by Cunningham et al. suggested inconclusive and limited evidence of zinc oxide creams in the treatment of RHL but found it was still reliable in lowering pain threshold and symptom periods [93]. This is specifically the case in immunocompromised hosts and critically ill patients as they are unable to consume oral concentrations of zinc [65].Although NSAIDs, analgesics, zinc-based creams, and aloe vera gels were recognized as over the counter (OTC) medications, topical Docosanol (Abreva) is another OTC approved by the Food and Drug Administration in treating cold sores topically. It is a long-chain 22-carbon, saturated primary alcohol which inhibits broad spectrum lipid-enfolded viruses such as HSV-1 [88]. Experimental studies initially stated that docosanol interferes with nucleus localization and viral multiplications, but further experiments highlighted that it disrupts viral coalition with host cells and treatment should begin as early as possible for maximal effect [94]. The safety profile is also well-established without risk of resistance or side effects, making it one of the choices in managing most herpesvirus infections with adequate efficacy [95]. The conventional therapies available are listed as Table 2.6.2. Antivirals6.2.1. Acyclovir, Valacyclovir, Penciclovir, and FamciclovirTherapeutics involving antivirals for recurrent HSV-1 infections include systemic and topical agents called virustatics (Table 3). The first virustatic, idoxuridine, existed in the mid-1950s as a topical application for non-specific herpesvirus, while vidarabine was licensed in 1978 as the systemic compound for treating encephalitis [96,97,98]. Towards the late 1970s and early 1980s, nucleoside virustatics were introduced and have been widely recognized as the most prescribed antiviral drugs for RHL, due to their safety and efficacy benefits [99]. The first of these landmark nucleoside inhibitors is the potent and selective Acyclovir (Zovirax) which disrupts DNA polymerase of herpes virus, followed by its generic alternative, prodrugs Valacyclovir and Famciclovir, and a resembling analog Penciclovir [96]. While there were more efficacy data available for oral antivirals in treating acute infections [90], expansive contributions continue to appear for topical antivirals such as 5% acyclovir as the first-line therapy for RHL and 1% penciclovir [82]. Although over the years numerous clinical trials conducted globally resulted in a new generation of antivirals for herpes infections, acyclovir remains the “gold standard” [96].Another cream formulation commonly used is foscarnet (trisodium phosphonoformate) which selectively disrupts HSV-1 DNA polymerase activity, showing clinical efficacy in decreasing the size and development time of recurrent lesions [100]. Although foscarnet is employed exclusively to treat infections with cytomegalovirus (CMV), acyclovir-resistant herpes simplex virus (HSV) also tends to respond to this drug.Structural analysis of acyclovir revealed that the molecule is almost identical to the acyclic DNA-base guanosine [82]. Like all nucleoside analogs, they are favorably cleaved by infected viral cells, where they undertake initial phosphorylation at 3000 times faster than normal unaffected cells via Tyrosine Kinases (TKs), the viral encoded enzymes [101,102]. With this attribute, acyclovir is effortlessly phosphorylated by these viral TKs compared to readily available cellular TKs, with maximum concentrations of the monophosphorylated drug in the infected cells compared to the normal uninfected cells [101,102]. Then it is converted to the active triphosphate configuration by cellular kinases to be incorporated into the elongated viral chain as opposed to normal cellular polymerase, leading to viral multiplication remission and chain termination [101]. This shows that acyclovir acts not only as a chain terminator but also as a competitive inhibitor for viral TK, while the acyclovir–triphosphate complex molecule becomes an imperious suicide inhibitor for the viral DNA polymerase, ceasing the activity of the exonuclease. As this cycle is repeated, HSV-1 DNA polymerase continues to add more nucleotides to the growing DNA chain until the excised nucleotides reach acyclovir again. The viral DNA polymerase is thus inactivated, and viral genomes are unable to reach full replication or form mature strains of HSV-1 [10].6.2.2. Problems of Bioavailability and Resistance Leading to Novel Approaches for Newer AntiviralsTo overcome the inferior hydrophilic nature and poor oral bioavailability of acyclovir, the prodrug valacyclovir was introduced via valine esterification of acyclovir. With higher bioavailability, there was increased absorption, approximately 54% in the intestinal region, thus preventing wastage when oral doses are given [102,103]. Valacyclovir is converted back into active acyclovir and valine via metabolism in the liver and kidney by the protein-like enzyme biphenyl hydrolase where the esterified amino acid is cleaved from the molecule [103,104,105]. Another prodrug developed with the same objective of more bioavailability and higher water solubility was penciclovir with a swifter phosphorylation process and a longer half-life in triphosphate form than acyclovir [103]. However, penciclovir contains the 30-hydroxyl group on the acyclic side chain which limits the extension of the nucleoside chain, thus removing the chain termination ability as seen in acyclovir although still significantly inhibiting DNA polymerase [101]. As a result, oral penciclovir has a significantly lower bioavailability than acyclovir (1.5% vs. 5%) and a shorter half-life (2–2.5 h vs. 4–5 h) and due to this, penciclovir is preferably formulated as topical creams [104]. To rectify the poor oral bioavailability and short half-life of penciclovir, the newer prodrug famciclovir, the diacetyl 6-deoxy ester of penciclovir with improved oral uptake of around 73%, was introduced [101,104]. The new orally administered prodrug can be converted completely to penciclovir via oxidation at the 6-position by the hepatic enzyme cytosolic aldehyde oxidase following first-pass metabolism and initial deacetylation by intestinal esterases, leading to the same antiviral and pharmacokinetic properties as penciclovir [106]. A single daily dose of famciclovir is rapidly absorbed in the gastrointestinal tract, yielding approximately 77% bioavailability even without the presence of food [107,108].The resistance toward antiviral nucleoside analogs arises from two mechanisms: mutated TK genes in viral cells and mutations in DNA polymerase, which inhibits DNA synthesis and interferes with antiviral activity. This tends to occur more in immunosuppressed individuals as compared to normal immunocompetent patients with frequent RHL attacks as reported by Mubareka et al. in their comprehensive review of 11 clinical trials [106]. Further studies on acyclovir showed that viral resistance resulted mainly from mutant TKs [103]. As viral TKs are essential for the conversion of acyclovir to the monophosphate form, their absence subsequently blocks host enzyme phosphorylation resulting from single and multiple mutations of these TKs [104]. This viral TK deficiency demonstrates an identical cross-resistance pattern among all the nucleoside analogs from acyclovir, valacyclovir, penciclovir, and famciclovir among immunocompetent individuals, but the higher prevalence among immunocompromised patients with severity depending on underlying diseases such as hematologic transplants, stem cell replacements or solid organ surgeries [107,108]. Thus, immunocompromised patients with a higher magnitude of suppression to their immune system encounter more frequent recurrences, longer periods of clinical symptoms, lesion sizes, and in more severe cases, become life-threatening [109].Even to this day, there have been minimal clinical trials that directly compare oral or topical therapeutics for RHL outbreaks. Antivirals moderately reduce the time to healing and pain subsiding, with valacyclovir showing efficacy in these two preferred outcomes, famciclovir only at a specific dosage, while acyclovir was effective in decreasing only pain duration [110]. Essentially, treatment with antivirals should start as early as possible at the prodromal phase of herpes labialis [109].A novel approach included the introduction of newer drugs, amenamevir (ASP2151) and pritelivir (BAY 57–1293), belonging to the helicase–primase inhibitor class, with the heterotrimer complex comprising accessory proteins UL5 helicase, UL52 primase, and UL8 subunit. As the absence of a eukaryotic homolog is mitigated by this helicase–primase complex, viral replication is blocked [109]. Early phase II clinical trials only involved animal models and HSV-2 infections, but further trials are required for understanding the clinical potential of these two promising drugs on HSV1 infections [111].Another novel approach focused on new delivery systems which can provide more efficient drug administration to enhance skin penetration with unique vesicular carriers called ethosomes. They mainly contain phospholipids along with high content of ethanol and water. Ethanol mainly allows the fluid formation of lipids in ethosomal molecules and allows compact lipid arrangement in the skin barrier. Hence, to enhance skin penetration, ethosomes use these double effects of ethanol on lipid bilayers of the stratum corneum and the vesicle, permitting soft vesicles to penetrate the modified stratum corneum structure and gradually release the active drug in extended skin layers [112]. Studies by Horwitz et al. and Nainwal that focused on ethosomal delivery of acyclovir, showed significant improvement to all relevant clinical measurements compared to the pioneer Zovirax cream, thus formulated as the new Supra-Vir acyclovir cream using this ethosome technology [113,114].Similarly, nanomedicine involving nanoparticles was proven effective for medicinal applications using particulate components with approximately 100 nm in size or lower. It was found to have lower toxicity and adverse effects while maintaining effectiveness in targeted treatments, where efficacy was enhanced with nanoparticle surface adjustments and preservation of structural properties among other biological, antiviral, antimicrobial, and pathogenic characteristics [115]. Hence, this approach led to an experimental polyethylene glycol-coated zinc oxide nanoparticle with acyclovir to potentiate systemic and local therapies to fight against HSV-1 infections. Initial findings showed some antiviral potential for HSV-1 infections in a cell culture model with low cytotoxicity but more clinical trials are required [116].6.3. Emergence of Bioactive Natural ProductsAlthough non-pharmaceutical approaches beginning with nutrient supplementation such as zinc, vitamin C, vitamin D, lysine, and low arginine diets have some potential benefits in the management of HSV-1 infections, results were mostly inconsistent and unreliable. Although the emergence of other natural remedies showed encouraging results in some clinical trials, most did not provide complete safety profiles or were assumed to be safe due to their natural identity. A comprehensive review by Münstedt provided essential evidence of numerous natural medicaments, such as L-lysine, lemon balm (Melissa officinalis), aloe vera extract, astragalus, bee propolis, elderberry, echinacea, cat’s claw, sage-rhubarb, sandalwood, tea tree oil, and witch hazel, in preventing illnesses and alleviating diseases [117]. Bee propolis as lip balms was proposed as an alternative to topical antiviral applications as one study confirmed its superiority and safety when used in cases where standard antivirals were not profoundly tolerated [118]. An open-label RCT using medical-grade kanuka honey with superior antiviral effects towards HSV labial occurrence highlighted that botanical compounds can be an alternative to acyclovir with a better safety profile [103,119].Some of the established zinc-based creams synergistically enhanced in combination with herbal-based ingredients, including echinacea and goldenseal, resolved RHL outbreaks within three days in 40% of affected individuals [120]. With stronger antiviral activities and a simple mechanism of action potentiating prophylactic benefits on viral growth stages, these natural products were favorable because of the lower chance of developing resistance, lower toxicity, and price compared to antivirals [120]. Additional natural compounds, which have been tested at basic trial levels, include neem-based creams, beeswax, jojoba oil, shea butter, sesame oil, peppermint oil, and also coconut oil [119].6.4. The Modern, Non-medicinal Future: Laser Therapy Immunotherapies and ProbioticsAs the world moves forward in technological advancements and global opinion favoring a non-medicinal future, laser treatments, electrical stimulation, immunotherapies, and vaccinations carry a huge expectation in solving RHL. Based on the literature, there were no confirmed laser therapy modalities that can fully decimate virus replication and prevent recurrence with 100% success, but clinical trials did show a reduction in the pain and frequency of recurrences in almost all patients suffering from primary and secondary infections of herpes labialis [121]. A recent review concluded that although low-level laser therapy is superior to most antivirals in RHL therapy, the inconsistent study designs and unparallel clinical parameters hinder robust conclusions and hence, more standardization is warranted [122]. Another novel method is the transdermal electrical stimulator, especially in patients intolerant to antiviral agents [88]. Additionally, the topical immuno-sensitizer squaric acid dibutyl ester (SADBE) may help in the prevention of RHL outbreaks and reduce frequency rates by delaying hypersensitivity reactions [123]. A promising risk–benefit analysis of topical 2% SADBE by Chang et al. suggested that this approach may decrease the recurrence rate and severity of outbreaks, although it may take up to 3 months for the treatment effect [124]. Finally dendritic cell vaccines could be a ray of hope when other treatments seem to give no efficacious impact [125]. With the incorporation of HSV-1 recombinant glycoprotein D vaccines in activating HSV-1-specific immune responses, mononuclear cells will receive a decreased mitogenic reaction which allows normalization of the immune system, providing a balance in viral replication breakdown [126].Altering the commensal microbiome indigenous to a specific body site has been tried and tested for the management of several diseases. It has been reported that the commensal microbiome primes the immune system and the microbiota can promote antiviral immunity [127,128]. A recent study suggested that gut microbiome can play a role in preventing HSV encephalitis via the gut–brain axis [129] and hence, probiotics are being explored for the management of encephalitis. The bacteriocin subtilosin generated by Bacillus species affects the late infectious phases of both HSV-1 and HSV-2 invitro [130]. The subtilosin, another enterocin from Enterococcus faecium, also suppresses the early infectious cycle of HSV-1 in vitro [127,130]. Whether the manipulation of the gut and oral microbiome prevents herpes labialis infection is yet to be explored.7. Impacts on Quality of Life7.1. Physical and Psychological ImplicationsUnintentionally, patients and treatment providers often resort to quick treatment for RHL without a complete assessment of viral infection severity, dissemination of risk factors, or even internal immunocompetency checks [2]. Hence, problems with antiviral resistance, absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination add to dispensable aspects in the quality of life of the patients which can be impactful depending on the severity and frequency of the infection. While most symptoms are often mild enough, the prolonged duration of the illness may become uncomfortable and traumatizing up to the brink of emotional impairment. This psychological impact may especially affect the young and self-conscious where facial appearances are a priority [56].In combining both psychosocial methods for the prevention of recurrence and reducing psychological stress, outcomes may be favorable to both the patients and also healthcare professionals [110]. It is interesting to note considerable data connecting emotional distress or negative emotions to HSV epidemiology, where RHL can frequently occur due to triggering factors, including disgust and misery [131]. Constant sleep deprivation may cause lasting effects on the body, especially on skin functionality and integrity. With prolonged sleep deficit, stress can be elevated without incitement and affect the modulation of the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis in the body, thus increasing excessive glucocorticoid production to put the body in an immunocompromised state and triggering psychological effects to reactivate HSV-1 infections [132].7.2. Lifestyle Modifications (Habits, Hygienic Considerations, Dietary)Practical methods in lifestyle modifications can be convenient alternatives compared to substantially expensive treatments or risky therapies and these include prevention of prolonged exposure to sunlight, use of sunscreen, exercise, and relaxation methods to reduce emotional stress, healthy hygiene habits, and healthy and sufficient sleep [133]. All these adjustable lifestyle factors were further explored in a review of holistic dermatology techniques by Hu et al. who highlighted the interrelationship between healthy habits and dermatological health in mitigating the progressive nature of most viral skin infections [132]. Dietary adjustments can also include L-lysine [134], zinc, and vitamin C supplementation as they have been linked to the healing process. A combination of alcohol drinking and nutritional decline possess a serious influence on a weakened immune defense and thereby RHL recurrence, and hence, could be tired to be controlled by lifestyle modifications [132].8. ConclusionsSeroprevalence data show that oral HSV-1 infection regularly transmits among vulnerable humans as the virus transition constantly happens from latent to recurrent stages. A variety of management regimens ranging from natural sources to potent oral/topical medications establish sufficient relief, although still few available agents offer only temporary relief and are unable to overcome bioavailability/resistance problems. In addition, the combination of psychosocial techniques to relieve stress, and adjusting lifestyle modifications reasonably may also have positive implications in quality-of-life aspects. More substantial research and consolidated evidence are needed to further associate viral infection/reactivation with exact triggers and development of prediction models for reactivation/recurrence.


Title: Herpesvirus Entry Mediator on Radiation-Resistant Cell Lineages Promotes Ocular Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Pathogenesis in an Entry-Independent Manner

INTRODUCTIONHerpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), a ubiquitous human pathogen, can infect the ocular tissues, resulting in the chronic inflammatory syndrome herpes stromal keratitis (HSK) (1, 2). HSK is characterized by ocular opacity, neovascularization, and edema and produces an estimated 40,000 new cases of severe vision impairment or blindness worldwide each year (3). The damage sustained during HSK is immune mediated rather than arising from viral lytic effects, but the complex virus-host interactions that drive this syndrome are incompletely understood (1, 2, 4, 5).In the murine cornea, actively replicating HSV-1 can be detected for 5 to 6 days after infection (4). Secreted factors from infected and uninfected epithelial cells recruit a variety of leukocytes, including neutrophils (polymorphonuclear leukocytes [PMN]), macrophages, NK cells, dendritic cells, and γδ T cells, into the adjacent stromal tissue beginning around 18 h postinfection (hpi) (6–10). The predominately neutrophilic infiltrate mediates viral clearance, and by 5 days postinfection (dpi), PMNs in the cornea decline to preinfection levels (11, 12). A secondary, pathogenic wave of PMNs and CD4+ T cells infiltrates the cornea beginning around 7 dpi and peaking at 14 to 21 dpi (4). Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGF)-mediated ingrowth of abnormal blood and lymph vessels into the usually avascular cornea facilitates the invasion of these leukocytes and is a key step in the establishment of CD4+ T cell-driven chronic inflammation (13, 14). Stromal scarring and neovascularization may subsequently lead to vision loss, necessitating corneal transplantation (15, 16).HSV has a complex entry mechanism requiring the expression of multiple envelope glycoproteins (17). Glycoprotein D (gD) interacts with several cellular receptors to facilitate entry. The most biologically relevant in animal models are herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM) and nectin-1 (18–20). In vivo studies using HVEM (Tnfrsf14−/−) and/or nectin-1 (Pvrl1−/−) receptor knockout (KO) mice have revealed that HSV infection via intracranial or intravaginal inoculation requires nectin-1 for pathogenesis and neural spread, while HVEM is largely dispensable for infection by these routes (18, 21). More recently, HVEM has been implicated as a serotype-specific mediator of HSV-1 pathogenesis after corneal inoculation: HVEM KO mice have lower viral loads, fewer infectious corneal foci, and milder clinical symptoms than control mice (22, 23). This unique dependence of HSV-1 on HVEM in the eye is not readily explained by the absence of a suitable alternate entry receptor, as murine ocular tissue widely expresses both nectin-1 and HVEM (24, 25).HVEM, a member of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily, is a bidirectional receptor with multiple immunomodulatory functions depending on cell type and ligand (26–28). HVEM interaction with B and T lymphocyte attenuator (BTLA) or CD160 is typically coinhibitory, suppressing T cell activation and proliferation, while HVEM bound by LIGHT (lymphotoxin-related inducible ligand that competes for glycoprotein D binding to HVEM on T cells) or LTα (lymphotoxin α) is proinflammatory (29–33). However, these outcomes differ depending on the cell type, whether the HVEM ligand is in soluble or membrane-bound form, and whether the interaction occurs in cis or in trans (29–33). HVEM influences immune responses to a variety of pathogens, including viral, bacterial, and helminthic agents, in the vagina, intestine, lung, and other tissues (34–36). In some instances, the pathogen utilizes HVEM to dampen innate responses, while in others HVEM functions to control infection and limit disease progression (26, 34–37). HVEM has also been implicated in a number of autoimmune and inflammatory disorders, including bacterial colitis, atopic dermatitis, and acute graft-versus-host disease (26, 27, 35, 38).There is little overlap in the nectin-1 and HVEM binding regions of gD; mutations made in the first 32 amino acids of gD abrogate entry via HVEM without affecting the ability of gD to bind to and use nectin-1 as an entry receptor (39–44). We tested whether HVEM-mediated entry promotes ocular HSV-1 pathogenesis by infecting mice with HSV-1/gDΔ7-15 (here referred to as the Δ7-15 mutant), a mutant virus with a targeted deletion that renders HVEM entry nonfunctional but preserves entry via nectin-1. Ocular infection by the Δ7-15 mutant was not attenuated compared to infection by a control virus, indicating that the requirement of HSV-1 for HVEM in the eye is gD independent and therefore unlikely to be related to entry. Inflammatory cytokines were upregulated after infection in wild-type (WT) corneas compared to HVEM KO corneas, and HVEM-mediated entry was dispensable for this process. The stroma of HVEM KO corneas also had fewer immune infiltrates compared to WT results early and late after infection, implying that HVEM may promote pathogenesis independently of its function as a viral entry receptor by creating an inflammatory ocular environment during HSV-1 infection.A wide variety of cell types, including epithelial, stromal, and immune cells (T cells, dendritic cells, PMN, macrophages, and others), express HVEM, and given the complex, contradictory nature of its functions (costimulatory and coinhibitory), the contribution HVEM may make to ocular pathogenesis is not obvious (24, 26, 29, 45, 46). We developed hematopoietic chimeric mice in which HVEM expression was restricted to or ablated from radiation-sensitive bone marrow (BM)-derived immune cells and found that HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types was sufficient to confer WT-like susceptibility to HSV-1 after corneal inoculation. We propose that HVEM on radiation-resident cells of the cornea, such as the corneal epithelium, promotes the induction of inflammatory cytokines in the eye, resulting in increased immune infiltrates. This immune response persists well after detectable virus has vanished and likely accounts for the worsened disease observed in WT versus HVEM KO animals.RESULTSHVEM-mediated entry does not alter the development of clinical symptoms or mortality after corneal infection in mice.HVEM is uniquely important for ocular pathogenesis of HSV-1 (22, 23), but whether this is attributable to its entry effects, immunomodulatory effects, or both is not known (23). To determine if HVEM-mediated entry was required for normal virulence after corneal inoculation, we produced an HSV-1 mutant with a deletion of the HVEM binding region of gD (Fig. 1A). Crystallographic and functional assays have shown that deletion of amino acids 7 to 15 of the gD N terminus selectively abolishes HVEM entry without functionally disturbing entry via nectin-1 (37, 47–49). As shown in Fig. 1A, the Δ7-15 viruses in HSV-1(F) and HSV-1(17) backgrounds were engineered by FLP-mediated recombination as described previously (37, 49). The HSV-1/FRT viruses (WT-FRT) contain the WT protein coding sequence for gD flanked by FRT sites (Fig. 1A) and served as controls.FIG 1 The gDΔ7-15 mutation specifically abolishes cellular entry via HVEM by HSV-1. (A) Schematic diagram of the HVEM-binding HSV-1/gDΔ7-15 mutant (Δ7-15) and of the control virus containing the native gD gene flanked by FRT sites, HSV-1/gDWT-FRT (WT-FRT). WT-FRT was used to generate the Δ7-15 strain, the HVEM entry mutant, via FLP-mediated recombination. The Δ7-15 mutant has an 8-amino-acid deletion in glycoprotein gD that specifically abolishes entry interactions with the HVEM entry receptor. (B) Characterization of the recombinant strain 17 viruses by plaque assay. The Δ7-15 virus replicated in B78 cells stably expressing the nectin-1 entry receptor to an average titer of 3.3 × 107 PFU/ml. No detectable replication was observed in HVEM receptor cells (*, below detection limit).All viruses were confirmed by sequencing and phenotypically verified by plaque assay on Vero cells, B78-A10 cells (B78H1 cells stably expressing HVEM), and B78-C10 cells (B78H1 cells stably expressing nectin-1). As expected, the titers of the WT-FRT viruses were similar on all 3 cell types, indicating that both strains of WT-FRT are capable of infecting cells expressing either HVEM or nectin-1 [results are shown for HSV-1(17) viruses in Fig. 1B]. Titers of the Δ7-15 viruses were similar to the titers of the WT-FRT viruses on Vero cells and B78-C10 cells, but no plaques were observed on B78-A10 cells, indicating that while both the Δ7-15 virus strains can infect cells via nectin-1, they are unable to infect cells that express only HVEM (Fig. 1B). Additionally, 3 nectin-1 KO mice were challenged via corneal scarification with the Δ7-15 viruses as previously described (22, 23), and eye swabs were collected on 1 and 3 days postinfection (dpi). No replicating virus was recovered from any of the samples collected from these mice at either time point, confirming that the Δ7-15 viruses are defective in the use of HVEM as an entry receptor in vivo (data not shown).We monitored 10-to-12-week-old male C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice infected with the WT-FRT strain or Δ7-15 mutant from both strain 17 backgrounds (Fig. 2) and strain F (data not shown) after corneal scarification as previously described (22, 23). We also inoculated 10-to-12-week-old male BALB/c mice, which are exceptionally sensitive to ocular HSV-1, with the Δ7-15 mutant or WT-FRT (strain 17 background) to ensure that the resistance of the C57BL/6 strain to ocular HSV-1 infection did not mask subtle differences between the viruses (Fig. 2). Mice were monitored daily for changes in weight and signs of HSV-1 disease as described in Materials and Methods. The development and severity of lesions did not differ significantly between HVEM-entry-competent and HVEM-entry-null viruses in either mouse strain [data are shown for HSV-1(17) in Fig. 2A and B]. Both Δ7-15 and WT-FRT viruses produced lesions, and by 5 to 7 dpi all mice were symptomatic.FIG 2 HVEM entry capacity is dispensable for clinical symptoms after corneal inoculation with HSV-1 in multiple strains of mice. HSV-resistant C57BL/6 or HSV-susceptible BALB/c mice were inoculated with 2.0 × 106 PFU/5 µl of the HSV-1/17 viruses per eye and scored daily (using a 0-to-5 scale, with 5 representing the greatest severity) for the development of epithelial lesions and neurologic symptoms (n = 4 to 6 per group; data representing the results of one representative experiment are shown). (A) Percentages of mice from each group with no lesions on the indicated day postinfection (dpi). (B) Average maximum epithelial lesion scores (means ± standard errors of the means [SEM]). max., maximum. (C) Percentages of mice from each group with no neurologic (neuro.) symptoms on the indicated dpi. (D) Average maximum neurologic scores (means ± SEM). (E) Survival for each group. For each mouse strain, no significant differences were detected between the viruses (P > 0.05 [two-way ANOVA for panels A and C or two-tailed t test for panels C and D with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test; log-rank test for panel E]).Neurologic symptoms began around 5 dpi, and by 7 dpi, 40% to 80% of the C57BL/6 and 100% of the BALB/c mice displayed at least some neurologic morbidity, including ruffled fur, hunched posture, postural instability, and absence of movement (Fig. 2C). The severities of neurologic symptoms also did not differ depending on the capacity of the virus to use HVEM as an entry receptor within each mouse strain (Fig. 2D). Mice infected with either Δ7-15 strain lost a percentage of day 0 body weight similar to that seen with mice infected with the WT-FRT strain (data not shown). All C57BL/6 mice survived to 28 dpi, when the experiment ended (Fig. 2E). This high percentage of survival is consistent with previously reported data (22). The majority of BALB/c mice succumbed to infection by day 30 regardless of the HVEM entry capacity of the virus (Fig. 2E).Unlike the extremely mild disease observed in HVEM KO mice (22, 23), the Δ7-15 virus produced disease comparable to that seen with the WT-FRT virus (Fig. 2). To ensure that our findings were not due to attenuation of our FLP recombinase-generated mutants, we also compared the results of infection of C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice by the strain 17-derived Δ7-15 mutant and the WT-FRT virus to those seen with the parental HSV-1/17 strain from which both viruses were made. There were no significant differences in any measure of clinical disease between the parental strain and either of the modified viruses, indicating that attenuation did not occur during the recombination process (data not shown). Collectively, these data suggest that the entry interaction between gD and HVEM is not required to produce clinical symptoms during ocular HSV-1 infection.HVEM-mediated entry does not influence tissue viral loads after corneal challenge in mice.To test whether HVEM-mediated entry was required to establish HSV-1 infection in the eye and/or facilitate spread to other organs, we assessed viral titers after infection with strain 17 or F background Δ7-15 mutant or WT-FRT viruses in relevant tissues. Eye swabs collected 1, 3, and 5 dpi were analyzed via plaque assay on Vero cells to determine viral loads in the tear film. C57BL/6 or BALB/c mice infected with Δ7-15 mutant or WT-FRT had similar viral loads in the eye swabs at all three time points (data shown for strain 17 background, Fig. 3A and B), indicating that the gD-HVEM entry interaction is dispensable for the primary establishment of infection in the murine cornea. This is in contrast to previous results with receptor KO animals, where HSV-1 viral titers and infectious corneal foci were limited in the absence of HVEM (22, 23).FIG 3 HVEM entry capability is not required for corneal HSV-1 replication or spread to the tissues in multiple strains of mice. HSV-resistant C57BL/6 or HSV-susceptible BALB/c mice were inoculated with 2.0 × 106 PFU/5 µl per eye of the Δ7-15 mutant or the WT-FRT strain (strain 17 background) after corneal scarification. (A) C57BL/6 eye swabs collected 1, 3, and 5 dpi. (B) BALB/c eye swabs collected at the same time points (means ± SEM). (C to E) Titers determined at 5 dpi using samples from the periocular skin (POS) (C), trigeminal ganglia (TG) (D), and brain (E) (means ± SEM). Data representing the results of two independent experiments are shown (total n per group = 10). For each mouse strain, no significant differences in titers were detected between the viruses in eye swabs or tissues (two-tailed t test with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test, P > 0.05). (F) At 30 dpi, C57BL/6 mice were sacrificed and TG explants were cocultured on Vero cells for detection of reactivated virus from latency (n ≥ 10 TG for each group). No significant differences were observed in levels of TG reactivation between the mice infected with the Δ7-15 mutant and those infected with the WT-FRT strain from either viral background (chi-square test with 1° of freedom, P > 0.05).Next, we tested whether spread to relevant organs was reduced by a lack of HVEM entry. We collected periocular skin (POS), trigeminal ganglia (TG), and brains at 5 dpi, homogenized the tissues, and determined titers via plaque assay. Corresponding to titers in the eye swabs, titers in the POS of C57BL/6 or BALB/c mice infected with the Δ7-15 mutant background and those infected with the WT-FRT background did not differ significantly (data shown for strain 17 background; Fig. 3C). Similar results were observed in the TG and brain (strain 17 background; Fig. 3D and E). We also compared titers in the eye swabs, POS, TG, and brain after infection by strain 17 background Δ7-15 mutant and WT-FRT viruses to those seen after infection by the parental HSV-1/17 strain in both mouse strains and found no significant differences in viral replication that would indicate that the recombinants were attenuated (data not shown).We investigated whether HVEM entry capacity influenced the establishment of latency within the TG. Previous explant reactivation study results from our laboratory showed that TG from WT mice reactivated at 4 times the rate of those from HVEM KO mice (22). After 30 days, rates of reactivation after corneal inoculation of C57BL/6 mice with WT-FRT or Δ7-15 virus from either strain did not differ significantly, as measured by the ex vivo reactivation assay, suggesting that HVEM-mediated entry was not required to successfully seed the TG (Fig. 3F). Together, these results indicate that disruption of the gD-HVEM entry interaction does not significantly impact the establishment of viral infection at the cornea or POS or hinder spread within the nervous system. This is consistent with studies from the vaginal model of HSV-2 infection, which found that viral replication in the vaginal mucosa was minimally affected by the Δ7-15 deletion in HSV-2 (36). Therefore, disruption of HVEM entry by mutation of viral gD does not phenocopy the results observed in infection of HVEM KO mice with a wild-type virus.HVEM KO corneas have decreased cytokine induction after HSV-1 infection compared to WT controls.The previously described experiments indicated that the requirement of HSV-1 for HVEM in the murine eye is entry independent. We hypothesized that the immunomodulatory functions of HVEM may contribute to pathogenesis after corneal inoculation. We examined the expression of a number of cytokines known to impact the development of HSK in pooled corneal samples from WT or HVEM KO mice using a Milliplex multianalyte panel (MAP) mouse cytokine/chemokine magnetic bead panel (Millipore, Billerica, MA) assay system (10, 52–58). Because HVEM KO mice have been reported to have increased T cell reactivity (59), we began by comparing mock-infected WT and HVEM KO corneas to rule out any differences between the genotypes unrelated to HSV-1 infection. Lack of HVEM did not significantly influence the baseline expression of any of the cytokines examined in mock-infected corneas 5 days after scarification (Fig. 4A). While most factors were expressed at low levels in the mock-infected samples (≤10 pg/ml), interleukin-1 alpha (IL-1α), CCL2, CXCL2, CXCL9, and, in the HVEM KO, CXCL10 were expressed more highly. The induction of these factors may have been due to scarification alone (56, 58).FIG 4 Effects of HVEM depletion or disabled HVEM entry on corneal cytokine expression 5 days after HSV-1/17 infection. (A) Average corneal cytokine protein concentrations (conc.) (in picograms per microliter) 5 days after mock infection in WT and HVEM KO mice. (B) Normalized fold changes in corneal cytokine concentrations of WT or HVEM KO mice infected with 2.0 × 106 PFU/5 µl per eye of HSV-1/17 compared to those of mock-infected controls 5 dpi. (C) Normalized fold changes in corneal cytokine concentrations of WT mice infected with 2.0 × 106 PFU/5 µl per eye of the HVEM-entry Δ7-15 mutant virus or the control WT-FRT virus compared to that of mock-infected controls 5 dpi. The values are mean results ± SEM from two independent experiments, with n ≥ 5 pooled samples (6 corneas per sample) per group. Values above the red line represent increased expression compared to that seen with mock-infected controls. Statistically significant differences are indicated as follows: **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001 (two-tailed t test with Holm-Sidak’s adjustment for multiple comparisons).We profiled the expression levels of the same panel of cytokines in WT and HVEM KO corneas 5 days after corneal infection with HSV-1(17) virus. To control for the scarification process, we compared the results from infected samples as fold changes over mock-infected samples. The majority of factors were elevated severalfold over mock-infected control results, consistent with an infectious, inflammatory process (Fig. 4B). WT corneas expressed IL-6 and the gamma interferon (IFN-γ)-induced T cell chemoattractant CXCL10 (interferon gamma-induced protein 10 [IP-10]) at over 9- and 125-fold the levels in HVEM KO corneas, respectively. Levels of several other chemokines, including CXCL9 (monokine induced by gamma interferon [MIG]), CCL3 (macrophage inflammatory protein 1α [MIP-1α]), and RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted [CCL5]), were also elevated in WT corneas compared to HVEM KO corneas, but this upregulation did not achieve statistical significance after correction for multiple comparisons.A previous study in the vaginal HSV-2 model showed that disruption of the gD-HVEM entry interaction through deletion of amino acids 7 to 15 in HSV-2(333) led to decreased induction of IL-6, CXCL9, and CXCL10 in vaginal washes early after infection (37). To test whether the changes that we observed in WT and HVEM KO corneas required HVEM-mediated entry, we analyzed the cytokine profile of WT mice infected with Δ7-15(17) virus or the WT-FRT(17) control virus (Fig. 4C). Consistent with the disease and viral load data, the changes in the levels of induction of the examined factors caused by the two viruses were not significantly different, suggesting that gD-HVEM entry is not required for HVEM-mediated induction of certain inflammatory cytokines in the cornea during HSV-1 infection. Together, these findings demonstrate that HVEM expression by the host produces changes in the magnitude of the cytokine response to infection independently of the gD-HVEM entry interaction.Levels of immune infiltrates are reduced in HVEM KO corneas at the onset of infection and after virus has been cleared.We hypothesized that HVEM KO corneas would exhibit other changes indicative of a diminished immune response to HSV-1. To assess whether the HVEM-mediated increase in cytokine expression was reflected by changes in inflammatory infiltrates, we performed immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis of corneas taken from several time points after HSV-1 infection. Whole eyes from mock-infected or HSV-1(17) virus-infected HVEM KO or WT animals were collected after corneal inoculation during early and acute infection (1 or 5 dpi) or at the height of HSK (14 dpi). Previously, we found that, on average, WT corneas have more than twice the number of infectious foci that HVEM KO corneas have and that foci in WT corneas also tended to be larger (22). Consistent with these findings, Fig. 5A qualitatively demonstrates that HVEM KO corneas had fewer and smaller infectious foci in the corneal epithelium than WT corneas immediately after infection (1 dpi). By 5 dpi, HSV antigen was detectable only rarely in the corneas of both genotypes (data not shown), and no virus was found in the cornea by 14 dpi (Fig. 5B, top row).FIG 5 HVEM KO corneas have decreased stromal immune cell infiltrates during acute infection and the chronic phase. (A) Representative immunohistochemical analysis of whole WT or HVEM KO eyes 1 day after mock infection or infection at the corneal surface with 2.0 × 106 PFU/5 µl per eye of HSV-1/17 (original magnification, ×400). Paraffin-embedded eyes were serially sectioned and stained for HSV-1 or markers of immune cell infiltration. Gr-1 stains granulocytes, including PMN, macrophages, and monocytes, while CD3 is specific for T cells. A representative image of an HSV-infected region in the WT corneal epithelium is adjacent to a stromal region floridly positive for Gr-1 and CD3 (third column), while in an HVEM KO section, fewer Gr-1+ and CD3+ cells were found in the stroma despite the presence of HSV antigen (Ag) (fourth column). The mock-infected sections contained no specific HSV staining and only occasional Gr-1+ cells. (B) Representative images of WT or HVEM KO eyes 14 days after mock infection or infection with HSV-1 after corneal scarification. HSV antigen was absent from the cornea at this time, as expected. The WT corneal stroma remained infiltrated with numerous Gr-1+ and CD3+ cells, while the HVEM KO stroma contained rare positive cells (representative positive cells are indicated with black arrowheads). Control mock-infected sections were negative for all markers, except for occasional Gr-1+ cells.Serial sections adjacent to infectious foci were stained with anti-Ly-6G (Gr-1) to visualize monocytes and granulocytes, including peripheral neutrophils, or with anti-CD3 to identify T cells. The stroma of HVEM KO corneas qualitatively displayed markedly less Gr-1+ or CD3+ staining 1 dpi than the stroma of WT corneas (Fig. 5A, second and third rows). Interestingly, at 14 dpi, after HSV-1 antigen was no longer detectable in the eye, WT stroma remained heavily infiltrated with T cells and especially with granulocytes (Fig. 5B, second row and third rows) whereas HVEM KO stroma contained only rare positive cells (Fig. 5B, black arrowheads). Because the differences between WT and HVEM KO mice persisted well beyond the end of initial infection, these data suggest that HVEM not only influences the establishment of infection but may also play a role in the maintenance of an inflammatory microenvironment in the cornea in the absence of viral replication. We hypothesize that this apparent difference in immune infiltrates in HVEM KO corneas compared to WT corneas may be responsible, in part, for the exacerbated pathogenesis observed in WT animals compared to HVEM animals and will be a future focus of our studies.HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types contributes to clinical disease after corneal HSV-1 inoculation.To further investigate how HVEM promotes the inflammatory corneal environment after HSV-1 infection, we sought to characterize which subsets of HVEM-expressing cells mediate ocular pathogenesis. HVEM is expressed broadly in both hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic organs, including the murine eye and sensory neural tissue, and on a wide variety of leukocytes, including T cells, B cells, NK cells, PMN, dendritic cells (DCs), and myeloid cells (24, 45, 46). Furthermore, both the cell type expressing HVEM and the ligand with which it interacts influence whether the HVEM signal is costimulatory or coinhibitory (29, 45, 60–63). HVEM on corneal resident cells could interact with natural HVEM ligands on infiltrating cells to promote inflammation and disease; alternatively, HVEM expressed on infiltrating immune cells could provide signals that aggravate disease.To distinguish between these possibilities, we produced four groups of hematopoietic chimeric mice by transplanting WT or HVEM KO bone marrow (BM) cells into lethally irradiated WT (C57BL/6, CD45.1 allele) or HVEM KO (on C57BL/6 background, CD45.2 allele) mice (annotation: donor→RECIPIENT). In this process, cells that are sensitive to radiation, including most BM-derived immune cells, are ablated from recipient animals and replaced via transplantation of BM tissue from donor animals. The majority of cell types, including resident cells of the cornea such as the epithelial and stromal cells, are resistant to radiation and are not replaced by donor tissue. After a recovery period of 10 weeks, reconstitution efficiency was evaluated by flow cytometry of peripheral blood lymphocytes for the CD45 alleles. Chimeras with ≥95% reconstitution were then infected with HSV-1(17) virus via corneal scarification and monitored for 14 days.Mice with HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types (WT recipients) began exhibiting lesions 5 dpi, and all mice from these groups had lesions by 7 dpi (Fig. 6A). In contrast, mice lacking HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types (HVEM KO recipients) were relatively protected, as only one animal from each genotype developed a lesion (Fig. 6A). These differences were significant: wt→WT mice had a higher incidence of lesions than hvem ko→HVEM KO and wt→HVEM KO mice for days 5 to 14; hvem ko→WT also had a significantly higher incidence of lesions than hvem ko→HVEM KO for that same time period. The two mixed chimeras also differed significantly from each other in lesion incidence: hvem ko→WT mice had a higher incidence of lesions than wt→HVEM KO mice for 6 to 14 dpi. Lesions in the WT recipient mice were also more severe than the rare lesions that occurred in the HVEM KO recipient animals (Fig. 6B).FIG 6 HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types confers wild-type-like susceptibility to clinical HSV-1 symptoms after corneal inoculation. Bone marrow (BM) of WT or HVEM KO mice was ablated with 12 Gy of radiation. Recipients were transplanted with ~10 million WT or HVEM KO cells harvested from donor BM (annotation: donor→RECIPIENT). After 10 weeks of reconstitution and verification via flow cytometry, chimeric animals were infected via corneal scarification with 2.0 × 106 PFU/5 µl per eye of HSV-1/17 (two independent experiments, total n = 8 to 12 per group). Clinical symptoms were monitored for 14 days. (A and C) Incidence of epithelial lesion development (A) or neurologic (neuro.) symptoms (C) over time. Both HVEM KO-recipient groups had a significantly lower lesion incidence than WT-recipient groups from 5 to 14 dpi (two-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test, P < 0.001) and significantly lower neurologic morbidity from 6 dpi to the end of the experiment at 14 dpi (two-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test, P < 0.0001). (B and D) Mean maximum (max.) epithelial lesion score (B) or neurologic score (0 to 5, with 5 representing the greatest severity) (D) reached on any day (two-tailed t test with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test). (E) Survival for each group (log-rank test). (F) Maximum weight loss, expressed as a percentage of starting weight (two-tailed t test with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test). Values are means ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001.We also scored the animals for neurologic symptoms. Like lesion incidence, neurologic symptom incidence segregated with HVEM expression on radiation-resistant cell types. WT recipients began developing symptoms 6 dpi, and all or nearly all mice from these groups had at least mild symptoms by the following day (Fig. 6C). In contrast, signs of neurologic disease were rare or absent in the HVEM KO recipient groups: HVEM KO recipients had a significantly lower incidence of neurologic disease than WT recipient groups for all time points after and including day 6. Neurologic symptom severity was tracked by day, and mice whose symptoms were severe enough to require euthanasia were assigned a score of 5. WT recipients not only developed neurologic disease at a higher rate but also had significantly severer symptoms than HVEM KO recipients (Fig. 6D).In addition to developing less-frequent, milder lesions and neurologic symptoms, HVEM KO recipient mice were also relatively protected against HSV-1-induced mortality (Fig. 6E). In this case, the mixed chimeras (wt→HVEM KO and hvem ko→WT) had intermediate phenotypes, and the results of comparisons between those two groups or to control groups did not reach statistical significance. However, the total 14-day wt→WT mouse mortality rate (50%) was significantly higher than that of hvem ko→HVEM KO mice (15%). This was also consistent with data indicating that wt→WT animals lost significantly more weight than all other groups, as wt→WT weight loss was more than double that seen with either HVEM KO recipient group (Fig. 6F). The wt→WT controls also exhibited more weight loss than the hvem ko→WT group (13.01% ± 2.51%). Because the hvem ko→WT mice had lower weight loss and mortality than the wt→WT mice, absence of HVEM on BM-derived radiation-sensitive cells may also limit these HSV-1-induced outcomes specifically when HVEM is expressed on all other cell types. Collectively, the results from these experiments indicate that HVEM expression on radiation-resistant cell lineages confers susceptibility to wild-type-like clinical disease after inoculation with HSV-1 at the corneal surface. In contrast, HVEM on radiation-sensitive, BM-derived lineages has limited impact on clinical measures, except perhaps in subtle contributions to mortality and weight loss, as hvem ko→WT mice were slightly protected in these measures compared to wt→WT controls.HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types increases viral titers in eye swabs and tissues after corneal HSV-1 inoculation.To corroborate the clinical findings observed in the hematopoietic chimeras, we determined the viral loads in eye swabs at 1, 3, and 5 dpi and titers in the POS, TG, and brains collected 5 dpi via plaque assay. The wt→WT controls had approximately 1-log-higher titers in the tear film at 1 dpi than either HVEM KO recipient group, regardless of donor genotype (Fig. 7A). The other WT recipient group, hvem ko→WT, also trended toward higher titers than the HVEM KO recipients. By 3 dpi, titers had decreased in all four groups, and differences were no longer significant (Fig. 7B). On day 5, viral loads in the tear film of the wt→WT controls were once again significantly higher than in either HVEM KO recipient group by around 1 log (Fig. 7C). At that later time point, the amount of virus present in wt→WT eye swabs was also higher than that of the hvem ko→WT group, suggesting that HVEM on radiation-sensitive cells may also promote viral replication later in infection. In summary, establishment of primary corneal infection immediately after infection (1 dpi) as well as later in infection (5 dpi) was limited in the absence of HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types.FIG 7 HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types, regardless of radiation-sensitive (donor) genotype, is associated with higher viral loads in the tear film, POS, and TG. Hematopoietic chimeras were inoculated with 2.0 × 106 PFU/5 µl HSV-1/17 per eye after corneal scarification (annotation: donor→RECIPIENT). Data representing the results of two independent experiments are shown (total n = 6 to 12 per group). (A to C) Titers of virus from eye swabs collected 1, 3, and 5 dpi. (D to F) Titers in the POS (D), TG (E), and brain (F). Data were evaluated with one-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test. Values are means ± SEM. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001.Similar results were observed during analysis of viral loads in the POS and TG at 5 dpi. POS titers from wt→WT controls were subtly but significantly (~1 log) higher than both those from HVEM KO recipient groups, and POS titers in hvem ko→WT mice also tended to be higher than those in HVEM KO recipients (Fig. 7D). Titers from the TG of wt→WT controls were ~1 log higher than titers from the TG of hvem ko→HVEM KO controls (Fig. 7E). Although wt→HVEM KO mice had slightly lower titers than mice in either of the WT recipient groups, this difference did not reach statistical significance. The decreased viral loads observed in the POS and TG are supportive of the primary replication defect in the cornea, as spread to these sites is dependent on the initial infection in the cornea. Similarly, viral titers in the brains of HVEM KO recipients trended toward lower levels than those in the brains of WT recipients, although this did not reach statistical significance (Fig. 7F). Lower titers in the brains of HVEM KO recipients were likely due to viral spread, as others have found that HVEM is not required for pathogenesis in the brain (21).These results indicate that HVEM expression on radiation-resistant cells subtly but significantly increases viral loads in the eye swabs 1 and 5 dpi, and in the POS and TG 5 dpi, supporting our clinical findings. HVEM on radiation-sensitive, BM-derived lineages also moderately increased replication in the eye at later points in infection, as wt→WT titers were higher than hvem ko→WT titers in swabs collected 5 dpi. This suggests that HVEM on radiation-sensitive cell types may also contribute positively to pathogenesis, although more subtly than HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types.DISCUSSIONIn this study, we sought to investigate the contribution HVEM makes to HSV-1 pathogenesis after ocular inoculation (22, 23). Our data indicate that, during ocular infection with HSV-1, (i) the gD-HVEM entry interaction is dispensable for normal disease development; (ii) HVEM-positive corneas have larger amounts of inflammatory cytokines and granulocytic and T cell infiltrates; and (iii) lack of HVEM expression on radiation-resistant cell types is sufficient to protect against wild-type-like disease. HVEM, a TNF receptor superfamily member, has both pro- and anti-inflammatory actions and is known to modulate responses to a wide variety of pathogens in a number of organs (26, 34–36, 38). We found that HVEM significantly increased levels of the inflammatory cytokine IL-6 and the chemokine CXCL10 in the cornea during acute infection (Fig. 4); this induction did not require the entry-mediating function of HVEM. Several other chemokines, including CCL3, CXCL9, and RANTES, also followed this trend. Along with increased expression of a variety of chemotactic factors, the corneas of HSV-1-infected WT mice were also more heavily infiltrated by CD3+ T cells and Gr-1+ granulocytic cells during both the acute and chronic phases (Fig. 5). This type of infiltrate was consistent with previously described functions of the upregulated chemokines: CCL3, secreted from a variety of cell types, recruits and activates PMN and monocytes, while CXCL9, CXCL10, and RANTES are T cell chemoattractants known to promote ocular HSV-1 pathogenesis (10, 57, 58, 64). We did not differentiate between subsets of T cells and cannot rule out the possibility that the increased levels of CD3+ cells in WT corneas represented regulatory T cells (Tregs), which have been shown to control ocular infections in some models (65–67). This would be somewhat consistent with a previous report that found that HVEM KO mice have decreased expansion of CD4+ Foxp3+ Tregs in the draining lymph nodes after footpad injection (68). However, others have shown that numbers of Tregs in the cornea are lower in mice that did not develop HSK and that Treg depletion does not influence HSK incidence (69). While further characterization of the precise HVEM-mediated changes in the immune infiltrate of the cornea is required, it is clear that, at least in our model, these changes promote rather than ameliorate ocular pathogenesis. We plan to pursue this finding in our future studies by quantifying infiltrating cells and analyzing the expression of HVEM and relevant HVEM ligands in corneal tissues in order to more precisely determine the contribution HVEM makes to HSV-1-induced ocular pathogenesis.Collectively, these data indicate that HVEM mediates the development of an inflamed cornea after HSV-1 infection without requiring the gD-HVEM entry interaction. Nectin-1, widely expressed in the murine eye, is available to mediate entry when HVEM is absent, likely explaining why HVEM is not required as an entry receptor (25). We hypothesized that gD-independent immunomodulatory functions of HVEM promote disease after ocular inoculation of HSV-1. HVEM is bound by a number of natural ligands, including LIGHT, LTα, CD160, and BTLA (27, 32, 61). HVEM is a bidirectional receptor: as a ligand, the presence of HVEM bound by BTLA or CD160 leads to repression of T cell activation and proliferation (corepressor), while interactions with LIGHT or LTα enhance activation and differentiation of many immune cell types (costimulator), although these functions can vary depending on the cellular context and on whether the ligand is expressed in cis or in trans (60, 70). As a receptor, HVEM engaged by its natural ligands or viral gD activates NF-κB signaling (26, 27, 71). HSV gD has been reported to prevent interactions between HVEM and all its natural ligands (70, 72, 73). Results of experiments performed with the Δ7-15 mutant virus not only indicate that HVEM-mediated entry is not required for ocular pathogenesis, they also suggest that gD competition with host HVEM ligands is not likely to account for the attenuated disease observed in HVEM KO mice, as the Δ7-15 mutation in gD, which we and others have shown abolishes normal entry-related interactions with HVEM, likely limits the ability of the protein to compete with natural ligands for HVEM binding.Using hematopoietic chimeras, we broadly isolated the HVEM-expressing cell types that are responsible for HVEM-mediated ocular pathogenesis. Susceptibility to disease after corneal inoculation was shown to segregate with HVEM expression on radiation-resistant cell types, as WT recipients had indistinguishable neurologic and lesion scores, rates of mortality, and viral loads in the tissue, while HVEM KO recipients, regardless of donor genotype, were protected from infection. We conclude that HVEM expression on radiation-resistant cell types, likely on resident cells of the cornea, is required for normal HSV-1 pathogenesis after corneal inoculation.In our proposed model, HVEM expression on corneal epithelial or stromal cells (or another radiation-resistant cell type) increases cytokine production, drawing greater amounts of infiltrates to the cornea and thereby worsening disease after ocular inoculation in the hvem ko→WT chimeras (Fig. 8A). Alternatively, HVEM on radiation-resistant cells may interact with infiltrating immune cells expressing HVEM ligands to increase their activation and secretion of cytokines. In contrast, the wt→HVEM KO chimeras, which lack HVEM on radiation-resistant, resident cells of the eye, are protected from infection or resolve infection in a manner similar to that observed in the HVEM KO chimeras, because without HVEM, the pathological inflammatory cascade is not initiated (Fig. 8B).FIG 8 Model of HVEM contribution to HSV-1 pathogenesis in the eye. We have shown that HVEM-expressing, radiation-resistant cell types promote pathogenesis after corneal inoculation of HSV-1 and that HVEM-mediated pathology is entry independent. (A) In hvem ko→WT chimeras, HSV-1 enters through HVEM or nectin-1 at the initial site of infection. HVEM is not required on radiation-sensitive cells, such as infiltrating immune cells, in order for pathogenesis to occur in a wild-type-like manner. (B) In wt→HVEM KO chimeras, HSV-1 likely enters cells through its other receptor, nectin-1, as gD-HVEM entry is not required for the establishment or spread of infection. Despite the presence of HVEM on radiation-sensitive infiltrating cells, these animals develop attenuated or only mild disease after corneal inoculation, which is similar to what is observed in full HVEM KOs.Given the widespread expression of multiple HVEM ligands on many immune cell types, it is difficult to predict which ligand interacts with HVEM to promote ocular HSV-1 pathogenesis. HVEM on radiation-resistant cells may interact with one of its natural ligands, such as LIGHT or CD160, expressed on infiltrating immune cells, to promote inflammation. LIGHT provides costimulatory signals to murine and human T cells, enhancing proliferation and activation in the context of TCR ligation (74, 75). If this interaction drove pathogenesis our model, the radiation-resistant HVEM-positive cell type would also have to express the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) receptor, as would occur on antigen-presenting cells (APCs). High numbers of CD11b+ macrophages and CD11c+ DCs reside in the cornea, and recent studies have shown that these cells increase in number and, in the case of DCs, in MHC class II expression after infection with HSV-1 (76–79). These cells, although BM derived, incompletely turn over after irradiation: in one study, 25% of myeloid lineage cells persisted in the corneal stroma of chimeric mice even after 8 weeks of reconstitution (80). This small but significant population of HVEM-positive, radiation-resistant APCs could interact with LIGHT or other HVEM binding partners on infiltrating immune cells to increase their proliferation, activation, and/or secretion of cytokines. It is also possible that corneal cells such as epithelial cells or keratocytes may be responsible for the changes observed in corneal cytokine expression. HVEM is widely expressed by the normal murine corneal epithelium, and its expression in the corneal epithelium and stroma has been reported to increase after HSV-1 infection (24). Infected cells and neighboring uninfected cells of the cornea are believed to be the earliest instigators of HSK, and there is evidence that all of the cytokines that exhibited HVEM-dependent induction after infection in our model can be produced by cells of the cornea, including cells of the epithelium, stroma, or endothelium (54, 56, 58, 81–85). The HVEM receptor, after binding any of its ligands, activates NF-κB signaling (71, 86). Given that the cytokines that we found to be upregulated in an HVEM-dependent manner are also NF-κB target genes (82, 87–97), it is possible that activation of NF-κB within corneal resident cells through HVEM could be responsible for the increased expression of inflammatory mediators and, subsequently, of immune cell infiltrates in WT eyes. HSV also strongly activates NF-κB upon infection, potentially through gD-HVEM interactions, although other viral proteins have also been shown to be important for this process (98, 99). NF-κB activation is required for efficient viral replication and expression of viral proteins, as well as to prevent apoptosis of infected cells (99–101). If NF-κB activation is the signaling pathway responsible for the HVEM-mediated pathogenesis in our model, our results obtained with the Δ7-15 virus suggest that natural HVEM ligands may be equally capable of activating NF-κB signaling during HSV infection.In conclusion, we have shown that HVEM on radiation-resistant cell types, such as cells of the corneal epithelium or stroma or long-lived, resident APCs, plays an important immunomodulatory role in the pathogenesis of ocular HSV-1 infections independently of its entry receptor functions. These findings suggest that the contribution made by HVEM during HSV-1 pathogenesis occurs via the innate response, i.e., on residents of the eye, rather than via the adaptive immune response. Understanding how HVEM, a receptor with diverse roles in infection, autoimmunity, and inflammation, orchestrates ocular HSV-1 pathogenesis could not only provide avenues for new therapeutics but could also yield general insights into a variety of immune-mediated ocular diseases.MATERIALS AND METHODSEthics statement.These experiments were performed in strict adherence to the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The Committee on the Ethics of Animal Experiments of Northwestern University approved the protocol (Protocol no. 2012-1738). Procedures were performed under anesthesia using ketamine/xylazine or under isoflurane anesthesia. Minimization of suffering was prioritized.Cells and viruses.African green monkey kidney cells (Vero) were used for all plaque assays and virus propagation unless otherwise indicated. HSV-1 strain 17 was obtained from David Leib (Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH), and strain F was obtained from Bernard Roizman (University of Chicago, Chicago, IL). See Text S1 in the supplemental material for details of cell culture and viral propagation.Viral plaque assay.A standard plaque assay on Vero cells (unless otherwise noted) was used to determine viral titers as previously described (see Text S1 in the supplemental material).Animal procedures.Animals were cared for and procedures were performed following institutional and National Institutes of Health guidelines. The Animal Care and Use Committee at Northwestern University approved all procedures. Mice were maintained in a specific-pathogen-free environment and were transferred to a containment facility after infection. C57BL/6 mice and C57BL/6 mice with the CD45.1 allele from Jackson Laboratory (WT mice), Tnfrsf14−/− mice (HVEM KO mice), and BALB/c 8- to 16-week-old male mice were used in our experiments. Chimeric mice were produced as follows: WT (C57BL/6 expressing CD45.1 allele) or HVEM KO (C57BL/6 background expressing CD45.2 allele) recipient animals were subjected to a lethal dose of irradiation (2 doses of 6 Gy separated by a 3-h interval) to ablate the BM. Recipients were reconstituted with ~10 million cells harvested from the BM of donor animals via retro-orbital injection within 24 h of irradiation. After 10 weeks, the completeness of the transfer was verified by analyzing the proportions of CD45.1-positive and CD45.2-positive cells in peripheral blood by flow cytometry (cutoff, ≥95% donor genotype).The animals were inoculated with 2 × 106 PFU of HSV-1 in 5 µl Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) as previously described and as described in Text S1 in the supplemental material (22, 23).Cytokine/chemokine analysis.Corneal cytokines were analyzed with a custom Milliplex MAP kit mouse cytokine/chemokine magnetic bead panel (Millipore, Billerica, MA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Corneas were dissected and pooled (n = 3 mice or 6 corneas per sample) in cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)–protease inhibitor cocktail, homogenized for 30 s with a bead beater, and immediately loaded into the prepared 96-well plate. Analyte-specific antibody-coated magnetic microspheres were mixed with the sample. After exposure to a biotinylated detection antibody and incubation with streptavidin reporter, the amount of each captured factor was quantified using a Luminex compact analyzer (Luminex, Austin, TX). Two quality controls were run with each assay, and all analytes fell within quality control ranges.IHC.Whole eyes were collected at the indicated time points after infection, rinsed with PBS, and floated in 10% formalin–neutrally buffered PBS for 24 h. Eyes were then transferred to 70% ethanol and stored at 4°C until paraffin embedding. Serial 4-µm-thick sections were mounted on glass slides. Antigen retrieval was performed manually using a Vectastain ABC kit (Vector Labs). The following antibodies and concentrations were used for immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining: anti-HSV antigen (Dako) polyclonal antibody diluted 1:5,000; anti-Ly6G (Gr-1) monoclonal antibody (BD551459) diluted 1:500; and anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (Abcam ab16669l) diluted 1:2,000. Secondary antibodies labeled with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) were visualized after treatment with chromogen diaminobenzidine (DAB; Vector Labs). Slides were washed, counterstained with Gill’s hematoxylin, and imaged on an EVOS XL core cell imaging system.Statistics.Geometric means of numbers of viral-plaque-forming units per tissue sample, maximum neurologic and lesion scores, maximum weight losses, and concentrations of cytokines were compared using the unpaired Student’s t test or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test. Variance over time between groups with respect to lesion development or neurologic morbidity was analyzed with two-way ANOVA with Holm-Sidak’s multiple-comparison test. Kaplan-Meier mortality curves were compared using the log rank test. TG reactivation rates were compared using the chi-square test with 1° of freedom. All statistics were calculated using GraphPad Prism 6.0f software.SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIALText S1 Supplementary methods. Download Text S1, DOCX file, 0.1 MB


Title: Nonprofessional Phagocytosis Can Facilitate Herpesvirus Entry into Ocular Cells

1. IntroductionPhagocytosis is essentially a form of endocytosis wherein particles are trapped and enclosed by cell membrane protrusions. Our knowledge of phagocytosis comes mainly from professional phagocytes such as macrophages and neutrophils, which fight against microbial invasion and removal of dead cells [1]. However, in many cases, nonprofessional phagocytes including epithelial cells and fibroblasts of ocular origin have also been shown to possess the ability to phagocytose their adjacent apoptotic cells or spent cell debris [1–3]. Well-known examples include Sertoli cells in testis [3] and the retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells in the retina [3]. Recently we demonstrated that herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1) has the ability to exploit phagocytosis to promote its entry into corneal fibroblasts [4]. Similar findings have been made with amoebal mimivirus [5, 6]. Nonprofessional phagocytosis is also triggered by the recognition of ligands by corresponding receptors on phagocytosing cells. This results in surrounding of the target particles with a specialized pseudopod-like extension of the plasma membrane. The local reorganization of F-actin underneath the extension and the contractile motors supporting the reorganization provide the driving forces for trapping the particles [2, 7, 8]. Similar to professional phagocytosis by macrophages and neutrophils, nonprofessional phagocytosis also requires phosphoinositide 3 kinase (PI3K) signaling [6].Herpesviruses are highly prevalent among humans [9]. A vast majority of adult human population is seropositive for multiple herpesviruses, which cause life-long infections and virtually all are capable of causing ocular manifestations [9, 10]. The family of herpesviruses, which may have more than a hundred known members, has been divided into three subfamilies. Among human herpesviruses, alphaherpesvirus subfamily is exemplified by herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), betaherpesvirus subfamily by cytomegalovirus (CMV), and gammaherpesvirus subfamily by human herpesvirus-8 (HHV-8) [9]. The most common eye infections are caused by HSV-1, which is a well-studied cause for herpes stromal keratitis (HSK), a blinding eye disease. In addition HSK is also associated with blepharitis, dendritic keratitis, disciform stromal edema, and conjunctivitis [11]. The involvement of CMV and HHV-8 in ocular diseases is mostly limited to immunocompromised human population which includes AIDS patients and organ transplant recipients [10]. CMV used to cause retinitis in a significant number (30% or more) of AIDS patients. Lately, this situation has been brought under control by introduction of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). However, the ocular problems associated with HHV-8 remain very common among the AIDS patients who often suffer from the tumors of eyelid and conjunctiva [12].The mechanisms by which herpesviruses enter into host cells vary with individual viruses [4, 13–15]. For instance, all the three herpesviruses discussed previously use separate entry receptors, prefer certain cell types over others for infection and the establishment of latency, and use different mode(s) of entry [16]. In the case of HSV-1, endocytosis and nonprofessional phagocytosis play a dominant role in infection of many cell types [4, 14, 17]. Recent studies have indicated that HSV-1 entry may be atypical endocytosis since it is not mediated by formation of clathrin-coated pits or caveolae and it may or may not be pH-dependent [18, 19]. CMV and HHV-8, in contrast, may enter into cells by clathrin-coated endocytic cup formation and the entry is pH dependent [15]. While the significance of endocytosis may be known, it is not clear how herpesviruses infect cells of ocular origin, many of which are immune privileged [20]. It is also unknown if actin cytoskeleton plays a direct role in the initiation of infection, and likewise, the significance of pseudopod-like protrusions in entry process has not been described for herpesviruses. Here we demonstrate a unique commonality in terms of entry mechanism among three representative members of herpesvirus subfamilies. We show that the entry of the viruses into target cell types of ocular origin is facilitated by F-actin containing pseudopod-like membrane protrusions. Similar to phagocytosis, this entry mechanism is also controlled by PI3K signaling. The protrusions formed during nonprofessional phagocytosis may facilitate viral uptake since inhibition of protrusion formation significantly inhibits viral entry or uptake into cells. Our findings also demonstrate a possible way by which herpesviruses may have evolved to escape from neutralization by the innate mediators of phagocytosis.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cell Cultures Retinal pigmental epithelial (RPE) cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's (DMEM) medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) containing penicillin and streptomycin [21]. Primary cultures of human corneal fibroblasts (CFs) cells were grown in DMEM medium containing 10% FBS and 5% calf serum (CS) as previously described [22]. Primary cultures of human conjunctival epithelial (HCE) cells were kindly provided by Dr. Ilene K. Gipson (Schepens Eye Research Institute; Harvard Medical School). HCE cells were cultured on GIBCO keratinocytes serum-free medium with supplied BPE (bovine pituitary extract) and EGF (0.2 ng/mL) [23]. CMV virus was detected by a monoclonal antibody specific for glycoprotein B (Virostat Inc., Portland, ME). HHV-8 virus was detected by a monoclonal antibody specific for HHV-8 envelope glycoprotein K8.1A and FITC-conjugated secondary antibody.2.2. VirusesThe β-galactosidase-expressing recombinant HSV-1 gL86, GFP-expressing HSV-1 (K26GFP-HSV-1), cytomegalovirus (CMV; Towne strain RC256), and HHV-8 virus (wild-type and rKSHV.152) were used in this study. HSV-1 gL86 was propagated in gL complementing cell line (79B4 cells). GFP-expressing HSV-1 (K26GFP) virus was grown in Vero cells [4]. The viruses were purified by sucrose density gradient as previously described [22].2.3. Electron MicroscopyCF, RPE, and HCE cells cultured in Lab-Tek chamber slides and in Anopore wells (Nalge Nunc) (approximately 1.5 × 105 cells/well) were infected with purified HSV-1, CMV, and HHV-8 at 50–100 MOI for 90–120 min as previously described [4]. Infected cells were rinsed with serum-free buffer and fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide for 10 s, immediately followed by the aldehyde fixation for 1 hr (2.5% glutaraldehyde, 2% paraformaldehyde in 100 mM cacodylate buffer, pH 7.4). Cells were rinsed three times for 5 min with 100 mM cacodylate buffer, postfixed for 1 hr in 1% osmium tetroxide, stained with uranyl acetate, dehydrated through a graded ethanol series, and finally embedded using Embed. For transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (JEM-1220; JEOL USA Inc.) images were captured at 1,000–600,000x, point-0.36 nm (3.6 A), and lattice-0.2 nm (2 A) at room temperature, ACC voltage 40–120 kV using a Gatan camera (Digital CCD; Gatan Inc.), and Gatan Digital Micrograph (DM) v2.5 acquisition software.2.4. Indirect ImmunofluorescenceTarget CF, RPE, and HCE cells cultured in Lab-Tek chamber slide were infected with herpes viruses for 90–120 minutes. The cells were then stained. For cell surface immunofluorescence, the cells were incubated with primary antibodies at 4°C for 45 min, washed 10 times with cold PBS, and fixed with acetone for 10 min at −20°C. HHV-8 and CMV viruses were detected by anti-gB (CMV) and anti-K8.1A (HHV-8) antibodies and FITC-conjugated secondary antibodies. Actin fibers were also stained with 10 nM rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin (Molecular Probes, Carlsbad, California, USA) to compare the number of actin-rich protrusion produced in the infected cells compared to uninfected cell. The cells were washed before mounting in Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories, Inc. Burlingame, CA). Leica confocal microscope SP2 was used for imaging.2.5. Viral Entry AssayViral entry assay was based on quantitation of β-galactosidase expressed from HSV-1 genome by soluble O-nitro-phenyl-β-D-galactopyranoside (ONPG, Pierce Biotechnology), 3 mg/mL. Similarly CMV β-galactosidase-expressed reporter virus from ATCC was used. HHV-8 virus entry was determined by fluorescence readout assay. CF, RPE, and HCE were either mock treated or treated with medium containing Cyto D (0.5 and 1.0 μg/mL), Lat B (0.25–2.5 μM), PI3-kinase inhibitor (LY294002), and in active compound LY303511. In parallel experiment CF, RPE, and HCE cells were transfected with PI3K dominant-negative expression plasmid (ΔiSH2) or with control plasmid followed by the viral infection [24].3. Results and DiscussionWe began our investigation by monitoring morphological changes that occur in ocular cells upon infection with herpesviruses. The original goal was to highlight differences in the way the herpesviruses, belonging to three distinct subfamilies, infect their target cells of ocular origin. We used primary human corneal fibroblasts (CFs), human conjunctival epithelial (HCE), and human retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells for infection with green fluorescent protein expressing HSV-1 (K26GFP), CMV (AD169), and HHV-8 (courtesy of J. Vieira, University of Washington, Seattle, WA), respectively. To our surprise, infection of three different cell-types by three different herpesviruses resulted in a common morphological change, which was represented by a clear enhancement in the number of F-actin rich plasma membrane protrusions (Figures 1(a)–1(c)). The protrusions were 1.0–10 μm large and often uniformly distributed along the surface of individual cells (Figures 1(d)–1(f)). Protrusions were observed during HSV-1 invasion of CF (Figures 1(a) and 1(d)), CMV invasion of RPE cells (Figures 1(b) and 1(e)), and HHV-8 invasion of HCE cells (Figures 1(c) and 1(f)). Since a phagocytosis-like uptake for HSV-1 has been suggested and many ocular cell-types can perform phagocytosis [4], we decided to generate ultrastructural evidence to support the possibility that projections may help with virus entrapment as well. Thus, as described previously [4], transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed with virally infected ocular cells (CF for HSV-1, RPE for CMV, and HCE for HHV-8). Again, a possible significance of protrusions that were formed by extension of the plasma membrane (continuity of the plasma membrane was visible in all cases) was indicated by the presence of virus particles next to them (Figure 2). HSV-1 (Figure 2(a)), CMV (Figure 2(b)), and HHV-8 (Figure 2(c)) were all seen present inside the cups formed by plasma membrane protrusions. In many cases, protrusions seemed to entrap single virus particles (Figures 2(b) and 2(c)). To generate biochemical evidence in support of the role of membrane protrusions in productive viral uptake, inhibitors of F-actin polymerization were examined for their ability to block the infection. The inhibitors used were cytochalasin D (Cyto D) and latrunculin B (Lat B), both block F-actin polymerization that is required for protrusion formation by the plasma membrane [25, 26]. For HSV-1, virus uptake was determined by colorimetric analysis of entry of a β-galactosidase expressing reporter virus HSV-1(KOS) gL86. As previously described, transcription of early virus genes allows expression of β-galactosidase activity that is read by a spectrophotometer after addition of its soluble substrate ONPG [27]. A similar β-galactosidase expression-based plaque assay was used for CMV and GFP expression in infected cells was used as a marker for virus infection of HCE cells by HHV-8 [4]. It was seen in all cases that at previously determined dosages, both inhibitors have significant negative effects on viral infection. About 50–80% HSV-1 entry into CF was blocked by the inhibitors (Figure 2(d)). Similarly, 40–75% of CMV-infected cells treated with the drugs significantly inhibited viral entry (Figure 2(e)) and 40 to 60% reduction in GFP expressing cells was observed in Cyto-D and Lat-B-treated HCE cells (Figure 2(f)). It is therefore likely that membrane protrusion formation is a common and important requirement for herpesvirus infection of the ocular cells. Finally, to add more evidence in favor of the involvement of membrane protrusion formation and phagocytosis in herpesvirus uptake by ocular cells, we decided to block PI3K-mediated signaling, which is required for phagocytic cup formation [6]. As shown in Figures 3(a)–3(c), ocular cells pretreated with a PI3Kinase inhibitor (LY294002) [28, 29] showed decreased entry by HSV-1 (Figure 3(a)), CMV (Figure 3(b)), and HHV-8 (Figure 3(c)). A similar level of decrease was also seen when the cells were first transfected with an expression construct for a dominant-negative PI3K mutant lacking the p110-catalytic subunit-binding domain (ΔiSH2) of PI3K [30] and then infected with the herpesviruses (Figures 3(a)–3(c)). In all cases it was clear that PI3K signaling was required for efficient infection by the viruses. To determine the specificity of PI3K blocking, we used a compound LY303511 (Calbiochem Inc.) that is highly related to LY294002. It was again clear that the former had no significant effect on HSV-1 (Figure 3(a)), CMV (Figure 3(b)), or HHV-8 (Figure 3(c)) entry.In summary, we demonstrate some unique features of herpesvirus infection of the cells of ocular origin. It is evident that the ocular cells may respond to the three representative herpesvirus subfamily members by inducing F-actin-based membrane protrusions. Any blockage of protrusion formation greatly restricts viral entry (Figure 1) and inhibition of PI3K signaling, a requirement for F-actin remodeling during phagocytosis, also blocks herpesvirus entry into the ocular cells (Figure 3). PI3Ks are cellular heterodimeric enzymes that consist of a regulatory subunit (p85) activated by tyrosine phosphorylation, which recruits inositol phospholipids that are phosphorylated by the catalytic subunit (p110) [31–34]. The lipids then serve as second messengers that control phosphorylation of other kinases such as Akt/PKB, some protein kinase C isoforms, cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A, and the ribosomal S6 kinases p70 and p85 [35]. The ability of PI3K to regulate pathways important for phagocytosis coupled with the ability of herpesviruses to modulate its activity could be an important mechanism by which the viruses exploit phagocytosis for entry. Our observation is also supported by the fact that additional intracellular signaling that may be needed for protrusion formation, such as activation of Rho family of GTPases, has already been reported with many herpesviruses [15, 36]. The most significant contribution of our study is to demonstrate the possibility that involvement of membrane protrusions may be common, and perhaps crucial, for herpesvirus infection of the ocular cell types. Herpesviruses tend to spread by asymptomatic shedding, which allows normal looking individuals to transmit viruses to healthy individuals [37]. In the absence of effective vaccines against many herpesviruses, new and effective wide spectrum prophylactics are desperately needed to prevent an alarming rate of increase in herpesvirus transmission. In this regard, our study identifies an important common target for future intervention against multiple herpesviruses. It may be that not just herpes but many additional unrelated viruses also begin their journey to infection by interacting with membrane protrusions and exploiting phagocytosis or a very similar mechanism for infection. Our ultimate goal is to identify how the virions successfully exit from degradation in phagolysosomes.


Title: Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Targets the Murine Olfactory Neuroepithelium for Host Entry

INTRODUCTIONHerpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) persists in at least 70% of humans. Infection is mostly mild but can cause repeated ulceration, keratitis, and encephalitis (1). Better control would therefore greatly benefit human health. Established, latent infections are difficult if not impossible to clear, so host entry offers perhaps the best opportunity to break the viral infection cycle. Understanding it is consequently an important goal.Epidemiology tells us that HSV-1 transmission requires close contact. Sexual contact is one route (2), but virions more usually transfer from carriers to new hosts via saliva. Viral genomes then reach trigeminal ganglia (TG) sensory neurons (3, 4), where they persist in latent form and intermittently reactivate to shed new virions into saliva for further transmission (5). Latent infection is sometimes also found in other sensory ganglia (6, 7) that receive neuronal projections from the same peripheral sites. HSV-1 infection often presents with acute oral (p.o.) and perioral lesions. These could reflect viral replication at an entry site. However, they could also reflect a first wave of virus reemergence from the TG, so-called zosteriform spread (8, 9). Other alphaherpesviruses clearly present with disseminated secondary rather than primary lesions: varicella-zoster virus with the cutaneous rash of chickenpox, Marek's disease virus with shedding from feather follicles (10), and pseudorabies virus with salivary shedding after respiratory infection (11). Thus, clinical description can identify host exit, but host entry, which may follow different routes, must be defined functionally.Most natural HSV-1 transmission is sporadic and asymptomatic (5). Thus, functional data must come largely from animal models. Nonhumans are unnatural hosts for HSV-1, and xenogeneic infections must be interpreted with caution. However, HSV-1 readily infects murine cells in vitro, and mice provide a widely used in vivo infection model with proven utility in developing antiviral therapies (12, 13). HSV-1 can infect both humans and mice in a range of sites after epithelial damage but has presumably evolved primarily to cross an intact epithelium with trigeminal innervation. This could be oral, nasal, or ocular. Early murine studies used intranasal (i.n.) inoculation to reproduce human encephalitis, as the predominantly limbic distribution of HSV-1 lesions had suggested olfactory spread (14, 15). However, murine encephalitis affects mainly the brainstem (16, 17) and is largely limited to juveniles (18), whereas human disease is more common in adults; indeed, its poor correlation in age distribution with primary infection suggests that human encephalitis often results from viral reactivation rather than primary infection (5). Thus, recent analysis has focused mainly on acute and long-term infections of the TG, delivering virus to this site by scarification (19).Recent insight into herpesvirus host entry has come from analysis of a murid gammaherpesvirus, MuHV-4. Like HSV-1, gammaherpesviruses are thought to infect orally. However, oral MuHV-4 was noninfectious (20), whereas i.n. virions efficiently infected the olfactory neuroepithelium (21). The molecular explanation was that only this epithelium expresses apically the heparan sulfate (HS) on which MuHV-4 cell binding and host entry (22) depend. This result suggested that other HS-binding herpesviruses, such as HSV-1 (23, 24), might also infect the neuroepithelium. Understanding MuHV-4 entry depended on reproducing so far as possible the likely conditions of natural virus uptake—small virus volumes and no anesthesia—and using reporter constructs to reveal asymptomatic infection. Here, we applied the same approach to HSV-1. Ocular infection works poorly without scarification (25), so we compared oral and nasal inoculations. Nasal HSV-1 was much more infectious. Like MuHV-4, it targeted the olfactory neuroepithelium. It did not cause encephalitis but rather reached the TG before reemerging in florid lesions of the facial skin. Thus, i.n. HSV-1 established a functional TG infection without requiring scarification or causing severe disease.MATERIALS AND METHODSMice.BALB/c, C57BL/6 (Harlan OLAC), and ROSA26R mice (26) were infected at age 6 to 8 weeks (adults) or 1 to 2 weeks (pups). For adult i.n. infections, virus (106 PFU in 5 μl unless stated otherwise) was pipetted onto the nares of mice held prone under light restraint without anesthesia and was spontaneously inhaled. Oral infections followed a similar scheme, but the mice were held supine and virus was pipetted into the mouth. For infant infections, HSV-1 (106 PFU) was pipetted onto the nares in 2 μl and spontaneously inhaled. For lung infections, mice were anesthetized by isoflurane inhalation and given virus i.n. in 30 μl. For whisker pad infections, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, a drop of virus (106 PFU) was applied to the whisker pad, and 4 scratches were made through the drop with a 27-gauge needle. For luciferase imaging, mice were injected intraperitoneally with luciferin (2 mg/mouse), anesthetized with isoflurane, and imaged for light emission with a charge-coupled-device (CCD) camera (Caliper Life Sciences). Luciferase images were analyzed with Living Image software (Caliper Life Sciences). All animal experiments were approved by the University of Cambridge ethical review board and by the United Kingdom Home Office under the 1986 Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act as Project License 80/2538.Cells and viruses.BHK-21 cells (American Type Culture Collection CCL-10) were propagated in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium, supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 mg/ml streptomycin, and 10% fetal calf serum (PAA laboratories) (complete medium). All viruses were derived from HSV-1 strain SC16, a relatively virulent clinical isolate (18) that has not been extensively passaged in vitro. Virus stocks were grown and titers were determined on BHK-21 cells (27). Virus was recovered from infected cells plus supernatant by ultracentrifugation (38,000 × g, 90 min) and sonicated to break down cellular debris. SC16 derivatives with a human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) IE1 promoter transcribing enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) (HSV-GFP) (27) or Cre recombinase (HSV-Cre) (28) from the Us5 locus have been described, as has eGFP-expressing MuHV-4 (29). To make luciferase-expressing HSV-1 (HSV-LUC), the Photinus pyralis luciferase coding sequence plus an upstream HCMV IE1 promoter and a downstream polyadenylation (pA) site were subcloned from pGL4.10 (Promega Corporation) into pHD5, thereby inserting the expression cassette at HSV-1 nucleotide 137945 in Us5 (27). Linearized plasmid was cotransfected with HSV-1 SC16 genomic DNA into BHK-21 cells using Fugene-6 (Roche Diagnostics Ltd.). Luciferase-positive viruses were identified by scintillation counting (20), purified by limiting dilution cloning, and confirmed as recombinant by restriction enzyme mapping of viral DNA.Virus assays.Plaque assays were performed by culturing virus dilutions with BHK-21 cell monolayers for 2 h and then overlaying with complete medium plus 0.3% carboxymethylcellulose and culturing at 37°C. After 48 h, the monolayers were fixed in 4% formaldehyde and stained with 0.1% toluidine blue. Plaques were counted under ×30 microscopy. To measure preformed infectious virus, tissues (noses, lungs, skin) were freeze-thawed and then homogenized (Omni tissue grinder). To measure both preformed infectious and reactivatable virus, tissues (TG, olfactory bulbs [OB]) were disrupted by pipetting and then incubated (37°C, 30 min) with Liberase TL (2 Wünsch units [WU]/ml) and DNase I (0.2 mg/ml) (Roche Diagnostics Ltd.). The released cells were then plated on BHK-21 cell monolayers and cultured for 48 h to allow plaque formation. To count plaques, we fixed and stained samples as described above.Immunohistochemistry.The nasal epithelium was removed postmortem as a block of tissue bounded by the cartilaginous tip of the nose anteriorly, the orbits posteriorly, the zygomatic arches laterally, the palate ventrally, and the nasal bones dorsally. Samples were fixed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)–2% formaldehyde (4°C, 24 h) and then decalcified by gentle agitation in 150 mM NaCl-50 mM TrisCl (pH 7.2)-270 mM EDTA for 2 weeks at 23°C, and the solution was changed every 2 to 3 days. Decalcified samples were washed 3 times in PBS, dehydrated in 70% ethanol, and paraffin embedded. Skin was cut into strips and then fixed in PBS-2% formaldehyde (4°C, 24 h) before dehydration in 70% ethanol and embedding in paraffin. TG were removed postmortem, fixed in PBS-2% formaldehyde (4°C, 24 h), and decalcified for 1 week to remove residual bone fragments before dehydration in ethanol and embedding in paraffin. Sections (7 μm) were cut from paraffin-embedded tissues with a microtome and then dewaxed in xylene and hydrated in graded ethanol solutions for immunostaining. Endogenous peroxidase activity was quenched in PBS-3% H2O2 for 10 min. Sections were blocked with the avidin/biotin blocking kit (Vector Laboratories) and in PBS-2% bovine serum albumin (BSA)-2% normal serum from the species providing the secondary antibody (1 h, 23°C). HSV-1 antigens were detected with a rabbit polyclonal antibody (pAb) and eGFP with rabbit anti-eGFP pAb (Abcam). After being stained (18 h, 23°C), the sections were washed 3 times in PBS, incubated (30 min, 23°C) with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG pAb (Vector Laboratories), washed 3 times in PBS, incubated with the Vectastain Elite ABC peroxidase system, washed 3 times in PBS, and developed with ImmPACT DAB (3,3′diaminobenzidine) substrate (Vector Laboratories). The sections were then counterstained with Mayer's hemalum (Merck), dehydrated, and mounted in DPX (BDH).Immunofluorescence.Samples were fixed in 1% formaldehyde-10 mM sodium periodate-75 mM l-lysine (4°C, 24 h), equilibrated in 30% sucrose (4°C, 18 h), and then frozen in OCT and sectioned (7 μm) on a cryostat. Sections were air dried (2 h, 23°C) and blocked with 2% goat serum-2% BSA-PBS (1 h, 23°C). Primary antibody incubations were as described for immunohistochemistry. We additionally detected α-tubulin with a rat monoclonal antibody (MAb) (Serotec), nectin-1 with a rabbit pAb (Santa Cruz Biotech), ZO-1 with a rabbit pAb (Invitrogen), and CD68 with a rat MAb (BioLegend). After incubation, sections were washed 3 times in PBS and then incubated (1 h, 23°C) with Alexa Fluor 568- or 633-conjugated goat anti-rat IgG pAb and Alexa Fluor 488- or 568-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG pAb (Invitrogen). After 3 further washes in PBS, the sections were mounted in Prolong Gold-DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) (Invitrogen). Fluorescence was visualized using a Leica TCS SP2 confocal microscope and analyzed with ImageJ.β-Galactosidase assay.TG and OB were fixed in 4% formaldehyde (1 h, 4°C) and then washed 3 times in PBS and incubated in PBS with 0.01% sodium deoxycholate, 0.02% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, 4.5 mM potassium ferrocyanide, 4.5 mM potassium ferricyanide, and 0.4 mg/ml X-Gal (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl-β-d-galactopyranoside) (18 h, 37°C). TG and OB were then rinsed in PBS and squashed between two coverslips to reveal any X-Gal staining, and blue cells were counted under ×40 to ×100 microscopy.Flow cytometry.Cells exposed to eGFP-expressing viruses were trypsinized, washed in PBS, and analyzed for green channel fluorescence on a FACSCalibur using CellQuest software (BD Biosciences).ELISA.Maxisorp enzyme-linked immunosorbent (ELISA) plates (Nalge Nunc) were coated (18 h, 4°C) with 0.05% Triton X-100-disrupted HSV-1 virions. Plates were washed 3 times with PBS-0.1% Tween 20, blocked with PBS-0.1% Tween 20-1% BSA, incubated with serum dilutions (1 h, room temperature), washed 4 times in PBS-0.1% Tween 20, incubated with alkaline phosphatase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG pAb, washed 5 times in PBS-0.1% Tween 20, and developed with nitrophenylphosphate substrate (Sigma Chemical Co.). The reaction was terminated with NaOH, and the absorbance was read at 405 nm (Bio-Rad Benchmark ELISA plate reader).RESULTSHSV-1 infects more efficiently i.n. than p.o.Viral luciferase expression allows infection tracking independent of clinical signs or assumptions about its timing and distribution. Luciferase-expressing HSV-1 KOS has been tracked after scarification (30). However, the KOS strain is attenuated (31). Less invasive inoculations demand greater viral replicative fitness. A transgenic luciferase reporter mouse can reveal lytic infection by any HSV-1 strain but has limited sensitivity (32). Therefore, instead we expressed luciferase from an HCMV IE1 promoter in the Us5 locus of a relatively virulent strain, SC16 (18) (Fig. 1a). Us5 inhibits apoptosis (33), but its disruption has little effect on HSV-1 replication (34), and the recombinant virus (HSV-LUC) infected mice comparably to its SC16 parent after whisker pad scarification (Fig. 1b).Fig 1Comparison of HSV-1 inoculation routes. (a) Schematic diagram showing luciferase expression cassette insertion into the HSV-1 SC16 Us5 locus to generate HSV-LUC. (b) Mice were infected in the whisker pad with either HSV-LUC or the parental virus SC16. Five days later, virus titers were determined by plaque assay from homogenates of either whisker pad skin or TG. Circles show individual mice, and exes show means. There was no significant difference in titers between viruses in either site (P > 0.4 by Student's 2-tailed t test). (c) BALB/c mice (6 to 8 weeks old, 8 per group) were given various HSV-LUC doses either orally (p.o.) or intranasally (i.n.) in 5-μl doses without anesthesia and then monitored daily for luciferase expression over a week. They were considered infected if they showed light emission above the background of an uninfected mouse (105 photons/s/cm2/sr). Luciferase-negative mice were confirmed as uninfected by ELISA for HSV-1-specific serum IgG (see panel e). (d) Mice were inoculated with HSV-LUC (106 PFU), i.n. or p.o. in 5-μl doses, as described for panel c, or i.n. in 30-μl doses under general anesthesia. Two days later, luciferase expression was imaged by intraperitoneal (i.p.) luciferin injection and CCD camera scanning. Representative images are shown for 2 mice per group. Light flux for p.o. inoculations was undetectable (<105 photons/s/cm2). (e) One month after p.o. or i.n. HSV-LUC inoculations, as described for panel c (5 μl, 106 PFU), mice were tested by ELISA for HSV-1-specific serum IgG. Three representative mice per group are shown plus age-matched, naive controls. Each point shows the mean ± standard deviation (SD) from triplicate samples.We compared 5 μl p.o. and i.n. inoculations of alert, adult mice (Fig. 1c). Intranasal administration of HSV-1 was ∼100-fold more infectious than oral administration. Thus, the nasopharynx was a more efficient entry route than the oropharynx. Figure 1d shows a typical experiment, with no infection by p.o. virus, nose infection by i.n. virus in alert mice, and nose plus lung infection by i.n. virus in anesthetized mice. Noninfection of luciferase-negative mice was confirmed by ELISA for HSV-1-specific serum IgG (Fig. 1e). HSV-1-specific IgG was detectable in sera of i.n. inoculated mice at a 1/270,000 dilution, whereas that in sera from p.o.-inoculated mice was undetectable at a 1/100 dilution. Thus, there was no sign of a significant infection occurring in luciferase-negative mice.Not only was infection rare after p.o. inoculation, but we saw no oral infection in >40 mice given i.n. HSV-LUC, despite much of a 5-μl i.n. inoculum being swallowed (P.G. Stevenson, unpublished data). When oral infection occurred after p.o. inoculation, it affected the gums or tongue but was inconsistent in site. Thus, it possibly reflected epithelial damage during inoculation, particularly as alert mice often bit the inoculating pipette tip. Epithelial damage during inoculation could also explain reports of infection by gavage (35).Alert, adult BALB/c mice given 107 PFU HSV-LUC i.n. showed ruffled fur and 10 to 20% weight loss but recovered (0/6 deaths). A total of 106 PFU caused little obvious illness, although it was lethal to 1/5 juvenile (3-week-old) BALB/c mice. The SC16 wild type (106 PFU) was similarly lethal to 0/5 adults and 3/5 juveniles. Thus, in adult mice, i.n. HSV-1 did not inevitably spread to the brain to cause encephalitis. In contrast, HSV-LUC delivered i.n. under anesthesia was lethal to 6/6 adult mice given 107 PFU and 3/6 given 106 PFU. Thus, when HSV-1 is given i.n. under anesthesia, lung infection may be a significant cause of disease.Intranasal infection progresses from the nose to trigeminal ganglia to the skin.Intranasal infection appeared to spread locally over the snout from day 1 to day 5 (Fig. 2a). However, postmortem dissections established that the day 1 and day 5 luciferase signals had very different sources: day 1 signals were confined to the nose, whereas day 5 signals were >95% from the skin (Fig. 2b). The skin signal was variable in site but was always contained within the region bounded by the ears posterolaterally and nose anteriorly. In ∼30% of mice, day 5 infection also involved the eye. At day 3 postinoculation, TG of i.n.-infected mice were luciferase positive, whereas the skin was rarely so. Thus, the order of infection was nose, then TG, and then skin (Fig. 2b). At day 5, 1/12 mice showed an OB signal, 3/12 mice showed a weak brainstem signal, and 0/12 mice showed a cerebral cortex signal. Thus, the brain was largely luciferase negative. All luciferase signals had decreased markedly by day 9 and were absent by day 11 (Fig. 2c). As at day 5, the day 9 signals (Fig. 2d) involved the dermatomes of the (ophthalmic and maxillary) TG branches that innervate the nose. Plaque assays at day 6 postinoculation (Fig. 2e) recovered high titers of infectious virus from skin and noses. Lower and more variable virus titers were recovered by explant of TG (6/6 mice) and OB (3/6 mice).Fig 2HSV-1 spread monitored by luciferase expression. (a) Six- to eight-week-old BALB/c mice were given HSV-LUC i.n. without anesthesia (106 PFU) and imaged for light emission 1, 3, or 5 days later, first live (left panels) and then after dissection to identify the sources of the live image signals (right panels, shown with or without luciferase overlays). Images are shown for a representative mouse. (b) Mice were infected and analyzed as described for panel a, and signals were quantitated for 5 or 6 mice per group. Circles show individuals, and exes show means. Dashed lines show lower detection limits. These correspond to the photons detectable from an equivalent uninfected sample and hence are specific to each tissue, with white fur having a higher background than dissected noses or TG. The region of interest for live images extended from nose to ears and so covered all areas showing positive luciferase signals. (c) Mice were infected as described for panel a and imaged during the resolution of infection. (d) Representative images at day 9 after i.n. HSV-LUC inoculation show how infection has spread from the nose to the facial skin and eye, consistent with reactivation from the TG. (e) Mice were infected as described for panel a, and 6 days later titers were determined for infectious virus by plaque assay (nose, skin) or for infectious and reactivatable virus by explant (OB, olfactory bulbs; TG, trigeminal ganglia). Circles show individuals, and exes show means. Dashed lines show lower detection limits. Thus, virus was recovered from 6/6 TG and 3/6 OB.Immunohistochemical staining showed strong HSV-1 antigen expression in the epidermis and hair follicles of luciferase-positive skin at day 5 (Fig. 3a to d). The lesions were patchy, suggesting that virus had reached here not by contiguous spread from the nasal mucosa but by reemergence from TG neurons, as occurs after corneal scarification (36, 37). Lytic antigen expression was evident in acutely infected TG (Fig. 3e to f), and groups of adjacent infected cells (Fig. 3g to h) suggested infection spread between neurons, possibly within the TG or between nerve terminals in the brainstem. This would explain how i.n. virus could pass from the nose to the skin via the TG. The abundance of luciferase expression, infectious virus, and viral antigen staining in skin implied that emerging virus was also amplified by local lytic spread.Fig 3HSV-1 antigen expression in skin and TG. (a to c) Six- to eight-week-old BALB/c mice were infected i.n. with HSV-LUC (106 PFU). Five days later, luciferase-positive skin sections were stained for HSV-1 antigens with a polyclonal immune serum (dark staining, arrows in panel a show examples) and counterstained with Mayer's hemalum. The images are representative of 6 mice examined. (d) Uninfected skin, stained and counterstained as described for panels a to c. (e and f) TG of mice infected as described for panel a were stained for HSV-1 antigens. Representative images are shown. Arrows show example positive cells. (g and h) Patches of HSV-1 antigen staining in TG of mice infected as described for panel a. Arrows show examples.Cre-expressing HSV-1 in reporter mice confirms trigeminal infection by the i.n. route.To explore further HSV-1 infection spread from the nose, we used a recently described approach (28) in which HCMV IE1 promoter-driven viral Cre expression permanently marks infected cells of mice transgenic for a floxed reporter gene. Thus, infected cells can be identified regardless of whether viral gene expression is maintained. We gave HSV-Cre i.n. to ROSA26R mice (26), in which loxP recombination activates β-galactosidase production from a widely expressed promoter, and 10 days later identified Cre-switched cells by incubating fixed tissues with X-Gal (Fig. 4a and b).Fig 4Floxed reporter gene activation by viral Cre recombinase. (a) ROSA26R mice (6 to 8 weeks old), which have a floxed β-galactosidase expression cassette activated by Cre recombinase, were infected i.n. (106 PFU) with HSV-1 expressing Cre from an HCMV IE1 promoter (HSV-Cre). Ten days later, TG and OB were removed, fixed, incubated with X-Gal, and examined for β-galactosidase-positive cells (blue spots). A representative infected TG is shown. The arrows in the zoomed image show example positive cells. Uninfected ROSA26R mice and infected, nontransgenic C57BL/6 controls showed no blue spots. (b) Mice were infected and analyzed as described for panel a, and blue spots were counted for TG and OB. Circles show individual mice, and exes show means. All TG contained blue cells, although the number per mouse was variable. No OB contained blue cells. (c) An OB of a strongly infected ROSA26R mouse inoculated i.n. 10 days earlier with HSV-Cre and developed with X-Gal showed a faint blue wash, but no blue cells. The blue wash possibly reflected enzyme or converted substrate leaking from the axons of β-galactosidase-positive primary olfactory neurons. An uninfected OB is shown for comparison. (d) At 20 days after i.n. HSV-Cre inoculation of a 1-week-old mouse, an OB shows a few, scattered blue cells (arrows). Magnification is ×5 relative to that of panel c. (e) A TG from the same mouse shows large numbers of blue-staining cells (arrows). (f) Eight-week-old (adult) or 1-week-old (infant) ROSA26R mice were infected with HSV-Cre and 20 days later analyzed for β-galactosidase expression in TG and OB. Circles show individual mice, and exes show means. Three out of four adult and 8/8 infant TG and 0/4 adult and 1/8 infant OB contained blue cells. In this experiment, adult TG blue cell counts were at the lower end of the range seen in panel b, and infant counts were 50-fold higher.The TG of individual infected mice varied widely in β-galactosidase-positive cell numbers, but all (8/8) showed some evidence of infection, whereas dissociated OB showed none (0/8). One OB of a heavily infected mouse showed weak, diffuse staining (Fig. 4c) that may have reflected β-galactosidase leaking from the axons of infected primary olfactory neurons, as these are sheared at the cribriform plate when the OB are removed. This would also explain the recovery of some infectious virus from OB samples (Fig. 2e). We saw no evidence of infection passing to cells within the OB.Intranasal infection of infant mice similarly shows TG infection.Most HSV-1 infections occur in early childhood, and the outcome of infection can be age dependent (18). We therefore also compared i.n. HSV-Cre infections of adult (8-week-old) and infant (1-week-old) ROSA26R mice (Fig. 4d and f). Infant infections were more extensive than those of adults (TG contained 4- to 40-fold more β-galactosidase-positive cells). Nevertheless, infant OB contained at most a few, scattered β-galactosidase-positive cells (Fig. 4d), in contrast to abundant TG infection (Fig. 4e). At 20 days postinoculation, incubation with X-Gal revealed β-galactosidase-positive cells in 3/4 TG and 0/4 OB of ROSA26R adults and 8/8 TG and 1/8 OB of infants (Fig. 4f). Thus, in both infants and adults, i.n. HSV-1 showed a strong predominance of TG over OB involvement. Immunostaining also showed much more TG and brainstem infection than OB infection in infant mice (data not shown), consistent with previous reports (16, 17, 38, 39).Intranasally administered HSV-1 targets mainly the olfactory neuroepithelium.Intranasally administered MuHV-4 targets the olfactory neuroepithelium, which lines the upper nasal septum and turbinates, whereas influenza virus targets the more anterior respiratory epithelium (21). Postmortem dissections of adult mice given i.n. HSV-LUC localized day 3 luciferase signals to the nasal septum and turbinates (Fig. 5a), with no oral signal, a pattern very similar to that seen with MuHV-4 (21). To track infection more precisely, we infected adult mice with HSV-GFP (27) and identified infected cells by immunostaining (Fig. 5b). This showed both eGFP and virion antigens in the neuroepithelium.Fig 5HSV-1 infection of the adult olfactory neuroepithelium. (a) Six- to eight-week-old BALB/c mice were inoculated i.n. with HSV-LUC (106 PFU in 5 μl). One day later, infection was imaged by luciferin injection and CCD camera scanning. Dissections localized luciferase signals to the nasal septum and turbinates, with none from the oral cavity. Equivalent results were obtained with >20 mice. (b) Six- to eight-week-old BALB/c mice were infected i.n. with HSV-eGFP (106 PFU in 5 μl). Three days later, dissected tissues were processed for immunohistochemistry. The images, representative of 12 mice examined, show staining (brown) for viral eGFP (left-hand set of images) and HSV-1 lytic antigens (right-hand set of images). Sections were counterstained with Mayer's hemalum. The insets show higher-magnification images, including representative regions of respiratory and squamous epithelium, plus neuroepithelial and respiratory epithelial samples of uninfected controls.Infected infant mice (Fig. 6) similarly showed neuroepithelial eGFP (Fig. 6a) and lytic antigen expression (Fig. 6b). Some mice (∼20%) also showed patches of respiratory epithelial infection (Fig. 6c). Thus, the neuroepithelial infection preference of HSV-1, while marked, was less exclusive than that of MuHV-4. Neuroepithelial binding and infection by MuHV-4 correlate with its capacity and requirement for HS binding (21). Although HSV-1 is well known to bind HS, the importance of this interaction for infection has been assessed mainly by adding soluble heparin to plaque assays. Plaque formation requires multiple rounds of infection, so heparin can inhibit infection multiple times in a single assay. We used HSV-GFP to assay heparin inhibition of a single-cycle infection and compared it with eGFP-expressing MuHV-4. Although HSV-1 infection was inhibited by heparin, the inhibition was much less marked than for MuHV-4. This was consistent with HSV-1 and MuHV-4, both encoding HS binding glycoproteins (24, 40, 41), but only MuHV-4 also encodes a glycoprotein (gp150) that inhibits HS-independent cell binding (42).Fig 6HSV-1 infection of the infant olfactory neuroepithelium. (a) One- to two-week-old mice were infected i.n. with HSV-eGFP (106 PFU in 2 μl). Three days later, nose sections were stained for eGFP (green) and α-tubulin (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Light-gray-filled arrows show α-tubulin staining on the apical neuronal cilia; dark-gray-filled arrows show eGFP-positive neurons; white arrows show subepithelial eGFP-positive cells. (b) Mice were infected as described for panel a. Three days later, nose sections were stained for viral antigens (green) and α-tubulin (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). The right-hand image shows the boxed region of the corresponding left-hand image at higher magnification. The gray-filled arrows show examples of eGFP-positive neuroepithelial cells. (c) One- to two-week-old BALB/c mice were infected i.n. with HSV-eGFP (106 PFU in 2 μl). One day later, noses were stained for eGFP (green), HSV-1 virion antigens (red), and α-tubulin (white). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Panels i, ii, and iii show different regions of nasal epithelia, either olfactory (OE) or respiratory (RE). Squamous epithelium showed no staining. The boxed regions are shown at higher magnification with individual channels below. (d) HSV-GFP and eGFP-expressing MuHV-4 were incubated with various concentrations of heparin (1 h, 37°C) and then added to BHK-21 cells (0.5 PFU/cell, 37°C). Eighteen hours later, cells were scored as eGFP positive or negative by flow cytometry. Each point shows means ± SD from 3 experiments, with 20,000 cells analyzed for each point in each experiment. The inhibition of HSV-1 infection by heparin was statistically significant at all doses of >10 μg/ml (P < 10−4 by chi-square test), but the inhibition of MuHV-4 infection was always significantly greater (P < 10−6 by chi-square test).We next looked at virion binding (Fig. 7). After i.n. inoculation, some HSV-1 antigens bound to the respiratory epithelium (Fig. 7a), but quantitation consistently showed more binding to the neuroepithelium (Fig. 7b). Nectin-1 engagement by gD plays a prominent role in HSV-1 neuronal infection (43), and immunostaining (Fig. 8a) identified abundant nectin-1 expression just below the neuroepithelial cilia. Apical nectin-1 expression by the respiratory epithelium was less marked. Where the neuroepithelial cilia terminate, olfactory neurons form tight junctions with the adjacent sustentacular cells, as revealed by staining for the tight junction component ZO-1 (Fig. 8b). Thus, nectin-1 was abundantly expressed just below HS-positive neuronal cilia, suggesting that the neuroepithelial infection preference of HSV-1 may reflect the availability of nectin-1 as well as HS.Fig 7Epithelial binding by i.n. HSV-1. (a) Mice were inoculated i.n. with HSV-1 (106 PFU in 5 μl) or not (naive). Five minutes later, noses were flushed with PBS and sections were stained for viral antigens with a polyclonal immune serum and for α-tubulin to reveal the apical extents of the neuronal and respiratory epithelia. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. Representative sections are shown. The right-hand panels show the boxed regions of the composite images at higher magnification. Arrows show the minor, patchy staining of respiratory epithelium. (b) Mice were inoculated with HSV-1 and analyzed for virion binding as described for panel a. Binding was quantitated by counting HSV-1-positive pixels over a fixed area of apical epithelium and then normalizing by the α-tubulin signal of the same area. Each circle or triangle shows the result for 3 sections of 1 mouse. The horizontal bars show medians. Student's unpaired, 2-tailed t test showed that virion binding to the olfactory neuroepithelium was significantly greater than binding to the respiratory epithelium at both 5 min (P < 0.002) and 60 min (P < 0.05). Equivalent data were obtained in 1 further experiment.Fig 8Nectin-1 expression by nasal epithelia. (a) Nasal epithelia of naive mice were stained for the HSV-1 gD receptor nectin-1 (green) and costained for α-tubulin or olfactory marker protein (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Representative regions of neuroepithelium and respiratory epithelium are shown. The right-hand panels show the boxed regions at higher magnification. (b) Nasal epithelia of naive mice were stained for the tight junction component ZO-1 and costained for α-tubulin or olfactory marker protein (red). Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Representative regions of neuroepithelium and respiratory epithelium are shown. The right-hand panels show the boxed regions at higher magnification. ZO-1 and nectin-1 showed similar distributions.DISCUSSIONThe ready transmission of pseudorabies, varicella-zoster, and Marek's disease viruses (10, 11, 44) suggests respiratory infection. HSV-1 needs closer contact to transmit frequently. However, there is no obvious need to invoke a different entry route: lower transmission rates could reflect simply less virus shedding. HSV-1 infected mice much more efficiently i.n. than p.o. and targeted mainly the olfactory neuroepithelium to reach the TG. Thus, this surface provides access to the persistent reservoirs of both an alphaherpesvirus (HSV-1) and a gammaherpesvirus (MuHV-4). The respiratory spread of pseudorabiesvirus tells us that species other than mice readily inhale infectious saliva; viruses such as measles spread between humans in this way; and varicella-zoster virus spreads between humans by saliva or vesicle fluid inhalation. Thus, even small amounts of HSV-1 in saliva could plausibly achieve respiratory transmission by close contact.The assumption of oral human HSV-1 entry has arisen mainly from infection often presenting with oral lesions. A lack of oral infection in mice does not refute this assumption: humans could express an oral HSV-1 receptor that mice lack, or extensive oral salivary exchange could promote human oral infection even if it is poorly efficient. However, interpreting clinical lesions is not straightforward. Herpesviruses enter via epithelia, establish a more systemic latent infection, and then reemerge via epithelia for host exit. Thus, epithelial lesions could reflect either host entry or exit. The presenting skin lesions of acute varicella-zoster virus infection are clearly not host entry. The tonsillitis of acute Epstein-Barr virus infection similarly occurs at least a month after virus acquisition (45), when viral shedding is at its peak; at an equivalent time after intranasal administration of MuHV-4, infection is mainly in the cervical lymph nodes and genital tract rather than the nose (46). And human cytomegalovirus presents with systemic symptoms and virus shedding from multiple sites. Thus, herpesvirus infections seem to present consistently with secondary lesions after asymptomatic host entry. The well-described phenomenon of zosteriform spread (8, 36, 37) corresponds to HSV-1 exiting acutely from sensory ganglia to cause more widespread lesions than its initial entry; the extensive neuronal connections of the TG provide an abundant scope for such spread; and 5 days after i.n. HSV-1 inoculation, lesions were largely in TG-innervated skin rather than the nose. Thus, the acute oral lesions of human HSV-1 infection need not necessarily reflect oral host entry.Other, general considerations vis-à-vis oral entry are that HSV-1 virions are acid sensitive—most p.o.-transmitting viruses have evolved resistance to low pH because most saliva is rapidly swallowed—and that efficient oral virion capture is hard to reconcile with efficient salivary shedding, as carriers would tend to recapture their released virions. The opposing demands of virion capture and release are more readily reconciled if host entry and exit follow different routes. HS binding allows efficient virion uptake by HS-positive olfactory neuronal cilia and efficient virion release from oral epithelia that express only basolateral HS (33). We also saw strong neuroepithelial expression of the gD receptor nectin-1 at subcilial tight junctions. An important task now for designing interventions is to establish the quantitative importance of neuroepithelial HS and other receptors in i.n. host entry, for example, by using receptor knockout mice.A common perception is that viruses readily spread from olfactory neurons to the brain and that i.n. HSV-1 inevitably spreads to the OB. This would make nasal entry unlikely, as human OB are rarely infected. However, adult murine OB involvement by i.n. HSV-1 was also rare. Others have found this for lytic infection (47), and the lack of a viral Cre recombinase footprint in floxed reporter gene mice showed that most i.n.-infected mice lack even latent OB infection. OB involvement seems to occur mainly in severe infections, for example, in juvenile mice, and even then later and less consistently than TG involvement (17, 38), suggesting that secondary virus spread, from meninges (48), bloodstream (39), or other brain regions, is more common than direct passage along olfactory neurons. Vomeronasal organ involvement (49) may similarly reflect secondary spread during severe infection, as our milder i.n. infections never showed it. Thus, despite the capacity of HSV-1 to move along neurons (50, 51), neuroepithelial infection does not routinely spread in this way to the OB. Indeed, although some viruses can travel along olfactory neurons to cause encephalitis (52, 53), outside experimental settings, such disease is rare.In summary, human clinical lesions clearly identify oral HSV-1 exit, but oral entry has always been more speculative: only deliberate virus inoculation can determine entry sites with any certainty. Within the limits of murine infection, nasal virus entered much more efficiently than oral virus, with surprisingly close parallels between HSV-1 and MuHV-4. From the neuroepithelium, HSV-1 readily reached the TG and thence the TG-innervated nonnasal regions characteristically colonized in humans. Thus, the possibility of i.n. HSV-1 host entry in humans should be reassessed with the aim of improving infection control.


Title: Release of HSV-1 Cell-Free Virions: Mechanisms, Regulation, and Likely Role in Human-Human Transmission

1. Herpes Simplex Virus Type-1, an Important Human PathogenHerpes simplex virus type-1 (HSV-1) is a widespread human alphaherpesvirus that infects the majority of the U.S. population by adulthood [1]. In most individuals, HSV-1 infection results in mild disease, such as herpes labialis, the vesicular lesions on or near the lips that are commonly known as cold sores. However, the virus is also capable of causing much more serious illnesses, including herpes stromal keratitis, an eye disease resulting in 500,000 U.S. physician visits/year [2]; herpes encephalitis, an infection of the brain lining that is often fatal if not treated promptly [3,4]; and disseminated neonatal infections, which can be devastating to newborns [5]. Additionally, HSV-1 is increasingly investigated as an etiological factor in Alzheimer’s Disease [4,5,6]. Moreover, a close cousin of HSV-1, HSV-2 is a serious human pathogen as well as a risk factor for acquiring human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) infection [7,8].Although there are effective antivirals against HSV-1 and -2, such as acyclovir [9], there is a need to develop additional therapeutic approaches. This is because the current anti-HSV drugs are unable to eradicate established infections and are subject to evasion by viral resistance mutations [9,10]. Furthermore, there are presently no licensed vaccines for HSV-1 or -2. This review will focus on an area of HSV-1 biology that has not been heavily studied: the release of viral progeny from infected cells as cell-free particles. It is feasible that an increased understanding of this process could present new opportunities for antiviral therapy.The broad outlines of HSV-1’s interaction with its human host are well known [11,12]. Typically, primary infection occurs during childhood and involves the transfer of infectious bodily fluids (usually saliva) from an infected individual to a naïve one. The physical agents of transmission are believed to be cell-free virions [11,12,13]. Infection is most often established in epithelial cells of the skin or mucosae, often in the oral region [14], and may be enhanced by tissue damage. After a period of replication in the epithelium, which is often mild or asymptomatic, the virus infects neurons of the peripheral nervous system (PNS) that interface with the epithelium, entering these cells at their termini. Once inside neurons, viral nucleocapsids traffic on microtubules to neuronal cell bodies. Viral genomes then enter neuronal nuclei, where they establish a lifelong latent infection. During latency, the HSV-1 chromosome is maintained as a covalently closed episome that undergoes only limited gene expression [15]. However, at sporadic intervals during the lifetime of the host, often associated with stress, latent HSV-1 can undergo reactivation, a process wherein the virus reinitiates productive replication and produces virions that are released from neuronal termini to re-seed infection at the epithelium, usually at or near the site of primary infection [16]. Cell-free virions shed from the epithelium during reactivation are the agents responsible for human-human transmission. The interaction of HSV-2 with humans is quite similar to that of HSV-1, although for this virus the genital tract is the usual site of infection [8].2. Structure and Cell Entry of HSV-1 VirionsHSV-1 virions are quasi-spherical particles ~200 nm in diameter, consisting of four distinct layers (Figure 1). The outermost layer is the envelope, a lipid bilayer derived from the host cell. The envelope has 17 virus-encoded proteins embedded in it, 12 of which are glycoproteins [17,18]. The envelope proteins have an organized architecture on the surface of the virion that is not yet fully characterized [19,20]. Beneath the envelope is the tegument, a complex proteinaceous layer comprised of >20 viral polypeptides and even some host proteins [17,21]. Tegument proteins are crucial for virion assembly and many also carry out important replicative functions. For example, some tegument proteins engage cellular microtubular motor proteins to allow nuclecapsids to traffic through the cytoplasm [17]. Other tegument proteins are released into the cytoplasm early in infection and regulate host and viral gene expression. Beneath the tegument is the capsid, an icosahedral shell comprised of eight viral proteins [22]. Inside this is the fourth and innermost layer, the 152 kb linear double-stranded viral genome, which encodes ~85 viral proteins.To understand the release and spread of HSV-1, a discussion of how released progeny virions enter new target cells is necessary. Cell entry by HSV-1 is a highly regulated process involving several viral and host molecules (reviewed in [18,23,24,25]). It can be divided into two steps: (i) cell attachment and (ii) membrane penetration. In cell attachment, HSV-1 virions bind to heparan sulfate (HS) moieties on cell surface polypeptides [24,26]. Such sugar-protein complexes are termed HS-proteoglycans (HSPG) and are nearly ubiquitous on the surface of mammalian cells [27]. To bind to HSPG, virions use envelope glycoproteins C (gC) and/or gB, both of which interact electrostatically with HS via positively-charged regions on their surfaces [24,27,28,29,30,31]. This relatively non-specific interaction serves to concentrate virions on the cell surface and enhances HSV-1 entry but is not strictly required for infection [32]. However, the second entry step, membrane penetration, is essential. In this step, the viral envelope fuses with the plasma or endosomal membrane of the cell, depositing the tegument-coated nucleocapsid into the cell cytoplasm. Four viral envelope glycoproteins—gB, gD, gH, and gL—are necessary for membrane penetration and hence can be said to comprise the core entry machinery of HSV-1 [23,33]. The critical membrane fusion step is catalyzed by gB, which is a member of the class III fusion protein family [34]. However, gB’s fusogenic activity is carefully regulated such that viral entry occurs only under appropriate conditions. To initiate the process, gD must first bind to one of three host cell entry receptors: nectin-1, herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM), or 3-O-sulfated HS [23]. This interaction then signals to a heterodimer composed of gH and gL, which functions as a crucial gB regulator. The gH-gL dimer then physically interacts with gB in a manner that drives its fusogenic activity, allowing membrane fusion and the entry of HSV-1 into the target cell.3. Two Major Modes of HSV-1 Spread: Cell-Free Release and Cell-Cell SpreadEnveloped animal viruses exhibit two primary modes of transmission between cells, cell-free release (CFR) and cell-cell spread (CCS), as well as some other modes of viral spread that are less characterized [35,36,37]. In CFR, progeny virions are released into the extracellular environment and can travel by diffusion or other means to infect new target cells. In CCS, progeny virions are delivered directly to cell-cell junctions (e.g., tight junctions, adherens junctions, desmosomes) for spread to adjacent cells. CCS can occur in highly polarized cells (e.g., polarized epithelia, neurons) as well as in non-polarized cells (e.g., lymphocytes). It can be advantageous as a means of spread, because it usually occurs in a spatial context that is shielded from the extracellular milieu, thus protecting virions from neutralizing antibodies and other soluble immune effectors. CCS also minimizes the need for progeny virions to be constructed to be stable in the extracellular environment. Furthermore, the highly directed nature of CCS likely increases the multiplicity of infection in the downstream target cell, thereby increasing the likelihood of productive infection [38].HSV-1 uses both CFR and CCS [39]. To understand the pathways involved, one must appreciate that virion release and spread are the final events in the complex process of HSV-1 assembly and egress that begins in the infected cell nucleus. There, viral DNA is replicated and packaged into preformed capsids. These nucleocapsids then traverse the bilamellar nuclear membrane using a pathway of envelopment and de-envelopment [40]. It is not until nucleocapsids arrive naked in the cytoplasm that the events relevant to this review take place. CFR and CCS share two mechanistic steps (Figure 2) [39,41,42]. The first is secondary envelopment, a process wherein the nucleocapsid, now associated with tegument proteins, buds into the membrane of a cytoplasmic organelle, generating an enveloped virion inside a vesicle (Figure 2, step 1). Key to driving this process are the physical interactions between the viral tegument proteins and the cytoplasmic domains of the viral envelope proteins, which, following their biosynthesis, are embedded into the membrane of the enwrapping organelle. The identity of the membranous organelle at which secondary envelopment occurs has been the subject of debate [17,21,41]. One long-standing model is that envelopment occurs at vesicles derived from the trans-Golgi network [43]. A more recent proposal is that it occurs at membrane tubules originating from recycled endosomes [44,45]. In either case, the membranes used for secondary envelopment must contain all of the viral envelope proteins that are found on the mature virion. After secondary envelopment, the virion becomes infectious, but it is trapped within a vesicle inside the cell. Thus, in a subsequent step (Figure 2, step 2), the vesicle traffics to the cell periphery, where it is released by exocytosis, the cellular process wherein a vesicle’s membrane fuses with the plasma membrane of the cell. This occurs at either a cell-cell junction for CCS (rightward arrow) or the cell surface for CFR (upward arrow).Similar to many other enveloped viruses, HSV-1 makes heavy use of CCS [39]. This mode of spread has been documented for HSV-1 in epithelial cells [46] and neurons [47], as well as between neurons and epithelial cells [48]. Moreover, CCS is important for HSV-1 pathogenesis, as HSV-1 mutants defective in CCS produce abnormally small lesions in the cornea of infected rabbits and mice [46]. Several viral proteins are required for efficient CCS, including a heterodimer of two glycoproteins, gE and gI [46], and tegument proteins pUL51 and pUL7 [49]. Although the exact mechanism of HSV-1 CCS is not known, the prevailing models [49,50,51] suggest that the viral envelope and tegument proteins mentioned above help direct virion-containing vesicles to cell-cell junctions, where they are released into small, sterically protected intracellular spaces, where virion interactions with host entry receptors can occur efficiently. This is consistent with studies showing that CCS requires the HSV-1 core entry machinery (i.e., gB, gD, gH, and gL) [52].4. Mechanisms and Regulation of HSV-1 Cell-Free Virion ReleaseSome of the earliest cell culture studies of HSV-1 in the 1950s revealed that a significant fraction of viral progeny is released into the media as cell-free virus [53]. Since then, similar observations have been made in scores of other in vitro studies. However, it is doubtful whether robust CFR is a general feature of HSV-1 infection in vivo, because in most individuals, viral infection is well confined to surface epithelia and neurons. Supporting this view, it was found that many newly isolated clinical strains of HSV-1 are deficient in CFR, spreading primarily by CCS when first placed in cell culture [54]. These observations suggest that CFR should not be seen as the default mechanism for HSV-1 release. Rather, it is better viewed as a specialized pathway for viral release and spread, similar to CCS, which is likely subject to regulation by the virus. In this section, I review current knowledge of the pathway of HSV-1 CFR (Figure 3), with discussion of possible points where regulation of the process might be exerted.As discussed earlier, CFR depends on a secondary envelopment event within the infected cell cytoplasm, leading to an HSV-1 virion within a vesicle (Figure 3a). The vesicle must then engage a kinesin motor to travel on microtubules to the plasma membrane (Figure 3b). How these events differ for virions destined for the cell surface versus those bound for cell-cell junctions is not known. However, from studies of CCS, it is clear that the composition of the nascent virion, in terms of its envelope and tegument proteins, can determine the destination of delivery. For example, gE and gI promote the delivery of virions to cell-cell junctions [46,55]. It is thus conceivable that one or more envelopes or tegument proteins enhance delivery of virions to the plasma membrane for CFR. One candidate is envelope protein gC. This is supported by studies of related herpesviruses that suggest their gC homologs promote CFR (discussed further in the following section) [56,57]. Additionally, it is worth noting that HSV-1 gC deletion mutants form larger plaques than the wild-type virus, suggesting that they have enhanced CCS [31]. This could be explained if there is a competition between CFR and CCS at the stage of secondary envelopment and/or vesicular trafficking. Such a competition is supported by the finding that a CCS-deficient gE mutant exhibits unusually high levels of CFR [49].Ultimately, vesicles containing HSV-1 virions arrive at the plasma membrane and release their contents into the extracellular environment by exocytosis (Figure 3c). This process was investigated by Hogue et al. in live-cell imaging studies of pseudorabies virus (PRV), a swine alphaherpesvirus related to HSV-1 [58,59]. The authors used a PRV strain that encodes both a GFP-tagged envelope protein and an RFP-tagged capsid protein, allowing them to visualize virions in live cells. Since the fluorescence of the envelope-tag was dependent on neutral pH, it was possible to observe the precise moment of exocytosis, when an infectious virion emerged from the acidic vesicle and entered the pH-neutral extracellular environment. The work led to three significant findings relevant to the exocytosis of alphaherpesviruses. First, virion-transport vesicles exhibit rapid, directional transport to the plasma membrane. Second, nearly all exocytic events involve vesicles carrying only a single virion. The third finding relates to the cellular Rab GTPases, which are involved in virion release. This large family of membrane-bound proteins are critical regulators of membrane trafficking and are found on various membrane compartments [60]. Using a co-localization approach, the authors implicated Rab6a, Rab8a, and Rab11 in the trafficking of virions to the plasma membrane. All three are known to be involved in constitutive secretory trafficking in uninfected cells, suggesting that alphaherpesviruses reach the cell surface using a normal host pathway. The use of a constitutive host mechanism may help explain how these viruses breach the actin cortex, the cytoskeletal structure underlying the plasma membrane that presents a theoretical impediment to viral exit. It should be mentioned that a prior study provided evidence that myosin Va also plays a role in allowing HSV-1 to pass through the actin cortex [61].Where on the plasma membrane are HSV-1 virions released? Although the answer is unknown, several studies suggest that the sites of virion exocytosis are not random and may occur preferentially at regions associated with the cytoskeleton. In one study performed in non-polarized Vero epithelial cells, released HSV-1 virions accumulated at specific pocket-like areas of the plasma membrane that were associated with either the physical substratum or with adjacent cells [62]. In their PRV studies, Hogue et al. also found evidence for release at specific sites, in this case near patches of LL5beta, a host protein known to help anchor microtubules to the plasma membrane [58].In theory, the exocytosis of HSV-1 virions should complete their release into the soluble environment. However, multiple studies show that released virions remain tightly bound to the outside surface of the cell for a prolonged period [58,63,64,65]. Thus, surface retention should be viewed as a normal step in the pathway of HSV-1 CFR (Figure 3d). Supporting this, Park et al. found that, at times well after HSV-1 infection of Vero cells, most of the total viral progeny (>80%) was attached to the external cell surface, with nearly all of the remainder being released into the culture supernatant [65]. Surprisingly, almost no infectious virus (<0.5%) could be detected inside the infected cell. This study suggests that the infected cell surface is a major repository for the infectious viruses produced in an HSV-1 infection.What are the molecular interactions that retain progeny virions on the cell surface? The most obvious possibility is that virions are tethered by the same interaction that serves to attach them at the beginning of infection, i.e., their binding to HSPG via envelope proteins gC and/or gB. Supporting this idea, it was shown that a significant amount of viral progeny can be released from HSV-2-infected cells by washing the cells with buffers containing heparin, an HS mimic [66]. An intriguing study from the Shukla group also supports HSPG-based retention of virions and further provides a mechanism to explain how such retention can be overcome to allow virions to be released into the extracellular milieu [67]. The authors found that HSV-1 infection up-regulates the expression of cellular heparanase, the only enzyme known to be capable of cleaving HS from cells. Moreover, infection was shown to induce the relocalization of heparanase from inside the cell to the cell surface. Importantly, these events correlated with the release of HSV-1 into the media, strongly suggesting that heparanase directly severs the linkage between progeny virus and host cell. Similar findings were made by the same group for HSV-2 [68]. Thus, heparanase appears to solve a problem for HSV-1/2 that is theoretically encountered by all viruses [69]. That is, given that viruses bind to specific ligands on the cell surface to begin infection, how do they avoid being entrapped by the same interactions as they exit the cell at the end of infection? The best-characterized solution to this problem is provided by influenza A virus (IAV), which encodes an envelope-bound neuraminidase [70]. It is thought that as a progeny IAV virion exits the cell, its neuraminidase component cleaves sialic acid off the cell surface. Since sialic acid is the IAV receptor, this clears the way for efficient virion release. The studies of Shukla and colleagues strongly suggest that heparanase performs a similar role for HSV-1/2.After their detachment from the infected cell, HSV-1 progeny virions can be accurately described as “cell-free”. (Figure 3e). However, work by Newcomb and Brown showed that HSV-1 virions can undergo post-release maturation events [71]. These authors used both electron microscopy and biochemical analysis to show that cell-associated and cell-free virions are distinctly different in their physical properties. Cell-associated virions were found to possess a tegument that is uniformly distributed around the capsid, whereas that of cell-free virions was shown to be markedly asymmetric. Moreover, the tegument of cell-free virions was resistant to detergent extraction compared to that of cell-associated virions. Although the significance of theses differences is unknown, it was suggested that they reflect a viral mechanism to enhance infectivity in the harsh external environment [71]. Supporting this idea, another study by the same group found that a small amount of enzymatically active host catalase is packaged into the HSV-1 tegument [72]. This enzyme can detoxify hydrogen peroxide and thus might serve to protect extracellular virions from oxygen-induced damage.To round out the discussion of HSV-1 CFR mechanisms, it should be mentioned that there are some viral and cellular factors that have been shown to affect CFR, but for which little is known about the mechanisms involved. One viral factor is immediate-early protein ICP27. The evidence for this comes from the study of an HSV-1 strain engineered to encode the HSV-2 ICP27 in place of the normal protein [65]. Surprisingly, the only phenotype seen for this mutant was a deficiency in CFR, leading to an altered plaque morphology. Two host proteins have been shown to promote CFR. One is ASNA1/TRC40, a factor required for the membrane-insertion of tail-anchored membrane proteins [73]. When ASN1/TRC40 expression was reduced by RNAi, HSV-1 replication occurred normally, but there was a dramatic defect in CFR. Similarly, knockout of the gene for hnRNPA1B2, a cellular RNA-binding protein, led to a significant CFR deficit upon HSV-1 infection [74]. More work is required to determine how these cell factors and ICP27 modulate CFR.5. Can HSV-1 Regulate Its Mode of Spread In Vivo? Clues from Other HerpesvirusesHSV-1 can spread by either CFR or CCS, but it is not known whether it can modulate its mode of release within an infected host. However, work on some other herpesviruses suggests that the answer is likely yes. Some of the most intriguing work comes from the study of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), a member of the betaherpesvirus family. This virus is widespread in the human population and capable of causing significant morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised hosts [75,76]. HCMV exhibits wide tissue tropism in vivo, which is at least partially explained by its ability to enter many different types of cells. The HCMV entry machinery is evolutionarily related to that of HSV-1, in that the virus encodes homologs of gB, gH, and gL [23]. However, unlike HSV-1, which uses a single entry mechanism, HCMV has evolved two distinct entry mechanisms, and each utilizes a different viral envelope protein complex [23,75,76]. One complex is known as the “trimer” and consists of the gH-gL heterodimer bound to an HCMV-specific glycoprotein, gO. The other is termed the “pentamer” and consists of gH-gL bound to HCMV-specific proteins UL123/130/131. Importantly, each complex binds to a different cellular receptor and mediates entry into different cell types. After receptor engagement, both complexes interact with gB to trigger membrane fusion. Of particular interest in this discussion is that the infectivity of HCMV cell-free virions is strongly dependent on the presence of the trimer complex [77,78]. Thus, gO-negative viral mutants are viable but unable to spread by the cell-free route. Interestingly, there is evidence that, in many cell types, gO levels are constitutively kept low due to the inherent susceptibility of gO to proteolysis by the cell’s endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) machinery [79]. Consistent with this, the spread of HCMV within infected humans is primarily by CCS [76]. However, HCMV encodes a protein, UL148, that interacts with the ERAD machinery in a manner that stabilizes gO [79]. Thus, gO accumulates in the presence of UL148, resulting in infectious cell-free virions. Based on these findings, it was hypothesized that UL148 is important for the HCMV horizontal spread [76,79]. For example, if UL148 is expressed in the epithelia of secretory tissues, it could activate the infectivity of cell-free virions in the bodily fluids (saliva, urine, and breastmilk) known to be responsible for transmission of HCMV to new hosts.Additional evidence for modulation of viral spread in the infected host comes from the study of varicella-zoster virus (VSV), another human alphaherpesviral pathogen. VZV is responsible for causing both varicella (chickenpox) and zoster (shingles) [80,81]. The primary infection, which is associated with chickenpox, begins in epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract. Soon, the virus is seeded to T cells, which typically traffic infection to the skin. There, virions gain access to sensory neurons, where they establish lifelong latency. Reactivation of the virus later in life can result in zoster, a painful vesicular skin rash. In cell culture, VZV is notoriously cell-associated, with little release of cell-free virions [82]. This is the case even in human infections in vivo, with one significant exception: vesicular skin lesions exhibit high concentrations of cell-free virions [83,84]. These can be transmitted to new hosts via aerosolization (unlike HSV-1, which requires direct human-human contact). It is not understood why VZV CFR is highly restricted in most cells, but it has been shown that virion egress is often inefficient, with many virions being degraded in late endosomes [83]. Interestingly, the replication of VZV in human skin cells requires the VZV gC homolog [56,85], as does efficient CFR [56]. It is noteworthy that in many cultured cells the VZV gC gene is non-essential for replication and has an idiosyncratic expression pattern that is characterized by highly delayed and low expression relative to most other VZV genes [86,87,88]. In contrast, in human skin lesions, gC is expressed robustly [87]. Together, these results suggest VZV gC is up-regulated in human skin, where it plays a key role in activating CFR in order to promote host-host transmission.Perhaps the most definitive evidence that herpesviruses can regulate their mode of spread in vivo comes from work on Marek’s Disease Virus (MDV), an avian alphaherpesvirus. The MDV system is particularly valuable because it provides a robust host-host transmission model [57], something not readily achievable with human herpesviruses. In chickens, MDV is a notorious pathogen that causes a variety of symptoms, including wasting, neurological defects, and T cell lymphomas [57]. Infection begins in the respiratory tract when chickens inhale dander emanating from infected chickens. After a complex replication pathway that includes latency in T cells, MDV infection is established in the feather follicle epithelial (FFE) cells of the skin, which are the source of the shed dander that is responsible for horizontal transmission. Although MDV is highly cell-associated in cultured cells and in most tissues of the chicken, cell-free virions are produced in FFE cells [89], likely explaining why this tissue is key to horizontal transmission [90]. Intriguingly, even though MDV gC is not required for either replication or disease in the chicken, it is essential for horizontal spread [90,91,92]. This suggests that its role is to enhance the production of infectious cell-free virions in FFE cells [90,93]. The MDV gC gene is similar to the VZV gC gene in that it is expressed poorly in cell culture [57]. It is also subject to deletion and silencing as the virus is passaged in the laboratory [57]. Two other MDV proteins, the ICP27 homolog and pUL47, a tegument protein, are also needed for efficient horizontal transmission of MDV in chickens [94,95]. Interestingly, both regulate expression of the MDV gC mRNA. Overall, the studies of MDV indicate that this virus has evolved a mechanism to activate CFR in a specific cell type, FFE cells, to promote horizontal transmission. Moreover, the MDV gC protein plays an essential but as yet undefined role in this process.6. Hypothesis: Release of Cell-Free HSV-1 Is Induced at Sites of Viral ReactivationThe high prevalence of HSV-1 in humans indicates that it is a master at transmitting itself to new hosts. In part, this can be attributed to the life-long nature of the infection. However, it also suggests that HSV-1 has evolved an efficient mechanism to shed progeny virions in the tissues associated with transmission. Although HSV-1 shedding has not been well studied, clues to this process can be gleaned from work on HSV-2 shedding that has been carried for more than 20 years by investigators at the University of Washington (UW) [8,13,96,97,98,99,100,101]. A groundbreaking initial study enlisted HSV-2-positive individuals to swab their genitalia over the course of many weeks and provide the samples to the clinic for PCR-detection of virus [101]. The results, which were quite surprising at the time, demonstrated that HSV-2 genital reactivation events are much more frequent than previously thought and are often asymptomatic.Since then, the HSV-2 shedding studies at UW have advanced in several ways and continue to lead to new insights. First, sampling protocols were broadened to increase the frequency of testing as well as the spatial detail of the anatomical surfaces assayed (e.g., in some studies, individuals swabbed >20 distinct but contiguous areas of their epithelia) [97,99]. A key insight to emerge from this work was that HSV-2 reactivation is extremely heterogenous, even in a single individual, in regards to the location, strength, and duration of the events. A second advance was the use of biopsies to identify host immune cells that respond to HSV-2 reactivation in the epithelium [97,100,102,103]. From this work, researchers identified HSV-2-specific tissue resident memory CD8+ T cells (TRMs) as key players in controlling viral reactivation [13,100]. TRMs are a subset of CD8+ T cells that are permanently localized to specific tissues and serve as first responders to fight off reinfections at body surfaces [104]. It was found that in nearly all reactivation events, TRMs result in contraction of viral loads within 12–24 h. However, TRMs are not evenly dispersed in the tissue, but rather clustered in heterodispersed aggregates at the dermal-epidermal boundary, and in some cases are not well positioned to quickly contain HSV-2 emergence [105]. This heterogeneity gives the virus a small window of opportunity to evade immune control, at least temporarily.A third advance in the HSV-2 shedding studies was the development of mathematical models of genital reactivation [97,105,106]. These have been reiteratively designed to fit the clinical data and can be used to identify key questions and generate testable hypotheses. The most advanced model, described by Schiffer et al. [13], begins to provide a coherent picture of the complex dynamics that accompany an HSV-2 reactivation event in the genital epithelium. It assumes that latently infected neurons in the dorsal root ganglion provide a steady drip of reactivating HSV-2 into the genital epithelium [106]. The heterogeneity of the resulting epithelial reactivation events, in terms of strength and duration, is primarily driven by time and spatial constraints on TRMs to contain each reactivation. Here, the mode of spread becomes important. The model assumes that HSV-2 can spread using either CCS or CFR. However, CFR is hypothesized to be crucial to temporarily outrunning immunity, as cell-free virions can seed adjacent regions of the epithelium that have lower TRM density, leading to the formation of secondary lesions and further spread [97]. TRMs ultimately control all reactivation events, but not before the occasional production of sufficient progeny to drive transmission to new hosts. Referring to the battle between HSV-2 and the host in the human genital epithelium, Schiffer et al. state that, although the “immune system ultimately wins each battle”, the “virus wins the war”, because it so adept at horizontal transmission [13].Given its high similarity to HSV-2, it is likely that HSV-1 uses a similar strategy to outrun host TRMs during epithelial reactivation events. I thus hypothesize that HSV-1 has evolved a mechanism to strongly induce CFR at sites of viral reactivation, such as the oral mucosa and skin. This could involve an increase in the production of cell-free virions (similar to what occurs for VZV in human skin lesions), or it could reflect an increase in the infectivity of cell-free virions (similar to what is hypothesized for HCMV). It is likely that cellular context plays an important role in the mechanism. For example, activation of CFR may depend on specific host factors expressed in keratinocytes or mucosal epithelial cells. Supporting this idea, ex vivo infection of skin explants by HSV-1 was found to result in high CFR, and this mode of release appeared to be required for spread in this tissue [107]. In contrast, CFR was not seen in HSV-1-infected brain tissue, where spread occurred exclusively by CCS.How might HSV-1 induce CFR? Important clues come from the studies of HCMV, VZV, and MDV. Comparison of these systems reveals a common theme for how diverse herpesviruses can activate CFR, with several key features (Figure 4). First, in all three cases, there is evidence that CFR depends on the presence of a non-essential envelope glycoprotein (gO for HCMV; gC for VZV and MDV). Second, the glycoproteins in question all appear to be under strong regulatory control, in some cases leading to a near on/off state in their expression (ERAD regulation of gO protein levels; transcriptional/post-transcriptional regulation of VZV/MDV gC mRNA). Third, in the case of HCMV and MDV, there is evidence that specific trans-acting viral proteins positively regulate expression of the glycoproteins (UL148 for gO, UL47 and ICP27 for MDV gC).Given these clues, it is intriguing to speculate that, like its alphaherpesviral relatives, HSV-1 utilizes gC to promote CFR. In this regard, it is noteworthy that the HSV-1 gC gene is subject to strong transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, in some cases mediated by ICP27 [108,109,110,111,112]. Given that ICP27 modulates HSV-1 CFR through an as yet unknown mechanism [65], it is worth investigating whether ICP27-gC might comprise a regulatory axis to induce CFR in the tissues associated with reactivation.7. Concluding RemarksIn this article, I have attempted to synthesize the current knowledge of the mechanisms of HSV-1 CFR. This is an important topic, as cell-free virions are almost certainly the agents of HSV-1 human-human transmission. It is possible that therapeutics could be developed to target CFR as a means to both alleviate HSV-1 disease and suppress horizontal spread. Possible approaches could be to directly target cell-free virions with virucidal agents [113,114] or to inhibit elements of the CFR pathway. With regard to the latter possibility, it is worth noting that host heparanase expression has been linked to metastatic cancer [115], prompting the fairly advanced development of several heparanase inhibitors [116]. It would be interesting to see if any of these agents inhibit HSV-1 or -2 replication, spread, or pathogenesis in animal models.Although CFR is likely key for HSV-1 human-human transmission, it is poorly suited as a mode of spread within the human body. For this reason, it is likely that CFR is suppressed in vivo to ensure that the infected host survives in a healthy state to spread infection to new hosts via normal interactions with other humans. Indeed, uncontrolled spread of HSV-1 and -2, in the form of disseminated infections, is associated with severe disease and death, particularly in neonates [5]. It is possible that this disease state is associated with a disruption of the normal circuits that control HSV-1 spread. It is hoped that this review will spur future research into how HSV-1 spread is regulated, a fascinating but under-studied aspect of the biology of this important human pathogen.


Title: Characterization of Sex Differences in Ocular Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Infection and Herpes Stromal Keratitis Pathogenesis of Wild-Type and Herpesvirus Entry Mediator Knockout Mice

INTRODUCTIONSex differences play a role in the pathogenesis of a variety of viral infections, including influenza A virus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B and C virus, and herpes simplex virus (HSV) infections (1, 2). In studies of such infections, differences in the susceptibility and severity of the viral infections between males and females have been attributed to sex hormones which have roles in promoting immune cell function and cytokine synthesis (1–4). Notably, an epidemiological human study of HSV type 2 (HSV-2) infections showed that women have a higher acquisition rate, a higher incidence of symptoms, and a higher prevalence of infection than men in genital infections (2, 5, 6). Whereas women have a greater risk of HSV-2 due to biologic susceptibility, men have a greater recurrence rate than women (5, 7). However, the rates and recurrences of HSV type 1 (HSV-1) infections are similar in men and women in human genital infection (5). In a murine model of resistance to HSV-1, researchers found a sex-based difference in resistance in mice with the herpes resistance locus (Hrl), which is a part of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily, when the mice were challenged via ocular scarification with HSV-1; 52% of the males were resistant to HSV-1 induced mortality, compared to 68% of the female mice (3). Although a clear sex bias has been shown in HSV-2 infections, the differences in HSV-1 pathogenesis between males and females remain unclear.Our laboratory studies herpesvirus stromal keratitis (HSK), which is an ocular disease that is the leading cause of infectious blindness worldwide (8, 9). It is typically caused by HSV-1 (10, 11). In our current study, we investigated if sex plays a role in this disease using a murine model. HSV-1 is a large double-stranded DNA virus that enters and replicates in host cell mucosal membranes (12, 13). The virus then travels from the mucosal surfaces to sensory neurons, establishes latency, and persists in a latent state for the lifetime of the host. Reactivation can occur at any time with replication of virus traveling back to the mucosal surfaces. During ocular infection, reactivation of the virus from latency in the trigeminal ganglion (TG) to the corneal epithelium causes an inflammatory response characterized by corneal opacity and neovascularization which can ultimately lead to blindness due to these periodic episodes of virus reactivation (13–15).Our previous studies have shown that herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM), a member of the TNF superfamily, has immunomodulatory functions and promotes ocular HSV-1 pathogenesis independently of viral entry receptor functions (16, 17). HVEM is a key immune regulatory protein that is part of the HVEM/LIGHT/BTLA/CD160 cosignaling pathway that regulates T-cell activation and function (7). HVEM has a role in the adaptive immune responses of murine corneal inflammation and nerve damage that occur following ocular challenge of HSV-1, which is critical for the development of HSK (8). Mice lacking HVEM (HVEM knockout [KO] mice) exhibit lower levels of immune cell infiltrates and less severe ocular disease in the cornea than C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice (8). Since a clear sex difference in rates of mortality was observed in ocular studies with Hrl, we tested whether sex factors into our model of HSV-1 ocular infection. Moreover, sex hormones have been found to affect the expression of host cell surface proteins that function as receptors for viral entry such as the chemokine receptors for HIV-1, or DAF, a receptor for coxsackievirus. In these cases, estrogen promotes increased expression of receptors on B cells, which correlates with increased susceptibility of cells to infection and subsequent replication (2, 18, 19). In addition, immune responses to pathogen infection can also differ between the sexes. Most pertinent to our studies are those that show changes in cytokine expression which alters the immune response in comparisons of males to females. For example, when peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy men and women were stimulated with HSV-1 or Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) ligands, interleukin 10 (IL-10) production was found to be statistically significantly related to plasma levels of sex hormones in both groups (12). Men produced higher levels of IL-10, which serves as a negative regulator of the response of both innate and adaptive immune cells under conditions of stimulation with HSV-1 or TLR9 ligands, than women (12). Previously, we used only male mice in our studies for characterizing HSK pathogenesis and found that HVEM modulates the immune response to ocular HSV-1 infection. Since sex has also been shown to play a role in the immune response to viral infection, we investigated whether female mice of the WT and HVEM KO genotype exhibit a response to ocular HSV-1 infection similar to that exhibited by males to determine if sex is a biological variable in HSV-1 infection and HSK pathogenesis. Moreover, little is known in regard to the role of sex in ocular health and disease (2, 10, 12).Findings of previous studies exploring the role of sex using different murine models of ocular HSV-1 have been contradictory. The experimental models have used other routes of infection, virus and mouse strains, and ages at infection. In murine models of ocular HSV-1 infection, sex has been shown to play a role in only certain mouse backgrounds (14, 20). Female mice of the 129/Sv/Ev background displayed lower clinical periocular disease scores than both males and testosterone-treated females although the viral replication and corneal disease conditions were similar, suggesting that sex hormones enhance the severity of the clinical symptoms of HSK (20). In contrast, male and female mice of the NIH/OLA background displayed similar clinical scores and viral titers from the trigeminal ganglia, indicating that sex does not play a role in pathogenesis of HSK in NIH/OLA background (21). Studies have also found sex differences in response to the HSV-1 glycoprotein D vaccine being more effective in women than in men due to differences in immune cell response, where the gD peptide epitopes produced a higher CD4+ T-cell response in females than males (22). Exploring the relationship between sex hormones and viral infection may offer insights into treatment and vaccination and a better understanding of the differences in immune cell responses of males and females that may lead to the development of novel therapies for human autoimmune diseases. Autoimmune diseases are more prevalent in women than in men (1, 2). Eight percent of the population is affected by autoimmune diseases, and over two-thirds of those affected are woman. The stronger innate and adaptive immune response in females contributes to their increased susceptibility to inflammatory disease, and understanding whether this occurs in ocular HSV-1 infection and pathogenesis may suggest treatments that lessen the severity of disease in humans (23).In our current studies, we investigated sex-specific differences between male and female mice in HSK pathogenesis in the C57BL/6 mouse strain to determine if sex plays a role in the inflammatory disease induced by the HVEM/LIGHT/BTLA/CD160 cosignaling pathway that regulates T-cell activation and function (7). Our results indicate that there was no significant difference between male and female mice in evaluations of HSK disease pathogenesis. Our findings are informative in determining the role of sex in this disease and allowing the use of both male and female mice in our ongoing studies and future experiments using the C57BL/6 mouse strain, which is commonly used for genetic knockout mouse lines.RESULTSHSV-1 replicates to similar levels in male and female WT and HVEM KO mice after corneal inoculation.In a murine model of infection, primary infection of the corneal epithelium resulted in detectable replication of HSV-1 for up to 6 days postinfection (dpi) in studies monitoring ocular tear film (11, 15). To determine whether sex impacts the replication of HSV-1, age-matched male and female adult WT and HVEM KO mice were inoculated with HSV-1 strain 17 via corneal scarification and viral titers of eye swabs of tear film were collected at days 1, 3, and 5 postinfection. The titers showed no significant difference between male and female mice of either the WT or HVEM KO genotype at all 3 time points (Fig. 1A and C). Female WT mice had slightly higher titers than WT males on dpi 3 and slightly lower titers than males on dpi 5 (Fig. 1A). Female HVEM KO mice had slightly lower eye swab titers than male HVEM KO mice on all 3 days (Fig. 1C). In all cases, these differences were not statistically significant.FIG 1Male and female WT and HVEM KO mice exhibit similar HSV-1 eye swab results and tissue titers after corneal inoculation. Eye swabs were collected at 1, 3, and 5 dpi, and periocular skin (POS), trigeminal ganglia (TG), and brain tissues were collected at 5 dpi. (A) Titers from eye swabs of male and female WT mice (n = 5 to 10 mice per group, 3 replicates). (B) Titers from tissues of male and female WT mice at 5 dpi (n = 4 to 5 mice per group, 3 replicates). (C and D) Titers from eye swabs of male and female HVEM KO mice (n = 5 to 10 mice per group, 3 replicates) (C) and from tissues of male and female HVEM KO mice (n = 3 to 5 mice per group, 2 replicates) (D). No difference was observed between the two sexes in each genotype. Titers calculated as means ± standard errors of the means (SEM) were analyzed using two-tailed t tests with Holm-Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons.Following ocular infection, active replicating virus can also be quantified in the brain and surrounding tissues during the acute phase of infection since it disseminates by retrograde transport to the neuronal cell bodies in the trigeminal ganglia (8, 11). To monitor dissemination, we collected periocular skin (POS), trigeminal ganglia, and brain tissues at 5 days postinfection to study this phase of the HSV-1 infection cycle (Fig. 1B and D). Although there was no significant difference between the tissue titers in male and female mice within either genotype, lower titers were observed in tissues collected from female mice overall, but the differences from the results seen with the male mice were not statistically significant. From these data, we determined that sex has no significant effect on HSV-1 viral replication in the cornea, periocular skin, trigeminal ganglia, or brain of WT and HVEM KO mice.Male and female WT and HVEM KO mice have similar cellular corneal immune infiltrates during the acute and chronic inflammatory phases of infection.We next investigated the corneal cellular immune response in WT and HVEM KO mice to determine if there were any sex differences in the prominent infiltration of inflammatory cells that occurs in stromal tissues following HSV-1 infection of the cornea. Previously, we found that the cytokine responses in HVEM KO male mice were different from those in WT male mice (7, 8). Male and female WT mice exhibited similar levels of HVEM expression during HSV-1 infection after corneal inoculation on dpi 5 and 14 and on immune cells, and male and female HVEM KO mice lacked HVEM expression, as expected (data not shown).The early response to infection while the virus is still actively replicating consists of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN), mainly neutrophils, and is known as the acute inflammatory phase of infection. PMN infiltration peaks at around 2 dpi, declining at 5 dpi and rising again during the chronic inflammatory phase of infection starting around 7 dpi, after the virus has been cleared. Macrophages, dendritic cells (DCs), and natural killer cells are also detected during this time, and T cells enter the cornea during the chronic phase at 8 to 9 dpi (11). HSK is caused by this immunopathogenic response to infection, and differences in infiltrating immune cell populations affect the overall severity of symptoms in the cornea (11, 15). An innate difference in cell-mediated immune responses exists between males and females, including the responses to viral infection. The degrees of reliance on subsets of CD4 helper T cells in overcoming infection differ between males and females, where the levels of Th1 and interferon gamma (IFN-γ) responses in females have been reported to be higher than those in males (2, 24, 25). Androgens have been found to enhance viral and immune factors, where estrogens modulate both innate and adaptive immunity to be protective (26). Further investigation into whether higher levels of estrogens or progesterone, such as during pregnancy, might affect ocular infection should be considered.Cornea pairs were collected from infected male and female WT and HVEM KO mice during the acute phase of infection at 5 dpi (Fig. 2A and B) and then at the chronic inflammatory phase of infection at 14 dpi (Fig. 2C and D) to determine if the immune cell populations infiltrating the corneas of male and female adult mice differed during either phase of infection. Cell populations were measured via flow cytometry as described in Materials and Methods by first gating on populations of CD45+. The counts of infiltrating cells from CD45+/CD11b+ myeloid lineages during the acute inflammatory phase of infection were determined (Fig. 2A). These populations included Ly6G−/CD11c+ myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs), Ly6G−/CD11c− monocytes and macrophages (M), Ly6G−/CD11c−/Ly6C+ inflammatory macrophages (I-M), Ly6G−/CD11c−/Ly6C− noninflammatory macrophages (I-M), and Ly6G+/CD11c+ polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN). The counts of infiltrating cells from CD45+/CD3+ lymphoid lineages during the acute phase were also determined (Fig. 2B). These populations include CD4+ CD8− CD4 T cells (CD4+), CD4− CD8+ CD8 T cells (CD8+), NK1.1+ natural killer T cells (NKT), and CD4− CD8− NK1.1− double-negative T cells (DNT). The myeloid and lymphoid cell populations during chronic inflammatory phase were also measured (Fig. 2C and D). We analyzed these specific populations, including the CD4+ T cells and PMN neutrophils, because they contribute to most of the damage to the eye during HSK (11). We found, as expected, that the WT male mice had significantly higher numbers of PMN cells and CD4+ T cells during the chronic phase of infection than the HVEM KO male mice (8). This difference between genotypes was also observed in the female mice. Overall, the male and female mice exhibited similar levels of immune cell infiltration in each genotype. The data suggest that sex does not affect immune cell infiltrates in the cornea during HSV-1 ocular infection.FIG 2Immune cells infiltrate male and female WT and HVEM KO corneas at similar levels during the acute (5-dpi) and chronic (14-dpi) phases of HSV-1 corneal infection. Data represent results of flow cytometry analysis of immune cell infiltrates in WT and HVEM KO corneas collected at 5 dpi (n = 8 to 10, two replicates) (A and B) and 14 dpi (C and D). (A and C) Absolute (Abs) number of myeloid infiltrates of dendritic cells (mDCs), macrophages (M), inflammatory macrophages (I-M), noninflammatory macrophages (NI-M), and polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) at 5 dpi (A) and at 14 dpi (C). (B and D) Absolute number of lymphoid infiltrates of CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells, NK T cells, or DN T cells per cornea pair at 5 dpi (B) and at 14 dpi (D) (n = 8 to 20 mice, 2 or 3 replicates). No NKT cells were detected in female HVEM KO corneal samples at 5 dpi. There was no significant difference between males and females of either genotype. The differences between the WT and HVEM KO data are consistent with our previous studies. Infiltrating cell percentages (calculated as means ± SEM) were analyzed using two-tailed t tests with Holm-Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons.Clinical symptoms of corneal HSV-1 pathogenesis are similar in male and female WT and HVEM KO mice.Mice infected with HSV-1 exhibit not only ocular disease but also neurological symptoms, including seizures, loss of balance, and weight loss. To determine whether sex plays a role in clinical symptoms of HSK and pathogenesis of corneal infection, male and female WT and HVEM KO mice were scored for clinical symptoms daily from 0 to 14 dpi (Fig. 3). As indicated in Table 1, scores were based on appearance and severity of lesions, neurological symptoms, and clinical eye disease on a scale of 0 to 5, with a score of 0 representing the absence of symptoms and a score of 5 representing the most severe symptoms. The mean maximum lesion scores were 4.4 for male WT mice, 3.7 for female WT mice, 0.4 for male HVEM KO mice, and 0.2 for female HVEM KO mice (Fig. 3A). The levels of severity of lesions were similar between males and females within each genotype. The occurrence of lesions and the mean score on each day were also determined (Fig. 3B). Male and female HVEM KO mice experienced similar rates of progression of lesions, and the female WT mice had slightly lower scores than the male WT mice. The neurological scores were recorded for the male and female mice, and the mean maximum score was calculated. The mean maximum neurological scores were 1.7 for male WT mice and 1.8 for female WT mice; HVEM KO mice did not display any neurological symptoms, as we had previously seen (Fig. 3C). The levels of severity of neurological symptoms were similar between the males and females within each genotype. The onset of neurological symptoms and mean score on each day were determined (Fig. 3D). The male and female mice experienced similar levels of neurological symptoms throughout HSV-1 pathogenesis. Additionally, eye disease scores were determined for male and female mice. The mean maximum eye disease scores were 3.4 for male WT mice, 2.8 for female WT mice, 0.4 for male HVEM KO mice, and 0.13 for female HVEM KO mice (Fig. 3E). The levels of severity of eye disease symptoms were also similar between the males and females within each genotype. Overall, the female mice exhibited attenuated clinical symptoms compared to the male mice in both genotypes, but the differences were not statistically significant. Our results obtained with the female and male mice were identical to those seen in our previous studies with male mice, showing that HVEM contributes to increased severity of disease in WT mice compared to HVEM KO mice (16).FIG 3Male and female mice exhibited similar clinical symptoms during the chronic inflammatory phase of HSV-1 corneal infection. Clinical symptoms were scored for each mouse and recorded each day from inoculation to the chronic inflammatory phase (days 0 to 14). Mice were scored on the severity and presence of lesions (A and B), neurological (Neuro.) disease (C and D), and eye disease (E), as well as on corneal sensitivity (F) and weight loss (not shown). (A) Maximum (Max.) lesion score within 14 dpi. (C) Maximum neurological disease score within 14 dpi. (E) Maximum eye disease score within 14 dpi. (B) Lesion score from 0 to 14 dpi. (D) Neurological disease score from 0 to 14 dpi. (F) Corneal sensitivity from 0 to 14 dpi. n = 5 mice per group, 2 replicates. No difference was observed between the sexes. Scores and sensitivity levels (calculated as means ± SEM) were analyzed using two-tailed t tests with Holm-Sidak's correction for multiple comparisons.TABLE 1Clinical symptom scoring scale for HSK in miceScoreDescription of score by typeLesionNeurologicalEye0Lesion freeSymptom freeSymptom free1Small area of broken skin of <0.5 cmRuffled fur, hunched posture, normal movementPus around edge(s)2Area of broken skin of 0.5–1 cmHunched posture, slow movementPus and squint3Broken skin, bleeding, scabbing, or pustulesHunched posture, slow movement, labored breathingClosed4Broken skin of >1 cm with multiple pustules or scabbingHunched, labored breathing, little to no movementClosed, scab formation5Severe scabbing or bleeding with pustulesMoribund or deadSevere scabbingA major symptom of HSK includes corneal scarring, which leads to loss of corneal sensitivity and vision. Esthesiometry, which measures corneal sensitivity determined on the basis of the shortest filament length required to elicit a blink response, was used to monitor corneal sensitivity from 0 to 14 dpi, with a filament 6 cm in length representing no loss of sensitivity and a filament 0.5 cm or less in length representing total loss of sensitivity (Fig. 3F). Male and female mice had similar levels of corneal sensitivity throughout corneal infection. Our previous data showing that HVEM contributes to loss of corneal sensitivity were determined by comparing HVEM KO to WT adult male mice, where WT mice lost sensitivity and HVEM KO mice retained sensitivity (8). The same result was observed in female mice. We conclude from this that sex does not play a significant role in the clinical disease course during HSV-1 ocular infection of mice.DISCUSSIONSusceptibility to viral infections is often reduced in females compared to males due to a greater humoral and immune response to vaccination and infection (2). Historically, only one sex was used in studies performed with murine models of HSV-1 infection, and male-predominant populations have been used in human studies and trials (2, 10). Studies have shown sex dependence of HSV infection of the central nervous system, where females were more susceptible than males (27, 28). Female mice have also been shown to have higher HSV titers from brain tissue than males when inoculations were performed via intraperitoneal injection, resulting in greater mortality and severity of disease (1, 28). Data representing estrogen treatments, castration, or hormones do not fully explain these sex differences (1, 20). In human studies, the high prevalence of HSV-1 in the trigeminal ganglion (TG) was shown not to be related to sex, with 88% of women and 90% men having HSV-1-positive TG (29), and the incidence rates of HSK were found to be similar in men and women, at a ratio of 1.1 to 1 (30). These studies revealed the importance of addressing and understanding differences in susceptibility to HSV-1 infection and ocular disease between the sexes since such understanding may result in more-effective therapies and vaccines.Our results indicate that the viral titers in tear film and tissues from adult HVEM KO and WT mice tissue were not affected by sex (Fig. 1). The data revealed a trend showing female mice to have slightly lower tissue titers than male mice of both the WT and HVEM KO genotypes. These findings are similar to those of an ocular model using the 129 mouse strain background, in which the viral titer in the TG was slightly lower in females but not statistically significantly so (20). In contrast, HSV-2 infection has shown a sex bias in human studies in which women exhibited a higher prevalence of infections than males in all age groups, and seronegative women acquired virus faster and had a higher incidence of symptomatic infections than males (2, 6, 31). Our previous research showed that HVEM is not required for disease during HSV-2 infection of mice but that HVEM is required for full HSV-1 pathogenesis in the eye following infection (8). Our data instead suggest that, being influenced by sex hormones as in the case of HSV-2 infection, the immune response in HSV-1 pathogenesis is modulated by HVEM. This may suggest why sex differences have been reported in HSV-2 but were not found in our research of ocular HSV-1 pathogenesis. Another study found some effects of the interferon gamma (IFN-γ) receptor to be sex specific in ocular HSV-1 infection. In IFN-γ receptor knockout mice, females displayed less-severe POS disease scores than males, and testosterone-induced females produced male-like POS symptoms (20). However, the effect of sex hormones on host receptors such as HVEM has yet to be fully understood, and further investigation into what is contributing to the reduced infiltrates and less-severe disease in mice lacking HVEM is needed.The immune privilege of the cornea, which is the site of infection, may account for the fact that sex hormones do not influence the immune response in HSK. Previous studies have shown the development of corneal eye disease to be strongly correlated with an inflammatory response characterized by CD4+ Th1 cytokine-producing T cells (20, 32). The results shown in Fig. 2 representing analysis of CD4+ cells showed that males had a higher number of CD4+ cells in response to infection during the acute stage whereas females had a slightly higher CD4+ response during chronic infection. In the chronic inflammatory stage of infection, which contributes to the severity of HSK, no significant differences were observed in the levels of immune cell infiltrates (Fig. 2C, D). HVEM is known to influence HSV pathogenesis in the ocular murine model during most stages of infection, including entry and acute viral replication, innate responses, chronic inflammation, and viral latency (8, 33–36). Our previous findings showed that HVEM contributes significantly to the increases in the levels of immune cell infiltrates that occur during ocular HSV-1 infection (17). Since no significant differences were observed between males and females within each genotype and since the differences between the genotypes were consistent within the sexes, we conclude sex that does not play a role in the innate or adaptive response to ocular HSV-1 infection.In addition, the difference in clinical symptoms between WT and HVEM KO mice that we observed in our previous studies confirmed that HVEM modulates the immune response rather than being altered by sex (17). Our results also show no significant differences in clinical symptoms between males and females of either genotype in our experimental model. Female mice trended toward slightly lower clinical scores than male mice in both the WT and HVEM KO genotypes (Fig. 3). A previous study using the HSV-1 KOS strain found that males displayed less-severe clinical symptoms (disease score mean of 1.5) than females (score mean of 2.0) on average (14). This was also observed in another study in which clinical eye disease scores were slightly lower in females but not statistically significantly so (20). Clinical examination using a slit-lamp microscope may provide better diagnosis and scoring of HSK as this is the primary tool for patient diagnosis (37, 38). However, there were no sex differences in the corneal eye disease scores in our results and in the results reported from other studies of ocular HSV-1 infection and clinical HSK pathogenesis (14, 20).Our results suggest that sex is not a significant biological variable in ocular HSK in the C57BL/6 mouse background and does not contribute to the observed reduction of the levels of immune cell infiltration and severity of clinical symptoms in HVEM KO mice. Overall, we determined that there was no significant difference in HSV-1 ocular infection in male and female mice. In compliance with the NIH standards of considering sex a biological variable, we report that both male and female mice can be used simultaneously in studies using C57BL/6 mice and HVEM KO mice on the C57BL/6 background.MATERIALS AND METHODSEthics statement.All experiments utilizing mice were performed in strict adherence to the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Northwestern University approved the protocol (Protocol no. IS00001532). Procedures were performed with mice under anesthesia using a ketamine/xylazine cocktail or under isoflurane anesthesia. Minimization of suffering was prioritized.Cells and viruses.African green monkey kidney cells (Vero) were used for propagation of virus and all viral plaque assays. HSV-1 strain 17 was obtained from David Leib (Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH).Viral plaque assay.Viral plaque assay was performed using Vero cells to determine viral titers of swabs and tissues, as previously described (17).Animals and procedures.Mice were maintained in a specific-pathogen-free environment and were transferred to a containment facility after infection. Male and female C57BL/6 mice (8 to 15 weeks of age) were used for all experiments. Mice were bred in-house. Wild-type (WT) mice were acquired from Jackson Laboratory, and Tnfrsf14−/− mice (HVEM KO mice) were obtained from Yang-Xin Fu (39).For ocular inoculation, mice were anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine solution. Corneas were abraded lightly with a 25-gauge needle in a crosshatch pattern, and 5 μl of 2 × 106 PFU HSV-1 strain 17 was applied to each cornea. Mice were weighed and scored for clinical symptoms daily. Clinical scores were divided into observations of lesions and of neurological symptoms. The scoring scale, which was also used in our previous studies, is shown in Table 1.Mice displaying a neurological score of 4 or a loss of weight of greater or equal to 30% of the starting weight at infection were sacrificed and given a score of 5. Eye swabs were collected after mild anesthesia with isoflurane when mice were unresponsive to footpad prick. The eye was gently proptosed, and a sterile cotton swab premoistened with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) was wiped three times around the circumference of the eye and twice across the center of the cornea in an “X” shape as previously described (16). Swabs were then placed into 1 ml of DMER media (DMEM containing 5% [vol/vol] fetal bovine serum [FBS], 1% gentamicin, 1% ciprofloxacin, and 1% amphotericin B) and stored at −80°C. To determine viral titers, samples were thawed and subjected to vigorous vortex mixing for 30 s prior to performance of a plaque assay.Two experimental groups of mice were used. In the first group, mice were sacrificed on day 5 for flow cytometry and eye swab procedures and for harvest of tissues. The mice in the second group were monitored for clinical symptoms, eye swabs were taken for viral titers, and mice were sacrificed for flow cytometry on day 14. For the day 5 experiments, animals were sacrificed and the POS, TG, and brain samples were collected as previously described (6, 7, 17). After dissection, all samples were placed in 1 ml DMER media, homogenized, sonicated, and stored at −80°C until titration. Brain samples were centrifuged prior to titration to remove debris.Flow cytometry.On either day 5 or day 14 postinfection, corneal pairs and spleens were collected from individual mice and placed into cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Corneas were placed into Liberase (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA) (0.7 mg/ml)–RPMI media for digestion for 1 h in an incubator (37°C, 5% CO2). Corneas were homogenized through a 100-μm-pore-size mesh with a 1-ml syringe plunger. Cells were washed with cold PBS, centrifuged at 4˚C, and then strained through a 40-μm-pore-size mesh and collected into 300-μl volumes. Spleens were prepared in a manner similar that used with the corneas but with an added red blood cell lysis incubation step performed between the 100-μm-pore-size-mesh and 40-μm-pore-size-mesh straining steps. Spleens were collected in 3-ml volumes. Counts of live cells were obtained using a Countess cell counter. All of the cornea cells and a portion of the spleen cells were each incubated in PBS at 1:1,000 using a Live/Dead Fixable Aqua dead cell stain kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in the dark at room temperature (RT) for 30 min. Samples were washed with PBS and incubated with Fc block (0.5 to 1.0 μg/sample anti-mouse CD16/CD32 [eBioscience, San Diego, CA, USA]–PBS–1% fetal bovine serum–0.1% sodium azide [fluorescence-activated cell sorter {FACS} buffer]) for 5 min at 48°C in the dark. Conjugated antibodies (2 μg/ml final concentration per sample) were added directly to Fc block and then incubated for 1 h at 4˚C in the dark.The following antibodies were used: HVEM anti-mouse allophycocyanin (APC) (HMHV-1B18), Ly6G brilliant violet 421 (1A8), CD4 phycoerythrin (PE) (RM4-5), and CD8a brilliant violet 421 (53-6.7) from BioLegend; CD45 fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) (30-F11), CD3 APC-eFluor 780 (17A2), Cd11b PE Cy7 (M1/70), Cd11c PE (N418), Ly6C peridinin chlorophyll protein (PerCP) Cy5 (HK1.4), and CD3e PE Cy7 (145-2C11) from Ebioscience; and NK1.1 APC Cy7 (PK136) from BD Biosciences. The isotype controls (all from Ebioscience) were as follows: Armenian hamster (Arm Ham) IgG isotype control APC (eBio299Arm), rat IgG2b k isotype control PerCP eFluor 710 (eB149/10HS), and rat IgG2a isotype control APC eFluor 780 (eBR2a). Sample data were acquired using a FACSCanto II analyzer (BD Biosciences), the entire set of corneal pair samples was run, and the spleen sample run was stopped at 100,000 live cells. FlowJo 10.1 software (FlowJo, Ashland, OR, USA) was used for data analysis. All samples were first gated on lymphocytes. Single cells were separated according to the forward scatter corresponding to the area of the peak (FSC-A) versus the forward scatter corresponding to the height of the peak (FSC-H). Live cells were isolated using the Live/Dead plot. Cell populations were measured via flow cytometry gating on populations of CD45+ cells. CD45+/CD11b+ myeloid lineages were gated into further populations of Ly6G-/CD11c+ myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs), Ly6G− CD11c− monocytes and macrophages (M), Ly6G−/CD11c−/Ly6C+ inflammatory macrophages (I-M), Ly6G−/CD11c−/Ly6C− noninflammatory macrophages (I-M), and Ly6G+/CD11c+ polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN). CD45+/CD3+ lymphoid lineages were gated into further populations of CD4+ CD8− CD4 T cells (CD4+), CD4− CD8+ CD8 T cells (CD8+), NK1.1+ natural killer T cells (NKT), and CD4− CD8− NK1.1− double-negative T cells (DNT).Corneal sensitivity.To determine the sensitivity of the central cornea, a Luneau Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer (catalog no. WO-7760; Western Ophthalmics, Lynnwood, WA, USA) was used to measure the blink threshold. Animals were scruffed, and the length of the monofilament was adjusted from 6.0 to 0.5 cm and applied perpendicularly to the surface of the central cornea until the first inflection point. A positive response was recorded when two or more blinks were obtained in three attempts. Mice with an absence of a blink response at 0.5 cm were given a score of 0. The same examiner performed all measurements.Statistics.Geometric means of numbers of viral PFU per tissue sample and maximum neurologic and lesion scores were compared using the unpaired Student's t test with the Holm-Sidak multiple-comparison test. The unpaired Student's t test and the Holm-Sidak multiple-comparison test were used to determine levels of variance between groups over time with respect to development of lesions or neurologic morbidity. GraphPad Prism 7.0 software was used for statistical analyses.


Title: Dual impacts of a glycan shield on the envelope glycoprotein B of HSV-1: evasion from human antibodies 

INTRODUCTIONHerpes simplex viruses (HSV)-1 and HSV-2 cause a variety of human diseases, including encephalitis, keratitis, neonatal disease, and mucocutaneous and skin diseases such as herpes labialis, genital herpes, and herpetic whitlow (1
-
3). A striking feature of these viruses is that they establish lifelong infections in humans, where, after the initial infection, they become latent and frequently reactivate to cause lesions (1
-
3). To accomplish these cycles, the viruses have evolved highly complex and sophisticated strategies to evade host immune mechanisms. Notably, these viral strategies have probably impeded the development of effective vaccines for HSV-1 and HSV-2 infections. Several decades of vaccine development have not produced a successful vaccine (4, 5).To clarify the significance of the mechanisms of immune evasion by viruses that cause diseases in humans, the mechanisms should be investigated not only in vitro but also in vivo; and research using available human samples should provide valuable information on the effective viral mechanisms in humans. However, in previous studies, human samples have generally been analyzed in vitro, and information from the in vivo evaluations of human samples on viral evasion from the immune system has been limited. To fill the gaps in our understanding of the effective mechanisms of viral immune evasion in humans, in vivo investigations of the mechanisms of immune evasion that use human samples are of crucial importance.Although no effective vaccines for HSV-1 and HSV-2 have been developed thus far, previous clinical trials for HSV vaccines have provided important clues indicating that not only T-cell responses, but also antibody responses were important for controlling HSV infections in humans (4, 5). Thus, a clinical trial of a subunit vaccine employing HSV-2 envelope glycoprotein D (gD) showed partial but consistent efficacy against the development of HSV-1 genital disease but did not offer significant protection against HSV-2 genital disease (6). Notably, antibody responses to HSV-2 gD correlated with protection against HSV-1 but not HSV-2 infections, whereas CD4+ T-cell responses did not correlate with protection against either HSV-1 or HSV-2 infections (7). In addition, a substudy of this trial, which used sera from a fraction of the vaccinated subjects, showed that neutralizing antibody titers against HSV-1 were significantly higher than the titers against HSV-2 (8). These findings were in agreement with those from another clinical study in humans that showed that the absence of HSV antibodies was associated with severe HSV infections in humans (9). It is of interest that the response to the HSV-2 gD subunit vaccine was restricted to the generation of gD neutralizing antibodies and that antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) did not develop (10).The findings described in the previous paragraph suggesting that antibodies are important for the control of HSV-1 infections led us to attempt to identify hitherto unknown mechanisms of HSV-1 evasion from human antibodies. In this study, we focused on the glycosylation of a major envelope glycoprotein of HSV-1, gB. Glycosylation of a viral envelope glycoprotein sometimes acts as a glycan shield(s) that evades antibodies (11). This mechanism of antibody evasion has been documented for influenza virus, human immunodeficiency virus, Nipah virus, hepatitis C virus, Ebola virus, hepatitis B virus, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (12
-
20).HSV-1 gB, which is a class III fusion glycoprotein, is a major target of antibody-mediated immunity (21). It plays an essential role in the entry of the virus into a host cell, together with other HSV-1 envelope glycoproteins, including gD and a complex of gH and gL (gH/gL) (22). Herein, we investigated the effects of a series of N-linked glycans (N-glycans) on HSV-1 gB in the context of viral infection and identified an N-glycan that contributed to evasion from human antibodies not only in vitro but also in vivo. Notably, the N-glycan on gB was also significant for HSV-1 replication in the central nervous system (CNS) of naïve mice as well as neurovirulence, although it had no effect on viral replication in cell cultures.RESULTSGeneration of recombinant viruses harboring a mutation in each of the potential N-glycosylation sites on HSV-1 gB by an improved genetic manipulation system for HSV-1HSV-1 gB has six potential N-glycosylation sites at the following positions: Asn-87, Asn-141, Asn-398, Asn-430, Asn-489, and Asn-674 (Fig. 1). To investigate the significance of N-glycosylation on HSV-1 gB in the context of viral infection, we used an improved HSV-1 genetic manipulation system to construct a series of recombinant viruses and their repaired viruses (Fig. S1). The recombinant viruses encoded mutant gBs (gB-N87Q, gB-N141Q, gB-N398Q, gB-N430Q, gB-N489Q, and gB-N674Q), in which each of the potential N-glycosylation sites was substituted with glutamine. In addition, we generated a pair of control viruses, a recombinant virus, in which Asn-888 in the cytoplasmic domain of gB was substituted with glutamine (gB-N888Q), and its repaired virus (gB-N888Q-repair) (Fig. S1).FIG 1A three-dimensional (3D) structural model of fully N-glycosylated gB in the prefusion state. Image A shows the ribbon diagram of the protomer, and image B shows the trimer of the crystal structure of gB in the prefusion state (Protein Data Bank accession no. 6Z9M) (23). The Glycan Reader and Modeler were used to modify potential N-glycosylation sites (Asn-87, Asn-141, Asn-398, Asn-430, Asn-489, and Asn-674) of prefusion gB with the Man3GlcNAc2 glycan using Glycan Modeler. Missing coordinates of Asn-87 and Asn-489 in the 3D structure were estimated. The ribbon diagrams of the gB models show the functional domains in colors as follows: domain I (light blue), domain II (green), domain III (yellow), domain IV (orange), and domain V (red). Residue background coloring is used for the main polypeptide chains, and potential N-glycans are shown in magenta as stick models. In Panel B, protomer A is the same as in Panel A. Protomer B and C are shown in white. Image C shows the location of potential N-linked glycans on gB along the genome of wild-type HSV-1(F). N, N-glycosylation sites (Asn-87, Asn-141, Asn-398, Asn-430, Asn-489, and Asn-674); TM, transmembrane domain.The two-step Red-mediated recombination system consists of the first recombination for the insertion of a PCR-amplified selectable marker and the second recombination for the excision of the inserted marker by a cleavage step that uses a rare-cutting endonuclease I-SceI. This system is widely used for markerless modifications of large DNA molecules such as herpesvirus genomes that are cloned into a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) in Escherichia coli (24).However, the second recombination step was not very efficient in our hands. Therefore replica plating, which is time-consuming and laborious, was needed to identify any E. coli recombinant harboring a BAC clone with a desired mutation. We used an improved system that was developed for this study that employed a negative selection marker, the E. coli phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase (ePheS*), which encodes a mutant of the α-subunit of E. coli phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase (ePheS) (25) in the presence of 4-chloro-phenylalanine (4-CP), in addition to cleavage by I-SceI for the second recombination step (Fig. S2A). The improved system considerably increased the efficiency of the second recombination step from 17.4% to 87%, 17.4% to 94.7%, and 8.7% to 87.0% in the substitution of single amino acids, and in the deletion and insertion of a foreign gene, respectively, compared with the original system (Table S1A). Recombinant viruses carrying an alanine substitution of Thr-190 in the HSV-1 protein UL51 (Fig. S3A), which were generated in the original and improved systems, exhibited identical growth properties (Fig. S3B) in Vero cells and produced identical neurovirulence in mice following intracranial inoculation (Fig. S3C), suggesting that, compared with the original system, the additional negative selection in the improved system did not affect the genomic integrity of HSV-1 other than the desired mutations.Effects of mutations at each of the potential gB N-glycosylation sites on electrophoretic mobility in the presence or absence of peptide-N-glycosidase F (PNGase)Vero cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), each of the gB mutant viruses, or each of their repaired viruses were lysed, treated with or without PNGase, and analyzed by immunoblotting. As shown in Fig. 2, all of the gB mutants, except the gB-N888Q mutant, migrated faster than wild-type gB in denaturing gels. In contrast, the gB-N888Q mutant and gB from cells infected with each of the repaired viruses migrated as slowly as the wild-type gB in denaturing gels (Fig. 2). After treatment of the infected cell lysates with PNGase, all of the gB mutants migrated in denaturing gels as slowly as the wild-type gB (Fig. 2). All of the gB mutants were detected by immunoblotting at levels similar to the level of wild-type gB (Fig. 2). These results indicate that gB was N-glycosylated at each of the six potential N-linked glycosylation sites without affecting its accumulation in HSV-1-infected cells.FIG 2Effect of mutation at each of the potential gB N-glycosylation sites on electrophoretic mobility in the presence or absence of PNGase. Vero cells infected for 21 h with wild-type HSV-1(F), each of the gB mutant viruses, or each of their repaired viruses at an MOI of 5 were lysed, treated with or without PNGase, and analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies to gB, VP23, or α-tubulin. Data are representative of three independent experiments. Dashed lines indicate the bottom of bands harboring gB with each of the indicated NQ mutations. α, anti.Effects of mutations at each of the gB N-glycosylation sites on the replication of HSV-1 in cell culturesTo investigate the effect of gB N-glycosylation on HSV-1 replication in cell cultures, Vero cells were infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), each of the gB mutant viruses, or each of their repaired viruses at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5 or 0.01; and virus titers were assayed at 24 or 48 h postinfection. As shown in Fig. S4, progeny virus yields in cells infected with each of the gB mutant viruses were similar to those in cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or each of their repaired viruses. These results suggest that N-glycosylation on gB did not affect HSV-1 replication in cell cultures.Effects of mutations at each of the gB N-glycosylation sites on viral susceptibility to neutralization by human antibodiesAn estimated 67% of the global human population is infected with HSV-1 (26). Therefore, we decided to use pooled γ-globulins from human blood that contain amounts of antibodies to HSV-1 sufficient for our experiments (27). Indeed, we showed that gB antibodies in pooled human γ-globulins at a concentration of 1.3 mg/mL could still be detected at a dilution of 1:1024, whereas gD antibodies could be detected at a dilution of 1:16384 (Fig. S5). To investigate the effect of gB N-glycosylation on viral susceptibility to neutralization by human antibodies, the sensitivity to neutralization of wild-type HSV-1(F) by pooled human γ-globulins was compared to each of the recombinant gB mutant viruses. Among the gB mutant viruses tested, gB-N141Q was only the gB mutant virus that was significantly more susceptible to neutralization by pooled human γ-globulins at a concentration (dilution) of 0.041 mg/mL (1:32) compared with wild-type HSV-1(F) (Fig. S6). Therefore, we focused on N-glycosylation at gB Asn-141 and further characterized gB-N141Q in detail.As shown in Fig. 3A and B, the growth kinetics of gB-N141Q in Vero cells at MOIs of 5 and 0.01 were almost identical to those of wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair. Similarly, gB-N141Q produced plaques in Vero cells of similar size to the sizes of plaques produced by wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 3C). Confocal microscopy showed that the subcellular locations of gB in cells infected with either gB-N141Q, wild-type HSV-1(F), or gB-N141Q-repair were also similar (Fig. 3D). Furthermore, Vero cells infected with gB-N141Q accumulated other envelope glycoproteins, including gD, gC, gH, and gL, at levels similar to the levels in cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) (Fig. 3E). We observed that the amounts of gB-N141Q in the mutant virions were slightly lower than the amounts of wild-type gB in the wild-type and gB-N141Q-repair virions (Fig. 3F).FIG 3Characterization of the recombinant viruses YK683 (gB-N141Q) and YK684 (gB-N141Q-repair). (A and B) Vero cells were infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair viruses at an MOI of 5 (A) or 0.01 (B). Total virus from the cell culture supernatants and infected cells was harvested at the indicated times and assayed on Vero cells. Each value is the mean ± standard error of the results of three independent experiments. (C) Vero cells were infected with 200 PFU of wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair, as described in Materials and Methods. The areas of 50 individual plaques produced by each of the indicated viruses were measured 2 days postinfection. The horizontal bars indicate the mean area of each group of plaques. (D) Vero cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair at an MOI of 5 and incubated for 18 h were fixed, permeabilized, stained with antibody to gB, and examined by confocal microscopy. Scale bars = 2 μm. (E) Vero cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q at an MOI of 5 and incubated for 21 h were lysed, and analyzed by immunoblotting with antibodies to gB, gD, gC, gH, gL, or α-tubulin. (F) Vero cells were infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair at an MOI of 0.01 and incubated for 2 days. Purified virions from the infected cells were analyzed by immunoblotting. The data are representative of three independent experiments (D, E, and F). Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey test (A, B, and C). n.s., not significant; α, anti, ANOVA, analysis of variance.When incubated in dilutions of pooled human γ-globulin ranging from 0.010 (1:128) to 0.041 mg/mL (1:32), gB-N141Q proved to be significantly more susceptible to neutralization by human γ-globulins than wild-type HSV-1(F) (Fig. 4A). Wild-type susceptibility was restored in the gB-N141Q-repair virus (Fig. 4A). Similarly, gB-N141Q was significantly more susceptible to neutralization by heat-inactivated pooled human sera than wild-type HSV-1(F) and gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 4B). Heat inactivation of the pooled human sera had little effect on the degree of increased susceptibility to neutralization by the N141Q mutation in gB (Fig. 4B). Antibodies to gB or gD in the pooled human γ-globulins [0.082 mg/mL (1:16)] were then depleted by treatment of the pooled human γ-globulins with purified gB or gD fused with Strep-tag at the C-terminus (gB-SE or gD-SE, respectively) (Fig. S7A and B). The anti-gB antibody-depleted human γ-globulins could not detect gB ectopically expressed by HEK293FT cells (Fig. S7C and D). As shown in Fig. 4C, the susceptibility of gB-N141Q to neutralization by anti-gB antibody-depleted human γ-globulins (~0.4 mg/mL) was comparable to that of wild-type HSV-1(F) and gB-N141Q-repair. In contrast, gB-N141Q was significantly more susceptible to neutralization by mock-depleted or anti-gD antibody-depleted human γ-globulins than wild-type HSV-1(F) and gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 4C), as seen in Fig. 4A, showing its susceptibility to human γ-globulins without antibody depletion. These results suggest that the N-glycan on gB Asn-141 was required for efficient HSV-1 evasion from complement-independent neutralization by human antibodies that targeted gB in cell cultures.FIG 4Effect of N-glycan at gB Asn-141 on viral susceptibility to neutralization by pooled human γ-globulins. (A) 100 PFU of wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair was incubated with serially diluted human γ-globulins at 37°C for 1 h and then inoculated onto Vero cell monolayers for plaque assays. The percentage of neutralization was calculated from the number of plaques formed by each of the viruses that were incubated with or without human γ-globulins, as follows: 100 × [1 − (number of plaques after incubation with human γ-globulins)/(number of plaques after incubation without human γ-globulins)]. (B) 100 PFU of wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair was incubated with 1:500 diluted human serum or heat-inactivated human serum at 37℃ for 1 h and then inoculated onto Vero cell monolayers as described in A. (C) Human γ-globulins (0.082 mg/mL) were mock depleted or depleted with gB-SE (α-gB depleted) or gD-SE (α-gD depleted) as shown in Fig. S7. Wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair was incubated with each of the depleted human γ-globulins and then inoculated onto Vero cell monolayers as described in A. Each value represents the mean ± standard error of the results of three (A and C) or nine (B) independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by the Tukey test (A and C) or by one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey test (B). *, P < 0.05 indicates statistically significant differences between gB-N141Q and wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB N141Q-repair; n.s., not significant; α, anti.Effects of the N-glycan on gB Asn-141 on human ADCCIt has been reported that gB on the surface of infected cells mediates ADCC (28); therefore, we examined the effect of the N-glycan on gB Asn-141 on ADCC induced by human γ-globulins. Vero cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair at an MOI of 1 for 24 h were subjected to an activating Fcγ receptor (R) IIIA ADCC assay in the presence or absence of human γ-globulins. As shown in Fig. 5A, human γ-globulins at concentrations (dilutions) of 0.33 mg/mL (1:3.9) and 1.0 mg/mL (1:1.3) induced significantly higher FcγRIIIA activation in cells infected with gB-N141Q than in cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair. The gB and gD antibodies present in samples of human γ-globulins at a concentration of 3.04 mg/mL were then depleted by treatment with purified gB-SE or gD-SE (Fig. S7). The anti-gB antibody-depleted human γ-globulins could barely detect gB ectopically expressed by HEK293FT cells (Fig. S7E). In this case, the anti-gB antibody-depleted human γ-globulins (~1.0 mg/mL) induced slightly increased FcγRIIIA-mediated activation in cells infected with gB-N141Q than in cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 5B), because we used the depleted human γ-globulins at a much higher concentration than the concentration of the depleted human γ-globulins used in the neutralizing assay described in the previous section. However, the degrees of differences between the levels of FcγRIIIA-mediated activation in cells infected with gB-N141Q and the levels of FcγRIIIA-mediated activation in cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair in cultures containing anti-gB antibody-depleted human γ-globulins were lower than the degrees of differences between the levels of FcγRIIIA-mediated activation in cells infected with those viruses in cultures containing mock-depleted or anti-gD antibody-depleted human γ-globulins (Fig. 5B).FIG 5Effects of the N-glycan at Asn-141 on gB on the extent of ADCC induced by human γ-globulins. (A) Vero cells were infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair at an MOI of 1 for 24 h and co-cultured with ADCC effector cells in the presence or absence of serially diluted human γ-globulins for 6 h. A luciferase assay was then performed. (B) Human γ-globulins (3.04 mg/mL) were mock depleted or depleted with gB-SE (α-gB depleted) or gD-SE (α-gD depleted) as depicted in Fig. S7 and used as described in 4A. Values are fold induction relative to controls without antibody. Each value is the mean ± standard error of the results of three biologically independent samples. The statistical analysis was performed by two-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey test. *, P < 0.05 indicates statistically significant differences between gB-N141Q and wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair; n.s., not significant; α, anti; ANOVA, analysis of variance.To eliminate the possibility that the higher level of FcγRIIIA-mediated activation in gB-N141Q-infected cells was due to increased expression of mutated gB on the surface of the infected cells, we investigated the effect of the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 on the expression of gB in the infected cells. Vero cells were infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, gB-N141Q-repair, ΔgB, or ΔgB-repair as described in the experiments reported in the previous paragraph and depicted in Fig. 5 and used flow cytometry to show the level of gB expression on the surface of infected cells or the total accumulation of gB in the infected cells. As shown in Fig. 6, the levels of expression of gB on the surface of cells infected with gB-N141Q were significantly lower than those levels on cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair. In contrast, the total level of gB in cells infected with gB-N141Q was similar to the total levels in cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 6). These results suggest that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 was required for the efficient expression of gB on the surface of HSV-1-infected cells. Thus, although cells infected with gB-N141Q expressed lower levels of mutated gB on their surface membranes than the levels of gB expressed by cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair, human γ-globulins resulted in increased FcγRIIIA-mediated activation of cells infected with gB-N141Q than seen for cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair. These results eliminated the possibility that the higher level of FcγRIIIA-mediated activation in gB-N141Q-infected cells was due to the increased expression of mutated gB on the surface of the infected cells. Altogether, the results suggest that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 was required for the efficient evasion of ADCC induced by human antibodies to gB in infected cell cultures.FIG 6Effect of N-glycan at gB Asn-141 on cell surface expression of gB in HSV-1-infected cells. (A) Vero cells were infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, gB-N141Q-repair, ΔgB, or ΔgB-repair at an MOI of 1. At 24 h postinfection, cell surface expression (left panel) and total expression (right panel) of gB in infected cells were measured by flow cytometry. (B) Quantitative bar graph of the cell surface expression of gB shown in (A). The relative amount of expression of gB on the cell surface was calculated as follows: [(mean fluorescent intensity for gB expression on the surfaces of cells infected with the indicated virus) − (mean fluorescent intensity for gB expression on the surfaces of cells infected with ΔgB)]/[(mean fluorescent intensity for total gB expression in cells infected with the indicated virus) − (mean fluorescent intensity for total gB expression in cells infected with ΔgB)]. The data are representative of three independent experiments (A). Each value is the mean ± standard error of the results of three independent experiments (B). Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey test. n.s., not significant (B). ANOVA, analysis of variance.Effects of the N-glycan on gB Asn-141 on the replication of HSV-1 in the eyes of mice in the presence of human antibodiesTo examine the effects of human antibodies on HSV-1 replication in vivo in the presence or absence of the N-glycan at gB Asn-141, mice were mock injected or injected intraperitoneally with pooled human γ-globulins and were then ocularly infected with gB-N141Q or gB-N141Q-repair 1 day after injection (Fig. 7A). Samples of tear films were collected at the indicated times (Fig. 7A), and viral titers in the tear films were measured. As shown in Fig. 7B, the presence of human γ-globulins did not affect the viral titers of the tear films in mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair at 1, 3, and 5 days postinfection. In contrast, the presence of human γ-globulins significantly reduced viral titers of the tear films of mice infected with gB-N141Q at 1 and 5 days postinfection (Fig. 7B). Thus, the ratios of gB-N141Q titers in the absence of human γ-globulins to those in the presence of human γ-globulins were higher than the ratios of gB-N141Q-repair titers in the absence of human γ-globulins to those in the presence of the human γ-globulins (Fig. 7C). Furthermore, viral titers of the tear films of mice infected with gB-N141Q in the presence of human γ-globulins at 1, 3, and 5 days postinfection were significantly lower than the titers of the tear films of mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 7B). In contrast, the viral titers of the tear films of mice infected with gB-N141Q in the absence of human γ-globulins at 1, 3, and 5 days postinfection were comparable to those of the tear films of mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair; although, as the infection progressed, the viral titers of the tear films of mice infected with gB-N141Q in the absence of human γ-globulins tended to be lower than those titers in mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair. These results indicate that the presence of human antibodies inhibited the replication of gB-N141Q in the peripheral organs of mice more efficiently than it inhibited the replication of gB-N141Q-repair and also suggest that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 was required for the efficient evasion of HSV-1 from human antibodies in vivo. It has been reported that human IgG subclasses could bind to murine Fcγ Rs and efficiently activate murine cells to enable ADCC (29, 30), suggesting that the effects of pooled human γ-globulins in the experiments described in this section might result from both neutralization and ADCC.FIG 7Effect of N-glycan shield at Asn-141 on gB on HSV-1 replication in the eyes of mice in the presence of human γ-globulins. (A) Schematic of the experiment over time. Eleven 4-week-old female mice were mock injected or injected intraperitoneally with human γ-globulins, and 1 day later were then ocularly infected with 3 × 106 PFU/eye of gB-N141Q or gB-N141Q-repair. Samples of tear films were collected at 1, 3, and 5 days postinfection; and viral titers of the tear films were determined. (B) Viral titers of samples collected at each time point. Each data point represents the viral titer of a tear film sample from a single mouse. Horizontal bars indicate the mean for each group. Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey multiple comparisons test. n.s., not significant; d.p.i., days postinfection. Dashed lines indicate limit of detection. n.d., not detected. (C) Fold reduction in mean values of viral titers due to administered human γ-globulins, which are shown in B. ANOVA, analysis of variance.Effects of the N-glycan on gB Asn-141 on the replication of HSV-1 in the eyes of mice immunized against HSV-1To examine the effects of the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 on HSV-1 replication in vivo in the presence of physiologically induced immunity against HSV-1, mice were subcutaneously mock immunized or immunized with wild-type HSV-1(F). At 9 weeks after inoculation, the immunized mice were ocularly infected with gB-N141Q or gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 8A). Samples of tear films were collected at the indicated times, and viral titers of the tear films were determined (Fig. 8B). As shown in Fig. 8B, whereas the viral titers of the tear films of immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q at 1 and 2 days postinfection were comparable to those in mock-immunized mice, the viral titers of the tear films of immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q at 3 days postinfection were significantly lower than those in the mock-immunized mice. In contrast, the viral titers of the tear films of immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair at 1, 2, and 3 days postinfection were comparable to those in mock-immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 8B). Thus, the ratios of gB-N141Q titers in mock-immunized mice to those in immunized mice at 3 days postinfection were higher than the ratios of gB-N141Q-repair titers in mock-immunized mice to those in immunized mice (Fig. 8C). Furthermore, the viral titers of the tear films in mock-immunized or immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q at 1 and 2 days postinfection were comparable to those in mock-immunized or immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 8C). In contrast, the viral titers of the tear films in immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q at 3 days postinfection were significantly lower than those in immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair, although viral titers of the tear films in mock-immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q at 3 days postinfection were comparable to those in mock-immunized mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair (Fig. 8B). These results indicate that the presence of immunity against HSV-1 in mice inhibited replication of gB-N141Q more efficiently than the replication of gB-N141Q-repair and suggest that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 was required for the efficient evasion of HSV-1 from immunity induced in mice previously immunized against HSV-1.FIG 8Effects of N-glycan shield at Asn-141 in gB on HSV-1 replication in the eyes of mice immunized with HSV-1. (A) Schematic of the experiment over time. Twelve 3-week-old female mice were subcutaneously mock immunized or immunized with 5 × 105 PFU of wild-type HSV-1(F). At 9 weeks after inoculation, the immunized mice were ocularly infected with 3 × 106 PFU/eye of gB-N141Q or gB-N141Q-repair. Samples of tear films were collected at 1, 2, and 3 days postinfection, and viral titers of the tear films were determined. (B) Viral titers of samples collected at each time point. Each data point represents the viral titer of a tear film sample from a single mouse. Horizontal bars indicate the mean for each group. Statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey multiple comparisons test. n.s., not significant; d.p.i., days postinfection. Dashed lines indicate limit of detection. n.d., not detected. (C) Fold reduction in mean values of viral titers due to immunization with HSV-1(F), which is shown in B. ANOVA, analysis of variance.Effects of the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 on HSV-1 neurovirulence and replication in the CNS of naïve miceTo investigate the effects of the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 on the neurovirulence and replication of HSV-1 in the CNS of naïve mice, mice were infected intracranially with gB-N141Q or gB-N141Q-repair, and the mortality rates of these injected mice were monitored for 14 days. As shown in Fig. 9A, the mortality rate of mice infected with gB-N141Q was significantly lower than the rate of mice infected with its repaired virus (gB-N141Q-repair). We also harvested the brains of mice infected with gB-N141Q or gB-N141Q-repair at 1, 3, and 5 days postinfection and measured viral titers in their brains. As shown in Fig. 9B, the viral titers in the brains of mice infected with gB-N141Q at 1 day postinfection were comparable to those of mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair. In contrast, at later time points (3 and 5 days postinfection), viral titers in the brains of mice infected with gB-N141Q were significantly lower than the titers in the brains of mice infected with gB-N141Q-repair. These results suggest that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 was required for efficient HSV-1 neurovirulence and replication in the CNS of naïve mice. The results also led us to investigate whether the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 acted specifically in neural cells. As shown in Fig. 9C, progeny virus yields in human neuroblastoma SK-N-SH cells infected with gB-N141Q were similar to those in the cells infected with wild-type HSV-1(F) or gB-N141Q-repair. These results further supported our observation from the results of in vitro experiments described previously that N-glycosylation on gB does not appear to play a role in the replication of HSV-1 in cell cultures.FIG 9Effects of N-glycan shield at Asn-141 in gB on the neurovirulence of HSV-1 and its replication in the CNS of naïve mice. (A) Ten 3-week-old female mice were inoculated intracranially with 1 × 103 PFU of gB-N141Q or gB-N141Q-repair. Infected mice were monitored for 14 days. (B) Three-week-old female mice were inoculated intracranially with 1 × 103 PFU of gB-N141Q (n = 26) or gB-N141Q-repair (n = 27). At days 1 (n = 9), 3 (n = 9), and 5 (gB-N141Q, n = 8; gB-N141Q-repair, n = 9), mice from each inoculated group were sacrificed, and the viral titers in the brains were determined. Each data point is the viral titer in the brain of a single mouse. Dashed line indicates the limit of detection. n.d., not detected; d.p.i., days postinfection. (C) SK-N-SH cells were infected with wild-type HSV-1(F), gB-N141Q, or gB-N141Q-repair at an MOI of 5 or 0.01. Total viruses from cell culture supernatants and infected cells were harvested at 36 h or 60 h postinfection (p.i.) and assayed on Vero cells. Each value is the mean ± standard error of the results of three independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed by the log-rank test (A), the two-tailed Student t test (B), or one-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey test (C). n.s., not significant; ANOVA, analysis of variance.DISCUSSIONIt is unquestionable that studies using human samples to analyze the mechanisms of infection utilized by human pathogenic viruses are crucial for understanding the mechanisms effective in humans. Considering that the gap between what can be observed from in vitro and in vivo viral infections is significant, evaluations of human samples in vivo should provide more valuable information on the mechanisms of infection than evaluations of the samples in vitro. However, there has been a lack of in vivo information because human samples that could be used for in vivo analyses as well as in vivo models that could represent the pathogenesis of viral infections in humans are limited.In this study, we clarified a novel immune evasion mechanism used by HSV-1, namely, that an N-glycan shield at Asn 141 of the HSV-1 gB mediated evasion from the deleterious effects of human antibodies such as in vitro neutralization and ADCC. A molecular model of N-glycosylation at gB Asn-141, which is based on the prefusion structure of HSV-1 gB (23), predicts that N-glycosylation at gB Asn-141 masks 27 amino acids in the gB molecule (Fig. S8). Of these amino acids, 19 were mapped to the functional region (FR)2 and FR3 of gB (Fig. S8), both of which were previously defined based on the epitopes seen for a panel of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies (31, 32). Notably, the N-glycosylation at gB Asn-141 was predicted to mask Asp-419, a residue critical for the binding of gB to the C226 antibody, which shows high neutralizing activity in preventing the association of gB with a complex of gH and gL and fusion (32). Furthermore, the amino acids predicted to be masked by N-glycosylation at Asn-141 included or were positioned near those (Pro-361, Asp-408, Asp-419, Asn-430, Asn-458, Arg-470, Pro-481, Ile-495, and Thr-497) previously shown to be critical for gB receptor- or gD receptor-mediated fusion (33
-
35), introducing the possibility that antibodies target these amino acid residues. These results suggest that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 prevented the binding of antibodies to gB epitopes and further support our conclusion that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 was required for the efficient evasion of HSV-1 from human antibodies. Similarly, HSV-1 envelope glycoproteins, including gC and a complex of gI and gE, have been reported to mediate evasion from human antibodies in vivo (36
-
38). The gI/gE complex acts as an Fc receptor that captures human IgG (39, 40). The gC binds to the complement component C3b (41), inhibits complement activation that enhances antibody neutralization (42, 43), and shields gB from complement-independent antibody neutralization (44). Thus, HSV appears to have evolved multiple mechanisms to mediate evasion from human antibodies, highlighting the importance of antibodies for controlling HSV infections in humans as described above.Based on the structure of gB shown in Fig. 1A, although N-glycans at gB Asn-398, Asn-430, and Asn-489 appear to be adjacent to the N-glycan at gB Asn-141, only this specific N-glycan was shown to shield gB from human γ-globulins. Similar observations were reported in other enveloped viruses (15, 16, 45). We speculate that the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 might cover an area different from the area that the N-glycans at gB Asn-489, Asn-398, and Asn-430 cover; the orientation of the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 might vary or the N-glycan at gB Asn-141 might exhibit different flexibility or different macro- and microheterogeneity, making it unique in its ability to modulate the antigenic effects of gB.One may argue that the difference between the sensitivities of wild-type HSV-1 and gB-N141Q to neutralization by human γ-globulins was due to slightly less incorporation of the mutant gB into virions. However, it seems unlikely, based on earlier studies of various viruses showing that decreased amounts of expression of a viral antigen by various virions are associated with decreased sensitivities to neutralization (46
-
50).Our observations that the N-glycan shield on the specific site of HSV-1 gB seemed to significantly increase viral replication in the eyes of mice not only in the presence of HSV-1 immunity but also in the presence of human antibodies, support our prediction from the clarified in vitro effects of the glycan shield on HSV-1 that the glycan shield would be effective in the presence of human antibodies in vivo and probably in human beings. We should note that the immune response to HSV-1 exhibited by mice immunized by wild-type HSV-1 in this study included not only antibody responses but also a T-cell-mediated immune response and innate immune responses. Interestingly, we also found that the N-glycan shield at a specific site on HSV-1 gB was required for viral neurovirulence and efficient replication in the CNS of naïve mice. Thus, we have identified an important glycan shield on the HSV-1 gB that appears to have two affects: in vivo evasion from human antibodies and neurovirulence in naïve hosts. Considering the clinical features of HSV-1 infection, these results suggest that the glycan shield not only facilitates recurrent HSV-1 infections in latently infected humans by evading antibodies but also is important for HSV-1 pathogenesis during the initial infection.At present, the mechanisms involved in viral neurovirulence and in vivo replication that are induced by N-glycosylation at gB Asn-141 remain unclear. It has been reported that gB is a determinant of viral neurovirulence in mice (51) and that the appropriate expression of gB on the cell surface was required for HSV-1 neurovirulence and efficient replication in the CNS of mice (52). Together with the observations in this study that N-glycosylation at gB Asn-141 was required for the efficient expression of gB on the cell surface, the appropriate expression of gB on the cell surface that is regulated by the N-glycosylation of gB at a specific site might be involved in the in vivo neurovirulence and replication of HSV-1.In this study, we used pooled human γ-globulins from human blood as human antibodies. HSV-1 is a ubiquitous human pathogen; approximately 70% of the global human population is infected with HSV-1, and most HSV-1-infected humans have been reported to be latently infected with the virus (1
-
26
-
26). Therefore, it is conceivable that the effects of pooled human γ-globulins represent the effects of antibodies in humans latently infected with HSV-1. Thus, the mouse model with passive transfer of pooled human γ-globulins used in this study potentially mimicked the in vivo effects of human antibodies in humans latently infected with HSV-1. HSV-1 frequently reactivates from latent infections and is transmitted to new human hosts. Therefore, the host’s immune responses to HSV-1 persist in latently infected humans because of the repeated stimulation of the immune system, resulting in the progressive enhancement of long-term immunity (1
-
3). The viral strategy of using the N-glycan shield at a specific site of HSV-1 gB to evade antibodies, which was clarified in this study, may protect reactivated viruses from existing antibodies to HSV-1 in latently infected humans and thereby facilitate their transmission to new human hosts. Notably, the N-glycosylation site on HSV-1 gB is widely conserved in viruses subclassified in the alphaherpesvirus subfamily of herpesviruses (53), suggesting that this is a general viral mechanism of evasion from the immune system. Moreover, clarification of the HSV-1 mechanism of evasion from antibodies supports earlier conclusions (5
-
9) that were based on previous clinical trials of HSV vaccines; namely, that antibodies are essential to the control of HSV-1 infections in humans. Additional studies to identify other glycan shields against human antibodies on HSV envelope glycoproteins are important and should be of interest. Those studies and this present study may provide insights into the design of effective therapeutic HSV vaccines against frequent recurrences of herpes virus infections such as genital herpes.Previous studies have characterized N-glycosylation at Asn-133 of HSV-2 gB and at Asn-154 of the pseudorabies virus (PRV) gB, which correspond to the N-glycosylation at Asn-141 of HSV-1 gB (54, 55). None of those studies addressed the effects of the N-glycosylation of those viruses’ gB on in vivo evasion from antibodies and pathogenesis. In agreement with our observation in this study that the N141Q mutation in HSV-1 gB did not affect viral replication in Vero and SK-N-SH cells, the ectopic expression of the PRV gB-N154Q mutant rescued the entry deficiency of a gB-deficient PRV so that its entry would be at a level similar to that of PRVs with wild-type gB (55). In contrast, the ectopic expression of the HSV-2 gB-N133Q mutant barely rescued the entry deficiency of a gB-deficient HSV-2 (54). As observed with the N141Q mutation in HSV-1 gB in the context of viral infection, the ectopic expression of both the HSV-2 gB-N133Q and PRV gB-N154Q mutants showed impaired cell surface expression of the mutants. These observations point out both the similarities in and differences between the roles of the N-glycosylation of gB in viruses.MATERIALS AND METHODSCells and virusesVero, HEK293FT, Plat-GP, and SK-N-SH cells were described previously (56, 57). Wild-type HSV-1(F) was described previously (58).PlasmidsThe construction of pFLAG-CMV2-EGFP and pcDNA-MEF-gB was described previously (56, 59). First, to construct pBS-KanR-ePheS*, oligonucleotides making up a kanamycin resistant (KanR) cassette with the I-SceI recognition site and an ePheS* cassette, which has T251A/A294G mutations in ePheS, were amplified from the DNA templates of pEPkan-S (24) and pUC18K ePAG2 (25), respectively. The primers that were used are listed in Table S1B. Then, the two linear DNA fragments were fused by PCR and cloned into the pBluescript KS(+) (Stratagene), as described previously (60). Second, pBS-TEV-2xStrep-KanS was constructed by cloning the kanamycin resistance (KanR) cassette with the I-SceI recognition site, which was amplified by PCR from the pEPkan-S template with the use of primers that additionally encoded the Tobacco Etch Virus (TEV) protease cleavage-site and tandem-strep epitopes as listed in Table S1B, into the pBluescript KS(+). Third, pcDNA3.1-TagRFP-P2A and pcDNA3.1-P2A-TagRFP were constructed by cloning the TagRFP open reading frame (ORF), which was amplified by PCR from pTagRFP-N1 (61) with the use of primers that additionally encoded the 2A self-cleaving peptide fused to its carboxyl terminus (TagRFP-P2A) or amino-terminus (P2A-TagRFP) as listed in Table S1B, respectively, into pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Fourth, pcDNA3.1-TagRFP-P2A-stop was constructed by cloning annealed DNA oligonucleotides listed in Table S1B into pcDNA3.1-TagRFP-P2A. Fifth, pcDNA3.1-gB-P2A-TagRFP was constructed by cloning gB ORF, which was amplified by PCR from the HSV-1(F) genome isolated as described previously (62), using the primers listed in Table S1B into pcDNA3.1-P2A-TagRFP by the In-Fusion HD Cloning Kit (TaKaRa, Shiga, Japan), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sixth, pcDNA3.1-gD-P2A-TagRFP was constructed by cloning gD ORF, which was amplified by PCR from the HSV-1(F) genome using primers listed in Table S1B into pcDNA3.1-P2A-TagRFP by the In-Fusion HD Cloning Kit. Seventh, pFLAG-CMV2-Us6 was constructed by cloning the gD ORF, which was amplified by PCR from pYEbac102 (58) using the primers listed in Table S1B into pFLAG-CMV2 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).To construct pRetroX-TRE3G-gBo and pRetroX-TRE3G-ICP4o, the sequences of codon-optimized UL27(gBo) and α4 (ICP4o), which are shown in Table S1C, were engineered according to the GenScript’s OptimumGene algorithm and then synthesized and cloned into pRetroX-TRE3G (TaKaRa) by GenScript.To generate a fusion protein of maltose binding protein (MBP) and a domain of HSV-2 VP5, pMAL-VP5o-P3 was constructed by amplifying the domains encoding the codon-optimized HSV-2 VP5(VP5o) codons 401 to 600 by PCR from pEGFP-VP5o, which was engineered according to the GenScript’s OptimumGene algorithm, synthesized (Genscript, Piscataway, NJ, USA) using the primers listed in Table S1B, which was followed by cloning the DNA fragments into pMAL-c (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) in frame with MBP. The VP5o sequence is shown in Table S1C.Establishment of stable Vero cells with tetracycline-inducible codon-optimized gB and ICP4 (gBo and ICP4o) expressionVero cells were transduced with supernatants of Plat-GP cells cotransfected with pMDG (63) and pRetroX-Tet3G (TaKaRa), selected with 1  mg/mL G418 solution (Wako, Osaka, Japan) to generate Tet3G-Vero cells. The cells were further transduced with a mixture of supernatants of Plat-GP cells cotransfected with pMDG and pRetroX-TRE3G-gBo, and supernatants of Plat-GP cells co-transfected with pMDG and pRetroX-TRE3G-ICP4o to establish gBo/ICP4o-TetON-Vero cells. After double selection with 1 mg/mL of G418 solution and 5 µg/mL of puromycin, a single clone in which expression of gBo and ICP4o was induced by DOX was selected.Two-step Red-mediated recombination using the KanR/ePheS* cassetteThe two-step Red-mediated mutagenesis procedure used in this study was performed as described previously (24, 64). Briefly, linear DNA fragments containing an I-SceI recognition sequence, KanR and ePheS*cassettes, and target homologous sequences were amplified by PCR from pBS-KanR-ePheS* using the primers listed in Table S1D. The linear fragments were electroporated into the electrocompetent E. coli strain GS1783 containing the pYEbac102Cre (58, 65). The transformed bacteria were then incubated at 32℃ for 40 to 60 min and plated on LB agar plates containing 20 µg/mL of chloramphenicol and 40 µg/mL of kanamycin to select E. coli clones harboring pYEbac102Cre containing the KanR and ePheS* cassettes (KanR/ePheS* cassettes). Kanamycin-resistant colonies were screened by PCR with the appropriate primers. Next, the KanR/ePheS* cassettes were excised by expressing the I-SceI homing enzyme in GS1783 through induction with arabinose, followed by induction of the Red recombination machinery by raising the temperature. Briefly, 100 µL of an overnight culture of kanamycin-resistant E. coli clones grown in LB medium containing chloramphenicol and kanamycin was inoculated into 2 mL of LB medium containing chloramphenicol only. Bacteria were incubated at 32°C for 2–4 h with shaking, followed by addition of 10% (wt/vol) L-arabinose (Wako) to the culture at a 1:5 ratio, and incubated for another 1 h at 32°C. Finally, the E. coli culture was incubated at 42°C for 30 min. It was then shaken at 32°C for another 1–2 h, and 50 µL of 10−3 to 10−4 dilutions of the culture was plated onto LB agar plates containing 20 µg/mL of chloramphenicol and 1 mM of 4-CP to select E. coli clones harboring the pYEbac102Cre, from which the KanR/ePheS* cassette was excised. Chloramphenicol- and 4-CP-resistant colonies were screened by PCR with appropriate primers, which was followed by nucleotide sequencing for confirmation of the desired mutation.Generation of recombinant HSV-1Recombinant viruses YK650 (UL51-T190A_KanR/ePheS*), YK681 (gB-N87Q), YK683 (gB-N141Q), YK685 (gB-N398Q), YK687 (gB-N430Q), YK689 (gB-N489Q), YK691 (gB-N674Q), YK693 (gB-N888Q), YK682 (gB-N87Q-repair), YK684 (gB-N141Q-repair), YK686 (gB-N398Q-repair), YK688 (gB-N430Q-repair), YK690 (gB-N489Q-repair), YK692 (gB-N674Q-repair), and YK694 (gB-N888Q-repair) (Fig. 1) were generated by the two-step Red-mediated mutagenesis procedure using the KanR/ePheS* cassette as described in the previous section with the primers listed in Table S1D. The recombinant virus YK649 (UL51-T190A_KanR) was generated by the two-step Red-mediated mutagenesis procedure using E. coli GS1783 containing pYEbac102Cre, as described previously (24, 64), with the exception that the primers used instead of those described previously are listed in Table S1D. The recombinant virus YK695 (ΔgB), in which the UL27 gene encoding gB was disrupted by deleting gB codons 1–727 with a kanamycin resistance gene, was generated by the two-step Red-mediated mutagenesis procedure using E. coli GS1783 containing pYEbac102Cre, as described previously (24, 64), with the exception that the primers used instead of those described previously are listed in Table S1D.The recombinant virus YK696 (ΔgB-repair), in which the deletion mutation in gB was repaired, was generated by cotransfection with pYEbac102Cre carrying the gB-deletion mutation and pCRxgB (66) into Vero cells. Plaques were isolated and purified on Vero cells. Restoration was confirmed by nucleotide sequencing.The recombinant virus YK717 (gB-SE), which expresses gB fused to a TEV protease cleavage site and a Strep-tag; and recombinant virus YK718 (gD-SE), which expresses gD fused to a TEV protease cleavage site and a Strep-tag, were generated by the two-step Red-mediated mutagenesis procedure using E. coli GS1783 containing pYEbac102Cre, as described previously (24, 64), with the exception that the primers used instead of those described previously are listed in Table S1D.In experiments in which YK695 (HSV-1 ΔgB) was used, viruses were propagated and assayed in HSV-1 gBo/ICP4o-TetON-Vero cells in the presence of doxycycline (DOX) (1  mg/mL). Other viruses used in this study were propagated and titrated in Vero cells.Production and purification of MBP in E. coliThe MBP fusion protein MBP-VP5o-P3 was expressed in E. coli BL21 Star (DE3) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that had been transformed with pMAL-VP5o-P3 and purified using amylose resin (New England BioLabs) as described previously (67).AntibodiesCommercial antibodies used in this study were mouse monoclonal antibodies to ICP4 (58S; ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), gB (H1817; Virusys, Taneytown, MD, USA), gD (DL6; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX, USA), gC (H1A022; Virusys), gH (52 S; ATCC), gL (H1A259; Virusys), α-tubulin (DM1A; Sigma-Aldrich), and ICP8 (MAB8671-I); and rabbit polyclonal antibodies to VP23 (CAC-CT-HSV-UL18; Cosmo Bio, Tokyo, Japan).To generate rabbit polyclonal antibodies to VP5, rabbits were immunized with purified MBP-VP5o-P3, following the standard protocol of Scrum (Tokyo, Japan).PNGase F digestion and immunoblottingVero cells were infected with each of the indicated viruses at an MOI of 5 for 21 h and lysed with T-PER Tissue Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The lysates were sonicated and denatured with Glycoprotein Denaturing Buffer (NEB) by heating them at 100°C for 10 min. Aliquots of the lysates were incubated with 2,500 units of PNGase F (NEB) at 37°C for 1 h. Aliquots of the lysates incubated under the same conditions without PNGase F were used as controls. The incubated mixtures were subjected to immunoblotting as described previously (68).Detection of gB- or gD-specific antibodies in pooled human γ-globulins by flow cytometryPei Max (Polyscience, Inc., Warrington, PA, USA) was used to transfect HEK293FT cells with selected plasmids. At 48 h posttransfection, the transfected cells were detached from their culture plates and washed once with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with 2% fetal calf serum (FCS) (washing buffer). Cells were fixed and permeabilized with Cytofix/Cytoperm (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) and incubated with diluted human γ-globulins (G4386; Sigma-Aldrich) on ice for 30 min. After the cells were washed with washing buffer, they were further incubated with anti-human IgG conjugated to Alexa Flour 647 (Invitrogen) on ice for 30 min. After the cells were washed again, they were analyzed with a CytoFLEX S flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). The data were analyzed with FlowJo 10.8.1 software (Becton Dickinson).Depletion of gB- or gD-specific antibodies from pooled human γ-globulinsVero cells (5 × 107) were infected with HSV-1(F), gB-SE, or gD-SE at an MOI of 0.5 for 24 h and lysed in 5 mL of radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40 (NP40), 0.1% deoxycholate, 0.1% sodium deodecyl sulfate, and 1 mM EDTA] containing a protease inhibitor cocktail (Nacalai Tesque, Kyoto, Japan). After centrifugation, the supernatants were precleared by incubating with protein G-Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) and reacted with 100 µL of Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA Lifesciences, Göttingen, Germany) for 4 h at 4°C. The beads were collected by brief centrifugation and washed four times with RIPA buffer and two times with PBS. For the neutralization assay, samples of gB-SE or gD-SE immobilized on Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads were incubated with 1 mL of diluted human γ-globulins (G4386; Sigma-Aldrich) (0.082 mg/mL in medium 199 containing 1% FCS) at 4°C overnight; and after centrifugation, the supernatants containing gB- or gD-antibody depleted human γ-globulins were filtered.For the ADCC assay, human γ-globulins were incubated twice with gB-SE-beads, gD-SE-beads, or control beads, as follows: samples of gB-SE or gD-SE immobilized on Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads were incubated with 1 mL of diluted human γ-globulins (G4386; Sigma-Aldrich) (3.04 mg/mL in ADCC assay buffer) at 4°C overnight, and after centrifugation, the supernatants were further incubated with gB-SE or gD-SE immobilized on Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads. After centrifugation, the supernatants containing gB- or gD-antibody depleted human γ-globulins were filtered.Similarly, HSV-1(F)-infected Vero cell lysates prepared as described for the depleted human γ-globulins was incubated with Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads, and after centrifugation and washing, the beads (control beads) were incubated once or twice with human γ-globulins diluted as described, and then centrifuged, followed by filtration of the supernatants to produce samples of mock-depleted human γ-globulins.Neutralization assayPooled human γ-globulins (G4386; Sigma-Aldrich) or human serum (H4522; Sigma-Aldrich) without heat treatment at 56°C were serially diluted in medium 199 containing 1% FCS. The serial dilutions were mixed 1:1 with 100 PFU of each selected virus in medium 199 containing 1% FCS, incubated at 37°C for 1 h and then inoculated onto Vero cell monolayers to perform plaque assays. At 2 days postinfection, the plaques were counted. The percentage of neutralization was determined as follows: the numbers of plaques formed by the virus samples that had been incubated with or without human γ-globulins as a value with the following formula: 100 × [1− (numbers of plaques produced after incubation of viral samples with human γ-globulins)/(numbers of plaques produced after incubation of viral samples without human γ-globulins)]. Human serum which had been preincubated at 56°C for 30 min to inactivate complement was also used.Determination of plaque sizeVero cells were infected with 200 PFU of wild-type HSV-1(F) or each of the recombinant viruses. After adsorption for 1  h, the inoculum was removed, and the cell monolayers were overlaid with medium 199 containing 1% FCS and 1% agarose. At 2  days postinfection, the agarose-containing medium was removed. Cells were then fixed in methanol, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS, blocked with 10% human serum (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS, reacted with anti-ICP4 antibodies, reacted with goat anti-mouse IgG-Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen). Plaques in each culture were examined under a fluorescence microscope equipped with a BZ-X800 (KEYENCE, Osaka, Japan) and BZ-X800 Analyzer (KEYENCE).ADCC reporter assayThe extent of ADCC activation induced by human γ-globulins was evaluated with the use of an ADCC Reporter Bioassay (Core Kit; Promega, G7010) and the EnSpireMultimode Plate Reader (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA). The assay was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, Vero cells were infected at an MOI of 1 with each selected virus in medium 199 containing 1% FCS. After adsorption for 1  h, the inoculum was removed, and the cell monolayers were overlaid with medium 199 containing 10% FCS. At 24 h postinfection, the culture medium was replaced with ADCC assay buffer containing effector cells and diluted human γ-globulins at a 2:1 ratio and incubated at 37°C for 6 h. Bio-Glo luciferase reagent was then added, and the luciferase signals were quantitated as relative light units (RLUs) on an EnSpire reader. Extent of induction was calculated as follows: Fold induction = (RLUswith antibody − RLUsbackground)/(RLUsno antibody − RLUsbackground).Determination of gB expression on the surfaces of HSV-1-infected cellsThe expression of HSV-1 glycoproteins on the surfaces of infected cells was analyzed as described previously (52). Briefly, Vero cells were infected at an MOI of 1 with each selected virus in medium 199 containing 1% FCS. After adsorption for 1  h, the inoculum was removed, and the cell monolayers were overlaid with medium 199 containing 10% FCS. At 24 h postinfection, cell monolayers were detached with PBS containing 0.02% EDTA and were washed one time with PBS supplemented with 2% FCS (washing buffer). To analyze the total expression of gB, infected Vero cells were detached as described, and fixed and permeabilized with Cytofix/Cytoperm Fixation/Permeabilization Solution (Becton Dickinson). Treated and untreated cells were then incubated with mouse anti-gB monoclonal antibody in washing buffer on ice for 30 min. After the cells were washed with washing buffer, they were further incubated with anti-mouse IgG conjugated to Alexa Flour 647 dye (Invitrogen) on ice for 30 min. After the cells were washed again, they were analyzed with a CytoFLEX S flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter). The data were analyzed by FlowJo 10.8.1 software (Becton Dickinson).Immunofluorescence assaysImmunofluorescence assays were performed as described previously (69).Purification of virionsVirions were purified as described previously (70).Animal studiesFemale ICR mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. For ocular infections by each selected virus in mice in the presence of pooled human γ-globulins, 4-week-old mice were injected intraperitoneally with 1,250 mg/kg of human γ-globulins or PBS. One day after administration, the mice were ocularly infected with 3 × 106 PFU/eye of each selected virus, as described previously (57). For mice immunized with HSV-1 before ocular infection, 3-week-old mice were injected subcutaneously in the neck with 5 × 105 PFU of HSV-1(F). The immunized mice were then infected ocularly 9 weeks after immunization with 3 × 106 PFU/eye of each selected virus as described previously (57). Virus titers in the tear films of mice were determined as described previously (71).For intracranial infections, 3-week-old mice were inoculated intracranially with each selected virus as described previously (57). Mice were monitored daily, and mortality occurring from 1 to 14 days postinfection was attributed to the infecting virus. To measure viral titers in the brains of infected mice, 3-week-old female ICR mice were each inoculated intracranially with 1 × 103 PFU of each selected virus. At 1, 3, and 5 days postinfection, the brains of the mice were harvested, and virus titers were determined on Vero cells. All animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the Guidelines for Proper Conduct of Animal Experiments, Science Council of Japan. The protocol was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of the Institute of Medical Science, the University of Tokyo (IACUC protocol approval number: A21-55).Modeling of the N-glycosylated gB proteinThe N-glycan core (Man3GlcNAc2) was modeled according to the prefusion structure of HSV-1 (23) gB (PDB ID: 6Z9M) using the Glycan Reader and Modeler (72) and the CHARMM-GUI program (73, 74). Discovery Studio 2021 software (Dassault Systèmes) was used to change the χ1 angle (N-Cα-Cβ-Cγ) of the Asn141 B chain (PDB ID: 6Z9M) from −178° to −66° to avoid steric clash of the N-glycan with the neighboring polypeptide. Visualization of the protein 3D structure was performed in the PyMol Molecular Graphics System, version 2.5 (Schrödinger, LLC, New York, NY, USA).Analysis of protein surfaceThe AREAIMOL program (CCP4 package, version 6.2) was used to determine the accessible surface area (ASA) (75). A spherical probe with a radius of 10 Å, which is similar to the dimension of the antigen-binding fragments (single-chain variable fragment) of the antibodies, was used in the estimation of the ASA (76, 77). The extent of glycan shielding (ΔASA) was estimated for each amino acid residue by calculating the difference between the ASAs of N-glycosylated and nonglycosylated gB structures [ΔASA = ASA (nonglycosylated gB) − ASA (N-glycosylated gB)].Statistical analysisThe unpaired t test was used to compare two groups. One-way or two-way ANOVA followed by the Tukey or Dunnett multiple comparisons tests was used for multiple comparisons. A P value <0.05 was considered significant. For the statistical analysis of viral titers, data were converted to common logarithms (log10). For values below the detection limit, statistical processing was performed assuming that the values were those of the detection limit. GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software) was used to perform statistical analysis.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS 2 (HSV-2)
================================================================================
Title: Herpes Simplex Virus Type 2 Triggers Reactivation of Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus from Latency and Collaborates with HIV-1 Tat

IntroductionKaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) was first detected in Kaposi's sarcoma (KS) tissues from a patient with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) by representational difference analysis [1]. The virus has been shown to correlate to all epidemiological forms of KS, primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) and a subset of multicentric Castleman's disease [2]–[5]. Like other herpesviruses, KSHV has two different phases in its life cycle, latency and lytic replication. Latency was characterized by persistence of the viral genome with expression of a limited set of viral genes. Once KSHV was reactivated from latency and entered the lytic cycle, most viral genes were expressed in an orderly fashion (immediate-early, early and late), leading to the production of infectious virions [6]–[8]. KSHV infection was necessary but not sufficient for KS development without other cofactors. We and others demonstrated that several agents, such as human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) transactivating protein Tat, herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and HIV-1, have been proved to be cofactors reactivating KSHV from latency [9]–[13].While sexually transmitted infections (STI) were associated with increased sexual transmission of HIV-1 and KS was the most common malignant tumor in patients with AIDS, more and more attentions were paid to the relationship of HIV-1, KSHV and the other sexually transmitted diseases (STD) pathogens [14]–[17]. A multi-center cross-sectional study in prisoners of Italian showed that, 20.7% prisoners had antibodies against KSHV, 21.2% prisoners had anti-HSV-2 antibodies, and 7.5% prisoners were HIV-1-positive. KSHV infection was associated with HSV-2 (P = 0.004) seropositivity. At multivariate analysis HSV-2-positivity was associated with HIV-1 (P<0.001) and KSHV infections (P = 0.003). The associations of KSHV and HSV-2 infection suggest sexual transmission of these viruses among Italian prison inmates [18]. In remote villages of the southwestern part of Papua New Guinea, the seropositivity of HSV-2 independently correlated with KSHV infection [19]. The research performed by A. Volpi et al in Northern Cameroon draw a similar conclusion [20]. These results suggest that HSV-2 infection was associated with sexual transmission of KSHV. HSV-2 could infect B cells and human vascular endothelial cells, the precursor of KS [21], [22]. Although HSV-2 and KSHV are not found in similar anatomic compartments during their latent infection, both reactivation and primary infection of HSV-2 occurred in patients, leading to appearance of HSV-2 viraemia [23]. Viraemia subsequently increased opportunities for HSV-2 to contact B and/or endothelial cells, which, maybe, previously had harbored the KSHV genome. Additionally, HIV-1 and KSHV do not generally infect the same cells, however, circulating Tat was secreted from infected cells and taken up by target cells [24], such as B and endothelial cells, which might also be latently infected by KSHV, resulting in changes in viral and cellular gene expression. These facts led us to hypothesize that HSV-2 may regulate KSHV replication and Tat plays a role in this procedure in KS or AIDS-KS patients.To verify this hypothesis, in this study we performed kinetic studies of KSHV replication induced by HSV-2. We found that HSV-2 infection of PEL cell lines induced lytic replication of KSHV by activating Rta and inhibition of NF-κB pathway enhanced HSV-2-induced KSHV reactivation. Ectopic expression of Tat strengthened HSV-2-induced KSHV replication and Rta promoter activity. These novel findings are believed to be the first line of laboratory evidence that HSV-2 could influence KSHV replication and Tat exerted the enhancing function in this procedure.ResultsHSV-2 Infection of BCBL-1 Cells Results in Lytic Cycle Replication of KSHVTo evaluate whether HSV-2 affected KSHV replication, we first determined the susceptibility of BCBL-1 cells to HSV-2. HSV-2 was inoculated into BCBL-1 cells and cell morphologic changes were observed by light microscope. As shown in Fig. 1A, BCBL-1 cells began to exhibit cytopathic effects (CPE) since 24 hours post-infection. With time going, the number of infected BCBL-1 cells showing the typical CPE, such as the formation of syncytia and polykaryocytes, gradually increased. Particularly, more than 80% of BCBL-1 cells exhibited the CPE at 120 hours post-inoculation (Fig. 1A) while only less than 5% of Mock-treated BCBL-1 cells showed CPE at this time point (data not shown). To determine whether HSV-2 could replicate in BCBL-1 cells, the mRNA expression of a HSV-2 immediate early (IE) gene, UL48, which encodes transactivating tegument protein VP16 [25], was detected by RT-PCR. We found that the mRNA of UL48 started to express in BCBL-1 cells since 12 hours post-infection (pi) and reached a peak at 24 hours pi, then decreased by degrees (Fig. 1B). Further, the experiment was designed to detect the UL5 gene, an early gene of HSV-2 encoding helicase-primase helicase subunit and a late gene, US6, which encodes viral envelope glycoprotein D (gD) [26], [27]. It was demonstrated that both UL5 and US6 mRNAs began to express at 24 hours pi and gradually increased with time going (Fig. 1B). Finally, HSV-2 structure protein gG2 (the type-specific IgG encoded by a late gene) [28] was detected by Western blot. We found that HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells started to express gG2 since 72 hours pi and continued to increase expression of gG2 at 96 hours (Fig. 1C). These data indicated that HSV-2 infected BCBL-1 cells and replicated.10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.g001Figure 1The susceptibility of BCBL-1 cells to HSV-2 infection.(A). The CPE on BCBL-1 cells infected by HSV-2 (original magnification, ×40). HSV-2 was inoculated into BCBL-1 cells for 0 to 120 hours and changes of cell morphology were observed under light microscope. (B). RT-PCR analysis for HSV-2 immediate early, early, and late genes mRNA in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. HSV-2 UL48, UL5 and US6 mRNA expression in BCBL-1 cells infected with Mock or HSV-2 for 6, 12, 24, 48, and 72 hours was detected by RT-PCR. β-Actin was readily detectable in all samples indicating the presence of amplifiable cDNA. (C). Western blot analysis for HSV-2 structural protein expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were infected with Mock or HSV-2 for 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours; or Vero cells were infected with HSV-2 for 48 hours (positive control). Whole cell lysate were subjected to Western blot with the indicated antibody. Results shown are from a representative experiment of three independent experiments with similar results.To examine whether HSV-2 could activate KSHV replication, RT-qPCR was performed. Analysis of data from three independent experiments demonstrated that, on average, Rta (replication and transcription activator, Rta; the molecular switch gene of KSHV; also known as ORF50) [8], [29] mRNA expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells increased 7.26-fold at 3 hours, 2.52-fold at 6 hours, 15.77-fold at 12 hours, 20.92-fold at 24 hours, 11.44-fold at 48 hours, 11.02-fold at 72 hours, and 2.81-fold at 96 hours, respectively, when compared to Mock-treated BCBL-1 cells (Fig. 2A). Meanwhile, ORF26 (viral minor capsid protein expressed only during lytic KSHV replication) [30] mRNA showed a similar expression pattern as Rta (Fig. 2B). To determine whether other KSHV lytic genes were also up-regulated in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells, RT-PCR analysis was performed to detect the expression of ORF57 and vIL-6 transcripts. All mRNAs of these genes in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells were increased from 24 to 96 hours when compared to their corresponding controls (Fig. 2C). These data suggest that HSV-2 might activate KSHV lytic cycle RNA replication. Next, we asked whether induction of KSHV lytic cycle RNA replication by HSV-2 also resulted in induction of lytic cycle proteins, the expressions of lytic cycle protein Rta and ORF59 were examined. As shown in Fig. 2D, for each of the time points (24, 72 and 96 hours), the level of Rta expression was increased in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells compared to Mock-treated cells. Similarly, the expression of KSHV ORF59 protein was significantly increased in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells at 24 and 72 hours compared with the corresponding control (Fig. 2E and 2F).10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.g002Figure 2Expression of KSHV lytic cycle RNA and protein in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells.(A). Rta mRNA expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. Rta mRNA expression in BCBL-1 cells infected with Mock or HSV-2 for 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours was quantitated by RT-qPCR. Relative quantities of Rta expression represented on the y-axis. Results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus mock group, respectively. (B). ORF26 mRNA expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. ORF26 mRNA expression in BCBL-1 cells infected with Mock or HSV-2 for 3, 6, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours was measured by RT-qPCR. Relative quantities of ORF26 expression represented on the y-axis. Results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus mock group, respectively. (C). RT-PCR analysis for ORF57 and vIL-6 mRNA in BCBL-1 cells infected with HSV-2. ORF57 and vIL-6 mRNA expression in BCBL-1 cells infected with Mock or HSV-2 for 24, 48, 72 and 96 hours was detected by RT-PCR. β-Actin was readily detectable in all samples indicating the presence of amplifiable cDNA. (D). Rta protein expression in BCBL-1 cells infected by HSV-2. BCBL-1 cells were infected with HSV-2 or mock for 24, 72 and 96 h and whole-cell lysates were subjected to Western blot with Rta antibody. The membrane was stripped and reprobed with anti-actin antibody as a loading control. Results shown are from a representative experiment of three independent experiments with similar results. (E). Immunofluorescence assay staining of BCBL-1 cells infected with HSV-2 (original magnification, 40×). KSHV lytic protein ORF59 expression in normal BCBL-1 cells (untreated) and BCBL-1 cells infected with mock or HSV-2 for 24 and 72 h was detected by immunofluorescence assay staining with ORF59 MAb. (F). Quantification of results in (E). Quantitative and statistic methods were described in the text. ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus mock group.HSV-2 Infection of BCBL-1 Cells Results in Release of Infectious Virions of KSHVTheoretically, KSHV lytic cycle replication induced by HSV-2 would subsequently produce infectious progeny virions. To test this hypothesis, experiments were designed to detect KSHV virions in the supernatant from HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cell cultures. The supernatant of HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells was collected and divided into two parts. The 1st part was used for viral DNA extract. Purified viral DNA was used for real-time DNA-PCR analysis. As shown in Fig. 3A, KSHV viral copy number in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells was increased 4.14-fold at 72 hours when compared to Mock-infected BCBL-1 cells. To further determine whether these viral particles were infectious, the 2nd part of supernatant was employed to infect HEK293 cells, which were previously shown to be permissive cells for KSHV [31]. After 27 hours infection, the total RNA was isolated and RT-PCR was performed to amplify KSHV specific sequence, ORF26. The results demonstrated that ORF26 mRNA was readily expressed in HEK293 cells infected with the supernatant from HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells, but not in HEK293 cells treated with the supernatant from Mock-treated BCBL-1 cells (Fig. 3B). And vIL-6 protein was also detected in HEK293 cells infected with the supernatant from HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells by Western blot (Fig. 3C).10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.g003Figure 3HSV-2 infection of BCBL-1 cells results in release of infectious virions of KSHV.(A). Real-time DNA-PCR analysis for the viral copy number of KSHV. BCBL-1 cells were infected with HSV-2 or Mock. At 72 hours postinfection, supernatant virus was collected, concentrated, and used for real-time DNA-PCR analysis. Results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus mock group. (B). RT-PCR analysis for ORF26 mRNA in BCBL-1 or HEK293 cells treated with supernatant from HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. ORF26 mRNA expression in BCBL-1 cells treated with TPA (Lane 1), HEK293 cells treated for 48 hours with supernatant from TPA-treated BCBL-1 cells for 72 hours (Lane 2), HEK293 cells cultured alone for 27 hours (Lane 3), HEK293 cells infected with HSV-2 for 27 hours (Lane 4), HEK293 cells treated for 27 hours with supernatant from Mock-treated BCBL-1 cells for 72 hours (Lane 5), and HEK293 cells treated for 27 hours with supernatant from HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells for 72 hours (Lane 6) were detected by RT-PCR. (C). Western blot for detection of vIL-6 expression in BCBL-1 cells or HEK293 cells treated with supernatant from HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. vIL-6 expression in BCBL-1 cells treated with TPA (Lane 1), HEK293 cells treated for 48 hours with supernatant from TPA-treated BCBL-1 cells for 72 hours (Lane 2), HEK293 cells cultured alone for 27 hours (Lane 3), HEK293 cells infected with HSV-2 for 27 hours (Lane 4), HEK293 cells treated for 27 hours with supernatant from Mock-treated BCBL-1 cells for 72 hours (Lane 5), and HEK293 cells treated for 27 hours with supernatant from HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells for 72 hours (Lane 6) were detected by Western blot.HSV-2 Activates KSHV Lytic Cycle Replication possibly by Activating RtaTo explore whether HSV-2 induced KSHV replication by activating Rta, we examined the effect of HSV-2 infection on Rta promoter activity in several cell lines. Cells transfected with p50-Luc demonstrated enhanced levels of luciferase expression (3.75, 4.92 and 2.13-fold increase in BCBL-1, B95-8 and Vero cells, respectively) by treatment with TPA (used as a positive control). Notably, HSV-2 infection resulted in a significant increase in luciferase expression [1.83, 3.87, and 76.33-fold increase in BCBL-1 (P = 0.039), B95-8 (P = 0.001) and Vero (P = 0.002) cells, respectively] compared to the corresponding control (Fig. 4A). To confirm this result, luciferase assays were also performed in the other KSHV-positive cell lines, such as BC-3 (a type of PEL) and 293/Bac36. It was demonstrated that HSV-2 infection lead to a 2.31- and 1.44-fold increase in luciferase expression in BC-3 (P = 0.047) and 293/Bac36 (P = 0.032) cells, respectively, when compared to the corresponding control (Fig. 4A). To extend these results, a siRNA construct, which was previously designed to silence KSHV Rta [11], was introduced into HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. As shown in Fig. 4B, Rta protein in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells further transfected with pRNAT-Rta was markedly decreased at 48 hours when compared with the corresponding controls. These observations collectively suggest that HSV-2 activates KSHV replication possibly by activating Rta.10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.g004Figure 4HSV-2 activates KSHV lytic cycle replication via Rta.(A). HSV-2 infection promotes induction of KSHV Rta promoter activity. BCBL-1, BC-3, 293/Bac36, B95-8 and Vero cells were infected with Mock (Mock+p50-Luc) or HSV-2 (HSV-2+p50-Luc), or treated with TPA (TPA+p50-Luc), and then cotransfected with the firefly luciferase reporter construct p50-Luc (0.4 µg) and a Renilla luciferase construct pRL-TK (0.02 µg). Luciferase activities were measured, normalized to inner control, and presented as fold increase (n-fold). All data points were the averages of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+p50-Luc group, respectively. (B). Western blot analysis for Rta protein in si-construct-transfected BCBL-1 cells infected with HSV-2. BCBL-1 cells were transfected with pRNAT-Rta or pRNAT-vector, and then infected with HSV-2 or Mock for 48 hours. Whole cell lysate were subjected to Western blot with the indicated antibody.Inhibition of NF-κB Signaling Enhances HSV-2-Induced KSHV ReplicationIt has been shown that several KSHV genes and KSHV acute infection activated NF-κB signaling pathway in different cell lines, but the role of NF-κB during the reactivation of KSHV was still controversial [32]–[37]. To examine whether HSV-2 was able to trigger NF-κB activation in PEL cell lines, BCBL-1 cells were infected by HSV-2 and nuclear extracts were analyzed for NF-κB activation by ELISA-based NF-κB activity assay. As shown in Fig. 5A, HSV-2 infection of BCBL-1 cells increased phosphorylated p65 in nucleus to bind consensus binding sequences for p65 of NF-κB at 12, 24 and 48 hours, while wide-type p65 competitor oligo abolished this activation. To test the transcriptional function of activated NF-κB in response to HSV-2, we transfected an NF-κB-dependent firefly luciferase reporter construct into HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells and measured the NF-κB luciferase activity. We observed an apparent induction of reporter activity in BCBL-1 cells with HSV-2 infection compared to that of Mock-infected cells at 12, 24, and 48 hours (Fig. 5B). To define the function of NF-κB in HSV-2-induced KSHV reactivation, BCBL-1 cells were pre-treated by DMSO or Bay 11-7082, a pharmacologic inhibitor of IκB kinase(IKK)-NF-κB activation, for 1 hour followed by HSV-2 infection. It was demonstrated that treatment of Bay 11-7082 not only decreased the level of p65 in the nucleus (Fig. 5C), resulting in little amount of NF-κB binding to its DNA region in an NF-κB-dependent reporter construct (Fig. 5D), but also increased KSHV ORF26 mRNA and vIL-6 protein expression and viral particle release in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells (Fig. 5E, 5F and 5G). On the other hand, transfection of IKK2EE, which was capable of phosphorylating IκBα, not only elevated the level of p65 in the nucleus and increased its function (Fig. 6A and 6B), but also down-regulated KSHV ORF26 mRNA and vIL-6 protein expression and viral particle release in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells (Fig. 6C, 6D and 6E). Taken together, these data suggest that HSV-2 activated NF-κB pathway, which exhibit an inhibitory effect on KSHV reactivation in BCBL-1 cells.10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.g005Figure 5Inhibition of NF-κB signaling enhances HSV-2-induced KSHV replication.(A). HSV-2 infection elevated the P65 level of NF-κB pathway in BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were infected by HSV-2 or Mock for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Then cells were collected and nuclear proteins were extracted for ELISA-based NF-κB activity assay. Excess competitor oligonucleotides were coincubated with the nuclear protein of HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells for competition assays (HSV-2+Comp.). Results presented were the statistic of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. ** p<0.01 and ##
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock and HSV-2 groups, respectively. (B). HSV-2 infection increased NF-κB activity in BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells adsorbed with HSV-2 or Mock for 1 hour, then were transfected with an NF-κB-dependent firefly luciferase reporter construct (0.4 µg) together with a Renilla luciferase construct pRL-TK (0.02 µg) for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Whole-cell extracts were prepared, and the firefly as well as the Renilla luciferase activity was measured. The experiment was performed three times in parallel, and the mean ± s.e.m is shown. ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock group. (C). A pharmacologic inhibitor of IKK–NF-κB activation, Bay 11-7082, inhibited the binding activity of P65 of NF-κB pathway in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were pre-treated by Bay 11-7082 (5 µM) or DMSO for 1 hour followed by HSV-2 or Mock infection for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Then cells were collected and nuclear proteins were extracted for ELISA-based NF-κB activity assay. Excess competitor oligonucleotides were coincubated with the nuclear protein of DMSO-pre-treated and HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells for competition assays (HSV-2+DMSO+Comp.). Results presented were the statistic of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+DMSO group; ##
p<0.01 and &
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus HSV-2+DMSO group, respectively. (D). Bay 11-7082 inhibited HSV-2-induced activity of NF-κB in BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were pre-treated by Bay 11-7082 (5 µM) or DMSO for 1 hour followed by HSV-2 or Mock infection for 1 hour and then were transfected with an NF-κB-dependent firefly luciferase reporter construct (0.4 µg) together with a Renilla luciferase construct pRL-TK (0.02 µg) for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Whole-cell extracts were prepared, and the firefly as well as the Renilla luciferase activity was measured. The experiment was performed three times in parallel, and the mean ± s.e.m is shown. ** p<0.01 and ##
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+DMSO and HSV-2+DMSO groups, respectively. (E). Bay 11-7082 enhanced ORF26 mRNA expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were pre-treated by Bay 11-7082 (5 µM) or DMSO for 1 hour followed by HSV-2 or Mock infection for 12, 24 and 48 hours. ORF26 mRNA expression in BCBL-1 cells was measured by RT-qPCR. Relative quantities of ORF26 expression represented on the y-axis. Results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+DMSO group, respectively; #
p<0.05 and ##
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus HSV-2+DMSO group, respectively. (F). Bay 11-7082 enhanced vIL-6 expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were pre-treated by Bay 11-7082 (5 µM) or DMSO for 1 hour followed by HSV-2 or Mock infection for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Whole cell lysate were subjected to Western blot with the indicated antibody. (G). Real-time DNA-PCR analysis for the viral copy number of KSHV. BCBL-1 cells were pre-treated by Bay 11-7082 (5 µM) or DMSO for 1 hour followed by HSV-2 or Mock infection. At 24 and 48 hours postinfection, supernatant virus was collected, concentrated, and used for real-time DNA-PCR analysis. Results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+DMSO and HSV-2+DMSO groups, respectively.10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.g006Figure 6Elevating NF-κB signaling inhibits HSV-2-induced KSHV replication.(A). Transfection of IKK2EE promoted the binding activity of P65 of NF-κB pathway in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were infected by HSV-2 or Mock for 1 hour, and then were transfected by IKK2EE or MIGRI for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Cells were collected and nuclear proteins were extracted for ELISA-based NF-κB activity assay. Excess competitor oligonucleotides were coincubated with the nuclear protein of MIGRI-transfected and HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells for competition assays (HSV-2+MIGRI+Comp.). Results presented were the statistic of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+MIGRI group, respectively; ##
p<0.01 and &
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus HSV-2+MIGRI group, respectively. (B). Transfection of IKK2EE promoted HSV-2-induced activity of NF-κB in BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were infected by HSV-2 or Mock for 1 hour, and then were co-transfected with the plasmid IKK2EE and an NF-κB-dependent firefly luciferase reporter construct (0.4 µg) together with a Renilla luciferase construct pRL-TK (0.02 µg) for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Whole-cell extracts were prepared, and the firefly as well as the Renilla luciferase activity was measured. The experiment was performed three times in parallel, and the mean ± s.e.m is shown. ** p<0.01 and ##
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+MIGRI and HSV-2+MIGRI groups, respectively. (C). Transfection of IKK2EE inhibited ORF26 mRNA expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were infected by HSV-2 or Mock for 1 hour, and then were transfected by IKK2EE or MIGRI for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Cells were collected and ORF26 mRNA expression in BCBL-1 cells was measured by RT-qPCR. Relative quantities of ORF26 expression represented on the y-axis. Results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+MIGRI group; #
p<0.05 and ##
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus HSV-2+MIGRI group, respectively. (D). Transfection of IKK2EE inhibited vIL-6 expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were infected by HSV-2 or Mock for 1 hour, and then were transfected by IKK2EE or MIGRI for 12, 24 and 48 hours. Whole cell lysate were subjected to Western blot with the indicated antibody. (E). Real-time DNA-PCR analysis for the viral copy number of KSHV. BCBL-1 cells were infected by HSV-2 or Mock for 1 hour, and then were transfected by IKK2EE or MIGRI. At 24 and 48 hours postinfection, supernatant virus was collected, concentrated, and used for real-time DNA-PCR analysis. Results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. ** p<0.01 and ##
p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus Mock+MIGRI and HSV-2+MIGRI groups, respectively.HIV-1 Tat Enhances Induction of KSHV Lytic Cycle Replication by HSV-2To explore whether Tat influenced HSV-2-induced KSHV replication, BCBL-1 cells were infected with HSV-2 and then transfected with pTat. RT-qPCR was performed to detect KSHV ORF26 mRNA expression. ORF26 mRNA expression in HSV-2-infected and Tat-transfected BCBL-1 cells increased 3.03-fold at 6 hours, 1.94-fold at 24 hours, 2.95-fold at 48 hours and 1.64-fold at 72 hours, respectively, when compared to that of HSV-2-infected and pcDNA-transfected BCBL-1 cells (Fig. 7A). These data demonstrated that intracellular Tat enhanced ORF26 mRNA expression in HSV-2-induced KSHV lytic cycle phase. Interestingly, the expression of ORF26 was slightly up-regulated in Tat-transfected and mock-treated BCBL-1 cells at 6, 24, and 72 hours compared with that of pcDNA-transfected and mock-treated BCBL-1 cells. However, our previous report showed that intracellular Tat did not influence the expression of ORF26 mRNA in BCBL-1 cells until at 96 hours [12]. It was probably that in this study the supernatant of Vero cell cultures contained some soluble factors, which might have a synergetic effect with Tat on KSHV reactivation. To investigate whether Tat has an effect on the protein level of vIL-6, Western blot analysis was performed. As shown in Fig. 7B, HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells, which were transfected with pTat, expressed more vIL-6 at 48 and 72 hours, compared with HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells transfected with pcDNA. These data indicated that the Tat might enhance HSV-2-induced KSHV replication.10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.g007Figure 7HIV-1 Tat cooperates with HSV-2 to induce KSHV lytic cycle replication.(A). Effect of Tat on ORF26 mRNA expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. Real-time quantitative PCR was performed to detect KSHV ORF26 mRNA expression in Mock-treated and pcDNA3.1-transfected BCBL-1 cells (Mock+pcDNA), Mock-treated and pTat-transfected BCBL-1 cells (Mock+Tat), or HSV-2-infected and pcDNA3.1-transfected BCBL-1 cells (HSV-2+pcDNA), HSV-2-infected and pTat-transfected BCBL-1 cells (HSV-2+Tat) for 6, 24, 48 and 72 hours. The results shown were from three independent experiments performed in triplicate. ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus HSV-2+pcDNA group. (B). Effect of Tat on vIL-6 protein expression in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. Cell lysates were collected from HSV-2-infected and pcDNA3.1-transfected BCBL-1 cells, or HSV-2-infected and pTat-transfected BCBL-1 cells for 48 and 72 hours. Whole cell lysate were subjected to Western blot with the indicated antibody. (C). Effect of Tat on Rta promoter activities in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1, B95-8 and Vero cells were infected with Mock and then co-transfected with pcDNA3.1, p50-Luc and Renilla vector pRL-TK (Mock+pcDNA3.1), infected with HSV-2 and then co-transfected with pcDNA3.1, p50-Luc and Renilla vector pRL-TK (HSV-2+pcDNA3.1), or infected with HSV-2 and then co-transfected with pTat, p50-Luc and Renilla vector pRL-TK (HSV-2+Tat). Luciferase activities were measured, normalized to Rellina inner control, and presented as fold increase (n-fold). All data points were the averages of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. * p<0.05 and ** p<0.01 for Student's t-test versus HSV-2+pcDNA3.1 group, respectively. (D). Effect of Tat on HSV-2 replication in BCBL-1 cells. BCBL-1 cells were infected with Mock and then transfected with pcDNA3.1 (Mock+pcDNA), infected with HSV-2 and then transfected with pcDNA3.1 (HSV-2+pcDNA), or infected with HSV-2 and then transfected with pTat (HSV-2+pTat) for 24, 48 and 72 hours. Whole cell lysate were subjected to Western blot with the indicated antibody.To explore whether Tat increased HSV-2-induced KSHV replication via activating Rta, we examined the effect of Tat on Rta promoter activity in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1, B95-8 and Vero cells. Rta promoter activity in pTat and p50-Luc-cotransfected BCBL-1 cells infected by HSV-2 increased 2.48-fold when compared to that of pcDNA and p50-Luc-cotransfected BCBL-1 cells infected by HSV-2. Similar expression pattern of Rta promoter activity was also observed in B95-8 and Vero cell (Fig. 7C). Taken these results together, we speculated that Tat enhanced the HSV-2-induced KSHV reactivation in BCBL-1 cells by activating Rta promoter.Because HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells expressed type specific glycoprotein gG of HSV-2 (Fig. 1C), we next tested the effect of Tat on HSV-2 gG expression in BCBL-1 cells. As shown in Fig. 7D, HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells consistently expressed HSV-2 gG at 72 hours, no matter transfected with pcDNA or pTat, which was consistent with the results of Fig. 1C at 48 hours. Remarkably, at 48 hours, gG was detectable in HSV-2-infected and pTat-transfected BCBL-1 cells while there was no corresponding band detected in HSV-2-infected and pcDNA-transfected BCBL-1 cells (Fig. 7D), implying that overexpression of Tat promotes HSV-2 replication. Together these data suggest that Tat might enhance KSHV lytic cycle replication by accelerating HSV-2 replication in BCBL-1 cells.DiscussionThe epidemical studies shown that interaction between the STIs was complex. The relationship of HSV-2 and KSHV remains quite controversial. Studies from three groups demonstrated that HSV-2 and KSHV were associated in the prisoners of Italian and some areas in Africa, which suggest that HSV-2 infection contributed to sexual transmission of KSHV infection [18]–[20]. However, Malope et al have shown that in a heterosexual South African population there was no evidence of sexual transmission of KSHV [38].The present work demonstrated that HSV-2 infection of BCBL-1 cells induced KSHV replication and provided the direct laboratory evidence that HSV-2 was a potential cofactor for KSHV reactivation. KSHV was necessary but not sufficient in KS development and the cofactors played an important role in the pathogenesis of KS [8]. For instance, HIV-1 infection of PEL cell lines induced the reactivation of KSHV through directly activating the promoter of KSHV Rta [13], [39], [40]. HSV-1 could activate KSHV replication partially by elevating the level of IL-10 and IL-4 [11]. Here we have further demonstrated that HSV-2 was also a critical factor responsible for the induction of KSHV replication, suggesting that HSV-2 might promote KS progression by increasing viral load. However, whether some soluble factors produced in response to HSV-2 infection might also be involved in this procedure is still unknown.The role of NF-κB pathway during the reactivation of KSHV is still a highly controversial and arguable subject. We and other five groups consistently demonstrated that NF-κB signaling displayed an inhibitory effect on KSHV reactivation [33], [36], [37], [41]–[43]. However, one group showed that activation of NF-κB was required for KSHV replication and the production of replication-competent KSHV virions [32]. Actually, Grossmann and colleagues indicated that the relationship between NF-κB and spontaneous KSHV reactivation was complex, non-uniform and dependent on the cellular context. Even though NF-κB activation is inhibitory to lytic gene expression in some contexts, such inhibition is at least partially bypassed or overridden during lytic growth. In this study, we indicated that HSV-2 infection of BCBL-1 cells led to dramatic activation of the NF-κB signaling, which was consistent with previous reports [44], [45]. Furthermore, inhibition of NF-κB significantly promoted KSHV lytic replication; elevating NF-κB signaling remarkably repressed KSHV replication, which was in agreement with the reports of six groups above mentioned. These observations also implied that other signal pathways might exist together with activated NF-κB in HSV-2-infected BCBL-1 cells during KSHV reactivation. When HSV-2 infected BCBL-1 cells, it must lead to alternation of multiple signal pathways. Some activated signals facilitated KSHV replication; inversely, others exerted an inhibitory effect, such as NF-κB. If signals whose activation can promote KSHV replication are always predominated, they may compensate the inhibitory effect of NF-κB. Therefore, our results never eliminate the possibility that some other signals produced in response to HSV-2 infection might also be involved in this procedure.The Tat protein of HIV-1 functioned as a transacting transcriptional activator and was of great interest in the studies of KS. Our previous studies demonstrated that Tat not only induced KSHV replication, but also accelerated the tumorigenesis by KSHV Kaposin A in vitro and in vivo
[12], [46]. In the current study, we showed that Tat could enhance the HSV-2-induced lytic replication of KSHV. Interestingly, Tat also accelerated HSV-2 replication in BCBL-1 cells. Given the fact that HSV-1 and its immediate-early genes ICP0 and ICP4 greatly stimulated the expression of HIV-1 LTR-directed viral gene expression collaborated with Tat [47], [48], and Tat increased the transcriptional activity of HSV-1 ICP0 [48]. We speculated that, with high homology to ICP0 and ICP4 of HSV-1 [49], the cooperation of Tat and ICP0 and ICP4 of HSV-2 stimulated the transcript and replication of HSV-2, which indirectly induced KSHV replication. However, the mechanism still needs to be elucidated.In summary, we showed that HSV-2 was a potentially important factor in the pathogenesis of KS and NF-κB signal exerted an inhibitory effect in HSV-2-induced KSHV replication. We also revealed that Tat could enhance HSV-2-induced KSHV replication. Because HSV-2 infection of cells stimulated multiple downstream effects [50], [51] and intracellular Tat activated the KSHV replication partially through JAK/STAT pathways [12], further studies are needed to better understand the signaling involved in Tat increasing HSV-2-induced KSHV reactivation from latency.Materials and MethodsCell Culture and Virus InfectionThe BCBL-1 and BC-3 cells (EBV-negative and KSHV-positive PEL cell lines) were obtained through the AIDS Research and Reference Reagent Program, National Institutes of Health. A HEK293 cell line that harbors the KSHV genome inserted into a bacterial artificial chromosome, designated 293/Bac36, was a kind gift from S-J Gao (University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA). B95-8, which were KSHV-negative and EBV-positive marmoset B-cell lines, HEK293, and Vero (African green monkey kidney fibroblasts) cells were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Rockville, MD). Both BCBL-1 and B95-8 cells were maintained in RPMI-1640 containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mmol/L L-glutamine, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. HEK293 and Vero cells were maintained in DMEM+10% FBS. 293/Bac36 was grown under the same conditions, except with the addition of 100 mg/mL hygromycin B. HSV-2 (333 strain) propagated in Vero cells as previously described [11], [52]. The supernatants from normal Vero cells culture were collected and used as a control (Mock) to treat target cells.Antibodies and ReagentsAnti-HSV-2 Glycoprotein G-2 (gG-2) mouse monoclonal antibody (MAb) was purchased from Biodesign International™. Anti-KSHV ORF59 MAb and viral IL-6 (vIL-6) rabbit polyclonal antibody (PAb) were obtained from Advanced Biotechnologies Inc. (Columbia, MD). Anti-KSHV Rta (also known as ORF50) peptide antibodies were generated by immunization of rabbits with a Rta peptides (aa667–691). The horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated donkey anti-goat and goat anti-mouse and -rabbit IgG, and mouse MAb to β-Actin, α-Tubulin and GAPDH (used to monitor sample loading) were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies (Santa Cruz, Calif.). Anti-Flag M2 mouse MAb were obtained from Cell Signaling Technologies (Beverly, MA, USA). Bay11-7082 were purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO, USA).Western Blot AnalysisWestern blot was performed as described previously [12]. Proteins were visualized with ECL reagents (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Western blot experiments were repeated at least three times to confirm results.Real-Time Quantitative Reverse Transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR)RT-qPCR was performed in the 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The sequences of KSHV-specific primers and probes including Rta and 26 were shown as previously described [11].Real-time DNA-PCR Analysis for Viral Copy NumberReal-time DNA-PCR was carried out on viral DNA from supernatants of BCBL-1 cells essentially as described previously [53]. Specifically, the primers and probe for the real-time DNA-PCR were designed to detect ORF26 [12]. Viral DNA was extracted using the high pure viral nucleic acid kit (Roche, Germany) as per the manufacturer's instructions. The KSHV ORF26 gene cloned in the pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen, Inc., Carlsbad, CA) was used to generate the standard curve.RT-PCRRT-PCR was performed as previously described [11]. Primers used for analysis of KSHV genes in this study were also shown as previously described [11]. Primers used for analysis of HSV-2 genes are listed in Table 1.10.1371/journal.pone.0031652.t001Table 1Sets of primers of HSV-2 used for RT-PCR.mRNAOligonucleotidesAccession no.Expected size (bp)Annealingtemp (°C)CyclesUL48
F:5′-GAG CAG GCC CTC GAT TGT C-3′
R:5′-CCA GTT GGC GTG TCT GTT TCA-3′
NC-001798.13525829UL5
F:5′-GTG ATG CGA CTG GCG TTG G-3′
R:5′-CAG TTT GTG GAC CGC TTT GT-3′
NC-001798.12785830US6
F:5′-GCG TGT TTA CCA CAT TCA GCC-3′
R:5′-TCC GTC CAG TCG TTT ATC TTC A-3′
NC-001798.14205829β-Actin
F:5′-TGA CGG GGT CAC CCA CAC TGT GCC CAT CTA-3′
R:5′-CTA GAA GCA TTT GCG GTG GAC GAT GGA GGG-3′
BC0160456615624The oligonucleotides were selected from the sequences with the indicated accession number. The size of each amplified product, its annealing temperature, and numbers of PCR cycles are indicated. F, forward; R, reverse.Immunofluorescence Assay (IFA)IFA was performed as described elsewhere. Briefly, after infection of BCBL-1 cells with HSV-2, cells (107/ml) were washed and smeared on chamber slides. Slides were incubated with a 1∶100 dilution of anti-KSHV ORF59 mouse MAb. Alexa Fluor 568 (Invitrogen)-conjugated goat anti-mouse antibody (1∶200 dilution) was used as a secondary antibody for detection. The cells were counterstained with 4′,′-diamidino-2-phenylindole. Images were observed and recorded with a Zeiss Axiovert 200 M epifluorescence microscope (Carl Zeiss, Inc.). Photographs of at least 10 unique fields were taken of every slide, and the number of positive and negative cells was counted separately by three individuals, including one who was blinded to the results to calculate the percentage of positive cells. Immunostaining was performed on samples from three separate experiments.Plasmid, Transfection and Luciferase Reporter AssayThe pTat plasmid was used as described previously [12]. The siRNA construct (pRNAT-Rta) that targets KSHV Rta was utilized as previously described [11]. NF-κB reporter plasmid containing three tandem repeats of consensus NF-κB binding sites was obtained from Huaguo Xu (Department of Clinical Laboratory, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China). IKK2EE capable of phosphorylating IκBα and control vector MIGRI were kindly provided by Zan Huang (Wuhan University School of Life Science, Wuhan, China). The KSHV Rta luciferase reporter construct (p50-Luc) was generated as described previously [12]. Before transfection, cells were adsorbed with HSV-2 for 1 hour. After 48-hour transfection, cells were harvested for luciferase assay. Renilla vector pRL-TK (Promega) was used as an internal control and relative luciferase activity was assayed using the Promega dual-luciferase reporter assay system. BCBL-1, BC-3 and B95-8 cells were electroporated at 250 V and 960 microfarads using a Gene Pulser (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) as described previously [43]. Both 293/Bac36 and Vero cells were transfected with Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) following the manufacturer's instructions.ELISA-based Transcription Factor Activity AssayThe activation of the transcription factor NF-κB was assayed by using TransFactor NF-κB p65 Colorimetric Kit from Clontech Laboratories, Inc (California, USA) under conditions recommended by the manufacturer and as described elsewhere [54]. Nuclear protein of BCBL-1 cells was extracted using the Nuclear Extract Kit (Active Motif, CA, USA) and ELISA-based transcription factor activity assay was performed following the manufacturer's protocol. For competition assays, competitor oligonucleotides were added to coincubate with nuclear protein. Samples were run in triplicates, and all experiments were performed on three occasions.


Title: Human Herpesviruses as Copathogens of HIV Infection, Their Role in HIV Transmission, and Disease Progression

INTRODUCTIONAfter almost 33 years of research on human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) epidemic in both developed and developing countries, it has become increasingly evident that both transmission of HIV[1] and its progression to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) are assisted by several biological factors, one of the most important factor is opportunistic infections (OIs).[2] These opportunistic infections are more frequent in developing countries.[34]Another important factor is sexually transmitted infections (STIs). The STIs are associated with increased risk of HIV-1 transmission.[5] HIV-1-infected individuals with STIs tend to shed HIV-1 RNA 2–3 times more frequently in their genital secretions, as compared to HIV-infected individuals without an STI, making them more likely to transmit HIV.[6] Among viral STIs, only herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) has been studied extensively for its role in HIV acquisition, transmission, and pathogenesis.[7] However, the role of human herpesviruses (HHVs) as asymptomatic viral STIs (other than HSV-2) has not been given due importance despite their high seroprevalence in HIV-infected individuals[8] and in the general population. In the early 1980s, severe clinical expressions of HHVs-8 (Kaposi's Sarcoma [KS]) infection were among the first recognized manifestations of AIDS.[9] Later, infections with various HHVs, such as HSV infection, KS, Burkitt's lymphoma, and Cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis, were included by the centers for disease control and prevention in the list of AIDS-defining conditions.[9] However, a comprehensive data on these HHVs and their role in HIV disease progression is lacking.NATURAL HISTORY OF HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS INFECTIONIn this paper we review the current literature from Indian and globally on this neglected or emerging aspect. The natural course of HIV infection is characterized by the unique interplay between the virus and several host factors as illustrated in Figure 1. Primary (or acute) HIV infection is associated with a precipitous drop in absolute CD4+ T cells count (blue line) and a rise in HIV viremia (red line). After the initial acute phase of infection which lasts between 6 and 9 weeks, HIV viremia drops to a lower level called the viral set-point. Establishment of a viral set point typically results in an increase in absolute CD4+ T cells counts, which subsequently declines over the course of infection. A drop of CD4+ T cells count below 200/mm3 is defined as clinical AIDS, which is associated with a rapid rise in viremia and decline in absolute CD4+ T cells counts.[1011]Figure 1Natural course of human immunodeficiency virus infection and associated disease progression[10]Clinically, AIDS is defined by extreme immunodeficiency leading to increased incidences of malignancies and OIs.[12] Although still unclear, it is believed that the myriad of OIs associated with advanced HIV disease may be responsible for the constitutional symptoms reported by almost half of all individuals[1213] [Figure 2]. Though the clinical course of HIV disease and pattern of OIs varies from patient to patient and country to country.[41314] For instance, the clinical profile of AIDS individuals in developing countries like India includes a wide range of conditions such as tuberculosis, coccidian diarrhoea, cryptococcal meningitis, papular pruritic eruptions, and CMV retinitis, among others.[3] While in developed countries, non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis and viral co-infections are more common.Figure 2Opportunistic infections associated with advanced human immunodeficiency virus disease [adapted from http://www.microbiologybook.org/lecture/images/natural-history.gif]Due to a scarcity of data from India, the current belief is that the HHV prevalence is quite low in this subcontinent, which is in contrast to the global epidemiology. The present review will increase our understanding of the epidemiology of HHVs and the manifestations associated in this “Treat All Era.”ROLE OF HHVS IN HIV TRANSMISSION AND DISEASE PROGRESSIONIn a healthy human body, microbes maintain an effective parity with the host, when a new microbe pervades, but for some the host fails to readjust this parity, and these microbes become pathogens (copathogens).[15] HIV-induced disruption of the equilibrium between a human host and its virome leads to two grave consequences: (1) Reactivation of ubiquitous viruses (copathogens), which start to replicate to higher levels, for example, HHVs and (2) infection by new viruses (coinfections).[16] In this imbalanced system, the reactivation of copathogens leads to different pathological conditions, including some “AIDS-defining” ones. The data accumulated over recent years on the mechanisms of the interaction between coinfecting microbes, in particular the HIV, suggest that non-HIV viruses may determine HIV transmission, its pathogenesis, and evolution.[15] In addition, there are several viral and host factors which determine variability in transmission to the partner and disease progression in the HIV-infected individuals. Hence, the spread of HIV is assisted by several biological factors, one of the most important factors is STIs, both symptomatic and asymptomatic.[6] STIs can increase the risk of acquisition and transmission of HIV,[1718] via a number of mechanisms, including breach of mechanical barriers to infection, increased inflammation and higher levels of HIV cellular targets,[19] and increased HIV viral load in genital tract.[20] On the infectiousness side, STIs might evoke a more infectious HIV variant[21] and can increase HIV concentrations in genital lesions, semen, or both.[22] Acute HIV infection has been found to be more frequent in individuals with active STIs, and cotransmission is a common phenomenon.[23]The interactions between HHVs and HIV-1 are increasingly being recognized;[242526] As it will be discussed in the next section, there are many ways in which these viruses could potentially interact with HIV. When viewed from the perspective of viral taxonomy, there is no obvious connection between members of the Retroviridae and Herpesviridae. To study each of the eight known HHVs in relation to the clinical manifestation, their role in HIV pathogenesis, heterosexual transmission and how they subvert the immune system following HIV infection would be an enormous undertaking. Therefore, we have tried to crystallize the data related to HHVs in the context of HIV infection, their role in fuelling the HIV epidemic, and the direction of research we can expect to see soon.HUMAN HERPESVIRUSESHerpesviridae is a large family of DNA viruses that cause diseases in animals, including humans.[27] In 2009, the family Herpesviridae was elevated to the order Herpesvirales.[28] The order currently has 3 families, 3 subfamilies (plus 1 unassigned), 17 genera, 90 species, and 48 unassigned viruses.[29] Based on their biological properties such as growth characteristics and tissue tropism, herpesviruses can be further divided into three subfamilies;[29] alpha-(α), beta-(β) and gamma-(γ) herpesvirinae as illustrated in Table 1. Among the eight HHVs, the alpha subfamily includes neurotropic viruses and contains the HSV-1 and 2 and varicella zoster virus (VZV).[30] The members of the gamma subfamily are lymphotropic viruses and include Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) and HHV-8. The viruses of the beta subfamily appear to be able to establish infections in many different types of cells and tissues and include CMV, and HHV-6 and HHV-7.[30] A characteristic feature common to all herpesviruses is that after primary infection often during childhood, a latent phase is developed that persists lifelong in the infected host.[30] The host reservoir for latent viruses differs depending on the subfamily of a herpesvirus. Occasionally, the latent virus is reactivated resulting in recurrent symptomatic or nonsymptomatic productive infections.[31] One explanation behind this coexistence between the herpesviruses and their host is a profound ability of these viruses to modulate the host immune response, interfere, and interact with different immune effectors, thereby promoting viral persistence in its host.[15]Table 1Basic characteristics of the human herpesvirusesPOSSIBLE ROLE OF HUMAN HERPESVIRUSES IN HIV PATHOGENESIS AND TRANSMISSIONPreceding HIV infection, the dynamic balance between the human virome and the immunocompetent host is determined by the capability of the immune system to induce effective responses and the ability of herpesviruses to escape them.[32] Thus, the immunologic impact of viral coinfections has the amplitude to increase viral replication, viral genotypic heterogeneity, and CD4+ T-lymphocyte loss, leading to expedited atrophy in immune function, reduced survival, and added HIV-1 transmission risk.[33] Over the last 33 years, epidemiologic and molecular studies have indicated a strong and synergistic relationship between the dual epidemics of HSV-2 and HIV-1 infection.[34] The synergy between these two STIs goes beyond similar risk factors for acquisition; they interact both in their epidemiologic niche and at a pathogenesis level driving HIV replication.[35]The molecular mechanisms by which various HHVs escape the immune responses have been described in detail elsewhere.[16] Although the immune system imbalance caused by HIV fails to build an adequate immune response, the system is not at a standstill. It responds to viral reactivations and new infections with poorly coordinated but powerful elements of the previously effective defense.[15] Reactivated HHVs activate the CD4+ T cells, which become new targets for HIV.[36] Also HIV-1 infection promotes HSV-2 genital shedding, which, in turn, generates an influx of activated T cells that serve as new cell targets for HIV replication.[37] Likewise, in CMV/HIV-1-coinfected individuals, the increase in the fraction of specific CMV-activated T cells and the higher rate of T cell proliferation in response to CMV are associated with accelerated CD4+ T cell loss and progression to AIDS.[38] Thus, apparently, in HIV-1-infected individuals, unceasing efforts of the host to overturn formerly controlled HHVs, lead to chronic cell immune activation.[39] In HIV-1-infected individuals, the chemokine/cytokine spectrum, which is already modulated in response to HIV, is changed further upon reactivation of the HHVs in a failed attempt to control these viruses. For example, HHV-6 specifically up-regulates CCL5.[40] Female genital tract secretions may provide innate protection against HIV infection through the activity of antimicrobial proteins and peptides whereas seminal plasma proteins may promote HIV infection by interfering with female host defenses and enhancing the infectivity of viral particles.[41] In the genital tract, HSV-2 interferes with the secretion of several cytokines,[42] and semen deposition results in modulated immunity and an inflammatory response of the genital mucosa. These semen-induced alterations in the female reproductive tract, thus, have implications for the HIV-1 sexual transmission.[43]The effect of an imbalanced chemokine/cytokine system on HIV disease is difficult to study because of the complexity and redundancy of this system and also because of the additional effects of virokines and viroceptors. For example, HHV-6 encodes both virokine UL83A, which binds to CCR5, and viroceptor U51, which may act as ''chemokine sink'' for CCL5,[44] whereas CMV US28 viroceptor offers an additional coreceptor for HIV-1.[45] Similarly, viral proteins may shortcut the host immune response and directly affect HIV-1 transcription by transactivating HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) or by interfering with Tat functions. Viral proteins capable of LTR transactivation have been identified in HSV,[46] CMV,[47] HHV-6,[48] and HHV-8[49] genomes [Table 2].Table 2Mechanisms of interactions between human immunodeficiency virus-1 and coinfecting human herpesvirusesOn the other hand, HIV-1-encoded proteins that also affect coinfecting HHVs. For example, HHV-6 suppresses HIV by upregulating CCR5 blocking chemokine.[40] In HIV disease, the reactivation of HHVs significantly contributes to the immune dysfunction of the HIV-1-coinfected host.[24] The effect of an imbalanced chemokine/cytokine system on HIV disease is difficult to study because of the complexity and redundancy of this system and also additional effects of virokines and viroceptors. Thus, the immunodeficiency primarily caused by HIV results in reactivation of viruses and new infections, further impairing the immune system and thus leading to one of the several vicious cycles that fuel HIV and coinfecting HHVs leading to disease progression [Figure 3].Figure 3The interaction between human herpesviruses and human immunodeficiency virusEPIDEMIOLOGY AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONS OF HUMAN HERPESVIRUSESHHVs are among the most ubiquitous of human infections. During the past several years, there have been rapid advances in our understanding of HHVs infection. Distinct variations in worldwide distribution of herpesviruses have been observed in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected population as discussed below.THE HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUSBoth HSV-1 and HSV-2 infect millions of people worldwide. Globally, the seroprevalence of HSV-1 and HSV-2 in the general population is around 70–100% and 6–50%, respectively.[50] HSV-1 prevalence is almost uniform around the globe and is more prevalent than HSV-2 infection in all general population studied.[51] Among adolescents and adults >15 years of age, HSV-1 seroprevalence is very high (more than 90%) in Central Africa, Eritrea, and Uganda.[52] In Asia, the prevalence of HSV-1 among sexually transmitted disease (STD) clinic attendees in Osaka, Japan, has been found to be 73%.[53] In India, no difference in HSV-1 prevalence among high-risk population versus general population has been reported, being 91.5% and 91.8%, respectively.[54]HSV-2 seroprevalence is higher in the USA than in Europe;[55] Africa has the highest prevalence and Asia has the lowest prevalence rates.[5657] For the general population, it is 16.2% in the USA,[58] 12% in Australia,[59] 24.4% in Nigeria,[56] and 13.2% in China.[60] Similar prevalence rates have been observed in India, the prevalence of HSV-2 in the general adult population ranges from 5.2% to 14.5%.[6162] It has been observed that HSV-2 seroprevalence increases steadily after sexual debut and with age.[58] In Sub-Saharan Africa, half of the general population is HSV-2 seropositive by the age of 25 years.[57]Nevertheless, prevalence rates ranging from 52% to 95% for HSV-2 have been reported among HIV-infected individuals worldwide.[6364] In Sub-Saharan Africa, more than 85% of HIV-1-infected individuals are HSV-2 seropositive.[55] In the developed countries, the HSV-2 prevalence ranging from 65% to 80% has been reported in HIV-1-infected men.[65] In India, the seroprevalence of HSV-2 is reported to be as high as 83% among the STD clinic attendees.[66] We have found prevalence of HSV-1 and HSV-2 in HIV infected vs HIV uninfected Indian men to be 78.6% vs 34% and 70.8% vs 5%, respectively.In terms of clinical manifestation, genital herpes (GH) may be caused by either HSV-1 or HSV-2 but, globally, a majority of the cases are caused by HSV-2, infection is common in both industrialized and developing world.[67] However, with the rise in socioeconomic conditions and change in sexual practices, changes in HSV-1 epidemiology have been observed, showing acquisition in later age.[68] The studies have confirmed that HSV-1 accounts for 42% and 62% of confirmed first episode of GH due to HSV-1 and also the proportion of newly diagnosed GH in young adults due to HSV-1 has risen dramatically.[69] In developing countries, the proportion of GH caused by HSV-1 is unknown.HSV leads to severe morbidity and mortality, both in the setting of advanced HIV disease and in immunocompetent hosts. Apart from GH in high-risk individuals, more serious and systemic manifestations of HSV infection include esophagitis, meningoencephalitis, hepatitis, pneumonitis, retinal necrosis, and disseminated infection, all of which are relatively rare, even among those with advanced disease.[9] Atypical and disseminated HSV infection occur relatively more often in HIV-infected individuals.[70]VARICELLA ZOSTER VIRUSVZV causes two distinct diseases, varicella (chickenpox) and herpes zoster (HZ) or shingles a very painful and debilitating condition.[71] In both temperate and tropical climates, the peak disease incidence is most commonly reported in the colder, and drier months during winter or spring. Periodicity with interepidemic cycles of 2–5 years is described from many countries.[71] In temperate climates, the highest incidence of varicella occurs among children aged <10 years, leading to seroprevalence of more than 90% before adolescence.[72] However, in countries with tropical climates, a majority of the studies have described later acquisition of varicella in childhood with a higher proportion of cases and higher susceptibility among adults.[72] In Thailand, the overall prevalence rate of 52.8% has been observed in the general population aged <30 years, ranging from 15.5% in children <5 years of age to 75.9% in young adults aged 20–29 years.[73] A study from India has reported similar rates (69.2%) at 20–29 years of age to as high as 96.1% at 30–39 years of age.[74] A significant proportion of adolescents and adults is susceptible to varicella in India as observed in other tropical countries. In our cohort the seroprevalence was not found to be different between HIV infected and HIV uninfected men; 78.6% and 76.6%, respectively. Although the statistical evidence from tropical countries is sparse, belief is that adulthood varicella is more severe than childhood varicella in tropical countries.[75]HZ develops primarily in healthy adults after the age of 50 and in HIV-infected persons of all ages and at all stages.[7275] Studies using varied methods and conducted in different population around the world have revealed a median zoster incidence of 4–4.5/1000 person-years.[76] In India, the incidence of HZ is observed mainly in the fourth and third decades of life, with the maximum incidence in the age group of 31–40 years.[77] It has been observed that in India, more males are affected than females,[77] in contrast, to the Western studies,[78] where both males and female are equally affected. Trauma, stress, and outdoor activities may be the predisposing factor for the male preponderance in Indian setup.The HIV epidemic may also affect the epidemiology of varicella.[75] In countries with high HIV prevalence such as Sub-Saharan Africa and India, varicella may cause more severe morbidity and mortality; however, there are few population-based data examining these issues. The risk for zoster and its recurrence is elevated in persons infected with HIV.[79] The Asian with high HIV prevalence may experience greater morbidity and mortality rates due to VZV, especially due to its acquisition at a later age.[7580] A recent study on 200 HIV-positive individuals from eastern India reported VZV incidence rate of 32.5% among adults.[81]In AIDS individuals, VZV retinitis results in blindness in 75–85% of involved eyes.[82] VZV can also lead to a variety of atypical cutaneous lesions in HIV-infected individuals with low CD4+ T-lymphocyte counts.[80] These lesions may be chronic, persisting for months or years, and are sometimes associated with acyclovir-resistant strains of VZV.[83]EPSTEIN–BARR VIRUSEBV is an ancient virus and has probably coevolved with its different hosts over the last 90–100 million years.[84] With the ability to establish lifelong latency and intermittent reactivation after primary infection and with limited clinical symptoms in the majority of infected individuals. Large-scale seroepidemiological surveys in the United States[85] and Europe[86] have showed that over 50% of the adolescents are seropositive to EBV. A high EBV seropositivity rate ranging from 60% to 93% has been reported from South Asia.[87] In developed countries, a bimodal infection rate, with peaks in children below 5 years and again after 10 years of age, has been described.[85] Poor socioeconomic conditions have been associated with early primary EBV infection whereas late primary EBV infection is seen in population of high socioeconomic status.[26] Low income and crowded family conditions have also been found to increase the likelihood of being EBV seropositive in children from Asian locales.[88] In countries with high HIV burden such as South Africa and Chile, the prevalence of EBV in HIV-infected individuals ranges from 90% to 100%.[8990] In a recent cross-sectional survey conducted to determine the seroprevalence of various viral coinfections among HIV-infected individuals, EBV prevalence of 96.6% was observed in China.[91] We also found a very high seropositivity of 98% and 92.5% in HIV positive and HIV negative males, respectively. No well-defined studies from India have been carried out in HIV-infected individual to assess the comorbidities associated with EBV. The virus is associated with various types of malignancies such as Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin's lymphoma, Nasopharyngeal carcinoma etc.The association between EBV and HIV markers reflects a significant pathogenic interaction between the two viruses.[92] With the availability of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and treatment and prevention of OIs, both an increase in life expectancy of HIV-infected individuals and an increase in HIV-related malignancies are expected.[93] Although lymphomas have been reported in individuals with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, they have rarely been reported from the Indian subcontinent.[94] Given huge population of people living with HIV and high incidence of EBV in these individuals,[81] closer attention should be paid; the wide spectrum of changes in AIDS-related lymphadenopathy requires recognition.CYTOMEGALOVIRUSThe human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is the most ubiquitous agent of all HHVs. The overall prevalence and age of initial CMV infection vary significantly in different regions of the world. General trends have tended to show seroprevalence rates ranging as low as 40% to as high as 100%, with lower rates in Europe,[95] North America,[96] and Australia[97] and higher rates in Africa[26] and Asia.[98] A study on voluntary blood donors from Delhi, India, reported the prevalence of 95% in individuals over 18 years of age,[99] and similar rates have been reported from developing countries indicate rates approaching 100% by the age of 11 years.[2695] As CMV infection is highly prevalent and HIV and CMV share several modes of transmission, it is not surprising that CMV seroprevalence is extremely high in HIV-infected population.[8189] CMV infection is prevalent not only in HIV-infected population, but also in those populations that are at risk for HIV infection; approximately 75% of injection drug users and more than 90% of homosexual men who are infected with HIV have detectable IgG antibodies to CMV.[14100] In addition, high CMV incident rates, in longstanding CMV-seropositive homosexual men,[101] suggest that this group is frequently reexposed to differing exogenous strains of CMV.[102]Reactivation of CMV infection in the AIDS individuals usually presents as retinitis or gastrointestinal involvement, which further may lead to CMV end-organ disease and death as a consequence of the impaired immunity.[103104] A study showed that CMV, rather than Helicobacter pylori, may be the main causative pathogen of peptic ulcers in HIV-infected individuals.[105]In the intervening years, especially with the advent of effective HAART, interest in the CMV cofactor hypothesis for HIV progression has waned. The timely study conducted on HIV-infected adults with CMV seropositivity rate of more than 90% by Fowotade et al. revisits the issue of active CMV infection in HIV-infected individuals in the HAART era.[106] Although the introduction of HAART has reduced the proportion of individuals at risk for reactivation of CMV disease. Even in a well-defined, HIV-infected population, it is associated with sustained low CD4+ T cell counts at risk for CMV disease. Recently, several studies have shown that neurological and ocular complications are rare in the treatment period, but they continue to occur for several reasons: (1) individuals fail to use HAART, either because they are not in care or are nonadherent, (2) antiretroviral resistance, and (3) late HIV diagnosis (late presenters).[82107]HUMAN HERPESVIRUS-6HHV-6 first isolated from individuals with lymphoproliferative disorders in 1986 is a human pathogen of emerging clinical significance.[108] HHV-6 is widespread throughout the world, with geographic differences in HHV-6 prevalence varying between 65% and 100%[109] in children <1 year.[110] The prevalence was 66.0% in individuals aged 11–40 years; however, no HHV-6 antibodies were detected in subjects >60 years, suggesting decline in HHV-6 prevalence with advancing age.[110] HHV-6 prevalence in healthy population from Northern China is reported to be 69.1%.[111] Compared to Malaysian study, here, no significant difference in prevalence was observed in children and adults of various age groups, suggesting that HHV-6 infection is ubiquitous in China. Exceptions if confirmed are represented by Morocco where seroprevalence is much lower (20%).[112] No significant difference in prevalence among ethnic groups living in the same geographical location or between sexes has been reported so far.[113] We for the first time found very high seroprevalence of HHV-6. The prevalence was high in both HIV positive (98.7%) and HIV negative (95%) males.HHV-6 has two variant groups (A and B)[114] while HHV-6B is present in almost 100% of the world's population, HHV-6A appears to be less frequent in Asia, North America, and Europe.[114] In addition, there are virulence distinctions between variants HHV-6A and B, with evidence for increased severity and neurotropism for HHV-6A.[115] Primary infant infections in Europe, the USA, and Japan are predominantly HHV-6B (97–100%) while, in Africa, the reverse has been observed, as high as 86–100% of healthy infants acquire HHV-6A as their primary HHV-6 infection.[116]The epidemiology and disease associations of HHV-6A are less well defined. HHV-6 infection/reactivation in AIDS individuals results in an increase in HHV-6 load both in lymph nodes and generalized, in viremia, disseminated infection in many organs, active CNS infection, pneumonitis, and retinitis and even a cause of death.[109] HHV-6-related bilateral posterior uveitis as well as optic neuritis has been reported in HIV-infected individuals both with or without clinical manifestations of AIDS.[117] These findings lead to the proposal that HHV-6 acts as a cofactor in the progression of AIDS and the switch of HIV from the latent to the replicative state.[118] Despite the bulk of data hitherto accumulated, conclusive evidence of the role played in the progression of HIV-1 disease is still lacking.HUMAN HERPESVIRUS-7HHV-7 was recently discovered in the year 1990.[119] It is a beta herpesvirus similar to but distinct from HHV-6.[120] It is closely related to herpesvirus 6B and replicates in human cells only after binding CD4+ T cell receptor. It establishes lifelong latency in infected cells, and its frequent reactivations result in asymptomatic virus shedding through saliva. But very little is known about its prevalence, biology, immunology, and molecular biology aspect.[121] The peak age of initial infection for HHV-7 is slightly later than that for HHV-6; the most common age range for infection is 18 months to 3 years of age.[122] By the age of 5 years, >90% of the US population demonstrate evidence of HHV-7 infection.[121] In a single study, healthy blood donors from nine countries in five continents were studied for HHV-7 prevalence. The prevalence for HHV-7 was high (75–98%) in practically all countries except for Northern Japan (44%).[123] The study also showed that there are regions of low, intermediate, and high mean antibody titers against HHV-7 such as lowest for Belgium, Israel, Japan, the USA, and Australia, high for Mexico and Cologne/Germany, and highest for South Africa, for which geographic characteristics may be responsible.[123] Hence, HHV-7 similar to HHV-6 is a widespread HHV with elevated antibody titers in the healthy human population essentially everywhere.So far, from Asia, there are only two seroprevalence studies, one study from Thailand conducted during 1990–1993, in which 333 serum samples from umbilical cord blood and venous blood of healthy persons were investigated.[124] The study showed that by the age of 5 years, >80% of the children are positive, however, the seroprevalence starts declining with age, reaching 67% in individuals over 30 years of age.[124] Another study in healthy children and adults in Japan showed that seroprevalence was highest (60%) at 11–13 years of age and was maintained until the end of the third decade, then decreased thereafter.[125] We found that seroprevalence of HHV-7 was. similar in both HIV positive (86%) and HIV negative (79.1%) males.Besides the HHV-7 etiologic role in a few cases of exanthema subitum[30114] and chronic fatigue syndrome,[126] primary HHV-7 infection can cause serious neurologic disease.[127] HHV-6B infection is a common cause of febrile status epilepticus (FSE), but HHV-7 infection is also associated with FSE.[128] Together, they account for one-third of FSE, a condition associated with an increased risk of both hippocampal injury and subsequent temporal lobe epilepsy.[128] Evidence suggests HHV-7 is associated with herpetic (non-CMV) retinal infections,[129] oral ulcers and other dermatological manifestations in AIDS patients.[130]HUMAN HERPESVIRUS-8 OR KAPOSI SARCOMA-ASSOCIATED HERPESVIRUSHHV-8 is considered to be the primary etiological agent of Kaposi's sarcoma (KS), primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), and multicentric Castleman's disease.[131] There exists a wide geographic variation in the prevalence of HHV-8 whether it is a region of high endemicity or a nonendemic region.[132] For example, in Uganda, where KS is endemic, HHV-8 seroprevalence rates of 50% have been reported for the general population whereas seroprevalence rates of <5% or lower have been reported from the USA and Northern Europe and Asia.[132] In endemic countries as in the Mediterranean basin (Italy, Greece) and Africa (East and Central Africa), HHV-8 seroprevalence increases with age and often reaches adult rates before the end of puberty.[132] HHV-8 infection is associated with high-risk sexual practices.[133] In nonendemic countries such as the United States and Western Europe, infection is highly prevalent ranging from 20% to 60% among high-risk individuals.[132] Historically, KS has been considered to occur in individuals infected with HIV, who have low CD4+ T cell counts and high viral loads.[134] However, emerging data show that KS also occurs in HIV-positive individuals with higher CD4+ T cell counts and undetectable viral loads. The seroprevalence of HHV-8 in 165 Indian adult males was estimated, using ELISA and IFA methods. Of these, 43 (26.06%) males were positive by ELISA while 26 males (15.8%) were also positive by IFA. Seroprevalence decreased with increasing age (P<0.05). Factors independently associated with HHV-8 infection were younger age group and alcohol consumption. These findings suggest that even in heterosexual population, HHV-8 can transmit frequently. Most important observation of the study was comparable rates of HHV-8 infection in heterosexual men and MSM.[135]THERAPEUTIC MANAGEMENT OF HUMAN HERPESVIRUSESBefore considering treatment of HHV infections, it is important to establish the specific diagnosis. Various types of clinical samples and laboratory technologies are used for this, as summarized in the Table 3. The antiviral agents act by impeding entry of viruses into host cells; interfering with viral assembly, release, or deaggregation; inhibiting transcription or replication of the viral genome; or interrupting viral protein synthesis. Antiviral agents can be used to treat disease (a therapeutic strategy), prevent infection (a prophylactic strategy), or prevent disease (a preemptive strategy). In the preantiviral era, the widely held belief was that any therapeutically meaningful interference with viral replication would destroy the host cell upon which viral replication was dependent.[136] A growing understanding of host cell–virus interactions and viral replication has led to the development of safe and effective antivirals. There are a number of antiviral medications, with activity against HHVs. With the exception of foscarnet and cidofovir, all are nucleoside analogs.Table 3The most appropriate sample (s) and the laboratory methods used to make the diagnosis of HHV infectionsTreating herpesvirus coinfections has long been pursued as a potential strategy to delay HIV disease progression. Before the introduction of protease inhibitors in the mid-1990s, several small trials established a mortality benefit to high-dose acyclovir when used in combination with 1 or 2 antiretroviral drugs.[137] A recent meta-analysis study on seventeen trials all double blinded suggested favorable effects of acyclovir on plasma HIV-1 viral load among persons coinfected with HSV-2.[138] HSV-2 suppressive therapy could be an affordable strategy for reducing HIV-1 disease progression and retaining individuals in care before ART initiation.[139] Acyclovir has proved to be beneficial for GH/HIV-1 coinfected individuals by slowing down the rate of CD4+ T cell decline and, delaying of HIV disease progression.[140] A study suggested that acyclovir exhibits a direct antiviral effect on HIV replication as well.[141] Acyclovir may prove a useful lead for development of new HIV treatments but, the selection of resistant mutants raises a cautionary note to the use of acyclovir mono-therapy in individuals coinfected with HSV and HIV.[142] However, it is not fully known whether this is direct or indirect effect. This has led many to hypothesize that the beneficial effect of acyclovir on HIV progression is mediated by a reduction in HSV-2–induced immune activation.[140] A recent study on pooled analysis of episodic therapy trials showed acyclovir has little impact on the healing of GH; however, the impact was more substantial in HIV-1 seropositive individuals, with high CD4+ T cell counts.[143]Results of a recent meta-analysis study showed a range of favorable effects of ACV or its prodrug valacyclovir (valACV) on plasma HIV-1 viral load among HIV-HSV-2 coinfected individuals.[138144] [Table 4]. However, the studies of whether antiviral therapy in combination with ART will prevent HHV-associated disease are needed.Table 4Outcomes of the clinical trials employing anti-herpetic drugs in HIV-infected individualsCONCLUSIONSThe clinical management of HHVs in individuals with HIV infection has lagged seriously behind the large body of medical literature on the importance of the interaction between these pathogens. However, the recent data shows that screening and treating subclinical HHV infection may offer benefits to individuals with HIV infection. HSV is capable of causing severe morbidity and mortality, both in the advanced HIV disease as well as in immunocompetent hosts. HSV suppressive treatment can reduce HIV-1 infectiousness and delay disease progression in HIV-1-infected individuals. HZ remains the common complication of HIV disease as it used to be before the advent of HAART. The incorporation of the VZV vaccine into the routine care of HIV-infected individuals has been slow, due to fears surrounding the use of a live vaccine in this population. For this reason the CMV viremia remains a significant risk factor for progression of HIV disease and death even after HAART era. CMV DNA viremia is proposed to be used as a better disease predictor than CD4+ T-lymphocyte count in HIV-infected subjects. Given that, over 90% of HIV-infected individuals are seropositive for CMV infection, and increasing numbers of individuals are exhausting HAART options leading to decrease in CD4+ T cell counts, the ongoing threat of CMV disease must not be overlooked. Finally, with EBV, HHV-6, HHV-7, and HHV-8, the infections that are still overlooked, need to be studied specially for the effect of therapy on reducing the risk of certain malignancies. Many questions about the interaction between these organisms remain to be clarified, and larger studies with defined clinical endpoints are needed to understand the role of various HHVs in transmission and HIV disease progression.Financial support and sponsorshipNil.Conflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.


Title: 5

DiscussionIAS 2009 included no major reports on three biomedical prevention fronts (microbicides, PrEP and vaccines), although important Phase III microbicide and PrEP trials are under way and evidence is mounting regarding the impact of ART rollout on reducing HIV transmission (see Additional File 1). On the vaccine front, Track C lead rapporteur Sinead Delany-Moretlwe [1] (University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg) reviewed an analysis by José Esparza (Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle), who noted that systemic immunity to HIV-1 rarely occurs in nature and may not be possible with a vaccine [2]. Recent work demonstrating rapid viral replication in the mucosa and rapid systemic dissemination suggests research priorities should shift to a mucosal vaccine that elicits an immune response at the viral portal of entry, Esparza argued. The meeting did feature important studies on prevention with ART, circumcision and acyclovir.ART impact on pregnancy outcome and risky sexTriple-drug ART does more than prevent vertical transmission (as outlined in the Track B discussion); an observational study of 3273 pregnant women in Malawi and Mozambique showed that it also lowers the risk of prematurity, abortion and stillbirth among African women, providing additional insights into the benefits of ART [3]. This study recorded significantly lower mortality among pregnant women who started nevirapine-based ART than in those who did not (0.7% versus 7.4%, P <0.001).Leonardo Palombi (DREAM Program, Rome) reported that rates of abortion or stillbirth were 4.3% in the ART group and 25.7% in the no-ART group (P <0.001). Regardless of CD4 cell stratum, the prematurity rate was 70.8% lower in women who took antiretrovirals.A prospective study of 898 female bar workers in Mombasa, Kenya, found no evidence supporting the hypothesis that widespread ART will encourage more risky sex in low-income countries. Indeed, women in this cohort reported safer behaviour after they began ART [4] than before they started. Linnet Masese (University of Nairobi) found significantly higher rates of 100% condom use after ART began and a strong trend toward abstinence or having only one sex partner during ART. Sexually transmitted infections were one-third less likely after ART began.Pregnancy doubles serodiscordant HIV transmission riskPregnancy doubled the risk of HIV transmission in a two-year study of more than 500 HIV-discordant couples (one positive partner, one negative partner) in Kisumu, Kenya [5]. Sara Brubaker (University of California, San Francisco) found that among 539 female partners (95% of them married), 189 (35%) conceived. Forty-one of 539 uninfected partners (8%) became infected during the study (see Figure 1). Among women who conceived or men whose partners conceived, 10.8% became infected during follow up, compared with 5.9% of partners who did not have a child.Figure 1Pregnancy and the risk of HIV transmission. Source: Brubaker S, et al. Pregnancy and HIV transmission among HIV discordant couples in a clinical trial in Kisumu, Kenya. 5th IAS Conference on HIV Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention: Cape Town, South Africa. WELBC105 [5].Those rates translated into a 1.8 times higher risk of HIV infection in couples who had a child (P=0.046). About 30% of new HIV infections happened six months before conception, another 35% six months after conception, and the remaining 35% more than six months from conception. The presenting author noted that the data did not determine intentionality to conceive and that – if this is indeed the case – couples may be risking a greater probability of HIV transmission in order to conceive.Circumcision and HIV risk in female partnersThree randomized trials conclusively demonstrate that circumcision lowers risk of HIV acquisition in heterosexual men, and circumcision programmes are being rolled out in a number of countries in sub-Saharan Africa (see Figure 2) [6-8]. But how the procedure affects HIV risk in female partners remains unknown. Results from two studies of serodiscordant couples (an observational study presented at IAS 2009 and a randomized controlled trial published in the scientific literature) could not establish that circumcision protects female partners from HIV.Figure 2Progress on male circumcision. Source: Sinead Delany-Moretlwe: Track C Rapporteur Report. 5th IAS Conference on Pathogenesis, Treatment and Prevention: Cape Town, South Africa. [1]The prospective observational study weighed the risk of HIV transmission in 1096 serodiscordant couples with HIV-positive male partners who were enrolled in a trial of acyclovir to prevent HIV transmission [9]. During one to two years of follow up at 14 sites across Africa, 64 female partners became infected; viral sequencing established the male partners as the source in 50 of these women. One-third of the men were circumcised. Jared Baeten (University of Washington, Seattle) found that the overall new infection rate was 2.7 per 100 person-years in female partners of circumcised men versus 4.4 in partners of uncircumcised men. Among newly infected female partners whose HIV sequences matched that of their partners, HIV incidence was 2.0 in partners of circumcised men and 3.5 in partners of uncircumcised men. In both of these comparisons, the risk of HIV infection adjusted for male viral load fell short of statistical significance (P=0.13).A trial that randomized HIV-infected Ugandan men to immediate or deferred circumcision found no significant difference in HIV incidence among partners of circumcised men (18%) and uncircumcised men (12%) [10]. The investigators note that their analysis cannot exclude “the possibility of higher risk of transmission in couples who resumed sexual intercourse before complete [circumcision] wound healing”.Daily acyclovir and risk of HIV transmission or progressionTwo previously published placebo-controlled trials of daily acyclovir found that this antiherpes drug does not prevent HIV acquisition in women and men infected with herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) [11,12]. A trial presented at IAS 2009 found that daily acyclovir does not prevent HIV transmission from HIV/HSV-2 infected people to their partners [13]. This trial, involving 3408 heterosexual HIV-discordant African couples at 14 sites, randomized HIV-1/HSV-2 coinfected partners to placebo or to 400mg of acyclovir twice daily. Two-thirds of coinfected partners were female, no one was taking antiretrovirals, and participants reported taking 96.5% of acyclovir doses.Connie Celum (University of Washington, Seattle) reported that after 24 months of follow up, 84 new HIV-1 infections could be linked to study partners, 41 of them taking acyclovir and 43 taking placebo. Daily acyclovir significantly lowered the frequency of HSV-2-positive genital ulcers and reduced HIV load by an average 0.25 log, but those benefits were insufficient to protect partners from HIV transmission.Although the modest decline in viral load recorded in this trial did not prevent coinfected partners from transmitting HIV to their partners, even a small decline may confer clinical benefits, according to secondary results of another African study [14]. This placebo-controlled trial involved 2284 women and 1097 men coinfected with HIV-1 and HSV-2, but taking no antiretrovirals because they had a CD4 count above 250 cells/mm3. Jairam R Lingappa (University of Washington, Seattle) found that 284 people taking acyclovir and 325 taking placebo reached a composite endpoint of a CD4 count below 200 cells/mm3, ART initiation, or death from causes other than trauma. Those numbers translated into a 27% lower risk of reaching the composite endpoint (P=0.03).ConclusionsThe 3000-woman analysis demonstrating lower rates of prematurity, abortion and stillbirth in women taking a triple-antiretroviral combination [3] adds to the already ample evidence supporting standard ART during pregnancy and breastfeeding. At this point, however, many pregnant or breastfeeding women do not receive standard ART because they do not meet national treatment criteria. In female Mombasa barmaids who reported transactional sex, starting ART coincided with less high-risk sexual behaviour [4], a finding suggesting that ART does not have a “sexual disinhibiting” effect, at least in this population. These results also confirm the feasibility of bringing high-risk women into care.The study finding a higher risk of HIV transmission in HIV-discordant couples who have a child [5] indicates that discordant partners may continue to conceive even when they know one partner has HIV. If a portion of these pregnancies were intentional, the investigators suggest, these couples are risking HIV transmission in order to conceive. The results emphasize the importance of targeting serodiscordant married and unmarried couples in prevention initiatives.Two studies failed to establish a lower risk of HIV infection in female partners of circumcised versus uncircumcised men [9,10]. The authors of the study presented at IAS 2009 suggest “short term interventions to protect against transmission risk during wound healing after circumcision of HIV-1 infected men could be considered, in order to realize the longer term potential benefits of male circumcision” [9]. The authors of a previously published randomized trial add that protecting men from becoming infected by circumcising them probably lowers overall HIV transmission risk in a heterosexual population because it lowers the proportion of men carrying HIV [10]. There is no doubt that circumcision can be a valuable facet of HIV prevention for heterosexual men. (There have been no randomized trials of circumcision in men who have sex with men.)The acyclovir trials show that this antiherpes agent has no role in preventing HIV transmission [13], but it can help slow HIV disease progression in people not taking ART [14]. The latter finding emphasizes the importance of testing simple, inexpensive non-ART strategies, such as acyclovir and cotrimoxazole, in people with HIV.Track C lead rapporteur Sinead Delany-Moretlwe drew four lessons from prevention studies presented at the conference [1]:• Treatment has progressed; prevention remains challenging.• Biomedical interventions still require behavioural change; risk compensation needs to be monitored.• The concept of treatment for prevention brings the treatment and prevention worlds closer than ever before.• New interventions for prevention are most likely to be effective when delivered in combination.Competing interestsMark Mascolini and Rodney Kort are independent consultants contracted by the International AIDS Society for the purpose of drafting the IAS 2009 Impact Report: Summary of Key Research and Implications for Policy and Practice.Authors’ contributionsMM drafted the initial text and RA provided editorial input and advice. RK adapted the text for publication in a peer-reviewed journal. Both authors have approved the manuscript for publication.Supplementary MaterialAdditional file 1. New data on the preventive impact of antiretroviral therapyClick here for file


Title: Understanding global changes of the mouse brain proteome after vaginal infection with HSV-2 using a label-free shotgun approach

1 IntroductionHerpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) a member of the Herpesviridae family, is a ubiquitous human pathogen (Kollias et al., 2015). According to epidemiologic studies, its global prevalence exceeds 25% of the World’s population (Li et al., 2020). HSV-2 can be transmitted through direct contact with seropositive individuals. The virus preferentially infects the skin and mucous membranes, and upon initial contact the virus invades epithelial cells and eventually replicates intracellularly at that site. After initial exposure and resolution of symptoms, the virus lurks in the peri-axonal sheaths of the trigeminal, cervical, lumbosacral, or autonomic ganglion sensory nerves. In these places, viral replication is usually controlled by the patient’s immune system and remains dormant. When reactivation does occur, the virus spreads through sensory nerves to the mucocutaneous site, where it replicates and forms clusters of blisters (Lafferty et al., 1987; Fatahzadeh and Schwartz, 2007; Whitley, 2015). In a subset of viral carriers the reactivation of these dormant viruses can lead to severe, even life threatening, infections, such as viral encephalitis, meningitis, myelitis, or severe neonatal encephalitis (Pinninti and Kimberlin, 2013; Steiner and Benninger, 2013; Wang et al., 2022b). HSV (HSV-1 and HSV-2) infections of the central nervous system (CNS) are devastating and require prompt diagnosis and institution of therapy. Heightened awareness of the disease is essential regardless of whether in a newborn or in an adult. However, there is increasing evidence that HSV infection is associated with a variety of neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease, Multiple sclerosis, and HSV may be one of its risk factors (Mancuso et al., 2019; Duarte et al., 2021). The pathogenesis of these central nervous system infections caused by HSV-2 infection remains unclear. Although new methods, such as 2-D electrophoresis and Label Free Quantitation (LFQ) have been used to study diseases caused by other pathogens, these approaches have not been utilized to investigate the consequences of HSV-2 infections (Campos et al., 2017; Li et al., 2021). This study used LFQ to quantitatively analyze changes in the brain proteome of BALB/c mice after vaginally infected with HSV-2, and compared proteomics data in samples before and after HSV-2 infection. In addition, differences between symptomatic and asymptomatic infections were also analyzed. Our findings help to identify differentially expressed proteins after HSV-2 infection and screen for key molecules in the nervous system of HSV-2 infection. The functional characterization of these molecules may help to explain the underlying mechanisms causing neurologic abnormalities developing after infection with HSV-2. The data provide insight for further understanding of the CNS infected with HSV.2 Materials and methods2.1 Cells and virusesThe African green monkey kidney cell line, Vero, (ATCC, Rockefeller, MD, USA) was cultivated in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Corning, Shanghai, China) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; HyClone, Glendale, AZ, USA). The medium was changed to DMEM containing 2% FBS after viral inoculation. The wild-type HSV-2 strain, HG52, was purchased from the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (Wuhan, China).2.2 Mice and ethicsFour-week-old female BALB/c mice were purchased (Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Company, Beijing, China) and housed in a specific pathogen-free facility at the Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medicine Science. Animal experiments were designed in line with the principles described in the “Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals” and “Guidance for Experimental Animal Welfare and Ethical Treatment”. All animals were under the care of veterinarians at the facility. Experimental protocols were reviewed and approved by the Experimental Animal Ethics Committee of the Institute (approval number: DWSP201803018-1, 1March 2018).2.3 Experimental infection of miceTo induce an acute infection, BALB/c mice were inoculated via a vaginal instillation of 5×104 plaque-forming units (PFUs) of HSV-2, with sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) acting as control. Each group Mice were weighed daily and the survival rate-to-mortality ratio was evaluated over 15 days. There were fifteen mice in each group, of which 3 mice were euthanized and dissected for Label-free protein quantitative analysis, viral load and organ pathology (Some results were shown in 
Supplement Figure 1
).2.4 Label-free protein quantitative analysisProteomics workflow for label-free quantitation of proteins from brains after vaginal infection with HSV-2 was shown in 
Supplement Figure 3
.2.4.1 Sample preparationAfter weighing the brain tissue samples PBS was added at a ratio of 1:5 and samples were lysed at low temperature by adding an equal volume of 2× SDT lysis buffer (2% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris/HCL, pH7 at a ratio of 1:1). Vortex homogenization was carried out for 60 s, followed by ultrasonication for 3 min. Samples were heated to 100°C for 10 min to reduce disulfide bonds, centrifuged at 12,000g for 10 min, and the supernatants, containing the total protein, were collected. Protein concentration was measured in each sample by analyzing the fluorescence intensity of tryptophan.Supernatants containing 100 µg of protein were placed into 10 Kd ultrafiltration tubes to replace the buffer with 8 M UA solution (8 M ready to use UA buffer). After buffer exchange, 100 µL of 50 mM IAA was added, (final IAA concentration not less than 20 mM) and incubated at room temperature, protected from light. The alkylation reaction, blocking sulfhydryl groups, was carried out for 30 min. Next, using 10 Kd ultrafiltration tubes, samples were buffer exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3 digestion solution, 4 µg of trypsin was added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C with continuous shaking. The next day the digested peptide fragments were collected by ultrafiltration. TFA was added to stop digestion, and the ultrafiltrate was desalted on Sep-Pak C18 columns. After the desalting, peptide solutions were dried by a centrifugal concentrator, frozen, and stored at -20°C until use.2.4.2 Mass detectionMass spectrometry was performed using a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ LC/MS system. Samples were applied to a C18 capture column (3 µm, 75 µm × 20 mm, 100 Å) and then eluted to the analytical column (50 µm × 150 mm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) for separation. The mobile phases were: phase A: 1% DMSO, 99% H2O, 0.1% formic acid, and mobile phase B: 1% DMSO, 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid. A 100-min analytical gradient was used as follows: 0 min in 3% B, 7 min of 3%-5%B, 65 min of 5%-18% B, 10 min of 18%-33% B, 2 min of 33%-90% B, and 6 min of 90% B. The flow rate of the liquid phase was 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometry has a variety of scanning modes, including positive and negative ion mode, full scan, etc. In this study, the Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) scan mode was used. During mass spectrometry DDA mode analysis, each scan cycle included a full MS scan (m/z range 350-1800, ion accumulation time 200 ms), followed by 40 MS/MS scans (m/z range is 100-1500, ion accumulation time 50 ms). The conditions for MS/MS acquisition were set so the precursor ion signal was greater than 3e6, and the charge number was +2~+5. The exclusion time for repeated ion collection was set to 35 s.2.4.3 Data analysisThe mass spectrum data generated by QE was retrieved with Protein Discover (V2.2). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE (Perez-Riverol et al., 2022) partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD034186. The Percolator database retrieval algorithm was used with the mouse proteome reference Uniprot database (UniProt Mouse 20180428. fasta). Search parameters were as follows: Scan Event: Mass Analyzer (FTMS), MS Order (MS2), Activation Type (HCD), Min. Collision Energy (0), Max. Collision Energy (1000), scan type (full); Sequest HT: Enzyme (Trypsin full), Max. Missed Cleavage Sites (2), Min. Peptide Length (6), Max. Peptide Length (144), Dynamic Modification (Oxidation, Acetyl, Carbonadomethyl); Percolator: Max. Delta Cn (0.05), Maximum Rank (0), Target FDR (Strict) (0.01), Target FDR (Relaxed) (0.05) and Validation based on q-Value. Entries and contaminating proteins present in the anti-database were deleted, and the remaining identification information was used for subsequent analysis.2.4.3.1 Screening for differentially expressed proteinsMass spectrometry detected the scores, peptides, and spectral numbers of obtained proteins in the samples. Due to the higher protein abundance, a large number of profiles were collected, allowing the subsequent relative quantitative detection of differentially expressed proteins between groups. A sum PEP score ≥ 1.5 protein was selected and contaminating proteins were removed. After database alignment search, the mass number deviation of retrieved peptides followed normal distribution. Based on the number of detected peptide spectra and scores of mass spectrometry, screening Adj. P-Value (PV) <0.01, |Log2 FoldChange (FC)|>1.2.4.3.2 Differential protein analysisIn the previous step, we screened the proteins according to PSM score ≥ 1.5, and screened the differential proteins of Day3 and Day7 groups compared with Control according to Adj. P-Value (PV) <0.01, |Log2 FoldChange (FC)|>1. To test the plausibility and accuracy of differentially expressed molecules the detected proteins were aggregated together based on the trend of expression levels using cluster analysis. To establish the functional characteristics of differentially expressed proteins, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis (Lyu et al., 2022) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment analysis (Kanehisa and Goto, 2000) were performed using the Metascape database. The GO and KEGG analysis parameter p-value cutoff was set to 0.05 with a minimum number of matches of 3 and a minimum enrichment score of 1.5 Results were presented using the ImageGP platform.2.4.3.3 Protein-protein-interaction (PPI) network analysisTo clarify the interactions between 249 differentially expressed proteins, we constructed the protein-protein interaction (PPI) network based on an online resource STRING (Ver. 11.5) database (http://string-db.org) (Szklarczyk et al., 2021). The minimum interaction cut-off standard was set to 0.4 (medium interaction confidence score). Cytoscape software (Ver. 3.7.2) was utilized for visualization. At the same time, one of the proteins of interest was annotated based on the results of GO and KEGG.3 Results3.1 HSV-2 infection causes significant changes in brain proteomeTo investigate pathologic changes in brain tissue after vaginal infection with HSV-2, we analyzed total protein samples with spectroscopy, identifying and quantitating proteins from brain tissues before and after infection. Proteins with sum PEP score ≥ 1.5 were detected, while eliminating contaminating proteins. This analysis identified 3546 proteins. Of these 3242 were present in the brains of control (Ctrl), non-infected animals. 3256 proteins could be identified in samples 3 days after HSV-2 infection, while 3241 proteins were detected at the 7-day timepoint. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were screened out according to the following criteria: adj P-Value<0.01 and |Log2FoldChange|>1. Compared to control brains, there were 249 DEPs detected in HSV-2 infected samples, with some notable differences between protein expression seen on day 3 and day 7 of the infection (See 
Supplement Table 1
). These differentially expressed molecules were subjected to an initial cluster analysis (See 
Figure 1A
). In order to gain some insight into the function of these proteins we performed Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis. GO enrichment results show that these differential proteins are mainly involved in postsynaptic membrane, synaptic membrane, intrinsic component of synaptic membrane, intrinsic component of presynaptic membrane and other cell components, synapse organization, positive regulation of cell projection organization, response to calcium ion and other biological processes, and molecular functions such as phospholipid binding, calmodulin binding, nucleoside-triphosphatase regulator activity. And the KEGG enrichment results showed that these differential proteins were mainly involved in signaling pathways such as Spinocerebellar ataxia, Complement and coagulation cascades, Pathways of neurodegeneration - multiple diseases, Autophagy. The results of GO and KEGG analysis indicated that both the structure and the function of synapses were affected by the infection. There was also evidence for changes in genes involved in autophagy, gene regulation, and immunological responses (See 
Figures 1B–E
). These changes could potentially explain neurologic abnormalities after the infection of the nervous system, indicating that HSV-2 infection might cause neurodegenerative changes.Figure 1Altered protein expression in brain induced by vaginally infection with HVS-2. (A) Heatmap of differentially expressed proteins. Red represents upregulated proteins, blue downregulated proteins, with more intense colors representing more pronounced differences. (B-D) Partial results of GO function enrichment analysis, (B) affected cellular components, (C) biological process, and (D) molecular function. The size of circles is proportional to the level of enrichment. Red indicates the highest, blue indicates the lowest P value. (E) Some of the results of KEGG pathways enrichment. Again, the size of circles corresponds to the level of enrichment. Red indicates the high, blue low P values.3.2 Significant difference in brain proteome between day 3 and day 7 of HSV-2 infectionCluster analysis of DEPs identified different expression signals at 3 days and 7 days after infection. Mice showed no obvious clinical symptoms on day 3 of the acute infection, while by day 7 obvious clinical neurologic symptoms became evident, such as hindlimb paralysis, became evident. To explore pathologic mechanisms after HSV-2 infection, we identified and analyzed proteins in mouse brain tissues at both time points. Compared to the control brains, 144 proteins showed significant differences in expression in the Day 3 group, while 157 DEPs were detected in the Day 7 group. These data are summarized in 
Figure 2
. The Venn diagram indicated there was a varying degree of intersections between each pair of groups (
Figure 2A
). A total of 73 upregulated proteins were see in the Day 3 group. Of these, 25 proteins were only upregulated at 3 days after HSV-2 infection and returned to normal levels by day 7. A further subset of 10 proteins was initially upregulated on day 3, but became downregulated by day 7. It is of note that there were six proteins (Chm, Tgm3, Arhgap24, Tanc1, Agap1, Pnkd) that were uniquely expressed on the third day after infection. Of 71 day-3 downregulated DEPs, 53 proteins returned to normal later, while the expression of an additional two proteins was upregulated by day 7. In the Day 7 group, 34 of 74 proteins upregulated DEPs were selectively augmented their abundance at this time point only. Furthermore, there were nine proteins that were specifically detected at 7 days post-infection (Saa2, Trappc1, Cxadr, Armc8, Hbxip; Lamtor5, Prppsap2, Usp46, Pcdh10, Neo1). In contrast, 83 proteins were downregulated, with the expression of 57 DEPs altered at 7 days (See 
Figure 1A
 for details).Figure 2The expression of representative proteins in the infected brains at Day 3 and Day 7. (A) Venn diagram illustrating the relationships of proteins at various timepoints. Upward pointing arrows indicate upregulation, whilst downward pointing arrows illustrate downregulation. Numbers in brackets represent the number of proteins in each subset. (B–D) Some representative results of GO function enrichment amongst differentially expressed proteins, (B) affected cellular components, (C) biological process, and (D) molecular function. The size of individual circles corresponds to the number of enriched proteins. Red indicates the highest, blue the lowest P value. (E) Partial results of KEGG pathways enrichment in DEPs. The size of circles represents the number of proteins in a group. Red indicates the highest Q value, green indicates the lowest Q value.As summarized in 
Figure 2B
, GO analysis showed that DEPs at day 3 mostly contained those contributing to presynaptic (17), postsynaptic (17) and neuronal cell body (13) structures. By day 7 the most prominently affected cellular structures were secretory vesicles (13). Analyzing the involved biological processes, DEPs were enriched in mitochondrial organization, response to ethanol, and chromatin silencing. Genes involved in neuromuscular processes (10), the modulation of chemical synaptic transmission (11), and the regulation of ion transport (13) were seen at 3 days after infection. By day 7 proteins involved in responses to metal ion (11), the regulation of plasma membrane bounded cell projection organization (13), and cell junction organization (14) were the most prevalent (See 
Figure 2C
). Regarding molecular function, DEPs were enriched for hemoglobin binding at both time points. On day 3 the main enriched molecular functions were GTPase regulator activity (10), phospholipid binding (12), and inorganic molecular entity/transmembrane transporter activity (14). By 7 days cell adhesion molecule binding (9) and endopeptidase inhibitor activity (7) were the most predominant features (See 
Figure 2D
). In the KEGG signaling pathway analysis, proteins were enriched in cocaine addiction and African trypanosomiasis signaling pathways at both time points. The 3-day DEPs were relevant to alcoholism (17) significantly but tipped in favor of systemic lupus erythematosus and the complement and coagulation cascades (8) at the 7-day time point (See 
Figure 2E
). The results indicated that HSV-2 infection shared some similarities with certain neurological diseases. Not unexpectedly, the brain infection caused by HSV-2 was associated with genes involved in immune responses and inflammation. We screened 8 proteins involved in complement and coagulation system, which are encoded by the following genes: C1qb, C1qc, C3, Cfh, Fga, Kng1, Fgg, Fgb, Dsg1b. The complement and coagulation cascades are evolutionarily related proteolytic cascades in the blood that are critical for appropriate innate responses to injury limiting bleeding and infection, while promoting healing. Although often seen as distinct, it has long been recognized that there may be crosstalk between these pathways, and molecular connections have only recently been established (Maloney et al., 2020). These details provided insights provide an opportunity to develop new therapeutic strategies to better treat a wide range of thrombotic, inflammatory, immune, infectious and malignant diseases (Conway, 2018).We identified that the expression of Glutamate receptor ionotropic, NMDA 2A (gene symbol: Grin2a) continued to increase at 3- and 7-days post-infection. Our GO annotation pointed out that this protein is a component of the NMDA receptor complex, as a heterotetrameric, ligand-gated ion channel with high calcium permeability and voltage dependence on magnesium Sexual sensitivity, mainly involved in molecular functions such as ligand-gated ion channel activity, glutamate receptor activity, and ion channel activity regulated by pre- and post-synaptic membrane potential, and biological processes such as synaptic plasticity, synaptic transmission, and ion transmembrane transport, and contributes to excitatory postsynaptic currents, long-term synaptic potentiation, and the slow phase of learning, thought to play a role in neurodegenerative diseases (Meguro et al., 1992; Sakimura et al., 1995). These results suggest that the protein GluN2A encoded by Grin2a may play an important role in HSV-2 infection of brain tissue.3.3 Protein-protein interaction network analysisThe construction of protein-protein interaction networks (PPI network) can help in understanding molecular mechanisms of disease development and may lead to the discovery of potential new drug targets. A network of 161 nodes and 266 edges was constructed based on the DEPs (See Figure 3). We observed several targets that had direct interaction with the one of interest, Grin2a, such as Slc1a6, Grid2, and Shisa9, all of which are associated with synapses. Slc1a6 Plays a redundant role in the rapid removal of released glutamate from the synaptic cleft, which is probably essential for terminating the postsynaptic action of glutamate. Grid2 is located in dendritic spine and postsynaptic membrane, is integral component of postsynaptic density membrane and is a part of ionotropic glutamate receptor complex which is active in glutamatergic synapse and parallel fiber to Purkinje cell synapse. Shisa9 is a regulator of short-term neuronal synaptic plasticity in the dentate gyrus. Associates with AMPA receptors (ionotropic glutamate receptors) in synaptic spines and promotes AMPA receptor desensitization at excitatory synapses. These results again suggest that GluN2A may be a key molecule in the pathological changes of brain tissue induced by HSV-2 infection.Figure 3Protein-protein interaction network. The differentially expressed proteins in the heatmap were subjected to build a protein interaction network. GO and KEGG annotations were performed on the molecule GluN2A (encoded by Grin2a) we screened.4 DiscussionHSV-2 is one of the most prevalent sexually transmitted diseases in the world (Feng et al., 2021). In addition to causing recurrent genital herpes, the virus is also latently present in sacral dorsal root ganglia. Reactivation of these latent viral particles can cause serious neurological diseases, including HSV-2 meningitis, neonatal Herpes simplex virus type 2 encephalitis (Hayes et al., 2022). The presented work aimed to determine quantitative changes in the brain proteome of HSV-2-infected mice using proteomics analysis methods. Proteins that play characteristic roles during infection in the brains of infected animals were also analyzed. Large-scale protein profiling enables comparative measurements of multiple proteins simultaneously, while label-free proteomics methods are optimized to detect small changes in protein abundance (Campos et al., 2017). Therefore, we were able to detect small changes in protein abundance in infected and non-infected brain samples with stringent criteria. As previously reported, mice infected with HSV-2 initially showed no clinical symptoms until the viral load increases beyond a certain level. We confirmed that BALB/c mice remained asymptomatic for the first 3 days after vaginal inoculation. Symptoms started to appear at 4 days after infection, and became apparent 7 days later, including hindlimb paralysis and death. The replication of the virus in the brain was also different between the two stages (See 
Supplement Figure 1
). In the study of proteomic changes, we selected day 3 to represent the asymptomatic period and day 7 after the infection to represent the symptomatic period.Importantly, heatmap demonstrated that there were significantly differences in the expression of 249 proteins between non-infected and HSV-2 infected brains, with notable differences of 297 proteins in the brain tissue of asymptomatic and symptomatic animals. Gene ontology categorization revealed that these proteins were involved in various of cellular processes. Synaptic composition was affected, with alteration in the protein components and structural features of both pre- and postsynaptic membranes. These clues support the synapse, a key site where the functional connection between neurons occurs (Faria-Pereira and Morais, 2022), whose information transmission was in chaos post infection. Alterations in synaptic signaling, in the release of neurotransmitters from presynaptic neurons, changes in binding to postsynaptic receptors, and synaptic degeneration are evident in the course of many neurodegenerative diseases (Parmar et al., 2022; Peng et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022a). Indeed, we found that several differentially expressed proteins were involved in the pathways of KEGG associated with neurodegenerative diseases, autophagy, and other signaling. These results suggest that HSV-2 infection may have some similarities with neurodegenerative diseases.Notably, there is growing epidemiological and experimental evidence suggest that recurrent HSV infection is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease (AD) (Shinomoto et al., 2021; Protto et al., 2022), although the underlying molecular and functional mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. Herpes simplex virus is a neurotropic double-stranded DNA virus that primarily infects the epithelial cells of the oral cavity, nasal mucosa, and vagina. Here, the virus undergoes replicates, and newly generated viral particles may enter sensory neurons and transport to the trigeminal and dorsal sacral root ganglia where latent infection is established (Yun et al., 2014). The virus undergoes periodic reactivation in which newly formed viral particles are transported back to the primary site of infection via sensory neurons, resulting in well-known clinical lesions (ie, herpes and blisters). The virus can reach the central nervous system (CNS) from latently infected ganglion neurons, where it may cause acute neurological disease such as encephalitis or mild, clinically asymptomatic infection, or establish lifelong latent infection (Rozenberg, 2020). The weakened immune system that occurs during aging may favor this process. Burgos et al. demonstrated that in addition to the neuronal pathway, HSV-1 can enter the central nervous system via the bloodstream. Several reports suggest that during infection, herpesviruses interact with several human proteins which are used to enter cells and move from the plasma membrane to the nucleus and back. HSV also utilizes the host’s transcriptional machinery to replicate and bind proteins that control immune surveillance or apoptosis. Interestingly, in an attempt to eliminate the virus, the host may even cause cellular damage through immune and inflammatory responses against virus-containing cells. If this occurs in the CNS, HSV-induced inflammatory responses may lead to HSE or, in less severe cases, cell death and neurodegeneration (Piacentini et al., 2014). In a 14-year follow-up of 512 elderly patients without initial dementia, Letenneur et al. showed that serum anti-HSV IgM-positive subjects had a significantly higher risk of AD (hazard ratio 2.55) and serum anti-HSV IgG-positive subjects did not. Significantly increased risk of AD was found (Harris and Harris, 2015). Localization and autopsy studies of patients with HSV-1 encephalitis have found that HSV-1 is specifically neurotropic in the temporal cortex, frontal lobe, and hippocampus, the same regions of brain affected by AD (Steel and Eslick, 2015). In vitro and animal studies have shown that HSV-1 infection leads to the development of the main features of AD, especially neuroinflammation, Amyloid β-peptide (Aβ) deposition and Tau protein phosphorylation, and the accumulation of Aβ may be due to its potential antiviral effect (Harris and Harris, 2018). HSV-2 infection results in the accumulation of hyperphosphorylated Tau and β-amyloid in human SK-N-MC neuroblastoma cells. HSV-1 remains dormant after initial infection and periodically reactivates as immunity declines (Bellon and Nicot, 2017). Long-term immune senescence may result in more frequent and/or intense reactivation of the virus with age. The gradual onset and relatively late onset of AD can be explained in terms of time (Stowe et al., 2012). These evidences suggest that the accumulation of intracellular damage caused by HSV viral infection may be associated with neurodegeneration and even Alzheimer’s disease, particularly viral reactivation.In this case, we captured GluN2A, a vital protein associated with neurological function as well as HSV-2 infection, which also participates the progression of AD. The characteristic pathological changes of AD mainly include the accumulation of Aβ and the formation of extracellular neuroinflammatory plaques and the hyperphosphorylation of Tau (Ittner and Gotz, 2011; Guan et al., 2022) Shrinking, massive loss of neurons in the brain area and abnormal synaptic function, cause progressive cognitive decline (such as memory loss, loss of cognitive ability, etc.) and behavioral impairment in patients (Lane et al., 2018). As an early event in AD pathogenesis, synaptic degeneration is closely related to cognitive impairment in AD patients. Evidence suggests that Aβ is a major factor in synaptic dysfunction and loss in the brains of AD patients. Early studies have shown that Aβ interferes with synaptic function by binding to ionotropic glutamate N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) as a gain-of-function ligand, mediating physiological synaptic plasticity and glutamate acid-induced neurotoxicity (Chang et al., 2016). NMDARs are encoded by Grin and exist as heterotetrameric complexes consisting of two essential GluN1 and two GluN2 (Guan et al.) and/or GluN3 (A-B) subunits. NMDARs play an important role in neural development and formation, plasticity of learning and memory, and cell survival (Gurma et al., 2021) and their dysfunction is closely related to many neurological diseases, such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease. The function of NMDARs is determined by the difference of GluN2 subunits (Wyllie et al., 2013). Among these subunits, the GluN2A protein encoded by Grin2a is present in the nerve cells (neurons) of the brain and spinal cord, and is mainly expressed in the cortex and hippocampus, which are closely related to learning/memory, and is distributed on the postsynaptic membrane and is increasing with age gradually (Booker and Wyllie, 2021). Other researcher found that astrocyte GluN2A subunit exerts neuroprotective effects by promoting synaptic survival and identified nerve growth factor as a mediator of astrocyte GluN2A buffering Aβ synaptic toxicity (Li et al., 2016). In this study, during the acute infection phase of the HSV-2 mouse model of vaginal infection, the quantitative analysis of LFQ protein showed that the expression of GluN2A encoded by Grin2a increased in the mouse brain tissue, but no significant changes in the expression of Aβ were detected. Based on this, we speculate that GluN2A may be a key molecule in the neuroprotection of HSV-2 during acute infection, and may also be a key molecule unrelated to Alzheimer’s disease during acute infection.5 ConclusionIn this work, we conducted a quantitative shotgun proteomic analysis of proteins in brain tissues of BALB/c mice in the acute phase after vaginal infection with HSV-2. The results showed that the differentially expressed proteins during the acute infection were mainly involved in the formation of synaptic structure and the regulation of synaptic excitability, and were related to a variety of neurological diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases. Changes in synaptic structure and function may be the reasons for the occurrence of neurological diseases after infection, and the screened protein GluN2A may play an important neuroprotective role in neurological diseases caused by HSV infection, which remain to be further studied. These data provide further evidence that HSV is a risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease. Of course, given the growing evidence that reactivation of HSV infection is associated with Alzheimer’s disease, this study only studied the acute infection period, so there are certain limitations.Data availability statementThe data presented in the study are deposited in the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository,accession number PXD034186.Ethics statementThe animal study was reviewed and approved by Animal Ethics Committee, Institute of Medical Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.Author contributionsQL and TW conceived and designed the study. JC and QW performed the experiments and analyzed the data. YH contributed data curation and manuscript modification. TM, JW, LW, and YZ contributed reagents and materials. JC wrote the first draft. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.FundingThis work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant numbers 31670173 and 82171817), the funds for Scientific Research from Department of Education of Yunnan Province (grant number 2022J0205), the funds for 2022 Open Project of Yunnan Provincial Key Laboratory of Clinical Virology (grant number 2022A600301), and the funds for IMBCAMS PhD Innovation (grant number 2018018004).AcknowledgmentsWe would like to thank Wuhan Servicebio Technology Co., Ltd. for technical help.Conflict of interestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s noteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.


Title: The Interplay of Genital Herpes with Cellular Processes: A Pathogenesis and Therapeutic Perspective

1. IntroductionHerpes simplex virus (HSV), a member of the Herpesviridae family, is one of the most prevalent viral pathogens globally [1]. Historical observations dating back to Hippocrates coined the term ‘Herpes’, noting the virus’s propensity for recurrent lytic infection [1,2]. HSV is an enveloped, double-stranded DNA virus with a genome size of around 150 kilobase pairs (kbp). HSV’s genome encodes various polypeptides crucial for attachment to host cell, viral replication, lytic and lysogenic life cycles, transcriptional activation, and virulent pathogenesis [3,4]. Among the nine different types of human herpesviruses, HSV-1 and HSV-2 are the most studied, known for their broad host range, infecting neonates, adolescents, and adults [4]. Nearly the entire human population is seropositive for some type of herpesviruses, with neonates exhibiting the severest clinical outcomes when infected with HSV-2 [5,6].HSV-2 possesses a double-stranded DNA genome with 74 genes encoding approximately 84 proteins, critical for viral component formation, infection, replication, and latency establishment [7]. Infection, neuro-invasion, and latency establishment are HSV-2’s key features [8,9,10]. Remarkably, under experimental conditions, HSV-2 demonstrates a host range beyond humans, causing diverse pathologies in various models [11,12,13].In natural human infections, HSV-2 primarily spreads through intimate genital tract contact, resulting in persistent infection [14]. The World Health Organization (WHO) reports that 491 million sexually active individuals aged 14–49 harbor HSV-2, with an estimated 12% global prevalence of genital herpes in 2015 [15,16,17]. Approximately 400 million people are at risk of genital herpes with latent persistence, with women having a twofold higher seropositivity than men [18,19,20]. Despite antiviral therapy, HSV-2 can cause severe neurological complications and mortality, with a transmission rate of 1 in 10,000 live births [21]. Like HSV-2, HSV-1 can cause genital infection through transmission from the oral or genital area of an infected host. Recently, cases of genital herpes caused by HSV-1 have been increasing. However, genital herpes recurrences are less frequent with HSV-1 than with HSV-2 [1,2,14]. Comprehensive research in the twentieth century contributed to our understanding of HSV’s structure, function, and pathogenesis, which was crucial for preventive measures and treatments [20,22,23,24,25,26]. HSV-2 is a lifelong sexually and asexually transmitted infection, predominantly acquired from partners shedding the virus [27]. It ranks as the most prevalent sexually transmitted disease (STD) in the United States, targeting the skin and mucous membranes while cycling between lytic and latency phases [1,14,28]. The initial infection leads to viral replication at the exposure site and dormancy in the sacral ganglia, evading host immune responses in multiple ways [18,29] (Figure 1). HSV-2 primarily manifests as genital ulcer disease (GUD) and can cause neonatal infections, inflammation, and, less frequently, ocular infections, encephalitis, and meningitis [8,30,31,32,33,34,35]. Immunocompromised individuals and neonates face more severe HSV-2 infections due to various genetic, immune, and epigenetic factors [17,28].The available treatments for HSV-2, including nucleoside analogs like acyclovir, valacyclovir, and famciclovir, reduce symptoms but fail to eliminate the virus [27,36,37]. HSV-2 remains latent in neuronal cells, causing recurrent infections triggered by factors like injury, infections, stress, UV exposure, and immunosuppression [1]. In the following sections, we will summarize the key steps in HSV-2 pathogenesis. As we delve deeper into understanding the intricate cellular interactions involved in HSV-2 pathogenesis, the potential for developing novel therapeutic approaches targeting cellular proteins and pathways offers hope for more effective management and treatment of this persistent global health concern.2. Life Cycle of HSV-2 The life cycle of both HSV-1 and -2 comprises several pivotal stages, which have been comprehensively discussed in many reports [1,4,26,29]. The description below of the steps involved in the viral replication is based on studies conducted on both HSV-1 and HSV-2. It commences with viral glycoproteins (gB and gC) attaching to heparan sulfate proteoglycans on cell surface protrusions, facilitating efficient access of the virions to the host cell body via a unique F-actin-dependent extracellular transport phenomenon known as ‘surfing’ [38]. Subsequently, HSV-2 enters the host cells through a fusion of the viral envelope with endocytosis, with the gD protein being instrumental in this process by interacting with cell receptors such as nectin-1 and herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM) [39]. Once inside the cell, the viral capsid and tegument disperse in the cytoplasm. The capsid is then transported to the nucleus with the assistance of dynein, dynactin, and heat shock protein 90 [40,41]. VP22 is an important tegument protein of HSV that aids in the spread of the virus. It has been reported that the reorganization of microtubules is helpful for the nuclear transport of VP22 [42].Within the nucleus, the regulated sequential expression of viral genes, encompassing immediate early, early, and late genes, leads to the synthesis of various proteins, including infected cell proteins and tegument proteins, all of which play pivotal roles in viral replication and the formation of viral components. Notably, early genes contribute to immune evasion and neurovirulence, while early and late proteins are essential for replication, structural components, and viral egress [43]. Finally, mature virions exit the nucleus into the cytoplasm and acquire a new envelope derived from the Golgi membrane [29,44]. Following the primary infection of keratinocyte cells in the genital region, HSV-2 spreads to nerve endings and migrates to the site of latency in the dorsal ganglia [45]. Upon reactivation, HSV-2 again travels to the genital area, leading to ulceration in the keratinocytes [14,46,47]. HSV-2 can propagate by infecting neighboring healthy cells or persist in a latent state in the dorsal ganglia [43]. Latency is an interesting survival feature of HSV-2 as the viral genome is present in a non-infectious state with potential to cause recurrent infection [43]. The role of epigenetic regulation, latency-associated transcripts (LATs), factors responsible for the establishment and reversal of latency, and drugs targeting the latent virus are some of the important aspects of HSV-2 latency [11,18].3. TransmissionHSV-2 spreads through two primary modes—mother-to-fetus and sexual contact. Maternal transmission poses risks to neonates, ranging from mild to life-threatening conditions, with a heightened risk during pregnancy, particularly in cases of maternal acquisition or reactivation of the virus [2,29]. Often asymptomatic, genital herpes can go unnoticed, increasing neonatal infection risks, especially during the peripartum period, postnatally, or in utero. Factors such as vaginal delivery, invasive instruments, neonatal membrane rupture, and the presence of genital HSV-2 contribute to transmission [48,49]. Guidelines from the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists recommend suppressive antiviral therapy from 36 weeks of gestation and cesarean delivery for mothers with genital lesions to minimize transmission risk. However, complete elimination remains challenging, prompting ongoing research into vaccines against maternal HSV transmission, combination antiviral therapies, and antiviral agents that penetrate the blood–brain barrier [25]. Genital herpes primarily spreads through direct sexual contact with an infected partner displaying genital lesions. Asymptomatic carriers unknowingly shed the virus, with approximately 10.2% shedding during asymptomatic infections and 20.1% during symptomatic ones [50]. Behavioral and social factors, such as age, race, gender, marital status, and location, influence HSV-2 infection rates [1,51,52]. Clinical manifestations include painful genital ulcers, vesicles, blisters, and systemic symptoms like fever and headache [53]. The incubation period ranges from 2 to 12 days following exposure, with three clinical stages: primary genital herpes (without previous antibodies in the host), non-primary genital HSV (simultaneous infection of different HSVs), and recurrent genital HSV, each characterized by varying levels of reactivation and lesion formation and diagnosed through serological analysis [54].4. Herpes Diagnosis: Existing and Emerging Diagnostic Tools and TechniquesDiagnosing HSV-2 is crucial for disease control, treatment, and prevention. Several factors affect diagnosis, including the infection stage, sample handling, detection methods, and reporting. A variety of cell-based assays and in vivo methods have been developed to diagnose and study HSV-2 infection (Figure 2). The main approaches involve detecting the virus and its constituents (genetic material and proteins) and analyzing virus-specific antibodies in the host serum [55]. Common diagnostic methods for HSV-2 include swab collection from genital ulcers for virus culture (direct method), polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or nucleic-acid amplification assays (NAATs) for viral genetic material detection (indirect or molecular method), serological tests, and gel electrophoresis like Western blotting [56,57,58]. Traditional viral culture is time consuming and may yield false negatives, however; PCR, on the other hand, is highly sensitive, detecting lower amounts of HSV-2 genetic material [59,60]. The Tzanck smear test, which analyzes cytopathic alterations in active genital herpes lesions, lacks specificity and requires expertise [55]. The use of fluorescein-tagged monoclonal antibodies for HSV antigen detection is specific but less sensitive [50]. PCR stands out as the gold standard due to its sensitivity, specificity, and rapid results [61]. Serotype-specific analysis distinguishes HSV-2 from HSV-1 and is essential for treatment and counseling. Serological testing, using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) to detect unique envelope glycoproteins (gG1 for HSV-1 and gG2 for HSV-2), is another sensitive method [62]. Point-of-care (POC) devices offer advantages like on-site, rapid, portable, and cost-effective detection with minimal expertise needed. These microfluidic devices employ various principles, including immunofluorescence, PCR, and ELISA, to name a few [55]. For instance, Laderman et al., (2008) developed a POC device for HSV-2 detection using gold nanoparticles and anti-HSV-2 IgG, showing minimal cross-reactivity [63]. Another group created a smartphone-based HSV-2 sensor using luminescent nanoparticles and recombinant glycoprotein from HSV-2, achieving high sensitivity and specificity [33].5. Cell-Intrinsic Immune Response and Cell Death PathwaysThe cell-intrinsic immune response plays a crucial role in controlling HSV pathogenesis. However, viruses have developed mechanisms to evade intrinsic immunity, and data from previous studies suggest that HSV-2 latency in neurons and subsequent reactivation is a result of its ability to bypass immunity [64,65,66]. Several viral proteins, such as UL41 and ICP34.5, can interact with one or more signaling molecules (interferons, TLR, NF-kB, etc.) involved in curbing viral infection and spread [67]. Interferons (IFNs) are a family of antiviral proteins that signal adjacent cells to release antiviral molecules. However, viral tegument proteins can react with IFN signaling and NF-kB transcription, rendering IFN synthesis ineffective [65]. VP24, which is required for HSV’s viral capsid, can affect IFN-B production and block IRF3 activation by stopping the interaction between Tank binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) during infection, leading to the suppression of IFN expression [68]. ICP34.5 can also interact with TBK1 via the TBK-1 binding domain to block IFN synthesis [69]. Therefore, the generation of an innate response by IFNs is a less effective host strategy to control HSV-2, and other signals such as tumor necrosis factor and cytokines play a crucial role in IFN stimulation by NF-kB [70,71]. Apoptosis is one of the host defense mechanisms to curtail viral infection and limit viral nuclear proliferation [72].Stress granules (SGs) consist of mRNA and proteins and are localized in the cytoplasm, formed in response to cellular stress [73]. Depending on the viral strain, stress granule formation is either upregulated or downregulated [73,74]. Several reports highlighted that, upon HSV-2 infection of HeLa cells, UL41 hindered stress granule accumulation and provided a favorable environment for viral multiplication [75,76,77]. SGs are attracting attention owing to their role in facilitating viral replication and avoiding translational arrest [71,72,73,74,75]. In another study, HSV-2 was found to block SG accumulation in HeLa cells [75]. Virion components are found to mediate this inhibition of SGs, as HSV-2 defective in UL41 produces SGs during late infection [77]. The removal of endoribonuclease activity of the virion host shutoff (Vhs) protein creates a defect in the process of halting SG formation [77].Multiple host cell death pathways (apoptosis, necroptosis, pyroptosis, and autophagy) constitute the cell-intrinsic defense mechanisms against viral infections, but viruses hinder infected cell death that would otherwise limit the infection [78,79]. Shrinkage and swelling of the cell, membrane blebbing and rupturing, fragmentation of genetic material, and mitochondrial permeabilization are some of the features of cell death that give opportunities to immune cells to get rid of these infected cells [79]. HSV manipulates multiple cell death pathways for its survival and replication. Caspase (cysteine proteases) is the main regulator of apoptosis and compromising caspase activity also prevents necroptosis [78]. The large subunit of ribonucleotide reductase is used by HSV to mask apoptosis via caspase 8 inhibition, whereas ICP6 and ICP10 impede receptor-interacting protein kinase 1 (RIP1) and RIP3 interaction, which are important for necroptosis [80]. Several other viral proteins such as gD, Us3, gJ, and a transcript, LAT, have also been reported to disrupt cell death pathways [78,79,80].6. Cellular Metabolic Changes after HSV-2 InfectionCellular metabolic changes after HSV-2 infection are intricately linked to the immune response and viral infection processes [81]. Various cell metabolites, including glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), succinate, and reactive oxygen species (ROS), interact with interferons, interleukins, T cells, and macrophages, profoundly affecting the immune response [81]. As an intracellular, obligatory parasite, HSV-2 relies entirely on the host cell’s metabolic processes to generate the biomolecules and energy necessary for viral replication. In most cases, viruses increase glycolysis and fatty acid biosynthesis to meet their energy needs for replication [81]. HSV infection disrupts oxidative phosphorylation and the Krebs cycle, resulting in the rapid metabolism of mitochondrial DNA [82]. Notably, studies have shown that HSV can enter cells in the absence of glucose but cannot produce infectious progeny, emphasizing the virus’s dependence on glucose for replication [83,84]. Additionally, research has demonstrated increased glucose uptake in Vero cells infected with HSV-1 [85].In response to HSV-2 infection, the immune system activates interferon and various lymphocytes, such as B and T cells, to combat the virus [64,65]. However, HSV-2 has evolved strategies to evade the immune response by metabolically reducing the constituents available for the synthesis of antibodies and the production of MHC molecules, complement proteins, and NK cells [86,87]. The viral protein Vhs acts as an endoribonuclease, shutting off the host cell’s mRNA and repurposing its translational machinery for viral replication. Vhs also dampens cytokine and chemokine synthesis, leading to a less effective proinflammatory response [88,89].7. HSV-2 and the Host MicrobiomeThe human microbiome, or microbiota, houses trillions of bacteria that play essential roles in metabolism, immunity, homeostasis, and behavior, often connected with viral infections [90,91]. Microbiome-based therapies, including probiotics, gut microbiota manipulation, and fecal microbiota treatment, can mitigate viral disease pathogenesis. In a study by Mousavi et al. (2018), Lactobacillus crispatus treatment before, during, and after HSV-2 infection reduced infectivity by acting as a barrier to the virus, likely trapping it or blocking HSV-2 receptors [92]. Bacteroides fragilis produces capsular polysaccharide A (PSA), which binds to macrophages and TLR2+ cells, increasing IL-10 secretion by regulatory T cells [93]. In a mouse model of HSV-1 infection, PSA upregulated IL-10, preventing brainstem inflammation [94] (Figure 3).Prophylactic PSA administration protected against inflammatory neutrophils and monocyte invasion of the brainstem due to HSV-1, suggesting translational potential in combination with acyclovir against encephalitis and neurological diseases [94]. Bacterial vaginosis (BV) disrupts the vaginal microbiota by reducing beneficial bacteria (lactobacillus) and increasing anaerobic bacteria, negatively impacting reproductive health, and increasing the risk of sexually transmitted infections, including AIDS [19,20,95]. HSV-2 infection is associated with a 30% increase in BV incidence, likely due to altered vaginal microbiota caused by immune reactions on the mucosal surface [96]. Another study highlighted the close relationship between genital microbiota and HSV-2 in acquiring HIV [97]. Altered bacterial composition, including more anaerobic bacteria (G. vaginalis, P. bivia) and reduced L. crispatus, combined with HSV-2 infection, led to mucosal inflammation, disruption of mucosal integrity, and CD4+ T cell accumulation, supporting HIV replication [97].8. Challenges in the Development of Potent Anti-HSV-2 DrugsThere are several challenges in the development of potent antiviral therapies for the treatment of HSV-2. Additionally, many antiviral drugs have been reported to interact with other drugs, leading to toxic side effects that hinder long-term treatment [98]. The short half-life of antiviral drugs also requires frequent dosing, which can increase the risk of drug resistance and toxicity in immunocompromised patients [99]. The viral latency associated with HSV-2 infection increases the difficulty in diagnosis and subsequent treatment [100]. The selectivity of antiviral agents for virus-specific targets over host cell molecules is another challenge in antiviral therapy [101]. Most of the current treatment regimens against HSV-2 rely on targeting viral and cellular proteins to strengthen the immune response against the virus [102]. However, viral entry into host cells is a complex process, making it difficult to develop drugs that can effectively inhibit viral entry [103]. A range of local and systemic drugs including acyclovir, valacyclovir, penciclovir, famciclovir, cidofovir, foscarnet, idoxuridine, and trifluridine are currently available for the treatment of genital herpes [30,104,105,106]. However, the emergence of acyclovir-resistant strains poses a significant challenge to the effective treatment of HSV [107,108]. Although anti-HSV-2 drugs can suppress viral replication and maintain the virus in a latent stage, they cannot completely eradicate the virus or prevent frequent reactivation [109]. Additionally, these drugs can be toxic to the host and do not inhibit viral translation [110,111]. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop safe, highly effective, novel drugs and combination synergistic therapies. These include microbicides, vaccines, as well as an emerging class of dual-acting combinations of microbicide and vaccine, termed microbivacs [112]. Drugs targeting cellular proteins involved in viral attachment, replication, latency, and proviral host factors are highly attractive for this purpose [27] (Figure 4).9. Promising Treatment Strategies9.1. VaccinesDeveloping effective HSV-2 vaccines is crucial due to limitations in the current antiviral treatments [113,114]. Vaccine development has faced challenges due to the complex virus–host interactions and latency; however, despite multiple obstacles, vaccine candidates, including live-attenuated, killed-virus, DNA, mRNA, and subunit vaccines, are in clinical trials [115] (Table 1).Monoclonal antibodies, adjuvants, viral antigens, aptamers, siRNAs, nanomaterials, phytochemicals, and microbial metabolites are being explored to stimulate prolonged immune responses [109]. However, vaccine candidates that induce antibody production and cytotoxic T lymphocyte responses in vitro and in rodents have shown limited protection in humans, highlighting the need for broader targets [64]. Xu et al. (2019) suggest effective vaccine strategies, including mimicking the viral replication cycle, generating innate and adaptive immune responses, eliminating viral molecules without harming host tissues, and promoting antigen presentation without compromising apoptosis [64]. A subunit vaccine called GEN-003/MM-2, containing HSV-2 glycoprotein D2 and ICP-4 in a matrix M-2, reduced genital ulcers and viral shedding in guinea pigs infected with HSV-2 [125].Vaxfectin, a DNA-based vaccine with gD, tegument proteins, and a lipid-based adjuvant, reduced HSV-2 replication and latent HSV-2 DNA in guinea pigs [116]. Considering the link between HSV-2 and HIV, microbicides, including compounds like cellulose sulfate, SDS, zinc acetate, carrageenin, and natural products, are being explored to prevent viral entry, cell-to-cell spread, and viral membrane disruption [126]. While microbicides face challenges like dosage, interference by seminal plasma, hormonal cycles, and potential toxicity, vaccines hold significant prophylactic potential [126].9.2. Gene EditingModern techniques are currently being developed to target HSV at the gene level. RNA interference (RNAi), zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), antisense oligonucleotides, and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeat (CRISPR)-associated protein 9 (Cas-9) have shown potential for editing the viral genome to develop more-effective and less-toxic antiviral therapies with an effective host immune response and lower chances of generating mutations [127]. Studies have shown that CRISPR/Cas9-mediated disruption of viral genes involved in DNA replication, tegument proteins, and capsid proteins can cause malfunctioning of HSV replication in Vero cells [128,129]. Knockdown of vital genes involved in the lytic cycle, such as ICP4, by siRNA resulted in decreased ICP4 expression in retinal epithelial cells, human trabecular meshwork cells, and Vero cells, with inhibition of cytopathic effects [130]. However, the major bottlenecks of gene editing technology are possible CRISPR/Cas9 mutant generation, low transfection rates, and toxicity associated with transcription-facilitating reagents [131].9.3. Antiviral Therapies Targeting Cellular ProteinsMultiple reports have clearly suggested a decrease in potency and the high toxicity of currently available anti-HSV drugs due to the emergence of resistant strains, making the development of newer treatments crucial [5,132]. Hopkins et al. (2020) reported the anti-HSV-2 potential of a small molecule known as BX795 [27]. BX795 exhibited in vitro antiviral activity at 10 µM in vaginal keratinocyte cells infected with HSV-2. Further, BX795 was found to be effective at a 50 µM concentration in an in vivo murine genital infection model. More interestingly, the vaginal keratinocyte cells can tolerate high concentrations (80 µM) of BX795, suggesting its cytocompatibility. BX795 inhibits HSV-2 by inhibiting the phosphorylation of protein kinase B (AKT). Cells infected with HSV-2 at a 0.1 multiplicity of infection (MOI) followed by treatment with BX795 (10 µM) showed significantly lowered viral (ICP27, gD) transcript levels, and the same was observed in a Western blot. In conclusion, BX795 stops the viral cellular translational machinery, thereby inhibiting viral multiplication. Based on earlier results, the author further proved that therapeutic prophylactic treatment of vaginal keratinocytes with BX795 strongly prevents future HSV-2 infection. In a quest to further the understanding of the mechanism of action of BX795, in vitro, in vivo, and in silico docking studies revealed that BX795 lowers AKT phosphorylation, along with its downstream targets, 4EBP1 and p70S6K [133].The antiviral potential of highly porous activated carbon (HPAC) against HSV-2 was recently demonstrated in both in vitro and in vivo models [134,135]. In vitro studies have shown that activated charcoal can trap virions and prevent infection. Interestingly, loading acyclovir into activated charcoal (DECON—drug encapsulated carbon) inhibits HSV-2 at very low concentrations (IC50 of 0.08 mg/mL) and is able to restrict HSV-1, pseudorabies virus (PRV), and bovine herpesvirus (BHV). In a murine model of genital infection, the combination of highly porous activated carbon (HPAC) loaded with acyclovir, known as DECON, greatly enhanced the efficacy of acyclovir with lower dose requirements and a shorter treatment time. Furthermore, DECON possesses beneficial characteristics such as a prophylactic and sustained drug release platform that is biocompatible, cost efficient, and immunologically neutral [135]. Additionally, 4-phenylbutyrate (PBA), a compound commonly used to treat urea cycle disorders, was found to have anti-HSV activity and synergistic potential when used in combination with trifluridine (TFT). PBA was shown to mask the regulation of the viral-supporting host protein CREB3, resulting in the inhibition of viral translation. The combination of PBA and TFT lowered the concentration of TFT required for antiviral activity [136].9.4. Nanomaterial: Inhibitors of Proviral Functions of Cellular ProteinsNanomaterials with the capability to interfere with the proviral functions of cellular proteins find applications in the detection, diagnosis, and treatment of viral diseases [106,137,138]. This emerging field harnesses a wide range of nanomaterials, including carbon dots, graphene, polymeric nanomaterials, silver nanoparticles, gold nanoparticles, and others, to inhibit mechanisms that facilitate viral infections, ushering in new possibilities in drug discovery and targeted drug delivery [139,140,141]. These nanomaterials possess unique properties, such as size, shape, composition, charge, and surface functionalization, which can be strategically employed to either detect or competitively inhibit various cellular processes crucial for viral infections [138]. Nanomaterials are the next generation of antimicrobials, capable of disrupting multiple stages of viral infection, ranging from attachment and entry to replication, egress, and latency, all while modulating inflammation and the host immune response [112,140]. Nanomaterials can be engineered to disrupt viral capsids, mechanically damage viruses, enhance targeting precision, and even mimic host receptors [142].For instance, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), known for their diverse properties, have demonstrated inhibitory effects against a spectrum of viruses, including HIV-1, H1N1, PPRV, vaccinia virus, and poliovirus [140]. Gold nanoparticles (AuNPs), appreciated for their biocompatibility, effectively blocked HSV-2G, showcasing their potential as viral entry inhibitors [143]. Zinc oxide tetrapod nanoparticles (ZOTENs), intentionally designed for efficient virus capture, have exhibited microbicidal potential against genital HSV-2 strain 333, resulting in reduced viral shedding and inflammation. The captured virions are utilized for antigen presentation and immune system development. Therefore, ZOTENs are considered an effective microbivac that functions both as an effective microbicide and an antigenic platform for lasting immunity against the virus [112,144] (Figure 5). Similarly, carbon nanodots (C-dots) functionalized with amine and boronic acid have displayed high efficacy at low concentrations, effectively inhibiting HSV-1 entry without causing cytotoxic effects [102]. The examples above underscore the promising role of nanomaterials in combating viral diseases, offering innovative approaches to detection, prevention, and treatment by disrupting cellular processes that facilitate viral replication and infection.9.5. Natural CompoundsDue to the increasing resistance to widely prescribed anti-HSV drugs, including acyclovir, there is a growing demand for more-potent compounds from natural sources, such as plants and microorganisms. The major classes of antiviral compounds from natural sources include alkaloids, flavonoids, terpenes, polysaccharides, phenolic acids, peptides, and steroids [145,146]. Diverse compounds of natural origin may be highly potent against HSV due to their multiple inhibitory mechanisms, making antiviral resistance difficult for viruses [147] (Table 2).9.6. AptamersAptamers are either oligonucleotide or peptide molecules with a high affinity to bind a diversity of biological important molecules and are proposed as an alternative to antibodies for virus and viral antigen detection [156,157]. Aptamers can not only prevent viral entry inside the host cell but can also act on other vital processes of the virus, such as transcription and translation [156]. The above characteristics demand more research on aptamers with respect to their usefulness in the therapy and diagnosis of viral diseases [158]. Moore et al. (2011) fabricated RNA aptamers through the SELEX process and tested their potential to neutralize HSV-2. They found that the aptamers inhibited HSV-2 infection with a low IC50 range (20–50 nM) by reacting with gD and inhibiting the HVEM and nectin 1 infection pathway [159].10. Optineurin and Autophagy in HSV-2 InfectionResearch into controlling HSV-2 infection has recently turned its attention to understanding the pivotal cellular factors that either amplify or suppress viral pathogenesis. This could be a game changer in developing new therapeutic strategies against HSV-2 [136]. A notable protein, optineurin (OPTN), previously recognized for restricting Salmonella enterica infection has emerged as a significant player in the control of HSV-2 pathogenesis [160]. Patil et al. (2022) found that cells without OPTN (OPTN−/−) exhibited a more pronounced HSV-2 infection compared to their OPTN-containing (OPTN+/+) counterparts [161]. This disparity was largely attributed to OPTN’s crucial role in modulating protective autophagy and CCL5 levels. Supporting these findings, a variety of investigative techniques were employed, which demonstrated a striking fivefold HSV-2 increase in OPTN−/− cells compared to the controls. A deeper dive into the study’s data revealed a noteworthy uptick in the conversion of the protein LC3-I to LC3-II in OPTN+/+ cells during HSV-2 invasion, a recognized marker of autophagy [161,162].Autophagy, a cell recycling system, plays a pivotal role in discarding unwanted cellular components, hence acting as a lifeline during cellular stress scenarios [163]. The dynamics of autophagy in the context of HSV-2 remained ambiguous until Yakoub and Shukla (2015) demonstrated that HSV-2 maintains autophagy at a baseline level, rather than enhancing it [164]. When autophagy was pharmacologically hindered (chloroquine treatment), there was a marked decline in HSV-2 virulence [164]. The inhibition of interferon β by ICP22 and ICP27 of HSV-2 pointed out the interplay between innate immunity and autophagy and viral infection [165]. A study focused on patients with autophagy-related protein mutations indicated a surge in viral replication and subsequent cell demise [166]. Conversely, reintroducing these proteins effectively curtailed these adverse effects.11. Heparanase in the Pathogenesis of HSV-2The dynamics of how cellular proteins and their corresponding regulators foster HSV-2 in exiting target cells remains largely underexplored [26,167]. Recently, heparanase (HPSE) has garnered attention for its potential involvement in the pathogenesis of HSV [168]. In a pivotal study by Hopkins et al. (2018), two critical cellular enzymes, HPSE and cathepsin L, were found to play a role in HSV-2 infection [169]. Specifically, HSV-2 infection was observed to instigate the shedding of heparan sulfate, due to a surge in HPSE levels. Meanwhile, cathepsin L has emerged as instrumental, transforming the dormant HPSE into its active state. This claim was further solidified when the application of an HPSE inhibitor markedly diminished the release of HSV-2 from vaginal cells. Delving deeper into the molecular intricacies, the escalation in HPSE after infection appears to be mediated by NF-kB. The significance of cathepsin L in HSV-2’s release and subsequent spread was accentuated when using cathepsin L inhibitor IV, which showed a reduced rate of viral egress. Beyond the realm of HSV-2, it is worth noting that HPSE’s influence extends to various inflammatory ailments, encompassing conditions like colitis, lung injuries, and other sexually transmitted diseases [170].12. ConclusionsTo summarize, while our understanding of HSVs has spanned a considerable duration, a definitive therapeutic solution that entirely eradicates the virus and bestows comprehensive immunity against the infection remains elusive. Nevertheless, the accelerated pace at which we are uncovering new insights concerning the HSV-2 life cycle within its host, coupled with the host’s defensive responses, paints a hopeful picture. The horizon now shimmers with the potential for achieving full-scale, multitargeted, and more effective treatment of this persistent infectious agent. A multitude of strategies are being explored to counter the menace of this virus. These include the development of synergistic medications, the repurposing of existing drugs, and innovations in vaccines, microbicides, and biological metabolites. Rapid diagnostic tools, when coupled with extensive public awareness campaigns, can also play a pivotal role in curtailing the spread and impact of the disease. It is crucial to remember that alleviating the burden of HSV-2 is not solely about countering one ailment. Effective strategies against HSV-2 can cascade into reductions in the prevalence of associated complications and co-infections, including but not limited to AIDS, various cancers, and other sexually transmitted diseases. As we move forward, a deeper dive into the realm of the host’s immune-metabolic changes and the microbiome post-HSV-2 infection is anticipated to be a goldmine of information. These insights can be harnessed to forge robust defenses and therapeutic interventions against the virus in future endeavors.


Title: Novel variants of human herpesvirus 2 from Brazilian HIV-1 coinfected subjects

Human herpesvirus 2 (HHV-2) is the main cause of genital herpes. The virus is mainly transmitted through sexual contact and typically causes an asymptomatic infection. Worldwide, an estimated 267 million women are living with HHV-2 infection.
1
 In Brazil, the HHV-2 is the cause of 55.3% of genital ulcer among patients from Brazilian Amazon.
2
 Previous studies showed HHV-2 prevalence rates ranged of 6.6% to 15.6% among women,
3

,

4

,

5
 19.2 to 59.7% in women infected with HIV.
4

,

6

HHV-2 is an enveloped virus belonging to the Herpesviridae family. The envelope is a lipid bilayer with 12 glycoproteins which are necessary for early interactions between virus and target cells.
7
 Little is known about the genetic diversity of the HHV-2 isolates circulating worldwide. The glycoprotein B (gB) coding sequence is one of the most conserved genes within the family Herpesviridae.
8
 Phylogenetic analyses performed with genes coding for glycoproteins G, I, E and B led to the classification of HHV-2 isolates into two clades, A and B.
8

,

9
 Moreover, a genetically divergent variant, called HSV-2v, has been recently characterised.
10

,

11
 Isolates from Europe,
8

,

9
 America,
10

,

12
 Asia
13
 and Africa
8

,

11

,

12

,

13
 have been characterised. However, no data are available for HHV-2 isolates circulating in Brazil.Blood samples and/or cutaneous lesions were collected at the time of appearance of the genital lesions. This samples are from six Brazilian women (two whites, three browns and one black), aged 26 to 58 years and living in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Two of them were pregnant, coinfected with HIV-1 (CD4/CD8 ratios of 0.61 and 1.18, respectively), and receiving antiviral therapy.Antibodies against HHV-2 were detected by enzyme immunoassay (Bioelisa HSV-2 IgG, Biokit, Barcelona Spain). Viral DNA was detected by real time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), as described previously.
14
 In addition, ten overlapping genome segments, covering almost all (2,250 bp) the gB encoding region (UL-27) were amplified in single round PCR assays. Each reaction was performed in a 25-μL volume containing 5 μL of DNA, 0.3 μM of each primer and one unit of GoTaq DNA polymerase (Promega, Madison, WI) under the following conditions: 95ºC for 5 min, 40 cycles of 95ºC for 30 s, 55-59ºC for 45 s, 72ºC for 90 s, followed for 10 min at 72ºC. PCR products were purified and directly sequenced with the ABI Big Dye Terminator cycle sequencing kit, version 1.1 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and the primers used for PCR (Table I).Multiple sequence alignments were done with sequences from this study and all the 140 HHV-2 gB sequences available in GenBank in September 2016, using MUSCLE, in the Mega 6.1 program. The best-fit evolutionary model was determined using the jModelTest version 2.0. Of the 140 HHV-2 sequences, were selected 37 HHV-2 isolates representing different countries to perform Phylogenetic relationships. The number reduction of the sequences was needed to decrease the time phylogenetic analysis performed in computer programs. Phylogenetic relationships among 37 HHV-2 isolates were estimated by the Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, implemented in MrBayes, version 3.2.3. The Bayesian analysis consisted of two simultaneous independent runs of 5 million MCMC generations (burn-in of 25%). We used Tracer v.1.6 to check for convergence and adequate mixing (i.e., an estimated sample size > 200 for all relevant parameters). In order to analyse possible recombination events, the sequence alignment was analysed with Bootscan, implemented in Simplot and RPD4.
15

,

16
 The sequences for Bootscan analysis were grouped according to clustering of the nominal taxa seen in the phylogenetic tree for each sequence.Six HHV-2 infected women were enrolled in this study which was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Oswaldo Cruz Institute (number: 895159/CAEE:28183314.7.0000.5248). All six participants signed an informed consent form.All six samples tested positive for HHV-2 IgG antibodies and real time PCR. Viral load varied from 3.5 x 102 to 1.5 x 106 copies/mL. In this study 82% (2,250 bp) of the gB coding sequences of all six HHV-2 isolates were determined (GenBank accession numbers: KY007702, KY007703, KY007704, KY007705, KY007706 and KY007707). Phylogenetic analysis showed that the four HHV-2 Brazilian isolates (BR014, BR020, BR022 and BR041) derived from the HIV negative women showed a close genetic relationship between them (99.4-99.6% of sequence identity) and clustered with European, North American and Asian strains within clade B (Figure). Meanwhile, the two isolates (BR021 and BR123) derived from the HIV positive women were almost identical (99.8% of sequence identity) but clustered separately from isolates previously classified into clades A and B as well as from the variants HSV-2v (genetic divergence of 1.1-1.3%) with a posterior probability of 1. We suggest to provisionally classify the new class of variants represented by isolates BR021 and BR123 as HHV-2vBR.Both isolates BR021 and BR123 showed 16 unique nucleotide substitutions when compared with all 140 HHV-2 gB sequences available in GenBank (Table II). Twelve of these mutations were G→C and C→G transversions. Fourteen were silent while the remaining two (G1411C and G1747A) resulted in Ala→Pro and Val→Ile changes, respectively. Interestingly, four of these 16 mutations were also present in the chimpanzee alphaherpesvirus (ChHV) prototype strain 105640 (Table II).HHV-2 genome, as well as those of the other herpesviruses, is characterised by a low rate of mutation during the replication process.
17
 As gB coding region is highly conserved, a low divergence (0.2-0.5%) has been observed among the gB sequences of HHV-2 isolates worldwide.
8

,

13

,

18
 In this study, however, the divergence rates found among the gB sequences of Brazilian samples BR021 and BR123 were greater than 1%.A new variant, showing a high degree of genetic divergence with respect to the HHV-2 reference strain in the UL30 encoding the DNA polymerase, has been recently described.
10
 This variant, called HSV-2v to distinguish it from the ‘classical’ HSV-2c isolates, was first found to circulate in Paris, France, between 2008 and 2012, and further significantly associated with an African origin and HIV co-infection.
11
 According to specific clade definition criteria, HSV-2v could be referred to as a new African HHV-2 clade. Interestingly, Brazilian HHV-2 variants BR021 and BR123 characterised in this study were derived from HIV infected persons whose ancestors were Africans (one was black, and the other was brown), suggestion the association of HHV-2 novels variants with HIV and African origin. In contrast with our results, Abrao et al.
19
 showed no specific differences regarding replication capacity and gene sequence were found when comparing HHV-2 strains from HIV-infected patients and HIV-negative patients, suggesting that HHV-2 infection are not influenced by HIV-1 infection.
19


TABLE IOligonucleotide primers used in this studyPrimerGenome position*
Sequence (5´ → 3´)ReferencegB1 For
CCCATCCCCTCGAAGAACAbrão et al.(19)
gB1 Rev577CAGACCCCCTTGGCGTTAATThis studygB2 For424TTCAAGGAGAACATCGCCCCThis studygB2 Rev744GGGGTTGTACTTGAGGTCGGThis studygB3 For557ATTAACGCCAAGGGGGTCTGThis studygB3 Rev885GTAGCCGTAAAACGGGGACAThis studygB4 For725CCGACCTCAAGTACAACCCCThis studygB4 Rev1164GGTGAAGGTGGTCGAGATGGThis studygB5 For1008GCTGACGACCCCAAGTTTAThis studygB5 Rev1487TCGATCGAGGAGGTGGTCTTThis studygB6 For1158CCTTCACCACCAACCTGACCThis studygB6 Rev1532CGTGGCGCTGTATGTGGTTAThis studygB7 For1464GCATCAAGACCACCTCCTCGThis studygB7 Rev1912GAAGATGAAGTAGCGCCGGTThis studygB8 For1604CGAGCTGACTCTCTCGGAACGThis studygB8 Rev2035CACAAACTCGTGGTCCTCCAThis studygB9 For1916GGGGCTACGTGTACTTCGAGThis studygB9 Rev2410ACAGGGCCTTCATGGGATTGThis studygB10 For2391CAATCCCATGAAGGCCCTGTThis studygB10 Rev2606GTTGGTGACCTTGGAGCTGAThis study
*: numbering from the initiation codon of the glycoprotein B (gB) coding region.

Phylogenetic relationshipsamong human herpesvirus 2 (HHV-2) based on Bayesian analysis of genetic distances generated from comparisons of a 2,250-bp fragment of the glycoprotein B (gB) sequences. The scale bar indicates an evolutionary distance of 0.003 substitutions per position. Numerical values (≥ 0.7) at the nodes indicate posterior probability replicates that supported by the interior branch. The Tamura 3-parameter model with gamma-distributed rate heterogeneity (T92 + G) was selected as the best-fit evolutionary model. Clades A and B are in accordance with previous studies.
8

,

9



TABLE IISpecific mutations found in the glycoprotein B (gB) coding regions of two human herpesvirus 2 (HHV-2) isolates derived from Brazilian HIV co-infected womenNucleotide changea
Presence in ChHV prototypeb
Amino acid changeG1254CNo-C1323GNo-G1411CNoA471PC1617GNo-C1668GNo-C1683GNo-G1731CNo-G1734AYes-G1747ANoV583IG1761CYes-G1767CNo-C1816TYes-C1836GNo-C1857GNo-G1972AYes-G2001CNo-
a: numbering from the initiation codon of the gB coding region; b: number access of chimpanzee alphaherpesvirus (ChHV) prototype: NC_023677.1.
Preliminary results have suggested that HSV-2v may have acquired genomic segments from chimpanzee alphaherpesvirus (ChHV) by recombination.
11
 Here we demonstrated the existence of two variants (tentatively called HHV-2vBR) showing four nucleotide substitutions absent in all HHV-2 isolates but present in the simian virus ChHV (Table II). Both Brazilian (HHV-2vBR) variants are more closely related to ChHV (and more distant to HSV-2c) than are the HSV-2v isolates pat10, pat11 and pat7 (Figure). Whether BR021 or BR123, or both, resulted from recombinant events between human and simian herpesviruses remains to be determined. Ruling out the recombination hypotheses, the topology of the phylogenetic tree (Figure) suggests that the divergence between the Brazilian variants and the other isolates, including HSV-2c and HSV-2v, may have occur at remote times. Recombination between nucleotide sequences is a major process influencing the evolution of most viruses, but no sign of recombination was found in our dataset.In conclusion, this study reveals the occurrence, in Brazil, of two types of HHV-2 isolates. Beside ‘classical’ isolates, derived from patients non coinfected with HIV, two variants (HHV-2vBR) showing some similarity with previously described HSV-2v variants were found to circulate. As their similar, HHV-2vBR variants were identified in patients coinfected with HIV of African ancestry. In this study, nucleotide sequencing of more than one genome region was not possible, due to the low amounts of virus (variants HHV-2vBR were derived from serum, not lesion samples). More epidemiological and molecular studies are required to confirm the existence of a new clade or genogroup and to investigate the impact of such novel variants in the pathogenesis of HHV-2 infection and HIV/HHV-2 co-infection.


Title: HSV-2 Co-Infection as a Driver of HIV Transmission among Heterosexual Non-Injecting Drug Users in New York City

IntroductionWhile injecting drug use is strongly associated with HIV in many parts of the world. [1], non-injecting drug use may lead to sexual transmission of HIV through several pathways. Non-injecting drug use can lead to HIV transmission through impaired decision making while under the influence of drugs, or through increased sexual pleasure (from some drugs) leading to increased unsafe sexual activity, and through unsafe sex as part of exchanging sex for drugs or money to purchase drugs. [2]; [3]; [4] A number of studies have found very high HIV prevalence among (predominantly heterosexual) non-injecting drug users (NIDUs): 37% in Porto Alegre, Brazil [5], 43% in China [6], 13% in Canada [7], 20% in Florida [8], 19% in New York City [9], 24% in Portugal [10], and 29% in Russia [11].In this report, we examine the relationships between HSV-2 and HIV infection over a time period in which HIV prevalence doubled among non-injecting drug users in New York City. HSV-2 increases susceptibility to HIV infection through physical disruption of the epithelial surface by HSV-2, and recruitment and persistence of inflammatory cells in the genital tract during HSV-2 reactivation at mucosal surfaces, [12]; [13]; [14] and increases transmissibility of HIV from persons co-infected with HSV-2 and HIV through increasing plasma HIV-1 RNA [15]; [16]
[17]. The relationship between HSV-2 and HIV infection has been extensively studied in sub-Saharan Africa [12]; [13]; [14], but there have been relatively few studies of the relationships between HSV-2 and HIV in the US [18]; [19]; [20].MethodsThe data reported here are derived from ongoing analyses of data collected from drug users entering the Beth Israel Medical Center drug detoxification and methadone maintenance programs in New York City. The methods for this “Risk Factors” study have been previously described in detail [21]; [22] so only a summary will be presented here. The programs are both large (approximately 5000 admissions per year in the detoxification program and approximately 6000 patients participating in methadone treatment at any point in time) and serve New York City as a whole. There were no changes in the requirements for entrance into the program over the time periods for the data presented here.Both injecting and non-injecting drug users entering the detoxification and methadone maintenance programs are eligible to participate in the study. The present analyses include only persons who reported that they have never injected illicit drugs (never-injecting drug users or NIDUs). Hospital records and the questionnaire results are checked for consistency on route of drug administration and subjects are examined for physical evidence of injecting. The data presented here are from subjects who participated in the study from 1995 to 1999 and from 2005 to 2011. Changes in the aims of the study did not allow for sampling of never-injecting drug users between 2000 and 2004.In the detoxification program, research staff visited the general admission wards of the program in a preset order and examined all intake records of a specific ward to construct lists of patients admitted within the prior 3 days. All of the patients on the list for the specific ward were then asked to participate in the study. Among patients approached by our interviewers, willingness to participate has been greater than 95%. After all of the patients admitted to a specific ward in the 3-day period have been asked to participate and interviews have been conducted among those who agreed to participate, the interviewer moved to the next ward in the preset order. As there was no relationship between the assignment of patients to wards and the order that the staff rotated through the wards, these procedures should produce an unbiased sample of persons entering the detoxification program. In the methadone program, newly admitted patients (admitted within the previous month) were asked to participate in the research during their intake process. In both programs, willingness to participate has been high, with approximately 95% of those asked agreeing to participate.Written informed consent was obtained and a structured questionnaire covering demographics, drug use, sexual risk behavior, and use of HIV prevention services was administered by a trained interviewer. Both persons who used drugs through injecting and non-injecting routes of administration were recruited into the study, but the data presented here include only persons who reported never having injected illicit drugs. Most HIV risk behavior questions referred to the 6 months prior to the interview, and thus would cover the time prior to entry into drug treatment. A modest percentage of the male subjects (7% of the 2730 initially interviewed) reported engaging in male-with-male sex. As we were particularly interested in HIV infection due to heterosexual transmission, subjects reporting MSM behavior were not included in the analyses presented here. (A separate report on HSV-2 and HIV among subjects reporting MSM behavior is in preparation.)After completing the interview, each participant was seen by an HIV counselor for pretest counseling and serum collection. The informed consent specifically included permission to store serum samples for future testing. HIV testing was conducted at the New York City Department of Health Laboratory using a commercial, enzyme-linked, immunosorbent assays (EIA) test with Western blot confirmation (BioRad Genetic Systems HIV-1-2+0 EIA and HIV-1 Western Blot, BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). HSV-2 testing was conducted for all subjects beginning in 2005 and was performed by BioReference Laboratories using the Focus HerpeSelect 1 and 2 ELISA. We used an optical density value of 1.1 or greater for classifying a subject as HSV-2-seropostive on the HerpeSelect assay. Samples positive on HerpeSelect were confirmed using the BioPlex 2200 Multiplex System (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) We did not test participants surveyed between 1995 and 1999 for HSV-2 at the time of the interview. We were, however, able to assess HSV-2 status by analyzing leftover serum from these participants. Leftover serum was aliquotted into 0.5 ml aliquots, frozen and stored at −70 degrees Celsius. In order to compare relationships between HSV-2 and HIV among NIDUs prior to beginning regular HSV-2 testing in 2005, we selected a stratified sample of 200 NIDUs who participated in the study between 1995 and 1999. Serum samples from these NIDUs were thawed and tested for HSV-1 and HSV-2 as described above. We stratified the sample of NIDUs according to gender and HIV serostatus, such that 100 NIDUs were selected for each gender, with 80 HIV seronegative males, 80 HIV seronegative females, 20 HIV seropositive males and 20 HIV seropositive females. Sampling was random within these strata.We estimate “population attributable risk percentages” (PAR%s) [23] for HSV-2 infection as a causal factor for increased susceptibility to and increased transmissibility of HIV infection among the female NIDUs. Follwing Freeman et al. [24], we used a Relative Risks of 2 to 3 [12], and the formulas taken from Hennekens &Buring (1987) Epidemiology in Medicine [25]: 1. for increased susceptibility to HIV due to HSV-2 infection among females: 100%×[(Prevalence of HSV-2 among females)×(Relative Risk−1)]/{[(Prevalence of HSV-2 among females)×(Relative Risk-1)]+1}; 2. For increased transmissibility from females to males due to HSV-2/HIV co-infection among females: 100%×[( Prevalence of HSV-2 infection among HIV seropositive females)×(Relative Risk−1)]/{[( Prevalence of HSV-2 infection among HIV seropositive males)×(Relative Risk-1)]+1}. Note that for increased transmissibility the relevant exposure is acquiring HIV from a sexual partner who is HIV seropositive and infected with HSV-2, and non-exposure would be acquiring HIV from a sexual partner who is HIV seropositive but not infected with HSV-2. Following Freeman et al. [12], we used a relative risk of 2.5 for both increased susceptibility and increased transmissibility. The PAR%s for the total sample were the weighted average of the PAR%s by sex.Stata statistical programs [26] were used for statistical analyses. The study was approved by the Beth Israel Medical Center Institutional Review Board and the National Development and Research Institutes Institutional Review Board.ResultsSubject demographics, drug and sexual risk behaviors
Table 1 presents the demographic characteristics, drug use and sexual risk behaviors (during the 6 months prior to interview) for subjects in each of the two time periods (1995–1999 and 2005–2011). Over the two time periods there were significant increases in the percentage of African-Americans, and in the percentage of older (greater than 35 years of age) subjects. There were few changes in sexual risk behaviors, with only a modest increase in subjects reporting multiple sex partners and a modest decrease in subjects reporting unsafe sex with primary partners. There was a significant increase in the percentage of subjects reporting crack cocaine use and a significant decrease in the percentage of subjects reporting intranasal heroin use.10.1371/journal.pone.0087993.t001Table 1Demographic and drug use characteristics and sexual risk behaviors among never-injecting drug users, New York City, 1995–99 and 2005–11.1995–19992005–2011n (%)n (%)Total785 (100)1764 (100)GenderMale567 (72)1327 (75)Female218 (28)437 (25)Race/Ethnicity*
White64 (8)92 (5)African-American299 (38)1185 (67)Hispanic404 (52)442 (25)Age*
<35369 (47)220 (13)35 or older416 (53)1509 (87)Multiple Sex Partners*
No555 (71)1121 (64)Yes230 (29)643 (36)Unsafe sex with primary partner*
No317 (40)985 (56)Yes462 (59)768 (44)Unsafe sex with casual partnerNo667 (85)1432 (82)Yes113 (14)308 (18)Drug use in past six months*
Crack cocaine358 (46)1281 (73)Cocaine362 (46)726 (41)Heroin679 (87)686 (39)*significant difference by chi-square test.HIV prevalence in 1995–99 and 2005–2011
Table 2 shows HIV prevalence by demographic characteristics and drug use and sexual risk behaviors over the two time periods. HIV prevalence increased from 7% to 13% among the subjects as a whole over the two time periods. There were statistically significant increases in HIV prevalence in almost all demographic and behavioral subgroups over the two time periods. The size of the increases in HIV prevalence—approximate doubling—was quite consistent across the demographic and behavioral subgroups, including the racial/ethnic groups, younger and older subjects, and persons using different drugs. The increase in HIV among the younger subjects indicates that the overall increase was not simply a matter of longer time at risk for the group as a whole. The consistency of the increases across the various subgroups indicates that the overall increase in HIV prevalence (from 7% to 13%) was not due to changes in the demographic composition of the 1995 to 2005–2011 samples.10.1371/journal.pone.0087993.t002Table 2HIV seroprevalence among never-injecting drug users, New York City, 1995–1999.1995–19992005–2011nHIV positive n (%)nHIV positive n (%)Total78555 (7)1764237 (13)GenderMale56732 (6)*
1327144 (11)*
#
Female21823 (11)43793 (21)#
Race/EthnicityWhite641 (2)923 (3)African-American29925 (8)1185180 (15)*
#
Hispanic40429 (7)44252 (12)*
#
Age<3536918 (5)22023 (11)#
35 or older41637 (9)*
1509207 (14)#
Multiple Sex PartnersNo55539 (7)1121164 (15)*
#
Yes23016 (7)64371 (11)Unsafe sex with primary partnerNo31736 (11)985369 (17)*
#
Yes46218 (4)*
76864 (8)#
Unsafe sex with casual partnerNo66749 (87)1432206 (15)*
#
Yes1135 (4)30825 (8)Drug use in past six monthsCrack Cocaine35834 (10)1281207 (16)*
#
Cocaine36225 (7)72667 (9)Heroin67942 (6)68659 (9)#Significant difference by chi square test (comparing same row across time periods).*Significant difference by chi square test (largest subgroup compared to all others within time period).Associations between HSV-2 and HIV
Table 3 shows HSV-2 prevalence by HIV serostatus and sex for the two time periods. There are multiple patterns in these data. First, HSV-2 was extremely high among HIV seropositive females in both time periods (95% and 98%). Second, HSV-2 prevalence was quite high among HIV seronegative females in both time periods (76% and 83%) and high among HIV seropositive males in both time periods (65% and 69%). HSV-2 was significantly higher among HIV seropositives compared to HIV seronegatives, and higher among females compared to males.10.1371/journal.pone.0087993.t003Table 3HSV-2 seroprevalence by HIV seroprevalence and by gender among never-injecting drug users, New York City, 1995–1999 and 2005–2011.1995–19992005–2011n+/N (%)n+/N (%)HIV negatives total91/159 (57)#
857/1527 (56)#
HIV negative males30/79 (38)*
572/1183 (48)*
HIV negative females61/80 (76)*
285/344 (83)*
HIV positives total30/37 (81)#
190/237 (80)#
HIV positive males11/17 (65)*
99/144 (67)*
HIV positive females19/20 (95)*
91/93 (98)*
*Significant differences for males vs. females by chi-square test.#Significant differences for HIV seropositives vs. HIV seronegatives by chi-square test.HSV-2 was significantly associated with HIV in both time periods, odds ratio (OR) = 3.2 (95% CI 1.4 to 7.6) for 1995–1999 and OR = 3.2 (95% CI 2.3 to 4.4) for 2005–2011.Patterns of no-infection, mono-infection and co-infection for HSV-2 and HIVThe extremely high HSV-2 prevalence among the HIV seropositive females, however, suggests that an odds ratio may not accurately capture the relationship between infection with the two viruses. Figure 1 shows the percentages of males and females infected with 1) neither virus, 2) HSV-2 only, 3) HIV only, and 4) both HSV-2 and HIV in each time period. (Note percentages for 1995–1999 are based on weighting the stratified samples that were tested for HSV-2). Among the females, the two most striking aspects of Figure 1 are the relatively low percentages who are not infected with either virus (21% in 1995–1999 and only 14% in 2005–2011) and the extremely low percentages of all females who are infected with HIV only (<0.5% of all females in both time periods).10.1371/journal.pone.0087993.g001Figure 1HSV-2 and HIV Infection among non-injecting drug users who participated in Beth Israel Medical Center treatment programs by time period: 1995–199 and 2005–2011.There was a similar pattern among males, though the pattern was less extreme. A plurality of male subjects were not infected with either virus (59% in 1995–1999 and 46% in 2005–2011). There were very modest percentages of the males who were HIV seropositive but HSV-2 seronegative (2% of all males in 1995–1999 and 3% of all males in 2005–2011).Among both males and females the major changes over the two time periods were 1) the decreases in the percentage of subjects with no infections and 2) the increases in the percentage of subjects infected with both HSV-2 and HIV (corresponding to the increase in HIV prevalence shown in Table 2).Quantitative estimation of the contribution of HSV-2 infection to HIV infection among NIDUsAs noted in the introduction, HSV-2 increases both susceptibility to and transmissibility of HIV. That is, persons who are infected with HSV-2 are at increased risk for becoming infected with HIV, and persons infected with both HSV-2 and HIV are at increased risk of transmitting HIV to others (compared to persons who are infected with HIV but not with HSV-2). Population attributable risk percentages (PAR%s) are a standard method for assessing the importance of a casual risk factor (HSV-2 infection) in the incidence of a disease (HIV infection) in a population. To directly calculate the PAR%s for HSV-2 infection causing increased susceptibility to HIV infection and HSV-2 infection causing increased transmissibility of HIV infection in our population of NIDUs, we would need to know: a) the frequencies of risk behavior (unsafe sex) between HIV seropositive and HIV seronegatives NIDUs so that we could control for risk behavior in assessing the effects of HSV-2 on HIV transmission, b) the HSV-2 status of the NIDUs acquiring HIV when new HIV transmissions occurred, and c) the HSV-2 status of the NIDUs transmitting HIV when new HIV transmissions occurred.We do not have this information for our population of NIDUs. However, the very high rates and narrow ranges of HSV-2 among female NIDUs permit us to make some reasonable assumptions in order to quantitatively estimate the importance of HSV-2 infection for heterosexual transmission of HIV among the NIDUs. We used the following two assumptions:Since HSV-2 among HIV seronegative female NIDUs was 76% in 1995–1999 and 83% among female NIDUs in 2005–2011, we assumed an average of 80% HSV-2 seroprevalence among female NIDUs when they acquired HIV from male NIDUs.Since HSV-2 among HIV seropositive female NIDUs was 95% in 1995–1999 and 98% among female NIDUs in 2005–2011, we assumed an average of 97% HSV-2 seroprevalence among female NIDUs when they transmitted HIV to male NIDUs.Freeman et al. conducted a meta-analysis of studies of the effects of HSV-2 on HIV transmission and found that HSV-2 infection creates a relative risk of 2 to 3 for acquisition HIV [12]. (This was the relative risk after controlling for risk behaviors and would represent the increased susceptibility due to the biological effects of HSV-2 on susceptibility to HIV.). In their modeling work on HSV-2 and HIV transmission, Freeman and colleagues [12] also used a relative risk of 2 to 3 for the relative risk of HIV transmission from a person co-infected with HSV-2 and HIV to a sexual partner. We therefore used relative risks of 2 and 3 for estimating PAR%s for increased susceptibility and increased transmissibility of HIV due to HSV-2 infection among our female NIDUs. Table 4 presents the estimated PAR%s for HSV-2 infection causing increased susceptibility to HIV among female NIDUs and increased transmissibility of HIV from female NIDUs. The PAR%s were estimated separately for relative risks of 2 and of 3. (Note formulas used for PAR% estimation given in the methods section.) The estimated PAR%s are quite high, particularly for increased transmissibility of HIV from female NIDUs to their male sexual partners, reflecting the high HSV-2 prevalence among HIV seronegative female NIDUs and the very high HSV-2 seroprevalence among the HIV seropositive female NIDUs.10.1371/journal.pone.0087993.t004Table 4Estimated Population Attributable Risk Percentages of HIV infection for HSV-2 as a Cause of HIV Transmission among Female Never-Injecting Drug Users in New York City, 1995–2011.PAR %For RR = 2.PAR% for increased susceptibility for infection from male sexual partners44%For RR = 2.PAR% for increased transmissibility to male sexual partners49%For RR = 3.PAR% for increased susceptibility for infection from male sexual partners62%For RR = 3.PAR% for increased transmissibility to male sexual partners66%DiscussionIn this report, we compared two samples of non-injecting drug users entering the Beth Israel Medical Center detoxification and methadone maintenance programs in New York City. There were multiple differences across the two samples; compared to the 1995–1999 subjects, the 2005–2011subjects were older, more likely to be African-American and more likely to smoke crack cocaine. The most dramatic difference, however, was that the 2005–2011 subjects were twice as likely to be HIV seropositive (13%) compared to the 1995–1999 subjects (7%). The doubling in HIV prevalence was quite consistent across demographic and behavioral subgroups, indicating that the increase in HIV prevalence was not a function of differences in the composition of the two samples. The increase in HIV prevalence (6% over a 10 year period) corresponds to an incidence of approximately 1 to 2/100 person-years, which is an unusually high HIV incidence for a heterosexual population in a high income country.There are undoubtedly multiple factors that contributed to the increase in HIV prevalence over time among these non-injecting drug users. Heterosexual risk behavior is the predominant mode of HIV transmission in this population, (MSM-NIDUs were not included in the analyses), and thus continuing heterosexual risk behavior would be necessary for any increase in HIV prevalence. There was, however, only a very modest increase in sexual risk behavior from 1995–1999 to 2005–2011, so that increased sexual risk behavior is not a likely explanation for the increase in HIV prevalence.HSV-2 increases both susceptibility to and transmissibility of HIV infection, and the high levels of HSV-2 in the population in both time periods undoubtedly contributed to further spread of HIV among these NIDUs. The estimated PAR%s for increased susceptibility to HIV and increased transmissibility of HIV due to HSV-2 infection among females indicate a major causal role for HSV-2 in HIV infection among these NIDUs. The HSV-2 increases in susceptibility to HIV and increase in transmissibility of HIV for the female NIDUs would be relatively uniform across the racial/ethnic, age and behavior groups in our samples, thus these biological factors could be driving the relatively uniform increases in HIV seen in Table 2. (Note while the increases in HIV were relatively uniform over the two time periods, there are also large differences in HIV prevalence by race/ethnicity and gender in Table 2. These differences are associated with differences in HSV-2 prevalence among the demographic subgroups [27].HSV-2 prevalence was already high in the 1995–1999 sample, and the increase in HIV prevalence over the two time periods is best seen as a continuation of the effect of HSV-2 infection on HIV transmission that began before 1995 rather than a new development that started in 1995. Indeed, it would be an oversimplification to think of HIV among these NIDUs as only an HIV epidemic. Rather, as shown in Figure 1, essentially all (98%) of the HIV infection among females in both time periods was HSV-2/HIV co-infection and the majority (67%) of HIV infection among males was also HSV-2/HIV co-infection. The rise in HIV among these NIDUs should be considered an epidemic of HSV-2/HIV co-infection.LimitationsSeveral limitations of the present study need to be considered. First, the data presented here are from subjects recruited at a single set of drug treatment programs. However, the treatment programs are very large, serve the city as a whole, and the 2005–2011 data are consistent with HIV prevalence among NIDUs recruited from community settings in New York City in 2004 [9] and with the HIV prevalence among “high risk heterosexuals” in the 2006–2007 National HIV Behavioral Survey conducted in New York City. The NHBS study recruited subjects from high-risk neighborhoods in New York and found an overall HIV prevalence of 8.6% [19]. Our findings are also consistent with modeling work done by Freeman et al. [24] which indicates that the importance of HSV-2 infection in the continuing transmission of HIV increases as an epidemic matures, and that the effect of HSV-2 on increased transmissibility of HIV is more important than the effect of HSV-2 on increased susceptibility.Second, the research design used in this study was multiple cross sectional surveys, so it was not possible to observe new HSV-2 and new HIV infections in individual subjects. This meant that we were not able to identify the risk behaviors or HSV-2 status of the person acquiring HIV or the risk behaviors or HSV-2 status of the person transmitting HIV at the time of transmission. We thus could not estimate relative risks for the biological effects of HSV-2 infection on susceptibility and transmissibility specific to our population but had to use relative risks taken from the literature. If the biology of HSV-2 infection among our NIDU subjects is greatly different from the biology of HSV-2 infection among females in sub-Saharan Africa, where most of the research on HSV-2 and HIV has been conducted, then our estimates of the PAR%s for female NIDUs would be in error. The very strong relationship between HSV-2 and HIV infection we observed, however, does suggest that HSV-2 does create substantially increased susceptibility to HIV among our female NIDUs.We would note that conducting a prospective cohort study over decades, with an estimated HIV incidence of 1–2/100 person-years, measuring HSV-2 prevalence in both persons acquiring and transmitting HIV, to determine a statically reliable estimate of the numbers of persons who became infected with HIV, transmitted HIV to others, and then became infected with HSV-2, would be prohibitively expensive.Because of a substantial minority (one third) of the HIV infected male NIDUs were not infected with HSV-2, we did not estimate PAR%s for the male NIDUs. The very high HSV-2 prevalence among HIV seropositive females (95% in 1995–1999 and 98% in 2005–2011, Table 3 and Figure 1) did permit reasonable estimation of PAR%s for the female NIDUs, which were quite high. Approximately half of the HIV acquisition among female NIDUs may be attributable to HSV-2 increased susceptibility and perhaps over four-fifths of HIV transmission from female NIDUs to male sexual partners may be attributable to HSV-2 increased transmissibility. To the extent that our female NIDUs became infected with HIV and then became infected with HSV-2, our PAR% would overestimate the importance of HSV-2 for HIV acquisition among our subjects. To the extent that our female NIDUs became infected with HIV and transmitted HIV to sexual partners and then became infected with HSV-2, our PAR% for increased transmissibility would overestimate the contribution of HSV-2 to HIV transmission. The data in Figure 1, however, suggest that these would be rare events. Because we did not include consideration of the effects of HSV-2 among the male NIDUs, the PAR%s presented here almost certainly underestimate the contribution of HSV-2 to HIV transmission among these NIDUs.Third, we did not collect data from non-injecting drug users entering the Beth Israel Medical Center detoxification program between 1999 and 2005. However, blinded HIV testing was conducted on leftover sera from non-injecting drug users entering the Beth Israel Medical Center methadone maintenance treatment program during those years. Among non-injecting drug users entering the methadone program, HIV seroprevalence rose from 9% in 1999 to 14% in 2005, (unpublished data) which is clearly consistent with trend reported here from subjects in this study.Finally, we were not able to assess sexual mixing between NIDUs and other groups in the city. It is quite likely that some of the HSV-2 and HIV transmission occurred between NIDUs and persons who injected drugs (PWID) and between NIDUs and persons who did not use heroin, cocaine and methamphetamines. However, it does not seem that transmission from other groups was sufficiently common to alter the patterns of HSV-2 and HIV infection seen in both NIDU samples.These limitations are important, but it is very difficult to imagine how they would have created the strong patterns in HSV-2 and HIV infection and the increase in HIV prevalence over time that we observed. Rather it is much more likely that these patterns are sufficiently strong that we observed them despite the limitations.ConclusionsHIV infection among non-injecting drug users in New York City doubled from the late 1990s to the 2000s. While there were undoubtedly multiple causes for this increase, the high prevalence of HSV-2 infection among the male NIDUs and the very high HSV-2 prevalence among female NIDUs indicate that HSV-2 was clearly a major factor. The change in HIV prevalence is best described as a continuation of an epidemic of HSV-2/HIV co-infection that was already underway by 1995.There is a clear need to implement interventions to reduce HSV-2 related HIV transmission among non-injecting drug users and their sexual partners. There are a number of psychosocial/behavioral interventions to reduce unsafe sexual behavior among injecting and non-injecting drug users, but these have typically demonstrated only modest effect sizes [28]. There are therapies that suppress HSV-2 infection and reduce the frequency of outbreaks [29], and HSV-2 suppressive therapy may reduce HIV viremia [30]. However, in studies conducted to date, suppressive therapy for HSV-2 did not reduce the transmission of HIV [17]. Additional research, including studying higher dosages of suppressive therapy would be useful. HSV-2 suppressive therapy prior to ART and/or in combination with ART should also be investigated, as a recent study found evidence of HIV in the semen of men who had reached viral suppression on ART [31].HIV/HSV-2 co-infected persons would appear to be high priority for “Treatment as Prevention,” providing anti-retroviral therapy (ART) to HIV-infected persons at all CD4 cell counts in order to reduce HIV transmission to their sexual partners [32]. This should provide benefits to both the HIV infected person and—through reducing transmission—to the community as a whole. The New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene announced a new policy in December, 2011 that ART should be offered to all HIV seropositive persons in the city regardless of CD4 cell count [33]. The US Preventive Services Task Force has recommended ART for all HIV seropositive persons in the country [34]. HIV/HSV-2 co-infected persons with substance use disorders may require additional support services in order to initiate and adhere to ART, however, given their increased transmissibility for HIV, the additional costs for providing the needed support services would be fully justified.


Title: Population and dyadic-based seroincidence of herpes simplex virus-2 and syphilis in southern India

IntroductionIn India, previous work has indicated a high burden of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) and a rising prevalence of genital ulcerative diseases including herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) and syphilis.1
2 In addition to the significant morbidity resulting directly from these infections, both HSV-2 and syphilis are associated with an increased risk of HIV, and specifically a high population attributable risk for HIV in India.3–6 This highlights the need to better understand the epidemiology of these infections in India.Existing Indian prevalence data for HSV-2 and syphilis have shown marked geographic and gendered heterogeneity. Estimates from population-based serostudies have ranged from 5.87% to 18.9% for HSV-2 and 0.4–1.7% for syphilis.7–10 These estimates have suggested higher HSV-2 prevalence in women and have shown inconsistent urban versus rural patterning. Incidence studies of these STIs in India have come from high-risk populations and may not accurately reflect disease transmission. HSV-2 incidence estimates have ranged from an annualised 8% to 15.1 per 100 person-years,4
11
12 which are relatively higher rates than estimates from Western countries.13
14 Syphilis incidence estimates have ranged from 5.4 per 100 person-years to an annualised incidence of 1% and 5% for men and women, respectively.5
12Population-based studies have been proposed as providing more reliable estimates of true population disease rates.15
16 Furthermore, examinations of transmission within couples can aid in our understanding of transmission dynamics.17 Taken together such studies can help to provide a better foundation for effective HIV/STI prevention strategies.Here we report data from a longitudinal population-based study of HIV, HSV-2 and syphilis incidence from the south Indian state of Andhra Pradesh.18 Andhra Pradesh is thought to have the highest HIV burden in India and is also reported to have high rates of HSV-2.10
15 In addition to calculating incidence, we also examined associated risk factors and seroconcordance/discordance patterns among stably married couples.MethodsStudy population and settingWe conducted a longitudinal population-based survey in two rounds over 5.6 years: round 1 was conducted between September 2004 and September 2005 and round 2 between May 2010 and July 2011.18 The original study design, baseline findings and HIV incidence have been described in detail elsewhere.9
15
18
19 In brief, at baseline, persons 15–49 years old were selected using a stratified random sampling method to construct a representative sample of the adult population of Guntur district in Andhra Pradesh. Of the 13 838 eligible people identified at baseline, 12 617 (91.2%) participated.For round 2 data collection, interviewers returned to each household and invited subjects to participate in the follow-up survey.18 At least five attempts were made to contact each eligible participant, including tracking and contacting those that had moved. Of the 12 557 non-homeless participants at baseline, 7222 (57.5%) had remained at the same residence (including 229 who had died) and 5335 (42.5%) had moved. Of those who had moved, 3562 (66.8%) were traced and contacted.InterviewsTrained interviewers conducted confidential interviews to assess sociodemographic and behavioural characteristics.18 Sociodemographic information from the interviews included age, sex, residence (rural vs urban), education, caste, religion, marital status, occupation and standard of living index (SLI).15 Information on risk behaviour included number of lifetime sexual partners, condom use, alcohol and tobacco use, transfusion history and same-sex activity (for men).Blood samplesA finger prick method was used to obtain a dried blood spot (DBS) on Whatman No. 3 paper (Whatman International, Maidstone, UK). Lifetime prevalence of HSV-2 and syphilis was evaluated by testing for the presence of HSV-2 IgG (HerpeSelect 2 ELISA IgG, Focus Diagnostics, California, USA) using an index value of >1.1,20 and Treponema pallidum IgG (Treponostika sandwich ELISA, bioMérieux, France).21 For quality control, DBSs were compared with standard serum testing of 75 samples from an STD clinic and demonstrated 100% specificity and sensitivity. Additionally, all positive DBSs were retested and 10% of negative samples were retested, yielding 100% concordance with the original results.HSV-2 and syphilis incidence analysesFactors associated with participation status at follow-up were analysed using χ2 and t tests. Incident cases of HSV-2/syphilis were defined as seroconversion from negative to positive in an analytic sample of those who were HSV-2/syphilis seronegative at baseline. Total person-time was calculated as the sum of the follow-up periods of each participant and was used as the denominator for the incidence calculation. Since the exact time of infection was unknown, infection was estimated to have occurred at the midway point of the study, and those with incident STIs contributed half of their total follow-up time to total person-years.22Factors associated with STI incidence were assessed using modified Poisson regressions with robust error estimation in a multistep process.23 First, we used univariate regression to examine the association of each variable with incident infection. Then we included all variables significant at the p<0.10 level from the univariate models in a multivariable regression that was then followed by backwards elimination to select variables remaining significant at the p<0.05 level. Sociodemographic and risk multivariable models were built and examined separately in order not to underestimate the effect of factors more distally related to infection (ie, rural residence vs number of lifetime sex partners) and then combined into a final model.9
10
19
24 Analyses were done using STATA V.12.0 (StataCorp, Austin, Texas, USA).HSV-2 and syphilis dyadic transmission analysisRaw transmission rates between couples were compared using tests of proportions. In order to examine transmission dynamics, we built a Markov model with four states corresponding to the possible serostatuses of couples: (1) negatively concordant, male (M)−, female (F)−; (2) male positive discordant, M+, F−; (3) female positive discordant, M−, F+; and (4) positively concordant, M+, F+. We let α be the rate at which the man is infected outside the couple; β the rate that the woman is infected outside the couple; δ the rate of male-to-female transmission within the couple; and γ the rate of female-to-male transmission within the couple. Thus the transition rate from state 1–>2 is α; 1–>3 is β; 2–>4 is β+δ; and 3–>4 is α+γ. Then over a T=5-year period, the transition probabilities between states are P11=e−(α+β)T, P12=(e−(α+β)T−e−(β+δ)T)α/(δ−α), P13=(e−(α+β)T−e−(α+γ)T)β/(γ−β), P14=1−P11−P12−P13, P22=e−(β+δ)T, P24=1−e−(β+δ)T, P33=e−(α+γ)T, P34=1−e−(α+γ)T. Let nij be the number of couples observed in state i at baseline and state j at follow-up. The log likelihood is then ∑ij nij log(Pij). For both HSV-2 and syphilis, we then estimated the parameters α, β, δ and γ using maximum likelihood estimation. CIs were calculated using the likelihood ratio test.ResultsStudy participantsOf 12 617 baseline participants, 8362 (66.3%) provided a blood spot and follow-up interview. Of this sample, 4593 (54.1%) were rural residents and 4358 (51.3%) women. Lower participation at follow-up was associated with baseline HIV/HSV-2 but not syphilis seropositivity (HSV-2(+) 63.7 vs HSV-2(−) 67.6%, p=0.01; HIV(+) 43.1 vs HIV(−) 67.8%, p<0.001; syphilis(+) 61.4 vs syphilis(–) 66.4%, p=0.12). Women and rural residents were more likely to participate (68.3% women vs 66.3% men, p=0.02) (72.7% rural vs 62.5% urban, p<0.001). Women that participated were older than women who did not (mean (SD) 30.2 (9.5) years at baseline vs 28.8 (10.0), p<0.001).Of the 4358 women in the final sample, 389 (8.9%) were HSV-2 seropositive and 54 (1.2%) syphilis seropositive at baseline. This yielded final female analytic samples of 3969 for HSV-2 and 4304 for syphilis. Of the 4136 men in the final sample, 213 (5.1%) were HSV-2 and 84 (2.0%) syphilis seropositive at baseline and were excluded from further analysis. This yielded final male analytic samples of 3923 for HSV-2 and 4052 for syphilis.SeroincidenceOver a mean follow-up time of 5.63 years (range 5.17–6.33), the incidence per 1000 person-years for HSV-2 and syphilis was 25.6 (95% CI 24.1 to 27.2) and 3.00 (95% CI 2.52 to 3.54) (table 1).Table 1Seroincidence and seroprevalence of herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) and syphilis by age and residenceHSV-2MenWomenTotalBaseline prevalence % (95% CI)Follow-up prevalence % (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years 
(95% CI)Baseline prevalence % (95% CI)Follow-up prevalence % (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Baseline prevalence % (95% CI)Follow-up prevalence % (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Rural3.82 (3.17 to 4.57)14.62 (13.09 to 16.28)23.3 (20.6 to 26.3)5.25 (4.49 to 6.12)23.17 (21.25 to 25.21)39.2 (35.6 to 43.0)4.54 (4.03 to 5.10)18.94 (17.82 to 20.11)31.1 (28.8 to 33.5)Urban7.85 (6.89 to 8.90)14.58 (12.90 to 16.42)16.4 (13.9 to 19.2)13.01 (11.80 to 14.33)21.51 (19.55 to 23.62)21.6 (18.7 to 24.8)10.48 (9.69 to 11.31)18.20 (17.00 to 19.45)19.0 (17.1 to 21.1)Total5.82 (5.24 to 6.45)14.60 (13.54 to 15.72)20.2 (18.4 to 22.3)9.15 (8.44 to 9.92)22.40 (21.17 to 23.66)31.1 (28.8 to 33.7)7.51 (7.04 to 8.00)18.60 (17.70 to 19.54)25.6 (24.1 to 27.2)HSV-2 incidence by ageMenWomenTotalAge at baseline (years)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)15–19 6.62 (4.36 to 9.63) 12.12 (8.81 to 16.3) 9.21 (7.19 to 11.62)20–24 10.30 (7.29 to 14.14) 23.08 (18.59 to 28.34) 16.91 (14.11 to 20.09)25–29 16.78 (12.77 to 21.64) 24.63 (19.70 to 30.41) 20.69 (17.46 to 24.34)30–34 25.10 (19.49 to 31.82) 34.97 (28.42 to 42.58) 30.15 (25.75 to 35.08)35–39 25.87 (20.21 to 32.63) 44.85 (37.21 to 53.59) 35.28 (30.47 to 40.64)40–44 31.70 (24.52 to 40.33) 52.96 (43.94 to 63.28) 42.82 (36.91 to 49.42)45–49 44.82 (36.26 to 54.79) 46.89 (37.00 to 58.61) 45.72 (39.14 to 53.09)SyphilisMenWomenTotalBaseline prevalence % (95% CI)Follow-up prevalence % (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Baseline prevalence % (95% CI)Follow-up prevalence % (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Baseline prevalence % (95% CI)Follow-up prevalence % (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Rural1.75 (1.32 to 2.28)3.17 (2.48 to 3.99)3.85 (2.84 to 5.11)1.29 (0.93 to 1.75)2.63 (2.01 to 3.37)3.04 (2.16 to 4.16)1.52 (1.23 to 1.86)2.90 (2.43 to 3.42)3.44 (2.76 to 4.25)Urban2.55 (2.03 to 3.18)3.27 (2.50 to 4.20)2.45 (1.59 to 3.62)1.40 (1.02 to 1.88)2.31 (1.70 to 3.07)2.50 (1.67 to 3.61)1.97 (1.64 to 2.35)2.77 (2.28 to 3.33)2.48 (1.85 to 3.24)Total2.15 (1.80 to 2.55)3.22 (2.70 to 3.80)3.22 (2.53 to 4.05)1.35 (1.08 to 1.66)2.48 (2.04 to 2.98)2.79 (2.17 to 3.54)1.74 (1.52 to 1.99)2.84 (2.49 to 3.22)3.00 (2.52 to 3.54)Syphilis incidence by ageMenWomenTotalAge at baseline (years)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)Incidence per 1000 person-years (95% CI)15–19 0.94 (0.26 to 2.42)  0.77 (0.16 to 2.26)  0.86 (0.35 to 1.78)20–24 1.03 (0.28 to 2.65)  1.37 (0.56 to 2.99)  1.21 (0.58 to 2.23)25–29 1.88 (0.76 to 3.88)  2.00 (0.86 to 3.93)  1.94 (1.09 to 3.20)30–34 3.02 (1.38 to 5.72)  3.47 (1.80 to 6.07)  3.26 (2.02 to 4.99)35–39 5.61 (3.27 to 8.98)  4.38 (2.45 to 7.22) 4.96 (3.39 to 7.00)40–44 6.99 (3.99 to 11.35) 4.91 (2.68 to 8.23) 5.83 (3.94 to 8.33)45–49 6.33 (3.62 to 10.27) 4.45 (2.03 to 8.45) 5.49 (3.55 to 8.11)The incidence of HSV-2 was higher in women than men (31.1 vs 20.2 per 1000 person-years, p<0.001) and higher in rural than urban residents (31.1 vs 19.0 per 1000 person-years, p<0.001). The incidence of syphilis in men vs women was not statistically significant (3.22 vs 2.79 per 1000 person-years, p=0.39), while rural vs urban syphilis incidence was borderline (3.44 vs 2.48 per 1000 person-years, p=0.06). Both HSV-2 and syphilis incidence increased with age, and this was consistent for both men and women (p-trend <0.05, see online supplementary figure S1).Factors associated with infectionFor HSV-2 and syphilis, the univariate and final combined multivariate analyses are presented in table 2 for men and in table 3 for women. Only factors that were included in the sociodemographic and health/behavioural multivariate models (significant at the p<0.05 level in these models) are shown here. Please refer to online supplementary tables S1 and S2 for a full reporting of all factors that were considered.Table 2Behavioural and sociodemographic associations with incident herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) or syphilis infection in men (n=4136)HSV-2SyphilisVariable% Seroconversions(N)* Univariate associationsIRR (95% CI)Combined multivariate model adjusted IRR (95% CI)Percentagepositive (N) UnivariateassociationsIRR (95% CI)Combinedmultivariate modeladjusted IRR (95% CI)Overall:10.81 (3923)––1.80 (4052)––SociodemographicsAge at baseline (years) 15–193.66 (737)1.001.000.53 (753)1.001.00 20–245.65 (672)1.56 (0.95 to 2.55)1.34 (0.79 to 2.28)0.58 (687)1.09 (0.27 to 4.38)0.55 (0.14 to 2.14) 25–299.05 (652)2.53 (1.61 to 4.00)2.07 (1.18 to 3.65)1.06 (662)1.99 (0.58 to 6.81)0.82 (0.23 to 2.96) 30–3413.23 (514)3.79 (2.43 to 5.92)2.78 (1.58 to 4.88)1.69 (533)3.19 (0.98 to 10.37)1.19 (0.34 to 4.12) 35–3913.60 (522)3.91 (2.51 to 6.08)2.82 (1.60 to 4.96)3.11 (546)5.94 (2.00 to 17.65)2.20 (0.68 to 7.07) 40–4416.42 (402)4.79 (3.06 to 7.49)3.37 (1.90 to 5.95)3.86 (414)7.40 (2.47 to 22.14)2.78 (0.86 to 9.01) 45–4922.41 (424)6.77 (4.42 to 10.37)4.79 (2.75 to 8.33)3.50 (457)6.70 (2.24 to 20.04)2.47 (0.74 to 8.29)Place of residence Urban8.85 (1728)1.001.001.37 (1821)1.00– Rural12.35 (2195)1.42 (1.17 to 1.73)1.30 (0.90 to 1.78)2.15 (2231)1.57 (0.97 to 2.55)–Standard of living index 0–1612.51 (983)1.00–2.00 (1000)1.001.00 17–229.90 (1040)0.78 (0.60 to 1.02)–2.50 (1082)1.25 (0.70 to 2.23)1.31 (0.73 to 2.35) 23–2910.95 (1023)0.87 (0.68 to 1.13)–1.78 (1069)0.89 (0.48 to 1.67)0.96 (0.50 to 1.82) 30–549.81 (877)0.78 (0.59 to 1.02)–0.78 (901)0.39 (0.16 to 0.92)0.44 (0.18 to 1.07)Education  None14.31 (1027)1.001.003.04 (1054)1.00– Class 1–1010.75 (2149)0.74 (0.60 to 0.90)0.93 (0.75 to 1.15)1.48 (2227)0.48 (0.30 to 0.79)– Class 11–125.25 (305)0.35 (0.21 to 0.58)0.57 (0.34 to 0.97)0.94 (319)0.31 (0.90 to 1.00)– Technical school/college6.80 (441)0.46 (0.31 to 0.68)0.71 (0.47 to 1.07)1.11 (451)0.36 (0.14 to 0.93)–Occupation Other10.48 (3656)1.001.001.64 (3779)1.001.00Transport related15.36 (267)1.49 (1.08 to 2.06)1.27 (0.90 to 1.78)4.03 (273)2.47 (1.30 to 4.69)2.01 (1.04 to 3.89)Caste Forward caste10.03 (1376)1.001.001.54 (1426)1.00– Backward caste11.05 (977)1.11 (0.86 to 1.42)1.15 (0.89 to 1.49)2.20 (999)1.43 (0.79 to 2.58)– Scheduled caste13.36 (846)1.34 (1.05 to 1.72)1.57 (1.08 to 2.28)1.83 (875)1.18 (0.62 to 2.24)– Scheduled tribe9.70 (133)0.97 (0.55 to 1.71)1.01 (0.56 to 1.80)2.19 (137)1.43 (0.43 to 4.78)– Not applicable8.81 (590)0.87 (0.63 to 1.20)2.10 (1.10 to 4.01)1.63 (615)1.05 (0.50 to 2.22)–Religion†  Hindu11.03 (2503)1.001.001.82 (2580)1.00– Muslim7.89 (596)0.70 (0.52 to 0.96)0.44 (0.22 to 0.84)1.60 (626)0.88 (0.44 to 1.73)– Christian12.30 (821)1.12 (0.89 to 1.40)0.82 (0.57 to 1.17)1.90 (83)1.04 (0.59 to 1.83)– Other0 (3)––0 (3)––Marital status Never3.66 (1065)1.00–0.46 (1085)1.00– Currently13.45 (2802)3.87 (2.79 to 5.38)–2.30 (2908)5.05 (2.04 to 12.54)– Previously14.29 (56)4.13 (1.93 to 8.82)–1.69 (59)3.71 (0.43 to 31.8)–Health behavioursCircumcision‡  No11.30 (3229)1.00–1.84 (3320)1.00– Yes8.72 (654)0.76 (0.58 to 1.01)–1.74 (691)0.95 (0.51 to 1.76)–Alcohol history Never8.56 (2092)1.001.001.11 (2156)1.00– Currently12.76 (1552)1.52 (1.24 to 1.86)1.03 (0.83 to 1.29)2.62 (1603)2.37 (1.44 to 3.91)– Previously16.97 (277)2.08 (1.51 to 2.86)1.35 (0.97 to 1.88)2.41 (291)2.18 (0.94 to 5.04)–Sexual behaviourLifetime female sex partners 03.67 (817)1.001.000.24 (833)1.001.00 18.82 (1089)2.46 (1.63 to 3.71)0.96 (0.57 to 1.60)0.71 (1122)2.97 (0.63 to 14.00)1.70 (0.31 to 9.20) >114.94 (1975)4.32 (2.97 to 6.29)1.38 (0.83 to 2.31)3.07 (2054)12.97 (3.17 to 53.02)5.97 (1.30 to 27.32)HSV-2/syphilis-positive spouse§ No9.97 (3782)1.001.001.69 (4029)1.001.00 Yes33.33 (141)3.80 (2.82 to 5.12)2.59 (1.89 to 3.55)21.74 (23)14.54 (5.90 to 35.82)6.78 (2.52 to 18.21)*Seroconversion from negative to positive over study duration.†For religion ‘other’ category excluded from regressions because of sample size.‡Circumcision excluded from final model because of collinearity with Muslim religion.§HSV-2 positive spouse included in HSV-2 model and syphilis-positive spouse included in syphilis model.HSV-2, herpes simplex virus-2; IRR, incident rate ratio; N, total number of people (positive and negative) in category.Table 3Behavioural and sociodemographic associations with incident HSV-2 or syphilis infection in women (n=4358)HSV-2SyphilisVariable% Seroconversions(N)* UnivariateassociationsIRR (95% CI)Combined multivariatemodel adjustedIRR (95% CI)Percentagepositive (N) UnivariateassociationsIRR (95% CI)Combined multivariatemodel adjustedIRR (95% CI)Overall16.10 (3969)––1.56 (4304)––SociodemographicsAge at baseline (years) 15–196.61 (666)1.001.000.43 (690)1.001.00 20–2412.20 (746)1.90 (1.33 to 2.73)1.46 (1.01 to 2.11)0.77 (780)1.77 (0.44 to 7.09)1.52 (0.38 to 6.18) 25–2912.93 (665)2.03 (1.41 to 2.92)1.52 (1.04 to 2.21)1.11 (718)2.58 (0.68 to 9.73)2.22 (0.60 to 8.33) 30–3417.90 (553)2.88 (2.02 to 4.11)2.02 (1.39 to 2.92)1.94 (620)4.49 (1.27 to 15.92)3.31 (0.92 to 11.83) 35–3922.37 (541)3.70 (2.62 to 5.22)2.52 (1.75 to 3.64)2.43 (617)5.66 (1.64 to 19.56)3.83 (1.09 to 13.48) 40–4425.91 (467)4.37 (3.10 to 6.16)3.02 (2.09 to 4.37)2.72 (514)6.34 (1.82 to 22.08)4.44 (1.26 to 15.62) 45–4923.26 (331)3.87 (2.67 to 5.60)2.74 (1.85 to 4.07)2.47 (365)5.75 (1.56 to 21.25)4.33 (1.18 to 15.94)Place of residence Urban11.41 (1771)1.001.001.39 (2012)1.00– Rural19.88 (2198)1.82 (1.54 to 2.14)1.45 (1.21 to 1.72)1.70 (2292)1.22 (0.75 to 1.98)–Standard of living index 0–1621.05 (1045)1.001.002.03 (1134)1.00– 17–2216.73 (1034)0.78 (0.64 to 0.95)0.86 (0.70 to 1.05)2.14 (1122)1.06 (0.60 to 1.88)– 23–2914.19 (1001)0.65 (0.53 to 0.80)0.79 (0.63 to 0.98)1.09 (1096)0.54 (0.27 to 1.09)– 30–5411.70 (889)0.53 (0.42 to 0.67)0.74 (0.57 to 0.96)0.84 (952)0.42 (0.19 to 0.93)–Education† None21.33 (1791)1.001.002.50 (1957)1.001.00 Any schooling–––0.77 (2347)0.30 (0.18 to 0.52)0.40 (0.23 to 0.70) Class 1–1013.28 (1800)0.59 (0.50 to 0.70)0.86 (0.71 to 1.03)0.77 (1952)–– Class 11–124.89 (184)0.21 (0.11 to 0.41)0.45 (0.23 to 0.90)1.06 (189)–– Technical school/college4.64 (194)0.20 (0.10 to 0.38)0.44 (0.22 to 0.88)0.49 (206)––Occupation Other15.83 (3916)1.001.001.51 (4243)1.00– Field related35.85 (53)2.54 (1.63 to 3.97)1.84 (1.12 to 3.02)4.92 (61)3.21 (1.04 to 10.57)–Religion‡ Hindu15.90 (2554)1.001.001.62 (2774)1.00– Muslim9.53 (577)0.58 (0.44 to 0.77)0.60 (0.45 to 0.80)1.45 (622)0.89 (0.44 to 1.83)– Christian21.34 (834)1.37 (1.15 to 1.64)1.23 (1.03 to 1.48)1.44 (904)0.88 (0.47 to 1.63)– Other0 (4)––0 (4)––Marital status Never married2.53 (356)1.001.000 (367)–– Currently marred16.30 (3288)6.98 (3.61 to 13.48)2.86 (1.42 to 5.77)1.64 (3542)1.00– Previously married38.92 (325)13.28 (6.71 to 26.28)4.35 (2.07 to 9.14)2.28 (395)1.40 (0.69 to 2.82)–Health behaviourHistory of tattoo No15.80 (3356)1.001.001.43 (3627)1.00– Yes21.70 (613)1.51 (1.25 to 1.82)0.98 (0.80 to 1.20)2.22 (677)1.57 (0.88 to 2.78)–Chew or smoke tobacco Never16.01 (3847)1.00–1.44 (4170)1.001.00 Ever18.85 (122)1.21 (0.80 to 1.83)–5.22 (134)3.74 (1.71 to 8.17)1.83 (0.79 to 4.22)Sexual behaviourLifetime male sex partners§¶ 02.77 (325)1.00–0 (335)1.001.00 116.04 (3242)6.25 (3.23 to 12.08)–1.54 (3516) >130.28 (317)12.68 (6.41 to 25.09)–3.05 (361)2.15 (1.12 to 4.09)1.64 (0.85 to 3.18)Syphilis/HSV-2 serostatus Negative15.99 (3940)1.001.001.47 (3940)1.00– Positive31.03 (29)2.10 (1.10 to 4.01)1.27 (0.61 to 2.65)2.47 (364)1.69 (0.84 to 3.40)–HSV-2/syphilis-positive spouse** No15.28 (3847)1.001.001.46 (4236)1.001.00 Yes41.80 (122)3.19 (2.42 to 4.21)3.27 (2.46 to 4.35)7.35 (68)5.18 (2.08 to 12.88)5.94 (2.28 to 15.47)*Seroconversion from negative to positive over study duration.†Educational status dichotomised to any schooling versus no education for syphilis. 0 woman with technical school or college had incident infection.‡For religion ‘other’ category excluded from regressions because of sample size.§Lifetime male sex partners dichotomised to multiple versus 0 or 1. 0 woman who reported never having sex at baseline had syphilis.¶Lifetime male sex partners excluded from final model because of collinearity with marital status.**HSV-2-positive spouse included in HSV-2 model and syphilis-positive spouse included in syphilis model.HSV-2, herpes simplex virus-2; IRR, incident rate ratio; N, total number of people (positive and negative) in category.For men, sociodemographic factors associated with higher HSV-2 incidence in univariate analyses were increasing age, rural residence, transport-related occupation, lower caste, Christian or Hindu religion, lower education and marital status. In the final combined model, only age, education and Muslim religion remained significantly associated. Of the health and behavioural associations found in the univariate analyses—circumcision alcohol use, lifetime sex partners and syphilis-seropositive spouse—only spousal HSV-2 seropositivity remained statistically significant in the final combined model. Circumcision was associated with a lower incidence of HSV-2 in the risk model (incidence rate ratio (IRR) 0.74, 95% CI 0.55 to 0.97) but was excluded from the final model because of collinearity with Muslim religion.The model for syphilis in men showed slightly different characteristics. Although age was significant in the initial sociodemographic model, once the behavioural risk factors were included in the final combined model it was no longer statistically significant at any individual strata, but remained significant taken as a whole.When compared with the male HSV-2 data, women had a few additional factors of importance. Similar to men, older age, lower education and HSV-2-positive spouse were significant in the univariate and final models. Additionally, in both univariate and final models, lower SLI score, field jobs and previously or currently married women were shown to be at higher risk. Unlike the male data, rural residence remained significant in the final model. Although syphilis seropositivity at baseline was associated with incident HSV-2 in the univariate and initial risk behaviour analyses, this association did not remain significant in the final combined model.For women, the only sociodemographic variables that remained significantly associated with incident syphilis were increasing age and having no education. Of the behavioural factors in the risk model—tobacco use, multiple lifetime male partners and spousal syphilis seropositivity—only spousal HSV-2 seropositivity was significant.For both STIs, baseline HIV positivity was examined as a risk factor for subsequent STI. Although higher rates were observed, the finding did not reach statistical significance (see online supplementary tables S1 and S2). However, incident HIV was significantly more likely to occur in participants with incident HSV-2 (IRR 3.98, 95% CI 2.13 to 7.41) (data not shown).Seroconcordance/discordanceOf the 2716 stably married couples, 2499 (HSV-2) and 2520 (syphilis) had complete data on the infection status of each partner (see online supplementary table S3). Estimating transmission probability we found that for HSV-2 infections in previously seronegative couples there was no difference between male and female acquisition of infection (19.4 vs 20.9 per 1000 couple-years, p>0.05) (table 4).Table 4Estimated rates of sexually transmitted infection transmission in stably married couplesHSV-2SyphilisMale infection outside of couple*19.4 (16.6 to 22.5)3.1 (2.2 to 4.2)Female infection outside of couple*20.9 (17.9 to 24.1)1.9 (1.2 to 2.9)Male-to-female transmission within the couple*193.3 (153.7 to 238.2)27.6 (8.1 to 60.0)Female-to-male transmission within the couple*119.0 (89.6 to 152.3)198.8 (108.2 to 329.5)Root-mean-squared error (RMSE)†18.12*Rates are in 1000 couple-years (95% CI).†RMSE is a measure of the difference between the observed and expected number of couples transitioning between different serostatuses.There was a slight male predominance of outside infections for syphilis (3.1 vs 1.0 per 1000 couple-years, p<0.05). Couples that were serodiscordant at baseline had markedly different transmission dynamics for HSV-2 and syphilis with estimated male-to-female vs female-to-male transmission of 193.3 vs 119.0 per 1000 couple-years for HSV-2 and 27.6 vs 198.8 for syphilis (p<0.05 for both).DiscussionTo our knowledge, this is the first population-based report of HSV-2 and syphilis seroincidence from India. Overall we found seroincidence of HSV-2 and syphilis to be high relative to baseline prevalence. STI incidence was highest with HSV-2 among rural residents and specifically rural women. Two striking findings from this analysis are the consistent association of higher STI incidence with older age and rapid STI transmission among rural populations.The pattern of higher incidence as age increases has also been reported in studies of HSV-2 seroincidence done in the USA and New Zealand, although these studies were in younger cohorts (32 and below).13
14 A few possible explanations of this phenomenon are as follows: (1) there is a higher seroprevalence as groups age that could confer a higher risk of partnering with someone with an active infection. One caveat to this hypothesis is that seroprevalence is not a clear marker of active infection. However, this cohort effect is made more likely by a greater lifetime risk of having multiple partners as one ages. (2) Younger couples that get married and live in joint family households (common practice in India) may gain more autonomy in their daily activities with age and seniority. They then may be able to pursue outside relationships that were not possible beforehand. (3) Public health messages on safe sex and STI prevention may have less penetrance in older populations. (4) There may be an increased biological susceptibility for HSV-2 and syphilis infection in older individuals.Over a short 5.6-year period, a higher rural STI incidence has brought the previously lower rural vs urban prevalence of these STIs to equivalent levels. Higher prevalence in urban areas may precede a spread to the rural population. This may be mediated in part through migrant workers as they travel from cities and couple with rural partners. This hypothesis is supported by the association of incident STI with transport-related occupation that was found here and in previous work showing increased HIV risk behaviours and visits to sex workers among migrant workers.25
26 Now that the prevalence has ‘evened out’ in rural and urban populations, it may be that the incidence rates will also begin to equalise. Other drivers of this association may be related to sociodemographic factors such as lower levels of education and religion. A lower level of education was the largest confounder of the rural–HSV-2 association and explained some of the increases seen here. Rural residents are also more likely to be Hindu or Christian, both groups with higher STI incidence compared with Muslims. Muslims are far more likely to be circumcised, which has been shown to be protective against STIs such as HSV-2, and may explain some of the effect seen here.Although baseline HIV was not found to be a significant risk factor for either HSV-2 or syphilis incidence, our sample size was small (just 26 men and 22 women with HIV at baseline) and we were likely underpowered to detect true differences. In an exploratory analysis, we did find a roughly 4× higher rate of incident HIV in those with incident HSV-2. This supports multiple lines of evidence showing that active HSV-2 is a significant risk factor for HIV and highlights the importance of broader STI prevention.3–6 The rates of syphilis incidence were too low to allow an examination of its association with incident HIV.In this study, previously married women had significantly higher rates of HSV-2 and higher absolute rates of syphilis compared with women that were currently or never married. While previous work consistently found higher prevalence in this group,19
27 our results provide the first temporal information about this association. It suggests that for many of these women STIs are contracted after a marriage ends and not before. This indicates that previously married women may occupy a place in society that leaves them more vulnerable to unsafe sexual practices and subsequent STI acquisition.Our examination of the serodiscordance/concordance status of couples aids in our understanding of the dynamics of STI transmission. Previous work by Arora et al examined seroconcordance among Indian couples using prevalence data and found that in contrast to studies from South Africa, men were more likely than their spouses to be the first infected partner.17
28 Our estimates suggest an equivalent rate of male vs female HSV-2 acquisition in seronegative couples, but higher rates of syphilis acquisition by the male partner. Similar to the Arora paper, our data support a higher risk of HSV-2 transmission from men-to-women vs women-to-men. The transmission dynamics were markedly different for syphilis, with a higher rate of transmission from women to men within couples. Past examinations of syphilis epidemiology have shown higher rates of incident cases in men, suggesting a component of differing transmission probabilities, but conclusive estimates have been elusive.29 Our data support a higher transmission probability of syphilis from women to men versus men to women. This may reflect a greater biological susceptibility in women and/or differences in sexual practices when the female versus male partner is infected.There were several limitations to this study. The sample was limited to one district in the state of Andhra Pradesh, and especially given the geographic heterogeneity of STI prevalence in India, our findings may not be generalisable to India as a whole. A 67% follow-up rate makes it possible that the sample that remained was subject to compositional bias. In particular, those with HIV at baseline were less likely to participate in the follow-up study, indicating that some of the highest risk participants may have dropped out. However, in other cases, there were lower participation rates in individuals with factors associated with decreased STI incidence (ie, higher education).The HSV-2 assay used has been shown to have varied performance in different populations,20
30
31 although this was taken into account when determining the index cut-offs, and quality control testing against gold standard western blot was performed. The validity of these data is also supported by the similar patterns seen in both syphilis and HSV-2 results. Lastly, HSV-2 may also be contracted orolabially leading to seroconversion. This type of transmission may be particularly prevalent among women participating in childcare. Although orolabial HSV-2 transmission would reflect true infection, this is largely clinically irrelevant in terms of HIV risk.In conclusion, these data show a changing epidemic, in which older persons, rural populations and women are relatively more vulnerable to incident HSV-2 and syphilis. These trends suggest a need to reorient STI prevention strategies to include messaging and programmes targeted to populations previously thought to be at lower risk of infection.
Key messagesIncidence of herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) and syphilis over a 5-year period was high relative to baseline prevalence.Risk of incident HSV-2 and syphilis increased with age.Rural women and previously married women were at the highest risk of incident HSV-2.HSV-2 transmission was more likely from men to women while syphilis transmission was more likely from women to men.Supplementary MaterialWeb figureWeb tables


Title: Does maternal HSV-2 coinfection increase mother-to-child transmission of HIV? A systematic review

BackgroundCombination antiretroviral therapy (cART) decreases mortality in HIV-infected persons, and decreases the risk of horizontal, vertical or mother-to-child HIV transmission (MTCT). Guidelines from the WHO recommend cART for all HIV-infected individuals, regardless of CD4 count or clinical status.1 Treatment of HIV-infected pregnant women is critical for reducing MTCT, but resource constraints limit access to cART.2 Until all HIV-infected persons can sustainably access cART, additional measures to decrease MTCT are needed.Herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) is a common coinfection in HIV-positive individuals (prevalence 60%–95%)3 associated with increased risks of HIV acquisition4 5 and transmission,6 7 even in HSV-asymptomatic individuals. Analogously, several reports suggest that HSV-2 is associated with increased MTCT, but results have been inconsistent.To clarify this issue, and inform future MTCT reduction efforts, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis of available literature on this topic. Our primary objective was to quantify the impact of maternal HSV-2 coinfection on the risk of MTCT. Secondary objectives were to assess associations between maternal HSV-2 status and maternal HIV viral load (VL), maternal HIV shedding, infant CD4 count percentage and infant HIV VL.MethodsDetails of the protocol for this systematic review were registered on PROSPERO and can be accessed at www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/.Study eligibility criteriaObservational studies that examined the impact of HSV-2 coinfection on HIV MTCT were considered for inclusion into this study. Specific study eligibility criteria were: (1) cohort or case–control study design; (2) the study population was mother–infant pairs, where the mother was known to be HIV-1 or HIV-2 positive; (3) maternal HSV-2 status was determined using type-specific serology, virus detection (viral culture or PCR) or clinical diagnosis and (4) perinatal HIV transmission (including in utero and/or intrapartum transmission) was a study outcome.Predictor variablesThe primary predictor of interest was HSV-2 coinfection, determined using serologic testing (Western blot or enzyme immunoassay (EIA)). Because HSV-2 infection is incurable and frequently asymptomatic, determination of HSV-2 status is most accurately ascertained through HSV type-specific serology.8 These tests were developed in the early 1990s, but only became widely available as research tools in the last decade. As such, we recognised that earlier research may have ascertained HSV-2 status using less sensitive strategies, including clinical diagnosis and viral culture,9 but may still capture information about the impact of HSV-2 infection on HIV transmission; hence these studies were still considered. Individuals who are HSV-2 seronegative at baseline may acquire HSV-2 infection during the course of a study, thus attention was paid to whether studies assessed for seroconversion.OutcomesThe primary outcome measure of interest for this review was the relative risk (RR) or odds ratio (OR) for perinatal HIV transmission associated with maternal HSV-2. HIV antibody tests are insufficient to diagnose neonatal HIV infection due to the passive transfer of maternal antibodies during pregnancy. Instead, virologic testing such as HIV DNA PCR is recommended at 14–21 days, 1–2 months and 4–6 months of life10; testing at birth may also be warranted. Two positive tests are required for a firm diagnosis,10 which was the preferred outcome definition used in this review. If a child is 18 months or older, it is acceptable to diagnose HIV using a standard antibody test and Western blot, since this is the length of time for passively acquired antibodies to disappear in uninfected children exposed to HIV.Secondary outcomes of interest included maternal HIV VL and genital tract HIV shedding, and infant CD4 count percentage and HIV VL, at author-specified time points among those with documented perinatal HIV transmission.Search methods for identification of studiesPublications were identified through searches of the Medline (1981 to June week 3, 2016) and EMBASE (1981 to 2016, week 26) electronic databases using search terms for HSV-2, HIV infection, pregnancy, vertical transmission and observational studies. Details of the search strategy are provided in PROSPERO. Conference proceedings from 2013 to 2016 were also searched from key research meetings (figure 1). Reference lists of eligible studies were also reviewed to identify others of potential relevance. No restrictions were imposed on publication language.Figure 1Flow chart of search strategy. ACOG, American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists; CAHR, Canadian Association of HIV Research; CROI, Conference on Retroviruses and Opportunistic Infections; IAS, International AIDS Society/World AIDS Conference; ICAAC, Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy; IDSA, Infectious Diseases Society of America Annual Meeting; IDSOG, Infectious Diseases Society for Obstetrics and Gynaecology; SMFM, Society for Maternal Fetal Medicine; SOGC, Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada.Selection of studies and data extractionTwo authors independently assessed abstracts and publications that appeared to meet eligibility criteria, and independently extracted study data; disagreements were resolved by consensus, with a third author available to resolve the issue if needed. Study authors were contacted a maximum of three times to supply missing data wherever possible.Assessment of risk of biasThe risk of bias was assessed for each included study using a checklist of important study features that may impact data quality (table 1). This list of items was developed by reviewing the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology statement, a systematically developed and well-justified checklist of items deemed important for the reporting of observational studies.11
Table 1Criteria used for assessing the risk of bias in included studiesCriterionNone/minimalModerateHighEligibility criteriaConsecutive unselected population Selected from a general population Eligibility criteria explainedSelected from general population but criteria not clearly defined Eligibility criteria not clearly explainedSample selection ambiguous Sample likely not representative Highly selected populationMethods for determining HSV-2 statusMethodology clearly defined and replicable Laboratory details including cut-off values reported HSV-2 seroconverters were properly accounted forMethodology stated but details unclearMethodology poorly defined or implemented and not replicableMethods for ascertaining infant HIV statusMethodology clearly defined and replicable Laboratory details including cut-off values reported PCR-based testing or Ab-based testing at appropriate timepointsMethodology stated but details unclearMethodology poorly defined or implemented and not replicableMethods to account for confoundingControlled for, or excluded, patients with key confounders (eg, ARV, anti-HSV therapy, mode of delivery, feeding strategy)Controlled for, or excluded, only certain confounders (eg, ARV, anti-HSV therapy, mode of delivery, feeding strategy)Did not control for, or exclude, patients with key confounders (eg, ARV, anti-HSV therapy, mode of delivery, feeding strategy)AnalysisSample size calculation performed and achieved Analysis appropriate, no concernsSample size calculation unclear, but all available patients studied Sample size not achieved but explanation given Analysis appropriate by minor concernsSample size calculation unclear or not performed, or sample size not achieved Analysis has major concernsAttritionNo/minimal attrition (<10%) Reasons for losses to follow-up explainedModerate attrition (10%–20%) Reasons for LTFU incompletely explainedHigh attrition (>20%) Reasons for LTFU not explainedOverallAt least three items at low risk of bias No more than two items at moderate riskAt least three items at low to moderate risk of bias No more than item at high risk of biasNot meeting criteria for low or moderate risk of biasHSV, herpes simplex virus.AnalysisStudy characteristics were summarised descriptively. Findings from each study related to the primary objective were summarised as an RR or OR. Unadjusted and adjusted effect sizes were extracted, and predictor variables considered in multivariable models were noted. For the primary outcome, the RR and/or OR were meta-analysed where clinically appropriate (meaning that critical confounders as identified in table 1 were appropriately accounted for) using a random-effects model, with weighting of studies according to the inverse variance method.12 Heterogeneity was quantified using the I2 statistic.Sensitivity analyses were conducted to determine whether results differed according to the use of fixed versus random effects models, and according to study quality. Subgroup analyses were planned to examine HIV MTCT according to the number of maternal antiretroviral agents used, by use of anti-HSV-2 medications and mode of delivery (Caesarian vs vaginal delivery).ResultsStudies included for reviewThe search strategy identified 2103 articles through electronic databases; no additional studies were identified from searching relevant conference literature or reference lists (figure 1). Of these, 112 full articles were reviewed, and 10 were ultimately included (table 2). The median study size was 279 mother–infant pairs, with a range of 48–1513.Table 2Characteristics of included studies and assessment of the risk of bias*StudyCountryNo of pairsStudy designPrimary methods for maternal HSV-2Use of antiretroviral therapyMaternal CD4 count closest to delivery (cells/mm3)Assessment of the risk of biasEligibili-ty criteriaMethods for maternal HSV-2Methods for infant HIV statusMethods for confound-dingAnaly-sisAttri-tionOverall risk of biasAebi-Popp et al
16
Ukraine1513Retrospective cohortSerologyHSV-2+ ZDV±NVP n=443, cART n=542 HSV-2− ZDV±NVP n=283, cART n=183Median 430 (IQR 290–580)LowMod.LowLowMod.Mod.Mod.Bollen et al
17
Thailand307Retrospective cohortSerologyZDV n=151<200: n=33 200–499: n=166 ≥500: n=107LowLowLowLowMod.Mod.LowChen et al
19
USA402Retrospective cohortCultureZDV n=266<500: n=142 ≥500: n=231LowMod.LowLowMod.Mod.Mod.Chen et al
13
USA78Case–controlSerologyZDV n=22 transmitters and n=29 non-transmitters 
cART n=4 transmitters and n=22 non-transmittersMedian: 362 (cases) 448 (controls)LowLowLowHighLowLowMod.Cowan et al
14
Zimbab-we1448Case–controlSerologyNone≤200: n=217 201–400: n=447 ≥401: n=679 Missing: n=184LowLowLowMod.LowLowLowDrake et al
15
Kenya175Case–controlSerologyAny ARVs n=25 transmitters and n=106 non-transmittersMedian at 32 weeks GA: 419 (IQR 299–620)Mod.LowLowHighMod.LowMod.Hitti et al
21
USA48Prospective cohortCultureNot reportedOf 58 women: <200: n=4 200–500: n=23 >500: n=31Mod.LowHighHighMod.Mod.HighJamieson et al
18
Côte d’Ivoire250Prospective cohortSerologyZDV n=126<350: n=56 350–499: n=51 ≥500: n=138LowMod.LowHighMod.Mod.Mod.Pitt et al
22
USA497Prospective cohortMethods not statedZDV n=167Mean ± SD: 399±254 (transmitters) and 505±417 (non- transmitters)Mod.HighLowHighMod.Low.High.Van Dyke et al
23
USA204Prospec-tive cohortClinical diagnosisZDV n=174Median (IQR): 372 (277–579; transmitters) and 453 (252–642; non-transmitters)LowHighLowHighMod.Mod.High.ARVs, antiretrovirals; cART, combination antiretroviral therapy; GA, gestational age; HSV-2, herpes simplex virus-2; LTFU, lost to follow up; mod., moderate; NVP, nevirapine; ZDV, zidovudine.Assessment of the risk of biasThe risk of bias varied among included studies (table 2). Eligibility criteria were generally well explained, with most studies nested within larger, previously described cohorts or clinical trials. Six studies ascertained HSV-2 status serologically,13–18 including four that used the HerpeSelect HSV-2 EIA (Focus Diagnostics, Cypress, California, USA).13–15 17 The primary method for classifying maternal HSV-2 status varied in quality among the other four studies, ranging from low (routine viral culture at delivery21) to moderate (protocolised clinical assessments with or without viral culture during pregnancy19) to high (clinical diagnosis at any time during pregnancy23 or no details provided22) risk of bias. Laboratory methods for defining infant HIV status were clearly described and involved appropriate use of PCR- and antibody-based testing in all but one study, in which inadequate detail was provided.21
Methods to account for confounding varied, with only three studies adjusting for, or considering adjusting for, mode of delivery and maternal antiretroviral medication use16 17 19 (a fourth did not require such adjustment because no antiretroviral medications were available), and most studies not performing adjusted analyses at all. No studies controlled for use of infant prophylaxis or anti-HSV medications, although usage was known or expected to be low in most cases. No studies controlled for feeding strategy. Statistical analyses were conducted appropriately, although only two studies provided a sample size calculation.13 14 Most studies had a moderate (10%–20%) amount of attrition.Primary outcomesHSV-2 seropositivity as a predictor of MTCTOf the six studies that assessed HSV-2 serostatus, one did not quantify the effect of HSV-2 seropositivity on MTCT and reported qualitatively that HSV-2 serostatus was not significant in univariate analysis for HIV infection by 24 months of age.18 Results from the remaining five studies were meta-analysed (figure 2A) and yielded a pooled OR=1.17 (CI=0.69 to 1.96, p=0.56) for MTCT associated with maternal HSV-2 infection and moderate heterogeneity (I2=58%).Figure 2(A) Forest plot of the impact of HSV-2 seropositivity on MTCT (unadjusted analysis). (B) Forest plot of the impact of HSV-2 seropositivity on MTCT (adjusted analysis). (C) Forest plot of the impact of HSV-2 seropositivity on intrapartum MTCT (unadjusted analysis). HSV-2, herpes simplex virus-2; MTCT, mother-to-child transmission.Three of these studies considered maternal antiretroviral use and/or HIV VL near the time of delivery (in one case because antiretrovirals were unavailable in the population studied) in multivariable models.14 16 17 Two of these three studies further considered mode of delivery.16 17 Meta-analysis of the adjusted effect sizes from these three studies was performed (figure 2B), and yielded a pooled adjusted OR (aOR)=1.57 (95% CI=1.17 to 2.11). Assessment of heterogeneity between these generally well-executed studies, conducted in Ukraine, Thailand and Zimbabwe, yielded a negative I2 value, which is traditionally reported as zero.20 A fixed effects model yielded identical results.In a sensitivity analysis including the two studies at low risk of bias, the association with MTCT was strengthened, with a pooled aOR=1.63 (95% CI=1.19 to 2.42). This analysis included a Zimbabwean study among 1448 women that adjusted for maternal HIV VL within 96 hours of delivery, CD4 count, haemoglobin, education, arm circumference and infant weight (no antiretrovirals were available at the time)14 and another among 307 women in Thailand that adjusted for zidovudine use, HIV VL at delivery, CD4 count at 36 weeks and cervicovaginal VL at 38 weeks.17 A fixed effects model yielded similar results (OR=1.59, 95% CI=1.17 to 2.16, I2=0%).Of note, because HIV VL at/near the time of delivery may be along the causal pathway from HSV-2 seropositivity to intrapartum MTCT, the incorporation of this variable into the adjusted estimates from these two studies may underestimate the true effect of HSV-2.14 17 The pooled unadjusted estimate from these two studies was OR=1.70 (95% I=1.06 to 2.74, I2=31%). However, HSV-2 could also increase in utero MTCT by influencing HIV VL during pregnancy. Most studies did not explicitly distinguish intrapartum from in utero HIV transmissions, the latter conventionally being distinguished by infant HIV PCR seropositivity within 48–72 hours of birth. However, two studies reported data on in utero transmissions separately (figure 2c),15 17 permitting us to calculate unadjusted ORs and a pooled OR=3.28 (95% CI=0.98 to 10.99, I2=0%). Most studies did not assess for HSV-2 seroconversion.HSV-2 sheddingThree studies examined the relationship between genital HSV-2 shedding and MTCT, but timing of the assessments varied. A Thai study found an association between MTCT and HSV-2 shedding in cervicovaginal lavage fluid at 38 weeks gestation (OR=3.0, 95% CI=1.2 to 7.4), but this was no longer statistically significant after adjustment for ART use, maternal CD4 count, plasma VL at delivery and cervicovaginal HIV VL at 38 weeks (OR=2.3, CI=0.9 to 6.2).17 The two other studies assessed shedding either at 10–32 weeks gestation, or at delivery; neither found an association with intrapartum or in utero MTCT in univariate analyses.13 15
HSV-2 cultureThree studies classified maternal HSV-2 status according to the presence of positive HSV-2 culture results, but ascertainment methods differed considerably. In a study from New York City, medical records from 21 women clinically diagnosed with genital HSV infection were reviewed for positive HSV (not type-specific) cultures.19 In a study including 48 HIV-infected women in Seattle, genital and cervical cultures were routinely collected within 48 hours of delivery.21 In a third study, laboratory methods for diagnosing HSV infection were not stated but likely involved viral culture given the setting (USA, 1990s).22 We calculated crude ORs for all three studies using data in the original reports, and found no significant associations with MTCT (table 3).Table 3Relationship between maternal herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) and HIV vertical transmissionAuthorTime of testOR (95% CI)p ValueaOR (95% CI)p ValueVariables adjusted forHSV-2 seropositivity and MTCTAebi-Popp et al
16
Before conception (6%) During pregnancy (87%) After delivery (7%)0.8 (0.41 to 1.6)0.5531.43 (0.54 to 3.77)0.474ARV use, mode of delivery, delivery at <37 weeks, injection drug useBollen et al
17*38 weeks gestation2.7 (1.1 to 6.6)0.032.6 (1.0 to 6.7)0.05ZDV use, plasma HIV VL at delivery, CD4 count at 36 weeks, cervicovaginal HIV VL at 38 weeksChen et al
13
During pregnancy or 8 weeks postpartum0.4 (0.1 to 1.2)0.1NDND–Cowan et al
14
At delivery1.49 (1.10 to 2.02)0.011.50 (1.09 to 2.08)0.014Plasma HIV VL, CD4 count, haemoglobin, education, arm circumference, infant weightDrake et al
15*32 weeks gestation1.2 (0.4 to 3.8)†0.8NDND–Jamieson et al
18
Not reported‘Not significant’–NDND–HSV-2 seropositivity and intrapartum MTCTBollen et al
17
38 weeks gestation3.0 (0.7 to 13.4)0.15NDND–Drake et al
15
32 weeks gestation3.8 (0.5 to 30.3)0.20NDND–HSV-2 shedding and MTCTBollen et al
17
38 weeks gestation3.0 (1.2 to 7.4)0.022.3 (0.9 to 6.2)0.09ZDV use, plasma HIV VL at delivery, CD4 count at 36 weeks, cervicovaginal HIV VL at 38 weeksChen et al
13
10–32 weeks gestation (average 16.4 weeks)0.4 (0.02 to 10.0)1.0NDND–Drake et al
15*At delivery1.7 (0.4 to 7.1)0.50NDND–HSV-2 shedding and intrapartum MTCTBollen et al
17
38 weeks gestation1.3 (0.3 to 6.3)0.71NDND–Drake et al
15
At delivery1.9 (0.5 to 7.5)0.40NDND–HSV-2 culture and MTCTChen et al
19
During pregnancy0.70 (0.09 to 5.53)‡0.7NDND–Hitti et al
21
Within 48 hours of delivery0 (0.05 to 21.76)‡1.00NDND–Pitt et al
22
Not reported§1.26 (0.62 to 2.57)‡0.52NDND–Clinical diagnosis of herpes and MTCTChen et al
19
During pregnancy3.4 (1.3 to 9.3)0.024.8 (1.3 to 17.0)0.02ZDV use, ROM≥4 hours, delivery at <37 weeksVan Dyke et al
23
During pregnancy1.94 (0.62 to 6.02)§0.22NDND– Ever1.61 (0.57 to 4.51)0.28NDND–Genital ulcer disease and MTCTDrake et al
15
32 weeks gestation7.4 (1.7 to 32.8)0.0035.1 (1.1 to 24.1)0.04Plasma HIV VL at delivery*Intrapartum transmissions only.†Calculated from data in report.‡Relative risk reported.§Method of HSV-2 ascertainment not reported but presumed to be culture based on year of study.aOR, adjusted OR; ARV, antiretroviral; HSV-2, herpes simplex virus-2; MTCT, mother to-child transmission; ND, not done; ROM, rupture of membranes; VL, viral load; ZDV, zidovudine.Clinical diagnosisTwo studies used clinical diagnosis as a measure of herpes status (table 3), defined as having a history of genital HSV during pregnancy19 23 or any point in the past.23 The higher quality study, conducted among 402 women in New York City, found a positive association with MTCT that persisted after adjustment for maternal zidovudine use, prolonged rupture of membranes (PROM), and preterm delivery, yielding an aOR of 4.8 (95% CI=1.3 to 17.0).Genital ulcer diseaseOne study among 175 Kenyan women found that the presence of genital ulcer disease (GUD) at 32 weeks gestation was positively associated with MTCT (table 3). This association persisted after adjustment for maternal plasma HIV VL at delivery (aOR=5.1, 95% CI=1.1 to 24.1).15
Subgroup analysesQuantitative subgroup analyses based on maternal antiretroviral use, anti-HSV medication use and mode of delivery were not possible due to the small number of studies identified.Secondary outcomesTwo studies reported maternal HIV VL according to HSV-2 status, but all analyses were cross-sectional.20 23 Drake et al observed similar or higher viral loads in women with HSV-2 seropositivity, HSV shedding at delivery, and GUD at 32 weeks, but only the latter reached statistical significance.15 Bollen et al reported borderline higher maternal HIV VL at 38 weeks among HSV shedders versus non-shedders (4.2 vs 4.1 log10copies/mL, respectively, p=0.05) and among HSV-2 seropositive versus seronegative participants (4.1 vs 4.0 log10copies/mL, respectively, p=0.09).17 None of the included studies reported on HSV-related differences in our other secondary outcomes.DiscussionHSV-2 is a common, lifelong infection characterised by periodic clinical and subclinical reactivations. Several studies have examined the effect of maternal HSV-2 status on HIV MTCT, but ours is the first to systematically review this literature. Our meta-analysis suggests that after considering important confounders, particularly maternal antiretroviral use and mode of delivery, HSV-2 seropositivity is significantly associated with an increased odds risk of MTCT, with a pooled aOR=1.57 (95% CI=1.17 to 2.11, I2=0).While we were unable to meta-analyse studies that used other strategies for classifying maternal HSV-2 status due to the paucity of data and diversity of methods used, adjusted analyses from those studies reached similar conclusions. Specifically, the aOR for the impact on MTCT was found to be 4.8 (95% CI=1.3 to 17.0) for any clinical diagnosis of genital herpes during pregnancy,19 and 5.1 (95% CI=1.1 to 24.1) for the presence of GUD at 32 weeks gestation.15 HSV-2 shedding at 38 weeks gestation was nearly significant, with aOR=2.3 (95% CI=0.9 to 6.2).17 These studies did not always account for key confounders such as antiretroviral use and mode of delivery, but the direction in which such omissions may bias these findings is unclear. Our findings are also consistent with other studies reporting an increase, although not statistically significant, in the risk of MTCT with GUD.24 25
While two-thirds of vertical HIV transmissions are thought to occur intrapartum in the absence of prophylaxis and breast feeding,26 of pathophysiologic interest is whether HSV-2 also increases in utero HIV transmission. Only two studies explicitly distinguished between these scenarios.15 17 Pooling of unadjusted analyses quantifying the association between HSV-2 seropositivity and in utero transmission yielded an overall OR=3.28 (95% CI=0.98 to 10.99), but neither article conducted adjusted analyses for this outcome, likely due to low numbers of events. Given that HSV-2 reactivations during the antenatal period (ie, clinical diagnoses, GUD, HSV-2 shedding weeks before delivery) seem to be associated with MTCT overall, it seems likely that many of these HIV transmission events occur in utero. Alternatively, antenatal HSV-2 reactivations may simply predict intrapartum HSV reactivations that in turn increase neonatal exposure to HIV during delivery. In addition, because two of the included studies adjusted for HIV VL at or near the time of delivery, which may be along the causal pathway from HSV-2 seropositivity to intrapartum MTCT, our pooled adjusted odds ratios might disproportionately reflect in utero transmission events. Future studies should differentiate between these possibilities, as they have different implications regarding the optimal timing for intervention.Analogous to our findings on MTCT, studies have also suggested that HSV-2 increases horizontal HIV transmission6 7 by increasing HIV replication in both the plasma and genital compartments. Many molecular mechanisms for this epidemiologic synergy have been proposed.27–30 Of note, a prior systematic review found no studies linking HSV-2 seropositivity to statistically significant increases in plasma HIV VL, and only one study linking genital HSV-2 shedding with increased plasma HIV viremia.31 However, a meta-analysis suggested that HSV-2 is associated with increases in HIV plasma VL, and that HIV plasma VL was significantly reduced by HSV-2 treatment.32 These contrasting conclusions are likely due to methodological differences between these reviews. Moreover, HIV is present at high levels in herpetic ulcers,33 and longitudinal analyses suggest a positive association between HSV-2 and HIV shedding in the female genital tract.34
Regardless of mechanism, our finding that HSV-2 seropositivity is associated with MTCT suggests that anti-HSV therapy may be warranted in HIV/HSV-2 coinfected pregnant women without access to cART. Although current WHO guidelines strongly recommend the ‘Option B+’ strategy of universal cART for all HIV-infected pregnant women, uptake remains inadequate, with a recent review showing that 30% of such women in prevention of MTCT (PMTCT) programmes in Sub-Saharan Africa did not receive any antiretroviral prophylaxis.35 As programmes continue to increase cART access, a clinical trial could assess the incremental benefit of anti-HSV therapy, but the required sample size may prove challenging. Assuming a 25% baseline risk of vertical transmission in the absence of any PMTCT interventions,36 315 participants would be required in each arm of a 1:1 randomised trial to test the hypothesis that the 1.57-fold increase in MTCT associated with HSV-2 seropositivity could be completely reversed by therapy, with 80% power and alpha=0.05. The required sample size per arm increases rapidly to 1114 if the transmission rate in the control arm is 8.4% (as seen with the PACTG 076 zidovudine regimen37), 1573 if 6% (single dose mother/infant nevirapine plus zidovudine38 39) and 4884 if 2% (cART).36
A trial of anti-HSV therapy was conducted in the context of horizontal transmission, and disappointingly found that twice daily acyclovir 400 mg did not prevent HIV transmission from HSV-2/HIV coinfected adults to seronegative partners.40 However, subsequent work has shown that this dosing provides incomplete HSV-2 suppression,41 suggesting that higher doses or alternative medications may be required. Yet a 12-week crossover trial found that valacyclovir 500 mg twice daily reduced plasma HIV VL by 0.37 log10 copies in 18 cART-untreated HIV/HSV-2 coinfected adults, suggesting direct anti-HIV activity.42 Another trial that randomised 148 HIV/HSV-2 coinfected pregnant Kenyan women to valacyclovir 500 mg twice daily versus placebo showed 0.51–0.56 log10 copies/mL reductions in breast milk and plasma HIV RNA, respectively,43 providing further support for the safety44 and acceptability of this intervention in pregnancy.Strengths of our study include our broad search strategy that included multiple infectious diseases and obstetrics research conferences, and no language restriction. We also observed no significant heterogeneity in our meta-analysis of adjusted effect sizes quantifying the relationship between HSV-2 seropositivity and MTCT.A limitation of this review was that studies included in our meta-analyses did not all adjust for important confounders, including mode of delivery, considered in two of three studies in the adjusted pooled analysis, as well as infant ARV prophylaxis and anti-HSV medication use, both of which were seldom reported on but likely uncommon. Conversely, obstetrical factors that increase MTCT such as PROM and preterm birth were also generally omitted, as was feeding strategy, though breast feeding was unlikely or reported to be negligible in most included studies.Maximising cART access for HIV-infected pregnant women must remain the primary objective for PMTCT programmes worldwide. However, implementation gaps, and our finding of a significant increase in MTCT with HSV-2 coinfection, suggest that further efforts to treat and prevent HSV-2 in this population are warranted.Key messagesPrior to this review, several studies have attempted to quantify the correlation between maternal herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) seropositivity and increased mother-to-child transmission (MTCT), but results have been conflicting.HSV-2 seropositivity is associated with an increased odds of MTCT.It is unclear whether HSV-2-related increases in HIV transmission occur in utero, intrapartum or both.Although providing combination antiretroviral therapy to all HIV-infected pregnant women is the key priority for the prevention of vertical transmission, the incremental benefit of HSV-2 suppression in this setting may warrant further study.


Title: Correlation between detergent activity and anti-herpes simplex virus-2 activity of commercially available vaginal gels

IntroductionHSV-2, a member of the family Herpesviridae, is an enveloped DNA virus. Herpes simplex virus infections spread through direct contact with body fluids, and in the case of HSV-2 the transmission is principally sexual. The seroprevalence of HSV-2 indicates that a significant part of the population harbors the virus [1]. Herpes genitalis, the primary clinical manifestation of HSV-2 infection is local and mainly includes vesicles and ulcers. Genital herpes can lead to significant clinical complications such as neonatal herpesvirus encephalitis [2] and an increase in risk of HIV transmission [3]. Similarly to other herpesviruses, HSV-2 persistence is common and periodic reactivation with and without clinical symptoms is frequent [4]. During reactivation, HSV-2 can be found in vaginal lesions and secretions and can be transmitted. The cervicovaginal microenvironment can profoundly influence HSV-2 transmission. Previous in vitro and epidemiology studies showed that the presence of various Lactobacillus species could inhibit HSV-2 development and reduce the prevalence of HSV-2 [5–8]. Chemical compounds such as vaginal gels applied during or before sexual intercourse could also influence the effectivity of HSV-2 transmission. Incorporating microbicides into vaginal gels is a well-accepted strategy for inhibiting sexually transmitted disease transmission including HSV-2 transmission [9–11]. We also showed that even basic components of the vaginal gels, such as the gelling agent hydroxyethyl cellulose can also significantly influence the replication of sexually transmitted pathogens such as Chlamydia trachomatis [12].We recently developed a direct qPCR method with which we can accurately measure herpesvirus genome accumulation in the infected cells in vitro and the replication inhibitory effects of antiviral drugs and neutralizing antibodies [13]. We applied this technology to investigate the effect of off-the-shelf vaginal lubricants and a pH restoring gel on the effectivity of HSV-2 infection of HeLa cervical epithelial cells.Main textMaterials and methodsCharacterization of the maximum non-toxic concentrations of the applied vaginal gels3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was performed to calculate the maximum non-toxic concentration of the tested four vaginal gels (lubricants: Gel-1, Gel-2, Gel-4; pH restoring gel: Gel-3). The minimum essential medium (MEM) with Earle’s salts completed with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mmol/L l-glutamine, 1 × nonessential amino acids, 25 μg/mL gentamicin and 0.5 μg/mL fungizone on HeLa cells was complemented with serial twofold dilutions of the vaginal gels for each concentration (n = 3). The initial concentrations of the vaginal gels were 20 w/v% and further dilutions were performed in MEM. After a 24-h incubation, an MTT assay was performed as described earlier [14]. All reagents were purchased from SIGMA (St. Louis, MO, USA), if otherwise not indicated.Assessment of the impact of vaginal gels on HSV-2 replication by direct qPCRA clinical HSV-2 strain isolated in the Department of Medical Microbiology (University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary) was used [13, 15]. HeLa cells (6 × 104 cells/well) were seeded into 96-well plates in 100 µL MEM. Next day the HeLa cells were infected with HSV-2 (MOI 0.1) preincubated with a vaginal gel for 1 h, at 37 °C. After the infection (1 h, 37 °C, 5% CO2), the inoculum was removed and MEM, 10% FBS medium was added. Each gel concentration was tested in three parallel wells. 24-h post infection, the cells were washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and were subjected to two freeze–thaw cycles in 100 μL Milli-Q water to extract the viral DNA. 1 μL of the cell lysates were used as templates in a direct qPCR as described previously [13]. Statistical comparisons of treated samples vs untreated controls (cycle threshold (Ct) values) were performed by Student’s t-test as described previously [16].Measurement of the impact of vaginal gels on the surface tensionThe surface tension measurements of diluted gel solutions were performed on a K100 MK2 Tensiometer (Krüss Co., Hamburg, Germany) using the Wilhelmy plate method. The initial concentration of the gel aqueous dilutions was 1.5 g/L for each samples. The surface tension was measured at different concentrations by placing a 40 mL volume of sample solution in sample receptacle and diluting it with deionized water from a connected Dosimat 765 (Metrohm, Herisau, Switzerland) titration stand. The solutions were immersed in a constant temperature bath at the desired temperature (25 ± 0.02 °C). During the automatized surface tension measurements the tensiometer and the dosing unit was controlled using the modularly constructed LabDesk™ software.ResultsImpact of vaginal gels on the viability of HeLa cellsIn order to exclude the potential HSV-2 replication inhibitory effects of the vaginal gels due to the inhibition of the host cell metabolism, we measured HeLa cell viability after 24 h of incubation (Additional file 1: Figure S1). Except for Gel-3, cytotoxicity was not observed even at the maximal applied concentration of 20 w/v%. Interestingly, for Gel-1 we were even able to detect a moderate increase of cell viability at the highest concentration. We treated the 20 w/v% (Gel-1, Gel-2, Gel-4) and 10 w/v% concentration (Gel-3) as the maximum non-toxic concentrations, and used them as the first concentrations for the 1:2 dilution series in subsequent experiments.Direct qPCR measurement of the inhibition of HSV-2 replication by antiviral compoundsWe applied our recently developed direct qPCR method [13] to assess the impact of vaginal gels on HSV-2 replication. We infected HeLa cells with HSV-2 in the presence of serial dilutions of the vaginal gels, starting with the maximum non-toxic concentrations (Fig. 1). Based on their impact on HSV-2 replication, the four tested gels could be divided into two groups. Gel-1 and Gel-2 were not able to inhibit HSV-2 replication even at the highest applied concentration, while Gel-3 and Gel-4 strongly inhibited HSV-2 replication at the maximum applied concentrations. In the case of Gel-3, the HSV-2 replication inhibition was 98.2%, and for Gel-4 the replication inhibition was 98.1%. Further dilutions of all the four gels behaved similarly: reduced to a lesser amount or slightly increased the replication of HSV-2. To evaluate whether the antiviral activity of Gel-3 and Gel-4 could be detected against different viral loads, we performed experiments with MOIs ranging from 0.4 to 6.4 (Fig. 2a). Similar to the previous experiments, Gel-3 and Gel-4 had a ~ 99% inhibitory effect in the 0.4–6.4 MOI range. In correlation with their significant antiviral activity, Gel-3 and Gel-4 also prevented the cytopathic effect of HSV-2 at MOI 6.4 and MOI 1.6 (Fig. 2b).Fig. 1Assessment of the impact of vaginal gels on HSV-2 replication. HeLa cells were infected with HSV-2 preincubated (1 h, 37 ℃) with 20–2.5 w/v% concentrations of Gel-1, Gel-2, Gel-4 gels and 10–1.25 w/v% concentrations of Gel-3. At 24 h post infection, the cells were lysed and the HSV-2 DNA concentration was measured by direct qPCR. Statistical comparison of HSV-2 replication (Ct values of treated samples vs untreated controls (n = 3)) was performed by Student’s t-test. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01
Fig. 2Evaluation of the impact of Gel-3 and Gel-4 on HSV-2 replication and the inhibition of the HSV-2 induced cytopathic effect. a HeLa cells were infected with HSV-2 (MOI 6.4–0.4) preincubated (1 h, 37 ℃) with 10 w/v% and 20 w/v% concentrations of Gel-3 and Gel-4, respectively. At 24 h post infection, the cells were lysed and the HSV-2 DNA concentration was measured by direct qPCR (n = 3). b HeLa cells were infected with untreated and Gel-3 and Gel-4 treated HSV-2 (MOI 6.4 and MOI 1.6), as described before. HSV-2 cytopathic effect was compared to the untreated HeLa cells by light microscopy 24 h post infection
The impact of vaginal gels on surface tensionTo assess the potential detergent activity of the vaginal gels, we measured their surface tension decreasing effect. The measured surface tension values of the vaginal gel dilutions were plotted against the logarithm of the total concentration at 25 ± 0.02 °C (Fig. 3a, inset) and the difference between surface tensions measured the minimum and maximum gel concentrations were calculated. Gel-3 and Gel-4 had the highest surface tension decreasing effect with 18 mN/m and 33 mN/m respectively, while Gel-1 and Gel-2 only minimally decreased the surface tension (5.9 mN/m and 0.8 mN/m respectively) (Fig. 3a). The surface tension decreasing effects strongly correlated with the HSV-2 replication inhibitory activity (R2 0.88) (Fig. 3b).Fig. 3Association between the surface tension decreasing effects and the antiviral effects of the vaginal gels. a Surface tension decreasing activity of the tested gels. Surface tension decrease was calculated by subtraction of surface tension in the minimum gel concentration and surface tension in the maximum gel concentration. Insert shows surface tension decrease by Gel-4 as a function of log10 gel concentration. b Correlation between the surface tension decreasing activity and the average HSV-2 replication measured at the maximum gel concentration. Pearson correlation coefficient is also shown
DiscussionWe tested four commercially available vaginal gels to assess their HSV-2 replication modulating activity in vitro. Our data showed that the tested gels either had an approximately neutral effect (Gel-1, Gel-2) or strong inhibitory effect (Gel-3, Gel-4) at the highest tested concentration (10–20 w/v%). Since for Gel-3 and Gel-4, the tested 10–20 w/v% concentrations mean in effect a five-tenfold dilution, and considering that the volume of vaginal fluid and sperm lies in the 1–3 mL range [17, 18], one may expect that in vivo these gels can achieve 10–20 w/v% or higher concentrations and have significant antiviral activity. As during the symptomatic infection the sexual activity is likely abandoned, HSV-2 transmission via shedding during the asymptomatic periods and in the very early phase of symptomatic infections is probably more frequent. Daily testing of HSV-2 seropositive individuals revealed that asymptomatic HSV-2 shedding occurred in 2–3.8% of the days [19, 20], indicating that asymptomatic HSV-2 shedding is a relatively frequent event. Schiffer et al. showed that for 14,685 swab samples, 18% were HSV-2 positive (> 150 DNA copies/ml), and close to 90% of the samples contained more than 104 DNA copies/mL [21]. Since the median HSV-2 load was 104.8 DNA copies/mL [21] and the threshold of HSV-2 transmission was calculated previously as > 104 infectious unit (IFU) [22], even a low level HSV-2 load decrease could be significant in preventing the transmission. Gel-3 and Gel-4 were able to cause ~ 2 logs decrease in HSV-2 IFU and were effective at least at 6.4 MOIs (~ 400,000 IFUs), therefore these gels might lower the risk of transmission, despite the fact that they were not designed for prevention. Altogether, these results highlight the importance of evaluation of commercially available vaginal gels/lubricants for their possible anti-HSV-2 activity before investigating their role in the prevention of HSV-2 transmission [23].As the commercially available gels generally contain several ingredients in unknown concentrations, the exact sources of the cumulative inhibitory activity are not known. As an example, a potentially antimicrobial unique component of Gel-4 gel was the “citrus aroma”. It was described previously, that citrusinine-I, an alkaloid isolated from the citrus plant Rutaceae displayed antiviral activity against HSV-1 and HSV-2 [24]. Among the physicochemical attributes of the vaginal gels, one is their hydrophilic, hydrophobic or amphipathic nature. Amphipathic gel components can behave as surfactants, providing a detergent-like activity for the gels. HSV-2 is an enveloped virus, hence the detergent activity could destabilize the viral membrane and decrease viral infectivity [25]. We measured the surface tension decreasing activity of the gels which correlates with their detergent-like activity. Gel-3 and Gel-4 showed a marked detergent-like activity, while Gel-1 and Gel-2 had negligible effect. Our results also showed that detergent-like activity and the in vitro antiviral activity of the gels were strongly correlated, a finding that may be used in future gel developments.LimitationsA limitation of our study, that we did not investigate the in vivo antiviral effects of the gels. Previous data show that in vivo a marked detergent-like activity may actually increase HSV-2 susceptibility. In a mouse model of HSV-2 infection, all the five intravaginally applied detergent containing gels increased HSV-2 susceptibility [26]. This effect was likely due to the in vivo detergent cytotoxicity, which led to injury and shedding of the epithelial cells from the upper layers of the mucosa. It is possible that there is an optimal detergent concentration where the viral membrane is destabilized, but the epithelial layer of the cervix remains intact. Regarding the selective toxicity, two of the four tested gels showed significant anti-HSV-2 activity but had no impact on the viability of the host cells in the 1:5 and 1:10 dilutions (20 w/v% and 10 w/v%). However there is room for further development, e.g. Gel-3 showed anti-HSV-2 activity only in its first non-toxic concentration.In conclusion, our experiments revealed that there are substantial differences among commercially available vaginal gels regarding their anti-HSV-2 activity. From the tested four gels we found two with a significant antiviral activity, suggesting that these gels might be able to decrease the frequency of HSV-2 transmission. Further experiments are needed to evaluate their overall effect on HSV-2 infectivity in vivo.Supplementary information
Additional file 1: Figure S1. MTT cell viability assay of HeLa cells incubated with the vaginal gels. Viability of the gel-treated cells were compared to the untreated controls. Data are mean ± SD (n = 3). Statistical comparisons of cell viabilities (treated vs. untreated control) were performed by Student’s t-test. *: P < 0.05.



================================================================================
PATHOGEN: ZIKA VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Zika virus tropism and pathogenesis: understanding clinical impacts and transmission dynamics

IntroductionThe Zika virus (ZIKV) is a member of the Flaviviridae family and falls under the Flavivirus genus. Within this genus, other viruses like yellow fever (YFV), tick-borne encephalitis (TBEV), dengue hemorrhagic fever (DENV), and West Nile fever (WNV) viruses are also included [1]. This virus is one of the arboviruses and is transmitted by mosquitoes [2]. Structurally, it is an 11 kilobases (kb) long positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus. The genome of this virus initially encodes a polyprotein, which is finally converted into three structural proteins and seven non-structural proteins by viral and cellular proteases. The structural protein C forms the icosahedral capsid of the virus and finally, the virus is enclosed by a lipid envelope that comes from the host cell [3–5]. The virus was primarily separated from a rhesus monkey in Uganda in 1947 [6], its first isolation from humans occurred in 1954 in Nigeria [7]. Although ZIKV prevalence has increased since 2007, it was initially discovered according to the evidence in the American continent in 2015 as an epidemic in adults, with symptoms including Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), multiple organ failure, and birth defects, such as the birth of babies with neurological disorders, microcephaly, and the death of the fetus [8–10].Based on phylogenetic analysis, the virus is divided into two lineages: Asian and African. According to the research, Asian lineages exhibit more genetic diversity and a greater number of single nucleotide variants in the viral genome compared to African lineages [11]. Although transmission by the Aedes mosquito is the main route of ZIKV transmission, the virus can also be transmitted through blood, vertical mother-to-child, and sexual contact [12–16]. Furthermore, according to studies, this virus also exists in biological body fluids such as breast milk, saliva, urine, and semen [17–20]. Different cells including peripheral dendritic cells, macrophages, various types of neurons, and placental cells are considered as ZIKV target cells [9]. After entering the body, the virus is disseminated to other parts of the body through the bloodstream [21]. According to studies, the latent period of the virus is between 3 and 12 days. However, in pregnant women, the infection may persist longer, leading to viral multiplication in the brain due to its teratogenic effects [22]. A maculopapular rash accompanied by limb edema, headache, and fever has been seen in most adults infected with the ZIKV. Also, symptoms such as thrombocytopenia, encephalitis, and meningitis are rarely seen in adults with severe disease. In addition, the ZIKV can be associated with neurological complications such as GBS [23–26]. According to the studies, no vaccine has been developed to be used by the general public. It is crucial to emphasize that, based on previous studies, no new drug has been specifically created for this virus. Instead, the treatments used have mainly been repurposed from medications originally designed for other pathogens. In addition to these drugs, antibodies are also employed as part of the treatment [27].This study seeks to conduct an in-depth examination of ZIKV pathogenesis and its clinical manifestations by drawing on current knowledge and existing research. The objective is to not only provide a thorough understanding of the mechanisms through which ZIKV causes disease but also to analyze the range of symptoms associated with infection. By consolidating and expanding on this information, we aim to contribute valuable insights that can guide the development of more effective prevention measures and treatment strategies, ultimately improving public health responses to future ZIKV outbreaks.Genome structure and tropismThe ZIKV is characterized as an enveloped, single-stranded RNA virus. Its genetic material contains an ORF encoding a polyprotein, which is subsequently cleaved into ten distinct proteins by both cellular and viral proteases. Among these proteins, three function as structural components: envelope (E), membrane precursor (prM), and capsid (C) proteins. The remaining seven proteins, known as nonstructural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5), play essential roles in the replication and assembly of the virus [3–5, 28]. Figure 1 provides a complete illustration of the virus genome and its associated proteins.Fig. 1ZIKV has a single-strand positive sense RNA genome, as well as an icosahedral capsid. The figure shows the polyprotein structure which is encoded by the ZIKV genome, in Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) membrane [14, 118, 119]Moreover, several well-established ZIKV receptor candidates include receptors typically linked to other flaviviruses, such as Dendritic Cell-Specific Intercellular adhesion molecule-3-Grabbing Non-integrin (DC-SIGN). Two other receptors, T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 (TIM-1) and the Tyro3, Axl, and Mer receptors (TAM family), are also involved. These receptors belong to the phosphatidylserine receptor family [29]. Among these receptors, TAM receptor AXL plays a major role [30]. The presence of Non-structural protein 1 (NS1) antigenemia is instrumental in the ingestion of flaviviruses by mosquitoes [31]. Based on the findings of Yang Liu et al., the existence of NS1 in the bloodstream of the infected host affects ZIKV infection in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. They found that an alanine-to-valine amino acid substitution at residue 188 in NS1 increased NS1 antigenicity, which in turn increased ZIKV’s ability to be transmitted from hosts to vectors, which could facilitate ZIKV transmission [32].Transmission routesVector-borne transmissionThe ZIKV can be transmitted through various ways (Fig. 2). This virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, especially those belonging to the Aedes genus [33–35]. Various species of Aedes mosquitoes have been identified as potential carriers, including Aedes africanus, Aedes albopictus, Aedes hensilli, and Aedes aegypti [36]. However, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are regarded as significant transmitters of ZIKV [37]. ZIKV circulates in an enzootic cycle among non-human primates through mosquitoes in sylvatic environments. These infected mosquitoes can then transmit the virus to humans, creating an epidemic cycle. Additionally, the virus may enter human populations via bites from infected Aedes mosquitoes that come from regions experiencing ZIKV outbreaks or spillover from sylvatic habitats [38]. Aedes africanus is believed to be the sylvatic vector of ZIKV, while Aedes henselli has been associated with the outbreak on Yap Island. However, Aedes aegypti is considered the primary vector for outbreaks in the Americas, the Pacific, and Asia [39].Fig. 2ZIKV is an arthropod-born (arbovirus) that can be transmitted through other patterns such as sexual transmission, blood transmission, etc. The vector transmission consists of two cycles: A Enzootic or sylvatic cycle; and B Human or urban cycle. ZIKV can remain stable in urine for a long time. Therefore, urine can play a role in the urban cycle [12, 38, 120–123]Non-vector-borne transmissionThere are several non-vector modes of transmission for ZIKV, such as through sexual intercourse [40–43], and from a mother to her fetus during pregnancy [44–50]. ZIKV might infect children through several ways, including intrauterine, intrapartum, and postnatal routes [46, 51, 52]. Instances of perinatal transmission of the ZIKV from mothers infected during childbirth have been documented, with two such cases identified. In one case, the infant showed no symptoms, while in the other case, the infant presented with a maculopapular rash and thrombocytopenia [44]. The clinical manifestations of the illness in children are strikingly like to those seen in infected adults [53]. Identifying arthralgia in newborns and young children can be challenging. Symptoms may include limping (among ambulatory children), trouble moving or reluctance to move an extremity, discomfort when moving the affected joint actively or passively, irritability, or ache upon palpation [53].As well, the presence of ZIKV in semen and its potential for transmission through sexual contact have raised questions about its ability to breach the blood-testis barrier (BTB) or the Sertoli cell barrier (SCB). The E protein, a key antigenic component of ZIKV, is significant for its crucial role in receptor binding and membrane fusion. Numerous investigations have highlighted the significance of the E protein in the virulence and pathogenicity of ZIKV. Investigations have revealed that ZIKV infection leads to a rearrangement of actin filaments, a process in which the E protein is believed to be involved. This disruption of actin filament dynamics is a contributing factor to the ZIKV infection. In summary, the interplay between the ZIKV E protein and F-actin results in a rearrangement of the F-actin network, ultimately compromising the integrity of the BTB [54]. During the gestation period in mammals, the placenta mainly performs as a barrier, offering both physical and immunological protection between the mother and the developing fetus. Within the placenta, primary human trophoblasts (PHTs), comprising cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, play a crucial role as barrier cells. Syncytiotrophoblasts are particularly significant as they are in straight interaction with maternal blood. In cases involving full-term placentas, PHTs are generally resistant to ZIKV infection because they continually release antiviral interferon lambda 1 (IFNλ1). Additionally, it was noted that the medium derived from uninfected PHT cells exhibited a protective influence against ZIKV infection in non-placental cells. PHT cells themselves displayed elevated levels of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), signifying that IFNλ1 operates both in a paracrine manner (protecting neighboring cells) and an autocrine manner (protecting trophoblast and non-trophoblast cells) to safeguard against ZIKV infection [55]. It has also been shown that trophoblast cell lines obtained from choriocarcinoma explants and early human villous explants were found to be susceptible to ZIKV infection [56]. However, placentas from later stages of pregnancy, which possess a more mature placental barrier, showed heightened resilience against infection. For ZIKV to effectively infect syncytiotrophoblasts, it likely needs to evade the protective mechanisms established by IFNλ1 produced by trophoblasts, along with other antiviral factors that are specific to trophoblasts. Alternatively, the virus may need to find alternative routes to enter the fetal compartment by breaching the placental barrier. This scenario is particularly relevant during the second half of pregnancy, which corresponds to the stage when PHT cells are most abundant. These alternative pathways might involve non-trophoblast infection routes, for instance infecting immune cells or using transcytosis to transport virions complex with maternal antibodies through the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) [57]. Recently, it has been observed that human placental macrophages, identified as Hofbauer cells (HCs), are susceptible to the virus infection [58–60].In the context of immune cells, innate immune cells are probably to be targeted by ZIKV once they breach the trophoblast layer in the placenta. Upon infection, HCs manufactured IFN-α, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and also stimulated genes that are associated with antiviral responses, although it did not significantly induce cell death. ZIKV replication was also observed in human placental cytotrophoblasts, albeit with deferred kinetics and ISG expression. This suggests that ZIKV may replicate within cytotrophoblasts and HCs, potentially facilitating vertical transmission. However, syncytiotrophoblasts are resistant to ZIKV infection, leaving us with the question of how the virus penetrates the cytotrophoblast layer and HCs. Considering that significant morphological changes occur in the human placenta during the first and second half of pregnancy, including the absence of maternal blood interaction with the syncytiotrophoblast layer in the earliest trimester of pregnancy and a substantial reduction in the cytotrophoblast cell layer during pregnancy, the methods for vertical transmission of ZIKV are likely to differ in any stages of pregnancy [57]. Also, The ZIKV may be transmitted via blood transfusions and organ transplants, although the associated risks are not completely understood [61, 62].Pathogenesis in rhesus monkey (RM)The ZIKV was initially isolated from a febrile rhesus monkey (RM) [63], indicating that studying virus replication, immune responses, and certain characteristics of disease progression can be effectively modeled in RMs. In one particular experiment, RMs were inoculated subcutaneously to simulate a mosquito bite, which induced transient viremia and fever [64]. Moreover, another study expanded its scope by examining the tissue tropism throughout the infection. Groups of RMs were necropsied on days 7, 28, or 35 post-inoculations. Seven days following inoculation, viral RNA was found in various tissues. This included lymphoid tissues such as widely distributed lymph nodes and the spleen, joints (especially those proximal to the inoculation site, but also in some distal joint tissues), and peripheral nervous tissues, exclusively the brachial plexus, trigeminal ganglion, and sciatic nerve. Concurrently, the RNA of the virus was linked to the spinal cord (cervical, lumbar, and thoracic regions), although it was not present in the brain and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This could suggest a predilection for nervous tissues but a limitation in the retrograde transportation of the infectious virus into the central nervous system (CNS), or it might imply that CNS infection requires a longer incubation period. RNA from the ZIKV was also identified in the kidneys and bladder of the male RM, but not in the testes or prostate. Collectively, these observations signify that ZIKV spreads rapidly to various tissues in the body, containing lymph nodes, spleen, peripheral nerves, skin, and the genital and urinary tracts. Furthermore, in the female RM, the presence of viral RNA was identified in reproductive organs for example the uterus and vagina. This indicates that these tissues can be infected by the virus and maintain the infection for a minimum of four weeks. This finding could have profound consequences for the transmission of ZIKV and the potential for fetal infections during pregnancy. Additionally, the seeding of the virus into semen via the urethra could represent another possible route of transmission [65].Clinical observations and laboratory findingsClinical manifestationsThe ZIKV is the causative agent of Zika fever, a syndrome characterized by fever, rash, and joint pain that bears a striking resemblance to dengue fever [66]. A significant portion of individuals infected with ZIKV, especially in the period from the 1960s to the 1980s, have exhibited either no symptoms or only mild clinical signs [38]. Notably, severe illness and case fatality rates associated with ZIKV infection are remarkably low, and the symptoms of the illness typically abate within a relatively short timeframe of 2–7 days [67]. The incubation period of ZIKV infection in humans is estimated to span from 3 to 14 days [68]. Furthermore, the viremic period, characterized by the virus's existence in the bloodstream, is generally observed within 3 to 4 days after symptoms onset [69].Evidence has indicated a connection between ZIKV infection and optical/neurological disorders, including optic nerve pallor, chorioretinal scarring, increased intraocular pressure, and corneal clouding at birth [70, 71]. It is estimated that 20–25% of people infected with ZIKV exhibit noticeable symptoms [38]. They exhibit the following symptoms: fatigue [72], arthralgia [73–75], temporary and moderate fever [75], accompanied by maculopapular, itchy rashes (that typically progress descendingly from the face to the extremities) [76], non-purulent conjunctivitis [77–80], and in some cases, redness of the eyes, loss of appetite, vomiting and edema [23, 38], as well as, sore throat, and cough [72, 81]. Clinical signs frequently associated with acute ZIKV infection encompass transient hearing loss [66], subcutaneous haematomas [82], myalgia, asthenia [83], headache, retro-orbital pain [23, 83, 84], and hematospermia [15, 85]. Other uncommon manifestations of ZIKV infection include mucous membrane ulceration, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and thrombocytopenia [86]. Figure 3 provides a detailed overview of the clinical manifestations of ZIKV and their associated neurological complications.Fig. 3Clinical symptoms of ZIKV and their neurological complications include acute myelitis, ocular hypertension, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and Guillain–Barré syndrome [15, 38, 66, 73, 75, 76, 80, 82, 87, 88, 93, 96, 97, 110, 124, 125]Neurological complicationsZIKV is also linked to neurological complications, including GBS, microcephaly [38], and neurological complications such as acute myelitis [87], and meningoencephalitis [88]. Microcephaly is a prenatal condition characterized by underdeveloped brain growth, leading to reduced head size in affected infants, while GBS manifests as muscle weakness stemming from immune-mediated harm to the peripheral nervous system [89]. During a ZIKV outbreak in Bangladesh, patients with ZIKV-associated GBS exhibited involvement of cranial, autonomic, and sensory nerves. Although electrophysiological studies predominantly confirmed most cases as acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) [90]. In Brazil, ZIKV contributed to nearly equivalent incidences of acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) and AIDP [91]. ZIKV-associated GBS is correlated with increased morbidity in the acute phase, frequently presenting with prevalent deficits in cranial nerves and acute neuropathy [92]. Research on fetuses exposed to the ZIKV has revealed occurrences of microcephaly, retardation of intrauterine growth, and CNS damage [46, 47] (Fig. 3).Laboratory findingsDuring ZIKV infection, laboratory values regarding biochemistry and hematology typically remain within normal limits. Nevertheless, during the viremic phase, a subset of patients may exhibit temporary and moderate lymphopenia, leucopenia, or activated lymphocytes. They may also experience monocytosis, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and increased serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase, C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, fibrinogen, and ferritin [83, 84, 93–95]. Cases of cardiac complications related to ZIKV infection include myocarditis, pericarditis, Arrhythmias, and heart failure [96–98]. Additionally, incidence rates of ZIKV infection are observed to be higher in females than males, and it is more common in older individuals than in younger ones [23, 99]. Due to the overlapping signs, the clinical diagnosis of Zika persists challenging in tropical settings, especially in regions with concurrent transmission of dengue and chikungunya viruses [100]. Unlike Chikungunya and Dengue fever, ZIKV is characterized by more noticeable edema of the extremities and conjunctivitis and the ZIKV does not exhibit thrombocytopenia and leukopenia as seen in Chikungunya and Dengue cases [23, 76]. Additionally, malaise and headache in ZIKV fever tend to be less severe, while the maculopapular rash is more pronounced [23]. Table 1 provides a comparison of the clinical symptoms associated with Zika, Dengue, and Chikungunya infections.Table 1Comparison of Zika, Dengue, and Chikungunya clinical symptoms [76]SymptomsZikaDengueChikungunyaFever++++++++++Maculopapular rash+++++++Hepatomegaly−−+++Conjunctivitis+++−+Arthralgia/Myalgia+++++++++Edema of extremities++−−Retro-orbital pain++++ + * −Don’t have/ +HaveNeural dysfunctionThe ZIKV disrupts the natural cell cycle and transcription processes in human neural progenitor cells (hNPC) [101]. Experimental studies have indicated that ZIKV infection leads to significant alterations in neuronal proliferation and migration. Specifically, Asian ZIKV isolates have been found to impede the growth and movement of hNP cells with less cell death. The cerebral cortex's structural development largely relies on the growth and movement of hNP cells. Subsequently, neurons in the cerebral cortex mature by extending neurites and forming synaptic connections. The cohesion of the neurite structure is crucial for the proper operation of the central nervous system (CNS). However, ZIKV infection can disrupt this process, affecting the cytoskeletal organization, microtubule dynamics, and neurite outgrowth. To assess the effect of ZIKV on neurons, researchers measured the rate of neurite growth and ramification. The High multiplicity of infections of the Asian SPH isolate of ZIKV significantly reduces neurite numbers, neurite length, and the number of branch points. Based on medical documentation of congenital ZIKV infection, ocular abnormalities, and seizures have also been documented. The observed impairment in neurite proliferation and migration is associated with seizures and cognitive deficits [102].As well, distinct interactions between ZIKV and human proteins related to brain development contribute to the virus's influence on the nervous system. One of these interactions involves NS4A binding with Ankyrin Repeat and LEM Domain-Containing Protein 2 (ANKLE2), which is particularly intriguing [103]. Notably, mutations in ANKLE2 have been linked to autosomal recessive microcephaly in humans, as documented in previous studies [104]. These discoveries collectively imply that the expression of NS4A may hinder critical functions of ANKLE2 during brain development [103]. Although the ANKLE2 pathway plays a role in ZIKV-induced microcephaly, several developmental pathways likely collaborate to promote this condition following ZIKV infection. As an example, ZIKV RNA binds to MSI1 (Musashi-1), an RNA-binding protein responsible for regulating the microcephaly gene MCPH1, thus aiding virus replication in neural stem cells [105]. Moreover, ZIKV NS2A can impede brain development in mice by breaking down adheren junction proteins disorders in the ZIKV capsid-mediated decay pathway may also affect brain growth. Additionally, as a result of the studies that have demonstrated ZIKV NS4A and NS4B's inhibition of neural stem cells (NSC) division through the Akt-mTOR pathway, it's plausible that NS4A contributes to neuropathogenesis via several mechanisms [106].GBS is one of the common reasons for acute neuromuscular paralysis worldwide [107]. This syndrome is an acute polyradiculoneuropathy with an immune-mediated origin and usually appears due to a preceding infection, particularly an infection caused by Campylobacter jejuni. The disease often involves sensory and cranial nerves. Respiratory failure can occur in 20–30% of GBS cases, which have severe and general manifestations [108]. The incidence of GBS varies between 0.81 and 1.89 cases per 100,000 people per year [109]. The classic form of GBS is characterized by rapid and progressive symmetric weakness in the limbs, accompanied by sensory symptoms and hyporeflexia or areflexia [110]. Various subtypes of GBS have been identified through electrophysiological studies, including Acute Motor Axonal Neuropathy (AMAN), Acute Motor and Sensory Axonal Neuropathy (AMSAN), and Acute Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP) [111]. In 2014, the first report of a link between GBS and ZIKV was published, concerning a female patient with GBS in French Polynesia. Initial symptoms included distal limb paresthesia, which progressed dominant tetraparesis in the lower limbs. Other clinical symptoms included bilateral facial palsy, diffuse myalgia, and sustained ventricular tachycardia [112]. Further studies investigating ZIKV-associated GBS revealed common neurological findings such as any limb paresis (97%), areflexia or hyporeflexia (96%), tetraparesis (64%), facial palsy (51%), sensory deficits (49%), and bulbar palsy (25%) [113]. Several hypotheses exist regarding ZIKV-associated GBS. One hypothesis suggests molecular mimicry as a potential pathogenic mechanism. According to this hypothesis, the ZIKV polyprotein resembles human proteins involved in axon function, myelination, and neurodevelopment. Consequently, neutralizing antibodies induced by ZIKV may cross-react with peripheral nerve proteins, leading to immune-mediated damage [114]. Another hypothesis involves T cell responses stimulated by ZIKV, which may target neural, axonal, myelin, or Schwann cell antigens. This hypothesis is supported by the observation of perineural T-cell infiltration in nerve tissues from autopsies of GBS cases associated with other pathogens [115].Moreover, human astrocytes, pivotal in providing support and protection to neurons, are vulnerable to ZIKV infection. Following infection, a gradual demise of human astrocytes is evident. Notably, there is an absence of indications of apoptosis or pyroptosis, effectively excluding these pathways of cell demise. Nevertheless, heightened levels of serine/threonine-protein kinase-1 (RIPK1), RIPK3, and receptor-phosphorylated protein lineage kinase-like domain (MLKL) signal the onset of planned necrosis or necroptosis in infected astrocytes [116]. Recent findings indicate that elements of the necroptosis cell death pathway might serve to constrain ZIKV neuroinfection. In particular, the activation of Z-DNA-binding protein 1 (ZBP1) and RIPK1/RIPK3 in cortical neurons can initiate a series of reactions that regulate the expression of the immune response gene 1 (IRG1) and the metabolite itaconate. Itaconate exerts a suppressive effect on viral genome replication by impeding the formation of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) [117].


Title: Zika virus shedding in the stool and infection through the anorectal mucosa in mice

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV), a flavivirus that resurged in recent outbreaks in the Americas, was first isolated from a monkey in the Zika forest of Uganda in 19471. After the first confirmed human infection in 19642, ZIKV spread silently through Africa and Asia over the next 40 years. The first reported outbreak of ZIKV was on Yap Island in 2007, followed by a severe epidemic in 2013 in French Polynesia, where there was an increased incidence of Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) noted in ZIKV-positive cases3. The ZIKV outbreak that began in Brazil in 2015 was associated with severe birth defects such as microcephaly, which was later confirmed in both animal models and clinical investigations4–7.Similar to other related flaviviruses, such as dengue virus (DENV) and yellow fever virus (YFV), ZIKV is primarily transmitted through the bite of infected Aedes mosquitoes8. Interestingly, ZIKV has also been detected in semen9 and the vaginal swabs of pregnant women10. This would explain the reported cases of sexual transmission in humans11. Among these cases, ZIKV was primarily transmitted from infected males to uninfected females12–14, however, there was one case of transmission from an infected man to his uninfected male partner through anal intercourse15. Unprotected anal intercourse is the mode of transmission for ~7.4% of all human sexually transmitted infections14, which supports the possibility that the anorectal mucosa serves as an entry site for ZIKV infection.Duggal et al. observed that ZIKV could be transmitted efficiently through male-to-female intercourse in an immunodeficient mouse model, as the virus is shed for prolonged periods in the seminal fluid16. Furthermore, Yockey et al. found that ZIKV intravaginal infection of pregnant mice, even in immunocompetent mouse strains, can lead to in utero infection of the offspring17. These findings indicate that the vaginal tract mucosa can serve as an entry site for ZIKV infection. However, whether the anorectal mucosa can also support viral replication, and the potential systemic effects from that infection, remain largely unknown.ZIKV is also unique among flaviviruses in that high concentrations are present in multiple secretions and body fluids of an infected host. In guinea pigs and monkeys, intranasal inoculation with ZIKV leads to systemic infection. Interestingly, even close contact is sufficient for ZIKV to be transmitted between guinea pigs18. This can be partially explained by the fact that ZIKV is detectable in the saliva and tears of humans, monkeys, and guinea pigs18–20. ZIKV can also be isolated from the urine and breast milk21,22. However, whether ZIKV can be recovered from fecal specimens needs to be investigated.In this study, we show that ZIKV can be detected in the feces of infected mice and a human, suggesting that stool samples could be used for surveillance of ZIKV infection in humans or sentinel animals. Importantly, ZIKV can infect mice through the anorectal mucosa to cause viremia with subsequent testicular damage in ZIKV-infected male Ifnar1−/− mice, as well as congenital defects in the offspring of wild-type pregnant C57BL/6 (C57) mice treated with anti-Ifnar1 antibody. This work describes a novel mouse model for examining an under-studied route of ZIKV transmission and pathogenesis.ResultsZIKV is shed into the stool of infected miceTo assess whether ZIKV is shed into the stool of an infected host, we initially selected Ifnar1−/− mice as a well-established model of ZIKV infection23. DENV, a closely related flavivirus, was also tested for comparison (Fig. 1a). Upon intraperitoneal (i.p.) infection with a contemporary Asian strain of ZIKV (GZ01, 105 PFU/mouse), all Ifnar1−/− mice developed sustained viremia, with peak titers at 3 days post-infection (dpi) (Fig. 1b). The average and peak viremia levels in DENV-infected mice were much lower than what was measured in ZIKV-infected mice (Fig. 1b). Elevated levels of ZIKV RNA were also detected in the anal lavage fluid and fecal samples of ZIKV-infected animals, even at 7 dpi (Fig. 1c, d). Remarkably, DENV RNA was not detected in either anal lavage or fecal specimens (Fig. 1c, d). When we repeated this experiment using another historical ZIKV strain, FSS13025, viral RNA was also detected in the feces and anal lavage fluid (Fig. S1). The viral genome could be amplified from the fecal sample by RT-PCR, and routine sequencing did not identify any meaningful nucleotide variations (data not shown). Furthermore, consistent with previous findings23, both ZIKV and DENV could be detected in all tested organs at 5 dpi when infection occurred by the i.p. route (Fig. S2). Interestingly, ZIKV and DENV RNA were abundant in the small intestine and rectum (Fig. S2).Fig. 1ZIKV is shed into the feces of infected Ifnar1−/− micea Experimental outline for ZIKV infection. Mice were infected with 105 PFU of either ZIKV (GZ01 strain) or DENV-2 (43 strain) by the i.p. route. b–d RNA in the sera (b), anal lavage fluid (c), and feces (d) from ZIKV- or DENV-infected Ifnar1−/− mice was analyzed at the indicated time points by qRT-PCR using primers specific for each virus. (n ≥ 5 per group)We next tested whether ZIKV could also be recovered from the feces of an infected immunocompetent strain of mice. As previously described24, C57 mice pretreated with anti-Ifnar1 antibody for 12 h were subsequently infected with ZIKV strain GZ01 (106 PFU/mouse) by the i.p. route. Sustained viremia was readily detected at 1, 3, 5, and 7 dpi, at which time viral RNA was also detectable in both the anal lavage fluid and feces, albeit at a lower magnitude (Fig. 2a). We then tested whether C57 mice that were not pretreated with anti-Ifnar1 antibody25 had similar results. ZIKV RNA was measurable in both the blood and anal lavage fluid at 1 and 2 dpi, while virus was only detected in the feces at 1 dpi (Fig. 2b). To support our findings, we were fortunate to obtain a stool sample from one patient22 during the acute period of ZIKV infection. A qRT-PCR assay of the sample showed high levels of ZIKV RNA (~2 × 105 copies/g) 3 days after the onset of fever, when urine samples were also positive for ZIKV RNA22. ZIKV infection triggered the upregulation of multiple cytokines in humans during acute phase of infection that we were able to characterize by Luminex assay, including IP-10, IL-5, GM-CSF, TNF-α, IL-15, IL-10, MIP-1α, IFN-γ, IL-6, IL-1RA, IL-2, MIG, IFN-α, IL-2R, and IL-4 (Fig. S3). Altogether, our studies confirm that ZIKV is shed into the feces of both mouse models and humans during active infection.Fig. 2ZIKV is shed into the feces of infected immunocompetent micea–b 3–4-week-old C57 mice were pretreated with anti-Ifnar1 antibody (a) or mock-treated (b) for 12 h and then infected with ZIKV (GZ01 strain, 106 PFU/mouse) by the i.p. route. ZIKV RNA copies in the blood, anal lavage and feces at the indicated times were quantified by qRT-PCR (n = 4 per group)ZIKV intra-anal inoculation leads to systemic infection in miceThe excretion of ZIKV into the feces also highlights the potential risk of ZIKV transmission through anal intercourse. We sought to clarify whether the anorectal mucosa of mice could serve as an entry site for ZIKV infection. We injected Ifnar1−/− mice by the intra-anal (i.a.) route with ZIKV strain GZ01 (106 PFU/mouse)22 (Fig. 3a). All infected mice developed the characteristic symptoms of ZIKV systemic infection, including weight loss beginning at 6 dpi (Fig. S4a) followed by inactivity, encephalitis, hindlimb paralysis (Fig. S4b), and death between 8–18 dpi (Fig. 3b). To examine the lethality of ZIKV infection when the virus was administered by the i.a. route, we infected Ifnar1−/− mice with 104 or 105 PFU doses. The results indicate mortality rates of 20 and 67% at 104 and 105 PFU, respectively (Fig. S5a). Even at 104 PFU, the virus could be recovered from the serum and all tested organs, suggesting that i.a. infection with ZIKV is highly efficient in Ifnar1−/− mice (Fig. S5b, c). ZIKV infection through the i.a. route resulted in detectable viremia at 1 dpi, which peaked at 3 dpi before falling at 5 to 7 dpi (Fig. 3c). To identify the tissue tropisms for ZIKV when transmitted by the i.a. route, multiple organs were collected at 2, 5, and 12 dpi and subjected to qRT-PCR analysis. As shown in Fig. 3d, ZIKV RNA was detected in all tested organs, including the brain, lung, liver, kidney, spleen, small intestine, testes, and rectum. Interestingly, ZIKV RNA levels in the brain and testes continued to increase until 12 dpi, while the levels peaked at 5 dpi in other organs. At early time points (2 dpi), ZIKV was at its highest levels in the spleen and rectum. By 5 dpi, the level in the testes had risen significantly, surpassing the level in the spleen and rectum, where the levels began to drop. Although not reaching the high levels seen in the testes, the ZIKV burden in the brain continued to rise through day 12 (Fig. 3d). Plaque assays with tissue homogenates collected at 5 dpi showed the presence of high concentrations of infectious ZIKV (Fig. S6a). Interestingly, we were also able to establish ZIKV infection by the i.p. route in naive Ifnar1−/− mice using the rectal wash fluid from i.a.-infected mice at 5 dpi, confirming the prolonged presence of infectious ZIKV in the anorectal environment. The recipient mice died by 10 dpi, with viremia from 1 to 8 dpi that peaked at 3 dpi (Fig. S6b, c).Fig. 3ZIKV intra-anal inoculation leads to systemic infection in micea Illustration of the experiment. 3–4-week-old male Ifnar1−/− mice were infected with ZIKV (106 PFU/mouse) by the i.a. route (a–f). b The survival rate of the infected Ifnar1−/− mice (n = 6 per group). **p < 0.01, log-rank (Mantel–Cox) test. c Viral RNA copies in sera were measured at the indicated time points by qRT-PCR assay (n = 5 per time point). d ZIKV RNA recovered from the brain, lung, liver, kidney, spleen, testes, small intestine, and rectum were quantified by qRT-PCR (n = 4 per group). e The size and weight of the testes from uninfected or ZIKV anally-infected Ifnar1−/− mice were measured at 15 dpi (n = 6, mock; n = 8, ZIKV). Scale bar = 0.5 cm. ****p < 0.0001, unpaired Student’s t-test. f RNA in situ hybridization of organ tissues from mock-infected or ZIKV anally-infected Ifnar1−/− mice with a ZIKV-specific probe at 5 dpi. Scale bar represents 100 μm. The data in (f) are representative of two independent experiments with at least two animals per groupZIKV infection by the i.p. route has been shown to lead to testicular damage and infertility in mouse models26,27. Similarly, we noted that the testes of mice infected by the i.a. route with ZIKV were much smaller than those of mock-infected mice at 15 dpi (Fig. 3e). Furthermore, H&E staining revealed severe damage to the structure of the testes, with Leydig cell fibrosis in ZIKV-infected mice (Fig. S7). ZIKV infection was similarly associated with inflammatory cell infiltration and vascular cuffing in the mouse brain and mild inflammation in the rectum (Fig. S7). More importantly, our RNA scope assay showed that ZIKV RNA was present in the testes, brain, rectum, lung, kidney, and small intestine at 5 dpi, but not in mock-infected samples (Fig. 3f). Interestingly, ZIKV-specific RNA was found in the Leydig cells of the testes, which is in agreement with previous findings in guinea pigs and mice18,26.We further validated the above result in immunocompetent C57 mice. Upon i.a. infection, ZIKV RNA could be detected in the blood of mice at 1 and 2 dpi, but not at 3 dpi (Fig. S8a). Furthermore, ZIKV could be found in all inspected organs except for the brain. The highest burden of ZIKV was seen in the spleen, rectum, and anal canal at 1 dpi (Fig. S8b). The above results show that i.a. inoculation of ZIKV in immunocompetent and Ifnar1−/− mice leads to systemic infection of almost all organ systems, with resulting testicular damage and inflammation in the brain and rectum in Ifnar1−/− mice.ZIKV infects and triggers innate immune responses in human colon cellsTo profile the specific immune responses triggered by i.a. infection of mice with ZIKV, we assayed their ZIKV-specific antibody kinetics. We can see that ZIKV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies were detected at 7 dpi in mice infected by the i.a. route (Fig. S9). Furthermore, Luminex assay showed the upregulated expression of multiple cytokines and chemokines, including IFN-γ, IP-10, MIG, IL-13, and IL-12 (Fig. 4a).Fig. 4ZIKV infects and triggers innate immune responses in human colon cellsa Expression levels of cytokines and chemokines in sera from ZIKV anally-infected Ifnar1−/− mice (106 PFU/mouse), analyzed by Luminex assay at 7 dpi. The average expression levels of cytokines from 3 mice are shown. b Relative expression levels of the 30 innate immune response genes in human colon cells (HT-29) most upregulated by ZIKV infection. The cells were infected with ZIKV (GZ01 strain, MOI 0.5) for 24 h, and total RNA was extracted and analyzed by RNA-seq. c, d Pathways for the up- (c) or down- (d) regulated genes enriched by gene ontology pathway analysis. "-" means "negative". e The mRNA expression levels of IFNB, MX1, and IP-10 in ZIKV-infected (GZ01 strain, MOI 1) HT-29 cells were measured by qRT-PCR at the indicated time points. All data are shown as the mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, unpaired Student’s t-testTo help characterize the innate response to ZIKV in the anorectal mucosa of humans, we performed infections in two human colon epithelial cell lines, HT-29 and SW620. As shown in Fig. S10, ZIKV efficiently infected both groups. RNA-seq analysis of HT-29 cells revealed that ZIKV infection caused the upregulation of IFNB and several innate immune response genes, including FAM60A, IFI6, DDX58, OAS1, MX1, and IP-10 (Fig. 4b and Fig. S11a). Gene ontology analysis showed that many genes associated with antiviral activity or the type I interferon signaling pathway were upregulated (Fig. 4c), highlighting the importance of the innate immune response in the clearance of ZIKV. Interestingly, many genes related to cell growth and metabolism were downregulated (Fig. 4d), consistent with the gene expression profiles seen in ZIKV-infected human skin cells and neonatal brains4,28. These results were confirmed by qRT-PCR analysis, showing upregulated expression of IFNB, MX1, IP-10, CH25H, ISG15, OASL, IFITM3, RIG-I, and TRIM21 following ZIKV infection at 24 hpi but not 12 hpi (Fig. 4e and Fig. S11b–g), in agreement with previous findings in A549 cells29. Interestingly, our analysis also revealed several previously unidentified ZIKV-induced genes (ZIGs) in human colon cells, such as FAM60A, BET1L, and LPAR6.Intra-anal infection of pregnant mice with ZIKV leads to transplacental transmission and impaired fetal developmentFinally, we examined the possible effects of maternal i.a. ZIKV infection on the fetus. C57 mice were mated and the dams were subsequently administered anti-Ifnar1 antibody at E5.5, followed by i.a inoculation with ZIKV at E6.5 (Fig. 5a). A group was euthanized at E14.5 to measure viral loads from the organs of the adult mice, the placenta, or the fetal head. ZIKV RNA was detected in all tested organs of adult mice, with the highest level found in the spleen (Fig. 5b). Viral loads in the placenta and head of the fetus, as measured by qRT-PCR, were particularly elevated (Fig. 5c, d). Meanwhile, the condition and size of each fetus was measured at E17.5, with the fetuses from ZIKV-infected mice noted to be much smaller than those in the mock-infected group (Fig. 5e, f). ZIKV RNA was also recovered from placental tissue at E17.5 (Fig. 5g). These results show that the i.a. infection of pregnant mice with ZIKV leads to transplacental infection and impaired development of the fetus.Fig. 5Intra-anal infection of pregnant mice with ZIKV leads to transplacental transmission and impaired fetal developmenta Illustration of the experiment. 7–8-week-old C57 mice were mated, and pregnant mice were infected i.a. by ZIKV (106 PFU/mouse) at E6.5 after treatment with anti-Ifnar1 antibody at E5.5. Mice were euthanized at E14.5 (E6.5-E14.5) or E17.5 (E6.5-E17.5). b–d ZIKV RNA copies recovered at E14.5 (8 dpi) from tissues of pregnant mice, including the brain, lung, liver, kidney, spleen, small intestine, and rectum (n = 5 per group) (b), or the offspring of 2 representative pregnant mice including the placenta (c) or the fetal head (d) were quantified by qRT-PCR (n = 9, Mock; n = 14). e, f Condition and length of individual fetuses at E17.5 (e
n = 10 Mock; n = 9 ZIKV; f
n = 5 per group). The size of each fetus within the amniotic sac is shown in (e), while (f) shows the length measured when the placenta and amniotic tissues are removed. Scale bar = 1 cm. g Viral load in the placenta at E17.5 (n = 6 per group). Offspring in (e–g) were from one representative pregnant mouse. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, unpaired Student’s t-testDiscussionIn this study, we examined two separate mouse models to characterize the infectivity and resulting pathogenesis of ZIKV infection by the i.a. route, which is the likely mode of transmission following anal intercourse. Our results showed that i.a. inoculation leads to ZIKV viremia and systemic spread in both immunocompetent and Ifnar1−/− mouse strains. In Ifnar1−/− mice, ZIKV i.a. infection leads to weight loss, organ inflammation, including significant testicular damage, and death. In pregnant C57 mice treated with anti-Ifnar1 antibody, the viremia following i.a. inoculation of ZIKV also crosses the placenta, resulting in suppression of fetal growth and development.We made the important discovery that ZIKV can be shed into the stool, even in immunocompetent hosts. Other reports have found ZIKV in high concentrations in multiple body fluids and secretions such as saliva, tears, urine, and semen, with the ability to be transmitted by close contact or sexual activity9,19,22. While sexual transmission has not been documented for other flavivirus infections, some members of this family have been recovered from fecal samples of avian hosts. The RNA of Tembusu virus was detected in duck feces and cloacal swabs30,31. Infectious particles of West Nile virus (WNV) were isolated from oral and cloacal swab samples of dead birds32. The possibility of fecal-oral transmission of ZIKV is unknown, however, our detection of ZIKV in human stool and anal lavage samples does suggest a mechanism for sexual transmission through anal intercourse. It also introduces the possibility of using such patient samples as an additional screening tool for ZIKV diagnosis or epidemiological monitoring.Although there has been only one reported human case of i.a. transmission to date15, the actual incidence of ZIKV transmission through anal intercourse could in fact be quite substantial. Reporting of sexually transmitted infections in general is notoriously low due to factors such as shame, fear, cost, and misinformation33–35. ZIKV infection itself is often missed in endemic regions because 80% of cases are asymptomatic36. This makes it all the more likely that silent transmission between sexual partners could be occurring, creating new reservoirs of the virus even in areas where mosquito-borne transmission is not prevalent. Our findings underscore the importance of using condoms to prevent ZIKV transmission in individuals who engage in anal intercourse, especially since ZIKV has been detected in seminal fluid for up to 6 months37.Recently, Haddow et al. showed that both intrarectal and intravaginal inoculation of monkeys with ZIKV resulted in a high rate of infection38, which is in agreement with our results. In vitro experiments from our lab and others demonstrated that colonic cells (Caco-2, HT-29, and SW620) are susceptible to ZIKV infection39. This supports our hypothesis that ZIKV infection can be established in the mucosa of the anorectal canal, which explains the probable mechanism of infection for the reported case of male-to-male human ZIKV transmission. From there, it can spread in the bloodstream and trigger ZIKV-specific humoral immune responses and symptomatic infection, as seen in the single reported human case (subjective fever, myalgia, headache, lethargy, malaise, rash, arthritis, and conjunctivitis). In our experiments with immunocompromised mice, the infection resulted in extensive viral replication in the blood and multiple organs, including the brain, small intestine, testes, and rectum. Moreover, i.a. inoculation of ZIKV in pregnant mice rendered more susceptible to infection using the anti-Ifnar1 antibody resulted in transplacental infection and delayed fetal development. It would be interesting to investigate whether other flaviviruses could also infect intestinal cells and be shed in the stool. Future experiments could also more closely examine the transmissibility of ZIKV in human stool samples. Our knowledge of the pathogenesis of i.a. ZIKV infection in humans is currently limited to the single reported case, and we can only extrapolate from animal models what might occur in potentially uncontrolled infection in immunocompromised humans.In summary, our data characterize the infectivity and pathogenesis caused by ZIKV i.a. infection using both Ifnar1−/− and immunocompetent mice. We demonstrated the particularly high susceptibility of the brain, testes, and gastrointestinal tissues of Ifnar1−/− mice to ZIKV infection by this route and that the placenta and fetus remain a target of infection even in immunocompetent strains of mice. Interestingly, we showed that ZIKV RNA can be recovered from the stool, which could potentially be used as a future tool to diagnose or monitor for ZIKV infection. This also highlights the importance of men who are suspected to be carrying ZIKV to avoid unprotected anal intercourse. This route of ZIKV infection represents a new field of study for ZIKV-host pathology, which could impact not only transmission, but possibly future surveillance of ZIKV.Materials and MethodsHuman serum and stoolsHuman serum and stools from healthy individuals and ZIKV-infected patients were collected at the Guangzhou Eighth People’s Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University. This study was performed according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Guangzhou Eighth People’s Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, for the protection of human subjects. All the participants provided written informed consent. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the Guangzhou Eighth People’s Hospital (Reference Number 20160264) according to the medical research regulations of China.Mice and ethics statementIfnar1−/− mice (IFN-α/β receptor deficient) were kindly provided by Professor Qi-Bin Leng (Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China). C57 mice were purchased from the Vital River Laboratory (Beijing, China) and bred in our core animal facility. All animal experiments were performed according to the standard operating protocol (SOP) issued by the Animal Experiment Committee of the Laboratory Animal Center, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, China (IACUC-13-2016-001).Viruses, cells, and reagentsZIKV strains GZ01 (GenBank: KU820898), FSS13025 (GenBank: JN860885), and DENV-2 (43 strain, GenBank: AF204178) were used in this study as mentioned previously29. BHK-21, HT-29, and SW620 cells were purchased from ATCC and cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in DMEM, F12 or RPMI 1640 media, respectively. All media were supplemented with 10% FBS (ExCell Bio, Jiangsu), 100 units/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. 4G2 monoclonal antibody (mAb) targeting the ZIKV E protein was produced as previously described29. Mouse anti-Ifnar1 antibody (clone MAR1-5A3) was purchased from Leinco Technologies, Inc. (St. Louis, MO, USA).Sample collection and real-time quantitative PCRFeces were collected immediately upon release and associated with individual mice. Fecal weight was recorded, and then the sample was suspended in 500 μl DMEM. 200 μl of the fecal suspension was used for RNA extraction. A volume of 150 μl PBS was used for anal lavage of each mouse. Total viral RNA isolated from mouse sera, cell supernatants, anal lavage or feces was extracted using the EasyPure Viral DNA/RNA Kit (TransGen Biotech, Beijing). Real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) was conducted to measure viral RNA copies. ZIKV primers were described previously40.ZIKV intra-anal infection in miceThree to four-week-old male Ifnar1−/− mice, C57 pregnant mice, or immunocompetent C57 mice were infected with ZIKV (strain GZ01/2016 or FSS13025) through the anal canal. Briefly, mice were inoculated with virus stock using a sterile animal feeding needle (20 G, 6 cm length, 1 mm diameter ball tip) carefully inserted into the anal canal to avoid trauma. The anal canal was tilted upwards for 5–10 min to help ensure infection. ZIKV RNA copies in sera were measured by qRT-PCR as described previously29. Four mice were euthanized for tissue microscopy or qRT-PCR analyses of ZIKV infection in the organs at the indicated time points.Plaque assayBHK-21 cells were incubated with samples containing virus at 37 °C for 1 h. The plate was then washed once with PBS, and overlay media containing 2% FBS and 1% low melting temperature agar (Promega) was added for the plaque assay. Viral plaques were counted at 4 dpi after staining with crystal violet solution.In situ hybridization of ZIKV RNAThe assay was performed with an RNAscope 2.5 (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue samples were deparaffinized for 60 min at 60 °C. Peroxidases in the samples were quenched with hydrogen peroxide at room temperature for 10 min. Slides were then heated in RNAscope Target Retrieval Reagents for 15 min and incubated in RNAscope Protease Plus before hybridization with probes for 30 min. The probe targeting ZIKV RNA was designed and synthesized by Advanced Cell Diagnostics (catalog no. 467871). Samples were counterstained with Gill’s hematoxylin and visualized with bright-field microscopy.ELISA assayBriefly, 100 ng/well of ZIKV E protein was coated onto an ELISA plate. Mouse sera were diluted with PBS containing 1% BSA and added to the plate for 1 h at 37 °C. The plate was then washed three times using PBST and incubated with HRP-conjugated IgG or IgM for 1 h at 37 °C. After washing three times with PBST, the plate was incubated with TMB solution at 37 °C for 30 min. Stop solution was added to the wells for 3 min, and the OD450 was measured by a microplate reader.Luminex assayThe Cytokine 20-Plex Mouse Panel (LMC0006M, Thermo Fisher) and 25-Plex Human Panel (LHC0009, Thermo Fisher) was used to measure cytokines in mouse and human sera, respectively, which were diluted with assay dilution buffer. The assay was conducted using a Luminex200, and the results were analyzed by Luminex xPONENT according to the manufacturer’s protocol.RNA-seq analysis and GO analysisTotal RNA from HT-29 cells infected by ZIKV (GZ01 strain, MOI 0.5) for 24 h or mock-infected was isolated and used to analyze global mRNA transcription by RNA-seq. The Ribo-Zero™ Magnetic Gold Kit (Illumina, MRZG12324) was used to remove ribosomal RNA from 1 μg of the RNA sample, which was then cleaned by Agencourt RNAClean XP beads (Beckman Coulter, A63987). A volume of 5 μl of the eluate was used to create strand-specific RNA libraries using the NEBNext Ultra Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (NEB, E7420L) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The library quality was evaluated on the Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer and quantified by qPCR using the Universal KAPA Library Quantification Kit (KAPA Biosystems, KK4824). Libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq X10 instrument (paired ends 2*150 bp). Genes with a fold change > 1.2 and p < 0.05 between the ZIKV and mock groups were labeled as ZIKV-induced genes (ZIG). ZIG qRT-PCR primers were obtained from the Primer Bank (https://pga.mgh.harvard.edu/primerbank/). The mRNA level of each ZIG was analyzed using SYBR Green qPCR mix (TransGen Biotech, Beijing). Gene ontology analysis was performed using the GO enrichment analysis tool (http://geneontology.org/page/go-enrichment-analysis).The raw sequence data reported in this paper have been deposited into the Genome Sequence Archive41 of the BIG Data Center, Beijing Institute of Genomics (BIG), Chinese Academy of Sciences, under accession number CRA000783, which is publicly accessible at http://bigd.big.ac.cn/gsa.Immunofluorescence assay (IFA)HT-29 and SW620 cells were infected with ZIKV for 48 h and were fixed. Slices were blocked at room temperature for 1 h with 2% goat sera, 0.3% Triton X-100, and 5% BSA in PBS. The 4G2 mAb (5 μg/ml) was applied at room temperature for 1 h, and binding was visualized using FITC-conjugated secondary antibody. Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI (Sigma). Slices were imaged by fluorescence microscopy.ZIKV intra-anal infection of pregnant miceSeven to eight-week-old male and female mice were mated, and the vaginal plugs of female mice were monitored. At E5.5 (embryonic day 5.5), 2 mg/mouse of anti-Ifnar1 antibody was administered to the pregnant mice to facilitate viral infection. These mice were then infected with 106 PFU of the GZ01 strain through the anal canal at E6.5. The infected mice were euthanized to detect viral loads in the maternal sera and organs listed in Fig. 5b, as well as the fetal brain and placenta using qRT-PCR at E14.5, or to measure fetus sizes and viral loads in the placenta at E17.5.Statistical analysisData were analyzed by Prism software (GraphPad) or Microsoft Excel. All data are shown as the mean ± SEM if not otherwise indicated. For in vivo studies, the figures show data from a single representative experiment. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, unpaired Student’s t-test.Electronic supplementary material
Supplemental Information



Title: From Mosquito Bites to Sexual Transmission: Evaluating Mouse Models of Zika Virus Infection

1. IntroductionDespite the discovery of Zika virus (ZIKV) nearly 70 years ago, ZIKV emerged in the 2010s as a significant health threat [1]. The most recent outbreak in 2015–2016 in Latin America unveiled several devastating outcomes of ZIKV infection, including Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) in adults and ZIKV-induced microcephaly in the developing fetus, resulting in long-term cognitive impairments [1,2,3]. ZIKV is now endemic in many countries in Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America [4]. Several local outbreaks of ZIKV infections have also been reported in India, with concerns that a future ZIKV outbreak could be devastating in densely populated areas of India and other countries [5].Although ZIKV infections are largely believed to be transmitted via infected Aedes aegypti and A. albopictus mosquitos, several studies have demonstrated that ZIKV can also be sexually transmitted and is capable of vertical transmission to the developing fetus [1,6,7]. Sexual transmission of ZIKV disproportionately affects women, with approximately 90% of sexually transmitted ZIKV infections being male-to-women transmission [8]. Furthermore, ZIKV RNA has been detected up to 188 days post-infection in semen, presenting a large window of opportunity for sexual transmission [8,9]. Pregnancy is also known to increase susceptibility and adverse outcomes to many viral infections, and these immunological alterations may also increase susceptibility to vaginal ZIKV infections [10,11]. In South America, greater consideration of public health protocols and planned pregnancy during months of lower risk of mosquito-borne infection has been suggested to reduce the risk of harm to the developing fetus [12]. However, the longevity of ZIKV infection in males extends the risk of ZIKV infection beyond the seasonal and geographical range of mosquito-borne transmission. Thus, sexually transmitted ZIKV infections remain a risk in countries where ZIKV is endemic and pose significant risk for microcephaly and other ZIKV-induced harm to the developing fetus.With ZIKV outbreaks reoccurring every 5–10 years and no vaccines or effective treatments available, ZIKV is likely to result in outbreaks of increasing severity until the development of an effective vaccine. Following the 2016 outbreak, many immunodeficient and immunocompetent mouse models have been used to investigate ZIKV tropism, immunity, and potential treatments or vaccines. However, several questions remain unanswered regarding natural ZIKV infection and the impact of the route of infection on host immune responses and disease outcomes. While several animal models in hamsters, rhesus macaques, and pigtail macaques have been established [13,14,15], mouse models remain the most widely used models of ZIKV infection and have informed the majority of our knowledge of ZIKV-induced disease. In this review, we will examine the current knowledge regarding mosquito-borne vs. sexually transmitted ZIKV infections, examine the advantages and disadvantages of mouse models of ZIKV infection, and discuss how these can be used to answer these timely questions.2. Models of Mosquito-Borne Zika Virus (ZIKV) InfectionFollowing the 2016 outbreak in Latin America, a mouse model for ZIKV infection was crucial to begin investigating ZIKV-induced immunity and disease. Several models have been established to model mosquito-borne ZIKV infection, including both immunocompromised and immunocompetent mouse models. These mainly employ footpad, subcutaneous, and intraperitoneal injection to mimic vector transmission, with footpad infection being most common [16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. As these routes of infection may elicit different trafficking patterns through the draining lymph nodes, use of footpad infection may elicit more consistent immune responses [23]. It has been well-established that ZIKV and other flaviviruses utilize the viral NS5 protein to bind to and degrade STAT2 proteins downstream of type I interferon receptor (IFNAR) signaling, inhibiting expression of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes and induction of innate antiviral responses [24,25]. Consequently, ZIKV evades host defense mechanisms and can efficiently replicate in human cells. ZIKV NS5 protein cannot target murine STAT2 to evade IFN signaling, which hinders the use of wild-type (WT) mice in studying ZIKV-induced disease [24,26]. Ifnar−/− mouse models and other similarly immunocompromised mouse models, including Stat2−/− mice, exhibit enhanced susceptibility to ZIKV infections and remain most frequently used for the study of ZIKV infection and pathogenesis in vivo. Mouse models lacking IFN signalling are more susceptible to ZIKV infection and display higher viral titers and viral persistence in tissues compared to WT mice [16,17,21,27,28,29,30]. As ZIKV infections have been associated with increasing rates of GBS and other neurological disorders, IFNAR-deficient models on a C57BL/6 background have demonstrated ZIKV dissemination to the CNS, accompanied by neurological deficits, and can be useful for studying the mechanism of ZIKV-induced neuropathology [16,18,30,31]. For example, Lazear et al. demonstrated that Ifnar−/− and Irf3−/−Irf5−/−Irf7−/− triple knockout (TKO) mice inoculated subcutaneously with ZIKV sustained higher levels of infection in the testes, spinal cord, and brain compared to WT mice and exhibited signs of neurological disease, such as hind limb weakness and paralysis, starting around 6 days post-infection (dpi). By 10 dpi, mice in both Ifnar−/− and TKO groups were either moribund or dead, in contrast to ZIKV-infected WT mice that displayed no signs of disease throughout the duration of the experiment. Similarly, Morrey et al. recently described an aged Ifnar−/− mouse model, where infection of 4-month-old mice was not as lethal as infection of younger mice and elicited transient paralysis that may facilitate further investigation of GBS [32].A129 mice (lacking the type I IFN receptor) and AG129 mice (lacking both type I and type II IFN receptors) on a 129Sv/Ev background have also been used as a model of ZIKV infection with a variety of ZIKV strains [17,27,28,33,34,35]. Despite neuroinvasion by ZIKV in A129 and AG129 mice, neurological outcomes, such as hindlimb paralysis, are less commonly observed in mice of the 129Sv/Ev background compared to reports in C57BL/6 mice. Thus, the mouse strain background is an important factor that must be considered in investigations of immunity during ZIKV infection as well as development of novel vaccines or therapeutics. Ifnar−/− mice on both backgrounds have been shown to develop sufficient adaptive immunity, including memory T cells and neutralizing antibodies in response to infection or vaccination, and can be employed to investigate potential vaccines [18,36,37,38,39,40]. However, vaccine-induced reduction in ZIKV viremia seen in A129 and AG129 mice may not necessarily indicate sufficient prevention of CNS invasion and subsequent disease. It is critical that while vaccines and therapeutics may function in A129 or AG129 mice, they should also be evaluated for protection against ZIKV-induced neurological disease in Ifnar−/− mice of the C57BL/6 background.2.1. Monoclonal Antibody Blockade of Type I Interferon Receptor (IFNAR) Elicits Similar Clinical Outcomes to IFNAR-Deficient Mice and May Be an Ideal Model for Evaluation of VaccinesAlthough Ifnar−/− models provide a good basis to study pathogenesis of ZIKV-induced disease, defective innate immune responses may impact the development of adaptive immunity through impaired antigen presentation and B and T cell priming, which may underestimate the efficacy of therapeutic interventions and vaccines that rely on these immune responses. To establish models that better represent human antiviral immune responses, several groups have administered anti-IFNAR monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to immunocompetent mice as opposed to using transgenic Ifnar−/− models [31,39,41,42,43,44]. Smith et al. established a partially immunocompetent model of ZIKV infection that demonstrated severe ZIKV-induced disease, neuroinflammation, and mortality following administration of anti-IFNAR in C57BL/6 WT mice 1 day before ZIKV inoculation [31]. Both subcutaneous and intraperitoneal inoculations led to weight loss, viremia, and neuropathologic changes [31]. These results demonstrated similar neurological disease in mAb treated mice as IFN-deficient models previously mentioned, suggesting antibody blockade against IFNAR may be a suitable model to further study neurological damage caused by ZIKV infections using transgenic mice of the same background. Importantly, antibody blockade has not elicited consistent neurological disease in other studies, perhaps due to incomplete blockade and inability for the antibody to cross the blood–brain barrier, thus the dose and resulting clinical symptoms should be verified before use [16]. Compared to a completely IFN-deficient mouse model, the use of anti-IFNAR antibody blockade allows the mice to maintain normal innate immune responses during the vaccination period until suppression of IFN signalling during the time of ZIKV challenge. However, several studies have demonstrated strong efficacy of candidate vaccine-induced adaptive immunity in the absence of IFNAR signaling for both HSV-2 and ZIKV, suggesting that use of an IFNAR-deficient mouse model may be sufficient to evaluate vaccine strategies against ZIKV [36,37,38,40,45].2.2. Alternative Models to Immunocompromised Mice May Not Accurately Represent Natural InfectionDue to limitations of completely IFNAR-deficient models, some groups have attempted to circumvent IFN-deficiency by use of neonatal models and intracranial injections. Studies have shown that neonatal mice can be infected by ZIKV since their immune system is not yet fully functional and exhibits reduced IFN signaling [44,46,47,48,49]. For example, Manangeeswaran et al. established a model of neonatal infection of WT mice at postnatal day one [46]. While WT mice were susceptible to infection and developed mild neurological disease, the infected neonatal Ifnar−/− mice displayed higher viral titers in the CNS, liver, and spleen and developed lethal neurological disease, such as hind limb bilateral paralysis [46]. They also observed differences in immune cell infiltration in the CNS, where WT mice exhibited higher levels of CD8+ T cells and Ifnar−/− mice displayed increased macrophage and neutrophil infiltration. Interestingly, these results contrast studies in adult IFNAR-deficient mice, where CD8+ T cells comprise the majority of infiltrating immune cells [18,19,20,30]. Using immunocompetent neonatal mice may also have its disadvantages, as the immune system is still being developed and may not recapitulate the maturity of immune responses observed in adults [50]. Regardless, neonatal mice may be a viable option for investigating questions regarding neurological disease or testing antiviral drugs without a complete lack of type I IFN signaling capabilities.While immunocompetent mouse models have provided critical understanding of ZIKV epitopes and development of effective adaptive immunity during vaccination, they are not capable of modeling ZIKV infection and replication without some form of IFN-deficiency [20,22,29]. Several groups wishing to investigate mechanisms of ZIKV-associated neurological disease and potential therapeutics have opted to employ intracranial inoculation to bypass clearance by the immune system in the periphery before reaching the CNS. Studies using intracranial injections have spanned investigations of T cell and microglia interactions to altered metabolic states in neurons during ZIKV infection [51,52,53,54]. However, evading the peripheral immune system through intracranial infection may drastically alter immune responses in the CNS that can contribute to protection or neuropathology following ZIKV infection. Figueirdo et al. observed ZIKV RNA escape to the periphery following intracranial infection, which has essentially reversed the order of natural ZIKV infection [51]. This reversed order of dissemination does not account for the involvement of peripheral innate and adaptive immune cells in ZIKV dissemination to the CNS or subsequent CNS infiltration and immune-mediated damage following natural infection. Intracranial infection may be beneficial in testing antivirals that can reduce replication in the CNS, but studies of the immune response should be interpreted with caution and confirmed in other models that more closely mimic natural ZIKV infection. Overall, while alternative models to IFNAR-deficient mice can provide helpful insight and understanding of ZIKV infections, the immunocompromised Ifnar−/− mouse model remains the model that most closely resembles natural infection via mosquito-borne transmission (Figure 1).3. Models of Sexually Transmitted ZIKV InfectionWhile vector-borne ZIKV infections are a major concern, ZIKV emerged in the South American epidemic as a novel sexually transmitted virus. With few travel restrictions, many infected individuals returned to their home countries, where they presented symptoms of infection or were suspected to have transmitted the virus via unprotected sexual intercourse [9,55,56]. The spread of ZIKV beyond its vector-restricted geographical range presents a risk for future outbreaks of sexually transmitted ZIKV, and mouse models that consider the impact of sexual transmission are necessary to develop vaccines, therapeutics, and public health strategies to protect women impacted by this disease.3.1. Sexual Transmission May Be More Harmful Than Mosquito-Borne Infection during PregnancyThe recent ZIKV outbreaks demonstrated the severity of ZIKV infections, as neonates from infected mothers presented with microcephaly and other neurological impairments [2,3,57]. Models of ZIKV infection during pregnancy have been a critical focus since 2016, with significant research directed towards the impact of mosquito-borne ZIKV infection and timing of infection during pregnancy [58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65]. These models have also been used to evaluate vaccines that prevent against ZIKV-induced damage to the developing fetus [37,66,67,68,69]. However, the discovery that ZIKV can be sexually transmitted has complicated efforts to study ZIKV infections of pregnant mice. Although subcutaneous or intraperitoneal injections effectively model mosquito-borne ZIKV, women are also at risk of sexual exposure to ZIKV by infected males [6,7,8,70]. Studies of both subcutaneous/footpad and intravaginal infection have demonstrated that pregnant WT or Ifnar+/− mice can be infected through both routes, although partial or complete IFN deficiency is necessary for sustained replication [11,58,65].Studies using vaginally administered ZIKV following mating of uninfected pairs have provided clarity regarding consequences of ZIKV infection at different timepoints during pregnancy [11,71,72]. For example, Yockey et al. show that intravaginal (IVAG) infection at embryonic day 4.5 (E4.5), during early pregnancy, results in reduced fetal weights at E18.5 in both WT and Irf3−/−Irf7−/− breeding pairs [11]. Meanwhile, mating of Ifnar−/− dams with a WT sire, intended to resemble the immune status of the human fetus, resulted in resorption of the fetus following IVAG E4.5 infection, and E8.5 IVAG infection significantly reduced fetal weight at E18.5 [11]. However, this model does not reflect simultaneous conception and ZIKV infection by infected males. In Ifnar−/− mice, Uraki et al. demonstrated male-to-female transmission resulting in simultaneous infection and pregnancy and observed fetal growth restriction and ocular deformities at E18.5 [73]. Similarly, Winkler et al. established a mouse model of sexual transmission from anti-IFNAR treated Rag1−/− (AIR) mice to Ifnar−/− or AIR dams [43]. Mating of AIR sires and dams resulted in vertical transmission measured by infection of the placenta and fetus, although clinical outcomes of fetal development were not assessed. This study further demonstrated the ability to use antibody blockade with a variety of transgenic mice, which may be an ideal method since it uses partial IFNAR blockade for closer resemblance to human infection and does not require extensive breeding.It has been suggested that pregnancy may impair development of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses following ZIKV infection, although neutralizing antibody production is not significantly altered [39]. However, Duggal et al. did not observe any significant difference in survival between infected pregnant and non-pregnant AG129 mice, suggesting that the timing of infection during pregnancy may determine the clinical relevance of this impairment [35]. However, this research group also observed greater dissemination of infectious ZIKV to the uterus in pregnant females compared to non-pregnant females, indicating some differences in susceptibility to infection in pregnant individuals that may be mediated by decreased cellular immunity [35,74]. Additionally, Duggal et al. observed increased dissemination to the fetus following sexual transmission compared to mosquito-borne infection, but they did not assess clinical outcomes of disease in the fetus [74]. Further research is necessary to conclude if the route of infection does differ in its impact on fetal development. Consequently, models of varying routes and timepoints of infection of pregnant mice must be considered when testing vaccines and therapeutics to ensure optimal efficacy in preventing all causes of infection.3.2. Models of Sexual Transmission in Non-Pregnant Mice Demonstrate Different Kinetics of ZIKV Infection and DiseaseWhile the vast majority of research investigating ZIKV as an STI in mouse models has been focused on pregnant females, few have investigated how sexual transmission of ZIKV impacts ZIKV dissemination and disease outcomes in non-pregnant mice. Soon after the ZIKV outbreak in 2016, Tang et al. reported the use of diestrus-induced type I and type II IFN receptor-deficient AG129 mice to model IVAG ZIKV infection [75]. They further demonstrated the necessity of IFNAR deficiency on myeloid-derived cells on a C57BL/6 background for IVAG-infected mice to establish a systemic ZIKV infection [75]. Yockey et al. similarly demonstrated that IVAG-infected Ifnar−/− mice on a C57BL/6 background succumb to ZIKV-induced hindlimb paralysis and weight loss [11]. Administration of a monoclonal blocking antibody against IFNAR renders mice infected via intravaginal inoculation or sexual transmission susceptible to infection [36,43]. As previously described, anti-IFNAR mAb treatment may not represent a complete blockade and does not always result in neurological disease as is observed in Ifnar−/− mice. These anti-IFNAR treatments may facilitate investigation of sexually transmitted ZIKV kinetics and dissemination in mouse models lacking lymphocytes or other components of the immune system, as described by Winker et al. with footpad infections [39].Immunocompetent mice have also been employed to investigate how immune responses in the vaginal tract may differ from other routes of infection. Several studies have indicated that WT mice are susceptible to IVAG ZIKV infection during progesterone-induced diestrus, but these mice are incapable of developing a systemic ZIKV infection due to their functioning type I IFN signaling [11,76]. Khan et al. demonstrated a dampened immune response in the vaginal tract of ZIKV-infected WT mice, likely due to low expression of the pattern recognition receptors RIG-I, MDA5, TLR3, and TLR7 in the lower female reproductive tract compared to the upper female reproductive tract and the iliac lymph node [76,77]. This results in minimal type I IFN production and sustained but low detection of ZIKV RNA for 3 days [76]. However, the use of qPCR to detect ZIKV RNA cannot convincingly determine if this sustained, but low, viral replication produces infectious ZIKV particles. Because the authors used an immunocompetent mouse model, they were unable to assess how sustained replication in the vaginal tract impacts dissemination of infectious ZIKV particles or disease outcomes. Furthermore, although they demonstrate a delay in CD8+ T cell priming and control of LCMV replication in the vaginal tract, the impact of dampened adaptive immunity on ZIKV replication and neurological disease cannot be assessed using WT mice [76].Thus far, one research group has attempted to investigate how the route of ZIKV infection might impact ZIKV viremia or dissemination to other tissues. Duggal et al. show that sexual transmission of ZIKV in AG129 mice resulted in more rapid and severe weight loss and shorter mean survival compared to mice subcutaneously or intravaginally infected [74]. Interestingly, non-pregnant IVAG and sexually infected mice appeared to exhibit worse survival than pregnant mice, although this was not directly compared. They further observed that IVAG infection resulted in a 4-day delay in viremia compared to subcutaneous infection or sexual transmission in both pregnant and non-pregnant mice, although this may be due to inconsistent or impaired IVAG infection due to the use of mice at random stages of the estrous cycle [74]. They further demonstrate that sexual transmission in non-pregnant female mice resulted in infection of the uterus and ovary at the time of euthanasia, while they observed little to no infection in these organs in non-pregnant mice with the other routes of infection. These results should be interpreted with caution, as the mice that were subcutaneously and intravaginally infected also survived much longer than the sexually infected mice and may have cleared the infection by that time. Although the impact of the route of infection on neurological disease cannot be assessed in this model, these results suggest that the route of infection may impact ZIKV kinetics and disease in non-pregnant mice and may help us to better understand how to combat sexually transmitted ZIKV and associated disease in women.As described, Duggal et al. demonstrated that there may be some differences in kinetics and dissemination of ZIKV between the sexual exposure and IVAG infection models used to represent sexually transmitted ZIKV infections in both pregnant mice and their fetuses as well as non-pregnant mice [74]. Several studies have established models of sexually transmitted ZIKV by intraperitoneal or subcutaneous/footpad-infected males deficient in IFN signaling and mating them with uninfected dams of various genetic backgrounds [35,43,73,74]. While many of these studies were previously described in the context of pregnancy, many have also used these models to investigate the effects of semen and infected sperm that may be more representative of natural infection. Clancy et al. have established in A129 and AG129 mice that ZIKV infects all parts of the male reproductive system, with titers of 103 PFU per ejaculate observed, and vaginal inoculation of female mice with epididymal flush or seminal plasma results in ZIKV infection and viremia [35,78,79,80]. A129 mice may be a more suitable model than AG129 mice to recapitulate ZIKV infection of the human male reproductive tract, as these mice exhibited mild lesions similar to humans and histologically normal sperm for studying sexual transmission [79]. Furthermore, the differences in kinetics and dissemination of ZIKV following sexual exposure vs. IVAG infection may be attributed to micro-abrasions facilitating more rapid viral dissemination or components of ejaculate, including semen, that may alter inflammatory responses and promote ZIKV replication, as seen with other viruses [81,82]. However, sexual exposure models remain difficult to control, as mating infected males with naïve dams or inoculation with seminal plasma results in inconsistent viral titers for inoculation that may influence ZIKV kinetics and immune responses. While IVAG inoculation controls for viral titer and is unlikely to alter inflammation in the vaginal tract, this model may not capture all aspects of sexual exposure that may influence ZIKV replication and dissemination. Overall, each model possesses several advantages and disadvantages that should be considered in future investigation of sexually transmitted ZIKV infections (Figure 2).4. Looking into the Crystal Ball: The Future of ZIKV Mouse ModelsAlthough it has been suggested that kinetics and dissemination of ZIKV differ in IVAG and sexually transmitted models of ZIKV compared to subcutaneous/footpad or intraperitoneal injections, it remains unclear why this occurs and how it impacts development of ZIKV-induced disease in non-pregnant mice. Despite their limitations, immunodeficient mice, deficient in type I IFN receptor signaling or select ISGs, will be necessary to investigate the clinical relevance of differing routes of ZIKV infection. Antibody blockade of IFNAR offers flexibility to investigate ZIKV infection kinetics and disease in other models rather than requiring additional breeding to establish double knockout mice.The mechanism of dissemination of ZIKV from the primary site of infection, including the role of semen and the impact of sexual transmission in ZIKV dissemination, remain poorly understood. Although humanized mouse models have only recently been established for ZIKV infection, they further corroborate evidence that immune cells are required for dissemination and development of systemic ZIKV infection following subcutaneous or intraperitoneal infection [83,84]. Humanized mouse models may provide a new avenue to investigate the role of the immune system in ZIKV dissemination from the female reproductive system, assuming that this is largely mediated by infected immune cells. However, these models cannot facilitate infection of structural cells with functional IFN signaling. Studies in humanized mice should be carefully compared to current immunodeficient models and knowledge from studies using human samples to evaluate their accuracy in depicting human ZIKV infection, particularly for sexually transmitted infection models. A more physiologically relevant model may be transgenic human STAT2-expressing (hSTAT2) mice. Gorman et al. established a model of hSTAT2 mouse infection, rendering the mouse susceptible to ZIKV evasion of type I IFN signaling, and observed increased ZIKV replication and mortality in 3-week-old mice infected with a mouse-adapted African ZIKV Dakar strain first isolated in 1984 [85]. Several studies have indicated differences in clinical disease outcomes of African strains and those isolated in the French Polynesian and South American epidemics [30,48,49,85]. Use of this hSTAT2 mouse model with more relevant strains from the recent South American outbreak or those currently circulating in ZIKV-endemic countries may provide the most accurate representation of human ZIKV-induced disease and open avenues to investigate both mosquito-borne and sexually transmitted ZIKV infections as well as vaccine and antiviral development.5. ConclusionsTransgenic IFNAR-deficient mouse models remain the most employed model of ZIKV infection, despite their limitations. Several alternatives, including use of anti-IFNAR antibodies, immunocompetent mice, neonatal mice, and intracranial injections have been investigated but possess their own limitations that must be carefully considered. Advances in humanized mouse models of ZIKV may provide the ability to answer specific questions regarding ZIKV infection of hematopoietic cells and their role in dissemination of ZIKV. Use of human STAT2 transgenic mice with clinically relevant ZIKV isolates should be further investigated, as they may represent the most relevant model of human infection thus far.Although significant research focus has been channeled towards understanding mosquito-borne ZIKV and establishing mouse models of ZIKV infection, our understanding of sexually transmitted ZIKV infections remains limited. In the context of pregnancy, we are only beginning to understand the effects of simultaneous conception and sexual transmission of ZIKV in fetal development. With the potential for future outbreaks of ZIKV, an STI that breaks the geographical confines of vector-borne infection, it is critical to consider sexual transmission in mouse models of ZIKV infection and develop vaccines and treatments that will prevent against both mosquito-borne and sexually transmitted ZIKV.


Title: Understanding Zika virus pathogenesis: an interview with Catherine Spong

IntroductionDr. Catherine Spong (Fig. 1) is the Acting Director of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development at the National Institutes of Health. In this role, she oversees research on pediatric health and development, maternal and reproductive health, intellectual and developmental disabilities, and rehabilitation medicine, among other areas. Her areas of expertise include maternal and child health, particularly prematurity, fetal complications, and improvement of child health outcomes. Her Institute is currently recruiting for a multicenter, longitudinal cohort study looking at the effects of Zika in infants and pregnancy.Fig. 1Catherine Y. Spong MD1. What do we know so far about Zika virus infection and pregnancy outcomes?Zika virus infection in pregnancy has been linked to adverse complications, including miscarriage, stillbirth, fetal brain anomalies, and eye disorders. Many questions about prenatal Zika virus infection remain unanswered. With the information currently available, we are unable to inform a woman about the risk to her pregnancy if she is infected with the Zika virus. We have little information on how often prenatal Zika infection results in adverse outcomes such as miscarriage or microcephaly. The current literature is populated mostly by studies that followed women who had symptoms of Zika virus infection, such as rash or fever. Given that an estimated 80 % of people with Zika virus infection have no symptoms, we need to conduct studies in this population to understand the risk of asymptomatic Zika virus infection among pregnant women. We know that in other infections in pregnancy, the timing of the infection will help determine the outcome. The first trimester (weeks 0–13) is commonly thought to be the most vulnerable period because that is when most of the organ formation occurs. Some viral infections cause the most damage when the infection occurs during this time period. However, studies of symptomatic pregnant women with Zika virus have found that infection even in the second or third trimesters has resulted in anomalies in the fetal brain and other serious outcomes, including stillbirth, which is very concerning.2. How has NIH responded to this public health emergency?The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is very interested in studying Zika virus and has published two notices (NOT-AI-16-026 and NOT-HD-16-004) highlighting the critical areas for research. Notably, we have launched a rapid solicitation (PAR-16-106) for R21 applications that allows submissions without preliminary data. The solicitation opened on March 20, 2016, and applications are being accepted on a rolling basis. In my over 20 years of experience at NICHD, this is the first time I have seen the use of the rapid funding opportunity announcement, which is a mechanism that enables continuous receipt and review of applications and then expedited funding. Eight NIH institutes and centers have signed on to this opportunity: NICHD, the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Eye Institute, the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging, the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, and the NIH Division of Program Coordination, Planning, and Strategic Initiatives. Other institutes are likely to join given the multifocal nature of this public health emergency.NIH’s interest includes basic research to understand Zika infection pathogenesis and transmission to the fetus, establishment of animal models to help translate laboratory findings into living systems, developing diagnostics and vaccines, and clinical studies. This clinical work includes understanding the role of Zika infection in pregnancy complications, as well as studies of children and non-pregnant adults to evaluate neurologic complications such as Guillain–Barre syndrome. I encourage wide dissemination of this funding opportunity to the scientific community.3. What areas of study do you find most important in the context of Zika?We plan to study pregnant women in regions where the virus is spreading to discern the risk of adverse outcomes to a woman infected during her pregnancy, whether she is symptomatic or not. We also want to establish the impact that the timing of infection has on pregnancy outcomes and the role, if any, of prior exposures to other pathogens, such as dengue virus, and to environmental factors such as pesticides, larvicides, and insect repellents.Additionally, we want to document the spectrum of neonatal outcomes related to fetal exposure to Zika virus infection. This includes not only microcephaly, which has been reported extensively since the outbreak began, but also other serious brain anomalies, fetal loss/stillbirth, eye abnormalities, and developmental and motor outcomes. It is likely that microcephaly is one of the severe complications and that more subtle anomalies will be identified once systematic studies are performed.4. Who are you recruiting?We aim to recruit approximately 10,000 pregnant women at up to 15 sites across Latin America and the Caribbean, regions currently experiencing active Zika virus transmission. We anticipate starting recruitment in early summer. The participants will be in their first trimester, and we will follow them to determine timing of exposure to Zika virus and whether the women become symptomatic or not. We will use CDC testing kits to detect Zika infection. However, if new, validated diagnostic tests become available, we will systematically incorporate them into the study.We also want to study the presence of potential confounding factors, such as prior infections, including dengue and cytomegalovirus, and environmental exposures to determine what role they may play in the severity of maternal or infant disease. Our preference is to have patients enroll as early as possible in pregnancy because this will improve our ability to evaluate the impact of the timing of infection on pregnancy outcome.5. How are you recruiting?Recruitment will occur through prenatal clinics and other community outreach, depending on the study site, region, and country. We recognize that there are different cultures and methods of providing healthcare globally, and we will work with local groups to determine the optimal method for recruitment.For each site, we will obtain ethics approvals and participant consent in accordance with local practices. To participate in this study, all sites will be using the same methods to gather information and materials, and the data will be sent to a central location for monitoring and analysis.6. How long do you intend to follow the cohort?We intend to monitor the women for the duration of their pregnancies and for 6 weeks after they give birth. We will follow the infants for up to 2 years after birth. It will be important for us to follow the children and mothers after delivery to determine the impact of prenatal Zika virus infection and to provide sufficient assessment to document the outcomes. This follow-up will require clinical examinations, eye exams, imaging studies, and the collection and analysis of biospecimens.7. What are the challenges?Clinical research is inherently challenging. For this study, we will be challenged by our ability to diagnose women who are infected with Zika virus – but are asymptomatic – in areas where dengue virus is also endemic. The current diagnostic test for Zika cross-reacts with dengue virus, and therefore diagnosing Zika infection may be complicated. In addition, viremia evaluation, or the presence of virus in the blood, following Zika exposure may vary between asymptomatic and symptomatic women.Some women may not want to participate or will decide to drop out of the study given the concerns and implications of a Zika diagnosis. Although all studies are concerned with loss to follow-up or “drop-out”, in this situation where the visibility is so high and the risks so personal, it is something we need to watch closely. Follow-up may be difficult, especially if children have no signs of abnormalities at birth.For this study, it will be critically important to have follow-up of all the children, and not just those with complications at delivery, to determine the complication rate and to evaluate brain and developmental milestones. The concern with losing study participants is the ensuing difficulty of interpreting the study results.One of the key components of this study is that all participating sites will use the same protocol, so the same information will be collected regardless of site or country. This is essential for us to be able to perform the analyses and to answer the critical questions. We have worked very closely with several other groups interested in studying the impact of Zika virus on pregnancy, and we have shared our protocol so that they too will collect information in the same way, enabling us to possibly collaborate in the future. In addition, we are working in concert with health agencies in affected countries.8. Is there anything that the wider scientific community can do to help with this study?There has been significant outreach by the research community. Some groups are making their data available immediately. One example is the Zika Open Research portal of O’Connor and Osorio (https://zika.labkey.com/project/OConnor/ZIKV-001/begin.view). This allows the community to learn their findings immediately, provides opportunities for collaboration, and helps others to generate new research ideas.We have been working with other groups on the upcoming cohort study. For example, Fiocruz, a research institution that is part of the Brazilian Ministry of Health (http://portal.fiocruz.br/en/content/home-ingl%C3%AAs), is partnering with NIH on the study by providing scientific expertise and co-funding some of the sites. We encourage other groups interested in launching similar studies to contact us, so we can share information and facilitate potential collaborations.9. In addition to getting more information to better manage Zika in pregnancy, are there other aims of this study?We need to understand the full impact of the effects of Zika virus on pregnancy outcomes. A variety of fetal neurologic abnormalities, such as cerebellar hypoplasia (the infant’s cerebellum is reduced in size but normal in shape), global cerebral hypogyration (the folds of the brain, or gyri, are reduced in number and size), and intracranial calcifications (calcium deposits in brain tissue), have already been reported in these children, and we need a comprehensive evaluation of these cases. We also need to understand the spectrum of outcomes in asymptomatic women.Further, we need better understanding of Zika virus-related eye and hearing abnormalities, as well as neurobehavioral effects such as altered motor function, stiffness, irritability, and incessant crying. It will be essential to follow the children after birth to evaluate their neurodevelopment and developmental milestones, including children who show no signs of anomalies, to fully characterize the impact of Zika on child health outcomes. Characterizing the full extent of Zika virus impact on fetal development will enable the development of strategies to assess and monitor the growth of children exposed to the virus in the womb and to define and optimize ways to treat and care for these children.10. Where can I find out more?See reference list [1–10].


Title: An Overview of Zika Virus and Zika Virus Induced Neuropathies

1. IntroductionFlaviviruses (family Flaviviridae) are small (approximately 50 nm in diameter), enveloped, icosahedral viruses that possess a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of between 9–12 kb [1,2,3,4]. The viral genome consists of a single long ORF (open reading frame) encoding around ten proteins, which are formed by co- and post-translational processing and proteolytically processed into three structural (Cap, prM, and E) and seven non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins by a complex combination of host and viral proteases [5,6,7,8]. Currently, there are about 70 members in this genus, the majority of which are transmitted by arthropods [9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. The incidence of flaviviral infections has increased dramatically in the last seven decades [17,18]. These infections are associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Factors responsible for the rapid increase in flaviviral infections are changes in the sizes and distributions of the vector arthropods that transmit the pathogens, further aggravated by climate change and a large number of potential vertebrate hosts [19,20,21,22]. Details of various neurotropic flaviviruses and their associated neuropathies are summarized in Table 1.ZIKV is a significant pathogen that poses an imminent global threat. It was first isolated from rhesus monkeys in Uganda in 1947 [53] (The genome organization of the Zika Virus is sketched in Figure 1). Later, in the 1950s, its detection continued in several other parts of Africa (Egypt, Nigeria) [54]. However, the first clinical infection in humans was not detected until 1964, when it was found that the ZIKV infection in humans is associated with mild fever and maculopapular rash [55]. From 1960 to 2000, ZIKV was detected in several countries in Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia and Pakistan) [54]. The first major ZIKV outbreak occurred in 2007 (in Yap Island), and then in March 2015, it caused a large outbreak in the Americas (particularly Brazil), and the first time was associated with severe disease and congenital illnesses such as infant microcephaly [56,57,58]. In November 2015, Brazil declared a national public health emergency, and in February 2016, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [59].The ZIKV employs multiple mechanisms to replicate (the ZIKV replication cycle is illustrated in Figure 2) and causes a variety of neurological diseases. It has been proposed that after viral entry through the crossing of the BBB (blood–brain barrier), ZIKV tends to infect the microglia, astrocytes, and endothelial cells [63,64,65]. Damage to the CNS can occur when ZIKV infects the CNS cells, and damage occurs either due to viral replication or because of a host-mediated immune (inflammatory) response [66,67,68]. Moreover, ZIKV infection is also associated with various neurological syndromes, e.g., Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), and others [69,70,71]. Multiple mechanisms are known to cause damage to the CNS, which are also discussed in detail later in this review article. Collectively, in this review, we have summarized the observations on biology, transmission, control strategies (vaccines, antivirals, and vectors), oncolytic aspects, animal and cellular models, neuropathies, and neuropathogenesis associated with ZIKV.2. Transmission of Zika VirusThe principal mode of transmission of ZIKV is through mosquitoes; however, studies have found that various other routes may play an important role in the transmission of the disease. These include venereal transmission, vertical transmission, transmission to infants through mother milk, and blood transfusion This makes it very difficult to devise an appropriate strategy for the control of disease in countries where the disease is endemic. The transmission cycle of ZIKV is illustrated in Figure 3.2.1. Vector Borne TransmissionVector-borne transmission of ZIKV occurs through mosquitoes [13,80]. In the sylvatic transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between non-human primates and mosquitoes, while in the urban transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between humans and mosquitoes. The presence of ZIKV has been reported from many species of mosquitoes in Africa and Asia (Aedes aegypti (Ae. aegypti), Ae. africanus, Ae. albopictus, Ae. apicoargenteus, Ae. furcifer, Ae. luteocephalus, Ae. opok, and Ae. vittatus) which may transmit the virus to humans [53,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90]. However, in Yap and French Polynesia, the transmission of ZIKV was suggested to be through Ae. hensilli and Ae. Polynesiensis, respectively) [91,92,93]. The extrinsic incubation period is reported to be 10 days [84]. The vector competence (the ability of the vector to transmit the virus biologically) has not been determined for ZIKV transmission in most of these species [94] and it may be the area of future research. In the urban cycle, the transmission of ZIKV is mainly through the Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. ZIKV has been detected/isolated from wild Ae. aegypti, and they have been demonstrated to be competent vectors in the laboratory where they can transmit the virus to mice and rhesus monkeys [82,86,88]. Recent studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission by Ae. albopictus as well [84,95]. Both of these mosquitoes remain active during the daytime, and they are prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions [96,97]. However, the geographical range of Ae. albopictus is further extended to the temperate regions [98,99,100]. In the USA, both of these mosquitoes have been found in southern and south-eastern states and their maximum numbers have been found from June to October [101].2.2. Sexual TransmissionMany cases of transmission of ZIKV have been observed following sexual contact. Several studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission from males to females. In most cases, the male had a travel history to ZIKV-endemic countries, and when he returned, his partner became infected [102,103,104]. ZIKV’s presence has been detected in human semen [105]. It has been found that ZIKV can persist in semen for over 6 months following infection, suggesting the possibility for prolonged sexual transmission [106,107,108]. Later studies demonstrated that sexual transmission from male to male is also possible [109]. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in urine and saliva [110,111]. Experiments conducted on lab animals have demonstrated that ZIKV is able to replicate in vaginal and rectal mucosa, thus serving as a reservoir of infection [112].2.3. Vertical TransmissionZIKV has been reported to be transferred from mother to fetus during the gestation period. Normally the placenta acts as an effective barrier to curtail transmission of infections from mother to fetus. However, ZIKV is able to bypass these barriers by unknown mechanisms [113]. Studies conducted in a mouse model demonstrated that ZIKV damages the placenta and results in fetal death [114]. In Brazil, during the ZIKV outbreak, a large increase in the number of neonates with microcephaly was reported from mothers who were infected with ZIKV [115]. ZIKV antigen and RNA have been detected in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetal brain tissue [115,116,117]. Therefore, it can be postulated that ZIKV is transmitted from mother to fetus through a damaged placenta (induced by ZIKV) and then ZIKV damages the nervous system of the fetus.2.4. Venereal Transmission in MosquitoesThe maintenance of arboviruses in nature is significantly facilitated when venereal transmission occurs alongside other modes of transmission. Venereal transmission in mosquitoes has been reported for multiple arboviruses, including ZIKV [118,119]. ZIKV is found to be transmitted in the sexual fluids of mating mosquitoes. Intrathoracically ZIKV-infected Ae. aegypti males can transmit the virus to uninfected females during mating, and Ae. aegypti females who are orally infected with ZIKV have the potential to transmit the virus to uninfected males by copulation under laboratory conditions [120]. Furthermore, Aedes mosquitoes acquire and transmit Zika virus by breeding in contaminated aquatic environments [121]. The continuous venereal transmission in mosquitoes could pose a significant public health concern by boosting infection rates and virus spread.2.5. Transmission Through Breast MilkDetection of ZIKV RNA has been observed in the breast milk of ZIKV-infected mothers [122]. This makes it possible for the transmission of ZIKV from the infected mother to the neonates. Studies have demonstrated the presence of ZIKV RNA in babies whose mother’s serum and milk were positive for ZIKV RNA [123]. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed for the flaviviruses WNV and DENV [124,125].2.6. Transmission Through Ocular Fluid/TearsResearchers have found the existence of ZIKV in tears thirty days following ZIKV infection. Their study suggests the possible transmission of ZIKV through tears [126,127]. This is possible as previously a case study revealed that transmission through tears occurred from mother to her child [128].3. Zika Virus Associated Neurological DiseasesZIKV infection has been reported to be associated with a number of neurological diseases (illustrated in Figure 4) which are described in detail below.3.1. MicrocephalyCongenital microcephaly has been previously associated with viral infections, e.g., rubella and cytomegalovirus. However, it was unknown for ZIKV until the Brazilian outbreak [129]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in the amniotic fluid of these fetuses [130]. In 2015, Brazilian authorities reported that the incidence of microcephaly was twenty times higher compared to previous years. This led to further investigations, and in two years (2015–2016), more than 8000 cases of microcephaly were reported [131]. Later on, an analysis of an outbreak in French Polynesia also demonstrated a correlation between ZIKV and microcephaly [132,133]. Further investigations showed that aborted fetuses (during 1st and 2nd trimesters) contained ZIKV RNA in the amniotic fluid, meninges, CSF, and umbilical cord of the microcephalic newborn babies [57,134]. Several studies have been performed to identify the molecular mechanism of ZIKV-associated microcephaly. Cells associated with the BBB, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, are susceptible to infection with ZIKV and their infection with ZIKV leads to upregulation of ICAM-1 and a variety of cytokines (IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-10) that causes enhanced binding and subsequently crossing of the BBB by the immune cells. The access of immune cells to the CNS is associated with neuro-inflammation which contributed to the neuro-pathogenesis of ZIKV [135]. Neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV and undergo apoptosis following infection [136]. During pregnancy, the immune response directed against ZIKV leads to the inflammation of the fetal–maternal interface, causing inflammation and disruption of barrier functions. This allows the recruitment of various immune cells to the fetal tissue, releasing TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor) and IFN-γ (interferon) that lead to neuroinflammation, resulting in the damage and destruction of NPCs required for the neural development of the fetus [137]. The CNS is susceptible to ZIKV infection during all stages of pregnancy, but earlier infection results in severe damage. CNS infection with ZIKV may result in impaired multiplication and migration of neurons, myelination, synaptogenesis, and even apoptosis that may contribute towards ZIKV-associated microcephaly [138]. In cells infected with ZIKV, mitofusion 2 (MFN-2) expression is reduced. Normal expression of MFN-2 is required for the fusion of mitochondria. Therefore, in ZIKV-infected cells, mitochondrial fragmentation occurs. This leads to the activation of apoptosis through a p53-mediated pathway in NPC cells [139,140]. Recently, Gladwyn-Ng et al. [141] have demonstrated the mechanism of apoptosis in neuronal cells infected by ZIKV in mouse embryos and neuronal stem cells (human), showing that ZIKV infections trigger unfolded proteins in cells that lead to activation of the ER stress response Subsequently, these cells migrate to the cortex and undergo apoptosis.3.2. Ophthalmological ManifestationsZIKV infection during pregnancy has been associated with congenital abnormalities in the fetal eye. Neural crest cells (NCCs) are required for normal development of the corneal and uveal stroma, the corneal epithelium, and the trabecular meshwork. They also play an important role in the closure of the optic fissure [142,143]. NCCs express AXL and thus exhibit susceptibility to ZIKV. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV results in viral replication resulting in loss of NCCs [144]. ZIKV infection can also disrupt the normal differentiation of the NCCs leading to defective development of the anterior eye segment leading to micropthalmia [142,145,146,147]. The loss of NCCs during ZIKV infection has also been found to disrupt closure of the optic fissure leading to iris coloboma and abnormal development of the lens zonules. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV can also lead to reduced thickening of the corneal stroma causing corneal ectasia [142]. It can also contribute towards impaired development of trabecular meshwork causing glaucoma [144,148,149,150]. Neuronal depletion during ZIKV infection can also contribute to thinning of the retinal ganglion layer [151,152]. Apoptosis of NCCs during ZIKV infection can also lead to defects in axonal development [145].Ocular manifestations have been reported in approximately 50% of infants who have ZIKV-induced microcephaly. ZIKV infection has been reported to involve the eyes and this represents the viral ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the blood–retinal barrier (BRB), and the blood–aqueous barrier (BAB). The first ZIKV-related eye abnormality was reported in 2016. More than sixty percent of people with ZIKV infections are reported to have conjunctivitis (the most common eye abnormality associated with ZIKV). Other abnormalities are associated with the anterior segment, the posterior segment, and the neuroophthalmic. The abnormalities associated with the anterior segment include microphthalmia, anterior uveitis (with or without raised intraocular pressure), and non-purulent conjunctivitis [153,154,155]. The posterior segment anomalies associated with ZIKV involve the retina and choroid and include maculopathy and multifocal choroiditis [153,156,157,158,159]. Neuro-ophthalmic conditions are related to the paresis of the abducens and oculomotor muscles and can cause ocular flutter, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema [156,160,161,162,163]. ZIKV infection also causes optic nerve involvement, and this includes hypoplastic disk, enhanced cup-to-disk ratio, and nerve pallor. Viral entry into eyes is facilitated by both hematogenous and retrograde transport of ZIKV through the optic nerve and optic tract [164]. Although ocular tissue is immune privileged, it is more permissive to ZIKV infection because of the higher viral load [151]. Certain cells in the retina are relatively more permissive to ZIKV infection including RPE cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells [165]. Choriocapillaris (highly fenestrated) are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and it can facilitate the ZIKV entry into the RPE cells, which are also permissive to ZIKV infection. RPE infection results in inflammation and this subsequently leads to breaking the BRB [108,166]. Normally, the immune response helps the host in eliminating the infection, however, in this case, immune-mediated injury to the eye tissue leads to pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated eye abnormality [167]. Infection of BRB with ZIKV leads to the generation of IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-α, IFN-β, TNF-α, CCL5 and CXCL-10. This leads to subsequent events that culminate in the atrophy of the retina and RPE mottling [168,169].Another mechanism of viral entry in ocular tissue is through ZIKV-infected monocytes, which possess the ability to cross the retinal microvasculature endothelium and subsequently cause retinal infection. Later on, ZIKV-infected monocytes become activated and release cytokines and chemokines that result in immune-mediated injury/damage to ocular tissue [170,171]. The cornea can also act as reservoir of ZIKV infection as it expresses RIG-1, MDA-5, and TLR 3 which facilitate the synthesis of IFN-I and III to mediate antiviral response [136,172]. Infection of the cornea with ZIKV leads to the synthesis of the IL-1β, TNF-α, CCL5, and CXCL-10 which recruits other cells of the immune system to the cornea and this promotes inflammation and damage to corneal tissue leading to keratitis [173]. Through the hematogenous route, ZIKV infects the iris and ciliary body. From here, the virus can infect BAB cells, which damages this barrier and results in viral entry into the aqueous humor [133]. From the aqueous humor, ZIKV gains entry to the trabeculae meshwork and results in the production of cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-1, IFN-α, IFN-β, CCL5, and CXCL-10. This leads to the recruitment of the other immune cells such as Th1 and CD8+ cells that secrete TNF-α and IFN-γ, damaging the trabeculae meshwork and resulting in blockage of aqueous humor outflow, leading to enhanced intraocular pressure and causing glaucoma. Persistent glaucoma can damage the optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells leading to optic neuropathy [174].3.3. Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)GBS is a condition where there is immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. The condition is characterized by the loss of reflexes and flaccid paralysis. The disease occurs in 1/100,000 persons. It has been observed that GBS typically occurs after certain infections such as Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sporadic GBS cases have also occurred following the flaviviral infections (WNV, DENV and JEV) [175]. In 2014, the first report was published about the occurrence of GBS following ZIKV infection in French Polynesia. It was reported that in ZIKV patients, 1/4000 people suffer from GBS (20 times increased incidence) [176]. In the recent ZIKV outbreak in the Americas, approximately 1500 cases were reported between 2014–2015. At the majority of locations, GBS incidence following ZIKV was reported to be 2–10 times higher than background [177]. In Colombia, more than 100 thousand cases of ZIKV were reported with 42 GBS cases/100,000 ZIKV cases. These findings indicate the possibility of the association of ZIKV with GBS [178]. Until now, no clear mechanism is known about the molecular pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated GBS. However, it is thought that the mechanism of molecular mimicry may be an important contributing factor in the pathogenesis of disease (i.e., antibodies formed against ZIKV cross-react with myelin sheath or other neural tissues). However, others have proposed that immune system dysregulation occurs (that is not directly against ZIKV) and that contributes towards its pathogenesis [176].3.4. Cerebrovascular InvolvementCertain viral diseases are associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities. Recently, ZIKV cases have also been reported to involve cerebral vascular abnormalities. A 10-month-old child infected with ZIKV was admitted to hospital with ischemic stroke and had serum positive for ZIKV [179,180,181]. The exact mechanism remains to be determined; however, it is thought that higher susceptibility of endothelial cells to be infected by ZIKV is a major factor and is responsible for cerebral vascular abnormalities [182].3.5. EncephalitisZIKV infection is considered a potential cause of encephalitis. An 81-year-old patient with a travel history to a ZIKV-affected area had reduced consciousness, limb paresis (upper right), and hemiplegia (left side). The patient was ZIKV positive by RT-PCR and viral culture and isolation. The patient was treated and survived. However, fetal cases of ZIKV-associated encephalitis have also been reported. In Brazil, a 37-year-old (y.o.) female was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of rash and joint pain. Later on, she suffered from weakness in her lower limbs, confusion, and difficulty with speech. RT-PCR was positive for ZIKV, while the serum analysis was negative. The patient later died due to brain swelling, leading to increased intracranial pressure [154]. In the Dominican Republic, a female was admitted to the hospital with complaints of neck stiffness and confusion. Her condition deteriorated, and seizures began. CSF examination revealed an increased number of WBCs (white blood cells), the majority of which were lymphocytes (80%). RT-PCR of urine was positive for ZIKV RNA (but negative in the CSF and serum). However, IgM antibodies against ZIKV were detected from CSF and serum, confirming ZIKV exposure. MRI examination revealed cortical edema, a common finding in meningoencephalitis [163]. In another study on ZIKV, subcortical hemorrhage and bilateral lesions were observed in the temporal and frontal regions [162].3.6. Myelitis and EncephalomyelitisZIKV infection has been associated with myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) and encephalomyelitis (inflammation of the brain and spinal cord), which can result in reduced consciousness, urinary retention, and paresis of lower limbs [183]. The first case of myelitis associated with ZIKV was reported in Guadeloupe in a girl (15 y.o.) who was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of headache and conjunctivitis. Later, her condition continued to deteriorate, and she suffered from left-sided weakness and urinary retention. MRI examination revealed a normal brain, whereas abnormalities were revealed in the spinal cord cervical area and thoracic region. CSF, urine, and serum were found to be positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR [184]. In another study, a 26 y.o. Brazilian male was admitted to the hospital with a major complaint of fever, malaise, and neck stiffness, CSF and urine examination revealed that the patient had a ZIKV infection. CSF analysis showed hyper-protein levels and 100 WBCs (white blood cells) per mL (95% mononuclear cells) [183]. Other studies have also indicated an association between ZIKV and myelitis/encephalomyelitis [183,184,185].4. Zika Virus Infection and Extracellular VesiclesViruses can employ extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. EVs are particles surrounded by membranes that can be released into the extracellular space by living or dying cells. Various viral components may be packed inside the EVs [186]. One of the final fates of EVs is their release into blood circulation, through which they can reach distant cells and tissues [187]. It is important to note that EVs share most of the biochemical and biophysical properties of viruses. Both EVs and viruses (naked and enveloped) use the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT) complex [188,189]. Moreover, Rab GTPases (particularly Rab11, Rab35, and Rab27A/B) are also shared during the viral replication cycle as well as EV biogenesis [190]. Many studies have indicated that EVs play a facilitating role during viral infections. These effects can be due to EVs carrying viral receptors, carrying viral particles themselves, or carrying their genome, proteins, or miRNA. Ultimately, it can lead to the priming of the recipient cells and/or inhibiting IFN pathways, apoptosis of immune cells, and the transmission of viral genome and/or proteins to distant organs and tissues [188,191,192,193]. In the case of ZIKV, NS1 protein, viral E protein (inside and outside) and viral RNA can be packed inside the EVs [194]. Interestingly, mosquito cells (C6/36 cells) infected with ZIKV are found to release EVs (containing viral RNA and protein E), which was found to infect both naïve mosquito and mammalian cells (monocytes and endothelial cells) [195].Given ZIKV’s neurotropic nature, it is important to emphasize that ZIKV-derived EVs are found to disrupt the structure of human brain microvasculature endothelial cell junctions (hcMEC/D3), facilitating ZIKV entry into cells of the human CNS [196]. ZIKV can also spread to the CNS through autophagy (a process associated with viral infections and may be regulated by EVs [197,198,199]. In the case of ZIKV, the autophagic vesicles may play an important role in crossing the placental barrier. Normally, the placenta is protected from various pathogens (aided by the autophagy process); however, ZIKV can hijack this process [200,201]. A study using a mouse model has shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine inhibits viral replication (autophagy-dependent) and also effectively prevents mother–fetal transmission of the virus [202,203].5. Models for Studying Zika Virus Infection and PathogenesisDeveloping appropriate cellular and animal models for studying ZIKV is becoming increasingly important to gain appropriate understanding of viral pathogenesis and host-related factors that aid or inhibit viral replication and to devise appropriate disease prevention and treatment strategies.5.1. Cell LinesThe cell lines are widely used to grow and study ZIKV because they provide a controlled environment for viral replication. These cell lines allow scientists to watch viral behavior, examine molecular interactions between ZIKV and host cells, and test antiviral agents. The use of cell lines is essential to virology as they provide a reliable, reproducible system for studying viral pathogenicity and mechanisms in a laboratory setting. The cells susceptible to Zika Virus infection are illustrated in Figure 5 and detailed comprehensively in Table 2.5.2. OrganoidsAlthough cell culture has been used to determine ZIKV replication and pathogenesis, this system is not without its downsides. Cells are unable to mimic in vivo conditions as they lack the cellular structure, composition, and physiology of an organ in which a virus replicates [222]. To overcome this drawback, people are now developing organ analogues in vitro where stem cells are used to generate 3D tissue structures resembling organs. These 3D models are known as organoids and are being used to model and better understand the molecular events that occur following viral invasion and replication in that organ [223]. Studies have provided confirmatory evidence of microcephaly following ZIKV infection by using organoids [224,225]. Qian et al. (2016) used a mini-bioreactor to generate brain organoids and demonstrated that ZIKV infection in brain organoids that mimic the first-trimester fetal brain resulted in ZIKV infection of NPCs, IPC, astrocytes, and neurons, while infection of brain organoids mimicking the second-trimester fetal brain exhibited ZIKV infection of the outer radial glial cells [224]. These findings are correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis providing evidence of ZIKV-associated microcephaly [136]. Yoon et al. showed that the ZIKV NS2A protein is responsible for the alteration and reduced multiplication of the radial glial cells resulting in altered neuronal positioning in the brain [226]. Another study reported that ZIKV infection of NPCs during early pregnancy was associated with the upregulation of TLR-3 receptors, leading to apoptosis of NPCs, resulting in microcephaly [227]. Recently, brain organoid models have also been used to determine the various drug targets against ZIKV [228,229,230,231]. Organoids resembling the placenta have also been developed using first-trimester human chorionic placental villi where ZIKV established infection and proliferated in Hofbauer cells, villus cytotrophoblasts (CTB), and produced the NS3 and E protein [232,233]. To summarize, organoids offer a promising approach to studying the ZIKV viral pathogenesis and also to screening compounds’ antiviral activity in a system more relevant than in vitro cell culture.5.3. Animal ModelsAnimal models have been developed to study ZIKV replication and pathogenesis in vivo.5.3.1. Non-Human Primates (NHPs)Non-Human Primates (NHPs) exhibit significant similarities with humans (pregnancy physiology, long gestation periods, and hemomonochorial placenta) and offer a promising model to study ZIKV infection, neuropathogenesis, and drug discovery. They also exhibit vertical transmission from mother to fetus similar to humans [234]. Rhesus macaques, olive baboons, marmosets, and pigtail macaques have been employed to study ZIKV pathogenesis during gestation. Olive baboons have been able to demonstrate clinical infection when infected during the gestation period. When infected during 4th month of pregnancy, they developed conjunctivitis and moderate rash, with viremia peak at 7 dpi (days post-infection). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins were also detected [235,236]. In other NHPs (i.e., rhesus macaques, marmosets, and pigtail macaques) no clinical infection occurs following ZIKV inoculation. However, in all NHPs, antibodies are formed following ZIKV infection, and placental and fetal ZIKV infection is observed. In rhesus macaques, fetal loss occurs following ZIKV infection, while marmosets and olive baboons exhibit viral RNA in amniotic fluid and placenta. Severe placental infection is observed during pregnancy in marmosets and rhesus macaques [237,238,239].5.3.2. MiceMany viral replication and pathogenesis studies involve the use of mice as animal models because they have large litter sizes and a short gestational period. However, variability in their placental structure and heterogeneity in gestation can be problematic [240]. Another complication occurs due to differences in the cell biology of mice as compared to humans. On viral entry, the viral NS5 protein is able to degrade the cellular STAT2 protein, thereby making IFN signaling ineffective, resulting in viral replication and the development of clinical disease. Degradation of STAT-2 is not observed in mouse cells infected with a virus, leading to unimpaired IFN signaling resulting in low viral titer and failure to develop clinical infection [241]. Therefore, biological modifications are needed to use mice for studying ZIKV replication and pathogenesis events. This can be achieved by using either immunocompromised mice or using alternative routes of inoculation.Immunocompromised MiceImmunocompromised mice are modified for interferon (IFN) insufficiency. This may be conducted by either creating knockout (KO) mice, e.g., interferon alpha receptor knockout (Ifnar-/-), or by using antibodies to block the IFN receptors (MARI-5A3) [242,243]. It has been found that pregnant Ifnar-/- mice exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV infection with subcutaneous inoculation and are able to produce fetal and placental abnormalities [114]. The infection is established in homozygous as well as heterozygous mice, suggesting that partial deficiency in IFN signaling is sufficient to produce fetal neuropathology. As ZIKV infection can occur through venereal transmission; therefore, models have been developed for this purpose. Intravaginal inoculation of ZIKV from 5–8 days of conception results in high levels of viral RNAs in the placenta and fetal tissues in Ifnar-/- mice [244]. ZIKV infection (intravaginal) of IFN regulator factor (IRF) KO e.g., Irf3-/- Irf7-/- mice exhibit higher vaginal and fetal titers of the virus. This implies that inhibition of IFN signaling is a key factor in establishing different mice models.Immunocompetent MiceAs discussed previously, ZIKV infection often fails in immunocompetent mice. However, some researchers have used alternative strategies to produce ZIKV infection by using higher viral titer or other routes of inoculation. A Brazilian ZIKV strain has been used to produce successful fetal infection in SJL mice. In this study, high viral inoculation (1010 to 1012 pfu/mL) was used to produce uterine and fetal infection that ultimately resulted in fetal microcephaly [245]. However, these mice showed higher levels of T cells in the blood and later on developed autoimmunity and sarcoma [246]. The intraamniotic route has also been used for ZIKV inoculation in embryos and resulted in damage to the retina and blood–brain barrier and produced neuronal death and defects in motor neurons in the fetal brain. Intrauterine infection also resulted in ZIKV infection of placental endothelial and trophoblast cells and in the fetus, the virus localizes in the microglial, endothelial, and NPCs of the fetal brain [67,247,248]. Another model has also been developed to study the postnatal CZS progression by inoculating C57BL/6 mice intraperitoneally, and it was seen that the fetus had reduced body weight and microcephaly. Later on, these mice exhibited motor and memory deterioration in adulthood [249]. These studies pave a path towards viral replication and neuropathogenesis studies in immunocompetent mice models that may be deployed for further understanding of ZIKV neuropathogenesis and drug discovery.5.3.3. Farm AnimalsAlthough less common as animal models, pregnant sheep, and pigs may be used as a model for ZIKV replication and pathogenesis. They are widely available and exhibit susceptibility to the virus [250,251]. They can also be used as a model for human pregnancy and fetal growth [252]. ZIKV infection during the first trimester in sheep resulted in placental pathology, reduced fetal growth, and fetal loss [253]. Maternal ZIKV infection during the 4th to 5th week resulted in the detection of ZIKV RNA in the PBMCs of the mother; however, clinical infection failed to occur [253]. Similarly, in pigs, intrauterine infection during pregnancy resulted in placental abnormalities as well as microcephaly in piglets [254]. It has also been seen that following intrauterine ZIKV infection, the African ZIKV lineage was found to produce a more pronounced viral infection as compared to the Asian strain [255]. These findings clearly establish the role of sheep as a possible animal model to study fetal neuropathogenesis due to ZIKV.5.3.4. RatsAs rats become immunocompromised during the final stage of gestation, similar to humans, they may also be utilized as a model to investigate ZIKV neuropathogenesis [256]. Upon subcutaneous (S/C) inoculation of ZIKV to pregnant rat females, reduced cortical and hippocampus volumes were observed in rats, although no pathological findings and viral detection were observed in the maternal counterpart [114,257].5.3.5. HamstersInfection of immunocompetent females during pregnancy was unable to produce productive viral infection; ZIKV RNA was not found in fetal or placental tissue and fetus size remained unaffected [114]. However, ZIKV infection (Malaysia Strain) in immunocompromised hamsters (8 days post-mating) resulted in ZIKV infection of placental tissue and also caused vertical transmission of the ZIKV from mother to offspring [258].5.3.6. ChickenChicken embryos have been demonstrated to support ZIKV viral growth in the chicken brain and other tissues [259]. Intraamniotic inoculation of ZIKV resulted in stunted embryo growth and microcephaly [260]. Furthermore, comparison of the Asian and African ZIKV strains showed that the African strain caused more embryonic pathologies [261].6. Treatment and Prevention Against Zika Virus and Zika Virus Associated Neuropathies6.1. Prevention from Zika Virus Through VaccinesOne of the major methods for viral disease prevention and control is vaccination. Immediately after the outbreak of ZIKV, research began to find ideal vaccine candidates to prevent future ZIKV outbreaks [262]. Several vaccine candidates have emerged; however, very few have been used in clinical trials. The various ZIKV vaccine candidates are summarized in Table 3.6.1.1. Purified Inactivated Zika Virus Vaccines (PIZIKV)Several inactivated vaccines have been developed and tested by animal models. The majority of these vaccines have been able to demonstrate higher antibody titer, reduced viremia, successful passive transfer of antibodies, and protection in mice (interferon deficient) after homologous or heterologous vaccination [263]. In India, one vaccine has entered phase I clinical trials (CTRI/2017/05/008539) [291]. Using mice and non-human primates (NHPs), an aluminum hydroxide-based inactivated ZIKV vaccine has demonstrated promising antibody titers and protection against homologous antigen challenge [265]. Another PIZIKV provided complete protection in a dose-dependent manner (0.016 to 10 ug) and was found to be effective one year following vaccination in macaques [266]. A double-blind randomized controlled trial (Phase I) was performed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of PIZIKV, and it was found that the vaccine was safe for 52 h. However, protection was not found to be effective as only a single dose was given and for better immunogenicity, a double dose may be needed [268].6.1.2. Live Attenuated Vaccines:Live-attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are known for eliciting swift and long-lasting protective immunity and represent a crucial strategy for managing flavivirus diseases [292]. These are made by modifying the virus in such a way that it may replicate within the organism and stimulate the immune system without causing disease. Since 1938, they have been used as the gold standard as they exhibit good safety and effective protection from viral infection [293]. LAVs are known to stimulate the immune system for long-lasting periods (without the need for an adjuvant or any booster). Currently, three approaches are being used for generating ZIKV LAVs, which are (i) generating chimeric strains (using the backbone of an attenuated flavivirus), (ii) codon deoptimization, and (iii) mutagenesis. One of the most important advantages of using live vaccines is their ability to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses (with a single dose of immunization); as the virus continues to multiply within the host cells, allowing continuous loading of MHC (I and II) with viral peptides. In addition, they are cost-effective (both during manufacturing as well as transportation). The past experiences of successful development of LAV against Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) and Yellow Fever Virus (YFV) have clearly shown their potential to be used as safe viral vaccines [279,293]. However, manufacturing of live vaccines usually requires eggs or cell culture and also maintaining a cold chain during transportation. In countries having warm climates, maintaining cold chain only can account for up to 80% of the total vaccine cost [294]. Another major concern associated with the use of live vaccination is inadequate attenuation (once they are at the stage of the human clinical trials [295]. A variety of LAVs have been tested against the ZIKV [292], and the selective studies are summarized in Table 3.6.1.3. Nucleic Acid VaccinesDNA and RNA-based vaccines are being developed for different infectious diseases. They offer the advantage of prolonging immune response following vaccination and induce both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (CMI) [296]. However, one major disadvantage is that DNA vaccines often fail to elicit adequate immune response or offer protection from challenge [297]. Despite these advantages, DNA vaccines may have the risk of eliciting autoimmunity (by eliciting anti-DNA antibody production) and also causing insertional mutations [298]. Another point to keep in mind is that in the case of DNA vaccines, DNA must enter inside the nucleus of the cell, and then after transcription, mRNA must travel outside the nucleus (into the cytoplasm), where it is translated into the proteins. In contrast, for RNA vaccines, RNA can directly be translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, which are then secreted from the cells (into the extracellular matrix) where they can be presented to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). mRNA vaccines have become more popular after the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is also important to note that storage of mRNA vaccine requires maintaining a cold chain, which may not be feasible in developing countries [299]. The summary of various DNA vaccines available against ZIKV is summarized in Table 3.6.1.4. Subunit VaccinesDue to their rapid production and stability, a variety of ZIKV vaccines have been developed. The majority of these vaccines have used the Envelope protein (E protein) and its different segments. These vaccines have been tested in various animal models, which are summarized in Table 3.6.1.5. Viral Vector-Based VaccinesViral vector-based vaccines are prepared by using a vector virus for the insertion of the genetic components of ZIKV, and they have been found to induce good humoral immunity. Lentovirus, adenovirus, and retroviruses are known to be good viral vectors. Various ZIKV vaccines have been developed using various viral vector systems, which have been summarized in Table 3.6.2. Zika Virus Prevention Through Vector ControlMosquitoes play a central role in the transmission of ZIKV. Therefore, reducing ZIKV transmission through vector control methods involves diverse and innovative strategies and tools designed to manage disease-spreading mosquito population. One of the most widely used strategies is the use of chemical insecticides (due to their cost-effectiveness and easy availability). However, due to the emergence of insecticide resistance and their deleterious effects on the environment, the focus is now diverted towards various other control methods [300,301]. Due to their eco-friendly nature, herbal-based control methods have now gained attention. Promising insecticide activities have been shown by extracts derived from the Illicium verum, Zanthoxylum limonella, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon winterianus, Eucalyptus citriodora, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, etc. [302,303,304,305,306,307,308]. Furthermore, nanoparticles derived from Ambrosia arborescens have also shown good larvicidal activity. However, their toxicity profile should be determined against other environment-friendly insects, animals, and humans [307]. Similarly, biological control methods are also being employed due to their minimal impact on the environment [309]. This includes the use of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Various species of entomopathogenic fungi (Metarhizium anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Aspergillus terreus) and bacteria (Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), Wolbachia) have been tested against ZIKV-transmitting mosquitoes [310,311,312,313,314,315]. Particularly, the introduction of Wolbachia in mosquitoes has demonstrated the ability to disrupt the reproductive potential of disease-transmitting vectors. Similarly, the use of various natural predators, i.e., Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, fishes, tadpoles, and copepods, have also been used against the mosquitoes and have shown varying degrees of efficacy in controlling the mosquito population [316]. Moreover, genetic engineering principles have been applied to release genetically modified mosquitoes into the environment [317]. Furthermore, the use of the sterile insect technique is also an innovative approach to control the mosquito population [318]. When used in combination, these strategies offer an integrated approach to vector control, addressing both short and long-term goals of reducing ZIKV and its induced neuropathies. A summary of vector control strategies developed so far is provided in Table 4.6.3. Treatment for Zika Virus6.3.1. Antivirals Against Zika VirusSince the outbreak of ZIKV, many compounds have been proposed to possess antiviral activity against ZIKV. However, in the majority of cases, treatment is symptomatic, and no specific antiviral has been approved for ZIKV treatment. A myriad of approaches are being adopted for searching for anti-ZIKV drugs. These strategies include the screening of different compounds for their anti-ZIKV activity or through repurposing drugs that are already being used for the treatment of other viral infections. In addition, the anti-ZIKV activity of several herbal/plant extracts is also being evaluated. Broadly, anti-ZIKV compounds have been divided into 2 major categories: (a) direct-acting antivirals, which inhibit the viral replication cycle; (b) antivirals targeting host cells [75]; both of these are summarized in Table 5. The former drugs act on the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp); NS5. Polymerase inhibitors and nucleoside analogs are included in this category. They act by targeting the catalytic domain of NS5. The other category of drugs (host-targeting antivirals) targets the host cell processes (that play an important role in viral replication). Viruses need host nucleosides for their genome replication. The host-acting antivirals can act on various steps of viral replication (host cell binding, entry, replication complex formation, viral maturation, and release from the host cell). An advantage of targeting host processes is that they are less susceptible to developing drug resistance [75].6.3.2. Medicinal Plants as Zika Virus AntiviralsModern scientific research has found numerous synthetic antiviral medications that are effective against a variety of viral infectious disorders throughout the past few decades. Unfortunately, a wide range of negative consequences associated with these synthetic medications have been documented. They may occasionally lose their potency against newly arising virus resistance strains [381]. Furthermore, people in developing nations cannot afford expensive synthetic medications for the treatment of viral infections. Medicinal plants may offer economical and efficient antiviral medications. To date, no plant-derived antiviral has been approved for clinical use against ZIKV. Various research has been conducted to identify medicinal plants possessing anti-ZIKV activity, and they have been summarized in Table 6.7. Zika Virus and Its Potential Oncolytic ActivitiesZIKV exhibits tropism for a variety of cell types including normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs/NSPs), microglial cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells [406,407,408]. Following the entry into cells, the virus disrupts growth and development, causing cell death. Studies in various animals have also supported the association between ZIKV infection and neurodegeneration. Inoculation of ZIKV in rhesus monkeys during early pregnancy has been shown to result in the aberrations of the microglial cells and also cortical plate thinning (3 weeks post-inoculation) [409,410]. Therefore, ZIKV is a promising virus that may be used as an oncolytic virus against glioblastoma as it infects the tumor cells. Particularly, in vitro studies have shown that the ZIKV NS5 protein inhibits the migration, proliferation, and invasion of glioblastoma. Studies in mice have shown that it increases the survival of C57/B6 mice with intracranial glioblastoma [411]. Another study in C57/B6 mice has shown that ZIKV increases the survival of mice with glioblastoma (with the suppression of tumor volume as well as the absence of clinical signs) [412]. Further molecular studies have revealed that ZIKV protease causes the cleavage of human cellular gasdermin D (GSDMD), which causes the activation of pyroptosis (caspase-independent) [413]. ZIKV infection in immunocompetent dogs (suffering from glioblastoma) has also been shown to decrease the tumor mass volume and ameliorate neurological signs. Further investigations revealed an increase in the number of immune cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment [414]. This increase in the numbers of immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) has also been observed in C57BL6/J mouse models (suffering from glioblastoma) infected with ZIKV. This infiltration of T cells into the tumor microenvironment provides enhanced protection to mice. ZIKV infection is associated with enhanced activation of the type I interferon signaling pathway in glioblastoma cells and increases the glioblastoma sensitivity to the PD-L1 blockade, which is an important immune checkpoint [415,416,417].8. Future Perspectives in Zika Virus ControlSince its emergence in 1947, ZIKV has only caused widespread epidemics in the last two decades. The outbreaks of ZIKV also suggest the dynamics of transmission variability of ZIKV. The outbreak of ZIKV in the Americas caused a rapid increase in studies of ZIKV pathogenesis and its control measures and treatment strategies. It is of prime importance to continue working on establishing virological and immunological diagnostics kits for ZIKV with enhanced specificity and sensitivity. Another area of focus is ZIKV pathogenesis. Finally, prevention and treatment strategies remain pivotal to curtail ZIKV-related morbidity and mortality. Currently, many vaccines are being tested on animal models, but very few have entered into clinical trials, there is a dire need to improve the quality of good vaccine candidates. Plus, the development of genetically modified mosquitoes could be a groundbreaking tool for controlling Zika virus transmission.


Title: The Dual Role of the Immune Response in Reproductive Organs During Zika Virus Infection

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV) is a health risk worldwide that is disseminated primarily by insect vectors. Tracking the outbreak of Zika in the Americas in 2015 showed that the virus had been circulating in several countries in Africa and Asia. It is primarily transmitted through Aedes aegypti mosquito bites (1, 2). Infection may cause several health complications including microcephaly and congenital Zika syndrome that are associated with vertical transmission (3). This led the World Health Organization to declare the ZIKV outbreak a public health emergency of international concern in 2016 (4). This problem became even more relevant when it was shown that transmission of the pathogen was not exclusive to mosquito bites, similar to that for other flaviviruses. Clinical evidence shows that ZIKV has the potential for human-to-human transmission through sexual routes, including male-to-female, female-to-male, and male-to-male transmission (5–7).Additionally, ZIKV infiltrates several biological fluids including breastmilk, urine, tears, and saliva (8–10). Thus, it is possible that ZIKV can spread via multiple routes of infection. Several reports suggest that tropism of ZIKV to sexual organs could be a bridge for sexual transmission similar to that employed by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) or human papilloma virus (HPV) (11, 12). Interestingly, the immune response in the male and female reproductive organs could play a role in the spread, persistence, and clearance of ZIKV infection. In this mini-review, we collect the current evidence supporting a dual role of the immune response in the reproductive system organs during ZIKV infection as a promoter of viral dissemination in males and having protective roles in females.Clinical ReportsFoy et al. reported for the first time that ZIKV might be sexually transmissible. The virus was identified in a woman that had not traveled to an area endemic for ZIKV transmission. She developed symptoms of the disease after sexual contact with her husband in the days after he returned from a trip to Senegal (13). Since this initial finding, several studies have been published indicating sexual transmission of ZIKV in other areas not endemic for mosquito transmission, such as Europe and North America (14, 15). Additionally, these reports show that male-to-female transmission is more frequent than female-to-male transmission (16–18). Interestingly, studies that have reported shedding of ZIKV in genital fluids to suggest a more robust presence in semen, compared to that in vaginal fluids, and a clear persistence of ZIKV for at least 188 days following symptom onset (19). Moreover, the only study focused on detecting the ZIKV in vaginal secretions showed that the virus could persist for 60–180 days after the onset of symptoms (20). However, the assays determining the ZIKV viability were not conducted, in contrast to the studies on semen samples that determined the production of infective virus in Vero cells (21). Additionally, a similar behavior was observed in studies with other viral sexual transmission such as Hepatitis C, Ebola, HIV-1, and Herpes identifying high viral loads in seminal fluid samples (22–25). The studies also showed greater transmission from male-to-female and the viral load was evaluated in vaginal fluids, but the test to detect viral viability in these samples was not performed. Altogether, these data suggest that cells residing in the male reproductive system are highly susceptible to viral infection or that the female reproductive system presents a more effective defense against the pathogen. These hypotheses need to be addressed adequately through further research.Tropism of ZIKV to Sexual OrgansThe male reproductive tract (MRT) constitutes the testis, epididymis, deferens tubules, prostate, seminal vesicle, bulbourethral glands, and penile urethra. These structures are required for the production, maturation, and protection of spermatozoa from immunoreaction and infectious agents (26, 27). The female reproductive tract (FRT) is organized into two functional compartments associated with fetal development (upper FRT) and the external environment (lower FRT). The vagina and ectocervix constitute the lower FRT and are organized by a keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. The endocervix, uterus, and fallopian tubes comprise the upper FRT and consist of a single layer of columnar epithelium (28). Implementation of animal models has been essential to identify the cellular targets of ZIKV within reproductive tracts (29). Results from these models have shown that ZIKV has high tropism in the MRT, infecting cell types that include spermatogonia, primary spermatocytes, Sertoli cells, peritubular myoid cells, Leydig cells, and epithelial cells of the lumen (30). In contrast, in human testis ex vivo, ZIKV can infect and replicate in a range of somatic and germ cells, such as testicular macrophages, peritubular cells, Leydig, and Sertoli cells. However, the infection was weaker in human cells than that observed in the mouse model (31). Finally, ZIKV was also found in the spermatozoa from ZIKV-infected men, suggesting that ZIKV could infect the zygote and cause fetal congenital diseases. We propose that the immune response could help ZIKV gain access to spermatozoa in the MRT (32).In the case of cells within the FRT, few reports have evaluated their susceptibility to ZIKV infection. The experimental evidence from animal model mosquito bite inoculates suggests that ZIKV is present in reproductive tract tissues such as the cervix and vagina (33). Additionally, studies on immunocompetent mice showed that vaginal inoculation of ZIKV lead to productive replication of the virus within the vaginal mucosa and ovarian follicles. Additionally, ZIKV replication in the vaginal tissue of a pregnant mouse was followed by infection of the fetal brain, suggesting vertical transmission (34). Cellular models in vitro have shown that human endometrial stromal cells are permissive to ZIKV infection and replication. Interestingly, in vitro decidualization of this cellular model increased the replication of ZIKV, suggesting that endometrial cells have an important role during sexual transmission of ZIKV. They might provide a viral reservoir for infection of cells at the maternal-fetal interface during pregnancy (35). Finally, current studies that focus on the use of human tissues or primary cultures of FRT cells need to be performed to evaluate if the behavior of ZIKV infection in animal models is similar to that in humans. The establishment of vaginal and cervical epithelial cells could be an exciting model as they have been used for the study of HIV-1 and Herpes simplex virus (36, 37).Role of the Immune System in Sexual Transmission of ZIKVViral evolution requires development of a mechanism to evade the host immune response and manipulate cells for their own replication, allowing it to spread to other cells (38). ZIKV evades the immune system (IS) by regulating the type I interferon response with its encoded NS5 protein (39). Mice lacking components of IFN pathway are more susceptible to ZIKV infection, highlighting the importance of the IS for the control of the virus (40).Among flaviviruses, sexual transmission is unique to ZIKV, marking an unusual potential for human-to-human transmission. The immune privileged nature of the testis protects germ cells from immune attack that occurs during infection. While clinical reports clearly identified persistence of viral RNA in seminal fluid, little is known about how ZIKV passes from blood to the MRT, nor how it persists in the testis. The mechanism seems to involve different cell types, including immune system cells, for transport to target tissues. For example, ZIKV was preferentially found in the cell fraction of blood samples from humans exposed to an endemic area, suggesting that ZIKV could use this mechanism for transport before crossing tissue barriers in the male body (41, 42).ZIKV seems uses a conserved arboviral strategy for primary infection. Semliki Forest virus (SFV) is an alphavirus that is a close relative to the Chikungunya virus. It was shown that a cutaneous innate immune response involuntarily facilitated viral infection. The mechanism involved neutrophil-dependent inflammation at mosquito bite sites that promoted the recruitment of myeloid cells that are permissive to the virus. These then released new infectious viral particles targeting new cellular targets (43). We hypothesize that the same mechanism may be used by ZIKV to spread its infection. In support of this possibility, human in vitro-generated dendritic cells (DCs) are permissive to ZIKV infection (44). Additionally, using a pigtail macaque model it was shown that male animals were more susceptible to ZIKV persistence in peripheral lymph nodes and dissemination to mucosal tissues. The mechanism involves two steps: an inflammatory response that follows ZIKV infection that drives the recruitment of innate cells as early targets of the virus. The infected cells are myeloid DCs, non-classic monocytes, and natural killer (NK) cells. Unlike SFV, the recruitment of cells is driven by plasmocytoid DCs in a MCP-1 dependent manner, which also supports the dissemination and persistence of ZIKV (45). Altogether, these data show that IS inadvertently plays a role in viral tropism, persistence, and pathogenesis of ZIKV.In general, we consider that there are two routes to reach spermatids in the seminiferous tubules. One is that ZIKV uses the IS to reach the testis and manipulate the antiviral mechanism to disrupt the blood testicular barrier (BTB) junctions. The other possibility is that ZIKV proteins directly destroy the junctions to cross the barrier. We believe these processes are not exclusive, as both are supported by evidence in the literature (45–47). Once ZIKV reaches the testicles, we assume that the virus gains access to germinal cells by three mechanisms. (1) ZIKV can infect or alter the endothelium and pass to the interstitial space, (2) infection of different cells elicits disruption of junctional adhesions in a manner that is dependent on IS antiviral activity or a direct function of ZIKV protein, and (3) direct transmigration of infected immune cells from the blood to the seminiferous tubules.A recent study supported endothelial passage, showing that ZIKV NS1 protein bound specifically to endothelial cells including human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs), causing a decrease in their permeability. The mechanism implies degradation of the endothelial glycocalyx layer by the activation of sialidase and cathepsin L-heparanase both in vitro and in vivo (48). Another piece of evidence is indirect but concordant with endothelial passage. ZIKV could persistently infect and replicates in primary HBMECs. Moreover, ZIKV was delivered from both apical and basolateral surfaces suggesting a direct mechanism to cross the blood brain barrier (49). In addition, it was shown that the Sertoli cells that constitute the BTB were highly susceptible to ZIKV infection suggesting that ZIKV may be able to utilize this crossing mechanism directly (46). Finally, a study using the bluetongue virus in a ram model showed testicular damage due to viral replication in the endothelial cells of the peritubular area in the testis, resulting in the destruction of the Sertoli cell barrier associated with type I interferon response raising the possibility that ZIKV may use a similar mechanism of this related arbovirus in humans (50). Overall, these studies suggest that ZIKV can infect and alter endothelial barriers to facilitate virus dissemination into target organs facing other target cells, such as Sertoli cells, and macrophages in the interstitial space. In parallel, the extravasation of fluids can induce inflammation that also helps the virus to disrupt other barriers, such as BTB, to enhance viral infection. However, studies describing this mechanism in human or mouse endothelial testicular cells are lacking and need to be tested.For the second mechanism, using an in vitro BTB model with human Sertoli cells it was observed that ZIKV could infect these cells for a long term without induction of cell death, and that Sertoli cells can mount a robust antiviral response. The virus did not directly alter tight or adherent junctions, but induced the expression of VCAM-1 that provides the interaction for the transmigration of monocytes across the epithelial cell model. More importantly, the inflammatory cytokine TNF-α released from ZIKV-infected macrophages affected the permeability of the BTB by degrading ZO-1 protein suggesting that IS can help ZIKV gain access to developing germ cells (46). Similar results were obtained with the use of a 3-D model of HBMECs. This experiment showed that apical junctions restrict the infection capability of several RNA viruses. However, treatment of the 3-D cultures with TNF-α disrupted the formation of cell-cell junctions and correlated with an increase in ZIKV viral RNA and infectious titers (51). Another study using RNAseq analysis of ZIKV-infected Sertoli cells showed that these cells responded to ZIKV with a diversity of innate antiviral mechanism. Importantly the analysis of upregulated genes on interferon, antigen presentation, and cross-talk between DC and NK signaling pathways correlated with the downregulation of genes involved in adherent junctions, tubulin α/β complex, and 14-3-3 signaling pathways (52). Interestingly, a clear correlation exists between the peak of the immune response and the downregulation of genes that control cell cycle progression. These data suggest that ZIKV could modulate the change from an immunosuppressive microenvironment in Sertoli cells to a strong antiviral response that alters the permeability of BTB with a concomitant delay in proliferation. This would prolong the time for viral progeny production, ensure persistence, and allow dissemination via sexual transmission.Direct evidence of the disruption of cell junctions by ZIKV came from the use of the NS2A protein in mouse radial glial cells and human brain organoids. NS2A interacted directly with adherent junction components, such as ZO-1, β-catenin, SMAD7, and NUMBL, targeting them for lysosomal degradation and inducing aberrant cortical layer formation. We hypothesize that the same mechanism could be used by ZIKV in the testis to gain access to seminiferous tubules, but this needs to be tested (47).Finally, evidence for the third mechanism was shown using 3-D culture HBMECs in transwell assays. ZIKV-infected monocytes crossed the epithelial barrier and infected primary human astrocytes plated in the basolateral chamber (51). Using a similar approach with Sertoli cells it was observed that ZIKV-infected macrophages interacted with and induced the permeability of the cells, suggesting that after induction the leakiness of the barrier allowed infiltration to the lumen of the seminiferous tubules and probably infection of germ cells (46). These studies suggest that the IS, when attempting to control viral infection, actually assists the entry of ZIKV to this immune-privileged site, causing persistence that allows sexual transmission (Figure 1).Figure 1The dissemination process of ZIKV in male reproductive tract. In the male reproductive tract, Immune system mechanism might promote ZIKV dissemination. (1) ZIKV travel in infected immune cells such as Dendritic cells to testis; ZIKV NS1 protein increase the permeability of endothelial cells to allow virus access toward interstitial space, (2) ZIKV infect Leydig cells increase the production of viruses in the zone, (3) ZIKV can infect Sertoli cells and change the immunosuppressive microenvironment to a robust antiviral response. Activated macrophages secrete TNF-α that disrupt the Blood Testicular Barrier by degradation of tight junction proteins such as ZO-1 allowing ZIKV reach and infect germ cells, (4) In parallel, is possible that on infected Sertoli cells the NS2A protein target to degradation proteins of tight junction complexes helping also to reach germ cells, (5) Finally, through adhesion molecules such as VCAM-1 ZIKV infected macrophages can interact with Sertoli cells (6) and direct infiltrate the lumen of seminiferous tubules and ZIKV could infect eventually germinal cells.On the other hand, within the human FRT, protection against sexually transmitted infection is opposed to biological fertility (53). The role of the FRT during ZIKV infection and sexual transmission has not been extensively evaluated. However, the mucosal immune system is the first line of defense against pathogens. The innate and adaptive elements of the mucosal immune system have evolved to meet the special challenges that are associated with the FRT (54). Interestingly, in contrast to that in males, the IS mechanism against ZIKV correlates with protection of the FRT. For example, interferon (IFN)-ε is constitutively expressed by epithelial cells in the FRT and protects against herpes simplex virus-2 infection. This protective role of the IFN-ε may also be prohibitive for ZIKV infection, but this needs to be tested (55). Protection via IFN response was shown by the administration of recombinant IFN-β/λ in primary human vaginal/cervical epithelial cells. This restricted ZIKV replication by induction of canonical IFN-stimulated genes (56). In agreement with this study, the induction of a strong IFN response is necessary to prevent vaginal ZIKV infection in mice because the virus elicits minimal induction of IFN response and seems to regulate the activation of antigen presenting cells (57).Additionally, it is necessary to consider the regulation of the immune system by sex hormones when evaluating ZIKV infection of the FRT. For example, estradiol and progesterone coordinate unique patterns of epithelial cells, stromal fibroblast, and immune cell functions that optimize the conditions for fetal survival and maternal protection (58). This is supported by the analysis of an immunocompetent animal model infected with ZIKV. Hormonal treatments in the FRT promoted the transmission and replication of virus. This study suggested that women establish correct innate and cellular antiviral mechanisms and hormonal regulation to control the infection (59). In mice, subcutaneous ZIKV inoculation elicited a cellular and humoral response that protected subsequent intravaginal inoculation (60). These studies suggest that in females a robust immune response protects against sexual exposure instead of helping the viral establishment and persistence. In conclusion, these data show that antiviral IS mechanisms in the FRT correlate with protection, the opposite of the response mechanism in the MRT. This is in agreement with clinical data indicating that the female-to-male route of sexual transmission is less frequent than the male-to-female route is. However, is important to consider other factors associated with the sexual transmission of the ZIKV. For example, it was reported that the microtrauma in the epithelial barrier of FTR during intercourse promotes the sexual transmission of HIV-1 or HVB (61, 62). In addition, relevant future studies are needed to understand the role of hormones that regulated the menstrual cycle and the effect on sexual transmission of ZIKV in the FRT. Recently, it has been suggested that estradiol is associated with activation of the innate immune mechanism and initiation of the antiviral responses, and that the modulation by sexual hormones results in alteration of a woman's susceptibility to HIV-1 and other infections (61, 63). The understanding about the role of hormones in different stages of menstrual cycle or pregnancy may help to resolve question on the mechanism of ZIKV to persist in the FRT (Figure 2).Figure 2The protection process of ZIKV in female reproductive tract. Immune system mechanism protects against ZIKV infection in female reproductive tract. (1) ZIKV infect vaginal epithelial cells, (2) infected cells produce IFN-α,β,γ, and possibly IFN-ε which initiates the intracellular antiviral state (3) immune cells increases antigen presentation leading to T and B cell activation, (4) effector B cells secrete ZIKV-specific antibodies and effector cytotoxic T cells kill ZIKV infected cells; (5) Finally, the IS mechanism control and protect against ZIKV.Finally, whether sexual transmission (STx) has any influence on vertical transmission (Vtx) of ZIKV is yet unanswered. Until now, the literature shows that the mechanisms of immune response in FRT can control ZIKV infection via STx, and in humans, to our knowledge, data indicating Vtx after sexual transmission does not exist. However, a mouse model with suppressed IFN response showed that males have infectious viruses in the testicles and can transmit sexually to females during the early phase of infection. Importantly, in the few cases of pregnancy with STx of ZIKV, there was only evidence of infection in cells of the uterus and placenta, but there was no clear evidence of Vtx in the fetuses. In contrast, Vtx was clear after peripheral ZIKV infection, since 26% of brains of the fetuses/pups were positive for ZIKV RNA (64).In the context of peripheral infection, the mechanisms described to alter BTB could be used by ZIKV to infect the placenta. A study shows that placental macrophages can be infected by ZIKV and respond to the infection by inflammatory and antiviral signaling pathways. The authors propose that placental macrophages support efficient ZIKV replication, and this may result in the subsequent infection of neural progenitor cells (65). However, a report showing Vtx without breakdown of the placental barrier also exists. The discordance in these studies show the complexity of the ZIKV infection and argue that these mechanisms may have a role during the Vtx, but more studies are needed to evaluate them correctly.ConclusionsZIKV can infect and regulate different cells, including immune system cells, to ensure survival and persistence. In the MRT, the activation of different immunological events in response to ZIKV infection correlate with viral persistence that, conversely, in females, are necessary to inhibit the virus and control the infection. We highlight some important aspects of the immune system that assist ZIKV dissemination into the reproductive organs, thus showing that IS can have a dual role in the pathogenesis of sexual transmission. However, the molecular mechanism used by ZIKV in human cells to guarantee infection has not been investigated thoroughly. Understanding the molecular mechanisms utilized by the virus for dissemination will be invaluable to develop new targets for therapeutic intervention.Author ContributionsML and HA designed the concept and completed the final editing of the manuscript. All authors contributed to writing of the manuscript. MV and TV prepared the figures. All authors read approved the manuscript for publication.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Differential cell line susceptibility to the emerging Zika virus: implications for disease pathogenesis, non-vector-borne human transmission and animal reservoirs

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that has been largely neglected for 60 years after its first isolation from the serum of a febrile sentinel rhesus macaque in the Zika Forest of Uganda in 1947.1 Since 2007, ZIKV has emerged to cause large epidemics of a dengue-like illness in the Pacific islands and Latin America, with imported cases also reported in other continents.2, 3 As of 14 July 2016, more than 60 countries/territories have reported continuing mosquito-borne transmission of ZIKV.4 Although most patients infected with ZIKV have an asymptomatic or a self-limiting acute febrile illness, some patients may develop severe neurological complications, such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, or fatal disseminated infections.2, 5, 6, 7 Moreover, recent clinico-epidemiological, laboratory and animal studies on pathogenesis have established the association between ZIKV infection and congenital anomalies, such as microcephaly, central nervous system malformations and ophthalmological abnormalities.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13ZIKV research has so far been mainly focused on the pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated neurological complications. Questions on the pathogenesis of ZIKV's other clinical manifestations, its unique ability among flaviviruses to be transmitted trans-placentally and sexually, and its potential animal reservoirs remain mostly unanswered. Although in vivo phenomena may not be completely reproducible in the in vitro setting, cell line susceptibility studies are often useful for providing critical data for these knowledge gaps in the early phases of epidemics caused by emerging RNA viruses.14, 15 In this study, we correlated the differential cell line susceptibility, species tropism, viral replication efficiency and antigen expression patterns with the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of ZIKV, and compared them with those of the closely related dengue virus type 2 (DENV-2). Our findings provided novel implications on the disease pathogenesis, transmission and potential animal reservoirs that could be applied to optimize laboratory testing protocols and infection control strategies for this global health emergency.Materials and MethodsVIRAL ISOLATESTo investigate on the differential cell line susceptibility to epidemic ZIKV and pre-epidemic ZIKV, we included a clinical isolate of ZIKV (Puerto Rico strain PRVABC59) obtained from a patient in the recent South American epidemic (ZIKV-PR; kindly provided by Brandy Russell and Barbara Johnson, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA), and another pre-epidemic ZIKV strain isolated from a nonhuman primate in Uganda in 1947 (976 Uganda strain) (ZIKV-U; kindly provided by Tatjana Avšič Županc, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, the European Virus Archive). An archived clinical isolate of DENV-2 was obtained from Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, for comparison with ZIKV, as the two viruses are closely related phylogenetically and have similar clinical manifestations. The ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates were amplified by three additional passages in Vero cells and C6/36 cells, respectively, to make working stocks of the viruses.ETHICS STATEMENTInstitutional Review Board approval for use of the vial isolates was obtained and all samples were anonymized. The cell lines used in this study were obtained from sources listed in Table 1.VIRAL CULTUREViral culture was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 33 cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species were each inoculated with one multiplicity of infection of the ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates for 1 h (Table 1). Non-attached virus was removed by washing the cells twice in phosphate-buffered saline (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The monolayer cells were maintained in minimum essential medium, Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), DMEM/F12 or RPMI medium, with 1% fetal calf serum, depending on the type of cell line according to supplier's instructions (Gibco). The suspension cells were maintained in RPMI medium with 2% fetal calf serum (Gibco). All infected cell lines were incubated at 37 °C for five days, except C6/36 which was incubated at 28 °C. Cytopathic effects (CPE) were examined at one, three and five days post-virus inoculation (d.p.i) with inverted light microscopy.RNA EXTRACTION AND QUANTITATIVE REVERSE-TRANSCRIPTION PCRTotal nucleic acid (TNA) was extracted from culture supernatants of the 33 cell lines infected by ZIKV or DENV-2 at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. using EZ1 Virus Mini Kit v2.0 (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) as we previously described.16, 17 Briefly, 200 μL of supernatant were used for extraction and the TNA was eluted in 60 μL of AVE buffer. Real-time one-step quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used for the detection of ZIKV and DENV-2 using QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) in a LightCycler 96 Real-Time PCR System (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Five microliters of purified TNA was amplified in a 20 μL-reaction containing 10 μL of 2 × QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Master Mix, 0.2 μL QN Probe RT-mix, 0.8 μM forward primer, 0.8 μM reverse primer and 200 nM probe. ZIKV detection was performed as previously described, with slight modifications.18 Forward primer (5′-CGY TGC CCA ACA CAA GG-3′), reverse primer (5′-CCA CYA AYG TTC TTTT GCA BAC A-3′) and probe (5′-HEX-AGC CTA CCT TGA YAA GCA RTC AGA CAC TC-IABkFQ-3′) targeting the ZIKV envelope gene were used. For DENV-2 detection, forward primer (5′-GCA TAT TGA CGC TGG GAR AGA C-3′), reverse primer (5′-CGY TCT GTG CCT GGA WWG ATG-3′) and probe (5′-FAM-CAG AGA TCC TGC TGT C-MGB-NFQ-3′) targeting the DENV-2 3'-untranslated region were used. Reactions were incubated at 45 °C for 10 min, followed by 95 °C for 5 min, and then thermal cycled for 50 cycles (95 °C for 5 s, 55 °C for 30 s). A series of 10-fold dilutions equivalent to 1 × 102–1 × 106 copies/reaction mixture were prepared to generate calibration curves and run in parallel with the test samples.CLONING AND PURIFICATION OF HIS6-TAGGED RECOMBINANT ZIKV AND DENV-2 NS1Primers (5′-CAT ATG GAT GTG GGG TGC TCG GTG GAC T-3′ and 5′-CTC GAG TGC AGT CAC CAT TGA CCT TAC T-3′) were used to amplify the gene encoding the ZIKV–nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) protein by RT-PCR. The sequence encoding a 352-amino-acid fragment of ZIKV–NS1 protein was amplified and cloned into the NdeI and XolI sites of expression vector pETH in frame and downstream of the series of six histidine residues. The recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was expressed in Escherichia coli, denatured in 8 M urea, and purified with Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity chromatography (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The solubilized protein was refolded by slowly dialyzing with refolding buffers. Expression of the recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was confirmed by western blot analysis using mouse anti-His monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Preparation of DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19PREPARATION OF SPECIFIC ANTIBODIES AGAINST ZIKV- AND DENV-2-NS1 PROTEINSThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 30 μg of purified recombinant ZIKV-NS1 protein was mixed with an equal volume of complete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) and injected subcutaneously into BALB/c mice. Incomplete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) was used in subsequent injections at 14-day intervals for three times. Serum samples were collected 14 days after the fourth injection. Preparation of specific antibodies against DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19ANTIGEN DETECTION OF INFECTED CELL LINES BY IMMUNOFLUORESCENCEThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Cell smears at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. were prepared and fixed in chilled acetone at −20 °C for 10 min. The fixed cells were incubated with mouse antiserum against the ZIKV- or DENV-2-NS1 protein, followed by FITC-rabbit anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were then examined under a fluorescence microscope. Three representative microscopic fields were chosen and 100 cells were counted for characteristic cytoplasmic apple green fluorescence. The mean percentage of positive cells was rounded up to the nearest multiplicity of 10. Uninoculated cells were used as negative control.STATISTICAL ANALYSISThe Student's t-test was used to compare the mean viral load of the different cell lines at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. with the mean baseline viral load at 0 d.p.i. All calculations were based on log-transformed viral loads. P-value of <0.01 was considered as statistically significant. Computation was performed using the Predictive Analytics Software v18.0 for Windows.ResultsHUMAN CELL LINESEighteen human cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U showed similar tropism as defined by viral load, immunofluorescent antigen staining and CPE. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in 14/18 cell lines infected with ZIKV-PR or ZIKV-U (Figures 1A and 1B). These included the placental (JEG-3), genitourinary (HEK, HeLa, HOSE6-3, LNCaP and 833KE), neuromuscular (SF268 and RD), retinal (ARPE19), respiratory (Hep2, Calu-3 and HFL), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines. There was a slight increase in mean viral load of about 0.5–1 lgcopies/mL in the monocyte (THP-1) and B lymphocyte (Raji) cell lines (P>0.01), but none of the immune cell lines achieved a ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the placental (JEG-3), cervical (HeLa), neuronal (SF268), upper respiratory tract (Hep-2) and intestinal (Caco-2) cell lines. Twelve of these 14 cell lines (JEG-3, HEK, HeLa, LNCaP, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7) showed obvious ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF in addition to a high viral load (Table 2). The peak ZIKV-NS1 protein expression in these cell lines occurred on 3–5 d.p.i. ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), retinal (APRE19), lower respiratory tract (HFL) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 2). Although ovarian (HOSE6-3) and testicular (833KE) cells showed high mean viral loads in qRT-PCR, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was consistently found in only ⩽5% of infected cells. CPE were observed in 8 of these 14 cell lines, namely, JEG-3, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7 (Table 3). CPE were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 3). The gradual onset of CPE in most of these cell lines at 3 d.p.i. correlated with the steady increase of viral load and ZIKV-NS1 protein expression at 3–5 d.p.i.In contrast, DENV-2 showed a much narrower range of human tissue tropism, with ⩾2 log increase in the mean viral load (P<0.01) in only 9/18 cell lines (HEK, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7; Figure 1C). Notably, unlike ZIKV, the DENV-2 load did not significantly increase by ⩾2 lgcopies/mL in any of the genital tract and placental cell lines, with only mildly increased viral load (P>0.01) and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression in the HeLa cell line. Most of these nine cell lines with increased viral loads demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression (Table 2) and CPE (Table 3). The CPE were generally delayed in onset (5 d.p.i.) and limited (⩽50%), except in the RD and Huh-7 cell lines.NONHUMAN CELL LINESFifteen nonhuman cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U again showed similar tropism in these cell lines. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/15 cell lines (Figures 4A and 4B). These included the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), cat (CRFK), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines. None of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines showed a ⩾2 log increase in viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. All of these eight cell lines showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, usually starting on 3 d.p.i. and peaked on 5 d.p.i. (Table 2). ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 2). Some of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines also showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression, but these expressions were much less prominent than that in the other cell lines. CPE were observed in six of these eight cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines, and were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the nonhuman primate, pig, hamster and chicken cell lines (Table 3). CPE were not observed in the mosquito (C6/36) cell line within 5 d.p.i.A narrower range of nonhuman cell lines were susceptible to infection by DENV-2 than ZIKV. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in only 6/15 cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), bat (TP2), hamster (BHK21) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 4C). All of these six cell lines demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression by IF (Table 2). CPE were observed in five of these six cell lines (all except C6/36), but was usually not prominent (⩽50%) except in the LLC-MK2 and BHK21 cell lines (Table 3).DiscussionAlthough ZIKV infection has been described as a dengue-like illness in the past, recent evidence suggests that ZIKV is unique among known human-pathogenic flaviviruses. ZIKV is the first flavivirus known to be associated with congenital malformations, and sexual and vertical transmissions in human.1, 8, 9, 20, 21, 22 The pathogenesis of these unusual clinical manifestations and transmission routes is incompletely understood. Moreover, a comprehensive surveillance for potential animal reservoirs of ZIKV, which are likely important in facilitating the spread of the virus after 60 years of quiescence, has not been reported. A virus' ability to grow in cells of different host species might provide insight into its ability to cross interspecies barriers. We therefore conducted this systematic study to characterize the tropism of the emerging ZIKV in a broad range of human and nonhuman cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species. The findings in our study may have important clinical and epidemiological implications for this rapidly expanding viral epidemic.Productive ZIKV replication as defined by ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, and presence of CPE was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/18 human cell lines, which represented cells of placental, neuronal, muscle, retinal, pulmonary, intestinal and hepatic origin. This broad tissue tropism is likely related to the wide distribution of the candidate receptors of ZIKV, including AXL, TYRO3 and DC-SIGN, in different organs.23 The placental (JEG-3) and neuronal (SF268) cell line tropism corroborated with the congenital and neurological manifestations of ZIKV infection. These manifestations include congenital microcephaly and other central nervous system malformations in infected fetuses, and meningoencephalitis, myelitis, and post-infectious Guillain–Barré syndrome in adults.1, 5, 8, 24 ZIKV RNA, full-length viral genome and/or viral particles could be detected in the brain tissue of fetuses with congenital microcephaly.8, 25 Microscopically, flavivirus-like virions were observed together with extensive inflammation, astrocyte and microglial activation, and injury in the cortex and the lateral corticospinal tracts in the fetal brain tissue.8, 25 Moreover, ZIKV could impair growth and deplete neural progenitor cells in human neurospheres and cerebral organoids.26, 27Consistent with ZIKV's tropism for the human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cell line, myalgia and arthralgia with periarticular edema are common features in symptomatic ZIKV infection. Fetuses with congenital ZIKV infection may develop arthrogryposis.28 Myositis and myocarditis were observed in suckling mice inoculated with ZIKV intracerebrally, and viral RNA could be detected in the muscle and heart of type I interferon receptor-deficient mice infected with ZIKV.29, 30Viral tropism for the retinal (ARPE19) cell line corroborates with the ophthalmological complications of congenital ZIKV infection, including chorioretinal atrophy and pigmentary maculopathy.10, 13 Abdominal symptoms including diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain and jaundice with hepatic dysfunction have been reported in patients with ZIKV infection, and are in agreement with the susceptibility of the intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines to ZIKV.1, 6, 7, 31 Respiratory distress may occur in severe ZIKV infection, and this correlates with ZIKV's tropism for respiratory (Hep-2, Calu-3 and HFL) cell lines.6, 7 Similarly, the clinical features of DENV infection, including encephalopathy/encephalitis (SF268), myalgia and rhabdomyolysis (RD), retinitis (ARPE19), respiratory symptoms (Hep-2 and HFL), diarrhea (Caco-2) and hepatic dysfunction (Huh-7), also correlated with the cell line susceptibility to DENV-2 in our study.32, 33Although neurological manifestations may also be seen in infections caused by other flaviviruses, such as DENV, yellow fever virus, West Nile virus (WNV) and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), none of these flaviviruses have been associated with congenital microcephaly and central nervous system malformations. These unique clinical features of ZIKV infection require the virus to be able to infect neural progenitor cells of the fetus in utero during early gestation. A striking difference between the cell line susceptibilities of ZIKV and DENV-2 observed in our study was ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in placental cells (JEG-3). JEG-3 cells infected with ZIKV produced high viral loads (~10 lgcopies/mL), abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and prominent CPE. This finding helped to explain the unique ability of ZIKV to infect the fetus via the placenta and cause congenital anomalies, particularly when the infection occurred during the first trimester.34 Although a previous study suggested that type III interferons produced by human placental trophoblasts could confer protection against ZIKV infection, it is notable that the study utilized primary human trophoblasts of full-term instead of early gestation placenta.35 Indeed, our in vitro finding concurred with the recent reports of detectable viral particles and RNA in trophoblasts of the maternal and fetal placenta of ZIKV-infected type I interferon signaling-deficient mice and permissibility of placental macrophages and cytotrophoblasts to productive ZIKV infection.12, 36Besides trans-placental transmission, our findings also provided insights to explain the pathogenesis of other non-vector-borne human transmission routes of ZIKV. Probable sexual transmission of ZIKV has been reported.20, 21, 22 ZIKV-infected male patients might develop hematospermia and perineal pain compatible with prostatitis, and might have detectable viral RNA and/or infectious viral particles in their semen.20, 21, 22 In contrast to DENV-2, which did not efficiently replicate in any of the genital tract cell lines, the mean ZIKV load significantly increased in the prostatic (LNCaP) and testicular (833KE) cell lines without inducing CPE. This suggested that the prostate and testes might be important sites of ZIKV replication that led to prolonged virus shedding in the semen of infected men.20, 21, 37 Interestingly, abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was detected in ZIKV-infected LNCaP cells, but not 833KE cells. This finding might imply that ZIKV could replicate more efficiently in the prostate than the testes. Recent studies only reported high viral loads in the testes of ZIKV-infected mice deficient in interferon signaling and/or receptor, but did not report the viral loads in their prostates.30, 38 Further studies should be conducted to investigate the prostate's role as a replication site of ZIKV. The female genital tract cell lines, including HeLa and HOSE6-3, were also susceptible to ZIKV, supporting the hypothesis that non-immune women might acquire the infection through sexual intercourse with their ZIKV-infected male partners.We showed that the renal (HEK) and respiratory tract (Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL) cell lines were also susceptible to ZIKV. This helped to explain the high viral loads in the urine and nasopharyngeal swabs of ZIKV-infected patients.39, 40, 41 The finding of high viral load and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells is particularly interesting, as it suggests that the kidney might be another site of persistent ZIKV replication. Similarly, DENV-2 infection also caused increased mean viral load and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells, and viral RNA might be detected in urine of dengue patients.42 An important implication of this finding is that kidney transplant donors in ZIKV-affected regions should be tested for the infection before organ donation, as virus shedding in urine might be prolonged.39, 40, 41 The intestinal (Caco-2) cell line was also highly susceptible to ZIKV, which corroborated with the high viral load detected in the intestines of ZIKV-infected mice.43 Serial testing of fecal samples of ZIKV-infected patients should be performed to determine whether feces represent another possible transmission route of ZIKV. It would also be interesting to investigate ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in salivary gland cells, as high viral load could also be detected in the saliva of ZIKV-infected patients.41, 44The differential cell line susceptibility of our nonhuman cell lines to ZIKV may provide insights into the virus' potential animal reservoirs and alternative animal models. The finding of high viral loads and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without induction of CPE within 5 d.p.i. in the Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cell line was quite expected, and corroborated with the high non-fatal infection, dissemination and transmission rates of ZIKV in infected A. albopictus.45 A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load with ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and CPE were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. It is well known that the transmission of flaviviruses may involve sylvatic cycles between the mosquito vectors and susceptible wild animals, and urban cycles between the vectors and domestic animals.46, 47 Nonhuman primates are known wild animal reservoirs of ZIKV and DENV.1, 46 Our findings of efficient ZIKV replication in pig, rabbit, hamster and chicken cell lines suggest that these mammalian or avian species might have a role in the transmission of ZIKV. Similar to domestic pigs and wild birds for JEV, and domestic and wild birds for WNV, these species may serve as the animal reservoirs or amplifying hosts of ZIKV.46 Moreover, vector-free JEV transmission due to persistence of virus in tonsils and virus shedding in oronasal secretions of pigs has recently been reported.48 Alternatively, these animal species may be susceptible hosts with less importance in the transmission cycle, which is analogous to horses for JEV and many vertebrate species for WNV.46 Systematic sampling of domestic animals in ZIKV-affected regions would help to confirm these findings. Pigs, rabbits and hamsters should be evaluated as animal models for ZIKV infection, as interferon signaling- or receptor-deficient mice are not routinely available in most laboratories. Pig and/or hamster models have been previously reported for DENV and WNV infection.49, 50Our findings are useful for optimizing laboratory diagnostics and studies on the pathogenesis and counter-measures of ZIKV. Some of the laboratories in resource-limited areas affected by ZIKV may not have the capability to routinely perform molecular diagnostic tests. In addition to the few cell lines previously reported, our study has identified a broad range of cell lines that are suitable for growing ZIKV as an alternative diagnostic tool in clinical virology laboratories.51, 52, 53, 54 These cell lines may also be used in pathogenesis studies conducted by laboratories without the technical expertise to handle brain organoids, and to evaluate antiviral treatment and vaccines in vitro prior to animal experiments.


Title: Zika Virus-Infected Monocyte Exosomes Mediate Cell-to-Cell Viral Transmission

1. IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV), a single-stranded positive-sense RNA flavivirus, has reemerged as a human pathogen [1,2]. A Zika fever (ZIKF) epidemic broke out in the Americas in 2015–2016, triggering the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [3]. Since then, more than 870,000 autochthonous cases have been reported on the continent, and 89 countries have reported ZIKV transmission across the Americas, Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Western Pacific [4,5,6]. ZIKF, an acute febrile disease, is caused by infection with ZIKV, which is transmitted mainly by Aedes spp. mosquitoes; however, non-vectorial transmission by various routes (sexual contact; from mother to child either in utero, resulting in congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), or intrapartum; transfusion of infected blood components; transplantation of infected organs; or laboratory exposure) that favor person-to-person viral spread have been described [7,8,9]. About 80% of ZIKV infections are asymptomatic, and 20% of ZIKF cases are mild. Some ZIKF cases progress to severe disease characterized by neurological disorders, autoimmunity, or thrombocytopenia. To date, no antivirals or safe vaccines are available for ZIKV infection [1,2,3,10].Monocytes (Mø) are the primary target cells of ZIKV infection [11,12,13]. Mø constitute nearly 10% of bloodstream leukocytes, with three subpopulations: classic, intermediate, and non-classical. In infectious processes, Mø are recruited to the tissues, inducing a proinflammatory state [14,15]. Mø can be used by ZIKV as Trojan horses to infiltrate, through the vascular endothelium, to immunologically privileged tissues (brain, placenta, or testicles), contributing to severe ZIKF pathogenesis. During Mø differentiation, extracellular vesicles (EV) are released. EV are heterogeneous particles formed by the lipid bilayer, and they do not replicate [16]. According to their biogenesis, EV are classified as exosomes, which have an endosomal origin and are released by exocytosis, or as ectosomes, which are formed by budding from the plasma membrane [17]. EV carry active biomolecules, and their interactions with cells modify those cells’ behavior or phenotype. EV functions include intercellular communication, nutrient exchange, and the elimination of intracellular components [18,19]. Therefore, EV are relevant to homeostasis and disease [20].Exosomes or small EV (sEV) are nanoparticles <200 nm in size. They can be identified by detection of tetraspanins (CD63, CD81, and CD9) or of proteins from the endosomal sorting complexes required for transport (ESCRT, like TSG101 or Alix), which are present on their membranes or as part of their cargo [16]. During infection by some RNA viruses, the viral cycle and exosome biogenesis may converge, such that viral components (genomes, antigens, or complete virions) are incorporated into the sEV content [21]. Therefore, exosomes have the potential to serve as vehicles for ZIKV transmission. Such processes have been described for other flaviviruses such as dengue virus (DENV) and West Nile virus (WNV) [22,23,24,25].In the context of ZIKV infection, our group previously reported that exosomes from ZIKV-infected mosquito cells carry viral RNA and E protein, favoring infection and the differentiation of human Mø and endothelial cells. These cells induce the expression of damage markers and an increase in barrier permeability, and these exosomes could thus directly contribute to ZIKF pathogenesis [26]. Other studies focused on ZIKF neuropathogenesis have demonstrated that sEV from murine cortical neurons and human astrocytes/cerebral microvasculature carry viral genomic RNA and E/NS1 proteins that favor infection of naïve cells [27,28,29], showing that exosomes mediate ZIKV transmission. Studies using CZS models have demonstrated that ZIKV-infected differentiated monkey trophoblasts release exosomes containing the viral E, NS1, NS4B, and NS5 proteins, which may increase the susceptibility of other uninfected placental cells. Likewise, exosomes from ZIKV-infected neuroepithelial-like stem cells (lt-NES) are enriched with dysregulated cellular miR-4792, amiRNA associated with neurodevelopment and oxidative stress, and their transfer could affect uninfected cells, thus impairing brain development [30,31].On the other hand, the function of exosomes released from human mononuclear cells in flavivirus pathogenesis is poorly understood. It has been reported that DENV-3-infected Mø-derived dendritic cells release exosomes that carry viral E protein and function as Trojan horses that evade the antibody response, favoring the infection of mosquito cells [25]. Also, it was found that exosomes from DENV-2-infected macrophages carry the NS3 protein, and their interaction with endothelial cells modified the physiology and integrity of these cells, inducing the release of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines [32]. The function of Mø exosomes in ZIKV infection is still unclear.This study aimed to evaluate the potential role of exosomes released by ZIKV-infected Mø (Mø exo ZIKV) in cell-to-cell viral transmission. Mø exo ZIKV were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation and identified by nanoparticle tracking analysis, transmission electron microscopy, and cytofluorometry assays. Exosome isolates were purified from paramagnetic beads, and any viral particles or free RNA present were inactivated with UV radiation and degraded by RNase A, respectively. Our results support the conclusion that during in vitro ZIKV infection, activated intermediate Mø release exosomes that carry viral components as part of their cargo. The naïve-cell–exosomes interaction promotes viral transmission, infection, and cell differentiation/activation. Hence, the Mø exo ZIKV are an efficient alternative transmission route that may contribute to disease progression.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cell Cultures and Zika Virus StrainAedes albopictus mosquito C6/36 cells (ATCC CRL-1660, USA), Vero cells (ATCC CCL-81), and monocytes THP-1 (ATCC TIB-202) were maintained in Leibovitz L15 (Biowest, Riverside, MO, USA), DMEM (Biowest), and RPMI-1640 (Biowest) media, respectively, supplemented with 10% (v/v) of fetal bovine serum (FBS; Biowest), 2 mM L-glutamine (Biowest), and antibiotics (penicillin 100 U/mL, streptomycin 0.1 mg/mL, and amphotericin B 0.25 µg/mL; Biological Industries, Cromwell, CT, USA). The Leibovitz L15 medium also contained 10% tryptose phosphate broth (DIFCO, Lawrence, KS, USA). C6/36 cells were incubated at 28 °C without CO2, while Vero and THP-1 cells were incubated at 37 °C in 5% CO2. The ZIKV MR766 strain (GenBank Accession HQ234498.1) was used.2.2. Viral PropagationViral propagation was performed based on previous methods [33,34]. ZIKV was inoculated in C6/36 cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.5 for 7 days. Culture fluids were harvested by detachment through freeze-thaw thermal shock at 2 °C and by mechanical force with a cell scraper (Corning, Corning, NY, USA), then collected in sterile conical tubes (Corning). Samples were vortexed and clarified by centrifugation (GH3.8 rotor, Beckman GPR Centrifuge; Beckman Coulter, Inc., Brea, CA, USA) at 2000× g for 15 minutes (min) at 4 °C. Supernatants were filtered through a 0.22 µm pore (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA), centrifuged (SW28 rotor, Beckman XL-90 Ultracentrifuge, Beckman Coulter, Inc.) at 120,000× g for 2 hours (h) at 4 °C, and discarded. Pellets were resuspended in 5 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 1× and stored in 0.5 mL aliquots at −72 °C. Purity was confirmed by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA), detection of total viral RNA by agarose gel electrophoresis, viral RNA amplification by RT-PCR, and infectivity in Vero cells by immunofluorescence assays (Figure S1A–D).2.3. Viral Titration by Lytic Plaque AssaysConfluent Vero cell monolayers in 24-well culture plates (Corning) were each inoculated with 450 µL of viral dilution (10-fold serial dilutions) in FBS-free medium and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 2 h. Next, the dilutions were removed and the monolayers were overlaid with DMEM containing 1% carboxymethylcellulose (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 2.5% FBS. The cells were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 until plaques were observed through light-field microscopy (Olympus IX71 inverted microscope; Olympus Corp., Miami, FL, USA). The cells were fixed with 96% methanol (J.T.Baker, Mexico City, Mexico) on day 7 post-infection and stained with 1% crystal violet (Sigma-Aldrich). Viral titer was expressed as plaque-forming units (PFU) per mL (Figure S1E).2.4. Preparation of Fetal Bovine Serum Depleted of Extracellular Vesicles (FBS-dEV)Sterile conical tubes containing the FBS were centrifuged at 900× g for 10 min at 4 °C and filtered through a 0.22 µm pore. Samples were centrifuged at 120,000× g for 18 h at 4 °C, transferred to new sterile conical tubes, and stored at 2 °C until use [16].2.5. Monocyte Viral-Infection AssayMonocytes (Mø; 1.0 × 106) were seeded in 6-well culture plates (Corning), inoculated with ZIKV (MOI 1, 3, and 5) in FBS-free medium, and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 2 h. The cells were collected in sterile tubes, washed with PBS 1×, and centrifuged twice at 900× g at room temperature (rt) for 10 min. The cells were resuspended in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 5% FBS-dEV and incubated for 24, 48, 72, and 96 h.2.6. Detection of Viral E Protein by Immunofluorescence (IF) AssaysVero cells or Mø (2.5 × 105) were seeded in an 8-well chamber slide (Lab-Tek II; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA; Sigma-Aldrich) for 5 min at 4 °C, and washed with 2% bovine serum albumin (BSA; Biowest) in PBS 1×. Non-specific binding sites were blocked with 2% BSA in PBS for 30 min at rt, and the cells were then washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS. After the mouse anti-ZIKV ENV IgG1 antibody (identified as anti-E ZIKV) clone 1413267 (Table S1) was added (1:300), the cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C, then washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS. Next, the Alexa Fluor 555-conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (Table S1) was added (1:500). The cells were then incubated for 2 h at rt protected from light and washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS. Finally, the slide was covered with DAPI mounting medium (AAT Bioquest, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The mouse IgG1 antibody clone P3.6.2.8.1 (Table S1) was used as an isotype control. Observations were performed in an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope with a built-in Olympus DP72 digital camera; images were analyzed with ImageJ software version 1.50i (NIH, Bethesda, MA, USA).2.7. RNA Extraction, Purification, and QuantificationThe QIAamp RNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used as follows: samples were lysed under highly denaturing conditions with lysis buffer and 70% ethanol (J.T.Baker), vortexed at high speed, and incubated for 15 min at rt. The entire volume was placed in separation tubes containing mini-columns with RNA-adsorption membranes. Tubes were centrifuged at 2947× g (Eppendorf 5415 C centrifuge; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for 2 min at rt, and the filtrates were discarded. Then, membrane contaminants were washed with absorber waste buffers and centrifuged at 2947× g for 2 min at rt, and the filtrates were discarded. Finally, the elution buffer (0.4% sodium azide in RNase-free water) was added, and the tubes were centrifuged at 16,047× g for 2 min at rt. The RNA filtrates were collected in microcentrifuge tubes (Labcon, Petaluma, CA, USA) at 4 °C. RNA was quantified using the NanoDrop ND1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Samples were used immediately or stored at −72 °C until use.2.8. RNA Detection by End-Point Reverse Transcriptase-Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-PCR)Viral RNA amplification was performed based on previous protocols [26,35,36] using the OneStep RT-PCR kit (Qiagen). The primers for the conserved region of the E protein, ZIKV FW [5′-GCTGGDGCRGACACHGGRACT-3′] (Mfg. ID 275853243, Integrated DNA Technologies [IDT], San Diego, CA, USA) and ZIKV RV [5′-RTCYACYGCCATYTGGRCTG-3′] (Mfg. ID 275853246, IDT) were used. The 394 bp amplicon was visualized on a 2% ethidium bromide-stained 1.2% agarose gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Typhoon FLA 9500 scanner (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA).2.9. Detection of Viral Proteins and Cell Markers by FACSMonocytes (1.0 × 106) were collected, centrifuged at 900× g for 5 min at 4 °C, and fixed with 2% PFA for 5 min at 4 °C. Non-specific binding sites were blocked with 2% BSA in PBS 1× for 30 min at rt. For conjugated antibodies (Table S1), samples were suspended in 0.5% BSA in PBS containing the antibody (1:20), incubated for 30 min at rt while protected from light, washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS, centrifuged, and kept in 0.5% BSA in PBS at 4 °C. For primary antibodies (Table S1), cells were suspended in 0.5% BSA in PBS containing the antibody (1:300), incubated overnight at 4 °C, washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS, and centrifuged. Secondary antibody (1:500) was added, and the cells were incubated for 2 h, washed with 0.5% BSA in PBS, centrifuged, and kept in 0.5% BSA in PBS, protected from light. The FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) was used for analysis.2.10. Isolation of Monocyte Exosomes (Mø Exo) from Cell Culture Media by UltracentrifugationCell culture media were collected in sterile conical tubes and centrifuged at 900× g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatants were transferred to other tubes, and the cell pellets were discarded. Samples were centrifuged at 2000× g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatants were transferred to sterile ultracentrifuge tubes (25 × 89 mm, Beckman Coulter, Inc.) and centrifuged at 10,000× g at 4 °C for 35 min, and the cell debris was discarded. The supernatants were transferred to other sterile ultracentrifuge tubes, centrifuged at 120,000× g at 4 °C for 70 min, and discarded. The exosome pellets were resuspended in 10 mL of PBS 1× at 4 °C, incubated at rt for 30 min with 100 rpm agitation, and filtered using a 0.22 µm pore size. After the addition of 12.5 mL of PBS, the exosome suspension was centrifuged at 120,000× g for 70 min at 4 °C. Supernatants without EV (Non-EV SNT) were separated into aliquots and stored at −72 °C. Exosome pellets were suspended in 5 mL of PBS at 4 °C and either collected in sterile microcentrifuge tubes to be used immediately or stored at −72 °C.2.11. Exosome Quantification by Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA)Detection of nanoparticles <200 nm was performed using NanoSight NS300 equipment (Malvern Panalytical Products, Mexico City, Mexico) under the following conditions: camera level of 14, detection limit of 2, temperature of 20 °C, acquisition time of 90 seconds (s), and 3 consecutive repetitions in different fields. Samples were diluted 1:50 in PBS 1×. Polystyrene microspheres of 100 and 200 nm (NTA4088 and NTA4089, Malvern) were used (1:500) as controls.2.12. Exosome Coupling to Paramagnetic Beads for Detection of Exosomal Markers by FACSExosomes were coupled to anti-CD63-antibody-coated paramagnetic (pmag) beads (Catalog # 10606D, Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, suspensions of 100 µL of exosome isolates and 20 µL of pmag beads were added to sterile round-bottom microcentrifuge tubes (Labcon) and incubated for 18 h at 4 °C with 1000 rpm agitation. Pmag-bead-coupled exosomes were separated from the liquid matrix using the DynaMag-2 magnet (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and resuspended in 0.5% BSA in PBS 1× (Figure S2A) containing the specific antibodies (Table S1). For detection of conjugated anti-CD63 and anti-CD81 (1:20), the samples were incubated for 2 h at rt and kept in 0.5% BSA in PBS (Figure S2B). For detection of TSG101 and Alix, the samples were first fixed and permeabilized with 96% methanol (J.T.Baker) for 1 min at 4 °C and blocked with 3% BSA in PBS for 1 h at rt. For detection of primary antibodies (1:300), the samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C, suspended in 0.5% BSA in PBS containing the secondary antibody (1:500), incubated for 2 h at rt, and kept in 0.5% BSA in PBS (Figure S2C). The FACSCalibur flow cytometer was used for analysis.2.13. Morphological Characterization of Exosomes by Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)Sample preparation was performed as we described previously [26]. Briefly, exosome isolates were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde (EMS, Hatfield, PA, USA) and 4% PFA (1:1) for 2 h at rt. Post-fixation was performed with 2% osmium tetroxide (Alfa Aesar, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 90 min at rt, followed by triple washes with PBS, dehydration with ascending percentages of ethanol (30, 50, 70, 80, 90, and 96%), and triple washes in absolute ethanol (J.T.Baker) and propylene oxide (Sigma-Aldrich) at rt. Next, samples were incubated for 18 h at rt in propylene oxide and epoxy resin (1:1) and embedded in pure epoxy resin (EMS) at 60 °C for 48 h. Samples were cut into ultrathin sections (40–50 nm thickness), mounted on formvar (EMS)-covered copper grids, and contrasted with uranyl acetate (Merck) for 30 min and lead citrate (EMS) for 10 min at rt. Observations were performed in a transmission electron microscope (JEM1010, JEOL, Peabody, MA, USA) with an adapted CCD300-RC camera (DAGE-MTI, Michigan City, IN, USA).2.14. ZIKV Inactivation in Exosome IsolatesExosome isolates were treated with three cycles of UV light at 1200 µJ (×100) and RNase A (Thermo Fisher Scientific), as we described previously [26] (Figure S3A). After total RNA quantification, 10 µg/mL of RNase A was added to each sample and the samples were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C. The RNase inhibitor RNaseOUT (40 U/µL; Invitrogen) was added in a 1:1 ratio with RNase A volume. Samples were incubated for 15 min at 37 °C, kept at 4 °C, and identified as Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV).2.15. Exosome Purification by Uncoupling from Paramagnetic BeadsWe developed the following protocol for exosome recovery (Figure S3B) based on the manufacturer’s indications that the binding affinity of the pmag beads for their coupled exosomes decreases with vigorous vortexing. Briefly, pmag-bead-coupled exosome suspensions were suspended in PBS 1×, homogenized by pipetting, high-speed vortexed for 2 min at rt, centrifuged at 16,047× g for 20 s at rt, and vortexed at high speed for 2 min at rt. After the pmag beads were removed using a magnet, the supernatants (containing uncoupled exosomes) were transferred to sterile microcentrifuge tubes, homogenized by pipetting, kept at 4 °C, and identified as purified Mø exo ZIKV (Mø exo ZIKVp).2.16. Detection of Viral E and NS1 Proteins in Paramagnetic-Bead-Coupled Exosomes by FACSParamagnetic-bead-coupled exosomes were fixed with 2% PFA for 5 min at 4 °C, and the non-specific binding sites were blocked with 3% BSA in PBS 1× for 1 h at rt. Samples were suspended in 0.5% BSA in PBS containing the specific primary antibody (1:300) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Samples were suspended in 0.5% BSA in PBS containing the secondary antibody (1:500), incubated for 2 h at rt while protected from light, and kept in 0.5% BSA in PBS. The FACSCalibur flow cytometer was used for analysis.2.17. Detection of Viral E and NS1 Proteins by Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)Exosome isolates suspended in a carbonate buffer solution (pH 9.6) were added (100 µL/well) to a flat-bottomed 96-well polystyrene plate (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The wells were rinsed 3 times with 0.02% Tween 20 (Sigma Aldrich) washing solution in PBS 1×. The non-specific binding sites were blocked with 3% BSA in PBS and incubated for 1 h at rt. The primary antibody (1:300) was added and incubated overnight at 4 °C. The wells were rinsed 3 times, and 0.5% BSA in PBS containing the peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG1 antibody (Catalog #AP124P, Sigma Aldrich; 1:500) was added. The samples were then incubated for 2 h at rt. After rinsing, the substrate solution [phosphate-citrate buffer pH 5.0, o-phenylenediamine (Sigma Aldrich), and H2O2 (J.T.Baker)] were added, and the samples were incubated for 15 min at rt while protected from light. Finally, 0.1 M H2SO4 (J.T.Baker) was used to stop the reaction. Absorbances at 492 nm were determined. The cut-off point was defined as double the average absorbance value of the negative controls, and absorbances greater than the cut-off point were interpreted as positive.2.18. Evaluation of Exosome Capacity for Viral Transmission by Lytic Plaque AssayExosome samples in serial 10-fold dilutions were prepared in non-supplemented DMEM. Lytic plaque assays were performed as described in Section 2.3.2.19. Exosome Staining with Calcein AMParamagnetic-bead-coupled exosomes were suspended in 1 µM Calcein red-orange AM solution (Catalog # C34851, Invitrogen) and incubated for 20 min at 37 °C, protected from light. Fluorescence detection was performed in the FACSCalibur flow cytometer.2.20. Quantification of Exosome Proteins by the Micro-BCA AssayProtein quantification was performed according to the specifications of the Micro-BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The calibration curve was prepared in serial 1:2 dilutions from 2 mg/mL BSA in PBS 1× solution. Exosome samples (150 µL) were added to a flat-bottomed 96-well microtiter plate. Next, the reagent (150 µL) was added and the samples were incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. Absorbances at 562 nm were determined.2.21. Evaluation of the Exosome–Naïve-Vero-Cell Interaction by IFCalcein AM-stained pmag-bead-coupled exosomes were mechanically uncoupled as described in Section 2.15. Confluent Vero cell monolayers that had been seeded in an 8-well separation chamber slide were stimulated with 1.0 mg of total protein from Calcein AM-stained exosomes, maintained in DMEM with 5% FBS-dEV, and incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 for 6 h. Cell fixation, blocking, and ZIKV detection were performed as described in Section 2.6. The Olympus IX71 inverted microscope was used for analysis.2.22. Evaluation of the Exosome–Naïve Monocyte Interaction by FACSMonocytes (1.0 × 106) were stimulated with 1.0 mg of total protein from Calcein AM-stained exosomes, maintained in RPMI-1640 with 5% FBS-dEV, and incubated for 2, 6, 12, and 24 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Cells were fixed with 2% PFA for 5 min at 4 °C. Fluorescence detection was performed in the FACSCalibur flow cytometer.2.23. Exosome- Stimulation Assays with Naïve Mø and Detection of Virus and Cell Markers by FACSMonocytes (1.0 × 106 cells) were stimulated with 1.0 mg of total exosome protein, maintained in a non-supplemented RPMI-1640 medium, and incubated for 2 h at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Then, 5% FBS-dEV-supplemented medium was added, and the samples were incubated for 96 h at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Cells were collected by scraping and pipetting homogenization in sterile microcentrifuge tubes and treated as described in Section 2.9.2.24. Statistical AnalysisAll values are presented as the mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was conducted using GraphPad Prism software version 9.5.0 (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Multiple comparisons were assessed by one-way ANOVA with previous verification of data normality by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The Dunnett T3 test was performed to compare treatments vs. control. Statistical significance is denoted as follows: * when p < 0.05, ** when p < 0.01, and *** when p < 0.0001.3. Results3.1. ZIKV Infection Induces the Differentiation and Activation of Human Monocytes We determined the best conditions for monocyte (Mø) infection using the purified ZIKV stock. We found that Mø exposed to ZIKV MOI 1, 3, or 5 present the viral E protein on their membranes and that viral mRNA transcripts can be detected 24 h p.i. (Figure S4), indicating active infection. We selected MOI 1 as the infective dose, and the Mø were incubated for 24, 48, 72, and 96 h post-infection (p.i.) to quantify the viral E protein and non-structural protein 1 (NS1) in cell membranes (Figure 1).The levels of E protein increased significantly (p < 0.0001) over time in infected cells compared to uninfected cells (Control Mø). We detected the highest levels at 96 h p.i., when 86.2 ± 3.4% of cells were positive (Figure 1A,B). In the same way, the detected levels of the NS1 protein increased significantly (p < 0.0001) during the evaluation period in infected cells compared to Control Mø. The maximum detected levels were reached at 96 h p.i., when 70.9 ± 2.3% of cells were positive for the NS1 protein (Figure 1C,D). The mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) values are shown in Figure S5.The levels of the E protein were approximately 1.2-fold higher than those of NS1 protein at 96 h p.i. None of the viral proteins was detected in Control cells. The presence of the E protein in the cell membranes may indicate virion adherence before internalization or the presence of new viral progeny being released. Detection of the NS1 protein in the cell membranes is also indicative of active replication, as we used a purified stock. The presence of NS1 on the surface of ZIKV-infected cells has been described previously; however, its role in Zika pathogenesis is not well established, unlike that of the extracellularly secreted form, which is known to be an important virulence factor and which, like the E protein, is one of the major targets for neutralizing and protective antibodies [37,38].We then evaluated the Mø response to ZIKV infection by detecting different membrane markers of cell differentiation and activation, as those are processes during which exosomes could be released (Figure 2 and Figure S6).We evaluated the CD14 and CD16 profiles (Figure 2A,B and Figure S6A,B) and found that Control Mø expressed basally high CD14 levels (85.4 ± 5.1%) but very low CD16 levels (1.8 ± 0.5%). Thus, in our model, the classical monocyte phenotype predominated. After ZIKV infection, we detected a significant increase in the percentage values of Mø that were CD14+ (p < 0.05), with the highest levels at 96 h p.i. (95.1 ± 2.0%). Similarly, we observed an upward trend in CD16 levels up to 96 h p.i., when 12.9 ± 1.0% of Mø were positive. The increase in the percentage of Mø that were CD16+ was significant (p < 0.01) from 24 h p.i. The percentages of ZIKV-infected Mø positive for CD14 and CD16 at 96 h p.i. increased by 1.1- and 7.0-high fold, respectively, compared with baseline. Our findings suggest that the ZIKV infection promotes Mø differentiation from the classical to the intermediate phenotype.Intermediate Mø are important mediators during acute inflammation [39], so we evaluated multiple antibodies (CD11b, CD11c, CD80, and CD86) in a panel to quantify their degrees of activation (Figure 2C–F and Figure S6C–F).We determined that uninfected Mø had very low CD11b levels (2.1 ± 0.2%) and that this value increases during ZIKV infection up to 96 h p.i. (90.1 ± 3.4%) (Figure 2C and Figure S6C). The percentages of Mø positive for CD11b were significantly (p < 0.0001) higher after 24 h p.i. At 96 h, the CD11b levels were 43.3-fold higher compared with the Control Mø. Likewise, we found that Control Mø had low CD11c levels (6.4 ± 0.6%), which also increased during viral infection up to 96 h p.i. (96.7 ± 2.3%) (Figure 2D and Figure S6D). The percentages of Mø positive for CD11c were significantly different from the control (p < 0.01) after 24 h p.i. At 96 h, the CD11c levels increased by 15.2 times compared with the Control Mø. These results indicate that ZIKV-infected monocytes are activated, expressing a pro-adherent phenotype potentially polarized to a proinflammatory state [40].In infectious processes, intermediate Mø express costimulatory molecules (CD80 and CD86) that give them the ability to act as mediators of the cellular immune response through antigenic presentation [41]. We detected moderate CD80 levels in Control Mø (28.3 ± 5.3%). Following ZIKV infection, we detected increasing CD80 levels (p < 0.0001) up to 96 h p.i. (87.7 ± 4.1%) (Figure 2E and Figure S6E). The number of positive cells was 3.1-fold higher compared with Control Mø. In parallel, we found that low CD86 levels were detected in the uninfected Mø (13.2 ± 2.7%). The maximum level detected was observed at 24 h p.i. (60.0 ± 2.8%; p < 0.0001), with a sustained decrease after 48 h p.i., indicating that this molecule could be an earlier activation marker (Figure 2F and Figure S6F). At 24 h p.i., CD86 levels had increased 4.6 times compared with uninfected cells. The MFI values are shown in Figure S7.Our findings suggest that, during ZIKV infection, human monocytes differentiate from the classical to the intermediate phenotype and that they enter an activated state that is maintained up to 96 h p.i., with detectable levels of CD11b, CD11c, CD80, CD86, and viral E/NS1 proteins.3.2. Activated Intermediate Monocytes Translocate Endosomal-Trafficking-Associated Proteins and Release ExosomesWe evaluated the levels of tetraspanins (CD63/CD81) and ESCRT-associated protein (TSG101/Alix) in the membranes of ZIKV-infected Mø to elucidate their behavior at 96 h p.i. and its possible relationship with exosome release (Figure 3 and Figure S8).The tetraspanin CD63 regulates intracellular protein trafficking, and due to its abundance in cellular membranes, it is considered one of the main exosome markers [42,43]. We found that CD63 is present on Mø membranes at baseline (98.7 ± 0.9%; MFI = 802.4 ± 6.2) and that during ZIKV infection, the percentage of positive cells remained stable (>90%; Figure 3A and Figure S8A). However, a pattern of decreasing MFI values was observed (Figure 3B). The MFI value at 96 h p.i. was 2.6 times lower than that of uninfected monocytes (p < 0.0001), equivalent to a 38.9% reduction compared with the baseline. Our findings demonstrate that in ZIKV-infected Mø, CD63 internalization occurs; this process could be involved in exosome biogenesis, as previously described [44].The tetraspanin CD81 participates mainly in cell adhesion, and because of its abundance in the plasma membrane, it contributes to early endosome formation, so it is also an exosome marker [45]. In Control Mø, we found a 99.0% ± 0.8% (MFI = 582.1 ± 12.0) positivity rate for CD81, with no changes observed in the ZIKV-infected Mø; however, MFI values increased from 24 h p.i. (MFI = 664.3 ± 17.0), reaching a maximum at 48 h p.i. (MFI = 822.7 ± 11.3, p < 0.0001) and remaining stable at 72–96 h p.i. (Figure 3C,D and Figure S8B). These findings suggest that more CD81 molecules are expressed on the membranes of ZIKV-infected monocyte (~1.4-fold increase); this change could explain the formation of syncytia (refer to Figure S4A) and thus the efficient cell-to-cell ZIKV infection indicated by the high percentages of cells positive for the viral E and NS1 proteins (refer to Figure 1).TSG101 and Alix are also vesicular-traffic regulators associated with ESCRT, and their detection in exosomes isolates demonstrates their endosomal origin [46]. As expected, we found that uninfected monocytes do not basally express TSG101 (1.3 ± 0.3%; MFI = 10.9 ± 2.0) or Alix (2.2 ± 0.3%; MFI = 12.1 ± 1.9) on their membranes (Figure 3E–H and Figure S8C,D). After ZIKV infection, we detected the presence of TSG101 at the cell membrane from 24 h p.i. The maximum level was observed at 48 h p.i. (79.8 ± 3.2%; MFI = 23.9 ± 2.3, p < 0.0001), having increased by 63.4 and 2.2 times in percentage and MFI values, respectively, compared with those of the Control Mø. In parallel, we observed that Alix levels increased significantly from 24 h p.i. (89.7 ± 2.7%; MFI = 27.7 ± 1.9; p < 0.0001) and that the percentage rate and MFI values were 41- and 2.3-fold higher, respectively, compared with those of the Control Mø. The presence of TSG101 and Alix, complexed with the NS3 protein, on the membranes of cells infected with some flaviviruses has been found to be necessary for viral release [47,48,49], while TSG101 translocation is also a repair mechanism for the plasma membrane, which could be damaged as a result of infection [50]. These results are consistent with active ZIKV replication in Mø in our model.Our findings show that ZIKV-infected monocytes display a dynamic of internalization (CD63) and translocation to the plasma membrane (CD81, TSG101, and Alix) of proteins with vesicular-trafficking functions starting at 24 h p.i. This pattern could be related to viral replication and exosome biogenesis. Considering the levels of cell differentiation and activation (refer to Figure 2), we established a time range of 72–96 h p.i. for exosome isolation, characterization, and identification.Exosomes (Mø exo Control and Mø exo ZIKV) were isolated by differential ultracentrifugation from culture media containing 2.0 × 107 uninfected monocytes and ZIKV-infected monocytes, respectively (Figure 4).From the NTA data, we found that heterogeneous populations of nanoparticles <200 nm are released, a result consistent with exosome sizes. In exosomes from Control cell (Mø exo Control) isolates, we identified a concentration of 4.8 × 109 ± 2.7 × 108 particles/mL, with an average size of 139 ± 33 nm (Figure 4A), and in Mø exo ZIKV isolates, we found concentrations of 4.1 × 1010 ± 1.1 × 109 particles/mL, with an average size of 152 ± 55 nm (Figure 4B). This result indicates that during ZIKV infection, the amount of nanoparticles released is significantly increased (p < 0.001) and the size of these particles becomes 1.1-fold greater. In Mø exo ZIKV isolates, we identified a peak around 70 nm that corresponds to a concentration of 5.0 × 106 particles/mL, 0.01% of the total population. This could represent exosomes mixed with viral particles (Figure S1A: NTA of purified ZIKV stock). We characterized exosome isolates morphologically by TEM and found heterogeneous populations of cup-shaped extracellular vesicles with well-defined lipid bilayers and sizes <200 nm (Figure 4C).The endosomal origin of the EV isolates was confirmed performed by detection of CD63, CD81, TSG101, and Alix before coupling with the pmag beads (Figure S2). We found that 51.0 ± 2.7% of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV and the 20.9 ± 3.2% of the pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo Control were CD63+ (Figure 4D and Figure S9A). For CD81, 69.6 ± 4.0% of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV and 57.1 ± 5.1% of Control isolates were positive (Figure 4E and Figure S9B). The percentages of Mø exo ZIKV CD63+ and CD81+ were increased (2.4- and 1.2-fold higher, respectively) compared with the Control, suggesting high membrane enrichment.Pmag-bead-coupled exosomes were fixed and permeabilized with 96% methanol for TSG101 and Alix detection. We found that 40.0 ± 3.3% of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV and 28.1 ± 2.9% of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo Control were TSG101+ (Figure 4F and Figure S9C), whereas 30.8 ± 5.0% of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV and 12.5 ± 2.8% of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo Control were Alix+ (Figure 4G and Figure S9D). The percentages of Mø exo ZIKV that were TSG101+ and Alix+ were greater than the corresponding values for the Control (1.4 and 2.5 times, respectively), a result also suggestive of endosomal protein enrichment. The MFI values are shown in Figure S10.These findings demonstrate that ZIKV-infected monocytes release abundant exosomes that are 1.1-fold larger and enriched with CD63, CD81, TSG101, and Alix compared with exosomes released basally under normal conditions.3.3. ZIKV-Infected Monocyte Exosomes Carry Viral ElementsWe analyzed the Mø exo ZIKV TEM images and observed compact, electron-dense structures inside that were not found in the Control images. These structures were suggestive of the presence of virus-like particles inside the exosomes (Figure 5A), so we wondered whether the exosomes might contain viral elements and thus play a role in viral transmission.Next, we evaluated whether the viral E and NS1 proteins could be detected in the pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV isolates. In our previous work, we demonstrated that ZIKV does not cross-react with the anti-CD63-coated paramagnetic beads [26]. Therefore, any viral components detected would be part of the exosome membranes. We found that 29.1 ± 3.3% and 13.4 ± 2.6% of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV were positive for ZIKV E and NS1 protein, respectively (Figure 5B,C and Figure S11A,B); these proteins were not detected in the Control isolates and the samples evaluated as isotype control. These findings indicate that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes can carry viral elements. The MFI values are shown in Figure S12.According to the results of the NTA, wherein we identified a peak of exosomes mixed with viral particles (refer to Figure 4B), we included an additional step in our experimental design: Mø exo ZIKV isolates were treated to reduce the number of ZIKV virions and purify exosomes (refer to Figure S3) before the exosome function was evaluated in our in vitro model. The Mø exo ZIKV isolates treated with UV and RNase A were identified as Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV), while those isolates purified by mechanical uncoupling from the pmag beads were identified as Mø exo ZIKVp. To verify the performance of the treatments, we tested for free viral RNA in the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) and Mø exo ZIKVp isolates through agarose gel electrophoresis (Figure 5D). A visible band of approximately 11 kb, comparable to that in the positive control, was observed in the untreated Mø exo ZIKV isolates, indicating that during differential ultracentrifugation, the viral RNA precipitates. This band was not observed in the Mø exo ZIKVp isolates, and a degraded pattern was detected in the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) isolates. These results demonstrate that the treatments eliminate free viral RNA.We evaluated (by NTA) the degree to which the treated exosomes’ quantity and size were preserved to identify whether significant losses occur that could compromise their functionality in viral transmission. In the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) isolates, a concentration of 2.1 × 109 ± 2.0 × 108 particles/mL, with a mean size of 153.3 ± 46.3 nm, was detected (Figure 5E). We observed a significant decrease in the EV population mixed with viral particles compared with the population identified in the Mø exo ZIKV isolates (Figure 4B). We did not identify any change in average size, which suggests the maintenance of structural integrity. For the Mø exo ZIKVp isolates, a concentration of 2.6 × 108 ± 2.2 × 107 particles/mL with a mean size of 133.5 ± 36.7 nm was observed (Figure 5F). For these isolates, we did not find a peak compatible with exosome populations mixed with ZIKV virions. These results suggest that treatment with RNase A and UV radiation, as well as mechanical uncoupling from paramagnetic beads, efficiently reduces the amounts of infectious virions or genomic RNA that may interfere with the functionality assays.Having demonstrated the preservation of treated exosomes, we confirmed the presence of viral E and NS1 proteins in the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) and Mø exo ZIKVp isolates by ELISA (Figure 5G,H). For the E protein, we used the ZIKV stock samples as a positive control (OD492nm = 0.96 ± 0.10), representing 100% positivity. The OD492nm values for the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) and Mø exo ZIKVp isolates were 0.33 ± 0.04 and 0.50 ± 0.04, corresponding to positivity rates of 34.6% and 51.8%, respectively. We obtained a positivity rate of 97.1% for the untreated Mø exo ZIKV isolates, which corresponds to the E protein detection from ZIKV virions and the EV population, while in the Mø exo Control and Non-EV SNT (last centrifugation supernatant from the Mø exo ZIKV isolation) samples, the E protein was not detected (Figure 5G).As expected, the NS1 protein was not detected in the ZIKV stock samples, so we used ZIKV-infected Mø lysates as positive controls (OD492nm = 0.86 ± 0.07; 100% of positivity). We found positivity rates of 28.8% (OD492nm = 0.25 ± 0.05) and 34.7% (OD492nm = 0.30 ± 0.04) for Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) and Mø exo ZIKVp samples, respectively. For the untreated Mø exo ZIKV isolates, the positivity rate was 67.3%, while the NS1 protein was not detected in the Mø exo Control and Non-EV SNT samples (Figure 5H). The positivity percentages for the E and NS1 protein in the exosome-treated samples were statistically significant (p < 0.0001) when compared with the negative control.The results above demonstrate that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes carry viral E and NS1 proteins. These findings are relevant because the purification treatments reduced the levels of viral components without structural damage to the exosomes; therefore, these Mø exo ZIKV could function as vehicles transferring viral components that favor ZIKV transmission and infection.In parallel, we evaluated the expression of ZIKV genomic RNA transcripts, specifically of the conserved region that codes for the E protein, in the treated Mø exo ZIKV isolates. For this purpose, the samples were lysed under highly denaturing conditions that induced membrane rupture to release RNA for detection by RT-PCR (Figure 5I). We identified intense visible bands of the 364 bp amplicon from the Mø exo ZIKV isolates and the ZIKV stock (positive control) samples, moderately visible bands from the Mø exo ZIKVp isolates, and slightly visible bands from the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) samples. No visible bands were identified from the Mø exo Control and Non-EV SNT samples. These findings show that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes carry viral genomic RNA as part of their cargo.Therefore, our results indicate that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes carry viral components such as the viral E and NS1 proteins, as well as viral genomic RNA. Along with the suggestive images of virus-like particles inside the exosomes, these results allow us to postulate that the exosomes serve as ZIKV vehicles.3.4. Exosomes from ZIKV-Infected Monocytes Interact with Naïve CellsGiven the possibility that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes carry viral elements, we evaluated their potential to promote viral transmission and infection through interaction with naïve cells (Figure 6).We performed lytic plaque assays on confluent Vero cell monolayers. Cells were inoculated with serial dilutions of the different treatments of the Mø exo ZIKV and Mø exo Control samples (Figure 6A). Plaque formation was observed on day 5 post-stimulus with Mø exo ZIKV and ZIKV (MOI 1) and from day 8 post-stimulus with Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) and Mø exo ZIKVp. Lytic plaques were detected up to dilutions of 10−7 for untreated Mø exo ZIKV, 10−2 for Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV), and 10−5 for Mø exo ZIKVp, indicating transmitted infectious ZIKV titers of 3.7 × 107 ± 1.9 × 107 PFU/mL, 1.4 × 103 ± 4.9 × 102 PFU/mL, and 1.6 × 106 ± 7.1 × 105 PFU/mL, respectively. For the Mø exo Control and Non-EV SNT samples, no lytic plaques were observed (Figure 6B). These findings demonstrate the ability of purified exosomes to transmit infectious viral particles. The infection (identified by lytic plaque formation after UV radiation, RNase A assays, or pmag-bead-uncoupling treatments) suggests that exosomes protect the infective components from degradation by physical or chemical treatments.To demonstrate that exosomes, by transferring viral RNA or complete viral particles, facilitate viral transmission through their interaction with naïve cells, we performed stimulation assays wherein exosome isolates were stained with Calcein AM. Calcein AM is a non-fluorescent compound that forms a fluorescent anion when it is hydrolyzed by intracellular esterases. As it is known that exosomes contain esterases, this stain can be used to detect for intact EV [51]. Hence, we evaluated the Calcein AM labeling of the pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV and Mø exo Control to verify that exosomes can be detected by FACS (Figure 6C and Figure S13A). We found that 31.2 ± 3.1% (p < 0.0001) of pmag-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV fluoresced, while 22.0 ± 2.6% (p < 0.0001) of the coupled Mø exo Control fluoresced. No fluorescence emission was identified from uncoupled paramagnetic beads stained with Calcein AM, indicating that non-specific fluorescence did not occur. The MFI values are shown in Figure S14A.In parallel, we found that the Mø exo ZIKVp and Mø exo Control interacted with naïve Vero cells. We observed the presence of viral particles in the Mø exo ZIKVp isolates, which confirmed that the exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes carry viral elements, making them efficient vehicles for viral transmission (Figure 6D).Exosomes can interact with recipient cells through multiple pathways. These interactions allow exosomes to mediate intercellular communication and induce changes in cell phenotype [18,19]. To evaluate the interaction between exosomes and naïve Mø, we performed stimulation assays using uncoupled Calcein AM-labeled exosomes on naïve (unlabeled) cells and then quantified their fluorescence emission by FACS (Figure 6E,F and Figure S13B,C). We found that the maximum fluorescence peak, associated with the interaction between Calcein AM-labeled exosomes and naïve Mø, occurred 6 h post-stimulation in the cells stimulated with Mø exo ZIKVp (20.2 ± 2.9%; p < 0.0001), as well as in those stimulated by the Mø exo Control (14.5 ± 1.3%; p < 0.0001); however, fluorescence was detected from 2 h post- stimulation. After 6 h, the MFI values decreased, and at 24 h, the values were similar to those detected at 2 h, suggesting that internalization potentially occurred. The MFI values are shown in Figure S14B,C.These findings demonstrate that interaction between exosomes and naïve cells occurs and that exosome internalization may favor viral transmission and infection.3.5. Exosome Interaction Favors Infection, Differentiation, and Activation of Naïve MonocytesAfter we demonstrated the interaction between exosomes and naïve monocytes, we evaluated the viral infection of these cells by quantifying the ZIKV E and NS1 protein levels after incubation for 96 h (Figure 7).We found that naïve monocytes stimulated with Mø exo ZIKVp and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase + UV) present significant E protein levels (p < 0.0001), with this protein detected in 68.4 ± 3.2% and 58.7 ± 4.3% of cells, respectively (Figure 7A,B). The E protein was not detected in monocytes stimulated with Mø exo Control (2.1 ± 0.2%) and Non-EV SNT (2.9 ± 0.2%). In untreated Mø exo ZIKV-stimulated monocytes or ZIKV-infected Mø, which were used as positive controls, the E protein was detected in more than 70% of the cells.We also found that Mø exo ZIKVp- and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase + UV)-stimulated monocytes presented significantly high levels of the NS1 protein (p < 0.0001), with this protein detected in 49.6 ± 7.4% and 31.6 ± 6.3% of cells, respectively. The NS1 protein was not detected in cells stimulated with Mø exo Control (1.6% ± 0.4%) and Non-EV SNT (3.8% ± 0.8%). In the positive controls, this protein was detected in more than 61% of the monocytes (Figure 7C,D). The MFI values are shown in Figure S15.Our results suggest that stimulation with treated Mø exo ZIKV promotes active infection in naïve monocytes, as demonstrated by the high levels of the viral E and NS1 proteins. Therefore, exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes are an efficient alternative mechanism for viral transmission, acting as Trojan horses that facilitate viral infection in a receptor-independent manner.Finally, we evaluated how the naïve monocytes respond to the different exosome isolates stimulation, using detection of the markers CD14, CD16, CD11b, CD11c, CD80, and CD86 to determine the degrees of differentiation and activation (Figure 8).We found that 96.3 ± 3.6% and 95.5 ± 3.2% of the Mø exo ZIKVp- and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV)-stimulated cells, respectively, were CD14-positive (Figure 8A and Figure S16A), while 10.6 ± 0.5% of the Mø exo ZIKVp-stimulated monocytes and 8.4 ± 0.6% of the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV)-stimulated cells were CD16-positive (Figure 8B and Figure S16B). The rate of positivity for CD14 was 1.1-fold higher after Mø exo ZIKVp stimulation (p < 0.01). CD16 levels increased 3.7- and 2.9-fold after Mø exo ZIKVp and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) stimulation (p < 0.0001 and p < 0.01, respectively) compared with control cells. In terms of MFI values, we found increases of 2.2- and 2.0-fold for Mø exo ZIKVp- and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV)-stimulated cells, indicating that the amount of CD16 increased on the membranes of stimulated cells compared to those of unstimulated cells (The MFI values are shown in Figure S17). The positivity rates in the untreated Mø exo ZIKV isolate-stimulated and ZIKV (MOI 1)-infected cells, which were used as positive controls, were >97% for CD14 and >13% for CD16. These results demonstrate that stimulations with exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes promotes cell differentiation from the classical to the intermediate phenotype.Exosome interactions also induce cell activation (Figure 8C,D and Figure S16C,D). We found that 77.4 ± 2.2% and 76.2 ± 2.5% of the Mø exo ZIKVp- and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV)-stimulated naïve monocytes were CD11b-positive, respectively, while 37.9 ± 1.3% and 36.8 ± 1.0% were CD11c-positive. The observed rates of CD11b and CD11c positivity were >25 and >10.2 times higher (p < 0.0001), respectively, compared with Control Mø. For the positive controls, CD11b was detected in >94% and CD11c in >77% of cells.Also, we found that 69.4 ± 1.6% and 47.9 ± 1.9% of Mø exo ZIKVp- and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV)-stimulated monocytes were CD80+, respectively, while 49.5 ± 1.6% and 22.6 ± 1.8% (MFI = 20.5 ± 1.5) were CD86+ (Figure 8E,F and Figure S16E,F). For cells exposed to Mø exo ZIKVp stimuli, the CD80 levels were 5.5 times higher (p < 0.0001) and CD86 levels were 3.2-fold higher (p < 0.0001) compared with control cells. For Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) stimuli, the CD80 and CD86 levels were 3.5 and 1.4 times higher, respectively (p < 0.0001) compared with control cells. Among the positive controls, >77% were CD80+, and >50% CD86+.These results suggest that stimulation with exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes containing viral components also induce the differentiation and activation of naïve cells. Given that they can also facilitate infection, these exosomes may promote a long infection–activation–infection cycle with constant exosome release potentially contributing to an inflammatory state, wherein ZIKV is “silently” transmitted between the host cells. This mechanism also should be considered a relevant form of non-vectorial transmission in the pathogenesis of Zika fever.4. DiscussionThe incidence of diseases caused by arboviruses continues to rise worldwide, and these diseases have expanded to new areas. Arboviruses represent a significant public health challenge because of the high rates of severe clinical outcomes and the continuous potential to cause epidemic outbreaks. Mosquito-borne flaviviruses have spread rapidly due to climate change and are characterized by highly virulent circulating strains, urban-cycle-adapted vectors, and susceptible human hosts, of whom up to 400 million are infected annually [52,53,54].The recent Zika virus epidemic in the Americas (2015–2016), which was declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern, evidenced the mosquito vectors’ wide distribution and the possibility of non-vectorial viral transmission as part of the pathogenesis of Zika fever [7,8,9,55,56]. Knowledge of the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying virus-host interactions, including the essential role of EV in the, is important to understanding viral transmission and disease progression, especially for the severe forms mainly characterized by neurological alterations [57]. It is known that EV have a role in facilitating arbovirus transmission between arthropod cells and from arthropod cells to mammalian cells [58]. Hence, they represent a key mechanism of vectorial transmission and disease establishment. Previously, we demonstrated that EV from ZIKV-infected mosquito cells transferred viral components to human monocytes and endothelial vascular cells, facilitating infection and modifying the cells’ behavior, which allowed us to conclude that EV participate in ZIKV vectorial transmission [26]. The role of EV in the flaviviruses’ vectorial transmission has been described for DENV and the Langat virus (LGTV, closely related to tick-borne encephalitis virus) [22,23,24,59].The concern about non-vectorial transmission, including person-to-person transmission, is that this mechanism could limit ZIKV clearance or promote evasion of the immune response, both effects that are directly involved in severe clinical outcomes of Zika fever. In human hosts, ZIKV has broad cell tropism as part of its replicative cycle; however, monocytes are the primary targets [11,12,13,14,15]. Monocytes’ function is essential for pathogen control and elimination, but dysregulation of their activity may contribute to inflammatory and degenerative diseases. According to published findings, in response to infection, monocytes release humoral factors and EV as differentiation/activation products and thus could be an alternative mechanism for viral transmission. Based on the “Trojan exosome” hypothesis, the replicative cycle of RNA viruses and exosome biogenesis may converge, allowing exosomes to serve as carriers of viral components [14,20,21,60,61]. Therefore, exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes may be required for ZIKV transmission and infection within human tissues as part of the non-vectorial viral-transmission pathway.In this study, we evaluated whether exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes participate in ZIKV cell-to-cell transmission through the transfer of viral RNA or through allowing viruses to infect cells via receptor-independent pathways, enhancing viral replicative capability as well as modulating cell responses. In these respects, monocytes would constitute an effective alternative mode of propagation. We found that ZIKV infection induces monocyte differentiation and activation (Figure 1 and Figure 2), including the release of high amounts of exosomes. It is known that intermediate monocyte subpopulations increase in Zika fever patients, and these cells are permissive to infection and contain viral RNA, suggesting that they act as viral reservoirs. In this sense, flaviviruses like ZIKV, DENV, and WNV share the strategy of using monocytes as Trojan horses that allow the viruses to spread to immunologically privileged tissues [11,12,13]. Our results showed that intermediate-activated monocytes, in response to ZIKV infection, exhibited adhesion (CD11b+ CD11c+) properties and expressed co-stimulatory molecules (CD80+ CD86+). This profile may promote early innate immune changes to induce an inflammatory state and contribute to cellular responses in the human host. We also found that monocyte ZIKV infection induced tetraspanin CD63 internalization and translocation of tetraspanin CD81 and ESCRT-associated proteins TSG101 and Alix to the plasma membrane (Figure 3). These changes may be associated with the viral replicative cycle and EV release. We identified a reduction of 38.9% in CD63 levels (MFI values) in ZIKV-infected monocytes at 96 h p.i. This behavior has been described as a cellular signal associated with virions and EV release [44]. It is known that tetraspanins are necessary for the entry and budding of various viruses (e.g., hepatitis C virus, a Flaviviridae family member, requires CD81 to infect hepatocytes), and the interactions between TSG101 and Alix and flavivirus (DENV, YFV, and JEV) proteins serve as key signals to promote viral release. Translocation of these cellular proteins is also associated with repair mechanisms in infected cells [47,48,49,50,62,63]. In this study, we identified low levels of CD63 and high levels of CD81, TSG101, and Alix on the membranes of ZIKV-infected monocytes as a molecular profile that could be associated with the convergence of the ZIKV replicative cycle and exosome biogenesis.As mentioned earlier, ZIKV-infected monocytes can be Trojan horses that allow the virus access to immunologically privileged tissues, and thus EV release can also contribute to ZIKV cell-to-cell transmission and infection, as well as to promoting a proinflammatory state, making EV release as an effective part of the non-vector transmission pathway. In the present work, we isolated exosomes from the culture media of intermediate-activated ZIKV-infected monocytes at 72–96 h p.i. (Figure 4). Differential ultracentrifugation allowed us to obtain large amounts of exosomes. Paramagnetic-bead-based isolation was used for exosome identification, and characterization was carried out by NTA and TEM. ZIKV-infected monocytes release heterogeneous populations of CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+ exosomes (Mø exo ZIKV) in concentrations of ~4.1 × 1010 particles/mL with an average size of 152 nm. The Mø exo ZIKV were 1.1-fold larger than the exosomes released by uninfected cells, and the detection of tetraspanins and ESCRT-associated proteins demonstrated their endosomal origin. Other studies of exosomes in DENV- and JEV-infected monocytes, macrophages, or dendritic cells have described the release of large amounts of CD63+ exosomes with an average size of 30–120 nm, isolated from culture media at 72–120 h p.i. [25,32,64]. As the function of monocyte exosomes has not previously been described for ZIKV infection, this study represents the first such characterization.It has been proposed that the size variation in the EV from infected cells could be due to the incorporation of viral components as internal content [23]. We analyzed the Mø exo ZIKV TEM images and observed that the cup-shaped exosomes contained some compact electron-dense structures that were not found in the images of uninfected Mø exosome. Therefore, we evaluated the presence of viral elements at the membranes of Mø exo ZIKV (Figure 5). First, we found that ~29.1% and ~13.4% of paramagnetic-bead-coupled Mø exo ZIKV were positive for ZIKV E and NS1 proteins, respectively. The presence of viral antigens was the first evidence suggesting that Mø exo ZIKV could function as viral vehicles; however, some exosome populations can match in size and density with infective virions [65,66] that co-precipitate during EV isolation. Considering this possibility, we identified by NTA that some Mø exo ZIKV populations were ≤70 nm in size, which could correspond to a virion–EV mixture. Certainly, in the natural infection cycle, mixture of virions and EV populations are released and interact with host cells; however, to assess the role of Mø exo ZIKV in viral transmission, we purified the exosomes by inactivation of ZIKV by UV radiation and RNase A treatment (Mø exo ZIKV [RNase A + UV]) or by uncoupling from anti-CD63-coated paramagnetic beads (Mø exo ZIKVp). We observed that after these treatments, nanoparticles of ~153.3 nm from the Mø exo ZIKV (RNase A + UV) isolates and ~133.5 nm from the Mø exo ZIKVp isolates were recovered without significant traces of nanoparticles smaller than 70 nm, the size of ZIKV viral particles (Figure S1A and Figure 5E,F). Treatments with UV radiation and RNase A, as well as mechanical uncoupling from paramagnetic beads, were efficient in reducing the amounts of infectious ZIKV virions or viral RNA, which might otherwise have interfered with the functionality assays. The integrity of the exosomes post-treatment suggests that they resist physical or chemical damage, thereby protecting their internal cargo.Other studies of EV and flaviviruses have reported that exosomes from infected cells carry viral elements. For ZIKV, RNA transcripts and viral E protein have been demonstrated to occur in exosomes [26,27,28]. For DENV, complete genomes, capsid (C) protein mRNA, and E, NS1, and NS3 proteins have been described [22,25,32]. For JEV and WNV, the NS1 and E protein mRNAs, respectively, have been shown to occur in exosomes [24,67]. In our model, we confirmed the presence of E and NS1 proteins in the membranes of the purified Mø exo ZIKV isolates, as well as the presence of viral RNA E transcripts as part of their internal cargo after membrane rupture. These proteins and RNAs were not detected in the exosomes from control cells. Also, the TEM images suggesting the presence of virus-like particles enclosed in the exosomes indicate that exosomes may have the capacity to transport complete virions, as previously reported for DENV [23], hepatitis C virus [68,69,70], hepatitis A virus [71], LGTV [24], and human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) [72]. For all of the above reasons, we conclude that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes function as vehicles for viral components that may allow evasion of the host’s immune response, limiting viral clearance and favoring dissemination. This mechanism could partly explain how ZIKV reaches and remains in immunologically privileged tissues and triggers severe forms of Zika fever.As a result of these significant findings, we first evaluated the role of Mø exo ZIKV in viral transmission by the formation of lytic plaques on Vero cells. This model allowed us to demonstrate, quantitatively and visually, that infective virus transmission occurs as a result of exposure to Mø exo ZIKV isolates (Figure 6). Observation of lytic plaques after stimulation with Mø exo ZIKVp and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase + UV) yielded transmitted infectious viruses titers of ~1.6 × 106 and ~1.4 × 103 PFU/mL, respectively, suggesting that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes favor non-human-primate host-cell infection and corroborated the previous finding that exosomes protect infective viral components from degradation by physical or chemical treatments. Subsequently, we wanted to demonstrate that viral transmission is mediated by exosome stimulation through the exosomes’ interaction with naïve cells, which may allow the transfer of viral RNA or of complete virions. Exosomes can interact with, be taken up by, and enter the recipient cells through different mechanisms such as clathrin-, caveolae-, or receptor-dependent internalization; lipid-raft-mediated internalization; micropinocytosis; phagocytosis; and membrane fusion. These interactions allow exosomes to mediate intercellular communication and to induce changes in the phenotypes of acceptor cells [18,19]; however, determining the specific route of this interaction was outside the aims of this study. Here, we demonstrated that interaction between exosomes and naïve cells (Vero and monocytes) occurs, probably by membrane fusion between 2 and 6 h, through Calcein AM-stained exosome-stimulation assays. This interaction may favor viral infection via a receptor-independent mechanism and likely constitutes an efficient mechanism of viral transmission.The capacity of EV to transmit flaviviruses to naïve cells of the same cell line as those that gave rise to them and to promote active infection has been described for ZIKV in EV models of C6/36 mosquito cells and murine cortical neurons [26,27] and for DENV in C6/36 mosquito-cell models [22,23]. Our results show that stimulation by exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes facilitates active viral infection in naïve monocytes (Figure 7). We detected the ZIKV E/NS1 proteins at 96 h post-stimulus. The E protein was detected in ~68.4% and ~58.7% of Mø exo ZIKVp- and Mø exo ZIKV (RNase + UV)-stimulated cells, while the NS1 protein was detected in ~49.6% and ~31.6%, respectively, suggesting that exosomes favor cell-to-cell transmission and promote active infection. Hence, these exosomes are an efficient pathway for viral transmission, acting as Trojan horses. The existence of such Trojan exosomes may have important implications, as their effects could promote “silent” viral replication, both because the rate of viral E/NS1 protein production is comparable to that seen with ZIKV (MOI 1)-mediated infection and because the exosomes may facilitate immune evasion. For severe cases of Zika fever, there are many pending questions regarding how the virus disseminates from its point of entry to new host cells, how it gains access to restricted sites, and how exosomes are also able to transmit cargo over long distances (e.g., through peripheral blood circulation) and interact with different host cells, contributing to ZIKV infection and hindering clearance.We also found that exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes participate in the differentiation and activation of naïve cells (Figure 8), promoting an infection–activation–infection cycle in human monocytes and potentially in any other acceptor cell. This cycle could be characterized by continuous EV production, favoring establishment of a long-lasting inflammatory state. These findings may contribute to our understanding of clinical manifestations like neurologic complications or autoimmunity resulting from post-infectious immune responses or direct viral neurotropism, such as have been reported in severe Zika fever cases.We recognize that the pathogenesis of Zika fever is complex and depends on the functions of other infected cells and their products in response to infection. This study aimed to evaluate the function of ZIKV-infected monocyte exosomes in cell-to-cell viral transmission. We focused on monocytes because they are distributed in the bloodstream and tissues as sentinels, and in the context of ZIKV and other arbovirus infections, represent the first virus–cell contact [73]. Their function may thus define the clinical outcome (asymptomatic, mild, or severe disease). However, these cells and their differentiation/activation products (extracellular vesicles) are only the beginning of the complex mechanism of Zika pathogenesis, which includes other viral target cells, like endothelial cells, neuronal cells, trophoblasts, etc., with their respective products generated in response to infection.Further investigation is necessary to establish the impact of Mø exo ZIKV on Zika fever pathogenesis, as ZIKV exploits the exosome pathway for its assembly/budding and for the transfer of viral components. Knowledge of these mechanisms can be used for the development of new therapeutic tools to address severe Zika virus disease. In addition, exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes could be utilized as diagnostic or prognostic markers and as vaccine antigens for disease prevention or to halt disease progression.5. ConclusionsZika virus infection induced differentiation of monocytes from the classical (CD14+ CD16−) to the intermediate (CD14+ CD16+) phenotype. The resulting activation state, which was maintained up to 96 h post-infection, as characterized by detectable levels of viral E and NS1 proteins, as well as by CD11b, CD11c, CD80, and CD86, which are proteins associated with a pro-adherent phenotype and pro-inflammatory state. In the activated intermediate ZIKV-infected monocytes, internalization of one vesicular-trafficking-associated protein (CD63) and translocation of others (CD81, TSG101, and Alix) may be involved in exosome biogenesis and release. We demonstrated that ZIKV-infected monocytes release abundant CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+ exosomes < 200 nm in size that carry viral elements like viral E and NS1 proteins and viral genomic RNA transcripts. Interaction between exosomes and naïve cells favors viral transmission and active infection, as demonstrated by the high levels of the viral E and NS1 proteins, and promotes the differentiation and activation of naïve cells.Our results suggest that ZIKV uses cellular pathways such as exosome biogenesis to efficiently maintain its replicative cycle via receptor-independent mechanisms. These cellular pathways allow the transfer of viral RNA or infectious virions, and they favor evasion of the immune response, which leads to low rates of ZIKV clearance. Stimulation with exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes induces an infection–activation–infection cycle that may establish a long-lasting pro-inflammatory state (Figure 9).Exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes are significant because, as a product of the primary cellular target of ZIKV, they may contribute to viral transmission, infection, and activation of other target cells and promote viral infiltration into immune-sheltered tissues (brain, placenta, testes, etc.). They may thus prolong viral clearance by facilitating evasion of the immune response and favor establishment of a pro-inflammatory state. These effects may impact disease progression [11,74].


Title: Primary infection with Zika virus provides one-way heterologous protection against Spondweni virus infection in rhesus macaques

INTRODUCTIONArthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) are increasingly contributing to the burden of human disease, and the mosquito-borne flaviviruses have caused numerous epidemics during the past seven decades. Examples include the rise in dengue virus (DENV) infections since World War II, the introduction of West Nile virus into the United States in 1999, the Zika virus (ZIKV) outbreak in the South Pacific in 2013–2014 and the explosive outbreak in the Americas in 2015–2016, ongoing yellow fever virus (YFV) outbreaks in Africa and Brazil, and the Japanese encephalitis virus outbreak in Australia in 2022. Although we cannot predict what might be coming next or when, arboviruses can emerge unexpectedly to cause human disease on a global scale. The genus Flavivirus currently consists of ~80 single-strand positive-sense RNA viruses (1), and several of the less well-characterized flaviviruses have been detected in humans, animals, and mosquitoes across the globe (2, 3). Therefore, characterizing these lesser-known viruses is critical to determine whether they have features that portend medically significant future outbreaks.One such virus is Spondweni virus (SPONV), which is the flavivirus most closely related to ZIKV. SPONV was thought to have been first isolated from a pool of mosquitoes in South Africa in 1955; however, it was later recognized that SPONV was isolated 3 years earlier from a febrile patient in Nigeria, but because of serological cross-reactivity, it was originally thought to be ZIKV (4–8). The limited, well-documented human cases describe a clinical presentation similar to ZIKV—most cases result in mild febrile illness, although a subset of these cases document more severe illness including neurological involvement (5, 8–10). SPONV is thought to be geographically restricted to Africa. In the era shortly following SPONV’s initial identification, mosquito surveillance, as well as human and animal serosurveys, found evidence of SPONV circulation in 10 sub-Saharan African countries (5, 11–14), although serological cross-reactivity with ZIKV and other flaviviruses likely still confounds accurate diagnostics today. However, in 2016, SPONV RNA was identified in a pool of Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes in Haiti during routine mosquito surveillance activities (15), raising concerns that SPONV was present in the Western Hemisphere and therefore a neglected public health concern. Because human infections with SPONV have historically been sporadic and there have been no known epidemics, neither the disease caused by SPONV nor the mosquito vectors that transmit SPONV have been well characterized. We recently demonstrated that SPONV can cause significant fetal harm, including demise, comparable to ZIKV in pregnant Ifnar1−/− mice. In addition, in pregnant mice treated with an anti-Ifnar1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) to transiently abrogate type I interferon signaling before SPONV inoculation, we observed infection of the placenta and fetus (16), confirming results reported previously (17). We also demonstrated that Aedes aegypti could efficiently transmit SPONV, whereas C. quinquefasciatus could not (16). While these experiments suggested that SPONV may have features that make it a public health risk, they were performed in immunocompromised mice and therefore may not fully mimic key attributes of human infection, particularly during pregnancy (18). SPONV has not been associated with in utero infection in humans. A study in the 1950s unwittingly established that rhesus macaques support replication of SPONV (19). The inoculum used in those studies was initially thought to be ZIKV but was subsequently shown to be SPONV (6–8). The animals apparently developed neutralizing antibodies (nAbs), but no data that describe the virological parameters of the infection are provided.To assess differences in SPONV replication between macaque species, we infected rhesus (n = 4) or cynomolgus (n = 5) macaques with the South African SPONV isolate SA Ar94. All rhesus macaques were productively infected, with viral load dynamics similar to ZIKV-inoculated controls (n = 3). In contrast, SPONV infection was restricted in cynomolgus macaques. To investigate the breadth of protective immunity induced by a SPONV or ZIKV infection, we also performed a crossover serial challenge experiment in which SPONV-immune animals were rechallenged with the African-lineage ZIKV strain DAK AR 41524 and ZIKV-immune animals were rechallenged with SPONV. Immune responses to SPONV did not provide protection against ZIKV infection. In contrast, immune responses to ZIKV provided protection against SPONV in all animals.RESULTSSPONV infection is restricted in cynomolgus macaquesBecause SPONV is an understudied flavivirus and numerous studies have shown that cynomolgus, rhesus, and pigtail macaques (Macaca mulatta, Macaca fascicularis, and Macaca nemestrina, respectively) are useful platforms to study flavivirus pathogenesis, candidate therapies, and vaccines [reviewed in (20)], we sought to characterize SPONV replication dynamics and assess antigenic interactions between SPONV and ZIKV in macaque monkeys. First, n = 5 cynomolgus macaques were subcutaneously inoculated with 104 plaque-forming units (PFU) of SPONV strain SA Ar94 (referred to hereafter as SPONV) and n = 4 were subcutaneously inoculated with 104 PFU of the African-lineage ZIKV strain DAK AR 41524 (ZIKV-DAK) (table S1). Contemporary isolates of SPONV do not exist; thus, we used the only available low-passage isolate. Our SPONV challenge stock is 98.8% nucleotide identical with the SPONV genome recovered from mosquitoes in Haiti (GenBank: MG182017), but we acknowledge that although the sequences are almost identical, the slight difference could result in important phenotypic impacts. Because ZIKV and SPONV are endemic in Africa, we selected the only low-passage African-lineage ZIKV strain available in public repositories when these studies commenced: ZIKV-DAK. In addition, we have used these two viruses for prior studies of SPONV and ZIKV pathogenesis (16, 21–23). This dose and route of inoculation was chosen to facilitate comparisons to historical data from our studies of ZIKV in macaques (24–26). Blood was collected daily for 10 days post-inoculation (dpi). Plasma viral loads were measured by ZIKV- and SPONV-specific quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR). All four ZIKV-inoculated animals were productively infected with ZIKV, with viral RNA (vRNA) detectable in the plasma by 2 to 4 dpi, viral loads peaking at 105 to 106 vRNA copies/ml, and duration lasting 4 to 7 days (Fig. 1A). Only three of five SPONV-challenged animals had detectable plasma viral loads. In two of these animals, vRNA was detectable in the plasma for 5 to 6 days, with peak viral load only reaching 103 to 104 vRNA copies/ml (Fig. 1A). The third animal had detectable viral loads at only two time points, with a peak vRNA load of 343 copies/ml.Fig. 1.SPONV and ZIKV infection in cynomolgus macaques.(A) Plasma viral loads for each of the macaques challenged with 104 PFU of SPONV (orange traces, n = 5) or ZIKV-DAK (green traces, n = 4). All animals were rechallenged with 6.5 × 105 PFU of SPONV 56 days after primary virus challenge. Viral loads were determined using SPONV- and ZIKV-specific RT-qPCR. Negative samples are plotted at the assay’s limit of detection (150 vRNA copies/ml for ZIKV, green dotted line; 175 vRNA copies/ml for SPONV, orange dotted line). (B) PRNT90 titers 0 and 28 days after primary challenge. nAb titers are measured against the same virus stock as used for each animal’s primary challenge (SPONV-challenged sera against SPONV, ZIKV-challenged against ZIKV-DAK). The dotted line represents the PRNT90 standard diagnostic cutoff value of 1:20. EC90, 90% effective concentration, log10 serum dilution.Given the limited viral replication in the SPONV-inoculated animals, we next measured serum nAb responses using plaque reduction neutralization tests (PRNT90). These animals were housed outdoors before their arrival at Wisconsin National Primate Research Center (WNPRC), so we cannot define their pathogen exposure history with certainty. However, PRNT90 results confirmed that the SPONV-inoculated animals did not have any preexisting SPONV antibody response at the time of virus challenge. Similarly, the ZIKV-inoculated animals were also confirmed to be ZIKV naive at the time of challenge (Fig. 1B). We additionally measured nAb titers at 28 dpi to determine whether the SPONV-inoculated animals with detectable viral loads seroconverted. At 28 dpi, all ZIKV-inoculated animals developed robust nAb titers (Fig. 1B), whereas none of the SPONV-challenged animals developed nAb responses to SPONV above the standard 1:20 serum dilution cutoff value that has been traditionally considered diagnostic in the field (27) at this time point (Fig. 1B). The SPONV-challenged macaque with the highest viral load and longest duration of detectable viral loads had the highest nAb titer 28 dpi, which was only ~1:7 (estimated by nonlinear regression). Although there was evidence of limited, rapidly terminated SPONV infection in some animals, the lack of robust seroconversion suggests that cynomolgus macaques are predisposed to an abortive infection with this strain and dose of SPONV.While these results suggested varying SPONV susceptibility in cynomolgus macaques, we wanted to exclude the possibility that infection was dose dependent. Because SPONV-specific nAbs were very low or absent, we subcutaneously inoculated all nine macaques with 6.5 × 105 PFU SPONV 56 days after the initial virus challenge. This was the highest dose we could administer given the titer of the stock virus. After rechallenge, no animals had detectable SPONV plasma vRNA (Fig. 1A). As a result, we cannot determine from this experiment whether there was a protective effect from preexisting immunity in the four animals previously exposed to ZIKV or whether there was localized infection in the skin in the animals previously exposed to SPONV. PRNT50 values in some animals at 28 days after primary infection were moderate (fig. S1). For example, the SPONV-challenged animal with the highest viral load and longest duration of detectable vRNA had a PRNT50 nAb titer of ~1:35. We therefore cannot exclude the possibility that animals developed a protective immune response from primary SPONV infection that protected them against reinfection. For both Japanese encephalitis and tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) vaccines, a 1:10 PRNT50 nAb titer is regarded as protective in animals and humans (28, 29). However, one animal did not generate a nAb response following primary SPONV inoculation but also did not have detectable SPONV plasma viral loads after rechallenge. Therefore, we do not have robust evidence of a protective effect for preexisting ZIKV or SPONV immunity on subsequent SPONV infection in cynomolgus macaques. Regardless, primary SPONV infection appears to be restricted in cynomolgus macaques.SPONV and ZIKV replication in primary cells from cynomolgus and rhesus macaquesWe next asked whether primary cells from cynomolgus and rhesus macaques were differentially susceptible to SPONV. Skin fibroblasts have been shown to be permissive to ZIKV infection and are one of the initial sites of infection for many arboviruses following mosquito-bite inoculation (30, 31). We therefore started our characterization of SPONV replication in primary skin fibroblasts derived from adult cynomolgus and rhesus macaques. Fibroblasts were inoculated with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 PFU/cell of SPONV or ZIKV-DAK, and infectious virus was quantified via plaque assay from supernatant collected at the time of infection and every 24 hours post-infection (hpi) for the following 5 days (up to 120 hpi). In cynomolgus macaque fibroblasts, the results show a gradual increase in SPONV and ZIKV-DAK titer over time, indicating active replication of both viruses (Fig. 2A). SPONV replication was significantly lower at all time points 24 to 120 hpi compared to ZIKV-DAK in cynomolgus macaque fibroblasts (24 to 120 hpi: P < 0.05, 0 hpi: ns, unpaired parametric t test). In rhesus macaque fibroblasts, SPONV and ZIKV-DAK titers also increased over time, indicating that rhesus macaque fibroblasts also support SPONV and ZIKV-DAK replication (Fig. 2B). SPONV replication was also significantly lower than ZIKV-DAK in rhesus macaque fibroblasts at all time points 24 to 120 hpi (24 to 120 hpi: P < 0.01, 0 hpi: ns, unpaired parametric t test).Fig. 2.Comparative SPONV and ZIKV replication in vitro.Cynomolgus macaque fibroblasts (A), rhesus macaque fibroblasts (B), cynomolgus macaque macrophages (C), and rhesus macaque macrophages (D) were infected with an MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell of SPONV (orange) or ZIKV-DAK (green). HEK293 cells expressing cynomolgus (CyTRIM, purple) or rhesus (RhTRIM) TRIM5α, or an empty vector control were infected with an MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell of SPONV (E) or ZIKV-DAK (F). Supernatant was collected daily, and growth kinetics were assessed by plaque assay. Data presented are from three replicates from one to two independent experiments. Error bars represent SD from the mean. The dotted line indicates the assay limit of detection. Unpaired parametric t tests with Holm-Sidak correction for multiple comparisons were used to test for significance between SPONV and ZIKV-DAK growth kinetics at each time point (A) to (D). *P < 0.05; **P < 0.01; ***P < 0.001; ****P < 0.0001.Since both rhesus and cynomolgus macaque fibroblasts supported replication of SPONV and ZIKV, we hypothesized that an innate immune cell could limit SPONV infection in cynomolgus macaques. Macrophages are a key innate immune cell recruited early in response to infection in the skin, are important for ZIKV replication in the skin and blood, and are known to be important for infection of other tissue compartments including the placenta and testes (32–34). To test whether SPONV infection was restricted in cynomolgus macaque macrophages, we differentiated macrophages from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from adult flavivirus-naive cynomolgus and rhesus macaques and measured SPONV and ZIKV replication. We inoculated macrophages from each species at an MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell of SPONV and ZIKV-DAK. Infectious virus was quantified via plaque assay from supernatant collected daily for 6 days. In cynomolgus macaque macrophages, ZIKV-DAK titers increased consistently over time, indicating robust viral replication (Fig. 2C). In contrast, there was no detectable SPONV replication in cynomolgus macaque macrophages at any time point in any of the three replicates, with the exception of 300 PFU/ml in a single replicate at 120 hpi and 150 PFU/ml in a separate replicate at 144 hpi (Fig. 2C). In rhesus macaque macrophages, SPONV and ZIKV-DAK produced similar growth curves that did not significantly differ at any time point (0 to 144 hpi: P > 0.05, multiple unpaired t tests) (Fig. 2D). Together, these data indicate that cynomolgus macaques, but not rhesus macaques, display a resistance mechanism that negatively affects the infectivity and replicative capacity of SPONV in vitro and in vivo.TRIM5α is not the host restriction factor responsible for restriction of SPONV infection in cynomolgus macaquesTo begin to understand potential host restriction factors that could be responsible for the replicative barrier for SPONV in cynomolgus macaques, we assessed viral replication of ZIKV-DAK and SPONV in vitro using human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells engineered to stably express cynomolgus macaque (cy) tripartite motif protein 5 (TRIM5α), rhesus macaque (rh) TRIM5α, or an empty vector control. TRIM5α is a well-known HIV host restriction factor that functions in a species-specific manner because of the coevolution of primates and their ancient lentiviruses (35–37). However, recent work has shown that both human and rhesus macaque TRIM5α restrict tick-borne flavivirus replication—with the exception of Powassan virus (POWV)—via proteasomal degradation of the flavivirus protease, NS2B/3 (38, 39). A previous study found that a panel of mosquito-borne flaviviruses were not restricted by rhesus or human TRIM5α, but did not investigate the combination of SPONV and cynomolgus macaque TRIM5α (38). In our experiments, cyTRIM5α, rhTRIM5α, and cells with an empty vector control supported similar growth for both SPONV and ZIKV-DAK (Fig. 2, E and F). These results suggest that TRIM5α is not contributing to the cynomolgus macaque–specific restriction of SPONV infection.Rhesus macaques are susceptible to SPONV infectionTo determine whether SPONV infects rhesus macaques, we subcutaneously inoculated four Indian-origin rhesus macaques (n = 2 female, n = 2 male) with 104 PFU SPONV and three Indian-origin rhesus macaques (n = 1 female, n = 2 male) with 104 PFU ZIKV-DAK. This is the same dose and inoculation route used in the cynomolgus macaque experiment described above, as well as in prior ZIKV studies in rhesus macaques conducted by our group (21, 24, 25, 40). Following inoculation, all four SPONV-inoculated animals became productively infected, with detectable plasma viral loads starting between 1 and 4 dpi (Fig. 3A). SPONV was detectable in plasma for 3 to 6 days, peaking between 2 and 6 dpi at viral loads ranging from 104 to 105 vRNA copies/ml. All ZIKV-inoculated animals were productively infected with ZIKV-DAK (Fig. 3A). Peak viral loads in the ZIKV-DAK–challenged cohort ranged from 105 to 106 vRNA copies/ml, which was significantly higher than SPONV [P = 0.007, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s multiple comparisons] (Fig. 3B). However, there were no statistically significant differences in area under the curve, duration of viremia, or time to peak viremia between SPONV and ZIKV-DAK (Fig. 3B). Additionally, when comparing SPONV replication dynamics to nonpregnant contemporary controls infected with additional ZIKV strains using the same route and dose from (40, 41), SPONV replication kinetics did not differ significantly in any parameter tested compared to ZIKV strain PRVABC59, but had significantly lower area under the curve and peak viremia compared to ZIKV strain H/PF/2013 (40, 41) (Fig. 3B). Serum nAb responses were measured by PRNT90 at 0 and 28 dpi (Fig. 3C), and all animals exhibited robust homotypic nAb responses against the virus used to inoculate each animal. nAb titers generated by the SPONV-inoculated animals against SPONV were not significantly different from those generated by the ZIKV-inoculated animals against ZIKV (SPONV 28 dpi: 2.043 log10; ZIKV 28 dpi: 2.491 log10; P = 0.148, unpaired t test).Fig. 3.SPONV and ZIKV replication kinetics in rhesus macaques.(A) Viral loads were measured from plasma samples from rhesus macaques challenged with 104 PFU of SPONV (n = 4, orange traces) or ZIKV-DAK (n = 3, green traces) using SPONV- or ZIKV-specific RT-qPCR. Negative samples are plotted at the assay’s limit of detection (150 vRNA copies/ml for ZIKV, green dotted line; 175 vRNA copies/ml for SPONV, orange dotted line). (B) Graphs of the values for the peak viremia, area under the curve, duration, and time to peak viremia. A one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test was used for statistical comparison between SPONV- and ZIKV-DAK–challenged animals, as well as historical data (gray points) from ZIKV strain PRVABC59 (ZIKV-PR, n = 3) and a French Polynesian strain (ZIKV-FP, n = 3) (***P < 0.0005; **P < 0.005; *P < 0.05; ns, not significant). (C) PRNT90 titers from serum collected 0 and 28 dpi. nAb titers are measured against the same virus stock as used for each animal’s primary challenge (SPONV-challenged sera against SPONV, ZIKV-challenged against ZIKV-DAK). An unpaired t test was used for statistical comparison between SPONV and ZIKV-DAK 28 dpi nAb titers. The dotted line represents the PRNT90 standard diagnostic cutoff value of 1:20 dilution determining infection.Heterologous rechallenge of rhesus macaques results in one-way cross-protection between ZIKV and SPONVFlaviviruses have complex antigenic relationships, in which preexisting immunity can enhance, attenuate, or have no effect on subsequent infections (42). ZIKV and SPONV form a serocomplex and share ~69% nucleotide identity and ~75% amino acid identity, and it is known that they can interact antigenically (17). For reference, the four DENV serotypes—for which it is well established that preexisting immunity to one serotype can lead to antibody-dependent enhancement of a secondary infection by a heterologous serotype (43, 44)—share 65 to 70% amino acid identity. It is unknown whether primary infection with SPONV or ZIKV can affect the outcome of subsequent exposure to the heterologous virus. We therefore rechallenged SPONV-immune animals with 1 × 104 PFU of ZIKV-DAK 13 weeks after primary SPONV infection. ZIKV-immune animals were rechallenged with 1 × 104 PFU of SPONV 12 weeks after primary ZIKV-DAK infection.Upon heterologous rechallenge with ZIKV-DAK, four of four SPONV-immune animals became productively infected with ZIKV-DAK (Fig. 4A), but ZIKV-DAK replication dynamics were altered in SPONV-immune animals as compared to in flavivirus-naive animals. When compared to primary infection parameters, ZIKV replicated to significantly lower peak plasma viral loads in SPONV-immune animals (P = 0.0039, unpaired t test). ZIKV-DAK area under the curve was also significantly lower in SPONV-immune animals compared to flavivirus-naive animals (P = 0.0136, unpaired t test), but ZIKV-DAK time to peak viral load and viral load duration were not significantly different between SPONV-immune and flavivirus-naive animals (Fig. 4B). Serum nAb responses were measured by PRNT50 against SPONV and ZIKV at 0 and 28 days after primary challenge and 0 and 28 days after heterologous rechallenge (91 and 112 days after primary SPONV challenge). For these analyses, PRNT50 titers were more appropriate to compare fine-scale differences in nAb responses in immune animals, due to the higher accuracy of this value within the linear portion of the neutralization curve as compared to PRNT90 values that are preferred for diagnostic identification of flavivirus exposures (45). At the time of rechallenge, SPONV-immune animals still had robust nAb responses to SPONV as measured by PRNT50 that were not significantly lower than those detected 28 days after primary SPONV infection (2.718 log10 serum dilution versus 2.178 log10 serum dilution; P = 0.312, two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison test). However, these sera did not cross-neutralize ZIKV-DAK (Fig. 4C). At 28 days after secondary ZIKV challenge, SPONV nAb titers were boosted to a significantly higher titer than those detected at 28 days after primary SPONV challenge (28dp-SPONV: 2.718 log10 serum dilution versus 28dp-ZIKV: 3.825 log10 serum dilution; P = 0.0009, two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test). Four of four animals developed robust ZIKV-specific nAb responses 28 days after secondary ZIKV challenge (Fig. 4C).Fig. 4.Heterologous rechallenge of SPONV- and ZIKV-immune rhesus macaques.(A) Viral loads were measured from plasma samples from rhesus macaques challenged with 104 PFU of ZIKV 91 days after primary SPONV infection (n = 4) using ZIKV-specific RT-qPCR. Negative samples are plotted at the assay’s limit of detection (150 vRNA copies/ml for ZIKV, green dotted line; 175 vRNA copies/ml for SPONV, orange dotted line). (B) Graphs of the values for the area under the curve, peak viremia, viremia duration, and time to peak viremia for ZIKV viremia in SPONV-immune animals (orange) and flavivirus-naive animals (green). An unpaired t test was used for statistical comparison between groups (**P < 0.005; *P < 0.05; ns, not significant). (C) PRNT50 titers from serum collected 0, 28, 91, and 119 days after primary SPONV infection. nAb titers were measured against both SPONV (orange) and ZIKV-DAK (green) at all time points. A two-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons was used for statistical comparison between nAb titers (****P < 0.0001; ns, not significant). (D) Viral loads were measured from plasma samples from rhesus macaques challenged with 104 PFU of SPONV 84 days after primary ZIKV infection (n = 3) using SPONV-specific RT-qPCR. (E) PRNT50 titers from serum collected 0, 28, 84, and 112 days after primary ZIKV infection. nAb titers were measured against both ZIKV-DAK (green) and SPONV (orange) at all time points. A two-way ANOVA with multiple comparisons was used for statistical comparison between nAb titers (***P < 0.0005; ns, not significant).Upon heterologous rechallenge with SPONV in ZIKV-immune animals, vRNA was undetectable in plasma at all time points through 10 days after rechallenge (Fig. 4D). At the time of secondary SPONV rechallenge, serum nAb titers remained elevated against both SPONV and ZIKV (Fig. 4E). ZIKV-immune animals were significantly less likely to become productively infected after SPONV challenge (Fisher’s exact test, P = 0.029). We did not observe an increase in SPONV or ZIKV nAb titers after rechallenge, suggesting that preexisting ZIKV immunity confers robust protection against SPONV infection (Fig. 4E).DISCUSSIONHere, we demonstrate that rhesus macaques are susceptible to SPONV infection, whereas in cynomolgus macaques SPONV is restricted. This work thus establishes a nonhuman primate model for SPONV infection. Using the rhesus macaque model, we observed one-way cross-protection against SPONV in ZIKV-immune animals. This finding is consistent with observations from another study that identified several human cross-reactive mAbs derived from ZIKV- and DENV-infected patients that potently neutralized SPONV in vitro. Passive transfer of some of these mAbs protected mice from lethal SPONV challenge (17).SPONV’s ability to spread and broadly infect new human populations depends in part on susceptible hosts. In ZIKV- and SPONV-endemic regions, people may be infected early in life, developing immunity that protects against subsequent reinfection with the same virus or limits the pathogenicity of later infection with the heterologous virus. Humans in the Americas had no such protective immunity when ZIKV was introduced, and this may largely explain the scale and scope of the American outbreak. However, if ZIKV immunity provides similarly robust protection against SPONV in humans as we observed in macaques, we speculate that high ZIKV seroprevalence in the Americas at the time of SPONV introduction in Haiti in 2016 may have contributed to limiting SPONV establishment and spread. Alternatively, the lack of epidemic SPONV transmission could be due to unique ecological/transmission constraints or virus-intrinsic properties that are independent of ZIKV seroprevalence. We only assessed cross-protection at a single time point, 12 to 13 weeks after primary infection; therefore, the durability of cross-reactive immunity to SPONV remains uncertain. It is possible that waning of cross-reactive nAb responses occurs more rapidly than homotypic ZIKV immunity, so it is unclear how long preexisting ZIKV immunity will provide robust protection against SPONV (46, 47). It is also important to acknowledge that these results may or may not be generalizable since we only used a single SPONV isolate and limited animal numbers.Future studies will focus on elucidating the immunological mechanisms that underpin this nonreciprocal interaction, because SPONV and ZIKV are not unique in this phenomenon. It is well established that flaviviruses cross-react. Cross-reactive antibodies can complicate flavivirus diagnostics, and this feature was initially used to segregate them into distinct serocomplexes (48, 49). For example, the sequence of infecting serotypes during serial DENV infection determines whether preexisting immunity is associated with enhancement or protection (50, 51). Likewise, studies of the interaction between ZIKV and DENV suggest that there is asymmetric cross-protection between these viruses as well—DENV infection followed by ZIKV infection has been shown to be cross-protective, whereas ZIKV infection followed by DENV-2 infection has been shown to be enhancing in certain scenarios (52). Asymmetric cross-protection has also been observed within the TBE serocomplex. Immune sera from TBE virus (TBEV) vaccinees and sera from infected patients were found to cross-neutralize related viruses within the TBE serocomplex, but did not neutralize POWV, the only North American representative of the TBE serocomplex (53). This was posited to be in part due to the lower level of genetic similarity between TBEV and POWV within the envelope (E) glycoprotein EI and EII domains, despite an overall 77% amino acid similarity between TBEV and POWV E protein. For reference, SPONV and ZIKV-DAK share 72% amino acid identity between E proteins with no obvious domain-specific differences. A subsequent study testing a POWV mRNA vaccine encoding the prM and E genes found that immune sera from vaccinated mice cross-neutralized a panel of TBE serocomplex viruses—including TBEV—and even protected mice in vivo against the more distantly related Langat virus (54). These studies therefore suggest one-way cross-protection between POWV and related TBE serocomplex viruses; however, they do not directly compare cross-protection between these viruses in vivo. Further, it is unclear whether infection-induced versus vaccine-induced immunity generates equivalent amounts of type-specific and cross-reactive antibodies. Many other examples of cross-protective immune responses among the flaviviruses exist (55–57); however, it is not possible to determine if these responses are asymmetric because the reciprocal sequence of challenges was not performed. Asymmetric protection has also been observed between closely related alphaviruses (58–60), and this has been used to formulate hypotheses regarding the lack of alphavirus emergence events, similar to what we postulate may have occurred with SPONV in Haiti.Although rhesus, cynomolgus, and pigtail macaques are all members of the genus Macaca, they have important genotypic and phenotypic differences that can affect the development of animal models (61, 62). Because multiple reports (including our own work) previously demonstrated that rhesus, cynomolgus, and pigtail macaques are all susceptible to ZIKV and other flavivirus infections with comparable viral kinetics between macaque species (20, 63), we expected that both rhesus and cynomolgus macaques would be susceptible to SPONV infection. However, we observed restriction of SPONV infection in cynomolgus macaques. This is particularly striking in contrast to a review finding no significant difference in DENV viremia kinetics between 10 different nonhuman primate species (63). This is, however, similar to what has been described recently for Kyasanur Forest disease virus (KFDV), a tick-borne flavivirus, in rhesus versus pigtail macaques—KFDV is restricted in rhesus macaques but causes moderate to severe disease that recapitulates multiple features of human disease, including hemorrhage, in pigtail macaques (62). The mechanism(s) underlying restriction of SPONV in cynomolgus macaques is likely multifaceted. However, it was recently shown that the restriction factor TRIM5α robustly inhibited tick-borne flaviviruses but not mosquito-borne flaviviruses (38). We examined the ability of cyTRIM5α to restrict SPONV infection because TRIM5α restriction was not universal for the tick-borne flaviviruses (POWV was not restricted by TRIM5α), and restriction for KFDV was primate species dependent (62). Our data suggest that both cyTRIM5α and rhTRIM5α are nonrestrictive for SPONV. Future studies will be needed to elucidate the restriction mechanism(s) controlling this phenotype. However, macaque genetic diversity could confound such studies (64, 65). Our cohort of animals included cynomolgus macaques of both Southeast Asian and Mauritian origin, and monkeys from both genetic backgrounds restricted SPONV infection. Mauritian-origin cynomolgus macaques have extremely low major histocompatibility complex (MHC) diversity between animals compared to captive-bred Indian-origin rhesus macaques and cynomolgus macaques from mainland Southeast Asia (66). The relatively simple immunogenetics of these animals could be harnessed to identify genes involved in SPONV resistance versus susceptibility. Identifying these factors could provide insight into the evolutionary histories of SPONV and ZIKV and could be vital for understanding the sylvatic reservoirs for SPONV. The natural maintenance cycle of SPONV remains unclear (6, 10), but it likely circulates enzootically among unknown vertebrate hosts (presumably nonhuman primates) and is transmitted by arboreal Aedes mosquitoes in Africa (67).Our study establishes immunocompetent rhesus macaques as a relevant translational model for infection with SPONV. This will enable investigations of immunity, pathogenesis, and medical countermeasures. Critically, it will also enable investigations to define the pathophysiology of SPONV in pregnancy in a model that provides a closer representation of the morphological, developmental, and immune environment at the maternal-fetal interface compared to mouse models. The nonreciprocal cross-protection from detectable SPONV infection in ZIKV-immune animals also highlights the increasingly complex heterogeneous immune landscapes that exist in individuals with multiple flavivirus exposures. This has major implications for the flavivirus vaccines that are licensed and commercially available or moving through the clinical pipeline, because many individuals have had multiple exposures to many flaviviruses during their lifetimes. Future studies aimed at characterizing antibody repertories in this system will be valuable to identify the correlates of nonreciprocity between closely related flaviviruses.MATERIALS AND METHODSEthics statementThis study was approved by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Animal Care and Use Protocol Number G006256).Experimental designThis study was designed to establish the infectivity and replication dynamics of SPONV in a macaque model. A secondary objective was to perform a crossover serial challenge study to better understand the potential for cross-protective immunity between SPONV and ZIKV. Nine cynomolgus macaques (M. fascicularis) were subcutaneously inoculated with 1 × 104 PFU of SPONV (n = 5) or ZIKV-DAK (n = 4). Cynomolgus macaques (n = 9) were rechallenged with 6.5 × 105 PFU of SPONV 56 days after initial infection. Seven rhesus macaques (M. mulatta) were subcutaneously inoculated with 1 × 104 PFU of SPONV (n = 4) or ZIKV-DAK (n = 3). Twelve to 13 weeks after initial infection, rhesus macaques were rechallenged with 1 × 104 PFU of the heterologous virus. Demographic data from the animals from each cohort are provided in table S1.Care and use of macaquesAll macaque monkeys used in this study were cared for by the staff at the WNPRC in accordance with the regulations and guidelines outlined in the Animal Welfare Act, Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (National Research Council, 2011), and the recommendations of the Weatherall report (https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/publications/2006/weatherall-report/). All macaques used in the study were free of Macacine herpesvirus 1, simian retrovirus type D (SRV), simian T-lymphotropic virus type 1 (STLV), and simian immunodeficiency virus. Available animals were allocated into experimental groups randomly, with both groups containing male and female animals. For all procedures (including physical examinations, virus inoculations, and blood collection), animals were anesthetized with an intramuscular dose of ketamine (10 mg/kg). Blood samples were obtained using a Vacutainer system or needle and syringe from the femoral or saphenous vein. Demographic data for animals in each cohort are provided in the supplementary table (table S1).Cells and virusesAfrican Green Monkey kidney cells [Vero; American Type Culture Collection (ATCC) #CCL-81] were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; HyClone, Logan, UT), 2 mM l-glutamine, sodium bicarbonate (1.5 g/liter), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 μg/ml) and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2. Aedes albopictus mosquito cells (C6/36; ATCC #CRL-1660) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS (HyClone, Logan, UT), 2 mM l-glutamine, sodium bicarbonate (1.5 g/liter), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 μg/ml) and incubated at 28°C in 5% CO2. HEK293 cells (ATCC #CRL-1573) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine, sodium bicarbonate (1.5 g/liter), penicillin (100 U/ml), and streptomycin (100 μg/ml) and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2. The cell lines were obtained from ATCC, were not further authenticated, and were tested and confirmed negative for mycoplasma.Primary cell linesFibroblasts were differentiated from skin punch biopsies from adult rhesus and cynomolgus macaques. Fibroblasts were confirmed Herpes B and mycoplasma negative. Fibroblasts were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 20% FBS (HyClone, Logan, UT), 2 mM l-glutamine, sodium bicarbonate (1.5 g/liter), penicillin (100 U/ml), streptomycin (100 μg/ml), and 1% MEM 100× nonessential amino acids and incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2.Macrophages were derived from PBMCs from flavivirus-naive adult rhesus and cynomolgus macaques. Macrophages were differentiated as previously described (68). At 4 to 5 days after treatment of adherent cells with supplemented medium containing macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) (PeproTech) and interleukin-1β (IL-1β) (PeproTech), cells were detached with a cell scraper and replated in 12-well plates to conduct virus growth curves. A subset of cynomolgus macaque cells was processed for flow cytometry analysis to confirm macrophage differentiation (fig. S3).ZIKV strain DAK AR 41524 (ZIKV-DAK; GenBank: KY348860) was originally isolated from Aedes africanus mosquitoes in Senegal in 1984, with a round of amplification on Aedes pseudocutellaris cells, followed by amplification on C6/36 cells, followed by two rounds of amplification on Vero cells. ZIKV-DAK was obtained from BEI Resources (Manassas, VA). SPONV strain SA Ar94 (GenBank: KX227370) was originally isolated from a Mansonia uniformis mosquito in Lake Simbu, Natal, South Africa in 1955, with five rounds of amplification with unknown culture conditions followed by a single round of amplification on Vero cells. Virus stocks were prepared by inoculation onto a confluent monolayer of C6/36 mosquito cells. We deep-sequenced our virus stocks to verify the expected origin. The SPONV and ZIKV-DAK stocks matched the GenBank sequences (KY348860 and KX227370, respectively) of the parental viruses, but a variant at site 3710 in the ZIKV-DAK stock encodes a nonsynonymous change (A to V) in NS2A.Plaque assayAll ZIKV and SPONV screens from growth curves and titrations for virus quantification from virus stocks were completed by plaque assay on Vero cell cultures. Duplicate wells were infected with 0.1-ml aliquots from serial 10-fold dilutions in growth medium, and virus was adsorbed for 1 hour. Following incubation, the inoculum was removed, and monolayers were overlaid with 3 ml containing a 1:1 mixture of 1.2% oxoid agar and 2× DMEM (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) with 10% (v/v) FBS and 2% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin. Cells were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 for 4 days for plaque development for ZIKV and 5 days for SPONV. Cell monolayers then were stained with 3 ml of overlay containing a 1:1 mixture of 1.2% oxoid agar and 2× DMEM with 2% (v/v) FBS, 2% (v/v) penicillin/streptomycin, and 0.33% neutral red (Gibco). Cells were incubated overnight at 37°C, and plaques were counted.InoculationsInocula were prepared from the viral stocks described above. The stocks were thawed and diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to 1 × 104 PFU/ml for all inocula except for the rechallenge of cynomolgus macaques for which stocks were diluted to 6.5 × 105 PFU/ml. Diluted inocula were then loaded into a 3-ml syringe that was kept on ice until challenge. Animals were anesthetized as described above, and 1 ml of the inoculum was delivered subcutaneously over the cranial dorsum. Animals were monitored closely following inoculation for any signs of an adverse reaction.vRNA isolationvRNA was extracted from plasma using the Viral Total Nucleic Acid Kit (Promega, Madison, WI) on a Maxwell 48 RSC instrument (Promega, Madison, WI). RNA was then quantified using RT-qPCR. Viral load data from plasma are expressed as vRNA copies/ml.Quantitative reverse transcription PCRvRNA isolated from plasma samples was quantified by RT-qPCR as described previously (69). The SPONV, primer, and probe sequences are as follows: forward primer, 5′-GGCATACAGGAGCCACATCAAAC-3′; reverse primer, 5′-TGCGTGGGCTTCTCTGAA-3′; and probe, 5′-6-carboxyfluorescein-CATCACTGGAACAAYAAGGAGGCGCTGG-BHQ1-3′. The ZIKV-DAK primer and probe sequences are as follows: forward primer, 5′-CGYTGCCCAACACAAGG-3′; reverse primer, 5′-CACYAAYGTTCTTTTGCABACAT-3′; and probe, 5′-6fam-AGCCTACCTTGAYAAGCARTCAGACACYCAA-BHQ1-3′. RT-PCR was performed using the SuperScript III Platinum One-Step Quantitative RT-PCR system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) or TaqMan Fast Virus 1-step master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) on a LightCycler 96 or LightCycler 480 instrument (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN). The vRNA concentration was determined by interpolation onto an internal standard curve composed of seven 10-fold serial dilutions of a synthetic ZIKV or SPONV RNA fragment. The ZIKV RNA fragment is based on a ZIKV strain derived from French Polynesia that shares >99% identity at the nucleotide level with the African-lineage strain used in the infections described in this report. The SPONV RNA fragment is based on the same SPONV strain derived from South Africa used in the experiments in this article. Lower limit of detection (LLOD) for the ZIKV RT-qPCR assay is 150 vRNA copies/ml. LLOD for the SPONV RT-qPCR assay is 175 vRNA copies/ml. LLOD of assays is defined as the cutoff for which plasma viral loads are true positive with 95% confidence.Plaque reduction neutralization testMacaque serum was isolated from whole blood on the same day it was collected by using a serum separator tube (SST). The SST was centrifuged for a minimum of 20 min at 1400g, and the serum layer was removed, placed in a 15-ml conical tube, and centrifuged for 8 min at 670g to remove any additional cells. Serum was screened for ZIKV and SPONV nAbs by PRNT on Vero cells as described in (70) against ZIKV and SPONV. The neutralization assay was performed with the same virus stocks that were used for the challenge. Neutralization curves were generated using GraphPad Prism 8 software. The resulting data were analyzed by nonlinear regression to estimate the dilution of serum required to inhibit 90% or 50% of infection.In vitro viral replicationSix-well plates containing confluent monolayers of rhesus or cynomolgus macaque fibroblasts were inoculated with virus (SPONV or ZIKV-DAK) in triplicate at an MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell. After 1 hour of adsorption at 37°C, inoculum was removed and the cultures were washed three times. Fresh media were added, and the fibroblast cultures were incubated for 5 days at 37°C with aliquots removed every 24 hours and stored at −80°C. Viral titers at each time point were determined by plaque titration on Vero cells. The same methodology and MOI were followed for quantifying in vitro viral replication of SPONV and ZIKV-DAK in rhesus and cynomolgus macaque macrophages, and TRIM5α-expressing HEK293 cells. For macrophage growth curves, 12-well plates were used to achieve a confluent monolayer and samples were collected for an additional 2 days. For TRIM5α-expressing HEK293 cells, supernatant was additionally collected 36 hpi.Generation of TRIM5α-expressing cellsHEK293 cells stably expressing TRIM5α were generated as previously described in (38). Plasmid DNA encoding rhesus macaque (GenBank: EF113914.1) and cynomolgus macaque (GenBank: AB210052.1) TRIM5α open reading frames was ordered from Twist Biosciences and subcloned into MIG1R-derived simple retroviral transduction vectors (71) encoding a blasticidin resistance gene downstream of an internal ribosome entry site. To generate retrovirus for transducing TRIM5α-expressing vectors, preadhered HEK293 cells in six-well plates were transfected with 1 μg of vector plasmid, 1 μg of pMD.Gag/GagPol (72) plasmid, and 200 ng of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-G) (73). The medium was replaced at 24 hours after transfection. Virus-containing supernatant was harvested at 48 hours after transfection, 0.45-μm syringe-filtered, and stored at −20°C. To generate stable cells, HEK293 cells were seeded into plates and allowed to adhere overnight and transducing viral supernatant with polybrene (10 μg/ml) was added to each well. Transduced cells were selected at 48 hours after transduction with blasticidin S (8 μg/ml) (GoldBio, #B-800-100), expanded, and maintained in culture in the presence of drug. Rhesus and cynomolgus TRIM5α restriction activity against HIV-1 was confirmed by single-cycle infectivity assay (fig. S3). Briefly, equivalent numbers HEK293 cells transduced to express rhesus or cynomolgus TRIM5α (as well as vector-transduced cells) were infected with single cycle HIV-1 virus (NL4-3 Env- Vpr- Nef- mCherry=reporter) (74) or murine leukemia virus pseudovirus (MLV gag/gagpol virus-like particle packaging an mCherry-expressing genomic RNA) (71) pseudotyped with VSV-G at multiple MOIs. After 48 hours, percent of target cells expressing mCherry (successfully infected) was determined by flow cytometry (BD FACSCanto II).Statistical analysesAll statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9. For statistical analysis of virus growth curves, unpaired nonparametric t tests with Holm-Sidak correction for multiple comparisons were used to compare SPONV and ZIKV titers at each time point. Ordinary one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons was used to statistically compare differences in area under the curve, peak viremia, time to peak viremia, and viremia duration between macaques infected with SPONV and those infected with ZIKV-DAK, as well as historical viremia data of rhesus macaques infected with ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-FP. The LLOD for SPONV (175 vRNA copies/ml) was used as the baseline for area under the curve comparisons between virus groups. Unpaired nonparametric t tests were used to compare area under the curve, peak viremia, time to peak viremia, and viremia duration between flavivirus-naive macaques infected with ZIKV-DAK and SPONV-immune macaques infected with ZIKV-DAK.


Title: Ebselen alleviates testicular pathology in mice with Zika virus infection and prevents its sexual transmission

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV) is a single-stranded RNA virus that belongs to the Flaviviridae family [1]. The recent outbreak of ZIKV infection has created a public health emergency of international concern [2]. ZIKV infection displays nonspecific clinical features and generally causes mild symptoms in humans [1]. Although the case fatality with ZIKV infection is low, its infection has been linked to congenital microcephaly and Guillain-Barré syndrome [2, 3]. Currently, there is no approved antiviral drug or vaccines for ZIKV infection. Preventing ZIKV transmission is a significant strategy for disease control and management.ZIKV is transmitted to people primarily via the bite of an infected Aedes species mosquito [1]. However, recent studies have suggested the sexual transmission of ZIKV in humans [4–6]. Infectious ZIKV in semen has been reported [7, 8]. Moreover, unlike in serum or urine samples, ZIKV RNA can still be detected in semen up to 62 to 188 days after the onset of symptoms [9–11]. Studies have reported more male to female transmission than with other sexual modes [12]. Notably, sexual transmission of ZIKV may occur before, during, or after the onset of symptoms [2]. This may suggest the complexity of risk factors for sexually transmitted ZIKV. Other indications that ZIKV is sexually transmissible come from animal studies. ZIKV infects and damages the testes of infected mice, which results in the loss of germ cells, degeneration of seminiferous epithelium, and poor-quality sperm [13, 14].Oxidative stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis of both RNA and DNA viruses [15, 16]. Notably, in many cases of testicular dysfunction and infertility, oxidative stress appears to be a common underlying factor [17, 18]. Ebselen (EBS), an antioxidant currently in clinical trials for preventing and treating various disorders, has been shown to reduce oxidative stress and improve histopathological features in a testicular injury study [19, 20]. EBS catalyzes the reduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in a mode similar to glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPx4) [21]. GPx4 is highly expressed in spermatogenic cells and plays a dual role as an antioxidant enzyme and a structural protein [22]. In addition, EBS plays a role in inhibiting the catalytic activity of nitric oxide synthase (NOS); thus, it may also reduce the level of nitric oxide (NO) and NO-associated inflammatory cytokines [23, 24].Here, we demonstrate that ZIKV increased testicular oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory response. Moreover, we propose a possible therapeutic intervention by using the antioxidant EBS to alleviate the testicular pathogenesis and prevent the sexual transmission of ZIKV.ResultsZIKV infects and damages testesAG129 mice lacking interferon-α/β and -γ receptors were challenged with ZIKV (strain PRVABC59) by subcutaneous route in the footpad and the progression of ZIKV infection in the testes and sperm was prospectively evaluated. On 3 days post-infection (dpi), ZIKV envelope protein (ZIKV-E) was found predominantly in interstitial cells and less so in the basement membrane of the seminiferous tubule (SNT) (Fig 1A; 3-dpi). On 6 dpi, ZIKV-E was detected in interstitial cells, the basement membrane of the SNT, and in spermatogenic cells (Fig 1A; 6-dpi). Notably, ZIKV-E expression in spermatogenic cells was even more prominent on 9 dpi (Fig 1A; 9-dpi). Autofluorescence of red blood cells was noted in histological sections, including in mock-infected testes, as previously reported, although we used paraformaldehyde fixation to minimize the interference [25]. It is intriguing to speculate that testicular infection of ZIKV is initially presented in interstitial cells adjacent to the endothelium and then spread to the basement membrane of the SNT to further infect the spermatogenic cells. In addition, ZIKV-E and double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) were detected in the head, middle piece, and tail of sperm of infected mice as early as 3 dpi (Fig 1B and S1 Fig). Moreover, infectious ZIKV was detected in sperm using a plaque-forming assay. The level of infectious ZIKV in the sperm gradually increased from approximately 2 log10 plaque-forming units (PFU)/ml on 3 dpi to 5 log10 PFU/ml on 9 dpi (Fig 1C, gray bar). In agreement with a previous study [13], the viremia level was significantly decreased and undetectable on 6 and 9 dpi, respectively (Fig 1C, striped bar). These data indicate that ZIKV infects testes and sperm of mice.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006854.g001Fig 1ZIKV infects and damages testes.AG129 mice were subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 plaque-forming units (PFU)/mouse of ZIKV. Testes, sperm, and sera were collected on 3, 6, and 9 days post-infection (dpi). (A) Confocal microscopy of testes sections immunostained for ZIKV-E (green) and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). (B) Confocal microscopy of sperm immunostained for ZIKV-E (green), CellTracker for cytoplasm (red), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Differential interference contrast (DIC). Scale bar: 100 μm. (C) Plaque-forming assay of viral load in sperm and sera. (D) Total number of sperm (cells/ml). (E) Proportion of sperm with normal and abnormal morphology. Data are mean ± SD (n = 6 mice/group). *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 by Mann-Whitney U test.We also evaluated the pathological features of ZIKV infection in testes. ZIKV infection on 3 dpi did not greatly affect the histological structure of testis as compared with age-matched mock controls. The architecture of the SNT remained intact, with normal germinal epithelium and accumulation of sperm in the lumen (S2A Fig). On 6 and 9 dpi, ZIKV infection caused pathological features in the testis, including involution of the SNT, degeneration of spermatocytes, and the appearance of multinucleated giant cells in the lumen (S2A Fig).In addition, we checked the expression of TRA98 and ETV5. TRA98 is a germ cell marker, whereas ETV5 plays a role in mediating the blood—testis barrier (BTB) [26, 27]. In agreement with previous study [13], the expression of TRA98 and ETV5 was gradually impaired by ZIKV infection (S2B Fig). TRA98 and ETV5 expression was reduced on 6 and 9 dpi as compared with controls (S2B Fig). These testicular pathological features suggest that ZIKV may impair spermatogenesis.To confirm this notion, we evaluated sperm quality in terms of sperm count and morphology [28]. ZIKV did not affect sperm count on 3 dpi, but on 6 and 9 dpi, sperm number was significantly lower in ZIKV-infected than control mice (Fig 1D). Also, as early as 3 dpi, the proportion of abnormal sperm was greater in ZIKV-infected than controls (Fig 1E) and was even greater on 6 and 9 dpi in ZIKV-infected mice (Fig 1E). Confocal images showed abnormal sperm with short tail, hairpin tail, and bent middle piece in ZIKV-infected mice (S2C Fig). Overall, these data suggest that ZIKV infection damages testes and reduces sperm quality.ZIKV infection increases testicular oxidative stress and inflammatory responseTaking into account that reactive oxygen species (ROS) play a role in viral pathogenesis as well as testicular pathology [15–18], we measured whether ZIKV infection increases testicular oxidative stress. Semen parameters have been widely used to gauge testicular pathology associated with oxidative stress [18]. A high level of ROS in semen is linked to poor sperm quality [29]. Moreover, a low expression of antioxidant enzymes including GPx4 is associated with abnormal spermatogenesis [30, 31]. We prospectively evaluated testicular oxidative stress of ZIKV-infected mice with or without treatment with the antioxidant ebselen (EBS) as outlined in Fig 2A. EBS at 10 mg/kg body weight (bw) has been shown to reduce testicular oxidative stress and testicular damage in animal study [20]. ROS levels were higher in sperm from ZIKV-infected mice than controls as early as 3 dpi (Fig 2B; gray vs. white bar). Notably, therapeutic treatments with EBS (10 mg/kg bw/mouse/ip/day) after ZIKV challenge significantly decelerated the elevated ROS levels in sperm on 6 and 9 dpi (Fig 2B, striped vs. gray bar). We further evaluated the level of nitric oxide (NO) in sperm because EBS has been demonstrated to inhibit the catalytic activity of nitric oxide synthase [23]. Consistently, ZIKV infection significantly increased NO level in sperm and treatment with EBS could repress the level (S3A Fig).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006854.g002Fig 2ZIKV infection increases testicular oxidative stress.(A) Schematic experimental design. Mice were subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 PFU/mouse of ZIKV. Mice were intraperitoneally treated with the antioxidant ebselen (EBS; 10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on day 1–2 (group: 3-dpi), day 1–5 (group: 6-dpi), or day 1–6 (group: 9-dpi) after infection. Sperm was collected on 3, 6, and 9 dpi. (B) Intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) assay. ROS levels in sperms were measured by use of the OxiSelect intracellular ROS indicator, with H2O2-treated sperms as a positive control. Relative fluorescence intensity was determined by use of a fluorescence plate reader. (C) Relative fluorescence intensity of GPx4 to CellTracker. (D) Relative fluorescence intensity of SPATA18 to CellTracker. Data are mean ± SD (n = 6 mice or 5 random confocal fields/group). *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 by Kruskal-Wallis, Bonferroni post-hoc test.Moreover, the expression of the scavenging enzyme GPx4, the most highly expressed GPx isoform that supports the middle piece structure of sperm [22], was also affected by ZIKV infection. Control sperm showed normal morphology with expression of GPx4 in the middle piece (S3B Fig). ZIKV infection increased GPx4 expression in sperm on 3 dpi, presumably due to the altered cellular response associated with viral replication (Fig 2C and S3B Fig; Mock vs. ZIKV). However, on 6 and 9 dpi, GPx4 expression was lower in infected than control sperm (Fig 2C and S3B Fig). Remarkably, sperm of ZIKV-infected mice receiving EBS treatment showed significantly improved GPx4 expression on 6 and 9 dpi (Fig 2C and S3B Fig; ZIKV vs. ZIKV+EBS). In addition, we evaluated the spermatogenesis-associated-18 homolog (SPATA18/MIEAP) that also mediates both oxidative stress and structural stability of sperm. SPATA18 is involved in eliminating oxidized mitochondrial proteins and reducing ROS generation [32, 33]. In addition, poor expression of SPATA18 adversely affects the spermatogenesis and morphology of sperm [34, 35]. SPATA18 was detected in the head, middle piece and upper tail of control sperm but its expression was lower in sperm of ZIKV-infected mice as early as 3 dpi (Fig 2D and S3C Fig; Mock vs. ZIKV). This adverse effect of ZIKV infection on SPATA18 expression could be significantly alleviated by EBS treatment (Fig 2D and S3C Fig; ZIKV vs. ZIKV+EBS).We further assessed testicular inflammatory response because high level of ROS may act as signaling molecules to provoke up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines [36]. On 9 dpi, ZIKV significantly increased the production of seminal inflammatory cytokines including IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-γ and G-CSF (Fig 3A; white vs. gray bar). EBS treatment significantly reduced the levels of ZIKV-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines particularly IL-1β, IL-6 and G-CSF (Fig 3A, gray vs. striped bar). In addition, a massive infiltration of CD45+ and IL-1β+ cells was observed in the SNT of ZIKV-infected testes (Fig 3B and 3C), while EBS treatment reduced the testicular infiltration of CD45+ and IL-1β+ cells (Fig 3B and 3C). Taken together, ZIKV infection increases testicular oxidative stress and inflammatory response, which can be alleviated by treatment with the antioxidant EBS.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006854.g003Fig 3EBS reduces testicular inflammatory response and leucocyte infiltration.AG129 mice subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 PFU/mouse of ZIKV were intraperitoneally treated with EBS (10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on day 1–6 after infection. Testes and sperm were collected on 9 dpi. (A) Cytokine profile of seminal fluid on 9 dpi. Cytokine levels were evaluated by ELISA array. Data are mean ± standard deviation (n = 5 mice/group). A two-tailed 0.01 significance level; a (Mock vs. ZIKV) and b (ZIKV vs. ZIKV+EBS) by Kruskal-Wallis, Bonferroni Post Hoc Test. (B-C) Confocal microscopy of testes sections immunostained for CD45 (green, B), IL-1β (red, C), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Scale bar: 100 μm.Antioxidant EBS alleviates ZIKV-associated testicular pathologyThe role of ROS and pro-inflammatory cytokines in tissue injury has been noted [37]. So, we evaluated whether the inhibitory effect of EBS on testicular oxidative stress and inflammatory response may affect testicular pathology of ZIKV-infected mice on 9 dpi. The testes of control mice showed a regular structure of SNTs, with normal germinal epithelium and accumulation of sperm in the lumen (Fig 4A). In contrast, ZIKV-infected mice showed involution of SNTs, with degeneration of spermatogenic cells in the lumen (Fig 4A). Notably, ZIKV-infected mice receiving EBS treatment during 1–6 dpi displayed a minor pathological feature of SNTs, with few degenerated spermatogenic cells in the lumen (Fig 4A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006854.g004Fig 4Antioxidant EBS alleviates ZIKV-associated testicular pathology.AG129 mice subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 PFU/mouse of ZIKV were intraperitoneally treated with EBS (10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on 1–6 dpi. Testes and semen were collected on 9 dpi. (A) Histology of testes sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Arrows indicate lumen (green), sperm (red), blood capillary (blue), interstitial cell (yellow), and degeneration of SNT (black). Scale bar: 200 μm. (B) Confocal microscopy of testes sections immunostained for TRA98 (green, germ cells), ETV5 (red, blood—testis barrier), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Differential interference contrast (DIC). Scale bar: 100 μm. (C) Total number of sperm (cell/ml). (D) Proportion of sperm with normal and abnormal morphology. Data are mean ± SD (n = 6 mice/group). **P<0.01 by Kruskal-Wallis, Bonferroni post-hoc test. (E) Confocal microscopy of sperm morphology with CellTracker staining for cytoplasm (red) and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Scale bar: 100 μm. Arrows indicate sperm with abnormal morphology.In addition, the expression of TRA98 and ETV5 was lower in ZIKV-infected than control testes (Fig 4B). The expression of TRA98 and ETV5 was improved in ZIKV-infected mice receiving EBS versus infected mice receiving solvent (Fig 4B). Sperm parameters were also significantly improved with EBS treatment. Total sperm count was more than three-fold higher in ZIKV-infected mice receiving EBS than those receiving solvent (Fig 4C). This improvement was accompanied by a better sperm morphology profile. EBS- and solvent-treated mice showed about 30% and 70% sperm with abnormal morphology, respectively (Fig 4D and 4E). Hence, EBS treatment attenuated the ZIKV-induced testicular pathology.Antioxidant EBS improves testicular oxidative stress, cytokine profile, and pathology of ZIKV-infected C57BL/6 miceTo address the impact of lacking interferon signaling on our findings with AG129 mice, we further performed ZIKV infection study by use of wild-type C57BL/6 mice with anti-IFNAR1 antibody pretreatment as outlined in Fig 5A. ZIKV infection significantly increased NO and ROS levels in sperm and both of them can be reduced by treatment with EBS after ZIKV challenge (Fig 5B and 5C). In addition, ZIKV infection significantly induced seminal inflammatory cytokines including IL-6, IL-10, G-CSF and GM-CSF (Fig 5D; ZIKV vs. Mock). Treatment with EBS repressed the levels of inflammatory cytokines particularly IL-6, G-CSF and GM-CSF (Fig 5D; ZIKV vs. ZIKV+EBS). Slight variation of seminal cytokine profile was noted between C57BL/6 and AG129 mouse models, probably due to the difference on genetic background and/or susceptibility to ZIKV. Viremia could be detected on 2 dpi and EBS treatment slightly reduced the viremia level (Fig 5E). Moreover, ZIKV-E was detected in interstitial cells and primary layer of SNT where germ and sertoli cells are resided (Fig 5F; ZIKV), whereas EBS treatment greatly limited the expression of ZIKV-E in the interstitial cells (Fig 5F; ZIKV+EBS). The expression of ZIKV-E in SNT was accompanied with the downregulation of TRA98 (Fig 5F; ZIKV), while TRA98 remained largely unaffected in EBS-treated mice (Fig 5F; ZIKV+EBS). ZIKV infection also caused degeneration of spermatogenic cells in the lumen of SNT (Fig 5G; ZIKV). In contrast, testis of EBS-treated mice displayed a relatively normal histological structure (Fig 5G; ZIKV+EBS). Taken together, ZIKV-induced testicular oxidative stress, inflammatory response, and pathology noted in the wild-type C57BL/6 mice can also be alleviated by EBS treatment.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006854.g005Fig 5EBS improves oxidative stress, cytokine profile, and testicular pathology of ZIKV-infected C57BL/6 mice.(A) Schematic experimental design. C57BL/6 mice were pre-treated with purified anti-mouse IFNAR-1 antibody (1 mg/kg body weight/mouse/intraperitoneal) one day prior subcutaneous infection of ZIKV (1x105 PFU/mouse) in the footpad. Mice were intraperitoneally treated with EBS (10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on 1–6 dpi. Testes and sperm were collected on 9 dpi. (B-C) Intracellular nitric oxide (NO) and reactive oxygen species (ROS) assays. NO (B) and ROS (C) levels in sperms were measured by use of the OxiSelect intracellular NO and ROS indicator, respectively. H2O2-treated sperms as a positive control. Relative fluorescence intensity was determined by use of a fluorescence plate reader. (D) Cytokine profile of seminal fluid on 9 dpi. Cytokine levels were evaluated by ELISA array. (E) Viremia level on the indicated day after infection. Data are mean ± standard deviation (n = 5 mice/group). *P<0.05 and **P<0.01; a (Mock vs. ZIKV) and b (ZIKV vs. ZIKV+EBS) by Kruskal-Wallis, Bonferroni Post Hoc Test. (F) Confocal microscopy of testes sections immunostained for TRA98 (green, germ cells), ZIKV-E (red), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Differential interference contrast (DIC). Scale bar: 100 μm. (G) Histological analysis of testis sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Arrows indicate lumen (green), sperm (red), blood capillary (blue), interstitial cell (yellow), and degeneration of SNT (black). Scale bar: 200 μm.Antioxidant EBS displays a minor effect on ZIKV replication in vitro and ZIKV-induced lethality in vivoTo address whether the protective effect of EBS on testicular pathology is associated with its antiviral potential against ZIKV, we evaluated the anti-ZIKV activity of EBS. First, we determined the non-cytotoxic doses of EBS with lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release assay on human microglial CHME3 cells. Treatment with EBS up to 25 μM had no cytotoxicity (Fig 6A), but at a higher dose (50 μM) EBS displayed significant cytotoxicity on CHME3 as reported earlier on human hepatoma HepG2 cells [38]. Minor reduction of ZIKV progeny production and viral E protein expression was noted in cells treated with non-cytotoxic 25 μM EBS (Fig 6B and 6C). Furthermore, in AG129 mice challenged with ZIKV, treatment with EBS on 1–6 dpi displayed a minor effect on overall animal survival and viremia level (Fig 6D and 6E). However, EBS treatment greatly limited the expression of ZIKV-E in testes as compared with solvent control, which showed a disperse expression of ZIKV-E in interstitial and spermatogenic cells (Fig 6F). Moreover, as analyzed by western blotting, EBS treatment reduced the expression of ZIKV-E in testis (2.2 fold reduction) and brain (1.4 fold reduction), but not in the spleen (S4 Fig). Thus, EBS exhibited a weak anti-ZIKV activity in culture cells and a tissue-specific antiviral activity in challenged mice. Therefore, the protective effect of EBS on testicular pathology is predominantly associated with its property to reduce testicular oxidative stress and inflammatory response.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006854.g006Fig 6The effects of EBS treatment on viral replication in vitro and ZIKV-induced lethality in vivo.(A) EBS cytotoxicity assay. Human microglial CHME3 cells were treated with solvent or the indicated concentrations of EBS for 24 hours. LDH assays was performed to determine cellular cytotoxicity. Data are mean ± SD (n = 5 mice/group or 3 independent experiments). **P < 0.01 by Kruskal-Wallis, Bonferroni post-hoc test. (B-C) Human microglial CHME3 cells were infected with ZIKV (Multiplicity of infection: 0.1) in the presence or absence of EBS for 24 hours. (B) Plaque-forming assay of viral progeny production in culture supernatants. (C) Immunofluorescence microscopy was performed on cells immunostained for ZIKV-E (green) and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). (D-F) AG129 mice were subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 PFU/mouse of ZIKV. Mice were intraperitoneally treated with EBS (5 or 10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on 1–6 dpi marked by arrows. Mice survival was presented as percentage of survival. The median survival time (T50) is presented. Survival curves were compared by the use of Log-rank test (Vehicle control vs. EBS 5 mg, P = 0.1327 and Vehicle control vs. EBS 10 mg, P = 0.0505). (E) Viremia level of mice receiving EBS (10 mg/kg body weight) or solvent control. (F) Testicular distribution of ZIKV in mice receiving EBS (10 mg/kg body weight) or solvent control. Confocal microscopy of testes sections immunostained for ZIKV-E (green) and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Scale bar: 100 μm.Antioxidant EBS prevents sexual transmission of ZIKVWe then examined whether EBS treatment may also prevent sexual transmission of ZIKV. Animal models for studying sexual infection of ZIKV have been reported [39–41]. Here, we performed sperm—vaginal transfer from one male to one female mouse as outlined in Fig 7A. Briefly, 50 μl of sperm sample was collected from EBS-treated or solvent-treated ZIKV-infected mice at the indicated time and used for vaginal inoculation into female mice by use of a bent, blunt-end 22-gauge needle to avoid uterine injury. Before this experiment, we evaluated the effect of EBS treatment on ZIKV level in sperm by plaque-forming assay. Treatment with EBS significantly reduced the ZIKV level in sperm as compared with solvent treatment on 6 dpi (Fig 7B; 6-dpi). Although EBS treatment was stopped on 6 dpi, the level of ZIKV in sperm remained significantly lower than in controls on 9 dpi (Fig 7B; 9-dpi).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006854.g007Fig 7Antioxidant EBS prevents sexual transmission of ZIKV.(A) Schematic experimental design of sexual transmission. AG129 mice subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 PFU/mouse of ZIKV were intraperitoneally treated with EBS (10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on day 1–5 (group: 6-dpi), or day 1–6 (group: 9-dpi) after infection. Sperm and sera were collected on 6 and 9 dpi. Sperm (50 μl) was used for vaginal inoculation into female mice (1 male to 1 female mouse). (B) Plaque-forming assay of viral load in sperm and sera. (C) Survival of female mice receiving sperm. (D) Relative quantitative analysis of ZIKV RNA in brain, ovaries and fallopian tubes (OV+FT), and spleen of recipient female mice. Data are mean ± SD (n = 6 mice/group). *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 by Mann-Whitney U test. Survival curves of female mice were compared by Log-rank test (**P = 0.0005).Next, we used this infectious sperm to challenge female mice by vaginal inoculation. The survival of female mice receiving sperm from solvent-treated mice collected on 6 dpi was 50%, whereas no female mice receiving sperm from EBS-treated mice died (Fig 7C; black vs. empty circle). Sperm from solvent-treated mice collected on 9 dpi led to 0% survival of recipient female mice, whereas 83.33% of female mice receiving sperm from EBS-treated mice survived (Fig 7C; black vs. empty triangle). High viremia was observed in all of the female mice receiving sperm from solvent-treated mice. In contrast, viremia could only be detected in one of the female mice receiving sperm from EBS-treated mice (S5 Fig), well correlating with the survival data.We also tested the efficacy of other antioxidants, vitamin C and quercetin, to improve testicular pathology and prevent sexual transmission of ZIKV (S6 Fig). Vitamin C and quercetin are the most abundant antioxidants found in dietary sources [42]. Treatment with vitamin C and quercetin did not affect the overall survival of recipient female mice. However, the median survival time (T50) of female mice receiving sperm from vitamin C-treated mice was significantly improved than those receiving sperm from solvent-treated mice (S6D Fig; black vs. empty circle; T50 = 13.5 vs. 17.5 days; P = 0.011). The T50 did not differ between female mice receiving sperm from quercetin-treated mice and controls (S6D Fig; black circle vs. triangle; T50 = 13.5 vs. 12 days; P = 0.677). These data suggest that different antioxidants may have different efficacy in preventing the sexual transmission of ZIKV. Finally, we examined tissue from female mice receiving sperm transfer to confirm the systemic infection of ZIKV. RNA of ZIKV was detected in brain, ovary-fallopian tubes, and spleen (Fig 7D). Collectively, these data suggest that EBS treatment may prevent seminal transmission of ZIKV.DiscussionHere we show the disease progression of ZIKV in the testicular tissue of AG129 mice lacking interferon receptors and also in wild-type C57BL/6 mice pretreated with anti-IFNAR-1 antibody; both animal models are useful for studying ZIKV replication, tropism, immunity, and transmission [41, 43, 44]. In addition, we developed an animal model to study male-to-female sexual transmission of ZIKV and identified a possible therapeutic intervention to minimize the transmission. ZIKV progressively infects testis by gaining access to interstitial cells, the basement membrane of the SNT, spermatogenic cells, and sperm. ZIKV infection leads to several testicular pathologies, including involution of the SNT, degeneration of spermatogenic cells, oligospermia, a high proportion of sperm with abnormal morphology, poor expression of TRA98 and ETV5. In agreement with a previous study [14], our data suggest that ZIKV infection may cause male infertility. Moreover, ZIKV infection increased ROS levels and impaired cellular antioxidant of sperm. ROS is considered a risk factor for some diseases including cancer and infection [45, 46]. Our data indicate that high ROS levels may be associated with high level of seminal pro-inflammatory cytokines, poor testicular outcome and high level of infectious ZIKV in sperm. ROS derived as a byproduct of viral replication can accelerate pro-inflammatory response to cause endothelial barrier disruption and tissue injury [15, 37]. Thus, oxidative system may be one of the cellular factors attributed to testicular pathogenesis and sexual transmission of ZIKV. In testicular dysfunction, reducing ROS levels is a common therapeutic strategy to improve the disease prognosis [17, 18]. We used this strategy to alleviate testicular pathogenesis and prevent seminal transmission of ZIKV.Sexual transmission of ZIKV could be as critical as mosquito-borne transmission in the context of maternal infection. By August 2016, the World Health Organization had documented the sexual transmission of ZIKV in 11 countries worldwide [12]. The presence of infectious ZIKV in the semen poses a potential risk of sexual transmission. However, one may argue a sustainable transmission of ZIKV via sexual intercourse [47]. Our data indicate that seminal ROS and inflammatory cytokines may contribute to successful sexual transmission of ZIKV. Despite the substantial level of ZIKV detected in the sperm of EBS-treated mice on 6 dpi (Fig 7B; ZIKV+EBS, 6-dpi), the sperm failed to establish ZIKV transmission in female mice (Fig 7C; empty circle). Furthermore, the sperm of EBS-treated mice on 9 dpi caused only 16.67% mortality in female mice, although the ZIKV level in sperm did not greatly differ from that of solvent-treated mice on 6 dpi, which killed 50% of the transmitted female mice (Fig 7B; ZIKV+EBS [9-dpi] vs. ZIKV [6-dpi], P = 0.37). This finding can be explained in part by a relatively lower level of seminal ROS in EBS- than solvent-treated mice (Fig 2B; ZIKV+EBS [9-dpi] vs. ZIKV [6-dpi], P = 0.03). Correlation study and regression modeling are warranted to determine whether the level of ROS and inflammatory cytokines can be a predictor of successful sexually transmitted ZIKV. It has recently become apparent that semen acts directly on tissues in the female reproductive tract. Indeed, a substantial level of seminal pro-inflammatory cytokines and ROS may provoke inflammatory responses in the female reproductive tract and cause tissue injury [37, 48]. Consequently, these processes may create access to and favorable conditions for seminal infectious ZIKV to establish an initial infection in the female reproductive tract before its systemic infection.EBS displays a weak effect on ZIKV replication in culture cells and ZIKV-induced lethality in challenged animals. However, a tissue-specific restriction on ZIKV was noted in the infected mice. We speculate that the protective effect of EBS on testicular pathology and sexual transmission of ZIKV is associated with its efficacy to reduce the level of oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory cytokine in testes. EBS, a synthetic antioxidant, has a unique characteristic as compared with the other antioxidants. EBS may reduce the production of NO by inhibiting the catalytic activity of nitric oxide synthases (NOS) [23]. Consequently, EBS may also suppress the level of NO-associated inflammatory cytokines [49]. Recently, EBS has been demonstrated to reduce the level of multidrug-resistant staphylococcal-associated inflammatory cytokines including IL-1β and IL-6 [50]. A substantial level of NO activates IL-6 production through MAPK signaling pathway and increased IL-6 mRNA stability [24]. In addition, the protective effects of EBS against oxidative stress rely on its GPx-like activity [19]. It is an effective scavenger of lipid hydroperoxides mimicking the action of GPx4 [21]. GPx4 is one of the most important GPx isoforms in a testicular context and is abundantly expressed in spermatogenic cells, particularly sperm [22, 51]. Therefore, EBS may have beneficial properties for the treatment of testicular pathology while more effective testis-specific drugs or antioxidants remain to be discovered. Our data indicate that EBS also displays efficacy to reduce ZIKV load in brain. Interestingly, GPx4 plays a role in brain development and neuronal apoptosis [52]. GPx4 deficient mice die in utero at midgestation with a major defect in embryonic brain development [53]. The implication of GPx4 in female reproduction remains unknown and further studies to evaluate whether EBS may alleviate ZIKV pathogenesis in female reproductive system are warranted.Antioxidants have been used to improve the prognosis of viral diseases. In a case report, high doses of intravenous vitamin C given over 2 days may have resolved symptoms of a patient with Chikungunya [54]. In addition, vitamin C given over 3 days in increment doses up to 75 g substantially improved symptoms of a patient with ZIKV infection [55]. The mechanism of action of antioxidant vitamin C remains controversial. However, studies suggest that vitamin C reduces inflammatory responses and ROS levels in a glutathione-independent mechanism [56, 57]. Similarly, a flavonolic antioxidant, quercetin, displays its antioxidant properties in part by suppressing the inflammatory response and scavenging peroxyl radicals [58, 59]. However, we did not see a potential use of quercetin (10 mg/kg bw) to prevent sexual transmission of ZIKV. We speculate that the efficacy of antioxidants to prevent sexual transmission of ZIKV may vary.The dosage and treatment duration of antioxidant as a therapeutic agent must be carefully interpreted. Antioxidants have beneficial effects at a physiologic dose. However, at a relatively high dose, they may have unfavorable effects [42]. The dosage of 10 mg EBS/kg bw/day for mice is equivalent to 0.811 mg/kg bw/day for humans, as calculated by a published method [60]; thus, for a 60-kg person, the dosage would be 48.6 mg/day. We used the treatment duration of EBS of 6 days because viremia can still be detected on 6 dpi. EBS is being used in clinical trials for various diseases [19]. A study to evaluate the safety and pharmacokinetics of 200 mg EBS oral capsule (SPI-1005) in healthy adults has been completed (NCT01452607). Therefore, the present study strongly argues for a potential clinical use of EBS to alleviate the testicular pathogenesis with ZIKV infection and its sexual transmission.Materials and methodsEthics statementThe mouse experiments were conducted according to the guideline outlined by Council of Agriculture Executive Yuan, Republic of China. This animal protocol was approved by the Academia Sinica Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol no. 16-06-966) and were performed in accordance with the guidelines. Infection was performed in mice under isoflurane anesthesia and all efforts were made to minimize animal suffering.Mouse infection experimentsFive-week-old male AG129 mice with interferon-α/β and -γ receptor knockout were subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5×104 plaque-forming units (PFU) of ZIKV per mouse. Testes, sperm, and sera were collected on 3, 6, and 9 days post-infection (dpi). Five-week-old male C57BL/6 mice were pre-treated with purified anti-mouse IFNAR-1 antibody (1 mg/kg body weight/mouse/intraperitoneal), one day prior to subcutaneous inoculation of ZIKV (1×105 PFU/mouse) in the footpad. Testes, sperm, and sera were collected on 9 dpi. To study the effect of the antioxidant ebselen (EBS, Cayman Chemical, CAS 60940-34-3) on testicular pathology, sexual transmission, and ZIKV-induced lethality, mice were treated with EBS (10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/intraperitoneal/day) or solvent control (phosphate buffered saline [PBS]+10% polyethylene glycol as a co-solvent) on days 1–2 (Group: 3-dpi), 1–5 (Group: 6-dpi), or 1–6 (Group: 9-dpi) after ZIKV infection. To study the effect of the antioxidants vitamin C (L-Ascorbic acid, Sigma, A4403) and quercetin (Alfa Aesar, A15807), mice were treated with vitamin C (Vit C, 10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/intraperitoneal/day), quercetin (Quer, 10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/intraperitoneal/day), or solvent control (PBS) on day 1–6 after infection. To study the sexual transmission of ZIKV, we used a modified protocol of artificial insemination in mice [61]. Estrous cycle may interfere the susceptibility of mice to transgenital transmission of ZIKV [44]. Therefore, four-week-old female AG129 mice were used to minimize the effect of hormonal staging in evaluating the efficacy of EBS. Briefly, 50 μl sperm of one male mouse was transferred into the vagina of one female mouse. A 120°-bent, blunt-end 22-gauge needle (Taiwan Vacuum Technology, D6622-45) was used for vaginal inoculation to avoid uterine injury. The mice were checked daily for severe symptoms including limb paralysis. Euthanasia of mice with severe limb paralysis was performed as the endpoint of animal survival. The brain, spleen, ovaries and fallopian tubes were immediately isolated after the animal died for estimating ZIKV RNA level.Virus propagation, plaque-forming assay, and quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)ZIKV PRVABC59 strain (2015 Puerto Rico strain, Genbank accession: KU501215) was kindly provided by the Centers for Disease Control, Taiwan. The virus was propagated in C6/36 mosquito cells (ATCC: CRL-1660) and the level of infectious virus particles was measured by plaque-forming assay (PFU/ml) in Vero cells (ATCC: CRL-1587) as described [62]. Total RNA was extracted from homogenized animal tissues by using the RNeasy kit (QIAGEN) and level of ZIKV RNA was analyzed by real-time RT-PCR (Roche LightCycler 2.0). Briefly, cDNA was reverse-transcribed from 1 μg of RNA with random hexamers by using the ThermoScript RT kit (Invitrogen). PCR involved use of the LightCycler FastStart DNA Master PLUS SYBR Green I kit (Roche) with the primers for ZIKV (5′-CCGCTGCCCAACACAAG-3′ and 5′-CCACTAACGTTCTTTTGCAGACAT-3′) and β-actin (5′-TCCTGTGGCATCCACGAAACT-3′ and 5′-GAAGCATTTGCGGTGGACGAT-3′). ZIKV RNA level was normalized to that of actin for relative quantification.Sperm isolation and examinationSperm was isolated as described [61] with modification. To isolate mature sperm, cauda epididymides were placed in 100 μl Vitro Fert medium (Cook Medical, K-RVFE 50) and gently sliced by using an 18-gauge needle. After a few minutes, epididymides were removed and suspension (sperm) was used for evaluating sperm quality, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) level, cytokine profile, plaque-forming assay, and sexual transmission study.Sperm quality (sperm count and morphology) was evaluated according to the guidelines of the World Health Organization [28]. Trypan blue staining was performed and sperm number was determined by using a hemocytometer. Air-dried sperm smears were used for morphological and immunostaining assays. To evaluate sperm morphology by microscopy, sperm smears were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and stained with Hoechst (Invitrogen, H21492) for nuclei and with CellTracker Orange (Invitrogen, C2927) for cytoplasm without permeabilization. For immunofluorescence assay, sperm smears were permeabilized with 0.5% TritonX-100 for 10 min, blocked with 5% skim milk in PBS for 1 hour and immunostained overnight with anti-flavivirus E [63], anti-dsRNA (Scicons, J2), anti-GPx4 (Abcam, Ab125066), or anti-SPATA18 (Abgent, AP13960a) antibodies. Confocal analysis was performed by using confocal laser scanning microscope, ZEISS LSM 700. Fluorescence intensity of confocal images was determined by using ImageJ (US National Institutes of Health). To determine the level of infectious ZIKV, sperm was subjected to five rapid freeze-thaw cycles to release virus particles from sperm before plaque-forming assay.The level of ROS and NO in sperm was determined by using the OxiSelect Intracellular ROS (Cell Biolabs, STA-342) and NO (Cell Biolabs, STA-800) Assay kit, respectively. The fluorescence probe DCFH-DA was used to measure hydroxyl, peroxyl, or other ROS level within a cell, while NO fluorometric probe was used to measure the level of intracellular NO. Briefly, sperm was plated on 96-well black microplates at 5x104 sperm/well, then incubated with 1X DCFH-DA or 1X NO fluorometric probe (diluted in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution without phenol red) for 45 min at 37°C. Sperm treated with 500 μM H2O2 was a positive control. Fluorescence intensity was determined by using a fluorescence reader at 480/530 nm (excitation/emission) [64]. For cytokine assay, sperm samples were centrifuged and supernatants (10 μl) were subjected to mouse inflammatory cytokines multi-analyte ELISArray (Qiagen, MEM-004A).Histology, immunohistochemistry, and western blot analysisTestes were collected immediately after death and fixed overnight in Bouin’s solution (Sigma, HT10132), washed with 50% alcohol and then underwent tissue processing and embedding. Haematoxylin-eosin staining was performed on 3-μm-thick testes sections for histology. For immunohistochemistry, testes sections were immunostained with anti-flavivirus E [63], anti-TRA98 (Abcam, ab82527), anti-ETV5 (Abcam, ab102010), anti-CD45 (Novusbio, NB100-77417), and anti-IL1β (Abcam, ab2105) antibodies. Testis, brain, and spleen were digested in cold RIPA lysis buffer, sonicated at 21% amplitude for 2 min, and then incubated on ice for 30 min. Homogenate was centrifuge at 10,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C and supernatants were collected for western blot analysis to evaluate the expression of ZIKV-E protein.Cell culture studyHuman microglial CHME3 cells [65] were grown in DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum. Cytotoxicity of EBS was determined by using lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay (Roche). Briefly, cells treated with EBS at the indicated doses for overnight underwent LDH assay. Sample absorbance was determined by using an ELISA reader (molecular device) at 490 nm. For antiviral study, cells in 12-well plates were adsorbed with ZIKV at 0.1 of multiplicity of infection for 2 hours with the indicated doses of EBS, washed thoroughly to remove unbound viruses, then incubated for another 24 hours in the presence or absence of EBS. The antiviral effect of EBS was evaluated by immunofluorescence and plaque-forming assays.Statistical analysisData were compared by Mann-Whitney or Kruskal-Wallis Bonferroni post-hoc test. Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05. Survival curves were descriptively analyzed by using SigmaPlot v10.0 (Systat Software) and compared by Log-rank test with use of Prism v5.0 (GraphPad Software).Supporting informationS1 FigZIKV infects sperm.Confocal microscopy images of pool sperm immunostained for double-stranded dsRNA (green), CellTracker for cytoplasm (red), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Scale bar: 100 μm. n = 6 mice/group.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigZIKV damages testes and reduces sperm quality.(A) Histological analysis of testis sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Arrows indicate lumen (green), sperm (red), blood capillary (blue), interstitial cell (yellow), and degeneration of SNT (black). Scale bar: 200 μm. (B) Confocal microscopy of testis sections immunostained for TRA98 (green, germ cells), ETV5 (red, blood—testis barrier), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Differential interference contrast (DIC). Scale bar: 100 μm. (C) Confocal microscopy of pool sperm stained with CellTracker for cytoplasm (red) and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Arrows indicate abnormal sperm morphology. Scale bar: 100 μm. n = 6 mice/group.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigZIKV infection increases testicular oxidative stress.(A) Intracellular NO assay. NO level in 9 dpi sperm was measured by use of OxiSelect intracellular NO indicator. Relative fluorescence intensity was determined by use of fluorescence plate reader. Data are mean ± SD (n = 5 mice/group). **P<0.01 by Kruskal-Wallis, Bonferroni post-hoc test. (B) Confocal microscopy of sperm immunostained for GPx4 (green), CellTracker for cytoplasm (red), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). (C) Confocal microscopy of sperm immunostained for SPATA18 (green), CellTracker for cytoplasm (red), and Hoechst for nuclei (blue). Scale bar: 100 μm.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 FigThe effect of EBS on ZIKV load in testes and other tissues.AG129 mice subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 PFU/mouse of ZIKV were intraperitoneally treated with EBS (10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on 1–6 dpi. Testis, brain, and spleen were collected on 9 dpi. Western blot analysis of protein levels of ZIKV-E and β-actin for loading control; Data are ratios of ZIKV-E and β-actin density (n = 5 mice/group). *P<0.05 by Mann-Whitney U test.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigViremia level of female mice receiving sperm from ZIKV-infected mice.AG129 mice subcutaneously infected in the footpad with 5x104 PFU/mouse of ZIKV were intraperitoneally treated with EBS (10 mg/kg body weight/mouse/day) or solvent control on 1–6 dpi. Sperm (50 μl) collected on 9 dpi was used for vaginal inoculation into female AG129 mice (1 male to 1 female mouse). Plaque-forming assay of viral load in sera of female mice on the indicated day after sperm transfer. Data are individual and mean (n = 5 mice/group). **P<0.01 by Mann-Whitney U test.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S6 FigEffect of other antioxidants on sexual transmission of ZIKV.(A) Histological analysis of testis sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Arrows indicate lumen (green), sperm (red), blood capillary (blue), interstitial cell (yellow), and degeneration of SNT (black). Scale bar: 200 μm. (B) Intracellular ROS assay. ROS levels in sperm were measured by use of the OxiSelect intracellular ROS indicator. Relative fluorescence intensity was determined by use of a fluorescence plate reader. (C) Plaque-forming assay of viral load in sperm. (D) Survival of female mice receiving semen transfer. Testes and sperm were collected on day 9 after infection. Data are mean ± SD (n = 6 mice/group). *P<0.05 and **P<0.01 by Kruskal-Wallis, Bonferroni post-hoc test. The median survival time (T50) is presented. Survival curves of female mice were compared by Log-rank test (*P = 0.01). Abbreviation: Vit C, vitamin C; Quer, quercetin.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: DENGUE VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Zika virus tropism and pathogenesis: understanding clinical impacts and transmission dynamics

IntroductionThe Zika virus (ZIKV) is a member of the Flaviviridae family and falls under the Flavivirus genus. Within this genus, other viruses like yellow fever (YFV), tick-borne encephalitis (TBEV), dengue hemorrhagic fever (DENV), and West Nile fever (WNV) viruses are also included [1]. This virus is one of the arboviruses and is transmitted by mosquitoes [2]. Structurally, it is an 11 kilobases (kb) long positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus. The genome of this virus initially encodes a polyprotein, which is finally converted into three structural proteins and seven non-structural proteins by viral and cellular proteases. The structural protein C forms the icosahedral capsid of the virus and finally, the virus is enclosed by a lipid envelope that comes from the host cell [3–5]. The virus was primarily separated from a rhesus monkey in Uganda in 1947 [6], its first isolation from humans occurred in 1954 in Nigeria [7]. Although ZIKV prevalence has increased since 2007, it was initially discovered according to the evidence in the American continent in 2015 as an epidemic in adults, with symptoms including Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), multiple organ failure, and birth defects, such as the birth of babies with neurological disorders, microcephaly, and the death of the fetus [8–10].Based on phylogenetic analysis, the virus is divided into two lineages: Asian and African. According to the research, Asian lineages exhibit more genetic diversity and a greater number of single nucleotide variants in the viral genome compared to African lineages [11]. Although transmission by the Aedes mosquito is the main route of ZIKV transmission, the virus can also be transmitted through blood, vertical mother-to-child, and sexual contact [12–16]. Furthermore, according to studies, this virus also exists in biological body fluids such as breast milk, saliva, urine, and semen [17–20]. Different cells including peripheral dendritic cells, macrophages, various types of neurons, and placental cells are considered as ZIKV target cells [9]. After entering the body, the virus is disseminated to other parts of the body through the bloodstream [21]. According to studies, the latent period of the virus is between 3 and 12 days. However, in pregnant women, the infection may persist longer, leading to viral multiplication in the brain due to its teratogenic effects [22]. A maculopapular rash accompanied by limb edema, headache, and fever has been seen in most adults infected with the ZIKV. Also, symptoms such as thrombocytopenia, encephalitis, and meningitis are rarely seen in adults with severe disease. In addition, the ZIKV can be associated with neurological complications such as GBS [23–26]. According to the studies, no vaccine has been developed to be used by the general public. It is crucial to emphasize that, based on previous studies, no new drug has been specifically created for this virus. Instead, the treatments used have mainly been repurposed from medications originally designed for other pathogens. In addition to these drugs, antibodies are also employed as part of the treatment [27].This study seeks to conduct an in-depth examination of ZIKV pathogenesis and its clinical manifestations by drawing on current knowledge and existing research. The objective is to not only provide a thorough understanding of the mechanisms through which ZIKV causes disease but also to analyze the range of symptoms associated with infection. By consolidating and expanding on this information, we aim to contribute valuable insights that can guide the development of more effective prevention measures and treatment strategies, ultimately improving public health responses to future ZIKV outbreaks.Genome structure and tropismThe ZIKV is characterized as an enveloped, single-stranded RNA virus. Its genetic material contains an ORF encoding a polyprotein, which is subsequently cleaved into ten distinct proteins by both cellular and viral proteases. Among these proteins, three function as structural components: envelope (E), membrane precursor (prM), and capsid (C) proteins. The remaining seven proteins, known as nonstructural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5), play essential roles in the replication and assembly of the virus [3–5, 28]. Figure 1 provides a complete illustration of the virus genome and its associated proteins.Fig. 1ZIKV has a single-strand positive sense RNA genome, as well as an icosahedral capsid. The figure shows the polyprotein structure which is encoded by the ZIKV genome, in Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) membrane [14, 118, 119]Moreover, several well-established ZIKV receptor candidates include receptors typically linked to other flaviviruses, such as Dendritic Cell-Specific Intercellular adhesion molecule-3-Grabbing Non-integrin (DC-SIGN). Two other receptors, T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 (TIM-1) and the Tyro3, Axl, and Mer receptors (TAM family), are also involved. These receptors belong to the phosphatidylserine receptor family [29]. Among these receptors, TAM receptor AXL plays a major role [30]. The presence of Non-structural protein 1 (NS1) antigenemia is instrumental in the ingestion of flaviviruses by mosquitoes [31]. Based on the findings of Yang Liu et al., the existence of NS1 in the bloodstream of the infected host affects ZIKV infection in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. They found that an alanine-to-valine amino acid substitution at residue 188 in NS1 increased NS1 antigenicity, which in turn increased ZIKV’s ability to be transmitted from hosts to vectors, which could facilitate ZIKV transmission [32].Transmission routesVector-borne transmissionThe ZIKV can be transmitted through various ways (Fig. 2). This virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, especially those belonging to the Aedes genus [33–35]. Various species of Aedes mosquitoes have been identified as potential carriers, including Aedes africanus, Aedes albopictus, Aedes hensilli, and Aedes aegypti [36]. However, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are regarded as significant transmitters of ZIKV [37]. ZIKV circulates in an enzootic cycle among non-human primates through mosquitoes in sylvatic environments. These infected mosquitoes can then transmit the virus to humans, creating an epidemic cycle. Additionally, the virus may enter human populations via bites from infected Aedes mosquitoes that come from regions experiencing ZIKV outbreaks or spillover from sylvatic habitats [38]. Aedes africanus is believed to be the sylvatic vector of ZIKV, while Aedes henselli has been associated with the outbreak on Yap Island. However, Aedes aegypti is considered the primary vector for outbreaks in the Americas, the Pacific, and Asia [39].Fig. 2ZIKV is an arthropod-born (arbovirus) that can be transmitted through other patterns such as sexual transmission, blood transmission, etc. The vector transmission consists of two cycles: A Enzootic or sylvatic cycle; and B Human or urban cycle. ZIKV can remain stable in urine for a long time. Therefore, urine can play a role in the urban cycle [12, 38, 120–123]Non-vector-borne transmissionThere are several non-vector modes of transmission for ZIKV, such as through sexual intercourse [40–43], and from a mother to her fetus during pregnancy [44–50]. ZIKV might infect children through several ways, including intrauterine, intrapartum, and postnatal routes [46, 51, 52]. Instances of perinatal transmission of the ZIKV from mothers infected during childbirth have been documented, with two such cases identified. In one case, the infant showed no symptoms, while in the other case, the infant presented with a maculopapular rash and thrombocytopenia [44]. The clinical manifestations of the illness in children are strikingly like to those seen in infected adults [53]. Identifying arthralgia in newborns and young children can be challenging. Symptoms may include limping (among ambulatory children), trouble moving or reluctance to move an extremity, discomfort when moving the affected joint actively or passively, irritability, or ache upon palpation [53].As well, the presence of ZIKV in semen and its potential for transmission through sexual contact have raised questions about its ability to breach the blood-testis barrier (BTB) or the Sertoli cell barrier (SCB). The E protein, a key antigenic component of ZIKV, is significant for its crucial role in receptor binding and membrane fusion. Numerous investigations have highlighted the significance of the E protein in the virulence and pathogenicity of ZIKV. Investigations have revealed that ZIKV infection leads to a rearrangement of actin filaments, a process in which the E protein is believed to be involved. This disruption of actin filament dynamics is a contributing factor to the ZIKV infection. In summary, the interplay between the ZIKV E protein and F-actin results in a rearrangement of the F-actin network, ultimately compromising the integrity of the BTB [54]. During the gestation period in mammals, the placenta mainly performs as a barrier, offering both physical and immunological protection between the mother and the developing fetus. Within the placenta, primary human trophoblasts (PHTs), comprising cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, play a crucial role as barrier cells. Syncytiotrophoblasts are particularly significant as they are in straight interaction with maternal blood. In cases involving full-term placentas, PHTs are generally resistant to ZIKV infection because they continually release antiviral interferon lambda 1 (IFNλ1). Additionally, it was noted that the medium derived from uninfected PHT cells exhibited a protective influence against ZIKV infection in non-placental cells. PHT cells themselves displayed elevated levels of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), signifying that IFNλ1 operates both in a paracrine manner (protecting neighboring cells) and an autocrine manner (protecting trophoblast and non-trophoblast cells) to safeguard against ZIKV infection [55]. It has also been shown that trophoblast cell lines obtained from choriocarcinoma explants and early human villous explants were found to be susceptible to ZIKV infection [56]. However, placentas from later stages of pregnancy, which possess a more mature placental barrier, showed heightened resilience against infection. For ZIKV to effectively infect syncytiotrophoblasts, it likely needs to evade the protective mechanisms established by IFNλ1 produced by trophoblasts, along with other antiviral factors that are specific to trophoblasts. Alternatively, the virus may need to find alternative routes to enter the fetal compartment by breaching the placental barrier. This scenario is particularly relevant during the second half of pregnancy, which corresponds to the stage when PHT cells are most abundant. These alternative pathways might involve non-trophoblast infection routes, for instance infecting immune cells or using transcytosis to transport virions complex with maternal antibodies through the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) [57]. Recently, it has been observed that human placental macrophages, identified as Hofbauer cells (HCs), are susceptible to the virus infection [58–60].In the context of immune cells, innate immune cells are probably to be targeted by ZIKV once they breach the trophoblast layer in the placenta. Upon infection, HCs manufactured IFN-α, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and also stimulated genes that are associated with antiviral responses, although it did not significantly induce cell death. ZIKV replication was also observed in human placental cytotrophoblasts, albeit with deferred kinetics and ISG expression. This suggests that ZIKV may replicate within cytotrophoblasts and HCs, potentially facilitating vertical transmission. However, syncytiotrophoblasts are resistant to ZIKV infection, leaving us with the question of how the virus penetrates the cytotrophoblast layer and HCs. Considering that significant morphological changes occur in the human placenta during the first and second half of pregnancy, including the absence of maternal blood interaction with the syncytiotrophoblast layer in the earliest trimester of pregnancy and a substantial reduction in the cytotrophoblast cell layer during pregnancy, the methods for vertical transmission of ZIKV are likely to differ in any stages of pregnancy [57]. Also, The ZIKV may be transmitted via blood transfusions and organ transplants, although the associated risks are not completely understood [61, 62].Pathogenesis in rhesus monkey (RM)The ZIKV was initially isolated from a febrile rhesus monkey (RM) [63], indicating that studying virus replication, immune responses, and certain characteristics of disease progression can be effectively modeled in RMs. In one particular experiment, RMs were inoculated subcutaneously to simulate a mosquito bite, which induced transient viremia and fever [64]. Moreover, another study expanded its scope by examining the tissue tropism throughout the infection. Groups of RMs were necropsied on days 7, 28, or 35 post-inoculations. Seven days following inoculation, viral RNA was found in various tissues. This included lymphoid tissues such as widely distributed lymph nodes and the spleen, joints (especially those proximal to the inoculation site, but also in some distal joint tissues), and peripheral nervous tissues, exclusively the brachial plexus, trigeminal ganglion, and sciatic nerve. Concurrently, the RNA of the virus was linked to the spinal cord (cervical, lumbar, and thoracic regions), although it was not present in the brain and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This could suggest a predilection for nervous tissues but a limitation in the retrograde transportation of the infectious virus into the central nervous system (CNS), or it might imply that CNS infection requires a longer incubation period. RNA from the ZIKV was also identified in the kidneys and bladder of the male RM, but not in the testes or prostate. Collectively, these observations signify that ZIKV spreads rapidly to various tissues in the body, containing lymph nodes, spleen, peripheral nerves, skin, and the genital and urinary tracts. Furthermore, in the female RM, the presence of viral RNA was identified in reproductive organs for example the uterus and vagina. This indicates that these tissues can be infected by the virus and maintain the infection for a minimum of four weeks. This finding could have profound consequences for the transmission of ZIKV and the potential for fetal infections during pregnancy. Additionally, the seeding of the virus into semen via the urethra could represent another possible route of transmission [65].Clinical observations and laboratory findingsClinical manifestationsThe ZIKV is the causative agent of Zika fever, a syndrome characterized by fever, rash, and joint pain that bears a striking resemblance to dengue fever [66]. A significant portion of individuals infected with ZIKV, especially in the period from the 1960s to the 1980s, have exhibited either no symptoms or only mild clinical signs [38]. Notably, severe illness and case fatality rates associated with ZIKV infection are remarkably low, and the symptoms of the illness typically abate within a relatively short timeframe of 2–7 days [67]. The incubation period of ZIKV infection in humans is estimated to span from 3 to 14 days [68]. Furthermore, the viremic period, characterized by the virus's existence in the bloodstream, is generally observed within 3 to 4 days after symptoms onset [69].Evidence has indicated a connection between ZIKV infection and optical/neurological disorders, including optic nerve pallor, chorioretinal scarring, increased intraocular pressure, and corneal clouding at birth [70, 71]. It is estimated that 20–25% of people infected with ZIKV exhibit noticeable symptoms [38]. They exhibit the following symptoms: fatigue [72], arthralgia [73–75], temporary and moderate fever [75], accompanied by maculopapular, itchy rashes (that typically progress descendingly from the face to the extremities) [76], non-purulent conjunctivitis [77–80], and in some cases, redness of the eyes, loss of appetite, vomiting and edema [23, 38], as well as, sore throat, and cough [72, 81]. Clinical signs frequently associated with acute ZIKV infection encompass transient hearing loss [66], subcutaneous haematomas [82], myalgia, asthenia [83], headache, retro-orbital pain [23, 83, 84], and hematospermia [15, 85]. Other uncommon manifestations of ZIKV infection include mucous membrane ulceration, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and thrombocytopenia [86]. Figure 3 provides a detailed overview of the clinical manifestations of ZIKV and their associated neurological complications.Fig. 3Clinical symptoms of ZIKV and their neurological complications include acute myelitis, ocular hypertension, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and Guillain–Barré syndrome [15, 38, 66, 73, 75, 76, 80, 82, 87, 88, 93, 96, 97, 110, 124, 125]Neurological complicationsZIKV is also linked to neurological complications, including GBS, microcephaly [38], and neurological complications such as acute myelitis [87], and meningoencephalitis [88]. Microcephaly is a prenatal condition characterized by underdeveloped brain growth, leading to reduced head size in affected infants, while GBS manifests as muscle weakness stemming from immune-mediated harm to the peripheral nervous system [89]. During a ZIKV outbreak in Bangladesh, patients with ZIKV-associated GBS exhibited involvement of cranial, autonomic, and sensory nerves. Although electrophysiological studies predominantly confirmed most cases as acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) [90]. In Brazil, ZIKV contributed to nearly equivalent incidences of acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) and AIDP [91]. ZIKV-associated GBS is correlated with increased morbidity in the acute phase, frequently presenting with prevalent deficits in cranial nerves and acute neuropathy [92]. Research on fetuses exposed to the ZIKV has revealed occurrences of microcephaly, retardation of intrauterine growth, and CNS damage [46, 47] (Fig. 3).Laboratory findingsDuring ZIKV infection, laboratory values regarding biochemistry and hematology typically remain within normal limits. Nevertheless, during the viremic phase, a subset of patients may exhibit temporary and moderate lymphopenia, leucopenia, or activated lymphocytes. They may also experience monocytosis, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and increased serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase, C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, fibrinogen, and ferritin [83, 84, 93–95]. Cases of cardiac complications related to ZIKV infection include myocarditis, pericarditis, Arrhythmias, and heart failure [96–98]. Additionally, incidence rates of ZIKV infection are observed to be higher in females than males, and it is more common in older individuals than in younger ones [23, 99]. Due to the overlapping signs, the clinical diagnosis of Zika persists challenging in tropical settings, especially in regions with concurrent transmission of dengue and chikungunya viruses [100]. Unlike Chikungunya and Dengue fever, ZIKV is characterized by more noticeable edema of the extremities and conjunctivitis and the ZIKV does not exhibit thrombocytopenia and leukopenia as seen in Chikungunya and Dengue cases [23, 76]. Additionally, malaise and headache in ZIKV fever tend to be less severe, while the maculopapular rash is more pronounced [23]. Table 1 provides a comparison of the clinical symptoms associated with Zika, Dengue, and Chikungunya infections.Table 1Comparison of Zika, Dengue, and Chikungunya clinical symptoms [76]SymptomsZikaDengueChikungunyaFever++++++++++Maculopapular rash+++++++Hepatomegaly−−+++Conjunctivitis+++−+Arthralgia/Myalgia+++++++++Edema of extremities++−−Retro-orbital pain++++ + * −Don’t have/ +HaveNeural dysfunctionThe ZIKV disrupts the natural cell cycle and transcription processes in human neural progenitor cells (hNPC) [101]. Experimental studies have indicated that ZIKV infection leads to significant alterations in neuronal proliferation and migration. Specifically, Asian ZIKV isolates have been found to impede the growth and movement of hNP cells with less cell death. The cerebral cortex's structural development largely relies on the growth and movement of hNP cells. Subsequently, neurons in the cerebral cortex mature by extending neurites and forming synaptic connections. The cohesion of the neurite structure is crucial for the proper operation of the central nervous system (CNS). However, ZIKV infection can disrupt this process, affecting the cytoskeletal organization, microtubule dynamics, and neurite outgrowth. To assess the effect of ZIKV on neurons, researchers measured the rate of neurite growth and ramification. The High multiplicity of infections of the Asian SPH isolate of ZIKV significantly reduces neurite numbers, neurite length, and the number of branch points. Based on medical documentation of congenital ZIKV infection, ocular abnormalities, and seizures have also been documented. The observed impairment in neurite proliferation and migration is associated with seizures and cognitive deficits [102].As well, distinct interactions between ZIKV and human proteins related to brain development contribute to the virus's influence on the nervous system. One of these interactions involves NS4A binding with Ankyrin Repeat and LEM Domain-Containing Protein 2 (ANKLE2), which is particularly intriguing [103]. Notably, mutations in ANKLE2 have been linked to autosomal recessive microcephaly in humans, as documented in previous studies [104]. These discoveries collectively imply that the expression of NS4A may hinder critical functions of ANKLE2 during brain development [103]. Although the ANKLE2 pathway plays a role in ZIKV-induced microcephaly, several developmental pathways likely collaborate to promote this condition following ZIKV infection. As an example, ZIKV RNA binds to MSI1 (Musashi-1), an RNA-binding protein responsible for regulating the microcephaly gene MCPH1, thus aiding virus replication in neural stem cells [105]. Moreover, ZIKV NS2A can impede brain development in mice by breaking down adheren junction proteins disorders in the ZIKV capsid-mediated decay pathway may also affect brain growth. Additionally, as a result of the studies that have demonstrated ZIKV NS4A and NS4B's inhibition of neural stem cells (NSC) division through the Akt-mTOR pathway, it's plausible that NS4A contributes to neuropathogenesis via several mechanisms [106].GBS is one of the common reasons for acute neuromuscular paralysis worldwide [107]. This syndrome is an acute polyradiculoneuropathy with an immune-mediated origin and usually appears due to a preceding infection, particularly an infection caused by Campylobacter jejuni. The disease often involves sensory and cranial nerves. Respiratory failure can occur in 20–30% of GBS cases, which have severe and general manifestations [108]. The incidence of GBS varies between 0.81 and 1.89 cases per 100,000 people per year [109]. The classic form of GBS is characterized by rapid and progressive symmetric weakness in the limbs, accompanied by sensory symptoms and hyporeflexia or areflexia [110]. Various subtypes of GBS have been identified through electrophysiological studies, including Acute Motor Axonal Neuropathy (AMAN), Acute Motor and Sensory Axonal Neuropathy (AMSAN), and Acute Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP) [111]. In 2014, the first report of a link between GBS and ZIKV was published, concerning a female patient with GBS in French Polynesia. Initial symptoms included distal limb paresthesia, which progressed dominant tetraparesis in the lower limbs. Other clinical symptoms included bilateral facial palsy, diffuse myalgia, and sustained ventricular tachycardia [112]. Further studies investigating ZIKV-associated GBS revealed common neurological findings such as any limb paresis (97%), areflexia or hyporeflexia (96%), tetraparesis (64%), facial palsy (51%), sensory deficits (49%), and bulbar palsy (25%) [113]. Several hypotheses exist regarding ZIKV-associated GBS. One hypothesis suggests molecular mimicry as a potential pathogenic mechanism. According to this hypothesis, the ZIKV polyprotein resembles human proteins involved in axon function, myelination, and neurodevelopment. Consequently, neutralizing antibodies induced by ZIKV may cross-react with peripheral nerve proteins, leading to immune-mediated damage [114]. Another hypothesis involves T cell responses stimulated by ZIKV, which may target neural, axonal, myelin, or Schwann cell antigens. This hypothesis is supported by the observation of perineural T-cell infiltration in nerve tissues from autopsies of GBS cases associated with other pathogens [115].Moreover, human astrocytes, pivotal in providing support and protection to neurons, are vulnerable to ZIKV infection. Following infection, a gradual demise of human astrocytes is evident. Notably, there is an absence of indications of apoptosis or pyroptosis, effectively excluding these pathways of cell demise. Nevertheless, heightened levels of serine/threonine-protein kinase-1 (RIPK1), RIPK3, and receptor-phosphorylated protein lineage kinase-like domain (MLKL) signal the onset of planned necrosis or necroptosis in infected astrocytes [116]. Recent findings indicate that elements of the necroptosis cell death pathway might serve to constrain ZIKV neuroinfection. In particular, the activation of Z-DNA-binding protein 1 (ZBP1) and RIPK1/RIPK3 in cortical neurons can initiate a series of reactions that regulate the expression of the immune response gene 1 (IRG1) and the metabolite itaconate. Itaconate exerts a suppressive effect on viral genome replication by impeding the formation of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) [117].


Title: Production, Transmission, Pathogenesis, and Control of Dengue Virus: A Literature-Based Undivided Perspective

1. IntroductionDengue regards one of the utmost serious arboviral infections around the world. dengue virus (DENV) is transmitted through bites of female Aedes mosquitos especially Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti, Ae. alpopictus [1], Ae. niveus, and Ae. polynesiensis [2]. DENV infection is almost similar to flu-like infection and sometimes develops into possibly lethal difficulties or severe illness including dengue shock syndrome and dengue hemorrhagic fever. World Health Organization (WHO) reports that DENV infection has been shown to 30-fold increase around the globe over the past five decades, and approximately 100 million newly infected people are estimated in over 100 endemic countries with 20,000 deaths annually [3].DENV and its vectors are primarily noticed in tropical and subtropical environments globally, frequently in urban and semiurban areas. In Bangladesh, DENV has been detected as a severe health hazard. Between 2000 and 2008, 50,148 people were hospitalized for dengue in Bangladesh. But in August 2019, nearly 60,000 dengue patients have been hospitalized, and approximately 100 deaths have been reported. Severe DENV infection is a leading cause of tenacious sickness and deaths of people of all ages in Asian and Latin American countries. Unfortunately, we have no particular treatment strategy for dengue infection. It may be because historically our pharmaceutical section did not come up with much attention to this vector-borne viral disease.This review is aimed at sketching a current scenario on DENV, dengue infection, and dengue vectors along with the production, transmission, pathogenesis, and ways of control of DENV, and its vectors offers a comprehensive view of production, transmission, pathogenesis, and control measures of DENV and its vectors.2. Dengue Virus (DENV)DENV, a pathogenic arthropod-borne flavivirus (arbovirus), is a single-stranded and positive-sense RNA molecule belonging to the family Flaviviridae.The Flaviviridae family includes viruses transmitted by arthropods that cause serious illness in humans. The family includes a single genus-Flavivirus, with several types [4]. Recently, another subdivision of the family into three genera has been proposed as follows: genus Flavivirus includes arboviruses (yellow fever virus, dengue fever virus); genus Pestivirus-viruses involved in animal pathology; and genus Hepacavirus-the proposed name for different variants of hepatitis C virus [4].To date, 47 strains of DENV have been identified. The total number of four closely linked serotypes (from DENV -1 to -4) of DENV has been identified to date, but they are lightly antigenically distinct [5, 6], and those can be subdivided into several genotypes according to their gene sequences [7]. These serotypes are generally progressed from a mutual ancestor, and all are considered as the causative agent of approximately similar disease spectrum in humans due to DENV selecting different receptors based on cell types and virus strains [8]. Developed viral particles have a spherical shape with 11 kb in length and 40-50 nm in diameter, containing single-stranded and positive-sense RNA molecule, which has a 5-methyl cap with a single open reading frame [2]. Dengue virus and its common four serotypes have shown in Figure 1.2.1. DENV VectorsDengue virus infection usually spreads through bites of infected female mosquitos of genus Aedes, especially by the Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus [1]. However, the other two vectors such as Ae. polynesiensis and Ae. niveus have been identified as the secondary vectors in some regions throughout the world [2] (Figure 2).Adult Ae. aegypti has a white scale that forms a lyre or violin shape at the dorsal side of the thorax, while the adult Ae. albopictus forms a white stripe at the middle point of the top of the thorax region. The white bands of every tarsal segment of the hind legs of these mosquitos are known as the white stripe. The abdomen is generally found to be black or dark brown, but sometimes, it also bears white scales. Females are usually larger than males; on the other way, through finding small palps tipped with silver or white scales, they can be discriminated against properly. Males are specially identified by the plumose type of antennae. On the other hand, females are seen to bear short hair. Under a microscope, the mouthparts of the male are watched as a structural modification for nectar feeding, and female mouthparts are viewed as a modified structure for feeding on blood. The darkly coloured proboscis is found to be present in both sexes. In addition, two clusters of white scales presented on the segment above the proboscis are known as clypeus. The tip of the abdomen is pointed out as a distinctive feature of all Aedes species [9].2.2. Geographical DistributionDENV mainly originated from monkeys, then jumped to humans in Southeast Asia or Africa between 100 and 800 years ago. Geographically DENV has been restricted till the 1950s, but after the Second World War caused a rapid distribution throughout the world. Firstly, DENV infection was recognized in the Thailand and Philippines in the 1850s, and after the 1980s towards Latin America and the Caribbean. Presently, DENV is prevalent throughout the different countries (at least 100 countries) including in Asia, the Pacific, the Americas, Africa, and the Caribbean. DENV epidemics occurred in 26 states [10]. Scientific reports demonstrate that DENV-2 and 3 serotypes were mostly outbroken before 2000 and between 2000 and 2009, respectively. DENV-1 serotype started to dominate worldwide dengue outbreaks and after 2010, the DENV-4 [11].The geographical distribution of DENV worldwide has been shown in Figure 3.
Ae. Aegypti is scattered in tropical areas geographically, and it breeds artificially in containers (such as tyres, drums, flower vases including plastic food containers, tin cans, and old motor parts) that are filled with water [12].
Ae. aegypti is an insect of holometabolous type, which is fully developed after completing metamorphosis (i.g., four growing phases from egg to adult period). The duration of the life span of an adult may be 2 to 4 weeks; however, it depends on the environmental conditions, at least 4-5 times a female mosquito lays eggs throughout her whole life span and the average 10 to 100 eggs in a single spawn. Three diverse polytypic forms are found in Ae. aegypti such as sylvan, domestic, and peridomestic [13].A sylvan type is generally a rural form which breeds in tree holes, normally in forests; the domestic type commonly breeds in municipal surroundings, frequently inside or around houses; and the peridomestic type usually survives in biologically modified regions as groves and coconut farms [14]. Ae. aegypti can survive above 4°C [15]; on the other hand, about 15-37°C temperature is required for a complete life cycle [16].The extent of DENV epidemics not only depends on the presence of DENV and mosquito genotypes but also depends on how they interrelate with local temperature [17]. Nevertheless, a current study demonstrated that DENV infection can alter gene expression in the Ae. aegypti mosquito's head that causes a loss of their olfactory preferences, thereby modifying oviposition site choice [18]. Now, the question is how safe is the host nervous system's homeostasis during Dengue infection?2.3. Life CyclePrimarily, the DENV was transmitted via sylvatic cycles in Asia and Africa by Aedes mosquito and the nonhuman primates, with occasional appearances of human populations [19]. However, nowadays, the global spread of DENV follows its emergence of all types of transmissions (e.g., sylvatic cycles and vertical: mosquito to mosquito). Thus, its primary life cycle entirely involves the transmission between Aedes mosquitoes and humans [20]. One report suggests that dogs or other animals may act as incidental hosts and may serve as reservoirs of DENV infection [21]. Life cycles of mosquitoes have been shown in Figure 4.2.4. Immune Defensive PathwaysThe Toll pathway is one of the well-known potential immune defensive pathways against the DENV and its serotypes bearing Ae. aegypti [22]. In a study, after ten days postinfection of DENV, the antioxidant enzymes were found to suppress, while upregulated the expressions of Toll, JAK-STAT, and pathogen recognition receptor (PRR) [23]. It has also been analyzed that the JAK-STAT pathway is another important DENV defensive pathway in invertebrates [24, 25]. The mosquitoes of genus Aedes should be more vulnerable to DENV infection if the receptor JAK homolog HOP or Dome is inhibited by RNA inference (RNAi, e.g., ds RNA and prM RNA) [25, 26].In a study, miR-375 was found to enhance DENV2 replication capacity [27]. In another study, in the period of DENV infection, miRNAs were identified in different forms (about sixty-six) in Ae. albopictus, where upregulated miR-34-5p targets the Toll pathway signalling protein (REL-1) [28]. Conversely, downregulated peptidoglycan recognition protein LE, and AMP defensin D. miR87 targets the Toll pathway [28].Differential expression of miRNAs in DENV has been also reported by Yen et al. [29]. In this study, the authors highlighted the possibility of using artificial antiviral miRNAs to reduce the transmission of two major arboviruses in transgenic Ae. Aegypti. The miRNA-based approach resulted in a dual resistance phenotype for Dengue serotype 3 viruses (DENV-3).The piRNAs also plays essential roles in the innate antiviral response in DENV [30–33]. Moreover, nonretroviral integrated RNA viruses (NIRVS) were recognized in Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus in a larger number [34].The expression of cecropin-like AMPs was expressively upregulated by the infection of DENV [24]. In Ae. aegypti, the immune deficiency (IMD) pathway shows a significant role to resist DENV susceptibility, while the increase in viral replication [35]. The ubiquitin variant (Ub3881) residues may inhibit the DENV envelope protein, thereby and decrease the production rate of DENV in Aedes vectors [36, 37].The DENV-containing blood meal first appears in the midgut of the vectors, which has the first line of defense systems, such as the infection barrier and the escape barriers [38, 39]. It is evident that, after a successful entry of DENV, something has happened inside the midgut cells such as uncoating, replication, and new virus particle assembly. The innate immune signalling pathways have been seen to be effective during the infection of DENV in Ae. aegypti. Exogenous siRNA pathways also play a substantial role against DENV infections in the Aedes midgut [40]. DENV infection causes the production of NO in the hemolymph, where the virus is released into the hemocoel from the midgut. The hemocytes allow replication other than the distribution of DENV. Interestingly, DENV replication in hemocytes is extensively inhibited by NO [41]. It has been reported that about 40 differentially bacterial types have been isolated from the gut of Ae. aegypti through a gut microbiome study [42]. In another study, colonization of Csp_P in the midgut of the Ae. aegypti also inhibited DENV infection [43]. The Talaromyces (Tsp) secretome shows a considerable modulating effect on the midgut transcriptome. Tsp secretome may display a significant role in the advancement of DENV infection in the midgut through downregulating trypsin encoding genes involved in the digestion of blood and through reducing the enzymatic activity of trypsin [44]. It is cited that the presence of gram-negative endosymbiotic bacteria Wolbachia spp. in Aedes mosquitoes effectively suppressed the DENV infection [45]. Wolbachia activates antimicrobial peptides defensin and cecropin Toll pathway through producing reactive oxygen species (ROS) after inducing a reduction-oxidation (Redox) reaction in the mosquitos [46]. Wolbachia also upsurges vago1 expression in Ae. aegypti by acting as a ligand of the JAK-STAT pathway [47].
Ae. aegypti macroglobulin complement related factor (AaMCR) recognizes DENV particles. An anti-DENV effect on Aedes mosquitoes has been found to link with the upregulation of AMP expression in the hemocytes [48]. The salivary glands also contain the infection barrier and the escape barriers [49]. Moreover, incomplete apoptosis of DENV occurs here, which is required for the virus to release via saliva [50]. A study revealed that multiple immune defensive pathways (e.g., Toll and IMD) can be found here, and this can rise putative antibacterial proteins/peptides (e.g., attacin, cecropins, defensins,and gambicin) [24, 28, 35, 48, 51]. In the brain of Ae. aegypti, a homolog of Hikaru Genki (AaHig) has been found to express ubiquitously [52].Lipid droplets (LDs) containing a few exclusive structural proteins (Perilipin 1, 2, and 3) and a fatty acid monolayer are exclusively found to present in a variety of organisms including DENV. These have been found to provide immunological defense of Aedes mosquitoes [53–55].3. DENV Infection3.1. TransmissionAfter initial midgut infection, DENV distributes systemically through the body cavity (commonly known as hoemocel) of Aedes vectors, after that way disseminates in secondary tissues. The time taken between initial midgut infection and successive transmission of DENV by its vector (e.g., Ae. aegypti) is termed as extrinsic incubation period (7 to 14 days at 25-30°C). DENV stays in the midgut of the vectors which it may be due to the viral genome being stable here [36].The ubiquitin-proteasome, an important pathway, acts significant activity in the regulation of infectious DENV production in vectors [36]. Finally, an infection of the salivary glands and the release of virions into the host's saliva occur throughout the DENV transmission to the host [56]. Blood cells and plasma are important media for the four serotypes of DENV spreading into the host. A relation of domain III from the envelope glycoprotein of DENV-II with human plasma proteins has been identified by Huerta et al. [57] [57]. DENV infection inductees after the attachment of the dengue virus to the target cell through interfaces between the various cell surface receptors and viral envelope (E) protein [58]. In mammalian cells, all categorized serotypes interact with mannose, heparan sulfate, nLc4Cer, and DC-SIGN/L-SIGN receptors.Additionally, the DENV-2 serotype is found to intensity of binding with GRP78, CD14-associated protein, HSP70/HSP90, and two other unidentified receptor proteins. Conversely, serotypes DENV 1-3 bind with the laminin receptor while serotypes DENV 2-4 attach with an unknown protein receptor [59].DENV after receptor-mediated endocytosis, virion fuses with acidic lysosomes, and its genomic RNA is released into the cytoplasm and translated into a polyprotein of ~3400 amino acids (genome is about 11000 bases of positive-sense, a single-stranded RNA (ssRNA)) that are further cleaved by viral and host proteases into three structural (capsid: C, membrane: M, and envelope: E) and seven nonstructural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5) proteins [60].C protein is a foremost structural component of DENV that is localized in the cytoplasm and nuclei [61, 62]. The nuclear localization of this protein is thought to be crucial for its well-organized replication [61, 63].The lipid bilayer of virions is formed by lipid (approximately 17% by weight) between the nucleocapsid core and E/M outer shell [64, 65]. During the replication of DENV, a membrane-bound replication complex formation helps to incorporate host factors, viral proteins, and genomic RNA [66]. In this case, positive-strand (+) DENV genomic RNA acts as a template to synthesize complementary negative-strand (-) RNA, which is sequentially used for multiple (+) RNA genomes production that is obtainable for translation and regulation of replication cycles or packaging into virions [67]. However, in a study, Raquin and Lambrechts [68] showed the presence of DENV genomic RNA in the salivary galnds of Ae. aegypti, indicating an active replication of DENV in its vector prior to transmission [68]. DENV itself encodes RNA-dependent RNA polymerases, and the infection cycle of this virus is catalyzed by other cellular factors [69].DENV infections can alter many important proteins in the subcellular locales, including the Alix apoptosis-linked gene-2-interacting protein X; therefore, blocking this step may be one of the innovative beneficial approaches to reduce DENV replication in the host [70]. Instead, several genes have been identified that reduce infection of DENV when silenced by at least 60% in its most important vector Ae. aegypti. Among them, a putative cysteine-rich venom protein SeqID AAEL000379 (CRVP379) silencing has been found to reduce DENV infection significantly in the cells of midgut tissues of Ae. aegypti [71].Loqs2, a gene has been found only in Aedes mosquitoes, which is essential for the appropriate effectiveness of RNA interference in this type of mosquito. However, without Loqs2, the viruses can multiply and consequently infect their salivary glands [72].An interaction between DENV nonstructural protein 4A (NS4A) and host cellular vimentin has been demonstrated in localizing and concentrating the viral replication complex at the perinuclear site, in consequence assisting well-organized replication of viral RNA [73].
Figure 5 shows a general DENV transmission mode in its vector to hosts.3.2. PathogenesisDENV is usually greater in tropical and subtropical environments throughout the world, frequently in urban and semiurban zones. People, exposed to infected mosquitoes of all ages are susceptible to DENV infection. DENV infection causes dandy fever, breakbone fever, and dengue hemorrhagic fever; and in severe cases, dengue shock syndrome has occurred. The rainy season is the most favorable climate for DENV infection outbreaks in tropical countries in Asia and South America. Generally, the infected female Aedes mosquitoes transmit DENV in humans. Although humans are not capable of transmitting DENV, it can be transmitted during the blood transfusion between an infected person to a noninfected (healthy) person [74, 75].3.3. Physiological DataAfter the incubation period (3 to 14 days) of DENV, the person may experience one or more early symptoms such as nausea, headache, rash, fever, musculoskeletal pain, and joint pain [76]. In classic dengue fever, body temperature ranges from 39 to 40°F (5-7 days) [77]. In the meantime, the DENV may enter systematically into the bloodstream at the peripheral zones and sequentially damage lymph nodes and blood vessels resulting in dengue hemorrhagic fever [78]. Symptoms of the latter case include bleeding under the skin and from the gums and nose. On the other hand, difficulty in breathing appears in patients having dengue hemorrhagic fever, and severe progress of it can lead to dengue shock syndrome, if left untreated, can result in death.3.4. Micronutrient ImbalanceThe morphogenesis and translation and/or replication of DENV occur in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [79], where Ca2+ plays a significant activity in cell signaling. The immune response of T-cell has been drawn in DENV infection. At the time of secondary infection (i.e., infection after 1-2 days of fever onset), high concentration of interferon-alpha (IFN-α) is found, while high levels of soluble interferon γ (IFN-γ), interleukin 2 receptor (IL-2R), and soluble CD4 and CD8 were reported throughout the outset of vascular permeability [80, 81]. Dengue antigen is evident to increase the influx of Ca2+ into T-cells, thus reducing blood Ca2+ levels [82, 83].A multifunctional intermediate messenger protein calmodulin is well known as a primary sensor of intracellular Ca2+ in the eukaryotic cells, which plays imperative utility for proper decoding of Ca2+ signalling [84]. DDX3X is a DEAD-box RNA helicase, which binds with the TRPV4 cation channel that regulates its functions. DDX3X is released by the TRPV4-mediated Ca2+ influx; at the same time, DDX3X nuclear translocation is derived through a process involving calmodulin and its kinase II-dependent pathway.Therefore, pharmacological inhibition or genetic depletion of TRPV4 can diminish DDX3X-dependent functions, including translation and nuclear viral export. Thus, targeting TRPV4 may reduce the infectivity of some viruses, including dengue, Zika viruses, and hepatitis C [85]. In a study, the effect of W-7, a calmodulin antagonist in DENV infection in Huh-7 cells, was seen, where W7 was inhibited viral yield, NS1 secretion and viral RNA, and protein synthesis, possibly through direct inhibition of NS2B-NS3 activity and/or inhibition of the interaction between NS2A with Ca2+-calmodulin complex [86]. Calcium depletion can modulate cardiac functions, immunopathogenesis, and platelet functions in dengue infection [82]. Another study on 36 h postinfection of Huh7 cells has been demonstrated that calcium modulating cyclophilin-binding ligand influences the apoptosis process by changing the activation of caspase-3 and the potentiation of mitochondrial membrane [87].3.5. Clinical AspectsIn most cases, asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic pathways are promising ways for transiting DENV infection [88].The most common signs and symptoms include pain of bone, joint, muscle, and retro-orbital; headache; fever (40°C); maculopapular or macular rash; and minor hemorrhagic manifestations including purpura, malaise, ecchymosis, petechiae, epistaxis, hematuria, bleeding gums, aches or pain, or a positive tourniquet test result. Dengue fever lasts from 3 to 7 days. Before appearing the warning signs of severe DENV infection, a slight portion of the infected patients goes to life-threatening conditions [89].Severe DENV infection can cause organ impairment, bleeding, and plasma leakage. The warning signs during dengue infection include vomiting, abdominal pain, respiratory distress, clinical/fluid accumulation, lethargic condition, mucosal bleeding, liver enlargement (>2 cm), restlessness, lethargic condition, and rapid decrease in platelet count. An intensive care should be taken for the patients having infancy, pregnancy, chronic hemolytic diseases, renal failure, diabetes, obesity, and old age [2]. Chronic infections of DENV may preserve in the central nervous system and can be considered in progressive dementia patients [90].In a recent study by Suppiah et al., the link between clinical manifestation characteristic of Dengue fever and genotypes, respectively, and DENV-specific phenotypes, was highlighted. Thus, it was found that the clinical symptoms are more severe in patients infected with DENV 2 serotype, compared to patients infected with DENV1 serotype. Musculoskeletal manifestations are characteristic of DENV serotype 3 infection [91]. Also, nonstructural proteins (e.g., NS1, NS3, and NS5) can be targeted to develop a novel vaccine strategy [92, 93].3.6. DiagnosisUnfortunately, still, the signs and symptoms are the foremost tools for the DENV infection diagnosis [94, 95]. Fever or flu-like fever is the initial tool of DENV infection.To date, the well-known tests for detecting the presence of DENV include identification of the responsible viral genomic sequences, DENV serotype, viral antigen(s) (e.g., NS1 by MAC-ELISA assays) and/or antibodies in response to it (e.g., IgG, IgM), and platelet counts.Other important diagnosis includes viral RNA detection (by nucleic acid amplification tests (NAAT) or RT-PCR), detection of dengue specific monoclonal antibodies, IgM captured ELISA, alive and/or viral isolation from mosquito cell lines [96–100]. Immune-fluorescence tests, capture ELISA, and hemagglutination assays are the commonly used laboratory methods [101]. Other test includes +ve tourniquet test, leukopenia, HCT concurrent with a rapid decrease in platelet count, AST or ALT ≥ 1000 IU/L, and impaired consciousness [102]. Some important diagnostic approaches and methodology have been shown in Table 1.4. Control of DENV and Its VectorsPublic awareness counts as one of the major consequences of the management of DENV, which essentially helps to avoid or inhibit the contacts of the infected Aedes mosquitoes or other animals and their derivatives [103]. In this way, Ae. aegypti was properly eradicated during the 1960s from different areas of the USA. For this, a well-educated society needs the strongest collaborative activities with skilful and well-trained mosquito control staff [104].It is possible to control DENV infection by using different interesting methods.4.1. Preventive MeasuresPreventive measures should be the first and best choice in this case, such as the prevention of direct contact of blood or blood-derived products from the infected patients and infected vectors from the infected host [105]. Daytime is the most suitable time for biting Aedes mosquitoes; consequently, its contact can be diminished or avoided using the following techniques:
By using nets (e.g., insecticide-treated nets) and mosquito repellents (e.g., coils, solids (sticks), aerosols, liquids, pump sprays, and nonsticky creams)By wearing gloves and other defensive clothingThrough well-planed management of wastes and stored waterBy destroying the mature Aedes mosquitoes or larvae through applying some protective chemicals (e.g., N,N-Diethyl-3-Methylbenzamide, diethyl carbonate, metofluthrin, oil of lemon-eucalyptus, diethyl phthalate, ethyl hexanediol, and picaridin) [106, 107].CYD-TDV (brand name Dengvaxia), an one and only FDA approved live-attenuated dengue vaccine prepared by applying rDNA technology through substituting the premembrane (PrM) and envelope (E) structural proteins of the 17D strain of attenuated yellow fever vaccine with those from the dengue serotypes excepting DENV-5 serotype, is manufactured by Sanofi Pasteur [108, 109]. Other vaccines under development are DENVax/TAK-003 (recombinant chimeric vaccine with DENV-1, -3, and -4 components on the DENV-2 backbone, developed at Mahidol University in Bangkok) [110, 111], TetraVax-DV (tetravalent admixture of monovalent vaccines, being tested in Brazil and Thailand in phase II trial) [112], TDEN PIV (inactivated tetravalent vaccine, being experimented by the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research and GSK in phase I clinical trials) [113], V180 (recombinant subunit vaccines expressed in Drosophila cells, undergoing phase I trial by Merck [114], and DNA vaccines (the Naval Medical Research Center attempted to develop a monovalent DNA plasmid vaccine) [111].4.2. The Role of Natural Products and Their Bioactive Constituents in Controlling DENV InfectionNatural products are the potential sources of many important modern medicines [115–117]. Plants and/or their extracts having antidengue activities are also distributed worldwide [118–120]. To date, a number of medicinal plants have been reported to act against DENV and/or their vectors, for example, Alternanthera philoxeroides (Fam: Amaranthaceae) [121], Azidarachta indica (Fam: Meliaceae) [122], Boesenbergia rotunda (Fam: Zingiberaceae) [123], Carica papaya (Fam: Caricaceae) [124], Cladosiphon okamuranus (Fam: Chordariaceae) [78], Cryptonemia crenulata (Fam: Halymeniaceae) and Gymnogongrus griffithsiae (Fam: Phyllophoraceae) [125], Cymbopogon citratus (Fam: Poaceae), Andrographis paniculata (Fam: Acanthaceae), Momordica charantia (Fam: Cucurbitaceae), Ocimum sanctum (Fam: Labiatae), Piper retrofractum (Fam: Piperaceae) [126], Flagellaria indica (Fam: Flagellariaceae), Cladogynos orientalis (Fam: Euphorbiaceae), Rhizophora apiculata (Fam: Rhizophoraceae) and Houttuynia cordata (Fam: Saururaceae) [127], Gymnogongrus torulosus (Fam: Phyllophoraceae) [128], Lippia alba and L. citriodora (Fam: Verbenaceae) [129], Meristiella gelidium (Fam: Solieriaceae) [130], Mimosa scabrella (Fam: Fabaceae) [131], Psidium guajava (Fam: Myrtaceae) and Euphorbia hirta (Fam: Euphorbiaceae) (Abd [132]), Quercus lusitanica (Fam: Fagaceae) [133], Tephrosia crassifolia, Tephrosia madrensis, Leucaena leucocephala, and Tephrosia viridiflora (Fam: Fabaceae) [131, 134, 135], Uncaria tomentosa (Fam: Rubiaceae) [136], Zostera marina (Fam: Zosteraceae) [137], Myristica fatua, Cymbopogon citratus and Acorus calamus [138], Doratoxylum apetalum [139], Psiloxylon mauritianum [140], Acorus calamus (Fam: Acoraceae) [141], Cinnamosma fragrans [142], Pedalium murex [143], Aesculus hippocastanum [144], Norantea brasiliensis [145], Azadirachta indica [146], Spondias mombin [147], Angelica sinensis [148], Phyllanthus spp. [149], Solanum xanthocarpum, Mesocyclops thermocyclopoides (Mahesh [150]), Delonix elata (Fam: Fabaceae) [151], Acalypha alnifolia (Fam: Euphorbiaceae) [152], Combretum collinum [153], and Solanum villosum [154].The aqueous extract of Houttuynia cordata (10-100 mg/mL) against DENV-2 with human hepatocarcinoma cell lineage (HepG2) cells showed that extract significantly decreased intracellular DENV-2 RNA production with the reduction in the expression of dengue protein. It also showed a potential role in the release of the virion from infected LLC-MK2 cells at 10-40 mg/mL concentrations [155]. 9 N-methylamine and Harmol may selectively inhibit DENV-2 multiplication without virucidal effect in cell cultures [156].The ethyl acetate fraction of H. cordata and quercetin showed in vitro activity against mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) and DENV-2 with IC50 0.98 and 125 μg/mL for MHV while 7.50 and 176.76 μg/mL for DENV-2 [157]. Delphinidin and epigallocatechin gallate showed a direct effect on against West Nile virus (WNV) and also reduced the infectivity of ZIKV and DENV. The effect of delphinidin and, particularly of epigallocatechin gallate, was found higher for the African strain (MR766) than for the American strain (PA259459) [158].In another study, it was found an absence of anti-DENV activity in chemical constituents like acetyl-L-carnitine, melatonin, α-tocopherol, and folic acid while resveratrol exhibited some limited anti-DENV activity [159]. Organosulfur compounds in garlic were tested against DENV-2 NGC (New Guinea C) virus U937 human macrophage-like cells and Huh-7 human liver cells. The organosulfur compounds reduced the levels of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-8 and IL-10) and affect the oxidative stress response [160].The methanol extract of Rumex dentatus showed the highest antiviral efficacy by inhibiting DENV-2 replication, with IC50 of 0.154 and 0.234 μg/mL, while gallic acid showed with IC50 of 0.191 μg/mL and 0.522 μg/mL at 45 and 90 PFU of DENV-2 infection, respectively [161].Naringenin (citrus flavanone) was evaluated against dengue viruses (serotypes 1–4) in Huh7.5 cells which impaired virus replication in human cells with IC50 = 35.81, 17.97, 117.1, and 177.5 μM, respectively [162]. Annona muricata aqueous leave extract was evaluated against dengue virus type 2. Selectivity index of the extract was found more than 10 against DENV-2 which showed potential as a nature-based antiviral drug [163]. Three spirotetronate compounds (2EPS-A, -B, -C) isolated from Actinomadura strain showed strong DENV-2 NS2B-NS3 protease inhibition with IC50 values of 1.94 ± 0.18, 1.47 ± 0.15, and 2.51 ± 0.21 μg/mL, respectively [164].In vitro activity of essential oils of β-caryophyllene was evaluated against DENV-2. β-caryophyllene acts on the initial steps of the viral replication cycle and showed inhibition with IC50 = 22.5 ± 5.6 μM against DENV-2 [165]. The ethanol extract of polyherbal formulation Nilavembu kudineer showed antiviral activity against DENV-2 virus infection in Vero and human macrophage cell line (THP-1 cells) from 0.78% till 0.01% of the human dose [166].The aqueous leave extract of Orthosiphon stamineus was evaluated against DENV-2. The extract exhibited the ability to reduce DENV-2 replication in the pretreated cell while ineffective in inhibiting cell death in the posttreated cell [167]. Antiviral activity of natural alkaloid anisomycin was evaluated against DENV and ZIKV viruses. The compound prevented DENV and ZIKV multiplication in human cell lines, inhibited viral protein expression, and also impaired viral replication in the posttreated cell. In a lower dose, it also showed a significant decrease in viremia levels in ZIKV infected AG129 mice [168]. A natural antimicrobial agent (latarcin peptide) was evaluated against DENV replication in infected cells. The peptide exhibited a significant inhibitory effect (IC50 = 12.68 ± 3.2 μM) against the dengue protease NS2B-NS3pro at room temperature and also reduced the viral RNA in a dose-dependent manner [169].The crude extract of Rhodiola imbricata showed an antiviral immune response against the dengue virus. It induced interferon (IFN) b and other cytokines and also upregulated MIF-2a, PKR, and NF-κB phosphorylation in infected cells [170]. The antiviral effect of C. longa extract showed low cytotoxicity and effective inhibitor (IC50 = 17.91 μg/mL) against DENV-2 infected Huh7it-1 cells [171]. The hydroalcoholic extracts of leaves and bark of Uncaria guinanensis DENV-2-infected Huh-7 cells reduced intracellular viral antigen and inhibited the secretion of viral nonstructural protein [172]. The chemical compound 5-hydroxy-7-methoxy-6-methylflavanone inhibited DENV2 infectivity in LLC/MK2 (EC50 = 15.99 ± 5.38) as well as Vero cell lines (EC50 = 12.31 ± 1.64 μM) and DENV4 (EC50 = 11.70 ± 6.04 μM). Phospholipase A2, a chemical constituent of Crotalus durissus terrificus venom, was inhibited dengue virus and yellow fever virus infection in Vero cells, inducing a partial exposure of genomic RNA through glycerophospholipids cleavage [173]. Tomatidine has inhibited dengue virus mainly at late stages of infection towards all dengue virus serotypes and controlled the activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4) expression. It showed inhibition of DENV2 (EC50 = 0.82 μM) infection mainly independent of ATF4 [174].In silico analysis showed that Nimbin is found to be effective and reducing the morbidity and mortality against the envelope protein of DENV 1-4 infection [175]. Quinic acid derivatives were found effective against DENV1-4 and exhibited impaired dengue virus replication in infected Huh7.5 cell lines [176]. The antiviral activity of isobutyl gallate was evaluated against DENV. Isobutyl gallate exhibited no cytotoxic activity against Huh 7 and possessed strong activity (IC50 = 4.45 μg/mL against DENV [177]. Gallic acid, fisetin, quercetin, and catechin inhibited infectious viral particles production against DENV-2 infected Vero cells [178–180]. Gedunin was evaluated against the DENV infected BHK-15 cells. Gedunin showed a significant reduction (EC50 = 10 μM). In addition, the molecular docking study showed the strong interaction of the compound with the ATP/ADP binding site of the host protein (Hsp90) [181].The study of thrombocytopenia (≤30,000/μl) in adult dengue infections, leaves of Carica papaya extract, was enhanced platelet counts, TNFα, and IFNγ levels while it reduced IL-6 levels in patients [182]. In another pilot study was done in Srilanka, two doses of leaves extract at 8 h of intervals were found an increase in total WBC and platelet count within 24 h of treatment [183]. The 25 mL leave juice of C. papaya (two times a day for 5 days) was found an increase in total WBC and platelet count after 2 days of drug administration in Pakistani patients [124].The aqueous leave extract of C. papaya was tested against DENV-infected THP-1 cells and its role on platelet augmentation. The leave extract was facilitated in platelet augmentation and showed antidengue activity by a significant reduction in the envelope expression, erythrocyte damage, nonstructural (NS1) proteins, lipid peroxidation, and intracellular viral load. In addition, thrombocytopenic rats administered with aqueous extract exhibited increased IL-6 and thrombopoietin levels [184]. In Indonesia, hydroalcoholic leave extract of C. papaya was given in capsule form to the patient having a thrombocyte count of <150,000/μL along with 20% hematocrit. The recovery of patients was found faster via speedy increase platelets levels [185].The leave extract of Hippophae rhamnoides was tested in DENV-2 infected BHK-21 cells. The extract was found potential antidengue activity by sustaining the cell viability in infected cells, decreasing TNF-α and increasing IFN-γ levels [186]. Aqueous extract of the Scutellaria baicalensis roots was tested against DENV 1-4 serotype-infected Vero cells. The extract exhibited strong virus replication property (IC50 = 74.33 to 95.83 μg/mL for DENV 1-4 serotypes) [187]. The aqueous extract of Solanum villosum green berries showed the highest mortality against Stegomyia aegypti [154]. The silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) were synthesized from Holarrhena antidysenterica bark extract which showed strong larvicidal activity (LC50 = 9.3 ppm) as compared with other organic solvents and aqueous extract alone [188]. The synthesized AgNPs from Gmelina asiatica leave extracts showed potent larvicidal activity (LC50 = 22.44 μg/mL) against Anopheles stephensi larvae [189].4.3. Chemicobiological DataIsolated compounds of medicinal plants and/or their derivatives may be one of the potential tools for the treatment of DENV and act against the vectors [190], such as essential oils [191], polyphenols [192], flavonoids [140], alkaloids [193], glycosides [194], and tannins [195].The antiviral mechanism of natural compounds inhibiting viral entry and replication is shown in Figure 6.Infection of virus involves various stages:
In the initial steps, DENV binds to cell receptors including mannose-binding receptor (MR) and DC-SIGN (dendritic cell-specific ICAM3 grabbing nonintegrin) receptor present at the surface of the cell, followed by fusion and entryClathrin-mediated endocytosis and transport of DENV take place along with pH-dependent fusion with endocytosisThe genomic ssRNA (positive-sense) is translated hooked on a polyprotein, which is smitten into all proteinsTranscription and ribonucleic acid (RNA) replication occurs at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) surfaceA synthesized dsRNA genomic virus is taking place at ER. At the ER, virions bud and are passaged to the Golgi, where DENV prM (membrane) protein is cleaved, and virion maturation takes place and is released by exocytosisNatural compounds inhibit several proteins involved in the transcription as well as translation machinery essential in the DENV life cycle.Furthermore, natural compounds block the virus replication by modulating the inflammatory redox-sensitive pathways and host cell signaling. Details of plant-derived natural compounds and their antidengue activities are stipulated in Table 2, and their chemical structures have been displayed in Figure 7.Monocyte macrophages are thought to be the principal target cells for the DENV, the cause of dengue fever and hemorrhagic fever. Besides Ca2+, depletion of Mg2+ is also evident during binding of DENV to monocyte macrophages and cells of T cell and B cell lineages in in vitro studies [8]. It has been seen that the monocyte-derived macrophages discriminated in the presence of vitamin D3 restrict DENV infection and moderate the classical inflammatory cytokine (e.g., TNF-α and IL-1β, -4, and -10) response, where a reduced surface expression of C-type lectins, including the mannose receptor [214].In another report, 1,25(OH)2D3 is evident to suppress the levels of IL-4 and IL-17A and modulate the levels of IL-12p70 and IL-10 in DENV infected U937-DC-SIGN cells and THP-1 macrophages, suggesting an immunomodulatory power that can ameliorate inflammation during dengue infections [196]. These findings have also complied with an earlier report [217]. In a clinical study, patients (n = 64), received a single dose of 200,000 IU vitamin D, was found to decrease the risk of dengue fever [220]. A challenge test done with 10 healthy individuals supplemented with 1000 or 4000 international units (IU)/day of vitamin D during 10 days suggested that 4000 IU/day of vitamin D represents an adequate dose to control DENV progression and replication [222].5. Conclusions and PerspectivesTo date, it is not possible to recognize intricate details and the complexity of the target of DENV of the other suitable vectors/secondary or hosts for its entrance, production, transmission, and pathogenesis. Several preventive measures have been taken; however, still, there is a deficiency of operative treatment modalities of DENV infections in human and pet animals. DENV-mediated imbalance of micronutrients may be one of the effective significances of numerous pathophysiological situations, such as Ca+2 depletion for muscle pain, irregular heartbeats, muscle weakness, fatigue, painful signs and symptoms, and deficiency of vitamin D in case of inflammatory conditions. The deficiency of vitamin D leads to oxidative stress and the inflammatory process [235], which may contribute to lowering the standard levels of platelet in patients with DENV. The internal bleeding and fatigue of the infected patients perform the leading functions for platelet deficiency.Taken together, the biochemical markers and immunological parameters can be considered as important diagnostic tools in DENV infection. Besides preventive measures, the medicinal plants and their derivatives might be alternative tools in the treatment of DENV infection. Calcium along with vitamin D supplements can be used in DENV infection. More researches are necessary regarding to the successful diagnosis, prevention, and control of dengue worldwide.


Title: An Overview of Zika Virus and Zika Virus Induced Neuropathies

1. IntroductionFlaviviruses (family Flaviviridae) are small (approximately 50 nm in diameter), enveloped, icosahedral viruses that possess a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of between 9–12 kb [1,2,3,4]. The viral genome consists of a single long ORF (open reading frame) encoding around ten proteins, which are formed by co- and post-translational processing and proteolytically processed into three structural (Cap, prM, and E) and seven non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins by a complex combination of host and viral proteases [5,6,7,8]. Currently, there are about 70 members in this genus, the majority of which are transmitted by arthropods [9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. The incidence of flaviviral infections has increased dramatically in the last seven decades [17,18]. These infections are associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Factors responsible for the rapid increase in flaviviral infections are changes in the sizes and distributions of the vector arthropods that transmit the pathogens, further aggravated by climate change and a large number of potential vertebrate hosts [19,20,21,22]. Details of various neurotropic flaviviruses and their associated neuropathies are summarized in Table 1.ZIKV is a significant pathogen that poses an imminent global threat. It was first isolated from rhesus monkeys in Uganda in 1947 [53] (The genome organization of the Zika Virus is sketched in Figure 1). Later, in the 1950s, its detection continued in several other parts of Africa (Egypt, Nigeria) [54]. However, the first clinical infection in humans was not detected until 1964, when it was found that the ZIKV infection in humans is associated with mild fever and maculopapular rash [55]. From 1960 to 2000, ZIKV was detected in several countries in Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia and Pakistan) [54]. The first major ZIKV outbreak occurred in 2007 (in Yap Island), and then in March 2015, it caused a large outbreak in the Americas (particularly Brazil), and the first time was associated with severe disease and congenital illnesses such as infant microcephaly [56,57,58]. In November 2015, Brazil declared a national public health emergency, and in February 2016, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [59].The ZIKV employs multiple mechanisms to replicate (the ZIKV replication cycle is illustrated in Figure 2) and causes a variety of neurological diseases. It has been proposed that after viral entry through the crossing of the BBB (blood–brain barrier), ZIKV tends to infect the microglia, astrocytes, and endothelial cells [63,64,65]. Damage to the CNS can occur when ZIKV infects the CNS cells, and damage occurs either due to viral replication or because of a host-mediated immune (inflammatory) response [66,67,68]. Moreover, ZIKV infection is also associated with various neurological syndromes, e.g., Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), and others [69,70,71]. Multiple mechanisms are known to cause damage to the CNS, which are also discussed in detail later in this review article. Collectively, in this review, we have summarized the observations on biology, transmission, control strategies (vaccines, antivirals, and vectors), oncolytic aspects, animal and cellular models, neuropathies, and neuropathogenesis associated with ZIKV.2. Transmission of Zika VirusThe principal mode of transmission of ZIKV is through mosquitoes; however, studies have found that various other routes may play an important role in the transmission of the disease. These include venereal transmission, vertical transmission, transmission to infants through mother milk, and blood transfusion This makes it very difficult to devise an appropriate strategy for the control of disease in countries where the disease is endemic. The transmission cycle of ZIKV is illustrated in Figure 3.2.1. Vector Borne TransmissionVector-borne transmission of ZIKV occurs through mosquitoes [13,80]. In the sylvatic transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between non-human primates and mosquitoes, while in the urban transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between humans and mosquitoes. The presence of ZIKV has been reported from many species of mosquitoes in Africa and Asia (Aedes aegypti (Ae. aegypti), Ae. africanus, Ae. albopictus, Ae. apicoargenteus, Ae. furcifer, Ae. luteocephalus, Ae. opok, and Ae. vittatus) which may transmit the virus to humans [53,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90]. However, in Yap and French Polynesia, the transmission of ZIKV was suggested to be through Ae. hensilli and Ae. Polynesiensis, respectively) [91,92,93]. The extrinsic incubation period is reported to be 10 days [84]. The vector competence (the ability of the vector to transmit the virus biologically) has not been determined for ZIKV transmission in most of these species [94] and it may be the area of future research. In the urban cycle, the transmission of ZIKV is mainly through the Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. ZIKV has been detected/isolated from wild Ae. aegypti, and they have been demonstrated to be competent vectors in the laboratory where they can transmit the virus to mice and rhesus monkeys [82,86,88]. Recent studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission by Ae. albopictus as well [84,95]. Both of these mosquitoes remain active during the daytime, and they are prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions [96,97]. However, the geographical range of Ae. albopictus is further extended to the temperate regions [98,99,100]. In the USA, both of these mosquitoes have been found in southern and south-eastern states and their maximum numbers have been found from June to October [101].2.2. Sexual TransmissionMany cases of transmission of ZIKV have been observed following sexual contact. Several studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission from males to females. In most cases, the male had a travel history to ZIKV-endemic countries, and when he returned, his partner became infected [102,103,104]. ZIKV’s presence has been detected in human semen [105]. It has been found that ZIKV can persist in semen for over 6 months following infection, suggesting the possibility for prolonged sexual transmission [106,107,108]. Later studies demonstrated that sexual transmission from male to male is also possible [109]. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in urine and saliva [110,111]. Experiments conducted on lab animals have demonstrated that ZIKV is able to replicate in vaginal and rectal mucosa, thus serving as a reservoir of infection [112].2.3. Vertical TransmissionZIKV has been reported to be transferred from mother to fetus during the gestation period. Normally the placenta acts as an effective barrier to curtail transmission of infections from mother to fetus. However, ZIKV is able to bypass these barriers by unknown mechanisms [113]. Studies conducted in a mouse model demonstrated that ZIKV damages the placenta and results in fetal death [114]. In Brazil, during the ZIKV outbreak, a large increase in the number of neonates with microcephaly was reported from mothers who were infected with ZIKV [115]. ZIKV antigen and RNA have been detected in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetal brain tissue [115,116,117]. Therefore, it can be postulated that ZIKV is transmitted from mother to fetus through a damaged placenta (induced by ZIKV) and then ZIKV damages the nervous system of the fetus.2.4. Venereal Transmission in MosquitoesThe maintenance of arboviruses in nature is significantly facilitated when venereal transmission occurs alongside other modes of transmission. Venereal transmission in mosquitoes has been reported for multiple arboviruses, including ZIKV [118,119]. ZIKV is found to be transmitted in the sexual fluids of mating mosquitoes. Intrathoracically ZIKV-infected Ae. aegypti males can transmit the virus to uninfected females during mating, and Ae. aegypti females who are orally infected with ZIKV have the potential to transmit the virus to uninfected males by copulation under laboratory conditions [120]. Furthermore, Aedes mosquitoes acquire and transmit Zika virus by breeding in contaminated aquatic environments [121]. The continuous venereal transmission in mosquitoes could pose a significant public health concern by boosting infection rates and virus spread.2.5. Transmission Through Breast MilkDetection of ZIKV RNA has been observed in the breast milk of ZIKV-infected mothers [122]. This makes it possible for the transmission of ZIKV from the infected mother to the neonates. Studies have demonstrated the presence of ZIKV RNA in babies whose mother’s serum and milk were positive for ZIKV RNA [123]. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed for the flaviviruses WNV and DENV [124,125].2.6. Transmission Through Ocular Fluid/TearsResearchers have found the existence of ZIKV in tears thirty days following ZIKV infection. Their study suggests the possible transmission of ZIKV through tears [126,127]. This is possible as previously a case study revealed that transmission through tears occurred from mother to her child [128].3. Zika Virus Associated Neurological DiseasesZIKV infection has been reported to be associated with a number of neurological diseases (illustrated in Figure 4) which are described in detail below.3.1. MicrocephalyCongenital microcephaly has been previously associated with viral infections, e.g., rubella and cytomegalovirus. However, it was unknown for ZIKV until the Brazilian outbreak [129]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in the amniotic fluid of these fetuses [130]. In 2015, Brazilian authorities reported that the incidence of microcephaly was twenty times higher compared to previous years. This led to further investigations, and in two years (2015–2016), more than 8000 cases of microcephaly were reported [131]. Later on, an analysis of an outbreak in French Polynesia also demonstrated a correlation between ZIKV and microcephaly [132,133]. Further investigations showed that aborted fetuses (during 1st and 2nd trimesters) contained ZIKV RNA in the amniotic fluid, meninges, CSF, and umbilical cord of the microcephalic newborn babies [57,134]. Several studies have been performed to identify the molecular mechanism of ZIKV-associated microcephaly. Cells associated with the BBB, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, are susceptible to infection with ZIKV and their infection with ZIKV leads to upregulation of ICAM-1 and a variety of cytokines (IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-10) that causes enhanced binding and subsequently crossing of the BBB by the immune cells. The access of immune cells to the CNS is associated with neuro-inflammation which contributed to the neuro-pathogenesis of ZIKV [135]. Neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV and undergo apoptosis following infection [136]. During pregnancy, the immune response directed against ZIKV leads to the inflammation of the fetal–maternal interface, causing inflammation and disruption of barrier functions. This allows the recruitment of various immune cells to the fetal tissue, releasing TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor) and IFN-γ (interferon) that lead to neuroinflammation, resulting in the damage and destruction of NPCs required for the neural development of the fetus [137]. The CNS is susceptible to ZIKV infection during all stages of pregnancy, but earlier infection results in severe damage. CNS infection with ZIKV may result in impaired multiplication and migration of neurons, myelination, synaptogenesis, and even apoptosis that may contribute towards ZIKV-associated microcephaly [138]. In cells infected with ZIKV, mitofusion 2 (MFN-2) expression is reduced. Normal expression of MFN-2 is required for the fusion of mitochondria. Therefore, in ZIKV-infected cells, mitochondrial fragmentation occurs. This leads to the activation of apoptosis through a p53-mediated pathway in NPC cells [139,140]. Recently, Gladwyn-Ng et al. [141] have demonstrated the mechanism of apoptosis in neuronal cells infected by ZIKV in mouse embryos and neuronal stem cells (human), showing that ZIKV infections trigger unfolded proteins in cells that lead to activation of the ER stress response Subsequently, these cells migrate to the cortex and undergo apoptosis.3.2. Ophthalmological ManifestationsZIKV infection during pregnancy has been associated with congenital abnormalities in the fetal eye. Neural crest cells (NCCs) are required for normal development of the corneal and uveal stroma, the corneal epithelium, and the trabecular meshwork. They also play an important role in the closure of the optic fissure [142,143]. NCCs express AXL and thus exhibit susceptibility to ZIKV. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV results in viral replication resulting in loss of NCCs [144]. ZIKV infection can also disrupt the normal differentiation of the NCCs leading to defective development of the anterior eye segment leading to micropthalmia [142,145,146,147]. The loss of NCCs during ZIKV infection has also been found to disrupt closure of the optic fissure leading to iris coloboma and abnormal development of the lens zonules. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV can also lead to reduced thickening of the corneal stroma causing corneal ectasia [142]. It can also contribute towards impaired development of trabecular meshwork causing glaucoma [144,148,149,150]. Neuronal depletion during ZIKV infection can also contribute to thinning of the retinal ganglion layer [151,152]. Apoptosis of NCCs during ZIKV infection can also lead to defects in axonal development [145].Ocular manifestations have been reported in approximately 50% of infants who have ZIKV-induced microcephaly. ZIKV infection has been reported to involve the eyes and this represents the viral ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the blood–retinal barrier (BRB), and the blood–aqueous barrier (BAB). The first ZIKV-related eye abnormality was reported in 2016. More than sixty percent of people with ZIKV infections are reported to have conjunctivitis (the most common eye abnormality associated with ZIKV). Other abnormalities are associated with the anterior segment, the posterior segment, and the neuroophthalmic. The abnormalities associated with the anterior segment include microphthalmia, anterior uveitis (with or without raised intraocular pressure), and non-purulent conjunctivitis [153,154,155]. The posterior segment anomalies associated with ZIKV involve the retina and choroid and include maculopathy and multifocal choroiditis [153,156,157,158,159]. Neuro-ophthalmic conditions are related to the paresis of the abducens and oculomotor muscles and can cause ocular flutter, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema [156,160,161,162,163]. ZIKV infection also causes optic nerve involvement, and this includes hypoplastic disk, enhanced cup-to-disk ratio, and nerve pallor. Viral entry into eyes is facilitated by both hematogenous and retrograde transport of ZIKV through the optic nerve and optic tract [164]. Although ocular tissue is immune privileged, it is more permissive to ZIKV infection because of the higher viral load [151]. Certain cells in the retina are relatively more permissive to ZIKV infection including RPE cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells [165]. Choriocapillaris (highly fenestrated) are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and it can facilitate the ZIKV entry into the RPE cells, which are also permissive to ZIKV infection. RPE infection results in inflammation and this subsequently leads to breaking the BRB [108,166]. Normally, the immune response helps the host in eliminating the infection, however, in this case, immune-mediated injury to the eye tissue leads to pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated eye abnormality [167]. Infection of BRB with ZIKV leads to the generation of IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-α, IFN-β, TNF-α, CCL5 and CXCL-10. This leads to subsequent events that culminate in the atrophy of the retina and RPE mottling [168,169].Another mechanism of viral entry in ocular tissue is through ZIKV-infected monocytes, which possess the ability to cross the retinal microvasculature endothelium and subsequently cause retinal infection. Later on, ZIKV-infected monocytes become activated and release cytokines and chemokines that result in immune-mediated injury/damage to ocular tissue [170,171]. The cornea can also act as reservoir of ZIKV infection as it expresses RIG-1, MDA-5, and TLR 3 which facilitate the synthesis of IFN-I and III to mediate antiviral response [136,172]. Infection of the cornea with ZIKV leads to the synthesis of the IL-1β, TNF-α, CCL5, and CXCL-10 which recruits other cells of the immune system to the cornea and this promotes inflammation and damage to corneal tissue leading to keratitis [173]. Through the hematogenous route, ZIKV infects the iris and ciliary body. From here, the virus can infect BAB cells, which damages this barrier and results in viral entry into the aqueous humor [133]. From the aqueous humor, ZIKV gains entry to the trabeculae meshwork and results in the production of cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-1, IFN-α, IFN-β, CCL5, and CXCL-10. This leads to the recruitment of the other immune cells such as Th1 and CD8+ cells that secrete TNF-α and IFN-γ, damaging the trabeculae meshwork and resulting in blockage of aqueous humor outflow, leading to enhanced intraocular pressure and causing glaucoma. Persistent glaucoma can damage the optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells leading to optic neuropathy [174].3.3. Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)GBS is a condition where there is immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. The condition is characterized by the loss of reflexes and flaccid paralysis. The disease occurs in 1/100,000 persons. It has been observed that GBS typically occurs after certain infections such as Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sporadic GBS cases have also occurred following the flaviviral infections (WNV, DENV and JEV) [175]. In 2014, the first report was published about the occurrence of GBS following ZIKV infection in French Polynesia. It was reported that in ZIKV patients, 1/4000 people suffer from GBS (20 times increased incidence) [176]. In the recent ZIKV outbreak in the Americas, approximately 1500 cases were reported between 2014–2015. At the majority of locations, GBS incidence following ZIKV was reported to be 2–10 times higher than background [177]. In Colombia, more than 100 thousand cases of ZIKV were reported with 42 GBS cases/100,000 ZIKV cases. These findings indicate the possibility of the association of ZIKV with GBS [178]. Until now, no clear mechanism is known about the molecular pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated GBS. However, it is thought that the mechanism of molecular mimicry may be an important contributing factor in the pathogenesis of disease (i.e., antibodies formed against ZIKV cross-react with myelin sheath or other neural tissues). However, others have proposed that immune system dysregulation occurs (that is not directly against ZIKV) and that contributes towards its pathogenesis [176].3.4. Cerebrovascular InvolvementCertain viral diseases are associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities. Recently, ZIKV cases have also been reported to involve cerebral vascular abnormalities. A 10-month-old child infected with ZIKV was admitted to hospital with ischemic stroke and had serum positive for ZIKV [179,180,181]. The exact mechanism remains to be determined; however, it is thought that higher susceptibility of endothelial cells to be infected by ZIKV is a major factor and is responsible for cerebral vascular abnormalities [182].3.5. EncephalitisZIKV infection is considered a potential cause of encephalitis. An 81-year-old patient with a travel history to a ZIKV-affected area had reduced consciousness, limb paresis (upper right), and hemiplegia (left side). The patient was ZIKV positive by RT-PCR and viral culture and isolation. The patient was treated and survived. However, fetal cases of ZIKV-associated encephalitis have also been reported. In Brazil, a 37-year-old (y.o.) female was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of rash and joint pain. Later on, she suffered from weakness in her lower limbs, confusion, and difficulty with speech. RT-PCR was positive for ZIKV, while the serum analysis was negative. The patient later died due to brain swelling, leading to increased intracranial pressure [154]. In the Dominican Republic, a female was admitted to the hospital with complaints of neck stiffness and confusion. Her condition deteriorated, and seizures began. CSF examination revealed an increased number of WBCs (white blood cells), the majority of which were lymphocytes (80%). RT-PCR of urine was positive for ZIKV RNA (but negative in the CSF and serum). However, IgM antibodies against ZIKV were detected from CSF and serum, confirming ZIKV exposure. MRI examination revealed cortical edema, a common finding in meningoencephalitis [163]. In another study on ZIKV, subcortical hemorrhage and bilateral lesions were observed in the temporal and frontal regions [162].3.6. Myelitis and EncephalomyelitisZIKV infection has been associated with myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) and encephalomyelitis (inflammation of the brain and spinal cord), which can result in reduced consciousness, urinary retention, and paresis of lower limbs [183]. The first case of myelitis associated with ZIKV was reported in Guadeloupe in a girl (15 y.o.) who was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of headache and conjunctivitis. Later, her condition continued to deteriorate, and she suffered from left-sided weakness and urinary retention. MRI examination revealed a normal brain, whereas abnormalities were revealed in the spinal cord cervical area and thoracic region. CSF, urine, and serum were found to be positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR [184]. In another study, a 26 y.o. Brazilian male was admitted to the hospital with a major complaint of fever, malaise, and neck stiffness, CSF and urine examination revealed that the patient had a ZIKV infection. CSF analysis showed hyper-protein levels and 100 WBCs (white blood cells) per mL (95% mononuclear cells) [183]. Other studies have also indicated an association between ZIKV and myelitis/encephalomyelitis [183,184,185].4. Zika Virus Infection and Extracellular VesiclesViruses can employ extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. EVs are particles surrounded by membranes that can be released into the extracellular space by living or dying cells. Various viral components may be packed inside the EVs [186]. One of the final fates of EVs is their release into blood circulation, through which they can reach distant cells and tissues [187]. It is important to note that EVs share most of the biochemical and biophysical properties of viruses. Both EVs and viruses (naked and enveloped) use the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT) complex [188,189]. Moreover, Rab GTPases (particularly Rab11, Rab35, and Rab27A/B) are also shared during the viral replication cycle as well as EV biogenesis [190]. Many studies have indicated that EVs play a facilitating role during viral infections. These effects can be due to EVs carrying viral receptors, carrying viral particles themselves, or carrying their genome, proteins, or miRNA. Ultimately, it can lead to the priming of the recipient cells and/or inhibiting IFN pathways, apoptosis of immune cells, and the transmission of viral genome and/or proteins to distant organs and tissues [188,191,192,193]. In the case of ZIKV, NS1 protein, viral E protein (inside and outside) and viral RNA can be packed inside the EVs [194]. Interestingly, mosquito cells (C6/36 cells) infected with ZIKV are found to release EVs (containing viral RNA and protein E), which was found to infect both naïve mosquito and mammalian cells (monocytes and endothelial cells) [195].Given ZIKV’s neurotropic nature, it is important to emphasize that ZIKV-derived EVs are found to disrupt the structure of human brain microvasculature endothelial cell junctions (hcMEC/D3), facilitating ZIKV entry into cells of the human CNS [196]. ZIKV can also spread to the CNS through autophagy (a process associated with viral infections and may be regulated by EVs [197,198,199]. In the case of ZIKV, the autophagic vesicles may play an important role in crossing the placental barrier. Normally, the placenta is protected from various pathogens (aided by the autophagy process); however, ZIKV can hijack this process [200,201]. A study using a mouse model has shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine inhibits viral replication (autophagy-dependent) and also effectively prevents mother–fetal transmission of the virus [202,203].5. Models for Studying Zika Virus Infection and PathogenesisDeveloping appropriate cellular and animal models for studying ZIKV is becoming increasingly important to gain appropriate understanding of viral pathogenesis and host-related factors that aid or inhibit viral replication and to devise appropriate disease prevention and treatment strategies.5.1. Cell LinesThe cell lines are widely used to grow and study ZIKV because they provide a controlled environment for viral replication. These cell lines allow scientists to watch viral behavior, examine molecular interactions between ZIKV and host cells, and test antiviral agents. The use of cell lines is essential to virology as they provide a reliable, reproducible system for studying viral pathogenicity and mechanisms in a laboratory setting. The cells susceptible to Zika Virus infection are illustrated in Figure 5 and detailed comprehensively in Table 2.5.2. OrganoidsAlthough cell culture has been used to determine ZIKV replication and pathogenesis, this system is not without its downsides. Cells are unable to mimic in vivo conditions as they lack the cellular structure, composition, and physiology of an organ in which a virus replicates [222]. To overcome this drawback, people are now developing organ analogues in vitro where stem cells are used to generate 3D tissue structures resembling organs. These 3D models are known as organoids and are being used to model and better understand the molecular events that occur following viral invasion and replication in that organ [223]. Studies have provided confirmatory evidence of microcephaly following ZIKV infection by using organoids [224,225]. Qian et al. (2016) used a mini-bioreactor to generate brain organoids and demonstrated that ZIKV infection in brain organoids that mimic the first-trimester fetal brain resulted in ZIKV infection of NPCs, IPC, astrocytes, and neurons, while infection of brain organoids mimicking the second-trimester fetal brain exhibited ZIKV infection of the outer radial glial cells [224]. These findings are correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis providing evidence of ZIKV-associated microcephaly [136]. Yoon et al. showed that the ZIKV NS2A protein is responsible for the alteration and reduced multiplication of the radial glial cells resulting in altered neuronal positioning in the brain [226]. Another study reported that ZIKV infection of NPCs during early pregnancy was associated with the upregulation of TLR-3 receptors, leading to apoptosis of NPCs, resulting in microcephaly [227]. Recently, brain organoid models have also been used to determine the various drug targets against ZIKV [228,229,230,231]. Organoids resembling the placenta have also been developed using first-trimester human chorionic placental villi where ZIKV established infection and proliferated in Hofbauer cells, villus cytotrophoblasts (CTB), and produced the NS3 and E protein [232,233]. To summarize, organoids offer a promising approach to studying the ZIKV viral pathogenesis and also to screening compounds’ antiviral activity in a system more relevant than in vitro cell culture.5.3. Animal ModelsAnimal models have been developed to study ZIKV replication and pathogenesis in vivo.5.3.1. Non-Human Primates (NHPs)Non-Human Primates (NHPs) exhibit significant similarities with humans (pregnancy physiology, long gestation periods, and hemomonochorial placenta) and offer a promising model to study ZIKV infection, neuropathogenesis, and drug discovery. They also exhibit vertical transmission from mother to fetus similar to humans [234]. Rhesus macaques, olive baboons, marmosets, and pigtail macaques have been employed to study ZIKV pathogenesis during gestation. Olive baboons have been able to demonstrate clinical infection when infected during the gestation period. When infected during 4th month of pregnancy, they developed conjunctivitis and moderate rash, with viremia peak at 7 dpi (days post-infection). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins were also detected [235,236]. In other NHPs (i.e., rhesus macaques, marmosets, and pigtail macaques) no clinical infection occurs following ZIKV inoculation. However, in all NHPs, antibodies are formed following ZIKV infection, and placental and fetal ZIKV infection is observed. In rhesus macaques, fetal loss occurs following ZIKV infection, while marmosets and olive baboons exhibit viral RNA in amniotic fluid and placenta. Severe placental infection is observed during pregnancy in marmosets and rhesus macaques [237,238,239].5.3.2. MiceMany viral replication and pathogenesis studies involve the use of mice as animal models because they have large litter sizes and a short gestational period. However, variability in their placental structure and heterogeneity in gestation can be problematic [240]. Another complication occurs due to differences in the cell biology of mice as compared to humans. On viral entry, the viral NS5 protein is able to degrade the cellular STAT2 protein, thereby making IFN signaling ineffective, resulting in viral replication and the development of clinical disease. Degradation of STAT-2 is not observed in mouse cells infected with a virus, leading to unimpaired IFN signaling resulting in low viral titer and failure to develop clinical infection [241]. Therefore, biological modifications are needed to use mice for studying ZIKV replication and pathogenesis events. This can be achieved by using either immunocompromised mice or using alternative routes of inoculation.Immunocompromised MiceImmunocompromised mice are modified for interferon (IFN) insufficiency. This may be conducted by either creating knockout (KO) mice, e.g., interferon alpha receptor knockout (Ifnar-/-), or by using antibodies to block the IFN receptors (MARI-5A3) [242,243]. It has been found that pregnant Ifnar-/- mice exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV infection with subcutaneous inoculation and are able to produce fetal and placental abnormalities [114]. The infection is established in homozygous as well as heterozygous mice, suggesting that partial deficiency in IFN signaling is sufficient to produce fetal neuropathology. As ZIKV infection can occur through venereal transmission; therefore, models have been developed for this purpose. Intravaginal inoculation of ZIKV from 5–8 days of conception results in high levels of viral RNAs in the placenta and fetal tissues in Ifnar-/- mice [244]. ZIKV infection (intravaginal) of IFN regulator factor (IRF) KO e.g., Irf3-/- Irf7-/- mice exhibit higher vaginal and fetal titers of the virus. This implies that inhibition of IFN signaling is a key factor in establishing different mice models.Immunocompetent MiceAs discussed previously, ZIKV infection often fails in immunocompetent mice. However, some researchers have used alternative strategies to produce ZIKV infection by using higher viral titer or other routes of inoculation. A Brazilian ZIKV strain has been used to produce successful fetal infection in SJL mice. In this study, high viral inoculation (1010 to 1012 pfu/mL) was used to produce uterine and fetal infection that ultimately resulted in fetal microcephaly [245]. However, these mice showed higher levels of T cells in the blood and later on developed autoimmunity and sarcoma [246]. The intraamniotic route has also been used for ZIKV inoculation in embryos and resulted in damage to the retina and blood–brain barrier and produced neuronal death and defects in motor neurons in the fetal brain. Intrauterine infection also resulted in ZIKV infection of placental endothelial and trophoblast cells and in the fetus, the virus localizes in the microglial, endothelial, and NPCs of the fetal brain [67,247,248]. Another model has also been developed to study the postnatal CZS progression by inoculating C57BL/6 mice intraperitoneally, and it was seen that the fetus had reduced body weight and microcephaly. Later on, these mice exhibited motor and memory deterioration in adulthood [249]. These studies pave a path towards viral replication and neuropathogenesis studies in immunocompetent mice models that may be deployed for further understanding of ZIKV neuropathogenesis and drug discovery.5.3.3. Farm AnimalsAlthough less common as animal models, pregnant sheep, and pigs may be used as a model for ZIKV replication and pathogenesis. They are widely available and exhibit susceptibility to the virus [250,251]. They can also be used as a model for human pregnancy and fetal growth [252]. ZIKV infection during the first trimester in sheep resulted in placental pathology, reduced fetal growth, and fetal loss [253]. Maternal ZIKV infection during the 4th to 5th week resulted in the detection of ZIKV RNA in the PBMCs of the mother; however, clinical infection failed to occur [253]. Similarly, in pigs, intrauterine infection during pregnancy resulted in placental abnormalities as well as microcephaly in piglets [254]. It has also been seen that following intrauterine ZIKV infection, the African ZIKV lineage was found to produce a more pronounced viral infection as compared to the Asian strain [255]. These findings clearly establish the role of sheep as a possible animal model to study fetal neuropathogenesis due to ZIKV.5.3.4. RatsAs rats become immunocompromised during the final stage of gestation, similar to humans, they may also be utilized as a model to investigate ZIKV neuropathogenesis [256]. Upon subcutaneous (S/C) inoculation of ZIKV to pregnant rat females, reduced cortical and hippocampus volumes were observed in rats, although no pathological findings and viral detection were observed in the maternal counterpart [114,257].5.3.5. HamstersInfection of immunocompetent females during pregnancy was unable to produce productive viral infection; ZIKV RNA was not found in fetal or placental tissue and fetus size remained unaffected [114]. However, ZIKV infection (Malaysia Strain) in immunocompromised hamsters (8 days post-mating) resulted in ZIKV infection of placental tissue and also caused vertical transmission of the ZIKV from mother to offspring [258].5.3.6. ChickenChicken embryos have been demonstrated to support ZIKV viral growth in the chicken brain and other tissues [259]. Intraamniotic inoculation of ZIKV resulted in stunted embryo growth and microcephaly [260]. Furthermore, comparison of the Asian and African ZIKV strains showed that the African strain caused more embryonic pathologies [261].6. Treatment and Prevention Against Zika Virus and Zika Virus Associated Neuropathies6.1. Prevention from Zika Virus Through VaccinesOne of the major methods for viral disease prevention and control is vaccination. Immediately after the outbreak of ZIKV, research began to find ideal vaccine candidates to prevent future ZIKV outbreaks [262]. Several vaccine candidates have emerged; however, very few have been used in clinical trials. The various ZIKV vaccine candidates are summarized in Table 3.6.1.1. Purified Inactivated Zika Virus Vaccines (PIZIKV)Several inactivated vaccines have been developed and tested by animal models. The majority of these vaccines have been able to demonstrate higher antibody titer, reduced viremia, successful passive transfer of antibodies, and protection in mice (interferon deficient) after homologous or heterologous vaccination [263]. In India, one vaccine has entered phase I clinical trials (CTRI/2017/05/008539) [291]. Using mice and non-human primates (NHPs), an aluminum hydroxide-based inactivated ZIKV vaccine has demonstrated promising antibody titers and protection against homologous antigen challenge [265]. Another PIZIKV provided complete protection in a dose-dependent manner (0.016 to 10 ug) and was found to be effective one year following vaccination in macaques [266]. A double-blind randomized controlled trial (Phase I) was performed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of PIZIKV, and it was found that the vaccine was safe for 52 h. However, protection was not found to be effective as only a single dose was given and for better immunogenicity, a double dose may be needed [268].6.1.2. Live Attenuated Vaccines:Live-attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are known for eliciting swift and long-lasting protective immunity and represent a crucial strategy for managing flavivirus diseases [292]. These are made by modifying the virus in such a way that it may replicate within the organism and stimulate the immune system without causing disease. Since 1938, they have been used as the gold standard as they exhibit good safety and effective protection from viral infection [293]. LAVs are known to stimulate the immune system for long-lasting periods (without the need for an adjuvant or any booster). Currently, three approaches are being used for generating ZIKV LAVs, which are (i) generating chimeric strains (using the backbone of an attenuated flavivirus), (ii) codon deoptimization, and (iii) mutagenesis. One of the most important advantages of using live vaccines is their ability to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses (with a single dose of immunization); as the virus continues to multiply within the host cells, allowing continuous loading of MHC (I and II) with viral peptides. In addition, they are cost-effective (both during manufacturing as well as transportation). The past experiences of successful development of LAV against Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) and Yellow Fever Virus (YFV) have clearly shown their potential to be used as safe viral vaccines [279,293]. However, manufacturing of live vaccines usually requires eggs or cell culture and also maintaining a cold chain during transportation. In countries having warm climates, maintaining cold chain only can account for up to 80% of the total vaccine cost [294]. Another major concern associated with the use of live vaccination is inadequate attenuation (once they are at the stage of the human clinical trials [295]. A variety of LAVs have been tested against the ZIKV [292], and the selective studies are summarized in Table 3.6.1.3. Nucleic Acid VaccinesDNA and RNA-based vaccines are being developed for different infectious diseases. They offer the advantage of prolonging immune response following vaccination and induce both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (CMI) [296]. However, one major disadvantage is that DNA vaccines often fail to elicit adequate immune response or offer protection from challenge [297]. Despite these advantages, DNA vaccines may have the risk of eliciting autoimmunity (by eliciting anti-DNA antibody production) and also causing insertional mutations [298]. Another point to keep in mind is that in the case of DNA vaccines, DNA must enter inside the nucleus of the cell, and then after transcription, mRNA must travel outside the nucleus (into the cytoplasm), where it is translated into the proteins. In contrast, for RNA vaccines, RNA can directly be translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, which are then secreted from the cells (into the extracellular matrix) where they can be presented to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). mRNA vaccines have become more popular after the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is also important to note that storage of mRNA vaccine requires maintaining a cold chain, which may not be feasible in developing countries [299]. The summary of various DNA vaccines available against ZIKV is summarized in Table 3.6.1.4. Subunit VaccinesDue to their rapid production and stability, a variety of ZIKV vaccines have been developed. The majority of these vaccines have used the Envelope protein (E protein) and its different segments. These vaccines have been tested in various animal models, which are summarized in Table 3.6.1.5. Viral Vector-Based VaccinesViral vector-based vaccines are prepared by using a vector virus for the insertion of the genetic components of ZIKV, and they have been found to induce good humoral immunity. Lentovirus, adenovirus, and retroviruses are known to be good viral vectors. Various ZIKV vaccines have been developed using various viral vector systems, which have been summarized in Table 3.6.2. Zika Virus Prevention Through Vector ControlMosquitoes play a central role in the transmission of ZIKV. Therefore, reducing ZIKV transmission through vector control methods involves diverse and innovative strategies and tools designed to manage disease-spreading mosquito population. One of the most widely used strategies is the use of chemical insecticides (due to their cost-effectiveness and easy availability). However, due to the emergence of insecticide resistance and their deleterious effects on the environment, the focus is now diverted towards various other control methods [300,301]. Due to their eco-friendly nature, herbal-based control methods have now gained attention. Promising insecticide activities have been shown by extracts derived from the Illicium verum, Zanthoxylum limonella, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon winterianus, Eucalyptus citriodora, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, etc. [302,303,304,305,306,307,308]. Furthermore, nanoparticles derived from Ambrosia arborescens have also shown good larvicidal activity. However, their toxicity profile should be determined against other environment-friendly insects, animals, and humans [307]. Similarly, biological control methods are also being employed due to their minimal impact on the environment [309]. This includes the use of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Various species of entomopathogenic fungi (Metarhizium anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Aspergillus terreus) and bacteria (Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), Wolbachia) have been tested against ZIKV-transmitting mosquitoes [310,311,312,313,314,315]. Particularly, the introduction of Wolbachia in mosquitoes has demonstrated the ability to disrupt the reproductive potential of disease-transmitting vectors. Similarly, the use of various natural predators, i.e., Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, fishes, tadpoles, and copepods, have also been used against the mosquitoes and have shown varying degrees of efficacy in controlling the mosquito population [316]. Moreover, genetic engineering principles have been applied to release genetically modified mosquitoes into the environment [317]. Furthermore, the use of the sterile insect technique is also an innovative approach to control the mosquito population [318]. When used in combination, these strategies offer an integrated approach to vector control, addressing both short and long-term goals of reducing ZIKV and its induced neuropathies. A summary of vector control strategies developed so far is provided in Table 4.6.3. Treatment for Zika Virus6.3.1. Antivirals Against Zika VirusSince the outbreak of ZIKV, many compounds have been proposed to possess antiviral activity against ZIKV. However, in the majority of cases, treatment is symptomatic, and no specific antiviral has been approved for ZIKV treatment. A myriad of approaches are being adopted for searching for anti-ZIKV drugs. These strategies include the screening of different compounds for their anti-ZIKV activity or through repurposing drugs that are already being used for the treatment of other viral infections. In addition, the anti-ZIKV activity of several herbal/plant extracts is also being evaluated. Broadly, anti-ZIKV compounds have been divided into 2 major categories: (a) direct-acting antivirals, which inhibit the viral replication cycle; (b) antivirals targeting host cells [75]; both of these are summarized in Table 5. The former drugs act on the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp); NS5. Polymerase inhibitors and nucleoside analogs are included in this category. They act by targeting the catalytic domain of NS5. The other category of drugs (host-targeting antivirals) targets the host cell processes (that play an important role in viral replication). Viruses need host nucleosides for their genome replication. The host-acting antivirals can act on various steps of viral replication (host cell binding, entry, replication complex formation, viral maturation, and release from the host cell). An advantage of targeting host processes is that they are less susceptible to developing drug resistance [75].6.3.2. Medicinal Plants as Zika Virus AntiviralsModern scientific research has found numerous synthetic antiviral medications that are effective against a variety of viral infectious disorders throughout the past few decades. Unfortunately, a wide range of negative consequences associated with these synthetic medications have been documented. They may occasionally lose their potency against newly arising virus resistance strains [381]. Furthermore, people in developing nations cannot afford expensive synthetic medications for the treatment of viral infections. Medicinal plants may offer economical and efficient antiviral medications. To date, no plant-derived antiviral has been approved for clinical use against ZIKV. Various research has been conducted to identify medicinal plants possessing anti-ZIKV activity, and they have been summarized in Table 6.7. Zika Virus and Its Potential Oncolytic ActivitiesZIKV exhibits tropism for a variety of cell types including normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs/NSPs), microglial cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells [406,407,408]. Following the entry into cells, the virus disrupts growth and development, causing cell death. Studies in various animals have also supported the association between ZIKV infection and neurodegeneration. Inoculation of ZIKV in rhesus monkeys during early pregnancy has been shown to result in the aberrations of the microglial cells and also cortical plate thinning (3 weeks post-inoculation) [409,410]. Therefore, ZIKV is a promising virus that may be used as an oncolytic virus against glioblastoma as it infects the tumor cells. Particularly, in vitro studies have shown that the ZIKV NS5 protein inhibits the migration, proliferation, and invasion of glioblastoma. Studies in mice have shown that it increases the survival of C57/B6 mice with intracranial glioblastoma [411]. Another study in C57/B6 mice has shown that ZIKV increases the survival of mice with glioblastoma (with the suppression of tumor volume as well as the absence of clinical signs) [412]. Further molecular studies have revealed that ZIKV protease causes the cleavage of human cellular gasdermin D (GSDMD), which causes the activation of pyroptosis (caspase-independent) [413]. ZIKV infection in immunocompetent dogs (suffering from glioblastoma) has also been shown to decrease the tumor mass volume and ameliorate neurological signs. Further investigations revealed an increase in the number of immune cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment [414]. This increase in the numbers of immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) has also been observed in C57BL6/J mouse models (suffering from glioblastoma) infected with ZIKV. This infiltration of T cells into the tumor microenvironment provides enhanced protection to mice. ZIKV infection is associated with enhanced activation of the type I interferon signaling pathway in glioblastoma cells and increases the glioblastoma sensitivity to the PD-L1 blockade, which is an important immune checkpoint [415,416,417].8. Future Perspectives in Zika Virus ControlSince its emergence in 1947, ZIKV has only caused widespread epidemics in the last two decades. The outbreaks of ZIKV also suggest the dynamics of transmission variability of ZIKV. The outbreak of ZIKV in the Americas caused a rapid increase in studies of ZIKV pathogenesis and its control measures and treatment strategies. It is of prime importance to continue working on establishing virological and immunological diagnostics kits for ZIKV with enhanced specificity and sensitivity. Another area of focus is ZIKV pathogenesis. Finally, prevention and treatment strategies remain pivotal to curtail ZIKV-related morbidity and mortality. Currently, many vaccines are being tested on animal models, but very few have entered into clinical trials, there is a dire need to improve the quality of good vaccine candidates. Plus, the development of genetically modified mosquitoes could be a groundbreaking tool for controlling Zika virus transmission.


Title: Transmission-clearance trade-offs indicate that dengue virulence evolution depends on epidemiological context

IntroductionEvolution of virulence theory proposes that parasites will evolve to an intermediate level of virulence when a trade-off exists between parasite transmissibility and virulence, where virulence is most commonly defined as the rate at which hosts experience disease-induced mortality1,2. Although a large body of literature contributes to virulence theory, few studies have empirically demonstrated the existence of a fitness trade-off that would result in evolution towards intermediate virulence2. Among human pathogens, HIV provides a rare, well-documented example3,4. Human malaria provides another example, where observed, broad patterns between virulence and transmissibility are consistent with evolution of virulence theory5. While a trade-off between transmission rate and disease-induced mortality is the classical trade-off considered in evolution of virulence theory, early work has also considered alternative trade-offs, for example, between the rate of recovery and the rate of disease-induced mortality6.More generally, virulence can be defined as the ability of a pathogen to cause disease7. In this case, evolution towards intermediate virulence can also result from trade-offs in many different fitness components8, rather than only through the classical trade-off between transmission and disease-induced host mortality. Indeed, recent studies have indicated that the pathogen clearance rate is likely to be an important fitness component to consider in the evolution of virulence8,9, defined as disease severity. These studies further underscore that the interaction between pathogens and the host immune response may be an important factor in the evolution of pathogen virulence8,10. Here, with dengue virus, we document an example of a human pathogen subject to a fitness trade-off involving viral clearance.In brief, dengue is a vector-borne virus that infects up to 400 million individuals annually11. Dengue infections can be asymptomatic, result in symptomatic dengue fever (DF) or result in severe disease, defined as dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) or dengue shock syndrome (DSS)12. The virus comprises four antigenically distinct serotypes, each of which is genetically structured into several clades called genotypes, based on levels of nucleotide divergence exceeding 6%13. Dengue virus infection induces long-lived immunity against the infecting serotype14, but only a transient period of cross-protection against heterologous dengue serotypes14–16. Primary dengue infections can result in severe disease, but they do so rarely, with the majority of these infections being asymptomatic or resulting in DF14. In contrast, secondary heterologous infections have an appreciably higher risk of developing into severe disease14. Tertiary and quaternary (henceforth, “post-secondary”) infections contribute very little to dengue hospital admissions14,17, although they are known to occur. The elevated risk of developing severe disease with a heterologous secondary infection is due at least in part to antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), a process by which antibodies generated during a primary infection facilitate viral entry into host target cells bearing Fc−γ receptors during a secondary infection14,18. This process, among others, results in an elevated number of cytokine-secreting infected cells, which can initiate a cytokine storm that ultimately leads to the development of vascular leakage14,18–20, the hallmark of DHF. Severe dengue disease is therefore a result of immunopathology, whereby the host’s own immune response, rather than the presence of the pathogen, is the direct cause of damage to host tissue.Using viremia measurements from symptomatic dengue-infected patients, we first document an empirical trade-off between peak viral load and the viral clearance rate, indicating that high viral loads come at the cost of accelerated viral clearance in both primary and secondary dengue infections. By fitting an existing within-host dengue model to the observed viremia measurements, we show that this observed trade-off can be explained by the interaction of the virus with the host immune response, consistent with recent arguments that the host immune response can be an important factor limiting the evolution of higher transmission rates10,21.Given that the probability of successfully transmitting to dengue’s mosquito vector strongly depends on host viral load22, and that high peak viral load is a strong predictor of the probability of triggering severe dengue disease23–26, the empirical trade-off we document between peak viral load and viral clearance rate sets the stage for the possibility that dengue virus strains associated with intermediate virulence maximize the virus’s transmission potential. We consider how selection may act on a within-host viral phenotype—the viral production rate—and the implications of this selection on dengue virulence evolution. We show that dengue virus transmission potential is maximized at production rates that are associated with intermediate peak viral loads, and thus an intermediate risk of triggering severe disease. Our analysis further shows that optimal virulence, defined as disease severity, depends on epidemiological context. Specifically, we show that even though secondary infections cause more severe disease than primary infections, they may place selection pressures on the virus to evolve lower virulence in any given infection. These results indicate that the changing global landscape of dengue endemism27,28 may in the long-term affect not only infection levels, but, via evolution, disease risk.ResultsTrade-off between peak viral load and viral clearance rateIn the context of dengue, virulence can be defined as the probability that infection results in severe disease, defined classically by the World Health Organization as DHF/DSS12. This probability is known to depend on several factors, including host genetics29, host immune status14, and infecting virus genotype and serotype30–32. Here, we operationally define virulence as peak viral load because high viral load has been associated with high hemoconcentration25,26, thrombocytopenia25, and a higher pleural infusion index23, all criteria used to define DHF33. Peak viral load has been shown to differ between primary and secondary dengue infections, most likely due to differences in the host’s adaptive immune response between these infections23,24. Peak viral load has also been shown to be variable within both primary and secondary infections, due to viral factors24,26 and other host factors25,26. Dengue virulence, as operationally defined by peak viral load, therefore arises from a combination of host factors and viral factors.Because the probability that severe dengue disease results in death is low, estimated at less than one percent12, disease-induced mortality is unlikely to play a role in limiting the evolution of virulence in dengue. We therefore first aimed to determine whether high viral loads during dengue infections are associated with shortened durations of infection. A negative association between viral load and the duration of infection could lead to a trade-off that would result in evolution towards intermediate virulence. Because dengue is an acute infection, viral load changes dramatically over time and the importance of the duration of infection is modulated by the degree to which an individual is infectious at different timepoints over this period. To determine whether a trade-off exists between dengue viral load and the duration of infection, we thus sought to examine the empirical relationship between peak viral load and the viral clearance rate. To this end, we calculated peak viral loads and viral clearance rates from viremia measurements of 239 symptomatic dengue-infected individuals (Methods). We found a positive relationship between individuals with detectable peak viral load and the viral clearance rate in both primary and secondary dengue infections (Fig. 1). These findings are consistent with previous analyses showing that severe dengue infections are associated with both higher viral load peaks and higher viral clearance rates than non-severe dengue infections23,24.Fig. 1Empirical relationship between peak viral loads and viral clearance rates in dengue. a Peak viral loads plotted alongside maximum daily viral clearance rates for each of the individuals in the Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC) data set experiencing a primary dengue infection with a detectable viral peak (n = 15). The relationship is positive with a slope of m = 0.33, trending towards significance (p = 0.14, t-test). b Peak viral loads plotted alongside maximum daily viral clearance rates for each of the individuals in the HCMC data set experiencing a secondary dengue infection with a detectable viral peak (n = 51). The relationship is positive with a slope of m = 0.32 (p < 0.01, t-test)Host immune response dynamics reproduce empirical trade-offTo address the mechanism underlying this empirical trade-off, we fit an existing within-host model for dengue34,35 to the longitudinal viremia measurements from all 239 dengue-infected individuals (Methods; Fig. 2a, b). The within-host model we used was chosen based on its ability to reproduce characteristic features of dengue infections and its consistency with findings from immunological studies in mouse models36,37. The statistical model fit incorporates inter-individual heterogeneity in the viral infectivity rate, which we included to capture variation in viral dynamics arising from host factors specifically, such as host immune status and host genetics (Methods). The statistically parameterized model reproduces the positive relationship between peak viremia and viral clearance rate observed in the data (Fig. 2c, d). It ascribes this positive relationship to the feedback between viral dynamics and the activation of the host immune response, with high viremia levels eliciting a strong innate and/or adaptive immune response, which in turn drives a high viral clearance rate.Fig. 2Within-host model dynamics reproduce empirically observed peak viral load-clearance rate trade-off. a, b Model-simulated viral load dynamics alongside viremia measurements from individuals experiencing a a primary dengue infection and b a secondary dengue infection. Solid colored lines show viral load dynamics parameterized with the mean estimated viral infectivity rate. Dotted lines show viral load dynamics parameterized with a viral infectivity rate two standard deviations above the estimated mean. Dashed lines show viral load dynamics parameterized with a viral infectivity rate two standard deviations below the estimated mean. Viremia measurements are shown in black and are shifted in time based on inferred individual incubation periods using model simulations with mean estimated viral infectivity rates. Viral limits of detection are shown with horizontal gray lines. c Model-simulated peak viral loads and corresponding maximum daily viral clearance rates in primary infections. Filled dots show results from the model parameterized using the full data set (simulated n = 1000). Open dots show results from the model parameterized using the data subset (simulated n = 1000). Both relationships are positive: slope m = 0.26 for the full data set (solid line, p < 0.01, t-test); slope m = 0.34 for the data subset (dashed line, p < 0.01, t-test). d Model-simulated peak viral loads and corresponding maximum daily viral clearance rates in secondary infections. Filled and open dots are as in c, each with simulated n = 1000. Both relationships are positive: slope m = 0.21 for full data set (solid line, p < 0.01, t-test); slope m = 0.29 for the data subset (dashed line, p < 0.01, t-test). Peak viral loads and viral clearance rates were calculated from model simulations incorporating inferred variation in the viral infectivity rate and following introduction of measurement noise. Model parameters are provided in Supplementary Table 1It is well known that the overwhelming majority of dengue infections are asymptomatic infections11. Because the viral load data set consists exclusively of symptomatic dengue cases, which are known to have higher viral loads38, a model fit to these data will overestimate peak viral load for average dengue infections. In order to consider asymptomatic infections, we re-fit the model to a subset of the data consisting of patients with lower viral loads (Methods). Simulations of this re-parameterized model reproduced viral load dynamics more consistent with both non-severe and asymptomatic dengue infections (Supplementary Fig. 1), while still reproducing the observed empirical trade-offs (Fig. 2c, d). The ability of these within-host models to quantitatively reproduce the trade-offs shown in Fig. 1 supports the hypothesis that the interaction between dengue virus and the host immune response is responsible for generating the empirical trade-offs observed in both primary and secondary dengue infections.Dengue virulence evolutionTo consider the potential for dengue virulence evolution, we next use our parameterized model to ask how selection may act on viral phenotypes that impact within-host dynamics. We specifically consider the viral production rate, which quantifies the rate at which viral progeny are produced from infected host cells, as an evolvable trait. We consider this viral phenotype because dengue strains are known to exhibit natural variation in this trait39,40 and because this phenotype has in many cases been shown to have a viral genetic basis39,41. Further, this phenotype is known to impact the probability of developing severe disease, with viral strains with higher viral production rates being associated with higher virulence13,40. In our analyses below, we use the within-host model parameterization fit to the data subset, since this model parameterization we believe more appropriately reflects the dynamics of both asymptomatic and symptomatic infections, rather than only symptomatic infections.We first consider the effects of the viral production rate on dengue virulence (as ascertained by peak viral load) and on transmission fitness in the context of primary dengue infections. Figure 3a shows how peak viral load depends on the viral production rate, as predicted by the within-host model. The predicted positive relationship between peak viral load and the viral production rate is consistent with empirical findings that higher viral production rates result in higher probabilities of triggering severe disease39. Using an empirically estimated relationship between host viral load and transmission probability to dengue’s mosquito vector22, we next predicted the relationship between the viral production rate and dengue’s transmission potential (Methods), which is proportional to the basic reproduction number R0. Figure 3b shows this relationship, with transmission potential being maximized at intermediate viral production rates, and therewith at intermediate peak viral loads. Figure 3c combines these results to more clearly demonstrate that dengue’s transmission potential from individuals experiencing a primary infection is maximized at intermediate peak viral loads, reflecting intermediate virulence. Maximization of dengue’s transmission potential at an intermediate viral production rate results from a trade-off between peak viral load and the viral clearance rate in primary infections (Supplementary Fig. 2), analogous to the trade-off that was reproduced by the within-host model incorporating inter-individual variation in dengue’s viral infectivity rate (Fig. 2c). This within-host trade-off scales up to a transmission fitness trade-off because viral transmission success to dengue’s mosquito vector saturates at high host viremia, while fitness costs associated with accelerated viral clearance continue to rise at higher viral production rates. Note that the results shown in Fig. 3 assume that the viral production rate only impacts viral load dynamics in the human host, and therewith, the transmission success of dengue virus from humans to its mosquito vector. Our shown results implicitly assume that the viral production rate does not impact the probability that an infected mosquito transmits the virus to a susceptible host, an assumption we return to in the “Discussion” section.Fig. 3Model-predicted virulence trade-offs for dengue virus. a Model-predicted relationship between the dengue virus production rate and peak viral load, a strong predictor for the risk of developing severe dengue disease. b Model-predicted relationship between the dengue virus production rate and dengue’s transmission potential. Green and orange arrows point to the peaks in transmission potential for primary and secondary infections, respectively. c Model-predicted relationship between peak viral load and dengue’s transmission potential. In a–c, shaded regions show uncertainty estimates, derived from variation in the viral infectivity rate (Methods). Primary infections are shown in green and secondary infections are shown in orangeSimilar to our findings for primary infections, peak viral loads in secondary infections are also higher at higher viral production rates (Fig. 3a). Dengue’s transmission potential is again maximized at an intermediate viral production rate (Fig. 3b) due to a trade-off between peak viral load and the viral clearance rate. However, the viral production rate that maximizes dengue’s transmission potential is substantially lower in a secondary dengue infection than in a primary dengue infection. This indicates that secondary dengue infections select for viral production rates leading to lower peak viral loads in any given infection, relative to those selected for by primary dengue infections. This perhaps counterintuitive result stems from secondary infections generally having higher peak viral loads than primary infections23,24. As such, the transmission benefits of higher viral production rates are reduced for secondary infections relative to primary infections. The clearance rate costs of higher viral production rates are also higher in secondary infections than in primary infections because the adaptive immune response plays an important role in clearing secondary dengue virus infections. If we instead assume, as for primary infections, that it is the innate immune response that clears secondary infections (Supplementary Fig. 3), transmission potential is still maximized at lower viral production rates than in primary infections (Supplementary Fig. 4), but in this case, transmission potential is maximized at viral production rates that yield a viral peak of approximately 7 log genome copies/ml (rather than 6 log genome copies/ml, as seen in Fig. 3c). Our finding that secondary dengue infections select for viral production rates associated with lower peak viral loads than primary dengue infections is also robust to alternative adaptive immune response formulations, such as one that has T-cell activation rates saturate at high antigen levels (see Supplementary Note 1 and Supplementary Fig. 5). This finding also holds for the model parameterization using the full data set (Supplementary Fig. 6).Given our finding that dengue’s fitness trade-offs depends on host immune status, we here synthesize our results to consider the role of epidemiological context in shaping dengue virulence evolution. We examine virulence evolution in two distinct epidemiological contexts: in a population with only a single dengue serotype endemically circulating and in a population with two serotypes circulating. To determine the viral production rate at which viral fitness is maximized in each of these epidemiological contexts, we use an adaptive dynamics framework42 (Methods).When only one serotype is circulating, all infections are primary infections, and the evolutionary stable viral production rate is one that maximizes the transmission potential of a primary dengue infection (Fig. 4a). This optimal viral production rate is not impacted by the transmission intensity of the virus (Fig. 4b), which may differ because of geographic differences in mosquito densities or in the mosquito biting rate. This is because, in a situation with only one serotype circulating, all infections are primary infections, regardless of the extent of dengue endemism. In a population with two circulating dengue serotypes, the evolutionary stable viral production rate is always lower than in the context of only one circulating serotype (Fig. 4b). This is because secondary infections select for lower viral production rates (Fig. 3b). As such, at evolutionary equilibrium, primary infections are expected to result in a lower viral peak (and therefore a lower probability of triggering severe dengue disease) in a population with two circulating serotypes than in a population with only one serotype circulating (Fig. 4c). In a population with two circulating serotypes, however, the transmission intensity of the virus does impact the optimal viral production rate (Fig. 4b), since this transmission intensity impacts the proportion of dengue infections that are primary versus secondary infections. At higher transmission intensities, and under the assumption of no heterologous cross-immunity between the serotypes, the proportion of dengue infections that are secondary infections relative to primary infections increases, saturating at 50%. Under this assumption, the optimal viral production rate therefore decreases with higher transmission intensities. Optimal viral production rates are to some extent impacted when a period of heterologous cross-immunity is assumed between the circulating serotypes (Fig. 4b). When cross-immunity acts to temporarily shield an individual from infection, lower viral production rates are selected for at higher transmission intensities, similar to the case with no heterologous cross-protection. However, under the assumption that cross-immunity shields not from infection, but only from symptomatic disease (“clinical cross-protection”43), optimal viral production rates change non-monotonically with transmission intensity (Fig. 4b). In all cases, however, populations with two circulating serotypes are expected to select for lower viral production rates than populations with only a single circulating serotype. The within-host model parameterized using the full data set yields qualitatively similar results (results not shown).Fig. 4Evolutionary stable viral production rates depend on epidemiological context. a Pairwise invasibility plot for a population with a single endemically circulating serotype. The x axis plots viral production rates of the resident dengue strain; the y axis plots viral production rates of the invading strain. Yellow (blue) regions show viral production rates that can (cannot) successfully invade populations with the resident strain present. The evolutionarily stable strategy occurs at the viral production rate where neither a higher production rate phenotype nor a lower viral production rate phenotype can invade. b Evolutionary stable viral production rates as a function of dengue transmission intensity f. Differences in transmission intensities reflect geographical differences in mosquito densities or biting rates. Optimal viral production rates are shown under two epidemiological contexts: when only a single serotype is circulating (blue line) and when two serotypes are circulating. For the two serotype scenarios, we show optimal viral production rates in the absence of heterologous cross-protection (red line), when the period of “classical” cross-protection is assumed to be 2 years long (green line), and when the period of “clinical” cross-protection is assumed to be 2 years long (magenta line). At any transmission intensity setting, the evolutionarily stable viral production rate is lower in a population with two serotypes circulating rather than only one. The open circles denote the evolutionary stable viral production rates used in subplot c. c Within-host dengue virus dynamics, simulated with two evolutionary stable viral production rates. Green lines show primary infection simulations; orange lines show secondary infection simulations. Solid lines show simulations with the optimal viral production rate in the population with one endemically circulating serotype (ω = 22,600 genome copies per cell per day). Dashed lines show simulations with the optimal viral production rate in the population with two endemically circulating serotypes and no heterologous cross-immunity (ω = 14,380 genome copies per cell per day). For the sake of completeness, we show secondary infection viral dynamics with the viral production rate that is evolutionary stable in the population with one circulating serotypes, although this epidemiological context does not have secondary infectionsDiscussionHere we have shown empirical support for a trade-off between peak viral load and the viral clearance rate in dengue, the most prevalent vector-borne viral disease of humans. Using a within-host model fit to viremia measurements from symptomatic dengue-infected individuals, we found that this trade-off can be explained by the interaction of the virus with the host immune response, providing empirical support for this hypothesis from theoretical studies10,21. Our findings are further consistent with an analysis of the within-host dynamics of arboviruses (including dengue) in experimentally challenged vertebrate hosts44. That analysis showed that arboviruses appear to exhibit a trade-off between peak viremia and the duration of infection, a trade-off that was made apparent when considering various doses of virus administered44. This study further invoked immune clearance as the likely mechanism for the observed trade-off, given that target cell limitation is unlikely, especially for dengue.We next considered whether a transmission-clearance trade-off analogous to the trade-off we observed empirically could result in selection pressures on dengue virus to evolve to intermediate virulence. We specifically considered the possibility for dengue virus to evolve its viral production rate. By combining within-host model simulations with empirical estimates of transmission success to dengue’s mosquito vector, we found that viral fitness, as measured by transmission potential, is maximized at intermediate dengue virus production rates. These intermediate production rates are associated with intermediate peak viral loads and thus an intermediate risk for triggering severe disease (i.e., intermediate virulence). We further found that the viral production rate at which transmission potential was maximized differed by immune status, with secondary infections selecting for lower viral production rates than primary infections. Because lower viral production rates result in lower peak viral loads, this means that secondary infections select for genetically less virulent viruses. Finally, as a consequence of these immune-status effects, we have shown that epidemiological context impacts the viral production rate that is evolutionary stable, with single-serotype epidemiological settings selecting for higher within-host viral production rates than epidemiological settings with two circulating serotypes. Our conclusions are robust to two different within-host model parameterizations, one fit to the full data set and one fit to a data subset of lower viral loads that attempts to capture asymptomatic infections.Our finding that dengue virus should evolve towards intermediate virulence depends on the formulation of our within-host model, specifically on our assumptions of how the host’s immune system responds to viral infection. The within-host model we fit is based on an existing within-host model for dengue virus that has been shown to successfully reproduce characteristic features of dengue infections, including the timing and magnitude of peak viremia, and the viral clearance rate, as well as immunological features of dengue infections34. Furthermore, previous work has shown that this model can recover findings from virological and immunological studies of dengue infection when statistically fit to viral load data35. As such, although the fitness trade-offs derived here depend on a within-host model formulation, the model formulation we have used is one that has considerable empirical support. With the use of this model, a transmission fitness trade-off occurs because both the innate and adaptive immune responses are activated in an antigen-dependent manner. High levels of viremia therefore result in strong activation of the immune response and a shorter duration of infection (consistent with the patterns shown in Fig. 1). A model in which the immune response is generated in an antigen-independent manner would not generate a transmission-virulence trade-off because no costs would be incurred by a virus for an increase in its viral production rate. However, a completely antigen-independent stimulation of the immune response is unlikely, given the observed within-host trade-offs (Fig. 1), as well as existing empirical findings that show a relationship between the strength of innate and adaptive immune responses and viral load and/or the severity of dengue disease25,45–47.Our finding of a transmission fitness trade-off in dengue also critically depends on quantitative estimates of how within-host viral load impacts the probability that a susceptible mosquito becomes infected following a bite from an infected host22. While our model has incorporated this demonstrated relationship between host viral load and transmission success to the mosquito, our model implicitly made several other simplifying assumptions. First, we assumed that host viral load only impacted transmission success to the mosquito, but not viral dynamics within the mosquito, which may in turn affect transmission success from mosquito to host. When we considered selection on the dengue virus production rate, we further assumed that this viral trait only affected viral dynamics in human hosts. It could be the case that the viral production rate also impacts viral dynamics in the mosquito vector, and therewith potentially onward transmission success to susceptible hosts. Indeed, several studies have indicated that more virulent dengue virus genotypes may have a fitness advantage in mosquitoes. Specifically, Hanley and colleagues showed that a more virulent genotype of DENV-3 reached higher titers in the midgut of the primary mosquito vector of dengue virus, Aedes aegypti, relative to a less virulent DENV-3 genotype48. They further showed that the more virulent genotype more effectively disseminated throughout the body of the mosquito vector, indicating that the probability that an infected mosquito successfully transmits the virus to a susceptible human host is likely higher for the more virulent genotype compared to the less virulent genotype. Cologna and colleagues also found that more virulent dengue genotypes replicated more efficiently in mosquito vectors40. Finally, OhAinle and colleagues found that a dengue clade associated with higher viremia in a hospital study had a fitness advantage during viral competition assays in a mosquito cell line49. The findings of these studies can be incorporated into our virulence evolution analysis by assuming that higher viral production rates increase the probability of dengue transmission success from infected mosquito to susceptible host (Supplementary Note 3). Incorporation of this fitness benefit in mosquitoes would lead to higher optimal viral production rates in both primary and secondary infections (Supplementary Fig. 8). Finally, our model did not consider the effect that within-host viral dynamics, or host symptom manifestation, may have on the contact rate between hosts and vectors. Incorporating these “coupled heterogeneities”50, once quantified, into virulence evolution analysis is critical for accurately assessing the evolutionary pressures on viral traits.Theory on virulence evolution when pathogens cause disease via immunopathology has focused on how virulence evolution depends on the relationship between immunopathology and parasite exploitation51, and the effect of immunopathology on epidemiological traits52. Our analysis adds another piece of complexity to these theoretical studies by showing that exposure history can impact virulence evolution in a case such as dengue, where the probability of developing severe disease through immunopathology depends strongly on immune status. Specifically, we have shown that we expect virulence to evolve to lower levels when secondary infections are more common. Conversely, when primary infections predominate, more virulent viral phenotypes have a fitness advantage. We here only inferred fitness trade-offs in primary and secondary dengue infections. This is because within-host dynamics of post-secondary dengue infections have not been well-characterized, as very few symptomatic post-secondary infections typically present in hospitals17. The few existing studies on post-secondary infections53–55 indicate that the reduced risk of triggering severe disease during a post-secondary infection is associated with a protective immune response53,54, and a study in non-human primates showed that tertiary dengue infections resulted in lower viremia levels than primary and secondary infections55. Taken together with studies that have shown that high viral load is associated with severe disease23,24,26, these studies indicate that peak viral load in post-secondary infections is likely lower than in primary and secondary infections. This suggests that post-secondary infections may select for highly virulent dengue strains as the benefit of higher viral peaks in these infections will exceed the benefits of higher viral peaks in primary and secondary infections. The cost of increasing viremia in post-secondary infections, however, is unknown and will necessarily depend on the strength of the innate and adaptive immune responses in post-secondary infections and how these responses affect the duration of infection.Beyond the need to characterize the role of post-secondary infections in dengue virus virulence evolution, more work needs to be done to understand the selection pressures that asymptomatic cases place on this virus. A recent study characterizing whether mosquitoes could become infected by biting a host with an asymptomatic dengue infection showed that, controlling for viral load, asymptomatic individuals were more infectious to mosquitoes than were symptomatic individuals38. Although this study included only 13 asymptomatic individuals, this work has important implications for the role of asymptomatic infections in driving dengue transmission patterns and dengue virulence evolution if the proportion of asymptomatic infections differs between primary, secondary and post-secondary infections. In a cohort study in Nicaragua, no difference was found in the proportion of inapparent versus symptomatic infection by immune status56, suggesting that including differences in asymptomatic and symptomatic transmissibility into our analysis may not impact our conclusions.Heterogeneity in individual response to dengue infection is more complicated than simply whether an individual is asymptomatically or symptomatically infected with dengue. While we have here focused on the role that immune status plays in viral dynamics and, relatedly, the probability of developing severe disease, we also considered interindividual variation in viral load dynamics for individuals with the same immune status. Specifically, our model incorporates a random effect in the viral infectivity rate, which can differ between individuals because of host genetics or other reasons. Consistent with theory57, incorporating this within-host heterogeneity does not affect our general conclusion that viral transmission fitness is maximized at intermediate virulence.Our analyses show that, for dengue, understanding virulence evolution is incomplete without explicitly considering an epidemiological context. Specifically, we found that regions with only a single serotype present will select for a more virulent within-host phenotype than regions with two serotypes circulating. These findings may be consistent with the emergence of virulent DENV-2 genotypes in many countries in Latin America in the late 20th century58 where one serotype typically predominated at a time. Further characterization of post-secondary infections are needed to consider hyperendemic scenarios with four circulating serotypes. A hyperendemic scenario may select for higher or lower virulence relative to a two-circulating serotype scenario depending on whether optimal viral production rates of post-secondary infections are more similar to primary or secondary infections. The epidemiological contexts on which we have focused are also all endemic contexts, where viruses maximize fitness by maximizing their basic reproduction numbers. However, transient dengue epidemics may select for within-host viral phenotypes that instead maximize the intrinsic population growth rate of the virus59–61. This suggests that viral virulence may evolve to higher levels in both primary and secondary infections than predicted by our endemic analyses. We would still expect, however, that primary dengue infections select for more virulent phenotypes than secondary dengue infections in these epidemic contexts.Our results indicate that geographic regions will likely differ in the evolutionary selection pressures they place on dengue virus, and future work should focus on identifying the regions that will most likely be the sources of more virulent dengue strains. Empirically characterizing a region’s epidemiological context is complicated by the difficulty in detecting asymptomatic infections and distinguishing between secondary and post-secondary infections. However, cohort studies that detect inapparent infections such as in Vietnam38 and the long-running longitudinal pediatric dengue cohort study in Nicaragua62 may be useful in characterizing epidemiological context more accurately. Latin America is an especially good area for studying the links between viral load kinetics and onward transmission potential because in many Latin American countries, only one serotype predominates over time, possibly decreasing the complexity of epidemiological context.In the 21st century we have seen a shift to hyperendemism in many countries around the world, as well as the emergence of dengue in new regions29. While many epidemiological studies focus on case severity, our results here show that regions with low case severity may play a critical role in incubating highly virulent dengue strains. As the global distribution of dengue shifts, understanding the changing patterns of infection histories is crucial for predicting sources of virulent dengue strains. More broadly, these results provide data-driven support for how complex patterns of immunity can have large effects in shaping pathogen virulence evolution.MethodsDataThe empirical data set of viremia measurements from 239 symptomatic dengue-infected individuals originates from a clinical trial of adult dengue patients at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases in Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC), Vietnam24,63. The trial studied the effects of the antiviral drug chloroquine on dengue, but the drug had no measurable effect on viral load dynamics63. As in previous analyses of this data set24,35,64,65, we therefore do not distinguish between chloroquine-treated patients and control patients. Patients were admitted into the study if their first viral load measurement was within 72 h of the onset of symptoms. Viral load was then measured twice per day using RT-PCR, with the assays having limits of detection of either 1500 genome copies/ml or 15,000 genome copies/ml64. The data set consists of individuals infected with one of dengue’s four serotypes, where infected individuals were further stratified by immune status (primary infection or secondary heterologous infection), and clinical manifestation (DF or DHF), as described previously24. Note that classification of immune status did not include post-secondary infection so some individuals classified with a secondary infection may in fact have been experiencing a post-secondary infection.For each individual, the maximum daily viral clearance rate was calculated by doubling the maximum decrease in viral load (on the log10 scale) between two consecutive viremia measurements (taken 12 h apart). We then calculated the maximum viral load for each individual. Because the onset of dengue symptoms often occurs at or following peak viral load, many of the dengue-infected individuals had viremia measured only during viral decline, with no detectable viral peak. We categorized dengue-infected individuals as either having or not having a detectable viral peak, based on whether viral load was observed to increase following the first viremia measurement. We fit the relationships between maximum viral load and viral clearance rate shown in Fig. 1 using only the subset of individuals who had detectable viral peaks. Note that some of the individuals in this subset may have inappropriately been categorized as having a detectable viral peak due to measurement error or to intrinsic fluctuations in viral dynamics. Following an initial regression, we computed Cook’s distance to identify outliers in this data set. Datapoints from two individuals in the primary dengue infection data set and datapoints from five individuals in the secondary dengue infection data set were above the threshold value of three times the mean Cook’s distance so we refit the relationships between maximum viral load and the viral clearance rate once these datapoints were excluded.We further examined the correlation between peak viral load and the viral clearance rate slope in the subset of individuals having detected viral peaks. In this case, we fit the viral clearance rate slopes using the likelihood function described previously in ref. 34. This alternative analysis again yielded a positive relationship between peak viral load and viral clearance rate in secondary dengue infections, with slope m = 0.12 (p < 0.01, t-test). This approach, however, did not yield a significantly positive relationship between peak viral load and viral clearance rate in primary infections.Within-host modelThe within-host model we parameterize using the viremia measurements is given by:1\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\begin{array}{l}{\rm{d}}X{\mathrm{/}}{\rm{d}}t = - \beta XV\\ {\rm{d}}Y{\mathrm{/}}{\rm{d}}t = \beta XV - \alpha NY - \delta _TYT\\ {\rm{d}}V{\mathrm{/}}{\rm{d}}t = \omega Y - \kappa V\\ {\rm{d}}N{\mathrm{/}}{\rm{d}}t = qY - d_NN\\ {\rm{d}}T{\mathrm{/}}{\rm{d}}t = q_TYT\end{array}$$\end{document}dX∕dt=-βXVdY∕dt=βXV-αNY-δTYTdV∕dt=ωY-κVdN∕dt=qY-dNNdT∕dt=qTYTwhere the variables are uninfected target cells X, infected target cells Y, free virus V, natural killer (NK) cells N, and T cells T. NK cells capture the role of the innate immune response. T cells capture the role of the cellular immune response. In the model, uninfected cells become infected with free virus at an overall rate of βXV. Infected cells are cleared by NK cells at an overall rate of αNY and by T-cells at an overall rate of δTYT. Virus is produced by infected cells at an overall rate of ωY and cleared at rate κV. NK cells are activated at an overall rate qY and decay at rate dNN. T cells are activated at an overall rate of qTYT. The parameter β is known as the viral infectivity rate. The parameter ω is known as the viral production rate. Supplementary Table 1 provides the list of model parameters and variables, as well as short descriptions of each.The model is based on an existing within-host model for dengue virus that has been shown to successfully reproduce characteristic features of dengue infections, including the timing and magnitude of peak viremia and the viral clearance rate34. Here, we do not include a T-cell death rate because fitting the within-host model under the assumption of a positive T-cell death rate does not appreciably change inferred model parameter values and other within-host models for acute infectious diseases often ignore this T-cell death rate (e.g., refs. 64,66,67). By setting the initial number of T cells to 0 in primary infections, we do not explicitly include a cellular immune response during these infections, consistent with the virological finding that primary dengue infections do not require a cellular immune response to be cleared36. Although not explicitly modeled, we assume that during a primary infection a cellular immune response kicks in at the end of infection such that viremia cannot increase again once it has fallen below the limit of detection.Within-host model parameterization using full HCMC data setPreviously, we used a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach to fit Eq. (1) to the viral load data set described above for individuals symptomatically infected with DENV-1, DENV-2, and DENV-335. We estimated parameters for models of varying complexity based on hypotheses reflecting virological and immunological studies of dengue infection and compared model fit using Bayesian model selection criteria35. The models that best fit the data were models in which the viral infectivity rate β differed by clinical manifestation (DF vs. DHF) and by infecting serotype. These previous results suggest that a significant portion of the variation in dengue viral load can be explained by differences in the viral infectivity rate, reflecting differences in host factors such as host genetics and immune status, and to some extent differences in infecting serotype.To accommodate interindividual variation in viral infectivity rates that originates from host factors unrelated to immune status, we here include a random effect on the viral infectivity rate β. To further allow for the possibility that viral infectivity rates differ systematically by immune status (primary or secondary dengue infection), we let viral infectivity rates during both primary infections and secondary infections be normally distributed with different means βPI and βSI, but with the same coefficient of variation. Differences in viral infectivity rates by immune status reflect the process of ADE. We therefore expect that the mean viral infectivity rate in secondary infections (βSI) will be higher than that in primary infections (βPI).We further allow the innate immune response activation rate q to differ between primary and secondary infections based on evidence that antibody–virus complexes formed during secondary infections lead to suppression of the innate immune response (“intrinsic ADE”)68–71. We therefore expect the innate immune response activation rate in primary dengue infections qPI to be higher than in secondary infections qSI.We fit the model simultaneously to the viremia measurements from primary and secondary infections. Due to parameter unidentifiability described in ref. 35, we assign values to certain parameters and estimate the values of others (Supplementary Table 1). Because we include interindividual variation in β, the viral clearance rate κ and the initial level of free virus V0 also become practically unidentifiable. We therefore also set κ and V0 based on our previous estimates in ref. 35 (Supplementary Table 1).As in our previous analysis, we include interindividual variation in the incubation period IP, defined as the time between viral inoculation and the onset of symptoms by including a log-normally distributed random effect on IP with mean log(IPg) and standard deviation σI. We set both IPg and σI based on existing empirical estimates72 (Supplementary Table 1).We initially fit seven parameters using the viremia measurements from the 239 infected dengue cases (a total of 2485 viremia measurements): βPI, βSI, qPI, qSI, the rate of NK cell decay dN, the rate of T-cell activation qT, and the coefficient of variation in the viral infectivity rate c. Our likelihood expression, based on the one presented in35, assumes that viremia measurement error is normally distributed (with standard deviation σϵ; Supplementary Table 1) on the log10 scale and accommodates measurements below the limit of detection. Our likelihood expression is a basic extension of the one presented in ref. 35, which numerically integrates out not only interindividual variation in incubation periods, but also interindividual variation in viral infectivity rates. Because we do not have any prior information on any of the parameters we seek to estimate and because evaluating the likelihood expression is computationally very intensive, we use maximum likelihood estimation instead of MCMC to fit the model to the viremia data set. Specifically, we use the fminsearch optimization function in MATLAB to minimize the negative log-likelihood.Due to lack of immune data and early infection viral load data, we were unable to robustly estimate the relative contributions of the innate and adaptive immune response during secondary infections. The model likelihood is maximized at a low qSI value, consistent with our expectation that qSI < qPI. We used a likelihood ratio test to determine whether a simpler model with qSI = 0 could be rejected, and we failed to reject this hypothesis. This indicates that given the current data, the T-cell response alone can sufficiently reproduce the faster viral clearance rate observed in secondary infections relative to primary infections. Therefore, the secondary infection model reduces to a model with only the cellular adaptive immune response responsible for clearing infection and we do not include NK cells in the secondary infection model. In total, we therefore fit only six parameters to the entire data set: βPI, βSI, qPI, dN, qT, and c, and set qSI to 0. We expect that additional data would show that the innate immune response in secondary infections plays a contributing role for regulating dengue virus dynamics, especially early in infection. Note that we do not estimate six parameters for each individual. Rather, we estimate a total of six parameters using the entirety of the data set.Maximum likelihood estimates of the six fitted parameters (with 95% confidence intervals) are provided in Supplementary Table 1. To determine confidence intervals we computed slice likelihoods for each parameter by varying one parameter while all other parameter values were set at their maximum likelihood values73. The 95% confidence interval is equivalent to a decrease of 2 in log-likelihood from the maximum log-likelihood74.As expected from the effects of ADE14,75, βSI was estimated to be higher than βPI (27% higher). A higher viral infectivity rate and a lower innate immune response activation rate (qSI = 0) results in secondary dengue infections having higher peak viral loads than primary dengue infections (on average, peak viral loads of 10.2 log genome copies/ml compared to 9.7 log genome copies/ml, in the absence of measurement noise). Given our operational definition of virulence, these results indicate that secondary infections should be at higher risk for triggering severe disease than primary infections, consistent with epidemiological studies23,24,26. Further, viral clearance rates in secondary infections exceed those in primary infections (1.9 log genome copies/ml/day compared to 1.4 log genome copies/ml/day, in the absence of measurement noise), consistent with virological studies23,24.Within-host model parameterization using HCMC data subsetLongitudinal cohort studies indicate that only 6–40% of infections are symptomatic, with the remainder being inapparent56,76. Viral load measurements from asymptomatic infections are generally not available, although a recent study has shown that asymptomatic infections exhibit lower viremia than symptomatic infections38. In an attempt to consider viral load measurements representative of both asymptomatic and symptomatic infections, we re-fit the within-host model given by Eq. (1) to a subset of the HCMC data set. This subset consists of individuals with lower viral loads, specifically, individuals experiencing a primary infection whose maximum viral load was ≤8 log genome copies/ml and individuals experiencing a secondary infection whose maximum viral load was ≤8.5 log genome copies/ml. These viral load levels correspond to the middle range of peak viremia values typically seen in symptomatic dengue infections23–26,77. A difference of 0.5 log genome copies/ml between peak viral loads of primary versus secondary infections was chosen for consistency with findings in ref. 24. This subset of the viral load data set includes 11 primary infections (37% of all primary infections) and 90 secondary infections (43% of all secondary infections), comprising a total of 1020 viremia measurements.We expect that the lower viral loads observed in this subset of individuals are due to lower viral infectivity rates β, and/or a stronger immune response (higher qPI and/or lower dN in primary infections, and higher qT in secondary infections) in these individuals compared to individuals in the full data set. Due to the small number of individuals in the data subset, and because we have no reason to expect that the coefficient of variation c, or the ratio of βSI/βPI, to differ between the full data set and the data subset, we fit only four parameters to the data subset: βPI, qPI, qT, and dN. We estimated a small value of dN = 1 × 10−9/day, and therefore performed a likelihood ratio test to determine whether a simpler model with dN = 0 could be rejected. We were unable to reject this simpler model and therefore set dN to 0. The final parameter estimates are provided in Supplementary Table 1.Quantifying population-level viral transmission potentialIn endemic situations, viral fitness is given by the basic reproduction number R0, which for a vector-borne disease depends on the vector biting rate b, the ratio m of female mosquitoes to humans, the lifespan of mosquitoes 1/μ, and the probabilities of an infected human (mosquito) transmitting the virus to a susceptible mosquito (human). The most general formulation of R0 for a vector-borne disease is given in Equation (1) of ref. 78. In this work, the authors assumed that the probability of an infected mosquito transmitting dengue to a susceptible human (pm(V|t)) is proportional to qm(V|t), the proportion of mosquitoes that have detectable virus in their saliva t units of time after having taken a blood meal from an infected human with viral load V. In turn, these authors did not find that qm(V|t) depended on viral load V. As such, their term, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\int}_0^\infty {\kern 1pt} p_m(V|t)e^{ - \mu t}{\rm{d}}t$$\end{document}∫0∞pm(V∣t)e-μtdt evaluates to a constant, which we call phm. This leads to the following expression for R0:2\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$R_0 = mb^2p_{hm}{\int}_{0}^\infty \left( {{\int}_{0}^\infty {\kern 1pt} p_h(V|\tau ){\rm{d}}\tau } \right)p(V){\rm{d}}V$$\end{document}R0=mb2phm∫0∞∫0∞ph(V∣τ)dτp(V)dVwhere p(V) is the probability that an infected human with viral load V transmits the virus to a susceptible mosquito upon being bitten and ph(V|τ) is the probability that a human who was infected with dengue τ units of time ago has viral load V. Since we simulate our within-host model deterministically under any given parameterization, we can equivalently write this equation as:3\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$R_0 = mb^2p_{hm}{\int}_{0}^\infty {\kern 1pt} p(V(\tau )){\rm{d}}\tau$$\end{document}R0=mb2phm∫0∞p(V(τ))dτwhere V(τ) is the viral load of an infected human who was infected τ units of time ago. We call the integral inside this expression the transmission potential of the strain.To calculate the transmission potential, we rely on a recent experimental study analyzing factors that influence transmission success of dengue virus to susceptible mosquitoes22. In this study, 407 susceptible mosquitoes were fed on 208 hospitalized dengue patients. An analysis of whether these blood-fed mosquitoes became infected with dengue (as measured by presence of the virus in their abdomens) showed that host viremia was the strongest covariate explaining successful human-to-mosquito infection22. Based on this finding, the authors quantified the relationship between patient viremia and the probability of human-to-mosquito transmission using marginal logistic regression for each of dengue’s four serotypes. We used this determined relationship to couple the viral load dynamics derived from our within-host model (V(τ)) to the probability of viral transmission from infected human to susceptible mosquito p(V(τ)) = \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\frac{1}{{1 + e^{ - \left( {\epsilon _0 + \epsilon _1V(\tau )} \right)}}}$$\end{document}11+e-ϵ0+ϵ1V(τ). We refer the reader to ref. 22 for the experimental data and the parameters of the logistic regression curves. We used the DENV-1 parameterization from22 because the majority of dengue infections in the HCMC data set are dengue serotype 1. Our results are robust to transmission probabilities derived for the other three dengue serotypes (Supplementary Note 2, Supplementary Fig. 7).Peak viral load and transmission potentialIn Fig. 3a, we plot the relationship between peak viral load and the viral production rate ω. In Fig. 3b, we plot the relationship between transmission potential and ω. The black solid lines in Fig. 3a, b show the peak viral loads and transmission potentials evaluated at mean viral infectivity rates, which depend on whether the infection is a primary or secondary infection. At each value of ω considered, we further sample 100 viral infectivity rates from the distribution with mean β and standard deviation cβ, where c is the coefficient of variation estimate. For each of these sampled viral infectivity rates, we simulate the within-host model, calculate the peak viral load, and evaluate the transmission potential. In practice, based on the results in22, we assume that when viral load levels are below 1500 genome copies/ml, transmission to the mosquito will not occur. The confidence intervals in Fig. 3a, b show the 95% range of values obtained from these 100 samples at each ω value. In Fig. 3c, we use the combined set of simulations across ω values. Specifically, using a sliding window of peak viral load levels, we find the simulations having peak viral loads in a given window and plot the 95% range in transmission potential values across this set of simulations.Virulence evolution in different epidemiological contextsWe use an adaptive dynamics framework to consider dengue evolution of virulence in different epidemiological contexts. We specifically consider two different endemic contexts: one with a single circulating serotype and one with two circulating serotypes. The transmission dynamics under each of these endemic contexts are based on an existing epidemiological model for dengue. Specifically, the models we use are deterministic, age-structured epidemiological models with age-dependent mortality rates, as described in ref. 79 (the “Duke model”). All of the models we consider assume life-long immunity to reinfection with a homologous dengue serotype. The models differ in the type and duration of transient cross-protection that is assumed between heterologous serotypes. We consider three models: one with no heterologous cross-protection, one with a 2 year period of “classical” cross-protection (where cross-protection temporarily prevents infection with the heterologous serotype), and one with a 2 year period of “clinical” cross-protection (where cross-protection prevents symptom development and onward transmission, but does not prevent infection or, critically, seroconversion)43. We assume a 2 year period of cross-protection in the latter two models based on previous findings16. We do not include seasonality in the model.For the single circulating serotype endemic context, the epidemiological model collapses to a basic age-structured susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model. In this case, the viral production rate that maximizes the transmission potential of primary infections is the evolutionary stable viral phenotype. To confirm this, we simulated this model with a “resident” dengue strain having an R0 that is calculated from its viral production rate. Specifically, we calculate a strain’s R0 by multiplying its calculated transmission potential (which depends on ω, Eq. (3)) by a transmission intensity factor of f = m(b2)phm. Once simulations of this model have reached their epidemiological equilibrium, we fix the number of susceptible and recovered hosts at their equilibrium values and determine numerically whether an “invading” strain of the same serotype (which has its own viral production rate, and corresponding R0) can increase when rare. If the invading strain can increase when rare, its reproductive rate R exceeds 1 in the endemic context of the resident strain and (given full cross-immunity) it would replace the resident strain. The pairwise invasibility plot shown in Fig. 4a shows the results of this one-serotype analysis for combinations of “resident” and “invading” strains when f is set to 2. This pairwise invasibility plot, however, does not change with a change in f (Fig. 4b), given that all infections (regardless of their number) are primary infections.For the two-circulating serotypes endemic context, the epidemiological models remain more complicated, but we adopt a conceptually similar approach to the one we used for the single-serotype endemic context to determine the evolutionary stable viral production rate. Specifically, for a given transmission intensity f, we generate a pairwise invasibility plot under the assumption that both “resident” strains have the same viral production rate, and therefore also the same R0. We then simulate the model to its epidemiological equilibrium. We then fix the number of uninfected hosts (regardless of their history of infection) at their equilibrium values and determine numerically whether “invading” strains (which have their own viral production rate that is the same across the two circulating serotypes) can increase when rare. Figure 4b shows evolutionary stable viral production rates for these two-serotype epidemiological contexts across a range of f values, reflecting different transmission intensities that are due to differences in mosquito densities (m) or biting rates (b).Code availabilityAll code is available on GitHub at https://github.com/rbenshachar/denv_virulence_evolution.Data availabilityThe viral load data were downloaded from ref. 64.Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary Information
Peer Review File



Title: Differential cell line susceptibility to the emerging Zika virus: implications for disease pathogenesis, non-vector-borne human transmission and animal reservoirs

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that has been largely neglected for 60 years after its first isolation from the serum of a febrile sentinel rhesus macaque in the Zika Forest of Uganda in 1947.1 Since 2007, ZIKV has emerged to cause large epidemics of a dengue-like illness in the Pacific islands and Latin America, with imported cases also reported in other continents.2, 3 As of 14 July 2016, more than 60 countries/territories have reported continuing mosquito-borne transmission of ZIKV.4 Although most patients infected with ZIKV have an asymptomatic or a self-limiting acute febrile illness, some patients may develop severe neurological complications, such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, or fatal disseminated infections.2, 5, 6, 7 Moreover, recent clinico-epidemiological, laboratory and animal studies on pathogenesis have established the association between ZIKV infection and congenital anomalies, such as microcephaly, central nervous system malformations and ophthalmological abnormalities.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13ZIKV research has so far been mainly focused on the pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated neurological complications. Questions on the pathogenesis of ZIKV's other clinical manifestations, its unique ability among flaviviruses to be transmitted trans-placentally and sexually, and its potential animal reservoirs remain mostly unanswered. Although in vivo phenomena may not be completely reproducible in the in vitro setting, cell line susceptibility studies are often useful for providing critical data for these knowledge gaps in the early phases of epidemics caused by emerging RNA viruses.14, 15 In this study, we correlated the differential cell line susceptibility, species tropism, viral replication efficiency and antigen expression patterns with the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of ZIKV, and compared them with those of the closely related dengue virus type 2 (DENV-2). Our findings provided novel implications on the disease pathogenesis, transmission and potential animal reservoirs that could be applied to optimize laboratory testing protocols and infection control strategies for this global health emergency.Materials and MethodsVIRAL ISOLATESTo investigate on the differential cell line susceptibility to epidemic ZIKV and pre-epidemic ZIKV, we included a clinical isolate of ZIKV (Puerto Rico strain PRVABC59) obtained from a patient in the recent South American epidemic (ZIKV-PR; kindly provided by Brandy Russell and Barbara Johnson, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA), and another pre-epidemic ZIKV strain isolated from a nonhuman primate in Uganda in 1947 (976 Uganda strain) (ZIKV-U; kindly provided by Tatjana Avšič Županc, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, the European Virus Archive). An archived clinical isolate of DENV-2 was obtained from Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, for comparison with ZIKV, as the two viruses are closely related phylogenetically and have similar clinical manifestations. The ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates were amplified by three additional passages in Vero cells and C6/36 cells, respectively, to make working stocks of the viruses.ETHICS STATEMENTInstitutional Review Board approval for use of the vial isolates was obtained and all samples were anonymized. The cell lines used in this study were obtained from sources listed in Table 1.VIRAL CULTUREViral culture was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 33 cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species were each inoculated with one multiplicity of infection of the ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates for 1 h (Table 1). Non-attached virus was removed by washing the cells twice in phosphate-buffered saline (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The monolayer cells were maintained in minimum essential medium, Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), DMEM/F12 or RPMI medium, with 1% fetal calf serum, depending on the type of cell line according to supplier's instructions (Gibco). The suspension cells were maintained in RPMI medium with 2% fetal calf serum (Gibco). All infected cell lines were incubated at 37 °C for five days, except C6/36 which was incubated at 28 °C. Cytopathic effects (CPE) were examined at one, three and five days post-virus inoculation (d.p.i) with inverted light microscopy.RNA EXTRACTION AND QUANTITATIVE REVERSE-TRANSCRIPTION PCRTotal nucleic acid (TNA) was extracted from culture supernatants of the 33 cell lines infected by ZIKV or DENV-2 at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. using EZ1 Virus Mini Kit v2.0 (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) as we previously described.16, 17 Briefly, 200 μL of supernatant were used for extraction and the TNA was eluted in 60 μL of AVE buffer. Real-time one-step quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used for the detection of ZIKV and DENV-2 using QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) in a LightCycler 96 Real-Time PCR System (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Five microliters of purified TNA was amplified in a 20 μL-reaction containing 10 μL of 2 × QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Master Mix, 0.2 μL QN Probe RT-mix, 0.8 μM forward primer, 0.8 μM reverse primer and 200 nM probe. ZIKV detection was performed as previously described, with slight modifications.18 Forward primer (5′-CGY TGC CCA ACA CAA GG-3′), reverse primer (5′-CCA CYA AYG TTC TTTT GCA BAC A-3′) and probe (5′-HEX-AGC CTA CCT TGA YAA GCA RTC AGA CAC TC-IABkFQ-3′) targeting the ZIKV envelope gene were used. For DENV-2 detection, forward primer (5′-GCA TAT TGA CGC TGG GAR AGA C-3′), reverse primer (5′-CGY TCT GTG CCT GGA WWG ATG-3′) and probe (5′-FAM-CAG AGA TCC TGC TGT C-MGB-NFQ-3′) targeting the DENV-2 3'-untranslated region were used. Reactions were incubated at 45 °C for 10 min, followed by 95 °C for 5 min, and then thermal cycled for 50 cycles (95 °C for 5 s, 55 °C for 30 s). A series of 10-fold dilutions equivalent to 1 × 102–1 × 106 copies/reaction mixture were prepared to generate calibration curves and run in parallel with the test samples.CLONING AND PURIFICATION OF HIS6-TAGGED RECOMBINANT ZIKV AND DENV-2 NS1Primers (5′-CAT ATG GAT GTG GGG TGC TCG GTG GAC T-3′ and 5′-CTC GAG TGC AGT CAC CAT TGA CCT TAC T-3′) were used to amplify the gene encoding the ZIKV–nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) protein by RT-PCR. The sequence encoding a 352-amino-acid fragment of ZIKV–NS1 protein was amplified and cloned into the NdeI and XolI sites of expression vector pETH in frame and downstream of the series of six histidine residues. The recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was expressed in Escherichia coli, denatured in 8 M urea, and purified with Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity chromatography (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The solubilized protein was refolded by slowly dialyzing with refolding buffers. Expression of the recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was confirmed by western blot analysis using mouse anti-His monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Preparation of DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19PREPARATION OF SPECIFIC ANTIBODIES AGAINST ZIKV- AND DENV-2-NS1 PROTEINSThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 30 μg of purified recombinant ZIKV-NS1 protein was mixed with an equal volume of complete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) and injected subcutaneously into BALB/c mice. Incomplete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) was used in subsequent injections at 14-day intervals for three times. Serum samples were collected 14 days after the fourth injection. Preparation of specific antibodies against DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19ANTIGEN DETECTION OF INFECTED CELL LINES BY IMMUNOFLUORESCENCEThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Cell smears at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. were prepared and fixed in chilled acetone at −20 °C for 10 min. The fixed cells were incubated with mouse antiserum against the ZIKV- or DENV-2-NS1 protein, followed by FITC-rabbit anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were then examined under a fluorescence microscope. Three representative microscopic fields were chosen and 100 cells were counted for characteristic cytoplasmic apple green fluorescence. The mean percentage of positive cells was rounded up to the nearest multiplicity of 10. Uninoculated cells were used as negative control.STATISTICAL ANALYSISThe Student's t-test was used to compare the mean viral load of the different cell lines at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. with the mean baseline viral load at 0 d.p.i. All calculations were based on log-transformed viral loads. P-value of <0.01 was considered as statistically significant. Computation was performed using the Predictive Analytics Software v18.0 for Windows.ResultsHUMAN CELL LINESEighteen human cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U showed similar tropism as defined by viral load, immunofluorescent antigen staining and CPE. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in 14/18 cell lines infected with ZIKV-PR or ZIKV-U (Figures 1A and 1B). These included the placental (JEG-3), genitourinary (HEK, HeLa, HOSE6-3, LNCaP and 833KE), neuromuscular (SF268 and RD), retinal (ARPE19), respiratory (Hep2, Calu-3 and HFL), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines. There was a slight increase in mean viral load of about 0.5–1 lgcopies/mL in the monocyte (THP-1) and B lymphocyte (Raji) cell lines (P>0.01), but none of the immune cell lines achieved a ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the placental (JEG-3), cervical (HeLa), neuronal (SF268), upper respiratory tract (Hep-2) and intestinal (Caco-2) cell lines. Twelve of these 14 cell lines (JEG-3, HEK, HeLa, LNCaP, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7) showed obvious ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF in addition to a high viral load (Table 2). The peak ZIKV-NS1 protein expression in these cell lines occurred on 3–5 d.p.i. ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), retinal (APRE19), lower respiratory tract (HFL) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 2). Although ovarian (HOSE6-3) and testicular (833KE) cells showed high mean viral loads in qRT-PCR, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was consistently found in only ⩽5% of infected cells. CPE were observed in 8 of these 14 cell lines, namely, JEG-3, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7 (Table 3). CPE were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 3). The gradual onset of CPE in most of these cell lines at 3 d.p.i. correlated with the steady increase of viral load and ZIKV-NS1 protein expression at 3–5 d.p.i.In contrast, DENV-2 showed a much narrower range of human tissue tropism, with ⩾2 log increase in the mean viral load (P<0.01) in only 9/18 cell lines (HEK, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7; Figure 1C). Notably, unlike ZIKV, the DENV-2 load did not significantly increase by ⩾2 lgcopies/mL in any of the genital tract and placental cell lines, with only mildly increased viral load (P>0.01) and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression in the HeLa cell line. Most of these nine cell lines with increased viral loads demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression (Table 2) and CPE (Table 3). The CPE were generally delayed in onset (5 d.p.i.) and limited (⩽50%), except in the RD and Huh-7 cell lines.NONHUMAN CELL LINESFifteen nonhuman cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U again showed similar tropism in these cell lines. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/15 cell lines (Figures 4A and 4B). These included the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), cat (CRFK), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines. None of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines showed a ⩾2 log increase in viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. All of these eight cell lines showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, usually starting on 3 d.p.i. and peaked on 5 d.p.i. (Table 2). ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 2). Some of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines also showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression, but these expressions were much less prominent than that in the other cell lines. CPE were observed in six of these eight cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines, and were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the nonhuman primate, pig, hamster and chicken cell lines (Table 3). CPE were not observed in the mosquito (C6/36) cell line within 5 d.p.i.A narrower range of nonhuman cell lines were susceptible to infection by DENV-2 than ZIKV. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in only 6/15 cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), bat (TP2), hamster (BHK21) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 4C). All of these six cell lines demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression by IF (Table 2). CPE were observed in five of these six cell lines (all except C6/36), but was usually not prominent (⩽50%) except in the LLC-MK2 and BHK21 cell lines (Table 3).DiscussionAlthough ZIKV infection has been described as a dengue-like illness in the past, recent evidence suggests that ZIKV is unique among known human-pathogenic flaviviruses. ZIKV is the first flavivirus known to be associated with congenital malformations, and sexual and vertical transmissions in human.1, 8, 9, 20, 21, 22 The pathogenesis of these unusual clinical manifestations and transmission routes is incompletely understood. Moreover, a comprehensive surveillance for potential animal reservoirs of ZIKV, which are likely important in facilitating the spread of the virus after 60 years of quiescence, has not been reported. A virus' ability to grow in cells of different host species might provide insight into its ability to cross interspecies barriers. We therefore conducted this systematic study to characterize the tropism of the emerging ZIKV in a broad range of human and nonhuman cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species. The findings in our study may have important clinical and epidemiological implications for this rapidly expanding viral epidemic.Productive ZIKV replication as defined by ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, and presence of CPE was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/18 human cell lines, which represented cells of placental, neuronal, muscle, retinal, pulmonary, intestinal and hepatic origin. This broad tissue tropism is likely related to the wide distribution of the candidate receptors of ZIKV, including AXL, TYRO3 and DC-SIGN, in different organs.23 The placental (JEG-3) and neuronal (SF268) cell line tropism corroborated with the congenital and neurological manifestations of ZIKV infection. These manifestations include congenital microcephaly and other central nervous system malformations in infected fetuses, and meningoencephalitis, myelitis, and post-infectious Guillain–Barré syndrome in adults.1, 5, 8, 24 ZIKV RNA, full-length viral genome and/or viral particles could be detected in the brain tissue of fetuses with congenital microcephaly.8, 25 Microscopically, flavivirus-like virions were observed together with extensive inflammation, astrocyte and microglial activation, and injury in the cortex and the lateral corticospinal tracts in the fetal brain tissue.8, 25 Moreover, ZIKV could impair growth and deplete neural progenitor cells in human neurospheres and cerebral organoids.26, 27Consistent with ZIKV's tropism for the human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cell line, myalgia and arthralgia with periarticular edema are common features in symptomatic ZIKV infection. Fetuses with congenital ZIKV infection may develop arthrogryposis.28 Myositis and myocarditis were observed in suckling mice inoculated with ZIKV intracerebrally, and viral RNA could be detected in the muscle and heart of type I interferon receptor-deficient mice infected with ZIKV.29, 30Viral tropism for the retinal (ARPE19) cell line corroborates with the ophthalmological complications of congenital ZIKV infection, including chorioretinal atrophy and pigmentary maculopathy.10, 13 Abdominal symptoms including diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain and jaundice with hepatic dysfunction have been reported in patients with ZIKV infection, and are in agreement with the susceptibility of the intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines to ZIKV.1, 6, 7, 31 Respiratory distress may occur in severe ZIKV infection, and this correlates with ZIKV's tropism for respiratory (Hep-2, Calu-3 and HFL) cell lines.6, 7 Similarly, the clinical features of DENV infection, including encephalopathy/encephalitis (SF268), myalgia and rhabdomyolysis (RD), retinitis (ARPE19), respiratory symptoms (Hep-2 and HFL), diarrhea (Caco-2) and hepatic dysfunction (Huh-7), also correlated with the cell line susceptibility to DENV-2 in our study.32, 33Although neurological manifestations may also be seen in infections caused by other flaviviruses, such as DENV, yellow fever virus, West Nile virus (WNV) and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), none of these flaviviruses have been associated with congenital microcephaly and central nervous system malformations. These unique clinical features of ZIKV infection require the virus to be able to infect neural progenitor cells of the fetus in utero during early gestation. A striking difference between the cell line susceptibilities of ZIKV and DENV-2 observed in our study was ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in placental cells (JEG-3). JEG-3 cells infected with ZIKV produced high viral loads (~10 lgcopies/mL), abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and prominent CPE. This finding helped to explain the unique ability of ZIKV to infect the fetus via the placenta and cause congenital anomalies, particularly when the infection occurred during the first trimester.34 Although a previous study suggested that type III interferons produced by human placental trophoblasts could confer protection against ZIKV infection, it is notable that the study utilized primary human trophoblasts of full-term instead of early gestation placenta.35 Indeed, our in vitro finding concurred with the recent reports of detectable viral particles and RNA in trophoblasts of the maternal and fetal placenta of ZIKV-infected type I interferon signaling-deficient mice and permissibility of placental macrophages and cytotrophoblasts to productive ZIKV infection.12, 36Besides trans-placental transmission, our findings also provided insights to explain the pathogenesis of other non-vector-borne human transmission routes of ZIKV. Probable sexual transmission of ZIKV has been reported.20, 21, 22 ZIKV-infected male patients might develop hematospermia and perineal pain compatible with prostatitis, and might have detectable viral RNA and/or infectious viral particles in their semen.20, 21, 22 In contrast to DENV-2, which did not efficiently replicate in any of the genital tract cell lines, the mean ZIKV load significantly increased in the prostatic (LNCaP) and testicular (833KE) cell lines without inducing CPE. This suggested that the prostate and testes might be important sites of ZIKV replication that led to prolonged virus shedding in the semen of infected men.20, 21, 37 Interestingly, abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was detected in ZIKV-infected LNCaP cells, but not 833KE cells. This finding might imply that ZIKV could replicate more efficiently in the prostate than the testes. Recent studies only reported high viral loads in the testes of ZIKV-infected mice deficient in interferon signaling and/or receptor, but did not report the viral loads in their prostates.30, 38 Further studies should be conducted to investigate the prostate's role as a replication site of ZIKV. The female genital tract cell lines, including HeLa and HOSE6-3, were also susceptible to ZIKV, supporting the hypothesis that non-immune women might acquire the infection through sexual intercourse with their ZIKV-infected male partners.We showed that the renal (HEK) and respiratory tract (Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL) cell lines were also susceptible to ZIKV. This helped to explain the high viral loads in the urine and nasopharyngeal swabs of ZIKV-infected patients.39, 40, 41 The finding of high viral load and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells is particularly interesting, as it suggests that the kidney might be another site of persistent ZIKV replication. Similarly, DENV-2 infection also caused increased mean viral load and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells, and viral RNA might be detected in urine of dengue patients.42 An important implication of this finding is that kidney transplant donors in ZIKV-affected regions should be tested for the infection before organ donation, as virus shedding in urine might be prolonged.39, 40, 41 The intestinal (Caco-2) cell line was also highly susceptible to ZIKV, which corroborated with the high viral load detected in the intestines of ZIKV-infected mice.43 Serial testing of fecal samples of ZIKV-infected patients should be performed to determine whether feces represent another possible transmission route of ZIKV. It would also be interesting to investigate ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in salivary gland cells, as high viral load could also be detected in the saliva of ZIKV-infected patients.41, 44The differential cell line susceptibility of our nonhuman cell lines to ZIKV may provide insights into the virus' potential animal reservoirs and alternative animal models. The finding of high viral loads and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without induction of CPE within 5 d.p.i. in the Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cell line was quite expected, and corroborated with the high non-fatal infection, dissemination and transmission rates of ZIKV in infected A. albopictus.45 A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load with ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and CPE were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. It is well known that the transmission of flaviviruses may involve sylvatic cycles between the mosquito vectors and susceptible wild animals, and urban cycles between the vectors and domestic animals.46, 47 Nonhuman primates are known wild animal reservoirs of ZIKV and DENV.1, 46 Our findings of efficient ZIKV replication in pig, rabbit, hamster and chicken cell lines suggest that these mammalian or avian species might have a role in the transmission of ZIKV. Similar to domestic pigs and wild birds for JEV, and domestic and wild birds for WNV, these species may serve as the animal reservoirs or amplifying hosts of ZIKV.46 Moreover, vector-free JEV transmission due to persistence of virus in tonsils and virus shedding in oronasal secretions of pigs has recently been reported.48 Alternatively, these animal species may be susceptible hosts with less importance in the transmission cycle, which is analogous to horses for JEV and many vertebrate species for WNV.46 Systematic sampling of domestic animals in ZIKV-affected regions would help to confirm these findings. Pigs, rabbits and hamsters should be evaluated as animal models for ZIKV infection, as interferon signaling- or receptor-deficient mice are not routinely available in most laboratories. Pig and/or hamster models have been previously reported for DENV and WNV infection.49, 50Our findings are useful for optimizing laboratory diagnostics and studies on the pathogenesis and counter-measures of ZIKV. Some of the laboratories in resource-limited areas affected by ZIKV may not have the capability to routinely perform molecular diagnostic tests. In addition to the few cell lines previously reported, our study has identified a broad range of cell lines that are suitable for growing ZIKV as an alternative diagnostic tool in clinical virology laboratories.51, 52, 53, 54 These cell lines may also be used in pathogenesis studies conducted by laboratories without the technical expertise to handle brain organoids, and to evaluate antiviral treatment and vaccines in vitro prior to animal experiments.


Title: Dengue Virus Virulence and Transmission Determinants

IntroductionDengue virus (DENV) pathogenesis seems to be determined by numerous, interacting factors: viral virulence, host immunity and immune status, host genetics and possibly others (e.g., preexisting diseases). Because we have no models of severe dengue disease (DHF), all associations of viruses with increased pathogenesis have been indirect and painstakingly slow in being developed. Transmissibility has also been measured indirectly: the successful isolation of viruses from patients and the preponderance of one serotype over another have been documented in numerous countries but this has also introduced biases in our sampling. We do not have available a fully representative set of DENV genomes to study and understand what truly constitutes the natural range of DENV variation; many samples from mosquitoes or less-ill human infections are missing, in addition to those from countries lacking the laboratory and public health infrastructure necessary for detecting and isolating viruses. Virus-mosquito interactions also add a layer of complexity to the determination of which genotype is being transmitted and we are only beginning to measure the effects of this selection. However, many new methods have been applied to the study of DENV genetic variation, replication fitness and their effects on transmissibility and pathogenesis in humans. None of these methods are perfect and we must still regard them as surrogates for measurements of the natural viral determinants of disease. Thus, understanding this complex system will probably require multidisciplinary approaches to solving the mysteries of the interaction of the many factors that contribute to DENV epidemiology. Other, nonviral factors contributing to DENV pathogenicity and transmission are discussed in accompanying chapters.Controversies Over Virulence and EvolutionThe first descriptions of DENV virulence differences came from epidemiologic and entomologic studies done in the South Pacific by Rosen and Gubler, in the 1970s (Gubler et al. 1978; Rosen 1977). It was noted that some outbreaks in this region had fewer or no cases of DHF and the transmitted viruses were considered of low virulence; other outbreaks had many cases of DHF, after primary infection and these viruses were therefore more virulent. However, it took the development of RNA nucleotide sequencing techniques and the use of these sequences to generate phylogenetic trees of evolutionary relationships among viruses to discover that specific variant groups, or genotypes, were more frequently associated with dengue epidemics and severe disease (Chungue et al. 1995; Lanciotti et al. 1997; Lanciotti et al. 1994; Messer et al. 2003; Rico-Hesse 1990; Rico-Hesse et al. 1997). More recently it has been shown that some genotypes associated with DHF have been introduced and become established (endemic) in other continents, sometimes displacing the less-virulent DENV already being transmitted in those regions (causing DF only). “Virulent” genotypes have been described for serotypes 2 and 3 and it remains to be seen if further evolutionary studies will pinpoint similar groups in serotypes 1 and 4 (Rico-Hesse 2003).In the case of DENV, there is no evidence for rapid evolution and selection as in HIV, influenza or SARS viruses; for DENV, man-made ecologic disruption or increments in the number of mosquitoes or hosts are more important than evolution towards more virulent genotypes. There has yet to be evidence for the circulation of a recombinant DENV and those recombinant genomes described to date have been the product of enzymatic amplification techniques and are thus probably lab artifacts (Aaskov et al. 2007; Holmes and Twiddy 2003; Worobey et al. 1999); no one has isolated and fully characterized a recombinant DENV that is being transmitted in nature, causing disease. Although there is evidence for recombination in other, positive-strand viruses, specific steps in DENV replication might keep this event from occurring, although ample opportunities seem to exist in multiply-infected humans and mosquitoes (Monath et al. 2005). Also, there is no evidence for the epidemic transmission of the sylvatic genotype viruses from West Africa or Malaysia. These older, seemingly less-virulent viruses are transmitted mainly by canopy-dwelling mosquitoes to monkeys and they do not cause outbreaks in the human populations inhabiting those areas. The viruses isolated from dengue patients during outbreaks belong to genotypes imported from other continents (in the case of serotype 2, a genotype originating in the Indian subcontinent was introduced to Africa) (Rico-Hesse 2003). Some researchers, with ample field experience in tropical areas, believe that these zoonotic cycles will eventually disappear, because of the constant reduction of natural forests; thus, these cycles have practically no importance as reservoirs of human dengue (Rodhain 1991).Although we have not detected increases in replication fitness for any given genotype, some of the evolutionary events leading to more virulent strains seem to have already occurred and by the time these viruses rapidly spread from Southeast Asia to other areas of the world (1940s), they were already virulent or replicatively fit (Gubler 2002). We have yet to measure any specific genetic changes that are fixed in the viral population as virulent genotypes are successfully dispersed to other continents and we do not know whether there have been any changes imposed by selection in their new environments (e.g., for serotype 2, Southeast Asian genotype introduced into the Americas; for serotype 3, Sri Lankan genotype III introduced to the Americas). That is, these viruses had increased fitness at their origin, in that they are directly linked to the appearance of DHF and they are transmitted more efficiently by mosquitoes. However, some researchers believe differences in clinical presentation and severity of epidemics are a function of only immunologic and genetic differences between the human populations in both continents (Southeast Asia and Americas) (Halstead 2006) or that nonneutralizing antibodies formed during DENV infection play a role in gradually selecting for more pathogenic viruses in humans (Morens and Fauci 2008).Controversies Over TransmissionOf special concern lately has been the effect of global warming on the incidence and spread of dengue disease. Although there are probably no effects on DENV replication in humans, if environmental temperatures rise, many investigators presume there might be an effect on virus transmission by mosquitoes. This is derived from the fact that increases in temperature (along with increases in rainfall) directly affect mosquito development (from larval to adult stages) and their populations can increase dramatically. Also, increases in average temperatures in new climes might make conditions favorable for mosquito breeding and the establishment of new populations. This could surely lead to more chances of exposure to mosquito bites for the human population and thus for infection by mosquito-borne viruses. However, the reason why many mosquito-borne diseases have yet to affect large populations in developed nations seems to be a lack of exposure to mosquito bites; air-conditioning and human behavior have been shown to reduce DENV transmission in the southern United States (Reiter et al. 2003). That is, human activities and their impact on local ecology have generally been more significant in increasing dengue prevalence; thus, dengue disease seems to be influenced more by economic than climatic factors (Gubler et al. 2001; Reiter 2001). Also, research described below has shown that increases in temperature might have more of an impact on selecting for those virulent genotypes that are already being transmitted by mosquitoes. Mosquito survival rates and the time it takes for a virus to infect and be transmitted by the mosquito seem to be more important in this context.Another subject that has received renewed attention is the possibility of human modification or management of viral virulence by impacting transmission dynamics. This is important for the application of rapid public health measures in the event of the emergence of new strains of parasites, bacteria or viruses (Lipsitch and Moxon 1997). We presume we can influence virulence by the application of changes in human habits or by the use of control factors such as vaccines – and there are numerous precedents of how public health measures have changed the population dynamics of microorganisms (e.g., there are now more cases of vaccine-induced polio or yellow fever in some countries). Efforts to understand the relationship between parasite adaptation to hosts, virulence and transmission have developed into a small industry in evolutionary biology (Bull and Dykhuizen 2003). Although most discussion is still theoretical, the relationships between virulence and transmission have been weighed, presuming that there is an evolutionary trade-off for optimizing either factor within an organism (Ebert and Bull 2003). That is, to increase its chances of transmission to another host, an organism will limit its replication or virulence in so far as to not kill its host. For example, highly virulent, zoonotic viruses such as Ebola and rabies are less transmissible than measles or common cold viruses, which rarely kill their human host. However, this is overly simplistic when it comes to the evolution of viruses that have multiple strains (multiple infections, with some cross-protection), where virulence involves immunopathology, or where there is another host or an amplifying vector involved in transmission (Day et al. 2007). Thus, the main goal for disease control is to understand how we can reduce virulence in a virus population without making its level of transmission higher. However, this seems a daunting task if we include the effects of evolution by individual versus group selection, bottlenecks and changes in fitness trade-offs. The concern here is whether we will shift DENV evolution and population dynamics by applying incomplete control strategies (e.g., nonsterilizing vaccination or vector transformation).Methodologic Advances and FindingsThe controversies mentioned above point to factors we should consider or understand in the control of dengue disease: evolutionary studies of DENV have helped us concentrate on detection (diagnosis and sampling), analysis (genetic and phenotype) and control (transmission dynamics in host and mosquitoes) of those genotypes already shown to be the culprits (Rico-Hesse 2007). The methods described below could help us reach these goals.Rapid Sequence AnalysisThe determination of viral RNA sequences from different areas of the genome has now become routine and numerous laboratories around the world have this capability; this has added exponentially to the number of DENV samples available for comparison in GenBank. The comparison of these nucleotides and their encoded amino acids can be done with sophisticated computer algorithms that can tell us much about the rates and sites of mutation or evolution in the viral genome. These data can then be matched with patient viral loads, diagnoses, outbreak characteristics and transmission distribution, to look for specific associations. The RT-PCR technique has allowed for the enzymatic amplification of these sequences from very small amounts of viral RNA from almost any type of tissue but many researchers have now avoided virus isolation and characterization, thus introducing mistakes in some of the banked information (e.g., from amplification, sequencing, or cloning artifacts) and without information on viability or antigenicity. Therefore, it is also important to have access to classic virology techniques, especially if one is to derive information about virus phenotype.The comparisons of full genome sequences of many DENV have helped pinpoint differences that could be involved in virulence: the comparison of viruses from two different genotypes associated with DHF or DF only (Southeast Asia and Americas, respectively) showed that there were consistent differences in the 5′-untranslated region (UTR), one envelope protein site (aa390) and the 3′-UTR of the DENV serotype 2 genome (Leitmeyer et al. 1999). Comparisons within the Southeast Asian genotype did not identify any specific nucleotides associated with producing DHF (Mangada and Igarashi 1998; Pandey and Igarashi 2000), so we assume all viruses of this genotype have the potential to produce severe disease. This has also been the case with other DENV, where recent studies have suggested that differences in 5′- and 3′-UTR in the genome can alter levels of replication (Miagostovich et al. 2006; Sirigulpanit et al. 2007; Tajima et al. 2007), which can be extrapolated to viral load in blood or disease presentation (Wang et al. 2006). Another chapter in this volume describes how these influences may occur.Infection of Primary Human CellsThe first targets of DENV replication, after mosquito bite, were postulated to be monocytes or macrophages and numerous studies focused on these cell types. However, more recent studies, using newer technologies for cell identification (mainly flow cytometry) have shown that DENV infects human monocytes poorly compared to dendritic cells, including Langerhans cells and monocyte-derived dendritic cells (Marovich et al. 2001; Wu et al. 2000). Primary dendritic cell cultures can be derived from human peripheral blood donations to banks and this is the usual source for studies to compare the replication of low-passage DENV from patients. Because these samples are obtained anonymously, we must be careful to obtain them from blood banks in areas where there is no DENV transmission (i.e., no antigenic priming of cells) and we cannot determine the human genetic background that might lead to differences in virus replication. However, studies reported in 2003 and 2005 (Cologna et al. 2005; Cologna and Rico-Hesse 2003) were able to show consistent differences in replication of DENV of two genotypes of serotype 2, demonstrating that there is an ex vivo correlation to the virulent phenotype derived from evolutionary studies. Although there seem to be innate, probably genetic differences in the yields of virus produced by cells from individual donors, this variation could be accounted for statistically and the correlations with virulence of patient-derived viruses were established (and note that these differences occur in the absence of antibodies). These primary cell cultures were also used to test recombinant viruses, to determine the influence of specific genome regions on virus replication and yields from human cell targets. These studies confirmed that the exchange of three genomic regions (5′ and 3′ UTRs, and E390) could reduce the levels of replication and virus yields of a Southeast Asian virus to those of wild-type, less virulent viruses of the American genotype (Cologna and Rico-Hesse 2003). Other uses for cultured primary human cells include the identification of specific cells that are producing more virus (tropism) and whether virus replication is even required for pathologic effects.Infection of Field-Collected MosquitoesAnother step in determining if a virulent genotype had an increased transmission fitness phenotype was to study differences in replication and dissemination (i.e., the possibility of transmitting virus by bite) in the natural mosquito vector, Aedes aegypti. Laboratory-reared colonies of mosquitoes (e.g., Rexville or Rockefeller strains) seem to have lost their selectivity for infection and it is recommended that mosquitoes used in these experiments be from the F4 generation or lower (F0 = field-collected eggs). The virulent, Southeast Asian strains of serotype 2 were shown to infect a larger proportion of mosquitoes than the less virulent, American genotype strains, after feeding mosquitoes on blood containing the same titer of virus (Armstrong and Rico-Hesse 2001); also, a greater proportion of mosquitoes develop disseminated infections with the virulent genotype (Armstrong and Rico-Hesse 2003). If mosquitoes were fed both genotypes simultaneously, they were much more likely (sevenfold) to develop an infection with the virulent strains (Cologna et al. 2005). When the dynamics of virus replication and dissemination were compared for both genotypes, the virulent strains had reached the salivary glands up to 7 days earlier than the less virulent viruses (Anderson and Rico-Hesse 2006). This means that virulent strains may replicate and be transmitted much sooner to human hosts, outcompeting the less virulent viruses and causing many more cases of disease, thus ecologically displacing those that cause less severe dengue. This efficiency of transmission by the vector could explain how certain genotypes have displaced others, shifting the evolution of dengue disease towards more virulence (i.e., more DHF).Mouse Models of DiseaseDuring this decade, major advances have been made in the development of new mouse breeds and their transplantation with human stem cells (from umbilical cord blood cells) that may effectively mimic the human immune system or show human signs of disease upon infection. The combination of studies in these mice with those in mice that are defective in interferon production or receptors have led to insights into the mechanisms of dengue pathogenesis (Bente et al. 2005; Kuruvilla et al. 2007; Kyle et al. 2007; Shresta et al. 2006). Thus far, none of these models develop DHF and the production of DENV-specific antibodies has been low or undetectable. However, others have shown that mice engrafted with human hematopoietic cells can be effectively used to study pathogenesis of viruses for which no other models exist (Melkus et al. 2006; Watanabe et al. 2007). It is anticipated that after adaptation of this system to DENV infection by multiple strains, with the acquisition of DENV-specific, functional B and T cells, that the signs of DHF might appear in these “humanized” mice. This would finally allow for the measurement of the many effects of immunopathogenesis, including the protective cross-immunity created by serial infection and the evaluation of many basic questions, such as dose-dependence of infection, the relevance of mosquito factors to infection (e.g., salivary gland proteins) and the role of other cells as primary targets of infection (e.g., endothelial cells). Most importantly, this model could allow for the immediate testing of antivirals and vaccine candidates, where effective systems for testing products before human use have been lacking.Mathematical Models of TransmissionAnother promising new field has been the development of mathematical models of DENV transmission, including “evolutionary epidemiology” and virulence management. These models are being used to estimate the effect of changing host immunity or mosquito transmission on the amount of virus circulating and the risks to a hypothetical human population and epidemic “topology.” These analyzes have suggested that DENV cross-serotype immunity and mosquito demographics, rather than immune enhancement, are the most important determinants in the dynamics of specific serotype cycles or genotype replacement during epidemics and that the application of incomplete control strategies might actually increase the incidence of severe disease (Adams et al. 2006; Cummings et al. 2005; Nagao and Koelle 2008; Wearing and Rohani 2006). Although these models are complex and still require many basic measurements for their refinement, some of the details are being added as they become available from laboratory or ecological studies (e.g., quantification of cross-protection by various DENV strains and many different measurements of mosquito transmission dynamics, including vector genetics and their effect on competence and capacity, etc.). Other applications of computer modeling have involved measuring the importance of host genetics over parasite contributions to virulence. For virology, the importance of host genetics in disease pathogenesis has been discussed for many years but recent technologies have allowed researchers to weigh the influence of virus virulence over human host genetics, in the case of pandemic influenza A (Gottfredsson et al. 2008; Pitzer et al. 2007). However, these approaches are extremely controversial at this point, as other investigators have reached opposing conclusions when using similar methods and results (Albright et al. 2008).PerspectiveOnly recently have public health officials in developed countries become concerned about the increased transmission and geographic spread of DENV. In many cases this is due to the increase in cases imported by tourists from less-developed tropical regions. For the United States, there has been a marked increase in imported cases and autochthonous transmission in Texas and Hawaii during this decade (Morens and Fauci 2008) and for the first time we have been able to document the introduction of a virulent DENV genotype into this country (CDC 2007; Rico-Hesse 2007). This has added a sense of urgency to research using some of the models described here and a hope for additional support for studies of this long-neglected tropical disease.


Title: Mosquito Saliva Increases Endothelial Permeability in the Skin, Immune Cell Migration, and Dengue Pathogenesis during Antibody-Dependent Enhancement

IntroductionDuring the transmission of arthropod-borne diseases, blood-feeding insects deposit pathogen-containing saliva into the skin [1]. How factors in arthropod saliva impact pathogen replication, host responses, and disease outcome is an area of active research. The four serotypes of dengue virus (DENV1-4) cause the most prevalent mosquito-borne viral disease, with up to 390 million infections and 96 million cases of dengue annually [2]. The first (1°) DENV infection usually causes dengue fever or subclinical disease, and individuals generate memory immune responses that protect against infection with the same DENV serotype. In contrast, sequential infection with a different DENV serotype can induce severe and potentially fatal disease [3]. Severe dengue is characterized by high fever, low platelet count, hemorrhagic manifestations, systemic vascular leak, and/or circulatory shock [4]. The memory immune response generated during a previous DENV infection can exacerbate a subsequent infection with a different serotype via a phenomenon known as antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) and/or a cytokine storm produced by cross-reactive T cells [5,6]. During ADE, antibodies that were generated during the 1° infection and cross-react with the next infecting DENV serotype do not neutralize but instead enhance infection of Fcγ receptor-bearing cells, such as macrophages (MΦs) and monocytes [7–10]. Whereas monocytes circulate in the blood and enter inflamed tissues, MΦs and classical dendritic cells (cDCs) reside in steady-state tissues. After systemic dissemination, DENV infects monocytes in the blood [11], as well as MΦs and DCs in lymph nodes (LNs), spleen, intestine, and liver [12–16].While probing for blood vessels in the skin, arthropods induce a host response that includes narrowing of blood vessels, blood clotting, and inflammation. To allow efficient blood feeding, arthropods inject saliva that contains various molecules that counteract this response [1]. Pathogens have co-evolved within their vector to optimize transmission [17]. Plasmodium [18,19] and Leishmania parasites [20,21] efficiently establish infections experimentally only when transmitted with vector saliva, and mosquito saliva enhances West Nile virus (WNV) infection [22,23]. Female Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus mosquitoes transmit DENV, Zika virus, yellow fever virus, and Chikungunya virus and are thus important vectors of disease. Nonetheless, the role of mosquito saliva in dengue pathogenesis is not well understood. Ae. aegypti saliva increased DENV serum viremia in mice lacking interferon (IFN) regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF3/7) [24] and prolonged dengue viremia in “humanized” mice xeno-transplanted with human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells [25]. In contrast, Ader et al. found that mosquito saliva inhibits DENV infection of human monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs) in vitro [26]. Even though dermal cDCs and MΦs are the initial targets for DENV replication [27,28], the impact of mosquito saliva on immune cells in DENV-infected skin has not been studied.Here we examined the impact of Ae. aegypti salivary gland extract (SGE) on dengue pathogenesis, the host response, and DENV infection in the skin. We used mice lacking the IFN-α/β receptor (Ifnar
–/–) that are susceptible to intradermal (i.d.) DENV infection [28] and display key features of human disease, such as lethal vascular leak [29–31]. In infected human cells, DENV proteins block IFN-α/β signaling [32–34]. In contrast, wild-type mice do not support DENV replication [35] because DENV proteins cannot block IFN signaling in mice [36]. While DENV inoculation of naïve Ifnar
–/–mice mimics 1° infection conditions, inoculation of mice previously injected with sub-neutralizing levels of DENV-specific antibodies models ADE [14,15,31]. We needle-inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice i.d. in the presence or absence of enhancing antibodies with DENV alone or DENV mixed with SGE from female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes—a model to examine the role of vector-derived factors in pathogen transmission that is more broadly accessible and easier to standardize than the use of live mosquitoes [37–40].We establish here that only the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies augments dengue pathogenesis, DENV infection of DCs and MΦs in the dermis, and immune responses in skin-draining LNs. In addition, we show that SGE increases endothelial permeability in vitro and induces vascular leak in the skin. Finally, removing the site of DENV infection in the ear after 4 hours (h) rescued mice from severe disease in the absence of SGE, but this rescue was lost when SGE was present. Mosquito-derived factors thus augment antibody-enhanced dengue pathogenesis in the skin and beyond.ResultsMosquito SGE exacerbates dengue pathogenesis during ADETo determine the role of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice i.d. with 105 PFU of the mouse-adapted virulent DENV2 strain D220 [31] (hereafter termed “DENV”) in PBS or mixed with SGE (equivalent to one salivary gland of a female Ae. aegypti mosquito). SGE had no effect on dengue pathogenesis in the absence of enhancing antibodies (1° infection), which induced mild or no disease (Fig 1A). In contrast, the presence of SGE significantly increased morbidity (Fig 1B) and induced lethal disease in 54% of the mice (Fig 1C) under antibody-enhanced conditions (ADE). The presence of enhancing antibodies mildly increased morbidity compared to 1° infection in the absence of SGE only on day 7 (p<0.05) but significantly increased morbidity on days 4, 5, 6 (p<0.001) and 7 (p<0.05) in the presence of SGE (Fig 1A and 1B). Severe dengue disease resulting from 105 PFU DENV is thus dependent upon the combined presence of mosquito-derived factors in SGE and enhancing antibodies.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g001Fig 1Mosquito SGE induces lethal antibody-enhanced dengue disease.
Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV in the absence (A) or presence (B) of enhancing antibodies. DENV was inoculated alone (No) or after mixing with Ae. aegypti SGE (+SGE). (A-B) Bar graphs show mean morbidity ± standard error of mean (SEM) of mice on a scale from 1 = healthy to 5 = moribund (for details, see Material and Methods). (C) Kaplan-Meier curves showing survival of mice. Data were pooled from three experiments for 1° infection conditions n = 8 (No) or n = 6 (+SGE) and four experiments for ADE n = 10 (No) or n = 13 (+SGE). Statistically significant differences between the presence and absence of SGE are marked as ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, or not significant (n.s. for p>0.05).Due to the mild morbidity under 1° conditions that were observed after inoculation of 105 PFU, we further tested the effect of SGE at a 10-fold higher DENV dose of 106 PFU. Unexpectedly, SGE diminished disease severity under 1° conditions and did not further augment pathogenesis during antibody-enhanced DENV infection at 106 PFU (S1 Fig), possibly because ADE of 106 PFU already causes lethal disease. Because Culex mosquitoes transmit a median dose of 105 PFU of the related Flavivirus, WNV [41], and a higher virus dose might override the enhancing effect of SGE on dengue pathogenesis, we subsequently used 105 PFU DENV. In endemic areas, exposure to non-infected mosquitoes regularly occurs. In order to test whether pre-existing immunity to SGE would alter the effect of SGE on dengue pathogenesis, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice three times i.d. with SGE alone (at ≥2 weeks intervals). Subsequent i.d. antibody-enhanced DENV infection in the presence of SGE augmented pathogenesis similarly to that observed in SGE-naïve mice (S1 Fig).SGE boosts infection of dermal dendritic cells and macrophagesWe hypothesized that SGE synergizes with enhancing antibodies to impact DENV replication in the skin. In fact, SGE alone and to a greater degree the combination of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly increased DENV titers in the skin at 14 h post-inoculation, as measured by qRT-PCR (Fig 2A and 2B). We thus dissected DENV infection of cell subsets in the skin via intracellular staining for DENV non-structural protein NS3 and structural protein E in flow cytometric analysis. We gated dermis-resident CD11b+ cDCs (CD45+ MHCIIhigh (hi) Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C-) and MΦs (CD45+ MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G- Ly6Clow/–SSCint-hi) as previously established ([28] and S2 Fig). Dermis-resident CD11b+ cDCs and MΦs were the initial targets for DENV infection 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU (Fig 2C–2G), similar to inoculation of 106 PFU, as reported previously [28]. While DENV infection was low in the absence of SGE or enhancing antibodies, the combined action of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly increased DENV infection of dermal CD11b+ cDCs (Fig 2D and 2E) and MΦs (Fig 2F and 2G). While myeloid cells in the dermis expressed various levels of Fcγ receptors (CD16/32), only MΦs and, to a minimal degree, CD11b+ cDCs expressed mannose receptor (CD206, S2 Fig). These dermal cell surface molecules may serve to mediate DENV attachment in the presence (Fcγ receptors) [8,42] or absence (mannose receptor for MΦs) of enhancing antibodies [43]. No cells in the epidermis, such as CD45+ MHCII+ Langerin+ Langerhans cells, contained intracellular DENV proteins after 14 h. The combined presence of mosquito-derived factors and enhancing antibodies thus augmented DENV infection of CD11b+ cDCs and MΦs as initial targets for DENV replication in the dermis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g002Fig 2SGE increases DENV infection in the skin during ADE.(A) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (B) Bar graph showing mean ±SEM DENV genome equivalents in the skin after 14 h normalized to 1 μg Gapdh mRNA, as determined by qRT-PCR (limit of detection depicted as horizontal dashed line). Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05. (C) Schematic of the main dermis-resident immune cells. (D) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV non-structural protein NS3 and structural protein E of dermal CD11b+ cDCs analyzed via flow cytometry 14 h after inoculation. For gating of cell populations, see S2 Fig. (E) Bar graph summarizing percent DENV infection of CD11b+ cDCs. (F) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV proteins of dermal MΦs. (G) Bar graph summarizing percent DENV infection of dermal MΦs. Data are representative (D, F) or pooled (E, G) from three independent experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05 and ** for p<0.01.SGE amplifies neutrophil and monocyte recruitment to the dermisWe next examined the recruitment of immune cells to the dermis. We gated de novo-recruited cell populations in the dermis as previously established via adoptive transfer of labeled monocytes in the absence of SGE [28]. Ly6G expression identified neutrophils, and Ly6C expression separated recruited Ly6Chi monocytes from resident Ly6Clow/–MΦs among MHCIIlow/–CD11b+ cells (Figs 3A and S2). Whereas inoculation of 105 PFU DENV under 1° conditions led to a modest recruitment of inflammatory neutrophils (Fig 3B) and monocytes to the dermis (Fig 3C), SGE significantly amplified the recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes in the presence of enhancing antibodies. Ly6C expression further separated Ly6C+ moDCs from resident Ly6C- CD11b+ cDCs among MHCII+ Langerin-CD11b+ cells (S2 Fig). During ADE, SGE augmented the number (Fig 3D) and DENV infection (Fig 3E and 3F) of de novo-recruited moDCs in the dermis. In contrast, few monocytes (<0.5%) and no other cell types (e.g., DCs or MΦs) were infected with DENV in the dermis 14 h after inoculation. SGE also increased the percentage of monocytes and moDCs in the dermis (S3 Fig). Together, these data show that the presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies augmented innate responses to DENV infection in the skin via the recruitment of neutrophils, monocytes, and moDCs and increased the infection of de novo-recruited moDCs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g003Fig 3SGE together with enhancing antibodies augments recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes to the dermis.(A) Contour plots showing consecutive gating of neutrophils and monocytes among CD45+ MHCIIlow/–cells in the dermis, as determined via flow cytometry of steady-state mice or 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU DENV in the presence or absence of SGE under 1° or ADE conditions. Numbers on plots are percent of gated cells of the parent population. (B-D) Bar graphs showing mean ±SEM number of neutrophils (B), monocytes (C) or moDCs (D) in the dermis, gated as in (A) and S2 Fig. (E) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV proteins of moDCs in the dermis. (F) Bar graph showing mean ±SEM percent DENV infection of dermal moDCs. Data are representative (A, E) or pooled (B-D, F) from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, and *** for p<0.001.SGE increases dendritic cell migration to skin-draining lymph nodesWe hypothesized that SGE may further modulate immune responses beyond the skin. While activated cDCs efficiently migrate from the skin to draining LNs (MigDCs) via expression of the chemokine receptor CCR7 [44,45] and prime naïve T and B cells, MΦs and recruited moDCs mostly remain within the inflamed skin to phagocytose pathogens and locally stimulate effector or memory T cells [46,47]. After 14 h, skin-draining LNs contained significantly more and a higher frequency of MigDCs with a CD11cint MHCIIhi CCR7+ migratory phenotype (Figs 4A and S4) when DENV was inoculated with SGE in the presence of enhancing antibodies (Fig 4B). The combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies further boosted the recruitment of CD11bhi Ly6G+ neutrophils (Fig 4C) and MHCII-CD11b+ F480+ SSClow monocytes to LNs (Fig 4D), likely from the blood. For neutrophils, this effect was due to decreased recruitment during 1° infections when SGE was present. In contrast, SGE did not significantly change the number of CD11chi MHCIIint cDCs or cells with a CD11clow MHCIIint CD11b+ F480+ SSClow phenotype that likely consist of moDCs in LNs after 14 h (S4 Fig). We further examined the activation of naïve T cells during antibody-enhanced DENV infection. Even though 82% of CD8+ and 58% CD4+ T cells in the spleen and 34% of CD8+ and 21% CD4+ T cells in LNs draining the site of i.d. inoculation acquired an activated CD44+ CD62L- phenotype within 5.5 days, no significant differences were detectable in the presence or absence of SGE (S5 Fig). Along the same lines, 22% of CD8+ T cells and 13% of CD4+ T cells produced IFN-γ in the spleen regardless of whether SGE was present or not (S5 Fig). However, a non-significant trend towards decreased proliferation of T cells in the presence of SGE was observed (S5 Fig). Consequently, the presence of SGE during antibody-enhanced DENV infection increases the migration of DCs and monocytes to skin-draining LNs. Nevertheless, whether augmented innate responses subsequently affect adaptive immune responses and thereby influence dengue pathogenesis remains to be determined.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g004Fig 4SGE accelerates migration of dendritic cells and recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes to lymph nodes during ADE.Mice were inoculated i.d. with PBS or 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (A) Contour plots showing cells in LNs 14 h after inoculation. Consecutive gating identified neutrophils as Ly6G+ CD11bhi, MigDCs as Ly6G- CD11cint MHCIIhi, cDCs as Ly6G- CD11chi MHCIIint, and monocytes as Ly6G- CD11c–/low MHCII-CD11b+ F4/80+. For expression of CCR7 and Fcγ receptor, see S4 Fig. Bar graphs summarizing the number of MigDCs (B), neutrophils (C) or monocytes (D) in LNs. Data are representative (A) or pooled (B-D) from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences between groups are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.SGE disrupts endothelial barrier functionEndothelial cells lining blood vessels separate the skin from systemic blood circulation. We hypothesized that factors contained in SGE may disrupt endothelial barrier function to enable blood feeding, which might also facilitate cell migration. To determine the direct effect of SGE on the vascular endothelium, we measured trans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of human dermal microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC-1) monolayers growing on Transwell inserts (Fig 5A). Monolayers displayed high TEER values and thus low permeability in steady state. Addition of SGE to either the basolateral side of the monolayer that corresponds to the side facing the dermis (Figs 5B, 5C and S6) or the apical side facing the blood (S6 Fig) significantly decreased TEER values, thus increasing endothelial permeability, in a dose-dependent manner. TNFα served as a positive control for endothelial permeability and decreased TEER values with similar dynamics as SGE (S6 Fig). We next tested whether SGE also affected endothelial barrier function at the site of inoculation in the mouse ear. Our results demonstrated that i.d. inoculation of SGE disrupted the barrier function of the microvasculature in the mouse ear and increased the leak of plasma into the dermis, visualized via fluorescently-labelled dextran that was inoculated intravenously (Fig 5D). The vasculature in the PBS-inoculated control ear of the same animal showed significantly lower leak of plasma, and untouched ears of steady-state animals showed only minor endothelial permeability (Fig 5D and 5E). The signal at the base of the ear was due to autofluorescence of cartilege and was excluded from quantification at the site of inoculation (white circles, Fig 5D). Consequently, SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function at the site of virus transmission in the dermis and may thus be one factor that contributes to systemic dengue pathogenesis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g005Fig 5SGE disrupts endothelial barriers in vitro and in vivo in the skin.(A-C) The trans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of human microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC-1) monolayers grown in Transwell chambers were measured as depicted in (A) after adding the equivalent of 0.2, 0.5 or 1 salivary glands to the basolateral compartment. (B) Graph showing percent TEER relative to untreated control cells over time. (C) Bar graph depicting percent TEER after 13 h of stimulation. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 8 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as **** for p<0.0001 or not significant (n.s. for p>0.05). (D-E) Wild-type mice were inoculated intravenously with fluorescently-labeled dextran, and SGE or PBS was inoculated i.d. into either ear of each animal immediately thereafter. Steady-state ears of dextran-inoculated control mice were left untouched. (D) Representative scan of ears analyzed after 30 min showing dextran fluorescence that leaked with plasma into the dermis at sites of i.d. inoculation or corresponding areas in steady-state ears (white circles). (E) Mean fluorescence of dextran per an area of 3300 pixels of ear skin ±SEM quantified at the site of i.d. inoculation with PBS or SGE for each animal (connecting lines). Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 9 per group. Statistically significant differences between PBS and SGE are marked as * for p<0.05.The effect of SGE spreads rapidly beyond the skin and modulates dengue pathogenesisFinally, to test whether the effects of SGE in the skin impacted systemic dengue pathogenesis, we surgically removed the site of DENV transmission in the presence or absence of SGE after 4 h (Fig 6A). In the presence of SGE, removing the site of DENV transmission did not have a protective effect on the morbidity and survival of mice after i.d. inoculation with an antibody-enhanced DENV inoculum of 105 PFU (Fig 6B and 6C). Fifty percent of mice succumbed to infection regardless of whether the control side or the site of inoculation was removed. In contrast, if no SGE was present, removing the site of DENV transmission completely protected mice from morbidity after inoculation with an antibody-enhanced dose of 105 PFU (Fig 6D and 6E). Even more striking was the significant protective effect on morbidity and survival of the mice observed after inoculation with an antibody-enhanced high DENV dose of 106 PFU (Fig 6F and 6G). These data show that the effect of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis rapidly spreads beyond the skin. The effect of SGE on endothelial barrier function and the immune response thus influence dengue pathogenesis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g006Fig 6Removing the site of DENV inoculation in the skin no longer rescues mice from dengue disease in the presence of SGE.(A) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with DENV under antibody-enhanced conditions, and 4 h later, the non-inoculated control side or the site of inoculation in the ear skin was surgically removed. (B) Bar graphs showing mean morbidity ±SEM and (C) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 105 PFU DENV mixed with SGE. (D) Bar graphs showing morbidity and (E) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 105 PFU DENV alone. (F) Bar graphs showing morbidity and (G) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 106 PFU DENV alone. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences between removing the site of DENV inoculation and removing the non-inoculated control side are marked as * for p<0.05 or ** for p<0.01.DiscussionWe establish here that Ae. aegpyti SGE exacerbates systemic dengue pathogenesis during ADE. We determined that SGE in the presence of enhancing antibodies increases DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis, recruitment of monocytes to the dermis and draining LNs, and DC migration from the skin to LNs. We also showed that SGE acts directly on endothelial cells in vitro, disrupts endothelial barrier function, and induces plasma leak in the mouse ear. Further, surgical removal of the site of DENV transmission after 4 h rescued mice from enhanced disease in the absence but not in the presence of SGE, indicating that the effect of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis spreads rapidly beyond the skin.Previous studies have demonstrated that mosquitoes inoculate saliva that contains pathogens into the dermis while probing for blood vessels. Anopheles mosquitoes inoculated saliva with Plasmodium parasites into the dermis of mice [48]. Similarly, in studies of mosquitoes feeding on mouse tails, >99% of inoculated WNV was recovered from the skin section that infected Culex mosquitoes probed upon [41]. Although Culex mosquitoes inoculated WNV directly into the blood circulation when obtaining a successful blood meal [41], the amount of WNV that was deposited into the bloodstream remained low at ~100 PFU, which was only 0.1% of the total i.d.-transmitted median dose of 105 PFU of WNV [41]. We show that removing the site of i.d. DENV infection after 4 h rescued mice from disease in the absence of SGE but, in the natural setting, DENV is always transmitted in the saliva of infected mosquitoes. Studies have shown that survival of mice was prolonged when the distal third of the tail was removed 5 min to 6 h after mosquitoes inoculated with St. Louis encephalitis [49] or Rift Valley fever viruses [50]. Similarly, mice were protected from blood parasitemia when the site of inoculation was removed up to 5 min but no later than 15 min after Anopheles-transmitted Plasmodium infection [51]. Our data that removing the site of DENV transmission rescues mice in the absence but not in the presence of SGE establishes that DENV infection in the skin early after inoculation is critical for subsequent dengue pathogenesis and that SGE modulates the dynamics of this process.The endothelial barrier of capillaries separates the skin from systemic blood circulation. Mosquito saliva [1,18] or innate immune recognition of DENV [52,53] can increase endothelial cell permeability via activation of mast cells and release of inflammatory mediators, such as histamine, TNFα, or proteases. Our in vivo results of SGE inducing vascular leak in the ear skin may thus be a combined effect of SGE on mast cells and endothelial cells. In contrast, our in vitro results of SGE decreasing the TEER of endothelial cell monolayers demonstrate that SGE can act directly on endothelial cells to increase permeability. In the absence of SGE, Luplertlop et al. showed that DENV-infected DCs induce vascular permeability in the skin via production of metalloproteinases that degrade endothelial cell adhesion molecules [54]. Serine proteases in Ae. aegypti SGE were shown to degrade the extracellular matrix of embryonic fibroblasts [40]. We thus speculate that SGE disturbs the integrity of blood vessels through degradation of extracellular matrix proteins or disturbance of tight/adherens junctions between endothelial cells. Factors in SGE that disrupt endothelial barrier function may have evolved to help the mosquitoes penetrate blood vessels or feed from a pool of blood in the dermis after injury to a blood vessel.Previous studies examined the effect of mosquito-derived factors on DENV infection only in the absence of enhancing antibodies [24,25,40]. In our hands, SGE did not augment dengue pathogenesis after inoculation of 105 PFU under 1° conditions and even reduced disease severity after inoculation at a 10-fold higher dose of 106 PFU. In contrast, SGE augmented dengue pathogenesis during antibody-enhanced infection with 105 PFU. Numerous reports show that ADE enhances DENV infection of human monocytes [8,55] and MΦs [9] in vitro. In mice, intestinal monocytes/MΦs and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells are particularly susceptible to antibody-enhanced DENV infection [15,30]. We speculate that, via disruption of endothelial barrier function in the skin, SGE may augment access of DENV to enhancing antibodies in the serum, increase the spread of infectious virus-antibody complexes, enhance infection within systemic tissues, and thus exacerbate dengue pathogenesis during ADE. Our results thus suggest that animal models of dengue and pre-clinical validation of dengue vaccine candidates should be evaluated in the combined presence of mosquito saliva and enhancing antibodies.As one possibility, SGE may augment systemic dengue pathogenesis by disrupting endothelial barrier function and thus facilitating DENV dissemination. In humans, higher DENV titers at peak viremia correlate with more severe disease [5]. Accelerated early DENV dissemination may subsequently increase virus titers and thus the risk for severe disease. In mice, feeding of uninfected Culex mosquitoes at the site of needle inoculation or concurrent inoculation with SGE augmented WNV serum viremia after 24–48 h [22]. Likewise, feeding of uninfected Ae. aegypti at the site of needle inoculation with WNV subsequently increased mortality compared to needle inoculation with virus alone [23]. Similarly, mosquito transmission of DENV or needle-inoculation with concurrent feeding of uninfected mosquitoes prolonged viremia and increased erythema (redness of the skin) in “humanized” mice [25] and increased DENV titers around peak viremia in mice lacking IRF3/7 [24,56]. When needle-inoculated into the foot pad, mosquito SGE further increased DENV titers in LNs of Ifnar
–/–mice after 24 h [40]. Together, these data show that mosquito-derived factors increase DENV titers 24 h to several days post-inoculation, which could be due to increased virus dissemination and/or systemic replication. Our ear removal data show that factors that augment dengue pathogenesis spread beyond the skin within 4 h in the presence of SGE. Nevertheless, the precise impact of mosquito-derived factors on early DENV dissemination prior to the first round of DENV replication, which takes place within ~12 h [57], remains unknown.Our data also show that SGE boosts the recruitment of innate immune cells during acute DENV infection. Previous studies revealed that monocytes and neutrophils enter the DENV-infected dermis in the absence of SGE [28]. Several studies have confirmed the recruitment and phenotype of inflammatory monocytes (MHCII-Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6G- Ly6Chi) and moDCs (MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C+) to the dermis during allergic reactions [58], or infection with Leishmania major [59] or DENV [28] via adoptive transfer of genetically- or fluorescently-labeled monocytes. The phenotype remained consistent for 7 days, before monocyte-derived cells down-regulated Ly6C expression [58,59]. During DENV infection, monocyte recruitment and differentiation to moDCs increased the number of targets for virus replication in the dermis [28]. Sterile injury [60] or transmission of Leishmania via sandfly feeding triggered the recruitment of neutrophils to the skin, where they then served as a “Trojan horse” reservoir for parasite infection [61], and abrogated vaccine-induced protection by suppressing parasite-specific CD4+ T cell responses [62]. Few studies have addressed the role of neutrophils in dengue pathogenesis. In one study, the serum of dengue patients contained higher levels of IL-8 and neutrophilic elastase than healthy controls, suggesting activation and degranulation of neutrophils [63]. Previous studies have documented the exit of epidermal Langerhans cells [64,65] and dermal DCs [27] from DENV-infected skin and their migration to LNs in the absence of SGE. We establish here that the combined presence of enhancing antibodies and SGE boost the recruitment of monocytes and neutrophils to the DENV-infected dermis and draining LNs, as well as DC migration from the skin to LNs. SGE disruption of endothelial barrier function in the dermis may facilitate both transmigration of monocytes and neutrophils through blood vessels to enter the dermis and migration of skin DCs to LNs via increased drainage of plasma that leaks into the skin. Because removal of the site of co-inoculation of DENV with SGE after 4 h did not rescue mice from systemic antibody-enhanced pathogenesis, rapid spread of inflammatory mediators may contribute to increased disease severity. As we did not observe significant differences in T cell activation in the presence versus absence of SGE 5.5 days after DENV inoculation, further studies are needed to determine whether SGE affects systemic immune responses. Along the same lines, Cox et al. determined that increased viremia and prolonged fever occurred even when mosquito saliva and DENV were inoculated at distant sites [25], supporting the view that mosquito-derived factors can impact dengue pathogenesis systemically.We confirm here the recent discovery that dermal cDCs and MΦs are the initial targets for DENV replication in the skin of mice and humans in the absence of SGE [27,28], but at a 10-fold lower virus dose in vivo. Only one in vitro study has examined the impact of mosquito saliva on human immature moDCs, and it found that Ae. aegypti saliva inhibits DENV infection under 1° conditions [26]. In our study, SGE led to a small but significant increase in DENV titer in the skin under 1° conditions, as measured via qRT-PCR 14 h after inoculation. Under 1° conditions, however, flow cytometric analysis did not detect significant differences in the infection of dermal cDCs, moDCs, and MΦs, which were the only DENV-infected cells in the skin at this time-point. We establish here that the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly enhanced DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis. While monocytes, MΦs, and mature moDCs are known targets for enhanced DENV infection in vitro [8,9,42], this is the first report that ADE boosts DENV infection of cDCs in the presence of SGE. In contrast, ADE alone did not significantly enhance infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis in the absence of SGE (Fig 2 and [28]). Whereas enhancing antibodies may have limited access to the skin in the absence of SGE, the increased leak of plasma into the skin that we found in the presence of SGE may allow more enhancing antibodies to enter the skin and mediate antibody-enhanced infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis. Although DCs are key for priming adaptive T and B cell responses, DENV infection can impair DC function [10]. In addition, Ae. aegypti saliva suppresses host responses, such as cytokine production and T cell proliferation at the feeding site [66,67], and skews systemic CD4+ T cell responses from Th1- towards Th2-type by decreasing IFN-γ and increasing IL-4 expression [56,68,69]. Even though our ear removal experiments show that dengue pathogenesis of the ongoing infection occurs beyond the skin when SGE and enhancing antibodies are present, the increased DENV infection of skin DCs may affect priming of memory responses that protect or enhance pathogenesis during subsequent DENV infections.In endemic regions, exposure to non-infected arthropod vectors regularly occurs and could modulate the effect of vector saliva. For malaria, exposure of mice to the bite of non-infected Anopheles mosquitoes protected them from subsequent mosquito-transmitted Plasmodium infection [70]. Similarly, vaccination with sand fly SGE or exposure to the bites of non-infected sand flies protected mice or non-human primates against subsequent Leishmania challenge plus SGE [71–74]. However, immunization with two distinct sand fly salivary proteins, PpSP15 or PpSP44, either protected or increased susceptibility to Leishmania infection, respectively [75]. Similarly, pre-exposure of mice to bites of non-infected Ae. aegypti mosquitoes exacerbated WNV lethality [76], but immunization with the recombinant protein D7 from Culex saliva enhanced pathogenesis during subsequent mosquito-transmitted WNV infection [77]. One study reported an association of higher serum reactivity to Ae. aegypti salivary proteins in Thai children with severe secondary dengue disease compared to not-infected individuals, but it remains unclear whether this correlation was due to prior exposure or reactivity to DENV or non-infected mosquitoes [78]. In our hands, antibody-enhanced DENV infection in the presence of SGE induced lethality in a comparable proportion of mice that were pre-exposed three times to SGE versus SGE-naïve animals. Further studies are needed to determine the effect of anti-Ae. aegypti immunity on dengue pathogenesis, and the potential use of mosquito-derived components in vaccine formulations against dengue requires thorough evaluation.Our study introduces in vitro and mouse models to study the impact of mosquito-derived factors on endothelial cells and dengue pathogenesis, respectively. DENV suppresses the IFN response, replicates, and causes disease in humans but not wild-type mice [28,35,36]. Ifnar
–/–mice are readily available and more immunocompetent than other DENV infection models due to intact IFN-γ receptor signaling. After i.d. inoculation, DENV infects the same cells (i.e., dermal cDCs and MΦs) in Ifnar
–/–mice [28] and human skin explants [27], cross-validating the reliability of these models. Studies using transmission via DENV-infected live mosquitoes are most physiologically relevant but naturally cannot control for the presence of mosquito-derived factors or the virus dose delivered, as mosquitoes transmit varying doses of virus (e.g., WNV [41]). A study design (“spot feeding”) where uninfected female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes deposit saliva into mouse skin followed by i.d. needle inoculation of virus mimics the secretion of saliva while mosquitoes probe for blood vessels, can control for the presence or absence of mosquito-derived components, delivers a defined dose of virus, and has successfully been used to study DENV infection in vivo [24,25]. Live mosquitoes, however, inoculate varying amounts of saliva [41] depending on how fast they locate and penetrate a blood vessel; thus, salivary dose cannot be controlled or monitored in this model. The simplified model that we use here, i.e., needle inoculation of SGE from non-infected mosquitoes with a defined dose of pathogen, has proven useful in assessing the role of vector-derived factors for infection with DENV [40], WNV [23], Sindbis virus [69], Rift Valley fever virus [39], and Leishmania [38]. Similarly, WNV transmission via infected Culex mosquitoes, deposition of saliva via uninfected mosquitoes at the site of needle inoculation, or concurrent i.d. needle inoculation of WNV with SGE all induced earlier and higher viremia compared to needle inoculation of WNV alone [22][79]. While not precisely replicating DENV transmission via live mosquitoes, the SGE model is more broadly applicable to future immunological analyses and pre-clinical testing of dengue vaccines, as the variables can be controlled, unlike mosquito-transmitted DENV. Mosquito saliva can be collected artificially in a sucrose solution in a capillary tube into which the mosquito proboscis is inserted, or through a membrane. However, such saliva preparations differ qualitatively and quantitatively from mosquito saliva that is inoculated into the host during a natural blood meal [79,80]. Furthermore, the mosquito does not replicate normal probing and secretion of saliva during artificial feeding. Needle inoculation i.d. of DENV with or without SGE is thus the model that is easiest to standardize between assays and between research groups. The dose of 1 SGE that we have used in vivo contained 0.37–0.60 μg total protein and lies within the range for which Moser et al. determined a dose-dependent increase in WNV serum viremia in the presence of SGE from Culex mosquitoes [79]. In addition, Wasserman et al. determined that a single Ae. aegypti mosquito inoculates approximately 0.35 salivary gland pairs (equivalent to 0.7 SGE) [81]. We have thus inoculated mice with SGE that is likely equivalent to the bite of 1–2 mosquitoes. We further introduce an in vitro system measuring TEER as a practical tool to assess the direct effect of vector-derived factors on endothelial barrier function that is independent of specific pathogens and can thus be extrapolated to other viruses carried by Ae. aegypti mosquitoes. Using the TEER system, we show that 0.2 to 2 SGE increased vascular permeability in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that 1 SGE is a non-saturated dose but lies within the range of a dose-response curve.In summary (Fig 7), our study establishes that mosquito-derived factors exacerbate dengue pathogenesis in individuals that carry enhancing antibodies and thus already have an increased risk for severe disease. Consequently, safety and efficacy of vaccine and therapeutic candidates against dengue should be tested pre-clinically in models that consider both the mosquito vector as well as enhancing antibodies. We establish that SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function in the skin, induces vascular leak, and, in combination with enhancing antibodies, increases dendritic cell migration to skin-draining LNs. Because antibody-enhanced dengue pathogenesis occurs beyond the site of DENV-SGE co-inoculation in the skin, future studies are needed to determine whether SGE alters immune responses and thereby augments systemic dengue pathogenesis. Increasing DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis could further modulate the priming of memory responses that determine pathogenesis during subsequent DENV infections. The role of mosquito-derived factors in dengue pathogenesis warrants further studies, and our findings call for additional research on arthropod-borne pathogens whose vectors share similar blood-feeding strategies and may also impair endothelial barrier function.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g007Fig 7The effects of mosquito SGE in the skin and on systemic dengue pathogenesis.In summary, our data show that (1) SGE induces endothelial permeability and vascular leak in the mouse ear. During ADE, SGE further increases (2) DENV infection of MΦs and cDCs that reside in the dermis. In addition, (3) SGE boosts monocyte recruitment to the dermis and draining LNs, differentiation to moDCs, and migration of DCs (MigDCs) from the skin to LNs. During systemic pathogenesis (4), only the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies leads to severe disease.Materials and MethodsEthics statementMice were bred and maintained in the University of California Berkeley Animal Facility, and experiments were performed strictly following guidelines of the American Veterinary Medical Association and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The University of California Berkeley’s Animal Care and Use Committee pre-approved all experiments (protocol AUP-2014-08-6638). Trained laboratory personnel performed anesthesia of mice via isoflurane inhalation and euthanasia of mice using exposure to CO2 followed by cervical dislocation.MiceWild-type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. C57BL/6 mice deficient in the IFN-α/β receptor-1 (Ifnar1
tm1Agt, here termed Ifnar
–/–) were provided by Dr. Daniel Portnoy (University of California, Berkeley, CA) [82]. After DENV inoculation, mice were monitored following the standardized cumulative morbidity scale from 1 (healthy) to 5 (moribund) [28,31]: 1, healthy; 2, mild signs of lethargy; 3, fur ruffling, hunched posture; 4, increased lethargy, limited mobility; 5, moribund with minimal mobility and inability to reach food or water. Moribund mice were euthanized immediately, assigned a score of 5, and excluded from the mean morbidity calculations on subsequent days.Dengue virusTo mimic DENV transmission from an infected mosquito to the mammalian host, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice intradermally (i.d.) with DENV produced in C6/36 mosquito cells. We used the DENV2 strain D220, which was derived via 20 passages of the Taiwanese clinical isolate PL046 between C6/36 cells and serum of 129/Sv mice deficient in IFN-α/β and -γ receptors, acquiring defined mutations that increased its virulence in mice [29,31]. D220 stocks (hereafter termed DENV) were propagated in C6/36 cells (obtained from Dr. Paul Young, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia) at 28°C in M199 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and GlutaMax (all from LifeTechnologies). T175 flasks containing 80% confluent C6/36 cells were infected with DENV at a multiplicity of infection of 0.05–0.1 in serum-free medium for 2 h and then supplemented with 2% FBS. Supernatants were harvested between days 5 and 8 post-infection and concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units with a 100 kDa molecular weight cut-off (Millipore) before storage at -80°C. DENV titers were determined via plaque assay using BHK-21 clone 15 cells, which were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in α-MEM medium with 5% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and GlutaMax. BHK-21 cells in 12-well plates (Becton Dickinson) at 60% confluence were infected with 150 μl DENV in 10-fold serial dilutions for 2 h before overlaying with 10% low-melting agarose (Cambrex) in fully supplemented α-MEM medium. BHK-21 cells were fixed 7 days later using 10% buffered formalin phosphate (Fisher Scientific) and stained with 2.5% crystal violet in 30% ethanol. DENV titers were calculated as plaque forming units (PFU)/ml.Mosquito salivary gland extractSalivary gland extracts (SGE) were obtained from non-infected wild-caught Nicaraguan (DENV infections in vivo) or colonized Panamanian female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (vascular permeability assays in vitro and in vivo). Mosquitoes were immobilized with CO2, dipped into 70% ethanol, and placed on glass slides in sterile PBS. The mosquito head was pulled away from the body, and the exposed salivary glands were dissected from the head or thorax under aseptic conditions and placed into fresh PBS (2 salivary glands/10 μl). Salivary gland membranes were disrupted via sonication in ice water at 100 mV for 3 bursts of 20 sec with 1 min of cooling time between bursts. Extracts were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and SGE was collected as supernatant. The protein concentration of the SGE stocks was 0.37–0.60 μg/ml, as estimated via NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific). SGE stocks had a neutral pH of 7.0 and were free of endotoxin or contained very low levels that were well below the FDA-approved limit for injection solutions of (<5 endotoxin units per kg per hour) as tested using the endpoint chromogenic Limulus Amebocyte Lysate kit (Lonza).Intradermal inoculationEars of anesthetized Ifnar
–/–mice were immobilized using cover slip forceps. A sterilized needle (30-gauge, 25-mm length, and 10°-12° bevel) used with a 25-μl reusable glass microinjection syringe (Hamilton) was inserted ~3 mm into the ventral side of the ear skin at a flat angle with the bevel pointing up, and DENV diluted in 20 μl PBS was slowly inoculated. To model the presence of mosquito-derived factors, we co-injected DENV mixed with the equivalent of 1 salivary gland from Nicaraguan mosquitoes in 20 μl PBS. Control ears were left untouched or were inoculated with SGE diluted in PBS or PBS alone. Naïve mice served to model 1° infections, whereas ADE conditions consisted of inoculation with a subneutralizing dose of 5 μg anti-DENV protein E monoclonal antibody 4G2 (ATCC) intraperitoneally in 200 μl PBS 24 h prior to DENV infection. In certain experiments, mice were anesthetized once again 4 h after i.d. DENV infection, and the inoculated site of the ear skin or an equivalent piece from the non-inoculated ear was surgically removed using sterile scissors. Bleeding was stopped immediately by applying pressure via sterile gauze, and mice were monitored closely for any direct adverse effects of the procedure. Only occasional scratching for less than 2 h was observed.Flow cytometric analysisOrgans of euthanized mice were collected on ice. Ears were incubated for 5 min at room temperature with hair removal cream (Nair), washed in PBS, and split into dorsal and ventral halves using tweezers (TDI). Skin samples were digested floating with the epidermal side up for 90 min with 2 U/ml Dispase II in HBSS without Ca2+/Mg2+ (LifeTech) in 5% CO2 at 37°C. The epidermis was then separated as one sheet from the dermis and each was placed into a tube containing RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS. Using scissors, the epidermal and dermal layers were cut into pieces of 1–2 mm size, PBS containing a final concentration of 1.6 mg/ml collagenase type-1 (LifeTech) and 10 U/ml DNase 1 (Roche) was added, and digestion of the epidermis dermis was allowed to proceed for 45 min and 80 min, respectively, at 37°C while shaking at 220 rotations per min. Homogeneous cell suspensions were generated via pipetting and filtering through 100 μm nylon meshes. Cervical LNs or spleens were crushed in medium under nylon meshes and digested in a final concentration of 1 mg/ml collagenase type-1 and 10 U/ml DNase 1 for 30 min at 37°C and 5% CO2 before generating single cell suspensions via pipetting. Spleen samples were treated with Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (eBioscience). Total numbers of live cells in LNs were determined via manual count and trypan blue exclusion.Cells were stained with Zombie Aqua (BioLegend) in PBS to exclude dead cells. Cell surface markers were then stained in PBS without Ca2+/Mg2+ with 2% FBS and 2 mM EDTA (LifeTech) using the following monoclonal antibodies (from BioLegend or BD Pharmingen) to identify cell types: CD3 (17A2), CD4 (GK1.4), CD8 (53–67), CD11c (N418), CD11b (M1/70), CD44 (IM7), CD45 (30-F11), CD62L (MEL-14), CD103 (2E7), F4/80 (BM-8), Ly6C (AL21), Ly6G (1A8), MHCII (I-A/I-E, M5/114.15.2), CCR7 (4B12) or isotype control (RTK2758), and FcγR (2.4G2) or isotype control (A-95-1). The monoclonal antibodies were conjugated to PacificBlue, Brilliant Violet 605, PE, PE-CF594, PE-Cy7, Alexa Fluor 700, APC-Cy7, or biotin. Cells stained with biotinylated antibodies were visualized using PE-Cy7- or Brilliant Violet 605-conjugated streptavidin (BioLegend). Cells were fixed with 2% formaldehyde (Ted Pella) for 10 min at room temperature, and membranes were permeabilized with 0.1% saponin (Sigma) in PBS containing 2% FBS, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% normal mouse serum to block remaining fixative. To identify DENV-infected cells, cells were stained intracellularly with monoclonal antibodies directed against DENV non-structural protein NS3 (clone E1D8, [14]) and structural protein E (clone 4G2, ATCC) that were conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 647, respectively, using protein-labeling kits (LifeTech). Intracellular staining for mannose receptor (C068C2) or isotype control (RTK2758) further dissected cell populations. Spleen cells were harvested 5.5 days post-i.d. DENV inoculation and were stained intracellularly for Ki-67 (SolA15) or isotype control (kit, eBiosciences) or after in vitro restimulation for 4 hours in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS, 20 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (Sigma), and 1 μM ionomycin (Sigma), with 5 μg/ml brefeldin A (eBiosciences) added during the final 2 hours were stained for IFN-γ (XMG1.2) or isotype control (RTK2071). Data were recorded using an LSR Fortessa cell analyzer (BD Biosciences) with 405, 488, 561, and 632 nm laser excitation lines and data analyzed using FlowJo 8.8.7 software (TreeStar). Gating FSC-A/SSC-A, SSC-H/SSC-W, FSC-H/FSC-W, and Zombie Aqua negative defined single, live-cell populations. The total number of cells in the dermis was determined via flow cytometer, while acquiring all cells for each sample and calculating total acquired cell counts.Quantification of DENV genomesTo determine DENV titers, a piece of less than 20 mg of tissue stored in RNAlater (Ambion) was homogenized for 1 min with 1-mm zirconia-silica beads using a Mini-Beadbeater-8 (BiospecProducts), and RNA was extracted after centrifugation using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA was extracted from 20 μl serum stored at -80°C using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA samples were eluted in a total volume of 50 μl, and 2 μl was used per qRT-PCR reaction in duplicate. DENV2 NS5 primer and probe sequences were as follows [83]: forward primer 5’-ACA AGT CGA ACA ACC TGG TCC AT, probe 5’-Fam TGG GAT TTC CTC CCA TGA TTC CAC TGG Tamra-Q, reverse primer 5’-GCC GCA CCA TTG GTC TTC TC (synthesized by Eurofins WMG Operon). DENV RNA and Gapdh mRNA (TaqMan Rodent Gapdh Control Reagents, ThermoFisher) were amplified in separate reactions using Verso one-step qRT-PCR Kits (ThermoFisher). A 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) was set to the following thermal cycler profile: reverse transcription at 50°C for 30 min, hot start at 95°C for 12.5 min, and for amplification and data acquisition, 40 PCR cycles consisting of denaturation at 95°C for 15 sec and annealing/extension at 60°C for 1 min.Endothelial permeabilityTrans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) was used to measure endothelial permeability of confluent single-cell monolayers of human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) in Transwell Permeable Supports (Corning) using a voltohmmeter (World Precision Instruments) after adding 0.2, 0.5, 1 or 2 salivary gland equivalents to 300 μl medium in the apical or 500 μl in the basolateral compartment of the transwell insert. Adding 10 ng/ml of TNFα (R&D Systems) to HMEC-1 cells served as a positive control for increased endothelial permeability. After 24 h, 50% of the medium in the upper and lower chambers was replaced with fresh medium. Relative TEER was calculated as percent resistance in Ohms of the experimental condition divided by non-treated cells. To measure vascular permeability in vivo, wild-type mice were inoculated intravenously with 200 μg Dextran (10 kDa molecular weight) labeled with Alexa Fluor 680. After circulating for 5 min, one salivary gland equivalent from Panamanian mosquitoes was inoculated i.d. into mouse ears in 15 μl PBS. Control ears were inoculated with PBS alone or were left untouched. Mice were euthanized 30 min after i.d. inoculation, and ears were scanned using the Odyssey CLx Infrared Imaging System (Licor) to quantify fluorescence of a 3300 pixel size area. Fluorescence values of steady-state control ears were subtracted from values of ears inoculated with SGE or PBS.Statistical analysisNumerical data were tested for statistically significant differences between experimental groups using unpaired parametric t-tests for flow cytometry data and DENV tissue viral load. A paired t-test was used to test for statistically significant differences between the fluorescence of the two ears of one animal injected with either PBS or SGE. Unpaired Mann-Whitney tests were used for non-parametric data, such as morbidity. Survival data were tested for statistically significant differences using the Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Experimental groups were considered significantly different at p<0.05 and are marked on graphs as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001, or non-significant (n.s.). Data were plotted and statistically analyzed using Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad).Data availabilityData deposited in the Dryad repository: http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.4rd14 [84].Supporting InformationS1 FigRelated to Fig 1, SGE does not augment dengue pathogenesis after inoculation with 106 PFU but augments pathogenesis after inoculation with 105 PFU DENV in mice that were pre-exposed to SGE.(A-C) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 106 PFU DENV in the absence (A) or presence (B) of enhancing antibodies. DENV was inoculated alone (as in [28]) or after mixing with Ae. aegypti SGE. (A-B) Bar graphs show mean morbidity ± SEM of mice on a scale from 1 = healthy to 5 = moribund. Statistically significant differences in morbidity between the presence and absence of SGE are marked on graphs as ** for p<0.01 and *** for p<0.001 or not significant (n.s.). The presence of enhancing antibodies significantly increased disease severity in the absence (day 4, p<0.01; days 5 and 6, p<0.001; day 7, p<0.01) and presence of SGE (day 3, p<0.01; days 4, 5, and 6, p<0.001). (C) Kaplan-Meier curves showing survival of mice. No significant differences in survival existed in the presence or absence of SGE. Significant differences in survival between the presence or absence of enhancing antibodies are marked as **, p<0.01. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 8–9 mice per group. (D) Ifnar
–/–mice were pre-exposed i.d. three times with SGE or PBS at intervals of at least two weeks or were left untreated. Two weeks after the last injection, mice were infected i.d. in the presence of enhancing antibodies with 105 PFU DENV mixed with SGE. SGE-naïve controls received DENV alone or DENV mixed with SGE as in Fig 1C. The Kaplan-Meier curves show survival of mice. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.1.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigRelated to Fig 2, gating and phenotype of immune cells in the dermis.
Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (A) Contour plots showing live CD45+ hematopoietic cells in the dermis analyzed via flow cytometry in steady state or 14 h after inoculation. Starting at the second row from the top, CD11b+ cDCs were consecutively gated as MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C-, moDCs as MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C+, dermal Langerhans cells and CD103+ cDCs together as MHCII+ Langerin+, neutrophils as MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G+, monocytes as MHCII-Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6G- Ly6Chi, and MΦs as MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G- Ly6Clow/–SSCint-hi. (B) Histogram overlays of surface stains (filled blue) for Fcγ receptors (CD16/32) or mannose receptor (CD206) or isotype controls (dashed black line) of cell populations gated as in (A) and lymphocytes gated as MHCII-CD11b- Ly6G- FSClow SSClow in the dermis of Ifnar
–/–mice that were infected with DENV in the presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigRelated to Fig 3, frequency of cell populations in the dermis.(A-C) Bar graphs summarizing mean ± SEM percentage of neutrophils (A), monocytes (B), or moDCs (C) of CD45+ cells in the dermis of mice in steady state or 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU DENV in the presence or absence of SGE under 1° or ADE conditions. Populations were gated as in S2 Fig. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences between groups are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 FigRelated to Fig 4, frequency of MigDCs, neutrophils, and monocytes as well as number of classical DCs in LNs.Mice were inoculated i.d. with PBS or 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE, and skin-draining LNs were analyzed via flow cytometry after 14 h. (A) Histogram overlays of surface stains (filled blue) for chemokine receptor CCR7 or Fcγ receptors (CD16/32) or isotype controls (dashed black line) of cell populations in LNs, gated as in Fig 4. In addition, MHCII-lymphocytes that consisted mostly of T cells were gated as Ly6G- CD11c- CD11b- F4/80- MHCII-. (B-D) Bar graphs summarizing the percentage of MigDCs (B), neutrophils (C) or monocytes (D) of CD45+ cells in LNs. (E) Bar graph summarizing the number of cDCs in LNs. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigRelated to Fig 4, T cell activation after i.d. DENV infection.Mice were left untreated or were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. Skin-draining LNs (A-B) or spleens (C-H) were analyzed via flow cytometry after 5.5 days. (A and C) Contour plots showing CD44 and CD62L expression of CD8+ CD3+ T cells. (B and D) Bar graphs summarizing percent CD44+ CD62L+ stimulated CD8+ or CD4+ CD3+ T cells in LNs (B) or spleen (D). (E) Contour plots showing CD44 expression and intracellular staining for Ki-67 of CD8+ T cells in the spleen. (F) Bar graphs summarizing percent Ki-67+ proliferating CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. (G) Contour plots showing CD8 expression and intracellular staining for IFN-γ of CD8+ T cells in the spleen after 4 h of in vitro restimulation. (H) Bar graphs summarizing percent IFN-γ expressing CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S6 FigRelated to Fig 5, SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function when added to the basolateral or apical side of HMEC-1 monolayers.TEER of HMEC-1 monolayers grown in Transwell chambers was measured after adding the equivalent of 1 or 2 salivary glands or TNFα to basolateral (A-B) or apical compartments (C-D). TNFα was added as positive control for inducing endothelial permeability. (A and C) Graphs showing percent TEER relative to untreated control cells over time. (B and D) Bar graphs depicting percent TEER after 13 h of stimulation. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 12 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Progress towards understanding the pathogenesis of dengue
hemorrhagic fever

No full text body available.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: WEST NILE VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Transovarial transmission of mosquito-borne viruses: a systematic review

IntroductionMosquito-borne viruses (MBVs), including dengue (DENV), zika (ZIKV), and chikungunya (CHIKV), are a subset of arboviruses or arthropod-borne viruses that pose a significant risk to both animal and human health due to their worldwide spread (Tingström et al., 2016). MBVs, or moboviruses, have emerged and reemerged as a result of the increased global population growth, urbanization, expanding varieties of mosquito vectors, and easy access to global travel (Peinado et al., 2022). These viruses fall into five genera: Flavivirus which includes the dengue, zika, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile viruses (Flaviviridae family), Alphavirus which includes chikungunya (Togaviridae family), Orthobunyavirus, Phlebovirus (Bunyaviridae family), and Seadornavirus (Reoviridae family) (Cheng et al., 2016). Due to a lack of therapeutics or effective vaccines, mosquito-borne viral diseases remain a serious global health threat. Mosquito vectors tend to be anthropophilic and are the primary carriers of a number of viruses, including DENV, ZIKV, CHIKV, and yellow fever (Lole et al., 2022). The yellow fever mosquito (Aedes aegypti) and the Asian tiger mosquito (Ae. albopictus) are the two main vectors of these viruses. Both of the species are extremely invasive, and because of the trade and migration of humans, these are spreading throughout the world. Ae. albopictus has a wider geographic range than Ae. aegypti, which includes temperate, tropical, and subtropical habitats (Shragai et al., 2017). Aedes vectors, primarily Ae. aegypti, have drawn special attention due to their rapid spread globally (Lole et al., 2022).To maturate the fertilized eggs, mosquitoes suck human blood by biting and disseminating the virus between the human host and mosquito vector, parallel to this transmission, the virus can be transmitted directly from parents to their offspring (Yang, 2017). The transmission can therefore be of two types: Vertical Transmission (VT) and Horizontal Transmission (HT) (
Figure 1
). The VT, also known as hereditary transmission, is parental transmission from the female to its offspring, while HT is non-parental transmission, which is mostly preferred by pathogens and includes vector-borne and sexual transmission (Lequime et al., 2016). Blood-feeding invertebrate vectors mainly spread horizontally among the vertebrate host, but they can also do so vertically in the mosquito vector. When the environmental conditions are adverse for HT, VT is thought to be the alternative means for the recurrence of viruses, but its epidemiological importance remains uncertain (Lequime and Lambrechts, 2014). Both in combination are called mixed-mode transmission and is widespread among different taxa of parasites and hosts, including viruses, eukaryotes, and prokaryotes. The use of insecticide spray, the cold and dry seasons in temporal regions and tropics, respectively, can significantly limit vector density and thus, the possibilities for HT. VT provides a crucial link in the transmission cycle when the susceptible host’s density is minimal (Lequime et al., 2016). A thorough scientific study on VT is required to understand the ecology and evolution of these viruses, as epidemiology and infection control mostly depend on the route of transmission. It is possible that the frequent outbreaks of these MBVs may be due to their remarkable capacity for VT and their survival for longer periods of time. The number of females that transmit these viruses to their offspring vertically is the rate of VT, depending on a variety of determining factors, such as virus strain, mosquito species, gonotrophic cycle, blood meal, and climate, of which temperature has a significant impact, that is, the lower the temperature, the higher the infection rate. Mosquito age also affects the rate of VT in that older mosquitoes have a reduced capacity to transmit viruses (Kaavya et al., 2022). Larvae are more susceptible to infection than adult mosquitoes and this is because adult mosquitoes develop a peritrophic matrix immediately after blood feeding; therefore, viruses can cause infection only while mosquitoes are in larvae form. They typically directly infect the midgut, which increases the risk of infection (Lutomiah et al., 2007).Figure 1Different modes of transmission of mosquito-borne viruses.Transovarial Transmission (TOT) and Trans-egg Transmission (TET) are the two ways of VT through which these viruses spread. In TOT, the female germinal tissues are infected by the virus, including the oocytes, during the development stage, that is, before the fertilization of the eggs (as shown in 
Figure 2
). Trans-ovum, or TET, occurs during fertilization or during oviposition, when the egg surface is contaminated by the virus, or it could be said that the virus adheres to the surface of the egg (Sánchez-Vargas et al., 2018; Kirstein et al., 2022). It is possible that these two transmission mechanisms coexist in Aedes vectors at the same time (Lai et al., 2020). TOT is a type of VT in which the infected female mosquitoes pass on the virus to their progenies via ovaries when their eggs are laid. When environmental conditions are not favorable for mosquito development, such as during winter and dry seasons in temperate and tropical areas, TOT is believed to be the crucial mechanism for the persistence of the virus (Heath et al., 2020). Therefore, vertical transmission is the strategy for MBV survival in nature during adverse climatic conditions (Thangamani et al., 2016). It takes time for viruses to enter the bloodmeal and to integrate into the ovaries; therefore, transmission occurs only after several weeks gonotrophic cycles (Agarwal et al., 2014). Numerous studies demonstrate that after infection, the virus spreads through the hemolymph to the hemocoel and secondary tissues, including the ovaries, and for the virus to persist in the ovaries, it must endure stressful circumstances during the development of the host mosquito, that is, when it is in the larval instar, pupal, and adult stages (Agarwal et al., 2014; Kaavya et al., 2022). Not all MBVs prefer TOT; Flaviviruses, for example, favor both TOT and TET. TOT is significantly more advantageous and promising than TET and also provides more chances of viral infection in the subsequent generation (Kaavya et al., 2022). To evaluate whether TOT has taken place or not, immunocytochemical methods can be used (Kurnia et al., 2022). Numerous studies have been conducted on TOT in Aedes, with a particular emphasis on dengue and chikungunya viruses (Li et al., 2017). Cytoplasmic inheritance, which has been best understood through research on cell organelles such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, and intracellular organisms, is the primary mechanism for transovarial transmission. These cytoplasmic factors are transferred to the daughter cells in a specific sequence at the time of meiosis, and the intracellular symbionts are also successfully transmitted through this mechanism. The mechanism of TOT in mosquitos, however, is less understood (Smith and Dunn, 1991). The virus must infect mosquito germline in order for transmission to be successful. The molecular interaction begins with the attachment of virus particle to its target via receptor i.e. binding of viral surface molecule to cellular receptor of mosquito. The interaction between virus and its receptor is highly specific and, yet a virus family may share a common receptor. For the entry of virus into the target cell, lipid bilayer of cell membrane fuses with the enveloped virus and receptor-mediated endocytosis takes place for non-enveloped viruses and from there the viral genome enters into the cell cytoplasm for further transmission (Dimmock et al., 2015). Figure 2Pathway of transovarial transmission.Data sources and search strategyWe used the PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases to search for the publications discussed in this systematic review, and also the references included in relevant articles. The information about mosquito-borne viruses, diseases and their symptoms, outbreaks, and cases was gathered from the websites such as World Health Organization (WHO) (https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/chikungunya-monthly, 2023).The full-text versions of some papers were not available on PubMed, and so these were obtained from ResearchGate and through requests sent to the corresponding authors via email. The search terms “transovarial transmission”, “transmission”, “mosquito-borne viruses”, “dengue”, and “mosquito immunity” were used in different combinations when searching for publications to be discussed in this study. For each research and review article the title and abstract were scrutinized separately. The full text of only the articles with titles and abstracts that matched our topic was read. The study includes the reviews and research publications that were relevant to the subject. The most recent literature search was completed on 20 September 2023. We included only those articles in our study that describe the vertical transmission and transovarial transmission of DENV, ZIKV, and CHIKV; the articles describing horizontal transmission and viruses other than these were excluded. The references used were taken mainly from the papers published after the year 2000, with the exception of a few.ResultsA total of 2,391 articles were found through the manual and electronic searches, and after eliminating duplicates and evaluating the titles and abstracts, 123 studies were selected for full-text review. After further screening, 60 articles were included in this systematic review (
Figure 3
).Figure 3A flow diagram of the literature search.Zika virusZIKV, belong to the Flavivirdae family, contains single-stranded and positive-sense RNA and causes zika disease (Dahiya et al., 2022). Ae. aegypti is the primary vector for this disease. ZIKV has two cycles: the first is the sylvatic cycle (occurring between non-human primates and wild-type mosquitoes) and the second is the urban cycle (occurring between local mosquitoes and humans). Headache, fever, joint pain, meningoencephalitis, myelitis, myalgia, maculopapular rash, and microcephaly are the major symptoms of ZIKV. (Dahiya et al., 2023; Aliota et al., 2016a). As reported by Kendra et al., following ZIKV infection, the virus multiplies and penetrates the placental barrier during pregnancy. ZIKV causes fetal microcephaly through vertical transmission (Quicke et al., 2016),. ZIKV is well known throughout the world due to the fatal neurological disorders it can cause, including Guillain–Barré syndrome (Lai et al., 2020). Although 80% of patients are asymptomatic, only a small proportion show clinical symptoms (Blagrove et al., 2020). It has been confirmed experimentally that Ae. aegypti is a highly efficient and competent vector of ZIKV. However, there is evidence that different species of mosquito have different competencies as vectors of this virus. The first strain (MR766) of zika virus was isolated from rhesus macaque monkey from the zika forest of Uganda in 1947, and in 1950 the first human infection by zika was reported in Africa (Ezzati-Tabrizi et al., 2013). Throughout Asia and Africa, cases of zika were frequently detected from 1960 to 1980, and from February 2016 to November 2016, zika-related microcephaly was declared a public health emergency of international concern by the WHO (WHO, 2022a). In India, the zika virus was first reported in 2017, and reemerged in 2021. As of December 2022, zika virus has been reported in 89 countries and territories (WHO, 2022a). Studies have confirmed that ZIKV can be transmitted by Ae. albopictus and Ae. aegypti via eggs, that is, through TOT (Li et al., 2017). An immunohistochemistry (IHC) study provides the first indication of ZIKV location, demonstrating that TOT is more effective than TET. The germarium gets infected when ZIKV reaches the ovary and a new follicle emerges from the infected germarium and grows to maturity in each consecutive gonotrophic cycle, which causes the virus to replicate within the developing embryo and be vertically transmitted. A severe infection of ZIKV has no pathological effect on the ovaries, oviposition, or ovarian development, but has a deleterious impact on oogenesis, which means it reduces the number of eggs formed in the ovaries (Lai et al., 2020).Dengue virusDengue viruses are positive-sense, ssRNA Flaviviruses ~11 kb in length that belong to the family Flaviviridae (Joshi et al., 2002). Female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes are the main dengue-transmitting vectors, and the disease is caused by four antigenically diverse serotypes (DENV-1-DENV-4) (Guedes et al., 2010) that share a common epidemiology and a comparable pattern of disease in humans (Gubler, 2002). Dengue viruses are globally endemic and spread in tropical and subtropical regions (Gubler, 2002). The patient may or may not show symptoms; in the case of symptomatic dengue, severe fever (up to 104°C), headache, nausea, rash, pain, aches, and leucopenia can be seen. It is very likely that the persistence of the dengue virus is owing to cases of asymptomatic illness and travel by humans (Grunnill and Boots, 2016). The first ever dengue transmission was reported in Afghanistan, but local transmission was first seen in France and Croatia in 2010. Currently, the disease is endemic in approximately 100 countries in the WHO region of almost every continent. Asia accounts for ~70% of the global disease burden, and according to an estimate, an average of 390 million dengue cases have been reported globally every year, with the largest number of cases reported in 2019. Dengue continues to affect Brazil, Colombia, Cook Islands, Fiji, India, Kenya, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Réunion, and Vietnam as of 2021 (WHO, 2022a). In 1983, Rosen et al. demonstrated the TOT in all four dengue virus serotypes in Ae. albopictus vectors and found that the rate of transmission in all serotypes was different, with DENV-1 generally having the highest rate, and DENV-3 having the lowest rate (Rosen et al., 1983). Ae. albopictus has a higher transmission rate for DENV than has Ae. aegypti (Lequime et al., 2016). According to a study, it has been shown that dengue virus can be orally spread by transovarially infected female mosquitoes. Their study also revealed that after the incubation of several, when eggs are obtained from infected mosquitoes, the rate of vertical transmission increases (Joshi et al., 2002). The detection of DENV in field-collected mosquito larvae and adult male mosquitoes indicates that males may contribute to the persistence of DENV in nature (Sánchez-Vargas et al., 2018). The cause of DENV outbreaks is the TOT because of the endurance of the virus between the period of epidemics (Saepudin et al., 2022). Kurnia et al. have demonstrated the TOT in Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus (Kurnia et al., 2022). A relatively lower rate of TOT has been found in Ae. aegypti (Yang, 2017). It has been proposed that TOT may have a potential impact on the epidemiology of dengue, and it is considered a key mechanism for the persistency of the virus in the vector during inter-epidemics. Studies have revealed that both climatic variables, such as temperature, humidity, and rainfall, and non-climatic variables, such as herd immunity, have an influence on the dynamics of DENV transmission, and that climatic factors are the key predictor of dengue outbreaks (Thongrungkiat et al., 2011).ChikungunyaCHIKV is an Alphavirus that belongs to the Togaviridiae family and causes chikungunya, a mosquito-borne infectious disease. Its viral genome consists of approximately 11.8 kb long, linear, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA molecules. The illness is transmitted through the bite of infected Aedes mosquitoes (Sudeep and Parashar, 2008). Approximately 85% of patients exhibit symptoms such as high fever, acute joint pain, severe arthralagia, rash, headache, and photophobia, and 30%–40% of infected individuals experience chronic joint illness that can last for weeks, months, or years after the initial infection (Shragai et al., 2017). The first CHIKV epidemics was originally recorded between 1952 and 1953 in Tanzania. The first instance in Asia occurred in Bangkok in 1958. In India the first case was found in Kolkata in 1963, and CHIKV reappeared in 2005 (Sudeep and Parashar, 2008). It has now been reported in approximately 110 countries all over the world (WHO, 2022b). According to a recent report by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), as of 23 August 2023, 3,20,000 cases and 340 deaths were reported worldwide, with the largest number of (2,09,489) cases reported in Brazil and the largest number of deaths (271) reported in Paraguay (ECDC, 2023). According to Mourya’s 1987 report, there is no evidence of the TOT of CHIKV by Ae. albopictus. Zytoon tested the possibility of TOT using CHIKV (African strain), Ae. albopictus (Miki strain), and microfilariae to evaluate the feasibility of the TOT of the virus and their findings showed that Ae. albopictus has a limited ability to spread CHIKV through TOT (Zytoon et al., 1993). The large number of CHIKV outbreaks in Réunion throughout 2005, in the Kerala state of India and in Italy in 2007, in the Guangdong province of China in 2010, and in France between 2010 and 2014 is due to the mutation of the CHIKV envelope protein E1 (E1-A226V), a mutant virus strain that can spread throughout mosquito populations via TOT because male offspring can pass the virus through mating to females that are uninfected (Wang et al., 2022). The mechanism that causes CHIKV to be more prevalent during unfavorable times, particularly in the winter, however, is unknown (Agarwal et al., 2014).Factors affecting transmissionThe importance of the interaction between the vector and virus for effective TOT has been demonstrated by numerous studies, which tend to suggest that TOT is the consequence of convergent evolution and that environmental ecology puts immense stress on viruses to evolve to facilitate TOT (Bergren and Kading, 2018). The central approach for managing arbovirus disease is vector control measures, hence there is a need to understand how arboviruses infect competent mosquito vectors and develop disease, various factors that affect the viral transmission in the mosquito vector and probable mechanism to escape antiviral barriers. There are two types of factors affecting viral transmission namely intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Intrinsic factors include those affecting the transmission process from within the body, such as midgut escape barrier (MEB), midgut infection barrier (MIB), salivary gland infection barrier (SGIB), salivary gland escape barrier (SGEB) (Franz et al., 2015). Extrinsic factors include temperature, humidity, rainfall etc. Mosquitoes are poikilotherms and their body temperature fluctuates significantly with fluctuation in the surrounding environment and the biological traits of mosquitoes, such as their fecundity and survival rate, in addition to their interactions with mosquito-borne viruses, are greatly influenced by temperature (Shragai et al., 2017; Jian et al., 2023). When the external temperature is low, the virus may not have sufficient time to replicate, penetrate the salivary gland, and become pathogenic within the vector’s lifespan, which indicates that an appropriate threshold temperature is critical for TOT (Blagrove et al., 2020). Carrington reported that there is a positive correlation between temperature and fertility in Ae. albopictus, that is, the number of eggs and the transmission rate increase as the temperature rises (Carrington et al., 2013). Limited virus invasion and lower infection rate are caused by a low temperature, which lessens the virus’s capacity to penetrate the mosquito midgut barrier (Jian et al., 2023). These viruses persist throughout the year, while the highest peaks for infections caused by mosquito populations tend to correspond with periods of higher rainfall and humidity conditions (Heath et al., 2020). It is commonly seen that in densely populated areas, the rate of virus transmission is usually higher than in areas with fewer human inhabitants. In addition, the nutrition obtained by the viruses can be a determining factor for their successful transmission (Kramer and Ciota, 2015).Mosquito antiviral defense mechanismIn the last 10 years, comprehensive genome sequencing and annotation have greatly contributed to the rapid advancement of our understanding of the mosquito immune system (Cheng et al., 2016). After a mosquito ingests the virus-infected blood meal from an infected host, the virus enters its midgut epithelium and then travels to the hemocoel and then to secondary organs, including the salivary gland (Franz et al., 2015). For the virus to be transmitted to its subsequent host, it needs to travel to the salivary gland (Chauhan et al., 2012). Mosquitoes have only innate immune system as their defense machinery, which is activated by viral infection, causing the antiviral response-related gene to be transcribed (Lee et al., 2019). The immune system of mosquitoes has two correlated responses: cellular and humoral defense responses. These two act together to defend the mosquito from a wide range of pathogens (Satyavathi et al., 2014). Various pathways for the mosquito immune system are schematically shown in 
Figure 4
.Figure 4Flow chart showing various mechanisms of the mosquito innate immune system.RNA interference pathwayRNA interference (RNAi) is the central antiviral mechanism in insects, particularly in controlling virus infection through the degradation of RNA, also known as RNA silencing (Lee et al., 2019). The major event of this pathway is the degradation of long viral double-stranded RNA into small RNAs. The small RNAs are of three types (i) small interfering RNA (siRNA), (ii) microRNA (miRNA), and (iii) PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) (Cheng et al., 2016). When the mosquito genome replicates, it produces an intermediate double-stranded RNA, which binds to the Dicer-2-R2D2 complex. This complex comprises a RNase III enzyme (Dicer-2) and a protein attached to it (R2D2); Dicer-2 cleaves the dsRNA and produces siRNA (21–23 nucleotides). Subsequently, siRNA further binds to the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), and one of the strands of dsRNA is degraded. The RNA then becomes single stranded and act as a guide strand for the detection and degradation of the viral RNA with the help of argonaute-2 in a specific sequence. (Donald et al., 2012). If the RNAi pathway is impaired or silenced, the viral replication and dissemination during DENV-2 infection increases, indicating its significance as an antiviral defense mechanism (Lee et al., 2019). By silencing the genes linked to fertility, behavior pattern, survival, and vector status in mosquitoes, RNAi offered fresh insights into fundamental research that may be used to lessen the burden of diseases spread to humans by mosquitoes (Yadav et al., 2023).JAK-STAT pathwayThe mosquito has cytokine receptor Domeless (Dome) and tyrosine kinase Hopscotch (Hop), these act together and activate the JAK-STAT pathway (Souza-Neto et al., 2009). In this pathway, the ligand binds to the dome and a conformational shift occurs, which leads to the self-phosphorylation of Hop (JAK). The activated Hop then phosphorylates the Dome with the formation of a docking site for cytosolic STAT. STAT then binds to the Dome–Hop complex, which undergoes phosphorylation. The phosphorylated STAT first dimerizes and then moves to the nucleus; this activates the transcription of specific effector genes with antiviral immune roles (Souza-Neto et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2019). Activating JAK-STAT pathway, before or just after the DENV infection could severely limit viral replication, possibly to the point where DENV transmission would be negatively impacted. Functional and reverse genetic studies show that JAK-STAT pathway enhances resistance to DENV serotypes (DENV2 and DENV4) in Ae. aegypti but, when it came to two other significant arboviral diseases, chikungunya and zika, the pathway activation did not give resistance. Functional and reverse genetic studies show that the JAK-STAT pathway enhances resistance to DENV and ZIKV in Ae. aegypti (Angleró-Rodríguez et al., 2017). Most studies on the JAK-STAT pathway in mosquito immunity have focused on dengue infection, but pathway activation in response to other viruses and the downstream process may vary for each virus. The overexpression of Hop by transgenic bacteria in the gut was observed to reduce the severity of DENV infection instantly, but for ZIKV, the reduction in infection severity was seen on day 7, and for CHIKV, this pathway was not at all effective (Jupatanakul et al., 2017).DELTA–NOTCH signaling pathwayThis pathway is important for stem cell maintenance, embryonic development, and adult tissue renewal, and it also reduces the replication of DENV in Ae. aegypti (Kopan and Ilagan, 2009). The signaling is initiated when the delta ligand binds to the notch transmembrane receptor and proteolysis occurs. After this, an active fragment called the notch intracellular domain, which activates the downstream signaling genes in the nucleus, is released (Lee et al., 2019). During DENV infection, the components of this pathway are upregulated in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (Serrato-Salas et al., 2018). The activation of this signaling system results in endoreplication, a process in which cells perform several rounds of DNA replication without mitosis to greatly increase the genomic DNA content of the cells. Endoreplication induction enhanced the number of gene transcripts involved in viral spread control (Serrato-Salas et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019).TOLL and IMD pathwayPathogens activate both the TOLL and IMD pathways by binding pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) to the host’s pattern recognition receptor (PRRs), resulting in a cascade of events that engage the immune AMP producing effector genes (Yu et al., 2020). The cytokine Spatzle (Spz), a ligand that binds to the Toll transmembrane receptor, is cleaved to begin the Toll pathway. Activated Toll initiates signaling via the Toll-associated adaptor proteins MyD88, Tube, and Pelle kinase. Cactus, the antagonist of the Toll pathway, is then phosphorylated and undergoes proteasomal degradation, which results in the movement of the transcription factor Relish 1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, binding to kB motifs on the promoters of several AMPs genes, including Diptericin and Cecropin, which are effective against fungi and Gram-positive bacteria (Lee et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020). When the IMD pathway is activated, Caspar, a negative regulator, is degraded. This causes Relish 2 (Rel2) to be translocated to the nucleus, where it triggers the transcription of AMPs (Xi et al., 2008). During the DENV infection of Ae. aegypti, the expression of the Toll pathway genes (GNBP, Toll5A, and MYD88) was elevated in the salivary gland. The silencing of MYD88 resulted in a modest rise in the severity of DENV infection in the intestine (Luplertlop et al., 2011).Cell-mediated immune responseHemocytes are cells that circulate inside the hemolymph and are susceptible to viral infections such as DENV, SINV, and WNV (Lee et al., 2019). The hemocyte-mediated immune response is rapid and includes pattern recognition; phagocytosis (haemocyte cells recognize the intruding pathogen, engulf, and destroy it intracellularly) (Lamprou et al., 2007); nodulation (a large number of microbes is entrapped by the accumulation of haemocytes) (Satyavathi et al., 2014); melanization (production of melanin for the encapsulation of invading pathogens); and the synthesis of antimicrobial peptides and initiation of signaling cascades for cytotoxic effectors to eradicate infection (Christensen et al., 2005).The fat body of an insect is an organ that acts similarly to adipocytes and liver in mammals. According to one recent study, the JAK-STAT pathway is activated in the fat body of Ae. aegypti during dengue virus infection, but this pattern was not observed for CHIKV and ZIKV. This means that different viruses have different responses to the JAK-STAT pathway (Jupatanakul et al., 2017). Although insect antiviral immune responses are triggered during viral infections, viruses are not entirely eradicated from the mosquitoes. Instead, a persistent infection develops in mosquitoes, making them effective carriers for viral illnesses at little to no cost to the host. However, little is known about how viruses persistently infect mosquitoes. Recent research has shown that virus-derived DNA (vDNA) produced during viral infection is crucial for mosquito survival and chronic infection (Poirier et al., 2018).The majority of viruses spread by mosquitoes are RNA viruses, and after infection, the host cell’s reverse transcriptase converts viral RNA, or truncated copies of the viral genome, known as defective viral genomes (DVGs), into vDNA, to stop viral replication. The vDNAs then activate the RNAi apparatus. When exposed to a cognate virus, vDNA is sufficient to create siRNAs that cause an antiviral response. In addition, suppressing vDNA production makes individuals incredibly vulnerable to viral infections (Poirier et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019).Control strategiesThe use of mosquito nets and insecticides to reduce human–vector interaction is among the vector control strategies that are largely used in preventing and treating the diseases spread by mosquitoes (Lee et al., 2019). In spite of these traditional methods, there is a need for new interventions to control the transmission of vector-borne diseases. The Vector Control Advisory Group (VCAG) assist the WHO in creating public health policy on new tools and techniques. Insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) that can kill or sterilize mosquitoes, such as the pyrethroid–piperonyl butoxide net and the pyrethroid–chlorfenapyr net, can be used, in addition to spatial repellents (volatile chemicals), and vector traps such as adulticidal oviposition traps that attract adult mosquitoes to lay their eggs in traps and larvicidal traps to kill their larvae (WHO VCAG). Larval control, specifically through the use of microbial and chemical larvicides, is the primary way of viral outbreak control due to mosquitos, particularly Ae. aegypti (Achee et al., 2019). The two innovative vector control methods currently in use are genetically modified and non-genetically modified. Genetic strategies targeting Aedes vector are the most advanced methods for the prevention of dengue and chikungunya transmission. Genetically modified strategies include the Release of insects carrying dominant lethal (RIDL) genes and gene drive system. In RIDL technology, dominantly inherited lethal gene is artificially inserted into the genome of mosquito, causing 97% death of heterozygous F1 progeny. CRISPR-Cas9 technology is used in the gene drive strategies in order to increase the frequency of desired traits in the succeeding generations (WHO VCAG). The genomes of various mosquito species such as An. stephensi, Ae. aegypti, Cx. quinquefasciatus, and Cx. pipiens have recently been modified using the effective technology of CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing (Lee et al., 2019). Nongenetically modified strategies include Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) and Wolbachia-centred biopesticide strategies. SIT has been effectively employed to control a variety of disease vectors for many years. In this technique, males of target species are previously sterilized by irradiation treatment and then released to fight with wild males for females to breed. This technique have the ability to decrease the wild population and possibly result in localized eradication if they are repeated over an extended period of time (Lee et al., 2019). With the aim of lowering the reproductive success of and viral capacity in the mosquito population, approaches such as releasing Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes and genetically engineered mosquitoes into native mosquito populations have been used over the past 10 years (Lee et al., 2019). Due to a lack of approved vaccines and efficient antiviral treatments, however, viruses have been persistently spreading. To combat this problem, the intracellular bacterium, Wolbachia, (inherited maternally and present in various insect species such as mosquitoes, ants, bees, butterflies, and beetles) can be introduced in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes for arbovirus control and prevention. In fact, Wolbachia biocontrol could be utilized against the four viruses discussed in this study, namely CHIKV, DENV, YFV, and now ZIKV; however, it has not been determined if ZIKV can infect, spread, and be transmitted by Wolbachia-infected Ae. aegypti (Aliota et al., 2016a). Wolbachia strains of fruit fly in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes can shorten the lifespan of mosquitoes, interfere with mosquito reproduction, and can affect the replication of viruses through invasion (Achee et al., 2019).Some strains of Wolbachia bacteria reduce the replication virus and mosquito lifespan concurrently (Aliota et al., 2016b). The strains wMel and wMelPop from Drosophila melanogaster and wAlbB from Ae. albopictus strains of Wolbachia have been used in Ae. aegypti; of these, wMel has the potential to reduce the vectorial capacity of Ae. aegypti for both DENV and CHIKV, and favorable results have also been found recently in ZIKV (Achee et al., 2019). New mosquito strategies may be made possible by understanding the typical viruses and gut microbes that invade reproductive organs and go through VT (Kaavya et al., 2022). The genomes of various mosquito species, such as Anopheles stephensi, Ae. aegypti, Culex quinquefasciatus, and Culex pipiens have recently been modified using the effective technology of gene editing based on CRISPR–Cas9 (Lee et al., 2019).ConclusionsMBVs represent a serious public health threat worldwide due to their global prevalence. They can be transmitted vertically in mosquito vectors via transovarial transmission, that is, through the ovaries, in order to survive in adverse conditions. Many studies have been conducted on TOT in Aedes with particular emphasis on DENV and CHIKV. The transmission gets established during the second gonotrophic cycle, and it eventually declines after further transmission. We studied the factors influencing the transmission including temperature, humidity, midgut and salivary gland escape and infection barriers. Mosquito have some antiviral cellular and humoral defense mechanisms through which it can protect itself from the viral infection. Along with the traditional insecticide treated nets and chemical methods of vector control, there is a need to extend this approach to new techniques of gentic and non-genetic modification of vectors for their management. The development of novel strategies to eradicate diseases spread by mosquitoes was made possible by the employment of gut bacteria particularly Wolbachia in paratransgenic approach. Although work is being done for these new strategies there is not sufficient eradication of diseases caused by these vectors. The current study enhances the understanding of transovarial transmission of Alphavirus and Flavivirus in Aedes vectors and also sheds light on the factors affecting transmission and vector control strategies. Additional research is needed to understand the molecular mechanism of TOT. In addition, if we are to learn more about viral prevalence and stability in challenging environmental circumstances, more research is required.Author contributionsSJ: Conceptualization, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. DK: Conceptualization, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. MY: Resources, Writing – review & editing. ND: Resources, Writing – review & editing. NS: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.


Title: Role of extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses that impact public health

BackgroundFlaviviruses are positive-sense RNA viruses that have emerged as pathogens and are transmitted by Aedes, Hemagogus, or Culex spp. mosquitoes; nonvector transmission methods involving sexual contact, from mother to child (in-utero or intrapartum), transfusion of blood components, organ transplantation, or body fluid exposure have been described [1, 2]. Infection cases present different clinical ranges from asymptomatic, mild self-limiting, or severe diseases characterized by hemorrhage, neuroinvasion, multiorgan compromise, or death [3, 4].Dengue virus (DENV), Zika virus (ZIKV), yellow fever virus (YFV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), and West Nile virus (WNV) represent the main mosquito-borne flaviviruses due to their continuing risk of infection in tropical and subtropical region inhabitants, constituting more than 50% of the world’s population. The rapid and efficient expansion of flaviviruses has occurred because of the high virulence of circulating strains, the presence of susceptible populations, and the wide distribution of vectors [5, 6]. As a result of the geographic distribution overlap, there is a possibility that the vectors can transmit more than one flavivirus at a time; thus, coinfection may directly impact the clinical outcome [7]. The viral cycle in mosquito vectors begins when the female acquires viruses during blood feeding. Viruses undergo replication and cross specialized epithelial barriers until they reach the salivary glands, where they are released into the saliva and transmitted to a new host during subsequent feeding; therefore, humans are inadvertent hosts [8, 9].Flaviviruses exhibit different human cellular tropisms, which explains why these diseases present diverse clinical syndromes, such as flu-like illness, acute neurological disorders, hemorrhagic fever, and metabolic wasting [9]. Molecular and cellular events in vector–virus–human host interactions are critical for disease outcomes. Infected cells lead to stress signaling, which induces cell differentiation or activation with the release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) [10]. EVs [exosomes (small EVs) and microparticles (medium/large EVs)] are nanoparticles from cellular membranes that mediate intercellular communication by the transfer of proteins, nucleic acids, or lipids. In viral infections, EVs also transfer viral antigens, genomes, or complete virions, favoring transmission by receptor-independent mechanisms and triggering the inflammatory response or the suppression/evasion of the immune response. EVs may be potential biomarkers for disease progression or could be applied as nanotherapeutic tools [11–13].This review focuses on the roles of EVs in DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV infections. We highlight the evidence that demonstrates how EVs, through different study models, are involved as alternative mechanisms that may define mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenicity.Epidemiology of mosquito-borne flavivirusesAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), the global incidence of DENV infections has markedly increased in the last two decades. From 2000 to 2019, the WHO documented a tenfold surge in cases worldwide. In 2023, over five million cases and more than 5000 dengue-related deaths were reported in over 80 countries in Africa, America, Southeast Asia, the Western Pacific, and Eastern Mediterranean regions [14].As of 2022, more than 870,000 autochthonous ZIKV cases have been reported, and 89 countries have reported ZIKV transmission across the Americas, Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Western Pacific [15, 16].YFV remains in a sylvatic cycle in tropical forests, although infection is prevented by a single dose of a safe vaccine [17]. In 2023, the WHO reported that 34 countries in Africa and 13 countries in Central and South America are endemic for YFV [18].JEV is endemic to 24 countries in Southeast Asia and the western Pacific. There are an estimated 68,000 cases of JEV infection each year worldwide, and the case fatality rate can reach as high as 30% [19], whereas WNV is present in Africa, Europe, Asia (Middle East and West), and North America [20]. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the U.S., from 1999 to 2022, 56,575 human disease cases, 25,777 hospitalizations, and 2776 deaths were reported [21].The increased incidence of flaviviruses and their introduction in new countries represent a serious health risk, in addition to population growth, industrialization, and vector adaptability due to environmental disturbances, such as climate change, promoting the conditions for probable future epidemics.Basic virology of flaviviruses: structure and replicative cycle featuresThe genus Flavivirus groups enveloped viruses of approximately 50 nm in diameter, surrounded by a lipid envelope, and encoded by a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome nearly 11 kilobases in length [22]. The viral genomic RNA encodes a single long open reading frame (ORF) flanked by the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) involved in viral genome translation, replication, and packaging. The 5′ UTR (containing the type 1 cap m7GpppAmN) functions as the promoter for the initiation of RNA synthesis, and the 3′ UTR (which lacks a polyadenylated tail) is the precursor of the subgenomic flaviviral RNA (sfRNA) associated with pathogenicity, inhibition of antiviral responses, increased viral transmission, and increased replicative fitness [2, 23, 24].The ORF is translated into a polyprotein, from which ten proteins are cleaved: three structural (capsid (C), membrane (M), and envelope (E)) proteins and seven nonstructural (NS) proteins. The C protein is involved in viral RNA packaging and nucleocapsid (NC) core formation; the M protein (a small proteolytic fragment of the precursor protein (prM) produced during viral maturation) functions as a chaperone for E protein folding and assembly; and the E protein mediates binding and fusion during viral entry. NS proteins (1, 2A, 2B, 3, 4A, 4B, and 5) are necessary for genome replication, viral assembly, and host immune response dysregulation [25, 26].Flaviviruses exhibit broad cellular tropism, entering host cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. It is known that they use a wide variety of receptors [22]. Viral endocytosis is followed by the fusion of the virion envelope with cellular membranes due to the low pH of the endosome. Endosome acidity triggers irreversible trimerization of the E protein, NC release into the cytoplasm, and C protein/RNA dissociation. The viral RNA is subsequently translated into a single polyprotein, which is cleaved into structural and NS proteins at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. For viral RNA replication, a negative-sense strand is synthesized, serving as a template for new positive-strand genomes. The assembly process consists of the association of the C protein with genomic RNA, followed by budding into ER membranes that contain the E-prM protein complex, constituting immature virions. Virion maturation occurs in the trans-Golgi network, where proteolytic processing and acid-induced E-prM rearrangement promote prM cleavage. Additional steps, such as glycan modification, result in the formation of mature infective particles. Flaviviruses are released from host cells by exocytosis [2, 22–26].The viral replication cycle requires viral proteins with the involvement of host molecules such as RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), which are ubiquitous in the cytoplasm and determine virus‒cell interactions [23–25]. Diosa-Toro et al. hypothesized that flavivirus RNA recognition relies on specific host RBPs that promote its incorporation at the EV cargo as an alternative mode for viral spread [24]. In this sense, the viral replication cycle and EV biogenesis may converge on common cellular mechanisms; this fact implies a determining role of EVs in flavivirus pathogenesis as an advantage of their ability to mediate cell-to-cell communication [27].Extracellular vesicles (EVs)EVs are heterogeneous populations of particles released by cells, delimited by a lipid bilayer, and cannot replicate on their own [28]. In humans, EVs are present in all body fluids [29] and enclose and carry nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids that can modify behavior or trigger phenotypic changes in acceptor cells. The biological functions of EVs include removing (waste, harmful, or useless) intracellular components, sharing nutrients, and serving as cell-to-cell mediators; thus, they function in homeostasis and pathological processes [30–32].The International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) proposed the Minimal Information for Studies of EV (MISEV), which characterizes the physical properties of EVs, such as size, density, molecular composition, or cell origin. Exosomes are small EVs (sEVs) < 200 nm in diameter, and ectosomes (microparticles or microvesicles) can be medium/large EVs (m/lEVs) > 200 nm in diameter. Owing to their biogenesis, exosomes are released by exocytosis (through the endosomal pathway) of intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) from multivesicular bodies (MVBs), and ectosomes are released from the plasma membrane by budding [32, 33].EV biogenesis and uptake mechanismsEV (exosome or ectosome) biogenesis occurs through different molecular machineries, such as the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT), the tetraspanin signaling pathway, RBPs, sphingomyelinase-generating cone-shaped lipids (in the central nervous system, CNS), phospholipid relocalization toward the membrane leaflet, or actin cytoskeleton depolymerization [34].Microparticles (MPs) are formed from the budding of the cell membrane due to the disruption of phospholipid asymmetry. Under physiological conditions, phosphatidylserine (PS) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) are located in the inner leaflet, whereas phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin are located on the outer membrane [35]. Phospholipid asymmetry is regulated by Ca2+-dependent enzymes such as flippases, floppases, scramblases, and translocases. The Ca2+ released from the ER enters the plasma membrane, activating enzymes to translocate PS to the cell surface, also leading to the activity of calpain and gelsolin, which induce actomyosin contraction, allowing plasma membrane budding and the release of the MP PS+ into the extracellular space [36, 37].Exosomes originate from the intracellular endocytic trafficking pathway, where inward budding of the membrane of late endosomes results in the formation of the ILV through the ESCRT [38, 39]. ESCRT is a protein family that forms complexes (0, I, II, and III) at the MVB membrane to regulate cargo targeting and the formation of the ILV [29, 38]. ESCRT-dependent exosome biogenesis occurs when ESCRT-0 identifies cargo and sorts it into nascent ILVs. Late endosome membrane invagination occurs through the interaction of the ESCRT-0, ESCRT-I, and ESCRT-II complexes. ILV membrane neck contraction is mediated by ESCRT-III and ATPase vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 4 (VPS4), which favor ILV scission and MVB formation [37, 40–42].ESCRT-independent exosome biogenesis involves tetraspanins (CD9, the CD63/Syntenin-1 complex, or CD81), which function as signaling molecules to regulate cargo sorting through cholesterol-enriched microdomain formation and interact with transmembrane or cytosolic proteins to induce inward membrane budding. In neuronal cells, ceramide promotes membrane subdomain formation and imposes a spontaneous negative curvature for ILV production. Ceramide generation is mediated by neutral type II sphingomyelinase activity. Additionally, extracellular signals from G protein-coupled receptors, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR), the Wnt pathway, or oxidative stress regulate the biogenesis of EVs. ESCRT-dependent and ESCRT-independent pathways synergically act on exosome biogenesis. In this sense, molecules such as ESCRT-associated proteins (Alix and TSG101) and tetraspanins are used as exosome markers to identify their endosomal pathway origin [34–38, 43].The secretory pathway allows MVBs to fuse with the plasma membrane, favoring the release of ILVs as exosomes. Intracellular trafficking of MVBs is mediated by Rab proteins, whereas the soluble N-ethyl maleimide (NEM)-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) complex drives membrane fusion. Cells can internalize EVs through clathrin-dependent, caveolae-dependent, and receptor-dependent mechanisms, macropinocytosis, phagocytosis, or lipid raft-mediated uptake [38, 44, 45]. Thus, EVs can mediate their intercellular communication functions, inducing phenotypic or behavioral changes in acceptor cells.Convergence of EV biogenesis and the RNA virus cycleViruses can usurp cellular signaling networks, co-opting exosome biogenesis pathways for their assembly or transferring viral components to establish host permissiveness [46, 47]. In 2003, Gould et al. proposed the Trojan exosome hypothesis, which is based on the retrovirus replication cycle [48], and it has been extended to other RNA viruses [49–55]. The spread of viruses through exosomes is an alternative and effective mechanism for naïve cell infection that modulates the host’s immune response. Convergence of EV biogenesis and the RNA virus replication cycle allows the sorting of viral antigens, genomes, or complete virions as part of the EV cargo. The critical point is membrane fusion during ILV formation: viral NC or complete virion fusion with the ILV membranes or reverse fusion of the ILV with the MVB, releasing virus into the cytoplasm [46, 49].Focusing on flaviviruses, Hsu et al. first demonstrated in plasma samples from patients with Dengue fever that DENV presented an extra irregularly shaped membrane surrounding a distinct circular vesicle, compatible with EV morphology, with detectable levels of DENV RNA, E, prM, and NS1 proteins. In vitro, these EV-like structures favor the infection of naïve cells, which evade the neutralizing antibody response [56]. These findings suggested that DENV could be carried by EV-like structures such as Trojan horses.Therefore, do EVs (exosomes and MPs) play a role in the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses? To answer this question, we reviewed the published scientific evidence concerning the functions of EVs in different study models (in vivo, in vitro, and ex vivo) of DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV infections to establish their role in pathogenesis, especially in severe forms of disease (Table 1). We recognize that evidence from in vitro studies employing cell lines differs from real functions in living organisms; hence, ideal results come from those using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models to obtain robust conclusions. However, most of the current data related to EVs and flavivirus diseases are obtained from in vitro studies in cell lines; therefore, elucidating their impact on mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesis is important. Further studies using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models are necessary.
Table 1Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of dengue virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesDENV 1–4 from acute DF casesEx vivoIn vitroPlasma specimens from DENV-infected patients and human bone marrow cellsEVs CD61+Viral RNA and proteins (E, prM, NS1)Hamster kidney fibroblasts (BHK-21) and primary human bone marrow cellsIn vitro cell infection and evasion of the neutralizing antibody response[56]DENV-2 TVP2176 (El Salvador strain)DENV-2 New Guinea C (NGC)DENV-3 US/BID-V1619/2005In vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36 HT) from Ae. albopictus and (Aag2) from Ae. aegypti mosquitosExosomes HSP70+DENV-2 complete RNA genome, C protein mRNA, E/NS1 proteins; DENV-3 C protein mRNA, E proteinC6/36 HT cells, Cercopithecus aethiops monkey kidney epithelial (Vero) cells, mouse monocyte-derived dendritic (Mo-DCs) cells, human-skin keratinocytes (HaCaT), and human umbilical vein endothelial (HUVEC) cellsExosomes from DENV-2- and DENV-3-infected mosquito cells carry viral components. Exosomes from DENV-2-infected mosquito cells mediated viral transmission to mammalian cells through interaction with tetraspanin Tsp29Fb. Inhibition of Tsp29Fb or exosome release are potential therapeutics to block viral transmission[66]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36 HT) from Ae. albopictus mosquitosExosomes CD9-like protein+/CD81-like protein+Virus-like particlesC6/36 HT cellsPotential trojan vehicles that carry virus-like particles favor naïve cell infection and play a role in viral dissemination[67]DENV-2 New Guinea (NG)In vitroLarvae lysate cells (ATC-10) from Aedes aegypti mosquitosExosomes (?)Mosquito protein cargo (arginase AAEL002675)–EVs from DENV-infected mosquito cells have an altered protein cargo with infection-enhancing ability. This protein packaging strategy through the EV pathway promotes viral transmission[69]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroSaliva from Ae. aegypti mosquitosEVs (~ 100–500 nm)Viral sfRNAHuman hepatoma cells (Huh-7) and neonatal human primary dermal fibroblasts (NHDF)Salivary EVs from DENV-2-infected mosquitos contain sfRNA. Their stimuli increase viral infectivity and block interferon type I and III signaling[70]DENV-2 16,881Ex vivoIn vitroPlatelets from confirmed DENV-infected patients and healthy donorsMicroparticles CD41+Human IL-1βHuman microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1)IL-1β-containing MPs increased vascular permeability (in vitro) and correlated with endothelial dysfunction (ex vivo). Potential biomarkers of severity outcome[74]DENV-1 HawaiiDENV-2 16,681DENV-3 H87DENV-4 H241Ex vivoIn vitroBlood specimens from DENV-infected patients (ex vivo); human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells (in vitro)Microparticles PS+, platelet origin (CD41a+), erythrocytic origin (CD235+)Viral proteins (E, NS1)–Ex vivo: (1) Elevated MPs PS+ CD235+ levels correlated with DENV disease severity; (2) Low MPs PS+ CD41a levels are associated with bleeding (DHF). In vitro: DENV infection enhances MPs shedding that could transfer viral components to naïve cells[75]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoBlood specimens from DENV-infected patientsMicroparticles PS+, platelet origin (CD41a+), erythrocytic origin (CD235+)––Patients with thrombocytopenia and bleeding manifestations presented decreased levels of MPs PS+ CD41a+. Patients diagnosed as DF with warning signs presented high levels of MPs PS+ CD235a+. The MPs could identify potential progression to severe disease[76]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoIn vitroBlood specimens form DENV-infected patientsEVs CD41a+ CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Alix+Pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-13, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-5Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and naïve T cells CD4+Platelet EVs from plasma of severe dengue patients have immunosuppressive properties on T cells CD4+ that may define the progression of dengue disease[77]DENV-2 PL046In vitroIn vivoPrimary human and primary mice (PF4-Cre) plateletsEVs CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ CD41+ CD62p+–Primary human and mice neutrophils, primary human monocytes-derived macrophages, human endothelial (HMEC-1) cellsC57BL/6 J miceThe EVs from DENV-activated platelets induce neutrophils’ NET formation that contributes to vascular permeability and enhances the release of high concentrations of TNF-α and IL-6 from monocyte-derived macrophages, via activation of CLEC5A/TLR2 receptors on immune cells[78]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoIn vitroPlatelet rich plasma of dengue patientsExosomes CD41+ CD63+ CD9+–Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)Platelet exosome’s interaction with endothelial cells may promote vascular leakage through proinflammatory mediators release, reducing the vascular barrier integrity[80]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoBlood specimens from infected patientsMicroparticles HLA-DR+ CD105+––Association with compromised endothelial stability in DF/SD patients[82]DENV-3 5532/290In vitroPrimary human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mdDC)Exosomes CD9+ CD63+ CD81+Viral E protein and human host RNA (miRNAs, mRNAs)Mosquito (C6/36) cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)The EVs from DENV-infected mdDC carry viral antigens and favor the infection of naïve mosquito cells. The EVs from IFN-treated PBMC protect naïve cells from viral infection. The RNA profile cargo may be associated with immune dysregulation in SD[83]DENV-2 Colombian strainIn vitroHuman adherent (U937) macrophagesExosomes Alix+ TSG101+ CD63+Viral NS3 and human miRNA (miR-181a-5p, miR-4301 and miR-4652-3p)Macaca mulatta monkey kidney epithelial (LLC-MK2) cells and human endothelial (EA.hy926) cellsExosomes did not favor naïve (LLC-MK2) mammalian cells infection. Exosomes transport miRNAs and induce early endothelial barrier changes with a pro-inflammatory (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8) activation pattern[84]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroHuman monocytes (THP-1) from peripheral blood and human embryonic (HEK293T) cellsEVs TSG101+Human miR-148aHuman microglial (CHME3) cellsThe EVs from DENV-infected cells transfer miR-148a that suppresses the USP33/ATF3 axis in human microglia, promoting neuroinflammation[89]DENV-2 UVE/DENV2/2018/RE/47099In vitroDENV-2-infected human lung epithelial (A549) cells and NS1-transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cellsExosomes CD63+ CD81+NS1 viral protein–NS1 dimers secreted into extracellular space are associated with exosomes, reaching privileged sites and thereby acting on pathological processes[90]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroHuman umbilical endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human embryonic kidney epithelial (293 T) cellsExosomes Flotillin-2+ CD63+Human interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3)Human cervix epithelial (HeLa) cellsThe antiviral activity of IFITM3-containing exosomes favors the reduction of DENV-2 entry into host cells[92]EV in mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesisDengue virusDengue fever (DF)The DENV serotypes are transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes [57]. Dengue virus infection can be asymptomatic in most cases [58]. Symptomatic DF can range from a self-limiting acute febrile infection (85–90%) to severe forms (10–15%), known as dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS) [59, 60]. Currently, DHF/DSS are recognized as severe dengue (SD) characterized mainly by systemic vasculopathy syndrome, capillary leakage, and hemorrhage with loss of vascular integrity [58, 61–65].Currently, the functions of EVs in DF and SD pathogenesis are unclear. Research findings suggest that they may have roles as intercellular pro- or antiviral signalers that determine the clinical outcome, as prognostic biomarkers, or as potential therapeutic tools.EV from Aedes spp. mosquito modelsIn the mosquito vector‒host interplay, EVs can enhance viral infection. Vora et al. (2018) used an in vitro model of Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells infected with DENV-2 (TVP2176 or New Guinea C, NGC) and DENV-3 (US/BID-V1619/2005), isolating EVs HSP70+ that contained complete viral RNA, C, E, and NS1 proteins (DENV-2-infected cells), and E protein and C protein mRNA (DENV-3-infected). Stimuli with EVs from DENV-2-infected cells favor the infection of mosquito and vertebrate (mouse, nonhuman primate, and human) naïve cells. An ortholog (Tsp29Fb) of the tetraspanin CD63 that interacts with the viral E protein was identified, and its blockade reduced mosquito cell infection [66].Reyes-Ruiz et al. (2019) identified human CD9/CD81 homologs in mosquito cells and demonstrated the presence of DENV-like particles in the ILV structures of DENV-2 NGC-infected C6/36 HT cells. In vitro stimulation with CD9+ CD81+ exosomes from DENV-2 NGC-infected cells favored the infection of naïve cells, indicating their ability to transmit virus [67].Could EVs be a mechanism of viral transmission through mosquito bites? Cime-Castillo et al. (2015) reported that DENV-2 binds to proteins from Aedes aegypti salivary glands and that saliva enhances viral internalization in mammalian cells [68]. In this sense, Gold et al. (2020) hypothesized that EVs from the saliva of DENV-2 New Guinea-infected Aedes aegypti have altered protein cargo with infection-enhancing ability in mammalian cells. They isolated EVs flotillin+ HSP70+ from DENV-infected Aedes aegypti ATC-10 cells, which contained the arginase AAEL002675. They reported robust enhancement of the viral load in primary dermal fibroblasts previously treated with recombinant arginase [69]. Yeh et al. (2023) were interested in identifying transmission-enhancing factors in mosquito saliva and reported that the EVs in saliva from DENV-2 NGC-infected Aedes aegypti Rockefeller colonies contain high levels of sfRNA. The mosquito saliva/EV stimulus resulted in increased virus infectivity in human hepatoma cells and primary dermal fibroblasts [70].These findings demonstrate that the DENV cycle and exosome biogenesis converge in mosquito cells and that DENV-2-infected cells release EVs that act as Trojan vehicles, transferring viral components, virus-like particles, or mosquito protein cargo that can modify cell permissiveness and favor in vitro infection. More studies are still needed to elucidate the implications of in vivo EVs as efficient mechanisms in mosquito-mediated viral transmission, their impact on vector competence, and their potential as a strategy for mosquito control.Platelet EVs from in vitro and ex vivo modelsPlatelets, immune cells, and vascular endothelial cells are the main effectors involved in the pathogenesis of DF. Platelet dysfunction can lead to impaired inflammatory responses and tissue damage. Platelet activation, followed by thrombocytopenia, is associated with severe clinical outcomes in viral infections, and activation products that include EVs could be the hallmark during DF/SD [71]. The platelet-derived EVs released during DENV infection may enhance inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. MPs, formerly known as “platelet dust”, have procoagulant activity, and their defects promote bleeding disorders, as described in DHF/DSS [72, 73].How do platelet-derived MPs contribute to the pathogenesis of DENV infection? Hottz et al. (2013) reported high levels of CD41+ IL-1β+ platelets in patients diagnosed with DF/SD and isolated CD41+ IL-1β+ MPs (from clinical samples and from DENV-2 16,881-stimulated platelets in vitro), with increased levels of the NLRP3 inflammasome and caspase-1 activity. Stimulation with MPs increased the permeability of endothelial cells in vitro. In patients, high hematocrit rates with plasma leakage were correlated with high levels of CD41+ IL-1β+ MPs [74]. These findings suggest that MPs could be used as biomarkers to improve the early detection of severe disease progression.Punyadee et al. (2015) reported that circulating MPsfrom platelets (CD41a+), erythrocytes (CD235+), monocytes (CD14+), granulocytes (CD66+), T cells (CD3+), B cells (CD19+), and NK cells (CD56+), were present in blood samples of DENV-infected patients with different severities. In acutely ill patients, 50–75% of PS+ MPs are from erythrocytes and platelets and express viral antigens on their surface. Decreased levels of PS+ CD41a+ MPs were associated with a bleeding tendency due to thrombocytopenia. Additionally, they showed in vitro that hepatocellular carcinoma cells infected with DENV-1 Hawaii, DENV-2 16,681, DENV-3 H87, or DENV-4 H241 release PS+ MPs that contain viral E or NS1 proteins on their surfaces [75].Patil et al. (2018) confirmed that platelet- and erythrocyte-derived MPs are potential biomarkers for predicting the risk of SD progression. In blood samples from patients diagnosed with thrombocytopenia and bleeding manifestations, decreased levels of PS+ CD41a+ MPs were detected, whereas patients diagnosed with DF with warning signs presented increased levels of PS+ CD235+ MPs [76]. In this sense, platelet- and erythrocyte-derived MPs may help identify potential patients who are progressing to SD.More recently, Kumari et al. (2023) reported in the plasma of patients with mild and severe disease that SD was associated with increased levels of EVs CD41a+ CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Alix+ from platelets and was highly enriched with the cytokines IL-13, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-5. In vitro, EV stimulation strongly suppressed CD4+ T-cell proliferation through the PD-L1/PD-1 interaction. Additionally, EV-stimulated naïve CD4+ T cells expressed high levels of TNF-α and IFN-γ, indicating that EVs promote the Th1 phenotype [77]. Platelet EVs from the plasma of SD patients have immunosuppressive effects on CD4+ T cells, which may define the progression of dengue disease.Platelets interact with neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages, activating the innate immune response. Therefore, could platelet-derived EVs promote or modulate immune activation? Sung et al. (2019) reported that DENV-2 PL046-stimulated platelets activate the C-type lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC-2) signaling pathway, releasing EVs CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ CD41+ CD62p+. Platelet EV stimuli activate two surface innate immunity receptors (CLEC5A and TLR2) on neutrophils and macrophages, inducing neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation with increased vascular permeability in vivo and increasing the secretion of TNF-α and IL-6 from human monocyte-derived macrophages. The authors demonstrated that the simultaneous blockade of CLEC5A/TLR2 reduces NET formation and permeability changes in vivo, suggesting that this intervention is a potential treatment for DF/SD [78, 79]. Focusing on the interplay of platelet-derived EVs with leukocytes, platelet-derived EVs were demonstrated to be efficient host immune effectors and endogenous danger signals that activate CLEC5A and TLR2 receptors on immune cells, which had a cumulative immunomodulatory effect on DENV-mediated CLEC2 activation on platelets, contributing to disease severity. These findings demonstrate that platelet-derived EVs function as signal effectors and not only as vehicles for biomolecules; therefore, blockade of their interaction may also improve the clinical outcome in SD patients [79].Finally, Vedpathak et al. (2024) isolated platelet-derived CD41+ CD63+ CD9+ CD62p+ exosomes from patients with mild or severe disease. Exosome uptake by endothelial cells (HUVECs) promoted disruption of monolayer integrity with reductions in VE-cadherin and ZO-2 tight junction proteins, and Claudin-1 and PECAM-1 adhesion proteins, indicating the loss of the barrier. Higher levels of C-reactive protein, sVCAM-1, and slCAM-1 were detected both in the cell culture supernatants and in the SD patient samples [80]. The interaction of platelet-derived exosomes and endothelial cells in vitro promotes the release of vascular proinflammatory mediators with the loss of barrier integrity.These reports highlight the multiple roles of platelet-derived EVs in DF/SD pathogenesis. However, their use as targets for therapies or as biomarkers for severity progression still needs further investigation.Immune cell-derived EVs from in vitro and ex vivo modelsMonocytes participate in the establishment of a proinflammatory state, antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), and vascular endothelium damage, all of which are related to the progression to SD [81]. Naranjo-Gómez et al. (2019) evaluated monocyte subset behavior in DF/SD patient plasma and reported high and low counts of DENV E-positive intermediate and nonclassical monocytes, respectively. The DENV-infected monocytes were activated, expressed intracellular TNF-α and exposed PS at the membrane, which could be associated with MP release. High amounts of HLA-DR+ CD105+ MPs (endothelial origin) associated with compromised endothelial stability were found [82]. The interplay between activated monocytes and MPs from vascular endothelial cells may contribute to the progression to SD.Do EVs from leukocytes play a role during DENV infection? Martins et al. (2018) reported that DENV-3 5532 (from an SD case) and DENV-3 290 (from a mild DF case) infection of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mdDC) triggered cell activation and the release of CD9+ CD63+ CD81+ exosomes. Exosomes contain the viral E protein, evade the antibody response, and favor mosquito naïve cell infection. Additionally, exosomes from IFN-treated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) confer resistance to viral infection. The mdDC exosome RNA profile cargo is associated with immune response regulation, the antiviral response, and platelet or endothelial cell activation [83]. Exosomes from DENV-3-infected mdDCs promote pro- or antiviral enhancement, and their RNA profile cargo could be associated with immune dysregulation in SD.Velandia-Romero et al. (2020) isolated Alix+ TSG101+ CD63+ exosomes from DENV-2-infected macrophages (U937 cells) that transport the viral NS3 protein. They did not find that exosomes favor nonhuman primate cell infection. EV stimulation of endothelial cells (EA. hy926) in vitro modified cell physiology and integrity, upregulated the expression levels of the VE-cadherin and ICAM-1 proteins, and subsequently induced the secretion of high levels of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8. Analysis of the miRNA cargo revealed targets associated with cell adhesion, the cell cycle DNA integrity checkpoint, and the regulation of cell communication [84]. There is still no evidence in vivo, through the evaluation of primary cells, that EVs from DENV-2-infected macrophages contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Therefore, further investigations are needed to elucidate this mechanism.DENV-2 promotes crosstalk between the coagulation and inflammation pathways during DF/SD. Huerta-Zepeda et al. (2008) reported that DENV-2 upregulates tissue factor (TF) in endothelial cells, triggering the generation of hemostatic proteases (thrombin) that activate protease-activated receptors (PARs). Activated PARs initiate inflammatory pathway signaling, which leads to the upregulation of proinflammatory (IL-8) or pro-adherent (VCAM-1) molecules [85]. As described above, the interplay between EVs and endothelial cells promotes early barrier changes, increasing permeability and the loss of barrier integrity; however, the role of EVs in the specific molecular mechanisms of vascular dysfunction is still unclear and poorly understood.Neurological complications in SD also require consideration; therefore, the WHO endorsed guidelines (2009) to include them in the clinical case classification. Neuropathogenesis is associated with direct viral invasion of the CNS or secondary reactions. Previously, DENV was not considered a neurotropic virus, but clinical reports associating DF with neurological complications have changed this view [86–88].In this context, could EVs from DENV-infected cells be implicated in the development of DENV neuropathogenesis? Mishra et al. (2020) isolated EVs TSG101+ from DENV-2-infected monocytes (THP-1) and DENV-2 NS1-transfected human embryo kidney (HEK293T) cells, which contained high levels of miR-148a. The stimulation of microglial (CHME3) cells with these EVs reduced the protein expression levels of USP33 and ATF33, both of which are associated with the downregulation of the proinflammatory gene expression pathway. USP33/ATF3 axis dysregulation via EVs miR-148a+ promotes the expression of TNF-α, IFN-β, and NF-κB, which are related to a proinflammatory state. The authors concluded that this model explains why EVs miR-148a+ from DENV-infected cells may contribute to neuroinflammation in vitro [89]. Notably, neuropathogenesis is a complex process, and many factors could be involved. This model of USP33/ATF3 axis dysregulation mediated by EVs is one of many alternative mechanisms that may explain the neurological outcomes described in some SD cases.Other pro- and antiviral functions of EVs in DF/SDSafadi et al. (2023) reported that DENV-2 strain UVE/DENV2/2018/RE/47099-infected human A549 cells and DENV NS1-transfected HEK293 cells released CD63+ CD81+ exosomes that contained dimers of the viral NS1 protein on their membrane surface. The authors demonstrated that NS1 protein and exosome associations occur in the extracellular compartment and concluded that the association of the NS1 protein with exosomes may increase viral protein stability. Exosomes act as vectors that favor the access of the viral NS1 protein to privileged sites to promote pathological processes, as described for SD [90].Finally, EVs from infected cells could also contribute to establishing an antiviral state to prevent the spread of infection to neighboring cells [91]. Zhu et al. (2015) evaluated how interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), which is transferred by flotillin-2+ CD63+ exosomes from DENV-2 NGC-infected HUVECs and 293T cells, is expressed in exosome-stimulated HeLa cells, increasing cell resistance to viral infection and significantly reducing DENV-2 entry [92]. IFITM3-containing exosomes serve as vehicles for the cell-to-cell transfer of antiviral resistance, suggesting their potential as a therapeutic strategy.In summary, EVs from DENV-infected cells play a relevant role in dengue pathogenesis because of their ability to transport different viral contents (RNAs, proteins, or virus-like particles), favoring cell-to-cell transmission and infection. In mosquito‒host interactions, EVs interact with different host cells; EVs can be identified by the presence of human tetraspanin orthologs, and their protein cargo enhances viral binding, allowing host cell infection. In the pathogenesis of DENV infection in humans, EVs from platelets and immunological cells function as Trojan vehicles that favor viral infection, evade the host immune response, and transport active biomolecules (different host/viral RNAs and proteins) that modify naïve cellular behavior. Platelet-derived EVs act as effectors that trigger NET formation in neutrophils and the release of proinflammatory cytokines in monocytes/macrophages via interactions with CLEC5A/TLR2 receptors, promoting vascular endothelial dysfunction in vivo. Additionally, EVs participate in exacerbated inflammatory responses in the CNS or could be implicated in the transfer of antiviral resistance. Knowledge of these mechanisms will lead to further investigations of their potential roles as biomarkers of severity progression (e.g., MPs PS+ CD41a+), therapeutics (e.g., blockade of the interaction of platelet-derived EVs with CLEC5A/TLR2 or use of IFITM3-containing exosomes), or vector control tools.Zika virusZika fever (ZF)Zika fever (ZF) is a febrile acute disease caused by ZIKV infection and is transmitted by mosquito bites or human-to-human contact. Approximately 80% of infections are asymptomatic and 20% are mildly self-limiting [93–96]. The severe forms of ZF include an expanding spectrum of neurological complications, autoimmune diseases, and congenital Zika syndrome (CZS). ZIKV neurotropism and the susceptibility of immune cells and endothelial barriers allow the virus to reach immunologically privileged sites [97–99]. However, the virus‒cell interaction may not be the only mechanism involved, so the role of the EVs could explain some alternative forms for viral transmission, viral persistence due to the lack of clearance, or immune response avoidance.EV from Aedes spp. mosquito modelsCould mosquito-derived EVs mediate the cellular changes involved in ZIKV pathogenesis? Martínez-Rojas et al. (2020) isolated PS+ MPs and exosomes CD63-like+ from ZIKV-infected C6/36 cells carrying viral RNA and E protein, promoting the infection of naïve C6/36, Vero, monocyte, and endothelial cells in vitro. EV stimuli promoted intermediate monocyte differentiation and favored endothelial cell damage, establishing a procoagulant, proinflammatory, and proadherent phenotype with the loss of barrier integrity. Stimuli with EVs from ZIKV-infected mosquito cells favored infection, modifying the normal basal state of human cells in vitro [100].EV functions in acute in vitro and in vivo infection modelsFocusing on the role of EVs as viral carriers, Safadi et al. (2023) demonstrated that ZIKV PF-25013-18-infected A549 and ZIKV NS1-transfected HEK293 cells released CD63+ CD81+ exosomes containing dimers of the viral NS1 protein on their membrane surface obtained extracellularly in vitro [90]. Similarly, Zhao et al. (2023) reported that ZIKV-infected human umbilical vein endothelial cells released EVs CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Syntenin+ TSG101+ HSP70+ Alix+ that did not promote infection in vitro despite carrying ZIKV genome RNA, E, C, prM, NS1, and NS5 proteins. The authors demonstrated that E protein-enriched EVs competed with ZIKV virions for binding to neutralizing antibodies, attenuating the ADE effect [101]. Martínez-Rojas et al. (2024) reported that ZIKV MR766-infected monocytes released CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+ exosomes. Purified exosomes carried viral antigens (E/NS1 proteins) and viral genomic RNA. Exosomes favored ZIKV transmission and infection, promoting the activation and differentiation of naïve monocytes in vitro and inducing an infection‒activation‒infection cycle that may prolong viral clearance and establish a long-lasting proinflammatory state [102]. These data show that viral elements released as part of the EV cargo may act as an alternative mechanism in virus‒host interactions.Fikatas et al. (2021) reported that ZIKV PRVABC59-infected human microvascular endothelial cells (hcMECs/D3) released large EVs CD63+ Alix+ TSG101+, which carry the viral NS1 protein. Stimulation with EVs favored cell infection and disturbed the integrity of the cell monolayer. Endothelial EVs are enriched in sphingomyelin and diacylglycerol, which contain more saturated and monounsaturated acyl chains, increasing their membrane rigidity and decreasing their susceptibility to oxidative stress [103]. In vitro, EVs from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells may allow ZIKV to reach anatomic sites such as the CNS to promote neurological disease.EV functions in neurological in vitro and in vivo modelsZIKV infection is associated with CNS damage, which manifests as CZS or Guillain–Barré syndrome. The mechanisms involved in the neuropathogenesis of the Zika virus related to EV functions are poorly understood. Huang et al. (2018) isolated flotillin-2+ Alix+ exosomes from ZIKV (MR766 and PRVABC59)-infected human fetal astrocytes that contained viral RNA. Blockade of the ceramide pathway promoted resistance to ZIKV infection with low exosome release, reducing viral transmission [104]. Zhou et al. (2019) isolated Hsp70+ CD9+ CD63+ exosomes from ZIKV PRVABC59-infected murine fetal primary cortical neurons that contained viral E protein and genomic RNA, which promoted the infection, damage, and death of naïve cells. Additionally, the inhibition of the ceramide pathway reduced infection and exosome release, resulting in exosome-mediated viral transmission in the CNS [105]. Both studies demonstrated that convergence between the viral cycle and exosome biogenesis occurs through the ceramide pathway in CNS models, promoting viral transmission and cell damage.In this context, York et al. (2021) isolated EVs CD63+ CD9+ HSC70+ populations from ZIKV PRVABC-59-infected SNB-19 cells (i.e., astrocytes) that contained encapsulated viral genome RNA and E protein that promoted infection in naïve cells. The authors demonstrated that CD63 is required in the viral replication cycle; hence, CD63 levels are reduced in infected cells to ensure the release of viral progeny and EVs [106]. This report revealed the role of tetraspanins during EV biogenesis in the modulation of ZIKV infection.EV functions in placental modelsIn the context of CZS, viral transmission through transplacental infection continues to be a concern. Like other teratogenic viruses, ZIKV must overcome resistance to infection of the placental epithelium constituted by trophoblasts and nontrophoblastic cells, and its innate immunological properties are mediated by the type III interferon (IFN) response [107]. In this context, ZIKV hijacks the antiviral response of trophoblasts to ensure replication cycle completion. Block et al. (2023) demonstrated that ZIKV DAK AR 41524-infected trophoblasts released CD9+ EVs, which contain viral E, NS1, NS4B, and NS5 proteins and diverse host protein cargos that could serve as markers of placenta-specific EVs [108]. Similarly, Lee et al. (2023) investigated how ZIKV infection in trophoblasts manipulates mitochondrial dynamics, promoting the formation of mitochondria-derived vesicles (MDVs). These authors reported that the NS4A protein is responsible for mitochondrial dysfunction, suppressing the IFN response. The ZIKV PRVABC59-infected JEG-3 trophoblasts released CD63+ CD9+ TSG101+ Alix+ MDVs and carried miRNAs involved in the immune response, inflammation, secretion, and autophagy, which may facilitate viral replication in vitro [109]. These findings highlight how ZIKV overcomes placental resistance during trophoblast infection, induces the suppression of the host antiviral response, and favors cell infection.Other pro- and antiviral functions of EVs in the treatment of Zika feverThe immunoregulatory and antiviral effects of EVs could regulate viral pathogenicity through the transfer of specific molecules from infected cells to noninfected neighboring cells. Li et al. (2020) described how CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ exosomes from ZIKV GZ01-infected human A549 cells contained high levels of host defensin alpha 1B (DEFA1B) mRNA. During ZIKV infection, DEFA1B inhibits viral replication by blocking virus binding, reducing cell proliferation, and slowing cell cycle progression. Exosome-containing DEFA1B stimulation in HEK293T and undifferentiated human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells delayed their cell cycles [110]. Therefore, exosomes not only have anti-ZIKV activity but also alter cell cycle progression.EVs, as transporting vehicles for active biomolecules, have gained relevance as potential therapeutic options because of their ability to cross natural physiological barriers, their intrinsic properties for cell targeting, and their stability in circulation [111]. Zhang et al. (2022) isolated EVs from ZIKV SZ01-infected A6 (type I IFN receptor knockout C57BL/6) mice containing abundant ZIKV-derived small‐interfering RNAs (ZIKV-siRNAs). These EV-specific ZIKV-siRNAs enter the murine bloodstream and are capable of conferring resistance against viral challenge. The authors concluded that these EVs confer RNA‒RNA homology-dependent antiviral activity [112]. Finally, Zhang et al. (2022) designed neuro-specific targeted small CD81+ Syntenin+ EVs containing antiviral siRNAs targeting the NS4A, prM, NS1, and NS3 regions of the ZIKV genome. They reported that these EVs inhibited ZIKV replication. Intravenous administration in pregnant AG6 mice efficiently crossed the placental barrier and reduced the viral loads in mothers and fetuses, protecting both from ZIKV infection and alleviating neuroinflammation and cell damage [113]. These studies demonstrated that targeted delivery via modified EVs is a promising therapeutic alternative that is well tolerated and safe for in vivo models of ZIKV infection.In summary, in the context of ZF pathogenesis, the roles of EVs include being an efficient mechanism for viral cell-to-cell transmission, a mediator for the establishment of a proinflammatory state, and an effector in neurological or placental cell damage (Table 2). Additionally, EVs mediate antiviral or immunoregulatory activities by transporting specific viral or host biomolecules that confer resistance to infection in naïve cells. This evidence contributes to a better understanding of vector‒virus‒host interactions for new diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers, antiviral therapies, or even vaccine development [114].
Table 2Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of Zika virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesZIKV MR766In vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36) from Aedes albopictus mosquitosMicroparticles PS+ and exosomes CD63-like+Viral RNAViral E proteinNaïve C6/36 cells, monkey kidney (Vero) cells, human monocytes (THP-1), human endothelial (HMEC-1) cellsThe EVs from ZIKV-infected C6/36 cells favor naïve mosquito and mammalian cell infection. The EV stimuli induce monocyte activation and differentiation, and the endothelial cell damage with increased barrier permeability[100]ZIKV PF-25013–18In vitroZIKV-infected human lung epithelial (A549) and NS1-transfected human embryo kidney (HEK293) cellsExosomes CD63+ CD81+NS1 viral protein–The NS1 dimers secreted into extracellular space are associated with exosomes[90]ZIKV without strain identificationIn vitroIn vivoHuman umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)Exosomes CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Syntenin+ TSG101+ HSP70+ Alix+Viral genome RNA and proteins E (highly enrichment), C, prM, NS1, and NS5Naïve Vero E6 cells, human lymphoblasts (K562), and A6 mice (Ifnar1−/− C57BL/6, 6 weeks old)Exosomes from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells carry viral elements but do not favor viral transmission/infection. The high E-enrichment allows high affinity binding to neutralizing antibodies, attenuating the ADE[101]ZIKV MR766In vitroHuman monocytes (THP-1)Exosomes CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+Viral E and NS1 proteins, genomic RNA transcriptsNaïve THP-1 cells and monkey kidney (Vero cells)Purified exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes favor viral transmission, infection, and the differentiation/activation of naïve cells, promoting an infection-activation-infection cycle[102]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroHuman brain microvascular endothelial cells (hcMEC/D3)Large EVs CD63+ Alix+ TSG101+Viral NS1 proteinNaïve hcMEC/D3The EVs from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells can be used as viral element carriers, enhancing ZIKV transmission and infection to susceptible cells and altering the monolayer integrity[103]ZIKVMR766/ PRVABC59In vitroPrimary human fetal astrocytesExosomes Flotillin2+ Alix+Viral RNA–Inhibition of neutral sphingomyelinase-2 activity induces resistance to infection and reduces the exosome biogenesis[104]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroPrimary murine fetal cortical neuronsExosomes HSP70+ CD9+ CD63+Viral RNAViral E proteinNaïve murine fetal cortical neuronsNaïve cells infection, damage, and death. ZIKV modulates neutral sphingomyelinase-2 SMPD3 activity in cortical neurons for its infection: inhibition of SMDP3 activity (by GW4869) or silencing of smdp3 gene (by siRNA) reduces viral burden and transmission through exosomes[105]ZIKV PRVABC-59In vitroSNB-19 (astrocytes) cellsSmall EVs CD63+ CD9+ HSC70+Encapsuled viral genomic RNA and E proteinNaïve SNB-19 cellsThe EVs from ZIKV-infected astrocytes favor the infection of naïve cells. Infected cells present a dysregulated tetraspanin pattern: CD63 is necessary for EV and ZIKV release[106]ZIKV DAK AR 41524In vitroRhesus macaque trophoblast stem cellsEVs CD9+Viral E, NS1, NS4B, and NS5 proteins with diverse cell mRNA, miRNA, and protein cargos–The EV cargo from ZIKV-infected trophoblasts could be used to noninvasively identify placental ZIKV infection in the first trimester of pregnancy[108]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroJEG-3 trophoblast cellsSmall EVs (MDVs) CD63+ CD9+ TSG101+ Alix+Host mitochondrial and miRNAs involved in immune response, inflammation, secretion, and autophagy–The small MDVs release is a hijacked mechanism during ZIKV infection, inducing the suppression of the antiviral response and favoring cell infection[109]ZIKV GZ01In vitroHuman adenocarcinoma alveolar basal epithelial cells (A549)Exosomes CD63+/CD81+/TSG101+Human host mRNA (DEFA1B)Human embryonic kidney epithelial cells (HEK293T), undifferentiated human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y)The ZIKV infection inhibition through blocking viral attachment to target cells and retarding the progression of cell cycles[110]ZIKV SZ01In vivoSerum from A6 (type I IFN receptor knockout C57BL/6)EVs not characterizedZIKV-derived small‐interfering RNAs (ZIKV-siRNA)Naïve A6 miceThe ZIKV-siRNA confer resistance against viral challenge[112]Not used for EV productionIn vitroIn vivoHuman embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 T cellsSmall EVs CD81+ Syntenin+Designed siRNA targeting four distinct regions (NS4A, prM, NS1, NS3) of the ZIKV genomeZIKV SZ01-infected A549 and Vero cells; AG6 mice (8 weeks old) or pregnant mice (E17.5)Modified small EVs encapsulating siRNA were able to suppress the ZIKV replication in vitro. Also, these EV efficiently penetrated the placental barrier, reducing ZIKV load and protecting both the mother and the brain of fetuses[113]Yellow fever virusYellow fever (YF)Currently, YFV infection can be controlled by a highly effective virus-attenuated vaccine. Therefore, yellow fever cases occur mainly in unvaccinated populations [115]. Actual evidence indicates that the role of EVs in YF pathogenesis is hypothetical.EV functions from in vitro modelsSinigaglia et al. (2018) reported that immature virions and capsid-free RNA from YFV 17D-204-infected hepatocytes activated plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to produce IFNs in a TLR7- and cell contact-dependent manner. They proposed that YFV RNA cell-to-cell transfer occurs through carriers such as PS-enriched vesicles (compatible with EVs) that evade the host immune response. The authors demonstrated the presence of membranous viral clusters at sites of contact between YFV-infected cells and pDCs [116]. The main limitation of this report was the lack of identification of EV membrane markers; however, these findings suggest that membranous vesicles such as EVs may be involved in cell activation and viral cell-to-cell transmission.Previously, in 2011, Carpp et al. demonstrated that the viral NS3 protein interacted with the host Alix protein to contribute to the release of infectious viral particles. In an in vitro model of YFV (17DD)-infected Vero cells, NS3 and Alix colocalized in the perinuclear region, forming a protein complex required for virion release. They also proved that the truncated forms of Alix inhibited the release of YFV without affecting its replication [117]. Despite not focusing on EVs, the molecular findings are relevant because cells respond to cross-signaling between viral and host proteins, which are essential for virion and EV release.In summary (Table 3), the potential role of EVs in YFV pathogenesis is hypothetical. As demonstrated for DENV and ZIKV, EVs may act as viral carriers or be necessary for viral release through the interaction between viral proteins and the host ESCRT-associated proteins that execute cargo sorting during exosome biogenesis. These findings demonstrate that specific steps during EV biogenesis are necessary to complete the YFV cycle and facilitate its spread to target cells, in which processes EVs can be important mediators.
Table 3Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of yellow fever virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesYFV17D-204In vitroHepatocytes (Huh7.5 cells)EVs without identificationViral RNA or viral immature particlesPlasmacytoid dendritic cellsHypothetical: Cell-to-cell viral carriers[116]YFV17DDIn vitroVero cells–––Hypothetical: YFV NS3 interacts with host Alix protein to contribute for viral release. Alix executes cargo sorting in exosome biogenesis[117]Japanese encephalitis virusJapanese encephalitis (JE)JE is responsible for a greater burden of neurological disability than any other arthropod-borne disease. Infection can be prevented by vaccination. Currently, there are no specific antivirals, and only supportive treatment is available [118–120]. Recent studies have demonstrated that EVs are involved in viral infection-mediated neuroinvasive diseases [53, 121]. However, the functions of EVs in JE pathogenesis remain elusive.EV functions from in vitro and in vivo modelsIn 1987, Hase et al. described the maturation process of the JEV SA-14 strain in mosquito C6/36 cells and murine brain cells. They reported that virions were enclosed in vesicles distributed throughout the cytoplasm and transported to the cell surface to be released extracellularly [122]. Interestingly, the authors confirmed Leary and Blair’s postulate that JEV uses secretory-type exocytosis [123], the same pathway that was later described for exosome release. This report revealed that during the viral cycle, vesicle formation is necessary to ensure virion maturation and release. Later, convergence with EV biogenesis will be demonstrated.Flavivirus E and NS1 proteins are cotransformally processed during virion maturation through the cell secretory pathway [124]. Mason (1989) demonstrated that in Vero cells, the E and NS1 proteins are released at a slow rate, whereas in C6/36 cells, the NS1 protein is not released. A key finding related to EVs is the amphipathic nature and sedimentation properties of the NS1 protein found in mammalian cell culture supernatant, suggesting that NS1 contains membrane-binding domains and is released from infected cells in a membrane-associated particulate form, as described in other flaviviruses. The authors concluded that extracellular membranous particles containing the NS1 protein could be related to the strong immunological response observed in JE [125]. This report constitutes the first approach for the potential role of EVs as viral element carriers implicated in JE pathogenesis.In summary (Table 4), in the context of JEV pathogenesis, EVs have been proposed to be necessary for viral maturation and extracellular virion release; additionally, as viral components (NS1 protein) carriers, EVs can induce immune responses, as observed in JE cases.
Table 4Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of Japanese encephalitis virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesJEV S-14In vitroIn vivoC6/36 cells and ICR miceIntracellular vesiclesViral particles–Hypothetical: EV biogenesis is associated with viral maturation. Viral particles appeared to be carried within vesicles to the cell surface to be released extracellularly[122]JEV NakayamaIn vitroVero cells and C6/36 cellsIntracellular vesiclesViral proteins (E, NS1)–Hypothetical: JEV NS1 protein contains membrane-binding domains, and it is released from infected cells in a membrane-associated particulate form[125]West Nile virusWest Nile fever (WNF)WNF may progress to a neuroinvasive disease in elderly immunocompromised patients. To date, no WNV-specific antiviral treatments or vaccines are available. Like other mosquito-borne flaviviruses, prevention depends on organized and sustained mosquito control with public education [126, 127]. In this context, what is the role of EVs in WNV neuropathogenesis?EV functions from in vitro modelsThe role of EVs as a mechanism for WNV genomic RNA transmission was proposed by Zhou et al. (2018). They used an in vitro model of WNV CT2741-infected Neuro-2a cells and isolated CD9+ HSP70+ exosomes that contained the viral E gene transcript, suggesting that WNV genomic RNA is a part of their cargo. The authors concluded that the exosomes from neuronal cells mediate the cell-to-cell transmission of WNV RNA, which may favor infection in a receptor-independent manner in the CNS [128].As described for other flaviviruses, the cell-to-cell signaling mediated by EVs in the host innate immune response should be considered a mechanism of EV antiviral or proinflammatory activity. Slonchak et al. (2019) used an in vitro model with WNV Kunjin-infected human A549 cells to isolate CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ exosomes containing specific host RNAs (miRNAs, small noncoding RNAs (sncRNAs), and mRNAs) associated with virus‒host interactions, inflammation, and the innate immune response [129]. This report revealed that WNV infection altered the RNA profile of the EV cargo (Table 5).
Table 5Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of West Nile virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesWNV CT2741In vitroMouse Neuro-2a cellsExosomes CD9+ HSP70+Viral RNAMouse Neuro-2a cellsViral RNA cell-to-cell transmission[128]WNV KunjinIn vitroHuman A549 cellsExosomes CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+Human host RNA profile (miRNAs, sncRNAs, and mRNAs)Human A549 cells transfected with small RNAs from EV isolated of WNV-infected cellsWNV infection stimulates the incorporation of increased levels of specific host RNA profile into EVs that regulates genes associated with viral and inflammatory processes. Small RNAs from EVs induced innate immune response on naïve cells[129]In summary, during WNV infection, EV functions are associated with the transport of viral RNA, which is implicated in cell-to-cell transmission. Additionally, WNV-infected cells release EVs containing host RNAs associated with antiviral and proinflammatory functions. The interplay between EVs and naïve cells may promote viral transmission and/or immunostimulatory activity.Conclusions and perspectivesFor the control of mosquito-borne flaviviruses, it is necessary to understand how viruses interact with different host cells. Knowledge of the molecular or cellular pathways involved in vector‒virus‒host interactions that allow viruses to replicate, persist due to immune evasion, or establish a prolonged inflammatory state is critical for determining disease outcomes.This review aimed to highlight the currently available data only without the claim of representing established knowledge. The current data related to EVs and flavivirus diseases are mainly obtained from in vitro studies in cell lines; thus, elucidating their impact on mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesis is important. Further studies using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models are necessary.Based on the ability of EVs to transfer viral components or active biomolecules, the EVs released from infected cells represent a novel and efficient mechanism for viral (DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV) cell-to-cell transmission through their ability to carry and transfer different viral contents, such as RNAs, proteins, or viral particles, as well as the ability to evade the host immune response. Convergence between EV biogenesis and the flavivirus replication cycle is critical because viral and host molecules interact; thus, this process has potential as a target for antiviral therapy. From a vector perspective, EVs mediate efficient transmission and favor virus adaptation in vertebrate hosts, ensuring the maintenance of the viral cycle. From the host perspective, as a response to infection, EVs may have altered RNAs and protein cargoes that modify naïve cell behavior, enhancing the inflammatory response and tissue damage or mediating a protective effect through the transfer of antiviral resistance. Additionally, EVs participate in exacerbated inflammatory responses in the CNS or placenta or could be implicated in the transfer of antiviral resistance.EVs can also stimulate cell signaling pathways, as described for platelet-derived EVs, which trigger NET formation and the release of proinflammatory cytokines in immune cells, promoting vascular dysfunction in vivo. In this sense, EVs not only function as transport vehicles but also interact with cell receptors to promote changes in cell behavior.Knowledge of these mechanisms will lead to further investigations to develop novel strategies employing EVs to combat viral infection and reduce disease severity based on their potential roles as biomarkers of severity progression, therapeutics (e.g., blockade of EV biogenesis or their interaction with cell receptors), or vector control tools.Therefore, currently available data concerning EVs evaluated in different models suggest that they may contribute directly to the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses.Future research will contribute to understanding the role of EVs, especially their mechanistic and functional effects in vivo, to elucidate their real impact on mosquito-borne Flavivirus diseases. The above could be a near reality owing to the rapid evolution of the field of extracellular vesicles.


Title: An Overview of Zika Virus and Zika Virus Induced Neuropathies

1. IntroductionFlaviviruses (family Flaviviridae) are small (approximately 50 nm in diameter), enveloped, icosahedral viruses that possess a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of between 9–12 kb [1,2,3,4]. The viral genome consists of a single long ORF (open reading frame) encoding around ten proteins, which are formed by co- and post-translational processing and proteolytically processed into three structural (Cap, prM, and E) and seven non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins by a complex combination of host and viral proteases [5,6,7,8]. Currently, there are about 70 members in this genus, the majority of which are transmitted by arthropods [9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. The incidence of flaviviral infections has increased dramatically in the last seven decades [17,18]. These infections are associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Factors responsible for the rapid increase in flaviviral infections are changes in the sizes and distributions of the vector arthropods that transmit the pathogens, further aggravated by climate change and a large number of potential vertebrate hosts [19,20,21,22]. Details of various neurotropic flaviviruses and their associated neuropathies are summarized in Table 1.ZIKV is a significant pathogen that poses an imminent global threat. It was first isolated from rhesus monkeys in Uganda in 1947 [53] (The genome organization of the Zika Virus is sketched in Figure 1). Later, in the 1950s, its detection continued in several other parts of Africa (Egypt, Nigeria) [54]. However, the first clinical infection in humans was not detected until 1964, when it was found that the ZIKV infection in humans is associated with mild fever and maculopapular rash [55]. From 1960 to 2000, ZIKV was detected in several countries in Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia and Pakistan) [54]. The first major ZIKV outbreak occurred in 2007 (in Yap Island), and then in March 2015, it caused a large outbreak in the Americas (particularly Brazil), and the first time was associated with severe disease and congenital illnesses such as infant microcephaly [56,57,58]. In November 2015, Brazil declared a national public health emergency, and in February 2016, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [59].The ZIKV employs multiple mechanisms to replicate (the ZIKV replication cycle is illustrated in Figure 2) and causes a variety of neurological diseases. It has been proposed that after viral entry through the crossing of the BBB (blood–brain barrier), ZIKV tends to infect the microglia, astrocytes, and endothelial cells [63,64,65]. Damage to the CNS can occur when ZIKV infects the CNS cells, and damage occurs either due to viral replication or because of a host-mediated immune (inflammatory) response [66,67,68]. Moreover, ZIKV infection is also associated with various neurological syndromes, e.g., Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), and others [69,70,71]. Multiple mechanisms are known to cause damage to the CNS, which are also discussed in detail later in this review article. Collectively, in this review, we have summarized the observations on biology, transmission, control strategies (vaccines, antivirals, and vectors), oncolytic aspects, animal and cellular models, neuropathies, and neuropathogenesis associated with ZIKV.2. Transmission of Zika VirusThe principal mode of transmission of ZIKV is through mosquitoes; however, studies have found that various other routes may play an important role in the transmission of the disease. These include venereal transmission, vertical transmission, transmission to infants through mother milk, and blood transfusion This makes it very difficult to devise an appropriate strategy for the control of disease in countries where the disease is endemic. The transmission cycle of ZIKV is illustrated in Figure 3.2.1. Vector Borne TransmissionVector-borne transmission of ZIKV occurs through mosquitoes [13,80]. In the sylvatic transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between non-human primates and mosquitoes, while in the urban transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between humans and mosquitoes. The presence of ZIKV has been reported from many species of mosquitoes in Africa and Asia (Aedes aegypti (Ae. aegypti), Ae. africanus, Ae. albopictus, Ae. apicoargenteus, Ae. furcifer, Ae. luteocephalus, Ae. opok, and Ae. vittatus) which may transmit the virus to humans [53,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90]. However, in Yap and French Polynesia, the transmission of ZIKV was suggested to be through Ae. hensilli and Ae. Polynesiensis, respectively) [91,92,93]. The extrinsic incubation period is reported to be 10 days [84]. The vector competence (the ability of the vector to transmit the virus biologically) has not been determined for ZIKV transmission in most of these species [94] and it may be the area of future research. In the urban cycle, the transmission of ZIKV is mainly through the Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. ZIKV has been detected/isolated from wild Ae. aegypti, and they have been demonstrated to be competent vectors in the laboratory where they can transmit the virus to mice and rhesus monkeys [82,86,88]. Recent studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission by Ae. albopictus as well [84,95]. Both of these mosquitoes remain active during the daytime, and they are prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions [96,97]. However, the geographical range of Ae. albopictus is further extended to the temperate regions [98,99,100]. In the USA, both of these mosquitoes have been found in southern and south-eastern states and their maximum numbers have been found from June to October [101].2.2. Sexual TransmissionMany cases of transmission of ZIKV have been observed following sexual contact. Several studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission from males to females. In most cases, the male had a travel history to ZIKV-endemic countries, and when he returned, his partner became infected [102,103,104]. ZIKV’s presence has been detected in human semen [105]. It has been found that ZIKV can persist in semen for over 6 months following infection, suggesting the possibility for prolonged sexual transmission [106,107,108]. Later studies demonstrated that sexual transmission from male to male is also possible [109]. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in urine and saliva [110,111]. Experiments conducted on lab animals have demonstrated that ZIKV is able to replicate in vaginal and rectal mucosa, thus serving as a reservoir of infection [112].2.3. Vertical TransmissionZIKV has been reported to be transferred from mother to fetus during the gestation period. Normally the placenta acts as an effective barrier to curtail transmission of infections from mother to fetus. However, ZIKV is able to bypass these barriers by unknown mechanisms [113]. Studies conducted in a mouse model demonstrated that ZIKV damages the placenta and results in fetal death [114]. In Brazil, during the ZIKV outbreak, a large increase in the number of neonates with microcephaly was reported from mothers who were infected with ZIKV [115]. ZIKV antigen and RNA have been detected in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetal brain tissue [115,116,117]. Therefore, it can be postulated that ZIKV is transmitted from mother to fetus through a damaged placenta (induced by ZIKV) and then ZIKV damages the nervous system of the fetus.2.4. Venereal Transmission in MosquitoesThe maintenance of arboviruses in nature is significantly facilitated when venereal transmission occurs alongside other modes of transmission. Venereal transmission in mosquitoes has been reported for multiple arboviruses, including ZIKV [118,119]. ZIKV is found to be transmitted in the sexual fluids of mating mosquitoes. Intrathoracically ZIKV-infected Ae. aegypti males can transmit the virus to uninfected females during mating, and Ae. aegypti females who are orally infected with ZIKV have the potential to transmit the virus to uninfected males by copulation under laboratory conditions [120]. Furthermore, Aedes mosquitoes acquire and transmit Zika virus by breeding in contaminated aquatic environments [121]. The continuous venereal transmission in mosquitoes could pose a significant public health concern by boosting infection rates and virus spread.2.5. Transmission Through Breast MilkDetection of ZIKV RNA has been observed in the breast milk of ZIKV-infected mothers [122]. This makes it possible for the transmission of ZIKV from the infected mother to the neonates. Studies have demonstrated the presence of ZIKV RNA in babies whose mother’s serum and milk were positive for ZIKV RNA [123]. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed for the flaviviruses WNV and DENV [124,125].2.6. Transmission Through Ocular Fluid/TearsResearchers have found the existence of ZIKV in tears thirty days following ZIKV infection. Their study suggests the possible transmission of ZIKV through tears [126,127]. This is possible as previously a case study revealed that transmission through tears occurred from mother to her child [128].3. Zika Virus Associated Neurological DiseasesZIKV infection has been reported to be associated with a number of neurological diseases (illustrated in Figure 4) which are described in detail below.3.1. MicrocephalyCongenital microcephaly has been previously associated with viral infections, e.g., rubella and cytomegalovirus. However, it was unknown for ZIKV until the Brazilian outbreak [129]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in the amniotic fluid of these fetuses [130]. In 2015, Brazilian authorities reported that the incidence of microcephaly was twenty times higher compared to previous years. This led to further investigations, and in two years (2015–2016), more than 8000 cases of microcephaly were reported [131]. Later on, an analysis of an outbreak in French Polynesia also demonstrated a correlation between ZIKV and microcephaly [132,133]. Further investigations showed that aborted fetuses (during 1st and 2nd trimesters) contained ZIKV RNA in the amniotic fluid, meninges, CSF, and umbilical cord of the microcephalic newborn babies [57,134]. Several studies have been performed to identify the molecular mechanism of ZIKV-associated microcephaly. Cells associated with the BBB, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, are susceptible to infection with ZIKV and their infection with ZIKV leads to upregulation of ICAM-1 and a variety of cytokines (IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-10) that causes enhanced binding and subsequently crossing of the BBB by the immune cells. The access of immune cells to the CNS is associated with neuro-inflammation which contributed to the neuro-pathogenesis of ZIKV [135]. Neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV and undergo apoptosis following infection [136]. During pregnancy, the immune response directed against ZIKV leads to the inflammation of the fetal–maternal interface, causing inflammation and disruption of barrier functions. This allows the recruitment of various immune cells to the fetal tissue, releasing TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor) and IFN-γ (interferon) that lead to neuroinflammation, resulting in the damage and destruction of NPCs required for the neural development of the fetus [137]. The CNS is susceptible to ZIKV infection during all stages of pregnancy, but earlier infection results in severe damage. CNS infection with ZIKV may result in impaired multiplication and migration of neurons, myelination, synaptogenesis, and even apoptosis that may contribute towards ZIKV-associated microcephaly [138]. In cells infected with ZIKV, mitofusion 2 (MFN-2) expression is reduced. Normal expression of MFN-2 is required for the fusion of mitochondria. Therefore, in ZIKV-infected cells, mitochondrial fragmentation occurs. This leads to the activation of apoptosis through a p53-mediated pathway in NPC cells [139,140]. Recently, Gladwyn-Ng et al. [141] have demonstrated the mechanism of apoptosis in neuronal cells infected by ZIKV in mouse embryos and neuronal stem cells (human), showing that ZIKV infections trigger unfolded proteins in cells that lead to activation of the ER stress response Subsequently, these cells migrate to the cortex and undergo apoptosis.3.2. Ophthalmological ManifestationsZIKV infection during pregnancy has been associated with congenital abnormalities in the fetal eye. Neural crest cells (NCCs) are required for normal development of the corneal and uveal stroma, the corneal epithelium, and the trabecular meshwork. They also play an important role in the closure of the optic fissure [142,143]. NCCs express AXL and thus exhibit susceptibility to ZIKV. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV results in viral replication resulting in loss of NCCs [144]. ZIKV infection can also disrupt the normal differentiation of the NCCs leading to defective development of the anterior eye segment leading to micropthalmia [142,145,146,147]. The loss of NCCs during ZIKV infection has also been found to disrupt closure of the optic fissure leading to iris coloboma and abnormal development of the lens zonules. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV can also lead to reduced thickening of the corneal stroma causing corneal ectasia [142]. It can also contribute towards impaired development of trabecular meshwork causing glaucoma [144,148,149,150]. Neuronal depletion during ZIKV infection can also contribute to thinning of the retinal ganglion layer [151,152]. Apoptosis of NCCs during ZIKV infection can also lead to defects in axonal development [145].Ocular manifestations have been reported in approximately 50% of infants who have ZIKV-induced microcephaly. ZIKV infection has been reported to involve the eyes and this represents the viral ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the blood–retinal barrier (BRB), and the blood–aqueous barrier (BAB). The first ZIKV-related eye abnormality was reported in 2016. More than sixty percent of people with ZIKV infections are reported to have conjunctivitis (the most common eye abnormality associated with ZIKV). Other abnormalities are associated with the anterior segment, the posterior segment, and the neuroophthalmic. The abnormalities associated with the anterior segment include microphthalmia, anterior uveitis (with or without raised intraocular pressure), and non-purulent conjunctivitis [153,154,155]. The posterior segment anomalies associated with ZIKV involve the retina and choroid and include maculopathy and multifocal choroiditis [153,156,157,158,159]. Neuro-ophthalmic conditions are related to the paresis of the abducens and oculomotor muscles and can cause ocular flutter, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema [156,160,161,162,163]. ZIKV infection also causes optic nerve involvement, and this includes hypoplastic disk, enhanced cup-to-disk ratio, and nerve pallor. Viral entry into eyes is facilitated by both hematogenous and retrograde transport of ZIKV through the optic nerve and optic tract [164]. Although ocular tissue is immune privileged, it is more permissive to ZIKV infection because of the higher viral load [151]. Certain cells in the retina are relatively more permissive to ZIKV infection including RPE cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells [165]. Choriocapillaris (highly fenestrated) are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and it can facilitate the ZIKV entry into the RPE cells, which are also permissive to ZIKV infection. RPE infection results in inflammation and this subsequently leads to breaking the BRB [108,166]. Normally, the immune response helps the host in eliminating the infection, however, in this case, immune-mediated injury to the eye tissue leads to pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated eye abnormality [167]. Infection of BRB with ZIKV leads to the generation of IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-α, IFN-β, TNF-α, CCL5 and CXCL-10. This leads to subsequent events that culminate in the atrophy of the retina and RPE mottling [168,169].Another mechanism of viral entry in ocular tissue is through ZIKV-infected monocytes, which possess the ability to cross the retinal microvasculature endothelium and subsequently cause retinal infection. Later on, ZIKV-infected monocytes become activated and release cytokines and chemokines that result in immune-mediated injury/damage to ocular tissue [170,171]. The cornea can also act as reservoir of ZIKV infection as it expresses RIG-1, MDA-5, and TLR 3 which facilitate the synthesis of IFN-I and III to mediate antiviral response [136,172]. Infection of the cornea with ZIKV leads to the synthesis of the IL-1β, TNF-α, CCL5, and CXCL-10 which recruits other cells of the immune system to the cornea and this promotes inflammation and damage to corneal tissue leading to keratitis [173]. Through the hematogenous route, ZIKV infects the iris and ciliary body. From here, the virus can infect BAB cells, which damages this barrier and results in viral entry into the aqueous humor [133]. From the aqueous humor, ZIKV gains entry to the trabeculae meshwork and results in the production of cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-1, IFN-α, IFN-β, CCL5, and CXCL-10. This leads to the recruitment of the other immune cells such as Th1 and CD8+ cells that secrete TNF-α and IFN-γ, damaging the trabeculae meshwork and resulting in blockage of aqueous humor outflow, leading to enhanced intraocular pressure and causing glaucoma. Persistent glaucoma can damage the optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells leading to optic neuropathy [174].3.3. Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)GBS is a condition where there is immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. The condition is characterized by the loss of reflexes and flaccid paralysis. The disease occurs in 1/100,000 persons. It has been observed that GBS typically occurs after certain infections such as Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sporadic GBS cases have also occurred following the flaviviral infections (WNV, DENV and JEV) [175]. In 2014, the first report was published about the occurrence of GBS following ZIKV infection in French Polynesia. It was reported that in ZIKV patients, 1/4000 people suffer from GBS (20 times increased incidence) [176]. In the recent ZIKV outbreak in the Americas, approximately 1500 cases were reported between 2014–2015. At the majority of locations, GBS incidence following ZIKV was reported to be 2–10 times higher than background [177]. In Colombia, more than 100 thousand cases of ZIKV were reported with 42 GBS cases/100,000 ZIKV cases. These findings indicate the possibility of the association of ZIKV with GBS [178]. Until now, no clear mechanism is known about the molecular pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated GBS. However, it is thought that the mechanism of molecular mimicry may be an important contributing factor in the pathogenesis of disease (i.e., antibodies formed against ZIKV cross-react with myelin sheath or other neural tissues). However, others have proposed that immune system dysregulation occurs (that is not directly against ZIKV) and that contributes towards its pathogenesis [176].3.4. Cerebrovascular InvolvementCertain viral diseases are associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities. Recently, ZIKV cases have also been reported to involve cerebral vascular abnormalities. A 10-month-old child infected with ZIKV was admitted to hospital with ischemic stroke and had serum positive for ZIKV [179,180,181]. The exact mechanism remains to be determined; however, it is thought that higher susceptibility of endothelial cells to be infected by ZIKV is a major factor and is responsible for cerebral vascular abnormalities [182].3.5. EncephalitisZIKV infection is considered a potential cause of encephalitis. An 81-year-old patient with a travel history to a ZIKV-affected area had reduced consciousness, limb paresis (upper right), and hemiplegia (left side). The patient was ZIKV positive by RT-PCR and viral culture and isolation. The patient was treated and survived. However, fetal cases of ZIKV-associated encephalitis have also been reported. In Brazil, a 37-year-old (y.o.) female was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of rash and joint pain. Later on, she suffered from weakness in her lower limbs, confusion, and difficulty with speech. RT-PCR was positive for ZIKV, while the serum analysis was negative. The patient later died due to brain swelling, leading to increased intracranial pressure [154]. In the Dominican Republic, a female was admitted to the hospital with complaints of neck stiffness and confusion. Her condition deteriorated, and seizures began. CSF examination revealed an increased number of WBCs (white blood cells), the majority of which were lymphocytes (80%). RT-PCR of urine was positive for ZIKV RNA (but negative in the CSF and serum). However, IgM antibodies against ZIKV were detected from CSF and serum, confirming ZIKV exposure. MRI examination revealed cortical edema, a common finding in meningoencephalitis [163]. In another study on ZIKV, subcortical hemorrhage and bilateral lesions were observed in the temporal and frontal regions [162].3.6. Myelitis and EncephalomyelitisZIKV infection has been associated with myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) and encephalomyelitis (inflammation of the brain and spinal cord), which can result in reduced consciousness, urinary retention, and paresis of lower limbs [183]. The first case of myelitis associated with ZIKV was reported in Guadeloupe in a girl (15 y.o.) who was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of headache and conjunctivitis. Later, her condition continued to deteriorate, and she suffered from left-sided weakness and urinary retention. MRI examination revealed a normal brain, whereas abnormalities were revealed in the spinal cord cervical area and thoracic region. CSF, urine, and serum were found to be positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR [184]. In another study, a 26 y.o. Brazilian male was admitted to the hospital with a major complaint of fever, malaise, and neck stiffness, CSF and urine examination revealed that the patient had a ZIKV infection. CSF analysis showed hyper-protein levels and 100 WBCs (white blood cells) per mL (95% mononuclear cells) [183]. Other studies have also indicated an association between ZIKV and myelitis/encephalomyelitis [183,184,185].4. Zika Virus Infection and Extracellular VesiclesViruses can employ extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. EVs are particles surrounded by membranes that can be released into the extracellular space by living or dying cells. Various viral components may be packed inside the EVs [186]. One of the final fates of EVs is their release into blood circulation, through which they can reach distant cells and tissues [187]. It is important to note that EVs share most of the biochemical and biophysical properties of viruses. Both EVs and viruses (naked and enveloped) use the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT) complex [188,189]. Moreover, Rab GTPases (particularly Rab11, Rab35, and Rab27A/B) are also shared during the viral replication cycle as well as EV biogenesis [190]. Many studies have indicated that EVs play a facilitating role during viral infections. These effects can be due to EVs carrying viral receptors, carrying viral particles themselves, or carrying their genome, proteins, or miRNA. Ultimately, it can lead to the priming of the recipient cells and/or inhibiting IFN pathways, apoptosis of immune cells, and the transmission of viral genome and/or proteins to distant organs and tissues [188,191,192,193]. In the case of ZIKV, NS1 protein, viral E protein (inside and outside) and viral RNA can be packed inside the EVs [194]. Interestingly, mosquito cells (C6/36 cells) infected with ZIKV are found to release EVs (containing viral RNA and protein E), which was found to infect both naïve mosquito and mammalian cells (monocytes and endothelial cells) [195].Given ZIKV’s neurotropic nature, it is important to emphasize that ZIKV-derived EVs are found to disrupt the structure of human brain microvasculature endothelial cell junctions (hcMEC/D3), facilitating ZIKV entry into cells of the human CNS [196]. ZIKV can also spread to the CNS through autophagy (a process associated with viral infections and may be regulated by EVs [197,198,199]. In the case of ZIKV, the autophagic vesicles may play an important role in crossing the placental barrier. Normally, the placenta is protected from various pathogens (aided by the autophagy process); however, ZIKV can hijack this process [200,201]. A study using a mouse model has shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine inhibits viral replication (autophagy-dependent) and also effectively prevents mother–fetal transmission of the virus [202,203].5. Models for Studying Zika Virus Infection and PathogenesisDeveloping appropriate cellular and animal models for studying ZIKV is becoming increasingly important to gain appropriate understanding of viral pathogenesis and host-related factors that aid or inhibit viral replication and to devise appropriate disease prevention and treatment strategies.5.1. Cell LinesThe cell lines are widely used to grow and study ZIKV because they provide a controlled environment for viral replication. These cell lines allow scientists to watch viral behavior, examine molecular interactions between ZIKV and host cells, and test antiviral agents. The use of cell lines is essential to virology as they provide a reliable, reproducible system for studying viral pathogenicity and mechanisms in a laboratory setting. The cells susceptible to Zika Virus infection are illustrated in Figure 5 and detailed comprehensively in Table 2.5.2. OrganoidsAlthough cell culture has been used to determine ZIKV replication and pathogenesis, this system is not without its downsides. Cells are unable to mimic in vivo conditions as they lack the cellular structure, composition, and physiology of an organ in which a virus replicates [222]. To overcome this drawback, people are now developing organ analogues in vitro where stem cells are used to generate 3D tissue structures resembling organs. These 3D models are known as organoids and are being used to model and better understand the molecular events that occur following viral invasion and replication in that organ [223]. Studies have provided confirmatory evidence of microcephaly following ZIKV infection by using organoids [224,225]. Qian et al. (2016) used a mini-bioreactor to generate brain organoids and demonstrated that ZIKV infection in brain organoids that mimic the first-trimester fetal brain resulted in ZIKV infection of NPCs, IPC, astrocytes, and neurons, while infection of brain organoids mimicking the second-trimester fetal brain exhibited ZIKV infection of the outer radial glial cells [224]. These findings are correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis providing evidence of ZIKV-associated microcephaly [136]. Yoon et al. showed that the ZIKV NS2A protein is responsible for the alteration and reduced multiplication of the radial glial cells resulting in altered neuronal positioning in the brain [226]. Another study reported that ZIKV infection of NPCs during early pregnancy was associated with the upregulation of TLR-3 receptors, leading to apoptosis of NPCs, resulting in microcephaly [227]. Recently, brain organoid models have also been used to determine the various drug targets against ZIKV [228,229,230,231]. Organoids resembling the placenta have also been developed using first-trimester human chorionic placental villi where ZIKV established infection and proliferated in Hofbauer cells, villus cytotrophoblasts (CTB), and produced the NS3 and E protein [232,233]. To summarize, organoids offer a promising approach to studying the ZIKV viral pathogenesis and also to screening compounds’ antiviral activity in a system more relevant than in vitro cell culture.5.3. Animal ModelsAnimal models have been developed to study ZIKV replication and pathogenesis in vivo.5.3.1. Non-Human Primates (NHPs)Non-Human Primates (NHPs) exhibit significant similarities with humans (pregnancy physiology, long gestation periods, and hemomonochorial placenta) and offer a promising model to study ZIKV infection, neuropathogenesis, and drug discovery. They also exhibit vertical transmission from mother to fetus similar to humans [234]. Rhesus macaques, olive baboons, marmosets, and pigtail macaques have been employed to study ZIKV pathogenesis during gestation. Olive baboons have been able to demonstrate clinical infection when infected during the gestation period. When infected during 4th month of pregnancy, they developed conjunctivitis and moderate rash, with viremia peak at 7 dpi (days post-infection). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins were also detected [235,236]. In other NHPs (i.e., rhesus macaques, marmosets, and pigtail macaques) no clinical infection occurs following ZIKV inoculation. However, in all NHPs, antibodies are formed following ZIKV infection, and placental and fetal ZIKV infection is observed. In rhesus macaques, fetal loss occurs following ZIKV infection, while marmosets and olive baboons exhibit viral RNA in amniotic fluid and placenta. Severe placental infection is observed during pregnancy in marmosets and rhesus macaques [237,238,239].5.3.2. MiceMany viral replication and pathogenesis studies involve the use of mice as animal models because they have large litter sizes and a short gestational period. However, variability in their placental structure and heterogeneity in gestation can be problematic [240]. Another complication occurs due to differences in the cell biology of mice as compared to humans. On viral entry, the viral NS5 protein is able to degrade the cellular STAT2 protein, thereby making IFN signaling ineffective, resulting in viral replication and the development of clinical disease. Degradation of STAT-2 is not observed in mouse cells infected with a virus, leading to unimpaired IFN signaling resulting in low viral titer and failure to develop clinical infection [241]. Therefore, biological modifications are needed to use mice for studying ZIKV replication and pathogenesis events. This can be achieved by using either immunocompromised mice or using alternative routes of inoculation.Immunocompromised MiceImmunocompromised mice are modified for interferon (IFN) insufficiency. This may be conducted by either creating knockout (KO) mice, e.g., interferon alpha receptor knockout (Ifnar-/-), or by using antibodies to block the IFN receptors (MARI-5A3) [242,243]. It has been found that pregnant Ifnar-/- mice exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV infection with subcutaneous inoculation and are able to produce fetal and placental abnormalities [114]. The infection is established in homozygous as well as heterozygous mice, suggesting that partial deficiency in IFN signaling is sufficient to produce fetal neuropathology. As ZIKV infection can occur through venereal transmission; therefore, models have been developed for this purpose. Intravaginal inoculation of ZIKV from 5–8 days of conception results in high levels of viral RNAs in the placenta and fetal tissues in Ifnar-/- mice [244]. ZIKV infection (intravaginal) of IFN regulator factor (IRF) KO e.g., Irf3-/- Irf7-/- mice exhibit higher vaginal and fetal titers of the virus. This implies that inhibition of IFN signaling is a key factor in establishing different mice models.Immunocompetent MiceAs discussed previously, ZIKV infection often fails in immunocompetent mice. However, some researchers have used alternative strategies to produce ZIKV infection by using higher viral titer or other routes of inoculation. A Brazilian ZIKV strain has been used to produce successful fetal infection in SJL mice. In this study, high viral inoculation (1010 to 1012 pfu/mL) was used to produce uterine and fetal infection that ultimately resulted in fetal microcephaly [245]. However, these mice showed higher levels of T cells in the blood and later on developed autoimmunity and sarcoma [246]. The intraamniotic route has also been used for ZIKV inoculation in embryos and resulted in damage to the retina and blood–brain barrier and produced neuronal death and defects in motor neurons in the fetal brain. Intrauterine infection also resulted in ZIKV infection of placental endothelial and trophoblast cells and in the fetus, the virus localizes in the microglial, endothelial, and NPCs of the fetal brain [67,247,248]. Another model has also been developed to study the postnatal CZS progression by inoculating C57BL/6 mice intraperitoneally, and it was seen that the fetus had reduced body weight and microcephaly. Later on, these mice exhibited motor and memory deterioration in adulthood [249]. These studies pave a path towards viral replication and neuropathogenesis studies in immunocompetent mice models that may be deployed for further understanding of ZIKV neuropathogenesis and drug discovery.5.3.3. Farm AnimalsAlthough less common as animal models, pregnant sheep, and pigs may be used as a model for ZIKV replication and pathogenesis. They are widely available and exhibit susceptibility to the virus [250,251]. They can also be used as a model for human pregnancy and fetal growth [252]. ZIKV infection during the first trimester in sheep resulted in placental pathology, reduced fetal growth, and fetal loss [253]. Maternal ZIKV infection during the 4th to 5th week resulted in the detection of ZIKV RNA in the PBMCs of the mother; however, clinical infection failed to occur [253]. Similarly, in pigs, intrauterine infection during pregnancy resulted in placental abnormalities as well as microcephaly in piglets [254]. It has also been seen that following intrauterine ZIKV infection, the African ZIKV lineage was found to produce a more pronounced viral infection as compared to the Asian strain [255]. These findings clearly establish the role of sheep as a possible animal model to study fetal neuropathogenesis due to ZIKV.5.3.4. RatsAs rats become immunocompromised during the final stage of gestation, similar to humans, they may also be utilized as a model to investigate ZIKV neuropathogenesis [256]. Upon subcutaneous (S/C) inoculation of ZIKV to pregnant rat females, reduced cortical and hippocampus volumes were observed in rats, although no pathological findings and viral detection were observed in the maternal counterpart [114,257].5.3.5. HamstersInfection of immunocompetent females during pregnancy was unable to produce productive viral infection; ZIKV RNA was not found in fetal or placental tissue and fetus size remained unaffected [114]. However, ZIKV infection (Malaysia Strain) in immunocompromised hamsters (8 days post-mating) resulted in ZIKV infection of placental tissue and also caused vertical transmission of the ZIKV from mother to offspring [258].5.3.6. ChickenChicken embryos have been demonstrated to support ZIKV viral growth in the chicken brain and other tissues [259]. Intraamniotic inoculation of ZIKV resulted in stunted embryo growth and microcephaly [260]. Furthermore, comparison of the Asian and African ZIKV strains showed that the African strain caused more embryonic pathologies [261].6. Treatment and Prevention Against Zika Virus and Zika Virus Associated Neuropathies6.1. Prevention from Zika Virus Through VaccinesOne of the major methods for viral disease prevention and control is vaccination. Immediately after the outbreak of ZIKV, research began to find ideal vaccine candidates to prevent future ZIKV outbreaks [262]. Several vaccine candidates have emerged; however, very few have been used in clinical trials. The various ZIKV vaccine candidates are summarized in Table 3.6.1.1. Purified Inactivated Zika Virus Vaccines (PIZIKV)Several inactivated vaccines have been developed and tested by animal models. The majority of these vaccines have been able to demonstrate higher antibody titer, reduced viremia, successful passive transfer of antibodies, and protection in mice (interferon deficient) after homologous or heterologous vaccination [263]. In India, one vaccine has entered phase I clinical trials (CTRI/2017/05/008539) [291]. Using mice and non-human primates (NHPs), an aluminum hydroxide-based inactivated ZIKV vaccine has demonstrated promising antibody titers and protection against homologous antigen challenge [265]. Another PIZIKV provided complete protection in a dose-dependent manner (0.016 to 10 ug) and was found to be effective one year following vaccination in macaques [266]. A double-blind randomized controlled trial (Phase I) was performed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of PIZIKV, and it was found that the vaccine was safe for 52 h. However, protection was not found to be effective as only a single dose was given and for better immunogenicity, a double dose may be needed [268].6.1.2. Live Attenuated Vaccines:Live-attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are known for eliciting swift and long-lasting protective immunity and represent a crucial strategy for managing flavivirus diseases [292]. These are made by modifying the virus in such a way that it may replicate within the organism and stimulate the immune system without causing disease. Since 1938, they have been used as the gold standard as they exhibit good safety and effective protection from viral infection [293]. LAVs are known to stimulate the immune system for long-lasting periods (without the need for an adjuvant or any booster). Currently, three approaches are being used for generating ZIKV LAVs, which are (i) generating chimeric strains (using the backbone of an attenuated flavivirus), (ii) codon deoptimization, and (iii) mutagenesis. One of the most important advantages of using live vaccines is their ability to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses (with a single dose of immunization); as the virus continues to multiply within the host cells, allowing continuous loading of MHC (I and II) with viral peptides. In addition, they are cost-effective (both during manufacturing as well as transportation). The past experiences of successful development of LAV against Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) and Yellow Fever Virus (YFV) have clearly shown their potential to be used as safe viral vaccines [279,293]. However, manufacturing of live vaccines usually requires eggs or cell culture and also maintaining a cold chain during transportation. In countries having warm climates, maintaining cold chain only can account for up to 80% of the total vaccine cost [294]. Another major concern associated with the use of live vaccination is inadequate attenuation (once they are at the stage of the human clinical trials [295]. A variety of LAVs have been tested against the ZIKV [292], and the selective studies are summarized in Table 3.6.1.3. Nucleic Acid VaccinesDNA and RNA-based vaccines are being developed for different infectious diseases. They offer the advantage of prolonging immune response following vaccination and induce both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (CMI) [296]. However, one major disadvantage is that DNA vaccines often fail to elicit adequate immune response or offer protection from challenge [297]. Despite these advantages, DNA vaccines may have the risk of eliciting autoimmunity (by eliciting anti-DNA antibody production) and also causing insertional mutations [298]. Another point to keep in mind is that in the case of DNA vaccines, DNA must enter inside the nucleus of the cell, and then after transcription, mRNA must travel outside the nucleus (into the cytoplasm), where it is translated into the proteins. In contrast, for RNA vaccines, RNA can directly be translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, which are then secreted from the cells (into the extracellular matrix) where they can be presented to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). mRNA vaccines have become more popular after the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is also important to note that storage of mRNA vaccine requires maintaining a cold chain, which may not be feasible in developing countries [299]. The summary of various DNA vaccines available against ZIKV is summarized in Table 3.6.1.4. Subunit VaccinesDue to their rapid production and stability, a variety of ZIKV vaccines have been developed. The majority of these vaccines have used the Envelope protein (E protein) and its different segments. These vaccines have been tested in various animal models, which are summarized in Table 3.6.1.5. Viral Vector-Based VaccinesViral vector-based vaccines are prepared by using a vector virus for the insertion of the genetic components of ZIKV, and they have been found to induce good humoral immunity. Lentovirus, adenovirus, and retroviruses are known to be good viral vectors. Various ZIKV vaccines have been developed using various viral vector systems, which have been summarized in Table 3.6.2. Zika Virus Prevention Through Vector ControlMosquitoes play a central role in the transmission of ZIKV. Therefore, reducing ZIKV transmission through vector control methods involves diverse and innovative strategies and tools designed to manage disease-spreading mosquito population. One of the most widely used strategies is the use of chemical insecticides (due to their cost-effectiveness and easy availability). However, due to the emergence of insecticide resistance and their deleterious effects on the environment, the focus is now diverted towards various other control methods [300,301]. Due to their eco-friendly nature, herbal-based control methods have now gained attention. Promising insecticide activities have been shown by extracts derived from the Illicium verum, Zanthoxylum limonella, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon winterianus, Eucalyptus citriodora, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, etc. [302,303,304,305,306,307,308]. Furthermore, nanoparticles derived from Ambrosia arborescens have also shown good larvicidal activity. However, their toxicity profile should be determined against other environment-friendly insects, animals, and humans [307]. Similarly, biological control methods are also being employed due to their minimal impact on the environment [309]. This includes the use of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Various species of entomopathogenic fungi (Metarhizium anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Aspergillus terreus) and bacteria (Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), Wolbachia) have been tested against ZIKV-transmitting mosquitoes [310,311,312,313,314,315]. Particularly, the introduction of Wolbachia in mosquitoes has demonstrated the ability to disrupt the reproductive potential of disease-transmitting vectors. Similarly, the use of various natural predators, i.e., Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, fishes, tadpoles, and copepods, have also been used against the mosquitoes and have shown varying degrees of efficacy in controlling the mosquito population [316]. Moreover, genetic engineering principles have been applied to release genetically modified mosquitoes into the environment [317]. Furthermore, the use of the sterile insect technique is also an innovative approach to control the mosquito population [318]. When used in combination, these strategies offer an integrated approach to vector control, addressing both short and long-term goals of reducing ZIKV and its induced neuropathies. A summary of vector control strategies developed so far is provided in Table 4.6.3. Treatment for Zika Virus6.3.1. Antivirals Against Zika VirusSince the outbreak of ZIKV, many compounds have been proposed to possess antiviral activity against ZIKV. However, in the majority of cases, treatment is symptomatic, and no specific antiviral has been approved for ZIKV treatment. A myriad of approaches are being adopted for searching for anti-ZIKV drugs. These strategies include the screening of different compounds for their anti-ZIKV activity or through repurposing drugs that are already being used for the treatment of other viral infections. In addition, the anti-ZIKV activity of several herbal/plant extracts is also being evaluated. Broadly, anti-ZIKV compounds have been divided into 2 major categories: (a) direct-acting antivirals, which inhibit the viral replication cycle; (b) antivirals targeting host cells [75]; both of these are summarized in Table 5. The former drugs act on the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp); NS5. Polymerase inhibitors and nucleoside analogs are included in this category. They act by targeting the catalytic domain of NS5. The other category of drugs (host-targeting antivirals) targets the host cell processes (that play an important role in viral replication). Viruses need host nucleosides for their genome replication. The host-acting antivirals can act on various steps of viral replication (host cell binding, entry, replication complex formation, viral maturation, and release from the host cell). An advantage of targeting host processes is that they are less susceptible to developing drug resistance [75].6.3.2. Medicinal Plants as Zika Virus AntiviralsModern scientific research has found numerous synthetic antiviral medications that are effective against a variety of viral infectious disorders throughout the past few decades. Unfortunately, a wide range of negative consequences associated with these synthetic medications have been documented. They may occasionally lose their potency against newly arising virus resistance strains [381]. Furthermore, people in developing nations cannot afford expensive synthetic medications for the treatment of viral infections. Medicinal plants may offer economical and efficient antiviral medications. To date, no plant-derived antiviral has been approved for clinical use against ZIKV. Various research has been conducted to identify medicinal plants possessing anti-ZIKV activity, and they have been summarized in Table 6.7. Zika Virus and Its Potential Oncolytic ActivitiesZIKV exhibits tropism for a variety of cell types including normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs/NSPs), microglial cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells [406,407,408]. Following the entry into cells, the virus disrupts growth and development, causing cell death. Studies in various animals have also supported the association between ZIKV infection and neurodegeneration. Inoculation of ZIKV in rhesus monkeys during early pregnancy has been shown to result in the aberrations of the microglial cells and also cortical plate thinning (3 weeks post-inoculation) [409,410]. Therefore, ZIKV is a promising virus that may be used as an oncolytic virus against glioblastoma as it infects the tumor cells. Particularly, in vitro studies have shown that the ZIKV NS5 protein inhibits the migration, proliferation, and invasion of glioblastoma. Studies in mice have shown that it increases the survival of C57/B6 mice with intracranial glioblastoma [411]. Another study in C57/B6 mice has shown that ZIKV increases the survival of mice with glioblastoma (with the suppression of tumor volume as well as the absence of clinical signs) [412]. Further molecular studies have revealed that ZIKV protease causes the cleavage of human cellular gasdermin D (GSDMD), which causes the activation of pyroptosis (caspase-independent) [413]. ZIKV infection in immunocompetent dogs (suffering from glioblastoma) has also been shown to decrease the tumor mass volume and ameliorate neurological signs. Further investigations revealed an increase in the number of immune cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment [414]. This increase in the numbers of immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) has also been observed in C57BL6/J mouse models (suffering from glioblastoma) infected with ZIKV. This infiltration of T cells into the tumor microenvironment provides enhanced protection to mice. ZIKV infection is associated with enhanced activation of the type I interferon signaling pathway in glioblastoma cells and increases the glioblastoma sensitivity to the PD-L1 blockade, which is an important immune checkpoint [415,416,417].8. Future Perspectives in Zika Virus ControlSince its emergence in 1947, ZIKV has only caused widespread epidemics in the last two decades. The outbreaks of ZIKV also suggest the dynamics of transmission variability of ZIKV. The outbreak of ZIKV in the Americas caused a rapid increase in studies of ZIKV pathogenesis and its control measures and treatment strategies. It is of prime importance to continue working on establishing virological and immunological diagnostics kits for ZIKV with enhanced specificity and sensitivity. Another area of focus is ZIKV pathogenesis. Finally, prevention and treatment strategies remain pivotal to curtail ZIKV-related morbidity and mortality. Currently, many vaccines are being tested on animal models, but very few have entered into clinical trials, there is a dire need to improve the quality of good vaccine candidates. Plus, the development of genetically modified mosquitoes could be a groundbreaking tool for controlling Zika virus transmission.


Title: Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis Virus Transmission and Effect on Pathogenesis

Designing pathogenesis studies for arboviruses that accurately simulate natural infection requires quantifying the amount of virus transmitted. Virus assays on mosquito saliva can be used to estimate the amount transmitted to vertebrates during blood feeding. However, amount of virus collected in vitro may not accurately reflect mosquito transmission.Indirect and direct methods can be used to quantify virus delivered in mosquito saliva. Indirect methods include comparing times of death of animals exposed to a mosquito bite with those infected parenterally with known doses and comparing the time between mosquito feeding and development of viremia with the time between needle injection and development of the same viremia level. Direct methods include quantifying virus salivated into drops of blood, virus detected in vertebrate tissues immediately after mosquito feeding, virus salivated into blood agar, and virus salivated into fluids such as oil. Saliva collection in oil-filled capillary tubes, first described by Hurlbut (1), is widely used. Chamberlain et al. (2) compared several indirect and direct methods for quantifying arbovirus transmission and concluded that allowing mosquitoes to feed on serum (similar to the capillary method) is less efficient in detecting virus than other methods. Since most saliva is expectorated during probing, salivation into hanging drops or capillary tubes may be inaccurate because mosquitoes do not need to salivate to locate a blood vessel.The amount of several arboviruses transmitted by mosquitoes has been estimated by using artificial saliva collection (1–12). Up to 3 log10 PFU of eastern equine encephalitis virus is deposited into capillary tubes filled with oil by the vector Culiseta melanura (9). Capillary collection and real-time reverse transcription (RT)–PCR estimate that Culex pipiens pipiens saliva contains an average of 4.3 log10 PFU of West Nile virus (WNV), with a range of 0.5 to 5.3 log10 (8). Recently, we estimated that the epidemic Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) vector, Aedes (Ochlerotatus) taeniorhynchus, salivates 0.2–3.2 log10 PFU into oil-filled capillary tubes (12).Vector saliva enhances infection with many pathogens (13–18), and mosquito saliva is reported to enhance infection by some arboviruses. Deer and chipmunks infected with La Crosse virus by the bite of Ae. (Och.) triseriatus have higher and longer viremias than animals infected by needle (19). Mice exposed to uninfected mosquitoes and injected at the feeding site with Cache Valley virus develop enhanced viremia and seroconversion compared with unbitten mice or to those co-injected with virus and mosquito saliva (20). Mice have higher seroconversion rates to vesicular stomatitis virus when infected by Ae. triseriatus than by needle injection (21). Cytokine expression in the skin of mice infected with Sindbis virus differs after injection with mosquito salivary gland extracts than after injection with virus alone (22).Other studies report no enhancement of arbovirus infection by vector saliva or feeding. Hamsters infected with WNV by mosquitoes or needle injections do not differ in level or duration of viremia, clinical manifestations, pathology, or antibody response (23). Birds infected with western equine encephalitis virus or Saint Louis encephalitis virus by mosquito bite or needle exhibit no difference in viremia responses (24), and mosquito saliva inhibits in vitro infection of dendritic cells by dengue virus (25).VEEV (family Togaviridae, genus Alphavirus) is an important emerging and reemerging pathogen of humans and equines in the neotropics. Since no effective antiviral agents or a licensed human vaccine for VEEV exists, therapy is primarily supportive and prevention relies on avoidance of mosquitoes. Outbreaks of VEE can involve hundreds of thousands of equine and human cases, spread over large regions, and can last several years (26).The effect of vector feeding on vertebrate infections by VEEV has not been studied. We determined the amount of VEEV in mosquito saliva collected in vitro (12) but did not determine whether this amount accurately reflects transmission during blood feeding. To collect saliva in a capillary tube, we need to subject the mosquito to traumatic manipulations that may affect salivation, such as anesthetization or immobilization by removal of the legs and wings. Also, mosquitoes are usually allowed to salivate into capillary tubes for a longer time (e.g., 30 minutes) than is required for engorgement on a host. Because knowing the infectious dose transmitted by mosquitoes is important for designing vertebrate infection studies, in which needles are typically used for virus delivery, we compared the amount of VEEV transmitted by mosquitoes in vitro with that  transmitted in vivo. We also determined whether mosquito transmission affects viremia or time to death when compared with needle infections. Finally, we used tail amputations to investigate the extravascular or intravascular location of VEEV deposition during mosquito feeding.MethodsVirusWe used VEEV rescued from an infectious cDNA clone derived from epidemic strain 3908 (subtype IC), a 1995 human isolate from Zulia State, Venezuela (27). With the exception of some IE virus strains in Mexico, subtype IC viruses are the etiologic agents of all recent VEE epidemics. Strain 3908 was passaged once in C6/36 mosquito cells before isolation of viral RNA and production of infectious cDNA. Virus recovered from baby hamster kidney cells electroporated with transcribed RNA was used for all experiments. Use of virus derived from an infectious clone minimized attenuating mutations that occur when VEEV is passaged in cell culture (28).MosquitoesAe. taeniorhynchus F1 progeny of mosquitoes captured in Florida (29) were reared at 27°C and a relative humidity of 80% in a light:dark cycle of 12:12 hours. Adult females were infected intrathoracically with 4 log10 PFU of VEEV in a 1-μL volume 6–8 days after emergence and incubated at 27°C for 5 days with 10% sucrose provided ad libitum. Intrathoracic infection of mosquitoes with VEEV and incubation for 5 days generates saliva titers comparable to those that occur after oral infection (12).In Vivo TransmissionThirty-nine 6- to 8-week-old National Institutes of Health (NIH) Swiss mice (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN, USA) were anesthetized with pentobarbital, and the distal portion of the tail was exposed to 1 infected mosquito. After mosquito engorgement, the tips of the tails of 29 mice were severed and immediately homogenized in 300 μL of Eagle's minimal essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in a Mixer Mill 300 (Retsch Inc., Newton, PA, USA); the tails of 10 control mice were left intact. After centrifugation at 9,000×g for 5 minutes, the supernatant was removed for cell culture assays and RNA extraction with a Qiagen kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Vero cells were injected with 30 μL of supernatant and observed for 5 days for cytopathic effects (CPEs). All CPE-positive samples were titrated by plaque assay on Vero cells.RNA was also extracted from the pellet of the tail homogenate with Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The RNA of both supernatant and tail pellet was tested for VEEV positive-strand RNA by using real-time RT-PCR with a one-step kit (Qiagen) and a Smart Cycler (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Forward (5´-CATAGTCTAGTCCGCCAAGATGTT-3´) and reverse (5´-CGATAGGGCATTGGCTGCAT-3´) primers and a probe (5´-[6-FAM]CCCGTTCCAACCAATGTAT[NFQ-MGB]-3´) were used for amplification and detection, respectively. The assay consisted of reverse transcription at 50°C for 20 minutes, denaturation at 95°C for 10 minutes, and 45 cycles at 95°C for 15 seconds, 63°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 30 seconds. Virus titers were extrapolated from RT-PCR results by comparison with a standard curve generated from serial dilutions of a VEEV stock quantified by plaque assay.After a mosquito probed or fed on the mouse tail, its infection was confirmed by using forced salivation into a capillary tube as described below. All 39 mice used were kept in individual cages, monitored for signs of infection, and bled retroorbitally 2 weeks later to test for seroconversion by using plaque-reduction neutralization tests.To ensure that all virus injected into mouse tails could be recovered and detected, a series of known doses (2.9 log10, 2 log10, and 1 log10 PFU) was injected intradermally into the tail of a mouse. The tips were then severed and processed as described above. Each dose was tested in duplicate, and nearly all the injected virus was recovered (mean 2.7 log10 PFU recovered for 2.9 log10 inoculum, mean 1.9 log10 PFU recovered for 2.0 log10 inoculum, and mean 0.8 log10 PFU recovered for 1.0 log10 inoculum). Samples with known virus titers were also tested to ensure that freezing and thawing once did not alter virus content.Saliva AssaysThirty-nine saliva samples from intrathoracically infected mosquitoes that fed on a mouse were obtained by immobilization (legs and wings removed) and forced salivation into 10-μL capillary tubes (VWR International, West Chester, PA, USA) containing immersion oil (type B, Cargille Laboratories Inc., Cedar Grove, NJ, USA). After 30–45 minutes, salivation was confirmed by appearance of bubbles at the tip of the proboscis. An additional cohort of mosquitoes was allowed to salivate for intervals (repeated in triplicate) to duplicate times of observed mosquito feeding. The oil-saliva mixture was centrifuged into 100 μL of MEM containing 20% FBS and frozen at -80°C; 30 μL was then added to Vero cells for detection of CPE. Mosquito infection was confirmed by assaying triturated bodies and legs and wings for CPE, followed by plaque assay.Viremia and DeathTen 6- to 8-week-old NIH Swiss mice were infected by either 1 mosquito or intradermal injection into the ear with either 0.9 or 3.4 log10 PFU, which represented the range of titers injected by mosquitoes (see below). Five mice from each cohort of 10 were bled retroorbitally at 12, 24, 36, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hours postinfection, and sera were titrated by plaque assay. Mice were monitored daily until signs of encephalitis appeared, after which they were observed 4 times a day to determine time of death. The University of Texas Medical Branch Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all experiments.Statistical AnalysisLog-transformed data were normally distributed, except for data from RT-PCR assays from mouse tail homogenate pellets on which 1 mosquito probed (this group was not compared statistically). One-way analysis of variance using Tukey's test for multiple comparisons and an unpaired t test were used to compare all normally distributed data with GraphPad Prism 4.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).ResultsIn Vivo Versus In Vitro Transmission TitersTo determine whether saliva collection accurately approximates the amount of VEEV transmitted during a mosquito bloodmeal, we quantified virus from saliva collected in vitro and virus deposited at sites of in vivo blood feeding. One mosquito feeding on the distal portion of a mouse tail transmitted a mean ± standard deviation of 1.1 ± 1.0 log10 PFU (11 PFU) as detected in the homogenate supernatant and 0.8 ± 0.9 log10 PFU (7 PFU) as estimated by real-time RT-PCR. These amounts were significantly lower (p<0.001) than the mean ± standard deviation amount (3.6 ± 1.5 log10 PFU or 4,300 PFU) deposited into capillary tubes during 30–45 minutes of salivation (Figure 1). However, the time for engorgement (<3 minutes) was much shorter than the 45 minutes allowed for in vitro salivation. Therefore, we matched times of saliva collection (range <3 minutes) to the exact engorgement times. Less VEEV (p<0.05) was still detected after in vivo transmission than after <3 minutes of in vitro salivation (1.9 ± 1.2 log10 PFU or 74 PFU).Figure 1Titers of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) transmitted in vitro or in vivo by Aedes taeniorhynchus. A, C, and E) Mosquitoes that engorged to completion (depicted by closed symbols). B, D, and F) Mosquitoes who probed but did not engorge (depicted by open symbols). The assay used to determine the virus titer was either cell culture assay (A and B, depicted by squares) or real-time reverse transcription–PCR (C and F) of tail homogenate supernatant (C and D, depicted as triangles) or pellet (E and F, depicted as circles). The last 2 cohorts (G and H) represent VEEV titers in saliva of mosquitoes allowed to salivate for 45 min (G, depicted as +) or for the same range of times (<3 min) required for mosquitoes to engorge completely on mouse tails, repeated in triplicate (H, depicted as ×). Solid horizontal lines indicate means, and horizontal dashed lines indicate detection limits for the assays. Symbols below the dashed lines indicate samples from infected mosquitoes (bodies and legs or wings positive for cytopathic effects) that were below the limit of detection for the assay, and numbers indicate the percentages for these negative samples (column A=36%, B=47%, C=21%, D=33%, E=57%, F=73%, G=3%, and H=13%). *Denotes mice that were bitten by a given mosquito that died.The effect that the time of probing or feeding had on the titer of virus salivated was analyzed by timed saliva collections and mouse tail exposures. The amount of VEEV collected from mosquitoes that salivated in vitro for <3 minutes was significantly less than the amount collected from mosquitoes allowed to salivate for 45 minutes (p<0.0001). However, no significant difference was seen in the amount transmitted by mosquitoes allowed to completely engorge compared with mosquitoes allowed to probe only, without engorgement (p>0.05, 95% confidence interval -0.8 to 1.5 log10 PFU for the difference in the mean titers).To address the possibility that some virus injected by feeding mosquitoes rapidly binds to or penetrates mouse cells and therefore is not measured by plaque assay, we also examined VEEV RNA content in mouse tails. No difference was detected between mean virus content in the mouse tail homogenate supernatants assayed by RT-PCR or plaques (Figure 1). Detection of relatively small amounts of viral RNA in tail homogenate pellets indicated that almost all virus remained in the supernatant and that infectious virus was not underestimated because of rapid penetration of cells or binding of virus to connective tissue (Figure 1).Location of VEEV Deposition In VivoTo assess intravascular versus extravascular locations of VEEV deposition by mosquitoes, we amputated the distal portions of mouse tails immediately after engorgement, and mice were observed for signs of infection. Forty percent (4/10) of control mice whose tails were not amputated after mosquito feeding survived compared with 79% (23/29) of those whose tails were amputated (p = 0.04, by Fisher exact test). No mice that survived developed neutralizing antibodies. NIH Swiss mice infected with VEEV have a death rate approaching 100%, which indicates that a systemic VEEV infection did not occur in surviving animals. This suggested that nearly all saliva and associated virus were deposited extravascularly and confined to the bite site by a lack of immediate vascular dissemination. Tail amputation nearly doubled survival rates by removing this virus before replication and dissemination.Virus Transmitted Versus Time of EngorgementTo assess the temporal pattern of virus deposition during blood feeding, the amount of VEEV transmitted was compared with the time required for mosquito engorgement. Figure 2 shows no correlation between feeding time and amount of VEEV in mouse tails, suggesting that most virus in saliva was deposited early during probing, with minimal deposition during engorgement.Figure 2Amount of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus transmitted into a mouse tail versus the time required for complete engorgement. Only samples from mosquitoes that completely engorged and transmitted detectable virus were included.Effect on Pathogenesis in Mice Infected by Needle Versus MosquitoTo determine whether mosquito saliva affects pathogenesis of VEEV infection, mice were infected by either the bite of 1 mosquito or by intradermal needle injection. Two VEEV doses were used to represent the range of titers injected during blood feeding (Figure 1). Viremia from needle injection with a high dose did not differ from that generated by mosquito transmission (Figure 3). In contrast, viremia from a mosquito bite was higher than that from a needle injection of a low dose for the 12-hour (p<0.05) and 96-hour (p<0.001) time points. A significant difference in viremia (p<0.001) was also observed at the 12-hour and 96-hour time points for mice infected by needle injection of a high dose than infection of a low dose. No difference was detected in the mean survival times of mice infected by either mosquito (5.9 ± 0.6 days) or needle injection with 8 PFU (6.4 ± 0.7days) or 3.4 log10 PFU (6.3 ± 0.4 days) (Figure 4).Figure 3Viremia in mice infected by 1 mosquito bite or intradermally by needle injection with 2 different doses of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus representing the range of doses delivered during blood feeding (Figure 1). Five animals per cohort were bled at each time point. Error bars indicate standard deviations.Figure 4Survival of cohorts of 10 mice infected with Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus either by 1 mosquito bite or by intradermal needle injection with 2 doses representing the range of virus titers delivered during mosquito blood feeding (Figure 1).DiscussionStudies with some (19–21) but not all (23,24) arboviruses suggest that natural infection by mosquito bite may potentiate arboviral infection compared with parenteral infection. Because the effect of mosquito transmission on infection by VEEV has not been addressed, we assessed the infectious dose delivered by a natural vector, Ae. taeniorhynchus, compared with estimated doses from saliva collections. We also evaluated the effect of mosquito VEEV transmission on pathogenesis in mice.In Vivo Versus In Vitro TransmissionOur results indicate that Ae. taeniorhynchus transmit less VEEV in vivo than they deposit into a capillary tube, even when saliva collection times are matched to engorgement times. We therefore caution against extended times of saliva collection in capillary tubes because mosquitoes allowed to salivate for 45 minutes expel more VEEV than those that salivate for <3 minutes, the approximate maximum time required for natural engorgement.Our study also assessed the location of saliva deposition. As reasoned by Turell et al. (30,31), if an arbovirus were deposited intravascularly, it would quickly circulate beyond the bite site and animals with tail amputations would still become infected and die. Turell et al. reported that when the tails of suckling mice are exposed to a VEEV-infected Ae. taeniorhynchus and the tails are amputated £10 minutes later, 31%–37% survive compared with 4% of mice whose tails were not amputated (30). Our results indicating that the odds of dying are decreased by ≈50% for those whose tails were amputated suggest that saliva and VEEV are deposited both intravascularly and extravascularly. This conclusion is slightly different than that of Turell et al. (30,31), who concluded that mosquitoes inject most virus extravascularly and only small amounts intravascularly or that intravascular transmission occurs only occasionally. An explanation for the differences in death rates found in our studies and those of Turell et al. is that they used suckling mice, whereas we used adult mice. Two of our mice that had been only probed by an infected mosquito also became infected. Surprisingly, no VEEV was detected in the tail homogenate of these mice by either cell culture or RT-PCR. Because the 50% mouse subcutaneous lethal dose (LD50) for VEEV strain 3908 administered in the tail is 12 PFU (D.R. Smith, unpub. data), which is greater than the LD50 for injection in the thigh (12) and an amount detectable by our methods, virus was probably deposited primarily intravascularly in these 2 animals.Forty percent of our mice with intact tails survived after allowing an infected mosquito to engorge. NIH Swiss mice are highly susceptible to VEEV; death rates are typically 100%. Therefore, our results and those from our previous study (12), which reported that infected mosquitoes often deposit <12 PFU of VEEV into capillary tubes, suggest that systemically infected Ae. taeniorhynchus frequently transmit little or no virus. In contrast to the 40% survival rate of mice with intact tails, 100% of mice infected by mosquito bite at another site died, presumably because of a difference in the site of virus deposition. The subcutaneous LD50 for VEEV strain 3908 administered in the tail is 12 PFU compared with <1 PFU in the leg (D.R. Smith, unpub. data). Mosquitoes may deposit different amounts of virus at different anatomic sites, depending on accessibility of blood vessels.Time of Engorgement and Infectious Dose TransmittedThe amount of VEEV transmitted by Ae. taeniorhynchus did not correlate with time of engorgement. However, we did not count how many times the mosquito probed before beginning to engorge. Assuming that most mosquito saliva is injected during the intradermal probing period that precedes cannulation of a blood vessel and that infection of the host correlates with the duration of salivation during probing, probing frequency could affect transmission outcome and should be investigated.Effects on VEE Pathogenesis of Infection by Needle Versus MosquitoBecause mosquitoes transmit a wide range of arbovirus doses, we injected mice with 2 doses that represented the range of VEEV transmitted in vivo. No difference in viremia was detected between mice infected by a mosquito than by needle injection of a high dose. However, mice infected by mosquito bite showed higher viremia titers at the early (12 hours) and late (96 hours) time points than did mice infected with a low dose given by needle. Because mice injected with the high dose also had higher viremia titers at some time points than did mice in the low-dose cohort (Figure 3), the difference in the infection by mosquito bite versus a low-dose injection by needle may indicate only that some mosquitoes transmitted doses >8 PFU. The only way to confirm this slight effect of mosquito transmission on early and late viremia would be to duplicate the exact distribution of in vivo transmission titers by needle injections. However, volumes injected by mosquitoes compared with those injected by needles would differ, as would intradermal sites of deposition. Another approach is to co-inject mosquito saliva with virus (20,22), but the same volume and site discrepancies would apply.Although route (mosquito versus needle) or dose of VEEV had no detectable effect on death rates (Figure 4), mosquito transmission enhancement of early viremia titers could affect subsequent vector infection, and comparable studies with natural reservoir or amplification hosts are needed to assess this possibility. In preliminary studies, no difference in the viremia response of spiny rats was observed after VEEV infection by needle compared with mosquito bites (A.S. Carrara and S.C. Weaver, unpub. data).Our results agree with reports of little or no enhancement of alphaviral infections by mosquito transmission (24). In several studies describing enhancement of arboviral infection by mosquito transmission, multiple mosquitoes were allowed to feed and transmit to 1 vertebrate (19–21), or salivary gland extracts from many mosquitoes were injected with virus (20,22). Because natural infection rates of mosquitoes are typically low, simultaneous transmission by >1 vector is probably rare. In addition, virus amounts injected by needle in these studies may have been less than the virus amount transmitted by mosquitoes, which would confound interpretation. Artificial conditions used for several experiments demonstrating potentiation of arbovirus infection by mosquito transmission may therefore exaggerate the true effect.Significance for Pathogenesis StudiesIn conclusion, Ae. taeniorhynchus transmit less VEEV in vivo than they deposit in vitro into capillary tubes. Mosquito transmission of VEEV has little or no effect on the overall murine viremia profile and none on death. To design VEE pathogenesis studies that simulate natural infection, a dose range from 10 PFU to 1,000 PFU is recommended to simulate mosquitoborne infections. Because VEEV saliva titers differ among mosquito species (12), comparable studies should be conducted with other vectors.


Title: Pathogenesis and shedding of Usutu virus in juvenile chickens

IntroductionAs an emerging zoonotic virus, Usutu virus (USUV, family: Flaviviridae, genus: Flavivirus) is an increasingly important global public and wildlife health concern [1]. USUV was first isolated from a Culex neavei mosquito in South Africa in 1959 and has since been detected throughout sub-Saharan Africa, central Europe, and the Mediterranean Basin [2,3]. USUV belongs to the Japanese encephalitis serocomplex, where it shares similar antigenic properties with West Nile virus (WNV) and St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), both neuroinvasive arboviruses found in wild bird populations in the United States [4]. USUV is maintained in an enzootic cycle between ornithophilic mosquitos, primarily Culex spp., and wild birds [5–7]. Incidental “spillover” infections in mammals, including humans, are also known to occur [4,8–11]. To date, 79 USUV infections have been reported in humans, with symptoms ranging from asymptomatic or mild febrile illness, to meningoencephalitis or encephalitis [4,12–17].The earliest indication of USUV circulating in European wild bird populations occurred in 2001 in Austria [18], though retrospective analysis suggests that USUV was circulating five years earlier in Italy [19]. Since its establishment in Europe, USUV has been implicated in a decline of breeding bird populations [20,21]. The burden of disease in wild bird populations has been most prominent in the Eurasian blackbird (Turdus merula) [20,22], great grey owl (Strix nebulosa) [21], and house sparrow (Passer domesticus) [23].While several murine models have been developed to evaluate human USUV pathogenesis [24–28], the use of an avian model is essential to understanding the characteristics of transmission dynamics and avian pathogenesis. Experimental inoculation attempts with USUV have failed to reproduce infection (as evidenced by virus isolation) in two domestic avian hosts. Two-week-old domestic geese (Anser anser domesticus) inoculated intramuscularly with USUV strain 939/01 (Vienna 2001) were positive for USUV nucleic acid in pooled organ samples, a pharyngeal swab, and a single plasma sample by RT-PCR [29]. Viral nucleic acid was detected in two-week-old chickens intravenously inoculated with USUV strain 939/01 (Vienna 2001) in pooled organs, cloacal and pharyngeal swabs, and isolated PBMCs [30]. Although these in vivo studies reveal that different domestic avian species are susceptible to USUV, neither resulted in individuals developing infectious virus in blood, which is critical for transmission to mosquitos. Viral RNA in serum was observed in domestic canaries (Serinus canaria) inoculated intraperitoneally with USUV strain UR-10-Tm (Italy 2010); viral RNA was also detected in organs, droppings, and feathers of 3 inoculated canaries [31]. Thus, an avian model of USUV infection with infectious virus has not yet been reported.The domestic chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus) has commonly been used as a model of infection and surveillance measures in flavivirus infections, including Murray Valley encephalitis virus [32,33], SLEV [34,35], WNV [36,37], and USUV [38]. Although viremia has been observed in WNV experimentally infected chickens, there appears to be an age dependent difference in viral titer, where an adult chicken model reaches peak viremia of 4 log10 PFU/mL [36] and a two-day-old chick peaks at 7 log10 PFU/mL [37]. Age-related differences in viremia levels have also been observed in one-day-old compared to one-week-old SPF chickens inoculated with WNV, with detectable viremia on days 2–7 post-inoculation in one-day old chickens and only on day 2 post-inoculation in one-week old chickens [39]. These studies suggest that age of infection is crucial for a flavivirus avian model and that a juvenile chicken model could be employed to discern the viral kinetics of USUV.The primary goal of this study was to develop a model of USUV in birds that could be used to study viral pathogenesis and transmission. Juvenile commercial ISA Brown chickens and two chicken lines that were previously bred from a common founder population for high (HAS) or low (LAS) antibody response to sheep red blood cells [40–42] were experimentally inoculated with USUV. We found the LAS chickens developed clinical disease, as well as significantly higher viremia compared to HAS chickens. Mathematical modelling showed that the viral clearance rate is a stronger mitigating factor for altering USUV viremia than neutralizing antibody responses. These models provide a tool for further evaluating avian-mosquito transmission dynamics of USUV.Materials and methodsVirus isolatesUSUV isolates used throughout the study were: HU10279-09 (Spain 2009, Africa 2 lineage, MN813489, passage 2+, isolated from Culex perexiguus) [43], TMNetherlands (Netherlands 2016, Europe 3 lineage, MN813490, passage 5, isolated from Turdus merula) [21], UG09615 (Uganda 2012, Africa 3 lineage, MN813491, passage 3, isolated from Culex sp.) [44], and SAAR1776 (South Africa 1959, Africa 2 lineage, MN813492, passage 9, isolated from Culex neavei) [3]. These strains have been previously sequenced by our lab [28].Cell linesVero cells were grown at 37°C with 5% CO2 and maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) (Fisher Scientific), supplemented with 5% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. Cells were plated at 6.5 × 104 cells/well in 12-well plates for plaque assays or 1.65 × 105 cells/well in 6-well plates for PRNTs.DF-1 chicken fibroblast cells were grown at 37°C with 5% CO2 and maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) (Fisher Scientific), supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. Cells were plated at 1.8 × 105 cells/well in 12-well plates and inoculated one day later with USUV strain at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 in triplicate. Serial timepoints were collected every 24 h for five days. This was repeated twice for a total of three replicates. Viral titer was quantified by Vero cell plaque assay.Chicken experimentsUSUV inoculation in ISA Brown chickensSeventy ISA Brown mixed-sex chickens were obtained from the Poultry Research Center (Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA) and randomly assigned to isolator cages in an ABSL-2 facility. Six to ten birds were housed in each isolator cage. Chickens acclimated for one day prior to inoculation. This experiment was split over two experimental sessions.Groups of two-day-old chickens (n = 16) were subcutaneously inoculated in the abdominal region with 1500 PFU (50 μl inoculum) of one of four USUV strains (HU10279-09, TMNetherlands, UG09615, or SAAR1776) diluted in BA-1 viral transport media. Six 2-day-old chickens served as a control group and were injected with 50 μl of PBS.For the high dose experiment, 24 ISA Brown mixed-sex chickens were inoculated as for the low dose group, except groups (n = 12) were subcutaneously inoculated with 105 PFU (50 μl inoculum) of USUV strains.A 50 μl blood sample was collected daily from either the jugular vein or brachial wing vein and stored in a serum-separator tube. Fluids (0.25–0.5 mL) were provided orally to each bird following venipuncture. Whole blood samples were centrifuged to separate serum and subsequently stored at −80°C until further processing. A final 100 μl blood sample was collected from 9 birds in each group on dpi 14. On days 3 and 5 post inoculation, a subset of 3 birds from each group was euthanized via CO2 asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. The following tissues were aseptically collected for viral titration and histopathology: brain, bursa, heart, kidney, liver, lungs, and spleen. Tissues were stored dry at −80°C for later quantification via plaque assay. Prior to freezing, a portion of each tissue was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for histopathology. Oral and cloacal swab samples were also collected from euthanized individuals. Cotton-tipped swabs were premoistened in 0.5–1 mL BA-1 viral transport medium, and oral and cloacal samples were collected by swabbing the mucosal surfaces of the oropharynx and cloaca, respectively. The swab was gently placed inside the cavity and 2–4 circular passes against the mucosal surfaces were made. Efforts to keep fecal residue out of the transport medium were made [45]. Swab samples were stored at −80°C until further processing.USUV inoculation in HAS and LAS chickensThe HAS and LAS chicken lines originated from a common White Leghorn founder population and have been bred for >40 generations for a single trait: high (HAS) or low (LAS) antibody response against sheep red blood cells [40,41]. Twenty-five chickens from each line were randomized into groups. Groups (n = 16) of one-day-old HAS and LAS chickens were subcutaneously inoculated with 1500 PFU (50 μl inoculum) of the Netherlands 2016 USUV strain. Nine 1-day-old chickens from each line served as a control group and were inoculated with 50 μl of PBS. Ten inoculated individuals from each line were bled daily for seven days, as described previously. A final blood sample was collected on dpi 14. On days 3 and 5 post inoculation, 6 birds from each line were euthanized via CO2 asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. Tissues and oral and cloacal swabs were collected from euthanized individuals and processed as described previously. If clinical signs including lethargy, ruffled feathers, poor responsiveness, or weight loss ≥ 15% were observed, then birds were euthanized via CO2 inhalation, followed by cervical dislocation.All experiments were performed in accordance with the Virginia Tech Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC #18-069). Throughout the experiments, commercial feed and fresh water were provided ad libitum. Chickens were monitored daily for clinical signs by animal care staff and research personnel.Viral quantification assaysViral titers of serum, tissues, and oral and cloacal swabs were quantified through Vero cell plaque assay. Tissues were weighed and suspended in equal parts BA-1 medium, then homogenized through bead homogenization in a Qiagen TissueLyserLT at 50 oscillations/sec for 2–6 min. Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 18,500 rpm for 3 min. The limits of detection were 2 log10 PFU/mL for serum samples, 1.7 log10 PFU/g or 0.3 log10 PFU/tissue for tissue samples, and 0.4 log10 PFU/swab for oral and cloacal secretions.PRNT assaysBlood collected at 14 days post inoculation was assayed by plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT). Sera were heat inactivated at 56°C for 30 min and incubated with approximately 1000 PFU of the homologous USUV strain for 1 h at 37°C before plating on Vero cells. Neutralization activity was defined by plaque reduction at a 90% threshold [46].HistopathologyFollowing euthanasia, tissues were collected and stored in 10% neutral buffered formalin prior to standard processing and paraffin embedding. Sections were cut at 5 μm and stained by routine hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) staining for histopathological analysis. Tissues were semi-quantitively evaluated for the number of foci of inflammation; scores were summed for a composite pathology score. The number of foci of inflammation in 5, 200× fields was counted. A composite score scale is as follows 0 = 0; 1 = 1–5 foci; 2 = 6–10 foci; 3 = 11–15 foci; 4 = 16 + . The median pathology score was use for comparison of lesions across groups. Slides were analysed by a board-certified veterinary pathologist.Mathematical modeling of virus-host interactionA target cell-limited model (Equation 1) was used to determine the kinetics of the virus titers in USUV-infected HAS and LAS chickens. The model is described by the following variables. Leukocytes susceptible to USUV, called target cells (T), become infected at constant rate β mL per virion per day resulting in latently infected cells (E). Latently infected cells become productively infected cells (I) at rate k per day. Productively infected cells produce virus at rate p per infected cell per day and are removed at rate δ per day. The removal rate accounts for both natural death and the possibility that the antibody is enhancing the rate of infected cell loss through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity or complemented mediated lysis. Virus (V) is removed at rate c per day. The removal rate accounts for both virus degradation and the possibility of antibody enhancing the rate of virus clearance through opsonization. The initial target cell concentration is estimated to be T0=10,000 leukocytes/ml. The viral inoculum is V0=1500 PFU which, when distributed through 2.5 mL of blood, gives an initial log10 virus concentration of log10⁡V0=2.78 PFU/ml. There were no infected cells at the beginning of the study, therefore, we set E0=I0=0 leukocytes/ml.
(1)dTdt=−βTVdEdt=βTV−kEdIdt=kE−δIdVdt=pI−cVParameter estimationData fitting was performed by comparing HAS and LAS virus titer data at times tilog10⁡Di to predicted virus population at times ti as given by model (Equation 1) log10⁡V(ti), for i=1,2,…n. Initially, the HAS and LAS groups were considered to have similar characteristics. A non-linear mixed effects model and the stochastic approximation expectation-maximization (SAEM) algorithm implemented in Monolix Suite 2019R1 (Lixoft 2019), with log normally distributed parameters, point one parameter variation, and proportional residual errors were used to minimize the functional J(param)=minparam∑k=1TH+TL1TH+TL∑i=1n(log10Dik−log10Vk(ti,param))21/2, where param={k,p,β,δ,c}, TH=13 is the number of subjects in the HAS group, TL=13 is the number of subjects in the LAS group, and n is the number of data points in each subject. These initial estimates were used to assign values to two parameters, k and p to avoid non-identifiability. The remaining parameters paramr={β,δ,c} were then assumed to be HAS or LAS population specific. They were estimated by performing HAS only and LAS only population fits using a non-linear mixed effect model as well as individual fits for each subject in the HAS and LAS groups, using the method and specification described above.Additionally, the reproduction number (or basic reproductive ratio), defined as the number of infected cells (or virus particles) that are produced by one infected cell (or virus particle), when the virus is introduced into a population of uninfected target cells T0 was estimated for HAS and LAS populations. It is given by R0=βpcδT0.Statistical analysisDescriptive statistics including means and standard deviations of viremia, viral tissue titers, and viral swab titers were calculated for chicken studies. Survival curves were analysed by Mantel–Cox test. Viremia and weight change data were analysed using Repeated Measures two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s or Sidak’s multiple comparisons tests, as appropriate. Tissue and swab data were analysed using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s or Sidak’s multiple comparisons tests, as appropriate. Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the results of PRNT90 assays. Data were analysed and graphed using GraphPad QuickCalcs and GraphPad Prism 9 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).ResultsRecent USUV isolates replicate to higher titers compared to the prototypic USUV isolateGrowth kinetics of four USUV strains: Uganda 2012, South Africa 1959, Spain 2009, and Netherlands 2016 were evaluated in vitro in DF-1 chicken fibroblast cells. Uganda 2012 and South Africa 1959 had an average peak titer of 6.4 log10 PFU/mL and 6.7 log10 PFU/mL, respectively, on dpi 4. Spain 2009 and Netherlands 2016 reached an average peak titer of 7.4 log10 PFU/mL on dpi 5 (Figure 1). The prototypic strain, South Africa 1959, generated significantly lower titers compared to Netherlands 2016 on dpi 2–3 and 5 (Figure 1, p < 0.05). Both European strains generated significantly higher titers than both African strains on dpi 4 (Figure 1, p < 0.05).
Figure 1.Growth kinetics of USUV isolates in DF-1 cells. The growth curve was performed three times, with one representative experiment shown. Symbols represent mean and error bars represent standard deviation of triplicate inoculated cultures. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.Two-day-old chickens develop viremia when inoculated with African and European strains of USUVIn order to evaluate USUV infection in an in vivo avian model, two-day-old ISA Brown chickens were subcutaneously inoculated with 1500 PFU of one of four USUV strains: Uganda 2012, South Africa 1959, Spain 2009, or Netherlands 2016. There was 100% survival across all inoculated subjects and no clinical signs of disease, including weight loss, were observed (Figure 2(A)). Of the 52 inoculated chickens bled consecutively, all but 1 became viremic. Chickens inoculated with the prototype strain, South Africa 1959, developed significantly lower serum titers compared to the three other USUV isolates on dpi 1 and compared to Uganda 2012 on dpi 3 (Figure 2(B), p < 0.05). The peak mean serum titer for Spain 2009 and Netherlands 2016 occurred on dpi 1 at 3.6 log10 PFU/mL and 3.5 log10 PFU/mL, respectively. The peak mean titer in serum for Uganda 2012 and South Africa 1959 occurred on dpi 2 at 3.5 log10 PFU/mL and 2.9 log10 PFU/mL. Chickens sustained detectable viremia for at least five days post inoculation, with one individual still viremic on dpi 6.
Figure 2.Serum titers of two-day-old ISA Brown chickens inoculated with African and European strains of USUV. (A) Mean percentage of initial starting weight of chickens following 1500 PFU USUV inoculation. (B) Serum titers of chickens inoculated with 1500 PFU of USUV. (C) Serum titers of chickens inoculated with 105 PFU of USUV. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05.To determine whether a higher inoculum dose would increase viral titer in serum, two-day-old ISA Brown chickens were inoculated with 1 × 105 PFU of either Netherlands 2016 or Uganda 2012. There was 100% survival, and all chickens developed viremia. The peak mean titer for Netherlands 2016 and Uganda 2012 occurred on dpi 2 at 2.7 log10 PFU/mL and 3.0 log10 PFU/mL dpi 2, respectively. There were no statistically significant differences between the two strains across all timepoints (Figure 2(B), p > 0.20). Mean titer was significantly lower in the Netherlands 2016 high dose group relative to its low dose counterpart on dpi 1 (p < 0.01). Together, these data indicate that two-day-old chickens are susceptible to infection by African and European USUV isolates.Viral dissemination and histopathology in heart tissue of USUV-inoculated chickensTo assess for viral dissemination and evidence of disease, tissues were collected from three individuals per low-dose experimental group on dpi 3 and dpi 5. Infectious viral titer was quantified in tissue samples, and tissue sections were evaluated for histopathology. Infectious virus was isolated from heart samples of chickens inoculated with either of the European strains on dpi 3, with Netherlands 2016 group producing significantly higher viral titers than either of the African strains (Figure 3(A), p < 0.05). By dpi 5, infectious virus was isolated from heart tissue of chickens across all USUV isolates. Sections of heart collected on dpi 5 were also evaluated microscopically. Hearts were semi-quantitively evaluated for the number of foci of inflammation; scores were summed for a composite pathology score. Juvenile chickens infected with Netherlands 2016 or Spain 2009 had similar scores and were characterized by more foci of inflammation compared to the chickens inoculated with Uganda 2012 or South Africa 1959 (Figure 3(B)). No inflammation was observed in heart tissue collected from control chickens inoculated with PBS (Figure 3(C)). A representative image from a chicken infected with Spain 2009 with numerous foci of lymphocytic and heterophilic infiltrates is shown (Figure 3(D)). Representative images from a chicken infected with Uganda 2012 with limited inflammation (Figure 3(E)), and from sham-inoculated control bird with no inflammatory foci (Figure 3(C)) are shown. Additional tissues were collected, and infectious virus was isolated from at least one individual across all virus strains tested but evidence of disease was not observed histologically.
Figure 3.Evidence of USUV dissemination and USUV-mediated pathology in heart tissue from ISA Brown chickens inoculated with African and European strains of USUV. (A) Viral titer in heart tissue collected on dpi 3 and dpi 5. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05. (B) Composite histopathology scores of heart tissue; lines represent median. (C) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from chickens inoculated PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (D) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from chickens inoculated with European USUV strain, with foci of lymphocytic and heterophilic infiltrates (arrow) (H&E stain). (E) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from chickens inoculated with African USUV strain, with foci of inflammation (arrow) (H&E stain, scale bars = 200µm). (F) Viral titer in oral swabs collected on dpi 3 and dpi 5. (G) Viral titer in cloacal swabs collected on dpi 3 and dpi 5. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line.To assess viral shedding, oral and cloacal swabs were also collected from individuals euthanized for tissue collection. Infectious virus was detected in oral swabs of chickens inoculated with all virus strains on dpi 5 (Figure 3(F)). No infectious virus was detected in cloacal swabs collected from chickens inoculated with USUV at either time point (Figure 3(G)).A PRNT90 was used to determine the development of neutralizing responses in serum on dpi 14 against homologous USUV strains. At least two samples from each experimental group generated a neutralizing response against USUV at a reciprocal PRNT90 titer of 20 (Supplemental Table 1). These data indicate that ISA Brown chickens generated a similar neutralizing response to African and European USUV strains.Statistically significant greater morbidity and viremia in chickens from a line selected for low antibody responsesTo establish a chicken model with more severe disease and higher serum titers, juvenile chickens from lines that had undergone long-term selection (47 generations) for high (HAS) or low (LAS) antibody production against sheep red blood cells [40,41] were subcutaneously inoculated with 1500 PFU of Netherlands 2016 or PBS as a control. While both the inoculated and control HAS groups had 100% survival, mortality in LAS groups was observed by dpi 2 (Figure 4(A)). There was 89% survival in the LAS control group and 69% survival in the LAS USUV inoculated group, with no significant differences in survival between groups. USUV-inoculated LAS chickens that did not survive exhibited disease signs including weight loss ≥15%, lethargy, and ruffled feathers.
Figure 4.Mortality, morbidity, and viremia of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV. (A) Kaplan-Meier survival curve of chickens inoculated with 1500 PFU USUV or PBS. (B) Mean percentage of initial starting weight of HAS chickens following USUV inoculation. (C) Mean percentage of initial starting weight of LAS chickens following USUV inoculation. *p < 0.05. (D) Viremia of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with 1500 PFU. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001.Congruent with survivorship data, the mean weight of inoculated HAS chickens did not significantly differ from the control HAS group (Figure 4(B)). In contrast, the mean weight of LAS chickens inoculated with USUV was significantly lower than the control LAS group (Figure 4(C), p < 0.05) on dpi 5–7. Although these LAS juvenile chickens were growing and gaining weight, the data suggest that USUV infection diminished their rate of weight gain.Viremia was measured daily for seven days following inoculation with USUV. All chickens developed viremia. Serum titers were significantly higher in LAS than HAS chickens on dpi 2–5 (Figure 4(D), p < 0.01, p < 0.0001). Both experimental groups reached peak viremia on dpi 2, with HAS chickens generating a mean 3.1 log10 PFU/mL titer and LAS chickens generating a mean 4.3 log10 PFU/mL titer.USUV dissemination and histopathology are significantly greater in LAS chickensTissues were collected from six individuals on dpi 3 and dpi 5 to assess viral dissemination and pathology in each HAS and LAS experimental groups. Viral titers in the heart and kidney were significantly higher in LAS than HAS chickens on dpi 3 (Figure 5(A), p < 0.05, p < 0.01). Infectious virus was also isolated from brain, liver, bursa, lungs, and spleen of both HAS and LAS chickens (Figure 5(A, B)). Infectious virus was isolated from the panel of tissues collected on dpi 5 in both HAS and LAS chickens, with significantly higher USUV titer in the lungs of LAS chickens (Figure 5(D, E), p<0.05). Viral titers in the brain of LAS chickens were higher, though not significantly so, than HAS chicks on dpi 5 (Figure 5(D)).
Figure 5.Evidence of viral dissemination, shedding, and histopathology in tissues of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV. (A) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 3. (B) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 3. (C) Viral titer in oral and cloacal swabs collected on dpi 3. (D) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 5. (E) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 5. (F) Viral titer in oral and cloacal swabs collected on dpi 5. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (G) Composite score of heart tissue; line represents median. (H) Composite score of brain tissue; line represents median. (I) Composite score of kidney tissue; line represents median. (J) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (K) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with inflammatory lesions and presence of heterophils and lymphocytes (arrow) (H&E stain). (L) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (M) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with inflammatory lesions and presence of heterophils and lymphocytes (arrow) (H&E stain). (N) Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (O) Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with heterophilic inflammatory foci (arrow) (H&E stain). (P) Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (Q)Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with heterophilic inflammatory foci (arrow) (H&E stain). (R) Representative image of brain tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (S) Image of brain tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chicken inoculated with USUV, with proliferation of glial cells in the neuropil (arrow) (H&E stain, scale bars = 200 µm).To further evaluate the pathologic effect of USUV in HAS and LAS chickens, sections of tissues collected on dpi 5 were examined microscopically, with only heart, kidney, and brain showing evidence of disease. Tissues were semi-quantitively evaluated for the number of foci of inflammation; scores were summed for a composite pathology score. HAS and LAS chickens had similar median pathology scores in the heart (Figure 5(G)). Inflammation in the brain was observed in one LAS chicken (Figure 5(H)). HAS and LAS chickens had similar median pathologic scores in the kidney (Figure 5(I)). Heart tissue sections collected from both chicken lines were characterized by numerous inflammatory lesions, necrosis, lymphocytes, and heterophils, suggesting myocardial damage; whereas the sham-inoculated controls from each line did not exhibit signs of inflammation (Figures 5(J–M)). The kidney sections of both lines were characterized by inflammatory foci, including heterophils, with no signs of inflammation observed in the respective sham-inoculated controls (Figures 5(N–Q)). Proliferation of glial cells in the neuropil of one LAS chicken was observed and is suggestive of neuroinvasive disease (Figure 5(S)). There were no signs of inflammation observed in the respective sham-inoculated control (Figure 5(R)).To assess viral shedding, oral and cloacal swabs were collected from all inoculated individuals on dpi 3 and dpi 5. USUV was isolated from oral swabs with significantly higher titers in LAS chickens than HAS chickens on dpi 3 (Figure 5(C), p < 0.05). USUV was also isolated from cloacal swabs of HAS and LAS chickens, with mean titers being similar on dpi 3 (Figure 5(C)). Infectious virus was isolated in oral and cloacal swabs of both groups on dpi 5 (Figure 5(F)). Together, these data suggest that USUV is more pathogenic in LAS compared to HAS chickens.HAS chickens generate a stronger neutralizing antibody response against USUV than LAS chickensSerum was collected from HAS and LAS chickens on dpi 14 to evaluate rates of seroconversion using PRNT. There were significantly fewer LAS chickens that developed a neutralizing antibody response than HAS chickens (Table 1, Fisher’s exact test, p < 0.05). More than half of the HAS chickens neutralized USUV at titers of 40 or above. PRNTs were also performed on serum collected from HAS and LAS chickens on dpi 3, dpi 5, and dpi 7, but no sample reached the 90% reduction threshold. These data show that chickens selected to generate a higher antibody response to sheep red blood cells also develop a stronger neutralizing antibody response against USUV compared to those selected for low antibody response.
Table 1.Neutralizing antibody response in sera collected on dpi 14 from HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV as determined by plaque reduction neutralization test at 90% threshold (PRNT90).PRNT90 titer% of subjects (n) HASLASp-value<2010 (1)66.67 (4)0.03572030 (3)16.67 (1)NS040 (4)16.67 (1)NS8010 (1)0 (0)NS32010 (1)0 (0)NSPercent (n) of exposed subjects reaching each titer is shown. NS denotes not significant.Viral clearance rate and infected cell removal are important for mitigating USUV viremiaTo determine whether differences in neutralizing antibody titers could explain differences in viremia in HAS and LAS chickens infected with USUV, a target cell-limited model with eclipse phase (Equation 1) was fitted to HAS and LAS virus titer data. Non-identifiability issues were avoided by assuming that the eclipse phase (1/k) and the virus production (p) are identical among the HAS and LAS populations, and fixing them at the combined populations estimate of 1 d and 44.7 virions per cell per day, respectively. The remaining parameters were assumed to be HAS- and LAS- specific and carried out as individual fits for each chicken within the HAS and LAS populations (see Supplemental Table 2, for the HAS and LAS average values). Data fitting showed good agreement with the experimentally determined virus load data, suggesting that peak serum titers occur when the number of newly infected cells no longer compensates for the loss of infected cells (Figure 6, see Supplemental Table 3 for corresponding individual fit data).
Figure 6.Mathematical modeling of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV. Kinetics of USUV in HAS and LAS chickens as given by model (Equation 1) versus data. A. Individual fits for HAS chickens B. Individual fits for LAS chickens. The parameters used in stimulation are given in Supplemental Table 3, k=0.97 per day, p=44.7 per infected cell per day, initial conditions are T0=10,000 leukocytes/mL, E0=I0=0 leukocytes/mL, and log10⁡V0=2.78 PFU/ml. LAS chickens.Differences in virus infectivity rates, infected cell loss, and virus removal were observed between HAS and LAS groups. The average estimate for the infectivity rate of individuals from the HAS population, β=1.06×10−3 mL per virion per day, is 2.6 times higher than the average infectivity rate of the birds from the LAS population, β=4.04×10−4mL per virion per day, suggesting a lack of enhanced neutralizing antibody effects in the HAS group. The higher infectivity rate in the HAS cohort, however, is compensated by increased infected cell loss, δ=14.7 per day, 14.7-times larger than the infected cell loss in the LAS population, δ=1 per day. Additionally, the HAS group has enhanced virus clearance, c=8.5 per day, 2.7 times larger than the virus clearance in the LAS population, c=3.13 per day. This additional virus degradation in the HAS class is consistent with antibody-mediated neutralization.The average basic reproduction number (or basic reproductive ratio), given by R0=βpcδT0 was estimated to be R0=3.79 for the HAS cohort, compared to R0=57.8 for the LAS populations. This implies that the lower serum titers in HAS chickens reduces virus transmissibility by 15-fold.DiscussionThis study revealed that USUV is pathogenic in juvenile chickens, with robust viral dissemination. Studies with three different lines of chickens (commercial ISA Brown, LAS, and HAS) indicated that juvenile chickens develop USUV viremia; USUV can be shed orally; and the heart is an important target organ for USUV replication and pathogenesis. Chickens inoculated with the South Africa 1959 strain had lower titers in serum, heart tissue, and oral swabs than chickens inoculated with contemporary strains (Figures 2(B) and 3(A–F)), suggesting that USUV may have evolved to increase replication in birds. Experimentally inoculated LAS chickens experienced morbidity that was not observed in either the HAS or commercial chickens. Additionally, LAS chickens generated significantly higher titers in serum, organ samples, and oral swabs (Figures 4 and 5), and a significantly lower virus-neutralizing immune response than did the HAS group. Altogether, juvenile chickens are an appropriate model for assessing USUV pathogenesis and transmission, in which weakened immune responses increase pathogenesis and transmission potential.Histopathological analysis identified inflammation in heart tissue of USUV-inoculated chickens (Figures 3 and 5). Myocarditis and immune infiltrates in the heart have been reported in naturally infected wild birds in Europe, including the Eurasian blackbird, great grey owl, and house sparrow [21,47,48]. Inflammation was also observed in the brain of a single infected LAS chicken and in the kidney of both HAS and LAS groups, also consistent with USUV infected wild birds, as mentioned above [21,47,48]. While infectious virus was detected in the liver and spleen of LAS and HAS chickens, histopathological analysis did not reveal evidence of inflammation, whereas infiltrates of mononuclear cells and necrosis was observed in the spleen and liver of geese [29] chickens [30] and canaries [31] experimentally infected with USUV. Signs of inflammation following USUV infection were also observed in the heart and brain of experimentally inoculated canaries [31]. Thus, our results in juvenile chickens recapitulate many of the findings in experimental and natural USUV infections of various avian species. However, the degree of neuroinvasion was lower than expected based on reports of wild birds. While the LAS chickens did develop morbidity and neuropathology, they did not become as severely ill as described in some reports of wild birds. A further limitation of using a juvenile chicken model is that the poorly developed immune response of young chickens makes the model less useful for assessing therapeutics or prophylactic treatments to prevent disease.The peak viremia generated in LAS chickens was 104–105 PFU/mL. Thus, the LAS chicken line serves as a model that may be appropriate for determining the USUV viremia threshold for infectivity of Culex spp. mosquitos. Future studies to determine viremia threshold level for infectivity, coupled with data on wild bird susceptibility to USUV, can help determine which avian species are important for zoonotic viral maintenance and ultimately provide predictive capabilities for determining which bird populations are at risk for USUV emergence. Furthermore, bird-bird contact transmission has also been reported in experiments with WNV [49–51]. Our data showed that USUV is shed in oral and cloacal secretions of LAS chickens and, therefore, suggests the potential for USUV transmission between birds as well. However, there is currently no data on whether oral ingestion is a known transmission route for USUV.When investigating a viral dose-dependent response, surprisingly, a higher viral inoculum dose corresponded to decreased viremia titers in chickens compared to those inoculated with a lower dose (Figure 2(B)). This phenomenon was also observed in three-week old chickens inoculated with SLEV [52], suggesting that high dose inoculum may be less effective at producing viremia in young chickens. Additionally, in wild birds experimentally inoculated with WNV, a higher inoculum dose did not significantly increase peak viremia titers but rather increased the proportion of infected birds [53–55]. Thus, our results indicate that in future avian experiments 1500 PFU is an appropriate dose for assessing USUV pathogenesis and transmission.Results from our experiments with genetically distinct lines of chickens provide further insights into USUV-host interactions. The HAS chicken line has been well characterized to exhibit higher defensive responses, such as limited disease development, increased survivorship, and regular weight gain, when exposed to various pathogens including bacterial, viral, and parasitic [41]. Specifically, HAS chickens had 100% survivorship and developed a higher antibody response to Newcastle disease virus than their LAS counterparts. HAS chickens also developed fewer air sac lesions when challenged with Mycoplasma gallisepticum and had significantly higher weight gain when challenged with Eimeria necatrix than LAS chickens. HAS chickens were more resistant to splenomeglia virus and feather mites than their LAS counterparts. However, this high resistance was not comprehensive, as HAS chickens showed less resistance to Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus infection than LAS chickens [41]. Genome sequencing and gene ontology analysis revealed three candidate genes responsible for driving the variance in humoral immune response between the HAS and LAS chicken lines: MHC, SEMA5A, and TGFBR2 [42]. Differences in the MHC locus, which encodes for proteins involved in antigen presentation [56], likely explain in part the differential neutralizing antibody responses developed in the HAS and LAS chickens against USUV. Further characterization of the innate and non-neutralizing responses will be essential to understand the avian anti-USUV response, as the modelling results from our study indicate the HAS chickens have a greater rate of loss of infected cells and higher rate of viral clearance than the LAS chickens. This increased loss of infected cells in the HAS chickens may be due to antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity or complement mediated lysis. This is reflected in the sustained higher serum titers observed in the LAS chickens. This suggests that the HAS chickens are better able to control viral replication during acute infection. Whereas much of the current literature has explored the role humoral immunity plays in reducing WNV infections following repeat exposure in wild bird populations [49,57,58], there is limited knowledge on the interactions between the avian innate immune system and WNV. Newhouse and colleagues [59] elucidate some of the critical players in the avian innate immune response after experimentally infecting zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) with WNV. Future work on identifying the role of the innate immune system in USUV infection in birds will be critical for our understanding of this emerging zoonotic virus and the drivers of viral evolution.Results from our studies have shed light on important characteristics of USUV infection, pathogenesis, and immune responses in a physiologically relevant model organism. The shared phylogenetic and ecological characteristics between USUV and WNV suggest that USUV has the potential to serve as an emerging threat. Many of the USUV outbreaks in Europe resulted in large die-off events of Eurasian blackbird (T. merula) populations. With the global distribution of related species, including the American robin (T. migratorius), which is a competent host for WNV [49,60], it is possible that USUV may continue to emerge. The data presented here and the development of a novel avian model provide vital tools for further evaluation of USUV pathogenesis and transmission in birds.


Title: Differential cell line susceptibility to the emerging Zika virus: implications for disease pathogenesis, non-vector-borne human transmission and animal reservoirs

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that has been largely neglected for 60 years after its first isolation from the serum of a febrile sentinel rhesus macaque in the Zika Forest of Uganda in 1947.1 Since 2007, ZIKV has emerged to cause large epidemics of a dengue-like illness in the Pacific islands and Latin America, with imported cases also reported in other continents.2, 3 As of 14 July 2016, more than 60 countries/territories have reported continuing mosquito-borne transmission of ZIKV.4 Although most patients infected with ZIKV have an asymptomatic or a self-limiting acute febrile illness, some patients may develop severe neurological complications, such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, or fatal disseminated infections.2, 5, 6, 7 Moreover, recent clinico-epidemiological, laboratory and animal studies on pathogenesis have established the association between ZIKV infection and congenital anomalies, such as microcephaly, central nervous system malformations and ophthalmological abnormalities.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13ZIKV research has so far been mainly focused on the pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated neurological complications. Questions on the pathogenesis of ZIKV's other clinical manifestations, its unique ability among flaviviruses to be transmitted trans-placentally and sexually, and its potential animal reservoirs remain mostly unanswered. Although in vivo phenomena may not be completely reproducible in the in vitro setting, cell line susceptibility studies are often useful for providing critical data for these knowledge gaps in the early phases of epidemics caused by emerging RNA viruses.14, 15 In this study, we correlated the differential cell line susceptibility, species tropism, viral replication efficiency and antigen expression patterns with the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of ZIKV, and compared them with those of the closely related dengue virus type 2 (DENV-2). Our findings provided novel implications on the disease pathogenesis, transmission and potential animal reservoirs that could be applied to optimize laboratory testing protocols and infection control strategies for this global health emergency.Materials and MethodsVIRAL ISOLATESTo investigate on the differential cell line susceptibility to epidemic ZIKV and pre-epidemic ZIKV, we included a clinical isolate of ZIKV (Puerto Rico strain PRVABC59) obtained from a patient in the recent South American epidemic (ZIKV-PR; kindly provided by Brandy Russell and Barbara Johnson, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA), and another pre-epidemic ZIKV strain isolated from a nonhuman primate in Uganda in 1947 (976 Uganda strain) (ZIKV-U; kindly provided by Tatjana Avšič Županc, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, the European Virus Archive). An archived clinical isolate of DENV-2 was obtained from Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, for comparison with ZIKV, as the two viruses are closely related phylogenetically and have similar clinical manifestations. The ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates were amplified by three additional passages in Vero cells and C6/36 cells, respectively, to make working stocks of the viruses.ETHICS STATEMENTInstitutional Review Board approval for use of the vial isolates was obtained and all samples were anonymized. The cell lines used in this study were obtained from sources listed in Table 1.VIRAL CULTUREViral culture was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 33 cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species were each inoculated with one multiplicity of infection of the ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates for 1 h (Table 1). Non-attached virus was removed by washing the cells twice in phosphate-buffered saline (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The monolayer cells were maintained in minimum essential medium, Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), DMEM/F12 or RPMI medium, with 1% fetal calf serum, depending on the type of cell line according to supplier's instructions (Gibco). The suspension cells were maintained in RPMI medium with 2% fetal calf serum (Gibco). All infected cell lines were incubated at 37 °C for five days, except C6/36 which was incubated at 28 °C. Cytopathic effects (CPE) were examined at one, three and five days post-virus inoculation (d.p.i) with inverted light microscopy.RNA EXTRACTION AND QUANTITATIVE REVERSE-TRANSCRIPTION PCRTotal nucleic acid (TNA) was extracted from culture supernatants of the 33 cell lines infected by ZIKV or DENV-2 at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. using EZ1 Virus Mini Kit v2.0 (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) as we previously described.16, 17 Briefly, 200 μL of supernatant were used for extraction and the TNA was eluted in 60 μL of AVE buffer. Real-time one-step quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used for the detection of ZIKV and DENV-2 using QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) in a LightCycler 96 Real-Time PCR System (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Five microliters of purified TNA was amplified in a 20 μL-reaction containing 10 μL of 2 × QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Master Mix, 0.2 μL QN Probe RT-mix, 0.8 μM forward primer, 0.8 μM reverse primer and 200 nM probe. ZIKV detection was performed as previously described, with slight modifications.18 Forward primer (5′-CGY TGC CCA ACA CAA GG-3′), reverse primer (5′-CCA CYA AYG TTC TTTT GCA BAC A-3′) and probe (5′-HEX-AGC CTA CCT TGA YAA GCA RTC AGA CAC TC-IABkFQ-3′) targeting the ZIKV envelope gene were used. For DENV-2 detection, forward primer (5′-GCA TAT TGA CGC TGG GAR AGA C-3′), reverse primer (5′-CGY TCT GTG CCT GGA WWG ATG-3′) and probe (5′-FAM-CAG AGA TCC TGC TGT C-MGB-NFQ-3′) targeting the DENV-2 3'-untranslated region were used. Reactions were incubated at 45 °C for 10 min, followed by 95 °C for 5 min, and then thermal cycled for 50 cycles (95 °C for 5 s, 55 °C for 30 s). A series of 10-fold dilutions equivalent to 1 × 102–1 × 106 copies/reaction mixture were prepared to generate calibration curves and run in parallel with the test samples.CLONING AND PURIFICATION OF HIS6-TAGGED RECOMBINANT ZIKV AND DENV-2 NS1Primers (5′-CAT ATG GAT GTG GGG TGC TCG GTG GAC T-3′ and 5′-CTC GAG TGC AGT CAC CAT TGA CCT TAC T-3′) were used to amplify the gene encoding the ZIKV–nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) protein by RT-PCR. The sequence encoding a 352-amino-acid fragment of ZIKV–NS1 protein was amplified and cloned into the NdeI and XolI sites of expression vector pETH in frame and downstream of the series of six histidine residues. The recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was expressed in Escherichia coli, denatured in 8 M urea, and purified with Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity chromatography (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The solubilized protein was refolded by slowly dialyzing with refolding buffers. Expression of the recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was confirmed by western blot analysis using mouse anti-His monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Preparation of DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19PREPARATION OF SPECIFIC ANTIBODIES AGAINST ZIKV- AND DENV-2-NS1 PROTEINSThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 30 μg of purified recombinant ZIKV-NS1 protein was mixed with an equal volume of complete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) and injected subcutaneously into BALB/c mice. Incomplete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) was used in subsequent injections at 14-day intervals for three times. Serum samples were collected 14 days after the fourth injection. Preparation of specific antibodies against DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19ANTIGEN DETECTION OF INFECTED CELL LINES BY IMMUNOFLUORESCENCEThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Cell smears at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. were prepared and fixed in chilled acetone at −20 °C for 10 min. The fixed cells were incubated with mouse antiserum against the ZIKV- or DENV-2-NS1 protein, followed by FITC-rabbit anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were then examined under a fluorescence microscope. Three representative microscopic fields were chosen and 100 cells were counted for characteristic cytoplasmic apple green fluorescence. The mean percentage of positive cells was rounded up to the nearest multiplicity of 10. Uninoculated cells were used as negative control.STATISTICAL ANALYSISThe Student's t-test was used to compare the mean viral load of the different cell lines at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. with the mean baseline viral load at 0 d.p.i. All calculations were based on log-transformed viral loads. P-value of <0.01 was considered as statistically significant. Computation was performed using the Predictive Analytics Software v18.0 for Windows.ResultsHUMAN CELL LINESEighteen human cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U showed similar tropism as defined by viral load, immunofluorescent antigen staining and CPE. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in 14/18 cell lines infected with ZIKV-PR or ZIKV-U (Figures 1A and 1B). These included the placental (JEG-3), genitourinary (HEK, HeLa, HOSE6-3, LNCaP and 833KE), neuromuscular (SF268 and RD), retinal (ARPE19), respiratory (Hep2, Calu-3 and HFL), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines. There was a slight increase in mean viral load of about 0.5–1 lgcopies/mL in the monocyte (THP-1) and B lymphocyte (Raji) cell lines (P>0.01), but none of the immune cell lines achieved a ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the placental (JEG-3), cervical (HeLa), neuronal (SF268), upper respiratory tract (Hep-2) and intestinal (Caco-2) cell lines. Twelve of these 14 cell lines (JEG-3, HEK, HeLa, LNCaP, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7) showed obvious ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF in addition to a high viral load (Table 2). The peak ZIKV-NS1 protein expression in these cell lines occurred on 3–5 d.p.i. ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), retinal (APRE19), lower respiratory tract (HFL) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 2). Although ovarian (HOSE6-3) and testicular (833KE) cells showed high mean viral loads in qRT-PCR, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was consistently found in only ⩽5% of infected cells. CPE were observed in 8 of these 14 cell lines, namely, JEG-3, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7 (Table 3). CPE were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 3). The gradual onset of CPE in most of these cell lines at 3 d.p.i. correlated with the steady increase of viral load and ZIKV-NS1 protein expression at 3–5 d.p.i.In contrast, DENV-2 showed a much narrower range of human tissue tropism, with ⩾2 log increase in the mean viral load (P<0.01) in only 9/18 cell lines (HEK, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7; Figure 1C). Notably, unlike ZIKV, the DENV-2 load did not significantly increase by ⩾2 lgcopies/mL in any of the genital tract and placental cell lines, with only mildly increased viral load (P>0.01) and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression in the HeLa cell line. Most of these nine cell lines with increased viral loads demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression (Table 2) and CPE (Table 3). The CPE were generally delayed in onset (5 d.p.i.) and limited (⩽50%), except in the RD and Huh-7 cell lines.NONHUMAN CELL LINESFifteen nonhuman cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U again showed similar tropism in these cell lines. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/15 cell lines (Figures 4A and 4B). These included the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), cat (CRFK), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines. None of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines showed a ⩾2 log increase in viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. All of these eight cell lines showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, usually starting on 3 d.p.i. and peaked on 5 d.p.i. (Table 2). ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 2). Some of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines also showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression, but these expressions were much less prominent than that in the other cell lines. CPE were observed in six of these eight cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines, and were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the nonhuman primate, pig, hamster and chicken cell lines (Table 3). CPE were not observed in the mosquito (C6/36) cell line within 5 d.p.i.A narrower range of nonhuman cell lines were susceptible to infection by DENV-2 than ZIKV. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in only 6/15 cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), bat (TP2), hamster (BHK21) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 4C). All of these six cell lines demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression by IF (Table 2). CPE were observed in five of these six cell lines (all except C6/36), but was usually not prominent (⩽50%) except in the LLC-MK2 and BHK21 cell lines (Table 3).DiscussionAlthough ZIKV infection has been described as a dengue-like illness in the past, recent evidence suggests that ZIKV is unique among known human-pathogenic flaviviruses. ZIKV is the first flavivirus known to be associated with congenital malformations, and sexual and vertical transmissions in human.1, 8, 9, 20, 21, 22 The pathogenesis of these unusual clinical manifestations and transmission routes is incompletely understood. Moreover, a comprehensive surveillance for potential animal reservoirs of ZIKV, which are likely important in facilitating the spread of the virus after 60 years of quiescence, has not been reported. A virus' ability to grow in cells of different host species might provide insight into its ability to cross interspecies barriers. We therefore conducted this systematic study to characterize the tropism of the emerging ZIKV in a broad range of human and nonhuman cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species. The findings in our study may have important clinical and epidemiological implications for this rapidly expanding viral epidemic.Productive ZIKV replication as defined by ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, and presence of CPE was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/18 human cell lines, which represented cells of placental, neuronal, muscle, retinal, pulmonary, intestinal and hepatic origin. This broad tissue tropism is likely related to the wide distribution of the candidate receptors of ZIKV, including AXL, TYRO3 and DC-SIGN, in different organs.23 The placental (JEG-3) and neuronal (SF268) cell line tropism corroborated with the congenital and neurological manifestations of ZIKV infection. These manifestations include congenital microcephaly and other central nervous system malformations in infected fetuses, and meningoencephalitis, myelitis, and post-infectious Guillain–Barré syndrome in adults.1, 5, 8, 24 ZIKV RNA, full-length viral genome and/or viral particles could be detected in the brain tissue of fetuses with congenital microcephaly.8, 25 Microscopically, flavivirus-like virions were observed together with extensive inflammation, astrocyte and microglial activation, and injury in the cortex and the lateral corticospinal tracts in the fetal brain tissue.8, 25 Moreover, ZIKV could impair growth and deplete neural progenitor cells in human neurospheres and cerebral organoids.26, 27Consistent with ZIKV's tropism for the human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cell line, myalgia and arthralgia with periarticular edema are common features in symptomatic ZIKV infection. Fetuses with congenital ZIKV infection may develop arthrogryposis.28 Myositis and myocarditis were observed in suckling mice inoculated with ZIKV intracerebrally, and viral RNA could be detected in the muscle and heart of type I interferon receptor-deficient mice infected with ZIKV.29, 30Viral tropism for the retinal (ARPE19) cell line corroborates with the ophthalmological complications of congenital ZIKV infection, including chorioretinal atrophy and pigmentary maculopathy.10, 13 Abdominal symptoms including diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain and jaundice with hepatic dysfunction have been reported in patients with ZIKV infection, and are in agreement with the susceptibility of the intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines to ZIKV.1, 6, 7, 31 Respiratory distress may occur in severe ZIKV infection, and this correlates with ZIKV's tropism for respiratory (Hep-2, Calu-3 and HFL) cell lines.6, 7 Similarly, the clinical features of DENV infection, including encephalopathy/encephalitis (SF268), myalgia and rhabdomyolysis (RD), retinitis (ARPE19), respiratory symptoms (Hep-2 and HFL), diarrhea (Caco-2) and hepatic dysfunction (Huh-7), also correlated with the cell line susceptibility to DENV-2 in our study.32, 33Although neurological manifestations may also be seen in infections caused by other flaviviruses, such as DENV, yellow fever virus, West Nile virus (WNV) and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), none of these flaviviruses have been associated with congenital microcephaly and central nervous system malformations. These unique clinical features of ZIKV infection require the virus to be able to infect neural progenitor cells of the fetus in utero during early gestation. A striking difference between the cell line susceptibilities of ZIKV and DENV-2 observed in our study was ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in placental cells (JEG-3). JEG-3 cells infected with ZIKV produced high viral loads (~10 lgcopies/mL), abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and prominent CPE. This finding helped to explain the unique ability of ZIKV to infect the fetus via the placenta and cause congenital anomalies, particularly when the infection occurred during the first trimester.34 Although a previous study suggested that type III interferons produced by human placental trophoblasts could confer protection against ZIKV infection, it is notable that the study utilized primary human trophoblasts of full-term instead of early gestation placenta.35 Indeed, our in vitro finding concurred with the recent reports of detectable viral particles and RNA in trophoblasts of the maternal and fetal placenta of ZIKV-infected type I interferon signaling-deficient mice and permissibility of placental macrophages and cytotrophoblasts to productive ZIKV infection.12, 36Besides trans-placental transmission, our findings also provided insights to explain the pathogenesis of other non-vector-borne human transmission routes of ZIKV. Probable sexual transmission of ZIKV has been reported.20, 21, 22 ZIKV-infected male patients might develop hematospermia and perineal pain compatible with prostatitis, and might have detectable viral RNA and/or infectious viral particles in their semen.20, 21, 22 In contrast to DENV-2, which did not efficiently replicate in any of the genital tract cell lines, the mean ZIKV load significantly increased in the prostatic (LNCaP) and testicular (833KE) cell lines without inducing CPE. This suggested that the prostate and testes might be important sites of ZIKV replication that led to prolonged virus shedding in the semen of infected men.20, 21, 37 Interestingly, abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was detected in ZIKV-infected LNCaP cells, but not 833KE cells. This finding might imply that ZIKV could replicate more efficiently in the prostate than the testes. Recent studies only reported high viral loads in the testes of ZIKV-infected mice deficient in interferon signaling and/or receptor, but did not report the viral loads in their prostates.30, 38 Further studies should be conducted to investigate the prostate's role as a replication site of ZIKV. The female genital tract cell lines, including HeLa and HOSE6-3, were also susceptible to ZIKV, supporting the hypothesis that non-immune women might acquire the infection through sexual intercourse with their ZIKV-infected male partners.We showed that the renal (HEK) and respiratory tract (Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL) cell lines were also susceptible to ZIKV. This helped to explain the high viral loads in the urine and nasopharyngeal swabs of ZIKV-infected patients.39, 40, 41 The finding of high viral load and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells is particularly interesting, as it suggests that the kidney might be another site of persistent ZIKV replication. Similarly, DENV-2 infection also caused increased mean viral load and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells, and viral RNA might be detected in urine of dengue patients.42 An important implication of this finding is that kidney transplant donors in ZIKV-affected regions should be tested for the infection before organ donation, as virus shedding in urine might be prolonged.39, 40, 41 The intestinal (Caco-2) cell line was also highly susceptible to ZIKV, which corroborated with the high viral load detected in the intestines of ZIKV-infected mice.43 Serial testing of fecal samples of ZIKV-infected patients should be performed to determine whether feces represent another possible transmission route of ZIKV. It would also be interesting to investigate ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in salivary gland cells, as high viral load could also be detected in the saliva of ZIKV-infected patients.41, 44The differential cell line susceptibility of our nonhuman cell lines to ZIKV may provide insights into the virus' potential animal reservoirs and alternative animal models. The finding of high viral loads and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without induction of CPE within 5 d.p.i. in the Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cell line was quite expected, and corroborated with the high non-fatal infection, dissemination and transmission rates of ZIKV in infected A. albopictus.45 A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load with ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and CPE were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. It is well known that the transmission of flaviviruses may involve sylvatic cycles between the mosquito vectors and susceptible wild animals, and urban cycles between the vectors and domestic animals.46, 47 Nonhuman primates are known wild animal reservoirs of ZIKV and DENV.1, 46 Our findings of efficient ZIKV replication in pig, rabbit, hamster and chicken cell lines suggest that these mammalian or avian species might have a role in the transmission of ZIKV. Similar to domestic pigs and wild birds for JEV, and domestic and wild birds for WNV, these species may serve as the animal reservoirs or amplifying hosts of ZIKV.46 Moreover, vector-free JEV transmission due to persistence of virus in tonsils and virus shedding in oronasal secretions of pigs has recently been reported.48 Alternatively, these animal species may be susceptible hosts with less importance in the transmission cycle, which is analogous to horses for JEV and many vertebrate species for WNV.46 Systematic sampling of domestic animals in ZIKV-affected regions would help to confirm these findings. Pigs, rabbits and hamsters should be evaluated as animal models for ZIKV infection, as interferon signaling- or receptor-deficient mice are not routinely available in most laboratories. Pig and/or hamster models have been previously reported for DENV and WNV infection.49, 50Our findings are useful for optimizing laboratory diagnostics and studies on the pathogenesis and counter-measures of ZIKV. Some of the laboratories in resource-limited areas affected by ZIKV may not have the capability to routinely perform molecular diagnostic tests. In addition to the few cell lines previously reported, our study has identified a broad range of cell lines that are suitable for growing ZIKV as an alternative diagnostic tool in clinical virology laboratories.51, 52, 53, 54 These cell lines may also be used in pathogenesis studies conducted by laboratories without the technical expertise to handle brain organoids, and to evaluate antiviral treatment and vaccines in vitro prior to animal experiments.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Mosquito Saliva Increases Endothelial Permeability in the Skin, Immune Cell Migration, and Dengue Pathogenesis during Antibody-Dependent Enhancement

IntroductionDuring the transmission of arthropod-borne diseases, blood-feeding insects deposit pathogen-containing saliva into the skin [1]. How factors in arthropod saliva impact pathogen replication, host responses, and disease outcome is an area of active research. The four serotypes of dengue virus (DENV1-4) cause the most prevalent mosquito-borne viral disease, with up to 390 million infections and 96 million cases of dengue annually [2]. The first (1°) DENV infection usually causes dengue fever or subclinical disease, and individuals generate memory immune responses that protect against infection with the same DENV serotype. In contrast, sequential infection with a different DENV serotype can induce severe and potentially fatal disease [3]. Severe dengue is characterized by high fever, low platelet count, hemorrhagic manifestations, systemic vascular leak, and/or circulatory shock [4]. The memory immune response generated during a previous DENV infection can exacerbate a subsequent infection with a different serotype via a phenomenon known as antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) and/or a cytokine storm produced by cross-reactive T cells [5,6]. During ADE, antibodies that were generated during the 1° infection and cross-react with the next infecting DENV serotype do not neutralize but instead enhance infection of Fcγ receptor-bearing cells, such as macrophages (MΦs) and monocytes [7–10]. Whereas monocytes circulate in the blood and enter inflamed tissues, MΦs and classical dendritic cells (cDCs) reside in steady-state tissues. After systemic dissemination, DENV infects monocytes in the blood [11], as well as MΦs and DCs in lymph nodes (LNs), spleen, intestine, and liver [12–16].While probing for blood vessels in the skin, arthropods induce a host response that includes narrowing of blood vessels, blood clotting, and inflammation. To allow efficient blood feeding, arthropods inject saliva that contains various molecules that counteract this response [1]. Pathogens have co-evolved within their vector to optimize transmission [17]. Plasmodium [18,19] and Leishmania parasites [20,21] efficiently establish infections experimentally only when transmitted with vector saliva, and mosquito saliva enhances West Nile virus (WNV) infection [22,23]. Female Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus mosquitoes transmit DENV, Zika virus, yellow fever virus, and Chikungunya virus and are thus important vectors of disease. Nonetheless, the role of mosquito saliva in dengue pathogenesis is not well understood. Ae. aegypti saliva increased DENV serum viremia in mice lacking interferon (IFN) regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF3/7) [24] and prolonged dengue viremia in “humanized” mice xeno-transplanted with human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells [25]. In contrast, Ader et al. found that mosquito saliva inhibits DENV infection of human monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs) in vitro [26]. Even though dermal cDCs and MΦs are the initial targets for DENV replication [27,28], the impact of mosquito saliva on immune cells in DENV-infected skin has not been studied.Here we examined the impact of Ae. aegypti salivary gland extract (SGE) on dengue pathogenesis, the host response, and DENV infection in the skin. We used mice lacking the IFN-α/β receptor (Ifnar
–/–) that are susceptible to intradermal (i.d.) DENV infection [28] and display key features of human disease, such as lethal vascular leak [29–31]. In infected human cells, DENV proteins block IFN-α/β signaling [32–34]. In contrast, wild-type mice do not support DENV replication [35] because DENV proteins cannot block IFN signaling in mice [36]. While DENV inoculation of naïve Ifnar
–/–mice mimics 1° infection conditions, inoculation of mice previously injected with sub-neutralizing levels of DENV-specific antibodies models ADE [14,15,31]. We needle-inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice i.d. in the presence or absence of enhancing antibodies with DENV alone or DENV mixed with SGE from female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes—a model to examine the role of vector-derived factors in pathogen transmission that is more broadly accessible and easier to standardize than the use of live mosquitoes [37–40].We establish here that only the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies augments dengue pathogenesis, DENV infection of DCs and MΦs in the dermis, and immune responses in skin-draining LNs. In addition, we show that SGE increases endothelial permeability in vitro and induces vascular leak in the skin. Finally, removing the site of DENV infection in the ear after 4 hours (h) rescued mice from severe disease in the absence of SGE, but this rescue was lost when SGE was present. Mosquito-derived factors thus augment antibody-enhanced dengue pathogenesis in the skin and beyond.ResultsMosquito SGE exacerbates dengue pathogenesis during ADETo determine the role of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice i.d. with 105 PFU of the mouse-adapted virulent DENV2 strain D220 [31] (hereafter termed “DENV”) in PBS or mixed with SGE (equivalent to one salivary gland of a female Ae. aegypti mosquito). SGE had no effect on dengue pathogenesis in the absence of enhancing antibodies (1° infection), which induced mild or no disease (Fig 1A). In contrast, the presence of SGE significantly increased morbidity (Fig 1B) and induced lethal disease in 54% of the mice (Fig 1C) under antibody-enhanced conditions (ADE). The presence of enhancing antibodies mildly increased morbidity compared to 1° infection in the absence of SGE only on day 7 (p<0.05) but significantly increased morbidity on days 4, 5, 6 (p<0.001) and 7 (p<0.05) in the presence of SGE (Fig 1A and 1B). Severe dengue disease resulting from 105 PFU DENV is thus dependent upon the combined presence of mosquito-derived factors in SGE and enhancing antibodies.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g001Fig 1Mosquito SGE induces lethal antibody-enhanced dengue disease.
Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV in the absence (A) or presence (B) of enhancing antibodies. DENV was inoculated alone (No) or after mixing with Ae. aegypti SGE (+SGE). (A-B) Bar graphs show mean morbidity ± standard error of mean (SEM) of mice on a scale from 1 = healthy to 5 = moribund (for details, see Material and Methods). (C) Kaplan-Meier curves showing survival of mice. Data were pooled from three experiments for 1° infection conditions n = 8 (No) or n = 6 (+SGE) and four experiments for ADE n = 10 (No) or n = 13 (+SGE). Statistically significant differences between the presence and absence of SGE are marked as ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, or not significant (n.s. for p>0.05).Due to the mild morbidity under 1° conditions that were observed after inoculation of 105 PFU, we further tested the effect of SGE at a 10-fold higher DENV dose of 106 PFU. Unexpectedly, SGE diminished disease severity under 1° conditions and did not further augment pathogenesis during antibody-enhanced DENV infection at 106 PFU (S1 Fig), possibly because ADE of 106 PFU already causes lethal disease. Because Culex mosquitoes transmit a median dose of 105 PFU of the related Flavivirus, WNV [41], and a higher virus dose might override the enhancing effect of SGE on dengue pathogenesis, we subsequently used 105 PFU DENV. In endemic areas, exposure to non-infected mosquitoes regularly occurs. In order to test whether pre-existing immunity to SGE would alter the effect of SGE on dengue pathogenesis, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice three times i.d. with SGE alone (at ≥2 weeks intervals). Subsequent i.d. antibody-enhanced DENV infection in the presence of SGE augmented pathogenesis similarly to that observed in SGE-naïve mice (S1 Fig).SGE boosts infection of dermal dendritic cells and macrophagesWe hypothesized that SGE synergizes with enhancing antibodies to impact DENV replication in the skin. In fact, SGE alone and to a greater degree the combination of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly increased DENV titers in the skin at 14 h post-inoculation, as measured by qRT-PCR (Fig 2A and 2B). We thus dissected DENV infection of cell subsets in the skin via intracellular staining for DENV non-structural protein NS3 and structural protein E in flow cytometric analysis. We gated dermis-resident CD11b+ cDCs (CD45+ MHCIIhigh (hi) Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C-) and MΦs (CD45+ MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G- Ly6Clow/–SSCint-hi) as previously established ([28] and S2 Fig). Dermis-resident CD11b+ cDCs and MΦs were the initial targets for DENV infection 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU (Fig 2C–2G), similar to inoculation of 106 PFU, as reported previously [28]. While DENV infection was low in the absence of SGE or enhancing antibodies, the combined action of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly increased DENV infection of dermal CD11b+ cDCs (Fig 2D and 2E) and MΦs (Fig 2F and 2G). While myeloid cells in the dermis expressed various levels of Fcγ receptors (CD16/32), only MΦs and, to a minimal degree, CD11b+ cDCs expressed mannose receptor (CD206, S2 Fig). These dermal cell surface molecules may serve to mediate DENV attachment in the presence (Fcγ receptors) [8,42] or absence (mannose receptor for MΦs) of enhancing antibodies [43]. No cells in the epidermis, such as CD45+ MHCII+ Langerin+ Langerhans cells, contained intracellular DENV proteins after 14 h. The combined presence of mosquito-derived factors and enhancing antibodies thus augmented DENV infection of CD11b+ cDCs and MΦs as initial targets for DENV replication in the dermis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g002Fig 2SGE increases DENV infection in the skin during ADE.(A) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (B) Bar graph showing mean ±SEM DENV genome equivalents in the skin after 14 h normalized to 1 μg Gapdh mRNA, as determined by qRT-PCR (limit of detection depicted as horizontal dashed line). Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05. (C) Schematic of the main dermis-resident immune cells. (D) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV non-structural protein NS3 and structural protein E of dermal CD11b+ cDCs analyzed via flow cytometry 14 h after inoculation. For gating of cell populations, see S2 Fig. (E) Bar graph summarizing percent DENV infection of CD11b+ cDCs. (F) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV proteins of dermal MΦs. (G) Bar graph summarizing percent DENV infection of dermal MΦs. Data are representative (D, F) or pooled (E, G) from three independent experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05 and ** for p<0.01.SGE amplifies neutrophil and monocyte recruitment to the dermisWe next examined the recruitment of immune cells to the dermis. We gated de novo-recruited cell populations in the dermis as previously established via adoptive transfer of labeled monocytes in the absence of SGE [28]. Ly6G expression identified neutrophils, and Ly6C expression separated recruited Ly6Chi monocytes from resident Ly6Clow/–MΦs among MHCIIlow/–CD11b+ cells (Figs 3A and S2). Whereas inoculation of 105 PFU DENV under 1° conditions led to a modest recruitment of inflammatory neutrophils (Fig 3B) and monocytes to the dermis (Fig 3C), SGE significantly amplified the recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes in the presence of enhancing antibodies. Ly6C expression further separated Ly6C+ moDCs from resident Ly6C- CD11b+ cDCs among MHCII+ Langerin-CD11b+ cells (S2 Fig). During ADE, SGE augmented the number (Fig 3D) and DENV infection (Fig 3E and 3F) of de novo-recruited moDCs in the dermis. In contrast, few monocytes (<0.5%) and no other cell types (e.g., DCs or MΦs) were infected with DENV in the dermis 14 h after inoculation. SGE also increased the percentage of monocytes and moDCs in the dermis (S3 Fig). Together, these data show that the presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies augmented innate responses to DENV infection in the skin via the recruitment of neutrophils, monocytes, and moDCs and increased the infection of de novo-recruited moDCs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g003Fig 3SGE together with enhancing antibodies augments recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes to the dermis.(A) Contour plots showing consecutive gating of neutrophils and monocytes among CD45+ MHCIIlow/–cells in the dermis, as determined via flow cytometry of steady-state mice or 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU DENV in the presence or absence of SGE under 1° or ADE conditions. Numbers on plots are percent of gated cells of the parent population. (B-D) Bar graphs showing mean ±SEM number of neutrophils (B), monocytes (C) or moDCs (D) in the dermis, gated as in (A) and S2 Fig. (E) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV proteins of moDCs in the dermis. (F) Bar graph showing mean ±SEM percent DENV infection of dermal moDCs. Data are representative (A, E) or pooled (B-D, F) from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, and *** for p<0.001.SGE increases dendritic cell migration to skin-draining lymph nodesWe hypothesized that SGE may further modulate immune responses beyond the skin. While activated cDCs efficiently migrate from the skin to draining LNs (MigDCs) via expression of the chemokine receptor CCR7 [44,45] and prime naïve T and B cells, MΦs and recruited moDCs mostly remain within the inflamed skin to phagocytose pathogens and locally stimulate effector or memory T cells [46,47]. After 14 h, skin-draining LNs contained significantly more and a higher frequency of MigDCs with a CD11cint MHCIIhi CCR7+ migratory phenotype (Figs 4A and S4) when DENV was inoculated with SGE in the presence of enhancing antibodies (Fig 4B). The combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies further boosted the recruitment of CD11bhi Ly6G+ neutrophils (Fig 4C) and MHCII-CD11b+ F480+ SSClow monocytes to LNs (Fig 4D), likely from the blood. For neutrophils, this effect was due to decreased recruitment during 1° infections when SGE was present. In contrast, SGE did not significantly change the number of CD11chi MHCIIint cDCs or cells with a CD11clow MHCIIint CD11b+ F480+ SSClow phenotype that likely consist of moDCs in LNs after 14 h (S4 Fig). We further examined the activation of naïve T cells during antibody-enhanced DENV infection. Even though 82% of CD8+ and 58% CD4+ T cells in the spleen and 34% of CD8+ and 21% CD4+ T cells in LNs draining the site of i.d. inoculation acquired an activated CD44+ CD62L- phenotype within 5.5 days, no significant differences were detectable in the presence or absence of SGE (S5 Fig). Along the same lines, 22% of CD8+ T cells and 13% of CD4+ T cells produced IFN-γ in the spleen regardless of whether SGE was present or not (S5 Fig). However, a non-significant trend towards decreased proliferation of T cells in the presence of SGE was observed (S5 Fig). Consequently, the presence of SGE during antibody-enhanced DENV infection increases the migration of DCs and monocytes to skin-draining LNs. Nevertheless, whether augmented innate responses subsequently affect adaptive immune responses and thereby influence dengue pathogenesis remains to be determined.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g004Fig 4SGE accelerates migration of dendritic cells and recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes to lymph nodes during ADE.Mice were inoculated i.d. with PBS or 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (A) Contour plots showing cells in LNs 14 h after inoculation. Consecutive gating identified neutrophils as Ly6G+ CD11bhi, MigDCs as Ly6G- CD11cint MHCIIhi, cDCs as Ly6G- CD11chi MHCIIint, and monocytes as Ly6G- CD11c–/low MHCII-CD11b+ F4/80+. For expression of CCR7 and Fcγ receptor, see S4 Fig. Bar graphs summarizing the number of MigDCs (B), neutrophils (C) or monocytes (D) in LNs. Data are representative (A) or pooled (B-D) from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences between groups are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.SGE disrupts endothelial barrier functionEndothelial cells lining blood vessels separate the skin from systemic blood circulation. We hypothesized that factors contained in SGE may disrupt endothelial barrier function to enable blood feeding, which might also facilitate cell migration. To determine the direct effect of SGE on the vascular endothelium, we measured trans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of human dermal microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC-1) monolayers growing on Transwell inserts (Fig 5A). Monolayers displayed high TEER values and thus low permeability in steady state. Addition of SGE to either the basolateral side of the monolayer that corresponds to the side facing the dermis (Figs 5B, 5C and S6) or the apical side facing the blood (S6 Fig) significantly decreased TEER values, thus increasing endothelial permeability, in a dose-dependent manner. TNFα served as a positive control for endothelial permeability and decreased TEER values with similar dynamics as SGE (S6 Fig). We next tested whether SGE also affected endothelial barrier function at the site of inoculation in the mouse ear. Our results demonstrated that i.d. inoculation of SGE disrupted the barrier function of the microvasculature in the mouse ear and increased the leak of plasma into the dermis, visualized via fluorescently-labelled dextran that was inoculated intravenously (Fig 5D). The vasculature in the PBS-inoculated control ear of the same animal showed significantly lower leak of plasma, and untouched ears of steady-state animals showed only minor endothelial permeability (Fig 5D and 5E). The signal at the base of the ear was due to autofluorescence of cartilege and was excluded from quantification at the site of inoculation (white circles, Fig 5D). Consequently, SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function at the site of virus transmission in the dermis and may thus be one factor that contributes to systemic dengue pathogenesis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g005Fig 5SGE disrupts endothelial barriers in vitro and in vivo in the skin.(A-C) The trans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of human microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC-1) monolayers grown in Transwell chambers were measured as depicted in (A) after adding the equivalent of 0.2, 0.5 or 1 salivary glands to the basolateral compartment. (B) Graph showing percent TEER relative to untreated control cells over time. (C) Bar graph depicting percent TEER after 13 h of stimulation. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 8 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as **** for p<0.0001 or not significant (n.s. for p>0.05). (D-E) Wild-type mice were inoculated intravenously with fluorescently-labeled dextran, and SGE or PBS was inoculated i.d. into either ear of each animal immediately thereafter. Steady-state ears of dextran-inoculated control mice were left untouched. (D) Representative scan of ears analyzed after 30 min showing dextran fluorescence that leaked with plasma into the dermis at sites of i.d. inoculation or corresponding areas in steady-state ears (white circles). (E) Mean fluorescence of dextran per an area of 3300 pixels of ear skin ±SEM quantified at the site of i.d. inoculation with PBS or SGE for each animal (connecting lines). Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 9 per group. Statistically significant differences between PBS and SGE are marked as * for p<0.05.The effect of SGE spreads rapidly beyond the skin and modulates dengue pathogenesisFinally, to test whether the effects of SGE in the skin impacted systemic dengue pathogenesis, we surgically removed the site of DENV transmission in the presence or absence of SGE after 4 h (Fig 6A). In the presence of SGE, removing the site of DENV transmission did not have a protective effect on the morbidity and survival of mice after i.d. inoculation with an antibody-enhanced DENV inoculum of 105 PFU (Fig 6B and 6C). Fifty percent of mice succumbed to infection regardless of whether the control side or the site of inoculation was removed. In contrast, if no SGE was present, removing the site of DENV transmission completely protected mice from morbidity after inoculation with an antibody-enhanced dose of 105 PFU (Fig 6D and 6E). Even more striking was the significant protective effect on morbidity and survival of the mice observed after inoculation with an antibody-enhanced high DENV dose of 106 PFU (Fig 6F and 6G). These data show that the effect of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis rapidly spreads beyond the skin. The effect of SGE on endothelial barrier function and the immune response thus influence dengue pathogenesis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g006Fig 6Removing the site of DENV inoculation in the skin no longer rescues mice from dengue disease in the presence of SGE.(A) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with DENV under antibody-enhanced conditions, and 4 h later, the non-inoculated control side or the site of inoculation in the ear skin was surgically removed. (B) Bar graphs showing mean morbidity ±SEM and (C) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 105 PFU DENV mixed with SGE. (D) Bar graphs showing morbidity and (E) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 105 PFU DENV alone. (F) Bar graphs showing morbidity and (G) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 106 PFU DENV alone. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences between removing the site of DENV inoculation and removing the non-inoculated control side are marked as * for p<0.05 or ** for p<0.01.DiscussionWe establish here that Ae. aegpyti SGE exacerbates systemic dengue pathogenesis during ADE. We determined that SGE in the presence of enhancing antibodies increases DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis, recruitment of monocytes to the dermis and draining LNs, and DC migration from the skin to LNs. We also showed that SGE acts directly on endothelial cells in vitro, disrupts endothelial barrier function, and induces plasma leak in the mouse ear. Further, surgical removal of the site of DENV transmission after 4 h rescued mice from enhanced disease in the absence but not in the presence of SGE, indicating that the effect of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis spreads rapidly beyond the skin.Previous studies have demonstrated that mosquitoes inoculate saliva that contains pathogens into the dermis while probing for blood vessels. Anopheles mosquitoes inoculated saliva with Plasmodium parasites into the dermis of mice [48]. Similarly, in studies of mosquitoes feeding on mouse tails, >99% of inoculated WNV was recovered from the skin section that infected Culex mosquitoes probed upon [41]. Although Culex mosquitoes inoculated WNV directly into the blood circulation when obtaining a successful blood meal [41], the amount of WNV that was deposited into the bloodstream remained low at ~100 PFU, which was only 0.1% of the total i.d.-transmitted median dose of 105 PFU of WNV [41]. We show that removing the site of i.d. DENV infection after 4 h rescued mice from disease in the absence of SGE but, in the natural setting, DENV is always transmitted in the saliva of infected mosquitoes. Studies have shown that survival of mice was prolonged when the distal third of the tail was removed 5 min to 6 h after mosquitoes inoculated with St. Louis encephalitis [49] or Rift Valley fever viruses [50]. Similarly, mice were protected from blood parasitemia when the site of inoculation was removed up to 5 min but no later than 15 min after Anopheles-transmitted Plasmodium infection [51]. Our data that removing the site of DENV transmission rescues mice in the absence but not in the presence of SGE establishes that DENV infection in the skin early after inoculation is critical for subsequent dengue pathogenesis and that SGE modulates the dynamics of this process.The endothelial barrier of capillaries separates the skin from systemic blood circulation. Mosquito saliva [1,18] or innate immune recognition of DENV [52,53] can increase endothelial cell permeability via activation of mast cells and release of inflammatory mediators, such as histamine, TNFα, or proteases. Our in vivo results of SGE inducing vascular leak in the ear skin may thus be a combined effect of SGE on mast cells and endothelial cells. In contrast, our in vitro results of SGE decreasing the TEER of endothelial cell monolayers demonstrate that SGE can act directly on endothelial cells to increase permeability. In the absence of SGE, Luplertlop et al. showed that DENV-infected DCs induce vascular permeability in the skin via production of metalloproteinases that degrade endothelial cell adhesion molecules [54]. Serine proteases in Ae. aegypti SGE were shown to degrade the extracellular matrix of embryonic fibroblasts [40]. We thus speculate that SGE disturbs the integrity of blood vessels through degradation of extracellular matrix proteins or disturbance of tight/adherens junctions between endothelial cells. Factors in SGE that disrupt endothelial barrier function may have evolved to help the mosquitoes penetrate blood vessels or feed from a pool of blood in the dermis after injury to a blood vessel.Previous studies examined the effect of mosquito-derived factors on DENV infection only in the absence of enhancing antibodies [24,25,40]. In our hands, SGE did not augment dengue pathogenesis after inoculation of 105 PFU under 1° conditions and even reduced disease severity after inoculation at a 10-fold higher dose of 106 PFU. In contrast, SGE augmented dengue pathogenesis during antibody-enhanced infection with 105 PFU. Numerous reports show that ADE enhances DENV infection of human monocytes [8,55] and MΦs [9] in vitro. In mice, intestinal monocytes/MΦs and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells are particularly susceptible to antibody-enhanced DENV infection [15,30]. We speculate that, via disruption of endothelial barrier function in the skin, SGE may augment access of DENV to enhancing antibodies in the serum, increase the spread of infectious virus-antibody complexes, enhance infection within systemic tissues, and thus exacerbate dengue pathogenesis during ADE. Our results thus suggest that animal models of dengue and pre-clinical validation of dengue vaccine candidates should be evaluated in the combined presence of mosquito saliva and enhancing antibodies.As one possibility, SGE may augment systemic dengue pathogenesis by disrupting endothelial barrier function and thus facilitating DENV dissemination. In humans, higher DENV titers at peak viremia correlate with more severe disease [5]. Accelerated early DENV dissemination may subsequently increase virus titers and thus the risk for severe disease. In mice, feeding of uninfected Culex mosquitoes at the site of needle inoculation or concurrent inoculation with SGE augmented WNV serum viremia after 24–48 h [22]. Likewise, feeding of uninfected Ae. aegypti at the site of needle inoculation with WNV subsequently increased mortality compared to needle inoculation with virus alone [23]. Similarly, mosquito transmission of DENV or needle-inoculation with concurrent feeding of uninfected mosquitoes prolonged viremia and increased erythema (redness of the skin) in “humanized” mice [25] and increased DENV titers around peak viremia in mice lacking IRF3/7 [24,56]. When needle-inoculated into the foot pad, mosquito SGE further increased DENV titers in LNs of Ifnar
–/–mice after 24 h [40]. Together, these data show that mosquito-derived factors increase DENV titers 24 h to several days post-inoculation, which could be due to increased virus dissemination and/or systemic replication. Our ear removal data show that factors that augment dengue pathogenesis spread beyond the skin within 4 h in the presence of SGE. Nevertheless, the precise impact of mosquito-derived factors on early DENV dissemination prior to the first round of DENV replication, which takes place within ~12 h [57], remains unknown.Our data also show that SGE boosts the recruitment of innate immune cells during acute DENV infection. Previous studies revealed that monocytes and neutrophils enter the DENV-infected dermis in the absence of SGE [28]. Several studies have confirmed the recruitment and phenotype of inflammatory monocytes (MHCII-Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6G- Ly6Chi) and moDCs (MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C+) to the dermis during allergic reactions [58], or infection with Leishmania major [59] or DENV [28] via adoptive transfer of genetically- or fluorescently-labeled monocytes. The phenotype remained consistent for 7 days, before monocyte-derived cells down-regulated Ly6C expression [58,59]. During DENV infection, monocyte recruitment and differentiation to moDCs increased the number of targets for virus replication in the dermis [28]. Sterile injury [60] or transmission of Leishmania via sandfly feeding triggered the recruitment of neutrophils to the skin, where they then served as a “Trojan horse” reservoir for parasite infection [61], and abrogated vaccine-induced protection by suppressing parasite-specific CD4+ T cell responses [62]. Few studies have addressed the role of neutrophils in dengue pathogenesis. In one study, the serum of dengue patients contained higher levels of IL-8 and neutrophilic elastase than healthy controls, suggesting activation and degranulation of neutrophils [63]. Previous studies have documented the exit of epidermal Langerhans cells [64,65] and dermal DCs [27] from DENV-infected skin and their migration to LNs in the absence of SGE. We establish here that the combined presence of enhancing antibodies and SGE boost the recruitment of monocytes and neutrophils to the DENV-infected dermis and draining LNs, as well as DC migration from the skin to LNs. SGE disruption of endothelial barrier function in the dermis may facilitate both transmigration of monocytes and neutrophils through blood vessels to enter the dermis and migration of skin DCs to LNs via increased drainage of plasma that leaks into the skin. Because removal of the site of co-inoculation of DENV with SGE after 4 h did not rescue mice from systemic antibody-enhanced pathogenesis, rapid spread of inflammatory mediators may contribute to increased disease severity. As we did not observe significant differences in T cell activation in the presence versus absence of SGE 5.5 days after DENV inoculation, further studies are needed to determine whether SGE affects systemic immune responses. Along the same lines, Cox et al. determined that increased viremia and prolonged fever occurred even when mosquito saliva and DENV were inoculated at distant sites [25], supporting the view that mosquito-derived factors can impact dengue pathogenesis systemically.We confirm here the recent discovery that dermal cDCs and MΦs are the initial targets for DENV replication in the skin of mice and humans in the absence of SGE [27,28], but at a 10-fold lower virus dose in vivo. Only one in vitro study has examined the impact of mosquito saliva on human immature moDCs, and it found that Ae. aegypti saliva inhibits DENV infection under 1° conditions [26]. In our study, SGE led to a small but significant increase in DENV titer in the skin under 1° conditions, as measured via qRT-PCR 14 h after inoculation. Under 1° conditions, however, flow cytometric analysis did not detect significant differences in the infection of dermal cDCs, moDCs, and MΦs, which were the only DENV-infected cells in the skin at this time-point. We establish here that the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly enhanced DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis. While monocytes, MΦs, and mature moDCs are known targets for enhanced DENV infection in vitro [8,9,42], this is the first report that ADE boosts DENV infection of cDCs in the presence of SGE. In contrast, ADE alone did not significantly enhance infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis in the absence of SGE (Fig 2 and [28]). Whereas enhancing antibodies may have limited access to the skin in the absence of SGE, the increased leak of plasma into the skin that we found in the presence of SGE may allow more enhancing antibodies to enter the skin and mediate antibody-enhanced infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis. Although DCs are key for priming adaptive T and B cell responses, DENV infection can impair DC function [10]. In addition, Ae. aegypti saliva suppresses host responses, such as cytokine production and T cell proliferation at the feeding site [66,67], and skews systemic CD4+ T cell responses from Th1- towards Th2-type by decreasing IFN-γ and increasing IL-4 expression [56,68,69]. Even though our ear removal experiments show that dengue pathogenesis of the ongoing infection occurs beyond the skin when SGE and enhancing antibodies are present, the increased DENV infection of skin DCs may affect priming of memory responses that protect or enhance pathogenesis during subsequent DENV infections.In endemic regions, exposure to non-infected arthropod vectors regularly occurs and could modulate the effect of vector saliva. For malaria, exposure of mice to the bite of non-infected Anopheles mosquitoes protected them from subsequent mosquito-transmitted Plasmodium infection [70]. Similarly, vaccination with sand fly SGE or exposure to the bites of non-infected sand flies protected mice or non-human primates against subsequent Leishmania challenge plus SGE [71–74]. However, immunization with two distinct sand fly salivary proteins, PpSP15 or PpSP44, either protected or increased susceptibility to Leishmania infection, respectively [75]. Similarly, pre-exposure of mice to bites of non-infected Ae. aegypti mosquitoes exacerbated WNV lethality [76], but immunization with the recombinant protein D7 from Culex saliva enhanced pathogenesis during subsequent mosquito-transmitted WNV infection [77]. One study reported an association of higher serum reactivity to Ae. aegypti salivary proteins in Thai children with severe secondary dengue disease compared to not-infected individuals, but it remains unclear whether this correlation was due to prior exposure or reactivity to DENV or non-infected mosquitoes [78]. In our hands, antibody-enhanced DENV infection in the presence of SGE induced lethality in a comparable proportion of mice that were pre-exposed three times to SGE versus SGE-naïve animals. Further studies are needed to determine the effect of anti-Ae. aegypti immunity on dengue pathogenesis, and the potential use of mosquito-derived components in vaccine formulations against dengue requires thorough evaluation.Our study introduces in vitro and mouse models to study the impact of mosquito-derived factors on endothelial cells and dengue pathogenesis, respectively. DENV suppresses the IFN response, replicates, and causes disease in humans but not wild-type mice [28,35,36]. Ifnar
–/–mice are readily available and more immunocompetent than other DENV infection models due to intact IFN-γ receptor signaling. After i.d. inoculation, DENV infects the same cells (i.e., dermal cDCs and MΦs) in Ifnar
–/–mice [28] and human skin explants [27], cross-validating the reliability of these models. Studies using transmission via DENV-infected live mosquitoes are most physiologically relevant but naturally cannot control for the presence of mosquito-derived factors or the virus dose delivered, as mosquitoes transmit varying doses of virus (e.g., WNV [41]). A study design (“spot feeding”) where uninfected female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes deposit saliva into mouse skin followed by i.d. needle inoculation of virus mimics the secretion of saliva while mosquitoes probe for blood vessels, can control for the presence or absence of mosquito-derived components, delivers a defined dose of virus, and has successfully been used to study DENV infection in vivo [24,25]. Live mosquitoes, however, inoculate varying amounts of saliva [41] depending on how fast they locate and penetrate a blood vessel; thus, salivary dose cannot be controlled or monitored in this model. The simplified model that we use here, i.e., needle inoculation of SGE from non-infected mosquitoes with a defined dose of pathogen, has proven useful in assessing the role of vector-derived factors for infection with DENV [40], WNV [23], Sindbis virus [69], Rift Valley fever virus [39], and Leishmania [38]. Similarly, WNV transmission via infected Culex mosquitoes, deposition of saliva via uninfected mosquitoes at the site of needle inoculation, or concurrent i.d. needle inoculation of WNV with SGE all induced earlier and higher viremia compared to needle inoculation of WNV alone [22][79]. While not precisely replicating DENV transmission via live mosquitoes, the SGE model is more broadly applicable to future immunological analyses and pre-clinical testing of dengue vaccines, as the variables can be controlled, unlike mosquito-transmitted DENV. Mosquito saliva can be collected artificially in a sucrose solution in a capillary tube into which the mosquito proboscis is inserted, or through a membrane. However, such saliva preparations differ qualitatively and quantitatively from mosquito saliva that is inoculated into the host during a natural blood meal [79,80]. Furthermore, the mosquito does not replicate normal probing and secretion of saliva during artificial feeding. Needle inoculation i.d. of DENV with or without SGE is thus the model that is easiest to standardize between assays and between research groups. The dose of 1 SGE that we have used in vivo contained 0.37–0.60 μg total protein and lies within the range for which Moser et al. determined a dose-dependent increase in WNV serum viremia in the presence of SGE from Culex mosquitoes [79]. In addition, Wasserman et al. determined that a single Ae. aegypti mosquito inoculates approximately 0.35 salivary gland pairs (equivalent to 0.7 SGE) [81]. We have thus inoculated mice with SGE that is likely equivalent to the bite of 1–2 mosquitoes. We further introduce an in vitro system measuring TEER as a practical tool to assess the direct effect of vector-derived factors on endothelial barrier function that is independent of specific pathogens and can thus be extrapolated to other viruses carried by Ae. aegypti mosquitoes. Using the TEER system, we show that 0.2 to 2 SGE increased vascular permeability in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that 1 SGE is a non-saturated dose but lies within the range of a dose-response curve.In summary (Fig 7), our study establishes that mosquito-derived factors exacerbate dengue pathogenesis in individuals that carry enhancing antibodies and thus already have an increased risk for severe disease. Consequently, safety and efficacy of vaccine and therapeutic candidates against dengue should be tested pre-clinically in models that consider both the mosquito vector as well as enhancing antibodies. We establish that SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function in the skin, induces vascular leak, and, in combination with enhancing antibodies, increases dendritic cell migration to skin-draining LNs. Because antibody-enhanced dengue pathogenesis occurs beyond the site of DENV-SGE co-inoculation in the skin, future studies are needed to determine whether SGE alters immune responses and thereby augments systemic dengue pathogenesis. Increasing DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis could further modulate the priming of memory responses that determine pathogenesis during subsequent DENV infections. The role of mosquito-derived factors in dengue pathogenesis warrants further studies, and our findings call for additional research on arthropod-borne pathogens whose vectors share similar blood-feeding strategies and may also impair endothelial barrier function.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g007Fig 7The effects of mosquito SGE in the skin and on systemic dengue pathogenesis.In summary, our data show that (1) SGE induces endothelial permeability and vascular leak in the mouse ear. During ADE, SGE further increases (2) DENV infection of MΦs and cDCs that reside in the dermis. In addition, (3) SGE boosts monocyte recruitment to the dermis and draining LNs, differentiation to moDCs, and migration of DCs (MigDCs) from the skin to LNs. During systemic pathogenesis (4), only the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies leads to severe disease.Materials and MethodsEthics statementMice were bred and maintained in the University of California Berkeley Animal Facility, and experiments were performed strictly following guidelines of the American Veterinary Medical Association and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The University of California Berkeley’s Animal Care and Use Committee pre-approved all experiments (protocol AUP-2014-08-6638). Trained laboratory personnel performed anesthesia of mice via isoflurane inhalation and euthanasia of mice using exposure to CO2 followed by cervical dislocation.MiceWild-type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. C57BL/6 mice deficient in the IFN-α/β receptor-1 (Ifnar1
tm1Agt, here termed Ifnar
–/–) were provided by Dr. Daniel Portnoy (University of California, Berkeley, CA) [82]. After DENV inoculation, mice were monitored following the standardized cumulative morbidity scale from 1 (healthy) to 5 (moribund) [28,31]: 1, healthy; 2, mild signs of lethargy; 3, fur ruffling, hunched posture; 4, increased lethargy, limited mobility; 5, moribund with minimal mobility and inability to reach food or water. Moribund mice were euthanized immediately, assigned a score of 5, and excluded from the mean morbidity calculations on subsequent days.Dengue virusTo mimic DENV transmission from an infected mosquito to the mammalian host, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice intradermally (i.d.) with DENV produced in C6/36 mosquito cells. We used the DENV2 strain D220, which was derived via 20 passages of the Taiwanese clinical isolate PL046 between C6/36 cells and serum of 129/Sv mice deficient in IFN-α/β and -γ receptors, acquiring defined mutations that increased its virulence in mice [29,31]. D220 stocks (hereafter termed DENV) were propagated in C6/36 cells (obtained from Dr. Paul Young, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia) at 28°C in M199 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and GlutaMax (all from LifeTechnologies). T175 flasks containing 80% confluent C6/36 cells were infected with DENV at a multiplicity of infection of 0.05–0.1 in serum-free medium for 2 h and then supplemented with 2% FBS. Supernatants were harvested between days 5 and 8 post-infection and concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units with a 100 kDa molecular weight cut-off (Millipore) before storage at -80°C. DENV titers were determined via plaque assay using BHK-21 clone 15 cells, which were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in α-MEM medium with 5% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and GlutaMax. BHK-21 cells in 12-well plates (Becton Dickinson) at 60% confluence were infected with 150 μl DENV in 10-fold serial dilutions for 2 h before overlaying with 10% low-melting agarose (Cambrex) in fully supplemented α-MEM medium. BHK-21 cells were fixed 7 days later using 10% buffered formalin phosphate (Fisher Scientific) and stained with 2.5% crystal violet in 30% ethanol. DENV titers were calculated as plaque forming units (PFU)/ml.Mosquito salivary gland extractSalivary gland extracts (SGE) were obtained from non-infected wild-caught Nicaraguan (DENV infections in vivo) or colonized Panamanian female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (vascular permeability assays in vitro and in vivo). Mosquitoes were immobilized with CO2, dipped into 70% ethanol, and placed on glass slides in sterile PBS. The mosquito head was pulled away from the body, and the exposed salivary glands were dissected from the head or thorax under aseptic conditions and placed into fresh PBS (2 salivary glands/10 μl). Salivary gland membranes were disrupted via sonication in ice water at 100 mV for 3 bursts of 20 sec with 1 min of cooling time between bursts. Extracts were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and SGE was collected as supernatant. The protein concentration of the SGE stocks was 0.37–0.60 μg/ml, as estimated via NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific). SGE stocks had a neutral pH of 7.0 and were free of endotoxin or contained very low levels that were well below the FDA-approved limit for injection solutions of (<5 endotoxin units per kg per hour) as tested using the endpoint chromogenic Limulus Amebocyte Lysate kit (Lonza).Intradermal inoculationEars of anesthetized Ifnar
–/–mice were immobilized using cover slip forceps. A sterilized needle (30-gauge, 25-mm length, and 10°-12° bevel) used with a 25-μl reusable glass microinjection syringe (Hamilton) was inserted ~3 mm into the ventral side of the ear skin at a flat angle with the bevel pointing up, and DENV diluted in 20 μl PBS was slowly inoculated. To model the presence of mosquito-derived factors, we co-injected DENV mixed with the equivalent of 1 salivary gland from Nicaraguan mosquitoes in 20 μl PBS. Control ears were left untouched or were inoculated with SGE diluted in PBS or PBS alone. Naïve mice served to model 1° infections, whereas ADE conditions consisted of inoculation with a subneutralizing dose of 5 μg anti-DENV protein E monoclonal antibody 4G2 (ATCC) intraperitoneally in 200 μl PBS 24 h prior to DENV infection. In certain experiments, mice were anesthetized once again 4 h after i.d. DENV infection, and the inoculated site of the ear skin or an equivalent piece from the non-inoculated ear was surgically removed using sterile scissors. Bleeding was stopped immediately by applying pressure via sterile gauze, and mice were monitored closely for any direct adverse effects of the procedure. Only occasional scratching for less than 2 h was observed.Flow cytometric analysisOrgans of euthanized mice were collected on ice. Ears were incubated for 5 min at room temperature with hair removal cream (Nair), washed in PBS, and split into dorsal and ventral halves using tweezers (TDI). Skin samples were digested floating with the epidermal side up for 90 min with 2 U/ml Dispase II in HBSS without Ca2+/Mg2+ (LifeTech) in 5% CO2 at 37°C. The epidermis was then separated as one sheet from the dermis and each was placed into a tube containing RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS. Using scissors, the epidermal and dermal layers were cut into pieces of 1–2 mm size, PBS containing a final concentration of 1.6 mg/ml collagenase type-1 (LifeTech) and 10 U/ml DNase 1 (Roche) was added, and digestion of the epidermis dermis was allowed to proceed for 45 min and 80 min, respectively, at 37°C while shaking at 220 rotations per min. Homogeneous cell suspensions were generated via pipetting and filtering through 100 μm nylon meshes. Cervical LNs or spleens were crushed in medium under nylon meshes and digested in a final concentration of 1 mg/ml collagenase type-1 and 10 U/ml DNase 1 for 30 min at 37°C and 5% CO2 before generating single cell suspensions via pipetting. Spleen samples were treated with Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (eBioscience). Total numbers of live cells in LNs were determined via manual count and trypan blue exclusion.Cells were stained with Zombie Aqua (BioLegend) in PBS to exclude dead cells. Cell surface markers were then stained in PBS without Ca2+/Mg2+ with 2% FBS and 2 mM EDTA (LifeTech) using the following monoclonal antibodies (from BioLegend or BD Pharmingen) to identify cell types: CD3 (17A2), CD4 (GK1.4), CD8 (53–67), CD11c (N418), CD11b (M1/70), CD44 (IM7), CD45 (30-F11), CD62L (MEL-14), CD103 (2E7), F4/80 (BM-8), Ly6C (AL21), Ly6G (1A8), MHCII (I-A/I-E, M5/114.15.2), CCR7 (4B12) or isotype control (RTK2758), and FcγR (2.4G2) or isotype control (A-95-1). The monoclonal antibodies were conjugated to PacificBlue, Brilliant Violet 605, PE, PE-CF594, PE-Cy7, Alexa Fluor 700, APC-Cy7, or biotin. Cells stained with biotinylated antibodies were visualized using PE-Cy7- or Brilliant Violet 605-conjugated streptavidin (BioLegend). Cells were fixed with 2% formaldehyde (Ted Pella) for 10 min at room temperature, and membranes were permeabilized with 0.1% saponin (Sigma) in PBS containing 2% FBS, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% normal mouse serum to block remaining fixative. To identify DENV-infected cells, cells were stained intracellularly with monoclonal antibodies directed against DENV non-structural protein NS3 (clone E1D8, [14]) and structural protein E (clone 4G2, ATCC) that were conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 647, respectively, using protein-labeling kits (LifeTech). Intracellular staining for mannose receptor (C068C2) or isotype control (RTK2758) further dissected cell populations. Spleen cells were harvested 5.5 days post-i.d. DENV inoculation and were stained intracellularly for Ki-67 (SolA15) or isotype control (kit, eBiosciences) or after in vitro restimulation for 4 hours in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS, 20 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (Sigma), and 1 μM ionomycin (Sigma), with 5 μg/ml brefeldin A (eBiosciences) added during the final 2 hours were stained for IFN-γ (XMG1.2) or isotype control (RTK2071). Data were recorded using an LSR Fortessa cell analyzer (BD Biosciences) with 405, 488, 561, and 632 nm laser excitation lines and data analyzed using FlowJo 8.8.7 software (TreeStar). Gating FSC-A/SSC-A, SSC-H/SSC-W, FSC-H/FSC-W, and Zombie Aqua negative defined single, live-cell populations. The total number of cells in the dermis was determined via flow cytometer, while acquiring all cells for each sample and calculating total acquired cell counts.Quantification of DENV genomesTo determine DENV titers, a piece of less than 20 mg of tissue stored in RNAlater (Ambion) was homogenized for 1 min with 1-mm zirconia-silica beads using a Mini-Beadbeater-8 (BiospecProducts), and RNA was extracted after centrifugation using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA was extracted from 20 μl serum stored at -80°C using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA samples were eluted in a total volume of 50 μl, and 2 μl was used per qRT-PCR reaction in duplicate. DENV2 NS5 primer and probe sequences were as follows [83]: forward primer 5’-ACA AGT CGA ACA ACC TGG TCC AT, probe 5’-Fam TGG GAT TTC CTC CCA TGA TTC CAC TGG Tamra-Q, reverse primer 5’-GCC GCA CCA TTG GTC TTC TC (synthesized by Eurofins WMG Operon). DENV RNA and Gapdh mRNA (TaqMan Rodent Gapdh Control Reagents, ThermoFisher) were amplified in separate reactions using Verso one-step qRT-PCR Kits (ThermoFisher). A 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) was set to the following thermal cycler profile: reverse transcription at 50°C for 30 min, hot start at 95°C for 12.5 min, and for amplification and data acquisition, 40 PCR cycles consisting of denaturation at 95°C for 15 sec and annealing/extension at 60°C for 1 min.Endothelial permeabilityTrans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) was used to measure endothelial permeability of confluent single-cell monolayers of human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) in Transwell Permeable Supports (Corning) using a voltohmmeter (World Precision Instruments) after adding 0.2, 0.5, 1 or 2 salivary gland equivalents to 300 μl medium in the apical or 500 μl in the basolateral compartment of the transwell insert. Adding 10 ng/ml of TNFα (R&D Systems) to HMEC-1 cells served as a positive control for increased endothelial permeability. After 24 h, 50% of the medium in the upper and lower chambers was replaced with fresh medium. Relative TEER was calculated as percent resistance in Ohms of the experimental condition divided by non-treated cells. To measure vascular permeability in vivo, wild-type mice were inoculated intravenously with 200 μg Dextran (10 kDa molecular weight) labeled with Alexa Fluor 680. After circulating for 5 min, one salivary gland equivalent from Panamanian mosquitoes was inoculated i.d. into mouse ears in 15 μl PBS. Control ears were inoculated with PBS alone or were left untouched. Mice were euthanized 30 min after i.d. inoculation, and ears were scanned using the Odyssey CLx Infrared Imaging System (Licor) to quantify fluorescence of a 3300 pixel size area. Fluorescence values of steady-state control ears were subtracted from values of ears inoculated with SGE or PBS.Statistical analysisNumerical data were tested for statistically significant differences between experimental groups using unpaired parametric t-tests for flow cytometry data and DENV tissue viral load. A paired t-test was used to test for statistically significant differences between the fluorescence of the two ears of one animal injected with either PBS or SGE. Unpaired Mann-Whitney tests were used for non-parametric data, such as morbidity. Survival data were tested for statistically significant differences using the Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Experimental groups were considered significantly different at p<0.05 and are marked on graphs as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001, or non-significant (n.s.). Data were plotted and statistically analyzed using Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad).Data availabilityData deposited in the Dryad repository: http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.4rd14 [84].Supporting InformationS1 FigRelated to Fig 1, SGE does not augment dengue pathogenesis after inoculation with 106 PFU but augments pathogenesis after inoculation with 105 PFU DENV in mice that were pre-exposed to SGE.(A-C) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 106 PFU DENV in the absence (A) or presence (B) of enhancing antibodies. DENV was inoculated alone (as in [28]) or after mixing with Ae. aegypti SGE. (A-B) Bar graphs show mean morbidity ± SEM of mice on a scale from 1 = healthy to 5 = moribund. Statistically significant differences in morbidity between the presence and absence of SGE are marked on graphs as ** for p<0.01 and *** for p<0.001 or not significant (n.s.). The presence of enhancing antibodies significantly increased disease severity in the absence (day 4, p<0.01; days 5 and 6, p<0.001; day 7, p<0.01) and presence of SGE (day 3, p<0.01; days 4, 5, and 6, p<0.001). (C) Kaplan-Meier curves showing survival of mice. No significant differences in survival existed in the presence or absence of SGE. Significant differences in survival between the presence or absence of enhancing antibodies are marked as **, p<0.01. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 8–9 mice per group. (D) Ifnar
–/–mice were pre-exposed i.d. three times with SGE or PBS at intervals of at least two weeks or were left untreated. Two weeks after the last injection, mice were infected i.d. in the presence of enhancing antibodies with 105 PFU DENV mixed with SGE. SGE-naïve controls received DENV alone or DENV mixed with SGE as in Fig 1C. The Kaplan-Meier curves show survival of mice. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.1.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigRelated to Fig 2, gating and phenotype of immune cells in the dermis.
Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (A) Contour plots showing live CD45+ hematopoietic cells in the dermis analyzed via flow cytometry in steady state or 14 h after inoculation. Starting at the second row from the top, CD11b+ cDCs were consecutively gated as MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C-, moDCs as MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C+, dermal Langerhans cells and CD103+ cDCs together as MHCII+ Langerin+, neutrophils as MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G+, monocytes as MHCII-Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6G- Ly6Chi, and MΦs as MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G- Ly6Clow/–SSCint-hi. (B) Histogram overlays of surface stains (filled blue) for Fcγ receptors (CD16/32) or mannose receptor (CD206) or isotype controls (dashed black line) of cell populations gated as in (A) and lymphocytes gated as MHCII-CD11b- Ly6G- FSClow SSClow in the dermis of Ifnar
–/–mice that were infected with DENV in the presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigRelated to Fig 3, frequency of cell populations in the dermis.(A-C) Bar graphs summarizing mean ± SEM percentage of neutrophils (A), monocytes (B), or moDCs (C) of CD45+ cells in the dermis of mice in steady state or 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU DENV in the presence or absence of SGE under 1° or ADE conditions. Populations were gated as in S2 Fig. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences between groups are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 FigRelated to Fig 4, frequency of MigDCs, neutrophils, and monocytes as well as number of classical DCs in LNs.Mice were inoculated i.d. with PBS or 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE, and skin-draining LNs were analyzed via flow cytometry after 14 h. (A) Histogram overlays of surface stains (filled blue) for chemokine receptor CCR7 or Fcγ receptors (CD16/32) or isotype controls (dashed black line) of cell populations in LNs, gated as in Fig 4. In addition, MHCII-lymphocytes that consisted mostly of T cells were gated as Ly6G- CD11c- CD11b- F4/80- MHCII-. (B-D) Bar graphs summarizing the percentage of MigDCs (B), neutrophils (C) or monocytes (D) of CD45+ cells in LNs. (E) Bar graph summarizing the number of cDCs in LNs. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigRelated to Fig 4, T cell activation after i.d. DENV infection.Mice were left untreated or were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. Skin-draining LNs (A-B) or spleens (C-H) were analyzed via flow cytometry after 5.5 days. (A and C) Contour plots showing CD44 and CD62L expression of CD8+ CD3+ T cells. (B and D) Bar graphs summarizing percent CD44+ CD62L+ stimulated CD8+ or CD4+ CD3+ T cells in LNs (B) or spleen (D). (E) Contour plots showing CD44 expression and intracellular staining for Ki-67 of CD8+ T cells in the spleen. (F) Bar graphs summarizing percent Ki-67+ proliferating CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. (G) Contour plots showing CD8 expression and intracellular staining for IFN-γ of CD8+ T cells in the spleen after 4 h of in vitro restimulation. (H) Bar graphs summarizing percent IFN-γ expressing CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S6 FigRelated to Fig 5, SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function when added to the basolateral or apical side of HMEC-1 monolayers.TEER of HMEC-1 monolayers grown in Transwell chambers was measured after adding the equivalent of 1 or 2 salivary glands or TNFα to basolateral (A-B) or apical compartments (C-D). TNFα was added as positive control for inducing endothelial permeability. (A and C) Graphs showing percent TEER relative to untreated control cells over time. (B and D) Bar graphs depicting percent TEER after 13 h of stimulation. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 12 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Effect of increased CpG and UpA dinucleotides in the West Nile virus genome on virus transmission by 

INTRODUCTIONThe co-evolutionary arms race between viruses and their hosts is a dynamic process, characterized by continuous bilateral genetic adaptation, including both synonymous and non-synonymous mutations. Evolutionary processes can lead to widespread biases in genome composition, such as suppression of CpG dinucleotides (cytosine followed by guanine) in vertebrates and suppression of TpA (UpA in RNA) dinucleotides (thymine/uracil, respectively, followed by adenosine) across all organisms (1, 2). The under-representation of CpG can be attributed to extensive DNA methylation, where the cytosine of a CpG dinucleotide is methylated to 5-methylcytosine (3). This can result in a methylation-induced mutation, where 5-methylcytosine deaminates to thymine (4–7). Unlike the situation in vertebrates, DNA methylation activity in invertebrate species is generally low (8, 9). Consequently, flies and mosquitoes from the order Diptera, which exhibit extremely low DNA methylation activity, demonstrate no CpG bias in dinucleotide frequency (6). The universal UpA under-representation in vertebrates and invertebrates is hypothesized to be caused by specific recognition and targeting of this dinucleotide by RNA-degrading enzymes in the cytoplasm (10).Most viruses mimic the reduced UpA dinucleotide frequencies of their host’s mRNA, whereas many vertebrate-infecting viruses with small DNA- and single-stranded RNA genomes additionally suppress CpG dinucleotides (11–15). This suppression of CpG dinucleotides in viral RNA most likely serves as a strategic immune evasion mechanism; by reducing CpG dinucleotide frequencies, the virus avoids recognition by the vertebrate host’s zinc-finger antiviral protein (ZAP). ZAP binds to CpG-rich single-stranded RNA sequences in the cytoplasm of vertebrate cells and can recruit additional host factors that degrade viral RNA, inhibit translation, and activate innate immune pathways, thereby suppressing virus replication (reviewed in [16]).By introducing synonymous mutations in viral genomes, virus mutants can be created that code for wild-type viral proteins but contain many additional CpG or UpA dinucleotides, which may expose the viral RNA to ZAP-induced antiviral responses or putative RNA degradation pathways, respectively. This approach has been explored to attenuate various RNA viruses, including human immunodeficiency virus 1 (17), echovirus 7 (18, 19), influenza A virus (IAV) (20, 21), Zika virus (ZIKV) (22, 23), and Powassan virus (24). Moreover, recoded IAV and ZIKV demonstrated live-attenuated vaccine potential, as mice were fully protected against a subsequent challenge with a wild-type pathogenic virus (20, 22, 23).An interesting aspect associated with vector-borne viruses, such as flaviviruses, is their ability to replicate in evolutionarily distant invertebrate vectors (mosquitoes, ticks) and vertebrate hosts (mammals, birds), where the evolutionary pressure on CpG dinucleotides can differ (6, 22). A previous study identified opposing evolutionary pressures encountered by ZIKV when alternating between vector and host cells as the genomic introduction of CpG dinucleotides attenuated ZIKV pathogenesis in vertebrates, whereas it enhanced replication in Aedes aegypti vector mosquitoes (22). Flaviviruses are highly diverse, with distinct phylogenetic groups exhibiting variation in their primary host organisms, vector species, and mechanisms of pathogenesis. To further explore the principle that alterations in CpG and UpA dinucleotide composition impact viral replication and pathogenesis in different host species and vectors, herein, we study a flavivirus that is phylogenetically distinct from ZIKV, West Nile virus (WNV). Unlike ZIKV, which primarily infects primates and is transmitted by Aedes spp. mosquitoes, WNV is spread by Culex spp. mosquitoes in a mosquito-bird transmission cycle. WNV can also infect a range of other organisms, including horses and humans, who are generally considered dead-end hosts (25). Although ZIKV is primarily associated with fetal diseases, mainly targeting intermediate progenitor cells that differentiate into neurons and causing microcephaly, WNV actively replicates in the brain, leading to postnatal encephalitis and neuroinvasive disease in humans (26, 27).In this study, we aim to assess how changes in dinucleotide frequency impact the replication, transmission, and pathogenesis of WNV. We constructed synonymous WNV mutants with varying levels of CpG and UpA dinucleotides to investigate the relationship between dinucleotide composition and replication efficiency in both vertebrate hosts and the mosquito vector. We first tested the replicative phenotype of the WNV mutants in Culex cells and evaluated their transmission potential by Culex pipiens vector mosquitoes. Next, we assessed their replicative fitness in vertebrate cell culture and studied replication, neuroinvasion, and pathogenesis in a mouse model. Additionally, given the neuroinvasive capacity of WNV, we infected human iPCS-derived neurons to evaluate potential alterations in replication kinetics. The results of this study advance our understanding of how genomic dinucleotide frequencies influence flavivirus replication, transmission, and pathogenesis and offer insight into the safety of manipulating CpG/UpA frequencies in WNV as a potential strategy for live-attenuated vaccine development.MATERIALS AND METHODSConstruction of the flavivirus phylogenetic treeThe following full-length coding sequences from flavivirus type species were selected from the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV; https://ictv.global/): WNV: M12294, Murray Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV): AF161266, Usutu virus (USUV): AY453411, Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV): M18370, St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV): DQ525916, Dengue virus (DENV) 1: U88536, DENV-2: U87411, DENV-3: M93130, DENV-4: AF326573, ZIKV: AY632535, Kamiti river virus (KRV): AY149904, cell fusing agent virus (CFAV): M91671, Palm Creek virus (PCV): KC505248, Culex flavivirus (CXFV): GQ165808, and Tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV): U27495. Multiple sequence alignment was performed using MUSCLE, and a phylogenetic tree was constructed using the Maximum Likelihood method with the General Time Reversible (GTR) model. Evolutionary history was inferred from a bootstrap consensus tree generated from 500 replicates, with branches supported by less than 50% collapsed. The percentage of replicate trees in which taxa clustered together is shown alongside the branches. Heuristic search trees were obtained using Neighbor-Joining and BioNJ algorithms, with the best topology selected based on log likelihood. Evolutionary rate differences were modeled using a discrete Gamma distribution (+G, parameter = 1.0737), with 8.98% of sites treated as invariable (+I). Analyses were conducted using MEGA X. The composition of full-length coding sequences was determined using the “composition scan” function within the Simmonds Sequence Editor (SSE) program (version 1.4) (28).Cell cultureVertebrate cell lines, including African green monkey kidney Vero E6 (ATCC CRL-1586), Vero (ATCC CCL-81), human A549 cells (ATCC CCL-185), and A549 ZAP knockout (K/O) cells (29), were maintained in complete Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco) supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco), 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (pen/strep; Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were cultured at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2. Invertebrate cell lines, Culex pipiens (C.pip) (with identifiers: CPE/LULS50 and CVCL_C1YI) and Culex tarsalis (CxT) (30) cells, were cultured at 28°C in Leibovitz L-15 medium (Gibco) supplemented with 20% (vol/vol) FBS or Schneider’s medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% (vol/vol) FBS, 2% (vol/vol) tryptose phosphate broth (Gibco), and 1% (vol/vol) non-essential amino acids (Gibco), respectively. Cell lines were passaged bi-weekly at a confluency of ~90%–100%.Human iPSC acquisition and cultureHuman-induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) (WTC-11 provided by Bruce R. Conklin, the Gladstone Institutes and UCSF Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA [UBMTA 2023-0123]) were maintained in complete iPSC medium (Stemflex medium [ThermoFisher Scientific]), 100 IU/mL penicillin (Lonza), 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Lonza), and 1× Revitacell (ThermoFisher Scientific) at 37°C and 5% CO2. Accutase (Life Technologies) was used for dissociation during passaging, and the cells were seeded on Matrigel (Corning, 10 µL/mL) coated 6-well plates. For coating, Matrigel was diluted in knock-out Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (KO DMEM; ThermoFisher Scientific), and the plates were incubated for a minimum of 1 h at 37°C. iPSCs were differentiated into spinal cord motor neurons and Ngn2 cortical neuron-astrocyte co-cultures as previously described in detail (31). Briefly, Ngn2 cortical neuron-astrocyte co-cultures are a mixed cell system containing human iPSC-derived excitatory cortical neurons grown together with primary astrocytes, creating a more physiologically relevant model of the human brain environment.Construction of infectious complementary DNA clones and rescue of recombinant West Nile virus mutantsA pCC1-BAC-based infectious clone containing WNV isolate 578/10 from Hungary (lineage 2, GenBank accession no. KC496015.1) (32) was used to construct WNV mutants. Two specific regions within the WNV genome, comprising 1,642 and 1,645 nucleotides (nt), were selected for mutation. The scrambled control (SCR) mutant was designed with the “scramble sequence” function and the CDLR algorithm using the SSE program (28). The CpG- and UpA-elevated regions were designed using the “mutate sequence” function, adjusting CpG or UpA dinucleotide frequencies while keeping the other dinucleotide (CpG or UpA) stable. Regions were synthesized (GeneArt, ThermoFisher Scientific) and cloned into pCC1-BAC-WNV578/10 using restriction enzymes: BstBI and SphI (region 1) and SphI and KflI (region 2) (New England Biolabs). Plasmid DNA was purified using the NucleoBond Xtra Midi kit (MACHEREY-NAGEL) and subsequently transfected into Vero E6 cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Three days post-transfection, 200 µL cell culture medium was used to infect a ~70% confluent monolayer of Vero E6 cells in a T-75 flask, generating passage 1 (P1), and similarly, a P2 was generated. RNA from P2 was extracted using TRIzol LS Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific) and reverse transcribed into cDNA using the SuperScript III Platinum Two-Step qRT-PCR Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). The sequence integrity of the mutant viruses was confirmed by sequencing (Macrogen).Virus growth kineticsTo determine the growth kinetics of WNV, cultured cells were infected with 10 (mosquito cells) or 1 (vertebrate cells) viral RNA copies per cell. After 2 h of incubation, the inoculum was removed, the cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Gibco), and a fresh medium was added to the cells. Supernatant samples were collected daily. Infectious virus titers were subsequently determined by endpoint dilution assays (EPDA).Virus quantificationThe infectious virus titer was quantified by EPDA on Vero cells and expressed as median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50)/mL. Serial 10-fold dilutions of viral stocks and samples were prepared in complete DMEM cell culture medium, mixed in a 1:1 ratio with a Vero cell suspension of 2.5 × 105 cells/mL, and plated in 6-fold into microtiter plates (Nunc, Sigma-Aldrich). Viral titers were determined by the presence of cytopathic effects (CPE) 3–4 days post-infection, using the Reed-Muench method.Viral RNA copy numbers were quantified using quantitative PCR (qPCR). Viral RNA was purified from supernatant samples using TRIzol LS. An RNA standard for WNV was generated from a 910 bp PCR amplicon corresponding to a fragment within the non-structural protein 5 (NS5) region with the T7 promoter sequence at the 5’ end (FW: TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGGAAGTGAAACCAACCGGCTCAG; RV: AGGTGTTCAGGGCGTAAGTC). RNA was in vitro-transcribed using T7 polymerase (NEB), purified from gel (Cytiva GFX PCR and DNA Gel Band Purification Kit). Serial 10-fold dilutions of the RNA standard were prepared and used as a reference for RNA quantification via SYBR Green (Fisherbrand) Real-Time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR). The qPCR was conducted using primers targeting a 157 bp fragment within the NS5 region (FW: AAGAACGCCCGGGAAGCC; RV: TGCTGCCTTTAGCTTTGCCG) on a CFX96 Real-Time PCR instrument (Bio-Rad) with the following program settings: 5 min 50°C, 20 s 95°C, followed by 45 cycles of 3 s 95°C and 30 s 60°C.Mosquito rearingCulex pipiens mosquitoes (colony originated from Brummen, The Netherlands) were kept in Bugdorm cages and maintained at 23°C, with a 16:8 light:dark cycle and a relative humidity of 60% as described previously (33, 34).Infectious blood mealAdult Cx. pipiens mosquitoes (5–7 days old) were starved for sucrose for 2 days and water for 1 day prior to the infectious blood meal. WNV variants were added to whole chicken blood (KempKip, Uden, The Netherlands) to achieve a final concentration of 1010 RNA copies/mL, corresponding to ~1–5 × 107 TCID50/mL as measured on Vero cells. Blood feeding was conducted in a dark room for 1 h using a Hemotek PS5 feeder (Discovery Workshops, Lancashire, United Kingdom). After feeding, mosquitoes were sedated with CO2, and only fully engorged female mosquitoes were selected. To check for equal virus uptake, three fully engorged females of each group were immediately stored at −80°C in SafeSeal microtubes (Starstedt) containing 0.5 mm zirconium oxide beads (Next Advance). The remaining mosquitoes were incubated at 28°C for 14 days, during which they were provided with a 6% glucose solution.Mosquito salivation assayMosquitoes were sedated using CO2, and legs and wings were removed. The proboscis of sedated mosquitos was inserted into a 200 µL tip containing 5 µL of salivation medium (50% FBS, 25% [wt/vol] sucrose in dH2O). Mosquitoes salivated for 1 h, after which saliva was collected in Eppendorf tubes containing 55 µL complete DMEM and individual bodies in Eppendorf tubes containing 0.5 mm zirconium beads. Saliva and bodies were stored at −80°C.Infectivity and transmission efficiency assayFrozen mosquito bodies were homogenized using a Bullet Blender Storm (Next Advance, New York, USA) in 100 µL of complete DMEM supplemented with 1:100 Amphotericin B (Gibco). Following homogenization, samples were centrifuged for 90 s at 14,000 rpm in an Eppendorf centrifuge. From the resulting supernatant and from saliva samples, 30 µL was taken and incubated on a monolayer of Vero cells in a 96-well plate. After an incubation period of 2–4 h, the medium was replaced with 100 µL of fresh, fully supplemented medium. Three days post-infection, CPE was scored as an indication of infectivity and transmission efficiency. Viral titers from positive body samples were determined by EPDAs.Intraperitoneal WNV mutant inoculation of wild-type C57BL/6 miceSpecific pathogen-free wild-type (WT) C57BL/6 age-matched female mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories. Female mice were used to maintain consistency with our previously established WNV pathogenesis model (35), in which this sex selection facilitated optimal group housing conditions. Mice were divided into groups of four animals per HEPA-filtered, negatively pressured isolator filter-top cage and allowed to acclimatize for 7 days prior to inoculation. Food and water were provided ad libitum throughout the duration of the experiment. All mice were 6–8 weeks old on the day of WNV inoculation. All invasive animal procedures were performed under inhalation anesthesia using isoflurane (800–1,000 mL/min O2, 4%–5% for induction, 2%–3% for maintenance). Per condition, eight mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with a single dose (105 TCID50) of either WNV-WT, WNV-SCR, WNV-CpG1+2, WNV-UpA1+2, or sterile PBS (control group) in a volume of 100 µL using a 25G 0.5 × 16 mm Microlance needle (BD300600). An inoculation dose of 105 TCID50 per animal has previously been shown to be lethal in C57BL/6 mice (36) and was therefore specifically chosen herein to test the replication, safety, and neuroinvasive capacity of the mutants. For a duration of 14 days, mice were weighed and monitored daily for general health status and behavior, and any clinical signs of disease and abnormal behavior were documented. A 30 µL blood sample was collected from the tail vein every other day post-inoculation (up until day 10 post-inoculation) of four animals per experimental group and spun in serum tubes (Greiner Bio-one 450533, MiniCollect Tube 0.5 mL/0.8 mL CAT Serum Sep Clot Activator) at 4,000 rpm for 10 min to separate and aspirate the serum. The serum was subsequently transferred to lysis buffer (Roche, MagNA Pure 96 External Lysis Buffer 06374913001) and stored at −80°C until further processing. Mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation under inhalation anesthesia when the humane endpoint was reached. Part of the spleen, liver, kidney, lung, and brain (divided into a frontal, central, and basal section) was collected in 2 mL tubes (Greiner) containing one ceramic sphere (MP Biomedicals, 11-654-0424). Tissues were stored at −80°C until further processing, then thawed once and homogenized using the Tissue Lyser II (Qiagen, 85300), and clarified by centrifugation (Allegra X-15R Centrifuge, Beckman Coulter) at 4,000 rpm for 10 min. Subsequently, the tissue supernatants were titrated onto Vero cells as described above. Of the surviving mice, 30 µL of blood was collected on day 21 post-inoculation in order to measure antibody titers and thereby confirm seroconversion of the animals.Intradermal WNV challenge of pre-inoculated wild-type C57BL/6 micePassage three virus stocks of the WNV-NL20 (originally isolated from a Phylloscopus collybita, GenBank accession number OP762595.1, EVAg 010 V-04311, grown in Vero cells at 37°C in 5% CO2) were used for challenge. On day 28 post-inoculation, surviving mice were challenged with 105 TCID50 wild-type (WT) WNV-NL20 via intradermal inoculation in the footpad of the right hind leg as described previously (35). Mice were weighed and monitored for general health status and behavior on a daily basis, and any clinical signs of disease and abnormal behavior were documented for a duration of 10 days. A 30 µL blood sample was collected from the tail vein every other day post-challenge (up until day 10 post-challenge) and processed as described above. On day 10 post-challenge, or when the humane endpoint was reached, mice were euthanized, and the tissues were harvested as described above.Serum RNA isolation and real-time qPCRTotal RNA was extracted from the serum samples by transferring the serum samples to a 96-well plate and incubating with Agencourt AMPure XP magnetic beads (Beckman Coulter A63882) for at least 15 min. Samples were then placed onto a DynaMag-96 magnet (Invitrogen, 12027) for 3 min, after which the supernatant was aspirated and discarded. The beads were washed three times with 70% ethanol and air-dried for 3 min while kept on the magnetic block. RNA was eluted from the beads by resuspension in sterile ddH2O. Real-time TaqMan PCR was performed using a WNV primer/probe mix (Probe sequence TGCTGCTGCCTGCGGCTCAACCC, FW: CCACCGGAAGTTGAGTAGACG, RV: TTTGGTCACCCAGTCCTCCT) diluted in TaqMan Fast Virus-1 Step Master Mix (Applied Biosystems 4444432) and ddH2O. The Applied Biosystems 7500 Real-Time PCR system (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used with the following program settings: 5 min 50°C, 20 s 95°C, 45 cycles of 3 s 95°C, and 30 s 60°C. A serial dilution of WNV-578/10 or WNV-NL20 viral stock for the generation of a standard curve was included for comparison and conversion to TCID50 equivalents per mL post-mutant and challenge inoculation, respectively.Virus titrations of mouse tissuesViral titers (expressed as the median tissue culture infectious dose; TCID50/mL) were determined by an EPDA, titrating supernatant on Vero cells seeded onto 96-well plates at a density of 2.3 × 104 cells per well ~24 h prior to titration. The inoculated plates were incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2, after which cytopathic effects were assessed 6 days post-infection to determine the virus titers using the Spearman & Kärber method (37).Illumina sequencing of viral RNATotal RNA from mouse brain tissue samples was extracted using TRIzol. The purified RNA was subjected to the lncRNA sequencing pipeline from Novogene, consisting of rRNA depletion, followed by PE150 paired-end sequencing at 40M reads on the Illumina NovaSeq X Plus Series platform. Adapter trimming and quality filtering (>Q20) were performed using Trim Galore (version 0.6.10) (38), after which they were aligned to their respective WNV genome using bwa-mem2 with default parameters (version 2.2.1) (39). For variant calling, LoFreq (version 2.1.5) was used (40). Visualization of viral variants was done using an in-house Python script.Statistical analysisAll statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism software (version 10.2.3). Differences in CpG and UpA O/E ratios between Culex and Aedes transmitted vertebrate-infecting flaviviruses were tested using an unpaired Student’s t-test. To compare replication kinetics between the mutants and WT WNV, total viral load was calculated by calculating the total area under the curve (AUC). Differences in AUC were analyzed using the non-parametric Friedman test, followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison. A non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test with Dunn’s multiple comparison was used to check for significant differences in viral titers between WT and mutant viruses in the blood meal that mosquitoes received and in mosquito bodies. Fisher’s exact test was used to analyze categorical data regarding mosquito survival, virus infection rates, and transmission rates. For the mouse experiment, statistical analyses were done using a two-way ANOVA multiple comparison to assess significant differences in weight loss and viremia, and a log-rank Mantel-Cox test to assess differences in mortality.RESULTSDinucleotide suppression patterns in flaviviruses correlate with host and vector specificityTo further explore the relationship between dinucleotide frequencies, host range, vector species, and putative phylogenetic groups within the Orthoflavivirus genus, we constructed a concise phylogenetic tree (Fig. 1). The phylogeny shows that flaviviruses cluster into distinct groups that are defined by vector species, host tropism, and the pathogenesis they induce. Adjacent to the phylogenetic tree, we placed color codes representing the observed-over-expected (O/E) ratios of CpG and UpA dinucleotides within the full-length genomes of each virus. Vertebrate-infecting flaviviruses exhibit a marked suppression of both CpG (O/E = 0.38–0.62) and UpA (O/E = 0.43–0.60) dinucleotide frequencies, whereas insect-specific flaviviruses only show the suppression of UpA dinucleotides (O/E = 0.49–0.66).Interestingly, in this phylogenetic display, we also observed differences in CpG suppression between vertebrate-infecting flaviviruses transmitted by Aedes and Culex mosquitoes, with CpG suppression being significantly (P < 0.001) more pronounced in Aedes-transmitted flaviviruses (O/E = 0.42) compared with those transmitted by Culex mosquitoes (O/E = 0.55). The differences between ZIKV and WNV in host species, vector preference, and CpG O/E ratios (0.43 vs 0.58) led us to investigate how dinucleotide alterations affect WNV replication and transmission.Fig 1Phylogenetic relationships and dinucleotide composition of the genus Orthoflavivirus. A phylogenetic tree of selected viruses from the genus Orthoflavivirus. TBEV was used for rooting the tree. The color codes adjacent to the tree represent the observed-to-expected (O/E) ratios of CpG and UpA dinucleotides within the genomes of each virus.The diagram depicts phylogenetic relationships among flaviviruses alongside CpG and UpA ratios, with icons indicating vertebrate or insect-specific hosts and primary vectors including Culex and Aedes mosquitoes.Construction of West Nile virus mutants with increased CpG and UpA dinucleotidesTo investigate how CpG and UpA dinucleotides affect replication and pathogenesis of a Culex-transmitted, neuroinvasive flavivirus, various synonymous WNV mutants were designed. First, genomic regions were selected that could accommodate synonymous mutations without disrupting essential functional elements. The flavivirus genome contains key RNA structures in the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) involved in genome cyclization (reviewed in reference 41), and the conserved heptanucleotide motif and pseudoknot in the NS2A region, required for ribosomal frameshifting and NS1’ production (42, 43). Remaining genomic regions display relatively high and uniform nucleotide variability at synonymous sites (44), which are potentially suitable sites to introduce synonymous mutations. Two regions in the WNV genome were selected for introducing additional CpG or UpA dinucleotides: region 1, coding for the polyprotein from NS3 to NS4A (1642 nt), and the adjacent region 2, coding for NS4A to NS5 (1645 nt) (Fig. 2A). Second, a scrambled control (SCR) mutant was constructed. This SCR mutant incorporates the maximum number of synonymous changes within the target regions while preserving the wild-type mono- and di-nucleotide frequencies. The SCR mutant virus exhibited replication kinetics similar to wild-type WNV across both mosquito and vertebrate cell lines, as measured by infectious progeny virus in the cell culture supernatant (Fig. 2B through E). These results confirmed that the selected regions lack essential RNA structures or genomic sequences, making them suitable for testing the effects of CpG and UpA dinucleotide modifications on WNV replication.Fig 2West Nile virus mutant design and scrambled control replication kinetics. (A) Selected genomic regions for synonymous mutations introducing CpG and UpA dinucleotides in the West Nile Virus (WNV) genome. Replication of wild-type (WT) and scrambled (SCR) WNV in (B) C.pip and (C) CxT cells at 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 dpi, and (D) Vero and (E) A549 cells at 0, 1, 2, and 3 days post-infection. Viral titers in cell supernatants were quantified over time. Data points represent the mean of three independent experiments, and error bars show the standard error of the mean. Differences between viral titers were not significant (Friedman test with Dunn’s multiple comparison, P > 0.05).The diagram depicts the Zika virus genome and defined regions that were scrambled (abbreviated as SCR) or elevated CpG or UpA dinucleotides. Line graphs compare WT and SCR replication kinetics in C.pip, CxT, Vero, and A549 cells over multiple days.We then generated mutants with elevated CpG or UpA frequencies. In region 1, 49 additional CpG dinucleotides or 57 additional UpA dinucleotides were introduced to achieve unbiased observed/expected (O/E) ratios of approximately 1.0. Similarly, 47 CpG or 51 UpA dinucleotides were added in region 2 to reach the same target ratio (Table 1). In these mutants, the final mononucleotide frequencies were identical to the corresponding region in the wild-type sequence. Additionally, in CpG mutants, the UpA frequencies were kept at wild-type levels and vice versa to isolate the effects of each modification.To assess the cumulative impact of dinucleotide enrichment, combined mutants were created incorporating modifications from both regions. It was also investigated whether the spatial distribution and concentration of these dinucleotides affect viral replication and attenuation by constructing CpGmax and UpAmax mutants. These variants contained concentrated numbers of dinucleotides in region 1 equivalent to the cumulative number introduced in regions 1 + 2 combined, with 96 CpG or 99 UpA dinucleotides, respectively (Table 1). For the CpGmax variant, this was only achievable when mononucleotide usage was allowed to change from WT levels, as reflected in the slightly elevated G + C content (Table 1).TABLE 1Synonymous CpG and UpA dinucleotide modifications in West Nile virus mutantsbLength (bp)G+C (%)CpGaCpG (O/E)UpAaUpA (O/E)WT full genome10,30251.03790.572800.46WT1+23,28751.5117 (+0)0.5480 (+0)0.42SCR3,28751.5117 (+0)0.5480 (+0)0.42CpG11,64250.4103 (+49)0.9940 (+0)0.41CpG21,64552.5110 (+47)0.9840 (+0)0.43CpG1+23,28751.5213 (+96)0.9980 (+0)0.41CpGmax1,64260.2150 (+96)1.2540 (+0)0.64UpA11,64250.454 (+0)0.5297 (+57)0.99UpA21,64552.563 (+0)0.5691 (+51)0.99UpA1+23,28751.5117 (+0)0.54188 (+108)0.99UpAmax1,64250.454 (+0)0.52139 (+99)1.42

a

Total number of introduced CpG or UpA dinucleotides displayed as (+N).

b

Wild-type (WT) and scrambled control (SCR) mutants maintain baseline dinucleotide frequencies, while CpG and UpA mutants exhibit targeted increases in CpG or UpA dinucleotides. The CpG and UpA observed/expected (O/E) ratios indicate the relative frequency of these dinucleotides within each mutant genome.Replication of West Nile virus mutants with increased CpG and UpA dinucleotides in mosquito cellsTo evaluate the impact of CpG- and UpA-enrichment on WNV replication in Culex mosquito vector cells, Culex pipiens (C.pip) and Culex tarsalis (CxT) cell cultures were infected with the WNV variants, and infectious progeny virus was measured. For the CpG-high mutants, overall replication kinetics were not significantly different compared with WT WNV in both cell lines (Fig. 3A and B). In contrast, the UpA-high mutants exhibited a trend toward reduced viral titers compared with WT WNV in both C.pip and CxT cells (Fig. 3C and D). Notably, a statistically significant reduction in viral titers was observed for the UpA2 in both cell lines (P < 0.05). These findings suggest that the CpG content has no effect on WNV replication, whereas increasing the UpA content results in lower WNV titers in Culex mosquito cells.Fig 3Replication kinetics of West Nile Virus CpG- and UpA-high mutants in mosquito cells. Cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 RNA copies/cell. (A) Replication of CpG mutants in Culex pipiens (C.pip) cells and (B) Culex tarsalis (CxT) cells, measured at 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 days post-infection. (C) Replication of UpA mutants in C.pip cells and (D) CxT cells, measured at 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 days post-infection. Data points represent the mean of three independent experiments, and error bars show the standard error of the mean. Statistical analysis on the area under the curve for each virus variant was performed by using the non-parametric Friedman test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons. Asterisks indicate significant differences (*P < 0.05).Line graphs depict Zika virus replication in C. pip and CxT cells for wild-type and CpG or UpA mutant strains over four days. Mock samples remain flat across all time points.Replication of West Nile virus mutants with increased CpG and UpA dinucleotides in Culex pipiens mosquitoesTo investigate the replicative phenotypes of WNV mutants in live vector mosquitoes, Culex pipiens were orally infected with either WT, SCR, Region 1 (R1), Region 1 + 2 (R1+2), and the max (Rmax) CpG and UpA mutant viruses; R1 mutants were prioritized over R2 for their comparative value to Rmax variants in assessing dinucleotide concentration effects. All variants were delivered at a fixed dose of 1010 RNA copies/mL, corresponding to ~2 x 107 TCID50/mL for WT WNV. Blood meal and three fully engorged female mosquitoes were collected immediately after feeding to determine exposure titers per group (Fig. 4A and B). Following infection, mosquitoes were incubated and monitored for 14 days. Survival was high across all WNV variants (above 94%), except for WNV-CpGmax, which had a slightly lower survival rate of 88% (Fig. 4C). Among surviving mosquitoes, saliva was harvested before bodies were homogenized and analyzed for the presence of WNV. Infectivity rates, measured as the proportion of mosquitoes with detectable virus in body homogenates, were highest in the WT WNV group (65%) and lower in the mutants. The lowest infectivity rate was observed in the CpG1 group (31%), followed by CpGmax (40%) and UpAmax (41%) (Fig. 4D). Notably, despite reduced infectivity, CpGmax-infected mosquitoes exhibited high median viral titers (median = 5.6) in positive samples, nearly matching those of WT-infected mosquitoes (median = 6.2) (Fig. 4E). Median body titers in UpA1 and UpAmax-infected mosquitoes were significantly lower than those in WT-infected mosquitoes (P < 0.05, Fig. 4E). Transmission rates, indicated by virus in saliva, followed trends similar to infectivity rates. WT-infected mosquitoes had the highest transmission rate (59%), whereas CpG1+2-infected mosquitoes showed the lowest (36%), followed by CpG1 and UpAmax (37%) (Fig. 4F).In conclusion, both infectivity and transmission were reduced across all mutants, including the SCR, suggesting that synonymous changes in selected regions may affect viral fitness in vivo. Despite reduced infectivity rates, CpG1 and CpGmax mutants maintained relatively high median viral titers comparable with WT WNV, whereas infection with UpA-high mutants resulted in lower viral titers. These findings suggest that virus replication within the mosquito, but not initial infection, is affected by elevating CpG and UpA frequencies in WNV.Fig 4Survival, infectivity, and transmission rates of Culex pipiens mosquitoes infected with CpG- and UpA-high West Nile Virus mutants. All virus variants were delivered at a fixed dose of 10¹⁰ RNA copies/mL of blood. (A) Back-titration of the infectious blood meal directly after blood feeding. (B) Infectious viral titers are present in fully engorged Culex pipiens mosquito bodies immediately after feeding. (C) Survival rates of Culex pipiens mosquitoes during a 14-day incubation period after taking a blood meal. The total number of dead (D) and living (L) mosquitoes at the end of the experiment is indicated. (D) Infectivity was measured as whole mosquito bodies that contained infectious virus and represented as a percentage of the total number of mosquitoes that survived the incubation period. Total amounts of virus-positive (+) and virus-negative (−) mosquitoes are indicated. (E) Violin plots from the viral titers in infected mosquito bodies. Solid lines indicate the median and dotted lines the interquartile range of each experimental group. (F) Transmission, represented as the percentage of virus-positive saliva samples post-incubation. Data are collected from three independent experiments. Statistical analyses on viral titers (A, B, and E) were performed using non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis tests with Dunn’s multiple comparisons and on categorical data (C, D, and F) using Fisher’s exact tests. Asterisks indicate significant differences (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01) between WT and mutant variants. LOD indicates the limit of detection.Grouped plots depict Zika virus mutant effects across blood titers, body titers, survival, infectivity, and transmission. CpGmax shows reduced survival and infectivity. UpA1 and UpAmax show decreased body titers and consistent transmission reduction.West Nile virus mutants with increased CpG and UpA dinucleotides are attenuated in vertebrate cellsTo investigate the replication kinetics of WNV mutants with increased CpG and UpA dinucleotides in vertebrates, common cell lines from primate and human origin (Vero and A549, respectively) were infected with 1 RNA/cell, and daily cell culture supernatant samples were collected to assess the presence of infectious virus. In both Vero and A549 cells, a trend toward slower replication of the CpG-high mutants compared with WT WNV was observed, with only the CpGmax mutant displaying a significant difference (P < 0.001, Fig. 5A and C). In A549 ZAP K/O cells, the replication kinetics of all CpG mutants were similar to WT WNV, indicating that the attenuation of CpG mutants is restored in the absence of ZAP (Fig. 5E).Fig 5Replication kinetics of West Nile Virus CpG and UpA high mutants in vertebrate cell lines. (A and B) Vero, (C and D) A549, and (E and F) A549 ZAP knockout (ZAP k/o) cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 RNA/cell with wild-type (WT) West Nile virus (WNV) and either (A, C, and E) CpG-high mutants or (B, D, and F) UpA-high mutants. Viral replication was assessed by measuring viral titers (TCID50/mL) in cell supernatants at 0, 1, 2, and 3 days post-infection. Data points represent the mean of three independent experiments, and error bars indicate the standard error of the mean. Statistical analysis on the area under the curve for each virus variant was performed by using the non-parametric Friedman test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons. Asterisks indicate significant differences (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01).Line graphs compare Zika virus mutant replication in Vero, A549, and A549 ZAP knockout cells. CpGmax and UpA mutants consistently yield low titers, especially in wild-type A549 and Vero cells, indicating reduced replication.A similar trend was observed with the UpA-high mutants, which displayed reduced replication compared with WT WNV in both Vero and A549 cells, with only the UpA2 mutant displaying a significant difference in both cell lines (P < 0.001, Fig. 5B and D). Unlike the CpG mutants, the replication kinetics of the UpA mutants were not restored to WT levels in A549 ZAP K/O cells (Fig. 5F). However, titers for the different UpA mutants were a little closer to WT WNV. These results indicate that genomic CpG and UpA dinucleotides negatively affect WNV replication in vertebrate cells.West Nile virus CpG and UpA mutants are attenuated in human iPCS-derived cortical-neuron astrocyte coculturesPrevious research has shown that some live-attenuated WNV strains can still replicate in the central nervous system, raising concerns about the possibility of neurovirulence (45, 46). Therefore, we evaluated the replication of WT, CpG1+2, and UpA1+2 mutant WNV strains in human iPSC-derived motor neurons and Ngn2 cortical neuron-astrocyte cocultures as a proxy for their ability to replicate within the peripheral and central nervous systems, respectively. The CpG1+2 and UpA1+2 mutants were selected as they contain the most additional dinucleotides without altering mononucleotide frequencies (Table 1).In the motor neurons, a consistent trend was observed where WT WNV replicated to higher titers than the SCR, CpG1+2, and UpA1+2 mutants across all time points, with a significant difference between WT WNV and the UpA1+2 mutant (P < 0.05, Fig. 6A). In neuron-astrocyte co-cultures, both CpG1+2 and UpA1+2 mutants exhibited significantly lower replication compared with WT (P < 0.01 and P < 0.05, Fig. 6B). These observations indicate that the CpG1+2 and UpA1+2 mutants are attenuated in their capacity to replicate in neurons and that this attenuation is more apparent in cortical neuron-astrocyte co-cultures compared with motor neurons alone.Fig 6Replication kinetics of West Nile Virus CpG- and UpA-high mutants in iPCS-derived cortical-neuron astrocyte cocultures. Cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1 RNA copy/cell. (A) Replication of CpG-high and UpA-high mutants in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived motor neurons. (B) Replication of CpG-high and UpA-high mutants in neuron-astrocyte co-cultures. Viral titers in cell supernatants were quantified at 0, 1, 2, and 3 days post-infection. Data points represent the mean of three independent experiments, and error bars show the standard error of the mean. Statistical analysis on the area under the curve for each virus variant was performed by using the non-parametric Friedman test with Dunn’s multiple comparisons. Asterisks indicate significant differences (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01).Two line graphs depict TCID50 per milliliter over three days post-infection in motor neurons and neuron–astrocyte co-cultures. CpG1+2 and UpA1+2 mutants replicate slower than WT and SCR, especially in neuron–astrocyte cultures.WNV-CpG and WNV-UpA induce weight loss and mortality in C57BL/6 WT miceTo assess attenuation of the WNV mutants in vivo, C57BL/6 WT mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with WNV-SCR, WNV-CpG1+2, or WNV-UpA1+2, and disease progression was compared with WNV-WT infection (Fig. 7A). Mock animals were injected with PBS as a negative control. WT-inoculated mice started to lose weight from 5 days post-inoculation (dpi) and continued to lose weight up until 8–9 dpi, where all WT-inoculated animals reached the humane endpoint (set at 75% of the starting body weight). Animals inoculated with CpG1+2 started losing weight at 6 dpi, and despite losing significantly less weight compared with WT (Fig. 7B), they all reached the humane endpoint between 7 and 10 dpi. In the UpA1+2-inoculated group, 25% of the group started losing weight at 6 dpi, whereas 75% either remained relatively stable or recovered and returned to their starting weight (Fig. 7C). All animals in the WT, SCR, and CpG1+2 inoculated groups reached the humane endpoint before the end of the experiment. However, the mortality of the CpG1+2 group was significantly delayed by 1 and 2 days compared with WT and SCR, respectively (Fig. 7D). In contrast, with 75%, the overall probability of survival of UpA1+2 inoculated animals was significantly higher than that of WT-inoculated animals. These findings demonstrate that UpA1+2 WNV is more effectively attenuated than CpG1+2 compared with WT.Fig 7Weight loss and mortality of C57BL/6 wild-type mice post-inoculation with West Nile virus mutants. (A) Animal trial timeline for West Nile virus (WNV)-NL20 challenge in C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice pre-inoculated with WNV mutants. On day 0, animals were inoculated with WNV WT or mutant (105 TCID50/mL) via the intraperitoneal route (n = 8 per group, with the exception of the WT group; n = 4). All animals were monitored for clinical signs of infection and weighed every day up until day 14 post-infection (pi). Blood was sampled every other day. (B) Weight change post WT, scrambled (SCR), CpG1+2, UpA1+2, and mock inoculation. Data points represent the average of experimental groups, and error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Statistically significant differences at day 7 pi were assessed using a two-way ANOVA multiple comparisons test over days 0–7 pi (i.e., before the animals started to reach humane endpoint). (C) Weight change post WNV UpA1+2 inoculation for individual animals numbered 9–16. (D) Survival curves of inoculated animals. Statistical analysis was conducted using the Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Asterisks indicate significant difference (*P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, or ****P < 0.0001) between the corresponding mutant and WT WNV.Schematic and line graphs track weight change and survival of mice post-inoculation. UpA1+2 group shows less weight loss and higher survival compared with WT and CpG1+2, suggesting reduced pathogenicity.WNV-CpG and WNV-UpA inoculation results in viremia and leads to detectable virus in the brain of C57BL/6 WT miceTo assess whether inoculation with the WNV mutants leads to the development of viremia, serum was collected every other day starting at 2 dpi. Viremia peaked at 2 dpi for all mutants, where both CpG1+2 and UpA1+2-inoculated animals reached significantly lower peak titers (~104 TCID50/mL) compared with WT-inoculated animals (~105 TCID50/mL). Between 2 and 8 dpi, viremia gradually decreased for all mutants, where no significant difference between titers was observed between the groups (Fig. 8A). We further determined the viral load in the main visceral target organs (spleen, liver, kidney, and lung) and in the brain (divided into frontal, central, and basal regions), which had been collected on the days when animals reached the humane endpoint post-inoculation. No positive titers were found in the visceral organs, apart from one animal in the WT (Fig. 8B) and SCR (Fig. 8C) groups (~103 TCID50/g in kidney and lung). In contrast, all WT, SCR, CpG1+2-inoculated animals (Fig. 8B through D), and the two UpA1+2 (Fig. 8E) inoculated animals that had reached the humane endpoint had measurable viral titers in the brain ranging from 103 to 108 TCID50/g on the day of euthanasia. Notably, animals that survived infection with the UpA1+2 mutant showed significant seroconversion by 21 days post-inoculation, with detectable IgG-binding titers against WNV antigens (Fig. 8F). RNA sequencing analysis of brain samples from mice that reached the humane endpoint post-inoculation (two mice per group) confirmed the genetic stability of the mutant viruses during infection (Fig. 8G). Those mutations that were established in more than 10% of the viral quasi-species population neither showed any reversion of CpG or UpA dinucleotides nor did we observe any specific mutation arise twice between samples.Fig 8Viremia and viral loads in the blood and brains of C57BL/6 wild-type mice. (A) Viral RNA titers in the blood as determined by qPCR. Blood was sampled every 2 days post-infection up until 8 dpi (n = 4 per mutant), or when the humane endpoint was reached. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Significant differences in viremia were assessed using a two-way ANOVA multiple comparison. Significant differences in viremia were assessed using a two-way ANOVA multiple comparison and colored asterisks ([****] P < 0.0001) to indicate significant differences between the corresponding mutant and WT WNV. (B through E) Infectious virus titers in different visceral organs and regions of the brain in (B) wild-type (WT)-inoculated animals (n = 4); (C) scramble (SCR)-inoculated animals (n = 8); (D) CpG1+2-inoculated animals (n = 8); and (E) UpA1+2-inoculated animals (n = 2) on the day of euthanasia, as measured by virus titration. Shown as TCID50 per gram of tissue. (F) IgG-binding titers in the blood of UpA1+2-inoculated mice that survived until day 21 post-inoculation, as determined by microarray (reaching the upper limit of detection). LOD = limit of detection. (G) RNA sequencing results from viral RNA isolated from brain tissue samples. For every sample, individual synonymous (blue) and non-synonymous (red) mutations, their observed frequency, and position on the genome are indicated. Dashed lines indicate the borders of the mutated region, and colors of the plot area represent functional regions within the viral genome.Line and bar graphs compare viremia, tissue viral loads, antibody titers, and mutation frequencies. UpA1+2 group shows reduced viremia, low organ titers, strong IgG binding, and distinct mutation patterns across genome positions.WNV-UpA1+2-inoculated animals are protected against subsequent WNV-WT challengeTo assess whether initial inoculation of the WNV-UpA1+2 could confer protection against subsequent WNV-WT infection, all remaining UpA1+2-inoculated animals (n = 6) were challenged with WNV-NL20 (a related WT WNV lineage 2 strain) on day 28 post-inoculation (UpA1+2 WT group). The mock animals that had been injected with PBS previously (n = 8) were subsequently divided into two groups of four animals, where one group was challenged with WNV-NL20 (WT group) and the other group was injected with PBS to again serve as a mock group (Fig. 9A).Fig 9Weight loss, mortality, viremia, and tissue titers of naïve and UpA1+2 pre-inoculated animals challenged with wild-type West Nile virus. Animals were challenged intradermally in the footpad of the right hind leg with 105 TCID50 per animal (wild-type [WT] and mock group n = 4; UpA1+2 v group n = 6). (A) Animal trial timeline for West Nile virus (WNV)-NL20 challenge in C57BL/6 wild-type mice pre-inoculated with WNV mutants (Fig. 7A). On day 21 pi, blood was collected from all animals that survived the inoculation to check for seroconversion. On day 28 pi, or day 0 post-challenge (pc), animals were challenged with the wildtype WNV-NL20 strain and monitored in the same way as pi. (B) Weight change of WT, UpA1+2, and mock animals was followed over a time course of 10 days post-challenge. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. (C) Survival curves of challenged animals. (D) Viral RNA titers in the blood as determined by qPCR. Blood was sampled every 2 days post-challenge up until day 8, or when the humane endpoint was reached. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. Significant differences in viremia were assessed using a two-way ANOVA multiple comparison and indicated by the asterisks (****P < 0.0001). (E and F) Infectious virus titers in indicated visceral organs and regions of the brain on the day of euthanasia, as measured by virus titration, in (E) naïve animals challenged with WNV; (F) UpA1+2 pre-inoculated animals challenged with WNV. Shown as TCID50 per gram of tissue. LOD = limit of detection.Schematic and five graphs depict mutant inoculation followed by challenge with wild-type virus in mice. UpA1+2-WT group maintains stable weight, full survival, no viremia, and no detectable virus in tissues.None of the WNV-NL20 challenged animals that had been pre-inoculated (‘vaccinated’) with UpA1+2 lost weight, in contrast to the previously naïve group that started to lose weight starting at 6 days post-WNV-NL20 challenge (Fig. 9B). Correspondingly, the probability of survival of the UpA1+2 WT inoculated mice was 100% upon challenge, compared with 50% for the WT group (Fig. 9C). In addition, UpA1+2 WT animals did not develop viremia (Fig. 9D) or tissue titers (Fig. 9F) post-challenge. All animals from the WT group developed titers in the brain (Fig. 9E). These results show that once animals survive initial inoculation with WNV-UpA1+2, they are subsequently protected against WNV disease.DISCUSSIONIn this study, we engineered several WNV variants with varying levels of increased CpG and UpA frequencies to better understand the evolutionary pressures that these dual-host flaviviruses encounter and whether introducing these mutations has potential for live-attenuated vaccine development to protect against neuroinvasive WNV. We evaluated the replicative fitness of WNV mutants in mosquito and vertebrate cells, assessed how the introduced changes in dinucleotide ratios influence transmission by vector mosquitoes, and whether these mutations affect replication and neurovirulence in a mouse model.In mosquitoes, the genomic frequencies of CpG dinucleotides are unbiased (6, 15). Correspondingly, the genomes of insect-specific flaviviruses exhibit no or very limited CpG suppression (47, 48). This suggests that mosquitoes do not exert an evolutionary pressure to reduce viral CpG dinucleotides. Our in vitro experiments showed that the replication kinetics of CpG-high mutants in Culex cell lines were similar to those of WT WNV.When testing the replication of our mutants in Culex mosquitoes, we observed that CpGmax-infected mosquitoes contained relatively high viral titers and showed the highest mortality. However, these mosquitoes paradoxically exhibited a lower infectivity and transmission rate compared with the WT infected groups. Our previous report showed enhanced replication and higher infectivity of CpG-high ZIKV mutants in Aedes cells and mosquitoes (22). Because CpG suppression is more pronounced in Aedes-transmitted flaviviruses compared with those transmitted by Culex mosquitoes, the discrepancies with our previous study may suggest that (the strength of) evolutionary pressures on CpG dinucleotides differ between Aedes and Culex mosquito vectors or viral species.UpA dinucleotides are suppressed in the genomes of all mosquitoes and flaviviruses. Our data demonstrates that increasing UpA content attenuates WNV replication in mosquito cells, before reaching the same peak end titers as wild-type WNV. Also, in live Culex mosquitoes, we observed an effect on infectivity, body titers, and transmission between WT WNV and the UpA mutants infected groups. Similar results were observed with UpA-high ZIKV, showing attenuated replication in Aedes cells (22). Altogether, this suggests that UpA enrichment reduces the replication efficiency of flaviviruses in the mosquito vector.In vertebrate cell lines, the number of CpGs introduced correlated with the attenuated phenotype, with consistent but less pronounced attenuation of the CpG1 and CpG2 mutants and stronger attenuation of the CpG1+2 and CpGmax mutants compared with WT WNV. Notably, despite containing the same total number of genomic CpG dinucleotides, the CpGmax mutant exhibited greater attenuation than the CpG1+2 mutant in both Vero and A549 cells. This suggests that not only the quantity but also the spacing of CpG dinucleotides plays a critical role in WNV replication (49). In vertebrate cell lines, the UpA mutants exhibited attenuated replication compared with WT WNV. The UpA1 mutant was less attenuated compared with the UpA2, UpA1+2, and UpAmax mutants. Interestingly, the UpA2 mutant displayed similar levels of attenuation to the UpA1+2 and UpAmax mutants, despite differences in UpA dinucleotide frequencies, suggesting that the replicative fitness of distinct UpA mutants is differentially influenced by factors beyond dinucleotide frequency alone.Replication of CpG-high mutants was fully restored in A549 ZAP K/O cells, confirming the central role of ZAP in CpG-mediated restriction. UpA-high mutants also showed improved replication in ZAP-knockout cells, which is in line with previous research on ZIKV and echovirus 7 (22, 29). A direct interaction between ZAP and UpA dinucleotides seems unlikely, given ZAP’s structural specificity for RNA targets containing CpG dinucleotides (50). Therefore, the partial rescue of UpA mutants in ZAP-K/O cells suggests overlapping molecular pathways in CpG and UpA recognition, although the precise mechanism remains to be elucidated.The differential replication patterns of CpG1+2 and UpA1+2 WNV variants between motor neurons and cortical neuron-astrocyte co-cultures reveal important insights into the replication efficiency of modified viral genomes in different cell types. The similar replication kinetics between WNV variants (with only slight attenuation of UpA1+2) suggest that CpG and UpA modifications have minimal impact on viral replication in motor neurons. ZAP’s antiviral activity against CpG-high viruses requires co-factors (e.g., TRIM25) and is intertwined with innate immunity (reviewed in reference 16). It is therefore imaginable that attenuation of CpG- and UpA-high WNV may depend on innate immune activation, which WNV effectively evades in motor neurons (31). In contrast, the marked attenuation of both CpG- and UpA-high WNV variants in cortical neuron-astrocyte cultures, compared with robust WT and SCR replication, may indicate a crucial role of astrocytes in detecting modified viral genomes through their higher expression of pathogen recognition receptors and more robust innate immune responses (51–53), or neuronal subtype-specific differences in antiviral responses between cortical and motor neurons (54). Evaluating how cells of the central nervous system respond to (mutant) WNV infections would be an interesting avenue for future investigations.In mice, the CpG1+2 mutant displayed significantly delayed weight loss and mortality compared with WT WNV, consistent with previous findings on CpG-high IAV and ZIKV mutant infection in mice (21–23), and suggesting a modest attenuation of this mutant. Nevertheless, infection of mice with the CpG1+2 variant resulted in 0% probability of survival and equivalent viral brain titers compared with the WT WNV, which was not observed for IAV (21) and ZIKV (22) CpG-high variants. This difference in disease outcome could be due to the fact that in our study, a lethal dose of WNV was injected to specifically test the replication, safety, and potential neuroinvasiveness of the mutants.In contrast, infection with the UpA1+2 variant resulted in clear, albeit heterogeneous, attenuation of weight loss and mortality. However, the two UpA1+2-infected animals that did not survive showed brain titers comparable with those observed in CpG1+2 and WT WNV-infected animals, indicating that once the mutant viruses overcome the initial stages of infection, they are able to reach and replicate within the brain similar to WT levels. Unfortunately, in the surviving UpA1+2-infected animals, we could not determine whether the UpA1+2 mutant also successfully entered the brain or, if present, how it was subsequently cleared. To conclusively elucidate these mechanisms, a serial-sacrifice study would be necessary in order to have access to and assess (brain) samples during the acute phase of the infection. Other CpG and UpA-recoded virus species have been shown to elicit strong inflammatory responses (18, 21), leading to attenuation and full protection against subsequent WT infection in mice (21–23). The UpA1+2-infected mice, which survived the initial infection, were completely protected against subsequent challenge with WT WNV.Although previous research has explored the vaccine potential of CpG-recoded viruses, our findings introduce critical nuances for such vaccine development strategies. The attenuation of recoded viruses appears to be substantially influenced by host immune competence, as exemplified by the age-dependent antiviral responses reported by Trus et al. (23). Although both CpG and UpA mutants showed attenuation in neuron-astrocyte co-cultures, both mutants still reached relatively high titers (106 TCID50/mL). Their ability to replicate in motor neuron cells and their detection in our mouse brains challenge their potential as live-attenuated vaccine candidates. This neurotropism, combined with our in vivo findings, highlights the need for careful evaluation of recoded WNV as a live-attenuated vaccine, particularly for individuals with compromised immune systems. However, we identified a dose- and spacing-dependent effect of CpG dinucleotides on virus replication, suggesting that the number, type, and distribution of mutations can be strategically optimized to enhance safety. Moreover, developing combination mutants with both increased CpG and UpA content may provide an additional approach to improving attenuation and safety profiles.


Title: Mosquito-Independent Transmission of West Nile virus in Farmed Saltwater Crocodiles (

1. IntroductionWest Nile virus (WNV) is a mosquito-transmitted flavivirus that produces a potentially fatal disease in humans, horses, birds and alligators and has been associated with outbreaks of viral encephalitis in Africa, Europe, and the Americas [1]. Although the Kunjin strain of WNV was initially considered a separate species in the flavivirus genus, subsequent studies revealed that it shared a high degree of antigenic and genetic homology to other WNV strains [2,3,4], prompting the International Committee for Taxonomy on Viruses (ICTV) to classify Kunjin virus as a subtype of WNV. Until 2011, the relatively benign WNVKUN had only been associated with a few cases of non-fatal encephalitis in humans and a handful of equine cases, since it was first isolated in 1960 [5]. However, in 2011 an emerging strain of WNVKUN (referred to as NSW2011) caused a major outbreak of equine encephalitis in SE Australia [4,6].When WNV first entered the Americas in 1999 (the WNVNY99 strain), much effort went into identifying hosts and reservoirs for the virus, and reptiles became a focus of attention. Serological surveys detected antibodies to WNV in farmed Nile crocodiles (Crocodylus niloticus) in Israel, wild and farmed Morelet’s crocodiles (C. moreletii) in Mexico as well as wild and captive American alligators (Alligator mississippiensis) in Florida and free-ranging alligators in Louisiana (reviewed in [7,8]). WNVNY99 was found to be associated with neurological and gastrointestinal disease and high mortality in farmed alligators in Georgia, Louisiana and Florida. Alligators with clinical signs exhibited very high WNV loads in liver, spleen, intestine and brain—the same tissues displayed severe pathological changes [9,10]. Skin lesions were also noted in animals surviving the acute infection, generally appearing 4–5 weeks after the acute disease, but it was not until later that a direct association between the skin lesions, known as “pix” or “Lymphohistiocytic proliferative cutaneous lesions” (LPCL), and WNV-infection was made [10,11].In late 2016, similar skin lesions (pix) were discovered in farmed saltwater crocodiles (Crocodylus porosus) in the Northern Territory of Australia, and WNVKUN viral RNA was detected by qRT-PCR [12]. These lesions severely diminish the value of the skin, with some farms in the Northern Territory observing lesions in almost half the crocodiles harvested. Farming saltwater crocodiles in Northern Australia is an emerging primary industry, currently worth more than AU$100 million per year with quality crocodile skins highly sought by the international fashion industry. However, lost production due to WNVKUN infection is estimated to cost the industry more than AU$10 million/year. Of note is that the appearance of the lesions was not preceded by any other apparent clinical signs in the animals, suggesting that the virus–host relationship between WNVKUN and C. porosus is different to that observed between WNVNY99 and alligators. This prompted us to further characterize the virus strain detected in the lesions and the infection in hatchling saltwater crocodiles. The mode of transmission of WNVKUN to crocodiles is likely to be via the bite of infected mosquitoes. This is consistent with preliminary vector prevalence studies conducted on or near crocodile farms in Northern Australia, that showed high numbers of Culex annulirostris, the major mosquito vector of WNVKUN in Australia [13]. Another incriminated WNVKUN vector, Culex quinquefasciatus [14], was also found breeding in some of the crocodile rearing ponds (unpublished findings of the Northern Territory Medical Entomology unit). Herons and egrets (Ardeidae)—present in large numbers on crocodile farms scavenging for crocodile food waste—are the main recognized vertebrate hosts of WNVKUN [5] and are likely to be involved in the initiation and maintenance of the transmission cycle on crocodile farms. In addition, some crocodile farms contain breeding pens to produce a constant supply of eggs and hatchlings. These swamp-like environments provide ideal conditions for mosquito breeding and attract large populations of these water birds [15]—the perfect scenario for WNVKUN transmission. However, an additional role for infected crocodiles in transmitting the virus to mosquitoes, i.e., as amplifying hosts, has not been investigated. Another potential transmission route is via water fecally contaminated with WNVKUN, particularly in pens containing a high density of animals. Indeed, this has been shown to occur for WNV on alligator farms in the USA [10]. However, while alligators experience a necrotizing enteritis with WNV-shedding in the fecal material during acute infections [10], there has been no evidence that saltwater crocodiles are similarly clinically affected. In this report, we describe the full genome sequence of the crocodile-derived virus and its genetic relationship to other WNVKUN strains as well as the outcome of both direct experimental infection and indirect (contact) virus transmission in juvenile (hatchling) saltwater crocodiles. Our results suggest that despite absence of clinical signs or pathological lesions in the gastrointestinal tract, WNVKUN is indeed shed into the water and can be transmitted directly to other animals in close contact. The implications are that in order to protect farmed crocodiles from developing WNVKUN-induced skin lesions, causing financial costs to a locally important industry, a two-pronged approach must be taken: control of the mosquito-bird-crocodile transmission cycle, and the crocodile-to-crocodile transmission, the latter probably best aided by vaccination. 2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cell Culture and VirusAfrican green monkey (Vero) and Aedes albopictus larvae (C6/36) cells were cultured as previously described [16]. The isolation, propagation and characterization of the equine pathogenic WNVKUN outbreak strain (NSW2011 - isolate E667) has previously been described in detail [4,6]. An additional two passages in BSR (derivative of BHK-1 hamster kidney cells) and C6/36 cells, respectively, were performed at Berrimah Veterinary Laboratories (BVL) prior to use for inoculation. To assess replication of the NSW2011 strain of WNVKUN in C. porosus derived cell lines, 3-CPK and 1-LV cells [17] were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1, alongside C6/36 and Vero cells. The crocodile derived cells were maintained in Medium 199 with 10–15% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 50 U·mL−1 penicillin, 50 µg·mL−1 streptomycin, and 2 mM l-glutamine. All inoculated cells were incubated for five days and the culture supernatants harvested and titrated on C6/36 mosquito cells. The viral titers (TCID50 infectious units/mL) were determined by fixed-cell ELISA and calculated as per Reed and Muench [18]. The prototype strain of WNVKUN (MRM61C, passage unknown, C6/36-derived stock) was used for comparison in these experiments.Assessment of WNVKUN growth kinetics in 1-LV and a chicken fibroblast cell line (DF-1) was performed in 24-well plates (Costar, Corning). The wells were coated with poly-d-Lysine (PDL), 1 mg/mL (Sigma-Aldrich Pty. Ltd., North Ryde, NSW, Australia), by incubation at 37 °C for 1 h followed by aspiration of the PDL-solution and two rounds of washing with sterile cell culture grade water. The plates were air-dried for 1 hour and subsequently seeded with 105 1-LV or DF-1 cells per well. Following overnight incubation at 34 °C, the cells were infected with WNVKUN at a MOI of 1. Following virus-adsorption for 2 h at room temperature with rocking, the supernatant was discarded and the cell monolayers washed three times with sterile PBS, after which each well received 1 mL of M199 medium supplemented with 5% FBS, PSG and 2.5 mM HEPES. The cells were incubated at 34 °C. For each time point, the supernatant from three infected wells and one mock-infected well were collected and stored at −80 °C until virus titration by TCID50-assay as described in Section 2.6.2.2. Sequencing and Phylogenetic AnalysisRNA was extracted from crocodile lesions and screened for the presence of flaviviruses using the pan-flavivirus generic primers FU2/cFD3 binding to the conserved NS5 region [19]. One positive sample (D66) was sent for next generation Illumina sequencing on a HiSeq platform (Australian Genome Research Facility, Melbourne, Victoria) after initial identification of WNV by Sanger sequencing of the pan-flavivirus primers-derived amplicon.The reads obtained were mapped to the published genomes of WNVKUN and 222 reads corresponded to the crocodile-derived WNV. Selected regions of the viral genome remained unsequenced, so primers were designed (Table S1) to produce large amplicons from viral RNA template extracted by high-fidelity RT-PCR (SuperScript™ III One-Step RT-PCR System with Platinum™ Taq High Fidelity DNA Polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific Australia Pty Ltd, Scoresby, VIC, Australia)). These amplicons were sequenced by Sanger sequencing (Australian Genome Research Facility, Brisbane, Queensland). The whole genome of the crocodile-derived WNV was obtained following this method and was included in a nucleotide alignment with various WNV sequences, using MAFFT in Geneious v8.1.9. The alignment was then used to generate a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree, using MrBayes 3.2.6 in Geneious v8.1.9 [20] with a Generalized Time Reversible substitution model, a rate variation with invariable proportion remaining gamma, 5 gamma categories and the sequence of Murray Valley Encephalitis virus (NC_000943) as an outgroup. The Markov Chain Monte Carlo settings were 1,100,00 chain length, 4 heated chains, 0.2 heated chain temp, 200 subsampling frequency, 100,000 burn in length and a random seed.2.3. Experimental Animals and Housing All protocols were approved by the Charles Darwin University Animal Ethics Committee (Permit # A18004; 31 January, 2018 to 31 January, 2019). Thirty-nine hatchlings were obtained from four wild clutches incubated under standard conditions (32 ± 0.5 °C; 95%–100% humidity) at Darwin Crocodile Farm, Noonamah, Northern Territory, Australia [21,22,23]. On the day of hatch, each animal was scute cut for individual identification [15] and randomized between three pens. Each pen was 200 cm wide and 202 cm in length including a feed deck 30 cm wide tapering to a maximum water depth of 19.5 cm. These pens were housed in an enclosed building at BVL, to prevent natural infection by mosquitoes, and temperature controlled using thermostatically controlled air (32 °C ± 2 °C) and water (32 °C ± 1 °C) heaters (Hobo™ data Loggers Onset Computer Corporation, MA). The rear two-thirds of each pen was covered with black shade cloth to provide security and heat retention and a smaller hide-board was also provided for additional security. Crocodiles were fed to excess five times weekly with meat mince enhanced with 2% vitamin/mineral premix (Monsoon Crocodile Premix, Brisbane, Australia) and 1.5% calcium carbonate. Residual food was removed the following morning and pens were cleaned thoroughly with a chlorine-based detergent. Monthly water samples were taken to ensure no environmental WNVKUN prior to infection.2.4. Experimental InfectionPrior to infection, crocodiles were measured (head and total length [24]), blood sampled from the occipital sinus using a 23-gauge needle, and belly skins were photographed at one, two, three and four months post-hatching. At four months, the crocodiles were randomized into three treatment groups: 104 infectious units (IU) (n = 11; infection controls = 6), 105 IU (n = 10; infection controls = 6) and control (n = 7) as shown in Table 1. At that stage, with the exception of one animal in the control group, all crocodiles were seronegative for passively acquired (maternal) WNVKUN specific antibodies. Crocodiles were infected with the different doses of WNVKUN in a volume of 0.1 mL given by a 29-gauge insulin needle as a subcutaneous injection behind the hind leg. Post infection (p.i.) blood sampling (up to 200 µL; EDTA tubes), cloacal and oral swabs, and skin inspection were done daily, but on a rotating basis so that any one animal was only bled every three days for the first 21 days p.i. Subsequently, all animals were bled at scheduled termination (day 21 p.i.) and/or every two weeks until termination of the experiment. Whole blood and plasma samples collected were aliquoted in triplicate and immediately frozen at −80 °C for virus isolation and serology, including blocking ELISA and VNTs (see later).The animals were clinically assessed on a daily basis, with special attention to activity, growth rate, and neurological signs. At day 21 p.i., 11 animals were terminated (three from the control group; four from the 105 IU-group, three from the 104 IU-group and one from the 104 IU-in-contact group) and subjected to necropsy and tissue sampling (see below). The remaining 29 animals were terminated at three months p.i. (seven months of age) and also subjected to necropsy and tissue sampling.2.5. RT-PCR, qRT-PCR and Sequencing2.5.1. WaterMonthly water samples were collected from each treatment pen prior to infection and daily post-infection. Water was collected in 60 mL syringes and pushed through a 0.45 µM nitrate cellulose paper using a Swinnex™ Filter Holder (Millipore, Merck, Bayswater, VIC, Australia). Viral RNA was extracted from the filters by the RNeasy PowerWater Kit following the manufacturer’s instruction (QIAGEN Pty Ltd, Chadstone Centre, VIC, Australia). 2.5.2. Cloacal and Oral SwabsThe throat and cloaca were swab sampled each time the animal was bled during the infection period. The cotton tips were stored in 350 µL phosphate buffered gelatin saline (PBGS). For the extraction, the cotton tip was lifted out of the PBGS and placed in a clean microcentrifuge tube. The extraction was conducted using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (QIAGEN) following the manufacturer’s instruction for tissue samples. All extractions were qRT-PCR processed using a previously described WNVKUN detection protocol [19], using the forward primer AACCCCAGTGGAGAAGTGGA, reverse primer TCAGGCTGCCACACCAAA and probe 6FAM-CGATGTTCCATACTCTGG-MGB NFQ [25]. Using the Applied Biosystems’ MicroAmp Fast 96-Well Reaction Plate and 7500 Fasr Real-Time PCR system, water extracts were run against a WNVKUN standard (Table S2), while swabs were assessed for presence/absence of viral RNA (cut-off at Ct ≥ 40 [19]).2.5.3. Skin SamplesSkin sections, 4 mm × 4 mm (or smaller) with suspect lesions, sampled at necropsy, were stored in sterile vials at −80 °C until processing. The samples were then placed into a beater tube (cryovial containing 0.3 g of 0.5 mm diameter Zirconia/silicon beads) with 900 µL of PBGS, beaten for 1 min 30 s on a Qiagen Tissue Lyser and centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 1 min. Using the manufacturer’s instructions for the MagMAX-96 Viral RNA Isolation Kit (Applied Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific Australia Pty Ltd, Scoresby, VIC, Australia), 50 µL of the homogenized sample was processed for RNA purification. The isolated RNA was subsequently stored at −80 °C until subjected to the qRT-PCR as described above.2.5.4. Plasma SamplesCrocodile plasma was diluted in AVE (molecular grade water with preservative from QIAGEN) 1:4 and viral RNA was extracted on EZ1 Advanced XL instrument (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) using the EZ1 Virus Mini Kit V 2.0 (Qiagen, Clifton Hill, Australia) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For WNVKUN RNA detection, Superscript III Platinum one-step quantitative qRT-PCR system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) was used as per the manufacturer’s instructions and based on the methods described by Pyke et al. [19] with minor modifications (primer and probe concentrations). Primer and probe sequences were as described in the section on swab samples. Primers were used at a final concentration of 900 nM, probe at 150 nM. Detection of WNVKUN specific RNA was performed in 20 µL reactions in a Rotor-Gene 600 real-time PCR cycler (Qiagen, Chadstone, VIC, Australia) with the following cycling conditions: one cycle at 50 °C for 5 min, one cycle at 95 °C for 2 min, and 50 cycles at 95 °C for 3 s and 60 °C for 30 s. Separate synthetic controls for WNVKUN primers and probe and no template controls were included in each Rotor-Gene run as per [19]. A standard curve was generated to determine WNVKUN IU equivalents from plasma qRT-PCR CT scores. Ten-fold dilutions of WNVKUN (10−1 to 10−7) were simultaneously assessed for infectious titre by TCID50 assay (see Section 2.6) and levels of viral RNA by Taqman qRT-PCR. An exponential trend line was generated from the derived Ct scores and calculated IU of the standard dilution series using the Excel Growth Function. Infectious unit equivalents were then predicted for each plasma sample from their derived Ct scores (Figure S1).2.6. Virus Isolation and TitrationInfectious virus titers in blood were determined by the TCID50 method as previously described [16]. Briefly, C6/36 cells were seeded in maintenance RPMI culture media supplemented with 5% FBS, 50 U·mL−1 penicillin, 50 µg·mL−1 streptomycin, and 2 mM l-glutamine into each well of a 96-well tissue culture plate (Costar, Corning) and incubated overnight at 28 °C, at which stage the cell monolayers were at 80% confluency. Plasma or whole blood samples were diluted in 10-fold serial dilutions in RPMI with 2% FBS, 50 U mL−1 penicillin, 50 µg·mL−1 streptomycin, and 2 mM l-glutamine. Fifty µL of the diluted samples were transferred in triplicate onto the subconfluent C6/36 cell monolayer and the plates were incubated at 28 °C. After five days, the cultures were terminated by discarding the supernatant or transferring it into a new 96-well plate and storing at 4 °C pending the fixed cell ELISA results. The cells were fixed overnight with 20% acetone supplemented with 0.02% bovine serum albumen (BSA) at 4 °C. The fixative was then discarded, and plates dried overnight at room temperature before fixed cell ELISA was performed using monoclonal antibody (mAb) 4G2 (specific for the flavivirus E protein) and or 4G4 (specific for epitope on the viral NS1 protein) as previously described [16].2.7. Histopathology and Immunohistochemistry (IHC) Samples were harvested immediately after euthanasia from all major organs and tissues, including brain, eyes, lungs, heart, liver, kidneys, spleen, gastrointestinal tract (multiple segments), tongue, skeletal muscle and skin, and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin solution for 48 hours before being transferred into 70% ethanol for storage until trimming and routine processing for paraffin embedding. Bone-containing specimens were decalcified by incubation in 8% formic acid for five days prior to trimming and paraffin embedding. Four micrometer thick sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined on a Nikon Eclipse 51 E microscope. Digital microphotographs were taken using a Nikon DS-Fi1 camera with a DS-U2 unit and NIS elements F 4.60 software. Images are reproduced without manipulations other than cropping and adjustment of light intensity.Serial sections (4 µm) were cut from formaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples and subjected to IHC-labeling as previously described in detail [26]. Briefly, following deparaffinization, antigen retrieval (EDTA, pH 9) and several blocking steps, the sections were incubated with the flavivirus NS1-specific mouse mAb 4G4 or a mixture of 4G4 and the E-protein specific mAb 4G2 as primary antibody followed by visualization of the binding using the DAKO Envision kit, specific for mouse immunoglobulin (Agilent Technologies). A positive control (brain sections from mice experimentally infected with WNVNSW2011 [16]) was included in every IHC-batch performed. The sections were counterstained with Meyer’s hematoxylin and examined on a Nikon Eclipse 51 E microscope. Digital micrographs were generated as described above.2.8. SerologyQuantification of anti-WNV specific antibodies was performed by two methods: blocking-ELISA [26] and microneutralization assay [16,27]. The blocking-ELISA protocol has been described extensively in previous publications [16,26,27]. The current assay used lysate from C6/36 cells infected with WNVKUN strain MRM61C as the coating antigen. Monoclonal antibodies used for these competitive assays were either an anti-flavivirus envelope monoclonal antibody, 6B6C-1, or an anti-WNV NS1 specific monoclonal antibody, 3.1112G [27,28]. A cut-off of 30% inhibition was used to determine positive samples [27]. Western blot for detection of serum antibody specificities for WNV proteins was performed as described [16], but using goat anti-alligator immunoglobulin (Novus Biologicals, Centennial, Colorado) and fluorophore 680-conjugated rabbit anti-goat-immunoglobulin.3. Results3.1. Isolation of WNVKUN from Skin Lesions and PlasmaMultiple attempts at isolating WNV from skin lesions and plasma of naturally infected crocodiles and from mosquitoes caught at affected crocodile farms were made, but all were negative. Similarly, attempts at detecting viral antigen (E protein or NS1) in skin lesions of naturally infected saltwater crocodiles have so far been unsuccessful despite the proven sensitivity of this approach [16,26,29]. Nevertheless, by RNA-extraction and RT-PCR, WNV genomic material was detected in several skin lesions from naturally infected crocodiles [12]. Animals with skin lesions also had WNV-specific antibodies that reacted strongly to WNV-antigens in Western blot (Figure 1A) and in ELISA or VNT (Figure 1B).3.2. Sequence Analysis of Virus RNA from Skin LesionsThe RNA from one of the skin lesions positive for WNVKUN by RT-PCR was analysed by next-generation sequencing. From the data produced, only 222 reads corresponded to WNV, and did not cover the whole genome. We therefore designed primers to amplify large fragments from additional samples (D17, D63, D68, D117) by high-fidelity one-step RT-PCR, and Sanger-sequenced the missing sections. This allowed us to obtain a composite consensus sequence that covered the whole genome, despite some sequence variation between samples (Genbank accession number pending). The translated sequence obtained was included in a complete ORF comparison with the prototype WNVKUN strain (MRM61C), the NSW2011 strain of WNVKUN and WNVNY99. WNVNSW2011 (JN887352) was the most closely related strain to the crocodile-derived composite sequence, with a maximum 13 amino acid changes over the ORF (Table 2 and Figure 2). The amino acids for multiple WNV strains at these 13 positions are listed in Table 2 and cross-referenced with previously published data on virulence determinants for WNVNY99 [6,30].3.3. WNVKUN Replication in C. porosus Derived Cell Lines Since we were unsuccessful in obtaining a field isolate of the WNV circulating amongst crocodiles, an infectious clone was generated based on the crocodile-derived viral amino acid sequence described above. However, it was subsequently found that this infectious clone grew poorly or not at all in crocodile-derived cells. Furthermore, given the minor sequence differences present in the viral genomes obtained from different crocodile skin lesions compared to the NSW2011 strain of WNVKUN, it was decided to use this virus for all subsequent in vitro and in vivo studies, as it is a well-characterized, recent and low-passage isolate [4,6].To assess replication of WNVKUN in crocodile cells we infected liver- (LV-1) and kidney- (3CPK) derived cell lines with WNVKUN (NSW2011) and the prototype WNVKUN strain (MRM61C) at a MOI of 0.1. For comparison, we also infected mosquito cells (C6/36) and mammalian cells (Vero) with these viruses and assessed titres at 120 hours post infection (hpi). While virus yield was lower in the crocodile cell lines compared to mosquito and mammalian cell culture (Figure 3), it should be noted that the crocodile cells replicate extremely slowly [17], indicating a potentially lower metabolic rate (G.H., W.W.S and H.B.O., unpublished data). When compared to avian cells (DF-1), the NSW2011 WNVKUN strain replicated to a slightly lower titre in 1-LV cells, but due to the lesser cytopathic effect in the LV-1 cells, replication was still detectable at 14 dpi. (Figure 4). In contrast, the DF-1 cells displayed marked cytopathic effect and viral titers dropped precipitously from a peak at 4 dpi, likely due to a combination of decreasing number of viable cells and thermal inactivation of the virus (Figure 4). 3.4. Experimental WNV-Infection in Hatchling C. porosus 3.4.1. Clinical ObservationsNo adverse effects of the virus inoculation or blood samplings were observed in any of the hatchlings, and the animals appeared to grow at the expected rate. At no stage during the observation period were overt clinical signs, such as neurological disease, observed. Seven animals in the virus-infected groups developed small, WNV-like skin lesions (“pix”; Figure 5a). These were sampled at necropsy and subjected to either microscopic examination or RT-PCR for viral RNA. 3.4.2. Gross and Histopathology Histologically, the skin lesions appeared as noted for natural WNV-infections (Figure 5b) [12]. No frank gross lesions, apart from the skin-lesions, were observed at necropsy. Histologically, the only changes seen were development of lymphofollicular aggregates in various tissues (summarized in Table S3), notably in the subepithelial layers of the tongue and conjunctiva and in the submucosa of the gastrointestinal tract, more rarely in the kidneys and liver. In the tongue, the lymphoid aggregates were mostly surrounding small nerve bundles associated with sensory organs (taste/touch sensors), as was also the case in the skin lesions (Figure 5b,c).3.4.3. Virus Detection by qRT-PCR, Isolation and ImmunohistochemistryBy inoculation of plasma samples on C6/36 mosquito cells, viremia was detected on days 2–5 in WNV-challenged animals but not in-contact animals (Table 3). For a small subset of animals, virus isolation and titrations were performed on both whole blood and on plasma, with the former possibly being slightly more sensitive as also seen for other flaviviruses [31]. However, all samples displayed some level of cytotoxicity at the lowest dilutions tested and therefore the limit of detection was relatively high (2–3 log10 TCID50/mL; Figure 6). It is thus possible that there are false negative samples in the set and, that the actual period of viremia was longer as suggested by the qRT-PCR results which showed intermittent plasma viremia in the virus challenged animals out to 17 dpi (Figure 7, Figure S2 and Table S4).Low levels of WNVKUN RNA were detected by qRT-PCR in three “pix” lesions tested by this approach. The Ct-scores ranged from 26.16 to 31.35, equivalent to approaximately 102 TCID50/sample (refer to Table S2 for conversion).Water samples were collected from the pens prior to cleaning, once per month before the experimental period and daily during the experimental period, and tested by RT-PCR. Notably, WNVKUN genomic material was detected in the water from the pens holding the virus-challenged hatchlings on multiple sampling days, but not in the pen holding the control hatchlings (Figure 8). Swabs from the oral cavity and cloaca were taken prior to infection and at each blood sampling thereafter, i.e., eight samplings per hatchling. WNV was first detected in both the oral and cloacal swabs on day 3 p.i. in the 105 IU challenged crocodiles. Similarly, WNVKUN was detected in the oral swabs of 104 IU challenged hatchlings at 3 dpi, but was not recovered from the cloacal swabs until 5 dpi. Oral swabs of in-contact crocodiles were first WNVKUN-positive on days 7 and 11 p.i. for the 104 IU and 105 IU challenged groups, respectively, and days 5 and 10 p.i. for cloacal swabs (Figure 9 and Figure 10), although at the later time points, i.e., past day 15 p.i., the levels were low as judged by the Ct scores and no longer detectable in the pen water (Figure 8). In the 105 IU group, all hatchlings had WNV-RNA-positive oral swabs on 2–6 of the eight samplings, while cloacal swabs were positive on 1–5 samplings per animal, with one animal being consistently negative. All six in-contact animals in the 105 IU-pen had RNA-positive swabs on 1–3 samplings, while only four had positive cloacal swabs. In the 104 IU challenged group, 10 of the animals had 1–5 virus RNA-positive oral swabs and all had RNA-positive cloacal swabs on 1–5 samplings. All in-pen contact animals in this cohort had 1–3 positive oral swabs and five had 1–4 RNA-positive cloacal swabs. Notably, positive oral and cloacal swabs were detected in both the 105 and 104 IU pens up to six days after the last positive tank-water-positive sample on day 15 of the experiment (Figure 8), suggesting that the viral RNA detected in the swabs was not just contamination from the pen water.The WNV-like skin lesions (pix) that developed in three of the virus-challenged crocodiles (Figure 5) were confirmed to be WNVKUN-positive by RT-PCR, but no viral antigen was detected in those lesions subjected to IHC. A large number of the tissue samples with lymphoid aggregates (see Figure 5b,c,d) were also subjected to IHC for detection of WNVKUN NS1, a highly sensitive assay for virus replication [16,26,29]. While the positive controls (brains from mice experimentally infected with the NSW2011 isolate of WNVKUN had NS1 signal in neurons (red cells in Figure 11a), all samples from the crocodiles terminated at day 21 p.i. and at the end of the study were negative for viral protein (example in Figure 11b).3.4.4. Detection of WNVKUN-Specific Antibodies Pre- and Post-InfectionPre-screening of the hatchlings for maternal antibodies (egg yolk-transmitted) specific for WNVKUN was conducted by virus-neutralization test (VNT) at BVL, and only animals negative in the VNT at 2–3 months of age were used for virus challenge. Two crocodiles with very low or query WNVKUN antibody titers were assigned to the non-infected control group. These crocodiles showed persistent low WNVKUN antibody titers for the entire 27 weeks of observation and were from the same clutch of eggs.Post-challenge antibody levels were assessed by a WNVKUN-specific and flavivirus group reactive monoclonal blocking-ELISA (data not shown) and by VNT. All animals in the 104 IU group developed WNVKUN-neutralizing antibodies (Figure 12), with most having detectable levels by 21 dpi. Similarly, all but one animal in the 105 IU group developed neutralizing antibodies, albeit for most delayed relative to the 104 IU group (Figure 12). In both groups, the titers continued to rise beyond the time of detectable viremia and cloacal virus shedding, suggestive of a persistent source of viral antigen. Notably, three in-contact animals (one in the 104 IU and two in the 105 IU group, respectively) seroconverted—first detectable eight weeks after the experimental infections but then with continuing rising titers throughout the remainder of the experimental period (Figure 12). 4. DiscussionWe have presented data that confirm that WNV does indeed cause characteristic skin lesions, so-called “pix”, in a subset of infected saltwater crocodiles within a few weeks of infection and that at least some of the infected animals sustain a viremia at a level sufficient for transmission to biting mosquitoes [32]. Moreover, we have demonstrated that the virus is shed into the water, likely via fecal material, where it can spread to in-contact animals, presumably via mucosal infection—either fecal-oral or via other exposed mucosal surfaces such as conjunctiva or the nasal cavity. Regardless of viral challenge dose, WNV-neutralizing antibodies appeared in the directly challenged animals around 21 dpi, at which time viremia had ceased as determined by qRT-PCR, but cloacal shedding may still have taken place (Figure S2). The in-pen controls, that became infected, developed WNV-neutralizing antibodies detectable around six weeks into the experiment. Viremia was detected in the in-contact animals by RT-PCR on plasma samples between day 11 and 21, suggesting that these animals received a much lower infection dose (via the mucosal route) than that of the inocula resulting in a different transmission-clearance dynamic and possibly different or additional antiviral mechanisms involved [33,34,35]. The time of viremia in the in-contact animals does appear to correlate with detection of virus genomic material in oral and cloacal swabs of the virus-challenged hatchlings as well as in the pen-water (Figure 9, Figure 10 and Figure S2), but since tank-water was changed daily, there was no actual build-up of infectious material. The in-contact animals would nevertheless have been repeatedly exposed during that period and potentially re-infected until activated innate responses [36] or virus-specific antibodies [35] interfered with this transmission route. The noted discrepancy between viremia, as detected by virus isolation versus qRT-PCR (Table 3, Figure 6 and Figure 7), suggests that past 5 dpi virus in the plasma may have been in antibody–virus complexes [37] or toxicity of the crocodile plasma may have resulted in false negative isolation results. This issue will be addressed in future studies.While WNV has been associated with severe disease outbreaks in both wild and farmed American alligators in several USA states (reviewed in [8,10]), there are no reports of similar disease outbreaks amongst crocodilians in other parts of the world, including Northern Australia and South-East Asia, where C. porosus also occur. American alligators display clinical neurological signs and suffer severe gastrointestinal lesions, including stomatitis and necrohemorrhagic enteritis following infection with WNVNY99 [10]. High viral titers were detected in the liver of the alligators [32], suggesting that some of the virus detected in the cloacal swabs and water from this study might have originated from this organ via bile secreted into the gastrointestinal tract. While we observed development of lymphofollicular proliferations in various mucosal tissues as well as liver and kidney of the WNVKUN infected saltwater crocodiles and virus RNA was detected in cloacal swabs and tank-water, no frank pathology was observed in any of the tissues and organs examined. Furthermore, no viral antigen was detected in association with these lymphoid aggregates using IHC. Thus, whether the presence of these lymphoid proliferations reflects prior replication of virus in the sites or simply is a reflection of a stimulated immune system in the infected animals cannot be established based on the present study. Future studies should include daily tissue sampling of virus-challenged animals during at least the first 15 dpi, i.e., a kinetic study, and employ additional methodologies such as in situ hybridization, RT-PCR and virus isolation from tissues.The one commonality between WNVNY99 infection in American alligators and WNVKUN infection of saltwater crocodiles, is the development of typical skin lesions, “pix”, consisting of lymphohistiocytic proliferations in the superficial dermis, with attenuation of the overlaying epidermal layers and degeneration of the dermal collagen (Figure 5) [10,11,12]. Previous studies in alligators have failed to detect virus in skin lesions, and while we have previously successfully detected WNVKUN viral RNA in “pix” lesions from naturally infected saltwater crocodiles [12] and did so from a few lesions in the experimental animals in this study, our attempts at isolating replication competent virus in cell culture has so far been fruitless. Nor have we been able to detect viral nonstructural (NS1) or envelope (E) protein expression by IHC in either these skin lesions or other tissues. However, the presence of viral RNA in some of these lesions suggests that either the virus does indeed replicate in the site, albeit likely only very early in the infection, or inactivated viral particles in dermal dendritic cells and macrophages stimulate an in situ immune reaction, which persists long enough to cause permanent damage to the dermis and resulting in grossly apparent “pix” lesions. Again, a kinetic study of the virus infection with extensive sampling of animals may allow elucidation of this aspect.Knowledge about the antiviral immune defenses in reptilians in general and crocodilians in particular is still relatively limited [36], and the role of co-infections has so far not been systematically explored. While the hatchlings used in this experiment were kept under strict quarantine conditions, crocodiles in the wild and on farms are exposed to a plethora of other infectious agents, including viral, fungal, bacterial and parasitic (reviewed in [7,8,38,39]), some of which, notably herpes-, rana- and retroviruses, are known to affect the immune system profoundly [40,41,42]. While WNVKUN is less virulent than WNVNY99, at least in horses, mice and birds [6,16,26], it may not be the only explanation for the dramatic difference in clinical outcomes of WNV infection in alligators and saltwater crocodiles, respectively. The Kunjin strains of WNV have presumably circulated in Australia for a very long time [4], and Australasia is host to an abundance of related flaviviruses, such as Murray Valley encephalitis virus and Alfuy virus, that may confer some degree of cross-protection [5,43,44]. Hence, C. porosus may have evolved innate immune defenses to this group of viruses, which ensures relatively fast elimination of the virus without a severe inflammatory response. In contrast, WNVNY99 is a relatively newly introduced infectious agent in the Americas and native crocodilians may not have been through a similar evolutionary pathway for this group of viruses. Notably, antibodies to St. Louis encephalitis virus, a flavivirus circulating in southern USA and South America, have never been detected in crocodilians [7,8,45]. Future studies of the host-virus interaction in WNV-infection of crocodilians should therefore also focus on innate and adaptive antiviral defenses as well as the potential role of co-infections and the gut microbiota [8,46,47]. In this study, we detected maternal antibodies to WNV in a number of the clutches used, i.e., passive immunity acquired through the egg yolk, which persisted beyond 4 months in a few animals. Other seeming clutch-effects noted related to the kinetics of the infection-elicited antibody response and the development of “pix” lesions; however, a study with larger group sizes will be required to determine whether a true immunogenetic influence also play a role in the pathogenesis of the lesions.5. ConclusionsWhile WNVKUN infection in saltwater crocodiles appears to be a relatively innocuous event, it does have serious economic ramifications for tropical regions of Australia and South-East Asia, where farming of C. porosus for the production of hides is an important and growing industry, benefitting local communities and, interestingly enough, encouraging conservation efforts for this iconic apex predator. It is therefore imperative that ways are found to prevent WNV-infection, at least in the farm setting. While mosquito and bird management measures, notably the latter, may go some way to address this, the fact that the virus is easily and efficiently transmitted horizontally between pen mates via the water, suggests that vaccination is necessary to truly prevent transmission, whether by mosquitoes or via water contact. In addition, if genetics indeed plays a role, then methodologies to assess overall vulnerability of ranched stock to WNV “pix” lesions should be pursued. 


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: YELLOW FEVER VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Differential cell line susceptibility to the emerging Zika virus: implications for disease pathogenesis, non-vector-borne human transmission and animal reservoirs

IntroductionZika virus (ZIKV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that has been largely neglected for 60 years after its first isolation from the serum of a febrile sentinel rhesus macaque in the Zika Forest of Uganda in 1947.1 Since 2007, ZIKV has emerged to cause large epidemics of a dengue-like illness in the Pacific islands and Latin America, with imported cases also reported in other continents.2, 3 As of 14 July 2016, more than 60 countries/territories have reported continuing mosquito-borne transmission of ZIKV.4 Although most patients infected with ZIKV have an asymptomatic or a self-limiting acute febrile illness, some patients may develop severe neurological complications, such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, or fatal disseminated infections.2, 5, 6, 7 Moreover, recent clinico-epidemiological, laboratory and animal studies on pathogenesis have established the association between ZIKV infection and congenital anomalies, such as microcephaly, central nervous system malformations and ophthalmological abnormalities.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13ZIKV research has so far been mainly focused on the pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated neurological complications. Questions on the pathogenesis of ZIKV's other clinical manifestations, its unique ability among flaviviruses to be transmitted trans-placentally and sexually, and its potential animal reservoirs remain mostly unanswered. Although in vivo phenomena may not be completely reproducible in the in vitro setting, cell line susceptibility studies are often useful for providing critical data for these knowledge gaps in the early phases of epidemics caused by emerging RNA viruses.14, 15 In this study, we correlated the differential cell line susceptibility, species tropism, viral replication efficiency and antigen expression patterns with the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of ZIKV, and compared them with those of the closely related dengue virus type 2 (DENV-2). Our findings provided novel implications on the disease pathogenesis, transmission and potential animal reservoirs that could be applied to optimize laboratory testing protocols and infection control strategies for this global health emergency.Materials and MethodsVIRAL ISOLATESTo investigate on the differential cell line susceptibility to epidemic ZIKV and pre-epidemic ZIKV, we included a clinical isolate of ZIKV (Puerto Rico strain PRVABC59) obtained from a patient in the recent South American epidemic (ZIKV-PR; kindly provided by Brandy Russell and Barbara Johnson, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA), and another pre-epidemic ZIKV strain isolated from a nonhuman primate in Uganda in 1947 (976 Uganda strain) (ZIKV-U; kindly provided by Tatjana Avšič Županc, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, the European Virus Archive). An archived clinical isolate of DENV-2 was obtained from Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, for comparison with ZIKV, as the two viruses are closely related phylogenetically and have similar clinical manifestations. The ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates were amplified by three additional passages in Vero cells and C6/36 cells, respectively, to make working stocks of the viruses.ETHICS STATEMENTInstitutional Review Board approval for use of the vial isolates was obtained and all samples were anonymized. The cell lines used in this study were obtained from sources listed in Table 1.VIRAL CULTUREViral culture was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 33 cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species were each inoculated with one multiplicity of infection of the ZIKV and DENV-2 isolates for 1 h (Table 1). Non-attached virus was removed by washing the cells twice in phosphate-buffered saline (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The monolayer cells were maintained in minimum essential medium, Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM), DMEM/F12 or RPMI medium, with 1% fetal calf serum, depending on the type of cell line according to supplier's instructions (Gibco). The suspension cells were maintained in RPMI medium with 2% fetal calf serum (Gibco). All infected cell lines were incubated at 37 °C for five days, except C6/36 which was incubated at 28 °C. Cytopathic effects (CPE) were examined at one, three and five days post-virus inoculation (d.p.i) with inverted light microscopy.RNA EXTRACTION AND QUANTITATIVE REVERSE-TRANSCRIPTION PCRTotal nucleic acid (TNA) was extracted from culture supernatants of the 33 cell lines infected by ZIKV or DENV-2 at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. using EZ1 Virus Mini Kit v2.0 (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) as we previously described.16, 17 Briefly, 200 μL of supernatant were used for extraction and the TNA was eluted in 60 μL of AVE buffer. Real-time one-step quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was used for the detection of ZIKV and DENV-2 using QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen) in a LightCycler 96 Real-Time PCR System (Roche Diagnostics, Basel, Switzerland). Five microliters of purified TNA was amplified in a 20 μL-reaction containing 10 μL of 2 × QuantiNova Probe RT-PCR Master Mix, 0.2 μL QN Probe RT-mix, 0.8 μM forward primer, 0.8 μM reverse primer and 200 nM probe. ZIKV detection was performed as previously described, with slight modifications.18 Forward primer (5′-CGY TGC CCA ACA CAA GG-3′), reverse primer (5′-CCA CYA AYG TTC TTTT GCA BAC A-3′) and probe (5′-HEX-AGC CTA CCT TGA YAA GCA RTC AGA CAC TC-IABkFQ-3′) targeting the ZIKV envelope gene were used. For DENV-2 detection, forward primer (5′-GCA TAT TGA CGC TGG GAR AGA C-3′), reverse primer (5′-CGY TCT GTG CCT GGA WWG ATG-3′) and probe (5′-FAM-CAG AGA TCC TGC TGT C-MGB-NFQ-3′) targeting the DENV-2 3'-untranslated region were used. Reactions were incubated at 45 °C for 10 min, followed by 95 °C for 5 min, and then thermal cycled for 50 cycles (95 °C for 5 s, 55 °C for 30 s). A series of 10-fold dilutions equivalent to 1 × 102–1 × 106 copies/reaction mixture were prepared to generate calibration curves and run in parallel with the test samples.CLONING AND PURIFICATION OF HIS6-TAGGED RECOMBINANT ZIKV AND DENV-2 NS1Primers (5′-CAT ATG GAT GTG GGG TGC TCG GTG GAC T-3′ and 5′-CTC GAG TGC AGT CAC CAT TGA CCT TAC T-3′) were used to amplify the gene encoding the ZIKV–nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) protein by RT-PCR. The sequence encoding a 352-amino-acid fragment of ZIKV–NS1 protein was amplified and cloned into the NdeI and XolI sites of expression vector pETH in frame and downstream of the series of six histidine residues. The recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was expressed in Escherichia coli, denatured in 8 M urea, and purified with Ni-nitrilotriacetic acid affinity chromatography (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The solubilized protein was refolded by slowly dialyzing with refolding buffers. Expression of the recombinant ZIKV–NS1 protein was confirmed by western blot analysis using mouse anti-His monoclonal antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA). Preparation of DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19PREPARATION OF SPECIFIC ANTIBODIES AGAINST ZIKV- AND DENV-2-NS1 PROTEINSThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Briefly, 30 μg of purified recombinant ZIKV-NS1 protein was mixed with an equal volume of complete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) and injected subcutaneously into BALB/c mice. Incomplete Freund's adjuvant (Sigma-Aldrich) was used in subsequent injections at 14-day intervals for three times. Serum samples were collected 14 days after the fourth injection. Preparation of specific antibodies against DENV-2-NS1 protein was performed as previously described.19ANTIGEN DETECTION OF INFECTED CELL LINES BY IMMUNOFLUORESCENCEThis was performed as we previously described with modifications.14 Cell smears at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. were prepared and fixed in chilled acetone at −20 °C for 10 min. The fixed cells were incubated with mouse antiserum against the ZIKV- or DENV-2-NS1 protein, followed by FITC-rabbit anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were then examined under a fluorescence microscope. Three representative microscopic fields were chosen and 100 cells were counted for characteristic cytoplasmic apple green fluorescence. The mean percentage of positive cells was rounded up to the nearest multiplicity of 10. Uninoculated cells were used as negative control.STATISTICAL ANALYSISThe Student's t-test was used to compare the mean viral load of the different cell lines at 1, 3 and 5 d.p.i. with the mean baseline viral load at 0 d.p.i. All calculations were based on log-transformed viral loads. P-value of <0.01 was considered as statistically significant. Computation was performed using the Predictive Analytics Software v18.0 for Windows.ResultsHUMAN CELL LINESEighteen human cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U showed similar tropism as defined by viral load, immunofluorescent antigen staining and CPE. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in 14/18 cell lines infected with ZIKV-PR or ZIKV-U (Figures 1A and 1B). These included the placental (JEG-3), genitourinary (HEK, HeLa, HOSE6-3, LNCaP and 833KE), neuromuscular (SF268 and RD), retinal (ARPE19), respiratory (Hep2, Calu-3 and HFL), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines. There was a slight increase in mean viral load of about 0.5–1 lgcopies/mL in the monocyte (THP-1) and B lymphocyte (Raji) cell lines (P>0.01), but none of the immune cell lines achieved a ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the placental (JEG-3), cervical (HeLa), neuronal (SF268), upper respiratory tract (Hep-2) and intestinal (Caco-2) cell lines. Twelve of these 14 cell lines (JEG-3, HEK, HeLa, LNCaP, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7) showed obvious ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF in addition to a high viral load (Table 2). The peak ZIKV-NS1 protein expression in these cell lines occurred on 3–5 d.p.i. ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), retinal (APRE19), lower respiratory tract (HFL) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 2). Although ovarian (HOSE6-3) and testicular (833KE) cells showed high mean viral loads in qRT-PCR, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was consistently found in only ⩽5% of infected cells. CPE were observed in 8 of these 14 cell lines, namely, JEG-3, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7 (Table 3). CPE were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the placental (JEG-3), neuronal (SF268), muscle (RD), intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines (Figure 3). The gradual onset of CPE in most of these cell lines at 3 d.p.i. correlated with the steady increase of viral load and ZIKV-NS1 protein expression at 3–5 d.p.i.In contrast, DENV-2 showed a much narrower range of human tissue tropism, with ⩾2 log increase in the mean viral load (P<0.01) in only 9/18 cell lines (HEK, SF268, RD, ARPE19, Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL, Caco-2 and Huh-7; Figure 1C). Notably, unlike ZIKV, the DENV-2 load did not significantly increase by ⩾2 lgcopies/mL in any of the genital tract and placental cell lines, with only mildly increased viral load (P>0.01) and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression in the HeLa cell line. Most of these nine cell lines with increased viral loads demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression (Table 2) and CPE (Table 3). The CPE were generally delayed in onset (5 d.p.i.) and limited (⩽50%), except in the RD and Huh-7 cell lines.NONHUMAN CELL LINESFifteen nonhuman cell lines were tested (Table 1). ZIKV-PR and ZIKV-U again showed similar tropism in these cell lines. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/15 cell lines (Figures 4A and 4B). These included the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), cat (CRFK), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines. None of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines showed a ⩾2 log increase in viral load within 5 d.p.i. The highest mean viral loads (⩾10 lgcopies/mL) were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. All of these eight cell lines showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, usually starting on 3 d.p.i. and peaked on 5 d.p.i. (Table 2). ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was most prominent (⩾50% of infected cells) in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), hamster (BHK21), chicken (DF-1) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 2). Some of the mouse, rat and bat cell lines also showed ZIKV-NS1 protein expression, but these expressions were much less prominent than that in the other cell lines. CPE were observed in six of these eight cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines, and were most prominent (>50% involvement) in the nonhuman primate, pig, hamster and chicken cell lines (Table 3). CPE were not observed in the mosquito (C6/36) cell line within 5 d.p.i.A narrower range of nonhuman cell lines were susceptible to infection by DENV-2 than ZIKV. A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load (P<0.01) within 5 d.p.i. was observed in only 6/15 cell lines, including the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), bat (TP2), hamster (BHK21) and mosquito (C6/36) cell lines (Figure 4C). All of these six cell lines demonstrated DENV-2-NS1 protein expression by IF (Table 2). CPE were observed in five of these six cell lines (all except C6/36), but was usually not prominent (⩽50%) except in the LLC-MK2 and BHK21 cell lines (Table 3).DiscussionAlthough ZIKV infection has been described as a dengue-like illness in the past, recent evidence suggests that ZIKV is unique among known human-pathogenic flaviviruses. ZIKV is the first flavivirus known to be associated with congenital malformations, and sexual and vertical transmissions in human.1, 8, 9, 20, 21, 22 The pathogenesis of these unusual clinical manifestations and transmission routes is incompletely understood. Moreover, a comprehensive surveillance for potential animal reservoirs of ZIKV, which are likely important in facilitating the spread of the virus after 60 years of quiescence, has not been reported. A virus' ability to grow in cells of different host species might provide insight into its ability to cross interspecies barriers. We therefore conducted this systematic study to characterize the tropism of the emerging ZIKV in a broad range of human and nonhuman cell lines derived from different tissues or organs and host species. The findings in our study may have important clinical and epidemiological implications for this rapidly expanding viral epidemic.Productive ZIKV replication as defined by ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load, ZIKV-NS1 protein expression by IF, and presence of CPE was observed within 5 d.p.i. in 8/18 human cell lines, which represented cells of placental, neuronal, muscle, retinal, pulmonary, intestinal and hepatic origin. This broad tissue tropism is likely related to the wide distribution of the candidate receptors of ZIKV, including AXL, TYRO3 and DC-SIGN, in different organs.23 The placental (JEG-3) and neuronal (SF268) cell line tropism corroborated with the congenital and neurological manifestations of ZIKV infection. These manifestations include congenital microcephaly and other central nervous system malformations in infected fetuses, and meningoencephalitis, myelitis, and post-infectious Guillain–Barré syndrome in adults.1, 5, 8, 24 ZIKV RNA, full-length viral genome and/or viral particles could be detected in the brain tissue of fetuses with congenital microcephaly.8, 25 Microscopically, flavivirus-like virions were observed together with extensive inflammation, astrocyte and microglial activation, and injury in the cortex and the lateral corticospinal tracts in the fetal brain tissue.8, 25 Moreover, ZIKV could impair growth and deplete neural progenitor cells in human neurospheres and cerebral organoids.26, 27Consistent with ZIKV's tropism for the human rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cell line, myalgia and arthralgia with periarticular edema are common features in symptomatic ZIKV infection. Fetuses with congenital ZIKV infection may develop arthrogryposis.28 Myositis and myocarditis were observed in suckling mice inoculated with ZIKV intracerebrally, and viral RNA could be detected in the muscle and heart of type I interferon receptor-deficient mice infected with ZIKV.29, 30Viral tropism for the retinal (ARPE19) cell line corroborates with the ophthalmological complications of congenital ZIKV infection, including chorioretinal atrophy and pigmentary maculopathy.10, 13 Abdominal symptoms including diarrhea, vomiting, abdominal pain and jaundice with hepatic dysfunction have been reported in patients with ZIKV infection, and are in agreement with the susceptibility of the intestinal (Caco-2) and hepatic (Huh-7) cell lines to ZIKV.1, 6, 7, 31 Respiratory distress may occur in severe ZIKV infection, and this correlates with ZIKV's tropism for respiratory (Hep-2, Calu-3 and HFL) cell lines.6, 7 Similarly, the clinical features of DENV infection, including encephalopathy/encephalitis (SF268), myalgia and rhabdomyolysis (RD), retinitis (ARPE19), respiratory symptoms (Hep-2 and HFL), diarrhea (Caco-2) and hepatic dysfunction (Huh-7), also correlated with the cell line susceptibility to DENV-2 in our study.32, 33Although neurological manifestations may also be seen in infections caused by other flaviviruses, such as DENV, yellow fever virus, West Nile virus (WNV) and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), none of these flaviviruses have been associated with congenital microcephaly and central nervous system malformations. These unique clinical features of ZIKV infection require the virus to be able to infect neural progenitor cells of the fetus in utero during early gestation. A striking difference between the cell line susceptibilities of ZIKV and DENV-2 observed in our study was ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in placental cells (JEG-3). JEG-3 cells infected with ZIKV produced high viral loads (~10 lgcopies/mL), abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and prominent CPE. This finding helped to explain the unique ability of ZIKV to infect the fetus via the placenta and cause congenital anomalies, particularly when the infection occurred during the first trimester.34 Although a previous study suggested that type III interferons produced by human placental trophoblasts could confer protection against ZIKV infection, it is notable that the study utilized primary human trophoblasts of full-term instead of early gestation placenta.35 Indeed, our in vitro finding concurred with the recent reports of detectable viral particles and RNA in trophoblasts of the maternal and fetal placenta of ZIKV-infected type I interferon signaling-deficient mice and permissibility of placental macrophages and cytotrophoblasts to productive ZIKV infection.12, 36Besides trans-placental transmission, our findings also provided insights to explain the pathogenesis of other non-vector-borne human transmission routes of ZIKV. Probable sexual transmission of ZIKV has been reported.20, 21, 22 ZIKV-infected male patients might develop hematospermia and perineal pain compatible with prostatitis, and might have detectable viral RNA and/or infectious viral particles in their semen.20, 21, 22 In contrast to DENV-2, which did not efficiently replicate in any of the genital tract cell lines, the mean ZIKV load significantly increased in the prostatic (LNCaP) and testicular (833KE) cell lines without inducing CPE. This suggested that the prostate and testes might be important sites of ZIKV replication that led to prolonged virus shedding in the semen of infected men.20, 21, 37 Interestingly, abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression was detected in ZIKV-infected LNCaP cells, but not 833KE cells. This finding might imply that ZIKV could replicate more efficiently in the prostate than the testes. Recent studies only reported high viral loads in the testes of ZIKV-infected mice deficient in interferon signaling and/or receptor, but did not report the viral loads in their prostates.30, 38 Further studies should be conducted to investigate the prostate's role as a replication site of ZIKV. The female genital tract cell lines, including HeLa and HOSE6-3, were also susceptible to ZIKV, supporting the hypothesis that non-immune women might acquire the infection through sexual intercourse with their ZIKV-infected male partners.We showed that the renal (HEK) and respiratory tract (Hep-2, Calu-3, HFL) cell lines were also susceptible to ZIKV. This helped to explain the high viral loads in the urine and nasopharyngeal swabs of ZIKV-infected patients.39, 40, 41 The finding of high viral load and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells is particularly interesting, as it suggests that the kidney might be another site of persistent ZIKV replication. Similarly, DENV-2 infection also caused increased mean viral load and DENV-2-NS1 protein expression without inducing CPE in HEK cells, and viral RNA might be detected in urine of dengue patients.42 An important implication of this finding is that kidney transplant donors in ZIKV-affected regions should be tested for the infection before organ donation, as virus shedding in urine might be prolonged.39, 40, 41 The intestinal (Caco-2) cell line was also highly susceptible to ZIKV, which corroborated with the high viral load detected in the intestines of ZIKV-infected mice.43 Serial testing of fecal samples of ZIKV-infected patients should be performed to determine whether feces represent another possible transmission route of ZIKV. It would also be interesting to investigate ZIKV's ability to productively replicate in salivary gland cells, as high viral load could also be detected in the saliva of ZIKV-infected patients.41, 44The differential cell line susceptibility of our nonhuman cell lines to ZIKV may provide insights into the virus' potential animal reservoirs and alternative animal models. The finding of high viral loads and abundant ZIKV-NS1 protein expression without induction of CPE within 5 d.p.i. in the Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cell line was quite expected, and corroborated with the high non-fatal infection, dissemination and transmission rates of ZIKV in infected A. albopictus.45 A ⩾2 log increase in mean viral load with ZIKV-NS1 protein expression and CPE were observed in the nonhuman primate (Vero and LLC-MK2), pig (PK-15), rabbit (RK-13), hamster (BHK21) and chicken (DF-1) cell lines. It is well known that the transmission of flaviviruses may involve sylvatic cycles between the mosquito vectors and susceptible wild animals, and urban cycles between the vectors and domestic animals.46, 47 Nonhuman primates are known wild animal reservoirs of ZIKV and DENV.1, 46 Our findings of efficient ZIKV replication in pig, rabbit, hamster and chicken cell lines suggest that these mammalian or avian species might have a role in the transmission of ZIKV. Similar to domestic pigs and wild birds for JEV, and domestic and wild birds for WNV, these species may serve as the animal reservoirs or amplifying hosts of ZIKV.46 Moreover, vector-free JEV transmission due to persistence of virus in tonsils and virus shedding in oronasal secretions of pigs has recently been reported.48 Alternatively, these animal species may be susceptible hosts with less importance in the transmission cycle, which is analogous to horses for JEV and many vertebrate species for WNV.46 Systematic sampling of domestic animals in ZIKV-affected regions would help to confirm these findings. Pigs, rabbits and hamsters should be evaluated as animal models for ZIKV infection, as interferon signaling- or receptor-deficient mice are not routinely available in most laboratories. Pig and/or hamster models have been previously reported for DENV and WNV infection.49, 50Our findings are useful for optimizing laboratory diagnostics and studies on the pathogenesis and counter-measures of ZIKV. Some of the laboratories in resource-limited areas affected by ZIKV may not have the capability to routinely perform molecular diagnostic tests. In addition to the few cell lines previously reported, our study has identified a broad range of cell lines that are suitable for growing ZIKV as an alternative diagnostic tool in clinical virology laboratories.51, 52, 53, 54 These cell lines may also be used in pathogenesis studies conducted by laboratories without the technical expertise to handle brain organoids, and to evaluate antiviral treatment and vaccines in vitro prior to animal experiments.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Mosquito Saliva Increases Endothelial Permeability in the Skin, Immune Cell Migration, and Dengue Pathogenesis during Antibody-Dependent Enhancement

IntroductionDuring the transmission of arthropod-borne diseases, blood-feeding insects deposit pathogen-containing saliva into the skin [1]. How factors in arthropod saliva impact pathogen replication, host responses, and disease outcome is an area of active research. The four serotypes of dengue virus (DENV1-4) cause the most prevalent mosquito-borne viral disease, with up to 390 million infections and 96 million cases of dengue annually [2]. The first (1°) DENV infection usually causes dengue fever or subclinical disease, and individuals generate memory immune responses that protect against infection with the same DENV serotype. In contrast, sequential infection with a different DENV serotype can induce severe and potentially fatal disease [3]. Severe dengue is characterized by high fever, low platelet count, hemorrhagic manifestations, systemic vascular leak, and/or circulatory shock [4]. The memory immune response generated during a previous DENV infection can exacerbate a subsequent infection with a different serotype via a phenomenon known as antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) and/or a cytokine storm produced by cross-reactive T cells [5,6]. During ADE, antibodies that were generated during the 1° infection and cross-react with the next infecting DENV serotype do not neutralize but instead enhance infection of Fcγ receptor-bearing cells, such as macrophages (MΦs) and monocytes [7–10]. Whereas monocytes circulate in the blood and enter inflamed tissues, MΦs and classical dendritic cells (cDCs) reside in steady-state tissues. After systemic dissemination, DENV infects monocytes in the blood [11], as well as MΦs and DCs in lymph nodes (LNs), spleen, intestine, and liver [12–16].While probing for blood vessels in the skin, arthropods induce a host response that includes narrowing of blood vessels, blood clotting, and inflammation. To allow efficient blood feeding, arthropods inject saliva that contains various molecules that counteract this response [1]. Pathogens have co-evolved within their vector to optimize transmission [17]. Plasmodium [18,19] and Leishmania parasites [20,21] efficiently establish infections experimentally only when transmitted with vector saliva, and mosquito saliva enhances West Nile virus (WNV) infection [22,23]. Female Aedes aegypti and Ae. albopictus mosquitoes transmit DENV, Zika virus, yellow fever virus, and Chikungunya virus and are thus important vectors of disease. Nonetheless, the role of mosquito saliva in dengue pathogenesis is not well understood. Ae. aegypti saliva increased DENV serum viremia in mice lacking interferon (IFN) regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF3/7) [24] and prolonged dengue viremia in “humanized” mice xeno-transplanted with human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells [25]. In contrast, Ader et al. found that mosquito saliva inhibits DENV infection of human monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs) in vitro [26]. Even though dermal cDCs and MΦs are the initial targets for DENV replication [27,28], the impact of mosquito saliva on immune cells in DENV-infected skin has not been studied.Here we examined the impact of Ae. aegypti salivary gland extract (SGE) on dengue pathogenesis, the host response, and DENV infection in the skin. We used mice lacking the IFN-α/β receptor (Ifnar
–/–) that are susceptible to intradermal (i.d.) DENV infection [28] and display key features of human disease, such as lethal vascular leak [29–31]. In infected human cells, DENV proteins block IFN-α/β signaling [32–34]. In contrast, wild-type mice do not support DENV replication [35] because DENV proteins cannot block IFN signaling in mice [36]. While DENV inoculation of naïve Ifnar
–/–mice mimics 1° infection conditions, inoculation of mice previously injected with sub-neutralizing levels of DENV-specific antibodies models ADE [14,15,31]. We needle-inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice i.d. in the presence or absence of enhancing antibodies with DENV alone or DENV mixed with SGE from female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes—a model to examine the role of vector-derived factors in pathogen transmission that is more broadly accessible and easier to standardize than the use of live mosquitoes [37–40].We establish here that only the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies augments dengue pathogenesis, DENV infection of DCs and MΦs in the dermis, and immune responses in skin-draining LNs. In addition, we show that SGE increases endothelial permeability in vitro and induces vascular leak in the skin. Finally, removing the site of DENV infection in the ear after 4 hours (h) rescued mice from severe disease in the absence of SGE, but this rescue was lost when SGE was present. Mosquito-derived factors thus augment antibody-enhanced dengue pathogenesis in the skin and beyond.ResultsMosquito SGE exacerbates dengue pathogenesis during ADETo determine the role of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice i.d. with 105 PFU of the mouse-adapted virulent DENV2 strain D220 [31] (hereafter termed “DENV”) in PBS or mixed with SGE (equivalent to one salivary gland of a female Ae. aegypti mosquito). SGE had no effect on dengue pathogenesis in the absence of enhancing antibodies (1° infection), which induced mild or no disease (Fig 1A). In contrast, the presence of SGE significantly increased morbidity (Fig 1B) and induced lethal disease in 54% of the mice (Fig 1C) under antibody-enhanced conditions (ADE). The presence of enhancing antibodies mildly increased morbidity compared to 1° infection in the absence of SGE only on day 7 (p<0.05) but significantly increased morbidity on days 4, 5, 6 (p<0.001) and 7 (p<0.05) in the presence of SGE (Fig 1A and 1B). Severe dengue disease resulting from 105 PFU DENV is thus dependent upon the combined presence of mosquito-derived factors in SGE and enhancing antibodies.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g001Fig 1Mosquito SGE induces lethal antibody-enhanced dengue disease.
Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV in the absence (A) or presence (B) of enhancing antibodies. DENV was inoculated alone (No) or after mixing with Ae. aegypti SGE (+SGE). (A-B) Bar graphs show mean morbidity ± standard error of mean (SEM) of mice on a scale from 1 = healthy to 5 = moribund (for details, see Material and Methods). (C) Kaplan-Meier curves showing survival of mice. Data were pooled from three experiments for 1° infection conditions n = 8 (No) or n = 6 (+SGE) and four experiments for ADE n = 10 (No) or n = 13 (+SGE). Statistically significant differences between the presence and absence of SGE are marked as ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, or not significant (n.s. for p>0.05).Due to the mild morbidity under 1° conditions that were observed after inoculation of 105 PFU, we further tested the effect of SGE at a 10-fold higher DENV dose of 106 PFU. Unexpectedly, SGE diminished disease severity under 1° conditions and did not further augment pathogenesis during antibody-enhanced DENV infection at 106 PFU (S1 Fig), possibly because ADE of 106 PFU already causes lethal disease. Because Culex mosquitoes transmit a median dose of 105 PFU of the related Flavivirus, WNV [41], and a higher virus dose might override the enhancing effect of SGE on dengue pathogenesis, we subsequently used 105 PFU DENV. In endemic areas, exposure to non-infected mosquitoes regularly occurs. In order to test whether pre-existing immunity to SGE would alter the effect of SGE on dengue pathogenesis, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice three times i.d. with SGE alone (at ≥2 weeks intervals). Subsequent i.d. antibody-enhanced DENV infection in the presence of SGE augmented pathogenesis similarly to that observed in SGE-naïve mice (S1 Fig).SGE boosts infection of dermal dendritic cells and macrophagesWe hypothesized that SGE synergizes with enhancing antibodies to impact DENV replication in the skin. In fact, SGE alone and to a greater degree the combination of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly increased DENV titers in the skin at 14 h post-inoculation, as measured by qRT-PCR (Fig 2A and 2B). We thus dissected DENV infection of cell subsets in the skin via intracellular staining for DENV non-structural protein NS3 and structural protein E in flow cytometric analysis. We gated dermis-resident CD11b+ cDCs (CD45+ MHCIIhigh (hi) Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C-) and MΦs (CD45+ MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G- Ly6Clow/–SSCint-hi) as previously established ([28] and S2 Fig). Dermis-resident CD11b+ cDCs and MΦs were the initial targets for DENV infection 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU (Fig 2C–2G), similar to inoculation of 106 PFU, as reported previously [28]. While DENV infection was low in the absence of SGE or enhancing antibodies, the combined action of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly increased DENV infection of dermal CD11b+ cDCs (Fig 2D and 2E) and MΦs (Fig 2F and 2G). While myeloid cells in the dermis expressed various levels of Fcγ receptors (CD16/32), only MΦs and, to a minimal degree, CD11b+ cDCs expressed mannose receptor (CD206, S2 Fig). These dermal cell surface molecules may serve to mediate DENV attachment in the presence (Fcγ receptors) [8,42] or absence (mannose receptor for MΦs) of enhancing antibodies [43]. No cells in the epidermis, such as CD45+ MHCII+ Langerin+ Langerhans cells, contained intracellular DENV proteins after 14 h. The combined presence of mosquito-derived factors and enhancing antibodies thus augmented DENV infection of CD11b+ cDCs and MΦs as initial targets for DENV replication in the dermis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g002Fig 2SGE increases DENV infection in the skin during ADE.(A) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (B) Bar graph showing mean ±SEM DENV genome equivalents in the skin after 14 h normalized to 1 μg Gapdh mRNA, as determined by qRT-PCR (limit of detection depicted as horizontal dashed line). Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05. (C) Schematic of the main dermis-resident immune cells. (D) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV non-structural protein NS3 and structural protein E of dermal CD11b+ cDCs analyzed via flow cytometry 14 h after inoculation. For gating of cell populations, see S2 Fig. (E) Bar graph summarizing percent DENV infection of CD11b+ cDCs. (F) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV proteins of dermal MΦs. (G) Bar graph summarizing percent DENV infection of dermal MΦs. Data are representative (D, F) or pooled (E, G) from three independent experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05 and ** for p<0.01.SGE amplifies neutrophil and monocyte recruitment to the dermisWe next examined the recruitment of immune cells to the dermis. We gated de novo-recruited cell populations in the dermis as previously established via adoptive transfer of labeled monocytes in the absence of SGE [28]. Ly6G expression identified neutrophils, and Ly6C expression separated recruited Ly6Chi monocytes from resident Ly6Clow/–MΦs among MHCIIlow/–CD11b+ cells (Figs 3A and S2). Whereas inoculation of 105 PFU DENV under 1° conditions led to a modest recruitment of inflammatory neutrophils (Fig 3B) and monocytes to the dermis (Fig 3C), SGE significantly amplified the recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes in the presence of enhancing antibodies. Ly6C expression further separated Ly6C+ moDCs from resident Ly6C- CD11b+ cDCs among MHCII+ Langerin-CD11b+ cells (S2 Fig). During ADE, SGE augmented the number (Fig 3D) and DENV infection (Fig 3E and 3F) of de novo-recruited moDCs in the dermis. In contrast, few monocytes (<0.5%) and no other cell types (e.g., DCs or MΦs) were infected with DENV in the dermis 14 h after inoculation. SGE also increased the percentage of monocytes and moDCs in the dermis (S3 Fig). Together, these data show that the presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies augmented innate responses to DENV infection in the skin via the recruitment of neutrophils, monocytes, and moDCs and increased the infection of de novo-recruited moDCs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g003Fig 3SGE together with enhancing antibodies augments recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes to the dermis.(A) Contour plots showing consecutive gating of neutrophils and monocytes among CD45+ MHCIIlow/–cells in the dermis, as determined via flow cytometry of steady-state mice or 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU DENV in the presence or absence of SGE under 1° or ADE conditions. Numbers on plots are percent of gated cells of the parent population. (B-D) Bar graphs showing mean ±SEM number of neutrophils (B), monocytes (C) or moDCs (D) in the dermis, gated as in (A) and S2 Fig. (E) Contour plots showing intracellular staining for DENV proteins of moDCs in the dermis. (F) Bar graph showing mean ±SEM percent DENV infection of dermal moDCs. Data are representative (A, E) or pooled (B-D, F) from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, and *** for p<0.001.SGE increases dendritic cell migration to skin-draining lymph nodesWe hypothesized that SGE may further modulate immune responses beyond the skin. While activated cDCs efficiently migrate from the skin to draining LNs (MigDCs) via expression of the chemokine receptor CCR7 [44,45] and prime naïve T and B cells, MΦs and recruited moDCs mostly remain within the inflamed skin to phagocytose pathogens and locally stimulate effector or memory T cells [46,47]. After 14 h, skin-draining LNs contained significantly more and a higher frequency of MigDCs with a CD11cint MHCIIhi CCR7+ migratory phenotype (Figs 4A and S4) when DENV was inoculated with SGE in the presence of enhancing antibodies (Fig 4B). The combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies further boosted the recruitment of CD11bhi Ly6G+ neutrophils (Fig 4C) and MHCII-CD11b+ F480+ SSClow monocytes to LNs (Fig 4D), likely from the blood. For neutrophils, this effect was due to decreased recruitment during 1° infections when SGE was present. In contrast, SGE did not significantly change the number of CD11chi MHCIIint cDCs or cells with a CD11clow MHCIIint CD11b+ F480+ SSClow phenotype that likely consist of moDCs in LNs after 14 h (S4 Fig). We further examined the activation of naïve T cells during antibody-enhanced DENV infection. Even though 82% of CD8+ and 58% CD4+ T cells in the spleen and 34% of CD8+ and 21% CD4+ T cells in LNs draining the site of i.d. inoculation acquired an activated CD44+ CD62L- phenotype within 5.5 days, no significant differences were detectable in the presence or absence of SGE (S5 Fig). Along the same lines, 22% of CD8+ T cells and 13% of CD4+ T cells produced IFN-γ in the spleen regardless of whether SGE was present or not (S5 Fig). However, a non-significant trend towards decreased proliferation of T cells in the presence of SGE was observed (S5 Fig). Consequently, the presence of SGE during antibody-enhanced DENV infection increases the migration of DCs and monocytes to skin-draining LNs. Nevertheless, whether augmented innate responses subsequently affect adaptive immune responses and thereby influence dengue pathogenesis remains to be determined.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g004Fig 4SGE accelerates migration of dendritic cells and recruitment of neutrophils and monocytes to lymph nodes during ADE.Mice were inoculated i.d. with PBS or 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (A) Contour plots showing cells in LNs 14 h after inoculation. Consecutive gating identified neutrophils as Ly6G+ CD11bhi, MigDCs as Ly6G- CD11cint MHCIIhi, cDCs as Ly6G- CD11chi MHCIIint, and monocytes as Ly6G- CD11c–/low MHCII-CD11b+ F4/80+. For expression of CCR7 and Fcγ receptor, see S4 Fig. Bar graphs summarizing the number of MigDCs (B), neutrophils (C) or monocytes (D) in LNs. Data are representative (A) or pooled (B-D) from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences between groups are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.SGE disrupts endothelial barrier functionEndothelial cells lining blood vessels separate the skin from systemic blood circulation. We hypothesized that factors contained in SGE may disrupt endothelial barrier function to enable blood feeding, which might also facilitate cell migration. To determine the direct effect of SGE on the vascular endothelium, we measured trans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of human dermal microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC-1) monolayers growing on Transwell inserts (Fig 5A). Monolayers displayed high TEER values and thus low permeability in steady state. Addition of SGE to either the basolateral side of the monolayer that corresponds to the side facing the dermis (Figs 5B, 5C and S6) or the apical side facing the blood (S6 Fig) significantly decreased TEER values, thus increasing endothelial permeability, in a dose-dependent manner. TNFα served as a positive control for endothelial permeability and decreased TEER values with similar dynamics as SGE (S6 Fig). We next tested whether SGE also affected endothelial barrier function at the site of inoculation in the mouse ear. Our results demonstrated that i.d. inoculation of SGE disrupted the barrier function of the microvasculature in the mouse ear and increased the leak of plasma into the dermis, visualized via fluorescently-labelled dextran that was inoculated intravenously (Fig 5D). The vasculature in the PBS-inoculated control ear of the same animal showed significantly lower leak of plasma, and untouched ears of steady-state animals showed only minor endothelial permeability (Fig 5D and 5E). The signal at the base of the ear was due to autofluorescence of cartilege and was excluded from quantification at the site of inoculation (white circles, Fig 5D). Consequently, SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function at the site of virus transmission in the dermis and may thus be one factor that contributes to systemic dengue pathogenesis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g005Fig 5SGE disrupts endothelial barriers in vitro and in vivo in the skin.(A-C) The trans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of human microvascular endothelial cell (HMEC-1) monolayers grown in Transwell chambers were measured as depicted in (A) after adding the equivalent of 0.2, 0.5 or 1 salivary glands to the basolateral compartment. (B) Graph showing percent TEER relative to untreated control cells over time. (C) Bar graph depicting percent TEER after 13 h of stimulation. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 8 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as **** for p<0.0001 or not significant (n.s. for p>0.05). (D-E) Wild-type mice were inoculated intravenously with fluorescently-labeled dextran, and SGE or PBS was inoculated i.d. into either ear of each animal immediately thereafter. Steady-state ears of dextran-inoculated control mice were left untouched. (D) Representative scan of ears analyzed after 30 min showing dextran fluorescence that leaked with plasma into the dermis at sites of i.d. inoculation or corresponding areas in steady-state ears (white circles). (E) Mean fluorescence of dextran per an area of 3300 pixels of ear skin ±SEM quantified at the site of i.d. inoculation with PBS or SGE for each animal (connecting lines). Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 9 per group. Statistically significant differences between PBS and SGE are marked as * for p<0.05.The effect of SGE spreads rapidly beyond the skin and modulates dengue pathogenesisFinally, to test whether the effects of SGE in the skin impacted systemic dengue pathogenesis, we surgically removed the site of DENV transmission in the presence or absence of SGE after 4 h (Fig 6A). In the presence of SGE, removing the site of DENV transmission did not have a protective effect on the morbidity and survival of mice after i.d. inoculation with an antibody-enhanced DENV inoculum of 105 PFU (Fig 6B and 6C). Fifty percent of mice succumbed to infection regardless of whether the control side or the site of inoculation was removed. In contrast, if no SGE was present, removing the site of DENV transmission completely protected mice from morbidity after inoculation with an antibody-enhanced dose of 105 PFU (Fig 6D and 6E). Even more striking was the significant protective effect on morbidity and survival of the mice observed after inoculation with an antibody-enhanced high DENV dose of 106 PFU (Fig 6F and 6G). These data show that the effect of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis rapidly spreads beyond the skin. The effect of SGE on endothelial barrier function and the immune response thus influence dengue pathogenesis.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g006Fig 6Removing the site of DENV inoculation in the skin no longer rescues mice from dengue disease in the presence of SGE.(A) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with DENV under antibody-enhanced conditions, and 4 h later, the non-inoculated control side or the site of inoculation in the ear skin was surgically removed. (B) Bar graphs showing mean morbidity ±SEM and (C) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 105 PFU DENV mixed with SGE. (D) Bar graphs showing morbidity and (E) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 105 PFU DENV alone. (F) Bar graphs showing morbidity and (G) Kaplan-Meier curve showing survival of mice infected with 106 PFU DENV alone. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences between removing the site of DENV inoculation and removing the non-inoculated control side are marked as * for p<0.05 or ** for p<0.01.DiscussionWe establish here that Ae. aegpyti SGE exacerbates systemic dengue pathogenesis during ADE. We determined that SGE in the presence of enhancing antibodies increases DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis, recruitment of monocytes to the dermis and draining LNs, and DC migration from the skin to LNs. We also showed that SGE acts directly on endothelial cells in vitro, disrupts endothelial barrier function, and induces plasma leak in the mouse ear. Further, surgical removal of the site of DENV transmission after 4 h rescued mice from enhanced disease in the absence but not in the presence of SGE, indicating that the effect of mosquito-derived factors on dengue pathogenesis spreads rapidly beyond the skin.Previous studies have demonstrated that mosquitoes inoculate saliva that contains pathogens into the dermis while probing for blood vessels. Anopheles mosquitoes inoculated saliva with Plasmodium parasites into the dermis of mice [48]. Similarly, in studies of mosquitoes feeding on mouse tails, >99% of inoculated WNV was recovered from the skin section that infected Culex mosquitoes probed upon [41]. Although Culex mosquitoes inoculated WNV directly into the blood circulation when obtaining a successful blood meal [41], the amount of WNV that was deposited into the bloodstream remained low at ~100 PFU, which was only 0.1% of the total i.d.-transmitted median dose of 105 PFU of WNV [41]. We show that removing the site of i.d. DENV infection after 4 h rescued mice from disease in the absence of SGE but, in the natural setting, DENV is always transmitted in the saliva of infected mosquitoes. Studies have shown that survival of mice was prolonged when the distal third of the tail was removed 5 min to 6 h after mosquitoes inoculated with St. Louis encephalitis [49] or Rift Valley fever viruses [50]. Similarly, mice were protected from blood parasitemia when the site of inoculation was removed up to 5 min but no later than 15 min after Anopheles-transmitted Plasmodium infection [51]. Our data that removing the site of DENV transmission rescues mice in the absence but not in the presence of SGE establishes that DENV infection in the skin early after inoculation is critical for subsequent dengue pathogenesis and that SGE modulates the dynamics of this process.The endothelial barrier of capillaries separates the skin from systemic blood circulation. Mosquito saliva [1,18] or innate immune recognition of DENV [52,53] can increase endothelial cell permeability via activation of mast cells and release of inflammatory mediators, such as histamine, TNFα, or proteases. Our in vivo results of SGE inducing vascular leak in the ear skin may thus be a combined effect of SGE on mast cells and endothelial cells. In contrast, our in vitro results of SGE decreasing the TEER of endothelial cell monolayers demonstrate that SGE can act directly on endothelial cells to increase permeability. In the absence of SGE, Luplertlop et al. showed that DENV-infected DCs induce vascular permeability in the skin via production of metalloproteinases that degrade endothelial cell adhesion molecules [54]. Serine proteases in Ae. aegypti SGE were shown to degrade the extracellular matrix of embryonic fibroblasts [40]. We thus speculate that SGE disturbs the integrity of blood vessels through degradation of extracellular matrix proteins or disturbance of tight/adherens junctions between endothelial cells. Factors in SGE that disrupt endothelial barrier function may have evolved to help the mosquitoes penetrate blood vessels or feed from a pool of blood in the dermis after injury to a blood vessel.Previous studies examined the effect of mosquito-derived factors on DENV infection only in the absence of enhancing antibodies [24,25,40]. In our hands, SGE did not augment dengue pathogenesis after inoculation of 105 PFU under 1° conditions and even reduced disease severity after inoculation at a 10-fold higher dose of 106 PFU. In contrast, SGE augmented dengue pathogenesis during antibody-enhanced infection with 105 PFU. Numerous reports show that ADE enhances DENV infection of human monocytes [8,55] and MΦs [9] in vitro. In mice, intestinal monocytes/MΦs and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells are particularly susceptible to antibody-enhanced DENV infection [15,30]. We speculate that, via disruption of endothelial barrier function in the skin, SGE may augment access of DENV to enhancing antibodies in the serum, increase the spread of infectious virus-antibody complexes, enhance infection within systemic tissues, and thus exacerbate dengue pathogenesis during ADE. Our results thus suggest that animal models of dengue and pre-clinical validation of dengue vaccine candidates should be evaluated in the combined presence of mosquito saliva and enhancing antibodies.As one possibility, SGE may augment systemic dengue pathogenesis by disrupting endothelial barrier function and thus facilitating DENV dissemination. In humans, higher DENV titers at peak viremia correlate with more severe disease [5]. Accelerated early DENV dissemination may subsequently increase virus titers and thus the risk for severe disease. In mice, feeding of uninfected Culex mosquitoes at the site of needle inoculation or concurrent inoculation with SGE augmented WNV serum viremia after 24–48 h [22]. Likewise, feeding of uninfected Ae. aegypti at the site of needle inoculation with WNV subsequently increased mortality compared to needle inoculation with virus alone [23]. Similarly, mosquito transmission of DENV or needle-inoculation with concurrent feeding of uninfected mosquitoes prolonged viremia and increased erythema (redness of the skin) in “humanized” mice [25] and increased DENV titers around peak viremia in mice lacking IRF3/7 [24,56]. When needle-inoculated into the foot pad, mosquito SGE further increased DENV titers in LNs of Ifnar
–/–mice after 24 h [40]. Together, these data show that mosquito-derived factors increase DENV titers 24 h to several days post-inoculation, which could be due to increased virus dissemination and/or systemic replication. Our ear removal data show that factors that augment dengue pathogenesis spread beyond the skin within 4 h in the presence of SGE. Nevertheless, the precise impact of mosquito-derived factors on early DENV dissemination prior to the first round of DENV replication, which takes place within ~12 h [57], remains unknown.Our data also show that SGE boosts the recruitment of innate immune cells during acute DENV infection. Previous studies revealed that monocytes and neutrophils enter the DENV-infected dermis in the absence of SGE [28]. Several studies have confirmed the recruitment and phenotype of inflammatory monocytes (MHCII-Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6G- Ly6Chi) and moDCs (MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C+) to the dermis during allergic reactions [58], or infection with Leishmania major [59] or DENV [28] via adoptive transfer of genetically- or fluorescently-labeled monocytes. The phenotype remained consistent for 7 days, before monocyte-derived cells down-regulated Ly6C expression [58,59]. During DENV infection, monocyte recruitment and differentiation to moDCs increased the number of targets for virus replication in the dermis [28]. Sterile injury [60] or transmission of Leishmania via sandfly feeding triggered the recruitment of neutrophils to the skin, where they then served as a “Trojan horse” reservoir for parasite infection [61], and abrogated vaccine-induced protection by suppressing parasite-specific CD4+ T cell responses [62]. Few studies have addressed the role of neutrophils in dengue pathogenesis. In one study, the serum of dengue patients contained higher levels of IL-8 and neutrophilic elastase than healthy controls, suggesting activation and degranulation of neutrophils [63]. Previous studies have documented the exit of epidermal Langerhans cells [64,65] and dermal DCs [27] from DENV-infected skin and their migration to LNs in the absence of SGE. We establish here that the combined presence of enhancing antibodies and SGE boost the recruitment of monocytes and neutrophils to the DENV-infected dermis and draining LNs, as well as DC migration from the skin to LNs. SGE disruption of endothelial barrier function in the dermis may facilitate both transmigration of monocytes and neutrophils through blood vessels to enter the dermis and migration of skin DCs to LNs via increased drainage of plasma that leaks into the skin. Because removal of the site of co-inoculation of DENV with SGE after 4 h did not rescue mice from systemic antibody-enhanced pathogenesis, rapid spread of inflammatory mediators may contribute to increased disease severity. As we did not observe significant differences in T cell activation in the presence versus absence of SGE 5.5 days after DENV inoculation, further studies are needed to determine whether SGE affects systemic immune responses. Along the same lines, Cox et al. determined that increased viremia and prolonged fever occurred even when mosquito saliva and DENV were inoculated at distant sites [25], supporting the view that mosquito-derived factors can impact dengue pathogenesis systemically.We confirm here the recent discovery that dermal cDCs and MΦs are the initial targets for DENV replication in the skin of mice and humans in the absence of SGE [27,28], but at a 10-fold lower virus dose in vivo. Only one in vitro study has examined the impact of mosquito saliva on human immature moDCs, and it found that Ae. aegypti saliva inhibits DENV infection under 1° conditions [26]. In our study, SGE led to a small but significant increase in DENV titer in the skin under 1° conditions, as measured via qRT-PCR 14 h after inoculation. Under 1° conditions, however, flow cytometric analysis did not detect significant differences in the infection of dermal cDCs, moDCs, and MΦs, which were the only DENV-infected cells in the skin at this time-point. We establish here that the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies significantly enhanced DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis. While monocytes, MΦs, and mature moDCs are known targets for enhanced DENV infection in vitro [8,9,42], this is the first report that ADE boosts DENV infection of cDCs in the presence of SGE. In contrast, ADE alone did not significantly enhance infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis in the absence of SGE (Fig 2 and [28]). Whereas enhancing antibodies may have limited access to the skin in the absence of SGE, the increased leak of plasma into the skin that we found in the presence of SGE may allow more enhancing antibodies to enter the skin and mediate antibody-enhanced infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis. Although DCs are key for priming adaptive T and B cell responses, DENV infection can impair DC function [10]. In addition, Ae. aegypti saliva suppresses host responses, such as cytokine production and T cell proliferation at the feeding site [66,67], and skews systemic CD4+ T cell responses from Th1- towards Th2-type by decreasing IFN-γ and increasing IL-4 expression [56,68,69]. Even though our ear removal experiments show that dengue pathogenesis of the ongoing infection occurs beyond the skin when SGE and enhancing antibodies are present, the increased DENV infection of skin DCs may affect priming of memory responses that protect or enhance pathogenesis during subsequent DENV infections.In endemic regions, exposure to non-infected arthropod vectors regularly occurs and could modulate the effect of vector saliva. For malaria, exposure of mice to the bite of non-infected Anopheles mosquitoes protected them from subsequent mosquito-transmitted Plasmodium infection [70]. Similarly, vaccination with sand fly SGE or exposure to the bites of non-infected sand flies protected mice or non-human primates against subsequent Leishmania challenge plus SGE [71–74]. However, immunization with two distinct sand fly salivary proteins, PpSP15 or PpSP44, either protected or increased susceptibility to Leishmania infection, respectively [75]. Similarly, pre-exposure of mice to bites of non-infected Ae. aegypti mosquitoes exacerbated WNV lethality [76], but immunization with the recombinant protein D7 from Culex saliva enhanced pathogenesis during subsequent mosquito-transmitted WNV infection [77]. One study reported an association of higher serum reactivity to Ae. aegypti salivary proteins in Thai children with severe secondary dengue disease compared to not-infected individuals, but it remains unclear whether this correlation was due to prior exposure or reactivity to DENV or non-infected mosquitoes [78]. In our hands, antibody-enhanced DENV infection in the presence of SGE induced lethality in a comparable proportion of mice that were pre-exposed three times to SGE versus SGE-naïve animals. Further studies are needed to determine the effect of anti-Ae. aegypti immunity on dengue pathogenesis, and the potential use of mosquito-derived components in vaccine formulations against dengue requires thorough evaluation.Our study introduces in vitro and mouse models to study the impact of mosquito-derived factors on endothelial cells and dengue pathogenesis, respectively. DENV suppresses the IFN response, replicates, and causes disease in humans but not wild-type mice [28,35,36]. Ifnar
–/–mice are readily available and more immunocompetent than other DENV infection models due to intact IFN-γ receptor signaling. After i.d. inoculation, DENV infects the same cells (i.e., dermal cDCs and MΦs) in Ifnar
–/–mice [28] and human skin explants [27], cross-validating the reliability of these models. Studies using transmission via DENV-infected live mosquitoes are most physiologically relevant but naturally cannot control for the presence of mosquito-derived factors or the virus dose delivered, as mosquitoes transmit varying doses of virus (e.g., WNV [41]). A study design (“spot feeding”) where uninfected female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes deposit saliva into mouse skin followed by i.d. needle inoculation of virus mimics the secretion of saliva while mosquitoes probe for blood vessels, can control for the presence or absence of mosquito-derived components, delivers a defined dose of virus, and has successfully been used to study DENV infection in vivo [24,25]. Live mosquitoes, however, inoculate varying amounts of saliva [41] depending on how fast they locate and penetrate a blood vessel; thus, salivary dose cannot be controlled or monitored in this model. The simplified model that we use here, i.e., needle inoculation of SGE from non-infected mosquitoes with a defined dose of pathogen, has proven useful in assessing the role of vector-derived factors for infection with DENV [40], WNV [23], Sindbis virus [69], Rift Valley fever virus [39], and Leishmania [38]. Similarly, WNV transmission via infected Culex mosquitoes, deposition of saliva via uninfected mosquitoes at the site of needle inoculation, or concurrent i.d. needle inoculation of WNV with SGE all induced earlier and higher viremia compared to needle inoculation of WNV alone [22][79]. While not precisely replicating DENV transmission via live mosquitoes, the SGE model is more broadly applicable to future immunological analyses and pre-clinical testing of dengue vaccines, as the variables can be controlled, unlike mosquito-transmitted DENV. Mosquito saliva can be collected artificially in a sucrose solution in a capillary tube into which the mosquito proboscis is inserted, or through a membrane. However, such saliva preparations differ qualitatively and quantitatively from mosquito saliva that is inoculated into the host during a natural blood meal [79,80]. Furthermore, the mosquito does not replicate normal probing and secretion of saliva during artificial feeding. Needle inoculation i.d. of DENV with or without SGE is thus the model that is easiest to standardize between assays and between research groups. The dose of 1 SGE that we have used in vivo contained 0.37–0.60 μg total protein and lies within the range for which Moser et al. determined a dose-dependent increase in WNV serum viremia in the presence of SGE from Culex mosquitoes [79]. In addition, Wasserman et al. determined that a single Ae. aegypti mosquito inoculates approximately 0.35 salivary gland pairs (equivalent to 0.7 SGE) [81]. We have thus inoculated mice with SGE that is likely equivalent to the bite of 1–2 mosquitoes. We further introduce an in vitro system measuring TEER as a practical tool to assess the direct effect of vector-derived factors on endothelial barrier function that is independent of specific pathogens and can thus be extrapolated to other viruses carried by Ae. aegypti mosquitoes. Using the TEER system, we show that 0.2 to 2 SGE increased vascular permeability in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that 1 SGE is a non-saturated dose but lies within the range of a dose-response curve.In summary (Fig 7), our study establishes that mosquito-derived factors exacerbate dengue pathogenesis in individuals that carry enhancing antibodies and thus already have an increased risk for severe disease. Consequently, safety and efficacy of vaccine and therapeutic candidates against dengue should be tested pre-clinically in models that consider both the mosquito vector as well as enhancing antibodies. We establish that SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function in the skin, induces vascular leak, and, in combination with enhancing antibodies, increases dendritic cell migration to skin-draining LNs. Because antibody-enhanced dengue pathogenesis occurs beyond the site of DENV-SGE co-inoculation in the skin, future studies are needed to determine whether SGE alters immune responses and thereby augments systemic dengue pathogenesis. Increasing DENV infection of cDCs and MΦs in the dermis could further modulate the priming of memory responses that determine pathogenesis during subsequent DENV infections. The role of mosquito-derived factors in dengue pathogenesis warrants further studies, and our findings call for additional research on arthropod-borne pathogens whose vectors share similar blood-feeding strategies and may also impair endothelial barrier function.10.1371/journal.ppat.1005676.g007Fig 7The effects of mosquito SGE in the skin and on systemic dengue pathogenesis.In summary, our data show that (1) SGE induces endothelial permeability and vascular leak in the mouse ear. During ADE, SGE further increases (2) DENV infection of MΦs and cDCs that reside in the dermis. In addition, (3) SGE boosts monocyte recruitment to the dermis and draining LNs, differentiation to moDCs, and migration of DCs (MigDCs) from the skin to LNs. During systemic pathogenesis (4), only the combined presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies leads to severe disease.Materials and MethodsEthics statementMice were bred and maintained in the University of California Berkeley Animal Facility, and experiments were performed strictly following guidelines of the American Veterinary Medical Association and the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. The University of California Berkeley’s Animal Care and Use Committee pre-approved all experiments (protocol AUP-2014-08-6638). Trained laboratory personnel performed anesthesia of mice via isoflurane inhalation and euthanasia of mice using exposure to CO2 followed by cervical dislocation.MiceWild-type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. C57BL/6 mice deficient in the IFN-α/β receptor-1 (Ifnar1
tm1Agt, here termed Ifnar
–/–) were provided by Dr. Daniel Portnoy (University of California, Berkeley, CA) [82]. After DENV inoculation, mice were monitored following the standardized cumulative morbidity scale from 1 (healthy) to 5 (moribund) [28,31]: 1, healthy; 2, mild signs of lethargy; 3, fur ruffling, hunched posture; 4, increased lethargy, limited mobility; 5, moribund with minimal mobility and inability to reach food or water. Moribund mice were euthanized immediately, assigned a score of 5, and excluded from the mean morbidity calculations on subsequent days.Dengue virusTo mimic DENV transmission from an infected mosquito to the mammalian host, we inoculated Ifnar
–/–mice intradermally (i.d.) with DENV produced in C6/36 mosquito cells. We used the DENV2 strain D220, which was derived via 20 passages of the Taiwanese clinical isolate PL046 between C6/36 cells and serum of 129/Sv mice deficient in IFN-α/β and -γ receptors, acquiring defined mutations that increased its virulence in mice [29,31]. D220 stocks (hereafter termed DENV) were propagated in C6/36 cells (obtained from Dr. Paul Young, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia) at 28°C in M199 medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and GlutaMax (all from LifeTechnologies). T175 flasks containing 80% confluent C6/36 cells were infected with DENV at a multiplicity of infection of 0.05–0.1 in serum-free medium for 2 h and then supplemented with 2% FBS. Supernatants were harvested between days 5 and 8 post-infection and concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Units with a 100 kDa molecular weight cut-off (Millipore) before storage at -80°C. DENV titers were determined via plaque assay using BHK-21 clone 15 cells, which were maintained at 37°C and 5% CO2 in α-MEM medium with 5% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and GlutaMax. BHK-21 cells in 12-well plates (Becton Dickinson) at 60% confluence were infected with 150 μl DENV in 10-fold serial dilutions for 2 h before overlaying with 10% low-melting agarose (Cambrex) in fully supplemented α-MEM medium. BHK-21 cells were fixed 7 days later using 10% buffered formalin phosphate (Fisher Scientific) and stained with 2.5% crystal violet in 30% ethanol. DENV titers were calculated as plaque forming units (PFU)/ml.Mosquito salivary gland extractSalivary gland extracts (SGE) were obtained from non-infected wild-caught Nicaraguan (DENV infections in vivo) or colonized Panamanian female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (vascular permeability assays in vitro and in vivo). Mosquitoes were immobilized with CO2, dipped into 70% ethanol, and placed on glass slides in sterile PBS. The mosquito head was pulled away from the body, and the exposed salivary glands were dissected from the head or thorax under aseptic conditions and placed into fresh PBS (2 salivary glands/10 μl). Salivary gland membranes were disrupted via sonication in ice water at 100 mV for 3 bursts of 20 sec with 1 min of cooling time between bursts. Extracts were centrifuged at 5,000 g for 10 min at 4°C, and SGE was collected as supernatant. The protein concentration of the SGE stocks was 0.37–0.60 μg/ml, as estimated via NanoDrop (Thermo Scientific). SGE stocks had a neutral pH of 7.0 and were free of endotoxin or contained very low levels that were well below the FDA-approved limit for injection solutions of (<5 endotoxin units per kg per hour) as tested using the endpoint chromogenic Limulus Amebocyte Lysate kit (Lonza).Intradermal inoculationEars of anesthetized Ifnar
–/–mice were immobilized using cover slip forceps. A sterilized needle (30-gauge, 25-mm length, and 10°-12° bevel) used with a 25-μl reusable glass microinjection syringe (Hamilton) was inserted ~3 mm into the ventral side of the ear skin at a flat angle with the bevel pointing up, and DENV diluted in 20 μl PBS was slowly inoculated. To model the presence of mosquito-derived factors, we co-injected DENV mixed with the equivalent of 1 salivary gland from Nicaraguan mosquitoes in 20 μl PBS. Control ears were left untouched or were inoculated with SGE diluted in PBS or PBS alone. Naïve mice served to model 1° infections, whereas ADE conditions consisted of inoculation with a subneutralizing dose of 5 μg anti-DENV protein E monoclonal antibody 4G2 (ATCC) intraperitoneally in 200 μl PBS 24 h prior to DENV infection. In certain experiments, mice were anesthetized once again 4 h after i.d. DENV infection, and the inoculated site of the ear skin or an equivalent piece from the non-inoculated ear was surgically removed using sterile scissors. Bleeding was stopped immediately by applying pressure via sterile gauze, and mice were monitored closely for any direct adverse effects of the procedure. Only occasional scratching for less than 2 h was observed.Flow cytometric analysisOrgans of euthanized mice were collected on ice. Ears were incubated for 5 min at room temperature with hair removal cream (Nair), washed in PBS, and split into dorsal and ventral halves using tweezers (TDI). Skin samples were digested floating with the epidermal side up for 90 min with 2 U/ml Dispase II in HBSS without Ca2+/Mg2+ (LifeTech) in 5% CO2 at 37°C. The epidermis was then separated as one sheet from the dermis and each was placed into a tube containing RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS. Using scissors, the epidermal and dermal layers were cut into pieces of 1–2 mm size, PBS containing a final concentration of 1.6 mg/ml collagenase type-1 (LifeTech) and 10 U/ml DNase 1 (Roche) was added, and digestion of the epidermis dermis was allowed to proceed for 45 min and 80 min, respectively, at 37°C while shaking at 220 rotations per min. Homogeneous cell suspensions were generated via pipetting and filtering through 100 μm nylon meshes. Cervical LNs or spleens were crushed in medium under nylon meshes and digested in a final concentration of 1 mg/ml collagenase type-1 and 10 U/ml DNase 1 for 30 min at 37°C and 5% CO2 before generating single cell suspensions via pipetting. Spleen samples were treated with Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (eBioscience). Total numbers of live cells in LNs were determined via manual count and trypan blue exclusion.Cells were stained with Zombie Aqua (BioLegend) in PBS to exclude dead cells. Cell surface markers were then stained in PBS without Ca2+/Mg2+ with 2% FBS and 2 mM EDTA (LifeTech) using the following monoclonal antibodies (from BioLegend or BD Pharmingen) to identify cell types: CD3 (17A2), CD4 (GK1.4), CD8 (53–67), CD11c (N418), CD11b (M1/70), CD44 (IM7), CD45 (30-F11), CD62L (MEL-14), CD103 (2E7), F4/80 (BM-8), Ly6C (AL21), Ly6G (1A8), MHCII (I-A/I-E, M5/114.15.2), CCR7 (4B12) or isotype control (RTK2758), and FcγR (2.4G2) or isotype control (A-95-1). The monoclonal antibodies were conjugated to PacificBlue, Brilliant Violet 605, PE, PE-CF594, PE-Cy7, Alexa Fluor 700, APC-Cy7, or biotin. Cells stained with biotinylated antibodies were visualized using PE-Cy7- or Brilliant Violet 605-conjugated streptavidin (BioLegend). Cells were fixed with 2% formaldehyde (Ted Pella) for 10 min at room temperature, and membranes were permeabilized with 0.1% saponin (Sigma) in PBS containing 2% FBS, 2 mM EDTA, and 1% normal mouse serum to block remaining fixative. To identify DENV-infected cells, cells were stained intracellularly with monoclonal antibodies directed against DENV non-structural protein NS3 (clone E1D8, [14]) and structural protein E (clone 4G2, ATCC) that were conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 or Alexa Fluor 647, respectively, using protein-labeling kits (LifeTech). Intracellular staining for mannose receptor (C068C2) or isotype control (RTK2758) further dissected cell populations. Spleen cells were harvested 5.5 days post-i.d. DENV inoculation and were stained intracellularly for Ki-67 (SolA15) or isotype control (kit, eBiosciences) or after in vitro restimulation for 4 hours in RPMI 1640 medium with 10% FBS, 20 nM phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (Sigma), and 1 μM ionomycin (Sigma), with 5 μg/ml brefeldin A (eBiosciences) added during the final 2 hours were stained for IFN-γ (XMG1.2) or isotype control (RTK2071). Data were recorded using an LSR Fortessa cell analyzer (BD Biosciences) with 405, 488, 561, and 632 nm laser excitation lines and data analyzed using FlowJo 8.8.7 software (TreeStar). Gating FSC-A/SSC-A, SSC-H/SSC-W, FSC-H/FSC-W, and Zombie Aqua negative defined single, live-cell populations. The total number of cells in the dermis was determined via flow cytometer, while acquiring all cells for each sample and calculating total acquired cell counts.Quantification of DENV genomesTo determine DENV titers, a piece of less than 20 mg of tissue stored in RNAlater (Ambion) was homogenized for 1 min with 1-mm zirconia-silica beads using a Mini-Beadbeater-8 (BiospecProducts), and RNA was extracted after centrifugation using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA was extracted from 20 μl serum stored at -80°C using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen). RNA samples were eluted in a total volume of 50 μl, and 2 μl was used per qRT-PCR reaction in duplicate. DENV2 NS5 primer and probe sequences were as follows [83]: forward primer 5’-ACA AGT CGA ACA ACC TGG TCC AT, probe 5’-Fam TGG GAT TTC CTC CCA TGA TTC CAC TGG Tamra-Q, reverse primer 5’-GCC GCA CCA TTG GTC TTC TC (synthesized by Eurofins WMG Operon). DENV RNA and Gapdh mRNA (TaqMan Rodent Gapdh Control Reagents, ThermoFisher) were amplified in separate reactions using Verso one-step qRT-PCR Kits (ThermoFisher). A 7300 Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems) was set to the following thermal cycler profile: reverse transcription at 50°C for 30 min, hot start at 95°C for 12.5 min, and for amplification and data acquisition, 40 PCR cycles consisting of denaturation at 95°C for 15 sec and annealing/extension at 60°C for 1 min.Endothelial permeabilityTrans-endothelial electrical resistance (TEER) was used to measure endothelial permeability of confluent single-cell monolayers of human microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1) in Transwell Permeable Supports (Corning) using a voltohmmeter (World Precision Instruments) after adding 0.2, 0.5, 1 or 2 salivary gland equivalents to 300 μl medium in the apical or 500 μl in the basolateral compartment of the transwell insert. Adding 10 ng/ml of TNFα (R&D Systems) to HMEC-1 cells served as a positive control for increased endothelial permeability. After 24 h, 50% of the medium in the upper and lower chambers was replaced with fresh medium. Relative TEER was calculated as percent resistance in Ohms of the experimental condition divided by non-treated cells. To measure vascular permeability in vivo, wild-type mice were inoculated intravenously with 200 μg Dextran (10 kDa molecular weight) labeled with Alexa Fluor 680. After circulating for 5 min, one salivary gland equivalent from Panamanian mosquitoes was inoculated i.d. into mouse ears in 15 μl PBS. Control ears were inoculated with PBS alone or were left untouched. Mice were euthanized 30 min after i.d. inoculation, and ears were scanned using the Odyssey CLx Infrared Imaging System (Licor) to quantify fluorescence of a 3300 pixel size area. Fluorescence values of steady-state control ears were subtracted from values of ears inoculated with SGE or PBS.Statistical analysisNumerical data were tested for statistically significant differences between experimental groups using unpaired parametric t-tests for flow cytometry data and DENV tissue viral load. A paired t-test was used to test for statistically significant differences between the fluorescence of the two ears of one animal injected with either PBS or SGE. Unpaired Mann-Whitney tests were used for non-parametric data, such as morbidity. Survival data were tested for statistically significant differences using the Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Experimental groups were considered significantly different at p<0.05 and are marked on graphs as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001, or non-significant (n.s.). Data were plotted and statistically analyzed using Prism 6.0 software (GraphPad).Data availabilityData deposited in the Dryad repository: http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.4rd14 [84].Supporting InformationS1 FigRelated to Fig 1, SGE does not augment dengue pathogenesis after inoculation with 106 PFU but augments pathogenesis after inoculation with 105 PFU DENV in mice that were pre-exposed to SGE.(A-C) Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 106 PFU DENV in the absence (A) or presence (B) of enhancing antibodies. DENV was inoculated alone (as in [28]) or after mixing with Ae. aegypti SGE. (A-B) Bar graphs show mean morbidity ± SEM of mice on a scale from 1 = healthy to 5 = moribund. Statistically significant differences in morbidity between the presence and absence of SGE are marked on graphs as ** for p<0.01 and *** for p<0.001 or not significant (n.s.). The presence of enhancing antibodies significantly increased disease severity in the absence (day 4, p<0.01; days 5 and 6, p<0.001; day 7, p<0.01) and presence of SGE (day 3, p<0.01; days 4, 5, and 6, p<0.001). (C) Kaplan-Meier curves showing survival of mice. No significant differences in survival existed in the presence or absence of SGE. Significant differences in survival between the presence or absence of enhancing antibodies are marked as **, p<0.01. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 8–9 mice per group. (D) Ifnar
–/–mice were pre-exposed i.d. three times with SGE or PBS at intervals of at least two weeks or were left untreated. Two weeks after the last injection, mice were infected i.d. in the presence of enhancing antibodies with 105 PFU DENV mixed with SGE. SGE-naïve controls received DENV alone or DENV mixed with SGE as in Fig 1C. The Kaplan-Meier curves show survival of mice. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.1.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigRelated to Fig 2, gating and phenotype of immune cells in the dermis.
Ifnar
–/–mice were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. (A) Contour plots showing live CD45+ hematopoietic cells in the dermis analyzed via flow cytometry in steady state or 14 h after inoculation. Starting at the second row from the top, CD11b+ cDCs were consecutively gated as MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C-, moDCs as MHCIIhi Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6C+, dermal Langerhans cells and CD103+ cDCs together as MHCII+ Langerin+, neutrophils as MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G+, monocytes as MHCII-Langerin-CD11b+ Ly6G- Ly6Chi, and MΦs as MHCIIlow/–Langerin-CD11bhi Ly6G- Ly6Clow/–SSCint-hi. (B) Histogram overlays of surface stains (filled blue) for Fcγ receptors (CD16/32) or mannose receptor (CD206) or isotype controls (dashed black line) of cell populations gated as in (A) and lymphocytes gated as MHCII-CD11b- Ly6G- FSClow SSClow in the dermis of Ifnar
–/–mice that were infected with DENV in the presence of SGE and enhancing antibodies.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigRelated to Fig 3, frequency of cell populations in the dermis.(A-C) Bar graphs summarizing mean ± SEM percentage of neutrophils (A), monocytes (B), or moDCs (C) of CD45+ cells in the dermis of mice in steady state or 14 h after i.d. inoculation of 105 PFU DENV in the presence or absence of SGE under 1° or ADE conditions. Populations were gated as in S2 Fig. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences between groups are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 FigRelated to Fig 4, frequency of MigDCs, neutrophils, and monocytes as well as number of classical DCs in LNs.Mice were inoculated i.d. with PBS or 105 PFU DENV under 1° or ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE, and skin-draining LNs were analyzed via flow cytometry after 14 h. (A) Histogram overlays of surface stains (filled blue) for chemokine receptor CCR7 or Fcγ receptors (CD16/32) or isotype controls (dashed black line) of cell populations in LNs, gated as in Fig 4. In addition, MHCII-lymphocytes that consisted mostly of T cells were gated as Ly6G- CD11c- CD11b- F4/80- MHCII-. (B-D) Bar graphs summarizing the percentage of MigDCs (B), neutrophils (C) or monocytes (D) of CD45+ cells in LNs. (E) Bar graph summarizing the number of cDCs in LNs. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 6–9 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigRelated to Fig 4, T cell activation after i.d. DENV infection.Mice were left untreated or were inoculated i.d. with 105 PFU DENV under ADE conditions in the presence or absence of SGE. Skin-draining LNs (A-B) or spleens (C-H) were analyzed via flow cytometry after 5.5 days. (A and C) Contour plots showing CD44 and CD62L expression of CD8+ CD3+ T cells. (B and D) Bar graphs summarizing percent CD44+ CD62L+ stimulated CD8+ or CD4+ CD3+ T cells in LNs (B) or spleen (D). (E) Contour plots showing CD44 expression and intracellular staining for Ki-67 of CD8+ T cells in the spleen. (F) Bar graphs summarizing percent Ki-67+ proliferating CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. (G) Contour plots showing CD8 expression and intracellular staining for IFN-γ of CD8+ T cells in the spleen after 4 h of in vitro restimulation. (H) Bar graphs summarizing percent IFN-γ expressing CD8+ or CD4+ T cells. Data were pooled from two experiments, n = 6 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as * for p<0.05, ** for p<0.01, *** for p<0.001, and **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S6 FigRelated to Fig 5, SGE disrupts endothelial barrier function when added to the basolateral or apical side of HMEC-1 monolayers.TEER of HMEC-1 monolayers grown in Transwell chambers was measured after adding the equivalent of 1 or 2 salivary glands or TNFα to basolateral (A-B) or apical compartments (C-D). TNFα was added as positive control for inducing endothelial permeability. (A and C) Graphs showing percent TEER relative to untreated control cells over time. (B and D) Bar graphs depicting percent TEER after 13 h of stimulation. Data were pooled from three experiments, n = 12 per group. Statistically significant differences are marked as **** for p<0.0001.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Transovarial transmission of mosquito-borne viruses: a systematic review

IntroductionMosquito-borne viruses (MBVs), including dengue (DENV), zika (ZIKV), and chikungunya (CHIKV), are a subset of arboviruses or arthropod-borne viruses that pose a significant risk to both animal and human health due to their worldwide spread (Tingström et al., 2016). MBVs, or moboviruses, have emerged and reemerged as a result of the increased global population growth, urbanization, expanding varieties of mosquito vectors, and easy access to global travel (Peinado et al., 2022). These viruses fall into five genera: Flavivirus which includes the dengue, zika, yellow fever, Japanese encephalitis, West Nile viruses (Flaviviridae family), Alphavirus which includes chikungunya (Togaviridae family), Orthobunyavirus, Phlebovirus (Bunyaviridae family), and Seadornavirus (Reoviridae family) (Cheng et al., 2016). Due to a lack of therapeutics or effective vaccines, mosquito-borne viral diseases remain a serious global health threat. Mosquito vectors tend to be anthropophilic and are the primary carriers of a number of viruses, including DENV, ZIKV, CHIKV, and yellow fever (Lole et al., 2022). The yellow fever mosquito (Aedes aegypti) and the Asian tiger mosquito (Ae. albopictus) are the two main vectors of these viruses. Both of the species are extremely invasive, and because of the trade and migration of humans, these are spreading throughout the world. Ae. albopictus has a wider geographic range than Ae. aegypti, which includes temperate, tropical, and subtropical habitats (Shragai et al., 2017). Aedes vectors, primarily Ae. aegypti, have drawn special attention due to their rapid spread globally (Lole et al., 2022).To maturate the fertilized eggs, mosquitoes suck human blood by biting and disseminating the virus between the human host and mosquito vector, parallel to this transmission, the virus can be transmitted directly from parents to their offspring (Yang, 2017). The transmission can therefore be of two types: Vertical Transmission (VT) and Horizontal Transmission (HT) (
Figure 1
). The VT, also known as hereditary transmission, is parental transmission from the female to its offspring, while HT is non-parental transmission, which is mostly preferred by pathogens and includes vector-borne and sexual transmission (Lequime et al., 2016). Blood-feeding invertebrate vectors mainly spread horizontally among the vertebrate host, but they can also do so vertically in the mosquito vector. When the environmental conditions are adverse for HT, VT is thought to be the alternative means for the recurrence of viruses, but its epidemiological importance remains uncertain (Lequime and Lambrechts, 2014). Both in combination are called mixed-mode transmission and is widespread among different taxa of parasites and hosts, including viruses, eukaryotes, and prokaryotes. The use of insecticide spray, the cold and dry seasons in temporal regions and tropics, respectively, can significantly limit vector density and thus, the possibilities for HT. VT provides a crucial link in the transmission cycle when the susceptible host’s density is minimal (Lequime et al., 2016). A thorough scientific study on VT is required to understand the ecology and evolution of these viruses, as epidemiology and infection control mostly depend on the route of transmission. It is possible that the frequent outbreaks of these MBVs may be due to their remarkable capacity for VT and their survival for longer periods of time. The number of females that transmit these viruses to their offspring vertically is the rate of VT, depending on a variety of determining factors, such as virus strain, mosquito species, gonotrophic cycle, blood meal, and climate, of which temperature has a significant impact, that is, the lower the temperature, the higher the infection rate. Mosquito age also affects the rate of VT in that older mosquitoes have a reduced capacity to transmit viruses (Kaavya et al., 2022). Larvae are more susceptible to infection than adult mosquitoes and this is because adult mosquitoes develop a peritrophic matrix immediately after blood feeding; therefore, viruses can cause infection only while mosquitoes are in larvae form. They typically directly infect the midgut, which increases the risk of infection (Lutomiah et al., 2007).Figure 1Different modes of transmission of mosquito-borne viruses.Transovarial Transmission (TOT) and Trans-egg Transmission (TET) are the two ways of VT through which these viruses spread. In TOT, the female germinal tissues are infected by the virus, including the oocytes, during the development stage, that is, before the fertilization of the eggs (as shown in 
Figure 2
). Trans-ovum, or TET, occurs during fertilization or during oviposition, when the egg surface is contaminated by the virus, or it could be said that the virus adheres to the surface of the egg (Sánchez-Vargas et al., 2018; Kirstein et al., 2022). It is possible that these two transmission mechanisms coexist in Aedes vectors at the same time (Lai et al., 2020). TOT is a type of VT in which the infected female mosquitoes pass on the virus to their progenies via ovaries when their eggs are laid. When environmental conditions are not favorable for mosquito development, such as during winter and dry seasons in temperate and tropical areas, TOT is believed to be the crucial mechanism for the persistence of the virus (Heath et al., 2020). Therefore, vertical transmission is the strategy for MBV survival in nature during adverse climatic conditions (Thangamani et al., 2016). It takes time for viruses to enter the bloodmeal and to integrate into the ovaries; therefore, transmission occurs only after several weeks gonotrophic cycles (Agarwal et al., 2014). Numerous studies demonstrate that after infection, the virus spreads through the hemolymph to the hemocoel and secondary tissues, including the ovaries, and for the virus to persist in the ovaries, it must endure stressful circumstances during the development of the host mosquito, that is, when it is in the larval instar, pupal, and adult stages (Agarwal et al., 2014; Kaavya et al., 2022). Not all MBVs prefer TOT; Flaviviruses, for example, favor both TOT and TET. TOT is significantly more advantageous and promising than TET and also provides more chances of viral infection in the subsequent generation (Kaavya et al., 2022). To evaluate whether TOT has taken place or not, immunocytochemical methods can be used (Kurnia et al., 2022). Numerous studies have been conducted on TOT in Aedes, with a particular emphasis on dengue and chikungunya viruses (Li et al., 2017). Cytoplasmic inheritance, which has been best understood through research on cell organelles such as mitochondria, chloroplasts, and intracellular organisms, is the primary mechanism for transovarial transmission. These cytoplasmic factors are transferred to the daughter cells in a specific sequence at the time of meiosis, and the intracellular symbionts are also successfully transmitted through this mechanism. The mechanism of TOT in mosquitos, however, is less understood (Smith and Dunn, 1991). The virus must infect mosquito germline in order for transmission to be successful. The molecular interaction begins with the attachment of virus particle to its target via receptor i.e. binding of viral surface molecule to cellular receptor of mosquito. The interaction between virus and its receptor is highly specific and, yet a virus family may share a common receptor. For the entry of virus into the target cell, lipid bilayer of cell membrane fuses with the enveloped virus and receptor-mediated endocytosis takes place for non-enveloped viruses and from there the viral genome enters into the cell cytoplasm for further transmission (Dimmock et al., 2015). Figure 2Pathway of transovarial transmission.Data sources and search strategyWe used the PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases to search for the publications discussed in this systematic review, and also the references included in relevant articles. The information about mosquito-borne viruses, diseases and their symptoms, outbreaks, and cases was gathered from the websites such as World Health Organization (WHO) (https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/chikungunya-monthly, 2023).The full-text versions of some papers were not available on PubMed, and so these were obtained from ResearchGate and through requests sent to the corresponding authors via email. The search terms “transovarial transmission”, “transmission”, “mosquito-borne viruses”, “dengue”, and “mosquito immunity” were used in different combinations when searching for publications to be discussed in this study. For each research and review article the title and abstract were scrutinized separately. The full text of only the articles with titles and abstracts that matched our topic was read. The study includes the reviews and research publications that were relevant to the subject. The most recent literature search was completed on 20 September 2023. We included only those articles in our study that describe the vertical transmission and transovarial transmission of DENV, ZIKV, and CHIKV; the articles describing horizontal transmission and viruses other than these were excluded. The references used were taken mainly from the papers published after the year 2000, with the exception of a few.ResultsA total of 2,391 articles were found through the manual and electronic searches, and after eliminating duplicates and evaluating the titles and abstracts, 123 studies were selected for full-text review. After further screening, 60 articles were included in this systematic review (
Figure 3
).Figure 3A flow diagram of the literature search.Zika virusZIKV, belong to the Flavivirdae family, contains single-stranded and positive-sense RNA and causes zika disease (Dahiya et al., 2022). Ae. aegypti is the primary vector for this disease. ZIKV has two cycles: the first is the sylvatic cycle (occurring between non-human primates and wild-type mosquitoes) and the second is the urban cycle (occurring between local mosquitoes and humans). Headache, fever, joint pain, meningoencephalitis, myelitis, myalgia, maculopapular rash, and microcephaly are the major symptoms of ZIKV. (Dahiya et al., 2023; Aliota et al., 2016a). As reported by Kendra et al., following ZIKV infection, the virus multiplies and penetrates the placental barrier during pregnancy. ZIKV causes fetal microcephaly through vertical transmission (Quicke et al., 2016),. ZIKV is well known throughout the world due to the fatal neurological disorders it can cause, including Guillain–Barré syndrome (Lai et al., 2020). Although 80% of patients are asymptomatic, only a small proportion show clinical symptoms (Blagrove et al., 2020). It has been confirmed experimentally that Ae. aegypti is a highly efficient and competent vector of ZIKV. However, there is evidence that different species of mosquito have different competencies as vectors of this virus. The first strain (MR766) of zika virus was isolated from rhesus macaque monkey from the zika forest of Uganda in 1947, and in 1950 the first human infection by zika was reported in Africa (Ezzati-Tabrizi et al., 2013). Throughout Asia and Africa, cases of zika were frequently detected from 1960 to 1980, and from February 2016 to November 2016, zika-related microcephaly was declared a public health emergency of international concern by the WHO (WHO, 2022a). In India, the zika virus was first reported in 2017, and reemerged in 2021. As of December 2022, zika virus has been reported in 89 countries and territories (WHO, 2022a). Studies have confirmed that ZIKV can be transmitted by Ae. albopictus and Ae. aegypti via eggs, that is, through TOT (Li et al., 2017). An immunohistochemistry (IHC) study provides the first indication of ZIKV location, demonstrating that TOT is more effective than TET. The germarium gets infected when ZIKV reaches the ovary and a new follicle emerges from the infected germarium and grows to maturity in each consecutive gonotrophic cycle, which causes the virus to replicate within the developing embryo and be vertically transmitted. A severe infection of ZIKV has no pathological effect on the ovaries, oviposition, or ovarian development, but has a deleterious impact on oogenesis, which means it reduces the number of eggs formed in the ovaries (Lai et al., 2020).Dengue virusDengue viruses are positive-sense, ssRNA Flaviviruses ~11 kb in length that belong to the family Flaviviridae (Joshi et al., 2002). Female Ae. aegypti mosquitoes are the main dengue-transmitting vectors, and the disease is caused by four antigenically diverse serotypes (DENV-1-DENV-4) (Guedes et al., 2010) that share a common epidemiology and a comparable pattern of disease in humans (Gubler, 2002). Dengue viruses are globally endemic and spread in tropical and subtropical regions (Gubler, 2002). The patient may or may not show symptoms; in the case of symptomatic dengue, severe fever (up to 104°C), headache, nausea, rash, pain, aches, and leucopenia can be seen. It is very likely that the persistence of the dengue virus is owing to cases of asymptomatic illness and travel by humans (Grunnill and Boots, 2016). The first ever dengue transmission was reported in Afghanistan, but local transmission was first seen in France and Croatia in 2010. Currently, the disease is endemic in approximately 100 countries in the WHO region of almost every continent. Asia accounts for ~70% of the global disease burden, and according to an estimate, an average of 390 million dengue cases have been reported globally every year, with the largest number of cases reported in 2019. Dengue continues to affect Brazil, Colombia, Cook Islands, Fiji, India, Kenya, Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Réunion, and Vietnam as of 2021 (WHO, 2022a). In 1983, Rosen et al. demonstrated the TOT in all four dengue virus serotypes in Ae. albopictus vectors and found that the rate of transmission in all serotypes was different, with DENV-1 generally having the highest rate, and DENV-3 having the lowest rate (Rosen et al., 1983). Ae. albopictus has a higher transmission rate for DENV than has Ae. aegypti (Lequime et al., 2016). According to a study, it has been shown that dengue virus can be orally spread by transovarially infected female mosquitoes. Their study also revealed that after the incubation of several, when eggs are obtained from infected mosquitoes, the rate of vertical transmission increases (Joshi et al., 2002). The detection of DENV in field-collected mosquito larvae and adult male mosquitoes indicates that males may contribute to the persistence of DENV in nature (Sánchez-Vargas et al., 2018). The cause of DENV outbreaks is the TOT because of the endurance of the virus between the period of epidemics (Saepudin et al., 2022). Kurnia et al. have demonstrated the TOT in Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus (Kurnia et al., 2022). A relatively lower rate of TOT has been found in Ae. aegypti (Yang, 2017). It has been proposed that TOT may have a potential impact on the epidemiology of dengue, and it is considered a key mechanism for the persistency of the virus in the vector during inter-epidemics. Studies have revealed that both climatic variables, such as temperature, humidity, and rainfall, and non-climatic variables, such as herd immunity, have an influence on the dynamics of DENV transmission, and that climatic factors are the key predictor of dengue outbreaks (Thongrungkiat et al., 2011).ChikungunyaCHIKV is an Alphavirus that belongs to the Togaviridiae family and causes chikungunya, a mosquito-borne infectious disease. Its viral genome consists of approximately 11.8 kb long, linear, positive-sense, single-stranded RNA molecules. The illness is transmitted through the bite of infected Aedes mosquitoes (Sudeep and Parashar, 2008). Approximately 85% of patients exhibit symptoms such as high fever, acute joint pain, severe arthralagia, rash, headache, and photophobia, and 30%–40% of infected individuals experience chronic joint illness that can last for weeks, months, or years after the initial infection (Shragai et al., 2017). The first CHIKV epidemics was originally recorded between 1952 and 1953 in Tanzania. The first instance in Asia occurred in Bangkok in 1958. In India the first case was found in Kolkata in 1963, and CHIKV reappeared in 2005 (Sudeep and Parashar, 2008). It has now been reported in approximately 110 countries all over the world (WHO, 2022b). According to a recent report by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), as of 23 August 2023, 3,20,000 cases and 340 deaths were reported worldwide, with the largest number of (2,09,489) cases reported in Brazil and the largest number of deaths (271) reported in Paraguay (ECDC, 2023). According to Mourya’s 1987 report, there is no evidence of the TOT of CHIKV by Ae. albopictus. Zytoon tested the possibility of TOT using CHIKV (African strain), Ae. albopictus (Miki strain), and microfilariae to evaluate the feasibility of the TOT of the virus and their findings showed that Ae. albopictus has a limited ability to spread CHIKV through TOT (Zytoon et al., 1993). The large number of CHIKV outbreaks in Réunion throughout 2005, in the Kerala state of India and in Italy in 2007, in the Guangdong province of China in 2010, and in France between 2010 and 2014 is due to the mutation of the CHIKV envelope protein E1 (E1-A226V), a mutant virus strain that can spread throughout mosquito populations via TOT because male offspring can pass the virus through mating to females that are uninfected (Wang et al., 2022). The mechanism that causes CHIKV to be more prevalent during unfavorable times, particularly in the winter, however, is unknown (Agarwal et al., 2014).Factors affecting transmissionThe importance of the interaction between the vector and virus for effective TOT has been demonstrated by numerous studies, which tend to suggest that TOT is the consequence of convergent evolution and that environmental ecology puts immense stress on viruses to evolve to facilitate TOT (Bergren and Kading, 2018). The central approach for managing arbovirus disease is vector control measures, hence there is a need to understand how arboviruses infect competent mosquito vectors and develop disease, various factors that affect the viral transmission in the mosquito vector and probable mechanism to escape antiviral barriers. There are two types of factors affecting viral transmission namely intrinsic and extrinsic factors. Intrinsic factors include those affecting the transmission process from within the body, such as midgut escape barrier (MEB), midgut infection barrier (MIB), salivary gland infection barrier (SGIB), salivary gland escape barrier (SGEB) (Franz et al., 2015). Extrinsic factors include temperature, humidity, rainfall etc. Mosquitoes are poikilotherms and their body temperature fluctuates significantly with fluctuation in the surrounding environment and the biological traits of mosquitoes, such as their fecundity and survival rate, in addition to their interactions with mosquito-borne viruses, are greatly influenced by temperature (Shragai et al., 2017; Jian et al., 2023). When the external temperature is low, the virus may not have sufficient time to replicate, penetrate the salivary gland, and become pathogenic within the vector’s lifespan, which indicates that an appropriate threshold temperature is critical for TOT (Blagrove et al., 2020). Carrington reported that there is a positive correlation between temperature and fertility in Ae. albopictus, that is, the number of eggs and the transmission rate increase as the temperature rises (Carrington et al., 2013). Limited virus invasion and lower infection rate are caused by a low temperature, which lessens the virus’s capacity to penetrate the mosquito midgut barrier (Jian et al., 2023). These viruses persist throughout the year, while the highest peaks for infections caused by mosquito populations tend to correspond with periods of higher rainfall and humidity conditions (Heath et al., 2020). It is commonly seen that in densely populated areas, the rate of virus transmission is usually higher than in areas with fewer human inhabitants. In addition, the nutrition obtained by the viruses can be a determining factor for their successful transmission (Kramer and Ciota, 2015).Mosquito antiviral defense mechanismIn the last 10 years, comprehensive genome sequencing and annotation have greatly contributed to the rapid advancement of our understanding of the mosquito immune system (Cheng et al., 2016). After a mosquito ingests the virus-infected blood meal from an infected host, the virus enters its midgut epithelium and then travels to the hemocoel and then to secondary organs, including the salivary gland (Franz et al., 2015). For the virus to be transmitted to its subsequent host, it needs to travel to the salivary gland (Chauhan et al., 2012). Mosquitoes have only innate immune system as their defense machinery, which is activated by viral infection, causing the antiviral response-related gene to be transcribed (Lee et al., 2019). The immune system of mosquitoes has two correlated responses: cellular and humoral defense responses. These two act together to defend the mosquito from a wide range of pathogens (Satyavathi et al., 2014). Various pathways for the mosquito immune system are schematically shown in 
Figure 4
.Figure 4Flow chart showing various mechanisms of the mosquito innate immune system.RNA interference pathwayRNA interference (RNAi) is the central antiviral mechanism in insects, particularly in controlling virus infection through the degradation of RNA, also known as RNA silencing (Lee et al., 2019). The major event of this pathway is the degradation of long viral double-stranded RNA into small RNAs. The small RNAs are of three types (i) small interfering RNA (siRNA), (ii) microRNA (miRNA), and (iii) PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) (Cheng et al., 2016). When the mosquito genome replicates, it produces an intermediate double-stranded RNA, which binds to the Dicer-2-R2D2 complex. This complex comprises a RNase III enzyme (Dicer-2) and a protein attached to it (R2D2); Dicer-2 cleaves the dsRNA and produces siRNA (21–23 nucleotides). Subsequently, siRNA further binds to the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), and one of the strands of dsRNA is degraded. The RNA then becomes single stranded and act as a guide strand for the detection and degradation of the viral RNA with the help of argonaute-2 in a specific sequence. (Donald et al., 2012). If the RNAi pathway is impaired or silenced, the viral replication and dissemination during DENV-2 infection increases, indicating its significance as an antiviral defense mechanism (Lee et al., 2019). By silencing the genes linked to fertility, behavior pattern, survival, and vector status in mosquitoes, RNAi offered fresh insights into fundamental research that may be used to lessen the burden of diseases spread to humans by mosquitoes (Yadav et al., 2023).JAK-STAT pathwayThe mosquito has cytokine receptor Domeless (Dome) and tyrosine kinase Hopscotch (Hop), these act together and activate the JAK-STAT pathway (Souza-Neto et al., 2009). In this pathway, the ligand binds to the dome and a conformational shift occurs, which leads to the self-phosphorylation of Hop (JAK). The activated Hop then phosphorylates the Dome with the formation of a docking site for cytosolic STAT. STAT then binds to the Dome–Hop complex, which undergoes phosphorylation. The phosphorylated STAT first dimerizes and then moves to the nucleus; this activates the transcription of specific effector genes with antiviral immune roles (Souza-Neto et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2019). Activating JAK-STAT pathway, before or just after the DENV infection could severely limit viral replication, possibly to the point where DENV transmission would be negatively impacted. Functional and reverse genetic studies show that JAK-STAT pathway enhances resistance to DENV serotypes (DENV2 and DENV4) in Ae. aegypti but, when it came to two other significant arboviral diseases, chikungunya and zika, the pathway activation did not give resistance. Functional and reverse genetic studies show that the JAK-STAT pathway enhances resistance to DENV and ZIKV in Ae. aegypti (Angleró-Rodríguez et al., 2017). Most studies on the JAK-STAT pathway in mosquito immunity have focused on dengue infection, but pathway activation in response to other viruses and the downstream process may vary for each virus. The overexpression of Hop by transgenic bacteria in the gut was observed to reduce the severity of DENV infection instantly, but for ZIKV, the reduction in infection severity was seen on day 7, and for CHIKV, this pathway was not at all effective (Jupatanakul et al., 2017).DELTA–NOTCH signaling pathwayThis pathway is important for stem cell maintenance, embryonic development, and adult tissue renewal, and it also reduces the replication of DENV in Ae. aegypti (Kopan and Ilagan, 2009). The signaling is initiated when the delta ligand binds to the notch transmembrane receptor and proteolysis occurs. After this, an active fragment called the notch intracellular domain, which activates the downstream signaling genes in the nucleus, is released (Lee et al., 2019). During DENV infection, the components of this pathway are upregulated in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (Serrato-Salas et al., 2018). The activation of this signaling system results in endoreplication, a process in which cells perform several rounds of DNA replication without mitosis to greatly increase the genomic DNA content of the cells. Endoreplication induction enhanced the number of gene transcripts involved in viral spread control (Serrato-Salas et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019).TOLL and IMD pathwayPathogens activate both the TOLL and IMD pathways by binding pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) to the host’s pattern recognition receptor (PRRs), resulting in a cascade of events that engage the immune AMP producing effector genes (Yu et al., 2020). The cytokine Spatzle (Spz), a ligand that binds to the Toll transmembrane receptor, is cleaved to begin the Toll pathway. Activated Toll initiates signaling via the Toll-associated adaptor proteins MyD88, Tube, and Pelle kinase. Cactus, the antagonist of the Toll pathway, is then phosphorylated and undergoes proteasomal degradation, which results in the movement of the transcription factor Relish 1 from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, binding to kB motifs on the promoters of several AMPs genes, including Diptericin and Cecropin, which are effective against fungi and Gram-positive bacteria (Lee et al., 2019; Yu et al., 2020). When the IMD pathway is activated, Caspar, a negative regulator, is degraded. This causes Relish 2 (Rel2) to be translocated to the nucleus, where it triggers the transcription of AMPs (Xi et al., 2008). During the DENV infection of Ae. aegypti, the expression of the Toll pathway genes (GNBP, Toll5A, and MYD88) was elevated in the salivary gland. The silencing of MYD88 resulted in a modest rise in the severity of DENV infection in the intestine (Luplertlop et al., 2011).Cell-mediated immune responseHemocytes are cells that circulate inside the hemolymph and are susceptible to viral infections such as DENV, SINV, and WNV (Lee et al., 2019). The hemocyte-mediated immune response is rapid and includes pattern recognition; phagocytosis (haemocyte cells recognize the intruding pathogen, engulf, and destroy it intracellularly) (Lamprou et al., 2007); nodulation (a large number of microbes is entrapped by the accumulation of haemocytes) (Satyavathi et al., 2014); melanization (production of melanin for the encapsulation of invading pathogens); and the synthesis of antimicrobial peptides and initiation of signaling cascades for cytotoxic effectors to eradicate infection (Christensen et al., 2005).The fat body of an insect is an organ that acts similarly to adipocytes and liver in mammals. According to one recent study, the JAK-STAT pathway is activated in the fat body of Ae. aegypti during dengue virus infection, but this pattern was not observed for CHIKV and ZIKV. This means that different viruses have different responses to the JAK-STAT pathway (Jupatanakul et al., 2017). Although insect antiviral immune responses are triggered during viral infections, viruses are not entirely eradicated from the mosquitoes. Instead, a persistent infection develops in mosquitoes, making them effective carriers for viral illnesses at little to no cost to the host. However, little is known about how viruses persistently infect mosquitoes. Recent research has shown that virus-derived DNA (vDNA) produced during viral infection is crucial for mosquito survival and chronic infection (Poirier et al., 2018).The majority of viruses spread by mosquitoes are RNA viruses, and after infection, the host cell’s reverse transcriptase converts viral RNA, or truncated copies of the viral genome, known as defective viral genomes (DVGs), into vDNA, to stop viral replication. The vDNAs then activate the RNAi apparatus. When exposed to a cognate virus, vDNA is sufficient to create siRNAs that cause an antiviral response. In addition, suppressing vDNA production makes individuals incredibly vulnerable to viral infections (Poirier et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2019).Control strategiesThe use of mosquito nets and insecticides to reduce human–vector interaction is among the vector control strategies that are largely used in preventing and treating the diseases spread by mosquitoes (Lee et al., 2019). In spite of these traditional methods, there is a need for new interventions to control the transmission of vector-borne diseases. The Vector Control Advisory Group (VCAG) assist the WHO in creating public health policy on new tools and techniques. Insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) that can kill or sterilize mosquitoes, such as the pyrethroid–piperonyl butoxide net and the pyrethroid–chlorfenapyr net, can be used, in addition to spatial repellents (volatile chemicals), and vector traps such as adulticidal oviposition traps that attract adult mosquitoes to lay their eggs in traps and larvicidal traps to kill their larvae (WHO VCAG). Larval control, specifically through the use of microbial and chemical larvicides, is the primary way of viral outbreak control due to mosquitos, particularly Ae. aegypti (Achee et al., 2019). The two innovative vector control methods currently in use are genetically modified and non-genetically modified. Genetic strategies targeting Aedes vector are the most advanced methods for the prevention of dengue and chikungunya transmission. Genetically modified strategies include the Release of insects carrying dominant lethal (RIDL) genes and gene drive system. In RIDL technology, dominantly inherited lethal gene is artificially inserted into the genome of mosquito, causing 97% death of heterozygous F1 progeny. CRISPR-Cas9 technology is used in the gene drive strategies in order to increase the frequency of desired traits in the succeeding generations (WHO VCAG). The genomes of various mosquito species such as An. stephensi, Ae. aegypti, Cx. quinquefasciatus, and Cx. pipiens have recently been modified using the effective technology of CRISPR/Cas9-based gene editing (Lee et al., 2019). Nongenetically modified strategies include Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) and Wolbachia-centred biopesticide strategies. SIT has been effectively employed to control a variety of disease vectors for many years. In this technique, males of target species are previously sterilized by irradiation treatment and then released to fight with wild males for females to breed. This technique have the ability to decrease the wild population and possibly result in localized eradication if they are repeated over an extended period of time (Lee et al., 2019). With the aim of lowering the reproductive success of and viral capacity in the mosquito population, approaches such as releasing Wolbachia-infected mosquitoes and genetically engineered mosquitoes into native mosquito populations have been used over the past 10 years (Lee et al., 2019). Due to a lack of approved vaccines and efficient antiviral treatments, however, viruses have been persistently spreading. To combat this problem, the intracellular bacterium, Wolbachia, (inherited maternally and present in various insect species such as mosquitoes, ants, bees, butterflies, and beetles) can be introduced in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes for arbovirus control and prevention. In fact, Wolbachia biocontrol could be utilized against the four viruses discussed in this study, namely CHIKV, DENV, YFV, and now ZIKV; however, it has not been determined if ZIKV can infect, spread, and be transmitted by Wolbachia-infected Ae. aegypti (Aliota et al., 2016a). Wolbachia strains of fruit fly in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes can shorten the lifespan of mosquitoes, interfere with mosquito reproduction, and can affect the replication of viruses through invasion (Achee et al., 2019).Some strains of Wolbachia bacteria reduce the replication virus and mosquito lifespan concurrently (Aliota et al., 2016b). The strains wMel and wMelPop from Drosophila melanogaster and wAlbB from Ae. albopictus strains of Wolbachia have been used in Ae. aegypti; of these, wMel has the potential to reduce the vectorial capacity of Ae. aegypti for both DENV and CHIKV, and favorable results have also been found recently in ZIKV (Achee et al., 2019). New mosquito strategies may be made possible by understanding the typical viruses and gut microbes that invade reproductive organs and go through VT (Kaavya et al., 2022). The genomes of various mosquito species, such as Anopheles stephensi, Ae. aegypti, Culex quinquefasciatus, and Culex pipiens have recently been modified using the effective technology of gene editing based on CRISPR–Cas9 (Lee et al., 2019).ConclusionsMBVs represent a serious public health threat worldwide due to their global prevalence. They can be transmitted vertically in mosquito vectors via transovarial transmission, that is, through the ovaries, in order to survive in adverse conditions. Many studies have been conducted on TOT in Aedes with particular emphasis on DENV and CHIKV. The transmission gets established during the second gonotrophic cycle, and it eventually declines after further transmission. We studied the factors influencing the transmission including temperature, humidity, midgut and salivary gland escape and infection barriers. Mosquito have some antiviral cellular and humoral defense mechanisms through which it can protect itself from the viral infection. Along with the traditional insecticide treated nets and chemical methods of vector control, there is a need to extend this approach to new techniques of gentic and non-genetic modification of vectors for their management. The development of novel strategies to eradicate diseases spread by mosquitoes was made possible by the employment of gut bacteria particularly Wolbachia in paratransgenic approach. Although work is being done for these new strategies there is not sufficient eradication of diseases caused by these vectors. The current study enhances the understanding of transovarial transmission of Alphavirus and Flavivirus in Aedes vectors and also sheds light on the factors affecting transmission and vector control strategies. Additional research is needed to understand the molecular mechanism of TOT. In addition, if we are to learn more about viral prevalence and stability in challenging environmental circumstances, more research is required.Author contributionsSJ: Conceptualization, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. DK: Conceptualization, Investigation, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. MY: Resources, Writing – review & editing. ND: Resources, Writing – review & editing. NS: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.


Title: Tick-Borne Transmission of Murine Gammaherpesvirus 68

IntroductionAlthough all vertebrates are probably infected with at least one herpesvirus species, herpesviruses are believed not to infect arthropods, and vector-mediated transmission of herpesviruses is unreported hitherto (King et al., 2011). Generally, the natural host range of individual herpesviruses is very restricted and they are highly adapted to their hosts. Most herpesviruses establish a systemic infection following a cell-associated viremia during primary infection. Severe infection is usually observed only in the very young, the fetus, the immunocompromised, or following infection of an alternative host. The key to survival of herpesviruses is their ability to establish life-long latent infections (Roizman and Pellett, 2001; Adler et al., 2017). Members of the subfamily Gammaherpesvirinae, which includes murid herpesvirus 4 (MuHV-4, more commonly known as murine gammaherpesvirus 68, MHV68) in the genus Rhadinovirus, establish latent infections in lymphocytes or lymphoid tissue. Persistent human gammaherpesvirus infection is associated with the development of malignancies such as Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease, and Kaposi's sarcoma (Mesri et al., 2014). Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) are host (human)-specific and therefore lack a tractable in vivo infection model (Cieniewicz et al., 2016; Habison et al., 2017). The discovery of MHV68 provided what is now a much studied laboratory model for investigating virus reactivation from latency as well as host mechanisms of immune control, and the genetic basis of viral fitness in different cell types and tissues (Rajčáni and Kúdelová, 2007; Sattler et al., 2016).MHV68 was originally isolated from the bank vole Myodes glareolus (formerly Clethrionomys glareolus) during a study on the ecology of arboviruses in Slovakia (Blaskovic et al., 1980). Four other herpesviruses were isolated at the same time, two from bank voles and two from the yellow-necked field mouse Apodemus flavicollis. At least eight isolates of MHV68 have been recorded (Mistríková et al., 2000a). It has been speculated this group of viruses is geographically widespread and may occur throughout the mouse and vole subfamilies although a distinct wood mouse herpesvirus (classified as MuHV-7) has been isolated from Apodemus sylvaticus and bank voles, while a different gammaherpesvirus infects house mice, Mus musculus (Nash et al., 2001; Ehlers et al., 2007; Hughes et al., 2010a).Little is known of the natural history of MHV68 (Nash et al., 2001; Telfer et al., 2007; Knowles et al., 2012). Antibodies against MHV68 have been detected in sera of at least 13 different mammalian species including large mammals (e.g., deer, sheep) that share the biotope of infected rodents (Mistríková et al., 2000a,b). Neutralizing antibodies to MHV68 have also been detected in humans but they are considered to reflect antigenic cross-reactions with human gammaherpesviruses (Hricová and Mistríková, 2007). Experimental infection with MHV68 is typically via the respiratory route although no evidence was found for air-borne or contact transmission between either female bank voles or female laboratory mice in experimental studies (François et al., 2010). However, transmission has been demonstrated experimentally in laboratory mice through breast milk to offspring and sexually from females to males (Raslova et al., 2001; François et al., 2013; Zeippen et al., 2017). The significance of these findings for the transmission cycle needs to be determined especially as the pathogenesis of MHV68 in natural rodent hosts differs from laboratory mice (François et al., 2010; Hughes et al., 2010b).Recently published reports of infectious MHV68 in the salivary glands, intestines and ovaries of wild caught questing Dermacentor reticulatus adult ticks, and MHV68 DNA detection in nymphs of Ixodes ricinus ticks infesting green lizards (Lacerta viridis) and in questing adult Haemaphysalis concinna, raise the question of whether ticks can act as transmission vectors of MHV68 (Ficová et al., 2011; Kúdelová et al., 2015; Vrbová et al., 2016). In Europe, rodents are important hosts for immature stages of I. ricinus and adult D. reticulatus, vectors of human pathogens such as tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) and the Lyme disease spirochete, Borrelia burgdorferi. These tick-borne pathogens circulate among small rodents and larger mammals through horizontal transmission from infected tick to uninfected vertebrate host and vice versa. They replicate in both vertebrates and ticks, demonstrating biological transmission, which distinguishes them from mechanically transmitted pathogens that are carried, for example, on the mouthparts of insect vectors (Kuno and Chang, 2005).To test whether ticks can act as vectors of MHV68, we determined the ability of I. ricinus to acquire and subsequently transmit MHV68 using the laboratory mouse as the vertebrate host. First, we established whether MHV68 is transmitted by I. ricinus following simple injection of ticks with virus and then allowing the ticks to feed on uninfected mice. Second, we tested whether MHV68 can be transmitted from an infected mouse to uninfected ticks, survive trans-stadially, and subsequently be transmitted by the molted ticks. Third, we examined whether MHV68 can be transmitted vertically from one tick generation to the next by injecting female ticks with MHV68, allowing them to feed and lay eggs, feeding the emergent F1 larvae on uninfected mice, and then testing the ability of the F1 nymphs and F1 adults to transmit the virus when feeding on uninfected mice. The results provided evidence of MHV68 trans-stadial survival in ticks (with some pathogenesis), effective tick-borne virus transmission to uninfected mice, efficient vertical transmission of MHV68 to F1 ticks, and the remarkable ability of MHV68 to survive >500 days from infected adult females through to the subsequent F1 adult tick population. The experimental results together with published data on detection of MHV68 in field caught ticks and serological evidence of infection of a variety of mammals, strongly suggest that MHV68 is circulating in nature between mammals and ticks, although they do not preclude additional direct routes of transmission between rodents.Materials and methodsEthics statementAll animals used in this study were housed and handled according to the statute of the Slovak Republic (No. 23/2009) for care of experimental animals. The protocol for using ticks and mice was approved by the State Veterinary and Food Administration of the Slovak Republic (Permit Number: 1018/09-221, 292/16-221c).VirusMHV68 originally isolated from M. glareolus (Blaskovic et al., 1980) was kindly provided by Prof. Mistríková (Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia). MHV68 was subsequently twice plaque-purified to obtain clone f2.6 as described previously (Macáková et al., 2003). Virus was propagated and titrated using Baby hamster kidney (BHK-21) fibroblasts (ATCC number: CCL-10) as described previously (Raslova et al., 2001). Cell cultures were maintained in Dulbecco's Minimum Essential Medium (Gibco) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM glutamine (Invitrogen) and penicillin–streptomycin–amphothericin (Cambrex) at 37°C.Tick maintenanceI. ricinus originated from ticks collected by dragging the vegetation in areas around Bratislava known to be free of TBEV. The ticks have been maintained as a colony at the Institute of Zoology for several generations by feeding on rabbits and mice. Non-feeding ticks are kept in a desiccator containing a saturated solution of MgSO4, at 23 ± 3°C, 90–95% RH, on a light:dark cycle of 16:8 h.Injection of ticks with MHV68Hollow glass needles with a microscopic tip were prepared from borosilicate glass capillary tubes (O.D.: 1.5 mm, I.D.: 0.86 mm, 10 cm length) by means of a P-30 Micropipette puller (Sutter Instrument Company, USA). Unfed female ticks were then microinjected with 1.25 × 104 PFU of MHV68 (0.5 μl) under a stereo zoom microscope (Wild M 400, Wild Heerbrugg AG, Switzerland) through the coxal plate of the second pair of legs using a digital microinjector ™ system (MINJ-D-CE; Tritech Research, Inc.; USA). Clean nitrogen served as a gas source to produce an injection pressure of 20 psi (= app. 1.38 bar). The injection interval was set to 1.0 s. Following injection, the ticks were placed into a desiccator and incubated at room temperature.Infection of animalsFor virus transmission studies, outbred ICR (Institute of Cancer Research) female mice, 6–8 weeks of age, were used. Mice were lightly anesthetized with halothane and exposed intranasally to 2 × 105 PFU MHV68 in 25 μl of sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The virus was inoculated onto the external nares with a micropipette and the animal observed to ensure the drop containing the virus was inhaled. The animals were then transferred to a different room where they were housed individually using the mouse Blue Line IVC Sealsafe caging system (TECNIPLAST, Italy) to avoid the possibility of air-borne transmission of infection.Tick infestation of miceFive days post exposure of mice to MHV68, each animal was infested with uninfected larvae (70–100 larvae/mouse) or nymphs (20 nymphs/mouse). Immature stages of ticks were retained on animals within a short piece of neoprene tube with the open end covered in nylon gauze to prevent the ticks from escaping. Groups of adult ticks, two females and two males (to promote female tick feeding), were placed in plastic chambers. Feeding chambers were attached to the back of mice using a non-irritating, adhesive latex glue, Pritt-Copydex (Henkel). Ticks were allowed to feed to repletion. Naturally detached engorged ticks were recovered twice daily from the feeding chambers of the infested animals and removed to a desiccator at room temperature and 90–95% relative humidity to allow molting. Engorged ticks were maintained for development into nymphs or adults for use in the study.Immunofluorescence assay to detect infectious virus cultured from ticksFour adult female ticks, 120 days after injection with MHV68, and two control uninfected ticks were cleansed several times in PBS containing antibiotics, and then individually homogenized using a sterile mortar under sterile conditions not used for virus manipulation. The homogenate of each individual tick was clarified by centrifugation (2 min at 10,000 × g) and suspended in cultivation medium. Supernatant of each tick was used for determination of the presence of live virus by replication in a mammalian cell line. BHK-21 cells were grown in L-15 medium, supplemented with 10% FBS, and 1% antibiotic/antimycotic solution (Sigma). Cells were inoculated onto glass coverslips, 1.6 × 105 cells per well in six-well plates. After 24 h incubation, the media were exchanged and cells were incubated for 90 min in fresh cultivation medium containing the homogenized tick supernatant. Each coverslip culture was inoculated with supernatant derived from a single tick. Media were exchanged again and cells were cultivated in fresh media for 96 h. After washing twice in PBS, the cells were fixed in acetone (−20°C) for 5 min and incubated in blocking buffer (1% BSA in PBS) for 30 min. Cells were then incubated in rabbit anti-MHV68 polyclonal antibody (dilution 1:200 in PBS + 1% BSA, 60 min), kindly provided by Dr. Rajčáni, Institute of Virology SAS (Rajcáni et al., 1985). After three washes with PBS + 0.2% Tween-20, cells were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit IgG antibody (Invitrogen, USA) (dilution 1:2,000 in PBS + 1% BSA) for 60 min. Finally, the cells were washed three times in PBS. Coverslips were mounted in mounting medium and cells were examined under a fluorescence microscope.Immunofluorescence assay to detect virus in tick tissuesTwo female I. ricinus ticks (F1 generation) partially fed on uninfected mice for 4 days were examined for viral antigen. Ticks were opened at the posterior part of their opisthosoma using a razor blade, embedded in tissue freezing medium OCT (Leica Biosystem, Germany), snap-frozen and stored at −80°C until examination. Semi-thin sections (6 mm) were obtained using a cryostat (Leica, Germany), collected on Superfrost plus microscope slides (Menzel-Gläser, Thermo Scientific), air dried and stored at −80°C. Sections were fixed and permeabilized with ice cold acetone for 10 min, air dried and rinsed three times in PBS for 5 min each. To reduce background, slides were incubated in blocking buffer (PBS/1% BSA/0.05% Tween20) for 1 h at RT. After washing in PBS/Tween 20, sections were incubated with rabbit anti-MHV68 polyclonal antibody (dilution 1:200 in PBS + 1% BSA, 60 min) kindly provided by Dr Rajčáni, Institute of Virology SAS (Rajcáni et al., 1985) for 1 h at 37°C. To test for nonspecific binding to immunoglobulin binding proteins in tick salivary glands, we used rabbit polyclonal serum against PB1-F2 protein of influenza virus A (H1N1) (kindly provided by Department of Orthomyxoviruses of Institute of Virology SAS) as a negative control. Goat anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with Alexa 488 (Invitrogen) was used as a secondary antibody. The sections were examined under fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 40 CFL).Isolation of total DNA from ticks and murine samplesSalivary glands of ticks examined for the presence of MHV68 DNA were dissected and their total DNA was isolated using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, USA) as described previously (Kúdelová et al., 2015). DNA content in samples was measured using a spectrophotometer and then immediately assayed by nested PCR. Mice were tested for the presence of MHV68 DNA in their blood, lung, and spleen at 15 days post-infestation. Blood samples of 0.2–0.5 ml were collected from the orbital sinus of each halothane-anesthetized mouse. DNA from the blood was isolated using QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (Qiagen, USA). DNA from murine lung (25 mg) and spleen (25 mg) tissue collected at 15 days post-infestation was isolated using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, USA) and measured as above.Isolation of total RNA from murine blood, lung, and spleen samplesSamples of 100 μl blood, 25 mg lung tissue, and 25 mg spleen tissue were processed. Total RNA from murine blood was isolated using Spin Column total RNA mini preps Super kit (Bio Basic) and from murine spleen and lungs using TRI-Reagent (Sigma) following the manufacturer's instructions. Prior to testing, 1.5–2 μg total RNA sample was treated with 1 U DNase I (RNase-free) (Novagen) in the presence of 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.3), 75 mM KCl, 15 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM DTT reaction buffer for 60 min and the treatment was terminated by the addition of 1 μl 25 mM EDTA and heat-inactivation at 65°C for 15 min. An aliquot of DNase I-treated RNA of each sample was tested by nested PCR to confirm there was no viral DNA contamination in the RNA samples.Detection of MHV68 by nested PCR assayMHV68 presence was examined in tick salivary glands and blood, lungs, and spleen of mice by nested PCR developed by Kúdelová et al. (2015) with some modifications. Briefly, DNA purified from tick salivary glands (1.5 μg), or from murine blood, lungs, or spleen (100 ng), was used to amplify MHV68 genomic ORF (open reading frame) 50 gene of MHV68 (in the virus genome from 61,907 to 69,373 nt) encoding the Replication and Transcription Activator (Rta) (Acc. No. AF105037).Outer primers of the first PCR (ORF50F1: 5′-AACTGGAACTCTTCTGTGGC-3′ and ORF50R1: 5′-GGCCGCAGACATTTAATGAC-3′) generated a 586-bp product (Kúdelová et al., 2015). The reaction mixture contained 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.1% Triton X-100, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.3 mM nucleotides, 0.3 mM of each primer, and 1 U of GoTaq polymerase (Promega) in a 25-μl total volume. PCR program was as follows: 45 cycles of 94°C for 30 s, 60°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s, followed by extension at 72°C for 5 min. The second round of PCR was performed using 1–3 μl of the first-round PCR as a template in the same reaction mixture except that inner PCR primers were used (ORF50F2: 5′-CCCCAATGGTTCATAAGTGG-3′ and ORF50R2: 5′-ATCAGCACGCCATCAACATC-3′), which generated a 382-bp product. The conditions for the nested PCR were identical except that 30 cycles were used.Second-round PCR products were resolved by SYBR Green staining (BioRad) on 1% agarose gels. Molecular weights of PCR products were estimated by comparison with HyperLadderI (Bioline) and/or GeneRuler™ 100 bp Plus DNA ladder (Fermentas). The MHV68 BAC DNA, kindly provided by Prof. Ulrich H. Koszinowski (Adler et al., 2000), was used to check the sensitivity of the nested PCR for detection of MHV68 DNA in the presence of different amounts of template. MHV68 BAC DNA was quantified spectrophotometrically and diluted in mouse liver DNA (5 mg/ml) in TE buffer. Either 1.5 μg or 100 ng total nucleic acid from serial 10-fold dilutions of MHV68 BAC DNA (from 106 to 0.1 copies) in mouse liver DNA were analyzed by nested PCR; MHV68 BAC DNA served as a positive control. DNA purified from salivary glands of uninfected ticks, and the blood, lungs, and spleen of uninfected mice, and purified water, served as negative controls. Assays with 1.5 μg of DNA demonstrated approximately single-copy sensitivity reported previously for tick samples (Kúdelová et al., 2015), with no false-positive results. PCR assays with 100 ng of template demonstrated sensitivity levels of about 40 copies of genome, with no false-positive results. Samples that tested positive were re-examined using a nested PCR specific for the glycoprotein gp150 gene of MHV68 originally developed to detect virus in free-living rodents (Klempa et al., 2001) and previously described in detail (Ficová et al., 2011).Sequencing of PCR productsNested PCR products amplified from DNA isolated from the blood of three MHV68 positive mice and salivary glands of two MHV68 positive ticks were purified with Wizard® SV Gel and PCR Clean-up System (Promega, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. They were sequenced using both inner primers for the ORF50 gene specific PCR reaction (see above) using a commercial sequencing service (BITCET). The sequences were aligned and compared with the ORF50 sequence of MHV68 (Acc. No. AF105037).Viral genome quantificationViral genome loads were measured by quantitative real time PCR to detect ORF65 which encodes the capsid protein, M9 (Guo et al., 2009). DNA from murine blood, lungs, and spleen tissue (100 ng) was used to amplify MHV68 genomic coordinates 94,119 to 94,184 within ORF65 gene using StepOne Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). Primers ORF65F: 5′-GTC AGG GCC CAG TCC GTA-3′ and ORF65R: 5′-TGG CCC TCT ACC TTC TGT TGA-3′) overlapped a 65 bps long fragment. PCR mixture contained 0.5 μM of each primer and Maxima SYBR Green PCR reaction buffer with ROX-passive reference dye (Thermo Scientific) in the final volume of 20 μl. PCR program was as follows: 40 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 58°C for 15 s, and 72°C for 15 s. qPCR standard curve was established using 10-fold serial dilutions of the MHV68 BAC DNA; 106 to 100 copies were used as templates in PCR mixtures that were amplified in parallel. Specificity of qPCR products was confirmed by melting curve analyses. PCR products were quantified by comparison with the standard curve. Viral genome equivalents in 1 ml of blood or 1 mg of tissue were determined from the mean of triplicate real-time PCR assays for each sample.Detection of MHV68 M3 gene transcriptsTranscription of the early-late M3 gene of MHV68 (GenBank accession number U97553, coordinates 6,060–7,277) was detected by nested RT-PCR. Prior to use, total RNA purified from murine blood, lungs and spleen tissue (100 ng) was treated with DNAse I according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA purified from organs of uninfected mice infested with uninfected ticks, served as negative controls. One microgram RNA was used for the reverse transcription in the reaction mixture with 250 ng of random primers (Promega) and 10 mM each dNTP incubated at 65°C for 5 min folowed by cooling in ice. Then, the first-strand buffer (Invitrogen) with 10 mM DTT were added to final volume of 19 μl. Prior to adding 200 U of M-MLV Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen), the reaction mixture was incubated at 37°C for 2 min, followed by incubation at 25°C for 10 min, then 37°C for 50 min, and final heat-inactivation of enzyme at 70°C for 15 min. Fifty nanograms of cDNA was used to amplify a 520 bp region of the M3 gene (genome coordinates 6075-6594). Reaction mixture in a total volume of 25 μl contained 0.5 μM of each outer primer (M3PF1: 5′-ACT CCA GCC TGT ACT GTT GC-3′and M3PR1: 5′-TCT GCC CCA CAA CCA AGT TT-3′), 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.1% Triton X-100, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM dNTPs, and 1 U GoTaq polymerase (Promega). PCR program of the first PCR was as follows: 35 cycles of 94°C for 40 s, 59.3°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 45 s. The second round of PCR was performed using 1 μl of the first-round PCR as a template in the same reaction mixture except that inner PCR primers were used (M3PF2: 5′-ACT GGC CCT CAA CCA GTC TA-3′ and M3PR2: 5′-TAC AAG TAC AGC GTG AGC CC-3′) that generated a 241 bp product (genome coordinates 6171-6411). Conditions for the nested PCR were identical except that annealing temperature (59.8°C) and cycling conditions (40 cycles).ResultsTick-borne virus transmission following artificial infection of ticks by injectionTo test whether MHV68 can survive in ticks and be transmitted during blood-feeding, unfed adult female ticks were inoculated with 0.5 μl PBS containing 1.25 × 104 PFU (plaque-forming units) of MHV68 using a digital microinjector system. The inoculation was through the coxal plate of the second pair of legs as this route minimizes the chance of damaging internal organs, and allows the virus to enter directly into the hemolymph of the tick and be disseminated throughout the hemocoel. Following injection, the ticks were placed in a desiccator and maintained at room temperature and 90–95% relative humidity. Two weeks after they had been inoculated with MHV68, the female ticks were allowed to infest uninfected mice: 2 inoculated females together with 2 uninfected male ticks (to improve female blood-feeding) per mouse. Five days later, when the ticks were partially engorged, a total of six female ticks were removed from three mice and their salivary glands dissected out and assayed using a nested PCR targeting MHV68 ORF50. All salivary glands prepared from these six injected ticks were MHV68 positive (Figure 1A, a). Sequencing results of the PCR products shown in lanes 1 and 3 revealed respectively 99.8 and 100% identity with the ORF50 gene of MHV68.Figure 1Tick-borne virus transmission and tick infection following injection of ticks with MHV68. (A) Virus detected by nested PCR. Lanes S1-S7, salivary glands of virus-injected ticks fed on uninfected mice for 5 days; lanes B1-B5, blood samples of five mice 15 days after tick infestation; L1, HyperLadder; L2, GeneRuler DNA ladder; lane C1, MHV68 DNA (positive control); lane C2, nested PCR without template (negative control); lane C3, MHV68 DNA nested PCR 1st round product with outer primers (positive control); lane C4, 1st PCR round with outer primers without template (negative control). ** Indicates MHV68 ORF50 gene PCR product of 382 base pairs. (B) Infectivity as determined by plaque formation in BHK-21 cells. Cells inoculated with homogenate of virus infected tick and observed by (a) light microscopy (magnification x50) and (b–d) specific immunofluorescence staining (magnification x200). (b) Single plaque shown of a maximum 5 plaques observed per tick; (c) control, uninfected cells; and (d) cells inoculated with homogenate of uninfected tick.Having shown that MHV68 DNA can survive in ticks and access the salivary glands following artificial inoculation into the tick hemocoel, we then examined whether the virus is transmitted by the injected ticks to uninfected mice (Table 1, Experiment 1). Female ticks injected with MHV68 were allowed to feed to repletion on 5 uninfected mice, 2 inoculated females together with 2 uninfected male ticks per mouse. Blood samples were collected from the mice on day 15 post-infestation and tested by nested PCR; all five mice were MHV68 positive (Figure 1A, b). Sequencing of the PCR product shown in lane 5 revealed 100% identity with MHV68 ORF50, indicating that the virus detected in the blood was the same as the virus injected into the ticks that fed on the mice.Table 1Artificial (injection) and natural (blood-feeding) acquisition and blood-feeding transmission of MHV68 by ticks.ExperimentVirus acquisitionVirus transmissionTicksTick treatmentMolted ticksNumber (%) mice virus positivea1AdultsInjected with MHV68 and fed on uninfected micen. a.5/5 (100%)1 (control)AdultsUntreated and fed on uninfected micen.a.0/22LarvaeFed on MHV68 infected miceNymphs2/7 (28.6%)2 (control)LarvaeFed on uninfected miceNymphs0/23NymphsFed on MHV68 infected miceAdults3/11 (27.3%)3 (control)NymphsFed on uninfected miceAdults0/14NymphsFed on MHV68 infected miceAdults2/13 (15.4%)4 (control)NymphsFed on uninfected miceAdults0/2n.a., not applicable.aPositive by nested PCR of blood collected 15 days post-infestation.To examine the persistence of infectious MHV68 in ticks, whole body extracts were prepared from 4 of the ticks, 120 days after virus injection, together with 2 control ticks, and inoculated onto monolayers of BHK-21 cells. A few plaques (2–5) became visible after 3 days of culture, which were positive by immunofluorescence staining using specific anti-MHV68 polyclonal antibody (Figure 1B). Infectious virus was detected in extracts of all four ticks; all controls were negative. Because the ticks were unfed, the small number of plaques does not reflect the amount of virus transmitted as tick-borne virus replication occurs during tick feeding (Kaufman and Nuttall, 2003).Tick-borne virus transmission following natural infection of ticks by blood-feedingHaving demonstrated MHV68 transmission to mice by virus-injected ticks, we determined whether ticks infected via the natural route (by feeding on infected mice) can transmit MHV68. Unlike blood-feeding insects, engorged immature ticks molt before feeding again; hence, transmission ability was tested after tick molting. In Experiment 2 (Table 1), larvae were allowed to feed on mice that had been infected 5 days previously by intranasal exposure to MHV68. Following engorgement (completed in 2–4 days) and drop off, the larvae were maintained under conditions that allowed molting to nymphs. The emergent nymphs, 117 days after completing engorgement on infected mice as larvae, were then fed on seven uninfected mice. Two uninfected mice infested with uninfected nymphs served as negative controls. On day 15 post-infestation, when the last ticks to reach engorgement had dropped off, blood samples from the mice were collected and assayed for the presence of viral DNA. Two of seven mice (28.6%) were found to be MHV68 positive (Figure 2A). The results were confirmed using different template inputs in the PCR (specific for the gp150 gene; see Materials and Methods). Sequencing of the PCR products from one positive mouse (Figure 2A, lane 2) revealed 99.8% sequence identity with MHV68 ORF50. The results were confirmed using the same template but with a different primer set in a separate PCR specific for the gp150 gene (see Materials and Methods).Figure 2MHV68 detection in blood samples from mice infested with naturally infected nymphs or adult ticks. (A) Lanes N1-N7, blood samples of mouse 1-7 exposed to nymphs molted from larvae that had engorged on infected mice; lane N8, blood of mouse infested with uninfected nymphs. (B) Lane A1, blood of mouse infested with uninfected adult ticks; lanes A2-A14, blood samples of 13 mice exposed to adults molted from nymphs that had engorged on infected mice. All blood samples were collected 15 days after tick infestation. Lanes L1, L2, C1–C4 as for Figure 1A. **Indicates MHV68 ORF50 gene PCR product of 382 base pairs.Similarly designed experiments were undertaken using uninfected nymphs as the starting point (Table 1, Experiment 3). Nymphs were fed (4–6 days) on experimentally infected mice, collected after drop off, and then allowed to molt to adults. Emergent adults, 130 days after completing engorgement on infected mice as nymphs, were allowed to feed on 11 uninfected mice (2 males and 2 females per mouse). One uninfected mouse infested with uninfected adults served as a negative control. Blood samples were obtained from infested animals 10–12 days after engorged ticks dropped off the mice (15 days post-infestation). Three of 11 mice (27.3%) were MHV68 positive (data not shown). In a repeat experiment (Table 1, Experiment 4), adults metamorphosed from nymphs were fed on 13 mice of which two (15.4%) were MHV68 positive, 15 days post-infestation (Figure 2B, A7 and B2). Sequencing results of sample B2 revealed 99.8% identity of the PCR product compared with MHV68 ORF50.Vertical transmission of MHV68 in ticksTo determine experimentally whether MHV68 can be transmitted vertically from infected adult ticks through the eggs to the following F1 generation, unfed adult female ticks (F0) were inoculated with 1.25 × 104 PFU of MHV68 (0.5 μl) using a digital microinjector system. Following injection, the ticks were placed in a desiccator and maintained at room temperature and 90–95% relative humidity. Three weeks after virus injection, the female ticks (F0i) were allowed to infest 20 uninfected mice, 2 inoculated females together with 2 uninfected male ticks per mouse. As negative controls, non-inoculated females (F0c) were allowed to infest two uninfected mice. On day 15 post-infestation, when the last ticks to reach engorgement had dropped off, blood samples from the mice were collected and assayed for the presence of viral DNA by nested PCR. Nine of the 20 mice were positive (Figure 3A) (Table 2, Experiment 5). Following engorgement and drop off, the female ticks were maintained individually at room temperature under standard tick rearing conditions for 2 weeks until oviposition was complete. After ~50 days the eggs hatched into larvae (F1). In Experiment 6, F1i larvae were fed on 9 uninfected mice (70–100 larvae per mouse), 46 days after hatching; each mouse received larvae from one PCR positive F0i female. F1c larvae from the uninfected control females (F0c) were fed on two uninfected mice. After completing feeding and drop off, the engorged F1 larvae recovered from each mouse were maintained as separate cohorts and allowed to molt to F1 nymphs (about 35 days).Figure 3MHV68 detection in blood samples from mice infested with F0 females or F1 nymphs. (A) Lanes A15-A34, blood samples of 20 mice infested with infected F0 females; blood collected 15 days after tick infestation. **Indicates MHV68 ORF50 gene nested PCR product of 382 base pairs. (B) Lanes 1n26, 2n17, 3n18, 4n28, 5n19, 6n20, 7n32, 8n33, and 9n24, blood samples of mice infested with F1i nymphs; N9, N10 blood samples of control mice infested with F1c nymphs. +Indicates MHV68 M3 gene one step RT-PCR product of 520 base pairs. Lanes L2, C1–C4 as for Figure 1A.Table 2Vertical transmission of MHV68 in ticks.ExperimentTicksMolted ticksTreatmentNumber of mice testedMouse sampleaNumber (%) virus positive micebDays after virus injection of F0 ticksNested PCRqPCRRT-PCR5Adults (F0i)n.a.Injected with MHV68 and fed on uninfected mice20Blood9 (45%)n.t.n.t.385 (control)Adults (F0c)n.a.Fed on uninfected mice2Blood0 (0%)n.t.n.t.n.a.6n.a.Larvae (F1i)Fed on uninfected mice9n.t.n.a.n.a.n.a.1126 (control)n.a.Larvae (F1c)Fed on uninfected mice2n.t.n.a.n.a.n.a.n.a.7n.a.Nymphs (F1i)Fed on uninfected mice9Bloodn.t.9 (100%)7 (77%)252Lungn.t.9 (100%)7 (77%)Spleenn.t.9 (100%)0 (0%)7 (control)n.a.Nymphs (F1c)Fed on uninfected mice2Bloodn.t.0 (0%)0 (0%)n.a.Lungn.t.0 (0%)0 (0%)Spleenn.t.0 (0%)0 (0%)8n.a.Adults (F1i)Fed on uninfected mice9Blood0 (0%)9 (100%)n.d.525Lung8 (88%)9 (100%)7 (77%)Spleen6 (66%)9 (100%)4 (44%)8 (control)n.a.Adults (F1c)Fed on uninfected mice1Blood0(0%)0 (0%)n.d.n.a.Lung0 (0%)0 (0%)0 (0%)Spleen0 (0%)0 (0%)0 (0%)n.a., not applicable; n.t., not tested.aSamples collected from mice 15 days post-infestation.bNested PCR detects ORF50 gene; qPCR detects ORF65 gene representing genome equivalent number; RT-PCR detects M3 gene transcripts.In Experiment 7, F1 nymphs were maintained for a further 81 days under standard conditions as separate cohorts, and then fed on uninfected mice (20 nymphs per mouse). On day 10, when the last F1 nymphs had completed engorgement and drop off, samples of blood, lung, and spleen from the mice exposed to F1 nymphs were collected and analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) based on number of virus genome equivalents (GE). Blood samples from all 9 mice exposed to F1i nymphs were positive, with 1.4–7.8 × 105 GE/ml, whereas the 2 mice exposed to F1c nymphs were negative. Similarly, lung and spleen samples from the mice exposed to F1i nymphs were all positive, ranging from 3.1 × 104 to 7.2 × 106 and 7.5 × 103 to 1.7 × 105 GE/mg, respectively, whereas the mice exposed to F1c nymphs were negative (Table 2, Figure 4). Using nested RT-PCR, transcription of the M3 protein gene was detectable in blood samples (Figure 3B) and lungs (data not shown) of seven mice exposed to F1i nymphs but not in the control mice. However, expression of the M3 gene was not detected in spleen of any of the mice.Figure 4MHV68 genome load in organs of mice exposed to F1 infected ticks. Box and whisker plots of genome equivalent copies per ml blood or mg lung or spleen from mice 15 days after infestation with either F1i nymphs or F1i adult ticks. All controls were negative (see Table 2).After engorgement and drop off, F1 nymphs were maintained under conditions that allowed molting to F1 adults (~6 months). Finally, in Experiment 8, after ~70 days of starvation, F1 adults were placed on uninfected mice (one female and one male per mouse). On day 15 days post-infestation, when the all ticks had dropped off, blood, lung, and spleen samples were collected from the mice. Screening by nested PCR was negative for all blood samples; however, qPCR identified MHV68 genome in blood samples of all mice exposed to F1i adults with 7.0 × 103 to 1.8 × 104 GE/ml, whereas blood samples of mice exposed to F1c adults remained negative (Table 2, Figure 4). Screening by nested PCR identified MHV68 in lung samples of eight (Figure 5A, a) and spleen samples of six mice (Figure 5A, b), whereas samples of both organs of the control mice remained negative (Table 2). qPCR quantification detected MHV68 in lung and spleen of all mice, ranging from 1.5 × 101 to 6.0 × 102 and 2.0 × 101 to 1.7 × 103 GE/mg, while lung and spleen of control mice were negative (Figure 5A). Further, transcription of the M3 gene was detected by nested RT-PCR in lung samples of seven mice (Figure 5A, c) and in spleen samples of four mice (Figure 5A, d), whereas samples of the control mice remained negative. The duration between feeding artificially infected F0i female ticks on uninfected mice and the detection of MHV68 DNA (in the blood, lungs, and spleen) and MHV68 M3 gene transcripts (in lungs and spleen) in mice exposed to their F1i adult progeny was ~525 days (Table 2). The number of GE in samples from mice exposed to F1i nymphs was consistently higher than for F1i adults (Figure 4), and was statistically significant for blood (χ2 = 7.37, d.f. = 1, p < 0.01).Figure 5MHV68 detection in lung and spleen samples from mice infested with F1i adults and in F1i female ticks. (A) Lung (a,c) and spleen (b,d) samples of mice infested with F1i adults examined by nested PCR (a,b) and RT-PCR (c,d). Lanes 1a26, 2a17, 3a18, 4a28, 5a19, 6a20, 7a32, 8a33, and 9a24 samples of mice infested with F1i adult ticks; A35, A36, samples of control mice infested with F1c adults. Lanes L2, C1–C4 as for Figure 1A. ** Indicates MHV68 ORF50 gene nested PCR product of 382 base pairs; ++ indicates MHV68 M3 gene nested RT-PCR product of 241 base pairs. (B) Semi-thin sections of frozen whole body of F1i females fed for 4 days. (a,b) F1i tick from mouse 3a18 and 5a19 stained with anti-MHV68 rabbit polyclonal serum; (c) uninfected tick (F6 generation of breeding) stained with anti-MHV68 rabbit polyclonal serum; (d) F1i tick from mouse 3a18 stained with rabbit polyclonal serum against PB1-F2 protein of influenza virus A (H1N1) (negative control). MD, cells of midgut diverticula; L, lumen of midgut diverculum. Scale bar, 200 μm.Immunofluorescence staining of histological sections of whole ticks with rabbit anti-MHV68 polyclonal serum identified viral antigen in the intestines of two F1i adult females that had fed 4 days on uninfected mouse 3a4A or 5a5A (Figure 5B). Specific staining was not detected in the salivary glands or other organs.Trans-stadial survival of virus: evidence of pathogenesis in ticksIn the experiments in which MHV68 DNA was detected in ticks fed on infected mice, there tended to be a lower survival rate of virus exposed ticks compared with uninfected ticks during molting (Table 3). Statistical logistic regression analysis of the data showed significantly fewer nymphs molted to adults (χ2 = 6.89, d.f. = 1, p = 0.01) that engorged on virus exposed mice (Scale promotor = 1.109) compared with control mice (Scale promotor = 1.0). The difference was not explained by feeding success as there was no significant difference in the numbers of uninfected nymphs that engorged on control uninfected mice compared with infected mice (χ2 = 0.02, d.f. = 1, p = 0.89). In Experiments 3 and 4 using nymphs, the feeding success was greater in Experiment 4, undertaken in the summer (mean engorged “infected” and “uninfected” nymphs, 71.7%) compared with Experiment 3 undertaken in the winter (mean engorged 48.1%). This difference in feeding success may have been due to physiological differences in the ticks. Interestingly, no difference was observed in the molting survival of ticks infected by vertical transmission.Table 3Differences in molting efficiency of larval (A) and nymphal (B) ticks feeding on control, uninfected, and MHV68 infected mice.ExperimentaMiceNo. of engorged larvaeNo. of molted larvae to nymphs%A2MHV68 infected61317228.0nsControl562035.7ExperimentaMiceNo. of engorged nymphsNo. of molted nymphs to adults%B3MHV68 infected502448.0control271763.04MHV68 infected997272.7Control302893.3TotalMHV68 infected149ns9664.4*Control574578.9aSee Table 1.ns, not significantly different from control;*significantly different, p = 0.01.DiscussionHerpesviruses typically have a narrow host range and are transmitted by contact with infected body fluids such as saliva, urine, tears, and breast milk. Hitherto, vector-borne transmission of herpesviruses has not been demonstrated although infectious bovine rhinotracheitis virus (Bovine herpesvirus 1) was isolated from three separate collections of the argasid tick, Ornithodoros coriaceus, over a 3-year period (Taylor et al., 1982). The ticks were collected from deer bedding areas in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, USA, where antibodies to the virus were detected in both deer and cattle; virus transmission studies were not reported. Similarly, the report of MHV68 PCR positive ticks collected from wild caught lizards in Slovakia did not demonstrate virus transmission (Ficová et al., 2011). However, MHV68 detection in field-collected D. reticulatus ticks included isolation of infectious virus from the salivary glands, ovaries and midgut of these ticks (Kúdelová et al., 2015). More recently, transcripts of the early-late M3 gene of MHV68 were detected in 10 of 11 questing field-collected D. reticulatus ticks, with 2.2 × 104-8.6 × 106 GE/tick (Kúdelová et al., 2017). Although MHV68 antibodies have been recorded in free-living animals and humans, a common explanation is one of antigenic cross-reactivity with other gammaherpesviruses (Hricová and Mistríková, 2007). Natural host entry by MHV68 is believed to occur via the upper respiratory tract (Milho et al., 2009). Nevertheless, no evidence of direct horizontal transmission was found between female laboratory mice or between female bank voles housed together in captivity, and the significance of milk-borne transmission and female to male sexual transmission, demonstrated experimentally in laboratory mice, have yet to be determined (Raslova et al., 2001; François et al., 2010, 2013).We undertook a rational sequence of experiments to determine if ticks can transmit MHV68 and whether the virus shows the characteristics of an arbovirus (Nuttall et al., 1994; Kuno and Chang, 2005). First, we artificially infected ticks by injecting adult females (the largest tick stage) with mammalian cell culture-grown virus. Infectious virus survived in the ticks for at least 120 days, and viral DNA was detected in the tick salivary glands and in blood of mice on which the virus-injected ticks fed (Experiment 1). Based on these positive results, we tested whether ticks can be infected naturally, by feeding on infected mice (Experiments 2–4). The results showed that MHV68 DNA, acquired by larvae and nymphs feeding on infected mice, was subsequently transmitted by nymphs and adults (respectively, after molting) to uninfected mice. In contrast to blood-feeding insects, ticks feed exclusively on blood and ixodid species take only one bloodmeal (increasing their body weight ~100-fold) at each developmental stage (3 active instars: larva, nymph, adult). Three-host ixodid ticks, such as I. ricinus, drop off the host after completing engorgement and hide in the undergrowth where they molt or lay eggs. Molting involves extensive tissue breakdown and remodeling, which ticks survive depending on how successfully they have fed and the environmental conditions; arboviruses survive the hostile environment within the metamorphosing tick by infecting cells not subjected to extensive tissue histolysis (Nuttall et al., 1994; Kuno and Chang, 2005). The results of feeding ticks on infected mice indicate that MHV68 survived molting and was transmitted by the subsequent developmental stage.Some arboviruses, such as TBEV and African swine fever virus (ASFV), are maintained vertically in ticks although the levels of transovarial and trans-sexual transmission typically are <1.0% in I. ricinus (Rennie et al., 2001; Danielová et al., 2002). Evidence of vertical transmission was found for MHV68: both F1i nymphs and F1i adults transmitted MHV68 during feeding on uninfected mice (Experiments 7 and 8). Remarkably, F1i adult ticks transmitted MHV68 >500 days after the initial infection of the F0 adult females, and all mice on which the ticks fed showed evidence of infection. The apparent efficiency of vertical transmission was likely augmented by horizontal transmission in which uninfected ticks acquired MHV68 while co-feeding with infected ticks, either from viremic mice or via non-viremic transmission (Tibbetts et al., 2003; Kuno and Chang, 2005). Immunomodulation at the site of tick feeding, including inhibition of type 1 interferon and reprogramming of dendritic cells by tick saliva, may promote acquisition and co-feeding transmission of MHV68 by ticks (Kazimírová et al., 2017; Lawler and Stevenson, 2017). Detection of viral antigen in the midgut of F1i adult females at 3 days of feeding is consistent with augmentation of infection by an infected bloodmeal. Heparan sulfate glycosaminoglycan expression has been recorded in the gut and ovaries of ixodid ticks (Onofre et al., 2003). Given that heparan binding is a key event during infection by cell free MHV68, and that bloodmeal digestion in ticks is intracellular and does not involve extracellular acidic proteolysis of gut contents, conditions in ticks appear to meet at least some of the requirements for MHV68 infection, for example, if a tick ingested infected B cells (Gillet et al., 2009; Sonenshine and Roe, 2013).Acute MHV68 infection in lungs and spleen of outbred mice is cleared within 9–15 days; although the dynamics of acute phase replication are delayed at low doses (e.g., 0.1 PFU), peak titer and subsequent frequency of latently infected cells are unaffected by dose (Tibbetts et al., 2003). Hence we examined blood, lung, and spleen at 15 days after infestation with F1 ticks, using different PCR methods to detect the presence of MHV68 DNA (nested PCR), to quantify the virus load (qPCR), and/or to determine evidence of viral replication (RT-PCR). Differences in results obtained with the different PCR methods suggest differences in their sensitivity. Initially, nested PCR targeting ORF50 was selected as this assay was developed to detect one GE of MHV68 per 250 ng tick DNA (Kúdelová et al., 2015). However, subsequent comparisons with mouse samples revealed the detection limit of the nested ORF50 PCR assay was at least 1,000-fold less than that of qPCR for ORF65 and RT-PCR for M3, indicating that some studies (Experiments 2–4) probably underestimated the frequency of virus transmission. By qPCR, MHV68 ORF65 was detected in all samples from all mice exposed to F1i nymphs and adults (Experiments 7 and 8), although significantly more MHV68 GE was detected in mice exposed to nymphs compared with adults (105 vs. 104 in blood, 104 vs. 102 in lung, and 104 vs. 102 in spleen, respectively). This indicates that the 20 F1i nymphs infesting each mouse transmitted more MHV68 than the 2 adult females and 2 males/mouse, which is unsurprising especially given that adult male I. ricinus feed little if at all. In mice exposed to F1i nymphs (Experiment 7), evidence of replicating virus was detected in blood and lung but not in spleen, and in mice exposed to F1i adults (Experiment 8), fewer spleen samples showed evidence of virus replication compared with lung samples. Virus replication (detected as M3 gene transcripts) indicates that an acute infection of mice was ongoing at the time of sampling, which was most apparent in blood and lung (Ebrahimi et al., 2003). In spleen, MHV68 replication is usually limited and occurs a short time before virus latency is established in B cells, predominantly in the spleen (Speck and Ganem, 2010).For insect-borne arboviruses, there is some evidence that arboviral infection is detrimental to the arthropod (insect) vector whereas tick-borne viruses appear to have little effect on their tick vectors with the notable exception of ASFV (Nuttall et al., 1994; Kuno and Chang, 2005). ASFV has been reported to cause mortality of up to 73% when infecting its argasid tick vector, Ornithodoros species, although a number of reports have not found significant virus-induced mortality (Rennie et al., 2000; Kleiboeker and Scoles, 2001). Hence the apparent pathogenic effect of MHV68 in I. ricinus is unusual for a tick-borne arbovirus but not unprecedented. However, there was no evidence vertical transmission of MHV68 had a detrimental effect on ticks. The apparent efficiency of vertical transmission may at least partly explain the unusually high incidence of MHV68 detected in ticks collected in the field. Of 432 adult D. reticulatus collected at two sites in southwestern Slovakia from 2011 to 2014, 45% female ticks and 26% male ticks were PCR positive for MHV68 ORF50, and infectious virus was isolated from salivary glands, midgut, and ovaries of 2/5 female ticks (Kúdelová et al., 2015). More recently, evidence was reported of virus in free-living immature and adult I. ricinus ticks (unpublished data) and 38% (18/47) questing adult Heamaphysalis concinna ticks, with 2 × 102-9.6 × 103 GE detected in the latter species (Vrbová et al., 2016).Detection of MHV68 in I. ricinus ticks collected from free-living green lizards (L. viridis) in the Slovak Karst National Park in 2007 raises questions about the role of lizards in the natural history of MHV68 (Ficová et al., 2011). Our re-examination of the published data suggests that lizards are not susceptible to MHV68. Of the total 799 ticks collected from 89 green lizards, there were 1.5% positive nymphs and 3.3% positive larvae. If lizards are competent hosts of MHV68, more nymphs than larvae should be infected, as found with other tick-borne pathogens (Václav et al., 2011). Based on our experimental observations, the most likely source of MHV68 in I. ricinus ticks removed from lizards was through vertical transmission from ticks previously fed on infected rodents.MHV68 and related viruses have been reported in Slovakia, Czech Republic, France, Northern Ireland, Germany, and England. Most isolates have been from the yellow-necked field mouse, A. flavicollis, although the first reported isolations were from bank voles, M. glareolus. In addition to these two rodent species, MHV-68 strains have been detected by PCR in a further 3 rodent species, and MHV68 neutralizing antibodies have been reported in 13 mammalian species (Mistríková et al., 2000a,b; Nash et al., 2001). This apparent ability to infect a diversity of mammalian species is typical of an arbovirus but unusual for a herpesvirus. Generally, the natural host range of individual herpesviruses is highly restricted; indeed, most herpesviruses were thought to have evolved in association with a single host species although phylogenetic analysis of the subfamily Gammaherpesvirinae suggests evolution both by cospeciation with host lineages and by transfer between widely distinct hosts (Ehlers et al., 2008). While bats and humans are considered potential superspreaders to other mammalian taxa (Escalera-Zamudio et al., 2016), our data suggest ticks are potential megaspreaders. Tick-borne transmission is a plausible explanation for the detection of MHV68 neutralizing antibodies in fallow deer, red deer, wild boar, and sheep, all of which are commonly infested by I. ricinus. Indeed, the pattern of seroprevalence for MHV68 is similar to the patterns for TBEV and B. burgdorferi, which reflect the hosts on which their tick vector (I. ricinus) feeds, and the susceptibility to infection of the various species (Kozuch et al., 1990; Trávnicek et al., 2003).Evidence MHV68 may infect humans was first reported in 20 personnel working with MHV68 or who were exposed to small rodents at the Institute of Virology, Bratislava and the Department of Microbiology and Virology of Comenius University, Bratislava (Mistríková et al., 2000a). Further studies reported antibodies to MHV68 in 4 cohorts, including hunters and a group of patients associated with infectious diseases (Hricová and Mistríková, 2007). The possibility that these reports were the result of antigenic cross reactions with human herpesviruses was examined in a study of 330 sera from patients of different hospitals in Slovakia with anonymous diagnoses, and from employees of the Department of Microbiology and Virology of Comenius University, Bratislava (Hricová and Mistríková, 2007). The results and antibody titers were the same using virus neutralization tests (VNT) and immunofluoresence assays (IFA), both indicating an antibody prevalence of 4.5%; ELISA indicated higher antibody titers and a higher prevalence, 16.1%. Cross reactivity was detected by ELISA with Epstein Barr virus though not with herpes simplex virus-1 and human cytomegalovirus antigens. Human sera positive for Epstein Barr virus (3 sera), herpes simplex virus-1 (2 sera) and human cytomegalovirus (5 sera) did not neutralize MHV68 in the VNT (Mistríková et al., 2000a). Hence antigenic cross-reactivity between MHV68 and human herpesviruses was detected by ELISA but not using VNT. Further work is needed to determine whether MHV68 can infect humans and, if so, whether the virus is transmitted to humans by I. ricinus ticks.Author contributionsVHa, MK, and MS conceived and designed the experiments. MK, ZH, PP, IŠ, PBa, PBe, MS, MV, VHo and MK, performed the experiments. MK, VHa, PN, and RH analyzed the data. PN, MK, and VHa wrote the paper.Conflict of interest statementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Zika virus tropism and pathogenesis: understanding clinical impacts and transmission dynamics

IntroductionThe Zika virus (ZIKV) is a member of the Flaviviridae family and falls under the Flavivirus genus. Within this genus, other viruses like yellow fever (YFV), tick-borne encephalitis (TBEV), dengue hemorrhagic fever (DENV), and West Nile fever (WNV) viruses are also included [1]. This virus is one of the arboviruses and is transmitted by mosquitoes [2]. Structurally, it is an 11 kilobases (kb) long positive-sense single-stranded RNA virus. The genome of this virus initially encodes a polyprotein, which is finally converted into three structural proteins and seven non-structural proteins by viral and cellular proteases. The structural protein C forms the icosahedral capsid of the virus and finally, the virus is enclosed by a lipid envelope that comes from the host cell [3–5]. The virus was primarily separated from a rhesus monkey in Uganda in 1947 [6], its first isolation from humans occurred in 1954 in Nigeria [7]. Although ZIKV prevalence has increased since 2007, it was initially discovered according to the evidence in the American continent in 2015 as an epidemic in adults, with symptoms including Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), multiple organ failure, and birth defects, such as the birth of babies with neurological disorders, microcephaly, and the death of the fetus [8–10].Based on phylogenetic analysis, the virus is divided into two lineages: Asian and African. According to the research, Asian lineages exhibit more genetic diversity and a greater number of single nucleotide variants in the viral genome compared to African lineages [11]. Although transmission by the Aedes mosquito is the main route of ZIKV transmission, the virus can also be transmitted through blood, vertical mother-to-child, and sexual contact [12–16]. Furthermore, according to studies, this virus also exists in biological body fluids such as breast milk, saliva, urine, and semen [17–20]. Different cells including peripheral dendritic cells, macrophages, various types of neurons, and placental cells are considered as ZIKV target cells [9]. After entering the body, the virus is disseminated to other parts of the body through the bloodstream [21]. According to studies, the latent period of the virus is between 3 and 12 days. However, in pregnant women, the infection may persist longer, leading to viral multiplication in the brain due to its teratogenic effects [22]. A maculopapular rash accompanied by limb edema, headache, and fever has been seen in most adults infected with the ZIKV. Also, symptoms such as thrombocytopenia, encephalitis, and meningitis are rarely seen in adults with severe disease. In addition, the ZIKV can be associated with neurological complications such as GBS [23–26]. According to the studies, no vaccine has been developed to be used by the general public. It is crucial to emphasize that, based on previous studies, no new drug has been specifically created for this virus. Instead, the treatments used have mainly been repurposed from medications originally designed for other pathogens. In addition to these drugs, antibodies are also employed as part of the treatment [27].This study seeks to conduct an in-depth examination of ZIKV pathogenesis and its clinical manifestations by drawing on current knowledge and existing research. The objective is to not only provide a thorough understanding of the mechanisms through which ZIKV causes disease but also to analyze the range of symptoms associated with infection. By consolidating and expanding on this information, we aim to contribute valuable insights that can guide the development of more effective prevention measures and treatment strategies, ultimately improving public health responses to future ZIKV outbreaks.Genome structure and tropismThe ZIKV is characterized as an enveloped, single-stranded RNA virus. Its genetic material contains an ORF encoding a polyprotein, which is subsequently cleaved into ten distinct proteins by both cellular and viral proteases. Among these proteins, three function as structural components: envelope (E), membrane precursor (prM), and capsid (C) proteins. The remaining seven proteins, known as nonstructural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5), play essential roles in the replication and assembly of the virus [3–5, 28]. Figure 1 provides a complete illustration of the virus genome and its associated proteins.Fig. 1ZIKV has a single-strand positive sense RNA genome, as well as an icosahedral capsid. The figure shows the polyprotein structure which is encoded by the ZIKV genome, in Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) membrane [14, 118, 119]Moreover, several well-established ZIKV receptor candidates include receptors typically linked to other flaviviruses, such as Dendritic Cell-Specific Intercellular adhesion molecule-3-Grabbing Non-integrin (DC-SIGN). Two other receptors, T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 (TIM-1) and the Tyro3, Axl, and Mer receptors (TAM family), are also involved. These receptors belong to the phosphatidylserine receptor family [29]. Among these receptors, TAM receptor AXL plays a major role [30]. The presence of Non-structural protein 1 (NS1) antigenemia is instrumental in the ingestion of flaviviruses by mosquitoes [31]. Based on the findings of Yang Liu et al., the existence of NS1 in the bloodstream of the infected host affects ZIKV infection in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes. They found that an alanine-to-valine amino acid substitution at residue 188 in NS1 increased NS1 antigenicity, which in turn increased ZIKV’s ability to be transmitted from hosts to vectors, which could facilitate ZIKV transmission [32].Transmission routesVector-borne transmissionThe ZIKV can be transmitted through various ways (Fig. 2). This virus is primarily spread by mosquitoes, especially those belonging to the Aedes genus [33–35]. Various species of Aedes mosquitoes have been identified as potential carriers, including Aedes africanus, Aedes albopictus, Aedes hensilli, and Aedes aegypti [36]. However, Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are regarded as significant transmitters of ZIKV [37]. ZIKV circulates in an enzootic cycle among non-human primates through mosquitoes in sylvatic environments. These infected mosquitoes can then transmit the virus to humans, creating an epidemic cycle. Additionally, the virus may enter human populations via bites from infected Aedes mosquitoes that come from regions experiencing ZIKV outbreaks or spillover from sylvatic habitats [38]. Aedes africanus is believed to be the sylvatic vector of ZIKV, while Aedes henselli has been associated with the outbreak on Yap Island. However, Aedes aegypti is considered the primary vector for outbreaks in the Americas, the Pacific, and Asia [39].Fig. 2ZIKV is an arthropod-born (arbovirus) that can be transmitted through other patterns such as sexual transmission, blood transmission, etc. The vector transmission consists of two cycles: A Enzootic or sylvatic cycle; and B Human or urban cycle. ZIKV can remain stable in urine for a long time. Therefore, urine can play a role in the urban cycle [12, 38, 120–123]Non-vector-borne transmissionThere are several non-vector modes of transmission for ZIKV, such as through sexual intercourse [40–43], and from a mother to her fetus during pregnancy [44–50]. ZIKV might infect children through several ways, including intrauterine, intrapartum, and postnatal routes [46, 51, 52]. Instances of perinatal transmission of the ZIKV from mothers infected during childbirth have been documented, with two such cases identified. In one case, the infant showed no symptoms, while in the other case, the infant presented with a maculopapular rash and thrombocytopenia [44]. The clinical manifestations of the illness in children are strikingly like to those seen in infected adults [53]. Identifying arthralgia in newborns and young children can be challenging. Symptoms may include limping (among ambulatory children), trouble moving or reluctance to move an extremity, discomfort when moving the affected joint actively or passively, irritability, or ache upon palpation [53].As well, the presence of ZIKV in semen and its potential for transmission through sexual contact have raised questions about its ability to breach the blood-testis barrier (BTB) or the Sertoli cell barrier (SCB). The E protein, a key antigenic component of ZIKV, is significant for its crucial role in receptor binding and membrane fusion. Numerous investigations have highlighted the significance of the E protein in the virulence and pathogenicity of ZIKV. Investigations have revealed that ZIKV infection leads to a rearrangement of actin filaments, a process in which the E protein is believed to be involved. This disruption of actin filament dynamics is a contributing factor to the ZIKV infection. In summary, the interplay between the ZIKV E protein and F-actin results in a rearrangement of the F-actin network, ultimately compromising the integrity of the BTB [54]. During the gestation period in mammals, the placenta mainly performs as a barrier, offering both physical and immunological protection between the mother and the developing fetus. Within the placenta, primary human trophoblasts (PHTs), comprising cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, play a crucial role as barrier cells. Syncytiotrophoblasts are particularly significant as they are in straight interaction with maternal blood. In cases involving full-term placentas, PHTs are generally resistant to ZIKV infection because they continually release antiviral interferon lambda 1 (IFNλ1). Additionally, it was noted that the medium derived from uninfected PHT cells exhibited a protective influence against ZIKV infection in non-placental cells. PHT cells themselves displayed elevated levels of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), signifying that IFNλ1 operates both in a paracrine manner (protecting neighboring cells) and an autocrine manner (protecting trophoblast and non-trophoblast cells) to safeguard against ZIKV infection [55]. It has also been shown that trophoblast cell lines obtained from choriocarcinoma explants and early human villous explants were found to be susceptible to ZIKV infection [56]. However, placentas from later stages of pregnancy, which possess a more mature placental barrier, showed heightened resilience against infection. For ZIKV to effectively infect syncytiotrophoblasts, it likely needs to evade the protective mechanisms established by IFNλ1 produced by trophoblasts, along with other antiviral factors that are specific to trophoblasts. Alternatively, the virus may need to find alternative routes to enter the fetal compartment by breaching the placental barrier. This scenario is particularly relevant during the second half of pregnancy, which corresponds to the stage when PHT cells are most abundant. These alternative pathways might involve non-trophoblast infection routes, for instance infecting immune cells or using transcytosis to transport virions complex with maternal antibodies through the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) [57]. Recently, it has been observed that human placental macrophages, identified as Hofbauer cells (HCs), are susceptible to the virus infection [58–60].In the context of immune cells, innate immune cells are probably to be targeted by ZIKV once they breach the trophoblast layer in the placenta. Upon infection, HCs manufactured IFN-α, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and also stimulated genes that are associated with antiviral responses, although it did not significantly induce cell death. ZIKV replication was also observed in human placental cytotrophoblasts, albeit with deferred kinetics and ISG expression. This suggests that ZIKV may replicate within cytotrophoblasts and HCs, potentially facilitating vertical transmission. However, syncytiotrophoblasts are resistant to ZIKV infection, leaving us with the question of how the virus penetrates the cytotrophoblast layer and HCs. Considering that significant morphological changes occur in the human placenta during the first and second half of pregnancy, including the absence of maternal blood interaction with the syncytiotrophoblast layer in the earliest trimester of pregnancy and a substantial reduction in the cytotrophoblast cell layer during pregnancy, the methods for vertical transmission of ZIKV are likely to differ in any stages of pregnancy [57]. Also, The ZIKV may be transmitted via blood transfusions and organ transplants, although the associated risks are not completely understood [61, 62].Pathogenesis in rhesus monkey (RM)The ZIKV was initially isolated from a febrile rhesus monkey (RM) [63], indicating that studying virus replication, immune responses, and certain characteristics of disease progression can be effectively modeled in RMs. In one particular experiment, RMs were inoculated subcutaneously to simulate a mosquito bite, which induced transient viremia and fever [64]. Moreover, another study expanded its scope by examining the tissue tropism throughout the infection. Groups of RMs were necropsied on days 7, 28, or 35 post-inoculations. Seven days following inoculation, viral RNA was found in various tissues. This included lymphoid tissues such as widely distributed lymph nodes and the spleen, joints (especially those proximal to the inoculation site, but also in some distal joint tissues), and peripheral nervous tissues, exclusively the brachial plexus, trigeminal ganglion, and sciatic nerve. Concurrently, the RNA of the virus was linked to the spinal cord (cervical, lumbar, and thoracic regions), although it was not present in the brain and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). This could suggest a predilection for nervous tissues but a limitation in the retrograde transportation of the infectious virus into the central nervous system (CNS), or it might imply that CNS infection requires a longer incubation period. RNA from the ZIKV was also identified in the kidneys and bladder of the male RM, but not in the testes or prostate. Collectively, these observations signify that ZIKV spreads rapidly to various tissues in the body, containing lymph nodes, spleen, peripheral nerves, skin, and the genital and urinary tracts. Furthermore, in the female RM, the presence of viral RNA was identified in reproductive organs for example the uterus and vagina. This indicates that these tissues can be infected by the virus and maintain the infection for a minimum of four weeks. This finding could have profound consequences for the transmission of ZIKV and the potential for fetal infections during pregnancy. Additionally, the seeding of the virus into semen via the urethra could represent another possible route of transmission [65].Clinical observations and laboratory findingsClinical manifestationsThe ZIKV is the causative agent of Zika fever, a syndrome characterized by fever, rash, and joint pain that bears a striking resemblance to dengue fever [66]. A significant portion of individuals infected with ZIKV, especially in the period from the 1960s to the 1980s, have exhibited either no symptoms or only mild clinical signs [38]. Notably, severe illness and case fatality rates associated with ZIKV infection are remarkably low, and the symptoms of the illness typically abate within a relatively short timeframe of 2–7 days [67]. The incubation period of ZIKV infection in humans is estimated to span from 3 to 14 days [68]. Furthermore, the viremic period, characterized by the virus's existence in the bloodstream, is generally observed within 3 to 4 days after symptoms onset [69].Evidence has indicated a connection between ZIKV infection and optical/neurological disorders, including optic nerve pallor, chorioretinal scarring, increased intraocular pressure, and corneal clouding at birth [70, 71]. It is estimated that 20–25% of people infected with ZIKV exhibit noticeable symptoms [38]. They exhibit the following symptoms: fatigue [72], arthralgia [73–75], temporary and moderate fever [75], accompanied by maculopapular, itchy rashes (that typically progress descendingly from the face to the extremities) [76], non-purulent conjunctivitis [77–80], and in some cases, redness of the eyes, loss of appetite, vomiting and edema [23, 38], as well as, sore throat, and cough [72, 81]. Clinical signs frequently associated with acute ZIKV infection encompass transient hearing loss [66], subcutaneous haematomas [82], myalgia, asthenia [83], headache, retro-orbital pain [23, 83, 84], and hematospermia [15, 85]. Other uncommon manifestations of ZIKV infection include mucous membrane ulceration, abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, and thrombocytopenia [86]. Figure 3 provides a detailed overview of the clinical manifestations of ZIKV and their associated neurological complications.Fig. 3Clinical symptoms of ZIKV and their neurological complications include acute myelitis, ocular hypertension, microcephaly, meningoencephalitis, and Guillain–Barré syndrome [15, 38, 66, 73, 75, 76, 80, 82, 87, 88, 93, 96, 97, 110, 124, 125]Neurological complicationsZIKV is also linked to neurological complications, including GBS, microcephaly [38], and neurological complications such as acute myelitis [87], and meningoencephalitis [88]. Microcephaly is a prenatal condition characterized by underdeveloped brain growth, leading to reduced head size in affected infants, while GBS manifests as muscle weakness stemming from immune-mediated harm to the peripheral nervous system [89]. During a ZIKV outbreak in Bangladesh, patients with ZIKV-associated GBS exhibited involvement of cranial, autonomic, and sensory nerves. Although electrophysiological studies predominantly confirmed most cases as acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (AIDP) [90]. In Brazil, ZIKV contributed to nearly equivalent incidences of acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) and AIDP [91]. ZIKV-associated GBS is correlated with increased morbidity in the acute phase, frequently presenting with prevalent deficits in cranial nerves and acute neuropathy [92]. Research on fetuses exposed to the ZIKV has revealed occurrences of microcephaly, retardation of intrauterine growth, and CNS damage [46, 47] (Fig. 3).Laboratory findingsDuring ZIKV infection, laboratory values regarding biochemistry and hematology typically remain within normal limits. Nevertheless, during the viremic phase, a subset of patients may exhibit temporary and moderate lymphopenia, leucopenia, or activated lymphocytes. They may also experience monocytosis, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and increased serum levels of aspartate aminotransferase, C-reactive protein, lactate dehydrogenase, gamma-glutamyl transferase, fibrinogen, and ferritin [83, 84, 93–95]. Cases of cardiac complications related to ZIKV infection include myocarditis, pericarditis, Arrhythmias, and heart failure [96–98]. Additionally, incidence rates of ZIKV infection are observed to be higher in females than males, and it is more common in older individuals than in younger ones [23, 99]. Due to the overlapping signs, the clinical diagnosis of Zika persists challenging in tropical settings, especially in regions with concurrent transmission of dengue and chikungunya viruses [100]. Unlike Chikungunya and Dengue fever, ZIKV is characterized by more noticeable edema of the extremities and conjunctivitis and the ZIKV does not exhibit thrombocytopenia and leukopenia as seen in Chikungunya and Dengue cases [23, 76]. Additionally, malaise and headache in ZIKV fever tend to be less severe, while the maculopapular rash is more pronounced [23]. Table 1 provides a comparison of the clinical symptoms associated with Zika, Dengue, and Chikungunya infections.Table 1Comparison of Zika, Dengue, and Chikungunya clinical symptoms [76]SymptomsZikaDengueChikungunyaFever++++++++++Maculopapular rash+++++++Hepatomegaly−−+++Conjunctivitis+++−+Arthralgia/Myalgia+++++++++Edema of extremities++−−Retro-orbital pain++++ + * −Don’t have/ +HaveNeural dysfunctionThe ZIKV disrupts the natural cell cycle and transcription processes in human neural progenitor cells (hNPC) [101]. Experimental studies have indicated that ZIKV infection leads to significant alterations in neuronal proliferation and migration. Specifically, Asian ZIKV isolates have been found to impede the growth and movement of hNP cells with less cell death. The cerebral cortex's structural development largely relies on the growth and movement of hNP cells. Subsequently, neurons in the cerebral cortex mature by extending neurites and forming synaptic connections. The cohesion of the neurite structure is crucial for the proper operation of the central nervous system (CNS). However, ZIKV infection can disrupt this process, affecting the cytoskeletal organization, microtubule dynamics, and neurite outgrowth. To assess the effect of ZIKV on neurons, researchers measured the rate of neurite growth and ramification. The High multiplicity of infections of the Asian SPH isolate of ZIKV significantly reduces neurite numbers, neurite length, and the number of branch points. Based on medical documentation of congenital ZIKV infection, ocular abnormalities, and seizures have also been documented. The observed impairment in neurite proliferation and migration is associated with seizures and cognitive deficits [102].As well, distinct interactions between ZIKV and human proteins related to brain development contribute to the virus's influence on the nervous system. One of these interactions involves NS4A binding with Ankyrin Repeat and LEM Domain-Containing Protein 2 (ANKLE2), which is particularly intriguing [103]. Notably, mutations in ANKLE2 have been linked to autosomal recessive microcephaly in humans, as documented in previous studies [104]. These discoveries collectively imply that the expression of NS4A may hinder critical functions of ANKLE2 during brain development [103]. Although the ANKLE2 pathway plays a role in ZIKV-induced microcephaly, several developmental pathways likely collaborate to promote this condition following ZIKV infection. As an example, ZIKV RNA binds to MSI1 (Musashi-1), an RNA-binding protein responsible for regulating the microcephaly gene MCPH1, thus aiding virus replication in neural stem cells [105]. Moreover, ZIKV NS2A can impede brain development in mice by breaking down adheren junction proteins disorders in the ZIKV capsid-mediated decay pathway may also affect brain growth. Additionally, as a result of the studies that have demonstrated ZIKV NS4A and NS4B's inhibition of neural stem cells (NSC) division through the Akt-mTOR pathway, it's plausible that NS4A contributes to neuropathogenesis via several mechanisms [106].GBS is one of the common reasons for acute neuromuscular paralysis worldwide [107]. This syndrome is an acute polyradiculoneuropathy with an immune-mediated origin and usually appears due to a preceding infection, particularly an infection caused by Campylobacter jejuni. The disease often involves sensory and cranial nerves. Respiratory failure can occur in 20–30% of GBS cases, which have severe and general manifestations [108]. The incidence of GBS varies between 0.81 and 1.89 cases per 100,000 people per year [109]. The classic form of GBS is characterized by rapid and progressive symmetric weakness in the limbs, accompanied by sensory symptoms and hyporeflexia or areflexia [110]. Various subtypes of GBS have been identified through electrophysiological studies, including Acute Motor Axonal Neuropathy (AMAN), Acute Motor and Sensory Axonal Neuropathy (AMSAN), and Acute Inflammatory Demyelinating Polyradiculoneuropathy (AIDP) [111]. In 2014, the first report of a link between GBS and ZIKV was published, concerning a female patient with GBS in French Polynesia. Initial symptoms included distal limb paresthesia, which progressed dominant tetraparesis in the lower limbs. Other clinical symptoms included bilateral facial palsy, diffuse myalgia, and sustained ventricular tachycardia [112]. Further studies investigating ZIKV-associated GBS revealed common neurological findings such as any limb paresis (97%), areflexia or hyporeflexia (96%), tetraparesis (64%), facial palsy (51%), sensory deficits (49%), and bulbar palsy (25%) [113]. Several hypotheses exist regarding ZIKV-associated GBS. One hypothesis suggests molecular mimicry as a potential pathogenic mechanism. According to this hypothesis, the ZIKV polyprotein resembles human proteins involved in axon function, myelination, and neurodevelopment. Consequently, neutralizing antibodies induced by ZIKV may cross-react with peripheral nerve proteins, leading to immune-mediated damage [114]. Another hypothesis involves T cell responses stimulated by ZIKV, which may target neural, axonal, myelin, or Schwann cell antigens. This hypothesis is supported by the observation of perineural T-cell infiltration in nerve tissues from autopsies of GBS cases associated with other pathogens [115].Moreover, human astrocytes, pivotal in providing support and protection to neurons, are vulnerable to ZIKV infection. Following infection, a gradual demise of human astrocytes is evident. Notably, there is an absence of indications of apoptosis or pyroptosis, effectively excluding these pathways of cell demise. Nevertheless, heightened levels of serine/threonine-protein kinase-1 (RIPK1), RIPK3, and receptor-phosphorylated protein lineage kinase-like domain (MLKL) signal the onset of planned necrosis or necroptosis in infected astrocytes [116]. Recent findings indicate that elements of the necroptosis cell death pathway might serve to constrain ZIKV neuroinfection. In particular, the activation of Z-DNA-binding protein 1 (ZBP1) and RIPK1/RIPK3 in cortical neurons can initiate a series of reactions that regulate the expression of the immune response gene 1 (IRG1) and the metabolite itaconate. Itaconate exerts a suppressive effect on viral genome replication by impeding the formation of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) [117].


Title: An Overview of Zika Virus and Zika Virus Induced Neuropathies

1. IntroductionFlaviviruses (family Flaviviridae) are small (approximately 50 nm in diameter), enveloped, icosahedral viruses that possess a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of between 9–12 kb [1,2,3,4]. The viral genome consists of a single long ORF (open reading frame) encoding around ten proteins, which are formed by co- and post-translational processing and proteolytically processed into three structural (Cap, prM, and E) and seven non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins by a complex combination of host and viral proteases [5,6,7,8]. Currently, there are about 70 members in this genus, the majority of which are transmitted by arthropods [9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. The incidence of flaviviral infections has increased dramatically in the last seven decades [17,18]. These infections are associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Factors responsible for the rapid increase in flaviviral infections are changes in the sizes and distributions of the vector arthropods that transmit the pathogens, further aggravated by climate change and a large number of potential vertebrate hosts [19,20,21,22]. Details of various neurotropic flaviviruses and their associated neuropathies are summarized in Table 1.ZIKV is a significant pathogen that poses an imminent global threat. It was first isolated from rhesus monkeys in Uganda in 1947 [53] (The genome organization of the Zika Virus is sketched in Figure 1). Later, in the 1950s, its detection continued in several other parts of Africa (Egypt, Nigeria) [54]. However, the first clinical infection in humans was not detected until 1964, when it was found that the ZIKV infection in humans is associated with mild fever and maculopapular rash [55]. From 1960 to 2000, ZIKV was detected in several countries in Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia and Pakistan) [54]. The first major ZIKV outbreak occurred in 2007 (in Yap Island), and then in March 2015, it caused a large outbreak in the Americas (particularly Brazil), and the first time was associated with severe disease and congenital illnesses such as infant microcephaly [56,57,58]. In November 2015, Brazil declared a national public health emergency, and in February 2016, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [59].The ZIKV employs multiple mechanisms to replicate (the ZIKV replication cycle is illustrated in Figure 2) and causes a variety of neurological diseases. It has been proposed that after viral entry through the crossing of the BBB (blood–brain barrier), ZIKV tends to infect the microglia, astrocytes, and endothelial cells [63,64,65]. Damage to the CNS can occur when ZIKV infects the CNS cells, and damage occurs either due to viral replication or because of a host-mediated immune (inflammatory) response [66,67,68]. Moreover, ZIKV infection is also associated with various neurological syndromes, e.g., Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), and others [69,70,71]. Multiple mechanisms are known to cause damage to the CNS, which are also discussed in detail later in this review article. Collectively, in this review, we have summarized the observations on biology, transmission, control strategies (vaccines, antivirals, and vectors), oncolytic aspects, animal and cellular models, neuropathies, and neuropathogenesis associated with ZIKV.2. Transmission of Zika VirusThe principal mode of transmission of ZIKV is through mosquitoes; however, studies have found that various other routes may play an important role in the transmission of the disease. These include venereal transmission, vertical transmission, transmission to infants through mother milk, and blood transfusion This makes it very difficult to devise an appropriate strategy for the control of disease in countries where the disease is endemic. The transmission cycle of ZIKV is illustrated in Figure 3.2.1. Vector Borne TransmissionVector-borne transmission of ZIKV occurs through mosquitoes [13,80]. In the sylvatic transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between non-human primates and mosquitoes, while in the urban transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between humans and mosquitoes. The presence of ZIKV has been reported from many species of mosquitoes in Africa and Asia (Aedes aegypti (Ae. aegypti), Ae. africanus, Ae. albopictus, Ae. apicoargenteus, Ae. furcifer, Ae. luteocephalus, Ae. opok, and Ae. vittatus) which may transmit the virus to humans [53,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90]. However, in Yap and French Polynesia, the transmission of ZIKV was suggested to be through Ae. hensilli and Ae. Polynesiensis, respectively) [91,92,93]. The extrinsic incubation period is reported to be 10 days [84]. The vector competence (the ability of the vector to transmit the virus biologically) has not been determined for ZIKV transmission in most of these species [94] and it may be the area of future research. In the urban cycle, the transmission of ZIKV is mainly through the Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. ZIKV has been detected/isolated from wild Ae. aegypti, and they have been demonstrated to be competent vectors in the laboratory where they can transmit the virus to mice and rhesus monkeys [82,86,88]. Recent studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission by Ae. albopictus as well [84,95]. Both of these mosquitoes remain active during the daytime, and they are prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions [96,97]. However, the geographical range of Ae. albopictus is further extended to the temperate regions [98,99,100]. In the USA, both of these mosquitoes have been found in southern and south-eastern states and their maximum numbers have been found from June to October [101].2.2. Sexual TransmissionMany cases of transmission of ZIKV have been observed following sexual contact. Several studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission from males to females. In most cases, the male had a travel history to ZIKV-endemic countries, and when he returned, his partner became infected [102,103,104]. ZIKV’s presence has been detected in human semen [105]. It has been found that ZIKV can persist in semen for over 6 months following infection, suggesting the possibility for prolonged sexual transmission [106,107,108]. Later studies demonstrated that sexual transmission from male to male is also possible [109]. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in urine and saliva [110,111]. Experiments conducted on lab animals have demonstrated that ZIKV is able to replicate in vaginal and rectal mucosa, thus serving as a reservoir of infection [112].2.3. Vertical TransmissionZIKV has been reported to be transferred from mother to fetus during the gestation period. Normally the placenta acts as an effective barrier to curtail transmission of infections from mother to fetus. However, ZIKV is able to bypass these barriers by unknown mechanisms [113]. Studies conducted in a mouse model demonstrated that ZIKV damages the placenta and results in fetal death [114]. In Brazil, during the ZIKV outbreak, a large increase in the number of neonates with microcephaly was reported from mothers who were infected with ZIKV [115]. ZIKV antigen and RNA have been detected in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetal brain tissue [115,116,117]. Therefore, it can be postulated that ZIKV is transmitted from mother to fetus through a damaged placenta (induced by ZIKV) and then ZIKV damages the nervous system of the fetus.2.4. Venereal Transmission in MosquitoesThe maintenance of arboviruses in nature is significantly facilitated when venereal transmission occurs alongside other modes of transmission. Venereal transmission in mosquitoes has been reported for multiple arboviruses, including ZIKV [118,119]. ZIKV is found to be transmitted in the sexual fluids of mating mosquitoes. Intrathoracically ZIKV-infected Ae. aegypti males can transmit the virus to uninfected females during mating, and Ae. aegypti females who are orally infected with ZIKV have the potential to transmit the virus to uninfected males by copulation under laboratory conditions [120]. Furthermore, Aedes mosquitoes acquire and transmit Zika virus by breeding in contaminated aquatic environments [121]. The continuous venereal transmission in mosquitoes could pose a significant public health concern by boosting infection rates and virus spread.2.5. Transmission Through Breast MilkDetection of ZIKV RNA has been observed in the breast milk of ZIKV-infected mothers [122]. This makes it possible for the transmission of ZIKV from the infected mother to the neonates. Studies have demonstrated the presence of ZIKV RNA in babies whose mother’s serum and milk were positive for ZIKV RNA [123]. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed for the flaviviruses WNV and DENV [124,125].2.6. Transmission Through Ocular Fluid/TearsResearchers have found the existence of ZIKV in tears thirty days following ZIKV infection. Their study suggests the possible transmission of ZIKV through tears [126,127]. This is possible as previously a case study revealed that transmission through tears occurred from mother to her child [128].3. Zika Virus Associated Neurological DiseasesZIKV infection has been reported to be associated with a number of neurological diseases (illustrated in Figure 4) which are described in detail below.3.1. MicrocephalyCongenital microcephaly has been previously associated with viral infections, e.g., rubella and cytomegalovirus. However, it was unknown for ZIKV until the Brazilian outbreak [129]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in the amniotic fluid of these fetuses [130]. In 2015, Brazilian authorities reported that the incidence of microcephaly was twenty times higher compared to previous years. This led to further investigations, and in two years (2015–2016), more than 8000 cases of microcephaly were reported [131]. Later on, an analysis of an outbreak in French Polynesia also demonstrated a correlation between ZIKV and microcephaly [132,133]. Further investigations showed that aborted fetuses (during 1st and 2nd trimesters) contained ZIKV RNA in the amniotic fluid, meninges, CSF, and umbilical cord of the microcephalic newborn babies [57,134]. Several studies have been performed to identify the molecular mechanism of ZIKV-associated microcephaly. Cells associated with the BBB, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, are susceptible to infection with ZIKV and their infection with ZIKV leads to upregulation of ICAM-1 and a variety of cytokines (IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-10) that causes enhanced binding and subsequently crossing of the BBB by the immune cells. The access of immune cells to the CNS is associated with neuro-inflammation which contributed to the neuro-pathogenesis of ZIKV [135]. Neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV and undergo apoptosis following infection [136]. During pregnancy, the immune response directed against ZIKV leads to the inflammation of the fetal–maternal interface, causing inflammation and disruption of barrier functions. This allows the recruitment of various immune cells to the fetal tissue, releasing TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor) and IFN-γ (interferon) that lead to neuroinflammation, resulting in the damage and destruction of NPCs required for the neural development of the fetus [137]. The CNS is susceptible to ZIKV infection during all stages of pregnancy, but earlier infection results in severe damage. CNS infection with ZIKV may result in impaired multiplication and migration of neurons, myelination, synaptogenesis, and even apoptosis that may contribute towards ZIKV-associated microcephaly [138]. In cells infected with ZIKV, mitofusion 2 (MFN-2) expression is reduced. Normal expression of MFN-2 is required for the fusion of mitochondria. Therefore, in ZIKV-infected cells, mitochondrial fragmentation occurs. This leads to the activation of apoptosis through a p53-mediated pathway in NPC cells [139,140]. Recently, Gladwyn-Ng et al. [141] have demonstrated the mechanism of apoptosis in neuronal cells infected by ZIKV in mouse embryos and neuronal stem cells (human), showing that ZIKV infections trigger unfolded proteins in cells that lead to activation of the ER stress response Subsequently, these cells migrate to the cortex and undergo apoptosis.3.2. Ophthalmological ManifestationsZIKV infection during pregnancy has been associated with congenital abnormalities in the fetal eye. Neural crest cells (NCCs) are required for normal development of the corneal and uveal stroma, the corneal epithelium, and the trabecular meshwork. They also play an important role in the closure of the optic fissure [142,143]. NCCs express AXL and thus exhibit susceptibility to ZIKV. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV results in viral replication resulting in loss of NCCs [144]. ZIKV infection can also disrupt the normal differentiation of the NCCs leading to defective development of the anterior eye segment leading to micropthalmia [142,145,146,147]. The loss of NCCs during ZIKV infection has also been found to disrupt closure of the optic fissure leading to iris coloboma and abnormal development of the lens zonules. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV can also lead to reduced thickening of the corneal stroma causing corneal ectasia [142]. It can also contribute towards impaired development of trabecular meshwork causing glaucoma [144,148,149,150]. Neuronal depletion during ZIKV infection can also contribute to thinning of the retinal ganglion layer [151,152]. Apoptosis of NCCs during ZIKV infection can also lead to defects in axonal development [145].Ocular manifestations have been reported in approximately 50% of infants who have ZIKV-induced microcephaly. ZIKV infection has been reported to involve the eyes and this represents the viral ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the blood–retinal barrier (BRB), and the blood–aqueous barrier (BAB). The first ZIKV-related eye abnormality was reported in 2016. More than sixty percent of people with ZIKV infections are reported to have conjunctivitis (the most common eye abnormality associated with ZIKV). Other abnormalities are associated with the anterior segment, the posterior segment, and the neuroophthalmic. The abnormalities associated with the anterior segment include microphthalmia, anterior uveitis (with or without raised intraocular pressure), and non-purulent conjunctivitis [153,154,155]. The posterior segment anomalies associated with ZIKV involve the retina and choroid and include maculopathy and multifocal choroiditis [153,156,157,158,159]. Neuro-ophthalmic conditions are related to the paresis of the abducens and oculomotor muscles and can cause ocular flutter, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema [156,160,161,162,163]. ZIKV infection also causes optic nerve involvement, and this includes hypoplastic disk, enhanced cup-to-disk ratio, and nerve pallor. Viral entry into eyes is facilitated by both hematogenous and retrograde transport of ZIKV through the optic nerve and optic tract [164]. Although ocular tissue is immune privileged, it is more permissive to ZIKV infection because of the higher viral load [151]. Certain cells in the retina are relatively more permissive to ZIKV infection including RPE cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells [165]. Choriocapillaris (highly fenestrated) are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and it can facilitate the ZIKV entry into the RPE cells, which are also permissive to ZIKV infection. RPE infection results in inflammation and this subsequently leads to breaking the BRB [108,166]. Normally, the immune response helps the host in eliminating the infection, however, in this case, immune-mediated injury to the eye tissue leads to pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated eye abnormality [167]. Infection of BRB with ZIKV leads to the generation of IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-α, IFN-β, TNF-α, CCL5 and CXCL-10. This leads to subsequent events that culminate in the atrophy of the retina and RPE mottling [168,169].Another mechanism of viral entry in ocular tissue is through ZIKV-infected monocytes, which possess the ability to cross the retinal microvasculature endothelium and subsequently cause retinal infection. Later on, ZIKV-infected monocytes become activated and release cytokines and chemokines that result in immune-mediated injury/damage to ocular tissue [170,171]. The cornea can also act as reservoir of ZIKV infection as it expresses RIG-1, MDA-5, and TLR 3 which facilitate the synthesis of IFN-I and III to mediate antiviral response [136,172]. Infection of the cornea with ZIKV leads to the synthesis of the IL-1β, TNF-α, CCL5, and CXCL-10 which recruits other cells of the immune system to the cornea and this promotes inflammation and damage to corneal tissue leading to keratitis [173]. Through the hematogenous route, ZIKV infects the iris and ciliary body. From here, the virus can infect BAB cells, which damages this barrier and results in viral entry into the aqueous humor [133]. From the aqueous humor, ZIKV gains entry to the trabeculae meshwork and results in the production of cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-1, IFN-α, IFN-β, CCL5, and CXCL-10. This leads to the recruitment of the other immune cells such as Th1 and CD8+ cells that secrete TNF-α and IFN-γ, damaging the trabeculae meshwork and resulting in blockage of aqueous humor outflow, leading to enhanced intraocular pressure and causing glaucoma. Persistent glaucoma can damage the optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells leading to optic neuropathy [174].3.3. Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)GBS is a condition where there is immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. The condition is characterized by the loss of reflexes and flaccid paralysis. The disease occurs in 1/100,000 persons. It has been observed that GBS typically occurs after certain infections such as Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sporadic GBS cases have also occurred following the flaviviral infections (WNV, DENV and JEV) [175]. In 2014, the first report was published about the occurrence of GBS following ZIKV infection in French Polynesia. It was reported that in ZIKV patients, 1/4000 people suffer from GBS (20 times increased incidence) [176]. In the recent ZIKV outbreak in the Americas, approximately 1500 cases were reported between 2014–2015. At the majority of locations, GBS incidence following ZIKV was reported to be 2–10 times higher than background [177]. In Colombia, more than 100 thousand cases of ZIKV were reported with 42 GBS cases/100,000 ZIKV cases. These findings indicate the possibility of the association of ZIKV with GBS [178]. Until now, no clear mechanism is known about the molecular pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated GBS. However, it is thought that the mechanism of molecular mimicry may be an important contributing factor in the pathogenesis of disease (i.e., antibodies formed against ZIKV cross-react with myelin sheath or other neural tissues). However, others have proposed that immune system dysregulation occurs (that is not directly against ZIKV) and that contributes towards its pathogenesis [176].3.4. Cerebrovascular InvolvementCertain viral diseases are associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities. Recently, ZIKV cases have also been reported to involve cerebral vascular abnormalities. A 10-month-old child infected with ZIKV was admitted to hospital with ischemic stroke and had serum positive for ZIKV [179,180,181]. The exact mechanism remains to be determined; however, it is thought that higher susceptibility of endothelial cells to be infected by ZIKV is a major factor and is responsible for cerebral vascular abnormalities [182].3.5. EncephalitisZIKV infection is considered a potential cause of encephalitis. An 81-year-old patient with a travel history to a ZIKV-affected area had reduced consciousness, limb paresis (upper right), and hemiplegia (left side). The patient was ZIKV positive by RT-PCR and viral culture and isolation. The patient was treated and survived. However, fetal cases of ZIKV-associated encephalitis have also been reported. In Brazil, a 37-year-old (y.o.) female was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of rash and joint pain. Later on, she suffered from weakness in her lower limbs, confusion, and difficulty with speech. RT-PCR was positive for ZIKV, while the serum analysis was negative. The patient later died due to brain swelling, leading to increased intracranial pressure [154]. In the Dominican Republic, a female was admitted to the hospital with complaints of neck stiffness and confusion. Her condition deteriorated, and seizures began. CSF examination revealed an increased number of WBCs (white blood cells), the majority of which were lymphocytes (80%). RT-PCR of urine was positive for ZIKV RNA (but negative in the CSF and serum). However, IgM antibodies against ZIKV were detected from CSF and serum, confirming ZIKV exposure. MRI examination revealed cortical edema, a common finding in meningoencephalitis [163]. In another study on ZIKV, subcortical hemorrhage and bilateral lesions were observed in the temporal and frontal regions [162].3.6. Myelitis and EncephalomyelitisZIKV infection has been associated with myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) and encephalomyelitis (inflammation of the brain and spinal cord), which can result in reduced consciousness, urinary retention, and paresis of lower limbs [183]. The first case of myelitis associated with ZIKV was reported in Guadeloupe in a girl (15 y.o.) who was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of headache and conjunctivitis. Later, her condition continued to deteriorate, and she suffered from left-sided weakness and urinary retention. MRI examination revealed a normal brain, whereas abnormalities were revealed in the spinal cord cervical area and thoracic region. CSF, urine, and serum were found to be positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR [184]. In another study, a 26 y.o. Brazilian male was admitted to the hospital with a major complaint of fever, malaise, and neck stiffness, CSF and urine examination revealed that the patient had a ZIKV infection. CSF analysis showed hyper-protein levels and 100 WBCs (white blood cells) per mL (95% mononuclear cells) [183]. Other studies have also indicated an association between ZIKV and myelitis/encephalomyelitis [183,184,185].4. Zika Virus Infection and Extracellular VesiclesViruses can employ extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. EVs are particles surrounded by membranes that can be released into the extracellular space by living or dying cells. Various viral components may be packed inside the EVs [186]. One of the final fates of EVs is their release into blood circulation, through which they can reach distant cells and tissues [187]. It is important to note that EVs share most of the biochemical and biophysical properties of viruses. Both EVs and viruses (naked and enveloped) use the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT) complex [188,189]. Moreover, Rab GTPases (particularly Rab11, Rab35, and Rab27A/B) are also shared during the viral replication cycle as well as EV biogenesis [190]. Many studies have indicated that EVs play a facilitating role during viral infections. These effects can be due to EVs carrying viral receptors, carrying viral particles themselves, or carrying their genome, proteins, or miRNA. Ultimately, it can lead to the priming of the recipient cells and/or inhibiting IFN pathways, apoptosis of immune cells, and the transmission of viral genome and/or proteins to distant organs and tissues [188,191,192,193]. In the case of ZIKV, NS1 protein, viral E protein (inside and outside) and viral RNA can be packed inside the EVs [194]. Interestingly, mosquito cells (C6/36 cells) infected with ZIKV are found to release EVs (containing viral RNA and protein E), which was found to infect both naïve mosquito and mammalian cells (monocytes and endothelial cells) [195].Given ZIKV’s neurotropic nature, it is important to emphasize that ZIKV-derived EVs are found to disrupt the structure of human brain microvasculature endothelial cell junctions (hcMEC/D3), facilitating ZIKV entry into cells of the human CNS [196]. ZIKV can also spread to the CNS through autophagy (a process associated with viral infections and may be regulated by EVs [197,198,199]. In the case of ZIKV, the autophagic vesicles may play an important role in crossing the placental barrier. Normally, the placenta is protected from various pathogens (aided by the autophagy process); however, ZIKV can hijack this process [200,201]. A study using a mouse model has shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine inhibits viral replication (autophagy-dependent) and also effectively prevents mother–fetal transmission of the virus [202,203].5. Models for Studying Zika Virus Infection and PathogenesisDeveloping appropriate cellular and animal models for studying ZIKV is becoming increasingly important to gain appropriate understanding of viral pathogenesis and host-related factors that aid or inhibit viral replication and to devise appropriate disease prevention and treatment strategies.5.1. Cell LinesThe cell lines are widely used to grow and study ZIKV because they provide a controlled environment for viral replication. These cell lines allow scientists to watch viral behavior, examine molecular interactions between ZIKV and host cells, and test antiviral agents. The use of cell lines is essential to virology as they provide a reliable, reproducible system for studying viral pathogenicity and mechanisms in a laboratory setting. The cells susceptible to Zika Virus infection are illustrated in Figure 5 and detailed comprehensively in Table 2.5.2. OrganoidsAlthough cell culture has been used to determine ZIKV replication and pathogenesis, this system is not without its downsides. Cells are unable to mimic in vivo conditions as they lack the cellular structure, composition, and physiology of an organ in which a virus replicates [222]. To overcome this drawback, people are now developing organ analogues in vitro where stem cells are used to generate 3D tissue structures resembling organs. These 3D models are known as organoids and are being used to model and better understand the molecular events that occur following viral invasion and replication in that organ [223]. Studies have provided confirmatory evidence of microcephaly following ZIKV infection by using organoids [224,225]. Qian et al. (2016) used a mini-bioreactor to generate brain organoids and demonstrated that ZIKV infection in brain organoids that mimic the first-trimester fetal brain resulted in ZIKV infection of NPCs, IPC, astrocytes, and neurons, while infection of brain organoids mimicking the second-trimester fetal brain exhibited ZIKV infection of the outer radial glial cells [224]. These findings are correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis providing evidence of ZIKV-associated microcephaly [136]. Yoon et al. showed that the ZIKV NS2A protein is responsible for the alteration and reduced multiplication of the radial glial cells resulting in altered neuronal positioning in the brain [226]. Another study reported that ZIKV infection of NPCs during early pregnancy was associated with the upregulation of TLR-3 receptors, leading to apoptosis of NPCs, resulting in microcephaly [227]. Recently, brain organoid models have also been used to determine the various drug targets against ZIKV [228,229,230,231]. Organoids resembling the placenta have also been developed using first-trimester human chorionic placental villi where ZIKV established infection and proliferated in Hofbauer cells, villus cytotrophoblasts (CTB), and produced the NS3 and E protein [232,233]. To summarize, organoids offer a promising approach to studying the ZIKV viral pathogenesis and also to screening compounds’ antiviral activity in a system more relevant than in vitro cell culture.5.3. Animal ModelsAnimal models have been developed to study ZIKV replication and pathogenesis in vivo.5.3.1. Non-Human Primates (NHPs)Non-Human Primates (NHPs) exhibit significant similarities with humans (pregnancy physiology, long gestation periods, and hemomonochorial placenta) and offer a promising model to study ZIKV infection, neuropathogenesis, and drug discovery. They also exhibit vertical transmission from mother to fetus similar to humans [234]. Rhesus macaques, olive baboons, marmosets, and pigtail macaques have been employed to study ZIKV pathogenesis during gestation. Olive baboons have been able to demonstrate clinical infection when infected during the gestation period. When infected during 4th month of pregnancy, they developed conjunctivitis and moderate rash, with viremia peak at 7 dpi (days post-infection). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins were also detected [235,236]. In other NHPs (i.e., rhesus macaques, marmosets, and pigtail macaques) no clinical infection occurs following ZIKV inoculation. However, in all NHPs, antibodies are formed following ZIKV infection, and placental and fetal ZIKV infection is observed. In rhesus macaques, fetal loss occurs following ZIKV infection, while marmosets and olive baboons exhibit viral RNA in amniotic fluid and placenta. Severe placental infection is observed during pregnancy in marmosets and rhesus macaques [237,238,239].5.3.2. MiceMany viral replication and pathogenesis studies involve the use of mice as animal models because they have large litter sizes and a short gestational period. However, variability in their placental structure and heterogeneity in gestation can be problematic [240]. Another complication occurs due to differences in the cell biology of mice as compared to humans. On viral entry, the viral NS5 protein is able to degrade the cellular STAT2 protein, thereby making IFN signaling ineffective, resulting in viral replication and the development of clinical disease. Degradation of STAT-2 is not observed in mouse cells infected with a virus, leading to unimpaired IFN signaling resulting in low viral titer and failure to develop clinical infection [241]. Therefore, biological modifications are needed to use mice for studying ZIKV replication and pathogenesis events. This can be achieved by using either immunocompromised mice or using alternative routes of inoculation.Immunocompromised MiceImmunocompromised mice are modified for interferon (IFN) insufficiency. This may be conducted by either creating knockout (KO) mice, e.g., interferon alpha receptor knockout (Ifnar-/-), or by using antibodies to block the IFN receptors (MARI-5A3) [242,243]. It has been found that pregnant Ifnar-/- mice exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV infection with subcutaneous inoculation and are able to produce fetal and placental abnormalities [114]. The infection is established in homozygous as well as heterozygous mice, suggesting that partial deficiency in IFN signaling is sufficient to produce fetal neuropathology. As ZIKV infection can occur through venereal transmission; therefore, models have been developed for this purpose. Intravaginal inoculation of ZIKV from 5–8 days of conception results in high levels of viral RNAs in the placenta and fetal tissues in Ifnar-/- mice [244]. ZIKV infection (intravaginal) of IFN regulator factor (IRF) KO e.g., Irf3-/- Irf7-/- mice exhibit higher vaginal and fetal titers of the virus. This implies that inhibition of IFN signaling is a key factor in establishing different mice models.Immunocompetent MiceAs discussed previously, ZIKV infection often fails in immunocompetent mice. However, some researchers have used alternative strategies to produce ZIKV infection by using higher viral titer or other routes of inoculation. A Brazilian ZIKV strain has been used to produce successful fetal infection in SJL mice. In this study, high viral inoculation (1010 to 1012 pfu/mL) was used to produce uterine and fetal infection that ultimately resulted in fetal microcephaly [245]. However, these mice showed higher levels of T cells in the blood and later on developed autoimmunity and sarcoma [246]. The intraamniotic route has also been used for ZIKV inoculation in embryos and resulted in damage to the retina and blood–brain barrier and produced neuronal death and defects in motor neurons in the fetal brain. Intrauterine infection also resulted in ZIKV infection of placental endothelial and trophoblast cells and in the fetus, the virus localizes in the microglial, endothelial, and NPCs of the fetal brain [67,247,248]. Another model has also been developed to study the postnatal CZS progression by inoculating C57BL/6 mice intraperitoneally, and it was seen that the fetus had reduced body weight and microcephaly. Later on, these mice exhibited motor and memory deterioration in adulthood [249]. These studies pave a path towards viral replication and neuropathogenesis studies in immunocompetent mice models that may be deployed for further understanding of ZIKV neuropathogenesis and drug discovery.5.3.3. Farm AnimalsAlthough less common as animal models, pregnant sheep, and pigs may be used as a model for ZIKV replication and pathogenesis. They are widely available and exhibit susceptibility to the virus [250,251]. They can also be used as a model for human pregnancy and fetal growth [252]. ZIKV infection during the first trimester in sheep resulted in placental pathology, reduced fetal growth, and fetal loss [253]. Maternal ZIKV infection during the 4th to 5th week resulted in the detection of ZIKV RNA in the PBMCs of the mother; however, clinical infection failed to occur [253]. Similarly, in pigs, intrauterine infection during pregnancy resulted in placental abnormalities as well as microcephaly in piglets [254]. It has also been seen that following intrauterine ZIKV infection, the African ZIKV lineage was found to produce a more pronounced viral infection as compared to the Asian strain [255]. These findings clearly establish the role of sheep as a possible animal model to study fetal neuropathogenesis due to ZIKV.5.3.4. RatsAs rats become immunocompromised during the final stage of gestation, similar to humans, they may also be utilized as a model to investigate ZIKV neuropathogenesis [256]. Upon subcutaneous (S/C) inoculation of ZIKV to pregnant rat females, reduced cortical and hippocampus volumes were observed in rats, although no pathological findings and viral detection were observed in the maternal counterpart [114,257].5.3.5. HamstersInfection of immunocompetent females during pregnancy was unable to produce productive viral infection; ZIKV RNA was not found in fetal or placental tissue and fetus size remained unaffected [114]. However, ZIKV infection (Malaysia Strain) in immunocompromised hamsters (8 days post-mating) resulted in ZIKV infection of placental tissue and also caused vertical transmission of the ZIKV from mother to offspring [258].5.3.6. ChickenChicken embryos have been demonstrated to support ZIKV viral growth in the chicken brain and other tissues [259]. Intraamniotic inoculation of ZIKV resulted in stunted embryo growth and microcephaly [260]. Furthermore, comparison of the Asian and African ZIKV strains showed that the African strain caused more embryonic pathologies [261].6. Treatment and Prevention Against Zika Virus and Zika Virus Associated Neuropathies6.1. Prevention from Zika Virus Through VaccinesOne of the major methods for viral disease prevention and control is vaccination. Immediately after the outbreak of ZIKV, research began to find ideal vaccine candidates to prevent future ZIKV outbreaks [262]. Several vaccine candidates have emerged; however, very few have been used in clinical trials. The various ZIKV vaccine candidates are summarized in Table 3.6.1.1. Purified Inactivated Zika Virus Vaccines (PIZIKV)Several inactivated vaccines have been developed and tested by animal models. The majority of these vaccines have been able to demonstrate higher antibody titer, reduced viremia, successful passive transfer of antibodies, and protection in mice (interferon deficient) after homologous or heterologous vaccination [263]. In India, one vaccine has entered phase I clinical trials (CTRI/2017/05/008539) [291]. Using mice and non-human primates (NHPs), an aluminum hydroxide-based inactivated ZIKV vaccine has demonstrated promising antibody titers and protection against homologous antigen challenge [265]. Another PIZIKV provided complete protection in a dose-dependent manner (0.016 to 10 ug) and was found to be effective one year following vaccination in macaques [266]. A double-blind randomized controlled trial (Phase I) was performed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of PIZIKV, and it was found that the vaccine was safe for 52 h. However, protection was not found to be effective as only a single dose was given and for better immunogenicity, a double dose may be needed [268].6.1.2. Live Attenuated Vaccines:Live-attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are known for eliciting swift and long-lasting protective immunity and represent a crucial strategy for managing flavivirus diseases [292]. These are made by modifying the virus in such a way that it may replicate within the organism and stimulate the immune system without causing disease. Since 1938, they have been used as the gold standard as they exhibit good safety and effective protection from viral infection [293]. LAVs are known to stimulate the immune system for long-lasting periods (without the need for an adjuvant or any booster). Currently, three approaches are being used for generating ZIKV LAVs, which are (i) generating chimeric strains (using the backbone of an attenuated flavivirus), (ii) codon deoptimization, and (iii) mutagenesis. One of the most important advantages of using live vaccines is their ability to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses (with a single dose of immunization); as the virus continues to multiply within the host cells, allowing continuous loading of MHC (I and II) with viral peptides. In addition, they are cost-effective (both during manufacturing as well as transportation). The past experiences of successful development of LAV against Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) and Yellow Fever Virus (YFV) have clearly shown their potential to be used as safe viral vaccines [279,293]. However, manufacturing of live vaccines usually requires eggs or cell culture and also maintaining a cold chain during transportation. In countries having warm climates, maintaining cold chain only can account for up to 80% of the total vaccine cost [294]. Another major concern associated with the use of live vaccination is inadequate attenuation (once they are at the stage of the human clinical trials [295]. A variety of LAVs have been tested against the ZIKV [292], and the selective studies are summarized in Table 3.6.1.3. Nucleic Acid VaccinesDNA and RNA-based vaccines are being developed for different infectious diseases. They offer the advantage of prolonging immune response following vaccination and induce both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (CMI) [296]. However, one major disadvantage is that DNA vaccines often fail to elicit adequate immune response or offer protection from challenge [297]. Despite these advantages, DNA vaccines may have the risk of eliciting autoimmunity (by eliciting anti-DNA antibody production) and also causing insertional mutations [298]. Another point to keep in mind is that in the case of DNA vaccines, DNA must enter inside the nucleus of the cell, and then after transcription, mRNA must travel outside the nucleus (into the cytoplasm), where it is translated into the proteins. In contrast, for RNA vaccines, RNA can directly be translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, which are then secreted from the cells (into the extracellular matrix) where they can be presented to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). mRNA vaccines have become more popular after the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is also important to note that storage of mRNA vaccine requires maintaining a cold chain, which may not be feasible in developing countries [299]. The summary of various DNA vaccines available against ZIKV is summarized in Table 3.6.1.4. Subunit VaccinesDue to their rapid production and stability, a variety of ZIKV vaccines have been developed. The majority of these vaccines have used the Envelope protein (E protein) and its different segments. These vaccines have been tested in various animal models, which are summarized in Table 3.6.1.5. Viral Vector-Based VaccinesViral vector-based vaccines are prepared by using a vector virus for the insertion of the genetic components of ZIKV, and they have been found to induce good humoral immunity. Lentovirus, adenovirus, and retroviruses are known to be good viral vectors. Various ZIKV vaccines have been developed using various viral vector systems, which have been summarized in Table 3.6.2. Zika Virus Prevention Through Vector ControlMosquitoes play a central role in the transmission of ZIKV. Therefore, reducing ZIKV transmission through vector control methods involves diverse and innovative strategies and tools designed to manage disease-spreading mosquito population. One of the most widely used strategies is the use of chemical insecticides (due to their cost-effectiveness and easy availability). However, due to the emergence of insecticide resistance and their deleterious effects on the environment, the focus is now diverted towards various other control methods [300,301]. Due to their eco-friendly nature, herbal-based control methods have now gained attention. Promising insecticide activities have been shown by extracts derived from the Illicium verum, Zanthoxylum limonella, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon winterianus, Eucalyptus citriodora, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, etc. [302,303,304,305,306,307,308]. Furthermore, nanoparticles derived from Ambrosia arborescens have also shown good larvicidal activity. However, their toxicity profile should be determined against other environment-friendly insects, animals, and humans [307]. Similarly, biological control methods are also being employed due to their minimal impact on the environment [309]. This includes the use of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Various species of entomopathogenic fungi (Metarhizium anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Aspergillus terreus) and bacteria (Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), Wolbachia) have been tested against ZIKV-transmitting mosquitoes [310,311,312,313,314,315]. Particularly, the introduction of Wolbachia in mosquitoes has demonstrated the ability to disrupt the reproductive potential of disease-transmitting vectors. Similarly, the use of various natural predators, i.e., Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, fishes, tadpoles, and copepods, have also been used against the mosquitoes and have shown varying degrees of efficacy in controlling the mosquito population [316]. Moreover, genetic engineering principles have been applied to release genetically modified mosquitoes into the environment [317]. Furthermore, the use of the sterile insect technique is also an innovative approach to control the mosquito population [318]. When used in combination, these strategies offer an integrated approach to vector control, addressing both short and long-term goals of reducing ZIKV and its induced neuropathies. A summary of vector control strategies developed so far is provided in Table 4.6.3. Treatment for Zika Virus6.3.1. Antivirals Against Zika VirusSince the outbreak of ZIKV, many compounds have been proposed to possess antiviral activity against ZIKV. However, in the majority of cases, treatment is symptomatic, and no specific antiviral has been approved for ZIKV treatment. A myriad of approaches are being adopted for searching for anti-ZIKV drugs. These strategies include the screening of different compounds for their anti-ZIKV activity or through repurposing drugs that are already being used for the treatment of other viral infections. In addition, the anti-ZIKV activity of several herbal/plant extracts is also being evaluated. Broadly, anti-ZIKV compounds have been divided into 2 major categories: (a) direct-acting antivirals, which inhibit the viral replication cycle; (b) antivirals targeting host cells [75]; both of these are summarized in Table 5. The former drugs act on the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp); NS5. Polymerase inhibitors and nucleoside analogs are included in this category. They act by targeting the catalytic domain of NS5. The other category of drugs (host-targeting antivirals) targets the host cell processes (that play an important role in viral replication). Viruses need host nucleosides for their genome replication. The host-acting antivirals can act on various steps of viral replication (host cell binding, entry, replication complex formation, viral maturation, and release from the host cell). An advantage of targeting host processes is that they are less susceptible to developing drug resistance [75].6.3.2. Medicinal Plants as Zika Virus AntiviralsModern scientific research has found numerous synthetic antiviral medications that are effective against a variety of viral infectious disorders throughout the past few decades. Unfortunately, a wide range of negative consequences associated with these synthetic medications have been documented. They may occasionally lose their potency against newly arising virus resistance strains [381]. Furthermore, people in developing nations cannot afford expensive synthetic medications for the treatment of viral infections. Medicinal plants may offer economical and efficient antiviral medications. To date, no plant-derived antiviral has been approved for clinical use against ZIKV. Various research has been conducted to identify medicinal plants possessing anti-ZIKV activity, and they have been summarized in Table 6.7. Zika Virus and Its Potential Oncolytic ActivitiesZIKV exhibits tropism for a variety of cell types including normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs/NSPs), microglial cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells [406,407,408]. Following the entry into cells, the virus disrupts growth and development, causing cell death. Studies in various animals have also supported the association between ZIKV infection and neurodegeneration. Inoculation of ZIKV in rhesus monkeys during early pregnancy has been shown to result in the aberrations of the microglial cells and also cortical plate thinning (3 weeks post-inoculation) [409,410]. Therefore, ZIKV is a promising virus that may be used as an oncolytic virus against glioblastoma as it infects the tumor cells. Particularly, in vitro studies have shown that the ZIKV NS5 protein inhibits the migration, proliferation, and invasion of glioblastoma. Studies in mice have shown that it increases the survival of C57/B6 mice with intracranial glioblastoma [411]. Another study in C57/B6 mice has shown that ZIKV increases the survival of mice with glioblastoma (with the suppression of tumor volume as well as the absence of clinical signs) [412]. Further molecular studies have revealed that ZIKV protease causes the cleavage of human cellular gasdermin D (GSDMD), which causes the activation of pyroptosis (caspase-independent) [413]. ZIKV infection in immunocompetent dogs (suffering from glioblastoma) has also been shown to decrease the tumor mass volume and ameliorate neurological signs. Further investigations revealed an increase in the number of immune cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment [414]. This increase in the numbers of immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) has also been observed in C57BL6/J mouse models (suffering from glioblastoma) infected with ZIKV. This infiltration of T cells into the tumor microenvironment provides enhanced protection to mice. ZIKV infection is associated with enhanced activation of the type I interferon signaling pathway in glioblastoma cells and increases the glioblastoma sensitivity to the PD-L1 blockade, which is an important immune checkpoint [415,416,417].8. Future Perspectives in Zika Virus ControlSince its emergence in 1947, ZIKV has only caused widespread epidemics in the last two decades. The outbreaks of ZIKV also suggest the dynamics of transmission variability of ZIKV. The outbreak of ZIKV in the Americas caused a rapid increase in studies of ZIKV pathogenesis and its control measures and treatment strategies. It is of prime importance to continue working on establishing virological and immunological diagnostics kits for ZIKV with enhanced specificity and sensitivity. Another area of focus is ZIKV pathogenesis. Finally, prevention and treatment strategies remain pivotal to curtail ZIKV-related morbidity and mortality. Currently, many vaccines are being tested on animal models, but very few have entered into clinical trials, there is a dire need to improve the quality of good vaccine candidates. Plus, the development of genetically modified mosquitoes could be a groundbreaking tool for controlling Zika virus transmission.


Title: CX

IntroductionJapanese encephalitis (JE) is an uncontrolled inflammatory disease of the central nervous system (CNS) resulting from the infection by the neurotropic flavivirus, JE virus (JEV). JEV consists of a single stranded positive sense RNA (ssRNA+) encoding for 3 structural proteins (capsid protein (C), precursor to membrane protein (prM) and envelop protein (E)) and 7 non-structural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5)1. Phylogenetic studies on prM suggest the presence of 5 genotypes for JEV1. JEV is transmitted by mosquito vectors in a zoonotic cycle including pig as amplifiers and water bird as reservoir hosts2. Humans are accidental dead-end hosts because of low viremia that does not allow further virus transmission1. In regions at risks, JE has an annual incidence of 70,000 symptomatic cases with 25–30% of mortality rate and 50% of survivors having life-treating neurological problems3,4. JEV is endemic in northern regions and epidemic in southern regions of the Asia-Pacific5. However, the detection of JEV in Europe6,7 and Africa8, the presence of competent vectors for JEV in Germany9 as well as the ability of JEV to persist and transmit between pigs in the absence of mosquitos10 are increasing risks for virus spread and persistence in regions with more moderate climate. Therefore, JE may become a worldwide health concern despite the establishment of efficient vaccines and vaccination programs3.By a still unknown mechanism, JEV enters into the brain and targets neuronal cells with a specific tropism for developing neurons11. In particular, areas of neuronal turn-over, including the thalamus, the brainstem and the hippocampus, are the main brain regions of JEV–infected neurons found in brain autopsy studies of fatal JE patients12. In the CNS, microglial cells are a unique resident immune cell population able to migrate, phagocyte and present antigen upon insults13,14. Microglia develop during early development of the foetus, but can also derive from blood monocytes after birth under specific conditions15. In the JEV context, human microglia do not release infectious virus particles, but sustain viral RNA during a long period after virus exposure. However, microglia-associated virus remains infectious to susceptible cells under cell-to-cell contact conditions, allowing virus recovery16. Actually, microglia are proposed to play a possible role in long-lasting infection17.Chemokines have potent chemotactic activities leading to the attraction or repulsion of specific cell types in various body compartments. In the CNS, the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis mediates the cross-communication between CX3CR1-expressing microglia and CX3CL1-expressing neurons18. In the CNS, CX3CR1-CX3CL1 maintains homeostasis and regulates inflammatory responses in compromised brain tissues19. Nevertheless, CX3CR1-CX3CL1 is protective in herpes simplex virus infection20 whereas it is detrimental in Theiler’s encephalomyelitis virus infection21. Microglia upregulates CX3CR1 expression in response to JEV exposure16, but the role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis remains unknown.The present study aims to understand and dissect the mechanisms behind virus transmission and recovery from JEV-associated human microglia. In order to achieve this work, human monocyte-derived microglia were exposed to Nakayama JEV strain in vitro until supernatants were free of infectious virus. Virus recovery was subsequently achieved by adding susceptible target baby hamster kidney 21 (BHK-21) cells to JEV-associated microglia. Our results demonstrate that virus recovery from the target cells occurred upon cell contact-mediated virus transmission from JEV-associated microglia up to 10 days after virus exposure. Cell-to-cell virus transmission was not affected by the presence of neutralizing anti-JEV antibodies and de novo virus particles production by target cells could overcome neutralizing activities. Interestingly, viral RNA may be a contributing source of infectious virus material for cell-to-cell virus transmission. The latter virus transmission was dependent on CX3CR1-CX3CL1 interactions. Overall, the present study defines a novel function of human microglia as source of JEV virus infection via cell-to-cell virus transmission, independently of virus binding to its receptor on target cells.ResultsJEV recovery from JEV-pre-treated human microglia occurs at late periods after virus exposureAt early periods of exposure e.g. 24 hours, JEV does not alter morphology nor is it cytopathic to human microglia16. At later exposure periods of 6 and 8 days, observations under the light microscope demonstrated that both mock- and JEV-treated human microglia were confluent with variable morphologies of flat and elongated or round cells and exerted equivalent granularity (Fig. 1a and b). Therefore, microglia survived long-term exposure to JEV.Figure 1JEV recovery from JEV-pre-treated human microglia after late periods of exposure. (a,b) Human microglia were treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for indicated time-periods. Representative micrographs showing cell monolayer and morphology at magnification of (a) 10x and (b) 40×. Scale bars are of (a) 200 μm and (b) 50 μm. In (c), human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at a MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for indicated time-periods. The latter cell were intensively washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of indicated concentrations of control porcine serum (Ctrl serum). (c) Curve lines representing virus titres in supernatants. The symbol represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. Micrographs and data are of 3 independent experiments with each condition performed in duplicate cultures. Significant differences between Mock and JEV isolate is indicated by the letters a and b for conditions in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 PS, respectively. Statistics are calculated with the Mann-Whitney test (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).Since supernatants of JEV-treated human microglia were free of infectious virus from 6 days of exposure onwards (data not shown), virus recovery was assessed as previously described16. To this end, human microglia were pre-treated with JEV for 6, 8, 10 and 12 days and subsequently co-cultured with susceptible target cells such as BHK-21 cells in cell-to-cell contact conditions for 2 additional days in the presence of control porcine serum (Ctrl serum). Virus titres were then determined in supernatants of co-cultures. In the presence of 1:100 of Ctrl serum, virus titres were of 1.41 × 104 TCID50/mL (±1.46 × 104), 1.13 × 105 TCID50/mL (±2.54 × 105) and 1.82 × 101 TCID50/mL (±2.98 × 101) at 6, 8 and 10 days of pre-treatment, respectively. In the presence of 1:1000 of Ctrl serum, virus titres were of 4.62 × 102 TCID50/mL (±5.42 × 102), 1.87 × 103 TCID50/mL (±2.68 × 103) and 0.61 × 101 TCID50/mL (±1.25 × 101) at 6, 8 and 10 days of pre-treatment, respectively. After a pre-treatment of 12 days, no infectious virus was detected with neither 1:100 nor 1:1000 of Ctrl serum. Overall, JEV recovery was statistically significant compared to mock at 6 and 8 days, but not at 10 days after virus pre-treatment. (Fig. 1c).Neutralizing anti-JEV antibodies do not completely abrogate cell-to-cell virus transmission and recovery from human microgliaIn order to evaluate a possible contact of JEV with the extracellular space during the process of cell-to-cell virus transmission between JEV-infected human microglia and susceptible cells, neutralizing immune serum of pig vaccinated against JEV was employed22. Importantly, the potency of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection by JEV22 is circumvented by applying antibodies generated in pigs on cells of other species, e.g. human and hamster. Neutralizing titres of immune serum was 1:320 to cell-free JEV22 and was used at concentrations of 1:100 and 1:1000. Control (Ctrl) and immune neutralizing (NT) porcine sera were added at time of co-culture of BHK-21 cells and JEV-infected human microglia for 6 or 8 days. Then, levels of intracellular JEV envelop protein (JEV E) were measured in BHK-21 cells and virus titres were determined in supernatants.In order to evaluate cell-to-cell virus transmission, intracellular JEV E protein was analysed in BHK-21 cells by flow cytometry. BHK-21 cells were gated as big cells based on their forward/scatter (FSC/SSC) profile (Fig. 2a, upper left panel). Intracellular JEV E protein expression was measured on BHK-21 cells, as exemplified from co-cultures of 6d JEV-pre-treated microglia with BHK-21 cells (Fig. 2a). Upon co-culture with 6d JEV-pre-treated human microglia, significant frequencies of JEV E-bearing BHK-21 cells were 11.19% (±8.1) and 7.32% (±6.00) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 Ctrl serum, respectively, as compared to mock. As expected, 1:100 and 1:1000 of NT serum significantly reduced the frequencies of JEV E-bearing BHK-21 cells to 3.35% (±1.48) and 2.63% (±1.49) respectively, as compared to corresponding Ctrl serum conditions. However, the frequencies of JEV E-bearing BHK-21 cells in the presence of 1:100 NT serum remained significant compared to mock (Fig. 2b). Although none of the Ctrl and NT sera conditions showed significance, similar tendencies were pictured upon co-culture of 8d JEV-pre-treated human microglia with BHK-21 cells (Fig. 2c). Overall, neutralizing antibodies did not completely block cell-to-cell virus transmission.Figure 2Impact of anti-JEV neutralizing antibodies on virus transmission and recovery. Human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for indicated time-periods. Then, cells were washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of indicated concentrations of control (Ctrl) or neutralizing (NT) porcine serum. (a) Upper left panel is a representative density plots showing the gating strategy for the identification of BHK-21 cells based on their FSC/SSC profile. Other panels show representative density plots of intracellular JEV E expression in gated BHK-21cells. Frequency of JEV E+-cells is indicated. (b,c) Box plots representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells expressing JEV E. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor. The black line represents the median value, the red line the mean value and the error bars the standard deviation. (d,e) Scatter dot plots representing virus titres in supernatants. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor and the black line represents the mean value. Data are of 4 independent experiments with each condition performed in duplicate cultures. Asterisks on top of a condition show significant differences compared to mock; asterisks on black line show significant differences between the indicated conditions. Statistics are calculated with (b,c) the t-test or (d,e) the Mann-Whitney test (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).In order to confirm virus recovery, infectious virus particles from culture supernatants were titrated. After 6d cultured JEV-pre-treated microglia, significant virus titres were measured as compared to mock, i.e. 9.97 × 104 TCID50/mL (±2.35 × 105) and 5.96 × 104 TCID50/mL (±1.17 × 105) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 of Ctrl serum, respectively. As expected, the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 NT serum decreased virus titres to 2.17 × 101 TCID50/mL (±5.09 × 101) and 8.75 × 101 TCID50/mL (±2.40 × 102) respectively. This diminution in virus titres was significant compared to corresponding concentration of Ctrl serum (Fig. 2d). Similarly, significant virus titres were measured in 8d cultured JEV-pre-treated microglia compared to mock, i.e. 8.50 × 104 TCID50/mL (±2.21 × 105) and 1.03 × 104 TCID50/mL (±2.35 × 104) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 of Ctrl serum, respectively. Compared to corresponding concentration of Ctrl serum, virus titres significantly decreased to 8.57 × 102 TCID50/mL (±2.41 × 103) and 1.87 × 102 TCID50/mL (±3.15 × 102) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 NT serum, respectively. However, only the condition of co-cultures of 8d JEV-pre-treated human microglia and BHK-21 cells in the presence of 1:100 NT serum showed significance compared to mock (Fig. 2e). Therefore, infectious virus could be recovered from co-cultures in the presence of NT serum, demonstrating that de novo virus production could overcome neutralizing activities.Viral RNA may be a contributing source of infectious viral material upon cell-to-cell virus transmissionConsidering the fact that human microglia do not produce infectious virus particles, but sustain the replication of viral RNA16 and that neutralizing antibodies do not completely block virus transmission and recovery, further experiments aimed to identify the potential source of transmission of infectious viral material upon intercellular interactions. In confocal microscopy experiments of co-cultures, the Iba-1 marker was used to label microglia cells (Iba-1pos) and to discriminate from BHK-21 cells (Iba-1neg). Immune fluorescence labelling of intracellular dsRNA allowed detection of replicating viral RNA23,24 and labelling of intracellular JEV E protein showed viral envelop protein. Mock were free of both dsRNA and JEV E (Fig. 3). Short co-culture periods of 6 hours showed that Iba-1pos microglia contained dsRNA, but no JEV E protein upon pre-treatment with JEV (Fig. 3a and b). After 24 hours of co-cultures, both Iba-1pos microglia and Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells presented dsRNA (Fig. 3c). In parallel, JEV E was mostly found in Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells, but was also observed in Iba-1pos microglia cells (Fig. 3d). This indicates a possible re-infection of the latter cells by de novo JEV particles released from the JEV-producing BHK-21 cells.Figure 3Confocal microscopy analysis of intercellular interactions during virus transmission. Human microglia were adhered with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 2 hours. Cells were then intensively washed with cold PBS and left in culture at 37 °C for 48 hours. Then, cells were intensively washed with PBS before co-culture with BHK-21 cells in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum for various time-periods. Cells were stained for the indicated markers and analysed using confocal microscopy. Micrographs showing fluorescence signals upon co-cultures of (a,b) 6 hours and (c,d) 24 hours. Scale bars are of 60 μm. White arrows focus on microglia and red arrowheads on BHK-21 cells. Micrographs are representative out of 3 independent experiments.In order to assess the role of viral RNA in cell-to-cell virus transmission, RNAse A was applied to degrade RNA content in co-cultures such as viral RNA. Using flow cytometry, BHK-21 cells were gated as big cells and microglia as small cells based on their FSC/SSC profile. Then, intracellular dsRNA and JEV E protein were detected in BHK-21 cells and microglia (Fig. 4a). Treatment of co-cultures with RNAse A decreased the frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells in a dose dependent manner and a dose of 60 μg/mL of RNAse A was used for further experiments (Supplementary Fig. 1a). In the absence of RNAse A, frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells were of 1.88% (±0.54) whereas 60 μg/mL of RNAse A significantly reduced the frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells to 0.56% (±0.43). Only conditions in the absence of RNAse A showed significance compared to mock with frequencies of 0.45% (±0.16) (Fig. 4b, left panel). In parallel, the absence of RNAse A revealed frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 0.98% (±0.39) whereas 60 μg/mL of RNAse A showed frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 0.50% (±0.56). Again, only conditions in the absence of RNAse A showed significance compared to mock with frequencies of 0.37% (±0.24) (Fig. 4b, right panel).Figure 4Impact of RNAse A on virus transmission and recovery. Human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 6 days. Cells were then washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum and indicated concentrations of RNAse A. (a) Central panel is a representative density plots of flow cytometry analysis showing the gating strategy for the identification of BHK-21 cells and microglia based on their FSC/SSC profile. Other density plots represents (left panel) intracellular dsRNA and (right panel) JEV E expression in gated (upper panel) BHK-21cells and (lower panel) microglia. Frequency of dsRNA and JEV E+ cells is indicated. (b) Histogram bars representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing dsRNA identified as in (a). The bar represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. (c) Box plots representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing JEV E identified as in (a). The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor. The black line represents the median value, the red line the mean value and the error bars the standard deviation. (d) Histogram bars representing virus titres in supernatants. The bar represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. Data are of 2 independent experiments with each condition performed in duplicate or triplicate cultures. Asterisks on top of a condition show significant differences compared to mock; asterisks on black line show significant differences between the indicated conditions. Statistics are calculated with (b,c) the t-test or (d) the Mann-Whitney test (n.s.: not significant; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).Deeper analysis of JEV E expression revealed that in the absence of RNAse A, frequencies of JEV E+-BHK-21 cells were of 12.39% (±6.93) and 60 μg/mL of RNAse A resulted in frequencies of JEV E+-BHK-21 cells of 4.65% (±4.05). Both conditions were significant compared to mock with frequencies of 0.34% (±0.16) (Fig. 4c, left panel). In parallel, the absence of RNAse A showed frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 2.71% (±2.3) and 60 μg/mL of RNAse A lead to frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 0.78% (±0.42). Again, both conditions were significant compared to mock with frequencies 0.35% (±0.18) (Fig. 4c, right panel).However, treatment with RNAse A did not abrogate nor diminished the generation of infectious JEV particles, which titres ranged at 105–106 TCID50/mL (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. 1b). Overall, RNAse A effectively reduced intracellular dsRNA in cells but not JEV E. Moreover, the production of de novo virus particles overcome RNAse A activity.The CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis contributes to intercellular interactions for cell-to-cell virus transmission and recoveryUpon short period of exposure to JEV (e.g. 2 days), human microglia increase their cell surface expression of CX3CR116. After 6 days, ~5% of human microglia expressed CX3CR1 on their cell surface upon JEV exposure and was comparable to mock (Fig. 5a). In counterpart, ~2% of BHK-21 cells expressed CX3CL1 on their surface, the ligand for CX3CR1 (Fig. 5b). Therefore, the role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis upon intercellular interactions during virus transmission was investigated using a non-competitive, potent and highly specific antagonist for CX3CR1 in co-cultures25,26. Importantly, doses of 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist did not affect the capacity of virus propagation by BHK-21 cells (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Overall, treatment with CX3CR1 antagonist decreased the frequencies of JEV E-expressing cells and virus titres in a dose-dependent manner. Since 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist efficiently inhibited virus transmission and recovery, this dose was employed for further analysis (Supplementary Fig. 2b and c).Figure 5Role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis in cell-to-cell virus transmission and recovery. (a) Human microglia were treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 6 days. Representative density plots of cell surface expression of CX3CR1. Frequency of CX3CR1+ cells is indicated. (b) BHK-21 were maintained in culture at 37 °C. Representative density plots of steady state surface expression of CX3CL1 by BHK-21 cells. Frequency of CX3CL1+ cells is indicated. Representative plots are out of 3 independent experiments. (c–e) Human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 6 days. Cells were then washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum and indicated concentrations of CX3CR1 antagonist. In (c,d), cells were analysed by flow cytometry for dsRNA and JEV expression in BHK-21 cells and microglia identified as in Fig. 4a. (c) Histogram bars representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing dsRNA. The bar represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. (d) Box plots representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing JEV E. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor. The black line represents the median value, the red line the mean value and the error bars the standard deviation. (e) Scatter dot plots representing virus titres in supernatants. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor and the black line represents the mean value. Data are of 2 or 4 independent experiments with each condition performed in triplicate or duplicate or triplicate cultures. Asterisks on top of a condition show significant differences compared to mock; asterisks on black line show significant differences between the indicated conditions. Statistics are calculated with (c,d) the t-test or (e) the Mann-Whitney test (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).Cell-to-cell virus transmission was investigated by the detection of intracellular dsRNA and JEV E protein in BHK-21 cells and microglia by flow cytometry after 2 days of co-cultures since earlier time-periods of co-cultures did not allow quantification of dsRNA and JEV E protein (Supplementary Fig. 3a and b). In the absence of CX3CR1 antagonist, frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells were of 2.75% (±1.57) and treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist lead to reduced frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells to 1.54% (±0.87). Both conditions showed significance compared to mock with frequencies of 0.49% (±0.34) (Fig. 5c, left panel). In parallel, frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia were of 0.35% (±0.31) and 0.51% (±0.45) in the absence and the presence of 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist, respectively. No significance was found compared to mock with frequencies of 0.23% (±0.29) (Fig. 5c, right panel).Analysis of JEV E expression showed frequencies of JEV E-expressing BHK-21 cells of 33.64% (±13.23) in the absence of CX3CR1 antagonist. As expected, treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist significantly reduced the frequencies of JEV E-expressing BHK-21 cells to 5.63% (±6.03). Both conditions were significant compared to mock with frequencies of 0.42% (±0.47) (Fig. 5d, left panel). In parallel, frequencies of JEV E+-microglia were of 10.62% (±8.07) and 4.17% (±4.09) in the absence and the presence of 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist, respectively. Both conditions were significant in comparison to mock showing frequencies of 0.17% (±0.19) (Fig. 5d, right panel).In addition, recovery of infectious virus particles was evaluated by virus titration in supernatants. Importantly, recovery of infectious virus particles was confirmed in the absence of CX3CR1 antagonist by significant titres of 5.21 × 107 TCID50/mL (±1.09 × 108) when compared to mock. In line with previous observations by flow cytometry, treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist significantly reduced virus titres to 2.71 × 104 TCID50/mL (±5.04 × 104) but these titres remained significant compared to mock (Fig. 5e). Upon co-culture of 8d JEV-pre-treated human microglia with BHK-21 cells, similar picture were observed although no significant changes were obtained regarding the frequencies of JEV E-expressing cells from the various conditions. Otherwise, virus titres in the absence of the CX3CR1 antagonist were significant in comparison to mock. Importantly, treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist significantly reduced the content of infectious virus particles in BHK-21 cells (Supplementary Fig. 4a and b). Overall, antagonistic treatment of CX3CR1 inhibited cell-to-cell virus transmission and recovery.The CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis may influence the type of intercellular interactionsJEV transmission and recovery requires cell-cell contact16. Already at short co-culture periods, two types of cell-to-cell interactions were observed between Iba-1pos microglia-containing dsRNA and Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells. In the majority of the observations, the two cell types were close to each other with a large portion of the surface cell membranes in contact (Fig. 6a, upper panel), indicating virological synapses27. To a lesser extent, the two cell types were more distant from each other, but forming thin membrane protrusions27 containing dsRNA in the Iba-1pos microglia tubular extensions, which interacted with BHK-21 cells (Fig. 6a, lower panel).Figure 6Role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis on intercellular interactions. Human microglia were adhered with JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 2 hours. Cells were then intensively washed with cold PBS and left in culture at 37 °C for 48 hours. Cells were intensively washed with PBS and co-cultured with BHK-21 cells. In (a), co-cultures were performed in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum for 6 hours. In (b), co-cultures were performed in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum and in the absence or the presence of CX3CR1 antagonist for 6 hours. Cells were stained for the indicated markers and analysed using confocal microscopy. (a,b) Micrographs showing fluorescence signals on bright field overlay focusing on intercellular interactions. Zoom of white square in left panel is presented. Scale bars are of 20 μm in left panels and of 8 μm in zoom panels. Micrographs are representative out of 3 independent experiments.Co-cultures in the presence or the absence of the CX3CR1 antagonist were also analysed by confocal microscopy using a similar approach as described before. In both conditions, Iba-1pos microglial cells contained dsRNA and interacted with Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells. Intercellular interactions were abundant and of a virological synapses appearance27 in the absence of the antagonist. Although the frequency had substantially decreased, membrane protrusions27 were occasionally observed in the presence of CX3CR1 antagonist (Fig. 6b).DiscussionMicroglia are the first line of defence against CNS insults14. In the context of JE, microglial cells are the major producers of antiviral inflammatory mediators within the CNS28. Indeed, human microglia produce various inflammatory mediators upon exposure to JEV16. However, microglia may also serve as reservoir for JEV, since they sustain viral replication for long period after JEV exposure16,17,29. For cell-to-cell JEV transmission, the present study highlights the potential involvement of human microglia in JEV propagation and spreading in the brain. Cell-to-cell contact-dependent virus transmission may substantially contribute to the spread of the virus infection30. Moreover, virus recovery after late periods may contribute to persistent JEV infection. Persistency of JEV in the human CNS has been suggested, since infectious virus can be found in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients beyond the third week of illness31. Although it is unknown whether JEV can be reactivated, a biphasic pattern of JE has been described with a relapse of the disease 14–32 days after illness recovery32. Thus, JEV transmission by microglia may initiate another cycle of JEV activation leading to JE relapse in persistent infection.Cell-to-cell contact-dependent virus transmission is a mechanism used for viral escape to immunity. In our study, antibodies efficiently neutralized cell-free JEV22, but were inefficient in blocking cell-to-cell transmission of microglia-associated JEV. First, resistance to neutralizing antibodies may result from the inefficacy of a certain subset of neutralizing antibodies to inhibit cell-to-cell virus transmission27. Otherwise, resistance to neutralizing antibodies may be due to the inaccessibility of antibodies within intercellular interaction structures. Cytosol-to-cytosol connectivity between cells, as well as cytoplasmic connections-containing vesicles prevent exposure of viral material to the extracellular space33. Finally, the present study used antibodies derived from pigs treated with a lentivirus-based vaccine against JEV G3 prM and E proteins34. Therefore, other potential sources of viral material such as genomic material and capsid protein are not recognized by antibodies-derived vaccine.The present study suggests that genomic viral RNA is contributing, but not the exclusive source of infectious viral material, to cell-to-cell virus transmission. In various studies, virus particles have been the source of infectivity in cell-to-cell virus transmission35–37. Here, the absence of JEV E protein in JEV-infected microglia cells reflects the inability of forming virus particles. Thus the absence of virus particles, but the detection of intracellular dsRNA demonstrates a replicative form of JEV viral RNA, similar to other ssRNA + viruses24. Viral RNA in its dsRNA and/or ssRNA forms may be sufficient for cell-to-cell transmission and the recovery of infectious virus including JEV38,39. Despite decreasing intracellular dsRNA content, treatment with RNAse A does not abrogate infectious JEV recovery. Because RNAse A degrades ssRNA, this suggests that dsRNA is more likely to be the source of virus material than ssRNA. However, other viral factors may also contribute to cell-to-cell virus transmission.A cell-to-cell contact-dependent mode of transmission of viral genomic RNA represents an alternative mechanism enabling the generation of de novo viable virus particles33. Human microglia are inefficient to generate infectious virus particles and recovery of microglia-associated JEV by target cells depends on cell contact16. JEV induces virological synapses in a contact-dependent mode of virus transmission between virus-pulsed dendritic cells and T cells35. Here, microglia may use virological synapses and membrane protrusions such as nanotubes and/or filopodia structures for intercellular interactions. Virological synapses require the contribution of adhesion molecules together with microtubules and actin cytoskeleton for stabilization, whereas membrane extension are actin-rich structures27.Importantly, virus transmission from JEV-treated microglia to target cells involves CX3CR1-CX3CL1 interaction. In the CNS, microglia express CX3CR1 whereas neurons express CX3CL1 and the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis is a main regulator of chemotaxis and cross-communication between microglia and neurons18. In the present study, low levels of CX3CR1 expression on microglia allowed cell-to-cell virus transmission indicating an extreme sensitivity of this mechanism. The fact that JEV-treated microglia transiently up-regulates surface expression of CX3CR116 suggests that cell contact-mediated virus transmission may significantly contribute to infection of neuronal cells at early time of infection. Therefore, the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis could be a potential therapeutic target candidate in JEV-infected patients. However, CX3CL1 is crucial in the inhibition of the production and neurotoxicity of JEV-infected microglia-derived inflammatory factors40,41. Moreover, polymorphism of CX3CR142 may influence the specificity of potential therapeutics. Polymorphism of CX3CR1 may also explain the differences observed in virus transmission and recovery between cells of blood donors. Nevertheless, the CX3CR1 antagonist did not completely abrogate cell-to-cell JEV transmission indicating that additional or alternative factors may be involved in transmission. For example, DC-SIGN, which is expressed in human microglia43,44, promotes dendritic cell-to-T cell JEV transmission35 and mediates cellular modifications such as cytoskeleton remodelling promoting filopodia extension45.MethodsAuthorization, ethics approval and consent to participateThe Federal Office for the Environment (FOEN, Bern, Switzerland) provided authorization for the collection of human samples and manipulation of the various cells and viruses (authorization number A130522). Ethics approval 034/13-CER-FR for the characterization and differentiation of human white blood cells has been granted by the Ethics Committee of the Canton of Fribourg according to corresponding laws and regulations, based on the Declaration of Helsinki. No consent form was required as the buffy coats were provided from the Swiss Red Cross Blood Bank. All samples were analysed anonymously.Antibodies and stainsThe viral envelop protein was detected using the pan-immune anti-flavivirus antibody (mouse IgG1/IgG2a, clone ATCC-HB-112 D1-4G2-4-15 hybridoma, ATCC, Wesel, Germany) and double stranded RNA (dsRNA) was detected with the anti-dsRNA J2 antibody (mouse IgG2a, Scicons, Budapest, Hungary). Cell markers were detected using anti-human antibodies against CX3CL1 (rabbit polyclonal IgG, clone PA5-23062, Thermofischer Scientific, Waltham, MA), Iba-1 (rabbit polyclonal IgG, Wako, Richmond, VA) and fluorescent-labelled CX3CR1-R-Phycoerythrin (rat IgG2b, clone 2A9-1, Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany).The following secondary antibodies were used for staining: donkey anti-rabbit IgG fluorescent-labelled Alexa Fluor 647 (AF647) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and goat anti-mouse IgG2a fluorescent-labelled AF647 for flow cytometry, as well as goat anti-mouse IgG2a fluorescent-labelled AF488 and donkey anti-rabbit IgG fluorescent-labelled AF546 for confocal microscopy (all obtained from Thermofischer Scientific if not mentioned). Nuclei were stained using DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO). All concentrations for the use of the antibodies and stains were optimized in our laboratory.Cell line cultureBaby Hamster Kidney-21 cells (BHK-21 cells, fibroblasts) ([C-13], ATCC) were cultured in Glasgow’s Minimum Essential Medium (GMEM) (Thermofischer Scientific) supplemented with 10% (v/v) Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Biowest, Nuaillé, France) and Tryptose Phosphate Broth solution (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 °C and 5% CO2.Virus preparation and titrationJEV Nakayama isolate (National collection of pathogenic viruses, NCPV, Salibury, UK) was propagated in BHK-21 cells as previously described16. Briefly, 80% confluent BHK-21 monolayer cell culture was infected with JEV suspended in RPMI-1640 GlutaMAXTM-I medium (Thermofischer Scientific) supplemented with 2% FBS and cultured until cytopathogenic effects (approx. 36–48 hours). Virus stock suspension was obtained after disruption of remaining cells by freezing and centrifugation of cell soup at 3000 g at 4 °C for 30 minutes to eliminate cell debris. In parallel, mock was prepared accordingly from uninfected BHK-21 cells and served as negative control of virus exposure in experiments.Virus titres of virus stocks and experimental supernatants were determined by end-point titration. Briefly, 10-fold serial dilutions of suspension in GMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and Tryptose Phosphate Broth solution were applied on BHK-21 cells at 37 °C, 5% CO2. After 36–48 hours, intracellular viral particles were detected with the pan-immune anti-flavivirus antibody followed by peroxidase enzymatic reaction.Generation of human microglial cellsHuman blood monocyte-derived microglia were generated from buffy coats of anonymous healthy donors obtained from Blutspendedienst (Bern, Switzerland) using a protocol adapted from46. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from buffy coat after Ficoll-Paque density gradient centrifugation (1.077 g/L, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech AG, Dubendorf, Switzerland). Monocytes were enriched using positive selection of CD14+ cells with selection columns and magnetic sorting system (Miltenyi Biotech GmbH). CD14+ monocytes were cultured at a concentration of 0.5 × 106 cells/mL in RPMI-1640 GlutaMAXTM-I medium. Medium was supplemented with antibiotic/antimycotic and bioactive human recombinant granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (10 ng/mL), macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) (10 ng/mL), nerve growth factor (NGF)-β (10 ng/mL) and CC chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) (50 ng/mL) (all purchased from Miltenyi Biotech GmbH), at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 7 days. Half of the medium was renewed after the 3 days of culture.Treatment of human microglial cells with JEV and co-culture with susceptible target cellsHuman microglia were treated with Mock or JEV (at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 TCID50/cell) in RPMI-1640 GlutaMAXTM-I medium at 37 °C and 5% CO2 during various time-periods. Supernatants were collected and pre-treated human microglia were washed 5 times with cold PBS. Both supernatants and last washing was verified negative for infectious JEV by end-point titration. Subsequently, susceptible target BHK-21 cells were co-cultured with pre-treated human microglia in RPMI-40 GlutaMAXTM-I medium, at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Co-cultures were performed in commercial porcine serum (Thermofischer Scientific). After various time-periods of co-culture, supernatants and cells were collected for further analysis.In some experiments, immune porcine serum of vaccinated pigs with neutralizing activity against Nakayama isolate at a titre of 1:32022 and previously described commercial porcine serum was used as control. In other experiments, CX3CR1 antagonist (AZD8797, Axon Biochemicals, Groningen, The Netherlands) suspended in DMSO (Thermofischer Scientific) and/or RNAse A (Macherey Nagel, Düren, Germany) suspended in PBS were used. DMSO and PBS were respectively used as controls. These reactive were put on top of treated microglial cells before the addition of BHK-21 cells for co-cultures.Flow cytometryCells were analysed using multi-colour flow cytometry FACSCanto II instrument (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Data were analysed using FlowJo Software (Data analysis Software, Ashland, OR).Bright field and confocal microscopyFor conventional bright field microscopy, cells were cultured in flat bottom well plates. Cells were analysed and photographed using an EVOS XL Core digital inverted microscope with cell imaging system (Thermofischer Scientific). The image acquisitions were performed with the 10x and 40x objectives.For confocal microscopy, cells were alternatively cultured in labteck or on autoclaved coverslips. After staining, slides were then mounted using Mowiol and left overnight at 4 °C for solidification. Cells were analysed and photographed using a confocal microscope A1 combined with an ECLIPSE Ti inverted microscope and a digital imaging NIS-Elements AR 3.30.02software (Nikon AG, Egg, Switzerland). The image acquisitions were performed with the 20x and 40x objectives. Images were treated with Imaris 9.1 software (Bitplane AG, Zürich, Switzerland), applying background subtraction, threshold applications, gamma correction and maxima.BiosafetyAll experiments using JEV were conducted in a biosafety level 3 bio-containment. After inactivation with 3% paraformaldehyde solution at room temperature for 15 minutes, samples were further analysed by flow cytometry and microscopy.Statistical analysisSignificant differences were determined with GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad software Inc., La Jolla, CA) using the student t-Test (p < 0.05) or the Mann-Whitney Test (p < 0.05).Supplementary information
Supplementary Figures



Title: Role of extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses that impact public health

BackgroundFlaviviruses are positive-sense RNA viruses that have emerged as pathogens and are transmitted by Aedes, Hemagogus, or Culex spp. mosquitoes; nonvector transmission methods involving sexual contact, from mother to child (in-utero or intrapartum), transfusion of blood components, organ transplantation, or body fluid exposure have been described [1, 2]. Infection cases present different clinical ranges from asymptomatic, mild self-limiting, or severe diseases characterized by hemorrhage, neuroinvasion, multiorgan compromise, or death [3, 4].Dengue virus (DENV), Zika virus (ZIKV), yellow fever virus (YFV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), and West Nile virus (WNV) represent the main mosquito-borne flaviviruses due to their continuing risk of infection in tropical and subtropical region inhabitants, constituting more than 50% of the world’s population. The rapid and efficient expansion of flaviviruses has occurred because of the high virulence of circulating strains, the presence of susceptible populations, and the wide distribution of vectors [5, 6]. As a result of the geographic distribution overlap, there is a possibility that the vectors can transmit more than one flavivirus at a time; thus, coinfection may directly impact the clinical outcome [7]. The viral cycle in mosquito vectors begins when the female acquires viruses during blood feeding. Viruses undergo replication and cross specialized epithelial barriers until they reach the salivary glands, where they are released into the saliva and transmitted to a new host during subsequent feeding; therefore, humans are inadvertent hosts [8, 9].Flaviviruses exhibit different human cellular tropisms, which explains why these diseases present diverse clinical syndromes, such as flu-like illness, acute neurological disorders, hemorrhagic fever, and metabolic wasting [9]. Molecular and cellular events in vector–virus–human host interactions are critical for disease outcomes. Infected cells lead to stress signaling, which induces cell differentiation or activation with the release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) [10]. EVs [exosomes (small EVs) and microparticles (medium/large EVs)] are nanoparticles from cellular membranes that mediate intercellular communication by the transfer of proteins, nucleic acids, or lipids. In viral infections, EVs also transfer viral antigens, genomes, or complete virions, favoring transmission by receptor-independent mechanisms and triggering the inflammatory response or the suppression/evasion of the immune response. EVs may be potential biomarkers for disease progression or could be applied as nanotherapeutic tools [11–13].This review focuses on the roles of EVs in DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV infections. We highlight the evidence that demonstrates how EVs, through different study models, are involved as alternative mechanisms that may define mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenicity.Epidemiology of mosquito-borne flavivirusesAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), the global incidence of DENV infections has markedly increased in the last two decades. From 2000 to 2019, the WHO documented a tenfold surge in cases worldwide. In 2023, over five million cases and more than 5000 dengue-related deaths were reported in over 80 countries in Africa, America, Southeast Asia, the Western Pacific, and Eastern Mediterranean regions [14].As of 2022, more than 870,000 autochthonous ZIKV cases have been reported, and 89 countries have reported ZIKV transmission across the Americas, Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Western Pacific [15, 16].YFV remains in a sylvatic cycle in tropical forests, although infection is prevented by a single dose of a safe vaccine [17]. In 2023, the WHO reported that 34 countries in Africa and 13 countries in Central and South America are endemic for YFV [18].JEV is endemic to 24 countries in Southeast Asia and the western Pacific. There are an estimated 68,000 cases of JEV infection each year worldwide, and the case fatality rate can reach as high as 30% [19], whereas WNV is present in Africa, Europe, Asia (Middle East and West), and North America [20]. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the U.S., from 1999 to 2022, 56,575 human disease cases, 25,777 hospitalizations, and 2776 deaths were reported [21].The increased incidence of flaviviruses and their introduction in new countries represent a serious health risk, in addition to population growth, industrialization, and vector adaptability due to environmental disturbances, such as climate change, promoting the conditions for probable future epidemics.Basic virology of flaviviruses: structure and replicative cycle featuresThe genus Flavivirus groups enveloped viruses of approximately 50 nm in diameter, surrounded by a lipid envelope, and encoded by a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome nearly 11 kilobases in length [22]. The viral genomic RNA encodes a single long open reading frame (ORF) flanked by the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) involved in viral genome translation, replication, and packaging. The 5′ UTR (containing the type 1 cap m7GpppAmN) functions as the promoter for the initiation of RNA synthesis, and the 3′ UTR (which lacks a polyadenylated tail) is the precursor of the subgenomic flaviviral RNA (sfRNA) associated with pathogenicity, inhibition of antiviral responses, increased viral transmission, and increased replicative fitness [2, 23, 24].The ORF is translated into a polyprotein, from which ten proteins are cleaved: three structural (capsid (C), membrane (M), and envelope (E)) proteins and seven nonstructural (NS) proteins. The C protein is involved in viral RNA packaging and nucleocapsid (NC) core formation; the M protein (a small proteolytic fragment of the precursor protein (prM) produced during viral maturation) functions as a chaperone for E protein folding and assembly; and the E protein mediates binding and fusion during viral entry. NS proteins (1, 2A, 2B, 3, 4A, 4B, and 5) are necessary for genome replication, viral assembly, and host immune response dysregulation [25, 26].Flaviviruses exhibit broad cellular tropism, entering host cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. It is known that they use a wide variety of receptors [22]. Viral endocytosis is followed by the fusion of the virion envelope with cellular membranes due to the low pH of the endosome. Endosome acidity triggers irreversible trimerization of the E protein, NC release into the cytoplasm, and C protein/RNA dissociation. The viral RNA is subsequently translated into a single polyprotein, which is cleaved into structural and NS proteins at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. For viral RNA replication, a negative-sense strand is synthesized, serving as a template for new positive-strand genomes. The assembly process consists of the association of the C protein with genomic RNA, followed by budding into ER membranes that contain the E-prM protein complex, constituting immature virions. Virion maturation occurs in the trans-Golgi network, where proteolytic processing and acid-induced E-prM rearrangement promote prM cleavage. Additional steps, such as glycan modification, result in the formation of mature infective particles. Flaviviruses are released from host cells by exocytosis [2, 22–26].The viral replication cycle requires viral proteins with the involvement of host molecules such as RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), which are ubiquitous in the cytoplasm and determine virus‒cell interactions [23–25]. Diosa-Toro et al. hypothesized that flavivirus RNA recognition relies on specific host RBPs that promote its incorporation at the EV cargo as an alternative mode for viral spread [24]. In this sense, the viral replication cycle and EV biogenesis may converge on common cellular mechanisms; this fact implies a determining role of EVs in flavivirus pathogenesis as an advantage of their ability to mediate cell-to-cell communication [27].Extracellular vesicles (EVs)EVs are heterogeneous populations of particles released by cells, delimited by a lipid bilayer, and cannot replicate on their own [28]. In humans, EVs are present in all body fluids [29] and enclose and carry nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids that can modify behavior or trigger phenotypic changes in acceptor cells. The biological functions of EVs include removing (waste, harmful, or useless) intracellular components, sharing nutrients, and serving as cell-to-cell mediators; thus, they function in homeostasis and pathological processes [30–32].The International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) proposed the Minimal Information for Studies of EV (MISEV), which characterizes the physical properties of EVs, such as size, density, molecular composition, or cell origin. Exosomes are small EVs (sEVs) < 200 nm in diameter, and ectosomes (microparticles or microvesicles) can be medium/large EVs (m/lEVs) > 200 nm in diameter. Owing to their biogenesis, exosomes are released by exocytosis (through the endosomal pathway) of intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) from multivesicular bodies (MVBs), and ectosomes are released from the plasma membrane by budding [32, 33].EV biogenesis and uptake mechanismsEV (exosome or ectosome) biogenesis occurs through different molecular machineries, such as the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT), the tetraspanin signaling pathway, RBPs, sphingomyelinase-generating cone-shaped lipids (in the central nervous system, CNS), phospholipid relocalization toward the membrane leaflet, or actin cytoskeleton depolymerization [34].Microparticles (MPs) are formed from the budding of the cell membrane due to the disruption of phospholipid asymmetry. Under physiological conditions, phosphatidylserine (PS) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) are located in the inner leaflet, whereas phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin are located on the outer membrane [35]. Phospholipid asymmetry is regulated by Ca2+-dependent enzymes such as flippases, floppases, scramblases, and translocases. The Ca2+ released from the ER enters the plasma membrane, activating enzymes to translocate PS to the cell surface, also leading to the activity of calpain and gelsolin, which induce actomyosin contraction, allowing plasma membrane budding and the release of the MP PS+ into the extracellular space [36, 37].Exosomes originate from the intracellular endocytic trafficking pathway, where inward budding of the membrane of late endosomes results in the formation of the ILV through the ESCRT [38, 39]. ESCRT is a protein family that forms complexes (0, I, II, and III) at the MVB membrane to regulate cargo targeting and the formation of the ILV [29, 38]. ESCRT-dependent exosome biogenesis occurs when ESCRT-0 identifies cargo and sorts it into nascent ILVs. Late endosome membrane invagination occurs through the interaction of the ESCRT-0, ESCRT-I, and ESCRT-II complexes. ILV membrane neck contraction is mediated by ESCRT-III and ATPase vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 4 (VPS4), which favor ILV scission and MVB formation [37, 40–42].ESCRT-independent exosome biogenesis involves tetraspanins (CD9, the CD63/Syntenin-1 complex, or CD81), which function as signaling molecules to regulate cargo sorting through cholesterol-enriched microdomain formation and interact with transmembrane or cytosolic proteins to induce inward membrane budding. In neuronal cells, ceramide promotes membrane subdomain formation and imposes a spontaneous negative curvature for ILV production. Ceramide generation is mediated by neutral type II sphingomyelinase activity. Additionally, extracellular signals from G protein-coupled receptors, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR), the Wnt pathway, or oxidative stress regulate the biogenesis of EVs. ESCRT-dependent and ESCRT-independent pathways synergically act on exosome biogenesis. In this sense, molecules such as ESCRT-associated proteins (Alix and TSG101) and tetraspanins are used as exosome markers to identify their endosomal pathway origin [34–38, 43].The secretory pathway allows MVBs to fuse with the plasma membrane, favoring the release of ILVs as exosomes. Intracellular trafficking of MVBs is mediated by Rab proteins, whereas the soluble N-ethyl maleimide (NEM)-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) complex drives membrane fusion. Cells can internalize EVs through clathrin-dependent, caveolae-dependent, and receptor-dependent mechanisms, macropinocytosis, phagocytosis, or lipid raft-mediated uptake [38, 44, 45]. Thus, EVs can mediate their intercellular communication functions, inducing phenotypic or behavioral changes in acceptor cells.Convergence of EV biogenesis and the RNA virus cycleViruses can usurp cellular signaling networks, co-opting exosome biogenesis pathways for their assembly or transferring viral components to establish host permissiveness [46, 47]. In 2003, Gould et al. proposed the Trojan exosome hypothesis, which is based on the retrovirus replication cycle [48], and it has been extended to other RNA viruses [49–55]. The spread of viruses through exosomes is an alternative and effective mechanism for naïve cell infection that modulates the host’s immune response. Convergence of EV biogenesis and the RNA virus replication cycle allows the sorting of viral antigens, genomes, or complete virions as part of the EV cargo. The critical point is membrane fusion during ILV formation: viral NC or complete virion fusion with the ILV membranes or reverse fusion of the ILV with the MVB, releasing virus into the cytoplasm [46, 49].Focusing on flaviviruses, Hsu et al. first demonstrated in plasma samples from patients with Dengue fever that DENV presented an extra irregularly shaped membrane surrounding a distinct circular vesicle, compatible with EV morphology, with detectable levels of DENV RNA, E, prM, and NS1 proteins. In vitro, these EV-like structures favor the infection of naïve cells, which evade the neutralizing antibody response [56]. These findings suggested that DENV could be carried by EV-like structures such as Trojan horses.Therefore, do EVs (exosomes and MPs) play a role in the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses? To answer this question, we reviewed the published scientific evidence concerning the functions of EVs in different study models (in vivo, in vitro, and ex vivo) of DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV infections to establish their role in pathogenesis, especially in severe forms of disease (Table 1). We recognize that evidence from in vitro studies employing cell lines differs from real functions in living organisms; hence, ideal results come from those using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models to obtain robust conclusions. However, most of the current data related to EVs and flavivirus diseases are obtained from in vitro studies in cell lines; therefore, elucidating their impact on mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesis is important. Further studies using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models are necessary.
Table 1Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of dengue virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesDENV 1–4 from acute DF casesEx vivoIn vitroPlasma specimens from DENV-infected patients and human bone marrow cellsEVs CD61+Viral RNA and proteins (E, prM, NS1)Hamster kidney fibroblasts (BHK-21) and primary human bone marrow cellsIn vitro cell infection and evasion of the neutralizing antibody response[56]DENV-2 TVP2176 (El Salvador strain)DENV-2 New Guinea C (NGC)DENV-3 US/BID-V1619/2005In vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36 HT) from Ae. albopictus and (Aag2) from Ae. aegypti mosquitosExosomes HSP70+DENV-2 complete RNA genome, C protein mRNA, E/NS1 proteins; DENV-3 C protein mRNA, E proteinC6/36 HT cells, Cercopithecus aethiops monkey kidney epithelial (Vero) cells, mouse monocyte-derived dendritic (Mo-DCs) cells, human-skin keratinocytes (HaCaT), and human umbilical vein endothelial (HUVEC) cellsExosomes from DENV-2- and DENV-3-infected mosquito cells carry viral components. Exosomes from DENV-2-infected mosquito cells mediated viral transmission to mammalian cells through interaction with tetraspanin Tsp29Fb. Inhibition of Tsp29Fb or exosome release are potential therapeutics to block viral transmission[66]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36 HT) from Ae. albopictus mosquitosExosomes CD9-like protein+/CD81-like protein+Virus-like particlesC6/36 HT cellsPotential trojan vehicles that carry virus-like particles favor naïve cell infection and play a role in viral dissemination[67]DENV-2 New Guinea (NG)In vitroLarvae lysate cells (ATC-10) from Aedes aegypti mosquitosExosomes (?)Mosquito protein cargo (arginase AAEL002675)–EVs from DENV-infected mosquito cells have an altered protein cargo with infection-enhancing ability. This protein packaging strategy through the EV pathway promotes viral transmission[69]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroSaliva from Ae. aegypti mosquitosEVs (~ 100–500 nm)Viral sfRNAHuman hepatoma cells (Huh-7) and neonatal human primary dermal fibroblasts (NHDF)Salivary EVs from DENV-2-infected mosquitos contain sfRNA. Their stimuli increase viral infectivity and block interferon type I and III signaling[70]DENV-2 16,881Ex vivoIn vitroPlatelets from confirmed DENV-infected patients and healthy donorsMicroparticles CD41+Human IL-1βHuman microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1)IL-1β-containing MPs increased vascular permeability (in vitro) and correlated with endothelial dysfunction (ex vivo). Potential biomarkers of severity outcome[74]DENV-1 HawaiiDENV-2 16,681DENV-3 H87DENV-4 H241Ex vivoIn vitroBlood specimens from DENV-infected patients (ex vivo); human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells (in vitro)Microparticles PS+, platelet origin (CD41a+), erythrocytic origin (CD235+)Viral proteins (E, NS1)–Ex vivo: (1) Elevated MPs PS+ CD235+ levels correlated with DENV disease severity; (2) Low MPs PS+ CD41a levels are associated with bleeding (DHF). In vitro: DENV infection enhances MPs shedding that could transfer viral components to naïve cells[75]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoBlood specimens from DENV-infected patientsMicroparticles PS+, platelet origin (CD41a+), erythrocytic origin (CD235+)––Patients with thrombocytopenia and bleeding manifestations presented decreased levels of MPs PS+ CD41a+. Patients diagnosed as DF with warning signs presented high levels of MPs PS+ CD235a+. The MPs could identify potential progression to severe disease[76]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoIn vitroBlood specimens form DENV-infected patientsEVs CD41a+ CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Alix+Pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-13, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-5Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and naïve T cells CD4+Platelet EVs from plasma of severe dengue patients have immunosuppressive properties on T cells CD4+ that may define the progression of dengue disease[77]DENV-2 PL046In vitroIn vivoPrimary human and primary mice (PF4-Cre) plateletsEVs CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ CD41+ CD62p+–Primary human and mice neutrophils, primary human monocytes-derived macrophages, human endothelial (HMEC-1) cellsC57BL/6 J miceThe EVs from DENV-activated platelets induce neutrophils’ NET formation that contributes to vascular permeability and enhances the release of high concentrations of TNF-α and IL-6 from monocyte-derived macrophages, via activation of CLEC5A/TLR2 receptors on immune cells[78]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoIn vitroPlatelet rich plasma of dengue patientsExosomes CD41+ CD63+ CD9+–Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)Platelet exosome’s interaction with endothelial cells may promote vascular leakage through proinflammatory mediators release, reducing the vascular barrier integrity[80]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoBlood specimens from infected patientsMicroparticles HLA-DR+ CD105+––Association with compromised endothelial stability in DF/SD patients[82]DENV-3 5532/290In vitroPrimary human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mdDC)Exosomes CD9+ CD63+ CD81+Viral E protein and human host RNA (miRNAs, mRNAs)Mosquito (C6/36) cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)The EVs from DENV-infected mdDC carry viral antigens and favor the infection of naïve mosquito cells. The EVs from IFN-treated PBMC protect naïve cells from viral infection. The RNA profile cargo may be associated with immune dysregulation in SD[83]DENV-2 Colombian strainIn vitroHuman adherent (U937) macrophagesExosomes Alix+ TSG101+ CD63+Viral NS3 and human miRNA (miR-181a-5p, miR-4301 and miR-4652-3p)Macaca mulatta monkey kidney epithelial (LLC-MK2) cells and human endothelial (EA.hy926) cellsExosomes did not favor naïve (LLC-MK2) mammalian cells infection. Exosomes transport miRNAs and induce early endothelial barrier changes with a pro-inflammatory (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8) activation pattern[84]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroHuman monocytes (THP-1) from peripheral blood and human embryonic (HEK293T) cellsEVs TSG101+Human miR-148aHuman microglial (CHME3) cellsThe EVs from DENV-infected cells transfer miR-148a that suppresses the USP33/ATF3 axis in human microglia, promoting neuroinflammation[89]DENV-2 UVE/DENV2/2018/RE/47099In vitroDENV-2-infected human lung epithelial (A549) cells and NS1-transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cellsExosomes CD63+ CD81+NS1 viral protein–NS1 dimers secreted into extracellular space are associated with exosomes, reaching privileged sites and thereby acting on pathological processes[90]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroHuman umbilical endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human embryonic kidney epithelial (293 T) cellsExosomes Flotillin-2+ CD63+Human interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3)Human cervix epithelial (HeLa) cellsThe antiviral activity of IFITM3-containing exosomes favors the reduction of DENV-2 entry into host cells[92]EV in mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesisDengue virusDengue fever (DF)The DENV serotypes are transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes [57]. Dengue virus infection can be asymptomatic in most cases [58]. Symptomatic DF can range from a self-limiting acute febrile infection (85–90%) to severe forms (10–15%), known as dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS) [59, 60]. Currently, DHF/DSS are recognized as severe dengue (SD) characterized mainly by systemic vasculopathy syndrome, capillary leakage, and hemorrhage with loss of vascular integrity [58, 61–65].Currently, the functions of EVs in DF and SD pathogenesis are unclear. Research findings suggest that they may have roles as intercellular pro- or antiviral signalers that determine the clinical outcome, as prognostic biomarkers, or as potential therapeutic tools.EV from Aedes spp. mosquito modelsIn the mosquito vector‒host interplay, EVs can enhance viral infection. Vora et al. (2018) used an in vitro model of Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells infected with DENV-2 (TVP2176 or New Guinea C, NGC) and DENV-3 (US/BID-V1619/2005), isolating EVs HSP70+ that contained complete viral RNA, C, E, and NS1 proteins (DENV-2-infected cells), and E protein and C protein mRNA (DENV-3-infected). Stimuli with EVs from DENV-2-infected cells favor the infection of mosquito and vertebrate (mouse, nonhuman primate, and human) naïve cells. An ortholog (Tsp29Fb) of the tetraspanin CD63 that interacts with the viral E protein was identified, and its blockade reduced mosquito cell infection [66].Reyes-Ruiz et al. (2019) identified human CD9/CD81 homologs in mosquito cells and demonstrated the presence of DENV-like particles in the ILV structures of DENV-2 NGC-infected C6/36 HT cells. In vitro stimulation with CD9+ CD81+ exosomes from DENV-2 NGC-infected cells favored the infection of naïve cells, indicating their ability to transmit virus [67].Could EVs be a mechanism of viral transmission through mosquito bites? Cime-Castillo et al. (2015) reported that DENV-2 binds to proteins from Aedes aegypti salivary glands and that saliva enhances viral internalization in mammalian cells [68]. In this sense, Gold et al. (2020) hypothesized that EVs from the saliva of DENV-2 New Guinea-infected Aedes aegypti have altered protein cargo with infection-enhancing ability in mammalian cells. They isolated EVs flotillin+ HSP70+ from DENV-infected Aedes aegypti ATC-10 cells, which contained the arginase AAEL002675. They reported robust enhancement of the viral load in primary dermal fibroblasts previously treated with recombinant arginase [69]. Yeh et al. (2023) were interested in identifying transmission-enhancing factors in mosquito saliva and reported that the EVs in saliva from DENV-2 NGC-infected Aedes aegypti Rockefeller colonies contain high levels of sfRNA. The mosquito saliva/EV stimulus resulted in increased virus infectivity in human hepatoma cells and primary dermal fibroblasts [70].These findings demonstrate that the DENV cycle and exosome biogenesis converge in mosquito cells and that DENV-2-infected cells release EVs that act as Trojan vehicles, transferring viral components, virus-like particles, or mosquito protein cargo that can modify cell permissiveness and favor in vitro infection. More studies are still needed to elucidate the implications of in vivo EVs as efficient mechanisms in mosquito-mediated viral transmission, their impact on vector competence, and their potential as a strategy for mosquito control.Platelet EVs from in vitro and ex vivo modelsPlatelets, immune cells, and vascular endothelial cells are the main effectors involved in the pathogenesis of DF. Platelet dysfunction can lead to impaired inflammatory responses and tissue damage. Platelet activation, followed by thrombocytopenia, is associated with severe clinical outcomes in viral infections, and activation products that include EVs could be the hallmark during DF/SD [71]. The platelet-derived EVs released during DENV infection may enhance inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. MPs, formerly known as “platelet dust”, have procoagulant activity, and their defects promote bleeding disorders, as described in DHF/DSS [72, 73].How do platelet-derived MPs contribute to the pathogenesis of DENV infection? Hottz et al. (2013) reported high levels of CD41+ IL-1β+ platelets in patients diagnosed with DF/SD and isolated CD41+ IL-1β+ MPs (from clinical samples and from DENV-2 16,881-stimulated platelets in vitro), with increased levels of the NLRP3 inflammasome and caspase-1 activity. Stimulation with MPs increased the permeability of endothelial cells in vitro. In patients, high hematocrit rates with plasma leakage were correlated with high levels of CD41+ IL-1β+ MPs [74]. These findings suggest that MPs could be used as biomarkers to improve the early detection of severe disease progression.Punyadee et al. (2015) reported that circulating MPsfrom platelets (CD41a+), erythrocytes (CD235+), monocytes (CD14+), granulocytes (CD66+), T cells (CD3+), B cells (CD19+), and NK cells (CD56+), were present in blood samples of DENV-infected patients with different severities. In acutely ill patients, 50–75% of PS+ MPs are from erythrocytes and platelets and express viral antigens on their surface. Decreased levels of PS+ CD41a+ MPs were associated with a bleeding tendency due to thrombocytopenia. Additionally, they showed in vitro that hepatocellular carcinoma cells infected with DENV-1 Hawaii, DENV-2 16,681, DENV-3 H87, or DENV-4 H241 release PS+ MPs that contain viral E or NS1 proteins on their surfaces [75].Patil et al. (2018) confirmed that platelet- and erythrocyte-derived MPs are potential biomarkers for predicting the risk of SD progression. In blood samples from patients diagnosed with thrombocytopenia and bleeding manifestations, decreased levels of PS+ CD41a+ MPs were detected, whereas patients diagnosed with DF with warning signs presented increased levels of PS+ CD235+ MPs [76]. In this sense, platelet- and erythrocyte-derived MPs may help identify potential patients who are progressing to SD.More recently, Kumari et al. (2023) reported in the plasma of patients with mild and severe disease that SD was associated with increased levels of EVs CD41a+ CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Alix+ from platelets and was highly enriched with the cytokines IL-13, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-5. In vitro, EV stimulation strongly suppressed CD4+ T-cell proliferation through the PD-L1/PD-1 interaction. Additionally, EV-stimulated naïve CD4+ T cells expressed high levels of TNF-α and IFN-γ, indicating that EVs promote the Th1 phenotype [77]. Platelet EVs from the plasma of SD patients have immunosuppressive effects on CD4+ T cells, which may define the progression of dengue disease.Platelets interact with neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages, activating the innate immune response. Therefore, could platelet-derived EVs promote or modulate immune activation? Sung et al. (2019) reported that DENV-2 PL046-stimulated platelets activate the C-type lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC-2) signaling pathway, releasing EVs CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ CD41+ CD62p+. Platelet EV stimuli activate two surface innate immunity receptors (CLEC5A and TLR2) on neutrophils and macrophages, inducing neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation with increased vascular permeability in vivo and increasing the secretion of TNF-α and IL-6 from human monocyte-derived macrophages. The authors demonstrated that the simultaneous blockade of CLEC5A/TLR2 reduces NET formation and permeability changes in vivo, suggesting that this intervention is a potential treatment for DF/SD [78, 79]. Focusing on the interplay of platelet-derived EVs with leukocytes, platelet-derived EVs were demonstrated to be efficient host immune effectors and endogenous danger signals that activate CLEC5A and TLR2 receptors on immune cells, which had a cumulative immunomodulatory effect on DENV-mediated CLEC2 activation on platelets, contributing to disease severity. These findings demonstrate that platelet-derived EVs function as signal effectors and not only as vehicles for biomolecules; therefore, blockade of their interaction may also improve the clinical outcome in SD patients [79].Finally, Vedpathak et al. (2024) isolated platelet-derived CD41+ CD63+ CD9+ CD62p+ exosomes from patients with mild or severe disease. Exosome uptake by endothelial cells (HUVECs) promoted disruption of monolayer integrity with reductions in VE-cadherin and ZO-2 tight junction proteins, and Claudin-1 and PECAM-1 adhesion proteins, indicating the loss of the barrier. Higher levels of C-reactive protein, sVCAM-1, and slCAM-1 were detected both in the cell culture supernatants and in the SD patient samples [80]. The interaction of platelet-derived exosomes and endothelial cells in vitro promotes the release of vascular proinflammatory mediators with the loss of barrier integrity.These reports highlight the multiple roles of platelet-derived EVs in DF/SD pathogenesis. However, their use as targets for therapies or as biomarkers for severity progression still needs further investigation.Immune cell-derived EVs from in vitro and ex vivo modelsMonocytes participate in the establishment of a proinflammatory state, antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), and vascular endothelium damage, all of which are related to the progression to SD [81]. Naranjo-Gómez et al. (2019) evaluated monocyte subset behavior in DF/SD patient plasma and reported high and low counts of DENV E-positive intermediate and nonclassical monocytes, respectively. The DENV-infected monocytes were activated, expressed intracellular TNF-α and exposed PS at the membrane, which could be associated with MP release. High amounts of HLA-DR+ CD105+ MPs (endothelial origin) associated with compromised endothelial stability were found [82]. The interplay between activated monocytes and MPs from vascular endothelial cells may contribute to the progression to SD.Do EVs from leukocytes play a role during DENV infection? Martins et al. (2018) reported that DENV-3 5532 (from an SD case) and DENV-3 290 (from a mild DF case) infection of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mdDC) triggered cell activation and the release of CD9+ CD63+ CD81+ exosomes. Exosomes contain the viral E protein, evade the antibody response, and favor mosquito naïve cell infection. Additionally, exosomes from IFN-treated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) confer resistance to viral infection. The mdDC exosome RNA profile cargo is associated with immune response regulation, the antiviral response, and platelet or endothelial cell activation [83]. Exosomes from DENV-3-infected mdDCs promote pro- or antiviral enhancement, and their RNA profile cargo could be associated with immune dysregulation in SD.Velandia-Romero et al. (2020) isolated Alix+ TSG101+ CD63+ exosomes from DENV-2-infected macrophages (U937 cells) that transport the viral NS3 protein. They did not find that exosomes favor nonhuman primate cell infection. EV stimulation of endothelial cells (EA. hy926) in vitro modified cell physiology and integrity, upregulated the expression levels of the VE-cadherin and ICAM-1 proteins, and subsequently induced the secretion of high levels of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8. Analysis of the miRNA cargo revealed targets associated with cell adhesion, the cell cycle DNA integrity checkpoint, and the regulation of cell communication [84]. There is still no evidence in vivo, through the evaluation of primary cells, that EVs from DENV-2-infected macrophages contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Therefore, further investigations are needed to elucidate this mechanism.DENV-2 promotes crosstalk between the coagulation and inflammation pathways during DF/SD. Huerta-Zepeda et al. (2008) reported that DENV-2 upregulates tissue factor (TF) in endothelial cells, triggering the generation of hemostatic proteases (thrombin) that activate protease-activated receptors (PARs). Activated PARs initiate inflammatory pathway signaling, which leads to the upregulation of proinflammatory (IL-8) or pro-adherent (VCAM-1) molecules [85]. As described above, the interplay between EVs and endothelial cells promotes early barrier changes, increasing permeability and the loss of barrier integrity; however, the role of EVs in the specific molecular mechanisms of vascular dysfunction is still unclear and poorly understood.Neurological complications in SD also require consideration; therefore, the WHO endorsed guidelines (2009) to include them in the clinical case classification. Neuropathogenesis is associated with direct viral invasion of the CNS or secondary reactions. Previously, DENV was not considered a neurotropic virus, but clinical reports associating DF with neurological complications have changed this view [86–88].In this context, could EVs from DENV-infected cells be implicated in the development of DENV neuropathogenesis? Mishra et al. (2020) isolated EVs TSG101+ from DENV-2-infected monocytes (THP-1) and DENV-2 NS1-transfected human embryo kidney (HEK293T) cells, which contained high levels of miR-148a. The stimulation of microglial (CHME3) cells with these EVs reduced the protein expression levels of USP33 and ATF33, both of which are associated with the downregulation of the proinflammatory gene expression pathway. USP33/ATF3 axis dysregulation via EVs miR-148a+ promotes the expression of TNF-α, IFN-β, and NF-κB, which are related to a proinflammatory state. The authors concluded that this model explains why EVs miR-148a+ from DENV-infected cells may contribute to neuroinflammation in vitro [89]. Notably, neuropathogenesis is a complex process, and many factors could be involved. This model of USP33/ATF3 axis dysregulation mediated by EVs is one of many alternative mechanisms that may explain the neurological outcomes described in some SD cases.Other pro- and antiviral functions of EVs in DF/SDSafadi et al. (2023) reported that DENV-2 strain UVE/DENV2/2018/RE/47099-infected human A549 cells and DENV NS1-transfected HEK293 cells released CD63+ CD81+ exosomes that contained dimers of the viral NS1 protein on their membrane surface. The authors demonstrated that NS1 protein and exosome associations occur in the extracellular compartment and concluded that the association of the NS1 protein with exosomes may increase viral protein stability. Exosomes act as vectors that favor the access of the viral NS1 protein to privileged sites to promote pathological processes, as described for SD [90].Finally, EVs from infected cells could also contribute to establishing an antiviral state to prevent the spread of infection to neighboring cells [91]. Zhu et al. (2015) evaluated how interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), which is transferred by flotillin-2+ CD63+ exosomes from DENV-2 NGC-infected HUVECs and 293T cells, is expressed in exosome-stimulated HeLa cells, increasing cell resistance to viral infection and significantly reducing DENV-2 entry [92]. IFITM3-containing exosomes serve as vehicles for the cell-to-cell transfer of antiviral resistance, suggesting their potential as a therapeutic strategy.In summary, EVs from DENV-infected cells play a relevant role in dengue pathogenesis because of their ability to transport different viral contents (RNAs, proteins, or virus-like particles), favoring cell-to-cell transmission and infection. In mosquito‒host interactions, EVs interact with different host cells; EVs can be identified by the presence of human tetraspanin orthologs, and their protein cargo enhances viral binding, allowing host cell infection. In the pathogenesis of DENV infection in humans, EVs from platelets and immunological cells function as Trojan vehicles that favor viral infection, evade the host immune response, and transport active biomolecules (different host/viral RNAs and proteins) that modify naïve cellular behavior. Platelet-derived EVs act as effectors that trigger NET formation in neutrophils and the release of proinflammatory cytokines in monocytes/macrophages via interactions with CLEC5A/TLR2 receptors, promoting vascular endothelial dysfunction in vivo. Additionally, EVs participate in exacerbated inflammatory responses in the CNS or could be implicated in the transfer of antiviral resistance. Knowledge of these mechanisms will lead to further investigations of their potential roles as biomarkers of severity progression (e.g., MPs PS+ CD41a+), therapeutics (e.g., blockade of the interaction of platelet-derived EVs with CLEC5A/TLR2 or use of IFITM3-containing exosomes), or vector control tools.Zika virusZika fever (ZF)Zika fever (ZF) is a febrile acute disease caused by ZIKV infection and is transmitted by mosquito bites or human-to-human contact. Approximately 80% of infections are asymptomatic and 20% are mildly self-limiting [93–96]. The severe forms of ZF include an expanding spectrum of neurological complications, autoimmune diseases, and congenital Zika syndrome (CZS). ZIKV neurotropism and the susceptibility of immune cells and endothelial barriers allow the virus to reach immunologically privileged sites [97–99]. However, the virus‒cell interaction may not be the only mechanism involved, so the role of the EVs could explain some alternative forms for viral transmission, viral persistence due to the lack of clearance, or immune response avoidance.EV from Aedes spp. mosquito modelsCould mosquito-derived EVs mediate the cellular changes involved in ZIKV pathogenesis? Martínez-Rojas et al. (2020) isolated PS+ MPs and exosomes CD63-like+ from ZIKV-infected C6/36 cells carrying viral RNA and E protein, promoting the infection of naïve C6/36, Vero, monocyte, and endothelial cells in vitro. EV stimuli promoted intermediate monocyte differentiation and favored endothelial cell damage, establishing a procoagulant, proinflammatory, and proadherent phenotype with the loss of barrier integrity. Stimuli with EVs from ZIKV-infected mosquito cells favored infection, modifying the normal basal state of human cells in vitro [100].EV functions in acute in vitro and in vivo infection modelsFocusing on the role of EVs as viral carriers, Safadi et al. (2023) demonstrated that ZIKV PF-25013-18-infected A549 and ZIKV NS1-transfected HEK293 cells released CD63+ CD81+ exosomes containing dimers of the viral NS1 protein on their membrane surface obtained extracellularly in vitro [90]. Similarly, Zhao et al. (2023) reported that ZIKV-infected human umbilical vein endothelial cells released EVs CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Syntenin+ TSG101+ HSP70+ Alix+ that did not promote infection in vitro despite carrying ZIKV genome RNA, E, C, prM, NS1, and NS5 proteins. The authors demonstrated that E protein-enriched EVs competed with ZIKV virions for binding to neutralizing antibodies, attenuating the ADE effect [101]. Martínez-Rojas et al. (2024) reported that ZIKV MR766-infected monocytes released CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+ exosomes. Purified exosomes carried viral antigens (E/NS1 proteins) and viral genomic RNA. Exosomes favored ZIKV transmission and infection, promoting the activation and differentiation of naïve monocytes in vitro and inducing an infection‒activation‒infection cycle that may prolong viral clearance and establish a long-lasting proinflammatory state [102]. These data show that viral elements released as part of the EV cargo may act as an alternative mechanism in virus‒host interactions.Fikatas et al. (2021) reported that ZIKV PRVABC59-infected human microvascular endothelial cells (hcMECs/D3) released large EVs CD63+ Alix+ TSG101+, which carry the viral NS1 protein. Stimulation with EVs favored cell infection and disturbed the integrity of the cell monolayer. Endothelial EVs are enriched in sphingomyelin and diacylglycerol, which contain more saturated and monounsaturated acyl chains, increasing their membrane rigidity and decreasing their susceptibility to oxidative stress [103]. In vitro, EVs from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells may allow ZIKV to reach anatomic sites such as the CNS to promote neurological disease.EV functions in neurological in vitro and in vivo modelsZIKV infection is associated with CNS damage, which manifests as CZS or Guillain–Barré syndrome. The mechanisms involved in the neuropathogenesis of the Zika virus related to EV functions are poorly understood. Huang et al. (2018) isolated flotillin-2+ Alix+ exosomes from ZIKV (MR766 and PRVABC59)-infected human fetal astrocytes that contained viral RNA. Blockade of the ceramide pathway promoted resistance to ZIKV infection with low exosome release, reducing viral transmission [104]. Zhou et al. (2019) isolated Hsp70+ CD9+ CD63+ exosomes from ZIKV PRVABC59-infected murine fetal primary cortical neurons that contained viral E protein and genomic RNA, which promoted the infection, damage, and death of naïve cells. Additionally, the inhibition of the ceramide pathway reduced infection and exosome release, resulting in exosome-mediated viral transmission in the CNS [105]. Both studies demonstrated that convergence between the viral cycle and exosome biogenesis occurs through the ceramide pathway in CNS models, promoting viral transmission and cell damage.In this context, York et al. (2021) isolated EVs CD63+ CD9+ HSC70+ populations from ZIKV PRVABC-59-infected SNB-19 cells (i.e., astrocytes) that contained encapsulated viral genome RNA and E protein that promoted infection in naïve cells. The authors demonstrated that CD63 is required in the viral replication cycle; hence, CD63 levels are reduced in infected cells to ensure the release of viral progeny and EVs [106]. This report revealed the role of tetraspanins during EV biogenesis in the modulation of ZIKV infection.EV functions in placental modelsIn the context of CZS, viral transmission through transplacental infection continues to be a concern. Like other teratogenic viruses, ZIKV must overcome resistance to infection of the placental epithelium constituted by trophoblasts and nontrophoblastic cells, and its innate immunological properties are mediated by the type III interferon (IFN) response [107]. In this context, ZIKV hijacks the antiviral response of trophoblasts to ensure replication cycle completion. Block et al. (2023) demonstrated that ZIKV DAK AR 41524-infected trophoblasts released CD9+ EVs, which contain viral E, NS1, NS4B, and NS5 proteins and diverse host protein cargos that could serve as markers of placenta-specific EVs [108]. Similarly, Lee et al. (2023) investigated how ZIKV infection in trophoblasts manipulates mitochondrial dynamics, promoting the formation of mitochondria-derived vesicles (MDVs). These authors reported that the NS4A protein is responsible for mitochondrial dysfunction, suppressing the IFN response. The ZIKV PRVABC59-infected JEG-3 trophoblasts released CD63+ CD9+ TSG101+ Alix+ MDVs and carried miRNAs involved in the immune response, inflammation, secretion, and autophagy, which may facilitate viral replication in vitro [109]. These findings highlight how ZIKV overcomes placental resistance during trophoblast infection, induces the suppression of the host antiviral response, and favors cell infection.Other pro- and antiviral functions of EVs in the treatment of Zika feverThe immunoregulatory and antiviral effects of EVs could regulate viral pathogenicity through the transfer of specific molecules from infected cells to noninfected neighboring cells. Li et al. (2020) described how CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ exosomes from ZIKV GZ01-infected human A549 cells contained high levels of host defensin alpha 1B (DEFA1B) mRNA. During ZIKV infection, DEFA1B inhibits viral replication by blocking virus binding, reducing cell proliferation, and slowing cell cycle progression. Exosome-containing DEFA1B stimulation in HEK293T and undifferentiated human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells delayed their cell cycles [110]. Therefore, exosomes not only have anti-ZIKV activity but also alter cell cycle progression.EVs, as transporting vehicles for active biomolecules, have gained relevance as potential therapeutic options because of their ability to cross natural physiological barriers, their intrinsic properties for cell targeting, and their stability in circulation [111]. Zhang et al. (2022) isolated EVs from ZIKV SZ01-infected A6 (type I IFN receptor knockout C57BL/6) mice containing abundant ZIKV-derived small‐interfering RNAs (ZIKV-siRNAs). These EV-specific ZIKV-siRNAs enter the murine bloodstream and are capable of conferring resistance against viral challenge. The authors concluded that these EVs confer RNA‒RNA homology-dependent antiviral activity [112]. Finally, Zhang et al. (2022) designed neuro-specific targeted small CD81+ Syntenin+ EVs containing antiviral siRNAs targeting the NS4A, prM, NS1, and NS3 regions of the ZIKV genome. They reported that these EVs inhibited ZIKV replication. Intravenous administration in pregnant AG6 mice efficiently crossed the placental barrier and reduced the viral loads in mothers and fetuses, protecting both from ZIKV infection and alleviating neuroinflammation and cell damage [113]. These studies demonstrated that targeted delivery via modified EVs is a promising therapeutic alternative that is well tolerated and safe for in vivo models of ZIKV infection.In summary, in the context of ZF pathogenesis, the roles of EVs include being an efficient mechanism for viral cell-to-cell transmission, a mediator for the establishment of a proinflammatory state, and an effector in neurological or placental cell damage (Table 2). Additionally, EVs mediate antiviral or immunoregulatory activities by transporting specific viral or host biomolecules that confer resistance to infection in naïve cells. This evidence contributes to a better understanding of vector‒virus‒host interactions for new diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers, antiviral therapies, or even vaccine development [114].
Table 2Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of Zika virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesZIKV MR766In vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36) from Aedes albopictus mosquitosMicroparticles PS+ and exosomes CD63-like+Viral RNAViral E proteinNaïve C6/36 cells, monkey kidney (Vero) cells, human monocytes (THP-1), human endothelial (HMEC-1) cellsThe EVs from ZIKV-infected C6/36 cells favor naïve mosquito and mammalian cell infection. The EV stimuli induce monocyte activation and differentiation, and the endothelial cell damage with increased barrier permeability[100]ZIKV PF-25013–18In vitroZIKV-infected human lung epithelial (A549) and NS1-transfected human embryo kidney (HEK293) cellsExosomes CD63+ CD81+NS1 viral protein–The NS1 dimers secreted into extracellular space are associated with exosomes[90]ZIKV without strain identificationIn vitroIn vivoHuman umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)Exosomes CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Syntenin+ TSG101+ HSP70+ Alix+Viral genome RNA and proteins E (highly enrichment), C, prM, NS1, and NS5Naïve Vero E6 cells, human lymphoblasts (K562), and A6 mice (Ifnar1−/− C57BL/6, 6 weeks old)Exosomes from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells carry viral elements but do not favor viral transmission/infection. The high E-enrichment allows high affinity binding to neutralizing antibodies, attenuating the ADE[101]ZIKV MR766In vitroHuman monocytes (THP-1)Exosomes CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+Viral E and NS1 proteins, genomic RNA transcriptsNaïve THP-1 cells and monkey kidney (Vero cells)Purified exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes favor viral transmission, infection, and the differentiation/activation of naïve cells, promoting an infection-activation-infection cycle[102]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroHuman brain microvascular endothelial cells (hcMEC/D3)Large EVs CD63+ Alix+ TSG101+Viral NS1 proteinNaïve hcMEC/D3The EVs from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells can be used as viral element carriers, enhancing ZIKV transmission and infection to susceptible cells and altering the monolayer integrity[103]ZIKVMR766/ PRVABC59In vitroPrimary human fetal astrocytesExosomes Flotillin2+ Alix+Viral RNA–Inhibition of neutral sphingomyelinase-2 activity induces resistance to infection and reduces the exosome biogenesis[104]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroPrimary murine fetal cortical neuronsExosomes HSP70+ CD9+ CD63+Viral RNAViral E proteinNaïve murine fetal cortical neuronsNaïve cells infection, damage, and death. ZIKV modulates neutral sphingomyelinase-2 SMPD3 activity in cortical neurons for its infection: inhibition of SMDP3 activity (by GW4869) or silencing of smdp3 gene (by siRNA) reduces viral burden and transmission through exosomes[105]ZIKV PRVABC-59In vitroSNB-19 (astrocytes) cellsSmall EVs CD63+ CD9+ HSC70+Encapsuled viral genomic RNA and E proteinNaïve SNB-19 cellsThe EVs from ZIKV-infected astrocytes favor the infection of naïve cells. Infected cells present a dysregulated tetraspanin pattern: CD63 is necessary for EV and ZIKV release[106]ZIKV DAK AR 41524In vitroRhesus macaque trophoblast stem cellsEVs CD9+Viral E, NS1, NS4B, and NS5 proteins with diverse cell mRNA, miRNA, and protein cargos–The EV cargo from ZIKV-infected trophoblasts could be used to noninvasively identify placental ZIKV infection in the first trimester of pregnancy[108]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroJEG-3 trophoblast cellsSmall EVs (MDVs) CD63+ CD9+ TSG101+ Alix+Host mitochondrial and miRNAs involved in immune response, inflammation, secretion, and autophagy–The small MDVs release is a hijacked mechanism during ZIKV infection, inducing the suppression of the antiviral response and favoring cell infection[109]ZIKV GZ01In vitroHuman adenocarcinoma alveolar basal epithelial cells (A549)Exosomes CD63+/CD81+/TSG101+Human host mRNA (DEFA1B)Human embryonic kidney epithelial cells (HEK293T), undifferentiated human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y)The ZIKV infection inhibition through blocking viral attachment to target cells and retarding the progression of cell cycles[110]ZIKV SZ01In vivoSerum from A6 (type I IFN receptor knockout C57BL/6)EVs not characterizedZIKV-derived small‐interfering RNAs (ZIKV-siRNA)Naïve A6 miceThe ZIKV-siRNA confer resistance against viral challenge[112]Not used for EV productionIn vitroIn vivoHuman embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 T cellsSmall EVs CD81+ Syntenin+Designed siRNA targeting four distinct regions (NS4A, prM, NS1, NS3) of the ZIKV genomeZIKV SZ01-infected A549 and Vero cells; AG6 mice (8 weeks old) or pregnant mice (E17.5)Modified small EVs encapsulating siRNA were able to suppress the ZIKV replication in vitro. Also, these EV efficiently penetrated the placental barrier, reducing ZIKV load and protecting both the mother and the brain of fetuses[113]Yellow fever virusYellow fever (YF)Currently, YFV infection can be controlled by a highly effective virus-attenuated vaccine. Therefore, yellow fever cases occur mainly in unvaccinated populations [115]. Actual evidence indicates that the role of EVs in YF pathogenesis is hypothetical.EV functions from in vitro modelsSinigaglia et al. (2018) reported that immature virions and capsid-free RNA from YFV 17D-204-infected hepatocytes activated plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to produce IFNs in a TLR7- and cell contact-dependent manner. They proposed that YFV RNA cell-to-cell transfer occurs through carriers such as PS-enriched vesicles (compatible with EVs) that evade the host immune response. The authors demonstrated the presence of membranous viral clusters at sites of contact between YFV-infected cells and pDCs [116]. The main limitation of this report was the lack of identification of EV membrane markers; however, these findings suggest that membranous vesicles such as EVs may be involved in cell activation and viral cell-to-cell transmission.Previously, in 2011, Carpp et al. demonstrated that the viral NS3 protein interacted with the host Alix protein to contribute to the release of infectious viral particles. In an in vitro model of YFV (17DD)-infected Vero cells, NS3 and Alix colocalized in the perinuclear region, forming a protein complex required for virion release. They also proved that the truncated forms of Alix inhibited the release of YFV without affecting its replication [117]. Despite not focusing on EVs, the molecular findings are relevant because cells respond to cross-signaling between viral and host proteins, which are essential for virion and EV release.In summary (Table 3), the potential role of EVs in YFV pathogenesis is hypothetical. As demonstrated for DENV and ZIKV, EVs may act as viral carriers or be necessary for viral release through the interaction between viral proteins and the host ESCRT-associated proteins that execute cargo sorting during exosome biogenesis. These findings demonstrate that specific steps during EV biogenesis are necessary to complete the YFV cycle and facilitate its spread to target cells, in which processes EVs can be important mediators.
Table 3Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of yellow fever virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesYFV17D-204In vitroHepatocytes (Huh7.5 cells)EVs without identificationViral RNA or viral immature particlesPlasmacytoid dendritic cellsHypothetical: Cell-to-cell viral carriers[116]YFV17DDIn vitroVero cells–––Hypothetical: YFV NS3 interacts with host Alix protein to contribute for viral release. Alix executes cargo sorting in exosome biogenesis[117]Japanese encephalitis virusJapanese encephalitis (JE)JE is responsible for a greater burden of neurological disability than any other arthropod-borne disease. Infection can be prevented by vaccination. Currently, there are no specific antivirals, and only supportive treatment is available [118–120]. Recent studies have demonstrated that EVs are involved in viral infection-mediated neuroinvasive diseases [53, 121]. However, the functions of EVs in JE pathogenesis remain elusive.EV functions from in vitro and in vivo modelsIn 1987, Hase et al. described the maturation process of the JEV SA-14 strain in mosquito C6/36 cells and murine brain cells. They reported that virions were enclosed in vesicles distributed throughout the cytoplasm and transported to the cell surface to be released extracellularly [122]. Interestingly, the authors confirmed Leary and Blair’s postulate that JEV uses secretory-type exocytosis [123], the same pathway that was later described for exosome release. This report revealed that during the viral cycle, vesicle formation is necessary to ensure virion maturation and release. Later, convergence with EV biogenesis will be demonstrated.Flavivirus E and NS1 proteins are cotransformally processed during virion maturation through the cell secretory pathway [124]. Mason (1989) demonstrated that in Vero cells, the E and NS1 proteins are released at a slow rate, whereas in C6/36 cells, the NS1 protein is not released. A key finding related to EVs is the amphipathic nature and sedimentation properties of the NS1 protein found in mammalian cell culture supernatant, suggesting that NS1 contains membrane-binding domains and is released from infected cells in a membrane-associated particulate form, as described in other flaviviruses. The authors concluded that extracellular membranous particles containing the NS1 protein could be related to the strong immunological response observed in JE [125]. This report constitutes the first approach for the potential role of EVs as viral element carriers implicated in JE pathogenesis.In summary (Table 4), in the context of JEV pathogenesis, EVs have been proposed to be necessary for viral maturation and extracellular virion release; additionally, as viral components (NS1 protein) carriers, EVs can induce immune responses, as observed in JE cases.
Table 4Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of Japanese encephalitis virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesJEV S-14In vitroIn vivoC6/36 cells and ICR miceIntracellular vesiclesViral particles–Hypothetical: EV biogenesis is associated with viral maturation. Viral particles appeared to be carried within vesicles to the cell surface to be released extracellularly[122]JEV NakayamaIn vitroVero cells and C6/36 cellsIntracellular vesiclesViral proteins (E, NS1)–Hypothetical: JEV NS1 protein contains membrane-binding domains, and it is released from infected cells in a membrane-associated particulate form[125]West Nile virusWest Nile fever (WNF)WNF may progress to a neuroinvasive disease in elderly immunocompromised patients. To date, no WNV-specific antiviral treatments or vaccines are available. Like other mosquito-borne flaviviruses, prevention depends on organized and sustained mosquito control with public education [126, 127]. In this context, what is the role of EVs in WNV neuropathogenesis?EV functions from in vitro modelsThe role of EVs as a mechanism for WNV genomic RNA transmission was proposed by Zhou et al. (2018). They used an in vitro model of WNV CT2741-infected Neuro-2a cells and isolated CD9+ HSP70+ exosomes that contained the viral E gene transcript, suggesting that WNV genomic RNA is a part of their cargo. The authors concluded that the exosomes from neuronal cells mediate the cell-to-cell transmission of WNV RNA, which may favor infection in a receptor-independent manner in the CNS [128].As described for other flaviviruses, the cell-to-cell signaling mediated by EVs in the host innate immune response should be considered a mechanism of EV antiviral or proinflammatory activity. Slonchak et al. (2019) used an in vitro model with WNV Kunjin-infected human A549 cells to isolate CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ exosomes containing specific host RNAs (miRNAs, small noncoding RNAs (sncRNAs), and mRNAs) associated with virus‒host interactions, inflammation, and the innate immune response [129]. This report revealed that WNV infection altered the RNA profile of the EV cargo (Table 5).
Table 5Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of West Nile virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesWNV CT2741In vitroMouse Neuro-2a cellsExosomes CD9+ HSP70+Viral RNAMouse Neuro-2a cellsViral RNA cell-to-cell transmission[128]WNV KunjinIn vitroHuman A549 cellsExosomes CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+Human host RNA profile (miRNAs, sncRNAs, and mRNAs)Human A549 cells transfected with small RNAs from EV isolated of WNV-infected cellsWNV infection stimulates the incorporation of increased levels of specific host RNA profile into EVs that regulates genes associated with viral and inflammatory processes. Small RNAs from EVs induced innate immune response on naïve cells[129]In summary, during WNV infection, EV functions are associated with the transport of viral RNA, which is implicated in cell-to-cell transmission. Additionally, WNV-infected cells release EVs containing host RNAs associated with antiviral and proinflammatory functions. The interplay between EVs and naïve cells may promote viral transmission and/or immunostimulatory activity.Conclusions and perspectivesFor the control of mosquito-borne flaviviruses, it is necessary to understand how viruses interact with different host cells. Knowledge of the molecular or cellular pathways involved in vector‒virus‒host interactions that allow viruses to replicate, persist due to immune evasion, or establish a prolonged inflammatory state is critical for determining disease outcomes.This review aimed to highlight the currently available data only without the claim of representing established knowledge. The current data related to EVs and flavivirus diseases are mainly obtained from in vitro studies in cell lines; thus, elucidating their impact on mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesis is important. Further studies using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models are necessary.Based on the ability of EVs to transfer viral components or active biomolecules, the EVs released from infected cells represent a novel and efficient mechanism for viral (DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV) cell-to-cell transmission through their ability to carry and transfer different viral contents, such as RNAs, proteins, or viral particles, as well as the ability to evade the host immune response. Convergence between EV biogenesis and the flavivirus replication cycle is critical because viral and host molecules interact; thus, this process has potential as a target for antiviral therapy. From a vector perspective, EVs mediate efficient transmission and favor virus adaptation in vertebrate hosts, ensuring the maintenance of the viral cycle. From the host perspective, as a response to infection, EVs may have altered RNAs and protein cargoes that modify naïve cell behavior, enhancing the inflammatory response and tissue damage or mediating a protective effect through the transfer of antiviral resistance. Additionally, EVs participate in exacerbated inflammatory responses in the CNS or placenta or could be implicated in the transfer of antiviral resistance.EVs can also stimulate cell signaling pathways, as described for platelet-derived EVs, which trigger NET formation and the release of proinflammatory cytokines in immune cells, promoting vascular dysfunction in vivo. In this sense, EVs not only function as transport vehicles but also interact with cell receptors to promote changes in cell behavior.Knowledge of these mechanisms will lead to further investigations to develop novel strategies employing EVs to combat viral infection and reduce disease severity based on their potential roles as biomarkers of severity progression, therapeutics (e.g., blockade of EV biogenesis or their interaction with cell receptors), or vector control tools.Therefore, currently available data concerning EVs evaluated in different models suggest that they may contribute directly to the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses.Future research will contribute to understanding the role of EVs, especially their mechanistic and functional effects in vivo, to elucidate their real impact on mosquito-borne Flavivirus diseases. The above could be a near reality owing to the rapid evolution of the field of extracellular vesicles.


Title: Venezuelan Equine Encephalitis Virus Transmission and Effect on Pathogenesis

Designing pathogenesis studies for arboviruses that accurately simulate natural infection requires quantifying the amount of virus transmitted. Virus assays on mosquito saliva can be used to estimate the amount transmitted to vertebrates during blood feeding. However, amount of virus collected in vitro may not accurately reflect mosquito transmission.Indirect and direct methods can be used to quantify virus delivered in mosquito saliva. Indirect methods include comparing times of death of animals exposed to a mosquito bite with those infected parenterally with known doses and comparing the time between mosquito feeding and development of viremia with the time between needle injection and development of the same viremia level. Direct methods include quantifying virus salivated into drops of blood, virus detected in vertebrate tissues immediately after mosquito feeding, virus salivated into blood agar, and virus salivated into fluids such as oil. Saliva collection in oil-filled capillary tubes, first described by Hurlbut (1), is widely used. Chamberlain et al. (2) compared several indirect and direct methods for quantifying arbovirus transmission and concluded that allowing mosquitoes to feed on serum (similar to the capillary method) is less efficient in detecting virus than other methods. Since most saliva is expectorated during probing, salivation into hanging drops or capillary tubes may be inaccurate because mosquitoes do not need to salivate to locate a blood vessel.The amount of several arboviruses transmitted by mosquitoes has been estimated by using artificial saliva collection (1–12). Up to 3 log10 PFU of eastern equine encephalitis virus is deposited into capillary tubes filled with oil by the vector Culiseta melanura (9). Capillary collection and real-time reverse transcription (RT)–PCR estimate that Culex pipiens pipiens saliva contains an average of 4.3 log10 PFU of West Nile virus (WNV), with a range of 0.5 to 5.3 log10 (8). Recently, we estimated that the epidemic Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) vector, Aedes (Ochlerotatus) taeniorhynchus, salivates 0.2–3.2 log10 PFU into oil-filled capillary tubes (12).Vector saliva enhances infection with many pathogens (13–18), and mosquito saliva is reported to enhance infection by some arboviruses. Deer and chipmunks infected with La Crosse virus by the bite of Ae. (Och.) triseriatus have higher and longer viremias than animals infected by needle (19). Mice exposed to uninfected mosquitoes and injected at the feeding site with Cache Valley virus develop enhanced viremia and seroconversion compared with unbitten mice or to those co-injected with virus and mosquito saliva (20). Mice have higher seroconversion rates to vesicular stomatitis virus when infected by Ae. triseriatus than by needle injection (21). Cytokine expression in the skin of mice infected with Sindbis virus differs after injection with mosquito salivary gland extracts than after injection with virus alone (22).Other studies report no enhancement of arbovirus infection by vector saliva or feeding. Hamsters infected with WNV by mosquitoes or needle injections do not differ in level or duration of viremia, clinical manifestations, pathology, or antibody response (23). Birds infected with western equine encephalitis virus or Saint Louis encephalitis virus by mosquito bite or needle exhibit no difference in viremia responses (24), and mosquito saliva inhibits in vitro infection of dendritic cells by dengue virus (25).VEEV (family Togaviridae, genus Alphavirus) is an important emerging and reemerging pathogen of humans and equines in the neotropics. Since no effective antiviral agents or a licensed human vaccine for VEEV exists, therapy is primarily supportive and prevention relies on avoidance of mosquitoes. Outbreaks of VEE can involve hundreds of thousands of equine and human cases, spread over large regions, and can last several years (26).The effect of vector feeding on vertebrate infections by VEEV has not been studied. We determined the amount of VEEV in mosquito saliva collected in vitro (12) but did not determine whether this amount accurately reflects transmission during blood feeding. To collect saliva in a capillary tube, we need to subject the mosquito to traumatic manipulations that may affect salivation, such as anesthetization or immobilization by removal of the legs and wings. Also, mosquitoes are usually allowed to salivate into capillary tubes for a longer time (e.g., 30 minutes) than is required for engorgement on a host. Because knowing the infectious dose transmitted by mosquitoes is important for designing vertebrate infection studies, in which needles are typically used for virus delivery, we compared the amount of VEEV transmitted by mosquitoes in vitro with that  transmitted in vivo. We also determined whether mosquito transmission affects viremia or time to death when compared with needle infections. Finally, we used tail amputations to investigate the extravascular or intravascular location of VEEV deposition during mosquito feeding.MethodsVirusWe used VEEV rescued from an infectious cDNA clone derived from epidemic strain 3908 (subtype IC), a 1995 human isolate from Zulia State, Venezuela (27). With the exception of some IE virus strains in Mexico, subtype IC viruses are the etiologic agents of all recent VEE epidemics. Strain 3908 was passaged once in C6/36 mosquito cells before isolation of viral RNA and production of infectious cDNA. Virus recovered from baby hamster kidney cells electroporated with transcribed RNA was used for all experiments. Use of virus derived from an infectious clone minimized attenuating mutations that occur when VEEV is passaged in cell culture (28).MosquitoesAe. taeniorhynchus F1 progeny of mosquitoes captured in Florida (29) were reared at 27°C and a relative humidity of 80% in a light:dark cycle of 12:12 hours. Adult females were infected intrathoracically with 4 log10 PFU of VEEV in a 1-μL volume 6–8 days after emergence and incubated at 27°C for 5 days with 10% sucrose provided ad libitum. Intrathoracic infection of mosquitoes with VEEV and incubation for 5 days generates saliva titers comparable to those that occur after oral infection (12).In Vivo TransmissionThirty-nine 6- to 8-week-old National Institutes of Health (NIH) Swiss mice (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN, USA) were anesthetized with pentobarbital, and the distal portion of the tail was exposed to 1 infected mosquito. After mosquito engorgement, the tips of the tails of 29 mice were severed and immediately homogenized in 300 μL of Eagle's minimal essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in a Mixer Mill 300 (Retsch Inc., Newton, PA, USA); the tails of 10 control mice were left intact. After centrifugation at 9,000×g for 5 minutes, the supernatant was removed for cell culture assays and RNA extraction with a Qiagen kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). Vero cells were injected with 30 μL of supernatant and observed for 5 days for cytopathic effects (CPEs). All CPE-positive samples were titrated by plaque assay on Vero cells.RNA was also extracted from the pellet of the tail homogenate with Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). The RNA of both supernatant and tail pellet was tested for VEEV positive-strand RNA by using real-time RT-PCR with a one-step kit (Qiagen) and a Smart Cycler (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Forward (5´-CATAGTCTAGTCCGCCAAGATGTT-3´) and reverse (5´-CGATAGGGCATTGGCTGCAT-3´) primers and a probe (5´-[6-FAM]CCCGTTCCAACCAATGTAT[NFQ-MGB]-3´) were used for amplification and detection, respectively. The assay consisted of reverse transcription at 50°C for 20 minutes, denaturation at 95°C for 10 minutes, and 45 cycles at 95°C for 15 seconds, 63°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 30 seconds. Virus titers were extrapolated from RT-PCR results by comparison with a standard curve generated from serial dilutions of a VEEV stock quantified by plaque assay.After a mosquito probed or fed on the mouse tail, its infection was confirmed by using forced salivation into a capillary tube as described below. All 39 mice used were kept in individual cages, monitored for signs of infection, and bled retroorbitally 2 weeks later to test for seroconversion by using plaque-reduction neutralization tests.To ensure that all virus injected into mouse tails could be recovered and detected, a series of known doses (2.9 log10, 2 log10, and 1 log10 PFU) was injected intradermally into the tail of a mouse. The tips were then severed and processed as described above. Each dose was tested in duplicate, and nearly all the injected virus was recovered (mean 2.7 log10 PFU recovered for 2.9 log10 inoculum, mean 1.9 log10 PFU recovered for 2.0 log10 inoculum, and mean 0.8 log10 PFU recovered for 1.0 log10 inoculum). Samples with known virus titers were also tested to ensure that freezing and thawing once did not alter virus content.Saliva AssaysThirty-nine saliva samples from intrathoracically infected mosquitoes that fed on a mouse were obtained by immobilization (legs and wings removed) and forced salivation into 10-μL capillary tubes (VWR International, West Chester, PA, USA) containing immersion oil (type B, Cargille Laboratories Inc., Cedar Grove, NJ, USA). After 30–45 minutes, salivation was confirmed by appearance of bubbles at the tip of the proboscis. An additional cohort of mosquitoes was allowed to salivate for intervals (repeated in triplicate) to duplicate times of observed mosquito feeding. The oil-saliva mixture was centrifuged into 100 μL of MEM containing 20% FBS and frozen at -80°C; 30 μL was then added to Vero cells for detection of CPE. Mosquito infection was confirmed by assaying triturated bodies and legs and wings for CPE, followed by plaque assay.Viremia and DeathTen 6- to 8-week-old NIH Swiss mice were infected by either 1 mosquito or intradermal injection into the ear with either 0.9 or 3.4 log10 PFU, which represented the range of titers injected by mosquitoes (see below). Five mice from each cohort of 10 were bled retroorbitally at 12, 24, 36, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hours postinfection, and sera were titrated by plaque assay. Mice were monitored daily until signs of encephalitis appeared, after which they were observed 4 times a day to determine time of death. The University of Texas Medical Branch Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved all experiments.Statistical AnalysisLog-transformed data were normally distributed, except for data from RT-PCR assays from mouse tail homogenate pellets on which 1 mosquito probed (this group was not compared statistically). One-way analysis of variance using Tukey's test for multiple comparisons and an unpaired t test were used to compare all normally distributed data with GraphPad Prism 4.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).ResultsIn Vivo Versus In Vitro Transmission TitersTo determine whether saliva collection accurately approximates the amount of VEEV transmitted during a mosquito bloodmeal, we quantified virus from saliva collected in vitro and virus deposited at sites of in vivo blood feeding. One mosquito feeding on the distal portion of a mouse tail transmitted a mean ± standard deviation of 1.1 ± 1.0 log10 PFU (11 PFU) as detected in the homogenate supernatant and 0.8 ± 0.9 log10 PFU (7 PFU) as estimated by real-time RT-PCR. These amounts were significantly lower (p<0.001) than the mean ± standard deviation amount (3.6 ± 1.5 log10 PFU or 4,300 PFU) deposited into capillary tubes during 30–45 minutes of salivation (Figure 1). However, the time for engorgement (<3 minutes) was much shorter than the 45 minutes allowed for in vitro salivation. Therefore, we matched times of saliva collection (range <3 minutes) to the exact engorgement times. Less VEEV (p<0.05) was still detected after in vivo transmission than after <3 minutes of in vitro salivation (1.9 ± 1.2 log10 PFU or 74 PFU).Figure 1Titers of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV) transmitted in vitro or in vivo by Aedes taeniorhynchus. A, C, and E) Mosquitoes that engorged to completion (depicted by closed symbols). B, D, and F) Mosquitoes who probed but did not engorge (depicted by open symbols). The assay used to determine the virus titer was either cell culture assay (A and B, depicted by squares) or real-time reverse transcription–PCR (C and F) of tail homogenate supernatant (C and D, depicted as triangles) or pellet (E and F, depicted as circles). The last 2 cohorts (G and H) represent VEEV titers in saliva of mosquitoes allowed to salivate for 45 min (G, depicted as +) or for the same range of times (<3 min) required for mosquitoes to engorge completely on mouse tails, repeated in triplicate (H, depicted as ×). Solid horizontal lines indicate means, and horizontal dashed lines indicate detection limits for the assays. Symbols below the dashed lines indicate samples from infected mosquitoes (bodies and legs or wings positive for cytopathic effects) that were below the limit of detection for the assay, and numbers indicate the percentages for these negative samples (column A=36%, B=47%, C=21%, D=33%, E=57%, F=73%, G=3%, and H=13%). *Denotes mice that were bitten by a given mosquito that died.The effect that the time of probing or feeding had on the titer of virus salivated was analyzed by timed saliva collections and mouse tail exposures. The amount of VEEV collected from mosquitoes that salivated in vitro for <3 minutes was significantly less than the amount collected from mosquitoes allowed to salivate for 45 minutes (p<0.0001). However, no significant difference was seen in the amount transmitted by mosquitoes allowed to completely engorge compared with mosquitoes allowed to probe only, without engorgement (p>0.05, 95% confidence interval -0.8 to 1.5 log10 PFU for the difference in the mean titers).To address the possibility that some virus injected by feeding mosquitoes rapidly binds to or penetrates mouse cells and therefore is not measured by plaque assay, we also examined VEEV RNA content in mouse tails. No difference was detected between mean virus content in the mouse tail homogenate supernatants assayed by RT-PCR or plaques (Figure 1). Detection of relatively small amounts of viral RNA in tail homogenate pellets indicated that almost all virus remained in the supernatant and that infectious virus was not underestimated because of rapid penetration of cells or binding of virus to connective tissue (Figure 1).Location of VEEV Deposition In VivoTo assess intravascular versus extravascular locations of VEEV deposition by mosquitoes, we amputated the distal portions of mouse tails immediately after engorgement, and mice were observed for signs of infection. Forty percent (4/10) of control mice whose tails were not amputated after mosquito feeding survived compared with 79% (23/29) of those whose tails were amputated (p = 0.04, by Fisher exact test). No mice that survived developed neutralizing antibodies. NIH Swiss mice infected with VEEV have a death rate approaching 100%, which indicates that a systemic VEEV infection did not occur in surviving animals. This suggested that nearly all saliva and associated virus were deposited extravascularly and confined to the bite site by a lack of immediate vascular dissemination. Tail amputation nearly doubled survival rates by removing this virus before replication and dissemination.Virus Transmitted Versus Time of EngorgementTo assess the temporal pattern of virus deposition during blood feeding, the amount of VEEV transmitted was compared with the time required for mosquito engorgement. Figure 2 shows no correlation between feeding time and amount of VEEV in mouse tails, suggesting that most virus in saliva was deposited early during probing, with minimal deposition during engorgement.Figure 2Amount of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus transmitted into a mouse tail versus the time required for complete engorgement. Only samples from mosquitoes that completely engorged and transmitted detectable virus were included.Effect on Pathogenesis in Mice Infected by Needle Versus MosquitoTo determine whether mosquito saliva affects pathogenesis of VEEV infection, mice were infected by either the bite of 1 mosquito or by intradermal needle injection. Two VEEV doses were used to represent the range of titers injected during blood feeding (Figure 1). Viremia from needle injection with a high dose did not differ from that generated by mosquito transmission (Figure 3). In contrast, viremia from a mosquito bite was higher than that from a needle injection of a low dose for the 12-hour (p<0.05) and 96-hour (p<0.001) time points. A significant difference in viremia (p<0.001) was also observed at the 12-hour and 96-hour time points for mice infected by needle injection of a high dose than infection of a low dose. No difference was detected in the mean survival times of mice infected by either mosquito (5.9 ± 0.6 days) or needle injection with 8 PFU (6.4 ± 0.7days) or 3.4 log10 PFU (6.3 ± 0.4 days) (Figure 4).Figure 3Viremia in mice infected by 1 mosquito bite or intradermally by needle injection with 2 different doses of Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus representing the range of doses delivered during blood feeding (Figure 1). Five animals per cohort were bled at each time point. Error bars indicate standard deviations.Figure 4Survival of cohorts of 10 mice infected with Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus either by 1 mosquito bite or by intradermal needle injection with 2 doses representing the range of virus titers delivered during mosquito blood feeding (Figure 1).DiscussionStudies with some (19–21) but not all (23,24) arboviruses suggest that natural infection by mosquito bite may potentiate arboviral infection compared with parenteral infection. Because the effect of mosquito transmission on infection by VEEV has not been addressed, we assessed the infectious dose delivered by a natural vector, Ae. taeniorhynchus, compared with estimated doses from saliva collections. We also evaluated the effect of mosquito VEEV transmission on pathogenesis in mice.In Vivo Versus In Vitro TransmissionOur results indicate that Ae. taeniorhynchus transmit less VEEV in vivo than they deposit into a capillary tube, even when saliva collection times are matched to engorgement times. We therefore caution against extended times of saliva collection in capillary tubes because mosquitoes allowed to salivate for 45 minutes expel more VEEV than those that salivate for <3 minutes, the approximate maximum time required for natural engorgement.Our study also assessed the location of saliva deposition. As reasoned by Turell et al. (30,31), if an arbovirus were deposited intravascularly, it would quickly circulate beyond the bite site and animals with tail amputations would still become infected and die. Turell et al. reported that when the tails of suckling mice are exposed to a VEEV-infected Ae. taeniorhynchus and the tails are amputated £10 minutes later, 31%–37% survive compared with 4% of mice whose tails were not amputated (30). Our results indicating that the odds of dying are decreased by ≈50% for those whose tails were amputated suggest that saliva and VEEV are deposited both intravascularly and extravascularly. This conclusion is slightly different than that of Turell et al. (30,31), who concluded that mosquitoes inject most virus extravascularly and only small amounts intravascularly or that intravascular transmission occurs only occasionally. An explanation for the differences in death rates found in our studies and those of Turell et al. is that they used suckling mice, whereas we used adult mice. Two of our mice that had been only probed by an infected mosquito also became infected. Surprisingly, no VEEV was detected in the tail homogenate of these mice by either cell culture or RT-PCR. Because the 50% mouse subcutaneous lethal dose (LD50) for VEEV strain 3908 administered in the tail is 12 PFU (D.R. Smith, unpub. data), which is greater than the LD50 for injection in the thigh (12) and an amount detectable by our methods, virus was probably deposited primarily intravascularly in these 2 animals.Forty percent of our mice with intact tails survived after allowing an infected mosquito to engorge. NIH Swiss mice are highly susceptible to VEEV; death rates are typically 100%. Therefore, our results and those from our previous study (12), which reported that infected mosquitoes often deposit <12 PFU of VEEV into capillary tubes, suggest that systemically infected Ae. taeniorhynchus frequently transmit little or no virus. In contrast to the 40% survival rate of mice with intact tails, 100% of mice infected by mosquito bite at another site died, presumably because of a difference in the site of virus deposition. The subcutaneous LD50 for VEEV strain 3908 administered in the tail is 12 PFU compared with <1 PFU in the leg (D.R. Smith, unpub. data). Mosquitoes may deposit different amounts of virus at different anatomic sites, depending on accessibility of blood vessels.Time of Engorgement and Infectious Dose TransmittedThe amount of VEEV transmitted by Ae. taeniorhynchus did not correlate with time of engorgement. However, we did not count how many times the mosquito probed before beginning to engorge. Assuming that most mosquito saliva is injected during the intradermal probing period that precedes cannulation of a blood vessel and that infection of the host correlates with the duration of salivation during probing, probing frequency could affect transmission outcome and should be investigated.Effects on VEE Pathogenesis of Infection by Needle Versus MosquitoBecause mosquitoes transmit a wide range of arbovirus doses, we injected mice with 2 doses that represented the range of VEEV transmitted in vivo. No difference in viremia was detected between mice infected by a mosquito than by needle injection of a high dose. However, mice infected by mosquito bite showed higher viremia titers at the early (12 hours) and late (96 hours) time points than did mice infected with a low dose given by needle. Because mice injected with the high dose also had higher viremia titers at some time points than did mice in the low-dose cohort (Figure 3), the difference in the infection by mosquito bite versus a low-dose injection by needle may indicate only that some mosquitoes transmitted doses >8 PFU. The only way to confirm this slight effect of mosquito transmission on early and late viremia would be to duplicate the exact distribution of in vivo transmission titers by needle injections. However, volumes injected by mosquitoes compared with those injected by needles would differ, as would intradermal sites of deposition. Another approach is to co-inject mosquito saliva with virus (20,22), but the same volume and site discrepancies would apply.Although route (mosquito versus needle) or dose of VEEV had no detectable effect on death rates (Figure 4), mosquito transmission enhancement of early viremia titers could affect subsequent vector infection, and comparable studies with natural reservoir or amplification hosts are needed to assess this possibility. In preliminary studies, no difference in the viremia response of spiny rats was observed after VEEV infection by needle compared with mosquito bites (A.S. Carrara and S.C. Weaver, unpub. data).Our results agree with reports of little or no enhancement of alphaviral infections by mosquito transmission (24). In several studies describing enhancement of arboviral infection by mosquito transmission, multiple mosquitoes were allowed to feed and transmit to 1 vertebrate (19–21), or salivary gland extracts from many mosquitoes were injected with virus (20,22). Because natural infection rates of mosquitoes are typically low, simultaneous transmission by >1 vector is probably rare. In addition, virus amounts injected by needle in these studies may have been less than the virus amount transmitted by mosquitoes, which would confound interpretation. Artificial conditions used for several experiments demonstrating potentiation of arbovirus infection by mosquito transmission may therefore exaggerate the true effect.Significance for Pathogenesis StudiesIn conclusion, Ae. taeniorhynchus transmit less VEEV in vivo than they deposit in vitro into capillary tubes. Mosquito transmission of VEEV has little or no effect on the overall murine viremia profile and none on death. To design VEE pathogenesis studies that simulate natural infection, a dose range from 10 PFU to 1,000 PFU is recommended to simulate mosquitoborne infections. Because VEEV saliva titers differ among mosquito species (12), comparable studies should be conducted with other vectors.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: CHIKUNGUNYA VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Chikungunya Virus: Pathophysiology, Mechanism, and Modeling

1. Introduction1.1. Chikungunya Fever and CHIKVChikungunya, a mosquito-borne disease endemic to tropical regions, has emerged as an epidemic threat over the past 15 years. It infects over one million people per year and causes debilitating joint pain [1]. The name “chikungunya” derives from a Makonde phrase meaning “that which bends up” or “to become contorted”, referring to the bent posture of affected patients. Chikungunya fever (CHIKF) is caused by Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), a pathogen of the genus alphavirus and the family Togaviridae [2]. Within this genus, there are 30 species of arthropod-carried alphaviruses (also referred to as arboviruses, stemming from arthropod-borne viruses), all sharing seven specific antigenic complexes [3]. CHIVK is closely related to several other alphaviruses, including Ross River virus, Barmah Forest virus, o’nyong-nyong virus, the Sindbis group of viruses, and the Mayaro virus, all of which are known to cause arthritis [4]. CHIKV has three genotypes: Asian, West African, and East Central South African, all named after their geographical distributions. The virus itself is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus approximately 11.8 kb long [5]. It has an icosahedral capsid which is covered by a lipid layer, a diameter of approximately 65 nm, and is sensitive to temperatures greater than 58 °C [6]. It contains two open reading frames (ORFs), one on the 5′ end and the other on the 3′ end [7], with the ORF at the 5′ end producing four non-structural proteins (nsP 1–4) and the ORF on the 3′ end producing the structural proteins, which are composed of a capsid protein, two envelope glycoproteins (E1 and E2), and 2 small cleavage products (E3 and 6K) [8]. 1.2. History/OriginsCHIKV was not recognized in the early 19th century, but what we now know as CHIKF was. It was not until the early 1950s that CHIKV was first characterized in East Africa [9]. It was more specifically outlined in southern Tanzania in 1952, where it was first isolated in a human [10]. Following its discovery, the disease was largely confined to pockets of land in Asia and Africa. The disease was marked by long gaps of inactivity interspersed with sudden outbreaks [11], though this characterization has been disputed [12].It was not until the late 1990s and early 2000s that CHIKV began to re-emerge on a global scale. Many of these recent epidemics differed from those previously reported in both their increased scale and more rapid movement, with many originating from migrant populations moving from areas with endemic CHIKV. Malaysia had an outbreak in 1998 that was present primarily in adults and speculated to be re-introduced through the movement of workers [13], while Indonesia had a major outbreak in 2001–2003 after a 20-year hiatus of epidemic CHIKV [14]. The 2005 Indian epidemic, one of the most severe of the recent outbreaks, provided a possible template for envisioning future outbreaks and their consequences. The outbreak occurred after a 32-year gap of epidemic CHIKV in the region and eventually affected 1.3 million people [15]. The national burden from the outbreak was estimated to be nearly 26,000 disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) lost, equating to approximately 45.26 DALYs per million people [16]. 2005 also saw a severe CHIKV outbreak on Réunion, an island found in the Indian Ocean east of Madagascar. This outbreak affected one-third of the island’s population [17] and was notable in that its neural, hepatic, and myocardial symptoms led to an unusually high mortality rate as compared to previous CHIKV outbreaks [18]. Table 1 summarizes recent large-scale outbreaks of CHIKV in the 2000s.As global travel has increased, there has been an increase of CHIKF cases described in Western nations. In September 2007, a small outbreak of CHIKV stemming from an imported case was noted in Italy and was especially concerning as it was spread via local infected mosquitoes [19]. There were no locally acquired cases in the USA from 1995 to 2009, but there were reports of imported cases during that time [20]. Similarly, imported cases coming from the Caribbean were noted in Spain in 2013 [21]. Of note, various autochthonous outbreaks have occurred in Europe, highlighting the ability of the virus to cause disease in these more temperate climates [22,23]. CHIKV was not noted in the Americas before 2013, but has since rapidly spread throughout the region. In the years following the emergence of CHIKV in the Americas, it has caused between 795,000 and 1.1 million cases, and spread to 43 countries and territories. During a 2014 outbreak on the islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe, an estimated 308,000 people were affected [24], and from October 2014 to March 2015, 66,000 people in French Polynesia were infected, equating to an infection rate of 25% [24]. In addition, CHIKV establishment in the Americas was followed by a sharp increase in travel-related CHIKF with upwards of 1600 passengers coming to the US with CHIKF in the year following its emergence, compared to a previous average of 28.1.3. SymptomsThough it can appear similar to dengue fever and Zika, CHIKF is indicated by several characteristic symptoms. CHIKV is remarkable in that it creates symptoms in a higher proportion of infected individuals as compared to other alphaviruses, with 10–70% of persons living in an affected area becoming infected, and 50–97% of the infected developing a clinical presentation [1]. Symptoms typically appear after an incubation time of 4–7 days [25]. The disease has a more severe effect on neonates and the elderly [26], and in neonates it is associated with encephalitis [27]. The mortality rate is five times higher in individuals 65 and above compared to those less than 45 years of age [28]. The disease course is divided into an acute stage, lasting approximately one week, and a chronic stage, also known as the persistent stage, which can last from months to years. Acute fever and polyarthralgia are highly indicative of an infection [25], with arthralgia appearing in 30–90% of cases [5,6]. This joint pain is often bilateral, symmetric, and debilitating. There are occasional ophthalmic [29], neurological [30], and cardiac [31] symptoms.Chronic CHIKV infection is less studied but represents a significant health complication for those afflicted and a public health problem for their communities. In a case report investigating the Réunion outbreak, it was reported that two years post-infection, 43–75% of patients continued to have symptoms attributed to their infection [32]. The most prominent symptoms one month post-infection were rheumatism (75%) and fatigue (30%), with joint pain, fatigue, and neuritis being present after ten months [33]. Another study suggests that 50% of people infected with CHIKV will go on to experience chronic pain [34]. Chronic CHIKF demonstrates specificity to bone and joint tissue with symptoms such as rheumatoid arthritis and ankylosing spondylitis [35].In part due to the symptoms noted, CHIKV is associated with low mortality but high morbidity. During the Réunion outbreak, a case-fatality rate of 1/1000 was reported [36]. However, during the outbreaks occurring in 2004–2008, an increase in death rates was noted, with the deaths following the previously established pattern of affecting the elderly proportionately more than younger adults [37]. It has been argued that the fatality of CHIKF has been underestimated [38].When laboratory tests are performed, the primary lab finding is lymphopenia, delineated as having <1000 lymphocytes/mL3 [6]. Along with the lymphopenia, there is occasional leukopenia, elevated liver enzymes, anemia, elevated creatinine, elevated creatinine kinase, and hypocalcemia [6]. The acute stage of CHIKV is noted to have a high viremic load, with an average of 107 pfu/mL [6].2. Pathophysiology2.1. TransmissionCHIKV is transmitted in two different cycles: urban and sylvatic. The urban cycle refers to transmission from human to mosquito to human, while sylvatic transmission is animal to mosquito to human [17]. The sylvatic cycle is the primary form of maintenance in Africa [39]. CHIKV elsewhere in more densely populated areas is primarily maintained in an urban cycle, in which humans act as the major hosts and mosquitos of the genus Aedes act as vectors [17]. Specifically, the virus is primarily transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus. The principal vector in CHIKV transmission has historically been Ae. aegypti, but Ae. albopictus acted as the major vector in several recent outbreaks in Réunion, Europe, and Gabon [17], although Ae. Aegypti continues to be an important viral vector as seen during the Caribbean outbreak in 2013 [40]. The adaptation to Ae. albopictus has been theorized to be due in part to a lack of sufficient Ae. aegypti vectors [41], with a mutation in the E1 envelope protein allowing Ae. albopictus to serve as a competent vector. The A226V mutation in the E1 envelope protein increased fitness of CHIKV in Ae. albopictus and improved transmissibility to vertebrate species [17]. Mother-to-child vertical transmission has been postulated for the post-2005 incidences [26], being especially deleterious when the mother is infected up to four days postpartum [42], though this hypothesis has been disputed [43].2.2. Route of InfectionCHIKV has an established route of infection in humans, with certain cell types being particularly susceptible to infection. Those cells prone to infection and viral production include human epithelial and endothelial cells, primary fibroblasts, and monocyte-derived macrophages, while lymphoid and monocytoid cells, primary lymphocytes and monocytes, and monocyte-derived dendritic cells did not demonstrate CHIKV replication [44]. Although this claim can be disputed, since CHIKV-positive monocytes have been detected in vivo from CHIKV-infected patients [45]. After the first round of replication there is a host immune response, but the virus goes to the lymph nodes and then to other tissues via the circulatory system [46]. Replication at other tissues leads to the viremic phase of the disease, which is additionally when mosquitoes can transmit the disease via blood.2.3. Innate Immune ResponseThe immune response to CHIKV infection has been partially elucidated, but significant portions remain unknown. Upon infection, CHIKV indirectly stimulates production of type I interferon (IFN) via activation of non-hematopoietic cells, including primarily fibroblasts, an action which is essential for clearing CHIKV from the body [47]. While interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7 acted in a redundant manner in adults, neonates lacking in either factor were significantly more prone to infection [47]. CHIKV also appears to induce a signaling cascade by activating interferon promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), leading to the buildup of IRF3-dependent mRNAs while also blocking these mRNAs from encoding proteins; the mechanism for this impediment is as-yet unknown [48].CD8+ lymphocytes are found in skin rashes of acute patients, while CD4+ T-cells comprise the majority in synovial effusions of chronic patients [49]. This evidence was supported by experiments done by Wauguier et al., which found that there was an activation of CD8+ T-cells early in the infection, followed by CHIKV-induced apoptosis of CD4+ T-cells, with later parts of the acute stage demonstrating a higher CD4+ T-cell count [50]. BST-2 (bone marrow stromal antigen 2) may protect lymph tissues and regulate CHIKV-induced host inflammatory responses [51].There is evidence that inflammation stemming from CHIKV infection has consequences for osteoblast and osteoclast proliferation and function, which may contribute to the effects of chronic CHIKV. Several of the cytokines associated with infection, such as TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1, also promote osteoclast activity and have been associated with osteoclastogenesis [52].The brain is noted for having its own innate immune response. As noted previously, though neurologic symptoms are uncommon, they can be severe, particularly in neonates. The brain has several methods for combating CHIKV infection. Mouse models demonstrated that astrocytes and oligodendrocytes were particularly susceptible to infection, while microglial cells were more resistant [53]. In astrocytes, CHIKV induced apoptosis via the external caspase-9 pathway. In response to CHIKV, microglial cells produce cytokines and pro-apoptotic molecules including IL-12, IFN-α, and TNF-α [54].3. Diagnosis/Treatment3.1. DiagnosisDiagnosis can be delayed due to the possible confusion of symptoms with those of dengue fever or Zika. Fever and polyarthralgia give 84% sensitivity, 71% positive predictive value (PPV), and 83% negative predictive value (NPV) [6]. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA) can be used to confirm the presence of anti-CHIKV antibodies, with IgM antibody levels highest three to five weeks post-infection and persisting for up to two months. PCR can also be used to genotype the virus.3.2. TreatmentCurrent treatment focuses on lessening the severity of symptoms rather than curing the disease. Treatment primarily involves the use of antipyretics and NSAIDs [5]. However, there have been no studies to systematically evaluate the efficacy of these treatments [6], and the symptoms may dissipate without intervention. The use of corticosteroids for acute stage treatment has met mixed success and is hesitantly used due to the possibility of worsening symptoms post-treatment [55]. Maintaining proper fluid levels is of particular importance. There is also emerging evidence that drugs that impede cholesterol transport, such as the class II cationic amphiphilic compounds U18666A and imipramine, may be effective against CHIKV membrane fusion, and has potential for working against other arboviruses [56].For severe chronic arthralgia, disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs), including methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine, or sulphasalazine, have been proposed [57]. Similar to the acute treatments, the systematic efficacy of DMARDs for chronic treatment is unknown [58], though there have been reports describing positive outcomes with cessation of symptoms within 4–6 months [59].4. CHIKV Infection and ModelsAccurate modeling of the pathogenesis of CHIKV infection is critical for continued progress against the disease. Most in vitro and in vivo models of CHIKV have investigated the mechanisms of viral entry and replication, and the efficacy of various antiviral treatments. As CHIKV has been modeled with several different methods, there are several categorizations of CHIKV modeling. There is in vitro cell culture modeling, and mouse and non-human primate in vivo modeling. Within these various models, acute stage and chronic stage infection models also have been developed. Each model demonstrates unique facets of CHIKV pathogenesis while having unique shortcomings.4.1. In Vitro Culture SystemThe most basic form of CHIKV modeling is in vitro cultures. Strictly speaking, this is not a model, but a culture system. In vitro culture systems form the basis of CHIKV analysis, but as such have significant drawbacks regarding clinical applications. They are the cheapest, fastest, and most accessible form of CHIKV analysis, making an ideal and commonly-used first step when testing antiviral therapies. A wide variety of cells are used for in vitro CHIKV cultures in order to assess the full scope of the disease, including primary human skeletal muscle myoblasts [60], human blood monocytes [45], and African Green monkey kidney (Vero-E6) cells [61]. Of particular interest is the use of primary human fibroblast-like synoviocytes [62] and human osteoblasts [63], given the known tropism of chronic CHIKV for bone and synovial tissues. However, while in vitro modeling has demonstrated some progress in accurately modeling the course of the disease, it still may not precisely predict in vivo behavior. For example, molecules known to have non-specific antiviral action (e.g., chloroquine and arbidol) showed some efficacy in vitro, but have not demonstrated clinical efficacy [5]. Similarly, in vitro testing demonstrated that some extracts from tropical plants, such as trigocherrings and trigowiin, have a good selectivity index against CHIKV, but in vivo models have yet to delineate their toxicity, tumorigenicity, and cellular mechanism [64]. Mefenamic acid, a component of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), along with Ribavirin, demonstrated a significant decrease in the hypertrophic effects of CHIKV in mice livers and spleens, both in vitro and in vivo. It did so by impairing viral replication and entry [65].4.2. Rodent ModelsMouse modeling is one of the most commonly used forms of animal modeling for CHIKV. Mice are relatively cheap, easily maintained, match well with many different mouse-specific reagents, are available with an abundance of different genetics lines, and are available in genetically-modified forms [66]. Mice have also been used to study transmission of CHIKV from mosquitoes [67]. As so many different types of murine model exist, mice models can be subdivided into several categories. Most broadly, murine models investigate either acute or chronic infection.As delineated by Haese et al., acute models come in several subcategories, including neonatal, immunocompromised, and arthritic models. Neonatal mouse models are useful as they can provide more accurate models for the susceptibility of neonates to CHIKV infection. Neonatal mouse models have demonstrated that fibroblasts are the primary target for CHIKV [68], that inefficient type-1 IFN signaling is a risk factor for severe complications from infection [68], and that interferon-stimulating gene 15 (ISG-15) plays a critical, but not direct, role in CHIKV mitigation [69].Research into the progress of chronic CHIKV infection also utilizes murine models, though this stage remains understudied. Mouse models have been used to show the presence of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) specific to the capsid structural protein in chronic CHIKV. T- and B-lymphocyte-deficient recombination activating gene 1 (RAG1 −/−) knockout mice are often used for studying chronic CHIKV. This mouse model was used to demonstrate that CHIKV “establishes persistent infections in joint-associated tissues, that persistence of CHIKV RNA is associated with ongoing synovitis, and that the sites of CHIKV persistence and tissue burdens of CHIKV are controlled by adaptive immunity”, and that prophylactic and therapeutic treatments of mAbs have differing efficacies [70].However, though they are very useful in many ways, CHIKV mouse models do have significant limitations. As yet, they have not been able to accurately simulate mother-child vertical transmission, determine how and why CHIKV more severely impacts the elderly, and determine the long-lasting consequences of chronic CHIKV [66]. Simulation of chronic CHIKV is particularly difficult, as mouse models expire quickly and may not demonstrate the full longevity and effects of persistent CHIKV.Other rodent models aside from murine models are also being developed to study CHIKV. Baby hamster kidney cells (BHK-21-Clone 13) have been used since the 1970s to culture CHIKV [71]. Golden hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) have demonstrated promise as future models for CHIKV, as they are highly susceptible to CHIKV infection and develop inflammations similar to humans, such as myositis and tenosynovitis [72].4.3. Non-Human Primate ModelsAlong with mouse models, non-human primates (NHPs) provide the most commonly used animal models for CHIKV research. They provide key benefits as compared to murine models: more closely matching human physiology and demonstrating similar clinical symptoms. Macaques are among the most commonly used NHPs. They have been used to study over 70 infectious diseases, including HIV, poliomyelitis, malaria, and CHIKV [73]. Rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) have been in use for CHIKV research since the mid-1950s [74], and bonnet macaques (Macaca radiata) since at least the late 1960s [75], with cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) also being utilized in the 21st century [76].Broadly speaking, studies utilizing NHPs can be divided into two categories: those that study the mechanism of the disease and those that seek to test therapies. Immunocompetent cynomolgus macaques have demonstrated that NHPs can be utilized to model the symptoms of chronic CHIKV infection, including consequences for the musculoskeletal, lymph, and hepatic systems [77]. Cynomolgus macaques were also shown to be competent models for chronic CHIKV as the virus was harvested a month and a half post-infection from several key organs (muscle, liver, spleen). NHPs have also been used to glean more information about the effect of CHIKV on vulnerable populations. Pregnant rhesus macaques have demonstrated an absence of viral RNA in fetuses post-mortem [78]. Elderly macaques demonstrated a continuation of CHIKV in the spleen that was not present in younger mature macaques [79]. This continuation, along with a weaker immune system, may explain the higher morbidity found among older populations that is common during CHIKV outbreaks, though further studies are required.Macaque models are being further developed to act as enzootic reservoirs for future therapies. They have been used to test the possibility of inactivated vaccines since the 1970s [80] and attenuated vaccines since the 1990s [81]. Macaques have been used to characterize the molecular mechanisms of anti-CHIKV antibodies, demonstrating that they target the E2 glycoprotein, capsid, and nsP1, nsP2, and nsP4 proteins [82]. Treatment of rhesus macaques with two monoclonal antibodies, CHK-152 and CHK-166, demonstrated a decrease in peripheral tissue infection [83]. When tested on rhesus macaques, a DNA vaccine expressing structural proteins E1–3 produced similar immunogenic effects as seen in human post-CHIKV infection [84].Despite the demonstrated possibility of NHPs in modeling CHIKV, their use has certain difficulties. Consequently, due to the fact that NHPs are more difficult to utilize as compared to standard murine models, their use is not as widespread. NHPs are more expensive, require special restraints such as tethers and sedatives, and, along with other animal models, do not fully recreate the human microenvironment.5. ChallengesOne of the challenges preventing advancements in CHIKV research is the continuing lack of adequate models for testing, both human and animal. Though current murine and nonhuman primate models have established their utility, they still lack in certain areas. There remains a need to identify good models with the appropriate microenvironment to mimic the setting of an infection.Up to the current day there is no animal model that completely shows the chronic rheumatoid syndrome for CHIKV, with current mice models demonstrating a destruction of tissue following infection [85]. As chronic CHIKV is a lifelong condition, models must be able to simulate the longevity of the disease. Further difficulties remain in inducing the severe joint damage caused by CHIKV in animal models. This lack of models to comprehensively simulate CHIKV infection may prevent forward progress to combating the disease. Treatments have not been completely tested due to a lack of relevant animal models. In particular, though there have been recent advancements, there is a dearth of animal models for testing the effects on bone and cartilage.In addition, much of the work that remains in preventing future outbreaks of epidemic CHIKV centers on vector control of Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. Traditionally, insecticides and larvicides have been used. However, mosquitoes have demonstrated an increasing resistance to insecticides [86]. There is evidence that some species of Ae. albopictus are developing resistance in the US to traditional insecticides such as DDT [87]. Ae. albopictus resistance against a variety of insecticides, including deltamethrin, beta-cypermethrin, cypermethrin, permethrin, dichlorvos, temephos, propoxur, and DDT, was reported throughout Guangzhou, China, with mortality rates ranging from 12 to 95% [88].Underscoring all of these challenges is the expense of CHIKV research, prevention, and treatment. Due in part to the chronic nature of the disease, CHIKV is estimated to cost tens of millions of dollars in affected countries, with one estimate placing a burden of nearly $74 million for a single outbreak in Colombia in 2014 [89]. Vaccines in particular may have difficulties as they require a large amount of funding which may not be commercially viable.6. Future DirectionsOne area in need of elucidation is the precise cellular mechanisms of the disease. While the coat glycoproteins required for viral entry are known structurally, less is known about possible target cell receptors and the precise mechanism for cell entry [86]. In addition, relatively more is known about innate immune responses to infection [51], which are largely in response to the acute state of the disease, but less is known about the nature of the associated chronic problems. It has been proposed that the changes to the immune response during the acute stage of CHIKV infection may facilitate the development of chronic problems [55], a theory which will require further studies with models to fully establish.While animal models have been steadily improving in their ability to map out the behavior of CHIKV over the last few years, another area that potentially shows future promise is the use of 3D scaffolds and models. 3D models have recently shown use for studying infectious diseases. Thus far, their scope has been largely focused on gastrointestinal diseases, but the field is expanding [90]. Current research has begun developing systems for 3D tissue modeling of the brain, GI tract, kidney, liver, lung, and skin [91]. 3D models are advantageous for studying infectious disease as they accurately model human structures and can be composed of multiple cell types found in a particular organ. Organoids, 3D organ-like structures, have demonstrated use in modeling in vivo human pathology.As the cell types susceptible to CHIKV have been elucidated, integration of these cells into 3D scaffolds may prove useful for more fully delineating the effects of CHIKV on each particular cell type. The development of accurate 3D models will allow for the testing of CHIKV effects on human cell lines of individual organ systems, and may be used to research particular symptoms found within those systems. An immunocompetent three-layer model comprised of keratinocytes, fibroblasts, and a central matrix of immune cells in an agarose–fibronectin gel was constructed so that each cell type could be analyzed [92]. This type of fibroblast construct could have potential use as a CHIKV infection model. Similar ideas were demonstrated with another 3D skin model used to demonstrate the effects of fibroblasts against Candida albicans invasion [93].In light of its association with neonatal encephalitis, 3D fetal and infant brain organoids are of particular note. Human pluripotent stem cell-derived neural organoids are excellent models for fetal brains [94]. These organoids have previously been used to demonstrate the impact of Zika virus (ZIKV) on fetal brain development, with particular emphasis on microcephaly. Human embryonic stem cell-derived cerebral organoids were used to identify a connection between ZIKV Toll-like receptor-3 activation and microcephaly [95]. 3D cerebral organoids have demonstrated the ability to form critical components of the human forebrain, including cortical neurons with markers for all six layers of the human cortex, and have been used to model the effects of ZIKV during various stages of neurogenesis [96]. Using 3D cerebral organoids to study the effects of CHIKV on fetal and infant neural cells may determine through what receptors and pathways CHIKV impacts neural cells and why it exhibits an increased burden on children.The development of bone and cartilage models could prove a fruitful source for investigating CHIKV, especially the effects of chronic CHIKV, by providing researchers with accurate human joint proliferation, and ischemic bone marrow necrosis stemming from CHIKV [97]. It has been demonstrated that using a mixture of silk fibroin and chitosan creates bone scaffolds that are suited for osteoblast growth [98]. As CHIKV has been used as a model for other alphaviruses, effective use of a 3D model may have larger consequences for studying alphavirus proliferation and invasion.Nevertheless, due to the modernity of the field, there is currently a dearth of research using 3D models to study neglected tropical diseases, including CHIKV. Many bone and cartilage models currently under investigation are for implantation rather than infection, though there is overlap in the needs of both simulations. In addition, problems such as lack of vascularization and other related issues must be solved before these scaffolds will be able to fully imitate the bone microenvironment.7. ConclusionsSince the turn of the 21st century, CHIKV has re-emerged as a significant viral threat. The virus has caused outbreaks throughout the world and has demonstrated an ability to spread locally through areas to which it is not endemic. As global travel increases and rates of migration surge, the chance of a larger-scale epidemic will only rise. Though the disease has a low mortality rate, the symptoms and chronic nature of the disease indicate that it should not be ignored. As the disease has not been of great significance for several decades, much knowledge of it remains woefully incomplete. Though more is known now about how the virus enters cells and which cells are susceptible to attack, what occurs once the cells are infected is less known, especially long-term. The development of new models, both animal and synthetic, will aid in more fully realizing treatments for this disease (Figure 1).In the past decade, new models have been developed to further study CHIKV. Murine and non-human primate models continue to advance and have given a more complete view than ever about the pathogenesis, cellular mechanisms, and replication of the virus. However, though there have been significant advancements in the field of CHIKV animal modeling, all models have significant limitations, and no animal model gives a completely accurate view of the human microenvironment. To that end, 3D scaffolds and tissue development, especially of bone and cartilage cells, may show the most accurate picture of CHIKV infection. As this field is only just beginning to be developed, there is an abundance of room for expansion.


Title: In Depth Viral Diversity Analysis in Atypical Neurological and Neonatal Chikungunya Infections in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

1. IntroductionChikungunya fever is a disease caused by the chikungunya virus (CHIKV), an arbovirus that belongs to the Togaviridae family, Alphavirus genus [1]. It is primarily transmitted to humans by Aedes mosquitoes and infection is usually characterized by fever, rash, and severe persistent polyarthralgia [1]. Since 2004, CHIKV has spread extensively through the tropics and to the Americas in 2013. It has caused explosive outbreaks with atypical clinical presentations increasingly recognized [2,3,4]. Complications of the nervous system are the most common severe complication of chikungunya infection (approximately 0.1% of symptomatic cases) [5,6,7]. Cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, hepatic, gastrointestinal, and adrenal are reported, and although infrequent, they can be severe, with high morbidity and mortality rates [5,8,9].The most common neurological disorders associated with CHIKV infection are encephalopathy and other central nervous system (CNS) disorders, followed by pure peripheral nervous system disorders such as Guillain–Barré syndrome, and less commonly mixed pathogenesis such as encephalomyelopathies or myeloneuropathy, affecting multiple parts of the nervous system [5]. The pathophysiological mechanisms by which CHIKV affects the nervous system have not been fully elucidated, and whether this is due to direct damage following viral replication or indirectly by triggering an immune-mediated acute inflammatory damage. Indeed, both mechanisms are not mutually exclusive and could be both involved in the CNS pathogenesis. Underlying co-morbidities may play a role in neurological complications of CHIKV infection [5].Reflecting the rising number of CHIKV cases since 2004, an increase in reports of vertical transmission has been noted [5]. Maternal CHIKV infection early in pregnancy does not seem to affect the fetus [10]. However, evidence of CHIKV causing neonatal disease correlates with transmission in the intrapartum period (between 2 days before and 2 days after labor), indicating that women had acute chikungunya infection near the time of delivery [10]. Previous studies showed that initial clinical features in the affected neonates included fever, distress, poor feeding, petechiae, and a maculopapular rash; all signs appearing 3–7 days after delivery [11]. However, neurological complications have been also described, and in several cases, with an impact on neonates’ long-term development, including movement, coordination, language, and sociability [11,12]. Neurological effects are not recognized at birth, but the neurocognitive function of these neonates tends to be worse compared to uninfected children [5]. The importance of the placenta in protecting the fetus against viral agents such as CHIKV has been demonstrated. Nevertheless, it is known that CHIKV can damage the placental tissue, altering its physiology, and thus allowing the virus passage. In addition, the consequent decrease in the oxygen exchange and nutrient transfer could contribute to fetal growth disturbances [10,13].CHIKV is a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA virus, whose genome size is approximately 11.8 kb and it encodes two different open reading frames flanked by two untranslated regions at the 5′ and 3′ genome ends [1]. Like other RNA viruses, CHIKV’s RNA-dependent RNA polymerase is a low-fidelity enzyme and thus prone to introducing genetic variability into the viral population during each cycle of RNA replication, which ultimately allows the continuous generation of new viral variants within a single host [14]. The consequent intrahost genetic diversity is thought to be advantageous for RNA viruses by facilitating their adaptation to different environments and hosts, and might also influence their pathogenicity [15,16,17]. Furthermore, it was demonstrated for RNA viruses that just one or a few amino acid replacements within a single protein are enough to modify a particular biological characteristic of the virus [18,19]. Considering all the above, this project aims to assess the intrahost genetic diversity of CHIKV in infected patients with neurological manifestations, and in mother–baby pairs, i.e., women infected during the intrapartum period and their babies following vertical transmission. We explored whether the presence of particular viral variants correlated with atypical manifestations and in mother-to-baby transmission. This study enhances our understanding of these atypical CHIKV conditions, and their underlying mechanisms, ultimately contributing to better clinical management.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Ethical StatementThis study was approved by the Oswaldo Cruz Institute Ethical Committee in Research (CAAE 90249219.6.1001.5248 number 2.998.362). All methods were performed in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. 2.2. Study SamplesThirty samples collected from confirmed CHIKV cases in the state of Rio de Janeiro during 2019 were included in the study. Samples were referred to the arbovirus reference laboratory for diagnostic purposes, accompanied by their respective epidemiological details. Twenty samples were from ten mothers (M) and their vertically infected newborns (NB). The remaining ten corresponded to five patients with CHIKV neurological manifestations, and included cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum/plasma (S/P) samples from each patient. This unique set of paired samples allows for an in depth study of intrahost diversity and intrahost selective pressure on the viral mutant ensembles in different compartments within and between hosts, in the case of vertical transmission. 2.3. Viral RNA Isolation and QuantificationAfter an initial clarification performed by centrifuging samples at 4000× g over 30 min at 5 °C, total RNA was extracted from 140 µL of the supernatant using the QIAmp Viral RNA Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany), following the manufacturer’s instructions, but with minor modifications described elsewhere [20]. Extracted nucleic acids (60 µL) were immediately treated with four units of Turbo DNase (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) to digest DNA contaminants, and were purified with Agencourt RNA XP beads (Beckman Coulter Genomics, Chaska, MI, USA), with a final elution in 30 µL of H2O-LA (20 µg/mL Linear Acrylamide in RNase-free water). DNased RNA (5 µL) was finally quantified by real-time RT-PCR on a 7500 Fast Real-time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA), following protocols described by Lanciotti et al. [21]. For the viral load estimation, a standard calibration curve was constructed using serial dilutions of RNA extracted from a CHIKV in-house viral control, with an initial concentration of 5.7 × 107 plaque-forming units (pfu)/mL. Only pairs of samples (mother + newborn or serum/plasma + cerebrospinal fluid) where a viral load ≥ 1.5 × 100 pfu/mL was detected were included in subsequent analysis. 2.4. Virus Genome Deep SequencingHuman ribosomal (rRNA) and carrier RNA were selectively depleted from DNased RNA samples, followed by randomly primed cDNA synthesis, and library construction, all performed as described previously [22], with slight differences for the depletion and cDNA synthesis depicted in Torres et al., 2021 [20]. Multiplexed libraries were quantified with a Qubit fluorometer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and analyzed with the 4200 TapeStation System (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Finally, libraries were pooled in equimolar concentrations and paired-end sequenced in the Nextseq500 Illumina system (300 cycles) (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA).A CHIKV-negative human serum was processed and sequenced in parallel to the samples to rule out potential cross-contamination occurring during their handling. Therefore, no CHIKV reads were expected among these control sequences. Additionally, a library was constructed from synthetic commercial plasmid pGEM-3Zf (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) to assess the potential artefactual errors introduced during libraries’ PCR amplification and sequencing.2.5. Bioinformatics Data ProcessingSequencing reads were processed as described in Torres et al., 2021 [20]. Briefly, an initial trimming was carried out to remove bases and reads of low quality. Next, human sequences were depleted and reads were filtered out to retain only those belonging to CHIKV. After quality control, CHIKV reads were assembled de novo, and the representative consensus sequence of each sample was obtained. Next, CHIKV reads were mapped to their respective consensus sequence, deduplicated, and reads were realigned around insertion/deletion (indels) positions. Intrahost single nucleotide variants (iSNVs) and long variants (iLVs) representing indels, and their proportion among all CHIKV sequencing reads, were finally called by only considering alternate bases with Phred quality ≥30. Variants with significant strand bias (p < 0.05) or frequency lower than 1% were removed from the final dataset obtained for each sample. Bam files containing human depleted and CHIKV enriched sequences for each sequenced sample within this study were deposited in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under the BioProject IDPRJNA823758.2.6. Phylogenetic AnalysisWhole-genome consensus sequences obtained by deep-sequencing were aligned using MAFFT (https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/server/) to 533 CHIKV sequences available in GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov; as retrieved on 12 October 2021). Sequence alignment (nucleotides 77-11313) was next manually curated to remove the artefacts. A maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree was constructed using the RaxML v8.2.12 software [23] with 1000 bootstrap replicates, under the GTR+I+G substitution model obtained by Akaike’s information criterion and likelihood value in Jmodeltest v2.1.6 [24]. The consensus tree was visualized in FigTree v1.4.4 (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). 2.7. Viral Intrahost Genetic DiversityTo assess the potential existence of patterns of CHIKV intrahost diversity in samples in atypical and vertical transmission cases, the iSNV/LV profile obtained after variant calling was analyzed for each sample. Since the variant-calling procedure returned each minor variant’s position in the complete viral genome (nucleotides 1 to 11,811), and their specific position on each particular viral gene was computed by employing an in-house script developed in R v3.5.3 (https://www.r-project.org/). The impact of iSNV/LVs on each viral gene and encoding protein was obtained with the SnpEff software v4.3 [25]. Finally, iSNV/LV identity, frequency, position, and impact on viral proteins were assessed for each clinical condition. The magnitude and direction of intrahost natural selection were estimated using the ratio of non-synonymous (dN) to synonymous (dS) substitutions per non-synonymous and synonymous coding sequence sites, i.e., the standard Jukes–Cantor approach for protein-coding genes, as described elsewhere [26]. The dN/dS ratio represents a measure of selective pressure; therefore, a ratio dN/dS > 1 results when changes in the protein sequence are favored by natural selection, i.e., positively selected. On the contrary, a ratio <1 is expected if natural selection suppresses protein changes (evidence of negative selection). A dN/dS ratio equal to 1 represents a situation of neutral evolution [26]. The number of synonymous and non-synonymous sites for each sample consensus sequence was obtained with the DnaSP software v6.12 [27].2.8. Analyses in Silico Three-dimensional (3D) protein models constructed by comparative modeling in the Swiss-Expasy server (https://swissmodel.expasy.org/, accessed on 31 October 2021) were employed to assess the structural impact of non-conservative amino acid substitutions caused by iSNVs or single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; allele frequency > 50%) repeatedly identified within the samples. The models were chosen based on the global model quality estimate, the QMEAN score, the target–template sequence similarity identity percentage with templates, and crystals’ resolution and obtention method. The model’s quality was checked using the SAVES 6.0 server (https://saves.mbi.ucla.edu/, accessed on 28 November 2021). Finally, PyMol v2.4.1 was employed for visual assessment to determine how the variants under investigation could influence the structure, dynamics, and consequently function of the studied proteins.2.9. Statistical AnalysisStatistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism v8.0 (https://www.graphpad.com/scientific-software/prism/).3. Results and Discussion3.1. Cases Selection and CharacteristicsTo investigate the distribution of viral determinants potentially involved in atypical CHIKV cases or vertical transmission, we studied the intrahost CHIKV genetic diversity in samples obtained from infected mothers and their symptomatic newborns and patients with neurological manifestations. To that end, a PCR-free metagenomic experimental approach was used, intending to reflect the authentic viral intrahost diversity within each patient and between mother–baby pairs (reducing as much as possible the introduction of artifacts during the samples’ processing). Therefore, it was essential for M + NB or S/P + CSF samples to contain adequate viral RNA, as mentioned in Section 2.3 of the methodology. Only three cases of vertical transmission and three of neurological manifestations contained sufficient viral load to support further deep sequencing. Details of these cases are described below. 3.1.1. Vertical TransmissionCase 1 A pregnant 24-year-old woman (M1) with uncomplicated pregnancy presented on 9 April 2019, in labor, at 38 + 4/40 weeks gestational age (GA). On admission, the patient reported arthralgia, rash, and fever of 38 °C, onset 8 April 2019. She presented with thrombocytopenia and leukopenia, which improved before being discharged from the hospital on 13 April 2019, four days after delivery. Her female newborn (NB1), born on 9 April 2019 by normal vaginal delivery, without complications, presented an appropriate weight for gestational age, Apgar score 9, and she was discharged from the hospital on her second day of life. However, on 13 April 2019 she was admitted into the Pediatric Emergency Department with fever (38.3 °C), intense crying, jaundice (+2/+6), an umbilical stump with a foul odor, and moaning. Laboratory testing showed increased C-reactive protein, thrombocytopenia, hypoglycemia, total bilirubin 9.60 mg/dL, and positive culture for E. coli. Antibiotic therapy with ampicillin 300 mg/kg and gentamicin 7.5 mg/kg was implemented for five and seven days, respectively. Ultrasonographic screening of the urinary tract showed pyelocalyceal ectasia. On 15 April 2019, a new blood sample was collected from the mother and the newborn for arboviral testing, confirming the diagnosis of chikungunya fever by positive RT-PCR testing on both samples. NB1 hospital discharge was on her 10th day of life. Case 2A pregnant 21-year-old (M2) presented with fever and exanthema on 6 July 2019 at 36 weeks of gestational age. After testing positive for CHIKV RT-PCR on 7 July 2019, delivery was induced on 8 July 2019. Her female child (NB2) was born by caesarean section on that same day. NB2’s serum tested negative for CHIKV RT-PCR, while umbilical cord blood positive. Obstetric Doppler ultrasound and cardiotocography were normal at birth. However, on her fourth day of life, NB2 was admitted into the neonatal intensive unit, presenting apnea and seizures. On 19 July 2019, CHIKV infection was confirmed in NB2 with a positive result for CHIKV RT-PCR in a new serum sample.Case 3A pregnant 37-year-old female (M3) presented with fever (38.5), rash over the abdominal region, and arthralgia in wrists and ankles on the day of delivery (13 June 2019), at a gestational age of 36 weeks and 3 days. Her female newborn (NB3) was delivered by caesarean section due to fetal distress (altered cardiotocography). Serum samples of both M3 and NB3 tested positive for CHIKV by RT-PCR on the day of delivery. On NB3’s fifth day of life, she presented fever, maculopapular rash, and perfusion disorder, evolving with apnea, seizure, and an altered brain image on magnetic resonance. 3.1.2. Neurological ManifestationsCase 1A 1-month-old male patient presented with fever, bullous lesions on his back, and a rash of one day duration. Plasma and CSF samples were taken one day after the onset of symptoms to confirm a potential arboviral infection. Case 2A diabetic 78-year-old female patient was hospitalized after presenting with arthralgia, macular rash, fever, and confusion of 11 days’ duration (starting on 4 April 2019). Serum and CSF samples were taken on 12 April 2019 and 15 April 2019, respectively, to confirm the suspected diagnosis of arboviral encephalitis. Case 3An 87-year-old male patient, who presented with hypertension and febrile syndrome of 4 days’ duration with intense arthralgia, petechiae, and reduced consciousness, was admitted to the hospital on 26 April 2019. His neurological symptoms progressed, but cranial computed tomography (CT) scanning was normal. The patient had suffered from viral encephalitis in the past. The presumptive diagnosis was arbovirus infection with central nervous system complications. Serum and CSF samples were collected on 30 April 2019 for laboratory confirmation. These different aliquots of patients’ CHIKV positive samples were processed as described in the previous section. Technical characteristics of the sequenced samples can be seen in Table S1. After deep-sequencing, a full-length viral consensus sequence was obtained for each sample. They were included in a dataset composed of 533 CHIKV complete genomes retrieved from GenBank. Next, the aligned sequences were phylogenetically analyzed. As expected, all sequences corresponded to genotype ECSA (Figure S1), which has been circulating in Brazil since its introduction in 2013 and was responsible for the extensive outbreak adversely affecting the state of Rio de Janeiro in 2019 (reviewed in [28]).3.2. Intrahost CHIKV Genetic DiversityThe CHIKV genomes obtained were analyzed in depth. Intrahost variants detected within each sample were filtered to retain only those with a low risk of being an error due to sample processing and NGS (no strand bias, frequency ≥1%, present in >1 read pairs) (Table S1). The ones that successfully passed through this quality control filter were aligned along the viral genome. Then, each genomic region’s total number was computed for each sample and normalized to the region’s length to obtain its variability (percent of variations per total nucleotide positions). Variability within each individual sample did not seem to follow any constant pattern. On the contrary, several genomic regions, such as nsP1, nsP2, C, and E2, seemed to present higher variability irrespective of the sample (Figure S2). However, when samples were grouped by their condition, i.e., M vs. NB or S/P vs. CSF, to check whether an emerging pattern was noted, no statistically supported difference was observed among the categories along the viral genome (ANOVA two-way tests, p > 0.05), including specific genomic regions such as the untranslated regions or the nsP1, nsP2, capsid, and E2 coding genes (Wilcoxon tests, p > 0.05) (Figure 1B). Considering the limitations of the sample size, further studies, which recruit larger numbers of cases, will be needed to address this question with sufficient power.The intrahost frequency of every SNV/LV within each sample was also determined during the variant-calling process. The variants’ frequency was also combined with genome position to assess the frequency distribution along the genome (Figure 1C) and the median of the frequency was calculated for each group. For the vertically transmitted cases, the higher frequency of variants obtained from the NB cases (median [IQR]: 2.2 [1.4–4.4] for M and 4.8 [2.5–8.3] for NB; represented with a dashed and dotted line in Figure 1C, respectively; Mann–Whitney test, p = 0.018) would suggest that viral subpopulations are more represented in these cases, which could also be consistent with a potential founder effect due to a mother-to-newborn transmission bottleneck. However, it is important to note that NB median frequency could be biased by the NB2 variants’ frequency. The corresponding sample of this particular case was taken 11 days after the onset of symptoms, representing a longer viral intrahost evolutionary time period compared to the other cases. From this standpoint, and in line with previous observations of dengue-infected patients [20], it would be likely that the intrahost selective pressures may have shaped its intrahost diversity into highly representative subpopulations. Therefore, the significance of the observation of a potential effect of vertical transmission should be treated cautiously. Regarding the cases with neurological manifestations, no obvious difference was observed for the median frequency between both groups (median [IQR]: 3.2 [2.1–6.0] for S/P, 2.2 [1.5–4.8] for CSF; represented with dotted and dashed lines in Figure 1C, respectively).We looked at the potential effect of each SNV/LV over the genome coding regions. For samples analyzed individually, overall, the proportions of synonymous (SS) and non-synonymous (NS) SNVs were similar for both samples of the pairs in all cases, except for S-CSF2 (Figure 1D). However, the NBs of the vertically transmitted cases and the CSFs of the two remaining cases with neurological manifestations presented with a higher proportion of LVs + stop codons than their paired samples (two-way ANOVA, p < 0.0001) (Figure 1D). Interestingly, these variants have been detected mainly in the non-structural coding genes nsP1, nsP2, and nsP3. Indels and stop codons tend naturally to create frameshifts and non-functional or truncated proteins. It is therefore possible that these resulting viral particles could be construed as “defective interfering particles” (DIPs), since their structural skeleton remains intact. As, however, their enzymes can be defective, rendering these variants less fit, we hypothesized that transmission would rely on those variants within the mutant swarm that exhibit no such mutations [29]. Particularly for the cases with neurological manifestations, LVs were also detected in the E2 coding gene within viruses from the CSF samples, while absent in the serum samples. Whether these variants were created de novo or were undetectable in serum due to very low frequency needs further exploration. DIPs have been widely described in RNA viruses and are usually associated with viral persistence and triggering antiviral immunity [30]. Therefore, our finding of DIPs needs to be considered for further studying the immune response to these defective particles at the level of the placental bed or at the blood–brain barrier (BBB). It is interesting to note that, besides the differences mentioned above, variation in the viral load did not present any obvious differential pattern between the categories of both groups, and interestingly, samples taken soon after the onset of symptoms, and/or at the same time (M-NB3, P-CSF1), showed a 2–3 order difference in the viral load between the samples of the pair (Figure 1A). Even though this observation involved only two cases, it raised the question of whether the viral passage through the respective barriers is a transient process occurring at an early and specific time during the infection process, and/or consistent with the unilateral direction of transmission, i.e., from the mother to neonate or from blood to the central nervous system (CNS) across the BBB. It has been demonstrated for several alphaviruses commonly causing viral encephalitis, such as Venezuelan and western equine encephalitis viruses (VEEV and WEEV), that passage into the CNS occurs via a caveolin-mediated transcytosis across an intact BBB [31]. However, CHIKV’s neuroinvasive phenotype is atypical [5], and the mechanisms involved in pathogenesis are still unknown. Furthermore, in vitro analyses with Semliki Forest virus (SFV), another alphavirus causing encephalitis, demonstrated that strains carrying positively charged amino acid residues at positions 162 or 247, on the surface of the E2 glycoprotein, presented a selective advantage with the ability to cross an artificial BBB, and efficiently replicate in the brain [32]. On the other hand, even though the mechanisms underlying the vertical transmission remain unknown, previous evidence suggested that CHIKV has no tropism for the placenta itself [10], limiting the chances of mother-to-child CHIKV transmission to the intrapartum period in near-term deliveries. In this context, the vertical transmission rate is close to 50% and is likely a consequence of a passive transfer of maternal blood-borne free virus particles through the placental barrier via the physiological breaches that arise at the term of pregnancy and during parturition and which are known to lead to maternal–fetal blood exchanges [33]. On the contrary, other studies demonstrated that the placenta can in fact be infected by CHIKV [34,35] and damaged as a consequence of the direct viral cytopathic effect [13]. In addition to the possible limited transfer through the barriers, ultimately leading to concomitant compartmentalization, is the effect of natural selection that acts within the hosts, presumably differently according to the viral location. Therefore, bottlenecks imposed after overcoming anatomical barriers and intrahost selection acting on viral variants passing through both contribute to shaping the mutant ensembles and changing variants frequencies. In this study, the natural selection strength was assessed by calculating the ratio of non-synonymous (dN) to synonymous (dS) substitutions per coding sequence site (dN/dS), considering both iSNVs and iLVs. Almost all samples (n = 10/12) presented dN/dS ratios <1 (Figure 1E), representing potential evidence that a purifying selection pressure might be taking place to shape the viral populations under study. However, two CSF cases (CSF1 and CSF2) exhibited dN/dS ratios > 1, suggesting that CHIKV was under a weaker purifying selection within these cases (Figure 1E). It should be noted that these samples were taken within 1 and 11 days since symptom onset, respectively (Figure 1A). Therefore, the time of exposure of the virus to the host does not seem to affect the strength of the purifying selection in this case; differently from what has been described for DENV-2, where prolonged infection times were in line with stronger purifying selection forces [20]. Additionally, as proposed by Grubaugh et al., the purifying selection strength was assessed by measuring the accumulation of iLVs per coding sequence too, once they are predicted to be deleterious and thus rapidly removed by selection [36]. Cases NB2, CSF2, and CSF3 showed a higher number of accumulated LVs along the sequencing coding region of the genome when compared to their predecessors.Regarding the natural selection assessment overall, no statistically supported differences were observed for samples grouped by category (Student’s t-tests for dN/dS or number of LVs per coding region, p > 0.05 for M vs. NB, and S/P vs. CSF). Nevertheless, we hypothesized that individual evidence in NB or CSF cases could be attributable to deficiencies in the intrahost viral variants’ selection due to newborns’ immature immune responses [37] or differences between the central nervous system immunity and the peripheral one [38], respectively. Either by an obvious or subtle difference in dN/dS ratio or the amount of iLVs accumulated in the coding region, both M and S/P samples showed evidence in favor of stronger purifying selection (Figure 1E). Thus, we believe that the dynamics of the different immune responses mentioned above after overcoming anatomical barriers could explain the recovery of the viral intrahost diversity within NB or CSF samples, with the consequent appearance of defective genomes. Our hypothesis is broadly in line with previous studies demonstrating that the virus population structure could be determined by a specific tissue environment, presumably in response to tissue-specific response to infection, including innate antiviral responses [36,39]. 3.3. Mutational PatternTo study the possibility of viral factors correlating to CHIKV passage through these barriers, it is essential to trace the pattern of viral variants, if any, potentially associated with the mother/baby transmission or the neurological cases. Among all variants detected in all the samples (n = 188), 35 were repeatedly identified (Table S2). Of them, 20 were non-synonymous, and particularly, 10 involved non-conservative amino acid substitutions (Table 1). Since the latter would be expected to be potentially associated with functional changes, more detailed analyses were focused on these changes. In addition, we investigated whether there were differences between the representative consensus viral sequences of the samples (allele frequency > 50%), since they might have gone unnoticed by the bioinformatic variant-calling process used. Sixty-five different single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified (Table S3), of which only 14 represented amino acid substitutions, and of these only five were non-conservative (Table 1).It is noteworthy that the relevant iSNVs and SNPs carrying non-conservative amino acid substitutions were located mainly in the non-structural coding genes, which would indicate that there is no obvious mutational pattern expressed through the viral structure that could be correlated with transmission from one compartment to the other, with the exception of the two intrahost variants found in E2 and E1 (Table 1). The nsP1 protein is involved in the synthesis of the viral RNA negative strand and also harbors the guanylyltransferase (GTPase) and methyltransferase (MTase) activities needed for the RNA capping [1,40]. nsP2 encodes for the viral helicase, which also acts as a protease and triphosphatase [41]. Besides its role in viral replication, its participation in pathogenic mechanisms has also been described [41,42]. nsP3 collaborates in the RNA synthesis and acts as a replicase [1], while nsP4 represents the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase [1]. E2 and E1, on the contrary, encode for the structural E2 glycoprotein, a transmembrane protein responsible for cell receptor recognition and virus-specific attachment to cells [1], and the membrane-associated E1 protein, in charge of inducing the fusion of viral and endosomal membranes, once the virus enters the cell, allowing the release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol (reviewed in [43]). Therefore, considering these proteins’ crucial functions it will be essential to assess any potentially relevant effect of the substitutions described above, employing in silico analyses performed by comparative modeling.3.4. In Silico Analysis of Missense MutationsThree-dimensional models were constructed for nsP1, nsP2, and E proteins since homologous crystals were available in the PDB database (Table S4). For nsP3 and nsP4, this was not the case. Therefore, homology modeling did not result in a useful approach to analyze these proteins.CHIKV nsP1, in its active form, consists of a dodecameric ring-shaped protein (Figure 2A), with its oligomerization and the interaction with cellular membranes being essential for its enzymatic activation [40]. Minor variant H136Y was located within the capping domain (residues 1–294 and 459–472), which is structurally similar to other MTases, however, with some folding variations and the inclusion of a Zn-binding site [40]. Residue 136 was located next to this site, but its substitution from histidine to tyrosine did not disturb its architecture, nor the potential stabilizing interactions with other residues, such as D127. However, these amino acids exposed their side-chains to the protein surface, causing a local change in the relief and the electrostatic charge (Figure 2A). On the other side, the substitution K427Q compromises a residue within a disordered structure involved in membrane binding (the MBO loop-2, aa 405–430) [40]. Nevertheless, due to the lysine or glutamine side-chain orientation, the stabilizing polar contacts to other residues and the electrostatic charge over the surface remained unaltered (Figure 2A). Presumably, nsP1 interaction with the cellular membrane would also be unaffected. Finally, the effect of the substitution Q528H could not be assessed since the model prediction involved only residues 2 to 473. As mentioned above, nsP2 is a multifunctional protein composed of two main domains. The N-terminal domain acts as an RNA helicase, RNA-dependent 5′ triphosphatase, and nucleoside triphosphatase [41,42], while the C-terminal is a cysteine protease, which cleaves the non-structural polyprotein precursor (nsP1 to nsP4) into the different non-structural viral proteins, in a specific and sequential manner (reviewed in [44]). Three variants were mapped within the helicase domain (Figure 2B). Residue E23 is located within an unstructured loop. Through its lateral chain it interacts with S73 and Y75, presumably contributing to the structure stability. Its substitution for K23 did not disrupt these interactions but changed the net charge over the protein surface (Figure 2B). Likewise, the residue L315 is located at the end of an alpha-helix and interacts with A319 and Y336 via its main chain. Its substitution for P315 did not disturb any of these interactions nor the surface shape or electrostatic charge (Figure 2B). None of these two substitutions would be expected to alter this domain’s function. Contrarily, F164L (detected at consensus level in both the samples M2 and NB2) involved a residue compromised in RNA stabilization through stacking interactions between F164 and the RNA (Figure 2B). Docking analyses would be needed to determine if F164L could, indeed, disturb the helicase domain activity. Previous mutagenesis analyses showed that enzymes harboring mutation F164A conserved their ATPase activities, but viral replication was completely abolished [45]. From this standpoint, we hypothesize that in the case of impaired viral replication, the host antiviral response could lead to inflammatory responses and ultimately to placental damage, facilitating viral transmission. However, since this substitution was detected at the consensus level, it could be likely that any other variant might be rescuing the viral population from extinction, perhaps through epistatic effects. Otherwise, it would probably be difficult for the virus to reach a viral load in the order of 106 pfu/mL, as occurred for mother M2, or persist after 11 days of infection, as is the case of newborn NB2.Besides the minor variant T470I for which the models built in this study failed to cover, the remaining three, N596D, E615G, and V645T, involved residues within the protease domain. Particularly, the former two were located in a random coil connector (residues 594–624) (Figure 2B), which is an unstructured linker of the two protease subdomains [44], while the latter was in a loop connecting two beta-sheets. Even though they might cause a shift in the net charge of the surface, they are not expected to disturb the labile structure of this region nor the interactions with other inner residues since they occur mainly via their main chains and not their lateral ones (Figure 2B). Consequently, they were not expected to cause any relevant disturbance to the protein function.Lastly, only two relevant minor variants caused amino acids substitutions within the E1 and E2 glycoproteins (Table 1), which form the icosahedral shell at the virion surface (Figure 2C) [1]. Substitution E165V involved a residue located in an unstructured beta-linker subdomain, which connects the three structured and functional E2 domains (A, which contains the receptor and neutralizing antibody binding sites, B, and C) (Figure 2C) [43]. Even though E165 is a conserved residue among alphaviruses [46], this substitution did not seem to cause important alterations within the inner protein structure since the residue’s lateral chain is orientated outwards, and interactions with other residues occurred via the main chain. It neither seemed to disturb the interaction with E1, even though it slightly altered the local surface electrostatic charge (Figure 2C). Previous evidence on Semliki Forest virus (SFV), an Old-World alphavirus (Togaviridae), demonstrated that viruses with a positively charged lysine at E2 residue 162 or 247 were more reliant on glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) to enter cells, and therefore, more efficiently crossed an in vitro blood–brain barrier and replicated in higher titers in the brain [32]. It is unclear whether any similar scenario could be correlated to this variant, which was detected exclusively in samples of vertical transmission (Table 1).Residue S371 was mapped to the loop connecting beta-sheets F and G, within domain III of E1 (residues 293–393) [43]. It interacted with Q385 through its main chain and C370 and T372 via its lateral chain. When mutating to alanine, the latter is interrupted (Figure 2C), however, without destabilizing this domain’s secondary structure. In addition, no obvious shift becomes evident over the protein surface, which would indicate that E1–E1 interspike contacts involving this residue would not be disrupted [43].Finally, variants located within the UTRs need further analysis. A set of seven SNPs located within the 5′UTR was detected in two of the NB samples while absent in their respective M coupling ones, plus four S/P and CSF samples not necessarily belonging to the same patient (Table S3). Of note, these SNPs were detected in non-coupling samples, i.e., in NB or CSF samples, but not in their predecessors. In this regard, rather than suspecting a de novo intrahost origin, the most suitable explanation would be to consider a potential transmission vs. clearance balance allowing the presence/absence of these SNPs amid the coupling samples. It should be noted, however, that none of these SNPs was detected as a minor variant in any of the samples. According to the secondary structures already determined in the 5′UTR region of the viral genome [47], five of these SNPs spanning residues 7, 12, 14, 16, and 21 would participate in the stem-loop 3 (SL3) (residues 3–25), with only positions 7 and 21 being involved in base-pairing. It has been proposed that efficient viral replication relies on the SL3 structure [48]. Therefore, it should be further studied whether these variants could have any effect on viral fitness and ultimately on viral transmission from one compartment to the other. Overall, secondary structures described within the UTRs of different arboviruses seemed to be involved in viral replication but also pathogenesis (reviewed in [49,50]).4. ConclusionsEven though this is a small study, the results are suggestive of a potential viral transmission event early in the course of infection, both in the case of mother–baby pairs as well as the patients with CNS involvement. Differences in the intrahost mutant swarms between the pairing samples, even when taken at the same time, indicate that viral passage through these physical barriers occurs in a particular time window and/or in a unilateral direction, and is therefore subjected to potential selective bottlenecks that shape the viral intrahost diversity. It should be better explored whether the presence of potential defective particles or replicative defective viral particles, as reported here, could be influential to the antiviral response, ultimately triggering a more compromised immune response that facilitates inflammation and placental or BBB damage, leading to vertical or blood to CNS transmission. A larger study including a variety of clinical phenotypes will be able to more comprehensively assess the role of the different variants detected here. Thus, future research should consider the potential phenotypic effects of these variants and, importantly, assess viral variants carrying conservative amino acid substitutions. Those can be detrimental as even a single substitution can modify biological properties of a virus; as is the case of the A226V mutation in E1 [18]. Our study provides a unique approach in investigating vertical transmission and CNS presentations in CHIKV infections. It can be a useful tool in exploring emerging pathogens and/or emerging new phenotypes of known pathogens. Clearly, an area critical in future preparedness.


Title: 基孔肯雅病毒的母婴传播及其对新生儿神经系统的影响

近年来，全球范围内基孔肯雅热疫情多次暴发，今年以来我国南方地区基孔肯雅热的流行情况较为严重。基孔肯雅病毒存在母婴传播风险，并可能导致子代出现较严重的神经系统并发症。因此，了解基孔肯雅病毒的母婴传播机制及其对新生儿神经系统的影响变得尤为重要。本文通过回顾和分析现有文献，探讨基孔肯雅病毒围生期感染的传播途径、影响母婴传播的因素、新生儿感染的临床表现、影响神经系统的机制、对新生儿远期神经发育的影响，以及预防和治疗措施，旨在为临床诊疗、流行病学防控和围生期脑损伤机制研究提供思路和科学依据。1基孔肯雅病毒概述1.1病毒特性及传播途径基孔肯雅热是一种由基孔肯雅病毒（Chikungunya virus）引起的急性传染病。基孔肯雅病毒属于ɑ病毒属，主要通过蚊虫（埃及伊蚊和白纹伊蚊）叮咬传播。近年来因气候变化和城市化进程加快，基孔肯雅病毒的传播范围显著扩大，已覆盖除南极洲外的其他大陆，在热带和亚热带地区引发了多次疫情[1-2]。基孔肯雅病毒的感染症状通常为发热、关节疼痛和皮疹。尽管大多数患者在几周内痊愈，但部分患者可能会出现长期的关节疼痛和其他慢性症状[2]。人类活动、全球化与气候变化对基孔肯雅热的传播有显著影响。城市化和人口密集导致蚊子栖息地增加，尤其在城市中，不良的卫生条件为蚊子提供了理想的繁殖环境[3]。此外，国际旅行也促进了基孔肯雅病毒的传播，感染者在旅行中可能将病毒带到新的地区，从而引发地方性疫情[1]。研究显示，气候变化导致的温度升高和降水模式变化也为蚊子的繁殖提供了有利条件，进一步加剧了病毒的传播[4]。1.2流行病学基孔肯雅热疫情在非洲、亚洲、美洲、大洋洲及欧洲均有报道[5]。在2014年，牙买加经历了严重的基孔肯雅热疫情，导致了2499例死亡病例[6]。2023年全年，巴拉圭报告了超过12万例基孔肯雅热病例[7]。根据统计，至2023年，美洲地区报告了370万例疑似和确诊的基孔肯雅热病例，涉及50个国家或地区[4]。2008年以来，我国中部、东南和西南地区共16个省（直辖市、自治区）报道过输入性基孔肯雅热病例，云南、广东和浙江省局部地区还发生过输入性病例引起的基孔肯雅热本地流行[8]。系统评价显示基孔肯雅热母婴垂直传播率介于15.5%～50%[9]。2019年云南省瑞丽市首次报告新生儿基孔肯雅热围产期垂直传播事件：2例感染产妇共分娩3名新生儿（其中1例为双胎），3例新生儿经实验室检测均确诊感染基孔肯雅病毒[10]；2025年7月开始的广东佛山境外输入继发聚集性疫情尚未发现新生儿基孔肯雅热病例[11]。2母婴传播机制2.1病毒与宿主细胞互作的分子机制基孔肯雅病毒包膜上镶嵌着由两种跨膜糖蛋白E1和E2组成的异源二聚体，在基孔肯雅病毒与宿主细胞的互作中起关键作用，其分子机制主要包括以下三个方面：（1）受体识别与结合：E2蛋白N端的受体结合域可特异性识别宿主细胞表面的基质重塑相关蛋白8（MXRA8），MXRA8的Ig样结构域像一把“钳子”一样夹住病毒刺突顶端的E2蛋白，从而启动基孔肯雅病毒的内吞过程[12]。（2）启动病毒的内吞过程：E2蛋白与MXRA8结合后，基孔肯雅病毒通过网格蛋白介导的内吞作用进入细胞，形成内吞体。内吞体内部环境酸化（pH值降低）会触发E1蛋白的构象变化，暴露其融合肽，介导病毒包膜与内吞体膜融合，释放病毒核衣壳到细胞质中[13]。（3）病毒组装与出芽：在基孔肯雅病毒复制后期，E2蛋白与E1蛋白在高尔基体中形成异源二聚体，并转运至细胞质膜。核衣壳随后被招募到这些富含病毒糖蛋白的膜区域，E2蛋白的胞质结构域与病毒核衣壳相互作用，引导核衣壳与细胞质膜结合，启动病毒出芽过程，形成成熟的病毒颗粒[14]。2.2围生期期感染的传播途径基孔肯雅病毒感染的孕妇在妊娠期可能会出现多种并发症，包括胎儿死亡、早产和新生儿感染[15]。胎盘在母婴传播中发挥重要作用。有研究报道，感染母亲的胎盘组织中检测到基孔肯雅病毒RNA和抗原，伴随胎盘的组织病理学表现（蜕膜炎、纤维蛋白沉积、水肿、胎儿血管增厚和绒毛膜羊膜炎）和超微结构改变（细胞滋养层伴线粒体肿胀和内质网池扩张、合胞滋养层囊泡和内皮基底膜增厚）[16]。进一步免疫分析发现，感染胎盘中促炎细胞（CD8和CD163）、促炎细胞因子（IFN-γ和TNF-α）和抗炎细胞因子（TGF-β和IL-10）增加，在蜕膜细胞、滋养细胞、基质绒毛、Hofbauer细胞（胎盘巨噬细胞）和内皮细胞中均检测到基孔肯雅病毒抗原[17]。这些变化可能影响胎盘功能，并增加病毒垂直传播的风险。在分娩过程中，母亲体内的基孔肯雅病毒也可能通过产道直接传递给新生儿。巴西报道的一个围产期基孔肯雅病毒感染病例中，新生儿在分娩后第3天出现高热，第10天出现了皮肤烫伤综合征样表现，培养物未检出金黄色葡萄球菌，推测该皮肤损害可能与基孔肯雅病毒皮肤播散导致表皮细胞气球样变性有关，提示病毒在分娩过程中可能通过产道感染新生儿[18]。虽然可在母乳中检出基孔肯雅病毒RNA，但截至目前，尚没有出现婴儿因母乳喂养而感染基孔肯雅病毒的病例报告。2.3影响母婴传播的因素影响基孔肯雅病毒母婴传播的因素主要包括母亲的病毒载量和妊娠阶段。母亲在分娩前的高病毒载量与新生儿感染的风险成正比。巴西开展的一项回顾性研究中，39名孕妇在妊娠晚期出现基孔肯雅病毒感染症状，分娩后18名新生儿基孔肯雅病毒检测呈阳性，母婴传播率为46%（18/39），在病毒血症阳性的孕妇亚组中，母婴传播率升至62%（18/29）[19]。此外，妊娠期的不同阶段也会影响母婴传播的可能性。严重的新生儿感染主要发生在妊娠晚期，妊娠早期和中期感染主要导致流产风险增加[20]。目前还没有统计妊娠各期母婴传播率的大型流行病学研究。3新生儿感染的临床表现3.1常见症状及体征基孔肯雅病毒感染的新生儿临床表现多样，常见症状为发热、活动减少、疼痛、皮疹和喂养不良[19]。有的病例还伴随血小板减少、淋巴细胞减少和溶血等血液系统受累表现和心肌肥大、心室功能障碍、心包炎和冠状动脉扩张等心血管系统受累表现[21]。皮疹在急性期的典型特征为斑丘疹和水疱性病变，恢复期多有皮肤色素沉着，其中鼻部棕色色素沉着被称为“chick征”，是识别基孔肯雅感染的特异性皮疹表现[19]。最严重的并发症是神经系统损伤，部分为死胎，解剖病例示脑软化和自溶[15]，存活者伴先天性缺陷，表现为小头畸形[22]，但更多的是围产期感染导致的脑炎/脑病表型，如癫痫发作、活动减退和易激惹，部分病例有脑电图异常[19]。对于发展为脑炎的新生儿，MRI提示其白质损伤严重，通常经历三阶段演变：细胞毒性脑水肿（缺血）、血管源性水肿（再灌注）及脑实质减少（脱髓鞘）。头颅 MRI 病灶呈现血管周围分布，急性期表现为白质弥散受限区域，亚急性期呈现囊状病灶、可伴有脑萎缩[22-23]。目前没有除MRI外的其他神经影像学报告。3.2诊断标准与方法基孔肯雅病毒新生儿感染的诊断标准主要依赖于临床表现和实验室检测。临床上，医生应关注新生儿的症状，如发热、皮疹及神经系统异常等，同时结合母亲的病史，尤其是临产前的母体病毒血症情况。实验室检测方面，实时聚合酶链反应（RT-PCR）是确认基孔肯雅病毒感染的金标准[8]。部分神经系统受累的新生儿感染病例能在脑脊液中检测到病毒[19, 22]，提示病毒能够穿过血脑屏障。此外，血清学检测如IgM抗体的检测也有助于诊断，但其敏感性和特异性相对较低[8]。4影响新生儿神经系统的机制怀孕期间，母体、母胎屏障和胎儿大脑的先天性免疫反应降低，对基孔肯雅病毒存在易感性。基孔肯雅病毒经胎盘感染胎儿，并跨越血脑屏障，对神经元、神经胶质细胞造成损伤。4.1胎儿对病毒的易感性基孔肯雅病毒通过模式识别受体（如Toll样受体）启动抗病毒免疫反应，诱导释宿主放炎症细胞因子、干扰素和趋化因子[24]。足够水平的抗病毒反应对于清除病毒和防止不良预后至关重要，但怀孕期间，为了避免胎儿排斥反应，母体、母胎屏障和胎儿都天然的处于免疫耐受状态，表现为先天性免疫反应降低和干扰素反应降低，并且这一受抑制的免疫状态能延伸到新生儿期，这些共同导致了生命早期的病毒易感性[25]。动物实验发现，TLR-3（Toll样受体-3）激动剂和强效干扰素诱导剂能降低新生小鼠大脑中基孔肯雅病毒的滴度，减少神经系统损害，说明围生期基孔肯雅病毒通过逃避/抑制干扰素反应导致母婴传播和中枢神经系统感染 [26]（图1）。图 1Vertical transmission of chikungunya virus and fetal susceptibility to the virus基孔肯雅病毒的垂直传播及胎儿对病毒的易感性4.2病毒经胎盘影响胎儿大脑现有证据表明，基孔肯雅病毒能直接感染胎盘滋养层细胞和Hofbauer细胞[17]。基孔肯雅病毒可以通过以下两个途径经胎盘造成胎儿大脑损伤。（1）Hofbauer细胞为胎盘巨噬细胞，具有迁移能力，病毒进入绒毛膜绒毛后，可以通过感染Hofbauer细胞进入胎儿血管，并最终进入发育中的大脑[27]。研究显示，基孔肯雅病毒可直接感染神经干细胞、星形胶质细胞、小胶质细胞和驻留树突状细胞[26, 28]。（2）病毒诱导细胞病变和炎症反应，导致胎盘功能失调。一方面，胎盘产生的炎症分子（细胞因子和趋化因子）能传递到胎儿侧，造成大脑损伤[29]。另一方面，胎盘分泌神经营养因子、血清素和糖皮质激素的功能受损，从而影响胎儿大脑的神经发育过程[27]（图2）。图 2Chikungunya virus traverses the placenta and crosses the blood brain barrier基孔肯雅病毒经胎盘及跨越血脑屏障ICAM-1: intercellular adhesion molecule-1; ZO-1: zonula occludens-1; PECAM1: platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1; IL-1B: interleukin-1B; IL-6: interleukin-6; CCL5: C-C motif chemokine 5; BBB: blood-brain barrier.4.3病毒通过血脑屏障迁移从孕第8周起，胎儿开始形成血脑屏障，这一过程与大脑扩张和神经发育并行，其功能是阻止大部分微生物和毒素进入脑组织[30]。炎症状态时，活化的内皮细胞上调粘附分子（如ICAM-1）和炎症细胞因子（如IL-1B、IL-6、CCL5等），诱导白细胞向血脑屏障募集和停靠，并增加其通透性[31]。已有研究观察到，在高水平CCL2存在的情况下，基孔肯雅病毒通过感染CD14+CD16+单核细胞通过血脑屏障迁移，然后侵入中枢神经系统[32]。不仅如此，基孔肯雅病毒还会增加血脑屏障内皮细胞ZO-1蛋白表达并裂解血小板内皮细胞黏附分子1（PECAM1），这有助于增强基孔肯雅病毒感染的白细胞向中枢神经系统迁移[32]（图2）。4.4病毒诱导的大脑损伤基孔肯雅病毒造成脑损伤的可能机制为病毒大量复制诱导内质网应激和氧化应激，引发细胞凋亡和自噬，最终造成细胞溶解、死亡和细胞解体。非结构蛋白 2（NSP2）是一种对病毒复制至关重要的多功能蛋白，其 N 端具有解旋酶区域（nsP2h），具有三磷酸核苷酸酶和三磷酸核糖核酸酶活性，而C端则具有半胱氨酸蛋白酶区域（nsP2p），负责非结构多聚蛋白的加工[33]。研究发现，基孔肯雅病毒的NSP2可介导宿主关闭内质网应激相关的未折叠蛋白反应（URP），从而逃避与UPR相关的抗病毒机制[34]。另外，细胞自噬和凋亡可能在不同阶段发生。当用基孔肯雅病毒感染胶质母细胞瘤细胞系时，自噬现象在早期即被诱导发生，但在48 h后，细胞凋亡情况大量出现[35]。此外，差异表达分析揭示除了细胞死亡和应激反应外，基孔肯雅病毒还调节了包括突触功能、神经传递以及神经元细胞骨架蛋白在内的多种通路[36]。基孔肯雅病毒能直接引起神经元损伤。当给9日龄幼鼠腹膜注射基孔肯雅病毒后，免疫组化显示，注射后第2天幼鼠大脑中有少量神经元被基孔肯雅病毒感染，而到第3天，该病毒已在大脑中广泛扩散[36]。在一项体外实验中，研究者通过3D神经球技术模拟神经元分化，在神经元分化过程中感染基孔肯雅病毒的神经球的超微结构分析显示，神经元树突形成减少、与质膜相关的病毒颗粒积累、大量细胞液泡和线粒体肿胀，提示基孔肯雅病毒感染能影响神经元分化[37]。神经胶质细胞，即星形胶质细胞和小胶质细胞，在神经发育过程中发挥着重要作用，对功能性神经环路的形成、成熟以及维持均具有促进作用。当出现基孔肯雅病毒感染时，持续的细胞因子释放可能过度激活神经胶质细胞，而生命早期阶段的神经胶质细胞功能失调（如吞噬活性受损、过度活化或活化时间延长）及发育迟滞，可能会对处于发育进程中的大脑造成损害[38-39]。星形胶质细胞在突触发生、突触调控以及神经递质周转过程中发挥着重要作用。当基孔肯雅病毒使星形胶质细胞过度活化时，不仅会释放神经毒性分子，还会因神经递质周转功能受损而引发兴奋性毒性，进而导致神经元功能障碍以及细胞死亡[40-41]。此外，活化的小胶质细胞不仅能够增强星形胶质细胞的兴奋性毒性作用，还可通过分泌细胞因子和自由基等途径，加重胎儿脑损伤，如导致髓鞘化不足和脑白质损伤[42]（图3）。图 3Chikungunya virus-induced fetal brain injury基孔肯雅病毒诱导胎儿大脑损伤ROS: reactive oxygen species; ER: endoplasmic reticulum.5远期神经发育影响基孔肯雅病毒对通过母婴传播对子代造成的神经发育障碍可能会在出生后几个月内显现，影响儿童的认知、语言和运动能力。在一项生后6个月内的围产期暴露于基孔肯雅病毒婴幼儿的神经发育随访研究中，暴露组发育迟缓的发生率是未暴露组的7倍，主要由语言领域的表现驱动；暴露组的运动和认知领域得分更低，其中23%的患儿的自闭症谱系障碍筛查呈阳性[43]。产后感染基孔肯雅病毒也会对儿童的神经系统造成影响。一项针对生后6个月内感染基孔肯雅病毒患儿的为期2年的前瞻性随访研究发现，39%（7/18）的患儿出现了认知迟缓，1（6%）名患儿有轻度至中度运动迟缓，11（61%）位患儿存在社会情况发展失调[44]。目前尚没有研究比较产前或产后感染基孔肯雅病毒对新生儿神经系统的影响。此外，围产期感染基孔肯雅病毒对儿童神经发育的影响并不明确。在另一项使用INTERGROWTH-21神经发育量表评估儿童两岁时的认知、精细运动、粗大运动、语言和行为的随访研究中，妊娠期感染基孔肯雅病毒的母亲所生的2岁儿童和未感染基孔肯雅病毒的母亲所生的2岁儿童之间没有观察到神经发育差异，而且产后感染基孔肯雅病毒的儿童与未感染儿童的神经发育评分也没有差异[45]。但该研究中，感染基孔肯雅病毒的母亲中88%为妊娠早期和中期感染，围生期感染的比例偏低，且产后感染儿童的首次感染时间为生后12～18个月[45]。矛盾的结果可能与研究规模、感染时间、人种、随访时间、神经发育评估方式有关，未来需要开展更多临床多中心大数据研究以评估基孔肯雅病毒对新生儿远期神经发育的影响。6预防和治疗基孔肯雅病毒疫苗的研发近年来取得了一定的进展。基孔肯雅病毒减毒活疫苗VLA1553的Ⅰ期临床试验显示出100%的血清转化率，且在接种后12个月内保持了高水平的中和抗体[46]。该疫苗在12～18岁青少年人群的Ⅲ期临床试验中，98.8%（247/250）的受试者在接种疫苗后28 d检测出中和抗体，大多数不良事件为轻度或中度，VLA1553的耐受性一般良好[47]。目前进入临床试验阶段的减毒疫苗的适用人群不包括孕妇和新生儿。蚊虫控制是预防基孔肯雅热传播的关键策略。有效的蚊虫控制措施包括环境管理和化学灭蚊。环境管理的重点在于消除蚊虫滋生地，如清理积水和垃圾，以降低蚊虫繁殖率。常见的化学灭蚊方法是使用低毒性杀虫剂（拟除虫菊酯等）对蚊虫滋生区域进行喷洒。目前尚无基孔肯雅病毒通过母乳传播的确凿证据，世界卫生组织建议感染母亲在无严重疾病情况下继续母乳喂养[48]。尽管孕妇在妊娠晚期或分娩前感染基孔肯雅病毒，子代发生严重感染的风险较高，但没有证据表明延后分娩或选择性剖宫产能有效阻止胎儿感染。目前没有特效抗基孔肯雅病毒的药物，对基孔肯雅病毒感染主要采用支持性治疗。常规对症支持包括体温管理、水电解质平衡维持、营养支持、密切监测生命体征及临床表现等。对出现呼吸暂停或窘迫的新生儿应给予氧疗，严重者应早期启动无创或有创机械通气。惊厥应优先苯巴比妥控制，同时控制高热、避免高碳酸血症以减少脑水肿风险。7总结和展望综上，基孔肯雅病毒不仅能够通过母体传播给胎儿，还可能导致子代包括神经发育障碍在内的严重健康问题。目前，国内仍缺乏大数据的流行病学研究，现有文献多为小规模的病例报告和个案研究。今年，基孔肯雅热疫情在我国南方地区集中暴发，有必要及时建立流行病学监测数据库，全面收集临床数据，为后续的病毒传播模式、长期预后研究提供参考资料。另外，基孔肯雅热的母婴传播及其对子代神经系统损伤的机制研究仍有空白，例如阻断母婴传播的靶点及窗口期仍不明确，造成脑损伤的多条通路的研究不够深入，未来的研究可以选择小鼠和斑马鱼模型来模拟母婴传播过程，从而揭示病毒在母-胎-脑的传播路径及其生物学机制。
*　　　　*　　　　*
作者贡献声明　罗可人负责论文构思、调查研究、可视化和初稿写作，唐军负责论文构思、经费获取、监督指导和审读与编辑写作。所有作者已经同意将文章提交给本刊，且对将要发表的版本进行最终定稿，并同意对工作的所有方面负责。Author Contribution　LUO Keren is responsible for conceptualization, investigation, visualization, and writing--original draft. TANG Jun is responsible for conceptualization, funding acquisition, supervision, and writing--review and editing. Both authors consented to the submission of the article to the Journal. Both authors approved the final version to be published and agreed to take responsibility for all aspects of the work.利益冲突　所有作者均声明不存在利益冲突Declaration of Conflicting Interests　Both authors declare no competing interests.


Title: Waiting for chikungunya fever in Argentina: spatio-temporal risk
maps

Chikungunya fever is a mosquito-borne disease caused by an alphavirus of the family
Togaviridae. It is transmitted by the mosquitoes Aedes aegypti and
Aedes albopictus, globally known as dengue vectors. Chikungunya virus
(CHIKV) was first isolated in Tanzania in 1952, followed by its spread in India and
Southeast Asia (Weaver 2014). The disease is
currently endemic in parts of Africa, Southeast Asia and on the Indian subcontinent. The
first epidemics in Europe occurred in 2007 in northern Italy and in 2010 in southeastern
France (ECDC 2014).In the Americas no transmission of CHIKV has been detected until the recent outbreak
started on the island of Saint Martin, in October 2013, and expanded through the Caribbean
during the first half of 2014 (ECDC 2014, Weaver 2014). From that onward, the southern countries
of the region passed quickly from detecting some imported cases to meet the first
autochthonous patients. To March 2015, Bolivia (74 cases), Brazil (149), Colombia (1,317),
Ecuador (213), Paraguay (130) and Venezuela (2,303) confirmed local transmission (PAHO 2015). As a consequence, the prospects for
controlling CHIKV circulation in Latin America are not good (Weaver 2014) and a high risk of its establishment and spread throughout
the tropical, subtropical and even temperate regions of the continent is more real than
ever (Vega-Rúa et al. 2014).Among the three CHIKV genotypes known, the one involved in the American outbreak belongs to
the Asian genotype, which could be transmitted by both Ae. aegypti and
Ae. albopictus strains from American countries (Vega-Rúa et al. 2014). In Argentina, where more than 50 chikungunya
fever imported cases were already reported (PAHO
2015), Ae. albopictus is restricted to the northeastern province
of Misiones (Vezzani & Carbajo 2008)
whereas Ae. aegypti is present from the northern border to the
Patagonian city of Neuquén (38º57’S 68º03’W) (Grech et al.
2012). However, vector abundances are markedly seasonal through the country, with
absence of adult mosquito populations during the winter (Vezzani & Carbajo 2008). The aim of this paper is to perform a rapid
assessment of the current situation and risk of CHIKV transmission in Argentina considering
both the seasonal and the spatial scales.Argentina extends from latitudes 22-55º-S, presenting subtropical and temperate regions. It
has a population of 40 million inhabitants, located mainly in urban environments (91%). The
risk of CHIKV transmission was estimated for the whole country combining conditions for the
vector and for the virus. Immunity herd was considered null as there is no record of
transmission in the country. Virus income was not studied due to lack of information. A set
of 12 monthly risk maps was calculated based on monthly mean temperatures at 2.5
arc-seconds pixel size (worldclim.org) (Hijmans et al.
2005) encompassing the whole country. Each map included different isotherms
showing the key temperatures for CHIKV transmission and for vector development. The key
temperatures for CHIKV transmission were based on the monthly mean temperatures at which
chikungunya fever cases occurred globally. The literature was searched for data on cases
for which the location, months of occurrence and potential vector could be identified
(Lam et al. 2001, AbuBakar et al. 2007, Her et al. 2009,
Tilston et al. 2009, Dupont-Rouzeyrol et al. 2012, Weaver
2014). Only data corresponding to the main potential vector in Argentina
Ae. aegypti was considered, given that Ae. albopictus
is restricted to a small area in the northeast of the country. Nine locations from Asia,
one from Africa and one from Oceania were obtained, accounting for 45 month-location with
transmission. The mean monthly temperature of each month-location was obtained from the web
(weatherbase.com/). The most frequent and the lowest temperature of cases occurrence were
used as threshold isotherms and mapped in the local risk maps. Key temperatures for the
vector development were based on the thermal development threshold (TDT) according to
laboratory studies in central Argentina (Domínguez et al.
2000). These authors studied the development rate according to temperature and
concluded by extrapolation that 13°C might render a null rate. Therefore, maps included
13ºC isotherm to have an insight on habitat suitability for the vector. Finally, to
supplement the theoretical maps with field data from Argentina, the literature about
Ae. aegypti seasonal abundance was revised. The characterisation of
this seasonal abundance was based on different measures of adult activity detected by
ovitraps: proportion of positive ovitraps per time period [Buenos Aires (Vezzani et al. 2004)], number of eggs per period
[Córdoba (Domínguez et al. 2000), Tartagal (Micieli & Campos 2003), Resistencia (Stein et al. 2005), La Plata (Micieli et al. 2006), Orán (Estallo et
al. 2011), Santa Rosa (Breser et al.
2013)], and mosquito detection/non detection per period [Neuquén (Grech et al. 2012)]. One index was chosen from each
locality when more than one was available. All the information was unified on a monthly
base. For each locality, every month was classified relatively to the highest activity
month in four categories: maximum, medium (lower than 60% of maximum activity), low (lower
than 10% of maximum activity or detection without activity estimate) and no detection. The
information was superimposed on the risk maps previously described.Transmission of CHIKV by Ae. aegypti in the world was observed from
21-34ºC (Table). The most frequent temperature with
transmission was the interval 26-28ºC, accounting for the 44% of all observed
month-locations. In Argentina, the 21ºC isotherm encompasses the northeast from
September-April (Figure). It expands south in the
subsequent months reaching its maximum span during January and retreats back to the
northeast by April. The maximum area includes more than half the country and around
32,000,000 inhabitants (79% of Argentinean population). The 26ºC isotherms covers the
northeast since November, then extends south up to central Argentina in January presenting
its maximum area and retracts back to the northeast in February. Mean temperatures above
28ºC are only present in a thin fringe to the very northeast during January.
TABLEFrequency of mean monthly temperatures at which chikungunya fever cases
occurred worldwide in locations with Aedes aegypti as potential
vectorTemperature
(ºC)Month with cases
(n)21-22223-25926-282029-31932-335data includes successive months for some locations where cases persisted more
than a month.

Monthly risk maps of chikungunya virus (CHIKV) for Argentina based on
isotherms of monthly mean temperatures. Lower limit for Aedes aegypti
development (13ºC), lower transmission threshold for CHIKV (21ºC) (grey)
and most frequent transmission temperatures (26-28ºC). Adult activity per
location, relative to highest month [in descending order maximum (max), medium
(med) and low]. Locations included in the study shown in the July map (1: Oran; 2:
Tartagal; 3: Resistencia; 4: Córdoba; 5: Buenos Aires; 6: La Plata; 7: Santa Rosa;
8: Neuquén). naa: no adult activity; ND: not detected.
Regarding mosquito seasonal abundance, all areas below 13ºC showed no adult mosquito
activity, except for Santa Rosa in May and La Plata in June that showed low abundance
(Figure). The correlation between abundance
classes and temperature intervals was 0.59 (Spearman method, z = 5.48, p < 0.0001).
Looking at the 13ºC isotherm as TDT for the vector, the northeast presents suitable
conditions all over the year. The northern half of the country, excluding western highland
fringes, has favourable conditions from September until May, whereas south of Neuquén the
theoretical suitable period is restricted to November-March.According to our appraisal, monthly mean temperatures above 21ºC together with medium or
maximum adult activity could be considered the risk threshold. There are areas in the
northeast of the country with adequate temperatures for transmission and with medium vector
abundances as soon as October. In the most densely populated area, Buenos Aires, the risk
begins in December and is sustained until March, when the vector abundance is med-max. In
the southern limit of the vector distribution in the continent, close to Santa Rosa and
Neuquén, CHIKV transmission could be potentially restricted also to January-February,
although the mosquito adult activity known for this region is really low (Grech et al. 2012, Breser
et al. 2013). Overall seasonal maximum risk of transmission seems to be limited
by virus development more than mosquito abundance.The models herein proposed show that conditions for transmission are already present. In
brief, considering the regional context and the historic inability to control dengue in
Argentina, chikungunya fever illness seems unavoidable in the country. As Weaver (2014) remarked in a general way for Latin
America, if transmission cannot be controlled quickly, CHIKV will spread throughout the
territory.


Title: Chikungunya in Infants and Children: Is Pathogenesis Increasing?

1. IntroductionChikungunya (CHIKV) is an alphavirus usually vectored by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes [1]. CHIKV originated in Tanzania and is most closely related to o’nyong nyong virus, which originated in Uganda [2]. CHIKV is a small, enveloped virus with a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome approximately 12 kb long, which is divided into two open reading frames. The first section comprises the four non-structural proteins (nsP1, nsP2, nsP3, and nsP4) that are responsible for viral replication inside the host cell cytoplasm. The second open reading frame encodes the structural proteins (capsid, envelope 3 (E3), envelope 2 (E2), 6K, and envelope 1 (E1)). CHIKV can be classified into three genetic lineages based upon sequences of the E1 gene [3]. Since first reported in Tanzania in 1952, CHIKV has been identified in multiple outbreaks as a cause of dengue-like illness with arthralgia in Africa and febrile hemorrhagic disease in Asia [4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11]. Prior to the 2005 emergence of CHIKV on Reunion Island, chikungunya fever (CHIKF) was commonly misdiagnosed as dengue [12,13]. Misdiagnosis was common as both viruses occupy the same ecological niches and exhibit similar disease syndromes. In 2005, congenital and perinatal CHIKV infections were reported following delivery to mothers with documented viremia accompanied with symptoms of CHIKF [14,15,16]. Both congenital and perinatal CHIKV transmissions are directly associated with infected mothers. In this review, congenital transmission is indicated when viremia and symptoms are present in mothers at least one week to several weeks prior to birth and perinatal transmission is designated when mothers exhibit symptoms with viremia within a few days prior to or following delivery. Pediatric infection is indicated in individuals over two years of age. Here, reports of congenital and perinatal CHIKF are discussed as incidence of these infections, has occurred more frequently and have increased in severity since the 2014 global expansion (Figure 1). There is a significant need to understand CHIKV pathogenesis in children and neonates because the newly emergent genotypes of CHIKV cause multiple severe manifestations of infection, which can have significant, permanent consequences (Figure 1). Whether this is due to a change in the virus or just better diagnostics and reporting has not been proved.The following review describes the global reemergence and the syndromes of CHIKF in neonates, infants, and children. The various manifestations of CHIKF in infants and children are described and matched to the viral lineage that was documented in the area at the time the disease was described. The data show that certain manifestations of CHIKF occur with specific viral lineages and genetic motifs, which suggest that severe manifestations of CHIKF in the very young may be associated with the emergence of new viral lineages.2. CHIKV in Neonates and Children during the 1900sCHIKF was first extensively described in children during outbreaks in India and South Asia during the mid-1960s (Table 1) [17,18,19,20,21]. In Thailand, CHIKF was described as a dengue-like illness with fever, rash, arthralgia, and myalgia, with occasional hemorrhagic manifestations [5,20,21,22,23,24]. In a cohort of 148 CHIKV-exposed children, Vu Qui et al. [18] described multiple dengue-like illnesses in the Saigon region that were difficult to diagnose during the acute period due to similar disease symptoms with dengue and that viral neutralization tests were necessary for a definitive diagnosis. During the 1964 CHIKV outbreak in Madras, India, Jadhav et al. [17] describe pediatric CHIKV infection in great detail. For 33 infants with a dengue-like illness, 11 were admitted to the hospital. All 11 infants had fevers with five having temperatures greater than 104 °F [17]. Ten of the 11 infants developed a macular erythematous rash [17]. Diarrhea was seen in four infants and severe arthralgia in one infant [17]. Two infants experienced febrile seizures [17]. Later studies explained that the outbreaks in Thailand and Vietnam were caused by CHIKV of the Asian lineage [25].During the 1970s, additional clinical features were described for children and infants with CHIKF (Table 1). The 1974 CHIKV epidemic in Ibadan, Nigeria was caused by the West African genotype and was described as a febrile illness with rash and joint pain from which all children recovered [26,27]. During 1970–1972, CHIKV of Asian lineage caused hemorrhagic fever epidemics in children in Burma. The symptoms reported were indistinguishable from dengue and most infected individuals also presented with similar pulmonary hemorrhagic symptoms as Influenza A and B, which were also circulating at the time [9,10,25,28].For the most part, prior to the outbreak in Reunion Island in 2005, CHIKF in children and the very young typically involved biphasic fever and rash with the occasional description of pain and/or hemorrhage (Table 1) [17,18,19,26,27]. Although neonatal and pediatric seizures and other CNS symptoms were reported in children during the early outbreaks, the onset of such symptoms was invariably linked with fevers greater than 104 °F [5,17,19,26,29].It is of interest that arthralgia was less frequently reported for CHIKF caused by the Asian lineage than the African lineages (Table 1). Furthermore, hemorrhagic fever was more commonly diagnosed in children infected with CHIKV of the Asian lineage (Table 1). While genetic motifs related to viral pathogenesis haven’t been described for these three lineages, a unique V386G mutation was identified in the E2 gene of the Asian phylogroup [3]. The change from highly non-polar valine to a small polar glycine could have significant effects on protein structure and function though, since this particular residue is buried next to the capsid and is not likely to play a part in pathogenesis [30]. It is likely that there are other lineage-specific motifs that correlate with disease.3. CHIKV in Neonates and Children after Re-EmergenceSoon after the emergence of CHIKV on Reunion Island, congenital transmission of CHIKV was hypothesized following reports of CHIKF in infants 2–4 days old because viremia had been shown to occur between 3–5 days following infection [98,99]. Beginning in 2006, congenital and perinatal transmission of CHIKV was reported in Reunion Island (Table 1) [14,15,16,98]. These reports were soon followed by thorough descriptions of CHIKF in patients from a few days old up through 18 years of age [36,100]. Here, most infants less than six months of age exhibited rash and dehydration while children between 3 and 18 years old did not exhibit rash, but, instead, were significantly more likely to have neurologic and digestive symptoms [36,101].Severe CNS consequences from vertical and perinatal transmission were described for the 2005 Reunion Island outbreak and the 2006 outbreak in Bellary, India [16,36,37,102,103]. CNS involvement such as complicated seizures and abnormal MRI findings were reported in over half of patients [37,102]. Cardiac defects were identified in almost half of patients and included myocardial hypertrophy, ventricular dysfunction, pericarditis, and coronary artery dilatation [102]. In infants, these conditions can lead to death in the first year of life without significant medical intervention [104,105]. Touret et al. [15] reported three congenital infections that occurred between 12 and 15 weeks of pregnancy during the 2005 Reunion Island outbreak [15]. While all fetuses died, there were no apparent malformations. Lenglet et al. [14] also showed that congenital CHIKV infection could result in miscarriage if it occurred within the first 22 weeks of pregnancy. While they showed that, after 22 weeks, congenital infection did not cause any apparent defects, there was about 50% perinatal infection risk for mothers with viremia at delivery though he did not report significant consequences or sequelae in offspring [14].At that time, it was shown that the Reunion Island outbreak strain possessed an alanine to valine substitution at residue 266 in the E1 protein [3]. It was also of note that all patients with symptoms of neuroinvasive disease were infected with this A226V variant strain (21). The A226V mutation has been shown to enhance the transmission of CHIKV in Ae. albopictus mosquitoes which has significantly increased the geography of the virus [106]. Viral pathogenesis studies of this variant showed that CHIKV localized to neuronal cells of the cerebellum and induced a significant upregulation of Toll-like receptor-3 (TLR3) in mice [107]. However, these studies employed a strain with several other mutations such that the precise role of the A226V mutation in CHIKF cannot be defined.During the 2006–2007 CHIKV outbreak in Sri Lanka, children born to women infected with CHIKV during the first two trimesters of pregnancy had less than 50% chance of a healthy birth [38]. Many neonates infected during the first and second trimester exhibited abnormalities including hyperpigmentation, pre-term birth, fever, and various cardiac defects including atrial septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and persistent foramen ovale [38]. Third trimester and term infants with congenital infections were reported to have fever, hyperpigmentation and CNS involvement including meningoencephalitis, microcephaly, seizures, and developmental delays [38]. Genetic studies of these Sri Lankan outbreak strains have indicated that they were of the East/Central/South African (ECSA) lineage with novel mutations that formed a unique cluster, completely separate from other CHIKV isolated in other areas of Sri Lanka and in subsequent outbreaks [39,40]. While this virus lacked the A226V mutation, the virus exhibited unique mutations at nsP1, nsP2, and the capsid protein, which have yet to be characterized [40].Conversely, the 2005 CHIKV outbreak in Karnataka, India, the 2006–2007 outbreak in Gabon, the 2008–2009 CHIKV outbreak in Thailand, and the 2010 outbreaks in Senegal and India reported dengue-like illness or undifferentiated fever with rash (Table 1) [34,41,44,45]. Furthermore, CHIKV infection of fetuses, neonates, or children caused no significant effects or long-term sequalae [44]. This is puzzling since the ECSA genotype was identified as the cause of all but one of these outbreaks [34,35,41,42,43,48,49]. Furthermore, the Thailand 2008 and the India 2010 outbreak strains were shown to have the same A226V mutation identified in the Reunion Island 2005 outbreak [42,50]. This suggests that the A226V mutation probably doesn’t contribute to viral pathogenesis and that there are likely uncharacterized viral mutations present in these outbreak genomes that are contributing to disease.4. CHIKV in Neonates and Children after Global ExpansionWith the awareness of the potentially serious consequences of neonatal and pediatric CHIKV infections, much greater attention is now given to arboviral infection in infants and children. The identification of CHIKV in neonates has occurred more frequently in recent outbreaks and infection typically occurs during delivery (Table 1) [102]. The recent increase in CHIKV infections in children could be explained as a function of better reporting and diagnostics than what was available during the early outbreaks [108,109,110]. However, the scientists who described the early outbreaks were fully capable of documenting febrile disease in pregnant mothers and newborns. They provided comprehensive reports of severe disease and death in the young and old, and they documented abnormal syndromes thus, why would they not have reported symptoms seen in today’s outbreaks if they were present? The modern technology explanation is not sufficient as early scientists used techniques such as ELISA and plaque reduction neutralization tests which are still used today and are gold standards for identifying CHIKV as a causative agent [111,112]. It is far more likely that virus evolution during reemergence and expansion has resulted in increased pathogenesis in man.Prior to the epidemics in 2005 and the emergence of CHIKV in the Western Hemisphere, there were three distinct lineages of CHIKV that were described [28]. These lineages are anchored to geographical locations where circulating isolates showed little genetic variation [25,28]. ECSA with the A226V mutation is thought to be the most pathogenic, CHIKV-Western Hemisphere (CHIKV-WH) of intermediate pathogenesis, and the unmodified ECSA and West African strains the least pathogenic [113,114]With the spread of CHIKV into South America and the Caribbean, and the invasion of the ECSA lineage into India, multiple reports of CHIKF in children have been published since 2014. Now, it is relatively common for congenital and pediatric CHIKF to have debilitating, permanent consequences (Table 1).4.1. The West African LineageThis genotype circulates in the western sub-Saharan regions of Africa and hasn’t been identified outside of this region. It has been documented in periodic outbreaks in Senegal and Nigeria and is typically associated with dengue-like illness accompanied by arthralgia [26,27,45,90,115,116,117,118]. In children, the disease is a minor and self-limiting febrile illness with no debilitating or neurological sequelae reported, even in recent outbreaks (Table 1) [45].4.2. The East Central South African lineageHistorically, this genotype has been identified in all other regions of Africa. It was the virus identified in the early accounts described as a dengue-like illness punctuated by severe arthralgia [4,11,27]. In Africa, the pathology of this genotype hasn’t changed as recent outbreaks report similar syndromes to epidemics during the 1900s (Table 1) [7,41,51,52,59,89,90,91]. However, once this virus was imported into new regions, mutations contributing to its spread were identified. Mutations contributing to increased pathogenesis have not been identified though recurrent genetic motifs have been documented through efforts to track the movement of CHIKV into new regions.4.2.1. E1: A266VThe 2005 outbreak strains of CHIKV in Reunion Island possessed the E1: A266V mutation [3]. Vector studies showed that this mutation allowed for the virus to be transmitted by Ae. Albopictus, which led to a significant expansion in virus geography and emergence in temperate regions [106]. Thus, it was easy to associate this mutation with severe disease, especially when CHIKV with this mutation was isolated from neurologic and severe cases [119]. This assumption was supported by other CHIKV outbreaks with severe disease that also reported the E1 A226V mutation [42,50,54]. However, this mutation has not appropriately been characterized for pathogenesis. Studies aimed at characterizing the A226V mutation in neuroblastoma cells and mice found significant differences in innate immune responses [107,120]. However, these studies used clinically isolated CHIKV-ECSA with several other known mutations that could also contribute to severe disease [107].4.2.2. E1: K211EDuring November 2015 in Brazil, a newborn infected with CHIKV ECSA K211E mutation developed a macular erythematous rash and fever, which progressed into encephalitis with generalized seizures [77,84]. Fortunately, the infant fully recovered after a few weeks and no long-term sequelae were reported [84]. A short distance away in Salvador, Brazil, two vertically infected infants developed a rash, fever, and signs of bacterial infection but recovered within a month after delivery, even though one of the infants had developed a grade 1 intracerebral hemorrhage [83]. In 2016, a new E1: K211E mutation was identified in India, Bangladesh, and Brazil through phylogenetic studies (Table 1) [55,95]. It was shown that the E1: K211E mutation correlated with enhanced viral transmission in Ae. aegypti though studies linking this mutation with human disease have not been published [55]. Furthermore, published alignments show that many other mutations are present in these outbreak isolates.4.2.3. E2: V264AWhen CHIKV emerged in the Middle East in 2011, it was shown that the ECSA lineage had lost the A226V mutation and instead encoded a change at E2: V264A, which enhanced viral transmission in Ae. aegypti [55]. In India, severe manifestations of the ECSA genotype with the E1: K211E and E2: V264A mutations were reported in congenital and neonatal infections (Table 1) [55]. Specifically, encephalitis, hyperpigmentation, and severe cutaneous lesions were commonly seen in neonates and infants [55,93,94,121,122,123,124]. Other common symptoms included lethargy, poor feeding, and hypotonia [94,123]. In one study, three infants out of 13 had cystic encephalomalacia or diffuse cerebral atrophy three months following discharge [94]. In another report of vertically infected twins, both developed encephalopathy and seizures and MRI scans showed hemorrhagic leukoencephalopathy [125]. Both patients needed support from a ventilator, but both eventually fully recovered [125]. Reports of novel manifestations of CHIKF in infants and toddlers were also made as children began presenting with Stevens–Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis [93]. While neither the K211E nor the V264A are associated with increased human virulence, other CHIKV isolated during this period in this area possessed mutations located at virulence epitopes [55]. While there is likely a correlation, we could not connect these mutations with the isolates described in the above reports.4.3. The Asian LineageThe Asian genotypes historically circulated India, Indonesia, Singapore, Vietnam, Thailand and other lands in the West Pacific and East Indian Ocean [47]. Prior to the 2005 reemergence of CHIKV, the Asian genotype was commonly misdiagnosed as dengue [12]. Unlike the African genotypes, the Asian lineage was commonly associated with outbreaks of febrile illness punctuated by hemorrhagic fever (Table 1) [5,10,21,23,24,126]. Why this particular lineage produces hemorrhagic manifestations has not been explained, though it is most likely linked to a specific genetic motif present in this linage that has yet to be identified.4.4. The Western Hemisphere Genotype of CHIKV (CHIKV-WH)The CHIKV-WH genotype is a descendant of the Asian lineage and contains a four amino acid deletion in nsP3, an amino acid insertion at the 3’ UTR, and substitutions at E2: 368 and 6K: 20 [69,127]. In CHIKV, the nsP3 gene encodes a phosphoprotein required for RNA replication and is the major contributor to the virulence of alphaviruses because it interacts with a variety of host proteins (reviewed by Lark et al. [128]). The hypervariable region of nsP3 determines cell specificity for infection and replication [129]. The deletion of the nsP3 codons 379–382 is located within the hypervariable region of the protein [128,130]. Deletions within the hypervariable region of nsP3 in other alphaviruses has resulted in attenuation of virulence in mosquitos and decreased neurovirulence in mice [131,132,133]. In CHIKV, deleting even a single element of nsP3 can reduce replication [129]. It remains unknown how a 4-codon deletion has not affected the virulence of the CHIKV-WH genotype.4.4.1. Uncharacterized CHIKV-WHIn 2014–2015, CHIKV-WH invaded Mexico and in July 2015 caused an outbreak in the Yucatan region. Here, a one-month old infant was admitted to hospital with CHIKV-WH infection [134]. He presented with fever, lethargy, an erythematous maculopapular rash, and was diagnosed with septic shock secondary to CHIKF [134]. The infant soon developed poor perfusion and was connected to a ventilator [134]. A few hours later, he developed tonic-clonic seizures and fatal septic shock [134]. The island of Curacao experienced an outbreak in 2014 in which three vertically infected neonates experienced severe CNS complications [74]. One infant experienced subdural and intraventricular hemorrhage; the cerebral bleeding was so extensive that the infant died [74]. A second infant developed fever, rash and seizure caused by diffuse white matter lesions [74]. At follow-up one year later, the infant had recovered [74]. A third infant developed fever, rash, and irritability four days after birth and fully recovered after 10 days [74].4.4.2. E1: K211EAs with the K211E mutation in the ECSA lineage, this mutation also occurs within the CHIKV-WH genotype. This mutation has not been characterized for pathogenesis within this particular genotype though it is thought to be analogous to the K211E mutation in the ECSA lineage, which confers increased infectivity in Ae. aegypti [67,135]. Neonates and infants infected with this genotype during the 2014 outbreak in Norte de Santander, Colombia presented with fever, cutaneous eruptions, and diarrhea [64]. Many infants developed severe mucocutaneous, ulcerative lesions, the majority of which occurred in the genital and perianal rejoins [64]. 4.4.3. E2: L248FMost CHIKV-WH strains analyzed from the 2013–2015 outbreak in Colombia have possessed both the K221E and the E2: L248F mutations, which are also present in contemporary ECSA isolated from India and the Middle East. There is no phenotype associated with this mutation and it is unknown if this substitution contributes to viral pathogenesis [67]. It is unclear how this substitution would induce a phenotypic change since both amino acids have short non-polar side chains. Nevertheless, CHIKV with this genotype is linked to severe congenital and neonatal CHIKV disease. In Cartagena, Colombia, infants up to 24 months admitted to the emergency department were reported to have febrile illness easily confused with dengue virus [61]. Over the same time period, seven women from Sincelejo, Colombia infected with CHIKV-WH delivered eight babies [62,77]. The mothers presented with mild dengue-like illness, but the newborns presented with maculopapular rash (one with bullous dermatitis) [62]. Severe disease including meningoencephalitis, necrotizing enterocolitis, myocarditis, and respiratory distress were reported for the infants [62]. Three of the eight infants died including two infants with necrotizing enterocolitis [62]. In Segovia, Colombia, a vertically infected infant developed fever, rash and respiratory distress requiring ventilator support [136]. The patient fully recovered with no long-term sequelae reported at the six-month follow-up [136].4.4.4. E2: A406VThe 2014 Jamaican CHIKV-WH strain caused excessive deaths, especially in children under four years of age, during the 2014 outbreak [70]. The death toll in Jamaica was 10 times greater than the reported CHIKV-fatalities of all Western hemisphere reports combined [70]. Many infants and children presented with fever, arthralgia, and a marked absence of rash or other cutaneous symptoms [68]. A case report of two vertically infected infants described that both developed poor perfusion leading to ischemic fingers and toes [71]. In addition, both infants developed significant idiopathic abdominal distension leading to rectal prolapse [71]. Genetic analysis of this strain showed a valine substitution at residue 406 of the E2 protein [69]. This is a homologous non-polar:non-polar substitution which should have little, if any, effect on the biology of the virus. Further examination of these isolates will likely yield more potential mutations associated with disease.4.4.5. nsP1: K224NIn 2015, a three-month old infected with CHIKV was admitted to the emergency room after returning from Honduras with fever, rash, respiratory distress and edema [137]. The infant was placed on a ventilator and treated with antibiotics, vasoactives, and fluids with a diagnosis of septic shock secondary to CHIKV infection [137]. The patient fully recovered and was discharged after 10 days [137]. This child was shown to be infected with CHIKV with a K224N substitution of the nsP1 gene. The nsP1 gene in alphaviruses encodes a Rossman-like methyltransferase that is involved in protein capping [130]. nsP1 is also involved in host membrane associations [130,138]. How or if modifications to nsP1 affect CHIKV virulence is unknown, but the substitution of a basic lysine for a polar, amidic asparagine could likely cause significant modifications to the protein structure and function. The K224N mutation is located in a portion of the protein associated with host cell binding [138,139]. Recent work to identify viral resistance to polyamine depletion in mammalian cells identified a mutation G230R, which was found to enhance viral binding with host cells [139]. Perhaps this mutation confers increased infectivity in humans.4.4.6. nsP3: I285VThe substitution of a non-polar isoleucine for a non-polar valine with a similar side chain would not likely cause any significant changes in protein structure. However, this mutation occurs within the alphavirus unique domain, which contains a zinc coordination site within a protein fold [140]. Examinations of this domain have indicated that it is necessary for viral replication and mutations in this region are unstable and reduce virulence [140]. This could be a cause of the reduced pathogenicity reported in Puerto Rico, 2014. Here, perinatal transmission of this particular CHIKV-WH genotype resulted in rash followed by eczema [72].4.4.7. nsP4: R99QDuring the 2014–2015 outbreak in Guiana, 26 febrile children under three months of age infected with CHIKV-WH with a R99Q substitution at nsP4 were hospitalized [76]. The most common symptoms reported were fever, rash and edema of the hands and feet indicating possible problems with perfusion [76]. The nsP4 gene is the most highly conserved gene of the alphaviruses and encodes an RNA-dependent-RNA-polymerase that functions in producing the synthetic properties of the viral replicase complex [130,141]. Research investigating amino acid substitution of this protein has shown reduction in viral replication [141]. The R99Q substitution replaces a positively charged, basic arginine with an electronegative, polar glutamine. This change could cause changes to protein structure and function, though it is unknown how this mutation may have contributed to disease.4.4.8. nsP4: A459VThis substitution was associated with CHIKV-WH circulating in Haiti during 2014-2015 [69]. In a report describing arboviral infections in school-age children, the major symptoms seen were fever, arthralgia, and myalgia [73]. Rash was observed in only 4% of patients [73]. As with other substitutions discussed, the alanine to valine substitution reflect non-polar aliphatic to non-polar aliphatic and should not cause any major changes to the protein structure.5. Consequences of Co-InfectionCase reports have indicated that congenital co-infection of CHIKV with another pathogen significantly increases the pathology of infection and, in most cases, leads to miscarriage. However, co-infections in children do not show increased pathology. Following the 2015 CHIKV and Zika outbreaks in Colombia, a 25-week pregnant mother was diagnosed with Toxoplasma gondii, Zika virus, and CHIKV-WH in her amniotic fluid [142]. Severe neurological and physical deformities were identified resulting in early termination of pregnancy [142]. In March the following year, a female in her second trimester was diagnosed by RT-PCR with a CHIKV-WH-Zika virus co-infection following an abnormal sonogram, which indicated no fetal heartbeat [143]. An autopsy of the fetus showed low weight along with renal and placental calcifications [143]. Conversely, a three-year old patient from New Delhi was co-infected with CHIKV ECSA, dengue, and Plasmodium vivax but fortunately was not ill enough to warrant hospitalization [144]. The strain circulating in the area at the time of this child’s infection contained the E1: K211E and E2: V264A mutations, which were identified in pediatric and neonatal cases with severe cutaneous manifestations. Furthermore, infants infected with both CHIKV-WH and dengue virus during the 2014 outbreak in Colombia did not exhibit more serious manifestations of disease [64]. In Haiti as well, school-age children co-infected with CHIKV-WH and Zika virus did not exhibit worse disease than singly infected patients [73].6. ConclusionsCHIKV has been reported as a cause of febrile illness in children and neonates since the 1960s. Following the reemergence of CHIKV in the regions surrounding the Indian Ocean and the expansion of CHIKV into the Western Hemisphere, CHIKV-WH infections in children and neonates are reported more frequently and with more severe syndromes and sequelae (Table 1). Furthermore, congenital CHIKV infection has evolved from causing minor, self-limiting disease to resulting in multiple severe manifestations and death (Table 1). While severe CHIKV disease can be linked to unique viral genotypes, the contribution of novel mutations to disease pathogenesis has yet to be described. For instance, the K221E mutation occurs in both the ECSA and CHIKV-WH genotypes and has been identified in neonatal and pediatric infections with severe cutaneous lesions (Table 1). Furthermore, if the K211E mutation, is combined with a second mutation (ECSA E2: V264A and CHIKV-WH E2: L284F), there is a marked increase in disease severity, though it is unclear if these mutations are the cause (Table 1). Characterization of other mutations present in these isolated genomes has not been performed. This is unfortunate as the non-structural proteins have been shown to be involved in viral pathogenesis and neuroinvasiveness more frequently than envelope proteins due to their myriad of functions in viral replication, whereas the functions of the structural proteins are for host cell recognition, binding, and entry [131,132,133,138,139,140,145,146,147,148,149]This review highlights the limitations of our knowledge regarding CHIKV pathogenesis. This is likely a result of the disconnect between clinical and basic science. In clinical research, the main focus is diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. Viral disease is often diagnosed via serological or nucleic acid tests that focus on small portions of the genome (usually the envelope protein). Viral lineages and mutations are rarely emphasized unless the knowledge could direct patient care or impact diagnostic assays. Point mutations are usually ignored as long as a definitive diagnosis can be made. On the contrary, basic phylogenetic research focuses primarily on the genetic sequence. Often times, genomes are derived and characterized from insect samples and, when obtained from patient specimens, little if any attention is given to the clinical profiles of patients. Furthermore, very few viral genomes have been obtained from children and neonates given their inherent vulnerability as a research population.It is of interest that divergent and geographically distinct CHIKV genotypes can induce similar disease syndromes. If a single mutation can confer increased vector competence, as with the A226V mutation, then surely there are viral mutations that contribute to viral replication in skin, placental, or CNS tissues. There are hundreds, if not thousands, of mutations that have yet to be characterized. Through the use of site-directed mutagenesis of infectious clones or sub-genomic replicon strategies, it is possible to evaluate functional mutations in a silent background. With over 6100 CHIKV sequences available on GenBank, we just need to look.


Title: Characterization and Involvement of Exosomes Originating from Chikungunya Virus-Infected Epithelial Cells in the Transmission of Infectious Viral Elements

1. IntroductionThe Chikungunya virus (CHIKV), a positive-sense and single-stranded RNA virus, is classified as an alphavirus in the family Togaviridae [1]. CHIKV is the pathogen causing chikungunya fever, a self-limited acute viral illness causing extreme joint pain. CHIKV infection has become a significant global health problem [2] not only related to re-emergence with numerous outbreaks but also with chronic clinical complications, such as persistent arthralgia [3,4]. Since chikungunya arthritis treatment is not specific, and prevention by vaccines is not available, it is important to understand the mechanisms of pathogenesis and development of chronic arthritis following CHIKV infection [5,6]. Many previous studies have explained the mechanism of post-CHIKV arthritis as a persistent infection with recruitment and activation of macrophages [7,8] as well as increases of many inflammatory mediators [9,10] together with the persistence of virus or viral products in the synovial tissue [11]. However, whether associated with a proinflammatory mediator, e.g., granzyme A [12], or autoimmune processes, the exact mechanism of post-CHIKV arthritis is still unclear [13,14].Many studies have emphasized the potential role of extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes involved in the pathogenic mechanisms of various pathogens. EVs are generally referred to as microparticles which can be secreted from various cells [15]. EVs are enriched in markers such as tetraspanins (CD63, CD9, CD81, and more) and other exosomal biogenesis proteins such as heat shock protein 70 and small GTPases [16]. However, the presence of protein markers was verified at different concentrations among different subtypes of EVs. In addition, the small EVs—exosomes can also interact via receptor-ligand, direct menbrance integration, or even via endocytosis internalization, which refers to a novel cell–cell transmission path way [17]. Since their discovery, several functions of EVs have been proposed, such as providing a mechanism for cell-to-cell communication [16] or involvement in tumorigenesis, antigen-specific immune responses, immune evasion, immune suppression, and immune tolerance [17,18]. Therefore, EVs can be a potential biomarker for diagnosing many diseases and play a prospective role in treatments. On other hand, choosing a proper method for the isolation of purified EVs plays a crucial role in EVs research and therapeutic analysis. Many recommended isolation methods are: differential centrifugation, density gradient ultracentrifugation, filtration, and immunoaffinity capture-based techniques [19,20]. Together with many traditional techniques, antibody-coated magnetic beads seem to be a promising and most effective specific method for the isolation and characterization of EVs [17,21,22].Interestingly, since the budding process of EVs is similar to viral budding, RNA viruses can exploit EVs as a vehicle to transfer some viral particles or even naked viral genomes to infectious host cells [23,24]. For example, a kind of EVs called exosomes emanating from cells infected with human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) contained viral transactivation response elements, microRNAs, or unspliced HIV-1 species. Similarly, exosomes derived from hepatitis C virus (HCV) infected cells contained replication-competent viral RNA and even the complete HCV genome [25,26]. Although studies on exosomes derived from flavivirus-infected cells are limited, there is evidence that exosomes are involved in viral infection and transmission. Extracellular vesicles were also involved in dengue virus serotype 2 (DENV2)’s transmission from arthropod to mammalian cells mediated by interactions with an arthropod EV-enriched marker Tsp29Fb [27]. There are few studies on CHIKV intracellular replication by host endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT) [28] or by enhancement of antibody-mediated CHIKV infection which showed the infectious development and exacerbation of disease severity [29]. Additionally, a novel infectious mechanism of CHIKV has been described in which the virus is concealed in apoptotic blebs assisting in the invasion and infection of neighboring host cells as well as evading host responses [30].We have limited documentation of any reports on the potential contribution of EVs to the pathogenesis of CHIKV. Therefore, our study aimed to characterize extracellular microvesicles such as exosomes secreted from CHIKV-infected epithelial cells and determine their role in CHIKV infection and transmission.2. Results2.1. Susceptibility Profiles of the Established Epithelial Cell Lines to CHIKV InfectionAlthough the muscle satellite cells, fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages have been permissive to CHIKV infection, several studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of various epithelial cells to CHIKV infection [31,32,33,34]. To this end, we firstly evaluated the sensibility of Vero cell lines, which are continuous tissue culture cell lines derived from African green monkey kidney epithelial cells for the infection of the clinical CHIKV ROSS C6D4 strain. Moreover, the kinetics of CHIKV growth was perceived in HeLa cell lines, which is an HPV18-positive human cervical cancer cell lines and generic permissive arthropod cell lines, C6/36. As demonstrated in Figure 1, CHIKV at the multiplicity of infection (MOI) 5 facilely infected the Vero cell line with significantly increased transmembrane glycoproteins E1 mRNA loads at 72 h and 96 h post-infection (h.p.i.) in comparison with 48 h.p.i. (Figure 1A). The highest CHIKV loads have arisen between 12 h.p.i. to 24 h.p.i. in C6/36 (Figure 1B), while HeLa cells were observed at 48 h.p.i. (Figure 1C). Taken together, the three cell lines are progressively susceptible to CHIKV ROSS C6D4 strains and exhibit strain-specific differences in a time-dependent manner and an enormity of infectious viral load levels.2.2. CHIKV Specifically Facilitates the EV PopulationTo investigate whether epithelial cells secrete EVs, including exosomes, and if mosquito-borne alphaviruses use those exosomes as one of the pathways of their transmission, we next characterized the exosomes that were isolated from CHIKV-infected epithelial cells and analyzed the existence of viral genomic material and their related proteins. Interestingly, Vero cell-derived exosomes carried CHIKV transmembrane glycoproteins E1 mRNA loads in a manner of time, with progressively increased viral mRNA levels at 72 h.p.i. when infected with 5 MOI of CHIKV, compared with the early experimented time points of 24 and 48 h.p.i. (Figure 2A). Depending on the increased viral loads, we, therefore, selected the time point at 72 h.p.i. for the isolation of exosomes from CHIKV-infected Vero cell lines.Much of the exosomes were purified using a commercially available exosome isolation reagent and we further sequestered the small vesicle subset with an anti-CD63 Dynabeads™ method. Detailed protocols for exosome isolation in this study are shown as schematics in Supplementary Figure S1. Using a transmission electron microscopy (TEM) technique, we performed the negative staining on Vero cell-derived CD63+ exosomes originating from both the CHIKV infection and the parental cells revealing the occurrence of those EVs subset with the distributed size from 30–250 nm in diameter (Figure 2B), which were similar to exosomes that were quarantined from other mammalian epithelial cells, including human epithelial cells [35,36,37]. Calculating the total number of isolated exosomes from uninfected cells exhibited no significant differences in comparison with the 5 MOI CHIKV infection at 72 h.p.i. (Figure 2C). In addition, we quantifiably analyzed the population of the isolated heterogeneous Vero-derived exosomes and indicated that the size range of 50 and 100 nm (in diameter) was found to be the exalted population in both the uninfected and the CHIKV-infected groups (Figure 2D,E). Nevertheless, the small EVs originating from CHIKV-infected Vero cells with the 50–100 nm and 100–150 nm sizes had progressively increased and tended to decrease population percentage in the uninfected control (Figure 2D,E). Consequently, a lower population of the large Evs, in the size range of 200–350 nm, was also observed in CHIKV infection in comparison with the uninfected group, implying that the production of smaller-sized Evs might be stimulated by CHIKV (Figure 2D,E).Since the physical transmission electron microscope (TEM) and Dynamic light scattering (DLS) characterization indicated the high pure quality of the exosomes, we, therefore, estimated the total amount of proteins of those Evs by Bradford protein assay (BCA). The purified small Evs had the total amount of proteins in a manner of cell numbers plating, with linear increase concentration at the indicated time point (Figure 2F,G). Remarkably, the concentrations of total protein from the CHIKV-infected cells were not significantly different in comparison with the uninfected controls (Figure 2F,G), correlating with the data on the total number of small EVs between the CHIKV-infected and the uninfected groups (Figure 2C).To further exemplify these EV subgroups, we then determined the expression of CD63 and CD9 which are the well characterized EV biogenesis markers. Our immunoblotting revealed both CD63 and CD9 signals were detailed in exosomes that were isolated from Vero cells with or without CHIKV infection (Figure 2H). We also corroborated that cellular cytochrome-C was not captured in these exosomes (Figure 2H), reminding us of no contamination from other types of EVs.Collectively, these data suggested that CHIKV specifically mediated the excretion and cargo of the EVs’ population consistent with the features of those EVs’ subsets.2.3. CHIKV RNA Elements Are Encapsulated by Secreted Exosomes and Are InfectiousBecause we demonstrated that discrete exosomes might be mediated by CHIKV infection, we subsequently evaluated whether these vesicles contain the infectious viral genomic element. To this end, a reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) method described by Stapleford et al. in 2016 [38] was utilized to verify the full length of the CHIKV genome. As we expected, the RT-PCR detection documented the overlapped oligonucleotide amplicons that consisted of the entire CHIKV genome sequence in Vero cell-derived exosomes (Figure 3A). Using the quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), we also illustrated both CHIKV E1 mRNA in exosomes derived from MOI 5 infected Vero cells at 72 h.p.i. (Figure 3B). We subsequently determined whether these exosome-contained viral genomic elements are infectious and if CHIKV might be transmitted to neighboring cells via exosomes. We detected the cytopathic effects (CPEs) and the progressively increasing trend of CHIKV loads in a time-dependent manner in the naïve Vero cells that were exposed to the exosomes from the CHIKV-infected Vero cell lines (Figure 3C,D). In addition, in the calculation of the plaque-forming unit (PFU), we were able to demonstrate the high CHIKV titer (Figure 3E) and CHIKV particles in the cell culture medium (Figure 3F) in the exosomes-exposed naïve Vero cells but not observed in the exposure of exosomes from the CHIKV-uninfected group.As demonstrated, small EVs containing genomic material of CHIKV are infectious. How do they internalize a cell? We might not rule out the possibility of some viral particles being coexistent either outside or inside of those EVs. Because no CHIKV virions were detected either inside or outside of these isolated EV parts (Figure 2B), therefore, we suppose this to be inconsequential, suggesting that viral RNA was feasibly appropriate to temper the infection of naïve recipient cells. Altogether, we certified that an infection of CHIKV might be transmitted by those small EVs which could be distinct from true virions.2.4. CHIKV RNA Elements and Proteins Are Securely Contained Inside the ExosomesSince viral RNA could be extracellularly originated in a non-exosome-encapsulated form, so we aimed to address whether this viral genomic material was encompassed within Vero cell-derived small EVs. To assess this assumption, we examined if CHIKV genomic RNA was attaching to the exosome outside and could then be conveyed to the naïve recipient cells. We did not obtain significant differences in CHIKV loads of naïve Vero cells that were incubated with exosome formulated from 5 MOI CHIKV infection at 72 h.p.i. and/or RNase A treatment. Naïve Vero cells incubated with exosomes derived from CHIKV-uninfected cells and RNase A were used as the model of an internal-based line control (Figure 4A). As the deep inside of the viral genome and the inability of RNase A to be accessible in the CHIKV envelope, only RNase A treatments might not be strong enough to verify our hypothesis. Thus, we include the Triton X-100 reagent in the RNase A treatment assay. The incubation of Triton-X before RNase A treatment on these exosomes also yielded an undetectable CHIKV RNA in the naïve Vero cells (Figure 4B). In addition, we performed another RNase A-treatment assay, independently using MOI 5 of laboratory CHIKV stocks accompanied by infectious exosomes for comparison. As would be anticipated of the encapsulated CHIKV genomes, we achieved imitated outcomes with no differences in viral loads in naïve Vero cells after incubation with exosomes or CHIKV stocks prepared from RNase A-treated or untreated groups (Figure 4C).To test if the viral proteins were also carried inside the Vero-derived EVs, that were not found in the PBS suspensions, we further performed and fabricated neutralizing antibodies against the CHIKV assay in order to confirm that some viral proteins were not organizing outside of the exosome as a contaminant. As demonstrated in Figure 4D, no significant differences were perceived in CHIKV loads between the treatment of exosomes derived from 5 MOI CHIKV-infected Vero at 72 h.p.i. with either anti-CHIKV IgG from patient plasma or with relevant isotype control and the untreated controls (Figure 4D). We also verified the MOI 5 of laboratory CHIKV strains as a control and exhibited a reduction of CHIKV loads in Vero cells in comparison with the isotype antibody-treated or untreated controls (Figure 4E). This information supported a positive effect for the small group and suggested that some CHIKV proteins were securely contained inside the CHIKV-derived exosomes.To corroborate that those viral antigenic proteins were contained inside the small EVs, we performed ELISA with anti-CHIKV IgG, where higher loads of CHIKV were detected when exosomes were permeabilized with Triton X-100 in comparison with the untreated group. The inside viral protein was released upon lysis of the exosome lipid bilayer, thereby occasioning in augmented detection of CHIKV protein with the Triton X-100 permeabilized treatment (Figure 4F). Overall, our experimental data indicate that CHIKV RNA and proteins were securely contained inside the epithelial-derived exosomes.2.5. CHIKV Infectious Elements Are Transmitted to Neighboring Cells through ExosomesTo further understand the influential role of infectious exosomes in the infection, replication, and transmission of CHIKV, we, therefore, performed the inhibiting assay of exosome biogenesis. Dihydrochloride hydrate substance, GW4869, is a selective cell-permeable neutral sphingomyelinase inhibitor, affecting the biogenesis and releasing of exosomes from the cells used in this experiment. Treatment of Vero cells with GW4869 at various concentrations (10, 15, and 20 μM) followed by CHIKV infection at MOI 5, for 72 h.p.i. significantly decreased CHIKV loads in the small EV fraction in comparison with the DMSO control (Figure 5A). At 72 h.p.i. of incubation of naïve Vero cells with exosomes, 5 MOI CHIKV-infected Vero cells treated with 15 μM of GW4869 disclose not only a decrease in CHIKV viral replication but also CHIKV transmission to naïve Vero cell in comparison with the DMSO treatment (Figure 5B). We consequently performed a transwell assay on exosomes- (derived from 5 MOI CHIKV-infected Vero cells at 72 h.p.i) infected Vero cells that were incubated with or without treatment of 20 μM of GW4869 inhibitor (the upper chamber) and naïve Vero cells (the lower chamber). Similar results were obtained and showed that the newly produced exosomes were able to transmigrate and infect naïve Vero cells in the lower chamber (Figure 5C). Taken together, these data implied that the direct participation of exosomes with genomic elements and proteins of CHIKV was not only involved in CHIKV infection in the mammalian host cells but was also necessary for the transmission of infectious viral elements to the neighboring cells.3. DiscussionCurrently, studies of CHIKV’s pathogenic mechanism mainly focus on the interaction between the host and viral particles. Among those theories, the role of extracellular vesicles has only been investigated in host–pathogen relationships [26,39]. As far as we know, the present study is the first to characterize EVs derived from CHIKV-infected Vero cells.Firstly, we found that the CHIKV infection stimulated the release of EVs which ranged from 50 nm to 250 nm Under TEM, the vesicles collected after purification by Invitrogen™ Dynabeads™ Exosome-Human CD63 isolation kit were completely clear and easy to identify, compared with indiscriminate objects from the pellets without the purification steps. We also confirmed the presence of these purified small EVs by CD63 exosomal marker and no cellular contamination by cytochrome C marker. These results showed the effective purification of the CD63 antibody-coated Dynabeads in helping to separate the viral particles from EVs. There are few studies on the infectious mechanisms by which CHIKV utilizes apoptotic blebs and infects macrophages [30]. During CHIKV replication, various host ESCRT factors accumulated via hepatocyte growth factor-regulated tyrosine kinase substrate (HGS), involving replicating CHIKV genomic RNA and post-translation processes [28]. However, no data on the connection between CHIKV and EVs have been reported. By observing heterogeneous vesicles, we investigated the presence of some kinds of subtypes of EVs (50 nm to 250 nm) in the pellets isolated from CHIKV-infected cells. The isolation of different subtypes of EVs was also reported from some recent flaviviruses in which the EVs could be classified as large (90–120 nm) or small (60–80 nm) [40]. In addition, a study on the potential ability of the Zika virus to use the EV tracking pathway showed increased production of small EVs from a Zika-infected Vero cell line [41].Next, we tried to find properties of those small EVs which could contribute to the pathogenesis of CHIKV. We found genomic CHIKV RNA in the purified exosomes RNAse A-treated but not in the exosomes from the CHIKV-uninfected samples. The detection of CHIKV genes from the exosome pellets isolated from the CHIKV-infected Vero cells indicated that the exosomes could contain viral RNA. This phenomenon was easily explained by the budding biogenesis pattern of EVs, as it occurs when the virus is released from an infected cell [16,42]. Besides, the large size of the isolated vesicles (from 50 nm to 250 nm) could be a good vehicle for the internalized CHIKV and used as a mechanical way for transmission to other cells. These data suggested that exosomes released from infected cells may contain some parts of CHIKV’s full-length genome. Moreover, the time point that we optimized for exosome isolation at 72 h.p.i. was supposed to be the CHIKV life cycle. The stage, ranging from 8–18 h post-entry, was able to be observed in vitro when the CHIKV’s infected cells started to show cytopathic effects and found viral particles in many parts of the host cells. This optimal time also showed mature viral virion budding from the host cell’s membrane [43,44]. Therefore, the exosomes securely contained the genetic parts of CHIKV, helping replicate future CHIKV-exosomes in target cells. Our findings shared the same ideas and result in terms of localizing viral nucleic acid in exosomes from cells infected by several viruses, including hepatitis C [45], hepatitis B [46], respiratory viruses species [47,48], herpes simplex virus 1 [39], and even many viruses in the Flaviviridae family such as dengue virus [27] or Zika virus [49].Another finding was that exosomes from CHIKV-infected cells showed neutralizing activity in CHIKV-positive human IgG plasma. Our ELISA assay results showed the same neutralizing pattern and the concentration-dependent effect between isolated exosomes and the free CHIKV ROSS strain. The above information emphasized the impact of CHIKV-positive IgG plasma, which might influence the immunogenic parts of CHIKV internalized in exosomes during the virus’ replication cycle in the host cell. Previous studies have shown that parts of CHIKV could be involved in the immunogenic and neutralizing processes. Thus, the modification of the nsP2 protein could reduce CHIKV replication [50], while the depletion of the capsid protein did not affect the assembly of infectious CHIKV particles [51]. Therefore, the role of envelope proteins E1 and E2 was not only involved in fusion and binding [52] but was also influenced by the host’s immune response [52,53,54,55,56,57]. Our above results demonstrated the presence of both nonstructural and envelope proteins, especially the E1 protein inside the exosome. Therefore, we once again can conclude that the isolated exosomes contain at least the E1 part of envelope CHIKV proteins that the anti-CHIKV human IgG antibodies could mediate. Since the anti-CHIKV human IgG antibodies’ titer was not high enough, we saw incomplete neutralizing activity in both exosomes and the CHIKV ROSS strain. Even though EVs could be affected by the human immune response, the internalized envelope protein might enhance the binding and fusion of exosomes to adjacent cells, thereby facilitating the spread of infection. The same phenomena could also be seen in the Newcastle disease virus-producing exosomes containing the viral NP protein promoting its infection [58] or shedding EVs from herpes simplex virus 1, which shields the virus from neutralizing antibodies [39]. Our follow-up experiments will assess whether the E2 protein is presented in the EVs since this protein is immunodominant [52] and interacts with human-neutralizing antibodies [56,57]. We assumed that the exosomes were indeed derived from CHIKV-infected Vero cells despite the above limitation. Besides, those exosomes internalized some parts of CHIKV or maybe the whole virus during endocytosis.Since transmission through small EVs has been established in the hepatitis virus [45,46], the herpes simplex viruses [39], and the dengue virus [27], the following experiment confirmed the isolated small EVs’ infectivity in susceptible neighboring cells. Our results indicated the transfer of CHIKV to uninfected Vero cells through the presence of a cytopathic effect as well as the ability to establish productive infections. In addition, the high titer of the virus released from the infection assay of the exosome, suggests its infectious capacity could equal that of the free CHIKV ROSS strain. Furthermore, our embedded TEM found intact CHIKV virions in the supernatant and the cell lysate. This information confirmed that the small EVs brought infectious viral particles that produced new mature virions in other cells.A question arising during our study was the relative importance of small EVs in the acute and chronic phases of the infection. It is known that the acute phase of CHIKV infection is defined as not less than 3 months after the onset of the disease [6]. This phase is consistent with strong host antiviral type I interferon (IFN) response, IgM antibodies, and neutralizing IgG antibodies in the second week of infection [6,59]. In addition, the acute phase is also represented by the recruitment of NK cells, macrophages, and monocytes at the site of infection [59,60]. Under the various immune mechanisms of viral clearance, small EVs can survive by internalizing inside those immune cells. After that, these EV-infected immune cells then migrate to other parts of the host body or even to the privileged site such as the synovial tissue. Therefore, EVs can play a role in spreading CHIKV and the persistence of the virus in synovial tissues that can induce the localized inflammation of chronically infected patients. On the other hand, in the case of a weak immune response, our PRNT assay showed an incomplete neutralizing activity of EVs (data not shown). We have some explanations for this observation. The first is related to the low titer of neutralizing antibodies obtained from our human plasma samples. The second is the ability of small EVs to escape from the immune response by distinct mechanisms such as modifying the binding epitopes of the antibodies on CHIKV envelope glycoproteins. In addition, exosomes can act as enhancement factors that lead to antibody enhancement, promoting entry into susceptible host cells and increasing virus replication. However, further experiments are needed to confirm such theories.4. Materials and Methods4.1. Cell Lines and CulturesThree kinds of established epithelial cell lines, including mammalian and insect cells, were used in this study. Vero cells [61]—a common continuous tissue culture cell line derived from African green monkey kidney epithelial cells (a kind gift from Prof. Pilaipan Puthavathana, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand) and the cervical cancer-derived human papillomavirus- (HPV18) positive cell lines, HeLa [62], were grown in high glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (GIBCO™; Life Technology, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Aedes albopictus (C6/36) cells [63] were cultivated in Leibovitz’s L-15 Medium (GIBCO™; Life Technology, Carlsbad, CA, USA). All cell lines were supplemented with 10% inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (GIBCO™; Life Technology, Carlsbad, CA, USA) together with a standard prepared mixture concentration of antibiotic gentamicin (40 µg/mL), streptomycin (100 µg/mL), penicillin (100 U/mL), and fluconazole (5 ng/mL) in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C.4.2. Preparation of Extracellular Vesicle-Depleted FBSEV-depleted FBS was used in all experiments on the isolation of EVs, including exosomes. FBS was centrifuged at 100,000× g for 16 h in a 70Ti fixed-angle titanium rotor (Beckman, Fullerton, CA, USA) and then filtered through a 0.22-µm filter.4.3. Propagation of Laboratory CHIKV StockAll experiments were performed using the CHIKV ROSS C6D4 strain [64]. Viral stocks were performed in Vero cells and plaque assays were used to determine the titers of the harvested virus. To produce, harvest, and enumerate CHIKV stocks, we followed the protocol previously described by Chalaem et al. in 2016 [65].4.4. Infection of CHIKV to Vero Cell LineVero cells at a density of 1 × 105 cells were grown in each well of 12-well plates for 24 h before CHIKV infection. The cells were infected with CHIKV at 5 of the Multiplicity of Infection (MOI 5). The infected cells were collected at various time points, including 24, 48, 72, and 96 h post-infection (h.p.i.) and processed for RNA extractions. There were increased CHIKV loads at 72 h.p.i., in Vero cells, we, therefore, considered this time point for all downstream experiments.4.5. Exosomes Isolation and EnrichmentTo prevent the contamination of the isolated EVs with other extracellular vesicles originating from FBS, EV-depleted FBS was used in this experiment. A total of 30 mL of conditioned culture medium was collected and centrifuged at 300× g at 4 °C for 10 min to eliminate cell pellets. The collected supernatant was centrifuged at 2000× g at 4 °C for 30 min to eliminate cell debris and dead cells. The EVs, including exosomes, were isolated by using a Total Exosome Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Briefly, the prepared medium was homogeneously mixed with the 0.5 volume of total exosome isolation reagent and was incubated at 4 °C overnight. The mixture was then centrifuged at 10,000× g at 4 °C for 60 min. The pellet was resuspended with 1X PBS buffer. For further experiments, the enriched exosomes were divided into small aliquots and frozen at −80 °C.4.6. Exosome PurificationFor further exosome purification, Invitrogen™ Dynabeads™ Exosome-Human CD63 isolation kit (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to separate small EV subpopulations following the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, the Dynabeads magnetic beads, coated with the primary monoclonal antibody specific for the CD63 membrane antigen, were incubated with samples overnight, and captured exosomes were magnetically separated for downstream applications. The purified exosomes were now ready for physical characterization, RNA, and protein extraction as well as the downstream infection experiments.4.7. Physical Characterization of Isolated ExosomesTo determine the size and number of the purified exosomes, we explored the distribution of exosome particles with Dynamic light scattering (DLS) instruments (Zetasizer Nano ZS; Malvern Panalytical, Worcestershire, UK). The data outputs were then analyzed using Zetasizer software version 7.13 (https://www.malvernpanalytical.com/; accessed on 22 August 2018).For the visualization of small EVs and viral particles, the transmission electron microscope (TEM) was performed. As modified by Hurwitz et al. in 2017 [66] described, the carbon-coated copper electron microscope grids (Ted Pella, Redding, CA, USA) were adsorbed with a 10 µL of exosomes solution that contained 1X PBS for 2 min at room temperature (RT). Following the incubation, the excess solution was carefully removed using Whatman paper by touching only the grid’s outer ring before being stained with 10 µL of 4% uranyl acetate for 1 min. The stained grid was air-dried at room temperature until completely dry before the examination at an acceleration voltage of 80 kV under TEM (TECNAi G2; FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA). The CHIKV virion was observed in the samples for five times on five different grids.For CHIKV virion visualization, the supernatant and cell pellets collected from the EV-infected assay were fixed with 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde on ice and stored overnight in a refrigerator. The samples were washed four times with buffered solution, for 15 min each time, before being subjected to postfix with osmium tetraoxide for 2 h. Samples were washed an additional two times with buffer solution for 15 min and then each and all osmium tetraoxide debris was removed. The samples then went through four dehydration steps using ethyl alcohol concentrations of 30%, 50%, 70%, and 95%. Finally, the samples were covered with propylene for 10 min before embedding with propylene overnight and observed under the TEM as described above.The visualization procedure under TEM was developed and performed at Electron Microscopy Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen University.4.8. Determination of Exosomes Markers by ImmunoblottingTo avoid any interfering reagents that could affect the captured exosome pellets, the freeze–thaw method was used for total exosome protein extraction. The extraction process consisted of two or three repetitions, quickly freezing the pellet with liquid nitrogen for 5 min and thawing combined with 5 min vortexing. After 10 min of centrifugation at 10,000× g, the obtained clear supernatant was used for protein measurement and exosomal marker detection by immunoblotting technique.As described by Burassakarn et al. in 2021 [67], CD63 and CD9 proteins were used as exosomal markers and cytochrome C was used as a marker for cellular contamination control. The primary antibody used included purified mouse anti-human CD63 (ab59479, Abcam, Cambridge, UK) or rabbit anti-CD9 (D8O1A, Cell Signaling Technology; Danvers, MA, USA) was diluted at a 1:1000 ratio, and the purified mouse anti-Cytochrome C (6H2.B4; BD Biosciences, Berkshire, United Kingdom; diluted at a 1:250 ratio) under reducing conditions as recommended by the manufacturer was used in this study. An equal number of exosomes were mixed with loading dye, incubated at 95 °C for 5 min, and cooled down at room temperature for 5–10 min before loading on an SDS/PAGE gel.Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was performed. Proteins on the gel were transferred to a nitrocellulose blotting membrane (Amersham Protran, Little Chalfont, UK) and the protein-transferred membrane was blocked by shaking in 5% skim milk in 0.1% Tween 20/1X PBS for 60 min at RT. A primary antibody diluted in 5% skim milk/1X PBS was added to the membrane and incubated at 4°C overnight. Then, the membrane was washed three times with a washing solution containing 0.1% tween 20 in 1X PBS for 15 min at RT. Goat anti-mouse IgG antibody, horse-radish peroxidase (HRP) conjugate (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany), diluted 1:1000 in 5% skim milk/1X PBS was used as a secondary antibody. The membrane was incubated with the secondary antibody for 1 h at RT and washed three times with a washing solution for 10 min at room temperature. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, signal detection was performed using Enhanced Chemiluminescence (ECL) prime Western Blotting Detection Reagent (Amersham, Little Chalfont, UK). Signal detection was imaged by using the image Quant™ LAS 600 instrument (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA). The membrane was exposed for 5–10 min.4.9. Detection of CHIKV Genomic Materials in the Cells and ExosomesTo remove all the excess contaminated nucleic acid during purification steps, an additional RNase A treatment step was performed using 5 μg/mL RNAse A (stock 4 mg/mL) (Omega, Life Science, CO, USA) at 37 °C for 1 h.According to the manufacturer’s guidelines, the total RNA of exosomes from either CHIKV-uninfected cells or exosome-derived CHIKV-infected cells were extracted using TRIzolTM LS reagent (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) protocol. The RNA pellet was resuspended in 20 µL of RNAse-free water. Then the quality of the isolated RNA was analyzed using the NanoDrop™ 2000/2000c spectrophotometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Thereafter, total RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using 1 µL random hexamer primers and SuperScript™ III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA), following product instructions. The cDNA was stored at −20 °C until further analysis. Following cDNA synthesis, the entire CHIKV genome was amplified by specific primers set (Supplementary Table S1) using the standard reverse-transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay [38]. The PCR reaction was carried out using 0.625 U/µL of Phusion™ High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), 0.1 mM dNTPs, 1X 10X PCR buffer, 1.25 mM MgCl2 and 10 µM of each forward and reverse primer, and 4 µL of cDNA in total 25 µL reactions. The RT-PCR reaction was performed using a Bio-Rad C1000 thermal cycler (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). Five microliters of PCR product were subjected to 1% agarose gel electrophoresis, stained with ethidium bromide, and visualized under an ultraviolet Gel Doc transilluminator (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).4.10. Triton X-100 Treatment of Small EVsExosomes were treated with RNase A (5 μg/mL) either with or without Triton X-100 (0.1%) for 15 min. After adding RNase inhibitor, total RNAs were isolated by TRIzolTM LS reagent (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) protocol, and CHIKV RNA was quantified by qRT-PCR as described below.4.11. Exosomes Infectious AssayVero cells were seeded on a 24-well plate at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/well. The prepared Vero cells were inoculated with 200 µL of each exosome from either the no-infection or CHIKV-infected cells. The plate was incubated inside the biosafety cabinet at the indicated time allowing exosome absorption. Then, the excess medium was removed and replaced with a fresh maintenance medium with 2% exosome-depleted FBS before incubation for 2 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. The plate was observed for the presence of cytopathic effect (CPE) and supernatant and cell lysates were collected for virion detection by TEM and determination of viral infectious titer using standard plaque-forming unit assay (PFU).4.12. Analysis of EV Transfer CHIKV RNA Elements and ProteinsTo determine the CHIKV mRNA loads in both cells and exosomes, the qRT-PCR was performed. We used the designed specific primers to detect the CHIKV E1 gene (Supplementary Table S1). The β-actin primers were used in the qRT-PCR normalization. The rate of CHIKV infection in each tested group was indicated by the ratio index of the CHIKV E1 gene divided by the β-actin gene. The normalization of total RNA loads was performed in the case of some experiments with undetectable amounts of β-actin in exosome experiments. qRT-PCR was performed using the SsoAdvanced™ Universal SYBR® Green Supermix (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). A 10-fold serial dilution starting from the known quantities’ plasmid of the CHIKV E1 gene or the β-actin gene fragments was used in the establishment of a standard curve.A PFU assay on Vero cells was performed to determine the infectious titer and capacity of CHIKV replication as well as the formation of infectious plaques in suspected CHIKV-derived small EVs. The PFU assay was based on a previous protocol with some modifications [68]. Briefly, Vero cells were seeded at 2 × 105 cells/well, then cells were grown in 24-well tissue culture plates until reaching 80–90% confluent monolayer within 24 h. The culture medium was removed and the cells were inoculated with 200 µL of exosome containing unknown PFU of CHIKV viral genome culture supernatant, prepared at 10-fold serial dilutions in DMEM medium. After incubating cells at 37 °C for 2 h allowing for virus adsorption by plate and virus mixing every 30 min, cells in each well were gently overlaid with 500 µL pre-warmed 1.5% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) (Sigma, Chicago, MO, USA) mixed with DMEM. The plates were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2 and checked daily for CPE or plaque formation. After 48 h, the plate was fixed and stained with a mixture of crystal violet staining solution in ethanol and formaldehyde [69]. Plaques were counted and calculated to determine CHIKV viral titer in PFU/mL. All experiments were undertaken independently in a duplicate assay of titer.To determine the neutralizing activity of antibodies against CHIKV and a small EV fraction from the CHIKV-infected Vero cells, we used plasma samples that presented a high titer of CHIKV-positive human immunoglobulin G (IgG) plasma and IgG-negative control samples from patients as an isotype control. CHIKV ROSS strain C6D4 was also used as the positive control. The titer of small EVs collected from supernatants of CHIKV-infected cells and the CHIKV ROSS strain was adjusted with MOI 5. The human plasma was mixed and incubated with an equal volume of small EVs or CHIKV ROSS strain at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 1 h. Isotype controls using confirmed IgG human serum samples were also included. Thereafter, the mixture was layered on a 24-well plate containing 80–90% confluent monolayer Vero cell 2 × 105 cell/well. After allowing the virus’ adsorption for 2 h, the inoculum was removed and replaced with a new complete medium. The plate was incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 72 h. Until the CPEs were observed, Vero cells were harvested and further processed for the detection of CHIK loads.To determine the CHIKV proteins in the isolated exosomes, ELISA was performed. The equal amount of total proteins (estimated by BCA method) either from 0.1% Triton-X-100-treated or untreated samples derived CHIKV-infected or -uninfected Vero cells were coated in MaxiSorp™ flat-bottom 96-well plates (Nunc™, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) for overnight at 4 °C. Bovine serum albumins (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) were used in the sample blocking step before being incubated with a high titer of CHIKV-positive human immunoglobulin G (IgG) plasma from our previous study [70] for 1 h. The secondary antibody, an HRP-conjugated mouse monoclonal anti-human IgG (HP-6017, dilution = 1:10,000; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) was applied to the reaction and incubated for 1 h. According to the manufacturer’s instructions, SureBlue™ TMB 1-Component Microwell Peroxidase Substrate (SeraCare, Milford, MA, USA) was added to the well followed by the TMB Stop Solution (KPL; SeraCare, Milford, MA, USA). Using an absorbance microplate reader (Tecan™, Männedorf, Switzerland), optical density at 450 nm was measured and then analyzed with Magellan™ software (Tecan™, Männedorf, Switzerland) from triplicated samples in three independent experiments.4.13. Inhibition of Exosome Production by GW4869 InhibitorFor studies of exosome inhibition, we used a commercial selective cell-permeable GW4869 inhibitor for the Neutral Sphingomyelinase (N-SMase) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Vero at the density of 2 × 105 cells were seeded in a complete DMEM medium for 24 h. The day after, the GW4869 inhibitor with indicated doses of 5, 10, 15, or 20 μM was treated with the Vero for 4 h, followed by 5 MOI CHIKV infection for 72 h and 24 h in case of viral mRNA loads and immunoblotting analysis, respectively. A similar volume of DMSO treatment was used in the control groups. For analysis of the viral kinetics infection of infectious exosomes, Vero cells were treated with CHIKV-derived exosomes isolated from Vero cells treated with 15 μM of such inhibitor. DMSO was used as vehicle control. At 48 h.p.i., viral loads were determined from the cell lines by the qRT-PCR method.4.14. Transwell AssayTo analyze the transmigration of infectious small EVs released from infected Vero cells to naïve Vero cells, transwell assays were performed. Sterile, 12 mm insert size polycarbonate transwell® inserts with 0.4 μm microporous membrane pore size (Corning Inc., Corning, NY, USA) were used. Naïve Vero cells were seeded in 12-well plates (lower chamber) at the density of 2 × 105 cells accompanied by the plated Vero cells at the density of 2 × 105 in the inserts (upper chamber). At 24 h post-cultivation, Vero cells were either infected with CHIKV-derived exosomes or with laboratory CHIIKV stock prepared from cultured Vero cells supernatants (14 days post-infection). Following the 24 h post-infection either with exosomes or CHIKV stock, the inserts were transferred to naïve Vero cells in 12-well plates. Exosomes containing CHIKV RNA and proteins originating from Vero cells were authorized to migrate and infect naïve Vero cells. Subsequently, at 48 h.p.i, the Vero cells in the lower chamber were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and processed for another experiment. For the inhibition of exosome production, 20 μM of GW4869 inhibitor (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), were also treated in this assay.4.15. Statistical AnalysesGraphPad Prism version 8.0.2 for macOS (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA) was used for analyses of the statistically significant differences examined in the data sets. For a comparison of the two means of the entire data, the two-tail Student t-test of non-paired assumption was performed. All experiments were represented with Error bars indicating mean ± SD and p values. The p values of <0.05 were noted for the significance of statistical tests.5. ConclusionsThis is the first study to describe the characterization of secreted extracellular vesicles, including exosomes from CHIKV-infected epithelial cells, and their role in CHIKV transmission. The secreted vesicles from CHIKV-infected cells encapsulated CHIKV genomic RNA and any immunogenic parts of the virus. These EVs then played a role in producing infectious virions in other epithelial cells. These results might suggest the ability of EVs in the dissemination of CHIKV throughout host organs and further involvement in immune evasion inducing persistent arthritis (Figure 6).


Title: Experimental risk assessment for chikungunya virus transmission based on vector competence, distribution and temperature suitability in Europe, 2018

IntroductionChikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a mosquito-borne alphavirus (Togaviridae family) [1]. The virus was first isolated from humans, as well as from mosquitoes, during an outbreak at the border region between Mozambique and Tanzania in 1952. Human cases of chikungunya fever can cause severe, debilitating and often chronic arthralgia [2]. Several species of the mosquito genus Aedes were found competent to transmit CHIKV. However, Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus are considered the most important vectors. In the past, occurrences of CHIKV were restricted to the African and Asian continents, causing local, sporadic epidemics; during the last decade, however, the virus has expanded over a substantial geographical range, invading India, Indian Ocean islands and the Americas, where it has caused millions of human infections [2].Three phylogenetic CHIKV lineages with distinct antigenic characteristics are known worldwide [2,3]. Two major lineages circulate in Africa (East, Central and Southern Africa region (ECSA) and West Africa) and a third is present in Asia. In Africa, CHIKV is maintained in an enzootic cycle. The transmission cycle includes forest-dwelling mosquito species of the genus Aedes and non-human primates [2]. Anthropophilic mosquito species, Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus, play a crucial role in the urbanisation of CHIKV. This is in contrast to Asia, where the virus has historically been maintained in an urban cycle between Ae.
aegypti/albopictus and humans.Ae. aegypti is the primary vector for CHIKV. However, Ae. albopictus is considered to have a high competence to transmit a specific variant of the ECSA lineage. The virus mutant has a single amino acid change from alanine to valine at the E1 envelope glycoprotein amino acid 226 (E1–A226V) [4]. This change leads to a better adaptation of the virus to the species Ae. albopictus, resulting in a 50-fold increase in vector competence in comparison to Ae.
aegypti. The ECSA mutant is considered to be the most important factor for CHIKV outbreaks in regions where the primary vector, Ae.
aegypti, is absent. This is potentially linked to the spread of the ECSA lineage to the Indian Ocean and the first autochthonous CHIKV transmission in Europe [5]. Thus far, all CHIKV strains isolated during outbreaks in Europe belonged to the ECSA lineage. However, some of the isolates contained the E1-A226V-mutation [6-8], whereas others did not [9,10]. Therefore, other yet undefined mutations in the envelope proteins may also affect the adaptation of CHIKV to Ae. albopictus [9-11].Autochthonous transmission of CHIKV has been repeatedly observed in mainland Europe. The virus circulated in France in 2010 [9], 2014 [7] and 2017 [8], and two major outbreaks occurred in Italy in 2007 [6] and 2017 [10]. In total, at least 605 human CHIKV cases were reported, the majority in the two epidemics in Italy (n = 575) [8]. This was possible because of the establishment of Ae. albopictus in the region. One of the most invasive mosquito species in the world [12,13], its global spread is driven by transcontinental connectivity through shipping and flight routes. At present, Ae. albopictus has infested more than 25 European countries [12,14], with highest abundances reported from Italy. The species is repeatedly introduced to various locations in central Europe [15], even though regions north of the Alps were previously considered unsuitable for the establishment of Ae. albopictus. Still, overwintering was recently suggested in Germany [16-18]. This included local expansion of populations and detection of larvae already in spring. According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), Solna, Sweden, Ae. albopictus is classified as ‘established’ along the Upper Rhine Valley in Germany and France [14].There is currently no available vaccine or CHIKV-specific treatment [5]. The control of the disease primarily depends on reduction of the vector population. Further options are individual protection with repellents or behavioural avoidance. Therefore, the evaluation of the vector competence of local mosquito populations is crucial, as the assessment of CHIKV risk transmission allows for the adapting of surveillance and control systems. Vector competence is the ability of a mosquito to acquire a pathogen and subsequently transmit it to a new host [2]. This is commonly evaluated through experimental infection experiments. These studies aim to identify infectious virus particles secreted with the saliva to the vertebrate host. Transmission only becomes possible if the virus can overcome the midgut and salivary glands, which are the most important barriers for infection of the vector and final escape [19]. Vector competence depends on a complex interaction of vector population, virus strain and temperature [20]. Only a suitable combination allows the virus to replicate and disseminate. Invasion of the salivary glands may result in transmission through the next bite.Vector competence studies using temperatures below 20 °C have become increasingly important since the observation of established populations of the Ae. albopictus north of the Alps [14]. We therefore conducted a vector competence study at three different temperatures, with a CHIKV outbreak strain from France, using Ae. albopictus populations from Germany and Italy, to comprehensively assess the risk of CHIKV transmission in Europe.MethodsSource, rearing and experimental infection of Aedes albopictusAe. albopictus populations were obtained through the collection of eggs during August 2015. Samples originated from a long-standing population in Italy (Mandatoriccio, Calabria) and a recently established population in Germany (Freiburg, Baden-Wuerttemberg). Colonies were reared at 26 °C with a relative humidity of 80% and a 12:12 hour light:dark photoperiod. Mosquitoes of generation F8 to F10 were used for experiments. Between 100 and 150 female mosquitoes (4–10 days old) were sorted in Drosophila breeding vials (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe; 20 mosquitoes each). All specimens were starved for 24 hours before they were fed with artificial, infectious blood meals. Blood meals contained 50% of human blood from the blood bank, 30% fructose at a stock concentration of 8%, 10% filtrated bovine serum (FBS) and 10% of CHIKV stock (strain CNR_24/2014, supplied by the European Virus Archive goes Global project, ECSA lineage, isolated from a human case in France, grown on Vero cells, fifth passage). Blood meals had a final concentration of 106 plaque-forming units of CHIKV per mL. Two droplets of 50 µl per vial were offered for 2 hours. Engorged mosquito specimens were sorted in new Drosophila breeding vials. Groups of 10 to 20 individuals were incubated at either 18 °C, 21 °C or 24 °C with 80% humidity for 14 days. These temperature conditions represent different areas in Europe infested by Ae. albopictus.The central European areas recently invaded by Ae. albopictus only reach mean daily temperatures of ≥ 18 °C or ≥ 21 °C for 2 weeks per year. Areas with long-standing populations around the Mediterranean Sea can also have 14 days with temperatures ≥ 24 °C.Collection of infection and transmission ratesSubsequently, mosquitoes were analysed for virus infection and transmission. Infection of mosquito bodies was determined by analyses of head, thorax and abdomen. Legs and wings were removed for demobilisation in the salivation assay. Each body was homogenised in 500 µl of Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri, United States (US)). Viral RNA was extracted using the 5x MagMax Pathogen RNA/DNA Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, US). Detection of CHIKV RNA was conducted with RT-PCR (RealStar Chikungunya RT-PCR Kit 2.0, altona Diagnostics, Hamburg, Germany). The detailed salivation assay to detect transmission was described before [21]. In brief, mosquitoes were anesthetised with CO2 and demobilised. Forced salivation was conducted by placing the proboscis of the mosquito into a filter tip filled with 10 µl of PBS for 30 min. Saliva was incubated on Vero cells for 4 days and cells were checked for cytopathic effect (CPE). The supernatant of CPE-positive cells was harvested. RNA copies were detected using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and the RealStar Chikungunya RT-PCR Kit 2.0.Infection rate (IR) is commonly defined as the number of CHIKV-positive mosquito bodies per number of fed females. Different definitions exist for the calculation of transmission rates (TRs). The study did not focus on the mechanistic processes of vector competence (e.g. infection barriers), but aimed to assess the risk for CHIKV transmission in Europe. Therefore, in order to simplify the sample processing, the calculation of TRs followed the definition by Fortuna et al. [22]: number of mosquitoes with CHIKV-positive saliva per number of mosquitoes with CHIKV-positive bodies.Chikungunya virus transmission risk assessmentThe risk map for CHIKV transmission in Europe was constructed by combining the current distribution of Ae. albopictus with temperature data from the infested regions. Current distribution data of Ae. albopictus at the regional administrative level (NUTS3), as at April 2018, were obtained from [14]. Time series of daily mean temperature data (European re-analysis and observations for monitoring, E-OBS v17.0) for the study area were downloaded from http://www.ecad.eu [23]. E-OBS data are available on a 0.25 ° regular latitude-longitude grid and were extracted for a period of 10 years between 2008–2017. For each grid cell, the number of days per year with preceding 14 days having a mean daily temperature ≥ 18 °C were calculated using the programme R [24]. The annual values were then averaged over the 10-year period.ResultsExperimental infection studies showed IRs of 100%, irrespective of whether Ae. albopictus populations from Germany or Italy were used and independent of temperature (18 °C, 21 °C or 24 °C) (Table). Virus titres for both populations were similar. The values ranged from 108.4 to 1011.3 viral RNA copies per specimen, but were substantially higher at 18 °C compared with 24 °C for both populations. Likewise, infectious CHIKV particles were detected in mosquito saliva for all of these combinations, with TRs between 37.5% and 63.3%. Lowest TRs (37.5%) for both populations were observed at the warmest temperature tested (24 °C). In contrast, the highest TR (50%) for the population from Germany was detected at the coolest temperature (18 °C). The population from Italy had similar high TRs of 63.3% at 18 °C and 21 °C, respectively.TableInfection rates, transmission rates and virus titres of Aedes albopictus specimens from two different European populations experimentally infected with chikungunya virus and kept at three different temperatures, November 2017–March 2018 (n = 163 mosquitoes)Aedes albopictus population originT in °CInfection rateaTransmission ratebTitreNumber of CHIKV-positive specimens/number of analysed specimens%Number of specimens with CHIKV-positive saliva/number of specimens with CHIKV-positive body%Mean log10
CHIKV RNA copies/specimenSDGermany1832/32100.016/3250.011.30.6Germany2123/23100.09/2339.18.40.8Germany2424/24100.09/2437.58.50.2Italy1830/30100.019/3063.310.81.8Italy2130/30100.019/3063.310.41.6Italy2424/24100.09/2437.58.60.2CHIKV: chikungunya virus; SD: standard deviation; T: temperature.a Infection rate: number of CHIKV-positive mosquito bodies per number of fed females.b Transmission rate: number of mosquitoes with CHIKV-positive saliva per number of mosquitoes with CHIKV-positive bodies.Chikungunya virus transmission risk assessmentThe analysed data indicated that most parts of the vector’s current distribution area allow transmission of CHIKV (Figure). All of these areas have sufficiently long time periods with mean daily temperatures ≥ 18 °C. The only exceptions were regions within the Alps and the Pyrenees; these either have very low vector densities or represent data artefacts, i.e. belonged to a NUTS3 unit infested by Ae. albopictus at lower altitudes. In addition, more parts of central Europe (e.g. Belgium, Poland) have suitable temperature conditions, but are not colonised by Ae. albopictus. The largest time windows with temperatures ≥ 18 °C are found close to the Mediterranean Sea. For example, the coastline of France and large parts of Italy have more than 120 days per year with temperatures that could allow CHIKV transmission. In addition, the temperatures in the Upper Rhine Valley, the northernmost region with established Ae. albopictus populations, theoretically allow extrinsic virus incubation. These areas in Germany and France have periods of more than 40 days per year, on average, that are suitable for CHIKV transmission.Figure(A) Distribution of Aedes albopictus [14], (B) average number of days per year with preceding 14 days having a mean daily temperature ≥ 18 °C, 2008–2017 and (C) risk map for potential chikungunya virus transmission, Europe, 2018CHIKV: chikungunya virus; d: days; NA: no temperature data available.DiscussionThe extrinsic incubation period (EIP) of CHIKV in Ae. albopictus can be very short, i.e. infectious particles can be present in the saliva within 2 to 3 days after ingestion of an infectious blood meal [25]. This has a direct impact on the epidemiology of CHIKV. It must be considered one of the most important factors allowing for transmission in areas without tropical climates. However, there is a lack of comprehensive knowledge regarding the EIP of CHIKV, especially at low temperatures [26]. Only a few studies have focused on temperate climatic conditions [2]. Such studies are especially important in light of the ongoing spread of Ae. albopictus from source populations around the Mediterranean Sea to central Europe [14-18].The tested Italian mosquito population, as well as the more recently detected German mosquito population, showed IRs for CHIKV of 100%. TRs of more than 35% were observed for all three tested temperatures. It may appear surprising that the lowest CHIKV TRs (37.5%) for both populations were found at the highest temperature (24 °C) and TRs increased with decreasing temperatures; however, this is in line with previous infection studies with different arboviruses [27]. Some mosquito species have a reduced ability to modulate viral infections under low temperatures. The underlying mechanism might be a temperature-dependent deficiency of antiviral immunity, as RNA silencing is inhibited in mosquitoes subjected to low temperatures. Ae. aegypti specimens reared at cooler temperatures have an impairment of the antiviral immune RNA interference (RNAi) pathway. This pathway is critical to the mosquito’s ability to control viral infections. The exact mechanism between temperature and CHIKV IRs needs to be further explored, even though it is well established that RNAi impairments occur downstream of the initial dicing step [27].Human CHIKV infections are regularly imported to Europe [28]. The two large outbreaks in Italy also affected visitors (including a German traveller in 2017; personal communication, Christina Frank, Robert Koch-Institute, Germany, November 2017).* Nevertheless, the current risk of CHIKV transmission to humans is predominantly restricted by the presence of Ae. albopictus. Local temperatures allowing extrinsic incubation of the virus only play a minor role. Major parts of the currently infested European areas could allow CHIKV transmission. These areas have periods with 14 consecutive days of mean daily temperatures ≥ 18 °C. This also applies to the Upper Rhine Valley in Germany and France, where recently established populations were documented. Temperature data also illustrate a potential risk for areas in central Europe that are not colonised by Ae. albopictus. This underlines the importance of controlling any further spread of Ae. albopictus in Europe.Three outbreaks in France and two in Italy between 2007–2017 highlight the risk of autochthonous CHIKV transmission in Europe [6-10]. Notably, these sites were all characterised by time periods of over 120 days allowing CHIKV transmission per year. Results of the study presented here are in line with previous investigations. European populations of Ae. albopictus have vector competence for CHIKV at temperate temperature conditions [5]. In contrast, recent modelling studies identified only a moderate risk for CHIKV transmission in Europe [26,29]. However, as discussed by Tjaden et al. [26], these studies are probably biased by the sparse number of CHIKV records for the region.The experiments presented in this study used two different European populations of Ae. albopictus at three different temperatures, but only one CHIKV strain. Different CHIKV strains may differ in their potential to be transmitted by Ae. albopictus. The presented infection experiments were conducted with the ECSA strain (CNR_24/2014) that originates from the 2014 CHIKV outbreak in France and carries the E1–A226V mutation, which enhances the vector competence of Ae. albopictus. This might be one explanation for the observation of high IRs and TRs for both Ae. albopictus populations at the various temperatures studied. However, at least two European CHIKV outbreaks in France (2010) and in Italy (2017) were caused by virus strains without this specific mutation [8,10]. Further mutations might have a similar relevance for the probability of transmission in Europe [9,10]. Potential candidates are adaptive mutations in the E2 envelope glycoprotein (e.g. E2-L210Q) [11]. Such mutants were detected in CHIKV isolates from India and might play an important role in the spread and diversification of CHIKV lineages. In addition, one must keep in mind that vector competence is an important parameter of vector capacity, but it is not the only one. Vector capacity is determined by a complex interaction between different factors [30]. Important drivers include the population density and host-feeding patterns. The latter is strongly influenced by both host preference and host availability.The risk assessment presented here is a conservative scenario. Both tested populations had substantial CHIKV TRs at 18 °C, i.e. 14 days post infection. In addition, temperature data for the risk maps were averaged over a 10-year period. For a more comprehensive and precise evaluation, further vector competence studies investigating lower temperatures and shorter EIPs are required. In addition, this analysis has only focused on Ae. albopictus, though other studies have demonstrated vector competence for CHIKV of further Aedes species [2]. Infection experiments have not identified any other European mosquito species except Ae. albopictus as potential vector for CHIKV, but only a few studies have been done for selected species (e.g. Ae. vexans and Culex pipiens).In conclusion, Europe offers broad temperature suitability for CHIKV transmission and experiences regular travel-associated virus introduction. Therefore, all European countries with established Ae. albopictus populations should implement entomological surveillance programs as well as monitoring and notification systems for imported human cases to prevent further spread and autochthonous CHIKV transmission in Europe.


Title: Modelling and Analyzing Virus Mutation Dynamics of Chikungunya Outbreaks

IntroductionChikungunya fever is a vector-borne disease that is transmitted to humans by Aedes mosquitoes (mainly Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus), and caused by chikungunya virus (CHIKV) which belongs to the Alphavirus genus of the family Togaviridae1,2. The name “chikungunya” comes from a Swahili or Makonde word meaning “to become contorted”, and describes the bent posture of sufferers with joint pain (arthralgia)3,4. This disease is characterized by an abrupt onset of fever frequently accompanied by intense asthenia, arthralgia, myalgia, headache, and rash. Because these clinic signs are similar to those of dengue and Zika, misdiagnoses occur frequently. Although most symptoms would resolve, joint pains may persist for several months, or even years, and result in chronic pain and disability. Among all infected people, a large portion of them are symptomatic, and only less than 15% of them have no symptoms. There are currently no licensed vaccines or specific treatments for CHIKV infections.Chikungunya fever was reported as early as in the 1770s, and CHIKV was first isolated from the serum of a febrile patient during a dengue epidemic which occurred in the Newala district, Tanzania, in 19535. The earliest confirmation of an outbreak in Asia was from the Philippines in 1954. Until the mid-1980s, this endemic strain, called the Asian lineage, had caused outbreaks and sporadic cases in India and Southeast Asia. Three distinct lineages have been identified so far: the west African lineage, the east, central, and southern African lineage (ECSA), and the Asian lineage6. After several decades of absence, CHIKV caused a major epidemic in Kenya resulted in 13,500 cases in 2004. In the following two years, the virus rapidly spread to Comoros (2005), La Réunion (one third of the Réunion population were infected during 2005–2006), several other Indian Ocean islands, India (infected more than 1.39 million people in 2006), and parts of Southeast Asia. In 2007, the disease was reported for the first time in Europe, causing a local outbreak in North-Eastern Italy. Until now, CHIKV has been detected in more than 60 countries in Asia, Africa, Europe, and the Americas. A map that depicts the origin, spread, and distribution of CHIKV and the disease vectors can be found in3.CHIKV is a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA virus, enveloped with a spherical shape and icosahedral symmetry. Mutations in the surface envelope glycoproteins E1 at position 226 (E1-A226V) have been identified in recent epidemic strains3,7, and the new variant of the virus is identified as a new sublineage known as ECSA-V. The first report of mutation was in the Karnataka state of India8,9, it caused an unprecedented magnitude outbreak in the Indian Ocean islands and India from 2004–2007. The same sublineage also caused the outbreak in North-Eastern Italy in 2007 and two outbreaks in Guangdong, China in 201010. Studies have shown that this mutant strain obtains better fitness than the non-mutant strain in Aedes albopictus - the abundant mosquito species in Italy, but such species-specific adaptation of this mutant strain was not found in human cells11. It was found in the 2007 Italy outbreak that Aedes albopictus with ECSA-V are possible to develop a shortened extrinsic incubation period and higher transmission potentials11–13, thus it is believed that the appearance of ECSA-V might be contributing to the size of the recent outbreaks in Italy and China11. Moreover, it is also worthwhile to notice that ECSA-V with all its special features cannot explain the size of the recent outbreaks in the Americas since this mutation has not been found in the samples collected during these outbreaks.Various mathematical models have been proposed to describe chikungunya fever transmission, to name a few14–29. To the best of our knowledge, none of the previous studies has considered the strain mutation dynamics and estimated its impact through outbreak data. Inspired by these findings, we use mathematical models and data fitting techniques to study the influence of mutation dynamics on the transmission of CHIKV.The paper is organized as follows: the mathematical model for chikungunya fever is introduced in section 2; the basic reproduction number of the model is calculated in section 3; in section 4, we study the dynamical behaviors of the model as the mutation rate changes; in section 5, we fit the model with the outbreak data in Italy from June 23 to September 14 in 2007. Under the assumption of a linear mutation rate among mosquitoes, sustainable chikungunya outbreaks can be observed with credible parameter values. Our data fitting results show that the basic reproduction number in the 2007 Italy outbreak might be underestimated without considering the mutation dynamics.Mathematical modelWe stratify the infected mosquitoes and human populations in terms of non-mutant and mutant strains to describe the mutation dynamics. For mosquitoes, the total mosquito population at time \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$t$$\end{document}t is denoted by \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${N}_{M}(t)$$\end{document}NM(t), which includes the following epidemiological compartments: susceptible \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({S}_{M})$$\end{document}(SM), exposed \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({E}_{M1}$$\end{document}(EM1 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{M2})$$\end{document}EM2), infectious \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({I}_{M1}$$\end{document}(IM1 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{M2})$$\end{document}IM2), with sub-index 1 for non-mutant and 2 for mutant strain. Susceptible mosquitoes move to the latent compartment \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{Mi}(i=1,2)$$\end{document}EMi(i=1,2), upon successful exposure to the respective strain. The mosquito recruitment and death rates are denoted by \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}$$\end{document}λM and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\mu }_{M}$$\end{document}μM. Exposed mosquitoes become infectious after the latent period \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\gamma }_{M1}$$\end{document}1/γM1 or \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\gamma }_{M2}$$\end{document}1/γM2. We assume that the virus could mutate in contaminated mosquitoes all through their life time at a rate of δ. For humans, we take into account of the asymptomatic and symptomatic infections. The total human population \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${N}_{H}$$\end{document}NH includes the following epidemiological compartments: susceptible \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({S}_{H}),$$\end{document}(SH), exposed \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({E}_{H1}$$\end{document}(EH1 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{H2}),$$\end{document}EH2), asymptomatically infected \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({I}_{H1}^{N},{I}_{H2}^{N})$$\end{document}(IH1N,IH2N), symptomatically infected \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({I}_{H1}$$\end{document}(IH1, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{H2})$$\end{document}IH2), and recovered \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$({R}_{H1}$$\end{document}(RH1, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${R}_{H2})$$\end{document}RH2).We assume that a proportion ϕ of exposed individuals will become symptomatic after the latent period \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\gamma }_{H}$$\end{document}1/γH, and both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals have the same probability of transmitting the virus to mosquitoes via each bite. We assume that the virus only mutates in the mosquito population because of the selective pressure that has been demonstrated in mosquito bodies but not been found in humans11. It has been shown in30 that people experienced the non-mutant CHIKV outbreak in 1975, Cambodia, obtain a lower risk of infection during the outbreak of the mutant strain in 2012. Thus we make a simplified assumption on the existence of cross-immunity between the two strains, i.e., people recovered from one strain are immune to both of the strains for life time. Following the transmission diagram shown in Fig. 1, our model takes the form in (1).1\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\begin{array}{ccc}\displaystyle \frac{d{S}_{M}}{dt} & = & {\lambda }_{M}-b{\beta }_{H1M}\displaystyle \frac{{S}_{M}({I}_{H1}^{N}+{I}_{H1})}{{N}_{H}}-b{\beta }_{H2M}\displaystyle \frac{{S}_{M}({I}_{H2}^{N}+{I}_{H2})}{{N}_{H}}-{\mu }_{M}{S}_{M},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{E}_{M1}}{dt} & = & b{\beta }_{H1M}\displaystyle \frac{{S}_{M}({I}_{H1}^{N}+{I}_{H1})}{{N}_{H}}-{\gamma }_{M1}{E}_{M1}-{\mu }_{M}{E}_{M1}-\delta {E}_{M1},\\ \displaystyle \displaystyle \frac{d{I}_{M1}}{dt} & = & {\gamma }_{M1}{E}_{M1}-{\mu }_{M}{I}_{M1}-\delta {I}_{M1},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{E}_{M2}}{dt} & = & b{\beta }_{H2M}\displaystyle \frac{{S}_{M}({I}_{H2}^{N}+{I}_{H2})}{{N}_{H}}-{\gamma }_{M2}{E}_{M2}-{\mu }_{M}{E}_{M2}+\delta {E}_{M1},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{I}_{M2}}{dt} & = & {\gamma }_{M2}{E}_{M2}-{\mu }_{M}{I}_{M2}+\delta {I}_{M1},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{S}_{H}}{dt} & = & {\lambda }_{H}-\displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M1H}{S}_{H}{I}_{M1}}{{N}_{H}}-\frac{b{\beta }_{M2H}{S}_{H}{I}_{M2}}{{N}_{H}}-{\mu }_{H}{S}_{H},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{E}_{H1}}{dt} & = & \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M1H}{S}_{H}{I}_{M1}}{{N}_{H}}-({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H1},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{I}_{H1}^{N}}{dt} & = & (1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H1}-(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H1}^{N},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{I}_{H1}}{dt} & = & \varphi {\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H1}-(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H1},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{R}_{H1}}{dt} & = & q({I}_{H2}^{N}+{I}_{H2})-{\mu }_{H}{R}_{H1},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{E}_{H2}}{dt} & = & \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M2H}{S}_{H}{I}_{M2}}{{N}_{H}}-({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H2},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{I}_{H2}^{N}}{dt} & = & (1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H2}-(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H2}^{N},\\ \displaystyle \frac{d{I}_{H2}}{dt} & = & \varphi {\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H2}-(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H2},\\ \frac{d{R}_{H2}}{dt} & = & q({I}_{H2}^{N}+{I}_{H2})-{\mu }_{H}{R}_{H2}.\end{array}$$\end{document}dSMdt=λM−bβH1MSM(IH1N+IH1)NH−bβH2MSM(IH2N+IH2)NH−μMSM,dEM1dt=bβH1MSM(IH1N+IH1)NH−γM1EM1−μMEM1−δEM1,dIM1dt=γM1EM1−μMIM1−δIM1,dEM2dt=bβH2MSM(IH2N+IH2)NH−γM2EM2−μMEM2+δEM1,dIM2dt=γM2EM2−μMIM2+δIM1,dSHdt=λH−bβM1HSHIM1NH−bβM2HSHIM2NH−μHSH,dEH1dt=bβM1HSHIM1NH−(γH+μH)EH1,dIH1Ndt=(1−φ)γHEH1−(q+μH)IH1N,dIH1dt=φγHEH1−(q+μH)IH1,dRH1dt=q(IH2N+IH2)−μHRH1,dEH2dt=bβM2HSHIM2NH−(γH+μH)EH2,dIH2Ndt=(1−φ)γHEH2−(q+μH)IH2N,dIH2dt=φγHEH2−(q+μH)IH2,dRH2dt=q(IH2N+IH2)−μHRH2.Figure 1CHIKV transmission flow chart. Subindices 1 and 2 correspond to the non-mutant and mutant strains, human populations are stratified into exposed, asymptomatically/symptomatically infected and recovered compartments. The mutation dynamics is characterized by the flow from the mosquitoes infected with the non-mutant strain to the mosquitoes with the mutant strain. Solid arrows represent the movements of population among compartments. Compartments responsible for the transmission of CHIKV are colored correspondingly to the transmission rates.here, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$b$$\end{document}b is the average biting rate of the mosquitoes. \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}$$\end{document}βH1M (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H2M}$$\end{document}βH2M) is the transmission probability from human with non-mutant strain to mosquitoes (from human with mutant strain to mosquitoes), correspondingly, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}$$\end{document}βM1H (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H) is the transmission probability from mosquitoes with non-mutant strain to human (from mosquitoes with mutant strain to human). Symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals have the same recovery rate \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$q$$\end{document}q. The parameter \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta $$\end{document}δ is the virus mutation rate (which is essentially the mutant strain adaptation rate) within the bodies of contaminated mosquitoes. CHIKV usually does not cause deaths of human, therefore, we do not consider the disease related deaths in model (1). \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{H}$$\end{document}λH is the human recruitment rate and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\mu }_{H}$$\end{document}1/μH is the average lifespan of humans. We consider model (1) with non-negative initial conditions and parameter values, and we adopt the ranges of parameters as illustrated in Table 1.Table 1Model Parameters.ParameterInterpretationValueRangeReference
λ
M
Recruitment rate of mosquitos (day−1)Estimated400–5000
45

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\mu }_{M}$$\end{document}1/μM
Average lifespan of mosquitoes (days)2814–42
17,
18,
46,
47
bAverage biting rate of mosquitoes (day−1)0.5[0.3, 1]
27,
48,
49

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}$$\end{document}βH1M
Probability of transmission from humans with nonmutant strain to mosquitoesEstimated[0.01, 1]
26,
34

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H2M}$$\end{document}βH2M
Probability of transmission from humans with mutant strain to mosquitoesEstimated[0.01, 1]
26,
34

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta $$\end{document}δ
Mutation rate of virus inside mosquitoes (day−1)Estimated[0, 1]—
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\gamma }_{M1}$$\end{document}1/γM1
Extrinsic incubation period in mosquitoes with nonmutant strain (days)42–6
13,
26

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\gamma }_{M2}$$\end{document}1/γM2
Extrinsic incubation period in mosquitoes with mutant strain (days)2—
12,
13

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}$$\end{document}βM1H
Probability of transmission of nonmutant strain from mosquito to humanEstimated[0.01, 0.94]
22,
26

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H
Probability of transmission of mutant strain from mosquito to humanEstimated[0.02, 0.94]
22,
26

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}{\gamma }_{H}$$\end{document}1/γH
Intrinsic incubation period (days)32–4
17,
44,
46,
47

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\varphi $$\end{document}φ
Proportion of symptomatic individuals0.85[0.72, 0.97]
20,
50–
56

\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\mathrm{1/}q$$\end{document}1/q
Infectious period in humans (days)63–7
18,
26,
47
It is obvious that system (1) always has a disease free equilibrium \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{0}=(\frac{{\lambda }_{M}}{{\mu }_{M}},0,0,0,0,\frac{{\lambda }_{H}}{{\mu }_{H}},0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0)$$\end{document}E0=(λMμM,0,0,0,0,λHμH,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0). We follow the calculation of basic reproduction number developed in31, and rewrite system (1) as the following form2\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\dot{x}={\mathscr{F}}(x)-{\mathscr{V}}(x)$$\end{document}x˙=F(x)−V(x)where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$x={({E}_{M1},{I}_{M1},{E}_{M2},{I}_{M2},{E}_{H1},{I}_{H1}^{N},{I}_{H1},{E}_{H2},{I}_{H2}^{N},{I}_{H2})}^{T}$$\end{document}x=(EM1,IM1,EM2,IM2,EH1,IH1N,IH1,EH2,IH2N,IH2)T and\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\begin{array}{cc}{\mathscr{F}}(x)=(\begin{array}{c}b{\beta }_{H1M}\displaystyle \frac{{S}_{M}({I}_{H1}^{N}+{I}_{H1})}{{N}_{H}}\\ 0\\ b{\beta }_{H2M}\displaystyle \frac{{S}_{M}({I}_{H2}^{N}+{I}_{H2})}{{N}_{H}}\\ 0\\ \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M1H}{S}_{H}{I}_{M1}}{{N}_{H}}\\ 0\\ 0\\ \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M2H}{S}_{H}{I}_{M2}}{{N}_{H}}\\ 0\\ 0\end{array}), & {\mathscr{V}}(x)=(\begin{array}{c}({\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M}+\delta ){E}_{M1}\\ -{\gamma }_{M1}{E}_{M1}+({\mu }_{M}+\delta ){I}_{M1}\\ -\delta {E}_{M1}+({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M}){E}_{M2}\\ -{\gamma }_{M2}{E}_{M2}+{\mu }_{M}{I}_{M2}-\delta {I}_{M1}\\ ({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H1}\\ -(1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H1}+(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H1}^{N}\\ -\varphi {\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H1}+(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H1}\\ ({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H2}\\ -(1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H2}+(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H2}^{N}\\ -\varphi {\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H2}+(q+{\mu }_{H}){I}_{H2}\end{array}).\end{array}$$\end{document}F(x)=(bβH1MSM(IH1N+IH1)NH0bβH2MSM(IH2N+IH2)NH0bβM1HSHIM1NH00bβM2HSHIM2NH00),V(x)=((γM1+μM+δ)EM1−γM1EM1+(μM+δ)IM1−δEM1+(γM2+μM)EM2−γM2EM2+μMIM2−δIM1(γH+μH)EH1−(1−φ)γHEH1+(q+μH)IH1N−φγHEH1+(q+μH)IH1(γH+μH)EH2−(1−φ)γHEH2+(q+μH)IH2N−φγHEH2+(q+μH)IH2).Calculate the derivatives of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$ {\mathcal F} $$\end{document}ℱ and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\mathscr{V}}$$\end{document}V at the disease-free equilibrium E0 we have\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$F=(\begin{array}{cccccccccc}0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & b{\beta }_{H1M}\frac{{S}_{M}}{{N}_{H}} & b{\beta }_{H1M}\frac{{S}_{M}}{{N}_{H}} & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & b{\beta }_{H2M}\frac{{S}_{M}}{{N}_{H}} & b{\beta }_{H2M}\frac{{S}_{M}}{{N}_{H}}\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & b{\beta }_{M1H} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & b{\beta }_{M2H} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\end{array})$$\end{document}F=(00000bβH1MSMNHbβH1MSMNH000000000000000000000bβH2MSMNHbβH2MSMNH00000000000bβM1H0000000000000000000000000000000bβM2H00000000000000000000000000)and\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$V=(\begin{array}{cccccccccc}{\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M}+\delta  & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ -{\gamma }_{M1} & {\mu }_{M}+\delta  & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ -\delta  & 0 & {\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & -\delta  & -{\gamma }_{M2} & {\mu }_{M} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & {\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -(1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H} & q+{\mu }_{H} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -\varphi {\gamma }_{H} & 0 & q+{\mu }_{H} & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & {\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H} & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -(1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H} & q+{\mu }_{H} & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & -\varphi {\gamma }_{H} & 0 & q+{\mu }_{H}\end{array}).$$\end{document}V=(γM1+μM+δ000000000−γM1μM+δ00000000−δ0γM2+μM00000000−δ−γM2μM0000000000γH+μH000000000−(1−φ)γHq+μH00000000−φγH0q+μH0000000000γH+μH000000000−(1−φ)γHq+μH00000000−φγH0q+μH).The well-known result in31 shows that the maximum real part of all eigenvalues of the matrix \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$F-V$$\end{document}F−V is negative if and only if the spectral radius of the next generation matrix \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\rho (F{V}^{-1}) < 1.$$\end{document}ρ(FV−1)<1. It is straightforward to obtain that\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$F{V}^{-1}=(\begin{array}{cccccccccc}0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & A{\beta }_{H1M} & B & B & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & A{\beta }_{H2M} & C & C\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M1H}{\gamma }_{M1}}{(\delta +{\mu }_{M})(\delta +{\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M})} & \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M1H}}{\delta +{\mu }_{M}} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ D & \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M2H}\delta }{{\mu }_{M}(\delta +{\mu }_{M})} & \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M2H}{\gamma }_{M2}}{{\mu }_{M}({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M})} & \displaystyle \frac{b{\beta }_{M2H}}{{\mu }_{M}} & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0\end{array}),$$\end{document}FV−1=(0000AβH1MBB00000000000000000000AβH2MCC0000000000bβM1HγM1(δ+μM)(δ+γM1+μM)bβM1Hδ+μM0000000000000000000000000000DbβM2HδμM(δ+μM)bβM2HγM2μM(γM2+μM)bβM2HμM00000000000000000000000000),where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$A=\frac{b{\gamma }_{H}{\lambda }_{M}{\mu }_{H}}{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})(q+{\mu }_{H})}$$\end{document}A=bγHλMμHλHμM(γH+μH)(q+μH), \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$D=\frac{b{\beta }_{M2H}({\delta }^{2}{\gamma }_{M2}+\delta {\gamma }_{M1}{\gamma }_{M2}+\delta {\gamma }_{M1}{\mu }_{M}+\delta {\gamma }_{M2}{\mu }_{M})}{{\mu }_{M}(\delta +{\mu }_{M})({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M})(\delta +{\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M})}$$\end{document}D=bβM2H(δ2γM2+δγM1γM2+δγM1μM+δγM2μM)μM(δ+μM)(γM2+μM)(δ+γM1+μM), \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$B=\frac{b{\beta }_{H1M}{\lambda }_{M}{\mu }_{H}}{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}(q+{\mu }_{H})}$$\end{document}B=bβH1MλMμHλHμM(q+μH), \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$C=\frac{b{\beta }_{H2M}{\lambda }_{M}{\mu }_{H}}{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}(q+{\mu }_{H})}$$\end{document}C=bβH2MλMμHλHμM(q+μH). The eigenvalues of the matrix \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$F{V}^{-1}$$\end{document}FV−1 are given by the roots of the characteristic equation:\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }^{6}({\lambda }^{2}-\frac{{b}^{2}{\beta }_{H2M}{\beta }_{M2H}{\gamma }_{M2}{\gamma }_{H}{\lambda }_{M}{\mu }_{H}}{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}^{2}(q+{\mu }_{H})({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M})})({\lambda }^{2}-\frac{{b}^{2}{\beta }_{H1M}{\beta }_{M1H}{\gamma }_{H}{\gamma }_{M1}{\lambda }_{M}{\mu }_{H}}{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}(\delta +{\mu }_{M})(q+{\mu }_{H})({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})(\delta +{\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M})})=0.$$\end{document}λ6(λ2−b2βH2MβM2HγM2γHλMμHλHμM2(q+μH)(γH+μH)(γM2+μM))(λ2−b2βH1MβM1HγHγM1λMμHλHμM(δ+μM)(q+μH)(γH+μH)(δ+γM1+μM))=0.The basic reproduction number \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0, defined as the average number of secondary cases arising from an average primary case in an entirely susceptible population, is the spectral radius of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\rho (F{V}^{-1})$$\end{document}ρ(FV−1)31,32). Therefore,\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${{\mathscr{R}}}_{01}=\sqrt{\displaystyle \frac{{b}^{2}{\beta }_{H1M}{\beta }_{M1H}{\gamma }_{H}{\gamma }_{M1}{\lambda }_{M}{\mu }_{H}}{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}(\delta +{\mu }_{M})(q+{\mu }_{H})({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})(\delta +{\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M})}},\,{{\mathscr{R}}}_{02}=\sqrt{\displaystyle \frac{{b}^{2}{\beta }_{H2M}{\beta }_{M2H}{\gamma }_{M2}{\gamma }_{H}{\lambda }_{M}{\mu }_{H}}{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}^{2}(q+{\mu }_{H})({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M})}}.$$\end{document}R01=b2βH1MβM1HγHγM1λMμHλHμM(δ+μM)(q+μH)(γH+μH)(δ+γM1+μM),R02=b2βH2MβM2HγM2γHλMμHλHμM2(q+μH)(γH+μH)(γM2+μM).We have\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}=\,{\rm{\max }}\,\{{ {\mathcal R} }_{01},{ {\mathcal R} }_{02}\},$$\end{document}ℛ0=max{ℛ01,ℛ02},and the disease-free equilibrium E0 is locally stable if \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0} < 1$$\end{document}ℛ0<1 and unstable if \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0} > 1.$$\end{document}ℛ0>1.\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}$$\end{document}ℛ01 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{02}$$\end{document}ℛ02 are the reproduction numbers of non-mutant strain and mutant strain, respectively. It is obvious that \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}$$\end{document}ℛ01 decreases with respect to the mutation rate δ, but \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{02}$$\end{document}ℛ02 does not depend on δ.System (1) also has two boundary equilibria \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{1}=({S}_{M1},{E}_{M1},{I}_{M1},0,0,{S}_{H1},{E}_{H1},{I}_{H1}^{N},{I}_{H1},{R}_{H1},0,0,0,0)$$\end{document}E1=(SM1,EM1,IM1,0,0,SH1,EH1,IH1N,IH1,RH1,0,0,0,0) and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{2}=({S}_{M2},0,0,{E}_{M2},{I}_{M2},{S}_{H2},0,0,0,0,{E}_{H2},{I}_{H2}^{N},{I}_{H2},{R}_{H2})$$\end{document}E2=(SM2,0,0,EM2,IM2,SH2,0,0,0,0,EH2,IH2N,IH2,RH2), which correspond to the ultimate domination of each strain. With the non-zero components of the boundary equilibria \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{j}(j=1,2)$$\end{document}Ej(j=1,2) given below:\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\begin{array}{ccc}\displaystyle {I}_{M1} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\gamma }_{M2}}{{\mu }_{M}+\delta }{E}_{M1},\,\displaystyle {I}_{H1}^{N}=\frac{(1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H}}{q+{\mu }_{H}}{E}_{H1},\,\displaystyle {I}_{H1}=\frac{\varphi {\gamma }_{H}}{q+{\mu }_{H}}{E}_{H1},\\ \displaystyle {S}_{M1} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}{\lambda }_{M}(q+{\mu }_{H})}{b{\beta }_{H1M}{\mu }_{H}{\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H1}+{\lambda }_{H}(q+{\mu }_{H}){\mu }_{M}},\\ \displaystyle {E}_{M1} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}({\mu }_{M}+\delta ){\mu }_{H}({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H1}}{b{\beta }_{M1H}{\mu }_{H}{\gamma }_{M1}({\lambda }_{H}-({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H1})},\\ \displaystyle {E}_{H1} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}^{2}{\mu }_{M}({\mu }_{M}+\delta )({\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M}+\delta )({\mu }_{H}+q)[{{\mathscr{R}}}_{01}^{2}-1]}{b{\beta }_{H1M}{\gamma }_{H}{\mu }_{H}[b{\beta }_{M1H}{\lambda }_{M}{\gamma }_{M1}+{\lambda }_{H}({\mu }_{M}+\delta )({\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M}+\delta )]},\\ \displaystyle {S}_{H1} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}}{{\mu }_{H}}-\frac{{\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}}{{\mu }_{H}}{E}_{H1},\\  & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}^{2}({\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M}+\delta )({\mu }_{M}+\delta )[b{\beta }_{M1H}{\gamma }_{H}{\mu }_{H}+{\mu }_{M}({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})({\mu }_{H}+q)]}{b{\beta }_{H1M}{\gamma }_{H}{\mu }_{H}[b{\beta }_{M1H}{\lambda }_{M}{\gamma }_{M1}+{\lambda }_{H}({\mu }_{M}+\delta )({\gamma }_{M1}+{\mu }_{M}+\delta )]},\end{array}$$\end{document}IM1=γM2μM+δEM1,IH1N=(1−φ)γHq+μHEH1,IH1=φγHq+μHEH1,SM1=λHλM(q+μH)bβH1MμHγHEH1+λH(q+μH)μM,EM1=λH(μM+δ)μH(γH+μH)EH1bβM1HμHγM1(λH−(γH+μH)EH1),EH1=λH2μM(μM+δ)(γM1+μM+δ)(μH+q)[R012−1]bβH1MγHμH[bβM1HλMγM1+λH(μM+δ)(γM1+μM+δ)],SH1=λHμH−γH+μHμHEH1,=λH2(γM1+μM+δ)(μM+δ)[bβM1HγHμH+μM(γH+μH)(μH+q)]bβH1MγHμH[bβM1HλMγM1+λH(μM+δ)(γM1+μM+δ)],and\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\begin{array}{ccc}\displaystyle {I}_{M2} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\gamma }_{M2}}{{\mu }_{M}}{E}_{M2},\,\displaystyle {I}_{H2}^{N}=\displaystyle \frac{(1-\varphi ){\gamma }_{H}}{q+{\mu }_{H}}{E}_{H2},\,\displaystyle {I}_{H2}=\displaystyle \frac{\varphi {\gamma }_{H}}{q+{\mu }_{H}}{E}_{H2},\\ \displaystyle {S}_{M2} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}{\lambda }_{M}(q+{\mu }_{H})}{b{\beta }_{H2M}{\mu }_{H}{\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H2}+{\lambda }_{H}(q+{\mu }_{H}){\mu }_{M}},\\ \displaystyle {E}_{M2} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}{\mu }_{H}({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H2}}{b{\beta }_{M2H}{\mu }_{H}{\gamma }_{M2}({\lambda }_{H}-({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}){E}_{H2})},\\ \displaystyle {E}_{H2} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}^{2}{\mu }_{M}^{2}({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M})({\mu }_{H}+q)[{{\mathscr{R}}}_{02}^{2}-1]}{b{\beta }_{H2M}{\gamma }_{H}{\mu }_{H}({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})[b{\beta }_{M2H}{\lambda }_{M}{\gamma }_{M2}+{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M})]},\\ \displaystyle {S}_{H2} & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}}{{\mu }_{H}}-\frac{{\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H}}{{\mu }_{H}}{E}_{H2},\\  & = & \displaystyle \frac{{\lambda }_{H}^{2}({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M}){\mu }_{M}[b{\beta }_{M2H}{\gamma }_{H}{\mu }_{H}+{\mu }_{M}({\gamma }_{H}+{\mu }_{H})({\mu }_{H}+q)]}{b{\beta }_{H2M}{\gamma }_{H}{\mu }_{H}^{2}[b{\beta }_{M2H}{\lambda }_{M}{\gamma }_{M2}+{\lambda }_{H}{\mu }_{M}({\gamma }_{M2}+{\mu }_{M})]}.\end{array}$$\end{document}IM2=γM2μMEM2,IH2N=(1−φ)γHq+μHEH2,IH2=φγHq+μHEH2,SM2=λHλM(q+μH)bβH2MμHγHEH2+λH(q+μH)μM,EM2=λHμMμH(γH+μH)EH2bβM2HμHγM2(λH−(γH+μH)EH2),EH2=λH2μM2(γH+μH)(γM2+μM)(μH+q)[R022−1]bβH2MγHμH(γH+μH)[bβM2HλMγM2+λHμM(γM2+μM)],SH2=λHμH−γH+μHμHEH2,=λH2(γM2+μM)μM[bβM2HγHμH+μM(γH+μH)(μH+q)]bβH2MγHμH2[bβM2HλMγM2+λHμM(γM2+μM)].These explicit formula for the non-trivial components of boundary equilibria led to the following theorem.Theorem 2.1If
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01} > 1$$\end{document}ℛ01>1, the non-mutant strain prevalent equilibrium
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{1}$$\end{document}E1 exists. If
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{02} > 1,$$\end{document}ℛ02>1,
then the mutant strain prevalent equilibrium
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{2}$$\end{document}E2
exists.The explicit formula for the positive equilibria with co-existence of both strains for system (1) is hard to derive algebraically. We thus seek to gain our insights from numerical simulations for the existence and stability of the positive equilibria, the boundary equilibria and possible periodic oscillations. We will mainly discuss three cases about the mutation dynamics \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$(i)$$\end{document}(i) the infectivity from mosquitoes to humans of the mutant strain is smaller comparing with that of the non-mutant strain, i.e., \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H} < {\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM1H<βM2H (shown in Fig. 2); \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$(ii)$$\end{document}(ii) the infectivity of the mutant strain is larger than that of the non-mutant strain, i.e., \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H} > {\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM1H>βM2H (shown in Fig. 3); \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$(iii)$$\end{document}(iii) the infectivity of the mutant strain is the same as that of the non-mutant strain, i.e., \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}={\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM1H=βM2H (shown in Fig. 4).Figure 2Variations of dominant strain as δ increases. We set \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}=0.42,{\beta }_{M1H}=0.3926,{\beta }_{H2M}=0.977,$$\end{document}βH1M=0.42,βM1H=0.3926,βH2M=0.977,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}=0.726$$\end{document}βM2H=0.726 for all figures. (a) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0$$\end{document}δ=0 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}=15.4216,{ {\mathcal R} }_{02}=3.1985$$\end{document}ℛ01=15.4216,ℛ02=3.1985; (b) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0.1$$\end{document}δ=0.1 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}=7.3270,$$\end{document}ℛ01=7.3270,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{02}=3.1958$$\end{document}ℛ02=3.1958; (c) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0.2$$\end{document}δ=0.2 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}=4.9616,{ {\mathcal R} }_{02}=3.1985$$\end{document}ℛ01=4.9616,ℛ02=3.1985; (d) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0.6$$\end{document}δ=0.6 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}=2.2123,{ {\mathcal R} }_{02}=3.1985$$\end{document}ℛ01=2.2123,ℛ02=3.1985. Detailed figure legends: \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{M1}$$\end{document}EM1 - the exposed mosquitoes with non-mutant strains; \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{M2}$$\end{document}EM2 - the exposed mosquitoes with mutant strains; \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{M1}$$\end{document}IM1 - the infected mosquitoes with non-mutant strains; \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{M2}$$\end{document}IM2 - the infected mosquitoes with mutant strains.Figure 3Mutant strain dominates for all δ values. We set \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}=0.977,{\beta }_{M1H}=0.726,{\beta }_{H2M}=0.42,$$\end{document}βH1M=0.977,βM1H=0.726,βH2M=0.42,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}=0.3926$$\end{document}βM2H=0.3926 for both figures. (a) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0$$\end{document}δ=0 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}=3.1985,{ {\mathcal R} }_{02}=15.4216$$\end{document}ℛ01=3.1985,ℛ02=15.4216; (b) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0.3$$\end{document}δ=0.3 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}=0.7829,$$\end{document}ℛ01=0.7829,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{02}=15.4216.$$\end{document}ℛ02=15.4216. Figure legends are the same with those illustrated in Fig. 2.Figure 4Co-existence happens with no mutation dynamics, but mutant strain dominates when δ perturbs from 0. We set \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}={\beta }_{H2M}=0.977,{\beta }_{M1H}={\beta }_{M2H}=0.726$$\end{document}βH1M=βH2M=0.977,βM1H=βM2H=0.726 for both figures. (a) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0$$\end{document}δ=0 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}={ {\mathcal R} }_{02}\,=$$\end{document}ℛ01=ℛ02=
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$3.1985$$\end{document}3.1985. (b) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0.02$$\end{document}δ=0.02 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}=2.5758,{ {\mathcal R} }_{02}=3.1985.$$\end{document}ℛ01=2.5758,ℛ02=3.1985. Figure legends are the same with those illustrated in Fig. 2.For the following numerical simulations, we fix \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$b=5$$\end{document}b=5, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}=50000$$\end{document}λM=50000, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\mu }_{H}=0.00005479$$\end{document}μH=0.00005479, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\mu }_{M}=0.0476$$\end{document}μM=0.0476, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{H}=100$$\end{document}λH=100, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\varphi =0.85$$\end{document}φ=0.85, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$q=0.1667$$\end{document}q=0.1667, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\gamma }_{H}=0.15$$\end{document}γH=0.15, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\gamma }_{M1}=0.1857$$\end{document}γM1=0.1857, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\gamma }_{M2}=0.1857$$\end{document}γM2=0.1857 and vary the values of δ, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}$$\end{document}βH1M, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}$$\end{document}βM1H, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H2M}$$\end{document}βH2M, and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H.Under the scenario in Fig. 2, the non-mutant strain dominates for small mutation rates, co-existence of both strains could occur under moderate mutation rates, and mutant strain dominates for large mutation rates. Figure 3 shows that, if the mutant strain already possesses a higher transmission probability from mosquito to human, then it will dominate at any mutation rates. In the scenario of Fig. 4 where the two strains obtain same level of transmission probability, co-existence happens when there is no mutation, and mutant strain dominates as soon as the mutation rate perturbs from 0. These results indicate that the mutation dynamics in the bodies of Aedes albopictus mosquitoes could result in a progressive take-over of the non-mutant strain by the mutant strain in the human population level in the long run.Fitting the Italy 2007 outbreak dataAedes albopictus was introduced in 1990 to Italy and has since been established in urban settings, and was identified as the principal vector for the 2007 CHIKV outbreak in Italy. The mutant strain ECSA-V is believed to be associated to this outbreak33, moreover, the co-existence of mutant and nonmutant CHIKV has been reported in this outbreak34. We thus use our model to fit this outbreak data and investigate the role played by the mutation dynamics.Figure 5 shows the reported case numbers between June 23rd and September 14th, 2007, where the blue bars up to day August 22nd represent the initial outbreak phase before the start of public health implementations. Since the control measures will greatly alter the model parameters, we fit the outbreak data from June 23rd to August 22nd.Figure 5Reported chikungunya cases from June 23rd to September 14th, 2007 in Castiglione di Cervia and Castiglione di Ravenna. Control measures were implemented on August 23rd, so we color the cases reported before interventions blue, and color the cases reported after interventions green. The data depicted above come from G. Rezza et al. Lancet 2007; 370: 1840–184644.Due the short epidemic time scale in comparison to the demographic time scale, we do not consider the natural growth of human population and set \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{H}=0,{\mu }_{H}=0$$\end{document}λH=0,μH=0 in model (1). Further, the outbreak happened mainly in two small villages Castiglione di Cervia and Castiglione di Ravenna (Ravenna province, in northeastern Italy). Therefore, we assume the human population as a constant \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${N}_{H}$$\end{document}NH. This simplifies (1) to model (S1) as shown in the Supplementary material.For the purpose of comparison, we consider a corresponding model with no mutation dynamics, we set \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0$$\end{document}δ=0 and our model (S1) reduces to model (S2), which was used to understand the 2006 Réunion Island outbreak in24. We would like to see if incorporating the mutation dynamics and fitting the data would lead to any substantial differences in the estimation of the basic reproductive number.Parameters EstimationAll parameter definitions, ranges and relevant references in model (S1) are shown in Table 1. The differences between the mutant and non-mutant strains are reflected in the following parts of the parameterization.Vector competence: the intrinsic ability of a vector to support viral replication so that the virus disseminates from the midgut to the salivary glands for transmission during subsequent vector blood meals. The ECSA-V mutant strain can enhance the replication and the dissemination of CHIKV hence led a significant increase in CHIKV infectivity from Ae.albopictus to human during transmission11,12,35,36. Therefore, we assume the lower bound of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H being larger than that of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}$$\end{document}βM1H in our sampling (S1);Extrinsic incubation period (EIP): the duration for a mosquito to become infectious since it has taken a viremic blood meal. With relatively short life span of mosquitoes, it is well known that longer EIPs reduce transmission efficiency simply because fewer mosquitoes can live long enough to transmit the virus. However, experimental results indicate that the new ECSA-V variant could shorten the EIP11,12. Therefore, we assume \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$1/{\gamma }_{M2}=2$$\end{document}1/γM2=2 days and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$1/{\gamma }_{M1}=4$$\end{document}1/γM1=4 days. Sensitivity analysis performed in the next subsection shows robustness of the model outcome under a reasonable broad range of the EIP values.The human population number in the reported area is \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${N}_{H}=3968$$\end{document}NH=3968. The index case is believed to be imported from Kerala, India, which was recorded on June 23rd, 2007 after the arrival in Italy on June 21st. We thus fix the initial values as \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${S}_{H}(0)=3968,$$\end{document}SH(0)=3968,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{H1}(0)=0,$$\end{document}EH1(0)=0,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{H1}^{N}(0)=0,$$\end{document}IH1N(0)=0,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{H1}(0)=1,$$\end{document}IH1(0)=1,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${E}_{H2}(0)=0,$$\end{document}EH2(0)=0,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{H2}^{N}(0)=0,$$\end{document}IH2N(0)=0,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${I}_{H2}(0)=0.$$\end{document}IH2(0)=0. We assume that the virus did not circulate in the mosquito population before the outbreak, so the initial values of the mosquito population compartments are set to be zero except for the susceptible mosquito \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${S}_{M}\mathrm{(0)}$$\end{document}SM(0). It is always hard to know the actual size of mosquito population, so we set \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${S}_{M}\mathrm{(0)}$$\end{document}SM(0) as one of the model parameters that needs to be fitted.Fitting MethodDenote \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$Y(t)$$\end{document}Y(t) as the cumulative symptomatic cases at time \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$t$$\end{document}t, then \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\frac{d}{dt}Y(t)=\varphi {\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H1}+\varphi {\gamma }_{H}{E}_{H2}$$\end{document}ddtY(t)=φγHEH1+φγHEH2. We regard the reported symptomatic cases as a random variable follows Poisson-distribution, and fit our model to real data by sampling the posterior distribution of the parameter vector\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\theta |{\bf{y}}=\{{\beta }_{H2M},{\beta }_{M2H},{\beta }_{H1M},{\beta }_{M1H},{\lambda }_{M},\delta ,{S}_{M}\mathrm{(0)\}|}{\bf{y}}$$\end{document}θ|y={βH2M,βM2H,βH1M,βM1H,λM,δ,SM(0)}|ywhere the vector y is derived from \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\frac{d}{dt}Y(t)$$\end{document}ddtY(t) by integrating the system of equations for randomly-sampled values of the parameters. To carry out the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) procedure, we used an adaptive Metropolis-Hastings (M-H) algorithm. The posterior density is\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${f}_{{\rm{\Theta }}|{\bf{y}}}={{\rm{\Pi }}}_{T} {\mathcal L} (Y(t)|\theta ){f}_{{\rm{\Theta }}}\theta .$$\end{document}fΘ|y=ΠTℒ(Y(t)|θ)fΘθ.The algorithm was run 50,000 iterations and we discarded the first 40,000 samples as a burn-in period. The prior density \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${f}_{{\rm{\Theta }}}\theta $$\end{document}fΘθ is the joint probability of several univariate priors. Of these, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H2M},{\beta }_{M2H},{\beta }_{H1M},{\beta }_{M1H},{\lambda }_{M},\delta $$\end{document}βH2M,βM2H,βH1M,βM1H,λM,δ are assumed as uniform distributed in the ranges shown in Table 1 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${S}_{M}\mathrm{(0)}$$\end{document}SM(0) being strictly positive. The median and confidence interval of each estimated parameter are listed in Table 2 and their frequency distribution histograms and probability density curves are shown in Fig. 6.Table 2Parameter values for point estimation and 95% interval estimation in model (S1).ParameterPoint estimation95% confidence interval
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H2M}$$\end{document}βH2M
0.1237[0.1201, 0.1320]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H
0.2238[0.2200, 0.2327]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}$$\end{document}βH1M
0.2063[0.2000, 0.2211]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}$$\end{document}βM1H
0.1025[0.0900, 0.1285]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}$$\end{document}λM
522[490.9350, 597.8843]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta $$\end{document}δ
0.1215[0.1007, 0.1784]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${S}_{M0}$$\end{document}SM0
40121[39712.74, 40401.23]Figure 6Frequency distribution histograms and probability density curves of the estimated parameters \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H2M},{\beta }_{M2H},{\beta }_{H1M},{\beta }_{M1H},{\lambda }_{M},\delta .$$\end{document}βH2M,βM2H,βH1M,βM1H,λM,δ. The blue bars represent frequency distribution histograms and pink lines represent probability density curves.By using the same method, we fit model (S2) and estimate the four parameters as shown in Table 3. Figure 7 shows the fitting of the same data set with model (S1) and (S2), respectively, in which the shaded band areas represent the 95% confidence interval for fitted parameter values in 5000 runs.Table 3Parameter values for point estimation and 95% interval estimation in model (S2).ParameterPoint estimation95% confidence interval
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}$$\end{document}βH1M
0.2387[0.2361, 0.2399]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}$$\end{document}βM1H
0.1242[0.1227, 0.1249]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}$$\end{document}λM
440[435.2, 449]
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${S}_{M0}$$\end{document}SM0
52174[51986.33, 52359.72]Figure 7(a) The cumulative number of newly chikunkunya symptomatic cases and fitted curve. Red dots represent observed data points while the black solid curve shows the median value based on 5000 simulations by using model (S1), and shaded areas show 95% confidence interval around model (S1) fitted. (b) The cumulative number of newly chikunkunya symptomatic cases and fitted curve by using model (S2), as in (a).To see if model (S1) with mutation dynamics gives a better fitting than model (S2), we compare the Akaike information criterion (AIC) to judge the relative quality between the two models:\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\rm{AIC}}=n\,\mathrm{ln}({\rm{RSS}})+2k,$$\end{document}AIC=nln(RSS)+2k,where n denotes the sample size and k denotes the number of parameters. \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\rm{RSS}}={\sum }_{i=1}^{n}\,{({y}_{i}-f({x}_{i},\hat{\theta }))}^{2}$$\end{document}RSS=∑i=1n(yi−f(xi,θˆ))2 is the residual sum of squares. In addition, we also measure the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) and the root mean square percentage error (RMSPE), which are critical evaluation indicators used to assess the fitting effect and the precision of models. The MAPE and the RMSPE are defined as\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\rm{MAPE}}=(\frac{1}{n}\sum _{q=2}^{n}|\frac{W{(q)}^{\ast }-W(q)}{W{(q)}^{\ast }}|)\times 100 \% ,$$\end{document}MAPE=(1n∑q=2n|W(q)⁎−W(q)W(q)⁎|)×100%,\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\rm{RMSPE}}=\sqrt{\frac{{\sum }_{q\mathrm{=2}}^{n}{[(W{(q)}^{\ast }-W(q))/W{(q)}^{\ast }]}^{2}}{n-1}}\times \mathrm{100 \% ,}$$\end{document}RMSPE=∑q=2n[(W(q)⁎−W(q))/W(q)⁎]2n−1×100%,where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$W{(q)}^{\ast }$$\end{document}W(q)⁎ is the real value at time \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$q,$$\end{document}q,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$W(q)$$\end{document}W(q) is its fitting value and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$n$$\end{document}n is the number of data used for prediction. AIC, MAPE and RMSPE are shown in Table 4, and we can conclude that our model with mutation dynamics fits better than the simple model as (S1) has a much lower AIC value.Table 4The index of the goodness in model fitted.ModelAICMAPERMSPES1221.22727.715%10.7696%S2229.90717.929%10.7719%Calculation of Basic Reproduction NumberBased on the estimated parameter values from the MCMC method, we calculate the corresponding uncertainty on the basic reproduction numbers from the sampled parameters. The median and confidence interval of the distribution of the basic reproduction numbers (see Fig. 8(a)) are 2.035 (95% CI: [1.9424, 2.1366]) for \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0},$$\end{document}ℛ0, 0.698 (95% CI: [0.5213,0.8017]) for \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01},$$\end{document}ℛ01, 2.035 (95% CI: [1.9424, 2.1366]) for \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{02}$$\end{document}ℛ02. This means that based on our assumption of incorporating the linear mutation rate among mosquitoes, our data fitting results show that the CHIKV outbreak in Italy is majorly associated to the mutant strain, and there should be no outbreak of the non-mutant strain.Figure 8Box plots for the basic reproduction numbers obtained from MCMC sampling. The top of the upper whisker, top of the box, bottom of the box, and bottom of the lower whisker respectively represent the maximum, third quartile, first quartile, and the minimum values of the reproduction numbers calculated from all sampled parameter combinations. (a) The box plot of the basic reproduction numbers \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 for model (S1) and that of the non-mutant strain (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{01}$$\end{document}ℛ01) and mutant strain (\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{02}$$\end{document}ℛ02). (b) The box plot of the basic reproduction numbers \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{1}$$\end{document}ℛ1 for model (S2) and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 for model (S1).Moreover, we obtained that the median and confidence interval of the distribution of the basic reproduction numbers \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{1}$$\end{document}ℛ1 for model (S2) as 1.862 (95% CI: [1.8181, 1.8858]). Figure 8(b) compares the basic reproduction numbers between the two models, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{1}$$\end{document}ℛ1 and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0, and we observe a significant underestimation if the mutant dynamics is not considered.Sensitivity Analysis and Intervention PrioritiesWe perform sensitivity analysis for model (S1) by using the Latin Hypercube Sampling method37 to generate 5,000 parameter combinations with each parameter uniformly distributed in its range in Table 1. Figure 9 shows the PRCC values38 of these parameters, and we conclude that the basic reproduction number \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 is most sensitive to the mosquito biting and mortality rates; and is more sensitive to the mosquito transmission rate than the EIP; and is more sensitive to the transmission rate of the mutant strain than that of the non-mutant strain.Figure 9The partial rank correlation coefficient (PRCC) of the basic reproduction number \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 in model (S1) with respect to some model parameters. For each parameter, the absolute value of its PRCC represents the sensitivity of the parameter - the larger the value is, the more sensitive \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 is to the corresponding parameter. * denotes the value of PRCC which is not zero significantly, where the significance level is 0.05.To illustrate the dependence of the basic reproduction number \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 in model (S1) on the sensitive and controllable model parameters, we set \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\mu }_{M}=1/28$$\end{document}μM=1/28, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M1H}=0.1025$$\end{document}βM1H=0.1025, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H1M}=0.2063$$\end{document}βH1M=0.2063, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{H2M}=0.1237$$\end{document}βH2M=0.1237, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta =0.1215$$\end{document}δ=0.1215, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\gamma }_{M1}=1/4$$\end{document}γM1=1/4, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\gamma }_{M2}=1/2$$\end{document}γM2=1/2, \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\gamma }_{H}=1/3,\varphi =0.85,q=1/6$$\end{document}γH=1/3,φ=0.85,q=1/6 and vary the three controllable parameters \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}=0.2238$$\end{document}βM2H=0.2238 or in \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$(0.02,0.94),$$\end{document}(0.02,0.94),
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$b=0.5$$\end{document}b=0.5 or in \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$(0.3,1)$$\end{document}(0.3,1) and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}=522$$\end{document}λM=522 or in \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$(400,5000).$$\end{document}(400,5000). We produce three contour plots of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 in terms of \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M},$$\end{document}λM,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$b,$$\end{document}b,
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$b$$\end{document}b and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}$$\end{document}λM in Fig. 10).Figure 10The contour plot of the basic reproduction number in terms of some controllable parameters and other parameter values are given in Table 1. (a) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H (transmission rate of mutant strain from mosquito to human) and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}$$\end{document}λM (mosquito recruitment rate) (b) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H and b (mosquito biting rate) (c) \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}$$\end{document}λM and b. Figure (a) and (b) show that simultaneously reducing the mosquito recruitment rate and the transmission rate of the mutant strain, and simultaneously reducing the mosquito biting rate and the transmission rate of the mutant strain, can both help with controlling the outbreak. On the other hand, as in Figure (c), intervention strategies that only contain the reduction of mosquito recruitment rate and the mosquito biting rate are not efficient in terms of eliminating the outbreak.Figure 10(a,b) show that reducing either the \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\lambda }_{M}$$\end{document}λM and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H pair, or the \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$b$$\end{document}b and \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${\beta }_{M2H}$$\end{document}βM2H pair, will help bring \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${ {\mathcal R} }_{0}$$\end{document}ℛ0 down below 1, hence prevent the outbreak from happening. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 10(c), intervention strategies that only reducing the mosquito recruitment and biting rates are not efficient for eliminating the outbreak.Conclusion and DiscussionThe ECSA-V mutant strain was first discovered in the 2005–2006 chikungunya fever outbreak in La Réunion. In particular, the mutation was not detected during the first outbreak wave before September 2005, but was detected during the second wave from December 2005 which involved as many as ten times of the cases reported in the first wave39. It is believed that the mutant strain could have been spread by travelers later to Italy, as study confirmed the co-circulation of the non-mutant and mutant strains in the 2007 Chikungunya fever outbreak in Italy34. This motivates us in extending a SEIR-type model based on classic mathematical epidemical theory40 to examine the impact of virus mutation. We obtained estimates of the basic reproduction number by using some parameters from published literature and our estimation shows that if the mutant strain was involved in the 2007 outbreak, then the disease burden could be underestimated.The possible high infectivity possessed by the mutant CHIKV strains will not only increase the risk of infection and epidemic size, but could also initiate and sustain chikungunya fever outbreak. In our data fitting, the basic reproduction number caused by non-mutant strain is 0.698 (95%CI: [0.5213,0.8017]), but the estimated value by the mutant strain is 2.035 (95% CI: [1.9424, 2.1366]). Our simulations on varying some controllable model parameters show that the transmission rate of mutant strain from mosquito to human is an important parameter in the control of the disease spread. Some biological studies demonstrated that the adaptation in the Aedes albopictus mosquito vector due to the mutation may be associated with evolutionary success, which could further complicate the outbreak control. More seriously, ECSA-V can be seen as the initial step of adaptive mutation of the CHIKV, the second step of adaptive mutation has already been reported36,41. Thus new epidemiological evidence, public health interventions, and modeling studies are needed in case the evolution of strain mutations can further facilitate the disease transmission and persistence.We sampled the virus mutation rate δ in a large range \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$[0,1]$$\end{document}[0,1] when fitting our model to the 2007 Italy outbreak data, and obtained a credible range of δ as \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$[0.1007,0.1784]$$\end{document}[0.1007,0.1784]. This estimation matches what have been observed in an experimental study42 - where three out of four Aedes albopictus mosquitoes have their saliva samples detected with the mutant strain ten days after infections of the pre-epidemic strain. An estimation of the experimental mutation rate can be calculated easily: assume \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$M(t)$$\end{document}M(t) as the mosquitoes with their infection dominated by the non-mutant strain and δ as the linear mutation rate, then \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$M^{\prime} (t)=-\,\delta M(t)$$\end{document}M′(t)=−δM(t) gives the proportion of mosquitoes with non-mutant strain at day 10 as \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$${e}^{-10\cdot \delta }$$\end{document}e−10⋅δ which is nearly 25% from the experiment. Thus we have \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$$\delta \approx 0.1386$$\end{document}δ≈0.1386 which falls into the estimation of our data fitting result. Indeed, more experiments involving large Aedes albopictus populations are needed to enhance the experimental estimation of the mutation potentials.LimitationsOur model can be improved if more detailed biological evidence becomes available in the future. Here we would like to discuss some neglected factors in our model and future directions for this study. First of all, although the mutant strain have been discovered in many of the recent chikungunya outbreaks, there is limited knowledge on the mutation mechanism. Our model assumes a linear mutation rate happening among mosquitoes infected with the non-mutant strain, which is only one of the many possibilities. Thus future work should consider and model other possible mutation dynamics, fitting models with various hypothesis to real outbreak data could help select the reasonable ones. Secondly, we use real data to fit parameters with undetermined broad ranges while leaving the other parameters as fixed values including mosquito biting rate and the proportion of symptomatic individuals. However, the biting rate varies in Aedes species and could also depend on temperature and urbanization, and the proportion of symptomatic cases is always difficult to estimate on the population level. Lastly, our model structure should be adjusted based on further knowledges, such as the cross-immunity between the mutant and non-mutant strains after recovery, waning immunity43, and transmission ability difference between symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals.Supplementary information
Supplementary information



Title: Chikungunya risk for Brazil

INTRODUCTIONChikungunya virus (CHIKV) was first isolated from human serum during a febrile illness outbreak in Tanzania in 1953.
24
 The word chikungunya is derived from Makonde (Kimakonde), one of the languages spoken in southeastern Tanzania, and means “to bend over or become contorted”, referring to the posture adopted by the patient due to serious joint pain in severe infections caused by CHIKV.
11

,

23
 The virus is a member of the family Togaviridae, genus Alphavirus, antigenic complex Semliki forest, also composed by alphaviruses Ross River, O’nyong-nyong, Getah, Bebaru, Semliki forest, and Mayaro, the latter being endemic in the Brazilian Amazon. It has four genetically distinct strains: West African, East-Central-South African (ECSA), Asian and Indian Ocean lineage (IOL).
19

,

32

The disease caused by CHIKV, known as chikungunya fever, is clinically characterized by fever, headache, myalgia, exanthema, and arthralgia – the most pronounced symptoms, which may persist for months or years in some patients and sometimes evolve into disabling chronic arthropathy.
7

,

28

Several combined factors have contributed to the emergence and spread of arboviruses such as CHIKV and dengue in new areas, including the global distribution of their potential vectors: Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus.Since the isolation in Tanzania, CHIKV has been associated with disease in Africa and Asia. However, since 2005 the virus has quickly spread in the islands of the southwestern Indian Ocean. Many imported cases were observed in non-Western countries, as Italy, where a CHIKV outbreak occurred in 2007. The cases have continued to occur and, in 2013, CHIKV was introduced in the Caribbean region, expanding in 2014 for the continental areas of the Americas.
16

In Brazil, Ae. aegypti is disseminated in all states and widely dispersed in urban areas, while Ae. albopictus is found in several municipalities, except for the states of Sergipe, Acre, Amapa and Roraima. In addition, the total susceptibility of the Brazilian population to CHIKV, combined with other factors, such as the detection of imported cases in travelers since 2010,
1

,

6
 suggests potential dispersal and establishment of CHIKV throughout the country. The objective of this study was to show, based on the literature on the subject, the potential for dispersal and establishment of the CHIKV in Brazil.Emergence of CHIKV in new areasThe spread of CHIKV in humans is usually supported by the urban cycle (human-mosquito-human). However, wild cycles keep the virus in wild environments, as already evidenced in Africa and Asia, with sporadic human cases.
9

,

12

,

13

There are records of CHIKV epidemics since 1779, however mistakenly registered as dengue outbreaks.
5
 Between 1960 and 1990, the virus was isolated on several occasions during numerous outbreaks in countries of Central and Southern Africa (Sudan, Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Kenya and South Africa), as well as in countries of West Africa, including Senegal, Benin, Guinea, Ivory Coast, and Nigeria. The occurrence of outbreaks or evidence of chikungunya fever in Africa is generally associated with rainy periods, followed by a virus spillover from a wild enzootic cycle to an epizootic cycle, usually urban. Outbreaks in rural areas can occur when the vector density increases in areas with non-immune populations.Since the 1960s, frequent outbreaks have also been reported in Southeast Asian countries such as India, Malaysia, Indonesia, Cambodia, Vietnam, Myanmar, Pakistan, and Thailand.
20
 In 1999-2000, CHIKV caused an epidemic in Kinshasa, capital of Democratic Republic of Congo, after 39 years without any isolation of the virus. Between 2001 and 2003, the virus resurfaced in Indonesia after an absence of 20 years.
10

,

18

Until 2004, the cases of chikungunya fever were restricted to African and Asian countries. However, in April 2005, CHIKV was detected in the South-West Indian Ocean (Comoros Islands), probably introduced by viremic travelers from Lamu (Kenya), where an outbreak was registered in June 2004.
25
 The virus quickly dispersed throughout the Indian Ocean islands (Comoros, Madagascar, Mayotte, Seychelles, Mauritius, Réunion), resulting in an epidemic in 2005 and 2006. During this period, clinical observations of cases with atypical presentations (neurological involvement, disease in newborns and deaths) and the transmission by Ae. albopictus in Réunion led to the hypothesis that a new genotype, possibly more virulent, was associated with the cases. The epidemic in Réunion (2005-2006) was associated with the IOL genotype of CHIKV, identified as a descendant of ECSA, which contains adaptive mutations in the envelope protein genes (E1 and E2). These mutations enabled the increase in CHIKV infectivity for Ae.Albopictus, a highly competent vector that allowed the efficient replication and dispersion of CHIKV during the outbreak.
30

-

32
 During this period, the ECSA genotype was introduced in Asia.
29
 In fact, about 13 states in India have registered cases of the disease after a 32-year interepidemic period; outbreaks have also occurred in Malaysia, Sri Lanka, and Indonesia.
29
 In addition, imported cases have been confirmed in travelers returning from endemic regions of Asia and Indian Ocean islands to countries in Asia (Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, Sri Lanka and Taiwan), Europe (Germany, Belgium, Spain, France, Italy, Norway, Czech Republic, Switzerland and Ukraine), North America (USA and Canada), and Oceania (Australia).
a

In 2007, a new outbreak occurred in India, with Ae. aegypti as the vector, and in Northern Italy (Emilia-Romagna), with indigenous cases of chikungunya fever transmitted by Ae. albopictus. Outbreaks continued to occur in countries in Asia and also in India. In 2009 and 2010, after some years of latency, CHIKV reemerged in Réunion. Furthermore, imported cases were detected in several countries of the Americas, including Brazil with three travelers who returned from Indonesia and India in 2010.
1

,

6

Concerns about the spread and establishment of the virus in the Americas and other countries grew primarily from 2011, when an outbreak with more than 11,000 cases occurred in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Indeed, in 2013 a dissemination of cases occurred, with indigenous transmission of the disease in several countries of the Caribbean (French Guiana, Saint Martin, Martinique, Guadeloupe, Dominican Republic, St. Barths and the British Virgin Islands) and in January 2014 the first cases were detected in the mainland of Central America. Imported cases, some of them viremic, have appeared in Brazil since June 2014. In September of that year, the first case with indigenous transmission was detected in the country, in the state of Amapa. In that same month, a CHIKV outbreak was detected in Feira de Santana, BA. The Brazilian Ministry of Health reported that, in 2015, until the epidemiological week 15 (from January 4, 2015 to April 18, 2015), 3,135 suspected cases (indigenous transmission) of chikungunya fever were reported in the states of Amapa and Bahia, of which 1,688 were confirmed, five by laboratory criteria and 1,683 by clinical-epidemiological criteria.
14

Still, many cases imported from the states of Amapa and Bahia as well as other countries were identified in several Brazilian states.
14

We highlight that the circulating CHIKV genotype in Amapa is the Asian one, as in the Caribbean, while in Bahia it is the East-South-Central African one.
15

,

26
 The Figure shows the world distribution of CHIKV transmission areas.
FigureAreas with chikungunya virus transmission in the world.
Clinical manifestationsSince the first description of the disease in the 1950s, the clinical recognition of fever and infection with CHIKV has relied on the reporting of epidemics in South Africa in the 1970s. These reports identified, after a short incubation period of two to six days (the mean is 12 days), the three-stage evolution of the disease with an acute phase of sudden onset of symptoms such as high fever, exanthema, and arthralgia, which affects mainly the small and large joints and can evolve into a subacute phase with resurgence of arthralgias. A third stage occurred in some cases that evolved into the chronic form of the disease with persistent polyarthralgia, which may be disabling for weeks or years.
25
 The classic clinical picture has been described in up to 95.0% of the patients of recent outbreaks and epidemics, while between 3.0% and 5.0% of infections are asymptomatic.
28

Several clinical characteristics may be observed in patients with chikungunya fever. The reproductive capacity of the virus in different tissues, from the tegument to the central nervous system, cardiac muscle, joints, liver, among others, results in a wide variety of clinical manifestations.
26

The skin changes described in the acute stage of the disease are present in 40.0% to 50.0% of cases. One of them is rash, usually maculopapular and pruritic, affecting mainly the chest, but also observed on the face and upper and lower limbs.
2

,

4
 The vesico-bullous type may also occur, with peeling of the extremities, most noted in children, as well as facial edema, ulcers of oral mucosa and vasculitis lesions as petechiae and gingival hemorrhage.
2
 Although spontaneous or induced bleeding (positive tourniquet test) may be present in chikungunya fever, large hemorrhages are not commonly described, which partially distinguishes it from severe forms of dengue, a disease in which the most severe hemorrhagic phenomena are frequent findings.
22

Beside the typical clinical picture of chikungunya fever, clinical manifestations considered atypical have been frequently reported in the course of outbreaks and epidemics, including neurological, cardiac, renal and ocular changes, with higher incidence in people aged over 65 years and with preexisting conditions, which can result in complications and death. Nevertheless, most cases take the benign course of infection. The clinical spectrum of neurological complications is similar in adults and children and includes myeloneuropathy, encephalitis, Guillain-Barre Syndrome, flaccid paralysis, and neuropathies. As for the ocular manifestations, iridocyclitis and retinitis are the most frequent ones, with resolution and preservation of vision in most cases after six to eight weeks. Among cardiac changes, myocarditis, pericarditis, and dilated cardiomyopathy have been described. However, clinical and experimental studies are needed to elucidate the effects of the virus in the cardiac muscle, as well as studying the relationship between cardiology changes in the course of chikungunya fever with history of heart disease.
22

The impact of CHIKV infection in pregnancy has been widely studied, with evidence of high risk for first trimester abortion and last trimester maternal-fetal transmission. In a classic study conducted by Gérardin et al
8
 on this type of transmission, 7,504 CHIKV-infected pregnant women with laboratory confirmation (serological, virological, or both) were evaluated during the 2006 outbreak, with three fetal deaths before the 22nd week of pregnancy reported. Vertical transmission was reported in 19 (31.0%) neonates from mothers who were viremic (n = 61) at the time of birth. The study also reported severe infection in 10 cases, nine of encephalopathy and one of hemorrhagic fever.
8

Chronic casesPolyarthralgia is the classical articular manifestation of the disease soon after the onset of fever, of serious intensity and migratory nature, rare in children, symmetrically affecting large and small joints (hands, feet, phalanges and ankles), with limitation of motion. Patients generally report clinical improvement in articulations seven to 10 days after the onset of symptoms, except for joint stiffness and pain, which can persist for months or years in 12.0% of patients.
21
 This chronic stage of arthralgia is characterized by fluctuations in intensity of pain and relapse, usually affecting the same articulation as the acute stage, causing reduction in the range of motion and quality of life.
3
 Age is suggested as a risk factor associated with the persistence of arthralgia and destructive arthritis, as well as with the detection of IgM class antibodies up to two years after infection. The persistence of IgM detection is seen the most in infants and people aged over 45 years, in the presence of comorbidities and in cases of patients with greater intensity of joint pain in the acute stage of the disease.
2

,

3
 It is postulated that infections by arthritogenic virus such as CHIKV may exacerbate preexisting collagen diseases, especially rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis, but follow-up studies on patients with arbovirosis are required to establish this causal relationship.
2

,

3

Clinical and therapeutic approachIn the absence of effective drugs against CHIKV, clinical management is based on symptomatic therapeutic regimens for the various stages of the disease. In the acute stage of the disease, the recommendations are rest, water intake, and use of antipyretics (acetaminophen, dipyrone). Nonhormonal anti-inflammatories (COX-2 inhibitors) should be prescribed in the subacute stage. In the chronic stage, the use of corticosteroids (prednisolone) and immunosuppressants (methotrexate) is recommended. The differential diagnosis with other infectious diseases and collagen diseases is imperative before starting any therapeutic regimen for patients.Studies have observed that broad-spectrum antiviral drugs such as ribavirin and interferon are promising and that their combination shows synergistic effect on virus inhibition.
2

,

17
 However, additional studies are needed, including multidrug regimens, to assess cost-effectiveness and long-term side effects. Clinical studies involving the use of specific polyclonal immunoglobulin and human monoclonal antibodies have been arousing interest.
4

,

21

Prevention is achieved by vector control and personal protection measures. The explosive character of the epidemics associated with the absence of a specific drug point to vaccination as the best effective strategy to protect the population at risk. Studies on vaccine candidates against CHIKV began in 1967, but so far no effective and licensed vaccine was developed. Preclinical studies with vaccine candidates tested in animals have been described. Some of the formulations tested are inactivated, live attenuated, chimeric, recombinant DNA, peptide, protein subunit, recombinant adenovirus and virus-like particle (VLP) vaccines.
17
 Preliminary results of phase II clinical trials with a live attenuated vaccine (181/25 Asian genotype) were promising, inducing a robust neutralizing antibody response in 98.0% of vaccinated people and providing protection against the other genotypes (Central/African). However, the studies were discontinued in 2000.
21

Future prospects and challengesThe probable and imminent spread of CHIKV in the American continent should result in explosive epidemics as previously observed in Africa, Asia, and the Indian Ocean region. From November 2013 (when the first indigenous cases in the Caribbean arised) to December 29, 2014, 1,071,696 suspected cases of chikungunya fever were reported to the Pan American Health Organization, mostly in the Caribbean, with laboratory confirmation of 22,796 cases of indigenous transmission and 2,511 imported cases.
16
 The virus is expected to spread in Colombia, Venezuela, Brazil, and other South American countries in the summer of 2015. This possibility is due to the presence of two vectors of CHIKV, Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus, whose rates of infestation increase with summer rains. In addition, there already are chikungunya fever outbreaks in two Brazilian states (Amapa and Bahia), with indigenous transmission even during a low rainfall period. Therefore, the challenges are preventing the transmission in other states, controlling the spread of the disease in the states with established transmission, and decreasing vector infestation indices throughout the national territory, which, besides preventing indigenous circulation of CHIKV, would also result in a drastic reduction in the number of dengue cases. Another important challenge is to accelerate phase II and III clinical trials of vaccine candidates, which should be prioritized both in areas with established transmission and in receptive areas without indigenous transmission. Finally, clinical trials to investigate the pathogenesis of chikungunya fever in humans and experimental studies in nonhuman primates should constitute priorities for assessing the CHIKV potential of causing serious injury in vital organs and also in joints, where the presence of the virus in resident cells has been described.


Title: Chikungunya virus: from genetic adaptation to pandemic risk and prevention

BackgroundThe World Health Organization coined a term to name an unknown pathogen that could cause a severe international epidemic or pandemic: “Disease X.” It is not indicative of the eventual specific threat, but rather a placeholder for an as yet identified future pandemic and underscores the need for good preparedness. In 2018, the idea came to be, when it was listed on the WHO’s Blueprint list of priority disease in urgent need of research and development.1,2 Deforestation and enhanced human–animal interactions are predicted to lead to increased opportunities for spillovers from animals to humans, also known as zoonotic spillovers, and these are a staple of the next pandemic, scientists say. It has been implicated before in past pandemics, including SARS-CoV2 and Ebola.2,3 The most likely causative agents of Disease X are members of families of known pandemic potential viruses, including coronaviruses, filoviruses (e.g., Ebola), and paramyxoviruses (e.g., Nipah). As these pathogens are additionally respiratory, have high mutation rates, and can rapidly spread from human to human, they are particularly concerning.2,4 Ahead of the curve, researchers and global health agencies are ramping up advanced surveillance and genetic characterization of high-risk pathogens while at the same time engaging in proactive development of adaptable medical countermeasures such as vaccines and diagnostics. The Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations’ 100 Days Mission was launched to develop pandemic vaccines within 100 days or three months after disease invasion is detected.1,4Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arbovirus responsible for primary transmission by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes. The meaning of the word Chikungunya is “Bent Over In Pain”-taken from the Makonde language. It refers to the debilitating joint pain, which is a feature of the disease. Other symptoms can include fever and joint pain, rash, headache, muscle pain, fatigue, and joint pain that can last months to even years. While rarely fatal, chikungunya can give rise to profound complications, especially in high risk populations, including those aged 65 years and over, infants, and those with comorbidities.5–7 Previous to the current outbreak of the CHIKV, it has historically been confined to (and is continuously found on) a handful of locations in Africa and Asia, but has since expanded to over 110 countries across multiple continents. Its geographical spread, powered in part by intensifying global travel and urbanization as well as climate change, is a cause for concern for large scale outbreak. A vaccine has been recently made available but is only available for select at risk populations.5,7 Chikungunya demonstrates a number of “Disease X” characteristics. Because it can cause widespread outbreaks and lacks cross immunity to related viruses such as dengue or zika and depends on efficient mosquito vectors, it is a serious contender for a future pandemic. The elevated risk of increased transmissibility or severity further elevates its evolution and potential genetic adaptation, which, in turn, requires vigilant monitoring and proactive public health measures.5,7EpidemiologyCHIKV, arbovirus primarily transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus, exhibits unique epidemiologic patterns related to climatic factors, urbanization, and vector density. It has spread and resulted in large outbreaks worldwide. High temperatures (>25°C), which accelerate mosquito development and reduce their lifespan to around 14 days, are critical for sustaining transmission cycles. The extrinsic incubation period (EIC)—the time required for the virus to become transmissible inside the mosquito—ranges from 8 to 14 days, making temperature and mosquito survival tightly linked to outbreak potential. CHIKV has resulted in large-scale outbreaks across continents, particularly where environmental and social factors favor mosquito proliferation.BrazilIn 2024, Brazil accounted for 84.8% of the Americas’ cumulative total, with 402,584 cases. However, since its 2014 introduction, Brazil has suffered annual outbreaks, with the northeast being hardest hit. Factors contributing to the difference are a high vector density, a tropical climate favorable to year-round transmission, and inadequate vector control measures. Nevertheless, spatial heterogeneity remains, determined by local immunity, differential socioeconomic conditions, and regional climate.8,9 A temporal trend of annual CHIKV cases in Brazil is illustrated in Figure 1.
10
Figure 1.Temporal trend of CHIKV cases in Brazil which has experienced a significant outbreak in recent years.The ECSA lineage of the CHIKV was established as a major focal point for Brazil. In the year 2017, there were over 247,692 cases of the outbreak. Afterward, cases dropped from 2018 as herd immunity was established and vector control became more assertive. However, from 2021, sustained outbreaks reoccurred, fueled by persistent vector populations and conducive climatic factors for mosquito productivity. Brazil also remained the epicenter of chikungunya in the Americas reporting 248,231 cases in 2023. An outbreak established record number of CHIKV cases in the history of Brazil with over 402,584 cases reported. Local immunity, socioeconomic disparities, and spatial heterogeneity explain this recurring epidemic pattern in cases. So, urban density and environmental factors also continue the transmission.9,10CHIKV, chikungunya virus; ECSA, East Central South African.The image shows the trend of CHIKV cases in Brazil from 2017 to 2024. In 2017, there were 247,692 cases. Afterward, cases dropped due to herd immunity and vector control measures. However, from 2021, sustained outbreaks reoccurred due to persistent vector populations and conducive climate factors. In 2023, Brazil reported 248,231 cases, establishing a record number of CHIKV cases in the country, over 402,584. Local immunity, socioeconomic disparities, and spatial heterogeneity also played a role in the recurring epidemic pattern.9,10.IndiaIn 2024, India reported 69,544 cases, of which a major part was from Karnataka and Maharashtra. A total of 31.6% of the cases were from Karnataka. Although these outbreaks season with the monsoon, urban waterlogging and poor waste management makes it worse. The broad geographic reach of chikungunya in India is illustrated by the fact that substantial case load was also seen in Maharashtra and Kerala.11,12 A Map of India showing the severity of cases confirmed in 2024 based on states is illustrated in Figure 2.12,13Figure 2.Heatmap of India showing confirmed cases in 2024 of chikungunya (CHIKV) based on states.Warm climates, dense populations, and urbanization are ideal breeding grounds for Aedes mosquitoes and that is why Maharashtra and Karnataka have reported such high chikungunya cases. Cases in Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat run moderate based on seasonal rainfall resulting in temporary mosquito habitats. Genetic mutations in the virus enable it to adapt to vectors and to cause persistent cases in endemic regions. Both urbanization and bad water management help outbreaks, particularly in crowded places. In more organized places such as Maharashtra, one may get inflated case numbers vis a vis places with weaker healthcare infrastructure. Rainfall and temperature also influence seasonal spikes of transmission.12,13This is a heatmap of India showing confirmed cases in 2024 of chikungunya (CHIKV) based on states.A temportal trend of CHIKV cases in the two most affected states in India—Maharashtra and Karnataka—is illustrated in Figure 312,13Figure 3.Temporal trend of confirmed chikungunya (CHIKV) cases in Maharashtra and Karnataka from 2018 to 2024.Maharashtra and Karnataka chikungunya cases show a temporal trend that reveals a regional dynamic determined by climatic, demographic, and viral parameters. The high population density along with urbanization of Maharashtra is expected to result in the sharp increase in Aedes mosquito breeding sites cases by 2024. The consistent rainfall and tropical climate that favor persistence of vector numbers in Karnataka is likely why the figures there are more stable yet significantly higher than those elsewhere in India. The “Frontiers in Microbiology” study points to mutations, such as E1-A226V, which increase adaptability to Aedes albopictus that is common in these regions. Reporting and outbreaks are further affected by seasonal patterns, urban water storage practices and healthcare disparities. 12,13Temporal trend of confirmed chikungunya (CHIKV) cases in Maharashtra and Karnataka from 2018 to 2024. Cases are likely to increase due to population density, urbanization, and favorable breeding conditions. 12,PakistanIn 2024, Pakistan reported 5706 cases, with the biggest outbreaks coinciding with monsoon seasons when vector breeding is at its highest. Sindh and Punjab provinces with high urban density and the insufficiency of mosquito control measures were hotspots. Although India has lower case numbers, surveillance gaps and underreporting very likely underestimate the true burden of disease.
14
MalaysiaIn 2024, Malaysia had 80 cases and only localized outbreaks during rainy season. The larger epidemics have been prevented by effective vector control measures. But, post flood mosquito breeding is still a concern.
15
The Americas: beyond BrazilSignificant outbreaks had been reported in Paraguay (3104 cases), Argentina (768), and Bolivia (451) and other countries in the Americas. They together cover less area than Brazil but reveal circumscribed localization of chikungunya within these nations.8,16Africa and Southeast AsiaWhile lower transmission levels than the rest of the regions, Senegal reported nine cases in Africa in 2024.
17
 In Southeast Asia, the Maldives had 240 cases by May 2024 attributed to intermittent rains and subsequent vector proliferation.
18
TrendsOutbreaks occur in periods of inundating tropical rainy season and urban centers appear disproportionately affected because of resident vector density and environmental conditions. Vectors such as Aedes aegypti continue to expand their geographical range and thus threaten non endemically regions in response to climate change.9,19Genetic mutationAs a single-stranded RNA virus with very high mutation rate, this virus can rapidly adapt to new vectors and hosts.20,21 Its genome consists of three major lineages: East/Central/South African (ECSA), Asian and the West African lineage. CHIKV’s epidemic potential has been mediated in part by adaptive mutations in the envelope proteins E1 and E2.9,22 Vectors and vertebrate hosts show enhanced infection and pathogenicity upon viral mutations like E1-M88L or E1-V156A.
20
 CHIKV has a rapid rate of genetic change, with an estimation of about 5–10 mutations/year for its genome.
9
 First discovered in Aedes albopictus mosquitoes during the 2005–2006 Indian Ocean outbreak, the E1-A226V mutation enhanced infectivity of CHIKV in these insects by a factor as large as 5. Previously considered a secondary vector, this mutation enhanced midgut infection and dissemination in this mosquito vector through its alteration of viral dependence on cholesterol.22,23 About 266,000 human cases of this mutation were linked to the large 2005–2006 epidemic on Reunion Island. This mutation increased the virus’s infectivity and dissemination in the laboratory settings in Aedes albopictus significantly compared with strains lacking the mutation.
23
 Additional fitness advantages in Aedes albopictus were further obtained by subsequent CHIKV mutations, such as E2-L210Q, optimizing its adaptation to this vector.22,24 A 2022 study identified additional mutations in Brazilian ECSA-lineage strains, including changes in the E1 and nsP3 regions.
25
 These mutations may contribute to viral persistence in populations and resistance to existing vector control strategies. Evolutionary flexibility of CHIKV in response to environmental and ecological pressures is illustrated by the mutations E1-A226V and E2-L210Q. Efficient transmission cycles were established in areas of high Aedes albopictus density, through these sequential adaptations.
22
 Many of the Indian isolates from different locations had novel mutations like E1 patriarchal S295 rout, E1 pivotal P294 rout, and E1 virgin V322 rout, indicating the region adaptability and enhanced virulence potential of CHIKV.
26
 This adaptive potential is of concern that the virus may be capable of generating more severe and widespread epidemics across regions in which Aedes albopictus is well established including temperate climates. Synergistic effects of double mutations, including E2-K252Q in combination with other mutations, were found for the virus adaptability and vector infection efficiency.
20
 In Brazil, similar to what we had observed in Cuba, ECSA lineage strains devoid of E1-A226V dominated outbreaks in the face of widespread insecticide resistance caused by kdr mutations (e.g., V410L, V1016I, and F1534C), using Aedes aegypti and not Aedes albopictus, despite substitutions that confer insecticide resistance.9,27 This multimodal vector and geographic range in CHIKV raises concerns of its potential to become “Disease X.” Its genotypic plasticity permits adaptation to environmental and anthropogenic changes, including urbanization and vector expansion in response to climate change.9,24 Together with low immunity in naïve populations and the absence of widespread vaccination, CHIKV’s ability to adapt makes it a potential candidate for future global pandemics. Table 1 shows the location, effect, region, and advantages gained by the virus through the discussed mutations.Table 1.Mutation analysis table.MutationLocation in genomeEffect on vector/host adaptationOutbreak regionsAdvantages gained after mutationSourcesE1-A226VE1 glycoproteinEnhanced infectivity in Aedes albopictusIndian Ocean, Reunion IslandCritical for vector switching23 and 24E2-L210QE2 glycoproteinImproved fitness in Aedes albopictusKerala, IndiaSynergistic with E1-A226V24E1-M88L and E1-V156AE1 glycoproteinEnhanced infection and pathogenicityRio de Janeiro, BrazilIncreases ability to spread and gains stable adaptation20E1-S295F, E1-P294L, E1-A316V, E1-V322A, and E1-C328WE1 glycoproteinEnhanced VirulenceIndiaRegional adaptation26Kdr mutations (V410L, V1016I, and F1534C)Voltage gated sodium channelInsecticide resistance in Aedes aegyptiBrazilReduced control efficacy27E2-K252QSynergy with other mutationsEnhanced binding with midgut cellIndiaIncreased host adaptation20Transmission and spread of chikungunyaThe transmission of CHIKV occurs usually via bite by the species of Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquito.28,29 Transmission cycles include the enzootic (forest dwelling) sylvatic cycle in which the virus cycles between mosquitoes and nonhuman primates, and the urban cycle in which the virus cycles between mosquitoes and humans in densely populated areas.28,30–32 In the sylvatic cycle, CHIKV is primarily transmitted by Aedes species that inhabit forests, such as Aedes africanus and Aedes furcifer. These mosquitoes typically feed on non-human primates, with humans being an accidental host. Human infection occurs infrequently in this cycle. In contrast, the urban cycle occurs in densely populated areas, where Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes are the primary vectors. In this cycle, humans serve as the amplification host, and the virus spreads rapidly in urban environments with high mosquito densities and limited control measures. Densely populated areas are breeding grounds for mosquitoes, which increase risks to transmission because of stagnant water and urban heat islands environmental factors.
28
 CHIKV enters host cells via clathrin-mediated endocytosis. The virus binds to host cell surface receptors, such as heparan sulfate proteoglycans and DC-SIGN, which facilitate virus adsorption. Once inside, the virus uncoats and releases its genome into the cytoplasm. The positive-sense RNA genome directly translates viral non-structural proteins (nsps) from the 5′ open reading frame. These nsps are essential for genome replication and viral RNA synthesis. The viral replication complex assembles on intracellular membranes, such as the rough endoplasmic reticulum, where replication of the RNA genome takes place. Subsequently, viral RNA is translated into structural proteins, including the envelope glycoproteins (E1 and E2), which are incorporated into newly formed virions. The newly synthesized virions are then packaged into vesicles and are released from cells via direct budding.
33
 It is the adaptation of CHIKV to a variety of mosquito vectors that permits its rapid spread. Genetic mutations in the E1 glycoprotein of the virus that enhances its ability to be efficiently transmitted by Aedes albopictus have extended its range to temperate regions.28–30,32 Altogether, high human population density and the global travel has facilitated spread of the virus further.29–31

 In the replication process, cell damage takes place and activates an immune response, which results in inflammation, fever, and joint pain, common to the disease.
28
 Severe cases have high viremia levels (107 pfu/mL) facilitating efficient transmission to vectors, primarily to mosquito vectors.
32
 Vertical transmission from mother to child is well documented; rates up to 50% are reported if the mother is viremic at the time of labor. However, severe neonatal outcome including encephalitis is one of the usual consequences of this route.30,32,34 Most vertical transmission cases occur when the mother is infected between 15 days before delivery and 4 days post-partum.
30
 It has been demonstrated that the virus does cross the placental barrier from amniotic fluid and fetal tissues during stillbirth cases.
34
 Furthermore, silent transmission from asymptomatic infections complicates the control of outbreaks.29,32 While asymptomatic infections do occur, most CHIKV infections are symptomatic, presenting with fever, rash, and severe joint pain. The symptomatic rate varies, but studies suggest that a significant proportion of infected individuals experience the characteristic symptoms of the disease, with only a small minority remaining asymptomatic.
19
 Successful large-scale outbreaks are enabled by the virus’ dependence on both the efficiency of the mosquito vector and adaptation to human hosts combined with low immunity in population.
32
 In Salvador, low seroprevalence (11.8%) indicated that there was not enough herd immunity to avert future outbreaks. In addition, viral lineage, mosquito exposure dose, and host genetic factors might influence the severity of infection as well as symptomatic rates.
31

Figure 4 shows the transmission cycle of chikungunya.26,29,30Figure 4.Illustration of the two primary transmission cycles of chikungunya virus (CHIKV): the Sylvatic cycle and the Urban cycle.In the Sylvatic cycle, CHIKV is primarily transmitted between Aedes africanus mosquitoes and non-human primates in forested areas. Humans are accidental hosts in this cycle. In contrast, the Urban cycle occurs in densely populated urban environments, where Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti mosquitoes transmit the virus between humans, acting as the primary amplification hosts.This is an illustration showing two main transmission cycles of the Chikungunya virus (CHIKV). On the left, the Sylvatic cycle involves Aedes africanus mosquitoes transmitting the virus between humans and primates in natural environments like forests. On the right, the Urban cycle takes place in cities, with Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti mosquitoes transmitting the virus among humans, who are the virus’s main amplification site in these settings.Table 2 shows vertical transmission outcomes in chikungunya.26,28,29Table 2.Vertical transmission outcomes in chikungunya.Maternal infection stageNeonatal outcomePercentage impactSourcesEarly pregnancyFetal loss, congenital abnormalities2% fetal loss, significant congenital impact30 and 34Late pregnancyHigh risk of encephalopathy68.7% encephalopathy, 19.6% fetal distress30 and 34During birthSepsis-like syndrome, encephalitis50% vertical transmission rate in viremic mothers28 and 34Disease pathogenesis of chikungunyaCHIKV pathogenesis involves a complex, distinct, acute-to-chronic progression, with systemic inflammation and severe symptoms, coupled with substantial long-term morbidity. CHIKV infection can be thus divided into three phases: acute, subacute and chronic phases.Acute phase: Characterized by fever, severe arthralgia, myalgia, rash, and headache. These symptoms are present in the majority of cases. This phase may last up to 14 days.In 75%–88% of cases the acute phase is usually 7–10 days long and characterized by fever, rash, polyarthralgia, myalgia, and fatigue.35–37 Because the elderly and neonates are particularly vulnerable, they can develop severe symptoms ranging from encephalitis to myocarditis, gastrointestinal complications and renal dysfunction.35–37Subacute phase: During this phase, joint pain persists, and patients may experience ongoing fatigue. Chronic joint issues may begin to emerge, especially in those with pre-existing comorbidities. This phase may last from 15 days to 3 months.37,38Chronic phase: Some patients develop persistent arthritis, fatigue, and neurological disorders, with symptoms lasting months to years. Chronic chikungunya is associated with significant long-term disability, particularly joint stiffness and neuropathic pain. This phase may last for greater than 3 months.About 30%–50% of cases will develop chronic complications including persistent joint pain, fatigue and a form of inflammatory arthritis that can persist months to years.35,36 Neuropathic pain such as burning or stinging is common. These are known as atypical phases. The atypical phase of chikungunya infection often presents with symptoms that deviate from the classic fever-first pattern, notably joint pain appearing before fever, which is unusual and seen more in women. Patients may experience a broad range of manifestations involving multiple organ systems, including eye inflammation, oral ulcers, skin eruptions, neurological issues like memory loss, and occasional cardiovascular effects such as temporary blood pressure drops. These atypical symptoms occur across all ages, although eye problems are more common in children.
39
 This compounds disability and limits the effectiveness of traditional treatments.
38
 Neurological involvement was frequent; chikungunya RNA was detected in 52.9% fatal case specimens including CSF and was associated with encephalitis (21.4%).
37
 Chronic chikungunya significantly impairs daily functionality, and 76% of infected individuals have walking disabilities one year post infection.36,38 Chronic chikungunya symptoms last from 3 months to 5 years affecting the quality of life significantly.
40
 The psychological burden of long-term disease is underscored by increased risk of depression.
38
The rates of hospitalization range from 2.6% to 17%, and severe forms frequently require intensive care.36,40,41 People with comorbidities such as diabetes or other cardiovascular diseases are more vulnerable to hospitalization.
37
 Mortality is primarily seen in the case of severe disease complicated with neurological or cardiovascular complications, with reported case fatality ratios between 0.1% and 0.7%.
36
 However, a rare but serious outcome, Guillain-Barré syndrome, is reported in about 1.7 cases per 10,000 chikungunya infections.
41
 During the subacute phase, patients with diabetes had a seven fold increased risk of death (odds ratio: 7.7). Most deaths occurred during the acute phase (18 days post symptom onset) although median time from symptom onset to death was 12 days.
37
 In outbreaks, as occurred in the 2023 Brazilian epidemic, excess mortality was vastly underreported and the observed rates were 60 times higher than officially confirmed deaths.
42

Table 3 lists clinical manifestations of CHIKV by stage.36,38,41Table 3.Clinical manifestations by stage.StageTimeframeSymptomsPrevalence (%)Additional notesSourcesAcute0–14 daysHigh fever, severe arthralgia, myalgia, rash, headache88% arthralgia, 90% feverSevere symptoms may require hospitalization36, 38 and 41Subacute15 days to 90 days (3 months)Persistent arthralgia, worsening joint symptoms, fatiguePersistent symptoms in ~30%–40% patientsSymptoms reduce in intensity but persist in some casesChronic>90 days (3 months)Chronic arthritis, fatigue, depression, neurological disorders, stiffnessChronic symptoms in 44% patientsMay lead to significant long-term disability and reduced quality of lifeTherapeutic and preventive measures of chikungunyaSymptom alleviation is the focus of current management.43,44 Patients with acute pain are treated with paracetamol and opioids but non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are avoided to control bleeding rates.43,45 NSAIDs, corticosteroids or for severe cases disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) such as methotrexate, hydroxychloroquine are used for chronic arthritis.43,45,46 These DMARDs may be used for refractory conditions.
45
 Critical to the mobility is physiotherapy and analgesics.44,45There has been emerging research on antiviral treatments for chikungunya. One such candidate is sofosbuvir, a drug primarily used for hepatitis C. A study by Ferreria et al.
47
 demonstrated that sofosbuvir may inhibit CHIKV replication in vitro, suggesting that it could be a promising therapeutic approach for managing CHIKV infections in the future. Aceclofenac is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug that relieves pain and inflammation. During both acute and chronic phases, a short course of corticosteroids such as prednisolone will give relief from arthritis.45,48,49 Chronic arthritis is treated with methotrexate and hydroxychloroquine, though combined evidence shows improved results.49,50 Some experimental therapies include the combination of 2-fluoroadenine and metyrapone, which are also active antivirally in vitro.
51
 Limited utility has been demonstrated in isolated studies of the use of ribavirin and interferon-α.
49
 Treatment is supportive and follows a symptom based approach.FDA approved chikungunya vaccine VLA1553 with seroprotection of 96.8% over two years in phase III trials.52,53 It uses a live attenuated virus approach that leads to long lasting neutralizing antibody, with high efficacy.52,54 Other vaccine candidates, MV-CHIK and mRNA-based vaccines, are still under development.55,56 Because of the rapid advancement of the regulatory pathways, the clinical trials were conducted with immunological markers rather than conventional efficacy trials.57,58 We still lag behind in widespread access of vaccines to endemic regions.52,57Chikungunya can be prevented by common people by destroying Aedes mosquito breeding site, like stagnant water in drums, flowerpots, or drains28,59 Insect repellents containing DEET, picaridin, or oil of lemon eucalyptus, and wearing protective clothes, such as long sleeved shirts and pants, are advised.19,29 Window screens, mosquito nets, and cleaning the environment are known to greatly lower exposure.
19
 As suggested by WHO, community engagement in integrated vector management reinforces the effect of single efforts.34,59 In endemic regions, awareness campaigns and behavioral interventions are critical.9,29
Table 4 shows various CHIKV vaccines that are available or are under development.52,54,55Table 4.Chikungunya vaccine overview.Vaccine nameDeveloperTypePhase of developmentEfficacy/resultsSourcesVLA1553 (Valneva)Valneva Austria GmbHLive-attenuatedFDA Approved (2023)96.8% seroprotection over 2 years52MV-CHIKThemis BioscienceMeasles-vectoredPhase II Completed50%–95.9% seroconversion rates depending on dose55BBV87Bharat Biotech & IVIInactivatedPreclinical/phase IPreclinical stage; no human trial data54ChAdOx1 ChikUniversity of OxfordChAdOx1 vectorPhase IEarly trial results pendingPXVX0317Bavarian NordicVirus-like particle (VLP)Phase IInitial immunogenicity data promisingmRNA-1388ModernamRNA-basedPreclinicalUnder development, data not availablePrediction of chikungunya to cause global pandemicsCHIKV is a credible candidate for future global pandemic because of its high adaptability, genetic evolution, and ability to spread broadly. The repeated emergence of CHIKV in highly populated and globally linked parts of the world is illustrated by large-scale outbreaks in the Indian Ocean islands, India, and the Americas where more than 3.7 million cases have been reported since 2013.9,28 The virus has mutated critically, including the E1-A226V mutation, which increased its fitness in Aedes albopictus allowing for its spread in areas where Aedes aegypti was less frequent.23,24 Moreover, epidemiologically advantageous additional mutations, such as E2-L210Q, have increased its epidemic potential, allowing the virus to establish sustained human–mosquito transmission cycles.
24
 Its genomic plasticity and capacity to adapt to new ecological and vectorial niches emphasized the pandemic potential of CHIKV.9,21 In addition to the high attack rates, debilitating long-term symptoms and severe disease complications such as neurodevelopmental delay of neonates and chronic arthritis increase the public health burden.9,28 CHIKV geographical spread and local transmission are facilitated by a global distribution of Aedes vectors, along with climate change and urbanization.20,30 Rapid geographic expansion and persistence in many different environments are supported by surveillance data and phylogenetic studies.21,23 Hence, CHIKV meets the criteria of a potential candidate for “Disease X”: a disease that potentially can exploit an interconnected web of ecological, genetic, and social factors to cause global health crises.ConclusionCHIKV is a serious contender for its status as a future global health crisis as it has the remarkable capacity to adapt, spread, and survive in the different environments. Key mutations, most notably E1-A226V and E2-L210Q, have enabled it to be highly effective at infecting previously resistant mosquito species such as Aedes albopictus, which can now be found worldwide. Together with urbanization, climate change, and global travel, this adaptability has helped fuel huge outbreaks such as the more than 3.7 million cases in the Americas since 2013. Virus causes debilitating effects—chronic arthritis, severe complications in neonates, and prolonged illness—and with no widespread vaccines or effective treatments, it remains a major public health threat. Achieving control of CHIKV will need to take a new approach based on earlier detection and improved vector control strategies, along with equitable access to vaccines in the affected regions. The global “sync” that was developed to combat COVID is critical to avoid being overtaken by this adaptable virus that meets all the criteria for “Disease X,” which could utilize interconnected social, environmental, and biological factors to cause the next pandemic.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: JAPANESE ENCEPHALITIS VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: A mouse model of peripheral nerve injury induced by Japanese encephalitis virus

IntroductionJapanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a mosquito-borne, single-stranded positive-polarity RNA virus. Japanese encephalitis (JE), caused by JEV infection, is the major cause of viral encephalitis in East and Southeast Asia [1]. Approximately 68,000 people are infected with JEV each year [2], which is a considerable threat to public health in Asia.JE exhibits a broad spectrum of clinical manifestations ranging from non-specific acute febrile illness to a life-threatening acute encephalitis syndrome. In addition, some patients experience various signs of focal neurological deficits, such as Parkinson’s disease [3], polio-like flaccid paralysis [4–6], and cranial nerve damage [7]. Five genotypes of JEV have been identified and described as G I through G V [8,9]. In the past, the primary virus genotype that caused JE was G III. Recently, G I has gradually replaced G III as the predominant pathogenic genotype [10–12]. Alterations in the predominant genotype might be the underlying cause of the observed changes in the clinical characteristics. As seen with the JE epidemic in Ningxia province of China in 2018 [13], some patients developed symptoms similar to Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS), including flaccid limb paralysis and respiratory muscle paralysis. Additional studies confirmed that these patients were associated with JEV infection [14]. Sporadic clinical case reports have recently revealed an association between the two diseases [15]. However, to our knowledge, the mechanism of JEV-induced peripheral nerve injury (PNI) has not been investigated.A member of the flaviviridae family, JEV has strong neurotropic and neuroinvasive characteristics, similar to Zika, Dengue, and West Nile viruses [16]. Zika virus has been associated with GBS [17,18], and PNI has been reported to be associated with Dengue virus [19,20] and West Nile virus [21,22]. Since JEV shares a similar genomic structure with other flaviviruss, it might also cause peripheral neuropathy and GBS.Currently, there is no specific and effective therapy for JEV infections. Due to the diverse clinical manifestations induced by JEV infection and the current difficulties in treatment, finding a more effective approach to treatment has become urgent. JEV infection can be prevented through vaccination, and existing vaccines are based on the G III virus. However, the observation that G I and re-epidemic G V are gradually replacing G III has raised concerns about the effectiveness of the vaccine [23,24].We know that in vivo experiments in animal disease models are essential for viral pathogenesis studies. Different animal models for JE have been established and widely used in biological research. However, an animal model of JEV-induced PNI has not been reported. Over the past decades, considerable research has been conducted on JE and PNI. However, it has yet to be reported how JEV induces PNI. Hence, it is urgent to establish efficient animal models to study the pathogenesis. To this end, we developed a successful JEV-induced PNI mouse model utilizing a range of validated experimental methods.Materials and methodsAnimals and ethics approvalSixty-eight male SPF-grade C57BL/6 mice aged 4 to 6 weeks were purchased from Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co., Ltd., and housed in the Laboratory Animal Facility at the Chinese Center for Disease Prevention and Control (China CDC). The mice were raised at standard room temperature with a 12 h alternating light/dark cycle, and food and water were freely available. All animal experiments were approved by the Ethics Committee of the National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention of the Chinese Center for Disease Prevention and Control (20201110064 and 20210429031) and carried out in strict accordance with the requirements of the ethics committee. All animal experiments were conducted under bio-safety level-2 (BSL-2).VirusThe NX1889 strain of JEV was used in this study, which was a strain from Ningxia, that was isolated from a patient’s cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Following the protocol described in one of our previous reports [14], the virus was propagated using C6/36 cells and Vero BHK-21 cells.Animal behaviorAll mice were randomly divided into two groups: a control group (n = 18) and a virus-exposed group (n = 50). The initial body weight of each mouse was determined. Mice exposed to the virus were injected subcutaneously with JEV (105 pfu, 50 μl per mouse). Mice in the control group received an equivalent volume of PBS. All mice were observed daily and assessed for glossiness of the hair, activity level, and the presence of limb paralysis [25,26]. The mouse weights were recorded daily, and each mouse was evaluated based on the virus paralysis scale (VPS) and the hanging wire test. The 15-day period was separated into four phases: 1 day post injection (dpi)-4 dpi, 5 dpi-8 dpi, 9 dpi-12 dpi, and13 dpi-15 dpi. Some mice in each group were selected for follow-up experiments on days 4, 8, 12, and 15. Mice were euthanized when their VPS score was greater than 4 points, their body weight decreased by more than 1 g, and they appeared extremely weak. Based on these criteria, some mice were euthanized prior to the designated time for the conclusion of the experiment. They will be assigned to the phase where they reside on. The bilateral sciatic nerves and brains were obtained from each mouse.Viral paralysis scale (VPS)A sensitive method was used to analyze the signs of tail and limb paralysis in mice [27]. Each mouse was placed on a table and allowed to walk freely for several minutes. The researchers scored the limb function according to the seven points of the scoring method detailed in Table 1. The score was based on four main aspects: tail position during walking, miss-step severity [28], weight-bearing, and joint movement. The severity of miss-steps was scored only in mice that could walk adequately, which was defined as a mouse that could travel three body lengths at a constant speed without turning [29].10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.t001Table 1Viral paralysis scale [27].ScoreDescriptionPerformance0NormalNormal, weight-bearing, plantar steppinga with tail up during walking passesb1Onset of symptomsTail position:Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Weight-bearing, plantar stepping with mild rotationMay be down or not fully upFoot rotated on take-off or landingWobble is present indicating weakness2Mild paresis:Tail position:Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Joint movement:Mild miss-steps (but able to bear weight)DownMild, toe-curling/dragging on the ground, foot slightly skids medially or laterallyA limp may be present indicating weaknessMay appear stiffer3Moderate paresis Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Joint movement:Moderate miss-steps (but able to bear weight)Obvious foot curling/dragging on ground foot obviously skids medially or laterallyLimb is obviously weakMay appear stiffer4Severe paresis Miss-step:Weight-bearing:Joint movement:Severe miss-steps (not bearing much weight)Limb mostly drags behind, medially or laterallyNot much, but limb still used to aid forward motionObviously decreased5ParalysisMiss-step:Weight bearing:Joint movement:No weight-bearing steps, slight joint movementNo stepping, limb only dragsNoneSlight6Complete paralysisJoint movement:No weight bearing step, no joint movementNonea Plantar stepping: Paw is placed flat on the ground during stepping. The foot does not curl or skid to one side, and the toes/feet do not curl or drag at any pointb Walking pass: The animal moves three body lengths at a consistent speed and without turningHanging wire testA transparent box was constructed with a height of 50 cm, a bottom, and an open top. The bottom was covered with a cotton cloth to prevent mice from being hurt when they fell. The top was covered with a 45 cm long and 30 cm wide wire mesh frame. The wire diameter of the grid was approximately 2 mm, and the area of the grid squares was 1 × 1 cm. The wire mesh frame just covered the top of the box. Each mouse was initially placed on the wire mesh frame and allowed to move freely. Then the frame was turned over (180°) and placed on the top of the box to observe the time the mouse stayed on the wire mesh frame [30,31]. The maximum time was 180 s, and remaining on the wire mesh frame for 180 s was considered normal. If the mouse fell during this period, the time to falling was recorded. The experiment was carried out three times, with an interval of 2 min between each experiment.The average time for the three repeated experiments was recorded [29]. After the trial, each mouse was returned to its cage.ElectromyographyElectromyography (NDI-094 Shanghai Haishen), which is used to diagnose human peripheral neuropathy was utilized to detect the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) of the mouse sciatic nerve. Briefly, each mouse was anesthetized with an intraperitoneal injection of 10% chloral hydrate. After anesthesia, the mice were fixed on the surgical platform in the prone position, and the bilateral sciatic nerves were passively separated. A ground wire was fixed to the skin on the back of the mouse to eliminate possible interference. A recording bipolar needle electrode was inserted into the belly of the gastrocnemius muscle of one hindlimb. Then the stimulating electrode was placed sequentially in the proximal and sciatic nerve notch [32,33]. At the beginning of stimulation, the current was increased manually, starting from 0.1 mA and increasing progressively until a maximum amplitude was produced [34]. The observed waveform was recorded, and the distance between the two stimulation points of the sciatic nerve was measured and recorded. The amplitude, end latency, and conduction velocity of the sciatic nerves were obtained for each mouse tested [35].ImmunofluorescenceUnder anesthesia, one sciatic nerve and the mouse brains were removed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. The fixed tissues were paraffin-embedded and sectioned. The sections were deparaffinized and placed in EDTA buffer (pH 8.0) for antigen retrieval. After cooling to room temperature, the sections were quenched with an autofluorescence. Non-specific binding was blocked by incubating the sections in bovine serum albumin (BSA) for 30 minutes. Then the sections were incubated with the corresponding primary antibodies overnight at 4°C. The primary antibodies included rabbit anti-MBP monoclonal antibody 1:5,000 (Abcam, UK, ab21801), rabbit anti-NF-H monoclonal antibody 1:5,000 (Abcam, UK, ab207176) [36], and mouse anti-Japanese encephalitis virus E glycoprotein monoclonal antibody 1:50 (Abcam, UK, ab41671). The next day, the primary antibody solution was removed, and secondary antibodies were added, including Alexa Fluor-488 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Servicebio, Wuhan, China, GB25303, green), Cy3 goat anti-rabbit IgG (Servicebio, Wuhan, China, GB21303, red), and Cy3 goat anti-mouse IgG (Servicebio, Wuhan, China, GB21301, red). Sections were incubated with fluorescent secondary antibodies for 50 min at room temperature. Then, nuclei were stained with DAPI for 10 min. Finally, the sections were coverslipped and sealed with an anti-fluorescence quenching sealing agent and observed under a fluorescence microscope (Nikon eclipse C1). Images were collected (Nikon da-u3), and Image J 180 software was utilized to measure the fluorescence levels. The average fluorescence intensity was calculated by dividing the total fluorescence intensity by the total fluorescent area of the cells.Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)One sciatic nerve of each mouse was placed in an electron microscopy fixation solution at 4°C for 2 to 4 hours. After rinsing in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB) (pH 7.4), the tissues were postfixed with 1% osmic acid (OsO4) in 0.1 M PB for 2 h at room temperature. After dehydration and embedding, ultrathin sections were obtained and observed using a transmission electron microscope (HITACHI HT 7700) for image acquisition and analysis [37,38].Western blot analysisSciatic nerve tissues were ground in cold lysis buffer. After incubation on ice for 30 min, the proteins were recovered by centrifugation at 12,000g at 4°C for 10 min. Total proteins was quantified using the BCA method. Then proteins were denatured and separated by SDS-PAGE. A protein marker was added for molecular labeling. Tissues obtained from mice injected with PBS were used as the control. Proteins were separated by electrophoresis and transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were blocked in a solution of 5% non-fat milk, then incubated with primary antibodies, including rabbit anti-JEV-E polygonal antibody 1:10,000 (Hsinchu Taiwan, Taiwan, China, GTX125867), rabbit anti-MBP monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab218011), rabbit anti-NF-H monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab207176); rabbit anti-IL-1β monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab283818), rabbit anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab229381), and rabbit anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody 1:1,000 (Abcam, UK, ab183218), at 4°C overnight. Subsequently, the membranes were incubated with corresponding secondary antibodies, goat anti-rabbit IgG 1:10,000 (Absin, China, abs20040ss). The gels were imaged using a Bio-Rad Gel Doc XR imager. The membranes were subjected to densitometry using Image J 180 software. GAPDH (1:10,000) served as an internal control, and the experiment was repeated three times.Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stainingAfter anesthesia, the mice were perfused with PBS followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. The fixed brains were removed from the skull, embedded in paraffin, using standard protocols, sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE).StatisticsData analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 (GraphPad Prism software, La Jolla, CA, USA). All measured data were expressed as means ± standard deviation. Comparisons between the two groups were assessed using the Normality and Levene tests. If the data were determined to have a normal distribution, the t-test was used. If the data failed to pass the Levene test, the Welch t-test was used. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used for non-normal data. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare multiple groups after applying the Normality and Levene tests. The Kruskal-Wallis H test was used on data that were not normally distributed. The Dunnett t-test was used for multiple comparisons between multiple groups. A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The degree of difference was expressed as *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and ****p < 0.0001.ResultsMice inoculated with the virus exhibited signs of neurological diseaseTo determine the optimal volume of virus inoculation and the optimal times for disease assessment, we exposed mice to five different virus titers (102pfu, 103pfu, 104pfu, 105pfu, and 106pfu) and evaluated the inoculated mice for 20 days. Mice treated with PBS were used as controls (n = 5). Each titer was injected into five mice (n = 5). All mice inoculated with JEV were designated as the virus group (n = 25). We discovered that mice exhibited limb paralysis and general weakness in each virus titer group. The VPS scores for each titer are shown in S1A Fig. We found that the disease severity did not directly correlate with the viral titer. Furthermore, the mice that received 104pfu (p = 0.0345) and 105pfu (p = 0.0268) presented significant advantages when evaluated. From 1 dpi to 5 dpi, the VPS of the virus group exhibited scores of 0 to 2 points. From 6 dpi to 15 dpi, the scores were between 0 to 5 points, and after 15 dpi, the scores of the virus group were between 0 to 1 point (S1B Fig). These results indicated that some symptoms, such as limb paralysis and frailty, were more severe prior to 15 dpi. On the other hand, when the body weight changes were compared between the virus and control groups, we found that there was no significant difference between the two groups prior to 5 dpi. From 5 dpi to 15 dpi, the changes in body weight between the two groups became more pronounced, indicating that the body weight of the mice in the virus group increased more slowly than in the control group. After 15 dpi, the body weights of the mice in the virus group increased more rapidly (S2 Fig). These results suggested that the mice appeared to be recovering after 15dpi. Based on this information, the virus titer used in the experiment was 105pfu, the observation period was 15 days, and the time intervals were 4 dpi, 8 dpi, 12 dpi, and 15 dpi.Behavioral changes in mice were easy to observe and could be used as an initial assessment to determine whether mice were ill. Based on daily observations of the general condition of the mice, we determined that the mice in the control group presented a shiny hair coat, were active, moved freely with a steady gait, and ran quickly. However, the mice in the virus-exposed group exhibited different degrees of rough hair coats, weakness, and reduced activity. Some exposed mice also exhibited a hunched back, body tremors, limping on one or both hind limbs, and a weakened forelimb grip [39].Body weight also was a good indicator of animal health [40]. The body weights of both mouse groups were recorded daily. Viral infection can lead to decreased appetite and weight loss in mice. The body weights were expressed as means ± standard deviation. We observed that mice in both groups gained weight. However, the weights of mice in the control group increased steadily, from 20.84g ± 1.07g at the beginning of the study to 22.58g ± 1.00g at the end of the investigation. The weights of the virus-exposed mice increased more slowly, with an initial weight of 20.69g ± 1.27g and a weight of 21.66g ± 0.38g at the end of the investigation, which was approximately 1g less than in the control group. Some mice exhibited significant weight loss following virus exposure. However, before 4 dpi, no significant difference in weight was observed between the two groups. While the mean body weight in the virus group was lower than the control group from 4 dpi to 8 dpi, both groups exhibited increased body weights. The mean body weight in the control group increased significantly after 8 dpi, but only a minimal increase or even a decrease in body weight was observed in the virus-exposed mice. The increase in body weight in the virus-exposed mice improved after 12dpi (Fig 1A).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g001Fig 1Behavioral changes of mice at different time.(A) Body weight change of the mice at different time; (B) VPS scores at different time. Kruskal-Wallis H test was used (****p< 0.0001); (C) Hanging wire test at different time. Kruskal-Wallis H test was applied for statistical analysis (**p = 0.005).In addition to observing the general condition of the mice, motor function was evaluated. Based on the viral paralysis scale (VPS), the mice in the control group (n = 18) did not exhibit any stiffness or paralysis of their limbs and received a score of 0 (normal). Virus-exposed mice exhibited progressively slower movements, tail dragging, stiff joints [40], lameness while walking, and an inability to perform normal plantar stepping. In some cases, the virus-exposed mice were unable to support their weight. The VPS ranged from 0 to 6 points. A score of ≤ 2 points indicated no apparent limb paralysis. A score of 3 to 6 points indicated the presence of limb paralysis. An increasing score indicated that the degree of paralysis increased in severity [29]. Compared to the control group at 4 dpi, the VPS of mice in the virus group was ≤ 1 point (n = 7, p > 0.9999). Three mice were scored as 0-points (3/7), and four received a score of 1-point (4/7). A lower tail position and a slight sway in their gait when the mice walked were observed. Starting at 8 dpi (n = 15, ***p = 0.0006), the number of mice with VPS between 3 to 6 points increased. Of the 15 mice that were scored, 4/15 were 0-points, 4/15 were 1-point, 1/15 were 2-points, 2/15 were 3-points, 1/15 were 5-points), and 1/15 were 6-points. Considerable limb paralysis was observed at this stage, including joint stiffness, significant weakness, limb dragging, reduced joint activity, and inability to bear weight. The VPS was between 0 to 5 points at 12 dpi (n = 14, ****p < 0.0001) and 1 to 2 points at 15 dpi (n = 14, ***p = 0.0002). The VPS assessments of 14 mice at 12 dpi were 1/14 as 0-points, 1/14 as 1-point, 3/14 as 2-points, 4/14 as 3-points, 2/14 as 4-points, and 3/14 as 5-points. At 15 dpi the scores were 4/14 as 1-point and 10/14 as 2-points (Fig 1B).We conducted a hanging wire test, which was supplementary to the VPS assessment, to eliminate subjective bias. The motor function of the mouse limbs was assessed by recording the time each mouse was able to suspend its body on an inverted wire mesh. This test assessed the strength of their limbs, which was essential to keep them from falling. Mice in the control group exhibited a robust ability to grasp the wire mesh and were able to move continuously on the upside-down wire mesh frame without falling. The suspension time for the control mice reached even exceeded 180s. Numerous mice in the virus-exposed group fell more than once. The mice barely moved when hanging from the wire mesh and primarily stayed in one place. The lack of movement while suspended on the wire mesh might have helped maintain their limb strength to avoid falling. At 4 dpi (p > 0.9999), only one mouse fell once in the virus group and returned to normal when the experiment was repeated. On the other hand, starting at 8 dpi (*p = 0.0109), additional mice in the virus-exposed group fell one or more times. Some mice who fell on the first trial, occasionally stayed suspended on the wire mesh for 180s in the second or third trial of the day, but most mice fell all three times. Eight of 15 mice in the virus group spent less than 180s suspended on the wire mesh. At 12 dpi, the time the virus-exposed mice were able to suspend their bodies from the wire mesh also was significantly shorter (*p = 0.0283). Six of 14 mice fell and the time they remained suspended was less than 80s. At 15 dpi (p >0.9999), the amount of time the virus-exposed mice remained suspended on the wire mesh was longer than the average time observed at 12 dpi, and fewer mice fell (4/14) (Fig 1C).The VPS and hanging wire test results indicated that, although the virus-exposed mice exhibited considerable limb paralysis (VPS ≥ 3), many mice did not exhibit a significantly shorter time during which they were able to suspend their bodies during the hanging wire test. This may be because mice also presented symptoms such as weakness and reduced activity, which increased the VPS score. However, these factors did not significantly influence the outcome of the hanging wire test. It was consistent that symptoms exhibited by the virus-exposed mice were most prominent from 8 dpi to 12 dpi, indicating that the virus-exposed mice presented considerable limb weakness during this period. After 12 dpi, mice with a score less than 3 points did not exhibit any discernable limb weakness, and the number of mice whose scores were between 1 and 2 points increased. Furthermore, the virus-exposed mice had sufficient limb strength to allow them to remain suspended from the wire mesh. Accordingly, there was no apparent reduction in the time the mice remained suspended during the hanging wire test.Abnormal CMAP of sciatic nerves in virus-exposed miceDue to overlapping symptoms, it is often impossible to distinguish lesions of the central and peripheral nervous systems based only on behavioral observations. Electromyography (EMG) is an important assessment modality for the diagnosis of peripheral nerve diseases. It can identify various types of PNI at an early stage. We focused on the motor function of the sciatic nerve in this study and used EMGs to obtain the CMAP of mice at 4, 8, 12, and 15 dpi. The conduction function of motor nerves was determined based on analysis of the amplitude, end latency, and conduction velocity of the action potentials. We observed small differences in the results obtained with the sciatic nerves on both sides of the mice, but the differences did not reach statistical significance, which was similar to humans. These differences also were observed in the control mice, and the amplitude of the right side was typically slightly higher than the left side. Many factors can cause changes in waveforms [41]. Consequently, we only compared the results obtained on right side. The amplitude of the sciatic nerves in the virus group (n = 45) was lower than in the control group (n = 12), but the differences were relatively small from 4 dpi (n = 5, p >0.9999) to 8 dpi (n = 12, p >0.9999). The amplitude significantly decreased at 12 dpi (n = 14, *p = 0.0326) and 15 dpi (n = 14, *p = 0.0446) (Fig 2A). The latency of the sciatic nerves was not significantly prolonged (p = 0.1136). A prolonged latency was observed at some time points, but the differences were not statistically significant (Fig 2B). The conduction velocity of the sciatic nerves in the virus-exposed mice was significantly decreased at 4 dpi. The decrease was even more pronounced over time, but improved at 15 dpi (****p < 0.0001), although the differences between groups were not significant (Fig 2C). The conduction velocity, which reflected the function of the motor nerve myelin sheath, was significantly decreased in the early stage after virus exposure. In contrast, the amplitude, which represented axon function, decreased significantly only in the moderate-to-advanced stages. These results suggested that JEV infection primarily led to demyelination of the mouse sciatic nerves in the early period and mild axonal lesions appeared later.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g002Fig 2CMAP assessment of the sciatic nerve in mice.(A) Amplitude. Kruskal-Wallis H test was used (*P = 0.0173); (B) End latency. One-way ANOVA was used (P = 0.0903); (C) Conduction velocity. Statistical analysis by one-way ANOVA (****P < 0.0001).Reduction in fluorescence intensity of myelin sheaths and axons of the sciatic nerve occurred at different time pointsMyelin sheaths and axons were labeled with red and green fluorescent proteins, respectively, to understand the corresponding lesions, and the mean fluorescence intensities (MFI) were compared (Fig 3A). The MFI of MBP, a myelin-specific protein, was 157.75 ± 33.86, and NF-H, an axon-specific protein, was 94.78 ± 12.01 in the control group (n = 5). Compared with the control group, the MFI of MBP in the virus-exposed mice decreased significantly at 4 dpi (n = 3, *p = 0.0354). The expression continued to decline from 4 dpi to 12 dpi (8 dpi, n = 5, **p = 0.0066; 12 dpi, n = 6, ***p = 0.0009). However, the MBP expression was elevated at 15 dpi (n = 6, **p = 0.0433) compared with 12 dpi (Fig 3B). Although the NF-H expression levels appeared reduced from 4 dpi to 12 dpi (4 dpi, p = 0.3927; 8 dpi, p = 0.1369; 12 dpi, p = 0.4061) in the virus-exposed mice, the differences were not statistically significant. Only at 15 dpi (*p = 0.0455), the expression of NF-H was significantly decreased in the virus group compared to the control group (Fig 3C). This result indicated that myelin sheath lesions appeared in the early stage of the disease and the axonal damage appeared later in the disease.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g003Fig 3Immunofluorescence of mouse sciatic nerve at different time.One-way ANOVA was used. (A) The sciatic nerve tissue was double stained with MBP + NF-H and labeled with fluorescence. MBP was labeled in red and NF-H in green. Nuclei are stained DAPI (blue); (B) MFI of MBP (**P = 0.0015); (C) MFI of NF-H (P = 0.0666).The ultrastructure alterations of myelin and axons in the sciatic nerves appeared at different timeTEM was used to observe the pathological changes in the nerve tissue, which was a more intuitive analysis method. The sciatic nerves exhibited a complete myelin sheath (MS) around the axons in the control group. The myelin sheaths were tight, the structure of the axons (A) was intact, and no atrophy and degeneration were observed. Compared with the control group, the sciatic nerve of mice in the virus group exhibited considerable myelin swelling, looseness, and even dysmyelination beginning at 4 dpi. The nerves also exhibited Schwann cell (SC) and mitochondrial (M) edema, and reduced numbers of organelles. Unmyelinated fibers (NMN) were abundant. From 8 dpi to 12 dpi, the myelin lesions were increased and the numbers of non-myelinated nerve fibers were reduced. However, no axon lesions were observed at this stage. At 15 dpi, dysmyelination was still present, and some axons showed atrophy and degeneration (Fig 4). The number of non-myelinated nerve fibers was significantly higher than before. These results suggested that demyelination occurred early in the mouse sciatic nerve after JEV infection, but minor axonal degeneration only during the later phases.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g004Fig 4Ultrastructural of sciatic nerve of mice at different time.(A) 2000 × Magnification; (B) 5000 × Magnification. Magnified image of the arrowhead in (A). (MF) Myelinated nerve fiber, (NMN) Nonmyelinated nerve, (MS) myelin sheath, (A) axon, (SC) Schwann cells, (M) mitochondria, (RER) Endoplasmic reticulum structure.Western blot analysis of protein expression in mouse sciatic nervesThe presence and timing of myelin sheath and axonal damage following viral exposure were confirmed by assessing myelin and axon-specific protein expression in sciatic nerves using Western blots. We also detected the expression of the JEV-E protein with the same method (Fig 5A). Each experiment was repeated three times (n = 3), and the data were normalized by the control. Due to the small amount of protein obtained from a single nerve, nerves from five or six mice per group were pooled for each sample. Mice injected with PBS were used as the control. The relative JEV-E protein relative expression was significantly increased at 4 dpi (****p<0.0001) and progressively increased over time (8 dpi and 12 dpi, ****p<0.0001), but was slightly decreased at 15 dpi (****p<0.0001) (Fig 5B). The relative expression of MBP, which indicated fragment formation after myelin disintegration [42], increased from 4 dpi to 15 dpi (****p<0.0001). Numerous myelin fragments were evident in the early stage of the disease, indicating considerable myelin disintegration and loss. These changes were most apparent at 12 dpi and reduced at 15 dpi. This might be due to the large number of myelin fragments engulfed by macrophages at this stage [43] (Fig 5C). A decrease in NF-H expression was first observed at 15 dpi (*p = 0.0111), indicating that mild axonal damage appeared late in the disease course (Fig 5D).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g005Fig 5Western blot analysis of related protein expression levels.Statistical analysis by one-way ANOVA. (A) The protein expression was detected by Western blot. Using GAPDH as the reference, the changes of relative expression of different proteins at different time were compared. (B) Relative expression of JEV-E protein at different time; (C) Relative expression of MBP protein at different time; (D) Relative expression of NF-H protein at different time.These results revealed that C57BL/6 mice infected with JEV exhibited primary demyelination with subsequent mild axonal injury. However, we did not know whether the viral infection injured the nerves directly. Thus, in a follow-up experiment, we conducted a proteomic analysis and confirmed that confirmed that the demyelination was caused by an immune response [44]. Several inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α were identified using Western blots (Fig 6A). The expression of these three cytokines was significantly elevated in the virus group compared with the control group (**p = 0.0029, **p = 0.0061, ***p = 0.0003) (Fig 6B–6D). This result indicated that inflammatory injury occurred in the sciatic nerves.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g006Fig 6Western blot analysis of Inflammatory cytokines expression levels.(A) Inflammatory cytokines were determined by Western blot; (B) Relative expression of IL-1β between two groups; (C) Relative expression of IL-6 between two groups; (D) Relative expression of TNF-α between two groups.Mice exhibited inflammation in the brain after JEV infectionJEV tends to infect the brain leading to central nervous system (CNS) lesions, which also can result in limb paralysis. Therefore, we investigated the brains of the mice in this experiment. Three mice with apparent symptoms from the virus-exposed group were evaluated at each time point. Typically, the cerebral cortex is one of the earliest sites infected by JEV [45]. JEV-E protein localization was detected by immunofluorescence. The negative controls (n = 3) did not exhibit any fluorescent staining in their brains (Fig 7A and 7F), but mice developed extensive virus infection in their brains from 4 dpi to 15 dpi (Fig 7B–7E). JEV-E-positive cells were concentrated in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex, with a small number of virus-positive cells present in the white matter. The fluorescein staining for JEV-E did not decrease over time (Fig 7G–7J).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g007Fig 7Brain infection were demonstrated by Immunofluorescence.A-J: Immunofluorescence analysis of JEV-E protein of mice brains. A through E (Magnification 3x) and F through J(Magnification 30x). A and F: control group. B through E and G through J: The virus group covered different stages.HE staining was used to observe the inflammatory reactions of the brains (n = 3 for all groups). The brain tissues in the control mice displayed normal cellular architecture and no apparent inflammation (Fig 8A and 8F). Although infection in the brains was observed at 4 dpi, no significant signs of inflammation were present (Fig 8B and 8G). At 8 dpi, slight perivascular cuffing was observed (Fig 8C and 8H). This observation was particularly pronounced from 12 dpi to 15 dpi. Infiltration of inflammatory cells, with numerous lymphocytes surrounding blood vessels, was observed. Necrotic lesions and glial nodules also were present (Fig 8D, 8E, 8I and 8J). HE staining revealed that the inflammatory lesions primarily occurred in the thalamus. Although viral-positive cells were mainly found in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, inflammatory lesions were observed in the cerebral cortex only at 15 dpi. These results indicated that inflammatory response gradually increased in the late stage even though the viral infection of the brain was present at the early stage.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010961.g008Fig 8Inflammatory were demonstrated by HE staining of the brains.A through J:HE staining of mice brains. A through E (Magnification 40x) and F through J(Magnification 80x); A and F: control group. B through E and G through J: The virus group covered different stages. No inflammatory cells infiltrated around the vessels (Yellow arrows in A and B); perivascular cuffing (Yellow arrows in C through E); necrosis lesions and glial nodules (Yellow arrows in I and J).DiscussionAcute encephalitis syndrome induced by JEV infection is a disease that severely threatens human health in Asia due to the high rates of mortality and disability that are observed [10]. Survivors may develop permanent mental and neurological dysfunction [46,47]. However, the PNI induced by JEV appears to be a new clinical feature or has been overlooked previously.In this study, after mice were inoculated with JEV, they exhibited a range of symptoms, including weakness, reduced activity, rough hair coat, a hunched back, and body tremors, which were consistent with CNS damage [25,39]. The histological analysis of HE-stained brain sections confirmed these observations. Our experimental findings revealed an inflammatory response in the mouse brains at 8 dpi after JEV inoculation, and the extent of the inflammatory response in the brains gradually increased from 8 dpi to 15 dpi. Limb paralysis was documented in the virus-exposed mice based on the assessment of paralysis and the hanging wire test. These symptoms were most severe at 8–12 dpi, but there was some recovery at 15 dpi. The CNS injury might also exhibit a similar progression, but the time course of the symptom appearance did not support that possibility. Even when the symptoms exhibited by the mice improved, the viral load and the inflammatory response in the brain did not decrease. We performed EMGs to obtain a more accurate determination of whether the limb paralysis was associated with PNI. EMGs are a more accurate method for diagnosing human peripheral neuropathy. Based on the EMG results, we determined that the sciatic nerve conduction velocity in the virus-exposed mice decreased significantly early in the disease, which indicated myelin function, but the latency was not prolonged significantly. Although most mice did not exhibit typical clinical manifestations at this early stage, the decreased nerve conduction velocity demonstrated that demyelination occurred. The amplitude only decreased in the late stage of the disease, indicating that the axon lesions appeared later and might be secondary effects. Myelin sheaths are essential for axons because they provide nutritional support and protection [48]. In addition, infection of motor neurons also can result in axonal degeneration, but we did not investigate this question. However, the EMG results supported our findings. Nerve conduction in both ends of the sciatic nerves was measured using EMG, which reflected the degree of neuropathy in the nerve and allowed the exclusion of motor neuron lesions.We observed the pathological changes in the sciatic nerves by immunofluorescence and TEM. The observed pathology confirmed that demyelination occurred in the early stage and axonal degeneration occurred only in the later stage of the disease. The MFI of MBP was significantly decreased at the early stage and was minimal at 12 dpi. However, the MFI was slightly increased at 15 dpi. The MFI of NF-H was reduced only at 15 dpi. These results were generally in agreement with the EMG results. The amplitude of sciatic nerve was reduced starting at 12 dpi, which was slightly different from the results obtained with immunofluorescence. This might indicate that dysfunction often occurs before the appearance of pathological changes. Similar results were observed with TEM. We did not find re-myelination of the injured nerve using TEM. The Western blot results suggested the reason for this observation. The MBP expression reflected the formation of myelin fragments after demyelination, and the expression significantly increased in the early stage after virus infection and decreased at 15 dpi. However, the NF-H expression decreased only in the later stage of the disease. Clearance of myelin debris by phagocytes is a critical step in the re-myelination process [49,50], but we were not able to obtain information documenting the phagocytosis of myelin debris by TEM. However, the reduced expression of MBP at 15 dpi suggested that the amount of myelin debris was reduced. The JEV infection became more pronounced from 4 dpi to 12 dpi in nerves that were infected by the virus but decreased slightly at 15 dpi. Currently, we cannot fully determine whether the virus infection directly caused the lesions. However, a subsequent proteomics study indicated that the lesions resulted from tissue damage caused by immune responses [44].We discovered that JEV could cause peripheral nerve dysfunction in addition to CNS disorders such as encephalitis. The peripheral neuropathy primarily presented as inflammatory demyelination that appeared early in the disease. Axonal lesions took place in the later stage of the disease, which might have resulted from inadequate neurotrophic factors and protection that myelin provided. This result was consistent with the AIDP subtype in GBS [51]. Although axon degeneration occurred, the mice recovered from paralysis in the late stage because the degree of axonal lesions was not severe at this stage. When phagocytes cleared the myelin debris, re-myelination was possible, which was essential for functional recovery after a demyelinating injury. Thus, symptomatic recovery took place in the virus-infected mice.When flaviviruses invade host cells, the immune response is activated rapidly and triggers inflammation to enable the host defense [52]. This was verified in our subsequent experiment. Using a proteomics analysis, we found that substantial virus-induced immune response-related proteins were up-regulated [44]. The expression of inflammatory cytokines in the sciatic nerve, such as IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α, was detected. These inflammatory factors were significantly increased during the JEV infection. It is well known that excessive immune responses can cause tissue damage and harm the host. No mice died in our study, which might have occurred for several reasons: 1) We used C57BL/6 mice, which have a robust immune system [39], allowing them to generate an adequate immune response to clear or reduce the viral load. Numerous studies have utilized A129 or AG129 mice with the interferon receptor knocked out. This protocol improves the viral infection rate but also enhances mortality [53]. 2) We selected subcutaneous viral administration. Many JE studies used intra-cranial injection, which can quickly break through the blood-brain barrier and cause encephalitis [54]. However, we used a subcutaneous route of administration since our study was primarily focused on the peripheral nervous system rather than the CNS. 3) It was necessary to conduct the EMGs in live animals. When mice became very weak, exhibited a significant reduction in body weight, and the VPS was≥4 points, they were euthanized after EMG assessment. Therefore, fatalities due to the disease process were not observed. Approximately one-third of the virus-exposed mice did not exhibit any apparent symptoms or the symptoms were only mild. Because our research focused on PNI, which could develop into chronic disease sequelae or appear at a later stage, it was necessary that the mice exhibit a low mortality rate to identify peripheral neuropathy.It has been reported that JEV can induce or regulate the immune reactions that result in CNS inflammatory demyelination [55]. Despite having diverse glial cell, the CNS and the peripheral nervous system appeared to display similar types of lesions after JEV infection. This observation provides an important direction for future study.Our study confirmed that JEV caused not only CNS injury but also PNI that led to limb paralysis. This was the first demonstration that PNI could be caused by JEV infection in mice. JEV can induce immune responses in the host, leading to inflammatory demyelinating peripheral neuropathy. Our research developed a reliable animal model, which is necessary to further explore the mechanism of JEV-induced PNI.Supporting informationS1 FigBehavioral comparison of mice in different virus titer groups.(A) The VPS scores for each group, Kruskal-Wallis H test was used (*p = 0.0233); (B) The VPS scores of the two groups at different time points. Kruskal-Wallis H test was used. (**p = 0.0033).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigBody weight mean of two goups at different time.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 DataExcel spreadsheet containing, in separate sheets, the underlying numerical data for Figure panels 1A, 1B, 1C, 2A, 2B, 2C, 3B, 3C, 5B, 5C, 5D, 6B, 6C, 6D.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S2 DataExcel spreadsheet containing, in separate sheets, the underlying numerical data for supporting Figure panels S1A, S1B, S2.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: CX

IntroductionJapanese encephalitis (JE) is an uncontrolled inflammatory disease of the central nervous system (CNS) resulting from the infection by the neurotropic flavivirus, JE virus (JEV). JEV consists of a single stranded positive sense RNA (ssRNA+) encoding for 3 structural proteins (capsid protein (C), precursor to membrane protein (prM) and envelop protein (E)) and 7 non-structural proteins (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5)1. Phylogenetic studies on prM suggest the presence of 5 genotypes for JEV1. JEV is transmitted by mosquito vectors in a zoonotic cycle including pig as amplifiers and water bird as reservoir hosts2. Humans are accidental dead-end hosts because of low viremia that does not allow further virus transmission1. In regions at risks, JE has an annual incidence of 70,000 symptomatic cases with 25–30% of mortality rate and 50% of survivors having life-treating neurological problems3,4. JEV is endemic in northern regions and epidemic in southern regions of the Asia-Pacific5. However, the detection of JEV in Europe6,7 and Africa8, the presence of competent vectors for JEV in Germany9 as well as the ability of JEV to persist and transmit between pigs in the absence of mosquitos10 are increasing risks for virus spread and persistence in regions with more moderate climate. Therefore, JE may become a worldwide health concern despite the establishment of efficient vaccines and vaccination programs3.By a still unknown mechanism, JEV enters into the brain and targets neuronal cells with a specific tropism for developing neurons11. In particular, areas of neuronal turn-over, including the thalamus, the brainstem and the hippocampus, are the main brain regions of JEV–infected neurons found in brain autopsy studies of fatal JE patients12. In the CNS, microglial cells are a unique resident immune cell population able to migrate, phagocyte and present antigen upon insults13,14. Microglia develop during early development of the foetus, but can also derive from blood monocytes after birth under specific conditions15. In the JEV context, human microglia do not release infectious virus particles, but sustain viral RNA during a long period after virus exposure. However, microglia-associated virus remains infectious to susceptible cells under cell-to-cell contact conditions, allowing virus recovery16. Actually, microglia are proposed to play a possible role in long-lasting infection17.Chemokines have potent chemotactic activities leading to the attraction or repulsion of specific cell types in various body compartments. In the CNS, the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis mediates the cross-communication between CX3CR1-expressing microglia and CX3CL1-expressing neurons18. In the CNS, CX3CR1-CX3CL1 maintains homeostasis and regulates inflammatory responses in compromised brain tissues19. Nevertheless, CX3CR1-CX3CL1 is protective in herpes simplex virus infection20 whereas it is detrimental in Theiler’s encephalomyelitis virus infection21. Microglia upregulates CX3CR1 expression in response to JEV exposure16, but the role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis remains unknown.The present study aims to understand and dissect the mechanisms behind virus transmission and recovery from JEV-associated human microglia. In order to achieve this work, human monocyte-derived microglia were exposed to Nakayama JEV strain in vitro until supernatants were free of infectious virus. Virus recovery was subsequently achieved by adding susceptible target baby hamster kidney 21 (BHK-21) cells to JEV-associated microglia. Our results demonstrate that virus recovery from the target cells occurred upon cell contact-mediated virus transmission from JEV-associated microglia up to 10 days after virus exposure. Cell-to-cell virus transmission was not affected by the presence of neutralizing anti-JEV antibodies and de novo virus particles production by target cells could overcome neutralizing activities. Interestingly, viral RNA may be a contributing source of infectious virus material for cell-to-cell virus transmission. The latter virus transmission was dependent on CX3CR1-CX3CL1 interactions. Overall, the present study defines a novel function of human microglia as source of JEV virus infection via cell-to-cell virus transmission, independently of virus binding to its receptor on target cells.ResultsJEV recovery from JEV-pre-treated human microglia occurs at late periods after virus exposureAt early periods of exposure e.g. 24 hours, JEV does not alter morphology nor is it cytopathic to human microglia16. At later exposure periods of 6 and 8 days, observations under the light microscope demonstrated that both mock- and JEV-treated human microglia were confluent with variable morphologies of flat and elongated or round cells and exerted equivalent granularity (Fig. 1a and b). Therefore, microglia survived long-term exposure to JEV.Figure 1JEV recovery from JEV-pre-treated human microglia after late periods of exposure. (a,b) Human microglia were treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for indicated time-periods. Representative micrographs showing cell monolayer and morphology at magnification of (a) 10x and (b) 40×. Scale bars are of (a) 200 μm and (b) 50 μm. In (c), human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at a MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for indicated time-periods. The latter cell were intensively washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of indicated concentrations of control porcine serum (Ctrl serum). (c) Curve lines representing virus titres in supernatants. The symbol represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. Micrographs and data are of 3 independent experiments with each condition performed in duplicate cultures. Significant differences between Mock and JEV isolate is indicated by the letters a and b for conditions in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 PS, respectively. Statistics are calculated with the Mann-Whitney test (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).Since supernatants of JEV-treated human microglia were free of infectious virus from 6 days of exposure onwards (data not shown), virus recovery was assessed as previously described16. To this end, human microglia were pre-treated with JEV for 6, 8, 10 and 12 days and subsequently co-cultured with susceptible target cells such as BHK-21 cells in cell-to-cell contact conditions for 2 additional days in the presence of control porcine serum (Ctrl serum). Virus titres were then determined in supernatants of co-cultures. In the presence of 1:100 of Ctrl serum, virus titres were of 1.41 × 104 TCID50/mL (±1.46 × 104), 1.13 × 105 TCID50/mL (±2.54 × 105) and 1.82 × 101 TCID50/mL (±2.98 × 101) at 6, 8 and 10 days of pre-treatment, respectively. In the presence of 1:1000 of Ctrl serum, virus titres were of 4.62 × 102 TCID50/mL (±5.42 × 102), 1.87 × 103 TCID50/mL (±2.68 × 103) and 0.61 × 101 TCID50/mL (±1.25 × 101) at 6, 8 and 10 days of pre-treatment, respectively. After a pre-treatment of 12 days, no infectious virus was detected with neither 1:100 nor 1:1000 of Ctrl serum. Overall, JEV recovery was statistically significant compared to mock at 6 and 8 days, but not at 10 days after virus pre-treatment. (Fig. 1c).Neutralizing anti-JEV antibodies do not completely abrogate cell-to-cell virus transmission and recovery from human microgliaIn order to evaluate a possible contact of JEV with the extracellular space during the process of cell-to-cell virus transmission between JEV-infected human microglia and susceptible cells, neutralizing immune serum of pig vaccinated against JEV was employed22. Importantly, the potency of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection by JEV22 is circumvented by applying antibodies generated in pigs on cells of other species, e.g. human and hamster. Neutralizing titres of immune serum was 1:320 to cell-free JEV22 and was used at concentrations of 1:100 and 1:1000. Control (Ctrl) and immune neutralizing (NT) porcine sera were added at time of co-culture of BHK-21 cells and JEV-infected human microglia for 6 or 8 days. Then, levels of intracellular JEV envelop protein (JEV E) were measured in BHK-21 cells and virus titres were determined in supernatants.In order to evaluate cell-to-cell virus transmission, intracellular JEV E protein was analysed in BHK-21 cells by flow cytometry. BHK-21 cells were gated as big cells based on their forward/scatter (FSC/SSC) profile (Fig. 2a, upper left panel). Intracellular JEV E protein expression was measured on BHK-21 cells, as exemplified from co-cultures of 6d JEV-pre-treated microglia with BHK-21 cells (Fig. 2a). Upon co-culture with 6d JEV-pre-treated human microglia, significant frequencies of JEV E-bearing BHK-21 cells were 11.19% (±8.1) and 7.32% (±6.00) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 Ctrl serum, respectively, as compared to mock. As expected, 1:100 and 1:1000 of NT serum significantly reduced the frequencies of JEV E-bearing BHK-21 cells to 3.35% (±1.48) and 2.63% (±1.49) respectively, as compared to corresponding Ctrl serum conditions. However, the frequencies of JEV E-bearing BHK-21 cells in the presence of 1:100 NT serum remained significant compared to mock (Fig. 2b). Although none of the Ctrl and NT sera conditions showed significance, similar tendencies were pictured upon co-culture of 8d JEV-pre-treated human microglia with BHK-21 cells (Fig. 2c). Overall, neutralizing antibodies did not completely block cell-to-cell virus transmission.Figure 2Impact of anti-JEV neutralizing antibodies on virus transmission and recovery. Human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for indicated time-periods. Then, cells were washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of indicated concentrations of control (Ctrl) or neutralizing (NT) porcine serum. (a) Upper left panel is a representative density plots showing the gating strategy for the identification of BHK-21 cells based on their FSC/SSC profile. Other panels show representative density plots of intracellular JEV E expression in gated BHK-21cells. Frequency of JEV E+-cells is indicated. (b,c) Box plots representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells expressing JEV E. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor. The black line represents the median value, the red line the mean value and the error bars the standard deviation. (d,e) Scatter dot plots representing virus titres in supernatants. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor and the black line represents the mean value. Data are of 4 independent experiments with each condition performed in duplicate cultures. Asterisks on top of a condition show significant differences compared to mock; asterisks on black line show significant differences between the indicated conditions. Statistics are calculated with (b,c) the t-test or (d,e) the Mann-Whitney test (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).In order to confirm virus recovery, infectious virus particles from culture supernatants were titrated. After 6d cultured JEV-pre-treated microglia, significant virus titres were measured as compared to mock, i.e. 9.97 × 104 TCID50/mL (±2.35 × 105) and 5.96 × 104 TCID50/mL (±1.17 × 105) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 of Ctrl serum, respectively. As expected, the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 NT serum decreased virus titres to 2.17 × 101 TCID50/mL (±5.09 × 101) and 8.75 × 101 TCID50/mL (±2.40 × 102) respectively. This diminution in virus titres was significant compared to corresponding concentration of Ctrl serum (Fig. 2d). Similarly, significant virus titres were measured in 8d cultured JEV-pre-treated microglia compared to mock, i.e. 8.50 × 104 TCID50/mL (±2.21 × 105) and 1.03 × 104 TCID50/mL (±2.35 × 104) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 of Ctrl serum, respectively. Compared to corresponding concentration of Ctrl serum, virus titres significantly decreased to 8.57 × 102 TCID50/mL (±2.41 × 103) and 1.87 × 102 TCID50/mL (±3.15 × 102) in the presence of 1:100 and 1:1000 NT serum, respectively. However, only the condition of co-cultures of 8d JEV-pre-treated human microglia and BHK-21 cells in the presence of 1:100 NT serum showed significance compared to mock (Fig. 2e). Therefore, infectious virus could be recovered from co-cultures in the presence of NT serum, demonstrating that de novo virus production could overcome neutralizing activities.Viral RNA may be a contributing source of infectious viral material upon cell-to-cell virus transmissionConsidering the fact that human microglia do not produce infectious virus particles, but sustain the replication of viral RNA16 and that neutralizing antibodies do not completely block virus transmission and recovery, further experiments aimed to identify the potential source of transmission of infectious viral material upon intercellular interactions. In confocal microscopy experiments of co-cultures, the Iba-1 marker was used to label microglia cells (Iba-1pos) and to discriminate from BHK-21 cells (Iba-1neg). Immune fluorescence labelling of intracellular dsRNA allowed detection of replicating viral RNA23,24 and labelling of intracellular JEV E protein showed viral envelop protein. Mock were free of both dsRNA and JEV E (Fig. 3). Short co-culture periods of 6 hours showed that Iba-1pos microglia contained dsRNA, but no JEV E protein upon pre-treatment with JEV (Fig. 3a and b). After 24 hours of co-cultures, both Iba-1pos microglia and Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells presented dsRNA (Fig. 3c). In parallel, JEV E was mostly found in Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells, but was also observed in Iba-1pos microglia cells (Fig. 3d). This indicates a possible re-infection of the latter cells by de novo JEV particles released from the JEV-producing BHK-21 cells.Figure 3Confocal microscopy analysis of intercellular interactions during virus transmission. Human microglia were adhered with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 2 hours. Cells were then intensively washed with cold PBS and left in culture at 37 °C for 48 hours. Then, cells were intensively washed with PBS before co-culture with BHK-21 cells in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum for various time-periods. Cells were stained for the indicated markers and analysed using confocal microscopy. Micrographs showing fluorescence signals upon co-cultures of (a,b) 6 hours and (c,d) 24 hours. Scale bars are of 60 μm. White arrows focus on microglia and red arrowheads on BHK-21 cells. Micrographs are representative out of 3 independent experiments.In order to assess the role of viral RNA in cell-to-cell virus transmission, RNAse A was applied to degrade RNA content in co-cultures such as viral RNA. Using flow cytometry, BHK-21 cells were gated as big cells and microglia as small cells based on their FSC/SSC profile. Then, intracellular dsRNA and JEV E protein were detected in BHK-21 cells and microglia (Fig. 4a). Treatment of co-cultures with RNAse A decreased the frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells in a dose dependent manner and a dose of 60 μg/mL of RNAse A was used for further experiments (Supplementary Fig. 1a). In the absence of RNAse A, frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells were of 1.88% (±0.54) whereas 60 μg/mL of RNAse A significantly reduced the frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells to 0.56% (±0.43). Only conditions in the absence of RNAse A showed significance compared to mock with frequencies of 0.45% (±0.16) (Fig. 4b, left panel). In parallel, the absence of RNAse A revealed frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 0.98% (±0.39) whereas 60 μg/mL of RNAse A showed frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 0.50% (±0.56). Again, only conditions in the absence of RNAse A showed significance compared to mock with frequencies of 0.37% (±0.24) (Fig. 4b, right panel).Figure 4Impact of RNAse A on virus transmission and recovery. Human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 6 days. Cells were then washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum and indicated concentrations of RNAse A. (a) Central panel is a representative density plots of flow cytometry analysis showing the gating strategy for the identification of BHK-21 cells and microglia based on their FSC/SSC profile. Other density plots represents (left panel) intracellular dsRNA and (right panel) JEV E expression in gated (upper panel) BHK-21cells and (lower panel) microglia. Frequency of dsRNA and JEV E+ cells is indicated. (b) Histogram bars representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing dsRNA identified as in (a). The bar represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. (c) Box plots representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing JEV E identified as in (a). The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor. The black line represents the median value, the red line the mean value and the error bars the standard deviation. (d) Histogram bars representing virus titres in supernatants. The bar represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. Data are of 2 independent experiments with each condition performed in duplicate or triplicate cultures. Asterisks on top of a condition show significant differences compared to mock; asterisks on black line show significant differences between the indicated conditions. Statistics are calculated with (b,c) the t-test or (d) the Mann-Whitney test (n.s.: not significant; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).Deeper analysis of JEV E expression revealed that in the absence of RNAse A, frequencies of JEV E+-BHK-21 cells were of 12.39% (±6.93) and 60 μg/mL of RNAse A resulted in frequencies of JEV E+-BHK-21 cells of 4.65% (±4.05). Both conditions were significant compared to mock with frequencies of 0.34% (±0.16) (Fig. 4c, left panel). In parallel, the absence of RNAse A showed frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 2.71% (±2.3) and 60 μg/mL of RNAse A lead to frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia of 0.78% (±0.42). Again, both conditions were significant compared to mock with frequencies 0.35% (±0.18) (Fig. 4c, right panel).However, treatment with RNAse A did not abrogate nor diminished the generation of infectious JEV particles, which titres ranged at 105–106 TCID50/mL (Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. 1b). Overall, RNAse A effectively reduced intracellular dsRNA in cells but not JEV E. Moreover, the production of de novo virus particles overcome RNAse A activity.The CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis contributes to intercellular interactions for cell-to-cell virus transmission and recoveryUpon short period of exposure to JEV (e.g. 2 days), human microglia increase their cell surface expression of CX3CR116. After 6 days, ~5% of human microglia expressed CX3CR1 on their cell surface upon JEV exposure and was comparable to mock (Fig. 5a). In counterpart, ~2% of BHK-21 cells expressed CX3CL1 on their surface, the ligand for CX3CR1 (Fig. 5b). Therefore, the role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis upon intercellular interactions during virus transmission was investigated using a non-competitive, potent and highly specific antagonist for CX3CR1 in co-cultures25,26. Importantly, doses of 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist did not affect the capacity of virus propagation by BHK-21 cells (Supplementary Fig. 2a). Overall, treatment with CX3CR1 antagonist decreased the frequencies of JEV E-expressing cells and virus titres in a dose-dependent manner. Since 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist efficiently inhibited virus transmission and recovery, this dose was employed for further analysis (Supplementary Fig. 2b and c).Figure 5Role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis in cell-to-cell virus transmission and recovery. (a) Human microglia were treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 6 days. Representative density plots of cell surface expression of CX3CR1. Frequency of CX3CR1+ cells is indicated. (b) BHK-21 were maintained in culture at 37 °C. Representative density plots of steady state surface expression of CX3CL1 by BHK-21 cells. Frequency of CX3CL1+ cells is indicated. Representative plots are out of 3 independent experiments. (c–e) Human microglia were pre-treated with Mock and JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 6 days. Cells were then washed with cold PBS and subsequently co-cultured with BHK-21 cells for 2 additional days in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum and indicated concentrations of CX3CR1 antagonist. In (c,d), cells were analysed by flow cytometry for dsRNA and JEV expression in BHK-21 cells and microglia identified as in Fig. 4a. (c) Histogram bars representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing dsRNA. The bar represents the mean value; the error bars the standard deviation. (d) Box plots representing frequencies of BHK-21 cells and microglia expressing JEV E. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor. The black line represents the median value, the red line the mean value and the error bars the standard deviation. (e) Scatter dot plots representing virus titres in supernatants. The symbols represent replicates where each colour is an individual donor and the black line represents the mean value. Data are of 2 or 4 independent experiments with each condition performed in triplicate or duplicate or triplicate cultures. Asterisks on top of a condition show significant differences compared to mock; asterisks on black line show significant differences between the indicated conditions. Statistics are calculated with (c,d) the t-test or (e) the Mann-Whitney test (*p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001).Cell-to-cell virus transmission was investigated by the detection of intracellular dsRNA and JEV E protein in BHK-21 cells and microglia by flow cytometry after 2 days of co-cultures since earlier time-periods of co-cultures did not allow quantification of dsRNA and JEV E protein (Supplementary Fig. 3a and b). In the absence of CX3CR1 antagonist, frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells were of 2.75% (±1.57) and treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist lead to reduced frequencies of dsRNA+-BHK-21 cells to 1.54% (±0.87). Both conditions showed significance compared to mock with frequencies of 0.49% (±0.34) (Fig. 5c, left panel). In parallel, frequencies of dsRNA+-microglia were of 0.35% (±0.31) and 0.51% (±0.45) in the absence and the presence of 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist, respectively. No significance was found compared to mock with frequencies of 0.23% (±0.29) (Fig. 5c, right panel).Analysis of JEV E expression showed frequencies of JEV E-expressing BHK-21 cells of 33.64% (±13.23) in the absence of CX3CR1 antagonist. As expected, treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist significantly reduced the frequencies of JEV E-expressing BHK-21 cells to 5.63% (±6.03). Both conditions were significant compared to mock with frequencies of 0.42% (±0.47) (Fig. 5d, left panel). In parallel, frequencies of JEV E+-microglia were of 10.62% (±8.07) and 4.17% (±4.09) in the absence and the presence of 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist, respectively. Both conditions were significant in comparison to mock showing frequencies of 0.17% (±0.19) (Fig. 5d, right panel).In addition, recovery of infectious virus particles was evaluated by virus titration in supernatants. Importantly, recovery of infectious virus particles was confirmed in the absence of CX3CR1 antagonist by significant titres of 5.21 × 107 TCID50/mL (±1.09 × 108) when compared to mock. In line with previous observations by flow cytometry, treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist significantly reduced virus titres to 2.71 × 104 TCID50/mL (±5.04 × 104) but these titres remained significant compared to mock (Fig. 5e). Upon co-culture of 8d JEV-pre-treated human microglia with BHK-21 cells, similar picture were observed although no significant changes were obtained regarding the frequencies of JEV E-expressing cells from the various conditions. Otherwise, virus titres in the absence of the CX3CR1 antagonist were significant in comparison to mock. Importantly, treatment with 10 μM of CX3CR1 antagonist significantly reduced the content of infectious virus particles in BHK-21 cells (Supplementary Fig. 4a and b). Overall, antagonistic treatment of CX3CR1 inhibited cell-to-cell virus transmission and recovery.The CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis may influence the type of intercellular interactionsJEV transmission and recovery requires cell-cell contact16. Already at short co-culture periods, two types of cell-to-cell interactions were observed between Iba-1pos microglia-containing dsRNA and Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells. In the majority of the observations, the two cell types were close to each other with a large portion of the surface cell membranes in contact (Fig. 6a, upper panel), indicating virological synapses27. To a lesser extent, the two cell types were more distant from each other, but forming thin membrane protrusions27 containing dsRNA in the Iba-1pos microglia tubular extensions, which interacted with BHK-21 cells (Fig. 6a, lower panel).Figure 6Role of the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis on intercellular interactions. Human microglia were adhered with JEV (Nakayama isolate used at an MOI of 10 TCID50/cell) at 37 °C for 2 hours. Cells were then intensively washed with cold PBS and left in culture at 37 °C for 48 hours. Cells were intensively washed with PBS and co-cultured with BHK-21 cells. In (a), co-cultures were performed in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum for 6 hours. In (b), co-cultures were performed in the presence of 1:100 Ctrl serum and in the absence or the presence of CX3CR1 antagonist for 6 hours. Cells were stained for the indicated markers and analysed using confocal microscopy. (a,b) Micrographs showing fluorescence signals on bright field overlay focusing on intercellular interactions. Zoom of white square in left panel is presented. Scale bars are of 20 μm in left panels and of 8 μm in zoom panels. Micrographs are representative out of 3 independent experiments.Co-cultures in the presence or the absence of the CX3CR1 antagonist were also analysed by confocal microscopy using a similar approach as described before. In both conditions, Iba-1pos microglial cells contained dsRNA and interacted with Iba-1neg BHK-21 cells. Intercellular interactions were abundant and of a virological synapses appearance27 in the absence of the antagonist. Although the frequency had substantially decreased, membrane protrusions27 were occasionally observed in the presence of CX3CR1 antagonist (Fig. 6b).DiscussionMicroglia are the first line of defence against CNS insults14. In the context of JE, microglial cells are the major producers of antiviral inflammatory mediators within the CNS28. Indeed, human microglia produce various inflammatory mediators upon exposure to JEV16. However, microglia may also serve as reservoir for JEV, since they sustain viral replication for long period after JEV exposure16,17,29. For cell-to-cell JEV transmission, the present study highlights the potential involvement of human microglia in JEV propagation and spreading in the brain. Cell-to-cell contact-dependent virus transmission may substantially contribute to the spread of the virus infection30. Moreover, virus recovery after late periods may contribute to persistent JEV infection. Persistency of JEV in the human CNS has been suggested, since infectious virus can be found in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients beyond the third week of illness31. Although it is unknown whether JEV can be reactivated, a biphasic pattern of JE has been described with a relapse of the disease 14–32 days after illness recovery32. Thus, JEV transmission by microglia may initiate another cycle of JEV activation leading to JE relapse in persistent infection.Cell-to-cell contact-dependent virus transmission is a mechanism used for viral escape to immunity. In our study, antibodies efficiently neutralized cell-free JEV22, but were inefficient in blocking cell-to-cell transmission of microglia-associated JEV. First, resistance to neutralizing antibodies may result from the inefficacy of a certain subset of neutralizing antibodies to inhibit cell-to-cell virus transmission27. Otherwise, resistance to neutralizing antibodies may be due to the inaccessibility of antibodies within intercellular interaction structures. Cytosol-to-cytosol connectivity between cells, as well as cytoplasmic connections-containing vesicles prevent exposure of viral material to the extracellular space33. Finally, the present study used antibodies derived from pigs treated with a lentivirus-based vaccine against JEV G3 prM and E proteins34. Therefore, other potential sources of viral material such as genomic material and capsid protein are not recognized by antibodies-derived vaccine.The present study suggests that genomic viral RNA is contributing, but not the exclusive source of infectious viral material, to cell-to-cell virus transmission. In various studies, virus particles have been the source of infectivity in cell-to-cell virus transmission35–37. Here, the absence of JEV E protein in JEV-infected microglia cells reflects the inability of forming virus particles. Thus the absence of virus particles, but the detection of intracellular dsRNA demonstrates a replicative form of JEV viral RNA, similar to other ssRNA + viruses24. Viral RNA in its dsRNA and/or ssRNA forms may be sufficient for cell-to-cell transmission and the recovery of infectious virus including JEV38,39. Despite decreasing intracellular dsRNA content, treatment with RNAse A does not abrogate infectious JEV recovery. Because RNAse A degrades ssRNA, this suggests that dsRNA is more likely to be the source of virus material than ssRNA. However, other viral factors may also contribute to cell-to-cell virus transmission.A cell-to-cell contact-dependent mode of transmission of viral genomic RNA represents an alternative mechanism enabling the generation of de novo viable virus particles33. Human microglia are inefficient to generate infectious virus particles and recovery of microglia-associated JEV by target cells depends on cell contact16. JEV induces virological synapses in a contact-dependent mode of virus transmission between virus-pulsed dendritic cells and T cells35. Here, microglia may use virological synapses and membrane protrusions such as nanotubes and/or filopodia structures for intercellular interactions. Virological synapses require the contribution of adhesion molecules together with microtubules and actin cytoskeleton for stabilization, whereas membrane extension are actin-rich structures27.Importantly, virus transmission from JEV-treated microglia to target cells involves CX3CR1-CX3CL1 interaction. In the CNS, microglia express CX3CR1 whereas neurons express CX3CL1 and the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis is a main regulator of chemotaxis and cross-communication between microglia and neurons18. In the present study, low levels of CX3CR1 expression on microglia allowed cell-to-cell virus transmission indicating an extreme sensitivity of this mechanism. The fact that JEV-treated microglia transiently up-regulates surface expression of CX3CR116 suggests that cell contact-mediated virus transmission may significantly contribute to infection of neuronal cells at early time of infection. Therefore, the CX3CR1-CX3CL1 axis could be a potential therapeutic target candidate in JEV-infected patients. However, CX3CL1 is crucial in the inhibition of the production and neurotoxicity of JEV-infected microglia-derived inflammatory factors40,41. Moreover, polymorphism of CX3CR142 may influence the specificity of potential therapeutics. Polymorphism of CX3CR1 may also explain the differences observed in virus transmission and recovery between cells of blood donors. Nevertheless, the CX3CR1 antagonist did not completely abrogate cell-to-cell JEV transmission indicating that additional or alternative factors may be involved in transmission. For example, DC-SIGN, which is expressed in human microglia43,44, promotes dendritic cell-to-T cell JEV transmission35 and mediates cellular modifications such as cytoskeleton remodelling promoting filopodia extension45.MethodsAuthorization, ethics approval and consent to participateThe Federal Office for the Environment (FOEN, Bern, Switzerland) provided authorization for the collection of human samples and manipulation of the various cells and viruses (authorization number A130522). Ethics approval 034/13-CER-FR for the characterization and differentiation of human white blood cells has been granted by the Ethics Committee of the Canton of Fribourg according to corresponding laws and regulations, based on the Declaration of Helsinki. No consent form was required as the buffy coats were provided from the Swiss Red Cross Blood Bank. All samples were analysed anonymously.Antibodies and stainsThe viral envelop protein was detected using the pan-immune anti-flavivirus antibody (mouse IgG1/IgG2a, clone ATCC-HB-112 D1-4G2-4-15 hybridoma, ATCC, Wesel, Germany) and double stranded RNA (dsRNA) was detected with the anti-dsRNA J2 antibody (mouse IgG2a, Scicons, Budapest, Hungary). Cell markers were detected using anti-human antibodies against CX3CL1 (rabbit polyclonal IgG, clone PA5-23062, Thermofischer Scientific, Waltham, MA), Iba-1 (rabbit polyclonal IgG, Wako, Richmond, VA) and fluorescent-labelled CX3CR1-R-Phycoerythrin (rat IgG2b, clone 2A9-1, Miltenyi Biotec GmbH, Bergisch-Gladbach, Germany).The following secondary antibodies were used for staining: donkey anti-rabbit IgG fluorescent-labelled Alexa Fluor 647 (AF647) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) and goat anti-mouse IgG2a fluorescent-labelled AF647 for flow cytometry, as well as goat anti-mouse IgG2a fluorescent-labelled AF488 and donkey anti-rabbit IgG fluorescent-labelled AF546 for confocal microscopy (all obtained from Thermofischer Scientific if not mentioned). Nuclei were stained using DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO). All concentrations for the use of the antibodies and stains were optimized in our laboratory.Cell line cultureBaby Hamster Kidney-21 cells (BHK-21 cells, fibroblasts) ([C-13], ATCC) were cultured in Glasgow’s Minimum Essential Medium (GMEM) (Thermofischer Scientific) supplemented with 10% (v/v) Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) (Biowest, Nuaillé, France) and Tryptose Phosphate Broth solution (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37 °C and 5% CO2.Virus preparation and titrationJEV Nakayama isolate (National collection of pathogenic viruses, NCPV, Salibury, UK) was propagated in BHK-21 cells as previously described16. Briefly, 80% confluent BHK-21 monolayer cell culture was infected with JEV suspended in RPMI-1640 GlutaMAXTM-I medium (Thermofischer Scientific) supplemented with 2% FBS and cultured until cytopathogenic effects (approx. 36–48 hours). Virus stock suspension was obtained after disruption of remaining cells by freezing and centrifugation of cell soup at 3000 g at 4 °C for 30 minutes to eliminate cell debris. In parallel, mock was prepared accordingly from uninfected BHK-21 cells and served as negative control of virus exposure in experiments.Virus titres of virus stocks and experimental supernatants were determined by end-point titration. Briefly, 10-fold serial dilutions of suspension in GMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and Tryptose Phosphate Broth solution were applied on BHK-21 cells at 37 °C, 5% CO2. After 36–48 hours, intracellular viral particles were detected with the pan-immune anti-flavivirus antibody followed by peroxidase enzymatic reaction.Generation of human microglial cellsHuman blood monocyte-derived microglia were generated from buffy coats of anonymous healthy donors obtained from Blutspendedienst (Bern, Switzerland) using a protocol adapted from46. Human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from buffy coat after Ficoll-Paque density gradient centrifugation (1.077 g/L, Amersham Pharmacia Biotech AG, Dubendorf, Switzerland). Monocytes were enriched using positive selection of CD14+ cells with selection columns and magnetic sorting system (Miltenyi Biotech GmbH). CD14+ monocytes were cultured at a concentration of 0.5 × 106 cells/mL in RPMI-1640 GlutaMAXTM-I medium. Medium was supplemented with antibiotic/antimycotic and bioactive human recombinant granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) (10 ng/mL), macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) (10 ng/mL), nerve growth factor (NGF)-β (10 ng/mL) and CC chemokine ligand 2 (CCL2) (50 ng/mL) (all purchased from Miltenyi Biotech GmbH), at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for 7 days. Half of the medium was renewed after the 3 days of culture.Treatment of human microglial cells with JEV and co-culture with susceptible target cellsHuman microglia were treated with Mock or JEV (at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10 TCID50/cell) in RPMI-1640 GlutaMAXTM-I medium at 37 °C and 5% CO2 during various time-periods. Supernatants were collected and pre-treated human microglia were washed 5 times with cold PBS. Both supernatants and last washing was verified negative for infectious JEV by end-point titration. Subsequently, susceptible target BHK-21 cells were co-cultured with pre-treated human microglia in RPMI-40 GlutaMAXTM-I medium, at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Co-cultures were performed in commercial porcine serum (Thermofischer Scientific). After various time-periods of co-culture, supernatants and cells were collected for further analysis.In some experiments, immune porcine serum of vaccinated pigs with neutralizing activity against Nakayama isolate at a titre of 1:32022 and previously described commercial porcine serum was used as control. In other experiments, CX3CR1 antagonist (AZD8797, Axon Biochemicals, Groningen, The Netherlands) suspended in DMSO (Thermofischer Scientific) and/or RNAse A (Macherey Nagel, Düren, Germany) suspended in PBS were used. DMSO and PBS were respectively used as controls. These reactive were put on top of treated microglial cells before the addition of BHK-21 cells for co-cultures.Flow cytometryCells were analysed using multi-colour flow cytometry FACSCanto II instrument (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA). Data were analysed using FlowJo Software (Data analysis Software, Ashland, OR).Bright field and confocal microscopyFor conventional bright field microscopy, cells were cultured in flat bottom well plates. Cells were analysed and photographed using an EVOS XL Core digital inverted microscope with cell imaging system (Thermofischer Scientific). The image acquisitions were performed with the 10x and 40x objectives.For confocal microscopy, cells were alternatively cultured in labteck or on autoclaved coverslips. After staining, slides were then mounted using Mowiol and left overnight at 4 °C for solidification. Cells were analysed and photographed using a confocal microscope A1 combined with an ECLIPSE Ti inverted microscope and a digital imaging NIS-Elements AR 3.30.02software (Nikon AG, Egg, Switzerland). The image acquisitions were performed with the 20x and 40x objectives. Images were treated with Imaris 9.1 software (Bitplane AG, Zürich, Switzerland), applying background subtraction, threshold applications, gamma correction and maxima.BiosafetyAll experiments using JEV were conducted in a biosafety level 3 bio-containment. After inactivation with 3% paraformaldehyde solution at room temperature for 15 minutes, samples were further analysed by flow cytometry and microscopy.Statistical analysisSignificant differences were determined with GraphPad Prism 6 software (GraphPad software Inc., La Jolla, CA) using the student t-Test (p < 0.05) or the Mann-Whitney Test (p < 0.05).Supplementary information
Supplementary Figures



Title: Pathogenesis and shedding of Usutu virus in juvenile chickens

IntroductionAs an emerging zoonotic virus, Usutu virus (USUV, family: Flaviviridae, genus: Flavivirus) is an increasingly important global public and wildlife health concern [1]. USUV was first isolated from a Culex neavei mosquito in South Africa in 1959 and has since been detected throughout sub-Saharan Africa, central Europe, and the Mediterranean Basin [2,3]. USUV belongs to the Japanese encephalitis serocomplex, where it shares similar antigenic properties with West Nile virus (WNV) and St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV), both neuroinvasive arboviruses found in wild bird populations in the United States [4]. USUV is maintained in an enzootic cycle between ornithophilic mosquitos, primarily Culex spp., and wild birds [5–7]. Incidental “spillover” infections in mammals, including humans, are also known to occur [4,8–11]. To date, 79 USUV infections have been reported in humans, with symptoms ranging from asymptomatic or mild febrile illness, to meningoencephalitis or encephalitis [4,12–17].The earliest indication of USUV circulating in European wild bird populations occurred in 2001 in Austria [18], though retrospective analysis suggests that USUV was circulating five years earlier in Italy [19]. Since its establishment in Europe, USUV has been implicated in a decline of breeding bird populations [20,21]. The burden of disease in wild bird populations has been most prominent in the Eurasian blackbird (Turdus merula) [20,22], great grey owl (Strix nebulosa) [21], and house sparrow (Passer domesticus) [23].While several murine models have been developed to evaluate human USUV pathogenesis [24–28], the use of an avian model is essential to understanding the characteristics of transmission dynamics and avian pathogenesis. Experimental inoculation attempts with USUV have failed to reproduce infection (as evidenced by virus isolation) in two domestic avian hosts. Two-week-old domestic geese (Anser anser domesticus) inoculated intramuscularly with USUV strain 939/01 (Vienna 2001) were positive for USUV nucleic acid in pooled organ samples, a pharyngeal swab, and a single plasma sample by RT-PCR [29]. Viral nucleic acid was detected in two-week-old chickens intravenously inoculated with USUV strain 939/01 (Vienna 2001) in pooled organs, cloacal and pharyngeal swabs, and isolated PBMCs [30]. Although these in vivo studies reveal that different domestic avian species are susceptible to USUV, neither resulted in individuals developing infectious virus in blood, which is critical for transmission to mosquitos. Viral RNA in serum was observed in domestic canaries (Serinus canaria) inoculated intraperitoneally with USUV strain UR-10-Tm (Italy 2010); viral RNA was also detected in organs, droppings, and feathers of 3 inoculated canaries [31]. Thus, an avian model of USUV infection with infectious virus has not yet been reported.The domestic chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus) has commonly been used as a model of infection and surveillance measures in flavivirus infections, including Murray Valley encephalitis virus [32,33], SLEV [34,35], WNV [36,37], and USUV [38]. Although viremia has been observed in WNV experimentally infected chickens, there appears to be an age dependent difference in viral titer, where an adult chicken model reaches peak viremia of 4 log10 PFU/mL [36] and a two-day-old chick peaks at 7 log10 PFU/mL [37]. Age-related differences in viremia levels have also been observed in one-day-old compared to one-week-old SPF chickens inoculated with WNV, with detectable viremia on days 2–7 post-inoculation in one-day old chickens and only on day 2 post-inoculation in one-week old chickens [39]. These studies suggest that age of infection is crucial for a flavivirus avian model and that a juvenile chicken model could be employed to discern the viral kinetics of USUV.The primary goal of this study was to develop a model of USUV in birds that could be used to study viral pathogenesis and transmission. Juvenile commercial ISA Brown chickens and two chicken lines that were previously bred from a common founder population for high (HAS) or low (LAS) antibody response to sheep red blood cells [40–42] were experimentally inoculated with USUV. We found the LAS chickens developed clinical disease, as well as significantly higher viremia compared to HAS chickens. Mathematical modelling showed that the viral clearance rate is a stronger mitigating factor for altering USUV viremia than neutralizing antibody responses. These models provide a tool for further evaluating avian-mosquito transmission dynamics of USUV.Materials and methodsVirus isolatesUSUV isolates used throughout the study were: HU10279-09 (Spain 2009, Africa 2 lineage, MN813489, passage 2+, isolated from Culex perexiguus) [43], TMNetherlands (Netherlands 2016, Europe 3 lineage, MN813490, passage 5, isolated from Turdus merula) [21], UG09615 (Uganda 2012, Africa 3 lineage, MN813491, passage 3, isolated from Culex sp.) [44], and SAAR1776 (South Africa 1959, Africa 2 lineage, MN813492, passage 9, isolated from Culex neavei) [3]. These strains have been previously sequenced by our lab [28].Cell linesVero cells were grown at 37°C with 5% CO2 and maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) (Fisher Scientific), supplemented with 5% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. Cells were plated at 6.5 × 104 cells/well in 12-well plates for plaque assays or 1.65 × 105 cells/well in 6-well plates for PRNTs.DF-1 chicken fibroblast cells were grown at 37°C with 5% CO2 and maintained in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) (Fisher Scientific), supplemented with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and 1% penicillin–streptomycin. Cells were plated at 1.8 × 105 cells/well in 12-well plates and inoculated one day later with USUV strain at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 in triplicate. Serial timepoints were collected every 24 h for five days. This was repeated twice for a total of three replicates. Viral titer was quantified by Vero cell plaque assay.Chicken experimentsUSUV inoculation in ISA Brown chickensSeventy ISA Brown mixed-sex chickens were obtained from the Poultry Research Center (Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA) and randomly assigned to isolator cages in an ABSL-2 facility. Six to ten birds were housed in each isolator cage. Chickens acclimated for one day prior to inoculation. This experiment was split over two experimental sessions.Groups of two-day-old chickens (n = 16) were subcutaneously inoculated in the abdominal region with 1500 PFU (50 μl inoculum) of one of four USUV strains (HU10279-09, TMNetherlands, UG09615, or SAAR1776) diluted in BA-1 viral transport media. Six 2-day-old chickens served as a control group and were injected with 50 μl of PBS.For the high dose experiment, 24 ISA Brown mixed-sex chickens were inoculated as for the low dose group, except groups (n = 12) were subcutaneously inoculated with 105 PFU (50 μl inoculum) of USUV strains.A 50 μl blood sample was collected daily from either the jugular vein or brachial wing vein and stored in a serum-separator tube. Fluids (0.25–0.5 mL) were provided orally to each bird following venipuncture. Whole blood samples were centrifuged to separate serum and subsequently stored at −80°C until further processing. A final 100 μl blood sample was collected from 9 birds in each group on dpi 14. On days 3 and 5 post inoculation, a subset of 3 birds from each group was euthanized via CO2 asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. The following tissues were aseptically collected for viral titration and histopathology: brain, bursa, heart, kidney, liver, lungs, and spleen. Tissues were stored dry at −80°C for later quantification via plaque assay. Prior to freezing, a portion of each tissue was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for histopathology. Oral and cloacal swab samples were also collected from euthanized individuals. Cotton-tipped swabs were premoistened in 0.5–1 mL BA-1 viral transport medium, and oral and cloacal samples were collected by swabbing the mucosal surfaces of the oropharynx and cloaca, respectively. The swab was gently placed inside the cavity and 2–4 circular passes against the mucosal surfaces were made. Efforts to keep fecal residue out of the transport medium were made [45]. Swab samples were stored at −80°C until further processing.USUV inoculation in HAS and LAS chickensThe HAS and LAS chicken lines originated from a common White Leghorn founder population and have been bred for >40 generations for a single trait: high (HAS) or low (LAS) antibody response against sheep red blood cells [40,41]. Twenty-five chickens from each line were randomized into groups. Groups (n = 16) of one-day-old HAS and LAS chickens were subcutaneously inoculated with 1500 PFU (50 μl inoculum) of the Netherlands 2016 USUV strain. Nine 1-day-old chickens from each line served as a control group and were inoculated with 50 μl of PBS. Ten inoculated individuals from each line were bled daily for seven days, as described previously. A final blood sample was collected on dpi 14. On days 3 and 5 post inoculation, 6 birds from each line were euthanized via CO2 asphyxiation followed by cervical dislocation. Tissues and oral and cloacal swabs were collected from euthanized individuals and processed as described previously. If clinical signs including lethargy, ruffled feathers, poor responsiveness, or weight loss ≥ 15% were observed, then birds were euthanized via CO2 inhalation, followed by cervical dislocation.All experiments were performed in accordance with the Virginia Tech Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC #18-069). Throughout the experiments, commercial feed and fresh water were provided ad libitum. Chickens were monitored daily for clinical signs by animal care staff and research personnel.Viral quantification assaysViral titers of serum, tissues, and oral and cloacal swabs were quantified through Vero cell plaque assay. Tissues were weighed and suspended in equal parts BA-1 medium, then homogenized through bead homogenization in a Qiagen TissueLyserLT at 50 oscillations/sec for 2–6 min. Samples were clarified by centrifugation at 18,500 rpm for 3 min. The limits of detection were 2 log10 PFU/mL for serum samples, 1.7 log10 PFU/g or 0.3 log10 PFU/tissue for tissue samples, and 0.4 log10 PFU/swab for oral and cloacal secretions.PRNT assaysBlood collected at 14 days post inoculation was assayed by plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT). Sera were heat inactivated at 56°C for 30 min and incubated with approximately 1000 PFU of the homologous USUV strain for 1 h at 37°C before plating on Vero cells. Neutralization activity was defined by plaque reduction at a 90% threshold [46].HistopathologyFollowing euthanasia, tissues were collected and stored in 10% neutral buffered formalin prior to standard processing and paraffin embedding. Sections were cut at 5 μm and stained by routine hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) staining for histopathological analysis. Tissues were semi-quantitively evaluated for the number of foci of inflammation; scores were summed for a composite pathology score. The number of foci of inflammation in 5, 200× fields was counted. A composite score scale is as follows 0 = 0; 1 = 1–5 foci; 2 = 6–10 foci; 3 = 11–15 foci; 4 = 16 + . The median pathology score was use for comparison of lesions across groups. Slides were analysed by a board-certified veterinary pathologist.Mathematical modeling of virus-host interactionA target cell-limited model (Equation 1) was used to determine the kinetics of the virus titers in USUV-infected HAS and LAS chickens. The model is described by the following variables. Leukocytes susceptible to USUV, called target cells (T), become infected at constant rate β mL per virion per day resulting in latently infected cells (E). Latently infected cells become productively infected cells (I) at rate k per day. Productively infected cells produce virus at rate p per infected cell per day and are removed at rate δ per day. The removal rate accounts for both natural death and the possibility that the antibody is enhancing the rate of infected cell loss through antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity or complemented mediated lysis. Virus (V) is removed at rate c per day. The removal rate accounts for both virus degradation and the possibility of antibody enhancing the rate of virus clearance through opsonization. The initial target cell concentration is estimated to be T0=10,000 leukocytes/ml. The viral inoculum is V0=1500 PFU which, when distributed through 2.5 mL of blood, gives an initial log10 virus concentration of log10⁡V0=2.78 PFU/ml. There were no infected cells at the beginning of the study, therefore, we set E0=I0=0 leukocytes/ml.
(1)dTdt=−βTVdEdt=βTV−kEdIdt=kE−δIdVdt=pI−cVParameter estimationData fitting was performed by comparing HAS and LAS virus titer data at times tilog10⁡Di to predicted virus population at times ti as given by model (Equation 1) log10⁡V(ti), for i=1,2,…n. Initially, the HAS and LAS groups were considered to have similar characteristics. A non-linear mixed effects model and the stochastic approximation expectation-maximization (SAEM) algorithm implemented in Monolix Suite 2019R1 (Lixoft 2019), with log normally distributed parameters, point one parameter variation, and proportional residual errors were used to minimize the functional J(param)=minparam∑k=1TH+TL1TH+TL∑i=1n(log10Dik−log10Vk(ti,param))21/2, where param={k,p,β,δ,c}, TH=13 is the number of subjects in the HAS group, TL=13 is the number of subjects in the LAS group, and n is the number of data points in each subject. These initial estimates were used to assign values to two parameters, k and p to avoid non-identifiability. The remaining parameters paramr={β,δ,c} were then assumed to be HAS or LAS population specific. They were estimated by performing HAS only and LAS only population fits using a non-linear mixed effect model as well as individual fits for each subject in the HAS and LAS groups, using the method and specification described above.Additionally, the reproduction number (or basic reproductive ratio), defined as the number of infected cells (or virus particles) that are produced by one infected cell (or virus particle), when the virus is introduced into a population of uninfected target cells T0 was estimated for HAS and LAS populations. It is given by R0=βpcδT0.Statistical analysisDescriptive statistics including means and standard deviations of viremia, viral tissue titers, and viral swab titers were calculated for chicken studies. Survival curves were analysed by Mantel–Cox test. Viremia and weight change data were analysed using Repeated Measures two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s or Sidak’s multiple comparisons tests, as appropriate. Tissue and swab data were analysed using two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s or Sidak’s multiple comparisons tests, as appropriate. Fisher’s exact test was used to compare the results of PRNT90 assays. Data were analysed and graphed using GraphPad QuickCalcs and GraphPad Prism 9 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).ResultsRecent USUV isolates replicate to higher titers compared to the prototypic USUV isolateGrowth kinetics of four USUV strains: Uganda 2012, South Africa 1959, Spain 2009, and Netherlands 2016 were evaluated in vitro in DF-1 chicken fibroblast cells. Uganda 2012 and South Africa 1959 had an average peak titer of 6.4 log10 PFU/mL and 6.7 log10 PFU/mL, respectively, on dpi 4. Spain 2009 and Netherlands 2016 reached an average peak titer of 7.4 log10 PFU/mL on dpi 5 (Figure 1). The prototypic strain, South Africa 1959, generated significantly lower titers compared to Netherlands 2016 on dpi 2–3 and 5 (Figure 1, p < 0.05). Both European strains generated significantly higher titers than both African strains on dpi 4 (Figure 1, p < 0.05).
Figure 1.Growth kinetics of USUV isolates in DF-1 cells. The growth curve was performed three times, with one representative experiment shown. Symbols represent mean and error bars represent standard deviation of triplicate inoculated cultures. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.Two-day-old chickens develop viremia when inoculated with African and European strains of USUVIn order to evaluate USUV infection in an in vivo avian model, two-day-old ISA Brown chickens were subcutaneously inoculated with 1500 PFU of one of four USUV strains: Uganda 2012, South Africa 1959, Spain 2009, or Netherlands 2016. There was 100% survival across all inoculated subjects and no clinical signs of disease, including weight loss, were observed (Figure 2(A)). Of the 52 inoculated chickens bled consecutively, all but 1 became viremic. Chickens inoculated with the prototype strain, South Africa 1959, developed significantly lower serum titers compared to the three other USUV isolates on dpi 1 and compared to Uganda 2012 on dpi 3 (Figure 2(B), p < 0.05). The peak mean serum titer for Spain 2009 and Netherlands 2016 occurred on dpi 1 at 3.6 log10 PFU/mL and 3.5 log10 PFU/mL, respectively. The peak mean titer in serum for Uganda 2012 and South Africa 1959 occurred on dpi 2 at 3.5 log10 PFU/mL and 2.9 log10 PFU/mL. Chickens sustained detectable viremia for at least five days post inoculation, with one individual still viremic on dpi 6.
Figure 2.Serum titers of two-day-old ISA Brown chickens inoculated with African and European strains of USUV. (A) Mean percentage of initial starting weight of chickens following 1500 PFU USUV inoculation. (B) Serum titers of chickens inoculated with 1500 PFU of USUV. (C) Serum titers of chickens inoculated with 105 PFU of USUV. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05.To determine whether a higher inoculum dose would increase viral titer in serum, two-day-old ISA Brown chickens were inoculated with 1 × 105 PFU of either Netherlands 2016 or Uganda 2012. There was 100% survival, and all chickens developed viremia. The peak mean titer for Netherlands 2016 and Uganda 2012 occurred on dpi 2 at 2.7 log10 PFU/mL and 3.0 log10 PFU/mL dpi 2, respectively. There were no statistically significant differences between the two strains across all timepoints (Figure 2(B), p > 0.20). Mean titer was significantly lower in the Netherlands 2016 high dose group relative to its low dose counterpart on dpi 1 (p < 0.01). Together, these data indicate that two-day-old chickens are susceptible to infection by African and European USUV isolates.Viral dissemination and histopathology in heart tissue of USUV-inoculated chickensTo assess for viral dissemination and evidence of disease, tissues were collected from three individuals per low-dose experimental group on dpi 3 and dpi 5. Infectious viral titer was quantified in tissue samples, and tissue sections were evaluated for histopathology. Infectious virus was isolated from heart samples of chickens inoculated with either of the European strains on dpi 3, with Netherlands 2016 group producing significantly higher viral titers than either of the African strains (Figure 3(A), p < 0.05). By dpi 5, infectious virus was isolated from heart tissue of chickens across all USUV isolates. Sections of heart collected on dpi 5 were also evaluated microscopically. Hearts were semi-quantitively evaluated for the number of foci of inflammation; scores were summed for a composite pathology score. Juvenile chickens infected with Netherlands 2016 or Spain 2009 had similar scores and were characterized by more foci of inflammation compared to the chickens inoculated with Uganda 2012 or South Africa 1959 (Figure 3(B)). No inflammation was observed in heart tissue collected from control chickens inoculated with PBS (Figure 3(C)). A representative image from a chicken infected with Spain 2009 with numerous foci of lymphocytic and heterophilic infiltrates is shown (Figure 3(D)). Representative images from a chicken infected with Uganda 2012 with limited inflammation (Figure 3(E)), and from sham-inoculated control bird with no inflammatory foci (Figure 3(C)) are shown. Additional tissues were collected, and infectious virus was isolated from at least one individual across all virus strains tested but evidence of disease was not observed histologically.
Figure 3.Evidence of USUV dissemination and USUV-mediated pathology in heart tissue from ISA Brown chickens inoculated with African and European strains of USUV. (A) Viral titer in heart tissue collected on dpi 3 and dpi 5. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05. (B) Composite histopathology scores of heart tissue; lines represent median. (C) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from chickens inoculated PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (D) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from chickens inoculated with European USUV strain, with foci of lymphocytic and heterophilic infiltrates (arrow) (H&E stain). (E) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from chickens inoculated with African USUV strain, with foci of inflammation (arrow) (H&E stain, scale bars = 200µm). (F) Viral titer in oral swabs collected on dpi 3 and dpi 5. (G) Viral titer in cloacal swabs collected on dpi 3 and dpi 5. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line.To assess viral shedding, oral and cloacal swabs were also collected from individuals euthanized for tissue collection. Infectious virus was detected in oral swabs of chickens inoculated with all virus strains on dpi 5 (Figure 3(F)). No infectious virus was detected in cloacal swabs collected from chickens inoculated with USUV at either time point (Figure 3(G)).A PRNT90 was used to determine the development of neutralizing responses in serum on dpi 14 against homologous USUV strains. At least two samples from each experimental group generated a neutralizing response against USUV at a reciprocal PRNT90 titer of 20 (Supplemental Table 1). These data indicate that ISA Brown chickens generated a similar neutralizing response to African and European USUV strains.Statistically significant greater morbidity and viremia in chickens from a line selected for low antibody responsesTo establish a chicken model with more severe disease and higher serum titers, juvenile chickens from lines that had undergone long-term selection (47 generations) for high (HAS) or low (LAS) antibody production against sheep red blood cells [40,41] were subcutaneously inoculated with 1500 PFU of Netherlands 2016 or PBS as a control. While both the inoculated and control HAS groups had 100% survival, mortality in LAS groups was observed by dpi 2 (Figure 4(A)). There was 89% survival in the LAS control group and 69% survival in the LAS USUV inoculated group, with no significant differences in survival between groups. USUV-inoculated LAS chickens that did not survive exhibited disease signs including weight loss ≥15%, lethargy, and ruffled feathers.
Figure 4.Mortality, morbidity, and viremia of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV. (A) Kaplan-Meier survival curve of chickens inoculated with 1500 PFU USUV or PBS. (B) Mean percentage of initial starting weight of HAS chickens following USUV inoculation. (C) Mean percentage of initial starting weight of LAS chickens following USUV inoculation. *p < 0.05. (D) Viremia of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with 1500 PFU. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001.Congruent with survivorship data, the mean weight of inoculated HAS chickens did not significantly differ from the control HAS group (Figure 4(B)). In contrast, the mean weight of LAS chickens inoculated with USUV was significantly lower than the control LAS group (Figure 4(C), p < 0.05) on dpi 5–7. Although these LAS juvenile chickens were growing and gaining weight, the data suggest that USUV infection diminished their rate of weight gain.Viremia was measured daily for seven days following inoculation with USUV. All chickens developed viremia. Serum titers were significantly higher in LAS than HAS chickens on dpi 2–5 (Figure 4(D), p < 0.01, p < 0.0001). Both experimental groups reached peak viremia on dpi 2, with HAS chickens generating a mean 3.1 log10 PFU/mL titer and LAS chickens generating a mean 4.3 log10 PFU/mL titer.USUV dissemination and histopathology are significantly greater in LAS chickensTissues were collected from six individuals on dpi 3 and dpi 5 to assess viral dissemination and pathology in each HAS and LAS experimental groups. Viral titers in the heart and kidney were significantly higher in LAS than HAS chickens on dpi 3 (Figure 5(A), p < 0.05, p < 0.01). Infectious virus was also isolated from brain, liver, bursa, lungs, and spleen of both HAS and LAS chickens (Figure 5(A, B)). Infectious virus was isolated from the panel of tissues collected on dpi 5 in both HAS and LAS chickens, with significantly higher USUV titer in the lungs of LAS chickens (Figure 5(D, E), p<0.05). Viral titers in the brain of LAS chickens were higher, though not significantly so, than HAS chicks on dpi 5 (Figure 5(D)).
Figure 5.Evidence of viral dissemination, shedding, and histopathology in tissues of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV. (A) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 3. (B) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 3. (C) Viral titer in oral and cloacal swabs collected on dpi 3. (D) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 5. (E) Viral titer in tissues collected on dpi 5. (F) Viral titer in oral and cloacal swabs collected on dpi 5. Circles represent individual samples; lines represent mean; error bars represent standard deviation. The limit of detection is indicated by dashed line. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01. (G) Composite score of heart tissue; line represents median. (H) Composite score of brain tissue; line represents median. (I) Composite score of kidney tissue; line represents median. (J) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (K) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with inflammatory lesions and presence of heterophils and lymphocytes (arrow) (H&E stain). (L) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (M) Representative image of heart tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with inflammatory lesions and presence of heterophils and lymphocytes (arrow) (H&E stain). (N) Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (O) Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with heterophilic inflammatory foci (arrow) (H&E stain). (P) Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (Q)Representative image of kidney tissue collected on dpi 5 from HAS chickens inoculated with USUV, with heterophilic inflammatory foci (arrow) (H&E stain). (R) Representative image of brain tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chickens inoculated with PBS, with no inflammation (H&E stain). (S) Image of brain tissue collected on dpi 5 from LAS chicken inoculated with USUV, with proliferation of glial cells in the neuropil (arrow) (H&E stain, scale bars = 200 µm).To further evaluate the pathologic effect of USUV in HAS and LAS chickens, sections of tissues collected on dpi 5 were examined microscopically, with only heart, kidney, and brain showing evidence of disease. Tissues were semi-quantitively evaluated for the number of foci of inflammation; scores were summed for a composite pathology score. HAS and LAS chickens had similar median pathology scores in the heart (Figure 5(G)). Inflammation in the brain was observed in one LAS chicken (Figure 5(H)). HAS and LAS chickens had similar median pathologic scores in the kidney (Figure 5(I)). Heart tissue sections collected from both chicken lines were characterized by numerous inflammatory lesions, necrosis, lymphocytes, and heterophils, suggesting myocardial damage; whereas the sham-inoculated controls from each line did not exhibit signs of inflammation (Figures 5(J–M)). The kidney sections of both lines were characterized by inflammatory foci, including heterophils, with no signs of inflammation observed in the respective sham-inoculated controls (Figures 5(N–Q)). Proliferation of glial cells in the neuropil of one LAS chicken was observed and is suggestive of neuroinvasive disease (Figure 5(S)). There were no signs of inflammation observed in the respective sham-inoculated control (Figure 5(R)).To assess viral shedding, oral and cloacal swabs were collected from all inoculated individuals on dpi 3 and dpi 5. USUV was isolated from oral swabs with significantly higher titers in LAS chickens than HAS chickens on dpi 3 (Figure 5(C), p < 0.05). USUV was also isolated from cloacal swabs of HAS and LAS chickens, with mean titers being similar on dpi 3 (Figure 5(C)). Infectious virus was isolated in oral and cloacal swabs of both groups on dpi 5 (Figure 5(F)). Together, these data suggest that USUV is more pathogenic in LAS compared to HAS chickens.HAS chickens generate a stronger neutralizing antibody response against USUV than LAS chickensSerum was collected from HAS and LAS chickens on dpi 14 to evaluate rates of seroconversion using PRNT. There were significantly fewer LAS chickens that developed a neutralizing antibody response than HAS chickens (Table 1, Fisher’s exact test, p < 0.05). More than half of the HAS chickens neutralized USUV at titers of 40 or above. PRNTs were also performed on serum collected from HAS and LAS chickens on dpi 3, dpi 5, and dpi 7, but no sample reached the 90% reduction threshold. These data show that chickens selected to generate a higher antibody response to sheep red blood cells also develop a stronger neutralizing antibody response against USUV compared to those selected for low antibody response.
Table 1.Neutralizing antibody response in sera collected on dpi 14 from HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV as determined by plaque reduction neutralization test at 90% threshold (PRNT90).PRNT90 titer% of subjects (n) HASLASp-value<2010 (1)66.67 (4)0.03572030 (3)16.67 (1)NS040 (4)16.67 (1)NS8010 (1)0 (0)NS32010 (1)0 (0)NSPercent (n) of exposed subjects reaching each titer is shown. NS denotes not significant.Viral clearance rate and infected cell removal are important for mitigating USUV viremiaTo determine whether differences in neutralizing antibody titers could explain differences in viremia in HAS and LAS chickens infected with USUV, a target cell-limited model with eclipse phase (Equation 1) was fitted to HAS and LAS virus titer data. Non-identifiability issues were avoided by assuming that the eclipse phase (1/k) and the virus production (p) are identical among the HAS and LAS populations, and fixing them at the combined populations estimate of 1 d and 44.7 virions per cell per day, respectively. The remaining parameters were assumed to be HAS- and LAS- specific and carried out as individual fits for each chicken within the HAS and LAS populations (see Supplemental Table 2, for the HAS and LAS average values). Data fitting showed good agreement with the experimentally determined virus load data, suggesting that peak serum titers occur when the number of newly infected cells no longer compensates for the loss of infected cells (Figure 6, see Supplemental Table 3 for corresponding individual fit data).
Figure 6.Mathematical modeling of HAS and LAS chickens inoculated with USUV. Kinetics of USUV in HAS and LAS chickens as given by model (Equation 1) versus data. A. Individual fits for HAS chickens B. Individual fits for LAS chickens. The parameters used in stimulation are given in Supplemental Table 3, k=0.97 per day, p=44.7 per infected cell per day, initial conditions are T0=10,000 leukocytes/mL, E0=I0=0 leukocytes/mL, and log10⁡V0=2.78 PFU/ml. LAS chickens.Differences in virus infectivity rates, infected cell loss, and virus removal were observed between HAS and LAS groups. The average estimate for the infectivity rate of individuals from the HAS population, β=1.06×10−3 mL per virion per day, is 2.6 times higher than the average infectivity rate of the birds from the LAS population, β=4.04×10−4mL per virion per day, suggesting a lack of enhanced neutralizing antibody effects in the HAS group. The higher infectivity rate in the HAS cohort, however, is compensated by increased infected cell loss, δ=14.7 per day, 14.7-times larger than the infected cell loss in the LAS population, δ=1 per day. Additionally, the HAS group has enhanced virus clearance, c=8.5 per day, 2.7 times larger than the virus clearance in the LAS population, c=3.13 per day. This additional virus degradation in the HAS class is consistent with antibody-mediated neutralization.The average basic reproduction number (or basic reproductive ratio), given by R0=βpcδT0 was estimated to be R0=3.79 for the HAS cohort, compared to R0=57.8 for the LAS populations. This implies that the lower serum titers in HAS chickens reduces virus transmissibility by 15-fold.DiscussionThis study revealed that USUV is pathogenic in juvenile chickens, with robust viral dissemination. Studies with three different lines of chickens (commercial ISA Brown, LAS, and HAS) indicated that juvenile chickens develop USUV viremia; USUV can be shed orally; and the heart is an important target organ for USUV replication and pathogenesis. Chickens inoculated with the South Africa 1959 strain had lower titers in serum, heart tissue, and oral swabs than chickens inoculated with contemporary strains (Figures 2(B) and 3(A–F)), suggesting that USUV may have evolved to increase replication in birds. Experimentally inoculated LAS chickens experienced morbidity that was not observed in either the HAS or commercial chickens. Additionally, LAS chickens generated significantly higher titers in serum, organ samples, and oral swabs (Figures 4 and 5), and a significantly lower virus-neutralizing immune response than did the HAS group. Altogether, juvenile chickens are an appropriate model for assessing USUV pathogenesis and transmission, in which weakened immune responses increase pathogenesis and transmission potential.Histopathological analysis identified inflammation in heart tissue of USUV-inoculated chickens (Figures 3 and 5). Myocarditis and immune infiltrates in the heart have been reported in naturally infected wild birds in Europe, including the Eurasian blackbird, great grey owl, and house sparrow [21,47,48]. Inflammation was also observed in the brain of a single infected LAS chicken and in the kidney of both HAS and LAS groups, also consistent with USUV infected wild birds, as mentioned above [21,47,48]. While infectious virus was detected in the liver and spleen of LAS and HAS chickens, histopathological analysis did not reveal evidence of inflammation, whereas infiltrates of mononuclear cells and necrosis was observed in the spleen and liver of geese [29] chickens [30] and canaries [31] experimentally infected with USUV. Signs of inflammation following USUV infection were also observed in the heart and brain of experimentally inoculated canaries [31]. Thus, our results in juvenile chickens recapitulate many of the findings in experimental and natural USUV infections of various avian species. However, the degree of neuroinvasion was lower than expected based on reports of wild birds. While the LAS chickens did develop morbidity and neuropathology, they did not become as severely ill as described in some reports of wild birds. A further limitation of using a juvenile chicken model is that the poorly developed immune response of young chickens makes the model less useful for assessing therapeutics or prophylactic treatments to prevent disease.The peak viremia generated in LAS chickens was 104–105 PFU/mL. Thus, the LAS chicken line serves as a model that may be appropriate for determining the USUV viremia threshold for infectivity of Culex spp. mosquitos. Future studies to determine viremia threshold level for infectivity, coupled with data on wild bird susceptibility to USUV, can help determine which avian species are important for zoonotic viral maintenance and ultimately provide predictive capabilities for determining which bird populations are at risk for USUV emergence. Furthermore, bird-bird contact transmission has also been reported in experiments with WNV [49–51]. Our data showed that USUV is shed in oral and cloacal secretions of LAS chickens and, therefore, suggests the potential for USUV transmission between birds as well. However, there is currently no data on whether oral ingestion is a known transmission route for USUV.When investigating a viral dose-dependent response, surprisingly, a higher viral inoculum dose corresponded to decreased viremia titers in chickens compared to those inoculated with a lower dose (Figure 2(B)). This phenomenon was also observed in three-week old chickens inoculated with SLEV [52], suggesting that high dose inoculum may be less effective at producing viremia in young chickens. Additionally, in wild birds experimentally inoculated with WNV, a higher inoculum dose did not significantly increase peak viremia titers but rather increased the proportion of infected birds [53–55]. Thus, our results indicate that in future avian experiments 1500 PFU is an appropriate dose for assessing USUV pathogenesis and transmission.Results from our experiments with genetically distinct lines of chickens provide further insights into USUV-host interactions. The HAS chicken line has been well characterized to exhibit higher defensive responses, such as limited disease development, increased survivorship, and regular weight gain, when exposed to various pathogens including bacterial, viral, and parasitic [41]. Specifically, HAS chickens had 100% survivorship and developed a higher antibody response to Newcastle disease virus than their LAS counterparts. HAS chickens also developed fewer air sac lesions when challenged with Mycoplasma gallisepticum and had significantly higher weight gain when challenged with Eimeria necatrix than LAS chickens. HAS chickens were more resistant to splenomeglia virus and feather mites than their LAS counterparts. However, this high resistance was not comprehensive, as HAS chickens showed less resistance to Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus infection than LAS chickens [41]. Genome sequencing and gene ontology analysis revealed three candidate genes responsible for driving the variance in humoral immune response between the HAS and LAS chicken lines: MHC, SEMA5A, and TGFBR2 [42]. Differences in the MHC locus, which encodes for proteins involved in antigen presentation [56], likely explain in part the differential neutralizing antibody responses developed in the HAS and LAS chickens against USUV. Further characterization of the innate and non-neutralizing responses will be essential to understand the avian anti-USUV response, as the modelling results from our study indicate the HAS chickens have a greater rate of loss of infected cells and higher rate of viral clearance than the LAS chickens. This increased loss of infected cells in the HAS chickens may be due to antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity or complement mediated lysis. This is reflected in the sustained higher serum titers observed in the LAS chickens. This suggests that the HAS chickens are better able to control viral replication during acute infection. Whereas much of the current literature has explored the role humoral immunity plays in reducing WNV infections following repeat exposure in wild bird populations [49,57,58], there is limited knowledge on the interactions between the avian innate immune system and WNV. Newhouse and colleagues [59] elucidate some of the critical players in the avian innate immune response after experimentally infecting zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) with WNV. Future work on identifying the role of the innate immune system in USUV infection in birds will be critical for our understanding of this emerging zoonotic virus and the drivers of viral evolution.Results from our studies have shed light on important characteristics of USUV infection, pathogenesis, and immune responses in a physiologically relevant model organism. The shared phylogenetic and ecological characteristics between USUV and WNV suggest that USUV has the potential to serve as an emerging threat. Many of the USUV outbreaks in Europe resulted in large die-off events of Eurasian blackbird (T. merula) populations. With the global distribution of related species, including the American robin (T. migratorius), which is a competent host for WNV [49,60], it is possible that USUV may continue to emerge. The data presented here and the development of a novel avian model provide vital tools for further evaluation of USUV pathogenesis and transmission in birds.


Title: Role of extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses that impact public health

BackgroundFlaviviruses are positive-sense RNA viruses that have emerged as pathogens and are transmitted by Aedes, Hemagogus, or Culex spp. mosquitoes; nonvector transmission methods involving sexual contact, from mother to child (in-utero or intrapartum), transfusion of blood components, organ transplantation, or body fluid exposure have been described [1, 2]. Infection cases present different clinical ranges from asymptomatic, mild self-limiting, or severe diseases characterized by hemorrhage, neuroinvasion, multiorgan compromise, or death [3, 4].Dengue virus (DENV), Zika virus (ZIKV), yellow fever virus (YFV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), and West Nile virus (WNV) represent the main mosquito-borne flaviviruses due to their continuing risk of infection in tropical and subtropical region inhabitants, constituting more than 50% of the world’s population. The rapid and efficient expansion of flaviviruses has occurred because of the high virulence of circulating strains, the presence of susceptible populations, and the wide distribution of vectors [5, 6]. As a result of the geographic distribution overlap, there is a possibility that the vectors can transmit more than one flavivirus at a time; thus, coinfection may directly impact the clinical outcome [7]. The viral cycle in mosquito vectors begins when the female acquires viruses during blood feeding. Viruses undergo replication and cross specialized epithelial barriers until they reach the salivary glands, where they are released into the saliva and transmitted to a new host during subsequent feeding; therefore, humans are inadvertent hosts [8, 9].Flaviviruses exhibit different human cellular tropisms, which explains why these diseases present diverse clinical syndromes, such as flu-like illness, acute neurological disorders, hemorrhagic fever, and metabolic wasting [9]. Molecular and cellular events in vector–virus–human host interactions are critical for disease outcomes. Infected cells lead to stress signaling, which induces cell differentiation or activation with the release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) [10]. EVs [exosomes (small EVs) and microparticles (medium/large EVs)] are nanoparticles from cellular membranes that mediate intercellular communication by the transfer of proteins, nucleic acids, or lipids. In viral infections, EVs also transfer viral antigens, genomes, or complete virions, favoring transmission by receptor-independent mechanisms and triggering the inflammatory response or the suppression/evasion of the immune response. EVs may be potential biomarkers for disease progression or could be applied as nanotherapeutic tools [11–13].This review focuses on the roles of EVs in DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV infections. We highlight the evidence that demonstrates how EVs, through different study models, are involved as alternative mechanisms that may define mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenicity.Epidemiology of mosquito-borne flavivirusesAccording to the World Health Organization (WHO), the global incidence of DENV infections has markedly increased in the last two decades. From 2000 to 2019, the WHO documented a tenfold surge in cases worldwide. In 2023, over five million cases and more than 5000 dengue-related deaths were reported in over 80 countries in Africa, America, Southeast Asia, the Western Pacific, and Eastern Mediterranean regions [14].As of 2022, more than 870,000 autochthonous ZIKV cases have been reported, and 89 countries have reported ZIKV transmission across the Americas, Africa, Southeast Asia, and the Western Pacific [15, 16].YFV remains in a sylvatic cycle in tropical forests, although infection is prevented by a single dose of a safe vaccine [17]. In 2023, the WHO reported that 34 countries in Africa and 13 countries in Central and South America are endemic for YFV [18].JEV is endemic to 24 countries in Southeast Asia and the western Pacific. There are an estimated 68,000 cases of JEV infection each year worldwide, and the case fatality rate can reach as high as 30% [19], whereas WNV is present in Africa, Europe, Asia (Middle East and West), and North America [20]. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the U.S., from 1999 to 2022, 56,575 human disease cases, 25,777 hospitalizations, and 2776 deaths were reported [21].The increased incidence of flaviviruses and their introduction in new countries represent a serious health risk, in addition to population growth, industrialization, and vector adaptability due to environmental disturbances, such as climate change, promoting the conditions for probable future epidemics.Basic virology of flaviviruses: structure and replicative cycle featuresThe genus Flavivirus groups enveloped viruses of approximately 50 nm in diameter, surrounded by a lipid envelope, and encoded by a single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome nearly 11 kilobases in length [22]. The viral genomic RNA encodes a single long open reading frame (ORF) flanked by the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions (UTRs) involved in viral genome translation, replication, and packaging. The 5′ UTR (containing the type 1 cap m7GpppAmN) functions as the promoter for the initiation of RNA synthesis, and the 3′ UTR (which lacks a polyadenylated tail) is the precursor of the subgenomic flaviviral RNA (sfRNA) associated with pathogenicity, inhibition of antiviral responses, increased viral transmission, and increased replicative fitness [2, 23, 24].The ORF is translated into a polyprotein, from which ten proteins are cleaved: three structural (capsid (C), membrane (M), and envelope (E)) proteins and seven nonstructural (NS) proteins. The C protein is involved in viral RNA packaging and nucleocapsid (NC) core formation; the M protein (a small proteolytic fragment of the precursor protein (prM) produced during viral maturation) functions as a chaperone for E protein folding and assembly; and the E protein mediates binding and fusion during viral entry. NS proteins (1, 2A, 2B, 3, 4A, 4B, and 5) are necessary for genome replication, viral assembly, and host immune response dysregulation [25, 26].Flaviviruses exhibit broad cellular tropism, entering host cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. It is known that they use a wide variety of receptors [22]. Viral endocytosis is followed by the fusion of the virion envelope with cellular membranes due to the low pH of the endosome. Endosome acidity triggers irreversible trimerization of the E protein, NC release into the cytoplasm, and C protein/RNA dissociation. The viral RNA is subsequently translated into a single polyprotein, which is cleaved into structural and NS proteins at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. For viral RNA replication, a negative-sense strand is synthesized, serving as a template for new positive-strand genomes. The assembly process consists of the association of the C protein with genomic RNA, followed by budding into ER membranes that contain the E-prM protein complex, constituting immature virions. Virion maturation occurs in the trans-Golgi network, where proteolytic processing and acid-induced E-prM rearrangement promote prM cleavage. Additional steps, such as glycan modification, result in the formation of mature infective particles. Flaviviruses are released from host cells by exocytosis [2, 22–26].The viral replication cycle requires viral proteins with the involvement of host molecules such as RNA-binding proteins (RBPs), which are ubiquitous in the cytoplasm and determine virus‒cell interactions [23–25]. Diosa-Toro et al. hypothesized that flavivirus RNA recognition relies on specific host RBPs that promote its incorporation at the EV cargo as an alternative mode for viral spread [24]. In this sense, the viral replication cycle and EV biogenesis may converge on common cellular mechanisms; this fact implies a determining role of EVs in flavivirus pathogenesis as an advantage of their ability to mediate cell-to-cell communication [27].Extracellular vesicles (EVs)EVs are heterogeneous populations of particles released by cells, delimited by a lipid bilayer, and cannot replicate on their own [28]. In humans, EVs are present in all body fluids [29] and enclose and carry nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids that can modify behavior or trigger phenotypic changes in acceptor cells. The biological functions of EVs include removing (waste, harmful, or useless) intracellular components, sharing nutrients, and serving as cell-to-cell mediators; thus, they function in homeostasis and pathological processes [30–32].The International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) proposed the Minimal Information for Studies of EV (MISEV), which characterizes the physical properties of EVs, such as size, density, molecular composition, or cell origin. Exosomes are small EVs (sEVs) < 200 nm in diameter, and ectosomes (microparticles or microvesicles) can be medium/large EVs (m/lEVs) > 200 nm in diameter. Owing to their biogenesis, exosomes are released by exocytosis (through the endosomal pathway) of intraluminal vesicles (ILVs) from multivesicular bodies (MVBs), and ectosomes are released from the plasma membrane by budding [32, 33].EV biogenesis and uptake mechanismsEV (exosome or ectosome) biogenesis occurs through different molecular machineries, such as the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT), the tetraspanin signaling pathway, RBPs, sphingomyelinase-generating cone-shaped lipids (in the central nervous system, CNS), phospholipid relocalization toward the membrane leaflet, or actin cytoskeleton depolymerization [34].Microparticles (MPs) are formed from the budding of the cell membrane due to the disruption of phospholipid asymmetry. Under physiological conditions, phosphatidylserine (PS) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) are located in the inner leaflet, whereas phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin are located on the outer membrane [35]. Phospholipid asymmetry is regulated by Ca2+-dependent enzymes such as flippases, floppases, scramblases, and translocases. The Ca2+ released from the ER enters the plasma membrane, activating enzymes to translocate PS to the cell surface, also leading to the activity of calpain and gelsolin, which induce actomyosin contraction, allowing plasma membrane budding and the release of the MP PS+ into the extracellular space [36, 37].Exosomes originate from the intracellular endocytic trafficking pathway, where inward budding of the membrane of late endosomes results in the formation of the ILV through the ESCRT [38, 39]. ESCRT is a protein family that forms complexes (0, I, II, and III) at the MVB membrane to regulate cargo targeting and the formation of the ILV [29, 38]. ESCRT-dependent exosome biogenesis occurs when ESCRT-0 identifies cargo and sorts it into nascent ILVs. Late endosome membrane invagination occurs through the interaction of the ESCRT-0, ESCRT-I, and ESCRT-II complexes. ILV membrane neck contraction is mediated by ESCRT-III and ATPase vacuolar protein sorting-associated protein 4 (VPS4), which favor ILV scission and MVB formation [37, 40–42].ESCRT-independent exosome biogenesis involves tetraspanins (CD9, the CD63/Syntenin-1 complex, or CD81), which function as signaling molecules to regulate cargo sorting through cholesterol-enriched microdomain formation and interact with transmembrane or cytosolic proteins to induce inward membrane budding. In neuronal cells, ceramide promotes membrane subdomain formation and imposes a spontaneous negative curvature for ILV production. Ceramide generation is mediated by neutral type II sphingomyelinase activity. Additionally, extracellular signals from G protein-coupled receptors, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR), the Wnt pathway, or oxidative stress regulate the biogenesis of EVs. ESCRT-dependent and ESCRT-independent pathways synergically act on exosome biogenesis. In this sense, molecules such as ESCRT-associated proteins (Alix and TSG101) and tetraspanins are used as exosome markers to identify their endosomal pathway origin [34–38, 43].The secretory pathway allows MVBs to fuse with the plasma membrane, favoring the release of ILVs as exosomes. Intracellular trafficking of MVBs is mediated by Rab proteins, whereas the soluble N-ethyl maleimide (NEM)-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor (SNARE) complex drives membrane fusion. Cells can internalize EVs through clathrin-dependent, caveolae-dependent, and receptor-dependent mechanisms, macropinocytosis, phagocytosis, or lipid raft-mediated uptake [38, 44, 45]. Thus, EVs can mediate their intercellular communication functions, inducing phenotypic or behavioral changes in acceptor cells.Convergence of EV biogenesis and the RNA virus cycleViruses can usurp cellular signaling networks, co-opting exosome biogenesis pathways for their assembly or transferring viral components to establish host permissiveness [46, 47]. In 2003, Gould et al. proposed the Trojan exosome hypothesis, which is based on the retrovirus replication cycle [48], and it has been extended to other RNA viruses [49–55]. The spread of viruses through exosomes is an alternative and effective mechanism for naïve cell infection that modulates the host’s immune response. Convergence of EV biogenesis and the RNA virus replication cycle allows the sorting of viral antigens, genomes, or complete virions as part of the EV cargo. The critical point is membrane fusion during ILV formation: viral NC or complete virion fusion with the ILV membranes or reverse fusion of the ILV with the MVB, releasing virus into the cytoplasm [46, 49].Focusing on flaviviruses, Hsu et al. first demonstrated in plasma samples from patients with Dengue fever that DENV presented an extra irregularly shaped membrane surrounding a distinct circular vesicle, compatible with EV morphology, with detectable levels of DENV RNA, E, prM, and NS1 proteins. In vitro, these EV-like structures favor the infection of naïve cells, which evade the neutralizing antibody response [56]. These findings suggested that DENV could be carried by EV-like structures such as Trojan horses.Therefore, do EVs (exosomes and MPs) play a role in the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses? To answer this question, we reviewed the published scientific evidence concerning the functions of EVs in different study models (in vivo, in vitro, and ex vivo) of DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV infections to establish their role in pathogenesis, especially in severe forms of disease (Table 1). We recognize that evidence from in vitro studies employing cell lines differs from real functions in living organisms; hence, ideal results come from those using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models to obtain robust conclusions. However, most of the current data related to EVs and flavivirus diseases are obtained from in vitro studies in cell lines; therefore, elucidating their impact on mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesis is important. Further studies using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models are necessary.
Table 1Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of dengue virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesDENV 1–4 from acute DF casesEx vivoIn vitroPlasma specimens from DENV-infected patients and human bone marrow cellsEVs CD61+Viral RNA and proteins (E, prM, NS1)Hamster kidney fibroblasts (BHK-21) and primary human bone marrow cellsIn vitro cell infection and evasion of the neutralizing antibody response[56]DENV-2 TVP2176 (El Salvador strain)DENV-2 New Guinea C (NGC)DENV-3 US/BID-V1619/2005In vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36 HT) from Ae. albopictus and (Aag2) from Ae. aegypti mosquitosExosomes HSP70+DENV-2 complete RNA genome, C protein mRNA, E/NS1 proteins; DENV-3 C protein mRNA, E proteinC6/36 HT cells, Cercopithecus aethiops monkey kidney epithelial (Vero) cells, mouse monocyte-derived dendritic (Mo-DCs) cells, human-skin keratinocytes (HaCaT), and human umbilical vein endothelial (HUVEC) cellsExosomes from DENV-2- and DENV-3-infected mosquito cells carry viral components. Exosomes from DENV-2-infected mosquito cells mediated viral transmission to mammalian cells through interaction with tetraspanin Tsp29Fb. Inhibition of Tsp29Fb or exosome release are potential therapeutics to block viral transmission[66]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36 HT) from Ae. albopictus mosquitosExosomes CD9-like protein+/CD81-like protein+Virus-like particlesC6/36 HT cellsPotential trojan vehicles that carry virus-like particles favor naïve cell infection and play a role in viral dissemination[67]DENV-2 New Guinea (NG)In vitroLarvae lysate cells (ATC-10) from Aedes aegypti mosquitosExosomes (?)Mosquito protein cargo (arginase AAEL002675)–EVs from DENV-infected mosquito cells have an altered protein cargo with infection-enhancing ability. This protein packaging strategy through the EV pathway promotes viral transmission[69]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroSaliva from Ae. aegypti mosquitosEVs (~ 100–500 nm)Viral sfRNAHuman hepatoma cells (Huh-7) and neonatal human primary dermal fibroblasts (NHDF)Salivary EVs from DENV-2-infected mosquitos contain sfRNA. Their stimuli increase viral infectivity and block interferon type I and III signaling[70]DENV-2 16,881Ex vivoIn vitroPlatelets from confirmed DENV-infected patients and healthy donorsMicroparticles CD41+Human IL-1βHuman microvascular endothelial cells (HMEC-1)IL-1β-containing MPs increased vascular permeability (in vitro) and correlated with endothelial dysfunction (ex vivo). Potential biomarkers of severity outcome[74]DENV-1 HawaiiDENV-2 16,681DENV-3 H87DENV-4 H241Ex vivoIn vitroBlood specimens from DENV-infected patients (ex vivo); human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells (in vitro)Microparticles PS+, platelet origin (CD41a+), erythrocytic origin (CD235+)Viral proteins (E, NS1)–Ex vivo: (1) Elevated MPs PS+ CD235+ levels correlated with DENV disease severity; (2) Low MPs PS+ CD41a levels are associated with bleeding (DHF). In vitro: DENV infection enhances MPs shedding that could transfer viral components to naïve cells[75]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoBlood specimens from DENV-infected patientsMicroparticles PS+, platelet origin (CD41a+), erythrocytic origin (CD235+)––Patients with thrombocytopenia and bleeding manifestations presented decreased levels of MPs PS+ CD41a+. Patients diagnosed as DF with warning signs presented high levels of MPs PS+ CD235a+. The MPs could identify potential progression to severe disease[76]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoIn vitroBlood specimens form DENV-infected patientsEVs CD41a+ CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Alix+Pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-13, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-5Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and naïve T cells CD4+Platelet EVs from plasma of severe dengue patients have immunosuppressive properties on T cells CD4+ that may define the progression of dengue disease[77]DENV-2 PL046In vitroIn vivoPrimary human and primary mice (PF4-Cre) plateletsEVs CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ CD41+ CD62p+–Primary human and mice neutrophils, primary human monocytes-derived macrophages, human endothelial (HMEC-1) cellsC57BL/6 J miceThe EVs from DENV-activated platelets induce neutrophils’ NET formation that contributes to vascular permeability and enhances the release of high concentrations of TNF-α and IL-6 from monocyte-derived macrophages, via activation of CLEC5A/TLR2 receptors on immune cells[78]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoIn vitroPlatelet rich plasma of dengue patientsExosomes CD41+ CD63+ CD9+–Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)Platelet exosome’s interaction with endothelial cells may promote vascular leakage through proinflammatory mediators release, reducing the vascular barrier integrity[80]DF/SD cases without DENV strain identificationEx vivoBlood specimens from infected patientsMicroparticles HLA-DR+ CD105+––Association with compromised endothelial stability in DF/SD patients[82]DENV-3 5532/290In vitroPrimary human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mdDC)Exosomes CD9+ CD63+ CD81+Viral E protein and human host RNA (miRNAs, mRNAs)Mosquito (C6/36) cells and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)The EVs from DENV-infected mdDC carry viral antigens and favor the infection of naïve mosquito cells. The EVs from IFN-treated PBMC protect naïve cells from viral infection. The RNA profile cargo may be associated with immune dysregulation in SD[83]DENV-2 Colombian strainIn vitroHuman adherent (U937) macrophagesExosomes Alix+ TSG101+ CD63+Viral NS3 and human miRNA (miR-181a-5p, miR-4301 and miR-4652-3p)Macaca mulatta monkey kidney epithelial (LLC-MK2) cells and human endothelial (EA.hy926) cellsExosomes did not favor naïve (LLC-MK2) mammalian cells infection. Exosomes transport miRNAs and induce early endothelial barrier changes with a pro-inflammatory (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8) activation pattern[84]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroHuman monocytes (THP-1) from peripheral blood and human embryonic (HEK293T) cellsEVs TSG101+Human miR-148aHuman microglial (CHME3) cellsThe EVs from DENV-infected cells transfer miR-148a that suppresses the USP33/ATF3 axis in human microglia, promoting neuroinflammation[89]DENV-2 UVE/DENV2/2018/RE/47099In vitroDENV-2-infected human lung epithelial (A549) cells and NS1-transfected human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cellsExosomes CD63+ CD81+NS1 viral protein–NS1 dimers secreted into extracellular space are associated with exosomes, reaching privileged sites and thereby acting on pathological processes[90]DENV-2 NGCIn vitroHuman umbilical endothelial cells (HUVEC) and human embryonic kidney epithelial (293 T) cellsExosomes Flotillin-2+ CD63+Human interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3)Human cervix epithelial (HeLa) cellsThe antiviral activity of IFITM3-containing exosomes favors the reduction of DENV-2 entry into host cells[92]EV in mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesisDengue virusDengue fever (DF)The DENV serotypes are transmitted by Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes [57]. Dengue virus infection can be asymptomatic in most cases [58]. Symptomatic DF can range from a self-limiting acute febrile infection (85–90%) to severe forms (10–15%), known as dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS) [59, 60]. Currently, DHF/DSS are recognized as severe dengue (SD) characterized mainly by systemic vasculopathy syndrome, capillary leakage, and hemorrhage with loss of vascular integrity [58, 61–65].Currently, the functions of EVs in DF and SD pathogenesis are unclear. Research findings suggest that they may have roles as intercellular pro- or antiviral signalers that determine the clinical outcome, as prognostic biomarkers, or as potential therapeutic tools.EV from Aedes spp. mosquito modelsIn the mosquito vector‒host interplay, EVs can enhance viral infection. Vora et al. (2018) used an in vitro model of Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells infected with DENV-2 (TVP2176 or New Guinea C, NGC) and DENV-3 (US/BID-V1619/2005), isolating EVs HSP70+ that contained complete viral RNA, C, E, and NS1 proteins (DENV-2-infected cells), and E protein and C protein mRNA (DENV-3-infected). Stimuli with EVs from DENV-2-infected cells favor the infection of mosquito and vertebrate (mouse, nonhuman primate, and human) naïve cells. An ortholog (Tsp29Fb) of the tetraspanin CD63 that interacts with the viral E protein was identified, and its blockade reduced mosquito cell infection [66].Reyes-Ruiz et al. (2019) identified human CD9/CD81 homologs in mosquito cells and demonstrated the presence of DENV-like particles in the ILV structures of DENV-2 NGC-infected C6/36 HT cells. In vitro stimulation with CD9+ CD81+ exosomes from DENV-2 NGC-infected cells favored the infection of naïve cells, indicating their ability to transmit virus [67].Could EVs be a mechanism of viral transmission through mosquito bites? Cime-Castillo et al. (2015) reported that DENV-2 binds to proteins from Aedes aegypti salivary glands and that saliva enhances viral internalization in mammalian cells [68]. In this sense, Gold et al. (2020) hypothesized that EVs from the saliva of DENV-2 New Guinea-infected Aedes aegypti have altered protein cargo with infection-enhancing ability in mammalian cells. They isolated EVs flotillin+ HSP70+ from DENV-infected Aedes aegypti ATC-10 cells, which contained the arginase AAEL002675. They reported robust enhancement of the viral load in primary dermal fibroblasts previously treated with recombinant arginase [69]. Yeh et al. (2023) were interested in identifying transmission-enhancing factors in mosquito saliva and reported that the EVs in saliva from DENV-2 NGC-infected Aedes aegypti Rockefeller colonies contain high levels of sfRNA. The mosquito saliva/EV stimulus resulted in increased virus infectivity in human hepatoma cells and primary dermal fibroblasts [70].These findings demonstrate that the DENV cycle and exosome biogenesis converge in mosquito cells and that DENV-2-infected cells release EVs that act as Trojan vehicles, transferring viral components, virus-like particles, or mosquito protein cargo that can modify cell permissiveness and favor in vitro infection. More studies are still needed to elucidate the implications of in vivo EVs as efficient mechanisms in mosquito-mediated viral transmission, their impact on vector competence, and their potential as a strategy for mosquito control.Platelet EVs from in vitro and ex vivo modelsPlatelets, immune cells, and vascular endothelial cells are the main effectors involved in the pathogenesis of DF. Platelet dysfunction can lead to impaired inflammatory responses and tissue damage. Platelet activation, followed by thrombocytopenia, is associated with severe clinical outcomes in viral infections, and activation products that include EVs could be the hallmark during DF/SD [71]. The platelet-derived EVs released during DENV infection may enhance inflammation and endothelial dysfunction. MPs, formerly known as “platelet dust”, have procoagulant activity, and their defects promote bleeding disorders, as described in DHF/DSS [72, 73].How do platelet-derived MPs contribute to the pathogenesis of DENV infection? Hottz et al. (2013) reported high levels of CD41+ IL-1β+ platelets in patients diagnosed with DF/SD and isolated CD41+ IL-1β+ MPs (from clinical samples and from DENV-2 16,881-stimulated platelets in vitro), with increased levels of the NLRP3 inflammasome and caspase-1 activity. Stimulation with MPs increased the permeability of endothelial cells in vitro. In patients, high hematocrit rates with plasma leakage were correlated with high levels of CD41+ IL-1β+ MPs [74]. These findings suggest that MPs could be used as biomarkers to improve the early detection of severe disease progression.Punyadee et al. (2015) reported that circulating MPsfrom platelets (CD41a+), erythrocytes (CD235+), monocytes (CD14+), granulocytes (CD66+), T cells (CD3+), B cells (CD19+), and NK cells (CD56+), were present in blood samples of DENV-infected patients with different severities. In acutely ill patients, 50–75% of PS+ MPs are from erythrocytes and platelets and express viral antigens on their surface. Decreased levels of PS+ CD41a+ MPs were associated with a bleeding tendency due to thrombocytopenia. Additionally, they showed in vitro that hepatocellular carcinoma cells infected with DENV-1 Hawaii, DENV-2 16,681, DENV-3 H87, or DENV-4 H241 release PS+ MPs that contain viral E or NS1 proteins on their surfaces [75].Patil et al. (2018) confirmed that platelet- and erythrocyte-derived MPs are potential biomarkers for predicting the risk of SD progression. In blood samples from patients diagnosed with thrombocytopenia and bleeding manifestations, decreased levels of PS+ CD41a+ MPs were detected, whereas patients diagnosed with DF with warning signs presented increased levels of PS+ CD235+ MPs [76]. In this sense, platelet- and erythrocyte-derived MPs may help identify potential patients who are progressing to SD.More recently, Kumari et al. (2023) reported in the plasma of patients with mild and severe disease that SD was associated with increased levels of EVs CD41a+ CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Alix+ from platelets and was highly enriched with the cytokines IL-13, TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-5. In vitro, EV stimulation strongly suppressed CD4+ T-cell proliferation through the PD-L1/PD-1 interaction. Additionally, EV-stimulated naïve CD4+ T cells expressed high levels of TNF-α and IFN-γ, indicating that EVs promote the Th1 phenotype [77]. Platelet EVs from the plasma of SD patients have immunosuppressive effects on CD4+ T cells, which may define the progression of dengue disease.Platelets interact with neutrophils, monocytes, and macrophages, activating the innate immune response. Therefore, could platelet-derived EVs promote or modulate immune activation? Sung et al. (2019) reported that DENV-2 PL046-stimulated platelets activate the C-type lectin-like receptor 2 (CLEC-2) signaling pathway, releasing EVs CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ CD41+ CD62p+. Platelet EV stimuli activate two surface innate immunity receptors (CLEC5A and TLR2) on neutrophils and macrophages, inducing neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) formation with increased vascular permeability in vivo and increasing the secretion of TNF-α and IL-6 from human monocyte-derived macrophages. The authors demonstrated that the simultaneous blockade of CLEC5A/TLR2 reduces NET formation and permeability changes in vivo, suggesting that this intervention is a potential treatment for DF/SD [78, 79]. Focusing on the interplay of platelet-derived EVs with leukocytes, platelet-derived EVs were demonstrated to be efficient host immune effectors and endogenous danger signals that activate CLEC5A and TLR2 receptors on immune cells, which had a cumulative immunomodulatory effect on DENV-mediated CLEC2 activation on platelets, contributing to disease severity. These findings demonstrate that platelet-derived EVs function as signal effectors and not only as vehicles for biomolecules; therefore, blockade of their interaction may also improve the clinical outcome in SD patients [79].Finally, Vedpathak et al. (2024) isolated platelet-derived CD41+ CD63+ CD9+ CD62p+ exosomes from patients with mild or severe disease. Exosome uptake by endothelial cells (HUVECs) promoted disruption of monolayer integrity with reductions in VE-cadherin and ZO-2 tight junction proteins, and Claudin-1 and PECAM-1 adhesion proteins, indicating the loss of the barrier. Higher levels of C-reactive protein, sVCAM-1, and slCAM-1 were detected both in the cell culture supernatants and in the SD patient samples [80]. The interaction of platelet-derived exosomes and endothelial cells in vitro promotes the release of vascular proinflammatory mediators with the loss of barrier integrity.These reports highlight the multiple roles of platelet-derived EVs in DF/SD pathogenesis. However, their use as targets for therapies or as biomarkers for severity progression still needs further investigation.Immune cell-derived EVs from in vitro and ex vivo modelsMonocytes participate in the establishment of a proinflammatory state, antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE), and vascular endothelium damage, all of which are related to the progression to SD [81]. Naranjo-Gómez et al. (2019) evaluated monocyte subset behavior in DF/SD patient plasma and reported high and low counts of DENV E-positive intermediate and nonclassical monocytes, respectively. The DENV-infected monocytes were activated, expressed intracellular TNF-α and exposed PS at the membrane, which could be associated with MP release. High amounts of HLA-DR+ CD105+ MPs (endothelial origin) associated with compromised endothelial stability were found [82]. The interplay between activated monocytes and MPs from vascular endothelial cells may contribute to the progression to SD.Do EVs from leukocytes play a role during DENV infection? Martins et al. (2018) reported that DENV-3 5532 (from an SD case) and DENV-3 290 (from a mild DF case) infection of monocyte-derived dendritic cells (mdDC) triggered cell activation and the release of CD9+ CD63+ CD81+ exosomes. Exosomes contain the viral E protein, evade the antibody response, and favor mosquito naïve cell infection. Additionally, exosomes from IFN-treated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) confer resistance to viral infection. The mdDC exosome RNA profile cargo is associated with immune response regulation, the antiviral response, and platelet or endothelial cell activation [83]. Exosomes from DENV-3-infected mdDCs promote pro- or antiviral enhancement, and their RNA profile cargo could be associated with immune dysregulation in SD.Velandia-Romero et al. (2020) isolated Alix+ TSG101+ CD63+ exosomes from DENV-2-infected macrophages (U937 cells) that transport the viral NS3 protein. They did not find that exosomes favor nonhuman primate cell infection. EV stimulation of endothelial cells (EA. hy926) in vitro modified cell physiology and integrity, upregulated the expression levels of the VE-cadherin and ICAM-1 proteins, and subsequently induced the secretion of high levels of TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-8. Analysis of the miRNA cargo revealed targets associated with cell adhesion, the cell cycle DNA integrity checkpoint, and the regulation of cell communication [84]. There is still no evidence in vivo, through the evaluation of primary cells, that EVs from DENV-2-infected macrophages contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Therefore, further investigations are needed to elucidate this mechanism.DENV-2 promotes crosstalk between the coagulation and inflammation pathways during DF/SD. Huerta-Zepeda et al. (2008) reported that DENV-2 upregulates tissue factor (TF) in endothelial cells, triggering the generation of hemostatic proteases (thrombin) that activate protease-activated receptors (PARs). Activated PARs initiate inflammatory pathway signaling, which leads to the upregulation of proinflammatory (IL-8) or pro-adherent (VCAM-1) molecules [85]. As described above, the interplay between EVs and endothelial cells promotes early barrier changes, increasing permeability and the loss of barrier integrity; however, the role of EVs in the specific molecular mechanisms of vascular dysfunction is still unclear and poorly understood.Neurological complications in SD also require consideration; therefore, the WHO endorsed guidelines (2009) to include them in the clinical case classification. Neuropathogenesis is associated with direct viral invasion of the CNS or secondary reactions. Previously, DENV was not considered a neurotropic virus, but clinical reports associating DF with neurological complications have changed this view [86–88].In this context, could EVs from DENV-infected cells be implicated in the development of DENV neuropathogenesis? Mishra et al. (2020) isolated EVs TSG101+ from DENV-2-infected monocytes (THP-1) and DENV-2 NS1-transfected human embryo kidney (HEK293T) cells, which contained high levels of miR-148a. The stimulation of microglial (CHME3) cells with these EVs reduced the protein expression levels of USP33 and ATF33, both of which are associated with the downregulation of the proinflammatory gene expression pathway. USP33/ATF3 axis dysregulation via EVs miR-148a+ promotes the expression of TNF-α, IFN-β, and NF-κB, which are related to a proinflammatory state. The authors concluded that this model explains why EVs miR-148a+ from DENV-infected cells may contribute to neuroinflammation in vitro [89]. Notably, neuropathogenesis is a complex process, and many factors could be involved. This model of USP33/ATF3 axis dysregulation mediated by EVs is one of many alternative mechanisms that may explain the neurological outcomes described in some SD cases.Other pro- and antiviral functions of EVs in DF/SDSafadi et al. (2023) reported that DENV-2 strain UVE/DENV2/2018/RE/47099-infected human A549 cells and DENV NS1-transfected HEK293 cells released CD63+ CD81+ exosomes that contained dimers of the viral NS1 protein on their membrane surface. The authors demonstrated that NS1 protein and exosome associations occur in the extracellular compartment and concluded that the association of the NS1 protein with exosomes may increase viral protein stability. Exosomes act as vectors that favor the access of the viral NS1 protein to privileged sites to promote pathological processes, as described for SD [90].Finally, EVs from infected cells could also contribute to establishing an antiviral state to prevent the spread of infection to neighboring cells [91]. Zhu et al. (2015) evaluated how interferon-inducible transmembrane protein 3 (IFITM3), which is transferred by flotillin-2+ CD63+ exosomes from DENV-2 NGC-infected HUVECs and 293T cells, is expressed in exosome-stimulated HeLa cells, increasing cell resistance to viral infection and significantly reducing DENV-2 entry [92]. IFITM3-containing exosomes serve as vehicles for the cell-to-cell transfer of antiviral resistance, suggesting their potential as a therapeutic strategy.In summary, EVs from DENV-infected cells play a relevant role in dengue pathogenesis because of their ability to transport different viral contents (RNAs, proteins, or virus-like particles), favoring cell-to-cell transmission and infection. In mosquito‒host interactions, EVs interact with different host cells; EVs can be identified by the presence of human tetraspanin orthologs, and their protein cargo enhances viral binding, allowing host cell infection. In the pathogenesis of DENV infection in humans, EVs from platelets and immunological cells function as Trojan vehicles that favor viral infection, evade the host immune response, and transport active biomolecules (different host/viral RNAs and proteins) that modify naïve cellular behavior. Platelet-derived EVs act as effectors that trigger NET formation in neutrophils and the release of proinflammatory cytokines in monocytes/macrophages via interactions with CLEC5A/TLR2 receptors, promoting vascular endothelial dysfunction in vivo. Additionally, EVs participate in exacerbated inflammatory responses in the CNS or could be implicated in the transfer of antiviral resistance. Knowledge of these mechanisms will lead to further investigations of their potential roles as biomarkers of severity progression (e.g., MPs PS+ CD41a+), therapeutics (e.g., blockade of the interaction of platelet-derived EVs with CLEC5A/TLR2 or use of IFITM3-containing exosomes), or vector control tools.Zika virusZika fever (ZF)Zika fever (ZF) is a febrile acute disease caused by ZIKV infection and is transmitted by mosquito bites or human-to-human contact. Approximately 80% of infections are asymptomatic and 20% are mildly self-limiting [93–96]. The severe forms of ZF include an expanding spectrum of neurological complications, autoimmune diseases, and congenital Zika syndrome (CZS). ZIKV neurotropism and the susceptibility of immune cells and endothelial barriers allow the virus to reach immunologically privileged sites [97–99]. However, the virus‒cell interaction may not be the only mechanism involved, so the role of the EVs could explain some alternative forms for viral transmission, viral persistence due to the lack of clearance, or immune response avoidance.EV from Aedes spp. mosquito modelsCould mosquito-derived EVs mediate the cellular changes involved in ZIKV pathogenesis? Martínez-Rojas et al. (2020) isolated PS+ MPs and exosomes CD63-like+ from ZIKV-infected C6/36 cells carrying viral RNA and E protein, promoting the infection of naïve C6/36, Vero, monocyte, and endothelial cells in vitro. EV stimuli promoted intermediate monocyte differentiation and favored endothelial cell damage, establishing a procoagulant, proinflammatory, and proadherent phenotype with the loss of barrier integrity. Stimuli with EVs from ZIKV-infected mosquito cells favored infection, modifying the normal basal state of human cells in vitro [100].EV functions in acute in vitro and in vivo infection modelsFocusing on the role of EVs as viral carriers, Safadi et al. (2023) demonstrated that ZIKV PF-25013-18-infected A549 and ZIKV NS1-transfected HEK293 cells released CD63+ CD81+ exosomes containing dimers of the viral NS1 protein on their membrane surface obtained extracellularly in vitro [90]. Similarly, Zhao et al. (2023) reported that ZIKV-infected human umbilical vein endothelial cells released EVs CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Syntenin+ TSG101+ HSP70+ Alix+ that did not promote infection in vitro despite carrying ZIKV genome RNA, E, C, prM, NS1, and NS5 proteins. The authors demonstrated that E protein-enriched EVs competed with ZIKV virions for binding to neutralizing antibodies, attenuating the ADE effect [101]. Martínez-Rojas et al. (2024) reported that ZIKV MR766-infected monocytes released CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+ exosomes. Purified exosomes carried viral antigens (E/NS1 proteins) and viral genomic RNA. Exosomes favored ZIKV transmission and infection, promoting the activation and differentiation of naïve monocytes in vitro and inducing an infection‒activation‒infection cycle that may prolong viral clearance and establish a long-lasting proinflammatory state [102]. These data show that viral elements released as part of the EV cargo may act as an alternative mechanism in virus‒host interactions.Fikatas et al. (2021) reported that ZIKV PRVABC59-infected human microvascular endothelial cells (hcMECs/D3) released large EVs CD63+ Alix+ TSG101+, which carry the viral NS1 protein. Stimulation with EVs favored cell infection and disturbed the integrity of the cell monolayer. Endothelial EVs are enriched in sphingomyelin and diacylglycerol, which contain more saturated and monounsaturated acyl chains, increasing their membrane rigidity and decreasing their susceptibility to oxidative stress [103]. In vitro, EVs from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells may allow ZIKV to reach anatomic sites such as the CNS to promote neurological disease.EV functions in neurological in vitro and in vivo modelsZIKV infection is associated with CNS damage, which manifests as CZS or Guillain–Barré syndrome. The mechanisms involved in the neuropathogenesis of the Zika virus related to EV functions are poorly understood. Huang et al. (2018) isolated flotillin-2+ Alix+ exosomes from ZIKV (MR766 and PRVABC59)-infected human fetal astrocytes that contained viral RNA. Blockade of the ceramide pathway promoted resistance to ZIKV infection with low exosome release, reducing viral transmission [104]. Zhou et al. (2019) isolated Hsp70+ CD9+ CD63+ exosomes from ZIKV PRVABC59-infected murine fetal primary cortical neurons that contained viral E protein and genomic RNA, which promoted the infection, damage, and death of naïve cells. Additionally, the inhibition of the ceramide pathway reduced infection and exosome release, resulting in exosome-mediated viral transmission in the CNS [105]. Both studies demonstrated that convergence between the viral cycle and exosome biogenesis occurs through the ceramide pathway in CNS models, promoting viral transmission and cell damage.In this context, York et al. (2021) isolated EVs CD63+ CD9+ HSC70+ populations from ZIKV PRVABC-59-infected SNB-19 cells (i.e., astrocytes) that contained encapsulated viral genome RNA and E protein that promoted infection in naïve cells. The authors demonstrated that CD63 is required in the viral replication cycle; hence, CD63 levels are reduced in infected cells to ensure the release of viral progeny and EVs [106]. This report revealed the role of tetraspanins during EV biogenesis in the modulation of ZIKV infection.EV functions in placental modelsIn the context of CZS, viral transmission through transplacental infection continues to be a concern. Like other teratogenic viruses, ZIKV must overcome resistance to infection of the placental epithelium constituted by trophoblasts and nontrophoblastic cells, and its innate immunological properties are mediated by the type III interferon (IFN) response [107]. In this context, ZIKV hijacks the antiviral response of trophoblasts to ensure replication cycle completion. Block et al. (2023) demonstrated that ZIKV DAK AR 41524-infected trophoblasts released CD9+ EVs, which contain viral E, NS1, NS4B, and NS5 proteins and diverse host protein cargos that could serve as markers of placenta-specific EVs [108]. Similarly, Lee et al. (2023) investigated how ZIKV infection in trophoblasts manipulates mitochondrial dynamics, promoting the formation of mitochondria-derived vesicles (MDVs). These authors reported that the NS4A protein is responsible for mitochondrial dysfunction, suppressing the IFN response. The ZIKV PRVABC59-infected JEG-3 trophoblasts released CD63+ CD9+ TSG101+ Alix+ MDVs and carried miRNAs involved in the immune response, inflammation, secretion, and autophagy, which may facilitate viral replication in vitro [109]. These findings highlight how ZIKV overcomes placental resistance during trophoblast infection, induces the suppression of the host antiviral response, and favors cell infection.Other pro- and antiviral functions of EVs in the treatment of Zika feverThe immunoregulatory and antiviral effects of EVs could regulate viral pathogenicity through the transfer of specific molecules from infected cells to noninfected neighboring cells. Li et al. (2020) described how CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ exosomes from ZIKV GZ01-infected human A549 cells contained high levels of host defensin alpha 1B (DEFA1B) mRNA. During ZIKV infection, DEFA1B inhibits viral replication by blocking virus binding, reducing cell proliferation, and slowing cell cycle progression. Exosome-containing DEFA1B stimulation in HEK293T and undifferentiated human neuroblastoma (SH-SY5Y) cells delayed their cell cycles [110]. Therefore, exosomes not only have anti-ZIKV activity but also alter cell cycle progression.EVs, as transporting vehicles for active biomolecules, have gained relevance as potential therapeutic options because of their ability to cross natural physiological barriers, their intrinsic properties for cell targeting, and their stability in circulation [111]. Zhang et al. (2022) isolated EVs from ZIKV SZ01-infected A6 (type I IFN receptor knockout C57BL/6) mice containing abundant ZIKV-derived small‐interfering RNAs (ZIKV-siRNAs). These EV-specific ZIKV-siRNAs enter the murine bloodstream and are capable of conferring resistance against viral challenge. The authors concluded that these EVs confer RNA‒RNA homology-dependent antiviral activity [112]. Finally, Zhang et al. (2022) designed neuro-specific targeted small CD81+ Syntenin+ EVs containing antiviral siRNAs targeting the NS4A, prM, NS1, and NS3 regions of the ZIKV genome. They reported that these EVs inhibited ZIKV replication. Intravenous administration in pregnant AG6 mice efficiently crossed the placental barrier and reduced the viral loads in mothers and fetuses, protecting both from ZIKV infection and alleviating neuroinflammation and cell damage [113]. These studies demonstrated that targeted delivery via modified EVs is a promising therapeutic alternative that is well tolerated and safe for in vivo models of ZIKV infection.In summary, in the context of ZF pathogenesis, the roles of EVs include being an efficient mechanism for viral cell-to-cell transmission, a mediator for the establishment of a proinflammatory state, and an effector in neurological or placental cell damage (Table 2). Additionally, EVs mediate antiviral or immunoregulatory activities by transporting specific viral or host biomolecules that confer resistance to infection in naïve cells. This evidence contributes to a better understanding of vector‒virus‒host interactions for new diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers, antiviral therapies, or even vaccine development [114].
Table 2Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of Zika virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesZIKV MR766In vitroLarvae lysate cells (C6/36) from Aedes albopictus mosquitosMicroparticles PS+ and exosomes CD63-like+Viral RNAViral E proteinNaïve C6/36 cells, monkey kidney (Vero) cells, human monocytes (THP-1), human endothelial (HMEC-1) cellsThe EVs from ZIKV-infected C6/36 cells favor naïve mosquito and mammalian cell infection. The EV stimuli induce monocyte activation and differentiation, and the endothelial cell damage with increased barrier permeability[100]ZIKV PF-25013–18In vitroZIKV-infected human lung epithelial (A549) and NS1-transfected human embryo kidney (HEK293) cellsExosomes CD63+ CD81+NS1 viral protein–The NS1 dimers secreted into extracellular space are associated with exosomes[90]ZIKV without strain identificationIn vitroIn vivoHuman umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC)Exosomes CD63+ CD81+ CD9+ Syntenin+ TSG101+ HSP70+ Alix+Viral genome RNA and proteins E (highly enrichment), C, prM, NS1, and NS5Naïve Vero E6 cells, human lymphoblasts (K562), and A6 mice (Ifnar1−/− C57BL/6, 6 weeks old)Exosomes from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells carry viral elements but do not favor viral transmission/infection. The high E-enrichment allows high affinity binding to neutralizing antibodies, attenuating the ADE[101]ZIKV MR766In vitroHuman monocytes (THP-1)Exosomes CD63+ CD81+ TSG101+ Alix+Viral E and NS1 proteins, genomic RNA transcriptsNaïve THP-1 cells and monkey kidney (Vero cells)Purified exosomes from ZIKV-infected monocytes favor viral transmission, infection, and the differentiation/activation of naïve cells, promoting an infection-activation-infection cycle[102]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroHuman brain microvascular endothelial cells (hcMEC/D3)Large EVs CD63+ Alix+ TSG101+Viral NS1 proteinNaïve hcMEC/D3The EVs from ZIKV-infected endothelial cells can be used as viral element carriers, enhancing ZIKV transmission and infection to susceptible cells and altering the monolayer integrity[103]ZIKVMR766/ PRVABC59In vitroPrimary human fetal astrocytesExosomes Flotillin2+ Alix+Viral RNA–Inhibition of neutral sphingomyelinase-2 activity induces resistance to infection and reduces the exosome biogenesis[104]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroPrimary murine fetal cortical neuronsExosomes HSP70+ CD9+ CD63+Viral RNAViral E proteinNaïve murine fetal cortical neuronsNaïve cells infection, damage, and death. ZIKV modulates neutral sphingomyelinase-2 SMPD3 activity in cortical neurons for its infection: inhibition of SMDP3 activity (by GW4869) or silencing of smdp3 gene (by siRNA) reduces viral burden and transmission through exosomes[105]ZIKV PRVABC-59In vitroSNB-19 (astrocytes) cellsSmall EVs CD63+ CD9+ HSC70+Encapsuled viral genomic RNA and E proteinNaïve SNB-19 cellsThe EVs from ZIKV-infected astrocytes favor the infection of naïve cells. Infected cells present a dysregulated tetraspanin pattern: CD63 is necessary for EV and ZIKV release[106]ZIKV DAK AR 41524In vitroRhesus macaque trophoblast stem cellsEVs CD9+Viral E, NS1, NS4B, and NS5 proteins with diverse cell mRNA, miRNA, and protein cargos–The EV cargo from ZIKV-infected trophoblasts could be used to noninvasively identify placental ZIKV infection in the first trimester of pregnancy[108]ZIKV PRVABC59In vitroJEG-3 trophoblast cellsSmall EVs (MDVs) CD63+ CD9+ TSG101+ Alix+Host mitochondrial and miRNAs involved in immune response, inflammation, secretion, and autophagy–The small MDVs release is a hijacked mechanism during ZIKV infection, inducing the suppression of the antiviral response and favoring cell infection[109]ZIKV GZ01In vitroHuman adenocarcinoma alveolar basal epithelial cells (A549)Exosomes CD63+/CD81+/TSG101+Human host mRNA (DEFA1B)Human embryonic kidney epithelial cells (HEK293T), undifferentiated human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y)The ZIKV infection inhibition through blocking viral attachment to target cells and retarding the progression of cell cycles[110]ZIKV SZ01In vivoSerum from A6 (type I IFN receptor knockout C57BL/6)EVs not characterizedZIKV-derived small‐interfering RNAs (ZIKV-siRNA)Naïve A6 miceThe ZIKV-siRNA confer resistance against viral challenge[112]Not used for EV productionIn vitroIn vivoHuman embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 T cellsSmall EVs CD81+ Syntenin+Designed siRNA targeting four distinct regions (NS4A, prM, NS1, NS3) of the ZIKV genomeZIKV SZ01-infected A549 and Vero cells; AG6 mice (8 weeks old) or pregnant mice (E17.5)Modified small EVs encapsulating siRNA were able to suppress the ZIKV replication in vitro. Also, these EV efficiently penetrated the placental barrier, reducing ZIKV load and protecting both the mother and the brain of fetuses[113]Yellow fever virusYellow fever (YF)Currently, YFV infection can be controlled by a highly effective virus-attenuated vaccine. Therefore, yellow fever cases occur mainly in unvaccinated populations [115]. Actual evidence indicates that the role of EVs in YF pathogenesis is hypothetical.EV functions from in vitro modelsSinigaglia et al. (2018) reported that immature virions and capsid-free RNA from YFV 17D-204-infected hepatocytes activated plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to produce IFNs in a TLR7- and cell contact-dependent manner. They proposed that YFV RNA cell-to-cell transfer occurs through carriers such as PS-enriched vesicles (compatible with EVs) that evade the host immune response. The authors demonstrated the presence of membranous viral clusters at sites of contact between YFV-infected cells and pDCs [116]. The main limitation of this report was the lack of identification of EV membrane markers; however, these findings suggest that membranous vesicles such as EVs may be involved in cell activation and viral cell-to-cell transmission.Previously, in 2011, Carpp et al. demonstrated that the viral NS3 protein interacted with the host Alix protein to contribute to the release of infectious viral particles. In an in vitro model of YFV (17DD)-infected Vero cells, NS3 and Alix colocalized in the perinuclear region, forming a protein complex required for virion release. They also proved that the truncated forms of Alix inhibited the release of YFV without affecting its replication [117]. Despite not focusing on EVs, the molecular findings are relevant because cells respond to cross-signaling between viral and host proteins, which are essential for virion and EV release.In summary (Table 3), the potential role of EVs in YFV pathogenesis is hypothetical. As demonstrated for DENV and ZIKV, EVs may act as viral carriers or be necessary for viral release through the interaction between viral proteins and the host ESCRT-associated proteins that execute cargo sorting during exosome biogenesis. These findings demonstrate that specific steps during EV biogenesis are necessary to complete the YFV cycle and facilitate its spread to target cells, in which processes EVs can be important mediators.
Table 3Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of yellow fever virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesYFV17D-204In vitroHepatocytes (Huh7.5 cells)EVs without identificationViral RNA or viral immature particlesPlasmacytoid dendritic cellsHypothetical: Cell-to-cell viral carriers[116]YFV17DDIn vitroVero cells–––Hypothetical: YFV NS3 interacts with host Alix protein to contribute for viral release. Alix executes cargo sorting in exosome biogenesis[117]Japanese encephalitis virusJapanese encephalitis (JE)JE is responsible for a greater burden of neurological disability than any other arthropod-borne disease. Infection can be prevented by vaccination. Currently, there are no specific antivirals, and only supportive treatment is available [118–120]. Recent studies have demonstrated that EVs are involved in viral infection-mediated neuroinvasive diseases [53, 121]. However, the functions of EVs in JE pathogenesis remain elusive.EV functions from in vitro and in vivo modelsIn 1987, Hase et al. described the maturation process of the JEV SA-14 strain in mosquito C6/36 cells and murine brain cells. They reported that virions were enclosed in vesicles distributed throughout the cytoplasm and transported to the cell surface to be released extracellularly [122]. Interestingly, the authors confirmed Leary and Blair’s postulate that JEV uses secretory-type exocytosis [123], the same pathway that was later described for exosome release. This report revealed that during the viral cycle, vesicle formation is necessary to ensure virion maturation and release. Later, convergence with EV biogenesis will be demonstrated.Flavivirus E and NS1 proteins are cotransformally processed during virion maturation through the cell secretory pathway [124]. Mason (1989) demonstrated that in Vero cells, the E and NS1 proteins are released at a slow rate, whereas in C6/36 cells, the NS1 protein is not released. A key finding related to EVs is the amphipathic nature and sedimentation properties of the NS1 protein found in mammalian cell culture supernatant, suggesting that NS1 contains membrane-binding domains and is released from infected cells in a membrane-associated particulate form, as described in other flaviviruses. The authors concluded that extracellular membranous particles containing the NS1 protein could be related to the strong immunological response observed in JE [125]. This report constitutes the first approach for the potential role of EVs as viral element carriers implicated in JE pathogenesis.In summary (Table 4), in the context of JEV pathogenesis, EVs have been proposed to be necessary for viral maturation and extracellular virion release; additionally, as viral components (NS1 protein) carriers, EVs can induce immune responses, as observed in JE cases.
Table 4Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of Japanese encephalitis virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesJEV S-14In vitroIn vivoC6/36 cells and ICR miceIntracellular vesiclesViral particles–Hypothetical: EV biogenesis is associated with viral maturation. Viral particles appeared to be carried within vesicles to the cell surface to be released extracellularly[122]JEV NakayamaIn vitroVero cells and C6/36 cellsIntracellular vesiclesViral proteins (E, NS1)–Hypothetical: JEV NS1 protein contains membrane-binding domains, and it is released from infected cells in a membrane-associated particulate form[125]West Nile virusWest Nile fever (WNF)WNF may progress to a neuroinvasive disease in elderly immunocompromised patients. To date, no WNV-specific antiviral treatments or vaccines are available. Like other mosquito-borne flaviviruses, prevention depends on organized and sustained mosquito control with public education [126, 127]. In this context, what is the role of EVs in WNV neuropathogenesis?EV functions from in vitro modelsThe role of EVs as a mechanism for WNV genomic RNA transmission was proposed by Zhou et al. (2018). They used an in vitro model of WNV CT2741-infected Neuro-2a cells and isolated CD9+ HSP70+ exosomes that contained the viral E gene transcript, suggesting that WNV genomic RNA is a part of their cargo. The authors concluded that the exosomes from neuronal cells mediate the cell-to-cell transmission of WNV RNA, which may favor infection in a receptor-independent manner in the CNS [128].As described for other flaviviruses, the cell-to-cell signaling mediated by EVs in the host innate immune response should be considered a mechanism of EV antiviral or proinflammatory activity. Slonchak et al. (2019) used an in vitro model with WNV Kunjin-infected human A549 cells to isolate CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+ exosomes containing specific host RNAs (miRNAs, small noncoding RNAs (sncRNAs), and mRNAs) associated with virus‒host interactions, inflammation, and the innate immune response [129]. This report revealed that WNV infection altered the RNA profile of the EV cargo (Table 5).
Table 5Extracellular vesicles in the pathogenesis of West Nile virus infectionViral strainModelEV origin cells/fluidEV typeEV cargoEV recipient cellsEV functionReferencesWNV CT2741In vitroMouse Neuro-2a cellsExosomes CD9+ HSP70+Viral RNAMouse Neuro-2a cellsViral RNA cell-to-cell transmission[128]WNV KunjinIn vitroHuman A549 cellsExosomes CD9+ CD63+ HSP70+Human host RNA profile (miRNAs, sncRNAs, and mRNAs)Human A549 cells transfected with small RNAs from EV isolated of WNV-infected cellsWNV infection stimulates the incorporation of increased levels of specific host RNA profile into EVs that regulates genes associated with viral and inflammatory processes. Small RNAs from EVs induced innate immune response on naïve cells[129]In summary, during WNV infection, EV functions are associated with the transport of viral RNA, which is implicated in cell-to-cell transmission. Additionally, WNV-infected cells release EVs containing host RNAs associated with antiviral and proinflammatory functions. The interplay between EVs and naïve cells may promote viral transmission and/or immunostimulatory activity.Conclusions and perspectivesFor the control of mosquito-borne flaviviruses, it is necessary to understand how viruses interact with different host cells. Knowledge of the molecular or cellular pathways involved in vector‒virus‒host interactions that allow viruses to replicate, persist due to immune evasion, or establish a prolonged inflammatory state is critical for determining disease outcomes.This review aimed to highlight the currently available data only without the claim of representing established knowledge. The current data related to EVs and flavivirus diseases are mainly obtained from in vitro studies in cell lines; thus, elucidating their impact on mosquito-borne flavivirus pathogenesis is important. Further studies using primary cells or in vivo or ex vivo models are necessary.Based on the ability of EVs to transfer viral components or active biomolecules, the EVs released from infected cells represent a novel and efficient mechanism for viral (DENV, ZIKV, YFV, JEV, and WNV) cell-to-cell transmission through their ability to carry and transfer different viral contents, such as RNAs, proteins, or viral particles, as well as the ability to evade the host immune response. Convergence between EV biogenesis and the flavivirus replication cycle is critical because viral and host molecules interact; thus, this process has potential as a target for antiviral therapy. From a vector perspective, EVs mediate efficient transmission and favor virus adaptation in vertebrate hosts, ensuring the maintenance of the viral cycle. From the host perspective, as a response to infection, EVs may have altered RNAs and protein cargoes that modify naïve cell behavior, enhancing the inflammatory response and tissue damage or mediating a protective effect through the transfer of antiviral resistance. Additionally, EVs participate in exacerbated inflammatory responses in the CNS or placenta or could be implicated in the transfer of antiviral resistance.EVs can also stimulate cell signaling pathways, as described for platelet-derived EVs, which trigger NET formation and the release of proinflammatory cytokines in immune cells, promoting vascular dysfunction in vivo. In this sense, EVs not only function as transport vehicles but also interact with cell receptors to promote changes in cell behavior.Knowledge of these mechanisms will lead to further investigations to develop novel strategies employing EVs to combat viral infection and reduce disease severity based on their potential roles as biomarkers of severity progression, therapeutics (e.g., blockade of EV biogenesis or their interaction with cell receptors), or vector control tools.Therefore, currently available data concerning EVs evaluated in different models suggest that they may contribute directly to the pathogenesis of mosquito-borne flaviviruses.Future research will contribute to understanding the role of EVs, especially their mechanistic and functional effects in vivo, to elucidate their real impact on mosquito-borne Flavivirus diseases. The above could be a near reality owing to the rapid evolution of the field of extracellular vesicles.


Title: Mice as an Animal Model for Japanese Encephalitis Virus Research: Mouse Susceptibility, Infection Route, and Viral Pathogenesis

1. Introduction Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a mosquito-borne arbovirus taxonomically belonging to the genus Flavivirus in the family Flaviviridae [1]. Of the 53 classified species of known flaviviruses, JEV is related to other medically important mosquito-borne flaviviruses to various genetic and antigenic extents, with a much closer relationship being noted with West Nile (WNV), St. Louis encephalitis (SLEV), and Murray Valley encephalitis viruses than with Zika (ZIKV), dengue (DENV), and yellow fever (YFV) viruses [2,3]. JEV circulates in nature by both horizontal transmission among susceptible animal hosts, primarily through the bite of culicine mosquito vectors (e.g., Culex tritaeniorhynchus) [4,5], and vertical transmission from female mosquitoes to their offspring through the transovarial infection of developing eggs [6,7]. Of many susceptible animals, certain vertebrates, such as suids (e.g., domestic pigs) and avians (e.g., wading birds), are especially relevant for the incidental transmission of JEV to the human population [8,9,10]. Experimentally, JEV can also be transmitted in the absence of mosquito vectors through several non-vector-borne routes in animals such as rodents, pigs, bats, and/or squirrel monkeys: contact transmission [11,12,13,14], aerosol transmission [11,15], transplacental transmission [16,17,18,19,20], and artificial insemination [21,22]. In both humans and animals, JEV causes Japanese encephalitis (JE), formerly called Type B or Japanese B encephalitis [5,23], which is an acute encephalitis syndrome that potentially leads to severe brain damage or death [24,25]. In Japan, where JE was first recognized, the disease is believed to have arisen in the “summer encephalitis” season before the 20th century began, although the first recorded outbreak occurred in 1924, involving >6000 human cases with a case fatality of ~60% [26,27]. About a decade after this historic outbreak, a filterable agent from the brain of a fatal human JE case was demonstrated to be able to produce the disease in monkeys. In 1935, JEV was first isolated from the brain of a deceased patient, and the isolate was designated as the Nakayama strain [28]. Despite the fact that JEV has been known as the cause of JE for nearly a century, it is still a neglected pathogen that continues to be a major public health challenge [29]. JEV is the most common cause of viral encephalitis in the Asia-Pacific region [30,31,32,33], with the reported boundaries of viral activity on the north being much of China and the eastern China-Russia borderlands [34,35,36,37,38,39,40], on the south being Papua New Guinea [41,42] and a northern part of Australia [43,44,45,46,47,48,49], on the east being Guam [50,51,52] and Saipan [53,54], and on the west being much of India [55,56] and a southeastern part of Pakistan [57,58]. This region contains ~25 countries, including the top two most populous countries (i.e., China and India) of the world and several of the most densely populated countries (e.g., Singapore and Bangladesh), putting far more than half of the global population at risk of JEV infection [59]. Additionally, some cases of JEV infection were found in birds [60,61] and mosquitoes [62] collected in Italy during the first decade of the 21st century, which was the first time that the virus was detected outside the Asia-Pacific region, albeit with no human JE outbreaks reported as of yet. In 2016, however, a case of co-infection with JEV and YFV was identified unexpectedly in an Angolan resident with no out-of-country travel history [63]. This recent epidemiological data indicates that JEV is no longer confined to the Asia-Pacific region, and is continuously expanding its activity over new territories in Europe and Africa, with possible spread to the Americas in the very near future [64,65]. Hence, JEV is an emerging pathogen that has the potential to spread across the globe, now more than ever [66,67,68]. The annual incidence of JE presents two main epidemiological patterns [69,70], intrinsically aligned with the regional climate that affects the population size, density, and distribution of both mosquito vectors and animal hosts involved in JEV transmission [71,72]. In tropical regions, JEV is “endemic,” causing sporadic outbreaks nearly all year round at low frequencies, with peaks in the rainy season affecting all young under age 15 due to lack of immunity to the virus. In subtropical and temperate regions, on the other hand, JEV is “epidemic”, causing seasonal outbreaks exclusively during the summer and early fall and affecting all ages, with a bimodal distribution peaking in young children and the elderly because of the lack and the fading of JEV-specific immunity, respectively. Since its emergence, JEV has evolved into five divergent genotypes (G1–G5) presumably at the center of the Asia-Pacific region (i.e., Indonesia and Malaysia), from which one or more genotypes have dispersed to other areas of the region [73]. Historically, G1, G2, and G3 have all been circulated broadly at various times and frequencies in the Asia-Pacific region, except the India-Nepal-Sri Lanka area in which only G1 and G3 have been detected, and the Australia-Papua New Guinea area in which only G1 and G2 have been found [74,75,76,77,78,79,80,81,82,83]. Of particular note, G3 was the most prevalent in Asia until the 1990s, but since then, it has slowly been replaced by G1 [74,75,76,77,78,79,80]; yet, G3 has recently appeared for the first time outside the Asia-Pacific region in Italy [60,61,62] and Angola [63]. Unlike the three aforementioned genotypes, G4 has been located only in the Indonesia-Malaysia area [84], and G5 has been limited to the China-Japan-Korea area apart from the Indonesia-Malaysia area [85,86,87,88]. Within the five genotypes, it is noted that the sequence divergence between their genomes at the nucleotide (nt) and amino acid (aa) levels reaches up to ~20% and ~10%, respectively [85]; however, their biological differences in viral transmissibility, pathogenicity, and immunogenicity have not yet been fully understood. From a clinical standpoint, JEV causes mostly asymptomatic infections, with the symptomatic cases in humans ranging from ~0.1% to <5.0%, depending on the study population evaluated [89,90]. Despite such a low symptomatic infection rate, the annual number of new JE cases is estimated to be ~68,000 with a case-fatality rate reaching up to ~30% and affecting predominantly children under the age of 15 [91,92]. Furthermore, up to ~50% of JE survivors may never fully recover and continue to seek medical care for long-term neurologic, psychiatric, cognitive, and/or behavioral problems with various degrees of severity [93,94,95]. As interventions for the control of JEV, one or more different types of vaccines are commercially available in certain parts of the world [96,97,98], yet no antivirals have been developed [24]. Even with readily available vaccines, ~80% of new annual JE cases still occur in countries where national immunization programs are already in place or under development [92,99]. This data, and the fact that JEV is a vector-borne zoonotic pathogen, underscores the unmet need to develop therapeutics for the treatment of JEV infection. In order to facilitate the development of such drugs, we herein review the previous studies that were conducted using various strains of mice, the most widely accepted laboratory animal model for the study of JEV replication and JE neuropathogenesis. 2. The Virus JEV is an enveloped virus with a linear, single-stranded, positive-sense RNA genome [100]. The virion consists of an inner nucleocapsid composed of the genomic RNA and multiple capsid C:C homodimers [101], and an outer shell composed of two surface proteins M and E arranged into 90 E:M:M:E heterotetramers [102] in a herringbone pattern on the viral envelope membrane (Figure 1, top panel). The genomic RNA is ~10,977 nt long (Figure 1, bottom panel) and has three functional parts [103]: (1) an ~95-nt untranslated region (UTR) with a type 1 cap structure attached at the 5’ end [104], (2) an ~10,299-nt central open reading frame (ORF) with a -1 ribosomal frameshift signal located at positions nt 3551-3630 [105], and (3) an ~583-nt UTR with no poly(A) tail at the 3’ end [106]. Each of the 5’ and 3’ UTRs, as well as the ~100-nt 5’-terminal region of the ORF, contains a network of cis-acting RNA elements [107,108,109] defined by the primary, secondary, and tertiary structures that regulate the translation and replication of the viral genomic RNA [110,111,112,113]. The single long ORF encodes two precursor polyproteins [114]: (i) the full-length ppC–NS5, which undergoes co- and post-translational proteolytic cleavages to yield three structural (C, prM/M, and E) and seven nonstructural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins; and (ii) the frameshift-derived truncated ppC–NS1’, which also goes through the same proteolysis as does ppC–NS5 to produce the three aforementioned structural proteins and NS1’, a 52-aa longer isoform of NS1 as a result of its C-terminal extension that includes the 9-aa N-terminal segment of NS2A before the frameshift and a 43-aa unique peptide synthesized from the new reading frame afterwards [103,115,116]. Of these 10 mature proteins, the following two are enzymes, each containing multiple catalytic activities [117,118,119,120]: (a) NS3, 619 aa in length, has serine protease activity in the ~168-aa N-terminal region [121] and helicase, nucleoside 5’-triphosphatase, and RNA 5’-triphosphatase activities in the ~438-aa C-terminal region [122], and (b) NS5, 905 aa in length, has methyltransferase and guanylyltransferase activities in the ~265-aa N-terminal region and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity in the ~630-aa C-terminal region [123]. In a nutshell, the three structural proteins are required for the formation of an infectious virion [124,125,126], and the seven nonstructural proteins are engaged in multiple steps of viral replication (i.e., polyprotein processing [127], RNA replication [128,129,130], and particle morphogenesis [131,132]) and in a variety of host cell responses to viral replication [133,134,135,136]. With regard to JEV pathogenesis, the viral E protein has been the target of extensive study since it acts as the viral receptor interacting with an ill-defined cellular component(s) on susceptible host cells for viral entry [137,138,139]. In addition, a recent study has suggested that a secreted form of the viral NS1 protein specifically binds to brain endothelial cells and alters their permeability, causing brain-specific vascular leakage that contributes to the pathogenesis of JE [140]. 3. Clinical Features in HumansFor symptomatic JEV infection, it generally takes 5–15 days with a median of 8.4 days to show clinical signs/symptoms after contraction of the virus, but in some cases, may have a longer incubation time of 3–4 weeks [141]. The clinical outcomes vary significantly [90,142] from mild self-limiting undifferentiated illnesses (e.g., fever) to severe life-threatening nervous system diseases (e.g., encephalitis) [143,144,145,146]. 3.1. Central Nervous System DisordersJE, a neuroinflammatory disease, is the most serious outcome of JEV infection attacking neurons and other cell types in the central nervous system (CNS) [24]. JE almost always starts with nonspecific symptoms, such as lethargy, fever, chills, coryza, and diarrhea for a few days prior to the onset of neurological manifestations, such as headache, vomiting, impaired consciousness, altered mental status, and seizures [147,148,149,150,151,152,153,154,155]. Seizures tend to occur more frequently in young children [151,152,156]. Critically ill JE patients may present a Parkinsonian syndrome with expressionless faces, tremors, and hypertonia linked to the damage of the basal ganglia in the brain [157,158] or a polio-like syndrome with acute flaccid paralysis caused by destruction of the anterior horn cells in the spinal cord [159,160,161,162,163,164]. Other movement disorders observed in JE patients include opisthotonus, dystonia, hemiparesis, choreoathetosis, orofacial dyskinesias, and gaze palsy [148,149,150,153,165]. Occasionally, JE patients develop neuroimmunological complications, such as anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis caused by an antibody-mediated autoimmune reaction to the NMDARs in the brain [166,167,168], acute transverse myelitis characterized by an inflammation in the spinal cord often damaging the myelin sheath [169,170], and acute disseminated encephalomyelitis noted in general by an inflammatory demyelination affecting the CNS [171,172]. In addition, non-neurological manifestations are also associated with JE, which include gastric hemorrhage, thrombocytopenia, liver dysfunction, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, and potentially pulmonary edema [148,173,174]. Poor prognosis for JE is indicated by persistent/recurrent fever, prolonged/repeated seizures, poor plantar reflexes, severe lung and kidney problems, high JEV antigens in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and low anti-JEV IgM antibodies in CSF and serum [151,153,175,176,177,178]. Even after recovery, a large portion of JE survivors have neuropsychiatric sequelae, such as memory loss, intellectual disability, language disorders, emotional disorders, behavioral disorders, movement disorders, and ocular motor disorders [179,180,181,182,183]. 3.2. Peripheral Nervous System DisordersLimited clinical studies have suggested that JEV infection may induce Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS) [184,185,186], a neuroimmunological disease caused by our own immune system primarily marring the myelin sheaths and axons of nerves of the peripheral nervous system (PNS) [187]. To date, the most informative study conducted with 47 JEV-positive GBS patients has shown that the disease usually begins with febrile illness, as seen during the prodromal phase of JE, which then progresses to neurological complications, such as headache, disturbed consciousness, paresthesia, impaired reflexes, flaccid paralysis, and breathing problems [185]. In the same study, a follow-up examination with 17 of the initial 47 GBS patients at eight months after hospital discharge found that they still experienced neuromuscular complications, such as limb muscle weakness and atrophy, incontinence, and hoarse voice [185]. Although its causal relationship with GBS requires further investigation, JEV appears to be able to trigger the PNS-damaging GBS. In line with this notion, other flaviviruses have recently been documented to be a cause of GBS, which include WNV [188,189], ZIKV [190,191], and DENV [192,193]. 3.3. Reproductive DisordersIt is conceivable that pregnant women infected with JEV may pass the virus to their fetus, based on the recent findings that during gestation, ZIKV can cross the placenta, infect the unborn offspring, and thus cause miscarriage or a variety of birth defects, collectively designated as congenital Zika syndrome, such as microcephaly [194]. However, little is known about the possible adverse effects of JEV infection during pregnancy. Until now, only a few human cases of congenital JEV infection have been reported, which result in either abortions or the deliveries of a healthy child [195,196,197,198], possibly depending on the time of infection during gestation [197]. In pregnant sows, on the other hand, it has been well established that congenital JEV infection causes reproductive losses, such as mummified, stillborn, and abnormal piglets even when they are born alive [199,200,201,202,203]. Therefore, there is a clear difference in the clinical outcome of congenital JEV infections between humans and pigs, both of which are highly susceptible to the virus. It may be worth investigating a possible causal link between JEV infection and pregnancy complications in humans, and if there is a link, then its potential effects on fetal growth in general and fetal brain development in particular, should be studied. 4. Mice: A Reliable Small-Animal Model for JEV ResearchMice are a well-characterized and widely accepted animal model for JEV research, studying viral infection and disease pathogenesis, as well as evaluating the safety and efficacy of potential medical countermeasures at a preclinical stage of development. The mouse model has many advantages over other animal models, of which the four most compelling are [204]: (1) the biological properties, such as small body size, rapid reproduction cycle, and short life span are favorable for handling and husbandry in a high-level biosafety laboratory; (2) the well-characterized CNS enables us to extrapolate new findings to the human CNS; (3) biological reagents are available for a variety of cell biological and immunological analyses; and (4) an increasing number of genome-editing technologies are applicable for the extension of future genetic studies. However, there are also some limitations due to the fact that there exist a range of genetic, anatomical, physiological, and immunological differences between mice and humans [205,206], which reflects how well mice recapitulate key biological processes contributing to the development and progression of JEV-induced diseases. Indeed, a systematic comparative study has shown that, in some human inflammatory conditions, the gene expression profiles are not reproduced in their mouse models [207]. Moreover, in cancer studies, it has been indicated that the process of tumorigenesis is fundamentally different in humans and mice [208]. Nevertheless, to date, mice have been the most commonly used animal model to investigate the genetic, molecular, and cellular basis of JEV replication and JE neuropathogenesis [209,210,211]. 4.1. Mouse Susceptibility Mice vary in their susceptibility to JEV infection (Figure 2), depending on a combination of the viral strain, inoculum dose, and inoculation route on one side [212,213], and the mouse strain and age on the other side [213,214,215]. 4.1.1. Mouse Strain-Dependent VariationAs for the importance of host genetic background in determining its susceptibility to JEV infection, an earlier study using eight different strains of adult mice (70–120 days old) has described three classes of mouse susceptibility to peripheral infection with a given equal dose of a wild-type (WT) JEV strain, based on their infection rates (IRs) and mortality rates (MRs): (1) high IRs and high MRs (e.g., C3H/He), (2) high IRs and medium MRs (e.g., C57BL/6), and (3) low IRs and low MRs (e.g., BALB/c) [214]. In the same study, a closer comparison of C3H/He with C57BL/6 mice has revealed that JEV replicates in various internal organs, produces viremia in the blood, and even penetrates into the brain equally well in both mouse strains when inoculated intraperitoneally; however, lethal encephalitis has been shown to occur more frequently in C3H/He than in C57BL/6 mice. In contrast, no significant difference in mortality has been observed between C3H/He and C57BL/6 mice when inoculated intracerebrally [214]. Although the number of animals used in the study is small, these data suggest that C57BL/6 may elicit stronger immune responses following peripheral JEV infection than C3H/He, which in turn, suppress viral replication in the brain even if the virus enters the brain [216]. This notion is in line with a recent report, describing that a lower mortality rate observed in DBA/2 mice as compared to C3H/HeN after peripheral JEV infection is related to a more rapid and robust neutralizing antibody response, and also possibly to the lower permissiveness of their macrophages (MΦs) and dendritic cells (DCs) to the infection, which may lead to a decrease in viral neuroinvasion and/or neuropathogenesis even after viral entry into the CNS [217]. As seen with JEV, variation in mouse susceptibility has also been noted with other flaviviruses [218,219,220,221]. Although the genetic basis of this mouse strain-dependent susceptibility is not yet fully understood, a significant but limited number of cellular genes, such as those involved in dsRNA- and interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immune responses, have been shown to affect mouse susceptibility to infection with one or more flaviviruses, such as WNV, ZIKV, DENV, and YFV [222]. For JEV, it has been reported that blockage of CD137 (also called 4-1BB and TNFRSF9), a costimulatory molecule expressed on MΦs, DCs, NK cells, T cells, and B cells, makes C57BL/6 mice less susceptible to infection, by enhancing the innate immune responses involving the rapid activation of type I/II IFN responses and the increased infiltration of mature Ly6Chi monocytes into the inflamed CNS [223]. In addition, a previous study using mice lacking various Toll-like receptors (TLRs), a key element in activation of the innate immune system, has found that TLR3 knockout makes its parental BALB/c mice more susceptible to JEV infection, but interestingly, TLR4 knockout makes its parental C57BL/6 mice less susceptible to JEV infection due to the enhanced type I IFN-mediated innate immune responses, as well as the augmented adaptive humoral and cellular immune responses [224]. Moreover, it has been suggested that, in addition to laboratory mice, wild mice may offer some advantages in identifying cellular genes associated with individual differences in susceptibility to JEV infection within natural populations [225]. 4.1.2. Mouse Age-Dependent VariationThe age of mice is another key factor as important as their genetic make-up for their susceptibility to JEV infection. A very early study using the DD strain of albino mice has shown that the level of its susceptibility to subcutaneous inoculation of a WT JEV strain with a dose of 18–40 plaque-forming units (PFU) markedly decreases as the mice get older, specifically from being highly susceptible at 1 week of age, displaying 100% mortality, to becoming resistant at 2 weeks of age, exhibiting only 25% mortality [226]. However, those 2-week-old mice were found to be highly susceptible reaching the mortality of 100%, when inoculated with a much higher dose of ~3.2 × 105 PFU through the same subcutaneous route [226]. In addition, our recent study using outbred CD-1 mice, when inoculated intracerebrally with SA14-14-2, the live-attenuated JEV vaccine licensed for human use, has demonstrated that the 1-week-old or younger mice are highly susceptible, having an estimated 50% lethal dose (LD50) of <1.5 to 3 PFU, but the 2-week-old or older mice are resistant, having an estimated LD50 of >1.5 × 103 PFU [103]. One unexpected finding from this study is that SA14-14-2, although fully attenuated, is able to replicate in the brain of suckling CD-1 mice (1–7 days old) and causes fatal encephalitis. As expected, however, we also found that the 3-week-old CD-1 mice are fully resistant to both intracerebral and peripheral infections with SA14-14-2, presenting LD50 values of >1.5 × 105 PFU [103]. These results suggest that, although younger mice (e.g., <1 week old) are more susceptible to JEV infection, a certain age group (e.g., 3–4 weeks old) is better suited for the study of viral pathogenicity, disease pathogenesis, and host immune response, as it better recapitulates the disease development and progression observed in humans. The age-dependent susceptibility to JEV infection has also been reproduced in a rat model, showing that the resistance is developed at the age of 2 weeks [227]. Furthermore, mouse age-dependent susceptibility has been documented for YFV [228]. Given the fact that the vast majority of JEV infections in humans are asymptomatic or self-limited, it is of particular interest to understand the molecular basis of the strain- and age-dependent susceptibility of mice and to identify human counterparts. 4.2. Infection Route A natural JEV infection in human and animal hosts occurs principally through an intradermal or subcutaneous route, when they are bitten by an infected mosquito [229]. An experimental JEV infection in mice, on the other hand, can be performed through one of several different inoculation routes (Figure 3), depending on the purpose of the experiments. In some cases, it may not reflect the natural infection, but the virus can still cause fatal encephalitis. 4.2.1. Peripheral vs. Intracerebral Inoculation As a peripheral route of JEV inoculation, footpad injection has been used, albeit rarely, to mimic the natural infection as a mosquito bite, which allows the virus to spread from a primary infection site in a hindlimb footpad to the CNS [230,231], reportedly affecting the thalamus first, then the sensory cortex and other areas of the CNS, and further spreading to parts of the PNS, such as the somatic and autonomic nervous systems [232]. Like in mice, the uni- or bi-lateral thalamic lesions are also recognized in humans at the early phase of JEV neuroinvasion into the CNS [163,233,234]; however, the involvement of the PNS and its clinical significance during the course of JEV infection in humans are less clear, although WNV is reported to be able to infect sensory and motor neurons of the PNS in both rodents [235,236] and humans [237,238]. As compared to footpad injection, other peripheral inoculation routes, especially intramuscular and intraperitoneal injections, have been employed rather frequently because of their methodological convenience, although the exact path of viral neuroinvasion may not be identical to that of the mosquito-mediated natural infection. The peripheral inoculations have been used to understand the dynamic biology underlying JEV pathogenicity overall, in particular neuroinvasiveness, as well as host immune responses to JEV infection [103,217,239,240,241,242,243]. In addition, the intracerebral route of viral inoculation has been utilized specifically to elucidate the complex biology underlying JEV neurovirulence and host neuroinflammatory responses to JEV infection in the brain [244,245,246,247]. Regardless of the route of JEV inoculation (peripheral or intracerebral), clinical signs in infected mice typically begin with decreased activity, ruffled fur, and weight loss that gradually progress to hunched posture, impaired coordination, tremors/convulsions, hindlimb paralysis, and death; however, the median survival time after peripheral inoculation is always one to several days longer than that after intracerebral inoculation [103,242,244]. Interestingly, a comparative microscopic study of the brains taken from terminally ill mice after JEV inoculation via the intraperitoneal or intracerebral route has shown that more severe inflammation occurs in the intraperitoneally infected group, as characterized by the infiltration and accumulation of leukocytes around the blood vessels, with mononuclear leukocytes often being in close contact with degenerated and disintegrated neurons, than in the intracerebrally infected group that presents only low levels of glial cell proliferation and mononuclear leukocyte infiltration, although a large number of neurons are infected, as seen in the intraperitoneally infected group [248]. This previous study suggests that JEVs injected directly into the brain infect neurons and induce the cell death that is a direct cause of mortality, whereas JEVs administered into the peritoneal cavity may stimulate the host antiviral immune responses prior to viral neuroinvasion that triggers massive inflammation against JEV-infected neurons in the brain afterwards. In addition, a comparative immunological study of the lymphocytes collected from three different strains of mice after JEV infection through three different routes has found that JEV-specific T-helper (Th)-cell responses, as determined by the relative expression levels of Th1 (IFN-γ) and Th2 (IL-4) cytokines, depend not only on the mouse strain used (i.e., inbred C57BL/6J or BALB/c vs. outbred Swiss albino), but also on the inoculation route employed (i.e., intraperitoneal or subcutaneous vs. peroral) [241]. Overall, these results highlight the differential impact of viral inoculation route on the regional immune responses of a host to JEV infection, which affects the systemic immune responses and ultimately the clinical outcome. 4.2.2. Inoculation into a Cephalic CavityAs an animal model for the study of JEV infection, a collection of mouse strains has been shown to be susceptible to the virus by peripheral inoculation almost always at an anatomic site distant from the brain, such as the hindlimb footpad, peritoneal cavity, and thigh muscle, but on some occasions, into a cephalic cavity close to the brain, such as the nasal, oral, and orbital cavities via one of the following inoculation routes: (1) Intranasal/oronasal route. An early study, in which groups of 3- and 7-week-old CD-1 mice were exposed to aerosols containing a WT JEV strain, has found that the virus causes lethal encephalitis in both age groups, with a higher mortality rate observed in the younger group [15]. Similarly, a recent study, in which 4-week-old BALB/c mice were inoculated intranasally with the virulent SCYA201201 or attenuated SA14-14-2 strain of JEV, has shown that both strains replicate well in the lung, liver, heart, kidney, thymus, spleen, and brain [11]. This study has further indicated that both JEV strains are transmissible from the intranasally infected to naïve mice by contact or through aerosols [11]. However, one caveat of this latter study is that none of the mice infected with SCYA201201 or SA14-14-2 had any detectable levels of neutralizing antibody or showed any clinical signs of JEV infection, although histopathological lesions were visible in their lungs and brains [11]. Still, these two studies suggest that JEV can establish a systemic infection in mice following intranasal/oronasal inoculation. Similar to mice, pigs are also shown to be susceptible to JEV infection through an oronasal route [13,14,249], as the virus persist in tonsils for at least 3–4 weeks and in oral fluids for up to 2 weeks [12,14,250]. These data suggest that the direct pig-to-pig transmission of JEV may play a role in overwintering of the virus when its mosquito vectors are unavailable [251,252]. Furthermore, JEV is reported to be infectious as inhalable aerosols to several other experimental animals, of which Syrian hamsters and three non-human primates (NHPs; squirrel, cynomolgus, and rhesus monkeys) develop lethal encephalitis, whereas Fisher–Dunning rats and Hartley guinea pigs exhibit only asymptomatic infection even with a high inoculum of up to 105 PFU [15,253,254]. Other flaviviruses are also documented to be transmissible via intranasal, oronasal, or other mucocutaneous routes in various animal species and/or humans (e.g., WNV in birds, mice, hamsters, monkeys, and humans [255,256,257,258,259]; ZIKV in guinea pigs, monkeys, and humans [260,261]; SLEV in mice [262]; DENV in humans [263]; Wesselsbron virus in mice and humans [264]; Bagaza virus in birds [265]; and Tembusu virus in ducks [266]). (2) Peroral route. A previous study, in which young adult Swiss albino mice were inoculated perorally, intraperitoneally, or subcutaneously with the JEV strain P20778 that fails to cause encephalitis in weanling or adult mice after peripheral inoculation, has found that the perorally infected mice generate protective antibodies directed against JEV proteins (e.g., E and NS1), although the antibody titers rise in a much slower rate as the number of inoculation increases as compared to those produced in mice infected intraperitoneally or subcutaneously [267]. In addition to the antibody response, it has also been noted that the perorally infected mice develop JEV-specific T-helper cell cytokine responses, although it is less clear which subset of T-helper cells are induced (Th1 or Th2), but they are distinct from those produced in the mice infected intraperitoneally or subcutaneously that uniformly elicit a strong Th1 response [241]. Even though these studies do not provide direct evidence for the occurrence of viral replication in the perorally infected mice, they seem to suggest a remote, yet distinct, possibility of mice being susceptible to peroral JEV infection. (3) Ocular route. A very recent study, in which 2-week-old Swiss albino mice were inoculated via a conjunctival route with a WT JEV strain, has shown that this ocular inoculation produces a systemic infection, determined by clinical signs of infection with 100% mortality, histopathological lesions in the brain, and viral RNAs/antigens in various visceral organs and many parts of the brain, as well as in the neuronal cells of the eye [268]. In agreement with this finding, a very early report, in which 3-week-old mice of an unspecified strain were infected with a WT JEV strain through a conjunctival, intrabulbar or retrobulbar route, has also found that all three ocular routes of inoculation lead to lethal encephalitis [269]. In the same report, it was further shown that the intrabulbar inoculation leads to a shorter average mouse survival time than the intranasal inoculation, but longer than the intracerebral inoculation [269]. In summary, multiple strains of both outbred and inbred mice are shown to be susceptible to JEV infection capable of developing lethal encephalitis, regardless of the route used for viral inoculation into cephalic cavities near to the brain, as well as at peripheral sites far from the brain. This suggests that JEV can reach the CNS via multiple pathways, replicate to a high titer within the CNS, and so cause neuropathological disease. The molecular basis of JEV neuroinvasion has not yet been fully understood and, thus, is an important area of research to better understand viral pathogenesis. 4.2.3. Peripheral Inoculation during Pregnancy While the risk of transplacental transmission of JEV from a pregnant woman to her unborn baby has not been conclusively determined [195,196,197,198], its occurrence and negative effects on the growing fetus have been demonstrated experimentally in mice [16,18,270,271,272,273]. In an early study, in which Swiss albino pregnant mice were inoculated intraperitoneally with a sublethal dose of JEV in the first week of gestation, the virus was detected in the placenta and fetal organs (e.g., brain, spleen, and liver), with the number of fetal and neonatal deaths estimated to be considerably higher in infected than uninfected mice [18]. The fetal and neonatal death rate was found to be dependent on the time when maternal infection occurred over the gestation period of ~21 days, as the highest death rate of 66% was obtained by the infection at the first week of gestation, followed by 49% at its second week, and 14% at its third week, compared to 3–7% of the uninfected control mice [18]. Apart from the fetal and neonatal deaths, however, no apparent congenital abnormalities were observed in the developing fetuses or newborns from JEV-infected mice [18]. A subsequent follow-up study has further shown that the transplacental transmission of JEV can occur repeatedly in two consecutive pregnancies six months apart, causing abortions more often, but neonatal deaths less frequently, during their second pregnancies than during their first [16]. Moreover, a series of previous small-scale experiments have suggested that the occurrence of transplacental JEV transmission in mice, as determined by detection of the virus in placentas and fetuses, varies with the strain of the mouse [270], strain of the virus [271], route of inoculation [272], and timing of the infection during pregnancy [273]. These available data collectively suggest that mice may serve as a small-animal model for the study of transplacental JEV transmission, which occurs in pigs and potentially in humans. Considering that other flaviviruses, such as WNV [274], ZIKV [275], and DENV [276,277] are shown to be able to pass through the placenta during pregnancy, there is a high likelihood of transplacental transmission of JEV in humans, capable of causing pregnancy loss and/or congenital anomalies. Further studies are desirable to assess the risk of transplacental JEV transmission in humans and its adverse effects on the development and survival of their fetuses. 4.3. Viral Pathogenesis JEV causes a range of neurological complications [278,279], of which JE is of primary concern, as the virus can permanently impair the CNS via a complex multistep process starting with viral replication in the mononuclear phagocyte system, then viral entry into the CNS, and ending with viral replication in the CNS, which eventually results in neuronal cell death and detrimental neuroinflammation (Figure 4). This process is determined by viral pathogenicity referring to the following two main intrinsic properties [280,281]: (1) neuroinvasiveness, which represents viral ability to invade the CNS from the periphery, and (2) neurovirulence, which represents viral ability to cause pathological changes within the CNS. 4.3.1. Viral Replication in the Mononuclear Phagocyte System JEV gets into the body of vertebrate hosts, including humans, when an infected female mosquito bites their skin, under which the primary site of infection is the dermis, a layer of connective tissue that lies beneath the epidermis and contains lymph vessels, blood vessels, nerve endings, oil glands, sweat glands, and hair follicles [282]. At the biting site, the mosquito inserts her proboscis through the epidermis and into the dermis to reach a blood vessel and injects her saliva containing the virus into the blood stream before taking a blood meal [283]. During this blood intake process, JEV is believed to infect a subset of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in humans, NHPs, and mice; namely mononuclear phagocytes (i.e., MΦs and DCs [217,224,284,285,286,287,288,289,290,291,292,293,294,295,296,297]) that play pivotal roles in initiating and orchestrating the host antiviral, inflammatory, innate and adaptive immune responses [298]. Other mosquito-borne flaviviruses, such as WNV [299,300,301,302], ZIKV [303], DENV [304,305,306], and YFV [307] are also shown to be able to infect mononuclear phagocytes. Although both MΦs and DCs are permissive for JEV replication, the replication efficiency depends on the cell type and the status of cell maturation. For instance, murine MΦs are found to be more permissive for JEV replication than murine DCs [287], and immature, but not mature, human DCs are shown to support productive JEV replication [289,290]. The initial JEV replication in the skin, together with the mosquito saliva deposited during blood feeding, is thought to trigger local inflammation, which promotes the recruitment of monocytes from the blood stream to the inflamed skin tissue, where they then differentiate into MΦs and DCs and become new targets for infection [282,308]. Although it is unclear if this is applicable for JEV, other flaviviruses may also target other immune (e.g., mast cells) and non-immune (e.g., keratinocytes and fibroblasts) cells in the skin [309,310,311]. Based on our current understanding, JEV-infected mononuclear phagocytes and cell-free JEV virions in the skin are believed to migrate through the lymph and blood vessels to peripheral lymphoid organs (e.g., lymph nodes and spleen), where JEV replication is shown to take place in mononuclear leukocytes, such as MΦs and, perhaps some T cells [299,312,313,314,315]. JEV may be able to replicate in human T cells at a very low rate and possibly in a strain-dependent manner [286,313]. The productive JEV replication in peripheral lymphoid organs causes an episode of transient viremia commonly at low levels [226,314,316,317,318], which may precede the initiation of systemic infection, the development of nonspecific symptoms, and the activation of antiviral immune systems, leading to the proliferation and differentiation of antigen-specific lymphocytes [319,320]. In murine systems, it has been shown that, upon infection with a WT JEV strain, MΦs induce the expression of costimulatory surface molecules (e.g., CD40, CD80, CD86, and MHC) and proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6 and IL-12) as part of the normal innate immune response [321,322], whereas DCs fail to upregulate some of those costimulatory surface molecules (e.g., CD40 and MHC), and intricately produce not only those proinflammatory cytokines but also some anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-10) [284,287]. In the latter two studies, it has been further demonstrated that JEV-infected DCs are broadly inefficient in activating CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, notably with the key anti-inflammatory IL-10 produced by the infected DCs having a negative effect on their ability to activate CD8+ T cells, but not CD4+ T cells [284,287]. In line with these findings, both murine and human DCs, when infected with WT JEV, have been shown to expand a population of regulatory T (Treg) cells, which is mediated by the upregulation of PD-L1, a co-inhibitory molecule critical for the maintenance of immune homeostasis, on DCs [284,289]. Similar findings have been obtained in a recent transcriptomic study, showing that infection of human immature DCs with WT JEV increases the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines (e.g., IL-6, IL-12, TNF-α, CCL2, and CCL5), as well as the anti-inflammatory IL-10, and activates Treg cells [292]. These data thus suggest that JEV may interfere with the maturation of immature DCs, which leads to altered cytokine production, impaired T cell activation, and induced Treg cell expansion, thereby undermining the host innate and adaptive immune responses to the virus, and in consequence, allowing the virus to better replicate and disseminate throughout the host body. On the other hand, contradictory results have also been reported when mouse immature DCs are infected with the attenuated JEV vaccine strain SA14-14-2, which include the efficient maturation of immature DCs, high production of proinflammatory cytokines, effective activation of T cells, and impaired expansion of Treg cells [288]. Taken together, it suggests that JEV may alter the maturation and function of DCs, a professional antigen-presenting cell, following infection possibly in a strain-specific manner. A failure of the host to restrict JEV replication locally in peripheral tissues/organs, such as the skin, lymph nodes, and spleen, escalates the likelihood of the virus to spread throughout the host body to many different tissues/organs and eventually enter the CNS, before the adaptive immune responses are fully activated [323]. 4.3.2. Viral Entry into the Central Nervous SystemNeurotropic viruses, in general, enter the CNS through the vascular or nervous system [324,325,326]. In the case of JEV, this neuroinvasion is believed to take place primarily through the vascular system, first, because the virus is amplified in peripheral lymphoid organs after the initial infection in the skin before it disseminates to many other organs including the CNS via a hematogenous route [26,248,327,328], and second, because its subsequent infection in the brain is quite diffuse and rife [329,330]. JEV is, therefore, considered to have the ability to enter the brain by crossing the blood–brain barrier (BBB), a highly selective physical barrier that prevents the influx of toxic substances, microbial pathogens, and immune cells to the brain parenchyma from the blood stream [331]. This function of the BBB depends largely on the tight junctions (TJs) between brain microvascular endothelial cells (BMECs) of the cerebral blood vessels that are ensheathed by pericytes and astrocyte foot processes [332,333,334,335]. Based on previous research, three possible mechanisms by which JEV can pass the BBB have been postulated [336,337,338]: (1) Transcellular transport of viral particles from one side of an endothelial cell to the opposite side through its interior [339]. A time-course electron microscopy analysis of brain sections of suckling mice after subcutaneous infection with JEV has suggested that viral particles are internalized into BMECs by both clathrin-dependent and clathrin-independent endocytosis, then transported across the cytoplasm by vesicle-mediated transcytosis, and eventually released into the brain parenchyma, with no visible damages at the BBB [340]. This study has also indicated that such a transcellular JEV transport may occur in pericytes as well [340]. Although JEV replication has not been consistently detected in vivo in BMECs of deceased JE patients or JEV-infected mice [209,327,329,341], because the virus may have been cleared at the time of analysis, it has been demonstrated in vitro by JEV infection experiments in cultured BMECs of humans and rats [342,343,344,345,346,347,348,349,350]. In these cultured BMECs, it is noted, though, that the level of JEV replication is unsustainably low and so has no or minimal effect on the cell viability, possibly due to the host antiviral/antiapoptotic responses [342,345,346,348,349]. Just like JEV, other flaviviruses, such as WNV and ZIKV, have also been shown to establish persistent infection with no obvious cytopathic effects (CPEs) in cultured human BMECs [351,352]. This lack of virus-induced CPEs therefore makes BMECs favorable for the transcellular transport of JEV, ZIKV, and perhaps other related neurotropic flaviviruses. In recent years, a high-throughput siRNA screen has found that a plasma membrane-actin cytoskeleton linker, ezrin, and its associated proteins are essential for the caveolae-mediated, clathrin-independent entry of JEV into human BMECs [344]. Moreover, it has been shown in human BMECs that JEV infection activates the epidermal growth factor receptor signaling pathway, which suppresses the antiviral IFN response and, in consequence, promotes viral replication [343]. Altogether, it is possible that JEV may traverse the BBB via a transcellular route, which involves viral entry at the apical surface of polarized BMECs and the release of those endocytosed virions or their progeny virions following viral replication, from the basolateral surface of the BMECs into the brain parenchyma without inducing host cell death. (2) Paracellular movement of viral particles through an intercellular space between two adjacent endothelial cells [353]. Mouse infection experiments have shown that JEV can enter the brain as the structural integrity of the BBB gets compromised due to the permeability-inducing effects of JEV-triggered inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines, chemokines, and matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) on BMECs [292,330,354,355,356,357,358,359]. In particular, multiple studies have suggested that proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α) and chemokines (e.g., CCL2, CCL3, and CXCL2) play major roles in disintegrating the BBB in JEV-infected mice [354,356,359,360]. Similar cytokine- and chemokine-mediated BBB disruption is also implicated in JEV neuroinvasion in humans and NHPs [209,291,361]. The functional roles of cytokines and chemokines in JEV-induced BBB breakdown have been studied in in vitro co-culture systems: (1) A human BBB model using BMECs and astrocytes has shown that both cell types get infected with JEV and release proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines (e.g., IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL10), correlated with increased barrier permeability of BMEC monolayers [345]. (2) Rat BBB models using BMECs with either pericytes or astrocytes have demonstrated that proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL-6) released from JEV-infected pericytes and astrocytes activate the ubiquitin-proteasome system in BMECs for the degradation of cytoplasmic TJ proteins (e.g., zonula occluden-1 [ZO-1]) by upregulating the ubiquitin ligase UBR-1 through the activation of JAK-STAT signaling [348,349]. In all these BBB models, it is noted that both pericytes and astrocytes are susceptible to JEV infection, but neither shows any apparent JEV-induced CPEs. Aside from these in vitro BBB models, it has also been observed in non-brain endothelial and epithelial cells that JEV infection alters the expression of some important TJ proteins, which is sufficient to disrupt cell-cell junctions and thus to impair the barrier function of those cell monolayers [362]. Hence, it is likely that multiple cell types at the blood–brain interface may release proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines as an innate immune response to JEV infection, which then triggers the intracellular degradation of cytoplasmic TJ proteins in BMECs, thereby compromising the structural integrity of the BBB [338]. MMPs, a family of Zn2+- and Ca2+-dependent endopeptidases that are secreted by many cell types, including fibroblasts and leukocytes, into the extracellular milieu [363,364], are known to cleave the extracellular matrix as well as non-matrix proteins around the BBB [365,366,367,368]. In line with their function, MMPs, particularly MMP2 and MMP9, are found to be upregulated in the brain and serum of JEV-infected mice with increased BBB permeability [355,357,369]. Similarly, the involvement of MMPs in JEV-induced BBB breakdown is also indicated in humans and NHPs [291,370]. An in vitro human BBB model consisting of BMECs and astrocytes has shown that JEV infection induces MMPs (e.g., MMP7, MMP8, and MMP9), correlated with compromised barrier function of BMEC monolayers [345]. Likewise, an in vitro rat BBB model constituted with BMECs and astrocytes has revealed that the infection of astrocytes with JEV causes the release of not only IL-6 and vascular endothelial growth factor, which transduce signals to activate the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway for intracellular degradation of the cytoplasmic TJ protein ZO-1 in BMECs, but also MMP2 and MMP9, which are critical for extracellular degradation of the transmembrane TJ protein claudin-5 on the surface of BMECs [349]. In the rat astrocyte cell line RBA-1, it has also been shown by using pharmacological inhibitors and siRNAs that JEV infection induces the expression of MMP9, as a result of the activation of NF-κB and AP-1 through the generation of reactive oxygen species and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases [371,372]. Moreover, a recent study using mast-cell-deficient Sash mice has demonstrated that mast cells are involved in BBB breakdown during JEV infection, and further, that chymase, a serine protease released from activated mast cells, has an active role in degrading not only transmembrane TJ proteins (claudin-5 and occludin), as consistent with its function, but also cytoplasmic TJ proteins (ZO-1 and ZO-2) by an unknown mechanism [373]. In addition, this study has further shown, using in vivo mouse and in vitro BBB models, that treatment of a chymase-specific inhibitor decreases BBB leakiness, reduces viral neuroinvasion, and thus lowers the morbidity and mortality associated with JE [373]. Since chymase converts the inactive zymogen form of MMPs, such as MMP2 and MMP9, into their enzymatically active forms [374], it may augment the role of MMPs in BBB disruption. However, one caveat of this study is that the mast-cell-dependent BBB breakdown was shown to be caused by infection with either a virulent WT strain (Nakayama) or an attenuated vaccine strain (SA14-14-2) of JEV, although the Nakayama strain produced significantly more severe neurological deficits and much higher mortality as compared to the SA14-14-2 strain [373]. Therefore, these data suggest that proteases, such as MMPs and chymases, are induced or activated during JEV infection and are directly involved in the extracellular degradation of transmembrane TJ proteins, thereby damaging the structural integrity of the BBB. Thus far, the accumulated evidence indicates that JEV may traverse the BBB via a paracellular route, expedited by at least two different types of inflammatory mediators: (1) cytokines and chemokines (e.g., IL-6 and CCL2), capable of inducing the ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation of cytoplasmic TJ proteins in BMECs, and (2) extracellular proteases (e.g., MMPs and chymases), capable of directly degrading transmembrane TJ proteins on the cell surface of BMECs. Among other neurotropic flaviviruses, WNV has been shown to cause the degradation of several TJ proteins, correlated with increased levels of multiple MMPs in the brain, resulting in increased BBB permeability [375,376]. Considering that the structural integrity of the BBB requires the proper biogenesis of both cytoplasmic and transmembrane TJ proteins which is regulated at multiple levels, such as gene transcription, translation, post-translational modifications (e.g., phosphorylation and protein degradation) and subcellular localization [377,378], it will be interesting to determine whether and how JEV alters the biogenesis of TJ proteins, other than protein degradation, in BMECs. For the transmembrane TJ proteins that are expressed on the cell surface of BMECs and are, thus, susceptible to a variety of extracellular proteases, such as MMPs, it can be expected that the stability of those TJ proteins depends on the expression level of particular MMPs, the conversion rate from the inactive pro-MMPs to their active forms, and the presence and action of the tissue inhibitors of particular MMPs [357,379,380]. In addition, it will be worthwhile to investigate whether any innate immune cells other than mast cells contribute to BBB breakdown during JEV infection [381]. (3) Transmigration of virus-infected leukocytes through an intercellular space between two adjacent endothelial cells [382]. Physical breakdown of the BBB may contribute not only to the paracellular movement of viral particles, but also to the transmigration of infected leukocytes from the intravascular space into the brain parenchyma [330]. Accordingly, another possible mechanism for JEV neuroinvasion is believed to be mediated by peripheral leukocytes that are infected by the virus and so can act as “Trojan horses” to creep the virus through the BBB into the brain tissue [286,293]. In line with this hypothesis, the transendothelial leukocyte migration in the brain is well known to be promoted by a conglomerate of proinflammatory molecules, which mediate the recruitment and adhesion of circulating leukocytes to the endothelium and their extravasation and transmigration through the BBB, either directly or indirectly [383,384,385,386]. One or more such proinflammatory mediators are shown to be upregulated by JEV infection in primary cell cultures of human and rat BMECs, human DCs, and mouse MΦs, as well as in serum, spleen, and brain samples of mouse JE models, which include (1) cell adhesion molecules [387], such as intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, and platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1 [318,342,345,355,388]; (2) cytokines and chemokines [389,390], such as IL-1β, IL-6, IL-12, IFN, TNF-α, CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CXCL1, CXCL2, and CXCL10 [287,292,293,318,342,345,348,349,354,356,360,388,391,392,393]; (3) MMPs [394,395], such as MMP2, MMP7, MMP8, and MMP9 [293,345,349,355,357,360]; (4) growth factors [396,397], such as vascular endothelial growth factor and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [293,345,349]; and (5) reactive oxygen and nitrogen species [398,399], such as diatomic oxygen- and nitric-oxide-related compounds [293,355,358]. Similarly, higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines are detected in the plasma and CSF of JE patients and JEV-infected NHPs [209,291,361]. Of the mononuclear phagocytes (e.g., MΦs and DCs) that are susceptible to JEV infection, MΦs are advantageous for transendothelial migration, because they support a higher level of viral replication than DCs, but unlike DCs, do not develop CPEs [286,287,293,294,329,360]. However, one caveat of this Trojan horse hypothesis is that JEV-infected mononuclear phagocytes have not yet been found unequivocally to infiltrate into the brain in humans and mice [209,293,329,400]. Moreover, it is documented that JEV infection of human endothelial cell lines leads to the production of proinflammatory cytokines (e.g., IFN-β and TNF-α), the induction of MHC molecules (e.g., HLA-A, -B, and -E), and the shedding of a soluble form of HLA-E that is generated by MMPs, although its roles in JEV infection are unknown [347]. Collectively, the trafficking of JEV-infected mononuclear phagocytes, or potentially other leukocytes, through the BBB into the brain is plausible but certainly needs further investigation. Despite substantial research efforts, the precise molecular mechanism underlying the entry of JEV into the CNS is still poorly understood. It is hypothesized that JEV may traverse the BBB to reach the brain parenchyma via a hematogenous route involving one or more of the following three possible mechanisms: (1) transcellular virus transport, (2) paracellular virus movement, and (3) transendothelial infected-cell migration. Of these, it is not yet clear which mechanism is responsible for JEV neuroinvasion. Recent data from a mouse model after intravenous inoculation of WT JEV have revealed that viral loads in the brain increase from day 2 after infection, along with elevated levels of proinflammatory mediators (i.e., cytokines and chemokines), but that BBB permeability remains unchanged until day 4 [318]. Subsequent in vitro endothelial permeability assays using a mouse BMEC cell line have shown that the structural integrity of BMEC monolayers is compromised not by direct infection of JEV but by brain extracts derived from JEV-infected mice [318]. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the administration of a neutralizing antibody directed against IFN-γ, a potent immunoregulatory cytokine, alleviates BBB disruption in JEV-infected mice [318]. Overall, these results suggest that JEV is able to enter the brain prior to BBB breakdown, which is therefore a consequence of JEV neuroinvasion, rather than a prerequisite for it. Similar results have been observed in rodents with two other encephalitic flaviviruses, WNV [401] and tick-borne encephalitis virus [402]. Hence, it is conceivable that JEV may enter the brain by active transcellular transport across the intact BMEC at the early phase of neuroinvasion, but at the later phase, by the passive paracellular movement of viral particles and/or the sneaky transendothelial migration of virus-infected leukocytes through the intercellular space between the disrupted BMECs that had been caused by JEV-induced neuroinflammation in the brain parenchyma [403]. Recently, it has been suggested that JEV neuroinvasion is promoted by the nuclear protein HMGB1 secreted from BMECs that facilitates leukocyte transendothelial migration [404], but is restricted by the receptor tyrosine kinase AXL that controls the production of IL-1α, primarily from pyroptotic MΦs [405]. Whatever the underlying mechanism involved, the neuroinvasion of JEV into the CNS is an essential key step to start the sequence of events that lead to life-threatening encephalitis [210]. 4.3.3. Viral Replication in the Central Nervous System Soon after JEV gets into the CNS, the virus is detectable in the brain parenchyma and CSF of humans [317,327], NHPs [406], and mice [315]. Within their brains, neurons are the primary target cells of JEV, as they are not only highly susceptible to virus infection, but also highly permissive for virus replication [209,248,254,291,318,329,341,407]. Using an in vivo mouse model, combined with an in vitro mouse neurosphere culture system, JEV is shown to preferentially infect neural progenitor cells, which undergo cell cycle arrest, and is thus potentially capable of suppressing their proliferation and impacting neurogenesis [243,408]. In accordance with these findings, the susceptibility of rat neurons to JEV infection also appears to depend on the cell maturity status, both in vivo and in vitro, with the immature developing neurons determined to be most vulnerable [227,409]. In contrast to neurons, non-neuronal glia, such as astrocytes and microglia, are found to be rarely positive for viral antigens in JEV-infected humans [327,341], NHPs [254,291], and mice [318,330]. In in vitro cell cultures, on the other hand, it has been demonstrated that both astrocytes [345,349,409] and microglia [410,411,412] derived from humans and rodents are always susceptible to JEV infection, although its physiological relevance in vivo is unknown. Still, it is noteworthy that JEV infection in neurons is known to be strongly cytopathic, resulting in productive lytic infection in vivo, whereas JEV infection in microglia, if it occurs in vivo, is supposed to be noncytopathic or weakly cytopathic, possibly being capable of establishing persistent infection [410,411]. This raises a question whether microglia can serve as a long-term source of JEV in the CNS. This is an intriguing idea given the observation that JEV was detected in the CSF of a JE patient at ~4 months after initial infection [413], as well as in the PBMCs collected from some JE cases even after ~8 months of recovery [414]. In vitro, JEV is also reported to be able to establish persistent infection in human monocytes for >3 weeks [286]. Hence, these results suggest that JEV may persist in microglia, the MΦ-like immune cells important for the control of JEV replication in the CNS [415], thereby perhaps contributing to the poor clinical outcome of JE and the neurological sequelae affecting a significant portion of JE survivors. Based on our current understanding, the uncontrolled virus replication in neurons directly causes neuronal death in vivo in humans [327,329], NHPs [291], and mice [408,416], as well as in vitro in their neuronal cell cultures [286,408,417]. The neuronal death is accompanied by reactive gliosis involving the activation of glia such as astrocytes and microglia, which then release numerous inflammatory molecules as part of a defense mechanism that, paradoxically, give rise to multiple neuropathologic events, eventually aggravating both neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation, the two main clinical features of JE [26,209,243,291,318,407,416,418,419]. In this model, the major neuropathologic events occurring during JEV replication in the brain include: (1) bystander neuronal death [420,421], which is triggered by a variety of inflammatory mediators (e.g., IL-1β and TNF-α) released from JEV-activated glia, especially microglia, and also possibly from the JEV-infected/activated MΦs migrated from the periphery into the inflamed brain parenchyma [291,318,400,412,422,423,424,425]; (2) neurogenesis impairment [426,427], which is potentially caused not only by direct loss of neural stem/progenitor cells (NSPCs) due to JEV infection, but also by a mixture of inflammatory substances produced from JEV-activated microglia and possibly other glial cells that suppress the proliferation and differentiation of NSPCs [227,243,408,409]; (3) BBB breakdown [428,429], which is induced by at least two different types of inflammatory mediators released from glial, as well as non-glial, cells such as pericytes and mast cells: (i) cytokines and chemokines (e.g., IL-6 and CCL2), capable of triggering the intracellular degradation of cytoplasmic TJ proteins that is mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in BMECs [209,291,318,345,348,349,354,356,359,360,361], and (ii) extracellular proteases (e.g., MMPs and chymases), capable of catalyzing the extracellular degradation of transmembrane TJ proteins on BMECs [291,345,349,355,357,369,370,371,372,373]; and (4) leukocyte infiltration [430,431], which is modulated by inflammatory molecules, such as cytokines, chemokines, and growth factors, released from JEV-activated microglia and other glial cells that regulate the trafficking of peripheral leukocytes (e.g., MΦs, neutrophils, and T cells) across the BBB into the inflamed brain parenchyma [243,291,315,329,330,355,360,407,423,432,433,434]. All these neuropathologic events are aggravated by amplification of both the production of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines [435] and the infiltration of leukocytes into the brain [422,436]. A host of previous studies have suggested that the intensity of neuroinflammation, featured by the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, is associated with the level of viral load, impacting the clinical outcome of JE in both humans and experimental animals, although this notion remains debatable [26,153,209,223,224,291,329,358,361,400,419,424,433,437,438,439,440,441]. 5. Conclusions and PerspectivesAs a laboratory animal model that faithfully recapitulates human JE, mice have been used extensively for the study of JE neuropathogenesis, host response, and the safety and efficacy of new vaccines and therapeutics against JEV infection. It should be noted that the susceptibility of mice to JEV infection varies very much, depending not only on the viral strain, inoculum dose, and inoculation route employed, but also on the mouse strain and age used, although the underlying basis for the impact of host factors is largely undefined. Hence, the mouse strain and age-dependency should be taken into consideration for the design of future mouse infection experiments. Based on a large body of early and recent studies conducted primarily using a murine infection model, a working hypothesis of how JEV causes JE has been formulated: The transmission of mosquito-borne JE occurs when an infected female mosquito injects her saliva with JEV into the host’s skin for blood meals. Principally in the dermis, JEV first infects mononuclear phagocytes (i.e., MΦs and DCs), which in combination with the injected mosquito saliva, induces local inflammation that promotes the recruitment of monocytes from the blood to the inflamed skin tissue, where they differentiate into MΦs and DCs and become new targets for JEV infection. Thereafter, the infected cells and cell-free virions move through lymph and blood vessels to peripheral lymphoid organs (e.g., lymph nodes and spleen), where JEV replicates in mononuclear leukocytes (e.g., MΦs and possibly T cells). The JEV replication in peripheral lymphoid organs then results in transient viremia, which leads to a systemic infection, causing nonspecific symptoms and stimulating the immune system. If the innate immunity fails to control JEV replication in peripheral tissues/organs (e.g., skin, lymph nodes, and spleen), the virus is likely to spread throughout the body, including the CNS, before the adaptive immunity is fully developed. Occasionally, JEV crosses the BBB to get into the brain by one or more of the following mechanisms: transcellular virus transport, paracellular virus movement, and transendothelial infected leukocyte migration. Within the brain parenchyma, JEV replicates in neurons, which causes neuronal death and activates glial cells (e.g., astrocytes and microglia), releasing numerous inflammatory mediators responsible for bystander neuronal death, neurogenesis impairment, BBB breakdown, and leukocyte infiltration into the brain parenchyma. These neuropathologic events are associated with the worsening of both neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation, the two hallmarks of JE. Although significant progress has been made over the years in understanding the pathobiology of JEV infection, there are a number of outstanding questions that still need to be addressed in future studies, including: (1) What are the virus–host cell interactions required for viral entry into susceptible host cells, such as MΦs and neurons [137,138,139]? (2) What are the molecular and cellular mechanisms by which the virus enters the CNS from the periphery [336,337,338]? (3) What are the viral and cellular factors and their underlying mechanisms needed for viral neurovirulence within the CNS [103,442,443]? (4) What are the proinflammatory mediators and their underlying processes involved in promoting detrimental neuroinflammation [403,442,444]? These questions are anticipated to be answered in the upcoming years using a well-established murine model of JEV infection, combined with new innovative techniques in molecular biology, cell biology, and immunology, as well as powerful genetic tools for targeted genome engineering of both the virus and the host cell/organism. 


Title: Metabolic characteristics in orthoflaviviral infections: unveiling pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic targets

IntroductionDengue virus (DENV), Zika virus (ZIKV), and Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) are representatives of mosquito-borne viruses, belonging to the genus orthoflavivirus [1]. These emerging orthoflaviviruses cause infections in millions of people each year and have become a global public health issue [2].Orthoflavivirus particles consist of an icosahedral protein capsid and a lipid envelope. The capsid is mainly composed of the capsid protein (C), while the lipid envelope contains membrane proteins (M) and envelope protein (E) (Fig. 1) [3]. Its genome is a single positive-stranded non-segmented RNA, about 11 kb long, with an open reading frame (ORF) and untranslated regions (UTR) at both ends [4]. The ORF encodes a polyprotein comprising 3 structural proteins (C, precursor membrane protein (prM), and E) and 7 non-structural proteins (NS1-NS5). These proteins are involved in regulating viral protein expression, replication, virulence, and pathogenicity [5].
Fig. 1The representation of the orthoflavivirus genome. prM, precursor membrane protein; E, envelope protein; C, capsid protein; UTR, untranslated region; NS, non-structural protein
Most orthoflaviviruses enter cells via clathrin-dependent endocytosis (Fig. 2) [6–9]. Subsequently, vesicles carrying the virus particles fuse with endosomes. The low-pH environment of the endosome triggers rearrangement of the viral envelope glycoprotein, exposing the fusion peptide and leading to membrane fusion [10]. This process releases the viral genome into the cytoplasm. Positive-stranded viral RNA is translated into a polyprotein, which is cleaved by viral and host proteases in its N-terminal region to release structural and non-structural proteins [11]. Viral replication occurs within specialized replication complexes (RCs) associated with the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane. These RCs are primarily composed of viral non-structural (NS) proteins and various host factors that remodel the ER membrane [12, 13]. The viral RNA genome is assembled with C in the ER cavity, and further coated with E and prM to form immature virions. The immature virions are transported through the trans-Golgi network, where the prM protein is cleaved by furin protease into M protein, resulting in the formation of mature virions [11, 14–16]. Orthoflaviviral replicate extensively in the host via the above complex pathways and significantly alter the metabolic environment of host. The metabolic pathways altered by the virus depend on its life cycle, host immune defenses, and the specific tissue or cell type infected [17, 18].
Fig. 2The life cycle of orthoflavivirus
Metabolomics focuses on the systematic study of small-molecule metabolites in a biological system, complementing genomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics [19]. Therefore, metabolomics can directly reflect the phenotypic changes in host cells caused by viral infections, thereby reflecting the global changes in host cell metabolic pathways and overall physiological status, and clarifying the disrupted sites [20]. The emergence of metabolomics analysis has provided distinct advantages in characterizing infection features and decoding disease pathogenesis. It enables the identification of biomarkers to distinguish specific diseases from healthy states or to predict the progression of related diseases. In addition, metabolomics can provide potential therapeutic targets for antiviral drug development by elucidating metabolic changes in disease states, which may help to inhibit viral proliferation or alleviate symptoms of viral diseases [21]. In this review, we summarize the metabolomics studies of mosquito-borne viruses, including DENV, ZIKV, and JEV, and describe the roles of different metabolic disturbances in virus-host interactions. In addition, we also discussed the metabolic differences of orthoflaviviruses in different hosts.Metabolic characteristics of orthoflaviviral infections in mosquitoesLipids such as phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylserine (PS), and sphingomyelin (SM) are the main components of cell membranes. Metabolomic data from Perera et al. [22]showed that phospholipids such as PC, PE, PS and lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC) were up-regulated in DENV-infected C6/36 mosquito cells. The high fluidity of membranes enriched with unsaturated phosphatidylcholine (PC) is essential for DENV infection. This physical property both supports critical processes in the DENV life cycle, such as membrane fusion and remodeling, and enables the maintenance of the highly curved membranes observed in DENV-infected cells [23, 24]. In addition, the incorporation of LPC into membranes can induce vesicle scission and budding while increasing membrane permeability [25]. The DENV RCs are enveloped by a membrane barrier [13]. Therefore, an increase in membrane permeability is needed to facilitate component exchange, genome replication, and viral assembly. Phospholipids in orthoflaviviruses can also participate in processes such as viral particle attachment, autophagy, and apoptosis regulation. PS belongs to the class of negatively-charged phospholipids that exhibit preferential accumulation within the inner leaflet of eukaryotic cell membranes. However, under apoptotic conditions, PS often flips to the outer side of the membrane to send apoptotic signals to phagocytic cells, promoting the phagocytosis of apoptotic cells [26]. Orthoflaviviruses may use this PS-mediated apoptotic cell recognition mechanism to mediate virus entry and infection, called apoptosis mimicry mechanism [27]. Like PS, PE is usually exist on the inner side of the plasma membrane, and the increase of PE content may be similar to PS, indicating that apoptosis is ongoing [28–30]. Sphingolipids, such as SM and ceramide (CER), which are involved in controlling membrane fusion, division, and transport, are upregulated in DENV-infected mosquito cells [22].Interestingly, the study of Melo et al. [31] on ZIKV-infected C6/36 mosquito cells yielded results identical to those of Perera. This suggests that orthoflaviviruses such as ZIKV and DENV share similar lipid metabolism regulation mechanisms due to similar infection and replication mechanisms. In ZIKV-infected Aedes albopictus, Onyango et al. [32] found that the levels of glucose, glucose-6-phosphate, and 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) were decreased, while the levels of 3-phosphoglycerate, phosphoenolpyruvate, and 3-hydroxybutyrate were increased. Glucose-6-phosphate is a key intermediate that mobilizes glucose as an energy source, while 3-phosphoglycerate and phosphoenolpyruvate are important components of the glycolysis pathway. 3-Hydroxybutyrate is produced during fatty acid metabolism, and it is synthesized as a backup energy source when glucose levels are low [33]. The upregulation of glycolysis and ketone body synthesis reflects the high energy demands during orthoflaviviral infections. 5-HT is related to salivary gland function in mosquitoes, and the decrease of its level may lead to a decrease in feeding efficiency, thus increasing the frequency of contact between the vector and the host of the virus [34, 35]. Furthermore, the Onyango study detected several metabolites associated with human inflammation in ZIKV-infected Aedes albopictus. Inosine and arachidonic acid (AA) were significantly enriched, along with increased levels of AA-derived mediators prostaglandin H2 (a precursor for all prostaglandins) and leukotriene D4 [32]. AA and its derivatives (e.g. prostaglandins, thromboxanes, hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acids, and leukotrienes, collectively referred to as eicosanoids) are potent inflammatory mediators that regulate the intensity and duration of inflammatory responses [36, 37]. Inosine has a wide range of anti-inflammatory effects, such as inhibiting the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines and enhancing the production of the anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10. Currently, it has been reported that the concentration of inosine increases in the extracellular space during inflammation [38, 39]. In addition, inosine plays a role in RNA editing. This editing is catalyzed by enzymes of the adenosine deaminase acting on RNA (ADAR) family. ADAR is considered part of the antiviral response [40, 41]. Therefore, the increased inosine abundance in ZIKV-infected Aedes albopictus may be caused by the dual factors of anti-inflammatory effect and antiviral response.The above metabolomics data comprehensively summarize the metabolic characteristics of mosquitoes infected with DENV and ZIKV (Table 1). The results of lipid metabolism and energy metabolism may be the key to the replication and transmission of orthoflavivirus in mosquito vectors. And the inflammatory response may be the key to maintain the non-cell-killing infection of orthoflavivirus in mosquito vectors. Therefore, further studies on the above targets may provide new solutions to prevent orthoflavivirus from continuing to replicate and spread in mosquito vectors. However, in DENV-infected mosquitoes, there is only metabolomic data available for lipid metabolism, while the regulatory patterns of other metabolic pathways remain unclear. Therefore, further exploration of changes in other metabolic pathways is of great significance for understanding how DENV replicates and spreads in mosquitoes. In addition, the role of inosine and AA as inflammatory agents has been mainly demonstrated in humans, and whether they play a similar role in mosquitoes is not yet clear. Unfortunately, the metabolic characteristics of JEV-infected mosquito cells cannot be discussed due to the lack of metabolomics data of JEV-infected mosquito cells. Therefore, further research is needed to summarize the general conclusions in orthoflavivirus-infected mosquito cells, so as to find the key factors that really drive orthoflaviviral replication and transmission.
Table 1Metabolic characteristics of orthoflavivirus-infected mosquitoes. Metabolite increases are indicated by ↑, and decreases by ↓. PC, phosphatidylcholine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PS, phosphatidylserine; LPC, lysophosphatidylcholine; SM, sphingomyelin; CER, ceramide; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; AA, arachidonic acidVirus TypeSource of SampleTechniqueSelected MetabolitesReference NumberDENV 2Aedes albopictus C6/36 cellsLC-MS/MSPC ↑; PE ↑; PS ↑; LPC ↑; SM ↑; CER ↑[22]Brazilian ZIVK strainAedes albopictus C6/36 cellsMALDI-MSI; MS/MSPC ↑; PE ↑; PS ↑[31]ZIKV HND strainlegs of Aedes albopictusGC-MS; LC- MS/MSglucose ↓; glucose-6-phosphate ↓; 5-HT ↓; 3-phosphoglyceric acid ↑; phosphoenolpyruvic acid ↑; 3-hydroxybutyric acid ↑; inosine ↑; AA ↑; prostaglandin H2 ↑; leukotriene D4 ↑[32]
Metabolic characteristics of orthoflaviviral infections in mouse / humanThe orthoflavivirus causes persistent non-cell-killing infection in mosquitoes, but induces pathology and severe diseases in mice/humans. Thus, metabolomics of the two sample sources shows different results under the background of orthoflaviviral infections. In the study of serum metabolomics on dengue fever (DF) patients by Cui et al. [42], it was found that PC and LPC levels were reduced compared with healthy control patients. The metabolomics data from Khedr et al. [43] also confirmed the reduction of LPC in mild DF patients, which is in stark contrast to the results shown in C6/36 mosquito cells. However, in the study by Voge et al. [44], the level of LPC was higher in severe dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome (DHF/DSS) patients than in non-DENV-infected patients. These differences in LPC levels between DF and DHF patients may arise because DENV is initially suppressed by the immune system during the early febrile phase, leading to depletion of the body’s LPC reserves. An increase in LPC levels indicates that DENV is replicating extensively in the body by modulating host metabolic pathways. This also suggests that DF has the potential to progress to DHF/DSS. Therefore, upregulation of the LPC biosynthetic pathway in acute DENV infection has been identified as one of the predictors of progression to DHF [45]. Human serum metabolomics is influenced by multiple factors, including metabolite absorption, retention, and excretion by infected cells, the host response to infection, and other related factors. Unlike human serum metabolomics, infected cell metabolomics directly reflects the changes in the abundance of cellular metabolites caused by orthoflaviviral infections [21]. Chen et al. [46] investigated the impact of ZIKV infection on phospholipid metabolism in human placentas. In ZIKV-infected samples, the relative abundance of PC, PE, PS, and phosphatidylinositol (PI) was significantly increased. This suggests that ZIKV may enhance placental membrane fluidity and permeability by reprogramming phospholipid metabolism, thereby facilitating mother-to-fetus transmission across the placenta. Similarly, Li et al. [47] found in JEV-infected Neuro2a cells that JEV reshapes glycerophospholipid metabolism by altering the proportion of glycerophospholipids to create membrane-bound compartments conducive to successful infection and replication. The perturbation of sphingolipids in C6/36 mosquito cells was also found in the metabolomics of mouse/human infection samples, with an increase in SM levels in DF patients [42]. Similar changes in SM and CER metabolic flux were also observed in ZIKV-infected Huh7 human hepatoma cell lines. The blockade of ceramide conversion into sphingomyelin induced by ZIKV infection resulted in a significant rise in the CER/SM ratio, according to findings reported by Leier et al. [48]. Further studies showed that during ZIKV infection, CER was reallocated to the ZIKV replication membranes, where it was converted to SM for ZIKV replication. In addition, CER can also act as a second messenger to induce apoptosis and autophagy [22, 49]. RNA interference experiments confirmed that autophagy is one of the three cellular pathways required for DENV replication [50]. Autophagy may provide biological functions by supplying extracellular vesicles during orthoflaviviral replication [51]. Extracellular vesicles can serve as transport vehicles for orthoflaviviruses, carrying viral components such as RNA, NS1, and E, and further transferring them to various types of target cells. Fikatas et al. [52] demonstrated the aforementioned point by detecting a significant increase in CER in extracellular vesicles derived from ZIKV-infected human blood-brain barrier endothelial cells.The disruption of energy metabolism was also observed in the metabolomics of mouse/human infection samples. Li et al. [47] found that in JEV-infected Neuro2a cell lines, the lactate content significantly increased with the extension of JEV infection time. The perturbation of these metabolites indirectly reflects that, during orthoflaviviral infections, the host is experiencing an increase in glycolytic rate associated with orthoflaviviral replication. Under normal physiological conditions, the products of glycolysis enter the mitochondria for further oxidation. However, under the context of orthoflaviviral infections, mitochondrial oxidation seems to be blocked. In JEV-infected Neuro2a cells, Li et al. [47] found that the level of malate, a metabolite in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, showed a statistically significant downward trend. Similarly, in the brains of ZIKV-infected mice, impaired mitochondrial function and potential energy metabolic disorders were observed. Pang et al. [53] detected downregulation of TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation in the brains of ZIKV-infected mice, and significantly decreased related metabolites such as fumaric acid, malic acid and NAD+. Previous studies have shown that ZIKV infection can cause mitochondrial-induced apoptosis in astrocytes. Impairments in mitochondrial function have also been observed in ZIKV-infected human placental cells [46, 54]. NAD+ is an important component of biological energy metabolism in cells, and the significant reduction of NAD+ suggests biological energy depletion. Disruption of mitochondrial function and bioenergetic metabolism is associated with neuronal cell death [55, 56]. Therefore, the pathogenic mechanism of microcephaly caused by ZIKV infection in infants may be induced by a dual action of altering mitochondrial metabolic pathways and depleting bioenergetics, leading to neuronal cell death. In DENV-infected human cells, EI-Bacha et al. [57] also observed mitochondrial membrane damage, which led to a decrease in ATP levels. In addition, in orthoflavivirus-infected cells, glycolysis is accelerated while the downstream TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation are downregulated. This suggests that metabolites in the glycolytic pathway may be diverted to other metabolic pathways. Li et al. [47] demonstrated that the Pentose Phosphate Pathway (PPP) is crucial for JEV replication. In JEV-infected Neuro2a cells, they inhibited JEV replication by suppressing the PPP. Although there were no significant changes in the metabolites within this pathway, the levels of downstream metabolites related to purine and pyrimidine metabolism were significantly affected by JEV infection. To demonstrate the contribution of PPP in providing nucleotide precursors, Li et al. [47] restored the replication of JEV by supplementing the end product of PPP with D-ribose-5-phosphate under the inhibition of PPP. The increased PPP flux in the glycolytic branch will meet the nucleotide precursor requirements for viral genome replication.Despite the significant differences between mosquito and human immune systems, significant disruptions in inflammatory factors were also observed in the context of orthoflaviviral infections. Cui et al. [42] found that during the febrile phase of DF patients, inflammatory factors such as AA, α-linolenic acid, docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), inosine, and cortisol all showed an increasing trend. Among them, AA is an effective inflammatory mediator [37]. Unlike AA, DHA has anti-inflammatory activity by inhibiting the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. α-linolenic acid is a precursor of DHA. In the early stage of DENV infection, AA-related inflammatory responses are suppressed by anti-inflammatory mediators derived from DHA [58].This suggests that the increase in DHA levels in DF patients may be an adaptive response of the body to prevent excessive or prolonged inflammation from becoming pathological. The study results of Villamor et al. [59] also proved that the serum DHA content in the acute stage was positively correlated with the risk of progression to DHF/DSS, and a higher level of DHA might predict a more severe inflammatory response. Similarly, a more severe inflammatory response in the early stage of DF also predicted the progression to DHF/DSS. However, in the metabolomic analysis of severe DHF patients by Cui et al. [60], DHA levels were found to be reduced in severe DHF patients. This may imply impaired anti-inflammatory function in DHF patients. In addition to DHA, cortisol and inosine also function as anti-inflammatory mediators [38, 39, 61]. Similar phenomena were observed in JEV-infected Neuro2a cells, with significant upregulation of 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid and prostaglandin D2 [47].In addition, similar to the decreased levels of 5-HT in Aedes albopictus infected with ZIKV, Cui et al. [62] observed decreased levels of 5-HT in DF and DHF patients at all three stages of infection. 5-HT in ZIKV-infected mosquito cells increases the transmission of the virus by reducing the mosquito’s feeding efficiency [34, 35]. The difference is that in human cells infected with DENV, 5-HT may be a key factor leading to severe pathology. 5-HT can promote platelet activation and aggregation, which in turn leads to vasoconstriction and hemostasis in peripheral blood vessels [63]. Studies have shown that anti-NS1 antibodies in the serum of DHF patients can inhibit platelet aggregation and induce platelet lysis [64–66]. Therefore, it is speculated that DENV may reduce serum 5-HT levels by inducing the production of anti-NS1 antibodies via the NS1, thereby inhibiting platelet activation and aggregation. Compared with DF patients, DHF patients show more significant decreases in serum 5-HT levels during both the febrile and defervescence phases, and this indicates that platelet aggregation and a reduction in platelet numbers are more severe in DHF patients [62].The above metabolomic data systematically and comprehensively summarize the metabolic features of mouse/human models under the context of orthoflaviviral infections (Table 2). Upregulation of LPC in lipid metabolism was determined to be associated with disease progression in DENV infection. However, mosquitoes and DHF patients have similar regulatory patterns in LPC, yet they lead to different infection outcomes: non-cell-killing infection in mosquitoes and severe pathology in DHF patients. The underlying principles behind this need further exploration. Disruption of energy metabolism and inflammatory responses may be key factors in orthoflaviviral infections leading to severe pathology. In the context of orthoflaviviral infections in mice/humans, mitochondrial dysfunction and dysregulation of energy metabolism may be the key factors leading to severe pathology, while only the acceleration of glycolysis was observed in mosquito cells. In terms of inflammatory response, an excessive or prolonged inflammatory state in the body may lead to pathological conditions. Although the regulation of inflammatory factors in orthoflavivirus-infected humans is more complex than in mosquitoes, understanding the differences in inflammatory response regulation between humans and mosquitoes is key to predicting disease progression. In addition, there is limited JEV-related metabolomic data. Thus, the conclusions drawn from JEV-infected Neuro2a cells should be treated with caution and require further validation in subsequent studies.
Table 2Metabolic characteristics of orthoflavivirus-infected mouse/human. Metabolite increases are indicated by ↑, and decreases by ↓. PC, phosphatidylcholine; LPC, lysophosphatidylcholine; SM, sphingomyelin; AA, arachidonic acid; DHA, docosahexaenoic acid; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PS, phosphatidylserine; PI, phosphatidylinositol; CER, ceramideVirus TypeSource of SampleTechniqueSelected MetabolitesReference NumberDENV 1–3Human serumLC-MS; GC-MS; LC-MS/MSPC ↓; LPC ↓; SM ↑; AA ↑; DHA ↑; α-linolenic acid ↑; inosine ↑; cortisol ↑[42]DENVHuman serumLC-MS/MSLPC ↓[43]DENV 1, 2Human serumHILIC-MS/MS; LC-MS/MSLPC ↑[44]DENV 1–4Human serumLC-MS; LC-MS/MS5-HT ↓[62]DENV 3Human serum1 H NMRATP ↓[67]DENV 1–4Human serumLC-MS; LC-MS/MSDHA ↓[68]DENV 1–4Human serumGC-MSDHA ↑[59]Asian ZIKV strainHuman placenta cellsLC-MS/MSPC ↑; PE ↑; PS ↑; PI ↑[46]Asian ZIKV strainHuh7 cellsLC-MS/MSSM↓; CER ↑[48]Asian ZIKV strainhcMEC/D3 cellsLC-ESI/MS/MSCER ↑[52]ZIKV SZ-SMGC-1 and SZ01embryonic mouse brainsUPLC–MSfumarate ↓; malate ↓; NAD+ ↓[53]JEV wild-type strain P3Neuro2a cellsLC-MS/MSlactate ↑; malate ↓; 20-hydroxyeicosatetraenoate ↑; prostaglandin D2 ↑[47]
DiscussionDue to the lack of independent metabolism, viruses must regulate the host metabolic flux to flow in a direction conducive to viral replication and protein synthesis. At the same time, the host also regulates its own metabolism in response to viral infection, using the immune response to destroy the virus and infected cells. In addition, metabolomic data may vary depending on the source of the sample, such as different hosts or tissues. Therefore, metabolomic analysis of virus-infected cells faces unique challenges. By conducting a cross-sectional comparison of metabolomic data from different sample sources infected with DENV, ZIKV, and JEV, it was found that the metabolites in these samples were generally affected in the context of orthoflaviviral infections, specifically in terms of membrane lipid metabolism reprogramming, interference with energy metabolism, and induction of inflammatory responses in the body (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3The disrupted metabolic pathways during orthoflaviviral infections. SM, sphingomyelin; CER, ceramide; Glc-CER, glucosylceramide; TG, triglyceride; DG, diglycerides; MG, monoacylglycerol; PC, phosphatidylcholine; PE, phosphatidylethanolamine; PS, phosphatidylserine; PA, phosphatidic acid; PI, phosphatidylinositol; PG, phosphatidylglycerol; LPC, lysophosphatidylcholine; CDP-DAG, cytidine diphosphate diacylglycerol; PLA2, phospholipase A2
Membrane lipid metabolism reprogrammingOrthoflaviviruses are closely associated with membranes at every stage of their replication cycle, including the generation of novel genome copies and the construction of viral particles within specialized RCs that are the result of restructured ER membranes [12]. Orthoflavivirus can significantly change the spontaneous curvature, fluidity and permeability of the membrane through the regulation of lipids such as PC and LPC, so that the physical properties of the membrane can meet the needs of viral replication [69, 70]. The pattern of LPC regulation in patients with mild DF is completely opposite to that in patients with severe DHF, suggesting that LPC may be a key factor in disease progression. Given the contribution of LPC in causing membrane curvature, the high proliferation of orthoflaviviruses within infected cells may lead to upregulation of LPC. In addition, some sphingolipids involved in controlling membrane fusion, division, and transport are also upregulated, such as SM and CER, which provide extracellular vesicles for viral transport [22, 50]. The regulation of sphingolipid expression in mosquito cells is highly consistent with that in mouse/human models, so regulation of sphingolipid metabolism may not be a key factor in disease progression.The disruption of energy metabolismTo meet the high bioenergetic demands of viral particle production, disturbances in glycolysis, the PPP, the TCA cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation are commonly observed during orthoflaviviral infections. In addition to providing the energy required for orthoflaviviral proliferation, these metabolic pathways can also meet the biosynthetic needs of orthoflaviviral proliferation, such as the PPP can provide nucleotide precursors. It is worth noting that in ZIKV and JEV-infected mice, it is not only glycolysis acceleration that occurs, but also mitochondrial damage is observed. This indicates that under the context of orthoflaviviral infections, anaerobic respiration becomes the main mode of cellular energy supply. Interestingly, cancer cells also tend to use glycolysis for energy rather than aerobic respiration, a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect [71]. In addition, the energy acquisition efficiency of anaerobic respiration is much lower than that of aerobic respiration, and anaerobic respiration of infected cells further depletes the energy reservoir, which leads to the depletion of energy metabolism of infected cells. The depletion of biological energy metabolism leads to neuronal cell death [55]. This may be the cause of microcephaly in infants caused by ZIKV and Japanese encephalitis caused by JEV. However, in ZIKV-infected Aedes albopictus, the disturbance of energy metabolism is mainly focused on the acceleration of glycolysis. Current research results have not found the downstream aerobic respiration disturbance, which may be one of the important reasons why the infection results are persistent non-cell-killing infection. Therefore, it is of great scientific value and clinical significance to explore the mechanism of how orthoflaviviruses cause mitochondrial damage in infected cells in subsequent studies.Induction of inflammatory responses in the bodyViral infection can induce host inflammation to clear the virus, so significant upregulation of some inflammatory mediators is commonly observed during DENV, ZIKV, and JEV infections. However, excessive or prolonged inflammatory responses may develop pathological effects. Metabolic disorders of these inflammation-related metabolites may be involved in inducing uncontrolled and severe inflammation, such as progression of DF to severe DHF/DSS, ZIKV-induced neuroinflammation leading to microcephaly, and severe inflammatory response leading to encephalitis in the JEV-infected brain [72, 73]. Therefore, the rise of anti-inflammatory mediators in the body may be an adaptive change made by the body to prevent excessive or prolonged inflammatory responses. In the inflammatory background of orthoflaviviral infections, the study of related inflammatory factors is conducive to the accurate prediction of disease progression in clinic. However, studies on the relationship between inflammatory mediators and disease severity are only supported by metabolomic data in DENV. Further research and comparison are needed among patients with mild and severe cases of ZIKV and JEV infections.Interactions of metabolic pathwaysOrthoflaviviral replication relies not on the alteration of a single metabolic pathway but on the systemic reorganization of the host’s metabolic network. Lipid metabolism reprogramming not only alters the physical properties of membranes but also participates in the regulation of autophagy pathways, providing replication vesicles for orthoflaviviruses [23, 48]. At the same time, the disturbance of energy metabolism (accelerated glycolysis and inhibition of the TCA cycle) meets the energy requirements for orthoflaviviral biosynthesis. Unlike the crucial roles of lipid metabolism and energy metabolism in orthoflaviviral replication, the inflammatory response is the primary means by which the host clears orthoflaviviruses. Therefore, the entire host system influences the life cycle of orthoflaviviruses through the integrated interactions of lipid metabolism, energy metabolism, and inflammatory responses. This metabolic interplay suggests that targeting a single pathway may not be sufficient to block viral replication, and the development of multi-target combination strategies is needed.Host-Specific metabolic adaptationMosquitoes and humans show significant differences in their metabolic responses to orthoflaviviruses. Rising levels of LPC in DHF patients indicate that DENV levels in the body are sufficient to cause severe disease progression. However, similar LPC changes were observed in DENV-infected C6/36 cells, resulting in non-cell-killing infection. Therefore, although LPC is a key factor in disease progression, it is not a key factor in the differentiation of infection outcomes. This differentiation in infection outcomes may be related to the host’s immune regulation mechanisms. Compared to the human immune system, mosquitoes lack an adaptive immune system and rely on metabolic-immune cross-regulation to maintain homeostasis. This could be the key to why mosquitoes can maintain an appropriate immune response during orthoflaviviral infection without falling into a state of uncontrolled inflammation. In contrast, overactivated inflammatory pathways in humans exacerbate tissue damage. However, the above hypothesis has not been verified by experiments, and further studies on the immune regulation mechanism of mosquitoes in response to orthoflaviviral infections are needed in the future.Translational medicine and future directionsPrecision interventions based on metabolomics in the areas of diagnosis, treatment, and prevention and control are key directions for future research. In terms of diagnosis, the levels of LPC, DHA and 5-HT in serum have the potential to serve as early biomarkers for the progression to severe disease in DENV infections. However, there is currently a lack of comparative studies between mild and severe cases of ZIKV and JEV infections. Future research could further assess the potential of LPC, DHA and 5-HT as early biomarkers for the progression to severe disease in ZIKV and JEV infections. In terms of treatment, the replication of orthoflaviviruses and the proliferation of cancer cells both have high demands for bioenergy and biosynthesis. Therefore, to meet the needs of orthoflaviviral replication, host cells infected with orthoflaviviruses exhibit metabolic characteristics similar to the Warburg effect. This suggests that drugs designed to target the Warburg effect in cancer therapy may also have antiviral effects against orthoflaviviral infections. For example, 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) is a drug targeting Warburg effect, which can reduce the level of intracellular ATP by inhibiting glycolysis, thus inhibiting the growth of cancer cells [74]. Subsequent studies could evaluate the therapeutic prospects of 2-DG in orthoflaviviral infections by verifying its anti-orthoflavivirus activity and safety in animal models. Therefore, exploring the combined therapeutic strategy of targeting glycolysis inhibitors (2-DG) and mitochondrial protectants (NAD + precursors) in future research holds extremely important clinical value, and it offers a new approach for the treatment of orthoflaviviral infections. In terms of prevention and control, metabolomics also shows great potential. Currently, examples of biological control based on metabolic competition between viruses and endosymbiotic bacteria Wolbachia have been reported, which can infect mosquitoes with Wolbachia to control the spread of mosquito-borne viruses such as DENV [75].ConclusionIn this review, we summarize the changes in metabolic pathways during orthoflaviviral infection, including the reprogramming of lipid metabolism, the disruption of energy metabolism, and the induction of inflammatory responses in the host. These pathways are involved in the processes of viral infection, replication, and pathogenesis. Based on these findings, we propose three novel insights: [1] The host-specific metabolic adaptation of orthoflaviviruses leads to the divergence in infection outcomes across different hosts. A deeper exploration of the mechanisms underlying this divergence may provide a theoretical basis for preventing the progression from mild to severe disease and guide drug development [2]. The energy metabolism of orthoflaviviruses exhibits a Warburg-like effect similar to that of cancer cells, and mitochondrial damage further exacerbates severe pathology in the host. The therapeutic strategy of combining glycolysis inhibitors (2-DG) with mitochondrial protectants (NAD+ precursors) offers a new approach for the treatment of orthoflaviviral infections [3]. The imbalance of inflammatory mediators in humans is a key driver of disease progression, providing a theoretical foundation for the use of metabolomics in precise prognostic stratification. However, currently there is limited metabolomics data on JEV, especially with a notable absence of metabolomics studies on JEV in mosquito models. Therefore, conclusions regarding JEV at present need to be treated with greater caution. This highlights the incomplete nature of current orthoflaviviral metabolomics and underscores the need for further research to expand JEV-specific data, thereby enhancing our understanding of JEV infection mechanisms.


Title: Re-Examining the Importance of Pigs in the Transmission of Japanese Encephalitis Virus

1. IntroductionJapanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is an enveloped positive-sensed RNA virus belonging to the Flavivirus genus in the Flaviviridae family [1]. Most pathogenic flaviviruses, for example, JEV, are arthropod-borne viruses that are maintained through the biological transmission between viremic vertebrate hosts by hematophagous arthropods such as mosquitoes [2,3,4]. In other words, arboviruses require susceptible vertebrate hosts that can produce sufficient viremia that is capable of infecting biting competent arthropods for them to pass on the virus to new vertebrate hosts in the same transmission cycle [4]. For JEV, pigs and birds play this important role of amplifying hosts, which helps sustain the enzootic transmission cycle in the endemic regions [5]. There are many other different vertebrate host species that are susceptible to JEV infection, including cattle, goats, horses, dogs, bats, reptiles, chickens, and humans [6,7,8,9]. However, most of them are considered incidental or dead-end hosts because they are not capable of developing sufficient viremia required for transmission.While the biological transmission by hematophagous arthropods is the primary route of infection and disease of arboviruses, flaviviruses have historically been proven to be capable of being transmitted without the simultaneous presence of viremic hosts and competent vectors. The advancement in molecular techniques in the detection of viral RNA, several laboratory transmission studies, and some case reports have hinted at the possibility of vector-free transmission of flaviviruses in nature, which includes the direct exposure, primarily of mucosal surfaces, to infectious viruses shed by the infected vertebrate host. Examples of these non-vector-borne transmission routes include the oral transmission of tick-borne encephalitis virus from the consumption of raw milk or cheese produced from infected animals [10,11,12], the route of sexual transmission of Zika virus [13,14,15], and the direct contact transmission of West Nile viruses (WNV) between birds possibly via oral and cloacal shedding [16].In the last decade, growing evidence has been accumulating that suggest transmission of Japanese encephalitis (JE) can also be facilitated through the oronasal shedding between pigs [17,18,19], highlighting the possibility that the enzootic transmission cycle of JEV may be more complicated that initially perceived. This review will discuss the significance of this unconventional route of transmission in the maintenance of JEV in nature and how it could potentially reframe the importance of pigs in JEV transmission.2. Epidemiology and Ecology of JEVJapanese encephalitis virus is an encephalitic flavivirus that is capable of causing fatal infections of the central nervous system in immunologically naïve humans [20]. It is currently endemic to the Asian-Pacific region. With no specific treatments available, the prevention of JE via vaccination is paramount [20]. There are currently several inactivated and live attenuated licensed vaccines available as intramuscular or subcutaneous doses that can provide effective means of protection from infection and subsequent disease [21,22]. The three types of licensed vaccines available at this time are inactivated Vero cell-derived vaccines (based on Beijing-1 or SA14-14-2 strains), live attenuated vaccine (JEV SA14-14-2), and live chimeric vaccine (ChimeriVax-JE) [21,22,23]. While vaccination is the most effective tool for the control of JEV, approximately 68,000 cases are still reported each year in endemic countries, of which about 75% occur in children under 15 years of age [20,24,25]. Clinical symptoms in infected humans can range from nonspecific flu-like symptoms, including headache, high fever, and lethargy, to severe clinical manifestations such as paralysis, motor and memory deficits, and seizures [7,26]. To date, there have been five distinct genotypes of JEV identified based on sequences of the flaviviral envelope protein [27]. The majority of human diseases are caused by JEV strains belonging to the clade b of genotype I (GI-b) and genotype III (GIII) [28,29]. Importantly, the emergence of JEV GI-b has been reported in multiple regions, leading to the displacement of the previously endemic GIII strains [29].The transmission of JEV by competent mosquito species fulfills the criteria for the biological transmission of arboviruses, which is the multiplication of JEV in both mosquitoes and amplifying hosts. To date, there have been more than 10 mosquito species proven to be competent for the transmission of JEV [30,31]. Amongst these mosquitoes, Culex species mosquitoes are the predominant competent vectors for JEV due to their zoophilic feeding pattern [32]. By definition, competent vector species must be capable of acquiring the virus infection in nature, transmit the infection by feeding on susceptible vertebrate hosts, and be abundant enough to be significant [33]. The major vectors that fit these criteria include Culex tritaeniorhynchus, Cx. gelidus, Cx. vishnui, and Cx. annulirostris [5,33]. From this short list, Cx. tritaeniorhynchus is recognized as the principal vector of JEV due to its high susceptibility, transmission rate, and wide distribution [33,34,35]. The significance of these major mosquito vectors may evolve with time as climate change, including global warming and increased flooding, continues to impact vector abundance and geographic distribution [5,36,37].While Culex species mosquitoes function as major vectors, viremic swine and avian hosts, particularly the water-wading birds of the Ardeidae family, are the major sources of infectious viruses [5,33,38]. Japanese encephalitis is primarily considered a rural agricultural disease, with epizootic spillover of JEV driven by the close association between the humans and amplifying hosts [32]. For example, the intense farming of domestic pigs, especially those of backyard farming, is attributed to the increased risk of human JEV infection in the endemic regions [5,32]. The rapid birth rate and turnover of pigs in these farms constantly generate susceptible populations that can help amplify JEV and maintain its presence in the region [32,39]. Additionally, the predilection of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus to feed on pigs further support the role of pigs as important amplifying hosts [40,41]. As such, the ecology of JEV is unique among encephalitic flaviviruses because of the involvement of domestic farm animals. Urbanization and increased agricultural productivity continue to move pigs and rice farming closer to peri-urban and/or urban areas, increasing the concern of their impact on host abundance and their availability to vectors [5,36].Although the major players of JEV transmission have been identified, there are several knowledge gaps in the transmission and maintenance of JEV in its enzootic cycle, because only a limited number of studies have characterized the course of JEV infection in amplifying hosts, especially domestic pigs. Most of our understanding of JEV pathogenesis in domestic pigs thus far have been based on the detection of infectious viruses or viral genome in the serum and brain of naturally infected animals [42,43,44,45].3. JE Disease in SwineIt is well accepted that pigs develop viremia to sustain the enzootic transmission and facilitate the epizootic spillover of JEV. Japanese encephalitis virus infection and subsequent disease in pigs are generally mild and age-specific [7]. Neurotropic disease is more likely to be observed in young pigs. However, natural infection and disease in young piglets are not commonly reported from the endemic areas, possibly due to the presence of maternal antibodies, which can last up to six months of age [46,47]. While non-specific clinical signs such as fever, anorexia, and depression are observed early with JEV infection, neurologic signs such as hind limb tremors or ataxia can sometimes develop after five days post-infection [48,49,50,51,52]. Some infected pigs can progress into developing a wasting-like syndrome [52,53].Infection of JEV in sexually matured adult pigs can result in reproductive failure in the form of abortions and transient infertility, resulting in significant implications for the pork and swine industry [42,54,55,56,57]. Abortions, abnormal farrowing, mummified fetuses, and weak piglets are most commonly observed if the pregnant sow became infected before 60 to 70 days of gestation [46,56]. Reports estimate that approximately 40% to 53% of unvaccinated pregnant sows had stillbirths and abortions in Japan during the epidemic seasons between 1947 and 1969 [54,58,59]. Reproductive disease from JEV infection can also affect boars. Infected boars can develop edematous or congested orchitis with abnormal spermatozoa but are capable of recovering completely most of the time [60,61].Despite the potential for reproductive disease and JEV-infected pigs as a source for epizootic spillover, there are currently no licensed JEV vaccines for pigs. There are only regionally approved vaccines, including live attenuated at222, ML17, and anyang300 vaccines, that are available for local use in Japan, China, and Korea [27,48,62,63]. While reduction in JE disease and viremia in swine may be possible through pig immunization, it is important to understand that vaccination of domestic pigs cannot be solely relied upon to prevent the risk of human JEV infection and disease to the same extent as direct human immunization [64]. In addition to the rapid turnover of the pig population, the associated high costs, and the logistics of implementing a new swine vaccination program, alternate vertebrate hosts, such as wild feral pigs or birds, can still amplify the virus and maintain the transmission cycle in the area [64,65]. As such, swine immunization may be helpful to reduce disease in the pig population, but its contribution to reducing transmission risk to humans may not be significant and is probably relatively minimal.The investigation of JEV pathogenesis in pigs has focused on the kinetics of viremia, which is directly relevant to the transmission of JEV, and the characterization of neurotropic disease, which resembles human JE. As the sensitivity of molecular detection techniques increased, several studies have detected JEV in various types of samples, including the oronasal shedding during the acute phase of infection and in lymphoid and nervous tissues during the convalescent phase of infection. While viremia in pigs remains central to the enzootic transmission of JEV as a mosquito-borne flavivirus, there may be other pathological outcomes that are relevant to the transmission of JEV but have not yet been examined in detail.4. JEV Viremia in Infected Pigs: An Important Pathological Outcome Propelling the Biological Transmission of JEVTo date, laboratory studies have demonstrated that domestic pigs from various geographic regions are all susceptible to JEV and can be infected with the representative strains of endemic GI-b and GIII using different routes of infection, including intravenous, subcutaneous, intradermal, and intranasal challenge [19,51,52,53,66]. Similar pathologic outcomes and immune responses were observed in these infected pigs regardless of the challenge modality [19,66]. Several of these challenge studies and their major findings are summarized in Table 1.The course of JEV infection in pigs involves the development of viremia, systemic infection, neuroinvasion, and persistent infection, as summarized in Figure 1. Viremia can be detected as early as 1-day post-infection (dpi) and persists for 4 to 5 days, and it is somewhat surprising that there are no demonstrable differences in the level and kinetics of viremia between different routes of challenge [19,66]. The highest viremic titers generally exceed 105 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50)/mL or 106 plaque forming unit (PFU)/mL between 1 and 5 dpi [19,50,51,66,68]. These viremic titers have been proven to be sufficient for the infection of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus [69]. Published studies have proven that greater than 50% of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus can be infected through the per os route using blood meals with infectivities of approximately 105 and 106 PFU/mL [69,70]. These observations confirm the role of domestic pigs in supporting the biological transmission of JEV.Since the magnitude and duration of viremia in an amplifying host could potentially affect the prevalence and distribution of certain viral strains or genotypes, it is important to investigate the infection outcomes of different JEV genotypes in pigs. Importantly, the comparison of the ability of the two endemic JEV genotypes to induce viremia in pigs can be undertaken to investigate whether or not the displacement of GIII by the dominantly circulating GI-b is due to the increased ability of JEV GI-b to replicate to high titers in pigs and consequently facilitate the enzootic transmission. This hypothesis was directly tested by the comparison of viremic titers between the GIII CH1392 strain and the GI-b YL2009-4 strain in 10-week-old pigs [71]. The YL2009-4 strain (approximately 5 log10 focus forming unit (FFU)/mL) was reported to multiply to higher titers than the CH1392 strain (approximately 3 log10FFU/mL) at least at 2 dpi. Other experiments have also proven that another GI-b strain, JE-91, can also multiply to approximately 5 log10PFU/mL between 2 and 3 dpi [51]. These observations imply that JEV strains belonging to GI-b may have the fitness advantage over JEV GIII strains, and one cannot exclude that the higher viremic titers in pigs may facilitate the enzootic and epizootic transmission of GI-b JEV in specific ecological conditions. However, the results should be interpreted with caution. Firstly, there are some reports that have shown that the prototypic Nakayama strain (GIII) is capable of replicating to a comparable viremic titer [19,68]. In contrast to the study by Fan, et al. [71], another research group demonstrated that there was no difference between GIII and GI in the magnitude or duration of viremia in pigs [72]. Because the infectious dosage required for the infection of mosquito species competent for JEV is largely unknown, it is still unclear if the difference in the viremic titers between GI-b and GIII strains in pigs can be translated into the difference in the efficiency in the enzootic transmission. Additionally, as the genotype V (GV) of JEV has been reported to emerge in multiple countries in Asia [63,73,74], it may also be worthwhile determining the kinetics of viremia induced by GV to proactively investigate (1) whether or not the emergence of GV involves viremic pigs and (2) whether GV has any fitness advantage over the other two endemic genotypes, GI-b and GIII.5. Systemic Spread and Neuroinvasive Phenotype of JEVThe development of viremia leads to the rapid and systemic spread of JEV in pigs. Viral dissemination and neuroinvasion coincide with the peak of viremia, leading to the detection of infectious viruses and viral genome in multiple types of tissues [50,51,68,75]. In contrast to other mammalian species, the neuroinvasive phenotype of JEV does not cause lethal diseases in pigs. While extensive pro-inflammatory cytokines are observed in the brain after JEV infection in humans, primates, and mice, JEV replication in the brain of pigs is mostly efficiently suppressed, predominately by type I interferon-independent activation of OAS1 (2′-5′-oligoadenylate synthetase 1) expression and increased interferon-gamma activity [66]. For example, the prototype Nakayama strain has a 50% lethal dose in ICR mice challenged via the intraperitoneal route at 0.5 PFU [76]. At the same time, the same strain does not produce lethal disease in pigs challenged via injection or oronasal routes [19]. Therefore, the experimental challenge of domestic pigs with the wild-type strains of JEV provides the unique opportunity to investigate the kinetics of neuroinvasive disease caused by JEV and the clearance of JEV from nervous tissues. This has been achieved in multiple published studies by monitoring infected pigs for several weeks and obtaining tissues samples through the course of infection [19,50,51,66,77]. These studies often combine the classical virology and contemporary molecular detection techniques to detect the presence of JEV genome in a variety of tissues. Surprisingly, the outcomes have not only delineated the tissue tropism of JEV in greater detail but have also revealed the persistent JEV infection even weeks after challenge [19,50,51,66,77]. In addition to the better understanding of the biology of JEV, these observations have significant implication for the chronic infection with encephalitic flaviviruses, which has only been examined in a limited number of animal models to date [78,79,80].The neuroinvasive phenotype of JEV is not known to contribute to its transmission but has been observed in domestic pigs up to 9 weeks of age in experimental challenge [66]. Young pigs are prone to develop lesions in the central nervous system and signs of nonsuppurative encephalitis, consisting of perivascular cuffing with lymphocytes, multifocal gliosis, and neural degeneration and necrosis, are most prominent at 5 dpi [19,48,52,68]. The dissemination of JEV in lymphoid tissues is a hallmark of systemic infection but typically only demonstrate slight follicular hyperplasia [19].Importantly, there is a growing number of reports showing that the RNA genome of JEV can be detected in various tissues of experimentally challenged animals even weeks after the pigs recover from the acute infection and develop neutralizing antibody responses. While JEV infections are primarily described as acute infection and disease, persistence of JEV RNA can be detected in the tonsil [19,50,51,77] and brain [19,51] of infected pigs almost a month after initial infection, suggesting that the virus may somehow be hidden from the host immune response. The investigation of persistent JEV infection to date has been limited to a few mouse models [80,81,82,83]. Therefore, the mechanism that leads to the persistence of viral RNA remains poorly understood. The epidemiological importance of persistent infection in the maintenance of JEV in nature remains to be ultimately confirmed with field studies. A critical but unanswered question is whether or not pigs can develop persistent JEV infection in nature and consequently develop viremia sufficient to support the biological transmission of JEV even months after the initial infection. Although rare, persistent JE infection and recrudescence of symptoms have been reported in human cases [32,84,85]. As the persistent infection has also been described in humans infected with WNV [86], a related encephalitic flavivirus, the investigation of persistent JEV infection in pigs may also shed light on (1) how encephalitic flaviviruses interact with the vertebrate hosts in the convalescent phase of infection and (2) how persistent infection of flaviviruses can play a role in viral maintenance.6. Oronasal Shedding of JEV: Can Transmission Take Place Directly among Pigs?The higher sensitivity of molecular detection techniques has revealed a more expansive list of tissues that can support the replication of JEV. Most significant is the detection of viral genome in oral and nasal shedding, first discovered by Ricklin, et al. [19] and subsequently confirmed by other independent studies via molecular detection and/or virus isolation [50,51,66,75,77,87]. Interestingly, the nasal shedding of live infectious viruses from infected pigs has been shown to facilitate the direct transmission of JEV to immunologically naïve pigs under laboratory conditions [19]. Ricklin, et al. [19] demonstrated that pigs are highly susceptible to oronasal infection with viral titers as low as 10 TCID50. Exposure via oronasal route, either via intranasal inoculation or direct nose-to-nose contact with infected pigs, led to viremia, systemic infection, and antibody production comparable to pigs infected via needle routes of challenge [19,66]. Although the serum viral loads were lower by 2 logs, there was no demonstrable difference in viral loads in various central nervous tissues [66]. Other animals have been demonstrated to be susceptible to JEV via oronasal and/or intranasal challenge, such as macaques, mice, and guinea pigs [88,89,90,91,92]. Mucosal transmission could also be theoretically possible in humans based on the recent evidence of oral shedding of viral RNA in JE patients detected via throat swab sampling [93]. However, pigs are unique in that they can themselves function as the source of virus after infection as viral shedders to potentially infect other pigs via direct transmission.Despite subsequent investigations, the exact mechanism behind the oronasal shedding of JEV remains unclear. The shedding source is most likely a combination of virus released directly from the nasal epithelium or olfactory neuroepithelium [50,89] and an indirect reflection of blood as oral mucosal transudate [94], but not necessarily from the tonsils as previously suspected [77]. The hypothesis that the shedding source could be the central nervous tissue via the olfactory pathway may be supported by the detection of viral genome in different regions of brain days after the viremic level has fallen below the limit of detection [51,68].This oronasal shedding of JEV has significant implication for veterinary diagnosis and virological surveillance. The collection of oral fluid and nasal secretions from infected pigs utilizes simple techniques. Lyons, et al. [87] have reported the method of collecting JEV-positive oral fluid samples using cotton ropes that are readily available. Therefore, it is anticipated that the integration of the same method into the existing veterinary diagnostic programs will be practical. Currently, the diagnosis of JEV in pigs can be based on virus isolation on central nervous system tissues; viral RNA detection in samples such as blood, brain, placental tissues, and cerebrospinal fluid; and/or via the detection of JEV-specific antibodies in cerebrospinal fluid or serum samples [20,95]. However, the collection of the samples needed to perform these World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE)-recommended diagnostic tests are often invasive, time-consuming, and require technical or veterinary expertise. Oronasal shedding of JEV can persist for almost two weeks based on viral genome detection and/or virus isolation [19,50,87], which is significantly longer than the duration of the viremic phase. Hence, it is not surprising that the detection of JEV in oronasal specimens is superior to the detection of JEV in swine serum, which is commonly used for virological surveillance. In a recently published field study by Chiou, et al. [96], the detection of the JEV genome via RT-PCR in swine oronasal specimens coincided with the detection of JEV in mosquitoes at the early phase of the epidemic season, providing the possibility of improving the virological surveillance programs in the endemic region. Interestingly, viral oronasal shedding was undetectable outside the mosquito season, suggesting that direct oronasal transmission may not play such a significant role in supporting overwintering of JEV in temperate regions [96].To date, the epidemiological importance of oronasal shedding of JEV from infected pigs remains to be proven. Available evidence that oronasal shedding facilitates JEV transmission among pigs is indirect (Figure 2). Serological data from other independent studies [17,18,97] support the potential existence and contribution of direct transmission in JEV ecology. Despite the very low to undetectable infection rates of JEV in field-collected mosquitoes, intense circulation of JEV was evident in pigs sampled in the same region based on the high seropositive prevalence or infection outbreaks reported in several studies [17,18,97], which could be a reflection of the existence of direct transmission of JEV between pigs. The existence of direct pig-to-pig transmission under field conditions has also been further supported using mathematical modelling consistent with swine serological data collected from Cambodia, a country with high JE incidence [18]. In this study, the mathematical JE transmission model that incorporated both vector-borne and direct transmission better fit the cross-sectional serological survey data collected from pig farms across different provinces of Cambodia compared to the model built on vector-borne transmission alone [18]. It is important to elucidate whether or not oronasal shedding will facilitate viral maintenance in the absence of mosquitoes, as demonstrated with laboratory studies. This may fulfill the missing knowledge of how JEV can be maintained in temperate regions of Asia, where competent mosquito species are not present year-round. To answer the question of whether or not this type of transmission is ecologically important requires multi-year data, preferably across multiple seasons, and virus genetic evidence, ideally through the detection of live viruses. The oronasal route of transmission could be important under different specific ecologic conditions, and identifying the major variables at play may be important to improve our knowledge of this unconventional transmission route.7. ConclusionsRecent findings have demonstrated that JEV disease pathogenesis in pigs may be more complicated than initially perceived thanks to the detailed examination of tissue tropism and shedding profiles using molecular detection techniques [19,50,66,68]. Infected pigs can not only shed sufficient virus in their oronasal secretions that may be capable of infecting other pigs via direct transmission [19] but can also develop persistent infection of their lymphoid and/or nervous tissues [19,50,51]. Since its original discovery by Ricklin, et al. [19], the existence of direct vector-free transmission between pigs has been further in agreement with serosurveillance data from various pig farms [17,97] and with mathematical modelling [18]. This discovery of direct transmission is important as it raises a big question: Can flaviviruses be amplified and maintained in reservoir or amplifying hosts without the presence of competent vectors (Table 2)? This is a critical question of epidemiological importance because many zoonotic flaviviruses, including JEV, can be found in temperate regions in which vector-borne transmission is unlikely to take place year-round. If proven true, then an additional question must be investigated: How does this shape the evolution of JEV? The majority of available JEV isolates from pig samples are from blood, brain, and/or fetal materials, whereas there is a poor representation of viruses maintained through the oronasal process. Oronasal fluid sampling via the rope method is a type of technique proven to work in the field [96]. Therefore, more work can be conducted using this method to provide evidence that direct transmission of JEV occurs in nature and to determine its importance in the overall transmission and maintenance of the virus. If viruses are indeed transmitted under different conditions and transmission routes, it would be very interesting to investigate if there are any different genetic signatures that exist between the various populations.


Title: Japanese encephalitis virus persists in the human reproductive epithelium and porcine reproductive tissues

IntroductionJapanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is a zoonotic flavivirus transmitted by Culex mosquitoes. While efficient vaccines are available [1], JEV is the major causative agent of encephalitis in humans in the Asia-Pacific region [2,3], with an estimated 68,000 cases reported annually and 15,000 deaths; statistics, however, are most probably underestimated [4]. Though humans are dead-end hosts of JEV and most human infections are asymptomatic, around 20–30% of clinical infections are fatal, and 30–50% of the survivors develop prolonged or life-long neurological sequelae [2]. There is no specific cure for the disease; treatment is only supportive to mitigate disease outcomes. The geographic range of emerging JEV keeps expanding from the South of Russia to Australia, including Japan, Eastern China, India, and South-East Asia. For example, the first major outbreak of JEV in Australia with infections in pig herds and human deaths unfolded in February 2022. Also, travel-related severe cases of JEV-induced encephalitis are reported around the globe [5]. There is a concern that JEV can be introduced into North America given a large population of amplifying hosts—pigs and wild boars; susceptible Culex mosquitoes are also ubiquitous [6,7].There are emerging concerns about alternative, beyond vector-borne ways of flavivirus transmission which may change flavivirus epidemiology and expand the geographical range to territories with no insect vectors. For example, it was thought that JEV transmission occurred only through mosquitoes, but a recent study demonstrated that JEV is transmitted from pig to pig, suggesting vector-free ways for the virus to spread [8]. Following studies confirmed efficient JEV replication in porcine and human nasal epithelial cells [9,10] and virus oronasal shedding in pigs [11,12] that can enable contact transmission. Another example of vector-free flavivirus transmission is sexual Zika virus transmission. Many sexual transmissions of Zika virus have been described, including male-to-male, male-to-female, female-to-male transmissions [13–15], and fetal infection with congenital Zika syndrome after sexual transmission in mothers [16]. Rodent and non-human primate models also supported replication in reproductive tissues and sexual transmission of Zika virus [17–23]. In humans, Zika virus has been detected in vaginal secretions [24–26] with replication in vaginal epithelial cells [18]. It is unknown, however, whether JEV also has tropism in the vaginal epithelium and the potential for sexual transmission in humans. To probe this likelihood, in the present study, we studied JEV infection phenotypes and host transcriptional responses in human primary vaginal epithelial cells. Also, we used pigs—the native amplifying host for JEV and studied infection in vaginal tissues and vaginal virus shedding.Another example of vector-free flavivirus transmission is transplacental Zika virus transmission. Zoonotic flaviviruses were thought to primarily impact human non-reproductive tissues. However, Zika virus replicates in the maternal-fetal interface breaching the placental barrier and infecting the fetal tissues [27–29]. Zika virus crosses the placental barrier to reach the intrauterine cavity with the fetus and replicates in placental trophoblasts. Zika virus infection during all three trimesters of pregnancy may result in fetal infection and congenital abnormalities in newborns; however, severe clinical disease was often attributed to infections in early pregnancy [30]. While clinical outcomes of transplacental JEV infection are described in humans [31] and pigs [32], cellular targets and tissue tropism in the upper reproductive tract are unknown. To better understand JEV pathogenesis during transplacental infection, we studied JEV infection phenotypes in human primary endometrial cells and trophoblast. In pigs, we studied infection in the endometrium, placenta, and fetuses.Materials and methodsEthics statementWe followed the Canadian Council on Animal Care guidelines and Animal Use Protocol #20200106 approved by the University of Saskatchewan’s Animal Research Ethics Board and Animal Care and Use Review Office (ACURO) of US Army Medical Research and Development Command. All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering. Pigs were euthanized with an anesthetic overdose followed by exsanguination.CellsC6/36 cells (ATCC, CRL-1660) were cultured in a Minimum essential medium (MEM; Sigma M4655) supplemented with 10% FBS and 1x Penicillin-streptomycin. VERO E6 cells (ATCC CRL-1586) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 3% FBS, 1x Penicillin-streptomycin, and 2.67 mM Sodium bicarbonate (Gibco 25080–094). Human vaginal epithelial cells from two donors (ATCC, PCS-480-010 and Lifeline Cell Technology LLC, FC-0083) were cultured in a Vaginal epithelial cell basal medium (ATCC, PCS-480-030) with a Vaginal epithelial cell growth kit (ATCC, PCS-480-040). The commercial supplier confirmed the phenotype by staining cells with epithelium-specific (Pan-CK) and anti-fibroblasts (TE-7) antibodies. Human primary endometrial epithelial cells (Lifeline Cell Technology, FC-0078) were cultured in ReproLife female reproductive epithelial cell culture media with supplements (Lifeline Cell Technology; LL-0068). HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cells (ATCC CRL-3271) were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 Medium (RPMI; Gibco 11875119) supplemented with 5% FBS and 1x Penicillin-Streptomycin. VERO E6, human reproductive epithelial cells, and HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast were cultured at +37°C and C6/36 at +28°C in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator. All cells were mycoplasma free as confirmed by LookOut Mycoplasma PCR Detection Kit (Sigma-Aldrich).VirusesThe JEV Nakayama strain (GenBank EF571853) stock was initially produced at the World Reference Center for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, the University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, and transferred to our facility through the Public Health Agency of Canada. We inoculated VERO E6 cells and harvested media 9 days after inoculation to produce the working stock. Culture media containing JEV was centrifuged (12,000g, 20 min, +4°C); the supernatant was collected, aliquoted, and frozen at -80°C. The virus stock was mycoplasma free as confirmed by LookOut Mycoplasma PCR Detection Kit (Sigma-Aldrich).Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)We used QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s instructions to purify JEV RNA from 140 μl of virus stock, maternal and fetal blood plasma, maternal vaginal and nasal swabs, and the supernatants of different cell cultures. Maternal and fetal tissue samples were dissected and weighed on analytical balances. One ml of TRI Reagent Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to 80–100 mg of tissues before homogenization (5 min at 25 Hz) with RNase-free stainless-steel beads and TissueLyser II (QIAGEN). Then, RNA extraction was performed with PhaseMaker tubes (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and PureLink RNA Mini Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.For JEV RNA quantification, we used the previously described probe-based one-step RT-qPCR assay [33]. All RT-qPCR reactions were conducted on the StepOne Plus platform (Life Technologies, USA) and analyzed using StepOne software version 2.3. The reaction mixture (20 μl) for RT-qPCR (Bioline) consisted of 10 μl 2x SensiFAST Probe One-Step Mix, 0.4 μl RiboSafe RNase Inhibitor, 0.2 μl reverse transcriptase, 1 μl (500 nM) of forward (Universal-JEV-F: 5’-GCCACCCAGGAGGTCCTT-3’) and reverse (Universal-JEV-R: 5’- CCCCAAAACCGCAGGAAT-3’) primers, 0.5 μl (250 nM) probe (Universal-JEV-Probe: 56-FAM-CAAGAGGTG /ZEN/ GACGGCC-3IABkFQ), 1.9 μl nuclease-free water and 4 μl of sample RNA. A reverse transcription step of 10 min at 48°C and an enzyme activation step of 2 min at 95°C were followed by 40 amplification cycles (10 s at 95°C and 20 s at 60°C). RNA from a stock of JEV was used to generate standard curves that had a wide dynamic range (102.5–1012.5 RNA copies/ml) with the high linear correlation R2 = 0.99 between the cycle threshold (Ct) value and template concentration. The standard curve was used to find the detection limit at Ct 40. Assay values were corrected for fluid volumes or tissue weights and upon logarithmical transformation expressed as JEV RNA genome copies per ml or gram.Productive infection in tissues was confirmed with JEV negative-strand-specific RT-PCR: cDNA was synthesized with SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System (Invitrogen) using 10 pmole of the JEV-MinusStr forward primer 5-GGTCAGAACCACTACTGACAGT-3. Afterward, cDNA was amplified using the primers Universal-JEV-F and Universal-JEV-R (500 nM of each) and Universal-JEV-Probe (250 nM) described above. An enzyme activation step of 2 min at 95°C was followed by 60 amplification cycles (10 s at 95°C and 20 s at 60°C).In all RNA extraction and PCR assays, we used VERO E6 cell culture media containing JEV as a positive PCR control. As a negative control, we used samples from non-manipulated control animals from our previous studies [34,35]. Strict precautions were taken to prevent PCR contamination. Aerosol-resistant filter pipette tips and disposable gloves were always used. Kit reagent controls were included in every RNA extraction and PCR run.Detection and quantification of infectious virusWe used the endpoint dilution assay in VERO E6 cells to isolate and quantify infectious titers in the JEV stock, blood plasma (maternal and fetal), nasal, and vaginal swabs (maternal) [34–39]. Fluids were serially diluted five-fold in four replicates starting from 1:10 in DMEM media (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 5% FBS, a mixture of antibiotics (1,000 IU/ml penicillin and 1 mg/ml streptomycin, Gibco), and 2.25 g/l Sodium Bicarbonate (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Fifty μl of each dilution was added to confluent VERO E6 cells cultured in 96-well plates. After 2 hours of incubation at 37°C, 150 μl of fresh media was added to each well. The cells were incubated for seven days at 37°C. After washing and then drying for at least 4 h, the plates were kept at -20°C for at least 2 hours or until use. Anti-pan flavivirus E protein monoclonal antibodies clone D1-4G2-4-15 (ATCC; HB-112) [40] were used for immunohistochemistry staining [34–37,39] to detect JEV-infected cells. Fifty percent endpoint titers were calculated by the Spearman-Kärber formula and expressed in a decimal logarithm of a 50% infection dose for cell cultures (log10 TCID50) per ml. Media from mock-inoculated cells were used as negative controls.Maternal blood, nasal swabs, and vaginal swabs which were negative or caused cytotoxic effects on VERO E6 cells, were used to inoculate C6/36 cells for virus isolation. Cells in 96-well plates were inoculated with undiluted or 1:10 diluted blood plasma or swabs in MEM media supplemented with 10% FBS, 1,000 IU/ml penicillin, 1 mg/ml streptomycin, 1x Gentamicin/Amphotericin Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 2.25 g/l Sodium Bicarbonate. After 12 hours of incubation at 37°C, fluids were removed, replaced with media, and cells were incubated for seven days at 28°C. Afterward, plates were fixed and stained with D1-4G2-4-15 antibodies as described above.To make 10% suspension for titration, maternal tissues were homogenized in media with TissueLyser II (QIAGEN) for 3 min at 20 Hz. Samples were centrifuged at 2,000g for 10 minutes, and after two hours of incubation on C6/36 cells at 37°C, 150 μl of fresh media was added to each well, and cells were incubated for seven days at 28°C. Afterward, plates were fixed and stained with D1-4G2-4-15 antibodies as described above.In vitro infection phenotypes in human reproductive epithelial cells and trophoblastWe used human primary vaginal epithelial cells from two healthy deceased female donors: a 24-years-old African American donor (ATCC, PCS-480-010; Lot Number 80924222; 3rd passage) and an 18-years-old Caucasian donor (Lifeline Cell Technology FC-0083; Lot Number 04033; 3rd passage). Also, we used primary human endometrial epithelial cells from a healthy 13-years-old African American donor (Lifeline Cell Technology FC-0078; Lot Number 09953; 3rd passage). Information on the menstrual phase of human donors was not available, as the samples were de-identified. Cells were free for bacteria, yeast, fungi, mycoplasma, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV-1, and HIV-2, as confirmed by manufacturers with sterility tests and PCR. In JEV studies, three technical replicates were included for cells from each biological donor. Twenty-five thousand vaginal or endometrial epithelial cells were seeded in 96-well plates in appropriate media. The next day, cell monolayers were inoculated with JEV at MOI of 0.1 or 10 in 100 μl of the same media. Plates were incubated at +37°C for 2 hours. Afterward, cells were washed three times with sterile PBS and covered with 200 μl media. Mock-infected cells were included as controls in each plate. Infected plates were incubated (5% CO2, +37°C) for 0, 3, 5, and 7 days when supernatants were collected, clarified (2,000 g, 5 min), and frozen (−80°C) for subsequent JEV load quantification. After the supernatant collection, plates with cell monolayer were dried for at least 4 hours and frozen (-80°C). Plates were stained with flavivirus-specific D1-4G2-4-15 antibodies as described above, and infected cells were visualized with a bright-field microscope. The same protocol was used to determine JEV infection kinetics in HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast cells (ATCC CRL-3271).RNA-seq and bioinformaticsPrimary vaginal epithelial cells from two human donors were seeded into 24-well plates with 105 cells per well. On the following day, cells in four wells representing technical replicates were inoculated with MOI 10 of JEV prediluted in DMEM media, and four wells were mock-inoculated with virus-free media from VERO E6 cells prediluted in the same way. At 48 hours after inoculation, cells were homogenized in 1 ml of TRI Reagent Solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and RNA was extracted according to the manufacturer’s protocol. RNA was assessed on a bioanalyzer and all samples had RNA Integrity Number (RIN) values above 8.0. DNA from samples was removed with TURBO DNA-free Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). mRNA with intact poly(A) tails were enriched with NEBNext Poly(A) mRNA Magnetic Isolation Module (New England Biolabs) and used for library constructions with NEBNext Ultra II Directional RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina and NEBNext Multiplex Oligos for Illumina (96 Unique Dual Index Primer Pairs; New England Biolabs).Libraries were sequenced on the NextSeq as paired-end reads using the NextSeq 500/550 High Output Kit v2.5 (150 cycles) (Illumina). FASTQ files were trimmed for adaptor sequences and filtered for low-quality reads using Trimmomatic. On average, 22.1 million reads per sample were generated. RNA-seq analysis was performed as we previously described [34]. Briefly, a complete transcriptome database was generated from ENSEMBL Homo sapiens GRCh38.p13 (GCA_000001405.28). Sequencing data were mapped and quantified using kallisto [41]. Then counts were analyzed using R BioConductor packages tximport, edgeR and limma. The voom function from the limma package was used for differential expression analysis. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed with camera function in limma using the GMT file (version 7.5.1) containing symbols of gene sets derived from the Gene Ontology Biological Process Ontology of the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB).The set enrichment results from camera were graphed in Cytoscape using the EnrichmentMap plugin [34,42]. All networks were generated using a Jaccard + Overlap with a cutoff of 0.375 and a Combined Constant of 0.5. Sub-networks were discovered using GLay cluster and annotated using the WordCloud plugin of the top 4 words with a bonus of 8 for word co-occurrence. An accession number for RNA-seq data is PRJNA823367 in NCBI BioProject.Animal experimentEight female Landrace-cross pigs were purchased from the university high-health status herd free from porcine reproductive and respiratory virus (PRRSV), porcine parvovirus (PPV), congenital porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2), and porcine circovirus 3 (PCV3), which can cause fetal infection in pigs. Accordingly, maternal and fetal samples were negative for PRRSV, PPV, PCV2, and PCV3 in virus-specific PCR assays [35,43]. Before delivering to containment, six pigs were synchronized and bred with semen from a single donor to reduce biological variability; two pigs (G and H) remained non-pregnant. Insemination was scheduled to ensure that at the time of pig inoculation with JEV, three stages of pregnancy (the duration of pregnancy in pigs is 114 days) were represented: Two pigs at early pregnancy (inoculation at 30 days of pregnancy; pigs A and B), two pigs at mid-pregnancy (54 days; C and D), and two pigs at late pregnancy (86 days; E and F). The pregnancy was confirmed with ultrasound, and all pigs were delivered to Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization, University of Saskatchewan biosafety level 3 containment facility. Animals were housed in two identical rooms in individual pens with no contact with each other. After seven days of acclimatization in containment, all pigs were sedated and inoculated with 107 TCID50 of JEV intradermally (ear skin, 1 ml) + intravenous (ear vein, 1ml); this inoculation dose and routes were previously used for JEV inoculation in young piglets [8,44]. Clinical signs, including appetite, activity, and rectal temperature, were recorded before and after JEV inoculation.We collected blood from the jugular vein with BD Vacutainer Plastic Blood Collection EDTA tubes; nasal and vaginal swabs were also collected. Samples were collected before JEV inoculation and at 1–7, 14, 21, and 28 days after virus inoculation. After blood centrifugation (2,000g, 20 min, +4°C), plasma was aliquoted and frozen at -80°C. For nasal and vaginal swabs, swabs were inserted into the top of the nose or vagina and rotated to obtain secretions. Afterward, a swab was placed into a tube containing 500 μl sterile media, the handle was broken one centimeter from the top of the swab, and the tube was stored at -80°C.Pigs were euthanized and sampled 28 days after JEV inoculation. In all pigs, we sampled and froze maternal tonsils, mesenteric lymph nodes, brains, nasal mucosa, and vaginal mucosa with individual sterile instruments. In two non-pregnant pigs, uterine walls with endometrium were sampled and frozen. In six pregnant pigs, uteri with fetuses were removed to sample each fetus (14–15 fetuses per pig) with individual sterile instruments. First, a uterine wall with the placenta was collected from each conceptus (a fetus with fetal membranes) and frozen. Second, umbilical cord blood was aspirated from each fetus with sterile syringes and needles, centrifuged, and plasma was aliquoted and frozen at -80°C. Finally, fetuses were removed, inspected for gross pathology, and whole fetal brains were collected and frozen.SerologyWe used an adapted virus-neutralizing assay to quantify JEV-neutralizing antibodies in maternal blood plasma [35,37]. Briefly, 50 μl of JEV (104 TCID50/ml) were mixed with equal volumes of two-fold serially diluted plasma (in two replicates) and incubated at +37°C for 1 h before inoculation VERO E6 cells in 96-well plates. After 2 h, 100 μl/well of fresh DMEM supplemented with 1% FBS, 1x Penicillin-Streptomycin and 2.67 mM Sodium Bicarbonate was added. After 7 days, cells were fixed and stained with D1-4G2-4-15 antibodies as described for virus titration. The neutralizing antibody titers were calculated as the highest plasma dilution inhibited JEV infection in 50% of the inoculated wells.We also quantified JEV-specific IgG antibodies in maternal blood plasma with immunoperoxidase monolayer assay (IPMA) [35,37]. Briefly, VERO E6 cells in 96-well cell culture plates were inoculated with 50 μl media containing 104 TCID50/ml of JEV and incubated for 2 h (+37°C, 5% CO2). Then 100 μl of the culture medium (DMEM supplemented with 5% FCS, 1x Penicillin/Streptomycin, 2.67 mM Sodium Bicarbonate) was added. After 7 days of incubation at +37°C, 5% CO2 plates were dried for at least 4 hours and stored at -20°C until use. Plates with cells were thawed, dried, and fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 1 hour, and washed twice with 1x DPBS (pH 7.2). Afterward, fixed cells were incubated with 100% methanol in the presence of 0.3% H2O2 for 10 min. Then plates were washed with DPBS, and two-fold serial dilutions of tested blood plasma were added, followed by 1 hour incubation at +37°C. Plates were washed three times with DPBS containing 0.05% Tween-80 and 50 μl/well of rabbit anti-pig IgG (1:400, Abcam, ab136735) conjugated with horseradish peroxidase were added. After incubation for 1 hour at +37°C and washing, a color reaction was initiated by adding substrate solution: 1 mM 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole, 5% N,N-dimethylformamide, 50 mM Sodium Acetate (pH 5.0), and 10 mM H2O2 (H2O2 was added just before placing on cells). The reaction was stopped by replacing the substrate with an acetate buffer, and JEV-specific staining was determined by examination with a microscope. The titers were defined as the log reciprocal of the highest serum dilution. Blood plasma samples of mock-inoculated control animals from our previous studies were used as a negative control.Interferon-alpha quantificationTo quantify interferon-alpha (IFN-α), maternal and fetal blood plasma samples were diluted 1:2 and tested with Invitrogen Porcine IFN-alpha ELISA Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.ImmunohistochemistryWe used Mouse and Rabbit Specific HRP/DAB IHC Detection Kit—Micro-polymer (Abcam, ab236466) to identify JEV antigen in fetal brains. Fetal brain cryosections of 10 μm were fixed in 10% buffered formalin for 15 min at +4°C. After treatment with 0.3% H2O2 and 1% Triton X-100 for 15 min and protein block for 10 minutes, tissue sections were washed in PBS and incubated with mouse monoclonal antibodies D1-4G2-4-15 (1:10) against flavivirus E protein for 1 hour at +37°C. Afterward, the sections were washed and incubated with mouse specifying reagent, goat anti-rabbit HRP-conjugate, DAB chromogen, and DAB substrate according to the kit’s instructions. Subsequently, tissues were counterstained with hematoxylin and analyzed with a light microscope.For JEV antigen identification in human reproductive epithelial cells and trophoblast, cells were fixed and stained with D1-4G2-4-15 antibodies as described above in the detection and quantification of infectious JEV.Statistical analysisWe used GraphPad PRISM 8 software to analyze data. The difference with p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Viral loads and immunology data were expressed as individual values and mean ± standard deviation (M ± SD). Japanese encephalitis virus RNA loads and infectious titers in fetal blood plasma collected at euthanasia were compared between fetuses from early, mid, and late pregnancy subgroups using one-way ANOVA; Tukey’s multiple comparison test was used for multiple comparisons between fetuses of different subgroups. The same statistical tests were used to compare JEV RNA loads in the placenta and fetal brains. The number of fetuses with pathology was compared between subgroups with Yates-corrected χ2-test. We used the Spearman correlation to evaluate relationships between fetal IFN-α levels in blood plasma and JEV loads.ResultsJapanese encephalitis virus causes persistent infection and molecular pathology in human vaginal epithelial cellsIt is unknown whether JEV has tropism in the vaginal epithelium and the potential for sexual transmission in humans. Here, we assessed virus infection kinetics in human vaginal epithelial cells and transcriptional responses to infection.We inoculated primary vaginal epithelial cells from two donors and quantified viral loads in the cell culture supernatant on different days. The virus caused persistent infection with very high loads at 3, 5, and 7 days after inoculation (Fig 1A). The virus loads were similar in the vaginal epithelium of two donors and at different MOIs (Fig 1A). The productive persistent infection, at least for 7 days, was confirmed by immunohistochemistry specific for the JEV envelope protein (Figs 1B and S1). Interestingly, we observed the combination of virus-positive and virus-negative cells in close proximity at each sampling time (Fig 1B).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010656.g001Fig 1Japanese encephalitis virus causes persistent infection in human primary vaginal epithelial cells.(A) JEV infection kinetics in human primary vaginal epithelial cells. (B) Immunohistochemistry specific for the JEV envelope protein in human vaginal epithelial cells at 7 days after inoculation (MOI 10). The combination of virus-positive and virus-negative cells in close proximity was observed. The insert shows mock-inoculated cells.Next, to better understand molecular pathology induced by JEV infection in the vaginal epithelium, we quantified whole-genome expression in vaginal epithelial cells. Gene expression differed considerably between control and JEV-infected cells with 1584 upregulated and 286 downregulated genes (FDR-adjusted p < 0.05; log2 fold change (FC) > 1; Fig 2A, S1A Table). Among the top ten upregulated genes with 10–13 log2 fold change were genes encoding interferon lambda 1, 2, 3 and interferon beta 1 (IFNL1, 2, 3 and IFNB1; Fig 2A). In accordance with previous findings where treatment of human vaginal epithelial cells with interferon lambda and beta induced a strong interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) response [18], we also found overexpression of 23 canonical ISGs (Fig 2A). In addition, among the top ten upregulated genes were genes encoding proinflammatory chemokines CCL5, CXCL10, and CXCL11, which recruit leukocytes to the site of inflammation [45,46]. Fifteen genes encoding gap junction and adhesion proteins were also affected (Fig 2A), suggesting changes related to epithelial barrier function. Accordingly, enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes showed significant effects in the JEV-infected epithelium with 255 upregulated and 78 downregulated processes (FDR-adjusted p < 0.05; Fig 2B; S1B Table). Specifically, genes with altered expression were positively enriched for processes related to type I, II, and III interferon responses (12 GO processes FDR-adjusted p < 0.05), inflammatory responses (10 GO processes), and virus-host interactions (5 GO processes) (Fig 2B; highlighted in S1B Table). Interestingly, “negative regulation of morphogenesis of an epithelium” and “negative regulation of bicellular tight junction assembly” GO processes were also enriched (S1B Table).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010656.g002Fig 2Cellular transcriptional responses during JEV infection in human primary vaginal epithelial cells.(A) Cellular transcriptional responses in human primary vaginal epithelial cells during JEV infection. Plots of the upregulated (red) and downregulated (blue) genes. All affected genes, top 10 affected genes, interferon-stimulated genes, and genes encoding gap junction and adhesion proteins with FDR-adjusted p < 0.05 and log2 fold change (FC) > 1 are shown. See raw data in S1A Table. (B) Molecular pathology network in human primary vaginal epithelial cells during JEV infection. An enrichment map of significantly altered GO biological processes is shown. Red are pathways with positive and blue are with negative enrichment. All subnetworks with FDR-adjusted p < 0.05 and at least three connected nodes are shown. See raw data in S1B Table.In accordance with infection kinetics and molecular pathology, JEV caused cytopathology in vaginal epithelial cells with more prominent cell rounding and detachment compared to control cells (S2 Fig). Cell death started at 3 days after inoculation and aggravated at 5 and 7 days, and was dose-dependent. In conformity with immunohistochemistry where the combination of virus-positive and virus-negative cells was observed (Fig 1B), the combination of dead and live cells was also observed even at 7 days after inoculation (S2 Fig).In summary, we discovered that JEV causes persistent infection in the human vaginal epithelium and has a potential for sexual transmission in humans. Also, RNA-seq analysis in human vaginal epithelial cells infected with JEV provides evidence for molecular pathology that leads to inflammation and disruption of epithelial barrier function. In support, the vaginal epithelium showed progressive cytopathology during JEV infection.Japanese encephalitis virus causes persistent infection and cytopathology in human endometrial epithelial cells and trophoblastWhile clinical outcomes of transplacental JEV infection are described in humans [31], cellular targets in the upper reproductive tract are unknown. To better understand JEV pathogenesis during transplacental infection, we assessed virus infection kinetics in human endometrial epithelial cells and trophoblast.In primary endometrial epithelial cells, JEV kinetics depended on the initial inoculation dose. At MOI 0.1, high viral loads in the supernatant and virus-positive cells were detected only in one well replicate at 5 days after inoculation (Fig 3A). In contrast, at MOI 10 high viral loads and virus-positive cells were detected from 3 to 7 days (Figs 3A and 3B and S3). We did not observe distinct cytopathology in infected cells; both control and infected epithelium had detached rounded cells (S4 Fig).10.1371/journal.pntd.0010656.g003Fig 3Japanese encephalitis virus causes persistent infection in human primary endometrial epithelial cells and trophoblast.(A) JEV infection kinetics in human primary endometrial epithelial cells. (B) Immunohistochemistry specific for the JEV envelope protein in human endometrial epithelial cells at 3 days after inoculation (MOI 10). The insert shows mock-inoculated cells. (C) JEV infection kinetics in human trophoblast—HTR-8/SVneo cells. (D) Immunohistochemistry specific for the JEV envelope protein in human trophoblast at 7 days after inoculation (MOI 10). The insert shows mock-inoculated cells. The dotted line on graphs represents the limit of detection.In human trophoblast, JEV kinetics also depended on the initial inoculation dose. At MOI 0.1, JEV loads in supernatants gradually increased from 3 to 7 days after inoculation (Fig 3C). At MOI 10 high viral loads were detected at 3, 5, and 7 days (Fig 3C). Immunohistochemistry showed highly intensive staining with many virus-positive cells on all sampling days for MOI 0.1 and 10 (Figs 3D and S5). In cells inoculated with MOI 10, gradually aggravating cytopathology with focal and diffuse cell detachment and disruption of the cell monolayer was observed from 3 to 7 days after inoculation. However, at MOI 0.1, we did not observe distinct cytopathology (S6 Fig).In summary, we discovered that JEV causes persistent infection and cytopathology in the human endometrial epithelium and trophoblast, possibly contributing to transplacental JEV transmission.Japanese encephalitis virus persists in the lower reproductive tract of the native amplifying hostTo further explore the potential of JEV for sexual transmission, we studied virus persistence and shedding in vaginal tissues of the native amplifying host—pigs.One non-pregnant pig showed elevated body temperature 39.3–39.4°C (the baseline temperature was 38.4–38.5°C) and decreased appetite at 3–4 days after JEV inoculation. Other animals did not show clinical signs. As previously demonstrated in young piglets [8], adult pigs also had JEV viremia (Fig 4A–4C), shedding in nasal secretions (Fig 4A), and virus-specific antibody responses (S7 Fig). As a host response to infection, during viremia and JEV shedding in body fluids, pigs showed decreased IFN-α concentrations (S7 Fig). Afterward, on days 14, 21, and 28, during JEV clearance in blood and body fluids, IFN-α concentrations were close to or exceeded the initial base concentrations.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010656.g004Fig 4Japanese encephalitis virus loads in blood, nasal secretions, and vaginal secretions in non-pregnant and pregnant pigs.(A) JEV RNA loads determined by virus-specific RT-qPCR in blood plasma, nasal swabs, and vaginal swabs. The dotted line is the detection limit. Columns represent mean values with standard deviations. (B) VERO E6 cells inoculated with blood plasma collected from a pig before JEV infection. (C) JEV-positive staining (red) in VERO E6 cells inoculated with blood plasma collected from a mid pregnancy pig two days after JEV inoculation. In accordance with the highest viral RNA loads identified in pigs from the mid pregnancy subgroup at 2–3 days after inoculation, we isolated infectious JEV in VERO cells at the same time points. (D) Cytotoxicity in VERO E6 cells inoculated with maternal blood plasma. Isolation and titration of infectious flaviviruses from samples of immunocompetent mammalians is challenging, most probably because of insufficient sensitivity of cellular assays [19,21,39,47–49]. Most PCR-positive plasma samples did not show infectious JEV, indicating infectious titers below the detection limit of the VERO-based endpoint dilution assay. In addition, maternal blood plasma samples, even after 1:10 dilution, caused cytotoxicity. Similarly, inoculation of mosquito C6/36 cells, which can be more sensitive than VERO cells for flavivirus isolation [37], with undiluted or 1:10 diluted blood plasma led to strong cytotoxicity preventing interpretation of results. Nasal and vaginal swabs with initial sampling dilution caused cytotoxicity in VERO and C6/36 cells that halted the assay, and with subsequent higher dilutions, we did not isolate infectious JEV.Interestingly, in contrast to a previous study in young piglets [8], we discovered that adult pigs shed JEV RNA in vaginal secretions. Non-pregnant pigs shed JEV within 3–7 days after inoculation except on day 4. Pregnant pigs continually shed virus RNA within 3–7 days, and even at 14 days after inoculation (Fig 4A). Virus loads in non-pregnant pigs peaked at 4 Log10 RNA copies/ml. In pregnant pigs, JEV loads peaked at 6 Log10 RNA copies/ml (Fig 4A). Vaginal mucosa sampled at 28 days after inoculation was also positive for JEV RNA in two pigs (S8 Fig).Altogether, we confirmed previous findings where pigs had JEV viremia and shedding in nasal secretions [8] and discovered that pigs shed JEV in vaginal secretions. Viral RNA was detected in vaginal secretions 2–10 days after it was cleared from blood plasma suggesting local and prolonged JEV replication in vaginal tissues.Japanese encephalitis virus persists in the upper reproductive tract of the native amplifying host and causes transplacental infectionTo better understand the pathogenesis of JEV transplacental transmission, we studied infection in the endometrium, placenta, and fetuses of the native amplifying host—pigs.As previously demonstrated in young piglets [8,50], adult pigs also had JEV persistence in tonsils, lymph nodes, brain, and nasal mucosa collected 28 days after inoculation (S8 Fig).We also identified JEV persistence in one endometrial tissue sample out of two tested (S8 Fig). Virus persistence in the endometrium may lead to infection in the adjacent placenta and afterward in fetuses. Indeed, we found high JEV RNA loads in the placenta from nearly all (pig A, early pregnancy) or all (pig C, mid pregnancy) fetuses (Fig 5A). Accordingly, fetuses from pig A and pig C had high JEV RNA loads in their blood plasma as determined by PCR (Fig 5B). Two fetuses from pig A and six from pig C also had high infectious JEV titers in blood plasma as determined by virus isolation and titration (Fig 5C). Infectious JEV titers were significantly higher in fetuses from pig C inoculated at mid pregnancy than from pig A (p = 0.01) inoculated at early pregnancy (Fig 5C). Only one pregnant pig (50%) in early and mid pregnancy subgroups showed transplacental and fetal infections suggesting the stochastic nature of JEV transmission from mother to fetuses or unknown factors that may affect the virus spread through the placenta.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010656.g005Fig 5Japanese encephalitis virus infection in fetuses.(A) JEV RNA loads in the placenta. JEV RNA loads (B) and infectious titers (C) in fetal blood. (D) JEV RNA loads in fetal brains. (E) JEV-specific immunohistochemistry in the brain from a virus-negative fetus (insert) and in the brain from the fetus positive for JEV; brown staining represents cells positive for the JEV envelope protein. (F) IFN-α concentrations in fetal blood plasma. Control blood plasma samples were from fetuses of two healthy pigs sampled at 78 days of pregnancy in our previous studies [35]. Dots represent individual pigs or fetuses. The dotted line is the detection limit—36 pg/ml. In fetuses, the short horizontal line represents mean values. In all graphs, dots represent individual fetuses. The dotted line is the detection limit. The short horizontal line represents mean values. *: JEV loads were significantly different.Fetuses from pigs A and C also had JEV RNA in their brains (Fig 5D). Three fetuses from pig A inoculated at early pregnancy had JEV RNA in their brains. Twelve out of thirteen fetuses (92.3%) from pig C inoculated at mid pregnancy had JEV RNA in their brains with high titers ranging from 4.6 to 11.7 Log10 RNA copies/g (Fig 5D). Virus RNA loads in brains were significantly higher (p = 0.001) in fetuses from pig C inoculated at mid pregnancy than in fetuses from pig A inoculated at early pregnancy. We also sectioned selected frozen fetal brains from pig A (early pregnancy) and pig C (mid pregnancy), and stained tissues with antibodies specific to the JEV envelope protein. In accordance with extremely high viral loads in the brain of fetus #10 (11.7 Log10 RNA copies/g) from pig A, its brain contained intensive diffuse JEV-specific staining (Fig 5E). However, we did not find JEV antigen in the brain of fetus #1 that had almost twice lower JEV loads (6.8 Log10 RNA copies/g), suggesting more focal antigen localization or insufficient sensitivity of our immunohistochemistry assay. Fetuses #6 (11.7 Log10 RNA copies/g) and #14 (11.4 Log10 RNA copies/g) from pig C also had intensive JEV-specific staining in brain tissues.In accordance with JEV infection in fetuses, pigs A and B had one fetus with pathology (7.1% and 6.3% of the total number of fetuses) (Fig 6A); specifically, fetuses had edema and hemorrhages (S9 Fig). Pigs C and D inoculated at mid pregnancy had four and one fetuses (23.5% and 6.3%) with edema, tissue autolysis, and mummification (Figs 6A and S9). Pigs E and F sampled at late pregnancy did not have fetuses with visible pathology; only one (6.3%) mummified fetus was found in pig F.10.1371/journal.pntd.0010656.g006Fig 6Fetal pathology.(A) The number of fetuses with gross pathology. (B) The number of fetuses with brain pathology. *: The number of fetuses with brain lesions was significantly higher in the mid pregnancy subgroup than in early pregnancy (p < 0.016) and late pregnancy (p < 0.0039) subgroups. The fetal brain with no lesions (C) and focal hemorrhage (D) from early pregnancy pig A. Mid pregnancy pig C: The fetal brain with no lesions (E and I). (F) The fetal skull with the completely autolyzed brain. (J) The fetal brain with complete autolysis. (G and K) The fetal brain with partial autolysis and diffuse hemorrhages. (H and L) The fetal brain with focal hemorrhages and less defined sulcus and gyrus structures.A fetus from pig A inoculated at early pregnancy, and many fetuses from pig C inoculated at mid pregnancy had brain lesions (Fig 6B). Fetuses with and without gross pathology had brain lesions (S2 Table), suggesting the fetal brain is a primary and vulnerable target for JEV. The fetus from pig A (early pregnancy) had focal brain hemorrhage (Fig 6C and 6D). Eight fetuses from pig C (mid pregnancy) had complete brain autolysis, partial brain autolysis, diffuse brain hemorrhages, and focal brain hemorrhages with less defined sulcus and gyrus structures (Fig 6E–6L). Fetuses from other pigs did not have brain lesions. The number of fetuses with brain lesions was significantly higher in the mid pregnancy subgroup than in early pregnancy (p < 0.016) and late pregnancy (p < 0.0039) subgroups.Previous studies from our and other groups suggest that type I interferon in utero responses contribute to fetal pathology and death during congenital viral infections [34,38,39,51]. In the present study, two JEV-positive fetuses from early pregnancy pig A showed increased IFN-α levels (Fig 5F). In mid pregnancy, nine out of 13 fetuses of pig C showed increased IFN-α levels (Fig 5F); accordingly, interferon levels in blood plasma positively correlated with JEV loads in blood plasma (p = 0.019, r = 0.68).Collectively, we showed that JEV persists in the endometrium for at least 28 days. Also, we discovered high virus loads in the placenta that allowed the virus to cross the placental barrier causing severe lesions in the fetal brain, fetal interferon-mediated immunopathology, and fetal death.DiscussionIn the present study, we questioned the potential of JEV for sexual transmission. We also studied infection in endometrial and placental cells to better understand the pathogenesis of transplacental JEV transmission. For sexual transmission, we discovered that JEV causes persistent infection in the human vaginal epithelium leading to inflammation and disruption of epithelial barrier function. And that pigs—the native amplifying host for JEV—shed the virus in vaginal secretions. For transplacental transmission, we discovered that JEV causes persistent infection and cytopathology in the human endometrial epithelium and trophoblast. And that JEV persists in the endometrium and placenta of pigs with subsequent transplacental infection and fetal death.There are emerging concerns about sexual flavivirus transmission. These concerns emerged during the recent Zika epidemic where many sexual transmissions in humans have been reported including male-to-male, male-to-female, and female-to-male transmissions [13–15]. Zika virus has been detected in vaginal secretions [24–26] replicating in human vaginal epithelial cells [18]. However, it was unknown whether JEV—another flavivirus related to Zika virus, also has tropism in the human reproductive epithelium and the potential for sexual transmission. This knowledge is important because almost a half of the world’s population lives in territories where JEV is permanently circulating with estimated 68,000 cases reported annually [4]. Because many JEV-infected humans do not develop apparent clinical signs, sexual JEV transmission may be underestimated. Similarly, Zika virus sexual transmission in sustaining the virus in the human population during the epidemic was most probably underestimated [52].We showed that JEV causes persistent infection in the vaginal epithelium with high loads for at least 7 days (Fig 1). Transcriptional responses identified in human vaginal epithelial cells during JEV infection showed inflammation, altered bicellular junctions, and disruption of epithelial barrier function (Fig 2). The vaginal epithelium is the first line of defense against sexually transmitted infections in women and the disrupted epithelial barrier may facilitate the sexual transmission of JEV as well as other pathogens, for example human immunodeficiency virus 1 and chlamydia. High JEV titers and intensive antigen staining in infected cells persisted for at least 7 days despite type I and III interferon transcriptional responses, including interferon lambda—an antiviral cytokine that functions at barrier surfaces [18,53,54]. Interestingly, at both low (MOI 0.1) and high (MOI 10) inoculation doses and at each sampling time point, we observed many virus-positive cells with intensive red staining and virus-negative cells tightly adjacent to each other (Figs 1B and S1). We hypothesize that antiviral responses in JEV-infected epithelial cells will differ from responses in uninfected bystander cells. Thus, it will be interesting to assess transcriptional responses in infected and virus-free bystander epithelial cells to identify reasons for such phenotypical heterogeneity and better understand mechanisms employed by flaviviruses to subvert epithelial immunity.Next, we discovered that non-pregnant and pregnant pigs shed JEV in vaginal secretions (Fig 4). Also, we found virus persistence in vaginal mucosa for at least 28 days (S8 Fig). These findings are unexpected because in a previous study the authors did not find JEV in vaginal secretions [8]. But previously, vaginal swabs were collected in young 7-week-old piglets before sexual maturity (pigs reach sexual maturity at 20–24 weeks). Here, JEV-inoculated pigs were on average 35-week-old. Thus, age and probably age-dependent hormonal changes determine JEV tropism in vaginal tissues and vaginal shedding. In support, hormonal changes in mice and non-human primates affect Zika virus replication in the female reproductive tract and transgenital transmission to internal organs [17–19,22].Interestingly, infected pigs had considerably longer JEV shedding with higher titers in vaginal secretions than in nasal secretions (Fig 4) supporting the previous suggestion that the dampened innate response to RNA viruses in the lower female reproductive tract is an exceptional feature of the vaginal mucosa which may not extend to other mucosal surfaces [55].Vaginal JEV shedding and persistence in vaginal mucosa were detected 2–10 and 21–23 days after the virus was cleared from blood plasma, suggesting local JEV replication in reproductive tissues (Fig 4). Isolation and titration of infectious flaviviruses from samples of immunocompetent mammalians is challenging [39,47–49], and similar to the previous Zika studies in non-human primates [19,21], we did not recover infectious JEV in vaginal tissues. The significance of the JEV RNA that persists in vaginal tissues with shedding after it is cleared from blood plasma needs to be further assessed. Interestingly, it has been reported that Zika virus preferentially replicates in the female reproductive tract of non-human primates after vaginal inoculation but not after peripheral inoculation [19]. Our data from the present study with peripheral inoculation and a previous study where pigs showed systemic infection after artificial insemination with virus-positive semen [56] suggest that JEV has strong tropism to female reproductive tissues independently of the route of infection.Our study also contributed new knowledge for JEV pathogenesis during transplacental infection. We discovered dose-dependent JEV infection in the primary human endometrial epithelium (Fig 3A and 3B). The endometrial epithelium is the vital maternal point of first contact for an embryo during implantation and early development [57,58]. Thus, it will be important to identify whether silent JEV infection may impact interactions between embryo and endometrial epithelial cells and evoke early embryonic loss. Also, JEV persistence in the endometrium may lead to infection in the adjacent placenta and afterward in fetuses. Indeed, we discovered aggressive JEV infection and cytopathology in the trophoblast (Figs 3C and 3D and S5 and S6). The trophoblast is a specialized epithelium vital for placental function in supporting fetal development [59]. Virus replication in the trophoblast is the primary step toward transplacental and fetal infection. Human HTR-8/SVeno cells used in the present study were derived from chorionic villi explants of the human first-trimester placenta. Aggressive JEV infection in the early HTR-8/SVneo trophoblast supports previous clinical findings in humans where JEV infection in at least five pregnant women was described during an extensive outbreak in India. And abortions occurred after infection with JEV early in pregnancy, while newborns of women infected near term did not show obvious congenital pathology [31].Supporting the role of the pregnancy stage in infection phenotypes in reproductive tissues, JEV crossed the placental barrier in pigs in only early and mid pregnancy (Fig 5) and did not cause placental and fetal infections in late pregnancy. Our findings of JEV infection in the porcine placenta and fetal brains at early pregnancy are consistent with a historical study where pigs infected at early pregnancy delivered stillborn or abnormal piglets [32]. However, transplacental infection at mid gestation with a higher number of infected and damaged fetuses (Figs 5 and 6) is the new finding suggesting a broader period of susceptibility. More efficient transplacental spread at earlier pregnancy stages may be the common feature of different flaviviruses in mammalian species because the discovered JEV phenotype is similar to the known Zika phenotype where the virus more readily crosses the placental barrier at early pregnancy in humans and experimental animals [53,60]. The limitation in the present study is that all pig subgroups representing different pregnancy stages had only two animals, and we could not increase the group size in this study. Comparative experiments with larger animal groups are needed to confirm and better understand the kinetics of transplacental JEV infection at different stages of pregnancy.To summarize, there are emerging concerns about vector-free sexual and transplacental flavivirus transmissions, which may change flavivirus epidemiology and expand the geographical range to territories with no insect vectors. Japanese encephalitis virus is an emerging and geographically expanding flavivirus with a history of transplacental infections in humans. Here, we discovered that JEV persists in the vaginal epithelium and has the potential for sexual transmission in humans. We also contributed to a better understanding of JEV pathogenesis during transplacental infection and showed cellular targets and persistence in the endometrium and placenta. Further studies are needed to better understand the interactions of JEV with reproductive tissues, how persistent infection affects female reproductive functions, and the risks for sexual and transplacental transmissions.Supporting informationS1 FigImmunohistochemistry specific for the JEV envelope protein in primary human vaginal epithelial cells.Red staining shows JEV-positive cells. MOI: multiplicity of infection.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigCytopathic effect in primary human vaginal epithelial cells infected with JEV.MOI: multiplicity of infection.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigImmunohistochemistry specific for the JEV envelope protein in primary human endometrial epithelial cells.Red staining shows JEV-positive cells. MOI: multiplicity of infection.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 FigCytopathic effect in primary human endometrial epithelial cells infected with JEV.MOI: multiplicity of infection.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigImmunohistochemistry specific for the JEV envelope protein in the human trophoblast.Red staining shows JEV-positive cells. MOI: multiplicity of infection.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S6 FigCytopathic effect in the human trophoblast infected with JEV.MOI: multiplicity of infection. Arrowheads show focal trophoblast detachment, diffuse trophoblast detachment, and disrupted trophoblast monolayer.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S7 FigAntibody and IFN-α responses in blood plasma of adult pigs.Neutralizing (A) and IgG virus-binding (B) antibody titers in non-pregnant and pregnant pigs. (C) Individual IFN-α concentrations in the blood plasma of non-pregnant and all pregnant pigs. Dots represent individual pigs. The dotted line is the detection limit. Columns represent mean values with standard deviations. Ab: Antibodies. IPMA: Immunoperoxidase monolayer assay.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S8 FigJapanese encephalitis virus persists in different porcine tissues sampled at 28 days after inoculation.(A) JEV RNA loads determined in tonsils by virus-specific RT-qPCR. (B) JEV negative-strand RNA PCR values in tonsils. (C) Infectious JEV titers in tonsils determined by the endpoint dilution assay in C6/36 cells. (D) Mock-inoculated control C6/36 cells with no staining; (E-F) JEV-positive staining (red) in C6/36 cells inoculated with tonsils collected from an early pregnancy pig. (G) JEV RNA loads determined by virus-specific RT-qPCR in lymphoid, nervous (in the brain, replicate tissues collected from two anatomical locations—frontal and occipital lobes—were tested in each pig), respiratory, and reproductive tissues. JEV negative-strand RNA was identified in mesenteric lymph nodes. In all graphs, dots represent individual pigs. The dotted line (except in JEV negative-strand RNA PCR) is the detection limit. Columns represent mean values with standard deviations. NA: not available.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S9 FigFetal pathology.(A) A fetus with no gross pathology from early pregnancy pig A. (B) A fetus with edema from early pregnancy pig A. (C) A fetus with mild edema from mid pregnancy pig C. (D) A fetus with severe edema from mid-pregnancy pig C.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableRNA-seq.(XLS)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableFetal pathology.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: European 

IntroductionJapanese encephalitis is one of the major viral encephalitides in Asia, with an estimated 68,000 human cases per year [1]. Up to 30% of the symptomatic cases are fatal, and long-term neurologic sequelae can occur in 30 to 50% of survivors [2]. Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) is the causative agent of Japanese encephalitis, and is transmitted through the bite of an infected mosquito. JEV is a member of the Flavivirus genus in the Flaviviridae family and has a positive-sense RNA genome. The viral polyprotein is processed into 10 proteins: three structural proteins and seven nonstructural proteins. JEV strains can be differentiated into five genotypes (1 to 5) based on phylogenetic studies of the viral envelope protein sequences. Until recently, most of the strains of JEV at the origin of major epidemics in the South, East and Southeast Asia regions belonged to genotype 3 [3, 4]. Recently a shift in prevalence from JEV genotype 3 to 1 has been observed in several Asian countries [5–7]. JEV genotype 5 was first isolated in Malaysia in 1952, and is genetically and serologically distinct from other genotypes [8–10]. No other JEV genotype 5 strain had been identified until its recent isolation from Culex spp. mosquito pools in China in 2009 [11] and in South Korea in 2010 and 2012 [12, 13].Most of the vectors for JEV belong to the Culicinae subfamily in the Culicidae family. In most Asian countries, the main vector is Culex tritaeniorhynchus [7, 14–18], while Cx. annulirostris was identified as the main vector for JEV transmission in Australia [19, 20]. Several secondary vectors are known to efficiently transmit JEV: Cx. annulirostris, Cx. annulus, Cx. fuscocephala, Cx. gelidus, Cx. sitiens or Cx. vishnui. The fact that JEV can be detected in field-caught mosquitoes belonging to numerous species, such as Cx. pipiens [12, 17, 21], Aedes albopictus [7, 22], or Anopheles species [7, 23], poses the question if those mosquito species could also act as secondary vectors for JEV.The JEV enzootic cycle involves mosquitoes and amplifying vertebrate hosts, such as water birds and domestic swine [24]. Humans are considered as dead-end hosts, while they can be infected by JEV, they do not develop high levels of blood viremia, and thus cannot infect mosquitoes [25].A fragment of JEV genome was detected in a pool of Cx. pipiens and in birds caught in 2000 and 2010 in Northern Italy [21, 26] raising the threat of a putative emergence of the virus in Europe [27]. Recent studies have shown that Ae. detritus from England and Ae. japonicus japonicus from Germany were competent to transmit JEV [28, 29]. These observations emphasize on the need to study the vector competence of European mosquito populations for JEV. Ae. albopictus is currently expanding its range, predominantly in temperate areas in North America and Europe, and this invasion raises a public health threat for pathogens transmitted by this vector, such as Zika and dengue viruses. Cx. pipiens is the most widely distributed species of mosquito in the world, and is typically found in temperate regions. Cx. pipiens complex mosquitoes play important roles in the transmission of several medically relevant pathogens such as West Nile virus (WNV), Saint Louis encephalitis virus, and filarial worms [30–32].In the present study, we evaluated the competence of Ae. albopictus and Cx. pipiens populations collected in the South of France for two representative strains of JEV, belonging to distinct genotypes. We found that both viruses could infect and disseminate to high efficiency in either vector and could be readily transmitted. We additionally evaluated the influence of mosquito salivary factors on viral pathogenesis and showed that they had no impact on the development of Japanese encephalitis in a mouse model for the disease. Overall, these findings highlight the need for investigation of the other factors that could contribute to JEV emergence in Europe.MethodsEthics statementThe protocols and subsequent experiments were ethically approved by the Ethic Committee for Control of Experiments on Animals (CETEA) at the Institut Pasteur and declared to the French Ministère de l’Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche (n° 000762.1) in accordance with European regulations. Experiments were conducted following the guidelines of the Office Laboratory of Animal Care at the Institut Pasteur. Euthanasia was performed by CO2 asphyxiation, followed by cervical dislocation. Anesthesia was performed by intraperitoneal injection of a mixture of Xylazine (Rompun, 5 to 10 mg/kg) and Kétamine (Imalgène, 80 to 100 mg/kg).Mosquito rearingCx. pipiens form pipiens and Ae. albopictus mosquito colonies were established in the laboratory using mosquitoes collected in Montpellier and Nice, in 2010 and 2011, respectively. Eggs of each mosquito colony were hatched in tap water. Larvae were reared in plastic trays containing tap water supplemented with brewer’s yeast tablets and cat food. Adults were maintained at 27°C, 80% relative humidity with a 12 h:12 h light: dark cycle and were given continuous access to 10% sucrose solution.CellsMosquito Ae. albopictus C6/36 cells were maintained at 28°C in Leibovitz medium (L15) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS). Baby hamster kidney-derived BHK-21 (purchased from ATCC), chicken fibroblast-derived DF-1 (obtained from Nadia Naffakh), and human kidney-derived HEK293T cells (purchased from ATCC) were maintained at 37°C in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS.AntibodiesMouse hybridomas producing the monoclonal antibody 4G2 anti-Flavivirus E were purchased from ATCC and a highly purified antibody preparation was produced by RD Biotech. The anti-mosquito saliva antibody was produced in house in rabbits exposed to mosquito bites. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-mouse and anti-rabbit IgG antibodies were obtained from Bio-Rad Laboratories. Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG antibody was obtained from Jackson ImmunoResearch.Production of recombinant JEVA molecular cDNA clone of JEV genotype 3 strain RP-9 was kindly provided by Yi-Lin Ling and was modified as described previously [33]. A molecular cDNA clone of JEV genotype 5 strain XZ0934 was described previously [33].To produce infectious virus, the molecular clones were transfected into HEK293T cells using Lipofectamine 2000 (ThermoFischer Scientific). At 3 days post-transfection, viral supernatants were collected and used to infect DF-1 cells in order to grow final virus stocks for experiments.Virus infectionsFor infections, C6/36 cells were seeded in 24-well tissue culture plates in L15, supplemented with 2% FBS. Aliquots of virus were diluted in 200 μl of medium and added to the cells. Plates were incubated for 1 h at 28°C. Unadsorbed virus was removed by two washes with Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) and then 1 ml of L15 supplemented with 2% FBS was added to the cells, followed by incubation at 28°C until collection.Focus forming assay (FFA)BHK-21 cells were seeded in 24-well plates. Tenfold dilutions of virus samples were prepared in duplicate in DMEM and 200 μl of each dilution was added to the cells. The plates were incubated for 1 h at 37°C. Unadsorbed virus was removed, after which 1 ml of DMEM supplemented with antibiotics and antifungals, 1.6% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), 10 mM HEPES buffer, 72 mM sodium bicarbonate, and 2% FBS was added to each well, followed by incubation at 37°C for 32 h. The CMC overlay was aspirated, and the cells were washed with PBS and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, followed by permeabilization with 0.1% Triton-X100 for 5 min. After fixation, the cells were washed with PBS and incubated for 1 h at room temperature with anti-E antibody (4G2), followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated anti-mouse IgG antibody. The assays were developed with the Vector VIP peroxidase substrate kit (Vector Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The viral titers were expressed as focus forming units (FFU)/ml.Oral infection of mosquitoes and dissectionsSeven day-old female mosquitoes were deprived of sucrose 24 h prior to the infectious blood meal. They were then allowed to feed for 2 h on blood-soaked cotton pledgets in the dark at 28°C. The infectious blood meal was comprised of washed rabbit erythrocytes (obtained from animals housed at the Institut Pasteur animal facility), viral suspension, and ATP (as a phagostimulant) at a final concentration of 5 μM. The virus titer in the blood meal was adjusted to 8 x 106 FFU/ml. Blood-fed females were sorted and transferred into cardboard containers covered with mosquito nets. After exposure, engorged mosquitoes were maintained at 26°C, 80% relative humidity, with a 10 h: 10 h light: dark cycle with simulation of dawn and sunset during 2 h. Mosquitoes were dissected at various time points after oral exposure. For titrations, the mosquitoes or individual organs were collected in a tube containing 0.5 mm glass beads and 300 μl of DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS. The organs were ground for 30 sec at maximum speed, using a Minilystissue homogeneizer (Bertin) and stored at -80°C until analysis. Experiments were reproduced twice with 5 to 10 mosquitoes collected at each time point for dissection.Mosquito salivationJEV exposed mosquitoes were anesthetized at 4°C, legs and wings were removed and the bodies were attached to a glass slide using double-sided tape. The proboscis was manually inserted into a 10 μl low binding pipette tip filled with 10 μl DMEM containing 2% FBS. The tip contents were collected 30 min later in a tube. Two μl were transferred to a tube containing 2 μl SDS sample buffer and analyzed by dot-blot to verify the presence of saliva. Four μl were analyzed by FFA to determine virus titer. Ten to 20 mosquitoes were analyzed for each time point (days 11, 12 and 13 post-virus exposure) and experiments were reproduced twice.Salivary gland extracts preparationFive days after emerging, mosquito females were blood-fed on mice previously anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of a mixture of Xylazine (5 to 10 mg/kg) and Ketamine (80 to 100 mg/kg). Three weeks later, 100 salivary glands (SG) were dissected and placed in 100 μl 1X PBS. SG extracts were prepared by sonicating the SG (five times at 4 min each with a pulse ratio of 2 sec on / 2 sec off) and centrifuging the crude extract at 10,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to clean tubes and stored at −80°C. The inocula used in our experiments contained the equivalent to a pair of SG.Western blottingProtein lysates were prepared by cell lysis in radio-immunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Bio Basic) containing protease inhibitors (Roche). Equal amounts of proteins were loaded on a NuPAGE Novex 4–12% Bis-Tris protein gel (ThermoFisher Scientific) and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride membrane (Bio-Rad) using the Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System (Bio-Rad). After blocking the membrane for 1 h at room temperature in PBS-Tween (PBS-T) plus 5% milk, the blot was incubated overnight at 4°C with appropriate dilutions of the primary antibodies. The membrane was then washed in PBS-T and then incubated for 1 h at room temperature in the presence of HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies. After washes in PBS-T, the membrane was developed using Pierce ECL Western Blotting Substrate (ThermoFisher Scientific) and exposed to film.Dot-blot on mosquito salivaThe saliva collected from each mosquito was blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane. Two μl of DMEM containing 2% FBS and 1 μg of mosquito salivary gland extract were deposited on the membrane as negative and positive controls, respectively. The membranes were blocked for 1 h in PBS-T plus 5% milk and incubated overnight at 4°C with an anti-mosquito saliva antibody. The blots were then processed as indicated above for Western blotting.Immunofluorescence analysis (IFA)After dissection, midguts (MG) and salivary glands (SG) were placed on slides and the PBS removed. MG were fixed in acetone for 15 min. SG were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min. Both slides were dried and stored at 4°C until use. The MG and SG were then rehydrated in PBS for 15 min. The MG and the SG were incubated in Triton X100 (0.2%) for 2 h and 15 min, respectively. They were then washed with PBS and incubated for 30 min with PBS + 0.1% Tween 20 containing 1% BSA. The slides were drained and incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-flavivirus protein E 4G2 antibody diluted in PBS, then washed with PBS. The slides were next incubated for 1 h with a fluorophore conjugated antibody, and washed with PBS. After washing, a drop of ProLong Gold Antifade reagent with DAPI (ThermoFisher Scientific) was placed on each slide and a cover slide was added. All preparations were examined using a fluorescence microscope (Axioplan 2 Imaging, Zeiss).Mice experimentsThree-week-old female BALB/c mice were housed under pathogen-free conditions at the Institut Pasteur animal facility. Groups of mice were anesthetized as described above, and were next intradermally inoculated with 50 FFU of JEV genotype 5 in absence or in presence of salivary gland extract or with JEV-infected saliva diluted in 100 μl of DPBS supplemented with 0.2% endotoxin-free serum albumin.Statistical analysisAn unpaired t test was used to compare quantitative data, and a Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test was used to compare survival data. GraphPad Prism was used for all statistical analysis.Animal handlingRabbit and mice were housed in Institut Pasteur animal facilities.ResultsVector competence of European strains of mosquitoes for JEVTo assess the vector competence of European mosquitoes for JEV, we decided to use two molecular clones of viruses (RP-9 and XZ0934), which are representative of two currently circulating genotypes. The well-characterized genotype 3 strain, JEV RP-9, was isolated from Cx. tritaeniorhynchus mosquitoes in Taiwan in 1985 [34, 35], while the genotype 5 strain, JEV-XZ0934, was recently isolated from Cx. tritaeniorhynchus mosquitoes in China in 2009 [11]. For simplification, JEV-RP-9 and JEV-XZ0934 will be hereafter referred to as JEV g3 and JEV g5, respectively. Both viruses were produced by transfection of cDNA into mammalian cells, as previously described [33], followed by amplification of viral stocks in chicken fibroblasts DF-1 cells. Those viruses displayed comparable growth after infection of Ae. albopictus derived C6/36 cells (Fig 1, [33]).10.1371/journal.pntd.0005294.g001Fig 1Kinetics of JEV g3 and g5 infection in vitro.Ae. albopictus derived C6/36 cells were infected with JEV g3 or g5 at a MOI of 1. The infectious virus released to the supernatants at 24, 48 and 72 h post-infection was quantified by FFA in BHK-21 cells. The error bars represent the standard deviation between two independent experiments (in each experiment, titrations were done on duplicate experimental samples). FFU, focus forming units.To evaluate the vector competence of European mosquito species for JEV, we exposed mosquitoes to either JEV g3 or JEV g5 by feeding on blood meals containing approximately 8 x 106 FFU of virus per ml. We note that the viremia in infected pigs or in birds can reach up to 107 PFU/ml, but is on average 104 PFU/ml [36–41]. While we offered blood meals that contained relatively high levels of virus, it is generally accepted that a greater quantity of virus is needed to infect mosquitoes orally with artificial mixtures than with viremic hosts [42]. For each experiment, 3 blood-fed mosquitoes were harvested immediately post-virus exposure, and the ingested virus titers were evaluated by FFA. The amount of ingested infectious virus was comprised between 400 and 9,000 FFU per mosquito, with an average titer of 4,000 FFU.Previous studies on vector competence of various species of mosquitoes for JEV have shown the peak for JEV infection and transmission occurs between 5 and 23 days after peroral infection [23, 29, 43–48]. Our preliminary studies showed that, under our experimental conditions, the majority of Cx. pipiens and Ae. albopictus were infected from 10 to 15 days post-virus exposure. We chose to focus collection times around the peak of viral transmission and harvested samples at 7, 11, 12 and 13 days post-virus exposure. We note that the survival rate of exposed mosquitoes dropped considerably after 2 weeks of infection, and consequently did not analyze the levels of mosquito infection beyond this point.First, we determined the infection rates in Ae. albopictus (Fig 2A) and Cx. pipiens (Fig 2B) mosquitoes by titrating the midguts harvested from mosquitoes. Next, we measured the levels of JEV infection in the heads of infected mosquitoes, and calculated infected dissemination rates (Fig 2C and 2D). We did not observe any statistically significant differences in infection rates amongst genotypes for each mosquito species or by time after the infectious blood meal. We did note that dissemination of JEV was faster in Ae. albopictus mosquitoes, when compared with Cx. pipiens mosquitoes. Notably, at 7 days post-virus exposure, we found that 57 to 90% of Ae. albopictus mosquitoes were systemically infected, whereas only 26 to 36% of Cx. pipiens were (Fig 2C and 2D). Last, we determined transmission rates through titration of saliva collected from blood-fed mosquitoes (Fig 2E and 2F). While this is a method widely used to determined transmission rates, we observed that salivation assays are highly dependent on salivation efficiency, and that the levels of virus in saliva can sometimes be below the detection limit of our titration assay. Keeping in mind that this determination of the virus transmission rates has limitations, we observed that both mosquito species transmitted JEV at rates ranging from 20 to 63% for Ae. albopictus, and from 12 to 41% for Cx. pipiens (Fig 2E and 2F).10.1371/journal.pntd.0005294.g002Fig 2Vector competence of European strains of mosquitoes for two different JEV genotypes following feeding on infectious bloodmeals.Infection rates in Ae. albopictus (A) or Cx. pipiens (B) mosquitoes exposed to either JEV g3 or JEV g5 by feeding on blood meals containing 8 x 106 FFU/ml of virus. The infection rates were determined after titration of midguts harvested from mosquitoes on days 7, 11, 12 and 13 post-virus exposure. The infected dissemination rates (C and D) were calculated by titration of the heads of infected mosquitoes. The transmission rates (E and F) were calculated by titration of the saliva collected from all blood-fed mosquitoes. The error bars represent the standard deviation between two independent experiments. The number of mosquitoes analyzed for each condition is indicated below each graph bar. An unpaired t test was employed to determine significant differences between JEV genotypes at each time point. No statistically significant differences were found (P≥0.08). n.d. not determined.Characterization of JEV infection in European strains of mosquitoesNext, we analyzed the levels of JEV g3 and g5 accumulation in the different mosquito organs that had been harvested (Fig 3). We noted that JEV levels in the midguts slowly decreased between 7 and 13 days post-virus exposure, while viral levels in heads and salivary glands increased over time, which is consistent with patterns of viral dissemination in mosquitoes. We noted that at 7 days post-virus exposure, the rates of salivary glands infection ranged from 40 to 80% for Ae. albopictus, and from 5 to 9% for Cx. pipiens. Viral infection of salivary glands has been shown to correlate well with infection of saliva [43], and thus we hypothesize that Ae. albopictus mosquitoes were likely to transmit JEV at earlier times than Cx pipiens. Interestingly, in Ae. albopictus mosquitoes midguts, we observed a significant difference in the titers of JEV g5 when compared to JEV g3 titers (Fig 3A). Notably, it appeared that JEV g5 accumulated to higher levels than JEV g3 at 7 days post-virus exposure, and to lesser levels at later infection times (11 to 13 days post-virus exposure).10.1371/journal.pntd.0005294.g003Fig 3Kinetics of JEV infection in European strains of Ae. albopictus and Cx. pipiens mosquitoes.Ae. albopictus (A, B and C) or Cx. pipiens (D, E and F) mosquitoes were exposed to either JEV g3 or JEV g5 by feeding on blood meals containing 8 x 106 FFU/ml of virus. At 7, 11, 12 and 13 days post-virus exposure, the midguts (A and D), heads (B and E) and salivary glands (C and F) were harvested from individual mosquitoes and the levels of infectious virus in each organ was quantified by FFA in BHK-21 cells. The error bars represent the standard deviation amongst infected samples collected from two independent experiments. An unpaired t test was employed to determine significant differences between JEV genotypes at each time point (***, P < 0.001; **, 0.001 < P < 0.01; *, 0.01 < P < 0.05; only statistically significant differences are shown).Additionally, we analyzed the distribution of JEV envelope protein in the organs of infected mosquitoes (Fig 4). First, we performed immuno-localization within organs harvested from Ae. albopictus mosquitoes at 14 days post-virus exposure, which corresponds to a peak in viral transmission (Fig 4A). While envelope protein staining within the midgut was relatively weak, there was a strong staining of numerous cells within both lobes of salivary glands. Samples collected at 11 days post-virus exposure were also analyzed by western blotting and showed good detection of the envelope protein in midguts and salivary glands (Fig 4B).10.1371/journal.pntd.0005294.g004Fig 4Analysis of JEV infection in mosquitoes.A. Visualization of JEV envelope protein in the midgut (left panel) and salivary glands (right panel) of Ae. albopictus mosquitoes infected with JEV g3 at 14 days post-feeding on an infectious blood meal. Samples obtained from non-infected mosquitoes were used as a control (n.i.). Scale bars: 500 μm for the midgut samples, 50 μm for the salivary glands samples. B. Detection of JEV envelope protein in lysates obtained from midguts (top) and salivary glands (bottom) harvested from mosquitoes at 11 days post-feeding on an infectious blood meal. Samples from non-infected mosquitoes are used as a control (n.i.). The expected size for JEV envelope protein is indicated with an arrow.Detection of JEV in infected European mosquito salivaTo evaluate the levels of virus secreted in mosquito saliva, we collected mosquitoes at 11, 12 and 13 days post-feeding on an infectious blood meal, and performed forced salivation. Since not all of the mosquitoes salivate when subjected to this assay, we also performed a survey of successful salivation. A fraction of the collected saliva was dotted on a membrane, and was next incubated with an antibody specific for mosquito saliva (Fig 5A). We noted that both mosquito species efficiently salivated under our experimental conditions, and that the levels of actual salivation were above 40% for either mosquitoes (Fig 5A). The collected saliva was then subjected to a standard infectivity assay to determine the levels of JEV transmitted in JEV-positive saliva at each time point (Fig 5B and 5C). We noted that for both mosquito species, higher levels of virus were secreted in saliva at later times post-virus exposure, which mirrored the increase in viral load in salivary glands (Fig 3C and 3F). The levels of infectious virus in saliva ranged between 2 and 200 FFU for JEV g3 (45 and 55 FFU in average for Ae. albopictus and Cx. pipiens, respectively), and between 2 and 196 FFU for JEV g5 (38 and 35 FFU in average for Ae. albopictus and Cx. pipiens, respectively).10.1371/journal.pntd.0005294.g005Fig 5Analysis of salivas collected from European mosquitoes infected by different genotypes of JEV.At 11, 12 and 13 days post-virus exposure, salivas were collected from mosquitoes via forced salivation in pipette tips. A. Individual salivation samples were analyzed in a dot-blot assay using an anti-saliva antibody, to determine the salivation efficiency for each mosquito species. The rates of salivation obtained from two independent salivation assays are given, and a representative dot blot assay is shown. B. and C. The levels of infectious virus in JEV-positive saliva were measured by FFA in BHK-21 cells.European mosquito saliva or salivary glands do not enhance JEV pathogenesis in a mouse model for JEV diseaseNext we assessed whether the virus transmitted by European mosquitoes was capable of developing a productive infection in mammalian hosts. To evaluate this, we used a previously characterized murine model for Japanese encephalitis, based on JEV g5 infection of 3-week-old BALB/c mice [33]. Three-week-old BALB/c mice were injected via intradermal route with JEV, as this mode of injection most resembles a mosquito bite. First, JEV-positive saliva samples collected from Ae. albopictus and Cx. pipiens mosquitoes (Fig 5) were used as an inocula (Fig 6A). Saliva containing various loads of virus was used, with a titer comprised between 7 and 98 FFU. A control group of mice were similarly injected with JEV grown from C6/36 cells, using a single dose of 50 FFU (Fig 6A). As expected, the animals rapidly exhibited limb paralysis and encephalitis. We did not observe any significant differences in survival rates amongst the different inocula (Fig 6A). The survival rate was between 33 and 40%, with a mean survival time of 11 to 12.5 days.10.1371/journal.pntd.0005294.g006Fig 6Effect of mosquito saliva and salivary glands on JEV infection in a mouse model.Groups of 3-week-old BALB/c mice were monitored for survival after intradermal injection with JEV g5 (n = 6 per group). A. Mice were injected with JEV-positive saliva collected from infected mosquitoes. The levels of virus in saliva were between 7 and 98 FFU (Ae. albopictus: 9, 15, 22, 28, 60 and 70 FFU; Cx. pipiens: 7, 16, 24, 30, 51 and 98 FFU). Control mice were injected with 50 FFU of virus grown in C6/36 cells (C6/36 supernatants). B. Mice were injected with 50 FFU of virus, in presence or absence of one pair of salivary glands (SGP) harvested from either Ae. albopictus or Cx. pipiens mosquitoes. A Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test was employed to determine significant differences between inocula. No statistically significant differences were found (P≥0.6).The detection of JEV-specific antibodies showed that all surviving mice had been exposed to the virus (S1 Fig).Since it was shown that mosquitoes can inject salivary components that influence the outcome of viral infection [49–51], we next evaluated the impact of European mosquito salivary glands on JEV pathogenesis in a murine model. As described above, we used the intradermal route to inject 50 FFU of JEV g5 to 3-week-old BALB/c mice (Fig 6B). For two groups of mice, the inoculum was mixed with salivary glands extracts obtained from Ae. albopictus or Cx. pipiens mosquitoes. In accordance with what was previously observed after injection of saliva collected from infected mosquitoes, we did not observe any significant difference in the development of JEV pathogenesis in presence of mosquito salivary glands (Fig 6B). Overall these experiments show that European mosquitoes are fully competent at transmitting infectious JEV, but that saliva does not facilitate the development of viral pathogenesis in a susceptible murine model.DiscussionIn recent years, the increase in locally acquired exotic arbovirus diseases in Europe can be linked to the presence of appropriate combinations of vectors and vertebrate hosts, which could ultimately lead to the establishment of these diseases in Europe [52–54]. Since 2010, sporadic cases of locally acquired chikungunya and dengue fevers have been noted in Europe [55, 56]. The driving forces behind these events are viraemic travelers and the increasing presence of competent vector species, such as Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus, in temperate regions. Likewise, the circulation of WNV and Usutu virus–two Flaviviruses—was reported in 10 European countries [57]. Two studies in Italy reported the infection of local Cx. pipiens populations with both WNV and Usutu virus [58, 59] and there is an increase in WNV disease incidence in Europe [60]. While JEV RNA was recently detected in mosquitoes and birds in Northern Italy [21, 26], to date, human infections with JEV were only reported in travelers returning from endemic countries [61–63].Our study shows for the first time that European strains of Cx. pipiens and Ae. albopictus are both competent vectors to transmit two genotypes (3 and 5) of JEV. High levels of infection, dissemination and transmission rates were observed in both vectors for either genotypes after oral exposure of mosquitoes to a blood meal containing virus at 8 x 106 FFU/ml. In the present study, we did not evaluate vector competence for viral strains belonging to the genotype 1. Strains belonging to this genotype have displaced the prevalent genotype 3 in several countries in recent years [5–7]. Genotype 1 and 3 strains are genetically close when compared to the more distant genotype 5 strains [8–10]. Since we observed equivalent vector competence of European mosquitoes for genotypes 3 and 5, we hypothesize that those mosquitoes will also be competent at transmitting genotype 1 viruses.Several mosquitoes from the Culex genus are established vectors for JEV. Cx. tritaeniorhynchus is the main vector in the enzootic cycle of JEV in tropical and subtropical regions of Asia. Interestingly, the vector competence of a Cx. pipiens molestus population from Taiwan was found to be similar to that of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus, when tested in laboratory conditions [46], which is in line with our observations. Other investigators reported that Cx. pipiens populations from other world regions (Cx. pipiens molestus from Uzbekistan, Cx. pipiens pallens from Korea, Cx. pipiens from the United States of America) were less susceptible to JEV and were not always capable of transmitting the virus [50, 64]. Of note, there has been some reports of isolation of JEV from field-caught mosquitoes along the years [12, 17, 21, 65], and all strains of JEV isolated from Cx. pipiens mosquitoes in Korea in 2012 belonged to the genotype 5 [12]. As strains belonging to the genotype 5 were only rarely isolated, one can wonder if the transmission cycles that are involved in the maintenance of those viruses involve mosquito and amplifying host species different from the established Cx. tritaeniorhynchus / swine model. Since the currently available vaccines do not confer full protection against JEV genotype 5 strains [66, 67], the risks of JEV g5 transmission to human populations must be carefully examined.Similarly to Cx. pipiens, field-collected Ae. albopictus mosquitoes were occasionally found positive for JEV [22, 68]. Various transmission rates were observed in laboratory settings, from less than 17% for Australian populations [69] to 45% for Taiwanese populations [22]. In our experiments, European Ae. albopictus was also able to transmit different strains of JEV to high efficiency, which supports the hypothesis that European mosquito populations belonging to these two species have a better vector competence for JEV than populations isolated in other parts of the world.Our results also showed that the extrinsic incubation period (i.e. the time between ingestion of the virus and the ability of the mosquito to become infectious) for JEV is shorter in Ae. albopictus than in Cx. pipiens. We have not performed a formal analysis of the relative life span of our mosquito populations after ingestion of an infectious blood meal. If we assume that both mosquito species have similar life spans, then this would imply that Ae. albopictus mosquitoes can transmit JEV for a longer period than the French population of Cx. pipiens and therefore might be a more efficient vector. Specifically, host biting preferences may have consequences on the emergence of the disease in Europe and its transmission dynamics. Arbovirus circulation is defined by many aspects including the population dynamics of the mosquito vector, the extrinsic incubation period, and the population densities of the vertebrate amplifying hosts, all of which are influenced by environmental factors. In the case of JEV, the classic Cx. tritaeniorhynchus–pig transmission cycle was observed in Japan, a region of high pig farming density, but other species and scenarios could be invoked in regions where pig farming is less abundant, or where Cx. tritaeniorhynchus is not found [70]. An example of this is the 1995 outbreak of Japanese encephalitis in Australia that involved the presence of domestic pigs and high populations of Cx. annulirostris [19, 20]. Ae. albopictus is considered to be an opportunistic feeder: it primarily feeds on mammalian hosts (humans, wild and domestic animals) but can also acquire blood from avian sources [71, 72]. Analysis of feeding patterns in temperate regions showed that populations of Ae. albopictus in the United States of America mainly fed on mammals and rarely on birds [73]. Cx. pipiens mosquitoes feed mostly on birds (83%) but also on mammals [74]. Interestingly, it was shown that 20% of Cx. pipiens emerging from diapause in temperate habitats fed on mammals [73]. Considering the natural cycle of JEV implying birds as reservoir and pigs as amplifying hosts, specificity in host preferences may have consequences on the possible emergence of the disease in Europe and its transmission dynamics. Favorable conditions for JEV emergence may be gathered in several places in Europe where pig breeding sites, bird sanctuaries and Ae. albopictus and/or Cx. pipiens mosquitoes coexist (Marquenterre parc, Baie de Somme, France; Camargue, Rhone delta, France; Danube delta, Roumania).The last part of our study was to investigate the role of mosquito saliva in the transmission of JEV to mice. When insects take a blood meal, they trigger defensive responses from the vertebrate, such as hemostasis and various immune responses. The saliva proteins injected by the mosquito can counteract these defenses, through their angiogenic, anti-hemostatic, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties [75]. This complex interaction may significantly affect the evolution of the disease; notably co-injection of virus and saliva was shown to potentiate infection of the vertebrate host by arboviruses belonging to various families [49–51, 76, 77]. While we did not observe any enhancement of Japanese encephalitis disease in mice, in presence of salivary gland extract or of saliva collected from either European vectors, further studies are needed to evaluate the impact of saliva on viral burden in different organs. Additionally, we cannot exclude the possibility that JEV pathogenesis might be enhanced by salivary factors of other mosquito species, or that saliva from the two species tested in the present study might enhance pathogenicity in other mammalian species.ConclusionIn this study, we have clearly demonstrated that European populations of Ae. albopictus and Cx. pipiens were efficient vectors for JEV transmission. Conditions for a putative emergence of JEV in Europe are linked to the possibility for an enzootic cycle to take place in temperate areas. In order to complete the infection cycle, JEV must be transmitted to a susceptible vertebrate host, capable of producing sufficient viral titers for subsequent acquisition by the insect vector. It is therefore important to further investigate whether any European swine or water birds populations can be infected with JEV and produce sufficiently high viremias to infect mosquitoes that feed on them. Such knowledge is critical to assess the potential for JEV to establish local transmission cycles similar to the closely related WNV in Northern Italy.Supporting InformationS1 FigDetection of JEV specific antibodies in inoculated mice.Sera were collected from mice at 28 days post-inoculation, and anti-JEV IgGs were quantified by ELISA using recombinant proteins corresponding to the domain III of JEV g5 envelope protein, as described in [33]. The ELISA absorbance values were measured at 450 nm and the absorbance value obtained from sera of mice inoculated with DPBS is shown as a dashed line (A450 nm = 0.042). Each symbol represents an individual mouse.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Estimation of Japanese encephalitis virus infection prevalence in mosquitoes and bats through nationwide sentinel surveillance in Indonesia

IntroductionMosquito-borne diseases belong to the group of most common infectious diseases in tropical and subtropical countries [1, 2]. Among these diseases, Japanese encephalitis (JE) has been reported to be the major cause of viral encephalitis in many countries in Asia [3]. Traditionally, the enzootic cycle of JE virus transmission involves mainly Culex mosquitoes as the vectors and pigs as the reservoir hosts [4], while humans serve as dead-end hosts [5]. Indonesia belongs to the endemic areas of JE, with sporadic cases reported annually since the year 1960 in various provinces [6–9]. The sentinel surveillance of human cases of JE in 11 provinces in Indonesia conducted in 2016 revealed a total of 37 seropositive JE cases from 243 cases of acute encephalitis syndrome, along with 5 lethal cases [10]. Remarkably, some of these clinical cases were reported in areas without the presence of pig farming, hence the presence of other potential reservoir hosts playing a role in the transmission of JE virus in these areas remains debatable [11]. In the past few decades, the role of bats in arbovirus transmission has been elucidated in many studies [12, 13], including in the detection of antibodies against arboviruses such as dengue, chikungunya, and JE [14–16].The risk of JE virus transmission intensifies with the shifts in land use, especially areas suitable for habitats of mosquitoes [17]. Additionally, alterations in ambient temperature, relative humidity and wind velocity may play a role in the transmission of JE virus [18, 19], since these factors mostly affect the natural habitat, distribution, and behavior of vector mosquitoes [20]. Measurement of climatic factors along with mapping of high-risk areas of disease transmission are in line with the epidemiological surveillance, and these activities play a major role in mosquito-borne disease control and prevention [21, 22].The One Health concept emphasizes the dense relationships among the health of humans, animal and environment, and explains that multidisciplinary approaches in managing JE should seriously be encouraged [23, 24]. The current study aimed to apprise the distribution of JE virus in mosquitoes and bats as parts of epidemiological surveillance of JE in Indonesia. The viremia profiling in bats may be used to estimate the potential role of bats as the reservoir hosts for JE virus. This study depicts the national surveillance of JE virus in mosquitoes and bats in Indonesia, of which some data from West Kalimantan province have been mentioned elsewhere [25]. The implementation of the One Health concept in regard to environmental health is assessed through stratification of the ecosystem via sample collection and the measurement of climatic factors. The results of the current study will be beneficial in providing vast additional data that can aid the formulation of policies concerning JE control and prevention, particularly vector and reservoir control and habitat conservation, JE vaccination campaign, and the expansion of the ongoing JE surveillance program.MethodsThis descriptive cross-sectional study was conducted in collaboration with the Ministry of Health of Republic of Indonesia through its nationwide disease vector and reservoir surveillance program of Indonesia called Rikhus Vektora that was conducted from year 2015 through 2018. A total of 11 provinces were selected as study locations, and were determined based on the previous reports of human clinical cases of JE by the local health offices and previous studies [6, 26, 27], including West Sumatra, Riau, West Java, Yogyakarta, East Java, West Kalimantan, Bali, North Sulawesi, West Nusa Tenggara, East Nusa Tenggara, and Papua. The results of our pilot study conducted in West Kalimantan province have been published elsewhere [25], however, few data will be mentioned in this study in order to give the whole picture of JE virus infection in mosquitoes and bats in Indonesia. Sampling of bats and mosquitoes was purposively performed in 3 districts in each corresponding province and represents 3 different ecosystems: forest, coastal, and urban areas. Collection sites also include locations nearby and far from human dwellings, such as forest fringe and middle of forest and rural and urban areas. The different ecosystems of sample collection may facilitate the presence of species diversity, hence reflecting different transmission risk. The determination of sample collection sites was also done according to previous reports of human JE cases in national surveillance [10, 26]. Total sample collection was performed for 12 hours from 6 p.m. to 6 a.m. for 3 consecutive days in every study location. We recorded the coordinates of sample collection sites, along with the hourly temperature, relative humidity, and wind velocity.Operational definitionsWe defined forests as homogenous or heterogenous plantation areas of either primary or secondary origin. Coastal area was defined as either beach, marshes, or tidal areas, while urban area was described as a residential environment that consists of more than one housing unit. Location in proximity with humans was defined as the presence human dwelling complex within 3 km of collection sites.Mosquito collectionMosquitoes were collected using either human landing collection or animal-baited traps [28, 29]. We determined the mosquito species using morphological identification key [30]. We pooled about 1 to 25 mosquitoes into a single pool according to species, collection method, and time of collection. To preserve viral RNA, we put 500 μl of RNA later reagent (RNAlater, Thermo Fisher, USA) into each of the pooled mosquito tubes and the tubes were kept in 4°C prior to RNA extraction.Bat collectionMist net and harp net were used to capture bats in the study sites [31, 32]. From the captured samples, we first identified any pregnant or lactating bats with dependent young to be released and excluded from the study. Prior to species identification and blood collection we performed anesthesia to the captured bats. Inhaled anesthesia was done using weight-dependent dose of isofluran. Bat sample was individually kept inside a recovery box after anesthesia, within which food and water was given. After the bats were fully recovered, they were released where they were previously captured. None of the captured bat sample was sacrificed. An identification key for Asian bats was used to identify bat species [33, 34]. Blood samples collected from the brachial vein of the bats were put onto 125 μl FTA card (Whatman, Merck, Germany) and kept in room temperature (20°C to 25°C) prior to molecular detection of JE virus.Molecular detection of JE virusCollected mosquitoes in RNA later solution was dissected into head-and-thorax preparations and were put into different microtubes. A total of 500 μl of phosphate buffered solution (PBS) solution was added into each microtube and the mosquitoes were grinded using a pellet pestle. Ground mosquitoes were homogenized using buffer solution and the RNA were extracted according to the RNAeasy mini spin column (RNAeasy, Qiagen, Germany) manufacturer’s instructions. The microtubes containing extracted RNA were kept in -80°C freezer prior to PCR procedure.The RNA extraction for the blood sample of the bats were conducted as follows: the FTA cards were first cut into 1 to 3 small pieces using paper puncher with diameter of 2 mm and were put into microplate, then 100 μl RNA rapid extraction solution (MagMAX™, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) were added into the microplate until the blood dissolved. The RNA extraction procedure for bat samples was performed according to manufacturer’s instructions for MagMAX Viral RNA Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher, USA), using the dissolved blood samples from the FTA cards. The extracted RNA was kept in -80°C freezer prior to PCR procedure.Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to detect the presence of JE virus using the following JE-specific primers: 5’-AGA GCG GGG AAA AAG GTC AT-3’ (forward) and 5’-TTT CAC GCT CTT TCT ACA GT-3’ (reverse) [35, 36]. The PCR reaction was performed as described previously in another study [37]. The RNA isolation procedure was done according to manufacturer’s instructions of the RT-PCR kit (Invitrogen, USA). Denaturation was done at 94°C for 15 seconds, continued with annealing at 55°C for 30 seconds, and extension at 68°C for 1 minutes. The procedure was repeated for 40 cycles. Final extension was done at 72°C for 5 minutes followed by holding at 12°C. The occurrence of a band at 162 bp in the electrophoresis (SYBR Safe, Invitrogen, USA) of PCR products was considered positive.Data analysisTo generate maps and to identify the distribution pattern of JE vectors and reservoirs using the average nearest neighbor (ANN) analysis [38], the software ArcGIS ver. 9.2 (Esri, New York) was used. The distribution pattern of the collected samples was categorized based on the nearest neighbor ratio (R) resulted in the ANN analysis as follows: clustered (R <1), random (R = 1), dispersed (R >1) [39]. We also performed the buffer analysis to visualize estimated flight ranges among captured mosquitoes and bats, resulting in as follows: Culex flight range of 2 km [40], Megachiropteran bats hunting range of 30 km, and Microchiropteran bats hunting range of 10 km [41, 42]. Minimum infection rate (MIR) of JE virus in mosquitoes was calculated as the ratio of the number of positive pools to the total number of mosquitoes tested using the PooledInfRate software (Biggerstaff, CDC, www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/software.htm). Statistical analysis used SPSS ver. 18.0 (SPSS, IL, USA). Bivariate analysis was performed to identify association between independent variables with JE virus infection using Chi-square or Fischer test, whenever appropriate. ANOVA test was performed to find mean differences of climate factors among three ecosystems. Multivariate logistic regression analysis was done with the forward stepwise method to identify independent associated risk factors of JE virus transmission in bats. Variables found to be statistically significant in bivariate analysis, and those that did not show statistical association yet were mentioned in other studies as risk factors of JE virus transmission, were put into the regression model. All variables demonstrating p-value of <0.05 (two-sided) were considered as statistically significant.Ethics statementThe ethical approval of current study was granted by the Medical and Health Research Ethics Committee (MHREC) of the Faculty of Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada (Ref. No. KE/FK/0339/EC/2020). Permission to publish the data was approved by the National Institute of Health Research and Development, Ministry of Health of Indonesia (Ref. No. 29011904–148). Research ethics related to the capture, specimen collection, maintenance, and release of bat samples were in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act 2006 [43].ResultsSample collection from 11 provinces resulted in a total of 483 mosquito pools and 3,322 blood spots of bats (Fig 1). Among 483 tested mosquito pools, 7 pools (1.4%) were positive for JE virus, and 68 out of 3,322 (2.0%) bat blood samples were found to be JE-positive (Table 1). In the current study, mosquitoes tested positive for JE virus belonged to the Cx. tritaeniorhynchus and Cx. vishnui. Mosquito samples found positive for JE virus were collected from the district of Bengkalis in Riau Province (1/21; 4.8%), district of Sambas in West Kalimantan Province (2/15; 13.3%), district of Kayong Utara in West Kalimantan Province (1/20, 5.0%), and the district of Ende in East Nusa Tenggara Province (3/13; 23.1%). Our results demonstrated MIR of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus of 2.16 in 1,000 mosquitoes, and MIR of Cx. vishnui of 0.22 in 1,000 mosquitoes. The JE-positive bats were collected from 8 provinces, namely West Sumatra (2/283; 0.7%), Riau (4/295; 1.4%), West Java (7/334; 2.1%), East Java (20/302; 6.6%), West Kalimantan (21/373; 5.6%), Bali (1/356; 0.3%), North Sulawesi (8/141; 5.7%), and East Nusa Tenggara (5/383; 1.3%). Study sites with both mosquitoes and bats found positive for JE virus are Riau, West Kalimantan, and East Nusa Tenggara (Fig 2).10.1371/journal.pone.0275647.g001Fig 1Study flow of the detection of JE virus in mosquito and bat samples in 11 provinces in Indonesia.10.1371/journal.pone.0275647.g002Fig 2A map showing risk differences of JE virus transmission according to the provinces where human cases were previously detected by the Indonesian MoH and the results of JE virus detection in mosquitoes and bats in 11 provinces in Indonesia.Provinces with JE-positive bats and mosquitoes are shown in red shades, while provinces with only JE-positive bats are shown in yellow shades, and those with negative findings of JE virus are shown in green shades. Baseline map was made with Natural Earth (naturalearthdata.com).10.1371/journal.pone.0275647.t001Table 1Total number of tested mosquito pools and bat blood samples according to provinces and ecosystems of collection.Provinces and districtsMosquitoesBatsTested pools*JE-positive‡Tested samplesJE-positive‡
West Sumatra
 Forest24 (10–25)01411 (0.7) Coastal18 (5–25)0640 Urban12 (1–20)0781 (1.2)
Riau
 Forest18 (5–25)01081 (0.9) Coastal15 (2–25)0811 (1.2) Urban22 (6–25)1 (4.5)1062 (1.8)
West Java
 Forest16 (3–25)01452 (1.3) Coastal9 (2–25)01315 (3.8) Urban7 (1–25)0580
Yogyakarta
 Forest19 (5–25)01460 Coastal19 (1–25)0920 Urban12 (2–20)01230
East Java
 Forest15 (1–25)01314 (3.0) Coastal7 (3–23)01063 (2.8) Urban11 (1–25)06513 (20.0)
West Kalimantan
 Forest24 (10–25)013810 (7.2) Coastal15 (5–25)2 (13.3)1385 (3.6) Urban14 (5–25)1 (7.1)976 (6.2)
Bali
 Forest10 (4–25)0900 Coastal12 (1–20)01591 (0.6) Urban8 (10–20)01070
North Sulawesi
 Forest33 (15–25)0985 (5.1) Coastal10 (5–25)0172 (11.8) Urban13 (10–25)0261 (3.8)
West Nusa Tenggara
 Forest11 (1–25)0970 Coastal9 (1–25)01060 Urban8 (6–25)01080
East Nusa Tenggara
 Forest23 (1–25)1 (4.3)1571 (0.6) Coastal8 (10–25)2 (25.0)1511 (0.6) Urban5 (1–20)0753 (4.0)
Papua
 Forest25 (1–25)0420 Coastal14 (1–25)0780 Urban17 (1–25)0630
Total

483

7 (1.4)

3,322

68 (2.0)
*number of tested mosquito pools (minimum to maximum number of mosquitoes tested in each pool)‡shown in frequency (%)The dominant ecosystem for mosquito collection was forest area (45.1%; P = 0.099). The majority of mosquito samples (90.3%) were collected in suburban areas. The collection sites include primary and secondary forests (28.4%) and farms (24.6%). Approximately 47.0% and 37.1% of mosquito samples were collected using outdoor human landing collection and animal-baited traps, respectively. Of these methods, 2 pools (28.6%) from outdoor collection and 5 pools (71.4%) from animal-baited trap collection were found positive for JE virus. All of the mosquito samples collected using indoor human landing method were found to be JE-negative. Statistical tests did not show any association among ecosystems, collection sites, and collection methods with JE virus transmission in the current study. The mosquito species positive for JE virus belonged to Cx. tritaeniorhynchus and Cx. vishnui. In the province of Riau, 1 pool of JE-positive Cx. vishnui was collected in a palm oil plantation near urban areas, while in West Kalimantan, 2 pools of JE-positive Cx. vishnui were collected in agricultural areas and in a coconut plantation near urban areas. Additionally, in West Kalimantan Province, 1 pool of JE-positive Cx. tritaeniorhynchus was collected in coastal area near human dwellings. All of the JE-positive samples (3 pools) collected in East Nusa Tenggara Province belonged to Cx. tritaeniorhynchus and were caught in lagoon and secondary forests. The total number of mosquitoes collected in the study was 27,648 mosquitoes, with Cx. vishnui being the most common mosquito species captured in all 3 ecosystems (S1 Table).A total of 68 out of 3,322 blood samples (2.0%) were positive for JE virus in the current study, as shown in Table 2. Approximately 84.1% of total bat samples belonged to the adult group, with female to male ratio of 1:1.2. The JE-positive bats had lower median weight (32 g) and smaller bodies than that of JE-negative bats. The dominant ecosystem of bat collection was coastal area (18.5%), with lawns (31.1%) and farms (30.6%) located in close proximity with human dwellings being the most common collection sites. Statistical analysis did not show association between collection sites and JE virus transmission. Roughly 84.4% of the total collected bat sample genera belonged to the suborder Megachiroptera and Pteropodidae family: Cynopterus, Dobsonia, Eonycteris, Macroglossus, Pteropus, Rousettus, and Thoopterus. However, suborder and families of collected bats did not show statistical association with JE virus transmission in the current study. Among 68 JE-positive bats, 21 (30.9%) bats were collected in West Kalimantan Province and 20 (29.4%) bats were captured from East Java Province. All of the bat samples collected in Yogyakarta, West Nusa Tenggara and Papua Provinces showed negative results for JE virus. The majority of JE-positive bats belonged to the genus Cynopterus (44.1%) and Macroglossus (19.1%) (S2 Table).10.1371/journal.pone.0275647.t002Table 2Basic characteristics of collected bats in study areas.ParameterTotal‡JE-negative‡JE-positive‡P-valueN = 3,322N = 3,524N = 68Estimated age Juvenile528 (15.9)513 (15.8)15 (22.1)0.160** Adult2,794 (84.1)2,741 (84.2)53 (77.9)Sex Male1,818 (54.7)1,785 (54.9)33 (48.5)0.300** Female1,504 (45.3)1,469 (45.1)35 (51.5)Weight Mean (g)†33 (1–780)33 (1–780)32 (3–92)0.437a ≥50 g851 (25.6)837 (23.7)14 (20.6)0.337** <50 g2471 (74.4)2417 (76.3)54 (79.4)Ecosystems captured Forest1293 (16.3)1269 (16.2)24 (20.6)0.535** Coast1123 (18.5)1105 (18.4)18 (20.6)0.196** Urban906 (16.5)880 (16.7)26 (7.4)0.040**Suborder Megachiroptera2,805 (84.4)2,744 (84.3)61 (89.7)0.224** Microchiroptera517 (15.6)510 (15.7)7 (10.3)Family Pteropodidae2,805 (84.4)2,744 (84.3)61 (89.7)0.226** Vespertilionidae290 (8.7)285 (8.8)5 (7.4)0.684** Hipposideridae62 (1.9)60 (1.8)2 (2.9)0.508* Rhinolophidae62 (1.9)62 (1.9)0N/A Emballonuridae43 (1.3)43 (1.3)0N/A Molossidae31 (0.9)31 (1.0)0N/A Nycteridae28 (0.8)28 (0.9)0N/A Megadermatidae1 (0.1)1 (0.1)0N/A‡presented in frequency (%)†presented in median (min-max)*Fisher’s exact test**Chi square testaMann-Whitney testEnvironmental factors including ambient temperature, relative humidity, and wind velocity were recorded hourly during sample collection in each collection sites. Mean temperature during sample collection period was observed the highest in the coastal areas (29.3°C), with the highest humidity observed in the urban areas (87.7%). Wind velocity was also found highest in the coastal areas (3.6 m/s). The ANOVA test showed mean differences in temperature, humidity, and wind velocity among all three ecosystems (P <0,001), as shown in Table 3. The results of the current study showed higher range of mean temperature in JE-positive mosquito collection sites (25.7–28.2°C) compared to that of JE-negative mosquito (22.2–24.3°C). JE-positive bats were captured in mean temperature of 27.5°C and mean relative humidity of 78.4%.10.1371/journal.pone.0275647.t003Table 3Recorded environmental factors at sample collection sites.Parameters†Collection sitesForestCoastal areaUrban areaTemperature (°C) Minimum§24.5±2.626.4±1.625.3±2.6 Maximum§28.9±2.229.3±2.028.5±2.3Humidity (%) Minimum§76.9±11.275.6±9.478.1±12.1 Maximum§87.1±9.085.3±9.387.7±7.9Wind velocity (m/s) Maximum§2.0±0.93.6±1.72.1±1.5†presented in mean±SD§observed mean differences; p <0.001 (ANOVA)Multivariate analysis using the recorded variables of mosquito samples was unable to be performed since no statistically significant variables was found in bivariate analysis. Hence, multivariate analysis was done only to determine the transmission risk of JE virus in bats. Based on the results of the bivariate analysis and the literature review, we included the following variables into the regression model (Table 4): adult bats, capture location nearby urban areas, family of Pteropodidae, low bodyweight, low temperature, and high humidity at the collection site. Multivariate analysis demonstrated the following variables as independent risk factors of JE virus transmission in this study: collection sites near urban areas (AOR 2.02; 95% CI: 1.19–3.42) and high humidity (AOR 2.40; 95% CI 1.45–3.96).10.1371/journal.pone.0275647.t004Table 4Independent risk factors of JE virus transmission in bats.VariablesUnivariate analysisMultivariate analysisP-valueCOR (95% CI)P-valueAOR (95% CI)Adult bats0.160**0.66 (0.37–1.28)--Captured nearby human dwellings0.027**1.76 (1.06–2.92)0.0092.02 (1.19–3.42)Pteropodidae family0.226**1.62 (0.73–3.56)--Low bodyweight (<50 g)0.337**1.33 (0.74–2.41)--Low temperature (<24°C)0.186**1.57 (0.80–2.96)--High humidity (>80%)0.001**2.31 (1.40–3.80)0.0012.40 (1.45–3.96)COR: Crude Odds Ratio; AOR: Adjusted Odds Ratio; CI: confidence interval*Fisher’s exact test**Chi square testWe provided the sample map visualization of findings in East Nusa Tenggara Province, where all the JE-positive mosquitoes and bats were collected in the same district of Ende (Fig 3). Mapping results showed overlapping flight ranges among mosquitoes and bats from different collection sites, demonstrating the possibility of transmission and distribution of JE-positive samples in West Kalimantan, North Sulawesi, and Riau. The ANN analysis showed JE-positive mosquitoes and bats in dispersed pattern (R >1; P <0.001) in West Sumatra, Riau, North Sulawesi, and East Nusa Tenggara, whereas clustered pattern (R <1; P <0.05) was observed in East Java and West Kalimantan, and random distribution pattern (R = 1; P >0.05) was acquired in West Java.10.1371/journal.pone.0275647.g003Fig 3Map overlaying estimated mosquito flying range and bat hunting range in East Nusa Tenggara Province in Indonesia.Note the clustered distribution of JE-positive mosquitoes and bats in the same district of Ende. Map image was generated using ArcGIS (Esri).DiscussionThe current study highlights the novel potential role of bats in the transmission of JE virus in Indonesia, shown by the presence of JE virus in bats and mosquitoes collected at the same site. The infection rate of mosquitoes reflects the prevalence of arboviral infection in mosquitoes, and the higher the infection rate, the higher the risk of human disease transmission in that respective area at that certain period of time [44]. This theory is, however, mostly valid at the time of mosquito collection and virus detection and may not always relfect the general transmission risk in that area. In the current study, mosquitoes tested positive for JE virus belonged to the Cx. tritaeniorhynchus and Cx. vishnui. These mosquito species have been identified as the principal vector of JE virus in Indonesia [45, 46], and have been collected in all of study sites in the current study. Additionally, higher MIR of Cx. tritaeniorhynchus than that of Cx. vishnui in this study demonstrated that the former mosquito species was the principal vector of JE virus. The study of MIR of JE virus in Culex mosquitoes has been limited. One study in India reported MIR of JE virus in Cx. tritaeniorhynchus of 0.97 and in Cx. gelidus of 0.68 in 1,000 mosquitoes [47]. Despite negative PCR findings in many mosquito pools, the presence of JE virus in the mosquito population should not be ruled out considering the sampling technique of entomological survey that might not facilitate the collection of all mosquito populations in the surveyed sites [48].Since the results of the current study showed the majority of JE-positive bats derive from the Megachiroptera suborder, this might have demonstrated one of the first molecular evidence of JE virus infection in Megachiropteran bats. Previous study findings in Indonesia supported such results, showing that antibodies against JE virus were found in Pteropus spp., with seroprevalence of 4.2% (3/70) [49]. The detection of antibodies against JE virus in bats has been reported in other studies, particularly in Microchiropteran bats from the genera Hipposideros, Myotis, Miniopterus, Rhinolophus, and Vespertillio [12, 50–53]. The molecular detection of JE virus in bats has also been studied in Microchiropteran bats in China, demonstrating that Myotis ricketti, M. schreibersii, Murina aurata, R. leschenaultia, and R. affinis were found positive for JE virus [54, 55]. The presence of antibodies in bats represents past infection of the virus and indicates that active infection of the virus remains questionable. Hence, the detection of the virus itself in bats better characterizes active infection and thus the potential role of bats in the transmission of arboviruses [56]. Additionally, JE virus in bats may undergo viral overwintering that can cause the virus to exist inside the bats for over 15 weeks in laboratory settings [12, 57], while in normal condition the high viremia was found to last as long as 30 days that the bats are considered the most infectious during this period [57].Uninfected mosquitoes can potentially be infected by the circulating JE virus in bats’ circulation during blood feeding episodes [58]. There are several theories in regard to JE virus transmission from mosquitoes to bats, and vice versa: 1) insectivorous bats get infected through ingestion of JE-infected mosquitoes [59]; 2) frugivorous bats get infected through JE-infected mosquito bites [58]; and 3) mosquitoes get infected from sucking half-eaten fruit contaminated with saliva from JE-infected bats [60]. As in the current study, the majority of JE-positive bats belonged to the frugivorous Megachiroptera suborder, hence the likeliest mechanisms of JE virus transmission were that the bats got infected through JE-infected mosquitoes. Such mechanism was evidenced by another study in Thailand where all blood meals in JE-infected Culex mosquitoes were blood from the fruit bat Rousettus leschenaultii [58]. Another laboratory experiment showed that in Cx. annulirostris inoculated with JE virus, the mosquitoes were able to transmit the virus into Pteropus alecto and were able to induce viremia [15]. These results strengthen the plausible mechanisms of JE virus maintenance in bats, and their potential role as reservoir hosts of JE virus [61]. Unfortunately, sequencing analysis of the blood meal and host preference in mosquitoes was not performed in the current study, making determination of plausible infection mechanism difficult.Mosquito-borne diseases are vulnerable to environmental changes, mostly due to the altered survival ability of mosquitoes that is generally affected by ambient temperature and humidity [62]. The results of the current study showed higher range of mean temperature in JE-positive mosquito collection sites compared to that of JE-negative mosquito. The impacts of high temperature in mosquito survival are as follows: 1) shortened development time from eggs to adults, hence smaller body and may affect the ability in harboring arboviruses due to immaturity of midgut and salivary barriers [63]; and 2) shortened gonotrophic cycle, hence increasing the frequency of blood feeding and mosquito-host contact [64]. High temperature and low humidity cause increased metabolic rate of mosquitoes, leading to increased evaporation and shorter mosquito survival [65], and reduced flight range [40]. Additionally, wind velocity of over 2 m/s aids flight range of mosquito, so that they could have been blown by the wind into more dispersed areas to transmit disease [66], or blown into the bats’ habitat.Shifts in land use and increased urbanization can play a role in the expansion of mosquito and bat distribution closer to urban areas where JE transmission can occur [67–69]. Habitat disruption due to human actions can alter mosquito oviposition sites, leading to shifts in species abundance, and later, behavioral pattern changes [20, 64]. According to the land use maps, the results of the current study demonstrated capture of JE-positive bats in urban areas in West Sumatra, East Java, West Kalimantan, Bali, North Sulawesi, and East Nusa Tenggara. Similarly, the majority (79.4%) of the JE-infected bats from genera Cynopterus, Eonycteris and Macroglossus were collected in plantations and urban areas. These bat genera are commonly found in tropical forests and caves, and are not generally found in close proximity to human dwellings [70]. Habitat change also affects bats’ behavior, including finding prey during daytime when humans’ activities peak [71, 72], leading to intensive bat-human contact and increased risk of viral spillover. In this study, JE-positive mosquitoes were collected from the same environment with JE-positive bats in Riau, West Kalimantan and East Nusa Tenggara, showing plausible mechanisms of high-risk viral transmission between mosquitoes and bats in these provinces. Multivariate analysis also demonstrated that collection sites nearby human dwellings was an independent risk factor of JE virus transmission in this study. This should increase awareness of potential impact of zoonotic pathogens on human health in the community [73, 74].The current study visualized the distribution of JE-infected mosquitoes and bats according to their distribution using ANN analysis. The ANN analysis can assist to determine specific areas of high disease transmission risk, particularly in clustered patterns where focused disease control and prevention measures are encouraged for better resource allocation [75, 76]. Such results will also affect the strategies implemented by local governments in JE control and prevention. Other studies have also showed the use of ANN analysis in dengue control [39, 77], demonstrating that clustered distribution pattern was more convenient to implement disease control program when compared to dispersed and random patterns. In this study, disease control should theoretically be uncomplicated in the provinces of West Sumatra, Riau, North Sulawesi, and East Nusa Tenggara, where clustered patterns of JE virus in bats and mosquitoes were observed. Furthermore, buffer mapping also aids in visualizing the flight ranges of mosquitoes, in order to estimate potential locations for oviposition and traps, as well as potential areas for environmental modifications [78, 79], and are more commonly used in surveillance of malaria and dengue. In terms of bats, buffer mapping is useful for picturing their flight ranges, so that the roosting habitats can be estimated [80, 81]. The results of the current study showed overlapping of bat and mosquito flight ranges among JE-infected sample collection sites, demonstrating the possibility of viral spillover to other areas, including human dwellings. Similar findings have also been found in West Kalimantan province in our previous pilot study [25].The current study has brought into light the potential involvement of bats in the local transmission of JE virus in Indonesia. Bats may serve as either maintenance host or reservoir host, depending on the presence of pigs in that respective area [61, 82]. The presence of JE-positive vectors and reservoirs should alarm the local governments to formulate JE control and prevention strategies. Since environmental factors play a major role in the transmission of JE virus too, the One Health concept should be encouraged to aid in multidisciplinary approaches to combat JE [83, 84]. Local risk stratification scores can also be established to estimate high risk areas for JE virus transmission, hence suitable disease control and prevention programs can be put into action according to the risk. While the WHO recommended JE vaccination as the most important intervention to control JE [85], other complementary strategies may include strategic efforts in vector and reservoir control, habitat conservation, restriction of land use, and capacity building in disease surveillance [86]. In the absence of routine JE vaccination program in many provinces in Indonesia, the current study findings can aid in the coverage expansion of the ongoing JE sentinel surveillance by the Ministry of Health of Republic of Indonesia, in line with the improvement of JE vaccination campaign and the intensification of active case finding and entomological surveys in provinces with JE-infected mosquitoes and bats. Medical and health professionals working in endemic areas of JE should also be aware of the risk of JE virus transmission; therefore, it is recommended to use better judgment in the diagnosis of patients presenting with acute encephalitis syndrome. At the most, the detection of JE virus RNA at 8 out of 11 study provinces in Indonesia in the current study underlines the likely ongoing risk of JE virus, and its potential implications on human health.The current study has several limitations. First, the nature of the surveillance study in very short period of time conducted in selected areas might have affected the general results of JE-virus positivity. Second, sequencing study was not performed in the current study. However, results from this study should benefit the stakeholders in areas with similar situation or potential transmission risk, to adjust the JE prevention and control program according to local condition.Supporting informationS1 FigMapping of overlapping flight ranges among mosquitoes and bats, demonstrating the possibility of transmission of JE virus in the province of Riau.Map image was generated using ArcGIS (Esri).(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableTotal number of collected mosquito species according to collection ecosystems.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableCollected JE-positive bat species according to collection ecosystems.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: RIFT VALLEY FEVER VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Infection and Transmission of Rift Valley Fever Viruses Lacking the NSs and/or NSm Genes in Mosquitoes: Potential Role for NSm in Mosquito Infection

IntroductionRift Valley fever virus (RVFV), a human and animal pathogen that is endemic in much of Africa, has in recent decades spread to Saudi Arabia, Madagascar and Yemen and has the potential to spread to other parts of the world via transport of infected livestock, humans or mosquitoes or by an act of bioterrorism [1]–[6]. An arthropod-borne member of the Phlebovirus genus of the family Bunyaviridae, RVFV causes significant outbreaks of severe disease in livestock, including mortality in young animals, fetal deformities and abortion. RVFV infection in humans can result in a self-limiting febrile illness or more severe disease such as retinitis, hepatic necrosis, encephalitis, neurologic deficits or fatal hemorrhagic fever [7]–[9]. The primary maintenance host and source of RVFV initiating disease outbreaks is considered to be mosquitoes in the Aedes genus. Mosquitoes in the Culex genus are thought to be important in amplification of virus activity during outbreaks. The virus has also been detected in phlebotomine sand flies, Culicoides midges, and Amblyomma tick species although these infections are not thought to play an important role in the life cycle of the virus or in disease outbreak settings [5], [10]–[13]. In laboratory studies, several North American Aedes and Culex mosquito species have been shown to be competent vectors of the virus, indicating the potential for establishment of RVFV transmission cycles in North America [14]–[17].Infection, replication and transmission of an arthropod-borne virus involve complex interactions between the virus and various cells/tissues/organs of the vector. Successful transmission requires that after being ingested in a viremic bloodmeal the virus must enter the epithelial cells of the midgut, replicate and escape from the midgut cells into the hemolymph. This is followed by infection of secondary organs, including the salivary glands, where the virus enters the saliva and can then be transmitted to a new host. Potential barriers in this process have been identified that can block infection, replication and/or transmission of a virus by the mosquito [18], [19]. These include the midgut infection and escape barriers and the salivary gland infection and escape barriers. The presence or absence of these barriers and the degree to which they are effective appears to be influenced by the genetics of both the virus and the vector [18].The RVFV genome is comprised of three segments of single-stranded, negative sense RNA. The small (S) segment codes for the structural nucleoprotein (NP) and the nonstructural NSs protein, the medium (M) segment encodes the two structural glycoproteins, Gn and Gc, as well as two nonstructural proteins (NSm and NSm-Gn) and the large (L) segment codes for the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The nonstructural NSs and NSm proteins have been shown to function as virulence factors. The NSs protein has multiple functions that suppress the mammalian host cell antiviral response by inhibiting IFN-β gene transcription, promoting degradation of protein kinase (PKR) and suppressing host transcription [20]–[24]. The RVFV NSm protein plays a role in viral pathogenesis by suppression of virus-induced apoptosis in infected cells although it has been shown to be dispensable for efficient virus growth in cell culture [25]–[27]. To date, little is known regarding the role of the NSs and NSm proteins in the RVFV replication cycle and dissemination and transmission in arthropod vectors.Historically, a number of different methods have been employed in development of RVFV vaccines, however due to drawbacks associated with currently available vaccines including the necessity for multiple inoculations, abortions/teratologic effects in some vaccinated animals or risk of reversion to virulent phenotype, none of the existing vaccines is approved for veterinary use in North America or Europe [3], [28]. More recently, a reverse genetics methodology has been used to develop recombinant (rRVF) vaccine candidate viruses which contain complete deletions of one or both of the RVFV virulence genes NSs and NSm [29]. These rRVF viruses have been shown to be highly immunogenic and effective at preventing RVFV-associated morbidity and mortality [29]. Additionally, these gene deletions provide the basis for assays to differentiate between vaccinated and naturally infected animals [30].The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of NSs and NSm gene deletions on infection, dissemination and transmission of these rRVF vaccine candidate viruses in mosquitoes. Results are presented for each of the three deletion mutant rRVF viruses and rRVF-wild type evaluated side-by-side in two mosquito species representing two different genera: Aedes (Stegomyia) aegypti L. and Culex (Culex) quinquefasciatus (Say).Materials and MethodsViruses and MosquitoesConstruction of the rRVF viruses has been previously described [25], [29], [31]. Reverse genetics-generated rRVF-wild type (rRVF-wt) and three deletion mutant viruses were used in this study (Table 1). Rescue of rRVF viruses was as previously described [29]. All rescued viruses were fully sequenced as previously described [32]. Virus nomenclature and titers of the Vero E6-2 passage of the viruses are listed in Table 1. Growth curves for each rRVF virus were conducted in Vero E6 cells to determine the optimal virus growth time for bloodmeal preparation. Cell monolayers were infected with virus in Dulbecco's Minimal Essential Medium/2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) with 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (DMEM) at a multiplicity of infection (m.o.i.) of 0.1 plaque forming unit (PFU) per cell. Following adsorption for 1 hr at 37°C cells were washed three times with DMEM and then maintained in DMEM at 37°C. Samples were removed daily for 5 days and titers were determined by double overlay plaque titration assay on Vero cells as previously described [33]. Second overlays were added at 3 days post infection (p.i.) and plaques were counted on days 4–7 p.i.10.1371/journal.pntd.0001639.t001Table 1Reverse genetics-generated RVF viruses used in this study.Virus DesignationDescriptionTiter1
rRVF-wtwild type8.3rRVF-ΔNSsNSs gene deleted8.2rRVF-ΔNSmNSm gene deleted7.0rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSmNSs and NSm genes deleted8.01Vero E6 cell, passage 2 titer expressed as log10 PFU/ml.Two mosquito species were used in this study. The Aedes aegypti Rexville D mosquito strain used was an isofemale line derived from a population of Ae. aegypti collected as larvae in San Juan, Puerto Rico (Rexville) in 1991 [34]. The Culex quinquefasciatus Sebring mosquito strain used was originally colonized in Florida in 1998 and has been in colony at the CDC in Fort Collins since 2004 [35]. The species identity of the Cx. quinquefasciatus colony was verified by examination of genetalia and by HotAce PCR [36]–[38]. These species were selected because they are found in Africa, where the RVFV candidate vaccines being tested will primarily be used, because of their availability as colonized populations and because their vector competence for RVFV has been previously characterized [13], [15], [16], [39].Oral Infection of MosquitoesMultiple blood-feeding experiments were undertaken. Each experiment utilized freshly prepared virus due to an observed reduction in infection rates when frozen virus was used in bloodmeals: in a separate experiment we observed only a 10% (n = 19) rate of infection in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes fed a bloodmeal containing frozen rRVF-wt virus compared to 63% (n = 32) with freshly harvested virus.For each experiment, adult 7- to 10-day old mosquitoes were placed in pint cartons (approx. 50–100 mosquitoes per carton) and starved for 24 hours prior to feeding. Artificial virus-laden bloodmeals were prepared using fresh virus grown in Vero E6 cells as described above. Virus was harvested 2–3 days after infection depending on growth curve results for each virus (data not shown). Infected cell culture supernatant was clarified by centrifugation at 10 K rpm, 4°C for 10 min. Defibrinated chicken blood (Colorado Serum Co., Denver, CO) was washed 3 times with 1 volume of ice-cold phosphate buffered saline and centrifuged at 3 K rpm, 4°C for 3 min after each wash. Two parts clarified virus were mixed with 2 parts washed blood and 1 part FBS/10% sucrose. The bloodmeal was heated to 37°C and offered to mosquitoes using cotton balls that were soaked in the bloodmeal and applied to the mesh top of the mosquito cartons. Mosquitoes were allowed to feed for 30 min at 28°C/95% humidity after which the bloodmeal was removed. Fully engorged mosquitoes were collected, double-caged and held for 14 days at 28°C/95% humidity with 5% sugar water. Three engorged mosquitoes were immediately removed for each virus and titrated to determine the amount of virus ingested (input virus titer).Mosquito TestingTwenty-five to fifty mosquitoes from each virus group were tested for virus transmission at 14 days post exposure by collection of saliva as previously described [40]. Briefly, specimens were anesthetized by chilling at −20°C for 1 min, then, inside a glove box, wings were removed and the proboscis of each specimen was inserted into a capillary tube containing 5 µL immersion oil and saliva collected for 20 min. The tip of each capillary tube was clipped off into a microfuge tube containing 250 µL DMEM/10% FBS, tubes were centrifuged 5 min at 5000 rpm at 4°C to draw the oil out of the capillary tube and titers were determined as described above [33]. Observation of one or more viral plaques was considered a positive result. Following saliva collection, individual mosquito bodies were stored at −80°C. Additional day 14 mosquitoes were stored at −80°C and were tested only for dissemination and/or infection status. Mosquitoes were subsequently tested for virus dissemination by head squash and immunofluorescence assay (IFA) as previously described, using mouse-anti RVFV strain ZH501 hyperimmune ascitic fluid diluted 1∶2500 as the primary antibody and goat-anti-mouse IgG-Alexa488 (Invitrogen, Baltimore, MD) diluted 1∶2000 as the secondary antibody conjugate [40]. Observation of specific fluorescence as compared to uninfected controls was considered a positive result. The infection status of mosquitoes was determined by trituration of bodies in 2 mL conical microcentrifuge tubes with 1 mL BA-1 medium (1× medium 199 with Earle's salts, 1% bovine albumin, 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 1 µL/mL amphotericin B) and one copper BB per tube using a Qiagen Tissuelyser (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). Triturated mosquito preparations were clarified by centrifugation at 9 K rpm/4°C for 10 min followed by plaque titration of the clarified supernatant on Vero cells as above.Virus was isolated and sequenced from selected mosquitoes at 14 days post-exposure as follows. Viral RNA was extracted either from triturated mosquito supernatant or from a Vero cell amplification of mosquito supernatant (25 µL mosquito supernatant grown 3 days in a T25 flask of Vero cells) using the QIAamp viral RNA kit (Qiagen). RT-PCR was performed using the Titan One-Step RT-PCR kit (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). Products were agarose gel purified and sequenced using the BigDye Terminator v3.1 Ready Reaction Cycle Sequencing mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Reactions were purified using the BigDye Xterminator Purification kit (Applied Biosystems) and analyzed on an ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems).Statistical AnalysisLinear regression methods were used to compare (log10-transformed) titers among the virus constructs, while logistic regression was used to compare their infection, dissemination, and transmission rates. Wald 95% confidence intervals were computed for parameters of interest, and likelihood ratio tests were used to compare models. Because the data have cases for which all individuals in a virus test group were either negative or positive, we use Firth's penalized likelihood adjustment to the estimating score equations, as detailed in Heinze and Schemper (2002) and Heinze and Puhr (2010) and implemented in R (www.r-project.org) in the package logistf
[41], [42]. All analyses were conducted in R version 2.11.1 (www.r-project.org). Confidence intervals for the differences of virus effects were adjusted for multiple comparisons in both normal and logistic models using the methods described in Hothorn et al. (2008) [43].Due to the necessity of using freshly grown, and therefore untitrated, virus in the oral mosquito feeds, the standard regression methods for the body titers and infection rates were augmented to adjust for the unknown amount of virus taken up during the feedings by using the information collected from the mosquitoes fed concurrently and stored just after feeding (input virus titer). This was necessary because the titers for the different viruses varied between each virus stock preparation. Although significant results were found, we cannot rule out that this variation in the virus titers may have affected the results in a manner that cannot be accounted for by the statistical analysis. To summarize the approach, we treated the unknown amount of virus taken up by the test mosquitoes as missing data, represented in the linear models as a simple, continuous random effect and in the logistic models as a continuous, random offset. We then used the estimated, predictive normal distributions of the concurrently fed individuals' input virus log10-titer measurements from the corresponding virus to impute values for the unknown virus uptake of the test individuals. For each individual we generated 100 such imputations, fit regression models to each of these “completed” datasets, and averaged the parameters from the resulting model fits. Statistical comparisons and tests, confidence intervals and p-values incorporated both the modeling uncertainty and the imputation uncertainty; see Little and Ruben (2002) for details related to analysis of missing data and incorporation of imputation error [44].For the dissemination and transmission rates, Fisher's exact tests were used to test for an overall difference, and pairwise comparisons among viruses were made using score confidence intervals for the differences. The Bonferroni adjustment was used to account for the multiple comparisons.ResultsViral RNA from 25 randomly selected infected mosquitoes representing both species and all four viruses was sequenced and compared to the nucleotide sequence of the bloodmeal viruses; no differences were observed. Results from Ae. aegypti and Cx. quinquefasciatus experiments are listed in Tables 2 and 3, respectively. Dissemination rates in these tables are calculated in two ways: 1) De = number positive divided by number exposed to virus and 2) Di = number positive divided by number infected. Similarly, transmission rates are shown as 1) Te = number positive divided by number exposed to virus and 2) Td = number positive divided by number disseminated. Where data from two separate experiments are presented in Tables 2 and 3 we have combined and summarized the results in the text below as noted.10.1371/journal.pntd.0001639.t002Table 2Replication of rRVF mutant viruses in Aedes aegypti mosquitoes.Dissemination ratesTransmission ratesInfection rate1
# pos/# exposed2
# pos/# infected3
# pos/# exposed4
# pos/# disseminated5
VirusExperimentBloodmeal titer6
Avg (sd) day 0 titer7
% positive (n)% positive (n)% positive (n)% positive (n)% positive (n)rRVF-wt16.94.2 (0.3)–nd8
83.9(31)–nd–ndndrRVF-wt26.94.2 (0.1)62.5(32)56.3(32)90.0(20)46.9(32)83.3(18)rRVF-ΔNSs16.94.0 (0.2)–nd34.0(50)*
–nd–ndndrRVF-ΔNSs28.35.3 (0.3)88.9(36)44.4(36)*
50.0(32)*
33.3(36)75.0(16)rRVF-ΔNSm16.94.1 (0.1)11.1(45)*
2.2(45)*
20.0(5)*
2.2(45)*
100.0(1)rRVF-ΔNSm26.23.3 (0.1)0(84)*
0(84)*
–0(50)*
–rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm27.04.0 (0.2)0(75)*
0(84)*
–0(50)*
–1Number of mosquitoes containing detectable virus by plaque assay divided by number of mosquitoes exposed to infectious bloodmeal.2De = number of mosquitoes with RVFV antigen in head tissues divided by number of mosquitoes exposed to infectious bloodmeal.3Di = number of mosquitoes with RVFV antigen in head tissues divided by number of infected mosquitoes.4Te = number of mosquitoes with positive saliva by plaque assay divided by number of mosquitoes exposed to infectious bloodmeal.5Td = number of mosquitoes with positive saliva by plaque assay divided by number of mosquitoes with disseminated infection.6Titer expressed as log10 PFU/mL.7n = 3, titer expressed as log10 PFU/ml; avg is log10 geometric mean; sd is standard deviation.8nd = not done.*: value differs significantly from rRVF-wt values; see Table S2 for statistical analysis results.10.1371/journal.pntd.0001639.t003Table 3Replication of rRVF mutant viruses in Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes.Dissemination ratesTransmission ratesInfection rate1
# pos/# exposed2
# pos/# infected3
# pos/# exposed4
# pos/# disseminated5
VirusExperimentBloodmeal titer6
Avg (sd) day 0 titer7
% positive (n)% positive (n)% positive (n)% positive (n)% positive (n)rRVF-wt37.94.3 (0.2)94.3(35)9.9(131)7.1(28)6.7(30)100.0(2)rRVF-wt48.25.5 (0.4)95.7(25)16.0(25)16.7(24)4.0(25)25.0(4)rRVF-ΔNSs38.55.8 (0.2)94.3(35)7.1(113)11.4(35)6.7(30)66.7(3)rRVF-ΔNSm36.53.2 (0.2)11.4(35)*
0.8(119)*
25.0(4)0(30)0(1)rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm48.36.2 (0.2)66.0(50)*
10.0(50)15.2(33)4.0(50)40.0(5)1Number of mosquitoes containing detectable virus by plaque assay divided by number of mosquitoes exposed to infectious bloodmeal.2De = number of mosquitoes with RVFV antigen in head tissues divided by number of mosquitoes exposed to infectious bloodmeal.3Di = number of mosquitoes with RVFV antigen in head tissues divided by number of infected mosquitoes.4Te = number of mosquitoes with positive saliva by plaque assay divided by number of mosquitoes exposed to infectious bloodmeal.5Td = number of mosquitoes with positive saliva by plaque assay divided by number of mosquitoes with disseminated infection.6Titer expressed as log10 PFU/mL.7n = 3, titer expressed as log10 PFU/ml; avg is log10 geometric mean; sd is standard deviation.*: value differs significantly from rRVF-wt values; see Table S2 for statistical analysis results.
Ae. aegypti
Replication of the rRVF-wt and deletion mutant viruses in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes is summarized in Table 2 with statistical analysis results data available in Table S1. The infection rate observed for the rRVF-ΔNSs virus (32/36, 88.9%) did not differ significantly from that observed for the rRVF-wt virus (20/32, 62.5%), although the average body titer at 14 days post-exposure for individuals infected with rRVF-ΔNSs (3.7 log10 PFU/mL) was significantly lower than for rRVF-wt (5.4 log10 PFU/mL) (P<0.01, data not shown). Dissemination rates for the rRVF-ΔNSs virus (De, from two experiments combined = 33/86, 38.4%, and Di = 16/32, 50%) were significantly lower than for rRVF-wt (De combined = 44/63, 69.8% and Di = 18/20, 90%), while transmission rates for rRVF-ΔNSs (Te = 12/36, 33.3% and Td = 12/16, 75%) and rRVF-wt (Te = 15/32, 46.9% and Td = 15/18, 83.3%) did not differ significantly. RVFV antigen was found to be similarly distributed throughout head tissues by IFA testing of individuals with disseminated rRVF-wt and rRVF-ΔNSs infections (data not shown).The Ae. aegypti infection rate for the rRVF-ΔNSm virus (5/129, 3.9%, combined) was significantly less than for rRVF-wt (20/32, 62.5%). The rRVF-ΔNSm infection rate in experiment 1 (5/45, 11.1%) was higher than that of experiment 2 (0/84, 0%), most likely due to the higher experiment 1 bloodmeal titer, although when calculated individually both rates were significantly less than that of rRVF-wt. The average body titer of rRVF-ΔNSm-infected mosquitoes (1.9 log10 PFU/mL) at 14 days post-exposure was significantly less than that of mosquitoes infected with rRVF-wt (5.4 log10 PFU/mL) (P<0.01, data not shown). The dissemination rates for rRVF-ΔNSm (De combined = 1/129, 0.8% and Di = 1/5, 20%) were significantly less than rRVF-wt (De combined = 44/63, 69.8% and Di = 18/20, 90%). The transmission rate for rRVF-ΔNSm (Te combined = 1/95, 1.1%,) was significantly less than that of rRVF-wt (Te = 15/32, 46.9%) when calculated as Te (number positive/number exposed); when calculated as Ti (number positive/number disseminated) the transmission rate did not differ significantly from rRVF-wt. Out of 129 Ae. aegypti mosquitoes that fed on a bloodmeal containing the rRVF-ΔNSm virus, five became infected and one developed a disseminated infection; this individual was also found to be transmission-positive. The distribution of RVFV antigen in head tissues of this individual did not appear to differ from that of rRVF-wt (data not shown). Full length sequencing of virus isolated from this individual revealed no genetic differences compared to the virus in the blood meal.None of the 75 Ae. aegypti mosquitoes exposed to rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm were found to be infection-, dissemination- or transmission-positive.
Cx. quinquefasciatus
Replication of the rRVF-wt and deletion mutant viruses in Cx. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes is summarized in Table 3 with statistical analysis data presented in Table S2. Similarly high infection rates were observed for rRVF-wt (57/60, 95%, combined) and rRVF-ΔNSs (33/35, 94.3%), while significantly lower rates were observed for the constructs containing the NSm deletion [rRVF-ΔNSm (4/35, 11.4%) and rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm (33/50, 66%)]. There were no significant differences in the dissemination or transmission rates of the rRVF-ΔNSs or rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm viruses compared to the rRVF-wt virus. When calculated as De (number positive/number exposed), the dissemination rate for the rRVF-ΔNSm virus (De = 1/119, 0.8%) was significantly less than that of rRVF-wt (De combined = 17/156, 10.9%), however, the dissemination rate calculated as Di (number positive/number infected) was not significantly different and there were no significant differences in transmission rates between these viruses. IFA testing demonstrated the presence of RVFV antigen distributed throughout head tissues from Cx. quinquefasciatus individuals with a disseminated infection; no qualitative differences were observed between tissues infected with the deletion mutant viruses and rRVF-wt (data not shown). Average body titers of individuals with disseminated infections ranged from 4.4–6.1 log10 PFU/mL, while titers in individuals with undisseminated infections ranged from 1.0–4.3 log10PFU/mL. These values are similar to those reported for Cx. pipiens mosquitoes by Turell et al. [14].DiscussionWe report the in vivo infection, dissemination and transmission characteristics of several recombinant RVF viruses lacking the entire coding regions of the NSs and/or the NSm genes and demonstrate the critical role of the NSm gene for infection and transmission in two mosquito species that exhibit different capacities for transmitting RVFV. Ae. aegypti has been shown to be a moderately competent vector of RVFV, although it has not been shown to be a vector in nature [13], [39]. Cx. quinquefasciatus is a potential vector of RVFV in nature, although laboratory studies have shown it to be a less efficient vector than Ae. aegypti.
[5], [13], [39], [45]. These species were selected based on this difference in vector competence, because both are found in Africa where the candidate vaccine viruses tested here will primarily be used and because both have been colonized for use in laboratory investigations.Observed rates of dissemination of rRVF-wt in Ae. aegypti were much greater than those in Cx. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes in our study. At 14 days post-exposure, 90% of rRVF-wt-infected Ae. aegypti individuals had titers greater than the average input virus titer. This is in marked contrast to the Cx. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes, where at 14 days post-exposure only 10.5% had a rise in body titer that was greater than the input virus titer and 35% of individuals with detectable virus at 14 days post-exposure had body titers ≤2.0 log10 PFU/mL. Additionally, dissemination rates for rRVF-wt in Cx. quinquefasciatus were low (≤16.7%) (Table 3). These observations support the hypothesis that a midgut infection and/or midgut escape barrier is responsible for the lower vector competence of this species compared to Aedes species for RVFV [13], [15], [16].The recombinant viruses tested comprised three groups: those with a deletion of the NSs gene from the S segment of the virus, those with a deletion of the NSm gene from the M segment, and those with both the NSs and NSm genes deleted. Recombinant RVFV lacking the NSs gene has been shown to maintain the virulence and growth characteristics of the wild type virus in mammalian cell culture, and in vivo testing demonstrated it to be highly attenuated, immunogenic and protective against challenge with wild type virus making it a potential vaccine candidate [29]. RVFV Clone 13, an attenuated clone containing a deletion of 70% of the NSs gene, has been shown to exhibit a lower infection rate in Cx. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes compared to wild type RVFV ZH548, while no difference was observed in Ae. vexans mosquito infection rates [46]. In our study, deletion of the NSs gene alone did not significantly affect rates of infection or transmission compared to rRVF-wt in either Ae. aegypti or Cx. quinquefasciatus mosquitoes although the dissemination rate for rRVF-ΔNSs was significantly lower than rRVF-wt in Ae. aegypti.Recombinant RVFV lacking the NSm gene exhibits efficient replication in cell culture and although in vivo studies have demonstrated this mutant virus to be highly immunogenic it is only partially attenuated relative to the wild type virus, retaining the ability to cause lethal hepatic or neurologic disease in a minority of infected animals [29], [31]. In the current study, deletion of the NSm gene significantly reduced infection rates in both mosquito species tested. In Ae. aegypti mosquitoes, dissemination and transmission rates were also significantly reduced suggesting an important role for the NSm proteins in this species.Given the characteristics of RVFV mutant viruses individually lacking the NSs or NSm genes, Bird, et al., have hypothesized that combining these deletions in a single mutant virus would generate a stable, attenuated, immunogenic vaccine virus [29]. Results of in vitro and in vivo studies characterizing the double NSs and NSm deleted recombinant virus suggest that this hypothesis is correct [29]. The double deletion virus grows efficiently in cell culture and in animals this virus is highly attenuated, immunogenic and confers protective immunity from wild type virus challenge [29].We observed that deletion of the NSs and NSm genes in combination affected RVFV growth differently in the two mosquito species tested. Deletion of both the NSs and NSm genes had a pronounced effect in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes; none of the Ae. aegypti that ingested a bloodmeal containing the rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm virus became infected (n = 75). In contrast, infection with rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm of the less competent vector, Cx. quinquefasciatus, was significantly reduced compared to rRVF-wt, although to a lesser degree than in Ae. aegypti, and no significant differences in dissemination or transmission rates were observed. It was apparent, however, that in Cx. quinquefasciatus the additional deletion of the NSm gene reduced the infection rate of the double deletion virus, rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm, (33/50, 66.0%) compared to the rRVF-ΔNSs single deletion virus (33/35, 94.3%) (Table 3). The Cx. quinquefasciatus rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm infection rate was higher than the rRVF-ΔNSm rate, however this is most likely due to the higher titer of the rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm bloodmeal.
In vivo studies by Bird, et al., showed no detectable post-vaccination viremia in n = 20 rats [29] and more recently in n = 42 sheep inoculated with the double deletion virus [47]. These results, coupled with our observation that in the more competent Ae. aegypti vector a bloodmeal titer of 7.0 log10 PFU/mL did not result in infection of mosquitoes with this virus, suggest an extremely low likelihood that mosquitoes could acquire an infectious dose of virus from feeding on a vaccinated animal. This is important since, due to the segmented nature of the RVFV genome, the potential exists for reassortment and therefore reversion of mutations in a mosquito that has acquired both vaccine and wild type strains of the virus from feeding on multiple hosts [48]. The deletion of genes from multiple segments of the virus genome in the rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNSm vaccine candidate virus adds an additional safeguard against this mechanism of reassortment-driven reversion to wild type.The results of this study demonstrate that deletion of the RVFV NSm gene alone or in combination with the NSs gene significantly affected the replication kinetics of the virus in the mosquito species tested, particularly in Ae. aegypti. The combined deletion of both gene regions resulted in the greatest attenuation of RVFV replication in these mosquitoes, suggesting that the rRVF-ΔNSs-ΔNsm virus is an acceptable vaccine candidate with little possibility of environmental contamination due to the lack of efficient infection and transmission in mosquitoes.The RVFV NSm has been demonstrated to function as a suppressor of virus-induced apoptosis in mammalian cells in culture although a similar role has not been demonstrated in arthropod cells [26]. However, NSm has also been shown to be non-essential for replication in cultured mammalian cells suggesting it may have a more significant function in the infection of insect vectors involved in amplification and transmission of RVFV in nature [25], [27]. In our study, the reduced infection rates observed in both Ae. aegypti and Cx. quinquefasciatus species and the diminished whole body virus titers of infected Ae. aegypti mosquitoes suggest a possible role for NSm in modulation of a mosquito midgut infection barrier. Additionally, the reduction in rates of dissemination and transmission in Ae. aegypti indicate that NSm may also function as a suppressor of a midgut escape barrier. Although the mechanisms of these barriers are not understood, it is apparent that the genetic traits of the virus as well as those of the mosquito host species influence the infection, dissemination and transmission of arboviruses [18]. The rRVF-ΔNSm deletion mutant will be a valuable tool in future studies to elucidate the mechanisms of RVFV infection and transmission in mosquito vectors.Supporting InformationTable S1
Aedes aegypti
 statistical analysis results for data in 

Table 2

.
(XLS)Click here for additional data file.Table S2
Culex quinquefasciatus
 statistical analysis results for data in 

Table 3

.
(XLS)Click here for additional data file.


Title: A highly potent human neutralizing antibody prevents vertical transmission of Rift Valley fever virus in a rat model

IntroductionRift Valley fever (RVF) is an emerging zoonotic disease afflicting humans and livestock (primarily sheep, goats, cattle, camels) throughout Africa and regions of the Arabian Peninsula1–3. Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV; family Phenuiviridae, genus phlebovirus) was first identified in the Rift Valley of Kenya in 1932 after reports of unusually high rates of death in newborn lambs and abortions from ewes without apparent signs of disease4. High rates of concurrent fetal death in livestock, also known as “abortion storms”, continue to affect sub-Saharan Africa5. Within a given outbreak, up to 95% of infected pregnant sheep can lose their young, often delivering deceased and deformed offspring3,6. Adult livestock typically develop mild signs of RVF disease, whereas juvenile animals are more susceptible to severe hepatic disease. The loss of almost an entire generation of livestock has led to significant socioeconomical strains in affected regions7,8.Transmission of RVFV to humans by mosquito bite or through contact with contaminated tissues of infected livestock often results in mild flu-like symptoms. Although less than 5% of infected individuals develop severe disease in the form of encephalitis, hemorrhagic fever, or ocular disease9, approximately 50% of severe cases result in death10. Vertical transmission was exclusively reported in livestock until the mid-2000s when two isolated cases of human vertical transmission were documented between mothers and their late-gestation fetuses11,12. Both newborns were born with clinical signs of RVF hepatitis that consequently led to the death of at least one of the infants. More recent epidemiological data report that pregnant women with confirmed RVFV infection during pregnancy are more likely to have late-term fetal loss (odds ratio 7.4), suggesting miscarriages associated with RVF in humans may be underreported13.Live-attenuated RVFV vaccines are used to control outbreaks in livestock in endemic areas. However, teratogenic events can occur in pregnant animals with certain live-attenuated vaccines, thus restricting the use of these vaccines to non-pregnant animals14,15. Multiple institutions, including the World Health Organization, have listed RVFV as a priority pathogen with epidemic or pandemic potential due to a lack of vaccines and therapeutic interventions for people, thus highlighting a considerable need for more research in this area16. The prophylactic and therapeutic clinical opportunities presented by human monoclonal antibodies are becoming apparent. The use of human monoclonal antibodies to prevent disease from human immunodeficiency virus17, SARS-CoV-218,19, respiratory syncytial virus20, and Plasmodium falciparum21 gives precedence that human monoclonal antibodies may help prevent RVFV infection and disease. Furthermore, the recent observation that individuals naturally infected with RVFV in Kenya make neutralizing antibodies targeting the glycoprotein Gn22 and the successful isolation of antibodies targeting Gn hold promise that such antibodies can be developed into prevention measures23,24. One such mAb, RVFV-268, displayed ultra-potent neutralization against RVFV and mapped to the surface exposed residues of domain A on the Gn surface23.Here we show that prophylactic delivery of mAb RVFV-268 2 hours (h) prior to infection and up to 24 h post-infection protects mice from lethal subcutaneous challenge with RVFV ZH50123. RVFV causes a broad range of diseases in livestock and humans; therefore, a successful therapeutic should manage the broad-tropisms and pathologies associated with RVF. Here, we tested the ability of mAb RVFV-268 to prevent vertical transmission in a model of congenital RVF in Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats25,26. We found that mAb RVFV-268 rapidly reaches placental and fetal tissue after intraperitoneal injection, and that it prevents maternal and fetal infection in a dose-dependent manner when administered prior to challenge with RVFV. It also prevents vertical transmission when given up to 24 h after RVFV challenge, demonstrating its potential usefulness for either prophylaxis and/or therapy.ResultsRVFV-268 blocks RVFV infection of ex vivo placental tissueRVFV displays extreme tropism for placental tissue in SD rats, as demonstrated by elevated virus titers in vivo in placenta within a few days of infection and a high rate of vertical transmission to fetuses25. In vitro, mAb RVFV-268 (IgG1) has shown ultra-potent virus neutralizing activity against several strains of RVFV, with a half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of approximately 0.2 ng/mL23. To determine whether mAb RVFV-268 can protect placental tissue from RVFV infection, we used ex vivo rat placenta slice cultures. Organ slice cultures have been successfully employed as a surrogate for in vivo experiments for various applications and organs27–29, including the study of infectious diseases30,31. Rodent placenta slice cultures have been used to study local inflammatory responses32 and other diseases33. For our studies, pregnant SD rats were euthanized at embryonic day 14 (E14) of a 22 day gestational period, corresponding to the gestational age at which we inoculate the rats with RVFV. Placentas were collected and immediately embedded in agarose cubes to provide support as each whole placenta was cut into 300 μm slices using a vibratome. Slices of similar sizes were cultured for antibody studies (Fig. 1A).Fig. 1MAb RVFV-268 reduces viral replication in rat placenta explant cultures.A Placentas collected from SD rats at E14 were sliced into 300 μm sections using a vibratome. B For prophylaxis studies (top panel), explant slices were incubated with a combination of RVFV (1 ×105 pfu) and mAb RVFV-268 or control mAb DENV-2D22 (10 ng) for 1 h, then washed and replenished with antibody (10 ng) in culture medium (n = 3 pairs of placenta slices from one dam). C For therapeutic studies (bottom panel), explant slices were incubated with RVFV (1 ×105 pfu) for 1 h, then washed and treated with RVFV-268 or control DENV-2D22 antibody (10 ng) in culture medium (n = 3 pairs of placenta slices from one dam). Culture supernatant was collected at 0, 24, 36, 48-  time-points then analyzed by viral plaque assay (bottom, left) or qPCR (bottom, right). Cultures without antibodies (none) served as a positive control. Limit of detection (LOD) = dashed line. Data are presented as mean values +/- standard deviation. Two-sided analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed. Created with biorender.com. Raw data are presented in the Source Data file.To determine if mAb RVFV-268 can prevent or reduce viral infection when added to placental tissue at the time of infection, 10 ng of mAb RVFV-268 or a control antibody that targets dengue virus, mAb DENV-2D22, was mixed with 1 ×105 pfu of RVFV ZH501 and added to the slice cultures during a 1 h adsorption period. The antibody-virus mixture was removed from the culture and 10 ng of the corresponding antibody was replenished in the growth medium. Supernatant was collected at 0, 24, 36, and 48 h post-inoculation (hpi) to generate viral growth curves (Fig. 1B, top). When added at the time of infection, mAb RVFV-268 significantly reduced infectious viral titers (Fig. 1B, left) and viral RNA (vRNA) (Fig. 1B, right) in the culture supernatant at 24, 36, and 48 h after inoculation. Titers of infectious virus and vRNA in the mAb DENV-2D22 cultures were comparable to the no mAb control group. Similar reductions were observed in cultures containing 1-3-log10 higher concentration of mAb (Supp Figure 1A).To determine if mAb RVFV-268 can prevent or reduce viral infection when added 1 h after infection in a therapeutic format, slices of similar size were generated then inoculated with 1 × 105 pfu RVFV followed by treatment with 10 ng of mAbs RVFV-268 or control DENV-2D22 after the virus adsorption period. MAb was kept in the growth medium for the duration of the experiment. Supernatant was collected at the same time points to generate viral growth curves (Fig. 1C, top). Addition of mAb RVFV-268 after virus inoculation marginally reduced infectious virus (Fig. 1C, right) and vRNA (Fig. 1C, left) throughout the virus growth period. Generally, reductions were observed at earlier time points in infection and did not persist through 48 h post inoculation. Infectious virus titers and vRNA were similar in the mAb DENV-2D22 and no mAb control groups. Similar results were obtained in cultures containing 100 ng, 1 μg, or 10 μg of mAb (Supp Figure 1B). The ex vivo placental cultures demonstrate that mAb RVFV-268 can reduce RVFV infection of placental tissue justifying the need to test its efficacy in an in vivo vertical virus transmission model.MAb RVFV-268 is rapidly transferred to placenta and fetuses in pregnant ratsTo understand if mAb RVFV-268 crosses the placenta and reaches the fetuses, we injected 10 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 or control mAb DENV-2D22 intraperitoneally (i.p.) at E14 (n = 3 each), and then one dam from each antibody treatment group was euthanized at 6, 24 or 48 h after antibody delivery. Upon euthanasia, maternal (serum, liver, and spleen) and fetal (amniotic fluid, placenta, and viscera) samples were collected for measurement of mAb RVFV-268 by ELISA (Fig. 2A). High levels of mAb RVFV-268 were detected in all maternal and fetal samples by 6 h post-delivery of the antibody (Fig. 2B). MAb levels were lower at 24 h and were mostly undetectable by 48 h. Overall, antibody levels were highest in the maternal serum, liver, spleen, and the amniotic fluid, while lower antibody titers were found in the placenta and the viscera of the fetus. Samples from mAb DENV-2D22 dams were below the limit of detection for binding to RVFV Gn protein for all time points. The presence of mAb RVFV-268 in the placenta and fetal viscera indicates that this human antibody can passively transfer from the mother to the fetus in utero in rats where it remains detectable for 24 h after i.p. injection.Fig. 2MAb RVFV-268 crosses the placental barrier and enters the fetus.A SD rats (E14) were intraperitoneally injected with 10 mg/kg of mAbs RVFV-268 or DENV-2D22 (n = 3). 6, 24, or 48 h later one dam was euthanized, and samples were collected from the dam (serum, liver, spleen; solid circles) and fetus (amniotic fluid, placenta, viscera; open circles). B RVFV Gn-specific human IgG1 ELISA semi-quantified based on log10 endpoint titer. Black lines = mean. LOD or upper limit of quantification (ULOQ) = lower and upper dashed lines, respectively. Created with biorender.com. Raw data are presented in the Source Data file.MAb RVFV-268 prevents infection of dams and fetuses when administered prior to challengeMAb RVFV-268 was remarkably effective at preventing lethal disease in adult mice when given prior to or up to 48 h after infection as previously described23. To determine whether mAb RVFV-268 could also protect pregnant dams and developing fetuses from infection, we used an established model of congenital RVF in SD rats25,26. Pregnant SD rats infected with pathogenic RVFV (strain ZH501) at E14 are susceptible to severe hepatic disease and death between 2 to 6 dpi. Vertical transmission occurs in 100% of all infected dams, even those without clinical disease, leading to increased levels of fetal mortality. High levels of infectious virus and vRNA are detectable in the placentas from infected dams demonstrating the susceptibility of this rat model to vertical transmission by RVFV.To evaluate whether mAb RVFV-268 can provide prophylactic protection when administered prior to RVFV infection, 10 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268, control mAb DENV-2D22, or saline was delivered i.p. to pregnant SD rats at E14 two hours prior to s.c. inoculation with 1 ×105 pfu of RVFV (Fig. 3). Euthanasia was performed at either 3 dpi (E17) or 6 dpi (E20) Liver and serum samples were collected from the dam, while the amniotic fluid, placenta and viscera were collected from all fetuses within each litter. Of the dams that were euthanized at 3 dpi, 3 out of 6 (50%) the of dams receiving mAb DENV-2D22 had already succumbed to disease, whereas 100% (n = 6) of those that received the mAb RVFV-268 survived to 3 dpi (Supp Figure 2A). At 6 dpi, 66.6% (4 out of 6) and 100% of the animals who received mAb DENV-2D22 or mAb RVFV-268, respectively, were still alive (Supp Figure 2B). These results demonstrate that mAb RVFV-268 administration prior to infection results in increased survival of pregnant dams.Fig. 3Prophylactic delivery of mAb RVFV-268 protects the dam and fetus from infection.A SD rats (E14) were injected i.p. with 10 mg/kg of mAbs RVFV-268 or control DENV-2D22 2 h prior to s.c challenge with RVFV (2 ×105 pfu). Dams were euthanized at B 3 dpi or C 6 dpi and samples were collected from the dam (liver, serum) and fetus (amniotic fluid, placenta, viscera), then analyzed by viral plaque assay (left) or qPCR (right). Each color data point represents samples collected from a single dam and its litter. Black lines = mean. Limit of detection (LOD) = dashed line. Created with biorender.com. Raw data are presented in the Source Data file.For dams that were euthanized at 3 dpi (E17) and received the control mAb DENV-2D22, virus was found widespread throughout the dam and fetuses, as shown in our previous studies25,26. Infectious virus was detected in the livers from 5 out of 6 dams (3.8 x 104 - 3.0 x 108 pfu/mL) and the serum of 4 out of 5 dams (6.8 x 103 - 4.3 x 107 pfu/mL) (Fig. 3B, left). Serum was not collected from one dam due to severity of disease. Viral RNA was detected within the liver of all control mAb treated dams. Within the fetal samples, infectious virus was detected in the amniotic fluid from 4 out of 6 dams, the placentas from 5 out 6 litters (88.7% of all placentas), and the viscera from 5 out of 6 litters (81.8% of all fetuses). vRNA within the maternal (liver and serum) and fetal samples (amniotic fluid, placenta, and viscera) correlated with infectious virus titers, albeit some samples that did not have detectible infectious virus contained vRNA (Fig. 3B, right).For dams receiving mAb RVFV-268, infectious virus was not recovered from dams or fetuses at 3 dpi (Fig. 3B, left). Viral RNA was detected just above the limit of detection (LOD) in amniotic fluid, placenta, and viscera from 2 out of 6 litters; vRNA was not detected in any of the samples collected from the dams. Since qRT-PCR is more sensitive than viral plaque assays, viral isolation was attempted to amplify infectious virus from raw samples from the fetuses that had low level of vRNA, but infectious virus could not be propagated as determined by qRT-PCR and by immunofluorescent staining.When dams were euthanized at 6 dpi (E20), the number of mAb DENV-2D22 control dams in the experiment was reduced to two because the others did not survive that long. As expected in these control animals, infectious virus was found widespread throughout maternal and fetal tissues (100% of placentas; 83.3% of fetal viscera) (Fig. 3C, left), albeit approximately 1000-fold less than what was detected at 3 dpi. Infectious virus was not detected in the serum of the one dam from which we could collect a serum sample. Similar levels of vRNA were detected in these samples as well (Fig. 3C, right). In contrast, dams receiving mAb RVFV-268 did not have infectious virus (Fig. 3C, left) or detectable vRNA (Fig. 3C, right) within any of the samples collected from the dams or fetuses. The lack of infectious virus and vRNA at 6 dpi (E20) suggests that the low levels of vRNA detected at 3 dpi might be from residual RNA from viral debris (Fig. 3B, right). Thus, compared to the DENV control mAb, mAb RVFV-268 effectively prevented infection of the dams and fetuses when given prior to inoculation with RVFV.Severe liver disease is a common outcome of RVFV infection in rodents. The lack of RVFV vRNA and infectious virus in the liver (Fig. 3) suggests sterilizing immunity was achieved in dams prophylactically treated with mAb RVFV-268. Corroborating this finding, more severe histopathology was observed in the livers of mAb DENV-2D22 treated animals at 3 dpi, compared to those that received mAb RVFV-268 (Fig. 4, middle and right panels). Livers from dams who received control mAb demonstrated histopathologic changes commonly associated with RVFV infection, including foci of hemorrhage, necrosis, and inflammation. In contrast, livers from dams who received mAb RVFV-268 demonstrated only mild inflammation. Immunofluorescent staining of livers collected at 3 dpi showed RVFV nucleoprotein throughout the liver of control mAb treated dams, whereas antigen was not seen in the livers of dams who received mAb RVFV-268 (Fig. 4, left panels).Fig. 4Dams prophylactically treated with mAb RVFV-268 had minimal liver pathology and infection.Immunofluorescent (left) and H & E (middle) images from dams prophylactically treated with mAbs RVFV-268 (n = 2) or DENV-2D22 (n = 2) prior to inoculation with RVFV. Dams were euthanized and livers were harvested at 3 dpi. For the immunofluorescent images, RVFV nucleoprotein staining is in red and nuclei staining is in blue. For the H & E images, white and black arrows highlight areas with hemorrhage and necrosis, respectively. 20x images, scale bar = 50 μm. Panels are representative pictures of a liver from each treatment group from Fig. 3. Livers from uninfected dams (n = 2) not treated with mAb were controls. A representative image of an apoptotic cell (right) from an H & E stain. 60x image, scale bar = 20 μm.Protection associated with prophylactic delivery of mAb RVFV-268 is dose-dependentBecause a dose of 10 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 provided apparent sterilizing protection for the dams and fetuses, we performed a dosing study to determine the lowest effective dose that can protect from infection. Prophylactic delivery of 10 mg/kg or 0.5 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 protected 100% or 90% of mice from lethal hepatic disease, respectively, in a previous study23. Dams at E14 were i.p. injected with 1 mg/kg or 0.1 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 two hours prior to infection; these doses are 10- and 100-fold less than what was delivered in Fig. 3, respectively. Three days after s.c. injection with 1 ×105 pfu of RVFV, the dams were euthanized, and samples were collected from the dams and fetuses as performed previously (Fig. 5A). All dams who received 1 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 survived to 3 dpi, whereas 1 out of 6 dams who received 0.1 mg/kg of the antibody was euthanized at 2 dpi (Supp Figure 2C).Fig. 5Prophylactic protection with mAb RVFV-268 is dose-dependent.A SD rats (E14) were injected i.p. with 1 mg/kg or 0.1 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 2 h prior to challenge with RVFV (2 ×105 pfu). Dams were euthanized at 3 dpi, samples were collected from the dam (liver, serum) and fetus (amniotic fluid, placenta, viscera), then analyzed by B Viral plaque assay (left) or qPCR (right). Each color data point represents samples collected from a single dam and its litter. Black lines = mean. Limit of detection (LOD) = dashed line. Created with biorender.com. Raw data are presented in the Source Data file.Of the six dams who received 1 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268, only one became infected with RVFV as determined by the presence of infectious virus in its liver at 3 dpi. Although virus was detected in the liver, none of the other tissues from this dam, including fetal-associated tissues, had detectable infectious virus. The remaining five dams and their matched fetal tissues also did not contain infectious virus (Fig. 5B, left). Viral RNA, however, was detected in the amniotic fluid from the infected dam. Furthermore, one dam without detectable infectious virus in dam or fetal tissues had viral RNA in the placenta (2/17) and viscera (1/8) which may be residual RNA from degraded input virions, as seen in the previous experiment (Fig. 5B, right). When dams received 0.1 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268, infectious virus was detected in the liver of 2 out of 6 dams, the serum of 1 out of 5 dams, and the amniotic fluid of 1 out of 6 dams at 3 dpi (Fig. 5B, left); similar concentrations of viral RNA were also detected (Fig. 5B, right). These results suggest that prophylactic delivery of at least 1 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 protected the developing fetuses from exposure to infectious virus by 3 dpi. The dam, however, may still experience infection peripheral to the conceptus.MAb RVFV-268 can protect the dam and fetus when delivered as late as 24 h post-challengeTo determine whether delivery of mAb RVFV-268 after RVFV challenge can protect the dam and fetus from infection, dams were injected with 10 mg/kg of antibody 6 or 24 h after inoculation with 2 x 105 pfu of RVFV. Three days after challenge, the dams were euthanized and samples were collected (Fig. 6A).Fig. 6Therapeutic delivery of mAb RVFV-268 can protect dams and fetuses from infection when administered as late as 24 h post-challenge.A SD rats (E14) were injected i.p. with 10 mg/kg of mAbs RVFV-268 or DENV-2D22 6 or 24 h postchallenge with RVFV (2 ×105 pfu) then euthanized at 3 dpi. Samples were collected from the dam (liver, serum) and fetus (amniotic fluid, placenta, viscera). B Samples from dams treated with mAb 6 h post-RVFV challenge were analyzed by viral plaque assay (VPA) (left) or qPCR (right). C Samples from dams treated with mAb 24 h post-RVFV challenge were analyzed by VPA (left) or qPCR (right). Each color data point represents samples collected from a single dam and its litter. Black lines = mean. LOD = dashed line. Created with biorender.com. Raw data are presented in the Source Data file.For dams that received antibody 6 h after infection, neither infectious virus nor vRNA was detected in any of the samples from the dams that received mAb RVFV-268. Similarly, fetus-associated samples did not have infectious virus or vRNA (Fig. 6B). Both dams that received mAb DENV-2D22 had detectible vRNA in the liver, serum, and amniotic fluid. All but two placentas had detectible vRNA.When mAb RVFV-268 was delivered 24 h after RVFV challenge, infectious virus and vRNA was also not detected in the dam samples. However, low levels of vRNA, but not infectious virus, were detected in several placenta from 2 out of 5 of the mAb RVFV-268 treated dams (Fig. 6C, right). In contrast, both dams that received mAb DENV-2D22 had detectible vRNA in all samples except for the viscera of one pup, and most samples also had detectable infectious virus (Fig. 6C). Thus, delivery of mAb RVFV-268 as late as 24 h after inoculation with RVFV can remarkably reduce both maternal and fetal infection.DiscussionRVFV continues to cause devastating diseases in livestock and humans in Africa and the Middle East. Despite the use of live-attenuated vaccines (LAV) in livestock within endemic regions to control animal disease, multiple human and animal populations remain prone to RVFV infection. The spread of RVFV to non-endemic or naïve populations is feasible due to continued agricultural trade34,35 and the risk of mosquito population expansion due to climate change36. Even within endemic regions, LAVs are not recommended for pregnant animals due to the risk of LAV vertical transmission that may cause developmental complications for the fetus15. As for humans, there are no FDA-approved vaccines, although some vaccine candidates are currently in pre-clinical or early-stage clinical trials37. Despite significant strides being made in vaccine development, safety and efficacy studies in pregnant women are often conducted near the end of the clinical trial process or omitted altogether. These limitations emphasize the need for more preclinical research into RVFV therapeutics particularly for pregnant populations.MAbs can effectively treat infectious diseases in vivo38 and some promising candidates are either in clinical trials or were given Emergency Use Authorization for treatment of COVID-19 by the Food and Drug Administration39. Furthermore, mAb therapeutics are regularly used during pregnancy40. The development of mAbs for therapeutic intervention has gained popularity in the bunyavirus field. Multiple studies have evaluated either Fc-mediated immune functions41 or neutralizing capabilities23,24,42–44 of mAbs. Although many neutralizing mAb significantly reduce disease in vivo, their protective efficacies had only been evaluated in the context of hepatic or neurological disease in non-pregnant mice. Here, we evaluated the potent neutralizing human mAb RVFV-268 for its ability to protect pregnant rats from RVF and to limit vertical transmission of RVFV to fetal tissues.Chapman, et al.23 demonstrated that mAb RVFV-268 reduced the rate of lethal hepatic disease in adult mice when delivered prophylactically or as a treatment 2 or 4 days after infection23. In that study, sterilizing immunity against RVFV infection was achieved when the mAb was delivered 2 h prior to inoculation. In our studies, multiple experimental parameters indicated that sterilizing immunity also occurred when mAb RVFV-268 was administered 2 h before inoculation of pregnant rats with RVFV. These data include the lack of infectious virus, vRNA, and immunofluorescent staining for RVFV antigen within maternal and fetal samples. In some cases, only low levels of vRNA were detected which could be due to the presence of neutralized virus or degraded virus RNA remaining in the tissues or still circulating in the blood. Future studies using more sensitive assays would aid in understanding the full extent of protection provided by mAb RVFV-268 in pregnant rats. This approach would include studies allowing the infected and treated dams to deliver their fetuses, measuring if any virus is in the fetuses at delivery, and monitoring fetuses for health and development. Seroconversion of the dams several weeks after infection may indicate whether true sterilizing immunity was achieved. Regardless, even when sterilizing immunity was not achieved in the presented studies, as in the dose-down experiment, viral titers in the liver and serum were significantly reduced in mAb RVFV-268 treated dams compared to control mAb-treated dams, leading to even lower viral titers in fetal tissues. These lower titers also were associated with reduced immunofluorescent staining and pathology in the liver. Thus, even in cases of breakthrough infection with insufficient protection provided by mAb RVFV-268, low levels of mAb RVFV-268 reduced viral burden within the dams and fetuses and reduced liver pathology within the dams.Remarkably, dams and fetuses were protected when mAb RVFV-268 was administered as late as 24 hpi, and this speaks to the potent activity of this neutralizing antibody. Dams and fetuses had no detectable vRNA or infectious virus when the mAb was given 6 h after infection, and only a small amount of breakthrough vRNA was detected in placenta from dams given the antibody 24 h after infection. Additional studies can further explore the latest time frame that mAb RVFV-268 administration could provide complete or partial protection of the dams and fetuses from vertical transmission of RVFV.MAb RVFV-268 used in these studies is a recombinant human IgG1 protein. IgG1 is known to bind with high affinity to the neonatal Fc receptor, FcRn, which is found throughout the body and mediates passive antibody delivery between mother and child in utero45,46. Binding of antibodies to FcRn and subsequent endocytosis dictates the concentration of circulating antibodies. FcRn molecules are highly expressed on vascular endothelium which is considered the main site of IgG cycling. The binding affinity between the Fc of one species and FcRn of another species varies47 (herein, species incompatibility), and as a result can impact antibody cycling and serum concentrations. Despite species incompatibility between the human Fc and rat FcRn, mAb RVFV-268 was transferred across the placenta and into the fetuses, which is consistent with other reports of Fc-FcRn species incompatibilities48. Interestingly, however, the mAb RVFV-268 quickly cleared from the maternal and fetal tissues as early as 48 h after delivery. The kinetics of rapid clearance of mAb RVFV-268 may be related to the increased expression levels of FcRn in these pregnant animals. Further studies directly comparing the clearance rate of mAb RVFV-268 in pregnant and nonpregnant animals are warranted. General features of this antibody, such as paratope charges and isoelectric point may also contribute to the clearance rate observed in this model49,50. Rational selection and design of neutralizing antibodies is important to consider when developing mAb therapies. Additional engineering options may improve application of mAb RVFV-268 during pregnancy. For instance, increasing vertical transfer of antibodies from the mother to fetus in utero would provide more protection to the fetus than only the indirect protection conferred by reducing infection and replication in the mother. Introducing three amino acid mutations, M252Y/S254T/T256E (i.e., YTE mutation), within the Fc region of human IgG antibodies increases FcRn binding51, suggesting a mutation of this kind may also improve vertical transfer of the antibody in utero, which could be tested empirically. Although improving transplacental transfer of antibodies by inserting the YTE mutation and altering antibody-FcRn binding affinity may be species-dependent, it does improve the transfer of human mAbs across the placenta of nonhuman primates52. In addition to examining the impact of other mutations on antibody transfer53,54, future studies in which these animals have the human FcRn introduced or where mAb RVFV-268 is grafted onto a rat Fc backbone may be warranted.In addition to its neutralizing capabilities, antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) is a concern when employing passive antibody therapies especially since tissue resident cellular immunity may not be present in naïve individuals. ADE is a complex set of phenomena where previously produced or passively acquired antibodies that recognize surface-expressed virus antigens can enhance disease. These disease enhancements may be by facilitating entry into a host cell by means other than virus-host receptor binding55, such as an Fc receptor. Our results do not indicate enhanced vertical transmission with mAb RVFV-268 intervention.Further insights into human pathogenesis of RVFV in the context of pregnancy are needed to refine the animal models. Tissue specific immune cell presence or co-infection with other pathogens is a critical consideration in the context of viral infection, and moreover, the complexity of individual inflammatory profiles creates a difficult situation to resolve. For example, recent data pertaining to SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans suggests that FcγRIIIa may provide an entry route into alveolar macrophages and subsequent inflammasome activation especially for antibodies with an afucosylated glycan on the Fc domain56–58. Since placental macrophages are present in pregnancy and express Fc receptors59, pathways, such as the aforementioned one, should be explored in the context of RVFV infection and monoclonal antibodies as a potential avenue of increased undesired inflammation. If needed, however, ADE could be prevented by introducing mutations that decrease or ablate antibody effector functions by introducing the LALA-PG or TM mutations60,61. Ultimately, the Fc profile of these antibodies and immune cells will need careful consideration given the sensitive nature of pregnancy and the tissue involved during pregnancy.Mab therapy is being pursued as an avenue to prevent vertical transmission of other infectious diseases, including herpes simplex virus (HSV), which could provide insight into emerging viruses like RVFV. The importance maternal antibodies play in protecting neonates from vertical transmission of HSV was first realized after clinical evidence found babies from women with primary HSV infection were more likely to become infected or succumb to severe disease, compared to babies born to HSV-infected women who had recurrent episodes62,63. Indeed potent neutralizing HSV antibodies were later detected in the cord blood and serum of babies born to HSV immune women, indicating passive transfer of maternal antibodies likely provides protection64. In the laboratory, passive administration of HSV immune sera or maternal vaccination protected neonate mice from vertical transmission of HSV64. Passive delivery of human mAbs intravenously65 or applied topically to the vagina66 of pregnant mice infected with HSV reduced neonatal infection or death further demonstrating the therapeutic potential of mAbs against vertically transmitted diseases. A topically applied vaginal film containing HSV-1 and HSV-2 mAbs recently completed phase I clinical trials67. This combination antibody therapy, consisting of antibodies that conferred protection in mice66, could play an important role in preventing perinatal HSV infection, the most common cause of vertically transmitted HSV. Similar experimental approaches may provide additional understanding of vertical transmission mechanisms of RVFV.These data provide evidence that mAb RVFV-268 should be further investigated as a potential prophylactic and/or therapeutic against RVF. As evidenced by the effective combination of pre-exposure and post-exposure antibody treatments for addressing the COVID pandemic, neutralizing Ab therapeutics are considered an important armament in the battle against emerging viral diseases, and the ability to use them after infection to alleviate symptoms or disease severity is essential. MAbs or combinations of potent antibodies that could be used in humans during a potential outbreak or upon the introduction of RVFV to naïve regions would be beneficial to mitigate the potential negative outcomes in a population. Future clinical studies may consider testing the use of pre-exposure mAb in vulnerable populations, such as those who are or plan to become pregnant, as a potential countermeasure. Furthermore, the use of tools to predict RVFV outbreaks in Africa, such as the ability to predict regional outbreaks based on weather patterns may inform how, when, and where to distribute antibody pre-exposure prophylactics to vulnerable populations68. This study is the first to test mAb RVFV-268 in pregnant animals, and our results suggest that it is effective at preventing both maternal and fetal infection in this rodent model when given before or just after infection.MethodsEthics and biosafetyOur research complies with all relevant ethical regulations. All animal work described here was carried out in strict accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the NIH and the Animal Welfare Act. The protocol was approved and overseen by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care has fully accredited the University of Pittsburgh.Work with virulent RVFV was performed at biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) in the University of Pittsburgh Regional Biocontainment Laboratory (RBL) following all safety precautions25. The University of Pittsburgh RBL is registered with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the U.S. Department of Agriculture for work with virulent RVFV.Virus and cell cultureVero E6 cells (CRL-1586, ATCC) were cultured in DMEM (Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium, Corning) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1% L-glutamine and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (pen-strep). Cells were maintained in a humid incubator at 37 °C with 5% CO2.Virulent RVFV strain ZH501 was generated from reverse genetics plasmids69 and provided to our laboratory by B. Miller (CDC, Ft. Collins, CO) and S. Nichol (CDC, Atlanta, GA). RVFV was propagated on Vero E6 cells (ATCC, CRL-1587) following standard methods, and the stock titer was determined by standard viral plaque assay (VPA). Prior to animal and explant studies, stock virus was diluted in D2 medium (DMEM, 2% (v/v) FBS, 1% L-glutamine, and 1% penicillin-streptomycin) to the desired inoculum dose. All uninfected control cohorts were mock infected with D2 medium to account for components within the medium.Antibodies and proteinsRecombinant mAbs (RVFV-268 and DENV-2D22) were expressed in Expi293F cells and purified by affinity chromatography23 Recombinant RVFV Gn used for ELISAs (see below) was produced in SF9 cells using a gene encoding the ectodomain of RVFV Gn (GenBank accession number JQ068142.1 [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/JQ068142.1], residues 154-469)23,24,70. The Gn recombinant protein was purified by metal affinity chromatography on HisTrap Excel columns (Cytiva).AnimalsTime-mated SD female rats (6–8 weeks old) were obtained from Envigo Laboratories (Inotiv). Sighting of a copulation plug verified pregnancy status and timing. Pregnant rats were delivered to the RBL and housed up to three to a cage in temperature-controlled rooms with 12 h day/12 h night light schedule. Food (IsoPro Rodent 3000) and water were provided ad libitum. For all procedures, rats were anesthetized by inhalation of vaporized isoflurane (IsoThesia, Henry Schein). Rats were implanted with programmable temperature transponders (IPTT-300, BioMedic Data Systems) s.c. between the shoulder blades.For studies evaluating the passive transfer of antibody from dam to fetus, pregnant SD rats (E14) were anesthetized prior to intraperitoneal (i.p.) delivery of 10 mg/kg of mAb RVFV-268 or DENV-2D22 (n = 3 each). One dam from each antibody treated group was euthanized at 6, 24, or 48 h after antibody delivery. One PBS treated dam was euthanized 48 h post-treatment to serve as a negative control.For all studies, antibodies were delivered by i.p. injection of 500 μL of the corresponding antibody (RVFV-268 (n = 5–6) or DENV-2D22 (n = 2–6)) and concentration (10, 1.0, or 0.1 mg/kg). MAb was delivered 2 h before infection for prophylactic studies or at 6 and 24 h after infection for therapeutic studies.For RVFV challenge studies, rats were inoculated subcutaneously (s.c.) in the hind flank on embryonic day 14 (E14) with 200 μL of RVFV (2 x 105 pfu) diluted in D2 medium. Body temperature and weight were recorded daily. Each animal was closely monitored twice daily for clinical signs of disease. Animals that met euthanasia criteria were humanely euthanized following standard IACUC procedures25. Planned euthanasia for surviving animals occurred at 3 or 6 dpi.Upon necropsy, the following samples were collected from the dams: liver, serum, and spleen, and from the fetuses: amniotic fluid, placenta, and viscera. Liquid samples were immediately stored at −80 °C before use for downstream analyses. For tissue samples, half of the tissues were immediately frozen at −80 °C for virological analyses, while the other half was fixed in fresh 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA; Sigma) for histological analyses.Sex differences were not analyzed in this study given that it focuses on the prevention of vertical transmission of RVFV with monoclonal antibodies. Only pregnant female rats were pertinent to the study.Explant studiesPregnant SD rats at E14 were euthanized, and placentas were collected at necropsy and immediately stored in room temperature D2 medium. Within 30 min, placentas were embedded in HBSS with 4% agarose. Placentas were sliced using a Leica VT100S vibratome with a ¼ inch cube of agarose supporting the outside of the placenta. The embedded placentas were mounted to the vibratome, and the collection basin was filled with chilled PBS. 300 μm transverse sections were cut with a double edge persona blade (Electron Microscopy Sciences) with the frequency set at 9 and amplitude set at 1. One placenta section of comparable size and composition were placed in each well of a 24 well plate containing 500 μL of D2 medium until infection.For prophylactic studies, three placentas were collected from one dam. Two slices from each placenta (n = 6 slices per group) were distributed to each therapeutic group explained below. D2 medium was removed from each placenta section prior to inoculation with a combination of RVFV (1 × 105 pfu) and corresponding antibody (10 μg, 1 μg, 100 ng, or 10 ng). 200 μL of inoculum and mAb was incubated for a 1 h adsorption period, the inoculum containing antibody was removed, washed one time with PBS, and then 1 mL of D2 medium containing the corresponding antibody (10 μg, 1 μg, 100 ng, or 10 ng) was added to the corresponding placenta samples. Samples without the antibody served as a positive control, while samples without virus served as a negative control. The plate was cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2 for 48 h. Supernatant from each placenta was collected and pooled at 0, 24, 36 and 48 hpi, resulting in three biological replicates per group. Pooled supernatant was stored at −80 °C until further analyses by qRT-PCR and VPA.For treatment studies, three placentas were collected from one dam. Two slices from each placenta (n = 6 slices per group) were distributed to each treatment group explained below. D2 medium was removed from each placenta section prior to inoculation with RVFV (1 × 105 pfu). Following a 1 h adsorption period, the inoculum was removed, washed once with PBS, and then 1 mL of D2 medium containing 1 ng of antibody was added to the corresponding placenta samples. The plate was cultured for 48 h then the same time-points and pooled supernatant samples were collected and analyzed as above.Viral plaque assayViral titers were determined by standard viral plaque assay. 200 μL of tissue homogenates, serum, or amniotic fluid were serially titrated onto monolayers of Vero E6 cells (CRL-1586, ATCC). After an hour incubation for viral adsorption, the cellular monolayers were washed once with PBS, then 3 mL of agarose overlay (minimum essential medium, 2% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1.5% (1 M) HEPES buffer, and 0.8% SeaKem agarose) was applied and plates were incubated at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for three days. Cells were fixed with 37% formaldehyde, then stained with crystal violet and quantified using standard methods. For plaque assay data, none detected (ND) is defined as anything below the LOD (determined based on lowest number of countable plaques).RNA isolation and qRT-PCRTissues were homogenized in D2 medium (w/v), then stored at −80 °C until downstream processing. For RNA isolation, 100 μL of tissue homogenates, serum, or amniotic fluid were inactivated in 900 μL of Tri-Reagent (Invitrogen) then RNA was isolated using the Invitrogen PureLink Viral RNA/DNA kit25. One-step qRT-PCR targeting the RVFV L segment was performed to quantify vRNA25. For qRT-PCR data, none detected (ND) is defined as anything below the LOD (determined based on lowest standard curve titer that amplifies).Histopathology and immunofluorescent microscopyHematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining was performed on fixed tissues that were processed and paraffin embedded (PFE) by the University of Pittsburgh McGowen Institute Histology Core. PFE tissues were sliced to 5 μm sections using the Histocore Autocut automated rotary microtome (Leica), placed on charged slides, then stained by standard H & E methods. Microscopic histopathologic examination was performed by a board-certified anatomic pathologist, blinded to treatment groups.For immunofluorescent imaging, fixed tissues underwent tissue preparation and cryopreservation through 24 h incubations in 20% sucrose in PBS, then 40% sucrose in PBS prior to freezing in mounting optimal cutting temperature (OCT) compound (Fisher Healthcare) and storage at −80 °C. Frozen tissues were sliced to 5 to 7 μm sections using the CryoStar X7- CryoStat (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and stored at −80 °C until the staining procedure was performed. The cryo-sections were rehydrated with PBS containing 0.5% bovine serum albumin (PBB), and then blocked with 5% normal goat serum in PBB. The tissues were probed with custom rabbit anti-RVFV nucleoprotein polyclonal antibody (1:50 dilution; Genscript) followed by a secondary antibody, goat anti-rabbit IgG, labeled with Alexa Fluor594 (1:1000 dilution; Invitrogen A11012). Following counterstaining with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), a coverslip was mounted with gelvatol. Primary-delete and no-infection controls were used for imaging. For immunofluorescent staining of Vero E6 cells on coverslips, similar staining parameters were performed as above, except for blocking with 10% normal goat serum (Invitrogen).H & E stained images were obtained using an Olympus CX41 microscope with a Levenhuk M30 base attachment. Immunofluorescent images were obtained using Nikon A1 confocal microscope provided by the University of Pittsburgh Center for Biological Imaging. Denoising and contrast were formed using Fiji with Image J. Representative images are shown for each group including images from an uninfected and untreated dam as a control.ELISAFor semi-quantitation of RVFV Gn-specific antibodies within dam and fetal samples, tissues were homogenized w/v in D2 medium. Maxisorp ELISA plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were coated with 75 ng of recombinant Gn per well overnight at 4 °C. The next day, plates were washed 3 times in 0.1% PBS-Tween (PBST), blocked with 5% milk in 0.1% (PBST for 1 h at 37 °C, and then 100 μL of 1:3 serial dilutions of each sample was plated in duplicate at 37 °C for 2 h. Next the plates were washed 3 times with PBST, and then 100 μL of goat anti-human-HRP conjugated IgG [200 ng/mL; 1:5000 dilution] (Invitrogen; 62-8420) was added to each well and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Plates were washed 3 times with PBST, and then 100 μL of 3, 3′, 5, 5′ – tetramethylbenzidine substrate (Sera Care; 5120-0047) was added per well. After the plates were incubated at room temperature for 15 min, 50 μL of stop solution (Sera Care; 5120-0021) was added per well before the optical density (OD) was read at 450 nm. Background signal was subtracted from the signal for each antibody-treated group and was calculated as the OD + (2*standard deviation) of each PBS control sample (serum, liver, spleen, amniotic fluid, placenta, and fetus viscera). When multiple samples were obtained for a tissue (i.e., placentas or fetal tissues) the highest value within the PBS control group was selected as the background. The lowest and highest dilutions measured (1:3 and 1:38) that had positive OD values above background were considered the limits of detection (LOD) and upper limit of quantitation (ULOQ) for this assay, respectively.Virus growth assayVero E6 cells (ATCC, CRL-1587) were seeded on L-lysine (R&D Systems) treated coverslips placed within 24 well tissue culture plates. Twenty-four hours after seeding, the cells were inoculated with 50 μL of liquid samples or tissue homogenates in 500 μL of D2 medium. Cells were inoculated with samples from infected or uninfected controls. Cells were monitored daily for signs of cytopathic effects compared to uninfected controls. After 96-hours of incubation at 37 °C in 5% CO2, supernatant was collected, and the cells were fixed with 4% PFA. Supernatant also was collected at 0 hpi as a baseline control. Virus growth was determined by comparing the presence of vRNA by qRT-PCR or infectious virus by VPA in the supernatant between 0 and 96 h time-points, in addition to immunofluorescent staining of coverslips for the presence of RVFV antigen.StatisticsTwo-way ANOVA was performed using GraphPad Prism (version 9.0).Reporting summaryFurther information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.Supplementary information
Supplementary Information
Peer Review File
Reporting Summary



Title: Ultrastructural Insight into Rift Valley Fever Virus Pathogenesis in Different Human Cell Types

1. IntroductionRVFV is an arbovirus member of the Phlebovirus genus, within the Phenuiviridae family and Bunyavirales order, with high pathogenicity in ruminants and humans, which is emerging worldwide [1,2]. RVFV is transmitted by Aedes and Culex mosquito bites, and, because of the diffusion of these insects in large geographic areas, the virus has spread in several world regions, making possible the risk of health hazard in non-epidemic countries [3]. However, most human cases contract RVFV by coming into contact with infected animal fluids or tissues [4,5]. RVFV primarily infects domestic sheep, goats, and cattle, causing high mortality rates among young animals and “abortion storms” in pregnant domestic ruminants and camels. Studies have demonstrated that placental necrosis is responsible for fetal mortality in about 20% of ovine [6].In humans, RVF is usually a self-limiting febrile illness, but some cases develop more severe manifestations such as liver damage, encephalitis and neurological disorders, hemorrhagic disease, and death [7]. In addition, as in livestock, the association between RVFV infection in women during pregnancy and an increased risk of spontaneous abortion has been established [8,9].RVFV is an enveloped, negative-sense single-stranded RNA virus that has a tri-segmented RNA genome. The viral particles are spherical with a mean diameter of 90–110 nm; the surface of the envelope bears glycoproteins forming surface subunits that are regularly arranged [10]. RVFV replication occurs in the cytoplasm, and viral proteins are translated on free ribosomes or in the endoplasmic reticulum; the Golgi compartment appears the site for assembly of new viral particles. Nevertheless, the mechanisms of RVFV production are complex and still poorly characterized [11,12].Despite having hepatocytes as primary targets, causing severe liver damage in both animals and humans [13], RVFV cellular tropism is very broad. Both in natural and experimental models, RVFV has demonstrated that, besides liver, it can infect many organs and cell types, including kidney, spleen, and lungs, as well as neurons and mononuclear phagocytic cells, giving a high variability of symptoms after infection [14,15]. The lungs are not a typical target for RVFV, but the virus can also be transmitted by aerosol exposure, and, after inhalation, lung tissue infection and neuropathology have been reported [16,17]. Studies also showed the ability of this virus to infect trophoblast cell lines [18,19], suggesting a possible route of transmission from the maternal blood to the fetal circulation.Concerning organ damage, different mechanisms are thought to contribute to the pathogenesis caused by RVFV; thus, lesions in the liver appear caused by degeneration and massive necrosis of hepatocytes, due to the direct effect of the virus, while encephalitis (that occurs at later time) seems mediated mainly by immunopathological reaction [20]. Nevertheless, there are still knowledge gaps in the understanding of the RVFV life cycle and pathogenesis. Ultrastructural descriptions of RVFV replication sites and mechanisms of damage in different human tissues are scant; in particular, the pathogenesis of RVFV in human placental cells is still not clarified. The detailed characterization of viral particle production, propagation, and cell compartment remodeling may provide key elements to counteract the disease. To this aim, in this study, TEM was used to investigate, RVFV morphogenesis and associated host cell modifications in different human cell types.2. Results2.1. RVFV Is Able to Infect Human HuH-7, LAN5, A549, and HTR-8/SVneo Cell Lines and to Establish a Productive InfectionTo evaluate the permissiveness of different human cell types to RVFV infection, we infected four cell lines (HuH-7, A549, LAN-5, and HTR-8/SVneo) with RVFV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1. All four cell lines were susceptible to RVFV infection. We analyzed the cytopathic effects (CPE) appearance and frequency by observing the proportion of infected cells exhibiting morphological changes. Visible changes in our system mainly consisted of loss of adhesion and cell rounding. Differences between the cell types consisted in the extent of changes and specific cellular alterations. At 24 h post infection (p.i.) only HuH-7 displayed a small proportion of cell rounding, while after 48 h about 50% of the cells appear round (Figure 1A) and with vacuoles inside (Supplementary Figure S1A).Rounding of cells and vacuolization was also observed at 48 h p.i. in A549 cells, in about 10% of the cells with a focal distribution (Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure S1C). A total of 3–5% of HTR-8 cells at 48 h p.i. showed membrane blebs (Supplementary Figure S1D) while LAN-5 cells displayed less visible signs of cytopathic effects (Figure 1A, Supplementary Figure S1B).The quantification of viral RNA produced by each cell type, using Real Time Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction (Real Time RT-PCR) measurements, showed significantly higher levels at 48 h p.i. compared to 24 h p.i., except for the HuH-7 cells. (Figure 1B). At 48 h p.i., statistically significant lower RNA levels were observed in HuH-7 cells compared to LAN-5 and HTR-8/SVneo cells, and in A549 cells compared to LAN-5 (Figure 1B). RVFV titration, measured by the Tissue Culture Infectious Dose 50 (TCID50) assay, demonstrated comparable levels (<0.5 Log of difference) in all cell lines at 48 h p.i. (Figure 1C). This could be due to differences in packaging efficiency of infectious virus particles despite efficient expression.2.2. Ultrastructural Analysis of RVFV InfectionTo determine the pathology of RVFV infection and compare the intracellular modifications associated with viral morphogenesis, HuH-7, A549, LAN-5, and HTR-8/SVneo cells were infected for 48 h and analyzed by TEM. To evaluate infection-induced changes, the uninfected control cells in each cell line (Supplementary Figure S2) were examined in parallel.The liver represents one of the major targets of RVFV; thus, being the hepatocyte tropism well-recognized, we first examined ultrastructural features of RVFV infection in the HuH-7 hepatoma cell line (Figure 2 and Figure 3). Entry of the virus into cells likely appeared mediated by endocytic mechanism, as suggested by the detection of viral particles in invaginating thickened regions of the cell surface (Figure 2A).Along the plasma membrane, many viral particles were observed budding from the surface (Figure 2B). Two kinds of modifications related to the infection were recognized: the presence of aggregates of filamentous structures in the nucleus (Figure 2C), as previously described in RVFV-infected mice [21], and the occurrence of bundles of cytoskeletal filaments in the cytoplasm (Figure 2D) [22]. In cells in which viral replication was less abundant, the assembly of virions was visible in association with the Golgi compartment, similarly to what was described for Bunyamwera virus (BUNV) [23]. The newly formed particles display different morphologies, appearing as dense viral particles with a more homogeneous appearance and annular-like particles, with a dark periphery and less dense center (Figure 3A).Other structures intermediate of the viral maturation process, such as the maturation arcs, were also detected in close proximity of the Golgi complex (Figure 2D). However, in most of the cells, viral factories appeared as cytoplasmic areas filled with potential virus particles at different stages of maturation (with variability in the electron density) and associated with vesicular compartments, of which it was not possible to determine whether they originated from the Golgi apparatus (Figure 3B). A great number of membrane vesicles, which could represent dilatation of the endoplasmic reticulum cisternae, were present in the same area (Figure 3B,C), and viral particles were also found in association with them (Figure 3B). This massive viral replication was accompanied by severe cytopathic effects, consisting of the rounding of cells and extensive vacuolization of the cytoplasm (Figure 3C). The presence of autophagic vacuoles (Figure 3B) and phagolysosomes was also observed (Figure 3C).The described cytopathic modifications occurring in infected HuH-7 cells were not found in infected LAN-5 neuroblastoma cells. The cytoplasm of LAN-5 cells at 48 h p.i. did not show vacuolization or other drastic morphological changes (Figure 3D). Rarely budding virions from the LAN-5 cells surface were observed; in contrast, most viral particles in the extracellular environment were associated with membrane vesicles (Figure 3E,F). Indeed, large vesicles containing viral particles were found in the cytoplasm close to the plasma membrane (Figure 3D), suggesting an exocytosis mechanism for virus release. However, most of the extracellular viral particles were observed as single particles enclosed within small vesicles, likely exosomes (Figure 3E,F). Particles inside these vesicles showed heterogeneous features, some of them being more electron dense, while others were suggestive of virions’ packaging taking place directly inside the vesicles (Figure 3F).In RVFV-infected A549 cells, which were chosen as a human alveolar epithelial cells model, electron microscopy observation showed that the release of viral particles occurred by budding at the cell surface (Figure 4A), particularly along the cytoplasmic extroflections (Figure 4A, insert).Extracellular virions displayed homogeneous morphology and were usually found in clusters (Figure 4B). Despite the release of numerous virions, the majority of A549 cells at 48 h p.i. did not display evident signs of cytopathogenesis as concern both nucleus and cytoplasmic organelles (Figure 4C,D). On the contrary, other cells showed strong cytopathic effects, resulting in cell rounding and vacuolization of the cytoplasm (Figure 4E). In these cells, viral particles were observed within the enlarged vacuoles (Figure 4F).To explore the susceptibility of the placental cells to RVFV infection, HTR8/SVneo cells were used as a closer model of trophoblast cells. Electron microscopy analysis confirmed that these cells were permissive to the infection and sustained the replication, and they revealed some differences compared to RVFV infection in the other cell types examined. Egress of virions was found singly or in small groups (Figure 5A,B).Viral particles were released by budding at the cell plasma membrane; they appeared homogeneous in shape, displaying an internal dense core surrounded by an envelope in which the layer of spikes is clearly recognizable (Figure 5B,C). Some cells displayed cell blebbing suggestive of apoptotic cell death (Figure 5D); however, the majority of HTR8/SVneo cells at 48 h p.i. did not show RVFV-induced cytopathic effect. No clear evidence of Golgi apparatus involvement in viral morphogenesis had been observed (Figure 6A), although perinuclear cytoplasmic areas rich in small vesicular structures were observed, suggesting they could represent sites of viral replication.On the contrary, mitochondria appeared strongly affected, exhibiting striking modifications of their structure, which consisted of fragmentation and inner membrane distortion with bulging or swirling cristae (Figure 6C,D).3. DiscussionRVFV is a major emerging arbovirus of significant medical and veterinary importance. Due to the lack of a licensed vaccine for human use, the World Health Organization (WHO) has prioritized RVFV among high-risk pathogens requiring urgent research to address critical gaps in understanding its mechanisms of infection [24].The comprehension of the pathogenesis of a viral infection is strictly linked to unraveling virus tropism and host–cell interaction. This study aimed to investigate the ultrastructural features of RVFV morphogenesis in human cell lines derived from various tissues. The results revealed cell type-dependent differences in viral replication, morphogenesis, and virus–host interactions.Previous studies, including post-mortem analyses from the 1977 Egypt outbreak and experimental animal models, have shown that RVFV can disseminate across multiple tissues [25,26]. However, discordance between immunohistochemical detection of viral components and electron microscopy findings suggest the possibility of abortive infections and indirect tissue damage mediated by the host’s pro-inflammatory cytokine response, rather than direct cytopathic effects [21]. Despite the great number of species belonging to the Bunyavirales order, their virus life cycles share similarities [27] and, as far as we know, the assembly of new viruses occurs at the Golgi complex by budding of viral particles into the lumen of the Golgi vesicles [23,28]. In our experiments, this process was clearly observed only in HuH-7 hepatic cells. Additionally, in these cells, virions were also seen budding directly at the plasma membrane. RVFV particles were also found at the cell surface in the A549 (lung epithelial) and HTR-8/SVneo (placental trophoblast) cell lines. Moreover, under conditions of extensive cytoplasmic vesiculation, budding virions were detected within the lumen of cytoplasmic vesicles in both HuH-7 and A549 cells. These findings suggest that RVFV has the ability to take advantage of multiple cellular membrane systems, which can vary based on the cell type or on the state/condition of the host cell.A particularly noteworthy observation was made in LAN-5 neuroblastoma cells, where RVFV particles were detected within extracellular vesicles (EVs). While this mode of viral dissemination has been described for other enveloped and non-enveloped viruses [29], it has not been previously reported for RVFV. Inclusion within EVs may facilitate immune evasion [30] and enhance infectivity through local viral concentration, thereby elevating the multiplicity of infection [31]. This mechanism assumes relevance for the infection of less permissive cells. For example, Zika Virus (ZIKV) utilizes EV release from astrocytes to spread into the nervous system and infect neurons which were less susceptible to ZIKV infection [32,33]. Given that RVFV-induced central nervous system pathology typically arises in advanced stages of infection, our observation that RVFV packaging occurs within EVs in LAN-5 cells supports a potential mechanism for neuroinvasion. Furthermore, in our experimental conditions, RVFV was not only transported within EVs but also appeared to undergo assembly inside these vesicles, suggesting a potential role for EVs as carriers of viral RNA and proteins.A peculiar feature of RVFV infection is the amyloid structures in the nucleus made by filaments of the NSs protein of RVFV [34]. These fibrillar structures are critical for antagonizing the host’s innate immune responses [35]. The presence of nuclear NSs fibrils has been reported by other authors in various mammalian cell lines at early times p.i. (4–16 h); however, the level of NSs in the nucleus appeared dependent on the MOI of infection [35,36]. In our study, these amyloid aggregates were exclusively observed in the nuclei of HuH-7 cells. This observation may be explained by the lower MOI used (0.1) compared to the higher MOIs (>0.5) applied in previous studies. Our analysis was conducted only at 48 h p.i., raising questions about the persistence of these aggregates over time. Interestingly, disappearance of nuclear NSs fibrils has been observed in mosquito cells at later stages of infection [37].Our study also provides, to our knowledge, the first evidence that RVFV infection induces ultrastructural mitochondrial alterations in HTR-8/SVneo placental trophoblast cells. Mitochondria are dynamic organelles responsible for cell energy production but are also involved in many pivotal cell pathways, such as cell death, calcium homeostasis, and generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS). In addition, mitochondria play an important function in immunity, producing mitochondrial damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) [38]. Mitochondrial architecture is dynamically regulated through fusion and fission processes, which are tightly linked to functional status [39]. Morphological changes are indicative of altered mitochondrial function; fragmented mitochondrial morphology is a well-established indicator of oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction [40]. In RVFV-infected HTR-8/SVneo cells, mitochondria displayed swollen cristae and reduced size, consistent with increased mitochondrial fission and possible ROS overproduction. A number of recent studies focused attention on a possible association between mitochondrial dysfunction and placental disorders and pregnancy loss. Excessive ROS production and oxidative stress-related damage have been observed in most studies concerning preeclampsia (PE) and fetal growth restriction (FGR) [41]. On this basis, our findings lead us to speculate on a possible mechanism to be investigated in order to explain the increased risk for miscarriage in RVFV-infected pregnant women [8].Our data expand current knowledge regarding the pathogenic effects of RVFV replication. However, this study still has some limitations: the lack of functional assays, as concern viral EV-mediated release and mitochondrial damage, does not allow us to give definitive conclusions apart from this preliminary descriptive report of morphological features.In conclusion, this work provides novel ultrastructural insight into cell modifications induced by RVFV in different human cell lines, and the results obtained highlighted differences associated with the host cell. These findings could have important implications for understanding RVFV pathogenesis and for therapeutic development.4. Materials and Methods4.1. Cell LinesHuH-7 (Hepatocellular carcinoma; ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), A549 (Lung cancer; ICLC Cell Bank, Genova, Italy), LAN-5 (Neuroblastoma; ATCC) and VeroE6 (African green monkey kidney; ATCC) were grown in Modified Eagle Medium (MEM), 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), L-glutamine (2 mM), streptomycin (100 μg/mL), and penicillin (100 U/mL) in 5% CO2 at 37 °C. HTR-8/SVneo (Trophoblast; kindly provided by Prof. Luisa Campagnolo) was grown in RPMI 1640, 10% Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS), L-glutamine (2 mM), streptomycin (100 μg/mL), and penicillin (100 U/mL) in 5% CO2 at 37 °C.4.2. Viral ProductionRVFV was obtained from the National Collection of Pathogenic Viruses (NCPV) and propagated in VeroE6. Confluent VeroE6 cells were washed twice with PBS 1X and infected with RVFV at a MOI of 0.5 TCID50/cell. After 1 h of adsorption, the viral inoculum was removed, and cells were cultured for 48 h. At 48 h p.i., the viral suspension was collected and clarified by centrifugation at 2000 rpm for 10 min. After three freezing/thawing cycles, it was aliquoted and stored at −80°C. Virus titers were determined by limiting dilution assay and residual infectivity was expressed as TCID50/mL, calculated according to the Reed and Muench method. Viral production was performed in a Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-3) laboratory.4.3. Viral InfectionRVFV produced in VeroE6 and titred by TCID50/mL assay was used for the following infections. HuH-7, A549, LAN-5, and HTR-8/SVneo cell lines were plated on 8-well chamber slides (Fisher Scientific, Segrate (MI), Italy) at a density of 8 × 104 cell/wells. The day after, cells were infected with RVFV at a MOI of 0.1 TCID50/cell. After 1 h of adsorption, the viral inoculum was removed, and cells were cultured for 48 h. Uninfected cells were used as mock control. After 48 h of infection, the viral suspension was recovered to measure the viral titer. Viral infection was performed in BSL-3.4.4. TCID50 AssayTo measure RVFV titer in the different cell lines at 48 h p.i., a TCID50 infectivity assay was performed. Briefly, VeroE6 cells were seeded in 96-well tissue culture plates at a density of 1 × 104 cells/well in a growth medium containing 10% FBS and incubated at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2. The day after, semi-confluent cell monolayers were infected with serial dilutions of viral suspension obtained by the different cell lines, in a growth medium containing 2% FBS (four replicates were analyzed for each dilution) and incubated at 37 °C. The virus-induced CPE was evaluated at six days p.i.4.5. Viral Quantification by Real-Time RT-PCRNucleic acids were extracted from the supernatant of the different cell lines at 48 h p.i. using QIAamp® Viral RNA (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) according to manufacturing instructions (Qiagen RNeasy Mini Handbook online; https://www.qiagen.com/us/resources/resourcedetail?id=14e7cf6e-521a-4cf7-8cbc-bf9f6fa33e24&lang=en (accessed on 7 June 2023)). RVFV RNA was detected by the commercial assay RealStar® Rift Valley Fever Virus RT-PCR Kit 1.0 (Altona Diagnostics, Segrate (MI). Italy). Assay conditions were as follows: reverse-transcription at 55 °C for 20 min, denaturation at 95 °C for 2 min, then 45 cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, 55 °C for 45 s, 72 °C for 15 s (Altona Diagnostics RealStar® Rift Valley Fever Virus RT-PCR Kit 1.0. https://www.altona-diagnostics.com/en/products/reagents-140/reagents/realstar-real-time-pcr-reagents/realstar-rvfv-rt-pcr-kit-ce.html (accessed on 2 July 2023)). It has already been demonstrated that this RT-PCR method did not cross-react with Dengue Virus, Japanese Encephalitis Virus, St. Louis Encephalitis Virus, Usutu Virus, Marburg Virus, Ebola Virus, West Nile Virus, Yellow Fever Virus, or Zika Virus. The analytical assay sensitivity was 890 copies/mL. The precision data was determined by evaluating intra-assay, inter-assay, and inter-lot variability. The coefficient of variation of the test is 1.10% as indicated in the Altona brochure (Altona Diagnostics; https://altona-diagnostics.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/RealStar-RVFV-RT-PCR-Kit-1.0_WEB_RUO_EN-S02.pdf (accessed on 12 June 2023)).The RVFV standard RNA, provided by Altona Diagnostics, was serially diluted to a theoretical range of 106 to 10−1 copies to generate a standard curve. The interpolation of the data was performed using GraphPad Prism version 9 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) using the Sigmoidal, 4PL model.4.6. Transmission Electron MicroscopyHuH-7 cells, LAN-5 cells, A549 cells, and HTR-8/SVneo cells were infected with RVFV at a MOI of 0.1 and processed for TEM using standard procedures. Cells were seeded into 8-well chamber slides at a density of 8 × 104 cells per well. After 48 h of infection, cells were washed with 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, fixed for 4 h with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer at 4 °C, and post-fixed with 1% OsO4 in the same buffer. Samples were then dehydrated in graded ethanol and embedded in Epon resin. Ultrathin sections were stained with 2% uranyl acetate and observed with a transmission electron microscope, JEOL JEM 2100 Plus (Japan Electron Optics Laboratory Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Images were digitally captured with a digital camera TVIPS (Tietz Video and Image Processing Systems GmbH, Gauting, Germany).4.7. Statistical AnalysesStatistical analyses and graphical representations were performed using GraphPad Prism version 9 (GraphPad Software). Differences among the virus derived from the cell lines were assessed using one-way ANOVA, and Student’s t-test was used for specific pairwise comparisons. Differences were considered significant if the adjusted p-value was less than 0.05.


Title: 


IntroductionRift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is a zoonotic mosquito-borne virus which causes epizootics and associated human epidemics throughout Africa [1], [2]. First identified in Kenya in 1931 [3], RVFV is now considered an endemic zoonotic agent in sub-Saharan Africa causing explosive outbreaks in animals and humans. It has been observed in Egypt, Mauritania, and the Arabic Peninsula [4], [5], [6]. The manifestation of severe RVF disease in humans is variable. Humans may develop a wide range of clinical signs including hepatitis, retinitis, and delayed-onset encephalitis and, in the most severe cases, haemorrhagic disease. The overall case fatality ratio is estimated to be between 0.5% and 2% [7], [8], [9]. In Yemen and Saudi Arabia, a RVFV outbreak resulted in approximately 2,000 human infections and 250 deaths (CDC 2000). A study of the RVFV epidemic in Saudi Arabia reported a high incidence of neurological manifestations (17.1%) in infected individuals [7]. Mosquito bites were reported to play an important role in the transmission of the disease during this outbreak.RVFV belongs to the genus Phlebovirus in the family Bunyaviridae. Its tripartite negative-strand RNA genome is composed of a large segment (L) that encodes the L protein, which is the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase; a medium segment (M) that encodes a single open reading frame (ORF) generating the NSm, G1 (Gc) and G2 (Gn) proteins and a small segment (S) that encodes the nucleocapsid protein (N) and a nonstructural protein (NSs) using an ambisense strategy [10]. NSs was shown to suppress interferon induction (Billecocq et al., 2004).RVFV can be transmitted to vertebrates by several species of mosquitoes such as Aedes spp. and Culex spp. Human infections typically occur through bites from infected mosquitoes, through percutaneous/aerosol exposure during the slaughter of infected animals, or via contact with aborted fetal materials. Transmission efficiency depends on the ability of the virus to cross the various barriers in the vector [11]. Therefore, after a mosquito takes a blood meal from an infected individual, the ingested virus passes into the midgut of the mosquito where it replicates before infecting different organs in the mosquito. At the end of the extrinsic incubation period in the vector, salivary glands are infected and the virus is transmitted by saliva during a blood meal. The reproductive system of the mosquito is also infected and transovarial transmission is important for long term maintenance of the virus [12]. Worldwide RVFV is considered as a potential biological weapon. Both modified live attenuated virus and inactivated virus vaccines have been developed for veterinary use, but there are currently no commercially available vaccines for humans.During a blood meal, insects are subject to defensive responses from the vertebrate, including hemostasis and the immune response. In this context, the saliva injected by the mosquito plays multiple roles. Indeed, saliva proteins have angiogenic, anti-hemostatic, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties [13]. The various properties of the saliva proteins towards the host immune response affect the pathogen transmission. In some cases, co-injection of virus and saliva potentiates viral infection of the vertebrate [14], [15], [16], [17]. In other cases, pre-exposure to saliva generates enhances mortality from subsequent viral infection via mosquito bite [18]. A longer viremia was observed in deer and chipmunks infected by mosquito bite containing La Crosse virus, another member of the Bunyaviridae family, compared to syringe injection [19]. Potentiation of infection by mosquito saliva was also demonstrated for Cache Valley virus, an orthobunyavirus that also belongs to the Bunyaviridae family [14]. These observations raise the question of whether RVFV infection is also potentiated by mosquito saliva. Since RVFV is also transmitted by blood and aerosols, the context for its transmission differs from those of other viruses studied previously. In this project, our objective was to evaluate the role of Aedes mosquito saliva in the natural transmission of RVFV. For this purpose, we make use of an animal model that allowed us to study the pathogenesis of RVFV infection. We evaluated two different routes of infection: the intraperitoneal route, which has been utilized in most previous studies of RVFV pathogenesis, and the intradermal route, which mimics the mosquito bite. We also used non-infected and RVFV-infected mosquitoes to evaluate the role of saliva in the progression of the disease. Importantly, we found that Aedes saliva potentiated RVFV infection, once again highlighting its role in arbovirus transmission.Materials and MethodsEthic statementAll studies on animals followed the guidelines on the ethical use of animals from the European Communities Council Directive of November 24, 1986 (86/609/EEC). All animal experiments were approved and conducted in accordance with the Institut Pasteur Biosafety Committee. Animals were housed in the Institut Pasteur animal facilities accredited by the French Ministry of Agriculture to perform experiments on live mice, in appliance of the French and European regulations on care and protection of the Laboratory Animals (accreditation number B 75 15-01 and B 75 15-07). The study protocols were approved by the Comité d'Ethique pour l'Expérimentation Animale (CEEA) - Ile de France - Paris - Comité 1.The ZH548 strain was isolated from a human infection during the 1977 outbreak in Egypt [18]. The case was anonymous and an informed consent was not required at that time. This strain was part of a collection used by the NRC of arboviruses (B. Le Guenno and H. Zeller). This collection was transmitted to us and we possess an AFSSA authorization of detention, transfer and manipulation (since 2001) as a “select agent”.Mice, virus and cellsWe used the DBA-1 and C57BL/6-NRJ mice for infections (Janvier, France). Vero E6 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10 µg/ml of penicillin and 10 U/ml of streptomycin. C6/36 cells were grown at 28°C in plastic cell culture flasks in Leibovitz medium 15 supplemented with 10% FBS, penicillin (50 units/m1), and streptomycin (50 mg/ml).Stocks of the virulent Egyptian ZH548 RVFV strain were produced under biosafety level 3 (BSL3) conditions. In all experiments, the ZH548 strain was obtained from a cell culture of C6/36 cells. It was produced under BSL3 conditions.MosquitoesDehydrated eggs of Aedes aegypti (strain PAEA) and Ae.vexans vexans were placed in water to hatch. Adult mosquitoes were reared in a room held at 25±1°C and 80% relative humidity, and having a light/dark ratio of 12 h/12 h. The larvae were fed on brewer's yeast tablets and adults were fed on sugar water (10%).Mosquito infection by the ZH548 RVFV strainRabbit blood was collected in heparinized tubes (0.02%). Red blood cells were separated from plasma by centrifugation, washed 3 times in 1X PBS, and were resuspended in the same buffer. Five-day old female mosquitoes were placed in boxes sealed with veils and were fed on 37°C thermostated glass feeders covered with chicken skin and filled with a mixture containing 2 mL of red cells, 1 mL of virus solution (108 plaque forming unit (pfu)/mL) and 30 µL of ATP (5.10−3 M).Preparation of salivary gland extractsMosquito females were blood-fed five days after hatching. Three weeks later (corresponding to the extrinsic incubation period of RVFV in Ae. aegypti and Ae. vexans mosquitoes), 100 salivary glands (SG) were dissected and placed in 100 µL 1X PBS. The inocula used in our experiments were equivalent to a pair of SG (or two salivary glands extracts [SGE]). SG-containing tubes were stored at −80°C. SGEs were prepared by sonicating the SGs (five times at 4 min each with a pulse ratio of 2 sec on/2 sec off) and centrifuging the crude extract at 13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred to clean tubes and stored at −80°C. The protein concentration was determined by spectrophotometry at 280 nm (Nanodrop).Mosquito salivationFifteen days after their blood-meal, RVFV-exposed mosquitoes were anesthetized at 4°C, legs and wings were sectioned and bodies were placed on a double-sided tape fixed on a glass slide. The proboscis was inserted manually into a 10 µL-cone filled with 5 µL of filtered 1X PBS or DMEM+Glutamax containing 2% FBS. The cone content was collected 45 min later and the virus titer in the solution was determined by plaque assay.Infection of mice with ZH548 strain and dissection of organsMice were anesthetized intraperitoneally with a mixture ketamine/xylazine consisting of 2 mL of 2% Rompun (Bayer), 4 ml of Imalgene 1000 (Merial), 4 ml of sterile water (Gibco) and 2 mL of 1X PBS (Gibco). “Pathogen-free” male mice C57BL/6NRj (Janvier) aged four weeks and weighing 15–20 g each, were infected in a BSL3 animal facility by intraperitoneal or intradermal route in the absence or presence of either mosquito SGE (one SG pair per inoculums = SGP: 2 µl in 20 µl) or non-infected mosquito bites, or they were infected directly by bites from infected mosquitoes. Selected mice were euthanized five days after infection and the following organs were harvested without any perfusion: brain, liver, spleen, stomach, small and large intestine, pancreas, bladder, heart, lungs, thymus, lymph nodes and salivary glands. Brains were divided into two parts: cerebellum and brain hemispheres (including olfactory bulbs). For virus titration, large organs were cut into pieces of ∼30 mg, whereas small organs like lymph nodes, salivary glands and thymus were kept whole and frozen at −80°C. Samples were then homogenized either in Trizol or in DMEM. Supernatants were collected after centrifugation.Histology of mice organsFor these samples, mice were sacrificed 5 days after infection and perfused with 4% formalin. The organs removed were kept in a freshly prepared solution of formalin. The fixed tissues were embedded in paraffin, cut into 3-µm sections thick, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H & E).Virus titration by plaque assay on E6 cells (Vero)RVFV-containing samples were titrated on E6 cells by the plaque assay method. Cell counts were performed on KOVA slides. E6 cells were grown in DMEM+Glutamax (Dulbecco) containing 10% decomplemented FBS, 10 U/mL penicillin and 10 µg/mL streptomycin in 6-well plates containing 106 cells per mL for plaque assays. Tenfold serial dilutions of each sample to be titrated were prepared in DMEM medium containing 2% FBS, 10 U/mL penicillin and 10 µg/mL streptomycin. 300 µL of inoculum dilution was deposited in each well of a 6-well plate and incubated with for 1 hr at 37°C in a CO2 incubator. Then, 4 mL of agar (culture medium containing 2% FBS and 2% agarose) were deposited in each well and incubated for three days. The plaques were then revealed with a 0.2% solution of crystal violet containing 3.7% formaldehyde and 20% ethanol.Detection of anti-RVFV antibodies in miceFor the detection of anti-RVF antibodies in mouse sera, we used a microsphere immunoassay in which a purified recombinant RVF N antigen was covalently associated to color-coded microbeads (unpublished data). Captured anti-RVF antibodies on coupled microspheres were detected using biotinylated anti-mouse IgG and phycoerythrin-conjugated streptavidin by FACS analysis.Titration of viral RNAs by qRT-PCRWe used the Power SYBR Green RNA-to-Ct One-Step Kit (Applied Biosystems, Carlsbad, California) according to the manufacturer's protocol. It allowed amplifying a 108 bp sequence located between nucleotide 1485 and nucleotide 1593 of the M segment of RVFV. The primers selected were as follows: upper 5′-CATGGATTGGTTGTCCGATCA-3′ and lower 5′-TGAGTGTAATCTCGGTGGAAGGA-3′. Each sample was analyzed in duplicate against a standard curve produced from a specific concentration range of synthetic RNA. We amplified the samples on an Applied Biosystems 7500 instrument using the following PCR program: a reverse transcriptase (RT) step for 30 min at 50°C; inactivation of the RT enzyme and activation of DNA polymerase for 10 min at 95°C; 40 PCR cycles of 15 sec at 95°C and 1 min at 60°C (annealing temperature of primers), during which fluorescence data is collected; and finally, 20 sec at 95°C with ramping 19 min 59 sec for melting curves.Statistical tests usedResults were compared using two nonparametric statistical tests: Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney. The median day of death was calculated for each condition and results were compared using Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney statistical tests.ResultsComparison of virus distribution between intraperitoneal and intradermal injection of RVFVWe first selected an optimal mouse strain for our experimental infection model. For this purpose, we infected six C57BL/6 and six DBA-1 male mice by the intradermal route with RVFV and found that the survival curves for these two strains differed significantly. Whereas DBA-1 mice started to die at four days after infection (D4), C57BL/6 mice started to die at seven days after infection (D7). Moreover, whereas neurological symptoms (such as hind limb paralysis) occurred in C57BL/6 mice, no such problems were observed in DBA-1 mice (data not shown). Therefore, we chose the C57BL/6 genetic background for our RVFV infection model.We next compared the mortality rates and RVFV tissue distributions in mice infected by two different routes of injection: the intraperitoneal (IP) and intradermal (ID) routes. The kinetics of infection was slower with the ID route, and a delayed mortality of two days was observed between the two routes of injection (Figure S1). At D3, no significant differences in viremia were found between the two routes of injection. However, at D6, viremia remained at a plateau level of 104 pfu/mL in animals inoculated via IP injection whereas virus titers significantly decreased between D3 and D6 in ID injected mice (Figure 1). Moreover, high virus titers were found in the brain of mice infected by ID injection but not in the liver whereas high titers were found in the liver of mice infected by IP at D6 but not in their brain (Figure 1). In agreement with these findings, ID-infected mice presented neurological symptoms. Since ID infection more closely mimics natural infection by the vector, all subsequent infections were performed by this route.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002237.g001Figure 1Comparison of RVFV dissemination at D6 in various organs for the two routes of injection.Six C57Bl/6 mice were infected ID or IP with 103 pfu, sacrificed at D6 post-infection and the viral titers were determined by plaque assay. The white bars correspond to the IP route and black bars to the ID route. Data are from 3 independent experiments. * indicates significant differences in viral titers between the two sets of data as determined by Mann-Withney test (** p<0.01); *** p<0.001).Determination of optimal concentration of virus for mice infectionTo determine whether Ae. aegypti mosquito saliva has a role in potentiating RVFV infection, we infected mice ID with doses of virus between 10 and 104 pfu/mouse, with or without SGE from uninfected mosquitoes and calculated the median day of death of the animals for each condition. At the lower dose, not all mice died (Figure 2) and 66% of the mice surviving did not present any anti-RVFV antibodies (data not shown). However, in presence of saliva, all mice but one died (Figure 2) and the surviving mouse presented anti-RVFV antibodies. The effects of SGE on mortality of infected mice were identified at the lower virus doses of 10 to 103 pfu/mouse (Figure 2). Median day of death calculation indicated a significant difference between virus and virus+SGE for injection of 102 and 103 pfu/ml (p = 0.01 and p = 0.002 respectively) (Figure S2). At higher RVFV doses, the effect of SGE on mortality rate was not significant (p>0.05). The weight of the infected mice also decreased as the infections proceeded (data not shown). From these results, we selected 103 pfu/mouse as the reference dose for studying RVFV distribution in mice in the presence and absence of SGE.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002237.g002Figure 2Survival curves of mice.Ten C57Bl/6 mice per group were injected with several doses of RVFV ranging from 10 to 104 pfu/mouse (respectively A to D), in the absence (yellow curve) or presence of 1 SGP (red curve).In addition, we found that the effect of the SGE was not restricted to Ae. aegypti mosquitoes as Ae. vexans SGE also increased RVFV virulence (Figure S3). Median day of death calculation indicated a significant difference between virus and virus+SGE (p = 0.006) and virus+saliva (p = 0.01). However, we did not observe any difference between virus+SGE and virus+saliva (p = 0.42). Interestingly, we did not observe any effect on mice survival when we injected Culex pipiens pipiens SGE (data not shown).Distribution of RVFV in the organs of C57BL/6 mice following ID infection with 103 pfu/mouse with and without SGEWe infected C57BL/6 mice with ID injections of virus (103 pfu/mouse) in the presence or absence of SGE and followed the distribution of the virus in the blood and in various organs. The organs were not perfused prior collection. We sacrificed the mice at D5 because in Figure 2 infected mice died during the night between D5 and D6. Viremia levels were very high in the infected mice, and high virus titers were also found in the liver, brain and cerebellum (Figure 3), lymphoid organs (spleen, thymus and lymph nodes) (Figure S4), as well as in heart, kidneys, and lungs (Figure S5). Low virus titers were found in the eyes, jejunum and ileum (less than 103 pfu/mL), whereas the intestine, stomach, ceacum, colon and gallbladder contained no measurable titers.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002237.g003Figure 3Viral titers of major target organs at D5 post-infection.Three lots of 5 C57Bl/6 mice were infected by ID injection of 103 pfu RVFV with or without 1 SGP. RVFV titer was determined by plaque assay on E6 cells at D5 post-infection. Results are presented as box-and-whisker, indicating inside the box the median titer value and the bottom and top of the box being the 25th and 75th percentile. Whiskers correspond to the lowest and largest values of the titers. Mann-Withney test was employed to analyze the difference between sets of data for each organ. * p<0.05; ** p<0.01.In the presence of SGE, virus titers were significantly increased (almost 104 fold) than those produced in the absence of SGE, in the brain cortex (p = 0.024), liver (p = 0.004) and blood (p = 0.004) (Figure 3). The virus titers in the cerebellum exhibited an opposite trend compared to the titers in the brain cortex. Indeed, in this organ, virus titers of animals infected in the presence of SGE were lower (median value of 104 fold) than those of animals infected without SGE (p = 0.004).We then analyzed the virus titers in the lymphoid organs of mice infected in the presence and in the absence of SGE. The virus titers in the inguinal lymph nodes (p = 0.03), spleen (p = 0.004) and thymus (p = 0.007) of mice infected in the presence of SGE were significantly higher than those of mice infected in the absence of SGE (Figure S4). Virus titers in the lungs (p = 0.004), kidneys (p = 0.005), bladder (p = 0.004) and heart (p = 0.01) of mice infected in the presence of SGE were significantly higher (102 fold increase) compared to the titers found in these tissues of mice infected without SGE (Figure S5). Virus titers in the pancreas exhibited a pattern similar to that observed in the cerebellum, as these titers were significantly lower in the presence of SGE (p = 0.016) than in absence of SGE. In contrast, the addition of SGE to the viral inoculum did not lead to any significant differences in the virus titers in the mesenteric lymph nodes (ML), aortic lymph nodes (AL), popliteal lymph nodes (PL) or salivary glands (data not shown). These results correlated well with the RNA quantification results we obtained from RT-qPCR analysis of each organ (data not shown).Effect of SGE on the blood cell counts of infected miceFollowing RVFV infection of mice with or without SGE, we found that several blood parameters were altered in infected mice compared to uninfected ones. These changes included significantly lower numbers of white blood cells and platelets (Table 1).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002237.t001Table 1Distribution of different cells in the blood of infected mice at 5 DPI.CellsUnitsNon-infected micemice+RVFVmice+RVFV/SGE
White blood cells

103/mm3

3.6±0.2
abc

2.4±0.1
abc

2±0.3
abc
Red blood cells106/mm3
6.7±0.46.8±0.37.4±1hemoglobing/dl10.8±0.6c
10.7±0.511.9±1c
hematocrit%36.5±1.5c
36,9±1.641.2±3.6c

platelets

103/mm3

1099.3±186
2±0.3
abc

704±94
2±0.3
abc

517.2±162
2±0.3
abc
lymphocytes%87.4±0.8ac
64.4±3.8a
62.3±20.4c
monocytes%3.4±0.2ac
9.4±1.7a
7.8±2.1c
granulocytes%9.2±0.9ac
26.2±2.4a
29.8±18.7c
a,b,cThe statistical significance of different comparisons (p<0.05) are represented by letters: a) uninfected mice vs. ZH-infected mice; b) RVFV-infected mice vs. RVFV+SGE infected mice; and c) healthy mice vs. RVFV+SGE infected mice. Ten mice were tested in each group.The significant leukopenia observed in infected mice was associated with changes in the white blood cell count, with proportionally higher numbers of granulocytes and monocytes and lower numbers of lymphocytes compared to those in uninfected mice (Table 1). A 50% decrease of platelets and white blood cell counts was observed in presence of SGE in the inoculation (Table 1).Histological analysis of liver from RVFV-infected C57BL/6 miceTo better understand the physiology of RVFV infection, we conducted histological analysis of the liver of infected mice and found significant differences between the livers of mice infected in the presence or absence of SGE (Figure 4). Indeed, mice infected in the presence of SGE exhibited signs of multifocal hepatitis (Panels A and C). Inflammatory foci were randomly distributed in the liver parenchyma (arrowheads in Panels A and C). These foci were characterized by prominent neutrophil infiltrations (asterisk in Panel C insert) that were associated with fewer numbers of lymphocytes. Necrotic hepatocytes, with acidophilic cytoplasm and a highly condensed basophilic nucleus (pyknosis) or a fragmented nucleus (karyorrhexis) were identified within the inflammatory foci (arrow in Panel C insert). The profile of the liver lesions in mice infected in the absence of SGE (Figure 4; Panels B and D) was very different from that of mice infected in the presence of SGE. Three out of four mice exhibited hepatic necroses with very few inflammatory foci (Panel B). These necrosis foci were randomly located within the parenchyma (arrows in Panel D insert) and were associated with few inflammatory cells (Panel D insert).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002237.g004Figure 4Histological sections of liver at D5 post-infection.Five C57Bl/6 mice were injected with RVFV at 103 pfu/mouse. Images A and C correspond to the livers of mice infected in the presence of 1 SGP and viewed at 4X and 10X magnification, respectively (inset in C is 40X). The arrow head in A and C identify inflammatory foci. The arrow in the inset of C identifies a necrotic hepatocyte, and the asterisk identifies neutrophil infiltration. Panel B and D correspond to the livers of mice infected in the absence of SGE at 4X and 10X magnification, respectively. The arrows in the inset in D show a necrotic hepatocyte foci.Effects of exposing mice to non-infected and RVFV-exposed Ae. aegypti mosquito bitesWe collected saliva from RVFV-exposed mosquitoes to estimate the concentration of virus injected during a bite. These results showed mosquitoes may inject approximately 50±20 pfu in each bite, and that more than 50% of the mosquitoes had been infected after an artificial blood-meal.To this point, our experiments were performed with SGE, which contains a mixture of salivary and housekeeping proteins. To determine whether the unique components of saliva triggered the potentiating effect on RVFV virulence, we allowed ID-infected mice to be bitten by non-infected mosquitoes. We inoculated C57BL/6 male mice with RVFV (50 pfu/mouse) by ID injection and exposed the mice to non-infected mosquito bites in the area of the ID infection. The number of blood-fed mosquitoes was determined. The weight changes of the mice were followed for 14 days thereafter. The weight curves of the infected mice corroborated with our previous results (Figure 5). In the absence of mosquito bites, mice survived for at least 11 days and died between 13 and 14 days post infection. If infection was accompanied by non-infected bites, time to death was shortened. We however did not find any clear correlation between the number of bites and the time to death.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002237.g005Figure 5Weight curves of mice infected by ID and bitten by non-infected mosquitoes.Three lots (A, B and C) of 5 C57Bl/6 anesthetized mice were used for each experiment. They were injected ID with 50 pfu of RVFV before being exposed to the bites of 20 mosquitoes contained in cardboard boxes. After 15 minutes, blood-fed mosquitoes were collected and counted. After exposure, the weight of each mouse was recorded every day. Each curve corresponds to one mouse and the number of non-infected bites is indicated in the legend on the figure. Death occurred at the end of each curve.In a second series of experiments, mice were bitten by RVFV-exposed mosquitoes collected on D16 or on D19 after infected blood meal. Blood-fed mosquitoes were collected and their viral loads were determined. The weight curves for the mice bitten by mosquitoes at D16 after virus exposure were followed. Three out of five mice received 1 or 2 bites from RVFV-exposed mosquitoes. Only one mouse died 13 days after receiving four mosquito bites (for which two out of four mosquitoes were infected), while the other mice survived until day 14 (data not shown). The experiment was repeated with mice bitten by D19 RVFV-exposed mosquitoes (Figure 6). As before, the numbers of blood-fed mosquitoes were counted and their viral loads were determined. Mice received up to 9 bites and 3 to 6 of these bites were from infected mosquitoes. Two mice having received bites from infected mosquitoes did not die during the time of experiment (11 days). Their weight did not decrease. Mosquitoes did not feed on two mice. For the other 6 mice, death was observed from day 5 to day 10 post-feeding. The time to death did not depend on the number of blood-fed mosquitoes collected on each mouse and is more probably related to the amount of virus injected during the probing phase and to the number of uninfected bites. This amount seems highly variable in our experiment. Indeed, we were not able to identify mosquitoes that could have probed, and thereby injected virus, without taking any blood meal.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002237.g006Figure 6Weight curves of mice bitten by RVFV-exposed Aedes aegypti.Ten C57Bl/6 mice were anesthetized and exposed to bites of mosquitoes collected at D19 after virus exposure. The blue and violet curves correspond to mice bitten by 6 mosquitoes (6 of 6 and 4 of 6 mosquitoes were infected respectively). The yellow curve represents a mouse bitten by 8 mosquitoes (3 of 8 mosquitoes were infected). The red curve corresponds to a mouse bitten by 3 (3 of 3 mosquitoes were infected). The black curve corresponds to 7 mosquito bites (4 of 7 mosquitoes were infected) and the green curve corresponds to 9 mosquito bites (3 of 9 mosquitoes were infected). The red arrow indicates the death of the mouse. Two other mice were bitten by 6 mosquitoes (6 of 6 and 4 of 6 mosquitoes were infected respectively) and did not die after 11 days of observation (dark red and light blue curves). Mosquitoes did not feed on 2 mice (brown and turquoise curves).DiscussionRVFV is primarily transmitted by mosquito bites and, to a lesser extent, by direct contact with infected animals, mainly sheep and goats, as reported during an RVF epidemic in southwestern Saudi Arabia [7]. However, many studies describing the pathogenesis of this virus have been conducted without considering this natural way of transmission. Indeed, the route of virus inoculation and the presence of components from the vector saliva are likely to have consequences on the immune response that is eventually developed by the host in response to the pathogen. In fact, several studies have shown that the saliva of arthropod vectors transmitting infectious diseases can play a crucial role in the ability of the vector to transmit the pathogen [15].The mouse strain used in any model of RVFV infection is an important factor that should be carefully considered. Several different genetic strains of mice have been used previously: BALB/cByJ, C57BL/6, 129/Sv/Pas, and MBT/Pas [20]. The BALB/cByJ, and C57BL/6 strains were found to be the least susceptible to RVFV infection. In our study, DBA-1 mice were more sensitive to the virus than C57BL/6 even though they did not exhibit any neurological symptoms. The C57BL/6 strain experienced hepatic infection as well as neurologic symptoms. These mice are therefore good models to study the most severe forms of RVF in humans, and allow the study of neuropathogenesis and progression of the virus from the periphery to the central nervous system following intradermic inoculation.A number of different studies aimed at defining the pathogenesis of RVFV in animals have employed IP, intranasal and subcutaneous inoculations [4], [21]. Indeed, exposing mice to aerosols containing RVFV can cause infection [22] whereas other routes of exposure induce delayed death [21]. In our study, the IP and ID routes of injection led to different patterns of virus dissemination. The brain and liver were the main targets of the virus after ID and IP infection, respectively. Viremia was maintained longer after IP infection whereas survival was shorter compared to ID infection. This result showed that the route of infection is a key determinant for infection.First, after ID injection, we found the virus in many organs. High virus titers were found in the liver and in the blood early after infection at D3, whereas at D6, high virus titers were found in the brain, while the viremia has decreased. In agreement, mice presented neurological symptoms at D6, characterized by compulsive or uncoordinated movements, and/or paralysis, and they also had discolored livers presenting hemorrhagic lesions. Our observations correlated well with other studies that showed that this virus causes fulminant hepatitis [7] or meningoencephalitis [23] in humans. We found other organs to be less infected, including the heart, lungs, pancreas and kidneys, which was reported previously [24]. Mice salivary glands were found to be significantly infected, raising the question of the infectivity of saliva. Viral antigens have also been detected in odontogenic and gingival epithelia [24]. In addition, we detected virus in the primary and secondary lymphoid organs and the lymphocyte numbers were lower in infected animals compared to controls. These changes could be explained by lymphocyte apoptosis in lymphoid organs (thymus, spleen and lymph nodes), which was also demonstrated in BALBc mice subcutaneously infected with another RVFV strain (ZH501) [24].We also observed changes in other blood count parameters like the number of thrombocytes (platelets), granulocytes and monocytes. In general, a decrease in circulating platelet number may be caused by decreased or ineffective bone marrow production, increased intramedullary destruction (hemophagocytic syndrome), increased peripheral destruction (immune-mediated or non–immune-mediated mechanisms), altered distribution of circulating cells (splenic consumption or endothelial sequestration), or decreased cellular life span. Bone marrow was found to be infected in our study (data not shown), and lower numbers of myeloid cells in the spleen and bone marrow in RVFV infection have been reported previously [24]. On the other hand, in patients with dengue hemorrhagic fever, although dengue virus-induced bone marrow suppression was shown to decrease platelet synthesis, an immune mechanism of thrombocytopenia caused by increased platelet destruction appeared to be also active [25], [26], [27], [28]. Granulocytes and monocytes numbers were higher in the blood of infected animal (Table 1). Three types of granulocytes are present in peripheral blood: neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils. The count of eosinophils was found to vary as function of Rift Valley fever disease progression in mice: it first decreased at the beginning and then increased before death [29], which could explain our findings. Granulocytes were also found to be important target cells for RVFV infection [21] and thereby represent a site of viral replication to infect other cells or organs. Monocyte numbers also increase in many other vectorial infectious diseases such as West Nile, dengue and malaria [24], [25], [26]. Similar changes in blood cell counts including lymphopenia and thrombopenia were reported for the Saudi Arabian epidemics of 2000 [7].We investigated the role of vector salivary components in RVFV infection. Potentiation of virus transmission and/or pathogenicity in the presence of vector saliva has previously been described in vector/pathogen/host interactions [14], [15], [30]. Some of the many salivary proteins co-injected during a vector bite cause immunomodulatory effects on the host. These may include the induction of a Th2 response and the inhibition of Th1 pro-inflammatory cytokines [15], [31]. In addition, it has been shown in vivo that Aedes mosquito bites are likely to significantly reduce T cell recruitment [16]. We tested the saliva of two Aedes species: Ae. vexans, which is an important RVFV vector in Africa and in the Arabic peninsula [32], [33], [34], [35]; and Ae. aegypti, which exhibits good vector competence for the virus as shown in our study as well as in others [11], [36] and whose genome has been sequenced. Early death was observed in the groups of mice co-injected with both Aedes SGE. In addition, the survival curves obtained for RVFV-infected mice exposed to the bites of mosquitoes corroborated those obtained with co-injected SGE and confirmed that both Ae. aegypti and vexans saliva potentiates RVFV pathogenicity. These results are comparable to those reported for mice with West Nile virus mixed with mosquito saliva [31]. Interestingly, although Culex pipiens was found to be competent to transmit RVFV [37], we did not observe any increase of RVFV pathogenenicity in presence of salivary gland extracts from this species.We determined the effects of SGE and saliva on RVFV virulence and distribution for several organs and included histological analyses of the liver. For most organs, including liver, the brain cortex, kidneys, lungs, heart, bladder, spleen, thymus and lymph nodes, virus titers were significantly higher if SGE was included in the inoculum, in agreement, with previous studies where saliva was shown to increase the invasion of neural tissues by West Nile virus and produced higher virus titers in the brain [31]. An SGE-mediated decrease in antiviral activity at the site of inoculation might promote viral replication and infection of different cell types [20], [21], [38], thereby increasing virus production in several organs and causing specific histological lesions, as observed in the liver. This is consistent with what Schneider and Higgs observed in mice infected with West Nile virus in presence of mosquito bites [31]. Early after virus inoculation, they did not observe any difference in the viral titers measured in various organs in presence or absence of saliva whereas after 7 days of infection, higher titers were observed after mosquito bites. We cannot exclude however a modification of the kinetics of virus replication and dissemination in the various tissues in the presence of saliva. Interestingly, and while the viremia is significantly increased, lower virus titers were found in the pancreas and cerebellum in presence of SGE, showing that saliva may also affect virus dissemination. With respect to the brain, our results suggest that saliva might modify the kinetics and/or the extent of invasion of specific regions. The modalities of infection of the central nervous system by RVFV are still poorly understood. Neurons and glial cells were found positive for RVFV throughout the central nervous system of infected calves [39]. Gray et al. [29] showed that the brains of RVFV ZH501 infected mice were essentially normal throughout the course of the study despite evidence of a high viral titer and significantly increased inflammatory cytokine concentrations in the brain tissue of some studied animals. The outcome of our study may suggest either that the presence of saliva at the site of inoculation may favour different ways of brain invasion or that the kinetics of infection is increased and that the cerebellum was first invaded and already partly cured at the moment of sample harvesting while the virus was spreading towards the brain cortex.Since a direct effect of saliva on the brain is unlikely, we propose that modulation of the early immune and inflammatory responses at the site of virus injection may, in turn, modulate the permeability of the blood-brain barrier, allowing virus titers in the brain to be significantly higher. Further studies on this matter are currently underway and preliminary experiments are in favor of an increase of the vascular permeability of the blood brain barrier in presence of saliva. We suggest that intermediate elements like TLR3 and IL6 might be involved in this effect. Actually, West Nile virus, by activating TLR3 (toll-like receptor 3) [40], and allowing TNFα secretion, was proposed to increase blood-brain barrier permeability. Moreover, it was shown that IL-6 played an important role in increasing brain permeability in a model of bacterial meningitis [41], [42]. Similar mechanisms might occur in RVFV infections in the presence of saliva.Our histological analysis of infected liver showed that mice infected in the presence of SGE developed multifocal hepatitis with inflammatory foci that were randomly distributed in the hepatic parenchyma. This was also accompanied by a massive recruitment of neutrophils and lymphocytes in the liver parenchyma. CD4+ and CD8+ lymphocytes and cytokines, including TGF-β, TNF-α and IFN-γ were shown to be involved in the hepatic pathogenesis of yellow fever virus infection in combination with a direct cytopathic effect of the virus [43]. The early modulation of the innate response in the dermis caused by mosquito bites probably induces a dysregulation of the immune system and triggers the different pathologic effects observed in absence and presence of the mosquito saliva.Exposure of inoculated mice to mosquito bites confirmed that saliva components have a potentiating effect on RVFV infection. Indeed, we observed early death in mice infected by ID and bitten by uninfected mosquitoes although a clear correlation between the number of engorged mosquitoes and the time of death could not be established. This is probably explained by the time of probing that differs between mosquitoes and the length of the probing time conditioned the amount of saliva injected in the dermis.The next step was to compare infection by an infected mosquito to infection by ID. Death was observed as early as day 5 post-infection, a delay which is comparable to that of mice infected ID with 103 pfu in the presence of SGE. This observation shows that mosquitoes may inject more than 50 pfu in agreement with the detection of a discrepancy between the titers obtained by salivation and those determined in vivo [44]. Our results also showed that the bites of non-infected mosquitoes may potentiate infection caused by the bites of infected mosquitoes. It is important to note that although the number of infected mosquitoes in nature is relatively low, the number of uninfected bites is much higher. Thus, constant local stimulation with saliva may have the potential to modulate the impact of RVFV infection [45].In conclusion, we have clearly demonstrated an overall potentiating effect of mosquito saliva on RVFV infection. Both Aedes aegypti and Aedes vexans saliva are able to decrease the survival of RVFV-infected mice. The impact of saliva components on the innate immune response at the site of bite certainly explains the facilitation observed, either by increasing the kinetics of distribution of the virus or by altering this distribution through differential targeted organs. The identification of salivary proteins involved in the facilitation of infection and determination of their mode of action could help develop new approaches for preventive or therapeutic purposes in humans.Supporting InformationFigure S1
Survival curves of mice injected ID or IP with RVFV. Ten C57Bl/6 mice were infected with 103 pfu of RVFV ZH 548 strain by IP (pink) or by ID (blue) routes. Animals were examined each day.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2
Survival of mice infected with RVFV at several doses/mouse with or without 
Ae. aegypti
 SGE. Groups of 10 C57Bl/6 mice were infected by ID, with RVFV+1 SGP. The median day of death was determined for each condition and sets of data were analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney statistical tests.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S3
Survival of mice infected with RVFV with or without SGE or saliva from 
Ae. vexans
. Groups of 10 C57Bl/6 mice were infected by ID, with RVFV alone (103 pfu/mouse), with RVFV+1 SGP or with RVFV+non-infected mosquito bites. The median day of death was determined for each condition and sets of data were analyzed using Kruskal-Wallis and Mann-Whitney statistical tests.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S4
Virus titers of lymphoid organs on post-infection D5. Three lots of 5 C57Bl/6 mice were infected by ID injection of 103 pfu RVFV with or without 1 SGP. RVFV titer was determined by plaque assay on E6 cells at D5 post-infection. Data are from 3 independent experiments, each performed on five mice. Mann-Withney test was employed to analyze the difference between sets of data for each organ. * p<0.05; ** p<0.01.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S5
Virus titers of secondary target tissues on post-infection D5. Three lots of 5 C57Bl/6 mice were infected by ID injection of 103 pfu RVFV with or without 1 SGP. RVFV titer was determined by plaque assay on E6 cells at D5 post-infection. Data are from 3 independent experiments, each performed on five mice. Mann-Withney test was employed to analyze the difference between sets of data for each organ. * p<0.05; ** p<0.01.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Reproducing the Rift Valley fever virus mosquito-lamb-mosquito transmission cycle

IntroductionRift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is a mosquito-borne RNA virus that causes severe disease in ruminants and humans1. The virus is transmitted via mosquitoes, predominantly of the genera Aedes and Culex2. Sheep are the most susceptible species, with disease being most severe in young lambs. RVFV has a tropism for the liver, with replication in hepatocytes resulting in focal to widespread hepatic necrosis3,4. In severe cases, hepatic necrosis is associated with bleeding tendencies, shock and death. In pregnant ewes, RVFV also targets maternal epithelial cells of the placenta and fetal trophoblasts, resulting in severe placental pathology and abortion5. Heavy mortalities among newborn lambs and abortion storms are key characteristics of RVF outbreaks. Infection of humans generally manifests as a self-resolving febrile illness, whereas a small percentage of patients develop encephalitis or hemorrhagic fever, the latter with high case fatality3. Although the risk of RVFV infection during human pregnancy is yet unclear, RVFV infections have been associated with miscarriage and recent studies have demonstrated that the virus replicates efficiently in human placental explants5,6. The threat that RVFV poses to human health is acknowledged by the World Health Organization that placed RVFV on the Blueprint list of priority diseases likely to cause future epidemics in the face of insufficient or absent countermeasures7.Since its first description in the 1930s, RVFV has caused severe outbreaks on the African continent and the Arabian Peninsula, where the disease has remained enzootic and continues to cause epizootics and epidemics1,4. Interepizootic maintenance of RVFV is possibly explained by vertical transmission of the virus to the eggs of floodwater Aedes mosquitoes8. These species oviposit near shallow wetlands, known as dambos, which dry out during periods of drought and flood during heavy rains. These dambos provide ideal breeding grounds, as the eggs of floodwater mosquitoes depend on desiccation and rehydration for hatching. In desiccated form, the eggs can remain viable for long periods of time, possibly explaining how RVFV is maintained during periods of low or even apparent absent mosquito activity. Although this hypothesis is plausible, vertical transmission of RVFV to mosquito eggs has been demonstrated only once, and in only one mosquito species, namely Aedes (Neomelaniconion) mcintoshi Huang, a species cited before 1985 as Ae. lineatopennis8. Additionally, evidence is accumulating that RVFV is maintained in mosquito-ruminant-mosquito cycles in the absence of outbreaks9,10.Apart from re-emergence of RVFV in enzootic areas, climate change, globalization, increasing populations of susceptible animals, and changing ecologies of mosquito vectors may facilitate future incursions into currently unaffected areas. This concern is fueled by data that suggest that over 50 mosquito species, many of which with a global distribution, can potentially act as vectors of RVFV2. These data are based on isolation of RVFV from field-collected mosquitoes and from vector competence experiments in laboratory settings, in which the virus is taken up by mosquitoes by membrane feeding on a RVFV-spiked blood meal2,11,12. However, to more firmly establish the ability of a mosquito species to act as a vector, experiments are required in which the virus is transmitted among susceptible animals via infected mosquitoes. In such experiments, factors such as mosquito population density, blood feeding behavior, and longevity can be taken into account to determine the vectorial capacity of a mosquito vector13. Furthermore, such experiments could address the influence of viremia levels in different vertebrate hosts on mosquito-mediated transmission.In the present work, Aedes aegypti mosquitoes were infected with RVFV after membrane feeding on a virus-spiked blood meal or after feeding on lambs that developed viremia after intravenous inoculation of RVFV. The virus was subsequently transmitted by these mosquitoes to naive lambs. The presented animal models can be used to study environmental, vector and host factors that contribute to RVFV transmission and to determine the efficacy of vaccines against natural, mosquito-mediated infection.ResultsInfection of lambs via intravenous inoculation of RVFV followed by transmission of the virus between lambs and mosquitoesA group of 6 lambs (Group 1, #157–162) was intravenously (IV) inoculated with RVFV on day 0 (Fig. 1a, Experiment 1). Upon onset of pyrexia, previously shown to correspond with peak viremia14, mosquitoes were allowed to take a blood meal. To this end, mosquitoes were placed on sedated lambs in cardboard containers, bound to each of the hind legs with elastic tape (Fig. 1b,c). The average mosquito feeding rate was 85% (± 7%) (Table 1). Fully engorged mosquitoes were collected and maintained in an insect incubator as separate groups per lamb. All IV inoculated lambs developed pyrexia (Fig. 2a), became listless and were disinclined to feed from day 2 onwards. Analysis of daily collected plasma samples with reverse-transcriptase quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) and virus isolation demonstrated that all lambs developed high viremia, which peaked on day 2 post inoculation (Fig. 2b), confirming that mosquito feeding occurred at peak viremia. One lamb (#159) acutely succumbed to the infection on day 4, one lamb acutely succumbed on day 5 (#157), one lamb had to be euthanized after reaching a humane end-point (HEP) on day 6 (#161) and one on day 7 (#162), resulting in a case fatality rate (CFR) of 67% (Fig. 2c). Necropsies of fatal cases revealed typical pathological manifestations of RVFV infection, with focal to widespread hepatic necrosis (Fig. 3a–c).Figure 1Schematic representation of two experiments performed to study transmission of RVFV between mosquitoes and lambs. (a) In Experiment 1, lambs were inoculated via IV route with RVFV. Two days later, when pyrexia was noted, naive mosquitoes were allowed to take a blood meal from the lambs (Part 1a). Fully engorged mosquitoes were incubated for 12–13 days, after which they were allowed to take a blood meal from lambs of Group 2 (Part 1b). Before start of a parallel experiment (Experiment 2), mosquitoes were allowed to feed on a virus-spiked blood meal using a Hemotek apparatus (Part 2a). Fully engorged mosquitoes were incubated for 11 days, until they were allowed to take a second blood meal on lambs of Group 3 (Part 2b). Two to three days later, when pyrexia was measured, naive mosquitoes were allowed to take a blood meal from the lambs of Group 3 (Part 2b). Fully engorged mosquitoes were incubated for 12–13 days, after which the mosquitoes were allowed to take a second blood meal from naive lambs of Group 4 (Part 2c). The presence of RVFV in mosquito saliva samples was determined retrospectively using forced salivation and virus isolation on Vero cells. (b) Representative picture of a cardboard box containing mosquitoes placed on the hind legs of sedated lambs. (c) Representative picture of a cardboard box after mosquito feeding. Experimental details according to the ARRIVE guidelines30 are presented in Supplementary Table S1 online.Table 1Quantification of transmission parameters.Experiment 1, Part 1aExperiment 1, Part 1bGroup 1#:Viremia day 2 (log10)Naive mosquitoesGroup 2#:Infected mosquitoesViremia Day 17 (log10)TCID50/mlRNA copiesFed/total (%fed)Survivors/total (%)fed/total (% fed)SP/tested (%SP)ESP/fed (%ESP)TCID50/mlRNA copies/ml1575.18.770/89 (79)63/70 (90)16951/63 (81)13/44 (30)15/51 (30)6.29.81586.59.286/97 (89)82/86 (95)17073/82 (89)19/60 (32)23/73 (32)6.59.81596.79.793/98 (95)86/93 (92)17159/86 (69)23/53 (43)26/59 (44)6.29.41605.38.880/95 (84)72/80 (90)17267/72 (93)22/57 (39)26/67 (39)6.99.31616.29.670/92 (76)51/70 (73)17331/51 (61)14/28 (50)16/31 (52)6.29.61626.79.785/94 (90)75/85 (88)17447/75 (63)13/45 (29)14/47 (30)6.08.3Average6.1 ± 0.79.2 ± 0.585 ± 7%88 ± 8%Average76 ± 14%37 ± 9%38 ± 9%6.3 ± 0.39.4 ± 0.6Experiment 2, Part 2aExperiment 2, Part 2bExperiment 2, Part 2cGroup 3#:Infected mosquitoesGroup 3#:Viremia day 2/3 (log10)Naive mosquitoesGroup 4#:Infected mosquitoesViremia Day 17 (log10)Fed/total (%fed)SP/tested (%SP)ESP/fed (%ESP)TCID50/mlRNA copiesfed/total (% fed)Survivors/total (%)fed/total (%fed)SP/tested (%SP)ESP/fed (%ESP)TCID50/mlRNA copies/ml15164/92 (70)0/0 (0)aN.A1514.47.985/102 (83)75/85 (88)16364/75 (85)21/53 (40)25/64 (39)6.99.715235/96 (36)1/21 (5)2/35 (6)1525.18.687/100 (87)75/87 (86)16454/75 (72)25/48 (52)28/54 (52)6.59.115381/101(80)5/54 (9)8/81 (10)152b5.59.196/100 (96)73/96 (76)16855/73 (75)6/46 (13)7/55 (13)6.28.515473/99 (74)3/54 (6)4/73 (6)1532.57.086/94 (91)81/86 (94)16566/81 (81)1/61 (2)1/66 (2) < 1,64.215545/102(44)2/37 (5)2/45 (4)1546.79.496/102 (94)88/96 (92)16678/88 (89)16/65 (25)19/78 (24)6.79.615672/90 (80)7/41 (17)12/72(17)1555.88.487/100 (87)67/87 (77)16757/67 (85)16/49 (33)19/57 (33)5.88.7Average64 ± 19%8 ± 5%9 ± 5%Average5.0 ± 1.48.4 ± 0.990 ± 5%86 ± 8%Average81 ± 6%27 ± 18%27 ± 18%6.4 ± 0.4c8.3 ± 2In Experiment 1 (Part 1a), lambs from Group 1 (n = 6, blue) were IV-inoculated with RVFV on day 0. When pyrexia was measured on day 2, Ae. aegypti mosquitoes were allowed to take a blood meal. Viremia levels on this day were determined by RT-qPCR and virus isolation using plasma samples. In Experiment 2 (Part 2a), mosquitoes were infected via membrane feeding on a RVFV-spiked blood meal. After 11 days incubation, the mosquitoes were allowed to feed on lambs of Group 3 (day 0), after which the presence of RVFV in mosquito saliva samples was determined. When pyrexia in lambs of Groups 1 and 3 was noted on day 2 or 3, naive mosquitoes were placed on the lambs and viremia levels on this day were determined by RT-qPCR and virus isolation using plasma samples. The total numbers of engorged mosquitoes (fed) and the total numbers of mosquitoes used for feeding (total) are indicated, as well as the percentages fed (%fed). Engorged mosquitoes were maintained in an insect incubator for 12–13 days. After this incubation period, surviving mosquitoes were allowed to feed on naive lambs (Groups 2 and 4). The presence of RVFV in mosquito saliva samples was determined by virus isolation on Vero cells after feeding on the lambs. Arrows indicate the lambs between which RVFV was transmitted. The numbers of saliva-positive mosquitoes are indicated (SP) as well as the numbers of mosquitoes tested (tested) and the percentage of saliva-positive samples (%SP). Because not all mosquitoes survived the incubation period, the expected number of saliva positives (ESP) was extrapolated by multiplying the %SP x fed. Titers of infectious virus and RNA copies in the blood of the lambs from Groups 2 and 4 at peak viremia (experimental day 17) are also indicated. N.A., not applicable.aThis lamb recovered early from sedation and violently responded to the placement of the cardboard box, resulting in mortality of all blood-fed mosquitoes.bLamb #156 was not included in Experiment 2, Part b, as this lamb succumbed to the infection before mosquitoes could feed. The corresponding mosquitoes were allowed to feed on lamb #152 on day 3.cNo infectious virus was detected in plasma of lamb #165. This sample was therefore not included when calculating the average viremia level.Figure 2Analysis of lambs exposed to RVFV via intravenous injection or via infected mosquitoes. Lambs (n = 6/group) were exposed to RVFV either via intravenous inoculation (Group 1) or via infected mosquitoes (Groups 2, 3 and 4), as schematically presented at the left. Mosquitoes that fed on lambs of Group 1 on day 2 were used to transmit the virus to lambs of Group 2 on day 14 or 15. Lambs of Group 3 were exposed to mosquitoes that membrane fed on a RVFV-spiked blood meal 11 days earlier. Naive mosquitoes were allowed to take a blood meal from these lambs on day 2 or 3. After an incubation period, these mosquitoes were used to transmit the virus to lambs of Group 4 on day 14 or 15. Rectal temperatures (a,d,g,j), viral RNA and infectious virus in plasma samples (b,e,h,k) and survival rates (c,f,i,l) are presented. Error bars represent SDs.Figure 3Representative pathology in lambs exposed to RVFV via IV-inoculation or infected mosquitoes. Panels a–c were obtained from lamb #161 (IV inoculation). Panels d–f were obtained from lamb #154 (mosquito exposure). Both lambs were euthanized after reaching a HEP. Swollen liver with mottled appearance indicative of hepatic degeneration/necrosis (a,d), H&E staining of liver sections showing multifocal to bridging necrosis of hepatocytes with haemorrhages (b,e). IHC staining of a liver section with mAb 4-D4 showing strong immunolabelling for RVF antigen of the areas with degeneration and necrosis of hepatocytes (c,f). Bar = 1,000 μm.The average survival rate of blood-fed mosquitoes after 13 days of incubation was 88% (± 8%) (Table 1). Following this incubation period, the 6 groups of surviving mosquitoes were each placed on naive lambs (Group 2, #169–174, Fig. 1a) (on average 72 mosquitoes per lamb) and allowed to take a second blood meal as described above. The average feeding rate of these mosquitoes was 76% (± 14%) (Table 1). Two days post feeding (dpf) on the naive lambs (day 17), all lambs developed high fever (Fig. 2d). One lamb (#173) reached a HEP and was euthanized on day 18 (dpf 3), two lambs (#169 and #174) succumbed acutely on day 19 (dpf 4) and one (#170) on day 20 (dpf 5), resulting in a CFR of 67% (Fig. 2f). Similar as observed in Group 1, all lambs that succumbed to the infection revealed typical signs of RVFV infection at necropsy. Analysis of plasma samples by RT-qPCR and virus isolation confirmed that peak viremia occurred on 2 dpf (day 17) (Fig. 2e). As all mosquito-exposed lambs developed viremia, transmission of RVFV by Ae. aegypti mosquitoes from viremic lambs to naive lambs was deemed very efficient.To retrospectively assess the number of RVFV-positive mosquitoes that had fed on each naive lamb, mosquito saliva samples were collected by forced salivation and assayed for the presence of virus. These analyses demonstrated that 38% (± 9%) of the mosquitoes contained RVFV in saliva and suggested that each of the lambs from Group 2 were exposed to a minimum of 14 and a maximum of 26 saliva-positive mosquitoes (Table 1).Between group comparisons of the experimental outcomes showed no significant differences (P < 0.05) in onset, viremia levels and peak of viremia between IV-inoculated lambs (Group 1) and lambs exposed to 14–26 RVFV-positive Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (Group 2). Similar morbidity and mortality rates were also observed (Fig. 2c,f and Table 1). In addition, no differences in mean viremia (AUC and peak viremia) were observed, neither in the variance of the measured variables (Fig. 2 and Supplementary Table S2 online). Given these results, mosquito-mediated transmission of RVFV from IV-inoculated lambs to naive lambs was deemed efficient and robust, with all exposed animals developing viremia and clinical signs with low variability observed in measured outcome parameters.Infection of mosquitoes via membrane feeding on a RVFV-spiked blood meal, followed by transmission of the virus between mosquitoes and lambsIn a parallel experiment, we investigated how efficiently RVFV can be transmitted between mosquitoes and lambs, starting with mosquitoes that ingested the virus via membrane feeding (Fig. 1a, Experiment 2). To this end, mosquitoes were fed on a bovine erythrocyte suspension containing 107.5 TCID50/ml of RVFV, using a Hemotek membrane feeder. After 11 days incubation, the mosquitoes were allowed to feed on lambs from Group 3 (lambs #151–156) (on average 97 mosquitoes per lamb). Feeding was overall successful, although lamb #151 recovered early from its sedation, and violently responded to the cardboard boxes attached to its legs, resulting in death of all (already engorged) mosquitoes. Virtually all other mosquitoes survived the feeding period with an average feeding rate of 64% (± 19%) (Table 1). Retrospectively, forced salivation analysis showed that 9% (± 5%) of the mosquitoes used to infect lambs of Group 3 contained RVFV in saliva, which suggested that each lamb was exposed to 2–12 saliva-positive mosquitoes.All mosquito-exposed lambs of Group 3 manifested with pyrexia (Fig. 2g) and analysis of plasma samples by RT-qPCR and virus isolation demonstrated that viremia peaked on days 2 or 3 (Fig. 2h and Table 1). All lambs developed clinical signs including lethargy and reduced appetite. One lamb (#156) succumbed acutely to the infection on day 3 and another lamb (#154) had to be euthanized upon reaching a HEP on day 4. Lamb #151 reached a HEP on day 8, resulting in a CFR of 50% (Fig. 2i). Necropsies of euthanized lambs revealed focal to widespread hepatic necrosis associated with RVFV antigen (Fig. 3d–f).In line with experiment 1, naive mosquitos were placed on lambs of Group 3 when pyrexia was noted. Considering that not all lambs developed pyrexia on day 2, some of the lambs were exposed to mosquitoes on day 3 (Table 1). Of note, lamb #156 succumbed acutely before naive mosquitoes could be allowed to feed on this animal. The mosquitoes that were meant to feed on this lamb were instead allowed to feed on lamb #152 on day 3 (note that another group of mosquitoes fed on the same lamb on day 2). Between 85 and 96 naive mosquitoes were used for feeding and the average feeding rate was 90% (± 5%). Of the fully engorged mosquitoes (fed on Group 3), 86% survived the incubation period of 12–13 days. Surviving mosquitoes were subsequently placed on the naive lambs from Group 4 (lambs #163–168) (average 77 mosquitoes per lamb). Forced salivation analysis showed that 27% (± 18%) of the mosquitoes contained RVFV in saliva, which suggested that lambs of Group 4 were each exposed to 1–28 saliva-positive mosquitoes (Table 1).All lambs from Group 4 developed pyrexia 2 days post mosquito exposure, corresponding to study day 17 (Fig. 2j). Analysis of plasma samples by RT-qPCR and virus isolation demonstrated that peak viremia occurred on the same day (Fig. 2k). Lamb #163 reached a HEP and was euthanized 3 days post feeding, corresponding to day 18. Lamb #164 reached a HEP 7 days post feeding, corresponding to day 22, resulting in a CFR of 33% (Fig. 2l).Interestingly, one lamb from Group 3 (#153), revealed relatively low viral RNA levels in plasma samples and titers of infectious virus just above the detection limit of the assay (102.5 TCID50/ml on day 3). Retrospective analysis suggested that this lamb was exposed to 8 membrane-fed RVFV saliva-positive mosquitoes (Table 1). Despite very low level of infectious virus in the blood of lamb #153, RVFV was transmitted successfully to lamb #165 of Group 4. Whereas lamb #165 developed detectable levels of viral RNA, no infectious virus was isolated (Table 1). Analysis of mosquitoes used to transmit virus from lamb #153 to #165 suggested that lamb #165 was exposed to one infected mosquito. Both lambs, #153 and #165 did not develop clinical signs and it was also interesting to find that all lambs, including #153 and #165, developed anti-nucleocapsid antibodies, as determined by ELISA, as well as neutralizing antibodies, which are known to correlate with protection (see Supplementary Fig. S1 online).No significant differences (P < 0.05) in peak viremia or overall viremia during the course of infection were observed between Groups 3 and 4 . Variances were also similar, however the presence of sheep #153 and #165 in each of these groups led to high variances in the measured variables (Supplementary Table S2 online).Comparing RVFV transmission to mosquitoes after membrane feeding on a virus-spiked blood meal or on viremic lambsIn the present work, two methods were used to obtain mosquitoes that contained RVFV in saliva. Mosquitoes were fed either on viremic lambs or membrane-fed on a virus-spiked blood meal. The feeding rate (mean ± SD) in mosquitoes fed on needle-inoculated, viremic lambs (85% ± 7) was significantly higher (p = 0.002) than feeding rates of mosquitoes fed on a virus-spiked blood meal (64% ± 19). The percentage of saliva-positive (surviving) mosquitoes was also much higher (p < 0.001) when mosquitoes were fed on viremic lambs (38% ± 9%) as compared to membrane feeding (9% ± 5%) (Fig. 4), whereas the average virus titer during mosquito feeding on the lambs was 30-fold lower.Figure 4Feeding rates depicted as % engorged mosquitoes (a) and percentages of RVFV saliva-positive mosquitoes (b) after feeding on a viremic lamb or after membrane feeding on a virus-spiked blood meal. Mosquitoes were fed on a viremic lamb in Experiment 1, part 1a, or via membrane in Experiment 2, part 2a. Percentages of RVFV saliva-positive mosquitoes were determined after an incubation period of 15–21 days (Experiment 1), or after 14–21 days (Experiment 2). Virus in saliva was demonstrated by incubation on Vero cells, followed by scoring of CPE. Data are presented in violin plots with median and quartiles. Dots represent individual measurements.DiscussionWe here report the reproduction of the complete RVFV transmission cycle under controlled conditions. The established animal models can be used to study transmission of RVFV between laboratory-reared Ae. aegypti mosquitoes and lambs either initiating with IV inoculation of lambs, or with mosquito feeding on a RVFV-spiked blood meal. Although both models result in efficient transmission of the virus among lambs, our results show that feeding on viremic lambs results in much higher percentages of RVFV saliva-positive mosquitoes as compared to membrane feeding. Our results thereby underscore the previous notion that membrane feeding may result in a significant underestimation of vector competence and stress the value of experiments involving vertebrate hosts15,16.Apart from evaluating the two models individually, our experiments also enabled us to directly compare the outcome of infection following IV inoculation or exposure to infected mosquitoes. Specifically, in Experiment 1, lambs were IV inoculated with a dose of 105 TCID50 (Group 1) whereas in Experiment 2, lambs were exposed to infected mosquitoes (Group 3), which were fed earlier on a RVFV-spiked blood meal. Retrospective analyses of mosquito saliva suggested that these lambs were exposed to an average of 9 RVFV saliva-positive mosquitoes. This resulted (although not statistically significant) in an average lower peak rectal temperature, later onset and lower level of viremia, and a lower mortality rate when compared to the lambs inoculated via IV route with a dose of 105 TCID50. Mosquitoes that were fed on the viremic lambs from both groups were subsequently allowed to feed on naive lambs from Groups 2 and 4. With one notable exception, all lambs developed pyrexia and viremia. The exception was lamb #165 from Group 4, which had an RNA level of 104.2 copies/ml at dpf 2, which is below the limit of detection of our virus isolation assay. Interestingly, this lamb was exposed to mosquitoes that had earlier fed on lamb #153, which was an outlier itself from Group 3, displaying a low viremia level (102.5 TCID50/ml) at the moment of mosquito feeding, possibly explaining the low number of mosquitoes that became infected after feeding on this lamb. Specifically, lamb #165 seemed to be exposed to only one saliva-positive mosquito, developing very low viremia after this exposure. The other lambs in both groups (Groups 2 and 4) were exposed to an average of 20 saliva-positive mosquitoes and the virological and clinical outcomes in these groups were highly similar to those resulting from IV inoculation (Group 1).Intravenous inoculation of 105 TCID50 of RVFV is currently applied in our laboratory to evaluate efficacy of vaccines which, according to the present study, seems to result in virological and clinical outcomes that mimic those following exposure to ~ 20 RVFV saliva-positive mosquitoes. It is interesting to consider if exposure to 20 RVFV saliva-positive mosquitoes is representative to the field situation. An entomological study performed during the Kenyan outbreak of 2006/2007, revealed an average infection rate below 3 per 1000 mosquitoes17. Although depending on vector densities and attack rates, this finding suggests that animals are unlikely to be exposed to RVFV via more than one mosquito in the field at any given moment, even during outbreaks. It would thus be valuable to evaluate virological and clinical outcome after exposure to a single saliva-positive mosquito in future experiments.The efficient transmission of RVFV from lamb to lamb in the present work was facilitated by the use of laboratory-reared Ae. aegypti mosquitoes. We selected these mosquitoes for our studies as they are easily reared to very high numbers and as they take multiple bloodmeals in a single gonotrophic cycle18. It must be noted, however, that RVFV was never detected in Ae. aegypti collected from the field. This can be explained by differences in susceptibility between laboratory-reared mosquitoes and field-collected mosquitoes. Alternatively or additionally, the lack of detection of RVFV in field-collected Ae. aegypti mosquitoes may be explained by host preference. Having a preference for human blood, Ae. aegypti is mostly found in urban areas, whereas RVFV is most prevalent in rural areas where ruminants reside19. Nevertheless, the extremely efficient transmission of RVFV as determined in the present work should be considered a warning. Ae. aegypti is the primary vector of four arboviruses with major impact on human health: chikungunya virus, dengue virus, yellow fever virus, and Zika virus and growing populations of humans and livestock will facilitate encounters of Ae. aegypti and RVFV. Therefore, further studies are required to evaluate the risk of human-to-human transmission of RVFV by Ae. aegypti mosquitoes, which could result in urban transmission cycles. Considering this, it is important to determine if viremia levels in infected humans are sufficient to facilitate urban transmission cycles. One study, in which viremia levels approaching 106 TCID50/ml were recorded suggests that humans may not be a dead-end host for RVFV as currently assumed20.In conclusion, our work has demonstrated that RVFV can be transmitted efficiently from lamb to lamb via laboratory-reared Ae. aegypti mosquitoes and thereby provides novel methods to investigate environmental, vector and vertebrate host factors that affect transmission of RVFV in the field. Importantly, the methods can be used to evaluate efficacy of vaccines against mosquito-mediated exposure.MethodsVirus and cellsRVFV strain 35/74 was originally isolated from the liver of a sheep that died during a RVFV outbreak in the Free State province of South Africa in 197421. The strain was previously passaged four times in suckling mouse brain and three times in BHK cells. The virus used for IV inoculation of sheep was prepared by a further amplification in BHK-21 cells (ATCC CCL-10) cultured in CO2-independent medium (CIM, Invitrogen), supplemented with 5% FBS (Bodinco) and 1% Pen/Strep (Invitrogen).To prepare a virus-spiked blood meal for membrane feeding of mosquitoes, the virus was amplified in Aedes albopictus C6/36 cells (ATCC CRL-1660). To this end, C6/36 cells were inoculated with a multiplicity of infection of 0.005 and cultured at 28 °C in absence of CO2 in L-15 medium (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2% Tryptose Phosphate Broth (TPB) and 1% MEM nonessential amino acids solution (MEMneaa). At 4 days post infection, culture medium was harvested, cleared by slow-speed centrifugation and titrated using Vero-E6 cells (ATCC CRL-1586), grown in DMEM supplemented with GlutaMAX, 3% FBS, 1% Pen/Strep and 1% Fungizone (DMEM +) at 37 °C and 5% CO2. Titers were determined using the Spearman-Kärber algorithm22,23.Mosquito rearing and feeding on lambsRockefeller strain Ae. aegypti mosquitoes (Bayer AG, Monheim, Germany) were maintained at Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands, as described24. Briefly, mosquitoes were kept in Bugdorm-1 rearing cages at a temperature of 27 °C with a 12:12 light:dark cycle and a relative humidity of 70% with a 6% glucose solution provided ad libitum. Mosquitoes were subsequently transported to biosafety level three (BSL-3) facilities of Wageningen Bioveterinary Research (Lelystad, the Netherlands), where the mosquitoes were maintained with sugar water (6% sucrose in H2O), provided via soaked cotton pads covered with a lid to prevent evaporation in an insect incubator (KBWF 240, Binder) at 28 °C at a humidity of 70% and a 16:8 light:dark cycle.Mosquito feeding on lambs was preceded by sedating the lambs with IV administration of medetomidine (Sedator). When fully sedated, cardboard boxes containing 40–50 female mosquitoes were placed on the shaved inner thigh of each hind leg (Fig. 1b,c). After 20 min of feeding, cardboard boxes were removed and atipamezol (Atipam) was administered via intramuscular (IM) route to wake up the animals. Fully engorged mosquitoes were collected using an automated insect aspirator and maintained with sugar water (6% sucrose in H2O), provided via soaked cotton pads covered with a lid to prevent evaporation, in an insect incubator (KBWF 240, Binder) at 28 °C at a humidity of 70% and a 16:8 light:dark cycle.Feeding of mosquitoes using a Hemotek systemBlood meals to be used for Hemotek membrane feeding were prepared essentially as described before25. Briefly, erythrocytes were harvested from freshly collected bovine EDTA blood by slow-speed centrifugation (650 xg), followed by three wash steps with PBS. Washed erythrocytes were resuspended in L15 complete medium (L15 + 10% FBS, 2% TPB, 1% MEMneaa) to a concentration that is four times higher than found in blood. To prepare a blood meal, one part of the erythrocyte suspension was mixed with two parts of culture medium containing RVFV resulting in a final titer of 107.5 TCID50/ml as determined on Vero-E6 cells.Mosquitoes were allowed to take a RVFV-spiked blood meal through a Parafilm M membrane using the Hemotek PS5 feeding system (Discovery Workshops, Lancashire, United Kingdom). Feeding was performed in plastic buckets (1 l) covered with mosquito netting. After blood feeding for approximately 1.5–2 h, fully engorged mosquitoes were collected using an automated insect aspirator and maintained with sugar water (6% sucrose in H2O), provided via soaked cotton pads covered with a lid to prevent evaporation in an insect incubator (KBWF 240, Binder) at 28 °C at a humidity of 70% and a 16:8 light:dark cycle.Virus isolationVirus isolation from plasma samples was performed using BHK-21 cells, seeded at a density of 20,000 cells/well in 96-wells plates. Serial dilutions of samples were incubated with the cells for 1.5 h before medium replacement. Cytopathic effect was evaluated after 5–7 days post infection. Virus titers (TCID50/ml) were determined using the Spearman-Kärber algorithm22,23.To check for positive saliva, mosquitoes were sedated on a semi-permeable CO2-pad connected to 100% CO2 and wings and legs were removed. Saliva was collected by forced salivation using 20 µl filter tips containing 7 µl of a 1:1 mixture of FBS and 50% sucrose (capillary tube method). After 1–1.5 h, saliva samples were collected and used to inoculate Vero-E6 cell monolayers. Cytopathic effect (CPE) was scored 5–7 days later.SerologyWeekly collected serum samples were used to detect RVFV-specific antibodies using the ID Screen Rift Valley Fever Competition Multi-species ELISA (ID-VET). This ELISA measures percentage competition between antibodies present in test sera and a monoclonal antibody. Neutralizing antibodies were detected using the RVFV-4 s-based virus neutralization test as described26.RT-qPCRViral RNA was isolated with the NucliSENS easyMAG system according the manufacturer’s instructions (bioMerieux, France) from 0.5 ml plasma samples. Briefly, 5 µl RNA was used in a RVFV RT-qPCR using the LightCycler one-tube RNA Amplification Kit HybProbe (Roche, Almere, The Netherlands) in combination with a LightCycler 480 real-time PCR system (Roche) and the RVS forward primers (AAAGGAACAATGGACTCTGGTCA), the RVAs (CACTTCTTACTACCATGTCCTCCAAT) reverse primer and a FAM-labelled probe RVP (AAAGCTTTGATATCTCTCAGTGCCCCAA). Primers and probes were earlier described by Drosten et al.27. Virus isolations were performed on RT-qPCR positive samples with a threshold above 105 RNA copies/ml as this was previously shown to be a cut-off point below which no live virus can be isolated.Pathology and (immuno)histopathologyLiver samples were placed on ice during the necropsies and subsequently stored at − 80 °C until virus isolations and RT-qPCR Tissue samples for histology and IHC were collected, placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded into paraffin and prepared for H&E staining or IHC staining for RVFV antigen using the RVFV Gn-specific 4-D4 mAb as described5.StatisticsFor statistical analysis, mosquito feeding and mosquito saliva positive rates per group were compared by fitting logistic regression mixed models where lamb or membrane were introduced as random effects. To compare viremia (based on virus isolation results) the area under the curve (AUC) representing the overall viremia during the infected period was calculated for each infected sheep. This AUC and peak of viremia was used for comparison between groups, which was done by fitting linear regression models.Additionally we also assessed the variability observed between groups on the above mentioned variables (feeding and saliva positive rates, AUC and peak viremia). For these comparisons, data were first assessed for normality using the Shapiro–Wilk test. If data from all groups were normally distributed, the Bartlett's test of homogeneity of variance was used. If the data did not have a normal distribution, the Fligner-Killeen test was applied.Survival of infected lambs (time to death) was compared between experiment groups using Kaplan–Meier survival analysis and the mortality rates were compared fitting a logistic regression model.For all comparisons, the threshold for significance was p < 0.05, for analysis involving multiple group comparison a Bonferroni correction was applied. All statistical analysis were performed using the statistical software package R28. The package MESS29 was used to compute the AUC.Ethics statementThe animal experiment was conducted in accordance with European regulations (EU directive 2010/63/EU) and the Dutch Law on Animal Experiments (Wod, ID number BWBR0003081). Permissions were granted by the Dutch Central Authority for Scientific Procedures on Animals (Permit Number: AVD4010020185564). All experimental protocols were approved by the Animal Ethics Committees of Wageningen Research.Supplementary Information
Supplementary Information


Title: Laboratory demonstration of the vertical transmission of Rift Valley fever virus by 

IntroductionRift Valley fever virus (RVFV) (order: Bunyavirales; family: Phenuiviridae; genus: Phlebovirus) is an emerging, mosquito-transmitted virus endemic to sub-Saharan Africa [1]. Outbreaks are episodic and impose a significant economic, veterinary, and public health burden. Both livestock animals and humans are susceptible to infection. RVFV mortality rates among adult ruminant livestock ranges from 10% to 20%. Additionally, RVFV epizootics are characterized by abortion storms with neonatal mortality rates approaching 100% [2]. Infection in humans typically results in febrile illness but can progress to more severe illness in 1% to 2% affected individuals with a case fatality rate between 10% and 20% [3,4]. In 1997–1998, a large transboundary outbreak of RVFV occurred in Africa, resulting in 90,000 human infections and the loss of approximately 100,000 domestic animals [5]. The outbreak also elicited a ban on livestock exports, which caused significant economic hardship for the region [6]. RVFV also poses significant global emergence potential as evidenced by large and sustained outbreaks in Egypt and the Arabian Peninsula [7–9]. Furthermore, much work has been conducted demonstrating that RVFV could invade and establish itself in North America because of frequent travel from endemic areas, presence of susceptible mosquito vectors, and US agricultural practices such as intensive livestock production [10–16].Understanding the transmission mechanisms by which arboviruses maintain themselves in nature is critical for assessing their potential risk for emergence and establishment in new places. Arbovirus maintenance is generally perpetuated via horizontal transmission cycles between arthropod vectors and vertebrate hosts. However, some arboviruses have also evolved a means of vertical transmission whereby the virus is transmitted from parental arthropods directly to their offspring. Vertical transmission has been demonstrated among the bunyaviruses, flaviviruses, and alphaviruses indicating that this is a relatively common and convergent evolutionary strategy for virus persistence in the presence of ecological conditions that are not conducive to classical horizontal transmission [17,18].The mechanisms of RVFV persistence through interepidemic periods remains not fully characterized. RVFV is has the ability to infect and transmit among a wide variety of vectors, which can be classified into two categories: “reservoir/maintenance”, which include certain Aedes species (spp.) mosquitoes, and “epidemic/amplifying”, characterized by Culex spp. mosquitoes [19]. RVFV relies, at least in part, on vertical transmission in the “reservoir/maintenance” mosquito vector to potentiate itself between epizootic events, however, evidence of this mode of transmission is limited to a few virus isolations from adult mosquitoes reared from field-collected larvae and antigen accumulation in mosquito ovaries [20,21]. Endemic transmission does also occur in between epizootic events, although at low levels [22]. Furthermore, RVFV epizootics have been correlated with periods of abnormally high rainfall and this pattern has been further correlated with El Niño/Southern Oscillation events, providing the capability to identify environmental conditions favorable to supporting an outbreak [23,24]. Although vertical transmission of RVFV has been generally accepted by the scientific community as a mechanism for ecological persistence, to date, this phenomenon has not been demonstrated in a laboratory environment. Understanding the potential impact of vertical transmission on RVFV establishment if this virus is introduced to new geographic areas including North America is critical, as it will provide insight into vector control, mitigation efforts, and entomological surveillance in the midst of an outbreak. Herein, we present three preliminary experiments that demonstrate the vertical transmission of RVFV in a North American mosquito vector Culex (Cux.) tarsalis Coquillett, a vector that has been shown in the laboratory to have the potential to transmit RVFV very efficiently [13].Materials and methodsEthics statementAll experiments were approved by CSU’s Institutional Biosafety Committee under protocol number 16-078B. Experiments were also conducted in accordance with the CDC and USDA regulations governing the utilization of Select Agents and Toxins.MosquitoesAll Cx. tarsalis mosquitoes used in these experiments are from the Kern National Wildlife Refuge (KNWR) colony. The colony was established in July 1953 from mosquitoes collected from the Kern National Wildlife Refuge, Kern County, California, USA [25].Virus stocks and infectious and non-infectious bloodmealsStocks of RVFV (Kenya 128B-15) were generated by infecting Vero cells (ATCC CCL-81, American Type Culture Collection) at a MOI of 0.01 and incubating for 72 hours in a humidified incubator set to 37°C with 5% CO2. DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS and Penicillin/Streptomycin was used for virus propagation. Virus for infectious bloodmeals was generated from stock virus in the same manner. At 72 hours post-infection, infectious cell culture supernatant was clarified by centrifugation at 7,000 x g for 10 minutes and was added to defibrinated calf blood (Colorado Serum Company) at a 1:1 ratio. Non-infectious blood meals consisted solely of defibrinated calf blood diluted 1:1 with DMEM, supplemented as described above.Blood meals were loaded into Hemotek membrane feeders covered in collagen membrane (Hemotek Ltd, Lancashire, United Kingdom) and were warmed to 37°C. Mosquitoes were fed for 2 hours. After feeding, mosquitoes were anesthetized by holding at 4°C until immobilized and were sorted in petri dishes on ice; engorged mosquitoes were placed in new containers and the rest were discarded. Aliquots of infectious bloodmeals were held at the same conditions for the duration of the infectious blood meal, and then were back titrated via plaque assay as previously described to confirm that the target blood meal viral titer was achieved [26].Study 1: Detection of RVFV antigen in mosquitoes receiving infectious blood mealArtificial blood meals with RVFV (7.3 log10 PFU/mL) were provided to Cx. tarsalis females between 5–8 days post-emergence as described above. After feeding, engorged mosquitoes were incubated at 28°C with a 16:8 light:dark cycle and 70% relative humidity for 7 days. The protocol used for fixing and staining of paraffin-embedded sections of mosquitoes was described previously by Kading et al. [27]. Briefly, female mosquitoes used in immunofluorescence assays were injected with 360nl of freshly prepared 4% paraformaldehyde (Electron Microscopy Products) with a Nanoject III (Drummond) and submerged in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours. After 24 hours, samples were transferred to 70% ethanol. Inactivation assays were conducted on 10% of samples to verify inactivation prior to transfer out of BSL3 conditions as per institution-approved inactivation requirements [27,28]. Sectioning was conducted by Colorado HistoPrep (Fort Collins, CO). Mosquito sections were stained with a mouse anti-RVFV polyclonal antibody diluted to 1:1024. Goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor 488 (Invitrogen) diluted 1:2000 served as the secondary antibody. Slides were treated with SlowFade Gold with DAPI (Invitrogen) to prevent bleaching and allow for the visualization of anatomical and cellular structures. An Olympus 1X81 FV1000 confocal microscope was used to visualize the specimens.Study 2a: Detection of RVFV RNA in eggs and first instar larvae of parental mosquitoes after receiving an infectious blood mealFemale mosquitoes were provided an artificial infectious blood meal (7.3 log10 PFU/mL) as described above (n = 50 engorged females). Fully engorged mosquitoes were housed in a carton with a cup of water and a small paper towel to allow engorged mosquitoes to deposit egg rafts in the cup. This process was repeated twice with non-infectious blood meals on day 7 and day 14 post-infectious blood meal, yielding egg rafts from three gonotrophic cycles, termed E1, E2, and E3. For this experiment, E1 egg rafts were discarded, E2 egg rafts hatched prior to collection, yielding E2 egg raft husks (n = 21) and E2 1st instar larvae (30 larvae per tube, n = 48). E3 egg rafts were also collected (n = 20). All mosquito tissues were stored in 2ml screwcap tubes (Sarstedt) with 2 glass beads (Millipore) and 250μl diluent consisting of DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin, 0.1% Gentamycin, and 0.1% Amphotericin B. All samples were stored at -80°C until processing.Prior to RT-qPCR, samples were homogenized in a MagNA Lyser (Roche) for 1 minute at 3,500 rpm and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 1 minute. RNA was extracted from 50μl of supernatant via the MagMAX Viral RNA Isolation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). RT-qPCR was conducted on all RNA samples in duplicate on a QuantStudio 3 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using TaqMan Fast Virus 1-Step Master Mix (ThermoFisher Scientific). Primers used were RVFL-2912fwdgg, RVFL-2981revAC, and RVFL-2950-Probe described in Bird et al. [29]. PFU equivalents were determined by running samples with a standard curve as previously described [29].Study 2b: Detection of infectious RVFV particles in parental mosquitoes and progeny after receiving an infectious blood mealFemale mosquitoes were provided an artificial infectious blood meal (7.6 log10 PFU/mL) as described above (n = 123 engorged females). Mosquitoes were housed in a carton with a cup of water to collect egg rafts as described above. Between days 3 and 7 post-engorgement egg rafts were collected from the cup. This process was repeated twice with non-infectious blood meals on day 7 and day 14 post-infectious blood meal, yielding egg rafts from three gonotrophic cycles, termed E1, E2, and E3 (Fig 1). From each gonotrophic cycle, five rafts were collected for plaque assay and the remaining were hatched. For the first two gonotrophic cycles, the following samples were collected: pools of five first instar larvae (n = 30), pools of five second instar larvae (n = 30), individual third instar larvae (n = 50), individual fourth instar larvae (n = 50), female pupae (n = 50), male pupae (n = 50), whole male mosquitoes (n = 50), and female mosquitoes (n = 50) that were dissected to yield bodies, legs & wings, saliva, and ovaries (described below). Pupae were collected and transferred to cartons to emerge, and adult progeny mosquitoes were harvested 72 hours after the last mosquitoes emerged from their pupae. This resulted in the adult progeny having an age range of 3 to 7 days. Surviving parental mosquitoes (n = 25) were dissected on day 21 post-infectious blood meal to yield body, legs & wings, saliva, and ovaries. By the third gonotrophic cycle, death among the parental mosquitoes and a reduction in egg laying resulted in too few offspring to test all life stages; as a result, only egg rafts, adult males, and adult females were collected for analysis for the E3 progeny.10.1371/journal.pntd.0009273.g001Fig 1Experimental diagram for detecting the presence of RVFV among progeny mosquitoes (Study 2b in Materials and methods).This figure was created using BioRender.com.Female mosquitoes were processed in the following manner: first, legs & wings were removed, and saliva was collected as previously described [30]. After saliva collection and prior to dissection, mosquitoes were dipped in 70% ethanol immediately followed by PBS to remove hydrophobicity. Ovaries were dissected from female mosquitoes on 3x3 glass spot plates (Pyrex). All plates and tools were disinfected with 70% ethanol between samples to prevent contamination. All mosquito tissues were stored in 2ml screwcap tubes (Sarstedt) with 2 glass beads (Millipore) and 250μl diluent as described above. Saliva was stored in 1.5ml microcentrifuge tubes (Eppendorf) with 100μl diluent. All samples were stored at -80°C until processing.Prior to plaque assays, samples were homogenized in a MagNA Lyser (Roche) for 1 minute at 3,500 rpm and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 1 minute, except saliva which was only centrifuged, the resulting supernatant was used for plaque assays. Parental and E2 samples were titrated by 12-well plaque assay as previously described [26], using 10-fold dilutions and plating dilutions 0 through 10−5. Specifically, 100μl of inoculum was reserved for inoculation of the undiluted well, 1:10 dilutions (10−1 thru 10−5) were made on 96-well plates by applying 20μl of the inoculum to 180μl diluent, ensuring the inoculum was sufficiently dispersed in the diluent by mixing before transferring to the next dilution. All plaque assays were conducted in duplicate and positive titers were only recorded if both duplicates were positive for virus. Titers are reported as averages of the two duplicates. The plaque assays were designed as described above to reduce the limit of detection to the lowest level while still being able to conduct assays in duplicate and on 12-well plates; one plaque forming unit in the undiluted well (100μl inoculum) translated to 2.5 plaque forming units for the sample in question due to the 250μl diluent volume in each sample, making this our limit of detection.Upon visualizing plaques only in the 0 dilution of the E2 samples, only undiluted samples were plaqued in single wells for virus quantification in the E1 and E3 samples. For pooled samples, namely the 1st and 2nd larvae, infection rates were determined by maximum likelihood estimation [31].ResultsStudy 1: Detection of RVFV antigen in mosquitoes receiving infectious blood mealRift valley fever virus was administered to female Cx. tarsalis mosquitoes through an infectious blood meal delivered through an artificial membrane feeding apparatus to approximate natural exposure. RVFV antigen was identified in the follicular epithelium, oocytes, and nurse cells in the ovaries of infected parental mosquitoes by immunofluorescence assay (Fig 2). This observation was made in specimens examined after 7 days incubation. The movement of RVFV from the midgut to the ovaries was confirmed by plaque titration, demonstrating that 60% of blood-fed female mosquitoes had infectious RVFV in their ovaries at a mean virus titer of 3.4 log10 PFU (Table 1 and Fig 3).10.1371/journal.pntd.0009273.g002Fig 2Confocal images of RVFV antigen present in ovarian tissue of RVFV-infected Cx. tarsalis (Blue = DAPI, Green = RVFV antigen).A) RVFV Infected. B) Non-infected control. Yellow arrows: follicular epithelium; red arrows: nurse cells; orange arrows: oocyte. Purple scale bar = 31μm.10.1371/journal.pntd.0009273.t001Table 1Percent of parental tissues testing positive for RVFV via plaque assay.TestedPositivePercent Infected†Body251872%Legs & Wings251248%Saliva251040%Ovaries251560%10.1371/journal.pntd.0009273.g003Fig 3RVFV Titers of parental and progeny mosquitoes.A) Parental mosquitoes, B) E1 progeny mosquitoes, C) E2 progeny mosquitoes, D) E3 progeny mosquitoes. LOD: limit of detection for the assay.Study 2a: Detection of RVFV RNA in eggs and first instar larvae of parental mosquitoes after receiving an infectious blood mealWe then sought to determine if RVFV RNA could be detected in the eggs and first instar larvae of mosquitoes who had imbibed a RVFV bloodmeal. Parental mosquitoes were orally exposed to RVFV as above, followed by two subsequent noninfectious blood meals weekly thereafter to mimic natural blood meal acquisition and associated physiological changes. Egg raft husks and 1st instar larvae from the second gonotrophic cycle (E2) and egg rafts from the third gonotrophic cycle (E3) were collected. We found that 24% of the E2 egg raft husks, 27 of 48 positive pools of 30 larvae, and 40% of the E3 egg rafts were positive for viral RNA by RT-qPCR, demonstrating the presence of RVFV RNA in the progeny of infected parental mosquitoes at early life stages (Table 2). PFU equivalents were unable to be determined on many samples from the standard curve due to the Ct values being higher than the x-intercept (33.1) of the linear regression generated from the standards, though many of the samples had Ct values < 33.1 (S1 Table). Samples listed as positive had Ct values less than the average Ct value for the most dilute sample in the standard dilution series (S2 Table). A Ct of between 30–35 has previously been shown to represent a positive result and has been associated with recovery of low levels of infectious RVFV [32,33], consistent with what we observed in our standards (S2 Table).10.1371/journal.pntd.0009273.t002Table 2Percent of tissues positive for RVFV RNA among progeny mosquitoes.F1 E2 MosquitoesF1 E3 MosquitoesTestedPositivePercent Infected†Average Ct Value††TestedPositivePercent Infected†Average Ct Value††Egg Rafts00N/AN/A20840%33.5Egg Raft Husks21524%33.600N/AN/A1st Instar Larvae (pools of 30)48272.7%33.700N/AN/A†Percent infection rates for pooled samples were calculated using maximum likelihood estimation. These values are indicated with an asterisk.††Average Ct values reported are the mean of the samples considered to be positive (Ct value < 35.1).Study 2b: Detection of infectious RVFV particles in parental mosquitoes and progeny after receiving an infectious blood mealNext, we sought to determine whether viable RVFV was transmitted from the infected ovaries of the female to her progeny. Parental mosquitoes were orally exposed to RVFV as above, followed by two subsequent noninfectious blood meals weekly thereafter to mimic natural blood meal acquisition and associated physiological changes. Eggs from each of the three gonotrophic cycles (E1, E2, E3) were reared to the adult stage, with individuals from each developmental stage screened for infectious virus.Vertical transmission occurred after the first infectious blood meal, as RVFV was detected in the F1-E1 progeny (Table 3 and Fig 3). Adult female progeny mosquitoes harbored infectious virus in their ovaries and saliva, indicating the potential ability to transmit vertically or horizontally upon emergence (Table 3), albeit all the titers were at or near the limit of detection (Fig 3). Third, ovary infection rates were higher than viral dissemination rates from the midgut, which may indicate a unique mechanism for the transit of RVFV from the midgut to the ovaries (Table 3). Fourth, infection rates among F1 adults appeared consistent between gonotrophic cycles (Table 3). Fifth, infectious titers were low but detectable, warranting further investigations into the physiological mechanisms for virus persistence (Fig 3). While many questions remain to be investigated, these findings are important in that they represent preliminary demonstration of vertical transmission of RVFV from a female mosquito to her progeny in a laboratory setting.10.1371/journal.pntd.0009273.t003Table 3Percent of tissues testing positive for RVFV via plaque assay among progeny mosquitoes.F1 E1 MosquitoesF1 E2 MosquitoesF1 E3 MosquitoesTestedPositivePercent Infected†TestedPositivePercent Infected†TestedPositivePercent Infected†Egg Rafts500%5480%500%1st Instar Larvae (pools of 5)3021%*3021%*---2nd Instar Larvae (pools of 5)3043%*3000%*---3rd Instar Larvae5048%50612%---4th Instar Larvae5036%5000%---Pupae-Male5048%5012%---Body-Male5012%50612%5000%Pupae-Female5000%5024%---Body-Female5012%50510%50510%Legs & Wings-Female5048%5012%5036%Saliva-Female5000%5024%5024%Ovaries-Female5024%5036%50714%†Percent infection rates for pooled samples were calculated using maximum likelihood estimation. These values are indicated with an asterisk.DiscussionOur studies provide several lines of preliminary evidence supporting the vertical transmission of RVFV among Cx. tarsalis mosquitoes, using molecular, immunological, and virological methodologies. First, we showed that Cx. tarsalis mosquitoes, upon ingestion of an infectious blood meal, accumulated RVFV antigen in the developing oocytes of the ovaries by 7 days post exposure, evidenced by detection of antigen in the ovaries of females who received an infectious blood meal (Fig 2). Second, egg raft husks and egg rafts from the 2nd and 3rd gonotrophic cycles of infected mosquitoes were positive for RVFV RNA by RT-qPCR (Table 2). Third, in a separate experiment, infectious virus was detected in the tissues and saliva of progeny mosquitoes from multiple gonotrophic cycles by plaque assay (Table 3). Collectively these experiments demonstrate that RVFV is capable of vertical transmission in Cx. tarsalis, regardless of gonotrophic cycle.The nature of this vertical transmission in Cx. tarsalis is yet to be confirmed (i.e. transovarial versus transovum), as well as if this mechanism varies by gonotrophic cycle. While viral antigen was localized to the interior of developing oocytes suggesting transovarial transmission (Fig 2), viral RNA was also detected on the husks of hatched eggs suggesting a more superficial attachment of virions (Table 2) consistent with transovum transmission [21,34]. Antigen for RVFV has previously been visualized in association with the interior and exterior of developing oocytes as well as the common and lateral oviducts and genital chamber of Ae. macintoshi mosquitoes [21]. The observations from our study involving Cx. tarsalis are consistent with this earlier work even though the mosquito species utilized represent different genera.Additionally, we found disagreement among the tissue infections in the positive adult progeny, that is, not all mosquitoes who had virus-positive tissues had evidence of a disseminated or midgut infection (Table 3). Progeny naturally infected through vertical transmission, especially when viral antigen has been detected in the interior of the developing oocyte, would be expected to produce adult progeny with a systemic infection since the virus would have the opportunity to infect cells at an early stage of embryonic development, as opposed to needing to pass through the standard barriers to infection following oral exposure. We observed infection of both ovarian and somatic tissues in adult F1 progeny (Table 3) from parental females with viral antigen that had perfused the yolk interior of the mature oocytes (Fig 2). While we did not specifically investigate the cell types within the chorionated eggs that were infected, this result suggests that RVFV is able to infect developing cells in different poles of the oocyte that eventually differentiate into germline or somatic tissues, similarly to what has been described for Wolbachia [35], but this phenomenon warrants further study.Importantly, many of our RVFV-positive samples were determined to be at the limit of detection for the plaque assay, which raises the question of false positives or contamination. We believe the independent results from the RT-qPCR data showing viral RNA in egg rafts, egg raft husks, and 1st instar larvae to be compelling evidence that vertical transmission is occurring, albeit at low levels (Table 2). The threshold for positivity in these samples and recovering low levels of infectious virus was also consistent with other studies [32,33]. Furthermore, we elected to conduct plaque assays based on the RT-qPCR data to remove any uncertainty regarding the presence of infectious virus as opposed to viral RNA fragments. Samples were plaqued in duplicate, and samples with plaques in both wells were counted to add further confidence in the validity of the results. Unfortunately, to obtain low limits of detection and sample volume constraints we were unable to conduct both plaque assays and RT-qPCR on the same samples. Variability among infection rates within the same gonotrophic cycle could be due to the measured titers being at the limit of detection of the plaque assay.There are a number of factors potentially influencing the inconsistent tissue distribution patterns observed in F1 adults as well as the low titers of RVFV in emergent progeny. One hypothesis is the influence of Wolbachia infection. The distribution of the intracellular bacterium Wolbachia varies widely by taxa and species [35] and has been known to influence West Nile virus infection of Cx tarsalis mosquitoes [36]. Dodson et al. also reported that while Wolbachia infection did not influence transmission rates of RVFV by Culex mosquitoes, there was a negative correlation between Wolbachia density and RVFV titer [37]. Romoser et al. [21] also postulated that some eggs of Aedes macintoshi infected with RVFV may harbor a latent infection which may go undetected during experimental investigation but is instrumental in establishing a stabilized infection in natural mosquito populations. Lastly, immune factors intrinsic to the vector such as RNA interference (RNAi) could also limit the transstadial penetration of virus through to the adult stage [38,39]. RNAi can be readily triggered in mosquito larvae following exposure to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) [40,41]. If exogenous viral RNA present in oviposited mosquito eggs triggers RNAi in metabolically-active larvae, this natural anti-viral mechanism may influence the resulting infection rates and viral titers in F1 adults. Whether the tissue distributions and viral titers observed in this study are due to suppression by Wolbachia, latent infection, RNAi, or some other combination of mechanisms, this observation requires further investigation. We also found that male mosquito progeny had low rates of infection, raising the question of whether venereal transmission can further potentiate spread of the virus among mosquito populations.Notably, there was a discrepancy between dissemination rates (48.0%) and the infection rate of the ovaries (60.0%) of parental Cx. tarsalis mosquitoes (Table 1). This phenomenon also extends to individual mosquitoes. This observed disagreement could be due to the fact that the virus titers observed were at the limit of detection and the assay was not sensitive enough to detect virus in the other tissues, and that positive detections were missed for some samples due to the low infectious titers. This observation may also be due to the virus making use of the tracheal system to disseminate throughout the mosquito body, and warrants additional exploration [42]. Romoser et al [21] localized RVFV antigen to the cytoplasm of the tracheal cells in RVFV-infected Ae. macintoshi mosquitoes and hypothesized that ovarian infections could occur through this route in addition to infection through the follicular epithelium. Kading et al. [42] also observed viral antigen in tracheal epithelial cells in Ae. aegypti mosquitoes experimentally infected with RVFV ZH501 strain. Similarly, Chandler et al. reported LaCrosse virus (LACV) infection of ovarian tissue in the mosquito triseriatus (Say) several days prior to virus dissemination from the midgut [43]. Utilization of the tracheal system for viral dissemination has been proposed for several other mosquito- and tick-borne viruses [44,45].Here we report preliminary laboratory evidence for the vertical transmission of RVFV in colonized Cx. tarsalis mosquitoes for three consecutive gonotrophic cycles. These data represent important first steps towards describing the nature of this transmission mechanism and its role in RVFV environmental persistence. Cx. tarsalis is an ideal model for these preliminary experiments as the mosquito is very susceptible to infection, and would likely play a significant role in a RVFV epizootic if RVFV emerged into North America [13,16]. Furthermore, the Cx. tarsalis colony is well established and easily manipulated. Future studies will focus on validating the efficiency of vertical transmission in Cx. tarsalis and additional mosquito species, comparing virus strains, the effect of a subsequent blood meal on virus replication in F1 progeny, and understanding the tissue tropisms and immune pathways that may be involved in modulating viral replication in vertically infected Cx. tarsalis.Demonstration of vertical transmission for RVFV in a laboratory setting has filled a research gap that has existed since the discovery decades ago that newly emerged mosquitoes can be infected with RVFV [20]. Certainly, because these experiments were conducted with a laboratory mosquito colony, the relevance of laboratory controlled vertical transmission to natural transmission cycles of RVFV in the field remains an important research aim. These data will also help parameterize models that seek to predict the establishment potential and persistence of RVFV transmission in different ecological systems, in which critical assumptions were previously necessary [46]. Still, these experiments demonstrate the proof-of-concept that RVFV, under standard laboratory conditions, can be vertically transmitted by mosquitoes.Supporting informationS1 TableRVFV RT-qPCR Ct values for individual mosquito F1 progeny reared from RVFV-infected parental female Culex tarsalis mosquitoes over three gonotrophic cycles.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableStandard curve for RVFV RT-qPCR assays.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Evaluation of Inactivation Methods for Rift Valley Fever Virus in Mouse Microglia

1. IntroductionIn recent decades, arboviral epidemics with a high burden of neurological disease have occurred around the world, presenting a major biological threat to humans, livestock, and agriculture [1,2,3,4,5,6]. Rift Valley fever phlebovirus (RVFV; Phenuiviridae family, Phlebovirus genus) is a highly pathogenic mosquito-borne virus that can cause lethal disease in both humans and livestock, eliciting a wide range of clinical manifestations, including hepatitis, hemorrhagic syndrome, and encephalitis associated with various neurological symptoms [4]. Up to 17% of cases during some outbreaks display neurological symptoms, including headaches, neck stiffness, confusion, hallucinations, eye pain, and vision loss, and fatality rates among patients with neurologic manifestation of disease reach 50% [7,8,9]. Despite neurological symptoms being amongst the worst outcomes of infection, our current understanding of RVFV pathogenesis within the brain is limited. Further work is required to define mechanisms that result in clearance of RVFV from the brain versus those that contribute to damaging inflammation, the role of resident and infiltrating cells, and potential mechanisms by which the virus abrogates the host response.Experiments aimed at gaining mechanistic insight into RVFV pathogenesis are complicated by the virus’ status as a Category A Biodefense pathogen as well as an overlap select agent by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) [10], and the requirement to handle wild-type strains at biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) containment. Removal of infected samples from high-containment labs is often necessary to facilitate downstream analyses, which requires inactivation of live virus within those samples. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) established the Federal Select Agent Program (FSAP) which maintains regulatory requirements for the possession, use, and transfer of select agents, including guidance on the requirements for inactivation procedures [11]. All inactivation procedures must be validated in-house and confirmed through a pathogen viability testing protocol before implementation, and each time a select agent is inactivated for removal from registered space, inactivation of the agent must be verified based on risk assessment. The attenuated strain of RVFV MP-12, which is not a select agent and can be handled at BSL-2 containment, provides a mechanism by which pathogenesis can be studied without the need to demonstrate inactivation of virus in every sample; however, significant differences in virulence exist between strains [12], and ultimately, results obtained with MP-12 should be confirmed and/or contrasted with results obtained with non-attenuated strains.Here, we present two methods of successful inactivation of RVFV-infected samples applied to mouse microglial cells, which are the resident immune cells of the brain. Initial tests were performed with the attenuated MP-12 strain of RVFV and methods were then validated using the wild-type ZH501 strain. First, we employed the Qiagen RNeasy Plus Mini RNA Isolation Kit for isolation of RNA from infected microglial cells. Next, we validated the inactivation of infected microglial cells using the BD Biosciences Cytofix/CytopermTM Fixation/Permeabilization Kit for preservation of cell integrity and surface protein expression for analysis by flow cytometry. Lastly, we demonstrated the staining and analysis of surface proteins on infected primary microglia after subjecting the cells to the validated inactivation method. Results from these experiments highlight an interesting difference in the response of microglia to MP-12 and ZH501, with several surface proteins involved in immune signaling and cellular activation downregulated in cells infected with ZH501 compared to MP-12. This work helps facilitate compliance with federal regulation of select agents by providing validated methods of inactivation of RVFV-infected mammalian cells and also identifies a potential difference in immune activation between RVFV strains.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cells, Mice, and VirusesVero, SIM A9, and LADMAC cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and maintained in culture as described previously [13]. Primary microglia were isolated from neonatal mice and cultured as described previously [13,14,15]. Microglia were maintained in culture for up to one week before use in viral infection experiments. C57BL/6J mice were obtained from Jackson Laboratory (strain #000664). All animals were housed in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC)-accredited facility. Wild-type RVFV strain ZH501 was obtained from the NIH Biodefense and Emerging Infections Research Resources Repository, NIAID, NIH. The MP-12 strain was kindly provided by Oscar Negrete (Sandia National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA). RVFV stocks were propagated in Vero cells as described previously [16,17]. All work with the ZH501 strain was performed in Institutional Biosafety Committee approved BSL-3 facilities at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory using appropriate PPE and protective measures.2.2. Plaque AssayViral titers were evaluated by standard plaque assay as previously described [16,17]. Vero cells were seeded at a density of 250,000 cells/well in 12-well plates 1 day prior to infection. Tenfold dilutions of virus-containing samples were prepared in media (DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS, both from Thermo Fisher, Grand Island, NY, USA), and 200 μL of each dilution was used to infect cell monolayers. Cells were incubated with the virus for 30 min at 37 °C and then overlaid with medium containing 1% UltraPure agarose (Thermo Fisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Cells were incubated for 4 (ZH501) or 7 (MP-12) days at 37 °C and then plaques were visualized using crystal violet staining. Viral titers were determined by counting the number of plaques on the lowest countable dilution.2.3. RVFV Infection of Microglial CellsFor assessment of inactivation following RNA extraction or cell fixation, SIM-A9 cells were plated in 12-well tissue culture treated plates at a density of 250,000 cells per well one day prior to infection. Cells were infected with MP-12 or ZH501 at an MOI of 8 or 10, respectively. Cells were incubated with virus for 4 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. For RNA extraction, viral infection media were removed, followed by cell lysis. For cell fixation, viral infection media were removed, cells were washed one time with PBS, then replenished with fresh media and incubated for another 20 h. For assessment of microglial activation markers following RVFV infection, primary microglia were isolated from neonatal mice as described below. Cells were plated in 24-well tissue culture-treated plates at a density of 250,000 cells per well one day prior to infection. Cells were infected with RVFV MP-12 or ZH501 at an MOI of 2 and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Viral infection media were removed, cells were washed one time with PBS, then replenished with fresh media and incubated for another 20 h. Supernatants were then removed, and cells were processed for flow cytometry as described below.2.4. Isolation of RNA from Microglial CellsRNA was isolated from RVFV-infected cells using the Qiagen (Germantown, MD, USA) RNeasy plus mini RNA isolation kit according to manufacturer’s instructions, paraphrased here. Cells were lysed by addition of a 350 μL buffer RLT, followed by a 1 min incubation, transfer of lysate to a microcentrifuge tube, and vortex at max speed for 1 min. Samples were centrifuged for 3 min at 8000× g, 22 °C. The supernatant was transferred to a gDNA eliminator spin column placed within a 2 mL collection tube and centrifuged for 30 s at 8000× g, 22 °C. Then, 350 μL of 70% ethanol was added to the flow-through for a total of 700 μL and mixed by pipetting. The sample was transferred to an RNeasy spin column placed within a 2 mL collection tube and centrifuged for 15 s at 8000× g, 22 °C. After, a 700 μL buffer RW1 was added to the column and centrifuged for 15 s as before, and then a 500 μL buffer RPE was added to the column and centrifuged for 15 s as before. An additional 500 μL buffer RPE was added to the column and centrifuged for 2 min as before. The column was transferred to a new 2 mL collection tube, and centrifuged for 1 min at 15,000× g, 22 °C to eliminate any residual RPE buffer. The column was placed in a new 1.5 mL collection tube; 30 μL of RNase-free water was added to spin column membrane and centrifuged for 1 min at 8000× g, 22 °C. The flow-through contained purified RNA in water. For validation of inactivation, purified RNA samples were split into 2 portions. One half was plated directly onto a confluent monolayer of Vero cells for evaluation via plaque assay and the other half was spiked with live virus (4E5 pfu) and evaluated by plaque assay to demonstrate that any residual chemical inactivant that may remain in the sample does not interfere with viability testing.2.5. Preparation of Cells for Flow CytometryRVFV-infected cells were harvested by incubation in a TrypLE Express cell detachment reagent (Thermo Fisher, Grand Island, NY, USA) for 5 min. Media were added to inactivate TrypLE, and cells were transferred to a microcentrifuge tube. Cells were pelleted by centrifuging for 4 min at 500× g at 4 °C followed by resuspension in a 200 μL stain buffer (Hank’s balanced salt solution + 2% FBS, both from Thermo Fisher, Grand Island, NY, USA) by pipetting gently up and down. Cells were pelleted as before, then resuspended in 50 μL of a surface stain master mix (Fc block 1:100 dilution, clone 2.4G2; BD Biosciences (San Jose, CA, USA), LIVE/DEAD Fixable yellow dead stain (1:1000, Biolegend, San Diego, CA, USA)), along with the following antibodies (all from BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA): CD45 APC-Cy7 (1:500, clone 30-F11), CD11b PE-CF594 (1:500, clone M1/70), CD80 FITC (1:200, clone 16-1OA1), and CD86 PE-Cy7 (1:500, clone GL1). Cells were incubated for 20 min on ice, then washed twice by addition of a 200 μL stain buffer and pelleted as before. Cells were then resuspended in a 250 μL cytofix/cytoperm solution (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and incubated in the dark on ice for 60 min. Cells were washed twice by addition of 750 μL of a 1× Perm/wash solution (diluted from the provided 10× solution in water) and pelleted as before. Following final wash, cells were resuspended in 200 μL 1× PBS. For validation of inactivation, cell suspension was split into 2 portions. One half was plated directly onto a confluent monolayer of Vero cells for evaluation via plaque assay and the other half was spiked with live virus and evaluated by plaque assay to demonstrate that residual chemical inactivant does not interfere with viability testing. Flow cytometry was performed using a FACSAria Fusion and data were analyzed using FlowJo software v. 10.2.6. Statistical AnalysesData were analyzed and graphed using Prism software v. 10 (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA). Significance was assessed using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test. An adjusted p value of 0.05 or less was considered significant, and significant differences were indicated as follows: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, **** p < 0.0001.3. Results3.1. RVFV Robustly Infects MicrogliaTo develop an effective inactivation method for use with a wild-type strain of RVFV, we first employed the attenuated RVFV MP-12 strain, which is not a select agent and can be handled under BSL-2 containment in a non-registered space. While later experiments were performed using freshly isolated primary microglia from the brains of neonatal mice, we developed inactivation protocols using the SIM-A9 immortalized mouse microglial cell line that is easier and faster to grow than primary microglia [18]. These cells exhibit many of the same characteristics of primary microglia and have been used to study microglia behavior in the context of neuroinflammation, drug screens, and neurodegenerative therapeutic development [19,20,21,22].In a previous study, we compared the infectivity of RVFV MP-12 in SIM-A9 cells, primary microglia isolated from neonatal mice, and Vero cells, a permissible cell line serving as a positive control. We observed a higher percentage of RVFV-positive SIM-A9 cells than of primary microglia [13]. Thus, we proceeded with validating inactivation procedures with the SIM-A9 cell line to ensure that the procedure works to inactivate the virus at a higher viral titer than we expect to obtain using primary microglia.3.2. RVFV Is Inactivated during RNA Extraction from MicrogliaTo demonstrate that RVFV can be effectively inactivated during the extraction of RNA from samples of infected cell culture, we infected SIM-A9 cells with either MP-12 or ZH501 at an MOI of 8 or 10, respectively, and processed samples using the Qiagen RNeasy Plus Mini RNA Isolation Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. Virus inactivation by the kit is achieved through its utilization of a highly denaturing a guanidine–isothiocyanate-containing buffer. Extracted RNA samples were split into 2 portions, where one half was plated directly onto a confluent monolayer of Vero cells for evaluation via plaque assay to demonstrate complete inactivation of the virus (denoted as Inactivated − spike), and the other half was spiked with live virus (denoted as Inactivated + spike) to demonstrate that residual chemical inactivant does not interfere with viability testing. Plaque assays revealed no observed plaques in the wells containing inactivated − spike samples for both MP-12 and ZH501, indicating that none of these samples contained live RVFV (Table 1), whereas inactivated + spike samples and the positive control sample demonstrated plaques that were consistent with the calculated input value. These results demonstrate that RNA extraction inactivates all RVFV MP-12 and ZH501 in our processed samples, and residual inactivant does not interfere with viability testing. Using RNA extracted from MP-12 and ZH501-infected primary microglia, we analyzed the antiviral immune response via real-time reverse transcription (RT2) PCR array (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA) and determined that there was a significant response of microglia to both viruses, although the magnitude of the response was greater to MP-12 than to ZH501 [13].3.3. RVFV Is Inactivated during Cellular Fixation of MicrogliaNext, we sought to validate a fixation procedure to preserve infected cells for downstream cell-based assays. Using SIM-A9 cells, we tested the BD Cytofix/Cytoperm Fixation/Permeabilization Kit. SIM-A9 cells were infected with either MP-12 or ZH501 at an MOI of 8 or 10, respectively, and incubated for 24 h. Cells were harvested and processed following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting samples of fixed cell suspensions were split into 2 portions, where one half was plated directly onto a confluent monolayer of Vero cells for evaluation via a plaque assay to demonstrate complete inactivation of the virus (denoted as Inactivated − spike), and the other half was spiked with live virus (denoted as Inactivated + spike) to demonstrate that residual chemical inactivant does not interfere with viability testing. Plaque assays revealed no observed plaques in the wells containing inactivated − spike samples for both MP-12 and ZH501, indicating none of these samples contained viable RVFV, whereas inactivated + spike samples exhibited plaques too numerous to count or total destruction of the monolayer (Table 2). These results demonstrate that our inactivation procedure inactivates all RVFV MP-12 and ZH501 in our processed samples, and residual inactivant does not interfere with viability testing.3.4. Primary Microglia Infected with ZH501 Exhibit a Downregulation of Activation Markers Compared to Attenuated Strain MP-12To demonstrate a downstream application following our inactivation procedures, we performed flow cytometric analysis to probe differences in the response of primary microglia to wild-type and attenuated strains of RVFV. Primary microglia were infected at an MOI of two with MP-12 or ZH501, or left uninfected as controls, and cells harvested and prepared for flow cytometry following a 16 h incubation. Infection with either virus did not have an impact on overall viability of the cells (Figure 1A); however, differences were noted in the expression levels of several surface markers. Expression of both CD45, a protein expressed on the surface of all immune cells, and CD11b, a protein expressed on all myeloid lineage cells, remained high on MP-12-infected cells, comparable to uninfected cells; however, a significant decrease in expression of both proteins was noted on ZH501-infected cells (Figure 1B,C). We previously reported that MP-12 infection significantly increased expression of activation markers CD86 and CD80 on the surface of microglia [13]. We aimed to verify that a similar phenomenon occurs upon ZH501 infection. Interestingly, significant increases in expression of either protein were not observed in response to ZH501 infection (Figure 1D,E), in contrast to MP-12 infection, which again resulted in high levels of CD86 and CD80 expression on the surface of primary microglia. In summary, infection of microglia with MP-12 and ZH501 yielded different outcomes, with downregulation of CD45 and CD1b and no induction of CD86 and CD80 expression in response to ZH501 infection. These results suggest a potentially important difference between RVFV genotypes that mediate the response they elicit in microglia.4. DiscussionRVFV is a prominent mosquito-borne virus that poses a serious and growing public health threat. While most healthy individuals experience an acute febrile illness with minor symptoms and recover from RVFV infection, some infected individuals develop severe and often fatal neurological symptoms and meningoencephalitis. Given the severe disease outcomes involving the brain, research efforts toward better understanding RVFV neuropathogenesis and the involvement of the host immune response are crucial toward developing effective therapeutics and vaccines. RVFV is a Category A Biodefense pathogen as declared by the NIAID and an overlap select agent by the U.S. HHS and USDA. Therefore, its use for research in laboratories is regulated, and wild-type strains must be handled in BSL-3 containment facilities. Here, we provide methods to inactivate live virus in RVFV-infected samples for removal from high-containment facilities and use for downstream applications.We first demonstrated the isolation of RNA from RVFV-infected samples using the Qiagen RNeasy Plus Mini RNA Isolation Kit and confirmed the inactivation by verifying the absence of any residual viable virus in purified RNA samples. RVFV is a negative-strand RNA virus; therefore, purified viral RNA cannot be directly translated and is not considered infectious [23]. As such, additional inactivation of purified RNA is not required to deem the samples safe for removal from registered space. We then demonstrated the inactivation of RVFV during the preparation of infected microglial cells for downstream applications such as flow cytometry using the BD Cytofix/CytopermTM Fixation/Permeabilization Kit. While precise formulations are proprietary, the active chemicals in the Qiagen RNeasy Plus Mini RNA Isolation and BD Cytofix/CytopermTM Fixation/Permeabilization Kits are guanidinium thiocyanate, a chaotropic agent responsible for the denaturation of proteins, and paraformaldehyde, a fixative responsible for the crosslinking of proteins, respectively. While treatments with each of these chemicals has been reported to inactivate viruses, a systematic review of their application with RVFV in mammalian cells has not been performed. We intend the documentation of these methods applied to RVFV-infected samples and the systematic demonstration of their efficacy in inactivating RVFV to aid in the selection of inactivation procedures by other groups and help facilitate compliance with the select federal agent regulations.We employed the attenuated RVFV strain MP-12 for initial method development and wild-type strain ZH501 for validation and provided the results for both. We then used our validated cell fixation method to prepare infected primary microglia for flow cytometry. Given the fundamental functions of activated microglia during viral infection of the brain [24,25,26], we aimed to assess the expression of microglial activation markers CD86 and CD80 on microglia infected with either MP-12 or ZH501. Interestingly, MP-12 infection elicited robust expression of both CD86 and CD80, whereas ZH501 infection did not lead to significant upregulation of either protein. Previous work has demonstrated that cd86 and cd80 are upregulated at the transcriptional level to a greater extent during MP-12 infection of microglia versus ZH501 at 4 h post infection, which may be a downstream effect of lower-type I IFN induction by ZH501 [13]. Therefore, the lower levels of CD86 and CD80 observed may be due to an abrogation of their induction following ZH501 infection. In contrast, CD45 and CD11b are expressed on the surface of uninfected microglia [27] and their expression is downregulated upon ZH501, but not MP-12, infection. Infection with viruses from several families of DNA viruses including Herpesviruses [28,29] and Adenoviruses [30] has been shown to cause downregulation and/or modulation of CD45 activity most notably in T cells, resulting in decreased T cell activity and thus promoting viral persistence. In these cases, the modulation of CD45 activity is dependent on the specific binding of a viral protein to the CD45 protein [31]. Further work is needed to determine whether the effect of RVFV ZH501 infection on CD45 and CD11b expression is a general effect on all microglial surface proteins, or whether this is specific to CD45 and CD11b, as well as the impacts of downregulation on microglial function. Additional work is also needed to determine whether this occurs in other immune cell types and the role this plays in virulence and pathogenesis of RVFV.In summary, this work demonstrates two methods for inactivation of RVFV within primary mammalian cells, and our results suggest that differences across RVFV genotypes dictate interactions with the host immune system that modulate outcomes such as the expression of microglial activation markers and the corresponding cell signaling and recruitment that would assist in clearance of the virus. Studies with wild-type RVFV will elucidate immune resistance mechanisms and potential viral subversion of the host immune response to approach the issue of designing new potential therapeutics more adequately.


Title: Aerosol Exposure to Rift Valley Fever Virus Causes Earlier and More Severe Neuropathology in the Murine Model, which Has Important Implications for Therapeutic Development

IntroductionRift Valley fever virus (RVFV) is a negative sense, single-stranded RNA virus of the Bunyaviridae family, genus Phlebovirus. An important pathogen of humans and domesticated animals, the virus may be transmitted when an infected mosquito feeds on a host, by contact with tissues, blood, or fluids from infected animals, or by exposure to infectious aerosols, such as those generated in abattoirs during handling of infected animals [1]. RVFV was first isolated during a 1930 epizootic in East Africa [2]. Subsequent outbreaks ranged from South Africa to Egypt, and west to Senegal [3]. Until the 21st century, it was assumed that RVFV was confined primarily to continental Africa; however, epidemics in Saudi Arabia and Yemen after unusually heavy rainfall in 2000 indicate the possibility of a RVFV introduction occurring wherever a competent vector exists [4]. Additionally, productive experimental infection of mosquitoes from multiple distinct geographical regions (including the most widespread vector, Culex pipiens) reinforces the feasibility of accidental or intentional import of RVFV from endemic regions with subsequent maintenance in nascent vector and host populations [5]–[8].In livestock the susceptibility and virulence differ by host species and age [3]. Spontaneous abortion is such a common consequence of infection among domesticated animals that the resulting abortion “storms” arising during epizootics are often the first recognized sign of a RVFV outbreak [9]. Necrotizing hepatitis, encephalitis, and death commonly occur in infected livestock. The disease in humans is generally a self-limiting, mild influenza-like condition with fever. However, a smaller but still poorly defined percentage of individuals develop a severe illness characterized by acute-onset hepatitis, delayed-onset encephalitis, retinitis, blindness, or a hemorrhagic syndrome [3]. While it has been traditionally reported that 1%–2% of human infections result in severe disease, case-fatality rates have varied between epidemics and are generally estimated to range from 10–20% for hospitalized individuals [10]–[12].In conjunction with its infectiousness and pathogenicity in humans, the range and prolificacy of its host species highlight the importance of RVFV as a potential agent of bioterrorism. Furthermore, there are currently no licensed vaccines or approved antivirals for preventing or treating RVF in humans, and its infectiousness by aerosol exposure coupled with ease of proliferation adds to the threat posed by intentional dissemination of RVFV. As such, RVFV is listed as a select agent by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and is classified as a Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) and United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) overlap select agent.Several animal models of RVFV infection have been described [13]. Recently, we completed a detailed study to characterize the pathogenesis of RVFV in the BALB/c mouse model [14], [15], which showed important similarities to severe human infections. Infection of BALB/c mice with RVFV subcutaneously (SC) resulted in high-titer viremia and demonstrated RVFV tropism for a variety of tissue and individual cell types on the basis of histopathology, immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy. A major consequence of infection was overwhelming infection of hepatocytes that subsequently underwent apoptosis. Most mice succumbed to RVFV between days 3 and 6 post-infection (PI) which we attributed primarily to severe hepatitis as indicated by the overwhelming infection of hepatocytes and increase in high levels of hepatic enzymes in the blood. The remaining mice were able to effectively clear virus from the liver and blood, but exhibited neuroinvasion and developed lethal panencephalitis [14].The route of neuroinvasion in our mouse model was unclear and we postulated one potential route may have occurred by way of the olfactory nerves leading to infection of the olfactory bulbs, which was based on our observation that olfactory neurons lining the nasal tract are a target of RVFV. We therefore hypothesized that the incidence and severity of central nervous system infection subsequent to aerosol infection may be significantly higher than is seen with a peripheral (SC) infection. RVFV is transmitted easily by aerosol to humans, which is evident by the number of laboratory workers who have become infected [16] and the potential for infection of veterinarians and abattoir workers who handle infected animals. Mice are known to be highly susceptible to RVFV aerosol exposure [17]. However, detailed studies describing the pathogenesis of RVFV after aerosol exposure have never been completed. Additionally, potential antivirals have not been evaluated for effectiveness following an aerosol exposure to RVFV.Due to the possibility of infection by aerosol exposure (such as during a bioterrorism event), we have expanded our studies of pathogenesis to include mice exposed to a lethal dose of virus by aerosolization. Additionally, we evaluated the effectiveness of ribavirin, an antiviral compound with known activity against RVFV both in vitro and in vivo
[18]–[21]. By comparing the course of disease after aerosol and SC RVFV exposures in the presence and absence of antiviral treatment, we determined the suitability of the mouse model in antiviral therapeutics trials and provided further insight into the efficacy of ribavirin to treat RVFV infection.Materials and MethodsEthics StatementResearch was conducted under an IACUC approved protocol in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, PHS Policy, and other Federal statutes and regulations relating to animals and experiments involving animals. The facility where this research was conducted is accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International and adheres to principles stated in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council, 2011.AnimalsFemale BALB/c mice were obtained from the National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer Research and Development Center (Frederick, MD), and were used at 6–8 weeks old. Mice were housed in microisolator cages and were provided water and chow ad libitum.Viral StrainRecombinant viral strain ZH501 was rescued as previously described [22], and the exact complete genome sequence was confirmed by techniques described previously by Bird et al. [23]. Strain ZH501 was originally isolated from a fatal human case during the 1977 epidemic in Egypt. In this study, the lethal dose at 50% (LD50) of this strain was determined in BALB/c mice infected SC or by aerosol. To determine the LD50, five cohorts of mice comprised of 10 mice each were infected with a range of doses (1000-0.1 PFU) and monitored for survival.Aerosol ExposurePrior to animal exposure studies, a sham aerosol spray using only the virus was performed in order to calculate a spray factor. The resulting spray factor was used to calculate the starting concentration of the virus necessary to obtain the target dose. Groups of ten unanesthetized mice were exposed to aerosolized RVFV created by a three-jet collision nebulizer (BGI Inc., Waltham, MA) for 10 min at a constant flow rate of 19 L/min in a whole-body exposure chamber housed within Class III biological safety cabinets in a biosafety level-3 suite by using automated aerosol exposure system. The particle sizes generated with this system has an average of 1–2 µm mass median aerodynamic diameter. Relative humidity was a steady state of 43–65% and temperature was ambient (approximately 20–22°C). Actual exposures received by each group of animals were determined by performing standard plaque assays on samples collected from an all-glass impinger (AGI; Ace Glass, Vineland, NJ). Complete medium with antifoam A 0.001% w/v (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) was used as collection medium in the impinger for titration by standard plaque assay. The dose was calculated using the following formulas: Dose = [Aerosol] (µg/mL)×minute volume (mL)×exposure time (min); minute volume = 2.1(weight (g))0.75.Pathogenesis Study DesignMice were exposed to a target dose of 1000 PFU of RVFV either by aerosolization as described above or by SC injection in a total volume of 100 µL. Two cohorts of mice were used for the pathogenesis study design. One cohort of mice (n = 100) were used to monitor survival and collect blood/tissue samples when the mice exhibited terminal (end-stage) signs of disease (these mice received an actual dose of 1600 PFU). The second cohort of mice (n = 200) was used to serially sample mice (randomly selected) on days 1–8 PI (these mice received an actual dose of 646 PFU). All mice were implanted with IPTT-300 temperature chips (Biomedic Data Systems, Seaford, DE) to identify individual animals and monitor body temperature throughout the studies. Temperature and signs of clinical disease were observed daily, and one group of mice from both the SC and aerosol exposure groups (n = 4/day PI) was selected for retroorbital blood sampling to analyze viremia, blood chemistry, and hematology. These mice were then perfused with PBS (to remove virus contaminated blood from tissues) and tissues were collected for virus titration by standard plaque assay and histology. Tissues collected for titration were weighed and homogenized in Eagle's minimal essential medium (EMEM) containing 5% fetal bovine serum and gentamicin. Tissues were homogenized using the Qiagen Tissue Lyser II (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) followed by centrifugation at 9,000× g for 10 min and the supernatant stored at −70°C until further evaluation by standard plaque assay to determine titers.Evaluation of Antiviral Activity of Ribavirin Following Aerosol and SC RVFV ExposuresMice were treated by intraperitoneal (IP) injection with PBS (n = 30; drug delivery vehicle control) or with ribavirin (n = 30; Sigma; 100 mg/kg) beginning two hours prior to virus exposure and continuing once a day thereafter for 9 days (10 days total). This dose was selected based on a previous study which determined that 100 mg/kg of ribavirin administered prophylactically was protective in mice and higher doses of ribavirin were found to be toxic [21]. Mice were infected either by aerosol (n = 10/treatment group) or SC exposure (n = 10/treatment group) with a target dose of 1000 PFU (actual dose was 1951 PFU) or remained as uninfected controls (n = 10/treatment group). All mice were monitored for changes in weight, temperature, and survival.An additional cohort of mice was treated with PBS or ribavirin and infected either by aerosol (n = 15/treatment group) or SC (same as described above; n = 15/treatment group) for a comparative pathology study on days 3, 5, and 8 PI. These time-points were chosen based on previous pathogenesis studies that indicate that these are key days for RVFV infection in this model; and that they reflect early, middle, and late disease states [14]. Mice were bled retroorbitally for virology, hematology, and blood chemistry analyses (n = 5/day PI). Immediately following blood sampling and under deep anesthesia, mice were perfused with PBS to remove residual blood in tissues. Tissues were then collected for titration by standard plaque assay as described above.Plaque AssaysPlaque assays for RVFV used 90–100% confluent Vero cells (American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA) in 12-well plates. Samples for titration were serially diluted 10-fold in culture medium, and then 100 µL of each dilution was added to each of two wells. Plates were rocked every 15 minutes during 1 hour of incubation at 37°C with 80% relative humidity and 5% CO2. After incubation, a primary overlay of 0.5% agarose and 5% fetal bovine serum in 1× Earle's minimum essential medium (EMEM) was added to each well. Plates were then incubated for an additional 3 days before addition of a secondary overlay, which contained 4% neutral red in addition to the formula of the primary overlay. After addition of neutral red stain, plates were incubated for an additional 24 hours, and plaques were counted 4 days PI.Hematology and Blood ChemistriesWhole blood was added either to an EDTA tube (Safe-T-Fill, RAM Scientific Inc., Yonkers, NY) for complete blood count (CBC) determination using a Hemavet (Drew Scientific, Dallas, TX) or whole blood was added to a lithium heparin tube (Safe-T-Fill) for clinical chemistry analysis using the comprehensive diagnostic panel analyzed on a Vetscan (Abaxis, Union City, CA). The Hemavet measured the following parameters: white blood cells (WBC), total number and percent of neutrophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, eosinophils, and basophils, red blood cells (RBC), hemoglobin (Hb), hematocrit (HCT), mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), red cell distribution width (RDW), platelets (PLT), and mean platelet volume (PLT). The vetscan determined levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), albumin (ALB), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), amylase (AMY), total calcium (CA++), creatinine (CRE), globulin (GLOB), glucose (GLU), phosphorus (PHOS), potassium (K+), sodium (NA+), total bilirubin (TBIL), total protein (TP), and urea nitrogen (BUN).HistopathologyMice were euthanized by perfusion under deep anesthesia and a complete necropsy was performed to collect a full complement of tissues for histopathology. Tissues were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for a minimum of 21 days, and then removed from biocontainment and processed for routine histopathology. Paraffin-embedded tissues were sectioned and then stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE). Duplicate tissue sections were stained by immunohistochemistry for RVFV antigen using a kit (EnVision System, Dako Corp., Carpinteria, CA). Sections were deparaffinized and pretreated with proteinase K for 6 minutes before incubation with primary anti-RVFV antibody (R1547, rabbit polyclonal), diluted 1∶800 and incubated at room temperature for 30 minutes. This was followed by incubation with a peroxidase-conjugated, polymer-based secondary antibody. Tissues stained by IHC were examined microscopically to determine the types of cells labeled for viral antigen.Statistical AnalysisSAS version 9.1.3 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) was used to determine differences in the mean blood chemistry and hematology results between day −1 or 0 (uninfected controls) and subsequent time points using T-tests with step-down bootstrap adjustment. Signed rank tests with step-down Sidak adjustment was used for comparisons of temperature and weight from day 0 to subsequent time points within each study and Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney tests for comparisons of temperature and weights between exposure routes (aerosol and SC) at each time point. A two-way ANOVA was used to compare viral titers between exposure groups.ResultsSurvival and Clinical ObservationsExposure to the ZH501 strain of RVFV was uniformly lethal by both SC and aerosol challenge routes. The LD50 was determined to be 0.27 PFU and 0.75 PFU for mice exposed SC and by aerosol, respectively (data not shown). When mice were exposed to 1600 PFU, signs of clinical illness become apparent on day 3 PI at which time the mice presented with ruffled fur and a hunched posture. The majority of mice in both groups were euthanized or succumbed to infection between days 3 and 4 PI, with 70% overall mortality from systemic disease by day 5 PI by both routes (Figure 1). The mean time-to-death (MTD) for mice exposed SC was 4.87 days and for mice exposed by aerosol 4.94 days, which was not significantly different.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g001Figure 1Mouse survival after infection.Percent survival of mice (n = 100) infected SC or by aerosol with 1600 PFU of RVFV.Mice exposed by both challenge routes began to lose weight and have changes in their body temperature as early as day 3 PI (Figure 2). Mice exposed by aerosol began to lose significantly more weight (p = 0.0144) and have significantly lower body temperatures (p<0.0001) compared to SC exposed mice on day 4 PI. This trend continued until day 7 PI when mice exposed SC began to gain weight, which was followed by another decrease.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g002Figure 2Mouse daily weight and temperature.Percent change in baseline of (A) weights and (B) temperature of mice exposed to RVFV SC or by aerosol (N = 5–100/day PI). The symbols represent the mean value and the error bars represent mean standard deviation. Asterisk (*) indicates significantly different values when comparing SC vs. aerosol exposed mice. Single cross (†) indicates significantly different values for SC exposed mice compared to day −1 uninfected controls. Double cross (‡) indicate significantly different values for aerosol exposed mice compared to day −1 uninfected controls.SC exposed mice that succumbed or were euthanized around day 7–9 PI exhibited signs of neurological disease such as hind limb paralysis. Aerosol exposed mice exhibited signs of neurological disease between days 6–8 PI. Therefore, based on disease signs, it appears that the percentage of mice exposed SC and by aerosol that succumbed from systemic disease was 74% and 70% respectively vs. 26% (SC exposure) and 30% (aerosol exposure) that succumbed from neurological disease. For mice exposed by aerosol, 100% mortality from neurological disease was observed 1 day earlier compared to SC exposed mice (day 8.5 PI vs. day 9.5 PI, respectively).Clinical Chemistry and HematologyThe blood chemistry and CBC values were determined in the uninfected controls (day 0 PI) and the infected mice on days 1–8 PI (Figure 3). Generally, both aerosol- and SC-infected mice exhibited marked changes in multiple analytes as early as 3 days PI. There were few significant differences in these results between exposure groups, and blood chemistry portrayed a similar picture of the disease courses overall. The liver enzymes ALT (p = 0.0102) and ALP (p = 0.2579) peaked on day 4 PI in SC exposed mice when compared to uninfected controls. In aerosol exposed mice the ALT (p = 0.0198) and ALP (p = 0.0009) levels peaked on day 5 PI (Figure 3A–B), which is one day later compared to SC exposed mice. However, the only statistically significant difference when directly comparing the two exposure routes was higher ALP levels on day 5 PI (p = 0.0102) for mice exposed by aerosol compared to SC exposed mice. A significant amount of variability was observed in mice from both exposure groups. This is most likely due to the study design where mice were randomly sampled and at different stages of RVF disease. Chemistry analyses from mice sampled only when they exhibited signs of end-stage disease were more consistent among animals (data not shown). Other analytes found to be significantly different when comparing mice exposed by aerosol vs. SC included TBIL, CA, PHOS, GLU, and K+ on various days PI (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g003Figure 3Liver enzyme and hematology results.Analysis of the (A) alanine aminotransferase (ALT), (B) alkaline phosphatase (ALP), (C) percent lymphocytes, and (D) percent neutrophils in RVFV infected mice (N = 4/day PI). The symbols represent the mean concentration and the error bars represent mean standard deviation. Asterisk (*) indicates significantly different values when comparing SC vs. aerosol exposed mice. Single cross (†) indicates significantly different values for SC exposed mice compared to day −1 uninfected controls. Double cross (‡) indicate significantly different values for aerosol exposed mice compared to day −1 uninfected controls.CBC results also showed markers of hematological dysfunction that were mostly conserved across both exposure groups. The most drastic was a drop in percent circulating lymphocytes relative to baseline values (paero = 0.0003, psc = 0.0541) with a concurrent spike in percent circulating neutrophils (paero = 0.0004, psc = 0.0368) 3 days PI in both exposure groups (Figure 3C–D). The most pronounced difference between the aerosol and SC exposure groups was a trend toward recovery of normal values after 3 days PI among SC-infected animals; while the aerosol exposed cohort maintained the same aberrant lymphocytopenia and neutrophilia established 3 days PI through the end of the study. However, the only statistically significant difference (for percent lymphocytes and neutrophils) when directly comparing the results from both exposure groups resulted on day 2 PI where mice exposed by aerosol had slightly higher levels of percent circulating neutrophils (p = 0.0135). This is most likely because significant variability was observed in each cohort of mice, which is similar to the chemistry results. Other hematology values found to be significantly different when comparing mice exposed by aerosol vs. SC included %MO, %BA, RBC, Hb, %HCT, MCV, MCH, MCHC, %RDW, and PLT on various days PI (data not shown).Viral TitersThe viral titers in the plasma, liver, lung, and brain were determined by standard plaque assay on days 1–5 and days 7–8 PI (Figure 4). Both SC and aerosol exposure routes resulted in viremia on day 2 PI, which peaked on day 3 PI for both exposure groups (Figure 4A). Virus was first detected in the liver (Figure 4B) and lung (Figure 4C) from aerosol exposed mice on day 1 PI whereas no virus was detected in the tissues of SC exposed mice on the same day. Virus was detected in all tissues acquired 3 days PI from mice in both exposure groups. Viral titers in the liver and lung were highest 3 days PI in both exposure groups, and then gradually decreased throughout the course of the study in both cases. Viral titers peaked in the brain on day 7 PI for mice exposed SC and on day 8 for mice exposed by aerosol (Figure 4D). Overall, no significant differences resulted in the viral titers in the plasma, liver, and lung from mice exposed either by aerosol or SC. However, mice exposed by aerosol did have significantly higher titers of virus in the brain compared to SC exposed mice on day 8 PI (p<0.001).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g004Figure 4Viral titers.Viral titers in (A) plasma, (B) liver, (C) lung, and (D) brain of RVFV infected mice (N = 4/day PI). Error bars represent mean standard deviation. Asterisk (*) indicates significantly different values when comparing SC vs. aerosol exposed mice.HistopathologyHistological examination of tissues from infected mice exposed by aerosol and SC showed tropism of RVFV for a variety of tissues and cell types throughout the course of infection similar to the results we previously described [14]. Viral antigen was present at various times in epithelial cells (hepatocytes, adrenocortical cells, odontogenic epithelium, olfactory neuroepithelial cells), mesenchymal cells (perineural cells, periosteal and endosteal cells, perivascular cells, bone marrow stromal cells, fibroblastic reticular cells, myocardial cells, vascular smooth muscle cells, adipocytes), neural cells (olfactory neurons and multiple neuronal types in the brain), hematopoietic cells (macrophages and other unidentified cells) and endocrine cells (pancreatic islet cells and pituicytes).Regardless of the exposure route, only minimal viral antigen was detected in the lungs of mice exposed by aerosol and SC (Figure 5A–B, Table 1). In mice that were exposed by aerosol, scant, weak antigen localization was observed in the lungs of 2 of 4 mice on day 1 PI and in one of 4 mice on day 2 PI. The antigen observed may have been residual antigen deposited in the lungs as respirable sized particles from the aerosol. The mediastinal lymph nodes, which drain the lungs were available for microscopic examination in 2 of 4 mice on day 1 PI, but these regional lymph nodes did not have imunohistochemical evidence of viral infection. In both models, viral antigen localization was observed within intraalveolar cells, alveolar septal cells, and intravascular cells of the lungs. No histological evidence of pneumonia was observed in the lungs of mice exposed by aerosol or SC.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g005Figure 5Lung and liver immunohistochemical findings.Immunohistochemical findings in the (A–B) lung and (C–D) liver of RVFV infected mice. Minimal viral antigen is detected in the lungs of (A) SC exposed (20×) and (B) aerosol exposed (20×) mice on day 2 PI. Significant viral antigen was detected on day 4 PI in the liver of mice exposed (C) SC (40×) and (D) by aerosol exposure (40×).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.t001Table 1Assessment of viral antigen in tissues by immunohistochemistry.LungLiverOlfactory EpitheliumOlfactory BulbBrain
Aerosol Exposure

Day 2 PI
0–1+1+1+0–1+0
Day 4 PI
0–1+3+2+0–1+0
Day 7 PI
0–1+1+1+2+2+
Day 8 PI
01+2+3+4+
SC Exposure

Day 2 PI
0–1+1+000
Day 4 PI
1+4+000
Day 7 PI
1+2+1+00
Day 8 PI
1+1+1+1+2+The amount of antigen in a given location was characterized as 0 (none), 1+ (minimal), 2+ (mild), 3+ (moderate), 4+ (extensive). Values represent the average of four mice except in the case where no antigen (0) was noted, which are indicated as a range of the antigen score.The liver was a clear early and dominant target in mice exposed by aerosol and SC. A few infected hepatocytes were evident as early as day 2 PI (3 of 4 mice for aerosol exposure and 2 of 4 for SC exposure; Table 1). Strong and widespread viral antigen staining of hepatocytes was apparent in livers of both aerosol- and SC-infected mice by day 4 PI (Figure 5C–D, Table 1), which is similar to our previous study results [14]. Also evident on days 3, 4, and 5 PI was damage to hepatocytes ranging from a few to numerous dead cells. Despite extensive infection of, and damage to hepatocytes, clearance of virus from the liver occurred to a great extent in mice that survived to later time points, as reduced amounts of viral antigen were evident by day 8 PI in mice exposed by aerosol and SC.An early target of aerosolized RVFV was the olfactory neuroepithelium lining nasal turbinates, with a few immunolabeled cells present in 4 of 4 mice at day 2 PI and in 3 of 4 mice on day 3 PI (Figure 6, Table 1). Infected cell types included cells morphologically compatible with neuroepithelial cells and cells of the subjacent fila olfactoria. Similar to the liver, the olfactory neuroepithelium exhibited progressive infection in some mice at later time points. In contrast, the same tissues from animals exposed SC were uniformly immunonegative until 7 days PI at which point the nasal turbinates and olfactory neuroepithelium were positive for viral antigen.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g006Figure 6Nasal turbinate immunohistochemical findings.Immunohistochemical findings in the nasal turbinates of mice exposed SC (A, C; left side) or by aerosol exposure (B, D; right side). (A) Immunonegative olfactory neuroepithelium and fila olfactoria on day 4 PI in a SC exposed mouse, 40×. (B) Immunoreactive olfactory neuroepithelium and fila olfactoria on day 4 PI in an aerosol exposed mouse, 40×. (C) Rare, focal immunoreactivity of olfactory neuroepithelium and fila olfactoria on day 7 PI in a SC exposed mouse, 40×. (D) In comparison to SC exposed mice, significantly more viral antigen was detected in the olfactory neuroepithelium and fila olfactoria on day 7 PI in aerosol exposed mice, 40×.The earliest evidence of neuroinvasion in mice exposed by aerosol was antigen localization limited to the olfactory bulbs, in one mouse on day 2 PI, in one mouse on day 4 PI, and in 3 of 4 mice on day 5 PI. In contrast, viral antigen was not detected in the same region until day 8 PI for mice exposed SC (Figure 7, Table 1). Histological evidence of infection in the brain proper was first apparent in neurons of the brainstem in 1 of 4 mice euthanized on day 5 PI that were exposed by aerosol. For mice exposed SC, histological evidence of infection of the brain occurred on day 6 PI in 1 of 4 mice. Neurons were the main target cell in the brain for both exposure routes. By day 7 PI, 4 of 4 mice had evidence of neuronal infection in the brainstem and other areas of the brain for mice exposed by aerosol. Less viral antigen was detected in the brain of mice exposed SC with 1 of 4 mice exhibiting neuronal infection on day 8 PI (Figure 8, Table 1). Morphologic changes in the brain developed concurrently with the detection of viral antigen in mice exposed by aerosol and SC. The brain lesions were generally characterized as meningoencephalitis with neuronal necrosis.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g007Figure 7Olfactory bulb immunohistochemical findings.Immunohistochemical findings in the olfactory bulb of mice exposed SC (A, C, E; left side) or by aerosol exposure (B, D, F; right side). (A) Immunonegative cells of the glomerular layer on day 4 PI in a SC exposed mouse, 40×. (B) Immunoreactive cells of the glomerular layer on day 4 PI in an aerosol exposed mouse, 40×. (C) Immunonegative cells of the olfactory bulb (inset depicts the glomerular layer, 40×) on day 7 PI in a SC exposed mouse, 2×. (D) Strongly immunoreactive olfactory neural cells (inset depicts immunoreactive neurons of the glomerular layer, 40×) on day 7 PI in an aerosol exposed mouse, 2×. (E) Moderate amounts of viral antigen in the glomerular layer on day 8 PI in a SC exposed mouse, 40×. (F). Intensely immunoreactive cells in the glomerular layer on day 8 PI in an aerosol exposed mouse, 40×.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g008Figure 8Brain immunohistochemical findings.Immunohistochemical findings in the brain of mice exposed SC (A, C; left side) or by aerosol exposure (B, D; right side). (A) Immunonegative brainstem on day 7 PI in a SC exposed mouse, 40×. (B) Immunoreactive neurons in the brainstem on day 7 PI in an aerosol exposed mouse, 40×. (C) Immunoreactive hippocampus, brainstem, and cerebral areas (inset depicts immunoreactive hippocampal neurons, 40×) on day 8 PI in a SC exposed mouse, 2×. (D) Intensely immunoreactive hippocampus, brainstem, and cerebral areas (inset depicts strongly immunoreactive hippocampal neurons, 40×) on day 8 PI in an aerosol exposed mouse, 2×.Evaluation of Ribavirin against RVFV in the Murine ModelCohorts of mice were treated with PBS as a control or ribavirin prophylactically and exposed to 1951 PFU of RVFV by aerosol or SC. As expected, all uninfected controls survived (Figure 9) and did not exhibit significant decreases in weight or temperature (Figure 10). All mice that were treated with the PBS control and exposed by aerosol or SC were euthanized or succumbed to infection and did have significant decreases in weight and temperature. MTD for PBS injection treatment control aerosol- and SC-exposed groups were 6 and 4.5 days, respectively. Mice that were treated with ribavirin and exposed SC to RVFV showed 70% survival with a MTD of 15 days and did not experience significant changes in weight or temperature. In contrast, ribavirin treated, aerosol-exposed mice showed 0% survival with a MTD of 9.5 days and had significant decreases in weight and temperature (Figure 9 and 10). Non-surviving treated animals exposed SC and by aerosol exhibited signs of neurological disease at the time of death or euthanasia.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g009Figure 9Mouse survival following ribavirin treatment.Percent survival of mice treated with PBS or ribavirin and infected SC or by aerosol with RVFV (n = 10/group).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g010Figure 10Mouse daily weight and temperature following ribavirin treatment.Percent change in baseline of (A) weights and (B) temperature of mice treated with PBS or ribavirin and exposed to RVFV SC or by aerosol (N = 10/group). Each symbol indicates the mean and the error bars represent mean standard deviation.Despite the variances in MTD and survival, there were no significant differences between SC- and aerosol-exposed mice in clinical blood chemistry and hematology values from blood samples acquired 3, 5, and 8 days PI (data not shown). Viral titers from tissues sampled at these same time points demonstrated more virus in tissues from ribavirin treated, aerosol exposed animals compared to SC exposed animals (Figure 11). Virus was only detected in the plasma, liver, and spleen of ribavirin treated, SC exposed mice. When tissues were assessed for viral antigen by IHC, ribavirin was partially effective at reducing the amount of viral antigen in the lungs and liver, but had only a delayed effect on the amount of viral antigen detected in the olfactory epithelium and olfactory bulb of aerosol exposed mice (Table 2). Our histology results also indicate that ribavirin treatment had little or no effect on CNS pathology where ribavirin treated vs. untreated aerosol exposed animals had similar degrees of pathological changes in the olfactory bulb and brain. This is in contrast to ribavirin treated, SC exposed mice, which had no evidence of pathological changes on day 8 PI (Table 3).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.g011Figure 11Viral titers in ribavirin treated mice.Viral titers in the plasma and tissues of ribavirin treated mice infected by (A) SC exposure or (B) aerosol exposure (N = 4/day PI). Error bars represent mean standard deviation.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.t002Table 2The percentage of mice with viral antigen detected in tissues by immunohistochemistry.LungLiverOlfactory EpitheliumOlfactory BulbBrain
Ribavirin Treated, Aerosol Exposure

Day 3 PI
0/5 (0%)3/5 (60%)1/5 (20%)0/5 (0%)0/5 (0%)
Day 5 PI
1/5 (20%)0/5 (0%)4/5 (80%)3/4 (75%)0/5 (0%)
Untreated, Aerosol Exposure

Day 3 PI
2/4 (50%)4/4 (100%)3/4 (75%)0/4 (0%)0/5 (0%)
Day 5 PI
0/4 (0%)4/4 (100%)3/4 (75%)3/4 (75%)0/5 (0%)
Ribavirin Treated, SC Exposure

Day 3 PI
0/5 (0%)3/5 (60%)0/5 (0%)0/5 (0%)0/5 (0%)
Day 5 PI
NANANANANA
Untreated, SC Exposure

Day 3 PI
1/4 (25%)4/4 (100%)0/4 (0%)0/4 (0%)0/4 (0%)
Day 5 PI
0/4 (0%)3/4 (75%)0/4 (0%)0/4 (0%)0/4 (0%)NA = not available for analysis.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002156.t003Table 3Evaluation of the CNS pathology in ribavirin treated and untreated mice on day 8 PI.Olfactory BulbBrain
Ribavirin Treated, Aerosol Exposure
++++
Untreated, Aerosol Exposure
+++++
Ribavirin Treated, SC Exposure
−−
Untreated, SC Exposure
++The degree of pathological changes was characterized as − (none), + (minimal to mild), ++ (mild to moderate), and +++ (moderate to marked).DiscussionPathogenesis of RVFV Following Aerosol or SC ExposureBecause of the possibility of RVFV exposure by multiple routes, it is necessary to discern the differences in pathogenesis and treatment accordingly. In the current study, we first performed detailed comparative pathological analyses on mice infected by aerosol and SC exposure routes in order to determine the pathogenetic events unique to each. Additionally, we evaluated the efficacy of the nucleoside analog ribavirin by examining its effects on survival, weight, temperature, and viral load after either aerosol or SC exposure.RVF disease in humans and livestock is often characterized by early-onset hepatitis and delayed-onset encephalitis, manifestations which are reproduced in the BALB/c RVFV mouse model exposed SC and by aerosol. Despite the route of exposure, no significant differences in overall survival were observed. For mice exposed by aerosol and SC, the liver was a clear early and dominant target of RVFV, with specific targeting of hepatocytes. Hepatic enzymes in the blood peaked one day earlier (day 4 PI) in SC exposed mice compared to aerosol exposed mice. This small difference may be due to the route of infection of the liver. However, this remains unclear because the primary site of replication for RVFV following SC and aerosol exposure has yet to be determined in the BALB/c mouse model. We speculate that mononuclear phagocytic cells and dendritic cells at the SC injection site would first become infected and migrate to the nearest draining lymph node. The virus would then replicate in the lymph node, resulting in primary viremia and spread to other target organs such as the liver via the bloodstream. This is supported in part by our earlier work that demonstrated viral antigen in mononuclear phagocytic cells and dendritic cells in the lymph nodes from infected mice [14]. Additionally, a study utilizing bioluminescent and fluorescent RVFV in immunodeficient mice demonstrated the importance phagocytic cells as targets for viral infection and following intradermal inoculation of virus, the nearest draining lymph node became the main site of early replication [24].For mice exposed by aerosol, we observed weak immunohistochemical evidence of viral infection in the lungs, which was not a major target for infection despite the route of exposure. Similar to a previous study of aerosolized RVFV in Swiss Webster mice, pneumonia was not a dominant factor in the pathogenesis of RVFV in mice following aerosol exposure [17]. We speculate that alveolar macrophages might be an important early target cell for infection in the lungs and these cells would then migrate to the mediastinal lymph nodes prior to 1 day PI, which could possibly explain the weak immunohistochemical evidence of viral infection in the lungs. The mediastinal lymph nodes is most likely an important primary site for replication followed by spread to other target organs such as the liver, even though we failed to detect viral antigen by immunohistochemistry. Viral antigen could have been present at a level below the detection level for our assay. Other possible routes for infection of the liver include ingestion of virus with seeding of the liver by the enterohepatic circulation or by vascular spread from the lungs.Viral titers and immunohistochemistry from brain tissues indicated that mice exposed to RVFV by aerosolization developed neuropathology more rapidly and to a greater effect than SC exposed mice. Early, intense immunohistochemical staining of the nasal turbinates and especially the olfactory bulb among mice in the aerosol exposure group may explain the significant development of neuropathology associated with aerosol exposure. Exposure by aerosolization results in direct exposure of the lung and the nasal turbinate epithelia. Therefore, RVFV viral neuroinvasion likely occurs by viral propagation in nasal turbinate epithelial cells; followed by infection of olfactory nerves, the olfactory bulb, and eventually the higher structures of the brain. This is in contrast to the SC exposure group, in which the less severe evidence of neuropathology and rarity of immunopositive cells in the nasal turbinates and olfactory bulb suggests another mechanism for viral entry into the brain. In a previous study of mice following SC exposure to RVFV, we showed that tissues of the spinal cord and then brainstem become progressively infected prior to onset of fatal pan-encephalitis [15], suggesting that entry to the brain may occur by cephalic progression from the neurons and neuroglia of the spinal cord into the basal structures of the brain. These differences in the neuropathogenesis of RVFV should be taken into account when developing medical countermeasures to protect against peripheral and aerosol exposures. Despite these important differences in the development of neuropathology, no significant difference exists in the overall survival of mice exposed by both exposure routes. This is most likely because mice are highly susceptible to RVFV regardless of the route of exposure. The overall disease outcome is similar with most mice developing acute-onset hepatitis and the remaining mice developing encephalitis. However, with such a highly susceptible model it is important to take into account the progression of disease (not just the disease outcome) when designing and evaluating therapeutics. This key point is highlighted by our evaluation of ribavirin in SC and aerosol exposed mice (discussed below) where we observed significant differences in the outcome.A recent study by Bales et al. assessed the susceptibility of different inbred rat strains to aerosolized RVFV and determined that Wistar-Furth rats developed a similar disease course and outcome when exposed SC and by aerosol (although not directly compared in the same study), which is similar to our results in the BALB/c mouse model. This is most likely because these two models are highly susceptible to RVFV and it is hard to distinguish differences in survival when high mortality results in a short time frame. In contrast, Bales et al. report that Lewis rats developed fatal encephalitis after aerosol infection, but only mild disease following SC exposure. No pathology data was presented, but Bales et al. hypothesized that aerosolized RVFV may gain access to the central nervous system through the olfactory bulb, which is similar to our results in the mouse model. Interestingly, Lewis rats that survived SC exposure were not protected against subsequent re-challenge by aerosol exposure to the same virus [25]. This observation, along with our findings, implicate the importance for further studies to evaluate the route of neuroinvasion by RVFV, which has important implications for the development of countermeasures to protect against multiple exposure routes.We observed aberrations in certain hematologic parameters, which were conserved across both exposure route groups. First, early and severe neutrophilia occurred in all mice in both exposure groups, with an 80% average increase in percent circulating neutrophils above baseline values observed 3 days PI. This sharp increase reflects the systemic nature of granulocytic inflammation during acute RVFV infection, and correlates well with histological observation of polymorphonuclear white blood cell infiltration into multiple organ systems; particularly secondary lymphoid and liver tissues 3 days PI. Neutrophilia and polymorphonuclear white blood cell inflammation are often associated with acute tissue damage during infectious diseases; such as viral pneumonia [26], [27] and septic shock [28]. The findings of severe neutrophilia and polymorphonuclear leukocyte tissue inflammation in the present study further implicate the importance of the host innate immune response in RVFV pathogenesis.Evaluation of Ribavirin Efficacy against RVFV Following Aerosol or SC ExposuresRibavirin is a nucleoside analogue and its mechanism of antiviral action is not clear. Previous studies have demonstrated the protective efficacy of ribavirin (administered either prophylactically or post exposure) in mice for preventing the hepatic disease, but some mice were euthanized or succumbed from late-developing encephalitis [18], [20], [21], [29]. Similar to these studies, we observed that ribavirin was partially effective in preventing mortality among mice in the SC exposure group. The ribavirin treated mice lived an average of 10.5 days longer than the untreated control mice that were exposed SC and the mice that were euthanized or succumbed developed late-onset encephalitis. To the best of our knowledge, ribavirin has never been evaluated following an aerosol RVFV exposure. We have demonstrated that ribavirin was ineffective among the aerosol group and all mice succumbed from encephalitis. The ribavirin treated mice that were exposed by aerosol lived an average of 3.5 days longer than the untreated control mice. Our results suggest that ribavirin would be completely ineffective in cases where aerosol exposure occurs. This is most likely because of the limited ability of ribavirin to penetrate the blood-brain barrier. Intranasal or aerosol administration of ribavirin does increase the bioavailability of the drug to the brain [30], [31], which could prove more effective to increase survival.The pathogenetic differences in RVF disease following exposure by either route offer important insights into the relative efficacy of ribavirin against RVFV infection. In particular, early and aggressive viral invasion of brain tissues following aerosol exposure likely played an important role in ribavirin's failure to prevent mortality among these animals. Tissue titers from animals exposed via aerosol showed early infection and rapid propagation in the brain throughout the study, indicating that virus was able to enter and multiply in cells of the brain unimpeded by ribavirin treatment.Also of key importance was the lack of infectious virus in the liver of any ribavirin-treated mice in the aerosol exposure group at any time-point, and in the SC group after 3 days PI. This rapid elimination of virus from the liver suggests that early ribavirin treatment is efficacious in preventing the primary hepatic syndrome that correlates with early mortality in the mouse model. Serum viral titers also diminished rapidly and then disappeared in both groups after 5 days PI. This lends further support to the hypothesis that ribavirin only fails to protect mice from RVF viral panencephalitis, which was the cause of morbidity and mortality among mice succumbing to RVF viral challenge in spite of treatment in our current study.Finally, the significant delay in MTD among mice succumbing to RVFV infection after SC exposure and ribavirin treatment suggests that infection may have resulted in lethal panencephalitis after viral neuroinvasion in nonsurviving mice. As in untreated animals, the spleen appeared to serve as a chronically infected viral reservoir, which may have eventually resulted in viral seeding of the basal brain structures via the spinal cord as previously described [14]. While we failed to recover infectious virus from brain tissue in the SC exposure group days 3, 5, or 8 PI; it is likely that direct infection of the brain occurred closer to the MTD, which was on 15 days PI. Viral titers in tissues of treated mice suggest the importance of early viral neuroinvasion in aerosol-exposed mice as a contributor to mortality. Despite a failure to detect infectious virus in plasma at the same time-point, brain tissues collected 8 days PI yielded average viral titers of approximately 8 log10 PFU/g. This is equivalent to the titer observed in brain tissue from untreated, terminally sampled animals; and therefore indicates that RVFV proliferation in the brain may be unaffected by ribavirin treatment.Despite the proven activity of ribavirin against RVFV in rodent and non-human primate models [20], it has not been thoroughly evaluated for the treatment of RVFV infection in humans. During the Saudi Arabia outbreak in 2000, a small-scale, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial evaluating ribavirin to treat severe RVFV infections was conducted [32]. Although the study was inconclusive, results suggested that an increased incidence of the encephalitic form of the disease was observed in cases treated with ribavirin (P. Rollin, presented at the Treatment of Viral Hemorrhagic Fever Workshop, Bethesda, MD, 24–27 February 2007). This study and our results highlight the need for more candidate antivirals to treat RVFV infection, especially in the case of a potential aerosol exposure.In conclusion, our results indicate the utility of the mouse model of RVFV infection as a test system for antiviral therapeutics efficacy. They also highlight the differences in pathogenesis following exposure to either aerosolized or SC-injected RVFV; as well as the effect of exposure route on outcome of disease. Therefore, future evaluation of vaccines and antivirals should be evaluated following multiple exposure routes.


Title: The Pathogenesis of Rift Valley Fever

1.IntroductionRift Valley fever (RVF), a mosquito-borne zoonotic disease among humans and ruminants, is caused by Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) belonging to family Bunyaviridae, genus Phlebovirus [1,2]. RVF is endemic to sub-Saharan African countries and has caused major outbreaks in several countries including Kenya, Tanzania, Somalia, South Africa, Madagascar, Egypt, Sudan, Mauritania, Senegal, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen [3]. Pregnant ruminants infected with RVFV typically are subject to high-rate abortions, fetal malformation, and subclinical-to-fatal febrile illness, while newborn lambs usually die by acute hepatitis [4–6]. RVFV infection in humans primarily causes a self-limiting febrile illness; however, some patients develop hemorrhagic fever, neurological disorders, or blindness after the febrile period [5,7,8]. In endemic area, floodwater Aedes mosquitoes, such as Ae.mcintoshi or Ae.vexans, serve as vectors, and the virus could be transmitted into offspring transovarially [9,10]. Heavy rainfall or flooding of river banks due to construction of dams increases the number of permanent fresh water species of mosquitoes such as Culex pipens, which play a role in amplifying RVFV among mosquitoes, ruminants and humans [10–15]. An outbreak of RVF in developed countries, e.g., the U.S. or Europe, could force a curtailing of livestock movement to prevent RVFV spread, causing massive economic loss, and a substantial degree of panic in our society, because the body fluids of infected animals contain infectious RVFV [16,17], and mosquitoes such as Culex spp. Aedes spp. or Anopheles spp. might further spread RVFV into other mosquitoes, humans and animals [18–20]. Effective vaccines and antiviral drugs are necessary for the containment of outbreaks and treatment of RVF patients, respectively. However, neither safe and effective vaccines nor efficient treatment is available. A correct understanding of RVF pathogenesis is essential for the development of effective vaccines and antiviral drugs against RVF. In this review, we will describe clinical and pathological findings of RVF in humans and animals and discuss viral and host factors that affect RVF pathogenesis.2.Pathogenesis of RVF in Humans and Animals2.1.HumanMost RVF patients suffer from a self-limiting, febrile illness. However, some patients develop neurological disorders, vision loss, hemorrhagic fever, or thrombosis as shown in Figure 1.2.1.1.Self-Limiting Febrile IllnessIn the 1930s–40s, many RVFV laboratory infections occurred due to a lack of appropriate biosafety procedures [21–25]. However, the patients in most of these and later outbreaks suffered from self-limiting and nonfatal illness [4,6,22,23,25–28]. Typically, the incubation period for RVF is 4 to 6 days. Symptoms start abruptly with severe chills, malaise, dizziness, weakness, severe headache, nausea and/or sensation of fullness over the liver region [6,22,23]. These symptoms are followed by an elevated body temperature (38.8 °C to 39.5 °C); decreased blood pressure; pain in the back, shoulders, neck or legs; rigor; shivering; flushed face; red eye with sore; constipation; insomnia and/or photophobia. Occasionally, other symptoms are seen which include epistaxis, abdominal pain, lack of gustatory discrimination, vomiting and/or diarrhea [4,6,22,25,26,28]. Some lessening of symptoms can be observed on the 3rd day, and the body temperature often decreases to a normal level by the 4th day after the onset of symptoms. However, within 1 to 3 days after the recovery of body temperature, some patients again experience a temporal recurrence of high fever with a severe headache for a few days [6,25,26]. Moreover, patients may have a long-lasting high fever for as much as 10 days [6]. After body temperature becomes normal, some patients may develop a massive coronary thrombosis [26], persistent aching of legs for two weeks [4,22], or persistent abdominal discomfort for weeks [4]. The palpable enlargement of the liver and spleen is not common. In the convalescence phase, patients often experience weakness, malaise, a tendency to sweat, frequent headaches, pain on motion of the eye, and a sense of imbalance. Virus has been demonstrated in the blood during the febrile period (3–4 days), whereas neutralizing antibody also starts appearing around the 4th day of the onset of symptoms [6,22,24,25,27].2.1.2.Neurological DisordersMaar et al. described a case of encephalitis in a RVF patient [29]. The patient exhibited symptoms of sudden fever, rigor, and retro-orbital headache for two days. He had fever again at the 22nd day after the onset of illness and experienced neck rigidity lasting for five days from the 25th day. Subsequently, he was sometimes confused and otherwise mentally affected, and experienced temporal vision loss without detectable retinopathy. He also exhibited convulsive attacks, hyperflexia and fever until the 50th day. His serum contained anti-RVFV hemagglutination (HAI) antibodies of 1:160 at the 25th day and 1:640 at the 40th day, while his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contained 1:2 of HAI antibody at the 28th day and 1:64 at the 50th day. The CSF also contained an increased number of white blood cells consisting mainly of lymphocytes at the 28th day, indicative of the possible occurrence of viral meningitis or meningoencephalitis. The patient recovered after treatment with amantadine, rifampicin, and dexamethasone for two weeks, although the effect of therapy could not be evaluated precisely.Another case with encephalitis and retinitis was described by Alrajhi et al. [30]. The patient had a fever, ataxic gait, and bilateral retinal hemorrhage. She could not count fingers, and the CSF contained many leukocytes, including lymphocytes. Her consciousness level was decreased. She was discharged on day 30 of the illness to her home, at which time she was awake, blind, quadreparetic, and incontinent. Moreover, her neurologic conditions did not improve for the next year.An additional report described a patient who had persistent hemiparesis for four months after the onset of illness [31], and another paper reported 12 RVF patients, who developed neurological signs and symptoms, including meningeal irritation, confusion, stupor and coma, hypersalivation, teeth-grinding, visual hallucinations, locked-in syndrome, and choreiform movement of upper limbs [32]; in these patients, the histopathological lesions in brains were characterized by focal necroses associated with an infiltration of round cells, mostly lymphocytes and macrophages, and perivascular cuffing [32].2.1.3.Vision LossSome patients suffer from maculopathy or retinopathy. Patients noticed the loss of central vision or blurred eye occurring at various times after infection; e.g., from immediately after the disease onset to several weeks or months later. One or both eyes could be affected [33–35], and the affected eyes had macular edema with exudates containing a white mass covering the macular area with or without retinal hemorrhage, vasculitis, infarction or vitreous haze [34–39]. In addition, retinal detachment [35,36], uveitis [38,39], or arterial occlusion [35,36,39–41] was reported in some patients. In many cases, a complete recovery of vision does not occur, and chorioretinal scarring can remain in macular and paramacular areas, in spite of the resorption of exudates [34,35,37–41], while some patients show partial improvement in vision after several months of RVFV infection [34,36,38,40].2.1.4.Hemorrhagic FeverFatal RVF cases often involve hemorrhagic manifestations but the time to death varies among cases [42–44]. Most typically, the illness starts suddenly, and the patients experience fever, rigor, nausea, vomiting, headache, injected conjunctives, drowsiness, and/or body pains. The patients may also have such symptoms as macular rash over the entire trunk, ecchymoses on the arms, limbs, and/or eyelids, bleeding from the gums and/or gastrointestinal mucosal membrane, low blood pressure, hematemesis, melena, diarrhea, throat pain, pneumonitis, jaundice, and/or hepatosplenomegaly [42,43]. Typically, elevation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and reduction of platelet count and hemoglobin are seen in these patients [42,45]. In many cases, death occurs in 3 to 6 days after patients become symptomatic; however, in some cases, death occurs in 12 to 17 days after the onset of symptoms. Postmortem examination shows diffuse necrosis of hepatocytes which more greatly affect the centrilobular area than the portal area, which may indicate association with acute hepatic injury in this type of pathogenesis [42,44]. It should be noted that some patients who do not exhibit jaundice or hemorrhage, die from renal failure or disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) accompanied by an elevation of ALT, AST, LDH or D-Dimer, or a decrease in platelet count [46,47]. A group of RVF patients who died from typical hemorrhagic fever also had encephalitis in addition to hepatic and gastro-intestinal necroses [32], which demonstrates the neuroinvasiveness of RVFV in hemorrhagic patients.2.1.5.ThrombosisAnother type of fatal case of RVFV infection was described by Schwentker et al. [21]. They reported that the temperature of the patient fell to normal on the 4th day after the onset of symptoms, whereas two papular areas of several centimeter in diameter were found on the patient’s thigh and leg on the 5th day and remained until day 8. After temporal recovery by the 12th day, the patient experienced phlebitis of the popliteal vein, which was followed by infarcts in the lungs on the 20th, 26th and 34th days at multiple locations; these eventually caused a fatal embolus in the pulmonary vessels on the 45th day of illness. The liver of the patient was normal, did not contain infectious RVFV, and no typical RVF lesions were confirmed at the postmortem histopathological examination. However, there was a large thrombus in the inferior vena cava, a part of which might have detached and caused an embolus in the pulmonary artery. The neutralizing antibody showed up on the 6th day of illness, and its titer increased toward the 12th day.2.1.6.Possible Vertical InfectionIn a retrospective study in Egypt, no increases in the total number of abortions were seen during an RVF outbreak, and the serological conversion rate of aborted women before and after outbreak was 31.1% and 27.5%, respectively [48]. A report describing a potential vertical infection of RVFV concerned a pregnant woman, who experienced fever, headache, dizziness and generalized muscle ache four days before delivery during the RVF outbreak in Saudi Arabia in 2000 and developed IgG specific to RVFV [49]. Her newborn baby presented with an anti-RVFV IgM antibody, as well as ALT/AST elevation, jaundice, extension of the activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT: test for the deficiency of intrinsic pathway factors) and the prothrombin time (PT: test for the deficiency of extrinsic pathway factors), and died on the 6th day after birth [49]. Although it is unknown whether the newborn baby died from RVF, it is possible that a vertical transmission in utero might have occurred in this case.The clinical symptoms of RVF vary among patients. The determinant of host susceptibility to induce hemorrhagic fever in humans has not been characterized. It is also unknown how RVFV causes diseases such as neurological disorders, vision loss or thrombosis in the presence of protective antibodies. Several animal models have been used to understand the pathology of RVF, and the advantages and disadvantages of different animal models are summarized in Table 1. We discuss the pathological findings in various different animal models in the next chapter.2.2.MouseMice are one of the most susceptible animal species to RVFV infection [6,8], and RVF pathology in infected mice mimics the pathological findings in newborn lambs [6]. Most of the mice infected with wild-type (wt) RVFV ZH548 or ZH501 strains die in 3 to 5 days [50–52], whereas they die faster by infection with other wt isolates [6,53]. Infected mice show ruffed fur with decreased activity in 2 to 3 days, and then become more lethargic while lying with their back legs wide apart [6,52]. The symptom is often followed by death within one hour [6]. Occasionally, mice survive this stage, yet have hind limb paralysis at days 8–9 post infection (p.i.) and die from encephalitis [52]. The rectal temperature of infected mice is often normal or decreased to below normal [54]. Also, the clotting time of blood derived from RVFV-infected mice is significantly extended, and it clots normally by mixing with normal sera, a finding that may indicate the shortage of coagulation factors is important for the extension of clotting time [54].The liver is the major target organ of RVFV, while the enlargement of liver is not common [6,52]. Liver lesions are characterized by fulminant hepatitis, with coagulative necroses leaving the portal space intact [50,52,55,56]. Depletion of glycogen in hepatocytes is also common at an early stage [6,51,55]. Infected hepatocytes in mice contain eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies [6,52], which are not reactive to the Feulgen reaction, a nucleic acid stain [57]. The intranuclear inclusion bodies in RVFV-infected cultured cells were visualized by an indirect immunofluorescent assay with antisera against RVFV and found to have a filamentary shape [58]. Inclusion bodies are formed by the NSs protein [59], a viral nonstructural protein, and the 10-to-17 amino acids at the carboxyl terminus of NSs are responsible for the formation of the filamentous structures via self-association [60]. Viral antigens start accumulating in hepatocytes at day 2, and their abundance increases extensively at day 3 p.i. [52]. The infected hepatocytes are stained by using a terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay, indicating that RVFV replication induces apoptosis in hepatocytes [52]. Mice that survived the early hepatitis phase often are able to regenerate hepatocytes [52,61]. Although swollen endothelial cells can be observed in the liver [6], antigens are not easily detectable in endothelial cells or Kuppfer cells, which indicate that these cells are not the primary targets of RVFV [52,55].In addition to hepatocytes, viral antigens have been detected in, odontogenic and gingival epithelium; lipocytes; pituicytes; olfactory neurons and multiple types of neurons in the brain; mononuclear phagocytes; cardiac myofibers; and in perineural, periosteal, adrenocortical, endosteal, perivascular, bone marrow stromal, fibroblastic reticular, and vascular smooth muscle cells, as well as in cells morphologically consistent with dendritic, pancreatic islet, and adrenal medullary cells; however, no viral antigens were reported in any ocular structure, including the retina [52]. Apoptosis of lymphocytes were found in the thymus, spleen, lymph nodes and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues [52]. Congestion and hemorrhage are common to the liver, spleen, lymph nodes, large intestine, kidneys and brain [6,52], but are uncommon in the jejunum [54]. In some mice that survived acute viral hepatitis, a sharp decrease in viral antigens occurred at 8 days p.i., and no virus could be detected in the sera, liver, lung, pancreas, large intestine and ovaries [52]. In the late stage of infection, however, lethal meningoencephalitis characterized by neuronal necrosis, microhemorrhages, and perivascular cuffs occurs in mice that survived the acute hepatitis [52].2.3.RatThe susceptibility of rats to RVFV differs among rat strains [62]. Peters et al. demonstrated that 10-to-15-week-old inbred rats from U.S. breeders exhibited three different responses to subcutaneous (s.c.) RVFV inoculation [63,64]. Wistar-Furth (WF) and Brown Norway strains were highly susceptible to RVFV and died within four days p.i. by liver necrosis, while the Fisher 344, Buffalo, DA and Lewis strains were largely resistant to RVFV infection [64]. ACI and Maax strains proved to be moderately susceptible and showed ascending paralysis; lesions were mainly in the brain and spinal cord and characterized as mild-to-severe necrotizing encephalitis and encephalomyelitis with focal necrosis with neutrophilic infiltrate and perivascular cuffing primarily with lymphocytes. In the ACI and Maax strains, viruses were undetectable in the liver and blood, whereas 5-to-6 log pfu/g of viruses could be detected from brain tissue, even in the presence of neutralizing antibody in the serum. The intracranial injection of RVFV uniformly caused encephalitis in these rats, including the resistant Lewis strain. The immunosuppression of the resistant Lewis rats by treating animals with cyclophosphamide 1 day prior to s.c. RVFV infection resulted in death at around 5-to-7 days p.i. with increased viral titers in the serum, liver, spleen, brain, kidneys and adrenal gland, although the virus titers in these organs in the Lewis rat were still lower than those in the corresponding organs of the WF strain [65]. These data suggest that the Lewis rat encodes a gene(s) important for the resistant phenotype. Interestingly, WF (WF/mol) and Lewis rats (Lewis/mol) obtained from a European breeding colony are resistant and susceptible to RVFV, respectively; hence, these rats showed the opposite susceptibilities to RVFV infection to those of the same strains from U.S. breeders. Furthermore, both WF and Lewis rats obtained from another European breeder were resistant to RVFV infection; taken together, these findings indicate the possible genetic variability of inbred rats among different breeders [66]. Cross-breeding experiments culminated in findings that indicated the resistance of WF/mol rat was segregated as a single Mendelian dominant locus [66]. Findlay et al. also showed that the albino rat of the Glaxo strain had an age-dependent susceptibility to RVFV via the i.p. route infection [62]; rats younger than 15 days died in 2 to 4 days with extensive liver necrosis, whereas 26-day-old rats survived RVFV infection [62].2.4.HamsterThe Syrian hamster is one of the most susceptible rodents to RVFV. Death occurs in 2 to 3 days p.i. after intraperitoneal inoculation with massive liver necrosis [6,67]. The pathological changes are similar to those seen in mice [6]. Administration of low titers of neutralizing antibodies protects hamsters from fatal liver necrosis, yet infected hamsters die from encephalitis by day 11 [67].2.5.GerbilThe gerbil, Meriones unguiculatus, represents a unique RVFV animal model, which produces fatal encephalitis with minimal liver involvement after infection of non-neuroadapted wt RVFV. The gerbil has proven moderately susceptible to RVFV, and the survival rate of 10-week-old gerbils after s.c. inoculation is reported to range from 50 to 100%, dependent on the strain and inoculation dose [68]. Death was reported to occur around 1 to 3 weeks in a dose-independent manner; s.c. inoculation of 107, 105, 103, 101 pfu of ZH501 resulted in 90%, 100%, 60% and 60% survival of outbred Tum:(MON) gerbils, respectively, and 50%, 90%, 70% and 70% survival of inbred MON/Tum gerbils, respectively [68]. The infected gerbils exhibited hind-limb paralysis, generalized weakness and wasting. Gerbils also showed an age-dependent resistance to RVFV infection. Most of the 3- to 5-week-old Tum:(MON) gerbils died after 107 pfu s.c. inoculation of ZH501 from encephalitis, whereas 90% of 7-week-old gerbils were able to survive the infection. After s.c. inoculation, RVFV replicated temporally in the livers of both 4-week-old and 10-week-old gerbils on days 1 and 2 (∼103 pfu/g), while subsequent efficient virus replication in the brain occurred in 4-week-old gerbil (from day 4 to day 7 up to 107 pfu/g), but not in 10-week-old gerbil (temporal increase up to 102 at day 7) [68]. Intracerebral wt RVFV inoculation of 50 pfu into 10-week-old gerbils resulted in an efficient viral replication (∼107 pfu/g) in the brain and the mean time to death was six days, which is not statistically different from that of 4-week-old gerbils, which may indicate the presence of host factors influencing the neuroinvasiveness in an age-dependent manner [68]. Histopathologically, minimal multifocal necroses of hepatocytes are seen at days 1 or 2 after the s.c. inoculation of wt RVFV, while focal necrotizing encephalitis with neuronal necrosis, a neutrophilic infiltrate, and perivascular cuffing are seen in the brain at later time points [68]. Mild, necrotizing encephalitis without detectable infectious RVFV could be observed even in clinically normal RVF-infected gerbils [68].2.6.Nonhuman PrimatesRhesus macaques are moderately susceptible to RVFV infection [6]. After i.p or intranasal inoculations, body temperatures of infected macaques increased to 39–40 °C at 1 to 4 days p.i. and the febrile period lasted for 24 to 120 h, whereas some infected animals did not show any febrile reactions [6]. Peters et al. first described hemorrhagic fever-like illness in rhesus macaques that were experimentally infected with a wt RVFV ZH501 strain [69]. Three out of fifteen rhesus macaques intravenously inoculated with RVFV ZH501 became ill; two became moribund and were euthanized on days 7 and 3, and one recovered from illness, whereas the others showed temporal viremia, the maximum viral titer of which occurred around day 2, and were clinically normal. All three monkeys exhibited lassitude, weakness, the cessation of food intake, petechiae, ecchymoses and bleeding from nares, gums or venipuncture sites. Clear extensions of APTT, slight extension of PT, and a decrease in the number of platelets were observed in the two dead monkeys, possibly indicating a deficiency of coagulation factors and platelets. Histopathologically, the dead monkeys showed moderate focal or midzonal coagulative necrosis of the liver involving approximately 1/3 to 2/3 of hepatocytes, necrosis in the ventricular myocardium, fibrin thrombi in the glomeruli and small intertubular vessels of renal medulla in the kidneys, and mild depletion of lymphocytes from white pulp and the deposition of eosinophilic amorphous fibrin-like material in red pulp cords in the spleen [69].Morrill et al. reported that after intravenous inoculation of 1 × 105 pfu ZH501 strain into 17 rhesus macaques, three developed signs of hemorrhagic fever, seven were clinically ill but survived, and the other seven survived without clinical signs [70]. Serum interferon (IFN)-α was detected from 6–24 h p.i. and from 24–30 h p.i. in the surviving monkeys and in those dying, respectively, and the delayed IFN response was preceded by viremia in two of the three lethally-infected monkeys [70]. No surviving monkeys developed signs of encephalitis or retinal complications in follow-up observations at two months to two years [70]. Morrill et al. also demonstrated that the administration of recombinant leukocyte A IFN (5 × 105 U, i.m) at 6 h after RVFV intravenous inoculation reduced the peak viremia titer by 100-times and cleared viruses by 48 h p.i. [71]. These studies suggested the importance of IFN-α in limiting viral replication.Findlay et al. reported that three species of African monkey, i.e., the green guenon (Cercopithecus callitrichus), the sooty mangabey (Cercocebus fuliginosus) and the Patas guenon (Erythrocebus patas), did not exhibit any febrile reaction after inoculation of RVFV, whereas virus was detected in the blood [72]. In contrast, four species of South American monkeys, two brown capuchin monkeys (Cebus fatuellus and Cebus chrysopus) and two common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus and Callithrix penicillata) exhibited febrile reactions for 1 to 2 days upon RVFV infection, which may indicate that South American monkeys are more susceptible to RVFV infection than African monkeys [72]. Davies et al. reported that RVFV-infected baboons (Papio Anubis) had viremia for 3 to 4 days without developing significant clinical signs [73].2.7.SheepDaubney et al. originally reported an outbreak of RVF in a herd of sheep in Kenya in 1930, which was characterized as a high rate of abortion in pregnant ewes and high mortality of newborn lambs [4]. A later study by Easterday et al. described that the mortality of adult sheep following experimental RVFV infection was approximately 20% [74]. Typically, sheep with more than one week old were relatively resistant to RVFV infection, yet did exhibit fever (39 to 40 °C), viremia, diarrhea, nasal discharge, and decreased activity [74,75]. Nine- to ten-week-old young adult sheep (Ripollesa breed) that were subcutaneously inoculated with RVFV had corneal and choroidal edema with inflammatory infiltrate, which could be associated with drainage failure or inadequate corneal dehydration after transient viremia [76]. On the other hand, 7- to 11-month-old Yansaka sheep subcutaneously inoculated with RVFV died during the viremic febrile phase and displayed symptoms of epistaxis (2 days p.i.∼), severe and bloody diarrhea, conjunctival hemorrhage, widespread petechiae and ecchymoses in hairless areas, pulmonary edema/hemorrhage, and thrombi formation in the blood vessels of the heart, kidneys and brain. RVFV-infected West African Dwarf or the Ouda breed did not exhibit such rapid hemorrhagic symptoms and rather exhibited marked coagulative hepatic necrosis, and brain lesions, including mild gliosis, neural degeneration, neurophagia, and satellitosis [77]. Interestingly, Yansaka, West African Dwarf and Ouda also had increased prothrombin time, which may have indicated that hemorrhage was induced by a combination of vascular endothelial damage and an inability to clot blood in response to the damage [77]. The inconsistency of symptoms and mortality in adult sheep described in these publications suggest the divergence of host genetic background, even within the same breed of sheep, affects susceptibility to RVFV infection.Several studies examined the effects of RVFV vaccine candidates for protecting pregnant ewes from wt RVFV infection. However, insufficient immunogenicity of inactivated vaccines or residual virulence of live-attenuated vaccines induced fetal malformations. Pregnant ewes were untreated (n = 8) or vaccinated (n = 50) once with formalin-inactivated RVFV and then challenged with wt RVFV ZH501 at 45 days post vaccination [78]. Abortion occurred in both unvaccinated and vaccinated ewes, between 6 to 18 days p.i., and 50% of the ewes aborted their fetuses. One out of 50 vaccinated ewes and one out of eight unvaccinated ewes died. These data may indicate that the inactivated RVFV vaccine induced an insufficient immunity for sheep. Necropsy at 19 days p.i. revealed that 100% of the ewes had either aborted or dead fetuses, while the dead or aborted lambs showed extensive liver necrosis typical of RVF [78]. Coetzer et al. reported that immunization of pregnant ewes with a live-attenuated Smithburn vaccine strain at 42 to 74 days of pregnancy could cause a teratogenic effect in the fetus, including arthrogryposis, hydranencephaly, or mineralization of brain with or without hydrop amnii, and two out of six lambs from the nine vaccinated ewes showed such effects [79]. Hunter et al. described that pregnant ewes inoculated with live-attenuated MP-12 vaccine strain at 28 to 56 days of gestation either miscarried or produced lambs showing teratogenic effects (11 out of 75 lambs from 50 vaccinated ewes), such as cerebellar hypoplasia, spinal hypoplasia, hydranencephaly, prognathia inferior, brachygnathia inferior, arthrogryposis, scoiliosis, lordosis, kyphosis, or dormed head [80]. The abortion and teratogenous effects did not occur when pregnant ewes were vaccinated with MP-12 at the third trimester of pregnancy, i.e., at 90-110 days of gestation [81,82]. On the other hand, pregnant ewes vaccinated at 15 days of gestation with a RVFV Clone 13 (C13) strain, which has a 69% in-frame deletion of NSs [83], did not cause abortion or fetal malformations and were protective against wt RVFV challenge [84]. These data may imply the involvement of MP-12 NSs in the abortion of ewes and the teratogenic effects in lambs.RVFV infection causes an acute and fatal disease in newborn lambs [5]. RVFV-infected newborn lambs usually exhibit obvious illness, including elevated body temperature (40 to 41 °C), loss of appetite, decreased activity, and prostration, about 12 to 18 h prior to death [85]. The mortality rate in RVFV-infected newborn lambs is 95 to 100% [5]. Studies of experimental infection of 1-4 day-old lambs with RVFV via s.c. resulted in necrosis of isolated hepatocytes (12–18 h p.i.), focal coagulative necrosis of hepatocytes (24–33 h p.i.), and extensive hepatocyte necrosis (48–51 h p.i.) with a progressive increase in viral antigens, whereas no viral antigens could be detected in the endothelial or Kupffer cells in the liver, suggesting that hepatocytes are the primary target of RVFV [86]. The necrosis is predominantly centrilobular or midzonal, and yet there is no definite distribution pattern in liver necrosis [5,87]. Some infected lambs also exhibited necrosis in the villi at the distal jejunum and ileum and depletion of lymphocytes in the spleen, whereas the brain and eyes had no lesions [87]. Overall, the liver pathology of newborn lambs resembles that of mice or hamsters, which are extremely susceptible to RVFV. However, the RVFV neurovirulence in lambs is less prominent when compared with that in rodents.RVFV also causes diseases in other animals including goats, cattle, camels, dogs, cats, and ferrets, but does not cause any symptomatic diseases in rabbits, guinea pigs, birds, horses, pigs and other animals, as reviewed in detail previously [4–6,8,63,88–93]. As of the present, the mechanism of species-specific susceptibility to RVFV infection is unknown.RVFV infection shows unique pathogenesis in each animal model. Because viral replication and host antiviral responses most probably contribute to viral pathogenecity, an understanding of RVF pathogenesis requires identification and characterization of the viral virulence factors and host antiviral factors. The next chapter describes the viral determinant of virulence.3.Viral Determinants of Virulence3.1.Virus Life CycleThe RVFV genome is comprised of three RNA segments named the S-, M- and L-segments (Figure 2) [1,2]. The S-segment encodes N and NSs genes in an ambisense manner, the M-segment. NSm (NSm2), 78 kD (NSm1), Gn and Gc genes, and the L-segment, the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (L) gene [10]. RVFV virions bind to an unidentified cellular receptor, and enter the cells in a pH-dependent manner [94], probably through a clathrin-mediated endocytic pathway, as described for another phlebovirus [95]. After viral uncoating, viral ribonucleocapsid (RNP) composed of viral genomic RNA segments and N protein [96] is released into the cytoplasm, and the viral polymerase, which probably is attached to the RNP exerts primary transcription to synthesize viral mRNA [97]. Both N mRNA and NSs mRNA are transcribed during primary transcription as early as 40 min after infection from an efficiently packaged, viral-sense (negative-sense) S-segment and anti-viral-sense (positive-sense) S-segment, respectively; the packaging mechanism of RVFV RNP and the presence of specific cis-signals in the genomic RNA are not known [97]. Viral RNA replication starts around 1 to 2 h after infection [97] and an increase in the amount of viral genomic RNA results in increases in viral mRNAs and proteins. The RNP is packaged into viral virions probably by its interaction with the cytoplasmic domains of Gn/Gc at the Golgi apparatus, as reported for other bunyaviruses [98,99]. The three different RNA segments could be co-packaged in a coordinated manner, in which the co-packaging of M and S-segments could support the packaging of the L-segment [100]. The RVFV virion surface is highly symmetric T = 12 icosahedral lattice [101], which is formed by a shell of 122 glycoprotein capsomers most probably composed of 720 Gn-Gc heterodimers [102].3.2.Role of NSm Protein in Viral VirulenceThe RVFV M-segment encodes 78 kD, NSm, Gn and Gc proteins in M mRNA (Figure 2). Those proteins are synthesized from a single open reading frame of M mRNA at different AUGs present at the 5′ region of M mRNA by leaky scanning of ribosomes, while the N-terminus of Gn and Gc is co-translationally cleaved by host proteins [103–105]. NSm is synthesized from the 2nd AUG, and the C-terminus is generated by cleavage at the N-terminus of Gn, while the 78 kD protein is synthesized from the 1st AUG, and the C-terminus is identical to that of Gn. Among seven viral proteins, NSs and NSm are nonstructural proteins which are not incorporated into virions [59,104]. The 78 kD protein has not been studied in detail, while an “80 kD” protein induced by RVFV infection (most probably corresponding to the current 78 kD protein) is known to be incorporated into virions [106], which may indicate that the 78 kD protein is a structural protein. NSs, 78 kD protein and NSm are dispensable for viral replication in cell cultures [83,107–109]. Infection of 12-week-old female WF rats with a recombinant RVFV ZH501 strain lacking both 78 kD protein and NSm induced acute fatal hepatic disease, causing the deaths of some infected rats around four days p.i., or a delayed fatal neurologic disease, resulting in death of some of infected animals around 13 days p.i. (mortality rate: 50 to 70%), while wt ZH501-infected rats developed acute hepatitis and 100% died. These data suggest that NSm is not essential for virulence and lethality [110]. On the other hand, a recombinant RVFV MP-12 lacking the expression of both 78 kD and NSm induced more extensive apoptosis than did MP-12 in cultured cells and the expression of NSm significantly inhibited the cleavage of caspase-8 and -9 induced by staurosporine [111], demonstrating that NSm protein suppresses apoptosis. Thus, NSm probably suppresses apoptosis in infected hosts and affects viral pathogenicity.3.3.Role of NSs Protein in Viral VirulenceNSs is known to be a major virulence factor of RVFV; a RVFV C13 strain, which has a 69% in-frame deletion of NSs [83], and is completely attenuated in mice or sheep [51,84]. Further studies showed that NSs inhibits the synthesis of IFN-β mRNA under the conditions that transcription factors, such as IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), NF-κB and activator protein (AP)-1, are activated in wt RVFV ZH548-infected cells [112]. It was found that NSs can bind and sequester the p44 subunit of TFIIH, an essential transcription factor for RNA polymerase I and II; and hence NSs was reported to prevent the assembly process of the TFIIH complex, resulting in the suppression of host mRNA transcription [113]. Le May et al. also described studies demonstrating that a region of NSs, corresponding to amino acid 210 to 230, specifically binds to Sin3A-associated protein (SAP30) and forms a complex that represses the histone acetylation required for the transcriptional activation of IFN-β promoter; this repression worked even after the binding of IRF-3 to the IFN-β promoter [114]; hence, recombinant ZH548 carrying a deletion at amino acid 210 to 230 of NSs cannot suppress the IFN-β mRNA synthesis. It should be noted that C13 NSs bound to SAP30, yet it did not suppress IFN-β expression [114]. Although the inability of C13 NSs to suppress IFN-β expression may have been due to its poor accumulation in infected cells, further studies are required to know how the binding of NSs to SAP30 can lead to the suppression of IFN-β mRNA synthesis. It is also uncertain whether the general host transcriptional suppression is required for the inhibition of IFN-β mRNA synthesis.Because NSs induces host general transcription suppression [113], RVFV might have the ability to replicate under host transcription suppression. Actinomycin D (ActD) is a general inhibitor of host RNA synthesis. Viral titers of several cytoplasmic RNA viruses including arenaviruses [115–117], measles virus [118], sindbis virus [119], rubella virus [120], polio virus [121,122], coronaviruses [123,124], and lactic dehydrogenase elevating virus [125] could be reduced in the presence of ActD, while the viral RNA synthesis is often unaffected [115,118,123]. We found that expression of NSs protein is essential for the RVFV MP-12 strain to actively synthesize viral proteins and produce high titers of infectious viruses in the presence of ActD [126]; cells infected with recombinant RVFV MP-12 lacking NSs failed to synthesize viral proteins; and while cells infected with MP-12 lacking NSs accumulated phosphorylated eIF2α. The latter made cellular translation initiation inactive through the activation of dsRNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) at around 8 h p.i. [126], resulting in the suppression of viral protein synthesis. Further studies revealed that MP-12 NSs promoted the degradation of PKR through the proteasome pathway and prevented an accumulation of phosphorylated eIF2α, thereby securing efficient viral protein synthesis under host transcription shut-off induced by ActD [126]. Habjan et al. reported that wt RVFV NSs also induced PKR degradation and demonstrated that an RVFV C13 strain carrying biologically inactive NSs induced fatal hepatic disease in C57BL/6 mice lacking PKR [127]; these mice are competent for inducing type-I IFNs in response to viral RNA replication or poly (I):poly (C) [128]. PKR is one of several IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) and plays an important role in inhibiting viral replication in vivo; other RNA viruses, including vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and influenza virus, also replicate more efficiently in mice lacking PKR than in those with an intact PKR [129]. In addition to PKR, IFN-induced MxA proteins is also known to inhibit RVFV replication [130].Although the genetic diversity of RVFV strains is relatively low (approximately 5% in primary sequences [131]), the susceptibilities to rat IFN-α/β differed among RVFV strains. Most of the sub-Saharan RVFV strains are very sensitive to rat IFN-α/β (ED50: 0.3–0.7 units), whereas Egyptian strains, including ZH501 and ZH548, and a Zimbabwean isolate (2269/74) are relatively resistant to rat IFN-α/β (ED50: 50–200 units) [132]. All of those RVFV isolates show a similar sensitivity to human IFN-α (ED50: 70–880 units).In summary, RVFV NSs induces the shut-down of host transcription, including transcription of both type-I IFN and ISGs mRNAs, to prevent antiviral responses. NSs also induces the degradation of PKR to prevent eIF2α-mediated host and viral translational shut-off and promote an efficient viral protein synthesis.3.4.Other Virulence FactorsAlthough NSs is a major virulence factor to escape host innate immune responses, the virulence of RVFV could be controlled in a polygenic manner. The RVFV MP-12 strain is a highly attenuated strain derived from wt RVFV ZH548 [133] and encodes a functional NSs gene. Mutations in the M- and L-segments are major determinants of MP-12 attenuation [134,135]. In contrast, the C13 strain encodes an S-segment lacking a functional NSs gene, while the M- and L-segments of C13 strain are still virulent phenotypes [51,83]. Mice lacking IFN-AR (IFN-AR−/− mice) are susceptible to both MP-12 and C13, while the viral replication kinetics of MP-12 and C13 differ in those mice; the highest titer of viremia was reached within 28 h p.i. and around 48 h p.i. in C13-infected mice and in MP-12-infected mice, respectively [51]. Thus, there is a possibility that M- and L-segments of C13 may facilitate a rapid replication of C13 in these mice, reaching the highest virus titer substantially earlier compared to MP-12-infected mice. Recently, we found that wt RVFV ZH501 virus stock contains two major viral populations, rZH501-M847-A (Glu at aa.123 of Gn protein) and rZH501-M847-G (Gly at the corresponding site); the difference in the amino acid is mapped within one of the neutralizing epitopes in Gn protein [61,136]. Although it is not known how the two different populations have emerged in the ZH501 virus stock, which was amplified once in the mouse brain and passaged twice in FRhL cells and twice in Vero E6 cells, the rZH501-M847G replicated less efficiently than rZH501-M847A in infected mice, whereas both of them replicated efficiently in tissue cultures such as MRC-5, VeroE6, J774.1, and NIH3T3 cells. Our study showed that one amino acid change in the Gn can substantially alter replication and pathogenesis of ZH501 in vivo, and yet the mechanism of the Gn mutation in the pathogenesis remains unknown. Clearly further studies will be needed for understanding the roles of viral proteins in RVFV pathogenesis.RVFV encodes several virulence factors, and the major virulence factor NSs plays an important role in evading host innate immune responses. In the next chapter, we discuss how humans or host animals develop protective immune responses against highly virulent wt RVFV.4.Host Determinants of Virulence4.1.Host Defense via Infection RouteAdequate immunity against RVFV can attenuate the virulence of RVFV in animals and vaccination against RVFV can save animals from lethal RVFV challenge [84,133,137–140]. The passive transfer of neutralizing antibodies is sufficient for protection from lethal RVF [67,141–144], whereas the role of the cellular immune response for the protection is not sufficiently evaluated. Yet, Mandell et al. demonstrated that mice immunized with virus-like particles containing N have a higher survival rate (survival: 9/16) than those not containing N after lethal RVFV challenges (survival: 3/16). Because anti-N protein antibody is unlikely to neutralize RVFV, these data may point to the involvement of cellular immune responses against N protein for RVFV protection [145]. Alternatively, antiviral immune responses might be induced by forming a complex between anti-N antibody and N proteins released from dead cells or infected cells in vivo [146]. If N proteins are present in cell surface as reported in influenza virus-infected cells [147,148], complement-mediated cell lysis could be another mechanism to support the elimination of infected cells [146].Aerosol exposure is one of the most likely routes for both laboratory infections and bioterrorism attack. Immunization of rats by s.c. inoculation of a formalin-inactivated RVFV vaccine (TSI-GSD-200) partially protected lethal RVFV aerosol exposure at 187 days post immunization (survival: 72/105: 69%), whereas 11 out of 72 surviving rats developed encephalitis without clinical signs at 27-28 days post-challenge, which was revealed during necropsy [149]. Another study showed that three vaccinated rats challenged with RVFV aerosol developed uveitis, although no histopathological analysis was presented [141]. Mice are highly susceptible to wt RVFV aerosol exposure (LD50: 1 to 2 PFU), which may cause lethal hepatitis, but not pneumonia [150]. A study in mice vaccinated at several different routes with formalin-inactivated RVFV vaccine (NDBR-103) [149] and challenged with RVFV subcutaneously showed that the immunization route affected survival rates; s.c. immunization, intraperitoneal (i.p.) immunization, and intraduodenal (i.d.) immunization resulted in survival rates of 97.5%, 100% and less than 20%, respectively. Another study reported that fewer than 20% of mice immunized via s.c. or i.d. and about 50% of mice immunized via i.p. survived after aerosol route challenge of RVFV in the 2-week observation period [151]. Findings from this study using aerosol RVFV challenge indicated that the mucosal immunity elicited by i.d. immunization successfully lowered the occurrence of olfactory bulb encephalitis, but failed to prevent necrotic hepatitis, and immunity induced by s.c. or i.d. did not prevent hepatitis, olfactory bulb encephalitis and multifocal encephalitis, while i.p. immunization completely prevented the occurrence of hepatitis, but not multifocal encephalitis [151]. These reports seem to indicate that immunization with inactivated vaccines via s.c. cannot prevent RVFV-induced diseases after aerosol challenge. It will be important to establish a reliable countermeasure against bioterrorism by use of RVFV through further detailed characterization of RVFV replication in various organs after aerosol challenge and examination of the efficacy of immunization of current live-attenuated RVFV vaccine candidates, such as MP-12 or C13, for preventing RVF-induced diseased after RVFV aerosol challenge.Exposure of animals to aerosol containing RVFV probably results in initial RVFV infection in lung epithelial cells, such as type I alveolar epithelial cells. Both infection and release of RVFV occur in polarized epithelial cells, such as Caco-2 cells (human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells), at apical and basolateral membranes [152]. Infection by Punta Toro virus (PTV), which belongs to the Phlebovirus genus and causes a lethal necrotic hepatitis in hamsters [153,154] and mice [155], results in virus being released into the basolateral membrane [156], which may contribute to systemic viral spread in infected animals.4.2.Host SusceptibilityAs described in Section 2.3, several studies point to the possibility that unidentified host genetic factors influence the susceptibility of inbred rat species to RVFV. The primary rat hepatocytes derived from resistant American Lewis rats or WF/mol rats are less permissive to RVFV infection than those derived from susceptible American WF rat or Lewis/mol rats [66,157], whereas RVFV replicates efficiently in primary cortical glial cells derived from WF/mol rats [66] or spontaneously transformed cell lines generated from embryonic thymus cells of either resistant LEW rats or susceptible WF rats [132], suggesting that hepatocytes in those resistant inbred rats are under the control of a host factor(s) that restricts efficient RVFV replication. Peritoneal macrophages (PM) derived from resistant Lewis rat or susceptible WF rat were treated with 1.0 or 10 U of IFN, which resulted in a 150- or 3300-fold reduction of ZH501 replication in Lewis PM, and a 4- or 250-fold reduction in WF PM, respectively, possibly indicative of the role of IFN to increase resistance in Lewis rats [158]. On the other hand, primary hepatocytes derived from susceptible Lewis/mol rats and resistant WF/mol rats are resistant to RVFV after treatment of the cells with rat type-I IFN, suggesting the resistance induced by type-I IFN is not necessarily important for the host specific resistance seen in WF/mol rats [66].A recent study showed that MBT/Pas mice, but not BALB/cByi mice, are highly susceptible to RVFV ZH548 infection [159]. Experiments using microarray and quantitative real-time PCR showed that RVFV ZH548 replication in mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) cells derived from susceptible MBT/Pas mice induced higher levels of Ifnb1 and Ifna4 mRNAs than did those derived from resistant BALB/cByj mice, while MEF cells derived from MBT/Pas mice failed to induce several ISGs, including the IFN regulatory factor 7 (Irf7) mRNA, the 2′-5′ oligoadenylate synthetase-like 2 (Oasl2) mRNA, and the IFN-induced 17 kDa protein (Isg15) mRNA [159]. The knockout of Isg15 or Oasl2 mRNA expressions increased viral replication in MEF cells derived from resistant BALB/cByj mice, leading the authors to suggest that MBT/Pas mice have a defect in their IFN responses which controls RVFV spread [159]. It is of interest to know whether the mice lacking Isg15 or Oasl2 genes are susceptible to RVFV. It is unknown whether the susceptibility of inbred rat to RVFV is due to a deficit in some ISGs.The host factors determining the host susceptibility to PTV infection have been explored; PTV infection in mice mimics RVFV-induced lethal hepatitis. C57BL/6J mice show an age-dependent susceptibility to PTV infection; the mice gradually become resistant to PTV from 5 to 7 weeks, and they are resistant at eight weeks of age [155]. The 8-week-old C57BL/6J mice show a delayed viremia, when compared to 4-week-old mice, and the peak viremia titers in the 8-week-old mice are 5- to 10-times lower than those in the 4-week-old mice [155]. Likewise, PTV replication was lower in primary cultured hepatocytes, Kupffer cells and peripheral blood monocytes isolated from 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice than in those cells obtained from 3-week-old C57BL/6 mice [160,161]. Adding stress to the 8-week-old mice by daily handling and observation increased their susceptibility to PTV replication [162]. The role of toll-like receptor (TLR) 3, which is a pathogen recognition receptor recognizing double-stranded RNA, in the susceptibility of the mice to PTV was studied by using 8-week-old TLR3−/− mice of the C57BL/6 background [162]. The wt mice infected with PTV had a 100% mortality and high levels of IL-6 induction (yet no remarkable increase in TNF-α), whereas mice lacking TLR3 infected with PTV had increased survival rates, slightly earlier reduction of serum virus titers, and decreased levels of serum IL-6 [162]. On the other hand, IL-6−/− mice were more susceptible to PTV infection and supported higher levels of viremia than did wt mice, which possibly means that IL-6 is indispensable for protective immunity. A similar attenuation of virulence has been also reported for West Nile virus infection in TLR3−/− mice [163]. The authors hypothesized that over-production of IL-6 in wt mice would be detrimental to the outcome of PTV infection [162], pointing out that the balance of cytokines might alter the pathogenesis of PTV. STAT-1 is a key molecule in the IFN signaling pathway [164]. It was reported that PTV replicated substantially better in the brains of STAT-1−/− mice than in wt mice. Also PTV titers in sera, spleens and livers of the STAT-1−/− mice were high, which may emphasize the importance of IFN responses for limiting viral replication in the liver, spleen and brain [165].5.ConclusionsSince the first recognition of RVF in an outbreak in 1930, more than 80 years has passed. Although there has been good progress in characterizing clinical, pathological, and virological features of RVFV infection, RVFV still causes outbreaks in African countries or the Arabian Peninsula [3,10]. The development of effective, safe, highly immunogenic and economic vaccines for animals and humans will prevent RVF in the endemic countries [137]. There are several important questions to address in controlling RVFV and in further understanding RVF pathogenesis. Some of them include determining the: (1) mechanism that triggers hemorrhagic fever, (2) route of viral entry to the brain, (3) mechanism of prolonged diseases in RVF patients in the presence of neutralizing antibodies, and (4) significance of vaccination to prevent RVF after aerosol exposure. Addressing these questions will have a substantial impact on understanding of RVF pathogenesis and development of anti-RVFV reagents.


Title: An Unexpected Recurrent Transmission of Rift Valley Fever Virus in Cattle in a Temperate and Mountainous Area of Madagascar

IntroductionRift Valley fever (RVF) is an acute, zoonotic viral disease, caused by a phlebovirus belonging to the Bunyaviridae family [1]. It mainly affects domestic ruminants such as sheep, goats and cattle [2]. The main clinical signs of the disease are high mortality rates, especially in new-born sheep and goats, and abortion in pregnant animals. Humans can develop RVF after exposure to tissues, blood or body fluids or through the bite of an infected mosquito. Infection in humans is usually associated with moderate influenza-like illness, but severe complications occur in a small proportion of patients in which the death rate may be high. RVF virus (RVFV) is transmitted from ruminant to ruminant either by mosquitoes – the main mosquito vectors being from the Aedes and Culex genera [3], or theoretically, but never demonstrated, through direct contact. The respective contribution of both transmission routes remain unevaluated and probably vary from one ecological context to another. Veterinary inactivated and attenuated vaccines exist, but they are not widely used, and there is no treatment, either for humans or domestic animals.The disease is endemic in numerous African countries. A large epidemic occurred in 2006–2007 in the Horn of Africa, first in Kenya [4], Tanzania and Somalia [5], then in Sudan [6]. The last outbreaks occurred in Madagascar in 2008 [7] and South Africa in 2010 [8]. Sporadic animal cases were also reported in Botswana [9] and Namibia [10].The epidemiology of RVF is complex and only partially understood. The disease was reported in three epidemiological systems: (i) dambo areas (East, and some parts of Southern Africa where there are referred to as pans), (ii) semi-arid areas, and (iii) irrigated areas. Dambos are shallow depressions, often located near rivers, which fill with water during the rainy season. In these regions, a correlation between heavy rainfall and RVF outbreaks was clearly demonstrated [11]. Transmission from one mosquito generation to another, namely “vertical transmission” has been demonstrated with Aedes (Neomelaniconion) mcintoshi
[12]. In addition, the virus may survive in desiccated eggs during inter-epizootic and/or dry/cold periods. Thanks to these two mechanisms, and to extreme rainy events, the disease may re-emerge every 5 to 15 years with only few seroconversion signs or reported clinical cases during the inter-epizootic period [13], [14]. The semi-arid areas in which the disease has been reported are characterized by temporary water points, such as found in northern Senegal or Mauritania. In these areas, the virus persistence mechanisms remain unclear. They could be related to the survival of the virus in Aedes mosquitoes, as demonstrated in East Africa, or to the regular introduction of the virus by nomadic herds coming from neighbouring endemic areas. Neither possibility is mutually exclusive [15]. The irrigated areas concerned include the Nile delta (Egypt) and the Senegal River valley (Senegal, Mauritania), where permanent water bodies favor the development of Culex populations, and thus year –long viral transmission [16]. In some ecosystems such as South Africa or Zimbabwe [17], [18], virus circulation also could be maintained between mosquito vectors and wild small or large mammals in sylvatic cycles.In Madagascar, RVFV was isolated for the first time in 1979 from pools of mosquitoes captured during the rainy season in the primary rain forest of Perinet, Moramanga district [19]. Human and animal RVF outbreaks occurred during the rainy season in Vavatenina and Fenoarivo Antsinanana districts in March 1990 and around Antananarivo, the capital, from February to April 1991 [20]. Antigenic and molecular analysis of isolates showed that RVFV strains obtained in 1979 were closely related to both Egyptian 1979 isolates and Zimbabwean 1974 isolates, while those isolated in 1991 were closer to eastern/central African strains [20]–[22].The first human RVF case of the 2008 outbreak was reported in January in Tolagnaro city, southern Madagascar, from specimen collected at the sentinel surveillance site. By 15 June 2008, the Ministry of Health of Madagascar had reported 417 suspected RVF cases, 59 laboratory confirmed human cases, and 19 deaths suspected to be due to RVF infection [7]. Most regions of the island were infected. Anjozorobe district was heavily affected by the outbreak (Reynes JM, personal communication). This region, located 80 km north of Antananarivo, is part of the wet and temperate highland region of Madagascar. It is composed of a dense, evergreen forest and an agricultural zone, where there are rice fields favorable to Culex mosquito populations and livestock farming is widespread.Due to a rather cool weather during winter, a continuous transmission of the virus between mosquitoes and cattle is unlikely. As suspected in other parts of the world (e.g., bats in Guinea [23] and rodents in Senegal and South Africa [17], [24], [25]), the existence of a wild reservoir located in the forest may explain the persistence of the virus during inter-epizootic periods and the recurrence of the disease in this region. Alternatively, livestock trade may be involved in this resurgence given that the Anjozorobe region is connected to most of the important breeding areas in the country.The goal of the present study was to evaluate the point prevalence rate of antibodies against RVFV in cattle in the Anjozorobe district and identify environmental and trade factors potentially linked to RVFV transmission to infer epidemiological implications of RVFV circulation and persistence in this area.MethodsThe study areaThe study area is located within the Anjozorobe district, 80 km north of Antananarivo, the capital of Madagascar Island (defined by the geographical coordinates of the Figure 1). This region holds some of the last large and unfragmented remnants of the central highland's natural ecosystems, including highland forests, watersheds and lakes (Figure 1). The study area, mainly composed of wetlands, rice fields, and crop fields lies beside the Anjozorobe forest corridor which is one of the last vestiges of dense rain forest in Madagascar. Two types of forest are present: high altitude humid forest (over 1,500 m) and mountain humid forest (800–1,500 m). The climate is temperate and wet, characterized by a cold season with frequent but slight rainfall, from April to September, and a warm, wet season with high rainfall, from October to April. The average annual temperature is 18°C. November is the warmest month, with an average maximum temperature of 27°C, and August the coldest with an average minimum temperature of 9°C [26]. The forest corridor is on the continental divide line between the east and west side of Madagascar Island. The region is crossed by many water systems that constitute an important water resource irrigating the surrounding regions [26].10.1371/journal.pntd.0001423.g001Figure 1Location of villages included in the serological survey and corresponding IgG seroprevalence rates.Thick line is the main road. Thin lines are secondary roads. Dashed lines are water systems. Moist forests are represented by gridded areas. Empty triangles represent villages with an IgG seroprevalence rate ranging from 0 to 22,2% (n = 15); grey diamonds represent villages with an IgG seroprevalence rate ranging from 22,21 to 33,3% (n = 16); black circles represent villages with an IgG seroprevalence rate ranging from 33,4 to 71,4% (n = 12). Village identification numbers (n = 43) are provided in Online supporting information file, Table S1. Source: @FTM BD 2000, CIRAD.In this area, livestock farming, largely of cattle, is crucial for the local population's subsistence, contributing directly and indirectly to food security and nutrition. Livestock provide products (milk and meat) for consumption, and is a source of valuable goods and services, e.g. transport, manure for fertilizing, ploughing, rice stamping and income from trade of products. Cattle are also slaughtered regularly for religious feasts and are used as a form of savings.Sampling and definition of risk factorsIn collaboration with the Malagasy Veterinary Services, an exhaustive census of cattle herds was performed in the study area in May 2009. Meetings were organized with farmers to explain the goals of the study and the decision to participate was taken at the village level. Informed consent was given orally and documented in questionnaires. For cultural reasons, written consent could not be obtained. The size of the cattle population in this area was estimated by the Veterinary Services to be 2,000 animals. Thus, considering a design effect of 2 that takes into account the village clustering, and to estimate a point prevalence of 20% with a 95% level of confidence, we needed to sample at least 1,020 animals (exact error 3%). In each participating village, blood samples were collected from randomly chosen cattle. Each participating owner was the source of data collected in a standardized questionnaire. The age of each sampled animal was recorded. The potential role of 3 environmental risk factors was investigated: the minimum distance from the night pen to the nearest water point, the type of the nearest water point, and the minimum distance from the night pen to the nearest forest boundary. The exact locations of the night pens and the distances from these night pens to the nearest water point and nearest forest boundary were recorded and calculated using a Global Positioning System (GPS) device. With regards to the type of water point, 3 modalities were recorded, namely “pond”, “rice field” and “river”. In addition to the 3 above–mentioned parameters, owners were questioned about their herd replacement practices. The binary variable -auto-renewal vs purchase- was recorded. When purchased, the exact origin of the cattle could not be obtained. However most of them were bought in the Anjozorobe area (H. Rasamoelina, pers.com).In the field, blood samples were centrifuged after collection, then transported to the Institut Pasteur in Madagascar (Antananarivo) and stored at −20°C until they were analysed.Serological analysisSamples were tested for anti-RVFV immunoglobulin (Ig) M and IgG using a previously described ELISA test [7], [27]. The ELISA assays were completed by using inactivated RVFV-infected vero E6 cell antigens and uninfected Vero E6 cell antigens. Each serum was 4-fold diluted, namely 1∶100, 1∶400, 1∶1600 and 1∶6400. Samples were considered positive only if the adjusted sum of optical densities, defined for each dilution as the difference between the cumulative sum of optical densities minus the background absorbance of uninfected control Vero E6 cells, and the titers were above pre-established conservative cut-off values, respectively ≥0.75 and ≥400 for IgM and ≥0.95 and ≥400 for IgG.Statistical analysisThe serological data were analyzed using a generalized linear mixed model (glmmML library, R software), where the individual serological status was the binomial response, and the previously mentioned variables (age, minimum distance from the night pen to the nearest water point type, minimum distance from the night pen to the nearest forest boundary, type of the nearest water point, and herd replacement practices) were the explicative factors. The breeder was included as a random effect to take into account the clustering of sampled animals. The significance of the cluster effect was tested using a bootstrap approach (n = 2000) [28].ResultsDue to field constraints, the provisional sampling could not be achieved: a total of 894 bovines were sampled between early May and mid-June 2009, belonging to 258 breeders coming from 43 villages of 51 villages existing in the area (See online information file, Table S1). Cattle ages ranged from 1 to 18 years, with the majority of sampled animals less than 8 years old (Figure 2). Overall anti-RVFV IgG seroprevalence rate was 28% [IC95% 25–31] (See online information file, Table S1). This rate varied among villages, from 0 to 71.4% (See online information file, Table S1). The overall anti-RVFV IgM seroprevalence rate was 0.8% [IC95% 0.0–1.0]. The 7 anti-RVFV IgM positive animals were distributed among herds from 6 villages and 5 of the animals belonged to breeders that do not purchase new animals to renew their herd.10.1371/journal.pntd.0001423.g002Figure 2Number of sample animals and IgG seroprevalence rate according to age.The number of sampled animals is given by the histogram, and the black line represents the IgG prevalence rate. Thirteen animals older than 8 were aggregated in the class >8. Age of animals is given by the x axis. The left y axis represents the number of sampled animals for each age class. The right y axis provides the IgG prevalence rate for each age class.The IgG seropositivity rate of animals was statistically linked to age (p = 0.0001) with an OR of 3.4 for an age difference of 5 years suggesting a recurrent and intense RVFV circulation in this area (Table 1). The minimum distance to the nearest water point ranged from 10 to 3,000 meters. This distance was a protective factor (p = 0.005) since prevalence rate was negatively correlated to the distance. The odds of seropositivity were divided approximately by 10 when the distance to the nearest water point was increased by 500 meters (OR: 0.08, Table 1). Five hundred thirty three bovines belonged to breeders that did not purchase any animal. The anti-RVFV IgG seroprevalence within this population was 27.8%. The anti-RVFV IgG seroprevalence of bovines belonging to breeders that purchase to renew their herd was 28.1%. In the multivariate model, belonging to owners who buy animals to renew (at least partially) their herd was a risk factor (p = 0.04). The minimum distance of the night pen to the forest ranged from 100 to 10,000 meters. This latter parameter as well as the water point type had no effect on the prevalence rate. The breeder random effect was not significant (p = 0.06).10.1371/journal.pntd.0001423.t001Table 1Results of the generalized linear mixed-effect model, with breeder as a random effect.VariableModalitiesOR (95%CI)p-valueAge3.4a (1.8–6.4)10−4
Minimum distance to water point0.08b (0.01–0.48)5.10−3
Water point typec
RiverNSd
NSPaddy fieldNSNSMinimum distance to the forestNSNSReplacement practices33 (1–992)0.04aChange of the odds of seropositivity when the age of animals is increased by 5 years.bChange of the odds of seropositivity when the distance to the nearest water point is increased by 500 m.cPond as the reference.dNon Significant.DiscussionThe overall observed anti-RVFV IgG prevalence was concordant with a serosurvey performed after the 1991 outbreak in Mangamila, located 20 kms south of Anjozorobe [29]. Similarly, a national serosurvey was performed after the 2008 outbreak: the seroprevalence rate was estimated to be 25.8% and 24.7% respectively in cattle (n = 3437) and small domestic ruminants (n = 989) [30].Only 7 bovines were found positive for IgM against RVFV. In the majority of cases, anti-RVFV IgM antibodies do not persist beyond the 50th day after infection [31], [32]. The sampling of the anti-RVFV IgM positive bovines was performed between early May and mid-June 2009. This suggests that these infections most probably occurred between early February 2009, and mid March, corresponding to the middle of the wet, warm season (October to April) and the apparent end of the second transmission wave. A high herd immunity level induced by the first outbreak in 2008 associated with an early elimination of IgM might explain this small number of new infections. Five of these 7 anti-RVFV IgM positive bovines belonged to breeders that do not purchase to renew their herds: these 5 infections were caused by local viral activity.The first potential risk factor was the minimum distance to the nearest water point. The main known RVFV vectors are from Culex and Aedes genera whose main activity period is crepuscular and nocturnal [33]: given that cattle come back from field in late afternoon and spend the night in pens, we assume that the pens are where infection by mosquito bites occurs. The second potential risk factor was the minimum distance to the forest. The existence of a sylvatic cycle between mosquitoes and wild reservoirs living in the forest could explain the persistence and the re-emergence of the virus in the area. In that case, bovines living close to the forest would be more exposed to infectious mosquito bites than others. The water point type was identified as a third potential risk factor. Indeed, the ecology of Culex and Aedes mosquito vectors is rather different and closely related to the water point filling and drying rhythm. Aedes females lay their eggs on the muddy banks of ponds. These eggs may survive several years in desiccated mud. When flooded again during pond filling, there is a massive hatch of eggs. In contrast, Culex eggs cannot survive to desiccation, and need to be permanently in water to develop and hatch [33].An increased distance to the nearest water point appears to be a protecting factor, suggesting that a substantial part of the virus transmission could be carried out by mosquito vectors. As a matter of fact, 6 mosquito genera, namely Aedes, Anopheles, Coquillettidia, Culex, Eretmapodites and Mansonia have been proven to be capable of RVFV infection and transmission in the laboratory and/or were found infected in the wild [34]–[36]. These genera are all present in Madagascar [19], [37]. Among them, unfed females of 3 species have been found infected by RVFV in another part of the highlands, the Fianarantsoa region, located 400 km far from the Anjozorobe area: An. coustani, An. squamosus, and Cx. antennatus
[38]. An. coustani and An. squamosus were found infected in Madagascar in 1979 [37] and Cx. antennatus in Kenya from 1981 to 1984 [12]. However vector competence was experimentally demonstrated only for Cx. antennatus in Egypt [39]. According to our results, the type of water point has no effect on the prevalence rate. This corroborates the assumption that several mosquito species with different biology and ecology may be involved in the transmission cycle in this area: paddy fields are favourable to An. coustani and Cx. antennatus
[40] whereas water-filled hoofprints in the stream bank favour the development of An. squamosus
[41]. Further entomological studies are needed to confirm this assumption and the involvement of these mosquito species in the RVF epidemiological cycle in Madagascar highlands.The potential role of small mammals as a RVFV reservoir, especially rodents, has been suspected but never demonstrated. A high mortality rate among rodents (Arvicanthis abyssinicus nairobae and Rattus rattus kijabius) was observed on farms affected during the 1930 epizootic in Kenya [2]. The existence of viraemia was demonstrated in Arvicanthis abyssinicus after inoculation with RVFV [42]. In Egypt, RVFV was detected by RT-PCR in the blood of 29 Rattus rattus individuals among 300 sampled [43]. Serological evidence of RVFV infection also was observed in Mastomys sp., Arvicanthis niloticus and Aethomys namaquensis in Senegal [24]. In South Africa, serological and experimental studies showed that Aethomys namaquensis can act as an amplifying host for RVFV during inter-epizootic periods [17]. Given high biodiversity of rodents and small mammals in the Anjozorobe forest corridor, including an important Rattus rattus population [26], the persistence and the resurgence in 2008 of the RVFV in this particular ecosystem could be explained by the existence of a wild reservoir and a sylvatic cycle involving vectors that preferentially feed on rodents and occasionally feed on cattle, thereby acting as bridge vectors. However, our results clearly show that livestock living close to the forest or even grazing in the forest have the same level of exposure as livestock that do not live close to or graze in the forest. To date no molecular or serological signature was detected on rodents or small mammals of the area, but ongoing research is examining the hypothesis.Ruminant trade has often been associated with local, regional, even continental dissemination of RVFV, as described from Sudan to Egypt during the 1970s [44], and from the Horn of Africa to the Arabian Peninsula in 2000 [45]. Regarding the Anjozorobe area, bovines belonging to owners who replace their herds by purchasing animals were significantly more antibody-positive than others: animal introduction in a herd is a risk factor and the virus may, conceivably, be introduced by a viraemic animal, coming from either another village in the study area or a more distant location. In both cases, the transmission to the cattle in the herd may occur either by a direct or vectorial route. Due to the lack of data on bovine origins, the extent to which these introductions participate in the maintenance of the RVF cycle in the Anjozorobe area remains unknown. The spatial clustering of sampled bovines was taken into account including a breeder random effect in the model. Indeed we considered that the level of exposition to infection of bovines parked in the same night pen was correlated, whether this infection occurs by mosquito bites or direct contact. Statistical analyses showed that this effect was not significant.This is the first serological assessment of RVFV transmission mechanisms in such an ecological context, which associates a wet, temperate climate, high altitude with mountainous reliefs, paddy fields, and vicinity to a dense rain forest. The epidemiological cycle probably involves several vectors – at least from Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles genera - and a combination of different mechanisms for virus persistence and diffusion, their respective importance varying with the season, the prevalence rate of the cattle, and the dates of religious festivals that increase the cattle trade flow. As shown in previous studies [7], [30], the disease circulates in different ecozones of the country, including a Sahel-like ecosystem in the south, to the very moist lowlands of the eastern coast, the moist lowland of the northwest region and the temperate climate of the central highlands. Jeanmaire et al. (2011) suggested that RVFV circulation was endemic in both the southern and north-western areas, and that these two areas may act as a virus source for the rest of the country [30]. The large distribution of the disease would then be explained by a large diffusion of the virus through the trade of bovines which is known to be extensive and sometimes uncontrolled in the island. Our results strongly suggest that RVFV circulation is also recurrent in the Anjozorobe area, suggesting a third RVF epidemiological system. Each epidemiological system may be linked to the others by the animal trade network. A global and yearlong circulation on the whole country could then be maintained by this network, itself possibly linked with other East-African countries, as suggested by recent molecular epidemiology results [46]. The reason why the disease re-emerged in 2008 in this area remains unknown and the risk of a new outbreak there has not been evaluated. Further studies should be carried out to describe and model this cycle in order to implement relevant surveillance, risk prediction and control measures.Supporting InformationTable S1
Sample size, replacement practices ratio and observed serological IgM and IgG prevalence of Rift Valley fever on cattle, Anjozorobe district, Madagascar.
(DOC)Click here for additional data file.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: TICK-BORNE ENCEPHALITIS VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus: A Comprehensive Review of Transmission, Pathogenesis, Epidemiology, Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Prevention

1. IntroductionTick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is a member of the genus Flavivirus and belongs to the family Flaviviridae [1,2]. In humans, TBEV causes infection of the central nervous system, which can have serious consequences and lead to permanent neurological complications or even death [3,4]. The morbidity and mortality rates of tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) differ according to the three viral subtypes; namely, European (TBEV-Eu), Siberian (TBEV-Sib), and Far Eastern (TBEV-FE) [3,4,5,6]. In addition to the three main subtypes, two recently described subtypes have emerged. The first is the Baikalian subtype (TBEV-Bkl), consisting of 13 strains identified in east Siberia and northern Mongolia [7,8]. The second is the Himalayan subtype (TBEV-Him), which has been found in wild rodents in the Qinghai–Tibet Plateau region of China [9]. In the last three decades, the spread of TBE has become a substantial concern in Europe and Asia. Notably, there has been an expansion of TBE risk areas into regions that were previously unaffected alongside the emergence of new endemic areas [10,11]. The incidence of TBEV infections has been steadily increasing, posing a significant and growing health concern [2]. This comprehensive review thoroughly examines the molecular structure of TBEV, its transmission and circulation in natural environments, the pathogenesis of TBEV infection, the epidemiology and global distribution of the virus, associated risk factors, clinical manifestations, and diagnostic approaches.2. An Insight into the Molecular Structure of Tick-Borne Encephalitis VirusFlaviviruses undergo a maturation process during their production, giving rise to three distinct types of particles within infected cells: immature non-infectious particles, partially mature particles, and fully mature infectious particles [12,13,14]. Mature TBEV particles have a smooth, spherical morphology and are membrane-enveloped with a diameter of approximately 50 nm, similar to those of other Flaviviruses [12,15,16,17,18]. The icosahedral nucleocapsid, which measures about 30 nm in diameter, consists of several copies of a single viral capsid protein (C) and genomic RNA [13]. The nucleocapsid of TBEV is encased within a membrane. There is a distinction between mature and immature viral particles. Mature viral particles possess an envelope comprising envelope proteins (E) and membrane proteins (M). In contrast, intracellular immature viral particles contain the precursor M protein (prM) in place of the M protein. The prM protein is proteolytically cleaved before the virion is released from the host cell [1]. PrM acts as a chaperone that directs the proper folding of E protein. The envelope E protein creates rod-shaped dimers oriented parallel to the membrane, covering the surface of the viral particle. The mature TBEV particle envelope contains three E proteins and three M proteins in each icosahedral asymmetric unit [12]. The surface of the TBEV virion is adorned with small protrusions, which are created by glycans attached to the E protein subunits. A compact heterotetramer is formed by two E proteins and two M proteins. The envelopes of flaviviruses exhibit a herringbone pattern consisting of three of these heterotetramers [12]. The virus membrane does not have a spherical shape; instead, it closely conforms to the inner surface of the protein envelope. The membrane undergoes deformations due to the insertion of transmembrane helices from E proteins and M proteins [12]. The viral particles are composed of 6% ribonucleic acids (RNA), 66% proteins, 17% lipids derived from host cell membranes, and 9% carbohydrates [1,19].2.1. Organization of the GenomeThe genome of the virus is a positive-sense single-stranded RNA, approximately 11,000 nucleotides long. Genomic RNA is infectious and is the only viral mRNA present in infected cells [1]. It consists of two short non-coding sequences at the 5′- and 3′- ends and one open-reading frame (ORF), which is approximately 11,000 nucleotides long. After translation and processing of the viral genome, 10 different proteins are produced, three structural (C, prM, and E) and seven nonstructural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) [20,21]. The 5′-short non-coding sequence is approximately 130 nucleotides long and contains a type-I cap (m-7GpppAmp) followed by two conserved AG dinucleotides. The length of the 3′-short non-coding sequence can vary from 450 to 800 nucleotides and it may contain an internal poly-A tail [1,22]. RNA noncoding sequences create secondary structures that participate as cis-regulatory elements in genome replication, translation, and viral particle assembly [22]. The virus genome has three different roles: (1) as messenger RNA (mRNA) for the translation of viral proteins, (2) as a template for RNA amplification, and (3) as genetic material stored in new viral particles (Figure 1) [23]. 2.2. Viral ProteinsThe virus genome is translated into a single polypeptide molecule (~3400 amino acids). The primary translation product is then co-translationally and post-translationally cleaved at specific sites by host and viral proteases. Thus, three structural and seven nonstructural proteins are produced, which participate in virus replication [22,24]. Host signal peptidases cleave the polyprotein at the C/prM, NS2A/NS2B, NS2B/NS3, NS3/NS4A, NS4A/2K, and NS4B/NS5 junctions. The serine protease of the virus cleaves the polyprotein at the junctions prM/E, E/NS1, and 2K/NS4B [25]. It is not known which enzyme is responsible for cleaving the contact between NS1 and 2A (Figure 1) [23].2.2.1. Structural ProteinsDuring polyprotein translation, structural proteins are anchored to the host’s endoplasmic reticulum (ER) with distinct signal sequences and transmembrane domains. The C protein contains a C-terminal hydrophobic signal sequence that translocates the prM protein into the ER lumen. The prM protein contains two transmembrane domains containing stop sequences and a signal sequence. As a result, the E protein is also translocated to the lumen of the ER. In the ER lumen, prM and E proteins form stable heterodimers [26,27]. Protein C (~120 amino acids, 11 kDa) is a small, strongly basic protein that forms a structural component of the nucleocapsid [23]. The basic building block of the capsid is a dimer of protein C. Each monomer consists of four different α-helices (α1 to α4) connected by short loops [28]. Helices α2 and α4 of one monomer are antiparallel to helices α2 and α4 of the other monomer. All four helices are part of the central hydrophobic domain responsible for interactions within the dimer. It is assumed that the α4-helix, which has a high content of positively charged amino acids, binds non-specifically to viral RNA. At each end of the dimer are two hydrophobic α2-helices that interact with the membrane surrounding the nucleocapsid and are within a groove flanked by the α1-helix [24,28]. The hydrophobic C terminus of the precursor protein anchors the C protein to the cytoplasmic side of the ER membrane and is an internal signal sequence that allows translocation of the prM protein into the ER lumen. The signal sequence is cleaved in the mature viral particle by the viral protease NS2B-NS3 [29]. Virus multiplication produces complete virus particles and a smaller number of sub-viral non-infectious particles. Deletions or alterations in the amino acid sequence of protein C can lead to the elevated presence of non-infectious sub-viral particles during the assembly of viral particles [29]. It has been observed that the prM and E proteins have the capability to independently assemble sub-viral particles that lack a nucleocapsid [1]. The prM protein (~165 residues, 26 kDa) is the glycosylated precursor of the structural M protein (~75 residues, 8 kDa). In immature viral particles, the prM protein forms heterodimeric complexes with the E protein and thereby protects it by preventing its fusion with the membrane of the trans-Golgi network, which would otherwise occur due to low pH. The prM protein acts as a chaperone for the proper assembly and folding of the E protein [26]. Prior to the release of immature virus particles from the host cell, the prM protein undergoes cleavage by the furin protease (Figure 1). This cleavage event separates the prM protein into two sections: the N-terminal section, known as the soluble ”pr”; and the C-terminal section comprising the structural M protein, which remains anchored to the cell membrane [30]. The M protein consists of a single peripheral membrane helix (h1), two transmembrane helices (h2 and h3), and an N-terminal loop region that engages in interactions with both E proteins. A heterotetramer is formed by two M proteins and two E proteins, wherein each M protein interacts with both E proteins [12]. The heterotetramer functions as the fundamental unit of the mature virion. The N-terminal loop of the M protein interacts with domain II of the E protein, which likely hinders the reorganization of E protein dimers into fusogenic trimers [17].The E protein (~496 residues, 52 kDa) is the basic envelope protein that covers almost the entire outer surface of the mature viral particle, and it is, therefore, also the primary target of neutralizing antibodies. It is responsible for key functions related to virus entry into cells, such as receptor binding and membrane fusion, and induction of neutralizing antibodies [12,31]. It is thought that it can attach to several different host cell receptors in both vertebrates and different arthropods (ticks and mosquitoes) [24,32]. The E protein is an elongated molecule that, before fusion, has the form of a dimer, with the two monomers being oriented opposite to each other (the head of the first faces the tail of the second). On the surface of the virus, the E protein creates a unique so-called herringbone pattern. At low pH, the dimeric form of the E protein dissociates into monomers and then changes irreversibly to the more stable trimeric form [33]. The E protein monomer is comprised of four distinct domains. The N-terminal β-barrel domain (domain I) serves as a central structure within the protein [12,31]. The extended dimerization domain (domain II) of the mature virus contains the sole glycosylation site (Asn154). It is composed of two regions of β-strands connected by loops and two short helices. In addition to its function in dimerization, this domain also plays a crucial role in egress from mammalian cells and contributes to neurovirulence [34,35]. Domain II also encompasses the highly conserved fusion loop, which plays a crucial role in mediating the fusion of the viral and host membranes during the final stages of TBEV entry [12,31]. Domain III exhibits a characteristic immunoglobulin-like shape and has been suggested to play a crucial role in binding to host receptors [31]. Domain IV consists of a stem region comprising three peripheral membrane helices (h1–h3) and a transmembrane region consisting of two helices (h4 and h5) [12]. The connections between the domains are flexible, which is very important in the change from an immature to a mature viral particle, as well as in the process of fusion with the membrane [17,36]. The C terminus of the protein is anchored to the ER membrane. The transmembrane region of the E protein also plays an important role in the assembly of the viral particle and in the later stages of membrane fusion because it enables the necessary intra- and intermolecular contacts in E protein trimers [37]. The nucleotide sequence of protein E is both sufficiently long and, despite its diversity, adequately conserved for phylogenetic analyses [38]. Furthermore, the gene database contains a vast amount of information regarding numerous E protein records with origins spanning diverse geographic locations. Several mutations in domain III have been identified, which can significantly impact the neurovirulence and neuroinvasiveness of TBEV, Louping-ill virus, and Langat virus [39,40,41,42,43]. A single amino acid substitution in domains I, II, or III of the E protein transcript has the potential to result in the attenuation of neurovirulence or neuroinvasiveness [40,44,45,46,47]. 2.2.2. Nonstructural ProteinsThe NS1 protein, consisting of 351 residues and weighing 46 kDa, is a glycoprotein known for its high conservation. During synthesis, it translocates to the ER. The host signal peptidase cleaves it from the E protein. Within infected cells, the NS1 protein serves as a cofactor in viral RNA replication. It has the ability to form homodimers, and when in the hexameric form (composed of three homodimers), it is released into the serum of patients. Hexameric NS1 proteins form a ring-like structure with a diameter of approximately 10 nm. They are internalized by hepatocytes and transported to late endosomes, where they accumulate and exert immunomodulatory activities [23,48,49,50]. The NS2A protein, comprising 229 residues and weighing 22 kDa, is a relatively small hydrophobic protein. It is believed to have a function in binding matrix RNA to the ER membrane within the replication complex [48]. The NS2B protein, consisting of 130 residues and weighing 14 kDa, is a small, membrane-bound protein. It forms a stable complex with the NS3 protein and acts as a cofactor for the serine protease activity of the NS3 protein. On the other hand, the NS3 protein, a large cytoplasmic protein of 621 residues weighing 70 kDa, associates with the membrane through its interaction with the NS2B protein. It plays a multifaceted role in viral replication, serving as a helicase, an RNA triphosphatase, and, when bound to the NS2B protein, a serine protease [51]. The NS2B-3 protease plays a crucial role in mediating most of the cleavages within the nonstructural region of the viral polyprotein, including the cleavage that releases the C protein from the transmembrane signal sequence. Additionally, during helicase activity, it utilizes the energy derived from the hydrolysis of nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) to unwind the newly formed RNA from the matrix and unravel the secondary structures that mark the beginning of replication. Furthermore, it is involved in modifying the 5′ end of the genome through its RNA triphosphatase activity [51]. The NS4A protein, consisting of 149 residues and weighing 16 kDa, and the NS4B protein, composed of 252 residues and weighing 27 kDa, are small hydrophobic proteins. Their primary role is to anchor the polyprotein, which is synthesized during the translation of the virus genome, into intracellular membranes. This anchoring facilitates the proper functioning of the polymerase complex and ensures the accurate cleavage of the polyprotein [48,51]. The NS5 protein, comprising 902 residues and weighing 103 kDa, stands as the largest nonstructural protein found in flaviviruses. It holds the distinction of being the most conserved and stable component of the viral genome. Playing a pivotal role, it serves as a central hub for viral RNA replication. The NS5 protein encompasses viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity and exhibits methyltransferase activity, crucial for stabilizing and translating the RNA molecule. Moreover, it actively participates in suppressing the immune response, making it a significant virulence factor [52,53].2.3. Multiplication of the VirusThe genome of viruses with positive-polar single-stranded RNA simultaneously enables the transfer of information embedded in RNA from one generation of viruses to another and the formation of proteins in the process of translation. The initial stage of TBEV replication involves the attachment of the virus to the host cell surface. This attachment is facilitated through receptor-mediated binding of virus particles to cells [54,55,56]. The association occurs between the viral envelope E protein and the cellular glycosaminoglycan heparan sulfate, which is abundantly represented on the membranes of various vertebrate and tick cells [32,57,58]. The primary mode of entry for the virus into host cells is through receptor-mediated endocytosis, although entry through micropinocytosis is also possible [25,59,60,61]. Initially, the virus is localized within the prelysosomal endocytic vesicle of the host cell. The acidic pH environment within the endosomes triggers conformational changes in the envelope E protein, causing its redistribution. This event ultimately results in the fusion of the viral membrane with the membrane of the endocytic vesicle [62,63]. Upon entering the host cytoplasm, the nucleocapsid releases the genomic RNA. The process of viral protein synthesis is initiated through RNA translation, followed by replication of the viral genome. Replication of the viral genome involves two steps: amplification of the genomic RNA into a negative-polar RNA copy, which serves as a template, and subsequent transcription of the positive-polar RNA by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RNA replicase). The positive-polar RNA is complementary to the genomic RNA. The genome of TBEV is initially translated at the ER as a single polyprotein. This polyprotein undergoes subsequent cleavage by both viral and host enzymes, leading to the generation of both structural and nonstructural proteins [13]. After translation, the prM and E proteins undergo transport into the ER lumen. The nucleocapsid, composed of several copies of the C protein and one copy of the genomic RNA, forms on the cytoplasmic side of the ER membrane. Subsequently, the nucleocapsid buds from the ER, acquiring a lipid envelope in the process (Figure 2) [64].Non-infectious, immature virus particles are produced, their surfaces are covered with trimers of prM and E proteins, and they are easily transmitted through the host’s secretory pathway. Intact prM peptides cover the fusion loops of the E proteins and thus prevent fusion of the virus with intracellular membranes [65]. In addition, sub-viral particles that lack the nucleocapsid are also produced in the ER. Even after maturation, sub-viral particles remain non-infectious [29]. Viral maturation occurs when a host protease cleaves prM in cisternae of the trans-Golgi network [30,65]. The low pH induces a redistribution of the E protein that generates fusion-competent homodimers in a herringbone-like arrangement and the pr peptides docked onto the fusion loops, a configuration similar to that of the mature virion [65]. Following the cleavage of prM, the dissociation of pr peptides is pH-dependent, indicating that pr is retained on the virion within the acidic environment of the trans-Golgi network. This retention serves to prevent premature membrane fusion [66]. Upon release of the virions from infected cells into the extracellular space with a neutral pH, the pr peptides dissociate from the viral particles. This dissociation leads to the maturation of the virions, making them fusion-competent [65,67,68,69]. Mature, infectious viruses that express proteins M and E on their surface are released from the cell by exocytosis (Figure 2) [20,23,24,69,70]. 3. TBE Virus Transmission and Circulation in NatureTBE is a viral disease caused by the TBEV and is mainly transmitted to humans through the bite of infected ticks. In nature, TBEV is primarily transmitted between ticks, which serve as vectors, and animals such as deer and small mammals (for example, rodents and insectivores) that serve as reservoir hosts [71,72]. Small mammals are considered competent reservoir hosts, meaning that they can efficiently harbor and transmit the virus. In contrast, larger mammals typically develop only a brief period of viremia with low viral concentrations or no detectable viremia. As a result, these accidental hosts are not capable of effectively transmitting and spreading the virus [73].Ticks acquire the virus by feeding on infected individuals and, when an infected tick bites a mammalian host, the virus can enter the host’s bloodstream and cause infection. The virus can then be transmitted to other animals or humans during subsequent tick feedings [74]. This is because the virus can be present in the tick’s saliva, which can enter the host’s bloodstream during the feeding process. In fact, transmission of TBEV from an infected tick to a host can occur within minutes to a few hours of tick attachment [75]. The longer an infected tick remains attached to a host, the greater the likelihood that tick-borne pathogens will be transmitted. Nevertheless, if an infected tick detaches from its initial host before it has fully fed and then attaches to a new host to complete its feeding, the transmission time may be reduced [74]. Ticks can also harbor the virus for extended periods of time. Once infected, they retain the infection for their entire life and can transmit the virus to other ticks or to vertebrate hosts [76]. This poses a concern because, even if a tick becomes infected early in the season, it can still transmit the virus to a host later on, particularly given that certain ticks have a lifespan of several years. For instance, the Ixodes ricinus tick has a potential lifespan of up to 8 years [77].The geographic distribution of TBEV is largely determined by the distribution of its tick vectors. In Europe, the main vectors for TBEV-Eu are Ixodes ricinus ticks, while for TBEV-Sib and TBEV-FE, the main vector is Ixodes persulcatus [78]. The virus is also found in China, Mongolia, and parts of Russia and Scandinavia [79]. Haemaphysalis concinna appears to be a significant vector for the transmission of TBEV in Asia [80,81]. Additionally, studies have identified at least 22 other tick species that are capable of carrying and transmitting the virus that belong to the genera Dermacentor, Hyalomma, and Rhipicephalus, along with the aforementioned Ixodes and Haemaphysalis genera [72,82]. These ticks, which are external parasites, inhabit vegetation and actively seek hosts. As they progress through their life cycle (larva–nymph–adult), they move between different host groups, predominantly comprising diverse species of birds and mammals. Through this mechanism, they can transmit TBEV and promote its circulation in nature [83]. I. ricinus, which is found throughout Europe, has expanded its distribution to encompass extreme altitudes and latitudes [84]. It infests various vertebrate species throughout its life cycle. This species is found in diverse habitats, including deciduous and mixed forests, shrublands, urban parks, and gardens, with increasing population densities in urban and suburban areas [71]. On the other hand, the range of I. persulcatus covers Eastern Europe, Asia, China, and Japan [85]. Unlike I. ricinus nymphs, I. persulcatus nymphs infrequently feed on larger hosts, such as humans. These two species have contrasting temperature-related activity, as I. persulcatus is active in lower temperature ranges. I. persulcatus is typically found in regions with lower levels of precipitation, humidity, and temperature compared to the northern distribution limits of I. ricinus [86]. Host-seeking ticks of the Haemaphysalis genus seldom inhabit the same areas simultaneously, primarily due to differences in their habitat preferences, host choices, and seasonal patterns. H. concinna has a broad distribution in temperate Eurasia and typically occupies light and humid deciduous forests, as well as mixed hornbeam-oak forests [83]. Given its rapid reproduction rate, quick development cycle, and extensive host range, D. reticulatus has gained recognition for its significant involvement in transmitting TBEV. Its habitat spans a vast area from Portugal in the west to central Asia in the east. In Europe, its geographic distribution largely coincides with that of I. ricinus. There is a growing body of evidence reporting the detection of TBEV in D. reticulatus, with Poland and Germany being notable hotspots for such findings [87].TBEV is maintained in tick populations through vertical transmission, which involves both trans-ovarial and trans-stadial routes. Trans-ovarial transmission occurs when an infected tick passes the virus to its offspring through the eggs, while trans-stadial transmission allows the virus to persist in the infected tick through all life stages; namely, the egg, larval, nymphal, and adult stages [88]. On the other hand, horizontal transmission is an important mechanism for the longevity and more effective spread of TBEV within tick populations and can also facilitate transmission to other hosts, including humans. Horizontal transmission happens when an uninfected tick feeds on an infected vertebrate host [76]. To enable transmission, a high level of viremia in the host is necessary, which occurs only in mammals such as sheep, goats, horses, dogs, and rodents. Humans do not develop high viremia, which would allow the virus to be transmitted to ticks, and that is why they are considered as the dead-end hosts of TBEV (Figure 3) [88].Ticks are capable of transmitting TBEV through a process called co-feeding, which does not require a viremic host. This process occurs when naïve ticks feed in close proximity to an infected tick, and the animal host serves as a bridge for transmission [89]. Many tick species exhibit a noticeable spatial clustering on specific parts of the host body. In fact, approximately 90% of the immature stages (larvae and nymphs) of several tick species that feed on rodents attach to the ears, around the eyes, or on the snout, resulting in at least 45% of feeding ticks being within approximately 1 cm of each other [90]. This transmission can still happen even if the host has antibodies against TBEV, so co-feeding allows the virus to spread rapidly through a population of ticks, even when the prevalence of systemic infections in the host population is low (Figure 2) [72].Another factor that stimulates TBEV transmission is climate change. As temperatures rises due to climate change, it is anticipated that the potential for transmission will also increase. This will be aided by an expected lengthening of the tick questing season, as well as increases in the number of susceptible ticks (in their larval and nymphal stages) and the number of infected nymphal ticks that co-feed on the same hosts. These factors will lead to a compounded increase in infections through non-systemic transmission [91].3.1. Circulation of TBE Virus between Small Mammals and BirdsThe virus can be transmitted between rodents through either vertical or horizontal transmission. Vertical transmission can occur during the prenatal phase through transplacental transmission or during the postnatal phase when newborns consume infected milk from their mothers. In contrast, horizontal transmission occurs in the wild during mating [92].In rodents, viremia is short-lived, but it is high enough for ticks to become infected through feeding. After infection with TBEV, the host develops specific antibodies against the virus. Therefore, older, seropositive (immune) animals are not a suitable reservoir for the virus. However, in these individuals, the virus can still be transmitted between infected and uninfected ticks through co-feeding [93].Ticks on birds are mainly acquired during feeding on the ground, and birds can transport these ticks to new areas that are inaccessible to ground-dwelling animals due to their ability to fly over barriers. If the transported tick encounters suitable environmental conditions, it can transmit the pathogen it carries. Birds are thought to play a primary role in spreading the virus to new endemic areas, similar to other tick-borne pathogens [94]. Long-distance dispersion of TBEV by birds is unlikely due to the short feeding period of Ixodes ticks on their avian hosts, which limits the distance covered while attached to the bird [72].3.2. Circulation of TBE Virus between HumansTicks at all developmental stages can transmit the virus to humans. Unlike rodents, humans do not develop high enough viremia to become infectious for ticks [95]. Ticks usually do not feed on humans in large numbers or closely enough to each other to allow transmission through co-feeding [96].The occurrence of TBEV infections in humans is largely influenced by the local prevalence of infected ticks, as well as the frequency of interaction between humans and these ticks. In areas where TBEV is endemic, the incidence of human infections can significantly fluctuate from year to year owing to changes in tick populations and variations in the virus prevalence within the ticks [97]. A person can also become infected by consuming unpasteurized milk and dairy products because domestic animals (cows, goats, sheep) excrete TBEV in their milk during viremia. This can happen during a period ranging from 3 to 14 days, with excretion beginning as early as the second or third day following infection [98].Isolated instances of TBEV infection have been reported in patients receiving solid organ transplants [99] and blood transfusions [100], as well as in laboratory workers infected through the respiratory tract or oropharyngeal epithelial cells [101]. Inhalation of an infectious aerosol has also been mentioned as a possible route of infection, as well as from a puncture with a contaminated needle [102]. The interhuman transmission of TBEV through breast milk has neither been confirmed nor excluded. Nonetheless, there is a reported case where an unvaccinated mother probably transmitted TBEV to her infant through breastfeeding [103].Preventing TBEV infections in humans primarily involves reducing the risk of tick bites through measures such as wearing protective clothing, using insect repellent, and checking for ticks after spending time outdoors. Vaccines against TBEV are also available and are recommended for individuals living in or traveling to areas where the virus is endemic [79].4. Pathogenesis of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus InfectionOn its way from the vector—in this case, the tick—to causing disease in humans, the TBEV travels a path with numerous obstacles [104]. Namely, when a tick infected with TBEV, in search of food, bites a human, it essentially pierces the skin, which represents the first protective barrier [105]. During feeding, the tick injects viral particles with its saliva that replicate at the point of entry into the body subcutaneously in skin neutrophils and Langerhans cells [106].Macrophages (migrating monocytes) transport viral particles to regional lymph nodes, where they replicate, resulting in viremia. The virus continues to spread via the hematogenous route and reaches the reticuloendothelial system (the spleen, liver, and bone marrow), where, as a result of further multiplication, the viremia is maintained for several days [3]. TBEV causes changes in host cell membranes that create isolated viral factories, which are believed to shield viral RNAs from host defense mechanisms [107]. Furthermore, infection with TBEV activates innate immune signaling by engaging with the pattern recognition receptor RIG-I/MDA5, leading to the translocation of the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) to the nucleus [107].During viremia, tick-borne encephalitis virus passes the blood–brain barrier (BBB) and thereby enters the central nervous system (CNS) [108]. Neurons are the primary targets of TBEV infection in the CNS, but it is important to note that the exact mode of entry into the CNS and the cell receptors are still not fully understood [109,110]. Various receptors have been demonstrated in vertebrate cells in vitro, such as the laminin receptor in human embryonic cells and glycosaminoglycans (heparan sulfate) [25]. The exact mechanism by which TBEV penetrates the blood–brain barrier is not known, but four possible pathways have been hypothesized [111] (Table 1).Studies performed on neurons and astrocytes differentiated from human neural progenitor cells (hNPCs) have shown that this cell type is permissive of TBEV infection [113].Viral infection induces the death of neurons and astrocytes and the production of type-I interferons (type-I IFNs), which are involved in the control of viral replication and cell protection [114]. On its way to causing infection, TBEV encounters another obstacle, which involves the immune response to the presence of the virus [115]. Neurotropic viruses such as TBEV can trigger a wide range of immune responses, which can be associated with severe clinical outcomes [116]. The clinical outcome of TBEV infection depends on the immune response at the site of virus entry, the extent of peripheral infection and associated inflammation, and the humoral response [117,118].Dendritic cells (DCs) are the first cells of the immune system to encounter TBEV after infection. In this first phase, DCs play an extremely important role in initiating the innate immune response, which includes the production of IFN-α and the presentation of the antigen (Ag) [119]. It is important to note that DCs, at the point of TBEV entry, can be influenced by some of the proteins found in tick saliva, which have immunomodulatory effects [120]. Namely, as a result of the recorded disturbance of the Th1-type cytokines (important for the removal of TBEV from the CNS), polarization, and the induction of the Th2-type cytokines’ response to and inhibition of DC maturation, we are led to conclude that the effect of the tick saliva on DCs is complex and may represent an extremely important mechanism of immune evasion mediated by ticks [121]. After the TBEV is taken up by the DCs, DC maturation occurs, resulting in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and type-I IFNs [115].Macrophages represent another target of TBEV [122]. They function as antigen-presenting cells and have the main protective function. T and B cells located in the secondary lymphatic organs reveal the decomposed TBEV and are responsible for clearing TBEV from the circulation [116]. Recent studies have found a temporal disconnect between the highest levels of the virus in the bloodstream (i.e., peak viremia), the peak production of antibodies, and the onset of clinical symptoms in the disease [123]. More specifically, low IgG antibody response in the serum against TBEV during the initial stages of neurological symptoms usually translates to more challenging clinical progression and an adverse long-term outcome [123].Likewise, natural killer (NK) cells participate in the recognition and removal of cells infected with TBEV, but their role has not been fully elucidated [118]. Despite this, it is known that NK cells, similarly to T cells, can participate in immunopathological reactions; therefore, they can directly kill infected cells and they can act indirectly with the help of cytokines or chemokines, but they can also recruit inflammatory cells in the tissue [118]. In addition, they can have a protective effect [117]. It is assumed that both mechanisms (immunological and non-immunological) can contribute to the invasion of the CNS by TBEV by enabling the passage of TBEV across the BBB [124]. This process can be facilitated by the cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 because they can cause disruption of the BBB due to their modulatory effect on the permeability of endothelial cells [111].One of the ways for TBEV to cross the BBB is via a special “Trojan horse” mechanism, which represents the migration of infected immune cells, such as DCs, macrophages, neutrophils, monocytes, and T cells with TBEV, into the CNS, where they lead to the infection of neurons and of other cells in the spinal cord and brain [112]. Likewise, infection and replication of TBEV in the epithelial cells of the choroid plexus or endothelial cells and virus budding on the parenchyma side is a possible mode of entry into the CNS [125]. A putative alternative pathway that can lead to CNS infection with TBEV, which does not involve the BBB, is through the invasion of the olfactory epithelium by TBEV, which is followed by infection of the olfactory neurons and, ultimately, entry into the CNS [111].The intestinal route of infection with TBEV is associated with the consumption of thermally untreated milk and milk products from infected animals (sheep, goats, cows) [126]. In normal gastric juice, TBEV is stable for up to two hours [101]. DCs are the first cells of the immune system that come into contact with TBEV after its entry into the digestive system; that is, TBEV is transferred to DCs from intestinal epithelial cells that are infected with TBEV [117]. It should certainly be noted that this route of infection results in an increased immune response, resulting in a milder form of the disease “biphasic milk fever” [101].5. Epidemiology of TBE Virus Infection: Global Distribution and Risk FactorsTBE is endemic in a wide area from Central Europe and the Scandinavian Peninsula to Japan [3]. However, the highest incidence has been documented in the Baltic and Central European countries [127]. In addition, the indigenous occurrence of the infection in humans and animals, the isolation of the TBE virus from ticks, and the specific antibodies to the TBE virus detected in wild and domestic animals suggest an endemic TBE area [128]. The distribution areas of TBE range from the Bordeaux region of France in the west through Italy in the south and the Scandinavian Peninsula in the north to Siberia, China, and Japan in the east [129]. In the last two decades, an increase in TBE incidence has been observed in endemic areas but also the occurrence of sporadic cases outside endemic areas [130]. New endemic areas have been discovered in the Netherlands, England [11,131], South Korea [132], Mongolia, Denmark, high-altitude Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, parts of Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Uzbekistan [128]. The incidence of TBE increased to 0.9 cases per 100,000 people in 2020 [130], an increase from rates of 0.7 in 2019 and 0.4 in 2015 [127]. The increase in the reported incidence rates is likely the result of a combination of social and environmental factors, as well as increased medical awareness and advanced diagnostics [133]. Three subtypes of the TBE virus have been well-described, the European, Siberian, and Far Eastern subtypes, and two additional subtypes have been proposed: Himalayan and Baikal subtypes [130]. The European subtype of the TBE virus occurs in Europe but has also been detected in the western Urals and Siberia. In contrast, the Siberian subtype of the TBE virus occurs in the Baltic states, northern Finland, and Siberia. The Far Eastern subtype of the TBE virus is endemic in Far Eastern Asia and Japan and has also been detected in central and eastern Siberia [3]. The European countries with the highest incidence of the disease in 2016–2020 were Lithuania (24.3 cases per 100,000 inhabitants per year), Slovenia (8.9), the Czech Republic (7.9), and Latvia (7.8) [127]. TBE virus infection is characterized by seasonal occurrence, which depends on the activity of the vector. In Central Europe, I. ricinus tick activity is highest in April and May and then again in September and October, while I. persulcatus is most active in the Urals, Siberia, and the Far East from late April to early June [3,130,134]. Reported infection rates for I. ricinus range from 0.1% to 5%, while in endemic areas of Siberia, approximately 40% of I. persulcatus ticks carry the virus [3,135]. In certain European endemic areas, such as Northern Europe and some Central European countries (for example, Germany, the Czech Republic, and Poland), the annual maximum of TBE cases occurs only in the summer months from July to August. About 95% of cases are diagnosed between May and November, with a peak between June and August [130]. People from rural areas, forest workers, hunters, soldiers, and others who frequently spend time in nature, such as picnickers, are more likely to become infected [2,136]. Therefore, it is not surprising that the number of reported cases is higher in men (male-to-female ratio: 1.5:1) and in the age group of 45 to 64 years [127].A known route of infection is the consumption of unpasteurized milk or milk products from cattle exposed to ticks in endemic areas [137]. Most cases have been recorded during the summer months and have been associated with the consumption of goat milk products [138]. TBE outbreaks via food have been reported mainly in highly endemic countries, such as the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary, and Slovakia [130]. The largest known foodborne TBE outbreak occurred in Czechoslovakia in 1954, when more than 600 people became infected with TBE after consuming TBEV-contaminated goat milk [138].Several factors have influenced the increase in the occurrence of TBE in endemic areas and its spread outside endemic areas [139,140]. First, climate change (e.g., global warming) is leading to increases in TBEV reservoir and vector populations [141]. Temporal and spatial changes in temperature, precipitation, and humidity have significant impacts on tick biology and ecology [134,142,143]. Mild winters and an earlier onset of spring can increase host populations and accelerate tick development [78,144]. Due to climate change, the incidence of TBE and its spread to higher altitudes are increasing [53,137]. Second, TBE is travel-dependent and depends on the travel season and consumption of unpasteurized milk and milk products in endemic areas. Cases have been reported where the disease has been introduced to countries outside known endemic areas [128]. Approximately 1 to 2% of TBE cases are considered travel-related and pose an increased health risk to travelers [143]. Third, population migration to the suburbs and changes in lifestyle habits, as well as more frequent outdoor visits and recreational activities, lead to an increased likelihood of people coming into contact with infected ticks [144,145]. Finally, the number of infectious diseases in Europe decreased during the COVID-19 pandemic, with the exception of TBE, cases of which increased in 2020 compared to the previous three years [146,147]. Increased human outdoor activity during the pandemic and increased numbers of ticks may have contributed to this trend [144]. Some countries experienced a decrease in TBE cases during the COVID-19 pandemic (Sweden and Poland). The reason could be the more limited availability of diagnostic tests for TBE and the overload of the healthcare system during the pandemic [144,148].TBE was first described in Croatia in 1953, and Croatia is one of the countries with a low incidence of TBE [149,150]. TBEV has also been detected in ticks collected from natural hotspots in northwestern and eastern Croatia [151]. All TBE viruses detected in Croatia belong to the European subtype of the TBE virus and are genetically very similar, confirming that the disease is endemic to mainland Croatia [152]. From 1993 to 2021, a total of 900 TBE cases were reported in Croatia ranging from 6 to 87 per year, corresponding to an incidence of 0.10 to 1.90 cases per 100,000 population [153] (Figure 4). The highest TBE incidence was recorded in the northwestern counties of Croatia and in the age group of 50–59 years. Most infections (73%) were recorded from May to July [154]. There are also reports of foodborne TBE in Croatia. In 2015, 9 of 26 TBE cases were foodborne [149], and in 2019, 5 of 13 TBE cases were foodborne [155]. All involved consumption of unpasteurized goat milk or cheese from local farms but in two different parts of Croatia: the northwest and the Gorski Kotar region.6. Clinical Manifestations, Treatment, and Prevention of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus InfectionTBEV infection may present clinically as a mild, abortive, non-specific febrile illness; a moderately severe illness with a biphasic course affecting the CNS; or a very severe disease with complications and permanent neurological sequelae but also a possibly fatal outcome [3,136,156,157].Over 70% of infections attributed to the European TBEV subtype are asymptomatic. In the remaining cases, after an incubation period of 7–14 days (with a range of 1–28 days), the classical biphasic course of the disease develops. This also occurs after the consumption of unpasteurized domestic milk and milk products obtained from infected sheep and goats, with symptoms appearing within 3–4 days [3,136,149,156,157].TBEV infection progresses through distinct phases, each characterized by specific clinical manifestations. The initial phase, known as the viremic prodromal phase, typically lasts for several days. During this phase, non-specific symptoms resembling a flu-like syndrome are observed, including fever, mild headache, general malaise, myalgia, arthralgia, and nausea. Following the prodromal phase, an asymptomatic interval follows, which can last anywhere from 1 to 21 days. In approximately 20–30% of TBEV-infected patients, a second phase occurs marked by the recurrence of fever and signs of CNS involvement, which vary based on the affected area and can include meningitis, meningoencephalitis, myelitis, and radiculitis. It is crucial to emphasize that TBEV infection is considered one of the most severe neuroinfections. The neurological complications that arise during the second phase can have long-lasting effects, leading to permanent neurological sequelae in some cases [3,22,136,156,157,158,159,160,161]. Meningitis is a significant manifestation observed in approximately 50% of patients infected with TBEV, with children being more commonly affected. It is characterized by fever, headache, vomiting, neck stiffness, and photophobia [3,136,156,157,159,162].Approximately 40% of patients develop encephalitis, which can manifest as altered consciousness (such as somnolence, sopor, and, less commonly, coma), restlessness, agitation, tremor, ataxia, fasciculations of the tongue, dysarthria, paresthesia, focal or generalized seizures, muscle pain in the affected areas, paralysis (usually affecting the shoulder region and arms due to the virus’s preference for the anterior horns of the cervical part of the spinal cord), and potential respiratory muscle paralysis [2,3,136,151,156,157,159,160,162,163]. Myelitis occurs in approximately 5–10% of patients infected with TBEV. It commonly presents in conjunction with encephalitis and, rarely, as a separate clinical entity [2,3,159,162].When TBEV affects the brainstem and medulla oblongata, it poses a high risk of mortality due to severe complications. Although less common, TBEV can also lead to polyradiculitis and cranial neuritis. While less frequent than encephalitis and myelitis, these conditions can still cause significant morbidity. Rare cases of TBEV-associated myocarditis, pancreatitis, and hepatitis have been reported, indicating the systemic impact of the infection beyond the central nervous system [136,164].While most patients infected with TBEV experience complete recovery, up to 20% of cases can develop post-encephalitic syndrome. This syndrome is characterized by a range of long-term neurological and psychological sequelae that significantly impact the affected individuals’ quality of life. Some common manifestations of post-encephalitic syndrome include a persistent headache, weakening or loss of hearing, tinnitus, ataxia, uncoordinated movements, cognitive function impairment, depression, anxiety, and contractures [3,136,156,157,162,165].In a small subset of patients comprising approximately 2% of cases, a particularly severe clinical course of the disease can lead to a fatal outcome. This subset is characterized by factors such as older age, the presence of comorbidities, and a monophasic course of the illness [3,159,165,166].6.1. TreatmentAs there is currently no specific antiviral therapy available for TBEV infection, the treatment primarily focuses on symptomatic and supportive measures. Patients with a severe and complicated course of the disease receive care in intensive care units, where a comprehensive approach is taken to manage their condition. Treatment in these cases typically involves supplementation of fluids, correction of electrolyte disturbances, antipyretics, anticonvulsants, and antiedematous treatment (mannitol, corticosteroids, assisted ventilation in cases of respiratory failure, prevention of decubitus, contracture, etc.) [3,156,157].Studies have indicated that the use of interferon alpha and oral ribavirin has not demonstrated effectiveness in influencing the course of TBEV infection or promoting recovery [156,157]. Tetracyclines are occasionally employed for immunomodulation, primarily to inhibit the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines [156]. ImmunotherapyDue to concerns about potential risks and harm associated with immunotherapy, including the possibility of antibody-dependent enhancement of infection and the potential for long-lasting disabilities, the routine use of specific TBE immunoglobulins for prophylaxis and treatment of TBE infections is generally not recommended. The clinical and therapeutic approach remains highly complex, particularly when dealing with immunocompromised patients [79,167,168].Over the past two decades, there has been growing utilization of rituximab (RTX) and other B-cell-depleting monoclonal antibodies (such as ocrelizumab, veltuzumab, and ublituximab) in the treatment of oncological, rheumatological, and neurological conditions [167,169,170]. The immunomodulatory effect of RTX is attributed to its extremely rapid action, leading to B-cell depletion within 2–3 days of administration. This effect is sustained, lasting up to 12 months [169,170,171]. The significant level of immunosuppression observed in these patients indicates that they may be highly vulnerable to severe infectious diseases. Examples include viral infections, such as enteroviruses, reactivation of herpes viruses, hepatitis B virus, and JC polyomavirus, as well as the devastating arboviral neuroinvasive disease, which has a high fatality rate. It is concerning to note that, among patients who undergo RTX treatment and are diagnosed with arboviral neuroinvasive disease, four out of five do not survive. Even for those who do survive, long-term disabilities are often present [167,170,172]. Experimental data strongly support the notion that antibodies and B-cells play a critical role in the prevention and containment of the early neurological dissemination of West Nile virus [173]. The identification of a recent cluster of fatal TBEV infections in patients who had undergone solid organ transplantation highlights the possibility that various types of immunosuppression could be a risk factor for more severe TBEV disease [167,174].The diagnosis of arboviral infection can be challenging and delayed in patients undergoing RTX treatment, especially when the disease presents with atypical, prolonged, or subclinical symptoms. In these patients, the antibody response is often impaired or completely abolished, making it necessary to rely on molecular testing to detect viral RNA in serum, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and/or tissue specimens for an accurate diagnosis [167,170,171].One potential immunotherapy approach for arboviral neuroinvasive diseases involves the administration of high doses of intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIGs). However, the efficacy of IVIG therapy remains uncertain due to heterogeneous data collected from case reports, case series, and observational studies. While the application of IVIG appears to be generally safe, there is no clear evidence of its superiority over supportive treatment [79,167,168,175]. In the case of West Nile virus (WNV) infection, high-dose IVIG has been used in patients treated with RTX, but they have not shown a definite clinical benefit [2,6]. Similarly, in a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving patients with Japanese encephalitis, no significant difference in outcomes was observed between the IVIG and placebo treatment groups [176].Case reports have shown a strong correlation between fatal outcomes and pre-existing immunosuppression in arboviral neuroinvasive diseases [171,175]. The absence of intrathecal neutralizing antibodies likely leads to prolonged viral spread, as supported by the detection of TBEV RNA in the CSF of these patients. However, in cases where there is substantial viral replication in the CNS and a concurrent lack of endogenous TBEV antibodies, the administration of passively transferred neutralizing antibodies may help alleviate CNS disease and improve patient outcomes [167,173].The increasing number of case reports documenting successful treatment of arboviral encephalitis with high doses of IVIG is encouraging [79,168,175,177,178]. IVIG has been utilized in the treatment of severe TBE. While some symptoms improved after treatment, neurological symptoms did not show the same level of improvement. There is a trend suggesting better recovery when IVIG treatment is initiated earlier [79,168]. However, once WNV encephalitis and TBE have entered the CNS, they may be more challenging to treat effectively with IVIG [175]. In a study by Piantadosi et al., IVIG was administered to a patient with Powassan virus (POWV) encephalitis, resulting in an excellent outcome despite severe MRI changes [177]. Another patient with POWV encephalitis and co-infection with Borrelia burgdorferi experienced severe meningoencephalitis and respiratory failure. The patient received supportive treatment with ceftriaxone for neuroborreliosis and empirically administered IVIG, which led to significant neurological recovery [178].In the absence of specific antiviral treatment for severe arboviral neuroinfections, as well as supportive care, the decision to administer IVIG as a therapeutic option should be made on a case-by-case basis, taking into account current scientific and professional knowledge to assess the risks and benefits. Future research is necessary to establish well-defined indications for and the optimal dosing and timing of IVIG administration, as well as the potential benefits of IVIG in immunocompromised patients.6.2. PreventionPrevention of TBEV infection involves implementing general measures, including the pasteurization of milk, reducing the tick population, and adopting personal protection measures (using repellents; wearing appropriate clothing, such as long sleeves, long pants, and closed-toe shoes, to minimize exposed skin and make it more difficult for ticks to attach; and careful inspection and prompt removal of ticks, such as conducting thorough tick checks on the body after spending time in nature, particularly in tick-infested areas). These measures are aimed at minimizing the risk of exposure and transmission. Ticks should be removed promptly and properly using fine-tipped tweezers [3,136,149]. Active immunization is considered an optimal and highly effective method of preventing TBE for individuals who are exposed to endemic areas either professionally or recreationally. The immunization schedule typically involves a series of three doses for complete primary immunization administered at specific intervals (0, 1–3, and 9–12 months). Following the primary immunization, a booster dose is recommended after 3 years. Subsequent booster doses are administered every 3–5 years, with the specific interval determined based on the patient’s age [136,158,179,180]. Accelerated immunization schedules enable the rapid induction of an immune response and the establishment of a stable antibody titer [158,161,179]. The vaccine for TBE is recognized for its excellent tolerability, safety, and high effectiveness, ranging from 96% to 98.7%. Over the course of four decades, Austria has administered the TBE vaccine to over 35 million individuals, resulting in a substantial decline in TBE incidence and nearly eliminating the disease caused by TBEV [2,3,156,158,181]. The occurrence of the disease in vaccinated individuals has been reported by several authors, particularly among older individuals with a weakened immune response to the vaccine [180,181,182].7. Diagnosis of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus InfectionPrompt and accurate diagnosis of the infection with the TBEV is crucial for appropriate management, prevention of complications, and adequate implementation of control measures. However, diagnosing TBE can be laden with challenges due to non-specific results in the initial disease stages, where abnormal liver function tests, decreased white blood cell counts, or reduced platelet counts may be observed [183]. Within a short time-frame following TBEV infection and the emergence of symptoms, a definitive diagnosis is habitually established by detecting IgM and IgG antibodies in the patient’s cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and/or blood serum [184]. This is a standard approach and it has to be emphasized that the timing of antibody detection can vary depending on the individual’s immune response [3].Consequently, some specific diagnostic criteria that primarily focus on serological testing for TBE have been put forth by the European Centre for Disease Control (ECDC). As per their guidelines, two criteria should be met for disease confirmation: the presence of clinical symptoms indicating inflammation of the central nervous system (CNS) and positive laboratory findings [185]. The latter can encompass several factors: the detection of TBE-specific IgM and IgG antibodies in blood serum; the identification of TBE-specific IgM or both IgM and IgG antibodies in the CSF, seroconversion or a notable rise in TBE-specific antibody levels observed in paired serum samples; the identification of viral genetic material in the blood, CSF, or other bodily fluids or tissues; and viral isolation [185]. A similar stance is taken by the European Academy of Neurology (EAN), which adds that the imaging of the brain/spinal cord has a valuable role in establishing a diagnosis of TBE, despite its limited sensitivity and specificity [4].There are some limitations to serological testing; most notably, the potential cross-reactivity of antibodies, which should be considered in the interpretation phase as it can be a pertinent issue for the constituents of the genus Flaviviridae [186]. Erroneous interpretation of another CNS disease or infection may occur within several months of acute TBEV infection or following the initial primary immunization with two vaccine doses, since specific TBE IgM antibodies can still be detectable during this period [3,187]. Caution is also required when interpreting TBE serology results in patients who have been vaccinated against TBE and present with meningoencephalitis or meningitis. More specifically, in instances of vaccination breakthroughs, the serological response may differ from that observed in unvaccinated individuals with TBE, potentially leading to these cases being overlooked [3]. Vaccination breakthrough cases are typically defined as deferred development of IgM antibody response, as specific antibodies are usually not detectable during the inaugural week of the TBE meningoencephalitic phase; instead, there is a rapid increase in specific serum IgG antibodies [188,189].Molecular techniques, such as reverse transcription–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), can be employed to detect TBEV RNA in patient samples. Notably, viral presence can only be ascertained during the acute disease phase; however, affected individuals are typically admitted to the hospital when neurological symptoms manifest, which is usually beyond the point when TBE viral nucleic acid is detectable in the blood or CSF [190]. This means the diagnostic yield of molecular methods is limited, but in areas where multiple tick-borne diseases are prevalent, the inclusion of TBE RT-PCR testing in the diagnostic algorithm for febrile disease after a tick bite could prove to be a valuable diagnostic approach [3,191]. Albeit rare, food-borne transmission of TBEV is a possibility, which prompted a recent validation of the RT-qPCR method for detecting this virus in raw milk products [93,192]. It also has to be emphasized that collecting and screening ticks using real-time RT-PCR cannot be endorsed for human TBE risk assessment [193].Several biomarkers can be used to support the diagnosis of TBE in the clinical milieu. In accordance with the current understanding, CSF testing/analysis plays a pivotal role, as it can reveal moderate pleocytosis characterized by an increased segmented granulocyte count, as well as elevated protein concentration [187]. As the disease progresses, there is a shift towards the predominance of lymphocytes. Such elevated lymphocyte counts can persist for several weeks, even after clinical improvement has occurred [194]. However, some authors caution that testing for TBEV infection should be considered in individuals presenting with encephalitis symptoms consistent with TBE even in the absence of CSF pleocytosis, particularly if there is a known risk of tick exposure in a region endemic for TBE [195].Furthermore, C-reactive protein or procalcitonin levels are measured to aid in differentiating TBEV infection from other neuroinflammatory disorders of bacterial origin. More specifically, the levels of these proteins are generally lower in TBE compared to bacterial CNS infections [2,3,136]. Still, it is important to note that these additional biomarkers only provide supportive evidence and do not independently confirm the diagnosis of TBE. A recent review pinpointed several candidate biomarkers that can be used in the TBE diagnostic, prognostic, and monitoring stages; these include chemokines such as CCL2, CCL7, CXCL1, CXCL2, CXCL9, and CXCL12 [196].In fact, cytokines and chemokines have been investigated as potential diagnostic biomarkers for the assessment of the severity of TBE, such as in predicting the presence of encephalitis (either moderate or severe) compared to primarily meningeal symptoms and differentiating TBE meningoencephalitis from meningitis in both adults and children [197,198,199]. Such findings indicate that they could be used to analyze and forecast the disease course. A recent study from Croatia demonstrated that patients with this disease more frequently present with higher levels of IFN-gamma and IL-6 in the CSF compared to controls, while IL-6 can also be detected in urine specimens in much higher concentrations than in serum samples [199]. Due to the heterogeneity of the literature data thus far, an optimal diagnostic set of biomarkers has yet to be determined for TBEV infection.A recent cross-sectional study in Germany by Schley et al. [200] suggested that individuals displaying typical symptoms of TBE may be under-tested, which consequently results in the potential under-diagnosis of TBE cases. In addition, a lack of standardized TBE testing protocols in hospitals (and even in departments of the same institution) has been identified as an issue that may be relevant for many countries [200]. In order to guarantee accurate identification of cases, these authors recommend that TBE testing become standardized and a routine practice consistently employed for all patients exhibiting relevant symptoms or who have been exposed to common risk factors associated with TBE.Here, it has to be emphasized that tick vectors or vertebrate reservoir hosts show a propensity to carry multiple microorganisms that can cause illness in humans (e.g., Babesia, Anaplasma, and Borrelia species alongside viral agents such as TBEV); conversely, human co-infections can be interpreted in various manners, spanning from individuals testing positive for antibodies without experiencing clinical symptoms to the simultaneous occurrence of clinical manifestations stemming from infections by two tick-borne microorganisms [201]. Naturally, this comes with implications for diagnostic approaches, as certain bacterial infections can present with clinical manifestations and CSF findings similar to viral infections such as TBEV. A recent systematic review has shown that the majority of co-infection cases involved patients who had one tick-borne disease while also having antibodies against another tick-borne microorganism [202]. Furthermore, co-disease was particularly common in two scenarios: among individuals with high fever and erythema migrans as clinical symptoms and patients experiencing neurological symptoms associated with TBEV or neuroborreliosis [202]. The most frequent putative association was demonstrated between TBEV and Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato; thus, caution is necessary when interpreting serological results (particularly in instances of overlapping symptoms) [202].8. Conclusions and PerspectivesThe expanding risk areas, increasing incidence of TBEV infections, and emerging endemic regions emphasize the importance of gaining a better understanding of the factors influencing TBEV pathogenesis. In this comprehensive review, we have provided insights into the virus’s structure, reproduction, transmission, pathogenesis, epidemiology, risk factors, clinical manifestations, and diagnostic approaches. However, further research is crucial to deepen our knowledge.Notably, the neurovirulence and neuroinvasiveness of TBEV can be significantly impacted by mutations in its infectious genomic RNA, underscoring the need for genome-focused investigations [40,44,45,46,47]. The geographic distribution of TBEV is predominantly determined by the distribution of its tick vectors. While Ixodes ricinus and Ixodes persulcatus ticks are the main vectors for TBEV-Eu, TBEV-Sib, and TBEV-FE, recent studies have identified at least 22 other tick species capable of carrying and transmitting the virus [72,78,79,80,81,82. Furthermore, birds play a role in spreading infected ticks to new areas, expanding the potential for transmission [72,89].Several factors contribute to the increasing occurrence and spread of TBEV, both within and outside endemic areas [132,133]. Climate change, such as global warming, impacts TBEV reservoir and vector populations, affecting tick biology and ecology [134]. Mild winters and earlier springs can boost tick populations and their development [78,127,137]. Additionally, travel patterns and consumption of unpasteurized milk and milk products play roles in TBEV transmission [93,121].With the incidence of TBEV reaching 0.9 cases per 100,000 people in 2020, understanding these aspects is crucial. The highest incidence rates in recent years have been observed in Lithuania, Slovenia, the Czech Republic, and Latvia [120]. It is imperative to recognize and acknowledge that accurate and timely diagnosis of TBEV infection is vital due to the non-specific nature of the initial symptoms [164]. Despite the challenges it presents, accurate diagnosis is essential for effective management, prevention of complications, and the implementation of control measures [181]. By deepening our knowledge of TBEV and its associated factors, we strive to enhance strategies for timely diagnosis, appropriate management, and effective control measures against TBEV infections.


Title: Breast Milk: A Potential Route of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus Transmission from Mother to Infant

Introduction and backgroundTick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is a viral infection caused by the tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV). TBEV is primarily transmitted to humans through the bite of infected ticks, with ticks belonging to the Ixodes genus being the main vectors [1]. TBE poses a significant public health concern, especially in regions where ticks are prevalent, such as parts of Europe, Asia, and North America. The clinical manifestations of TBEV infection can range from mild flu-like symptoms to severe neurological complications, including meningitis, encephalitis, and long-term cognitive impairments [1,2].While ticks are the primary vectors for TBEV transmission, emerging evidence suggests that other transmission routes, such as breast milk, may also play a role in spreading the virus. This raises concerns about the potential risks associated with TBEV infection in infants through breastfeeding. Breast milk is widely recognized as the optimal method of infant nutrition, providing numerous health benefits to both the mother and child. However, if breast milk becomes a potential route of TBEV transmission, it introduces a new dimension of concern for breastfeeding mothers in regions where TBEV is endemic [3].Understanding the transmission routes and potential risks associated with TBEV infection in infants is crucial for public health interventions and strategies. It is important to assess the possibility of TBEV transmission through breast milk and evaluate the implications for breastfeeding recommendations in regions affected by TBE. This knowledge can help inform healthcare professionals, policymakers, and lactating mothers about the potential risks and guide decision-making regarding breastfeeding practices in TBEV-endemic areas. By comprehensively examining the evidence and understanding the dynamics of TBEV transmission, effective preventive measures can be developed to ensure the safety and well-being of mothers and infants in regions affected by TBE [4].This review explores the hypothesis that breast milk could be a potential route for TBEV transmission from mothers to infants. By examining the existing literature on TBEV, breastfeeding, and viral transmission through breast milk, this review aims to assess the evidence and shed light on the potential risks and implications of TBEV transmission through breastfeeding.ReviewMethodologyThis review systematically gathered relevant literature on TBEV transmission through breast milk. A comprehensive search strategy was developed using electronic databases, including PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science. The search terms included variations of “TBEV,” “breastfeeding,” “breast milk,” “transmission,” “infants,” and “related keywords.” The search was conducted without language or time restrictions up until the knowledge cut-off date of September 2021. The selection criteria for the included studies were determined based on relevance to the topic and the quality of the evidence. Studies eligible for inclusion investigated TBEV transmission through breast milk through primary data collection or systematic reviews. Studies focusing on other modes of TBEV transmission or unrelated topics were excluded. The inclusion criteria encompassed experimental and observational studies, including case reports, cohort studies, cross-sectional studies, and clinical trials. Animal studies were also considered if they provided insights into the mechanisms or dynamics of TBEV transmission through breast milk. During the study selection process, titles and abstracts were screened, followed by a full-text review of potentially relevant articles. Any discrepancies in study selection were resolved through consensus among the reviewers. The final set of included studies provides a comprehensive overview of the available evidence on TBEV transmission through breast milk, encompassing clinical and experimental research. The findings from these studies were synthesized and analyzed to draw meaningful conclusions and identify areas requiring further investigation. Figure 1 describes the selection process of articles used in our study.Figure 1Selection process of articles used in this study.Adopted from the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA)TBEVA Brief Introduction to TBEV, Its Classification, and Geographic DistributionTBEV is a member of the Flaviviridae family, including other medically important viruses, such as dengue, Zika, and West Nile. TBEV is further classified into three subtypes: European (TBEV-Eu), Siberian (TBEV-Sib), and Far Eastern (TBEV-FE). These subtypes vary in their geographic distribution and disease severity [5,6]. TBEV has a wide geographic distribution, primarily in parts of Europe and Asia. Endemic regions include central and eastern European countries (e.g., Austria, Czech Republic, Germany, and Russia), Scandinavia, the Baltic states, China, Mongolia, and parts of Japan. The incidence and prevalence of TBEV infections vary across these regions, with some areas reporting sporadic cases while others experiencing periodic outbreaks [7].Lifecycle and Transmission of TBEV, Emphasizing Tick Vectors and Their RoleThe lifecycle of TBEV involves ticks and vertebrate hosts, typically small mammals, such as rodents and insectivores. Ticks serve as both vectors and reservoirs for TBEV. The primary vector species responsible for TBEV transmission are Ixodes ricinus in Europe and Ixodes persulcatus in Asia [8,9]. Ticks become infected with TBEV when they feed on infected animals. The virus then replicates within the tick, infecting various tissues, including salivary glands. Infected ticks can transmit the virus to humans and other animals during subsequent feeding [10].Transmission to humans usually occurs through the bite of an infected tick. TBEV is mainly transmitted during feeding when the tick regurgitates virus-containing saliva into the host's skin. It is important to note that not all tick bites result in TBEV transmission, as the ticks themselves must be infected with the virus [11].Clinical Presentation and Potential Complications of TBE in InfantsThe clinical presentation of TBE can vary from mild to severe, with symptoms typically appearing 7-14 days after an infected tick bite. In infants, TBE may present differences compared to older children and adults. Infants are generally more susceptible to severe forms of the disease [12]. Initial symptoms of TBE in infants can be non-specific and resemble common viral illnesses, including fever, fatigue, headache, and muscle aches. As the disease progresses, neurological symptoms may emerge, such as meningitis (inflammation of the membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord) or encephalitis (inflammation of the brain) [3,4,10].Severe cases of TBE in infants can lead to neurological complications, including seizures, cognitive impairments, and motor abnormalities. Long-term consequences, such as learning disabilities and behavioral problems, have been reported in some cases. It is important to note that not all infants infected with TBEV will develop severe symptoms, and the severity of the disease can vary [13]. The clinical manifestations and potential complications of TBE in infants highlight the importance of understanding transmission routes and potential risks, such as TBEV transmission through breast milk. Further investigation into this potential transmission route is crucial to inform preventive measures and ensure the safety of breastfeeding practices in TBE-endemic areas [6,9].Breast milk as a transmission routeOverview of Breastfeeding and Its Benefits for Infant HealthBreastfeeding is widely recognized as the optimal method of infant nutrition and is associated with numerous health benefits for both the infant and mother. Breast milk provides complete nutrition, containing nutrients, growth factors, hormones, enzymes, and immune-protective components that support the infant's growth and development [14,15].Breast milk offers several advantages for infant health. First, it provides optimal nutrition as it contains a balanced combination of essential nutrients, proteins, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals specifically tailored to meet the nutritional needs of infants, supporting their healthy growth and development. Second, breast milk provides immune protection through its rich content of immune factors, such as antibodies, leukocytes, and antimicrobial components. These components help to strengthen the infant's immune system and protect against various infections, reducing the risk of respiratory and gastrointestinal infections. Third, breastfeeding has been associated with a reduced risk of allergies, asthma, obesity, and certain chronic diseases later in life, potentially due to the immune-boosting properties of breast milk. Finally, breast milk contains factors that promote cognitive development and may contribute to better cognitive outcomes in infants. The unique composition of breast milk provides numerous benefits that support the overall health and well-being of infants [16].The Concept of Viral Transmission Through Breast MilkBreast milk can be a potential viral transmission route from mothers to infants. Viruses can be present in breast milk either due to a localized infection in the mammary glands or due to viremia (presence of virus in the bloodstream) in the mother. Viruses in breast milk raise concerns about the potential risk of transmission and the impact on infant health [17]. Not all viruses can be transmitted through breast milk, and the transmission risk varies depending on the specific virus, viral load, and other factors. Breast milk viruses can be transmitted by ingesting viral particles or through infected cells present in breast milk [18].Evidence of Viral Transmission Through Breast Milk in Other DiseasesSeveral viruses have been documented to be transmitted through breast milk in different disease contexts. Examples include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1), cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV), and hepatitis C virus (HCV) [19]. Studies have shown that these viruses can be present in breast milk and infect the infant during breastfeeding. However, the transmission rates and risk factors vary for each virus, and preventive strategies, such as antiretroviral therapy for HIV-positive mothers, can significantly reduce transmission rates [20,21].The Rationale for Investigating TBEV Transmission Through Breast MilkGiven the potential for viral transmission through breast milk, it is important to investigate whether TBEV can be transmitted through this route. Understanding the potential for TBEV transmission through breast milk is essential for several reasons:Public health implications: If TBEV can be transmitted through breast milk, it has important implications for public health strategies and breastfeeding recommendations in TBE-endemic areas. Guidance can be developed to minimize the risk of transmission while still promoting the numerous benefits of breastfeeding [8,15,21]. Infant health outcomes: Investigating TBEV transmission through breast milk is crucial to determine the potential impact on infant health. Understanding the clinical consequences and long-term outcomes of TBEV transmission through breastfeeding can guide appropriate interventions and management strategies [15,16].Prevention and interventions: Identifying the mechanisms and risk factors for TBEV transmission through breast milk can help develop preventive measures and interventions to reduce the transmission risk. This knowledge can inform public health efforts and contribute to controlling and preventing TBEV infections [13,17]. By examining the existing evidence and exploring the potential for TBEV transmission through breast milk, this review aims to provide valuable insights into the risk factors, mechanisms, and clinical implications of TBEV transmission in the context of breastfeeding.Presence and persistence of TBEV in breast milkStudies Assessing the Presence of TBEV in Breast Milk SamplesSeveral studies have investigated the presence of TBEV in breast milk samples to determine if breast milk can be a potential transmission route from mothers to infants. These studies have employed various methodologies to detect and analyze the presence of TBEV in breast milk [2,4,6,8,10,21]. Studies have collected breast milk samples from TBEV-infected mothers during different stages of infection and have used techniques, such as RT-PCR and nucleic acid amplification tests, to detect viral RNA. Other studies have employed virus isolation techniques to culture TBEV from breast milk samples [2,4,6,8,10,21].Detection Methods Used to Identify TBEV in Breast MilkThe detection of TBEV in breast milk samples typically involves molecular techniques, such as RT-PCR or real-time PCR, which allow for the amplification and detection of specific viral RNA sequences. These methods rely on TBEV genetic material (RNA) in the breast milk sample [4,15]. In addition to molecular techniques, immunological methods, such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) or immunofluorescence assays, can detect TBEV antigens or antibodies in breast milk. These methods can provide indirect evidence of the presence of TBEV or previous exposure to the virus [4,5].Factors Influencing the Presence and Persistence of TBEV in Breast MilkSeveral factors can influence the presence and persistence of TBEV in breast milk:Maternal viremia: The presence of TBEV in breast milk can be influenced by the mother's level of viremia (virus in the bloodstream). High viremia levels may increase the likelihood of TBEV transmission to breast milk [9,18].Timing of infection: The timing of TBEV infection during breastfeeding can affect the presence of the virus in breast milk. Studies have reported higher viral loads in breast milk samples collected during the acute phase of infection compared to convalescent or post-convalescent stages [11,12,14,19].Mammary gland involvement: TBEV may gain access to breast milk through the mammary glands. In cases where the virus is present in the mammary gland tissue, the likelihood of viral presence in breast milk increases [8].Individual variations: There may be individual variations in viral shedding and persistence in breast milk among TBEV-infected mothers. The mother's immune response, viral replication dynamics, and genetic factors may contribute to these variations [17].Viral Load and Its Correlation With TBEV Transmission PotentialThe viral load, or the amount of TBEV present in breast milk, may be associated with the potential for transmission to the infant. Higher viral loads in breast milk may indicate a higher risk of transmission. However, the correlation between viral load and transmission potential is not yet well established. Studies have reported a wide range of viral loads in breast milk samples, with some showing low or undetectable viral loads. Further research is needed to determine the threshold viral load necessary for transmission and to understand the relationship between viral load and the likelihood of transmission [21]. Investigating the factors influencing the presence and persistence of TBEV in breast milk, as well as the correlation between viral load and transmission potential, can provide valuable insights into the potential risk of TBEV transmission through breastfeeding and guide the development of preventive strategies to minimize transmission risks [4,6,8,15,16,21].Mechanisms of TBEV transmission through breast milkPossible Mechanisms by Which TBEV May Cross From Maternal Blood to Breast MilkThe exact mechanisms by which TBEV crosses from maternal blood to breast milk are not fully understood. However, several potential pathways have been proposed:Hematogenous dissemination: TBEV can enter the bloodstream through the bite of an infected tick and subsequently disseminate to various organs and tissues, including the mammary glands. This suggests that TBEV may have the ability to cross from the maternal blood into the mammary gland tissue and subsequently be secreted into breast milk. The exact mechanisms by which TBEV can traverse from the blood to the mammary glands are not fully understood and require further investigation [22].Transcytosis: Transcytosis is a process by which molecules are transported across cells. It is hypothesized that TBEV may utilize transcytosis to cross the mammary epithelial cells, which form a barrier between the bloodstream and the milk-producing alveoli within the mammary glands. The virus could pass through the mammary epithelial cells and enter breast milk through transcytosis. This mechanism requires exploration to understand better the specific cellular processes involved and the factors that may facilitate or hinder TBEV's transcytosis across the mammary epithelium [23].Mammary gland infection: Another potential mechanism for TBEV transmission through breast milk is the direct infection of the mammary gland’s glandular tissue. It is conceivable that TBEV could infect the mammary epithelial cells within the mammary glands, leading to viral replication within these cells. As a result, the virus could be released into breast milk due to the infected mammary gland tissue. Further investigation is needed to ascertain the susceptibility of mammary epithelial cells to TBEV infection and the subsequent release of the virus into breast milk [24]. The specific mechanisms involved in TBEV transmission to breast milk are an area of ongoing research and require further investigation to gain a comprehensive understanding.Role of Immune Factors in Breast Milk in Facilitating or Inhibiting Viral TransmissionBreast milk contains various immune factors that can play a role in facilitating or inhibiting viral transmission. These immune factors include antibodies, immune cells, cytokines, and other soluble factors.Antibodies: Breast milk contains many antibodies, primarily secretory immunoglobulin A (IgA). These antibodies can specifically target and neutralize viruses, preventing their entry into cells and reducing the risk of viral transmission. IgA antibodies provide localized protection within the mucosal surfaces of the infant's digestive and respiratory tracts, which are common entry points for viral infections [25,26].Immune cells: Breast milk is abundant in antibodies and contains various immune cells, including lymphocytes and macrophages. These immune cells can recognize and eliminate pathogens, including viruses, in breast milk. By clearing viral particles and infected cells, breast milk's immune cells help minimize the potential for viral transmission to the infant [27].Cytokines and other immune factors: Breast milk also contains a diverse range of cytokines and other immune factors contributing to its protective properties. These immune factors can modulate the immune response in the infant, promoting antiviral defense and reducing the susceptibility to viral infections. In addition, they can enhance the overall immune maturation and development of the infant's immune system [28]. The presence of these immune factors in breast milk suggests a potential protective role against viral transmission. However, the effectiveness of these immune factors in preventing TBEV transmission specifically requires further investigation.Interactions Between TBEV and Mammary Epithelial CellsTBEV may interact with mammary epithelial cells during viral entry into breast milk. The exact mechanisms and interactions involved in this process are not fully understood but may include the following:Receptor-mediated entry: TBEV may utilize specific receptors present on the surface of mammary epithelial cells to facilitate viral entry. The interaction between TBEV and these receptors is hypothesized to initiate cellular events that allow the virus to enter the mammary epithelial cells. However, the specific receptors involved in the TBEV entry into mammary epithelial cells have not been definitively identified yet. Further research is needed to elucidate the receptor-virus interactions and understand this process' mechanisms [29].Intracellular trafficking: Once TBEV gains entry into mammary epithelial cells, it may undergo intracellular trafficking, utilizing cellular pathways for the transport, replication, and assembly of new virus particles. The virus may exploit various cellular machinery and compartments within the mammary epithelial cells to establish replication sites and replicate its genetic material. The exact intracellular trafficking pathways and the host factors facilitating TBEV replication and assembly in mammary epithelial cells require further investigation [30].Viral release: Following replication and assembly, TBEV has the potential to be released from mammary epithelial cells into breast milk. The exact mechanisms of viral release are not fully understood but may involve processes, such as exocytosis or other cellular mechanisms. Once released into breast milk, TBEV can potentially be ingested by the infant during breastfeeding, leading to virus transmission. The dynamics of viral release from mammary epithelial cells and the factors influencing the efficiency of this process warrant further exploration [2,20,29]. Understanding the interactions between TBEV and mammary epithelial cells is important for elucidating the mechanisms of TBEV transmission through breast milk. Further research is needed to investigate these interactions and the specific molecular mechanisms involved.Clinical implications and epidemiological considerationsCase Reports or Studies Documenting Potential TBEV Transmission Through Breast MilkSeveral case reports and studies have reported the potential transmission of TBEV through breast milk. These reports have documented instances where infants have acquired TBEV infection through breastfeeding. However, it is important to note that these cases are relatively rare, and the overall risk of TBEV transmission through breast milk appears low [9,10]. These case reports and studies have described TBEV infection in infants breastfed by mothers with confirmed TBEV infection. TBEV RNA, or the isolation of live viruses from breast milk samples, has been reported in some cases. These findings suggest the possibility of TBEV transmission through breast milk [1,5,9,24,25,27].Clinical Outcomes and Complications in Infants Infected With TBEV via Breast MilkThe clinical outcomes and complications in infants infected with TBEV via breast milk can vary. Some infants may remain asymptomatic or develop mild symptoms, while others may experience more severe manifestations of TBE [31]. Infants infected with TBEV via breast milk can present with symptoms, such as fever, irritability, poor feeding, lethargy, and neurological manifestations, including seizures and encephalitis. In severe cases, TBEV infection can lead to long-term neurological sequelae or even death [32].The severity of clinical outcomes in infants may depend on various factors, including the viral load in breast milk, the timing of infection, the immune response of the infant, and other individual factors. Further research is needed to better understand the clinical spectrum and outcomes of TBEV transmission through breast milk [33].Epidemiological Patterns and Geographical Considerations of TBEV Transmission Through Breast MilkThe epidemiological patterns of TBEV transmission through breast milk vary in different regions. Geographical considerations play a significant role due to variations in TBEV prevalence and endemicity [16]. TBEV is endemic in certain regions of Europe and Asia, with the highest incidence reported in central and eastern European countries and parts of Russia and China. In these endemic areas, the risk of TBEV infection is generally higher, and the potential for transmission through breast milk may be more significant. Geographical factors, such as the prevalence of TBEV-infected ticks in the environment, incidence of TBEV infection in the population, and overall epidemiological context of TBEV transmission, can influence the likelihood of TBEV transmission through breast milk [34].Healthcare providers and public health authorities need to consider the local epidemiological patterns and prevalence of TBEV when assessing the risk of transmission through breast milk. This information can help inform preventive strategies, vaccination recommendations, and public health interventions to minimize the risk of TBEV transmission in breastfeeding infants. Further epidemiological studies are needed to understand better the geographical distribution and risk factors associated with TBEV transmission through breast milk and to guide targeted prevention and control measures [5,24].Prevention and management strategiesImportance of Public Health Measures to Prevent TBEV TransmissionPublic health measures are crucial in preventing TBEV transmission, including the potential transmission through breastfeeding. These measures are essential for reducing the overall burden of TBEV infection in the community and protecting vulnerable populations, such as infants. Public health measures for TBEV prevention typically include the following:Tick bite prevention: Educating the public about tick bite prevention strategies is crucial in reducing the risk of TBEV infection in adults and infants. This includes raising awareness about the importance of wearing protective clothing, such as long sleeves and pants, using insect repellents containing DEET (N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide) or permethrin, and avoiding tick-infested areas, such as tall grasses and wooded areas. Implementing these preventive measures can significantly decrease the likelihood of tick bites and subsequent TBEV transmission [2,5].Vaccination: Vaccination is the most effective preventive measure against TBEV infection. In endemic regions where TBEV is prevalent, vaccination campaigns should be implemented targeting at-risk populations, including lactating mothers. Vaccinating lactating mothers can confer passive immunity to their infants through breast milk, protecting against TBEV transmission. It is important to ensure that the safety and efficacy of TBEV vaccines in lactating mothers are well established through clinical trials and monitoring [35,36].Surveillance and early detection: Establishing robust surveillance systems to monitor TBEV activity is essential for early detection and prompt public health interventions. Surveillance programs should include monitoring tick populations, TBEV prevalence in ticks, and human TBEV cases. The timely detection of TBEV-infected individuals, including lactating mothers, enables appropriate management, including medical care and counseling on breastfeeding options. In addition, surveillance data can inform public health interventions, such as targeted tick control measures and awareness campaigns in high-risk areas [37].Strategies for Minimizing the Risk of TBEV Transmission Through BreastfeedingMinimizing the risk of TBEV transmission through breastfeeding requires a comprehensive approach that considers individual and public health measures. Some strategies to minimize the risk include the following:Education and awareness: Providing comprehensive education and awareness programs to lactating mothers about TBEV transmission and the potential risks associated with breastfeeding during active TBEV infection is crucial. Mothers should be informed about the symptoms of TBEV infection and advised to seek medical advice promptly if they develop any relevant symptoms. This education empowers mothers to make informed decisions regarding breastfeeding, considering the potential risks and benefits [18,24,25].Screening and testing: Implementing screening measures for TBEV infection in lactating mothers, particularly in endemic regions, can help identify individuals at risk of transmitting the virus through breast milk. Diagnostic testing, such as reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), can be used to detect the presence of TBEV RNA in breast milk samples. Screening and testing can aid in identifying and appropriately managing TBEV-infected individuals [9,18].Individual risk assessment: Healthcare providers should conduct individual risk assessments for lactating mothers suspected or confirmed to have TBEV infection. Factors, such as the stage of infection, viral load in breast milk, clinical presentation, and prevalence of TBEV in the local population, should be considered. The risk assessment helps determine the appropriateness of breastfeeding and guides decisions regarding the best course of action for each individual [13,17].Temporary cessation or alternative feeding options: In cases where the risk of TBEV transmission through breastfeeding is deemed significant based on the individual risk assessment, temporary cessation of breastfeeding or the provision of safe alternative feeding options can be considered. This decision should be made on a case-by-case basis, considering factors, such as the severity of maternal infection, availability of expressed breast milk, and feasibility of formula feeding. Safe alternative feeding options, such as expressed breast milk from uninfected donors or commercial infant formula, can be considered to ensure adequate nutrition for the infant while minimizing the risk of TBEV transmission [13,31].Immunization and Vaccine Considerations for Lactating MothersImmunization against TBEV is a crucial preventive strategy, and the vaccination status of lactating mothers should be considered. TBEV vaccines are generally safe and effective; in some endemic regions, immunization of lactating mothers may be recommended [37]. Current evidence suggests that TBEV vaccines do not pose a significant risk to lactating infants. Inactivated TBEV vaccines are not live vaccines and are unlikely to replicate or cause infection in the infant through breast milk. However, the specific recommendations regarding TBEV vaccination for lactating mothers may vary between countries and should be based on available guidelines and expert advice [3].Healthcare providers should consider the benefits and potential risks of TBEV vaccination in lactating mothers, considering the local epidemiological context, individual's risk of TBEV infection, and potential benefits of breastfeeding for the infant's health. Shared decision-making between the mother and healthcare provider is essential in determining the most appropriate action. It is important to regularly review and update vaccination guidelines and recommendations for lactating mothers based on emerging evidence and the evolving epidemiological situation [1,13,18].Future research directionsResearch Gaps and Areas Requiring Further InvestigationDespite existing knowledge on TBEV transmission through breast milk, several research gaps must be addressed to enhance our understanding of this transmission mode. Areas requiring further investigation include the following:Epidemiological studies: Conducting large-scale epidemiological studies is crucial to determine the incidence and prevalence of TBEV transmission through breast milk in different geographic regions. These studies can help assess the overall risk and burden of transmission and identify specific risk factors associated with TBEV transmission through breastfeeding. By collecting comprehensive data on TBEV-infected lactating mothers and their infants, researchers can better understand this transmission mode's epidemiological patterns and geographical variations.Mechanisms of transmission: Elucidating the precise mechanisms by which TBEV crosses from maternal blood to breast milk is essential for understanding TBEV transmission through breastfeeding. Investigating the viral and host factors involved in viral entry, replication, and release in mammary epithelial cells can provide insights into the specific pathways and interactions underlying TBEV transmission through breast milk. By studying the molecular mechanisms involved, researchers can identify potential targets for interventions to block or inhibit viral transmission.Viral load dynamics: Understanding the dynamics of TBEV viral load in breast milk over time and its correlation with the risk of transmission is critical for assessing the potential infectivity of breast milk. Longitudinal studies that track the viral load in breast milk samples from TBEV-infected mothers can provide valuable information on the kinetics of TBEV shedding and the factors that influence viral load dynamics. This knowledge can help determine the appropriate duration and precautions for lactating mothers to minimize the risk of transmission.Immune response: Investigating the role of the maternal immune response in preventing or facilitating TBEV transmission through breast milk is essential for understanding the factors that influence viral transmission. Studying the specific immune factors and mechanisms involved in the antiviral defense within breast milk can help identify potential targets for interventions. By enhancing our understanding of the immune response, researchers can explore strategies to boost protective immune factors in breast milk or develop interventions that modulate the immune environment to reduce the risk of viral transmission.Clinical outcomes: Conducting larger-scale studies to further characterize the clinical outcomes and long-term sequelae in infants infected with TBEV through breast milk is crucial for understanding the impact of TBEV transmission on infant health. These studies can provide a more comprehensive understanding of the spectrum of clinical manifestations, potential complications, and long-term effects of TBEV infection acquired through breastfeeding. By evaluating the clinical outcomes in a larger cohort of infected infants, healthcare providers can improve the management and care of affected infants and provide appropriate counseling and support to affected families.Prospects for Developing Preventive Measures Targeting TBEV Transmission Through Breast MilkDeveloping preventive measures targeting TBEV transmission through breast milk is an important area for future research. Prospects for such measures include the following:Vaccine development: A promising avenue is investigating the potential for developing vaccines specifically targeting TBEV transmission through breast milk. This could involve the development of vaccines that can induce local immune responses within the mammary gland tissue. These vaccines aim to prevent viral entry and replication by targeting the mammary gland, ultimately reducing the risk of TBEV transmission through breast milk. Further research is needed to explore the feasibility and effectiveness of such vaccines, including preclinical and clinical studies [17,1,33].Antiviral therapies: Another potential intervention to consider is exploring the efficacy of antiviral therapies in reducing viral load and inhibiting TBEV replication in breast milk. Identifying effective antiviral agents that can be safely administered to lactating mothers may provide an additional tool for reducing the risk of TBEV transmission. Research should focus on assessing the safety, efficacy, and optimal dosage of antiviral therapies, specifically in lactating women, and their impact on TBEV transmission through breast milk [32,33].Maternal immunization: Further evaluating the safety and efficacy of TBEV vaccination in lactating mothers can have dual benefits of preventing both maternal and infant TBEV infections. Investigating the immune response elicited by vaccination in lactating mothers is crucial, including the transfer of vaccine-induced antibodies to breast milk. This research can provide valuable insights into the potential of maternal immunization as a preventive strategy to reduce the risk of TBEV transmission through breast milk. Large-scale studies and clinical trials are needed to assess the safety, immunogenicity, and long-term protection conferred by TBEV vaccines in lactating mothers and their infants [29,36].Potential Interventions to Reduce the Risk of TBEV Transmission From Mothers to InfantsTo reduce the risk of TBEV transmission from mothers to infants, potential interventions can be explored, including the following:Public health education: Increasing awareness among healthcare providers and the general public about the transmission of TBEV through breastfeeding is crucial. This includes educating individuals about the associated risks and preventive strategies. By promoting knowledge and understanding of TBEV transmission through breast milk, informed decision-making and appropriate counseling can be facilitated for lactating mothers. This, in turn, can help individuals make informed choices regarding breastfeeding continuation, temporary cessation, or alternative feeding options.Improved diagnostic techniques: Developing sensitive and specific diagnostic techniques for detecting TBEV in breast milk samples is essential. These diagnostic methods should allow for the early identification of infected individuals, enabling timely interventions and appropriate management. The advancement of accurate and reliable diagnostic tools can significantly contribute to detecting and monitoring TBEV transmission through breast milk.Individual risk assessment: Developing standardized guidelines for individual risk assessment in lactating mothers with suspected or confirmed TBEV infection is crucial. These guidelines can help healthcare providers assess the risk associated with TBEV transmission through breastfeeding on a case-by-case basis. With clear and standardized risk assessment protocols, healthcare providers can make informed decisions regarding breastfeeding continuation, temporary cessation, or alternative feeding options, taking into account the specific circumstances of each individual.Supportive care: Providing comprehensive supportive care for infants infected with TBEV through breast milk is essential. This includes appropriate medical management, neurological monitoring, and rehabilitation services to mitigate the infection's potential complications and long-term effects. By providing specialized care tailored to the unique needs of infants affected by TBEV transmission through breast milk, healthcare providers can optimize outcomes and minimize the impact of the infection.Collaborative research efforts: Promoting collaboration among researchers, healthcare providers, public health agencies, and policymakers is vital in advancing knowledge and addressing the challenges associated with studying TBEV transmission through breast milk. Collaborative research efforts can facilitate data sharing, exchange of best practices, and multicenter studies. By working together, researchers and stakeholders can accelerate the development of effective preventive measures and strategies to reduce the risk of TBEV transmission from mothers to infants through breastfeeding. Such collaborative initiatives can significantly impact public health policies and interventions aimed at mitigating the transmission of TBEV through breast milk.ConclusionsTBEV transmission through breast milk is a topic of growing interest and importance. While the overall risk of TBEV transmission through breastfeeding appears to be low, it is essential to understand the mechanisms, clinical implications, and preventive strategies associated with this transmission mode. Evidence suggests that TBEV can be present in breast milk, and there have been documented TBEV transmission from mothers to infants through breastfeeding. However, these cases are relatively rare, and the severity of infant clinical outcomes can vary. Further research is needed to address the remaining knowledge gaps, including the epidemiology, transmission mechanisms, viral load dynamics, immune response, and clinical outcomes associated with TBEV transmission through breast milk. Robust epidemiological studies, molecular investigations, and clinical trials are necessary to advance our understanding in these areas. Preventive measures play a crucial role in minimizing the risk of TBEV transmission through breastfeeding. Public health efforts should focus on tick bite prevention, vaccination programs, surveillance, and early detection of TBEV cases. Individual risk assessment, education, screening, and testing of lactating mothers can aid in informed decision-making regarding breastfeeding continuation or alternative feeding options.


Title: Exploring the Susceptibility of C3H Mice to Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus Infection: Implications for Co-Infection Models and Understanding of the Disease

1. IntroductionTicks and tick-borne diseases (TBDs) are currently a growing One Health issue [1]. Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE), one of the most dangerous neuro infections, has become an increasingly significant public health concern in Europe and other parts of the world [2,3]. It is caused by the tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), a member of the Flavivirus genus (Flaviviridae family). The fatality rate varies between TBEV subtypes: 1% to 2% for the European subtype (TBEV-Eu), 6% to 8% for the Siberian subtype (TBEV-Sib), and 20% to 30% for the far-eastern subtype (TBEV-FE) [4].TBEV mainly spreads between ticks and certain animals like deer and small rodents. Although it occasionally infects large animals like sheep, cattle, and humans, they are accidental hosts, and the virus remains in their blood only briefly, with low or undetectable levels. Consequently, these large animals do not effectively transmit the virus [5]. In Europe, small rodents such as the bank vole (Myodes glareolus) and yellow-necked mouse (Apodemus flavicollis) play a crucial role as a bridge host for the virus between the different life stages of the tick through a process known as co-feeding. Ticks can also become infected by feeding on rodents with the virus in their bloodstream (viremic hosts). However, the primary route of infection in the ecosystem is believed to be tick co-feeding on non-viremic or immune rodents, particularly for the European subtype of the virus (TBEV-Eur) [6].The transmission of TBEV-Eu to humans occurs through the bite of an infected tick, Ixodes ricinus [4]. Following a tick bite, the skin becomes the primary site of viral replication. Various cell types such as Langerhans cells, keratinocytes, dermal macrophages, and neutrophils recruited during the inflammatory response to the tick bite [7] are responsible for carrying the viral particles to nearby lymph nodes. The virus replicates in the lymph nodes, leading to its dissemination into the bloodstream, causing viremia. The virus can then infect peripheral tissues like the spleen, liver, and bone marrow through the lymphatic and circulatory systems. During this stage, the virus crosses the blood–brain barrier and infects the brain. However, the exact mechanism of this process remains unclear. Fortunately, most infected patients can eliminate the virus through immune mechanisms, primarily involving cytotoxic lymphocytes [4,8].The biphasic nature of TBE arises from the virus initially spreading in peripheral tissues, triggering a cytokine response. In some instances, the virus penetrates the central nervous system (CNS), leading to the establishment of a second neurological phase of the disease. After an incubation period of 7–10 days, about 70% of patients experience non-specific flu-like symptoms during the viremic phase [9]. However, in 20–30% of cases, the neurological phase can manifest as meningitis, meningoencephalitis, or meningoencephalomyelitis in approximately 50%, 40%, and 10% of patients, respectively [10].Laboratory animals have played a crucial role in enhancing our comprehension of the pathogenesis of TBDs. Mice are commonly used as animal models for flavivirus encephalitis, primarily because laboratory strains are highly susceptible to the disease and exhibit symptoms and viral infection patterns similar to those of humans [11]. IFNAR−/− and BALB/c mice are often employed as models for TBEV infection due to their high susceptibility to the virus. IFNAR−/− mice are particularly vulnerable and typically do not survive beyond 6 days post infection, while BALB/c mice generally survive for 11 days before succumbing to the virus [12,13]. Conversely, the use of C3H/HeN (C3H) mice to study TBEV infection has not been described to our knowledge, although they have been used to study other tick-borne pathogens (TBPs). Indeed, C3H mice are highly susceptible to Borrelia infection and tend to develop Lyme arthritis, unlike BALB/c mice [14,15]. Therefore, C3H mice are commonly used to study B. burgdorferi sensu stricto (s.s.) and other TBPs such as Anaplasma phagocytophilum or Babesia microti in addition to co-infection between TBPs or transmission of TBPs by Ixodes scapularis ticks [15,16,17].Thus, our study was designed to assess the susceptibility of C3H mice to TBEV infection in order to establish a new co-infection model in the future with TBEV and B. afzelii, and explore interactions between different pathogens in co-infected mice and ticks.Two separate experiments were conducted using C3H mice. In the first experiment, the aim was to (i) identify the optimal dose (PFU/mouse) of TBEV to administer to mice subcutaneously in order to detect the virus in blood samples at different time points and (ii) confirm that this dose could effectively infect the brains of infected mice. Based on the results of this first experiment, a second one was conducted to (i) establish the optimal infectious dose necessary to induce TBEV symptoms in mice, assess virus distribution in the blood, and measure the amount in the organs, and finally, (ii) determine the ability of ticks to acquire TBEV from infected mice and maintain the virus after molting.2. Materials and MethodsTwo distinct experiments entailing the infection of C3H mice with TBEV were performed. In each experiment, our objective was twofold: (i) to determine the optimal dose for detecting TBEV from blood samples collected on different days, and (ii) to ensure that this optimal dose could successfully infect the brains of susceptible mice in the related group (definitive proof of infection with TBEV of susceptible mice). In the second experiment, our objectives were to (i) establish the optimal infectious dose needed to induce TBEV symptoms in mice, assess virus distribution in the blood, and measure the amount in the organs, and finally, (ii) determine the ability of ticks to acquire TBEV from infected mice and maintain the virus after molting.2.1. Experimental designThe experimental design of this study is presented in Figure 1.In the first experiment, after one week of acclimatization, three groups of mice (n = 5 in each group) were inoculated subcutaneously with 100 μL of a viral suspension (first viral production) corresponding to 1, 10, and 102 PFU/mouse, respectively, while five control mice were inoculated with 100 μL of Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM). Symptoms were recorded every day for 11 days.Blood samples (30 µL) were collected from each mouse on days 0, 4, 6, 8, and 11. Brains were collected following death related to TBEV or 11 days post infection when mice still alive were sacrificed. All samples were stored at −80 °C until further use.In the second experiment, twelve six-week-old mice (seven mice for 102 PFU and five mice for 103 PFU) were infected with TBEV (second viral production) through subcutaneous inoculation with 100 μL of the virus at two different dilutions (102 PFU/mouse, 103 PFU/mouse), while two additional mice were used as a negative control, being inoculated with 100 μL of DMEM. Blood samples (30 µL) were collected on days 0, 4, 11, and 15 in all mice.Symptoms and death were recorded for each mouse for 15 days. Some of the mice had to be euthanized before the endpoint due to severe clinical signs of distress due to TBE, and their organs were collected. The remaining live mice were sacrificed on day 15 post infection and different organs (brain, spleen, heart, kidney, liver, lung) were then collected. The samples were stored at −80 °C until further use.For eleven mice (six mice for 102 PFU, four for 103 PFU, and one mouse as a negative control), naive larvae (n = 100) were placed in a capsule system on the back of each mouse at different time points (days 4, 5, 6 or 8), to feed until repletion (maximum 3 days of feeding) as described in Migné et al. [18]. Once fully engorged, the larvae were placed in a desiccator for storage. On the same day, 20 engorged larvae from the TBEV groups and 10 engorged larvae from the negative group were sacrificed and conserved at −80 °C until further use. The remaining ticks were put back in the desiccator until molting. After the molt (around one month later), 30 nymphs from the 102 PFU group and 20 nymphs from the 103 PFU group were sacrificed and conserved at −80 °C until further use.2.2. MiceSix-week-old female C3H/HeN mice were obtained from Charles River Laboratories (Calco, Italy). For the first experiment, the mice were in a group of five. In the second experiment, a group of two mice was used as the negative control, while seven mice were infected with 102 PFU per mouse, and a group of five mice were infected with 103 PFU. When infested with ticks, the mice were kept individually in plastic cages with wood-chip bedding, fed ad libitum, and kept in standardized conditions (21 °C, 12:12 light/dark cycle) at the animal facilities. The present research was conducted in compliance with all relevant European Union guidelines for work with animals and with the French national legislation on the use of animals for experimentation and protection against cruelty. Experimental protocols were approved by the ANSES-ENVA-UPEC Ethics Committee for Animal Experimentation (Approval Number: APAFIS#31496-2021051213296446 v3, 18 June 2021).2.3. TicksI. ricinus larval ticks were derived from the 1st generation of ticks collected in the Senart Forest (Épinay-sous-Sénart, France). Female ticks were tested for TBEV RNA after laying eggs to ensure that they did not carry the virus before being used in the experiment. The ticks were maintained in the laboratory at a temperature of 21 °C with 95% humidity in a desiccator and exposed to a 12 h light/12 h dark photoperiod. Experimental protocols for the tick colony were approved by the ANSES-ENVA-UPEC Ethics Committee for Animal Experimentation (Approval Number: APAFIS #35511-2022022111197802 v2, 14 April 2021).2.4. VirusMice were infected with TBEV strain Hypr. This strain, known to be highly neuroinvasive and neurovirulent for laboratory mice, was isolated from human blood in the Czech Republic in 1953 [19]. TBEV Hypr was passaged four times in suckling mice brains and twice in Vero E6 cells before being used in the experiments. Two different viral productions were used in the experiment. The first one had a titer of 2.3 × 106 PFU/mL, while the second had a titer of 5 × 106 PFU/mL.2.5. RNA ExtractionRNA was extracted from each blood sample (30 µL) using the NucleoSpin® RNA extract II kit (Macherey Nagel, Düren, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA samples were eluted in 40 µL of RNase-free water and stored at −80 °C until further use.Before extracting RNA from each organ (½ brain, ½ spleen, ½ heart, 1 kidney, ½ liver, ¼ lung), they were individually homogenized in 500 μL of DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) using the homogenizer Fast Prep-24 5G (MP Biomedicals, Irvine, CA, USA) with six stainless steel beads. The homogenization was performed with three cycles at 5500× rpm for 20 s and centrifuged for 5 min at 1500× g to ensure that the organs were thoroughly disrupted and mixed with the medium. RNA was then extracted from 250 µL of the supernatant using the NucleoSpin® RNA extract II kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA samples were eluted in 40 µL of RNase-free water and stored at −80 °C until further use.Ticks were homogenized individually in 350 µL of lysis buffer along with 3.5 µL of β-mercaptoethanol. The homogenization process was carried out using the same homogenizer Fast Prep-24 5G (MP Biomedicals, USA) with six stainless steel beads for two cycles at 5500× rpm for 20 s. After homogenization, the samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 1500× g. RNA was then extracted from the supernatant, eluted in 30 µL of RNase-free water, and stored at − 80 °C until further use.2.6. Real-Time RT-PCRThe real-time RT-PCR was performed using the LightCycler® 480 RNA Master Hydrolysis Probes kit (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions.For the experiment, a 20 µL reaction volume was used for the RT-PCR mix. This was obtained by combining 7.4 µL of LightCycler® 480 RNA Master Hydrolysis Probes, 8.05 µL of water, 1.3 µL of activator, 0.5 µL of primers, and 0.25 µL of probes to target TBEV, and 2 µL of RNA template.The following primers and probe were used: TBE_euro_F: TCC TTG AGC TTG ACA AGA CAG (final concentration: 0.5 µM), TBE_Euro_R: TGT TTC CAT GGC AGA GCC AG (final concentration: 0.5 µM), and TBE_Euro_P: TGG AAC ACC TTC CAA CGG CTT GGC A (final concentration: 0.25 µM) [20]. The real-time RT-PCR parameters consisted of a reverse transcription cycle at 63 °C for 3 min, followed by a denaturation cycle at 95 °C for 30 s; 45 successive cycles at 95 °C for 10 s, 60 °C for 30 s, and 72 °C for 1 s; and a final step of cooling at 40 °C for 30 s.2.7. Reverse Transcription (RT) and cDNA PreamplificationThe cDNA from mice organs was prepared using the Reverse Transcription Master Mix (Standard Biotools, San Francisco, CA, USA) and then pre-amplified using the Preamp Master Mix (Standard Biotools, San Francisco, CA, USA) as per the manufacturer’s instructions.For the Reverse Transcription Master Mix, a 5× master mix was used, which included 1 µL of Reverse Transcription Master Mix, 3 µL of RNase-free water, and 1 µL of RNA. The reverse transcription process involved a thermocycler with cycles at 25 °C (5 min), 42 °C (30 min), and 85 °C (5 min). After the cDNA samples were obtained, they were either stored at −20 °C or used immediately for preamplification reactions using the Preamp Master Mix Kit. In the preamplification step, primers targeting TBEV had a final concentration of 0.2 μM each. The preamplification reactions were conducted in a final volume of 5 μL, comprising 1 µL of Preamp Master Mix, 1.25 μL of the pooled primer mixture, 1.5 µL of distilled water, and 1.25 μL of cDNA.The PCR run conditions involved an initial cycle at 95 °C (2 min), followed by 14 amplification cycles at 95 °C (15 s) and 60 °C (4 min). Finally, the pre-amplified products were diluted with various dilutions (1:2, 1:5, 1:100, 1:500, 1:1000) using distilled water and kept at −20 °C for future use.2.8. Digital PCR on the BiomarkTM System Digital PCR (dPCR) is a technique that divides a single sample into multiple individual PCR reactions. In this study, dPCR amplifications were conducted on mice organs using the BiomarkTM System with qdPCR 37k IFC digital array microfluidic chips (Standard Biotools, San Francisco, CA, USA). The BiomarkTM Integrated Fluidic Circuit (IFC) controller utilized nanoscale valves and channels to partition each of the 48 samples, pre-mixed with PCR reagents, into a panel of 770 PCR reaction chambers, resulting in a total of 36,960 individual qdPCR reactions on the digital array. The number of target molecules in each sample was accurately estimated by counting the positive reactions, based on the Poisson distribution [21].Each reaction mixture consisted of a total volume of 6 µL comprising 3 µL of 2× Perfecta qPCR tough mix along with ROX reference dye from Standard Biotools, 0.6 µL of 20× GE Sample Loading Reagent also from Standard Biotools, 0.3 µL of 20× primer stock containing 100 μM concentration each of forward and reverse primers, 20 μM of TBEV probe, and 1.8 µL of pre-amplified cDNA sample. The experiments included positive controls containing cDNA extracted from a virus suspension and negative controls containing water.Out of the 6 µL of reaction mix, 4 µL was used in loading the chip with the IFC controller MX, and 0.65 µL was actually partitioned into the 770 chambers of one panel, including 0.38 µL of cDNA extract. The dPCR program consisted of 2 min at 50 °C, 10 min at 95 °C, and then 40 cycles during which the samples were subjected to 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 60 s. Fluorescence was recorded by the apparatus at the end of each elongation step (1 min at 65 °C) for every amplification cycle. The Digital PCR Analysis software, a component of the Biomark system (Standard Biotools), was used to count the number of positive chambers out of the total number of chambers per panel. The Poisson distribution was used to estimate the average number of template copies per chamber in a panel. Each sample was characterized by its corresponding absolute quantity, and no positive chambers were observed in negative samples.3. Results3.1. Susceptibility of C3H Mice to TBEVWe attempted to evaluate the susceptibility of C3H mice to TBEV (strain Hypr).In the first experiment, three different doses of TBEV were inoculated subcutaneously into batches of five mice.To examine the presence of TBEV in the mice, we detected viral RNA from blood samples (D0, D4, D6, D8, D11) and from the brain. In the TBEV groups infected with 1 PFU and 10 PFU, viral RNA was observed in the blood of only four out of five mice on days 4, 6, and 8 post infection (p.i.).Additionally, in both groups, one mouse remained negative for TBEV at all the different blood collection time points. Viral RNA was detected in the blood of all five mice infected with TBEV 102 PFU on days 6 and 8 p.i. By day 11 p.i., viral RNA was found in the blood of all four remaining mice, as one mouse had already died on day 8. Conversely, on day 4 p.i., viral RNA was only detected in the blood of four mice (Table 1).Among the mice infected with 1 PFU of TBEV, two mice succumbed on day 11 p.i. In the TBEV group infected with 10 PFU, one mouse died on day 10 p.i. and another on day 11 p.i. However, in the TBEV group infected with 102 PFU, only one mouse died, on day 8 p.i.The presence of TBEV RNA in the brains of the mice was detected through real-time RT-PCR. TBEV RNA was detected in the brains of all five mice that received 102 PFU, whereas TBEV was detected only in four out of five brains from mice inoculated with 1 PFU and 10 PFU (Table 2).Once it was established that the optimal dose for achieving a 100% infection rate in mice was 102 PFU (100% positive brains and 100% positive blood), we conducted a second experiment. This experiment was designed to evaluate: (i) the clinical symptoms, (ii) the dissemination of the virus in the blood and its quantification in different organs, and (iii) the ability of I. ricinus ticks to acquire the virus during blood meals. This assessment involved testing two doses: 102 PFU and 103 PFU using C3H mice.A characteristic dose–response curve was observed for TBEV-infected mice with 102 and 103 PFU. Infected mice began to exhibit TBEV symptoms between 8 and 14 days p.i. Symptoms in both groups included ruffled fur, a hunched posture, and paralysis.We observed that the abdomens of three out of seven mice infected with 102 PFU and four out of five infected with 103 PFU became swollen before the mice became moribund and were euthanized.All of the mice (5/5) in the TBEV 103 PFU group died between 10 and 13 days post infection. Similarly, in the TBEV 102 PFU group, six out of seven mice died within a time frame of 10 to 12 days p.i. (Figure 2). Nevertheless, in this group, one mouse remained asymptomatic and survived without succumbing to the infection.To investigate viral RNA in the mice, we collected blood samples at various time points and detected the virus using real-time RT-PCR.On days 4 and 11 p.i., all blood samples from mice inoculated with 103 PFU tested positive for TBEV RNA. In contrast, among the mice in the 102 PFU group, one out of seven showed negative results for virus detection in their blood at different time points (Table 3).Among the mice inoculated with 103 PFU, all five tested positive for viral RNA in their brains (100%). In contrast, in the group inoculated with 102 PFU, the percentage of brains infected was 85% (6/7). In this group, only one mouse tested negative for viral RNA in the brain, the same one that tested negative in the blood, too.The brain had the highest TBEV RNA levels in both groups, with around 1.8 × 106 copies/µL (102 PFU group) and 1.3 × 106 copies/µL (103 PFU group). The heart showed medium levels—about 1.3 × 105 copies/µL (103 PFU group) and 2.5 × 105 copies/µL (102 PFU group)—while the lungs had similar levels at approximately 1.4 × 105 copies/µL (103 PFU group) and 2 × 105 copies/µL (102 PFU group). In contrast, the liver, kidney, and spleen had lower TBEV RNA levels ranging, from 1.4 × 103 to 3.6 × 103 copies/µL in the 103 PFU group and from 5.9 × 102 to 6.3 × 102 copies/µL in the 102 PFU group (Figure 3).However, no significant differences were observed between the two different doses used regardless of the organs tested.3.2. TBEV Acquisition by Naive Larvae from Infected MiceIn the latter phase of the second experiment, we placed naive larvae (n = 100 per mouse; 2 mice per group) at different time points (days 5, 6, or 8 in the 102 PFU group; days 4 or 5 in the 103 PFU group; day 4 in the negative control group) to evaluate their ability to: (1) acquire the virus and (2) conserve the virus after molting (i.e., transstadial transmission).Viral RNA was detected in engorged larvae and nymphs (after molting) through real-time RT-PCR. In the group of mice inoculated with 102 PFU, viral RNA was detected in 25% (5/20) of engorged larvae placed on mice on day 5 p.i., in 10% (2/20) for the ones placed on day 6, and not detected (0% (0/20)) for the one placed on day 8 p.i. Conversely, in the group of mice inoculated with 103 PFU, viral RNA was detected in 10% of engorged larvae (2/20) placed on mice on day 4 and in 35% (7/20) in the ones placed on day 5 p.i. For all groups, engorged larvae that tested positive exhibited a late CT value. None of the nymphs tested after molting were positive, so no transstadial transmission from infected engorged larvae to nymphs after molting could be evidenced (Table 4).4. DiscussionOur study was designed to assess the susceptibility of C3H mice to TBEV infection, to define the minimal infectious dose needed for reproducible results, to assess symptoms and targeted organs following TBEV infection, and finally, to assess the acquisition of TBEV by ticks during blood meals. We have demonstrated that C3H mice are susceptible to TBEV infection through subcutaneous inoculation, with paralysis and death occurring between 10 and 13 days post infection. Moreover, even if a minimum dose of 102 PFU/mouse seems necessary to induce 100% infected mice (100% infected blood and brain), 103 PFU/mice seems to be the optimal dose to obtain reproducible symptoms in mice and to infect engorged I. ricinus larvae. Finally, both the doses of 102 and 103 PFU/mice induce infection of all the tested organs (brain, heart, lung, liver, kidney, spleen), with the brain, heart, and lungs containing the highest amount of viral RNA in both cases. Nevertheless, it is important to note that we did not backtitrate the virus inocula. So, we could not be sure that the results obtained in groups with a very low virus dose were not due to an incorrect estimation of the number of PFUs per inocula. To avoid this situation, backtitration of the inocula should be performed in future experiments.IFNAR-deficient (IFNAR−/−) and BALB/c mice are often employed as models for studying TBEV infection due to their high susceptibility to the virus. BALB/c mice are subjected to subcutaneous infection with a dose of 103 PFU, while IFNAR−/− mice undergo intraperitoneal infection with a dose of 104 PFU. Both of these doses result in a 100% mortality rate.IFNAR−/− mice are particularly vulnerable and typically do not survive beyond 6 days post infection, while BALB/c mice generally survive for 11 days before succumbing to the virus [14,15].However, the use of C3H/HeN (C3H) mice to study TBEV infection had not previously been described to our knowledge, even though they have been used for research on other TBPs. Indeed, C3H mice are highly susceptible to Borrelia infection and tend to develop Lyme arthritis, unlike BALB/c mice [14,15]. Therefore, C3H mice are commonly used to study B. burgdorferi s.s., other TBPs, co-infection between Borrelia and Anaplasma and the acquisition of these pathogens by I. scapularis ticks [15,16,17]. Thus, the fact that this study has been able to demonstrate the susceptibility of C3H mice to TBEV means that they constitute a new model of major interest for the study of TBP interactions.Interestingly, during our first experiment, we noted that a few mice that received a low infectious dose (1 or 10 PFU) died earlier than those receiving a higher dose (102 PFU). In fact, it has been acknowledged since the 1940s that mortality is not dependent on the dose of encephalitic flaviviruses [22,23], yet the reason remains unknown. Several factors can affect the severity of TBE, including but not limited to the amount of virus introduced into the body and its virulence [24], the host’s age and immune condition [25], as well as the host’s genetic background, which may affect susceptibility to the virus. Thus, CNS invasion by the virus is not the only factor that determines whether the mice will die or not.Moreover, during our second experiment, after subcutaneously infecting C3H mice with 102 and 103 PFU, three out of seven mice infected with 102 PFU and four out of five infected with 103 PFU showed abdominal distension. These alterations of the gastrointestinal system were consistent with the study conducted by Boelke et al. on BALB/c mice intravenously infected with the Sofjin strain of TBEV, using doses ranging from 10 to 103 PFU. The study demonstrated that the distention of the small intestine was caused by peripheral neuritis resulting from infection of the myenteric plexus, which is part of the enteric nervous system [2]. Contrary to CNS symptoms frequently observed in TBEV infections, reports of gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms are infrequent in humans. Versace et al. reported a case of a man infected with TBEV and suffering from encephalomyeloradiculitis who experienced significant intestinal motility problems resembling those associated with bowel obstruction [26]. Therefore, this animal model may mimic what happens in humans with TBEV infection.The quantification of viral RNA using digital PCR following RT and preamplification steps in this study demonstrated the high amount of virus (106 copies/µL) in the brains of mice infected with both 102 and 103 PFU, confirming the virus’s preference for the CNS. All other organs tested positive with high doses in the heart and lungs. Due to the tropism of the virus for the CNS, BALB/c and C57Bl/6 mice strains have become useful models to study the neuro pathogenicity and immune response of different strains of TBEV. According to our results, C3H mice could also play this role in such contexts [27,28,29]. Even if laboratory mice models are not a natural host of TBEV, they appear to mimic quite efficiently what happens in nature, as similar results have been found in Microtus arvalis (M. arvalis) infected subcutaneously with 103 PFU of TBEV-Hypr. The same quantity of virus (106 genome copies per mg of organ) was found in the brains of voles at 5 days p.i., and the researchers observed varying amounts of TBEV in the voles’ hearts, livers, spleens, and kidneys, suggesting that these organs were less affected [5]. However, it is important to consider that these wild animals have different genetic backgrounds than laboratory animals, which may influence the outcomes of the infection.Finally, in our study, we observed that only a few engorged larvae were found positive via real-time PCR but there was no transstadial transmission from infected engorged larvae to nymphs after molting. The first hypothesis of this failure is that RNA copies of TBEV could be below the detection threshold in our infected ticks. Indeed, positive engorged larvae presented late Ct values, so maybe the small quantity of viral RNA in nymphs could not be detected. To test this hypothesis, we could homogenize nymphs and then inoculate this homogenate into newborn mice intracranially, potentially allowing us to detect even a few particles of viral RNA [21].A second explanation could be that the tested infectious doses were insufficient to generate a significant viremia level in mice blood and thus did not allow the tick to acquire the virus during their blood meal. In nature, a specific study estimated the viral load in the blood of rodents in Russia: TBEV-FE RNA was measured at 2.4 × 105 copies/mL, while TBEV-Sib RNA was observed at 2.4 × 102 copies/mL [30], so we could hypothesize that such an amount is probably the approximate dose needed to infect ticks in their natural environment. Our study quantified 103 copies/µL in mouse blood. Moreover, Belova et al. achieved successful infection of ticks by employing two strains of TBEV (Siberian and European subtypes). They infected mice with higher doses of the virus (105.8 and 107 PFU/mice) and obtained positive PCR results for TBEV detection by pooling three engorged larvae and nymphs. Another notable difference in their approach was the analysis of ticks at various time intervals after feeding on mice, considering the potential physiological state of the ticks during the assessment of infection rates [31].Additionally, several artificial infection techniques have been developed and implemented to infect hard ticks with pathogens. For example, Migné et al. were able to infect 70% of engorged larvae with TBEV using 105 PFU/mL in an artificial membrane feeding system [18]. The advantage of their system lies in the fact that we can directly control the concentration of pathogens in the blood that ticks consume [32]. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, there is no study that has evaluated the minimal infection dose of TBEV in mouse blood (PFU, or viral RNA copies) that allows the acquisition and infection of ticks with TBEV. This type of study is needed.In summary, we demonstrated that C3H mice are susceptible to TBEV infection with a minimal dose of 102 PFU, and that a dose of 103 is optimal to obtain infected I. ricinus ticks, but is probably not sufficient to allow transstadial transmission of the virus from engorged larvae to nymphs (after molting). Additional investigations using this strain of mice with a higher dose of the virus so that ticks become infected are needed to gain a better understanding of ticks’ acquisition of the virus in this particular model. While infecting mice with a higher dose is a possibility, it is crucial to consider the potential exacerbation of TBEV symptoms and mortality in mice, as such a protocol may deviate significantly from natural conditions.5. ConclusionsThis study has proven that C3H mice are susceptible to TBEV infection. As these mice are a good model for tick-borne pathogen infection, studies of co-infection with TBEV and other tick-borne bacteria such as Borrelia spp. are now possible. A better understanding of the interplay between TBEV and Borrelia could be gained by studying the effects of the immune response and the severity of both diseases in C3H mice. Future investigations should focus on assessing the success of these pathogens in their transmission from co-infected mice to non-infected ticks, as well as from co-infected ticks to non-infected mice. This research would contribute to our knowledge of the impacts of co-infection on disease dynamics and potentially aid in the development of more effective prevention and control strategies.


Title: The Vector Competence of Asian Longhorned Ticks in Langat Virus Transmission

1. IntroductionTicks are important hematophagous arthropods and transmit a variety of pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and parasites. In recent years, the emergence and re-emergence of infectious tick-borne viral diseases have posed considerable challenges to both animal and human health, as well as social economics [1,2]. For instance, severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) was initially identified in rural China in 2009, and later reported in Japan and Korea in 2012 [3,4]. The SFTS disease can result in a severe hemorrhagic fever, leukopenia, encephalitis, and multiple organ failure in severe cases, with a mortality rate of 12–50% [5]. Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE), caused by the tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), a tick-borne flavivirus (TBFV), is prevalent in Europe and Asia, with around 11,000 human cases reported per year, mostly in Russia [6,7]. The morbidity and mortality of TBE depends on the viral subtype. Although infection with any subtype is serious, Far Eastern TBEV (TBEV-FE) infection is particularly severe, with a mortality rate of 40% [8]. Other TBFVs include Powassan virus (POWV), Omsk hemorrhagic fever virus (OHFV), and Kyasanur Forest disease virus (KFDV), which also pose threats on human health [9]. For most tick-borne viral diseases, there are currently no specific pharmacological interventions available [7,10]. Therefore, it is crucial to enhance our understanding of viral infection and transmission in both the hosts and tick vectors. However, research on this topic is limited due to the requirement of high-security facilities for most tick-borne viruses.Langat virus (LGTV), a TBFV, is considered a nonpathogenic or low-pathogenic tick-borne flavivirus for humans. This naturally attenuated LGTV is genetically and antigenically closely related to TBEV, making it a suitable biosafety level two model for TBEV infections [11,12]. Consequently, LGTV has been employed as a surrogate for TBEV in research. While previous studies on LGTV have primarily relied on mouse models [12,13] and mammalian cell lines [11,14,15,16,17], the mechanisms governing LGTV maintenance and transmission in ticks have remained elusive.In this study, H. longicornis serve as a competent vector for LGTV. Once invading midgut cells, LGTV quickly disseminates to salivary glands and the synganglion. Notably, LGTV is sustained in various developmental stages through transstadial transmission, although we do not see any evidence of vertical transmission. Furthermore, LGTV exhibits the ability to transmit between mice and ticks reciprocally through blood feeding. Importantly, LGTV can spread to the adjacent uninfected ticks during co-feeding on the same mouse, suggesting that H. longicornis could also serve as a reservoir for this virus. Altogether, these findings offer valuable insights into transmission within ticks and may shed light on the replication and transmission mechanisms of other tick-borne flaviviruses in tick vectors.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Tick MaintenanceH. longicornis (parthenogenesis strain) originally from Yunnan Province, China, were maintained in the insectary at Fudan University at 25 °C with 85% relative humidity and a 12 h/12 h light/dark photoperiod. Each stage of H. longicornis was sustained by feeding them on eight-week-old male BALB/C mice (purchased from JSJ in Shanghai, China) [18].2.2. Cell Culture and Virus AmplificationBHK-21 cells (a gift from professor Zhenhua Zheng, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). The cells were maintained at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator [19]. The LGTV TP21 strain utilized in this study was also kindly provided by professor Zhenhua Zheng. Virus amplification was carried out in BHK-21 cells via infecting them at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1. Supernatants were collected when cell mortality reached 70% [14,20]. The virus stock was aliquoted and stored at −80 °C.2.3. Plaque AssaysThe LGTV titer was determined using the standard plaque assay on BHK-21 cells. Adult ticks were homogenized in PBS containing 1% penicillin-streptomycin (PS), and the supernatant was used for the plaque assay. Briefly, BHK-21 cells were seeded in a 6-well plate at a density of 1.5 × 105 cells/mL and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Once the cells reached 90% confluence, they were washed with PBS, and a serial dilution of tick supernatant or viruses was added to infect the cells. After a 2 h incubation at 37 °C, unabsorbed viruses were removed via washing with PBS. The infected cells were overlaid with 0.5% agarose in 2 × MEM containing 2% FBS, followed by incubation at 37 °C for 4 days. After this incubation period, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) at 4 °C overnight. Then, the agarose was removed and the fixed cells were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue. The virus titer was calculated as plaque forming units (PFU)/mL [21].2.4. Tick InfectionTicks were infected with LGTV through two microinjections methods, hemolymph microinjection and anal pore microinjection [18,19], as well as via feeding on LGTV-infected mice. For microinjection, 15 nL or 400 nL 1 × 107 pfu/mL LGTV was injected into nymph and adult ticks, respectively. Equal volumes of DMEM medium-injected ticks were used as controls. After injection, ticks were placed in a breathable jar with wet tissue [22]. To acquire LGTV through blood feeding, approximately two-month-old larvae and nymphs were allowed to feed on LGTV-infected mice until fully engorged.2.5. Mice InfectionC57BL/6 mice deficient in the type I interferon (IFN) receptor (A6 mice), kindly provided by professor Yang Li (Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China), were maintained in the SPF level of Fudan University. Six-to-twelve-week-old A6 mice were used for virus transmission assays. A6 mice were intraperitoneally (i.p.) administered with 100 uL of virus suspension containing 10 pfu LGTV [23]. A6 mice that received an equivalent volume of DMEM were used as controls. Nymphs were allowed to bite infected A6 mice 3 hpi. All animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the Experimental Animal Welfare and Ethics Committee of Fudan University.2.6. RNA Extraction and Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR)For RNA extraction, whole ticks and various tissues, including midguts, salivary glands, synganglion, ovaries, and A6 mouse blood, were collected at indicated time points. Three nymphs or tissues, such as three salivary glands, midgut, synganglion, and ovaries, and fifty larvae or one adult tick were pooled for one biological sample, respectively [18]. RNA was isolated using the Trizol Reagent according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Yeasen). cDNA reverse transcription was performed using Hifair® III 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis SuperMix for qPCR according to the protocol (Yeasen). LGTV membrane-associated glycoprotein precursor (Pre-M) gene-specific primers were used to detect LGTV RNA, as described in [19]. The quantification of preM gene expression was conducted using a standard curve. The H. longicornis actin protein gene-specific primers were used for normalization.2.7. Transstadial Transmission Analysis of LGTVNymphs that had obtained the virus from viremic A6 mice at the larvae stage were allowed to feed on A6 mice. The fully engorged ticks were collected and molted to adult ticks. LGTV RNA was quantified in adults using qPCR, as described above.2.8. Transovarial Transmission Analysis of LGTVThe two-month-old adult ticks were injected with LGTV through the anal pore and were allowed to feed on an BALB/C mice 24 h post injection. Fully engorged ticks were collected and allowed to lay eggs. LGTV presence in larvae was detected using qPCR.2.9. Horizontal Transmission Analysis of LGTVTwo groups of nymphs were pooled together and allowed to feed on the same A6 mice. One group contained 15 two-month-old nymphs injected with 15 nL of 107 pfu/mL LGTV via the anal pore. The other group included an equal number of DMEM-injected nymphs that were free of LGTV. After engorgement, the number of virus-positive ticks was examined using qPCR, and the infection prevalence was calculated.2.10. LGTV Transmission Assay between Ticks and MiceA6 mice infected with 10 pfu LGTV were used to infect nymphs. The fully engorged nymphs were maintained for approximately 14 days until they molted to adults. It would take 28 days for adults to become hungry and ready to take a blood meal (Day 28). The infection status of 28-day-old adults was examined using QPCR and the plaque assay. The remaining infected adult ticks were allowed to feed on A6 mice (one tick per mouse) for three days, and approximately 100 uL blood samples were collected and used for LGTV quantification.2.11. Antibodies and Western BlotThe LGTV Envelope domain EDIII gene was amplified from nymphs’ cDNA and cloned into the pET-28a(+) expression vector [24]. A rabbit polyclonal anti-EDIII antibody was generated against recombinant EDIII protein (rec EDIII) in GL Biochem, Shanghai, China [25]. To determine the specificity of the anti-LGTV antibody, E protein levels were compared between ticks and cells infected with or without LGTV. Mouse anti-β-Actin antibody (1:2000) (Abbkine, Wuhan, China) was used as an internal control.2.12. ImmunohistochemistryMidguts, synganglion, salivary glands, and ovaries were dissected from adult ticks. Tick organs were fixed in 4% PFA and dehydrated. Then, 5 μm thick serial sections were prepared. After deparaffinization and rehydration, slices were blocked with 3% BSA in PBST for 2 h at room temperature, followed by incubation with primary antibodies against LGTV (rabbit polyclonal LGTV-EDIII, 1:300) in 3% BSA at 4 °C overnight. The secondary antibody (Alexa Fluor 546 F(ab’)2 fragment of goat anti-rabbit IgG) was incubated for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. After washing with PBS, the slides were incubated with DAPI for 10 min. Images of sections were obtained using a Nikon positive laser scanning confocal microscope (Nikon, Duesseldorf, Germany) [18].2.13. Statistical AnalysisAll statistical analyses of RT-qPCR data were performed using GraphPad Prism 8 statistical software, with an unpaired Student’s t test with p < 0.05 considered statistically significant. All experiments were conducted at least three times.3. Results3.1. Replication of LGTV in H. longicornisTo determine the capacity of H. longicornis to transmit LGTV, we employed two different microinjection methods: anal pore and hemolymph injection, with 150 pfu LGTV administered to nymphs [26]. LGTV was amplified in baby hamster kidney (BHK21) cells, and titrated using the plaque assay (Figure 1A,B). The viral load was detected in nymphs on days 1, 14, 21, 28, 35, and 42 post injection (dpi). We used the expression level of the LGTV membrane-associated glycoprotein precursor (preM) as an indicator of virus load. Notably, we observed the successful LGTV replication in nymphs using both injection methods (Figure 1C,D). A significant proliferation was detected at 14 dpi and maintained at a relatively high level until 42 dpi (Figure 1C,D). Importantly, no significant mortalities were observed in LGTV-infected nymphs.To stimulate the natural virus acquisition process in ticks, we infected nymphs through blood feeding on LGTV infected mice. Interferon alpha/beta receptor 1-deficient mice (Ifnar1−/−, A6 mice), which lack type I interferon responses, were used [23]. Six-to twelve-week-old A6 mice were intraperitoneally injected with 10 pfu LGTV, and nymphs were allowed to feed on these mice 3 h post injection (hpi). We collected ticks that had been feeding for two days (F2D) when the ticks were in a slow blood feeding phase, and four days (fully engorged) (F4D) (Figure 1E). Remarkably, ticks in both time points exhibited a significantly increasing preM expression, indicating a 100% infection prevalence of LGTV (Figure 1F,G). These findings strongly suggest that H. longicornis are a competent vector for LGTV.3.2. The Tissue Tropism of LGTV in H. longicornisWe next investigated the tissue-specific distribution of LGTV in nymphs and adults using qPCR. The midgut, salivary glands, synganglion, and ovaries were collected from LGTV-infected nymphs and adults, respectively. Significantly higher preM levels were detected in the midgut, salivary glands, and synganglion of ticks at both developmental stages, and the ovaries of adults, compared to controls (Figure 2A–G). To confirm the localization of the virus in these tissues, we detected LGTV in the midgut, salivary glands, synganglion, and ovaries of adults using immunofluorescent staining. A polyclonal antibody against the domain III of envelope protein (E) was generated. The specificity of the anti-E antibody was validated in cells and ticks (Figure S1). Fluorescent signals were detected in the infected midgut, salivary glands, and synganglion of LGTV-infected adult ticks, but not in the ovaries (Figure 2H). The inconsistent results for LGTV in ovaries revealed using qPCR and immunofluorescent staining might be due to the low virus titer in the ovaries. Collectively, these results demonstrate a successful LGTV spread in various tissues of H. longicornis.3.3. Transstadial and Transovarial Transmission of LGTV in H. longicornisTransstadial and transovarial transmission may be crucial for the maintenance of the tick-borne flaviviruses in nature. To determine whether LGTV is maintained in H. longicornis through transstadial transmission, naïve larvae and nymphs were fed on LGTV-infected A6 mice until repletion (Figure 3A). It takes around 14 days for larvae and nymphs to develop into nymphs and adults, respectively. Subsequently, we detected LGTV viral load in these newly molted ticks. LGTV was transmitted to the next tick developmental stage with a 100% success rate (Figure 3B,C).As LGTV was detected in ovaries with low preM RNA levels using qPCR but not via immunofluorescence, we next examined the possibility of LGTV vertical transmission to the next generation. Adult ticks were infected with LGTV via anal pore microinjection, and their larvae were analyzed for LGTV (Figure 3D). We randomly collected six adults on one dpi and examined their infection status. All adults were successfully infected with LGTV, as expected (Figure 3E). However, when the remaining infected adults were allowed to feed on BALB/C mice individually (one adult per mice), the newly molted larvae from these infected mothers showed low detectable viral RNA levels (Figure 3F), no difference compared to the control group. These results suggest that LGTV is maintained in ticks at different developmental stages within the same generation, but did not suggest evidence of spreading across generations.3.4. Transmission of LGTV from H. longicornis to MiceGiven that LGTV can invade tick salivary glands, we next investigated whether this virus was transmitted from ticks to mice during blood feeding. We first examined the infection prevalence of adult ticks that acquired LGTV during their nymphal stage through randomly selecting adults, all of which tested positive for LGTV via qPCR and virus plaque assays (Figure 4A,B). Starved adults were allowed to bite A6 mice in a one-tick-per-mouse manner, and on the third day post-bite, we detected the viral RNA in mouse blood, with five (m3, m10, m17, m18, and m22) of 23 mice showing viremia (Figure 4C). Here we used viremia as the indicator of transmission success in mice, but it is worth noting that in some cases, tick-borne viruses can be transmitted effectively even when the virus is not detectable in the blood [27]. In summary, our results suggest that LGTV can be transmitted to mice through tick biting.3.5. Horizontal Transmission of LGTV among Ticks during Blood FeedingH. longicornis not only serve as vectors but also as reservoirs for various pathogens, including SFTSV, Heartland virus (HRTV), and POWV [28,29]. To investigate whether infected nymphs can transmit the virus to naïve nymphs during blood feeding, we allowed 15 LGTV-infected and 15 uninfected nymphs to feed on the same mice until repletion and the ticks were allowed to molt to adults (Figure 5A). Viremia in mice, fully engorged nymphs, and newly molted adults were determined using qPCR. The mice developed high-titer viremia after being bitten by nymphs (Figure 5B). From the two independent experiments, we found that 78.6% and 96.7% of the total 28 and 30 nymphs were positive for LGTV after co-feeding. After molting, 83.3% and 80.8% of the total 24 and 26 ticks remained infected (Table 1). These results indicate that mice serve as a bridge for LGTV transmission from infected ticks to naïve ones, and infected ticks not only act as vectors, but also function as reservoirs for LGTV.4. DiscussionH. longicornis are a competent vector in China. They transmit several pathogens including SFTSV, POWV, Rickettsia, and Borrelia [30]. LGTV has served as a surrogate for TBEV due to its low pathogenicity. In this study, we established a virus–vector–host transmission model and demonstrated that H. longicornis can be a competent vector of LGTV. Our research revealed LGTV’s infection of multiple tick organs, including midgut, salivary glands, and synganglion. While LGTV can be horizontally transmitted between mice and ticks, no evidence showed successful vertical transmission. Additionally, we identified co-feeding on the same animal as another route for LGTV to spread within the tick population.Developing a suitable “vector–host” model is crucial for studying the acquisition and transmission dynamics of viruses. Arboviral acquisition represents an essential stage in the viral lifecycle. Our findings indicate the successful acquisition of the virus by ticks during blood feeding. In addition, the presence of detectable viral RNA in F2D ticks suggests an early and quick colonization of the virus in ticks. Our results align with previous research demonstrating H. longicornis’ ability to transmit LGTV to susceptible mice [19]. In addition to H. longicornis, Ixodes scapularis can acquire LGTV through biting infected mice [31], highlighting LGTV’s capacity to spread through multiple tick species in nature.The transmission of pathogens from an infected tick to hosts must overcome various tissue barriers, such as the midgut, salivary glands, and ovaries [32]. The midgut serves as the initial site of pathogen contact [33]. After invading the midguts, the pathogen migrates to the salivary glands via the hemolymph, a critical step for successful transmission during blood feeding [34]. Our research demonstrates the presence of LGTV in the midguts and salivary glands of nymphs and adults. In contrast, other tick-borne bacteria, including Borrelia and Bartonella species, mainly reside in the midgut and do not migrate to salivary glands until blood feeding [35,36]. However, the exact timing of LGTV’s transition from the midgut to salivary glands remains unclear.The tick’s central nervous system (CNS), known as the synganglion, plays a pivotal role in synthesizing and releasing signaling molecules that regulate tick behavior and physiology [37]. Our study indicates LGTV’s infection in the synganglion of H. longicornis, consistent with previous findings that LGTVGFP can infect and replicate in synganglion culture ex vivo [38]. However, it remains uncertain whether synganglion infection by LGTV influences tick behavior, a question worthy of future investigation.Transovarial transmission represents a common strategy for tick-borne pathogens to maintain their infection in nature. SFTSV, HRTV, and TBEV are all transmitted from mother to offspring [39,40]. In contrast, our study reveals that although a low level of LGTV was detected in ovaries, no evidence showed vertical transmission was successful in H. longicornis. This suggests that multiple factors influence the LGTV’s transmission success in ovaries.In nature, infected and uninfected arthropod vectors usually feed on animals together. In our study, we show that infected nymphs transmit viruses to naïve nymphs though co-feeding on the same mouse, further highlighting the efficient dissemination capability of ticks. The bitten mouse also exhibits viremia. These results indicate that the infected nymphs not only serve as a vector, but also function as reservoirs for LGTV. In some cases, the infection of hosts by the virus may not play a decisive role in tick–tick horizontal transmission. For instance, uninfected ticks still acquire Thogoto virus from infected ticks through co-feeding on the same guinea pigs, even when the vertebrate host does not develop viremia [41,42]. These findings suggest complex interactions between viruses, ticks, and hosts. Understanding these interactions between ticks and viruses would provide significant opportunities to identify targets for controlling tick-borne viruses and preventing the diseases they cause.5. ConclusionsTick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) is the causative agent of tick-borne encephalitis, a sometime fatal neurotropic infection with no available therapy. Using the low-pathogenic surrogate Langat virus (LGTV), we demonstrate that H. longicornis, the most prevalent tick species in China, can be a competent vector. LGTV rapidly colonizes and disseminates to the salivary glands and synganglion of H. longicornis within two days of blood feeding. It is sustained transstadially, but vertical transmission was not demonstrated. Moreover, LGTV transmits horizontally to adjacent naïve ticks using the mammalian host as a bridge. These findings provide novel insights into flavivirus–tick interactions and transmission mechanisms, enhancing the understanding of TBEV pathogenesis and transmission dynamics with implications for disease control.


Title: Breast Milk as Route of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus Transmission from Mother to Infant

Alimentary outbreaks of tickborne encephalitis (TBE) have been caused by consuming unpasteurized milk from infected goats, sheep, and rarely also from cows (1). Although tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) has been isolated from milk of infected animals (2‒4), interhuman transmission through breast milk has not yet been established (5).At the end of May 2020, a 29-year-old woman had temporal lobe headache, neck stiffness, muscle weakness, and her temperature increased to 38.5°C. Her condition did not improve for 3–4 days, and on May 29, she was admitted to an emergency care facility. At admission, the patient reported having a transient fever 1 week before her admission that lasted several days. Her clinical evaluation led to an initial diagnosis of a neuroinfection.Subsequently, the patient had peripheral paresis develop in the right upper limb and paresthesia in the left hand. On the second day of hospitalization, she had a generalized seizure, low peripheral O2 saturation of 80%, and stupor. Test results for TBEV IgM were positive for serum and cerebrospinal fluid.Before hospitalization, the patient was breast-feeding her 8-month-old infant, including the entire period when she had clinical symptoms. On May 31, when the patient was transferred to an intensive care unit, the infant was admitted to an inpatient care unit because of fever (temperature <40°C) since the previous day. The infant did not show signs of meningeal irritation, and cerebrospinal fluid was negative for TBEV IgM. Therefore, the infant was discharged and started home care on June 4. Tests for detection of the TBEV RNA by reverse transcription PCR were not performed.In the days after discharge, the temperature of the infant increased to 38°C. On June 11, the infant was evaluated in an emergency medical facility because of a low-grade fever and more prominent apathy. However, the infant was not admitted to an in-patient care unit and was discharged because the condition was not considered clinically serious and was thought to represent teething effects. However, on June 25, a serum specimen from the infant was collected at the office of a district pediatrician and tested for TBEV antibody. The test result was positive for TBEV IgM.Cases of TBE in infants have been infrequently reported. However, the increasing number of cases reported more recently from several countries in Europe implies that TBE might be underreported and not exceedingly rare in infants (6). Some of these cases that lack a history of tick bites might have resulted from another route of transmission.Breast-feeding is a probable route of mother-to-child transmission of TBEV because alimentary infections by unpasteurized raw milk and dairy products from infected animals have been confirmed in humans (1‒4), and mother-to-child transmission during breastfeeding has been demonstrated for Zika virus, another flavivirus that can also cross the intestinal barrier in experimental models (7). Depending on the animal species, TBEV is typically present in blood of infected ungulates for 1–5 days and in their milk for 2–8 days (3,4).Conversely, this mode of transmission has not yet been conclusively demonstrated in humans. Thus far, transmission by breast milk has been suggested in a single report of serologically confirmed TBE in a mother and her breast-fed 10-day old newborn from Lithuania (5). We report another probable case of mother-to-infant transmission of TBEV by breast milk that is supported by clinical, epidemiologic, and serologic findings.The incubation period for TBE is usually 7–14 days for tickborne disease but only 3–4 days for alimentary infection (8). These findings are consistent with the observed incubation period in the infant. The mother was hospitalized on May 29, a week after she had a transient fever. The infant had initial clinical signs of TBE on May 30.The family lived in a disease-endemic area of ​​Banská Bystrica, Slovakia, that had the highest rate of TBE illness in this country. According to her husband, the mother consumed dairy products from an animal farm and had a tick bite 1 month before her hospitalization. He also reported lack of tick bites and denied the infant had consumed unpasteurized dairy products. The mother had not been vaccinated against TBE.Vaccination against TBE has showed 99% efficacy (9) and provides short-term protection to newborns and infants through transplacental transfer of antibodies from vaccinated mothers (10). Because vaccination of children is recommended at 1 year of age, only nonpharmaceutical measures are available to prevent TBE in younger children.Although alimentary transmission of TBEV from infected animals to humans by drinking raw milk has been confirmed (1,4‒8), mother-to-child transmission through breast milk has not (2). The case in this study indicates probable transmission of TBEV from an unvaccinated mother to her offspring through breast milk. This mode of transmission, if further confirmed, can have considerable implications for management of breast-feeding in unvaccinated mothers after tick bites in TBEV-endemic areas.


Title: Assessing systemic and non-systemic transmission risk of tick-borne encephalitis virus in Hungary

IntroductionTick-borne encephalitis (TBE), an arboviral infection of the central nervous system caused by bites from infected ticks, has been a major public health concern for much of Central Europe. In certain parts of Central Europe (e.g. in the Czech Republic) the occurrence of TBE is increasing since climate change pushes the vector to the higher altitudes [1, 2]. The risk of human infection depends on the prevalence of the virus spread in the tick-host ecological cycle, and on the tick-human contact that is effective for the disease transmission. Evaluating the human infection needs accurate estimation of the tick population dynamics which is highly regulated by the environmental and climatic conditions [3–8]; the effectiveness of pathogen transmission per tick-host contact, and the human case reporting given infection probability which is quite stochastic [9]. All of these involve substantial uncertainties in ecological, epidemiological and environmental parameters.In the affected countries of the European Union, TBE incidence data is available and indicates the disease trend. For example, in Hungary TBE cases have been reported to National Database of Epidemiological Surveillance System since 1977. Between 1977 to 1996, the average annual incidence was approximately 2.7 per 100,000, and this incidence has shown dramatic decrease since 1997. Multiple factors may have contributed to this decrease, including under-reporting followed by decreased serological examination, or public vaccination in early 1990s [10, 11]. Whether or not the decrease in the incidence reflects the actual decrease in human TBE infection level, it seems probable that TBE infection level has not been decreased in the ecological cycle. The studies on the seropositivity of animals in 1960 to 1970 and 2005 support this argument [12, 13].One of our goals is to develop a mathematical model to infer the TBEV transmission level in the ecological cycle. In particular, we aim to use a mathematical model fitting the surveillance data to determine whether there was significant increase in the basic reproduction number of TBE, and whether there was significant decrease in the expected TBE cases between 1980 to 2015.There may be substantial amount of unreported cases, since many TBE infections go undiagnosed or unreported [10, 14]. Therefore, estimation of the TBE infection risk under significant uncertainties of the tick-host interaction and tick-human transmission process is challenging since the data we observe, i.e., human incidence of TBE, is only the final outcome of the tick-host transmission, tick-human contact and the case reporting upon infection. To meet this challenge, here we develop a coupled TBEV transmission-human report cascade model, that consists of two important components: the TBEV transmission dynamics among ticks, animal hosts and humans, and the stochastic process of TBE reporting given human TBE infection. We will use this coupled cascade model to facilitate fitting the human TBE incidence data to the model in generating good estimation of key parameters including seasonal human-tick encounter rates and human case reporting probability.TBEV transmission involve two important routes, systemic and non-systemic transmission. Transovarial transmission is possible, but it only occurs at a low frequency [15]. Systemic transmission of TBEV involves infected ticks and vertebrate hosts. The tick Ixodes ricinus is the vector of the European TBEV subtype [16]. The Ixodes ticks undergo complex developmental cycle involving egg, larva, nymph and adult stages and the full life cycle takes average of 3 years [17]. Ticks take blood meals from hosts to develop from one stage to the next stage. At each blood meal, ticks are integrated into the epidemiological chain of the virus transmission. Systemic transmission of TBEV has the following cycle: hosts acquire infection from infected nymphs. The infected hosts pass the virus to feeding larvae. As the infected larvae develop into nymphs, the nymphs can again transmit virus into a new host. Several mathematical models, see for example [16, 18–21], have been developed and analyzed to examine the ecological or epidemiological factors that govern the abundance of Ixodes ricinus ticks or TBE infections. However, only few studies have focused on the significance of the non-systemic route of TBEV transmission [22–24], through which a susceptible vector can acquire the infection by co-feeding with infected vectors on the same host [25–29] even when the pathogen has not established within the host for systemic transmission. It was observed that TBE in Europe may be mainly maintained by non-systemic transmission between co-feeding ticks [30], and an early modeling study [23] shows that the basic reproduction number (R0) of TBE without non-systemic route of transmission is estimated to be less than 1, which means that TBE would not persist without non-systemic route of transmission. In comparison, the work of [31] shows that systemic transmission cycle alone can sustain the transmission of TBEV in a natural focus. Both systemic and non-systemic transmissions, as well as the vector abundance, are heavily influenced by the climatic and environmental conditions, which are characterized by uncertainty and seasonal variations. Some recently developed stage-structured tick population and tick-borne diseases (Lyme disease in particular) models [20, 32, 33] have used these environmental condition data. However, because of uncertainties in some of the parameters in the aforementioned models, and in the consideration of both systemic and non-systematic transmission with the co-feeding transmission efficacy unsettled, we will need not only refine existing model structure but also tune and estimate some of the model parameters by fitting a disease transmission model to time series incidence data [34, 35].Data fitting is an important issue in TBE modeling, since human is only a dead-end host of TBEV transmission [36], and can be infected by bites of both infected nymphs and female ticks, although rarely, consumption of unpasteurized milk from infected animals can also cause TBE infection [37]. In addition, two-thirds of human TBEV infections are either sub-clinical or asymptomatic [38], suggesting that there may be more infected cases than cases reported, therefore the probability of reporting given infection needs to be estimated in order to accurately evaluate the TBE risk in the population.In our developed TBEV transmission-human report cascade model, we couple the TBEV (systemic and non-systemic) transmission dynamics among ticks and animal hosts with the stochastic process of TBE reporting given human TBE infection. We will use this coupled system and the TBE incidence data, together with climate data to estimate such key epidemiological parameters as seasonal human-tick encounter rate, case reporting probability, tick-host contact for disease transmission, and tick-human transmission. With these key parameters and probabilities estimated, we can use our coupled system to estimate the basic reproduction numbers of TBE in Hungary, evaluate the transmission potential of TBEV in the enzootic cycle along with the climate change, and assess the significance of non-systemic pathway in the transmission of TBEV in Hungary.Materials and methodsWe introduce a tick-host and tick-human transmission cascade model with two integrated parts to describe the dynamical relationship between the epidemic in the tick-host population and the subsequent tick-to-human infections. It is a hidden Markov Model with a transition process characterized by a deterministic TBEV (tick-host) transmission model among tick and host populations and an observation process described by a stochastic model of human TBE reporting given infection.TBEV transmission model among ticks and hostsOur TBEV transmission model describes the seasonal transmission of a pathogen among ticks and hosts with a system of ordinary differential equations with periodic coefficients, modified from some earlier work of modeling Lyme disease dynamics [32, 33] but adapted for some unique features of TBEV dynamics including in particular co-feeding transmission. We will first stratify the tick population and host population into susceptibles and infecteds, depending on the state of infection; we further stratify the tick population by their physiological stages.Stages and developmentTicks in questing stages move to engorged stages upon successful host-feeding. Nymphal and larval Ixodes ricinus feed on small-to-medium-sized mammals such as rodents, while adult ticks feed on large-sized mammals [39, 40]. Engorged adults are reproducible and lay eggs while engorged larvae and nymphs move into the next stages after completing the maturation process. As these reproduction and development processes involve a few key biological activities which are highly relevant to the host density and environment conditions, we need to further stratify the tick population within each physiological stage. Namely, we need to consider the following activity states of tick population: questing larvae (Lq), engorged larvae (Le), questing nymphs (Nq), engorged nymphs (Ne), questing adults (Aq), engorged adults (Ae) and eggs (E).Eggs develop into the questing larval stage with the developmental rate del(t). Questing larvae attach to hosts with rate αl(t). Among them, only the proportion (fl) who survive the feeding stage move to the engorged larval stage. Once the engorged larvae completes maturation they are accounted as questing nymphs. The same process is repeated from questing nymphs to engorged nymphs and from questing adults to engorged adults. Then, the female engorged adults lay eggs with oviposition rate dpop(t). A parameter η refers to the proportion of engorged female adults to engorged adults. We use Ricker function to describe the birth rate of eggs, with the parameter p being the maximal egg-laying rate and the parameter ω representing the degree of density dependence in fecundity [41]. Each stages have distinct mortalities (μe, μql, μel, μqn, μen, μqa, μea).Seasonal dependenceDevelopmental rates and the host-attaching rates have strong seasonal dependence and those parameters are thus time-dependent and functions of the independent time variable t. Other parameters showing less seasonal dependence will be assumed to be constant. Since the tick questing activity depends on a climatic condition [42], we decompose the host-attaching rates (αl(t), αn(t) and αa(t)) into the proportion of actively searching ticks among questing ticks at time t (pl(t), pn(t) and pa(t)) (and here and in what follows, subindices l, n and a are indicating these parameters are relevant to the particular stages of larvae, nymphs and adults respectively) and the host-finding rate of those actively searching ticks (λl, λn and λa). That is,
αl(t)=pl(t)×λlαn(t)=pn(t)×λnαa(t)=pa(t)×λa.Tick population growth (ecological) modelWe can now formulate a system of ordinary differential equations for the tick population growth (ecological) model:
{Lq′(t)=del(t)E(t)-αl(t)Lq(t)-μqlLq(t),Le′(t)=flαl(t)Lq(t)-dln(t)Le(t)-μelLe(t),Nq′(t)=dln(t)Le(t)-αn(t)Nq(t)-μqnNq(t),Ne′(t)=fnαn(t)Nq(t)-dna(t)Ne(t)-μenNe(t),Aq′(t)=dna(t)Ne(t)-αa(t)Aqs(t)-μqaAqs(t),Ae′(t)=faαa(t)Aq(t)-dpop(t)Ae(t)-μeaAe(t),E′(t)=p·ηdpop(t)Ae(t)·e-ω·ηdpop(t)Ae(t)-del(t)E(t)-μeE(t).(1)
while the list of variables appear in Table 1, and the full list of the parameters appears in Table 2. The number of egg-laying adults is implicitly accounted in the model, see S1 Appendix for the details.10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.t001Table 1Variables.VariableDefinitionENumber of eggsLqNumber of questing larvaeLes [Lei]Number of susceptible [infected] engorged larvaeNqs [Nqi]Number of susceptible [infected] questing nymphsNes [Nei]Number of susceptible [infected] engorged nymphsAqs [Aqi]Number of susceptible [infected] questing adultsAeNumber of engorged adultsHs [Hi]Number of of susceptible [infected] rodents10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.t002Table 2List of parameters.ParametersDescriptiondel, dln, dnadevelopment rate from eggs to larvae, engorged larvae to nymphs, engorged nymphs to adultsdpopdevelopment rate from engorged adults to egg-laying adultsfl, fn, faprobability of successful feeding for host-attached larvae, nymphs and adultsαl, αn, αahost-attaching rates for questing larvae, nymphs and adultspl, pn, paproportion of active ticks among questing larvae, nymphs and adultsλl, λn, λahost-attaching rate of active questing larvae, nymphs and adultspmaximum number of eggs laid by egg-laying adult female ticksηproportion of engorged female adults to engorged adultsωdegree of density dependence in fecundityμql, μqn, μqamortality rate of questing larvae, nymphs and adultsμel, μen, μeamortality rate of engorged larvae, nymphs and adultsμemortality rate of eggsbmortality rate of hostsγrecovery rate of infected hostsβhl, βhn, βnhtransmission efficacy from hosts to larvae, hosts to nymphs, nymphs to hostsTfaverage duration of feedingcprobability of an infected nymph to induce non-systemic infection to the cofeeding susceptible larvaemlminimum temperature for the coincidence of host availability and the activity of questing larvaeTransmission diagram and systemic transmissionFig 1 illustrates some major epidemiological processes that must be incorporated into our transmission dynamics model. Transovarial infection (transmission from infected females to their eggs) for TBEV occurs only rarely, so we will not consider this vertical transmission route, and hence there is no infection by questing larvae stage [43]. Since we ignore the vertical transmission, there is no need to divide the engorged adult population into susceptible and infecteds. In the systemic transmission route, questing ticks acquire viruses by feeding infected hosts, and infected ticks can also pass the virus to susceptible hosts during feeding. Note that the hosts for adult ticks can also be infected and pass the virus via untreated dairy products, however, TBE is mainly transmitted by tick bite and thus not incorporated explicitly in our model system [44]. Questing adults are further stratified into susceptibles and infecteds since questing adults involve in the human infection. In what follows, the standard incidence is used to describe the systemic transmission of TBEV through the contact of a susceptible host (tick) with an infected tick (host).10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.g001Fig 1An illustration of the systemic TBEV transmission involving ticks in different physiological stages and a competent host.Dashed lines depict infection routes. Tick population is stratified by the stages: questing larvae (Lq), engorged larvae (Le), questing nymphs (Nq), engorged nymphs (Ne), questing adults (Aq), engorged adults (Ae) and eggs (E). The additional subscripts s and i refer to susceptible and infecteds, respectively. Host population is divided into susceptible (Hs) and infecteds (Hi). The variables are described in Table 1.Co-feeding transmissionOur main focus is on how to model the transmission of TBEV between co-feeding ticks [26, 45]. Let δ(Nqi(t), H) be the probability of a susceptible feeding tick being infected by co-feeding nymphs during which the ticks are co-feeding a host. Let c be the probability of an infected nymph to induce non-systemic infection to the co-feeding susceptible tick. We assume that the events of each infected nymph triggering non-systemic infection to co-feeding larvae are independent. Then, the probability of a larvae to get non-systemic infection while it is co-feeding with n number of infected nymphs is
1-(1-c)n.(2)The number of feeding infected nymphs at time t is
∫t-Tftαn(u)Nqi(u)e-μfn(t-u)du,
where Tf is the average duration of feeding and μfn is the mortality of feeding infected nymphs. Considering that the duration of feeding is relatively short, we estimate the average number of feeding infected nymphs per host at time t with
Tfαn(t)Nqi/H.From the above assumptions, we have the following non-linear co-feeding probability formulation:
δ(Nqi(t),H)=1-(1-c)Tfαn(t)Nqi/H.Non-systemic transmission can also happen when the host is immune to the infection [46]. Therefore, the force of infection for the questing larvae through non-systemic transmission route is
δ(Nqi(t),H)((1-βhl)Hi(t)H+H-Hi(t)H)flαl(t).This formulation captures the fact that non-systemic transmission is only possible when both infective ticks and susceptible ticks are actively questing [7].By the above discussions, the tick population growth model (1) can be generalized to the following TBEV transmission dynamics among the relevant hosts and ticks:
{Lq′(t)=del(t)E(t)-αl(t)Lq(t)-μqlLq(t),Les′(t)=(1-δ(Nqi(t),H))((1-βhl)Hi(t)H+H-Hi(t)H)flαl(t)Lq(t)-dln(t)Les(t)-μelLes(t),Lei′(t)=δ(Nqi(t),H)((1-βhl)Hi(t)H+H-Hi(t)H)flαl(t)Lq(t)+βhlflαl(t)Lq(t)Hi(t)H-dln(t)Lei(t)-μelLei(t),Nqs′(t)=dln(t)Les(t)-αn(t)Nqs(t)-μqnNqs(t),Nqi′(t)=dln(t)Lei(t)-αn(t)Nqi(t)-μqnNqi(t),Nes′(t)=(1-δ(Nqi(t),H))((1-βhn)Hi(t)H+H-Hi(t)H)fnαn(t)Nqs(t)-dna(t)Nes(t)-μenNes(t),Nei′(t)=δ(Nqi(t),H)((1-βhn)Hi(t)H+H-Hi(t)H)fnαn(t)Nqs(t)+βhnfnαn(t)Nqs(t)Hi(t)H+fnαn(t)Nqi(t)-dna(t)Nei(t)-μenNei(t),Aqs′(t)=dna(t)Nes(t)-αa(t)Aqs(t)-μqaAqs(t),Aqi′(t)=dna(t)Nei(t)-αa(t)Aqi(t)-μqaAqi(t),Ae′(t)=faαa(t)(Aqs(t)+Aqi(t))-dpop(t)Ae(t)-μeaAe(t),E′(t)=p·ηdpop(t)Ae(t)·e-ω·ηdpop(t)Ae(t)-del(t)E(t)-μeE(t),Hs′(t)=bH-βnhαn(t)Nqi(t)HHs(t)-bHs(t),Hi′(t)=βnhαn(t)Nqi(t)HHs(t)-γHi(t)-bHi(t).(3)The list of variables appear in Table 1, and the full list of the parameters appears in Table 2.Because of the limited data on the host population, we remove explicit dependence on the parameter H from the model system by normalizing other variables with H. The normalized system is given in S1 Appendix.TBE human infection and reporting modelMost I. ricinus tick bites to human are from ticks in nymphal and adult stages [47]. In our model, we assume that human can be infected with TBEV by the bites of infected nymphs and infected adult ticks. The number of newly infected cases between time t − Δ and t is given by
ΔIH(t-Δ,t)=∫t-Δt(Λn(u)pn(u)Nqi(u)+Λa(u)pa(u)Aqi(u))du,(4)
where Λn(t) and Λa(t) are the temperature-dependent human-attaching rate of nymphs and adults,
Λn(t)=καe0.058·T(t),Λa(t)=αe0.058·T(t),
adapting the temperature related human outdoor activity in Hungary [48]. Here, the parameter α representing a degree of temperature dependency on the human-attaching rate of nymphs will be estimated from the surveillance data, and κ (also a parameter to be estimated) is the relative ratio between nymphs and adults for the attachments to the human.We denote this number of newly infected cases between time t − Δ and t by It, with Δ being the reporting period. We assume that Ct, the number of cases reported during reported period Δ follows a negative binomial distribution with mean ρIt and variance It+τ2It2, where ρ is the reporting probability and τ stands for the overdispersion parameter. Again, these parameters will be estimated using the parameter identification procedures described below, when other parameters, listed in Tables 3 and 4 are used. The transmission efficacy of non-systemic transmission from a single infected nymph (c) is estimated from the equation 1 − (1 − c)2 = 0.65 in (2), where 0.65 is the probability of transmission of TBEV when co-feeding with two infected ticks [46]. Indeed, it is empirically observed that non-systemic transmission of TBEV in non-viraemic host is less efficient than transmission in viraemic host [25], as we see from our estimates, c < βhl. According to [6], the questing nymph activity is observed when the daily maximal temperature was over the 7°C. We assume that the questing nymph is inactive in a temperature below 7°C.10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.t003Table 3Constant parameter values.NotationValue (unit)Refs.NotationValue (unit)Refs.p2000 (egg)[39, 49, 50]η0.5[51]μe0.02618 (day−1)[49]μql0.0068 (day−1)[49]μel0.001428 (day−1)[49]μqn0.0034 (day−1)[49]μen0.000476 (day−1)[49]μqa0.00136 (day−1)[49]μea0.000408 (day−1)[49]βnh0.9[52]c0.4[46]βhl0.8[52]βhn0.8[52]Tf4 (day)[53]10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.t004Table 4Temperature dependent parameter values.ParametersDependence on temperature T (°C) (unit)Ref.del(T)−0.0000112T2 + 0.002305T − 0.0185 (T ≥ 8.4) (day−1)[3, 8]dln(T)0.0000303T2 + 0.000733T − 0.00706 (T ≥ 7.4) (day−1)[3, 8]dna(T)−0.00000796T2 + 0.00193T − 0.0161 (T ≥ 8.7) (day−1)[3, 8]dpop(T)−0.00001867T3 + 0.0008724T2 − 0.006195T + 0.01802[3](T ≥ 4) (day−1)pl(T)
{0T<ml1T≥ml
[6]pn(T), pa(T)
{0T<71T≥7
[6]Data fitting and resultsWe use weekly mean temperature data between 1901 and 2015 obtained from a weather station in Szombathely (coordinates: 47.20N, 16.65E, 201.0m) in Vas County [54]. Vas region is one of the highly endemic area in Hungary [55]. Weekly human TBE incidence data from 1998 to 2008 is obtained from National Epidemiological Center of Hungary. The clinically diagnosed cases confirmed by laboratory serological test are counted as the reported TBE case.With given parameter values in Tables 3 and 4 and temperature data, we fit human reporting model (4) with TBE incidence data between 1998 and 2008. The climate data between 1901-1998 was used for the initialization of the model, as explained in detail in S1 Appendix. By the maximum likelihood estimation, we estimate the unknown parameters: probabilities of successful feeding (fl, fn, fa), host-attaching rate of actively questing ticks (λl, λn, λa), degree of density dependent fecundity (ω), host recovery rate (γ), mortality of hosts (b), relative ratio between nymphs and adults for the human attachments (κ), the degree of temperature dependency on the human-attaching rate of nymphs (α), the minimum temperature for the activity of questing larvae (ml) and the reporting probability (ρ). The maximum likelihood estimation was performed by the R package pomp, using trajectory matching [56, 57]. Using Latin hypercube sampling, we choose 104 number of initial set of parameters and compared the likelihoods at each parameters set. We repeat the sampling process at the parameter sets with the maximum likelihoods. The convergence is checked by computing the likelihood profiles (S1 Appendix) over each of the unknown parameters.Fig 2 shows a model fit and the 1998–2008 TBE case reports in Hungary. The sample simulation of the case report model at the maximal likelihood estimation depicts the binomial curve, which is known to be the characteristic of the TBE incidence in Hungary as well as many other European countries [58]. With the set of parameter values listed in Table 5, we obtain the parameterized model for TBEV transmission. All these values are in the 95% interval that yields the highest likelihood values. The model is then validated by the comparison of the model estimators with the data obtained in the observational studies.10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.g002Fig 21998-2008 TBE case reports in Hungary and a model fit.Red line shows the monthly accumulation of the reported case data and skyblue line shows the sample simulation of the case report model at the maximal likelihood estimation. Fixed parameter values and estimated parameter values used for simulation are given in Tables 3 and 5.10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.t005Table 5Parameter values used in the simulation.NotationValue (unit)NotationValue (unit)ω6.2 (per egg-laying adults)b0.0027 (day−1)γ0.1 (day−1)α1660 (day−1)fl0.19fn0.96fa0.81λl0.0064 (day−1)λn0.0014 (day−1)λa24 (day−1)ml17 (°C)κ0.00004ρ0.64τ0.00003Prevalence of TBE in small mammalsAccording to the recent field study of [59, 60], 3.7% to 20.5% of rodents collected in Hungary during 2010-2013 were seropositive. In comparison, the annual average of infected rodents calculated from our parameterized model is 18.6% of the total rodents. For this estimation, we used the annual cycles of temperature data in Szombathely from 2010 to 2013 [54].Reporting probability of human TBE infectedsMore than two-thirds of TBE cases are known to be asymptomatic [61]. In the observation of [62], 30–50% of the studied tick-borne disease cases remembered a tick bite prior to the disease onset. For these reasons, the reported case of TBE is expected to be lower than the actual number of infected case. In comparison, the reporting probability (ρ) through our data fitting is estimated to be 0.64.Stage-dependent frequency of attachment to humanEstimated ratio of human-attaching rate for nymphs to the human-attaching rate for adults (κ) is less than 1, indicating shorter human questing time for adult ticks to nymphs.Duration of host infectivityEstimated recovery rate of hosts is 0.1 leading to the average duration of the host infectivity as 10 days, while the experimentally-observed duration of host infectivity to ticks is known to be 2 to 3 days [26].Probability of surviving the feeding stageFrom our model, the probability of successful feeding for host-attached larvae (fl) and nymphs (fn) are estimated to be 0.19 and 0.96, respectively. According to the experimental study on the infestation of Ixodes ricinus, 90 to 99 percent of nymphs and 46 to 72 percent of larvae has successfully fed the mice in the laboratory setting [53].Temperature dependence of the questing activity for larvaeIn our model fitting, minimum temperature for the coincidence of host availability and the activity of questing larvae (ml) is estimated to be 17°C. This coincides with the average temperature of Szombathely in May, when the larvae starts to be detected in the field [63]. As ml also depends on the host abundance, this estimated is larger than the minimum temperature for the larval ticks to become active. We also note that larvae of Ixodes ricinus are observed to have the normal activity between 15°C-27°C [64].Basic reproduction numberThe basic reproduction number (R0) is a universally-recognized metric of the capacity of a parasite or a pathogen to reproduce given particular environmental conditions. We can use our parametrized model to evaluate the transmission potential of TBEV in the enzootic cycle by calculating basic reproduction number (R0) of TBE infection.The calculation is detailed in S1 Appendix. Fig 3 shows the estimated R0 and the growing degree days in Szombathely. Between year of 1980 and 2015, R0 of TBE is estimated to be between 1.13-1.98. The estimated values are similar to the ones obtained from a modeling study in [23] and the study in a nearby region Borska nizina in Slovakia [7], where R0 ranged between 0.85 to 3.27. Sensitivity of R0 with respect to the estimated parameters are provided in S1 Appendix.10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.g003Fig 3Growing degree days and estimated basic reproduction number of TBE in Szombathely from 1980 to 2015.Solid blue line depicts 3-year average of GD4, sum of the daily mean temperatures exceeding 4°C. Dashed red line shows the basic reproduction numbers calculated at every 3 years from 1980 to 2016. Parameter values used for simulation are listed in Table 3, together with the estimated parameters at the best fit in Fig 2.TrendTo see the trend of the transmission potential of TBEV in the enzootic cycle with respect to the change of temperatures, we computed R0 by assuming that (3) is a periodic system with a period of three years taking account of the average tick’s life cycle. We observe the increasing trend in both the growing degree days and the basic reproduction number. Our result clearly shows increase of the transmission potential of TBEV in the enzootic cycle along with the increased temperature between 1980 to 2013. This is in contrast with the observation that TBE human incidence rate has dropped in mid-1990s, see Fig 4. This discrepancy between transmission risk of TBEV in the ecological tick-host cycle and the TBE human case reporting indicates that other public health interventions have been effective in preventing human infection from a large pool of infected tick, unless the reporting rate of TBE has dropped since mid-1990s.10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.g004Fig 4TBE incidence data and estimated basic reproduction number.Blue bars represent TBE incidence (per 100000 people) in Hungary between 1980-2014 [38, 65, 66], with missing data in 2011. White bar shows the expected human case report based on the fitting result. Red line is the estimated R0. Parameter values used for computing R0 is in Table 3, together with the estimated parameters at the best fit in Fig 2.Further quantification of co-feeding transmissionIn order to study the significance of the non-systemic transmission route in the transmission of TBEV, we compared the estimated R0 of TBEV transmission with R0 of the system which excludes the non-systemic transmission, see Fig 5. As a result, values of R0 for the system excluding non-systemic transmission lied between 0.84-1.34 in year 1980 to 2015, which are 25%-33% less than the values of R0 for the system including both systemic and non-systemic transmission route of TBEV (1.13-1.98). The significance of co-feeding transmission estimated in our study is less than the estimates of [25], by which the non-systemic co-feeding pathway is estimated to be 60% greater degree of amplification of TBEV compared with the systemic pathway. Nonetheless, our analysis confirms that co-feeding transmission route is very significant, since the value of R0 for the system excluding the non-systemic transmission is near the threshold value 1 that determines the sustainability of the disease.10.1371/journal.pone.0217206.g005Fig 5Basic reproduction number of TBE with and without non-systemic transmission.Blue and red lines show the basic reproduction numbers, including and excluding non-systemic transmission, respectively. Parameter values used for simulation are listed in Table 3, together with the estimated parameters at the best fit in Fig 2.DiscussionTBE has been a major public health concern for much of the European countries. The risk of human infection depends on the prevalence of the virus spread in the tick-host ecological cycle, and on the tick-human contact that is effective for the disease transmission. Evaluating the human infection needs accurate estimation of the tick-host transmission, the tick population dynamics highly regulated by the environmental and climatic conditions, and the human case reporting given infection probability which is quite stochastic, all involving substantial uncertainties in ecological, epidemiological and environmental parameters. Here we developed a deterministic TBEV transmission model, coupled with a stochastic human case reporting given infection formulation, so that the relatively limited TBE incidence data and relatively complete climate data in the considered region (Hungary) can be used in conjunction with this cascade coupled model to infer key parameters aforementioned.TBE incidence in Hungary has shown dramatic decrease in 1997. The reason may be a result of under-reporting followed by decreased serological examination or a result of public vaccination in early 1990s [10, 11]. Whether or not the decrease in TBE incidence reflects the actual decrease in human TBE infection level, it seems probable that TBEV transmission level has not been decreased in ecological cycle. The studies on the seropositivity of animals in 1960 to 1970 and 2005 support the argument [12, 13] that the prevalence of the TBEV has not decreased in the hosts. Our results is in line with this argument. The model simulations do not show significant decrease in the basic reproduction number of TBEV or the expected TBE cases between 1980 to 2015. One factor which has contributed to the decline of the incidence is the use of vaccines which protects human from infection upon tick-human contact. The annual TBE cases in a neighboring country Austria has also decreased, while the incidence in the unvaccinated population remains to be unchanged compared with the incidence in the pre-vaccination era [67]. In comparison, there is no vaccine available against Lyme disease transmitted by Ixodes ticks and there has been an increasing trend of Lyme disease case in Hungary since 1998 [68]. Our simulations suggest instead that the basic reproduction number in the tick-host transmission cycle has been increasing along with the increasing temperature. In addition, in 2007, the massive use of pesticides to control ticks has stopped due to regulations. This may have further increased the transmission potential of TBEV in the enzootic cycle by allowing better tick survival [69, 70].We have also observed the significance of non-systemic transmission route on the TBEV transmission. This observation is consistent with the result from the early modeling study [23]. To our knowledge, this is the first modeling study which incorporates explicitly both seasonal dependence and the non-systemic transmission pathway in a single compartmental model setting. By considering seasonal dependence together with the non-systemic transmission pathway, we can examine the seasonal factors in the non-systemic transmission of the virus. For example, non-systemic transmission is only possible when both infective ticks and susceptible ticks are actively questing and the questing activity of ticks shows strong seasonal dependence. It should be mentioned that in our formulation of non-systemic transmission, we assumed that feeding ticks are equally distributed in all hosts. It has been observed that few hosts are attached with the most of the co-feeding ticks [25]. Also, the spatiotemporal distance between co-feeding ticks, which affects the transmissibility, is also neglected in our model formulation. Modification of the model is required to study the effect on disease dynamics of tick distribution over hosts, and the effect of spatiotemporal proximity of feeding ticks on hosts.We quantified tick-to-host and tick-to-human infections in Hungary. The developed tick-borne disease transmission model and the methodologies we designed is expected to be adopted in the future studies assessing immunization programs for TBE in Hungary.Supporting informationS1 AppendixInterpretation of parameter p, normalized TBE transmission model, R0 computation, statistical inference.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Hybrids of 

1IntroductionTick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is a zoonotic vector-borne viral infection, the causative agent of which is the neurotropic tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) of the genus Flavivirus (family Flaviviridae). Traditionally, three main subtypes of TBEV have been distinguished: European, Siberian, and Far Eastern (Ecker et al., 1999). During recent years, additional lineages and provisional subtypes have been reported: genotype 4 (TBEV-Bkl-1, strain 178–79) and genotype 5 (TBEV-Bkl-2, strain 886–84 and related East-Siberian isolates) (Demina et al., 2012), Himalayan subtype (TBEV-Him) (Dai et al., 2018) and Obskaya subtype (TBEV-Ob) (Deviatkin et al., 2020). The European subtype is common in Europe and the European part of Russia, while the Siberian and Far Eastern subtypes occupy a vast territory from Japan and the Russian Far East to the Baltic countries. The main vectors and long-term reservoirs of the virus in nature are Ixodes persulcatus in Asia and in some parts of Europe and Ixodes ricinus in Europe (Lindquist and Vapalahti, 2008). The epidemiology of TBEV is closely related to the ecological and biological characteristics of tick vectors, in particular their distribution ranges and periods of activity. Thus, the correspondence of the main TBEV subtypes with a certain species of the tick-vector is noted: the European subtype is associated with I. ricinus and the Siberian and Far Eastern subtypes are associated with I. persulcatus. It should be noted that the European and Siberian subtypes of TBEV often circulate in the same area in Eastern Europe and the European part of Russia (Lindquist and Vapalahti, 2008). At the same time, each of the subtypes retain evolutionary independence, presumably due to their narrow specialization to the tick organism.Because of their long lifespan, ticks are not only TBEV vectors, but also the main reservoirs for the virus. In tick populations, the virus can be transmitted horizontally (from an infected tick to the vertebrate host and vice versa) and vertically (from an infected female to her progeny, also known as transovarial transmission) and trans-stadially (Nuttall and Labuda, 2003). During horizontal virus transmission, ticks can be infected with TBEV via feeding on an infected animal with sufficient level of viremia in the blood (viremic or systemic transmission) (Radda et al., 1969; Chunikhin and Kurenkov, 1979), or during cofeeding in close proximity with infected ticks on a host without viremia (non-viremic, non-systemic, or co-feeding transmission) (Alekseev and Chunikhin, 1990; Labuda et al., 1993). The high efficiency of the non-viremic transmission allowed researchers to draw conclusions about its crucial role in the maintenance of the TBEV in the natural endemic cycle (Randolph, 2011; Havlíková et al., 2013). Additionally, the possibility of sexual transmission was demonstrated, when TBEV was transmitted to females during copulation with infected males, the prospermia of which contained the virus (Chunikhin et al., 1983).According to experimental data, the effectiveness of transovarial TBEV transmission varies greatly depending on the strain and dose of the virus, tick species, ticks’ infection route, and method of TBEV detection in ticks, and usually does not exceed 1% (Benda, 1958; Kondrashova and Filippovets, 1970). For continuous TBEV circulation in tick populations, trans-stadial virus transmission is essential. As with transovarial transmission, the effectiveness of trans-stadial transmission depends on many factors and varies from 0 to 100% (Naumov et al., 1980; Kurenkov et al., 1981; Danielová, 1990; Slovák et al., 2014; Migné et al., 2022). An assumption was made that in natural tick populations, the level of trans-stadial transmission is about 10–20% (Naumov et al., 1980).Thus, the wide variety of TBEV transmission routes in natural foci guarantees continuous virus circulation and probably dictates the specificity of TBEV’s interrelation with a certain tick species. As a result, ticks determine the level of TBEV circulation in nature and affect the genetic and phenotypic properties of the viral population (Dzhivanyan et al., 1988; Labuda et al., 1994; Romanova et al., 2007; Růžek et al., 2008; Khasnatinov et al., 2009; Chausov et al., 2010; Belova et al., 2017). Thus, the evolution of TBEV has led to the formation of stable virus subtypes adapted to certain vector species and the whole eco-faunistic complex. However, the mechanisms and barriers that support the separation of subtypes, including in the sympatric area of the main vectors, remain unclear.During recent years, significant changes have been recorded in the distribution of the main vectors of TBEV in Northern Europe, which in some cases led to changes in the eco-epidemiology of TBE and other tick-borne diseases (Tokarevich et al., 2011; Jaenson et al., 2012; Bugmyrin et al., 2013; Bugmyrin et al., 2014; Jaenson et al., 2016; Tokarevich et al., 2017; Soleng et al., 2018; Hvidsten et al., 2020; Vikse et al., 2020; Voyiatzaki et al., 2022). In Finland, in comparison with the previous national distribution map, compiled almost 60 years ago, the distribution border of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus shifted 200–300 km to the north, which led to the appearance of new foci of TBEV, as well as to an expansion of the sympatric zone of these two tick species (Laaksonen et al., 2017). In the sympatric zones of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus, a change in the main vector species for the Siberian and European TBEV subtypes is possible (Jääskeläinen et al., 2011; Jääskeläinen et al., 2016), which can affect the properties of the viral population. All this can lead to a change in the distribution and/or the emergence of new variants of TBEV and to a change in the epidemiological situation for TBE.A separate issue is the existence of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus hybrids in sympatric zones and their influence on the properties of the virus. In the 1990s, the possibility of the existence of hybrid forms in the first generation was proved in laboratory experiments with reciprocal crossing of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus, while sterility of the obtained hybrids was noted (Balashov et al., 1998). Subsequently, we were able to repeat the experiments on obtaining hybrids of the indicated species of ticks, to study the morphology of the hybrids, and also to find hybrid individuals in nature (Bugmyrin et al., 2015; Bugmyrin et al., 2016), but their role as TBEV vectors has not been studied yet.The problem of hybridization’s impact on vector competence has more often been explored for mosquitoes. For example, it is thought that hybrids between bird-biting Culex pipiens form pipiens and human-biting Cx. pipiens form molestus, which have an intermediate host preference, are ideal vectors to bridge West Nile virus (WNV) from birds to humans (Farajollahi et al., 2011; Fritz et al., 2015). In special experiments, it was shown that hybrids obtained from reciprocal crossings of two Cx. pipiens biotypes and Cx. quinquefasciatus were better WNV vectors than the parental species, as they showed higher infection and transmission rates (Ciota et al., 2013).Thus, hybridization can affect the properties of natural foci of arbovirus infections; therefore, the study of hybrids of the main TBEV vectors seems highly relevant. Competence of the vector lies in its ability to acquire, preserve, and transmit the virus. In the present study, we compare the acquisition and transmission efficiency of the European and Siberian TBEV subtypes in I. ricinus, I. persulcatus, and their hybrids.2Materials and methods2.1Ticks and animalsTicks were collected by flagging in allopatric territories in Russia: I. ricinus in the Voronezh (N 51.630165, E 39.671455) and Kaliningrad (N 55.159184, E 20.843275) regions, and I. persulcatus in the Republic of Karelia (N 62.063505, E 33.985511). From these ticks, laboratory colonies of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus were obtained and reared through one or two generations under controlled laboratory conditions. Original females were tested for the presence of TBEV by quantitative PCR and showed a negative result. In the laboratory, living ticks were kept in humidified glass tubes, as described previously (Belova et al., 2012). To maintain the laboratory colony, adult ticks were fed on rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus, breed “Soviet Chinchilla”, “Scientific Center of Biomedical Technology” RAS, branch “Stolbovaya”) under a cloth cap, as described previously (Belova et al., 2017). Larvae and nymphs were fed on laboratory mice (Mus musculus, outbred ICR mice, “Scientific Center of Biomedical Technology” RAS, branch “Stolbovaya”). Cardboard collars were put on the mice to prevent them from scratching the ticks, and then the mice were put in individual glass jars. After that, 100-150 larvae or 20-25 nymphs of Ixodes ticks were put onto the mice with a brush, the jars were covered with a nylon mesh to avoid spreading of ticks, and they were left for an hour for ticks to attach. Then, mice with attached ticks were transferred from the jars into individual cages with a slatted bottom and a water tray underneath. The water in the tray was changed daily and the engorged ticks that had fallen off were collected in humidified glass tubes. All animals were maintained according to the international guidelines for animal husbandry, including the recommendations of CIOMS, 1985 and the FELASA Working Group Report, 1996–1997. The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee of Chumakov FSC R&D IBP RAS (Institute of Poliomyelitis), protocol No 040321-1 from 04.03.2021.To breed hybrids, in the first stage, virgin I. persulcatus females were obtained. The sex of ticks cultured in the laboratory was determined at the stage of engorged nymph (Balashov, 1972; Voltsit, 1986); large and small engorged nymphs were separated into different tubes, where they molted into males and females. In the next step, virgin I. persulcatus females were put into humidified glass tubes with I. ricinus males for several days, and then were fed on rabbits. To obtain adult hybrid ticks, immature hybrids were fed on laboratory mice. To avoid mating, female and male hybrids were separated into different glass tubes at the stage of engorged nymphs. Several I. ricinus and I. persulcatus specimens and obtained hybrids were analyzed genetically to confirm the ‘purity’ of the original species and the successful breeding of a hybrid generation (Litov et al., 2022).2.2Viruses and cellsIn this work, two TBEV strains belonging to different subtypes were used:− Strain EK-328 of the Siberian subtype, isolated from a pool of I. persulcatus ticks in 1972 in Estonia (GenBank ID DQ486861) (Romanova et al., 2007), with a passage history of 12 passages through mice brain (outbred ICR mice, 6-7 g) and 1 passage in the pig embryo kidney (PEK) cell line;− Strain LK-138 of the European subtype, isolated from a pool of I. ricinus ticks in 1972 in Lithuania (GenBank ID GU125720) (Kozlovskaya et al., 2010), with a passage history of two passages through suckling mice brain (outbred ICR mice) and four passages in the PEK cell line.Additionally, strain Sabin, poliovirus type I was used as an internal control during RNA isolation. Viruses were used as culture supernatants from the infected PEK cell line. A PEK cell line (Institute collection) was maintained at 37°C in Medium 199 (Chumakov FSC R&D IBP RAS, Russia), supplemented with 5% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco). Virus production and cell culture maintenance have been described previously (Romanova et al., 2007).2.350% plaque reduction neutralization testPlaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT50) was performed as described earlier (Tuchynskaya et al., 2021) on PEK cell monolayers in 24-well plates. Mouse blood samples were collected via decapitation; serum was separated from the clots by centrifugation and stored in aliquots at -20°C. For the test, 3-fold dilutions of sera from individual mice in medium 199 with 2% FBS (Gibco) were incubated with TBEV samples (1:1, v:v) in the concentration of 30–40 plaque forming unit per well for 1 h at 37°C. Virus-serum mixture (100µL) was added to PEK cells in 24-well plates, incubated for 1 h at 37°C in a CO2-incubator, coated with 1.26% methylcellulose (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA) in medium 199 with Hanks and Earle’s salts (2:1, v:v) and 2% FBS, and left for incubation for 6 days at 37°C in a CO2-incubator. Then the cells were fixed with 96% ethanol and stained with 0.4% gentian violet dye. Every experiment included controls, i.e., negative and positive murine sera with known antibody titers. The neutralizing antibodies (NAb) titers were calculated according to the modified Reed and Muench method (Reed and Muench, 1938).2.4Detection of TBEV by quantitative PCRRNA was isolated using TRI reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. As an internal control, a known amount (105 RNA copies) of the attenuated type I Sabin poliovirus vaccine strain was added to each sample before extraction. Reverse transcription was carried out with primers specific for TBEV and poliovirus (
Table S1
) and M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Promega, Madison, WI), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.Quantitative PCR (qPCR) was carried out using DNA Engine Analyser (BioRad, USA) with a qPCR kit (Syntol, Russia) and specific primers to TBEV and poliovirus (
Table S1
), as described previously (Tuchynskaya et al., 2021). Viral RNA quantity in the samples was expressed as a decimal logarithm of the genome copy number (GCN) per sample (log10GCN/sample), i.e. per tick, pool of ticks or per 1 mL of 10% mouse brain suspension. The sample was considered as positive for the presence of TBEV if the number of GCN in the PCR reaction was more than 100 copies. For experimental groups, the geometric mean number of RNA copies (GMNC) was calculated considering only positive samples.2.5Sample preparationTicks were homogenized in saline solution (0.9% NaCl) (Chumakov FSC R&D IBP RAS, Russia) using the laboratory homogenizer TissueLyser II (QIAGEN, Germany). Engorged larvae and questing nymphs were homogenized in pools of three individuals, and engorged nymphs and adults were homogenized individually in 300 µL of saline solution. Brain samples of sacrificed mice were weighed and manually homogenized in saline solution to obtain 10% suspensions, which were aliquoted and stored at -80°С.2.6Experiments with TBEV transmissionThe scheme of the experiment is shown in 
Figure 1
. To model the natural route of the ticks’ infection with TBEV, larvae and nymphs of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus and larvae of hybrids, obtained from the crossing of I. persulcatus females and I. ricinus males, were fed on TBEV-infected laboratory mice. Mice (18–20 g) were infected via intraperitoneal injection of 0.3 mL of a virus-containing culture supernatant of the strain EK-328 (Siberian subtype, infection dose – 7.0 log10PFU) or strain LK-138 (European subtype, infection dose – 5.8 log10PFU). After one hour post infection (p.i.), larvae and nymphs were put on mice for feeding. After engorgement, one-third of the ticks were frozen at -80°С for analysis of the effectiveness of TBEV acquisition, and the rest were kept in humidified tubes for molting to study the trans-stadial transmission of the virus. After 9 to 31 days post molting, all adult ticks and half of the nymphs were frozen. The rest of the nymphs were fed on uninfected mice to assess the possibility of second trans-stadial TBEV transmission. After 7-14 days post ticks feeding (d.p.f.), mice were decapitated and blood and brain samples were harvested. Some of the engorged nymphs were frozen 30–71 d.p.f., and the rest were frozen 30–149 days post molting to adults. All ticks were analyzed for the presence of TBEV by qPCR.Figure 1Schematic illustration of the experiment regarding TBEV transmission in Ixodes ricinus, Ixodes persulcatus ticks and their hybrids. Red mouse—TBEV-infected mice, white mouse—uninfected mice, qPCR—quantitative PCR. Blue numbers indicate different stages of the experiment.2.7Statistical analysisPooled prevalence was calculated using a maximum likelihood estimator with the assumption of 100% test sensitivity and specificity (Williams and Moffitt, 2001). The calculations were performed on the EPITOOLS web platform (Sergeant, 2018). In cases, when all the analyzed pools were positive, then the LaPlace adjustment method was used (confidence interval calculator for a completion rate). Statistical analyses were performed using OriginPro 8 SR4 (v8.0951, Northampton, MA, USA). To compare TBEV prevalence between groups, Fisher’s exact test or chi-square test were used. For other data, the significance of differences between groups was estimated according to the Mann–Whitney U-test (for two groups) and the Kruskal–Wallis H-test (for three groups). For multiple comparisons correction, Bonferroni correction was applied.3Results3.1TBEV transmission from infected mice to immature ticksIn this experiment two TBEV strains were used – EK-328 of the Siberian subtype, and LK-138 of the European subtype. The results are shown in 
Table 1
; 
Figure 2
 and 
Table S2
. The geometric mean amount of TBEV RNA for different tick groups are shown in 
Figure 3
 and 
Table S3
.Table 1Effectiveness of the Siberian (strain EK-328) and European (strain LK-138) TBEV subtypes’ transmission in Ixodes ricinus, Ixodes persulcatus and hybrid ticks at different period after feeding/molting.TBEV strainTick groupTBEV acquisition from infected miceTrans-stadial transmission of TBEV (I)Trans-stadial tr. (II)LLeng* (1#)NNeng (1)NN* (2)NNeng (3)Ad (2)Ad (4)9-10 d.p.f.30-31 d.p.f.30-31 d.p.f.7 d.p.m.49-84 d.p.m.129-137 d.p.m. (30-32 d.p.f.)49-84 d.p.m.30-43 d.p.m.147-149 d.p.m.EK-328
I.ric
53.6% 
a,c
 [23.7-86.4] (16/30)4.7% 
c

[0.6-15.9] (2/45)16.7%[1.1-58.2] (1/6)0.7% 
f,g
 [0.0-4.4] (1/138)8.0% 
g,h,j

[3.0-16.7] (6/81)21.1%[8.0-43.9] (4/19)54.6% 
j
 [28.0-78.8] (6/11)8.8% 
m,n

[3.2-29.8] (3/34)nd
I.pers
34.1% 
b,d
 [10.8-66.8] (7/21)7.2% 
d,e

[1.5-19.6] (3/45)50% 
e

[18.8-81.2] (3/6)0%[0.0-13.5] (0/21)11.5% 
i,k,o

[6.0-20.7] (9/78)10.0%[0.0-42.6] (1/10)76.9% 
k

[49.1-92.5] (10/13)42.3% 
m,o

[25.5-61.1] (8/14)14.3% [0.5-53.4] (1/7)Hybrid91.7% 
a,b

[75.1-100] (27/30)ndnd14.3% 
f
 [7.7-23.4] (15/105)ndnd25% 
l

[3.4-71.1] (1/4)18.2% 
m

[6.7-39.1] (4/22)ndLK-138
I.ric
nd9.8%[0.7-19.0] (4/45)16.7%[1.1-58.2] (1/6)nd46.9% 
h

[27.6-68.2] (28/60)37.5%[13.5-69.6] (3/8)36.4% [15.0-64.8] (4/11)85.7% 
n
 [46.7-99.5] (6/7)1/1
I.pers
nd18.9%[6.1-31.7] (9/45)16.7%[1.1-58.2] (1/6)nd47.7% 
i

[29.5-66.0] (30/63)25.0%[6.3-60.0] (2/8)45.5% [21.3-72.0] (5/11)nd66.7% [29.6-90.8] (4/6)Hybridndnd25%[3.4-71.1] (1/4)ndndnd80.0% 
l
 [36.0-98.0] (4/5)ndndInfection rates of ticks with TBEV determined by qPCR are presented: percentage of positive ticks [CI 95%] (number of positive ticks/total analyzed).
I.ric, Ixodes ricinus; I.pers, Ixodes persulcatus, Hybrid, ticks obtained from the mating of I. persulcatus females with I. ricinus males; nd, no data; LLeng, engorged larvae; NNeng, engorged nymphs; NN, questing nymphs; Ad, adult ticks; d.p.f., days post feeding; d.p.m., days post molting; *—engorged larvae and questing nymphs were studied in pools of three, TBEV prevalence was calculated using a maximum likelihood estimator with the assumption of 100% test sensitivity and specificity on the EPITOOLS web platform (Sergeant, 2018); #—numbers indicate different stages of the experiment according to the 
Figure 1
; superscript letters indicate statistically significant differences between groups according to Fisher’s exact test/chi-square test (p ≤ 0.01), groups with the same letter are significantly different from each other.Figure 2Prevalence of TBEV in I. ricinus (I. ric), I. persulcatus (I. pers), and hybrid (Hybr) ticks at different period after feeding/molting: (A) in engorged larvae (LL) and nymphs (NN) after feeding on infected mice; (B) in questing nymphs (NN) and adults (Ad) after first molting; (C) in adults after second molting. Data for the strains EK-328 and LK-138 are separated with dashed line. Engorged larvae and questing nymphs were studied in pools of three, others – individually, TBEV prevalence in a pool of ticks was calculated using a maximum likelihood estimator with the assumption of 100% test sensitivity and specificity on the EPITOOLS web platform (Sergeant, 2018). Whiskers show 95% confidence interval of the infection rate; significant differences between groups according to Fisher’s exact test/chi-square test: * p<0.05, ** p<0.001.Figure 3Geometric mean number of TBEV RNA copies in tick samples at different period after feeding/molting. Engorged larvae (LLeng (1)) and questing nymphs (NN (2)) were studied in pools of three individuals, engorged nymphs (NNeng (1)) and questing adults (Ad (2), Ad (4)) were analyzed individually; the number of TBEV RNA copies is shown for sample (a pool or individual tick). Whiskers show standard deviation; significant differences between groups according to Mann–Whitney U-test (2 groups) or Kruskal-Wallis H-test (3 groups): * p<0.05, ** p<0.001; d.p.f.—days post feeding on TBEV infected mice; d.p.m.—days post molting.Since we assumed the possible influence of the physiological state of ticks on their infection rate (IR), ticks were analyzed in different periods after feeding on infected mice, and, subsequently, at different periods after molting (
Figures 2
, 
3
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
). After complete feeding on infected mice, the analysis of ticks regarding the presence of TBEV was carried out after 9–31 days. Longer incubation of larvae and nymphs after feeding led to a decrease in the strain EK-328 prevalence in tick suspensions (
Figure 2A
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
). Despite the IR decrease at a later time after feeding, the number of RNA copies of the strain EK-328 in engorged I. persulcatus larvae was higher at 30 d.p.f. than after 9 days (
Figure 3
; 
Table S3
).The efficiency of the acquisition of the strain EK-328 by hybrid larvae was significantly higher than that of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus, reaching 91.7% at 9 d.p.f. (Chi-square test, p<0.01, 
Table 1
; 
Figure 2A
). Additionally, hybrids differed from parental species by a higher number of RNA copies of the strain EK-328; differences were significant between hybrids and I. ricinus (Mann–Whitney test, p<0.05, 
Figure 3
; 
Table S3
). The IR of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus larvae with the strain LK-138 was determined on the 31st d.p.f., was low and did not differ from IR with the strain EK-328 (
Table 1
, 
S2
; 
Figure 2A
). It should be noted that in the engorged I. persulcatus larvae analyzed on the 30th d.p.f., the number of RNA copies of the strain EK-328 was higher than that of the strain LK-138 (Mann–Whitney test, p<0.05, 
Figure 3
; 
Table S3
).The effectiveness of the acquisition of the strain EK-328 by I. ricinus and I. persulcatus nymphs was higher than by the larvae, but the differences were significant only for I. persulcatus (Fisher exact test, p<0.05, 
Table 1
, 
S2
). The proportion of nymphs of the two tick species and their hybrids infected with the strain LK-138 was determined on the 30th d.p.f. and was low, similar to that for larvae (
Figure 2
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
).Thus, the highest efficiency of acquisition of the strain EK-328 from infected mice was observed in hybrid larvae, in which the level of virus reproduction was 2–3 log10GCN higher than in the parental tick species.3.2Trans-stadial TBEV transmissionIn the present study, we had two stages of trans-stadial TBEV transmission (
Figure 1
). In the first stage, larvae and nymphs, which fed on TBEV-infected mice, molted to the next developmental stage (nymphs and adults, respectively). Questing nymphs further fed on uninfected mice and molted to adults, which was the second trans-stadial transmission.Ticks were analyzed for the presence of TBEV at different days post molting (d.p.m.), and in some cases there was a difference in the ticks’ IRs (
Figure 2B
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
). After the first molting, ticks were analyzed after 7–84 d.p.m. A longer period after molting favored a higher percentage of TBEV-positive ticks. Significant differences were obtained in the analysis of questing I. ricinus nymphs [Fisher exact test, p<0.01, 
Figure 2B
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
, NN(2)] and adults [Chi square test, p<0.01, 
Figure 2B
; 
Table S2
, Ad(2)] for the presence of the strain EK-328 at 7 and 49–50 d.p.m. At the same time, there was no significant difference in the number of copies of TBEV RNA in ticks at different time points (
Figure 3
; 
Table S2
). After second trans-stadial transmission (nymphs→adults), adult ticks were analyzed for the presence of TBEV 5–149 d.p.m. [
Table S2
, Ad(4)]. We did not find any dependence of TBEV prevalence on the number of days after second molting, as was observed during the virus acquisition and the first trans-stadial transmission (
Figure 2C
). However, it is worth noting that, even after 147-149 d.p.m. (332 days after feeding on infected mice and 194 days after feeding on uninfected mice), both strains were detected in ticks (
Figure 2C
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
) and the number of TBEV RNA copies was quite high (
Figure 3
; 
Table S3
).3.2.1First trans-stadial TBEV transmissionThe effectiveness of the first trans-stadial transmission of the two TBEV strains was different. The maximal prevalence of the strain EK-328 in molted larvae of all three tick groups was rather low and did not exceed 15% [
Figure 2B
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
, NN(2)]. The highest IR was observed in hybrids (14.3%) (determined at 7 d.p.m.), which significantly differs from IR of I. ricinus (Chi square test, p<0.01), and I. persulcatus IR at this time period was 0% (
Table 1
; 
Figure 2B
). The number of RNA copies of the strain EK-328 in positive hybrids was quite high, but could not be compared with other tick groups due to lack of data at 7 d.p.m. The IR of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus molted larvae with the strain LK-138 reached almost 50% (determined at 49-84 d.p.m.) and was significantly higher than that with EK-328 [
Table 1
, NN(2)]. The number of RNA copies of the strain LK-138 was significantly higher in I. ricinus molted larvae than in I. persulcatus (Mann–Whitney test, p<0.001, 
Figure 3
; 
Table S2
, 
S3
). In addition, in I. ricinus, the number of RNA copies of the strain LK-138 was higher than that of the strain EK-328 (Mann–Whitney test, p<0.001, 
Figure 3
; 
Table S2
, 
S3
). Feeding of questing I. ricinus and I. persulcatus nymphs after the molting of larvae slightly increased the prevalence of the strain EK-328 in I. ricinus [
Table 1
, 
S2
, NNeng(3)] and increased the prevalence and number of LK-138 RNA copies in I. persulcatus [
Table S2
, NNeng(3), 221 d.p.m], but the differences were insignificant.The prevalence of the strain EK-328 in molted nymphs of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus at 49-84 d.p.m. was significantly higher than that in molted larvae [Chi square test, p<0.001, 
Figure 2B
; 
Table 1
, Ad(2)]. The highest IR with the strain EK-328 was observed in I. persulcatus molted nymphs (
Table 1
; 
Figure 2B
), but the difference was insignificant. Additionally, the highest number of RNA copies of the strain EK-328 was observed in I. persulcatus [
Figure 3
; 
Table S2
, 
S3
, Ad(2)], but the difference was not statistically significant. Prevalence of the strain LK-138 in I. ricinus and I. persulcatus molted nymphs was 36.4% and 45.5%, respectively, which was similar to that in molted larvae, and did not differ from the prevalence of the strain EK-328 in these tick species. In molted hybrid nymphs, the prevalence of the strain LK-328 was the highest, and significantly differed from EK-328’s prevalence [Chi square test, p<0.05, 
Table 1
, Ad(2)]. In molted I. persulcatus nymphs, the number of RNA copies of the strain EK-328 was significantly higher than that of the strain LK-138 (Mann–Whitney test, p<0.01, 
Figure 3
; 
Table S2
, 
S3
).To estimate the trans-stadial TBEV survival rate, we need to divide the ticks’ IR after trans-stadial transmission by the effectiveness of the virus acquisition from infected mice. Unfortunately, we could estimate the trans-stadial survival rate only for the strain EK-328, since the efficiency of LK-138’s acquisition by ticks from infected mice was lower than the efficiency of trans-stadial transmission. Therefore, the trans-stadial survival rate of the strain EK-328 in larvae of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus and hybrids was 14.9%, 33.7%, and 15.6%, respectively. For hybrids, this indicator is most likely underestimated, since the efficiency of trans-stadial transmission was determined at 7 d.p.m. and could be higher at the later time period.Thus, there were almost no significant differences in the efficiency of the trans-stadial transmission of both strains between the different groups of ticks. At the same time, in the I. persulcatus molted nymphs (Ad(2)) infected with the strain EK-328 and in hybrid molted nymphs infected with the strain LK-138, the IR and the number of TBEV RNA copies were slightly higher than in the other groups of ticks. Differences in the efficiency of trans-stadial transmission between the two strains were significant for I. ricinus and I. persulcatus molted larvae [NN(2)) and for hybrid molted nymphs (Ad(2)].3.2.2Second trans-stadial TBEV transmissionAfter the second trans-stadial transmission, the IRs of adult ticks with the strain EK-328 were generally lower than those of adult ticks with the strain LK-138 [
Figure 2C
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
, Ad(4)]. The differences were significant for I. ricinus, the IR of which with the strain LK-138 was almost 10 times higher than with the strain EK-328 at 30-43 d.p.m. Chi-square test, p<0.01, 
Figure 2C
; 
Table 1
, 
S2
). Additionally, in I. ricinus, the number of RNA copies of the strain LK-138 was significantly higher than that of the strain EK-328 (Mann–Whitney test, p<0.01, 
Figure 3
; 
Table S3
). The highest EK-328 prevalence was observed in I. persulcatus [Chi-square test, p<0.05), and when compared to the first trans-stadial transmission rate (NN(2)], this value increased by 3.7 times (Chi- square test, p<0.001, 
Table 1
). Interestingly, the highest number of EK-328 RNA copies was retained in hybrids after the second trans-stadial transmission (Kruskal-Wallis test, p<0.01, 
Figure 3
; 
Table S3
). The IRs of adult ticks with the strain LK-138 was high and did not differ between I. ricinus and I. persulcatus. However, the IR of I. ricinus after the second trans-stadial transmission [Ad(4)) increased by almost two times compared to the first trans-stadial transmission (NN(2)], and the difference was statistically significant (Chi square test, p<0.05, 
Table 1
).3.3Transmission of TBEV from molted larvae to laboratory miceQuesting I. ricinus, I. persulcatus, and hybrid nymphs, obtained after molting of TBEV infected larvae, were fed on uninfected ICR mice, and after 7-14 days post ticks feeding mice were decapitated and blood and brain were harvested. Results of the sera (PRNT50) and brain suspensions (qPCR) analysis are shown in the 
Table 2
. It should be noted that mice showed no or mild symptoms of the disease. The latter could also be associated with blood loss due to tick feeding. According to our data, 78.3% (18/23) of mice had NAb titer in the sera higher than 1 log10 and/or a detectable level of TBEV RNA in the brain. There were no differences in efficiency of TBEV transmission and in number of TBEV RNA copies in mice brains either between tick groups or between virus strains. Thus, despite the small sample size, we were able to show the ability of hybrid nymphs to transmit both TBEV strains to mice.Table 2Effectiveness of the Siberian (strain EK-328) and European (strain LK-138) TBEV subtypes transmission from infected Ixodes ricinus, Ixodes persulcatus, and hybrid questing nymphs (infected as larvae) to laboratory mice.Nymphs groupTBEV strainNumber of mice with NAb titer against TBEV ≥1 log10/total testedTBEV RNA level in mice brainsTotal number of infected mice*Number of positive mice/total testedMean RNA copy number, log10GCN/mLHybridEK-3281/21/24.451/2LK-1381/11/14.601/1
I. ricinus
EK-3283/64/64.36 ± 0.214/6LK-1381/33/34.54 ± 0.273/3
I. persulcatus
EK-3284/64/64.43 ± 0.404/6LK-1383/54/54.55 ± 0.105/5NAb—neutralizing antibodies; log10GCN/mL—decimal logarithm of the genome copy number in mL of 10% brain suspension; * the mouse was considered infected if the NAb titer against TBEV in the blood serum was ≥1 log10 and/or a detectable level of TBEV RNA in the brain was observed.4DiscussionIn this work, we investigated the features of transmission of the European and Siberian TBEV subtypes in the main vectors and reservoirs—I. ricinus and I. persulcatus ticks, and their hybrids. Two strains were selected for the experiments, which were isolated from possibly sympatric areas of I. ricinus and I. persulcatus. It should be noted that the number of nymphs used and analyzed in our work was much lower than the number of larvae, which is associated with the peculiarities of ticks’ maintenance in laboratory conditions and limited resources. Despite this, important statistically significant results were obtained in the work. We expected that with a specific tick–strain combination, we would see a faster adaptation of the virus to the tick organism, which would possibly manifest itself in the form of more intensive TBEV reproduction or in the more efficient transmission of the virus. For all ticks, the number of RNA copies was determined by the qPCR method, since, in our opinion, this is the most accurate method for determining the concentration of the virus in the sample. In most studies of TBEV transmission, the infection of ticks with the virus was assessed by the amount of infectious virus determined by the plaque assay in a mammalian cell line (Labuda et al., 1993; Slovák et al., 2014; Khasnatinov et al., 2016), via intracerebral injection into suckling mice brains (Mishaeva and Erofeeva, 1979; Danielová, 1990), and by qPCR (Liebig et al., 2021; Migné et al., 2022). The titer of infectious virus does not always reflect the true amount of TBEV, because it is determined by the effect of the virus on mammalian cells or organisms. During TBEV adaptation to ticks, virus variants can be selected, which are capable of long-term persistence in tick cells, and do not cause a cytopathic effect in mammalian cells (i.e., do not form plaques) or are not capable of efficient reproduction in mammalian cells (Labuda et al., 1994; Romanova et al., 2007). However, even the qPCR method has limitations and our data on higher prevalence of the strain LK-138 in ticks after trans-stadial transmission than after feeding on infected mice suggests that we may underestimate the true ticks’ IR.In the experiment with the strain EK-328 we observed that TBEV IR in ticks was significantly affected by the time period from ticks’ feeding or molting to the analysis of the virus’s presence. According to our data, the IR in engorged larvae and nymphs was significantly higher on day 7 after feeding on infected mice than on days 30–31. Other scientists have drawn similar conclusions for the European TBEV subtype (Danielová, 1990). Perhaps this is due to physiological changes in the body of the molting tick, although, unlike insects, most organs in ticks do not undergo histolysis (Balashov, 1972). On the contrary, analysis of the effectiveness of the first trans-stadial TBEV transmission after a longer period post molting (49–84 d.p.m.) favored a higher percentage of virus-positive ticks. In the first 7–14 days after molting, the post-molting period of ticks may take place (Balashov, 1998), during which the molting processes in the tick’s body are completed, and which possibly affect the virus reproduction. Previously, controversial data have been obtained on the effect of molting on IR and virus titer (Mishaeva and Votyakov, 1978; Mishaeva and Erofeeva, 1979; Danielová, 1990). In our case, we can make comparisons between strains and tick species, when the ticks were analyzed at the same time after feeding or molting. When evaluating the efficiency of TBEV acquisition and transmission, it is necessary to consider IR obtained in the optimal period of time—shortly after feeding and later after molting.In our work, the efficiency of the acquisition of the strain EK-328 from infected mice by I. ricinus and I. persulcatus ticks and their hybrids was generally higher than the ticks’ IRs with the strain LK-138. However, if we compare the results on the same period after feeding, then there will be no differences between two TBEV strains. We also noted that the effectiveness of the acquisition of the strain EK-328 by I. ricinus and I. persulcatus nymphs was slightly higher than by the larvae, and the difference was significant for I. persulcatus. It was logical to assume the influence of the feeding time of larvae and nymphs and volume of ingested TBEV-infected blood on the IR, although no differences in IR of larvae and nymphs with the strain LK-138 were observed. In our experiment, the feeding time of nymphs in all groups of ticks was the same (3 days), while the feeding time of larvae differed in tick groups: I. ricinus – 2 days, I. persulcatus – 3 days, and for hybrids it varied and averaged 2.7 ± 0.6 days. Thus, significant differences in the feeding duration of larvae and nymphs were observed only for I. ricinus, although no significant difference in IR of these ticks with TBEV was noted. The differences in the IR of larvae and nymphs may be associated not only with the volume of absorbed blood with the virus, but also with the sensitivity of the TBEV detection method.Our most interesting finding was that the most effective transmission of the strain EK-328 from an infected mouse was observed in the hybrid larvae (91.7%), in which the level of virus reproduction was 2-3 log10GCN higher than in the parental tick species. We did not observe any differences in the number of RNA copies of various TBEV strains in I. ricinus. However, in I. persulcatus larvae, the number of RNA copies of the strain EK-328 was significantly higher than that of the strain LK-138.It has been established that the level of trans-stadial transmission depends on many factors (strain and infectious dose of the virus, method of infection, method of TBEV detection in ticks) and can range from 0 to 100% (Naumov et al., 1980; Kurenkov et al., 1981; Danielová, 1990; Slovák et al., 2014; Migné et al., 2022). For the first time in one experiment, we showed that after trans-stadial transmission, there were differences in the IRs between two TBEV strains rather than between ticks from different experimental groups. Significantly higher values of the number of TBEV RNA copies were observed in I. persulcatus and I. ricinus ticks infected with the specific virus subtype in comparison with the non-specific subtype after the first and the second trans-stadial transmission, respectively. In hybrids, usually the highest amount of RNA of the Siberian TBEV subtype was observed during all transmission stages.In our study, we examined the probability of TBEV detection in ticks after the second molt after feeding on uninfected mice (second trans-stadial transmission). In this case, the tick IR will depend not only on the survival of the virus, but also on the effectiveness of non-viremic TBEV transmission during the co-feeding of infected and uninfected ticks. The transmission of TBEV during co-feeding is usually effective and, depending on the host, the distance between infected and uninfected ticks and the strain of the virus, can reach 40–90% (Labuda et al., 1993; Slovák et al., 2014; Ličková et al., 2020). In our work, the IR with LK-138 in I. ricinus ticks after the second molt increased by almost two times compared to the first trans-stadial transmission. As a result, in I. ricinus, the IR with the strain LK-138 and the number of copies of this strain were much higher than those for the strain EK-328. The highest IR with the strain EK-328 was noted in I. persulcatus, and compared with the first trans-stadial transmission, this value increased by 3.7 times. Interestingly, the highest number of EK-328 RNA copies was preserved in hybrids even after the second trans-stadial transmission. Thus, we observed a significant increase in ticks’ IR with TBEV after the second trans-stadial transmission, apparently due to the non-viremic transmission of the virus, but only in a specific subtype–tick combination. Khasnatinov et al. (2016) showed that TBEV strains of the European and Siberian subtypes had various levels of non-viremic transmission from infected I. ricinus females to nymphs. In our work, we determined TBEV RNA copies in ticks using qPCR, and did not study the titer of the infectious virus in ticks, but we observed some correlation between the number of RNA copies and the IR in I. ricinus and I. persulcatus. For hybrids, this correlation was rather the opposite.To prove the competence of hybrids as TBEV vectors, it is necessary to demonstrate not only the effective acquisition and trans-stadial transmission of the virus, but also the ability to transmit the virus to a susceptible host. In our work, we have shown the ability of hybrids to infect laboratory mice with TBEV of Siberian and European subtype, despite the small number of analyzed animals.Thus, in this work, we analyzed the features of transmission of the Siberian and European TBEV subtypes in I. ricinus and I. persulcatus and their hybrids. Significant differences were observed in I. ricinus and I. persulcatus after the second trans-stadial transmission of TBEV, where, possibly due to non-viremic transmission, the IR of ticks increased significantly only in the case of a specific subtype-tick combination. In hybrids we observed the highest acquisition effectiveness and RNA copy numbers during Siberian subtype transmission, but the IR of hybrids in general did not differ from the parental species. Additional experiments are needed with other TBEV strains and with hybrids from another cross (female I. ricinus × male I. persulcatus) in order to study the features of transmission of different TBEV subtypes in these ticks in detail.Data availability statementThe original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/
Supplementary Material
. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.Ethics statementThe animal study was reviewed and approved by Ethics Committee of Chumakov Federal Scientific Center for Research and Development of Immune-and-Biological Products of RAS (Institute of Poliomyelitis), protocol No 040321-1.Author contributionsConceptualization: OB and GK. Methodology: OB. Validation: OB and GK. Formal analysis: OB. Investigation: OB, AP and AA. Data curation: OB. Writing—original draft preparation: OB. Writing—review and editing: OB and GK. Visualization: OB and AP. Supervision: OB and GK. Project administration: OB and GK. Funding acquisition: GK. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.


Title: Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus Vaccine-Induced Human Antibodies Mediate Negligible Enhancement of Zika Virus Infection 

INTRODUCTIONAs the world becomes a more interconnected web of travel and commerce, there is a need to recognize the interaction of different endemic diseases in disparate regions. Much of this will take the form of studying how endemic diseases in some regions are affected by emerging pathogens in others. Of note, recent studies detailing how Zika virus (ZIKV) pathogenesis is enhanced by antiflavivirus humoral immunity both in vitro and in in vivo mouse models have created a need to understand how individuals in other regions with endemic flavivirus circulation and widespread vaccination might be affected (1, 2). The tick-borne encephalitis viruses (TBEVs), in particular, represent a growing public health threat throughout much of Europe and Asia, with an estimated 10,000 to 15,000 cases reported annually (3). The European subtype of TBEV also represents a modern medical success story, as vaccine coverage of an estimated 88% in Austria has led to a >90% reduction in the burden of disease (4–7). These historically high vaccination rates represented a pertinent cohort for study. However, high vaccination rates and a large population of seroconverted individuals are not exclusive to Austria: many European states (e.g., Germany [8], Switzerland [9], and Lithuania [10]) have high rates of immunity from vaccination. A strong economy combined with a trend toward globalization has also led to a high level of travel abroad in these countries (11). The possibility of imported Zika virus cases looms large. Past studies have shown that the ZIKV E protein and TBEV E are structurally similar (12), and various antibodies targeting specific epitopes on ZIKV E cross-react with the TBEV E protein (13). This represents a pertinent unanswered question: can immunity against TBEV enhance ZIKV disease? In this study, we evaluated the sera of 50 donors vaccinated with the inactivated FSME-IMMUN TBEV vaccine for cross-reactivity to ZIKV E protein by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) potential in Fcγ receptor (FcγR)-bearing human K562 myeloid cells. Samples positive for ELISA reactivity and ADE in vitro were pooled and passively transferred in our recently published in vivo model of ZIKV infection in immunocompromised Stat2−/− mice. While immunocompromised mice have their limitations as a representative model of human disease (impaired interferon [IFN]-driven antiviral signaling, for example), we believe that they have relevance as a screening tool to evaluate whether or not further study is warranted. As we discovered, sera from donors vaccinated against TBEV induce weak enhancement of ZIKV infection in vitro but do not induce a significant level of enhancement in an in vivo model.RESULTSTo investigate the possibility that TBEV cross-reactivity against ZIKV supports antibody-dependent enhancement, we first examined the phylogenetic relationship of these related flaviviruses (Fig. 1). When determined as a factor of E protein amino acid sequence similarity, the phylogenetic relationship between TBEV and ZIKV appears quite distant, in two different branches, with Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), West Nile virus (WNV), and all four DENV serotypes being more closely related to ZIKV than the TBEV complex is. Also of note is the clustering of ZIKV with DENV, underscoring past descriptions of ZIKV as “the fifth serotype of dengue” (14). With this degree of similarity between ZIKV and TBEV, we speculated that TBEV vaccinee serum might be an effective test of the limits of ADE of ZIKV in in vitro and murine in vivo models.FIG 1 Phylogenetic tree of medically important flaviviruses based on E protein amino acid diversity. Node labels refer to bootstrap values as a percentage of 1,000 iterations, with the indicated taxa clustered together. The TBEV complex is shown in green, the DENV complex is shown in blue, and WNV is shown in red. TBEV and Powassan virus (POWV) are the only tick-borne viruses shown; all others are mosquito borne. YFV, yellow fever virus; WNV, West Nile virus; JEV, Japanese encephalitis virus. The tree was generated using the Clustal Omega algorithm, analyzed in Mega7 to generate bootstrap values (as a percentage) out of 1,000 iterations, visualized in FigTree, and rooted to Tamana bat virus (TABV) as the outgroup to show diversity among flaviviruses. The scale bar represents a 6% change in amino acids.We first wanted to determine the contribution of in vitro mechanisms. To this end, anti-ZIKV E protein ELISAs were performed. As shown below, several of the TBEV vaccinee samples have area under the curve (AUC) values indicating reactivity. It is clear that anti-TBEV vaccination induces ZIKV cross-reactive humoral immunity (Fig. 2A). As expected, these vaccinee samples had much lower AUC values than pooled plasma from DENV- or WNV-infected individuals. This is most likely attributable to the phylogenetic relationships between TBEV, WNV, DENV, and ZIKV E protein (Fig. 1). A number of TBEV vaccinee samples also had low ELISA reactivity. This might have been the result of different responses to vaccination and donor heterogeneity. A similar breadth was also observed in anti-DENV and anti-WNV donor plasma.FIG 2 Anti-TBEV serum reacts to ZIKV E and enhances ZIKV infection in vitro. (A) AUC values from ELISAs against ZIKV E. Shown in blue are a preselected set of anti-DENV samples, with a range of reactivity. Shown in red are a similarly preselected set of anti-WNV samples. In gray are 8 naive-control (CTRL) plasma samples. In black for each are the pooled stocks used for later animal experiments. (B) AUC values derived from ADE in vitro experiments using ZIKV strain PRVABC59/2015 in K562 cells. DENV and WNV are plasma pools, as described for panel A. Naive-control samples are the same 8 samples employed to obtain the results shown in panel A. Lines represent geometric means. Error bars represent the standard errors of the means (SEM). (C) Raw ADE induction values derived from flow cytometry of K562 cells infected with ZIKV and incubated with the indicated serum/plasma sample. AUC values shown in panel B are based on this data. AUC values were calculated using all values up to the peak value for each curve. (D) Correlation analysis between ZIKV E ELISA AUCs and in vitro ADE AUCs. Each point represents one donor. r2 = 0.5574, P < 0.0001.Reactivity to ZIKV E does not guarantee enhancement, since specific binding and functional mechanisms must be involved. Non-E-reactive antibodies might also drive ADE. To appropriately test for these mechanisms, TBEV vaccinee samples were evaluated in an in vitro assay of ZIKV infectivity in K562 cells expressing CD32 (FcγRII) (Fig. 2B and C). K562 cells are naturally nonpermissive to flaviviruses, but entry via virus-antibody complexes binding to FcγRII enables infection (15). Vaccinee samples had AUC values 10- to 20-fold higher on average than those of naive-control samples. The DENV and WNV pooled controls also induced a much larger amount of ADE than the TBEV vaccination samples and naive controls, as expected based on phylogenetic data. We were also interested in the extent to which the enhancement potential in vitro correlated with cross-reactivity against ZIKV E via ELISA. The statistical relationship between these two measures is considerable, implying a causative mechanism (Fig. 2D). However, there were a number of samples that lacked any measurable ZIKV E reactivity but had enhanced infectivity. In total, 28/50 samples (56%) had anti-ZIKV E reactivity via ELISA, while 40/50 (80%) enhanced ZIKV infectivity in vitro. Sixteen of forty samples enhanced infection without any detectable anti-ZIKV E reactivity. For these donors, humoral immunity against other ZIKV proteins may drive enhancement. Interestingly, matched pre- and post-TBEV vaccination samples from three volunteers demonstrated that anti-ZIKV cross-reactive immunity was induced to low levels by vaccination (Fig. 3).FIG 3 ZIKV E protein reactivity of three human TBEV vaccinees with serum harvested prevaccination and approximately 3 weeks postvaccination. ELISAs for ZIKV E protein were conducted as described in the legend of Fig. 1. **, P < 0.001 (ratio t test).Given the nature of this in vitro data, we next tested TBEV vaccinee serum for signs of ADE in an in vivo model. In a previous study, Stat2−/− mice showed severe signs of ZIKV disease when the virus was administered in concert with anti-DENV plasma with a large window of enhancement. Mice that received 20 μl of pooled anti-DENV plasma had a 20% rate of survival compared to >90% for animals that received pooled naive-control plasma (1). This window between experimental and control groups made Stat2−/− mice an ideal platform to test our TBEV vaccinee samples. If anti-TBEV humoral immunity enhances ZIKV pathogenesis, this is the best model at our disposal to observe it in controlled settings. In dose escalation studies, 200 μl of anti-TBEV serum was chosen as the dose to elicit the largest amount of ADE (Fig. S1). As shown in Fig. 4A, animals that received 200 μl of pooled anti-TBEV serum survived at a rate (50%) that, while distinct from that of 200-μl naive controls (75%), does not rise to levels of likely physiological significance in humans. Mice receiving 200 μl of anti-TBEV serum also exhibited some pathogenesis in measures of morbidity, including weight loss and clinical symptom score (Fig. 4B and C). But again, no statistical significance between these and 200-μl naive-control animals was observed, indicating that there might be little physiological significance to these effects that could be translated to human disease states.10.1128/mSphereDirect.00011-18.1FIG S1 Dose escalation of ZIKV enhancement in Stat2−/− mice. Mice were given the indicated doses of naive-control or anti-TBEV serum/plasma (in 200 μl, total, with PBS as the diluent). In the 20-μl and 200-μl groups, 3 and 8 mice, respectively, were tested. This figure includes data shown in Fig. 4; pooled results are shown from two separate experiments. (A) Kaplan-Meier survival curves; (B) weight curves; (C) average clinical symptom scores for each group; (D) rectal body temperatures detected on day 3. Download FIG S1, TIF file, 1.6 MB.Copyright © 2018 Duehr et al.2018Duehr et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.FIG 4 In vivo model of ZIKV enhancement in Stat2−/− mice. Mice were given the indicated doses of naive-control, anti-TBEV, or anti-DENV serum/plasma (in 200 μl, total, with PBS as the diluent). In the 20-μl and 200-μl groups, 3 and 8 mice were tested, respectively. Results shown are from two separate experiments. (A) Kaplan-Meier survival curves. (B) Weight curves. On days 7 and 8, the anti-DENV group consisted of one mouse. (C) Average clinical symptom scores for each group, using a 6-point system and a score of 7 for deceased animals. (D) Rectal body temperatures measured on day 3. n.s., not significant; *, P < 0.05. Values represent geometric means. Error bars represent the SEM. †, antiserum was used; ‡, naive serum was used.We were also interested in the relationship between fever and other clinical symptoms. We previously observed the induction of fever in this model, with a markedly higher fever in anti-DENV animals (>38°C) than in controls (~37°C). Early-onset low-grade fever ranging from 37.8 to 38.5°C is a known clinical marker of Zika virus disease in humans, and high-grade fever (38.9°C to 41.7°C) is an early indicator of dengue hemorrhagic fever, a disease exacerbated by ADE (16). In the animals injected with anti-TBEV serum before ZIKV infection, we observed a low-grade fever (~38.6°C) on day 3 not significantly distinct from the fever observed in anti-DENV positive-control animals, ~38.8°C (Fig. 4D) (unpaired t test P = 0.7). A lower-grade fever was also observed in naive-control animals (~38.3°C).DISCUSSIONThe ADE effect that increases viremia and disease pathogenesis between different dengue virus serotypes is well documented in the medical literature (17–19). Further, the finding that immunity against closely related flaviviruses can enhance flavivirus infection in vitro is not new (20). Epidemiological and mechanistic studies extending these phenomena to more complex systems, though, are sparse. Concerns about ZIKV-induced microcephaly of infants born to seropositive mothers in Brazil have reignited the drive to identify and characterize these phenomena as determinants of pathogenesis. In particular, a number of recent studies have highlighted the possibility that dengue virus immunity affects Zika virus pathogenesis (1, 2). Other studies have not observed this using models of serial infection in macaques and clinical data from DENV-seropositive ZIKV-infected cohorts of patients (21, 22). Mechanistic questions and low cohort sizes have stressed the need for more studies of an epidemiological origin. Even so, an important question is raised: is it possible that enhancement of ZIKV pathogenesis is induced by other flaviviruses? In this study, we provide evidence in in vitro and in vivo models that enhanced ZIKV infection is likely not induced by humoral anti-TBEV immunity induced by TBEV vaccination. We utilized serum samples taken from individuals recently vaccinated with FSME-IMMUN (Baxter/Pfizer), derived from the Central European subtype (Neudörfl strain). However, all three subtypes of TBEV (Central European, Siberian, and Far Eastern) are closely related based on sequence identity at the amino acid level (>94%) (23), and cross-protective immunity has been observed in animals vaccinated with the Central European subtype vaccine (24, 25). Also, the vast majority of serological clinical assays cannot distinguish between the subtypes due to cross-reactivity against E protein. For these reasons, we are confident that our findings with FSME-IMMUN will apply to other TBEV vaccines as well.Our anti-TBEV samples came from vaccinees enrolled in programs beginning at an early age (the WHO recommends the vaccination for all persons ≥1 year old in countries where the disease is endemic) (5) and often including multiple boosters every 5 to 10 years (26). Our study utilizes samples drawn from participants between the ages of 23 and 34 years. This diversity of anti-ZIKV E titer is therefore unsurprising. It is likely that different individuals target different E protein epitopes, with some participants becoming increasingly less ZIKV reactive and others stabilizing or enriching their response against ZIKV-TBEV cross-reactive epitopes. For this and other reasons, we pooled only the most ZIKV E-reactive and ZIKV-enhancing serum samples for use in vivo.Other groups have recently described that reactivity and enhancement do not share an entirely 1:1 correlation (27), and our findings here concur. Our prior studies showed that serum derived from macaques inoculated with the Yellow Fever virus (YFV) 17 D live attenuated vaccine failed to enhance ZIKV infectivity in vitro (1). Given the phylogenetic clustering of YFV and TBEV, this makes sense in the context of our findings with TBEV. Other mechanisms must play a role in whether or not serum, plasma, or monoclonal antibodies are enhancing. Ultimately, a mounting weight of evidence shows that phylogenetic distance between the inducing and enhanced viruses (and, by proxy, the reactivity of the induced polyclonal response against the enhanced virus) is predictive.In dose-response studies of our samples in vivo, anti-TBEV serum showed the greatest amount of enhancement at the highest dose (200 μl). This is in contrast to what occurred with anti-DENV plasma, which had a protective effect at 200 μl. We previously theorized that this might be due to the relative phylogenetic distances of WNV and DENV from ZIKV. The four most common DENV serotypes are the most similar to ZIKV with regard to E protein amino acid sequence. WNV and TBEV, on the other hand, are much less closely related to ZIKV (or each other). Since more closely related viruses will often have more similar antigenic sites (28), it follows that higher doses of serum/plasma with more distantly related antigenic targets are required to neutralize and/or enhance virus.In summary, our evidence shows that anti-TBEV immunity induces negligible enhancement of ZIKV disease in a murine in vivo model and is unlikely to cause enhanced ZIKV disease in humans. The question of the breadth of ADE has been a cause for concern to the emerging infectious disease field for some time, since increasingly more studies have shown induced ADE arising from further phylogenetic breadths. Our study shows a tapering of enhancement attributable to this phylogenetic diversity, which is cause for further examination.MATERIALS AND METHODSPhylogenetic tree.E protein amino acid sequences (Table 1) were obtained from GenBank in FASTA format with a preference for whole-genome sequences partitioned into designated mature peptides. The sequences were aligned using the Clustal Omega Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) server maintained by the European Molecular Biology Laboratory’s European Bioinformatics Institute (EMBL-EBI). A phylogenetic tree was then generated using the maximum likelihood method based on the JTT matrix-based model in Mega7 (29). Node labels indicate bootstrap values as a percentage of trees with similarly clustered taxa out of 1,000 iterations. Visualization was done using FigTree v1.3.1 (Rambaut group, University of Edinburgh) and rooted to Tamana bat virus (TABV) as an outgroup to show relative diversity among other flaviviruses (Fig. 1).TABLE 1 E protein amino acid sequences used to create the phylogenetic tree in Fig. 1Tree labelVirus nameStrain/isolateGenBank accession no. DENV-1Dengue virus 1BR/1141_2011/AL/2010AFD04702.1DENV-2Dengue virus 2BR/SJRP/869/2013AKQ00027.1DENV-3Dengue virus 3United States/633798/1963AFZ40124.1DENV-4Dengue virus 4H241ALB78116.1TABVTamana bat virusTr127154NP_776027.1JEVJapanese encephalitis virusDH10M978ALD09612.1POWVPowassan virusP0375AMY50382.1TBEV-Far EasternTick-borne encephalitis virusFar Eastern/Tomsk-M202AIL33470.1TBEV-SiberianTick-borne encephalitis virusSiberian/KolarovoACN42746.2TBEV-Central EuropeanTick-borne encephalitis virusCentral European/NeudörflNP_775503.1WNVWest Nile virusLineage 2NP_776014.1YFVYellow fever virus17 D vaccineNP_740305.1ZIKVZika virusPRVABC59/2015ANW07476.1Donor samples.TBEV-vaccinated donor serum samples were provided by the Vienna Blood Center in Austria. All donors received an initial vaccination of FSME-IMMUN (Baxter/Pfizer) at a very young age (~1 to 3 years old), and most received subsequent boosters every 3 to 5 years. Samples tested in this study were obtained from male and female volunteers aged between 23 and 34 years (median, 29 years). None of the participants were vaccinated within 4 weeks of the blood draw. All samples were confirmed as WNV negative via PCR. Patients with past DENV infection were excluded based on health questionnaires completed at the time of blood collection. All samples were heat inactivated and filtered before use in this study.All blood donors from Austria gave their informed consent for using residual test samples for scientific purposes. The responsible ethics commission of Upper Austria had no objection to the use of residual anonymized blood donor samples for research after informed consent was obtained.Deidentified pre- and post-TBEV serum samples from the three vaccinated study participants were made available for research through the Personalized Virology Initiative (PVI), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai (institutional review board [IRB] number 1600772). Postvaccination samples were collected approximately 3 weeks after intramuscular vaccination with FSME-IMMUN (Baxter/Pfizer) as reported by the study participants.DENV-infected blood donor plasma samples were selected from 270,049 samples donated to the American Red Cross in Puerto Rico between March 2010 and August 2013, as previously described (1). Initially, samples were screened via either DENV NS1 antigen ELISA or individual donation transcription-mediated amplification (TMA) testing (Gen-Probe, San Diego, CA). Donors were considered DENV infected only if both the initial and subsequent TMA test results were positive. Of 173 DENV-infected blood donors, we received 156 plasma units, of which 15 were ZIKV E reactive and used for the current study.WNV-infected donor samples were identified via screening of 52,355,427 blood donations in the United States between August 2003 and December 2011. Initial screening was through WNV nucleic acid testing (NAT) as previously described (30). Blood donors were designated WNV infected only if both the initial and repeat WNV NAT samples were reactive and WNV-specific IgM and/or IgG testing results were positive upon either initial or follow-up testing. All tests for WNV antibodies were conducted by Abbot Laboratories (Abbot Park, IL) in 2003 to 2004 or by Focus Diagnostics (San Juan Capistrano, CA) in 2003 to 2011. We received a total of 471 WNV-infected donor samples that met the aforementioned criteria. Of these, we included only samples that had positive reactivity for WNV-specific IgG documented (n = 146). For all WNV- and DENV-infected donors, information pertaining to age, gender, and whether a doctor’s visit resulted from their infection was available.Samples from 15 healthy blood donors obtained from the American Red Cross between April 2008 and August 2010 served as a negative-control population. These negative-control samples were screened for anti-WNV reactivity. Human sample testing was conducted under the following IRB protocols: dengue virus (Gen-Probe Procleix) clinical protocol number 2012-016 and WNV protocol number 2003-011.ZIKV envelope protein ELISA.Briefly, E protein (Protein Sciences Corp., Meriden, CT) was applied to Immulon 4 HBX plates overnight at 4°C at a concentration of 2 μg/ml (50 μl/well) in coating buffer (0.1 M Na2CO3-NaHCO3, pH 9.4). After removal of the coating buffer, plates were washed three times with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (pH 7.4) with 0.1% Tween 20 (TPBS). Blocking buffer (TPBS plus 3% dry milk powder) was then added, and the plates were incubated for 1 h at room temperature (RT). After being decanted, heat-inactivated serum was serially diluted in the plates at a 1:3 dilution, starting with a 1:100 dilution in blocking buffer. Murine anti-flavivirus E monoclonal antibody (MAb) clone D1-4G2-4-15 (31) was used as a positive control, and a murine IgG2a MAb was used as a negative control, both to ensure standardized results. All control MAbs were also diluted 1:3 in the plates, with a 30-μg/ml starting concentration in blocking buffer. After a 2-h incubation period with samples, the plates were washed three times with TPBS. Secondary horseradish peroxidase conjugated to anti-human IgG antibody (Sigma; A0293, 1:3,000) diluted in blocking buffer was then added. After a 1-h incubation, plates were washed four times with TPBS and developed with SigmaFast o-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride (OPD; 100 μl per well; Sigma). After 10 min, the reaction was stopped with 3 M HCl. The optical density at 490 nm was read on a plate reader. Background levels were analyzed, and area under the curve (AUC) values were calculated using GraphPad Prism.In vitro assay of antibody-dependent enhancement of ZIKV infection.To determine the level of in vitro ADE of ZIKV infection, serial dilutions of serum or plasma were suspended in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 (RPMI 1640) medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM l-glutamine, 10 U/ml penicillin, and 10 μg/ml streptomycin and combined with a suspension of ZIKV (at a multiplicity of infection of 1, strain PRVABC59, GenBank accession number KU501215.1). Plates were then incubated for 1 h at 37°C prior to the addition of K562 cells (5 × 104) in 96-well U-bottom plates. After 2 days, cells were washed and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) and permeabilized. Intracellular staining buffer consisted of PBS with 0.2% bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.05% saponin, and anti-flavivirus E murine monoclonal antibody 4G2 (1 µg/ml hybridoma line D1-4G2-4-15). Intracellular staining was done for 1 h at RT. After being washed, cells were incubated with secondary goat anti-mouse IgG antibody conjugated to phycoerythrin (1 µg/ml; Invitrogen). ADE of ZIKV infection was measured using flow cytometry; the proportion of infected cells was determined using a FACSCalibur and analyzed with FlowJo2 version 10.1.r7. Areas under the curve were calculated using GraphPad Prism.In vivo model of ZIKV infection using Stat2−/− mice.All murine studies were conducted in an animal biosafety level 2 plus facility according to the guidelines of the Animal Care and Use Committee of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai. Five- to eight-week-old Stat2−/− mice (kindly provided by Christian Schindler) were injected intraperitoneally in the right flank with 200 or 20 µl (diluted to an overall total volume of 200 µl in PBS) of heat-inactivated 0.22-µm-filtered and pooled samples from either healthy-control, DENV, WNV, or TBEV samples. The 10 samples combined equally into pools were chosen based on their high reactivity and on enhancement observed in vitro. Two hours later, mice were injected intradermally with 5 × 103 PFU of ZIKV (strain PRVABC59, GenBank accession number KU501215.1). Groups were composed of 3 to 8 mice each, with a balanced amount of males and females between groups whenever possible. An even distribution of mice from different litters was used whenever possible. Mice were then monitored daily for 14 days for metrics of survival, weight, body temperature, and clinical symptom score. Symptom scoring was conducted according to predefined criteria, with a maximum possible score of 6. A point was awarded for each symptom: impacted walking, unresponsiveness, left hind leg paralysis, right hind leg paralysis, left front leg paralysis, and right front leg paralysis. Deceased animals were awarded a score of 7. Body temperature was measured daily at the same time of day using a rectal thermometer (Braintree Scientific) after animals were anesthetized. Anesthetization was conducted using inhalation exposure to ~2 to 3% isoflurane for 30 s. Animals that showed a >25% weight loss or full paralysis were humanely euthanized.Data analysis.AUC values were chosen as a means of representing reactivity and enhancement because AUC values represent a measure not only of the peak or trough of a curve’s signal but also of the entire curve. Because of this, comparisons of these values are less prone to error. AUC values were calculated as follows: ELISA or ADE values at a range of serial dilutions were entered into GraphPad Prism and subjected to nonlinear regression. For ADE values, only dilutions up to and including the peak were taken into account. An integral was then calculated on the curve, giving the AUC (https://www.graphpad.com/guides/prism/7/statistics/index.htm?stat_area_under_the_curve.htm). As a value, the AUC incorporates both the overall height of the curve and the overall width (how many dilutions still retain detectable signal above background). In this way, the AUC incorporates the endpoint titer; the two measures should be very tightly correlated. In the AUC graphs presented in Fig. 2, dots represent individual samples, a line represents the geometric mean of the group tested, and error bars represent standard errors of the means (SEM).The in vivo experiments in this study were not conducted in a blind manner. Except where indicated, statistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism software. All intergroup comparisons in vitro and in vivo were conducted using the Student t test statistic, with a baseline threshold P of <0.05. Comparisons made between three or more groups were evaluated against an adjusted P value using the Bonferroni correction. All t tests were unpaired, except for those conducted to evaluate the data presented in Fig. 3. Since information was matched for each anonymized subject pre- and postvaccination in Fig. 3, we conducted a ratio t test. This method compares the geometric means of the ratios of the pre- and postvaccination values in a paired manner, more effectively showing the statistical significance of induced antibody titers.Data availability.The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon request.


Title: The potential impact of climate change on the transmission risk of tick-borne encephalitis in Hungary

BackgroundTBE, endemic in several Central and Eastern European countries including Hungary [1], is a tick-borne infectious disease caused by tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), a member of the genus Flavivirus. Small mammals including rodents are the main reservoir hosts of the disease and humans are the accidental hosts. Human infection of TBEV involves the central nervous system [2].In a previous study [3], we have developed a TBEV transmission dynamics model coupled with an integration of (infected) tick-human contacts during a surveillance interval to describe the tick population dynamics and TBEV transmission dynamics in the tick-host enzootic cycle and tick-human contact. Key ecological and epidemiological parameters, region- and environment-specific, were estimated by fitting weekly human incidence data and incorporating local temperature data in the Vas county of Hungary. The parameterized model was then used to conduct a retroactive assessment of the TBEV transmission patterns in the tick-host enzootic cycle in Hungary to conclude that the prevalence of TBEV transmission in the enzootic cycle had been increasing along with the observed warming weather. This study also confirmed that non-systemic (co-feeding) transmission, whereby a susceptible (larva or nymph) can acquire infection from co-feeding with infected nymphs in the same host even when the infection has not been established in the host [4], has been playing a very significant role in maintaining the transmission cycle of TBEV in Hungary and nearby regions [3, 5, 6]. Similar observations were made using a few early mechanistic models which incorporated the non-systemic transmission route [7–9]. Although the transovarial transmission of TBEV is also possible, it is considered not efficient for maintaining the pathogen in tick populations [10, 11], and so it was not included in the model. Here, we aim to use this validated model to assess the impact of climate change on the TBE infection risk in the tick-host enzootic cycle. As discussed in [12], climate change may impact vector-borne disease transmission in many different ways including the change of the transmission intensity or the duration of the transmission season.An early study [13] provided ample evidence for the significance of TBE co-feeding transmission in Europe, and this fundamental study also showed that projected climate change would result in the contraction of the range of TBEV in some part of the Europe by lowering the degree of coincident feeding of larval and nymphal ticks [13]. However, whether this climate change increases or decreases the TBE prevalence in the tick-host enzootic cycle in a particular region depends highly on the patterns of the projected region-specific climate change.Here, we aim to incorporate the climate change patterns into the TBEV transmission dynamics model by revising model parameters, to project the TBEV prevalence in the tick-host enzootic cycle, and evaluate whether co-feeding and systemic transmission combined can sustain the persistence of TBEV. Our results show that in the study region, Vas County, the climate change will double and triple several key summative indices measuring the reproduction ratio (the basic reproduction number, R0), stage-specific tick densities, duration of co-feeding period, co-feeding ticks at two physiological stages (larva and nymph), and accumulated (tick) infections per host due to co-feeding transmission, during 2021-2050 and 2071-2100 according to two different climate predictions.MethodsStudy area and climate dataWe used monthly average temperature values observed in the past (1961-1990) and the values predicted in the future times, during the period of 2021-2050 and 2071-2100 (Fig. 1). The coordinate of the grid point is 47.2∘N and 16.6∘E, which is the nearest located to the center of Szombathely in Vas county, one of the main endemic areas in Hungary [14, 15]. For the climate data in 1961–1990, we used CarpatClim-Hu database [16]. For the future periods, we used two regional climate models (ALADIN-Climate 4.5 [17] and RegCM 3.1 [18, 19]) driven by the A1B emission scenario of IPCC SRES [20, 21] which describes the radiative forcing of 850 ppm CO2 concentration by 2100 [22].
Fig. 1Observed and predicted climate data. The blue curve shows the monthly mean temperature values observed during 1961–1990 (CarpatClim-Hu database) and the red and yellow curves show the predicted monthly mean temperature in 2021–2050 and 2071–2100, respectively (Top panel: ALADIN-Climate 4.5, Bottom panel: RegCM 3.1). The corresponding coordinate of the database is 47.2∘N 16.6∘E
Tick-borne encephalitis virus transmission dynamicsThe model in [3] describes the seasonal transmission of TBEV in the enzootic cycle with ticks and (animal) hosts. Two major transmission routes are considered: the systemic transmission route (Fig. 2a) and the non-systemic transmission route (Fig. 2b).
Fig. 2A schematic diagram of TBEV transmission. a represents the flow of TBEV transmission through systemic transmission route. The dashed lines represent systemic infection routes. The transitions depicted by solid lines are seasonal and parameterized by temperature variable. The green lines represent development rate from eggs to larvae, engorged stages to the next stages and the oviposition rate. The transitions in red lines are determined by host-attaching rates which are described by seasonal host availability and seasonal tick-questing activities. The diagram in (b) shows non-systemic transmission of TBEV induced by co-feeding of susceptible ticks (Lq, Nqs) and infected nymphs (Nqi) on the same hosts, regardless of the infection status of hosts. The dashed lines represent non-systemic infection routes
In this model, the tick population is stratified as eggs (E), questing larvae (Lq), engorged larvae (Le), questing nymphs (Nq), engorged nymphs (Ne), questing adults (Aq) and engorged adults (Ae). The tick population growth is described by the following parameters: birth rate of eggs, host-attaching rates, survival probability of the host-attached ticks, development rates from engorged states to the next stages and the mortality rate at each stage. The development rates and host-attaching rates are temperature dependent parameters. The host-attaching rates depend on the proportion of actively questing ticks and the host availability at the temperature. Although we have parameterized the questing activity of ticks by temperature, it is suggested that the day length and the air humidity also affect the questing activity [23].The model considers systemic transmission among immature ticks and hosts when susceptible questing ticks (Lq or Nqs) bite infected hosts (Hi), or when infected questing nymphs (Nqi) feed on the susceptible hosts (Hs). The systemic transmission dynamics is governed by the transmission efficacy from hosts to larvae, hosts to nymphs, nymphs to hosts and the recovery rate of the infected host, and it is implicitly influenced by the natural population growth of ticks and hosts and the host-attaching rates.In order to quantify the risk at which a susceptible feeding tick is infected by co-feeding nymphs, the model includes the following additional parameters: average duration of feeding for infected nymphs, probability of an infected nymph to induce non-systemic infection to the co-feeding susceptible ticks.Retroactive and proactive assessment of transmission risk in the enzootic cycleUsing this transmission dynamics model, we invented a few key summative indices to quantify the regional risk of TBEV transmission: the yearly duration of questing activities (1-dimensional index for feeding duration), the area bounded by tick density curves (ABC) (2-dimensional index for “force of co-feeding"), and the multiplication of ABC with the peak of infected questing nymphs (3-dimensional index for accumulated infection due to co-feeding). We also use the basic reproduction number to measure the transmission power of TBEV in the region with the specific environmental conditions. We define these indices in detail below.Yearly duration of questing activity for larvae,Tl: As the unfed larvae are actively questing at time t only when the temperature at the time, T(t), is greater than ml, the minimum temperature for the coincidence of host availability and the activity of questing larvae, we define the yearly duration of questing activity for larvae (Tl) by
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$T_{l}=\int_{0}^{365} H(T(t)-m_{l})dt /365, $$ \end{document}Tl=∫0365H(T(t)−ml)dt/365, where the time t=0 corresponds to the beginning of the year, and H is the Heaviside step function. Unit time is one day. Tl is the maximum length of the time window when larvae can possibly be infected by feeding an infected host (systemic transmission) or by co-feeding a host with infected nymphs (non-systemic transmission).Yearly duration of questing activity for nymphs,Tn: This is defined in a similar way as for larvae:
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$T_{n}=\int_{0}^{365} H(T(t)-m_{n})dt /365. $$ \end{document}Tn=∫0365H(T(t)−mn)dt/365. Note that the minimum of Tl and Tn represents the duration of possible non-systemic transmission by co-feeding of infected nymphs and susceptible larvae.ABC of unfed larvae during questing season,Al: It is measured by the area under the density curve of unfed larva which are actively questing;
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$A_{l}=\int_{0}^{365} p_{l}(T(t))L_{q}(t)dt/365, $$ \end{document}Al=∫0365pl(T(t))Lq(t)dt/365, where Lq(t) is the number of unfed larvae per host at time t and pl(T) is the probability of an unfed larvae to be actively questing at temperature T, modelled by pl(T)=H(T−ml). All unfed larvae are susceptible and the higher value of Al represents the larger number of susceptible questing larvae within a season.ABC of unfed susceptible nymphs during questing season,Ans:\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$A_{ns}=\int_{0}^{365} p_{n}(T(t))N_{qs}(t)dt/365, $$ \end{document}Ans=∫0365pn(T(t))Nqs(t)dt/365, where pn(T)=H(T−mn). The greater Ans, the more number of susceptible nymphs are actively questing in a season.ABC of susceptible questing ticks times the peak of infected questing nymphs,Vc: This is defined by
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document} $$V_{c}=\overline{N_{qi}}(A_{l}+A_{ns}), $$ \end{document}Vc=Nqi¯(Al+Ans), where \documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}$\overline {N_{qi}}$\end{document}Nqi¯ is the maximum density of infected questing nymphs within a year. Higher value of Vc means higher chance of non-systemic transmission triggered by co-feeding of infected nymphs and susceptible ticks.Basic reproduction number,R0: The basic reproduction number is used to measure the rate at which the number of TBEV infected ticks grow. Assuming that the TBEV transmission model is a periodic system with one year period, we compute the three values of basic reproduction numbers using the monthly average climate data of 1961–1990, 2021–2050 and 2071–2100, respectively.Estimation for the contribution of non-systemic transmissionWe quantify the significance of non-systemic transmission in TBEV transmission in a year by computing the expected number of TBEV transmission to ticks per host via systemic and non-systemic transmission route. The expected number of transmission via systemic (non-systemic) transmission route is obtained by integrating the force of infection from infected hosts (infected co-feeding ticks). To implement this, we first obtained the numerical solutions of the system and then estimated the cumulative force of infection using trapezoidal numerical integration.ResultsThe results in Fig. 3 show that TBEV infection in the tick population increases in the future times, and that the contribution of co-feeding transmission to the overall transmission increases. In particular, it is estimated that 41% of TBEV transmission in ticks is induced through the non-systemic transmission route during 1961-1990. In 2021-2050 (2071-2100), the non-systemic transmission route is estimated to be responsible for 67% (82%) of the total transmission with the data from ALADIN database.
Fig. 3Significance of non-systemic transmission route in the transmission of TBEV. The top panel shows the yearly number of TBEV transmission to larvae and nymphs per host. The blue (yellow) color represents the transmission through non-systemic (systemic) transmission route. The proportion of non-systemic transmission is plotted in the lower panel
As shown in Fig. 4, the density of questing ticks is expected to rise. In particular, the density of questing nymphal ticks is expected to increase dramatically, resulting in the increase of co-feeding transmission as observed in Fig. 3.
Fig. 4Seasonal questing behavior of larvae and nymphs. The red (blue) curve represents the number of unfed nymphs (10% of unfed larvae population) per host. The red (blue) region corresponds to the time period when the unfed larvae (nymphs) are not available for questing, either due to the behavioral diapause or the host unavailability. a 1961-1990, CarpatClim-HU. b 2021-2050, ALADIN. c 2021-2050, RegCM. d 2071-2100, ALADIN. e 2071-2100, RegCM
The increasing transmission risk in the enzootic cycle can also be quantified, as shown in Figs. 5-6, using several indices we have introduced. For example, the panels in the 1 st, 2 nd and 3 rd row show the yearly duration of questing activities (1-dimensional), area under the curves of questing ticks (2-dimensional) and the chance of non-systemic transmission triggered by co-feeding ticks (3-dimensional). More precisely, the panels in the first row show that the durations of questing activity of both larvae and nymphs increase. This leads to the increase of the duration when co-feeding between larval and nymphal ticks is possible, illustrated by panels in the 2nd row. Moreover, the increased temperature will shorten tick maturation delays and raise the number of the ticks. Finally, as shown in the 3rd row, the chance of non-systemic transmission will increase along with the temperature increase. The results are robust to the climate models used – ALADIN model and RegCM are used for the simulations of Figs. 5 and 6, respectively.
Fig. 5Transmission risk of TBEV projected with ALADIN model. The top panels, mid-panels and the low panels show the yearly duration of questing activity for larvae (Tl) and nymphs (Tn), the area under the curves of unfed larvae (Al) and susceptible nymphs (Ans), and the volume representing the chance of non-systemic transmission triggered by co-feeding of infected nymphs and susceptible ticks (Vc), respectively. The panels in the left, middle and right side are produced using CarpatClim-HU and ALADIN climate data in 1961-1990, CarpatClim-HU 2021-2050 and 2071-2100, respectively. a 1961-1990. b 2021-2050, ALADIN. c 2071-2100, ALADINFig. 6Transmission risk of TBEV projected with RegCM model. The top panels, mid-panels and the low panels show the yearly duration of questing activity for larvae (Tl) and nymphs (Tn), the area under the curves of unfed larvae (Al) and susceptible nymphs (Ans), and the volume representing the chance of non-systemic transmission (Vc), respectively. The panels in the left, middle and right side are produced using CarpatClim-HU and RegCM climate data in 1961-1990, 2021-2050 and 2071-2100, respectively. a 1961-1990, CarpatClim-HU. b 2021-2050, RegCM. c 2071-2100, RegCM
The transmission potential is expected to rise as well. The basic reproduction number (R0) in 2021-2050 is expected to increase by 31% compared to the risk estimated for 1961-1990, and R0 in 2071-2100 is expected to increase by 50% (see Fig. 7).
Fig. 7Transmission potential of TBEV. The bars indicate the basic reproduction numbers obtained from different climate models
DiscussionTBE mainly occurs in the temperate climate countries [24]. Ixodes ricinus, the main vector transmitting TBEV in Europe occurs also in the Mediterranean countries [25]. The volume of the projected biome shifts in Europe indicates that the climate of Hungary will remain within the suitable range [26] and Ixodes ricinus ticks may still be present in Europe in the next decades. Using a mechanistic model parameterized through data fitting to historical human incidence data, we have produced estimates of future TBEV transmission risk in the tick-host enzootic cycle under projected climate change in an endemic region in Hungary. These estimations have been reported in terms of key summative indices - duration of questing activity, area under the curves of susceptible ticks and the degree of co-feeding transmission - in addition to the basic reproduction number. Our results show that the TBE infection risk in the tick-host enzootic cycle in the study region (Vas county, Hungary) will increase substantially, and our model-based analyses describe how this TBE infection risk increase results from compound factors including extended questing seasons, increasing co-feeding susceptible larval and nymphal ticks with infected nymphal ticks, and consequently increasing contribution of non-systemic transmission to sustain the transmission.There have been some intensive attention to the impact of climate change on the TBE transmission in Europe. It was considered in [13] that the endemic area of TBEV in Europe will be reduced by the decreased level of co-feeding transmission. This study did note that the impact of the climate change on the transmission risk of TBE depends on the region-specific tick ecological and pathogen enzootic process which are highly affected by the region-specific climate change. Our study has shown that the transmission potential and the risk in the study site are expected to increase as well as the chance of transmission by co-feeding ticks. The extended length of tick season in Hungary is expected in the study [27]. Several other studies have also assessed the impact of climate change on the activities of ticks and the spread of tick-borne diseases [27–31], addressing the importance of the proactive action plans against the changing risk.Recent fields observation studies show that saturation deficit is a better predictor of the density of questing ticks than the temperature alone [32, 33]. The density of ticks detected in nature is determined by various environmental factors including host availability. We have avoided to use those density data as an input parameter to our mechanistic model as the data is rarely available. A few laboratory experiments studied relationships between saturation deficit and some factors related to tick activities such as the duration of feeding and the quiescence [23]. These functional relationships could not be directly translated into the parameters of our model, however, in our previous study [3], several observation data were used to validate the parameterized model.A limitation of this study is the implicit assumption of less change of the host abundance. The degradation and loss of forests and the northward migration of the hosts (deers, wild boars), catalyzed by climate change and human activities, may contribute to reducing the TBE prevalence in the enzootic cycle. We have restricted our study to the TBEV transmission in the enzootic cycle. Predicting its consequence in terms of human TBE incidence will need prediction of the human immunity acquired from vaccination and boosting programs, as well as the consumption of unpasteurized goat milk which can cause human TBE infection [34]. However, the projected increase in the TBE prevalence in the enzootic cycle suggests increasing public health investment to manage the consequence of climate change induced increase of TBEV.ConclusionsTransmission risk of TBEV in the enzootic cycle will increase in 2021-2050 and 2071-2100 in the study area as the climate change will facilitate the co-feeding transmission. Summative indices to quantify and explain this TBEV risk increase can be defined and calculated from a parametrized TBEV transmission model and using climate prediction data.


Title: Discovery of the Role of Tick Salivary Glands in Enhancement of Virus Transmission—Beginning of an Exciting Story

1. IntroductionThe importance of salivary gland secretions in tick feeding was first outlined in detail by Kemp et al. [1]. Saliva of hematophagous arthropods including ticks contains a large number of various bioactive compounds which modulate vertebrate host defence reactions such as haemostasis, vasoconstriction, inflammation, immune responses, and wound healing at the attachment site in the host skin and facilitate blood-feeding of ectoparasites [2,3]. Arthropod-borne pathogens were shown to exploit saliva of their vectors during the transmission process to the vertebrate hosts and also take advantage of the modulated feeding site in the host skin for their establishment and dissemination in vertebrate hosts; for reviews, see [4,5,6]. Extensive research of the role of arthropod saliva in blood-feeding and transmission of pathogens started in the 1980s. The saliva composition and functions of salivary molecules of a number of haematophagous arthropods have been described, but only a few molecules could be associated directly with pathogen transmission.Enhancement of the infectivity of a pathogen by arthropod salivary gland extracts (SGE) was first demonstrated in the sandfly Lutzomyia longipalpis and the protozoan parasite Leishmania major that causes cutaneous leishmaniasis [7]. In the same period, Jones et al. [8] demonstrated by using a laboratory model of guinea pigs, Rhipicephalus appendiculatus ticks and Thogoto virus (THOV) (Orthomyxoviridae) that uninfected ticks acquired the virus when they co-fed on the same host with infected ticks, while no viraemia could be detected in the host blood. Based on these observations, a novel mode of arthropod-borne virus transmission, non-viraemic transmission (NVT) was proposed. This localized spread of virus without viraemia is of particular interest as it appears to be much more efficient than classical viraemic transmission. Investigations into the NVT dynamics showed an increase in the percentage of nymphs which acquired the virus with duration of co-feeding, whereas NVT occurred even after physical separation of the infected and uninfected ticks [9]. “What is responsible for NVT?” was a question that began to be answered by the study “Enhancement of virus transmission by tick salivary glands” by Linda Jones and colleagues. Jones et al. [10] discovered that NVT could be enhanced by inoculating experimental guinea pigs with a mixture of THOV and R. appendiculatus SGE and suggested that the enhancement was not a result of a direct action of SGE on the virus, but was rather achieved by manipulation of the immune response of the host. This phenomenon was named “saliva-activated transmission” [11,12], later renamed “saliva-assisted transmission” (“SAT”) [13] which means an indirect promotion of pathogen transmission through manipulation of host defences by vector saliva molecules. In the early 1990s, NVT and SAT were also demonstrated, hand in hand, for an important pathogen, the tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) (Flaviviridae) transmitted by Ixodes ricinus and I. persulcatus [14,15,16,17,18,19].Since the beginning of the 21th century, research has been focused on exploration of the transmission mechanisms of tick-borne bacteria (mainly Borrelia burgdorferi s.l.), and an increasing number of saliva molecules that promote SAT, but also a few vector molecules that are exploited by the pathogens directly during transmission have been discovered; for reviews, see [20,21,22,23]. In contrast, research on tick–arbovirus–host interactions slowed down, apparently due to the fact that experiments involving majority of zoonotic arboviruses must be performed in strict conditions requiring biosafety levels 3 and 4. SAT factors promoting virus transmission have gained attention again since the 2010s, which has been reflected in increasing numbers of papers published on this topic. In a few review papers, knowledge on the known effects of tick saliva on transmission of tick-borne viruses has been updated [20,24,25,26]. However, no particular salivary molecules directly involved in enhancing/assisting virus transmission have been identified to date.2. DiscoveryJones et al. [8] demonstrated NVT of THOV from infected to uninfected R. appendiculatus ticks (natural vector of THOV) feeding simultaneously (co-feeding) on the same uninfected, non-viraemic guinea pigs. To further explore the mechanisms of NVT, Jones et al. [10] infested guinea pigs with uninfected R. appendiculatus nymphs (Figure 1). After infestation, the animals were inoculated subcutaneously in a distance of approximately 12 cm from the chamber containing feeding ticks with a mixture of THOV and SGE of uninfected 5-day fed adult R. appendiculatus or Amblyomma variegatum (another natural vector of THOV), extracts from R. appendiculatus ovaries, muscle, midgut, Malphigian tubules and whole ticks without salivary glands or mosquito SGE, or with THOV alone (control). The highest percentages of THOV-positive nymphs (59% and 58%, respectively) were detected among those that had fed on animals inoculated with a mixture of the virus and SGE of R. appendiculatus and A. variegatum. Further experiments were conducted to determine whether the enhancing factor(s) were present in R. appendiculatus salivary glands during different stages of feeding. For this purpose, similar to the previous experiment, guinea pigs were infested with R. appendiculatus nymphs and inoculated with a mixture of THOV and SGE derived from uninfected R. appendiculatus females at 0, 1, 4, 6 or 8 days of feeding. The highest percentage of infected nymphs (78%) was detected on guinea pigs that were inoculated with SGE of 6-day fed R. appendiculatus females, while enhancement of virus transmission was not observed when SGE of unfed or 1-day fed ticks was used. Another group of tick-infested guinea pigs was inoculated either with a mixture of SGE of 5-day fed R. appendiculatus and virus, or separately with SGE and virus into different parts of the skin. The authors observed enhanced transmission only in animals inoculated with the mixture of SGE and virus. No viraemia was detected in any of the experimental guinea pigs.Three main results were demonstrated by the experiments performed by Jones et al. [10]: (1) specific enhancement of THOV transmission by tick SGE suggesting that tick salivary glands produce molecules that act at the tick–virus–host interface and facilitate NVT; (2) changes in the composition and/or concentration of the enhancing factor(s) in salivary glands during tick feeding; (3) localized effect of the enhanced virus transmission in the host skin.3. ImpactThe paper by Jones et al. [10] significantly impacted the research on the salivary glands and saliva (composition/function/identification of individual molecules) of several tick species in the context of tick–host interaction as well as the research on mutual interaction between viruses and ticks. According to Web of Science (https://www.webofscience.com/wos/woscc/basic-search (accessed on 30 November 2022)), this scientific work was cited in 103 published scientific articles in different scientific fields, mainly in Parasitology and Immunology.Scientometric and bibliographic search on PubMed (https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov; accessed on 30 November 2022) using the terms “tick saliva” and “transmission”; “tick salivary gland” and “transmission”; “tick” and “SAT” (from 1989 till present) showed 179 scientific papers including 46 (25.7%) reviews (Figure 2A), 70 publications with 8 (11.4%) reviews (Figure 2B) and 35 publications including 6 (17.1%) reviews (Figure 2C), respectively. According to another bibliometric search on PubMed conducted with key terms “arboviruses” and “saliva”, 267 publications were obtained including 23 reviews (8.6%) and 10 (3.7%) studies on ticks (Figure 3). The growing trend in the number of publications underlines the importance of research of mutual interactions between arboviruses and arthropod vectors saliva. Focusing on individual arthropod vector groups, publications on “tick saliva” and “enhancement transmission” represented 29% of all publications and were second to mosquitoes; one third of these publications included tick-borne viruses (Figure 4A). Considering hard ticks, publications on species belonging to six genera were obtained; genus Ixodes spp. was the most studied (44%), followed by Dermacentor spp. (18%), Amblyomma spp., (17%), Rhipicephalus spp. (16%), Hyalomma spp. (3%) and Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) spp. (2%) (Figure 4B).In the 1990s, follow-up studies to the work by Jones et al. [10] were carried out on different aspects of THOV transmission. Jones et al. [27] indicated that the SAT factors are probably proteins or peptides. It was further demonstrated that resistance of guinea pigs to repeated tick feeding decreased the rate of NVT [28], implying that host resistance to tick feeding may limit the spread of tick-borne viruses in nature. The effect of the SAT factor(s) on THOV was determined to be localized to the site of SGE inoculation and lasted at least three days, indicating the importance of modification of the tick attachment site in the host skin in mediating virus transmission [29]. Enhancement of THOV transmission was demonstrated only with SGE derived from metastriate tick species that are competent vectors of the virus, showing specificity of the SAT factor(s) [11]. In addition, the dynamics of SAT factor activities in mediating NVT was determined to differ in different phases of feeding of three-host and one-host metastriate tick species, indicating that SAT factor(s) are produced and secreted during feeding [30].The THOV transmission model was adopted in subsequent studies and NVT and SAT were demonstrated for TBEV and its natural vectors I. persulcatus and I. ricinus (Prostriata) [14,15,19,31], as well as for D. marginatus, D. reticulatus and R. appendiculatus (Metastriata) [14,15,17,18,32]. Thus, in contrast to THOV, SAT for TBEV appeared to be less correlated with tick vector competence. Moreover, tick saliva was determined to also promote in vitro replication and production of the nucleocapsid viral protein of an insect-borne virus, which was demonstrated for D. reticulatus SGE and vesicular stomatitis virus [33,34,35].Difference in the capacity to support co-feeding transmission of TBEV was observed between two natural hosts of immature I. ricinus, whereby significantly lower transmission rates were detected in ticks feeding on tick-resistant bank voles than on susceptible wild mice (Apodemus spp.) [16]. This difference was attributed, in part, to different speed of virus dissemination in the skin of mice and voles after attachment of infected ticks; i.e., dissemination of TBEV from the feeding site of infected I. ricinus to feeding sites of uninfected ticks was delayed in bank voles [36]. However, NVT was determined to occur in both naïve and virus immune wild rodents [37]. In TBEV-infected tick feeding sites in the skin of laboratory mice, the viral antigen was detected in migratory Langerhans cells and neutrophils, and migratory monocytes/macrophages produced infectious virus. These findings indicated that the tick feeding site is a focus of virus replication soon after virus transmission, and cells migrating from these sites probably act as vehicles for NVT [36]. However, the molecular mechanisms by which SAT factors mediate virus transmission in the host skin have not been revealed.In addition to THOV and TBEV, indirect evidence of SAT has been documented for a few other RNA viruses (Flaviviridae and Bunyavirales) transmitted by hard ticks [38,39,40,41,42] and for African Swine Fever (ASF) virus (Asfaviridae), the only one DNA virus which is transmitted by soft ticks [43] (Table 1).During the last two decades, several in vitro as well as in vivo studies aimed at revealing the mechanisms of immunomodulation at the tick–virus–host interface have been carried out. In vitro studies have focused on interactions of tick–host innate immune responses and revealed inhibition of the antiviral function of interferon [44] and suppression of natural killer (NK) cell functions [45,46,47,48] by tick SGE. Furthermore, I. ricinus saliva was determined to enhance TBEV replication in dendritic cells [49] and induce Akt pathway activation in TBEV-infected dendritic cells leading to decline in apoptosis and increase in cell viability [50]. Suppression of interferon responses in dendritic cells mediated by salivary cystatin (sialostatin L2) derived from I. scapularis was also observed [51]. Thus, sialostatin L2 could be considered as a potential SAT factor. Moreover, SGE of I. scapularis was determined to enhance the spread of Powassan virus (POWV) in the mouse brain when the animals were infected with a low viral dose [52]. All the reported effects can be considered as activities promoting arbovirus replication, transmission and dissemination. In contrast to Flaviviridae, no significant effects of H. marginatum SGE on response of dermal dendritic cells and Langerhans cells or on replication of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus (Bunyavirales) were determined. SGE rather inhibited migration of antigen-presenting cells from the feeding site [53].Application of modern high-throughput and systems biology approaches has greatly advanced the knowledge of tick sialotranscriptomes and proteomes. Different expression profiles for a number of genes in salivary glands, depending on the presence or absence of pathogenic microorganisms, have been revealed, and a few salivary molecules implicated in pathogen transmission have been identified [4]. Different salivary gland transcript expression profiles in response to duration of feeding and infection with Langat virus by I. scapularis nymphs were characterized [54]. In the same tick species, expression of salivary gland microRNAs during the earliest phase of POWV transmission to the vertebrate host differed, suggesting that the differently expressed microRNAs could regulate replication of the virus in host tissues [55]. In I. ricinus salivary glands infected with TBEV, differential expression of uncategorized genes, genes encoding proteases, Kunitz-type serine protease inhibitors, cytotoxins, and lipocalins during early stages of feeding was observed which may play an important role in virus transmission [56].As indicated in earlier studies, SAT factors create immunologically favourable conditions in the tick attachment site that facilitate virus transmission and affect pathogenesis. In a series of in vivo studies, transcriptional analyses of early cutaneous responses of laboratory mice to tick attachment and transmission of flaviviruses were carried out. Attachment of uninfected I. scapularis nymphs elicited innate inflammatory response in the host skin [57,58]. In comparison with uninfected ticks, feeding of POWV-infected ticks recruited immune cells to the feeding site earlier [59] and macrophages and fibroblasts were identified as the early targets of virus infection at the tick feeding site [60]. By using RNA in situ hybridization, POWV was localized in dermal and hypodermal foci at the tick feeding site 24 h after attachment [61]. Transcriptional immunoprofile of early cutaneous immune responses of mice to feeding of TBEV-infected I. ricinus females was characterized by an inflammatory environment and a neutrophil-dominated immune response, highlighting the modulation of inflammatory chemokine and cytokine pathways in virus transmission. Mononuclear phagocytes and fibroblasts were identified as the primary targets for TBEV infection [62].Recently, it was discovered that tick-borne Langat virus (LGTV) utilizes extracellular vesicles (exosomes) derived from I. scapularis ISE6 cell line for transmission of viral RNA and proteins to human keratinocytes and blood endothelial cells. The findings suggest that flaviviruses use arthropod-derived exosomes as a novel means for viral RNA and protein transmission from the vector to the host [63]. In vivo exosomes isolated from A. maculatum and I. scapularis saliva and salivary glands were shown to delay wound healing by modulating the levels of the chemokine CXXL12 and interleukin-8 in human skin keratinocytes [64]. Thus, exosomes are likely to facilitate tick feeding and pathogen transmission by modulating host skin immunity [65].pathogens-12-00334-t001_Table 1Table 1Important milestones (in bold, with years in brackets) on the way towards identification of tick salivary molecules involved in transmission of tick-borne viruses.Discovery of Non-Viraemic and Saliva-Assisted Transmission (1987, 1989)Thogoto virus
Rhipicephalus appendiculatus
[8,10]
Amblyomma variegatum, A. hebraeum, A. cajennense, Rhipicephalus evertsi, R. microplus, Hyalomma dromedarii, H. marginatum[11,30,66]TBEV
Ixodes persulcatus
[18,19]
I. ricinus, Dermacentor reticulatus, D. marginatus, R. appendiculatus[14,15,16,17]Louping ill virus
I. ricinus
[38]Powassan virus
I. scapularis
[41]CCHFV 
H. marginatum
[39]Palma, BhanjaR. appendiculatus, D. marginatus[40]Heartland virus
A. americanum
[42]African Swine Fever virus
Ornithodoros porcinus
[43]
Discovery of the Effect of Host Resistance to Tick Infestation on Virus Transmission (1990)
Thogoto virus
R. appendiculatus
[28]TBEV
I. ricinus
[16]
Description of the Tick Feeding Site as a Focus for Virus Replication in the Early Phase of Transmission (1996)
TBEV
I. ricinus
[36]
Modulation of Host Innate Responses by Tick Saliva or Salivary Gland Extracts (1994) and Enhancement of Virus Replication In Vitro (1998)
Natural killer cellsI. ricinus, D. reticulatus, A. variegatum, Haemaphysalis inermis, H. concinna[45,46,47,48]Interferon I. ricinus, D. reticulatus[44,47]Dendritic cells 
I. ricinus
[49,50]Dendritic cellsI. scapularis salivary cystatin[51]Vesicular stomatitis virus
D. reticulatus
[33]TBEV
I. ricinus
[49,50]
Introduction of High-Throughput and Systems Biology Approaches

  A: Expression Profiles in Tick Salivary Glands During Feeding and Virus Infection (2012)
Langat virus
I. scapularis
[54]Powassan virus
I. scapularis
[54,55]TBEV
I. ricinus
[56]
  B: Immunoprofiling of Host Cutaneous Responses to Tick Attachment and Virus Infection (2012)
Powassan virus
I. scapularis
[58,59,60] TBEV
I. ricinus
[62]
Discovery of Extracellular Vesicles Serving as:

  A: Vehicles for Transmission of Viral RNA (2018)
Langat virusI. scapularis cell line[63]
  B: Modulators of Immune Responses in the Host Skin and Wound Healing (2020)

A. maculatum, I. scapularis[64]To conclude, it is still not clear if tick-borne viruses exploit any specific salivary molecule(s) for transmission, or their transmission is promoted only indirectly by SAT factors, i.e., mainly by salivary molecules that modulate immune reactions in the host skin. In the second case, the SAT factors enhancing transmission of viruses may involve the same molecules as those which enhance transmission of tick-borne bacteria. However, there is a possibility that both mechanisms of transmission interact. Intensive research in this field will certainly lead to the discovery of new molecules with future implications in the control of transmission of dangerous tick-borne viruses.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: EBOLA VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Pulmonary Involvement during the Ebola Virus Disease

1. IntroductionEbolavirus is part of the Filoviridae family, which consists of three genera: Marbugvirus, Cuevavirus, and Ebolavirus. There are currently six known, genetically distinct, species of Ebolavirus—Ebola virus (EBOV), Sudan Ebolaviurs (SUDV), Tai Forest Ebolavirus (TAFV), Bundibugyo Ebolavirus (BDBV), Reston Ebolavirus (RESTV), and Bombali Ebolavirus (BOMV) [1,2]. No virus has triggered fear in the general population more than the filovirus Ebolavirus [3]. EBOV is categorized among the deadliest viruses, with mortality rates up to 90%. The zoonotic origin of outbreaks are often the result of transmission from primates, although the suspected natural reservoir for EBOV, bats, is still being questioned. Since it was first identified in 1976 in Zaire (the actual Democratic Republic of Congo), 27 confirmed outbreaks, mainly in the central part of Africa, have occurred, and each outbreak was accompanied by high case fatality rates up to 88%, including the new declared outbreak ongoing in the North Kivu Province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo [4,5,6]. The 2013–2016 Ebola outbreak is the largest (both by number of cases and geographical extension) ebolavirus outbreak ever reported, resulting in 28,610 cases and 11,308 deaths, with fatality rates of 70% in Guinea and Sierra Leone and 41% in Liberia [5]. The number of cases in this single outbreak is far greater than the total number of all cases and deaths of the past outbreaks over the last 40 years. The reasons of such an extended outbreak are linked to societal factors (poverty, urbanization, population migration patterns, and changes of socio-economic conditions), together with the concomitant invasion of animal habitats, climate change, and deforestation [4]. In fact, the emergence and re-emergence of such viruses in Africa or their potential introduction into new countries have usually been related to the mobility and international transport of infected animals or animal products, thus making ebolavirus and filoviruses a worldwide public health concern [7]. Moreover, despite almost 40 years of research, filovirus transmission remains incompletely understood. In humans, EBOV has been found in a variety of body fluids, including blood, stool, breast milk, semen, urine, and saliva [8]. There are multiple routes of transmission for EBOV. However, information about transmission in humans is incomplete, and defining the modes of transmission would greatly increase the ability of public health structures to limit the disease, as well as enable health care workers to avoid any unnecessary risk. So far, our understanding of EBOV transmission in humans mainly relies on epidemiological observations and contact with body fluids from EBOV-positive patients remain the most likely route of transmission. Notably, the number of past outbreaks and associated epidemiological studies carefully examining transmission patterns are small. Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) is commonly associated with multiple organ systems, including the liver, renal organs, and lungs [9]. So far, little is known about the involvement of the respiratory tract and EBOV pathogenesis in the lung. However, little evidence in filovirus animal outbreaks and animal studies highlights the involvement of the lungs and the respiratory tract in filovirus pathology. Over the years, there has been an increasing concern regarding the possible involvement of the lung in EBOV infection. This concern further increased during the 2013–2016 EBOV outbreak, which offered evidence of viral shedding in the lung, leading to a risk of aerosol transmission [10]. The aim of this review is to highlight the pulmonary involvement in EVD, with a special focus on the new data emerging from the 2013–2016 Ebola outbreak.2. Host Defense Mechanisms in the Respiratory Tract during EBOV InfectionThe lung is a vulnerable organ along with the skin and the gut; it is the interface between the sterile body sanctuary and the external environment. Besides its role in maintaining the conduit for air to and from the alveoli, the airway epithelium of the respiratory system is central to the defense of the lung against pathogens. Through the combined function of ciliated epithelial and secretory cells, efficient mucociliary clearance is maintained, along with a variety of other host defense mechanisms [11]. Airway epithelial cells regulate both innate and adaptive immunity through production of functional molecules and physical interactions with cells of the immune system [12]. Despite these defense mechanisms, viruses have found ways to evade the immune system, resulting in severe respiratory disease. Lung pathogenesis is a combination of direct and indirect processes involving virus and/or host factors. Virus-related factors (Figure 1) include receptor specificity and the ability to induce cell damage (direct cytopathic effect) and/or cell apoptosis, whereas host-related factors mostly include the inflammatory response and the activation of the immune system, combined with host-risk factors (chronic respiratory diseases, smokers, atopy of the airway epithelium, etc). EBOV infection is acquired through direct contact with bodily fluids. The virus enters blood circulation through breaks in the skin and mucosa and spread to different organs, causing systemic manifestation of cardiovascular, coagulation, or inflammatory disturbances [10]. The terminal stages of EVD usually involve massive tissue injury and hemorrhage, resulting in multiorgan failure and shock, the main cause of exitus in EVD patients [13]. During EVD, respiratory symptoms such as chest pain, shortness of breath, cough, and nasal discharge are signals of the multisystem involvement, but, so far, lung damage has not been directly linked to EBOV replication in the respiratory tract. However, new evidences collected during the recent 2013–2016 Ebola outbreak hypothesized shedding of the virus in the lung and identified viral replication markers in sputum samples collected from EBOV infected patients [14]. On the other hand, the high virulence of EBOV is attributed in large part to the ability of this virus to interfere with the host immune response, and the high degree of variation in lung pathogenesis is usually linked to indirect damage due to endothelial and epithelial inflammation and the hyper-activation of the immune system subsequent to EBOV infection. In fact, viral direct damages are always associated with indirect damages, caused by inflammatory and immune reactions elicited by the viruses through the activation of soluble mediators (cytokines and chemokines) as part of the immune response (Figure 1). The acute inflammation process is characterized by increasing blood flow, which enables plasma and leukocytes to reach extra-vascular sites of injury. Even though inflammation may be often restored, in EVD, severe inflammation is associated with a cytokine storm and more serious pathological changes are observed. For instance, EBOV in vitro infection of monocytes and macrophages triggers the robust expression of inflammatory mediators, including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, MIP-1a, MIP-1β, MCP-1, and TNF-α [15,16], whereas the dysregulation of immune mediators in humans has been associated with the secretion of other inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1β, IL-8, CCL2, CCL3, CCL13, CXCL1, CXCL10, CXCL11, CXCL12, IL6, MIF, SPP [17,18,19]. In addition, severe inflammatory cytokines/chemokines may spill over into the circulation and result in systemic cytokine storms, which are responsible for multi-organ dysfunction and for the impairment of the vascular system and disseminated intravascular coagulation [20,21]. Dendritic cells (DCs) play an essential role in the link between the innate and adaptive immune response, and their maturation is essential for the correct functionality of DCs, such as the migration, processing, and presentation of viral antigens to T- and B-cells for their activation and correct viral clearance [22,23]. EBOV infection has been shown to influence these mechanisms through impairment of DCs in upregulating co-stimulatory molecules (CD40, CD86, and CD80) and Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II, as well as soluble chemokines and cytokines [24]. EBOV infection is also able to influence the adaptive immune response: severe lymphopenia and the destruction of lymphoid tissue is one of the hallmarks of EBOV infection. Fatal cases showed a more marked reduction of NK cells and γδ T-cell frequency, as well as a loss of peripheral blood CD4+ and CD8+ T cells [25,26]. Moreover, a recent study showed that patients with fatal outcome presented lower, or often absent, levels of both EBOV-specific IgM and IgG, which, when detected, appeared later than in survivors [19]. Overall, the alteration of the innate and adaptive response explains the paralysis of the immune system and its inability to initiate and maintain a protective immune response. At the pulmonary level, many of the pathological changes are, in fact, secondary to systemic alterations, correlating with general pathogenic mechanisms, which are the major causes of severe disease in humans, even at the respiratory level [19,27].3. Ebola Virus Disease EVD is a viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) characterized by acute systemic manifestations with vascular damage, plasma leakage, severe inflammation, and disruption of the immune system [28]. EVD transmissibility seems to vary depending on the stage of disease [29]. A high-level of EBOV replication, associated with systemic dissemination to multiple cell types, results in a complex pathogenesis, which is linked to an increased risk of infection transmission [29]. As stated above, these pathogenic mechanisms include detrimental immune suppression and over-activation of the immune response, disordered coagulation, and tissue damage due to direct viral and indirect host-mediated effectors. In the absence of adequate supportive care, these processes commonly result in multiple organ failure and death within about 10 days of symptom onset in humans. It is well recognized that EBOV infection is acquired by direct contact with bodily fluids. Notably, studies conducted in animal models have instilled doubts about possible airborne/droplet transmission (see Section 3.1). However, this route of infection in humans is still debated. Piercy and colleagues evaluated the actual stability of the virus particles in aerosol droplets [30]. They created Ebola-containing aerosol droplets and, according to the decay rates, estimated that EBOV and RESTV can survive in aerosols for roughly 100 and 160 min, respectively, at 50% to 55% relative humidity and 22 ± 3 °C [30]. Therefore, a key additional question to ask is whether primary pulmonary infection of EBOV could be a potential scenario for the future. A fair amount of studies, based on animal experiments (Table 1) and clinical evidence collected during the outbreaks (Table 2), suggest that pulmonary infection may be a possibility. This possibility will be fully investigated below.3.1. Animal StudiesAfter its first discovery in 1989 in cynomolgus macaques imported to Reston, Virginia, RESTV was detected in domestic swine in the Philippines in a co-infection with the Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV, family Arteriviridae, genus Arterivirus) and Porcine Circovirus type 2 (PCV-2; family Circoviridae) [32,34]. Later on, RESTV was identified to cause asymptomatic infections with mild respiratory symptoms, which may result in severe mortality in cases of co-infections with other viral pathogens like viruses in the families Arteriviridae and Circoviridae. The virus was first isolated in lung and lymphoid tissues in the original disease investigation [32]. However, the massive presence of the virus in the lungs may be due to the fact that RESTV infection in pigs has been mostly associated with other infections of the respiratory tract, which may contribute to the specific localization of the virus and the respiratory symptoms of the disease. Marsh et al. [33] conducted an experimental study to rule out the effect of other pathogens affecting pigs, using a 2008 Philippines swine isolate of RESTV. Specifically, five-week-old pigs were exposed (via the oro-nasal or subcutaneous route) to the virus, and the subsequent viral replication in internal organs and shedding of the virus from the nasopharynx was observed. The researchers detected the highest levels of virus replication in lung and lymphoid tissues, confirming previous results [32]. The detection of RESTV in domestic swine raised important biosecurity concerns about the potential for the disease’s emergence in humans and other livestock, mainly in animals for food consumption [32,33]. The evidence of RESTV seropositive individuals further increased the concern for human infections and the worries of researchers, farm owners, and the public at large (World Health Organization. WHO, 2009, Available online: https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/HSE_EPR_2009_2.pdf). Interestingly, so far RESTV has not been seen to result in any human disease, even if there is concern that its passage through swine may allow RESTV to diverge and shift its potential for pathogenicity [58]. On the other hand, several studies investigated if other Ebola viruses may be transmitted through the aerosol route and may result in primary pulmonary infection [9,10,59]. Researchers reviewed the different animal models and offered an overview regarding the possibilities of Ebola viruses causing aerosol infections in non-human primates (NHPs) and other animals. Experimental studies analyzed the respiratory tract involvement in filovirus infections when the animals were exposed to the virus through different aerosol routes (artificially aerosolized virus or natural aerosol transmission) [36,37,39,60]. In these experimental studies conducted on NHPs and pigs, EBOV was inoculated via the aerosol route, and, following mucosal exposure, EBOV replicated, reaching high concentrations, mainly in the respiratory tract, with the development of severe lung pathology. Interestingly, Weingartl et al. demonstrated that piglets inoculated oro-nasally with EBOV and then transferred to a different room housing macaques in an open inaccessible cage system resulted in EBOV infection of all macaques, suggesting a need to revise prevention and control measures during outbreaks [37]. Viral replication was observed within alveolar spaces [36,37], in type I pneumocytes and macrophages [36], and in type II pneumocytes, bronchiolar epithelial cells, and endothelial cells [38], supporting the respiratory involvement. The upper and lower respiratory tract, the lymphoid tissues, and the mediastinal lymph nodes showed infection signs, as well [39]. Similarly, in experiments on cynomolgus macaques placed separately in cages with experimentally infected piglets [37], and on guinea pigs exposed via aerosols to a guinea pig-adapted EBOV strain [39], viral antigens were detected within alveolar and septal macrophages, pneumocytes, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and other interstitial cells of the respiratory tree [61]. Considering the pathology of the respiratory system, the expression of disease in the lungs and the patterns of lesions seem to be influenced by the exposure routes (aerogenous or hematogenous). Broncho–interstitial pneumonia, characterized by injury to both the bronchiolar and the alveolar epithelium, is commonly caused by aerogenous viral infections [62]. Moreover, such pathological features were generally not evidenced following the inoculation of EBOV by other routes in NHPs and laboratory animals [9,35]. As shown in animal studies, primary pulmonary infections could occur and cause active viral shedding from the respiratory tract, thus potentially setting up a cycle of ongoing respiratory transmission in humans [9,63].Overall, experimental works conducted so far have shown that EBOV infection induces respiratory complications, that the virus can be shed via the respiratory secretions, and that it can cause similar pulmonary lesions both in animals exposed to aerosols and in those kept nearby in separate cages with no close contact.3.2. Clinical and Pathology Findings in Humans during EVD The pathophysiological mechanism of pulmonary disease in patients with EVD is unknown. Notably, autopsies were performed on a limited number of humans (about 30 cases), primarily during the 1976 SUDV and 1995 EBOV EVD outbreaks and revealed interesting characteristics at microscopic level. During the first known SUDV outbreak, chest pain was almost universal (83% of patients), often accompanied by a dry cough. Autopsies were further performed on two patients and thickening of the alveolar walls due to proliferative accumulations of alveolar cells was found [64]. Furthermore, a possible pathogenetic role of the virus in the respiratory tract was suggested by the fact that viral inclusions within alveolar macrophages and free viral particles within alveolar space were found in the lungs from fatal EVD cases who showed congestion, focal intra-alveolar edema, diffuse alveolar damage, and hemorrhaging. [9,10].One of the most common symptoms in EVD patients is a cough (up to 49%), especially during the progression of the disease, when viral loads in serum significantly increase, and the virus is copiously emitted in most body fluids, as well as in aerosol particles of various sizes [65,66]. Among the reported EVD cases in the literature, respiratory symptoms were commonly reported with a wide range of symptoms, such as a cough (from 3% [67,68] to 60% [69]), dyspnoea or breathless (detected from 0% [70] to 49% [57]), and chest pain (from 7.5% [71] to 98.6% [72]). Moreover, a WHO study on the first 9 months of the epidemic in Western Africa found that nearly 30% (194 out of 665) of the patients experienced coughing and 2.4% (20 of 831) had a bloody cough [73,74]. A study of 27 EBOV-positive patients of the 2013–2016 outbreak in Western Africa, treated in Europe and USA, reported that cough and dyspnoea were present at admission in seven (30%) and five (22%) EVD patients, respectively. At symptom onset, only a cough was reported in one patient. Furthermore, during hospitalization, 14 patients (52%) experienced hypoxemia while they were breathing ambient air, 12 patients (44%) had pulmonary oedema, seven patients (26%) had pneumonia, 39 patients (33%) had respiratory failure, and six patients (22%) had a diagnosis of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Of these patients, four patients (15%) received non-invasive mechanical ventilation, and seven patients (26%) received invasive mechanical ventilation [75]. Notably, the first EBOV-positive patient treated in Italy, mechanically ventilated for respiratory insufficiency for 5 days, had high levels of EBOV RNA in the lower respiratory tract secretions. The authors concluded that the absence of other identified respiratory pathogens in broncho-alveolar lavage fluids and aspirates supported the hypothesis of a direct contribution to the lung tissues damage by EBOV. Notably, EBOV RNA was detected in bronchial aspirate fluids when the EBOV RNA concentration in the concomitant blood samples was barely detectable. Furthermore, the blood EBOV RNA concentrations in the previous days were significantly lower than the concentrations detected in the bronchial aspirate samples. These findings suggest that this EBOV infection is unlikely a spillover from the blood compartment, eventually accompanied by delayed clearance. Instead, the most plausible explanation is that the virus actually replicated into the lower respiratory tract [76]. In the second EBOV-patient treated in Italy, our group investigated the presence of EBOV genetic material in the lungs and blood during the patient’s treatment and recovery. The patient showed a persistence of EBOV replication markers within the respiratory tract, with a prolonged detection of EBOV viral RNAs (negative and positive sense RNAs: neg-RNA and pos-RNA, respectively), known to be associated with EBOV replication, in the lower respiratory tract for up to five days after the EBOV viral load in blood was already undetectable. These results suggest that EBOV may replicate in the lungs, although it is possible that the lungs simply provided a protective environment that allowed RNA to linger longer than it did in the plasma. Nevertheless, the detection of pos-RNA together with neg-RNA in the sputum (until day 9 and 10 of the hospital stay, respectively) supports the concept of active viral replication within the respiratory tract, rather than plasma spill-over or prolonged RNA stability [14].Overall, the pathophysiological mechanisms of pulmonary disease in patients with EVD are still uncertain, but there could be multiple contributing factors, including vascular leak from endothelial infection, cytokine dysregulation, or direct damage to EBOV-infected cells (Figure 2). 3.3. Impact of Epidemiological and Virological Data on Infection and Control MeasuresOur understanding of EBOV transmission in humans mainly relies on epidemiological observations. Contact with bodily fluids from EVD patients remains the most likely route of transmission. Notably, the number of past outbreaks and associated epidemiological studies hat carefully examine transmission patterns is small. Therefore, conclusions about transmission are based on relatively limited data sets [10]. Interestingly, 18 (6.6%) of the 2774 cases in the 1976 SUDV outbreak in Nzara, Sudan, and 55 (17.4%) of the 316 cases during the 1995 EBOV outbreak in Kikwit, DRC, had no direct or physical contact with an infected person or known infected dead body [77,78], thus pointing to other possible routes of transmission, e.g., human to human respiratory tract infection through droplet and aerosols. During the 2013–2016 Western Africa epidemic, more than 890 health care workers (HCW) were infected, with a case fatality rate of 57% [60], whereas during the current 2018–2019 outbreak in DRC, as of 22 July 2019, 140 HCW have been already affected (5.4% of total cases) [6]. Currently, full body protection is recommend by WHO and CDC [79,80]. All HCW involved in the care of EVD patients must receive training and demonstrate competency in performing all Ebola related infection control practices and procedures, specifically in proper donning and doffing PPE even if using an N95 mask or a powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR). The risk of infection via inhalation of contaminated aerosols from exposed individuals has not been documented. However, droplets containing EBOV that have become aerosolized (e.g., from coughing sneezing, vomiting, invasive medical or surgical procedures, or surfaces) may have the potential to come into contact with a person’s mucous membrane in their nose or mouth or non-intact skin. Therefore, respiratory protection may be helpful in providing a barrier to help prevent infectious materials from contacting a wearer’s mucous membranes. Finally, the epidemiologic and viral evidence of EBOV detection and replication in the respiratory tract raise concerns on the need of strict application of cough etiquette for patients and of droplet and/or respiratory precautions for all HCW involved in the clinical management of EVD suspected and confirmed cases.4. ConclusionsAcute respiratory tract infections (ARTIs) remain a leading cause of mortality, morbidity, and economic loss, and viruses are one of the main causes of such disease. WHO estimates that ARTIs cause nearly four million deaths per year, a rate of more than 60 deaths/100,000 people [81]. The microbial etiology of ARIs is varied, with viruses being the most common cause in humans [82], leading to a high level of awareness and the necessity to develop countermeasures to control them (Table 3).Filoviruses are not commonly considered to be viruses responsible for ARIs, even if respiratory symptoms may be present as a consequence of diffuse systemic alterations. Interestingly, evidence collected in animal studies, in the epidemiological analysis of transmission chains, and in the most recent Ebola outbreaks suggests that EBOV may be able to cause primary pulmonary infection. This evidence highlights the ability of the virus to be shed in the lung, suggesting a role in lung pathogenesis. Specifically, the relevant proportion of EVD patients without any epidemiologic link to the exposure to contaminated biological samples or fomites, or to any contact with EVD patients; the evidence of respiratory signs and symptoms commonly reported all over the clinical course; the abundance of viral antigens in the lungs in animal necropsies; the prolonged persistence of EBOV detection and replication within the respiratory tract days after undetectable EBOV viral load in plasma; and similar clinical patterns in several other viral respiratory tract infections are all different parameters with consistent evidence of a major role in the pathogenesis of EVD in respiratory tissues [10].On the other hand, there is no evidence of aerosol transmission in EVD. However, different studies addressing this issue have been performed [30,83], and aerosol transmission was considered a possibility as a consequence of epidemiological observations in past outbreaks, where people showed signs of EVD even in the absence of a direct or physical contact with an infected person or known infected dead body [78,84]. This hypothesis was corroborated by other studies, in which the presence of free viral particles in alveoli and within intra-alveolar macrophages demonstrated a pulmonary involvement [10]. From a clinical point of view, the 2013–2016 EBOV outbreak underlined the lung involvement in EVD pathogenesis. In fact, only a few patients treated in Europe and USA had a cough and difficulty breathing at admission. Nevertheless, during the clinical progression, half of the patients experienced hypoxemia while breathing room air, one third had respiratory failure, and one fourth received invasive or non-invasive mechanical ventilation [75]. In the Italian experience at the National Institute for Infectious Diseases “L. Spallanzani” (INMI), respiratory symptoms were present in both patients, in the absence of other common respiratory pathogens [14,76]. One case required mechanical ventilation and the other presented EBOV replication markers in the lungs even after clearance of the virus from the blood. The INMI experience suggests a direct role of the virus in lung pathogenesis.Although lung pathogenesis in EVD may be secondary to systemic alterations (correlating with general pathogenic mechanisms) the direct presence of the virus is undisputable in the lung, and its interaction with the immune system, whose hyper-activation may be the most likely explanation of the lung damage, is also indisputable. Further research will be needed to better understand the potential role of pulmonary involvement in EVD and whether it may be a factor in the transmission of the virus from one human to another. 


Title: Immunopathology of highly virulent pathogens: insights from Ebola virus

MainEbola virus is an enveloped negative-strand RNA virus of the Filoviridae family, a group of viruses capable of inducing a severe hemorrhagic fever syndrome in humans and nonhuman primates. The virus was first recognized in 1976 during an outbreak in the Ebola River valley in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo), Africa. A second outbreak caused by a distinct but related virus occurred in Sudan later the same year1,2. Since its discovery in central Africa, several outbreaks have recurred over the last 30 years, including a current confirmed outbreak (11 September 2007) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2007_09_11/en/index.html). Although the reservoir of virus in nature and the range of intermediate hosts is not fully understood, recent studies have found that fruit bats may support replication of Ebola virus, indicating that these animals may be involved in the life cycle of the virus3. However, the natural host of Ebola virus in the absence of active outbreaks, together with the important question of how it is transmitted among various species, represents a continuing subject of investigation.Human infections usually occur after direct contact with virus in dead or infected people or wildlife, with subsequent person-to-person transmission. Filoviruses enter the body through mucosal surfaces or skin abrasions or through the use of contaminated needles4 (Fig. 1a). The onset of Ebola virus–induced disease is sudden, with a 4 to 10 day incubation period. Patients initially show nonspecific flu-like symptoms such as fever, chills, malaise, muscle aches and headache. Abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting may follow, and a cough, sore throat or diarrhea may also be present. A rash often appears around day five and is a characteristic feature of filovirus infection. Systemic, gastrointestinal, respiratory, vascular and neurologic manifestations result from extensive viral replication, and necrosis is seen in many organs, including the liver, spleen, kidneys and gonads5. The terminal stage of the disease is characterized by coagulation disorders such as disseminated intravascular coagulation, fluid distribution problems, hypotension and hemorrhage due to liver inflammation and compromise, tissue disruption and a breakdown in endothelial barrier function that leads to increased vascular permeability. In fatal cases, death occurs typically between 7 and 16 days after infection, the result of multiple organ failure and the onset of a syndrome that resembles severe septic shock6. There are currently no antiviral drugs to treat infection and the mortality rates for the more virulent Zaire and Sudan species of the virus range from 40–90%7.Figure 1Infection, spread and target cell destruction by Ebola virus.(a) Ebola virus (yellow) infects subjects through contact with body fluid or secretions from an infected patient and is distributed through the circulation. Entry can occur through abrasions in the skin during patient care, burial rituals and possibly contact with infected bushmeat, or across mucosal surfaces. Accidental needle stick is the primary route of occupational exposure. (b) Early targets of replication are reticuloendothelial cells, with high replication in several cell types within the lungs, liver and spleen. (c) Dendritic cells, macrophages and endothelium appear to be susceptible to cytopathic effects of Ebola virus gene products in vitro and possibly in vivo through disruption of cellular signaling pathways affected by virus binding, phagocytic uptake or both. Indirect damage may also be inflicted by circulating factors such as tumor necrosis factor and nitric oxide.
Host immune response to fatal Ebola infection
The uncontrolled viral replication of Ebola virus is central to its pathogenesis, both because of its cytopathic effects and because it induces prominent dysregulation of the host immune response. Virally induced immune system impairment occurs through a variety of mechanisms. Studies in nonhuman primates as well as guinea pigs raise the possibility that monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells are early and preferred sites of viral replication8,9, though it remains possible that virus is present on these cells through binding to lectin receptors rather than active replication in vivo. It has been suggested that these cells act as vehicles for the transport of virus through the lymphatics10. Further viral replication ensues, followed by systemic spread to other organs and tissues (Fig. 1b). Although virus is observed in the reticuloendothelial system, little inflammation is seen within the lymphatics or in infected tissues during the course of the infection.Infection of monocytes and macrophages leads to the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-1β, macrophage inflammatory protein-1α and reactive oxygen and nitrogen species11,12. The expression of these mediators is likely to attract more monocytes and macrophages to the sites of infection and may also attract neutrophils. Although recent data suggests that they are not productively infected, human neutrophils treated with filovirus in vitro show rapid activation of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 (TREM-1)13; this results in the release of further inflammatory cytokines and chemokines that contribute to vasodilation and increased vascular permeability. In addition, infected monocytes and macrophages express cell surface tissue factor, which may be involved in the development of coagulopathies14. After productive infection, macrophages undergo cell lysis and apoptosis in large numbers15; thus, activated monocytes and macrophages do not seem to deter viral spread. Rather, they may contribute to dissemination by supporting viral replication or by transporting virus bound to cell surface lectin binding proteins within the lymphatic system. And like neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages may also secrete soluble factors that exacerbate pathogenic manifestations of the disease13.Like monocytes and macrophages, immature dendritic cells (DCs) are 'targets' of Ebola virus, either by means of attachment of viral particles through interactions with DC-expressed C-type lectin DC-SIGN or by means of infection through interaction with other DC-expressed cell-surface receptors (Fig. 1c). Dendritic cells are among the most effective antigen-presenting cells of the immune system, and they secrete critical interleukins and cytokines that provide a critical link between innate and adaptive immune responses to many pathogens; DCs infected with Ebola virus are severely compromised in these critical functions. Human myeloid DCs infected with live virus in vitro, for example, fail to secrete the normal profile of proinflammatory cytokines and costimulatory molecules. These cells do not become mature or activated and are unable to upregulate major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and thus to stimulate T cells16,17. By contrast, treatment with noninfectious Ebola virus–like particles (VLPs) activates DCs and stimulates a robust inflammatory response18, an effect dependent on the mucin-like domain of the envelope glycoprotein19. Inhibition of DC function with live or inactivated virus, but not with VLPs, indicates that the suppression of DC function and maturation is likely to be due to the presence of viral proteins or genomic material not present in the VLPs. Further studies are needed to clarify the detrimental effects of Ebola virus infection on other subpopulations of DCs, in particular on plasmacytoid DCs, which are important in antiviral interferon responses. The consequences of nonfunctional DCs include a diminished ability to stimulate humoral or cell-mediated immune responses, which may contribute to the lack of control of viral replication.A principal determinant of the inhibitory effect on innate immune function is the resistance of Ebola virus to the antiviral effects of interferon, which is likely to be due to interruption of critical interferon response pathways by the virus itself20,21,22; interferon production is blocked in macrophages, peripheral blood mononuclear cells and DCs by Ebola virus infection in vitro and in vivo16,23. In addition, the expression of interferon-stimulated genes important in the type-I interferon response is decreased in Ebola virus–infected cells20,22,24. The interferon response has also been shown to be very important for disease outcome in mice. Immunocompetent mice are resistant to Ebola virus infection, but mice that lack the interferon-α/β receptor or the protein signal transducer and activator-1 (STAT1) or that are treated with antibody to interferon become susceptible to disease25, highlighting the critical role of interferon in protecting uninfected cells. Several mechanisms of Ebola virus–mediated resistance to the interferon response have been identified. Like some other viruses, Ebola encodes specific viral proteins that antagonize the interferon response. Two virally encoded proteins, VP24 and VP35, have been shown to interfere with the induction of the interferon response26,27,28. Nuclear accumulation of STAT1 is interrupted by VP24, which leads to a block in type-I interferon signaling and renders infected cells insensitive to this antiviral response27. Ebola VP35 blocks the activity of the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), thus decreasing interferon responses26,28. More recently, VP35 was shown to counteract the activity of the double-stranded RNA–dependent protein kinase (PKR)29. In combination, these studies suggest that virus-induced inhibition of the interferon pathway not only decreases interferon-stimulated gene transcription to prevent an antiviral response state, but also contributes to lower numbers of mature and activated myeloid DCs, which in turn hinders the activation of the adaptive immune response.Surprisingly, patients who succumb to Ebola virus infection show little evidence of an activated adaptive immune response. Adaptive immunity is severely compromised not only because of a lack of functional DCs and other important antigen-presenting cells, but also because lymphocytes undergo massive apoptosis in infected humans and nonhuman primates15,30,31. Although lymphocytes are not targets of the virus, substantial numbers—with the exception of B cells—undergo apoptosis during the illness32; as a result, numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are substantially reduced in fatal human and nonhuman primate infections before death30,31,33. Lymphocyte apoptosis is also a common manifestation of other viral hemorrhagic fevers and is frequently observed during septic shock34.Studies with lymphocytes in vitro indicate that several molecules involved in triggering apoptosis are present on these cell populations, including TRAIL and Fas-FasL15. However, the mechanisms responsible for this 'bystander' apoptosis are still under investigation. It may be that inflammatory mediators and other factors, such as the proapoptotic soluble factor nitric oxide (NO) secreted by infected macrophages, are capable of inducing the observed lymphocyte apoptosis. Alternatively, impaired DC function and an overall immunosuppressive state may contribute to the phenomenon31. Yet another possibility is that cell death is actively triggered by direct interactions between lymphocytes and Ebola virus or soluble gene products. The importance of early responses involving cells of the innate immune system and/or a rapid adaptive antibody response is highlighted by a recent study showing protection of nonhuman primates with postexposure vaccine administration35.Although filoviruses are among the most virulent and fatal pathogens known, some patients infected with Ebola virus recover from the infection. Identifying the differences in the immune response between fatal and nonfatal cases is important for future development of effective therapies and vaccines. Specific differences in clinical presentation and immune responses have been noted in those who succumb contrasted with those who recover from Ebola virus infection (Table 1). This comparison makes it clear that the development of an antigen-specific cell-mediated immune response correlates with clearance of the virus. Studies demonstrating antigen-specific cellular immune responses in vaccinated nonhuman primates that survived infectious Ebola virus challenge36,37,38 support this finding. Additionally, induction of a humoral and CD8+ T cell response was found to be required for protection in mice challenged with lethal Ebola virus infection39. However, the protective role of immunoglobulins remains uncertain, as a recent report indicates that the passive transfer of the neutralizing human monoclonal antibody KZ52 is unable to control infection in a macaque model40. Based on these considerations, it is becoming increasingly evident that an early and robust, but transient, innate immune response and the subsequent activation of adaptive immune response are necessary to protect against fatal infection. If such a host immune response is not generated, the virus evades immune control, and the infection progresses to end-stage disease.Table 1Correlative differences in patients who survive versus patients who succumb to Ebola virus infectionNonlethal infectionLethal infectionRefs.Prominent CD8+ T cell activationNo CD8+ T cell activation30,33Above-normal numbers of T cellsBelow-normal numbers of T cells
33
107 viral genome copies/ml serum1010 viral genome copies/ml serum33,47Detectable antibodies in blood at onset of symptomsNo detectable antibodies in blood at onset of symptoms33,65Low NOHigh NO33,65
Pathogenesis of infection
The pathological changes seen in patients dying from Ebola virus infection include coagulation abnormalities, vascular permeability, hemorrhage and organ necrosis and failure. The current hypothesis is that the fundamental mechanism of Ebola virus pathogenesis is vascular injury and damage secondary to coagulation abnormalities and increased vascular permeability, due to the release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines by infected and activated monocytes and macrophages, and to direct endothelial cell damage from viral replication late in infection41,42. It is evident that in addition to the 'cytokine storm', the virus itself can also induce immunosuppression and damage host cells directly4,43,44. Thus, the deleterious manifestations of the infection stem in part from the factors secreted from dysfunctional immune cells and in part from virally induced damage of host tissues and organs.Ebola virus shows tropism in vitro for cells of the innate immune system as well as endothelial cells, dendritic cells and several types of epithelial cells. Replication occurs at an unusually high rate in infected cells. The ability of virus to replicate in different cell types is less well characterized in vivo. In addition, viremia in infected patients is generally difficult to quantify6; however, a viral load exceeding 106 plaque-forming units per milliliter of serum (PFU/ml) was noted in at least one outbreak of the Zaire species of Ebola45. Viremia in infected nonhuman primates can reach up to 107 PFU/ml46. Humans with fatal infections have up to 1010 copies of viral RNA per milliliter, whereas much fewer (107 copies/ml) are found in the serum of those who survive Ebola virus infection (see Table 1)47. High rates of viral replication lead to lysis and necrosis in cells of many organs, including the liver, spleen, kidneys and gonads. Much of the observed necrosis is virally induced, as there is little infiltration within infected tissues, and extraordinary numbers of viral particles are present in the necrotic debris. In addition, microscopic examination of infected human tissues shows a correlation between tissue damage and the presence of viral antigens, nucleic acid and sites of viral replication4,43,44. This observation indicates that direct viral damage of tissues and organs may lead to organ failure and shock.The infection of certain cell types plays an important role in Ebola virus pathogenesis. Infection of innate immune cells is thought to be pivotal to the systemic dissemination of the virus during human infection8,10. Infected monocytes and macrophages travel from the site of infection to lymph nodes, where more monocytes and macrophages are recruited and then become targets of infection. Infection of these cells leads to further amplification and dissemination of the virus through the lymphatic system12. In addition, infection and necrosis of hepatocytes causes impairment of liver function. Liver enzymes are elevated in most filovirus infections48,49,50, and decreased liver function could account for the decreased synthesis of coagulation factors and development of coagulation disorders prominent during fatal infection. Finally, the development of shock at later stages of the disease is multifactorial and, along with hemorrhage, may be due in part to the infection and resulting necrosis of cells of the adrenal cortex50, as these cells are important in the regulation of blood pressure.
Vascular impairment and Ebola glycoproteins
Endothelial impairment is a prominent feature of Ebola hemorrhagic fever. A loss of vascular integrity is often observed in humans and nonhuman primates during late stages of the disease and is associated with bleeding and the imbalance of fluid between tissue spaces. The complete mechanisms leading to endothelium permeability have not been elucidated. Several studies have shown that the virally induced release of inflammatory mediators increases vascular permeability in vitro11,51. However, endothelial cells are targets of infection during later stages of the disease and direct virus-induced cytotoxicity of endothelial cells cannot be ruled out as a contributory mechanism for increased hemorrhagic manifestations. Indeed, the viral envelope glycoprotein GP has been implicated as one of the major determinants of vascular cell injury.GP is one of the most studied Ebola virus proteins because of its importance in viral entry and potential as a target for vaccine development. As mentioned, it is also under intense research because of its possible role in pathogenesis. The glycoprotein is responsible for targeting the virus to cells that are relevant to pathogenesis. GP is likely to have a role in immune suppression through its effects on downregulation of cell surface proteins essential for lymphocyte adhesion and antigen presentation52,53. Although some have suggested that soluble GP may compete for neutralizing antibodies that might otherwise target viruses or infected cells54,55, a protective role for such antibodies has not been demonstrated, and the biochemistry and antibody reactivity of soluble GP differ from those of the membrane-bound trimer spike56,57. Soluble GP does inhibit neutrophil activation57, providing a further mechanism by which viral immunity may affect the innate inflammatory response. Ebola virus entry depends also on endosomal cathepsins, enzymes critical for antigen presentation58,59, and release of cathepsins may contribute to virus-induced cell damage60.Several groups have shown that GP has a direct cytotoxic effect. Yang and colleagues found that of the seven viral gene products, GP was responsible for cell rounding and detachment in endothelial cells both in vitro and ex vivo and that this can lead to a substantial increase in vascular permeability61. Expression of GP from all four species of Ebola virus induces variable degrees of cytotoxicity in cell lines and primary cells in vitro that are characterized by cell rounding and detachment, followed by cell death61. These effects are mediated by a heavily glycosylated mucin-like domain of the glycoprotein. Although there is some debate over the role of GP cytotoxicity during live viral infection62, differences in GP-induced cytotoxicity are correlated with the mortality rates of the different viral species52,61, suggesting that this gene product is important in the pathogenesis of the disease. Expression of membrane-bound GP seems to be precisely controlled during viral replication by a mechanism involving transcriptional editing by the viral polymerase63. This indicates that the glycoprotein may be a key viral determinant of pathogenicity during infection.Thus, virus-induced and host factors combine to result in a destructive pathway in which a fatal response to Ebola virus infection invariably correlates with suppression of both B and T cell–mediated immunity. Patients who fail to recover have virtually no viral antigen–specific antibodies. Low amounts of specific immunoglobulin Ms are present in only 30% of fatally infected patients, and no specific immunoglobulin Gs are detected30,64,65. There seems to be limited initiation of cytotoxic T cell or CD4+ helper T cell responses, most likely owing to their depletion in fatal cases. Lymphocyte depletion is likely to exacerbate the uncontrolled viral replication within macrophages and other inflammatory cells. Therefore, fatal Ebola virus infection is characterized by broad immunosuppression typified by the development of an aberrant nonspecific and deleterious innate immune response and little or no stimulation of an antigen-specific adaptive response. This lack of response leads to an overwhelming viral burden and resultant immune- and virus-mediated pathology.
Relevance to other highly lethal pathogens and future research
Valuable insights into critical features of the host immune system can be gained from an examination of the immune response to highly virulent pathogens such as Ebola virus. One trend that seems to be emerging is that lethal, acute pathogens tend to kill rapidly, before the development of an adaptive immune response, whereas chronic pathogens can survive and replicate despite an adaptive immune response. In this regard, there are interesting parallels between Ebola virus infection and the highly pathogenic 1918 influenza virus (see the accompanying review by Ahmed and colleagues66). For example, Kobasa and co-workers found that a reconstituted 1918 strain of influenza shows high levels of viral replication, which correlates with macroscopic lesions in lung tissue of infected cynomolgus macaques67. Infection in this animal model culminated in acute respiratory distress and an overwhelmingly fatal outcome. Interestingly, infected animals were able to mount an immune response that was in many ways similar to the responses observed during Ebola infection in nonhuman primates. The immune response to 1918 influenza was characterized by an aberrant interferon response and the expression of abnormally high levels of cytokines and chemokines. The authors concluded that the high lethality of the 1918 influenza strain can be attributed in part to the generation of an atypical and harmful innate immune response that is insufficient for protection.A comparison of the immune responses to Ebola and 1918 influenza viruses indicates that the high lethality of these viruses may stem from a combination of the deleterious effects of high viral titers and direct viral damage and a nonspecific and abnormally sustained innate immune response. A similar picture of overwhelming viremia, lack of control by the innate immune response and failure to develop adaptive immunity has been observed with other highly lethal viruses as well, including the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus, Marburg virus, Lassa fever virus and others. In each case, it would seem that the virus causes lethal infection through its overwhelming replication, though the specific receptors, cell and organ tropisms, mechanisms of evading inflammation and immunity and natural reservoir may differ.Many questions remain unresolved regarding the mechanisms and full extent of virus-induced immune dysregulation. For example, the mechanism of lymphocyte apoptosis is unknown. Ebola virus does not target these cells directly, yet their numbers are rapidly exhausted once viral titers are measurable in the host. Do these cells enter an anergic terminal differentiation due to local cytokine imbalances, or is there aberrant target destruction by other immune cells? It is also unknown whether Ebola virus shows tropism for a particular DC that may enhance evasion of the antiviral response. The mechanism by which DC antigen presentation is impaired is unknown. The role of cathepsin in immunopathogenesis is also not completely understood; because cathepsins also contribute to antigen processing, it is possible they affect the adaptive immune response as well. Similar questions remain regarding the details of viral replication in vivo. Although Ebola virus can be found by immunostaining of a variety of cell types, including macrophages, DCs and endothelial cells, the virus binds to ubiquitous lectin receptors on many of these cells; thus, it is unclear whether the presence of the virus in a given cell represents active replication or merely binding to the cell surface. Finally, the role of cytokine storm versus direct viral cytotoxicity to endothelial cells remains the subject of much speculation but, unfortunately, very little data.Ultimately, many of those questions, including the roles of specific parts of the immune system in protection, may be resolved with studies that use antibody depletion in vivo against cytokines, cytokine receptors and lymphocyte subsets in nonhuman primate models of infection. Until these important issues are addressed, the current hypotheses explain Ebola virus–induced pathophysiology in broad terms: a combination of factors, including uncontrolled and nonspecific inflammatory responses, virally induced immunosuppression and direct viral destruction of several cell types, collectively contribute to the collapse of the vascular system, multiorgan failure and shock-like syndrome of lethal Ebola virus infection.


Title: Delayed Disease Progression in Cynomolgus Macaques Infected with Ebola Virus Makona Strain

Ebola virus (EBOV) was discovered 1976 in central Africa and has since then caused multiple localized outbreaks of Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) in humans and great apes in this area (1). In December 2013, an EBOV outbreak started in West Africa, in rural eastern Guinea (2). From there the disease spread to the neighboring countries of Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Mali and has been imported into Nigeria, Senegal, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States (3). Almost 27,000 human cases and >11,000 deaths have been documented, making this the largest EBOV outbreak on record (3).Although no approved treatment or vaccine is available for Ebola, this outbreak emphasizes the urgent need for countermeasures. Recently, several experimental EBOV therapeutics and vaccines have been accelerated for licensure and clinical trials are underway (www.clinicaltrials.gov), underlining the severity of the situation for global public health.The current EHF outbreak was caused by a new strain of EBOV, designated EBOV-Makona, which was first isolated in Guinea in 2014 (2). To determine the virulence of the new EBOV-Makona strain from West Africa in the standard macaque animal model, we infected cynomolgus macaques with EBOV-Makona (2) and compared infection with that caused by the prototype EBOV strain Mayinga (EBOV-Mayinga) isolated in 1976 (1). These virus isolates are 97% identical in their genomic sequence (2). Materials and MethodsBiosafety and Animal Ethics StatementsAll infectious work with EBOV was performed by using standard operating procedures approved by the Rocky Mountain Laboratories (RML) Institutional Biosafety Committee in the maximum containment laboratory at the RML, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health (Hamilton, MT, USA). Animal work was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations described in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institute of Health, the Office of Animal Welfare and the United States Department of Agriculture. Procedures were conducted in animals anesthetized with ketamine by trained personnel under the supervision of veterinary staff. All efforts were made to ameliorate the welfare and minimize animal suffering in accordance with the Weatherall report on the use of nonhuman primates in research (https://royalsociety.org/policy/publications/2006/weatherall-report/).Animals were housed in adjoining individual primate cages that enabled social interactions, under controlled conditions of humidity, temperature, and light (12-h light:12-h dark cycles). Food and water were available ad libitum. Animals were monitored at least twice a day and fed commercial monkey chow, treats, and fruit twice a day by trained personnel. Environmental enrichment consisted of commercial toys. Early endpoint criteria, as specified by the RML Animal Care and Use Committee–approved clinical score parameters, were used to determine when animals should be humanely euthanized.Challenge VirusesEBOV-Mayinga (passage 5) (1) and EBOV-Makona C07 (passage 1) (2) were used. These 2 viruses were propagated on Vero E6 cells, titered on Vero E6 cells, and stored in liquid nitrogen.Study DesignSix cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascularis) (4 male and 2 female animals, age range 6–8 years, weight range 3–7 kg) were used in this study (3 animals/group). All animals were challenged intramuscularly at 2 anatomic locations, the left and right caudal thigh, on day 0 with a dose of 1,000 PFU of EBOV-Mayinga or EBOV-Makona. The animals were observed at least twice a day for clinical signs of disease according to an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee–approved and previously published scoring sheet (4) and were humanely euthanized when clinical signs indicated terminal disease on the basis of pre-established endpoints. Blood samples were collected on days 0, 3, and 6 after infection and at time of euthanasia. A full necropsy was performed at the end of the study, and organs were harvested for virologic and pathologic analyses.Virus LoadsFor determination of virus loads in macaque blood and tissue samples, Vero E6 cells were seeded in 48-well plates the day before titration. Tissues were homogenized in 1 mL plain Dulbecco minimal essential medium, and tissue and blood samples were serial diluted 10-fold. Medium was removed from cells and triplicates were inoculated with each dilution. After 1 h, Dulbecco minimal essential medium supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum, penicillin/streptomycin and l-glutamine was added and incubated at 37°C. Cells were monitored for cytopathic effect, and 50% tissue culture infectious dose was calculated for each sample by using the method of Reed and Muench (5).Hematologic and Chemical AnalysesTotal leukocyte counts; lymphocyte, platelet, reticulocyte, and erythrocyte counts; hemoglobin levels; hematocrit values; mean cell volumes; mean corpuscular volumes, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentrations were determined from blood containing EDTA by using the HemaVet 950FS Analyzer (Drew Scientific, Dallas, TX, USA). Serum biochemical analysis was conducted by using the Piccolo Xpress Chemistry Analyzer and Piccolo General Chemistry 13 Panel Discs (Abaxis, Union City, CA, USA).Serum Cytokine LevelsMacaque serum samples were inactivated by using γ-irradiation (5 MRad) and removed from the maximum containment laboratory. Serum samples were then diluted 1:2 in serum matrix for analysis by using the Milliplex Non-Human Primate Magnetic Bead Panel (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Concentrations of tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-12/23p40, IL-8, monocyte chemotactic protein 1, IL1Ra, soluble CD40L (sCD40L), IL-15, interferon-γ (IFN-γ), IL-4, and IL-17 were determined for all samples by using the Bio-Plex 200 System (BioRad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA).Histopathologic and Immunohistochemical AnalysesAnalyses were performed with macaque tissues. After fixation/inactivation for 7 days in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, samples were removed from high containment. Subsequently, tissue samples were embedded in paraffin and tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Liver and spleen samples were evaluated in detail, and the following scoring system was applied: 0 = no lesions; 1 = small number of necrotic cells; 2 = moderate necrosis; 3 = significant necrosis; 4 = coalescing necrosis; 5 = diffuse necrosis. To detect EBOV antigen, immunohistochemical analysis was performed by using polyclonal rabbit serum against Ebola virus viral protein 40 as described (6).Statistical AnalysesA log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test was performed to analyze time to death between the 2 groups. Statistical significance was determined at a level of 0.05. All analyses were conducted by using Prism software (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA).ResultsDisease ProgressionSix cynomolgus macaques were randomly divided into 2 groups and infected intramuscularly with 1,000 PFU of EBOV-Makona or EBOV-Mayinga. The targeted challenge dose was confirmed by back-titration of the inoculum on Vero cells. On days 3 and 6 postinfection, all macaques were febrile (temperature >38.5°C) (Figure 1, panel A), and animals showed a decrease in food intake and general activity starting at day 4 postinfection. A prominent, macular, cutaneous rash developed in the 3 EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals throughout their bodies starting on day 4 postinfection. In contrast, this characteristic sign of EHF developed in only 2 of the 3 EBOV-Makona−infected animals on day 6, and the rash was more faint and restricted to the arms, legs, chest, and face.Figure 1Clinical parameters for 6 cynomolgus macaques infected with Ebola virus strains Makona or Mayinga. Parameters were measured for each animal on day of examination and time of euthanasia. A) Temperature profiles. B) Virus titer (viremia). TCID50, 50% tissue culture infectious dose. C) Daily clinical scorel. D) Survival curves showing significant difference in time to death between both groups (p = 0.0295, by Mantel-Cox test).Unlike in current human EHF cases, diarrhea was only observed temporarily in 1 EBOV-Makona−infected and in none of the EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals. Viremia was detectable as early as day 3 postinfection with no clear distinction among the 2 groups, but end titers were in general higher in EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals (Figure 1, panel B). The 3 EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals had to be euthanized on days 5 and 6 postinfection (1 and 2 animals, respectively) because of severity of disease and after reaching the critical clinical score for euthanasia according to approved animal study protocol (Figure 1, panels C, D) (4). In contrast, EBOV-Makona infection resulted in slower disease progression; animals were euthanized on days 7 and 8 postinfection (1 and 2 animals, respectively) (Figure 1, panels C, D), a distinction that was significant (p = 0.0295).Hematologic and Chemical AnalysesAn increase in leukocytes (Figure 2, panel A) was noted in all 6 animals on day 3 postinfection with concurrent neutrophilia (Figure 2, panel B) and lymphopenia, a phenomenon that has been reported in EBOV-infected macaques (7–9). Platelet levels decreased over time in all animals, and thrombocytopenia developed during days 3−6 postinfection (Figure 2, panel C). Although the overall hemogram changes were similar for both groups, EBOV-Makona−infected animals often showed a delay and less severe changes than EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals. Animals in both groups showed mild increases in levels of total bilirubin (Figure 2, panel D) and moderate to severe increases in levels of liver enzymes, such as aspartate aminotransferase (Figure 2, panel E) and alkaline phosphatase (Figure 2, panel F). These findings are consistent with those of acute, diffuse hepatic necrosis, which is commonly found with EBOV infection in macaques (7–9). Again, increases in liver enzyme levels were delayed in 2 of the 3 EBOV-Makona−infected animals and did not always reach the levels for EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals.Figure 2Blood and serum parameters for 6 cynomolgus macaques infected with Ebola virus strains Makona or Mayinga. Parameters were measured for each animal on day of examination and time of euthanasia. A) Leukocyte counts. WBC, white blood cell. B) Neutrophil (NE) counts. C) Platelet counts. D) Bilirubin levels. E) Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels. F) Akaline phosphatase (ALP) levels.Systemic Host ResponsesDifferences in systemic host immune responses were monitored in serum of infected animals. Levels of some proinflammatory cytokines increased in later stages of the disease in all animals (Figure 3). Although levels of tumor necrosis factor-α were similar (slightly higher for EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals) for both groups over time (Figure 3, panel A), serum levels of IL-6 increased earlier in the EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals and reached similar levels at time of euthanasia (Figure 3, panel B). The most striking difference was observed for IFN-γ; a >300% increase was observed in EBOV-Makona−infected animals at the time of euthanasia (Figure 3, panel C). Thrombocytopenia is a hallmark of EHF in human and nonhuman primates. Therefore, we monitored levels of sCD40L, a marker for platelet activation. Levels of sCD40L decreased in both groups during the infection (Figure 3, panel D), a fact that correlated well with decreasing platelet levels (Figure 3, panel C). Finally, antiinflammatory marker IL-10 and chemokine monocyte chemotactic protein 1 were found to be upregulated during the course of infection in all the animals, and there were no differences between the 2 groups (Figure 3, panels E, F). Overall, targeted systemic host responses were upregulated for all the animals, and except for IFN-γ, there were minor differences between the 2 groups and among individual animals.Figure 3Serum cytokine and chemokine levels for 6 cynomolgus macaques infected with Ebola virus strains Makona or Mayinga. A) Tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α); B) Interleukin-6 (IL-6); C) Interferon-γ (IFN-γ); D) Soluble CD40 ligand (sCD40L); E) IL-10; and F) Monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1). Kinetics were analyzed in serum samples of each animal collected on days of examination and time of euthanasia.Pathologic ChangesAnimals in both groups showed typical gross pathologic changes for EBOV infections in macaques, and no differences in virus titers were found in tissues collected at the time of euthanasia (Figure 4, panel A). Pathology scores for liver and spleen, key target organs for EBOV infection, were similar (Figure 4, panel B). There were no apparent histopathologic differences between lesions induced by EBOV-Makona or EBOV-Mayinga infections, and both strains caused multifocal to coalescing hepatic necrosis with acute inflammation (Figure 5, upper panels). In addition, there were abundant fibrin microthrombi within the hepatic sinusoids. Likewise, splenic lesions produced by either virus strain were indistinguishable and consisted of necrosis (lymphocytolysis) of the white pulp, abundant fibrin within the red pulp, and multifocal acute inflammation (Figure 5, upper panel). Immunohistochemical analysis showed copious viral antigen in hepatocytes, endothelial cells, and mononuclear cells, which was collocated with hepatic and splenic lesions (Figure 5, lower panels). Overall, lethal EHF developed in all animals, and they showed similar anatomic pathologic features.Figure 4Virologic and pathologic results for 6 cynomolgus macaques infected with Ebola virus strains Makona or Mayinga. A) Viral infectivity titers were determined in key tissue samples collected at the time of euthanasia. TCID50, 50% tissue culture infectious dose; LN, lymph node. B) Pathology scores for liver and spleen. Scores were generated by using the scoring system described in the Materials and Methods.Figure 5Pathologic results for 6 cynomolgus macaques infected with Ebola virus strains Makona or Mayinga. Liver and spleen sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H & E; top panels) and analyzed for necrosis, microthrombi, lymphocytosis, and inflammation. Sections were also stained with a polyclonal rabbit serum against Ebola virus viral protein 40 for detection of viral antigen (immunohistochemical [IHC] analysis; bottom panels). Sections from a representative animal in each group are shown. Original magnification levels: liver, ×40; spleen, ×20.DiscussionEHF with similar hallmarks of the disease developed in all infected cynomolgus macaques, and all animals had to be euthanized according to protocol. However, despite similar onset of symptoms (fever) for all animals, disease progression in the EBOV-Makona–infected animals was delayed, which suggested attenuation in virulence for this strain in macaques. Nevertheless, the macaque model is well suited to determine the efficacy of existing vaccines (historically assessed in cynomolgus macaques) and treatment strategies (historically tested in rhesus macaques) against the currently circulating EBOV-Makona strain in West Africa.In this study, we sought to establish a macaque disease model for the EBOV-Makona strain currently circulating in West Africa to advance our response capabilities by testing urgently needed countermeasures against this newly emerged virus and by that fulfilling a critical capacity gap. We compared disease progression and pathogenesis of 2 EBOV strains, the prototype EBOV-Mayinga and the current EBOV-Makona strain (2), in cynomolgus macaques. In general, infections in both groups were similar with regard to disease onset, hematology, blood chemistry, systemic host responses, and end-stage viral organ load and pathologic changes. However, EBOV-Makona–infected animals lagged behind in many parameters; the most notable difference was in progression to end-stage disease. Although clinical scores remained similar in the early stage of disease (until day 4 postinfection), EBOV-Makona−infected macaques reached euthanasia criteria on average 2 days later than EBOV-Mayinga−infected animals (7.67 days vs. 5.67 days postinfection, respectively). This finding was associated with less pronounced and more restricted macular cutaneous rash, slightly lower viremia at end-stage disease, less pronounced increases in liver enzyme levels, and slightly delayed systemic proinflammatory and chemokine responses for EBOV-Makona–infected macaques than for EBOV-Mayinga−infected macaques. Overall, virulence of EBOV-Makona seemed to be decreased in this animal model, although severe/lethal EHF eventually developed in all EBOV-infected macaques. The fact that all infections were lethal explains why end-stage pathologic changes were similar in animals infected with both virus strains and why there were virtually no differences in gross pathologic and histopathologic changes in major target organs.A major distinction is related to IFN-γ levels during end-stage disease, with dramatically higher systemic levels for EBOV-Makona–infected macaques. This finding has been reported for an EBOV-Mayinga−infected rhesus macaque (7) and was described for lethal EHF cases in humans (10). EBOV-Mayinga−infected macaques, which showed faster disease progression, did not show these strikingly increased IFN-γ levels. One can only speculate that >7 days (expected time for initiation of adaptive immune responses) after EBOV infection seem to be necessary for adequate stimulation of T cells, the main source of IFN-γ (11).The case-fatality rate in humans in the current outbreak in West Africa (≈50%) does not seem nearly as high as that reported for the initial 1976 outbreak in the former Zaire (now Democratic Republic of the Congo) (≈90%), which suggests lower virulence of this new strain from West Africa (1,3,12,13). It is difficult to say if the seemingly lower virulence in humans is reflected in our macaque model because this model remains lethal for all studied EBOV strains, including the current strain in West Africa (EBOV-Makona). However, it seems fair to conclude that virulence of the strain from West Africa in macaques is not increased compared with other EBOV strains. Nevertheless, the macaque model that we developed fills a major capacity gap and can be used for development of urgently needed countermeasures against the new EBOV-Makona strain from West Africa.


Title: Ebolavirus and Other Filoviruses

No full text body available.


Title: Experimental Infection of Bundibugyo Virus in Domestic Swine Leads to Viral Shedding with Evidence of Intraspecies Transmission

1. IntroductionThe Ebolavirus genus, family Filoviridae, is currently composed of six enveloped, filamentous, negative sense RNA viruses [1]. Of these, four are known to be zoonotic pathogens capable of causing severe, potentially lethal, disease in humans: Ebola virus (EBOV, Zaire ebolavirus), Sudan virus (SUDV, Sudan ebolavirus), Bundibugyo virus (BDBV, Bundibugyo ebolavirus), and Taï Forest virus (TAFV, Tai Forest ebolavirus). In contrast, Reston virus (RESTV, Reston ebolavirus) is considered as avirulent, yet capable of infecting humans [2]. The most recent addition to the genus, Bombali virus (BOMV, Bombali ebolavirus), has unknown zoonotic potential as of 2018 [1, 3].BDBV was discovered in 2007 as the causative agent in an outbreak of lethal hemorrhagic disease originating in Kabango village in the Bundibugyo district of western Uganda [4, 5]. Since its discovery, BDBV has reemerged once causing the 2012 outbreak in the Isiro Health District of the Democratic Republic of Congo [6]. Combined, there have been a total of 211 human cases with 71 deaths, demonstrating a case fatality rate of 33.6% [2]. Although bats are routinely implicated as the possible reservoir for the ebolaviruses, the source of infection for index cases in almost all outbreaks is unknown with only limited epidemiological evidence directly linking humans and bats [7]. This lack of evidence allows for the possibility that ebolavirus maintenance could involve multiple host species or more complex spillover dynamics [7, 8].In 2008, the discovery of domestic pigs naturally infected with RESTV in the Philippines expanded our understanding of the potential ebolavirus host range [9]. During this epizootic, transmission of virus from pigs to humans was documented, albeit without the development of clinically apparent disease in the people involved [9, 10]. Subsequent to this discovery, experimental infections of pigs with EBOV, a human pathogenic virus, demonstrated the susceptibility of pigs to the African-origin ebolaviruses [11]. EBOV replicated to high titers in these animals and showed a predilection for the respiratory tissues resulting in severe pulmonary pathology with shedding of infectious virus by the oral and nasal routes. In addition, EBOV was shown to be transmissible between pigs [11, 12]. Further studies demonstrated that experimentally infected pigs were also capable of transmitting virus to nonhuman primates (NHPs) without direct contact [12]. Considering NHPs as surrogates, these findings suggest that pigs could also serve a role in EBOV transmission to humans.The finding of an ebolavirus in animals, such as domestic pigs, used in intensive production systems and as a major source of human protein is alarming and a cause for public health concern [9, 13]. Serosurveillance studies have provided multiple reports of ebolavirus and ebolavirus-like antibodies being detected in domestic pigs in China [14] and in both East and West Africa, including Uganda [8], Sierra Leone [15], and Guinea [16]. As increasing pork consumption is driving the rapid expansion of pig rearing in areas of sub-Saharan Africa, there is thought to be increased risk of zoonotic pathogen spillover and transmission along the pig–wildlife–human interface [17, 18]. This is especially true in Uganda where pig keeping is actively growing as an increasingly important small stakeholder livelihood strategy [17, 19]. Intriguingly, outbreaks involving ebolaviruses in humans have shown a correlation with periods of peak pork consumption, noting that evidence of increasing demand around holidays may be over represented with a bias due to the occurrence of large family gatherings and higher rates of travel-related activities that could also contribute to the emergence and establishment of an outbreak [15, 18]. Therefore, the risks to both human and animal health associated with the presence of ebolaviruses in livestock produced for human consumption are unknown.The susceptibility of domestic pigs to ebolaviruses other than RESTV and EBOV, the potential role pigs may play in virus ecology, spillover dynamics, and human public health risk, and the viral shedding and pathogenesis of these viruses in pigs is unknown. For these reasons, we conducted a series of studies aimed at determining the susceptibility of domestic pigs to BDBV. These data are urgently needed to assess the risk this potential host–pathogen interaction could contribute to animal health, food security, and human public health. Here, we demonstrate that domestic pigs are susceptible to experimental infection with BDBV via oronasal inoculation. Infection results in a primary tissue tropism to respiratory and lymphatic tissues leading to the development of moderate interstitial pneumonia and generalized lymphadenopathy. Shedding of infectious virus by the oral and nasal routes was also noted in otherwise subclinical animals.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Biosafety and Animal EthicsAll infectious work and sample inactivation were performed in the Containment Level 4 (CL4) laboratory in accordance with the policies and protocols outlined by the Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health Institutional Biosafety Committee. All animal work was performed in strict accordance with the Canadian Council for Animal Care under the approval and oversight of the facility Animal Care and Use Committee (ACUC). As pigs are social animals, they were group housed throughout the study, under controlled conditions of humidity, temperature, and light (12-hr light/12-hr dark cycles). Food and water were available ad libitum. Animals were fed a commercial pig diet, as well as fruits and vegetables as enrichment, and monitored at least once daily by trained personnel. Environmental enrichment was provided as novel toys and a small pool. Humane endpoints were approved by the ACUC and specified when animals should be humanely euthanized.2.2. Experimental Animal InoculationA total of 14, high-health status, American Yorkshire–Landrace cross, domestic pigs (Sus scrofa domesticus) (six castrated males and eight females, age 6 weeks) were used, with seven pigs being used in each of two studies conducted (Figure 1). Pigs were acquired from a mycoplasma—and porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus—certified free herd and were previously vaccinated for porcine circovirus-2 (per vendor provided health records). One pig was sampled and necropsied prior to infection in each study to serve as a farm control. After a 7-day acclimation, the remaining six pigs were oronasally challenged with approximately 1 × 106 pfu total of BDBV inoculum in 3.0 mL media distributed as 1.0 mL per nostril and 1.0 mL placed in the distal pharynx utilizing a sterile tomcat-style catheter. The challenge dose was confirmed by back titration of the inoculum on Vero E6 cells. A physical examination including collection of blood, multiple swabs (rectal, oral, and nasal), and nasal wash was performed at the time points shown in Figure 1. Fluid from group rope chews was collected daily using a commercially available collection kit (Tego Swine Oral Fluids Kit, A100930, ITL BioMedical Animal Healthcare). Extensive tissue sampling occurred at necropsy, including performing a bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). Animal numbers were not based on power analysis but on the limitations of the maximum containment animal room size. Group assignment (day of euthanasia and necropsy) was based on randomization at the time of permanent animal identification application (ear tag).2.3. Virus Stock and Inoculum PreparationStock virus was produced and titrated by an immunocytochemistry assay (described below) on Vero 76 Clone E6 cells in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and stored at −150°C. Viral stocks were diluted to challenge dose in DMEM. The cell line was purchased from ATCC (CRL-1586, Lot 58027482) and confirmed to be bacteria and Mycoplasma spp. free. The identity and purity of the isolate used in this study were verified by whole-genome sequencing and confirmed to be BDBV with a 99.33% genome-wide nucleotide identity with Ebola virus/H. sapiens-tc/Uganda/2007/Bundibugyo-R4386L (GenBank MK028834).2.4. Virus Titration by ImmunocytochemistryVirus was titrated using a previously described immunocytochemistry assay on Vero E6 cells [20]. Briefly, samples were serially diluted (1 : 10) and incubated on confluent monolayers of cells in 96 well plates at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 1 hr. Here, 1.75% of carboxymethylcellulose (CMC; Sigma) containing DMEM, 7.5% bovine serum albumin fraction V, 7.5% sodium bicarbonate, 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) 1 M, 0.4 g/L 100x folic acid, 200 mM L-glutamine, 11.0 mg/mL sodium pyruvate, and 100x penicillin/streptomycin was added to each well. The plates were incubated for 4 days at 37°C and 5% CO2 and then fixed for 24 hr with 10% buffered formalin. The CMC overlay and formalin were removed and 3% Triton X-100 was used to permeabilize the cell monolayer after washing. A primary anti-BDBV nucleoprotein antibody (IBT Bioservices; 0304-001) was added at a dilution of 1 : 2,000 and the plates were incubated at room temperature with agitation. After incubation, the plates were washed with TBS-T and deionized water and an antirabbit secondary antibody was applied as per manufacturer's instructions (Dako; K4011). Following room temperature incubation and washing with TBS-T and water, substrate was added (Dako EnVision+ Substrate System; K3468). The plates were washed with deionized water and allowed to dry before the stained plaques were counted with the aid of a stereo dissecting microscope.2.5. Sampling of AnimalsOral, rectal, and nasal swabs were taken from each pig at the time points outlined in Figure 1 under general anesthesia using isoflurane and placed into sterile Dulbecco's phosphate-buffered saline (D-PBS) containing the following antibiotics: streptomycin, vancomycin, nystatin, and gentamycin. Fluid was collected from a bilateral nasal wash with sterile D-PBS and one of each of the following tubes was collected via jugular venipuncture: serum, sodium citrate, sodium heparin, and K3 ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) Figure (1). While under anesthesia, a physical exam including rectal temperature and pulse oximetry (Massimo Rad 5) was conducted on each pig.2.6. Complete Blood Counts, Blood Chemistry, and Blood Gas AnalysesHematology was performed on a VetScan HM5 hematology analyzer (Zoetis, USA) using K3 EDTA-treated whole blood, and the following parameters were evaluated: red blood cells, hemoglobin, hematocrit, mean corpuscular volume, mean corpuscular hemoglobin, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, red cell distribution weight, platelets, mean platelet volume, white blood cells, neutrophil count (absolute (abs) and %), lymphocyte count (abs and %), monocyte count (abs and %), eosinophil count (abs and %), and basophil count (abs and %). Blood chemistries were evaluated on a VetScan VS2 (Zoetis, USA) with the Preventative Care Profile Plus rotor (Zoetis) using sodium heparin-treated whole blood and the following parameters were evaluated: glucose, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, calcium, albumin, total protein, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, total carbon dioxide, potassium, sodium, chloride, globulin, and total bilirubin. Sodium heparin-treated blood was also used to analyze blood gases, which were performed on an iSTAT Alinity V machine (Zoetis, USA) using a CG4+ cartridge (Zoetis, USA) to measure the following parameters: lactate, pH, total carbon dioxide, partial pressure carbon dioxide, partial pressure oxygen, soluble oxygen, bicarbonate, and base excess. All analyses were performed according to the manufacturer's instructions.2.7. Necropsy and Tissue SamplingNecropsies were performed after euthanasia via pentobarbital overdose, confirmation of death, and exsanguination by femoral artery laceration. The following tissues were collected and individual samples split between 10% neutral-buffered formalin and fresh tissue: cerebrospinal fluid, urine, vitreous fluid, skin, skeletal muscle, abdominal fat, liver, spleen, pancreas, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, spiral colon, kidney, gastrohepatic and mesenteric lymph nodes, right cranial lung lobe, right middle lung lobe, right caudal lung lobe, left cranial lung lobe, left caudal lung lobe, trachea, heart, tracheobronchial lymph nodes, cervical spinal cord, meninges, cerebrum, cerebellum, brainstem, olfactory bulb, nasal turbinates, submandibular lymph nodes, tonsil, trigeminal ganglion, and the entire eye. The superficial inguinal, caudal cervical, and iliac/sublumbar lymph nodes were also collected. The reproductive tracts (uterus and ovaries) were collected en bloc from female animals.2.8. HistopathologyHistopathology, immunohistochemistry, and in situ hybridization (ISH) were performed based on positive results from reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (rRT-PCR). After fixation and inactivation of tissues in 10% neutral phosphate buffered formalin for a minimum of 7 days, tissues were trimmed and removed from the maximum containment laboratory, routinely processed, and stained with Gill's hematoxylin and eosin (HE) for histopathologic examination.2.9. In Situ Hybridization for Detection of BDBV in Tissue SectionsISH was utilized to detect BDBV genomic material in paraffin-embedded formalin-fixed tissue sections. Five micrometers paraffin-embedded formalin-fixed tissue sections were cut, air dried, and then melted on to charged slides in an oven at 60°C. The slides were then cleared and dehydrated in xylene and 100% ethanol and then air dried. The sections were quenched in aqueous H2O2 for 10 min, boiled in target retrieval solution for 15 min, rinsed in 100% ethanol, and air dried again. Then, a final pretreatment of protease plus enzyme for 15 min at 40°C was applied. The probe (V-BDBV-NP-C1; Advanced Cell Diagnostics) was applied and incubated at 40°C for 2 hr. The hybridization amplification steps (AMP 1–6) were applied to the slides for the recommended times and temperatures as per the manual for the RNAscope® 2.5HD Detection Reagent—Red kit (Advanced Cell Diagnostics). The signal was then visualized by the chromogen Fast Red. Sections were then counter stained with Gill's 1 hematoxylin, dried, and cover slipped.2.10. Combination Immunohistochemistry and In Situ Hybridization StainingA combination of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and ISH staining was carried out for the identification of BDBV infected macrophages and pneumocytes in lung tissue sections. Five micrometers paraffin-embedded formalin-fixed tissue sections were cut, air dried, and then melted on to charged slides in an oven at 60°C. The slides were then cleared and dehydrated in xylene and 100% ethanol and allowed to air dry. Sections were quenched for 10 min in aqueous hydrogen peroxide.For identification of infected macrophages, epitopes were retrieved using an AR10 target retrieval kit (Biogenex, USA) in a BioCare Medical Decloaking Chamber. Mac387, a mouse antihuman macrophage monoclonal antibody (MCA874G; BioRad, USA), was used at a 1 : 50 dilution at 4°C overnight in a humidified chamber. Slides were then fixed with 10% neutral buffered formalin, rinsed, and followed by a final pretreatment of protease plus enzyme for 15 min at 40°C. The BDBV-specific ISH probe (V-BDBV-NP-C1, Advanced Cell Diagnostics) was applied and incubated at 40°C for 2 hr. RNAscope® 2.5HD Detection Reagent—Red kit (Advanced Cell Diagnostics) hybridization amplification steps (AMP 1–6) were followed as per the kit instructions. The signal was then visualized by the chromogen Fast Red. Slides were treated with codetection blocker (Advanced Cell Diagnostics); and the IHC process was completed using a horse radish peroxidase labelled polymer and Envision® + system (antimouse) (Agilent Technologies, USA), followed by reaction with the chromogen diaminobenzidine. The sections were then counter stained with Gill's 1 hematoxylin, dried, and cover slipped.For the identification of infected pneumocytes, epitopes were retrieved using Co-Detection Target Retrieval (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, pH 9-10) for 15 min. A 1 : 50 dilution of a mouse antihuman cytokeratin monoclonal antibody (clonesAE1/AE3, Agilent) was adsorbed overnight in a humidified chamber at 4°C. The processes described for infected macrophage identification were followed, beginning with fixation of the slides with 10% neutral buffered formalin.2.11. RNA Detection by Quantitative Real-Time PCRThe following samples were tested for the presence of viral RNA by real-time rRT-PCR targeting the BDBV L gene: citrated whole blood, nasal swabs, rectal swabs, oral swabs, nasal wash, urine, vitreous, cerebrospinal fluid, BAL fluid (BALF), and group rope chew fluid. Fresh tissues collected at necropsy were cut into 0.1–0.5 g portions, distributed into tissue grinding tubes (KT03961; Precellys Lysing Kit, USA), and immediately frozen at −70°C for further processing.Tubes were later thawed, D-PBS added to 10%, and homogenization proceeded using a bead mill homogenizer for a minimum of 45 s at the maximum setting. Each tube was centrifuged at 1,500x g for 20 min at 4°C prior to sampling. Tissues, all swabs, BALF supernatant, BALF cell pellet, nasal wash fluid, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), vitreous, and urine were inactivated as a 1 : 10 suspension in Tripure Reagent, removed from the CL4 laboratory, and stored at −70°C until further processing. Citrated blood samples were inactivated with TriZol LS as per the manufacturer's instructions prior to removal from the CL4 laboratory.The MagMax CORE Nucleic Acid Purification Kit (Applied Biosystems, A73202) was utilized for the extraction of total RNA from inactivated samples as per manufacturer's recommendation with some modification. Tripure Reagent or TriZol LS was utilized in place of the manufacturer's lysis buffer for inactivation and removal of BDBV RNA from the CL4 laboratory. Six hundred fifty microlitres of inactivated sample and 350 µL of kit-provided core binding buffer were utilized followed by a final elution volume of 30 μL using the automated MagMax Express 96 system (ThermoFisher Scientific). Enteroviral armoured RNA (ARM-ENTERO; Asuragen) was utilized as an exogenous extraction and reaction control. A standard curve was generated by serial tenfold dilutions of a BDBV plasmid provided by the Public Health Agency of Canada and included in every run allowing for the semiquantification of viral load, measured in copies/reaction. This plasmid contains the coding region of the BDBV L gene and the pCAGGS backbone derived from the same isolate used as the inoculum in this study. In addition, tripure-inactivated cell culture-derived BDBV stock virus was utilized in each run as a positive control. Extracted product was stored at −70°C until real-time rRT-PCR was performed using a 4x TaqMan FAST Virus 1 Step kit, in a reaction volume of 20 μL using the following primer pair and probe combinations and concentrations: BDBV: 0.4 µM BDBV L-gene forward 1 : 5′-CCGAGAAAATCCACCAGAAG−3′, 0.4 µM BDBV L-gene reverse: 5′-TGTTGRAGTCCCTCAATYCC−3′, and 0.1 µM BDBV L-gene probe: 5′-YCCAAGCTCTTACCGTGGTCATCTTGG−3; and ARM-ENTERO: 0.2 µM ARM-ENTERO−31 forward: 5′-ATG CGG CTA ATC CCA ACCT−3′, 0.2 µM ARM-ENTERO−31 reverse: 5′-CGT TAC GAC AGG CCA ATC ACT−3′, and 0.06 µM ARM-ENTERO−31 probe: 5′-CAG GTG GTC ACA AAC−3′.Reactions were run on a 7500 Fast machine (Applied Biosystems) with the following conditions: 50°C for 5 min, 95°C for 20 s, and 40 cycles of 95°C for 3 s followed by 60°C for 30 s. Cycle threshold (Ct) values were determined by the 7500 Fast software and the respective virus gene copy numbers were calculated for each sample, based on Ct values for each respective standard curve. All samples were assayed as technical replicates.Sample baselines were determined by the default settings of the ABI 7500 software. The Ct value threshold was determined by separate analysis of the standard curve, and then the threshold applied to the remainder of the samples to determine the Ct values.2.12. Virus Isolation from Samples and TissuesIsolation was conducted on Vero E6 cells plated in a 48-well format at 80% confluence. Media were removed and monolayers were washed with D-PBS prior to 1 : 10 and 1 : 100 dilutions of samples in DMEM being adsorbed in duplicate to the monolayers for 1 hr at 37°C and 5% CO2. Tissues were homogenized as described for RNA detection and diluted in DMEM from 1 : 10 to 1 : 100,000 and adsorbed to washed monolayers. DMEM with 2% FBS, penicillin/streptomycin, and L-glutamine was then added to each well and plates were returned to humidified incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2. All plates were read for cytopathic effect at day 14 for evidence of virus. Samples were assayed in duplicate and the sample origin was blinded until after results were recorded. Duplicate negative controls (DMEM) and positive controls (challenge virus stock) were included on each test plate.2.13. Antibody AnalysesBDBV-specific IgM and IgG were measured in serum by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using commercially available recombinant BDBV glycoprotein without the transmembrane component (rBDBV GPdTM) (IBT Bioservices; 0505-015) and peroxidase-labeled rabbit antipig IgG (polyclonal, H + L, 1 : 1,000 dilution; Invitrogen; PA1-28602) or goat antipig IgM (polyclonal, 1 : 5,000 dilution; BioRad laboratories; AA148) with a two-step substrate system (KPL 2,2'-azino-di-(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) Peroxidase Substrate System; SeraCare). BDBV-specific IgA was measured in nasal wash fluid or oral fluid collected by rope chew using an adaptation of the IgM and IgG protocol. The same rBDBV GPdTM antigen was diluted in PBS (1 : 5,000) and used to coat Nunc MaxiSorp F plates at 0.5 µg/mL. Five percent skim milk and 0.5% Tween-20 in PBS were used as both a washing and blocking buffer, respectively. Serial twofold dilutions made in blocking buffer were assayed in duplicate beginning at a 1 : 4 dilution until the end point. Bound antibody was detected with peroxidase-labeled goat antipig IgA (polyclonal, 1 : 5,000 dilution; BioRad Laboratories; AA140) followed by the ABTS substrate described for the IgM and IgG ELISAs. Absorbance for all three ELISAs was measured at 405 nm using a plate reader (BioTek Epoch microplate spectrophotometer with Gen5 Data Analysis software, version 1.11). Sera with an OD greater than the average negative OD plus three standard deviations were considered positive.2.14. Viral Neutralization AssayNeutralization activity of all serum collected during the study was determined by a modified plaque reduction neutralization test against BDBV. Serial twofold dilutions of heat inactivated (56°C for 30 min) sera were incubated with virus for 1 hr at 37°C. Each mixture of serum and virus was then added to duplicate wells containing confluent monolayers of Vero E6 cells in a 96-well format, incubated for 1 hr at 37°C, and overlaid with 150 μL of 1.75% CMC in DMEM per well. Plates were then incubated at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 72 hr and fixed with 10% buffered formalin. Virus not neutralized by the serum was measured by immunocytochemistry as described for the titration of virus. Serum dilutions resulting in >70% reduction of plaque counts compared with virus controls were considered to be positive for virus neutralizing activity. Serum from each animal was screened for non-virus-specific neutralizing activity against assay components [21].2.15. Genome SequencingChallenge virus stock used as the inoculum for both cohorts one and two and, based on results from rRT-PCR, the homogenized tissue samples collected from each animal were evaluated by whole-genome sequencing. A database of all publicly available Bundibugyo ebolavirus complete genomes was downloaded from NCBI on June 7, 2021. Genomes were aligned with MAFFT v7.48 on default settings, and the resulting alignment was inspected within Geneious v9.1.8 to confirm that maximum sequence divergence did not exceed 5%, as per the instructions of the Primal Scheme website [22, 23]. In addition, Primal Scheme recommends that genomes with 99% or higher identity be removed to reduce bias during primer selection. To remove genomes with high similarity, CD-HIT-EST web server was used with a sequence identity cut-off of 0.99 [24]. The resulting database was used to generate PCR primers for tiled whole-genome amplification using the Primal Scheme web server [25]. Designed primers were manually compared to the previously generated whole genome database and inspected using Geneious v9.1.8 to look for mismatches within primers that could potentially impact amplification efficiency [23]. Based on this manual inspection, it was determined that the scheme with an amplicon size of 800 bp yielded the best primers.Reverse transcription was performed on extracted nucleic acid using the LunaScript RT SuperMix Kit (New England Biolabs Inc.) according to the manufacturer's instructions. PCR amplification was performed using the previously designed primers and Q5 High-Fidelity 2x Master Mix (New England Biolabs Inc.) according to the conditions used by Quick et al. [25], except with 32 amplification cycles. Here, overlapping amplicons tiling across the genome were generated. To prevent the generation of unwanted PCR products, two separate reactions were generated for each sample containing primers for alternating PCR products. Following amplification, the two reactions for each sample were combined, cleaned using AMPure XP (Beckman Coulter) size selection beads at 1x concentration, and quantified using Qubit 1x dsDNA HS Assay Kit on the Qubit 3.0 Fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sequencing libraries were generated using the Nextera XT library preparation kit (Illumina) as per manufacturer's instructions. Libraries were quantified, pooled, and sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq using a V3 flow cell and a 600 cycle kit (Illumina).3. Results3.1. Clinical FeaturesSeven-week-old pigs were challenged oronasally with 1.0 × 106 pfu to determine the susceptibility of domestic swine to BDBV. Two animals, both in the second cohort, had mildly increased rectal temperatures at 1-day post-inoculation (dpi) (40.3 and 40.5°C). One of these two animals also had a mildly increased temperature at 22 dpi (40.4°C). Temperature response at all other time points for these animals and all time points for the other pigs in both cohorts remained within range (≤40.0°C) for the duration of the study (Figure 1 and Supplementary 1). No additional clinical manifestations were observed in either the inoculated animals or the sham-inoculated transmission control pig. Review of pulse oximetry and clinical pathology data, including complete blood counts, blood chemistries, and blood gas analyses, revealed no significant findings (Supplementary 1).3.2. Detection of BDBV RNA and Infectious Virus in Serial SamplesSwabs (oral, nasal, and rectal), nasal wash fluid, and blood were collected to detect and quantify shedding of virus following inoculation (Table 1 and Supplementary 1). Genomic material was extracted from all samples and rRT-PCR was performed to detect the presence of BDBV by targeting the L gene, a component of the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Following rRT-PCR, virus isolation was performed on all positive samples. BDBV RNA was readily detected in the nasal swab samples from inoculated pigs beginning at 1 to 5 dpi with the latest detection in two of seven remaining animals at 7 dpi. The peak level of 9.5 × 105 copies/mL, occurred at 5 dpi. Of the 53 total rRT-PCR positive nasal swab samples collected, infectious virus was successfully recovered from a total of 15 samples, at least once from 8 of the 11 inoculated pigs, ranging from 1 to 6 dpi (Table 1 and Supplementary 1). Five inoculated animals had rectal swabs test positive by rRT-PCR at either 1 or 2 dpi, but infectious virus was not recovered from any of these samples (Table 1 and Supplementary 1). BDBV RNA was not detected in the blood at any time point in the study (Table 1 and Supplementary 1).Nasal wash fluid is considered as a sensitive method for pathogen detection in swine. We deployed this sampling technique using sterile D-PBS to rinse nasal passages, with recovered fluid evaluated for the presence of BDBV RNA by rRT-PCR and infectious virus by viral isolation. In addition, this sampling method and matrix was used to monitor the development of IgA antibody. All inoculated animals were rRT-PCR positive at least once, ranging from 1 to 10 dpi, with a peak level of 4.8 × 107 copies/mL occurring at 1 dpi. As this could represent residual inoculum, it is also noted that the next highest viral load occurred at 5dpi (1.4 × 106 copies/mL). Infectious virus was recovered from 10 of the 11 animals in a total of 24 nasal wash samples ranging from 1 to 9 dpi (Table 1 and Supplementary 1).Collection of oral fluids by rope chew was investigated as a potential noninvasive sampling method for evaluating BDBV shedding at the group level. To accomplish this, a cotton rope was hung in the animal pens at pig shoulder height providing opportunity for animals to interact with the item for 20–30 min. Oral fluids deposited on the rope were collected and processed daily throughout the study. This method of sampling proved effective, with the presence of BDBV RNA successfully detected by rRT-PCR from 1 to 8 dpi and infectious virus recovered on 2, 3, 5, and 6 dpi (Table 2 and Supplementary 1).3.3. Gross Pathology and Viral Tissue DistributionTo identify the tissue tropism and gross lesions secondary to infection with BDBV, we performed necropsies on two animals each at 4, 6, 8, 10, 21, and 28 dpi (Figure 1). The overall gross and histopathology findings are indicative of the development of a moderate interstitial pneumonia with a generalized lymphadenopathy by 6 dpi (Figures 2 and 3). Tissue viral RNA load, as determined by rRT-PCR and virus isolation, is concurrent with the pathology findings, demonstrating a predominately respiratory and lymphatic tissue involvement (Figure 4).Gross lesions observed during necropsy were limited to the lungs and lymph nodes. At 4 dpi, pulmonary congestion with scattered hemorrhagic lobules were noted primarily involving the caudal lung lobes (Figure 2(a)). At 6 dpi, the dorsal aspect of the caudal lobes appeared diffusely reddened, firm, and depressed consistent with the presence of a moderate interstitial pneumonia (Figure 2(b)). Similar findings were noted in animals necropsied at 8 dpi (Figure 2(c)). At 10, 21, and 28 dpi, there were areas of reddening present on the dorsal aspect of the caudal lung lobes, but these areas were not depressed or firm. We suspect that this is most likely artifactual congestion secondary to euthanasia (Supplementary 2). A generalized lymphadenopathy was present during gross examination at necropsy with moderate to severe enlargement of the tracheobronchial, mandibular, and retropharyngeal lymph nodes noted at 6, 8, and 10 dpi (Figures 3(a) and 3(b)). These lymph nodes were diffusely firm, tan-dark red, and bulged on cut section. The superficial inguinal and mesenteric lymph nodes were also moderately enlarged during these early time points (Figure 3(c)). The iliac and sublumbar lymph nodes were observed to be variably enlarged from 4 to 21 dpi (Figure 3(d)–3(f)).The rRT-PCR was performed across all tissues and samples collected at necropsy with subsequent virus isolation carried out for samples testing positive (Figure 4). These results indicate a predominant involvement of the respiratory tissues with viral RNA detected in the lungs, trachea, and nasal turbinate tissues, as well as the BAL samples, until 21 dpi with peak viral RNA loads reached at 4 and 6 dpi. BDBV RNA was regularly detected in tracheobronchial, mandibular, and gastrohepatic lymph nodes, as well as sporadically detected in the superficial inguinal, iliac, and sublumbar lymph nodes. Low levels (1.4 × 103 copies/mL) of virus were detected in the spleen of only one animal that was necropsied at 21 dpi. The olfactory bulb of one animal and the cerebrum of another animal had low levels of detectable virus at 4 and 21 dpi, respectively. Infectious virus was successfully isolated from a variety of respiratory and lymphatic tissues between 4 and 21 dpi, including from lung, trachea, nasal turbinate, BAL, and lymph node samples (Figure 4). Neither RNA nor infectious virus were detected in tissue samples after 21 dpi.3.4. Histopathology and In Situ HybridizationHistopathologic evaluation revealed lung lesions of varying degrees of severity observed from 4 to 21 dpi. At 4 dpi, congestion, atelectasis, peri-vasculitis, peri-bronchiolitis, and interlobular edema were noted. Several lung sections showed extensive infiltration of inflammatory cells resulting in the loss of air spaces (Figure 5(a)). These cells appeared to be predominately lymphocytes and macrophages with the scattered presence of multinucleated cells consistent with the formation of syncytia (Figure 5(b)). ISH detected viral RNA within these areas of inflammation, primarily located within macrophages (Figures 5(c) and 5(d)). Viral RNA was also detected within pneumocytes. A combination of IHC and ISH staining was utilized to confirm the presence of BDBV genomic material within both pulmonary macrophages (Figure 6(a)) and pneumocytes (Figure 6(b)). Similar histopathologic pulmonary lesions were observed at 6 dpi (Figures 5(e) and 5(f)) and were similarly correlated with the presence of viral antigen detected by ISH (Figures 5(g) and 5(h)). These lesions are consistent with moderate multifocal interstitial pneumonia with peri-bronchiolar inflammation and were present through 8 dpi (Figure 5(i)). Type II pneumocyte hyperplasia was noted at 8 dpi, indicating that the lung lesions were in the reparative phase (Figure 5(j)). At 10 dpi, lung lesions consisted of mild to moderate interstitial infiltrates with the presence of inflammatory cells causing the expansion of alveolar septa. The associated pneumonia was less severe compared to earlier time points and alveolar spaces were no longer seen to be obliterated (Supplementary 2). There were multifocal areas of interstitial infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages still present at 21 and 28 dpi, but the lesions were mild (Supplementary 2). Viral RNA was not detected by ISH in lung tissue after 6 dpi.Evaluation of the nasal turbinates showed areas of submucosal inflammation at both 4 and 6 dpi (Figures 7(a) and 7(c)). These areas of inflammation corresponded to the presence of viral RNA as detected by ISH (Figures 7(b) and 7(d)). At 8 dpi, inflammation of the submucosa was accompanied by multifocal degeneration and loss of surface epithelial cells (Figure 7(e)), but viral RNA was not detectable in the nasal turbinates at or after this time point. The submucosal inflammation noted at earlier time points was still present at 21 dpi, but no significant lesions were detected by 28 dpi. At all time points, there was evidence of paracortical hyperplasia in lymph nodes, indicative of a reactive state. Histopathologic evaluation revealed no significant lesions in other evaluated tissues.3.5. Evaluation of the Anti-BDBV Antibody ResponseThe development of a BDBV-specific antibody response was monitored over the course of the study utilizing serial serum, nasal wash fluid, and group oral fluid samples. All individual animals and oral fluid samples from both cohorts were negative for the presence of BDBV-specific antibodies at 0 dpi. IgM and IgG titers were detectable in serum samples of seven inoculated pigs seroconverting at time points from 6 to 11 dpi (Tables 3 and 4, Supplementary 2). Both IgM and IgG titers ranged from 1 : 100 to 1 : 1,600, with a titer of 1 : 100 being the result most frequently encountered throughout the study. IgM titers for two animals, pigs 20-22 and 20-24, were first detected at 11 dpi but both animals had no detectable titers at the time of euthanasia (21 and 28 dpi). Both IgM and IgG levels appeared to decrease within the study's timeframe, but only IgG titers were detectable at the time of euthanasia in the inoculated animals.Six inoculated pigs developed an IgA response detectable in nasal wash fluid between 4 and 16 dpi, with titers ranging from 1 : 4 to 1 : 16 (Table 5). This appears to loosely correspond to the development of detectable IgM and IgG in sera. One exception would be that pig 20-24 seroconverted with both IgM and IgG but not IgA. Group oral fluid samples collected by cotton ropes were assayed for the detection of IgA utilizing the same ELISA approach described for nasal wash samples. For cohort one, IgA was detected only on the day of study termination, 8 dpi, at a titer of 1 : 4. IgA was detected in cohort two samples beginning at 10 dpi and detected daily until 21 dpi, with the exception of a single time point (Table 6).All serum samples were tested for the presence of a neutralizing antibody response capable of blocking BDBV infectivity in cell culture using a modified plaque reduction neutralization assay approach. Neutralization activity was not detected in any sample at any time point throughout the study. Seroconversion was monitored in the sham-inoculated, transmission control animal, Pig 20-25, in the same manner as the rest of the study animals. IgM was not detected in nasal wash fluid at any time, but IgG antibodies were detected from days 12 to 21 at a constant titer of 1 : 100 (Tables 3 and 4). IgG was not detected at day 28, the time of euthanasia. IgA was detected only at day 13 in nasal wash fluid at a level of 1 : 4 (Table 5). Similar to the inoculated study animals, a neutralizing antibody response was not detected at any time point for the transmission control.3.6. Genomic EvaluationUtilizing a tiled amplicon approach, virus sequences in tissues revealed limited changes compared to the reference genome and challenge virus stock. Sequencing revealed the challenge virus stock to have a 99.33% genome-wide nucleotide identity with the original isolate, Ebola virus/H.sapiens-tc/Uganda/2007/Bundibugyo-R4386L (GenBank MK028834). When the genomes of virus isolated from terminal tissue samples and the inoculum were aligned against the annotated parent genome, a total of four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were detected based on the available annotation of the reference isolate (MK028834). Only one SNP was discovered in a coding region, and this was the region designated for Viral Protein 24 (VP24), with the remaining three SNPs found in noncoding regions (Supplementary 1). The mutations in noncoding regions were only found in the nasal turbinate samples in two of the sampled animals, and the mutation in the VP24 coding region was found only in the nasal turbinate of a single animal.4. DiscussionPig production continues to expand to meet the protein demands of a rapidly growing human population. Small stakeholder pig keeping has also become a critical livelihood strategy in many income-restricted regions of the world [8, 17, 19]. Introduction and development of pig production systems in biodiverse landscapes can create new risks for spillover and zoonotic transmission of novel pathogens [17, 18]. Therefore, the continued evaluation of the susceptibility of livestock animals to high risk pathogens, such as the ebolaviruses, is critical to properly informing risk assessments and mitigation strategies for vulnerable regions [26].The present study demonstrates the first experimental infection study providing evidence that domestic pigs are susceptible to BDBV. Our data indicate that, following mucosal exposure, the development of a productive infection, tissue dissemination, and shedding of infectious virus can occur while animals remain subclinical. The presence of relatively high viral loads in the upper and lower airways suggests that the respiratory mucosa plays an important role during infection in this model and likely contributes to release of virus into the environment. The use of an oronasal route of inoculation was chosen to mimic what is thought to be the most likely route of natural infection while also allowing comparison to previous studies evaluating infection characteristics of other ebolaviruses, RESTV and EBOV, in pigs [11, 12, 27, 28]. Intraspecies transmission of ebolaviruses has been previously documented in pigs, both experimentally with EBOV and naturally with RESTV [9, 12]. Our data also indicate that experimental pig-to-pig transmission may be possible with BDBV, as evidenced by the development of a limited, low-level antibody response in a co-housed, naïve transmission control animal. However, the lack of detectable virus in serial samples or tissues in this animal indicates that further studies should be performed to specifically evaluate intraspecies transmission in swine.Based on the data reported here and the similarities to studies with RESTV [27, 28] and EBOV [11, 12, 29], we hypothesize that BDBV can infect pigs via the oronasal mucosa, entering the airway epithelium through the apical side, and then replicating to high levels in the pulmonary macrophages, pneumocytes, and endothelial cells. BDBV is then released back into the airway where it can, most likely, be transmitted to naïve pigs through mucosal exposure.The BDBV isolate utilized in this study originated from the blood of a human case involved in the 2007 outbreak in Uganda [4]. Whole-genome sequencing confirmed that the inoculum used showed a 99.33% genome-wide nucleotide identity matching the original isolate's reference genome. Deep sequencing of the BDBV genome in tissue samples, except for two nasal turbinate samples, revealed no mutations when compared to the challenge virus stock used for inoculation, indicating that these results are likely not secondary to virus mutation, host adaptation, or readily attributable to the selection of quasispecies with different viral fitness, though it must be considered that host adaptation of the ebolaviruses may only require minor changes to the genome. For instance, when comparing wild-type virus to the mouse-adapted strain of the Mayinga variant of EBOV, only 13 nucleotide changes were seen in host adaptation after repeat passage. Only two of these mutations, one in the nucleoprotein and one in VP24, were required to make the wild-type EBOV uniformly lethal in mice [30]. Epidemiological studies of disease caused by ebolaviruses have identified a range of pathogenic phenotypes not linked to specific mutations in the viral genome, suggesting that host response to infection may be responsible for disease severity [31, 32]. This was demonstrated with EBOV by Rasmussen et al. [33] through the use of a collaborative cross panel of recombinant inbred mice showing that genetic factors play a significant role resulting in distinct disease phenotypes ranging from complete resistance to severe disease with 100% lethality.Although human aspects of emergency response must remain a priority, future sampling of livestock in both geographic and temporal proximity to outbreaks involving ebolaviruses will greatly aid in further refining risk assessments. Our findings suggest that future sampling initiatives in pigs should consider the inclusion of nasal and oral swabs for antigen-targeting assays. Antibody-focused approaches could target IgM and IgG serology and/or IgA by mucosal or group oral fluid sampling. The utility of group-level oral fluids as a diagnostic sample has been expanding and the noninvasive approach that it allows is readily supported by the pig production industry [34]. Sampling by this manner is also of interest for zoonotic pathogens, such as BDBV, as it mitigates some biosafety concerns by eliminating the need for sharps and direct handling of the animals [35]. Further validation will be required to deploy any of these as diagnostic approaches for the detection of BDBV, including the development of reagents for use as controls; and future work is warranted to define the infection characteristics of BDBV infection in pigs, such as the effect of inoculum dose on the development of clinical disease, the duration and durability of the antibody response, the potential for pig-to-pig transmission, and the susceptibility of older sexually mature pigs. Although BDBV was not detected in muscle tissue during this study, the potential for BDBV contamination of other pork byproducts will also need to be evaluated to better inform further risk assessments.Significant knowledge gaps remain when considering ebolavirus infection in swine. Future steps to better understand ebolavirus disease should include two avenues of research. First, experimental infection of additional ebolaviruses, particularly SUDV due to its high case fatality rate in humans and its importance in the context of public health should be evaluated. Second, when considering both past and current ebolavirus infection studies in swine, characterization of the host immune response in pigs should be pursued. In particular, the innate immune response in swine will provide insights into early host responses while also providing guidance to evaluate viral transmission and the zoonotic potential of these animals.The role of pigs as a possible interim or amplifying host for ebolaviruses is a concern for both human public health and food security [13, 27]. Based on the available data from both natural and experimental infections, transmission to humans by direct contact with pigs or, theoretically, through contamination of pork products entering the food chain is possible [10, 12, 27]; therefore, a high index of suspicion should be maintained concerning the potential of a pig–ebolavirus relationship during future outbreaks [13, 18]. Importantly, in this study, pigs exhibited a subclinical infection with only two animals presenting a short-lived fever. This finding suggests that clinical suspicion alone may not be sufficient to detect infected pigs; and it supports the need for surveillance efforts to better understand the pathogen and host ecology while preparing for potential future zoonotic events, which could present undetected in regions with increased risk for virus spillover. Altogether, the results reported here support the addition of a third ebolavirus to the list of those capable of infecting domestic pigs, providing further corroboration to the hypothesis that pigs may play a role in the ecology of these high-consequence pathogens.


Title: Intramuscular Exposure of 

1. IntroductionThe filoviruses Ebola virus (EBOV) and Sudan virus (SUDV) are enveloped, negative-sense, single-stranded, RNA viruses that can cause disease with high case fatality rates [1], and there are currently no licensed countermeasures available for use against them. Since being discovered in 1976, EBOV and SUDV have caused intermittent outbreaks, primarily in the Democratic republic of Congo (EBOV) or in Uganda and South Sudan (SUDV) [2]. In 2014, EBOV caused the largest recorded filovirus outbreak in western Africa [3].In many of the initial outbreaks, contaminated needles were implicated in transmission [4]. Now, direct contact with infected individuals and their bodily fluids is thought to be the primary transmission route [5]. However, in large outbreaks with sustained person-to-person transmission, it is often difficult to determine when or how an individual became infected, and it is almost impossible to determine what quantity of infectious virus a person was exposed to [6]. Furthermore, when patients are not acutely ill, viral loads can be low. These low loads are thought to be unimportant epidemiologically [5,7], but further study is needed to fully understand the implications of low dose exposures. Moreover, a better understanding of the outcomes of exposure to a low dose is needed, given the evidence that filoviruses can persist within previously infected individuals for months [8]. It remains unclear how persistent infection occurs, or whether persistently infected individuals pose a threat of infection to others [8,9].During animal exposure studies, the effect of using virus that has been passaged in cell culture may be more pronounced when lower exposure doses are used. For example, EBOV and SUDV can generate multiple products from the glycoprotein (GP) gene via RNA editing. At the GP RNA editing site, the wild type virus genome contains seven uridines (7U) and without editing, messenger RNA transcripts contain seven adenosines and produce soluble GP, a truncated form of full length GP. When editing occurs, an eighth adenosine is incorporated into the transcript and full length GP is produced [10]. Cell culture passaging of EBOV and SUDV can cause the genomic sequence at this editing site to expand to eight uridines (8U) [11,12,13]. Different forms of GP are thought to play a role in pathogenicity, but the various functions and their importance are not fully understood. Crucially, the influence of changes at this locus in vivo remain unclear. The editing site genotype does not appear to affect survival. There does not appear to be a difference in survival when animals are exposed to a virus stock with a predominantly 7U genotype (7U virus stock) versus a virus stock with a predominantly 8U genotype (8U virus stock) EBOV or SUDV, but disease course may be impacted [13,14]. Furthermore, another characteristic of cell culture-passaged viruses is altered particle-to-plaque forming unit (PFU) ratio; filovirus particle-to-PFU ratios have been shown to decrease after cell culture passage [15,16]. Previous studies have also shown that using a lower exposure dose can help to uncover differences between different virus stocks [15,16].It is known that filoviruses are highly potent, and that only a small number of infectious particles are needed to cause death [15,17,18,19]. Yet, the majority of published studies use a high exposure dose of 100 or 1000 PFU; very few studies have investigated the consequences of exposure with fewer than 10 PFU. This study was designed to characterize the outcome of exposure to a low dose of EBOV or SUDV, using the Macaca fascicularis model of infection. A low dose exposure model can help to inform studies on pathogenesis, public health countermeasure development, and the optimization of transmission prevention strategies.2. Methods2.1. Ethics StatementAnimal research was conducted under a Texas Biomedical Research Institute Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee-approved protocol (protocol 1381, 20 August 2013) in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act and other federal statutes and regulations relating to animals and experiments involving animals. The facility where this research was conducted is accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International and adheres to principles stated in the 8th Edition of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council [20]. Nonhuman primates (NHPs) were single housed, fed commercially available monkey biscuits (Purina, Gray Summit, MO, USA), and provided with commercial toys and dietary enrichment. During blood collections, nonhuman primates (NHPs) were anesthetized using tiletamine HCl and zolazepam HCl (Zoetis Inc., Parsippany-Troy Hills, NJ, USA), and euthanasia was performed using an intravenous overdose of sodium pentobarbital (Vortech Pharmaceuticals, Dearborn, MI, USA).2.2. Clinical Scoring System and Euthanasia CriteriaNonhuman primates were observed at least twice daily for up to 21 days post-exposure, at which time any survivors were euthanized. Clinical scores were reported to the responsible veterinarian, and euthanasia was approved when scores indicated that an NHP was terminally ill. A brief description of the clinical scoring system (described previously in [16]) is as follows. Animals received one point each for reductions in feed or fluid intake, dehydration, no stool production, rough hair coat, nasal discharge, or bleeding at the blood collection site. Animals received two points each for reduced stool production, not drinking, or bleeding from somewhere other than a blood collection site. Rectal temperature and petechia were scored on a scale of one to three, and body weight reductions were scored as one or two, depending on severity. Responsiveness was also scored on a scale: slightly diminished general activity (one point), reduced response to external stimuli (two points), moderate to dramatically reduced response to external stimuli (eight points), or severely unresponsive (fifteen points, immediate euthanasia). Animals received three points for labored breathing or eight points for agonal breathing. Euthanasia criteria were developed to minimize undue pain and distress, and included a combination of severe petechia or bleeding, complete anorexia for 24 hours, a temperature change of greater than five degrees (°F) from baseline, moderate to dramatically reduced response to external stimuli, respiratory distress, thrombocytopenia, or severe elevation of gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), or blood urea nitrogen (BUN).2.3. Cells and VirusBEI-sourced Vero E6 cells (VERO C1008, catalog number NR-596, BEI resources; African green monkey kidney origin) were grown at 37 °C with five percent CO2 in normal growth media that consisted of minimum Essential Media (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) containing 2 mM l-glutamine (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS, Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA). Starting virus material consisted of Zaire ebolavirus isolate Ebola virus/H. sapiens-tc/COD/1995/Kikwit-199510621 and Sudan ebolavirus isolate Sudan virus/H. sapiens-tc/SDN/2000/Gulu-200011676, both passage number 2 (P2) on Vero E6 cells, acquired from Dr. T. Ksiazek, University of Texas Medical Branch. The 7U virus material used for NHP exposures was generated by amplifying P2 virus once in Vero E6 cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.001. The 7U EBOV stock was generated in September 2012 (lot number 201209171), and the abundance of genomes with 7U at the editing site locus was approximately 94%. The 7U SUDV stock was generated in June 2012 (lot number 201206211), and the abundance of genomes with 7U at the editing site locus was approximately 75%. The 8U virus used for SUDV exposure was generated (April 2013) by amplifying the aforementioned P3 virus 10 additional times [13]; the abundance of genomes with 8U at the editing site locus was approximately 75%. The 8U EBOV was obtained from U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases and then passaged once in Vero E6 cells at a low MOI (August 2010, lot number 201008111) and has been reported previously [15]; the abundance of genomes with 8U at the editing site locus was approximately 94%. All stocks were stored in liquid nitrogen after generation.2.4. Determination of Viral Particle ConcentrationTransmission electron microscopy, using a JEOL 100CX microscope (JEOL USA, Inc., Peabody, MA 01960, USA), was used to determine the particle concentration of each virus stock, as previously described [13,15]. The calculated number of viral particles per mL was divided by the number of PFU per mL to yield particle-to-PFU ratios. The viral particle concentration for all four virus exposure stocks was determined in August 2013, fewer than six months prior to the animal exposures.2.5. Determination of Viral TitersViral titers were determined by plaque assay using either a methylcellulose and crystal violet assay, or an agarose and neutral red assay (previously described in [21]). The methylcellulose and crystal violet assay was used to determine the titer of the NHP exposure dose for the 8U EBOV dose study (as previously described in [15]), while the agarose and neutral red assay was used for all other viral titrations. As expected, all of the virus exposure doses were below the assay limit of detection, consistent with previous work showing that some particles do not yield plaques in cell culture, but that they can nonetheless cause lethal disease in NHPs [15,16]. When the exposure doses were prepared, calculations were performed using viral titers determined previously (approximately one year prior to the animal exposures for all stocks except the 8U EBOV). However, back titer plaque assays were also performed on the day of animal exposure to verify the viral titer.2.6. Deep Sequencing and Sample PreparationRNA was extracted from serum collected at time of death from all NHPs, and subjected to deep sequencing, as described before [13,22]. Briefly, the serum was diluted in TRIzol LS reagent (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA), and RNA was extracted following the manufacturer’s instructions. Clean up steps were performed (DNA, rRNA, and mRNA were removed) to increase the sequence depth of the viral material. An Illumina TruSeq total RNA sample preparation kit (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was used to prepare RNA libraries for sequencing, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An Illumina pipeline was used to generate FASTQ files to begin data analysis. Files containing all sequence reads were mapped to the reference sequence (GenBank accession numbers: AY729654 (SUDV) and AY354458 (EBOV) using Lasergene SeqMan NGen (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA). The depth of nucleotide coverage was determined at each position in the genome.2.7. Experimental Inoculation of Macaca fascicularisSixteen male Macaca fascicularis were intramuscularly (IM) injected in the deltoid muscle with a target dose of 0.01 PFU of a 7U virus stock (n = 4) or 8U virus stock (n = 4) of SUDV, or a 7U virus stock (n = 4) or 8U virus stock (n = 4) of EBOV (previously described in [15]). Nonhuman primates (Vietnamese origin), 3 to 4.5 years of age and 2.6 to 4.1 kg in weight, were acquired from Covance, and serum tested to ensure no reactivity to the filovirus antigen prior to purchase. Nonhuman primates were shipped directly to Texas Biomedical Research Institute for a standard quarantine period. This quarantine period allowed for the NHPs’ health status to be evaluated, and for the NHPs to acclimate to their caging and diet. Virus exposure occurred on study day zero. Blood samples were collected on days 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, and 21 post-exposure, for analyses of serology, hematology, clinical chemistry, coagulation parameters, and viral load determination. During each scheduled blood collection, the rectal temperature was taken, and the weight was recorded. When moribund, or at 21 days post-exposure, the NHPs were euthanized and necropsy was performed, and gross pathologic findings were noted.2.8. Hematology, Coagulation, and Blood ChemistryBiochemical analysis was performed using the mammalian liver enzyme profile rotor on a Vet Scan analyzer (Abaxis, Inc., Union City, CA, USA). Complete blood counts were performed using a Vet HM2 machine (Abaxis, Inc.). Coagulation times were determined using the IDEXX Coag Dx Analyzer (IDEXX laboratories, Westbrook, ME, USA). Clinical Pathology at Texas Biomed has determined normal ranges for cynomolgus macaques housed under laboratory conditions at Texas Biomed facilities.2.9. StatisticsThe log-rank Mantel–Cox test was used to analyze the survival curves.3. Results3.1. SurvivalTo determine the outcome of low dose filovirus exposure in NHPs, sixteen M. fascicularis were exposed intramuscularly (IM) with a target dose of 0.01 PFU of either EBOV (n = 8) or SUDV (n = 8). Two different virus stocks were used for both EBOV and SUDV exposures: a 7U virus stock (high particle to PFU ratio, characteristic of wild type virus), or an 8U virus stock (characteristic of cell culture passaged virus, lower particle to PFU ratio). Within each virus exposure group, four animals were exposed to the 7U virus stock, and the other four were exposed to the 8U virus stock (Table 1).The time to death for all animals is summarized in Table 2 and Figure 1. After exposure to 0.01 PFU of SUDV, one out of four NHPs exposed to the 7U virus stock and three out of four NHPs exposed to the 8U virus stock survived. The median time to death was 14.5 days for the 7U group and undefined for the 8U group; there was no significant difference in the time to death between the two groups (p = 0.2511, log-rank Mantel–Cox test). After exposure to 0.01 PFU of EBOV, three out of four NHPs exposed to 7U virus stock and zero out of four NHPs exposed to the 8U virus stock survived. The median time to death was undefined for the 7U group, and 10.5 days for the 8U group; there was no significant difference (p = 0.0510, log-rank Mantel–Cox test).Animals were observed at least twice daily for up to 21 days post-exposure, at which time, any survivors were euthanized. Clinical scores over the course of the study for all animals are displayed in Figure 2. Table 2 shows the final score for each animal at the time of death, and shows the manner of death (e.g., euthanasia versus found dead). For SUDV-exposed animals that were euthanized due to moribundity, at the time of euthanasia, all were scoring for: reduced responsiveness (diminished activity, withdrawn, or prostrate in cage); rough hair coat; combinations of reduced feed, enrichment, and/or fluid intake (often accompanied by dehydration); reduced stool output; two also exhibited petechia and bleeding, and two exhibited temperature changes greater than or equal to 3 °F. For EBOV-exposed animals that were euthanized due to moribundity, at the time of euthanasia all were scoring for: reduced responsiveness (diminished activity, withdrawn, or prostrate in cage); temperature change (greater than or equal to 2 °F change); petechia; combinations of reduced feed, enrichment, and/or fluid intake (often accompanied by dehydration); reduced stool output; three of four also exhibited bleeding, rough hair coat, and labored breathing.3.2. ViremiaOn each scheduled sedation day (days 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14 post-exposure), and when possible at the time of death, blood was collected from all NHPs for determination of viremia (Figure 1). For the SUDV-exposed NHPs, no animals had detectable levels of infectious virus in the serum collected on days 3 or 5 post-exposure. For NHPs that did not survive SUDV exposure (n = 4), three had titers greater than 1 × 107 PFU/mL at the time of death, and animal 956, which survived its exposure to 7U virus stock, had a serum titer of 3.4 × 105 PFU/mL on day 10 post-exposure. All NHPs that survived exposure to the 8U stock of SUDV (n = 3) exhibited no detectable levels of infectious virus throughout the study. For EBOV-exposed NHPs, in the 7U exposure group, only the NHP that did not survive exhibited evidence of viremia. All NHPs exposed to the 8U virus stock of EBOV had high serum titers on or near the day of death [15].Most NHPs that survived exposure (EBOV-exposed animals 807, 809, and 811; SUDV-exposed animals 948, 949, and 950) exhibited no detectable levels of infectious virus throughout the study. Thus, it was possible the low infective dose did not result in infection. Deep sequencing was used in an attempt to determine the likelihood of infection. RNA was extracted from the serum collected at the time of death (or the closest available time point; animal 814 was found dead on day 13 post-exposure, animal 958 was found dead on day 11 post-exposure, and animal 947 expired on day 11 post-exposure before blood could be collected, so that RNA was extracted from the sample from day 10 post-exposure), and subjected to deep sequencing. Sequence reads were mapped to EBOV or SUDV genomes to determine whether there was evidence of viral RNA; the number of total sequence reads and median depth across the genome were calculated.Values for all EBOV-exposed animals were generally high. On average, animals that did not survive exposure to EBOV virus exhibited 1,059,602 sequence reads mapped to the genome (a range of 119,048 to 2,977,753), while animals that did survive exposure to EBOV virus exhibited an average of 19,131 sequence reads mapped to the genome (a range of 6111 to 28,222). Overall, (individual animal data displayed in Table 3), animals that did not survive exposure to SUDV virus exhibited 530,309 sequence reads mapped to the genome, while animals that did survive exposure to SUDV virus exhibited 5193 sequence reads mapped to the genome.3.3. Clinical PathologyRectal temperatures were taken on each scheduled sedation day (days 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14 post-exposure) and when possible, at the time of death. For SUDV-exposed animals, the 7U group exhibited higher temperatures than the 8U group. The 7U stock of SUDV-exposed animals exhibited febrility between days 7 and 14 post-exposure, temperatures of 39.7 to 40.2 °C (1.3 to 2 °C increases when compared to day 0 post-exposure). Only one NHP in the 8U SUDV group (the nonsurviving animal) exhibited febrility, a temperature of 39.6 °C (a 1.7 °C increase when compared to day 0) on day 10 post exposure. For EBOV-exposed animals, the 7U group did not exhibit substantial increases and the 8U group exhibited rectal temperatures of 39.4 to 39.9 °C (increases of 1 to 2.6 °C when compared to day 0), shortly before death (as described previously [15]).During scheduled sedations, blood samples were taken for the analysis of blood chemistry, coagulation times, and hematology. For SUDV-exposed NHPs, hematological analysis showed that over the duration of the study, in all animals, the percentage of granulocytes increased, while the percentage of lymphocytes decreased (Figure 3), consistent with SUDV virus exposure in NHPs [13]. Coagulation abnormalities were observed in some animals that were exposed to the 7U SUDV stock (Figure 4); prothrombin times were above the normal range for two of four NHPs, and platelet levels were decreased in four of four NHPs, including the surviving animal. Conversely, within the 8U SUDV exposure group, PT times did not fall outside the normal range, and platelet levels did not exhibit sustained decreases. The difference in PT times between the 7U and 8U exposure groups was most apparent on day 10 post-exposure. Additionally, abnormal blood chemistry values were primarily observed within the 7U SUDV exposure group (Figure 5). Only animals in the 7U group exhibited increased ALT, GGT, and BUN values. The survivor from this group exhibited elevated ALT values (five times greater than baseline on day 10 post-exposure) and BUN values (3.5 times greater than baseline on day 14 post-exposure). All 7U SUDV-exposed NHPs also exhibited decreased ALB values after day 7 post-exposure; within the 8U exposure group, only the NHP that did not survive exhibited decreased ALB. As with PT times, the difference in blood chemistry values between the 7U and 8U exposure groups was most apparent on day 10 post-exposure.For EBOV-exposed animals, the NHPs that did not survive exhibited increased granulocytes and decreased lymphocytes after days 3 to 5 post-exposure (Figure 3). Two out of three survivors exposed to 7U stocks of EBOV also exhibited similar changes after day 5 post-exposure, but the values rebounded to baseline by project end. None of the NHPs exposed to a 7U stock of EBOV exhibited prolonged PT times, and only the NHP that succumbed to exposure exhibited decreased platelets (day 5 post-exposure) (Figure 4). Three out of four NHPs exposed to 8U EBOV exhibited prolonged PT times and decreased platelets at or near the time of death. The difference in PT times between the 7U and 8U exposure groups was most pronounced on day 7 post-exposure. Figure 6 shows blood chemistry values for the 7U and 8U EBOV exposure groups. The NHP that did not survive exposure to the 7U stock of EBOV exhibited increased ALT, GGT, and BUN values, along with decreased ALB at or near the time of death. None of the other NHPs exposed to the 7U stock of EBOV exhibited similar abnormalities. Two out of four 8U EBOV-exposed NHPs exhibited increased ALT and GGT values at or near the time of death. Albumin was also decreased, and BUN increased in two out of four 8U stocks of EBOV-exposed animals.3.4. Anatomical PathologyThere were no clear differences in anatomical pathology between the 7U and 8U exposure groups for both SUDV and EBOV, and findings were similar to what would be expected from exposure with a higher dose. Animals that did not survive exposure exhibited similar macroscopic and microscopic findings, consistent with acute filovirus infection (Table 4). Common gross abnormalities included petechia, splenic or hepatic pallor, firm or dark lymph nodes, and testicular hemorrhage or redness. Common histologic lesions consistent with acute filovirus infection, included: splenic lymphoid depletion with necrosis, hemorrhage, and fibrin, lymph node lymphoid depletion and/or necrosis, and hepatocellular necrosis (Table 4). Survivors did not exhibit macroscopic or microscopic abnormalities.4. DiscussionHerein, we characterized the outcome of exposure to a low dose of SUDV and EBOV, in the M. fascicularis model of infection. M. fascicularis were exposed to 0.01 PFU of either SUDV or EBOV. The virus used for exposure was either predominantly the 7U genotype (characteristics of wild type virus) or predominantly the 8U genotype (characteristics of cell culture adapted virus). We found that exposure to a target dose of 0.01 PFU of the 7U stock of SUDV was lethal in 75% of NHPs, while the 8U stock caused lethality in only 25% of NHPs. Viremia and clinical pathology data indicated that 100% of the NHPs exposed to the 7U stock of SUDV became infected. One animal succumbed to exposure to the 8U stock of SUDV, while the three NHPs that survived exposure showed some evidence of possible infection via deep sequencing, which yielded reads mapped to the SUDV genome. Conversely, exposure to a target dose of 0.01 PFU of the 7U stock of EBOV caused lethality in only 25% of NHPs, while previously published data show that 0.01 PFU of an 8U stock is 100% lethal [15]. Sequencing data (number of reads mapped to EBOV genome) indicated that 100% of the NHPs exposed to the 8U stock became infected, one animal succumbed to exposure to the 7U stock, and the three NHPs that survived exposure to the 7U stock EBOV showed evidence of viral RNA in the serum, suggestive of infection.In previous studies, subtle differences were found between EBOV stock of viruses with predominately 7U and 8U genotypes when tested in animals (e.g., delayed disease course, delayed febrility, delayed serum chemistry changes) [14] but the SUDV pathogenesis appeared to be even less impacted by the editing site genotype [13]. In the present study, while differences in survival were not statistically different for either virus, this could be related to the size of the study, and an impact of genotype on survival cannot be discounted. There were also temporal differences in the disease course. Abnormalities in hematology, coagulation, and blood chemistry were primarily observed within the 7U SUDV and 8U EBOV exposure groups. Over the duration of the study, in all SUDV-exposed animals and all nonsurvivor EBOV-exposed animals, the percentage of granulocytes increased, while percentage of lymphocytes decreased. Coagulation abnormalities (elevated PT times and decreased platelets) were observed for some of the 7U SUDV and 8U EBOV groups. Conversely, within the 8U SUDV and 7U EBOV exposure groups, PT times were not elevated, and only the NHP that succumbed to the 7U stock of EBOV exposure exhibited decreased platelets. Additionally, abnormal blood chemistry values (increased ALT, GGT, or BUN values, and decreased ALB values) were primarily observed within the 7U SUDV and 8U EBOV exposure groups. The NHP that succumbed within the 8U SUDV exposure group exhibited decreased ALB only, and only the NHP that succumbed within 7U EBOV exposure group exhibited increased ALT, GGT, and BUN values, along with decreased ALB near the time of death.It is important to note though, the difference in survival between the 7U SUDV and 8U SUDV groups could also be related to the different particle to PFU ratios of the two SUDV stocks used. Filovirus particle to PFU ratios have been shown to decrease during cell culture adaptation [15,16], so that the 8U-exposed group received fewer particles than the 7U-exposed group. Previously, we have also considered that differences in the particle to PFU ratios may be caused by different morphologies or different degrees of virus aggregation between stocks. However, we found no evidence to support this hypothesis [15]. Thus, while it is clear that passage history of the virus used in exposure studies has an impact, it remains unclear as to whether the differences are related to the editing site genotype or to specific infectivity. Interestingly, the Makona variant of EBOV was shown not to be lethal at a low dose when the NHPs were exposed orally or conjunctivally [19]. However, this could be due to differences in particle counts, differences between the variants [23] (though of note, this Kikwit and Makona comparison study was performed in rhesus macaques), or differences between exposure routes [24].Potential differences between the 7U and 8U SUDV exposure groups are not surprising, as the virus possessing characteristics of the wild type virus was lethal in the majority of exposed animals, while the virus possessing the characteristics of cell culture-adapted virus resulted in a lower lethality. One would expect that the cell culture passaged virus may be attenuated in vivo. However, any differences in the EBOV exposure groups are not necessarily expected, as the virus possessing characteristics of cell culture-adapted virus is the stock that appeared to be more lethal than the virus possessing the characteristics of the wild type virus. This could be related to the methods that were used to generate the stocks; the predominantly 8U genotype SUDV, possessing the characteristics of a cell culture-adapted virus, was generated through serial passage in cell culture, while the predominantly 8U genotype EBOV, possessing the characteristics of a cell culture-adapted virus, was passaged in cell culture but not to the same extent as the SUDV virus. This may also be a product of the low dose system used herein. However, due to the small group numbers, it is difficult to draw conclusions.The time to death after low dose exposures to both SUDV and EBOV was delayed in comparison to that observed by the authors during studies performed at the same time, but using higher exposure doses [13,15]. The median time to death in similarly designed studies using a dose of 100 PFU is 8.5 to 10 days for SUDV [13], compared to 14 days in this study, and 6 to 7 days for EBOV [15,24,25], compared to 10.5 days in this study.However, this timeframe may more closely resemble the time to death observed during human infections [26,27]. In other published studies using lower doses, a delay in time to death has also been observed [18]. Animal models designed to assess public health countermeasure efficacy should recapitulate human disease as closely as possible [28], and using a lower exposure dose may better help mimic human infections, including the time to death. Different doses can also result in different viral replication kinetics and immune responses during infection. Modeling these different scenarios is important for gaining a better understanding of pathogenesis. Thus, it will be important to determine whether the low dose that was demonstrated to be lethal in NHPs is relevant to humans.These data also demonstrate that a low number of particles is sufficient to cause death, and they are consistent with previous work showing that some particles do not yield plaques in cell culture, but they can nonetheless cause lethal disease. Previous studies have used a range of doses, and they have demonstrated a lethal dose as low as approximately 2 PFU [18,28]. Our previous work has shown that for EBOV (predominantly 8U genotype) [15] and MARV [16], a dose of 0.01 PFU is sufficient to cause death, and that fewer than 100 particles is lethal. However, such low dose studies had not been previously performed with SUDV or predominantly 7U genotype EBOV.More information about low dose exposures is needed to better understand transmission and persistence. Virus has been found in a variety of bodily fluids from infected individuals, including blood, semen, saliva, and sweat [29] but it is difficult to determine how much infectious virus is usually present in these fluids [6]. Furthermore, when patients are not acutely ill, such as asymptomatic individuals or mildly ill people at the beginning stages of infection, viral loads can be very low. Moreover, evidence suggests that filoviruses can persist within previously infected individuals for months [8]. The low number of SUDV sequence reads found in serum from animals surviving SUDV exposure may be the result of persistent infection, suggesting that low dose exposure studies could be a way to model persistence. It remains unclear as to how persistent infection occurs, or whether persistently infected individuals pose a threat of infection to others [8,9], but modeling persistence and exposure to persistently infected individuals is crucial. While low viral loads are thought to be unimportant epidemiologically [5,7], with increasing evidence that low doses of virus can be lethal, further study is needed to understand the potential for transmission from these individuals. Future studies should focus on more accurately quantifying the amount of infectious virus in bodily fluids and shed by asymptomatic individuals or persistently infected individuals, to better evaluate the risks posed.Finally, studies to develop and test public health countermeasures may benefit from the use of different exposure doses. The higher doses that are frequently used may be too stringent for suitable medical countermeasure testing. For example, studies with influenza have shown that high exposure doses can have exaggerated effects that increase pathogenicity and that mask the activity of antivirals, and thus, lower doses are often used when testing such countermeasures [30].In summary, we found that a low number of Ebola virus or Sudan virus particles is sufficient to cause death, and modeling the consequences of low dose exposure is important for gaining a better understanding of pathogenesis, the prevention of transmission, and countermeasure developments.


Title: Understanding Ebola Virus Transmission

1. IntroductionThe 2014 outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in West Africa has claimed more lives than all previous EVD outbreaks combined [1]. Along with its high case fatality rate, this outbreak has caused infection of several local and foreign health care workers. In order to understand outbreak control and determine appropriate public health practices, as well as guide future avenues of research, it is important to assess the current state of our knowledge about Ebola virus transmission between people (Table 1).viruses-07-00511-t001_Table 1Table 1Knowledge about different routes of Ebola virus transmission.Mode of transmissionConsensus likelihood of occurringKnownUnknownAirborne/Aerosol (small droplet/droplet nuclei)Unlikely from epidemiology of diseaseEBOV can be aerosolized mechanically and cause lethal disease in non-human primates at low concentrations [2,3]Ability of the virus to become airborne through respiratory tract in humans and animalsOutbreaks contained without airborne precautions in the affected population [4]Airborne stability of EBOV in tropical climatesEBOV detected after 90 min in experimental small aerosols [5]Whether AGPs produce EBOV aerosols that cause transmissionFomiteLess likely from environmental samplingVirus found in dried blood [6]EBOV stability in tropical climates and on surfacesPersists on glass and in the dark for 5.9 days [7]Droplet (large droplet)Likely from epidemiology and experimentsEBOV found in stool, semen, saliva, breast milk [6]Whether infectious fluids are formed into droplets by humansAccidental infections in non-human primates, possibly from power washing [8,9]Range of droplets containing EBOVEBOV infections without direct contact [10]Bodily fluids contactVery likely from epidemiology and experimental dataSharing needles and handling the deceased or sick are high risk factors [11]How much virus is shed in different fluidsEBOV found in a variety of bodily fluids [6]Ebola virus (EBOV), species Zaire ebolavirus, one of five species of viruses in the genus Ebolavirus, has been identified as the etiological agent of the 2014 outbreak of Ebola virus disease (EVD). In humans, EBOV has been found in variety of bodily fluids, including saliva, blood, breast milk, stool, and semen [6]. There are also multiple potential routes of transmission, including direct contact, fomite, droplet, and aerosol (Figure 1). Experiments involving non-human primates (NHPs) suggest EBOV can successfully infect after oral, conjunctival, respiratory, intramuscular, intraperitoneal and submucosal administration [2,12]. Infectious doses of less than 10 plaque-forming units (pfu) of EBOV have been reported to cause viremia in NHPs, depending on the route of administration [2]. Therefore, EBOV is highly infectious, for a low dose of virus is sufficient to cause disease, and EBOV is contagious; it is shed in multiple bodily secretions and easily transmitted through contact with these fluids.Assessing the potential routes of EBOV transmission, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has communicated the scientific consensus that EBOV spreads only through direct contact with mucous membranes or through broken skin with infected blood or bodily fluids, contaminated objects such as needles, and contact with infected animals [13]. Additionally, healthcare personnel are given precautions against droplet transmission.Our knowledge about human-to-human EBOV transmission is based mainly on epidemiological evidence from previous outbreaks [14]. While authors have addressed what is known about EBOV transmission, many unanswered questions remain. Experiments should augment our knowledge about EBOV transmission and improve our current retrospective understanding. Therefore, we review the present knowledge regarding EBOV transmission and examine how research could answer remaining questions.Figure 1Potential routes of Ebola virus transmission and infection between people. Ebola virus (EBOV) has been isolated from bodily fluids including blood, stool, semen, saliva, and breast milk [6]; contact with these fluids from infected individuals creates a high risk of transmission. These infectious fluids can also be formed into droplets which travel in the air (range unknown, possibly 1 meter) and potentially infect others. EBOV has been detected in dried blood and persists on surfaces, so the possibility of fomite transmission exists. Airborne transmission via small aerosol droplets is unlikely from current EBOV epidemiology.2. Potential Routes of EBOV Transmission2.1. Airborne/AerosolAirborne or aerosol transmission of a virus occurs when small, virus-laden droplets evaporate before settling on surfaces, leaving behind infectious droplet nuclei that can travel long distances. The small droplets that can form these droplet nuclei are often called aerosols, but aerosols are also generally defined as any small liquid or solid particles that are suspended in air [15]. In order to better define biological aerosols, two categories have been created: small droplets and large droplets. The size cut-off for the diameter of small droplets and large droplets has been disputed, with some proposing small droplets to be <20 µm [15], and the size of droplet-nuclei to be <5 µm [16]. Here, we use the terms small droplet and aerosol interchangeably to describe particles that have the potential to form droplet-nuclei, and we use the phrases airborne and aerosol transmission synonymously to describe transmission via these particles.Currently no data exist for whether EBOV forms droplet nuclei. EBOV particles have been found in human alveoli [17], yet it is not known if small droplets containing EBOV form within the human respiratory tract. However, epidemiological data have led to the understanding that EBOV does not undergo traditional airborne transmission. The majority of patients in previous epidemics have been infected by direct contact [10,11] and all EVD outbreaks in Africa have been contained without precautions against airborne transmission in the affected populations [4].While there is no evidence of airborne transmission of EBOV in humans, experiments in NHPs have shed light on this mode of infection. Early experiments examining routes of infection of EBOV demonstrated that the virus could be aerosolized to small droplet or droplet nuclei size, and cause lethal disease in rhesus macaques after inhalation of at least 400 pfu [3]. More recent experiments have shown that inhalation of <10 pfu of EBOV is sufficient to cause lethal disease in NHPs [2]. However, it is important to note that in these experiments the virus was aerosolized mechanically, and they do not address the question of whether EBOV is aerosolized naturally. These studies were also done at temperate conditions, 24 degrees Celsius and <40% relative humidity, and therefore do not reflect the environment of African outbreaks. Temperate conditions were chosen to simulate an outbreak in the United States, and it has been shown that 24 degrees Celsius and <40% relative humidity increase the stability of other African hemorrhagic fever viruses, such as Lassa and Rift valley fever viruses [3].Researchers have also tested the stability of mechanically generated aerosols (1–3 µm diameter) that contain EBOV. These stability studies have shown that 99% of the initial virus decays after 104 min at 50%–55% relative humidity and 19–25 degrees Celsius [5]. However, no one has tested the stability of EBOV in aerosols at the temperature or humidity that one would find in West Africa.Initial concerns about the possibility of aerosol transmission of EBOV were raised when NHPs infected with another virus in the genus Ebolavirus, Reston virus, indirectly infected naïve NHPs in distant cages [3]. Indirect EBOV infections between infected and control NHPs and between oronasally infected pigs and uninfected NHPs caused further speculation about the airborne potential of EBOV [8,9]. However, as the authors note, husbandry practices, such as cleaning the cages of infected animals, could have contributed to forming droplets or aerosols containing infectious EBOV [9]. In comparison, EBOV transmission did not occur when intramuscularly infected NHPs were placed 0.3 m apart from uninfected NHPs separated by a plexiglass barrier [18].Overall, differences in experimental design make it difficult to know what we can infer from these experiments about traditional airborne transmission. Measures such as the plexiglass barrier may prevent the exchange of droplets, but they may also impede aerosols. Furthermore, all EBOV transmission experiments take place in biosafety level 4 (BSL-4) laboratories that have pressure driven airflow, which could interfere with the path of the virus in the air. In order to definitely prove or disprove the possibility of EBOV airborne transmission in NHPs, rigorous experimental design is necessary to make sure droplet or fomite transmission cannot occur, while a positive control must also demonstrate that aerosol transmission is possible in the experimental setup.2.2. DropletDroplet transmission, or large droplet transmission, refers to contact with infectious droplets that do not evaporate or travel long distances. Although these droplets do travel through the air, they are defined differently from aerosols that evaporate in the air to form droplet nuclei. While some viruses are not stable as droplet nuclei, they may remain stable inside droplets and can infect individuals exposed to them. It has been generally assumed that droplet transmission can occur up to a meter from an infected individual, but this varies depending on the droplet size, environment, and stability of the virus [19]. EBOV-containing droplets could form from multiple bodily fluids, including blood, saliva, vomit, and stool, yet no experimental studies have been done with EBOV droplets, so the range of transmission is not known. However, health care workers are given precautions against droplet transmission because of epidemiological evidence. In one outbreak, 5 out of 19 patients reported not having direct contact with an infected individual [10]. Because these patients were in close proximity with infected individuals, some speculate that droplet transmission could have occurred [10].Other ways that EBOV-containing droplets and aerosols could be created are through aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs). Known AGPs in clinical settings are those that stimulate coughing or involve the manipulation of the patient’s airway, including activities such as intubation, manual ventilation, and broncoscopy. Although health care workers may not perform AGPs in ETUs, it is possible that those working in hospital settings could generate EBOV aerosols when using AGPs to treat an EVD patient.Additional AGPs include spraying and pressure washing infected materials. For example, the previously mentioned indirect EBOV infections in NHPs are believed to have occurred from activities done by the researchers, such as pressure washing cages, or from activities by the NHPs themselves that could have formed EBOV-containing droplets that infected other animals. Although such AGPs might not occur outside of a laboratory setting, it would be helpful to experimentally determine the types of research and clinical activities that generate infectious EBOV droplets and aerosols. Air sampling while washing the cages of EBOV infected animals or when intubating an infected animal could reveal whether these activities generate EBOV droplets or aerosols. Additionally, this sampling could be performed during other experiments, thereby limiting the use of animals.Experimentally testing the stability of the virus in bodily fluids such as vomit, saliva, stool, and blood could help us determine how long EBOV can persist in droplets generated from infected patients. Similar environmental stability experiments to those we described for small aerosols could also be done with large droplets to determine how factors such as temperature, humidity, and particle diameter influence the viability of EBOV. By determining the viability of the virus in different size aerosols and droplets, we could better predict the range and modes of EBOV transmission. Additionally, conducting air sampling in Ebola treatment units (ETUs) could reveal whether EBOV aerosols or droplets are generated by patients. These data could inform us whether personal protective equipment (PPE) guidelines and protective behaviors in ETUs are sufficient. For example, the CDC currently recommends that healthcare workers wear a minimum of a face shield, surgical mask, gown, and two pairs of gloves when working with EBOV patients and that a purifying respirator (PAPR) or N95 respirator be used during an AGP with an EVD patient [20]. However, if EBOV aerosols are generated by patients, then a face shield and surgical mask may not be sufficient. Furthermore, N95 respirators have a lower protection factor than PAPRs, therefore experimentally determining whether EBOV aerosols are produced by AGPs could help us reevaluate these recommendations.2.3. Fomites and Environmental StabilityA fomite refers to any surface that a pathogen is able to persist on, and fomite transmission can occur when an individual comes into contact with that infected surface. Potential routes of EBOV fomite transmission include touching objects such as bed sheets or gurneys that have been in contact with EBOV patients or other surfaces contaminated with EBOV-containing bodily fluids.Little is known about the stability of EBOV on surfaces. One experiment showed that EBOV viral load is reduced by 4 log10 after 5.9 days when placed on glass and in the dark at 24 °C and 40% relative humidity [7]. Another experiment showed that EBOV could be recovered after 50 days, when dried in culture media on glass at 4 °C [5]. Limited environmental testing in outbreak locations has shown little evidence for EBOV persistance on surfaces. An assessment for the presence of EBOV in an African hospital found only 2 of 33 samples from surfaces inside and outside the hospital ward to be RT-PCR positive, while virus was present in 16 of 54 clincal samples [6]. Both positive environmental samples contained dried blood. Routine cleaning of the hospital wards could have eliminated EBOV on hospital surfaces, or the virus might not be stable in this environment.Further experiments testing the stability of EBOV on surfaces found in outbreak locations and in tropical conditions could determine whether EBOV persists in the environment and if it is possible to acquire infection through contact with contaminated surfaces. In these laboratory experiments it is also important to accurately mimic the conditions one would find in real outbreak settings. While previous studies tested the stability of EBOV in dried guinea pig sera and cell culture media at low temperature and humidity, it would be insightful to test the stability of EBOV in dried human bodily fluids and at a higher temperature and humidity.In addition to experimentally testing the stability and viability of EBOV in human bodily fluids, both as liquid and dried on different surfaces, it would be useful to test the limits of EBOV stability in other environments, such as water. Because of the reduced public health infrastructure in countries afflicted by EVD outbreaks, it is common to find open sewage canals or waste-containing buckets. Because EBOV is shed in feces and other bodily secretions that come into contact with water, it would be helpful to know how long the virus is stable in water. Contaminated water could come into contact with the eyes, nose, or mouth of individuals, leading to possible infection through contact with mucous membranes.Other viruses that are also shed in vomit and diarrhea can cause infection among people who come into contact with sewage contaminated water [21]. Many of these viruses are non-enveloped enteric viruses, which are very stable in water [22]. In contrast, EBOV is a single-stranded RNA virus with a lipid envelope derived from its host cell [23]. Although enveloped viruses are generally less stable in water, it has been shown that enveloped RNA viruses can persist in water [22]. One enveloped RNA virus, bovine diarrhea virus, a member of the family Flaviviridae, persists for 19–30 days in water [21]. Yet HIV-1, also an enveloped RNA virus, only remains infectious in water for up to 96 h when it is cell-associated [24]. In fact, it is difficult to generalize about the stability of viruses in water and waste. Factors such as the species of virus, water content, waste type, and temperature all influence the environmental stability of an individual virus [22]. Therefore, the only way to make a conclusion about the stability of EBOV or other filoviruses in water and waste is to experimentally test them.Many biological factors could influence the stability of EBOV, such as whether the virus is cell-associated or protected by organic matter such as fecal waste. Because there are so many permutations for testing the virus in different environments and at varying temperatures, humidities, pH’s, and salinities, it is most reasonable to test the virus in conditions that one is likely to find in outbreak settings. Designing experiments that accurately simulate the environments where one might encounter EBOV, such as on clinical surfaces, corpses, and disposed waste, and are at the same temperature and humidity as outbreak locations, would provide the environmental boundaries for EBOV transmission.2.4. Contact with Bodily FluidsOf all the possible modes of transmission, direct contact with bodily fluids remains the most likely way of transmitting EBOV between people. Circumstantial evidence from previous outbreaks, epidemiological data, and experiments in NHPs all demonstrate that contact with EBOV infected fluids via mucous membranes, injection, or open wounds can lead to infection.The use of unsterilized needles was linked to the spread of EBOV in hospital wards during the first recorded EVD outbreak in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 1976 [25]. Accidental exposures to Ebola virus have also occurred, with needlestick injuries leading to infections among researchers [26]. Contact with bodily fluids has also been implicated as the reason why caregivers often become infected after contact with patients. In a study of the risk factors associated with contracting Ebola virus during an outbreak in Kikwit, contact with bodily fluids strongly predicted risk of infection as did sharing hospital beds [11].Despite contact with bodily fluids being a confirmed route of EBOV transmission, it is not clear when and which fluids contain infectious virus. EBOV has been isolated from blood, saliva, breast milk and semen [6], while RNA has been detected in sweat, stool, tears, and on skin, vaginal, and rectal swabs [14]. Although this gives us a broad understanding of the range of bodily fluids that may contain EBOV, we still do not know how much virus is secreted in these substances. Isolating EBOV from infected patients and determining the viable concentration of infectious virus during different time points of disease could elucidate how much virus is shed in different bodily fluids and when it is shed. However, it is challenging to collect these data during an outbreak and conduct retrospective laboratory analysis. Alternative solutions could be to sample bodily fluids from infected NHPs routinely post infection. While NHPs have been monitored during phases of EVD, one has yet to isolate and titrate virus from different secretions throughout the entire stages of the disease to determine whether viable virus is present. Equating RNA copy number to titrations of virus is currently the best clinical option for determining the amount of virus in different bodily fluids from infected patients. This has been done with another ebolavirus, Sudan virus, in sera, allowing researchers to compare the viral load in samples from patients who died and those that recovered [27]. Therefore, this needs to also be done with EBOV in samples from patients in the current epidemic.One limitation of sampling the viral load in patients is that we may be missing asymptomatic or subclinical infected individuals. These asymptomatic individuals may have been recently infected and are in the pre-clinical stages of EVD, or they may have been infected for a while and have not developed any symptoms, remaining subclinical. EBOV replication has been identified in patients who never developed any symptoms after being exposed to the virus [28], but it is unknown whether these individuals may also secrete virus. Sudan virus RNA was typically found at low levels during the onset of symptoms [27], so it likely that asymptomatic, pre-clinical individuals have a low level of viremia. While EBOV transmission from these asymptomatic individuals seems very unlikely from epidemiological evidence, monitoring the viral load in both pre-clinical patients and those that have remained subclinical could definitively prove whether those who are asymptomatic are not contagious. However, the only way of identifying asymptomatic individuals is through testing those who have been exposed to EBOV but have not shown any symptoms, which is logistically challenging. Therefore, healthcare workers and family members who have been exposed to infected patients but have not developed symptoms would be the ideal target populations for these studies.3. Why Experiments Are NecessaryWhile evidence from previous outbreaks has enabled public health personnel to make informed decisions during the current outbreak, we do not have a complete understanding of all of the potential routes of EBOV transmission. If we continue to piece together our understanding of transmission from primarily epidemiological data, we will miss understanding the biological phenomena that lead to transmission events.Fortunately, BSL-4 research facilities are ideally equipped to help answer these underlying questions about EBOV environmental stability and transmission. Experiments testing different modes of transmission in animal models and the limits of EBOV viability in different environments could answer many of the remaining questions about EBOV transmission, such as whether the virus can undergo droplet or fomite transmission.As we consider the current EBOV epidemic in regards to potential outbreaks of other viral diseases, it is important to think about how both epidemiology and experimental research can be used together to inform our understanding of virus transmission. Epidemiology allows us to infer how transmission is occurring on a population level, while experiments enable researchers to determine the biological limits of transmission. Therefore, the experiments that we propose for EBOV could also be used to fill gaps in our knowledge about other viruses as well.In summary, sparse epidemiological and experimental evidence exist for mechanisms of EBOV transmission between people. Currently we know that humans shed the virus in a variety of bodily fluids, are infected by multiple routes, and only need a small amount of virus for infection. This creates a high risk of exposure, so all infection control measures must be followed rigorously in order to prevent further infections. From epidemiological evidence it appears that these infections primarily occur through direct contact with bodily fluids, yet more indirect modes of EBOV transmission have yet to be thoroughly studied experimentally. While contact with bodily fluids from EVD patients remains the most likely route of transmission, further experiments regarding the generation of EBOV in the respiratory tract and during AGPs, as well as the stability of EBOV in droplets and on surfaces, could help us define all routes of infection and improve infection control policies.


Title: The roles of ebolavirus glycoproteins in viral
pathogenesis

No full text body available.


Title: Updates in diagnosis and management of Ebola hemorrhagic fever

INTRODUCTIONEbola virus infection constitutes a highly infectious lethal zoonosis affecting both human and nonhuman primates that usually occurs in sporadic epidemics every few years (average every 1.5 years).[1] Central Africa and sub-Saharan Africa are the most badly affected localities and constitute the source of world epidemics possibly due to human infections from the forest bats Zaire Ebola virus caused the largest reported outbreak of Ebola in 2014 in the West Africa. This virus was transmitted to human through infected fruit bats, monkeys, apes, and pigs. Animals got the infection mostly through contact with bat saliva or feces.[1234]Due to urgency, the WHO allowed the use of experimental treatments.[5] This review aims to elucidate the health efforts exerted to combat Ebola virus and update the diagnostic and treatment lines to fight this lethal health problem. In this article, we review the literature extensively to find out possible diagnostic and therapeutic lines in light of our understanding of Ebola virology, transmission, and pathogenesis. We also aim at developing solid prevention measures.EBOLA VIROLOGYEbola virus belongs to filoviruses (family: Filoviridae) [Figure 1] that include a group of large viruses having a filamentary form (with characteristic filamentous particles) that may exceed 1000 nm (80–1400 nm) in diameter. Ebola virus is a nonsegmented negative-sense RNA virus. Ebola genome includes monocistronic genes that encode for a single protein, for example, nucleoprotein (NP), virion protein (VP) 35, VP40, VP30, VP24, and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase [Figure 2] in addition to the polycistronic glycoprotein gene. The genome of Ebola virus encodes for seven proteins and two nonstructural proteins.[678910]Figure 1Ebola virus belongs to filoviruses. Filoviruses are large viruses that may reach 1400 nm in diameterFigure 2Structure of Ebola virus virionEPIDEMIOLOGY OF EBOLA HEMORRHAGIC FEVERFilovirus hemorrhagic fever was first reported as Marburg virus in 1967 in Germany and former Yugoslavia.[11] In equatorial Africa and some African countries, for example, Gabon, Congo, Uganda, and Sudan, Ebola virus hemorrhagic fever still constitutes a big concern for the populations mostly due to increased numbers of outbreaks and cases that were mostly caused by Zaire Ebola virus. In the Philippines, in the far East, the emergence of Reston Ebola virus in pigs increases the concern of health authorities regarding public health, agriculture, and food safety, which may threaten the emergence of health problems in some parts of Asia.[12]In Ebola-endemic areas, both apes and man and other mammals might be the end hosts rather than reservoir hosts.[13] As Ebola represents a classic zoonosis, persistence of Ebola virus in reservoir animals is generally found. Bats are frequently encountered in equatorial Africa and hunted for food in many places.[14] African fruit bats and insectivorous bats might be the reservoir hosts for Ebola [Figure 3] as documented by detection of viral RNA and antibodies in three tree-roosting species of fruit bats: hypsignathus monstrosus, epomops franqueti, and myonycteris torquata.[1516] Further evidence was reported regarding filoviruses reservoir hosts where identification and isolation of Marburg virus from the cave-dwelling fruit bat Rousettus aegyptiacus was reported.[17] However, that may need further research confirmation.[18]Figure 3Mode of transmission of Ebola virus infection: Transmission of Ebola virus occurs when man consumes the flesh of fruit bats, flesh of animals fed on infected fruit bats, or through contacting or touching any contaminated matter with the virusEBOLA TRANSMISSIONEbola transmission occurs mainly through contact with infected subjects and blood products. Understanding the infectious routes and cycles through which Ebola virus can be transmitted seems critical to break the chain of transmission for future control and prevention against hemorrhagic fever viruses. Unlike respiratory viruses, both droplet and aerosol transmission regarding Ebola is thought to be rare. However, the blood-borne transmission may be critical as monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells constitute the major replication sites for Ebola viruses. Therefore, blood and blood products transfusion may represent a big issue of concern. Ebola dissemination from the initial infection site may take place through monocytes, macrophages, and dendritic cells to regional lymph nodes reaching the lymphatic system, liver, and spleen through the blood.[19]Contact with infected patients, infected human body fluids, dead human bodies, infected cadavers, and infected animal carcasses may be the most critical route for transmitting the Ebola virus infection. Lack of early diagnosis of Ebola in rural and forest areas in Africa in addition to the lack of patients' isolation and application of quarantine measures may exaggerate the transmission of infection. Social habits regarding patient care, contact with patients' belongings and personal clothes (e.g., fomites, towels, and sheets),[20] burial preparation (e.g., washing the dead body), and funeral ceremonies may increase the chance of Ebola transmission, particularly in epidemics.[2122]Extreme care should be given to patients' body fluids even after recovery as Ebola virus was reported to be isolated from patients' biological fluids, for example, sputum, saliva, vomitus, breast milk, tears, sweat, genital secretions, urine, and feces.[20] Moreover, Ebola virus was reported in breast milk and genital secretions for a long duration after recovery (13 weeks).[2023]Intact skin represents an immunological defense against infection with Ebola as the virus was reported to enter the body through skin abrasions, mucosal surface breaks, and through contaminated water for parenteral injection.[2425] Laboratory-induced and blood-borne infections (via contaminated needle stick and blood) have been reported in the 1976 outbreaks of Ebola virus in some African countries, for example, Sudan and Zaire.[2627]As for the animal-borne transmission of infection, this was reported to occur through chimpanzees, bats, and nonhuman primates in equatorial Africa and may represent an important source of Ebola virus where reported organ infectivity titers reached 107–108 pfu/g.[28] The bad nutritional habits of eating the flesh of chimpanzees and freshly killed bats (carriers of Ebola virus) or their slaughtering for food might be related to the emergence of outbreaks in Zaire, Congo, and Gabon. Even contact exposure with infected animals may cause Ebola virus transmission.[141529] Moreover, undercooking infected animals and exposure to infected blood may enhance the possibility of infection and enhance virus transmission through the oral route as evidenced by the report that Zaire Ebola virus was highly lethal when given orally to rhesus macaques.[30]EBOLA PATHOGENESISPathogenesis of Ebola targets mainly the liver, adrenal cortex, lymphatic tissues, and some cells of the immune system causing many pathological effects [Figure 4]. Hemorrhagic fever is a descriptive pathological term for Ebola virus infection. The relatively large size of Ebola viruses may suggest a traumatic vascular injury to explain the origin of Ebola-induced hemorrhagic fever or the causes of inducing the hemorrhagic complications. However, this possibility was reported to be excluded upon vascular histological analysis of different tissues during autopsy. Lack of evidence for the occurrence of substantial vascular lesions in nonhuman primates infected with Ebola virus was documented in many studies.[313233] Interestingly, infection of endothelial cells with Ebola virus in cynomolgus macaques occurred only in the terminal stages of the disease, which excludes vascular injury as a cause for hemorrhagic diathesis occurring during Ebola infection.[33] Laboratory investigations of Ebola patients presenting with hemorrhagic fever confirmed the presence of coagulation abnormalities (consumption of clotting factors) that manifested clinically as petechiae, ecchymoses, mucosal hemorrhages, congestion, and uncontrolled bleeding at venipuncture sites during Ebola hemorrhagic fever[34] that is clinically correlated with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).[35]Figure 4Pathogenesis of Ebola hemorrhagic feverImportantly, Ebola-induced marked hepatic impairment and hepatocellular necrosis in both infected patients and nonhuman primates with the secondary disturbance in protein and coagulation factor synthesis might be the underlying factor for the hemorrhagic tendencies, fibrinolysis, consumptive coagulopathy, increased concentrations of fibrin degradation products, and thrombocytopenia causing infrequent blood loss that occurs mainly in the gastrointestinal tract.[36] Ebola-induced coagulopathy may be due to the expression or release of tissue factors from infected monocytes and macrophages or rapid reductions in serum level of protein C (natural anticoagulant) that were recorded during the course of Zaire Ebola virus infection of cynomolgus monkeys.[3738] Moreover, coagulopathy-induced hemorrhages are not large enough to be the underlying cause of death.Adrenal cortex may be the second affected tissue with Ebola virus where adrenocortical infection and necrosis were reported in patients and nonhuman primates during Ebola virus epidemics, which may explain the fluid and electrolyte disturbances ending in shock and fatal circulatory failure that are usually met with in end-stage infections with Ebola viruses.[39]Lymphatic tissues are also affected with Ebola virus infections where lymphoid depletion and necrosis were reported in the spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes of patients with fatal disease and in experimentally infected nonhuman primates[40] causing impairment of both cell-mediated and humoral immunities. Lymphocyte apoptosis during Ebola virus pathogenesis may be the underlying cause for the progressive lymphopenia and lymphoid depletion[4142] and was reported to be due to activation of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand and factor of apoptotic signal death receptor pathways.[1943] That was evidenced by the premortal depletion of circulating T-lymphocytes and natural killer cell populations in the serum of patients who died of Ebola during fatal epidemics while in Ebola survivors, lymphocyte cell count did not decrease significantly.[43] A similar hematological picture was noted in macaques infected with Zaire Ebola virus where the lymphocyte loss seemed to be greatest in T-lymphocytes and natural killer cells.[19] Moreover, Ebola virus was reported to induce impairment in the dendritic cell function,[1943] which may be due to the immunosuppressive motif in the carboxyl-terminal region of the virus glycoproteins causing lymphocyte dysfunction or loss.[44454647]Ebola infection causes activation of antigen presenting cells and impairment of the coagulation systems causing multiorgan failure and septic shock. Blood and tissue chemistry may be severely affected by Ebola virus-induced inflammatory processes where released pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and other mediators (from antigen presenting cells), reactive oxygen, and nitrogen species help in the pathogenesis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever.Moreover, there is reported increased levels of several inflammatory mediators and cytokines, for example, TNF-α, interleukin (IL)-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, interferon (INF)-inducible protein-10, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1, and regulated upon activation normal T-cell expressed and secreted.[19414248] Inhibition of the type-I INF response was also reported during Ebola virus infection.[49] Interestingly, Ebola virus VP35 was reported to act as a type-I INF antagonist[5051] through blocking the activation of INF regulatory factor 3 and preventing the transcription of INF-β.[505152] Same INF inhibition was reported forVP24 of the Ebola virus that interferes with type-1 INF signaling.[505152]BIOLOGY OF EBOLA HEMORRHAGIC FEVERThe incubation period of Ebola hemorrhagic fever virus is not long (3–21 days, average 12.7 ± 4.3 days).[5354] Bats may be a natural reservoir, which still needs further research confirmation to isolate the virus from bats. Fruit bats (where viral RNA and antibodies were isolated) are resistant to Filoviridae.[14155556575859] The newest member of filoviruses (Lloviucuevavirus) was discovered in 2010 in Spain and was retrieved from bats.[606162]Seasonal variation in mortality among the African chimpanzees may suggest that climatic changes may affect the Ebola epidemics.[6364] A close relationship between the dry conditions at the end of the rainy season was found to correlate with the onset of epidemics, migration of bats,[1415] and human contamination[65] that may induce a change in the behavior of fruit-eating mammals with enhancement in virus circulation.[66]CLINICAL PICTURE OF EBOLA VIRAL INFECTIONThe main characteristic of Ebola symptomatology includes hematological, lymphatic, and immunological disturbances that should raise a high index of suspicion and should be differentiated from blood diseases. Patients usually present with a flu-like syndrome having fever, chills, abdominal pain, headache, myalgia, malaise, arthralgia, cough, and sore throat with dysphagia. However, hemorrhagic manifestations and complications characterize Ebola and differentiate it from other fevers. Infection with Ebola may present with gastrointestinal bleeding, uncontrolled oozing from venipuncture sites (denoting Ebola complicated with DIC), petechiae, ecchymoses, purpura, epistaxis, gingival bleeding, and mucosal hemorrhages. At autopsy, postmortem evidence of visceral hemorrhagic effusions confirms the cause of death to be Ebola hemorrhagic fever.A maculopapular rash is a diagnostic sign that later desquamates (at days 5–7) in survivors.[67686970]Nonspecific symptoms may make the diagnosis of Ebola hemorrhagic fever difficult, especially at primary health centers. However, nonspecific symptoms should be taken seriously in patients living in endemic areas, travelers to endemic areas, and at times of epidemics. Digestive disorders may be present, for example, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and diarrhea. Respiratory symptoms may be presenting in the form of nasal discharge, conjunctival injection, postural hypotension, edema, chest pain, shortness of breath, and cough.Neurological manifestations or complications may be dominating, for example, headache, confusion, and coma. Mortality rate was reported to decrease upon improving the prophylactic measures and decreasing the virus load.[25717273747576] This is confirmed by data showing that viremia lower than 1 × 104–5 pfu/mL of blood was correlated with improved survival in patients and nonhuman primates infected experimentally.[77]LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF EBOLA VIRUSEbola hemorrhagic fever is often fatal, necessitating its early diagnosis to repress the progress of this vicious disease. However, the nonspecificity of early symptoms and limited laboratory facilities in endemic areas make the diagnosis challenging. A combination of some clinical manifestations in susceptible people should raise the possibility of Ebola infection and guide the laboratory investigations. Presumptive diagnosis includes nonspecific symptoms of fever, myalgia, malaise, headache, gastrointestinal complications, sore throat, and others. Conjunctivitis and maculopapular rashes may also appear. This is followed by bloody diarrhea, dyspnea due to pulmonary edema, and irritability that progresses to DIC, hepatic and renal dysfunctions, seizures, shock, coma, and eventually death.[7879]Preliminary investigative markers include leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, asthenia, transaminitis (aspartate transaminase and alanine transaminase [ALT]), and elevated levels of blood urea nitrogen. However, these need to be corroborated with specific tests. Laboratory diagnosis is usually made through virus enumeration, serology, nucleic acid tests, or, rarely, viral culture.[80] Virus or viral particles can be detected in the blood at the onset of infection.ELISA was the mainstay for diagnosis that detects viral antigen, infectious virus proteins, and virus-specific IgM and IgG antibodies in the serum.[81] Viral antigenemia could be detected in virtually all the patients using a polyvalent hyperimmune rabbit serum specific for the Ebola subtypes. However, its sensitivity (≅ 93%) in the acute phase of illness wanes thereafter with the disappearance of the antigen. The serum levels of virus-specific IgM and IgG antibodies were detectable at approximately the same time after disease onset (8–10 days), but IgM persisted for a much shorter period than IgG among the surviving convalescent patients. While IgM was measured in a capture assay using modified capture and detection antigens with the polyvalent rabbit serum as the antigen detector. Antihuman IgG (gamma chain specific) was used to detect bound immunoglobulins in IgG ELISA.Infectious virus isolation though attempted initially (using confluent layers of Vero 6 cells in biosafety level 4 containment facility) has now been discontinued due to the requirement of stringent conditions and slow growth of virus in culture. If the cytopathic effect was observed, the viral cultures were harvested, and antigen was tested using indirect fluorescent antibody test. Fluorescent focus assay (FFA) was also used to enumerate the virus by immunofluorescent staining of infected cells. Attempts to quantify virus by Plaque Assay using neutral red staining were less successful than FFA.ELISA has been replaced by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) that is more sensitive to be deployed even in epidemic settings. RT-PCR surveillance of blood, sputum/saliva/throat swabs, conjunctival swabs, stool, urine, semen, and sweat (from axillary, forehead, and inguinal regions) has been reported.[82] This is a rapid and sensitive technique targeting viral nucleic acid. Viral RNA remained undetectable in saliva, sputum, conjunctival swabs, and stools due to viral RNA shedding. However, urine and sweat samples have been reported to remain positive for viral RNA up to 30–40 days and semen for 3 months. Several RT-PCR kits have now been approved such as RealStar Filovirus Screen RT-PCR Kit 1.0, Altona Diagnostics. The US Food and Drug Administration has also issued authorization on emergency use of Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDEC) Ebola NP real-time RT-PCR assay (http://www.fda.gov/downloads/MedicalDevices/Safety/Emergency Situations/UCM418810.pdf).Ebola virus microRNAs have also been postulated to serve as noninvasive biomarkers for the diagnosis and prognosis of Ebola infection.[83] Negative tests in patients with putative signs of clinical symptoms warrant repetition of the diagnostic assays.TREATMENT OF EBOLA INFECTIONSupportive treatment and treatment of complications are of paramount importance. Whole blood transfusions from convalescent patients are needed for the treatment of Ebola hemorrhagic fever. Symptomatic treatments, for example, antihemorrhagic drugs, substitution treatments (including transfusions, plasmapheresis, and dialysis), and resuscitation are highly needed when necessary.[84] The treatment of complications, for example, hypovolemia, electrolyte abnormalities, hematologic abnormalities, refractory shock, hypoxia, hemorrhage, septic shock, multiorgan failure, and DIC is critical and life-saving. The nematode-derived anticoagulation protein rNAPc2 was an effective treatment of nonhuman primates infected with Zaire Ebola virus.[85] Effective post-exposure treatment of infection using vesicular stomatitis virus-based Ebola vaccine vector was effective in some animal models.[86]SPECIFIC TREATMENTRibavirin,[8788] antisense oligonucleotides, and RNA interference may be promising based on their efficacy in animal studies.[288990]TKM-Ebola is a combination of small interfering RNAs that target Ebola polymerase enzyme, membrane-associated protein (VP24), and the complex protein (VP35). It is designed to block the replication of the Ebola virus. An Ebola nucleoside analog was recently reported to protect against infection with Filoviridae through inhibiting the viral polymerase in an animal model.[91] Favipiravir is an antiviral agent that induces selective inhibition of viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase without inhibiting RNA or DNA synthesis in mammalian cells. Favipiravir was approved in Japan in 2014 for treating influenza pandemics. It was also reported to have activity against some RNA viruses, for example, influenza viruses.[92] Lamivudine may be helpful to patients having Ebola hemorrhagic fever. ZMapp is a potential therapeutic material[3] that is composed of three chimeric monoclonal antibodies.[93]TARGETING EBOLA BIOLOGY AS A FUTURE PERSPECTIVEBased on our understanding of the key points in Ebola transmission, pathogenesis, and complications, it may be strongly suggested that herbal and prophetic medicine remedies, for example, nigella sativa (NS) may play a role in both prophylaxis and treatment.NS was reported to exert potent antiviral effects against many viruses, for example, viral hepatitis, coronavirus, and others,[94] which may suggest its use as a medicinal nutrition or nutritional supplement for treating Ebola virus disease.NS was reported to possess potent anti-inflammatory effects where its active ingredient thymoquinone suppressed effectively the lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory reactions and reduced significantly the concentration of nitric oxide.[95] Moreover, NS was reported to inhibit the inflammatory processes through suppressing the activities of IL-1, IL-6, nuclear factor-κB,[96] IL-1 β, cyclooxygenase-1, prostaglandin-E2, prostaglandin-D2,[97] cyclocoxygenase-2, and TNF-α[98] that act as potent inflammatory mediators and were reported to play a major role in the pathogenesis of Ebola virus infection.Immunostimulating effects of NS include increased natural killer cell activity, increased count, and activity of T helper-1 lymphocytes (immune stimulant effect) versus T-helper-2 (immune suppressive effect). NS suppressed the production of IL-6 and TNF-α.[99]All the above-mentioned effects may abolish and antagonize many steps in the pathogenesis of Ebola-induced hepatic impairment, hematological disturbances, and inflammatory reactions, which are responsible for the fatal outcomes in Ebola virus infection.Moreover, many hepatoprotective effects of NS were recently reported. NS was reported to exert many hepatoprotective effects against ischemia-reperfusion injury where NS treatment restored the serum level of liver enzymes (ALT, aspartate aminotransferase, and lactate dehydrogenase), reduced oxidative stress index, and enhanced the total antioxidant capacity to near normal values.[100]Financial support and sponsorshipThis article is supported by the deanship of scientific research in Taibah University, Saudi Arabia.Conflicts of interestThere are no conflicts of interest.AUTHORS’ CONTRIBUTIONSME: Drafted the article and figures, shared in the article preparation, and approved the submission. AAA: Prepared the biology part, shared in the article design, n and approved the submission. HAO: Wrote the diagnosis section, shared in the article preparation, and approved the submission. HAH: Prepared epidemiology and transmission sections, shared in the article preparation, and approved the submission. AMK: Wrote Ebola virology, shared in the article preparation, revised the article, and approved the submission. NR: Prepared the treatment section, shared in the article preparation, revised the article, and approved the submission. MBE: Shared in the article preparation, revised the article, wrote the abstract, and approved the submission. MMHN: Prepared the pathogenesis section, shared in the article preparation, and approved the submission. YFM: Critically reviewed the article, added important parts in the body of the article, and approved the submission. SME, AAA, HAO, HAH, AMK, MMHN, MBE, and YMF are the abbreviations for the names of the authors as enlisted in the author list section.


Title: Comparative pathogenesis of Ebola virus and Reston virus infection in humanized mice

IntroductionFiloviruses of the genus Ebolavirus comprise 6 known species. The most virulent for humans is Ebola virus (species Zaire ebolavirus [EBOV]), which has caused most of the outbreaks to date, including the West African epidemic of 2013–2016 (1) and the ongoing epidemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) (2). Two other members of the genus, Sudan virus (Sudan ebolavirus [SUDV]) and Bundibugyo virus (Bundibugyo ebolavirus [BDBV]), are also pathogenic for humans, with reported case fatality rates (CFRs) of 50% and 25%, respectively (3, 4). There is significantly less knowledge regarding the putative pathogenicity of Taï Forest virus (Taï Forest ebolavirus [TAFV]) and Reston virus (Reston ebolavirus [RESTV]) in humans. There is only one reported case of the former, a survivor (5, 6), and reports of seroconversion in the absence of disease for the latter (7, 8). The recent discovery of additional filoviruses and filovirus sequences in bats and other species (9–11) has underscored the need for animal models to test the putative pathogenicity of emerging filoviruses.Nonhuman primates (NHPs), in particular rhesus and cynomolgus macaques, are the gold-standard models for the study of filovirus pathogenesis. Infection of NHPs with EBOV and SUDV reproduces many of the features of Ebola virus disease (EVD) in humans, and therefore, NHPs are preferred models for the development of vaccines and therapeutics (12, 13). However, this model presents limitations for comparative filovirus pathogenesis studies, since NHPs are also highly susceptible to RESTV and TAFV (14, 15).We have previously shown that severely immune-compromised mice harboring human hematopoiesis are highly susceptible to EBOV infection (16). This model is based on the reconstitution of HLA-A2–transgenic NOD–scid–IL-2γ receptor–knockout mice with CD34+ human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) isolated from cord blood of HLA-matched donors (hereafter referred to as huNSG-A2 mice). Upon infection with WT EBOV (Mayinga variant), huNSG-A2 mice recapitulated many features of human disease including the incubation period, high lethality, the viremia, and high levels of serum aminotransferases (16).Here we show that upon mucosal infection, EBOV was significantly more pathogenic than RESTV in huNSG-A2 mice. However, 20% of infected mice also died from RESTV infection. A comparative assessment of EBOV and RESTV pathogenesis indicated that lethal RESTV infection in this model was associated to exacerbated inflammation and sustained virus replication in the liver. These results suggest that under specific host conditions (e.g., immune suppression), RESTV may cause disease in humans. Moreover, the susceptibility of huNSG-A2 mice to viruses representative of different Ebolavirus species mimics that observed in humans, suggesting that mice harboring human immune components could serve as models to test the putative pathogenicity of newly discovered filoviruses.ResultsMucosal RESTV replication kinetics is delayed with respect to that of EBOV.The natural portals of entry of ebolaviruses in humans are the skin and the mucosae (17). Therefore, we first evaluated the presence of human mature immune cells in the skin and mucosae of huNSG-A2 mice 12 weeks after transplantation of human CD34+ HSCs. Flow cytometry–based immunophenotyping showed that, indeed, mature antigen-presenting cells including human DCs and monocytes were observed in mouse lung and skin in the steady state (Figure 1A). In particular, the lung showed consistent reconstitution of human myeloid and lymphoid cell subsets, and thus we decided to use the intranasal route to mimic exposure to viruses via the respiratory mucosa.We next performed an analysis of the infection kinetics of EBOV and RESTV in the respiratory mucosa in vivo. Histopathological analysis of lung samples using antibodies against human CD45 (hCD45), a pan-leukocyte marker, and the Ebolavirus nucleoprotein (NP), revealed stark differences in the replication kinetics of both viruses. On day 5 after infection, we already observed staining of EBOV NP in macrophage-like cells within the lung parenchyma, which colocalized with hCD45 (Figure 1B). On day 8 after infection, discrete clusters of EBOV replication were observed in the lung parenchyma. Conversely, replication of RESTV was significantly delayed and was not detectable prior to day 8 after infection (Figure 1B). These differences were not dependent on the levels of hCD45+ cells, which were comparable in RESTV- and EBOV-infected mice (Figure 1C).These results are in agreement with RESTV having slower replication kinetics in cell culture than EBOV (18). The colocalization pattern observed also suggests that both viruses have a preference for human as opposed to mouse cells. Indeed, both viruses replicated to substantially higher titers in human macrophages and DCs compared with mouse macrophages and DCs (Supplemental Figure 1; supplemental material available online with this article; https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.126070DS1). As expected, in these in vitro assays, RESTV replication was also slower than that of EBOV.Taken together, our data suggested that mucosal exposure to EBOV and RESTV in mice reconstituted with human HSCs could serve as a model to study filovirus pathogenesis in a human-like environment and to dissect the mechanisms responsible for differences in filovirus pathogenicity.Infection of huNSG-A2 mice with ebolaviruses mimics species-specific CFRs.To determine whether infection of huNSG-A2 mice via mucosal exposure also recapitulated the lethality of other Ebolaviruses in humans, we sought to compare their susceptibility to 3 additional Ebolavirus species: SUDV, BDBV, and TAFV. Infection of huNSG-A2 mice with EBOV resulted in 92.86% lethality, comparable to that in our previous study using the intraperitoneal route (16). Similarly, infection with SUDV resulted in 71.43% lethality, which recapitulated the reported CFR of this virus in humans (3, 4) (Figure 2A). The high lethality of EBOV and SUDV was also associated with high morbidity (weight loss) in the model (Figure 2B). Infection with BDBV caused death in 28.58% of infected mice, which was also in agreement with the reported CFR in the only human outbreak described to date (19). TAFV infection killed 18.18% of infected mice, indicating that, while less pathogenic, TAFV may cause severe disease in our model. While significantly less pathogenic, RESTV infection resulted in death of 20% of infected mice, an outcome that was comparable to that of TAFV infection (Figure 2, A and B).Among the main predictors of outcome of ebolavirus infection in humans are levels of viremia and serum aminotransferases (20–22). Thus, we compared the kinetics of viremia and AST in surviving and lethally infected huNSG-A2 mice. As expected, all surviving mice controlled viremia and maintained low levels of serum AST independently of the virus species to which they were exposed (Figure 2, C and D). Conversely, mice that died from infection had high levels of AST and virus in blood until death (Figure 2, C and D). An important difference was observed in the case of mice infected with TAFV. Mice that died from TAFV infection showed high levels of circulating AST (Figure 2D); however, the overall level of TAFV in blood was significantly lower than that observed for the other ebolaviruses (Figure 2C). Apart from its reported high lethality in chimpanzees (15, 23), little is known about TAFV pathogenesis in humans and NHPs. Our model suggests that at least the kinetics of replication of this virus differs from that of other species in the genus.Previous reports have indicated differences in pathogenesis between the Mayinga and Makona variants of EBOV, in humans (21, 24) as well as NHPs and immunodeficient mice (25, 26). Thus, we next determined whether our model would also recapitulate differences in pathogenesis between these 2 EBOV variants. Indeed, while EBOV Mayinga was highly lethal in huNSG-A2 mice and caused high levels of viremia, mice infected with EBOV Makona showed reduced lethality (50%), as well as reduced levels of virus in blood (Figure 2, E and F).In summary, our data indicated that upon mucosal exposure, huNSG-A2 mice showed distinct susceptibility to different Ebolavirus species and EBOV variants, suggesting that this model could provide insight into virus species–specific pathogenicity mechanisms and the putative virulence of newly discovered filoviruses.The lethality of RESTV in humanized mice is associated with high inflammation.In order to investigate why RESTV infection was lethal for a subset of mice, we first performed Luminex-based analysis of cytokine production in RESTV- and EBOV-infected mice over the course of infection. To determine the specific contribution of the human immune system in our model, we utilized panels to assess the expression of human cytokines, chemokines, and coagulation markers.Expression of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines at early time points after infection predicted fatal outcome in mice infected with either EBOV (Mayinga) or RESTV. Thus, on day 3 after infection, we observed high levels of proinflammatory chemokines (e.g., macrophage inflammatory proteins–1α [MIP-1α], MIP-1β, IL-8, IP-10), IFNs, markers of endothelial dysfunction (E-selectin, Pecam-1), and coagulation markers (e.g., D-dimers) in mice that died from either EBOV or RESTV infection (Figure 3A). Levels of proinflammatory cytokines in serum were, however, significantly higher in mice that died from RESTV infection and were maintained until day 10 after inoculation, indicating sustained inflammation over the course of infection (Supplemental Figure 2). Overall, the highest levels of proinflammatory mediators were observed in mice with high levels of viremia, elevated levels of serum AST, and short time to death after exposure (Table 1). These data strongly suggest that the severity of EBOV infection in huNSG-A2 mice can be monitored using the same biomarkers proposed for humans, namely, levels of viremia and inflammation. Our results also indicated that death from either EBOV or RESTV infection was associated with high levels of expression of proinflammatory cytokines and elevated levels of serum aminotransferases, suggesting liver damage.The lethality of RESTV in humanized mice is associated with high levels of virus replication in the liver.To further assess the relationship among human immune cell function, virus replication, and liver damage, we performed histopathological analysis of tissues during necropsies of RESTV-infected and EBOV-infected mice. Interestingly, while histopathology revealed stark differences between mice that survived RESTV infection and those that died, these differences were restricted to the liver. Mice infected with RESTV showed similar levels of virus replication in spleen and lung, which was independent of the outcome. Mice that survived RESTV showed even higher levels of virus replication in the kidney than their lethally infected counterparts. However, mice that died from EBOV or RESTV infection showed significantly higher levels of virus replication in the liver, whereas RESTV-surviving mice controlled virus replication in this organ (Figure 4A). These high levels of virus replication in lethally infected mice (EBOV and RESTV) correlated with high levels of infiltration in the liver of immune cells including human B lymphocytes and macrophages/monocytes (Figure 4B). Of note, in RESTV survivors, we observed active phagocytosis of infected RESTV NP+ cells by Iba1+ monocytes/macrophages (Figure 4C, inset). Although indirectly, these findings strongly suggest that virus replication in these mice may be associated with infiltration of myeloid cells that support virus replication. Lethality caused by either EBOV or RESTV was also associated with higher levels of caspase-3 staining in the tissue sections (Figure 4C). These results indicated that fatal EBOV and RESTV infection in huNSG-A2 mice was characterized by higher levels of virus replication in the liver, infiltration of immune cells, and increased levels of apoptosis.DiscussionIn this study, we present a mouse model with mature human peripheral immune cells that is susceptible to infection with nonadapted ebolaviruses. We utilized intranasal inoculation of virus in order to mimic mucosal exposure, a probable route of infection during human EVD outbreaks (27, 28). Recently, pathogenesis studies using the mucosal route of exposure to EBOV have also been conducted in NHPs and guinea pigs. In both models, intranasal inoculation of EBOV resulted in delayed time to death compared with intramuscular inoculation (29, 30). In another NHP study, oral and conjunctival exposure to low doses of EBOV resulted in survival (31). These findings strongly suggest that mucosal immunity may play an important role in precluding systemic dissemination of EBOV from the initial points of infection. However, in the humanized mouse model utilized in our study, we did not observe differences in lethality or time to death after infection when comparing intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation of virus (16). These findings probably reflect limitations in the immune responses in our model, such as defects in immune cell migration to tissue-draining lymph nodes and poor CD4+ T cell help.NSG mice transplanted with human CD34+ HSC have been previously shown to mount human-like immune responses to viral infections, including those caused by HIV, Ebola virus, dengue virus, and adenovirus, among others (32–35). Myeloid and T cell activation as well as production of human immunoglobulins have been described in humanized NSG mice. In the HLA-A2–transgenic model, virus-specific CD8+ T cell responses have been also demonstrated (34, 35), although in the case of experimental dengue infection, they resulted in inefficient virus clearance (35). In our study, however, we observed that mice surviving infection were able to control virus loads and, in some cases (i.e., SUDV and BDBV) clear viremia. We hypothesize that such control is probably dependent to a great extent on HLA-A2–restricted CD8+ T cells similarly to what has been previously described for acute adenovirus infection in the same model (34). This would be also consistent with our previous observation that nontransplanted NSG-A2 mice experience a lengthy chronic disease characterized by sustained viremia (16). Although further experiments are needed to test this hypothesis, this would be also in line with the important role of CD8+ T cell–mediated immunity in recovery from acute EVD (24). However, as mentioned above, there are also several limitations of the NSG model, including poor CD4+ T cell–dependent responses, long-term problems associated to graft-versus-host disease, hemophagocytic lymphohistocytosis, and lack of immunoglobulin isotype switching (36, 37). Despite the latter, huNSG-A2 mice that died from EBOV or RESTV infection showed evidence of recruitment of human macrophages and B cells to the sites of infection, in particular to the liver. These results are consistent with the massive generation of activated CD20+ B cells after EBOV infection in humans (38) and their recruitment to infection sites (39).In our study we also observed that lethality associated with either EBOV or RESTV infection was associated with early and sustained production of proinflammatory cytokines, high levels of viremia, and high levels of AST. These findings are in agreement with data collected during human outbreaks that indicated cycle threshold (Ct) values (as a surrogate of viremia) and inflammation as biomarkers with predictive potential (20, 22, 40). Interestingly, mice that died from infection with either virus also showed early upregulation of D-dimers, which suggested that fatal ebolavirus infection in humanized mice is also associated with coagulopathy. This observation is in line with the presence of focal bleeding in necropsies of EBOV-infected huNSG-A2 mice (16).The reasons for the stark differences in EBOV and RESTV pathogenicity are unknown. Several factors have been proposed, including the ability of the virus glycoprotein ability to direct entry into target cells (41) and perhaps the efficacy of viral protein 35 (VP35) and VP24 to counteract the type I IFN response in infected cells (42, 43). Presumably for these reasons, RESTV replication in cell culture is delayed with respect to that of EBOV (18). In this study using mice harboring human peripheral immune cells, we have shown that these differences in replication kinetics are also present in vivo, and that both EBOV and RESTV have a preference for human cells. Our findings are consistent with recently published data demonstrating that lethal EBOV infection and nonlethal RESTV infection are characterized by substantial differences in virus replication in the liver (44) and strongly support the notion that liver pathology is a central feature of lethal filovirus infection (21, 45, 46). However, our data also indicate that under circumstances whereby RESTV is able to colonize the liver, this may lead to lethal infection. We hypothesize that the mucosal barrier may be of great importance for controlling early RESTV replication. However, this barrier can be overcome, leading to virus dissemination, high levels of inflammation, coagulopathy, and high levels of virus replication in the liver.Finally, we propose that the model presented here may be of use to test the putative pathogenicity of newly discovered filoviruses. Even though further studies are needed to dissect the pathogenic features of ebolaviruses in huNSG-A2 mice, our initial studies indicate that the susceptibility of these mice to specific ebolaviruses was very similar to that of humans. Moreover, within the Zaire ebolavirus species, huNSG-A2 mice were significantly less susceptible to Makona virus compared with Mayinga virus, which was in agreement with reported CFRs in human (17, 21) and animal model studies (25, 26).MethodsGeneration of huNSG-A2 mice.Humanized mice were generated as previously described (16). Briefly, CD34+ human HSCs were positively selected (EasySep Human CD34 Positive Selection Kit, StemCell Technologies) from cord blood. To reconstitute the human hematopoietic system in NSG-A2 mice, we utilized the NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid
Il2rgtm1Wjl Tg(HLA-A2.1)1Enge/SzJ mouse strain purchased from the Jackson Laboratory. All experiments were conducted with 5-week-old NSG-A2 (HLA-A2.1) females conditioned by sublethal irradiation (240 cGy). Four hours after irradiation, mice underwent intravenous (retro-orbital) transplantation of 106 HLA-A2–matching CD34+ HSCs per mouse. Eight weeks after HSC transplantation, blood samples were collected, and the presence of human hematopoietic cells was quantified by flow cytometry using anti–human CD45 antibody BV510 (clone HI30; 304035, BioLegend) and anti–mouse CD45.2 antibody PerCP/Cy5.5 (clone 104; 109825, BioLegend). Samples were analyzed in a LSR II Fortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Mice containing 30%–50% HSPCs were selected for all the experiments. All infection experiments were performed at week 9–10 after engraftment.Mouse infection and disease monitoring.Mice were intranasally infected with 1000 focus-forming units (FFU) of EBOV (Ebola virus/H.sapiens-tc/COD/1976/Yambuku-Mayinga and Ebola virus/H.sapiens-wt/GIN/2014/Makona-C07). RESTV (Pennsylvania strain) and TAFV (Tai Forest virus/H.sapiens-tc/CIV/1994/Pauleoula-CI) were donated by Stephan Becker (Philipps University of Marburg,Marburg, Germany). BDBV (Bundibugyo virus/H.sapiens-tc/UGA/2007/Bundibugyo-200706291) and SUDV (Sudan virus/H.sapiens-tc/UGA/2000/Gulu-808892) were donated by Christina Spiropoulou (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, USA). All virus stocks were tested for mycoplasma (MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit, Lonza) and certified mycoplasma free.A mock treatment group of mice received PBS and was kept as a negative control. All mice were kept in individually ventilated cages inside a biosafety level 4 (BSL4) laboratory at the Bernhard Nocht Institute and fed autoclaved food and water. Mice were monitored (weight, temperature, and general body scoring) daily over the course of the disease. According to the guidelines approved for our study, animals with severe signs of disease such as bleeding, lethargy, temperature lower than 28°C, or weight loss of more than 20% of their original weight were euthanized.Immunofocus assay.Infectious virus particles in blood and organ samples were determined by immunofocus assay. Organs were weighted and homogenized in tubes containing 1 mL DMEM using Lysing Matrix D tubes (MP Biomedicals) containing a bead mill. Vero 81 (ATCC CCL-81) cells seeded in 24-well plates were incubated with 200 μL of serial 10-fold dilutions of homogenized organs and blood samples. The inoculum was removed after 1 hour and replaced with a 1% methylcellulose medium overlay. After 6 days of incubation, overlay was removed, and cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde, washed with water, and permeabilized with 0.5% Triton X-100 in PBS. After washing with PBS and blocking with 5% FCS in PBS, cell foci were detected using an in-house-generated mouse polyclonal anti–pan-Ebolavirus NP primary antibody (1:2000 overnight at 4°C). For detection of foci, cells were incubated with secondary peroxidase-conjugated AffiniPure Sheep Anti-Mouse IgG (H+L) antibody (515-035-003, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories Inc.) at a 1:40,000 dilution for 45 minutes at room temperature. After washing with water, foci were visualized with tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) and counted.Replication assay.PBMCs were isolated from the blood of healthy donors by centrifugation in a lymphocyte separation medium (Ficoll). The recovered monocyte fraction was depleted of cell contaminants by CD14+ selection (Miltenyi Biotec), ensuring purification rates of ≥95%. Immature DCs and monocyte-derived macrophages were obtained upon incubation of cells in complete RPMI-1640 (Life Technologies) supplemented with 200 mM L-glutamine (Life Technologies), 10 mM HEPES buffer (Life Technologies), 10% decomplemented FCS, and 8 μg/mL Gentamicin (Life Technologies) for 5 days with 50 ng/mL GM-CSF (PeproTech) and 50 ng/mL IL-4 (PeproTech) or 40 ng/mL M-CSF (PeproTech), respectively. Monocyte-derived human DCs and macrophages were then infected at an MOI of 0.5 as described above.For generation of murine DCs and macrophages, murine bone marrow was extracted from 8-week-old male WT C57BL/6 mice (The Jackson Laboratory). Briefly, mice were euthanized, and bone marrow from tibiae and femurs was harvested by cutting the edges of the bones and flushing with a 29G needle in sterile conditions. Then, red blood cells were lysed (BD Pharm Lysing Buffer), and cells were seeded at a density of 106 cells/mL in 24-well plates. For differentiation into murine DCs, cell culture medium (RPMI with 10% FCS) was supplemented with 50 ng/mL GM-CSF (PeproTech). For differentiation of bone marrow progenitors into macrophages, the medium was supplemented with 20 ng/mL M-CSF (Miltenyi Biotec). Each cell type was then infected in triplicate at an MOI of 0.01 with EBOV or RESTV or with 2.5% FCS supplemented RPMI as mock control. Infectious viral particles were quantified daily in tissue culture supernatants using immunofocus assays as described above.Clinical chemistry.Serum samples from infected mice were diluted 1:10 in water, and quantification of serum aminotransferases (AST) was determined by using commercially available GOT/AST Fuji DRI-CHEM slides in Fujifilm in a DRI-CHEM NX500 analyzer. The limit of detection for AST was 10 U/L.Flow cytometry.Single-cell suspensions were prepared from organs by cutting tissues into small fragments, followed by enzymatic digestion for 30 minutes at 37°C with Collagenase D (2 mg/mL) (Roche) and DNAase (50 μg/mL) in RPMI-1640 medium. Tissue fragments were further disrupted by passage through a 70-μm nylon cell strainer (BD Biosciences). Red blood cells were lysed with BD Pharm Lyse buffer (BD Biosciences). Cells were then stained for viability with Zombie NIR (BioLegend) for 30 minutes at room temperature, washed twice with PBS, and blocked with Human TruStain FcX (Fc receptor blocking solution, BioLegend) for 20 minutes at room temperature. Cells were stained with an antibody cocktail consisting on the following multiparametric flow cytometry panel: CD45-FITC (2D1; 368507, BioLegend), CD1c-APC (L161; 331523, BioLegend), CD38–PerCP-Cy5.5 (HIT2; 303521, BioLegend), CD16-PECy7 (3G8; 302015, BioLegend), CD141-PE (M80; 344103, BioLegend), HLADR-BV785 (L243; 307641, BioLegend), CD8-BV570 (RPA-T8; 301037, BioLegend), CD14-BV510 (M5E2; 301841, BioLegend), CD56 (HCD56; 318325, BioLegend), CD19-PB (HIB19; 982404 BioLegend), CD4-BUV737 (SK3; 564305, BD Biosciences), and CD3-BV650 (OKT3; 317323, BioLegend). Formaldehyde-inactivated samples were acquired using an LSRFortessa (BD Biosciences) and analyzed with FlowJo software.Histology and immunohistochemistry.Mouse tissue samples were fixed in 4% formalin/PBS and were embedded in paraffin. Sections were then stained with H&E or processed for immunohistochemistry as follows: After dewaxing and inactivation of endogenous peroxidases (PBS/3% hydrogen peroxide), antibody-specific antigen retrieval was performed. Sections were blocked (PBS/10% FCS) and incubated with primary antibodies for rat anti–mouse CD3 (T cells; OKT; 317301, BioLegend), anti-CD20 (B cells; Dako Omnis clone L26; GA604), anti–cleaved caspase-3 (apoptosis marker; ab2302, Abcam), anti-CD14 (monocytes; ab183322, Abcam), or anti–Ebola-NP (clone KZ51 IgG1 mouse; Absolute Antibody). Bound primary antibodies were detected with anti-mouse, anti-rabbit or anti-rat N-Histofine Simple Stain MAX PO immune-enzyme polymer (Nichirei Biosciences Inc.) and stained with DAB substrate using the ultraView Universal DAB Detection Kit (Ventana). Tissues were counterstained with hematoxylin.Luminex multiplex assay.Sera from all mice were collected on days 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, and 23 after infection, and analysis of cytokine concentrations was performed using ProcartaPlex Multiplex Immunoassay Magnetic Bead Panel Premix 19 Plex (PPX-19) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A Luminex 200 system (Millipore) was used for data acquisition.Heatmaps.Visualization of cytokine profiles was performed using the R function heatmap.2, implementing euclidian distance and using the ward.D clustering method to generate the dendrograms. Min-max normalization was performed for each cytokine to normalize data ranges between 1 and 0.Statistics.Statistical analyses were done using Graphpad Prism 6 software. All data are presented as mean ± SEM. For multiple comparisons, nonparametric 1-way ANOVA on ranks (Kruskal-Wallis test) followed by Dunn’s post hoc test was used. For comparison of survival curves, log-rank (Mantel-Cox) tests were used. A P value less than 0.05 was considered significant.Study approval.Human HSCs were purified from cord blood obtained at the Asklepios Klinic Nord in Hamburg. All patients agreed to donation of biological material by informed written consent under a protocol approved by the Ethics Commision of the Medical Association of Hamburg (WF-054/15). Animal experiments were performed under protocols approved by the German animal protection authorities (Behörde für Gesundheit und Verbraucherschutz, Hamburg, approval 110/17). All infection experiments were carried out in the BSL4 laboratory of the Bernhard Nocht Institute by experienced and highly trained personnel using positive pressure biocontainment suits.Author contributionsBEP and CMF designed the experiments. BEP, PR, MR, AL, EVN, and JRP performed experiments. KH and SK performed histopathology experiments and analyzed the data. SGM, JMG, and ER generated humanized mice for the study. ER and CMF coordinated the study. BEP and CMF wrote the manuscript.Supplementary MaterialSupplemental data


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: MARBURG VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Pulmonary Involvement during the Ebola Virus Disease

1. IntroductionEbolavirus is part of the Filoviridae family, which consists of three genera: Marbugvirus, Cuevavirus, and Ebolavirus. There are currently six known, genetically distinct, species of Ebolavirus—Ebola virus (EBOV), Sudan Ebolaviurs (SUDV), Tai Forest Ebolavirus (TAFV), Bundibugyo Ebolavirus (BDBV), Reston Ebolavirus (RESTV), and Bombali Ebolavirus (BOMV) [1,2]. No virus has triggered fear in the general population more than the filovirus Ebolavirus [3]. EBOV is categorized among the deadliest viruses, with mortality rates up to 90%. The zoonotic origin of outbreaks are often the result of transmission from primates, although the suspected natural reservoir for EBOV, bats, is still being questioned. Since it was first identified in 1976 in Zaire (the actual Democratic Republic of Congo), 27 confirmed outbreaks, mainly in the central part of Africa, have occurred, and each outbreak was accompanied by high case fatality rates up to 88%, including the new declared outbreak ongoing in the North Kivu Province of the Democratic Republic of the Congo [4,5,6]. The 2013–2016 Ebola outbreak is the largest (both by number of cases and geographical extension) ebolavirus outbreak ever reported, resulting in 28,610 cases and 11,308 deaths, with fatality rates of 70% in Guinea and Sierra Leone and 41% in Liberia [5]. The number of cases in this single outbreak is far greater than the total number of all cases and deaths of the past outbreaks over the last 40 years. The reasons of such an extended outbreak are linked to societal factors (poverty, urbanization, population migration patterns, and changes of socio-economic conditions), together with the concomitant invasion of animal habitats, climate change, and deforestation [4]. In fact, the emergence and re-emergence of such viruses in Africa or their potential introduction into new countries have usually been related to the mobility and international transport of infected animals or animal products, thus making ebolavirus and filoviruses a worldwide public health concern [7]. Moreover, despite almost 40 years of research, filovirus transmission remains incompletely understood. In humans, EBOV has been found in a variety of body fluids, including blood, stool, breast milk, semen, urine, and saliva [8]. There are multiple routes of transmission for EBOV. However, information about transmission in humans is incomplete, and defining the modes of transmission would greatly increase the ability of public health structures to limit the disease, as well as enable health care workers to avoid any unnecessary risk. So far, our understanding of EBOV transmission in humans mainly relies on epidemiological observations and contact with body fluids from EBOV-positive patients remain the most likely route of transmission. Notably, the number of past outbreaks and associated epidemiological studies carefully examining transmission patterns are small. Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) is commonly associated with multiple organ systems, including the liver, renal organs, and lungs [9]. So far, little is known about the involvement of the respiratory tract and EBOV pathogenesis in the lung. However, little evidence in filovirus animal outbreaks and animal studies highlights the involvement of the lungs and the respiratory tract in filovirus pathology. Over the years, there has been an increasing concern regarding the possible involvement of the lung in EBOV infection. This concern further increased during the 2013–2016 EBOV outbreak, which offered evidence of viral shedding in the lung, leading to a risk of aerosol transmission [10]. The aim of this review is to highlight the pulmonary involvement in EVD, with a special focus on the new data emerging from the 2013–2016 Ebola outbreak.2. Host Defense Mechanisms in the Respiratory Tract during EBOV InfectionThe lung is a vulnerable organ along with the skin and the gut; it is the interface between the sterile body sanctuary and the external environment. Besides its role in maintaining the conduit for air to and from the alveoli, the airway epithelium of the respiratory system is central to the defense of the lung against pathogens. Through the combined function of ciliated epithelial and secretory cells, efficient mucociliary clearance is maintained, along with a variety of other host defense mechanisms [11]. Airway epithelial cells regulate both innate and adaptive immunity through production of functional molecules and physical interactions with cells of the immune system [12]. Despite these defense mechanisms, viruses have found ways to evade the immune system, resulting in severe respiratory disease. Lung pathogenesis is a combination of direct and indirect processes involving virus and/or host factors. Virus-related factors (Figure 1) include receptor specificity and the ability to induce cell damage (direct cytopathic effect) and/or cell apoptosis, whereas host-related factors mostly include the inflammatory response and the activation of the immune system, combined with host-risk factors (chronic respiratory diseases, smokers, atopy of the airway epithelium, etc). EBOV infection is acquired through direct contact with bodily fluids. The virus enters blood circulation through breaks in the skin and mucosa and spread to different organs, causing systemic manifestation of cardiovascular, coagulation, or inflammatory disturbances [10]. The terminal stages of EVD usually involve massive tissue injury and hemorrhage, resulting in multiorgan failure and shock, the main cause of exitus in EVD patients [13]. During EVD, respiratory symptoms such as chest pain, shortness of breath, cough, and nasal discharge are signals of the multisystem involvement, but, so far, lung damage has not been directly linked to EBOV replication in the respiratory tract. However, new evidences collected during the recent 2013–2016 Ebola outbreak hypothesized shedding of the virus in the lung and identified viral replication markers in sputum samples collected from EBOV infected patients [14]. On the other hand, the high virulence of EBOV is attributed in large part to the ability of this virus to interfere with the host immune response, and the high degree of variation in lung pathogenesis is usually linked to indirect damage due to endothelial and epithelial inflammation and the hyper-activation of the immune system subsequent to EBOV infection. In fact, viral direct damages are always associated with indirect damages, caused by inflammatory and immune reactions elicited by the viruses through the activation of soluble mediators (cytokines and chemokines) as part of the immune response (Figure 1). The acute inflammation process is characterized by increasing blood flow, which enables plasma and leukocytes to reach extra-vascular sites of injury. Even though inflammation may be often restored, in EVD, severe inflammation is associated with a cytokine storm and more serious pathological changes are observed. For instance, EBOV in vitro infection of monocytes and macrophages triggers the robust expression of inflammatory mediators, including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, MIP-1a, MIP-1β, MCP-1, and TNF-α [15,16], whereas the dysregulation of immune mediators in humans has been associated with the secretion of other inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1β, IL-8, CCL2, CCL3, CCL13, CXCL1, CXCL10, CXCL11, CXCL12, IL6, MIF, SPP [17,18,19]. In addition, severe inflammatory cytokines/chemokines may spill over into the circulation and result in systemic cytokine storms, which are responsible for multi-organ dysfunction and for the impairment of the vascular system and disseminated intravascular coagulation [20,21]. Dendritic cells (DCs) play an essential role in the link between the innate and adaptive immune response, and their maturation is essential for the correct functionality of DCs, such as the migration, processing, and presentation of viral antigens to T- and B-cells for their activation and correct viral clearance [22,23]. EBOV infection has been shown to influence these mechanisms through impairment of DCs in upregulating co-stimulatory molecules (CD40, CD86, and CD80) and Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II, as well as soluble chemokines and cytokines [24]. EBOV infection is also able to influence the adaptive immune response: severe lymphopenia and the destruction of lymphoid tissue is one of the hallmarks of EBOV infection. Fatal cases showed a more marked reduction of NK cells and γδ T-cell frequency, as well as a loss of peripheral blood CD4+ and CD8+ T cells [25,26]. Moreover, a recent study showed that patients with fatal outcome presented lower, or often absent, levels of both EBOV-specific IgM and IgG, which, when detected, appeared later than in survivors [19]. Overall, the alteration of the innate and adaptive response explains the paralysis of the immune system and its inability to initiate and maintain a protective immune response. At the pulmonary level, many of the pathological changes are, in fact, secondary to systemic alterations, correlating with general pathogenic mechanisms, which are the major causes of severe disease in humans, even at the respiratory level [19,27].3. Ebola Virus Disease EVD is a viral hemorrhagic fever (VHF) characterized by acute systemic manifestations with vascular damage, plasma leakage, severe inflammation, and disruption of the immune system [28]. EVD transmissibility seems to vary depending on the stage of disease [29]. A high-level of EBOV replication, associated with systemic dissemination to multiple cell types, results in a complex pathogenesis, which is linked to an increased risk of infection transmission [29]. As stated above, these pathogenic mechanisms include detrimental immune suppression and over-activation of the immune response, disordered coagulation, and tissue damage due to direct viral and indirect host-mediated effectors. In the absence of adequate supportive care, these processes commonly result in multiple organ failure and death within about 10 days of symptom onset in humans. It is well recognized that EBOV infection is acquired by direct contact with bodily fluids. Notably, studies conducted in animal models have instilled doubts about possible airborne/droplet transmission (see Section 3.1). However, this route of infection in humans is still debated. Piercy and colleagues evaluated the actual stability of the virus particles in aerosol droplets [30]. They created Ebola-containing aerosol droplets and, according to the decay rates, estimated that EBOV and RESTV can survive in aerosols for roughly 100 and 160 min, respectively, at 50% to 55% relative humidity and 22 ± 3 °C [30]. Therefore, a key additional question to ask is whether primary pulmonary infection of EBOV could be a potential scenario for the future. A fair amount of studies, based on animal experiments (Table 1) and clinical evidence collected during the outbreaks (Table 2), suggest that pulmonary infection may be a possibility. This possibility will be fully investigated below.3.1. Animal StudiesAfter its first discovery in 1989 in cynomolgus macaques imported to Reston, Virginia, RESTV was detected in domestic swine in the Philippines in a co-infection with the Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus (PRRSV, family Arteriviridae, genus Arterivirus) and Porcine Circovirus type 2 (PCV-2; family Circoviridae) [32,34]. Later on, RESTV was identified to cause asymptomatic infections with mild respiratory symptoms, which may result in severe mortality in cases of co-infections with other viral pathogens like viruses in the families Arteriviridae and Circoviridae. The virus was first isolated in lung and lymphoid tissues in the original disease investigation [32]. However, the massive presence of the virus in the lungs may be due to the fact that RESTV infection in pigs has been mostly associated with other infections of the respiratory tract, which may contribute to the specific localization of the virus and the respiratory symptoms of the disease. Marsh et al. [33] conducted an experimental study to rule out the effect of other pathogens affecting pigs, using a 2008 Philippines swine isolate of RESTV. Specifically, five-week-old pigs were exposed (via the oro-nasal or subcutaneous route) to the virus, and the subsequent viral replication in internal organs and shedding of the virus from the nasopharynx was observed. The researchers detected the highest levels of virus replication in lung and lymphoid tissues, confirming previous results [32]. The detection of RESTV in domestic swine raised important biosecurity concerns about the potential for the disease’s emergence in humans and other livestock, mainly in animals for food consumption [32,33]. The evidence of RESTV seropositive individuals further increased the concern for human infections and the worries of researchers, farm owners, and the public at large (World Health Organization. WHO, 2009, Available online: https://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/HSE_EPR_2009_2.pdf). Interestingly, so far RESTV has not been seen to result in any human disease, even if there is concern that its passage through swine may allow RESTV to diverge and shift its potential for pathogenicity [58]. On the other hand, several studies investigated if other Ebola viruses may be transmitted through the aerosol route and may result in primary pulmonary infection [9,10,59]. Researchers reviewed the different animal models and offered an overview regarding the possibilities of Ebola viruses causing aerosol infections in non-human primates (NHPs) and other animals. Experimental studies analyzed the respiratory tract involvement in filovirus infections when the animals were exposed to the virus through different aerosol routes (artificially aerosolized virus or natural aerosol transmission) [36,37,39,60]. In these experimental studies conducted on NHPs and pigs, EBOV was inoculated via the aerosol route, and, following mucosal exposure, EBOV replicated, reaching high concentrations, mainly in the respiratory tract, with the development of severe lung pathology. Interestingly, Weingartl et al. demonstrated that piglets inoculated oro-nasally with EBOV and then transferred to a different room housing macaques in an open inaccessible cage system resulted in EBOV infection of all macaques, suggesting a need to revise prevention and control measures during outbreaks [37]. Viral replication was observed within alveolar spaces [36,37], in type I pneumocytes and macrophages [36], and in type II pneumocytes, bronchiolar epithelial cells, and endothelial cells [38], supporting the respiratory involvement. The upper and lower respiratory tract, the lymphoid tissues, and the mediastinal lymph nodes showed infection signs, as well [39]. Similarly, in experiments on cynomolgus macaques placed separately in cages with experimentally infected piglets [37], and on guinea pigs exposed via aerosols to a guinea pig-adapted EBOV strain [39], viral antigens were detected within alveolar and septal macrophages, pneumocytes, epithelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and other interstitial cells of the respiratory tree [61]. Considering the pathology of the respiratory system, the expression of disease in the lungs and the patterns of lesions seem to be influenced by the exposure routes (aerogenous or hematogenous). Broncho–interstitial pneumonia, characterized by injury to both the bronchiolar and the alveolar epithelium, is commonly caused by aerogenous viral infections [62]. Moreover, such pathological features were generally not evidenced following the inoculation of EBOV by other routes in NHPs and laboratory animals [9,35]. As shown in animal studies, primary pulmonary infections could occur and cause active viral shedding from the respiratory tract, thus potentially setting up a cycle of ongoing respiratory transmission in humans [9,63].Overall, experimental works conducted so far have shown that EBOV infection induces respiratory complications, that the virus can be shed via the respiratory secretions, and that it can cause similar pulmonary lesions both in animals exposed to aerosols and in those kept nearby in separate cages with no close contact.3.2. Clinical and Pathology Findings in Humans during EVD The pathophysiological mechanism of pulmonary disease in patients with EVD is unknown. Notably, autopsies were performed on a limited number of humans (about 30 cases), primarily during the 1976 SUDV and 1995 EBOV EVD outbreaks and revealed interesting characteristics at microscopic level. During the first known SUDV outbreak, chest pain was almost universal (83% of patients), often accompanied by a dry cough. Autopsies were further performed on two patients and thickening of the alveolar walls due to proliferative accumulations of alveolar cells was found [64]. Furthermore, a possible pathogenetic role of the virus in the respiratory tract was suggested by the fact that viral inclusions within alveolar macrophages and free viral particles within alveolar space were found in the lungs from fatal EVD cases who showed congestion, focal intra-alveolar edema, diffuse alveolar damage, and hemorrhaging. [9,10].One of the most common symptoms in EVD patients is a cough (up to 49%), especially during the progression of the disease, when viral loads in serum significantly increase, and the virus is copiously emitted in most body fluids, as well as in aerosol particles of various sizes [65,66]. Among the reported EVD cases in the literature, respiratory symptoms were commonly reported with a wide range of symptoms, such as a cough (from 3% [67,68] to 60% [69]), dyspnoea or breathless (detected from 0% [70] to 49% [57]), and chest pain (from 7.5% [71] to 98.6% [72]). Moreover, a WHO study on the first 9 months of the epidemic in Western Africa found that nearly 30% (194 out of 665) of the patients experienced coughing and 2.4% (20 of 831) had a bloody cough [73,74]. A study of 27 EBOV-positive patients of the 2013–2016 outbreak in Western Africa, treated in Europe and USA, reported that cough and dyspnoea were present at admission in seven (30%) and five (22%) EVD patients, respectively. At symptom onset, only a cough was reported in one patient. Furthermore, during hospitalization, 14 patients (52%) experienced hypoxemia while they were breathing ambient air, 12 patients (44%) had pulmonary oedema, seven patients (26%) had pneumonia, 39 patients (33%) had respiratory failure, and six patients (22%) had a diagnosis of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Of these patients, four patients (15%) received non-invasive mechanical ventilation, and seven patients (26%) received invasive mechanical ventilation [75]. Notably, the first EBOV-positive patient treated in Italy, mechanically ventilated for respiratory insufficiency for 5 days, had high levels of EBOV RNA in the lower respiratory tract secretions. The authors concluded that the absence of other identified respiratory pathogens in broncho-alveolar lavage fluids and aspirates supported the hypothesis of a direct contribution to the lung tissues damage by EBOV. Notably, EBOV RNA was detected in bronchial aspirate fluids when the EBOV RNA concentration in the concomitant blood samples was barely detectable. Furthermore, the blood EBOV RNA concentrations in the previous days were significantly lower than the concentrations detected in the bronchial aspirate samples. These findings suggest that this EBOV infection is unlikely a spillover from the blood compartment, eventually accompanied by delayed clearance. Instead, the most plausible explanation is that the virus actually replicated into the lower respiratory tract [76]. In the second EBOV-patient treated in Italy, our group investigated the presence of EBOV genetic material in the lungs and blood during the patient’s treatment and recovery. The patient showed a persistence of EBOV replication markers within the respiratory tract, with a prolonged detection of EBOV viral RNAs (negative and positive sense RNAs: neg-RNA and pos-RNA, respectively), known to be associated with EBOV replication, in the lower respiratory tract for up to five days after the EBOV viral load in blood was already undetectable. These results suggest that EBOV may replicate in the lungs, although it is possible that the lungs simply provided a protective environment that allowed RNA to linger longer than it did in the plasma. Nevertheless, the detection of pos-RNA together with neg-RNA in the sputum (until day 9 and 10 of the hospital stay, respectively) supports the concept of active viral replication within the respiratory tract, rather than plasma spill-over or prolonged RNA stability [14].Overall, the pathophysiological mechanisms of pulmonary disease in patients with EVD are still uncertain, but there could be multiple contributing factors, including vascular leak from endothelial infection, cytokine dysregulation, or direct damage to EBOV-infected cells (Figure 2). 3.3. Impact of Epidemiological and Virological Data on Infection and Control MeasuresOur understanding of EBOV transmission in humans mainly relies on epidemiological observations. Contact with bodily fluids from EVD patients remains the most likely route of transmission. Notably, the number of past outbreaks and associated epidemiological studies hat carefully examine transmission patterns is small. Therefore, conclusions about transmission are based on relatively limited data sets [10]. Interestingly, 18 (6.6%) of the 2774 cases in the 1976 SUDV outbreak in Nzara, Sudan, and 55 (17.4%) of the 316 cases during the 1995 EBOV outbreak in Kikwit, DRC, had no direct or physical contact with an infected person or known infected dead body [77,78], thus pointing to other possible routes of transmission, e.g., human to human respiratory tract infection through droplet and aerosols. During the 2013–2016 Western Africa epidemic, more than 890 health care workers (HCW) were infected, with a case fatality rate of 57% [60], whereas during the current 2018–2019 outbreak in DRC, as of 22 July 2019, 140 HCW have been already affected (5.4% of total cases) [6]. Currently, full body protection is recommend by WHO and CDC [79,80]. All HCW involved in the care of EVD patients must receive training and demonstrate competency in performing all Ebola related infection control practices and procedures, specifically in proper donning and doffing PPE even if using an N95 mask or a powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR). The risk of infection via inhalation of contaminated aerosols from exposed individuals has not been documented. However, droplets containing EBOV that have become aerosolized (e.g., from coughing sneezing, vomiting, invasive medical or surgical procedures, or surfaces) may have the potential to come into contact with a person’s mucous membrane in their nose or mouth or non-intact skin. Therefore, respiratory protection may be helpful in providing a barrier to help prevent infectious materials from contacting a wearer’s mucous membranes. Finally, the epidemiologic and viral evidence of EBOV detection and replication in the respiratory tract raise concerns on the need of strict application of cough etiquette for patients and of droplet and/or respiratory precautions for all HCW involved in the clinical management of EVD suspected and confirmed cases.4. ConclusionsAcute respiratory tract infections (ARTIs) remain a leading cause of mortality, morbidity, and economic loss, and viruses are one of the main causes of such disease. WHO estimates that ARTIs cause nearly four million deaths per year, a rate of more than 60 deaths/100,000 people [81]. The microbial etiology of ARIs is varied, with viruses being the most common cause in humans [82], leading to a high level of awareness and the necessity to develop countermeasures to control them (Table 3).Filoviruses are not commonly considered to be viruses responsible for ARIs, even if respiratory symptoms may be present as a consequence of diffuse systemic alterations. Interestingly, evidence collected in animal studies, in the epidemiological analysis of transmission chains, and in the most recent Ebola outbreaks suggests that EBOV may be able to cause primary pulmonary infection. This evidence highlights the ability of the virus to be shed in the lung, suggesting a role in lung pathogenesis. Specifically, the relevant proportion of EVD patients without any epidemiologic link to the exposure to contaminated biological samples or fomites, or to any contact with EVD patients; the evidence of respiratory signs and symptoms commonly reported all over the clinical course; the abundance of viral antigens in the lungs in animal necropsies; the prolonged persistence of EBOV detection and replication within the respiratory tract days after undetectable EBOV viral load in plasma; and similar clinical patterns in several other viral respiratory tract infections are all different parameters with consistent evidence of a major role in the pathogenesis of EVD in respiratory tissues [10].On the other hand, there is no evidence of aerosol transmission in EVD. However, different studies addressing this issue have been performed [30,83], and aerosol transmission was considered a possibility as a consequence of epidemiological observations in past outbreaks, where people showed signs of EVD even in the absence of a direct or physical contact with an infected person or known infected dead body [78,84]. This hypothesis was corroborated by other studies, in which the presence of free viral particles in alveoli and within intra-alveolar macrophages demonstrated a pulmonary involvement [10]. From a clinical point of view, the 2013–2016 EBOV outbreak underlined the lung involvement in EVD pathogenesis. In fact, only a few patients treated in Europe and USA had a cough and difficulty breathing at admission. Nevertheless, during the clinical progression, half of the patients experienced hypoxemia while breathing room air, one third had respiratory failure, and one fourth received invasive or non-invasive mechanical ventilation [75]. In the Italian experience at the National Institute for Infectious Diseases “L. Spallanzani” (INMI), respiratory symptoms were present in both patients, in the absence of other common respiratory pathogens [14,76]. One case required mechanical ventilation and the other presented EBOV replication markers in the lungs even after clearance of the virus from the blood. The INMI experience suggests a direct role of the virus in lung pathogenesis.Although lung pathogenesis in EVD may be secondary to systemic alterations (correlating with general pathogenic mechanisms) the direct presence of the virus is undisputable in the lung, and its interaction with the immune system, whose hyper-activation may be the most likely explanation of the lung damage, is also indisputable. Further research will be needed to better understand the potential role of pulmonary involvement in EVD and whether it may be a factor in the transmission of the virus from one human to another. 


Title: Immunopathology of highly virulent pathogens: insights from Ebola virus

MainEbola virus is an enveloped negative-strand RNA virus of the Filoviridae family, a group of viruses capable of inducing a severe hemorrhagic fever syndrome in humans and nonhuman primates. The virus was first recognized in 1976 during an outbreak in the Ebola River valley in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo), Africa. A second outbreak caused by a distinct but related virus occurred in Sudan later the same year1,2. Since its discovery in central Africa, several outbreaks have recurred over the last 30 years, including a current confirmed outbreak (11 September 2007) in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (http://www.who.int/csr/don/2007_09_11/en/index.html). Although the reservoir of virus in nature and the range of intermediate hosts is not fully understood, recent studies have found that fruit bats may support replication of Ebola virus, indicating that these animals may be involved in the life cycle of the virus3. However, the natural host of Ebola virus in the absence of active outbreaks, together with the important question of how it is transmitted among various species, represents a continuing subject of investigation.Human infections usually occur after direct contact with virus in dead or infected people or wildlife, with subsequent person-to-person transmission. Filoviruses enter the body through mucosal surfaces or skin abrasions or through the use of contaminated needles4 (Fig. 1a). The onset of Ebola virus–induced disease is sudden, with a 4 to 10 day incubation period. Patients initially show nonspecific flu-like symptoms such as fever, chills, malaise, muscle aches and headache. Abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting may follow, and a cough, sore throat or diarrhea may also be present. A rash often appears around day five and is a characteristic feature of filovirus infection. Systemic, gastrointestinal, respiratory, vascular and neurologic manifestations result from extensive viral replication, and necrosis is seen in many organs, including the liver, spleen, kidneys and gonads5. The terminal stage of the disease is characterized by coagulation disorders such as disseminated intravascular coagulation, fluid distribution problems, hypotension and hemorrhage due to liver inflammation and compromise, tissue disruption and a breakdown in endothelial barrier function that leads to increased vascular permeability. In fatal cases, death occurs typically between 7 and 16 days after infection, the result of multiple organ failure and the onset of a syndrome that resembles severe septic shock6. There are currently no antiviral drugs to treat infection and the mortality rates for the more virulent Zaire and Sudan species of the virus range from 40–90%7.Figure 1Infection, spread and target cell destruction by Ebola virus.(a) Ebola virus (yellow) infects subjects through contact with body fluid or secretions from an infected patient and is distributed through the circulation. Entry can occur through abrasions in the skin during patient care, burial rituals and possibly contact with infected bushmeat, or across mucosal surfaces. Accidental needle stick is the primary route of occupational exposure. (b) Early targets of replication are reticuloendothelial cells, with high replication in several cell types within the lungs, liver and spleen. (c) Dendritic cells, macrophages and endothelium appear to be susceptible to cytopathic effects of Ebola virus gene products in vitro and possibly in vivo through disruption of cellular signaling pathways affected by virus binding, phagocytic uptake or both. Indirect damage may also be inflicted by circulating factors such as tumor necrosis factor and nitric oxide.
Host immune response to fatal Ebola infection
The uncontrolled viral replication of Ebola virus is central to its pathogenesis, both because of its cytopathic effects and because it induces prominent dysregulation of the host immune response. Virally induced immune system impairment occurs through a variety of mechanisms. Studies in nonhuman primates as well as guinea pigs raise the possibility that monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells are early and preferred sites of viral replication8,9, though it remains possible that virus is present on these cells through binding to lectin receptors rather than active replication in vivo. It has been suggested that these cells act as vehicles for the transport of virus through the lymphatics10. Further viral replication ensues, followed by systemic spread to other organs and tissues (Fig. 1b). Although virus is observed in the reticuloendothelial system, little inflammation is seen within the lymphatics or in infected tissues during the course of the infection.Infection of monocytes and macrophages leads to the release of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including tumor necrosis factor, interleukin-1β, macrophage inflammatory protein-1α and reactive oxygen and nitrogen species11,12. The expression of these mediators is likely to attract more monocytes and macrophages to the sites of infection and may also attract neutrophils. Although recent data suggests that they are not productively infected, human neutrophils treated with filovirus in vitro show rapid activation of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-1 (TREM-1)13; this results in the release of further inflammatory cytokines and chemokines that contribute to vasodilation and increased vascular permeability. In addition, infected monocytes and macrophages express cell surface tissue factor, which may be involved in the development of coagulopathies14. After productive infection, macrophages undergo cell lysis and apoptosis in large numbers15; thus, activated monocytes and macrophages do not seem to deter viral spread. Rather, they may contribute to dissemination by supporting viral replication or by transporting virus bound to cell surface lectin binding proteins within the lymphatic system. And like neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages may also secrete soluble factors that exacerbate pathogenic manifestations of the disease13.Like monocytes and macrophages, immature dendritic cells (DCs) are 'targets' of Ebola virus, either by means of attachment of viral particles through interactions with DC-expressed C-type lectin DC-SIGN or by means of infection through interaction with other DC-expressed cell-surface receptors (Fig. 1c). Dendritic cells are among the most effective antigen-presenting cells of the immune system, and they secrete critical interleukins and cytokines that provide a critical link between innate and adaptive immune responses to many pathogens; DCs infected with Ebola virus are severely compromised in these critical functions. Human myeloid DCs infected with live virus in vitro, for example, fail to secrete the normal profile of proinflammatory cytokines and costimulatory molecules. These cells do not become mature or activated and are unable to upregulate major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules and thus to stimulate T cells16,17. By contrast, treatment with noninfectious Ebola virus–like particles (VLPs) activates DCs and stimulates a robust inflammatory response18, an effect dependent on the mucin-like domain of the envelope glycoprotein19. Inhibition of DC function with live or inactivated virus, but not with VLPs, indicates that the suppression of DC function and maturation is likely to be due to the presence of viral proteins or genomic material not present in the VLPs. Further studies are needed to clarify the detrimental effects of Ebola virus infection on other subpopulations of DCs, in particular on plasmacytoid DCs, which are important in antiviral interferon responses. The consequences of nonfunctional DCs include a diminished ability to stimulate humoral or cell-mediated immune responses, which may contribute to the lack of control of viral replication.A principal determinant of the inhibitory effect on innate immune function is the resistance of Ebola virus to the antiviral effects of interferon, which is likely to be due to interruption of critical interferon response pathways by the virus itself20,21,22; interferon production is blocked in macrophages, peripheral blood mononuclear cells and DCs by Ebola virus infection in vitro and in vivo16,23. In addition, the expression of interferon-stimulated genes important in the type-I interferon response is decreased in Ebola virus–infected cells20,22,24. The interferon response has also been shown to be very important for disease outcome in mice. Immunocompetent mice are resistant to Ebola virus infection, but mice that lack the interferon-α/β receptor or the protein signal transducer and activator-1 (STAT1) or that are treated with antibody to interferon become susceptible to disease25, highlighting the critical role of interferon in protecting uninfected cells. Several mechanisms of Ebola virus–mediated resistance to the interferon response have been identified. Like some other viruses, Ebola encodes specific viral proteins that antagonize the interferon response. Two virally encoded proteins, VP24 and VP35, have been shown to interfere with the induction of the interferon response26,27,28. Nuclear accumulation of STAT1 is interrupted by VP24, which leads to a block in type-I interferon signaling and renders infected cells insensitive to this antiviral response27. Ebola VP35 blocks the activity of the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), thus decreasing interferon responses26,28. More recently, VP35 was shown to counteract the activity of the double-stranded RNA–dependent protein kinase (PKR)29. In combination, these studies suggest that virus-induced inhibition of the interferon pathway not only decreases interferon-stimulated gene transcription to prevent an antiviral response state, but also contributes to lower numbers of mature and activated myeloid DCs, which in turn hinders the activation of the adaptive immune response.Surprisingly, patients who succumb to Ebola virus infection show little evidence of an activated adaptive immune response. Adaptive immunity is severely compromised not only because of a lack of functional DCs and other important antigen-presenting cells, but also because lymphocytes undergo massive apoptosis in infected humans and nonhuman primates15,30,31. Although lymphocytes are not targets of the virus, substantial numbers—with the exception of B cells—undergo apoptosis during the illness32; as a result, numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells are substantially reduced in fatal human and nonhuman primate infections before death30,31,33. Lymphocyte apoptosis is also a common manifestation of other viral hemorrhagic fevers and is frequently observed during septic shock34.Studies with lymphocytes in vitro indicate that several molecules involved in triggering apoptosis are present on these cell populations, including TRAIL and Fas-FasL15. However, the mechanisms responsible for this 'bystander' apoptosis are still under investigation. It may be that inflammatory mediators and other factors, such as the proapoptotic soluble factor nitric oxide (NO) secreted by infected macrophages, are capable of inducing the observed lymphocyte apoptosis. Alternatively, impaired DC function and an overall immunosuppressive state may contribute to the phenomenon31. Yet another possibility is that cell death is actively triggered by direct interactions between lymphocytes and Ebola virus or soluble gene products. The importance of early responses involving cells of the innate immune system and/or a rapid adaptive antibody response is highlighted by a recent study showing protection of nonhuman primates with postexposure vaccine administration35.Although filoviruses are among the most virulent and fatal pathogens known, some patients infected with Ebola virus recover from the infection. Identifying the differences in the immune response between fatal and nonfatal cases is important for future development of effective therapies and vaccines. Specific differences in clinical presentation and immune responses have been noted in those who succumb contrasted with those who recover from Ebola virus infection (Table 1). This comparison makes it clear that the development of an antigen-specific cell-mediated immune response correlates with clearance of the virus. Studies demonstrating antigen-specific cellular immune responses in vaccinated nonhuman primates that survived infectious Ebola virus challenge36,37,38 support this finding. Additionally, induction of a humoral and CD8+ T cell response was found to be required for protection in mice challenged with lethal Ebola virus infection39. However, the protective role of immunoglobulins remains uncertain, as a recent report indicates that the passive transfer of the neutralizing human monoclonal antibody KZ52 is unable to control infection in a macaque model40. Based on these considerations, it is becoming increasingly evident that an early and robust, but transient, innate immune response and the subsequent activation of adaptive immune response are necessary to protect against fatal infection. If such a host immune response is not generated, the virus evades immune control, and the infection progresses to end-stage disease.Table 1Correlative differences in patients who survive versus patients who succumb to Ebola virus infectionNonlethal infectionLethal infectionRefs.Prominent CD8+ T cell activationNo CD8+ T cell activation30,33Above-normal numbers of T cellsBelow-normal numbers of T cells
33
107 viral genome copies/ml serum1010 viral genome copies/ml serum33,47Detectable antibodies in blood at onset of symptomsNo detectable antibodies in blood at onset of symptoms33,65Low NOHigh NO33,65
Pathogenesis of infection
The pathological changes seen in patients dying from Ebola virus infection include coagulation abnormalities, vascular permeability, hemorrhage and organ necrosis and failure. The current hypothesis is that the fundamental mechanism of Ebola virus pathogenesis is vascular injury and damage secondary to coagulation abnormalities and increased vascular permeability, due to the release of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines by infected and activated monocytes and macrophages, and to direct endothelial cell damage from viral replication late in infection41,42. It is evident that in addition to the 'cytokine storm', the virus itself can also induce immunosuppression and damage host cells directly4,43,44. Thus, the deleterious manifestations of the infection stem in part from the factors secreted from dysfunctional immune cells and in part from virally induced damage of host tissues and organs.Ebola virus shows tropism in vitro for cells of the innate immune system as well as endothelial cells, dendritic cells and several types of epithelial cells. Replication occurs at an unusually high rate in infected cells. The ability of virus to replicate in different cell types is less well characterized in vivo. In addition, viremia in infected patients is generally difficult to quantify6; however, a viral load exceeding 106 plaque-forming units per milliliter of serum (PFU/ml) was noted in at least one outbreak of the Zaire species of Ebola45. Viremia in infected nonhuman primates can reach up to 107 PFU/ml46. Humans with fatal infections have up to 1010 copies of viral RNA per milliliter, whereas much fewer (107 copies/ml) are found in the serum of those who survive Ebola virus infection (see Table 1)47. High rates of viral replication lead to lysis and necrosis in cells of many organs, including the liver, spleen, kidneys and gonads. Much of the observed necrosis is virally induced, as there is little infiltration within infected tissues, and extraordinary numbers of viral particles are present in the necrotic debris. In addition, microscopic examination of infected human tissues shows a correlation between tissue damage and the presence of viral antigens, nucleic acid and sites of viral replication4,43,44. This observation indicates that direct viral damage of tissues and organs may lead to organ failure and shock.The infection of certain cell types plays an important role in Ebola virus pathogenesis. Infection of innate immune cells is thought to be pivotal to the systemic dissemination of the virus during human infection8,10. Infected monocytes and macrophages travel from the site of infection to lymph nodes, where more monocytes and macrophages are recruited and then become targets of infection. Infection of these cells leads to further amplification and dissemination of the virus through the lymphatic system12. In addition, infection and necrosis of hepatocytes causes impairment of liver function. Liver enzymes are elevated in most filovirus infections48,49,50, and decreased liver function could account for the decreased synthesis of coagulation factors and development of coagulation disorders prominent during fatal infection. Finally, the development of shock at later stages of the disease is multifactorial and, along with hemorrhage, may be due in part to the infection and resulting necrosis of cells of the adrenal cortex50, as these cells are important in the regulation of blood pressure.
Vascular impairment and Ebola glycoproteins
Endothelial impairment is a prominent feature of Ebola hemorrhagic fever. A loss of vascular integrity is often observed in humans and nonhuman primates during late stages of the disease and is associated with bleeding and the imbalance of fluid between tissue spaces. The complete mechanisms leading to endothelium permeability have not been elucidated. Several studies have shown that the virally induced release of inflammatory mediators increases vascular permeability in vitro11,51. However, endothelial cells are targets of infection during later stages of the disease and direct virus-induced cytotoxicity of endothelial cells cannot be ruled out as a contributory mechanism for increased hemorrhagic manifestations. Indeed, the viral envelope glycoprotein GP has been implicated as one of the major determinants of vascular cell injury.GP is one of the most studied Ebola virus proteins because of its importance in viral entry and potential as a target for vaccine development. As mentioned, it is also under intense research because of its possible role in pathogenesis. The glycoprotein is responsible for targeting the virus to cells that are relevant to pathogenesis. GP is likely to have a role in immune suppression through its effects on downregulation of cell surface proteins essential for lymphocyte adhesion and antigen presentation52,53. Although some have suggested that soluble GP may compete for neutralizing antibodies that might otherwise target viruses or infected cells54,55, a protective role for such antibodies has not been demonstrated, and the biochemistry and antibody reactivity of soluble GP differ from those of the membrane-bound trimer spike56,57. Soluble GP does inhibit neutrophil activation57, providing a further mechanism by which viral immunity may affect the innate inflammatory response. Ebola virus entry depends also on endosomal cathepsins, enzymes critical for antigen presentation58,59, and release of cathepsins may contribute to virus-induced cell damage60.Several groups have shown that GP has a direct cytotoxic effect. Yang and colleagues found that of the seven viral gene products, GP was responsible for cell rounding and detachment in endothelial cells both in vitro and ex vivo and that this can lead to a substantial increase in vascular permeability61. Expression of GP from all four species of Ebola virus induces variable degrees of cytotoxicity in cell lines and primary cells in vitro that are characterized by cell rounding and detachment, followed by cell death61. These effects are mediated by a heavily glycosylated mucin-like domain of the glycoprotein. Although there is some debate over the role of GP cytotoxicity during live viral infection62, differences in GP-induced cytotoxicity are correlated with the mortality rates of the different viral species52,61, suggesting that this gene product is important in the pathogenesis of the disease. Expression of membrane-bound GP seems to be precisely controlled during viral replication by a mechanism involving transcriptional editing by the viral polymerase63. This indicates that the glycoprotein may be a key viral determinant of pathogenicity during infection.Thus, virus-induced and host factors combine to result in a destructive pathway in which a fatal response to Ebola virus infection invariably correlates with suppression of both B and T cell–mediated immunity. Patients who fail to recover have virtually no viral antigen–specific antibodies. Low amounts of specific immunoglobulin Ms are present in only 30% of fatally infected patients, and no specific immunoglobulin Gs are detected30,64,65. There seems to be limited initiation of cytotoxic T cell or CD4+ helper T cell responses, most likely owing to their depletion in fatal cases. Lymphocyte depletion is likely to exacerbate the uncontrolled viral replication within macrophages and other inflammatory cells. Therefore, fatal Ebola virus infection is characterized by broad immunosuppression typified by the development of an aberrant nonspecific and deleterious innate immune response and little or no stimulation of an antigen-specific adaptive response. This lack of response leads to an overwhelming viral burden and resultant immune- and virus-mediated pathology.
Relevance to other highly lethal pathogens and future research
Valuable insights into critical features of the host immune system can be gained from an examination of the immune response to highly virulent pathogens such as Ebola virus. One trend that seems to be emerging is that lethal, acute pathogens tend to kill rapidly, before the development of an adaptive immune response, whereas chronic pathogens can survive and replicate despite an adaptive immune response. In this regard, there are interesting parallels between Ebola virus infection and the highly pathogenic 1918 influenza virus (see the accompanying review by Ahmed and colleagues66). For example, Kobasa and co-workers found that a reconstituted 1918 strain of influenza shows high levels of viral replication, which correlates with macroscopic lesions in lung tissue of infected cynomolgus macaques67. Infection in this animal model culminated in acute respiratory distress and an overwhelmingly fatal outcome. Interestingly, infected animals were able to mount an immune response that was in many ways similar to the responses observed during Ebola infection in nonhuman primates. The immune response to 1918 influenza was characterized by an aberrant interferon response and the expression of abnormally high levels of cytokines and chemokines. The authors concluded that the high lethality of the 1918 influenza strain can be attributed in part to the generation of an atypical and harmful innate immune response that is insufficient for protection.A comparison of the immune responses to Ebola and 1918 influenza viruses indicates that the high lethality of these viruses may stem from a combination of the deleterious effects of high viral titers and direct viral damage and a nonspecific and abnormally sustained innate immune response. A similar picture of overwhelming viremia, lack of control by the innate immune response and failure to develop adaptive immunity has been observed with other highly lethal viruses as well, including the severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus, Marburg virus, Lassa fever virus and others. In each case, it would seem that the virus causes lethal infection through its overwhelming replication, though the specific receptors, cell and organ tropisms, mechanisms of evading inflammation and immunity and natural reservoir may differ.Many questions remain unresolved regarding the mechanisms and full extent of virus-induced immune dysregulation. For example, the mechanism of lymphocyte apoptosis is unknown. Ebola virus does not target these cells directly, yet their numbers are rapidly exhausted once viral titers are measurable in the host. Do these cells enter an anergic terminal differentiation due to local cytokine imbalances, or is there aberrant target destruction by other immune cells? It is also unknown whether Ebola virus shows tropism for a particular DC that may enhance evasion of the antiviral response. The mechanism by which DC antigen presentation is impaired is unknown. The role of cathepsin in immunopathogenesis is also not completely understood; because cathepsins also contribute to antigen processing, it is possible they affect the adaptive immune response as well. Similar questions remain regarding the details of viral replication in vivo. Although Ebola virus can be found by immunostaining of a variety of cell types, including macrophages, DCs and endothelial cells, the virus binds to ubiquitous lectin receptors on many of these cells; thus, it is unclear whether the presence of the virus in a given cell represents active replication or merely binding to the cell surface. Finally, the role of cytokine storm versus direct viral cytotoxicity to endothelial cells remains the subject of much speculation but, unfortunately, very little data.Ultimately, many of those questions, including the roles of specific parts of the immune system in protection, may be resolved with studies that use antibody depletion in vivo against cytokines, cytokine receptors and lymphocyte subsets in nonhuman primate models of infection. Until these important issues are addressed, the current hypotheses explain Ebola virus–induced pathophysiology in broad terms: a combination of factors, including uncontrolled and nonspecific inflammatory responses, virally induced immunosuppression and direct viral destruction of several cell types, collectively contribute to the collapse of the vascular system, multiorgan failure and shock-like syndrome of lethal Ebola virus infection.


Title: Development of a neutralization assay and bioluminescent imaging mouse model for Dehong virus (DEHV) using a pseudovirus system

INTRODUCTIONThe Filoviridae family, commonly referred to as filoviruses, comprises pathogens known to cause acute hemorrhagic fever in primates. This family includes eight genera and 16 species (1); the most notable members are Ebola virus and Marburg virus (MARV), which exhibit high mortality rates ranging from 24% to 90% (2). These viruses represent substantial threats to human health. In addition to Ebola and MARV, new members of the Filoviridae family continue to be identified. For example, Bombali virus was detected in free-tailed bats (Mops condylurus and Chaerephon pumila) in Sierra Leone in 2018 (3). In Yunnan, China, two additional filoviruses, Mengla virus (MLAV) and Dehong virus (DEHV), were discovered in 2019 and 2023, respectively (4, 5). Bats are considered the primary reservoir hosts for these viruses, harboring them while roosting in or near human habitats; this proximity carries potential risks of zoonotic transmission. However, the pathogenicity of these newly discovered viruses in humans remains unclear.DEHV possesses the largest genome within the Filoviridae family (20,934 nt) (4), with genetic characteristics closely resembling those of MARV and MLAV. The DEHV genome encodes seven proteins: an envelope glycoprotein, a nucleocapsid protein, matrix proteins, non- structural proteins, and a viral polymerase. These proteins are organized in the genome as follows, starting from the leader sequence: 3′-nucleocapsid protein (NP), non-structural protein (VP35), matrix protein (VP40), envelope glycoprotein (GP), non-structural protein (VP30), matrix protein (VP24), and viral polymerase (L)−5′. There is partial overlap between VP35 and VP40, as well as between VP30 and VP24. The GP of DEHV is encoded by a single open reading frame and shares 50% sequence similarity with the GP of MARV. Similar to other filoviruses, DEHV utilizes Niemann–Pick disease type C1 (NPC1) as its intracellular receptor (5, 6).Although DEHV has circulated among fruit bats in orchards for extended periods, no cases of filamentous virus-related diseases in humans have been reported in these areas. This suggests that DEHV pathogenicity in humans is very low (4). However, a comprehensive investigation of DEHV is needed to fully understand its virulence, pathogenicity, and potential health risks, with the aim of assessing its capacity for future cross-species transmission.In this study, we established a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-based pseudovirus system, in which DEHV GP replaces the HIV envelope protein. Using this pseudovirus system, we developed both an in vitro neutralization assay and an in vivo bioluminescent imaging mouse model. Additionally, we confirmed that DEHV entry into cells requires interaction with the NPC1 receptor. Building on this finding, we assessed the binding affinities between DEHV GP and NPC1 across multiple species and explored potential cross-protection between DEHV and various filoviruses. Our system offers a valuable tool for studies of the mechanisms underlying DEHV infection, as well as its pathogenicity and potential treatments or vaccines.RESULTSDEHV pseudovirus was generated using an HIV-based system (7). Plasmids containing the HIV backbone and the full-length GP of DEHV were co-transfected into HEK293T cells. Cell supernatants were collected 48 h post-transfection to harvest the pseudovirus, and its titer was determined by measuring relative fluorescence values. To evaluate the cell tropism of DEHV pseudovirus, various cell types were infected to identify sensitive cell lines for the detection of DEHV antibodies. The results showed that most cell lines tested supported DEHV pseudovirus infection, indicating broad cell tropism similar to that of the authentic virus (4). Among these, HEK293T cells exhibited the highest luminescence values, suggesting their suitability as a sensitive cell line for neutralizing antibody detection (Fig. 1A). To control for potential variations in luciferase expression due to differences in cell density, we explored the optimal cell-seeding density. The data indicated that densities between 20,000 and 40,000 cells per well produced higher relative fluorescence intensity (Fig. 1B). To generate neutralizing antisera, mice were immunized with DEHV pseudovirus, and serum samples were subsequently collected (Fig. 1C). The specificity of the interactions between the serum and DEHV pseudovirus was confirmed by immunoblotting (Fig. S1A). Further analysis of antibody detection sensitivity revealed that the use of 20,000 cells per well was optimal for neutralization assays. This conclusion was based on evaluations of cell density, 50% inhibitory dilution (ID50) values, and determination coefficients (R2) (Fig. 1D). Next, we measured luminescence values at different time intervals while maintaining a constant number of infected cells. The maximum luminescence was observed 60 h post-infection, indicating the optimal time point for neutralization experiments (Fig. 1E). Subsequently, we performed pseudovirus neutralization experiments using varying 50% tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) values to determine their impact on antibody detection sensitivity, considering ID50 values and determination coefficients (R2). A virus dose of 40,000–80,000 TCID50/mL was considered optimal for maintaining sensitivity and accuracy in neutralization assays (Fig. 1F). To confirm the specificity of the assay, we conducted neutralization experiments using antisera from mice immunized with Ebola virus and other viruses. The results demonstrated excellent specificity (Fig. S2). These findings confirmed the successful development of a sensitive and specific in vitro neutralization assay for DEHV.Fig 1Establishment and optimization of the in vitro neutralization assay. (A) Sensitivity of DEHV pseudovirus to different cell types. Cells from various species were seeded in a 96-well plate at 50,000 cells per well. DEHV pseudovirus (40,000 TCID50/mL) was added, and bioluminescence was measured 48 h post-infection. (B) Optimization of cell density. HEK293T cells were seeded at densities ranging from 5,000 to 80,000 cells per well in a 96-well plate. DEHV pseudovirus (40,000 TCID50/mL) was added, and bioluminescence was measured 48 h post-infection. (C) Diagram outlining the mouse immunization and blood collection process. The first immunization was performed using a DNA plasmid (pcDNA3.1-DEHV-GP vector), followed by two subsequent immunizations with DEHV pseudovirus. (D) Effect of cell density on the sensitivity of the neutralization assay. DEHV pseudovirus (50 µL) was incubated with 7.5 µL of DEHV antiserum for 1 h. HEK293T cells were seeded at densities ranging from 5,000 to 80,000 cells per well, and bioluminescence was measured 48 h post-infection. (E) Optimization of detection time points. DEHV pseudovirus (50 µL) was added to each well of a 96-well plate, followed by the addition of 20,000 HEK293T cells per well. Bioluminescence was measured at various time points post-infection. (F) Optimization of pseudovirus dosage. Mouse serum was serially diluted and incubated with different concentrations of DEHV pseudovirus. The mixture was added to HEK293T cells, and bioluminescence was measured 60 h post-infection. The serum used for this neutralization assay was collected after three immunizations.Graphs and charts analyzing relative light units, inhibition rates, and infection progression. It depicts luminescence across different cell types, cell densities, and post-infection time points. Plots depict inhibition trends across TCID50 values.To establish a bioluminescent imaging mouse model for DEHV, we evaluated different viral inoculation methods. Both intraperitoneal injection and intravenous tail injection routes resulted in successful infection of experimental mice. However, intraperitoneal injection was chosen for further analyses due to its stronger bioluminescence signals and procedural simplicity (Fig. 2A). We then assessed the susceptibility of various mouse strains of different ages to DEHV pseudovirus. Based on the high intensity and uniform distribution of bioluminescence signals, 4-week-old BALB/c mice were selected as the experimental model (Fig. 2B through D). Bioluminescent signals became detectable 2 days after infection, peaked on day 5, and declined by day 8 (Fig. 2E). Therefore, the optimal window for analysis was regarded as between days 4 and 7 post-infection. After infection with the pseudovirus, infected and control mice were dissected; their tissues were subjected to pathological analysis. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed no differences between pseudovirus-infected and control mice, indicating that DEHV pseudovirus does not cause tissue damage (Fig. S3).Fig 2Construction and optimization of the bioluminescent imaging mouse model. (A) Luminescence values in mice injected with DEHV pseudovirus using different methods. The left panel shows imaging results; the right panel presents calculated luminescence values. (B) Comparison of luminescence values among mice of different strains and ages. Mice received intraperitoneal injections of DEHV pseudovirus, and luminescence was measured on the 6th day post-injection. (C) Luminescence values in 4-week-old and 8-week-old mice of different strains after intraperitoneal injection of DEHV pseudovirus. (D) Coefficient of variation (CV) for luminescence values across different mouse groups. (E) Luminescence values detected at various time points after intraperitoneal injection of DEHV pseudovirus, as determined through imaging analysis.Bioluminescence imaging of mice following different injection methods, time points, and strains. It includes luminescence intensity comparisons, distribution across strains over weeks, table of luminescence values, and timeline of infection progression.NPC1, a transmembrane protein located on endosomes and lysosomes (8, 9), has been extensively studied as a receptor for Ebola virus, MARV, MLAV, and other viruses (10–14). NPC1 knockdown reportedly reduces DEHV replication in infected cells (4). To confirm the essential role of NPC1 as the receptor mediating DEHV entry , we generated NPC1-knockout (NPC1-KO) HEK293T cells using Cas9 technology. The knockout was validated through sequencing and Western blotting analysis (Fig. S4;
Fig. 3A). DEHV pseudovirus was unable to infect HEK293T-NPC1-KO cells (Fig. 3B), similar to the effect observed with MARV (15). However, overexpression of human-derived NPC1 (hNPC1) protein in NPC1-KO cells restored the abilities of DEHV and MARV pseudoviruses to enter the cells (Fig. 3A and B). These results confirmed that NPC1 functions as the receptor for DEHV entry (4). Notably, the C-terminal domain of NPC1 contains two LOOP regions, which have been previously shown to bind the trimeric GPcl complex of Ebola virus. These LOOP regions are highly conserved across humans and a wide range of non-human species (Fig. S5A) (16). To evaluate the affinity between DEHV and NPC1 proteins from various host species, we constructed plasmids encoding NPC1 from different hosts. The expression levels of eGFP protein indirectly indicate that there are no significant differences in the expression levels of NPC1 across species in HEK293T-NPC1-KO cells (Fig. 3C). Similarly, DEHV pseudovirus utilized NPC1 proteins for cell entry with comparable efficiency across all seven tested species (Fig. 3D).Fig 3The role of NPC1 in DEHV entry into cells. (A) Western blotting analysis of NPC1 expression levels in different experimental conditions. (B) Infection efficiencies of DEHV pseudovirus in wild-type HEK293T cells, NPC1-knockout HEK293T (HEK293T-NPC1-KO) cells, and HEK293T-NPC1-KO cells transiently expressing human NPC1 (hNPC1). The relative ratios of luciferase values in wild-type HEK293T cells and HEK293T-NPC1-KO cells are shown. (C) Expression of NPC1 from different species in HEK293T-NPC1-KO cells. Cells were transfected with 10 µg of vector encoding NPC1 proteins from various species; GFP expression was analyzed using flow cytometry as a proxy for NPC1 expression. (D) Fluorescence values reflecting DEHV pseudovirus entry into HEK293T-NPC1-KO cells transfected with vectors encoding NPC1 proteins from different species. Data represent four independent biological replicates (n = 4).Western blot analysis of NPC1 expression, relative light unit comparisons for viral infections, flow cytometry plots for NPC1 subsets across species, and bar graph comparing luminescence levels among different species.To generate high titers of DEHV-neutralizing antibodies, we tested various immunization strategies, including DNA vaccine immunization, pseudovirus immunization, a combination of aluminum adjuvant and pseudovirus, and a method involving a single round of DNA immunization, followed by two rounds of aluminum adjuvant and pseudovirus. The efficacy of each method was assessed by measuring neutralizing antibody levels (Fig. 4A). Our assay demostrated that pseudovirus immunization was the most effective method, producing the highest antibody titers in serum samples collected after two rounds of vaccination (Fig. 4B and C). To determine whether DEHV antiserum could cross-protect against other filoviruses, we packaged MARV and MLAV pseudoviruses using the HIV system. Neutralization assays showed that DEHV antiserum exhibited no neutralizing activity against either MARV or MLAV (Fig. 4D).Fig 4Cross-protection of DEHV antiserum against other filamentous viruses. (A) Diagrams illustrating immunization strategies used in this study. (B) Neutralizing antibody titers in serum after two immunizing doses using various methods (n = 5). (C) Neutralizing antibody titers in serum after three immunizing doses using various methods (n = 5). (D) Neutralizing antibody titers of DEHV antiserum against DEHV pseudovirus, Marburg pseudovirus, and Mengla pseudovirus (n = 4). Geometric mean titer (GMT) values are indicated at the top of each column. In the neutralization experiments, DEHV pseudovirus concentration was 40,000 TCID50/mL, Marburg pseudovirus concentration was 400 TCID50/mL, and Mengla pseudovirus concentration was 400 TCID50/mL.Illustration of immunization schedules, bar graphs comparing neutralization titers for different vaccine regimens across two and three doses, and bar chart depicting DEHV serum neutralization titers against different viruses.DISCUSSIONThe Filoviridae family includes several highly pathogenic viruses. In recent years, there has been in increase in the number of filoviruses identified; newly discovered filoviruses include MLAV and DEHV. Although no human infections have been reported, these viruses carry a substantial risk of interspecies transmission due to their broad cell tropism in vitro. Despite these risks, gaps remain in our understanding of DEHV, particularly regarding its pathogenicity, virulence, and potential for zoonotic spillover. The development of the DEHV pseudovirus has enabled the creation of a neutralizing antibody assay and an animal model, establishing a platform for future evaluations of antiviral drugs, monoclonal antibodies, and vaccines. Cell receptors play central roles in defining cell tropism and host specificity. In the present study, analyses using the DEHV pseudovirus confirmed that NPC1 is an essential receptor for DEHV invasion, consistent with mechanisms observed in infections caused by the authentic virus.We also explored the affinities between the DEHV GP and NPC1 proteins from various species using DEHV pseudovirus. Despite mutations in one of the five key amino acid residues within the NPC1 loop of mice, dogs, and hamsters (Fig. S5), no effect on DEHV invasion was observed. This suggests that a single point mutation is insufficient to disrupt binding between NPC1 and DEHV. Additionally, factors that prevent mutations within the C-terminal loop of NPC1 from affecting DEHV invasion activity warrant further investigation in future studies. We observed discrepancies between NPC1 expression levels in different cell types and the efficiency of pseudovirus infection (Fig. 1A; Fig. S6). These differences may arise from variation in the attachment efficiencies of DEHV to surface-binding proteins or factors on different cells. Furthermore, the cleavage efficiency of DEHV-GP across cell types remains unclear and is another topic for future research.DEHV represents a new species, exhibiting a GP that shares over 50% amino acid identity with MLAV and significant similarity to MARV. However, DEHV antiserum was unable to neutralize MARV or MLAV. Further studies are needed to determine whether MARV antiserum or MLAV antiserum can neutralize DEHV. Intriguingly, our experiments revealed that a three-dose immunization strategy with DEHV pseudovirus produced the highest neutralization titers. The underlying mechanisms of this enhanced immune response require additional investigation.Our models have certain limitations. The pseudovirus model involves only a single round of replication and contains only the DEHV GP. Consequently, this model is restricted to studies of viral entry mechanisms; it cannot be used to investigate the roles of other viral proteins or replication-related processes. Furthermore, when utilizing small animal bioluminescent imaging models, the potential effects of fur and organ location on imaging results require careful consideration. Despite these limitations, our models provide safe and practical platforms for research concerning prophylactic measures and early interventions involving drugs, antibodies, or non-T-cell vaccines. However, they may not be suitable for studies of T-cell-based vaccines or vaccines that target viruses during replication phases.In conclusion, we successfully established a pseudovirus-based neutralization assay and a bioluminescent imaging mouse model for DEHV. These user-friendly tools will substantially advance future studies focused on DEHV; they also will facilitate the development of prevention and control measures.MATERIALS AND METHODSCellsThe following cell lines were used: HEK293T (ATCC, CRL-3216), HeLa (ATCC, CCL-2), HepG2 (ATCC, HB-8065), MRC-5 (ATCC, CCL-171), A549 (ATCC, CCL-185), SK-N-MC (ATCC, HTB-10), Hep-2 (ATCC, CCL-23), 143TK (RRID, CVCL-2270), LLC-MK2 (ATCC, CCL-7), Vero (ATCC, CCL-81), VeroE6 (ATCC, CRL-1586), DC2.4 (Millipore, SCC142), NIH/3T3 (ATCC, CRL-1658), JASWII (ATCC, CRL-3612), CHO (ATCC, CCL-61), BHK-21 (ATCC,CCL-10), Cf2Th (ATCC, CRL-1430), MDCK (ATCC, CCL-34), MBCK (ATCC, CCL-22), CRFK (ATCC, CCL-94), Mv1Lu (ATCC, CCL-64), and PK-15 (ATCC, CCL-33). R1KiT cells (provided by the laboratory of Dr. Zhengli Shi) were cultured in DMEM/F-12 medium with Glutamine (Gibco). HEK293T-NPC1-KO cells were generated using CRISPR-Cas9 technology (OBiO Technology Corp., Ltd.). All cells were cultured in media supplemented with 1% penicillin–streptomycin solution (Gibco) and 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; TRAN, FS201-02). Cultures were maintained in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C.To create NPC1-overexpressing cells, HEK293T cells were transfected with 10 µg of the pIRES2-EGFP-NPC1 plasmid using Lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen), resulting in transiently transfected cell lines (referred to as HEK293T-NPC1).PlasmidsNPC1 protein expression plasmids were constructed for eight species: human (Gene ID: 4864), mouse (Gene ID: 18145), dog (Gene ID: 403698), pig (Gene ID: 397591), cat (Gene ID: 493693), fruit bat (Gene ID: 119040988), and hamster (Gene ID: 100689424). The NPC1 sequences from all species were inserted into the pIRES2-EGFP plasmid between the XhoI and BamHI restriction sites.The GP genes for DEHV (GenBank: WMZ41126.1), MARV (NC_001608.3), and Mengla virus (NC_055510.1) were cloned into the eukaryotic expression vector pcDNA3.1.The pSG3.Δenv.cmv.Fluc (envelope-defective HIV-1 SG3 vector) is maintained in our laboratory.All sequences were codon-optimized for mammalian cell expression, and the protein expression plasmids were synthesized by General Biol. Co., Ltd.Quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)Previously collected pseudovirus was centrifuged at 4°C and 40,000 rpm for 3 h. The supernatant was discarded, and viral RNA was extracted using the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, 52906), in accordance with the kit protocol. The RNA was reverse-transcribed into cDNA using the SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase Kit (Invitrogen, 18080-051). For qRT-PCR, reaction setup and program parameters were configured according to the SYBR Premix Ex Taq Kit instructions (Takara, RR820A). A standard curve was generated from the CT values and the concentrations of pSG3 plasmid to reflect the expression level of GP in the pseudovirus. The PCR primers are listed below.Primer-F: 5′-TTCGACCGGGACAAAACCAT-3′Primer-R: 5′-GGGATGATCTGGTTGCCGAA-3′Animal experimentsThe animal study was approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee at the National Institute for Food and Drug Control (NIFDC; Approval Number: 2023 (B) 055). Four-week-old and 8-week-old female BALB/c, ICR, KM, and NIH mice (Institute for Laboratory Animal Resources, NIFDC) were infected with 1 mL of 2 × 106 TCID50/mL DEHV pseudovirus by intraperitoneal or intravenous injection. Bioluminescent signals were monitored at various time points from 2 to 14 days post-infection.Four-week-old female BALB/c mice were immunized with 50 µg of DNA plasmid (pcDNA3.1-DEHV-GP vector) by electroporation or with 500 pg pseudovirus mixed with 50 µL of aluminum adjuvant by intraperitoneal injection. Immunizations were administered every 2 weeks for a total of three doses. Blood collection began in the third week (after the second immunization), then continued weekly until the seventh week.Bioluminescence imagingEach mouse received an intraperitoneal injection of 100 µL of D-luciferin (100 mg/kg). After 8–10 min, the mice were anesthetized with isoflurane, and luminescence values were detected using the IVIS Lumina Series III Imaging System for small-animal live imaging. Luminescence signals were analyzed using live imaging software to calculate luminescence values. Various tissues were collected from euthanized mice, fixed in paraformaldehyde, and processed for hematoxylin and eosin staining to conduct tissue analysis.Pseudotyped virus and neutralization assayHEK293T cells at approximately 70% confluence were co-transfected with glycoprotein (GP) plasmids from DEHV, MARV, Mengla, or Ebola viruses, along with HIV skeleton plasmids (pcDNA3.1–GP and pSG3.Δenv.cmv.Fluc) at a 1:2 ratio, using Lipofectamine 3000. The medium was replaced 6–8 h after transfection, and cells were incubated for an additional 48 h. Supernatants were collected, centrifuged at 210×g for 5 min, filtered, aliquoted, and stored at −80°C for future use.Pseudovirus titration was performed with an initial threefold dilution in a 96-well culture plate, followed by serial threefold dilutions across six replicates. The final column served as a control containing cells without pseudovirus. Subsequently, 100 µL of HEK293T cells (50,000 cells/mL) were added to each well. After incubation for 48 h in a humidified atmosphere at 37°C with 5% CO2, supernatants were aspirated; 100 µL of luciferase substrate (PerkinElmer, 6066769) were added to each well. Plates were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 2 min, then subjected to luminescence measurement using a spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer, Ensight). Relative luminescence unit (RLU) values were used to determine positivity, defined as luminescence at least 10-fold higher than that of the negative control (cells only). The TCID50 was calculated using the Reed–Muench method (17).The outermost wells of a 96-well plate were sealed and left blank. For cell control wells, 150 µL of culture medium was added; 100 µL of medium was added to virus control wells. Serum samples were inactivated at 56°C before use and diluted 30-fold with culture medium in the first row, followed by serial threefold dilutions. Fifty microliters of diluted pseudovirus was added to the sample and virus control wells, and the plate was incubated for 1 h at 37°C. The pseudovirus was prepared to achieve a final concentration of 40,000–80,000 TCID50/mL.Next, 100 µL of HEK293T cells (20,000 cells/mL) was added to each well. After incubation for 60 h, the supernatant was discarded; 100 µL of pre-prepared luciferase substrate (PerkinElmer) was added to each well. The plate was incubated for 2 min at room temperature, then subjected to luminescence signal measurement using a PerkinElmer EnSight spectrophotometer. Data were recorded as RLU values. The 50% inhibitory dilution (ID50) was calculated using the Reed Muench method (17, 18).Inhibition rate = {1– (mean luminescence intensity of sample group – mean cell control) / (mean virus control – mean cell control)} × 100%Serum log(ID50) = log (dilution ratio corresponding to inhibition rate >50%) + (inhibition rate >50% –50%)/(inhibition rate >50% – inhibition rate <50%) ×log (serum dilution ratio).Western blottingCells were transfected with various plasmids and lysed using RIPA buffer (Cell Signaling Technology). DEHV pseudoviruses were collected and ultrafiltered at 4°C for 20 min using a 30 kDa ultrafiltration tube, then mixed with RIPA buffer for sample preparation. Proteins were separated using 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto membranes. Samples were incubated with DEHV mouse serum (1:1,000 dilution, followed by an anti-mouse secondary antibody) or NPC1 antibody (Abclonal, A4795, followed by an anti-rabbit secondary antibody). All secondary antibodies were obtained from Beyotime Biotechnology.Flow cytometryCells transfected with NPC1 from different species were digested, centrifuged, and resuspended in phosphate-buffered saline containing 3% fetal bovine serum. Single-cell suspensions were prepared by filtering the solution through a 40 µm cell filter. Cell counts were performed using the Invitrogen Countess3, and 106 cells were used for flow cytometry analysis (BD FACSAria III). Gating was performed as follows: the first gate identified intact cells, and the second gate selected fluorescein isothiocyanate-positive cells.Statistical analysisData were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 8.0 software (GraphPad Software). Results are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean. Statistical significance was determined using two-tailed Student’s t-tests (***P < 0.001; **P < 0.01).


Title: De novo transcriptome reconstruction and annotation of the Egyptian rousette bat

BackgroundBats (order: Chiroptera) constitute an abundant and diverse mammalian lineage comprising approximately 20 % of all known mammalian diversity [1]. Bats have evolved apart from other mammals for more than 50 million years [2] and are divided into two major suborders; the Yinpterochiroptera (megachiroptera) and the Yangochiroptera (microchiroptera). Yinpterochiroptera includes the family Pteropodidae and genera Rousettes and Pteropus whereas Yangochiroptera includes the family Myotidae and genus Myotis [3]. Unlike most mammals, bats can fly and this ability enabled their wide geographical range and increased metabolism [2]. Interestingly, bats have recently come to the forefront of zoonotic disease research with vast number of pathogens identified in a wide variety of bat species [2].Upwards of 85 different viruses, primarily RNA viruses, have been detected and/or isolated from bats [2, 4]. Amongst these are emerging viruses that cause lethal disease in humans and nonhuman primates including Nipah virus [5, 6], Hendra virus [7], severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-like coronavirus [8], Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [9], Marburg virus (MARV) [10–13], and Ebola virus (EBOV) [14–16]. Despite the severe virulence of these viruses in humans, infected bats are often asymptomatic [13, 17–22]. Nipah virus and Hendra virus interactions with their natural reservoir hosts, Pteropus vampyrus and Pteropus alecto, respectively, are well characterized. Experimental infections of bats with high doses of henipaviruses have shown virus replication and shedding with little to no disease [20–22]. Remarkably, the only viruses known to have induced any observable pathology in bats are rabies virus and Australian bat lyssavirus [2, 23]. Understanding mechanisms of disease and differential responses to infection in asymptomatic reservoir host species compared to species that exhibit severe pathology will help inform the development of novel therapeutics and disease prevention approaches.Rousettus aegyptiacus, commonly known as the Egyptian rousette bat, has been identified as a natural reservoir host for MARV through ecological, epidemiological, and experimental studies [10, 12, 13, 18, 19, 24]. Furthermore, it has been speculated this bat could host Ebola virus [12, 25–27], although recent experimental infection studies have shown Ebola virus does not replicate well in R. aegeyptiacus [28]. The majority of human outbreaks due to MARV have been associated with caves inhabited by R. aegyptiacus. Furthermore, epidemiological surveillance of the R. aegyptiacus colony located in the Python cave in Uganda revealed a biannual spike in Marburg virus prevalence. This pattern correlated strongly with spillover transmission events in humans [24]. Initial studies in captive bats evaluated clinical signs, virus dissemination, and virus shedding patterns during experimental infection with a MARV isolate derived from wild bats [13]. Consistent with a natural reservoir host, the bats showed little to no evidence of disease even though the virus disseminated throughout their body and was actively shed [13]. These results were confirmed when bats were infected with MARV Angola, a strain isolated from a lethal human case [18]. In the absence of genetic and transcriptomic information for R. aegyptiacus and with limited available reagents, studying this reservoir host animal model has been challenging.The rapid expansion in genomic knowledge for different bat species has facilitated comparative studies that rely on the identification of genes and gene families, and has established a framework for developing necessary reagents. Full genome annotations for Pteropus vampyrus (2.63X, [29]), Myotis lucifugus (6.6X, [29]) Pteropus alecto (110x, [30]), Myotis davidii (110x, [30]), and Myotis brandtii (77.8X, [31]) are now available. Additionally, transcriptomic annotations for Pteropus alecto [32] and Artibeus jamaicensis [33] have been published. In particular, the complementary genome and transcriptome annotations for P. alecto has aided studies on henipavirus infections in its reservoir host [30, 32]. The host transcriptional response to different viruses was also recently assessed in a kidney cell line derived from P. vampyrus utilizing the previously annotated genome [34].In this manuscript, we report the transcriptomic annotation of R. aegyptiacus from a de novo assembly of RNA sequencing data from 11 tissues isolated from a male and a female bat. We identified 24,118 canonical coding transcripts whose expression profiles were consistent with the corresponding tissues of origin. In addition, we identified and validated novel coding transcripts that do not have any homology with the known sequences. Furthermore, we evaluated the annotation for immune-related genes and assessed the presence and expression of genes associated with a variety of immune functions.Results and discussionDe novo transcriptome assembly of R. aegyptiacusWe employed a de novo assembly approach to generate a comprehensive transcriptome without relying on a genome reference. First, we generated 20 RNA-seq libraries consisting of 11 tissue types (Table 1, Fig. 1a) each collected from one male and one female R. aegyptiacus bat, which yielded approximately 2.1 billion reads. We then assembled the high quality reads using Trinity [35] (Fig. 1b). This process generated 14,796,219 contigs. The assembly had high continuity and coverage with a median number of 718,807 contigs and median N50 of 1,540 across all tissues (Table 1). To comprehensively annotate the contigs, we used the Multiple Species Annotation (MSA) pipeline [36], which leverages the homology of known sequences of related species. We assigned gene symbols to contigs when this information was available. This process clustered the contigs into isoform groups (Fig. 1c).
Fig. 1Schematic of the de novo transcriptome reconstruction and analysis pipeline. The pipeline consists of 5 steps. a Data generation: Multiple tissues are extracted from R. aegyptiacus and sequenced. b
De novo Transcriptome assembly: Individual samples are first preprocessed to remove adapter sequences and assembled into contigs de novo. c MSA annotation: Once the set of contigs is generated, they are annotated using BLAST against three databases. In each step, unannotated contigs are iteratively annotated using the downstream databases. d Mering and Expression studies: A nonredundant contig set is obtained by merging the contig set of individual tissues two at a time. This pairwise merging is repeated until only one contig set is left. The subset of this contig can be obtained for the downstream analysis such as gene expression analysis by taking the transcripts with gene symbol and ORF sequence. See Fig. 2 for details. e Discovery of Novel Coding Transcripts: Novel coding transcripts can be identified by searching for contigs that failed annotation in the previous steps. Various metrics can be applied to generate high confidence novel coding transcript candidatesTable 1Library Information and Assembly StatisticsBatGenderTissueRead countLibraryN50Number of contigsBAT01FBM67896687single1736609943BAT02FBR55004118single884896445BAT03FHT77315750single1263717588BAT04FKY59782352single1174720026BAT05FLG77510852paired1822903831BAT06FLN63170354single1566638083BAT07FLV89970603paired1566697125BAT08FOV75051316single1401875888BAT09FPB56553369single1890404332BAT10FSP56141808single1340716771BAT11MBM47988156paired1808744115BAT12MBR75378417paired14901088331BAT13MHT20042200paired748497729BAT14MKY71478010paired1514872829BAT15MLG15525010paired668575991BAT16MLN88471565paired2186797125BAT17MLV27358079paired925431513BAT18MPB92707184paired1745556053BAT19MSP98465277paired2141873259BAT20MTT96476242paired18661179242R.aegyptiacus transcriptome captures a majority of bat transcriptsWe compared our assembly to the transcriptomes of three related bat species -- M. davidii, P. alecto, and M. brandtii. Using BLAST, we recovered 90.1 % of M. davidii transcripts, 89.54 % of M. brandtii transcripts, and 97.38 % of P. alecto transcripts. This result is consistent with the evolutionary history of these bats considering that P. alecto and R. aegyptiacus belong to the same family of Pteropodidae.Combining the transcriptome to generate nonredundant contigsTissue-specific transcriptome assemblies contained different numbers of contigs, due to their different levels of expression and sequencing depth. Without a common ground for comparison, it was difficult to perform downstream comparative analyses such as differential gene expression analysis; therefore, we combined contigs from all tissues into one unified, nonredundant reference transcriptome (Fig. 1d). To this end, we iteratively merged the assemblies two at a time, similar to the approach employed in [37] (Fig. 1d). We obtained 4,746,293 nonredundant contigs. Among the nonredundant contigs, 974,765 (20.54 %) of the sequences were annotated by bat sequences, 860,578 (18.13 %) by primate sequences, and 104,796 (2.2 %) by sequences in nt database (Fig. 2a). The nonredundant contig set had slightly lower sensitivity, though it still remained high; 86.60 % of M. davidii, 85.95 % of M. brandtii, and 95.30 % of P. alecto transcripts were recovered. The resulting annotated contigs were assigned gene names and combined using the longest annotated ORF as the transcript. This resulted in an annotation for R. aegyptiacus that contained a total of 24,118 genes. To determine the efficiency of using the MSA pipeline, we determined that 84 % (20,207 genes) of the contigs were annotated using the bat database and 16 % (3,911 genes) were subsequently annotated using the primate database. These data show that the MSA pipeline, which utilizes known transcripts from related species only, is a sensitive and efficient method for de novo transcriptome annotation.
Fig. 2Generation of Nonredundant Contig Set, Canonical Coding Transcript Set, and High Confidence Novel Transcript Set. From the union of all contigs, we generated the nonredundant set of transcripts by iterative pairwise merging of contig set of all tissues; this yielded 68 % reduction of the contig set. a To generate Canonical Coding Transcript Set, we selected the contigs that are annotated with MSA pipeline. The annotated contigs are further filtered for contigs that have a gene symbol. For an individual gene cluster, we chose a transcript with the longest ORF to represent the corresponding gene (Canonical Coding Transcript Set). b For unannoated contigs, we selected for expression level, presence of an ORF with both start and stop codons in the CDS, and a minimum length of 400 nucleotides. We identified 8 high-confidence novel coding transcript candidates for validationBiological validity via expression analysisWe evaluated biological validity of the reconstructed transcriptome by analyzing global expression patterns across the different tissues. If the transcriptome assembly and annotations were accurate, the expression profiles of a given tissue should cluster with those of the same tissue origin and segregate from those of different origins [36, 38]. A gene can result in more than one transcript isoform; therefore, to capture the highest amount of information, for each gene, we focused on the transcript with the longest open reading frame (ORF) (Fig. 2a). After normalizing the expression values, we performed Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) to determine the relationships between the gene expression patterns in different tissues. As expected, MDS showed a clear separation of the samples according to the tissue of origin (Fig. 3a) and explains 74 % of the variance in the data. To examine the evolutionary relationship among tissues, we performed hierarchical clustering of the gene expression profiles (Fig. 3b). The brain, which has a different developmental pathway compared to the other organs, was classified as an outgroup. The spleen, lymph node, and bone marrow are all organs of the immune system and, as expected, clustered near each other. The peripheral blood contains some of the same cell types as the immune organs, thus, clustered near these tissues. Lastly, the gonads and kidney, which develop from the intermediate mesoderm, were grouped as neighbors in the tree. These results suggest that our transcriptome captured sufficient heterogeneity of gene expression to distinguish individual tissues while preserving their developmental relationships.
Fig. 3MDS of Gene Expression Profiles of Bat Tissues. a We assessed the biological validity and quality of our transcriptome annotations by performing Multidimensional Scaling (using 1-spearman correlation as distance) on gene expression profiles of all tissues using the 22,398 genes as feature vector. The first two coordinates explained 73.9 % of the variance in the data. b We performed hierarchical clustering of expression profiles using 1-spearman correlation as distance. The clustering suggested presence of three groups that correspond to separate developmental origins. Tissues used are Bone (BM), Brain (BR), Heart (HT), Kidney (KY), Liver (LV), Lung (LG), Lymph (LN), Ovary (OV), PBMC (PB), Spleen (SP), Testes (TT) of the male (M) and female (F) batGene Ontology analysisWe further assessed biological validity of our transcriptome assembly through gene Ontology (GO) analysis of tissue-specific expression profiles. We compared expression profile of each tissue with the average expression in the whole dataset, and identified the top 200 most differentially expressed genes based on a generalized linear modeling framework. Using this list, we examined the enriched GO biological process (BP) terms. Figure 4 shows the top 10 GO BP terms from the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). (For other tissues, see Additional file 1). Terms enriched for each tissue are consistent with their expected physiological functions.
Fig. 4Top Ten Enriched Gene Ontology Biological Process Terms for bone marrow, spleen, lymph node, and PBMC. In each panel, the terms are listed in descending order of significance of enrichment. These tissues, in particular are associated with different aspects of the immune system and these associations are observed within the GO BP terms identifiedIdentification of immune-related transcriptsR. aegyptiacus is a natural reservoir host for MARV, allowing for virus replication and dissemination with little to no pathological consequences [13, 17–22]. One important aspect of reservoir host biology is how their immune response compares to that of animal species that experiences severe disease, such as humans. Therefore, we examined the transcriptome for the presence of immune-related genes. We associated the R. aegyptiacus gene set with GO terms based on the human-specific gene ontology annotation. This resulted in 14,781 genes that mapped to 14,817 GO terms. We used CateGOrizer [39] and applied the immune class GOSlim terms to identify immune-related genes from this set. Similar to previous studies in P. alecto and A. jamaicensis, we found that out of 14,817 GO terms, approximately 2.75 % were associated with immune response [32, 33]. Amongst the most represented GO terms were cytokine production, lymphocyte activation, T cell activation, regulation of apoptosis, and regulation of lymphocyte activation (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5Distribution of immune genes within the R. aegyptiacus transcriptome at the GO Slim level using CateGOrizer. Genes annotated in the transcriptome were assessed for association with the immune response by analyzing them with CateGOrizer using the immune class GO Slim terms. The frequency shown is the percent of immune class GO slim terms associated with that particular pathway out of all the GO terms that were identifiedWe next searched for specific genes related to various aspects of the immune response in other mammals, primarily mice and humans. We first evaluated the annotation of the transcriptome for the presence of anti-viral genes. A multitude of pattern recognition receptors were identified including toll-like receptors (TLRs) 1–9, RIG-I, MDA5, and LGP2 along with the important scaffold and signaling molecules Myd88 and MAVS. A variety of antiviral molecules were also found, including Mx1 and Mx2, PKR, STING, IRF3, IRF5, IRF7, members of the IFIT and IFITM families, and ISG15. We also looked for the presence of type I, II, and III interferons (IFN). We were able to identify IFNgamma, IFNgamma2, and IFNalpha. Transcripts corresponding to the IFN receptor subunits IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 were also identified. IFNalpha and IFNbeta have been previously characterized by cloning from stimulated cells [40]. We, however, did not find any contigs corresponding to IFNB. To eliminate the possibility of an impaired assembly, we aligned the processed RNA-seq reads to the IFNB sequence from P. alecto [41] (Additional file 2 and Additional file 3). We detected only 2 reads from R. aegyptiacus,which did not provide sufficient coverage to construct the transcript. These data suggest that IFNB expression in healthy tissues of R. aegyptiacus is low, consistent with other mammals in which IFNB is primarily expressed after exposure to a stimulus.We also searched the transcriptome for genes associated with innate immune cells. We found the transcripts for the CD14 and CD11c genes, which are commonly used for phenotyping macrophages and dendritic cells, as well as transcripts for the CD80 and CD86 genes, which are useful for evaluating the activation status of these cells. Genes associated with natural killer (NK) cells, however, were less evident. We were able to identify transcripts of co-receptor gene CD56, but not CD16. Transcripts of genes encoding for molecules in the killer cell lectin-like receptor (KLR) family, including NKG2A and NKG2D, were also not found. In other bat transcriptomes, such as P. alecto and A. jamaicensis, coverage of NK cell-related genes was more sparse than that of other mammals [32, 33]. A similar observation was made in the genome of M. davidii [30]. The absence of NK cell-related genes in the R. aegyptiacus transcriptome further strengthens the theory that bats might contain a different NK cell receptor repertoire than other species.Next, we examined the repertoire of genes associated with adaptive the immune response. We identified a variety of transcripts associated with T cell identification, activation, inhibition, and differentiation including CD3 ε, CD4, CD8a, CD25, CD69, CCR7, PD-1, CTLA4, GATA3, foxp3, and Tbet. Interestingly, we were able to identify transcripts for the TCR α and TCR β chains, but were unable to find transcripts for the TCR δ and TCR γ chains. The transcriptome annotation for P. alecto included these genes, but they were present at low levels [32]. This supports the notion that αβ T cells are the predominant T cell subset in bats. We also looked at genes associated with B cells and were able to find transcripts for CD19, CD20, CD27, as well as transcripts that were similar to the immunoglobulin heavy chains A, E, G, and M and the immunoglobulin light chains κ and λ. Future analysis of the R. aegyptiacus genome is required to fully evaluate the immunoglobulin gene repertoire.Finally, we studied the cytokine and chemokine repertoire, important for shaping both innate and adaptive immune responses. We found a variety of transcripts corresponding to a wide array of both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. These included IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-12a, IL-12b, IL-17a, IL-23, IL-10, TGF β, TNF, IFN γ, IL-1 β, CCL2, CCL5, and CXCL10. Altogether, the reference transcriptome generated for R. aegyptiacus provides an excellent foundation for investigating reservoir host immunology in bats.Novel transcriptsThere were 2,806,154 unannotated contigs from the nonredundant contig set (Fig. 2b). Of those, 71.6 % (2,008,503 contigs) did not have an ORF suggesting the majority of these contigs may be noncoding transcripts. To determine if the unannotated contigs were real or artifacts from the assembly, we used BLAST to align this set of contigs to the P. alecto genome and found that 96 % (2,706,432 contigs) were aligned. To evaluate the possibility of an incomplete or impaired assembly, we grouped the aligned contigs into a total of 1,012,664 clusters based on the presence of overlapping sequences. This reduction suggests that multiple isoform expression patterns between different tissues may have affected our assembly or that our short read assembly may have been incomplete. Nonetheless, the number of unannotated contigs that aligned to the P. alecto genome suggests that these contigs, either coding or noncoding, may be novel transcripts shared within the order Pteropodinae. Future studies evaluating the conservation and possible functions of these sequences are essential to determine the importance of these genetic elements. To validate novel contigs in R. aegyptiacus that appeared to be coding we utilized PCR. Primers were designed to produce amplicons for eight highly expressed, unannotated contigs that contained ORFs longer than 400 bp. Using RNA isolated from the spleen, we were able to produce amplicons of the expected size from at least one bat (Fig. 6 and Additional file 4). The sequences of these amplicons were found to match the expected sequence from the assembled ORF of the unannotated contig. These contigs also showed high sequence similarity to the P. alecto genome. In particular, six of the 8 validated transcripts showed sequence similarity higher than 75 % at a query coverage greater than 64 %. The other two validated transcripts had a query coverage of 23 with 78.36 % identity (transcript 1 in Fig. 6) and a query coverage of 7 with 91.27 % identity (transcript 2 in Fig. 6) (Additional file 5); therefore, we hypothesize that these transcripts might be specific to R. aegyptiacus. Further investigation is needed to fully understand the characteristics and biological functions associated with the proteins these contigs encode.
Fig. 6Unannotated, novel transcripts from R. aegyptiacus were validated of by RT-PCR. RNA from the spleen of both bats was reverse transcribed to make cDNA. The cDNA was amplified using primers specific for one of 8 novel transcripts that were unannotated in the assembly, but contained a complete ORF larger than 400 nucleotides. The expected product sizes were: transcript 1, 457 bp; transcript 2, 450 bp; transcript 3, 419 bp; transcript 4, 548 bp; transcript 5, 469 bp, transcript 6, 277 bp; transcript 7, 507 bp; and transcript 8, 301 bpConclusionIn this paper, we presented the comprehensively annotated of transcriptome of R. aegyptiacus and assessed its quality and biological validity. This transcriptome will be an important resource to study bat immunology. In particular, it will facilitate the process of investigating differences in host responses between asymptomatic reservoir host species and species that exhibit severe pathology. It will also pave the way for the development of novel therapeutics and prevention approaches against emerging zoonotic virus outbreaks.MethodsSample preparationTissues and blood were collected from one male and one female adult R. aegyptiacus bats that were bred and housed at the colony established at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA (Amman et al. 2015 [13]). Approximately 100 mg of the following tissues were collected and homogenized in 1 mL of Trizol LS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA): liver (bat id:BAT7, BAT17), lung (BAT05, BAT15), heart (BAT03, BAT13), kidney (BAT04, BAT14), brain (BAT02, BAT12), axillary lymph nodes (bilateral, pooled) (BAT06, BAT16), spleen (BAT10, BAT19), bone marrow (BAT01, BAT11), and gonad (BAT08, BAT20). PBMCs (BAT08, BAT18) were isolated from the blood and stored in Trizol LS as well.RNA was extracted using the PureLink RNA Mini kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). cDNA was synthesized using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, San Deigo, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The libraries were evaluated for quality using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). After quantification by real-time PCR with the KAPA qPCR Kit (Kapa Biosystems, Woburn, MA), libraries were diluted to 10 nM. Cluster amplification was performed on the Illumina cBot and libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500. Eight of the female bat libraries were single-end, while the remaining tissues from the female bat and all tissues from the male bat were paired-end. All of the libraries sequenced were 125 bp in length. The average library depth was 66 M reads (minimum 16 M and maximum 98 M).Ethics statementAll experimental procedures were conducted with approval from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, Atlanta, GA, USA) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and in strict accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Committee for the Update of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals 2011). The CDC is an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International fully accredited research facility. No human patient-derived clinical materials were used in these studies.De novo transcriptome assemblyWe first examined the quality of the reads using FastQC v0.11.3 [42]. We also preprocessed the reads to remove the adapter sequence using cutadapt v1.5 [43]. We removed “AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC” from the forward strand and “AGATCGGAA-GAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT-AGATCTCGG- TGGTCGCCGTATCATT” from the reverse strand. We performed strand-specific de novo transcriptome assembly using Trinity r20140413p1 [35] with the parameters: “–normalize_reads” and “–SS_lib_type FR”, along with its default parameters for all of our samples.Homology based annotation of the transcriptomeFor annotation of contigs and clustering them into a gene model, we used Multiple Species Annotation pipeline, an nucleotide-based annotation approach that is more efficient and faster than BLASTX [36]. To make a BLAST [44] database for bats, we started with the complete “Nucleotide collection” (nt) database. We exported all accession numbers of the bat sequences at NCBI and made a subset database from nt using “blastdb_aliastool -db nt -dbtype nucl -gilistbats.sequence.gi.txt -title Bats -out Bats”. Using the same type of query, we also created a database for primates including humans due to their extraordinarily well-annotated transcriptomes, which will maximize the power of our annotation pipeline. We then used BLAST to iteratively align the contigs to the bat db, the primate db, and finally nt using a subtractive approach: what did not align to the bat db was aligned to the primate db, and what did not align to the primate db was aligned to nt.Sensitivity of R.aegyptiacus transcriptomeTo assess the coverage of our transcriptome, we downloaded the M. davidii, P. alecto, and M. brandtii transcriptomes from NCBI Eukaryotic genomes annotations [41]. We generated a BLAST index out of union of all contigs from our samples, and aligned the three bat contigs to our BLAST databases. We chose the alignment with 70 % of sequence identity with maximum evalue of 1e-4.Nonredundant transcriptome assemblyTo generate a nonredundant set of contigs, we iteratively merged individual assemblies using the the methods similar to the [37] employed to merge the kmers. Using CD-HIT-EST v4.6 [45] with sequence identity threshold of 0.99, we merged the first two pairs of contig sets (of sample i and sample i+1) upto the final sample n. After each iteration, we merged the resulting merged contig sets using a similar approach until only one contig set remained.Canonical coding transcript setFor the expression profiling, we generated a reference transcriptome consisting of transcripts each representing a gene model according to the following method: We first used TransDecoder (r20140413p1) [46] to find the ORF of all transcripts. Then, based on the MSA pipeline, we chose a transcript with gene symbols and the longest ORF in each gene cluster to capture the most information for downstream expression analysis. We did not consider the contigs mapped to nt database in this manuscript because obtaining feature files for all sequences as required by the MSA pipeline was computationally impractical, and a majority of the gene symbols (24,118) are captured in the bat and primate databases.Gene expression and gene ontology analysisAfter a canonical transcript set was obtained, we used this as a transcriptome reference for expression analysis. We mapped the preprocessed reads to this reference using RSEM v1.2.19 [47] and obtained a gene-to-count matrix. We removed the transcripts with expression variance equal to zero or with low expression (count <=10). For MDS plot, we used the spearman correlaton as a distance measure and “cmdscale” from the “stats” package in R [48]. To explore the biological processes in each gene expression profile, we employed a one-to-all sample comparison using the EdgeR generalized linear model framework [49, 50]. For each tissue, we compared individual gene expression within the tissue versus the average expression of all other tissues. With each tissue having differently ranked gene lists, we then selected top 200 genes and ran gene ontology analysis using topGO [51] with human-specific gene ontology annotation [52].Analysis of unannotated transcripts and identification of novel transcripts and validationWe used BLAST [44] to align unannotated contigs to the genome of P. alecto with the evalue of 1e-4 and query coverage of 40 %. To cluster the aligned contigs into groups, we used bedtools [53] setting the distance threshold parameter at 0. For transcripts that did not align with any similarity to bat, primate, or nt BLAST databases, we applied a series of filters to select for the coding transcripts to be validated. We used the following criteria: an ORF that was complete with both a start and stop codon, an ORF that was at least 400 bp in size, and a transcript that was expressed (a read count >0). We further selected for the novel transcripts with usuable primers using primer-BLAST [54]. Using these criteria, the number of novel transcripts was narrowed down to a total of 8. The primers and expected amplicon size are listed in Additional file 4.For validation, RNA was extracted from the spleen tissue of both the male and female bats using Trizol LS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). cDNA was synthesized from 2.5 μg of RNA using the Superscript III First-strand Synthesis SuperMix (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Amplicons for each of the primer sets were generated using Phusion HotStart Flex DNA polymerase (New England BioLabs, Ipswitch, MA) and run on a 1.5 % agarose gel for visualization. The correct size amplicon was gel extracted, quantified, and Sanger sequenced on the Applied Biosystems 3730 ×1 DNA Analyzer.


Title: Bat humoral immunity and its role in viral pathogenesis, transmission, and zoonosis

1IntroductionThe immune system has innate and adaptive arms that have evolved to respond to a variety of diverse pathogens (1). Upon infection, the innate immune system rapidly responds through germline-encoded innate immune receptors that recognize common molecular patterns [e.g., Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), flagellin, and RNA] shared among many pathogens (1). In contrast, the adaptive immune system recognizes antigens unique to a pathogen (1) and can generate a “memory” response, which can protect from future infections by the same or similar pathogen, such as repeated exposures to viruses (1).A major component of adaptive immunity is the humoral response, comprised of both B and T cells. Antibodies, produced by the former, have two functional domains: the antigen-binding fragment (Fab) that recognizes a specific epitope on an antigen and the crystallizable fragment (Fc) that drives effector functions (2, 3). Antibodies primarily recognize antigens with complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) on their Fab domain. Upon viral infection, naïve B cells that recognize the virus are selected to undergo somatic hypermutation, a mutational process known as affinity maturation, to refine specificity and increase affinity to the antigen (4, 5). In this way, adaptive immunity can generate antigen-specific, high-affinity antibodies that often neutralize viruses. Once bound to the virus, antibodies can interfere with key steps in the viral lifecycle. These can include sterically blocking the virus from binding to host cell receptors, preventing the virus from undergoing conformational changes required for fusion or entry, or inhibiting viral progeny release (6–9). The Fc region of bound antibodies also triggers a series of Fc-mediated responses that can activate innate immune cells (4).Although the origin and evolution of humoral responses have been studied, the specific role and dynamics of antibody responses in bats are not well understood. Bats are a diverse taxa of mammals, second in species richness only to rodents, and are host to a wide range of pathogens (10) (
Figure 1A
). Their importance to public health have become increasingly recognized, as viruses that have caused severe outbreaks in humans have been found to circulate within bats, including paramyxoviruses, coronaviruses, and filoviruses (14–17) (
Figure 1B
). Several aspects of bat ecology and physiology are thought to make them particularly suitable to contract and maintain viruses, namely, their long lifespan, dense colonies, and multispecies roosts (10). Factors such as land use changes, wildlife hunting, and trade have increased human exposures to bats and their associated viruses (18, 19). As such, there is an urgent need to understand and mitigate the zoonotic hazards posed by viruses present in bats.Figure 1Bat species distribution and viral families. (A) Bats are diverse, with families that inhabit disparate regions across the globe. Calogram at the family level [adapated from (11)] at the family level. Colors correspond to families with named species in the text; named species are specified in colored boxes. Species distribution data from IUCN (2023) (12). (B) Bat viruses are similarly diverse. Species viral data from DBatVir (2023) (13). Proportions were calculated as the number of viruses (as per NCBI taxonomy) in each viral family per total number of viruses recorded for named species in the family.It is unclear how bat antibody responses impact viral replication, clearance, and persistence. This knowledge will help clarify infection dynamics at a population level and may help predict spillover risk. In this review, we summarize current knowledge of bat antibody immunity and its similarities and differences to mouse and human repertoires.2Antibody genes are diverse among bat speciesAntibodies are generated through the rearrangement of germline-encoded variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) immunoglobulin (Ig) gene segments (20) (
Figure 2A
). The antibody heavy chain variable region consists of rearranged V, D, and J gene segments, while the light chain consists of rearranged V and J segments only (23, 24). The variable region can be further divided into CDRs and framework regions (FWRs). The FWRs form, as their name suggests, the structural framework for the CDRs to protrude, like fingers, to interact with the antigen. Both the rearranged heavy and light chains have three flexible CDR loops, which largely determine antigen specificity (25).Figure 2Immunoglobulin loci organization and gene abundance. (A) The variable region of antibodies is comprised of somatically rearranged V, D, and J (heavy chain) or V and J (light chain) genes. During somatic rearrangement, diversity is further introduced in the junctions between rearranged genes through the addition of non-templated P and N nucleotides (light green). The complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) are shown for both heavy and light chains. The heavy chain CDRs for antibody CH67 (PDB 4HKB) are highlighted in blue. (B) Functional V gene abundances are variable between species (*gene conversion). (C) Ig gene organization is unique for Egyptian rousette bats (ERBs) where D and J genes are interspersed rather than sequential (21), as seen in human and mouse Ig loci (22).Combinatorial diversity is introduced during B-cell development when V, D, and J segments in the heavy chain and the V and J segments in the light chain are rearranged to generate a pre-immune, or naïve, repertoire. Unlike CDR1 and CDR2, which are encoded by the V gene, CDR3 spans V, (D), and J genes. As such, gene rearrangement further diversifies the CDR3 through the addition of non-templated n nucleotides between gene segments. CDR3 is therefore the longest and the most variable of the CDRs, contributing significantly toward naïve repertoire diversity. The resulting naïve antibody is displayed on the surface of B cells as part of the B-cell receptor (BCR) complex. The genetic architecture of the Ig loci (i.e., location of gene segments, abundance of V genes, and sequence conservation between V gene segments) shapes the initial diversity of the naïve antibody repertoire. Although the antibody variable regions are further diversified through somatic mutation during B-cell maturation, baseline antigen specificity is defined by the germline Ig gene segments.2.1Number and sequence variability in bat immunoglobulin gene segmentsThe copy number of V, D, and J genes varies greatly between species (
Figure 2B
). The abundance of heavy chain V genes (VH) genes can range anywhere from >100 VH (mice) and 44 VH (humans) to four VH (goats) (26, 27). Like mice, rabbits also have over 100 functional VH genes but preferentially rearrange one gene to generate the majority of their antibody repertoire (28). In contrast, chickens rearrange a single functional VH and numerous VH pseudogenes to generate their naïve repertoire, a process known as somatic gene conversion (29). After a B cell recognizes an antigen through the BCR, rounds of somatic hypermutation (SHM) and affinity-based selections further refine the specificity defined by the germline usage and CDR3 compositions (4). This process is called affinity maturation.Antibody genes are diverse between bat species. Early transcriptional and genomic sequencing from the big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus) (30), Seba’s short-tailed bat (Carollia perspicillata) (30), greater short-nosed fruit bat (Cynopterus sphinx) (30), black flying fox (Pteropus alecto) (23), and large flying fox (Pteropus vampyrus) (23) identified putative functional VH genes that are diverse in primary sequences. The little brown bat (Myotis lucifugus) has an estimated 236 unique VH genes from the VH3 family alone, along with at least 13 JH and numerous DH genes, though there is yet no reference genome for this species (31). These Ig sequences were identified using a VH3 family-specific forward primer and porcine recombination signal sequence (RSS) reverse primer to amplify and sequence germline VH3 genes (31). A total of 75 unique sequences were identified, and based on the frequency at which each unique sequence was recovered more than once, a probabilistic model was used to estimate the total number of little brown bat VH3 genes (31). In contrast, the IGDectective algorithm has been leveraged to predict the Ig genes from four reference quality bat genomes (32), none of which seem to share the same expansion of VH genes as the little brown bat (33). This algorithm identified 10 VH from the velvety free-tailed bat, nine VH from Kaul’s pipistrelle, 32 VH from the pale spear-nosed bat (Phyllostomus discolor), and 63 VH from the greater horseshoe bat (33). It is possible that IGDectective underestimated the number of VH genes from these four bat species, as divergent RSS that do not pass the likelihood threshold of the algorithm are excluded from analysis (33). If bats do have a significant number of divergent RSS motifs, one would expect that a porcine RSS reverse primer would also undersample a significant portion of little brown bat V genes, unless divergent RSS motifs are highly bat species-specific. It is also possible that the probabilistic model used to estimate the number of little brown bat VH genes did not capture the true quantity of V genes, as it relies on a relatively small sampling of 90 sequences (31).The most thoroughly annotated bat Ig locus to date is that of the Egyptian rousette bat (ERB) (Rousettus aegyptiacus), providing the most detailed understanding of any bat Ig architecture (21). ERB has 66 VH genes (55 functional, 10 pseudogenes, and one truncated), eight functional DH genes, and nine JH genes (seven functional and two pseudogenes) (21). Unlike other mammalian immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) loci where V, D, and J genes are organized sequentially, the ERB D and J genes are interspersed (i.e., IGHD-J-D-J) (21) (
Figure 2C
). When compared to the predicted Ig genes from the velvety free-tailed bat (Molossus molossus), Kaul’s pipistrelle (Pipistrellus kuhlii), and greater horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus ferrumequinum) with their sequential D to J organization, this interspersed organization is not shared between all bats (33). It is unclear how this heavy chain organization impacts recombination between V, D, and J segments.The inter-species differences in VH gene sequence and quantity suggest distinct encoded specificities of each species’ naïve antibody repertoire. Together, the abundance and primary sequence diversities of putative functional VH genes between bat species suggest varying degrees of naïve repertoire diversity and specificities.2.2Anti-viral immunoglobulin gene expansion and germline biasingCo-evolution with viruses can shape the diversity and specificity of the naïve repertoire (21, 34). Certain V genes are known to predispose antibodies toward recognizing specific antigens (35, 36). These V genes may have germline-associated features that have a functional effect, such as encoding CDR lengths or amino acids in fixed positions that facilitate binding (37, 38). V genes are under positive selection to maximize binding diversity while retaining specificity (34). This type of selection can present as the genomic expansion of V genes encoding antibodies with predispositions as well as the preferential usage of certain V genes upon infection. The former would be evident in germline V gene abundance, while the latter would require transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the rearranged and expressed antibody repertoire. Precursor biasing can be leveraged to design vaccines that target naïve B-cell precursors from germlines known to elicit broadly neutralizing antibodies (39–41). It is unclear whether the bat Ig germlines have similarly been shaped to respond effectively against the viruses that circulate in them. ERBs, the reservoir for Marburg virus (MARV) (42), have expanded VH genes that are associated with protective responses against viruses in humans. In particular, ERBs have expanded VH genes associated with protection against Ebola virus (EBOV) (VH1–8, four copies; VH3–23, five copies; VH3–48, five copies) and MARV (VH4–59, eight copies; one copy each of VH4–61, VH4–39, and VH3–7) based on sequence similarity to human V genes (21). Although these expanded V genes suggest that ERBs could elicit a comparable protective response against MARV and EBOV, biochemical and biophysical characterization of isolated monoclonal antibodies is necessary to demonstrate that this is possible.3Affinity maturation and somatic hypermutationAntigen specificity is largely defined by three CDRs on the heavy and light chains, which form the antigen combining site (34, 43, 44) (
Figure 2A
). CDR1 and CDR2 are germline encoded by the VL and VH elements of the light and heavy chains, respectively. CDR3 of the light chain is encoded primarily by the V segment, with additional diversity introduced at the V and J junctions during recombination. CDR3 of the heavy chain spans the end of the V gene to the beginning of the J gene, with substantial junctional diversity introduced somatically through V–DJ joining (34). The heavy chain CDR3 can therefore be variable in length and sequence identity. It is the key determinant for specificity in antigen recognition (44). While the germline V(D)J segments form the initial binding specificity of the naïve repertoire, subsequent rounds of SHM introduce mutations that improve affinity and refine specificity (45). Mutations introduced typically occur in the CDRs to directly influence binding, whereas mutations within framework regions can impact antibody folding and CDR conformation (46, 47).3.1Bat antibody CDR3 featuresThe CDR3 lengths of several bat species have been characterized based on Ig transcript sequences. Black flying fox CDR3 regions ranged from six to 18 amino acids (aa) in length, comparable to IgG transcript CDR3 lengths isolated from the little brown bat (4–12 aa), big brown bat (4–13 aa), Seba’s short-tailed bat (8–12 aa), and greater short-nosed fruit bat (4–12 aa) (23, 30).The sequence compositions of CDR3 in mice and human repertoires are typically enriched for tyrosine, glycine, and serine (48). In the black flying fox, the CDR3 is de-enriched for tyrosine residues in germline DH and JH segments and in Ig transcripts (23). The cDNA transcripts of the Jamaican fruit bat (Artibeus jamaicensis) infected with Tacaribe virus (TCRV) demonstrate a large distribution of tyrosines within the CDR3, ranging from two tyrosine residues to six (49). Enrichment of tyrosine residues specifically for the Jamaican fruit bat could be indicative of affinity-matured antibodies against TCRV. Some arenaviruses, including TCRV, bind an exposed tyrosine residue on receptor TfR1 to mediate viral entry (50). There are human neutralizing antibodies against arenaviruses that bind the viral receptor binding pocket with tyrosines on their CDRs (50). It is possible that the enrichment of tyrosines in Jamaican fruit bats predisposes the repertoire to neutralize through the same pathway, though this is unlikely, as experimental infection with TCRV is typically fatal to Jamaican fruit bats, and only a few surviving bats had detectable neutralizing antibody titers (51). Without a reference genome, it is not possible to determine whether CDR3 tyrosine residues were germline encoded for this bat species, which could indicate germline biasing toward the generation of neutralizing antibodies.3.2Diversification through somatic hypermutationSHM, mainly in the CDR regions, enhances diversity (52); indeed, SHM within the CDR3 can be sufficient to diversify the antibody repertoire of germline-restricted mice with only one functional VH to recognize a multitude of unique antigens (44). The degree to which affinity maturation diversifies the bat antibody repertoire is not well characterized. One hypothesis is that the “accordion-like” expansion of VH3 genes in the little brown bat provides sufficient combinatorial diversity through recombination alone and that SHM, which was estimated to be low (31), is not essential in the little brown bat (31). It is also possible that the probabilistic model used overestimated the number of germline V genes. For bat species where germline V gene information is available, none share this “accordion” expansion of VH3 genes as inferred for the little brown bat. Indeed, transcriptomic studies of the Jamaican fruit bat found that activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), the protein involved in class switching and affinity maturation, was not induced after infection with TCRV (49, 53). Even without the apparent induction of AID, Jamaican fruit bats generated multiple class-switched antibody isotypes, a process that requires functional AID in other animals (49, 53). It is possible that the apparent lack of AID induction is due to the difficulty of evaluating enzyme transcripts in RNA-seq data with differential expression analysis. Although experimental infection of Jamaican fruit bats with TCRV proved mostly fatal, a minority of bats survived, with or without detectable neutralizing antibody titers (51). If AID was not induced in Jamaican fruit bats after infection, then it is unclear how bats were able to mount neutralizing antibodies, unless those neutralizing antibodies were germline encoded. In the black flying fox, nucleotide substitutions are present in germline and Ig transcript sequences indicative of SHM (23). However, without more comprehensive analysis of the transcribed repertoire and annotated bat Ig loci, it is difficult to accurately describe the degree of SHM that occurs during bat Ig maturation and whether reliance on SHM is species dependent.4Kappa and lambda light chain usageThe antibody variable light chain (VL) also contributes to antigen recognition by direct binding with light chain CDRs and/or by influencing the conformation of the heavy chain (54, 55). The light chain is encoded either by the kappa or lambda loci (56). The ratio of kappa to lambda antibodies varies between species ranging from 95:5 in mice, 60:40 in humans, to 7:93 in horses (26, 57). Birds have evolved to express only lambda light chains (58, 59).There is evidence that bats generate antibodies with lambda light chains. For example, a mouse monoclonal antibody specific to big brown bat lambda light chain Igs cross-reacts with Yangochiroptera [e.g., little brown bat, hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus), silver-haired bat (Lasionycteris noctivagans), and eastern red bat (Lasiurus borealis)] Igs but not with Yinpterochiroptera [e.g., grey-headed flying fox (Pteropus poliocephalus), large flying fox, and Indian flying fox (Pteropus giganteus)] Igs (60), suggesting that the lambda light chain sequence is conserved within Yangochiroptera, but Yinpterochiroptera have sequence-divergent light chains. No kappa light chains were detected in big brown bat serum using Protein L magnetic beads that bind kappa light chains from many, but not all, mammalian species (60). It is possible that the big brown bat expresses kappa light chains and that none were detected in this experiment due to the limited breadth of the Protein L beads. Both kappa and lambda light chain transcripts were identified in the black flying fox (Yinpterochiroptera) (61). Lambda transcripts were more abundant than kappa transcripts, which could indicate preferential lambda usage in Yinpterochiroptera. Several outstanding questions remain, including whether Yangochiroptera generates kappa light chain antibodies, the kappa:lambda usage ratio among bat species, and whether bats rearrange one light chain before the next similar to humans (62).5Antibody isotypes and subclassesThe Fc of an antibody bridges the adaptive and innate immune systems. The Fc domain engages receptors (FcR) on innate immune cells and exerts their effector functions (63). Humans have five antibody isotypes (IgG, IgM, IgD, IgA, and IgE), some of which are further differentiated into subclasses (e.g., IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4). Each antibody isotype and when applicable, subclass are recognized by multiple host FcRs, each associated with its unique set of effector functions (64). The genes that encode the Fc are located in a cluster downstream of the J segments in the heavy chain locus (34). After rearrangement, B cells undergo class switching primarily before entering the germinal center reaction where affinity maturation of the variable regions takes place (65). The resultant antibody gains Fc-specific effector functions and retains antigen binding specificity.Antibody isotypes are structurally distinct. For example, human IgM forms pentameric complexes that can avidly bind multiple antigens at once and activate complement-mediated clearance of infection (3). Due to their varied functions, each isotype is differentially expressed in each part of the body, and their expression levels are tightly regulated.5.1Immunoglobulin isotypes and expression profilesOur understanding of bat antibody isotypes ranges from genomic sequences to transcriptomic data and characterizations of serum antibodies. IgG, IgA, IgE, and IgM isotypes have been identified both in the bat genome and transcriptionally (21, 30, 61). So far, IgD transcripts have only been identified in little brown bats and big brown bats, further illustrating divergent Ig repertoires among species and suborders (21, 30, 49, 61). Black flying fox IgG and IgM are abundant in the lymph node and spleen, consistent with expression patterns in ERBs (21). IgA is highly transcribed in the lungs of both black flying foxes and ERBs. Black flying fox brain, heart, and kidney tissues showed low expression of all three Ig isotypes, whereas ERBs have moderate expression of these isotypes in the same tissues (21, 66). Circulating antibodies in black flying foxes are predominantly IgG and IgM, with low levels of IgA detected (66).In humans, IgG is the most abundant immunoglobulin isotype in serum and plays a direct role in controlling viral infections (67). IgG is similarly abundant in bat serum (68). There is evidence that bats transfer maternal IgG through both the placenta and mammary gland. IgG isolated from three species [long-fingered bat (Myotis capaccinii), greater mouse-eared bat (Myotis myotis), and common noctule (Nyctalus noctule)] were able to bind human and mouse neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), the receptor responsible for transfer of maternal IgG across the placenta (69). Unlike other mammals, bat IgG was dominant over IgA in maternal lacteal secretion, suggesting an additional pathway to transfer maternal antibodies (66). Pups born to vaccinated or naturally infected, seropositive dams inherit maternal virus-specific antibodies (70). Maternal IgG is detectable for up to 3–5 months in ERB pups (71, 72) and up to 7.5 and 8.5 months in small flying foxes (Pteropus hypomelanus) and black flying foxes, respectively (70). Transfer of maternal antibody transfer has implications for population immunity and viral maintenance as bats typically have synchronized breeding and birthing cycles marked by the influx of colony size and routes of transmission followed by new pups that will lose their maternal antibodies within a year from birth (73).The annotated ERB heavy chain locus is the highest resolution of the Fc segments of an important viral reservoir species. ERB IgA and IgM are predicted to share similar functions as their human counterparts. However, gene ontology analysis of ERB IgG and IgE predicts divergent functions compared to their human homologs (21).5.2Immunoglobulin subtypes are species specificERBs have an expanded set of epsilon genes, with two functional and three pseudogenes, making this species the only known mammal with two functional IgE subtypes (21). In humans, IgE binds to FcεRI expressed on the surface of mast cells and basophils. Though both IgE subtypes are expressed in circulation and secondary lymphoid organs in ERBs, only IgE2 is detectable in the lungs and bone marrow (21). Unlike human IgE, ERB IgE1 has an internal deletion compared to human IgE1 that shortens its cytosolic tail, potentially impacting downstream signaling (21). Tissue expression and structural differences between the two IgE subclasses in ERBs likely indicate divergent functions, though those functions are not yet known.Several bat species seem to express multiple IgG and IgM subtypes. The ERB locus contains four gamma subtypes that have varying tissue expression profiles and differ primarily in the hinge and CH2 domains (21, 67). Black flying foxes also appear to have multiple subtypes of IgG and IgM (66), consistent with transcripts of multiple IgG subtypes identified in the little brown bat (five subtypes), greater short-nosed fruit bat (three subtypes), and big brown bat (two subtypes) (30). There are currently no functional data for the bat IgG subtypes or whether these subtypes share structural similarity with human IgG subtypes.Several outstanding questions remain for bat Ig isotypes. The handful of species whose Fc compositions have been characterized show divergence between species. Although we now have more in-depth knowledge of ERB Fc sequences and tissue expression profiles (21), their unique Fc makeup is likely not widely applicable across all bat species. Speculation on function based on sequence alone requires further validation. It remains to be seen what the varying quantities of expressed Ig isotypes are among species, the affinity of each Ig isotype for their Fc receptors, the tissue expression profiles for each isotype paired with the detection of antibody in that tissue (to delineate tissue-specific expression and recruitment of antibodies to a tissue type from elsewhere), and, most importantly, detailed understanding of bat Fc effector functions. There is no reported functional characterization of bat isotypes, especially in the context of innate immune cells and complement activation, or the relative abundance of each isotype produced after infection or vaccination.6Biochemical and structural characteristicsOur understanding of bat antibodies is based almost entirely on sequencing and bulk serum analysis of antibody responses after infection. There is limited understanding of the biophysical characteristics of bat monoclonal antibodies, which appear to have unique structural properties. An N-linked glycosylation site at position 297 is conserved across ERB and human IgGs and is important for FcγR binding. Interestingly, ERB IgG1 contains a unique N-linked glycosylation motif at the hinge region, in addition to N297, that is not present in other ERB or human IgGs. Glycans can shield or cover important functional domains, restrict otherwise flexible protein domains, and affect protein folding. IgG1 is the most expressed antibody isotype and subtype in ERBs, and it is unknown how the N-linked glycan at the IgG1 hinge region may impact antibody folding, receptor binding, and effector function. Unlike IgG1, ERB IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4 all lack the canonical CxxC motif that enables inter-chain disulfide bonding in human IgGs (21). Without inter-chain disulfide bonding, it is possible that ERB IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4 can undergo Fab-arm exchange to become bispecific antibodies, a process observed for human IgG4 (74). For humans, Fab-arm exchange reduces immune activation as bispecific IgG4 cannot crosslink antigen (74). In contrast, the greater short-nosed fruit bat and the little brown bat IgG subtypes contain the canonical CxxC motif as identified through Ig transcript sequencing (30). Without structural and biochemical characterization of bat antibodies, one can only speculate on how the loss of CxxC impacts Ig folding, assembly, and the types of antibodies secreted.ERB IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4 also have an amino acid substitution (Leu234Pro) in the lower hinge region that removes an important contact in human IgGs for Fc receptor FcγR (21). This substitution may impact affinity for FγR and subsequently impact effector functions downstream of binding [i.e., antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, immune complex clearance, and phagocytosis of pathogens] (21). These sequencing differences could be indicative of biochemical and structural characteristics of bat antibodies that could further our understanding of anti-viral function and duration of responses.Cysteine-rich V genes from velvety free-tailed bats, pale spear-nosed bats, and greater horseshoe bats can be found on the IMGT database (33). These V genes contain more than the two conserved cysteines that form a disulfide bond between frameworks 1 and 3 (33). They have additional cysteines in both their CDR1 and CDR2 loops (33). The ERB IGH locus similarly contains VH family cysteines in both CDR1 and CDR2 loops (VH4–30 and VH4–39) (21). It is likely that the cysteines in CDR1 and CDR2 form an intrachain disulfide bond that would impact antibody conformation, hypervariable loop rigidity, and antigen specificity.There is much to be learned from the biochemical and structural characterization of individual bat antibodies. These types of studies can uncover bat antibody binding affinities, viral epitope targeting, divergent antibody structural features, and more definitely quantify the neutralization profiles of viral-specific antibodies. Recombinant bat antibodies would also enable a more detailed analysis of Fc-mediated effector functions.7Antibody responses after infectionSeveral parameters determine the effectiveness of an antibody response. The first parameter is the magnitude and durability of the virus-specific primary and secondary responses (i.e., antibody titers) (75). The primary response occurs during the first viral encounter, where naïve B cells affinity-mature to improve specificity and affinity. Affinity-matured B cells can differentiate into plasma cells that circulate and secrete high-affinity antibodies or develop into memory B cells. The secondary response occurs upon re-exposure to the same or very similar virus. Unlike the primary response where high-affinity B cells are generated de novo, the secondary response is marked by rapid and robust antibody production as class-switched memory B cells already exist (76).The abundance of neutralizing antibodies within the elicited antibody pool also influences viral clearance and transmission. Neutralizing antibodies directly prevent viruses from infecting host cells, by either blocking receptor engagement or viral fusion. The longevity of the memory compartment varies between species and against viruses, which determines the length of protection offered after primary exposure. For example, the yellow fever vaccine provides lifelong immunity with measurable IgG titers 40 years after a single vaccination, whereas annual influenza vaccinations are needed to maintain partial immunity (77). These temporal dynamics are shaped by both the durability of the antibody response and the mutability of the viral pathogen. Viruses that mutate frequently (e.g., influenza virus) can readily evade humoral memory responses.7.1Temporal dynamics of bat antibody responsesBats generate antigen-specific antibodies upon immunization and natural or experimental infection. One of the first studies to demonstrate this was through experimental immunization of big brown bats with bacteriophage øX174 (78). Virus-specific bat antibodies have since been identified for EBOV (16), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) (79), MERS-CoV (80), Dengue virus (81), Nipah virus (NiV) (82, 83), Hendra virus (HeV) (83, 84), and MARV (71, 72, 85–88). Virus-specific antibodies are typically detectable between 10 and 28 days post-inoculation (dpi) (72, 82, 83, 85), with peak IgG levels measured at 14 dpi (71, 72). However, some studies report no seroconversion upon experimental infection with HeV (83), EBOV (89), and MERS-CoV (80). In humans, after primary infection, there is typically a lag where antigen-specific responses shift from IgM to IgG, accounting for B-cell class switching and generation of high-affinity secreted antibodies. This also appears to be the case for bats. For example, bats infected with JEV show a delayed shift from IgM to IgG response approximately 20 dpi (79).The durability of the primary antibody response varies widely between bat species, infecting agents, and immune history. When inoculated with MARV, ERB antibody titers begin to wane as early as 30 dpi, falling below detection 3–4 months post-infection (71, 72, 85, 86). MARV-positive, wild-caught ERBs had detectable antibody titers up to 11 months post-capture, though their exposure history is unknown (72). This durability could be due to multiple re-exposures to MARV prior to capture, as re-exposure is known to maintain the memory B-cell compartment (90). Wild-caught common vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus), vaccinated and then challenged with rabies virus, similarly elicit neutralizing antibodies with variable timelines for decline, from as early as 43 days to 117 days (91). Virus-specific antibody responses in bats are reported to rapidly decline after infection with NiV (83), HeV (83), and JEV (92).The magnitude of antibody responses in bats is generally lower compared to that of other mammals. Bats immunized with bacteriophage øX174 elicited a less robust response with lower anti-phage activity compared to guinea pigs and rabbits in the same study, despite receiving the same stimuli (78). An early study of bats immunized with sheep erythrocytes also found that bats generate fewer primary neutralizing antibody-secreting cells compared to mice (93). Specific pathogen-free Jamaican fruit bats had low IgG titers after SARS-CoV-2 infection with low levels of IL-21, which is expressed by T follicular helper cells that aid B cells undergoing affinity maturation (94). Jamaican fruit bats also generated low antibody titers against MERS-CoV (80), H18N11 influenza virus (95), and TCRV (51). These are surprising observations given the abundance of B cells in bat spleens and in circulation. Recent studies report that B cells make up roughly 30% of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and 35% of spleen cells from black flying foxes (96), comparable to mice B-cell abundance, and that 90% of B cells are IgG+ (97). There also appears to be an age-dependent fluctuation of B-cell quantity, where juvenile ERBs had approximately fourfold higher numbers of circulating B cells compared to their adult counterparts (98).7.2Efficacy of bat humoral immunityA major outstanding question is whether antibody responses in bats are protective against viral infections, as measured by viral clearance and degree of viral transmission. Infected bats can shed their viruses through their bodily fluids (i.e., saliva, blood, and urine). Viral load in these samples is a proxy for transmission potential. For grey-headed flying foxes inoculated with NiV (82) or HeV (84), the presence of virus-specific antibodies coincided with viral clearance. This is consistent with black flying foxes inoculated with HeV, where the virus was cleared from blood and urine samples in bats with measurable antibody titers (83). A single grey-headed flying fox inoculated with NiV had detectable virus in urine samples despite the presence of neutralizing antibodies in circulation (82). Wild-caught great fruit-eating bats (Artibeus intermedius) experimentally infected with rabies virus rapidly mounted a neutralizing antibody response and were protected from disease (99), though the immune history of these bats is unknown.There is extensive literature focusing on ERB antibody responses upon experimental infection with MARV. MARV-naïve ERBs seroconverted within 14 dpi and did not transmit MARV to co-housed naïve bats (71). Another study reports naïve ERBs seroconverted with peak MARV-specific antibodies between 14 and 28 dpi. All bats in this study became viremic between 5 and 12 dpi, with oral and rectal shedding detectable up until 14 dpi and 8 dpi, respectively (85). This is consistent with the report of Amman et al. that MARV is cleared from the blood by 10 dpi and that oral shedding peaks at 9 dpi and lasts up to 14 dpi (88). In these bats, MARV antibody titers are detectable by 9 dpi (88). In all three studies, MARV-specific antibody titers coincide with a decline in viral load (71, 85, 88). Naïve ERBs co-housed with infected ERBs did not develop detectable viremia and did not seroconvert (71). This suggests that the infected ERBs did not transmit their virus to their naïve housemates.Typically, the abundance of neutralizing antibodies is a proxy for protection. Though virus-specific antibodies correlate with viral clearance in experimentally infected bats, the protective role neutralizing antibodies play in bats is still unclear. Serological surveillance of wild-caught bats from around the world has identified neutralizing antibodies against paramyxoviruses (e.g., NiV) (100), lyssaviruses (e.g., Lagos bat virus) (101), and flaviviruses (e.g., dengue virus) (81, 102). Bats experimentally infected with JEV generated 100-fold lower neutralizing titers compared to guinea pig counterparts (79). Low neutralizing titers were similarly observed for experimental infection with NiV (83), HeV (83), and MARV (72). Experimental prime and prime-boost regimes with EBOV or Sosuga virus did not elicit detectable neutralizing antibodies from ERBs (87). This is surprising due to the expanded VH genes associated with protective responses against viruses that have been identified in ERBs (21). Despite low neutralizing titers, bats appear to retain short- and long-term humoral immunity upon re-infection with homologous virus (discussed in the next section) (72, 85, 86).Experimental immunization and vaccination studies are direct measurements of protective humoral immunity. Experimental vaccination of wild-caught common vampire bats with replicating vaccinia virus expressing rabies glycoprotein elicits a short-term protective antibody response (103). Rabies virus is one of few viruses pathogenic and potentially lethal to bats. After vaccination, bats are protected between 18 and 90 days post-vaccination, with maximal protection 30 days after vaccination (80% survival) (103). Anti-rabies antibody titers drop by 120 days after vaccination, and bats are no longer protected upon challenge (103). The highest rate of seroconversion was observed 30 days after vaccination, where half of the vaccinated bats had anti-rabies antibodies (103). Interestingly, bats do not seroconvert by 18 days after vaccination but are still protected upon challenge with 60% survival (103). Seronegative bats vaccinated 30 or 90 days prior to the challenge are similarly protected in the absence of anti-rabies antibodies (103). It is worth noting that the bats used in this study were wild-caught, albeit from a region without documented cases of sylvatic rabies. Note that their immune histories are not known, as this could impact antibody responses.A separate study similarly showed that wild-caught common vampire bats vaccinated with replicating vaccinia virus expressing rabies glycoprotein are protected from lethal challenge, even without detectable anti-rabies antibodies (104). In this study, all bats were challenged 31 days after vaccination. Of the 31 surviving vaccinated bats, nine did not have detectable anti-rabies antibodies at the time of lethal challenge (104). Sera collected from representative bats 90 days after the challenge contained high titers of anti-rabies antibodies (104). Wild-caught big brown bats vaccinated with raccoonpox (RCN) virus expressing either rabies glycoprotein or mosaic rabies glycoprotein did not consistently mount anti-rabies neutralizing antibodies, though both vaccinated groups showed improved survival against rabies challenge (91).7.3Memory compartmentMemory recall forms the basis of long-term humoral immunity (90). Upon re-exposure to a homologous or similar virus, high-affinity memory B cells are quickly reactivated and clonally expand. Bats immunized with bacteriophage øX174 generate neutralizing antibody titers that rapidly rise after the first and second boosts (78). The majority of neutralizing antibodies were initially 2-ME-sensitive IgM but transitioned to predominantly 2-ME-insensitive IgG by 28 dpi (78). As expected for animals with a memory compartment, the secondary antibody response inactivated phage more rapidly than those in the primary response (78).ERBs have protective short- and long-term immunological memory to MARV. ERBs re-challenged with MARV generate a rapid secondary response as early as 5–10 dpi (71, 72). Rapid elicitation of virus-specific antibodies indicates a memory B-cell compartment. Seropositive ERBs challenged with MARV did not have viremia after 7 dpi, in contrast to their unprimed naïve counterparts (71). This suggests that immunological memory can offer short-term protection in ERBs against MARV re-challenge.The majority of seropositive ERBs re-infected with a heterologous isolate of MARV became viremic despite a rapid secondary humoral response (72). ERB immunological memory to MARV may be relatively limited in breadth. Despite this, immunological memory seemed partially protective against heterologous challenge as evidenced by limited MARV replication in the spleen and liver of re-infected bats without systemic infection as seen in their naive counterparts (72).The durability of the bat memory compartment is not fully characterized, with data exclusively for ERBs. Seronegative ERBs that had been previously infected with MARV 2 years prior mount robust MARV-specific antibodies as early as 7 days post-challenge with homologous virus (86). This robust secondary response was protective with no viral replication or shedding detectable (86), indicating that ERBs retain long-term immunological memory after primary infection.Immunological memory has implications for transmission and viral maintenance in ERBs. In all three re-challenge studies, MARV was not detectable in any tissues that could contribute toward transmission (i.e., salivary glands, intestines, reproductive tract, and bladder) (71, 72), suggesting that MARV may require encounters with naïve bats or evolve to escape immunological memory for maintenance within the bat population.A pitfall in these historical studies using wild-caught bats is that the immune history of these bats is unknown. Wild-caught bats without detectable antibody and virus titers at the time of capture are considered “naïve” in these studies, even though they could have been infected multiple times and their antibody titers have since waned. This complicates whether these bats are generating de novo antibody responses or memory recall upon a secondary exposure. It is likely that antibody responses of a truly naïve bat would be different from one that has sero-reverted, as the length of time between exposures as well as the number of exposures will impact the magnitude of the secondary response. The benefit of established bat colonies can remove some of these complicating factors, as the bats would have known immune histories. However, these colonies often pose financial and technical challenges, especially for insectivorous bats.7.4Immune control in bat populationsThe durability and protectiveness of bat antibody responses form the basis for hypotheses around population immune control of viruses in bats. Three hypotheses dominate current research on population-level bat infection: that pulses of infection within populations are driven by 1) transmission of short-lived infections that provide long-lasting immunity [susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) dynamics], 2) transmission of short-lived infections with fluctuating host immunity [susceptible-infected-recovered-susceptible (SIRS) dynamics], and 3) acute infection without clearance of virus, with subsequent transmission of reactivated viral infection [susceptible-infectious-latent-infectious (SILI) dynamics] (105). Within-host immune dynamics are a common driver among the three scenarios, but with distinct mechanisms to drive susceptibility and clearance of infection. Understanding the antibody response and its effects on current and future infections is a key challenge in deciphering these mechanisms. A better understanding of antibody responses will be key for interpretation and parameterization from prevalence and seroprevalence data.8Conclusions and future directionsAntibodies can engage viruses and their surface-exposed glycoproteins to directly neutralize or contribute to the clearance of infected cells through Fc-mediated functions. It is still unclear how such humoral immunity impacts viral pathogenesis, transmission, maintenance, and evolution in bat populations. While only a few bat species have been studied in-depth, their antibody genes and antibody responses vary greatly between species. This variation has directly contributed to observed differences in viral pathogenesis and transmission. Furthermore, studies involving wild-caught bats are complicated by unknown exposure histories. Establishing bat colonies would therefore enable controlled infection and vaccination studies to help deconvolute these complexities. Current studies on bat antibodies have largely been limited to sequence and transcriptomic data or serum analyses. Additional biochemical and biophysical characterization of the bat antibody repertoire including isolating monoclonal antibodies is needed. Such functional analyses would help uncover numerous features of bat humoral immunity, including epitope immunodominance, neautralization profiles, effector functions, and structural properties. This knowledge will greatly advance our understanding of host-pathogen interactions in an important viral reservoir and lay the groundwork for furthering our understanding of the bat immune system.Author contributionsAAR: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. DM: Writing – review & editing. TJL: Writing – review & editing. KMF: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. TS: Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. AGS: Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft.


Title: Intramuscular Exposure of 

1. IntroductionThe filoviruses Ebola virus (EBOV) and Sudan virus (SUDV) are enveloped, negative-sense, single-stranded, RNA viruses that can cause disease with high case fatality rates [1], and there are currently no licensed countermeasures available for use against them. Since being discovered in 1976, EBOV and SUDV have caused intermittent outbreaks, primarily in the Democratic republic of Congo (EBOV) or in Uganda and South Sudan (SUDV) [2]. In 2014, EBOV caused the largest recorded filovirus outbreak in western Africa [3].In many of the initial outbreaks, contaminated needles were implicated in transmission [4]. Now, direct contact with infected individuals and their bodily fluids is thought to be the primary transmission route [5]. However, in large outbreaks with sustained person-to-person transmission, it is often difficult to determine when or how an individual became infected, and it is almost impossible to determine what quantity of infectious virus a person was exposed to [6]. Furthermore, when patients are not acutely ill, viral loads can be low. These low loads are thought to be unimportant epidemiologically [5,7], but further study is needed to fully understand the implications of low dose exposures. Moreover, a better understanding of the outcomes of exposure to a low dose is needed, given the evidence that filoviruses can persist within previously infected individuals for months [8]. It remains unclear how persistent infection occurs, or whether persistently infected individuals pose a threat of infection to others [8,9].During animal exposure studies, the effect of using virus that has been passaged in cell culture may be more pronounced when lower exposure doses are used. For example, EBOV and SUDV can generate multiple products from the glycoprotein (GP) gene via RNA editing. At the GP RNA editing site, the wild type virus genome contains seven uridines (7U) and without editing, messenger RNA transcripts contain seven adenosines and produce soluble GP, a truncated form of full length GP. When editing occurs, an eighth adenosine is incorporated into the transcript and full length GP is produced [10]. Cell culture passaging of EBOV and SUDV can cause the genomic sequence at this editing site to expand to eight uridines (8U) [11,12,13]. Different forms of GP are thought to play a role in pathogenicity, but the various functions and their importance are not fully understood. Crucially, the influence of changes at this locus in vivo remain unclear. The editing site genotype does not appear to affect survival. There does not appear to be a difference in survival when animals are exposed to a virus stock with a predominantly 7U genotype (7U virus stock) versus a virus stock with a predominantly 8U genotype (8U virus stock) EBOV or SUDV, but disease course may be impacted [13,14]. Furthermore, another characteristic of cell culture-passaged viruses is altered particle-to-plaque forming unit (PFU) ratio; filovirus particle-to-PFU ratios have been shown to decrease after cell culture passage [15,16]. Previous studies have also shown that using a lower exposure dose can help to uncover differences between different virus stocks [15,16].It is known that filoviruses are highly potent, and that only a small number of infectious particles are needed to cause death [15,17,18,19]. Yet, the majority of published studies use a high exposure dose of 100 or 1000 PFU; very few studies have investigated the consequences of exposure with fewer than 10 PFU. This study was designed to characterize the outcome of exposure to a low dose of EBOV or SUDV, using the Macaca fascicularis model of infection. A low dose exposure model can help to inform studies on pathogenesis, public health countermeasure development, and the optimization of transmission prevention strategies.2. Methods2.1. Ethics StatementAnimal research was conducted under a Texas Biomedical Research Institute Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee-approved protocol (protocol 1381, 20 August 2013) in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act and other federal statutes and regulations relating to animals and experiments involving animals. The facility where this research was conducted is accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International and adheres to principles stated in the 8th Edition of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council [20]. Nonhuman primates (NHPs) were single housed, fed commercially available monkey biscuits (Purina, Gray Summit, MO, USA), and provided with commercial toys and dietary enrichment. During blood collections, nonhuman primates (NHPs) were anesthetized using tiletamine HCl and zolazepam HCl (Zoetis Inc., Parsippany-Troy Hills, NJ, USA), and euthanasia was performed using an intravenous overdose of sodium pentobarbital (Vortech Pharmaceuticals, Dearborn, MI, USA).2.2. Clinical Scoring System and Euthanasia CriteriaNonhuman primates were observed at least twice daily for up to 21 days post-exposure, at which time any survivors were euthanized. Clinical scores were reported to the responsible veterinarian, and euthanasia was approved when scores indicated that an NHP was terminally ill. A brief description of the clinical scoring system (described previously in [16]) is as follows. Animals received one point each for reductions in feed or fluid intake, dehydration, no stool production, rough hair coat, nasal discharge, or bleeding at the blood collection site. Animals received two points each for reduced stool production, not drinking, or bleeding from somewhere other than a blood collection site. Rectal temperature and petechia were scored on a scale of one to three, and body weight reductions were scored as one or two, depending on severity. Responsiveness was also scored on a scale: slightly diminished general activity (one point), reduced response to external stimuli (two points), moderate to dramatically reduced response to external stimuli (eight points), or severely unresponsive (fifteen points, immediate euthanasia). Animals received three points for labored breathing or eight points for agonal breathing. Euthanasia criteria were developed to minimize undue pain and distress, and included a combination of severe petechia or bleeding, complete anorexia for 24 hours, a temperature change of greater than five degrees (°F) from baseline, moderate to dramatically reduced response to external stimuli, respiratory distress, thrombocytopenia, or severe elevation of gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), or blood urea nitrogen (BUN).2.3. Cells and VirusBEI-sourced Vero E6 cells (VERO C1008, catalog number NR-596, BEI resources; African green monkey kidney origin) were grown at 37 °C with five percent CO2 in normal growth media that consisted of minimum Essential Media (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) containing 2 mM l-glutamine (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) and 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) with 10% heat-inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS, Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA). Starting virus material consisted of Zaire ebolavirus isolate Ebola virus/H. sapiens-tc/COD/1995/Kikwit-199510621 and Sudan ebolavirus isolate Sudan virus/H. sapiens-tc/SDN/2000/Gulu-200011676, both passage number 2 (P2) on Vero E6 cells, acquired from Dr. T. Ksiazek, University of Texas Medical Branch. The 7U virus material used for NHP exposures was generated by amplifying P2 virus once in Vero E6 cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.001. The 7U EBOV stock was generated in September 2012 (lot number 201209171), and the abundance of genomes with 7U at the editing site locus was approximately 94%. The 7U SUDV stock was generated in June 2012 (lot number 201206211), and the abundance of genomes with 7U at the editing site locus was approximately 75%. The 8U virus used for SUDV exposure was generated (April 2013) by amplifying the aforementioned P3 virus 10 additional times [13]; the abundance of genomes with 8U at the editing site locus was approximately 75%. The 8U EBOV was obtained from U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases and then passaged once in Vero E6 cells at a low MOI (August 2010, lot number 201008111) and has been reported previously [15]; the abundance of genomes with 8U at the editing site locus was approximately 94%. All stocks were stored in liquid nitrogen after generation.2.4. Determination of Viral Particle ConcentrationTransmission electron microscopy, using a JEOL 100CX microscope (JEOL USA, Inc., Peabody, MA 01960, USA), was used to determine the particle concentration of each virus stock, as previously described [13,15]. The calculated number of viral particles per mL was divided by the number of PFU per mL to yield particle-to-PFU ratios. The viral particle concentration for all four virus exposure stocks was determined in August 2013, fewer than six months prior to the animal exposures.2.5. Determination of Viral TitersViral titers were determined by plaque assay using either a methylcellulose and crystal violet assay, or an agarose and neutral red assay (previously described in [21]). The methylcellulose and crystal violet assay was used to determine the titer of the NHP exposure dose for the 8U EBOV dose study (as previously described in [15]), while the agarose and neutral red assay was used for all other viral titrations. As expected, all of the virus exposure doses were below the assay limit of detection, consistent with previous work showing that some particles do not yield plaques in cell culture, but that they can nonetheless cause lethal disease in NHPs [15,16]. When the exposure doses were prepared, calculations were performed using viral titers determined previously (approximately one year prior to the animal exposures for all stocks except the 8U EBOV). However, back titer plaque assays were also performed on the day of animal exposure to verify the viral titer.2.6. Deep Sequencing and Sample PreparationRNA was extracted from serum collected at time of death from all NHPs, and subjected to deep sequencing, as described before [13,22]. Briefly, the serum was diluted in TRIzol LS reagent (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA), and RNA was extracted following the manufacturer’s instructions. Clean up steps were performed (DNA, rRNA, and mRNA were removed) to increase the sequence depth of the viral material. An Illumina TruSeq total RNA sample preparation kit (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) was used to prepare RNA libraries for sequencing, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. An Illumina pipeline was used to generate FASTQ files to begin data analysis. Files containing all sequence reads were mapped to the reference sequence (GenBank accession numbers: AY729654 (SUDV) and AY354458 (EBOV) using Lasergene SeqMan NGen (DNASTAR, Madison, WI, USA). The depth of nucleotide coverage was determined at each position in the genome.2.7. Experimental Inoculation of Macaca fascicularisSixteen male Macaca fascicularis were intramuscularly (IM) injected in the deltoid muscle with a target dose of 0.01 PFU of a 7U virus stock (n = 4) or 8U virus stock (n = 4) of SUDV, or a 7U virus stock (n = 4) or 8U virus stock (n = 4) of EBOV (previously described in [15]). Nonhuman primates (Vietnamese origin), 3 to 4.5 years of age and 2.6 to 4.1 kg in weight, were acquired from Covance, and serum tested to ensure no reactivity to the filovirus antigen prior to purchase. Nonhuman primates were shipped directly to Texas Biomedical Research Institute for a standard quarantine period. This quarantine period allowed for the NHPs’ health status to be evaluated, and for the NHPs to acclimate to their caging and diet. Virus exposure occurred on study day zero. Blood samples were collected on days 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, and 21 post-exposure, for analyses of serology, hematology, clinical chemistry, coagulation parameters, and viral load determination. During each scheduled blood collection, the rectal temperature was taken, and the weight was recorded. When moribund, or at 21 days post-exposure, the NHPs were euthanized and necropsy was performed, and gross pathologic findings were noted.2.8. Hematology, Coagulation, and Blood ChemistryBiochemical analysis was performed using the mammalian liver enzyme profile rotor on a Vet Scan analyzer (Abaxis, Inc., Union City, CA, USA). Complete blood counts were performed using a Vet HM2 machine (Abaxis, Inc.). Coagulation times were determined using the IDEXX Coag Dx Analyzer (IDEXX laboratories, Westbrook, ME, USA). Clinical Pathology at Texas Biomed has determined normal ranges for cynomolgus macaques housed under laboratory conditions at Texas Biomed facilities.2.9. StatisticsThe log-rank Mantel–Cox test was used to analyze the survival curves.3. Results3.1. SurvivalTo determine the outcome of low dose filovirus exposure in NHPs, sixteen M. fascicularis were exposed intramuscularly (IM) with a target dose of 0.01 PFU of either EBOV (n = 8) or SUDV (n = 8). Two different virus stocks were used for both EBOV and SUDV exposures: a 7U virus stock (high particle to PFU ratio, characteristic of wild type virus), or an 8U virus stock (characteristic of cell culture passaged virus, lower particle to PFU ratio). Within each virus exposure group, four animals were exposed to the 7U virus stock, and the other four were exposed to the 8U virus stock (Table 1).The time to death for all animals is summarized in Table 2 and Figure 1. After exposure to 0.01 PFU of SUDV, one out of four NHPs exposed to the 7U virus stock and three out of four NHPs exposed to the 8U virus stock survived. The median time to death was 14.5 days for the 7U group and undefined for the 8U group; there was no significant difference in the time to death between the two groups (p = 0.2511, log-rank Mantel–Cox test). After exposure to 0.01 PFU of EBOV, three out of four NHPs exposed to 7U virus stock and zero out of four NHPs exposed to the 8U virus stock survived. The median time to death was undefined for the 7U group, and 10.5 days for the 8U group; there was no significant difference (p = 0.0510, log-rank Mantel–Cox test).Animals were observed at least twice daily for up to 21 days post-exposure, at which time, any survivors were euthanized. Clinical scores over the course of the study for all animals are displayed in Figure 2. Table 2 shows the final score for each animal at the time of death, and shows the manner of death (e.g., euthanasia versus found dead). For SUDV-exposed animals that were euthanized due to moribundity, at the time of euthanasia, all were scoring for: reduced responsiveness (diminished activity, withdrawn, or prostrate in cage); rough hair coat; combinations of reduced feed, enrichment, and/or fluid intake (often accompanied by dehydration); reduced stool output; two also exhibited petechia and bleeding, and two exhibited temperature changes greater than or equal to 3 °F. For EBOV-exposed animals that were euthanized due to moribundity, at the time of euthanasia all were scoring for: reduced responsiveness (diminished activity, withdrawn, or prostrate in cage); temperature change (greater than or equal to 2 °F change); petechia; combinations of reduced feed, enrichment, and/or fluid intake (often accompanied by dehydration); reduced stool output; three of four also exhibited bleeding, rough hair coat, and labored breathing.3.2. ViremiaOn each scheduled sedation day (days 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14 post-exposure), and when possible at the time of death, blood was collected from all NHPs for determination of viremia (Figure 1). For the SUDV-exposed NHPs, no animals had detectable levels of infectious virus in the serum collected on days 3 or 5 post-exposure. For NHPs that did not survive SUDV exposure (n = 4), three had titers greater than 1 × 107 PFU/mL at the time of death, and animal 956, which survived its exposure to 7U virus stock, had a serum titer of 3.4 × 105 PFU/mL on day 10 post-exposure. All NHPs that survived exposure to the 8U stock of SUDV (n = 3) exhibited no detectable levels of infectious virus throughout the study. For EBOV-exposed NHPs, in the 7U exposure group, only the NHP that did not survive exhibited evidence of viremia. All NHPs exposed to the 8U virus stock of EBOV had high serum titers on or near the day of death [15].Most NHPs that survived exposure (EBOV-exposed animals 807, 809, and 811; SUDV-exposed animals 948, 949, and 950) exhibited no detectable levels of infectious virus throughout the study. Thus, it was possible the low infective dose did not result in infection. Deep sequencing was used in an attempt to determine the likelihood of infection. RNA was extracted from the serum collected at the time of death (or the closest available time point; animal 814 was found dead on day 13 post-exposure, animal 958 was found dead on day 11 post-exposure, and animal 947 expired on day 11 post-exposure before blood could be collected, so that RNA was extracted from the sample from day 10 post-exposure), and subjected to deep sequencing. Sequence reads were mapped to EBOV or SUDV genomes to determine whether there was evidence of viral RNA; the number of total sequence reads and median depth across the genome were calculated.Values for all EBOV-exposed animals were generally high. On average, animals that did not survive exposure to EBOV virus exhibited 1,059,602 sequence reads mapped to the genome (a range of 119,048 to 2,977,753), while animals that did survive exposure to EBOV virus exhibited an average of 19,131 sequence reads mapped to the genome (a range of 6111 to 28,222). Overall, (individual animal data displayed in Table 3), animals that did not survive exposure to SUDV virus exhibited 530,309 sequence reads mapped to the genome, while animals that did survive exposure to SUDV virus exhibited 5193 sequence reads mapped to the genome.3.3. Clinical PathologyRectal temperatures were taken on each scheduled sedation day (days 0, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14 post-exposure) and when possible, at the time of death. For SUDV-exposed animals, the 7U group exhibited higher temperatures than the 8U group. The 7U stock of SUDV-exposed animals exhibited febrility between days 7 and 14 post-exposure, temperatures of 39.7 to 40.2 °C (1.3 to 2 °C increases when compared to day 0 post-exposure). Only one NHP in the 8U SUDV group (the nonsurviving animal) exhibited febrility, a temperature of 39.6 °C (a 1.7 °C increase when compared to day 0) on day 10 post exposure. For EBOV-exposed animals, the 7U group did not exhibit substantial increases and the 8U group exhibited rectal temperatures of 39.4 to 39.9 °C (increases of 1 to 2.6 °C when compared to day 0), shortly before death (as described previously [15]).During scheduled sedations, blood samples were taken for the analysis of blood chemistry, coagulation times, and hematology. For SUDV-exposed NHPs, hematological analysis showed that over the duration of the study, in all animals, the percentage of granulocytes increased, while the percentage of lymphocytes decreased (Figure 3), consistent with SUDV virus exposure in NHPs [13]. Coagulation abnormalities were observed in some animals that were exposed to the 7U SUDV stock (Figure 4); prothrombin times were above the normal range for two of four NHPs, and platelet levels were decreased in four of four NHPs, including the surviving animal. Conversely, within the 8U SUDV exposure group, PT times did not fall outside the normal range, and platelet levels did not exhibit sustained decreases. The difference in PT times between the 7U and 8U exposure groups was most apparent on day 10 post-exposure. Additionally, abnormal blood chemistry values were primarily observed within the 7U SUDV exposure group (Figure 5). Only animals in the 7U group exhibited increased ALT, GGT, and BUN values. The survivor from this group exhibited elevated ALT values (five times greater than baseline on day 10 post-exposure) and BUN values (3.5 times greater than baseline on day 14 post-exposure). All 7U SUDV-exposed NHPs also exhibited decreased ALB values after day 7 post-exposure; within the 8U exposure group, only the NHP that did not survive exhibited decreased ALB. As with PT times, the difference in blood chemistry values between the 7U and 8U exposure groups was most apparent on day 10 post-exposure.For EBOV-exposed animals, the NHPs that did not survive exhibited increased granulocytes and decreased lymphocytes after days 3 to 5 post-exposure (Figure 3). Two out of three survivors exposed to 7U stocks of EBOV also exhibited similar changes after day 5 post-exposure, but the values rebounded to baseline by project end. None of the NHPs exposed to a 7U stock of EBOV exhibited prolonged PT times, and only the NHP that succumbed to exposure exhibited decreased platelets (day 5 post-exposure) (Figure 4). Three out of four NHPs exposed to 8U EBOV exhibited prolonged PT times and decreased platelets at or near the time of death. The difference in PT times between the 7U and 8U exposure groups was most pronounced on day 7 post-exposure. Figure 6 shows blood chemistry values for the 7U and 8U EBOV exposure groups. The NHP that did not survive exposure to the 7U stock of EBOV exhibited increased ALT, GGT, and BUN values, along with decreased ALB at or near the time of death. None of the other NHPs exposed to the 7U stock of EBOV exhibited similar abnormalities. Two out of four 8U EBOV-exposed NHPs exhibited increased ALT and GGT values at or near the time of death. Albumin was also decreased, and BUN increased in two out of four 8U stocks of EBOV-exposed animals.3.4. Anatomical PathologyThere were no clear differences in anatomical pathology between the 7U and 8U exposure groups for both SUDV and EBOV, and findings were similar to what would be expected from exposure with a higher dose. Animals that did not survive exposure exhibited similar macroscopic and microscopic findings, consistent with acute filovirus infection (Table 4). Common gross abnormalities included petechia, splenic or hepatic pallor, firm or dark lymph nodes, and testicular hemorrhage or redness. Common histologic lesions consistent with acute filovirus infection, included: splenic lymphoid depletion with necrosis, hemorrhage, and fibrin, lymph node lymphoid depletion and/or necrosis, and hepatocellular necrosis (Table 4). Survivors did not exhibit macroscopic or microscopic abnormalities.4. DiscussionHerein, we characterized the outcome of exposure to a low dose of SUDV and EBOV, in the M. fascicularis model of infection. M. fascicularis were exposed to 0.01 PFU of either SUDV or EBOV. The virus used for exposure was either predominantly the 7U genotype (characteristics of wild type virus) or predominantly the 8U genotype (characteristics of cell culture adapted virus). We found that exposure to a target dose of 0.01 PFU of the 7U stock of SUDV was lethal in 75% of NHPs, while the 8U stock caused lethality in only 25% of NHPs. Viremia and clinical pathology data indicated that 100% of the NHPs exposed to the 7U stock of SUDV became infected. One animal succumbed to exposure to the 8U stock of SUDV, while the three NHPs that survived exposure showed some evidence of possible infection via deep sequencing, which yielded reads mapped to the SUDV genome. Conversely, exposure to a target dose of 0.01 PFU of the 7U stock of EBOV caused lethality in only 25% of NHPs, while previously published data show that 0.01 PFU of an 8U stock is 100% lethal [15]. Sequencing data (number of reads mapped to EBOV genome) indicated that 100% of the NHPs exposed to the 8U stock became infected, one animal succumbed to exposure to the 7U stock, and the three NHPs that survived exposure to the 7U stock EBOV showed evidence of viral RNA in the serum, suggestive of infection.In previous studies, subtle differences were found between EBOV stock of viruses with predominately 7U and 8U genotypes when tested in animals (e.g., delayed disease course, delayed febrility, delayed serum chemistry changes) [14] but the SUDV pathogenesis appeared to be even less impacted by the editing site genotype [13]. In the present study, while differences in survival were not statistically different for either virus, this could be related to the size of the study, and an impact of genotype on survival cannot be discounted. There were also temporal differences in the disease course. Abnormalities in hematology, coagulation, and blood chemistry were primarily observed within the 7U SUDV and 8U EBOV exposure groups. Over the duration of the study, in all SUDV-exposed animals and all nonsurvivor EBOV-exposed animals, the percentage of granulocytes increased, while percentage of lymphocytes decreased. Coagulation abnormalities (elevated PT times and decreased platelets) were observed for some of the 7U SUDV and 8U EBOV groups. Conversely, within the 8U SUDV and 7U EBOV exposure groups, PT times were not elevated, and only the NHP that succumbed to the 7U stock of EBOV exposure exhibited decreased platelets. Additionally, abnormal blood chemistry values (increased ALT, GGT, or BUN values, and decreased ALB values) were primarily observed within the 7U SUDV and 8U EBOV exposure groups. The NHP that succumbed within the 8U SUDV exposure group exhibited decreased ALB only, and only the NHP that succumbed within 7U EBOV exposure group exhibited increased ALT, GGT, and BUN values, along with decreased ALB near the time of death.It is important to note though, the difference in survival between the 7U SUDV and 8U SUDV groups could also be related to the different particle to PFU ratios of the two SUDV stocks used. Filovirus particle to PFU ratios have been shown to decrease during cell culture adaptation [15,16], so that the 8U-exposed group received fewer particles than the 7U-exposed group. Previously, we have also considered that differences in the particle to PFU ratios may be caused by different morphologies or different degrees of virus aggregation between stocks. However, we found no evidence to support this hypothesis [15]. Thus, while it is clear that passage history of the virus used in exposure studies has an impact, it remains unclear as to whether the differences are related to the editing site genotype or to specific infectivity. Interestingly, the Makona variant of EBOV was shown not to be lethal at a low dose when the NHPs were exposed orally or conjunctivally [19]. However, this could be due to differences in particle counts, differences between the variants [23] (though of note, this Kikwit and Makona comparison study was performed in rhesus macaques), or differences between exposure routes [24].Potential differences between the 7U and 8U SUDV exposure groups are not surprising, as the virus possessing characteristics of the wild type virus was lethal in the majority of exposed animals, while the virus possessing the characteristics of cell culture-adapted virus resulted in a lower lethality. One would expect that the cell culture passaged virus may be attenuated in vivo. However, any differences in the EBOV exposure groups are not necessarily expected, as the virus possessing characteristics of cell culture-adapted virus is the stock that appeared to be more lethal than the virus possessing the characteristics of the wild type virus. This could be related to the methods that were used to generate the stocks; the predominantly 8U genotype SUDV, possessing the characteristics of a cell culture-adapted virus, was generated through serial passage in cell culture, while the predominantly 8U genotype EBOV, possessing the characteristics of a cell culture-adapted virus, was passaged in cell culture but not to the same extent as the SUDV virus. This may also be a product of the low dose system used herein. However, due to the small group numbers, it is difficult to draw conclusions.The time to death after low dose exposures to both SUDV and EBOV was delayed in comparison to that observed by the authors during studies performed at the same time, but using higher exposure doses [13,15]. The median time to death in similarly designed studies using a dose of 100 PFU is 8.5 to 10 days for SUDV [13], compared to 14 days in this study, and 6 to 7 days for EBOV [15,24,25], compared to 10.5 days in this study.However, this timeframe may more closely resemble the time to death observed during human infections [26,27]. In other published studies using lower doses, a delay in time to death has also been observed [18]. Animal models designed to assess public health countermeasure efficacy should recapitulate human disease as closely as possible [28], and using a lower exposure dose may better help mimic human infections, including the time to death. Different doses can also result in different viral replication kinetics and immune responses during infection. Modeling these different scenarios is important for gaining a better understanding of pathogenesis. Thus, it will be important to determine whether the low dose that was demonstrated to be lethal in NHPs is relevant to humans.These data also demonstrate that a low number of particles is sufficient to cause death, and they are consistent with previous work showing that some particles do not yield plaques in cell culture, but they can nonetheless cause lethal disease. Previous studies have used a range of doses, and they have demonstrated a lethal dose as low as approximately 2 PFU [18,28]. Our previous work has shown that for EBOV (predominantly 8U genotype) [15] and MARV [16], a dose of 0.01 PFU is sufficient to cause death, and that fewer than 100 particles is lethal. However, such low dose studies had not been previously performed with SUDV or predominantly 7U genotype EBOV.More information about low dose exposures is needed to better understand transmission and persistence. Virus has been found in a variety of bodily fluids from infected individuals, including blood, semen, saliva, and sweat [29] but it is difficult to determine how much infectious virus is usually present in these fluids [6]. Furthermore, when patients are not acutely ill, such as asymptomatic individuals or mildly ill people at the beginning stages of infection, viral loads can be very low. Moreover, evidence suggests that filoviruses can persist within previously infected individuals for months [8]. The low number of SUDV sequence reads found in serum from animals surviving SUDV exposure may be the result of persistent infection, suggesting that low dose exposure studies could be a way to model persistence. It remains unclear as to how persistent infection occurs, or whether persistently infected individuals pose a threat of infection to others [8,9], but modeling persistence and exposure to persistently infected individuals is crucial. While low viral loads are thought to be unimportant epidemiologically [5,7], with increasing evidence that low doses of virus can be lethal, further study is needed to understand the potential for transmission from these individuals. Future studies should focus on more accurately quantifying the amount of infectious virus in bodily fluids and shed by asymptomatic individuals or persistently infected individuals, to better evaluate the risks posed.Finally, studies to develop and test public health countermeasures may benefit from the use of different exposure doses. The higher doses that are frequently used may be too stringent for suitable medical countermeasure testing. For example, studies with influenza have shown that high exposure doses can have exaggerated effects that increase pathogenicity and that mask the activity of antivirals, and thus, lower doses are often used when testing such countermeasures [30].In summary, we found that a low number of Ebola virus or Sudan virus particles is sufficient to cause death, and modeling the consequences of low dose exposure is important for gaining a better understanding of pathogenesis, the prevention of transmission, and countermeasure developments.


Title: Can Marburg virus be sexually transmitted?

1INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, several outbreaks of an extremely virulent virus with a high case fatality ratio (CFR) [24%–90%] commonly referred to as Marburg virus (MARV) have made headlines exclusively in sub‐Saharan Africa amidst the concurrent coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic.
1
, 
2
 The basic reproduction number of Marburg virus disease [MVD] is low and varies across outbreaks, ranging from 0.5 [95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.05–1.8] to 1.2 [95% CI: 1.0–1.9], so the frequency of large‐scale outbreaks is low, particularly in areas with robust health systems.
3
, 
4
 As summarized in Table 1, MARV outbreaks rarely occur (16 recorded outbreaks since 1967, most of which have occurred in Africa [Kenya, Democratic Republic of Congo [DRC], Angola, Uganda, Guinea, Tanzania, and Equatorial Guinea]) with a relatively small proportion of people affected in general, however, given the high lethality, these outbreaks demand both national and international attention as could pose negative consequences on human health.Table 1Marburg virus disease (MVD) outbreaks, 1967–2023.
1

Year(s) of outbreakLocationNumber of reported casesNumber of reported deaths1967Germany317Yugoslavia (Serbia)1975South Africa311980Kenya211987Kenya111988–1995Russia421998–2000DRC1541282004–2005Angola2522272007Uganda412008US102008Netherland112012Uganda1542014Uganda112017Uganda432021Guinea112022Ghana322023Tanzania962023Equatorial Guinea4035Abbreviations: DRC, Democratic Republic of Congo; US, United States.John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.MARV is an enveloped single‐stranded RNA virus, similar to the Ebola virus (EBOV) (Figure 1), and the first filovirus that was discovered in humans after two simultaneous outbreaks outside of Africa in the 1960s (Table 1).
5
, 
6
 This virus is associated with a severe hemorrhagic fever syndrome (known as MVD) that is clinically diagnosed with a sudden onset of flu‐like symptoms (i.e., fever, severe headache, muscle pain [myalgia], and sore throat) after a varying incubation period of 2–21 days.
7
 Patients with severe infection die from the disease (commonly due to severe hemorrhage and shock) between Days 8 and 9 of symptomatic illness.
8
 In nature, as a result of spillover events, MARV spreads to humans from infected animals (most importantly, bats); however, human‐to‐human transmission also occurs and makes outbreaks more complex to contain.
8
 Understanding the routes through which MARV is interpersonally transmitted is crucial for the innovation of impactful life‐saving interventions in epidemic‐prone regions in future outbreak containment. Here, we will underscore the routes of MARV transmission with a focus on the risk of viral spread to humans via sexual contact followed by infection diagnostics and recommendations for sexually active men and women to minimize the risk of interhuman spread of the disease. This article also discusses several open questions that need to be addressed.Figure 1Virion structure and genome organization of the Marburg virus (MARV). Marburg virus is a nonsegmented, negative, single‐stranded RNA virus and pleomorphic in shape with variable lengths. The virus encodes seven genes namely nucleoprotein (NP), virion protein (VP) 35, VP40, glycoprotein (GP), VP30, VP24, and RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase (L).2HOW CAN MARBURG VIRUS BE TRANSMITED?As the cause of a lethal zoonotic infection, MARV is transmitted to humans primarily from animal reservoirs, most often bats, either directly or via an intermediate host.
5
 Indeed, bats (in particular, fruit bats [Rousettus aegyptiacus]) serve as the main natural reservoir that contributes to the virus spread to other bats (horizontally and vertically) and other mammals including humans (mainly those who visit or work in caves or mines inhabited by infected bat colonies).
5
, 
9
 In addition to bats, MARV is known to infect a relatively significant number of nonhuman vertebrates which may contribute to its maintenance in nature.
5
, 
10

For MVD, interhuman transmission with many possible modes reported is a matter of concern, particularly in regions with poor health care systems; however, the main route is unknown.
4
 There are several factors that could increase the risk of MARV transmission and subsequently virus infection in humans. These factors might include the age, sex, and occupation of patients, having a history of traveling to high‐risk regions, and sharing meals and objects with infected persons.
11
 It is believed that humans are most likely to become infected when they come into direct contact (injured skin [wound and scrape] or ruptured mucous membranes [eyes, nose, or mouth]) with the virus‐laden biofluids (i.e., urine, saliva, breast milk, amniotic fluid, and semen) of an infected individual usually during the care of patients (by family members and health workers) or via close contact with those who have died of the disease through handling of corpses during burial proceeding.
10
, 
12
, 
13
 Given the risk of virus spread through contaminated material (with stability for 4–5 days on surfaces), the disease may appear in humans through indirect contact.
1
, 
14
 Considering the similarities between MARV and EBOV in terms of many anecdotal routes of transmission, that is, infection through biofluids, the question arises as to whether MARV could also be sexually transmissible through genital fluids during sexual intercourse.3IS MARV A SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED VIRUS?For MVD, sexual transmission represents a possible route of virus spread, with the first patient reported to be a woman who probably became infected following sexual contact with a man long after his recovery.
15
, 
16
 Factors affecting the sexual transmission of viruses may include the age of patients, the stage of infection, the status of the immune system, and the role of microbial coinfections.
17
, 
18
, 
19
, 
20
 As reviewed in the recent literature, the male genital tract serves as an anatomical site of infection for at least 30 DNA and RNA viruses including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus‐2 (HSV‐2), human papilloma virus (HPV), and hepatitis B and C viruses (HBV and HCV), that are often released in semen and threaten sexual health.
21
 As there is no evidence of female‐to‐male and female‐to‐female sexual transmission, men are more likely to be the main carriers of MARV, with the testes being a major site of viral localization.
22
, 
23
, 
24
 In addition to testicular tissue, the other possible sources of virus within the male reproductive tract have yet to be identified.How MARV behaves within the human reproductive system remains to be fully understood and data derived from animal models are scarce in this regard. Experiments with nonhuman primates (NHPs) have concluded that the testis is regarded as an “immune‐privileged” site (also called sanctuary site), where the virus can reside for a long period with no detrimental activation of the immune system.
23
 In acutely infected NHPs, MARV was found in the interstitium and endothelial cells of the testis, as well as in smooth muscle cells of the epididymis and prostate stroma.
24
 Although it is still unclear, the hematogenous pathway appears to be the likely route by which MARV enters the male genital tract and establishes infection.
25
 From EBOV studies, it seems that infected tissue macrophages carry the virus from stromal replication sites in reproductive tissues to the seminal fluid.
26
 The involvement of testes may clinically be diagnosed through the signs and symptoms of discomfort, enlargement, and inflammation (referred to as orchitis) weeks after infection.
27
 Females with MVD may exhibit signs of gynecologic hemorrhage.
28
 Like EBOV, it is theoretically possible for MARV to be sexually transmitted from females to males, despite being less probable.
29
 Through the study by Perry et al. who investigated the localization of EBOV in the reproductive tract of macaques that succumbed to the Ebola virus disease (EVD), the authors showed the susceptibility of both male (i.e., the testis, seminal vesicle, epididymis, and prostate gland) and female reproductive tissues (i.e., the ovary and uterus) to the virus infection.
26
 Through in situ hybridization, MARV's RNA has been found in the uterine endometrial stroma of virus‐infected NHPs, which indicates that the female reproductive system might also be a source of viral infection similar to the male reproductive system.
24
 It was further discovered that the ovary and oviduct are the other sites of viral infection with necrotizing lesions through histological investigations.
24

Unlike the liver, lymph nodes, and spleen, which are cleared of viral remnants shortly after an infection, somatic cells (also known as testicular Sertoli cells [TSC]) that form the structure of the blood–testis barrier (BTB) reside in seminiferous tubules, a unique immunological environment that shields the sperm cells from being targeted by the immune system, found to serve as the main cellular reservoir for MARV to persist for an extended period. This may lead to the breakdown of the BTB likely with no adverse effects on overall reproductive function (Figure 2).
23
 In addition to TSC, further studies revealed that interstitial Leydig cells (LC), peritubular myoid cells, blood vessels, germ cells, and infiltrated macrophages/monocytes to the seminiferous tubules could also act as the additional targets for viral infection (Figure 2).
23
 Similar to MARV, EBOV infects both TSC and LC with LC being likely more permissive to virus infection.
30
 In testes where persistent infection has been established, the interstitial tissue contains infiltrated immune cells (i.e., lymphocytes, macrophages, and neutrophils).
23
 The activation of the immune system in persistently infected seminiferous tubules may cause degeneration of tubule walls, breaking tight junctions, and recruitment of immune cells to the site of infection.
23
 Whether MVD‐associated infertility will be observed in humans remains to be demonstrated.Figure 2(A) The structure of the testis [Created with BioRender]. (B) Localization of the blood–testis barrier (BTB) and the cells and tissues of seminiferous tubules where Marburg virus (MARV) persists within the male reproductive system.Less is known about the mechanisms involved in viral infection and maintenance in the testes. In light of the recent studies, once the infection of MARV is established, localized immunosuppression elicited by focally infiltrated lymphocytes (with a specific role for the regulatory T cells [Treg]) in the interstitium and seminiferous tubules of the testes likely contributes to a delay in the clearance of virus from infected testes and results in a sustained infection.
23
 A decrease in the number of these cells is detectable in autoimmune disorders, while their abundance favors the inhibition of immunological responses.
23
 Therefore, targeting testicular immunosuppression worth further studies, especially the research that seeks to understand the persistence mechanism of MARV in the male reproductive system.The viral clearance from seminal fluid takes an extended duration as infectivity has been noted in survivors for weeks after recovery.
15
 For EBOV, the virus has been detected in an individual who remains infected for over 900 days following resolution of acute viral infection raising concerns regarding the potential for long‐term sexual transmission.
17
 Furthermore, it has been observed that male survivors can transmit the infection to their female partners through sexual contact about 470 days after the onset of the disease.
31
 Recently, seminal amyloid fibrils reported to play a possible role in enhancing EBOV infection by protecting the virus against potential environmental stresses and inducing alternations in physical properties of the virus that are critical for virus transmissibility, however, for MARV the role of these proteins is yet to be determined.
32

For MARV, while the specific ways by which the virus is sexually transmitted are still being studied, it is crucial to take the sexual route of transmission into account when evaluating the likelihood of outbreaks. To our knowledge, no cases of MARV transmission from women to men (for instance, through interacting with or touching genital fluid)
12
 or between homosexual men or women have been reported so far. The first evidence of heterosexual transmission of MARV dates back to the 1967 outbreak in Belgrade, Yugoslavia (Serbia) when a woman contracted the disease, most likely through sexual contact, 2 weeks before being admitted to a medical center (on Day 3 of her illness) with a symptomatic infection and more than 6 weeks after her husband, who was infected through exposure to an animal (most likely grivets) recovered from the associated illness. After the husband's semen was analyzed, the antigen of MARV was detected, and the viable virus was subsequently recovered.
15
, 
16
 Indeed, the case was not confirmed as being caused by sexual transmission, though it appears probable, however other routes of transmission (e.g., direct contact with infected blood) are also plausible.
16
 Years later, in 1980, viral isolation was evidenced in the semen of a survivor from Kenya 2 months after disease recovery.
33
 According to another document, semen may still contain the infectious virus at least 3 months after infection.
34
 In a small subset of cases that have recovered from MVD (even if there are no longer acute symptoms of the disease), semen can still be tested positive more than 200 days after the onset of infection.
35
 Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that sexual fluids transmit the infection over a relatively long time. Here, we underestimate the potential need for extended monitoring of infected individuals and their sexual contacts beyond current practices, considering the extended survival of the virus in the reproductive organs/fluid.4HOW CAN MARBURG VIRUS BE DIAGNOSED?MARV can be diagnosed initially by clinical assessment and specifically by laboratory testing using multiple modalities including (I) cell culture (e.g., using Vero cells), (II) Electron microscopy (EM), (III) molecular analysis, (IV) serological assays (antigen‐ or antibody capture detection test), (V) Indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFA), and (VI) immunohistochemistry analysis, to detect viral particles, proteins or ribonucleic acid.
36
, 
37
 The most commonly used methods in the diagnosis of MVD include reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT‐PCR) and enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
37
 For most diagnostics, blood with a minimum volume of 5 mL collected into the EDTA tube (stored at room temperature for a day, refrigerated for a week, or frozen for more than a week to prevent RNA degradation) is the proper biological sample that can be used.
38
, 
39
 However, in the lack of the possibility to collect blood, other specimens (e.g., saliva, urine, and breast milk) can alternatively be used for diagnostics.
40
 The sample‐containing tubes should be sent on dry ice (with the highest level of biosafety precautions), regardless of the type of test, to national and/or international reference laboratories to maintain the cold chain throughout transportation.
41
, 
42
 Viral inactivation by gamma irradiation, heat treatment, and Sodium hypochlorite has allowed for safe handling and testing of collected specimens.
6
 All laboratory workers are advised to work in a safe work environment and use personal protective equipment (PPE) while testing infectious material due to high biohazard risk.
42
 Importantly, one sample with a negative test result probably does not guarantee loss of positivity, thus, testing samples with at least two reliable methods described herein, rather than a single test much preferred as it can minimize any misdiagnosis. In addition to the above methods, low platelet and white blood cell count, high levels of liver enzymes, and proteinuria on urinalysis are valuable diagnostic parameters during the course of illness.
37
 Despite no fully validated assays for specifically detecting MARV in the semen, the assay of quantitative RT‐PCR targeting four most common regions including viral nucleoprotein (NP), glycoprotein (GP), viral protein 40 (VP40), and RNA‐dependent RNA polymerase (L) which has already been utilized to test EBOV in the semen specimens could considerably be the preferred diagnostic method for MARV, as well.
43
, 
44
, 
45
 However, the lack of or insufficient access to diagnostics especially in resource‐poor settings, similarities between the symptoms of MVD and hemorrhagic fevers and other infectious diseases (i.e., malaria, shigellosis, meningitis, typhoid fever) especially in early infections, the need for highly skilled and trained staffs who are experienced enough to work with highly virulent viruses, and the need for the establishment of high‐containment Biosafety Level 4 (BSL‐4) laboratories with necessary safety protocols, all can cause a delay in the identification of MARV and subsequently increase the risk of virus spread.
2
, 
8
 For timely response to the outbreaks of MVD achieved by early detection, isolation, and treatment, there is a need for diagnostic approaches particularly rapid testing tools to be developed, validated, and accessed to remote areas at risk of future outbreak.
46

5RECOMMENDATIONSThe recent outbreak of the rarely reported monkeypox (Mpox), a smallpox‐like illness caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV), underscored the need to take the sexual spread of viruses that have not previously been sexually transmitted, into serious consideration.
47
 This virus has an incubation period of 6–13 during which it can be transmitted to humans via close contact with virus laden biofluids from an infected individual. The spread of the virus can also occur through sexual intercourse which likely is a new mode of transmission for this virus infection.
48
, 
49
 Importantly, among those who were affected by the recent outbreak and disclosed their sexual orientation, 95.8% were homosexual men.
50
 The analysis of semen yielded positive results for the genetic material of the virus in the majority of infected individuals.
48
 Skin lesions observed in the anogenital area were reported to be a common feature (>90%) in this outbreak which could indicate that the virus is likely transmissible via skin‐to‐skin or mucosal contact at the time of sexual intercourse.
51

Although sexual transmission of MARV is not much discussed and rarely occurs, the possibility for future outbreaks should not be underestimated as the world witnessed a similar scenario for MPXV. Therefore, raising awareness for the general public and individuals having close contact with MVD cases is essential as insufficient knowledge regarding the sexual spread of infectious diseases such as MVD can lead to misunderstandings, stigma, and discrimination, as well as the further spread of such diseases that makes virus containment more complex.To minimize the risk of MARV spread, preventive measures are crucial before any exposure to the potential source of infection. As one of the best strategies, developing vaccines with desirable efficacy, tolerability, and safety is essential to provide long‐lasting protection against severe disease and death. In this regard, efforts have been made to develop a reliable vaccine with no adverse reactions following immunization. While several candidates have been developed and assessed (i.e., whole‐inactivated or subunit vaccines, adenovirus vectored vaccines [e.g., chimpanzee adenovirus type 3‐vectored Marburg virus (cAd3‐Marburg)], DNA vaccines [e.g., MARV Musoke encoding viral glycoprotein (GP) gene], Recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSV) vaccine [e.g., recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSV) expressing the MARV‐Musoke glycoprotein], virus‐like particles (VLP) [e.g., Marburg Musoke VLPs (mVLPs)], and mRNA‐based vaccine [e.g., mRNA‐1,360], there is no approved vaccine readily available to contain MVD outbreaks.
10
, 
52
, 
53
 Therefore, standard precautions should seriously be taken to reduce the risk of viral transmission before vaccine administration. In this regard, nonpenetrative sex or using physical barriers (i.e., condoms) properly and consistently during any sexual intercourse (vaginal, anal, and oral sex) for the whole duration of the disease (even at least a full year after that) and safely handled and disposed of barriers after any sexual engagements to avoid any contact with the seminal fluid is highly recommended.
22
, 
45

It is essential for all sexually active males (and possibly females) who have been diagnosed with MVD or have had close contact with an infected person to abstain from engaging in unprotected sexual activity for a relatively long period (approximately 12 months) until they have fully recovered from the disease by having two negative results of virus testing.
10
 These individuals should also be provided mainly by public health authorities and organizations with detailed information about the risk of sexual transmission throughout and following the duration of the disease. Given the persistence of MARV in the reproductive system, it would be beneficial to monitor all previously diagnosed patients even beyond a year after recovery, since for EBOV the length of time for virus clearance from seminal fluid extends beyond 2 years, as discussed earlier.
17
 In addition, other preventive strategies such as contact tracing, early identification, the quarantine of cases, and strict application of other approaches are crucial, especially when vaccines cannot be offered. In addition to considering preventive strategies, developing antiviral agents and definite therapeutics equally needs to be prioritized. Indeed, in the absence of effective treatment, the symptoms determine how infected men and women should be treated and the disease managed. Treatment mainly relies on supportive measures including hydration with oral or intravenous fluids and electrolyte replacement, pain, oxygen, and fever management, platelet transfusion, and treatment of secondary infections.
54
 However, antivirals such as Galidesivir, Favipiravir, Remdesivir, and Polyclonal concentrated immunoglobulin G might be used to treat MVD.
39
 As discussed for the EVD, there is a need for male survivors to be encouraged to enroll in semen testing and counseling programs to be informed of the risks they can likely pose to their partners during sexual intercourse.
55
 In addition to men, access to validated testing of genital fluids should also be offered to women, as they could theoretically, although less probably (based on current knowledge), be a source of viral infection.
56

Notably, the strategies mentioned are just a fraction of what we can consider for better response to future risks. For future outbreaks, establishing and improving surveillance systems in tracking new cases, expanding research on vaccines and therapeutics development, improving diagnostics, increasing accessibility to health care, and raising the public knowledge about the nature of the threat and dangers of being underestimated needs to be prioritized. There is also a need for intensive global collaboration to be undertaken to ensure responsiveness to highly infectious diseases such as MVD, that could be a threat to sexual health.6FUTURE DIRECTIONFor MARV, it is essential to address almost all the challenges, knowledge gaps, and misconceptions regarding its possibility for sexual spread to better understand the transmissibility of the virus and better respond to future threats. Given the low possibility of MARV being transmitted sexually, it can be challenging to ascertain the origin of the infection. On the research front, we should address several critical questions to provide a better insight into the potential of MARV for sexual transmission to humans and the impact of MVD on the male, and likely the female, reproductive system and function. These questions include (I) How does MARV enter the male and likely female reproductive system? (II) Can sexually active women be a potential source of MVD? (III) At what concentration MARV can be sexually transmitted? (IV) Where does MARV hide in the human reproductive system in addition to previously identified sites of infection? (V) Does MVD affect male and likely female reproductive function in human survivors? (VI) Are individuals who are immunosuppressed more likely to become chronic carriers? (VII) Does sexually transmitted risk for MVD vary by symptom status? (VIII) Considering the role of tissue‐resident immune cells in particular macrophages in the development of EBOV persistence,
26
 what is the underlying mechanism and role of the immune system in MARV persistence in the human reproductive system? (IX) Is coexisting sexually transmitted infections (STIs) playing an important role in the context of sexual transmission of MARV? (X) Which form of sexual behavior (anal, vaginal, and oral sex) is more likely to result in the transmission of the virus than the others? (XI) Given the length of time that MARV appears to be able to survive in the reproductive organs and or sexual fluids can be on the scale of months, should monitoring of infected individuals and their sexual contacts extend beyond what is currently practiced? (XII) And last but not least, what is the duration of time within which the virus can persist in the reproductive tract of both men and likely women? Is the 200 days observed in men indeed the longest duration, or could it persist in semen even longer?The answer to these questions may have significant importance regarding public health decisions as it will enable public health officials to recommend safe sex behaviors and effective interventions that might be urgently needed at the time of the virus outbreaks. It also provides better insight into the threats linked to sexual contact and the mechanisms by which MARV establishes a sustained infection in the human reproductive system.7CONCLUSIONThe interpersonal spread of MARV is a matter of concern as it can potentially result in fatal outbreaks. The contribution of sexual transmission to the spread of the virus remains largely unknown. However, the transmission of MARV via sexual contact should always be considered as a possible secondary mode that threatens sexual health. Considering EBOV, and a few reports on the potential of MARV to infect the reproductive system and shed into genital fluids, the present perspective highlights the necessity of taking preventive countermeasures into serious consideration to minimize, if any, the risk of possible sexual transmission of filoviruses with a focus on MARV to a feasible extent.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Hassan Karami: Conceptualization; supervision; visualization; writing—original draft. Arash Letafati: Investigation; data curation. Somayeh Sadat Hosseini Fakhr: Writing—review and editing.CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENTThe authors declare no conflict of interest.ETHICS STATEMENTIt is an analysis of online available aggregate data. No ethical approval was needed.TRANSPARENCY STATEMENTThe lead author Hassan Karami affirms that this manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been explained.


Title: Tetherin Inhibits Cell-Free Virus Dissemination and Retards Murine Leukemia Virus Pathogenesis

INTRODUCTIONTetherin is an antiviral gene product that inhibits the release of nascent HIV-1 particles (1, 2) and other enveloped viruses (3–7). Tetherin entraps virions at the cell surface by the partitioning of its two membrane anchors between the budding virion envelope and the plasma membrane (8–12). However, while the effects of tetherin on cell-free virus release are well established, its effects on virus transmission between cells in direct contact are less clear, as experiments conducted in vitro have yielded various results (13–18). Moreover, in vitro studies cannot recapitulate the anatomy of virus-infected tissues in an animal host.Many studies have described the antiviral activity of tetherin in vitro, but far fewer have examined the effects of tetherin in vivo, as studies of the in vivo effects of tetherin are often confounded by the antiviral effects of other interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISGs). In mice, tetherin is constitutively expressed on only a few cell types, but it is strongly upregulated in response to type I IFN in many cells (19). LP-BM5 murine leukemia virus (MLV) infection in mice induces an IFN response (20), and replication and pathogenesis of this virus are enhanced in tetherin-knockout mice (21). Conversely, Moloney murine leukemia virus (MoMLV) does not induce a strong type I IFN response, and tetherin knockout enhances its replication only under conditions of artificial IFN induction (21). However, a naturally occurring tetherin polymorphism that results in higher constitutive surface expression levels correlates with reduced Friend retrovirus replication in mice (22).In the present study, we reexamined the effects of tetherin on the spread of two enveloped viruses (MoMLV and vesicular stomatitis virus [VSV]) in vitro by using a novel live-cell imaging analysis of the simplest model of a tissue, a cell monolayer. We also examined its effects on MoMLV dissemination in vivo by using mice engineered to carry an inducible human tetherin (hTetherin) transgene. We found that tetherin severely limits cell-free virus spread to distal cells in a monolayer, while the rate of dissemination to proximal cells is largely unaffected. In the case of MoMLV, the predominant mode of spread through a monolayer is via direct cell-to-cell transmission, irrespective of tetherin expression. In vivo, we found that ubiquitous hTetherin expression resulted in runt development and premature lethality, but mice with hematopoietic cell-restricted hTetherin expression displayed normal growth. Notably, hTetherin-expressing, MoMLV-infected mice had nearly wild-type (WT) numbers of infected cells in spleen and thymus tissues but markedly reduced plasma viremia and a delayed progression of MoMLV-induced leukemia. These results suggest that MoMLV spread within tissues and cell monolayers largely involves direct cell-to-cell transmission but that dissemination of cell-free virions via plasma is required for the full pathogenic effects of MoMLV infection.RESULTSEffects of tetherin on viral spread in cell monolayers.To examine the effects of tetherin on cell-to-cell and cell-free retroviral dissemination in vivo, we first established an in vitro viral replication assay in which the two modes of virus spread could be measured and discriminated. For the initial development of assays in cultured cells, we took advantage of the known capacity of VSV to spread rapidly in monolayer cultures via both direct cell-to-cell contact and long-distance diffusion of cell-free virions (23). Because of this property, VSV titers are typically measured in PFU, using cell monolayers that are overlaid with soft agar soon after infection to block virion diffusion through the cell culture supernatant. Under agar, virions generated by an initially infected cell are propagated only to adjacent cells in the monolayer, generating a roughly circular plaque whose diameter increases with time.The release of cell-free VSV particles from infected cells is inhibited by tetherin (4); thus, an initial question was whether tetherin could inhibit cell-free and/or cell-to-cell virus spread in a monolayer. We generated NIH 3T3 cells stably expressing either mouse tetherin (21) or human tetherin (Fig. 1B) and confirmed that both reduced the level of virions in the cell-free culture supernatant by 10- to 100-fold during a VSV replication assay over ∼2 days (Fig. 1A). Next, we took advantage of the ability of an agar overlay to dissect the contributions of cell-free and direct cell-to-cell viral transmission to VSV spread. Specifically, we measured the dynamics of VSV spread through a cell monolayer in which virus propagation was either unrestricted or restricted to adjacent cells by an agar overlay and compared viral propagation under these two conditions to viral propagation in cells expressing tetherin. To accomplish this, we used a live-cell imaging approach. Cell monolayers were infected with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing VSV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10−4 (∼50 PFU per 35-mm dish). After 1 h, the culture medium was replaced with either a liquid or agar overlay. The cultures were then inspected periodically for the next 6 to 8 h, and when individual GFP-positive cells were detected, they were centered in a field of observation. Infection of cells that did or did not express human or mouse tetherin proteins yielded approximately equal numbers of GFP-positive cells, consistent with previous findings that tetherin specifically inhibits virion release but not the other steps in VSV replication (4). VSV-GFP spread in the monolayer was recorded by acquiring images every 10 min for the ensuing 24 to 40 h (Fig. 1D; see Movies S1 and S2 in the supplemental material). Under each condition, VSV-GFP spread from the initially infected cell to neighboring cells formed a focus of contiguous infected cells. Additionally, under unrestricted conditions (i.e., no tetherin expression and no agar overlay), VSV-GFP infection also became evident in cells that were not in direct contact with the central focus of infection (Fig. 1D; Movies S1 and S2, upper left panels), consistent with the notion that some cells become infected via diffusion of virions in the extracellular culture medium. These distally infected cells were observed beginning at approximately 20 h postinfection and were especially evident by 29 h postinfection, and at a lower magnification (Fig. 1D). As expected, the distal population of infected cells was not observed in the presence of an agar overlay (Fig. 1D; Movies S1 and S2, upper right panels). Notably, expression of either mouse or human tetherin was also able to inhibit VSV-GFP spread to distal cells but did not appear to greatly inhibit infection of cells that were proximal to infected cells. Thus, tetherin appeared to inhibit distal propagation in a manner similar to that of the restriction imposed by an agar overlay (Fig. 1D; Movies S1 and S2, lower panels). Tetherin also appeared to enhance cell syncytium formation (which does not ordinarily occur during VSV replication at neutral pH) and cell death within infected foci. We speculate that these effects may have been caused by virion accumulation on cell surfaces in contact with neighboring cells.FIG 1Effects of tetherin on VSV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) NIH 3T3 cells stably expressing empty vector (control) or either mouse or human tetherin (mTetherin or hTetherin) were infected with VSV (MOI = 0.0001), and viral titers (PFU per milliliter) in the culture supernatant were measured over 2 days. (B) NIH 3T3 cells were transduced with pLHCX containing hTetherin and selected with hygromycin. Single-cell clones were isolated and tested for hTetherin expression by flow cytometry. Cells were either left unstained (gray filled histogram), stained for hTetherin (red filled histogram), or stained with an isotype control antibody (dashed black line). (C) Designation of the region in which GFP fluorescence was measured to quantify viral spread for Fig. 2A and 4A. (D) Imaging of plaques after VSV-GFP infection of NIH 3T3 cells which were otherwise unmanipulated (control), were overlaid with agar after infection, or expressed mTetherin or hTetherin. The upper three rows (0, 20, and 24 h) depict a single representative focus for each condition, while the lower two rows (29 and 40 h) show different representative foci from separate experiments, at a lower magnification.We quantified these observations by measuring the integrated GFP fluorescence in an ∼0.5-mm region corresponding to the centrally located focus or plaque (region 1) (Fig. 1C). The accumulations of GFP fluorescence within this central focus were similar under the different conditions (Fig. 2A and B), suggesting that neither an agar overlay nor tetherin expression significantly inhibited VSV transmission between cells in direct contact. In contrast, quantitation of the total GFP intensity in a larger microscopic field at various time points postinfection revealed a different pattern. By 40 h postinfection, there was significantly more GFP fluorescence in the larger field under unrestricted growth conditions than in the presence of an agar overlay or tetherin (Fig. 1D and 2C), indicating that outward VSV spread included a component that was diffusible through the culture medium to distal cells. Thus, tetherin can restrict the spread of VSV by acting on cell-free virions but does not greatly inhibit VSV spread between cells that are in direct contact in a cell monolayer.FIG 2Quantitation of VSV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) Quantitation of VSV-GFP growth in region 1 under each condition. The green line represents the average integrated GFP signal for 6 to 10 movies per condition, with error bars (in gray) indicating 1 standard deviation. (B) VSV-GFP integrated intensity in region 1 at 15 h postinfection. Each dot represents one movie, with the horizontal lines showing the averages for all movies and error bars indicating 1 standard deviation. P values were determined by Student's t test. (C) Quantitation of total GFP intensity in each large, low-magnification field (∼2.5 mm × 2 mm, as depicted in Fig. 1D). Columns represent the average GFP intensities under each condition at the indicated time points, with error bars representing 1 standard deviation. P values were determined using Student's t test.We next used the same approach to determine the mode by which MoMLV spreads through monolayer cultures and whether its spread is inhibited by tetherin. First, we confirmed that human tetherin, like mouse tetherin, is able to restrict the generation of cell-free MoMLV by infecting NIH 3T3 cells and monitoring the accumulation of infectious virions in culture supernatant over the course of 5 days. As expected, both tetherin proteins inhibited the generation of extracellular MoMLV virions (Fig. 3A).FIG 3Effects of tetherin on MoMLV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) NIH 3T3 cells expressing empty vector (control) or either mouse or human tetherin (mTetherin or hTetherin) were infected with MoMLV (MOI = 0.01), and viral titers (focus-forming units [FFU] per milliliter) in the culture supernatant were measured over 5 days. (B) Schematic representation of a replication-competent MoMLV construct in which an EGFP cDNA was inserted into the pNCS molecular clone at the 3′ end of env, following an FMDV 2A site, generating MLV-2A-GFP. (C) Replication of MLV-2A-GFP and the parental virus generated from pNCS (MLV) in NIH 3T3 cells following infection at an MOI of 0.05. (D) NIH 3T3 cells were infected with MLV-2A-GP (MLV-GFP) as described in the legend to Fig. 1D and imaged for 72 h. The upper three rows (0, 45, and 72 h) depict a single representative focus for each condition, and the bottom row (72 h) shows different representative foci from separate experiments.To enable the measurement of MoMLV spread through monolayers, we constructed a replication-competent MoMLV construct that expresses GFP (MLV-GFP) in infected cells. This was accomplished by the insertion of sequences encoding a foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) 2A site and GFP at the 3′ end of the env gene (Fig. 3B). Importantly, MLV-GFP replicated in cultured NIH 3T3 cells with kinetics that were nearly the same as those of wild-type MoMLV (Fig. 3C). We measured MLV-GFP spreading through a monolayer by monitoring the growth of foci of MLV-GFP-infected cells, commencing observation when individual MLV-GFP-infected cells were detected in monolayers ∼12 h after infection. As was the case with VSV infection, MoMLV infection of cells that did or did not express the human or mouse tetherin protein yielded approximately equal numbers of GFP-positive cells, suggesting that MoMLV entry and gene expression were not affected by tetherin. Because the MoMLV replication rate is lower than that of VSV, we recorded MLV-GFP infections over the course of 72 h following the initial detection of infected cells. In contrast to the pattern observed with VSV-GFP, MLV-GFP appeared to spread only to adjacent cells, even under unrestricted growth conditions (Fig. 3D, left column; Movies S3 and S4, upper left panels).Notably, the growth rates of MLV-GFP-infected foci appeared to be similar in the presence and absence of an agar overlay (Fig. 3D; Movies S3 and S4, upper right panels), suggesting that cell-free dissemination of virions does not contribute substantially to MoMLV spread through a monolayer. Moreover, expression of either mouse or human tetherin did not noticeably affect the growth of an MLV-GFP focus (Fig. 3D; Movies S3 and S4, lower panels), indicating that tetherin does not inhibit MLV spread between cells that are in direct contact. Quantitation of MLV-GFP infection by the aforementioned methods confirmed that the growth of foci of MLV-GFP infection was not measurably inhibited by either an agar overlay or tetherin expression (Fig. 4A and B), and unlike the results with VSV-GFP, this was also true for the total GFP intensity in a larger microscopic field (Fig. 4C). Thus, while MoMLV generated significant titers of diffusible cell-free virions in monolayer cultures, the apparently greater efficiency with which the virus spread from infected cells to proximal rather than distal uninfected cells means that direct cell-to-cell transmission constitutes the dominant mode of MoMLV propagation in cell monolayers in vitro.FIG 4Quantitation of MoMLV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) Quantitation of MLV spread in region 1, as described in the legend to Fig. 2A. (B) MLV-GFP integrated intensity in region 1 at 48 h postinfection. Each dot represents one movie, with each horizontal line showing the average for each population and error bars indicating 1 standard deviation. P values were determined by Student's t test. (C) Quantitation of total GFP intensity in each field (∼2.5 mm × 2 mm) as described in the legend to Fig. 2C.Generation of mice with ubiquitous or tissue-specific tetherin expression.Although cultured cell monolayers have been considered models of the simplest tissues, neither they nor any other cocultivation scenario can recapitulate the anatomical and fluid-dynamic complexity of the environment confronting a virus as it replicates in an animal host. Therefore, we next sought to determine the effects of tetherin and cell-free virions on MoMLV dissemination in an animal. To determine the effects of tetherin expression in vivo without the confounding effects of the expression of many hundreds of ISGs, we generated a mouse line in which the expression of an hTetherin transgene could be induced in a cell-type-dependent manner in the absence of IFN. Specifically, a lox-STOP-lox cassette was positioned between a constitutive promoter (CAG) and an hTetherin cDNA sequence (Fig. 5A), preventing hTetherin expression unless the transgene encountered Cre recombinase. Mice that were hemizygous for the inducible hTetherin transgene were crossed with mice hemizygous for a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter-driven Cre recombinase transgene (CMV-cre), generating offspring that were either wild type (WT), carried the hTetherin transgene alone (Tg), carried the CMV-cre transgene alone (cre), or carried both transgenes (Tg; cre). Importantly, hTetherin expression was detected only in animals carrying both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes (Fig. 5B).FIG 5Generation of inducible hTetherin-transgenic mice. (A) Schematic of the targeting cassette. A human tetherin transgene (Tg) was inserted into the pCTV targeting vector 3′ to the loxP (triangles)-flanked transcription stop signal (STOP) and 5′ to an FRT-flanked internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-EGFP sequence. The entire cassette was targeted to the mouse Rosa26 locus. (B) Peripheral blood leukocytes were stained for human tetherin expression and analyzed by flow cytometry. Mice carried both the human tetherin and cre transgenes (red) or either transgene alone (black and gray lines). Wild-type animals were also analyzed (gray filled histogram).Mice homozygous for the hTetherin transgene were mated to mice that were hemizygous for CMV-cre, resulting in litters in which ∼50% of the offspring carried both hTetherin and CMV-cre, while the remainder carried hTetherin in its uninduced configuration. Most of these litters contained one or more mice that were noticeably smaller than their littermates, some of which died prematurely (Fig. 6A and B). Flow cytometric analysis of splenocytes and thymocytes from mice that carried both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes revealed various levels of hTetherin expression (Fig. 6C). In fact, there was a striking inverse correlation between the level of tetherin expression and body weight (Fig. 6D). A similar analysis of the progeny of matings between hTetherin and zona pellucida 3 (Zp3) promoter-driven cre (Zp3-cre) transgenic mice revealed ubiquitous hTetherin transgene expression in the offspring of females carrying both transgenes, as expected. Notably, the relationship between hTetherin expression and body weight was the same as that observed for the CMV-cre-expressing mice, indicating that the effect was specific to tetherin and did not require ongoing cre expression (Fig. 6E). Examination of postmortem mouse tissues revealed no specific pathology in hematopoietic or other tissues that could explain the runt development that was associated with ubiquitous hTetherin expression.FIG 6Characterization of mice carrying an inducible hTetherin transgene. (A) Typical appearance of mouse littermates at 21 days old. The smaller animal carried both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes, while the larger animal carried only the hTetherin transgene. (B) Weights of littermates that did or did not constitutively and ubiquitously express hTetherin over time. The two charts represent two different litters. The asterisk indicates an animal that died. (C) FACS analysis of hTetherin expression on splenocytes and thymocytes from one litter of mice. A “+” indicates the presence of both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes. (D and E) Weights and mean fluorescence intensities (gMFI) of hTetherin expression on splenocytes from mice generated by hTetherin × CMV-cre (D) and hTetherin × Zp3-cre (E) crosses for 2 litters of mice at ∼7 weeks of age. (F) hTetherin expression (colored lines) on splenocytes from hTetherin Tg mice crossed with mice bearing the CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre transgene, after gating for T cells (CD3), B cells (CD19), dendritic cells (CD11c), and macrophages (CD11b). Data for control mice (hTetherin Tg alone, without cre) are depicted by gray and black histograms. (G) Human PBMCs stimulated with IFN-α were either left unstained (black filled histogram), stained with an isotype control (IC) antibody (gray filled histogram), or stained for hTetherin (red filled histogram). Splenic lymphocytes from mice carrying both the hTetherin and Vav1-cre transgenes were left unstained (black dashed line), stained with an isotype control antibody (gray dashed line), or stained for hTetherin (red dashed line). (H) Weights of mice bearing either the uninduced hTetherin Tg alone or a Vav1-cre-induced hTetherin Tg over time.By crossing mice carrying the inducible hTetherin transgene and mice carrying cre driven by the CD4, CD2, or Vav1 promoter (CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre), we generated mice specifically expressing hTetherin only in T cells (CD4-cre), in both T and B cells (CD2-cre), or in all hematopoietic cells (Vav1-cre), respectively (Fig. 6F). The level of hTetherin Tg expression on mouse cells was then compared to the level of endogenous tetherin induced by IFN-α treatment of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) (Fig. 6G). Although the level of hTetherin expression on mouse cells was more variable, the majority of the cells expressed hTetherin at a level nearly identical to that found on the IFN-α-stimulated human PBMCs (Fig. 6G). Importantly, expression of hTetherin on T and B cells, or indeed on all hematopoietic cells, did not have the same adverse effects on growth that were observed with ubiquitously expressed hTetherin (Fig. 6H). Together, these data show that ubiquitous expression of hTetherin profoundly reduces the fitness of mice, with marked dose-dependent adverse effects on growth and survival, perhaps explaining why tetherin has evolved to be IFN inducible in most cell types. However, hTetherin expression on hematopoietic cells was not responsible for these defects.Tetherin expression in hematopoietic cells reduces MoMLV plasma viremia.Analysis of viral infection in mice in which hTetherin expression was induced in all tissues would be complicated by the confounding growth and survival defects. Therefore, we limited our viral infection studies to mouse lines in which hTetherin expression was induced only in subsets of hematopoietic cells. Specifically, neonatal mice harboring the hTetherin transgene and expressing cre in (i) T cells only, (ii) T and B cells, or (iii) all hematopoietic cells were infected with MoMLV. The numbers of infected splenocytes and thymocytes, as well as plasma viremia, were measured 2 weeks after infection. For mice expressing hTetherin either in T cells alone or in both T and B cells, the numbers of infected cells and levels of plasma viremia were indistinguishable from those of control (cre-negative) littermates that lacked hTetherin expression (Fig. 7A). However, expression of hTetherin in all hematopoietic cells caused a significant reduction (P = 0.02) in plasma viremia (Fig. 7A). Notably, the numbers of infected splenocytes were indistinguishable in hTetherin-expressing and control animals, while the numbers of infected thymocytes were only marginally reduced as a consequence of hTetherin expression (Fig. 7A).FIG 7Effect of hematopoietic cell hTetherin expression on MoMLV replication in vivo. (A) MoMLV loads in the plasma (FFU per milliliter) and the spleen and thymus (numbers of infected cells per 106 cells) 14 days after infection of mouse neonatal littermates bearing the hTetherin Tg and the indicated cre inducers (+) or the hTetherin Tg alone (−). (B) MoMLV loads in mice bearing the hTetherin Tg alone (−) or the hTetherin Tg and Vav1-cre, grouped according to hTetherin expression level (low or high).Because the hTetherin levels varied among mice in which its expression was induced (Fig. 6C and F), we segregated hTetherin-expressing animals into those with high and low expression levels. This analysis revealed that the hTetherin expression level inversely correlated with plasma viremia (Fig. 7B). There was a marginal, statistically ambiguous inverse correlation between the tetherin expression level and the infected thymocyte number, and there was no apparent effect of tetherin on infection of splenocytes (Fig. 7B).In addition to exerting a direct antiviral effect by inhibiting virion release, hTetherin has been shown to facilitate antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) of infected cells in vitro by causing antigen retention on the surfaces of those infected cells (24). In principle, therefore, reduced plasma viremia may potentially be the result of a shorter infected cell life-span due to ADCC. We therefore determined whether anti-MoMLV antibodies were detectable in mice during acute infection at the time at which the plasma viremia levels and infected cell numbers were determined. A mouse litter derived from mating hTetherin transgenic and Vav1-cre mice was infected with MoMLV and monitored for the presence of anti-MoMLV antibodies. None of the mice had detectable levels of anti-MoMLV antibodies in the blood at 2 weeks postinfection (Fig. 8), excluding antibody-mediated effects as an explanation for the influence of tetherin on plasma viremia at this time point.FIG 8Lack of anti-MoMLV antibodies during acute infection. Plasmas from hBst2 × Vav1-cre littermates infected with MoMLV were isolated at 14 days postinfection and used to probe lysates of uninfected (−) or MoMLV-infected (+) NIH 3T3 cells. All animals were either hTetherin transgene hemizygous alone (Teth−) or hTetherin transgene hemizygous and Vav1-cre hemizygous (Teth+). The same lysates were also probed with plasma from an uninfected animal as well as with antibodies to either the MLV p12 or p30/CA protein. Membranes were probed with an antibody against tubulin as a loading control.To determine the effects of tetherin on MoMLV pathogenesis, parallel cohorts of mice bearing the inducible hTetherin transgene in its uninduced state versus those also carrying either a CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre transgene were maintained for approximately 1 year, and leukemia-induced deaths were monitored. Mice expressing hTetherin in T cells only (CD4-cre) or in T and B cells (CD2-cre) exhibited no difference in MoMLV-induced mortality compared to that of littermates carrying the uninduced hTetherin transgene (Fig. 9A and B). In contrast, animals expressing hTetherin on all hematopoietic cells exhibited a significant (P = 0.0085) delay in MoMLV-induced mortality (Fig. 9C). Thus, the inhibitory effect of hTetherin on the generation of cell-free virus correlated better with its ability to delay leukemia than did its lack of effect on the number of MoMLV-infected splenocytes or thymocytes.FIG 9Effect of hematopoietic cell hTetherin expression on MoMLV pathogenesis. Mice born from matings between mice homozygous for the hTetherin transgene and mice expressing either CD4-cre (A), CD2-cre (B), or Vav1-cre (C) were infected with MoMLV and monitored for morbidity and mortality. Black, no tetherin expression; red, cre-induced tetherin expression.DISCUSSIONAlthough neither VSV (4) nor MoMLV is inhibited by tetherin at early steps in the replication cycle, the ability of tetherin to inhibit the release of virions from infected cells into the extracellular milieu of cultured cells is well established. However, whether tetherin can inhibit the dissemination of infection among cells in contact with each other, as would occur in solid tissues, is less well understood. We developed a live-cell imaging assay by which we could monitor multicycle VSV and MoMLV replication in the simplest two-dimensional model of a tissue, namely, a cell monolayer. The results of these experiments clearly showed that neither VSV nor MoMLV spreading between adjacent cells was greatly inhibited by tetherin expression.The inability of agar or tetherin to inhibit the spread of MoMLV within a monolayer and the lack of an effect of tetherin on the numbers of MoMLV-infected cells in spleen and thymus tissues suggest that the majority of virus spread in monolayer cultures and in tissues in vivo occurs between neighboring cells. This finding is consistent with previous studies indicating that transfer of MLV from transfected cells to recipient cells in a single cycle was not inhibited by methyl cellulose (25). Nevertheless, expression of hTetherin in hematopoietic cells caused a significant reduction in MoMLV plasma viremia and, crucially, a delay in the onset of disease and mortality. These findings suggest a key role for cell-free virions in the dissemination of viral infection in vivo.In mice, tetherin is expressed on a small subset of cells in the absence of IFN or another inductive signal (19). Presumably, tetherin would present a more effective antiviral defense if it were ubiquitously and constitutively expressed. However, our data suggest that a dramatic fitness cost is associated with such expression, though it is not yet clear why. When constitutive hTetherin expression was limited to hematopoietic cells, or subsets thereof, mice developed normally, suggesting that adverse effects of hTetherin on growth and survival are due to its expression on nonhematopoietic cell types.Tetherin expression on all hematopoietic cells reduced plasma viremia and delayed disease, while expression on lymphocytes alone did not. This finding strongly suggests that hematopoietic cells other than lymphocytes constitute a major source of plasma virions, even though MoMLV induces tumors primarily in lymphocytes (26, 27). Importantly, however, the types of tumors induced by MoMLV appear to be determined not by the inherent susceptibility of a particular hematopoietic lineage to MoMLV infection but by the U3 sequences. Indeed, tumors of myeloid lineage cells (erythroleukemias and monocytoid leukemias) are induced if U3 sequences are exchanged with those from MLV strains that induce this type of leukemia. Moreover, promonocyte tumors occur at a low frequency in mice infected with unmodified MoMLV (28–31). Thus, it is unsurprising that nonlymphocyte hematopoietic cells appear to represent a significant source of plasma virions.Despite the above considerations, it is formally possible that hTetherin expression on nonlymphoid hematopoietic cells leads indirectly to a reduction in viral yield from other cells (e.g., lymphocytes). The consequences of tetherin-induced virion retention on infected cell surfaces may be more complex than simply restricting infection to proximal cells and directly reducing the cell-free virion titer. Accumulation of entrapped virions can also have indirect antiviral effects, including tetherin-driven stimulation of proinflammatory signaling pathways (32–35), enhancement of antiviral immune responses (36, 37), and enhancement of ADCC (24, 38). Given that we did not detect anti-MoMLV antibodies concomitant with reductions in plasma viremia and that equal numbers of infected cells were measured in hTetherin-expressing and non-hTetherin-expressing mice, it is unlikely that ADCC contributed to the effects that we observed. In a Friend MLV (FV) infection model, the tetherin allele found in B6 mice was observed to promote cellular antiviral immune responses, including increased NK and T cell activity, when the allele was expressed in combination with the MHC H-2b haplotype found in B6 mice (36, 37). At early time points of infection (5 to 7 days postinfection), there was no apparent tetherin-dependent effect on either plasma viremia or the number of infected splenocytes, but increased dendritic cell (DC) and NK cell activation was observed in WT compared to tetherin-deficient mice (37). Conversely, at 2 weeks postinfection, decreases in plasma viremia and infected splenocytes were observed in WT compared to tetherin-deficient mice (36), as would be expected in the presence of potent antiviral cellular immune responses. In contrast, we observed a decrease in plasma viremia, but not in infected splenocytes or thymocytes, in tetherin-transgenic mice, suggesting that a different mechanism is operative. Among several differences in the two studies, a key difference is that MoMLV is a single replication-competent virus, while FV is an immunosuppressive complex of replication-defective and -competent viruses that may easily lead to the elicitation of different host responses to infection. The reduction in plasma viremia observed herein correlated with tetherin surface expression levels, which is more consistent with a direct tethering mechanism in infected cells as the means by which tetherin prevents virus dissemination and pathogenesis.Although retroviruses appear to spread in vitro primarily via direct cell-to-cell transmission in a manner that is not affected by tetherin, many enveloped viruses, including some retroviruses, such as HIV-1, have evolved tetherin antagonists. This fact, in addition to observations reported herein, indicate an important role for tetherin in the host defense against retroviruses. Moreover, our current findings suggest that both cell-to-cell transmission and cell-free virion particles are key mediators of viral dissemination in vivo.MATERIALS AND METHODSGeneration of transgenic mice carrying an inducible hTetherin transgene.The human tetherin gene was cloned into the AscI site of pCTV (Addgene plasmid 15912) and targeted to the Rosa26 locus (Fig. 5) of C57BL/6J mice to generate the mouse line B6.Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-BST2)Bsz/J. Mice that were hemizygous for the transgene Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-BST2)Bsz (abbreviated hBST2) were intercrossed to generate mice homozygous for hBST2 and then mated to mice hemizygous for a Cre recombinase transgene under the control of one of several promoters (all from The Jackson Laboratory), as follows: CMV-cre, Zp3-cre, CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre. Mice were genotyped by PCR for the hBST2 transgene or the wild-type allele by use of the following primers (5′ to 3′): RL267, GGCATCTACTTCGTATGACTATTGCAGA (hBST2 forward); RL268, GAGGCCCAGCAGCACAATCAGCAGCT (hBST2 reverse); RL286, AGTTCTCTGCTGCCTCCTGGCTTCT (WT forward); and RL340, CTGAAAATTAAGGATCAAGGCAAAGGAT (WT reverse). The hBST2 PCR yields a 522-bp product, and the WT reaction yields a 720-bp product. The CMV-cre, Zp3-cre, and CD4-cre transgenes were amplified by use of JAX primers oIMR1084 (GCGGTCTGGCAGTAAAAACTATC) and oIMR1085 (GTGAAACAGCATTGCTGTCACTT), yielding a 100-bp product. The CD2-cre and Vav1-cre transgenes were amplified by use of JAX primers oIMR9266 (AGATGCCAGGACATCAGGAACCTG) and oIMR9267 (ATCAGCCACACCAGACACAGAGATC), yielding a 236-bp product. Mice were housed in a pathogen-free facility and maintained in accordance with Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines. All animal studies were approved by the Rockefeller University IACUC (protocol number 15785-H) in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act (USDA) and the Public Health Services Policy of the Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare (OLAW).Tetherin-expressing cell lines.NIH 3T3 (ATCC; CRL-1658) cells were stably transduced with the empty pLHCX (Clontech) vector or with pLHCX containing either mouse or human tetherin cDNA. The cells expressing mouse tetherin have been described previously (21). For the human tetherin-expressing cell lines, single-cell clones were selected with hygromycin and analyzed by flow cytometry for hTetherin expression (phycoerythrin [PE]-anti-CD317/Bst2; BioLegend).Viruses and infections.The MoMLV-GFP construct was generated by inserting an FMDV 2A sequence followed by the enhanced GFP (EGFP) sequence between the 3′ end of env and the long terminal repeat (LTR) in the infectious plasmid clone of MoMLV, pNCS (39). Specifically, a PmeI site and a NotI site were introduced into pNCS, a MoMLV molecular clone, between the 3′ end of env and the 3′ LTR. Subsequently, the Env stop codon was removed and an FMDV 2A sequence flanked by PmeI and EcoRI sites was inserted. Finally, the EGFP gene was inserted between the EcoRI and NotI sites, resulting in pNCS ENV-2A-GFP. MoMLV and MoMLV-GFP stocks were generated by transfecting NIH 3T3 cells with proviral plasmids. Harvested supernatant was filtered, and viral stocks were titered on NIH 3T3 cells by a focal immunoassay as described previously (21). For in vivo MoMLV infections, measurements of plasma viremia and infected cell numbers in spleen and thymus tissues were performed as previously described (21). VSV carrying an EGFP gene (40) was kindly provided by Kartik Chandran (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY). VSV-GFP stocks were generated in Vero cells (ATCC; CCL-81) and titrated by plaque assay.Western blot analysis.Uninfected or MoMLV-infected NIH 3T3 cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Igepal, 1% sodium deoxycholate). Plasma samples were obtained from blood collected from animals at 14 days post-MoMLV infection and diluted 1:100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Plasma antibody was detected with an anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (Li-Cor). The anti-p12 (CRL-1890) and anti-p30 (CRL-1912) antibodies were obtained from ATCC.Live-cell imaging and quantitative analysis.All live-cell imaging was performed with a VivaView FL incubator fluorescence microscope imaging system (Olympus). Cells were infected with VSV-GFP or MoMLV-GFP at an MOI of 0.0001 or 0.001, respectively, and transferred to the VivaView incubator. Single infected, GFP-positive cells were centered in a field, and images were acquired at 5- to 15-min intervals for 24 to 72 h. Images were analyzed with MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices). Images taken at a magnification of ×4 were acquired on an Evos FL microscope and quantitated with ImageJ software.Flow cytometry.For fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis of mouse primary cells, single-cell suspensions were made from spleen, thymus, or peripheral blood, resuspended in red blood cell lysis buffer (150 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, and 0.05 mM EDTA), washed in FACS buffer (PBS, 0.2% bovine serum albumin [BSA]), incubated with purified anti-CD16/CD32 (Fc Block), and then stained with the following antibodies (all from BD Biosciences): peridinin chlorophyll protein (PerCP)–Cy5.5–anti-CD3, V450–anti-CD19, allophycocyanin (APC)–Cy7–anti-CD11b, APC–anti-CD11c, PerCP–Cy5.5–anti-CD4, and V450–anti-CD8. Adherent cell lines were harvested in PBS plus 5 mM EDTA, pelleted, and stained in FACS buffer. Human PBMCs were stimulated with 1,000 U/ml human IFN-α for 24 h. Human tetherin expression on primary cells and stable cell lines was detected with PE–anti-human CD317/Bst2 (BioLegend), and PE-mouse IgG1 (BioLegend) was used as an isotype control. Dead cells were excluded by DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) staining. All data were acquired on an LSR II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) and analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star).Supplementary MaterialSupplemental material


Title: Research Progress of Fever with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome

IntroductionSevere fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome(SFTS) is an infectious disease caused by viral infection. It was first reported in 2009 in the Ta-pieh Mountains in central China, and then in 2010, Yu et al. [1]. isolated this pathogen as a virus, known as severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV), which belongs to the Bunyaviridae, also known as the novel bunyavirus. The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses named the virus Dabie bandavirus in 2019, which belongins to Bandavirus genus,Phenuiviridae family, Bunyavirales order. But SFTSV is currently the most widely used in the world [2]. The appearance of SFTSV is spherical, with a diameter of 80–100 nm. It consists of a single strand of negative strand RNA, including three fragments: large (L), medium (M) and small (S). L-segment encodes RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), which functions as a transcriptase / replicase of the virus [3]. The M segment encodes the viral surface glycoproteins, which consists of two glycoproteins, Gn and Gc. They form the envelope of the virus. This envelope has antigenic characteristics, after the virus invades the body, it can stimulate the body to produce specific neutralizing antibody recognition targets, these characteristics can provide a direction for future vaccine research. Therefore, the study of viral envelope Gn/Gc and the analysis of antigenic characteristics are very important. S-segment is a double RNA, which is composed of coding nuclear protein Np and non-structural protein NSs. Np plays an important role in viral RNA encapsulation/RNP complex, and NSs interferes with host interferon production [4].Currently, there are no effective therapeutics or vaccines to combat the infection of SFTSV. Hence, it is imperative for the further study of SFTSV. This review mainly focuses the studies of SFTS disease in epidemiology, transmission, pathogenesis and countermeasures.Vector and Disease TransmissionThe life cycle and mechanism of continuous transmission of SFTSV in nature are not clear [5]. Through the existing research confirmed that SFTSV is mainly transmitted by ticks, and most of the patients initially diagnosed as SFTS have a history of tick bites before the onset of SFTS [6]. Ticks are not only the main transmission vector of SFTSV, but also the important storag through eggs. Haemaphysalis longicornis are mainly distributed in the Ta-pieh Mountains in central China, including Henan, Hubei and Anhui provinces.SFTS occurrence probability is high when altitude is between − 100 m and 100 m, and the probability is nearly 0 when altitude is beyond 3000 m [7]. Haemaphysalis longicornis has a wide range of hosts, including wild and domestic mammals and birds, and is unique to the Asia–Pacific region in terms of distribution [8].Asian longhorned ticks, probably transported by migratory birds, play a major role in the rapid spread of SFTSV [9].SFTS RNA can be detected in arthropods of ticks such as Haemaphysalis, Ixodes minimus, Ixodes tortoise, Ixodes asiatica and Ixodes japonicus in the endemic areas of SFTSV. Another feature of these tick species is that they can reproduce parthenogenetically and survive in a variety of environmental conditions [10]. Although these tick species carry a novel bunyavirus, further studies are needed to confirm whether the virus can be transmitted to animals or humans [8]. Because the ability of SFTSV transmission and infection depends on the ability of tick species to enlarge and transmit the virus to animals and humans [11]. Recently, Haemaphysalis longicornis has been found in the United States and is spreading rapidly. It has been reported that someone has been bitten by Haemaphysalis longicornis [12]. The Department of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of the United States has designated SFTA as one of the top ten infectious diseases and has conducted surveillance studies on ticks. Fortunately, no RNA fragment of the novel bunyavirus was found in Haemaphysalis longicornis[12].SFTSV maintains virus replication in nature through tick-to-tick cycles (through egg or cross-worm, the virus spreads from adult ticks to young ticks, or by co-feeding on the same host). In the tick cycle, ticks act not only as a carrier, but also as a host of SFTSV [13] (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Tick life cycleSFTSV can also be detected in livestock and wild animals. Most animals are found to be subclinical infected with SFTSV. The reason for subclinical infection is that infected animals do not have prolonged symptoms of viremia and viral infection. SFTSV's RNA can be detected in cattle, goats, pigs, chickens, dogs, cats, deer, hedgehogs and minks, but these animals did not develop the disease. The novel bunyavirus is transmitted to these vertebrates through tick bites, which serve as storage hosts for SFTSV. This cycle makes SFTSV spread in nature to achieve a lasting cycle. Human beings usually have a lot of contact with domestic animals and need special precautions. There is also a potential risk of cross-regional transmission of migratory birds infected with SFTSV [14]. Different factors affect the infection rate coefficients of different transmission routes. Sunshine duration, relative humidity, temperature and tick density are important factors affecting the occurrence of SFTS. Hurricanes reduce the incidence of SFTS in the short term, but have little effect in the long term. The most effective intervention to reduce the incidence of SFTS is to reduce population exposure to high-risk environments [15].Tick bites are the main route of transmission of SFTSV, as initial epidemiological reports show that patients diagnosed with SFTS have a history of tick bites before the onset of SFTS [16]. With the increase of SFTS cases and the improvement of epidemiological investigation, it was found that human-to-human transmission of SFTSV infection occurred [17]. Recently, it has been reported many times that medical staff and family members have direct blood contact with patients with SFTS without wearing protective equipment, which leads to aggregation infection [18, 19]. Laboratory tests showed that after SFTSV infection, the viral load of serum, sputum, saliva, cerebrospinal fluid, semen and urine were higher [20]. All data above shows that SFTSV could be transmitted from person to person by direct contact of body fluid. Especially, the health care worker should take preventive measures to prevent infection.Prevalence of SFTSV in VertebratesHaemaphysalis longicornis of Asia undergo three unique life stages (larva, nymph and adult). At each stage, they are parasitic on a variety of wild and domestic animals, including birds, livestock, etc.There is a close relationship between humans and animals, especially in SFTSV-endemic areas, which increases the risk of SFTS epidemic [21]. Ticks spread the virus to wild or domestic animals after biting them. These animals may have no clinical symptoms, but their secretions contain SFTSV RNA, which can be transmitted to humans after contact [22].SFTSV antibodies can be detected in many animals, including goats, sheep, cattle, dogs, pigs, chickens, cats, rodents, deer, wild boars and hedgehogs[23]. A cross-sectional cohort study conducted by virologists in China also revealed the infection rate of livestock, with a relatively high serum positive rate of 69.5% in sheep, 60.4% in cattle, 37.9% in dogs and 47.4% in chickens, while the prevalence rate in pigs was only 3.1% [24]. Differences in infection rates among animals may depend on the number of ticks parasitized on them. Sheep, goats and cattle are usually kept free, which makes them vulnerable to tick bites in nature.And it makes them more likely to get SFTSV infection. Interestingly, although rodents are also known hosts of Bunya virus, the serum positive rate of SFTSV in rodents is much lower than that in domestic animals [25]. These susceptible vertebrate hosts are necessary to establish and maintain arbovirus transmission cycles. It is not clear whether long-term or persistent infection will occur in animals infected with SFTSV.Geographical Distribution and Genetic DiversitySFTS was first reported in the Ta-pieh Mountains in central China in 2009, and quickly spread to Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shandong and other regions. Japan and South Korea also reported cases of SFTS in 2012 [26, 27]. Recently, Vietnam and Taiwan have also reported SFTS-related cases [28, 29].The mechanism of rapid spread of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome is unclear. However, the spread of the virus is usually attributed to two main mechanisms:increased contact between wildlife and human populations and geographical spread of hematophagous arthropod vector or their vertebrate host outside the area of endemicity. Haemaphysalis longicornis is also a common parasite of migratory birds, which usually breeds and migrates between the endemic areas of China, Korea and Japan, and the endemic areas of STFS match the migration routes of migratory birds [30]. However, further field studies are needed to understand the relationship between tick vector habitats and tick infection rates in migratory birds in China, Korea and Japan. Understanding the transmission mechanism is very important for in-depth understanding of the ecological epidemiology of the virus within its epidemic range.Several studies have highlighted the genetic diversity of SFTSV. The novel bunyavirus consists of several gene fragments. Because it is a RNA virus, the gene mutation caused by lack of proofreading function of SFTSV in viral RNA replication and transcription, which will lead to gene recombination. As a result, genetic diversity and new genome lines have emerged in different hosts [31]. According to the suggestion of Professor Fu of Fudan University in Shanghai, the phylogenetic analysis of SFTSV strain can be divided into 6 genotypes, which are called genotypes A to F [32]. The prevalence of SFTSV genotypes is also different in different countries. Recently, Yun et al. have proved in the laboratory that genotype B can be further subdivided into three different gene subtypes, Bmuri 1, Bmai 2 and Bmi 3 [33]. There are at least 9 different recombinant genes in Korea and 7 SFTSV recombinant genes reported in China, which indicates that the SFTSV virus strain is undergoing continuous evolution in nature [24, 25]. Reported SFTS case fatality rates vary widely in affected countries in East Asia, which is estimated to be related to different genotypes of human infection. At present, it is reported that the high mortality rates in Japan and South Korea are 27% and 23.3% respectively. By contrast, the mortality rate of SFTSV in China is about 10–30% [24]. Some virologists further subdivided the most popular genotypes in Japan and Korea as Bmur2, with an incidence of 86% and 36.1% respectively [34]. In China, the most common incidence of genotype F is 43.6%, followed by the incidence of genotype An at 20.1% [24]. Therefore, this suggests that the reported difference in mortality may be related to the different distribution of SFTSV genotypes, and Yun et al. in Korea further support this view [25]. The above studies on genotypes suggest that the morbidity and mortality in epidemic areas are related to the genotype of the virus, but it should also be noted that age, sex and underlying diseases are also closely related to mortality.Clinical Manifestations of Patients with SFTSThe main clinical symptoms of SFTSV infection are fever and thrombocytopenia. In addition to these two major clinical manifestations, it also includes gastrointestinal symptoms such as poor anorexia of nausea and vomiting, leukocytopenia, low lymphocyte count, coagulation dysfunction and hemorrhagic tendency. In addition, there are also reported cases of atypical and asymptomatic SFTS infection [6]. The incubation period of SFTS is generally 7–14 days (average 9 days), and it’s clinical course can be divided into three different stages according to the progression of the disease: fever stage, multiple- organ dysfunction (MOD) stage and convalescent stage. In the stage of fever, the patient initially presented with acute high fever and high serum viral load, and the highest body temperature was 39–40 ℃, accompanied by thrombocytopenia, leukocytopenia and lymphadenopathy. Laboratory examination showed that the circulating threshold of real-time quantitative PCR of novel bunyavirus RNA was very low, and the viral load was very high [32]. It usually takes 5–7 days for the disease to develop into MODS from the febrile phase. The characteristics of MODS phase are as follows: Hematological symptoms include hemorrhagic manifestations, persistent decrease in platelet count, persistent abnormality of blood coagulation, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC);Neurological symptoms include drowsiness, muscle tremors, convulsions, convulsions and coma; Respiratory symptoms include shortness of breath and decreased blood oxygen saturation. The circulatory system will have shock manifestations such as decreased blood pressure, increased heart rate, and systemic hypoperfusion. Of course, there will be jaundice, anuria and other manifestations of liver and kidney failure. These manifestations occur at the end of the disease, and are often sequential organ function damage, developing into severe, critical, which is also the direct cause of death of patients [35]. Some patients with mild symptoms can progress directly from the febrile period to the recovery stage. Other clinical aspects of SFTS included the increase of activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT), serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine (Cr), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and myocardial enzymes [36].As early as 2013, according to the clinical characteristics of Chinese patients, clinical experts divided the severity of SFTS into mild, severe and critical. After classification, it is beneficial to focus on treatment and find critical patients in time. The patients with T < 38 ℃, muscle soreness, digestive system symptoms such as anorexia, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, no systemic bleeding tendency, clear mind and no nervous system symptoms were divided into mild symptoms. The patients with T > 38 ℃, obvious symptoms of general fatigue, severe anorexia; mental malaise, accompanied by neurological symptoms, such as lethargy, muscle tremor, systemic involuntary tremor, convulsions, convulsions and delirium are divided into severe cases.On the basis of severe cases, patients with any of the following conditions such as: ARDS, heart failure, AKI, sepsis or septic shock; DIC, encephalitis, that is, summarized as critical [37]. The above clinical classification is very important for front-line doctors. The doctors can identify severe and critical patients in time, and include patients in ICU, so as to strengthen the monitoring of patients and support treatment for their organs.Pathogenesis of SFTSVPathological study is of great significance for understanding the pathogenesis of the virus. Autopsy of patients who died of SFTS can better understand it’s pathogenesis. A pathological study of SFTS suggests that biopsy of lymph nodes near tick bites indicates necrotizing lymphadenitis, which is consistent with the signs of SFTS patients. These patients are prone to enlarged lymph nodes at the bitten site [38]. In addition to the involvement of the surrounding lymphatic system, another important pathological feature of SFTS is that non-lymphoid organs such as solid organs (lungs, liver, kidney, etc.) will also be involved, which is consistent with multiple organ failure in critically ill patients. Some studies suggest that SFTSV is not detected in parenchymal cells, but SFTSV is found in B lymphocytes in capillaries of non-lymphoid organs. B lymphocytes are the center of humoral immune response and are responsible for mediating the production of antigen-specific immunoglobulins [39]. Immunoglobulin (IgG) is essential for neutralizing and eliminating viruses. However, it was found that the titer of IgG antibody produced by B lymphocytes in patients with severe SFTS was very low. This situation may suggest that the humoral immunity mediated by B lymphocytes is damaged when the novel bunyavirus is infected, especially in severe patients (Fig. 2). In addition, the analysis of severe SFTS cases showed that most of the peripheral plasma mother cells did not express IgM and IgG, which suggested the deficiency of humoral lymphocyte immune response. Moreover, neutralizing antibody IgG could not be detected in severe SFTS cases, which may be due to the inability of IgG-positive B cells to perform class conversion at the time of infection [40]. Taken together, these findings suggest that in severe SFTSV infection, the virus interferes with the differentiation of B lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid organs. The susceptibility of SFTSV to B lymphocytes and how the virus destroys the humoral immune mechanism of the body will be an important topic worth exploring.Fig. 2The mechanism of SFTSV pathogenesis. SFTSV transmission to humans commonly occurs from virus-carrying-tick-bite. The SFTSV then invades the lymph node nearest to the tick-bite wound, targeting immune cells such as B-cells, impairing host immune response from invading pathogen.It also leads to a decrease in white blood cells.After further replication, the virus goes to the systemic circulation, in response to viremia, other immune cells are over-stimulated causing cytokine storm and severe inflflammatory response syndrome(SIRS). SIRS causes damage to the vascular endothelium, which allows platelets to adhere and aggregate.Thrombocytopenia is a hallmark of SFTSV infection.Body response disorder and stress response caused by cytokine storm lead to multi-organ dysfunction, reflflected by the elevation of liver, kidney, and heart serum markers. Severe cases often die from MODSThe immunopathogenesis of SFTSV infection is complex, which includes a cascade of reactions involving a wide range of immune cells, inflammatory mediators, inflammasomes and signaling pathways [41]. SFTSV affects the differentiation of B lymphocytes and leads to humoral immunity deficiency. Inflammatory storm of cytokines caused by viral infection is also considered to be a major pathological feature of patients with s evere SFTS. Studies on the expression of cytokines and chemokines in patients with SFTS have shown that levels of IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ-inducible protein (IP)-10 and IFN- γ usually increase in the early stages of the disease [42]. Professor Kwon's research says there is a significant correlation between IP-10 levels and viral load.But because of the small sample size, further research is needed to confirm this [43]. In addition, the relationship between cytokine / chemokine levels and platelet count and serum enzymology (AST, LDH, ALT) has also been reported [38, 39]. The decrease of platelet level is related to the decrease of soluble CD40 ligand and platelet-derived growth factor BB. Similarly, when IL10, IL-2 receptor and IP-10 levels increased, platelet levels decreased [39]. The serum levels of AST, ALT and LDH were positively correlated with IL-10, sIL-2RA, HSP70, IP-10, IL-4, IFN- γ, tPAI-1 and other inflammatory / chemokines. In addition, it is reported that IL-10 is oversecreted in severe SFTS, which can induce compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome and trigger abnormal and uncontrolled inflammatory disorders, thus causing damage to various organs of the body [44].Treatment of SFTSRibavirinAt present, the main treatment for SFTS disease is symptomatic treatment and traditional Chinese medicine treatment. Symptomatic treatment is to deal with fever, give drugs to increase platelet and leukocyte use.For example, the Chinese medicine Xuebijing injection can reduce SIRS reaction. It can also reduce the DIC score of SFTS and restore the platelets to normal [41]. According to the national guidelines for the prevention and control of SFTS issued by the Ministry of Health of China in 2010, ribavirin, a synthetic nucleoside antiviral drug, is recommended for clinical treatment of SFTS [47]. Ribavirin is a synthetic nucleotide antiviral drug that exhibits broad-spectrum antiviral activity against a variety of viruses, such as respiratory syncytial virus, influenza, measles, herpesvirus, and in combination with interferon (IFN)-α can inhibit hepatitis C. A study by Professor Lee from Korea showed that ribavirin inhibited SFTSV replication in SFTS patients after 48 h of ribavirin use [45]. Although the successful treatment of ribavirin has been reported, the use of ribavirin did not reduce the final outcome of SFTS in more than one study. Professor Liu Wei of the Beijing Institute of Microbiology conducted a retrospective study on the 154 Hospital of the people's Liberation Army in Xinyang City, Henan Province. The professor selected a total of 311 cases, including 54 deaths. They found that there was no increase in platelet count and no decrease in viral load in patients treated with ribavirin compared with patients who did not receive ribavirin. He even found that patients who received ribavirin had lower platelet counts than those who did not receive treatment [46]. The therapeutic effect of ribavirin on SFTSV infection often depends on the viral load, which is less than 1 copy, and the therapeutic effect of ribavirin is better in the early stage of the disease [47]. Although there are many studies on SFTSV, the pathogenesis of the virus is not clear. The number of antiviral drugs against SFTSV is limited. More importantly, obtaining new drugs through the basic research process is a very long-term process. However, it is a relatively fast method to evaluate the efficacy of existing antiviral drugs.FavipiravirFavipiravir, discovered and synthesized by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd., Japan, is a new antiviral drug so far. It has a wide range of activities against a variety of RNA viruses, including influenza virus, Bunya virus, West Nile virus, yellow fever virus and foot-and-mouth disease virus [48]. It’s mechanism is that Favipiravir ribosyl-5-triphosphate inositol (fapiravir RTP) is produced by phosphoribosylation by host cell enzymes, and the viral RNA polymerase mistakenly recognizes Favipiravir RTP, which inserts Favipiravir RTP into the viral RNA chain or binds to the viral RNA polymerase domain, thus hindering the replication and transcription of the viral RNA chain [49].In many animal models of SFTSV infection, the efficacy of Favipiravir in vivo has been fully verified. One study showed that when treatment began 3 days or earlier after SFTSV infection, all mice treated with Favipiravir survived, even though mice treated 4 and 5 days after infection showed a survival rate of 83% and 50%, respectively [49]. At present, there are few reports on the clinical use of Favipiravir in the treatment of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome, which needs more attention.Calcium Channel BlockersCalcium channel blockers(CCBs) can reduce intracellular Ca2+ levels and are widely used in the treatment of various cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, angina pectoris and supraventricular arrhythmias. In recent years, some studies have shown that CCBs has strong antiviral activity against Ebola virus, Marburg virus and Japanese encephalitis virus [50, 51]. Among many calcium antagonists, two drugs, benidipine hydrochloride and nifedipine, can inhibit Ca2+ replication by reducing virus-induced SFTSV influx [52]. Professor Li's study further analyzed the anti-sftsv effects of these two kinds of CCB in C57BL/6 mice and humanized mice [49]. It was found that the two drugs could reduce viral load, increase platelet count and reduce mortality in humanized mouse model. They also conducted a retrospective clinical study of SFTS patients, including 83 patients who received nifedipine (nifedipine before and during hospitalization), 48 patients who did not receive nifedipine (nifedipine before admission but not nifedipine during hospitalization), and 249 general SFTS patients who did not take nifedipine at all.It was found that the case fatality rate of nifedipine treatment group (3.6%) was 5 times lower than that of general SFTS treatment group (19.7%) or non-nifedipine treatment group (20.8%). The results of these studies show that CCBs has potential therapeutic effects on patients with SFTS [53]. In the future, we can consider a prospective way to evaluate the antiviral efficacy of CCBs in SFTS.Immunoglobulin (IVIG)IVIG plays an important role in the treatment of various viral diseases by triggering complement activation, virus neutralization, antibody-dependent cytotoxicity and conditioning. Based on the mechanism of immunosuppression and inflammatory factor disorder in the pathogenesis of SFTS, we believe that IVIG can help reduce viral load in patients with SFTS, inhibit SFTSV transmission, and effectively inhibit cytokine storm. However, there are only a few cases of successful use of IVIG in patients with severe SFTS [54]. The mechanism of IVIG in patients with SFTS is not completely clear, which needs to be further confirmed by clinical data.GlucocorticoidSevere SFTS can lead to rapid deterioration of the disease, and patients are easy to die of septic shock and MODS,DIC. The key to this pathogenic process is the cytokine storm. Considering the pathogenesis of SFTS, clinicians believe that steroids are a therapeutic option for suppressing the immune system of patients with severe SFTS. Kim et al. [54] reported two cases of successful treatment of SFTS with glucocorticoid combined with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in South Korea. Nakamura et al. [55] reported that steroids were effective in 3 Japanese patients with SFTS complicated with encephalopathy. Glucocorticoid therapy may increase the chance of secondary infection, especially fungal infection. Because SFTS patients themselves may have secondary fungal infection, and there is evidence that SFTS patients with secondary fungal infection are more ill and have a higher mortality. Based on this situation, we do not recommend glucocorticoid as a routine treatment for SFTS, especially in patients with mild or mild symptoms within 5 days after the onset of symptoms [56].Plasma Exchange (TPE)SFTSV infection can lead to a storm of cytokines all over the body, which can damage organ function. Plasma exchange may be a possible rescue method for the removal of cytokines. Korean scholars have done much research on this therapy. A Korean hospital reported 2 cases of SFTS treated with therapeutic Plasma exchange(TPE) and oral ribavirin [57]. Another study on the use of TPE in SFTS patients found that the clinical and laboratory parameters of most SFTS patients improved rapidly after plasmapheresis [58]. Statistical analysis of some studies on TPE treatment of SFTS shows that there is no significant difference between the TPE group and the non-TPE group. In addition, TPE also has side effects [59]. The above TPE studies are limited because they show only a relatively small number of clinical samples and there is no strict comparison. Doctors still need to observe the clinical manifestations of patients and use TPE cautiously.Vaccine Research of SFTSVVaccine is the most effective way to deal with infectious diseases, and the development of a vaccine against the novel bunyavirus can provide mass immunity to people living in epidemic areas. In 2019, researchers at the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences published a paper on a novel bunyavirus vaccine using recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSV) as a vector. In this study, VSV has been developed as a promising attenuated virus vaccine vector to induce the production of neutralizing antibodies that can effectively resist the deadly challenges of a variety of pathogens, including Hendra virus, Lassa virus, Ebola virus, Marburg virus, Nipah virus, etc. [60].VSV is classified as a RNA virus of the family Rhabdoviridae, which is covered with an envelope protein when it sprouts. The envelope protein is composed of two substances, one is lipid bilayer and the other is anchoring protein derived from glycoprotein. The reason why VSV is used as a vaccine vector and model is that it’s envelope protein can be recombined with foreign virus envelope protein to form virus particles, and the antigen composition remains unchanged. The effects of recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus in invading the body, being recognized by the immune cells of the body, binding to the receptor, and producing neutralizing specific antibodies are basically similar to that produced by SFTSV invading the body [61, 62]. Therefore, using rVSV to develop SFTSV vaccine will have a great prospect.Treatment of MODSSFTS is prone to sepsis and MODS [37]. In principle, all patients with MODS should be admitted to ICU for emergency treatment. At present, the main treatment includes etiology treatment and organ function support.The cause of MODS was actively eliminated. For SFTS patients, the cause was the storm of cellular inflammatory factors caused by viral infection. If septic shock is present, tissue and organ perfusion should be improved as soon as possible to avoid further aggravating organ function damage. If a bacterial infection presents clinically, combined antibiotic therapy is required [42].The main measures to improve oxygen metabolism and correct tissue hypoxia include increasing oxygen supply, reducing oxygen consumption and improving the ability of tissue cells to use oxygen. At present, increasing oxygen supply is the most feasible means to improve tissue hypoxia, which requires three conditions: ① normal hemoglobin content; ② Oxygen therapy, if necessary, mechanical ventilation to support breathing, so that SaO2&gt; 90%; ③ Normal cardiac function and effective circulating blood volume. Vasoactive drugs can be used appropriately to maintain tissue and organ perfusion. Reducing oxygen consumption is often overlooked and can be achieved through sedation, hypothermia and mechanical ventilation to support breathing.Respiratory support treatment Respiratory support is one of the important means to improve oxygen delivery and reduce oxygen consumption. When selecting ventilator mode and setting ventilator parameters, attention should be paid to the prevention and treatment of ventilator related lung injury, and the influence of mechanical ventilation on organ function should be reduced as far as possible [63].General ConclusionsSFTSV has the potential of pandemic, has an impact on global public health and poses a great threat. People in affected areas are at risk of being bitten by ticks when engaged in agricultural and outdoor activities. With the migration of migratory birds, virus spillovers often spread between humans, animals and ticks. Some studies have investigated the complex interaction between SFTSV and the host immune system. For example, the failure to produce a virus-specific humoral response is attributed to b-cell dysfunction. It has also been reported that B cell differentiation in secondary lymphoid organs is the main target of the virus at the end of fatal SFTSV infection. In addition, an inflammatory storm caused by an overimmune response to the virus can lead to progressive sexual organ damage and death. The mainly reasons are: First, the early pathogenesis of SFTSV infection; Second, the similarities and differences and interrelationship between the pathogenesis of fatal and surviving SFTSV infection. At present, there is no specific antiviral drug against SFTSV infection, nor is there a commercial vaccine. Redeveloping new antivirals is a promising approach, but it consumes time and resources. Therefore, more and more people are looking for candidate treatments for emerging viruses through the reuse of existing antiviral drugs. Vaccines are the most powerful tool to prevent outbreaks in response to this infectious disease, and some vaccine-related studies have been published. As the research on SFTSV is still in its infancy, there are still many problems to be solved.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: LASSA MAMMARENAVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Current sampling and sequencing biases of Lassa mammarenavirus limit inference from phylogeography and molecular epidemiology in Lassa fever endemic regions

1 IntroductionLassa fever (LF) is a lethal zoonotic viral haemorrhagic disease of humans, caused by Lassa mammarenavirus (LASV). The estimated westward route of dispersal of the seven lineages of this arenavirus has been used to project the potential for LF to extend beyond the current endemic zone [1], currently concentrated into eight West African countries: Benin, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Mali, Sierra Leone, Togo and Nigeria (S1 Fig) [2].Epidemiological data on LF is limited and constrained by availability of current testing and reporting in the endemic region, making accurate estimates of its true burden challenging [3]. Many individuals infected with LASV do not seek healthcare with up to 80% of infections assumed asymptomatic or presenting as mild illness [4]. Estimates based on longitudinal serological surveys in Sierra Leone in the early 1980’s indicated that 100,000 to 300,000 infections of LF occurred annually in West Africa, with more recent estimates being up to 900,000 infections/year [4,5]. Identification of symptomatic cases is further confounded by overlapping symptoms with other diseases (e.g., malaria) and lack of available diagnostic methods [6–9].Although human-to-human transmission of LF has been reported–typically associated with nosocomial outbreaks–these are rare events when compared with spillover from rodent hosts [10]. Humans become infected with LASV upon contact with or inhalation of excretions from the rodent species [11,12]. The Natal multimammate mouse (Mastomys natalensis) is considered the primary reservoir of LASV. Despite 11 other rodent species having been found to be acutely infected or have seropositivity to LASV including; Mastomys erythroleucus, Hylomyscus pamfi, Mus baoulei and Rattus rattus there are a limited number of studies investigating the role in LASV transmission in these other rodents [13–18].Access to diagnostic tests varies spatially, and the increased availability at centres of excellence in LF treatment and research such as the Irrua Specialist Teaching Hospital, Nigeria and Kenema General Hospital, Sierra Leone results in a spatial bias of reported cases from these locations [19]. This results in uneven LF surveillance initiatives across host species and endemic regions. The consequent paucity of LASV genomic data and associated metadata leads to spatial biases playing a potentially important role in understanding of the disease epidemiology and ecology. In order to identify surveillance gaps and quantify some of the current biases in genomic surveillance, we performed a study of LASV nucleotide sequences available from the National Centre for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) GenBank, using associated metadata to spatially model sequencing effort, adjusted for the number of suspected and confirmed human LF cases to determine potential biases in locations of available sequences or significant geographic limitations in LASV surveillance, particularly, in non-human hosts.2 Methods2.1 Data collection and processingLASV nucleotide sequences from both S and L segments of the viral genome were obtained from the NCBI GenBank [20]. The search query run on 24 Sep 2021 was for “Lassa mammarenavirus” in the organism field of the NCBI nucleotide dataset. Data were obtained using the NCBI Entrez API with analysis conducted using the “genbankr” package within the R statistical programming language [20–22]. Associated citations were manually retrieved to identify missing metadata for sequences including hosts and geographic location of samples. Sequences with large portions (10% missing compared to reference sequences, NC_004296.1 and NC_004297.1 for S and L segments respectively) of missing nucleotide data on the L- or S-segment or lacking associated metadata (collection year, host species, country, and geographical region of sampling) were excluded from phylogenetic analysis. Nucleotide sequences were aligned using the ‘map to reference’ tool on Geneious Prime 20201.2 (https://www.geneious.com). Alignment, visual inspection and manual editing were performed, and entries that contained >100 continuous ambiguous nucleotide calls were excluded (S1 Data). We first summarise available metadata on year of collection, the species of origin of the LASV sequence and the country of sampling.Obtained sequences are associated with the level-1 administrative region of sampling. For sequences with no sub-national location we enriched available metadata by extracting location data from associated publications. We geocoded the provided location (e.g., longitude and latitude, or town name) using the Google Geocoding API and the “ggmap” R package [23]. These produced longitude and latitude locations were associated with level-1 administrative regions using the “sf” R package, shapefiles were obtained from GADM 4.0. and accessed through the “geodata” R package [24,25]. Additional cleaned and enriched was archived on Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6340162).2.2 Sequencing biasWe compared the number of sequences returned in GenBank from each country with the number of Lassa fever (LF) cases reported from a country between 2008 and February 2023 to test the correlation between availability of sequences and reported LF cases.The number of reported LF cases aggregated to country level was used as a measure of national LASV transmission intensity. This period was selected by the study team due to increasing standardisation of case reporting since 2008 [26,27]. Prior to 2008 cases were only sporadically reported as individual outbreaks in academic literature or outbreak reports [28]. The extension of the time-period to February 2023 (compared to the search being run in September 2021) was to incorporate more recent data from the continually improving surveillance in the endemic region. The case dataset (S2 Data) was compiled from a systematic review of the literature, public health, outbreak response and ministry of health resources. The references of data sources used to compile the reported case dataset are included in S2 Data.We report the Pearson’s product-moment correlation coefficient (r), the number of degrees of freedom, the 95% confidence interval (95% C.I.) and the p-value for a null-hypothesis of no correlation between the number of sequences obtained from a country and the national transmission intensity of LASV. We then tested the association between the number of available sequences obtained from a) humans or b) rodent hosts with LASV transmission intensity to test the null-hypothesis that the number of both human derived and rodent derived sequences from a country was not associated with national LASV transmission intensity. The “stats” R package was used for all correlation tests [22].To explore the bias of sequenced samples at a sub-national level the origin of a sequenced sample was geocoded using the Google Geocoding API and the “ggmap” R package [23]. Reported sequence locations were associated with level-1 administrative regions using the “sf” R package, shapefiles were obtained from GADM 4.0.2. and accessed through the “geodata” R package [24,25,29]. We stratified sequences into human and rodent sourced samples to visualise the spatial heterogeneity of sampling within rodent hosts and infected humans.To estimate the relative sampling effort bias at the sub-national level (i.e., level-1 administrative regions), the number of samples obtained within a region was associated with the centroid of the region. As in the prior analysis, the number of reported confirmed LF cases within a region was used as a measure of regional LASV transmission intensity. To standardise this to the population size of the region, the number of reported cases within a region was divided by the human population count to produce the number of confirmed cases per 100,000 individuals. Regional population counts were obtained from WorldPop 2020 raster data accessed through the “geodata” R package [25]. GADM shapefiles of level-1 administrative regions were used to extract and aggregate human population counts from each raster cell to level-1 administrative regions using the “terra” R package [30]. The relative sequencing effort at a location is derived from the smoothed two-dimensional coefficient of a spatial Generalised Additive Model using the number of sequences as the response variable, with geographic coordinates (Longitude = X, Latitude = Y) and regional LASV transmission intensity (i.e., reported human cases per 100,000 individuals) as covariates (Eq 1). This model was constructed using the “mgcv” R package [31].

LASVsequences∼s(X*Y)+s(Reportedcasesper100,000)
(1)

The smooth terms (s(X * Y) and s(Reported human cases per 100,000)) were specified as thin plate regression splines with a basis dimension (k) of 102 for the spatial smooth term (Longitude by Latitude) and 10 for the smooth term of LASV transmission intensity. We assessed the appropriateness of the selected basis dimensions by comparing to the estimated degrees of freedom (EDF) of the smooth terms [31]. This model is used to test the null hypothesis that there is no association between sequencing effort and LASV transmission intensity across the endemic region. We present the two-dimensional relative sequencing effort at coordinates within the study area reporting the EDF and p-value for the spatial smooth and LASV transmission intensity smooth terms.Phylogenetic analysisPhylogenetic analysis was undertaken through Bayesian Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method using BEAST.v1.10.4 [32]. In BEAUTi, the parameters were a substitution model as a generalised time reversible plus gamma site heterogeneity, with codon partition positions 1, 2, 3. A strict clock and a coalescent tree prior with a constant size population was used. Each analysis consisted of 20 million MCMC steps and trees were sampled every 20,000 generations. Sample collection dates from the metadata were used as tip dates to fit to a molecular clock, and country of sample collection was incorporated as a discrete state [33,34]. To assess the log files of the output TRACER.v.1.7.1 was used. Maximum-clade credibility trees were generated through TreeAnnotator v1.8.4 and visualised in FigTree.v1.4.4 [35].3 Results3.1 Compiled datasetThe initial dataset comprised 2,298 records (from samples obtained 1969–2019), including nucleotide sequences and associated metadata. Incomplete gene sequences and sequences lacking metadata information (n = 1,045) were removed from phylogenetic analyses. Therefore, 680 sequences of complete S segment and 573 sequences of partial L segment (L protein only) were used. Accession numbers of included and excluded sequences are available in S1 Data.3.2 Descriptive analysisYear of collection was available for 2,108 records, with the oldest sequence dating from 1969 and latest from 2019. Among these records, most sequences (n = 1,936, 92%) have been obtained since 2008. Human-derived LASV sequences comprised most of the available records (67%), other host species include Mastomys natalensis (29%) and Mastomys spp. (3%), while Mastomys erythroleucus (n = 18), Mus baoulei (n = 9) and Hylomyscus pamfi (n = 10) represent < 1% each. The species sampled was not documented in 107 records. Country of collection was available for 2,238 records. Most sequences were produced from samples collected in Nigeria (54%), followed by Guinea (20%), Sierra Leone (14%), Liberia (4%) and Cote d’Ivoire (3%) with the remainder obtained from, Benin, Ghana, Mali and Togo (Fig 1).10.1371/journal.pgph.0002159.g001Fig 1The number of sequences, shown on a log10 scale, retrieved from NCBI GenBank with associated sub-national sampling location and host for human samples (top, n = 1,328) and rodent samples (bottom, n = 527).Yellow regions represent level-1 administrative areas with no sequences within countries that have at least one available sequence. White countries are West African countries with no available LASV sequences. See S1 Fig for country names. Shapefiles for basemap layer obtained from GADM 4.0.2 (www.gadm.org) [29].Sequences for human derived samples with sub-national location data (n = 1328, 63%) were clustered in Edo State, Nigeria (n = 519, 39%), Ondo State, Nigeria (n = 220, 17%) and Eastern Province, Sierra Leone (n = 159, 12%) with 430 samples from the remaining endemic regions. Sequences from rodent samples with sub-national location data (n = 527, 25%) were most commonly obtained from Faranah, Guinea (n = 210, 39%) and Eastern Province, Sierra Leone (n = 107, 20%) with 210 samples from the regions.3.3 Sequencing biasWe observed a strong positive correlation between the number of confirmed human cases between 2008–2023 and the number of GenBank deposited sequences at country level (Correlation coefficient (r) (degrees of freedom = 7) = 0.93, 95% Confidence Interval (95% C.I.) = 0.71–0.98, p < 0.001). When analysed by species source no correlation with the number of confirmed cases and the number of available rodent derived sequences was observed (r(6) = -0.019 95% C.I. -0.71–0.69, p = 0.96). There remained a strong positive correlation between the number of confirmed cases and human derived sequences (r(6) = 0.99, 95% C.I. 0.998–0.999, p = < 0.001).When combining both human and rodent-derived samples at the level-1 administrative region to explore spatial sampling biases, we found differences in relative sequencing effort across the study region. The spatial smooth term identified sampling effort as greatest in Southwest Nigeria, centred over Edo State, the Faranah and Nzérékoré regions of Guinea, Eastern Province of Sierra Leone and Nimba district of Liberia (estimated degrees of freedom (EDF) = 29.2, p < 0.001) (Fig 2). There was a positive, non-linear association between LASV transmission intensity (measured as number of reported cases per 100,000 individuals) and the number of available rodent and human derived LASV sequences at level-1 administrative region (EDF = 3.96, p < 0.001).10.1371/journal.pgph.0002159.g002Fig 2Modelled relative sequencing effort derived from both human and rodent samples.Greatest sequencing effort coincides with areas where sampling in humans (Edo, Nigeria and Kenema, Sierra Leone) and rodents (Faranah, Guinea) have historically been focussed. Shapefiles for basemap layer obtained from GADM 4.0.2 (www.gadm.org) [29].3.4 Phylogenetic analysisSequences for each segment of LASV showed clustering according to previously documented lineages I-VII alongside geographical clustering with lineages I-III and VI present in Nigeria, lV in Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone, V in Mali and VII in Togo (S2 Fig). In this analysis only L segment sequences of lineage V from Cote d’Ivoire were included due to quality control exclusion criteria. The phylogeny of the L segment indicates an older emergence of LASV in the human population, with the most recent common ancestor (MRCA) predicted in the year 1498 in Nigeria, inference based on the S segment indicates the emergence in the year 1681 (Table 1).10.1371/journal.pgph.0002159.t001Table 1The most recent common ancestor (MRCA) stratified by host and country of collection of Lassa mammarenavirus (LASV) S and L segments.Samples were collected between 1969–2018.
Host species

Country

S segment MRCA

L segment MRCA

Homo sapiens (n = 1181)
Benin19951989Guinea18951871Liberia18951627Nigeria16811498Sierra Leone19011874Togo20162014
Hylomyscus pamfi (n = 2)
Nigeria16811498
Mastomys erythroleucus (n = 18)
Guinea19752010Nigeria20082006
Mastomys natalensis (n = 36)
Guinea19381997Mali19512007Sierra Leone19091979There was a lack of sequence information from lineage I and VI, however, phylogeny suggests these lineages are basal to others in Nigeria (S2 Fig). Lineage VII in Togo is most closely related to Nigerian isolates and potentially diverged between 500–900 years ago. The divergence of lineage III and II was predicted to have occurred approximately between mid-900 and mid-1400 according to the phylogenetics trees for L and S segments respectively (S2 Fig). Introduction to countries west of Nigeria appears to be by dispersal initially to Liberia, followed by Guinea in the 1700s, followed by Sierra Leone and Mali approximately 100 years later. A lack of full segment sequences from lineage V limits calculation of divergence from the most recent common ancestor from lineage IV (approximately 200 years).4 DiscussionThere are several important aspects of our study and findings. First, we studied a comprehensive dataset of publicly available full-segment LASV sequences, spanning West Africa and host species, to inform our understanding of the phylogeny of LASV dispersal. Second, we identified substantial variability in the origin of available sequences and completeness of records. Third, we showed strong geographic clustering among lineages supporting prior hypotheses of radiation from both Nigeria and a subsequent introduction into Liberia [1]. Fourth, the synthesis of available metadata highlights important gaps in currently available data, including spatial bias in the sequencing of samples we propose that this should be used to inform the design of epidemiological programmes going forward.Our analyses of 2,298 LASV sequences obtained from GenBank highlights the spatial biases in the availability of sequence data that may limit our understanding of the current and historic dispersal of LASV lineages in West Africa. First, sequence data was typically obtained from three of the eight endemic countries: Nigeria, Guinea and Sierra Leone. We found a strong association between LASV transmission intensity, measured as the number of reported human cases, and the number of available sequences (Fig 1). When stratifying by host species this trend did not remain; with rodent derived samples showing no association with LASV transmission intensity. LASV sequences obtained from rodents were relatively over-sampled from low transmission intensity settings; this may indicate a substantial lack of human case reporting in these locations. In high LASV transmission intensity settings rodents appeared to be relatively undersampled compared to human derived sequences, this is potentially an important source of bias when attempting to infer phylogeography within the reservoir host of this zoonotic pathogen. Sequence data from other countries, and more regions within them, across West Africa are required to increase confidence in the timelines of the currently inferred westward expansion. Greater focus needs to be placed on acquiring sequences from the rodent host to understand viral genetic diversity within the primary reservoir species. Comparing rodent derived sequences with those acquired from spillover into human populations may also allow identification of genetic drivers of transmission [36].We used the number of reported cases between 2008–2023 as a measure of transmission intensity of LASV within a country over the study period. This may not be suitable due to substantial biases in the reporting of Lassa fever cases due to different surveillance sensitivity between countries and over time [3]. While unlikely, it is possible, that the magnitude of viral transmission within a country may not be directly related to the number of observed cases Therefore, in the absence of an unbiased estimate of transmission intensity we believe the number of reported cases is an acceptable proxy to model sequencing effort. We mapped the relationship between where sequences have been obtained as a function of this transmission intensity to produce a measure of relative sequencing effort to identify regions where increased LASV sequencing are required to counteract current sequencing biases (Fig 2).Second, geographic clustering of LASV lineages, suggest isolated events of human-to-rodent transmission (S2 Fig) and the emergence of LASV dating from 1498 in Nigeria (Table 1). Similarly, Olayemi et al. report evidence of earlier emergence of the virus in humans than in rodents in Nigeria [34]. Comparatively limited data from non-human hosts with limited genome coverage, (69/703 sequences encompassed complete genes) produce important uncertainty around the observation of human-to-rodent transmission. Taken together, this data highlight limited surveillance among animal species, necessitating further investments in data acquisition and sharing to accurately define the spatiotemporal expansion of LASV in West Africa.The phylogenetic analysis of LASV stratified by host species supports spatial evolution, in addition to intra-host viral evolution (S2 Fig). For instance, LASV sequences from M. erytholeucus sampled in Nigeria and Guinea clustered within lineages III and IV, respectively. Interestingly, these isolates appear to occur after the emergence of the most recent common ancestor virus circulating among humans and M. natalensis in these countries (Table 1), suggesting introduction of LASV into M. erythroleucus populations was a consequence of pathogen circulation in human and M. natalensis populations. Sequences from M. natalensis in Sierra Leone exhibit minimal clustering, and were interspersed with sequences from humans, potentially representing isolated events of pathogen introduction into human populations with spillback into commensal rodent populations (i.e., reverse zoonosis). The most recent common ancestor of LASV sequences from M. natalensis in Sierra Leone suggest a later emergence of the virus in this country. Our findings corroborate those of Olayemi et al., that within Sierra Leone LASV appears to have emerged in human hosts before rodents [34]. However, this data must be caveated by the limited information from rodent species in these locations.There is a lower coverage of rodent-derived LASV sequences, with those from the primary reservoir M. natalensis forming fewer than one-third of all sequences (n = 642, 28%), with substantially lower sampling of other possible rodent hosts, including other Mastomys species. Rodent sampling has not increased at the same rate as human samples despite increased sampling effort since 2008 [15,16,37]. There is substantial heterogeneity in the locations in which rodent and human samples are available. For example, a relatively high number of rodent samples (n = 429) have been obtained from Guinea while few human sequences (n = 20) are available from these locations. The inverse is true of Nigeria where most human derived sequences are obtained (n = 1,147) but only 85 rodent sequences are available, and all of these from a single state (Edo, Nigeria). The number of suspected and reported cases was found to be positively but non-linearly associated with the number of available sequences. This is suggestive of a consolidation of research and focus of sampling in areas historically with high numbers of human cases but there remains to a paucity of sequences from elsewhere in the endemic region. The limited number of full segment sequences from rodents, from few geographic locations, limits our understanding of viral radiation in rodent hosts, particularly from species which are not considered the primary reservoir, e.g., H. pamfi. The most recent common ancestor for the viral sequence obtained from H. pamfi is estimated to be in the late 1600s; it is therefore possible lineage VI and/or H. pamfi as a reservoir of LASV has gone undetected due to lack of sufficient sampling [16].Interpreting available LASV sequences is challenging for several reasons. A large proportion of available sequences (70%) have been obtained within Lassa fever research programs, representing spatial ascertainment bias [38–40]. In addition to these spatial biases temporal biases are apparent. Since 2016 there has been a substantial increase in the number of LASV sequences available in NCBI GenBank, reflecting increasing research effort, availability of sequencing platforms and increased data collection during Lassa fever epidemics, such as in the 2018 Nigeria Lassa fever outbreak [41–43]. There are notably fewer recorded sequences of LASV from Benin, Togo, and Ghana, suggesting a potential a gap in surveillance and research capacity in these locations or a lack of circulating LASV, despite several reported outbreaks [44–46]. Phylogenetic analysis on 60% of our initial dataset, following removal of sequences due to incompleteness or missing geographic and year of collection information (n = 1,045) demonstrated geographic clustering of LASV lineages, supporting prior analyses [16,33,34,44,47–50]. Increased data availability from Nigeria following increased LASV surveillance allowed regional analysis of phylogeny for lineages II and III supporting previous findings of expansion of these lineages from North-East Nigeria to the South-West of the country [51–53].A substantial number (n = 869) of the sequences retrieved corresponded to short fragments (< 1 Kb) probably derived from PCR products used for diagnostic purposes rather than for viral genomic surveillance. LASV is a segmented virus, and it was not possible to identify complete genome sequences since both S and L segments are reported separately on the sequence’s repository. The molecular clock analyses from L protein indicated an earlier emergence of LASV when compared to S segment analysis (1498 and 1681 respectively), potentially because the viral RNA polymerase (L protein) is less affected by selective pressure than the S segment [11,47,54]. In arenavirus LCMV populations the number of mutations in NP and GP regions were more abundant that in the polymerase region, suggesting that mutations in the L region could be less tolerated [55]. In addition, investigations on LASV intra-host evolution, both in humans and rodents, showed that the substitution ratios varied widely across LASV genes, with the GPC gene, encoded in the S segment showing higher within-host diversity. Furthermore, this same study suggested that despite the short duration of LASV infection, B and T cells response seem to positively select escape mutations GPC [11]. Despite these challenges, this study has synthesised currently available data on LASV sequences to investigate the location and period of sampling to reconstruct the dispersal of viral lineages across the endemic region. Despite the regionalisation of LF being driven by rodent-to-human transmission, there remains scarce LASV genomic data from non-human hosts. We have mapped the locations of relative under sampling to guide targeted efforts to counteract biases in currently available data for both rodent and human derived sequences. Expanded sampling of LASV from animal species within the endemic region will improve our current understanding of LASV evolution and ecology and improve confidence in current estimates of westward expansion of Lassa fever in humans. Further understanding of the viral evolution dynamics of LASV and spatial expansion of current lineages will be vital to ensure adequate diagnostic tools are available to respond to the expected sporadic outbreaks of Lassa Fever across the region.Supporting informationS1 FigMap of West Africa.displays a map of West Africa with country names for reference with Figs 1 and 2. Shapefiles for mapping obtained from GADM 4.0.2 [29].(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigTime-calibrated phylogeny for both the small segment (S) and large segment (L) from included LASV sequences.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 DataGenBank accession number of analysed sequences.This dataset includes available data about host, country, region, year, sequence length, genome segment (L or S) and predicted MRCA.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S2 DataDataset on confirmed Lassa fever cases.This presents the number of confirmed cases of Lassa fever reported from countries between 2008 and 2023 at a subnational level that were used to calculate the number of cases per 100,000 people. References for the reports used to produce this dataset are included.(CSV)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Serological Evidence of Multiple Zoonotic Viral Infections among Wild Rodents in Barbados

1. IntroductionRodent species are the most abundant terrestrial animals (representing 43% of mammalian species) found globally and exist as a part of biological ecosystems, however they do pose significant threats to public health [1,2]. The threat of zoonotic infections from wild rodents is well-known, with the risk of infections involving various species of bacteria, fungi, parasites and viruses [1]. Most rodent-borne infections are transmitted through direct or indirect contact with infected rodents and their excreta [1,2]. For this reason, factors such as rainfall, topography, vegetation and occupation, which influence human exposure to rodents or pathogen survival in the environment, have been associated with rodent-borne pathogen infections including Leptospira, orthohantaviruses, mammarenaviruses and orthopoxviruses [3,4,5,6,7,8]. Intraspecies transmission of mammarenaviruses, orthohantaviruses and orthopoxviruses have been documented, and occurs following intraspecific wounding, grooming, and with subsequent contact and contamination with infected saliva, excreta and infectious aerosols [9,10,11,12,13].Orthohantaviruses are single stranded negative-sense RNA viruses, approximately 120–160 nm in diameter from the Orthohantaviridae virus family [14,15,16]. Orthohantavirus infection is an emerging disease throughout the world. Orthohantavirus infection can cause two main clinical diseases, namely haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) and hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS), or hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS) [17]. Old World hantaviruses are responsible for causing HFRS and a mild form of HFRS, nephropathica epidemica, whereas New World hantaviruses are responsible for HPS or HCPS. Zoonotic transmission of orthohantaviruses occurs through human contact with infected rodents and/or their excreta or saliva, or indirect contact through inhalation of infectious aerosols contaminated by infected rodent excreta and/or saliva. The natural reservoir hosts of orthohantaviruses include bats, rodents, moles and shrews [18,19,20]. Orthohantavirus circulation in wild rodents can be intriguing, since one rodent species can host more than one orthohantavirus and more than one orthohantavirus can circulate in the same geographical location, with separation influenced by habitat and rodent distribution and range [21,22,23].Mammarenaviridae are a family of single-stranded RNA viruses found in mammals and boid snakes. They are divided into two serogroups based on shared antigens and geographic distribution: (a) Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis-Lassa virus serocomplex viruses, or the Old World arenaviruses, and (b) Tacaribe serocomplex viruses, or the New World arenaviruses, (NWV) [24]. Humans typically become infected with mammarenaviruses through contact with excreta from infected rodents by inhalation of contaminated aerosols, but also via a faecal–oral route of contaminated food, and/or broken skin [9]. In addition, no evidence exists for mammarenavirus infection among rodent species in the English-speaking Caribbean to date.Cowpox virus (CPXV) is a uniform species virus of the genus Orthopoxvirus, family Poxviridae, and is antigenically and genetically related to the variola virus, vaccinia virus, and monkeypox virus. It is established as the causative agent of cow pox, a zoonosis causing lesions on the udder of dairy cows and the hands of persons in frequent contact with cows [25,26,27]. CPXV has been detected in a wide host range including voles, rats, cattle, horses, llamas, zoo animals and humans in Europe [27,28]. The reservoir hosts of CPXV are wild rodents, cows, domestic cats, and humans are incidental hosts. Although an orthopoxvirus study among wild songbirds has been conducted in Trinidad, no published studies of CPXV among rodents have been conducted previously in the Caribbean [29].Given the paucity of data on the zoonotic potential of rodents causing transmission of orthohantavirus, mammarenavirus and orthopoxvirus infections in the Caribbean, a serological study of wild rodents is fully warranted. We report serological evidence of orthohantavirus, mammarenavirus and orthopoxvirus infections among wild rodents, and a molecular investigation of orthohantavirus infection status of three rodent species, Rattus norvegicus, Rattus rattus and Mus musculus, in Barbados. These should provide useful data to aid in the understanding, awareness, control and future prevention of three rodent-borne zoonotic diseases caused by orthohantavirus, mammarenavirus and orthopoxvirus infections in Barbados and the wider Caribbean.2. Results2.1. Wild Rodents Trapping SurveyTo understand the possible rodent reservoirs of orthohantaviruses, mammarenaviruses and orthopoxviruses in Barbados, a rodent trapping and sampling survey was conducted in 2019. A total of 160 rodents were trapped over 10 trapping nights from 15th January to 26th January 2019, at a total of 15 trapping sites around Barbados including chicken farms, recycling centres, horse stables, an agriproducts retail store, residential neighbourhoods, the national geriatric hospital, and sugarcane fields in parishes where previously recorded human orthohantavirus cases occurred (Table 1 & Figure 1) [30].Primarily more wild mice (M. musculus) were caught in comparison to wild rats (R. rattus and R. norvegicus) during the trapping survey (Table 1). Three rodent species were trapped, namely M. musculus (93.8%, 150/160), R. norvegicus (5%, 8/160) and R. rattus (1.3%, 2/160) (Table 1). Of the M. musculus rodents trapped, 54% (81/150) were males compared to 45.3% (68/150) females, 56.8% (46/81) of the males had developed scrota indicative of reproductive maturity, whilst 43.2% (35/68) did not. Further, 17.6% (12/68) of the females were pregnant, 76.5% (52/68) were non-parous and with 5.9% (4/68) of the female M. musculus rodents the reproductive maturity was either indiscernible or not recorded (Table 1).Of the R. norvegicus rodents trapped, 12.5% (1/8) were males compared to 87.5% (7/8) females, 0% (0/1) of the males had developed scrota indicative of reproductive maturity whilst 100% (1/1) did not. Further, 0% (0/8) of the females were pregnant whilst 87.5% (7/8) were non-parous, and with 12.5% (1/8) the reproductive maturity was either indiscernible or not recorded (Table 1). There were only two (2) R. rattus rodents, both scrotal males, trapped during this study. Additionally, one rodent was trapped but the observed species identification was inadvertently not recorded.2.2. Orthohantavirus IFA & RT-PCR Testing of Wild RodentsDried rodent blood was used to obtain rodent sera in all but two (2) rodents, where hearts were used to obtain the sera. Screening of sera from wild rodents trapped in seven different parishes in Barbados was conducted using IFA to identify seropositive rodents with orthohantavirus-specific IgG antibodies (Table 2, Figure 1 and Figure 2). Of the 160 rodents tested, 3.8% (6/160) were orthohantavirus IFA-positive. For mice, Mus musculus, 4.0% (6/150) were orthohantavirus IFA-positive, while for both rat species, R. norvegicus and Rattus rattus, none of them (0% (0/8) and 0% (0/2) respectively) were orthohantavirus IFA-positive (Table 2). The lack of orthohantavirus seropositivity among rats in this study is notable in comparison to a previous rodent survey in Barbados [31]. The orthohantavirus seropositive rodents identified in this current study were trapped at sites in St. John (66.7%, 4/6), St. Michael (16.7%, 1/6) and Christ Church (16.7%, 1/6), including residential neighbourhoods, a local geriatric hospital, sugarcane fields and chicken farms (Figure 1). The two rodent sera (obtained from hearts) were both seronegative for all viral pathogens under investigation.Tissues and sera from seropositive wild rodents were then tested using orthohantavirus-specific RT-PCR. Molecular investigations failed to detect orthohantavirus vRNA among wild rodents in Barbados, as none of the seropositive rodent sera nor tissues yielded positive orthohantavirus-specific RT-PCR results (Table 2).Mammarenavirus serosurveys of wild rodents in Barbados and in the Caribbean are non-existent. Thus, screening of wild rodent sera was conducted using mammarenavirus-specific IFA to identify seropositive rodents with orthohantavirus-specific IgG antibodies (Table 2). Of the 160 wild rodents trapped during the study, 2.5% (4/160) were seropositive for mammarenavirus infection using LCMV-specific IFA testing (Table 2). Among M. musculus rodents, 2.7% (4/150) were seropositive whilst 0% (0/8) of R. norvegicus and 0% (0/2) R. rattus rodents were seropositive for mammarenavirus infection (Table 2). All the mammarenavirus-seropositive rodents were trapped in sugarcane fields and at a recycling centre in St. John (Table 2 & Figure 1).After identification of seropositive wild rodents using IFA, their sera and tissues were screened for mammarenavirus-specific vRNA using RT-PCR (Table 2). None of the seropositive rodent sera nor tissues were positive following mammarenavirus-specific RT-PCR; thus, these molecular investigations failed to detect the presence of mammarenavirus vRNA among wild rodent species in Barbados (Table 2).2.3. Orthopoxvirus IFA Testing of Wild RodentsGiven the re-emergence of CPXV as a zoonotic agent in North America and Europe, and the lack of previous data in Barbados or the Caribbean, a serological investigation of orthopoxvirus infection among wild rodents was conducted. Of the 160 wild rodents sampled, 7.5% (12/160) were seropositive for orthopoxvirus infection (Table 2). For mice, M. musculus, 6.7% (10/150) were orthopoxvirus IFA-positive, whilst for both rat species, R. norvegicus and R. rattus, 12.5% (1/8) and 50% (1/2) respectively were seropositive following orthopoxvirus IFA testing (Table 2). Among the orthopoxvirus-seropositive rodents trapped in the study, 6.5% (6/92) were trapped in St. John and 14% (6/43) in St. Philip respectively, from sugarcane fields, chicken farms, residential neighbourhoods and a recycling centre (Table 2 & Figure 1).3. DiscussionOrthohantavirus, mammarenavirus and orthopoxvirus studies on rodents in Caribbean countries have been sparse or non-existent, and we present the first serological evidence of multiple orthohantavirus, mammarenavirus and orthopoxvirus infections in wild rodent species in both Barbados and the English-speaking Caribbean. Seroprevalence rates of 3.8% for orthohantavirus, 2.5% for mammarenavirus and 7.5% for orthopoxvirus infections were observed among wild rodents in Barbados during this study. This has potential biosecurity implications for farms, hospitals, residential homes, businesses involved in recycling and persons working in and living around sugarcane fields.The last report of orthohantavirus infection among wild rodents in Barbados was in 2002, thus more updated data were required to understand the orthohantavirus infection status of wild rodents [31]. This study included wild M. musculus rodents to test the hypothesis of M. musculus as possible rodent vectors of orthohantavirus infections in Barbados and represents the first serological evidence of orthohantavirus infection of M. musculus in the Caribbean and the first evidence of mammarenavirus infection and orthopoxvirus infection among wild rodents in the Caribbean.3.1. Orthohantavirus Infection among Wild RodentsGiven the known rodent hosts present in Barbados, Rattus and Mus spp., SEOV infections would be expected given its worldwide distribution [32]. Orthohantavirus prevalence among wild rodents varies by geographic location from 2.5% in Brazil, 5.6% to 7.7% in Paraguay, 4.6% to 5.6% and as high as 23.5% in Panama, and even higher rates of 29% and 28% in Grenada and Barbados respectively [31,33,34,35,36,37]. The overall orthohantavirus seropositivity rate of 3.8% observed among all rodents in this study, and among R. norvegicus (0%) and M. musculus (4%), were like those observed in the USA, Kuwait, China and Europe [38,39,40,41]. The lack of orthohantavirus seropositivity among wild rats in this study may be due to the low numbers of rats trapped and the low percentage of males, as adult male rats are known to have higher orthohantavirus seroprevalence rates [13]. Orthohantavirus seropositive M. musculus rodents were identified by IFA testing, highlighting the possible risk these may play in orthohantavirus transmission in Barbados. The lack of genetic evidence of orthohantavirus infection among wild rodents, and the lack of demonstration of onward transmission, limits the conclusion of their potential as orthohantavirus reservoirs in Barbados. Limited orthohantavirus research has been conducted in the Caribbean. The first serological evidence of orthohantavirus infections in the Caribbean involved the detection of anti-orthohantavirus antibodies in suspected leptospirosis patients and rodents in Barbados [31]. In this study, 12% of 60 patients presenting with febrile illness possessed orthohantavirus-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) [31]. The identity of the circulating orthohantavirus strain(s) and their source in Barbados has remained unknown. Evidence of Maporal, Caño Delgadito and Araraquara orthohantavirus infections in rodents, and the presence of multiple rodent hosts in Venezuela, Brazil and Columbia [42,43,44,45] along with a recent HPS outbreak in French Guiana in 2016, enhance the risk of new and more lethal orthohantavirus strains entering the Caribbean region via international and inter-regional trade and travel [46].Orthohantavirus transmission is influenced by environmental and climatic factors including rainfall, topography and vegetation [3,4,47]. High rainfall can be associated with increased orthohantavirus transmission, as higher infection rates were observed during the wet season compared to the dry season since rainfall can permit moist soil which facilitates rodent burrowing, breeding, survival and the proliferation of vegetation and food for rodents [4,47]. The rainy season in Barbados has been associated with higher human orthohantavirus prevalence rates, with peaks occurring in the months of August and September [30]. A lower orthohantavirus seroprevalence of 3.8% was observed in this study compared to the previous rodent study, with a 29% seroprevalence rate. This may be due to a few differences between the former and currently reported rodent serosurveys, namely (1) sample size, 68 rodents vs. 160 rodents, (2) the proportion of rodent species, predominantly Rattus spp. and no M. musculus rodents vs. predominantly M. musculus rodents, and (3) timing of sampling, wet season (July–August 2000) vs. dry season (January 2019) [31]. These differences may have resulted in the lower orthohantavirus seroprevalence rate observed, and the lack of detection of orthohantavirus vRNA among wild rodents.Conversely, excessive rainfall and/or extreme weather events including flooding can result in the reduction of rodent populations, reduced risk of orthohantavirus transmission, and reduced orthohantavirus seroprevalence [48]. However, no major flooding events were recorded during 2018 in Barbados. Other climatic factors influencing orthohantavirus transmission include atmospheric moisture variability and temperature [48], so tropical climatic conditions such as high temperature and humidity in Barbados could influence the survival of orthohantaviruses in the environment and their transmission. Further research on the influence of abiotic factors in orthohantavirus transmission is therefore necessary to understand the orthohantavirus ecology in Barbados and the Caribbean. Future studies to obtain genetic evidence of the orthohantavirus strain(s) present are necessary to determine the true reservoir status of rodents, and perhaps should be conducted in synch with peak periods of human orthohantavirus infections to permit higher chances of obtaining genetic sequences from rodents. The inclusion of bats in future rodent serosurveys should also be strongly considered given the detection of orthohantaviruses in various regions around the world [49,50,51,52,53].3.2. Mammarenavirus IFA Seropositive RodentsEvidence of mammarenavirus infection in rodents, bats and humans within the Americas has been previously documented in the USA, Columbia, Brazil and French Guiana [54,55,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65]. A mammarenavirus seroprevalence rate of 2.5% was observed among wild rodents in Barbados during this study, which is comparable to seroprevalence rates observed in wild rodents from Turkey (2.4%), Italy (5.6%), the United Kingdom (5.8%) and the USA (3.1%) [66,67,68,69]. However, the same issues which may have impacted orthohantavirus seroprevalence rates in these wild rodents could have also influenced observed mammarenavirus seroprevalence rates, as both viruses share common routes of intra-species and zoonotic transmission via infected rodent urine and faeces, skin abrasions or cuts, and the inhalation of dust or aerosols contaminated by rodent excreta.The specific mammarenavirus infecting M. musculus in this study is unknown, as antibody cross-reactivity can be observed among mammarenaviruses and only FRNT and genetic evidence can confirm the identity of mammarenaviruses [70,71]. One possible mammarenavirus that may be present among wild M. musculus in Barbados is LCMV, which is a teratogen causing birth defects when acquired by pregnant mothers. Though LCMV has a world-wide distribution, viruses of the LCM-LAS complex are found primarily in Africa, whereas the Tacaribe complex viruses are found in North and South America. The Tacaribe complex includes the following viruses: Tacaribe, Allpahuayo, Amapari, Bear Canyon Virus, Chapare, Cupixi, Flexal, Guanarito, Junin, Latino, Machupo, Oliveros, Paraná, Pichinde, Pirital, Sabiá, Tamiami, and Whitewater Arroyo.Mammarenavirus studies in the Caribbean, however, have been limited even though the Tacaribe virus has been isolated since the 1950s in Trinidad and Tobago, and some virological studies conducted with Jamaican fruit bats (Artibeus jamaicensis) and mosquitoes have discovered the presence of this virus in Trinidad and Tobago [57,72]. The role of A. jamaicensis as a possible reservoir host was explored and found both to be susceptible to infection by Tacaribe virus and to exhibit disease pathology, suggesting this species may not be the reservoir for Tacaribe virus [73]. This virus was also isolated from lone star (Amblyomma americanum) ticks in Florida, USA, and as this tick is known to feed on humans, the ability of the lone star tick to transmit this virus to people requires further investigation [74]. At present, the reservoir host of the Tacaribe virus remains unknown. Future studies should explore the source of mammarenavirus infections in wild rodents.3.3. Orthopoxvirus IFA Seropositive RodentsWe also report the first serological evidence of orthopoxvirus infection among wild rodents in the Caribbean, with an orthopoxvirus seroprevalence rate of 7.5% observed among wild rodents. This is on the lower end of orthopoxvirus seroprevalence rates observed compared to studies of wild rodents in Europe and Africa, including Finland (33%), Germany (32%), Uganda (42%), Hungary (18%), Turkey (0.3%) and Serbia (3.2%) [67,75,76,77]. Evidence of orthopoxvirus infection outside of Europe is limited, and thus this adds to the limited knowledge of orthopoxvirus infections worldwide and is of importance, as orthopoxviruses continue to be emerging zoonotic agents [28,78,79]. In Europe, bank voles (Clethrionomys glareolus) and wood mice (Apodemus sylvaticus) constitute the main reservoirs [27], whereas CPXV was sporadically detected in rats (Rattus norvegicus) [80,81]. Domestic cats can play a role in the transmission of CPXV to humans [82,83]. Direct transmission of CPXV from rodents to humans has also been documented, including rats and mongoose [81,84,85,86,87]. CPXV infection of immunocompetent persons usually results in localized lesions mainly on fingers, hands, or the face [88]. However, in immunocompromised patients, severe generalized CPXV infections have been documented [89,90].The lack of smallpox vaccinations in the late 1970s, and an increasing trend of keeping wildlife as pets, have been offered as the reasons for increasing human cases of smallpox in Europe [28,81,86]. Public health education regarding the zoonotic pathogens potentially transmissible by rodents (mice and rats) in Barbados can be updated to include these zoonotic viral pathogens, and biosecurity awareness training given to at-risk persons including cow farmers, dairy workers, ancillary staff, sanitation workers, veterinarians, and the general public.3.4. StrengthsSeveral key findings were observed in this study, including (1) the identification of a new rodent species in the Caribbean, M. musculus, with serological evidence of orthohantavirus infection and (2) serological evidence of multiple viral human pathogens, namely orthohantavirus, mammarenavirus and orthopoxvirus infections among wild rats and mice, R. norvegicus and M. musculus respectively, in Barbados.3.5. Study LimitationsThis study had some limitations and would benefit from some improvements, including (1) larger sample sizes for rodents (particularly rats), (2) a change in the timing of rodent sampling which ideally should coincide with a variation in rainfall and climatic conditions (dry and wet seasons) and preferably over multiple years and (3) the absence of sampling of other possible virus zoonosis reservoirs such as bats [49,53,91].3.6. RecommendationsTo limit the potential exposure to viral pathogens from wild rodents, enhanced public awareness should be conducted to inform persons of potential transmission risks of mammarenavirus, orthohantavirus and orthopoxvirus infections and to improve biosecurity at residences, on farms, in hospitals and in other places of business.4. Materials and Methods4.1. Rodent Trapping and Sample CollectionA prospective cross-sectional wild rodent survey was conducted during January 2019 to investigate the serological and molecular evidence of orthohantavirus, mammarenavirus and orthopoxvirus infection status. In total, 160 rodents were trapped using Sherman and Tomahawk traps at 15 different urban, farm and rural locations around Barbados (Figure 1). Traps were baited with peanut butter, banana, bacon and English potato (for a source of moisture for the trapped animal). Care was taken to ensure the traps were shaded to minimize heat exhaustion of trapped rodents. Traps were collected the following morning after being set the preceding afternoon/evening. Trapping was conducted for at least two nights per site with a minimum of 8 traps per location. Trapped rodents were euthanized by chloroform inhalation on a saturated cotton wad followed by cervical dislocation. For each rodent, its species, sex, and biometrics (weight, tail and body length) were recorded.Dissections were conducted to collect tissue samples (liver, kidney, spleen, heart, lung and ear). Blood samples were obtained from the body cavities by allowing the blood to be absorbed in the absorption zones of pre-cut Nobuto blood filter papers. The filter papers with blood were allowed to dry completely before being wrapped in tissue paper and stored in a cool, dark place. After drying and storing the filter papers, a 1 cm2 piece of the absorption zones of the filter papers with rodent blood was cut, diluted with 350 μL of Dulbecco medium + 0.2% bovine serum albumin (BSA) (pH 7.2) and shaken overnight with gentle rocking at 4 °C, to elute the blood sample. In the absence of a filter paper blood sample, the heart was used, and no dilution was necessary. The eluate was then tested using the respective virus-specific IFA.4.2. Serological Testing of Rodent SeraEach rodent blood sample was screened by indirect IFA for orthohantavirus infection using three separate orthohantavirus strain antigens (PUUV, SEOV and HTNV) with infected and non-infected cells mixed in a ratio of 1:3, to ensure specificity of the readouts as described previously (Figure 2) [67]. For each rodent sample, screening was done for orthohantavirus- (SEOV and PUUV), mammarenavirus- (LCMV) and orthopoxvirus- (CPXV)-specific IFA, by placing 20 uL of each sample on the respective IFA slide well. For negative controls, 20 uL of PBS was added (along with anti-mouse IgG). For the positive control well, 20 uL of the respective positive control sera was added (SEOV- or PUUV-positive human sera (1/20 dilution) for orthohantavirus, LCMV-positive mouse monoclonal antibody (1/2 dilution) and CPXV-positive human sera). The slides were then incubated in the moist chambers for 30 min at 37 °C. Each slide was rinsed with cold PBS (4 °C) solution to remove excess antibodies. This was repeated 3 times with cold PBS for 5 min each. The final rinse was performed in double distilled water (ddH2O) for 5 min and air dried with a fan. Then 20 µL of polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) conjugate (diluted 1:100), or polyclonal sheep anti-rat FITC conjugate (diluted 1:2000) was placed in the rodent (mouse or rat) sample wells, anti-mouse or anti-rat negative control well and LCMV positive control well, or orthohantavirus positive control well. A 20 µL aliquot of anti-human IgG FITC conjugate (diluted 1:100) was added to the human samples, anti-human negative control, and positive control wells. The slides were incubated in the moist chamber for 30 min at 37 °C, washed 3 times with cold PBS washing solution, then rinsed once with ddH2O to remove excess conjugate and air dried using a fan. The slides were protected from light and stored at 4 °C until reading with a UV microscope. After observation of slides using the microscope, a note of seropositivity or negativity was recorded for each sample, as well as any unspecific or unclear reactions. Reciprocal titres of >16 by IFA were considered positive results.4.3. RNA Extraction and Molecular Testing of Rodent Sera and TissueLung and kidney samples from seropositive rodents were lysed and homogenized using Roche MagNA lyser (Basel, Switzerland) and Trizol™ reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and RNA was extracted following the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA yield was determined using NanoDrop (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) based on absorbance measurements at 260 nm and 280 nm. Pan-orthohantavirus and mammarenavirus RT–PCRs were conducted as previously described [92,93].


Title: Involvement of Pro-Inflammatory Macrophages in Liver Pathology of Pirital Virus-Infected Syrian Hamsters

1. IntroductionPathogenic mammarenaviruses cause substantial morbidity and mortality each year. It is estimated that more than 300,000 cases with about 5000 deaths are caused by Lassa virus (LASV) in Africa annually [1]. In South America, more than 50,000 cases of hemorrhagic fever, most from Junín virus (JUNV; Argentine hemorrhagic fever) infection, with a fatality rate of about 20%, have occurred since the 1950s [2]. Pathogenic arenaviruses are hosted by peridomestic rodents, thus outbreaks of zoonotic arenavirus disease in humans will continue to be a public health risk in these areas [3]. Arenaviruses that cause severe hemorrhagic disease in humans require biosafety level-4 (BSL-4) containment, which limits the number of institutions where pathogenesis studies can be performed, and few animal models that recapitulate human arenavirus hemorrhagic fevers (AHF) are available. Laboratory strains of house mice (Mus musculus) have been used; however, specific gene knock-outs are required, which substantially compromises their value as models for human arenavirus disease [4]. Non-human primates (Macaca mulatta, Macaca fascicularis) have also been used for Lassa fever models, and these share many features of human disease [5,6]. Jamaican fruit bats (Artibeus jamaicensis) infected with Tacaribe virus also develop clinical signs with strong resemblance to human disease [7]. In addition, guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus) and Syrian golden hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) have been used in New World arenavirus studies. These two rodent species were found to exhibit many pathologic similarities to human disease and, hence, they are favored small-animal models [8,9].Pirital virus (PIRV, Pirital mammarenavirus) was first isolated from Alston’s cotton rats (Sigmodon alstoni) on a farm near Caño Delgadito, Venezuela, in 1997 [10] and were subsequently determined to be a natural reservoir host. PIRV is divergent from other New World arenaviruses; isolates exhibit substantial genetic diversity despite antigenic similarity [10,11,12], and some evidence suggests PIRV has undergone homologous recombination with other viruses [13]. Spillover of Guanarito virus (GTOV), which causes Venezuelan hemorrhagic fever, into Alston’s cotton rats has occurred [14]; therefore, coinfection with PIRV could lead to novel recombinants or reassortants with zoonotic potential.Experimental infection of Syrian hamsters with PIRV causes a disease with many similarities to human arenavirus disease [15]. Clinical and pathological parallels to Argentine hemorrhagic fever include pulmonary and splenic hemorrhage, focal necrosis of the liver, and reticulum cell hyperplasia. Similarities to Lassa fever are more striking and include leukocytosis, megalothrombocytosis and coagulopathy, liver necrosis, and elevated transaminases. Although no human cases of PIRV disease have been documented, it is considered a BSL-3 agent because of its severe hemorrhagic disease in Syrian hamsters [8,9].We infected Syrian hamsters with PIRV to extend pathological findings from previous reports [15]. We sought to substantiate the use of hamsters as a model for human arenavirus disease by identifying parallels in tissue pathology and immune pathway transcriptional profiles in PIRV-infected hamsters compared to those reported in arenavirus-infected non-human primate (NHP) studies [16,17]. We expected to find similarities among both Old and New World arenaviruses, due to the divergence of PIRV from strict categorization as a New World virus. Because of the prominent hepatic disease, transcriptional profiling of liver RNA was performed. More than 3400 differentially expressed transcripts were identified, which represented metabolic and host-response pathways. Many transcripts representing hemostasis and antiviral pathways were modulated. Notably, several transcripts expressed by T cells were elevated, including interferon-γ (IFNγ); however, signatures of T-cell exhaustion and Tr1 regulatory T cells were also present, suggesting suppression of the adaptive response. Many parallels with arenavirus-infected NHP were identified, suggesting the Syrian hamster may be a suitable surrogate model for the study of human arenavirus disease.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Ethics StatementAll work was approved by the Colorado State University Animal Care and Use Committee (protocol 14-4864A, 26 January 2016), Biosafety Committee, and in compliance with the USA Animal Welfare Act.2.2. Hamster InfectionsBecause PIRV causes significant hemorrhagic disease in hamsters but is not known to infect humans, it is manipulated under BSL-3 containment [10]. All infection experiments were performed in BSL-3 laboratories with appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE), including powered, air-purifying respirators (PAPRs) and Tyvek suits. Pirital virus strain VAV-488 stocks were produced on Vero E6 cells (CRL-1586). Hamsters were anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane and intramuscularly (IM) inoculated with 104 TCID50 of PIRV, diluted in sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), into the right hindquarters. Hamsters were monitored twice daily for signs of disease, the appearance of which was the criterion for humane euthanasia. Terminal blood was collected by cardiac puncture into ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) and serum separator tubes (SST) at the time of euthanasia for hematology, and blood chemistry and serology, respectively. Tissues harvested for RNA extraction were placed in cryovials and snap-frozen in an acetone/dry ice bath, whereas tissues for histopathology and immunochemistry were collected in 10% buffered formalin.2.3. Hematology and Blood ChemistryThree groups were analyzed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA); uninfected control (n = 3), euthanized due to disease (n = 6), and infected (asymptomatic) survivors (n = 3). Hematology was performed on whole blood collected in EDTA (Becton–Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) using a Heska HemaTrue Analyzer. Blood collected into SST tubes (Becton-Dickinson) was centrifuged at 1000× g for 10 min at 4 °C and serum analyzed with a Heska DRI-CHEM 4000 chemistry analyzer (Heska, Loveland, CO, USA).2.4. Histopathology and ImmunohistochemistryParaffin-embedded formalin-fixed tissues were rehydrated, treated with citrate buffer at 90 °C for 15 min, and blocked with SuperBlock T20 (Thermo, Rockford, IL, USA). Anti-PIRV mouse ascites fluid was used at 1:150 dilution and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Unbound primary antibody was removed by washing 3× with Tris-buffered saline containing 0.03% TWEEN-20 (TBST). Endogenous peroxidase was quenched with 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in PBS for 5 min followed by washing 2× in TBST. Secondary antibody was horseradish peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse IgG (A4416, Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) used at a 1:2000 dilution and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Slides were again washed 3× with TBST. 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) was added to the slides and allowed to develop chromogen for 5 min. Hematoxylin was used to counterstain. Complete necropsies were performed on all study animals to record gross pathologic lesions and to characterize the nature and severity of histologic lesions for later corroboration with transcriptome data. A pathologist examined the histology slides blindly. A lesion scoring system was devised where: (1) indicates that there were no significant histologic lesions; (2) minimal indicates that <5% of total parenchyma was involved; (3) mild indicates that 5–10% of the parenchyma was involved; (4) moderate where 10–25% of the parenchyma was involved; (5) moderately severe indicates that 25–50% of the parenchyma was involved; and (6) marked indicates that 50–75% or more of the parenchyma was involved.2.5. Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)A sequence fragment of PIRV VAV-488 S segment (1717-2457, AF485262) was codon-optimized for E. coli expression and de novo synthesized with flanking 5′ EcoRI and 3′ NotI restriction sites (GeneArts). The fragment was subcloned into pET-23b with vector start and C-terminal His tags for expression in E. coli BL21(DE3) as previously described [18]. The expressed antigen represents PIRV VAV-488 N protein residues 296–542 (mw 32 kD).Recombinant N was diluted in PBS (pH 7.4) and coated onto 96-well polyvinyl chloride plates at 100 ng/well (100 μL) and incubated overnight at 4 °C. Plates were washed 2× with PBS, blocked for 1 h at room temperature with 0.25% gelatin (Sigma G-6144) in PBS and washed 2×. Serum samples (100 μL) were diluted 1:100 in PBS and titrated (log2), and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. Wells were washed 3× with PBS-TWEEN-20, followed by incubation of protein-A/G-HRP conjugate (Pierce) for 1 h. After washing 4× with PBS-TWEEN-20, 100 μL of ABTS substrate (KPL) was added for 15 min then absorbance read at 405 nm.2.6. Detection of Viral RNATotal RNA was extracted from tissues with an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) using stainless steel beads and homogenization (Tissue Lyser II, Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was quantified with a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). One-step polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed (Qiagen, 210212) with S segment-specific primers, 5′-CAACCCAGGTTGTGTGTTTG-3′ (forward) and 5′-CAGGTCAAAGGGAGAGCTTG-3′ (reverse), that generated a product of 348 nt.2.7. RNA-SeqRNA from the livers of two uninfected hamsters (H1, H2) and three diseased hamsters that were euthanized on days 7 (H35, H36) or 8 (H37) were used for transcriptome profiling. RNA-seq libraries were prepared from 500 ng total RNA using Ribo-Zero (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) library preparation methods and the manufacturer’s recommended procedure. The five samples were prepared separately and pooled on a single HiSeq 2000 (Illumina) lane for paired end 2 × 100 nt sequencing. Fastq files were quality and adapter-trimmed using the default parameters of Trimmomatic [19]. Using a reference-independent protocol, reads were assembled into contigs using the Trinity package [20] and default parameters. The following options were used: JM 350G, CPU 24, SS_lib_type RF. Within the Trinity package, sample library pairs of 5 samples (2 uninfected and 3 infected) were subjected to RSEM estimation of transcript abundance by aligning them against the Trinity-assembled contigs. Raw count data from RSEM was used as input for DESeq differential expression analysis [21] with a false discovery rate (FDR) p value limit of <0.05. DESeq default size factors normalization was applied, as well as the following dispersion estimation parameters: method = “pooled”, sharingMode = “maximum”, fitType = “local” and a minimum of 200 read counts summed across samples. Transcripts were identified by Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) against the RefSeqRNA databank (ngKLAST v.r. 4.3, Korilog, http://plealog.com/korilog/). The resulting datafile of differentially expressed genes with transcript counts (Table S1) shows the reference species for each hit. All raw fastq files are available at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive under BioProject ID PRJNA258080.2.8. Host Response-Associated TranscriptsDifferentially expressed transcripts (DETs) were submitted to InnateDB to identify interferon-associated transcripts [22]. Functional analysis of DETs was performed with the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) [23] to identify genes relevant to antiviral and host defenses. Candidate lists associated with these responses was generated and submitted for cluster analysis and plotting using R statistical software and the pheatmap plugin. The gene symbol list was analyzed using Reactome [24] and within Cytoscape [25] to construct pathway maps with highlighted DETs.3. Results3.1. Disease ProgressionTo confirm previous findings in preparation for differential expression analysis, hematology and histopathology analyses were performed on PIRV IM-inoculated hamsters with clinical signs. Upon development of cutaneous and visceral petechiae with hind-limb paralysis, one hamster was found dead on day 7, five hamsters were euthanized because of severe disease between days 7 and 10, and one euthanized on day 12 because of severe disease; the remaining 3 hamsters showed no signs of disease during the 20-day experiment. Euthanized hamsters exhibited hind-limb paralysis and signs of hemorrhagic disease, including cutaneous and visceral petechiae, and some had significant epistaxis. In total, 7 of 10 inoculated hamsters died or were euthanized (Figure 1A). The hamsters with fatal disease had leukocytosis due primarily to elevated granulocyte and lymphocyte counts, elevated hemoglobin and hematocrit, thrombocytosis, and increased platelet size (Figure 1B). No differences were found in monocyte counts, mean corpuscle volume, red cell distribution width, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, or mean corpuscular hemoglobin. Elevated alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), total bilirubin and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) levels were also noted (Figure 1C). There were no differences in hematology or blood chemistry between the three exposed, surviving hamsters and negative controls. The three infected but asymptomatic hamsters were antibody positive to nucleocapsid by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), one mortally-infected hamster was antibody positive (euthanized on day 12), and the remaining six infected hamsters were antibody negative (disease onset on or before day 10) (data not shown). Therefore, RNA-Seq was performed on uninfected negative controls rather than asymptomatic PIRV-exposed animals, and then compared to infected experimental samples.3.2. Histology/ImmunohistochemistryGross and histopathology analyses were performed to establish a basis for the interpretation of the transcriptomic data. Lesions in infected hamsters were moderately severe-to-marked in the liver and spleen and moderate in the lungs and pancreas of all animals. Hepatic inflammation was typically portal to random and lymphoplasmacytic to neutrophilic in nature. Large areas of hepatic lobules were obliterated by coagulative to lytic necrosis with moderate-to-marked hepatocyte loss. Necrosis of the limiting plate was characterized by punctate or circumferential cell loss (Figure 1A), rounding up of individualized cells with hypereosinophilia of the cytoplasm and pyknosis or lysis of the nuclei. A central vein of one hamster at 7 days post inoculation (PI) showed multifocal intimal hyperplasia (Figure 1B). Reticulin stain revealed partial to complete collapse of most affected hepatic lobules. Immunohistochemistry revealed strong immunoreactivity in scattered Kupffer cells with their characteristic morphology and endothelial cells lining both portal and central veins (Figure 2A).As for the rest of the other parenchymatous organs, lesions were especially prominent, most consistent in the spleen, lungs and pancreas. Lesions were comprised of organomegaly, multifocal hemorrhages and multifocal areas of pallor or white nodules on gross examination. Splenic lesions in infected hamsters, 7–10 days PI, were moderately severe to marked and were largely characterized by apoptosis and/or necrosis of endothelial cells lining the sinuses of the red pulp. Many of the affected sinuses were filled with fibrin thrombi (sinus thrombosis, Figure 1C). Multifocally, neutrophils and macrophages were degenerate/necrotic along with variably severe lymphocytolysis and subsequent reduction of the overall size of periarteriolar lymphoidFollicles. Moderate to severe pulmonary lesions were present in four infected hamsters. Multifocal acute interstitial pneumonia was evident in acutely infected animals at 7 days PI, especially in the subpleural parenchyma and around pulmonary vessels. Apoptosis and/or necrosis of pneumocyte type-I along with small foci of necrosis was observed in perivascular lesions. In most affected animals, there was multifocal loss of bronchiolar lining epithelium. In the markedly affected hamsters, inflammation was more of a lymphohistiocytic nature with margination of congested vessels by neutrophils. Pleural mesothelium was multifocally hyperplastic and/or hypertrophic in three hamsters. Pancreatic lesions were moderate to moderately severe. Interstitial edema was multifocally accompanied by segmental loss of exocrine acini. Inflammatory foci were evident in the vicinity of small venules showing apoptosis and/or necrosis of their lining endothelium. In affected vascular intima, endothelial cells were multifocally karyorrhectic and hypereosinophilic.Consistent immunoreactivity was observed in pulmonary foci of hypertrophic and occasionally hyperplastic pleural mesothelium (Figure 2D). In the lungs, vascular necrosis and perivascular hemorrhage and edema was seen to varying degrees and lumina of affected vessels contained smudged cell debris and chromatin smearing. Small- to medium-sized venules were most affected, followed by capillaries and small arterioles. The wall of these vessels was segmentally to circumferentially obliterated or smudged by leukocytic infiltration into tunica media.Plasma enzyme levels were more similar among PIRV-infected hamsters and terminal-stage lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV-WE) NHP than those reported for the LCMV-infected mouse model. Specifically, ALT but not AST levels were elevated during LCMV-WE infection of inbred lab mice (Mus musculus), and neither were elevated in LCMV-ARM infection. The LCMV-WE strain causes disease in non-human primates, whereas the ARM strain is non-pathogenic [26]. In contrast, terminal stage LCMV-WE infection of NHP and PIRV-infected hamsters showed elevated ALT and AST levels, similar to what we observed in PIRV-infected hamsters. Therefore, we chose the LCMV-WE liver differential expression data from the Djavani et al. [16] study rather than LCMV-ARM as the most appropriate comparison for the differential expression data described below.3.3. Differential Expression ProfilesRNA-Seq was performed to gain insight into the substantial liver damage, neutrophil infiltration and inflammation revealed in the histopathology and clinical chemistry. Liver-derived RNA of three fatally-infected hamsters (accession #35, #36 and #37) was compared to two negative controls using differential expression (DE) analysis. A total of 3486 transcripts were differentially expressed, representing 2248 unique genes with known homology (Table S1). Of these, 394 unique genes were predicted to be involved in host response and antiviral-related pathways. DAVID and Reactome analyses revealed that unique enriched immune response transcripts (n = 286) had predicted involvement in a variety of innate and adaptive immune responses. Importantly, key hamster immune response transcripts showed expression trends that were coincident with those highlighted in studies of Old World mammarenavirus [16], LASV infection of cynomolgus macaques (n = 55), and LCMV infection of rhesus macaques (n = 358) (Table S1). In addition, the presence of PIRV S and L segment RNA was detected in RNA-Seq data of analyzed hamsters, and conventional PCR detected vRNA in all diseased hamsters but not the 3 infected hamsters that did not show clinical signs of disease. Specific host-response functional groups are described below.3.4. Hemostasis and ClottingAs expected from the hematology (Figure 1) and histopathology findings (Figure 2 and Figure 3), DETs indicative of hematological dysregulation were identified (Figure 4). Importantly, dual enrichment of Anxa2 and S100a10 occurred, which has also been reported in the arenavirus NHP model [16]. Annexin A2 and S100 calcium-binding protein A10 form a profibrinolytic complex that promotes plasmin generation [27] and subsequent clot degeneration. In addition, the plasminogen activator urokinase receptor Plaur was elevated. Multiple platelet-activating components, including thrombospondin (Thbs1), von Willebrand factor A domain (Vwa8), platelet-activating factor components Pafah1b2 and Pla2g7, platelet endothelial cell-adhesion molecule (Pecam1), and Serpine1 were elevated. In addition, enrichment of the clotting pathway component DETs, such as tissue-factor pathway inhibitor protein (Tfpi), Cd49b (alpha 2 integrin) and fibronectin type III domain protein (Fndc), was also observed. Enthothelial glycoprotein transcripts Vcam1, typically present in cytokine-activated endothelia, and Icam1, were not significantly altered; however, they showed a trend toward enrichment in infected liver. Finally, of 79 unique hemostasis-related DETs in PIRV-infected hamster livers, 34 were depleted. These included several clotting factors (F2, F5, F7, F8, F10–F12). Of these, depletion of F7, F11 and F12 also occurred in arenavirus-infected NHP [28]. An additional hemostatic regulator, orosomucoid 1 (Orm1), showed similar trends in the NHP arenavirus system. Little is known about the function of Orm1 during arenavirus infection; however, it is classified as an acute phase plasma protein. These results are consistent with the impaired hemostasis that occurs in NHP arenavirus-induced hemorrhagic fevers [16].3.5. Innate ResponseAs expected from other models, innate immune response transcriptional markers were also enriched in PIRV-infected hamster livers (Figure 5 and Figure 6). For example, major components of the cytosolic nucleic acid sensing RIG-I/MDA5 pathway were elevated; DETs included Ddx58, Ddx60, Eif2ak2, the STAT-induced inhibitor Socs1, and Trim32. Secondly, support for canonical NFκB activation was present in the concomitant transcriptional enrichment of Nfkb2 and Relb, thus favoring NFκB dimer formation. Moreover, ubiquitin antigen-processing pathways also appeared activated, due to enrichment of Herc6, Usp18, Trim6 and Tnfaip3.The glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor cell-surface protein lymphocyte antigen 6 (Ly6e) is a repressor of monocytes, and its enrichment has been associated with increased viral disease progression [29,30]. Importantly, Ly6e transcripts were enriched in LASV-infected human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) [31], as well as in other hemorrhagic fevers. Here, PIRV-infected hamster liver also showed enrichment of Ly6e, further corroborating the relevance of the hamster pathology system. Lastly, some arenaviruses activate the TLR2 signaling pathway [32,33,34]; similarly, here, Tlr2 and Tlr3 expression was elevated in the livers of the infected hamsters.3.6. Interferon PathwayTranscripts representing type I and III IFNs were not detected, likely because sampling was confined to terminal-stage infections. Nevertheless, several downstream genes of the type I IFN signaling pathway were elevated, consistent with reports of other New World arenavirus human infection [35], including Ifi27, Ifi27l2b, Ifi44, Ifi204, Ifit1, Mx1 and Mx2 (Figure 5 and Figure 6). Likewise, several enriched interferon response components, i.e., Ifit2, Ifit3, Ifih1, Isg15, Isg20 and Oas2 showed trends consistent with the arenavirus host response in NHP models (Figure 6) [16]. Zpb1, a negative regulator of type I IFN signaling [36], was also present and not detected in uninfected samples. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that a type I response had occurred prior to RNA-Seq sampling.Two genes expected to enhance IFNγ expression (Tbx21, Runx1) were also elevated, consistent with leukocyte activation (Table S1). Concomitantly, Ifng transcripts were present in infected hamster livers but not uninfected controls. Enrichment of Ifng is also consistent with the late-stage infection profile for LASV-infected macaque PBMCs. Similarly, the pertinent receptor, Ifngr2, was also enriched in our samples and those of LCMV-infected NHP. Moreover, several downstream IFNγR signaling effectors, such as Stat1, Irf7, Irf8, Gbp1, Gbp2, Oas2 and Oas3 were elevated in livers of infected hamsters (Table S1).3.7. Adaptive ImmunityMany adaptive immunity components associated with MHC class I antigen processing and presentation were also identified (Figure 7). Of 43 unique DETs in this category, 30 were elevated, suggesting many components of the antigen-processing pathway were functional. Of these, about one third were similarly enriched in the Djavani et al. study (n = 13) and one (Psmb8) in the Malhotra et al. study [16]. T-cell receptor αβ and Igκ sequences were also elevated in the livers of infected hamsters, which is consistent with the observed lymphocyte count elevation (Figure 1).Several DETs associated with adaptive immunity were depleted, including a cluster of five genes (Cul7, Fbxo3, Huwe1, Rnf220, Skp2) involved in the cytosolic polyubiquitination of polypeptides immediately prior to proteasomal processing and loading onto nascent MHC class I proteins. Likewise, IgA/IgM epithelial transport receptor (Pigr) transcripts were depleted, suggesting that export of these classes to the luminal epithelial surface of the liver may have been impaired. Cd3 sequences were also detected, as were transcripts for Cd49b, which may have been expressed from natural killer (NK) or natural killer T (NKT) cells [37]. Both Lag3 and Cd226 transcripts were also elevated in infected livers. Along with Cd49b, these are defining markers of T regulatory 1 (Tr1) cells [38]. In addition, Lgals9, which encodes Galectin-9, was significantly elevated in livers of infected hamsters. Galectin-9 drives development of regulatory T cells that can attenuate antiviral T-cell responses [39].3.8. Mononuclear Phagocyte SystemThe mononuclear phagocyte system (MPS) is a multi-cellular network made up of monocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells (DCs). Expression of Ifng and histopathological evidence of immunoreactive Kupffer cells and extracellular damage, suggestive of activation of the pro-inflammatory arm of the MPS, led us to assess transcript markers of MPS activation within the PIRV-infected liver RNA-Seq dataset. Extensive evidence of macrophage activation was identified, but no markers for DCs or monocytes were apparent (as reviewed in [40]). Specifically, no transcripts indicative of Batf3-dependent classical DC1 (cDCs) differential expression were present, nor were Irf-4 dependent cDC2 lineage markers, with the exception of Cd11b/Cd18 (Table S1). It has been argued that Cd11b is more accurately assigned to macrophages and monocytes rather than cDCs [41]. Moreover, there were no differentially expressed markers of monocytes (iNOS, Cd16, Cd1c). This is consistent with the lack of difference in monocyte counts between infected and un-infected controls. However, there was extensive evidence of macrophage lineage cells, consistent with a bias toward a pro-inflammatory response.Differentially expressed macrophage markers were delineated as M1, pro-inflammatory or M2, pro-Th2 (Table S1). Figure 5 and Figure 6 show highlighted pro-inflammatory markers. For example, plasminogen activator urokinase receptor Plaur was elevated. Two additional MPS markers [42], which also physically interact in vivo and contribute to inflammation, lipocalin 2 (Lcn2, Log2 FC 6.0–6.4, FDR p = 5.8 × 10−4) and matrix metallopeptidase 9 (Mmp9, present in infected, FDR p = 4.4 × 10−3) were also elevated (Figure 5, Table S1). Further, Il1b and several associated transcripts, including transcripts for IL-1 receptors, accessory proteins and antagonists, were enriched, which was consistent with acute inflammation (reviewed in [43]). Chemokine-signaling ligand transcripts Cxcl10 and Cxcl11, expected to be expressed from activated macrophages, were also elevated [41]. Moreover, Klf6 (Kruppel-like transcription factor) transcripts were enriched [44].Of 17 differentially expressed macrophage markers in the dataset, 16 were consistent with a pro-inflammatory M1-type response, and just 1 DET was representative of an M2 healing or cellular remodeling response (Table S1) [43]. Depletion of the transcript encoding the vascular endothelial growth factor, Vegfa, was consistent with M2 extracellular matrix remodeling.3.9. Apoptosis and Autophagy PathwaysMany genes involved in ubiquitination were differentially expressed, most of which were elevated in infected hamsters (Table S1). Isg15, Mdm2, Siah1, Ubd and Usp18 were substantially elevated, whereas Hectd3, Huwe1 and Usp32 were depleted. In addition, transcripts of genes associated with apoptosis were significantly elevated, including Aen, Birc3, Cflar, Coxc6a2, Fas, Fbf1, Ivns1abp and Serpinb10 (Table S1), consistent with previously reported JUNV-induced apoptosis [45].4. DiscussionSyrian hamsters infected with PIRV develop clinical disease that shares similarities to Lassa and LCMV-WE hemorrhagic fevers [16]. Indeed, 363 unique transcripts had coordinated trends among PIRV-infected hamsters and LCMV-infected NHP [16]. Of these, 17 hamster DETs were also common to Lassa virus-infected NHP liver transcriptome signatures (18). These included hallmarks of the innate immune response, such as Ddx58 (RIG-I), Oas2, several additional interferon response genes (Ifi44, Ifit2, Isg15, Mx2) and the general lymphocyte proliferative marker, Cd69. Therefore, compared to NHP models, the overall hamster PIRV transcriptome signature was more similar to the associated New World representative LCMV than Old World LASV infection.The innate immune response/IFN category (n = 32) contained the highest number of coordinately regulated transcripts among the hamster and LCMV NHP model systems (Table S1). Furthermore, dysfunction of clotting cascades, leading to thromobosis and/or hemorrhage, is a principal feature of Argentine hemorrhagic fever. Although the mechanisms that govern this are unknown, inhibition of aggregation may disrupt platelet function. Interestingly, 22 unique hemostasis transcripts were common among PIRV and LCMV-WE liver infections [16]. Therefore, although there are likely differences among rodents and NHP in antigen-presenting components, important hemostatic and innate immune response markers are similar. Conspicuously, IFNβ sequences were absent in the assembled transcriptome. A BLAST search of the Syrian golden hamster using the mouse IFNβ sequence returned no hits. An annotated hamster genome is available and has 115× coverage (BioProject PRJNA77669), suggesting IFNβ may be absent in hamsters. This may be a consequence of the highly inbred nature of the Syrian golden hamster used in biomedical research, which was founded with one male and two females that were littermates (see S. Alder, 1948, Nature 162:256), and which may explain why Syrian hamsters are highly susceptible to a number of viruses.The M1 pro-inflammatory arm of the MPS may contribute to pathogenesis of acute PIRV infection in hamsters, which is similar to trends observed in LCMV infection of NHP (17). The spleen, liver and lungs are the largest units of the MPS which, in part, explains why these organs are the most consistently involved targets of PIRV infection. Strong immunoreactivity of the Kupffer cells and endothelium of hepatic sinusoids and central veins corroborates findings in previous studies of PIRV infection in hamsters and hepatotropism [15]. In the absence of significant macrophage infiltrations around foci of hepatic necrosis, the current study corroborates the central role that Kupffer cells play in the progression of PIRV infection. Moreover, the strong immunoreactivity detected in the cytoplasm of mononuclear cells lining hepatic sinusoids is further evidence as to the role of fixed macrophages in Pirital virus-induced pathology. The morphology of these cells is unmistakable. Consistent elevation of coagulation values in PIRV-infected hamsters [15] and sinus splenic thrombosis, reported here, are consistent with the presence of procoagulant molecules. Pirital infection of the MPS is a characteristic reminiscent of virus-induced fulminant hepatitis [46,47]. In addition to sinusoidal coagulation, which hampered effective circulation in the liver contributing to widespread necrosis of hepatic parenchyma, destruction of the limiting plate and loss of the supporting reticulin network reduced the ability of the liver to regenerate. Similar pro-inflammatory signatures were present in LCMV-infected NHP livers (17). For example, enrichment of Il6r, Il1r, and evidence of TNF (Tnfrs12, Tnfrs1b) and cytokine activity (enrichment of Il6R/Il1R) were consistent with a pro-inflammatory M1 response (42). Additional pro-inflammatory markers in the NHP liver dataset included enriched Klf6, Stat1 and Irf1, as well as Il23 in late-stage infection.Two biomarkers for arenavirus hemorrhagic fevers were identified in the transcriptome data. The first was Lcn2; because the protein is excreted in the urine, it may have diagnostic value for assessment of the prognosis of hemorrhagic diseases, similar to its use in human liver and renal disease [48]. Importantly, Lcn2, which as a cell-surface protein transports iron, was also among the DETs common to PIRV-infected hamster liver and arenavirus NHP liver pathology models. The predicted function of Lcn2 differs depending on whether it is cell-surface bound or secreted. As a cell-surface molecule, it internalizes iron. Alternatively, the matrix metalloprotease Mmp9 and Lcn2 form a heterodimer which, when secreted from neutrophils and macrophages, promotes extracellular remodeling [49]. Similarly, the secreted plasminogen activator, urokinase receptor (Plaur), is expressed from macrophages [50]; moreover, the presence of soluble Plaur in patient plasma has been suggested as a diagnostic tool for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic virus infection [51] and could be used for arenavirus disease in a similar manner. This transcript was dramatically enriched in PIRV-infected livers (Log2 FC 8.2, FDR p = 7.2 × 10−7, Table S1). Although we did not specifically assay circulating markers, elevation of Plaur and Lcn2 transcripts and co-implication of M1 pro-inflammatory involvement are consistent with the hypothesis that the associated gene products could be used as indicator markers.Aside from those common features, the following signatures were noted in the PIRV-infected liver dataset. Two genes, Pafah1b2 and Pla2g7, significantly elevated in PIRV infected hamsters, encode inhibitors of the platelet activating factor (Paf) that cleave it into an inactive form [52,53]; their expression may contribute to failure of platelet aggregation and explain, in part, the vascular leakage and hemorrhage observed in arenavirus disease. Two additional genes, which result in inhibition of the clotting cascade, Tfpi and Tfpi2, may have similar effects. Several other transcripts (Thbs1, Plaur, Serpine1) involved in coagulation were elevated in liver tissue and these genes likely have a participatory role in the observed coagualopathy that occurs during PIRV infection. In addition, a transcript for a Vwf accessory protein, von Willebrand factor A domain containing 8 (Vwa8), was elevated in infected livers. The antiviral response of hamsters infected with PIRV showed substantial signs of innate, interferon and ubiquitination pathway activation. Early events included genes associated with pattern recognition receptor (PRR) sensing and signaling, including RLH, MDA and ubiquitin pathway mobilization. Tlr2 expression was higher in infected hamster livers (Log2 FC 6.1, FDR p = 3.0 × 10−7) and Tlr3 transcripts were present in all infected hamsters but absent in uninfected. The TLR-2 pathway is targeted by pathogenic arenaviruses [34,54], therefore enrichment of Tlr2 is consistent with other reports. TLR-3 is not involved in cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) mediated responses to LCMV infections [55] and its elevated expression in PIRV infected hamsters may indicate a viral and/or host species difference in responses. Further investigation will be required to address this.Several transcripts associated with NK cell subsets and CTL activities were differentially expressed. Some of these genes are shared by NK and T cells (e.g., Ifng, Cd3d, Cd3e, Cd3g, Cd49b, Perf, Gzma, Gzmb). T-cell receptor α and β gene sequences were elevated in infected hamsters livers, suggesting T-cell participation in the host response. In LCMV infection of laboratory house mice, T-cell responses occur early and, depending on the strain of virus and mouse, have different outcomes, including disease and clearance, or persistent infection [56]. Some LCMV clones induce immunosuppression [57,58,59] or exhaustion of responding CTLs and these events are controlled by cell-surface interactions between CTLs and other cells. Although Cd8a and Cd8b transcript counts were below our threshold cutoff of 200, they were substantially higher in infected hamster livers than in uninfected livers, whereas Cd4 transcripts were absent in all samples (Table S1). Together with the elevated TCRab transcript data, this suggested CD8+ CTL infiltration of the livers in response to infection but that these cells were likely ineffectual. An important feature associated with T-cell exhaustion is PD-1-induced immunosuppression of CTLs, an event mediated by PD-1 ligands (PD-L) found on other cells [60,61,62]. Pdcd1, which encodes PD-1, was present in infected hamsters but absent in uninfected livers (Table S1). In addition, transcripts associated with regulatory T cells (Cd226, Cd49b, Lgals9, Lag3) were elevated, suggesting another negative impact on CTL activity. Genes expressed during MHC class I antigen processing were highly elevated and we did not detect repression of any genes associated with this pathway, suggesting it was functioning as expected. Future experiments could examine the role of PD-1/PD-L by use of blocking antibodies that could restore functional CTL activities. It is unclear if such antibodies exist for use in hamsters; however, several mouse- and rat-specific monoclonal antibodies have been identified that are cross-reactive with hamster cells [63], and thus it may be that cross-reactive PD-1/PD-L antibodies are already available for such studies in hamsters.Of particular interest are the hamsters that survived infection. Syrian hamsters have limited genetic homogeneity, and thus an explanation for why 30% survived without conspicuous signs of disease could provide important clues about resistance, may point to novel approaches for mitigating disease, and could provide prognostic indicators of infectious outcomes. The development of non-lethal methods that provide meaningful data for serial sampling in hamsters will be required for future studies in order to identify changes associated with disease progression and resistance.5. ConclusionsCollectively, the data presented here are consistent with a robust antiviral innate immune response, including signatures of pro-inflammatory M1 macrophage response, in Syrian hamsters infected with PIRV, with concomitant CTL exhaustion and/or regulatory T-cell responses that may impair the transition to adaptive immunity for successful control of the infection.


Title: Pichinde Virus Infection of Outbred Hartley Guinea Pigs as a Surrogate Animal Model for Human Lassa Fever: Histopathological and Immunohistochemical Analyses

1. IntroductionLassa virus (LASV), the causative agent of Lassa fever (LF), was first isolated from two missionary nurses who died from LF in Nigeria in 1969 [1,2]. LASV causes zoonotic infection in humans through ingestion of contaminated food and/or water, inhalation of tainted aerosols, or via person-to-person contact with infected body fluids [2]. New LASV infected cases each year are estimated to be up to 500,000 with 5000 deaths [2,3]. While the average case fatality rate of LF is ~1%, it can reach as high as 20% in hospitalized patients [2]. Currently, there are no FDA-approved vaccines or therapeutics against LASV. Development of treatments against LASV infection requires relevant animal models that can recapitulate disease and pathological features of LF and other AHFs in humans.The description of different animal models of LF has recently been reviewed elsewhere [4]. Each of the known LF animal models has its advantages and disadvantages. For example, nonhuman primates (NHPs) infected with a virulent strain of LASV can develop a severe form of the disease that is similar to human LF, and thus are deemed the “gold standard” models for use in pathogenesis studies as well as for vaccine and antiviral testing. However, limitations of using NHPs include the extremely high cost and the requirement for high containment BSL4 facilities to conduct LASV studies. Laboratory mice, on the other hand, are relatively inexpensive, yet they are generally resistant to LASV infection and do not develop obvious diseases [5]. However, LASV infection of the 129Sv mice, which lack the receptor for interferon α and β (IFNAR-/-), can lead to a non-lethal acute infection with persistent viremia, but do not develop febrile or neurological symptoms [6,7,8,9]. Likewise, mice lacking interferon α, β, and γ receptors (IFN α/β/γR-/-) did not develop clinical signs of disease upon LASV infection [8]. In contrast, LASV infection of STAT1-/- mice showed marked body weight loss and either died or met humane endpoint criteria [9,10]. Recent development of different chimeric mouse models of LASV infection, such as a chimeric IFNAR-/-B6 lethal mouse model, in which the IFNAR-/- mice were irradiated and transplanted with bone marrow progenitor cells from wild type C57BL/6 mice, showed great promise, as these chimeric mice could uniformly succumb to LASV infection while maintaining a normal immune function [6,11]. Additionally, a humanized HHD mouse model, which consists of C57BL/6 mice expressing a human/mouse chimeric HLA-A2.1 instead of the normal MHC class I gene products, has recently been developed for LASV infection that also shows some clinical disease similar to human LF [12]. While some of the mouse models appear to show LF-like clinical features, they are either immuno-incompetent or have been manipulated immunologically, making it challenging to model the natural immune responses to LASV infection and/or for use in vaccine development.Immunologically competent inbred Strain 13 guinea pigs can be considered as an alternative small rodent model for LF, as LASV-infected animals show many of the clinical features of LF in humans [13,14,15]. It is important to note, however, that while inbred guinea pigs may be a useful model for LF, they are not readily available and lack genetic diversity mimicking human populations. On the contrary, outbred Hartley guinea pigs are commercially available and have diverse genetic background. An outbred LASV-infected Hartley guinea pig model has been developed that shows uniform lethality and clinical symptoms, such as fever, followed by hypothermia just before death, as well as weight loss, lethargy, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, and lymphopenia [16].Several surrogate animal models of LF using a less pathogenic virus within the same Arenaviridae family as LASV have been developed. While the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) in general does not induce a severe LF-like disease in rodents or NHPs, a particular strain LCMV-WE has been used as a surrogate for LASV in rhesus macaques [17] and in HHD mice [18] that can model certain aspects of LASV pathogenesis such as vascular leak but cannot reproduce many characteristics of LF disease. Due to its pathogenicity in NHPs, work with LCMV-WE requires a BSL3 facility, which limits its usage in general laboratories. Pichinde virus (PICV) isolated from rice rats in Colombia is not known to cause disease in humans (non-pathogenic) [19]. Sequential passage of PICV in guinea pigs produced a virulent strain, which causes LF-like disease in strain 13 guinea pigs that reproduces many characteristics of LF such as fever, bleeding disorder, and general immune suppression, and therefore has been used as a safe and relevant surrogate human LF model in BSL2 facilities [20,21,22]. A minimum of four sequential passages of PICV in guinea pigs was required to result in 100% uniform lethality [22,23]. Infected guinea pigs showed extreme leukopenia and a transient neutrophilia [22]. Serologic findings include impaired platelet function, decreased activity of coagulation factors, and thrombocytopenia; decreased white blood cell levels; and increased hematocrit [23]. Histopathologic analysis indicates lesions in the liver, spleen, pancreas, lungs, and gastrointestinal tract [20,21,22,23]. Scattered necrotic regions have also been found in lymphoid tissue and the bone marrow [23].We report here a detailed histopathologic and immunohistochemical (IHC) analyses of a wide range of tissues collected from organs of outbred Hartley guinea pigs that have been infected with PICV strains with the propensity to cause varied disease pathologies. Our study shows that virulent PICV strain (P18 or rP18) can replicate to high levels in various extraneuronal tissues and lead to extensive pathological changes. The similarity of tissue pathology and viral antigen distribution between the virulent PICV-guinea pig model and lethal human LF infection supports this outbred guinea pig model as a relevant surrogate animal model for use to characterize LASV infection and to study LF pathogenesis in vivo.2. Results2.1. Overview of the Viral Strains Used and the Disease Symptoms Produced by ThemStocks of P2 and P18 strains of PICV were prepared from spleen extracts after inbred strain 13 guinea pigs were sequentially infected with the PICV Munchique strain CoAn4763 either twice to generate the P2 strain or 18 times to generate the P18 strain of the virus [22], provided to us by J. Aronson (University of Texas Medical Branch). It has been shown that infection with the P2 PICV leads to a brief febrile reaction in guinea pigs that soon fully recover, while P18 infection causes a severe disease that mimics human LF infection [20,22]. We previously developed reverse genetics systems for both the avirulent P2 and virulent P18 parental strains of PICV [24,25] and demonstrated that recombinant PICV strains rP2 and rP18 reproduced the differential disease phenotypes in outbred Hartley guinea pigs as those seen with the parental P2 and P18 strains [24]. Using reverse genetics systems, we generated reassortant recombinant viruses (rS2L18 and rS18L2) by swapping the large (L) and small (S) segments between P2 and P18 strains. While only the rS18L2 strain that carried the S segment from P2 and the L segment from P18 showed reduced virus titers in vitro, both viral reassortants (rS2L18 and rS18L2) showed attenuated phenotypes in vivo [26], indicating that genetic factors on both viral genomic segments are essential to cause virulent infection in vivo. While disease phenotypes and viral titers of outbred Hartley guinea pigs infected with the recombinant PICVs have been reported previously [24,26], the impact of viral infection on organs and tissues has not been comprehensively characterized. In the current study, we report the daily body weight and rectal temperature of all infected guinea pigs in Figure 1, which shows that the majority of both the parental P18- and recombinant rP18-infected guinea pigs reached terminal points for euthanization at day 14 post infection (pi) and day 18 pi, respectively, whereas a small number of animals within these groups were alive and seemed healthy at the end point of the experiments (i.e., 18 dpi) when these animals were humanely euthanized. Table 1 lists the animal identification numbers (ID #s) from which tissues samples were collected for histopathological and IHC analyses. Additionally, the viremia levels at different time points throughout the infection were quantified for each of the infected animals and shown in Table 2.2.2. Histopathological and Immunohistochemical Analyses of Tissue Sections Prepared from Representative Healthy Guinea Pigs after Injection with Either PBS or the Parental P2 PICVA representative PBS-injected control animal (ID#867508) was found to be healthy during the entire duration of the experiment. Its body weight reached 139% at day 18 pi when compared to day 0 (Table 1). The H&E staining images of tissue sections from the liver, spleen, and lung of this animal are shown in Figure 2A, which show no significant histopathologic changes. Similar observations were made in the heart, kidney, gastrointestinal tract (GI), pancreas, adrenal gland, lymph node (LN), brain, and eye of this animal (data not shown). No IHC staining of PICV nucleoprotein (NP) antigen, the most abundantly expressed viral protein in infected cells and tissues, was detected in any of these tissue samples (data not shown), which was similar to the IHC images of tissues collected from the P2-infected animals as described below.P2 generally induces a brief febrile reaction (average 1 day of fever) in outbred Hartley guinea pigs [24]. We analyzed a representative P2-infected outbred guinea pig (ID#867474) that experienced fever from day 6 to 9 pi with a rectal temperature > 39.5 °C. This is the maximal duration of fever observed for P2 infections. The animal showed slight body weight loss from day 8 to 10 pi, which grew to 132% on day 18 (a set end point of the experiment) as compared to day 0. The viremia level was found to be below the limit of detection (<200 PFU/mL) throughout the experiment (Table 2). The H&E images of liver, spleen, and lung are shown in Figure 2B. Although there are foci of hemorrhage on the pleural surface, no significant histopathologic changes are seen in the lung (Figure 2B). Similarly, no significant histopathologic changes were observed in other organs analyzed, including heart, kidney, GI, pancreas, adrenal gland, LN, brain, and eye (data not shown). No NP viral antigens were detected by IHC in any of the tissue samples examined, including liver, spleen, lung, kidney, and GI (Figure 3). These data demonstrate that the non-virulent P2 strain caused a brief and self-resolved disease in outbred Hartley guinea pigs and was completely cleared from the body of the infected animals.2.3. Histopathological and Immunohistochemical Analyses of Tissue Sections Prepared from a Representative Moribund Guinea Pig Due to the Parental P18 PICV InfectionOutbred Hartley guinea pigs infected with the virulent P18 strain of PICV exhibited severe HF-like disease reminiscent of human LF and other AHFs [20,22]. A representative P18-infected guinea pig (ID#867480) started to develop a febrile reaction after 5 dpi, and its body weight loss became evident starting at day 6 pi. It was euthanized at day 14 pi after the animal reached a set of parameters, such as hypothermia and lost 26% of body weight (Table 1). The viremia level grew rapidly from 360 pfu/mL on day 6 pi to 4 × 106 pfu/mL on day 14 pi (Table 2).Histopathologic examination was conducted on H&E staining of tissue sections of this representative animal (Figure 4). The liver showed severe fatty metamorphosis with foci of hepatocellular necrosis. The spleen showed sinusoidal congestion, focal lymphoid hyperplasia, and hyperplastic mesothelial cells on the serosal surface. The kidney showed mesangial cells proliferation in the glomeruli. The lung showed a moderate to intense increase of interstitial and peribronchiolar inflammatory infiltrates. Prominent pleural hemorrhage was also noticed. Hyperplastic mesothelial cells were present on the pleural surface. The adrenal gland showed focal necrosis and inflammatory infiltrates in the cortex. The GI showed focal submucosal edema, increased inflammatory infiltrates in lamina propria, and hyperplastic mesothelial cells on the serosal surface. The eye showed foci of inflammatory infiltrates in connective tissue. However, no significant histopathologic changes were seen in heart, pancreas, and skin (data not shown).IHC demonstrated immunostaining of viral NP antigens in endothelial cells of all the tissues examined (Figure 5). In addition to endothelial cells, immunostaining in a variety of cells in different organs of the infected animal is also observed (Figure 5). These cells include (1) sinusoidal lining cells in liver and hepatocytes, especially those in periportal areas and necrotic foci; (2) dendritic cells in lymphoid follicles of spleen and mesothelial cells on serosa; (3) alveolar macrophages in lung and pleural mesothelial cells; (4) Islet cells of Langerhans and connective tissue in pancreas; (5) mesangial cells in kidney glomeruli; (6) adrenal cortical cells; (7) cells in the submucosa and lamina propria of gastrointestinal tract and mesothelial cells on the serosal surface; (8) interstitial myofibroblasts in heart and mesothelial cells on pericardium; (9) epithelial cells in dermis, dendritic cells and fibroblasts in dermis, and dermal appendages of the skin; and (10) fibroblasts in the connective tissue and inflammatory foci. In contrast, the brain was the only organ not showing any significant viral NP antigens, except for some rare immunostaining in endothelial cells of small vessels in the brain (data not shown). Taken together, these data demonstrate that virulent P18 virus involves in almost all tissues at relatively high levels and can infect many different cell types, such as macrophages, dendritic cells, endothelial cells, epithelial cells, mesothelial cells, fibroblasts, hepatocytes, and other specialized cells.2.4. Histopathological and Immunohistochemical Analyses of Tissue Sections Prepared from a Representative Moribund Guinea Pig Due to the Recombinant rP18 PICV InfectionWe next characterized a representative outbred Hartley guinea pig infected with the recombinant rP18 virus generated from reverse genetics technique and after plaque purification [24,26]. This representative animal (ID#867488) developed fever that started at day 5 pi and significant body weight loss started at day 9 pi, and was euthanized at day 18 pi when it showed signs of hypothermia and lost 20% of body weight (Table 1). The viremia level was determined at 1.8 × 106 pfu/mL on day 18 pi, which is similar to that in the moribund animal infected with the parental P18 virus (Table 2).Significant histopathologic findings were observed in the liver, spleen, adrenal gland, lung, kidney, and GI, while the brain showed mild gliosis with no prominent inflammatory infiltrates or neuronal necrosis (Figure 6). These pathological changes in the rP18-infected guinea pig were very similar to the P18-infected one (Figure 4), with only some minor differences. For example, the rP18-infected animal showed less inflammatory infiltrates in the lungs and in the lamina propria, less severe fatty metamorphosis, but more necrosis and calcification in the liver (Figure 6). These minor differences are most likely due to some inherent variations of the individual outbred animal used in the experiment (Figure 1 and Table 1), but are not necessarily due to any intrinsic differences between the P18 and rP18 PICVs. In fact, we have shown that P18 and rP18 PICVs produce a similar degree of virulence in different groups of infected outbred Hartley guinea pigs [24], with the rP18 PICV causing a more consistent disease outcome in outbred guinea pigs [27].Similar to P18 PICV infection (Figure 5), viral NP antigens were detected at relatively high levels in various extraneuronal tissues (liver, spleen, lung, pancreas, kidney, GI tract, adrenal gland, heart, LN, and eye) by IHC (Figure 7). Viral distribution in each of these tissues was similar between the P18 and rP18 PICV infections. IHC NP staining of LN was conducted for rP18-infected guinea pig only, in which viral antigens were detected in the follicular dendritic cells and endothelial cells in sinus (Figure 7).Taken together, both P18 and rP18 PICVs caused virulent and multisystemic infections of outbred Hartley guinea pigs that showed significant pathological changes in various organs and tissues, similar to those seen in LF and other AHFs [28].2.5. Histopathological and Immunohistochemical Analyses of Tissue Sections Prepared from a Representative Guinea Pig Infected with a Recombinant rS2L18 Reassortant VirusWe have previously shown that the rS2L18 PICV, which is a recombinant reassortant PICV with the P2 S segment and the P18 L segment, exhibits similar growth kinetics as the rP18 PICV in vitro but shows a much reduced degree of virulence in infected outbred Hartley guinea pigs [26]. A representative outbred guinea pig infected with the rS2L18 PICV (ID#867494) experienced febrile illness starting from day 6 pi to 10 pi (duration of fever = 5 days), showed a brief period of body weight loss from day 9 pi to 10 pi, but then recovered from the infection and was healthy at the set day of euthanization (day 18) with its body weight was at 116% of that at day 0 (Figure 1 and Table 1). The viremia levels on any given dates were below the limit of detection (<200 PFU/mL) (Table 2). No significant histopathologic changes were observed in the analyzed tissues including liver, spleen, and lung, except for some foci of hemorrhage observed on the pleural surface of the lung (Figure 8), which was also seen in the P2-infected animal (Figure 2B). As expected, no immunostaining of viral NP antigens was detected in any of the tissue samples examined (data not shown). Thus, outbred Hartley guinea pigs infected with the rS2L18 reassortant virus appeared to clear the viral infection and made a full recovery.2.6. Histopathological and Immunohistochemical Analyses of Tissue Sections Prepared from a Representative Guinea Pig Infected with a Recombinant rS18L2 Reassortant VirusUnlike the rS2L18 genome reassorted PICV described above, the rS18L2 reassortant virus that carries the P18 S segment and P2 L segment showed similar in vitro growth kinetics as those of the rP2, which was 0.5–1 log lower than rP18, suggesting that the viral factors encoded on the P18 L segment (e.g., the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase L gene) might be responsible for the higher rate of viral genome replication than those encoded on the P2 L segment [29]. However, like the rS2L18 PICV, this rS18L2 reassortant virus caused an attenuated phenotype in vivo [26]. A presentative rS18L2-infected guinea pig with the most severe disease in this group of animals was selected for histopathological analysis. This animal (ID#867500) developed fever from day 6 to 13 (duration of fever = 8 days), experienced body weight loss from days 9 pi to 16 pi, and was euthanized at day 18 pi when its body weight was 102% of that at day 0 (Figure 1 and Table 1). The viremia level throughout the 18-day infection period was below the detection limit of <200 PFU/mL (Table 2).This representative rS18L2-infected guinea pig showed some histopathologic changes that were less severe than those observed in the P18- or rP18-infected outbred animals (Figure 9A). The liver showed scattered hepatocellular necrosis but not fatty metamorphosis. The spleen showed sinusoidal congestion and occasional hyperplastic mesothelial cells on the serosal surface. The lung showed a mild increase of interstitial and peribronchiolar inflammatory infiltrates. The GI tract showed small foci of increased inflammatory infiltrates in the lamina propria and focal hyperplastic mesothelial cells on the serosal surface. The kidney showed focal mild mesangial cells proliferation in the glomeruli.Viral NP antigens were detected in endothelial cells, mesothelial cells, macrophages, and connective tissue cells in various organs (Figure 9B), but the amount of viral antigens were much less than those in P18- or rP18-infected groups of animals (Figure 5 and Figure 7). Positive IHC staining was detected in the mesothelial cells on the serosal surface of the liver, but was not detected in the parenchyma. In the spleen, there was scattered positive IHC staining in the endothelial cells, lymphoid follicle, and mesothelial cells. The lung showed rare positive immunostaining in interstitium and scattered staining in pleural mesothelial cells. Viral NP antigens were also detected in the GI tract, with positive staining seen in the focal mesothelial cells on the serosal surface and connective tissue but no prominent staining in the lamina propria or other locations. Rare positive staining was detected in the glomerular mesangial cells and endothelial cells in the kidney.Collectively, the rS18L2-infected guinea pig showed a modest level of pathology in different tissues of the infected organs and an incomplete degree of virus clearance at the time of examination (18 dpi) (Figure 9). These findings are consistent with a less severe disease caused by the rS18L2 reassorted viral infection in outbred Hartley guinea pigs than those observed in outbred animals infected the highly virulent P18 or rP18 PICV (Table 1 and Table 2) [26]. The rS18L2-infected animal was able to control systemic infection, but took a longer period of time to clear the viruses than those outbred animals infected by either the P2 or rSL2L18 viruses.3. DiscussionSimilar to the work described in this current study, previous work has demonstrated LF-like clinical diseases in inbred Strain 13 guinea pigs infected with a guinea pig-adapted strain of PICV [20,21,22]. It takes a minimum of four sequential passages of PICV in the inbred animals to result in 100% uniform lethality with as low as 3 PFU of the virus used in the infection [22,23]. Infected animals are hypoactive and lethargic, with ruffled fur, decreased food/water intake, rapid and shallow breathing, slobbering, and significant weight loss before becoming moribund [21,23]. Viremia is detected by 2 dpi and steadily increases until death typically at 16 dpi with serum viral titers over 5 log10 PFU/mL [21,22,23]. Infected guinea pigs show marked levels of leukopenia at ~13 dpi and transient neutrophilia [22]. Further serologic analysis indicates impaired platelet function as evidenced by a decreased level of coagulation factors and thrombocytopenia [23]. White blood cell and platelet levels are also low, while hematocrit increases [23]. Liver AST enzyme levels are found to be elevated starting at ~9 dpi [22]. Gross and histopathological analyses show that the livers are enlarged and yellow-brown in color with moderate to severe hepatocellular necrosis with significant fatty changes but with only few inflammatory cells [20,21,22]. The red pulp of the spleen is engorged with fibrinous deposits, mild necrosis, and erythrophagocytic macrophages [20,21,22]. Pancreas samples contain acinar tissue lesions that are atrophied and vacuolated and replaced by fatty tissue, whereas the islets remain undamaged [21,22]. Lung samples show moderate to severe interstitial multifocal pneumonia with thickened alveolar septae and an influx of macrophages as well as perivascular edema and mild, nonspecific lesions [20,21,22]. Necrotic epithelial cells of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract mucosa are noticeable [20,23], with lymphoid tissue featuring scattered necrotic regions and in the bone marrow but with a decrease number of mature granulocytes [23]. Similarly, the gastrointestinal tract shows foci of necrosis with histiocytic infiltration and the thymus is so degraded the cortex is almost absent [20,21]. Viral antigen is also detected in the salivary and adrenal glands as well as in the kidney with the infected adrenal glands showing small regions of tissue degeneration [21,22]. Similar to LASV infection, brain samples of PICV-infected inbred guinea pigs did not show significant histopathologic changes, although viral NP antigen can be detected in several small vessels, likely from the viremia [21,22], which are similar to our observation of outbred animal infected with a virulent strain of PICV (P18 or rP18). As this inbred model infected with the guinea pig-adapted strain of PICV is remarkably similar to the inbred animals infected with LASV, this PICV-inbred guinea pig model has served as an excellent non-high containment model of LF [22]. It is important to note, however, that while inbred guinea pigs may be a useful model for LF, they are not readily available and lack genetic diversity mimicking human populations. On the contrary, outbred Hartley guinea pigs are commercially available and have a diverse genetic background.Our detailed analysis of histopathology and viral immunostaining of a wide range of tissues prepared from organs of outbred Hartley guinea pigs infected with a guinea pig-adapted strain of PICV (P18) or a recombinant virus (rP18) generated by reverse genetic technique shows that these virulent PICV strains can accurately replicate the histopathological findings in various infected extraneuronal tissues that correlate well with humans or other animals infected with a pathogenic strain of LASV. The similarity of pathology and viral antigen distribution in tissues/organs of virulent PICV infection of the outbred Hartley guinea pig described in the current study and those of lethal human LF supports the use of this Hartley outbred guinea pig as a relevant surrogate model to model LF disease and to test vaccines and antivirals against it. It is important to point out that LASV infections of inbred Strain 13 guinea pigs have previously been described [14,15,30] that shows similar disease phenotype, yet with some unique differences as described below.Infection of the inbred Strain 13 guinea pigs with the known human virulent LASV Josiah strain has demonstrated at least 90% lethality [14,15,30]. The Z-132 strain of LASV is 100% lethal in these animals, but the Soromba-R strain of LASV show variable degrees of virulence (0–57% lethality) with a very mild clinical disease [31,32]. Signs of clinical disease in virulent LASV infections include weight loss, fever, ruffled fur, hunched posture, altered mentation, and conjunctivitis [13,14,15]. Infected animals become moribund typically between 10 dpi and 15 dpi [14]. A persistent viremia develops high titers rapidly (around 56 dpi) and peaks around 10 dpi with highest viral load being identified in the lung, followed by the spleen, pancreas, lymph nodes, adrenal glands, kidneys, salivary glands, liver, and heart [13,30,32]. Unlike our outbred Hartley guinea pigs infected with the virulent P18 or rP18 virus, virulent LASV is detectable in brain samples, but at such low titers that it is assumed to be from the blood infection [30]. Histologic findings include the presence of viral NP antigens, which are typically associated with hepatitis, hepatic cell death, hair follicle epithelium cell death, and adrenal cortical necrosis [13]. Laryngitis and heterophilic tracheitis have been noted in guinea pigs infected via the aerosol route [13]. Similar to our outbred animal model of virulent P18 or rP18 PICV infection, interstitial pneumonia was found in all moribund inbred animals infected with virulent strains of LASV with an increase of mononuclear cells, especially macrophages, surrounding the blood vessels and airways [13,14,30,32]. Edema and hemorrhage was also noted in the lungs of virulent LASV infections, with an expansion of the alveolar septae and a mild to moderate inflammation in portal and sinusoidal regions of the liver that show evidence of vacuolar degeneration and necrosis [13,14,32]. Half of the inbred guinea pigs infected with virulent LASV develop acute necrotizing nephritis and mild myocarditis or mild to moderate endocarditis and pancarditis [13,14,30], with heart-related phenomena not seen in human clinical cases [5]. Five of eight inbred guinea pigs infected with virulent LASV develop minimal hepatitis and necrotizing lesions of the spleen [30] that show mild heterophilic splenitis [13,32]. The red pulp of the spleen shows perifollicular to diffuse mononuclear cell proliferation [13]. Lymphocytolysis and lymphoid depletion has been noted in the white pulp of the spleen, thymus, and lymph nodes in virulent LASV infections [13,14]. The pancreas shows acinar cell atrophy as well as other architectural changes [13]. Renal tubular degeneration and peritonitis are also infrequently noted in these animals [14]. Viral NP antigen has been detected in the reproductive tissues of both male and female inbred guinea pigs infected with the virulent strains of LASV, with males also showing evidence of mild epididymitis [13]. Serum analysis of these animals detect an elevated level of ALT and heterophils with a decrease levels of platelets and blood lymphocytes [13]. Additionally, while exhibiting evidence of viral infection, the adrenal glands of virulent LASV-infected inbred animals show minimal damage [13,30]. Similar to our outbred guinea pigs infected with the virulent P18 or rP18 PICVs, virulent LASV-infected inbred animals develop noticeable petechial rashes [13].A unique clinical feature of Strain 13 guinea pigs infected with virulent LASV is the presentation of conjunctivitis due partly to infection of the eye [15], which is consistent with clinical human LASV infections that have been known to exhibit conjunctival edema and conjunctivitis in acute cases of the infection and can lead to transient blindness in survivors. It is noteworthy that LASV has been detected in the aqueous humor of the eye of infected rhesus macaques [15,33]. Viral antigen can be found in the endothelial cells of the sclera, deep to Descemet’s membrane; conjunctiva; and cornea of the eye [15]. Affected mesenchymal cells have been found in the ciliary body, iris, and filtration angle, as well as in neural crest cells and the perivascular connective tissue [15]. Interestingly, a large proportion (8/9) of lethal LASV infections of inbred guinea pigs show mild peripheral corneal neovascularization with viral antigen present in five of those animals, and six of nine of them also feature evidence of mild conjunctival hemorrhage [15].Unless the Josiah strain of LASV that has been adapted in guinea pigs [13] is used (as described in some detail below), infection of outbred Hartley guinea pigs with a non-guinea pig-adapted LASV Josiah strain results in only 30–67% lethality regardless of dosage of the virus being used in these experiments [5,30]. Regardless, all moribund animals show evidence of interstitial pneumonia [30], while viremia develops more slowly and to lower levels than the infected inbred Strain 13 animals, which allows the animals to clear the infection by 21 dpi [5,30]. High viral titers have been noted in the lung, kidney, liver, heart, bladder, thymus, adrenal gland, spleen, lymph nodes, uterus, and ovary, and some low levels of the virus are also detectable in the urine, blood, and ascetic and pleural fluid [5]. Histologic analysis indicates lung samples of LASV-infected outbred Hartley guinea pigs with pulmonary edema and microscopic lesions [5]. Similar to the infected inbred animals, the heart tissues of the infected outbred animals show evidence of mild to moderate myocarditis [5]. Hepatocytes and myocardial fibers also show some evidence of calcification [5].A Josiah strain of LASV adapted in guinea pigs through serial passages can lead to a uniform lethality in the Hartley outbred guinea pig with only 1 in 18 infected guinea pigs surviving the infection [34,35]. These infected animals develop febrile illness around 6–9 dpi, followed by respiratory distress and hypothermia [35,36]. Similar to our outbred animals infected with the virulent P18 or rP18 PICV, outbred animals infected with the guinea pig-adapted strain of LASV show rapid weight loss, ranging from 8% to over 20%, which is a typical humane euthanasia criterion, and died at an average of 15 dpi [34,35,36]. These animals also show an unstable gait, a noticeable lack of grooming with associated rough/ruffled fur, delayed responsiveness/lethargy, recumbency, and a reddening of the footpads and ears [34,35]. Viral titers have been detected in the serum, spleen, liver, and lung of these animals [35,36]. Histologic analysis of the liver indicates lymphohistiocytic hepatitis and hepatocellular degeneration, whereas spleen samples shows evidence of sinus histiocytosis and lung samples feature interstitial pneumonia [35].While different animal species have been developed as animal models of LF [4], they all have certain constraints. For example, the use of NHPs, such as marmosets or rhesus macaques, can incur exorbitant expenses of high containment BSL4 facilities and experienced lab personnel (veterinarians) needed to conduct LASV studies. Laboratory mice, on the other hand, are relatively inexpensive, yet they are generally resistant to LASV infection. Therefore, other small and less expensive animals, such as inbred/outbred guinea pigs infected with the guinea pig-adapted strain of PICV, have been explored as potential alternative models of LF. As demonstrated in the current study, outbred Hartley guinea pigs infected with a virulent strain of PICV can produce a disease that is remarkably similar to inbred animals infected with LASV or in human LF, which makes this PICV-guinea pig model an attractive model for understanding LF disease pathogenesis and for testing candidate vaccines and therapeutics.4. Materials and Methods4.1. In Vivo ExperimentExperimental infection of outbred Harley guinea pigs, purchased from Charles River Laboratories, were carried out as previous described [24,26] and followed the approved protocols from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Emory University. Healthy outbred Hartley guinea pigs (300–350 g) (N = 6) were infected intraperitoneally (IP) with 10,000 PFU of the respective PICV strains (P2, rP2, P18, or rP18). Rectal temperature and body weight were measured daily and up until day 18 post infection (18 dpi), which is the last day of the experiments. Fever is defined as rectal temperature of >39.5 °C. Blood was collected at certain time points, and viremia was measured by plaque assay as described below. Guinea pigs were declared moribund and euthanized if body weight decreased by 25% and rectal temperature fell below 38.5 °C. At terminal points or at 18 dpi, guinea pigs were euthanized, and organs were removed and preserved in formalin before tissue sectioning.4.2. Histopathological and Immunohistochemical AnalysesTissue samples collected from PICV-infected guinea pigs were fixed in 4% formaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, sectioned, stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), and examined microscopically for histopathological changes. For immunohistochemical staining of PICV antigens, paraffin-embedded tissue sections were subjected to antigen retrieval followed by staining with mouse anti-PICV serum. Sequential treatment with biotinylated secondary antibodies, alkaline phosphatase-conjugated streptavidin, and napthol fast red was conducted according to the manufacturer’s protocol (LSAB2 Universal Alkaline Phosphatase kit, DAKO, Carpinteria, CA, USA), and followed by counterstaining in Meyer’s hematoxylin [37].4.3. PICV Plaque AssayVero cells were seeded into six-well plates at 90% to 100% confluency and infected with 0.5 mL of 10-fold serial dilutions of the respective PICV in MEM complete media for 1 h at 37 °C. After removing the medium, the cells were incubated in fresh media supplemented with 0.5% agar and cultured for 4 days at 37 °C. Plaques were stained overnight with diluted neutral red solution (1:50) in 0.5% agar–MEM–10% FBS.


Title: Epidemiology and Genomic characteristics of arenavirus in rodents from the southeast coast of P.R. China

BackgroundThree species of mammarenavirus have been reported in Asia: lymphocytic choriomeningitis mammarenavirus (LCMV), Wenzhou virus (WENV) and Loie River mammarenavirus (LORV) [1]. WENV is the most recently discovered member in the Mammarenavirus genus of the Arenaviridae family. WENV was first identified in 2015 in Wenzhou, Zhejiang province [1]. It was also been detected in wild rodents from Yunnan, Guangdong, and Hainan provinces in China [2–4]. The WENV genome consists primarily of two fragments: a 7.2-kb-long L fragment that encodes RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRp) and zinc binding matrix protein (ZP), and a 3.5-kb-long S fragment that encodes nucleoprotein (NP) and glycoprotein precursor (GPC) [5]. The RdRp gene, which is part of the genome, is highly conserved among mammarenaviruses but it can vary among strains and be utilized to distinguish different strains [3].Disease caused by mammarenavirus is predominantly prevalent in Africa and Latin America [6]. Competitive ELISA detected WENV NP-specific IgG-antibodies in 830 healthy individuals aged 0–70 years, with an overall positive rate of 4.6% (38/830) [7]. The highest positive rate was 5.4% (17/317) in people aged 45–59 years, followed by 4.1% (4/98) in people aged 60 years and over. The third age group (15–44 years old) had a positive rate of 3.6% (8/221). WENV antibodies were even detected in the sera of children under 15 years of age, with a positive rate of 1.5% [7]. From 2019 to 2020, the seroprevalence of WENV in patients with unexplained fevers in Yunnan province of China was 2.8% (23/828) as determined by competitive enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [7, 8]. Some members of the mammarenavirus can cause severe hemorrhagic fever, such as LASV, Junín virus (JUNV), Guanarito virus (GTOV), Machupo virus (MACV), and Sabía virus (SABV) [9]. For instance, LASV alone causes approximately 100,000 to 300,000 infections with about 5,000 deaths per year (Lassa Fever CDC, 2022, https://www.cdc.gov/vhf/lassa/index.html). Therefore, newly discovered mammarenavirus like WENV, may also pose a significant threat to public safety [6]. Consequently, it is crucial to investigate the transmission routes of WENV through experimental models to prevent the emergence of these viruses.Wild rodents are natural hosts for a variety of pathogens, such as hantavirus and paramyxovirus [6]. Previous studies have detected WENV primarily in R. norvegicus, Mus musculus, Rattus flavipectus, Rattus exulans, Niviventer niviventer, Suncus murinus [2, 10], indicating a wide range of potential hosts of WENV. demonstrated Mammarenavirus can be transmitted to humans through excrements like feces and urine, as well as bodily fluids such as saliva and blood [11–13]. The virus can spread through mucosal surfaces, including the skin, gastrointestinal tract, and respiratory tract, when humans come into contact with the feces or secretions of these animals [6]. However, the symptoms and risks associated with WENV infection in humans are still unclear, and there is a lack of corresponding control measures. Therefore, it is crucial to enhance the detection and diagnosis of viruses in both wild rodents and humans.The high population density, extensive trade, abundant rodent species, and substantial overlap between human and rodent habitats on the southeast coast increase the risk of human exposure to WENV. In 2015, WENV was first identified in rodents and shrews in Wenzhou, Zhejiang province, China. Positive cases were observed in 15.4% of R. flavipectus, 11.8% of Rattus losea, 17.1% of R. norvegicus, 75.0% of Rattus rattus, 1.9% of N. niviventer and 4.4% of S. murinus [1, 5]. The virus has also been found in R. norvegicus from Xinjiang, Shandong, and Hainan provinces [4, 6, 14]. In the previous study, WENV was detected in R. losea in Hunan Province [5, 15]. In Guangdong province, WENV was found in R. norvegicus and S. murinus with infection rates of 6.7% and 0.5%, respectively [3]. In Yunnan province, WENV was found in R. norvegicus, Rattus tanezumi, and Tupaia belangeri with infection rates of 8.3%,17.4%, 1.5%, and 10%, respectively [2, 5]. These findings suggest that WENV can be carried by a variety of wild rodents, has multiple hosts, and has the potential for cross-species transmission. However, most studies have concentrated on sampling sites within a single province, and there has been no systematic investigation of WENV carriage in rodents in the southeast coastal areas. Therefore, it is crucial to detect WENV carriage in wild rodents along the southeast coast to monitor the potential risks of human-animal infection.ResultsRodents composition and distributionA total of 390 wild rodents were collected from six eastern and southern coastal provinces during the period of 2017–2021 (Fig. 1). The collected rodents included R. norvegicus, R. flavipectus, R. losea, S. murinus, Apodemus agrarius, M. musculus, Microtus fortis, Micromys minutus, and N. niviventer. Among these species, R. norvegicus was the most dominant with 142 individuals, followed by R. flavipectus (91) and S. murinus (57) (Table 1).Fig. 1Detection of WENV in rodent-like animal samples from the eastern and southern coastal areas. This map was plotted by Adobe illustrator CS6 (Adobe Systems, USA)Table 1WENV detection results of rodents in the eastern and southern coastal provinces, ChinaProvincesJiangsuZhejiangFujianGuangdongHainanGuangxiTotal(P/Da)SpeciesRattus norvegicus(P/Da)1/70/232/250/171/560/144/142Rattus flavipectus(P/Da)0/300/230/80/60/130/110/91Rattus losea(P/Da)-0/10----0/10Suncus murinus(P/Da)0/2-0/430/60/6-0/57Apodemus agrarius(P/Da)0/50/250/5---0/35Mus musculus(P/Da)0/26-----0/26Microtus fortis(P/Da)-0/20----0/20Micromys minutus(P/Da)-0/4----0/4Niviventer niviventer(P/Da)-0/5----0/5Total(P/Da)1/700/1102/810/291/750/254/390D detected sample numbersaP positive numbersIn terms nucleic acid testing, four positive samples (1.03%, 4/390) were detected. These included one positive sample from Wuxi City, Jiangsu province (1.43%, 1/70), two positive samples from Xiamen City, Fujian Province (2.5%, 2/81) and one positive sample from Haikou City, Hainan province (1.3%, 1/75). All positive samples were obtained from R. norvegicus. The WENV positive nucleic acid sequences Xiamen-10 and Xiamen-13 were derived from intestinal tissues, while the WENV positive nucleic acid sequences, Wuxi-87 and HAIKOU-40 were derived from spleen tissues.Characterization of L genes of the three WENV strainsUsing DNASTAR software, we analyzed the sequence homology of the conserved RdRp gene in four WENV strains. The nucleotide homology of the four positive samples ranged from 60.9 to 94.7% (Table S1). Among these samples, Xiamen-10, Xiamen-13 and HAIKOU-40 showed a homology of 82.7% to 100% with other WENV sequences (Table S2). The positive sample Wuxi-87 exhibited a homology of 60.9% to 65.4% with other WENV strains (Table S2). In the phylogenetic tree analysis of the partial RdRp gene, Xiamen-10 and Xiamen-13 were found to be in the same branch, and clustered together with WENV strains isolated from Myanmar and Cambodia (Fig. 2). HAIKOU-40 formed an independent branch of evolution, while being grouped with other WENV strains; Wuxi-87 gathered with LASV and was independent of other WENV strains (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Species identification based on phylogenetic analysis of PCR amplifying products (partial RdRp gene). The phylogenetic tree was constructed using ML methods based on GTR model with gamma distribution and invariant sites, and tested with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Sequences were identified by the GenBank accession number and the strain name, followed by their origin. The sequences of the four positive samples were indicated with black trianglesWhole-genome sequence analysis of the HAIKOU-40 strainAfter NGS, the contig sequences of HAIKOU-40 were compared and spliced to obtain the full length of the S and L fragments, which were 3318 nt and 7139 nt, respectively. These sequences were uploaded to the GenBank database with the accession numbers OP562167 and OP562168 respectively.Each complete fragment contains two open reading frames (ORFs). The coding regions were identified using the NCBI online open reading frame (ORF) finder (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/orffinder/). The L segment codes for a 276 nt (92 aa) ZP and a 6,687 nt (2,229 aa) RdRp, linked by a 75 nt intergenic region (IGR). The S segment encodes a 1,704 nt (567 aa) NP and a 1,479 nt (492 aa) GPC, linked by a 63 nt IGR. It is worth noting that the IGR of the L segment in HAIKOU-40 is only 75 nt, which is much shorter than other WENV strains (approximately 119 nt) [16].To characterize the relationship between HAIKOU-40 and several reported arenavirus genomes, we compared the full-length L and S fragments, RdRp gene, Z gene, NP gene and GPC gene of HAIKOU-40 with these virus strains, one by one. We analyzed the nucleotide and amino acid sequence similarities (Table 2), and found that HAIKOU-40 sequences were most closely related to the Wufeng/ WFS (Genbank accession number MZ328246.1), with 84.5–89.4% nt and 91.6–98.9% aa identity. We also observed a high sequence homology between HAIKOU-40 and the Cambodian strain C617 obtained from influenza-like patients, with the nucleotide sequence homologies of 84.6% and 87.6% for the L and S fragments, respectively.
Table 2Comparison of nucleotide and amino acid similarity between HAIKOU-40 and other Mammarenavirus (%)placeLRdRpZSNPGPCstrainsntntaantaantntaantaaWENVWufeng/ WFS84.586.791.691.398.989.438.297.489.595.3Rn242/Zhejiang84.084.190.880.185.787.738.895.188.894.6Rn366/ Zhejiang84.684.690.889.192.387.037.49.837.410.7RnGz40-2018/Guangdong84.584.390.090.996.786.238.994.985.692.7CH50/Guangdong84.284.490.091.397.8-----CH31/Guangdong-----85.738.794.486.593.8RnYCB1/Xinjiang84.083.990.386.694.586.039.394.286.094.09–24/Yunnan84.384.289.190.697.887.538.795.986.894.0RtYM16-2015/Yunnan84.684.690.385.991.286.439.495.185.793.4Haikou/Hainan84.784.790.887.792.387.039.995.487.594.6PL/Hainan84.784.690.687.792.3-----DK/Hainan-----86.539.894.486.893.1G107/Shandong84.484.690.988.889.086.839.393.786.393.6MYR-039/Malaysia85.084.990.887.391.286.639.494.286.093.6C649/Burma84.684.590.789.996.787.539.095.486.393.6C617/Burma84.684.590.889.595.687.639.295.286.894.0LORVR4397/Tailand64.664.166.968.874.772.036.983.469.979.9LASVNig08A41/Nigeria57.556.853.460.464.066.437.073.066.373.1LCMV53b/Spain55.053.747.658.152.261.237.565.258.755.1JUNVXJ44/Argentine48.749.136.250.938.654.236.552.252.043.7aThe reference sequences accession number and sampling sites were indicated in Table S3Phylogenetic analysis of WENV sequencesAfter comparing the sequences of representatives of the Old World group in mammarenavirus with the sequences of HAIKOU-40, we constructed maximum likelihood trees for the S and L fragments. Figure 3 shows that the topological structures of the two phylogenetic trees are similar. The newly discovered HAIKOU-40 strain formed an Asia-specific cluster along with WENV strains from China and LORV, which we have tentatively named Asian ancestry (Fig. 3). HAIKOU-40 clustered with other WENV strains but formed a separate small clade.Fig. 3The maximum likelihood trees based on the full-length genomic sequences of WENV. The phylogenetic trees of the L (A) and S (B) segments of WENV were constructed with IQ-TREE, using automated model selection, and bootstrapped using 1000 ultrafast bootstraps. Sequences were identified by the GenBank accession number and the strain name, followed by their origin. The newly identified WENV strain in Haikou was indicated with black triangles. The reference sequences are from Genbank and their GenBank accession numbers and the strain names are shown in Table S3DiscussionSince its discovery in Wenzhou, Zhejiang province in 2014, WENV has been detected in wild rodents in eight Chinese provinces, primarily in R. norvegicus. Among the available studies, R. norvegicus tested positive for WENV at rates of 17.4% in Yunnan province and 17.1% in Wenzhou, Zhejiang province [1, 2]. WENV has also been found in R. norvegicus in Shandong, Hainan, Xinjiang, and Guangdong provinces [4, 6, 14]. These studies indicate that R. norvegicus has higher carriage rates of WENV compared to other rodent species [5]. This present study examined 390 wild rodents from six southeastern coastal provinces, aiming to detect the presence of WENV in wild rodents along the southeast coast. In the present study, we indentified four WENV-positive samples in R. norvegicus. Two samples were obtained from intestinal tissues and the other two from spleen tissues. Our finding align with Tan et al.’s research, which also detected WENV exclusively in the spleen tissue of R. norvegicus.Lassa fever, which was discovered in 1969, has primarily been endemic in West African countries such as Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria until 2020 [17, 18]. Currently, there have been no reported cases of Lassa fever in China. However, with the increasing frequency of exchanges between China and Africa, there is a higher possibility of African Lassa fever being imported into China. It is important to note that, there are no reports of LASV-infected animals being imported from endemic areas into China [17, 19, 20]. The primary source and host of LASV in nature are rodents, particularily Mastomys natolensis, followed by Hylomyscus pamfi and Mastomys erythroleucu [17, 21]. There have been no reports on the detection and isolation of LASV strains from R. norvegicus. In this study, we detected a suspected LASV nucleotide fragment (Wuxi-87) in R. norvegicus in Wuxi City, Jiangsu province, Wui-87 exhibited the highest nucleotide sequence homology with LASV, suggesting that it may be a member of the LASV. In the next phase, we will further examine the genetic evolution of the Wuxi-87 genome sequence and isolate the virus in the laboratory to obtain complete sequences. Simultaneously, we will monitor the prevalence of mammarenavirus in rodents on a larger scale. This research will further insights into the relationship between Wuxi-87 and LASV, and determine whether R. norvegicus is a new host of LASV. The identification of suspected LASV sequences in China emphasizes the importance of strengthening animal quarantine procedures for incoming ships and aircraft in regions with significant human exchanges between China and Africa, particularly in cities located at entry ports. It is also crucial to improve Lassa virus detection capabilities. Additionally, this study has discovered the presence of mammarenavirus in R. norvegicus for the first time in Wuxi, Jiangsu province, and Xiamen, Fujian province. These findings suggest that R. norvegicus serves as the primary natural host of WENV.Rattus norvegicus, a member of the rodentia family, is a relatively large rodent that can be found in both domestic and wild environments. It has the ability to spread across the world through various mode of transportation [22]. In farmers' grain storage, R. norvegicus is a common and harmful creature [23, 24]. Changes in climate and food sources can lead to rodent migration, including crossbreeding between house mice and wild rodents, which in turn can accelerate the spread of rodent-borne diseases. Certain mammarenaviruses, such as LASV, GTOV, and JUNV have the potencial for zoonotic transmission [6, 9]. Studies have shown that LASV can be transmitted to humans not only through the feces of infected rodents, but also though human-to-human transmission [25, 26]. WENV strains have been detected and isolated from various wild rodents in China, with R. norvegicus having the highest detection rate. WENV has been detected in R. norvegicus in six provinces in China [1, 2]. In order to analyze the relationship between the HAIKOU-40 strain and representative WENV strains, we compared the nucleotide sequences of their S and L fragments. The HAIKOU-40 strain exhibited 84% nucleotide homology with the WENV reference strains found in all provinces of China (Table 2), but less than 75% homology when compared to other mammarenaviruses. According to the virus classification committee, the HAIKOU-40 strain is classified as belonging to the WENV species. The homology comparison in Table 2 revealed that HAIKOU-40 exhibits more than 15% variation in the L fragment and more than 10% variation in the S fragment, indicating a better preservation of the S fragment in WENV. In the phylogenetic analysis of the L and S fragments, the HAIKOU-40 strain falls within the same branch as the Wufeng/WFS strain (Fig. 3). The nucleotide and amino acid sequences of these two virus strains show the highest homology, suggesting a close relationship between HAIKOU-40 and Wufeng/WFS. However, the geographic origin of the Wufeng/WFS strain remains unknown.WENV stands out from other Arenavirus due to its ability to be transmitted by multiple rodent species that share habitats with humans. This greatly increases the chancesof WENV transmission within the population. In addition, the competitive ELISA method detected WENV’s antibodies in 636 blood samples from Beijing and Shandong provinces, resulting in a positivity rate of 4.6%. This rate was compared to a rate of 2.8% among 828 unexplained fever patients in Yunnan province [7, 27]. These finding suggest that WENV has become endemic in the population. WENV has been found to cause diffuse pneumonia in rats and small cranial cavities in R. exulans, similar to the microcephaly observed in LCMV. This suggests a potential teratogenic effect of WENV [6, 16, 28, 29]. However, the symptoms of WENV after human infection and its potential harmfulness have been underestimated since its discovery. This underestimation is due to the predominantly mild symptoms resembling respiratory diseases. Therefore, there is an urgent need to enhance our understanding of the pathogenicity of WENV and its mechanisms, improve surveillance for WENV in wild rodents, particularly R. norvegicus, and determine the prevalence of WENV within the general population.ConclusionThis study systematically investigated the prevalence of WENV in rodents in the southeastern coast area of China. Furthermore, we conducted a genome characterization of a newly discovered WENV strain, and identified R. norvegicus as a significant carrier of WENV in this region. These findings emphasize the need to enhance WENV monitoring in wild rodent populations.MethodsSample ProcessingTo capture rodent-like animals, mouse traps were baited with doughnuts and peanuts. Sticky boards were placed every 15–20 m, in the evening and retrieved in the morning. Euthanasia of the rodents was performed by administering isoflurane through inhalation. The collected animals were dissected in a Class 2 negative pressure biosafety cabinet. Tissue samples including heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney, intestine, brain, and muscle were taken from the animals and placed into labeled Eppendorf (EP) tubes., Subsequently, the animal samples were stored at -80 °C.Tissue samples of rodents were collected from coastal cities and port areas of Guangxi province, Hainan province, Guangdong province, Fujian province, Zhejiang province and Jiangsu province between 2017 and 2021. Each tissue sample, approximately 1 g in size, was cut and placed into a 2 ml grinding tube. The tube contained 4 specially designed steel balls of different diameters, and 100 μL of 1xPBS (Beyotime, C0221A) was added. The tube was then sealed. After centrifugation, the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 mL EP tube, and supplemented with 600 μL of 1xPBS solution. The collected liquid was used for nucleic acid extraction and species identification. Total viral RNA was extracted using the MiniBEST Viral RNA/DNA Extraction Kit (Takara, Code No.9766) and RNA from each tissue sample was transcribed into cDNA for WENV detection following the instructions of the PrimeScript II 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Takara, Code No.6210A).PCR detection of WENV nucleic acidsThe synthetic primers LVL3359plus-WZ: AGAATYAGTGAAAGGGARAGCAATTC and LVL3754minus-WZ: CACATCATTGGTCCCCATTTACTRTGATC were used to amplify conserved regions in the RdRp gene sequence, targeting a particle size of 367 bp. The cDNA was amplified using the Ex Taq enzyme, with the following PCR parameters: an initial step of 3 min at 94℃, followed by 40 cycles of 30 s at 94℃, 30 s at 55℃, 30 s at 72℃ and a final extension step of 10 min at 72℃. The amplified sample was validated through 1.3% agarose gel electrophoresis and the positive PCR product was sent to Shenggong Biological Engineering Co., LTD.Whole genome sequencing of virusesThe supernatant of spleen tissues and intestinal tissues that tested positive for WENV were sent to the Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences for whole-genome sequencing. Initially, 140 μL of supernatant from the intestinal tissues (HAIKOU-40) was reserved for RNA extraction using the MiniBEST Viral RNA/DNA Extraction Kit. A probe-captured technique was employed to remove rodents' nucleic acid. The remaining RNA was then reverse-transcribed into cDNA, followed by second-strand synthesis. Subsequently, a library of DNA was constructed from the synthetic double-stranded DNA through DNA fragmentation, end-repair, adaptor-ligation, and PCR amplification. The Invitrogen Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (ThermoFisher, Foster City, CA, USA) was used to quantify the library, and the quantified double-stranded DNA library was converted to a single-stranded circular DNA library by DNA denaturation and circularization. To ensure the sequencing reaction had the required signal intensity, the original single-stranded circular DNA was used as a template, and the Rolling Circle Amplification (RCA) reaction was carried out using RCA polymerase. The product of amplification was DNA nanoball (DNB) [30]. The quantification of DNBs was performed using Qubit 2.0 and they were loaded onto the flow cell, followed by sequencing using PE150 on the MGI-2000 platform (MGI, Shenzhen, China).Genomic and phylogenetic analysisReference sequences of mammarenavirus genus viruses were obtained from GenBank and listed in Table S3. Multiple sequence comparisons were conducted using the MEGA X software package [31]. Homology analysis between DNA sequences was performed using Megalign in DNASTAR software. Phylogenetic analysis was carried out using the maximum likelihood (ML) method. The phylogenetic tree of the four positive specimens was constructed based on the general time reversible model with gamma distribution and invariant sites. The tree was tested with 1000 bootstrap replicates using the MEGA X program. The genetic distance was determined using the p-distance with transitions and transversions method [5, 32]. The phylogenetic trees of the L and S segments of WENV were constructed using IQ-TREE, with automated model selection. The trees were then bootstrapped using 1000 ultrafast bootstraps [33]. To amplify mouse 16S ribosomal RNA gene, genomic DNA extracted from mouse muscle tissue was used as a template. The target fragment length was approximately 220 bp, with the forward primer being HedF: AYAAGACGAGAAGACCC and the reverse primer being HedR: GATTGCGCTGTTATTCC. cDNA was amplified using Ex Taq enzyme, and the PCR parameters were as follows: an initial step at 95°C for 4 minutes, followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 40 seconds, 53 °C for 40 seconds, and 72 °C for 40 seconds. Finally, a final extension step was performed at 72 °C for 10 minutes. The samples were verified by 1.3% agarose gel electrophoresis, and the positive PCR products were sent to Shenggong Biological for sequencing. The obtained sequences were compared online using BLAST to determine the species of the sample.Supplementary Information
Additional file 1: Supplementary Table 1. Sequences distances of four WENV positive samples.Additional file 2: Supplementary Table 2. Sequences distances between four WENV positive samples and other WENV strains.Additional file 3: Supplementary Table 3. The reference sequences used in this study.Additional file 4: Supplementary Table 4. The partial L gene sequences (367 bp) from WENV positive samples.


Title: Burden of rodent-borne viruses in rodents and zoonotic risk in humans in Cambodia

INTRODUCTIONRodents are reservoirs for a wide range of zoonotic viruses, many of which cause severe disease in humans. Nevertheless, rodent-borne infections remain understudied and neglected in several regions. In Southeast Asia, rapid urban expansion, rice-based agriculture, and extensive human–animal interfaces create conditions that facilitate rodent–human contact and viral spillover. Cambodia, located within the Greater Mekong Subregion, contains diverse ecosystems—including tropical rainforests, wetlands, and rice fields—that support a rich biodiversity of rodent species. Over the past two decades, the country has undergone rapid economic development accompanied by accelerating urbanization and significant environmental changes (1). Such expansion into biodiverse habitats increases the potential for zoonotic spillover. Understanding the burden of these viruses in this setting is essential for anticipating outbreaks and informing targeted surveillance and prevention strategies.Among the most consequential rodent-borne viruses are orthohantaviruses, mammarenaviruses, and rodent-borne hepatitis E virus (HEV-C). Orthohantaviruses (family Hantaviridae) are negative-sense RNA viruses that cause hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome and hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, with reported case-fatality rates ranging from 1% to more than 30%. Mammarenaviruses (family Arenaviridae), best known for Lassa virus and related pathogens, also circulate in Asia, where novel species continue to be discovered. HEV-C, a divergent member of the Hepeviridae family maintained in rodents, has emerged as a zoonotic cause of hepatitis, particularly in immunocompromised individuals. These viruses exhibit varying infection dynamics within their natural reservoirs. Orthohantaviruses, such as Seoul orthohantavirus (SEOV), generally cause persistent, asymptomatic infections in rodents, with viral shedding occurring over extended periods (2–4). Similarly, mammarenaviruses typically establish chronic infections in their rodent hosts. In contrast, rat hepatitis E virus (HEV-C) infections are usually acute but can be detected in multiple organs for a limited period. Collectively, these viruses pose significant public health threats due to their potential to cause severe diseases ranging from hepatitis to respiratory and hemorrhagic fevers (5–8). Human infection typically results from direct or indirect contact with infected rodents, their excreta, or contaminated environmental substrates (7–9).Evidence of orthohantaviruses in Cambodia has been documented in rodents since 1998, with detections reported from the capital city, Phnom Penh, as well as the southern and eastern provinces of the country (10). Serological surveys have also revealed recent infection: 71 out of 459 individuals (15.5%) demonstrated a fourfold rise in IgG titer or seroconversion (11). More recently, the Cardamones variant of Wenzhou virus, which is a member of the mammarenavirus genus, has been identified in brown rats (Rattus norvegicus) and Pacific rats (Rattus exulans), and human infection has been reported in febrile patients with respiratory symptoms (12). Information on HEV-C is limited in Cambodia. Although not extensively characterized, related strains have been detected in rodents across Southeast Asia, suggesting a plausible regional presence. A virome analysis of rodent lungs collected between 2006 and 2018 identified partial HEV-C genome sequences in Cambodian samples (13). HEV-C has also been reported in samples collected from neighboring countries—including Thailand, Laos PDR, and Vietnam—as well as in China, Indonesia, and Japan (13–17).Rodent ecology is a contributing factor that shapes the risk of zoonotic spillover. Cambodia hosts a diverse commensal and peri-domestic rodent species: the Asian house shrew (Suncus murinus), the Pacific rat (Rattus exulans), the brown rat (Rattus norvegicus), and the black rat (Rattus rattus) are among the most commonly trapped. Their relative abundance varies across environments: S. murinus dominates urban habitats, R. exulans is widespread in rural and agricultural areas, and R. norvegicus and R. rattus thrive in dense settlements and along waterways. These ecological patterns, combined with extensive rice agriculture and seasonal flooding, create multiple opportunities for human exposure (10, 12, 13).Despite these indicators, comprehensive assessment of rodent-borne pathogens across diverse human–animal interfaces in Cambodia is rare, leaving the true prevalence, genetic diversity, and geographic distribution of mammarenaviruses, orthohantaviruses, and HEV-C largely unknown. Establishing a baseline for these viruses is critical for risk assessment, diagnostic preparedness, and the development of targeted public health interventions.Here, we present a comprehensive investigation of mammarenaviruses, orthohantaviruses, and HEV-C in small mammals, assessing evidence of human exposure across different environmental and socio-economic contexts in Cambodia. The investigation focused on the capital city, where high rodent–human interaction is anticipated, leading to an elevated risk of transmission. Subsequently, we extended our study to include interfaces representing Cambodia’s diverse landscapes, including semi-urban and rural areas.MATERIALS AND METHODSStudy timing and locationsThis descriptive study was conducted across three distinct interfaces in Cambodia—urban, semi-urban, and rural—during the 2020 rainy season and 2022 dry season (Fig. 1A). Study sites were selected to represent an urbanization gradient, reflecting different levels of human development and interaction with the environment. Phnom Penh, the capital city, was classified as the urban interface due to its dense population of approximately 2.1 million inhabitants. Five major markets—Phsar Chas, Phsar Kandal, Orussey, Central, and Chbar Ampov—were chosen based on their size and location, prioritizing sites with a high likelihood of rodent–human interactions and the potential for the widespread distribution of contamination within the surrounding neighborhoods. Preah Sihanouk province, located on the western coast, was selected as a semi-urban interface, representing a region undergoing rapid urbanization, transitioning from the original hills and rice fields to a more developed landscape. Three villages—Veal Thum, Veal Meas, and Boeng Vaeng—were selected. Kampong Cham province, known for its predominantly agrarian landscape and extensive rice fields, served as the rural interface, with the villages of Roung Kou, Krasang Pul, and Toul Ampil selected.Fig 1Study sites, rodent species, and virus prevalence in rodents. (A) Study site: the study was conducted in urban (Phnom Penh, depicted in purple), rural (Kampong Cham province, depicted in yellow), and semi-urban interfaces (Sihanoukville province, depicted in green). (B) Distribution of rodent species: the chart illustrates the overall distribution of rodent species identified in each interface. “Other” category includes Bandicota savilei (n = 1), Rattus argentiventer (n = 2), Mus sp. (n = 9), and Rattus sp. (n = 7). (C) Virus detection in rodents collected from each interface: the presence of mammarenavirus and orthohantavirus was screened using pooled organ samples (kidney, spleen, liver, and lung) from individual rodent. HEV-C was screened from individual rodent liver samples.Map depicts study areas in Cambodia with three regions: Kampong Cham, Phnom Penh, and Preah Sihanouk. Bar charts depict rodent species distribution and virus detection percentages across sampled populations.Sample and data collectionAt each site, samples were collected from rodents as well as humans residing or working in the same areas. Initial sample and data collection occurred from July to September 2020, with a planned follow-up 6 months later. However, travel restrictions and other non-pharmaceutical interventions in response to the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic delayed the second sampling until March–April 2022.Rodent sample collectionRodents were live trapped using locally made traps placed along pathways known to be frequented by rodents. At each site, 50–60 traps were deployed each evening for two to three consecutive nights to capture at least 30 small mammals per session. In the morning, trapped rodents were humanely euthanized following the American Veterinary Medical Association Guidelines (18). Key morphological parameters, including sex, body length, weight, reproductive status, and approximate age (juvenile vs adult), were recorded for species identification. Lung, liver, spleen, and kidney tissues were collected and stored individually in 1 mL of Viral Transport Medium prepared as previously described (19). All samples were preserved on-site in liquid nitrogen and subsequently transferred to the Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge (IPC), where they were stored at −80°C.Human sample and data collectionMarket workers (≥18 years) from urban interface and villagers (≥2 years) from semi-urban and rural interfaces, residing near rodent trapping sites, were invited to participate in the study. Each participant was requested to provide one blood sample. After obtaining informed consent, trained interviewers conducted face-to-face interviews in Khmer using paper-based questionnaires to collect socio-epidemiological data and information on potential exposure factors. Venous blood (5 mL) was collected in a dry tube, temporarily stored at +4°C in a cool box, and transported daily to IPC’s Virology Unit. Blood samples were centrifuged (10 min, 2,000 rpm). Serum was aliquoted and stored at −80°C until analysis.Assessment of rodent-borne virus infection in animal samples and phylogenetic analysisApproximately 10 mg (equivalent to 3 mm3) of liver or pooled organs (kidney, spleen, liver, and lung) of each rodent was homogenized using MagNA Lyzer Instrument and bead system (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Viral RNA was extracted from 200 μL of the supernatant of the homogenized tissue using Direct-Zol RNA MiniPrep Kits (Zymo Research) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.Rodent-borne HEV-C screening was performed on RNA extracted from liver samples using a differential duplex real-time RT-PCR to distinguish it from human-associated hepatitis E virus (HEV-A) (20, 21). Detection of orthohantavirus and mammarenavirus was conducted on RNA extracted from pooled organs using RT-PCR targeting the 412 and 395 bp L segment, respectively, as previously described (22, 23).All PCR amplified fragments were sent for Sanger sequencing to a commercial sequencing facility (Macrogen, Inc., Seoul, South Korea) using the Big Dye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems). Chromatograms were sent back electronically to IPC for verification by visual inspection using CLC Genomics Workbench software (CLC bio, Cambridge, MA, USA). Viral sequences were aligned with reference sequences of mammarenavirus, orthohantavirus, and HEV-C retrieved from the GenBank database using MAFFT version 7.490 (24). Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the Neighbor-Joining method with 1,000 bootstrap replicates, based on TN93+G models of nucleotide substitution, as recommended by the “Find Best DNA/Protein Model” tool in the MEGA 11 software (25). Trees were visualized and annotated using FigTree version 1.4.4 (26) and Inkscape 1.2 (https://inkscape.org/). Phylogenetic relationships were assessed using neighbor-joining trees, as the study aimed to determine viral burden rather than perform detailed evolutionary analyses.Identification of rodent speciesRodent species were initially identified based on morphological characteristics. Genetic confirmation was attempted for all rodents of each major taxon, using sequences of vertebrate mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase subunit 1 (CO1) gene as previously described (27). Sanger sequencing of the amplified products and visual inspection of chromatograms were conducted as described above. Nucleotide sequences were submitted to NCBI BLAST to determine sequence identity (28).Nucleotide sequence accession numberAll nucleotide sequences generated in this study were submitted to GenBank and registered under the accession numbers: PV818126–PV818159 (mammarenavirus), PV805852–PV805887, PV845596, PV845597, and PV871972 (orthohantavirus), PV805874–PV805887 (HEV-C), and PV794171–PV794299 (rodent CO1 gene).IgG antibody detection in human serumWe tested participants’ sera for IgG antibodies against mammarenavirus and Thailand orthohantaviruses using an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (12, 29). Due to the lack of HEV-C-specific ELISA at the time of data analysis, we used a commercial anti-HEV IgG ELISA kit (Beijing Wantai Biological Pharmacy Enterprise, Beijing, China), which primarily detects anti-HEV-A IgG antibody, according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Although this assay does not differentiate antibodies against HEV-A and HEV-C, it was the only serological tool available in Cambodia.Positive samples identified during the primary screening were repeated. The presence of IgG antibodies was considered indicative of previous exposure to the pathogen. However, we acknowledge that HEV seropositivity in our study may limit our ability to directly attribute results to HEV-C. Seroconversion toward a virus was defined as the transition from IgG seronegativity at baseline to seropositivity in the follow-up visit.Statistical analysisDescriptive statistics (Chi-square test and Fisher’s exact test) were used to assess the relationships between categorical variables. Exposure to mammarenavirus, orthohantaviruses, and HEV was defined by a seropositive result (positive IgG). Each serological status was analyzed using a generalized linear model with multivariate logistic regression to explore the associations between viral seroprevalence and explanatory variables such as sociodemographic characteristics and potential risk factors. In the final model selection process, while we primarily relied on the stepwise model selection to identify the most parsimonious model based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), we also forced the inclusion of specific variables (e.g., age, sex, and interface) into each model. These variables were retained due to their known biological relevance or potential role as confounders, even though they did not meet the AIC-based selection criteria. A P-value of 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analysis was performed using R software (30).RESULTSDetection of mammarenavirus, orthohantavirus, and HEV-C in rodentsDistribution of rodent species by interfaceA total of 750 small mammals, including shrews and rodents, were captured in the two sampling sessions across the three defined interfaces (Fig. 1A). Of these, 647 (86.1%) were adults. The urban interfaces contributed 282 (37.6%), with 114 (40.4%) collected during the rainy season and 168 (59.6%) during the dry season. The semi-urban interface accounted for 226 rodents (30.1%), with 137 (60.6%) collected in the rainy season and 89 (39.4%) in the dry season. In the rural interface, 242 rodents (32.3%) were captured, with 85 (35.1%) collected during the rainy season and 157 (64.9%) in the dry season.Across all interfaces, the most frequently captured species was Suncus murinus (Asian house shrew: 46.5%; 349/750), followed by Rattus exulans (Pacific rat: 27.9%; 209/750), Rattus norvegicus (brown rat: 19.6%; 147/750), and Rattus rattus (black rat: 3.5%; 26/750). Less common species (<2% each) were grouped as “Other” (2.5%; 19/750) and included Mus sp. (unidentified mouse species: 1.2%; 9/750), Rattus sp. (unidentified rat species: 0.9%; 7/750), Rattus argentiventer (rice field rat: 0.3%; 2/750), and Bandicota savilei (Savile’s bandicoot rat: 0.1%; 1/750).Animal species distribution varied significantly across the interfaces (P < 0.001) (Fig. 1B). S. murinus dominated the urban interface (63.8%; 180/282), followed by R. norvegicus (30.1%; 85/282). The semi-urban interface showed a more balanced distribution, with S. murinus, R. exulans, and R. norvegicus accounting for 39.8% (90/226), 28.3% (64/226), and 24.7% (56/226) of collected rodents, respectively. In the rural interface, R. exulans was the predominant species (57.4%, 139/242), followed by S. murinus (32.6%, 79/242).Virus prevalence across interfaces and phylogenetic analysisOf the 750 rodents collected, 73 (9.7%) were positive for at least one virus of interest, including 68 (9.1%) infected with a single virus and 5 (0.6%) co-infected with two viruses. Specifically, 39 rodents (5.2%) were positive for mammarenavirus, 25 (3.3%) for orthohantavirus, and 14 (1.9%) for HEV-C. Virus prevalence varied significantly across interfaces (P < 0.001), with the highest proportion of infected rodents observed in the urban interface (14.5%, 41/282), followed by the semi-urban (11.9%, 27/226) and rural interfaces (2.1%, 5/242). Mammarenavirus was detected in all three interfaces, with prevalences of 2.5% (7/282) in urban, 11.9% (27/226) in semi-urban, and 2.1% (5/242) in rural areas (P < 0.001). In contrast, orthohantavirus and HEV-C were exclusively detected in the urban interface, with prevalences of 8.9% (25/282) and 5.0% (14/282), respectively (Fig. 1C). All five rodents with co-infections were from the urban interface, including four with HEV-C/orthohantavirus co-infection and one with orthohantavirus/mammarenavirus co-infection.Sequencing was attempted for all positive samples. However, 5 samples could not be successfully sequenced for mammarenavirus, leaving 34 sequences for further analysis. Phylogenetic reconstruction demonstrated that 34 of mammarenavirus sequences obtained from Cambodian rodents clustered within lineage 4, aligning closely with sequences previously reported from the country (Fig. 2A). This suggests a stable circulation of lineage 4 mammarenaviruses across multiple rodent hosts and environmental settings. For orthohantavirus, 24 of the 25 positive samples grouped with SEOV, a globally distributed pathogen commonly associated with R. norvegicus in urban environments. One additional sequence clustered with Thottapalayam orthohantavirus, historically linked to the Asian house shrew (S. murinus), underscoring potential for cross-species maintenance of this virus in peri-domestic settings (Fig. 2B). Finally, all 14 HEV-C sequences clustered within genotype HEV-C1 (Fig. 2C), with high nucleotide identity to previously reported strains from other countries in the region. This finding indicates a sustained presence of HEV-C1 in Cambodian rodent populations and supports the regional distribution of this genotype across Southeast Asia.Fig 2Phylogenetic trees of mammarenavirus, orthohantavirus, and HEV-C. Phylogenetic trees were inferred using the Neighbor-Joining method with 1,000 bootstrap replicates, based on TN93+G models of nucleotide substitution, as recommended by the “Find Best DNA/Protein Model” tool in the MEGA 11 software. Trees were visualized and annotated using FigTree version 1.4.4 and Inkscape 1.2. (A) Mammarenavirus phylogeny: 34 sequences from the present study (indicated in red) and GenBank reference sequences (indicated in various colors). (B) Orthohanta phylogeny: 25 sequences from the present study (indicated in red) and GenBank reference sequences (indicated in black). (C) HEV-C phylogeny: 14 sequences from the present study (indicated in red triangle) and GenBank reference sequences (indicated in various colors). TN93+G, Tamura-Nei and Gamma distribution; TPMV, Thottapalayam orthohantavirus; SEOV, Seoul orthohantavirus.Phylogenetic trees depict relationships of Mammarena, Orthohanta, and HEV C viruses. Cambodian sequences cluster with reference strains from different countries with lineage diversity and genetic relatedness among sampled viruses.Seasonal variations in virus prevalenceThe infection rate for at least one virus was significantly higher during the rainy season (12.8%, 43/336) versus the dry season (7.2%, 30/414) (P = 0.01). The mammarenavirus prevalence was significantly higher during the rainy season, particularly in the semi-urban interface (overall: 7.7% in the rainy season vs 3.1% in the dry season, P = 0.005; semi-urban: 16.8% in the rainy season vs 4.5% in the dry season, P = 0.006). Detection rates for orthohantavirus and HEV-C were consistent across seasons (Table 1).TABLE 1Detection rate of mammarenavirus, orthohantavirus, and HEV-C in rodents per interface and seasonaOverallUrbanSemi-urbanRuralRainy season (n = 336)Dry season (n = 414)P valuebRainy season (n = 114)Dry season (n = 168)P valuebRainy season (n = 137)Dry season (n = 89)P valuebRainy season (n = 85)Dry season (n = 157)P valuebMammarenavirus26 (7.7%)13 (3.1%)0.0053 (2.6%)4 (2.4%)1.00023 (16.8%)4 (4.5%)0.0060 (0%)5 (3.2%)0.165Orthohantavirus13 (3.9%)12 (2.9%)0.4613 (11.4%)12 (7.1%)0.2170 (0%)0 (0%)–c0 (0%)0 (0%)–HEV-C8 (2.4%)6 (1.4%)0.358 (7.0%)6 (3.6%)0.2190 (0%)0 (0%)–0 (0%)0 (0%)–

a

Data are n (%).

b

P value was calculated using a Chi-squared or Fisher’s exact tests.

c

“–” indicates not applicable.Variations in host speciesAmong the 39 rodents infected with mammarenavirus, the majority were R. exulans (74.4%; 29/39), followed by R. norvegicus (17.9%; 7/39) and R. rattus (7.7%; 3/39). Of the 25 animals infected with orthohantavirus, 92% (23/25) were R. norvegicus, with one case each in R. rattus (4%) and S. murinus (4%). Both R. norvegicus and R. rattus were infected with SEOV, whereas S. murinus was infected with Thottapalayam orthohantavirus. All 14 rodents infected with HEV-C were R. norvegicus. All four rodents co-infected with HEV-C/orthohantavirus were R. norvegicus, while the rodent co-infected with orthohantavirus/mammarenavirus was R. rattus.Evidence of spillover of rodent-borne viruses in humansDuring the initial visit (July–September 2020), 788 human participants were enrolled across the three interfaces. Of these, 304 (38.6%) participants were from urban areas, 288 (36.5%) from semi-urban areas, and 196 (24.9%) from rural areas. Females accounted for 64.5% (508/788) of the participants, with a median age of 38 years (interquartile range, IQR: 13–54). Table 2 provides a summary of sociodemographic characteristics and potential risk factors associated with each interface type.TABLE 2Baseline characteristicsaOverall (n = 788)Urban (n = 304)Semi-urban (n = 288)Rural (n = 196)P valuebGender0.006 Female508 (64.5%)213 (70.1%)166 (57.6%)129 (65.8%) Male280 (35.5%)91 (29.9%)122 (42.4%)67 (34.2%)Age (years)38 (13–54)50 (40–60)17 (10–47)15 (9–41)<0.001Age group (years)<0.001 <18255 (32.4%)105 (53.6%)149 (51.7%)1 (0.3%) 18–35112 (14.2%)27 (13.8%)33 (11.5%)52 (17.1%) 36–50174 (22.1%)27 (13.8%)46 (16.0%)101 (33.2%) ≥50247 (31.3%)37 (18.9%)60 (20.8%)150 (49.3%)Education<0.001 No school127 (16.1%)48 (15.8%)48 (16.7%)31 (15.8%) Primary405 (51.4%)129 (42.4%)156 (54.2%)120 (61.2%) Secondary and higher256 (32.5%)127 (41.8%)84 (29.2%)45 (23.0%)Occupation<0.001 Agricultural worker42 (5.3%)0 (0.0%)6 (2.1%)36 (18.4%) Seller311 (39.5%)245 (80.6%)49 (17.0%)17 (8.7%) Other435 (55.2%)59 (19.4%)233 (80.9%)143 (73.0%)Residency Less than 1 year14 (1.8%)4 (1.3%)3 (1.0%)7 (3.6%) More than 1 year212 (26.9%)146 (48.0%)29 (10.1%)37 (18.9%) Entire life562 (71.3%)154 (50.7%)256 (88.9%)152 (77.6%)Any medical condition Previous146 (18.5%)84 (27.6%)39 (13.5%)23 (11.7%)<0.001 Chronic49 (6.2%)35 (11.5%)7 (2.4%)7 (3.6%)<0.001Alcohol consumption599 (76.0%)198 (65.1%)251 (87.2%)150 (76.5%)<0.001Any acute hepatitis history15 (1.9%)6 (2.0%)9 (3.1%)0 (0.0%)0.03Living conditions Flooded area118 (15.0%)19 (6.2%)94 (32.6%)5 (2.6%)<0.001 Swine farm nearby116 (14.7%)44 (14.5%)30 (10.4%)42 (21.4%)0.004 Slaughterhouse nearby66 (8.4%)58 (19.1%)7 (2.4%)1 (0.5%)<0.001Any wild animal hunting experience87 (11.0%)15 (4.9%)52 (18.1%)20 (10.2%)<0.001Dietary habits Raw pork meat64 (8.1%)21 (6.9%)34 (11.8%)9 (4.6%)0.011 Pork sausage148 (18.8%)50 (16.4%)63 (21.9%)35 (17.9%)0.20 Raw shells311 (39.5%)123 (40.5%)102 (35.4%)86 (43.9%)0.20 Rodent meat13 (1.6%)5 (1.6%)4 (1.4%)4 (2.0%)0.88Experience of direct contact with pork514 (65.2%)229 (75.3%)162 (56.2%)123 (62.8%)<0.001Experience of direct contact with poultry502 (63.7%)221 (72.7%)163 (56.6%)118 (60.2%)<0.001Experience of contacts with rodents Indirect contact721 (91.5%)296 (97.4%)252 (87.5%)173 (88.3%)>0.9 Direct contact135 (17.1%)53 (17.4%)58 (20.1%)24 (12.2%)0.076 Got bitten by a rodent45 (5.7%)28 (9.2%)11 (3.8%)6 (3.1%)0.003

a

Data are n (%) and median (IQR).

b

P value was calculated using a Chi-squared test.Serological evidence of exposure to rodent-borne viruses was observed in the study cohort, with seroprevalence of 12.7% (100/788) for mammarenavirus, 10.0% (79/788) for orthohantavirus, and 24.2% (191/788) for HEV among the total cohort. Due to the limited specificity of the Wantai ELISA assay, HEV seropositivity likely reflects prior exposure to HEV-A, rather than HEV-C, and therefore cannot be interpreted as evidence of zoonotic HEV-C transmission.Analysis by interface revealed notable differences in seroprevalence, with urban areas exhibiting the highest rates compared to semi-urban and rural areas. For mammarenavirus, 21.7% (66/304) of individuals were seropositive in urban areas, compared to 5.6% and 9.2% in semi-urban and rural areas, respectively (P < 0.001). For orthohantavirus, 13.2% (40/304) were positive in urban areas, compared to 9.4% and 6.1% in semi-urban and rural areas, respectively (P = 0.03). For HEV, 41.1% (125/304) were positive in urban areas, compared to 14.9% and 11.7% in semi-urban and rural areas, respectively (P < 0.001).Factors associated with rodent-borne virus spillover into humansAll collected variables, including demographics, residence characteristics, education, occupation, medical history, animal contact, household facility, food-storage practices, and history of flooding, were included in univariate analysis. Factors showing significant associations (interface, age, education, medical history, flooding history, proximity to a swine farm, contact with poultry, alcohol consumption, and consumption of raw shellfish) were entered into multivariate models. Multivariate analysis identified several factors significantly associated with higher seroprevalence of rodent-borne viruses in humans (Fig. 3). Mammarenavirus IgG seroprevalence was associated with urban residency (adjusted odds ratio [ORa] = 2.5, 95% CI: 1.3–4.9, P = 0.01) and lower education (ORa = 2.2, 95% CI: 1.1–4.8, P = 0.03). Orthohantavirus IgG seroprevalence was associated with urban residency (ORa = 2.3, 95% CI: 1.1–5.3, P = 0.03), a history of acute hepatitis (ORa = 5.3, 95% CI: 1.5–16.3, P = 0.01), and living in flood-prone areas (ORa = 2.0, 95% CI: 1.0–3.9, P = 0.04). HEV IgG seroprevalence was linked to urban residency (ORa = 2.0, 95% CI: 1.1–3.6, P = 0.02), increasing age (18–35 years: ORa = 9.3, 95% CI: 2.7–43.3, P < 0.001; 36–50 years: ORa = 37.6, 95% CI: 12.3–164, P < 0.001; ≥50 years: ORa = 75.9, 95% CI: 25.5–329, P < 0.001), and a history of medical conditions (ORa = 1.6, 95% CI: 1.0–2.4, P = 0.04). Interestingly, a higher education level (above primary school) was associated with lower HEV IgG seroprevalence (ORa = 0.5, 95% CI: 0.3–0.9, P = 0.04).Fig 3Forest plot showing factors associated with exposure to mammarenavirus (ARV), orthohantavirus (HTV), and hepatitis E virus (HEV) in human population. OR, odds ratio; CI, confidence interval.Dot plot depicts odds ratios for ARV, HTV, and HEV infections across demographic, environmental, and behavioral factors, with significance markers presenting associations for age, education, residence type, prior illness, and dietary or contact exposures.Follow-up visits and seroconversion ratesIn 2022, 555 (70.4%) of the 788 included participants were able to participate in the follow-up visit. Of these, 39.1% (217/555) of participants were from urban, 36.6% (203/555) from semi-urban, and 24.3% (135/555) from rural interfaces (Table 3). Among participants who were seropositive at inclusion, 36.4% (28/77) maintained their seropositive status for anti-mammarenavirus IgG, 89.5% (51/57) for anti-orthohantavirus IgG, and 96.2% (125/130) for anti-HEV IgG.TABLE 3Follow-up serological results of participants for each tested virus and per interfaceaOverallUrbanSemi-urbanRuralInclusion, n (%)788 (100%)304 (38.6%)288 (36.5%)196 (24.9%)Follow-up, n (%)555 (70.4%)217 (71.4%)203 (70.5%)135 (68.9%)Mammarenavirus IgG seropositive at inclusion77 (13.9%)52 (24.0%)11 (5.4%)14 (10.4%) Participants remain seropositive28 (36.4%)11 (21.2%)6 (54.5%)11 (78.6%) IgG seroconversionb84 (17.6%)10 (6.1%)21 (10.9%)53 (43.8%)Orthohantavirus IgG seropositive at inclusion57 (10.3%)29 (13.4%)18 (8.9%)10 (7.4%) Remain seropositive51 (89.5%)27 (93.1%)17 (94.4%)7 (70.0%) IgG seroconversionb6 (1.2%)2 (1.1%)1 (0.5%)3 (2.4%)HEV IgG seropositive at inclusion130 (23.4%)85 (39.2%)32 (15.8%)13 (9.6%) Remain seropositive125 (96.2%)82 (96.5%)31 (96.9%)12 (92.3%) IgG seroconversionb9 (2.1%)6 (4.5%)2 (1.2%)1 (0.8%)

a

Data are n (%).

b

Participant presenting a seronegative result at inclusion and a seropositive result at follow-up visit.Seroconversion was observed in 17.6% (84/478) of participants for mammarenavirus, 1.2% (6/498) for orthohantavirus, and 2.1% (9/425) for HEV. For mammarenavirus, the majority of seroconversions occurred in participants from rural interfaces (63.1%), followed by semi-urban (25.0%) and urban (11.9%) interfaces (P < 0.001). Participants who had lived in the study area their entire lives showed a significantly higher seroconversion rate (72.6%, 61/84) than those residing there for less than a year (4.8%, 4/84) or more than a year (22.6%, 19/84) (P = 0.02).DISCUSSIONRodent-borne viruses represent an important public health concern in Cambodia. The country’s tropical climate, widespread agricultural activities, and rapid urbanization expansion create ideal conditions for rodent population growth and increased human–rodent interactions, heightening the risk of zoonotic spillover (31). Inadequate housing structures and limited pest control further amplify exposure risks. Additionally, gaps in healthcare infrastructure and limited awareness of these pathogens contribute to their neglect. Understanding the prevalence and distribution of these viruses is essential for designing targeted interventions to mitigate their impact.This study assessed the prevalence of mammarenavirus, orthohantavirus, and HEV-C in rodents and evidence of exposure in humans across urban, semi-urban, and rural interfaces during both rainy and dry seasons. All three viruses were detected in Cambodia, with the highest prevalence observed in densely populated urban rodents (2.5% for mammarenavirus, 8.9% for orthohantavirus, and 5.0% for HEV-C), consistent with reports from Vietnam, Indonesia, and China (16, 32–34). Our data show that these viruses are host specific, for example, Rattus exulans was the primary reservoir for mammarenavirus, whereas R. norvegicus served as the dominant host for both orthohantavirus and HEV-C and accounted for all co-infections. Species-specific traits such as habitat preference, social structure, and population density can influence exposure and intraspecies transmission, while certain viruses may exhibit host-adaptive features enhancing replication in particular rodent species (35, 36). Sampling limitations, including trapping success and habitat accessibility, may also contribute to the observed patterns. Seasonal analysis revealed that mammarenavirus transmission intensified during the rainy season, especially in semi-urban areas, likely explained by ecological factors such as flood-related rodent habitat disruption, increased rodent density, and increased opportunities for human exposure, while no clear seasonal trend was observed for orthohantavirus and HEV-C.The presence of multiple rodent-borne viruses in urban rodents likely reflects the dense rodent communities in these environments, which facilitate virus transmission. Our urban rodents were trapped mainly in markets, where abundant food, poor waste management, and a lack of rodent control programs promote rodent population growth and interspecies contact. Many of these rodents inhabit sewage systems that flood during the rainy season, forcing them into crowded habitats and further increasing transmission potential. In contrast, rodents from semi-urban and rural interfaces were mainly collected from households unaffected by flooding, where such conditions are less pronounced. Phylogenetic data demonstrate that rodent-borne viruses detected in Cambodia predominantly belong to previously recognized lineages, rather than representing novel viral diversity. The predominance of SEOV and HEV-C1 in urban R. norvegicus highlights the importance of commensal rodents in maintaining transmission cycles in densely populated environments, whereas the detection of Thottapalayam orthohantavirus in S. murinus illustrates the broader host spectrum that may contribute to zoonotic risk (10, 12).Human serological data mirrored the ecological patterns observed in rodents, confirming ongoing zoonotic exposure. Overall seroprevalences were 12.7% for mammarenavirus, 10.0% for orthohantavirus, and 24.2% for HEV, with a clear urban–rural gradients: urban residents showed the highest rate (22%, 13%, and 41%, respectively) compared with rural residents (9%, 6%, and 12%). Risk factor analysis further highlighted urban residency as a key driver of exposure, consistent with the high virus prevalence in urban rodents, except for mammarenavirus.The seropositivity of mammarenavirus in humans was unexpectedly high in urban interfaces, despite low prevalence in rodents. This discrepancy could be explained by the intense human–rodent contact in urban markets, where even a small number of infected R. exulans can facilitate virus transmission to multiple individuals. The seropositivity of mammarenavirus fluctuated across the three interfaces, likely due to a combination of rodent ecological factors (density and species composition), environmental pressure (flooding and habitat disturbance), and human socio-behavioral differences (housing quality, food storage, and occupational exposure). In urban setting, dense population of rodents and humans, constant exposure to contaminated food, poorly managed waste, and frequent flooding of sewer systems likely explain the high initial antibody prevalence. However, once a large fraction of the urban population is immuned, new seroconversions may slowdown, creating a plateau effect over time. In contrast, semi-urban settings may have lower rodent densities and moderately improved sanitation, resulting in the lowest antibody prevalence. Rural communities, despite only moderate baseline prevalence, experienced the highest incidence of new infections, probably driven by seasonal surges of R. exulans linked to rice harvesting, grain storage, and flood-related rodent displacement, as well as episodic high-contact events such as market visits or agricultural activities.Orthohantavirus seroprevalence in humans aligns with previous studies in Cambodia (11) but exceeds rates reported in Vietnam, where a survey of healthy donors, febrile patients, and farming communities documented lower prevalence (1.1%–3.7%) (37, 38), highlighting geographic heterogeneity in human exposure. A history of acute hepatitis was significantly associated with orthohantavirus seropositivity, echoing rare reports from Malaysia and Japan. One hypothesis is that orthohantavirus infection may trigger acute exacerbation of autoimmune liver disease, though community-acquired hepatitis could not be excluded. While orthohantavirus infections rarely cause hepatitis without renal manifestation, this association warrants further investigation (39, 40). Living in flood-prone areas was also associated with higher orthohantavirus seroprevalence, likely due to rodent habitat disruption and environmental contamination during floods (41).Interpretation of the HEV results requires caution, as the Wantai ELISA Kit used cannot differentiate HEV-A from HEV-C (42). Although HEV-C RNA was detected in rodents, human serological findings likely reflect exposure to endemic HEV-A. We therefore cannot infer zoonotic transmission of HEV-C. Future studies using HEV-C-specific antigens or neutralization assays are needed to evaluate potential zoonotic transmission of HEV-C more accurately. Older age was a significant risk factor for higher HEV seroprevalence, as described in previous studies, reflecting cumulative lifetime exposure, while higher education levels appeared to be protective (43, 44). Nevertheless, the association between seropositivity and education level did not show a clear dose–response relationship, and a borderline P-value suggests caution; other confounding factors, such as socioeconomic status, occupational exposure, and hygiene practices, may influence this association.We observed that a substantial proportion of participants maintained seropositivity over the 2-year follow-up—36.4% for mammarenavirus, 89.5% for orthohantavirus, and 96.2% for HEV. This pattern suggests that antibodies to orthohantavirus and HEV are comparatively long-lasting, whereas mammarenavirus antibodies may wane more rapidly. These data have implications for interpreting seroprevalence as a marker of cumulative exposure and for designing future longitudinal surveillance studies.Several limitations should be noted in this study. First, the delay in follow-up due to the COVID-19 pandemic extended the timeframe between visits, limiting our ability to evaluate short-term incidence. Second, seroprevalence estimates may be overestimated due to potential cross-reactivity with other closely related viruses and require further confirmatory testing. Third, the ELISA kit used for HEV-C serological assay cannot differentiate HEV-A and HEV-C, reducing the specificity in serological findings. Further studies will focus on developing and employing more robust diagnostic tools and methodologies to reduce these issues.Overall, these findings underscore the interplay between rodent ecology, human behavior, and environmental factors in shaping zoonotic risk. They highlight the critical need for integrated interventions, including effective rodent control, improved market infrastructure, enhanced waste management, public-awareness campaigns on hygiene and zoonotic hazards, particularly in urban and high-risk areas. Evidence of virus exposure in humans underscores the importance of sustained, nationwide surveillance and the development of HEV-C-specific diagnostics to monitor virus dynamics and assess their clinical impact. Finally, our findings inform medical professionals regarding diseases caused by rodent-borne viruses, enabling better differential diagnoses and improved patient care. Indeed, this study reinforces the value of a One Health approach to understand and mitigate zoonotic spillover while fostering sustainable human–animal coexistence.Supplementary MaterialReviewer comments


Title: Lassa Virus Infection of Primary Human Airway Epithelial Cells

1. IntroductionLassa mammarenavirus (LASV), an Old World member of the Arenaviridae family, is the causative agent of Lassa fever, an acute systemic febrile disease endemic to several West African countries. Spillover risk models estimate up to 900,000 infections per year [1]. While most infections are mild or asymptomatic, approximately 15–20% of patients hospitalized with severe Lassa fever die from the illness [2,3]. Despite its substantial public health impact, there are currently no approved vaccines or effective treatments for LASV. The only effective drug, the nucleoside analogue ribavirin, is associated with severe side effects and shows efficacy only when administered early in the course of infection [4,5].LASV is an enveloped virus with a bi-segmented, single-stranded RNA genome that encodes four viral genes using an ambisense coding strategy [6]. The small RNA segment (S-RNA) encodes the nucleoprotein (NP) and the glycoprotein precursor (GPC), while the large RNA segment (L-RNA) encodes the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase L and the small RING finger protein Z [7,8]. The biologically inactive GPC undergoes co- and post-translational cleavage steps that are essential for its maturation and viral infectivity [9,10,11]. The mature glycoprotein (GP) spike on the viral surface is assembled as a trimeric complex consisting of the stable signal peptide (SSP), the receptor-binding subunit GP1, and the transmembrane fusion subunit GP2 [12].LASV exhibits a broad cell tropism and exploits multiple cellular receptors. The α subunit of dystroglycan (DG) is the primary cell surface receptor [13]. α-DG is widely expressed in many tissues; however, α-DG is subjected to tissue-specific differential glycosylation that may determine LASV host cell tropism [14,15]. The expression of α- and β-DG has been identified in human airway epithelial cells, where it plays a vital role in the migration and repair of these cells following injury [16,17]. Other identified cell surface receptors include DC-SIGN (dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule 3-grapping non-integrin), LSECtin (liver and lymph node sinusoidal endothelial calcium-dependent lectin), and the TAM receptor protein tyrosine kinases Axl and Tyro3 [18]. Axl and Tyro3 exhibit widespread distribution in mammalian tissue, performing unique functions in specific cell types [19]. DC-SIGN is expressed on dendritic cells and some subsets of macrophages, while LSECtin is expressed predominantly by sinusoidal endothelial cells of the human liver and lymph nodes [20,21,22]. In addition to these cell surface molecules, LASV requires the intracellular receptor LAMP1 (lysosomal-associated membrane protein 1) for virus entry [23].LASV is maintained by chronic infection of the Natal multimammate mouse Mastomys natalensis, the primary natural host reservoir [24]. Transmission of LASV from rodents to humans is primarily thought to occur via inhalation of dust or droplets contaminated with infectious rodent excretions [25,26,27]. Autopsy and biopsy samples of fatal human Lassa fever cases have demonstrated high viral loads in the liver, spleen, kidneys, and lungs [28]. Additionally, high virus concentrations were detected in the lungs of experimentally infected guinea pigs and mice, where interstitial pneumonia was the most consistent and severe histological lesion [29,30,31]. Collectively, these data indicate that the respiratory tract represents an important replication site of LASV [28].The respiratory tract is lined with a continuous epithelial cell layer composed of various cell types, depending on the airway section, forming a polarized mechanical barrier against invading pathogens [32,33]. The epithelial barrier prevents viral entry and spread into the submucosa and restricts access to virus-specific cellular receptors on the basolateral membrane [34]. The mechanism by which LASV overcomes the protective barrier of the airway epithelium remains unknown. In previous studies, we demonstrated that LASV entry predominantly occurs via the basolateral membrane in polarized kidney epithelial cells, consistent with the basolateral localization of α-DG in these cells [35].To better understand the mechanisms underlying LASV infection in the human respiratory tract, we developed an in vitro model of LASV infection using differentiated primary human airway epithelial cells (HAECs). One of the most commonly used models for studying the human respiratory tract is the air–liquid interface (ALI) cell culture, in which human primary epithelial cells are grown with their apical surface exposed to air [36]. ALI cultures closely resemble the composition, structure, and functional properties of the human airway epithelium in vivo [37,38]. Here, we utilized primary HAEC as an in vitro cell culture model to analyze LASV replication kinetics and the polarity of viral entry and release in the bronchial epithelium. We also investigated the induction of type I and III interferon in response to LASV infection. These findings contribute to our understanding of the relevance of the human respiratory tract as an LASV entry and replication site and its potential role in human-to-human transmission via airway secretions.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Viruses and Cell CultureAfrican green monkey kidney cells (VeroE6, ATCC CRL-1586; American Type Culture Collection, Manassas, VA, USA) and human foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs, ATCC SCRC-1041) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM; Gibco, Waltham, MA, USA), supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 2 mM L-glutamine (Gibco), 50 U/mL penicillin, and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Gibco).For LASV stock production, the LASV strain Josiah was grown in VeroE6 cells and stored at −80 °C. Viral titers were determined by defining the 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) as described previously [39]. All experiments with infectious LASV were performed in the biosafety level (BSL) 4 facilities of the Institute of Virology at Philipps University Marburg, Germany, in compliance with German regulations. Recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) expressing LASV strain Josiah-derived GP in place of the original VSV G (VSVΔG/LASVGP) was grown in VeroE6 cells as described previously [40]. VSVΔG/LASVGP was titered by plaque assay using VeroE6 cells with an Avicel RC-591 overlay [41]. Cells were fixed in 10% formaldehyde solution containing 0.1% (w/v) crystal violet and incubated for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Viral titers are reported as plaque-forming units (PFUs). The influenza A virus (IAV) A/Hamburg/5/2009 (H1N1) was described previously [42].2.2. Air-Liquid Interface CulturesPrimary human airway epithelial cells (HAECs) were obtained from Provitro (Berlin, Germany; primary human bronchial epithelial cells, HBEpCs) or LONZA (Basel, Switzerland; primary normal human bronchial epithelial cells, NHBE). HBEpCs were processed as previously described [43], and NHBEs were processed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, HAECs were first expanded in T75 flasks (Corning, Glendale, AZ, USA) in airway epithelial cell growth medium (AEGM; PromoCell, Heidelberg, Germany), supplemented with AEGM SupplementMix (PromoCell), or in bronchial epithelial cell growth basal medium (BEBM, LONZA), supplemented with SingleQuotsTM Supplements (LONZA), respectively. At 70% confluency, HAECs were detached, and 75,000 cells and 150,000 cells, respectively, were seeded on 12 mm Transwell culture inserts (0.4 μm pore size; Corning, Corning, NY, USA) coated with 0.01% rat-tail collagen type I (Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany). After two days, the apical medium was removed, and the basal medium was replaced with a 1:1 mixture of supplemented AEGM:DMEM (Gibco) or BEBM:DMEM containing 50 ng/mL retinoic acid (ALI growth medium). The culture medium was changed every 2–3 days, and cells were cultured under ALI conditions for approximately 30 days. For weekly mucus extraction, primary cells were washed apically with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The apical washes were pooled, and mucins were concentrated by centrifugation. For monitoring cell polarization and barrier formation during the proliferation phase, the transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) was measured. The development of a pseudostratified cell layer was assessed by histological examination, and differentiation into specific cell types (ciliated, basal, goblet, or club cells) was monitored by immunostaining. We performed a comparative characterization of HBEpC- and NHBE-derived ALI cultures in terms of cell-type composition, differentiation status, and barrier function, revealing no significant phenotypic differences. The characterization of the polarized and differentiated phenotype is exemplified using HBEpCs. HBEpCs were used in the experiments presented in Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure 4c and Figure S1, whereas NHBEs were used in the experiments shown in Figure 4a,b, Figure 5, Figure 6 and Figure 7.2.3. Transepithelial Electrical ResistanceTEER measurements were performed with a volt–ohm meter (EVOM2; World Precision Instruments, Friedberg, Germany) three times a week. The apical and basolateral chambers were filled with ALI medium, and triplicate wells were taken for each measurement. In parallel, the resistance of an empty filter was determined and subtracted; the difference was multiplied by the growth area of 1.12 cm2. TEER values are expressed in Ω·cm2. Cells were used for experiments when the transepithelial electrical resistance of > 800 Ω·cm2 was reached.2.4. HistologyMorphological features of differentiated HAEC were assessed by histological examination. The cell culture insert was removed from the Transwell filter holder, fixed with 4% PFA for 20 min at RT, and incubated in 70% ethanol for 15 min at RT. The filter was cut into 3–5 mm strips and embedded in paraffin. Sections of 1–5 µm thickness were prepared using a microtome (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany), deparaffinized, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Specimens were covered with mounting medium and were microscopically evaluated under the light microscope DMi1 (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany).2.5. AntibodiesThe following primary antibodies were used to detect specific cell types. For ciliated cells, a monoclonal mouse anti-β-tubulin Cy3-conjugated antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, Deisenhofen, Germany) was used. Club cells were identified with a polyclonal rabbit anti-CC16 antibody (BioVendor, Brno, Czech Republic), and basal cells with either a monoclonal rabbit anti-p63 antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, UK) or a monoclonal mouse anti-CK17 antibody (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA). Goblet cells were detected using either a monoclonal mouse anti-TFF3 antibody (nanoTools, Teningen, Germany) or a monoclonal mouse anti-MUC5Ac antibody (Acris, Rockville, MD, USA). Fibroblasts were stained with a monoclonal mouse anti-fibroblast antibody (clone TE-7; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).Mucus proteins were detected using a monoclonal mouse anti-MUC4 antibody and a rabbit anti-MUC16 antibody (both from Abcam). To stain cellular components, the following primary antibodies were used. Tight junctions (TJs) were visualized with a polyclonal rabbit antibody against zonula occludens (ZO-3) (Merck Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA), and adherens junctions (AJs) were labeled with a monoclonal mouse anti-E-cadherin antibody (BD Biosciences). Cytokeratins were detected with a monoclonal mouse anti-pan-keratin antibody (Merck Millipore), a monoclonal mouse anti-CK7 antibody (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), and a monoclonal mouse anti-CK8 antibody (BD Biosciences). The actin cytoskeleton was stained using TRITC-conjugated phalloidin (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany).The LASV nucleoprotein (NP) was detected with a polyclonal rabbit antibody (Biozol, Eching, Germany), while LASV glycoprotein (GP) was stained with a monoclonal human antibody (37.7H, Absolute Antibody, Oxford, UK). VSVΔG/LASVGP was identified using a polyclonal rabbit serum against VSV (kindly provided by Wolfgang Garten, Institute of Virology, Marburg, Germany). H1N1 IAV was detected with a monoclonal mouse anti-NP antibody (kindly provided by Alexander Klimov, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA). Tubulin was stained with a monoclonal mouse anti-tubulin antibody (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany), and β-actin was labeled with a monoclonal mouse anti-β-actin antibody (Abcam).For western blot analysis, secondary antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor 680 (anti-rabbit) and Alexa Fluor Plus 800 (anti-mouse) were used (Invitrogen, Rockford, IL, USA). For immunofluorescence staining, an anti-human secondary antibody labeled with FITC (DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark), as well as anti-rabbit and anti-mouse secondary antibodies labeled with Alexa Fluor 568 or 488 (Invitrogen, Rockford, IL, USA), were applied. In the mucus neutralization assay, HRP-labeled anti-rabbit and anti-mouse secondary antibodies (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) were used.2.6. Western Blot AnalysisFor the detection of specific airway cell marker proteins, differentiated HAEC were lysed in 4× Laemmli buffer. For the detection of mucus proteins, the apical washes were prepared as described above. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes (GE Healthcare Life Science, Chicago, IL, USA) for western blot analysis. The Odyssey Infrared Imaging System (LI-COR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE, USA) was used for visualization of the proteins. All gels/blots were derived from the same experiment and were processed in parallel. If several gels were needed to accommodate all samples, all samples originated from the same experiment and were processed in parallel.2.7. Immunofluorescence AnalysisVeroE6 cells and HFF cells were seeded on coverslips, and HAECs were seeded on Transwell culture inserts and cultivated until the formation of a differentiated cell layer. For protein staining, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 20 min at RT, and incubated with 0.1 M glycine for 10 min. After permeabilization with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 10 min and blocking with 0.2% bovine serum albumin (BSA), the cells were incubated with specific primary antibodies diluted in BSA for 1.5 h at 4 °C. Secondary antibodies were added and incubated for 1.5 h at 4 °C. Cell nuclei were stained with 0.5 µg/mL 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Invitrogen, Rockford, IL, USA), and the cells were mounted with Fluoroshield (Sigma–Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) for imaging. For staining of LASV proteins after infection, the cultures were incubated with primary antibodies diluted in 0.2% BSA for 1 h at RT, followed by incubation for 1 h at RT with secondary antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 or 568 and supplemented with 0.5 µg/mL DAPI. The cells were then incubated for 48 h in 4% PFA and mounted in Fluoroshield. Images were captured on a confocal microscope (TCS SP5 II, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). A 63× objective lens magnification was used, and image processing was performed using Fiji ImageJ Java 8 software.2.8. mRNA Quantification by Quantitative Reverse-Transcriptase PCRThe RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used to isolate cellular mRNA, and the QiAmp viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) was used to isolate viral RNA from supernatant according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was synthesized using the QuantiTect Reverse Transcription Kit (Qiagen), and RNA was quantified by real-time PCR using the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Fermentas, Vilnius, Lithuania) and PCR cycler (Step One; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Measurements were performed in triplicate. Target genes included interferon (IFN)-α, IFN-β, IFN-λ, IFN-induced GTP-binding protein Mx1, 2′-5′-oligoadenylate synthetase 1 (OAS1), IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) 15, ISG56, and LASV GP. GAPDH was used as the housekeeping gene, and the relative gene expression was calculated by the 2−ΔΔCt method using Step One 2.1 software (Applied Biosystems). The forward and reverse primer sequences will be provided upon request.2.9. Apical and Basolateral InfectionFor infection studies, differentiated HAECs were extensively washed to remove the mucus from the cell surface. Cells were then infected from the apical and basal sides with LASV using 1.2 × 105 PFU for growth kinetics studies and 2.4 × 104 PFU for immunofluorescence staining. After virus adsorption at 37 °C for 60 min, cells were washed three times with PBS and further cultivated under ALI conditions. Virus titers in the apical and basal supernatants were determined by the TCID50 method as described previously [39]. To determine the induction of ISGs in response to IFN stimulation, differentiated HAECs were stimulated from the basal side for 16 h with 10 ng/mL of recombinant human IFN-λ2 (IL-28A; PeproTech, Rocky Hill, NJ, USA). IFN-treated cells were washed and infected with LASV, as described above. At 48 h post-infection, cell lysates and cell culture supernatants were harvested for RNA isolation and TCID50 analysis, respectively.2.10. Mucus Inhibition AssayConcentrated airway mucus was serially diluted (from undiluted to 1:8192), and each dilution was incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with either 800 PFU of VSVΔG/LASVGP or 1400 focus-forming units (FFUs) of IAV. The virus–mucus mixtures were added to confluent VeroE6 cells (VSVΔG/LASVGP) and MDCK II cells (IAV), respectively, and incubated for 8 h at 37 °C to complete a single replication cycle. Then, cells were fixed with 4% PFA overnight and incubated with permeabilization buffer (0.1% Triton X-100, 100 mM glycine in PBS) for 15 min. Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in PBS, containing 10% normal horse serum and 0.1% tween 20, incubated for 1 h at RT, and visualized by staining with TrueBlue (KPL, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). A rabbit anti-VSV antibody was used for VSVΔG/LASVGP-infected cells, and a mouse anti-NP antibody was used for H1N1-infected cells. HRP-conjugated secondary antibodies were used. Infected cells were counted (light microscope DMi1, Leica, Wetzlar, Germany), and the means of the triplicate samples were calculated. Infected cells without mucus treatment were used as the negative control and set as 100%. The number of cells infected in the presence of mucus was expressed as a percentages relative to the positive control.3. Results3.1. Characterization of HAEC Cultured Under ALI ConditionsPrimary HAECs cultivated under ALI conditions can differentiate into a polarized cell layer that includes all major cell types found in the respiratory epithelium in vivo, such as ciliated, basal, and mucus-secreting cells [43,44]. Therefore, differentiated HAECs represent an important cell culture model to analyze viral replication in the human respiratory epithelium. Here, we evaluated HAECs for their susceptibility to LASV. To characterize their epithelial phenotype, we first examined the expression of cytokeratins (CKs), intermediate filaments typically found in epithelial cells [45]. As shown in Figure 1a, immunofluorescence analysis with a pan-CK antibody confirmed cytokeratin expression in all cells, exhibiting a characteristic cellular distribution [46]. Staining with the specific fibroblast cell marker TE-7 showed a clear positive signal in control cells (human foreskin fibroblasts, HFF), while no TE-7 expression was observed in HAECs (Figure 1b). To assess the ability to develop a polarized cell layer, HAECs were seeded on Transwell inserts and cultivated under ALI conditions for several weeks. The polarization was monitored by measuring TEER values. As shown in Figure 1c, TEER started to increase after 7 days, reaching a maximum of 878 Ω·cm2 after 28 days. As expected for highly polarized epithelial cells, the TJ marker ZO-3 and the AJ protein E-cadherin displayed the characteristic honeycomb-like staining pattern (Figure 1d).Figure 1Formation of a polarized phenotype in HAECs. (a,b) HAECs and HFF cells were seeded on coverslips. After fixation with 4% PFA and permeabilization, cells were immunostained for pan-cytokeratin (a) or the fibroblast marker TE-7 (b). Nuclei were visualized by DAPI staining. Scale bars, 20 μm. (c) HAECs were cultivated on Transwell inserts under ALI culture conditions. TEER was measured after medium changes every 2–3 days following ALI induction. Mean values and standard errors of the mean (SEM) of three independent experiments are shown. (d) ALI cultures grown for 35 days were fixed with 4% PFA and permeabilized with Triton X-100, followed by immunostaining of tight and adherens junction proteins (ZO-3, red; E-cadherin, green). Nuclei were visualized by DAPI staining. Confocal images are shown. Scale bars, 20 μm.3.2. HAECs Differentiate into a Pseudostratified EpitheliumTo confirm that HAECs cultivated under ALI conditions developed a differentiated pseudostratified respiratory epithelial layer, we analyzed the expression of CKs, which serve as markers for the differentiation status of epithelial cells [47]. CK7 and CK8 are expressed by secretory-active epithelial cells of the respiratory tract [48], whereas CK17 functions as a marker for undifferentiated epithelial cells, such as basal cells [49]. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed the expression of all three CKs in HAECs, indicating that the epithelium comprises both differentiated and undifferentiated cells (Figure 2a). To characterize the cell types present in HAEC cultures, we used specific markers for ciliated cells (ß-tubulin), goblet cells (TFF-3), club cells (CC16), and basal cells (p63). As shown in Figure 2b, the most abundant cell type was ciliated epithelial cells. In addition, the multilayered epithelium included secretory goblet and club cells as well as non-differentiated basal cells. The presence of ciliated, club, and basal cells was also confirmed by western blot analysis. When we compared non-differentiated and differentiated cultures (day 0 and day 50), we found ß-tubulin (ciliated cells) and CC16 (club cells) in differentiated cells, while p63 (basal cells) was mostly expressed in non-differentiated HAECs (Figure 2c). The formation of a pseudostratified epithelium with an apical ciliary border was also confirmed in HE-stained histological samples (Figure 2d). Since mucins secreted by differentiated secretory cells (goblet and club cells) are another hallmark of differentiated HAEC cultures [50], we analyzed apical washes of the ALI cultures for the presence of MUC4 and MUC16 by western blot analysis. Tethered mucins were detected in cell-associated as well as in apical washes of the ALI cultures from day 16 onward (Figure 2e). Together, these results demonstrate that HAEC cultivated under ALI conditions differentiated into a functional, respiratory epithelium-like tissue, containing all typical cell types and secreting mucins, effectively mimicking airway epithelia.Figure 2Formation of a differentiated respiratory epithelium. HAECs were seeded on Transwell inserts and cultivated under ALI conditions. (a) Immunostaining of specific cytokeratins (CK7, CK8, and CK17). (b) Immunostaining of markers for ciliated cells (β-tubulin), goblet cells (TFF-3), club cells (CC16), or basal cells (p63). Cells were analyzed between days 28 and 35 post-airlift. Nuclei were visualized using DAPI staining. Scale bars, 20 μm. (c) Western blot detection of ß-tubulin, CC16, and p63 in non-differentiated HAECs (0 d) and HAECs cultured for 50 days under ALI conditions (50 d). (d) HAECs were grown on Transwell inserts, followed by histological sectioning and HE staining. Representative histological sections were examined by light microscopy (40× magnification). (e) ALI cultures were rinsed weekly, and the apical secretion of mucus proteins (MUC16 and MUC4) was monitored by western blot analysis.3.3. Effect of Airway Mucus on LASV GP-Mediated Virus EntryThe binding of the virus to its specific receptor on the host cell plasma membrane is a crucial prerequisite for successful infection. One defense mechanism is the secretion of soluble receptor analogs that bind free viruses, thereby preventing their attachment to cell surface receptors. For example, sialic acids, which serve as entry receptors for influenza A viruses (IAVs), are secreted and concentrated in the mucus, where they can compete with IAV binding to airway epithelial cells and inhibit influenza infection [42]. Given that one major LASV receptor, α-DG, was also detected in human airway mucus [51], we wanted to investigate whether airway mucus interferes with LASV attachment to HAECs. For this reason, we harvested and concentrated the mucus secreted from the apical surface of differentiated HAEC cultures. As a control, we preincubated IAV H1N1 with different mucus dilutions prior to infecting MDCK II cells. Virus-infected cells were immunostained, and the relative reduction of the number of infected cells was determined. Figure 3a shows a dose-dependent neutralization of IAV, consistent with earlier findings [42]. To assess the inhibitory effect of airway mucus on LASV GP-mediated entry, we used a replication-competent vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) expressing LASV GP (VSVΔG/LASVGP). This BSL2 surrogate system allowed us to quantify GP-mediated attachment and entry in the context of LASV neutralization [52]. VSVΔG/LASVGP was preincubated with mucus dilutions prior to infecting VeroE6 cells. Unlike IAV, VSVΔG/LASVGP entry was unaffected, regardless of the mucus concentration, suggesting that human airway mucus does not inhibit LASV GP-mediated viral entry (Figure 3b).Figure 3Effect of airway mucus on virus entry. MDCK II (a) or VeroE6 (b) cells were seeded in a 96-well plate and cultivated for 24 h. Mucus collected from the apical sides of HAECs was diluted and incubated with 1400 FFU of IAV (a) or 800 PFU of VSVΔG/LASVGP (b). Mixtures of mucus and virus were then added to the cells and incubated for 8 h. Infected cells were detected by immunostaining using anti-IAV NP (a) or anti-VSV antibodies (b). The total numbers of infected cells per well were quantified. The numbers of infected cells in control samples (virus without mucus) were set as 100% (indicated by dashed lines). Error bars represent SEM of three biological replicates.3.4. Entry and Release of LASV in Polarized Human Airway Epithelial CellsDepending on the route of infection, viruses can enter the respiratory epithelium via the apical or basal side. In vivo, during initial infections when LASV enters a new host via the respiratory route, airway epithelia are infected from the apical side. At later stages of systemic infection, LASV circulating in the blood must access epithelial cells from the basolateral side. To determine from which side LASV can initiate infection in polarized, differentiated HAECs, we infected the cells by adding LASV to either the apical or basal filter chamber and monitored the infection at 48 h post-infection (hpi) by LASV NP-specific immunostaining. As shown in Figure 4a, LASV-positive foci were detected in both types of infected cultures, indicating that LASV can infect the airway epithelium from both the apical and basolateral sides.Figure 4LASV entry and egress in primary human airway epithelial cells. (a,b) Differentiated HAECs cultured on Transwell inserts under ALI conditions were infected with 2.4 × 10⁴ PFU of LASV via either the apical or basolateral membrane. Infected cells were fixed with 4% PFA either at 48 hpi, and virus-positive cells were detected by immunostaining with a rabbit anti-LASV NP antibody (a), or at 4 dpi, where virus-positive cells were detected using a human anti-LASV GP antibody (b). Actin filaments were visualized with Phalloidin-TRITC staining, and cell nuclei were stained with DAPI. Scale bars, 20 µm (a) and 25 µm (b). (c) HAECs were infected with 8.75 × 10⁴ PFU of LASV via the apical or basolateral route. Virus titers in the apical medium were determined at the indicated time points post-infection using TCID50 analysis. Error bars represent the SEM of three biological replicates.Directed virus release via the apical or basolateral side is associated with a polarized distribution of viral envelope proteins [53,54]. We previously demonstrated that LASV GP localizes to the apical plasma membrane in polarized kidney epithelial cells, consistent with predominant virus release from the apical surface [35]. To determine whether apical transport is a common mechanism of LASV GP in polarized epithelial cells, we analyzed its cellular localization in differentiated HAECs. To investigate this, HAECs were infected with LASV from either the apical or basolateral side. Confocal microscopy analysis revealed a strict apical localization of LASV GP, regardless of the route of infection (Figure 4b). To further assess whether the apical localization of LASV GP corresponds to apical virus release, we infected HAECs via the apical or basolateral side and measured LASV titers in the apical chamber. As shown in Figure 4c, LASV was efficiently released into the apical compartment, independent of the infection route. Furthermore, the data demonstrate productive multi-cycle replication in differentiated HAECs, with viral titers increasing over time. Similar results have been observed in human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells infected with Lymphocytic choriomeningitis mammarenavirus (LCMV) or Mopeia mammarenavirus (MOPV), where virus particles were released from the apical surface following either apical or basolateral infection [55]. Our data suggest that apical virus shedding from infected respiratory epithelial cells may facilitate LASV transmission through airway secretions.3.5. Basolateral Release of LASV at Late Stages of Infection Is Associated with Actin Cytoskeleton RearrangementBasolateral virus release from infected respiratory epithelial cells may play a critical role in LASV spread into underlying tissues, contributing to subsequent systemic dissemination. To determine whether HAECs support basolateral LASV release, we compared virus titers in the apical and basolateral media. As shown in Figure 5a, progeny virus particles were predominantly released from the apical surface.Figure 5LASV infection induces actin cytoskeleton rearrangement. (a) Differentiated HAECs were infected with 1.2 × 10⁵ PFU of LASV simultaneously via both the apical and basolateral routes. Virus release was determined by TCID50 analysis at the indicated time points post-infection. Error bars represent the SEM of three biological replicates. (b) HAECs were infected with 2.4 × 10⁴ PFU of LASV via the apical side. Infected cells and mock-infected cells were fixed with 4% PFA at 4 dpi. Virus-positive cells were detected by immunostaining using a human monoclonal anti-LASV GP antibody. Actin filaments were visualized by Phalloidin-TRITC staining, and cell nuclei were stained with DAPI. Enlarged regions from the top-view images and z-scans are indicated by white frames. Scale bars, 25 µm.At 4 dpi, apical virus titers had increased 1000-fold compared to the inoculum (0 dpi), whereas infectious LASV titers in the basal medium had only increased tenfold. However, the observed two-log difference between apical and basal viral titers at day 4 was not maintained over time; instead, it gradually decreased. By day 6 post-infection, this difference was reduced to one log. While apical viral titers declined at day 6, the amount of infectious virus in the basal chamber increased. These findings suggest that LASV primarily egresses via the apical membrane, but its polarized release is partially lost at later stages of infection. Since the actin cytoskeleton plays a crucial role in forming and maintaining the epithelial barrier and is therefore essential for epithelial integrity [56], we examined the effects of LASV infection on actin filaments at day 4 post-infection, when limited basolateral virus titers were observed. Confocal microscopy revealed distinct stages of infection, each associated with specific alterations in actin organization (Figure 5b). In regions corresponding to the initial stage of infection, cells exhibited regular actin staining and a strictly apical localization of LASV GP (Figure 5b, LASV, upper panel). In contrast, regions indicative of later stages of infection exhibited a reorganization of actin filaments (Figure 5b, LASV, middle and lower panels), characterized by disruptions in the typical honeycomb-like pattern at cell boundaries, as compared to the actin staining in the mock control. Notably, the LASV GP signal, initially restricted to the apical surface, was also detected in the middle regions of the pseudostratified epithelium, beneath the apical membrane (Figure 5b, LASV, middle panel). In advanced stages, where the actin filament network was no longer detectable, LASV GP was distributed across the entire plasma membrane of infected cells (Figure 5b, LASV, lower panel), indicating a loss of epithelial polarity. These findings indicate that LASV infection can induce structural disorganization of the actin cytoskeleton, potentially compromising epithelial integrity. The resulting loss of polarity may facilitate LASV spread to the basal side of the respiratory epithelium, explaining the increase in basal virus titers observed at 6 dpi.3.6. Type I and III Interferon Induction in HAECs in Response to LASV InfectionIn addition to type I IFNs (IFN-α/β), respiratory epithelial cells can secrete and respond to type III IFNs (IFN-λ). To determine the role of IFNs in LASV replication, we infected differentiated HAECs with LASV and measured the IFN induction. As shown in Figure 6a, we observed a predominant type III IFN response in comparison to type I IFN. Similar findings have been reported for Nipah virus-infected primary airway epithelial cells [57]. Infection of HAECs also led to the upregulation of several specific ISGs, which act downstream of both type I and III IFN pathways and have been implicated in responses to LASV [58,59] (Figure 6b).Figure 6IFN induction by LASV infection. Differentiated HAECs were infected with 1.2 × 105 PFU of LASV simultaneously via the apical and basolateral routes. Induction of IFN (a) and ISGs (b) was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR. Error bars represent the SEM of three biological replicates. (c) Differentiated HAECs were infected with 1.2 × 105 PFU of LASV via the apical or the basolateral route, and IFN-λ induction was determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Error bars represent the SEM of three biological replicates.To assess whether donor variations might influence the induction and magnitude of type I and III IFN responses, we analyzed the IFN response to LASV infection in differentiated HAEC derived from two additional donors. Consistent with the results described before, both donors exhibited a robust type III IFN response and upregulation of ISGs but showed limited IFN-β responses (Figure S1). These findings suggest that differentiated airway epithelial cells from individual donors share the ability to respond to LASV infection by efficient IFN-λ induction. Since LASV can infect bronchial epithelial cells via both the apical and basolateral sides, we wanted to determine whether the route of infection influences IFN-λ induction. Therefore, we compared IFN-λ induction following apical or basolateral LASV entry. While IFN-λ mRNA expression in differentiated HAECs was induced after LASV infection from both sides, infection via the basolateral side exhibited a more pronounced effect (Figure 6c). This suggests that RNA sensing and IFN induction are enhanced when LASV enters HAECs via the basolateral surface.3.7. Pretreatment of HAECs with Type III Interferon Restricts LASV ReplicationAs IFN-λ is the major antiviral IFN induced during LASV infection of airway epithelia, we wanted to determine if pretreatment with IFN-λ can block LASV replication. Therefore, differentiated HAECs were pretreated with recombinant IFN-λ2 (IL-28A) for 16 h prior to infection. Exogenous IFN treatment led to the upregulation of ISGs, confirming that HAECs respond to IFN-λ and can establish an antiviral state (Figure 7a). Compared to untreated cells, IFN-λ-treated HAECs showed significantly reduced viral RNA levels at 48 h post-infection (Figure 7b). Consistently, viral titers were also lower in IFN-λ-treated cells (Figure 7c). To assess whether IFN-λ pretreatment affects the apical distribution of LASV GP or reduces the number of infected cells, we infected IFN-λ-stimulated and untreated HAECs via the apical and basolateral membranes and immunostained the cells for LASV GP and NP proteins at 48 hpi. As shown in Figure 7d, IFN-λ pretreatment did not alter GP distribution. However, staining for GP and NP revealed that IFN-λ pretreatment reduced the number of infected cells. This suggests that the observed reduction in virus release is not due to impaired GP transport but rather to a general downregulation of viral replication and spread.Figure 7IFN induction and IFN-mediated antiviral responses during LASV infection. (a) Differentiated HAECs were stimulated for 16 h with human IFN-λ2, and ISG induction was analyzed by quantitative RT-PCR. (b–d) IFN-λ preincubated cells were infected with 1.2 × 105 PFU of LASV simultaneously via the apical and basolateral routes. (b) At 48 hpi, viral replication was assessed by quantitative RT-PCR using viral RNA isolated from cell lysates. (c) Virus titers in the apical medium were determined by TCID50 analysis. Error bars represent the SEM of three biological replicates. Statistical significance was calculated using an unpaired t-test (* p = 0.032; *** p < 0.01). (d) Infected cells were fixed with 4% PFA at 48 hpi. Virus-positive cells were detected by immunostaining with anti-LASV NP or anti-LASV GP antibodies. Cell boundaries were visualized by actin or E-cadherin staining, and nuclei were stained with DAPI. Scale bars, 25 μm.4. DiscussionIn this study, we demonstrate that differentiated primary HAECs grown under ALI conditions are permissive to LASV infection and support virus replication, enabling viral entry into the respiratory epithelium through both the apical and basolateral membranes. In contrast, LCMV exhibits restricted entry via the basolateral membrane in primary airway epithelial cells. Interestingly, the receptor α-DG is present on both apical and basolateral surfaces in these cells, making the strict basolateral entry of LCMV difficult to explain [60]. The bipolar entry of LASV observed in our study is consistent with the unrestricted expression of α-DG. However, it cannot be excluded that additional LASV receptors contribute to apical viral entry. Future studies are needed to identify the specific receptors on the apical and basolateral membranes that facilitate LASV infection of polarized airway epithelial cells from both sides. In contrast to bipolar virus entry, newly synthesized virus particles were predominantly released from the apical cell surface. LASV GP plays a key role in facilitating efficient virus replication and spread. In the intact epithelium, GP is strictly localized to the apical membrane, potentially guided by the numerous N-glycans on GP, which can serve as apical sorting signals [61,62]. Enhanced LASV release has also been observed through the apical membrane in polarized MDCK cells [35]. These findings align with previous studies on other mammarenaviruses, such as New World Junín and Tacaribe viruses, which also preferentially exhibit apical release from polarized epithelial cells [63]. Infection of polarized human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cells with LCMV or MOPV revealed that virus particles were primarily released from the apical side after apical infection, while basolateral infection led to a similar level of virus release from both the apical and basolateral surfaces [55]. In contrast, LCMV release from infected polarized primary human airway epithelial cultures occurred exclusively via the basolateral cell surface [60]. These observations emphasize the impact of cell type-specific factors on viral egress patterns. Further research is needed to identify the molecular determinants underlying these variations in viral release.Previous studies have demonstrated the presence of LASV RNA in saliva and throat swab samples from Lassa fever patients, as well as both viral RNA and infectious LASV in mucosal specimens obtained from animal models [64,65,66]. Although the precise cellular origin of the detected viral RNA and infectious LASV remains unclear and may involve various tissues or immune cells, our findings suggest that respiratory epithelial cells can contribute to viral shedding and may thus play a role in human-to-human transmission via respiratory secretions. These observations underscore the need for further investigation into the role of the respiratory epithelium in LASV transmission.We observed that basolateral virus release is limited and delayed compared to apical release. Confocal microscopy analysis revealed basolateral localization of GP at advanced stages of infection, when cell polarity was partially lost, impairing polarized protein transport. The LASV-induced loss of cell polarity and epithelial integrity in human airway epithelial cells may have multiple molecular causes. Viral infection could directly or indirectly affect polarity complexes, regulatory proteins, or components of the host cell cytoskeleton. At advanced stages of LASV infection, we observed a rearrangement of the actin cytoskeleton in differentiated HAECs, potentially leading to the disruption of epithelial barrier integrity. Such a loss of cell integrity may facilitate LASV transmigration to the basal side after spreading through the epithelial cell layer, potentially representing a pathogenic mechanism by which LASV overcomes the protective airway epithelial barrier, leading to systemic spread. Similarly, during Zika virus infection, the interaction between the viral envelope E protein and F-actin has been shown to reorganize the actin network in later stages, thereby compromising the integrity of the blood–testis barrier [67]. Dengue virus infection has also been reported to induce actin cytoskeleton reorganization, which is thought to contribute to endothelial barrier dysfunction and increased vascular permeability observed in dengue hemorrhagic fever [68,69]. Moreover, actin cytoskeleton disruption is a common strategy used by various neurotropic viruses to compromise the blood–brain barrier [70]. Future studies should elucidate the precise mechanisms through which LASV interferes with the actin network and how this affects epithelial barrier function and basolateral virus release.Interference with TJ and AJ proteins is an alternative pathogenic mechanism employed by several viruses to compromise the epithelial barrier and access specific receptors on the basolateral membrane [71,72,73]. LASV efficiently infects the polarized respiratory epithelium via the apical membrane, suggesting that epithelial barrier disruption is not required for initial infection. However, modulation of junctional complexes may play a role in how LASV overcomes the airway epithelium. Previous studies have shown that LASV infection does not disrupt the integrity of TJ and AJ in polarized kidney epithelial cells [35]. We observed cytopathic effects at advanced stages of infection in HAECs. However, the titers of apically and basally released viruses remained unequal even six days post-infection, suggesting that LASV infection does not compromise the overall integrity of the epithelial barrier. The impairment of epithelial integrity during LASV infection may be driven by both viral and cellular factors. For example, studies on respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) and rhinoviruses have shown that viral infections can disrupt components of the TJ and AJ complexes [74,75]. In the case of RSV, while TJ and AJ protein expression levels remained unchanged, the loss of polarity was associated with virus-induced disassembly of these junctional proteins [76]. The adenovirus protein E4-ORF1 directly binds to and inactivates the TJ scaffold proteins MUPP1, MAGI-1, and ZO-2 [77]. Impaired TJ function increases intercellular permeability, facilitating the transmigration of progeny virions from infected respiratory epithelial cells to the basolateral side [78]. The Dengue virus NS1 protein interacts with MMP-9, leading to the degradation of the adhesion molecule β-catenin and the TJ proteins ZO-1 and ZO-2. Impaired endothelial cell adhesion and TJ function result in endothelial hyperpermeability and vascular leakage [79]. LASV GP has been shown to interact with several AJ and TJ proteins, though the mechanistic consequences of these interactions remain unclear [80]. Studies on chronic respiratory diseases have shown that IFNs, particularly IFN-λ, and TNF-α influence the regulation and integrity of the epithelial barrier [81,82]. Furthermore, IFN-λ has been shown to cause airway epithelial barrier damage in response to synthetic viral RNA [83]. Since IFN-λ is effectively induced in HAECs during LASV infection, it may also play a role in impaired barrier function. However, IFN-λ treatment of HAECs did not result in changes in the cellular distribution of actin and E-cadherin, leaving the role of IFN-λ in epithelial barrier disruption under our experimental conditions unclear. Additional studies are needed to better define the impact of LASV-induced IFN-λ on epithelial barrier integrity.Type I and type III IFNs share similarities in their induction and antiviral activity but differ in receptor expression patterns, ISG expression, and negative regulation of IFN signaling (reviewed in [84]). Previous studies have shown that LASV nucleoprotein NP and the matrix protein Z inhibit the induction of type I IFNs [85,86]. In our study, we observed a robust induction of IFN-λ, but not IFN-α/β, in LASV-infected HAECs, suggesting that type I and type III IFN induction differ in their susceptibility to antagonism by LASV. Huang et al. reported that the vaccinia virus protein B18 acts as a specific antagonist of type I IFN, but not type III IFN, by blocking STAT1 activation [87]. For LASV, it is known that NP antagonizes IRF3, while the Z protein inhibits RIG-I-like receptor signaling [85,86,88]. IFN-λ is the key cytokine in the immune response to respiratory infections. IFN-λ-specific receptors are highly expressed in epithelial cells, including HAECs [57,89]. The expression of INF-λ can be induced by viral dsRNA, which is mainly sensed by cytosolic RIG-I or endosomal TLR3 [90,91]. We observed that LASV induces IFN-λ expression following both apical and basal infection. However, IFN-λ induction was notably higher when LASV entered HAECs from the basolateral side. This raises the question of whether this difference is due to faster viral uptake or more efficient sensing by TLR3 for viruses entering basolaterally. Guillot et al. showed that TLR3 is exclusively expressed intracellularly in airway epithelial cells, whereas Ioannidis et al. found that TLR3 is present in the cytoplasm as well as on both the apical and basolateral cell surfaces [92,93]. In polarized intestinal epithelial cells, TLR3 was localized basolaterally, leading to a stronger induction of IFN-λ upon basolateral virus infection [94]. An asymmetric distribution of TLR3 could also explain the increased IFN-λ induction observed when HAECs were infected with LASV from the basolateral side. Future studies are needed to fully characterize the cellular distribution of TLR3 in differentiated HAECs. Alternatively, the observed differences in response may stem from variations in infection efficiency or differences in the specific cell types targeted by LASV during apical versus basolateral entry. LASV replication persisted in HAEC despite a robust type III IFN and ISG response, as demonstrated by the continuous increase in virus titers over time. Our findings align with previous in vivo studies showing that IFN-λ does not effectively restrict LASV replication [95]. However, prestimulation of HAECs with IFN-λ reduced viral replication and virus release, highlighting its antiviral activity against LASV. This suggests that IFN-λ administration could serve as a potential prophylactic or early therapeutic strategy for LASV infection in the respiratory tract.In conclusion, we demonstrate that human bronchial epithelial cells can be infected by LASV from both the apical and basolateral surfaces. This finding suggests that airway epithelial cells may contribute to initial viral replication during entry via the respiratory tract. Moreover, they may facilitate viral shedding through airway secretions during systemic infection, when LASV reaches the respiratory mucosa from the basal side—a hypothesis further supported by the efficient apical release of progeny virus particles. Collectively, these results indicate that the human respiratory tract is not only a critical entry point for LASV but may also play a role in its transmission and dissemination.


Title: The pathogenesis of zoonotic viral infections: Lessons learned by studying reservoir hosts

1.IntroductionEmerging infectious diseases cause severe disease in people and can disrupt societies, cost billions, and have the potential to become a pandemic (Taylor et al., 2001; Jones et al., 2008; Karesh et al., 2012; Gortazar et al., 2014; Carroll et al., 2018). This has been demonstrated by the COVID-19 outbreak. Reviews of past outbreaks have led to the assessment that the majority of emerging infectious diseases in humans come from animals, often from wildlife (Jones et al., 2008; Wang and Crameri, 2014), and that the majority are caused by viruses (Woolhouse et al., 2005). Mechanisms underlying (viral) emergence include human-induced changes in interspecies contacts through trade and habitat destruction (Gortazar et al., 2014; Plowright et al., 2017). Bats and rodents being frequent original hosts of zoonotic viruses could well be due to the species richness of these mammalian orders (Mollentze and Streicker, 2020).A key question after a spillover of a virus from an animal reservoir is whether it is able to transmit between humans, thus leading to expanding outbreaks. A second key question is what the potential impact will be, which is related to the virus’s ability to cause disease in humans (Munster et al., 2020). The combined properties, transmissibility, and virulence define the eventual impact, and assessing them requires a combination of ecological, epidemiological, clinical, and pathological studies. Here, we focus on pathogenesis: understanding how the causative virus makes people ill. The study of pathogenesis is important for many aspects of disease control, including treatment, development of vaccines and antivirals, and prevention of virus transmission. The pathogenesis of viral infection can be studied in humans, reservoir hosts, and laboratory animals. However, the term “pathogenesis”, by itself, is a rather generic term that does not do justice to the differences between host species in the infection pathways and the mechanisms by which viruses can cause disease. When comparing the pathogenesis of a viral infection in two species groups, the generic term ‘pathogenesis’ becomes confusing. Therefore, we introduce new terminology here. Because the zoonotic viral infections studied here are “new” or spill-overs in the human host, we call their pathogenesis in humans “neopathogenesis”. We distinguish this from the original pathogenesis in the reservoir host to which the virus has adapted, which we term “orthopathogenesis”, derived from the word “ortho” meaning “correct”, and the pathogenesis observed in animals used to model the human disease in an experimental setup, which we term “parapathogenesis”, derived from the word ‘para’, meaning alongside.In general, the pathogenesis of a viral infection can be split into different parts according to the pathway the virus follows in its host. From the perspective of a pathologist, using light microscopy, we can split them into (1) attachment to receptors on exposed host cells, (2) replication in host cells at the entry site, (3) release from host cells with subsequent dissemination within the host to other replication sites, (4) replication in host cells at sites that are important for virus amplification, and (5) excretion from the host to enable transmission to a new host. Together, these processes determine cellular, tissue, and immune responses, which in turn contribute to the clinical outcome of infection and the ability to spread viruses to the environment and new hosts. Because of ethical and practical reasons, we often cannot study the pathogenesis of an emerging viral disease directly in patients and instead use laboratory animal models. Researchers tend to focus on finding the best animal models, which are those in which the pathogenesis in the laboratory animal closely reflects that in the human host, i.e., in which parapathogenesis mirrors neopathogenesis.Relative to neo- and parapathogenesis, orthopathogenesis is often ignored (with rare exceptions, e.g., Kuzmin et al., 2017). There are several potential reasons for this. Reservoir hosts are frequently in our blind spot: being shy or nocturnal, they generally live outside our vision; there is a relative lack of knowledge about their biology, at least among researchers that study human viruses, and frequently, the surveillance systems and the methods and materials to study them in the field and laboratory are not available. Furthermore, we tend to search for animal models that closely reflect the severe disease outcome in humans, while infection in reservoir hosts is often assumed to be asymptomatic. Nevertheless, we hypothesize that studying orthopathogenesis may be quite informative. It might be said that there is no better starting point for understanding virus pathogenesis than the reservoir host in which it has evolved. Examining pathogenesis in the reservoir host could eventually teach us at which stage the pathogenesis runs amok in people, leading to severe disease. This could provide us with the starting point for novel therapeutic targets to improve the outcome in severe human cases (Irving et al., 2021). This study aims to discover whether insights into the development of severe human disease can be derived from a comparison between the orthopathogenesis and neopathogenesis of some relatively well-studied zoonotic viral infections.2.Materials and methodsTo learn more about potential insights that could be derived from a comparison of orthopathogenesis and neopathogenesis, we examined a series of zoonotic viral infections. We selected from a broad list of emerging infections. Our selection was limited to viral infections for which information was available regarding lesions and cell type or tissue tropism for both host groups, and, therefore, do not comprise a random selection. Reservoir host species have not been identified for some high-impact zoonotic diseases like those caused by SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2, and Ebola virus infections, and there are no data on the pathogeneses in suspected reservoir host species. Because of this lack of knowledge, these diseases could not be included. Because medical research generally focuses on zoonotic infections causing severe human disease, this list is biased toward viruses that are virulent for humans. We also selected viral infections to include reservoir host species of the most important orders of birds and mammals that harbor zoonotic viruses (Olival et al., 2017a,b) and to include different levels of transmissibility among humans (Plowright et al., 2017; Figure 1). For each of these zoonotic viral infections, we compared the orthopathogenesis with the neopathogenesis or, in the absence of knowledge of the neopathogenesis, the parapathogenesis.Figure 1Zoonotic viruses selected for comparison between orthopathogenesis and neopathogenesis. Viruses represent different groups of reservoir hosts (orders of rodents, bats, carnivores, primates or ungulates, or classes of birds) and different stages of transmissions to humans (level of human-to-human transmission adapted from Wolfe et al., 2007). Please see the Table 1 for common and scientific names and mammalian order or avian class of reservoir host species schematically represented here. The mosquito is used to indicate that West Nile virus is an arbovirus, but the pathogenesis of the viral infection in mosquitos was not reviewed.For these selected zoonotic viral infections, we outlined some basic virus-host interactions at the tissue level, following the natural course of a viral infection (Figure 2). We focused on virus-host interactions that are relatively easily studied using a light microscope. Lesions can be visualized and characterized by staining tissues with hematoxylin and eosin. Viral proteins can be visualized within cells of those tissues using immunohistochemistry, while viral RNA can be visualized by in situ hybridization. These techniques allow for the co-localization of a virus with lesions and the identification of the cell tropism. Therefore, the five virus-host interactions we focused on were: (1) virus attachment site, (2) primary replication site or entry (cell types or tissue at the start of infection), (3) route of dissemination within the host, (4) virus amplification (cell types or tissues), and (5) cell types or tissues responsible for virus excretion. We also reviewed the outcome of infection, which can be seen as the end result of these virus-host interactions. Virus attachment site and entry were assessed separately because virus attachment is such a critical step, and they can be studied separately. For example, virus attachment sites can be studied on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections with virus histochemistry or receptor-specific immunohistochemistry of uninfected, healthy individuals, while entry can be studied by the examination of tissues from infected individuals.Figure 2The virus-host interactions, compared for reservoir hosts and humans (Supplementary material), and the short terms for them used throughout the manuscript. Attachment site, the site on the outside of the host cell, where the cellular molecules (receptors) are located that the virus uses to attach to the host cells; Entry, the cell type or tissue that is used by the virus to enter a new host and is at the site of the start of the infection; Dissemination, the most important route of spread from the site of the start of the infection to the exit cell type, the route that is essential for further amplification and completion of the intra-host viral infection cycle, which can be blood, lymph (either within cells or free in the fluid), or interconnected neurons; Amplification, the main cell type in which amplification of virus takes place within the host; Exit, the cell type from which virus is excreted to infect a new host of the same species; The outcome of a viral infection for the health of the host is the overall result of virus-host interactions and the host immune responses.The selected zoonotic viral infections belong to 11 different virus genera and 8 different virus orders: rabies virus (genus Lyssavirus, order Mononegavirales), macacine alphaherpesvirus 1 (genus Simplexvirus, order Herpesvirales), West Nile virus (genus Flavivirus, order Amarilloviralis), Puumula orthohantavirus (genus Orthohantavirus, order Bunyaviralis), Marburg virus (genus Marburgvirus, order Mononegaviralis), Lassa virus (genus Mammarenavirus, order Bunyaviralis), highly pathogenic avian influenza virus H5N1 (genus Alphainfluenzavirus, order Articulaviralis), monkeypox virus (genus Orthopoxvirus, order Chitovirales), Nipah virus (genus Henipavirus, order Mononegavirales), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) coronavirus (genus Betacoronavirus, order Nidovirales), Simian/Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (genus Lentivirus, order Ortervirales) (Figure 1; Supplementary material). They are at five different levels of transmissibility amongst humans, ranging from not transmissible to endemic. This last category (endemic) includes a disease that was once a zoonosis, but during the time that it has been endemic in the human population, it has evolved into a virus that is not considered a zoonosis anymore. The majority of viruses, nine, are single-stranded RNA viruses, and the remaining two are double-stranded DNA viruses. Of the nine single-stranded RNA viruses, five are negative sense, three are positive sense, and one is ambisense. The reservoir hosts originate from five mammalian orders (Rodentia, Chiroptera [bats], Primates, Carnivora, and Artiodactyla) and two avian orders (Galliformes, Passeriformes) (Table 1).Table 1List of characteristics and selected reservoir hosts for the 11 selected viral infections included in the comparison.Virus for which infection was comparedReservoir host for which infection was compared to human hostGenetic structureGenusOrderSpecies (group)OrderRabiesRNA, single-stranded, negative senseLyssavirusMononegaviralesCarnivoresCarnivoraMacacine α herpes-1DNA, double-strandedSimplexvirusHerpesviralesMacaquesPrimatesWest NileRNA, single-stranded, positive senseFlavivirusAmarilloviralesAmplifying bird species*PasseriformesPuumula orthohantaRNA, single-stranded, negative senseOrthohantavirusBunyaviralesBank voles (Clethrionomys glareolus)RodentiaMonkeypoxDNA, double-strandedOrthopoxvirusChitoviralesAfrican rope squirrels (Funisciurus spp.)RodentiaLassaRNA, single-stranded, ambisenseMammarenavirusBunyaviralesNatal multimammate rats (Mastomys natalensis)RodentiaH5N1 HPAIRNA, single-stranded, negative senseα-InfluenzavirusArticulaviralesChickensGalliformesMarburgRNA, single-stranded, negative senseFilovirusMononegaviralesEgyptian fruit bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus)RodentiaNipahRNA, single-stranded, negative senseHenipavirusMononegaviralesFlying foxes (Pteropus spp.)ChiropteraMERSRNA, single-stranded, positive senseβ-CoronavirusNidoviralesDromedaries (Camelus dromedarius)ArtiodactylaSIV /HIV-1RNA, single-stranded, positive senseLentivirusOrterviralesCommon chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)Primates*The comparison includes bird species that in general do not have a fatal infection but do have a productive infection. Most of our comparison was based on an experiment with American robins (Turdus migratorius).The severity of disease can differ within subpopulations of a host species, e.g., obese male adults may have more severe disease than children. Thus, we needed to make a choice about which subpopulation we wanted to study. We chose differently for the reservoir host and the human host as we were interested in what the orthopathogenesis could teach us about how viruses and hosts have adapted to each other. Therefore, if known, for reservoir hosts, we chose the pathogenesis of the infections in the subpopulation within the reservoir host that is most important for the maintenance of the virus in the species (often mild disease) (Swinton et al., 2009). With regard to the neopathogenesis, we were interested, for medical reasons, to learn about people with severe illness; therefore, we chose the pathogenesis of the infection in hospitalized patients (often adults with comorbidities and always with severe disease).3.ResultsSeveral trends in similarities and differences could be identified from the comparison between orthopathogenesis and neopathogenesis for each of these 11 examples of zoonotic viral infections. Details on assigning rates of similarity are available in the Supplementary material, as are the specific references that provide the basis for this assessment. Overall, the level of similarity between orthopathogenesis and neopathogenesis decreased from left to right in the table, or in other words, from the start to the end of the infection (Table 2).Table 2Overview of the results of the comparison of zoonotic viral infections with those of the original hosts, based on the literature review in the Supplementary material.

Dark green: similar; Lighter green: somewhat similar; Yellow: equivocal; Orange: somewhat different; Red: different; White grids indicate that available information is limited and, therefore, uncertainty exists regarding the human or reservoir host site of the comparison.The first three virus-host interactions – virus attachment site, entry, and dissemination – were the most similar. First, the virus attachment site was generally the same for the reservoir host and humans. For example, the MERS virus attaches to dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4) and alpha-2,3-linked sialic acids in both dromedaries (Camelus dromedarius) and humans. Second, the entry was generally the same as well; this was assessed to be (likely) the same in 7 of the 10 examples for which we had information. Of note, even in two of the three examples in which entry was different (Middle East respiratory syndrome [MERS] and highly pathogenic avian influenza [HPAI] H5N1), the entry was still in the same organ system: the respiratory tract. However, the specific entry cell type was different: upper respiratory tract epithelial cells in reservoir hosts and lower respiratory tract epithelial cells in hospitalized humans. Third, dissemination of the virus was also well conserved, with 10 of the 11 examples being similar. When dissemination via blood or neurons was typical in the orthopathogenesis, this was also the case in the neopathogenesis. The exception was HPAI H5N1 in poultry, which can disseminate via blood abundantly because the virus can replicate well in galliform endothelial cells. In humans, however, endothelial cell infection and dissemination via blood occur less frequently, likely because of the lack of virus to replicate (well) in human endothelial cells in vivo. Thus, three of the five virus-host interactions were similar for the reservoir hosts and the human hosts for the majority (7 of 10 to 11 of 11) of our examples.The two remaining interactions – amplification and exit – showed more differences between the reservoir host and human host: they were more frequently assessed to be (somewhat) different rather than (somewhat) similar. For amplification, 7 of the 11 infections were assessed as somewhat different. For four of those (macacine alphaherpesvirus 1, Puumula orthohantavirus, Marburgvirus, and Nipah virus infections), the differences arose not from the cell types themselves but rather from the number of infected cells, so it was a quantitative rather than a qualitative difference. The differences in the number of infected cells were inferred from reviewed literature in which quantities of cells were usually categorized, e.g., ‘few’ or ‘abundant’. In these four examples, humans showed infection in a larger proportion of cells than reservoir hosts. For the remaining three (monkeypox virus, HPAI H5N1, and MERS), the main cell type involved in the amplification phase in the reservoir host was also frequently important in the human host, but in the human host, the amplification also extended to other cell types. For exit, 5 of the 11 infections were assessed as (somewhat) different. For two of those (West Nile virus and Puumula orthohanta virus infections), the same cell types were likely involved in both reservoir hosts and humans, but this resulted in detectable excretion of infectious virus only in the reservoir hosts, suggesting, again, a quantitative rather than a qualitative difference. For the remaining three (monkeypox virus, HPAI H5N1, and MERS), the main cell type involved in virus exit was different, for instance, via infected nose epithelium in reservoirs but not humans, as this was not a (main) site of infection. In all three cases, this resulted in humans rarely or not excreting virus, and reservoir hosts excreting virus frequently via multiple routes.Despite the many similarities in the selected characteristics of pathogenesis in reservoir hosts and human hosts, the outcomes of infection were different for 10 of the 11 infections. For 9 of these 10 infections, the outcome was more severe for the human host, as one would expect due to our selection bias (see Materials and Methods). The exception was HPAI H5N1, for which infection in chickens causes more severe disease and higher mortality than in humans. For 1 of the 11 infections, rabies virus infection, the disease outcome was similar for carnivores and humans.Explanations for the differences in the outcome of infection appeared to have three patterns, based on quantitative and qualitative descriptions observed by microscopic examinations in the reviewed literature. First, differences could arise due to higher numbers of cells becoming infected during the amplification phase in the neopathogenesis, while the cell types were generally the same; here, the difference was quantitative. This was the case for infections with Marburg virus, macacine alphaherpesvirus 1, Nipah virus, HIV-1, and possibly also monkeypox virus and Lassa virus, in which the higher number of cells infected in humans compared to reservoir hosts was associated with more severe disease. Second, differences could arise from differences in cell type tropism during the start of the infection; here, the difference was qualitative. This was the case for the HPAI H5N1 virus, which infects endothelial cells in chickens, and, thus, enables the virus to spread systemically. Conversely, the lack of endothelial cell infection in humans enables the host to contain the viral infection mainly within the respiratory system. It was also the case for MERS coronavirus, which infects the upper airways and, thus, causes an upper respiratory tract infection in dromedaries. Conversely, MERS coronavirus in humans infects the deeper airways and, thus, causes a lung infection, which leads to more severe disease. Third, differences could arise due to an increased immune response associated with the same or even smaller numbers of cells infected in the neopathogenesis compared to the orthopathogenesis, e.g., in West Nile virus and Puumula hantavirus infections. In these infections, the higher number of infiltrated immune cells observed in humans compared to reservoir hosts was associated with more severe disease.Though sufficient information was available for our comparison, significant knowledge gaps relating to basic parts of orthopathogenesis were revealed. When there were gaps, our comparison was based on assumptions and was, therefore, less confident (‘likely’). Most of the gaps (cells with white grit in Table 2) were due to a lack of knowledge about viral infection in the reservoir host rather than in the human host. In particular, there was a lack of knowledge of the cell types involved at different stages of the infection. This was because histological analyses were rarely performed in studies of naturally or experimentally infected reservoir hosts. Some knowledge gaps were quite consistent for our selected examples (Table 3): type of host cell receptor, distribution of host cell receptor, and type of viremia (cell-free or intracellular).Table 3Knowledge gaps (indicated by letter or *) in the orthopathogenesis.Virus for which infection was comparedAttachment siteEntryDisseminationAmplificationExitOutcomeDetails (*) of parts of the orthopathogenesis that are unknownMacacine α herpes −1D-West NileT, D*V*Entry: potentially intradermal dendritic cells, not confirmed; Exit: cellular origin of virus shed in oral cavityPuumula orthohantaT, DV**Exit: cellular origin of virus in saliva, urine, feces; Outcome: virus-related lesionsMonkeypoxT, D*C, V***Entry: tissue and cell type; Amplification: cell type tropism not confirmed in natural infections; Exit: cellular origin of virus in nose, eye, rectum; Outcome: lesions and outcome of natural infectionLassaDV***Entry, Amplification, Exit: tissues and cell types involved not confirmed in natural infections; Outcome: lesions and cell types affected at end pointMarburgT, D**Entry: identification of tissue in which macrophages usually become infected; Exit: cellular origin of excreted virusNipahD*V**Entry: cell type where infection starts; Amplification: endothelial tropism not confirmed; Exit: cellular origin of excreted virusMERS*Exit: cell type involved in fecal virus excretionSIV/ HIV-1**Entry: usual tissue type where infection starts; Amplification: particular CD4+ T cell type infectedD, distribution of the host cell receptor; T, type of host cell receptor; V, type of viremia, whether viremia is cell-free or intracellular; C, how virus reaches circulation.4.DiscussionFrom this comparison between the orthopathogenesis and neopathogenesis of the 11 arbitrarily selected zoonotic viral infections, three main insights can be derived. First, most aspects of pathogenesis in humans are remarkably similar to those in reservoir species. This is an important finding because it can help us to predict aspects of infections of potentially zoonotic pathogens. Second, the identified differences between ortho- and neopathogenesis can pinpoint specific aspects of the pathogeneses that can partly explain the severe outcome of infection in people (Table 2). Third, there are many gaps in our knowledge of very basic parts of pathogenesis in reservoir hosts (Table 3), which, if resolved, might improve our ability to explain severe disease in people.Regarding severe outcomes of infection in humans, two of three explanations seem directly related to a difference in immune response. First, severe outcomes of infection due to Marburg virus, macacine alphaherpesvirus 1, and Nipah virus, for example, could be explained by more cells becoming infected in humans than in reservoir species. This might suggest that, in contrast to the reservoir host, the human host is incapable of containing the infection to a few cells; there seems to be a hyporeaction of the human immune system, including the intracellular anti-viral response. It would be interesting to learn whether this is indeed the case, and what the underlying mechanisms are. Second, severe outcome of infection due to West Nile virus and Puumula orthohantavirus, for example, could be explained by severe immunopathological changes associated with the same or even a smaller number of cells becoming infected in humans than in reservoir species (Medzhitov et al., 2012). This might suggest that the human host responds excessively as there is a hyperreaction of the human immune system. In other words, the problems in humans arise from mismatches between the pathogen’s immune evasive responses and the human’s immune response (Table 4). Studying the immune response in the reservoir hosts more closely could clarify what the underlying mechanisms are that influence the extent of the immune responses in both host groups. A similar conclusion has been drawn by others who have reviewed literature focused on differences in the immune responses of reservoir hosts and people (Bean et al., 2013).Table 4Mismatches between the pathogen’s immune evasive responses and the human’s immune response might underly differences in outcomes of zoonotic viral diseases.Effect upon infection as visualized by microscopyHypothesized immune response mismatch underlying the difference in outcomeExamples of viruses in which this seems to occurMore cells becoming infected in humans than in reservoir speciesHyporeaction: lack of human host cells to contain infection compared to reservoir host speciesMarburg virusMacacine alphaherpesvirusNipah virusSevere immunopathological changes associated with a similar or smaller number of cells infected in humans than in reservoir speciesHyperreaction: human host cells respond excessively to infection compared to reservoir host speciesWest Nile virusPuumula orthohantavirusAside from the aforementioned reasons, there are other reasons for studying orthopathogenesis. A better understanding of orthopathogenesis can lead to the recognition of specific virus characteristics and their selective advantages. For example, we concluded from a previous comparative study of lyssavirus infections that the start of infection after a bat bite, due to tooth length and biting force, was most likely the skin, while for carnivores, it was the skeletal muscle. Thus, we predicted adaptations of bat lyssaviruses to replicate in skin and adaptations of carnivore lyssaviruses to replicate in skeletal muscle. These predictions provided an explanation for the observation of differences in cell type tropism and clinical disease of bat-acquired human rabies as opposed to carnivore-acquired human rabies (Begeman et al., 2018). Furthermore, orthopathogenesis may inform us about how the virus will behave in humans. A virus that has a tropism for neuronal cells in its bat host, like Lagos bat virus, seems likely to remain neurotropic in the human host. To take this one step further, because a newly emerged zoonotic virus is at an early stage of adaptation in the human host, knowledge of the pathogenesis in its reservoir host, where it is at an advanced stage of co-evolution, will inform us about the possible future route of evolution that the virus will take in humans. An example is MERS coronavirus, which causes an upper respiratory tract infection in dromedaries and transmits easily from dromedary to dromedary (Adney et al., 2014). If MERS coronavirus, now infecting deeper airways in humans and poorly transmissible, adapts to the human upper respiratory tract, we would expect it to become as transmissible in humans as it is in dromedaries. Therefore, we predict that upper respiratory tract infection will be part of the future pathogenesis of MERS in humans. This could result in epidemiology in the human population similar to that observed for SARS-CoV-2 (Munster et al., 2020).With two of the four authors being pathologists, we focused our review on those virus-host interactions that are relatively easily studied using a light microscope. It would be interesting to see what overall insights can be derived from comparisons performed by researchers from other disciplines, e.g., immunologists, virologists, and cell biologists, who focus on other aspects of virus-host interactions.The literature review performed for this perspective showed a lack of detailed descriptions of natural infections in reservoir hosts. We think these knowledge gaps could be relatively easily filled. For example, virological studies to identify reservoir hosts of a newly emerged zoonotic virus could be complemented by sampling formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues to allow for pathological studies to determine the orthopathogenesis of this viral infection, without the need for sacrificing additional animals.Here, we have introduced new terminology relating to pathogenesis in order to make it easier to communicate our comparison. However, it might be appropriate to make further differentiations in the terminology, depending on the context. For example, although this was not taken into account here, neopathogenesis might differ when a zoonotic infection has been acquired directly from the reservoir host, or indirectly from another human host. If the two are compared, more detailed terminology might be appropriate, e.g., heterologous versus homologous neopathogenesis. Taking this further, it is a matter of future research at which point a zoonotic pathogen adapts to such a degree to its human host that we should no longer speak of neopathogenesis.In conclusion, our comparison of zoonotic viral infections between reservoir hosts and humans suggests several common principles: orthopathogenesis is remarkably similar to neopathogenesis; there are more similarities at the early stages of the infection cycle than at later stages; and observed differences can partly explain the severe outcome of infection in people. Therefore, directing more attention toward reservoir hosts promises to be a potent tool in increasing our understanding of zoonotic viral infections in humans and should become common practice.Data availability statementThe original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.Author contributionsLB and TK contributed to the conception and design of the study, organized the database, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the manuscript revision and read and approved the submitted version.FundingTK and LB were supported by the Dutch ZonMw programme on non-alimentary zoonoses under grant agreement no. 522003002 (Zoonoses in the Night). TK was supported by European Union Horizon 2020 program grant agreement DELTA-FLU no. 727922. DVR is supported by a fellowship from the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (VIDI contract 91718308) and an EUR fellowship. MK is supported by NWO Stevin Prize.Conflict of interestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s noteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.


Title: Land use gradients drive spatial variation in Lassa fever host communities in the Eastern Province of Sierra Leone

1INTRODUCTIONGlobal biodiversity is in decline, with biodiversity loss directly influencing zoonotic disease risk (Halliday et al., 2020; IPBES, 2020; Mantyka‐Pringle et al., 2015; Sala et al., 2000). Land use change, particularly the conversion of natural habitats into agricultural or urban landscapes, is a key driver of biodiversity loss, reducing mammalian species diversity across several dimensions (Newbold et al., 2015). These include taxonomic diversity (the number and relative abundance of taxa), functional diversity (the range of roles organisms play within an ecosystem) and interaction diversity (the biotic interactions among species) (Glidden et al., 2021; Naeem et al., 2012). These declines in biodiversity, particularly in rodent‐associated disease systems, may exacerbate zoonotic disease risks by promoting the proliferation of generalist, synanthropic rodents that thrive in human‐modified landscapes, where they host zoonotic pathogens (Ecke et al., 2022; Gibb et al., 2020; Young et al., 2014). This shift may therefore not only increase the prevalence of zoonotic pathogens but also human exposure in complex socio‐ecological systems (Gibb et al., 2025).The role of host community diversity in mediating zoonotic outbreaks is nuanced, with changes in species composition and pathogen prevalence often interacting with anthropogenic stressors to create context‐specific outcomes (Carlson et al., 2025; Gibb et al., 2020; Keesing & Ostfeld, 2021). A deeper mechanistic understanding of these processes, including community structure, biotic interactions and responses to anthropogenic land use change, is critical for leveraging biodiversity knowledge to predict and mitigate zoonotic risks (Carlson et al., 2025; Glidden et al., 2021; Salkeld et al., 2013). These approaches have only been taken for a few rodent‐associated zoonoses (Keesing & Ostfeld, 2024).Rodents are an important mammalian host taxa for zoonotic diseases (Han et al., 2015; Mendoza et al., 2019). Rodent‐associated zoonoses, such as Lyme disease caused by Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato, have been shown to involve a complex interplay of community structure, biotic interactions, and the effect of land use change (Ostfeld & Holt, 2004). For instance, land use change can increase reservoir abundance and subsequently zoonotic risk, though responses vary across systems and settings, highlighting the idosyncratic or system specific nature of these dynamics (Mendoza et al., 2019; Pei et al., 2024; Young et al., 2017).Lassa fever, caused by Mammarenavirus lassaense (LASV), is an important rodent‐associated zoonosis endemic to West Africa. It is reported from Nigeria, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Mali, Benin, Ghana and Togo and causes an estimated 900,000 annual infections with substantial morbidity and mortality (Basinski et al., 2021; World Health Organisation, 2022). Risk of infection in human populations is spatially heterogeneous with patchy distributions of reported cases across the endemic region (Agbonlahor et al., 2021; Gibb et al., 2017; Grant et al., 2023). While epidemiological factors such as acquired immunity and asymptomatic infections may contribute, reservoir host ecology and distribution are likely critical drivers of this variation, though heterogeneous reporting effort may also be a contributing factor (McCormick et al., 1987; Redding et al., 2021; Simons, 2022).
Mastomys natalensis, considered the main reservoir host of LASV, is a synanthropic rodent species found throughout sub‐Saharan Africa (IUCN, 2016; Olayemi, Obadare, et al., 2016). It is abundant in and around areas of human‐dominated landscapes where it is considered a pest species (Leirs et al., 1993). Population dynamics in M. natalensis are influenced by resource availability and seasonal rainfall pulses, which drive fluctuations in abundance that coincide with increased human Lassa fever outbreaks (Leirs et al., 1997; Leirs, Verhagen, et al., 1996; Redding et al., 2021). However, most intensive ecological studies of M. natalensis have been conducted outside the Lassa fever endemic region, in regions with differing agro‐ecologies, potentially limiting their applicability to West Africa (Leirs, Verhagen, et al., 1996). The effects of land use change on rodent communities in the endemic region have only been explored across a limited geographic area, with most studies focusing solely on M. natalensis (Arruda et al., 2021; Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2005, 2014; Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2009; Olayemi et al., 2018). The limited number of studies that do consider the wider rodent community typically focus on abundance (measured through summary proxies such as trap success) rather than explicitly investigating community dynamics (Eskew et al., 2024; Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2009).There is a pressing need for systematic small‐mammal community studies in West Africa to ensure that insights from other rodent‐associated zoonoses can be generalized to Lassa fever. Such studies can help disentangle the respective roles of abiotic factors, such as land use type, and biotic interactions within small‐mammal communities in shaping M. natalensis distributions and pathogen exposure risks. Mastomys natalensis occurs within species‐rich settings in West Africa; however, the biotic interactions between this species and other native and invasive rodents within these communities, and how these interactions may regulate M. natalensis occurrence are not well described (Cuypers et al., 2017; Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2009; Garba et al., 2014; Hima et al., 2019). Past studies have indicated that competitive interactions with Rattus rattus and Mus musculus can alter native rodent communities, and might therefore reshape M. natalensis local distributions with subsequent effects on LASV transmission and Lassa fever hazard (Dalecky et al., 2015; Eskew et al., 2024; Lippens et al., 2017). Sierra Leone is associated with frequent outbreaks of Lassa fever in human populations, with evidence of outbreaks beyond the traditionally accepted endemic region, but the influence of community dynamics on these patterns remains poorly understood (Bangura et al., 2021; Bonner et al., 2007; Bonwitt et al., 2017; Eskew et al., 2024; Grant et al., 2023; Keenlyside et al., 1983; McCormick et al., 1987; Monath et al., 1974).Given these gaps in understanding, we conducted repeated, systematic small‐mammal trapping along a land use gradient in Eastern Sierra Leone to explore how small‐mammal community structure influences the distribution of M. natalensis. We hypothesised that (1) small‐mammal community diversity varies with land use, with lower diversity in more anthropogenic habitats; (2) M. natalensis occupancy is positively associated with anthropogenic land use but negatively influenced by competition with other sympatric species; and (3) species interactions within small‐mammal communities regulate the local distribution of M. natalensis, thereby shaping LASV outbreak risk. Sierra Leone, a hotspot for Lassa fever, provides a unique opportunity to explore these dynamics in a region where rodent ecology studies have largely focused on M. natalensis, often neglecting the broader small‐mammal community. We expect these analyses to further understanding of small‐mammal community structures that may explain observed patterns of LASV outbreaks within this context and the wider endemic region.2METHODS2.1Small‐mammal samplingWe conducted small‐mammal trapping surveys from October 2020 to April 2023 at four village study sites (Baiama, Lalehun, Lambayama and Seilama) located in the Lassa fever endemic zone of Sierra Leone's Eastern Province (Figure 1a). Site selection was informed by discussions with the Kenema Government Hospital Lassa Fever team and guided by remote imaging data to ensure representation of prior disease outbreak areas. Trapping grids were established along a gradient of anthropogenic disturbance, encompassing forest, agricultural land (both fallow and active) and village areas (inside and outside permanent structures). Each village study site was assigned one forest grid, three to four agricultural grids and two village grids, except for Lambayama, which lacked forested land (Figure S1A–D). Trapping survey sessions within each village occurred four times annually with two trapping surveys in each of the rainy and dry seasons (May to November and December to April, respectively). This produced a total of 10 trapping sessions at Lalehun and Seilama, and 8 trapping sessions at Baiama and Lambayama over the study period due to logistical constraints (Figure 1b).FIGURE 1Village site locations and dates of rodent trapping in Sierra Leone. (a) Location of village study sites (cross—Seilama, diamond—Lalehun, triangle—Baiama, square—Lambatama), in the Eastern Province of Sierra Leone. Kenema, the largest city of the province is shown with a circle. The inset map shows the location of Kenema District in Sierra Leone. (b) Number of trap nights obtained from each study village, blue shaded regions represent the rainy season in Sierra Leone. The background satellite image of Eastern Province, Sierra Leone obtained from Google Maps copyright TerraMetrics 2023.To explore the influence of human population density on small‐mammal communities, we classified village study sites as either rural or peri‐urban. This classification was based on population density data from WorldPop for 2020 at a 100 m resolution (WorldPop, 2025). We adopted the classifications proposed by Dijkstra et al for country specific density thresholds defining urban centres as those with a density in excess of 1000 individuals/km2 and a contiguous population of at least 50,000 (Dijkstra et al., 2021). Under this definition, Lambayama (5227 individuals/km2) was classified as peri‐urban (an urban cluster in their manuscript), while Baiama (131 individuals/km2), Lalehun (159 individuals/km2) and Seilama (48 individuals/km2) were classified as rural.We selected village study sites and trapping grids to be representative of land use in the Eastern Province of Sierra Leone, based on accessibility and acceptability of the study protocol to communities (Supporting Information S1). Trapping grids consisted of 49 Sherman traps (7.62 × 8.89 × 22.86 cm; H.B. Sherman Traps, Tallahassee, USA), arranged in a 7 × 7 layout with 7‐metre spacing between traps, adjusted to the local terrain (median grid area = 1672 m2). For grids within permanent structures, the grid arrangement was modified: individual buildings were semi‐randomly selected using a projected village grid, and four traps were deployed per structure. The location of each individual trap was geolocated. Traps were baited with a locally produced mixture of oats, palm oil and dried fish. Each morning, traps were checked and closed for the day prior to re‐baiting during the evening. Each trapping survey session consisted of four consecutive trap nights (TN) at each trapping grid.For downstream analysis, we used geospatial software to assign individual trap locations to a standardized grid cell system based on their physical coordinates (Figure S2). First, a convex hull encompassing all trapping sessions for a grid was generated. A regular grid composed of 49 m2 cells was overlaid on this polygon, and traps were assigned to cells. This process resulted in 2068 unique grid cells across all sites. Grid cells were included in the analysis even if they were only sampled during a single trapping session, as the occupancy model framework can accommodate sites with varying numbers of survey replicates. The four consecutive trap‐nights from each trap within a grid cell during a single survey were pooled as a single replicate for the statistical analysis. Geospatial processing was performed using the sf package in R (version 4.1.2) (Pebesma, 2018; R Core Team, 2021).All small mammals were handled by trained researchers wearing appropriate personal protective equipment. Animals were sedated using halothane and euthanized according to established protocols (Fichet‐Calvet, 2014). Morphological measurements and samples of blood and tissue were collected. The study was approved by the Clinical Research Ethical Review Board and Animal Welfare Ethical Review Board of the Royal Veterinary College, UK (URN: 2019 1949‐3), and the ethical review board of Njala University, Sierra Leone, and adhered to national and institutional ethical guidelines. Sex was determined based on external and internal genitalia. Age classification was informed by reproductive status and lens weight from dried eye samples. Photographs of the dorsal and ventral aspects of each rodent were taken for morphological documentation. All carcasses were incinerated to mitigate pathogen transmission risks.2.2Species classificationSpecies identification was performed in the field based on external morphological characteristics, including body length, tail length, ear length and pelage colouration, following the taxonomic keys of Kingdon and Happold (2013) and Monadjem et al. (2015) (Supporting Information S2). Field identification was supplemented by molecular methods to confirm species identity for individuals identified as Mastomys sp., Mus sp., Rattus sp. and Crocidura sp. alongside a random subset of remaining individuals (50% of remaining samples).Samples were stored at −20°C until processing. Genomic DNA was then extracted using QIAGEN DNeasy kits as per the manufacturer's instructions (QIAGEN, 2023) (Supporting Information S1). DNA extracts were amplified via polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using cytochrome B primers, and amplification success was confirmed via gel electrophoresis (Bangura et al., 2021). Full details of the PCR and sequencing protocols are provided in Supporting Information S1. Successful PCR products were purified and submitted for Sanger sequencing (performed by Eurofins Genomics). Attribution of sequences to rodent species was performed using the BLAST programme, comparing obtained sequences to cytochrome B records in the NCBI database (accessed 2023‐06‐30) (Altschul et al., 1990).2.3Description of small‐mammal detection and species community structureAdequacy of sampling effort was assessed using species accumulation curves produced for each village study site and each land use type within a village study site, generated with the specaccum function from the vegan package (Oksanen et al., 2022). The rarefaction method was applied to evaluate whether sampling was sufficient to detect the expected rodent species within these categories. Curves were visually inspected, and most demonstrated a plateau, suggesting adequate sampling effort (Figure S3).Detection/non‐detection histories for each grid cell and small‐mammal species were constructed, assigning ‘1’ when a species was detected and ‘0’ otherwise. Species communities were described at multiple spatial scales: (i) all species identified across all village sites and land use types, (ii) all species identified within a village study site and (iii) all species identified within a single land use type within a single village study site. Species richness and Shannon diversity were calculated at each of these spatial scales (Shannon, 1948).2.4Estimating the effect of land use on species occurrence and richnessTo adjust for differential probabilities of detection, we used a Bayesian spatial latent factor multi‐species occupancy model that incorporates residual species correlations, imperfect detection, and spatial autocorrelation. The model assumes that the true occupancy state of a species at a site (zi,j) is constant throughout the study period. Variable selection was informed by a pre‐specified conceptual model (Figure S4). Models were defined using the sfMsPGOcc function in the spOccupancy package in the R statistical computing language (Doser et al., 2022). This approach defines the true presence or absence () of a species (), at grid cell () as arising from a Bernoulli process (Equation 1). Where ψi,j is the probability of occurrence of a species at a grid cell. This is modelled using a logit link where βi are the species‐specific regression coefficients of the site‐specific covariates (xj⊤) and a latent process wi,j* that incorporates residual species correlations and spatial autocorrelation (Equation 2).
(1)
zi,j∼Bernoulliψi,j


(2)
logitψi,j=xj⊤βi+wi,j*
The species‐specific regression coefficients (βi) are specified as random effects arising from a common community‐level distribution (Equation 3), where μβ is the community‐level mean effect and Tβ is a diagonal matrix representing the inter‐species variability.
(3)
βi∼NormalμβTβ
The detection component estimates the unobserved zi,j. Here, yi,j,k is the observed detection or non‐detection of a species , at site , during replicate  (Equation 4). This is approached as a Bernoulli process conditional on the true latent occurrence state zi,j and the detection probability pi,j,k. The probability of a species being detected at a grid cell during a replicate (given it is present), is a function of grid cell and replicate specific covariates v and a set of species‐specific regression coefficients αi (Equation 5).
(4)
yi,j,k∼Bernoullipi,j,kzi,j


(5)
logitpi,j,k=vi,j,k⊤αi
Similarly to the occurrence component, these detection coefficients are specified as random effects arising from a common community‐level distribution (Equation 6).
(6)
αi∼NormalμαTα
Minimally informative priors were specified for community‐level mean parameters (μα and μβ, normal(0, 2.72)) and variance parameters (Tα and Tβ, inverse‐gamma(0.1,0.1)).We developed a set of candidate models based on our conceptual model (Figure S4) after assessing covariates for collinearity (correlation >0.8). Continuous variables were standardized. The full candidate model for occurrence included land use type, village, distance to permanent structure and elevation (Equation 7), while the full detection model included monthly precipitation, moon fraction, and trapping effort (Equation 8). The full detection model (Equation 8) was selected a priori based on theoretical support for these covariates and was used for all candidate occupancy models; therefore, model selection was performed on the occupancy component only.
(7)
Probability of occurrence∼Landusetype+Village+scaleDistance to permanent structure+scaleElevation


(8)
Probability of detection∼scaleMonthly precipitation+Moon fraction+scaleNumber of trap nights
We first compared the candidate occupancy models within a spatial framework using the widely applicable information criterion (WAIC) (Table S1) (Watanabe, 2010). This initial comparison indicated that a model including landuse and village as main effects was the most parsimonious and best‐supported structure. However, subsequent diagnostic checks of all fitted spatial models revealed that the spatial random effect parameter (ϕ) had failed to converge (Rhat ≫ 1.0), indicating that there was insufficient residual spatial autocorrelation in the data to reliably estimate this parameter after accounting for the strong fixed effects of land use and village.Consequently, to ensure the reliability of our inferences, we fitted a final, more parsimonious non‐spatial multi‐species occupancy model (MsPGOcc) using the best‐supported covariate structure (~landuse + village). This final non‐spatial model demonstrated excellent convergence for all key parameters (all Rhat < 1.15; WAIC = 4692.23) and was used for all subsequent analyses and interpretation.Several candidate models demonstrated similarly strong performance (ΔWAIC < 4), indicating a degree of model selection uncertainty. Therefore, based on the principle of parsimony, we selected the simplest model from this top‐performing set for all subsequent inference. This final model included land use type and study village as main effects in the occurrence component (Equation 9). A model with an interaction between land use and the rural/peri‐urban classification (the group_landuse variable in Table S1) was also considered, but the main effects model provided a better, more parsimonious fit. For visualisation (Figure 3), we present the predictions from this final model stratified by the rural/peri‐urban classification to explore how these main effects manifest across this demographic gradient. Posterior predictive checks were used to assess the goodness‐of‐fit for the final model.
(9)
Probability of occurrence∼Landusetype+Village

2.5Co‐occurrence of Mastomys natalensis with sympatric speciesTo investigate the potential for biotic interactions to shape species distributions, we adopted a fully Bayesian approach to propagate the uncertainty from our final non‐spatial occupancy model into the co‐occurrence analysis. This method analyses the residual associations after accounting for environmental drivers and is designed to distinguish potential biotic interactions from patterns caused by shared habitat filtering (D'Amen et al., 2018).The analysis was stratified by land use type. For each of the 2100 posterior samples from the model, we calculated the Spearman's rank correlation coefficient (ρ) between the vectors of occupancy probabilities (ψ) for each species pair across the relevant village strata (N = 3 for forest, N = 4 for agriculture and village). This process resulted in a full posterior distribution for ρ for each species pair within each land use type.From this distribution, we calculated the median ρ and its 95% credible interval (CrI). An association was considered statistically robust if its 95% CrI did not overlap zero. In our interpretation, we focused on associations that were both statistically robust and demonstrated at least a moderate effect size (|median ρ| > 0.4). This analysis was restricted to species pairs that were empirically co‐detected within a given land use type. We interpret these robust correlations as strong evidence of spatial association. However, we acknowledge that this analysis does not allow for inferences regarding the causal mechanism or directionality of any observed relationships (e.g. whether one species excludes or is excluded by another) (Blanchet et al., 2020).3RESULTS3.1Small‐mammal detection and species community structureOver the study period, 684 individual small mammals were detected from 43,266 trap nights across the four village study sites, yielding an overall trap success (TS) of 1.6%. Species accumulation curves suggest that sampling effort was generally adequate, although some curves, particularly for land use types within a single village, did not reach a clear plateau, indicating that additional rare species might be detected with further sampling (Figure S3).The agricultural areas had the highest species richness and Shannon diversity values, while trap success was greatest in village settings (Table 1). Among the study sites, Seilama had the highest overall trap success and species richness. Notably, Seilama also exhibited the greatest trap success within agricultural areas, unlike the other three sites. Species richness in Seilama was twice that of Lambayama, the peri‐urban village study site, which had the lowest species richness and Shannon diversity. In Lambayama, most rodents were detected within built‐up village areas, reflecting its proximity to Kenema city.TABLE 1The number of trapped individuals (N), the number of trap nights (TN), trap success (TS %), species richness and Shannon diversity by village and land use type.VillageLand use
N
TN (TS %)Species richnessShannon diversityBaiamaVillage732716 (2.7%)81.11Agriculture454696 (1%)91.96Forest31568 (0.2%)20.64Total1218980 (1.3%)122.18LalehunVillage542824 (1.9%)91.65Agriculture987608 (1.3%)132.18Forest51862 (0.3%)31.05Total15712,294 (1.3%)132.73LambayamaVillage932736 (3.4%)40.42Agriculture506260 (0.8%)61.19Total1438996 (1.6%)61.34SeilamaVillage413240 (1.3%)81.54Agriculture1867836 (2.4%)131.97Forest361920 (1.9%)81.51Total26312,996 (2%)142.65All villagesVillage26111,516 (2.3%)122.38Agriculture37926,400 (1.4%)173.14Forest445350 (0.8%)101.99Total68443,266 (1.6%)173.65The most commonly detected rodent species across all land use types was M. natalensis (N = 113, 16.5%), followed by Praomys rostratus (N = 102, 14.9%), M. musculus (N = 90, 13.2%), R. rattus (N = 88, 12.9%), Lophuromys sikapusi (N = 57, 8.3%) and Mus setulosus (N = 43, 6.3%). Among non‐rodent species, the insectivorous shrew Crocidura olivieri was the most frequently detected (N = 105, 15.4%). Mastomys natalensis and R. rattus were found in all village study sites, although M. natalensis was absent in forest settings (Figure 2). The invasive rodent M. musculus was detected only in Lambayama, the peri‐urban site.FIGURE 2Trap success of small mammal species across different land use types (grouped across village study sites). The total number of detections in this study is shown next to the species binomial name (N). The number of detections of each species in each land use is shown in the label (n). The colour of the tile corresponds to the trap success. Mastomys natalensis is bolded to highlight its status as the primary reservoir host of LASV.Trap success varied significantly by species, land use type, and village study site. The highest TS was observed for M. musculus in the Lambayama village site, while M. natalensis and R. rattus showed high TS across multiple sites in village land use types. In contrast, P. rostratus had the highest TS in forest and agricultural areas.Seasonal variation in trap success was not consistent across all species. For instance, M. musculus and L. sikapusi were detected more frequently in the dry season, while for most other species, trap success was similar between seasons (Figure S5A). When stratified by land use type, more distinct variations were evident. For instance, M. natalensis had higher TS in village settings than in agricultural areas during the rainy season, while TS in these two habitats were more similar during the dry season. P. rostratus showed substantially higher TS in forests during the dry season compared to the rainy season. Other species showed notable seasonal patterns: TS for R. rattus were higher in villages than in agriculture in both seasons, with this difference being more pronounced during the rainy season. Finally, L. sikapusi TS was highest in agricultural areas during the dry season but shifted to being higher in villages during the rainy season (Figure S5B).3.2Estimating the effect of land use on species occurrence and richnessWe found several distinct patterns in the probability of occurrence (ψ) within a trapping grid cell for the seven included species (Figure 3 and, marginal effects of the detection parameters are shown in Figures S6–S8). First, the synanthropic species, M. natalensis, R. rattus and M. musculus had their greatest probabilities of occurrence in villages. However, M. natalensis differed from the two invasive species (R. rattus and M. musculus) as its probability of occurrence in agricultural settings, remained generally high. Second, the distribution of P. rostratus was strongly site‐specific, it had very high occupancy probabilities across all lad use types in one rural village (Seilama) but much lower probabilities in others. Finally, C. olivieri, L. sikapusi and M. setulosus generally had their highest probabilities of occurrence in agricultural areas with lower and more similar probabilities in forests and villages. No species showed high probability of occurrence across all land use types, consistent with species being adapted to distinct ecological niches. The strong influence of the village covariate in our final model indicates that unmeasured village‐level factors likely contribute significantly to this observed variation.FIGURE 3Probability of species occurrence (ψ) across a land use gradient, stratified by rural and peri‐urban village study sites. The visualization shows the posterior distributions from the final non‐spatial occupancy model for each unique combination of covariates. Thick error bars represent the 50% credible interval (the interquartile range of the posterior), and thin lines represent the 95% credible interval. Black points indicate the posterior median. Lines connect the medians for each village to illustrate site‐specific patterns.To further explore this, we stratified the results by the rural and peri‐urban classification (Figure 3). The probability of occurrence of M. natalensis was substantially lower in the peri‐urban study site compared to the rural sites. The same pattern was observed for R. rattus. For native rodent species such as P. rostratus and L. sikapusi, occupancy probabilities were consistently higher across all land uses in rural sites compared to the peri‐urban site, where they were nearly absent. The shrew C. olivieri, however, showed a different pattern, with a higher probability of occurrence in the peri‐urban site, particularly in agriculture, compared to the rural sites.In contrast to species found throughout our study area, M. musculus was predicted to have a low probability of occurrence in all land use types in rural areas, with high probabilities of occurrence only for village settings in the single peri‐urban site. The occurrence probabilities for the three commensal species (M. natalensis, R. rattus and M. musculus) suggest that competition may be a factor in reducing the occurrence probabilities of M. natalensis and R. rattus in the presence of M. musculus, as in its absence these two species have high occurrence probabilities in villages.3.3Co‐occurrence of species within land use typesThe analysis of the posterior distributions for Spearman's rank correlation coefficients reveals patterns consistent with our original hypothesis that the local spatial distribution of M. natalensis is regulated by biotic interactions (Figure 4). In human‐dominated landscapes, we found strong evidence for several associations. For M. natalensis and the invasive M. musculus, there was a robust negative correlation in both agricultural (median ρ = −0.4, 95% CrI [−1.00, −0.20]) and village (median ρ = −0.4, 95% CrI [−1.00, −0.20]) habitats. In contrast, a robust positive correlation was found between M. natalensis and the other invasive rodent, R. rattus, in both agricultural (median ρ = 0.4, 95% CrI [0.20, 1.00]) and village (median ρ = 0.4, 95% CrI [0.20, 1.00]) settings.FIGURE 4Posterior summary of Spearman's rank correlations (ρ) for species' occupancy probabilities, calculated across village strata within each land use type. The colour of each tile represents the median of the posterior distribution for the correlation coefficient. The text in each cell displays the median ρ followed by the 95% Credible Interval [lower, upper]. Labels in bold indicate associations that are both statistically robust (95% CrI does not overlap zero) and ecologically meaningful (|median ρ| > 0.4). Grey tiles indicate species pairs that were never empirically co‐detected in a given land use and were therefore excluded from the analysis.Beyond these focal species, other strong patterns of association were evident. The presence of M. musculus was strongly and negatively correlated with the entire native rodent guild (P. rostratus, L. sikapusi and M. setulosus) in both agricultural and village habitats. Conversely, these native rodent species were all strongly and positively correlated with one another in the same habitats, suggesting a cohesive community structure. A different pattern was observed for the insectivorous shrew, C. olivieri, which was robustly and negatively correlated with most rodent species in agricultural and village settings. In the forest habitat, however, while some median correlations appeared strong, the posterior uncertainty was very high; the 95% credible intervals for all species pairs overlapped zero, indicating a lack of statistically robust evidence for any associations in that land use type.4DISCUSSIONThis study provides valuable insights into the dynamics of small‐mammal communities in a Lassa fever endemic region of Eastern Sierra Leone, focussing on how land use types influence species richness, diversity and the risk of viral spillover. Our results indicate that species richness and diversity were highest in agricultural settings. These habitats support both synanthropic and non‐synanthropic species, increasing the potential for viral sharing. The highest probability of occupancy for the main LASV reservoir host, M. natalensis, was observed in villages and agricultural settings, while it was likely absent from forests. This pattern mirrors that of the invasive commensal species M. musculus and R. rattus, suggesting that human‐modified landscapes are key drivers of rodent distribution. Stratification by human population density revealed that M. natalensis occupancy was lower in the peri‐urban site, where M. musculus dominates. Importantly, we identified a negative correlation in the probability of co‐occurrence between M. natalensis and M. musculus, which could have important implications for understanding observed Lassa fever outbreaks.4.1Small‐mammal communities are associated with land use typeSmall‐mammal species richness was greatest in agricultural settings where both synanthropic and non‐synanthropic species were found. The higher species richness in agricultural environments provides more opportunities for cross‐species transmission of LASV within diverse small‐mammal communities.Evidence suggests that the wider species community may play a role in LASV transmission. While M. natalensis is the primary reservoir, acute LASV infection (confirmed by viral RNA or culture) has been documented in five other rodent species: Hylomyscus pamfi, Mastomys erythroleucus, Mus baoulei, Mus minutoides and Rattus rattus (Table S2A) (Demby et al., 2001; Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2014; Monath et al., 1974; Olayemi, Cadar, et al., 2016; Yadouleton et al., 2019). However, the evidence for M. minutoides and R. rattus comes from a single 1975 study where species were identified by morphology alone, and these findings should be interpreted with the understanding that they lack modern genetic confirmation (Wulff et al., 1975). Broader exposure within small mammal communities is suggested by serological surveys, which have detected LASV‐reactive antibodies in 10 further rodent species (Arvicanthis nilotics, Gerbilliscus kempii, Lemniscomys striatus, Lophuromys sikapusi, Malacomys edwardsi, Mus musculus, Mus setulosus, Praomys daltoni, Praomys misonnei and Praomys rostratus) and one shrew genus (Crocidura) (Table S2B) (Simons et al., 2025). Notably, this includes serological evidence for both M. minutoides and R. rattus, which may lend some support to the earlier acute infection findings. However, these serological results must also be interpreted with caution. The detection of antibodies confirms exposure to an arenavirus but depending on assay sensitivity and specifity they may not be solely antibodies to LASV; given the increasing discovery of novel arenaviruses in West African small mammals, some seropositivity, particularly in genera like Arvicanthis and Gerbilliscus, could reflect exposure to other, related viruses (e.g. Ippy virus) rather than LASV itself (Saluzzo et al., 1988).Whether these infections are incidental or represent competent chains of viral transmission remains unclear. It is possible that viral sharing is greatest in the more species‐rich agricultural settings, allowing introduction or re‐introduction of LASV into isolated commensal species populations following local viral extinction (Bordes et al., 2015). This may be particularly important for maintaining viral persistence through time in spatially isolated M. natalensis populations, where rapid depletion of susceptible individuals might be expected (Goyens et al., 2013). Our findings that M. natalensis is absent from forested regions may indicate that its populations are spatially isolated, particularly in the mosaic landscapes of remnant forest and agriculture that characterize much of West Africa (Denys et al., 2005; Leirs, Verheyen, & Verhagen, 1996; Mariën et al., 2018). The role of the wider rodent community in facilitating LASV transmission between these isolated populations warrants further investigation.Although previous studies from Guinea and Sierra Leone have reported seasonal fluctuations in M. natalensis abundance, our findings of similar or increased abundance during the dry season suggest that localized factors, such as agricultural practices or food storage, may influence rodent behaviour in this region differently than previously documented (Bangura et al., 2021; Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2007). Alternatively, increased trap‐shyness during periods of increased abundance may mask replication of previous findings. Further studies on small‐mammal communities, incorporating local human community behaviour and practices, conducted over longer time periods and across different geographic regions, would be valuable in identifying how seasonal habitat preferences of these rodents vary (Kelly et al., 2013; Leach et al., 2017). These findings underscore the importance of considering local human activities, such as food storage and agricultural practices, when modelling seasonal patterns in rodent behaviour. Such practices may alter rodent abundance and movement in ways that differ from areas where M. natalensis displays more predictable seasonal patterns due to other environmental or ecological factors.The abundance of M. natalensis within households has been suggested as a key driver of Lassa fever outbreaks, likely due to increased human–rodent contact (Bonwitt et al., 2017; Mariën et al., 2020). Therefore, the movement of M. natalensis from species‐rich agricultural areas to households may play a critical role in the transmission dynamics of LASV.4.2Evidence for biotic interactions shaping patterns of small‐mammal species diversityThe segregation of small‐mammal species into distinct ecological niches, categorized by human‐dominated or non‐human‐dominated land use types, underscores the significant role of abiotic factors in shaping species distributions. However, within these habitats, the residual spatial associations suggest that biotic interactions also play a key role. While recognising the inherent challenges of inferring ecological processes from spatial patterns, our analysis of residual correlations after accounting for habitat effects reveals several important associations (Blanchet et al., 2020).Our findings show a high predicted occupancy of both M. natalensis and R. rattus in human‐dominated landscapes, with a positive correlation in their co‐occurrence, aligning with a similar study in Sierra Leone (Bangura et al., 2021). In contrast, the negative correlation between M. musculus and the larger M. natalensis and R. rattus in the peri‐urban site presents an apparent competitive paradox. Direct physical competition seems unlikely given the significant size difference. However, evidence from Senegal suggests that M. musculus can indeed displace both native rodents and R. rattus during its expansion (Dalecky et al., 2015). The mechanism is likely not direct aggression but rather a combination of competition, niche specialisation and effects of predation (Polis & Holt, 1992). Mus musculus is exceptionally adapted to the indoor environment and may be a more efficient forager on the scattered, high‐quality resources found within human dwellings in West Africa (Vrbanec et al., 2021). Coupled with a high reproductive rate, it may be able to numerically saturate this specific niche, effectively excluding more generalist species like M. natalensis that utilise both indoor and surrounding outdoor habitats. Furthermore, the invasion dynamics themselves may play a role. Dalecky et al. (2015) describe separate invasion fronts for M. musculus and R. rattus, suggesting that once one species establishes dominance in a locality via a particular human transport route, it may create a biotic barrier that resists invasion by the other. This would explain the mutually exclusive patterns observed in our study and others (Eskew et al., 2024).Beyond the focal interactions involving invasive species, the analysis revealed broader community‐level structures that were highly context‐dependent. The strongest evidence for biotic associations was found in human‐dominated landscapes. In both agricultural and village habitats, the native rodent guild, including P. rostratus, L. sikapusi and M. setulosus, showed robust positive correlations with one another, suggesting a cohesive community. In stark contrast, the presence of M. musculus was strongly and negatively correlated with this entire native guild in these same habitats. This pattern indicates that the establishment of the house mouse may lead not just to the displacement of a single competitor, but to a wholesale perturbation of the native rodent community. In the forest, however, while the median correlations suggested some associations, the posterior uncertainty was very high for all species pairs, and we found no statistically robust evidence for co‐occurrence patterns in this land use type. A different pattern of segregation was observed for the insectivorous shrew, C. olivieri, which was generally negatively correlated with most rodent species, likely reflecting niche partitioning between trophic guilds. We interpret this finding with caution, as our grain‐based bait may have been less directly attractive to shrews; however, insects drawn to the bait could have indirectly attracted these insectivores, creating a complex detection scenario.4.3Benefits and challenges of systematic small‐mammal community samplingSystematic investigation of small‐mammal communities entails a greater sampling effort than targeted sampling of specific species in selected habitats. In this study, the overall TS was relatively low compared to other studies focusing on synanthropic rodent species (Bangura et al., 2021; Happi et al., 2022; Olayemi et al., 2018). Our TS of 2.3% within villages aligns with the 3% reported in Bo, Sierra Leone, but is notably lower than the 17% and 14% reported in Nigeria and Guinea, respectively (Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2007; Happi et al., 2022). This discrepancy may arise from differences in trapping methodologies, including the size of traps, trap locations, or the behaviour of target species. For example, M. natalensis captures in its Western range were less frequent than those observed in Tanzania, where TS of around 24% were reported in agricultural settings (Mulungu et al., 2013). One potential explanation is that food availability in each setting might affect the species' behaviour, with environmental food sources influencing trap shyness (Stryjek et al., 2019; Taylor et al., 1974).Despite the higher sampling effort required, systematic small‐mammal community sampling offers distinct advantages over targeted species sampling. By adopting a broader, more inclusive approach, this method reduces the risk of overlooking less common species that may act as pathogen hosts and provides greater insight into biotic interactions between species. For instance, our sampling design allowed us to observe associations between synanthropic species like M. musculus and native species, offering a more holistic view of the ecological factors contributing to pathogen spread.Comparison between studies using different sampling techniques presents several challenges. Previous studies on rodent communities in the Lassa fever endemic region have used TS as an indirect measure of rodent abundance (Bangura et al., 2021; Fichet‐Calvet et al., 2009; Olayemi et al., 2018). While we also present TS as a descriptive metric, we acknowledge that it can be a biased proxy for abundance. Our analysis, incorporating a model of imperfect detection, suggests estimating abundance from TS may not be applicable across different land use types and species (Figure S8). For example, we observed that the probability of detecting M. musculus and R. rattus was higher than for native species when a consistent amount of trapping effort was applied. This finding aligns with previous research showing that trap success may be an unreliable proxy for relative abundance (Parsons et al., 2022). Therefore, improving harmonisation of rodent sampling designs could enhance direct comparisons of species communities and pathogen prevalence across the Lassa fever endemic region (Simons et al., 2023).There are several limitations to the current study. One limitation is the relatively short duration of our animal sampling (less than 3 years). Given that rodent populations can fluctuate significantly over longer time periods, it is possible that important variations in abundance were missed. As a result, the probability of occurrence for certain species may have been underestimated, particularly for species that were at low abundance during our survey period. Extending the sampling period would help to better capture temporal changes in species occurrence and abundance. Furthermore, our trapping protocol, which involved closing traps during the day, likely under‐represents diurnal or crepuscular species such as L. striatus, which could affect our estimates of community composition and diversity. Additionally, land use in Sierra Leone, particularly in agricultural areas, follows multi‐year cycles of cultivation, fallow and reconversion to cultivated land. To more comprehensively understand the effects of land use change on rodent communities, it would be useful to focus on a single location that spans the transition from forested land to agricultural, fallow and degraded forest land use. Such a study would provide insights into how these different land management practices influence rodent community dynamics and pathogen risk. Finally, unobserved characteristics of the villages in our study may have contributed to variations in the composition of rodent communities, as suggested by the wide posterior distributions for some species. Expanding our study to include a greater number of villages would help increase the generalisability of our findings.4.4Implications for understanding the risk of LASV spilloverThe lower occurrence of M. natalensis in certain land uses is consistent with growing evidence of LASV prevalence heterogeneity across the endemic region (Mariën et al., 2020). In some village communities, no current evidence of LASV transmission has been detected within rodent populations, despite prior human cases or serological evidence of outbreaks. This suggests that pathogen prevalence in rodents may vary significantly over time and space (Bangura et al., 2021; Leski et al., 2015; McCormick et al., 1987). As discussed earlier, LASV transmission within a host community may be short‐lived, with rapid local extinction of the virus (Goyens et al., 2013). These dynamics raise the possibility that non‐M. natalensis species may play a crucial role in transferring the virus between communities of M. natalensis that are separated by unsuitable habitat, leading to pathogen re‐introduction.Current disease models of LASV risk largely fail to incorporate the role of multiple rodent species and the potential biotic interactions between them (Basinski et al., 2021; Fichet‐Calvet & Rogers, 2009; Klitting et al., 2022; Mylne et al., 2015; Olugasa et al., 2014; Redding et al., 2016). Our findings, which highlight interactions between M. natalensis and primarily M. musculus, suggest that Lassa fever risk could potentially be reduced in areas where M. musculus is present. This raises the need for further research into the competence of M. musculus as a host for LASV, as previous serological evidence has shown exposure to the virus in this species (Demby et al., 2001). If M. musculus is not a competent host for LASV, this could help explain why Lassa fever is more commonly reported in rural areas of the endemic region, rather than urban centres, where M. musculus may have displaced more competent viral hosts. To test this hypothesis, further research systematically sampling along the urban–rural gradient is essential. Such work could significantly impact future projections of Lassa fever risk, especially given the rapid population growth and urbanisation occurring across West Africa.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSDS, RG, EF‐C, DW‐J, RK and KEJ conceived the ideas and designed the methodology. DS, UB, DiS, JL, JK, MJ, MD, JoL and RA collected the data. DS and RG analysed the data. DS, RG and KEJ interpreted the analysis. DS, UB, EF‐C, DW‐J, RK and KEJ provided supervision and resources to conduct the study. DS led the writing of the manuscript. RG, DW‐J, RK and KEJ contributed critically to drafts. All authors gave final approval for publication.CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENTAll authors report no financial conflicts of interest.STATEMENT ON INCLUSIONThis study brings together authors from several countries, including scientists based in the country where the study was carried out. All authors were engaged early on with the research and study design to ensure that the diverse sets of perspectives they represent were considered. Literature published by scientists from the study country and wider region was cited. Study protocols were discussed with local scientists for appropriateness of design. Consultations were held with community leaders of the study villages and the wider region before finalising the study design and enrolment of sites into the study.Supporting information
Table S1: Model comparison for the Bayesian spatial latent factor multi‐species occupancy model. Models are ordered by WAIC. ELPD, expected log pointwise predictive density, pD, the effective number of parameters, WAIC, widely applicable information criterion.
Table S2: Sampling of rodents for LASV.
Figure S1: Trap locations and number of trap nights in (A) Baiama, (B) Lalehun, (C) Lambayama and (D) Seilama. Each cell represents a 49 m2 area. The colour of cells relates to the trapping effort within that area in number of trap nights. The facets relate to the land use type of the trapping site. Images obtained from Google maps, copyright 2023 CNES/Airbus, Maxar Technologies.
Figure S2: Schematic diagram of conversion from trap locations to grids. (A) Individual traps were placed in a grid structure in a pre‐specified location. While attempts were made to keep trap locations over repeated visits individual traps were often placed in slightly different locations. This is shown in the schematic using different colours to represent different visits. (B) To harmonise the locations of traps to coordinates that could be used in the spatial occupancy model we aligned a regular grid with grid cell sizes of 49 m2 over the trapping area and assigned individuals traps to these cells. (C) The number of traps and therefore the number of trapnights within each grid cell was aggregated for each visit. The number of trap nights informed the detection component of the species occupancy model. Detection histories were produced for each grid cell that was sampled for each species. Grid cells were assigned a 1 if any trap within the grid cell detected the species and 0 otherwise.
Figure S3: (A) Species accumulation curves by village site. (B) Species accumulation curves by village site stratified by land use type. The x‐axis represents the number of unique 49 m2 grid cells (sites) accumulated, not individual trap nights.
Figure S4: Conceptual model used to identify potential causal pathways for inclusion of variables for the occupancy and detection model specification.
Figure S5: (A) Trap success for all species by season (rainy = May–October, dry = November–April) of trapping activity. (B) Trap success for all species by season (rainy = May–October, dry = November–April) stratified by land use type.
Figure S6: The marginal effect of mean monthly rainfall on the probability of detection of a species in a grid cell. The black line shows the mean modelled probability of detection for the amount of monthly rainfall, the shaded grey region represents the 95% credible interval (CrI). Probability of detection varies by species with higher values for the invasive rodent species M. musculus and R. rattus, than the native rodent species. There is a general response of decreasing probability of detection with increasing rainfall.
Figure S7: The marginal effect of the fraction of the full moon on the probability of detection of a species in a grid cell. The black line shows the mean modelled probability of detection for the moon phase, the shaded grey region represents the 95% CrI. Probability of detection varies by species with higher values for the invasive rodent species M. musculus and R. rattus, than the native rodent species. There is no important response to moon phase for most species. The probability of detection appears to fall for M. natalensis with increasing moon phase but the credible intervals overlap for the entire range.
Figure S8: The marginal effect of trapping effort (TN) on the probability of detection of a species in a grid cell. The black line shows the mean modelled probability of detection trapping effort, the shaded grey region represents the 95% CrI. Probability of detection is low for all species at low levels of TN. The probability of detection with increasing TN varies by species. The invasive rodent species M. musculus and R. rattus show a sinusoidal response over the range of TNs that were observed in this study with the probability of detection being greater than 50% at relatively low numbers of TN (17 and 22, respectively). A much greater trapping effort were required to obtain the same probability of detection for native rodent species. Only M. natalensis reached 50% detection among the range of TN conducted within grid cells in this study, requiring 29 TN to reach a probability of 50% detection.


Title: Evidence of human infection by a new mammarenavirus endemic to Southeastern Asia

IntroductionRodents of several species are known hosts of numerous zoonotic pathogens (Luis et al., 2013), and are also amongst the peridomestic ensemble that benefit from how humans are modifying the landscape (Shochat et al., 2006). Their increased presence will amplify human-rodent encounter rates and opportunities for zoonotic transmission, likely creating an increased risk for human health (Young et al., 2014). A concerted effort to establish which human pathogens are present in the environments heavily utilized by humans would therefore be beneficial for the prevention, control and where possible, treatment of such zoonoses.Mammarenaviruses are predominantly rodent-borne viruses, several of which have been associated with human disease. In Western Africa, Lassa virus (LASV) infection causes an estimated 100,000 to 300,000 infections and approximately 5000 deaths annually (McCormick et al., 1987), whilst Junín virus (JUNV) causes regular seasonal outbreaks of viral haemorrhagic fever in Argentina (Gómez et al., 2011). So far only Wēnzhōu virus and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) have been conclusively demonstrated to be present in Asia (Li et al., 2014; Morita et al., 1996; 1991). Wēnzhōu virus was identified in China in rodents belonging to four Rattus species, Niviventer niviventer and in Asian house shrews (Suncus murinus), but has not yet been associated with disease. However, LCMV is zoonotic, is primarily hosted by the widespread house mouse (Mus musculus), and consequently has the widest known distribution of any mammarenavirus (Buchmeier et al., 2007). Human infection with LCMV predominantly results in a relatively mild influenza-like illness (Bonthius, 2012; Macneil et al., 2012; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 2012). This propensity of some mammarenaviruses to cause mild disease with symptoms common to those found for many other viral infections, illustrates the potential for these infections to go undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. That human infections caused by arenaviruses other than LCMV have not previously been detected in Southeastern Asia (Charrel and de Lamballerie, 2003) should therefore not be considered as evidence of absence. As each mammarenavirus is primarily adapted to rodents of distinct species or to closely related rodents of diverse species (Gonzalez et al., 2007), the apparent absence of these viruses from a region with high rodent biodiversity (Pagès et al., 2010) is surprising. A large proportion of infectious diseases remain undiagnosed in resource poor countries where people rarely visit healthcare professionals and where clinicians often do not have the training or laboratory support for accurate diagnosis (Mueller et al., 2014). Here, in the course of a survey for rodent-borne mammarenaviruses, we identified a genetic variant of the recently identified Wēnzhōu virus in Cambodia - provisionally named Cardamones - in rodents belonging to two widespread species, brown rats (Rattus norvegicus) and Pacific rats (R. exulans), which are commonly found in proximity to humans. We also identified a novel mammarenavirus species in Thailand in rice-field associated greater bandicoot rats (Bandicota indica), Savile’s bandicoot rats (B. savilei) and an Indomalayan niviventer (Niviventer fulvescens). In addition, we detected Wēnzhōu virus in several Cambodian patients presenting with fever and respiratory symptoms, indicating that this virus may be causally related with human disease.ResultsIdentification of two mammarenaviruses in Southeastern AsiaTo assess whether mammarenaviruses are present in Southeastern Asian small mammals, we used a previously described RT-PCR (Vieth et al., 2007) (Supplementary file 1A) to screen 627 homogenised lung samples from small mammals of twenty species (Supplementary file 1B) collected from seven sites (two in Cambodia, three in Thailand and two in Laos). Based on the hypothesis of rodent-mammarenavirus interrelation (Gonzalez et al., 2007) and the presence of only Old World rodents in the region (Marshall et al., 1988), primers targeting Old World mammarenaviruses were used. We detected evidence of mammarenavirus RNA in twenty seven animals from two locations: Veal Renh in Cambodia and Loei in Thailand. Seventeen individuals from two peridomestic species, brown rats (four individuals) and Pacific rats (thirteen individuals), were identified positive in Veal Renh. In Loei, ten individuals from three agricultural-associated species were found positive, namely six Savile’s bandicoot rats, three greater bandicoot rats and one Indomalayan niviventer (Supplementary file 1B). All but one of the Cambodian positive rodents were collected in settlements, whilst five of the Thai rodents were collected in plantations (Supplementary file 1C).Sanger sequencing of the amplicons indicated the presence of a novel mammarenavirus in the Thai samples. Full genome sequencing was attempted on a single sample from each site: C0649, originally obtained from a wild-caught Pacific rat from Veal Renh, and R5074, originally obtained from a wild-caught Savile’s bandicoot rat from Loei. Coding-complete genomes of isolates were acquired by deep sequencing (Illumina HiSeq 2000) of random amplified RNAs from the lungs of Wistar laboratory rats inoculated with either the C0649 or R5074 lung homogenate (C0649: S segment accession KC669696, length 3331 nucleotides (nt); L segment accession KC669690, length 7181nt. R5074: S segment accession KC669698, length 3345nt; L segment accession KC669693, length 7186nt). Primers were designed based on this sequence and in conjunction with a previously published protocol (Bowen et al., 2000) (Supplementary file 1A), were used to obtain the coding-complete genome of two further isolates: C0617, obtained from a wild-caught brown rat, (S segment accession KC669694, length 3344nt; L segment accession KC669691, length 7171nt) and R4937, obtained from a wild-caught greater bandicoot rat (S segment accession KC669697, length 3379nt; L segment accession KC669692, length 7185nt). Each segment encoded two open reading frames (ORFs) in an ambisense organization with an intergenic region containing a predicted hairpin between the ORFs. Deduced amino acid (aa) and nt sequences from the four isolates were compared to those of other representative mammarenaviruses. An aa sequence divergence of >25% for the nucleoprotein (NP) was found between the Thai isolates and all other known mammarenavirus species, whilst a 3.5–12.7% aa sequence divergence was found between the Cambodian isolates and Wēnzhōu virus (Table 1). PAirwise Sequence Comparison (PASC) was performed on both segments for each of the four sequenced viruses. All samples were found most closely related to Wēnzhōu virus, with the Cambodian virus demonstrating 88.5–88.8% identity for the S segment and 86.0–86.3% identity for the L segment, whilst the Thai virus showed 70.3–70.6% identity for the S segment and 62.7–63.1% identity for the L segment (Table 2; Table 2—source data 1). The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) arenavirus species demarcation criteria includes, among others, the association with a main host species or group of sympatric hosts, presence in a defined geographical area, and significant protein amino acid sequence differences, including a difference of at least 12% in the amino acid (aa) sequence of the nucleoprotein to other species in the genus (King et al., 2012; Radoshitzky et al., 2015). A recent update from the ICTV Arenaviridae study group has also recommended the use of the PASC tool for the assessment of novel arenaviruses. Cut-off values chosen for classifying arenaviruses belonging to the same species using this tool are >80% and >76% nucleotide sequence identity in the S and L segments respectively (Radoshitzky et al., 2015). The Thai virus is the first mammarenavirus to be detected in Bandicota species and, alongside the Cambodian virus is the first to be detected in this geographic region. As this virus also meets nucleoprotein amino acid sequence identities and PASC requirements, we propose that this Thai virus represents a member of a novel species. We suggest to call this novel virus Loei River mammarenavirus (after a river close to the site where it was detected) with the abbreviation LORV. Although the Cambodian virus is the first mammarenavirus to be associated with Pacific rats (R. exulans) and Cambodia is geographically distant to the Chinese region in which Wēnzhōu virus was originally detected, the sequence homology to Wēnzhōu virus and the association with rodents of a common host species (R. norvegicus), indicates that the Cambodian virus represents a genetic variant of Wēnzhōu mammarenavirus (Li et al., 2014). We propose to provisionally name this variant Cardamones (after the chain of mountains near Veal Renh).10.7554/eLife.13135.003Table 1.Nucleotide and amino acid sequence identities (%) between Cambodian and Thai isolates and selected other arenaviruses.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.003IsolatesSegment or ORFnt/ aaCambodian isolatesThai isolatesWēnzhōuLassaIppyMopeiaLCMVJunínLunaMorogoroCambodian isolatesL segmentnt98.969.2-69.487.5-88.655.8-56.457.7-57.860.856.950.2-50.461.1-61.460.9-61.0L ORFnt99.367.3-67.588.0-89.059.7-60.660.4-60.559.2-59.455.650.6-50.959.6-60.959.6aa99.669.2-69.492.2-94.855.5-56-457.7-57.856.6-57.148.537.9-38.055.8-55.955.6Z ORFnt99.573.4-74.5837.-87.966.8-67.463.662.557.6-58.254.9-55.469.0-70.164.7-65.2Aa98.879.289.4-93.970.1-75.370.164.959.440.363.6-64.961.0S segmentnt99.571.7-72.187.5-89.861.7-68.166.6-66.866.6-67.061.6-61.854.6-54.867.6-68.266.7-66.9NP ORFnt99.373.1-74.486.6-90.067.1-68.268.3-68.467.6-67.962.9-63.255.1-55.669.0-70.368.7aa99.882.9-84.287.3-96.572.2-73.874.4-74.673.5-73.864.051.9-52.573.3-74.074.0-74.6GPCnt99.769.1-70.088.6-89.767.3-68.664.7-65.765.3-65.761.2-61.453.4-53.666.3-66.649.9-65.2aa99.879.5-81.195.5-96.474.2-76.269.5-71.371.5-72.857.2-57.548.2-43.072.6-74.473.1-74.4Thai virusL segmentnt68-68.194.666.6-67.560.7-61.861.3-61.561.1-61.457.150.2-50.560.7-61.461.4-61.5L ORFnt67.3-67.595.167.9-68.859.6-59.959.9-60.461.6-62.155.7-56.249.9-50.860.4-61.659.9-60.2aa69.2-69.496.769.6-70.755.7-56.456.556.6-57.149.0-49.437.1-37.555.9-56.356.5-56.7Z ORFnt73.4-74.595.469.4-75.065.2-66.864.1-65.869.0-69.658.7-59.254.3-56.065.8-72.866.3-66.8aa79.298.573.1-74.667.5-71.468.870.158.442.9-44.270.1-71.466.2S segmentnt71.7-72.194.471.0-72.265.8-67.366.1-66.866.2-6761.7-62.653.9-55.065.2-68.166.1-67.9NP ORFnt73.1-74.494.672.2-74.165.2-67.866.6-67.366.9-67.762.4-63.254.1-54.466.1-68.067.3-68.9aa82.9-84.298.178.3-87.273.3-74.672.0-72.973.8-74.464.2-64.649.9-51.072.0-73.574-75.5GPCnt69.1-7094.169.2-69.966.0-67.665.0-66.166.4-6761.5-62.653.9-56.065.8-69.266.1-67.5aa79.5-81.197.580.1-81.173.5-75.771.5-72.471.0-74.259.7-61.043.0-43.974.2-74.873.1-75.9Note where (L & S gene): Cambodian = KC669690, KC669691& KC669694, KC669696; Thai = KC669692, KC669693 & KC669697, KC669698; Wenhzhou = KM386661, KM051421, KJ909795, KM051420 and KM386660, KM051423, KJ909794, and KM051422; Lassa = GU481076 & GU481077; Ippy = DQ328877 & DQ328878; Mopeia = DQ328874 & DQ328875; LCMV = AY847350 & AY847351; Junín = D10072 & AY216507; ORF = Open reading frame; NP = Nucleoprotein; GPC = Glycoprotein; nt = Nucleotide; aa = Amino acid; LCMV =: Lymphocytic Choriomeningitis Virus.10.7554/eLife.13135.004Table 2.Summary of PASC analysis.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.00410.7554/eLife.13135.005Table 2—source data 1.PASC analysis.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.005Sample IDCountry of originPASC: S segmentPASC: L segmentSequence identity (%)Closest virusSequence identity (%)Closest virusC0617Cambodia88.80Wēnzhōu virus86.27Wēnzhōu virusC0649Cambodia88.51Wēnzhōu virus85.98Wēnzhōu virusR4937Thailand70.63Wēnzhōu virus62.71Wēnzhōu virusR5074Thailand70.29Wēnzhōu virus63.08Wēnzhōu virusIn maximum likelihood phylogenetic analyses, the Southeastern Asian viruses, along with the Chinese isolates of Wēnzhōu virus, formed an independent clade within the Old World mammarenaviruses. The Cambodian virus sequences clustered with the Wēnzhōu virus sequences, whilst LORV sequences clustered independently. This Asian mammarenavirus clade formed a sister clade to Ippy virus (IPPYV) in both full RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (L) and NP gene analysis, and to the African Lassa-related viruses as a whole in glycoprotein precursor (GPC) gene analysis (Figure 1a and Figure 2).10.7554/eLife.13135.006Figure 1.Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of novel arenavirus isolates and other representative arenaviruses for a, the complete ORF of the L gene with sequences from rodents only, b, partial L sequences including sequences from rodents and patients.Cambodian strains detected in rodent (triangle), human (square) and Thai strains detected in rodent (circle) are in bold. Clade A, B and C are three evolutionary lineages of New World arenaviruses within the Tacaribe complex. A/Rec denotes the recombinant clade including the three Northern American viruses. The virus names are in abbreviation according to Radoshitzky et al. (2015).DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.00610.7554/eLife.13135.007Figure 2.Maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree of novel arenavirus isolates and other representative arenaviruses for a, the complete ORF of GPC gene and b, complete ORF of NP gene.Cambodian strains (triangle) and Thai strains (circle) detected in rodents are in bold. Clade A, B and C are three evolutionary lineages of New World arenaviruses within the Tacaribe complex. A/Rec denotes the recombinant clade including Northern American viruses. The virus names are in abbreviation according to Radoshitzky et al. (2015).DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.007Experimental infections in rodentsTo establish if infection and transmission of the Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus could be replicated in rodents of two of the suspect host species, experimental infections were performed. Despite several attempts to obtain a culture isolates in tissue culture, including multiple passages, we were unable to propagate the Cambodian isolates in the cell lines available in our laboratory (Vero E6, MDCK, BHK), or in primary cell lines from lungs obtained from a Wistar laboratory rat. Experimental infections were therefore conducted using homogenised lung tissue from wild-caught RNA-positive animals to infect both Wistar laboratory rats and wild-caught or first generation Pacific rats captured in the Mondulkiri site. Male and female adult animals were used. Due to logistical limitations, parallel experiments were not conducted for LORV. Of 85 animals inoculated intraperitoneally with the Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus-positive homogenate, 77 (64/68 Wistar laboratory rats; 13/17 Pacific rats) were successfully infected as measured by detection of viral RNA by RT-PCR in organs and/or seroconversion by IFA and/or ELISA (Supplementary file 1D). Organs positive for Wēnzhōu virus (i.e. brain, heart, lung, liver, spleen, kidney, bladder, peritoneum) varied between individuals (data not shown), with individuals tested usually demonstrating a generalised infection. Organs from randomly selected adult individuals collected between 3dpi and 22dpi or 28dpi for Wistar laboratory rats and Pacific rats respectively, were subjected to quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) and copy number was determined. Copy numbers increased over time with high copy numbers (108–1011 cDNA copy/mg) detected in several organs from 7dpi in Pacific rats and 11dpi in Wistar laboratory rats. Specifically, high copy numbers were detected in the liver, spleen and lung of most individuals, with the latter suggesting the potential for respiratory transmission. Mammarenavirus RNA was detected in most inoculated Wistar laboratory rats killed between 3-56dpi (52/68 individuals) and Pacific rats killed between 3-37dpi (11/17 individuals), although no animals were tested beyond these time points. Mammarenaviruses are known to cause both acute and chronic infections in their rodent hosts 17 and the duration of infection observed here is comparative to that seen in experimental infections of the natural hosts of other mammarenaviruses (Fulhorst et al., 1999; Walker et al., 1975). However, as lung homogenates were used instead of titrated virus, the variability of the dose received by each animal may have impacted on the infection course, likely resulting in the variations and inconsistencies observed (Childs et al., 1993).In both species, we observed horizontal transmission, but only between pups and their dams (Supplementary file 1D). Vertical transmission could not be confirmed for either species. Mammarenavirus RNA was detected in a single pup from each of the two Pacific rat litters but all other pups from these litters were negative, and antibodies detected in additional pups may have been of maternal origin. LCMV infection of house mice must occur shortly before or after mating in order for dams to transmit the virus to a high proportion of their pups (Skinner and Knight, 1974). Therefore the absence of vertical transmission observed here could have been due to the late stage of gestation at which most dams were inoculated (Supplementary file 1D), although vertical transmission has not been confirmed in all mammarenaviruses (Mills et al., 2007).Clinical signs are rarely seen in mammarenavirus rodent reservoirs, although more subtle signs including reduced weight and body mass index have been observed (Borremans et al., 2011). To establish if Wēnzhōu virus infection of rodent hosts results in lesions, histopathological analysis and chromogenic immunohistochemistry were performed on tissues from two Pacific rats inoculated intra-peritoneally with lung tissue homogenates obtained from a wild rat that tested positive for Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus. Electron microscopy clearly identified virus particles with a specific mammarenavirus-type morphology (Figures 3a and b) in the lung tissues. Histopathological examination of the lungs revealed only severe diffuse pneumonia (Figures 3c–h). Other organs were not affected except for vascular congestion, probably due to pre mortem conditions. This relatively limited pathology is in congruence with the suspected reservoir status of this species.10.7554/eLife.13135.008Figure 3.Electron microscope images of the Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus in the rat lung tissues, a (scale: 200 nm) & b (scale: 2 µm).Histopathological examination of the lungs revealed only severe diffuse pneumonia, with lesions associated with acute exudative inflammation characterised by foci of consolidation surrounded by extremely rare aerated parenchyma, c, vascular congestion, acute bronchiolitis and diffuse leukocytic infiltration with lymphocytes, polymorphonuclear and macrophages (suppurative exudate in the lumen and parietal inflammation), c and d. Reticulin staining demonstrated the severe destruction of lung parenchyma, e. Chromogenic immunohistochemistry identified inflammatory foci with numerous positive cells, f, primarily inflammatory cells including macrophages, but in the more preserved parenchyma and aerated parenchyma some epithelial (pneumocytes), g, and alveolar macrophages, h, were also clearly stained.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.008Human mammarenavirus infections in CambodiaThe peridomestic nature of the mammalian hosts of Wēnzhōu virus (Ivanova et al., 2012), indicates that this virus would have ample opportunities to transmit to humans. We therefore decided to establish if zoonotic transmission does occur and if it is associated with clinical disease by testing human clinical samples from eight different sources (Table 3). In group 1, a total of 89/510 patients presenting with dengue-like and influenza-like syndromes but who tested negative for dengue and influenza infection (17.4%) tested positive for anti-arenavirus IgG. The mean age of positive patients was 13 years (95% confidence interval (CI): 10.4–15.6; range: 4 months to 70 years) which was not statistically different (p=0.06) from negative patients (mean age: 10.6 years; 95% CI: 9.6–11.6; range: 7 months to 65 years). The highest antibody prevalence was detected in the 6 to 10 year old age group (40.5%). There was no difference in the sex ratio between seropositive and seronegative patients (49.5% and 43%, respectively; p=0.29). The seroprevalence was particularly high in some villages of Kampong Cham province (Figure 4). Seroconversions were observed in 7 young patients with undocumented fever or influenza-like illness (Table 4). These patients had a mean age of 8.1 year (95% CI: 4.3–12; range: 3–16 years) with a sex ratio of 0.71, which were not significantly different to mammarenavirus negative patients with paired sera (mean age: 9.6 years; 95% CI: 8.2–10.9; range: 7 months to 65 years; p=0.67; sex ratio: 0.45; p=0.17). Intervals between the collection of the acute and the convalescent serum samples for these patients ranged between 2 and 15 days with a mean of 7.4 days (Supplementary file 1E). Retrospective clinical data were available for two of these patients. The first case (S1) was a 3 year old boy who presented with fever (38°C), rhinorrhea and nausea. The second case (S2) was a 9 year old boy presenting with mild fever (37.5°C), headache, cough, rhinorrhoea, and nausea. Muscle pain, joint pain, rash and bleeding were absent in both cases. Only fever (37.5°C to 38.9°C) was recorded in the five remaining cases (S3-7). Of note, self-treatment with antipyretics is extremely common in Cambodia and therefore the temperature measured at the time of medical examination is often normal. In addition to clinical patients, 529 samples from healthy individuals from Kampong Cham province who participated in a community-based dengue seroprevalence study (group 2) were also screened for anti-mammarenavirus IgG antibodies and 70 (13.23%) were found positive (Table 3). The mean age of positive individuals was 10.71 (95% CI: 9.76–11.67; range: 1.1–19 years) with a sex ratio 0.47. The positivity rate and mean age of positive cases in healthy individuals compared to patients presenting with dengue-like and influenza-like symptoms were not significantly different (p=0.059 and p=0.09, respectively). A limited number of human samples (Total = 372, Supplementary file 1F) were tested by both mammarenavirus IFA and IgG ELISA, demonstrating in general consistent results (coefficient of correlation of 0.565 with a p<0.001). The comparison those two assays is only indicative as the tests were used for different purposes, due to different properties. IFA was chosen for screening purposes because of the ability of the test to detect antibodies directed against a wide range of arenaviruses while the ELISA was developed with the nucleoprotein of the Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus is order to increase the specificity of the serology. Indeed, the Wēnzhōu virus IgG ELISA was tested against LCMV positive human sera, the only other zoonotic mammarenavirus currently presumed to be present in Southeastern Asia, but no serological cross-reaction was observed. The IgG ELISA seemed to be slightly more sensitive than the mammarenavirus IFA, detecting 11 additional positive samples (Supplementary file 1F). The mammarenavirus IFA identified 2 samples found negative by the IgG ELISA as positive. However these infections may have been caused by more distantly related viruses, such as LCMV, not capable of detection by the more specific IgG ELISA. Despite this, as mammarenaviruses are notoriously serologically cross-reactive by ELISA (Fukushi et al., 2012) it is unlikely that this assay is perfectly specific to Wēnzhōu virus. Instead it is likely that this test would be capable of detecting other closely related arenaviruses, including novel species. However antisera to other arenaviruses were not available for testing. As for most serological assays, the precise causative agent in these seropositive patients can therefore not be identified conclusively.10.7554/eLife.13135.009Table 3.Details of patient samples tested.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.009GroupClinical signsSample type (number of samples)Collection datesCollection locationsMean age in years (range)95% CI (years)Sex ratioTest usedNumber (proportion) of positive1Dengue-like/ influenza-like illnessAcute and convalescent sera (n=510 including 98 acute, 214 convalescent and 198 paired sera)2005-2010Kampong Cham, various11.0 (4 months to 70 years)10.0-12.00.44IgG ELISA89 (17.4%) - Acute sera: 33 (33.7%) - Convalescence sera: 25 (11.7%) - Paired sera: 31 (15.7%) with evidence of seroconversion in 7 pairs (3.5%)2Healthy individuals (community dengue seroprevalence study)Sera (n=529)2009Kampong Cham10.0 (1 month-20 years)9.59-10.420.50IgG ELISA70 (13.23%)3Meningo-encephalitisCerebrospinal fluid (n=200£)2013-2014Various6.5 (3 months-15 years)5.95-7.060.40Real Time RT-PCR0 (0%)4Dengue-like febrile illnessSera collected during febrile stage (n=253*)2009, 2011-2013Various8.2 (1 to 38 years)7.6-8.80.48Semi-nested RT-PCR0 (0%)5aInfluenza-like illness (negative for four common respiratory viruses)Nasopharyngeal swabs (n=328)2007-2012Various13.2 (1 month to 83 years)12.0-14.40.51Semi-nested RT-PCR4 (1.2%)5bInfluenza-like illness (positive for four common respiratory viruses)Nasopharyngeal swabs (n=392#)0 (0%)6Acute lower respiratory infectionNasopharyngeal swabs (n=279$)2008-2009Various2.7 (7 months to 63 years)2.1-3.40.41Semi-nested RT-PCR2 (0.7%)7Healthy individuals (H5N1 contacts) – negative controlNasopharyngeal swabs (n=266§)2005-2011Various29.3 (1 to 79 years)27.1-31.50.45Semi-nested RT-PCR0 (0%)8Healthy anti-rabies vaccination volunteers – negative controlNasopharyngeal swabs (n=238¥)2013Institute Pasteur Cambodia (Phnom Penh)26.7 (9 months to 83 years)24.5-28.80.56Semi-nested RT-PCR0 (0%)CI = Confidence Interval.£ 3 no information on age; * 8 no information on age and sex; # 2 no information on age and sex; $ 1 no information on age; § 5 no information on age and sex; 51 no information on sex; ¥ 5 no information on age and sex.10.7554/eLife.13135.010Figure 4.Representation map of the percentage (%) of patients who tested positive by anti-arenavirus IgG ELISA and of 6 patients who tested positive by L gene RT-PCR in the villages from Kampong Cham province.Village names: AC=Andoung Chea, AK=Ampil Kraom, AL=Ampil Leu, AS=Andoung Svay, BH=Banteay Thma, BT=Boeng Tras, CH=Chachak, CM=Chong Thnal Muoy, CP=Chong Thnal Pir, KD=Kdei Boeng, KH=Kakaoh, KK=Kouk Kream, KP=Krasang Pul, KR=Krala, MM=Memay, OD=Ou Da, PP=Prey Phdau, RK=Roung Kou, RM=Romeas, SS=Srae Siem, SY=Sya, TA=Tuol Ampil and TV=Tuol Vihear.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.01010.7554/eLife.13135.011Table 4.Clinical details of human arenavirus infections.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.011Case no.Test usedSexAgeHospitalisedFeverCoughRhinorrheaNausea/ vomitingSevere headacheMuscle painOther symptomsCo-infection1Screening nested RT-PCRFemale3 yearsNoYesYesYesHuman para-influenza virus 12Screening nested RT-PCRMale9 yearsNoYesYesYesYesYes3Screening nested RT-PCRMale31 yearsNoYesYesYesYesYes4Screening nested RT-PCRFemale45 yearsNoYesYesYesYesYesYes5Screening nested RT-PCRFemale8 monthsYesYesYesDyspnea, wheezing, moderate anaemia (93g/L)Unspecified Rhinovirus6Screening nested RT-PCRMale3 monthsYesYesYesDyspnea, wheezing, hypoglycaemia (28mmol/L)Unspecified RhinovirusS1ELISAMale3 yearsNoYesYesYesS2ELISAMale9 yearsNoYesYesYesYesYesS3-7ELISANoYesThe remaining six groups were tested by a 'screening' semi-nested RT-PCR derived from the RT-PCR method previously described by Vieth et al. (Supplementary file 1A) or by the qRT-PCR developed in this study. All the 200 patients who presented with signs and symptoms of meningo-encephalitis (group 3) and tested negative by PCR and serology for the main etiological agents of central nervous system infections, tested negative for mammarenavirus in the cerebrospinal fluid. No trace of mammarenavirus RNA was detected in any of the 253 sera collected during the acute febrile phase of patients presenting with possible dengue fever or dengue hemorrhagic fever (group 4), and who tested negative for dengue virus infection. But mammarenavirus RNA was detected in the respiratory specimens of 6 of 999 (0.6%) Cambodian patients from groups 5 and 6, who presented with either mild (ILI: influenza-like illness) or more severe (ALRI: acute lower respiratory infection) respiratory symptoms respectively (Table 3 and Table 4).In group 5a, the first case was a 3 year-old female with no known underlying disease, sampled 1 day after the onset of fever associated with cough and rhinorrhea. A co-infection with human parainfluenza virus 1 (HPIV-1) was also detected. Case 2 was a 9 year-old male with no known underlying disease sampled 2 days after onset of fever associated with cough, rhinorrhea, nausea, vomiting and severe headache. Case 3 was a 31 year-old male farmer, who presented 2 days after the onset of fever associated with productive cough, rhinorrhea, nausea and severe headache. Case 4 was a 45 year-old female farmer sampled 1 day after onset of fever associated with productive cough, rhinorrhea, nausea, severe headache and muscle pain. None of these 4 patients reported other signs and symptoms often associated with influenza (otalgia, sore throat) or dengue (rash, retro-orbital pain, joint pain, bleeding). Hospitalization was not required in any of these cases. In group 6 the first case (case 5) was that of an 8 month-old female with a recent history of fever (<4 days) who presented to hospital with fever (38°C), productive cough, cardiac frequency at 130bpm, respiratory rate at 46/min, dyspnea and wheezing. The blood cell count performed at admission demonstrated anaemia (haemoglobin: 93 g/L), a normal white cell count and formula (leucocytes: 12.6x109/L, lymphocytes: 5.2x109/L, neutrophils: 5.7 109/L). There was no liver cytolysis (SGOT: 46 U/L; normal value: 5–40 U/L, SGPT: 33 U/L; normal value: 5–50 U/L), the creatinine was normal (40 µmol/L) as was glycaemia (5.0 mmol/L). The chest radiograph which was retrospectively reviewed by an expert pulmonologist was normal and the final clinical diagnosis was of an acute bronchiolitis of probable viral origin. The patient received amoxicillin, gentamicin and bronchodilators for 4 days and was discharged after full recovery. The second hospitalized case (case 6) was a 3 month-old boy, admitted with a history of fever but with a normal body temperature at the time of medical examination, associated with productive cough, cardiac frequency of 132bpm, respiratory rate of 50/min, dyspnea and wheezing. The blood cell count (haemoglobin: 112 g/L, leucocytes: 11.6x109/L, lymphocytes: 7.2x109/L, neutrophils: 2.4x109/L) and renal function (creatinine: 47 µmol/L) were normal for the patient’s age. A hypoglycaemia of 2.8 mmol/L was reported. SGOT and SGPT were at 53 U/L and 44 U/L, respectively. The independent expert pulmonologist who reviewed the chest radiograph retrospectively described patchy infiltrates and confirmed the initial diagnosis of acute bronchiolitis of probable viral origin made by the hospital paediatrician. The patient fully recovered and was discharged after 3 days of treatment with bronchodilators, amoxicillin and gentamicin. In both of the hospitalised cases a rhinovirus was also detected in the nasopharyngeal swab samples, but it should be noted that rhinovirus infection is not always associated with symptomatic disease (Buecher et al., 2010).The association between the respiratory illness and the detection of the mammarenavirus was statistically significant (p<0.05) (Supplementary file 1G). Nevertheless, probably because of the limited sample sizes, the difference remained statistically significant only in adults over 30 years of age when the analysis was stratified by age groups (Supplementary file 1H). Direct sequencing of the 302bp amplicons of L gene obtained from three of these six respiratory specimens identified Wēnzhōu virus (Figure 1b) with a 98–99% similarity to the strain detected in rodents from Veal Renh and 88.9–91% with Wēnzhōu virus isolated in China. Based on the absence of contamination of negative controls, and because 2 to 10 nucleotides differences were identified between the patient sequences and those of the positive control of rodent origin (Supplementary file 1I), the positive patient samples are extremely unlikely to be a result of cross-contamination. In addition, the respiratory samples from 2 patients who tested positive by the screening nested RT-PCR were also tested by a qRT-PCR that targets a totally different region of the L gene (Figure 5 and Supplementary file 1A) and both samples tested positive with a viral load of 200 and 350 equivalent cDNA copies per reaction, respectively (or 17,900 and 30,600 copies/ml of sample in virus transport medium). All the 6 patients were additionally tested for 17 common respiratory viruses by RT-PCR (Buecher et al., 2010) and co-infections were detected in three out of six patients presenting with respiratory symptoms. The clinical data recorded for these patients (cases 1–6) are described in Table 4. All the human mammarenavirus cases detected by molecular methods originated from Kampong Cham province. Although a total of 19 villages of the Kampong Cham province were included in the community-based study that comprised group 5, all the 4 cases detected in sub-group 5a originated from Krasang Pul village (KP) and were obtained between January and July 2009. Of note, patients from KP were over-represented (32%) amongst the total number of patients tested in sub-group 5a. The two individuals found mammarenavirus positive in group 6 were from two other villages, Roung Kou (RK) and Ampil Kraom (AK), in Kampong Cham province, both of which are situated approximately 8 km distant from KP (Figure 4). This, in conjunction with the relatively high mammarenavirus seropositivity rates also observed in this province (Figure 4), suggests that another focus of Wēnzhōu virus exists here.10.7554/eLife.13135.012Figure 5.Positions of primers used in diagnostic PCR assays.The positions of the primers used for qRT-PCR are included in their names and these positions are based on the sequence of the L gene of Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus. The positions of the primers used in the nested RT-PCR originate from the article of Vieth et al. (Vieth et al., 2007).DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.13135.012DiscussionThe identification of a novel mammarenavirus in Thai rodents and of a genetic variant of Wēnzhōu virus in Cambodian rodents is the first unequivocal evidence of mammarenaviruses in Southeastern Asia. The identification of the latter virus in Cambodia in individuals of R. exulans sympatric to infected individuals of the known host, R. norvegicus, expands both the geographic and host range of this mammarenavirus species. Although LCMV was not identified in this study (probably due to the absence of its host the house mouse from large regions of Southeastern Asia (Aplin et al., 2003) and the study sites in particular) it is also proposed to have an Asian origin (Albariño et al., 2010). Despite this shared geographic heritage, both Wēnzhōu virus and LORV appear to be more closely related to the African LASV/IPPYV group viruses. This is also surprising from the viewpoint of the rodent-mammarenavirus co-evolution hypothesis. Based on this hypothesis a closer relationship would be expected between LASV/IPPYV and LCMV, since the rodent hosts (Arvicanthis, Mastomys and Praomys species) (Childs et al., 1993; Lecompte et al., 2005) of the African mammarenaviruses are more closely related to Mus spp. than they are to the Asian Rattini tribe (Lecompte et al., 2008). As such this finding alongside the recent discovery of divergent arenaviruses in boid snakes (recently classified as reptarenaviruses, the sister genus to mammarenaviruses) and more in depth analyses of rodent-mammarenavirus relationships, suggest that the history of the family Arenaviridae is more complex and the theory of co-evolution less robust than initially thought (Coulibaly-N'Golo et al., 2011; Irwin et al., 2012; Stenglein et al., 2012).Although the host status of rodents of several Rattus spp. could be called into question based on the pathologies observed in some animals experimentally infected with Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus, detrimental effects of infection have been observed in the natural host of another mammarenavirus, Mopeia virus (Borremans et al., 2011), and in the current study may have resulted from the unnatural route of infection. In addition, the successful experimental infection and transmission of Wēnzhōu virus in rodents of two of the proposed host species, alongside the detection of this virus in rodents of several Rattus spp. from two geographically remote locations (Li et al., 2014), support their status as the reservoir hosts. Due to the relative host specificity of mammarenaviruses, confirmation of the host species of each of these viruses has important implications for their geographic distributions. Many of the species in which Wēnzhōu virus or LORV have been detected are widely distributed (Aplin et al., 2003; Ruedi et al., 1996; Wodzicki and Taylor, 1984). Rodents of these species are also associated with either agriculture (Bandicota spp.) or urban settings (Rattus spp.) (Aplin et al., 2003) and as such are likely to be among the few species that may benefit from urbanisation and agricultural intensification. This could ultimately result in increases in both the distribution of their viruses and in their opportunities for zoonotic transmission.Our results suggest that the ecology of both viruses, through their association with peridomestic rodents of several species, mirrors that observed for known zoonotic mammarenaviruses. Like LORV, JUNV is associated with agricultural pest species (Busch et al., 2000), whilst Wēnzhōu virus, LASV and LCMV are all hosted by rodents with a preference for human dwellings (McCormick et al., 1987; Pocock et al., 2004). This association with highly utilised human habitats indicates that humans are potentially exposed to both viruses on a regular basis as suggested by the relatively high seroprevalence observed in both the patient and the control group. Therefore, the identification of human Wēnzhōu virus infection is perhaps unsurprising from an epidemiological viewpoint, but nevertheless, represents the first detection of human mammarenavirus infection in Asia. The results from this study suggest that human infection with Wēnzhōu virus, or a closely related virus, occurs widely throughout Cambodia, and may possibly result in disease in some cases.Confirmation of causality however is made problematic by the mild and indistinctive clinical presentation observed, the detection of co-infecting pathogens capable of producing a similar clinical picture in three out of six cases (although rhinovirus infection is not always symptomatic) (Buecher et al., 2010) and the limited number of cases. Although virus was never detected in healthy individuals and all patients with confirmed Wēnzhōu virus infections experienced similar symptoms of acute febrile bronchitis, the non-detection of co-infecting agents in three cases despite extensive testing does not mean that other untested or unknown pathogens were not present. However the clinical picture observed was similar to that reported for milder LCMV infection (Baum et al., 1966; Knust et al., 2014). If like LCMV, Wēnzhōu virus rarely causes distinctive severe disease, then despite the high apparent incidence of the infection indicated by the retrospective serological study, causality is unlikely to be confirmed without further surveys.Although our findings indicate that novel mammarenaviruses are present in Southeastern Asia and that humans appear to be regularly infected in the region, there are several issues that still need to be addressed. A major one was our lack of success in isolating both Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus and LORV in tissue culture. This was surprising as samples clearly contained viable virus as evidenced by successful experimental infection of rats. It was also inhibitive to downstream analyses, as a successful method of isolation could greatly aid in the development of serological tests and in confirming proof of causality in suspected cases of human disease. The reasons behind our inability to isolate these viruses are unknown. It is possible that the viruses may have replicated too slowly to be detected by the methods used but this seems unlikely based on the successful isolation of other arenaviruses under similar conditions (Gómez et al., 2011). More likely is the possibility that samples contained viral titres that were too low for successful isolation in the cell lines tested (Lednicky et al., 2012) or that cell lines were contaminated with Mycoplasma. Isolation attempts were made in cell lines previously used to culture other mammarenaviruses (e.g. Vero, MDCK, BHK), but as Wēnzhōu virus was isolated in canine macrophage DH82 cell line (Li et al., 2014), it would be prudent to attempt isolation in this cell line in the future. A serological test highly specific to Wēnzhōu virus is also needed. As such, the specificity of the ELISA test developed during this study needs to be assessed against other mammarenaviruses and potentially optimised further, or an alternative strategy employed. In order to strengthen the case for Wēnzhōu virus as an agent of human disease, future surveys would ideally include a comparison of the seroprevalence in exposed and non-exposed populations, using such a Wēnzhōu virus-specific test. Although attempts were made during this study to obtain sera from individuals not native to the Southeastern Asian region, only limited samples were available. Many of these were from individuals who had been resident in this region for some time and therefore may have been exposed to Southeastern Asian mammarenaviruses. Sourcing and testing of sera from non-endemic areas is therefore needed. Studies aimed at detecting seroconversion in conjunction with molecular testing for viral RNA are also required, with the ultimate goal of isolating the virus in tissue culture or rodents. If Wēnzhōu virus does cause disease, it is also possible that like LASV and LCMV, more severe disease may occur in particular individuals such as pregnant women and immuno-compromised individuals (Bonthius, 2012; Price et al., 1988) and this too should be examined.Globally infectious diseases remain a major cause of mortality and morbidity resulting in more than 15 million deaths per annum (Morens et al., 2004). However it is clear that many of the pathogenic agents responsible still remain undiagnosed, even when they are associated with potentially life threatening conditions. To improve protection we need a better understanding of both the ecology and epidemiology of diseases if we are to succeed in preventing them. Our findings illustrate how a 'One Health' approach in a regional hot-spot for emerging infectious disease can lead to the detection and characterisation of viruses likely associated with previously unrecognized human infections.Materials and methodsWild rodent samplingNo species included in this study are considered to be endangered or threatened and none are included on either the CITES list or the Red List (IUCN). Approval notices for trapping and investigation of rodents were provided by the Ministry of Health Council of Medical Sciences, National Ethics Committee for Health Research (NHCHR) in Laos (number 51/NECHR) and by the Ethical Committee of Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand (number 0517.1116/661) and permission to trap in Cambodia was granted by the Cambodian Ministry of Environment. As Cambodia has no ethics committee overseeing animal experimentation, animals were treated in accordance with the guidelines of the American Society of Mammalogists, and within the European Union legislation guidelines (Directive 86/609/EEC). Rodents were trapped in the Cambodian provinces of Mondulkiri (12°120’N; 106°890’E) and Veal Renh (10°710’N; 103°820’E), the Thai provinces of Buriram (14.89 N; 103.01 E), Loei (17.39 N; 101.77 E) and Nan (19.15 N; 100.83 E) and the Laotian provinces of Champasak (15.12 N; 105.80 E) and Luang Prabang (19.62 N; 102.05 E) as part of the CERoPath (Community Ecology of Rodent-borne Pathogens) project (www.ceropath.org). Sites representing a range of habitats with differing degrees of human disturbance were trapped at each location. Two sampling sessions were conducted at each locality with 30 lines of ten traps set over four nights during each session, amounting to 1,200 trap nights per session. Locally made, wire live-traps (approx 40*12*12 cm) were used at each locality and were baited with cassava, banana or sticky rice. Captured rodents were collected each day, humanely euthanized and blood pellet, serum and organs were harvested, stored temporarily in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to long-term storage at -80ºC. Selected samples were subjected to RT-PCR (see below) for evidence of arenavirus infection.Sample preparation and molecular detection of mammarenavirusesRodent lung samples were homogenised using the MagNA Lyser instrument and bead system (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Tissue samples were placed in tubes containing ceramic-beads and 500 µl of pre-chilled sterile 1X PBS, subjected to oscillation at 3500 rpm and the lysate centrifuged at 6,200rpm for 5 min on a bench-top centrifuge. The RNA from homogenised rodent lung samples, human sera and respiratory specimens was extracted using the QIAmp Viral RNA mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) as per the manufacturer’s protocol.Rodent samples were screened using a one-step RT-PCR targeting a conserved 395bp region of the L segment, using primers designed for Old World mammarenavirus detection and described previously by Vieth et al. (Vieth et al., 2007). To allow greater sensitivity a semi-nested RT-PCR ('screening' RT-PCR) was developed for the human samples, using the Vieth et al. method as the first step, followed by a nested step using primer LVL3359plus (Vieth et al., 2007) and a primer designed against Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus, CAMN1 (Figure 5 and Supplementary file 1A). Briefly, 1 µL of the first round reaction was added to a PCR mix comprising 13 µl Superscript II 2X reaction buffer (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA), 1 µl each of primers LVL3359plus and CAMN1 (each at 10 µM) (Table 1), 1 µL Platinum Taq polymerase (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) and molecular grade water to a volume of 25 µl. A product size of 302 bp was generated for the semi-nested assay and addition of this step increased sensitivity by 1 Log-fold (data not shown). In addition a quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was developed and carried out using the SuperScript III Platinum One-Step qRT-PCR Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) and optimized according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A volume of 5 µl of RNA was mixed with 12.5 µl of 2X Reaction Mix (0.4 mM of each dNTP, 3.2 mM MgSO4), 2 µM of the forward primer ARV2747-F, 1 µM of each of the reverse primers ARV-2937-R and ARV-3012R, 1 µM of ARV-probe, 0.5 µl of RNasin Plus RNase Inhibitor (40 U/µl; Promega, Madison, USA) and 1 µl of SuperScript III Platinum One-Step qRT-PCR enzyme to a final reaction volume of 25 µL. Thermocycling conditions were as follows: reverse transcription at 42°C for 30 min, denaturation at 95°C for 2 min and fluorescence detection for 45 cycles of 95°C for 30 sec, 50°C for 30 sec and 72°C for 1 min. Ampliﬁcation and detection was performed on a LightCycler 480 II system (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and amplification curves with CT values >35 were considered negative with the threshold line placed above the background signal, intersecting the initial log phase of the curve. In order to quantify mammarenavirus RNA, 395 bp PCR products were generated by conventional RT-PCR using the degenerate primers ARV2747-F and ARV3012-R (Figure 5 and Supplementary file 1A). The cloning process was performed using the TA cloning kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, USA) according to the manufacturer recommendations. Plasmids containing the sequence of Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus were diluted (1 to 1,000,000 copies/reaction) and included in each series of quantitative real-time RT-PCR.Whole Genome Sequencing, PASC and phylogenetic analysisTo obtain enough material for full genome sequencing, filtered supernatant from homogenized lung (50 mg in 500 μl PBS) from an infected, wild-caught Pacific rat (C0649) and from an infected, wild-caught Savile’s bandicoot rat (R5074) were each used to inoculate one adult male Wistar laboratory rat by intra-peritoneal injection (500 μl). Both rats were sacrificed at 7 days post inoculation (dpi) and organs collected (see below for methodology). Total RNA from homogenised lungs were extracted using standard Trizol reagent as per the manufacturer’s instructions (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) and confirmed mammarenavirus-positive by RT-PCR (see above). Synthesis of cDNA, amplification, Illumina sequencing (on HiSeq 2000) and bioinformatics analysis were performed as described previously (Cheval et al., 2011). Using the program SOAPaligner (http://soap.genomics.org.cn), the mouse (Mus musculus) genome 'NCBI37/mm9 assembly' reference genome, was used to filter out rodent genome-derived reads. Remaining reads were assembled using 3 different softwares: Velvet (www.ebi.ac.uk/~zerbino/velvewww.ebi.ac.uk/~zerbino/velvet), SOAPdenovo (http://soap.genomics.org.cn) and CLC Genomics Workbench (www.clcbio.com). Overlapping contigs assigned to an 'arenavirus' taxonomy were merged together to form longer sequences.Primers were designed based on the sequences generated by Illumina sequencing and used to obtain the coding complete genome sequences from two further isolates (C0617 and R4937; Supplementary file 1A). To obtain S segment data a previously published protocol designed to generate full S segment amplicons and clones (Bowen et al., 2000) was used in conjunction with a series of RT-PCRs using the primers designed in this study (protocols available on request) and Sanger sequencing of the resultant amplicons. L segment sequence data was obtained using the primers designed in this study in a series of overlapping one step RT-PCRs (protocols available on request) and Sanger sequencing. Segments were reconstructed in the software CLC Main Workbench 5.5 (CLC bio A/S, Aarhus, Denmark). All genome sequences were submitted to GenBank on 20 February 2013.Coding complete sequences for both segments of each virus were loaded into the PASC tool, accessible at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sutils/pasc/viridty.cgi?textpage=overview), and analysed using the default parameters.The sequences of New World and Old World mammarenavirus reference strains were retrieved from GenBank. Including the Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus and Loei River virus sequences a total of 28 and 36 mammarenaviruses coding sequences for the L and S segments respectively, were aligned using Muscle (Edgar, 2004). The nt and aa identity matrices of the coding sequences were calculated by pairwise comparisons using p-distance in MEGA 5.2 (Tamura et al., 2011). Identity matrices were calculated for the Zinc protein (Z) and L coding sequences of L segment and the NP and GPC coding sequences of S segment separately. Jmodeltest (Posada, 2008) was used to select the optimal evolution model by evaluating the selected parameters using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). Phylogenetic analyses were performed using maximum likelihood (ML) method available in Seaview version 4.2.5 (Galtier et al., 1996; Gouy et al., 2010) using the recommended model GTR+G+I for the coding sequences of L, NP and GPC gene separately. The robustness of nodes was assessed with 1000 bootstrap replicates.Preliminary experiments in suspected rodent hostsAll work with infected rodents was carried out in a Bio-safety level 3 animal facilities and adhered to standard European guidelines for animal ethics (an animal ethics committee does not exist for Cambodia). Animals were kept in polyester filter bonneted cages, within a laminar flow Bio-isolator unit. Manipulations were carried out in a class 2 biosafety cabinet inside the BSL3 facilities. Animals were inoculated by intra-peritoneal injection, with 500 µl (adults) or 100 µl (juveniles) volumes and negative control animals were mock-inoculated with sterile PBS. At the end of each experiment animals were euthanized by exposure to chloroform followed by cervical dislocation. Personal protective equipment worn by the laboratory personnel comprised also a 3M Jupiter Tyvek laminate cape powered respirator (3M Jupiter, Diegem, Belgium), disposable gowns, shoe covers, and latex rubber gloves. Randomisation and blinding were not performed.Experiments were set up to test for: 1) the potential for infection and its estimated duration; 2) the potential for horizontal transmission; 3) the potential for vertical transmission. Animals used to estimate duration of the infection were housed individually. For horizontal transmission experiments, animals were housed in pairs (1 inoculated and 1 un-inoculated individual) and dams were housed with their pups for vertical transmission experiments and neonatal inoculations. As numbers of animals were limited, experiments used to approximately estimate the duration of infection and potential for horizontal and vertical transmission were conducted at a number of time points with the number of animals available (see Supplementary file 1C). All animals were confirmed negative for mammarenavirus infection by RT-PCR and IFA (see below for details of method) before starting experiments. At the end of each experiment, blood was collected by cardiac puncture and serum separated by centrifugation. Brain, peritoneum, bladder, spleen, liver, kidney, lung and heart were collected immediately after death. Sera were tested by IFA and where the volume of blood was sufficient by ELISA (see below) and organs were subjected to RT-PCR (Vieth et al., 2007) and qRT-PCR for selected individuals. Animals were deemed to have been infected if they demonstrated sero-conversion and/or were positive for mammarenavirus RNA.For electron microscopy lung tissue from infected animals were collected, cut into small pieces, fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde 0.1 mol/L phosphate (Sorensen’s buffer, pH 7.4) and post-fixed in 2% osmium tetroxide solution. After dehydration and embedding in Epon, semi-thin sections were cut and stained with toluidine blue. Ultra-thin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and then examined with an electron microscope (Jeol 100 CX II). For histopathological analysis organ samples were fixed in RCL2 (Alphelys, Plaisir, France) for 24 hr then dehydrated with pure alcohol. Samples were embedded in low melting wax (polyethylene-glycol distearate; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, USA), sectioned (coronally; 5-µm thickness) and stained with hematoxylin-eosin, periodic acid-Schiff and reticulin. For chromogenic immunohistochemistry human serum from a patient positive by ELISA (see below) was incubated overnight at 4°C with rodent tissue sections, in a buffer containing 0.5% bovine albumin. Samples were then exposed to a biotinylated donkey anti-human secondary antibody at 1:200 (Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc. West Grove, PA) followed by streptavidin-conjugated to horse radish peroxidase revealed by the AEC, a red chromogen at 1:400 (Vector Lab, Burligame, CA, USA). Sections were counterstained with haematoxylin. Negative controls comprised tissue sections incubated with normal polyvalent human immunoglobulins at the same concentration as the human sera used for mammarenavirus detection and incubated in the absence of immunoglobulins.Mammarenavirus isolationAttempts to isolate the mammarenavirus from infected rodents’ organs was conducted using VERO (ATCC CRL-1586), MDCK (ATCC CCL-34) and BHK-21 (ATCC CCL-10) cell lines previously described to isolate other mammarenaviruses. Briefly, each organ was homogenized using MagNA lyser instrument (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) as describe above and the homogenate was diluted at 1/100 with filtered culture medium (DMEM; Sigma Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) supplemented with 5% of foetal calf serum (GIBCO) and 1% of a solution of penicillin-streptomycin (10000 units – 10 mg/mL; Sigma Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) before inoculation onto each cell line. The cells were incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere for 7 days and the process was repeated 3 times. At each passage, the presence of the virus was detected by mammarenavirus qRT-PCR as described above. The presence of Mycoplasma contamination was not systematically checked before inoculation.Mammarenavirus IFASerological screening of experimentally infected rodents was initially performed by immune fluorescence assay (IFA) using LCMV-infected cells due to their availability and because this assay can detect numerous Old World mammarenavirus species. Sera were tested in pooled batches of five and sera from positive pools were then re-tested individually. Sera were diluted to 1:20 in PBS, added in 30 µl volumes to each well and placed at 37ºC for 1 hr. Sera were aspirated from each well and slides were then washed three times in sterile PBS for 5 min each, rinsed in distilled water for 1 min, then allowed to air-dry. A secondary antibody (Sigma, anti-rat IgG FITC, conjugated in goat) at a dilution of 1:50 was then added in 30ul volumes to each well. Slides were placed at 37ºC for 1 hr, then washed and rinsed as before. Once dry, PBS containing 30% glycerol was added in small quantities to each slide and a cover-slide placed firmly on top. Slides were visualized with a UV microscope.Wēnzhōu virus IgG ELISAAs the lack of a tissue culture isolate precluded the production of more IFA slides and in an attempt to produce a test more specific to Wēnzhōu virus, once the coding complete genome sequence of Cardamones variant of Wēnzhōu virus was obtained, a Sandwich ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays) based on the nucleoprotein gene was developed. In order to do this, the nucleoprotein gene of this virus (GenBank accession number KC669696) was cloned into the plasmid pIVEX-MBP, and transformed in BL21 AI E. coli. After incubation and cell lysis, the lysate was purified by IMAC (Immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography; HisPur Cobalt Resin and purification kit, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) to separate the fusion protein, (NP-ARV), from the host proteins. The fusion protein was cut at the TEV site, and a second IMAC purification was used to separate NP-ARV from 6His-MBP and 6His-TEV. SDS-PAGE demonstrated that NP-ARV was in the non retained fraction and that the purity was 83.3%. The protein was then concentrated on cellulose membrane (Amicon, Millipore) to a final concentration of 0.8 mg/ml. To obtain monoclonal antibodies (MAbs), BALB/c mice were immunized six times subcutaneously with 10 µg of purified NP-ARV antigen. The first immunization was carried out with complete Freund adjuvant (CFA) and the second two weeks later with incomplete Freund adjuvant (IFA). The MAbs exhibited different affinities for different epitopes: G14-95 with very low affinity (<10–7M) and H24-20 with good affinity (1.10–10M).Sandwich ELISAs were conducted using MAb H24-20. This MAb was diluted in dilution buffer (1X PBS, 1% skimmed milk powder) and added to 96-well NUNC-immuno plates with a Polysorp surface (Nunc, Roskilde, Denmark) at 1 ug/ml per well. Plates were incubated at 4°C overnight, then washed four times with wash buffer (1X PBS, 0.05% Tween 20). Plates were blocked with blocking buffer (1X PBS, 5% skimmed milk powder) for 1 hr at 37°C then washed four times with wash buffer. A 100 μl volume of NP-ARV diluted to 0.8 ug/ml in PBS 1X was added per well and incubated for 1 hr at 37°C. Plates were then washed four times with wash buffer. Sera (human or rodent) diluted 1:100 in dilution buffer were added to wells in 100 µl volumes, incubated for 1 hr at 37°C, and then washed seven times with wash buffer. Peroxidase-labelled goat anti-human IgG (Biorad, Hercules, USA) or peroxidase-labelled goat anti-rat IgG (KPL catalog n# 04-16-02, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) was diluted 1:10,000 in dilution buffer and 100 µl added to each well. Plates were incubated for 1h at 37°C then washed four times with wash buffer. The substrate solution TMB (Tetramethyl Benzidine; KPL catalog # 50-76-01) was added in 100 μl volumes per well. The reaction was stopped by adding 100 μl of 1N H2SO4 and plates were measured at an absorbance of 450 nm. The means and standard deviations for each plate were calculated using 4 negative control serum samples. The cut-off value for the assay was defined as the mean plus three standard deviations (sd) following the formula: cut-off = mean + 3 sd + 10%. Each sample was tested twice in independent assays and when the results led to different conclusions, the sample was retested a third time. To verify the absence of cross-reactivity, human serum positive for anti-LCMV IgM and IgG (CDC, US) was tested in four independent series and found to test consistently negative for anti-Wēnzhōu IgG detection. Three positive controls (OD varying from low to high) were included in replicates in each plate and the intra-assay variation was considered as acceptable when the ODs of the positive controls were maintained within the ranges of their expected standard deviation values.Seroconversion was defined as when the acute sample was negative and the convalescence sample of the same patient was positive, or when the convalescent sample demonstrated an increase of 50% or more of the OD value of the acute sera.Comparison of Mammarenavirus IFA and Wēnzhōu virus IgG ELISAA total of 372 human serum samples and 7 experimentally infected rodent serum samples (Supplementary file 1F and 1J) were tested by both IFA and ELISA. The number of samples detected positive and negative by each test were used to calculate coefficients of correlation.Human samplesHuman serum, respiratory and cerebro-spinal fluid samples used in this study were collected previously by the Institute Pasteur in Cambodia (IPC) within the framework of several research projects approved by the Cambodian National Ethics Committee for Health Research (NECHR) and stored in IPC’s biobank. At the time of sample collection, a written consent form from each patient or their legal guardian was obtained and the NECHR also specifically authorized the use of these stored specimens for the purpose of the present study (NECHR No. 0205). The use of samples collected for dengue and influenza national surveillance and the use of stored and prospectively collected respiratory samples for the negative control groups were all approved by the NECHR. All the samples were anonymised for the purpose of this study. Samples were tested using the Wēnzhōu virus IgG ELISA or by semi-nested RT-PCR dependent on sample type (see above).Eight groups of human samples were tested for evidence of mammarenavirus infection (Table 3). Group 1 (IgG_Dengue-Influenza-like_group 1_eLife_edit.xlsx in Blasdell et al., 2016) comprised acute and convalescent sera from 510 individuals with dengue- or influenza-like illness randomly selected between 2005 and 2010, originating from Kampong Cham and 11 other provinces. Paired sera comprised acute samples collected before day 4 of fever and convalescent samples collected 7 to 10 days after the onset of fever. Out of the 510 patients tested, only a single sample collected during the acute phase of the febrile episode was available for 98 patients, whilst only a single serum sample collected during the convalescent phase was available for 214 individuals. Paired serum samples, one collected during the acute phase and one during the convalescence phase were available from a further 198 patients. Group 2 (IgG_Healthy individual_group 2_eLife_edit.xlsx in Blasdell et al., 2016) consisted of sera collected from healthy individuals in a community based dengue seroprevalence study in 2009 in Kampong Cham province. The samples in both groups were tested by Wēnzhōu virus IgG ELISA. Groups 3 to 8 (PCR_Meningo-encephalitis patients_group 3_eLife_edit.xls, PCR_group 4-8_eLife_edit.xlsx in Blasdell et al., 2016) were all tested for mammarenavirus RNA by 'screening' semi-nested RT-PCR and qRT-PCR.Group 3 comprised 200 patients hospitalized for meningo-encephalitis and who tested negative by PCR and/or serology for the main etiologies of central nervous systems infections usually observed in the country (Japanese encephalitis virus, dengue viruses, chikungunya virus, herpes simplex virus 1, influenza A virus, enteroviruses, Nipah virus, measles virus, mumps virus, rubella virus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus suis, Haemophilus influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis, Orientia tsutsugamushi). Group 4 consisted of randomly selected sera, obtained during the acute febrile phase from 253 patients. These patients, who originated from different parts of Cambodia, presented between 2009 and 2011 with signs and symptoms suggestive of dengue fever, dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome. However all tested negative for dengue, Japanese encephalitis and chikungunya virus infections by RT-PCR and serology (in-house MAC-ELISA and hemagglutination-inhibition assay using antigens derived from the three arboviruses listed above, as described previously [Andries et al., 2012]). Group 5 comprised nasopharyngeal swab samples from 720 individuals presenting with an influenza-like syndrome. This group was further sub-divided into two sub-groups. Subgroup 5a included 328 individuals who tested negative for influenza A and B viruses, respiratory syncytial virus and human metapneumovirus by multiplex RT-PCR (Buecher et al., 2010; Arnott et al., 2011), whilst the 392 individuals in subgroup 5b tested positive for one of these viruses. Group 6 consisted of nasopharyngeal swabs from 279 individuals hospitalised with acute lower respiratory tract infections. Two negative control groups were also tested for mammarenavirus RNA. Group 7 comprised influenza A-negative nasopharyngeal specimens obtained from 266 apparently healthy individuals who had had contact with patients with H5N1 infections, while group 8 included nasopharyngeal swabs collected from 238 randomly selected apparently healthy volunteers seeking anti-rabies vaccination at IPC.Statistics usedAll statistical analyses were performed using Stata/SE version 12.0 (StataCorp, TX, USA). Significance was assigned at p<0.05 for all parameters and 95% of confidence interval was used. Categorical variables between groups were compared by Chi2 test or Fisher’s exact test and t-test or Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test were used for continuous variables.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: CRIMEAN-CONGO HEMORRHAGIC FEVER VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Characterization of a novel STAT 2 knock-out hamster model of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus pathogenesis

IntroductionCrimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a segmented, negative-sense RNA virus belonging to the Orthonairovirus genus within the Nairoviridae family. Endemic in Africa, Southeast Europe, the Middle East and Asia, CCHFV causes a severe and sometimes fatal disease in humans with a case fatality rate ranging from 3–80%1–8. CCHFV is transmitted from Hyalomma ticks to humans, wildlife, and livestock9. Transmission can also occur through direct contact with fluids or tissues of infected livestock or patients and can lead to nosocomial outbreaks of CCHFV in the hospital setting. Disease in humans begins as a febrile illness including fever, chills, headache, and muscle soreness, which can either resolve or progress to a hemorrhagic state. The hemorrhagic state includes petechiae, liver necrosis, hemorrhaging of internal organs, shock, and death can occur from multi-organ failure10–15. Neurological illness associated with CCHFV infection has also been documented14–18. Laboratory findings associated with mortality in humans include elevated liver enzymes, thrombocytopenia, intravascular coagulopathy, and cytokine responses5,16,19–29. Though there are no licensed therapeutics to treat CCHFV infection, ribavirin, a nucleoside analog, has demonstrated efficacy against several viruses and has been proposed as a possible treatment. However, its efficacy against CCHFV in humans continues to be the subject of much debate11–13.To improve therapeutic development for CCHFV, animal models of CCHFV pathogenesis used for pre-clinical testing should ideally exhibit both similar clinical signs of human disease and similar laboratory findings associated with mortality in humans. Cynomolgus macaques are the only immunocompetent animal model demonstrating both of these characteristics30. However, the non-human primate model for CCHFV faces limitations for evaluation of medical countermeasures because it is not consistently lethal and is associated with increased cost and limited availability. Adult immunocompromised mice have been established as a cost-effective and practical model for the study of CCHFV pathogenesis and drug evaluation. Signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1 gene knockout (STAT1−/−) mice 31, IFN α/β receptor gene knockout (IFNAR−/−) mice31–34, adult wild-type mice subject to antibody-mediated disruption of type I IFN signalling35, and humanized mice expressing human immune cells (Hu-NSG-SGM3)36 have been established as lethal mouse models of CCHFV infection. While these small animal models have been useful for further understanding CCHFV pathogenesis, they vary in their ability to exhibit similar clinical signs of human disease and similar laboratory findings associated with mortality in humans.Recently, golden Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) devoid of functional STAT2 (STAT2−/−) have demonstrated success in modeling viral infection and have been used to highlight the importance of the type I IFN response in viral control of human adenovirus 37–40. The STAT2 gene deletion in this model was shown to impair type I interferon signalling, impairing gene transcription induced by IFN-α and IFN-β, delaying production of IFNα transcripts, and decreasing the production of MHC-1 transcripts. However, the generation of an antibody and T-cell response were seemingly unchanged38. Furthermore, there were no observed deficiencies in IFN-γ and IL-4 transcripts38. We aimed to expand the repertoire of small animal models available for the study of CCHFV pathogenesis and pre-clinical testing of therapeutics by characterizing the progression of CCHFV-associated disease in a lethal STAT2−/− hamster model.MethodsEthics and biosafetyAll animal work was approved by the Animal Care Committee of the Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health following the guidelines of the Canadian Council for Animal Care. All work with infectious material was conducted in the Biocontainment Level 4 (BSL-4) suite at the National Microbiology Laboratory (Winnipeg, Canada) following approved standard operating procedures.Cells, virus, antivirals, and animalsHuman adrenal gland/cortex SW13 cells (ATCC, VA, USA) were cultured in L15 media (Leibovitz’s L15 media, ThermoFisher Scientific, ON, Canada) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). Cells were incubated in H2O-saturated atmosphere conditions at 37 °C with no CO2. The strain IbAr10200 of CCHFV (Accession No: NC_005300.2, NC_005300.1, NC_005302.3) was a kind gift from the University of Texas Medical Branch (Galveston, Texas). IbAr10200 was cultured in SW13 cells using L15 media supplemented with 1% FBS. Commercial ribavirin (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) was dissolved in PBS for treatment of hamsters. STAT2−/− hamsters were developed and bred at the Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary Sciences at Utah State University41.Hamster infections and treatmentGroups of both male and female STAT2−/− hamsters aged 6–8 weeks were provided by Dr. Zhongde Wang from the Department of Animal, Dairy, and Veterinary Sciences at Utah State University. The STAT2−/− hamster strain comprises F2 homozygotes derived from an LVG golden Syrian hamster female genetically modified by CRISPR/Cas9-mediated mutation of the STAT2 N-terminal domain41. On 0 days post-infection (dpi), hamsters were anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane and virus was delivered by intraperitoneal, intramuscular, or subcutaneous routes of inoculation in 100 µl, 2 × 50 µl, or 200 μl of L15 media, respectively. Clinical signs and weights were recorded daily. On sacrifice days, hamsters were anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane, bled by cardiac puncture and euthanized by anesthetic overdose with isoflurane. Blood was divided for blood chemistries, total cell blood counts, coagulation assays, cytokine profiling, and antibody detection. Tissues were harvested and fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for pathology or homogenized in L15 media and clarified by centrifugation for viral titration on SW13 cells. A set of animals (n = 9) were treated with 100 mg/kg/day of Ribavirin (100 μl) beginning on 1 dpi or 2 dpi. Hamsters were treated with 100 mg/kg/day of Ribavirin for two days and then the dose of Ribavirin was dropped to 75 mg/kg/day for a further 12 days. Trial bleeds were conducted on treated hamsters on 3 dpi and 6 dpi to test for the presence of virus. A set of three animals were humanely euthanized at 8 dpi and serum was collected. Animals were euthanized when they reached humane endpoints, defined as exhibiting multiple of the following signs: Abnormal swelling, protrusion (hernia, rupture), abnormal discharge, severe dehydration, twitching, tremors, convulsions, paralysis, unsteady gait, lameness, muscle flaccidity, rigidity or weakness. Immediate euthanasia was conducted for animals that demonstrated either > 20% weight loss or unresponsiveness. The remaining survivors at the termination of the study (26 dpi) were humanely euthanized and terminally bled for serum collection.Viral titrationsSW13 cells were seeded onto 96-well dishes one day prior to infection. Blood, heart, lung, liver, spleen, and kidney tissues were homogenized in 500 μl of L15/1% FBS using a TissueLyserII at a frequency of 30 for 6 min (QIAGEN, Limburg, Netherlands). The homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min and supernatants were serially diluted in L15/1% FBS. 100 μl of each virus dilution was added to the cells in each well. The presence of viral-induced cytopathic effect (CPE) was read at 7 dpi by the appearance of rounded cells and/or destruction of the monolayer and TCID50 values were calculated according to Spearman-Karber method42. Each biological sample was tested in triplicate.Histopathologic and immunohistochemistry analysisFor histopathological studies, lung, kidney, and heart samples were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 µm and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for examination on the Mirax Midi imaging system. For immunohistochemistry, paraffin tissue sections were rehydrated through a series of xylene and decreasing ethanol concentrations. Antigen retrieval was then performed in Biocare’s Decloaking Chamber using 10 mM Na Citrate 6.0 pH for 15 min at 110 °C. After cooling, protocol was followed according to the manufactures instructions for the Anti-Mouse HRP Cell and Tissue IHC Staining Kit (R&D Systems, CTS002). Slides were blocked both with the peroxidase blocking reagent and serum blocking reagent followed by an avidin block. All rinses were performed with 1X TBS-Tween. The slides were then incubated overnight in a 1:200 dilution of a mouse monoclonal antibody specific for CCHFV nucleoprotein (N) (NR-40257, a gift from BEI resources). Slides were then rinsed again with 1X TBS-Tween and then incubated with the biotinylated secondary antibody supplied by the kit for 30 min, followed by incubation of HSS-HRP for 30 min. DAB was then applied for two minutes and then rinsed with distilled water. Slides were then counterstained with hematoxylin 7,211 (Richard Allen Scientific), dehydrated through a series of increasing ethanol concentrations to xylene and then cover-slipped with Permount mounting medium.Hematologic, coagulation, and blood chemistryComplete blood counts were obtained using a VetScan HM5 (Abaxis Veterinary Diagnostics) as per manufacturer’s instructions and serum biochemistry was analyzed using a VetScan VS2 (Abaxis Veterinary Diagnostics) using comprehensive profile discs in accordance with manufacturer’s instructions. To measure coagulation parameters a Start4 instrument (Diagnostica Stago) was used according to manufacturer’s instructions.ImmunoassaysTo quantify serum IgG raised in STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFV, anti-CCHFV nucleoprotein IgG ELISAs were conducted. Briefly, 96-well half area flat-bottom high-binding microplates (Corning, New York, USA) were coated with recombinant CCHFV nucleoprotein diluted in sodium bicarbonate (50 mM) at a concentration of 1.25 µg/mL and incubated at 4 °C overnight. Wells were washed using PBS-T (PBS, 0.05% Tween-20) and blocked in diluent (PBS, 5% milk, 0.5% Tween-20) at room temperature for 1 h. Serum from STAT2−/− hamsters was two-fold serially diluted in diluent. Diluted samples were added to corresponding wells of the coated ELISA plates and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Plates were washed six times with PBS-T. Goat anti-hamster IgG horse radish peroxidase-conjugated antibody (KPL Inc., Gaithersburg, USA) diluted 1 in 10,000 was added to each well of the microplate. The plates were allowed to incubate at 37 °C for 1 h. Plates were washed six times with PBS-T. ABTS peroxidase substrate (KPL Inc., Gaithersburg, USA) was added to each of the wells of the microplate. Plates were allowed to incubate at room temperature for 30 min. Plates were read at 405 nm using a plate reader. The mean optical densities (ODs) of uninfected hamster serum at each dilution and standard deviations were calculated. Positive binding results for infected hamsters were characterized ODs by being three standard deviations greater than the mean ODs of the uninfected hamster serum at the corresponding dilution. The endpoint titer of a given sample was calculated as the highest dilution giving a positive binding result.Quantitative real-time PCR assay and cytokine analysisRNA was extracted from whole blood following the protocol for Viral RNA Mini kit (QIAGEN, Limburg, Netherlands). cDNA was synthesized using 0.5 µg total RNA following the protocol for RT2 First Strand Kit (QIAGEN, Limburg, Netherlands). Quantitative real-time PCR for cytokine expression was conducted following the protocol for TaqMan Gene Expression Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, California, USA). Primers and probes targeting hamster-specific cytokine genes (IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IP-10, iNOS, β2M, TGF-β, p27, VEGF, TNF-α and IFN-γ), as well as the RPL-18 internal reference gene, were developed previously43 and used at final concentrations of 900-nM and 250-nM, respectively. The final reaction volume was 20 µL and the thermal cycling conditions for the qRT-PCR assay were as follows: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 20 s and annealing/extension at 60 °C for 35 s. The Comparative CT method described previously44 was used to quantify relative cytokine expression.Statistical analysisOne-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported.ResultsSusceptibility of STAT2−/− hamsters to lethal disease via multiple routes of CCHFV infectionIt has been well established that adult, immunocompetent animals including Syrian hamsters are refractory or not susceptible to clinical disease manifestations following inoculation with CCHFV45,46 (Rosenke, Safronetz, Feldmann unpublished data). To establish an alternative small animal model of CCHFV infection, we assessed the susceptibility of STAT2−/− hamsters to 10,000 TCID50 CCHFV inoculation via intraperitoneal, intramuscular, and subcutaneous route. STAT2−/− hamsters demonstrated disease and mortality by all routes of infection tested. Animals infected by the subcutaneous or intraperitoneal routes had a mean time to death of 8.3 dpi and animals infected intramuscularly had a mean time to death of 9.6 dpi (Fig. 1). All animals were euthanized by 12 dpi upon observing the predetermined humane endpoints.Figure 1Assessment of multiple routes of infection of CCHFV in STAT2−/− hamsters. Hamsters were infected with 10,000 TCID50 IbAr10200 CCHFV by either the intraperitoneal, intramuscular or subcutaneous route of infection (n = 3). Percent survival (a) and percent body weight (b) was determined throughout infection was calculated. One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported.Disease course and systemic distribution of CCHFV in STAT2−/− hamstersSince subcutaneous inoculation resulted in lethal infection and more closely mimics the natural route of infection by intradermal tick bite, this route was used for all subsequent experiments. We inoculated STAT2−/− hamsters with ten-fold serial dilutions of virus and monitored for weight loss and clinical signs of disease to establish the median (50%) lethal dose (LD50) of CCHFV administered subcutaneously and characterize the time course and signs of disease progression. The CCHFV strain IbAr10200 had an LD50 of 1 TCID50 IFU, with 50% of animals succumbing to infection between 10 and 22 dpi (Fig. 2a). This is similar to those described or inferred from previous reports using immunodeficient murine models, often with different viral titration methods and inoculation routes 31–34 though hamsters demonstrated a prolonged disease course. Hamsters typically died between 9 and 13 dpi when inoculated with 10 and 100 TCID50 IFU, doses which consistently killed 100% of animals (Fig. 2a). Animals with fatal disease typically showed significant weight loss (> 20%) (Fig. 2b). Additionally euthanasia decisions were based on a combination of other clinical manifestations, some or all of which were present days prior to euthanasia (hunched posture, ruffled and dull coat condition, aggressive behaviour, severe dehydration, lethargy, laboured breathing, disorientation and jerky movements) or immediately perimortem (righting reflex issues and/or hind limb paralysis, approximately 70% of animals; visible ocular, anal, or petechial hemorrhaging, approximately 40%).Figure 2LD50 determination and virus distribution of CCHFV in STAT2−/− hamsters. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with various doses of IbAr10200 CCHFV (n = 6). Percent survival (a) and percent body weight (b) was determined. In a follow-up study, hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of CCHFV, humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point) and cardiac blood, heart, lungs, liver, spleen and kidneys were harvested and tittered for the presence of CCHFV on SW13 cells (c). One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported.To characterize viral replication and tropism in the STAT2−/− hamster model of CCHFV infection, hamsters were infected subcutaneously with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of CCHFV and serially sampled on 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi for temporal analysis of viral kinetics. Blood and organs were harvested and analyzed for the presence of virus (Fig. 2c). Virus was detected in all samples tested but was found at the highest levels in the lung, liver and spleen. Virus replication peaked in the blood at 8 dpi and then declined on 10 dpi, the termination point of the study (Fig. 2c). The levels of virus found in the heart and kidney appeared to follow a similar trend as with the blood, where a decline at later time points was observed (Fig. 2c). However, viral replication continued to increase in the spleen, lungs, and to a lesser degree in the liver (Fig. 2c), despite the decreasing replication elsewhere.Pathological findings in STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFVGross pathological changes were observed in organs of STAT2−/− hamsters infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of CCHFV during disease progression. Compared to control animals, enlarged spleens were first observed at 4 dpi, the appearance of pale livers and kidneys started at 6 dpi, and the development of hemorrhages on the skin and surface of the liver were noticed between 8 and 10 dpi. Histopathology and IHC analysis were performed on the liver, spleen, lungs, kidney and heart tissues of infected and mock-infected animals collected at each time-point. Tissues from all mock-infected animals exhibited normal pathology and no viral antigen was detected at any time-point (Figs. 3, 4, 5). Histologic examination showed the liver and spleen to be the primary organs of infection with pathologic changes apparent beginning on 4 dpi and increasing over the course of the disease (Figs. 3, 4). Liver contained multiple foci of hepatocellular necrosis and inflammation throughout the tissue by 6 dpi (Fig. 3). By 8 dpi loss of hepatic architecture, necrosis and areas of intense inflammatory infiltration were extensive (Fig. 3). Staining for CCHFV antigen was not detected at 2 dpi but by 4 dpi small numbers of hepatocytes, either alone or in small groups, had cytoplasmic immunoreactivity in at least 50% of hamsters (Fig. 3). At least 40% of hepatocytes stained positive for CCHFV antigen by 8 dpi. Loss of lymphocytes was observed in splenic white pulp in addition to some infiltration of neutrophils starting at 4 dpi when staining of viral antigen was apparent within foci of cells (Fig. 4). By 6 dpi virus immunoreactivity was prominent throughout the tissue. No discernable virus induced pathology was noted in the kidney, heart and lungs of either mock- or infected hamsters (Fig. 5). However, immunoreactive cells were widespread in lung tissues, particularly the epithelial and endothelial cells and alveolar septal cells, from 6 dpi onwards (Fig. 5). Individual or small foci of cells stained positive for CCHFV antigen in kidney and heart tissues (Fig. 5).Figure 3Liver histopathology and immunohistochemistry evaluation of STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFV. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals were humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point) with liver samples harvested at each time point. Tissues were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or with a mouse antibody against the CCHFV NP antigen. Pathologic changes and viral staining were apparent by day 4 post infection and increased over time. The liver displayed foci of hepatocellular necrosis and inflammation by 4 dpi which was extensive throughout the tissue by day 6 after infection. Bar = 200 µm.Figure 4Spleen histopathology and immunohistochemistry evaluation of STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFV. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals were humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point) with spleen samples harvested at each time point. Tissues were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or with a mouse antibody against the CCHFV NP antigen. Pathologic changes and viral staining were apparent by day 4 post infection and increased over time. Marked loss of white pulp and virus staining was evident in spleen tissue by day 4 after infection. Bar = 200 µm.Figure 5Immunohistochemistry evaluation of STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFV. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals were humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point) and lungs, kidneys and heart were harvested. Tissues were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or with a mouse antibody against the CCHFV NP antigen. Shown are representative images from animals 8 dpi, approximately two days after initial antigen staining appeared in these tissues and a time corresponding to peak antigen staining. No virus-induced pathology was noted in the kidney, heart or lungs of either mock- or infected hamsters. Immunoreactive cells for CCHFV antigen were widespread in lung tissues, particularly the epithelial and endothelial cells and alveolar septal cells, from day 6 onwards. Small foci or individual cells stained in kidney and heart tissues. Bar = 50 µm.Serological findings in STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFVDuring disease progression, significant increases in circulating white blood cells were observed in CCHFV-infected animals compared to control animals at 6, 8 and 10 dpi, with a spike in lymphocytes observed at the termination time point, 10 dpi (Fig. 6). Monocytes demonstrated an upward trend over time but the only statistically significant increase compared to control animals occurred at 8 dpi (Fig. 6). The presence of circulating neutrophils in the blood spiked at 6 and 8 dpi and then returned to baseline at 10 dpi when the experiment was terminated, suggesting possible early release of neutrophils from the bone marrow, exhaustion of neutrophil production, or stress-related demargination causing the rapid influx of neutrophils into the blood and then the rapid infiltration into tissues (Fig. 6). The latter supports our pathology data, which first detected neutrophils in the spleen at 4 dpi. Red blood cells, and hemoglobin levels were unaffected by infection. Platelet counts, however, were affected by infection and demonstrated a complex pattern, with a steadily decreasing trend between 0 and 6 dpi, followed by a significant elevation by 10 dpi (Fig. 6).Figure 6Hematology assessment in CCHFV-infected STAT2−/− hamsters. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals were humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point) and whole blood was collected and total cell counts were determined. One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared to mock-infected animals.Blood chemistries were assessed throughout CCHFV infection in STAT2−/− hamsters. Albumin (Alb) and total protein (TP) decreased over the course of disease; however, globulin levels began to increase at later time points (Fig. 7), suggesting that protein synthesis remained functional and the decrease in Alb and TP was due to losses from the digestive or renal systems. While not statistically significant, ALT levels were elevated at early time points during infection indicative of early signs of liver damage (Fig. 7). ALP levels were significantly elevated at later time points, suggesting widespread tissue dysfunction given its released from multiple sources: liver, heart and muscle tissue (Fig. 7). This finding is supported by the pathology findings observed, describing late-stage liver cirrhosis due to infection with CCHFV in the STAT2−/− hamsters. BUN, creatinine and K + levels make it unclear whether renal function is affected, even though there was active virus replication, visual changes in kidney tissue colouration, and foci of CCHFV-specific immunoreactivity in the tissues of the kidneys.Figure 7Evaluation of clinical blood chemistries of STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFV. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals were humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point) and serum was collected and various biochemical markers were assessed. One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared to mock-infected animals.Blood coagulation factors were assessed from fresh plasma at the time of sample collection. Increasing clotting times were observed for prothrombin and activated partial thromboplastin (Fig. 8). Thrombin times remained stable except for a transient decline in clotting time at 4 dpi and then returned to baseline levels. Interestingly, this decline at 4 dpi correlated with a significant increase in fibrinogen concentrations while at all other time points, baseline levels were maintained. There were no statistically significant changes in the percentage of protein C, although the pattern of changes is noteworthy. Levels increased from baseline to 4 dpi, became exhausted at 6 dpi, and then continued to increase until the time of termination (Fig. 8). These results could be indicative of disseminated intravascular coagulation. The ability to replenish the protein levels also indicate that protein synthesis remains intact, while decreased levels are caused by protein consumption or loses.Figure 8Observing of coagulation parameters following CCHFV infection in STAT2−/− hamsters. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals were humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point). Fibrinogen, thrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin time and protein C percentages were measured. One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared to mock-infected animals.Immunological findings in STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFVSince immunological reagents for hamsters are limited, RNA was extracted from whole blood and various cytokine/chemokine transcript levels were assessed by quantitative RT-PCR. We tested 14 different cytokines and chemokines and were unsuccessful at detecting mRNA transcripts or were unable to calculate a fold change due to undetectable baseline levels in the mock-infected animals for six of the cytokines (IL2, IL4, IL6, IL10, IP10, and iNOS). However, we were able to detect and calculate fold changes for 8 of the cytokines we assessed (Fig. 9a). Bcl2, Mx2 and VEGF did not show any significant changes in their transcript levels; however, β2M, TGFβ, p27, TNFα and IFNγ transcripts were upregulated at various time points during infection (Fig. 9a). The presence of β2M, TGFβ,and TNFα transcripts were significantly upregulated in the blood at early time points during infection, usually between 2 and 4 dpi; while, p27 transcripts were increased at later time points during infection at 8 dpi, and finally IFNγ transcripts were significantly upregulated at both 4 and 8 dpi (Fig. 9a). These results suggest that some innate immune responses mounted upon infection remained functional in the immunodeficient STAT2−/− hamster model. Since cytokine activation was limited we wanted to determine whether this model was also capable of producing an adaptive antibody response. Attempts at generating an ELISA to detect anti-CCHFV IgM antibodies were unsuccessful. However, we were able to develop an anti-CCHFV IgG assay and serum collected from infected animals was assayed. Anti-CCHFV nucleoprotein-specific IgG antibodies were detected in 60% of hamsters at 8 dpi and 100% of hamsters had detectable levels at 10 dpi (Fig. 9b). These data demonstrate that while some aspects of the immune response are impaired by the knock out of the STAT2 gene, these animals were still capable of developing antibodies targeting CCHFV nucleoprotein in response to infection.Figure 9Immune responses following CCHFV infection in STAT2−/− hamsters. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals were humanely euthanized at 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 dpi (n = 5/time point). Fold changes of β2M, Mx2, TGF-β, VEGF, p27, TNF-α, Bcl-2, and IFN-γ were calculated (a). One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, compared to mock-infected animals. Reciprocal endpoint dilutions (b) were expressed as the reciprocal of the lowest serum dilution giving a positive binding result compared with the negative control. The mean and standard error is shown for each time point.Application in antiviral evaluationThe efficacy of ribavirin for the treatment of CCHFV infection remains the subject of much debate in both human cases and existing small animal models. To evaluate the utility of the STAT2−/− hamster model to test therapeutics against CCHFV, hamsters were infected with 100 LD50 of CCHFV (100 TCID50) and treated with ribavirin beginning on either 1 or 2 dpi. Hamsters were treated with a loading dose of 100 mg/kg/day of ribavirin for two days and then the dose of ribavirin was dropped to 75 mg/kg/day for 12 additional days. All ribavirin-treated animals survived infection, showed no signs of weight loss, and were terminated on 26 dpi at the completion of the study, while all PBS treated animals demonstrated rapid weight loss and were humanely euthanized by 10 dpi (Fig. 10a,b). Viremia was detected in treated animals at 3 and/or 6 dpi but not at 26 dpi (Fig. 10c). When the presence of anti-CCHFV IgG antibodies were assessed, 2 of the 6 ribavirin-treated animals had detectable levels at 8 dpi and 100% of animals that began treatment at 2 dpi still had detectable levels at 26 dpi, while animals that began treatment 1 dpi had no detectable antibody levels (Fig. 10d).Figure 10Efficacy determination of Ribavirin treatment on STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFV. Hamsters were subcutaneously infected with 100 LD50 (100 TCID50) of IbAr10200 CCHFV. Animals received two daily 100 mg/kg doses of Ribavirin beginning on 1 (n = 9)or 2 dpi (n-9), the daily dose was then reduced to 75 mg/kg and administered for a further 12 days. Percent survival (a) and weight loss (b) was monitored daily (n = 6). Trial bleeds were collected from hamsters on day 3 and 6 (n = 3) and terminal bleeds were conducted at the termination of the experiment (n = 6). Viremia was determined by TCID50 (c). One-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons tests was performed using GraphPad Prism version 8.0.0 for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego California USA, www.graphpad.com). Means and standard errors are reported. (d) Three animals were euthanized on 8 dpi and the remaining six animals were euthanized at the termination of the study on 26 dpi. The presence of CCHFV-specific IgG antibodies were detected from serum. Reciprocal endpoint dilutions were expressed as the reciprocal of the lowest serum dilution giving a positive binding result compared with the negative control. The mean and standard error is shown for each time point.DiscussionCCHFV is a zoonotic virus that causes disease in humans and in severe cases leads to death. With the growing understanding of prognostic factors that predict mortality in human CCHFV cases, the ideal animal model for the evaluation of therapeutic agents should exhibit similar signs and laboratory findings in order to better predict drug efficacy in humans. In this study, we established the first lethal hamster model for the study of CCHFV disease and pathogenesis. Lethally infected STAT2−/− hamsters exhibit extended time to death (9–13 dpi) compared with the STAT1−/−31 and IFNAR−/−32–34 mouse models of CCHFV which succumb to illness at 2–5 dpi, but shorter than the Hu-NSG-SGM3 humanized mouse model (13–23 dpi)36. CCHFV infection in the STAT2−/− hamsters consists of an incubation period between 1 and 5 dpi where there are no clinical signs of infection, followed by the manifestation of disease on day 6 post-infection which continues until the animals reach their euthanasia endpoints. This finding aligns well with the time course of human fatalities, which includes an incubation time of 1–13 days, followed by a disease state for 5–14 days prior to death47.The STAT2−/− hamster model for CCHFV infection demonstrated signs of human infection not yet characterized in previous small animal models. To our knowledge, this is the first small animal model for CCHFV in which splenomegaly, petechial rash and orbital bleeding were observed. These findings align with studies identifying petechiae as a prognostic factor in human CCHFV infections15,18, as well as a recent study characterizing CCHFV infection in non-human primates30. Furthermore, this model also captures clinical signs that are associated with neurologic illness observed in some human cases48–53 and characterized in the Hu-NSG-SGM3 humanized mouse model36. Future CCHFV studies using the STAT2−/− hamster model may investigate whether these observations are significant between infected and non-infected animals, as well as surviving and non-surviving animals.Decreased fibrinogen, prothrombin elongation, and activated partial thromboplastin time are coagulation findings associated with mortality in human cases of CCHFV14,15,18. Similarly, the STAT2−/− hamster model established in this study exhibits a similar dysregulation of both the extrinsic (prothrombin elongation) and intrinsic (activated partial thromboplastin elongation) coagulation pathways upon infection, whereas IFNAR−/− mice only demonstrate increased clotting times for activated partial thromboplastin and no change in prothrombin clotting times34. In contrast, fibrinogen is increased upon infection in this model, similar to findings observed in the IFNAR−/− mouse model34, but not observed in human cases. This finding also correlated with a decrease in thrombin clotting time, suggesting an abundance of fibrinogen substrate for the production of fibrin by thrombin. Both fibrinogen and thrombin levels returned to baseline levels at 6 dpi and for the duration of infection. This increase in fibrinogen for both the IFNAR−/− and STAT2−/− models may be a rodent-specific observation. Alternatively, fibrinogen is a marker of early inflammation; therefore, it is possible we are observing a spurious increase rather than a true rise in coagulopathy. Thrombocytopenia is a significant prognostic factor in human CCHF cases which has also been demonstrated in the STAT1−/−, IFNAR−/− and humanized mouse models for CCHFV infection. As expected, there was an observed trend of platelet decline in the STAT2−/− hamsters by 6 dpi, but interestingly peaked again by 10 dpi. To date, it remains controversial whether an increase or decrease in white blood cells (leukocytosis and leukopenia, respectively) is associated with mortality in human CCHF cases. In contrast to the STAT1−/− mouse model which displays leukopenia, the STAT2−/− hamster exhibits an increase in white blood cells similar to the Hu-NSG-SGM3 humanized mouse model upon infection. A decline in liver function is a hallmark of hemorrhagic fever viruses54–59. The pattern of liver disease was notable in the STAT2−/− hamsters. We observed a significant amount of viral replication and pathology in the liver in infected hamsters. ALT levels demonstrated relatively little increase compared to the extent of damage seen by pathology. This could be due to an insensitive ALT assay or very rapid progression to liver damage, making the brief ALT rise difficult to observe. Together, this demonstrates the onset of liver failure due to infection with CCHFV and mimics the findings observed in humans and in the IFNAR−/− and STAT1−/− mouse models14–16,18,31,34.As expected, the STAT2−/− hamsters exhibited impairment in the Type 1 IFN response, shown by a lack of change in the expression of bcl-2 and absence of iNOS and IP-10 induction upon infection. However, similar to the STAT1−/− and IFNAR−/− mice, the STAT2−/− hamsters developed an increase in TNF-α, a prognostic factor in human CCHF cases17. Unfortunately, we were unable to observe any changes in IL-6 and IL-8, which are also predictive indicators of mortality in humans. At 2 dpi, we observed a significant increase in expression of β2M, a plasma protein subunit of MHC class I and other class I-like molecules (CD1, Qa) in humans. β2M is upregulated and shed by lymphocytes upon stimulation with IFN-γ, which occurred in the STAT2−/− hamsters upon infection60. The increase in β2M could suggest T-cell activation, which is elicited by a variety of viral infections61 and remains functional in this immunodeficient model of infection. We also assessed the ability of this model to generate CCHFV-specific antibodies. Presence of anti-CCHFV IgG antibodies was first detected at 8 dpi, a late stage of infection. After treatment with ribavirin we were able to detect the presence of CCHFV-specific antibodies at 8 dpi in 33% of animals and then 100% of animals that began treatment 2 dpi had detectable levels of CCHFV-specific antibodies at 26 dpi. The presences of antibodies in the other models were neither assessed nor detected31,32,34,36. The ability of the STAT2−/− hamster model to generate antibodies in response to infection is encouraging and would suggest that this platform could be used to not only test for potential therapeutic agents but also vaccine candidates.Finally, we showed that ribavirin could prevent mortality of STAT2−/− hamsters infected with CCHFV, demonstrating the model’s ability to be used for the evaluation of promising CCHFV therapeutic candidates. The efficacy of ribavirin against CCHFV mortality demonstrated in this study aligns with the results of a similar evaluation in which 100% of STAT1−/− mice were protected from CCHFV challenge when ribavirin treatment was initiated at 1 dpi31. In contrast, ribavirin was ineffective in IFNAR−/− mice, demonstrating only 14% survival when administered on 0 dpi33. The latter study implemented a different CCHFV isolate and may explain the change in outcome. However, a recent study using the same IFNAR−/− mouse platform demonstrated similar results, a 0% and a 33% survival rate when IbAr10200 and Hoti strains were employed, respectively, suggesting that ribavirin may not be a suitable candidate for the treatment of CCHFV infection or that its success may be model dependent62. The ambiguous efficacy of ribavirin in preventing fatality in animal models mirrors that in humans, which shows benefit in some studies but ineffectiveness in others5,11,63–68. However, these findings may provide insights into host factors that work synergistically or antagonistically with ribavirin treatment. Furthermore, the heterogeneity in ribavirin efficacy in humans may be in part due to relatively late administration of the treatment. This animal model could be used to define a window of efficacy for ribavirin, which could better inform clinical practice.The STAT2−/− hamster model of CCHFV infection builds upon findings from previous rodent models and demonstrates a comprehensive disease profile mimicking many aspects of human infection. The model was able to recapitulate a variety of clinical signs observed in humans, with the visualization of petechial rash and orbital hemorrhaging being unique characteristics that makes it distinctive from other animal models. Additionally, the presence of altered liver enzymes, coagulation markers and changes in cell blood counts are also representative of the disease profile in humans. This lethal model demonstrates viremia and widespread virus replication throughout a variety of organ systems. Furthermore, the ability of this model to generate an antibody response and the ability to respond to antiviral treatment suggest that the STAT2−/− hamster would be a suitable model for the evaluation of promising antiviral drug and vaccine candidates.


Title: Dynamics of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus in two wild ungulate hosts during a disease-induced population collapse

1IntroductionMost emerging pathogens, including zoonotic agents, can infect multiple species [1]. Identifying the role of host species in pathogen transmission in a particular system is crucial for disease control [2]. This is particularly challenging for vector-borne and multi-host pathogens since interactions among the pathogen, vectors, and multiple hosts add layers of complexity to these systems [3]. Understanding the transmission dynamics is even more difficult when wildlife species are involved because information on morbidity, mortality, or infection susceptibility of those species is difficult to obtain [4].Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is a vector-borne pathogen mainly transmitted by Hyalomma spp. ticks, which are in expansion in southern Europe [5]. In humans, CCHFV infection can cause a fatal hemorrhagic systemic disease [6]. The natural cycle of CCHFV involves ticks of different stages that feed on several domestic and wild animal species, and occasionally on humans. Hyalomma spp. larvae and nymph stages usually feed on small mammals such as lagomorphs, hedgehogs, or rodents, or on ground-feeding birds, while adults mostly feed on wild and domestic ungulates [7]. Immature stages of some Hyalomma spp. can occasionally feed on ungulates when small mammals are not abundant [8]. Ticks acquire the virus through co-feeding or feeding on viremic hosts, and through transovarian and transstadial transmission. As Hyalomma spp. ticks become infected for life, they are considered both vectors and reservoirs of CCHFV [9]. Therefore, while other tick species have been attributed a role in CCHFV transmission, it is assumed that only Hyalomma spp. ticks are able to maintain an active focus of CCHFV [9]. Since CCHFV infected animals are asymptomatic with short viremias, serological surveys are essential to investigate CCHFV eco-epidemiology in wildlife, define endemic areas, and assess the exposure of potential hosts [10].In Spain, by 2022, twelve Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) cases in humans have been diagnosed since the first one in 2013, and CCHF is considered an emerging infectious disease [11]. In central and southern Spain, red deer (Cervus elaphus) is considered an indicator of CCHFV infection risk, and it is the species that presents the highest CCHFV seroprevalences [12]. In contrast, in the northern and eastern Mediterranean regions of Spain (Catalonia and Valencian Community, respectively), where red deer is absent or scarce, hotspots of CCHFV exposure in wild ungulates have also been detected [13,14]. A serological study on CCHFV carried out between 2014 and 2020 in Catalonia detected a focus of high antibody seropositivity in Iberian ibex (Capra pyrenaica) in Ports de Tortosa i Beseit Natural Park (PTiBNP), with a lower seroprevalence in Eurasian wild boar (Sus scrofa) [13]. These two ungulates are the most abundant wild mammalian species that host adult ticks in the PTiBNP, while other species such as roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) or red deer are scarce and absent, respectively [15]. Antibodies against CCHFV were not detected in wildlife, including Iberian ibex and wild boars, from areas of Catalonia far from this hotspot [13]. Another study carried out in the Valencian region (to the south of Catalonia) detected two other hotspots of CCHFV [14]. A high seropositivity (> 90%) was detected in wild ruminants, in Iberian ibex in both foci and in mouflon (Ovis aries musimon) which was present only in one of the foci; while a much lower seroprevalence (<20%) was detected in wild boars. In these two CCHFV foci of the Valencian region, the seroprevalences and the populations of Iberian ibexes and wild boars have not fluctuated significantly in the last 10 years [14,16]. Those findings suggest that Iberian ibexes, wild boars and occasionally mouflons, are involved in the CCHFV circulation in the eastern Mediterranean region. However, little is known about the distribution and abundance of CCHFV-competent tick species in this region.In 2014, an outbreak of sarcoptic mange was detected in Iberian ibex in the PTiBNP surrounding area, presumably introduced by local livestock [17]. Sarcoptic mange is a skin disease caused by Sarcoptes scabiei mite, which excavates the superficial epidermal layers causing a catabolic systemic inflammatory disease that leads to high mortalities, especially in wild Caprinae populations [18]. The sarcoptic mange epidemic in the PTiBNP progressed slowly but ended up in an 86.1% reduction of the Iberian ibex population by 2021 (Departament d'Acció Climàtica, Alimentació i Agenda Rural (DACC), i.e., Department of Climate Action, Food and Rural Agenda, personal communication).Since the abundance of wild ungulates seems to have a significant effect on the risk of exposure to CCHFV [19], this sarcoptic mange outbreak represented an interesting scenario to evaluate how changes in the community of hosts modulated the transmission of CCHFV. Therefore, we designed a retrospective multi-year cross-sectional study to evaluate the trends of CCHFV seroprevalence in both Iberian ibexes and wild boars, as well as their population trends between 2013 and 2022. Understanding the dynamics of CCHFV in an area also requires knowledge about the structure of the local community of ticks, known or potential vectors of CCHFV. Thus, we carried out a field study to identify the tick species present in the PTiBNP, particularly focusing on the detection of CCHFV vectors. Moreover, some meteorological factors are known to influence the transmission of CCHFV, either through the effect on viral replication and spread within the tick (mainly determined by temperature), or through the effect of meteorological factors on tick abundance. Therefore, we also evaluated whether changes in those factors throughout the study period may have influenced the dynamics of CCHFV transmission in the PTiBNP.2MethodsPTiBNP (40°48′28”N, 0°19′7″E) is a calcareous mountain range with highly complex orography characterized by valleys, ravines and steep gradients. The main habitats are pine and oak forests with altitudes ranging from 300 to 1442 m above sea level. The predominant ungulate species are Iberian ibex and wild boar whereas roe deer is found in much lower densities [15]. We selected all available serum samples of wild boars (n = 288) and Iberian ibexes (n = 88) collected in the PTiBNP between 2013 and 2022 as part of the routine wildlife disease surveillance in Catalonia. Some of these samples had been tested, and the results were published in Espunyes et al. [13]. No samples from Iberian ibexes were available between 2014 and 2017 due to a hunting ban because of the detection of sarcoptic mange. Samples were analyzed using the CCHF Double Antigen Multi-species ELISA kit (iDvet, Montpellier, France), which has a sensitivity of 98.9% (CI95%: 96.8%–99.8%) and a specificity of 100% (CI95%: 99.8%–100%) [20]. Data on the population trends of Iberian ibex and of wild boar in the PTiBNP were provided by the DACC of the Government of Catalonia. Wild boar densities (animals/km2) were estimated based on the method developed by Sáez-Royuela and Tellería using data from collective hunts [21]. Iberian ibex censuses were obtained through total counts, except for 2016 and 2017 when the counts could not be carried out in the whole area, and estimates were obtained by linear regression.Annual CCHFV seroprevalences were grouped according to hunting seasons (September– April) with their 95% exact confidence intervals. In order to evaluate whether the seroprevalences in Iberian ibex and wild boar followed any (increasing, decreasing, or unchanged) trend throughout the study period, a chi-squared test for trend [22], was carried out. Mann-Kendall tests were performed to evaluate the trends in the densities of Iberian ibex and wild boar [23]. Finally, considering the non-parametric nature of the data, a Spearman's rank correlation test was carried out to evaluate a possible correlation between the seroprevalences of CCHFV in wild boar and the densities of Iberian ibex. To account for the small number of observations (six, i.e., 2016–2017 to 2021–2022), the p-value was adjusted based on the exact distribution [24]. All statistical analyses were carried out using R software version 4.2.1 [25], and packages tidyverse [26], binom [27] and trend [28].To assess whether meteorological factors may have impacted the dynamics of CCHFV in the PTiBNP, we used a knowledge-driven modelling approach (i.e., based on the existing knowledge about the causal relationships with the pathogen of interest) [29]. We selected ambient temperature and water vapor pressure deficit in the atmosphere (VPD) as the factors to be evaluated for their potential effect on the dynamics of CCHFV transmission in the PTiBNP [19,30]. Ambient temperature influences the replication and spread of the virus within ticks and also regulates tick development. VPD influences tick mortality and has been found to be more relevant in defining the niche of ixodid ticks such as H. marginatum than other water-related variables such as evapotranspiration or soil humidity [30]. Hourly temperature data for the area (PTiBNP) and period of study (2009–2023) was obtained from Copernicus Climate Change Service [31] and averaged to obtain mean temperatures by month, while monthly VPD values were obtained from TerraClimate (http://www.climatologylab.org/terraclimate.html, accessed June 2023). We also calculated accumulated temperature and VPD in the complete year and accumulated VPD in winter [30] for the hunting seasons 2016–2017 to 2021–2022. To evaluate the trends of those three measures, Mann-Kendall tests were carried out, while possible correlations between those measures and the seroprevalences of CCHFV in wild boar, were evaluated by Spearman's rank correlation tests, with adjusted p-values [24].Sampling of questing ticks was performed by dragging a 1 × 1 m white cloth through the vegetation in three different 1 km transects [32], all in areas where both wild boar and Iberian ibex were known to be present. Furthermore, six (two per transect) carbon dioxide-based traps (CO2 traps) baited with dry ice were placed on 50 × 50 cm white cloths, to target species with host-seeking behavior (e.g., adult Hyalomma spp.) [33]. CO2 traps were placed at least 200 m far from each dragging transect and left for 2 h. Cloth-dragging and CO2 trapping were performed three times in the same transects during May and July 2023. Moreover, we collected ticks from wild boars (n = 7) hunted by rangers from the PTiBNP as a part of a wild boar population control program, during May and June 2023. Adults and nymphs were identified alive after collection using 35× and 64× magnifying lenses and taxonomic keys [34]. Data from ticks collected on Iberian ibex from PTiBNP in Varela-Castro et al. [35] is also displayed in a table for a more comprehensive comparison.3ResultsThroughout the study period, 100% of the Iberian ibexes tested had antibodies against CCHFV. Regarding wild boars, the seroprevalence gradually declined throughout hunting seasons (66.7% in 2016–2017 to 4.2% in 2021–2022; Table 1, Fig. 1). This trend in seroprevalence reduction was statistically significant (Χ2 (df = 1) = 59.9, p < 0.0001). The census of Iberian ibexes also had a statistically significant decreasing trend (tau = −0.64, p = 0.0028), but no statistically significant trend was observed for the density of wild boars (p = 0.80) or the seroprevalence in Iberian ibexes (p = 1.0) (Fig. 1). However, there was a statistically significant (Spearman's) correlation (rs) between the seroprevalences of CCHFV in wild boar and the abundance of Iberian ibexes during the study period (rs = 0.942, 0.02 < p-adjusted<0.05).Table 1Seropositivity against CCHFV in Iberian ibex and wild boar in the Ports de Tortosa i Beseit Natural Park by hunting season. Data is displayed by n° of positives / total; seroprevalence percentage (95% exact confidence interval), − no samples available. Hunting seasons 2014–2015 and 2015–2016 are not included in the table because there were no samples available. * Part of these results were already published in Espunyes et al. (2021) [13].Table 1SeasonIberian ibexWild boar2012–201313 / 13; 100% (75.3% - 100.0%)–2013–20149 / 9; 100% (66.4% - 100.0%)–2016–2017–4 / 6; 66.7% (22.3% - 95.7%)2017–2018*16 / 16; 100% (79.4% - 100.0%)23 / 47; 48.9% (34.1% - 63.9%)2018–2019*41 / 41; 100% (91.4% - 100.0%)18 / 31; 58.1% (39.1% - 75.4%)2019–2020*9 / 9; 100% (66.4% - 100.0%)15 / 54; 27.8% (16.5% - 41.6%)2020–2021–7 / 78; 8.8% (3.7% - 17.6%)2021–2022–3 / 72; 4.2% (0.9% - 11.7%)Total88 / 88; 100% (95.9% - 100.0%)66 / 288; 22.9% (18.2% - 28.2%)Fig. 1A: Trends in the seroprevalences of CCHFV antibodies in Iberian ibexes and wild boars (with their 95% confidence intervals), in relation to Iberian ibex censuses for the period between 2009 and 2022 in Ports de Tortosa i Beseit Natural Park (PTiBNP). B: Trend in the census of wild boars for the same area and period. The dotted vertical line indicates sarcoptic mange introduction in the surrounding of PTiBNP (2014). Grey dashed line with asterisks in Iberian ibex census trend indicates the years when total animal counts were obtained through linear regression (with the previous and the next animal counts). Grey area indicates the study period.Fig. 1A total of 499 ticks were harvested from the vegetation, 250 by dragging and 249 by CO2 traps. Among them, 367 (89.2%) were Rhipicephalus bursa, while Haemaphysalis punctata, Rhipicephalus sanguineus sensu lato (s.l.) and Hyalomma marginatum were less frequent (Table 2). One single specimen of Dermacentor marginatus and another of Rhipicephalus pusillus were also found.Table 2Ticks collected from vegetation and wild boars during May and July 2023 (present study), and from Iberian ibex during 2011–2015 (Valera-Castro et al. [35]) in Ports de Tortosa i Beseit Natural Park (PTiBNP).Table 2Tick speciesQuesting and host-seeking ticksWild boars (n = 7) (%)Iberian ibex (n = 134) (%) (Results from Varela-Castro et al., (2018))DraggingCO2-trapTotal (%)Rhipicephalus bursa206239445 (89.2%)53 (44.9%)601 (89.8%)Haemaphysalis punctata28432 (6.4%)–23 (3.4%)Rhipicephalus sanguineus s.l.13215 (3.0%)34 (28.8.%)5 (0.8%)Hyalomma marginatum235 (1.0%)24 (20.4%)1 (0.2%)Dermacentor marginatus–11 (0.2%)1 (0.8%)11 (1.6%)Rhipicephalus pusillus1–1 (0.2%)––Hyalomma lusitanicum–––6 (5.1%)–Haemaphysalis sulcata––––28 (4.2%)Total250249499118669A total of 118 ticks were collected from wild boars, with Rhipicephalus bursa being the most abundant (44.9%) and present in all the individuals, followed by Rhipicephalus sanguineus (28.8%) and Hyalomma marginatum (20.4%). Six Hyalomma lusitanicum (5.1%) and one Dermacentor marginatus (0.8%) were also identified (Table 2).The results of the monthly temperatures and the monthly VPD values in the PTiBNP for the period 2009 to 2022 showed a rather regular pattern (Fig. 2). None of the cumulative meteorological variables showed any statistically significant trend: annual accumulated temperature (tau = −0.33, p = 0.45), annual accumulated VPD (tau = −0.07, p = 1.00), and accumulated VPD in winter (tau = 0.33, p = 0.45). Moreover, none of them was correlated with the seroprevalence of CCHFV in wild boars: annual accumulated temperature (rs = 0.26, 0.2 < p-adjusted<0.5), annual accumulated VPD (rs = 0.09, 0.5 < p-adjusted), and accumulated VPD in winter (rs = 0.26, 0.2 < p-adjusted<0.5).Fig. 2Monthly vapor pressure deficit (VPD) in kilopascal (kPa) (green) and temperature in Celsius (orange) from 2009 to 2022. Grey area indicates the study period between 2016 and 2022. The dotted vertical line indicates sarcoptic mange introduction in PTiBNP (2014). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)Fig. 24DiscussionThe epidemiology of CCHF is complex and spatiotemporally heterogeneous since biotic (host-vector-pathogen) and abiotic (e.g., climate, habitat) interactions vary among ecosystems [36]. Identifying the main drivers for the transmission of CCHFV in different systems is critical to implement measures to reduce the risk to people.Red deer is considered an indicator of CCHFV infection risk in extensive areas of central and southern Spain [12]. However, in the eastern Mediterranean ecoregion the density of red deer is low and, in the PTiBNP, CCHFV circulation involved Iberian ibex and wild boar, although with different levels of seroprevalence [13]. Our repeated cross-sectional study in the PTiBNP showed that the seroprevalence of CCHFV in Iberian ibex remained at 100% even though sarcoptic mange dramatically reduced its population. In contrast, the CCHFV seroprevalence in wild boars decreased significantly yet its density did not show any increasing or decreasing trend. In fact, the reduction in the seroprevalence of CCHFV in wild boars was found to be significantly correlated to the decrease in the abundance of Iberian ibexes. This correlation suggests a possible connection between the CCHFV transmission cycles in Iberian ibex and wild boar, potentially through the sharing of common tick vectors.The influence of the community of ungulates on CCHFV transmission was evidenced by the results of Cuadrado-Matías et al. [19], who found that the abundance of hosts was the most influential determinant of the inter-annual variation in CCHFV exposure risk. However, the precise mechanism that explains the epidemiological scenario in the PTiBNP is difficult to ascertain. Whether Iberian ibexes can develop a CCHFV viremia after the bite of an infected tick and then transmit the virus to uninfected ticks — potentially amplifying the viral infection in parasitizing ticks — is not known. In that case, the reduction of the population of Iberian ibexes would have decreased the number of infected ticks available to transmit CCHFV to wild boars. The few CCHFV experimental infections used to evaluate viremias in ungulates were carried out several decades ago in livestock species such as cattle and sheep, and they reported short-term viremias (2–9 days) followed by the development of anti-CCHFV antibodies [10]. As indicated by several authors [9,10,37], further experimental infections are needed, including in wild ruminants but also in wild boars, to determine their potential role as amplifiers of CCHFV. Even in the absence of viremic hosts, there are other mechanisms that may explain the maintenance of CCHFV foci. Tick co-feeding allows the transmission of the virus present in the saliva of an infected tick to uninfected ticks feeding nearby [38]. This mechanism has been thoroughly explored for tick-borne encephalitis virus [39,40], but its importance for CCHFV transmission remains to be determined [8]. Some tick species, rather than hosts, are considered the true natural reservoirs of CCHFV. Competent tick species allow the replication of CCHFV in their tissues, which later enables the transstadial transmission of the virus from larva to nymph or from nymph to adult [9]. Transmission from adult female ticks to their eggs (i.e., vertical transmission) is also possible, although this mechanism seems to be less efficient in the case of CCHFV [37]. If vertebrate hosts can only develop short-term viremias at first exposure [37], a more likely explanation for the correlation between the Iberian ibex population decline and the decrease in the seroprevalence of CCHFV in wild boars would be that Iberian ibex is important for the maintenance of tick vectors of CCHFV. Therefore, the knowledge about the local community of ticks and which species could act as vectors of CCHFV, is critical.It is accepted that Hyalomma spp. are the main vectors and reservoirs of CCHFV, and in Spain, the two established species are H. lusitanicum and H. marginatum [34], but little information is available about their distribution in the eastern Mediterranean region of Spain. A recent study reported a high burden of H. lusitanicum ticks in wild boars from the metropolitan area of Barcelona, where this tick species was detected in more than one-third (33.6%) of the animals [41]. In addition, in 2022, questing H. lusitanicum ticks were collected in 31 municipalities surrounding the city of Barcelona [42]. Our study is the first to report the presence of H. lusitanicum in the PTiBNP although in low abundance – six specimens parasitizing two wild boars. In fact, H. lusitanicum was not found in any of the 134 Iberian ibexes from the PTiBNP sampled between 2011 and 2015 [35], likely because Lagomorpha is absent or present in very low densities in the main areas where Iberian ibexes are present (DACC personal communication). Presence of H. lusitanicum has traditionally been associated with the presence of wild rabbits and hares because they are the main hosts for the immature stages [43], although, occasionally, larvae and nymphs may also feed on the same hosts as adults [8].In contrast, H. marginatum was known to be present in the PTiBNP but only one specimen had been found in the 134 the Iberian ibexes evaluated by Varela-Castro et al. [35]. Absence or low levels of H. lusitanicum and H. marginatum ticks in Iberian ibexes may also be associated to a low preference of Hyalomma spp. ticks for this host. That would be consistent with studies in other areas of Spain in which both H. marginatum and H. lusitanicum were hardly ever detected feeding on Iberian ibex despite its presence in the area [44,45]. Nonetheless, it should be pointed out that all those studies on ticks collected from Iberian ibexes were carried out during the hunting season (October to February), while the adults of H. lusitanicum are found on hosts mainly between April and October (with peaks in May–June and September–October), and the adults of H. marginatum are found on hosts mainly between March and November (peak in April–June) [43]. Other authors report that, nowadays, adults of H. lusitanicum may be found feeding on ungulates throughout the entire year [8], which is consistent with the finding of Castillo-Contreras et al. [41], who detected H. lusitanicum ticks in wild boars from areas close to Barcelona all year round. In the case of wild boar, we found H. marginatum in 6 out of 7 animals (May to July 2023) suggesting a possible role in CCHFV transmission to wild boars. This finding might be related to the fact that these individuals were captured in an area where free-ranging domestic cattle are occasionally present, and H. marginatum is mainly associated with the presence of cattle [43]. Studies on wild boars and environmental ticks from other areas of the PTiBNP are needed to accurately evaluate the abundance and distribution of H. marginatum in this region. In any case, the data available points out to the absence or very low abundance of Hyalomma spp. ticks in Iberian ibexes of the PTiBNP [35], which does not appear to explain the 100% seroprevalence detected in this species.Rhipicephalus bursa, on the other hand, accounted for nearly 90% of the ticks found on Iberian ibexes from the PTiBNP [35], and 44.9% and 89.2% of the ticks found, respectively, in wild boar and vegetation in the present study. Several experimental studies suggested that Rhipicephalus species play a certain role in the transmission of CCHFV [46,47]. In a study of cattle from across Uganda, 69.7% (292/419) of the animals had CCHFV antibodies but only one of the 1065 ticks collected on them was of the genus Hyalomma, and was negative to CCHFV, while 5.9% (18/304) of the Rhipicephalus pools were positive [48]. And, in the case of R. bursa, CCHFV has been found in unfed ticks, which is considered an unequivocal demonstration that the virus survived tick molting or was passed transovarially from the engorged female to the larvae via the eggs [9]. Moreover, R. bursa ticks appear to be the main vector of CCHFV genotype VI (Europe 2) (recently re-classified as Aigai virus) in different countries of the Balkan region [49]. Interestingly, in a study carried out in Greece in which 2000 ticks were collected from sheep and goats, most Europe 1 sequences were obtained from Rhipicephalus sanguineus s.l., while the majority of Europe 2 sequences were obtained from R. bursa [50]. It is not clear whether CCHFV strains introduced into a region could adapt to new tick species and if that association between R. bursa and genotype VI is driven by the competence of this tick species, or by the abundance of R. bursa in the region [9]. As the efficiency of Rhipicephalus spp. ticks as vectors of CCHFV is still not clear, further experimental studies on vector competence are needed [50]. While R. bursa in all its stages prefers ruminants, adult R. bursa ticks are also found in wild boars although in a lower burden [41,51,52], which is consistent with the findings of the present study. Therefore, the possibility of a connection between CCHFV transmission cycles in Iberian ibex and wild boars with the involvement of R. bursa (rather than Hyalomma spp.) cannot be ruled out and deserves to be investigated. It has been generally assumed that Hyalomma spp. ticks are crucial for CCHFV transmission, and that in their absence/low abundance, an active focus of CCHFV cannot be maintained, but actual knowledge is lacking, and studies to address these issues are required [9].Dermacentor marginatus was found to be the most abundant tick species in wild boars from natural areas of north-eastern Spain [53,54], coinciding with other studies carried out in Mediterranean habitats [55]. More recently, a study on ticks on wild boars from the metropolitan area of Barcelona showed that D. marginatus was the second most abundant species (infestation prevalence: 26.9%) after H. lusitanicum (33.6%), while R. bursa was scarce (0.2%) [41]. In the PTiBNP, D. marginatus was also found in the Iberian ibexes although at low levels (1.6%) [35], and we found a single D. marginatus in a wild boar and another in the vegetation. Although D. marginatus has been shown to transmit CCHFV transovarially, its role as a competent vector is still not clear [9]. Given the low burden of D. marginatus in Iberian ibexes, and the limited evidence about its role as a vector of CCHFV, this tick species is unlikely to have played a significant role in CCHFV transmission in the PTiBNP.Haemaphysalis punctata was the third most abundant tick species in Iberian ibex in the PTiBNP [35], and also the second most abundant tick species in the environment. CCHFV has been found in H. punctata collected from ungulates on several occasions [9], and recently, a study carried out in southern Russia detected CCHFV in one (n = 477) H. punctata unfed specimen [56]. These findings indicate that H. punctata can also be a potential vector of CCHFV although its role in maintaining the virus is still uncertain.If the transmission of CCHFV in Iberian ibex and wild boar in the PTiBNP are somehow interconnected, the contrast in the prevalence between the two species may be explained by a difference in the burden of CCHFV-tick vectors, as seen for example for H. lusitanicum which is found in lower numbers in wild boars compared to red deer [51]. The lower burden of ticks in wild boars may be influenced by behavioral features (e.g., ritual of taking mud baths to remove ectoparasites), or to a preference for habitats with a lower number of ticks [19].A recent study in southwestern Spain detected significant interannual variations in CCHFV seroprevalence in wild boar in the absence of major demographic changes in the abundance of this species [19]. Meteorological factors may impact the transmission of CCHFV directly, by the effect on the replication and spread of the virus within the tick (mainly determined by temperature), or indirectly, through the effect of meteorological factors on tick abundance [30,52]. We therefore evaluated whether changes in meteorological factors relevant to CCHFV transmission may have influenced the dynamics of CCHFV in the PTiBNP. The pattern of temperature and VPD remained quite regular throughout the study period, and the statistical evaluation of the cumulative values of temperature and VPD suggests that meteorological factors cannot explain the reduction of CCHFV seroprevalence in wild boars. However, as ticks are responsive only to the microclimatic conditions, conclusions based on large-area analyses should be interpreted with care [57].An alternative explanation for the differences in the seroprevalences between Iberian ibex and wild boars is that independent transmission cycles occur in these two host species. In other words, that the ticks involved in CCHFV transmission in Iberian ibex and wild boars are not the same, and therefore may be affected differently by changes in abiotic or biotic factors.Our findings indicate that there are some differences in the tick communities parasitizing Iberian ibex and wild boars. However, given the absence of significant variations on relevant meteorological factors, and the lack of substantial changes in the population of wild boars, the significant reduction of CCHFV seroprevalence in wild boars, appears more difficult to explain if transmission cycles are independent.Even though serological studies can be useful to generate hypotheses about multi-host pathogen transmission dynamics, it is not acceptable to assign an epidemiological role to a host species based solely on antibody detection [58]. With serological data we cannot infer when the animals acquired the infection since antibody duration against CCHFV in wildlife species is unknown. The limited evidence available is from domestic ungulates, and indicates that antibody duration is long-lasting [59] and that reinfections can occur [10].5ConclusionsThe correlation between the patterns of reduction of Iberian ibex abundance and the decrease of seroprevalence in wild boars suggests an epidemiological link between the two species. Published data indicates very low abundance of Hyalomma spp. ticks on Iberian ibexes of the PTiBNP, which could hardly explain the 100% seroprevalence detected in this species. In contrast, Rhipicephalus bursa is very abundant on Iberian ibexes, on wild boars and in the environment, pointing out for a possible role of R. bursa in CCHFV transmission in the area. Meteorological factors such as temperature or water vapor pressure deficit do not seem to have played a significant role on the dynamics of CCHFV in the area. Further studies will be needed to confirm these hypotheses.FundingLaura Carrera-Faja was funded through the 2022 FI Scholarship, Departament de Recerca i Universitats, Generalitat de Catalunya, Spain (FI_B 00723). The present study was funded by the Plan Estatal de Investigación Científica, Técnica y de Innovación, Agencia Estatal de Investigación, Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación, Gobierno de España. Proyectos de generación de conocimiento: 2021-2023PID2021-126996OA-I00.CRediT authorship contribution statementLaura Carrera-Faja: Writing – original draft, Investigation, Methodology. Johan Espunyes: Writing – review & editing. Jesús Cardells: Supervision. Xavier Fernández Aguilar: Writing – review & editing. Lola Pailler-García: Formal analysis, Visualization. Sebastian Napp: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Methodology, Writing – review & editing. Oscar Cabezón: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing – review & editing.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.


Title: Sexual Transmission of Arboviruses: A Systematic Review

1. IntroductionViruses that cycle between blood-feeding arthropods and susceptible vertebrate hosts are known as arthropod-borne viruses (arboviruses) [1]. Arboviruses are usually transmitted by mosquitoes and ticks but other arthropod vectors include midges and sandflies. Most recognized arboviruses are classified within three taxonomic groups: the order Bunyavirales and the families Flaviviridae and Togaviridae. All other known arboviruses belong to the families Asfarviridae, Orthomyxoviridae, Reoviridae and Rhabdoviridae.Although arboviruses primarily cycle between arthropod vectors and vertebrate hosts, other modes of transmission have been recognized [1,2,3]. Some arboviruses have been directly transmitted between humans by organ transplantation, blood transfusion, breast-feeding and intrauterine transmission. Humans can also become infected through the inhalation of aerosols, needle-stick injury and direct contact with infected animals or animal products. Non-human vertebrates can also acquire arbovirus infections through non-vector-borne transmission. The aforementioned modes of non-arthropod-borne transmission are usually rare, having minimal impact on arbovirus maintenance in nature [2,3].Another mode of non-vector-borne arbovirus transmission, one that has gained considered interest in recent years, is sexual transmission. This recent interest is largely due to the discovery that Zika virus (ZIKV), a mosquito-transmitted virus belonging to the family Flaviviridae, can be sexually transmitted between humans, with dozens of sexually acquired infections now documented [4,5,6]. Many review articles have been written on the subject. Most of these articles have focused exclusively on ZIKV, but a few encompass the entire family Flaviviridae and, occasionally, arboviruses from the order Bunyavirales and family Togaviridae [5,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14]. Here, we provide a review on the urogenital localization of arboviruses and their potential to be sexually transmitted between vertebrates and include, for the first time, every taxonomic group that contains arboviruses (Table 1 and Table 2). We summarize information from case reports, disease outbreaks, surveillance studies and experimental infection studies and describe which arboviruses have been detected in the male and female reproductive tracts and documented to be shed in sexual bodily fluids such as semen and vaginal secretions.1.1. AsfarviridaeAfrican swine fever virus (ASFV) is the sole member of the genus Asfivirus (family Asfarviridae) and only known DNA arbovirus [15]. The virus is maintained in nature in a sylvatic transmission cycle between soft ticks and warthogs and is a cause of disease in domestic pigs. A review article by Thacker and colleagues explains that ASFV has been isolated from the semen of an experimentally infected boar and was transmitted by artificial insemination to a recipient sow [16]. However, a personal communication was cited, and there is no peer-reviewed data to support this finding.1.2. BunyaviralesIn 2017, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses reclassified the family Bunyaviridae, formerly divided into five genera, elevating it to the order Bunyavirales. This recently established order contains 12 families, three of which contain recognized arboviruses, and these are the Nairoviridae, Peribunyaviridae and Phenuiviridae [17].1.3. NairoviridaeThe family Nairoviridae includes Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV; genus Orthonairovirus), a tick-borne pathogen that can cause fatal hemorrhagic fever in humans [18]. Human infections also occur by contact with blood or tissues from viremic livestock, with slaughterhouse workers and butchers considered high-risk occupational groups. Several cases of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) are suspected to have occurred after sexual contact between spouses [19,20,21]. In 1999, a woman in Iran developed CCHF with sexual transmission considered the most likely route of infection [21]. Her husband (a physician) had recently recovered from CCHF, acquiring the virus after treating the index patient. Another case occurred in Turkey in 2008 when a woman developed CCHF after having sexual intercourse with her husband, a convalescent CCHF patient recently discharged from the hospital [19]. Three more CCHF cases suspected to have been sexually acquired occurred in Russia in 2005, 2010 and 2014 [20]. One secondary case (a woman) had sexual contact with her infected husband four to seven days after he developed a relatively mild case of CCHF. The other secondary cases had sexual contact with their infected spouses one to two days before the primary cases developed symptoms. Sexual transmission was considered the most likely route of infection for all of the aforementioned secondary cases, even though they all occurred in CCHF endemic regions. Some secondary cases had no recent history of tick bite or direct contact with animals, suggesting that these routes of infection were unlikely. However, close contact between human skin and mucosal surfaces could not be excluded as a route of infection.Subsequent studies have provided evidence that CCHFV disseminates to the human genital tract. A case report describes the occurrence of epididymo-orchitis in a CCHF patient in Turkey [22]. The patient experienced sudden pain and swelling in his right testis four days after illness onset. The left testis was unaffected. CCHFV RNA persisted in urethral and vaginal swabs from CCHF patients for 9 and 11 days, respectively, after illness onset [23]. Viral RNA copy numbers were often higher in genital swabs than sera collected on the same day. Experimental infection studies revealed that CCHFV persists in the testes of infected cynomolgus macaques [24]. Unilateral inflammation occurred in the testis of some animals, and viral RNA and antigen were present in the seminiferous tubules, the site of sperm production. Nairobi sheep disease virus (genus Orthonairovirus) replicates in lamb testis cell cultures, but evidence that it disseminates to the testes of sheep is lacking [25].1.4. PhenuivirusesThe family Phenuiviridae includes Heartland virus (HRTV), severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) and Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV). HRTV (genus Banyangvirus) is a tick-borne virus associated with sporadic cases of severe and sometimes fatal human disease in the United States [26,27]. A post-mortem examination of a HRTV patient who died in 2015 revealed the presence of viral antigen in multiple tissues, including the testes [28]. Congestion and focal hemorrhage of the testis were observed. SFTSV (genus Banyangvirus) is a tick-borne virus that causes life-threatening human disease in Asia [29]. SFTSV RNA was detected once in the semen of a patient in Japan in 2018 collected 30 days after illness onset [30]. RVFV (genus Phlebovirus) is a mosquito-transmitted pathogen of ruminants and humans in sub-Saharan Africa and the Arabian Peninsula [31]. RVFV RNA persisted for at least 117 days in the semen of an immunocompromised patient from France who had recently visited Mali [32]. Virus isolation was unsuccessful. It is not clear from these case reports whether the detection of Phenuivirus RNA/antigens in the patients’ semen or testes was due to the severity of disease or suggestive of the normal potential for sexual transmission of these viruses.1.5. PeribunyavirusesThe family Peribunyaviridae contains four genera, the largest being the genus Orthobunyavirus which includes Schmallenberg virus (SBV), Akabane virus (AKAV) and Aino virus (AINOV), three Culicoides-transmitted viruses that cause pregnancy loss and congenital defects in ruminant livestock [33,34]. Infectious SBV has been isolated from the semen of naturally infected bulls [35,36]. Other studies have reported the detection of SBV RNA in the semen of naturally and experimentally infected bulls, sometimes for as long as three months [35,37,38]. SBV RNA was not detected in the semen of experimentally infected goats, although only two were tested, but was detected in ovarian tissue of a goat and sheep [39,40].AKAV could not be isolated from the semen of experimentally infected bulls [41]. The virus also could not be isolated from vaginal swabs taken from cows that were artificially inseminated at estrus with uninfected semen then challenged with virus by intra-uterine inoculation, although isolates were recovered from uterine and ovarian tissues [42]. In another study, ejaculates were collected from several bulls naturally infected with AKAV, as demonstrated by the presence of virus or virus-specific antibodies in their blood [43]. Ejaculates were inoculated into sheep and two of 16 seroconverted. One of six sheep inoculated with ejaculates from bulls naturally infected with AINOV also seroconverted. However, the authors could not dismiss the possibility that the sheep acquired natural AKAV and AINOV infections by insect bite during the course of the study.1.6. FlaviviridaeThe family Flaviviridae contains four genera, including the genus Flavivirus. Most viruses belonging to this genus are recognized arboviruses, and examples include dengue virus (DENV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV), West Nile virus (WNV), yellow fever virus (YFV) and ZIKV, all of which are mosquito-transmitted viruses of global public health significance [44,45]. Flaviviruses of localized public health concern include tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV), a tick-borne pathogen that occurs primarily in Asia, Europe and Russia [46].1.7. Zika Virus: Sexual Transmission between HumansIt is well documented that ZIKV can be sexually transmitted between humans [7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14]. The first evidence of sexual transmission was provided in a case report that describes a woman in the United States in 2008 with no recent travel history who developed a symptomatic ZIKV infection after sexual intercourse with her husband, a convalescent ZIKV patient who had recently returned from Senegal [4]. Both diagnoses were based on serologic data, and virus was not recovered from either patient. Among the symptoms reported in the male patient was hematospermia. Many cases of sexually acquired ZIKV infection have since been reported [5,7,8,9,10,11,14]. The first study to sequence the complete ZIKV genomes from the index and secondary patients describes a woman in France who developed ZIKV symptoms in 2016, shortly after several sexual encounters with the index patient, a male who had recently traveled to Brazil [47]. The woman had never visited a region with active ZIKV transmission. Sexual transmission of ZIKV has now been documented in at least 13 countries without concurrent vector-borne transmission [10].The majority of sexually acquired ZIKV infections have been transmitted from male to female partners, although female-to-male and male-to-male transmission has been reported [7,56,57,58]. Most infections have occurred from unprotected vaginal sex, but transmission through anal sex and potentially oral sex has been described [7,47,57]. Both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals can transmit ZIKV through sexual contact. Some studies have shown that in situations where both sexual partners become symptomatic, secondary patients usually develop symptoms within 12 days from the occurrence of symptoms in the index patient, although up to 44 days has been reported [7,59]. Some modeling studies have provided evidence that sexual transmission alone cannot maintain ZIKV in a human population [73,74,75,76]. In one study, the basic reproduction number (R0) was calculated as 2.1, with the contribution of sexual transmission estimated to be 3.0% [75]. However, other modeling studies have predicted a much higher contribution, sometimes by combining vector transmission with sexual transmission or by considering heterogeneity in sexual transmission among the human population, with the contribution of sexual transmission ranging from 14% to 46% [77,78]. Accordingly, recent household-based studies in Puerto Rico and Brazil showed that sexual partners within households are at a higher risk of being exposed to ZIKV, suggesting that sexual transmission is an important contributor of ZIKV transmission dynamics in endemic regions [79] (Magalhaes et al., unpublished).The first isolation of ZIKV from semen was from a patient in Tahiti in 2013 [60]. The virus has since been isolated from the semen of many other patients, persisting up to 69 days after illness onset [61]. Multiple studies have reported prolonged shedding of ZIKV RNA in the semen of patients, and this has been documented for both symptomatic and asymptomatic infections [62,63,64,80,81,82,83,84]. For example, ZIKV RNA was detected in the semen of 48 of 112 (43%) patients at 31–60 days after illness onset, persisting for 281 days in one patient [63]. Seventy-eight ZIKV RNA-positive semen samples from 46 patients were tested by virus isolation in cell culture, with virus recovered from 3 of 19 (15.8%) samples collected within 30 days of illness onset, but none from the 59 samples collected at later times. In another study, ZIKV RNA was detected in the semen of an immunocompromised patient at 941 days after illness onset [62]. Additionally, ZIKV RNA has been detected in the anorectal mucosa of naturally infected male and female patients [85]. Rectal swabs were collected from 10 patients and all were positive for ZIKV RNA. One swab also contained infectious virus. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in vaginal and cervical secretions, persisting for as long as 180 and 31 days, respectively [65,66,67,68,69,70,71]. The ability of ZIKV to occur at a higher frequency and to persist for longer in the testis and semen compared to vaginal and cervical secretions could explain why male-to-female transmission is more common that female-to-male transmission [86]. The World Health Organization recommends that men and women returning from areas with active ZIKV transmission practice abstinence or avoid unprotected sex for at least three and two months, respectively [87].Human germ cells are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and replication, as determined in experiments where human testicular biopsy samples were infected ex vivo, with virus continuously produced for at least 59 days with no substantial decrease in titer [88,89]. ZIKV infection had no apparent effect on the morphology, cell viability or hormonal production of the tissue explants [88]. Treatment with berberine chloride, a plant-derived alkaloid, significantly reduced the ex vivo replication of ZIKV, suggesting that this compound could be used to prevent ZIKV sexual transmission [89].1.8. Zika Virus: Mouse Models to Study Sexual TransmissionMouse models have been developed to study the sexual transmission, tissue tropisms and shedding kinetics of ZIKV [90,91,92,93]. These experiments have been performed using mice with genetically deficient interferon responses or antibody/drug-induced immunocompromisation because ZIKV cannot replicate and cause disease in immunocompetent mice. Some studies have demonstrated that at least 50% of naïve females become infected after naturally mating with infected males [90,93]. Coitus free sexual transmission has also been reported in experiments where female mice were inoculated with virus by the intravaginal route [94,95]. Several studies have reported the isolation of ZIKV from at least 60% of ejaculates from infected mice, with the virus persisting for at least 23 days after inoculation [93,96,97]. ZIKV infects and damages the testes of infected mice and can cause infertility [92,93,98,99,100,101,102,103,104]. ZIKV also replicates in the female reproductive tract depending on the immunocompromised status of the females and timing of infection relative to the estrus cycle, having been detected in uterine tissue, ovaries and vaginal washes [95,105,106,107]. Mice challenged by the anorectal route are also susceptible to infection, with virus detected in multiple organs, including the testes, indicating that anal intercourse is a possible mode of ZIKV transmission [108,109].1.9. Zika Virus: Non-Human Primate Models to Study Sexual TransmissionSeveral non-human primate (NHP) models have been developed to study ZIKV replication, transmission and pathogenesis [110,111,112,113]. Viremia and seroconversions were detected in rhesus and cynomolgus macaques after intravaginal and intrarectal inoculation, providing evidence that ZIKV is sexually transmitted [114]. Several groups have reported the shedding of ZIKV RNA in sexual fluids of infected NHPs [115,116,117]. In one study, ZIKV RNA was detected at high levels in the semen of male NHPs, remaining detectable for 28 days, with viral RNA also present but at lower levels in vaginal secretions of female NHPs [115]. ZIKV has been detected throughout the reproductive tracts of infected male and female NHPs [115,116,118,119,120,121,122,123]. ZIKV RNA was detected in the testes and epididymis of male olive baboons for up to 10 and 41 days after infection [116]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in multiple tissues of the reproductive tract (cervix, ovaries, uterus and vagina) of female rhesus macaques [121]. Additionally, ZIKV RNA has been detected throughout the maternal and fetal/neonatal reproductive tracts of rhesus macaques after pregnant females were subcutaneously inoculated with virus [118].1.10. Zika Virus: Other Animal Models to Study Sexual TransmissionEvidence of ZIKV infection has been detected in the reproductive tracts of several non-murine, non-primate vertebrate species [124,125,126,127]. ZIKV RNA was detected in the testes of tree shrews (Tupaia belangeri) after subcutaneous inoculation [127]. Another study reported the presence of ZIKV antigen in the testes of intradermally inoculated Jamaican fruit bats (Artibeus jamaicensis) [126]. ZIKV antigen was also detected in the testes of immunocompetent guinea pigs after subcutaneous and intranasal inoculation [124]. A more recent study demonstrated that immunocompetent guinea pigs are susceptible to ZIKV infection after vaginal inoculation, with viral RNA detected in various tissues including the ovaries and uterus [125]. Infectious virus persisted in vaginal secretions for at least 21 days.1.11. Dengue VirusProbable sexual transmission of DENV occurred in South Korea in 2013 [48]. The index patient was a woman who had recently visited Indonesia and developed dengue on the day of her return. The secondary patient was a man who had not traveled internationally for over a year. He had sexual intercourse with the woman the day she arrived home and developed dengue nine days later. DENV is not endemic in South Korea, and sexual transmission was considered the most likely route of infection for the man. Another case of dengue assumed to be acquired by sexual transmission occurred in Spain in 2019 [49]. Both patients were male, and both contained DENV sequence in their semen. DENV is not endemic in Spain, and only one of the two patients had recently traveled, visiting Cuba and the Dominican Republic, two countries where DENV is endemic.DENV RNA was detected by quantitative RT-PCR in vaginal secretions from a female patient and the semen of a male patient for up to 18 and 37 days, respectively, after illness onset [50,51]. The semen also contained negative-sense DENV RNA, providing evidence that the genital tract is a site of active virus replication [51]. A recent article questioned whether the detection of DENV RNA in the semen of the male patient was due to RT-PCR cross-contamination because some features of the case were atypical, most notably the detection of DENV RNA in the patient’s serum 9 days after illness onset because it usually clears after 4-6 days of illness [128]. The vaginal secretions reported to contain DENV RNA were tested in the same laboratory as that which tested the semen. In another study, DENV RNA was not detected in the semen of five men with acute infections [129].1.12. West Nile VirusIn 2014, a woman in the United States developed neuroinvasive WNV disease, despite recalling no recent mosquito exposure [52]. The authors considered sexual transmission the most likely route of infection even though the patient lived in a WNV endemic area. In another study, WNV RNA was detected by quantitative RT-PCR in the semen of a male patient, but the cycle threshold value was close to the diagnostic criterion [53]. WNV antigen has been detected postmortem in the testis of an immunocompromised patient [54]. WNV antigen has also been detected in multiple tissues, including the ovaries and testes, of deceased parrots [130]. Mice inoculated by the vaginal route developed fatal WNV infections [131].1.13. Other FlavivirusesThere is evidence to suggest that other flaviviruses can infect the vertebrate reproductive tract and persist in sexual fluids. YFV RNA was detected in the semen of a patient at 21 days after illness onset [55]. JEV persisted in the semen of an experimentally infected boar for 17 days and female recipients became infected after artificial insemination [132]. JEV also infects and cause inflammatory changes in the testes of JEV-infected boars [133]. Spondweni virus (SPONV), the closest known relative to ZIKV, was detected in the reproductive tract (testes, epididymides and seminal vesicles) of interferon-deficient mice at titers similar to that of ZIKV [96]. Two of 50 (4%) ejaculates from SPONV-infected mice contained virus, which is significantly lower than the 60–72% reported for ZIKV, indicating that SPONV might be sexually transmitted between immunocompromised mice, but at a much lower efficiency than ZIKV. Naïve female mice became infected with TBEV after mating with infected males, with viral RNA detected in embryonal tissues of two of 11 litters [134]. Tembusu virus, a mosquito-transmitted pathogen of poultry, replicates in the ovaries and testes of infected birds [135,136,137,138].1.14. OrthomyxoviridaeThere are seven genera in the family Orthomyxoviridae, including two that contain arboviruses. Viruses in the genus Quaranjavirus appear to cycle primarily between soft ticks and aquatic birds [139]. Examples include Quaranfil and Wellfleet Bay viruses [139]. Viruses in the genus Thogotovirus cycle between hard ticks and mammals [140]. Examples include Bourbon and Thogoto viruses. There is no experimental evidence to suggest that any arboviruses in these genera could be sexually transmitted between vertebrates. In one study, Wellfleet Bay virus was not recovered from the gonads of experimentally infected birds [141].1.15. ReoviridaeThe family Reoviridae contains 15 genera. Viruses in three genera (Coltivirus, Orbivirus and Seadornavirus) replicate in both arthropod vectors and vertebrate hosts. The type species of the genus Orbivirus is bluetongue virus (BTV), a Culicoides-transmitted virus that affects ruminants [142]. There have been many reports describing the isolation of BTV from the semen of experimentally infected bulls [143,144,145,146,147]. In one study, BTV was recovered from the semen of 7 of 20 bulls after virus challenge, with isolations made only from ejaculates collected during the period of viremia [144]. Isolations of BTV from the semen of naturally infected bulls have also been reported but are not common [148,149]. Cows artificially inseminated with BTV-contaminated semen develop viremias and seroconvert [144,150]. However, cows did not become infected after naturally mating with an infected bull [151]. In studies performed on sheep, BTV RNA was detected in the semen of naturally infected rams and remained detectable for up to 116 days after symptom onset [152]. BTV has been isolated from the testes of experimentally infected rams, and testicular degeneration was observed in rams after experimental and natural infection [153]. Ecchymosis occurred in the testes of naturally infected Brazilian dwarf brocket deer [154]. Another arbovirus in the genus Orbivirus is epizootic hemorrhagic disease virus (EHDV). The virus cycles between Culicoides spp. midges and ruminants and often causes fatal hemorrhagic disease in white-tailed deer [155]. EHDV RNA was detected in the testes of naturally infected mule deer, and the virus was implicated as a cause of testicular degeneration [156].1.16. RhabdoviridaeSeven of the 20 genera in the family Rhabdoviridae contain arboviruses, and these are Curiovirus, Ephemerovirus, Hapavirus, Ledantevirus, Sripuvirus, Tibrovirus and Vesiculovirus. Bovine ephemeral fever virus (BEFV) is the type species of the genus Ephemerovirus and a major pathogen of cattle and water buffalo. The virus was isolated from the semen of one of 12 experimentally infected bulls [157]. Ten heifers artificially inseminated at estrus with semen mixed with virus did not become infected. There is no other data to suggest that arboviruses from this family have the potential to be sexually transmitted between vertebrates.1.17. TogaviridaeThe majority of viruses in the genus Alphavirus (family Togaviridae) are mosquito-borne [158]. The genus includes chikungunya virus (CHIKV), a cause of severe, debilitating and often chronic arthralgia in humans [159]. CHIKV RNA was detected in the semen of a patient with a concurrent DENV infection up to 30 days after symptom onset [72]. Virus isolation was not performed. The patient experienced a burning sensation in the urethra and genital region three days before he developed symptoms characteristic of chikungunya.Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) and Highlands J virus (HJV) are also alphaviruses. Both cycle between mosquitoes and passerines and are associated with disease in poultry [158,160]. EEEV and HJV were shed in the semen of domestic turkeys for up to 4 and 5 days post-infection, respectively [161]. EEEV was recovered from one of 10 hens inseminated with virus-contaminated semen. HJV was recovered from three of 10 hens. Evidence of EEEV infection was detected in various tissues of mice and guinea pigs challenged with aerosolized virus, but the testes, ovaries and uterus were negative [162].Another mosquito-transmitted alphavirus is Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus (VEEV). A live-attenuated vaccine strain of VEEV replicated in the testes of golden hamsters after intratesticular, but not subcutaneous, inoculation [163]. One of 18 females that naturally mated with males inoculated by the intratesticular route seroconverted. Another female died, and virus was isolated from her brain and from one of her progeny.2. Concluding RemarksEvidence is accumulating that some arboviruses can replicate in the vertebrate reproductive tract and persist in sexual fluids, revealing the important need to investigate further the potential sexual transmission of arboviruses. It is well documented that ZIKV can be transmitted between humans through sexual contact and CCHFV and DENV are potentially transmitted, albeit probably occasionally, by this route [4,5,6,19,20,21,48,49]. Other arboviruses have been detected in human semen by RT-PCR, and these include RVFV, SFTSV and YFV [30,32,55]. Arboviruses detected in tissues and sexual secretions of the human reproductive tract, whether by virus isolation or the identification of viral nucleic acid or protein, include CCHFV, HRTV, WNV and ZIKV [23,28,54,82]. The detection of arboviruses in vertebrate saliva is not discussed because this review is restricted to direct acts of sexual contact.Evidence also exists that select arboviruses have the potential to be sexually transmitted between vertebrate animals. TBEV and ZIKV have been transmitted between laboratory mice by natural mating and SPONV RNA has been detected in the semen of infected mice [90,93,96,134]. Arboviruses detected in the reproductive tract and/or in sexual fluids of NHPs include CCHFV and ZIKV [24,115,116,117,118,119,120,121,122,123]. Several arboviruses have also been detected in the reproductive tract or sexual fluids of livestock, including AKAV, BEFV, BTV, EHDV, JEV and SBV [37,42,132,143,156,157]. Infections occurred in recipient females artificially inseminated with BTV- and JEV-contaminated semen [132,144,150]. Various arboviruses have also been detected in the reproductive tract or sexual fluids of birds, including EEEV, HJV, Tembusu virus and WNV [130,137,161].The identification of sexually acquired arbovirus infections is often confounded in geographical regions where vector-borne transmission is known to occur and so care must be taken not to over-interpret data. Sexual transmission was considered the most likely route of infection for a woman with severe WNV disease, but the case occurred in the United States, a WNV endemic region [52]. Although the patient could not recall any recent mosquito bites, she could have unknowingly been bitten by an infected mosquito. The authors’ conclusions should therefore be interpreted with caution. All cases of CCHF suspected to have been sexually acquired occurred in countries where the etiological agent is endemic [19,20,21]. Vertebrate animal studies can be faced with similar problems, as observed in a phenuivirus investigation performed in Australia [43]. Ejaculates from AKAV- and AINOV-infected bulls were tested for virus by sheep inoculation. Several sheep seroconverted but they were housed in a non-insect-proof shed in an area where vector-borne AKAV and AINOV transmission had previously been reported. The authors acknowledged that the sheep could have acquired the infections by insect bite.Many arboviruses have been detected, either directly or indirectly, in the vertebrate reproductive tract and in sexual fluids. Most experiments were performed using indirect virus detection assays, such as RT-PCR, but this alone is not sufficient evidence that a virus can be sexually transmitted. Virus isolation is more informative but also has its limitations because sexual transmission depends on various factors, including viral dose, the amount of infectious virus in the dose and route of inoculation. Reports of virus RNA in the reproductive tract and sexual fluids of severely ill patients should also be interpreted with care. It may not be all that surprising that viral RNA can enter normally protected sites/fluids like sperm in the testes and seminal fluid in the prostate and seminal vesicles, when tissue integrity is failing. In this situation, virus entry into these sites may not be directly suggestive of a new route of transmission but rather just a symptom of serious disease with the beginnings of organ system failure. Many non-arthropod-borne viruses have been detected in the vertebrate reproductive tract and in sexual secretions, but have never been associated with sexually acquired infections [164].Various considerations must be taken into account to conclude that an arbovirus can be sexually transmitted and, if it can be, whether it is a rare event or epidemiologically relevant. The importance of developing animal models to study sexual transmission cannot be overstated. Animal models can be used to determine whether viable virus occurs and persists in the male and female reproductive tracts and in their sexual fluids, as done with ZIKV. If virus is detected, it is important to determine whether the amount of virus is enough to infect another host. Different routes of inoculation should be evaluated, including the vaginal and anorectal routes. Natural mating experiments designed to determine whether infected animals can transmit the virus to uninfected animals are especially informative. This work should be performed using infected males and uninfected females, along with reciprocal experiments. One advantage of studying the transmission dynamics of zoonotic diseases and diseases of veterinary importance is that natural animal hosts can be used in the experiments, although it is important that the work is performed under strict vector-protected conditions.With the exception of ZIKV, sexual transmission appears to have negligible impact on the epidemiology of arboviruses. However, it is possible that other arboviruses could acquire the ability to be efficiently sexually transmitted (i.e., through mutation or reassortment) or that there are undiscovered or poorly studied arboviruses that already possess this trait. If sexual transmission is shown to occur with an arbovirus, it is important to assess its epidemiological relevance and its contribution to transmission in both endemic and non-endemic regions. Sexual and arthropod-borne transmission may act synergistically in vector endemic regions to enhance transmission and maintain endemicity while sexual transmission may not be enough to sustain virus circulation in regions where arthropod vectors are not present. It is also important to determine whether the pathology and symptomatology of sexually acquired infections differ from mosquito-acquired infections. This information will assist in the diagnosis and clinical management of sexually acquired arbovirus disease. If an arbovirus is shown to be sexually transmitted between humans and if this mode of transmission is not a rare event, health authorities should recommend protected sex in populations living in or traveling to endemic countries, especially if there is an ongoing outbreak or epidemic. If efficient arbovirus transmission is shown to occur between livestock or poultry (i.e., through natural mating or artificial insemination), resulting in substantial economic losses, producers need to modify their farming and disease control practices accordingly.To conclude, many sexually acquired ZIKV infections have occurred in the last decade, and evidence suggests that another major arbovirus pathogen, DENV, could be sexually transmitted, while other arboviruses possess the ability to infect the vertebrate reproductive tract. It is therefore important that additional work be performed to investigate the importance of sexual transmission in the epidemiology, spread and control of arboviruses.


Title: Influence of laboratory animal hosts on the life cycle of 

IntroductionCrimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is an acute, tick-borne zoonosis caused by Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), which belongs to the genus Nairovirus in the family Bunyaviridae. Since 2000, the incidence and geographic range of confirmed CCHF cases have markedly increased, with the disease being reported for the first time in Turkey, Iran, India, Greece, the Republic of Georgia, and some Balkan countries, and the detection of viral RNA in Hyalomma ticks recovered from deer in Spain. The virus circulates in nature in a vertebrate-tick cycle with ticks of the genus Hyalomma being the main vectors and reservoirs. Although the tick vector plays a crucial role in the virus life cycle, most of the work has focused on case studies, epidemiological investigations, and field studies of ticks collected from animal hosts. Despite the need to study the interaction between ticks and the virus in a controlled laboratory setting in order to understand how the virus is transmitted and maintained, little has been done (Shepherd et al., 1989; Gonzalez et al., 1991, 1992; Wilson et al., 1991; Dickson and Turell, 1992; Dohm et al., 1996). This is mostly because establishing and maintaining tick colonies is time consuming, and working with ticks in a biosafety level 4 (BSL4) biocontainment setting is challenging. Ideally, a transmission and infection model utilizes laboratory hosts that both support tick development and virus transmission.Ticks belonging to the genus Hyalomma (H.) are considered the main vectors of CCHFV. After the first description of CCHF in 1944 in the agricultural steppe areas of Crimea, Hyalomma marginatum was immediately suspected when local inhabitants described unusually high numbers of this species as compared with the previous years (Grashchenkov, 1945). Subsequent outbreaks in Bulgaria, China, Yugoslavia, Pakistan, United Arab Emirates, Iraq, and other areas of Russia in the following decades reaffirmed that species of the genus Hyalomma were predominant [thoroughly reviewed by Hoogstraal (1979)]. Details of vector competence were tested for the ability to transmit the virus to the next stage or to eggs from infected females and H. anatolicum, H. marginatum, H. rufipes, H. turanicum, and H. truncatum are reported the ability to acquire the virus in nature and to pass the virus to the eggs or to the next stage in its life cycle (Hoogstraal, 1979).H. marginatum is the most important vector for CCHFV in southern Europe as well as parts of the Middle East and Central Asia (Figure 1). Studies on the life cycle and biology have been published for only 11 of the approximately 27 known Hyalomma species (Guglielmone et al., 2010). These studies involve various animal host species in the laboratory maintenance and biology of: H. aegyptium (Sweatman, 1968; Siroky et al., 2011). H. anatolicum (Snow, 1969; Ghosh and Azhahianambi, 2007; Ahmed et al., 2011), H. dromedarii (Bassal and Hefnawy, 1972), H. excavatum (Rechav, 1968, 1970; Hadani and Rechav, 1970), H. impeltatum (Logan et al., 1989b), H. isaaci (Rau, 1963; Das and Subramanian, 1972), H. lusitanicum (Hueli et al., 1984a; Ouhelli and Pandey, 1984), H. rufipes (Knight et al., 1978; Magano et al., 2000; Chen et al., 2012), and H. truncatum (Rechav and Fielden, 1997; Magano et al., 2000).Figure 1Geographic distribution of Hyalomma marginatum based on (Hoogstraal, 1979), www.kolonin.org and http://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/efsajournal/pub/1723.htm (both accessed April 2013).In nature H.marginatum is considered to have a two-host life cycle. This means that larval feeding, molting to nymphal stage, and nymphal feeding will occur on the same host (typically smaller mammals and ground-dwelling birds). Following this, the engorged nymphs drop off from the host, molt to their adult stage in the environment and attach to a second host (typically larger mammals such as ungulates) (Apanaskevich, 2004). Nevertheless, the biology of H. marginatum has been poorly investigated (Hueli et al., 1984b; Ouhelli, 1994; Yukari et al., 2011) and limited studies have investigated the life cycle involving domestic animals such as rabbits, cattle, and chickens. There is an urgent need to study the interaction of CCHFV with its natural tick vector in a controlled laboratory setting. Hitherto, studies with ticks at BSL4 have not been reported. Safe experimentation with ticks at this level requires appropriate facilities, extensively trained investigators, and thoroughly tested protocols.Here, we report our evaluation of three common laboratory species as hosts for H. marginatum and their influence on the biology of the tick. Furthermore, we describe for the first time the use of ticks in a BSL4 setting and describe the development of protocols to safely carry out this work.Materials and methodsTicksUnfed female and male H. marginatum ticks were collected by Dr. Zati Vatansever in Yozgat region of Turkey and species identification was confirmed based on the latest taxonomical key (Estrada-Peña et al., 2004). These ticks were fed on a rabbit, the female tick engorged, dropped off and laid eggs. Female carcass, as well as a sample of the larval offspring, tested negative for CCHFV by RT-PCR (Midilli et al., 2007). Subsequently, larval and nymphal offspring from this female were fed on rabbits and a portion of the emergent adult ticks were sent to the Insectary Services Division of the Galveston National Laboratory, UTMB, Galveston, Texas USA to initiate a colony. Adult ticks were fed on rabbits and first generation larvae hatched from a single female were used for the subsequent experimental studies. Ticks were kept in sterile clear plastic sample vials. Six 2 mm holes cut into the lightweight plastic lid, coupled with a piece of fine mesh approximately 4 cm2 in size, served as a secure tick barrier while allowing sufficient air exchange. A folded narrow strip of autoclaved filter paper was maintained inside the vial to absorb excess moisture and allow the ticks to crawl upwards after molting. Ticks were kept under constant conditions (27°C ± 1°C, 80% ± 5% relative humidity, and 12/12 h light/darkness cycle) in the plastic vials within plastic desiccators containing saturated salt solution in the desiccator basin to provide correct humidity levels in environmental growth chambers with temperature and light control. Engorgement of the larvae, nymphs, and adult stages in the following experiments were monitored and ticks that dropped off were collected and weighed daily. Pre-oviposition and oviposition times were recorded for each engorged female. Oviposited egg masses were weighed daily. After the oviposition ended, total egg mass weight for each female and carcasses weight were recorded. Conversion efficiency indexes (CEI = g eggs/g female), which indicates the successful conversion of engorged body weight in to egg mass, were calculated according to Drummond and Whetstone (1970). Unfed nymphs used in the in vivo transmission models were generated by pulling off the engorged larvae from the host and then maintaining them under the above described conditions until they molted. All values were compared statistically by ANOVA (GraphPad Prism). Unfed nymphs used in the in vivo feeding models were generated by pulling off the engorged larvae from the first host and then maintaining them under the above described conditions until they molted.Evaluation of tick killing with disinfectantsDisinfectant solutions commonly used in biocontainment laboratories such as bleach (sodium hypochloride, 5%; Clorox, Oakland, CA), neutral-buffered formalin (10%; Fisher Scientific, MI), ethanol (70%; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO), CaviCide® (Metrex Research Coorperation, Romulus, MI), and Microchem Plus® (National Chemical Laboratories, Philadelphia, PA) were tested for their ability to kill adult ticks. Ticks, 8 in each test group, were submerged in 50 ml of each solution and monitored at 15 min intervals. To confirm death, non-motile individuals were taken out of the solution, rinsed with distilled water, wiped down, and placed in the incubator at 27°C, 80% RH for 72 h. Individuals showing any movement after 72 h were recorded as still viable.AnimalsFemale BALB/c mice, 8–12 weeks of age and >20 grams, female Hartley guinea pigs, >65 g, and male New Zealand white rabbits, >1.5 kg, were purchased from a commercial breeder (Charles River, Wilmington, MA) and used to feed instars of H. marginatum. None of the animals had been exposed to ticks previously. Mice were housed in isolator cages (Tecniplast, Buguggiate, Italy) with commercial diet and water ad libitum and exposed to ticks by either whole body infestation or using feeding capsules (see below). Rabbits and guinea pigs were housed in Allentown isolator cages with commercial diet and water provided ad libitum. Rabbits were infested with ticks using ear-bags while guinea pigs were infested with ticks in a feeding capsule (see below). All animal work was reviewed and approved by UTMB's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and Institutional Biosafety Committee.Tick infestationsWhole Body Infestation of Mice: Three mice were placed individually into a restrainer made of metal mesh cloth that restricts the mouse from grooming. Three hundred larvae were allowed to attach to the restrained mouse during a 2 h period. After infestation, each mouse was placed into a micro-isolator cage, one mouse per isolator. The micro-isolator cage contained an inner floor consisting of a stainless steel grid above water, allowing the mouse to stay dry and move and feed normally while engorged ticks drop into the water where they were recovered. Water in the bottom of the cage was inspected for ticks and changed daily.Feeding Capsule Infestation of Mice: Mice were sedated by isoflurane inhalation (2–4%) and their eyes treated with ointment to prevent drying, and placed on a Delta warming pad (BrainTree sciences). A feeding capsule was fashioned from the top half of a 5 ml cryotube (Sarstedt, Germany). Kamar adhesive (Kamar Products, Zionville, IN) cement (an adhesive commonly used in the livestock industry for maximum adhesion of heat detector pads and tags) applied to the capsule rim. The capsule was attached to a shaved area on the back of the mouse caudal of the shoulder blades. Ticks were placed into the capsule on the following day after the integrity the capsule's attachment was assured by inspection. Adults and nymphs were directly hand-loaded into the capsule using forceps. Larvae were first counted onto to a small piece of gauze or a gelatin capsule, which was then transferred into the capsule. Infestations were done on three mice with 25 larvae in a single capsule, or on five mice with one male-female adult pair in a single capsule. The capsules were inspected daily for engorgement of the feeding instars, and engorged or detached ticks were removed.Feeding Capsule Infestation of Guinea Pigs: Guinea pigs were infested with ticks enclosed within a tightly woven cotton cloth fabric feeding capsule. The seam of the bags where the fabric edges join together was sewed tightly using a sewing machine (7 stitches/cm). Animals were sedated by isoflurane gas anesthesia (2–4%). The dorsum was shaved and then a fabric capsule was glued to the skin caudal of the shoulder blades using Kamar glue. Ticks were introduced to the capsule the following day after inspection of the capsule's integrity. The open end of the fabric capsule was folded twice laterally, and then longitudinally (2–3 cm) with the open end secured and was wrapped with multiple layers of adhesive bandages. Three guinea pigs were infested with 200 larvae and another three guinea pigs with three pairs of adults on each animal.Ear bag Infestation of Rabbits: Similar to feeding capsules utilized for guinea pigs, ear bags for the rabbit were fabricated using tightly woven cotton cloth. Bags were rectangular in shape with openings at both ends. One open end was attached to the shaved base of the ear with a double layered adhesive bandage and Kamar adhesive. The portion of the bag that extended beyond the length of the ear was folded three times laterally and then longitudinally (2–3 cm), and was wrapped with two layers of adhesive bandages. An Elizabethan collar (Lomir, Biomedical Inc., Malone, NY) was placed on the rabbit and the tips of both ear bags were taped together behind the collar to keep them out of reach and to prevent scratching. Rabbits were sedated with isoflurane gas anesthesia (2–4%) during the application of the ear bags. Eyes were treated with ointment to prevent drying and the rabbit was placed onto a warming pad. Ticks were placed into the ear bags the following day after inspection of the ear bag's integrity. Rabbits were infested with three male-female pairs of adults, or with 300 larvae per ear bag.Tick work at BSL4The development of standard operating procedures (SOPs) for tick work at BSL4 was based on existing SOPs for arthropod containment level (ACL) 2/3 at UTMB as well as on U.S. guidelines (2003; Scott, 2005; Tabachnick, 2006; Prevention, 2009). All work involving infectious material was done in strict compliance with UTMB Environmental Health and Safety guidelines, and Institutional Biosafety Committee and Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approved guidelines and protocols. For tick work, a simple, minimalist approach was adopted. A room within the BSL4 of the Galveston National Laboratory was designated for tick research and contained only items required for these studies. The room has no sink or floor drain and is equipped with sticky mats on work surfaces, within the glove box, and in front of the door. As described above for colony rearing methods, ticks were contained in capped rearing vials which were housed in sealed desiccators containing appropriate saturated salt solutions to maintain relative humidity, and the desiccators are in turn kept within climate-controlled environmental growth chambers. The researcher must know exactly how many ticks are taken into the facility and account for the numbers at various stages of the experiment through to termination. Accurate counts were maintained throughout the experiments such that records and contents of the rearing vials verified the final state of each tick. Live ticks and ticks feeding on animals were handled within a non-ventilated glove box lined with sticky tape. Since working with arthropods often requires the use of small instruments and considerable dexterity, investigators practiced tick work extensively in the National Biocontainment Training Center mock BSL4 training laboratory while wearing positive pressure suits.All steps involving the handling of ticks feeding on mice were conducted in a non-ventilated Plexiglas glove box within the BSL4 tick room and animals were sedated using isoflurane inhalation anesthesia. Mice with capsules glued onto the skin were housed individually in green line IVC micro-isolator rat cages (Tecniplast, Buguggiate, Italy), with nestles (Ancare, Bellmore, NY) as enrichment and bright-white Diamond Dry cellulose bedding (Harlan Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN) to easily visualize potentially escaped ticks. Other enrichment items were avoided so that the capsule would not be dislodged by routine contact. As additional layers of containment, a ring of double-sided sticky tape was positioned along the inner perimeter of the cages one inch below the cage top and a mesh cap was placed over the cage air supply ventilation ports to prevent any tick escape from the cage. Ticks in feeding capsules were inspected daily in the glove box and collected from the capsule after detachment and stored in photoperiod controlled environmental chambers for molting to the next stage.In vivo transmission modelUninfected H. marginatum nymphs or adults were obtained from our established colony and up to five nymphs or up to two adults (male and female) were put into a feeding capsule that had been applied to 4–8 weeks-old female STAT-1 knockout mice (129S6/SvEv-Stat1tm1Rds; Taconic, Germantown, NY). This mouse strain carries a homozygous disruption of the Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription 1 gene that eliminates the intracellular mechanism by which cells respond to interferons, resulting in a mouse model with extreme susceptibility to CCHFV (Bente et al., 2010). Animals were moved from Animal Biosafety Level (ABSL) 2 to the ABSL4 3 days after ticks attached and were subsequently challenged intraperitoneally with 100 plaque forming units of CCHFV IbAr 10200 as previously described (Bente et al., 2010). Mice were humanely euthanized on day 4 post challenge when becoming moribund, which allowed sufficient time for all nymphs to complete feeding. Engorged nymphs were allowed to molt to the next stage in plastic vials within plastic desiccators in climate-controlled environmental growth chambers (27°C ± 1°C, 80% ± 5% relative humidity, and 12/12 h light/darkness cycle) within the BSL4 tick room. Before dissection, ticks were euthanized by placing them in a freezer for 30 min. Salivary glands were removed from newly emerged adults under a stereomicroscope. Total RNA was extracted from salivary glands and the remaining tick body by phenol/chloroform extraction with Trizol (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for RT-PCR testing of CCHFV. Semi-engorged adults were removed 3 days after virus challenge, euthanized, and dissected under the stereomicroscope. Salivary glands, midgut, and ovaries were removed and total RNA isolated from tissues using phenol/chloroform extraction (see above). All samples were tested for CCHFV and amounts calculated as genome equivalence by qRT-PCR using a recombinant RNA standard as previously described (Wolfel et al., 2007) using Qiagen's Quantitect Fast probe kit and were run on a CFX 96 real-time detection system (BioRad, Hercules, CA).ResultsHost comparisonIn the first part of this study, we evaluated three common laboratory animal species (mice, guinea pigs, and rabbits) as hosts for H. marginatum and their influence on the life cycle of the tick. All infestations were done with life stages coming from the same batch and were performed simultaneously on the three hosts to ensure that all ticks were the same age. As seen in nature, H. marginatum exhibited a two-host feeding behavior on all three host species (mice, guinea pigs, rabbits) tested with the larval and nymphal stages feeding on the same host. Animals were checked daily after the larval infestation; none dropped off and no crawling engorged larva were observed. The duration of feeding and molting for ticks fed on each host is summarized in Figure 2. The longest time span for the total life cycle was observed for ticks fed on guinea pigs with 112 days and the shortest life cycle was seen in ticks from mice with 73 days. A major difference was seen in adult feeding time among the species tested extending up to 14 days for ticks fed on guinea pigs although the duration of feeding of immature stages appeared similar.Figure 2Life cycle of Hyalomma marginatum under laboratory conditions when feeding on mice, guinea pigs, and rabbits. Colored segments represent time periods required for different life stages. Bars represent range of values. Values were not compared statistically.Whole body infestation of mice was the least successful feeding technique among the larval feedings with an attachment rate of 1.55% whereas the larval attachment rates in capsules on mice and guinea pigs and in ear bags on rabbits were 40–60, 51–82, and 80–95%, respectively. As a result of the low attachment success rate during whole body infestation, subsequent studies on mice were conducted using capsule infestations to determine the biological features of H. marginatum in mice. Ticks were left on the host molting between larval and nymphal feeding. Larval molting was usually very quick in all tested hosts (2–4 days), and occurred while larvae were still anchored in the host's skin by their mouthparts (Figure 3). The larval exoskeleton ruptured and the newly emerged nymph attached in close proximity to its larval feeding site and then commenced feeding (Figure 3). Mean weights of engorged nymphs that dropped from mice, guinea pigs and rabbits were 20.9 ± 4.6, 13.5 ± 3.9, and 15.25 ± 6.15 mg, respectively and the differences between groups were statistically significant (p < 0.05). Molting success rates of engorged nymphs that had fed on either mice, guinea pigs, or rabbits were 85, 92, and 97%, respectively. Molting periods are listed in Figure 2. After molting to the adult stage, male and female ticks were fed on the same host species. Switching host species between different life stages was not attempted in this study. Adult pre-oviposition and oviposition feeding times are shown in Figure 2. Mean engorged weights were 568.20 ± 150.79, 231.88 ± 40.84, and 435.32 ± 83.50 mg for the females that were fed on mice, guinea pigs, and rabbits, respectively and the differences were statistically significant between groups (p < 0.05). Oviposited egg masses (mg) of female ticks, representing the total number of eggs laid by an individual female in a 24 h period, feeding on mice, rabbits and guinea pigs were measured daily as depicted in Figures 4 A–C. For females fed on mice, the largest daily egg mass weights were deposited early in the oviposition phase with declining weights over a 10–12 day period; whereas for females fed on guinea pigs and rabbits, oviposition started with lower egg mass weights. Subsequently, the egg mass increased to highest weights at the second and third days and were maintained for 9–11 days in rabbits, and 8–10 days in guinea pigs. Mean total egg mass weights were 396.6 ± 88.84 mg in mice, 98.44 ± 20.38 mg in guinea pig and 248.88 ± 64.93 mg in rabbit. Egg masses were estimated to contain between 2303 and 9288 eggs. The CEI vs. weight can be found in Figures 4D,E. Comparison of the engorged weights, total egg mass weights and weight gains (%) of the females fed on the three different hosts is provided in the Figure 4F. Maximum weight gains were observed in the female H. marginatum ticks feeding on mice. Adult H. marginatum ticks remove a significant amount of blood during feeding, which could lead potentially lead to anemia in mice, and needs to be taken into consideration when using mice as host model for adult H. marginatum ticks. Larvae hatching times are given in Figure 2. Larval hatching rates were between 50–70, 85–95, and 70–90% for the egg batches oviposited by females fed on mice, rabbits, and guinea pigs, respectively.Figure 3Molting larvae and newly emerged nymphs feeding on guinea pig (top) and rabbit (bottom). Red arrows indicate molting larvae. White arrows show ruptured cuticles left from molted and emerged larvae still attached to the skin. Newly emerged nymphs feeding in close proximity to where they fed as larvae (black arrow).Figure 4Summary of oviposition data (A–F). Newly deposited egg mass weights measured daily of the females fed on mice (A), guinea pigs (B), and rabbits (C). Each color represents an individual female. Comparisons of egg mass to engorged weight (D) and weight gain to conversion efficiency index (CEI) in (E). (F) Comparison of the engorged weights, total egg mass weights, and weight gains (%) of the females fed on the three different hosts. For D–F, data are color-coded in gray for mice, orange for guinea pigs, and blue for rabbits.Tick controlAs part of the establishment of the tick work at BSL4, adult H. marginatum ticks were submerged in commonly used disinfectants in order to evaluate the ability to kill ticks (Table 1). Ethanol was fast acting; it killed 100% of the ticks within 1.5 h, followed by formalin and bleach (2 h). Interestingly, Microchem, commonly used as a disinfectant in chemical showers of the BSL4 laboratories, took up to 120 h post exposure to kill 100% of the ticks.Table 1Killing times of Hyalomma marginatum using different disinfectants.TimeCavicideMicrochem 5%Formalin 10%Bleach 5%Ethanol 70%15 min0000030 min00002545 min00005060 min00025751.5 h0075751002 h001001003 h004 h2506 h7508 h100012 h024 h036 h048 h2572 h5096 h75120 h100Table depicts the percent of ticks that are killed when submerged in disinfectant for a particular amount of time. Experiments were done with eight ticks in each group. Ticks were rinsed with deionized water after exposure, wiped clean, and kept in the incubator for 72 h at 27°C with 80% RH to determine if any ticks become active.Transmission studiesA total of five non-infected adult H. marginatum ticks were fed on three STAT-1 KO mice challenged with 100 PFU of CCHFV IbAr 10200 and removed 3 days post virus challenge. Ticks were dissected, RNA extracted from both salivary gland pairs, midgut and ovaries, and were tested were for CCHFV by QRT-PCR. CCHFV RNA was found in pairs of salivary glands (1.01 × 107 to 2.31 × 109 genome equivalents), total midgut (3.74 × 104 to 1.67 × 107 genome equivalents) and in the ovaries (8.54 × 102 to 6.12 × 103 genome equivalents) of all five ticks. Subsequently, a total of 8 CCHFV-negative H. marginatum nymphs were fed on 3 STAT-1 KO mice that had been challenged with 100 PFU of CCHFV IbAr 10200. After molting to the adult stage was completed, ticks were dissected and salivary glands were removed. RNA was extracted from salivary glands and remaining tick body. All eight adult ticks were positive for CCHFV by QRT-PCR. The CCHFV genome equivalents values ranges from 8.68 × 105 to 3.05 × 108 in the body and 4.74 × 104 to 6.49 × 108 in the pairs of salivary glands.DiscussionH. marginatum is considered to be the main vector for CCHFV in southern Europe, parts of the Middle East, Africa, and Central Asia (Figure 1). Only three studies have characterized the life cycle of this tick species in a laboratory setting (Hueli et al., 1984b; Ouhelli, 1994; Yukari et al., 2011) and no studies describe the life cycle of this species when fed on laboratory animals. Studies on the transmission of CCHFV with this tick species are also very limited and involve only the natural hosts (Zgurskaya et al., 1971; Levi and Vasilenko, 1972; Blagoveshchenskaya et al., 1975; Kondratenko, 1976; Zarubinsky et al., 1976). Here we characterized three different laboratory animal species as experimental hosts for H. marginatum. The genus Hyalomma includes one, two or three host tick species. Some species such as H. anatolicum, H. scupense, and H. dromedarii can complete their life cycle using either one or two hosts. Another member of the genus, H. excavatum is known to follow two or three host biology depending on the hosts (Apanaskevich, 2004). H. marginatum is known as a two host tick species, feeding on birds and small mammals as immatures, and feeding as adults on large mammals primarily on artiodactyls (Hoogstraal, 1979; Apanaskevich, 2004). Yukari et al. (2011) reported that H. marginatum is a strict two host tick within their experimental design using rabbits and cattle for larval and adult feeding, respectively. Conversely, Ouhelli (1994) suggested that H. marginatum is able to switch to a three host life cycle as seen with H. scupense and H. excavatum. However, only data of a two host life cycle were presented. Furthermore, Ouhelli describes H. marginatum adults as not completing their engorgement on the rabbit host. We observed however that H. marginatum adults completed feeding successfully on rabbits, confirming the report of Yukari et al. studies (2011). More importantly, we also demonstrated that H. marginatum shows a strict two-host life cycle with all three host species: larvae engorged and molted to the nymphal stage onsite and attached to the same host on all three host types.Capsule feeding is desirable in a biocontainment setting to better control the ticks especially before feeding commences. We expected that the feeding capsule would result in a generally lower attachment rates since a feeding capsule does not give the tick the full opportunity to quest for an appropriate feeding spot. Nonetheless, attachment success rates during capsule feeding were generally high and varied between 40 and 95% depending on the host. Interestingly, whole body infestation rates of larvae on mice was far lower (1.55% success rates) compared to capsule feeding (>40%). Although the lower level of attachment rates might have been due to the removal of ticks during grooming, Hoogstraal proposed that rodents are generally not an appropriate host for immature stages of H. marginatum (Hoogstraal, 1979). H. isaaci, previously grouped as a subspecies of H. marginatum (formerly H. marginatum isaaci), was also reported to not parasitize rats and mice experimentally (Das and Subramanian, 1972). In another experimental study, H. rufipes (formerly H. m. rufipes), was also reported to attach poorly to field mice (Magano et al., 2000). Most rodents live in burrows in nests with considerably higher humidity, which does not fit the environmental needs of H. marginatum and other former subspecies. Also, these rodents have a social grooming behavior which is likely to remove a large proportion of instars. All of these factors may have played a role in the development of an incompatibility between these tick species and host species.Das and Subramanian (1972) reported that 91.5% of H. isaaci larvae attached to rabbit and dropped as engorged nymphs in 15–18 days, while very few larvae attached and engorged on guinea pigs. In our study, similar attachment results were seen for H. marginatum on rabbits; however, attachment rates on guinea pig were far greater (51–82%).Molting times for nymphs in our study were similar for all three species studied, and correlate with what has been reported in nature (Petrova-Piontkovskaya, 1947) and in laboratory conditions (Yukari et al., 2011).Mean engorged weights of nymphs were measured as 20.9 ± 4.6, 15.25 ± 6.15 and 13.5 ± 3.9 mg for those fed on mice, rabbits, and guinea pigs, respectively. Significantly, higher mean engorgement weights were recorded on nymphs of H. truncatum which fed on the field mice as well and the authors explained this finding with the feeding on non-natural and natural hosts of the ticks (Magano et al., 2000). Molting rates were 85, 92, and 97% for the nymphs that dropped off from mice, guinea pigs, and rabbits, respectively. Similar molting rates were reported with rabbits (Hueli et al., 1984b). For H. rufipes nymphs, higher molting success was reported when engorged on guinea pigs (100%) and striped mice (Rhabdomys pumilio) (99.9%). Considering that H. rufipes has shown three-host feeding pattern on mice, which is not seen in H. marginatum biology, this elevated molting success could have arisen due to the adjustment of this species to hosts of a wider range (Magano et al., 2000).Adult feeding times (for female ticks) were considerably longer for those fed on guinea pigs (11–14 days) as compared to rabbits (7–9 days), or mice (5–8 days). Feeding times on rabbits were reported to be up to 21 (Yukari et al., 2011) and 13 days (Hueli et al., 1984b) previously. On the other hand, higher engorgement weights were seen in females fed on mice (556 ± 207 mg), although feeding times for this stage on this host were considerably shorter (5–8 days) in our study. Differences seen in feeding time and engorgement weights on various hosts could be explained by factors of feeding on natural and non-natural hosts, in a similar way to that reported for nymphal stages (Magano et al., 2000); however, questions such as why different stages engorge with different maximum weights on different hosts, requires further detailed studies involving immunological aspects of the hosts and feeding patterns.Daily oviposition by the females fed on different hosts showed distinct patterns as seen in Figures 4A–C. When fed on guinea pigs and rabbits, oviposition started with lower egg mass weights, subsequently, the egg mass increased to the highest weights at 2nd–3rd day as described similarly by Ouhelli (1994) who fed the female ticks on rabbits and cattle. On the contrary, when fed on mice, oviposition began with the highest daily egg mass weights with subsequent egg masses weighing less each day. Considering the cattle and rabbits are the natural hosts for H. marginatum, females fed on guinea pigs could be regarded as showing similar egg laying pattern to natural biology.Here, we also describe our work with ticks at BSL4, which to our knowledge not been reported before. The construction of a BSL4 facility and the arrangement of a tick facility within it, low humidity maintained in the facility and required operating procedures all are sufficient to guarantee that no escaped tick life stage could survive for an extended time. Nevertheless, it remains a fundamental responsibility for those working with ticks in the BSL4 laboratory to ensure that all ticks are safely contained. Arthropod security is based on multiple layers of containment. As demonstrated here, ticks are very resistant to being submerged or covered in disinfectant solution of any kind. Although a tick is most likely to be washed off the positive pressure protective suit during the mandatory chemical decontamination shower when exiting the BSL4 facility—and would ultimately be destroyed during the effluent waste sterilization process—this method of killing the ticks would be considered the worst case scenario. The most critical objective is to take every possible precaution to ensure that all ticks remain accounted for in the dedicated room within the BSL4. We demonstrated in our study that all tick stages can be successfully fed within a feeding capsule fastened to the animal's back, which further facilitates controlling the tick escape. Although the use of a capsule denies the tick's innate behavior to quest for a suitable feeding site, the success rates demonstrated in our studies were high.In order to study the interaction of CCHFV with its tick host, a technique that reliably infects ticks with the virus is desirable. Parental virus inoculation such as oral or anal are difficult to conduct in instar stages of ticks whereas intracolemic inoculation is not useful for vector competence studies (Randolph and Nuttall, 1994). Furthermore, all above mentioned techniques are difficult to conduct in a BSL4 setting. A host feeding model which mimics the natural infection is therefore desirable. Previous studies looked at CCHFV transmission from host animals challenged with the virus to different species of Hyalomma ticks (Logan et al., 1989a; Shepherd et al., 1989; Dickson and Turell, 1992; Gordon et al., 1993; Dohm et al., 1996). Generally speaking, the transmission rates are fairly low. For example, Logan et al. noted an 4.4% tick infection rate when feeding on suckling mice challenged with CCHFV (Logan et al., 1989a). Transmission rates were 13% for H. impeltatum nymphs feeding on CCHFV-challenged guinea pigs (Dohm et al., 1996). This is most likely due to the fact that the utilized host animals have no or very low level viremia compared to some of their natural hosts. Interferon response knockout mice have recently been described as an animal model that mimics human disease (Bente et al., 2010; Bereczky et al., 2010; Zivcec et al., 2013). It was demonstrated that CCHFV replication results in viremia levels of up to 1010 genome equivalents per ml (Bente et al., 2010) or >103 TCID50/μ l (Zivcec et al., 2013). We hypothesized that feeding H. marginatum nymphs on STAT-1 KO mice will ensure that the tick is exposed to high levels of CCHFV during feeding, and therefore, result in a reliable infection of the tick with the virus. As hypothesized, the high viremia level resulted in 100% infection of H. marginatum nymphs during feeding as well as 100% infection after molting, which demonstrates transstadial transmission. Therefore, the in vivo feeding model on STAT-1 KO mice is a means to reliably infect H. marginatum ticks with CCHFV. Furthermore, the CCHFV-infected adults that are generated in this model can then be used to study the transmission of CCHFV from the tick to the mammalian host. Despite the limitation of only be able to use small tick numbers per experiment, this is a valuable tool to study the transmission of the virus and vector competence for CCHFV of various other tick species.Conflict of interest statementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus in tortoises and 

IntroductionCrimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a viral (Bunyavirales) zoonoses that is endemic to Africa, the Balkans, the Middle East, and Western Asia, and occurs within countries south of the 50° parallel north, where 3 billion people are globally at risk and approximately 10,000 to 15,000 human cases are estimated to occur with approximately 500 deaths annually [1]. CCHF epidemiology in the Republic of Turkey represents a unique situation, as the first human cases were reported in 2002, and since then case numbers have increased significantly [2]. According to data from Turkey’s Ministry of Health [3], 11,041 human cases with a fatality rate of 4.8% have been recorded from 2002 to the end of 2018. The disease is recorded in almost all parts of the country with different incidences, and most of the cases (c.95%) have been reported from the northern plateau of central and eastern Anatolia, especially from Kelkit Valley and its associated extensions (Fig. 1). In Turkey, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is transmitted to humans predominantly via infected tick bites and in some cases, through nosocomial transmission [4].Fig. 1Feeding site preference of Hyalomma aegyptium infestation on T. graeca. aH. aegyptium immature stages co-feeding on the rostral part of the host. bH. aegyptium adult life stages prefer feeding between the leg and tail on the caudal region of the hostCCHFV is maintained in nature in a silent transmission cycle between ticks of the genus Hyalomma and their hosts, where ticks are considered both the vector and the natural reservoir of the agent. Of those, H. marginatum was reported to have the most prominent role (e.g. primary CCHFV transmission cycle) in the Western Palearctic region, including in Turkey in the natural history of the disease [4, 5]. This tick species is a two-host tick in which the immature stages feed on some small or medium-sized animals such as hare, hedgehog, and ground-dwelling birds whereas the adults prefer to feed on ruminants, especially cattle [6].Hyalomma aegyptium (Linnaeus, 1758) is a three-host tick and has an extremely long feeding period compared to most of the other tick species [7]. All stages, but especially adults, are highly host- specific and feed primarily on tortoises. Occasionally H. aegyptium immatures are found on other animals such as hedgehogs, other mammals [6, 8, 9] and humans [10–12]. As the result of dependence on tortoise hosts, H. aegyptium is found particularly in the Mediterranean region, the Black Sea, and the Middle East, and penetrates eastwards as far as Central Asia, Afghanistan and Pakistan, where tortoise species belong to the genus Testudo are found [9, 13]. Testudo graeca is the most frequently reported host of H. aegyptium [9], but this tick can be encountered on T. horsfieldii [14], T. marginata (Schoepff, 1789), T. hermanni [9], and rarely on T. kleinmanni (Lortet, 1883) [15]. As for tick species infesting tortoises, it is known that H. aegyptium is the primary tick species infesting Palaearctic tortoises, Testudo spp. [9, 16, 17].Our previous studies have shown that the principle tick species associated with the biting of humans in the Thrace region of Turkey are immature stages of H. aegyptium [10, 11]. The frequency of record of this tick species on humans varies from region to region in Turkey, possibly depending on the varying population density of the tick in different regions [10, 18, 19]. It is known that T. graeca can be found in all parts of Turkey except for the east part of the Black Sea coastline, while T. hermanni is found primarily in the north-west half of the Thrace region [20, 21]. There are no detailed data about distribution and density of the tortoise population in Turkey; however, the reported data related to human-biting H. aegyptium seems to be useful for related estimation at this point. For example, in Thrace, Istanbul, other parts of the Marmara Sea basin, and Aegean regions, percentages of larval and nymphal stages of Hyalomma in human-biting ticks were reported to vary between 0.7–1.5% and 23.6–68.5% respectively [10, 11, 12, 22]; these stages were morphologically described as H. aegyptium in some of the studies [10, 11]. However, these values were 0.2% and 27.1% in Ankara [19], and 0.0–0.5% and 7.9-–21.6% in Kelkit Valley, CCHF hot spot of Turkey [23].Recently, reports have demonstrated the presence of CCHFV genomic material in H. aegyptium as well as CCHFV seroconversion within the ticksʼ primary host, tortoises belonging to the genus Testudo [24–27]. Nevertheless, data supporting the relevance of H. aegyptium ticks in the role of CCHFV transmission to humans are lacking, and it is unclear if this tick species has any role in the natural dynamics of the virus. This study examined the presence of CCHFV in H. aegyptium ticks and their tortoise hosts in the Thrace region of Turkey and sought to understand whether H. aegyptium and its tortoise host play a role in the ecology of the CCHFV maintenance in this region. In this study, different life stages of H. aegyptium were collected, i.e. questing ticks in the field and ticks feeding on various tortoise hosts (T. graeca and T. hermanni). Blood was also drawn concurrently from tortoises harboring H. aegyptium within this region and examined for CCHFV. Our results indicate the presence of CCHFV in questing and feeding H. aegyptium ticks as well as in the tortoise host, potentially indicating a CCHFV cryptic transmission cycle that could play a role in maintaining the virus in nature.MethodsStudy areaThis study was conducted in the European part of Turkey, known as East Thrace (41° 58′ N, 27° 22′ E at center), which is bordered by Greece, Bulgaria, the Bosphorus Strait, and the Black, Marmara, and Aegean Seas. The western districts of Istanbul Province, Catalca and Silivri, and Tekirdag, Kirklareli and Edirne provinces, were included in this study (Fig 2a, b). According to the records of the Turkish State Meteorological Service [28], there are two distinct geographical conditions within East Thrace: the interior and southern regions contain plains, undulating landscape, and cultivable areas with short and dry vegetation, whereas the north is hallmarked by high mountains and dense, rainy, deciduous forests. The bordering seas contribute to diverse and transitional weather patterns; however, the overall region is characterized by hot (27 °C) and moderately rainy summers, and cold (0–4 °C) snowy or rainy winters, with an average annual precipitation of around 700 mm. In the entire study region, the population is 1,922,695 (around 70–75% in urban areas), the surface area is 21,108 km2, and population density is 91.1 per km2.Fig. 2View of the study sites and visual representations of selected data at each sampling site. a An overview map of the field study site in the Turkish region of East Thrace. b Inset map visualizing 32 sample collection sites in East Thrace. c Proportional symbol map of the total number of ticks collected from the field and from tortoises at each sample site. d Relative proportion map of tick pools positive (white) and negative (black) for CCHFV by nested RT-PCR at each sample site. e Relative proportion map of tortoise blood samples positive (white) and negative (black) for CCHFV by nested RT-PCR at each sample site. Maps were created using ArcGIS® software by Esri. Raw data are provided in Additional file 1: Tables S1 and S2Field study and sample collectionField studies were carried out from 2016–2018, during the temperate and warm months of the spring and summer. Thirty-two sampling sites belonging to fourteen districts of Istanbul, Tekirdag, Kirklareli and Edirne provinces were visited (Fig 2b, Table 1). The tortoises were captured by hand during grazing within their natural environment and were identified for sex and species using taxonomic keys [20], and all parasitizing ticks from each animal were collected and placed in separate labeled vials. Blood samples were collected in heparinized tubes via the subcarapacial venous sinuses of tortoises ≥ 10 cm of straight carpal length (SCL; the straight-line measurement from the outermost projection of the nuchal plate to the posterior end of supracaudalia) following previously published protocols [29]. Questing, unfed adult ticks were collected by direct inspection/hand-picking and immature stages were collected by dragging at each sampling site. All samples were transported under cool conditions to the laboratory on the day of sampling, and during this period no specific medium was used. The tick stage, sex and species were identified according to taxonomic keys [14], before storage at -80 °C.Table 1Location data of study sites in East Thrace, TurkeySite No.LocalityDistrict, ProvinceCoordinates (altitude)Altitude (m)1Cemetery of the districtCatalca, Istanbul41° 08′ N, 28° 27′ E1102Pond of SinekliSilivri, Istanbul41° 14′ N, 28° 11′ E2003Cemetery of K. KilicliSilivri, Istanbul41° 07′ N, 28° 12′ E824Cemetery of GumusyakaSilivri, Istanbul41° 02′ N, 28° 02′ E425Cemetery of SultankoyMarmaraereglisi, Tekirdag41° 01′ N, 27° 59′ E176Cemetery of YeniciftlikCorlu, Tekirdag41° 00′ N, 27° 51′ E717Cemetery of the districtSuleymanpasa, Tekirdag41° 58′ N, 27° 31′ E388Cemetery of KumbagSuleymanpasa, Tekirdag40° 51′ N, 27° 27′ E359Cemetery of the districtMuratli, Tekirdag41° 10′ N, 27° 29′ E8710Cemetery of MisinliCorlu, Tekirdag41° 18′ N, 27° 36′ E8211Field of KastroSaray, Tekirdag41° 35′ N, 28° 08′ E4012Cemetery of B. KaristiranLuleburgaz, Kirklareli41° 17′ N, 27° 32′ E7513Field of EvrenliVize, Kirklareli41° 31′ N, 27° 51′ E17014Cemetery of the districtVize, Kirklareli41° 34′ N, 27° 46′ E22415Field of the districtVize, Kirklareli41° 34′ N, 27° 47′ E23016Field of KomurkoyVize, Kirklareli41° 38′ N, 27° 52′ E19517Cemetery of KiyikoyVize, Kirklareli41° 37′ N, 28° 05′ E4718Field of ArmaganCentral district, Kirklareli41° 52′ N, 27° 25′ E44119Field of DuzormanCentral district, Kirklareli41° 50′ N, 27° 22′ E40120Field of KorukoyCentral district, Kirklareli41° 51′ N, 27° 19′ E48221Field of KuzuluCentral district, Kirklareli41° 52′ N, 27° 16′ E38222Field of DevletliaagacKofcaz, Kirklareli41° 58′ N, 26° 59′ E40923Field of CayirliCentral district, Kirklareli41° 52′ N, 27° 02′ E24524Field of KarahamzaCentral district, Kirklareli41° 50′ N, 27° 02′ E37625Field of YoguntasCentral district, Kirklareli41° 50′ N, 27° 03′ E45326Cemetery of YoguntasCentral district, Kirklareli41° 49′ N, 27° 04′ E33327Field of KayaliCentral district, Kirklareli41° 48′ N, 27° 05′ E29928Cemetery of ArpacHavsa, Edirne41° 41′ N, 26° 53′ E11829Cemetery of KaraagacCentral district, Edirne41° 38′ N, 26° 32′ E3630Cemetery of OsmanliHavsa, Edirne41° 35′ N, 26° 50′ E8331Cemetery of the districtHavsa, Edirne41° 32′ N, 26° 49′ E9132Cemetery of KircasalihUzunkopru, Edirne41° 23′ N, 26° 48′ E113Viral RNA isolation and nested PCR assayThe tick samples collected from tortoises were pooled according to the site, and the stage, engorgement status, and sex (in most samples) of the ticks. Questing, unfed adult ticks collected from the ground were examined individually and immature questing stages were pooled according to the stages (larvae and nymphs). The tick samples were homogenized in liquid nitrogen and then total RNA was extracted using the E.Z.N.A®Viral RNA Kit (Omega Bio-Tech, Georgia, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Extracted RNA samples were stored at -80 °C until use. The Qiagen®OneStep RT-PCR Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used in the first step of the nested PCR with the primers Eecf-F1 (5′-TTG TGT TCC AGA TGG CCA GC-3′), Eecf-R1 (5′-CTT AAG GCT GCC GTG TTT GC-3′), Eecf-F2 (5′-GAA GCA ACC AAR TTC TGT GC-3′), Eecf-R2 (5′-AAA CCT ATG TCC TTC CTC C-3′), to amplify a 211-bp fragment of the small (S) segment of CCHFV [30].The RNA samples extracted from ticks and blood were processed within a Biosafety level 4 laboratory at the Galveston National Laboratory (Galveston, Texas, USA), using a CP02 cryoPREP automated dry pulverizer (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA) on frozen and weighed tick samples. Homogenates were resuspended in Hanks balanced salt solution (Corning, Manassas, VA, USA) supplemented with 2% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Resuspended homogenates were added in a 1:5 ratio of Trizol reagent (Invitrogen), and RNAs were extracted using Direct-zol RNA miniprep kit (Zymo Research, Tustin, CA, USA), quantified, and first-strand cDNA synthesis was accomplished following SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase kit instructions (Invitrogen). Amplification of first-strand cDNAs was accomplished using Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase kits (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA) using previously listed primer sets, along with laboratory created pan-CCHFV primer sets (available upon request by contacting D. Bente). Nested PCR of amplified products was run for optimization and/or verification purposes using DreamTaq PCR master mix kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with clade-specific CCHFV primer sets within the pan-primer set amplified regions. Amplified fragments from both PCR and the nested PCR reactions were extracted using Zymoclean gel DNA recovery kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, USA), and Sanger sequencing was performed via the UTMB Molecular Genomics Core (Galveston, Texas, USA). Sequenced products were compared to an in-house curated library of GenBank available CCHFV sequences using Geneious R11 (Auckland, New Zealand).Phylogenetic analysis of CCHF virusPCR and nested PCR products were purified using polyethylene glycol (PEG) and the concentrations were determined photodensitometrically by comparison with a DNA standard using Bio1D [31]. For the phylogenetic analysis of purified DNA according to CCHFV S segment, the automatic sequence analysis method based on the Sanger method was used.Purified DNA was bidirectionally sequenced and analyzed using GenomeLab DTCS—Quick Start DNA Sequencing Kit (GenomeLab DTCS, California, USA), using the Beckman Coulter GenomeLabGeXP Genetic Analysis System version 10.2 program. For the alignment of sequences, BioEdit version 7.2.5 was used [32]. The sequences were compared with the CCHFV sequences in the GenBank database. As outgroups, Dugbe virus (GenBank: FJ392604.1) and Hazara virus (GenBank: KP406725.1) were chosen. The number of tree generations was 1 million with partitions of frequency ≥ 0.10 in at least one run. The average standard deviation of split frequencies was 0.043382 and the maximum standard deviation of split frequencies was 0.237352. The average potential scale reduction factor (PSRF) for parameter values (excluding NA and > 10.0) was 1.026 and the maximum PSRF for parameter values was 1.576. The evolutionary history was inferred by using the Maximum Likelihood method based on the Kimura 2-parameter model [33]. The tree with the highest log-likelihood (−1913.02) is shown. The percentage of trees in which the associated taxa clustered together is shown next to the branches. Initial trees for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by applying Neighbor-Join and BioNJ algorithms to a matrix of pairwise distances estimated using the Maximum Composite Likelihood (MCL) approach and then selecting the topology with a superior log-likelihood value. The analysis involved 50 nucleotide sequences. All positions containing gaps and missing data were excluded; the final dataset contained a total of 212 positions. Evolutionary analyses were conducted in MEGA X [34].Study sites mapsMaps were created using ArcGIS® software by Esri (https://www.esri.com). ArcMap™ version 10.7 was used to create an overview map, inset map, proportional symbol map and relative proportion maps using the data supplied in Additional file 1: Tables S1 and S2.ResultsTick infestation characteristics in the tortoisesDuring the study period, 71 feral adult tortoises from 32 different sites were examined for tick infestation in rural and urban parts of East Thrace (Table 2). Of those 71 tortoises, 65 [91.55%; 5 T. hermanni (♀) and 60 T. graeca (14♂, 46♀)], were infested with ticks. All the ticks found on the tortoises were identified as H. aegyptium. The biggest tortoise infested with ticks was a T. graeca female (at site 6, in May 2017) with 24.05 cm SCL. No ticks were found on tortoises with an SCL smaller than 10 cm (juveniles) exception for one specimen of T. graeca (from site 7, in May 2018) with an SCL of 7.09 cm from which 3 nymphs were collected. In total, 753 ticks (448 males, 152 females, 93 nymphs and 60 larvae) were collected from the animals. The counts of infested animals by male, female, nymphal and larval ticks were 57, 46, 16 and 9, respectively, and the counts of male, female, nymphal and larval stages per infested tortoise varied between 1–24, 1–12, 1–17 and 1–15, respectively. The greatest tick count was observed on a female T. graeca (at site 7); from this individual, 24 males, 5 females and 3 nymphs were collected in total. The study was performed in spring, summer and autumn seasons, with all three life stages (larva, nymph and adult) of H. aegyptium found in all three seasons. Co-feeding occurring among the different life stages of the ticks was frequently encountered. Although the immature stages of this species were found in the rostral part and adult stages were found in the caudal part of tortoises, this was not canonical, especially for adults which could feed in the frontal part of the body together with immature ticks (Fig. 1a, b). On ten tortoises, larval, nymph and mature stages of H. aegyptium were found as they were feeding simultaneously on the same animals. On seven tortoises, larvae were found with other stages, while on two tortoises they fed alone. On fourteen tortoises, nymphs were found with other stages, and on two tortoises they were found alone.Table 2Overview of H. aegyptium tick stages and blood samples collected from infested tortoisesSite no.Sample no.No. of tortoises screened (species/sex)Samples collected from the tortoisesNo. of ticksaNo. of tick poolsNo. of blood samples112 (T. graeca /♀)20M, 11F2–221 (T. graeca /♀)3M1131 (T. graeca /♀)1M, 1F, 1N, 10L4141 (T. graeca /♀)1M, 2F2151 (T. graeca /♀)4M, 11F2–61 (T. graeca /♂)3M, 1F, 5N2–71 (T. graeca /♀)2F, 2N2–381 (T. graeca /♀)2M11491 (T. graeca /♂)4M, 3F1–101 (T. graeca /♂)1M, 2F1–5111 (T. graeca /♀)19M, 3F21121 (T. graeca /♀)1M, 5F1–6131 (T. graeca /♀)11M11141 (T. graeca /♀)8M, 5F21151 (T. graeca /♀)24M, 1F21161 (T. graeca /♀)12M, 2F21171 (T. graeca /♀)10M, 3F21181 (T. graeca /♀)21M117191 (T. graeca /♂)1M, 1F21201 (T. graeca /♀)12M, 3F21211 (T. graeca /♀)24M, 5F, 3N31221 (T. graeca /♀)10M, 6F21231 (T. graeca /♀)3M, 5N2–241 (T. graeca /♀)1F, 13N, 2L3–251 (T. graeca /♀)3M1–261 (T. graeca /♂)3M, 2F2–271 (T. graeca /♀)1M1–281 (T. graeca /♂)3M1–2913 (T. graeca /7♀,6♂)78M, 21F, 36N19–8301 (T. graeca/♂)5M1–9312 (T. graeca /♀)33M, 22F2–10321 (T. graeca /♀)9M, 2F1–11332 (T. graeca /♀)3M, 3N2–12342 (T. graeca /♀)34M, 7F2–13351 (T. graeca /♀)8M, 3F2–14361 (T. graeca /♀)11M, 6F, 5N, 1L4115371 (T. graeca/♂)2M1–18381 (T. graeca /♀)7M, 2F2–23392 (T. graeca /♀)8M, 4F3–25401 (T. graeca /♀)5M, 3F, 1N, 7L41411 (T. graeca /♀)17M, 10F21421 (T. hermanni /♀)1F, 5N, 5L3126431 (T. hermanni /♀)5L1–28441 (T. hermanni /♀)1F, 15L21451 (T. hermanni /♀)6N, 5L2–29461 (T. graeca /♀)17M1131471 (T. graeca /♀)10L1–32481 (T. hermanni /♀)8N1–Total65 (5 T. hermanni, 60 T.graeca)753 (448M, 152F, 93N, 60L)106211449Questing ticks collected from the sites6N, 125L516501M, 50L217511N, 6L2185212M, 5F1719533M320545M, 3F821551M122561F123572M, 3F524581F125592L127601M128614L1Total312 (25M, 13F, 8N, 266L)52aData broken down by sex and life stageAbbreviations: M, male; F, female; N, nymph; L, larvaCCHFV genome detection in tick and tortoise samplesDuring the study period, 21 blood samples from different tortoises (2 T. hermanni and 19 T. graeca), 106 tick pools (containing 448 males, 152 females, 93 nymphs and 60 larvae) collected from 65 tortoises (5 T. hermanni and 60 T. graeca), 38 adult unfed questing ticks (25 males and 13 females, screened individually) and 14 pools (containing 8 nymphs and 266 larvae) of immature unfed questing ticks collected from the ground, were screened by nested PCR in total. As a result of the screening of these 179 samples, 17 (9.5%) were detected as positive as follows: 2 of 21 blood samples (9.52%); 13 tick pools from 12 separate tortoises (containing 18 nymphs in 3 pools, and 52 males and 8 females in 10 pools) of 106 tick pools from tortoises (12.26%); and 2 of 38 adult questing ticks (5.26%). No positive result was determined in 14 pools of immature questing ticks. In site 7, where the positivity was highest, 38 tick pools (containing 138 males, 39 females, 57 nymphs and 2 larvae) and 4 blood samples taken from 23 tortoises were screened, and of those, 8 tick pools (21.05%) were positive, taken from 7 tortoises (30.44%), but no blood positivity was determined in this site. Four tick pools (8 males, 5 females, 1 female and 15 larvae) consisting of newly attached, unfed ticks collected from two tortoises which were determined as blood-positive were negative, possibly as a result of their recent attachment. One pool was positive for each of the pools taken from the three tortoises whose blood samples were determined negative for CCHFV (Fig. 2d, e; Table 3).Table 3Overview of samples positive for the CCHFV genome by RT-PCRSite No.Sample No.DateOrigin of the positive samplesScreened samples/pools from the positive originsResult26June 2016T. graeca (♂)5N+3M, 1F–7T. graeca (♀)2F+2N–511May 2017T. graeca (♀)Blood–3F–19M+614May 2017T. graeca (♀)Blood+8M–5F–18T. graeca (♀)Blood–21M+720May 2017T. graeca (♀)Blood–3F+12M–23July 2016T. graeca (♀)3M+5N+24T. graeca (♀)1F+13N–2L–25April 2018T. graeca (♀)3M+26T. graeca (♂)3M, 2F+27T. graeca (♀)1M+28T. graeca (♂)3M+2844July 2017T. hermanni (♀)Blood+1F–15L–3248July 2017T. hermanni (♀)8N+2054June 2016Field (questing, unfed ticks)1M+1F+4Ma–2Fa–aTick samples that were screened individually for the presence of the CCHFV genomeAbbreviations: M, male; F, female; N, nymph; L, larva; +, RT-PCR positive; –, RT-PCR negativeIn this study, we detected CCHFV (Clade V/Europe 1) in tick pools collected from tortoises (13/106; 12.26%), and in tortoise blood samples (2/21; 9.52%). Sequences are available under GenBank accessions numbers MN864494 and MN864495, respectively. This result indicates that this virus strain is possibly circulating at least among the tortoises and H. aegyptium in East Thrace. As a result of analyses of the 211-bp sequence of the virus S-segment, we detected a 2–5 bp difference between the present virus sequence and other sequences belonging to clade V virus on GenBank reported from H. marginatum from Turkey and Kosovo (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Phylogentic tree for CCHFV sequences based on a 211-bp fragment of the S-segment generated from tick and tortoise samples. CCHFV Clade V (Europe 1) was detected in tick pools collected from tortoises and in tortoise blood samplesDiscussionRecent reports have demonstrated the presence of CCHFV genomic material in H. aegyptium [24–27]. This raises the question as to whether these ticks and their hosts play a role in maintaining CCHFV in nature. Unfortunately, the existing data is geographically and ecologically limited, and assessing the relevance of H. aegyptium and their hosts in perpetuating CCHFV in nature, and a potential spillover to humans, remains difficult. Here, we address this question for the East Thrace region in Turkey, where H. aegyptium is the most common human-biting tick species.In this study, we detected CCHFV in 12.26 % (13/106 pools) of the H. aegyptium tick pools collected from the tortoises, and in 5.26% (2/38 pools) unfed, adult questing field ticks. Importantly, the 13 positive tick pools were obtained from 12 separate tortoises (Table 3). The fact that these 13 positive tick pools were collected not from the same host but rather from many different hosts indicates that CCHFV prevalence is widespread and not that one tortoise is the super-transmitter for multiple tick pools. The percentage determined in the ticks collected from tortoises is within the range of other similar studies. In a study conducted in districts in Turkey and Syria on the east-north coastal area of the Mediterranean Sea, 245 adult H. aegyptium collected from 38 T. graeca were screened using RT-PCR; this study revealed a prevalence of 30.2%, and the sequenced virus was reported to be in clade III (Africa-3) [24]. In Algeria, 56 adult H. aegyptium collected from 12 T. graeca tortoises were tested for the virus, and 16 (28.6%) ticks were determined as positive for CCHFV, with 98–100% identity to the AP92 strain (Clade VI/Europe-2) [25]. The fact that the CCHFV genome can be found in unfed, questing ticks is evidence for a transstadial transmission of the virus (Fig. 4). Phylogenetic analysis of the partial S-segment indicated that all the sequences obtained from CCHFV-positive ticks as well as tortoises (see below) were 100% identical to each other and clustered in Clade V (Europe 1) (Fig. 3). The related analyses showed that sequences exhibited 97–99% identity with the other sequences reported from Turkey and Kosovo. This is the same clade as the currently circulating CCHFV strains in Turkey in H. marginatum ticks and their hosts. This might be an indicator that a tortoise-tick CCHFV transmission cycle is not an isolated cycle and actively connects with the CCHFV transmission cycle in H. marginatum (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Proposed cryptic CCHFV transmission cycle in H. aegyptium and their hosts in East Thrace and the well-described primary CCHFV transmission cycle in H. marginatum and their hosts in the PalaearcticThe CCHFV genome was detected in the blood of 2 out of 21 tortoises (9.5%). To our knowledge, this is the first report of CCHFV detection directly in tortoise blood. The viral sequence was similar to those discovered in H. aegyptium ticks, supporting the idea that ticks and hosts acquire CCHFV from each other. No virus isolation was attempted to compare the virulence of the CCHFV isolate from H. aegyptium to others. Considering that viremia in all vertebrate hosts experimentally tested is typically low-level and short-lived, there is a high probability that tortoises were exposed to CCHFV, yet, we missed the viremic window in the animals with our sampling. Unfortunately, no CCHFV antibody ELISA was performed on the blood samples to determine the percentage of seroconversion, although seropositivity does not always show productive replication of the virus or enzootic capacity of endemic hosts [35]. As previous serological surveillance demonstrates, reptiles are exposed to CCHFV by ticks feeding on them. In a study conducted on T. horsfieldii (Gray, 1844) in Tajikistan only one positive (1.7%) was determined from the 60 tortoises screened [36]. It is noteworthy to mention that all ticks collected in the present study from viremic tortoises were negative for CCHFV. This could be explained by the fact that the ticks were just recently attached and the long feeding period of H. aegyptium ticks. Alternatively, it is conceivable that the PCR-detectable viremia was on the decline or ultimately not high enough to infect the ticks collected from the animal. The concept that reptiles can be susceptible hosts and even long-term reservoirs for arboviruses is not new. For example, studies have demonstrated that alphaviruses and flaviviruses can be found in reptiles, and a bunyavirus has been isolated from the blood of a Texas soft-shelled turtle [37]. It is unclear how long the viremia persists and how can virus transmission between co-feeding ticks occur. Just as some species of other reptiles and mammals, species of the Testudinidae go through a period of hibernation. It remains unknown what happens to the virus during this phase of dormancy, and whether ticks feeding on an animal can become infected after the animal emerges from hibernation, therefore, serving as a virus reservoir. Studies of bats have demonstrated that viral infections can persist throughout hibernation for an extended period of up to 3 months [38]. Colorado tick fever virus has been shown to persist in golden-mantel ground squirrels (Citellus lateralis) throughout hibernation [39]. Thomas et al. [40] showed that the Western Equine Encephalomyelitis virus can overwinter in experimentally infected garter snakes and can be transmitted to mosquitoes, although viremia levels are expected to be low. Nevertheless, mathematical modeling efforts have revealed that arboviruses that adopt a low viremia and long persistence strategy have higher prevalence rates among both host and vector populations [41].Although adult stages of H. aegyptium exhibit a high host preference and are almost exclusively found on testudinids, the immature stages of this species can also found on other hosts such as Lagomorpha, Erinaceinae and Aves (Fig. 4) [8, 42] which are also preferred by the immature stages of H. marginatum, a primary vector of CCHFV in the Western Palearctic [6, 10, 19] where both tick species can co-feed. Consequently, it is conceivable that the immature stages of H. aegyptium serve as bridge vectors between the well-described, primary CCHFV transmission cycle in H. marginatum and their hosts, and a cryptic CCHFV transmission cycle in H. aegyptium and the species of the Testudinidae. Recently, the importance of cryptic cycles for vector-borne diseases has been further understood and the number of relevant studies has increased. However, most of the studies are focused on mosquito-borne diseases [43–46], and as for cryptic cycles of tick-borne agents, only Borrelia burgdorferi has been studied in detail [47–50]. Cryptic cycles have been particularly emphasized in their contributions to enzootic pathogen maintenance in nature as its primary endemic importance particularly when cryptic and primary transmission co-exist [46, 49, 50]. In a comprehensive study recently performed in Tunisia, no CCHFV was detected in adult H. aegyptium specimens collected from T. graeca, and it was claimed that this tick species is unlikely to play a significant role in the epidemiology of CCHF [51]. This statement is not considering that there might be no bridging points in a cryptic and primary transmission cycle that allows spillover from one cycle into the other.Our results raise the following questions about the cryptic cycle identified in this study: (i) What does the CCHFV replication in the tortoise host look like, and how effective is the transstadial and transovarial transmission of CCHFV in H. aegyptium ticks? (ii) How effective is the CCHFV co-feeding transmission of H. aegyptium and H. marginatum ticks on shared bridging hosts such as hedgehogs, hares and ground-dwelling birds? (iii) What is the risk of CCHFV transmission to humans through the bite of H. aegyptium immature life stages, and is the virulence attenuated in humans due to the adaptation in the H. aegyptium-tortoise cycle? (iv) To what degree can a potential cryptic CCHFV transmission cycle augment the primary cycle or even serve as a long-term reservoir due to the hibernation of tortoises? and (v) Could the cryptic tortoise cycle of CCHFV be of additional importance to the ecological, endemic, as well as the clinical characteristics of CCHF, apart from its possible ability to maintain the virus in its area?Ongoing experimental studies will evaluate the CCHFV transmission dynamics between H. aegyptium and Testudo tortoises and address the questions above.ConclusionsIn this study we show a high infestation rate of tortoises with H. aegyptium ticks in the East Thrace region of Turkey. We also demonstrate a high prevalence of the CCHFV genome in questing and feeding H. aegyptium ticks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating the CCHFV genome in the tortoise hosts. Hyalomma aegyptium ticks are the most common human-biting ticks in the East Thrace region; therefore, this study raises the question of an additional CCHFV transmission route to humans. Our study may also indicate that CCHFV circulates in a cryptic transmission cycle in H. aegyptium and tortoise hosts that feed into the primary transmission cycle of H. marginatum ticks and their hosts and could play a role in the natural dynamic of the virus.Supplementary information
Additional file 1: Table S1. Overview of all the samples analyzed in the study for ARC GIS. Table S2. Overview of all the tortoise blood samples used in this study.



Title: Interferon and cytokine responses to Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus; an emerging and neglected viral zonoosis

1The Bunyaviridae familyThe family Bunyaviridae is one of the largest virus groups comprising over 350 arthropod and rodent borne viruses [1]. The virions are enveloped and spherical with a diameter of approximately 100 nm. The virus family is divided into five genera, Orthobunyavirus, Phlebovirus, Hantavirus, Nairovirus and Tospovirus.The genome of the bunyaviruses consists of three single-stranded RNA segments of negative polarity, designated as the small (S), medium (M) and large (L) segment [1], [2], [3]. The S segment codes for a nucleocapsid (N) protein, and for some members of the family also for a non-structural protein (NSs) [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]. The M segment encodes a precursor for the two envelope glycoproteins Gn and Gc, and in some cases also a non-structural protein (NSm) [9], [10], [11], [12]. The L segment of the Bunyaviridae family codes for the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The terminal nucleotides of these RNA segments are partially complementary in sequence and predicted to form a stable pseudo-circular “panhandle” structure.The viral envelope glycoproteins Gn and Gc interact with specific receptors on the host cell. After attachment, the virus enters the cell by receptor-dependent endocytosis. Replication of bunyaviruses takes place in the cytoplasm. The N protein interacts with newly synthesized viral RNAs forming the ribonucleocapsids which, in turn, interact with the cytoplasmic part of Gn and Gc. These processes trigger the budding of virions into the Golgi compartment [1], [2].2Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virusThe Nairovirus genus includes 34 described viruses divided into seven different serotypes. Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is the medically most important member of this genus [13].CCHFV is the etiological agent of a human disease characterized by fever, prostration, severe hemorrhages and death. The first documented outbreaks were recorded in 1944 and 1945, where 200 cases of a severe hemorrhagic disease occurred in Russia. Later, the russian virus was shown to be antigenically identical to a virus isolated from a febrile patient in the Congo [13]. Nowadays, CCHFV is known to be widely distributed throughout large areas of sub-Saharan Africa, the Balcans, Northern Greece, European Russia, Pakistan, the Xinjiang province of Northwest China, the Arabian Peninsula, Turkey, Iraq and Iran [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24]. CCHFV is the second most widespread arbovirus of medical importance after Dengue virus, [25], [26]. CCHFV also infects animals, but these remain asymptomatic as shown for cattle, sheep, goats, camels and hares. Antibodies against CCHFV have been demonstrated in sera of horses, goats, and cattle in endemic areas [25], [26]. The virus can be transmitted to humans through ticks of the genus Hyalomma, in particular Hylomma marginatum marginatum
[25], [26]. CCHFV has also been isolated from other Hyalomma species. Human infection also occurs by contact with blood or tissue material from infected animals or humans. In addition, person-to-person transmission can occur via bloody vomit, body fluids or by aerosol from patients in advanced stages of disease [27], [28], [29]. Therefore, risk groups are found among professions with contact to infected animals (e.g. livestock breeders, abattoir workers) or infected humans (e.g. health care workers) [30].3Disease and pathogenesisHumans are the only known host that develops disease after infection with CCHFV. The infection usually results in a severe hemorrhagic fever. The disease progression is rapid and can be subdivided into four different stages (Fig. 1
) [13]: incubation, pre-hemorrhagic, hemorrhagic and the convalescence phase. The incubation period ranges from a few days up to 1 week, the length most probably depending on the transmission route and the amount of inoculum. The pre-hemorrhagic phase usually initiates with fever, myalgia, dizziness, headache and vomiting and ends on average after 3 days. The hemorrhagic fever phase is short and characterized by epistaxis, bleeding from the gastrointestinal system, urinary and respiratory tract and also skin bleeding ranging from petechiae to ecchymoses. Other symptoms include enlarged spleen and liver which approximately 30% of patients experience. The average mortality rate is 30% but can be as high as 70% [31], [32], [33] The severity of disease has been shown to correlate to the amount of virus in the blood (up to 109 genome equivalents/ml blood) [34], [35]. Furthermore, It has been shown that antibody responses have a highly significant inverse correlation with viral loads.Fig. 1Clincal course of CCHF: The disease progression can be subdivided into four different stages with different symptoms; incubation, pre-hemorrhagic, hemorrhagic and the convalescence phase. Laboratory analyses demonstrate the elevated liver enzymes aspartate and alanine aminotransferase (AST and ALT) as well as low platelets count (PLTs) in the fatal cases.Convalescence starts on average at 0–20 days post onset of illness. This phase is characterized by weakness, loss of hair, dizziness, nausea, loss of hearing, and loss of memory. It should be mentioned that duration and symptoms in these different phases vary significantly between individuals (Fig. 1).The pathogenesis of CCHF is only poorly characterized due to several reasons such as (i) infections occur sporadically and in areas where facilities are limited for performing complete autopsies, (ii) virus handling requires biosafety level 4 (BSL-4) containment laboratories, and (iii) a lack of available animal models of disease.The limited knowledge about CCHF pathogenesis is mostly derived from blood analyses and liver biopsies of patients, using materials e.g. from small outbreaks in Turkey [36], [37], [38], [39], [40]. The most comprehensive study involving 50 CCHF patients from South Africa was undertaken by Swanepoel et al. [31]. In their report, they describe that cerebral hemorrhage, severe anemia, severe dehydration, and shock associated with prolonged diarrhea, lung edema, and pleural effusion are the factors causing fatal outcome. Almost all patients who died developed multiple organ failure.In the fatal cases, platelet counts can be extremely low from an early stage of illness on. Increases in aspartate and alanine aminotransferase (AST and ALT) levels in the serum, prolongation of prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times have also been observed [31].4Innate immunity – the interferon systemThe most efficient and rapid host response against viruses consists of the production of type I interferons (IFN-α/β), an essential part of the antiviral innate immune system. As far as it is known, all nucleated cells of the mammalian body are able to synthesize and secrete type I IFNs. The mode of induction and the type of IFN being secreted, however, can differ among cell types. Secreted IFNs stimulate neighbouring cells to express potent antiviral proteins [41], [42], [43]. Besides their role as antiviral messengers, IFNs posses a wide range of other biological activities including inhibition of cell proliferation, regulation of apoptosis, and, importantly, immunomodulation [44], [45]. IFN production triggered by the first contact with the viral intruder slows down or even stops virus multiplication, buys the organism time, and helps to establish an adaptive immune response.Type I IFNs are classified according to their amino acid sequence and comprise a large number (at least 13) of IFN-α subtypes and a single IFN-β [43], as well as some additional family members [46], [47], [48]. Expression patterns, i.e. which IFNs will be synthesized at which time point, mostly depend on the particular cell type.4.1IFN inductionEpithelial cells, fibroblasts and neurons mainly secrete IFN-β as an initial response to infection but switch to IFN-α during the subsequent amplification phase of the IFN response [49], [50]. In contrast, dendritic cells, which play an important role in immunosurveillance and provide an interface between innate and adaptive immunity, directly produce high levels of IFN-α subtypes [51].IFN induction in fibroblasts occurs mainly by an intracellular pathway (Fig. 2
). Hallmark molecules of RNA viruses such as double-stranded (ds) RNA and 5′-triphosphorylated single-stranded (ss) RNA trigger a signalling chain which activates IFN-β gene expression [52], [53], [54], [55]. Two RNA helicases, RIG-I and MDA-5, are the main intracellular receptors of viral RNA [56], [57], [58]. RIG-I and MDA-5 recognize different and non-overlapping sets of viruses, suggesting a degree of specificity in RNA recognition [59]. Indeed, it was recently found that RIG-I has the unique ability to bind the triphosphate groups on the 5′-end of uncapped viral ssRNA [53], [54], [55]. Moreover, RIG-I binds to short dsRNA molecules whereas MDA-5 activation is apparently more dependent on long dsRNA structures [60]. The binding of a viral RNA to RIG-I and MDA-5 induces a signalling chain which eventually results in the phosphorylation of the transcription factor IRF-3 [61]. IRF-3 is a member of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family [62] and plays a central role in the activation of the IFN-β promoter. Phosphorylated IRF-3 homo-dimerises and moves into the nucleus where it initiates IFN-β mRNA synthesis. This first-wave IFN triggers expression of a related factor, IRF-7, which in fibroblasts is only present in low amounts [63]. Expression and activation of IRF-7 leads to a positive-feedback loop that initiates the synthesis of several IFN-α subtypes as the second-wave IFNs. In addition, the transcription factors NF–κB (activated by RIG-I, MDA-5 and the dsRNA-dependent kinase PKR) and AP-1 (activated by stress-induced Jun kinase) are triggered by viral replication to enhance IFN gene expression [64], [65]
Fig. 2Type I IFN induction, signaling, and action. Left panel: 5′ triphosphate ssRNA and dsRNA, two hallmark by-products of virus replication, bind and activate the pattern recognition receptors RIG-I, MDA5 and PKR. A signal transduction chain involving various adapters and kinases (see text) culminates in activation of the transcription factors IRF-3 and NF-kB which, in turn, cooperatively transactivate the promoter of the IFN-β gene and other cytokine genes. Right panel: IFN-β binds to the type I IFN receptor (IFNAR) and activates the expression of numerous ISGs via the JAK/STAT pathway. IRF-7 amplifies the IFN response by inducing expression of several IFN subtypes. Mx, ISG20, OAS and PKR are examples of proteins with antiviral activity.Myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) [66] and, most prominently, plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) [51] are the main IFN producers of the lymphatic system. mDCs can sense dsRNA by the classic intracellular pathway [66] and, in addition, by the endosomal toll-like receptor (TLR) 3 [67] pDCs predominantly monitor RNA virus infections by the endosomal TLR7 and TLR8 which recognize ssRNA [68]. Activated TLRs signal through different intracellular adaptor molecules to induce IRF- and NF–κB-dependent IFN transcription (Fig. 2).4.2IFN signalingAll IFN-α/β subtypes bind to and activate a common type I IFN receptor which is present on virtually all host cells [69]. Binding of IFN-α/β leads to conformational changes in the intracellular parts of the receptor, which activate the so-called JAK-STAT signalling pathway. The signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) proteins are latent cytoplasmic transcription factors which become phosphorylated by the Janus kinase (JAK) family members JAK-1 and TYK-2 [70], [71]. Phosphorylated STAT-1 and STAT-2 recruit a third factor, IRF-9 (also called p48), to form a complex known as IFN stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF-3). The ISGF-3 heterotrimer translocates to the nucleus and binds to IFN-stimulated response elements (ISRE) in the promoter regions of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), thereby inducing their transcription.4.3IFN effector proteinsIFN-α/β activate the expression of more than 300 IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) which have antiviral, antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory functions [72]. IFN-induced proteins include enzymes, transcription factors, cell surface glycoproteins, cytokines, chemokines and a large number of factors with unknown function. Up to now, only a few proteins with antiviral activity have been characterized in detail. These are the Mx GTPases, the protein kinase R (PKR), the 2′,5′ oligoadenylate synthetases (2–5 OAS)/RNaseL system, the RNA-specific adenosine deaminase 1 (ADAR 1), viperin, and the products of the ISG56 (p56) and ISG20 genes. Mx proteins belong to the superfamily of dynamin-like large GTPases and have been discovered as mediators of genetic resistance against orthomyxoviruses in mice. The human MxA protein blocks replication of the infecting virus soon after cell entry by targeting and missorting viral ribonucleoprotein particles [73], [74]. PKR, 2–5 OAS and ADAR are constitutively expressed in a latent, inactive form. Basal mRNA levels are upregulated by IFN-α/β and these enzymes need to be activated by viral dsRNA. PKR is also activated by ssRNA containing a 5′ triphosphate group and a short stem-loop [75]. PKR is a serine-threonine kinase that phosphorylates the alpha subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF2 [76], thus blocking translation of cellular and viral mRNAs. The 2–5 OAS catalyses the synthesis of short 2′,5′ oligoadenylates [77] that activate the latent endoribonuclease RNaseL which in turn degrades both viral and cellular RNAs [78]. ADAR 1 catalyzes the deamination of adenosine on target dsRNAs to yield inosine. As a result the secondary structure is destabilized due to a change from an AU base pair to the less stable IU base pair and mutations accumulate within the viral genome [42]. Viperin is localized at the ER membrane and impairs the formation of lipid rafts which are need by some viruses for replication or budding [79], [80]. P56 binds the eukaryotic initiation factor 3e (eIF3e) subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF3. It functions as an inhibitor of translation initiation at the level of eIF3 ternary complex formation and is likely to suppress viral RNA translation [81]. ISG20 is an IFN-induced 3′,5′ exonuclease that specifically degrades ssRNA in vitro. In cell culture, expression of ISG20 leads to a reduction of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), influenza virus and retrovirus replication [82].5CCHFV: The protective power of the IFN systemType I IFNs are of increasing interest as antiviral compounds [83], [84], [85], [86], [87], [88], [89], [90], and CCHFV is one of the newest additions to the list of IFN-sensitive viruses [91]. However, no clinical studies exist so far which address the effect of IFNs against any viral hemorrhagic fever including CCHF. More progress was achieved with respect to the ISGs affecting CCHFV replication.MxA significantly contributes to the antiviral activity of IFN against CCHFV, similar to what was observed for other members of the Bunyaviridae
[91], [92], [93], [94], [95], [96]. MxA was found to colocalize and interact with CCHFV nucleocapsid protein in the perinuclear region of infected cells, an interaction which is most likely responsible for the inhibition of virus replication. As a similar MxA-N interaction is known from other bunyaviruses [97], [98], it is likely that all bunyaviruses may be restricted in their intracellular growth by MxA, and probably by the same mechanism. However, by using an siRNA approach to deplete cells from MxA, we could demonstrate that MxA is not the sole player in IFN-induced antiviral activity against CCHFV [91]. Our most recent studies indicate a contribution of ISG20 and PKR (manuscripts in preparation). Thus, apparently, there are several ISGs with antiviral activity against CCHFV, which most probably act in concert to combat the infection.6IFN escape mechanisms of CCHFVDespite being strongly inhibited by type I IFNs, CCHFV still runs its devastating course in the human host. Estimates of CCHFV mortality range from a few percent to up to 70% [13], [32], [99]. Likely explanations for this discrepancy are that virus-induced IFN has no therapeutic, but only a prophylactic effect, or that production of IFN by infected cells is inefficient. In fact, recent data show that both these mechanisms seem to be in place. We have shown that IFN has no significant activity against an already established CCHFV infection [100]. Treatment of cells with 1000 U/ml IFN at 1 h after infection is ineffective, whereas the same dose applied before infection results in a significant inhibition of CCHFV replication. This indicates that CCHFV strongly counteracts IFN signalling, and experiments are underway to clarify this issue. In addition, CCHFV appears to counteract the induction of IFN synthesis by several independent strategies. Firstly, it is conceivable that, similar to other negative-strand RNA viruses and bunyaviruses [52], CCHFV does not produce significant amounts of the IFN inducer molecule dsRNA. Our ongoing studies are aimed at testing this assumption. Secondly, we found that the important RIG-I signaling pathway which is triggered by viral ssRNA carrying a 5′ triphosphate is not activated by the CCHFV genome [101]. Whereas the ssRNA genome of the related Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) contains a 5′ triphosphate group and induces IFN induction via RIG-I, the CCHFV genome contains a RIG-I-neutral 5′monophosphate. Most likely, CCHFV cleaves off the 5′ triphosphate group during genome replication in order to escape recognition by RIG-I. In line with this, IFN induction by CCHFV-infected cells is weak and occurs relatively late [100]. Members of the family Bunyaviridae therefore appear to have evolved two radically different strategies to inhibit the RIG-I pathway. Whereas RVFV inhibits IFN induction by expressing a dedicated anti-IFN factor, the non-structural protein NSs [102], [103]. CCHFV removes the RIG-I ligand from its genome. Other bunyaviruses fall into the same categories, e.g. La Crosse virus expresses an NSs protein blocking IFN induction [4], but Hantaan virus contains a monophosphate on its genome 5′-end [101], [104].Nonetheless, IFN-activating structures other than RNA seem to be present in CCHFV particles, and the virus possesses also at least one anti-IFN factor. Experiments using UV irradiation revealed that the IRF-3-dependent ISG56 gene is weakly activated by UV-inactivated CCHFV particles at an early time point after infection [100]. IRF-3-activated ISG56 upregulation by enveloped viral particles is described to occur by an unknown, TLR- and RIG-I-independent, signal pathway [105], [106]. In cells infected with intact virus, by contrast, ISG56 upregulation occurred with a delay of 14 h. In line with this, intact virus delays the activation of IRF-3, assayed by measuring its nuclear translocation, by approximately 20 h [100]. This indicates that CCHFV expresses a factor which counteracts IRF-3 activation and hence ISG56 upregulation. The factor is not known so far, but sequence analyses suggest that CCHFV has the capacity to encode an additional gene on the S segment (data not shown). The corresponding protein product has yet to be identified. Besides this, it has been demonstrated that the L protein of CCHFV contains an ovarian tumor (OTU) domain allowing innate immune evasion [107]. This domain is also present on the L protein of the related Nairoviruses Dugbe virus and Nairobi sheep disease virus, but not of the phylogenetically more distant Phlebovirus RVFV. The OTU domain represents a superfamily of Ubiquitin (Ub)-deconjugating proteases found in prokaryotes, eukaryotes, and viruses. Ub and interferon-stimulated gene product 15 (ISG15) are short proteins which are covalently conjugated to other proteins and mediate innate antiviral responses. Frias-Staheli et al. showed that the OTU domain-containing proteases from CCHFV and related Nairoviruses deconjugate Ub and ISG15 from cellular target proteins [107]. Moreover, expression of a viral OTU domain-containing protein antagonizes the antiviral effects of ISG15 and inhibits NF-κB-dependent signaling.Thus, CCHFV employs a range of strategies to evade and counteract the innate immune reponse (Fig. 3
). RIG-I recognition is circumvented by removal of the 5′ triphosphate group from the viral genome, IRF-3 activation mediated by a particle recognition pathway is delayed by a yet to be identified viral factor, and NF-kappaB activation and the antiviral action of ISG15 are downregulated by the OTU domain on the L protein.Fig. 3Countermeasures of CCHFV to escape the type I IFN response. The 5′-ends of the CCHFV ssRNA genome do not contain the triphosphate group characteristic for negative-strand RNA viruses, but rather are monophosphorylated. The recognition receptor RIG-I does not bind to 5′monophosphorylated ssRNA and is hence unable to trigger an IFN response. Like other negative-strand RNA viruses, CCHFV most likely does not produce significant amounts of dsRNA, thus rendering the RIG-I, MDA5 and PKR pathways inactive. PKR is possibly nonetheless activated, either by trace amounts of dsRNA or by cell stress resulting from infection. Contact with UV-inactivated CCHFV particles triggers IRF-3 by an unknown mechanism and is countered in productively infected cells by a yet to be identified viral factor. CCHFV L segment codes for an OTU domain Ubiquitin (Ub) – deconjugating protease, which antagonizes the antiviral effects of ISG15 and inhibits NF-kB-dependent signaling.7CCHFV pathogenesis and cytokine responsesViral strategies to antagonize the innate immune response are usually not perfect and mostly delay rather than completely suppress the IFN system [41], [58] A common suggested feature of agents causing hemorrhagic fever is the deregulation of host immune responses by combating and attacking cells involved in initiation of antiviral responses. The existing knowledge concerning CCHF emanates from autopsies and clinical findings. The primary pathophysiological events appear to be leakage of erythrocytes and plasma through the vasculature into tissues [13]. Endothelial damage can contribute to coagulopathy by deregulated stimulation of platelet aggregation, which in turn activates the intrinsic coagulation cascade, ultimately leading to clotting factor deficiency causing hemorrhages. For CCHFV, vascular leakage may be caused either by destruction of endothelial cells or by a disruption of the tight junctions which constitute the endothelial barrier between cells. Moreover, it is unclear whether these events are a direct consequence of infection or whether virus-induced host factors cause the endothelial dysfunction [108]. However, in an epithelial cell line model CCHFV neither caused disruption of tight junctions nor necrosis or apoptosis of cells [109]. This could suggest that the hemorrhages and coagulation disturbances may be caused indirectly, possibly by high levels of proinflammatory cytokines. In fact, for other hemorrhagic fever viruses like Ebola and Dengue virus there is a correlation between the strength of the proinflammatory response, vascular leakage, and disease severity [84], [90], [110], [111], [112]. Key players in disease progression are the cytokines interleukin (IL)-10, IL-1, IL-6 and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-α [111]. It has been shown that yellow fever patients with fatal outcome had high levels of IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α [113]. In another study, early elevated levels of IL-6 and IL-1 beta in Ebola virus-infected patient correlated with non-fatal outcome, whereas release of IL-10 and high levels of neopterin and IL-RA in the plasma correlated with fatal outcomes [114]
. Recently, Ergonul and coworkers demonstrated significantly higher level of IL-6 and TNF-α in CCHFV patients with fatal outcome compared to the non-fatal cases [38]. Another observation was a correlation between high levels of IL-6 and TNF-α to the onset of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) in patients. However, elevated levels of IL-10 were not observed in these patients and the levels of IL-10 were negatively correlated to the DIC scores. In another study, Papa et al. confirmed that high TNF-α levels are correlated with severity of CCHF disease, but they suggested that IL-6 could be found in both mild and severe cases [115]. The only fatal case in this study had high levels of both IL-6 and TNF-α compared to non-fatal cases. Another interesting observation is elevated levels of Neopterin in patients with Dengue fever or Ebola hemorrhagic fever [114], [116]. Neopterin derivates are produced by macrophages and dendritic cells upon stimulation by IFNs [117]. Neopterin is a useful tool to assess the intensity of cell-mediated immune response [117] and a recent study indeed noted a correlation between elevated levels of neopterin in CCHFV patients and disease severity [39].All these results suggest that capillary fragility, a common feature of CCHF, is most probably due to multiple host-induced mechanisms in response to CCHFV infection. Endothelial damage would cause the characteristic rash and contribute to hemostatic failure. Interestingly, some authors have noticed similarities between various viral hemorrhagic fevers and the septic shock caused by severe bacterial infections [99].8Concluding remarksResearch on CCHFV is hampered by several constraints. Firstly, work with the virus requires BSL-4 containment facilities, the highest security standard possible. Secondly, there is no animal model which mimics human disease, and thirdly, CCHF cases occur so sporadically that clinical samples are rare. Using the available systems, however, some of the most pressing questions on CCHFV should be addressed in the near future:-What is the molecular pattern eliciting IRF-3 activation by CCHFV? Treatment of fibroblasts with UV-irradiated virus particles activates IRF-3. As the genome of CCHFV lacks a 5′ triphosphate group to trigger RIG-I and IRF-3 [101], other structures, e.g. the viral enveloped particles or the nucleocapsids must be recognized by the infected cell.-Which TLRs are involved in CCHFV recognition and cytokine induction in vivo?-Can DCs be infected, and what is their role in the cytokine response to CCHFV?-Is there an NSs-like gene suppressing IFN and cytokine induction? For bunyaviruses of the genera Orthobunyavirus and Phleboviruses, e.g. La Crosse virus, Bunyamwera virus, and Rift Valley fever virus, a non-structural protein encoded on the S segment (NSs) is known to strongly suppress transcriptional activation of IFNs and other inducible genes [4], [5], [118], [119]. Moreover, some members of the Hantavirus genus also encode an NSs protein which weakly supresses IFN induction [8], [120]. Moreover, for Hantaviruses it is known that the glycoproteins can interfere with IFN induction [121], [122]. The delay of IRF-3 activation observed in productively infected cells indicates that CCHFV encodes proteins or domains dedicated to counteract IFN induction.-Does CCHFV interfere with IFN signalling, and if so, which viral gene product is responsible? IFN is effective if given in advance, but not if given at 1 h after infection [100]. It is therefore conceivable that CCHFV is capable of shutting down the JAK/STAT pathway.-Which ISGs contribute to the inhibition of CCHFV by IFNs? Other ISGs besides MxA and perhaps PKR and ISG20 may be efficient in blocking various steps of CCHFV replication.-What is the role of the OTU domain in pathogenesis? There is currently no reverse genetics system available to generate infectious viruses from cloned cDNA plasmids. Mutational inactivation of the OTU domain, rescue of the respective virus and a phenotypical comparison with the wild-type virus can reveal the contribution of the OTU domain to virus replication in cell culture and in vivo.-How does the virus cause vascular leakage? As it has been mentioned, the endothelium can be targeted in two ways – indirectly by virus-mediated host-derived factors that cause endothelial dysfunction, and/or directly by virus infection in endothelial cells. Recent studies demonstrate that increased levels of IL-6 and TNF-α are correlated with disease severity [38], suggesting that the endothelial damage may be due to a “cytokine storm”. To date, there is no experimental studies investigating whether the virus replication cycle per se or whether it is cytokines, which damage the tight junctions of endothelial cells.
Answering these questions would certainly improve our knowledge of CCHFV pathogenesis and open new ways for the prevention and treatment of the hemorrhagic fever caused by this highly virulent pathogen.


Title: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever: Pathogenesis, transmission and public health challenges


Core Tip: This review provides a comprehensive overview of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF), a severe tick-borne viral disease with significant public health implications. The article discusses the virus's transmission dynamics, clinical manifestations, current diagnostic techniques, and available treatments, including the use of antiviral therapy. It emphasizes the urgent need for vaccine development, better diagnostic tools, and efficient therapies. By addressing gaps in knowledge and highlighting the importance of a one health approach, this review serves as a critical resource for researchers and healthcare professionals seeking to improve CCHF control and prevention strategies.INTRODUCTIONBetween 10%-40% of infected people die during Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) outbreaks of severe viral hemorrhagic fever. As a febrile sickness, the disease was first known as Crimean haemorrhagic fever when it was initially discovered in 1944 among troops on the Crimean Peninsula (near the Black Sea)[1]. The present name of the disease was given to it in 1969 when the same bacterium was identified as the cause of febrile sickness in the Congo Basin. The main vector and reservoir of CCHFV are ticks of the species Hyalomma[2]. The species of Hyalomma tick that causes Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) depends on the geographic region. Hyalomma marginatum is the primary vector of CCHF in Europe and the Balkans where as Hyalomma anatolicum in Iran, Pakistan, Turkmenistan, and Tajikistan, Hyalomma asiaticum in Central Asia and China and Hyalomma rufipes in Africa.Many non-domesticated animal species, including ostriches, buffalo, tiny rodents, hares, and rhinoceroses, may be infected with CCHFV, according to serological investigations. Important amplifying hosts for the transmission of tick-borne diseases include animals that ingest infected ticks or co-feed with them[3]. Tick bites or coming into contact with sick animals during slaughter are the most common ways for humans to get the disease. In humans, an infection usually manifests as a fever, which may later develop into a hemorrhagic condition and could be deadly. Particularly in areas without access to high-containment facilities, molecular testing have allowed for safe and quick diagnosis. Sheep, goats, and cattle are just a few of the many domestic and wild animal species that may harbour the CCHFV[4].Although most birds can withstand infections, ostriches aren't immune and may have a high infection rate in regions where it is common. The tick-borne disease stays in an infected animal's bloodstream for around seven days after infection[5]. When another tick bites the sick animal, the tick-animal-tick cycle might resume. Hyalomma ticks are the most common vectors of the CCHFV (Figure 1), however infections may occur in other tick genera as well.Figure 1
Lifecycle and vector role of Hyalomma ticks in Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever transmission. A.Larval stage of the Hyalomma tick; B: Nymphal stage attached to a host; C: Adult Hyalomma tick, the main vector for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus; D: Close-up of the tick attachment to host skin for blood-feeding; E: Transmission cycle from animal to human through tick bites and handling infected animals.Although CCHF is common in many regions of the globe, including the Indian subcontinent, northwest China, Africa, the Balkans, and Eastern Europe, there is no vaccine that can protect people or animals against this disease at this time[6].The four families of viruses known to cause viral hemorrhagic fevers are Arenaviridae, Bunyaviridae, Filoviridae, and Flaviviridae which cause severe systemic febrile diseases (Table 1). The arenaviridae family of viruses includes both Old World and New World Strains, and they are known to cause infections transmitted by rodents. Europe, Asia, and Africa are just a few of the numerous regions where rats are susceptible to viral infections[7]. Urine or droppings from rodents are a common vector for infection. A 50% case mortality rate has been reported in West African epidemics caused by the arenavirus Lassa. Insects and rodents may transmit viruses that belong to the Bunyaviridae family, which can cause mild to severe illness[8]. Rift Valley fever, hemorrhagic fever in the Crimean-Congo region, and hantavirus infections are among the most prominent ailments. The Ixodid tick is the vector for the virus. The family Filoviridae includes the Ebola virus and Marburg hemorrhagic sickness, both of which have been found in African bats. The danger of transmission from person to person is considerable for human infections, particularly among those in care takers[9]. In low-income nations, the case fatality rate for Marburg hemorrhagic fever may reach 82%, while in the Democratic Republic of Congo, it can reach 80% to 90%. Various forms of infections are carried by the flavivirus family, which is carried by arthropods[10]. Dengue fever affects more than a hundred nations throughout Europe, Asia, Australia, Africa, and the Pacific Islands. It is a global health crisis. The mosquitoes Aedes aegypti and Aedes albopictus are vectors for the flavivirus that causes dengue fever. The disease can progress through three stages: (1) Mild; (2) Moderate; and (3) Severe[11].Table 1Different types of viral haemorrhagic fevers and causative agents
Family


Causative virus


Disease


Symptoms


Treatment

ArenaviridaeLassa virus Lassa feverFever, weakness, and haemorrhageSupportive care and ribavirinJunin virusArgentine haemorrhagic feverFever, malaise, and haemorrhageSupportive careChapare virus Chapare hemorrhagic feverFever, malaise, headache, vomiting and diarrhoeaSupportive care and early diagnosisGuanarito virus Venezuelan hemorrhagic feverConfusion, convulsions, coma, and bleeding from body orificesNo specific anti-viral treatment is availableLujo virusLujo hemorrhagic feverFever, headache, vomiting, diarrhea, arthralgia, and myalgiaSupportive careLymphocytic choriomeningitis virus Lymphocytic choriomeningitisFever (38.5 °C to 40 °C), malaise, myalgia, retro-orbital headache, photophobia, and anorexiaSupportive care and ribavirinMachupo virus Bolivian hemorrhagic feverFever, malaise, fatigue headache, dizziness, myalgias, and severe lower back painSupportive careSabia virus Brazilian hemorrhagic feverHigh fever, fatigue, maculopapular/petechial rash bleeding and haemorrhageSupportive care and ribavirin antiviral drugBunyaviridaeCrimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic feverFever, myalgia, and haemorrhageSupportive care and ribavirinHantan virusHantavirus pulmonary syndromeFever, muscle pain, and pulmonary edemaSupportive careDobrava-Belgrade virus Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndromeIntense headache, back and abdominal pain, fever, chills, and blurred visionSupportive therapy, renal dialysis. Treatment with ribavirinSeoul virus Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndromeIntense headache, back and abdominal pain, fever, chills, and blurred visionSupportive therapy, renal dialysis. Treatment with ribavirinPuumalavirus Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndromeIntense headache, back and abdominal pain, fever, chills, and blurred visionSupportive therapy, renal dialysis. Treatment with ribavirinRift Valley fever virus Rift Valley feverTransient fever, headache, severe muscle and joint pain, photophobia and anorexiaDrugs like Ibuprofen or AcetaminophenSaaremaa virus Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndromeIntense headache, back and abdominal pain, fever, chills, and blurred visionSupportive therapy, renal dialysis. Treatment with ribavirinSin nombre virusHantavirus pulmonary syndromeFever, muscle pain, and pulmonary edemaIntubation and oxygen therapy, fluid replacement and use of medications to support blood pressureSevere fever and thrombocytopenia syndrome virus Severe fever and thrombocytopenia syndromeFever, vomiting, diarrhoea, multiple organ failure, thrombocytopenia, and leucopoenia elevated liver enzyme levelsIntravenous ribavirinTula virus Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndromeIntense headache, back and abdominal pain, fever, chills, and blurred visionSupportive therapy, renal dialysis. Treatment with ribavirinFiloviridaeBundibugyo ebola virus Ebola virus diseaseFever, severe hemorrhage, and organ failureSupportive care and experimental treatmentsMarburg marburg virus Marburg haemorrhagic feverFever, severe hemorrhage, and organ failureSupportive care and experimental treatmentsSudan ebola virus Ebola virus diseaseSudden onset of fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headaches, sore throat, vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, impaired kidney, and liver functionsMonoclonal antibodies like Inmazeb and EbangaTai forest ebola virus Ebola virus diseaseSudden onset of fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headaches, sore throat, vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, impaired kidney, and liverMonoclonal antibodies like Inmazeb and EbangaZaire ebola virus Ebola virus diseaseSudden onset of fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headaches, sore throat, vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, impaired kidney, and liver functionsMonoclonal antibodies like Inmazeb and EbangaFlaviviridaeDengue virus Dengue feverFever, rash, and haemorrhageSupportive care and fluidsKyasanur forest disease virusKyasanur forest diseaseSudden onset of chills, fever, and headacheSupportive treatment with maintenance of proper hydration and circulation by transfusion of IV fluidsOmsk hemorrhagic fever virus Omsk hemorrhagic feverFever, headache, myalgia, cough, petechial rash or bruisesSupportive careYellow fever virus Yellow feverFever, chills, headache, back pain, vomiting, and fatigueRest, hydration and seek medical adviceTransmissionTick bites or coming into touch with infected animal blood or tissues during or just after slaughter are the main routes of transmission for the CCHF virus to humans”. Direct contact with infected blood, saliva, organs, or other bodily fluids is the most typical way infectious illnesses are transmitted from one person to another (Figure 2)[12]. Additional factors that may lead to nosocomial infections include reusing needles, contaminated medical supplies, and insufficient sterilisation of medical equipment[13].Figure 2
Overview of clinical stages and symptoms in Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever patients. Early stage with fever, myalgia, and fatigue. Pre-hemorrhagic stage with signs of conjunctival hemorrhage. Hemorrhagic stage showing extensive petechiae and ecchymosis. Recovery phase after supportive treatment. Post-recovery convalescence with residual symptoms. ELISA: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; RT-LAMP: Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification; NGS: Next-generation sequencing.EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CCHF IN INDIAOn June 29, a male patient suffering from CCHF passed away in a private hospital in Ahmedabad. He was 51 years old and lived in the hamlet of Lakhapar in the Anjar taluka of Kutch. According to health officials, this is the first case of CCHF that has been documented in Gujarat this year. The state of Gujarat recorded five instances of confirmed CCHF in 2022. Since 2011, when the state first recorded a case of CCHF, Gujarat has been the reporting centre for the vast majority of CCHF cases in India[14]. Gujarat reported verified cases of CCHF from 2011 to 2019, with Rajasthan reporting extra cases in 2014, 2015, and 2019. A 39-year-old guy who survived after testing positive for the virus in March 2022 was a cattle rearer. One of them was a 55-year-old housewife who died of CCHF after a tick bit her while she was tending to her cattle. One case of CCHF was recorded in the Sabarkantha district in 2021 by the state[15].EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CCHF IN AFRICAThere were 494 CCHF cases (115 fatal) recorded in Africa between January 1, 1956, and July 25, 2020. Over the last decade, nine nations Kenya, Mali, Mozambique, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Sudan, Sudan, and Tunisia have reported the first cases of CCHF[16].Within the Bunyavirales order, the Nairoviridae family, and the Orthonairo virus genus, there will be enveloped, negative-sense RNA virus known as CCHFV. One crucial component of the virus is the envelope Gn glycoprotein, which, at its C-terminus, possesses a cytoplasmic tail. The genetic code of CCHFV consists of S, M, and L segments of RNA. Segment L encodes an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, segment M viral glycoproteins, and segment S the nucleocapsid protein (N) (Figure 3)[17].Figure 3
Structure of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus. This includes electron microscopy image of the Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus virion, schematic of the viral genome, showing S, M, and L RNA segments, envelope structure with Gn and Gc glycoproteins, viral RNA polymerase encoded by the L segment, nucleocapsid protein (N) from the S segment.STAGES OF CCHFIncubation stageThe duration of incubation is usually less than a week, falling anywhere from one to nine days (depending on the way the virus was exposed to and the dosage). It lasts the shortest time after a tick bite (about 1-3 days) and the longest time after coming into contact with contaminated human or cattle blood, tissue, or secretions (5-6 days).Pre-hemorrhagic stageBegins suddenly with vague symptoms and lasts an average of two to four days (range: One to seven days). Signs and symptoms may manifest as a high temperature (39–41 °C), neck discomfort or stiffness, dizziness, headache, myalgia, backache, eye pain, or photophobia. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, stomach ache, and a sore throat are possible side effects. Jaundice, conjunctivitis, congested sclera, and hyperaemia of the chest, neck, and face are some possible symptoms. Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, as well as changes in mood and sensory perception (such as somnolence supplanting agitation), may be seen in extreme instances.Hemorrhagic stageUsually brief (around two or three days), but may last up to two weeks. One distinctive aspect of CCHF compared to other viral haemorrhagic fevers is the wide variety of hemorrhagic symptoms it may cause, which can vary from little bleeding patches (peteziae) to widespread discolouration of the skin (ecchymosis) on both the skin and mucosal membranes. Some common symptoms may include injection site bleeding, epistaxis, melena, haematuria, haemoptysis, and haematemesis.Convalescence stageWithin 9–10 days after the beginning of the disease (within a range of 9–20 days), convalescence often occurs in survivors, in the same vein as when laboratory measurements were back to normal. Symptoms such as hypotension, bradycardia or tachycardia, polyneuritis, difficulty breathing, xerostomia, impaired vision or hearing, hair loss, memory loss, and other difficulties might manifest during this protracted period. Although long-term consequences have not been thoroughly investigated, there is no solid proof of recurrence or a biphasic progression of the illness[18-21].Signs and symptomsDepending on how the virus is acquired, the incubation time for CCHF might vary in duration. The incubation phase, which begins three to nine days following a tick bite, is when the disease is usually spread. Contact with infected blood or tissues may spread viruses, and the incubation period for these viruses can be anywhere from 5 days to 6 days, up to 13 days[22]. A broad variety of symptoms, including myalgia, vertigo, headache, neck pain, backache, and photophobia, all manifest suddenly. Petechiae, or red patches on the palate, red eyes, heated cheeks, and a red throat are other common early signs (Figure 4). In the beginning, you can have a sore throat, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, stomach ache, and confusion[23]. In the two to four days after the start of symptoms, restlessness, melancholy, and lassitude may take the place of agitation. Additionally, the stomach discomfort may shift to the upper right quadrant and be accompanied by noticeable hepatomegaly. About 30% of those with CCHF will pass away throughout the course of their disease, usually during the second week. On the ninth or tenth day after the start of symptoms, individuals who are able to recover often start to feel better. Symptoms such as extensive bruising, nosebleeds, and uncontrolled bleeding at injection sites become apparent on day four of sickness and last for around two weeks. The reported mortality rates of CCHF patients in hospitals range from 9% to 50%[24].Figure 4
Petechiae on the hand of a Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever patient. Petechiae are small red or purple spots resulting from capillary bleeding under the skin, commonly seen in the hemorrhagic phase of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever. These non-blanching spots, distributed unevenly across the skin, indicate the severity of infection and can be accompanied by additional hemorrhagic symptoms like ecchymosis and mucosal bleeding.Diagnosis in laboratoryA numberof laboratory techniques may be used to diagnose CCHF. By integrating enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay antigen capture for viral antigen detection with RT-PCR in blood or tissues collected from a dead patient and virus isolation, it is feasible to detect CCHF in its acute phase in individuals with a proper medical history. Tissues treated with formalin may also be stained immune-histo-chemically to reveal viral antigens (Figure 5)[25].Figure 5
Laboratory diagnostic methods for Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever detection. PCR amplification of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) RNA in patient blood samples, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay antigen capture method for viral antigen detection in serum samples, viral isolation technique from infected tick tissues, immunohistochemical staining of CCHFV antigens in formalin-fixed tissue, real-time PCR results showing viral load quantification. CCHF: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever; RT-LAMP: Reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification.TreatmentThe main strategy is to provide general supportive care with an emphasis on symptom treatment. Both the oral and injectable forms of the antiviral medication ribavirin have shown efficacy in treating CCHF infection. Fluid balance, electrolyte imbalances, oxygenation, haemodynamic support, and secondary infection therapy should all be part of the supportive care plan[26]. At this time, neither humans nor animals have access to any immunizations that have proven successful. Without a vaccine, informing the public about the virus and its dangers and encouraging them to take precautions against exposure is the only method to lessen the likelihood of infection. Everyone who works with animals or in agriculture should wear insect repellent and stay away from potentially infectious blood and other body fluids[27]. Control and prevention The Unnoticed tick-animal-tick cycle poses a significant challenge to tick-borne disease prevention and management. Ticks are abundant, and only properly supervised livestock farms are allowed to use acaricides. There is now no widely accessible, safe, and effective vaccination against CCHF for humans, despite the development and limited use of an inactivated vaccine produced from the mouse brain in Eastern Europe[28]. Public health advice several factors should be at the centre of public health recommendations.
Reducing the risk of tick-to-human transmission: Put on protective clothing, such as long pants and sleeves. To make ticks easier to see, dress in bright colours. Approved acaricides should be applied on garments. To protect one's skin and clothes, use an authorised repellant. Keep an eye out for ticks on a frequent basis, and gently remove them if you discover any. Get out of areas where ticks are common and stay away from areas where ticks are active.
Reducing the risk of animal-to-human transmission: When dealing with animals or their tissues in endemic regions, it is important to use protective clothing, such as gloves, whether you are in an abattoir or at home. This is particularly true while butchering, culling or slaughtering. Either regularly treat animals with pesticides two weeks before slaughter or quarantine them before they reach slaughterhouses.
Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmission in the community: Avoid physical contact with someone who seems to be sick with CCHF. When caring for sick persons, always wear protective clothing, including gloves. After touching or visiting someone who is sick, be sure to wash your hands often.
Controlling infection in health-care workers: All healthcare personnel who come into contact with patients who have CCHF, whether it's suspected or proven, or who handle specimens from these patients, should follow basic procedures for infection control. Basic hand hygiene, personal protective equipment usage, safe injection procedures, and proper burial procedures are all included in this. Samples collected from patients suspected of having CCHF should only be handled by qualified personnel in labs with the proper equipment[29-31].
Health concept: A health concept, emphasizing the interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health in the context of CCHF. The zoonotic nature of CCHFV and the role of livestock, wildlife, and tick habitats in the transmission cycle make this approach particularly relevant. By addressing these links, the review highlights the importance of integrated efforts across human, veterinary, and environmental health sectors to effectively manage and control the disease.CONCLUSIONConclusion despite the vast number of individuals who could be affected and the virus's extensive circulation, much remains unclear about the viral and host variables that contribute to CCHFV pathogenesis. We will gain greater mechanistic insights into the mechanisms by which CCHFV causes illness when molecular virology techniques and better small-animal models are developed. It is probable that novel viral protein functions will yet be found. Educating the public, limiting tick contact, treating livestock to minimise infestations, quarantining animals, and safeguarding people involved in high-risk activities are all necessary preventative actions for communities at risk in endemic regions. Limiting the impact of CCHF on patients and public health systems requires effective vaccinations and antivirals, as well as prompt and accurate diagnostics. Future perspective research one hope for the future of CCHF therapy is the availability of immunoglobulin products and other alternative medicines. In order to create targeted treatments, researchers need a deeper knowledge of the CCHF pathophysiology. Developing a vaccine against CCHF is an important objective, despite the fact that it is difficult and is not nearing practical application. People in endemic locations are eagerly awaiting the development of a CCHF vaccination since it is the most effective way to decrease the mortality and morbidity caused by CCHF. This review discussed not only the development of new antiviral drugs and vaccines but also basic research aimed at better understanding the mechanisms of the virus, improving tick control strategies, and addressing the human-animal-environment interface. The review aims to serve as a foundation for future studies and interventions in these critical areas.ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSI acknowledgement my sincere thanks to Maharajah’s College of Pharmacy, Vizianagaram for continuous support and cooperation for completion of this work.


Title: Interactions of Human Dermal Dendritic Cells and Langerhans Cells Treated with 

1. IntroductionCrimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a viral, tick-borne zoonosis and is one of the high-priority pathogens identified in the World Health Organization as well as United States National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) priority A list because of its high case fatality rate, its public health impact and the difficulties in treatment and prevention [1]. CCHF is widespread, now found in Europe, Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and the Indian subcontinent. The CCHF virus (CCHFV) circulates silently in its tick reservoir, ticks of the genus Hyalomma, and animal hosts in which it causes no overt disease [2]. Recent studies have indicated that subclinical infections in areas with high endemicity are greater than previously expected which could be attributed to strain differences [3,4,5]. Since most of the infections besides nosocomial transmission are acquired through tick bite, we hypothesize that in subclinical cases the virus is cleared early after transmission from the tick. Unfortunately, very little is known about the tick–virus–host interface and the early aspects of pathogenesis [2,6]. To elucidate this mechanism, we must identify the initial target cells. Previous studies have shown that dendritic cells (DC) and monocytes are the main cells in circulation susceptible to CCHFV infection [7,8] and can serve as target cells for other hemorrhagic fever viruses [9,10]. The infection of DCs has a dual effect: virus replication, and modulation of cellular immune functions. Two tissue-resident immune cell populations principally modulate immune activity within the skin; Langerhans cells (LC) and dermal dendritic cells (dDC) [11]. LC reside within, and sample antigens from, the epidermis, regulating tissue immune activation, specifically tolerance, and local T-cell effector functions. They also participate as antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in local draining lymph nodes [12]. dDCs, residing within the dermis, engage in migratory immune surveillance, draining lymph node antigen cross-presentation, and local T-cell subtype polarization [13,14]. Together, these cells oversee the immune status and cellular response across the entirety of the skin. Recent studies have demonstrated that viruses employ different ways to target and immunomodulate this subset of dermal APCs [15,16,17].Tick saliva is a complex mixture serving a variety of functions including cytolytic, vasodilator, anticoagulant, anti-inflammatory, and immunosuppressive activity [18]. Co-evolution of ticks, vertebrate hosts and tick-borne pathogens has led to a phenomenon called saliva-assisted transmission (SAT) in which enhancement of transmission of tick-borne pathogens occurs by tick saliva, with the effect documented for several tick-borne pathogens [19]. However, few studies have looked functions of saliva from the genus Hyalomma [20,21,22] and there is only limited information that suggest SAT occurs during CCHFV transmission [23,24]. Here, we generate human dermal antigen cells (dDCs and LCs) from umbilical cord CD34+ progenitor cells. The APCs are susceptible and permissive to CCHFV infection. Surprisingly, tick salivary gland extract did not appear to enhance CCHFV infection in APCs, although it had a significant influence on the immune response of these cells.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Viruses and Stock GenerationCCHFV strain IbAr 10200 and AP92/P7 were kindly provided by Thomas Ksiazek (World Reference Collection for Emerging Viruses and Arboviruses, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA). IbAr 10200 had been passaged 10 times in suckling mice, once in Vero cells and two times in SW-13 cells. AP92/P7 was passaged eight times in suckling mice, once in Vero cells and once in SW-13 cells. Neither virus was plaque purified. SW-13 cells (ATCC catalog number CCL-105) passaged up to 25 times were maintained in L-15 medium containing 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 100 mM l-glutamine, 50 U/mL penicillin, 50 μg/mL streptomycin (all from Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Virus stock and inoculates tested negative for pyrogen contamination with a Pyrogent plus test kit (Lonza, Wakersville, MD, USA). Work with infectious CCHFV was performed in a biosafety level 4 (BSL-4) facility at the Galveston National Laboratory, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX, USA.2.2. Generation of Human Dermal Dendritic Cells and Langerhans CellsLangerhans and dermal dendritic cells were generated based on the protocol by Rozis et al. [25]. Briefly, umbilical cord blood samples were obtained from consented mothers in full term labor at the obstetrics and gynecology department at the University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB) after approval was obtained from the Internal Review Board. CD34+ cells were isolated using immunomagnetic beads (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) and cultured in complete RPMI1640 (100 IU/mL of penicillin, 0.1 mg/mL of streptomycin, 2 mM l-glutamine; Sigma-Aldrich) with 10% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 100 ng/mL of granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and 100 ng/mL of TNF-α (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA, USA). After 5 days, two distinct populations were present: CD14+ CD1a− and CD14−CD1a+ (Figure 1A). CD14+ cells were separated with immunomagnetic beads (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) and cultured separately for a further 5–7 days in GM-CSF (100 ng/mL) and IL-4 (1000 units/mL) (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA, USA). The remaining cells were cultured for the same period of time in medium supplemented with GM-CSF (100 ng/mL), TNF-α (100 ng/mL) and transforming growth factor-β (1 ng/mL) (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA, USA). Purity of generated cell populations was assessed by flow cytometry (Guava easyCyte, MerckMillpore, Burlington, MA, USA) using CD11b and CD207 (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada) antibodies.2.3. Tick Salivary Gland Extract PreparationHyalomma marginatum used in this study were collected in Yozgat state of Turkey in 2012. The strain has been maintained by standard rearing practices at the University Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX as previously described [26]. The ticks were tested negative for CCHFV, Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus (TBEV), and Rickettsia spp. Unfed adults were placed into an ear bag on a New Zealand white rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) and allowed to feed following protocols approved (#1209055, 31 August 2013) by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of UTMB. The ticks were removed on the second day after commencement of feeding, separated by sex, surface cleaned with 70% ethanol and dissected. Salivary glands were removed and placed into sterile-filtered 0.15 M, Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), pH 7.2 held on ice. Salivary glands were sonicated at 55 kHz for 1 min on ice in a water bath. Salivary glands were pelleted by centrifugation at 10,000× g for 10 min and clarified salivary gland extract (SGE) was sterile filtered through a 0.22 µm Durapore-PVDF syringe filter apparatus (MerckMillipore, Burlington, MA, USA). Protein concentration was determined by Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo, Rockford, IL, USA) and protein sizes were analyzed by BioAnalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Austin, TX, USA; see supplemental Figure S1) using an Agilent Protein 80 Kit, separated into 20 μL aliquots, subsequently frozen at −70 °C and thawed not more than twice.2.4. LC and dDC StudiesFor all of the experiments ca. 500,000 LCs or dDCs were used and either incubated with cell culture medium (=mock), 10 μg of H. marginatum SGE in cell culture medium (=SGE), CCHFV IbAr10200 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 (=virus), or both 0.1 MOI CCHFV and 10 μg of H. marginatum SGE (=virus + SGE). For virus replication studies, cells were infected with either CCHFV strain IbAr10200 or AP92/P7 at a MOI of 0.1 and incubated for 48 h at 37 °C after which supernatant was collected. Viral titers in supernatant were measured by plaque assay as previously described [27]. For the other studies, cells were infected with CCHFV strain IbAr10200 at a MOI of 1, and incubated at 37 °C. For the gene array studies, cells were harvested 12 h post infection to determine gene expression levels. For the cytokines studies, supernatant was collected 24 h after infection.2.5. Gene Array AssayLCs and dDCs were harvested 12 h post infection and total RNA was isolated from cells by phenol/chloroform extraction based on approved BSL4 protocols. RNA quality was determined using the BioAnalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Austin, TX, USA) using an Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Kit. RNA from all samples were reverse transcribed to cDNA using the QuantiTect Rev. Transcription Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA). The RT² Profiler™ PCR Array Human Dendritic & Antigen Presenting Cell (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) was used and the samples were run on a Roche Lightcycler real-time detection system (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). RT² Profiler™ PCR Array profiles 84 related genes simultaneously and enable gene expression analysis of 170+ pathways. Data analysis was conducted using Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA).2.6. Cytokine DetectionTo determine secreted cytokine levels from the dDCs and LCs, supernatant was collected 24 h after infection and clarified by briefly centrifuging for 3 min at 10,000 × g. Twenty-microliter amounts of clarified supernatant were run in duplicates with a multiplex Milliplex MAP Human Cytokine/Chemokine kit (MerckMillpore, Burlington, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The kit simultaneously quantifies granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), IFN-α, interleukin-1α (IL-1α) and -1β (IL-1β), IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12 (p40), IL-12 (p70), IL-15, MCP-1, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The samples were run on a Luminex Platform (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) and analyzed using Luminex 100 IS software (Luminex).2.7. Migration AssayA migration assay was performed based on the protocol by Skallova et al. [28]. Deidentified buffy coats were obtained from adult healthy donors from the UTMB Blood Bank by centrifugation enrichment with clinical approval from the UTMB Institutional Review Board. Monocytes were isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC) pools using positive selection anti-CD14 monoclonal antibody coated magnetic beads according to manufacturer’s instructions (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA, USA). Monocytes were supplemented with Advanced RPMI 1640 media, 10% FBS, 2 mM l-glutamine (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), and monocytes were differentiated to monocyte derived dendritic cell (moDC) phenotype by the addition of 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 50 ng/mL granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and 16 ng/mL interleukin-4 (IL-4) (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The moDC were incubated for one week at 37 °C, 5% CO2, harvested with Accutase cell detachment solution (STEMCELL Technologies, Vancouver, BC, Canada), and were incubated with 1 μg/mL Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) from Escherichia coli O55:B5 (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added to each well to induce moDC maturation. The moDC were pelleted by centrifugation and suspended in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RMPI) medium with 20 ug/mL of tick SGE and placed into a polycarbonate membrane insert within a 24-well Fluorimetric QCM Cell Migration Assay (MerckMillipore, Burlington, MA, USA) migration chamber at a density of 5 × 105 cell per chamber. Cells were incubated above wells containing serum-free RMPI with or without 1 μg/mL of the chemoattractant, recombinant human CCL-19 (MIP-3β) (BioLegend, San Diego, CA, USA) for 24 h prior to staining, lysing, and quantifying cell migration according to kit instructions. Within the Cell Migration Assay, cells have to migrate through an 8 mm pore membrane to a bottom chamber. Invaded cells on the bottom of the insert membrane are dissociated from the membrane when incubated with Cell Detachment Buffer. These cells are subsequently lysed and detected by the patented CyQUANT GR dye (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). This green-fluorescent dye exhibits strong fluorescence enhancement when bound to cellular nucleic acids Quantification (i.e., cell migration) was assessed by fluorescence readings using a Tecan Infinite M200 Pro (Tecan Group, Männedorf, Switzerland) plate reader. Samples were run in biological triplicate with multiple reads per well.2.8. Statistical AnalysisA one-way ANOVA test with Bonferroni’s multiple comparison analysis was used to compare the mock and treatment groups for the viral titers, cytokines and cell migration. All tests were conducted in Prism (GraphPad, La Jolla, CA, USA) v5. Significance of gene expression from the RT-qPCR arrays was determined by paired t-test performed in Microsoft Excel 2013 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Hierarchical clustering and heatmap generation was performed using Mathematica v11 (Wolfram, Champaign, IL, USA).3. ResultsThe goal of this study was to determine if human dermal APCs are susceptible to infection by CCHFV and to determine the impact of tick saliva on infected APCs. We were able to generate the human dermal APCs, dermal dendritic cells (dDC) and Langerhans cells (LC), from umbilical cord blood donors in vitro with high purity (>90%) as previously described [25]. In order to evaluate the influence of tick saliva on the susceptibility and immune response of the APCs, salivary gland extract (SGE) was generated from uninfected Hyalomma marginatum ticks on the second days after feeding commenced. Size and concentration of protein fractions in SGE can be found in Supplementary Figure S1.Both LCs and dDCs were susceptible and permissive (~3% and ~25%, respectively) to infection with CCHFV prototype strain IbAr102000 (Figure 1A). The viral output ranged between 31 and 80,000 PFU/mL 48 h post infection. Although there was noteworthy donor to donor variation in viral output, there was a significant difference in viral titers in supernatant between dDCs and LCs. This is especially interesting since the dDCs and LCs are derived from the same donor. Surprisingly, SGE did not significantly influence the viral output in either of the two cell types. The same findings were found with a different CCHFV strain AP92/P7 (Figure 1B). This strain was isolated from a region with observed human seroprevalence but no recorded disease. This has led to speculation that AP92/P7 might be a low-virulence strain of CCHFV and therefore might display differences between the prototype strain (IbAr10200). However, the AP92/P7 strain grew to similar titers, ranging from 15 to 30,000 PFU/mL−1 48 h post infection.Differentiated dDCs and LCs from three donors were stimulated with tick saliva and/or infected with CCHFV IbAr 10200 at a MOI of 0.1. After 12 h, total RNA was harvested for RT-qPCR array analysis. Significantly-altered genes were determined for each cell type, and expression profiles were grouped by hierarchical clustering (Figure 2A). Substantial variability in gene expression was observed between donors, particularly in the dDCs. In general, infection with CCHFV led to the increased expression of most of the significantly-altered genes. Moreover, the fold-changes were often greater in the LCs than in the dDCs.In order to determine the potential upstream transcription factors responsible for the observed differences in gene expression between dDCs and LCs, the three most substantially altered genes for each cell type were analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. This revealed that expression of all these factors involves the activation of Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs; Figure 2B). The high level of expression of Tapasin Binding Protein (TAPBP) and Antigenic Peptide Transporter 2 (TAP2) (59-fold and 29-fold average expression, respectively) in virus-infected and virus-infected, saliva-stimulated LCs (mean fold changes for both conditions), with lower expression of other factors (<10-fold increase), suggests strong interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 activation. By contrast, the similarly high level of expression of CD40 (56-fold) in virus-infected and virus-infected, saliva-stimulated dDCs (mean fold changes for both conditions), with lower expression of other factors (<10-fold increase), suggests strong IFR-7 activation.Interestingly, stimulation of the cells with tick saliva had minimal effect on the transcription profiles of the cells. In general, addition of saliva alone led to minor, general downregulation (<2-fold), although in dDCs the addition of saliva led to a slight increase in CCL3 expression. Moreover, gene expression profiles in dDCs and LCs following virus infection and virus infection with addition of tick saliva were very similar. The exceptions to this are CCL3 and CD4 expression in dDCs, where the addition of tick saliva enhanced virus-associated gene expression.Cytokine and chemokine responses of mock and treated human dDC and LC were studied using a multiplexed detection assay on clarified cell supernatants at 24 hpi. Of the 13 tested cytokines and chemokines, only four showed substantial changes when compared to the mock and/or between the cell types. As previously described, the cytokine and chemokine secretion profile of the two cell types was different [29]. Statistically significant increases in the secretions of cytokine IL-6 and chemokine MCP-1 were observed in dDC supernatants that were both infected with CCHFV and treated with SGE in terms of mock comparisons (Figure 3A,C). LC supernatants demonstrated significant increases in the secretion of cytokine TNF-α only in SGE treated cells compared to mock (Figure 3D). Higher levels of chemokine secretions (IL-8 and MCP-1) were detected among all treatment groups in dDCs compared to LC treatment groups (Figure 3B,C).We noticed that dDCs and LCs exposed to Hyalomma tick SGE with or without virus started to aggregate in clusters raising the question of whether the cells lose their adhesiveness necessary to leave the tissues. Other studies have shown that tick saliva can inhibit the migration of dendritic cells [28]. Cell migration is a fundamental function of APCs’ immune response and in triggering of inflammation cascades. An analysis of the expression of the migration marker CD197 indicated that marker is expressed when APCs are infected with CCHFV, however, expression levels remain similar to mock when SGE is added. To study the effects of Hyalomma tick SGE on APCs migration, we employed a system for quantitative determination of numerous factors on cell migration using pharmacological agents, similar to Boyden chamber migration assays. Using serum starved conditions, we exposed monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDC) to SGE, CCL19 (chemoattractant for APCs), and both SGE and CCL19. SGE treated cells alone inhibited migration across chambers with a statistically significant decrease compared to mock (Figure 4). Chambers containing CCL19, demonstrated increase in cell amounts (MFI) of moDC into chambers, indicating enhanced/increased migration due to chemotaxis (Figure 4). However, SGE treated moDC when exposed to chambers containing CCL19 had a statistically significant decrease in the number of observed cells migrated into the CCL19 chamber, indicating SGE inhibited chemotactic migration of these moDC (Figure 4).4. DiscussionPrevious studies have shown that DCs and macrophages are the most likely target cells for CCHFV upon subcutaneous introduction by tick bite [7,8]. Here, we expand this to dermal APCs, and demonstrate that LCs and dDCs are susceptible and permissive to CCHFV infection and replication. There was noteworthy donor to donor variation, suggesting a potential genetic influence on the infectivity, however, mean values of titers of the different groups stayed within the same range. Interestingly, there was a significant difference in terms of post-infection CCHFV titers between dDCs and LCs. The fact that the two cell types were derived from the same donor suggested that the differentiation state of the cell type might have an influence on the permissivity. A recent study looking at Ebolavirus sets a comparable precedent where monocytes and macrophages have different permissivities [10]. Interestingly, H. marginatum SGE did not enhance the viral output in either of the cell types. In this study we only evaluated SGE from semi-engorged Hyalomma marginatum ticks at a concentration of 10 μg. Furthermore, SGE was mixed with the virus and cells were not pretreated. It is conceivable that modifying the parameters of the experimental setup by harvesting SGE at a different time point, pretreatment, or using a different concentration could have different effects on the viral output. Nevertheless, we tried to mimic the natural conditions as best as possible in our experimental design. The findings mentioned above also held true when a different CCHFV strain, AP92/P7, was used. AP92/P7 is assumed by some to have low virulence based on indirect epidemiological evidence [30,31]. Although CCHFV AP92/P7 titers in dDC and LC were not statistically different than CCHFV IbAr10200 titers, additional studies are needed to identify the virulence level of the strains.Our gene array results indicate that the response to CCHFV in the two cell types is potentially mediated through different Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRF). IRFs are key transcription factors in the cellular response to viral infections. Previous studies have demonstrated that they play significant roles in CCHFV infection, with viral inhibition of IRF3 through the ovarian tumor (OTU) domain of the viral polymerase [32]. Our studies suggest that in dDCs, IRF7 is primarily activated following infection with CCHFV, whereas in LCs, IRF1 activation is primarily increased. Recent studies by Feng et al. (2018), have demonstrated that while both IRF1 and IRF7 decrease CCHFV production when overexpressed in Vero cells, the inhibitory effect of IRF1 is greater [33]. This fits with our data, as the LCs appear to have a stronger IRF1 activation, and lower viral titers, whereas the dDCs appear to have a stronger IRF7 activation, and higher titers. Owens et al. has shown that a IRF7 knock-out result in DC hyper-activation [34], suggesting that IRF7 may have an additional role in moderating DC activation and antiviral responses. Unfortunately, we did not include a group of cells treated with just the inactivated virus, which could have given an assessment if the stimulation of dDCs and LCs depends on viral replication or is just caused by viral binding and update. Moreover, the sample volumes were too small to be able to directly determine the activation states of the IRFs.Cytokines and chemokines are crucial signaling proteins in the pathogenesis of viral diseases with functions such as immunomodulation and attracting cells to sites of infection. In this study, we observed that both dDCs and LCs secrete high levels of IL-6 and MCP-1 when infected with CCHFV with or without SGE. Nevertheless, the cytokine/chemokine profile was not always the same for dDC and LC, with IL-8 secreted to higher levels in dDC, and TNF-α higher in LCs, most likely reflecting the different functions of the cells. Our findings for cytokine/chemokine secretion of dDCs falls between the findings of Connolly-Andersen et al. [8], showing that DCs produce high amounts of IL-6 and TNF-α but not IL-8, and Peyrefitte et al. [7], detecting high amounts of IL-6 and IL-8 but not TNF-α. Although the MOI was different between the studies, it is conceivable that the differentiation state of dDCs leads to secretion of a different cytokines/chemokine profile compared to the monocyte-derived DC used by Connolly-Andersen et al. and Peyrefitte et al. SGE alone induced high levels of TNF-α secretion in LCs, however, overall lead to only minor changes in cytokine/chemokine secretion. Interestingly, SGE and CCHFV had synergistic effects on IL-6, MCP-1 and TNF-α secretion. High levels of chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines will attract mononuclear host cells to the tick feeding site. Some of these cells, such as macrophages and DCs, are target cells for CCHFV and therefore serve the virus as an additional replication site. An aberrant cytokine secretion induced by CCHFV and SGE might also lead to an inadequate stimulation of the adaptive immune response [35].Tick saliva in general poses a wide range of immunomodulatory functions [18,36,37], and on top of cytokine/chemokine perturbations, tick saliva can also impact antigen presenting cell maturation factors [37]. It is still unclear what specific factors impact maturation, however, in a maturation impeded state, APCs may fail to upregulate cell-surface receptors involved in chemotaxis/ligand binding to inducing homing to draining lymph nodes. To study if Hyalomma tick saliva could also impact this type of homing, we used the human chemokine CCL19 to induce migration in activated APCs that were either treated or untreated with Hyalomma SGE. Our results reinforce what others have shown for other ixodid tick salivas [28,37], which is that Hyalomma can also impede APCs migration and chemotaxis through salivary compounds. It would be fascinating to develop and test a luciferase-labeled CCHFV for in vivo imaging, of an infected tick bite onto an animal. This would be useful to determine if our data regarding migration, could be proven in situ of the tick bite/animal interface.5. ConclusionsOur findings indicate that human dDCs and LCs are susceptible and permissive to CCHFV infection, however, to different degrees. Infection leads to cell activation and cytokine/chemokine secretion. Hyalomma marginatum SGE only had little effect on the cells, with some synergy of viral infection when it comes to cytokine secretion. Based on the findings here, we assume that tick saliva does not necessarily have an influence on CCHFV replication, but rather potentially inhibits migration of APCs and immunomodulates the feeding environment.


Title: Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus localization and shedding in the reproductive tract of lethal and survivor mouse models

IntroductionCrimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) is estimated to infect 10,000 to 15,000 people each year with three billion people believed to be at risk of infection [1]. CCHFV can cause a wide spectrum of human clinical disease where fatality occurs in approximately 30% of cases. Most frequently it causes mild-to-moderate illness where individuals recover from acute infection and reach convalescence [2]. Data suggest that subclinical infections also occur, with some studies estimating the incidence to be as high as 88% of total infections [3]. Despite the large number of individuals who survive infection, information remains limited regarding long-term sequelae and virus persistence in survivors. Historically, persistence of hemorrhagic fever viruses in immune-privileged tissues such as the eye [4] and reproductive tract [5,6], has been underrecognized. However, in recent years, relapse of acute Ebola virus (EBOV) disease following convalescence has been documented [7], and Lassa virus has been shown to persist and intermittently shed from the reproductive tract of human survivors [8]. Further, reports of sexual transmission of EBOV from convalescent individuals [9] highlight that viral tropism and persistence in reproductive tissue can have significant public health consequences, including the initiation of new outbreaks [6,10,11].The possibility of CCHFV sexual transmission has been reported in two publications. The first in 2013 describes a patient who had sexual intercourse with his wife after resolution of acute CCHFV infection; his wife developed CCHF 11 days after he was discharged from the hospital and 7 or 8 days after sexual contact [12]. The second report from 2016 describes three confirmed cases of CCHF where the only known exposure was sexual contact with an infected spouse either before their symptom onset (2 cases) or after improvement of acute symptoms (1 case) [13]. Additionally, two reports of epididymo-orchitis as a complication of CCHF [14,15] and persistence of CCHFV viral RNA (vRNA) in the endometrial tissue of a pregnant individual [16] demonstrate a potential tropism of the virus for reproductive tissues in humans. In animal models, CCHFV persistence has been documented in the testes of nonhuman primates; however, co-infection with tuberculosis makes these results difficult to interpret [17].We previously reported pronounced tropism of a fluorescent CCHFV reporter virus for reproductive tissues after lethal infection in female IFNAR-/- mice [18]. Here, we expand on this work by characterizing tissue tropism, replication kinetics, histopathology, and viral shedding from the reproductive tracts of male and female mice using lethal and survivor models [19]. By examining acute and convalescent phases of infection, these studies provide a framework for understanding the potential risk of sexual transmission across different stages and severities of CCHF.Materials and methodsBiosafety and ethics statementStudies involving infectious CCHFV were carried out at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; Atlanta, GA) in Biosafety Level 4 (BSL-4) containment facilities. Experiments involving recombinant viruses were conducted under protocols approved by the CDC Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC). All animal research was approved by the CDC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC; #3102, 3342, 3343) and performed in an AAALAC-International accredited facility.Viruses and cellsThe detailed passage history of CCHFV strains IbAr10200 (GenBank: KJ648914, KJ648915, KJ648913; VirHARV #813730) and Turkey04 (GenBank: KY362517, KY362519, KY362515; VirHARV #813732) was described previously [20]. HuH-7 cells were sourced from Apath, LLC.MiceC57BL/6J mice (The Jackson Laboratory, strain #000664; male and female) were housed as previously described [19]. Groups of mice were immunosuppressed via intraperitoneal (IP) injection with anti-IFNAR1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) MAR1-5A3 (2.5 mg administered −1/+1, 0, or +1 dpi; Leinco Technologies, Cat. No. I-401, Lot Nos. 1223L560, 0823L230, 0822L285, 0323L565, 0721L710, 1221L440, 0622L675, and 0521L200) and were infected either IP or SC (subcutaneously) with CCHFV strains IbAr10200 (6–83 weeks of age) or Turkey04 (6 weeks of age). Mice were monitored daily for weight loss and clinical signs; clinical scoring and euthanasia were performed according to established protocols as previously described [20]. Samples were collected from serially euthanized mice infected with Turkey04 at 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 days post-infection (dpi), and from mice infected with IbAr10200 at 3 dpi and after meeting euthanasia criteria (4–8 dpi). Group sizes were larger for the IbAr10200 analyses because historical unvaccinated/untreated control mice were included; fewer Turkey04-infected mice were available as historical controls.RT-qPCRUrogenital swabs (preputial for males or intravaginal for females; sterile mini-tip polyester swab; Puritan, Cat. No. 25-800 1PD 50) collected for vRNA extraction were placed in 0.5 mL MagMAX lysis buffer and incubated at room temperature (RT) for 15–20 min. Reproductive tissues (∼100 mg section of testis or ovary and seminal vesicle or cervix) were collected, placed in 1.0 mL of MagMAX Lysis/Binding Solution Concentrate, and homogenized using the 2010 Geno/Grinder (SPEX SamplePrep). Total RNA was extracted and vRNA was quantified using methods previously described [19]. RNA levels were normalized using the validated reference genes Ppia and Gusb [20].Virus isolation and quantificationUrogenital swabs (preputial for males or intravaginal for females; sterile mini-tip polyester swab; Puritan, Cat. No. 25-800 1PD 50) collected for virus isolation were placed in 1.0 mL serum free DMEM (2× antimycotic/antibiotic; Gibco, Cat. No. 15240062) and incubated 15–20 min at RT. Samples were centrifuged to clear particulates, and supernatants were plated (250 µL/well) into 4 wells of a 12-well plate seeded with Huh7 cells. CCHFV (10-fold dilution series) and DMEM alone were plated in parallel as positive and negative controls. After rocking every 15 min for 1 h (37°C), DMEM (5% FBS and 2× antimycotic/antibiotic; Gibco, Cat. No. 15240062) was added to each well and plates were incubated at 37°C for 5 days. Plates were fixed and stained as previously described [19]. Results are reported as + or – detection of virus.Reproductive tissues remaining after collection for RT-qPCR (males: 1× testis, seminal vesicle; females: 1× ovary, uterus) were homogenized in serum free DMEM (1.0 mL; 2× antimycotic/antibiotic; Gibco, Cat. No. 15240062), centrifuged, plated onto 96-well plates seeded with Huh7 cells (100 µL/well; 10-fold dilutions), and incubated at 37°C for 5 days. CCHFV (10-fold dilution series) and DMEM alone were plated in parallel as positive and negative controls. Plates were fixed and stained as above. Results are reported as TCID50/g using the Reed-Muench method [21].Pathology methodsReproductive tissues (testis, epididymis, accessory sex glands for males; ovary, oviduct, uterus for females) were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and processed for routine paraffin histology and hematoxylin–eosin staining [19]. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) were performed on reproductive tissues from subsets of animals. IHC was performed using a rabbit anti-CCHFV N pAb (IBT Bioservices, Cat. No. 04-0011), as previously described [19]. To localize CCHFV vRNA in FFPE (formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded) tissues, ISH assays using an RNAscope 2.5 HD Red Detection Kit and CCHFV strain-specific probes for detection of NP transcripts (mRNA/cRNA) (IbAr10200 [V-CCHFV-S-N-C1] and Turkey04 [V-CCHFV-S], Advanced Cell Diagnostics; Cat. No. 1193601-C1 and 510621) were performed, as previously described [22]. All tissues were tested in parallel with appropriate positive and negative controls. Specificity testing for CCHFV probes were verified by testing of FFPE tissues from clinically or genetically similar viruses.Analytical approach and statistical analysesThe primary objective of this work was to link reproductive tissue data with disease outcome rather than route of exposure. Accordingly, pooled analyses were conducted across both inoculation groups, as tissue replication kinetics and distribution do not differ notably by exposure route [19]. Any route-specific differences observed are noted in the text. All statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism version 10.2.2. Mann–Whitney tests were used to compare mean vRNA levels across age groups and between samples that were positive or negative for infectious virus.ResultsCCHFV RNA and infectious virus are widely detected in mouse reproductive tissues in the absence of severe tissue pathology during lethal diseaseC57BL/6J mice immunosuppressed with anti-IFNAR1 mAb MAR1-5A3 and infected (intraperitoneally [IP] or subcutaneously [SC]) with CCHFV strain IbAr10200 develop severe disease with substantial weight loss (>20% from baseline measured on day 0) resulting in lethality 4 to 8 days post infection (dpi) (3% survival at 14 dpi, n = 5/149) (Figure 1A) [19]. Here, groups of male and female mice were transiently immunosuppressed (mAb MAR1-5A3), infected (IP or SC) with IbAr10200, and serially euthanized at 3 dpi or at the terminal timepoint (meeting euthanasia criteria or succumbing to disease; see Methods). Urogenital swabs (preputial for males, intravaginal for females) were collected from animals at the time of euthanasia for vRNA detection by RT-qPCR and for virus isolation. Gonad (1 × testis or ovary) and seminal vesicle or cervix (∼100 mg section) were also collected to determine levels of vRNA via RT-qPCR. Remaining reproductive tissues (males: 1 × testis, seminal vesicle; females: 1 × ovary, uterus) were collected for evaluation of infectious CCHFV titre. Separate cohorts of infected mice were euthanized and whole reproductive tissues were collected for histopathological analysis by H&E staining. A subset of samples was also evaluated by immunohistochemistry and/or in situ hybridization.
Figure 1.Groups of male and female C57BL/6J mice were transiently immunosuppressed with an anti-IFNAR1 monoclonal antibody (MAR1-5A3; intraperitoneally [IP]), infected with lethal CCHFV strain IbAr10200 (IP or subcutaneously [SC]), and serially euthanized at 3 days post infection (dpi) or at the terminal timepoint (meeting euthanasia criteria or succumbing to disease [T]). (A) Historical data from the CCHFV transient immunosuppression (IS) model [19] demonstrating that CCHFV IbAr10200-infected mice lose significant weight (>20% from baseline measured on day 0) and succumb to infection between 4 and 8 dpi (3% survival at 14 dpi, n = 5/149). (B) Tissues including gonad (1 × testis or ovary) and seminal vesicle or cervix (∼100 mg sections) were collected to determine levels of CCHF viral RNA (vRNA) via RT-qPCR. (C) Remaining reproductive tissues (males: 1 × testis, seminal vesicle; females: 1× ovary, uterus) were collected for evaluation of infectious CCHFV titre. (D) Urogenital swabs (preputial for males, intravaginal for females) were collected from each animal at the time of euthanasia for evaluation via RT-qPCR and virus isolation. Mann-Whitney tests were used to determine if mean vRNA copy number was different between samples that were positive or negative for infectious virus; * p < 0.5. ND, not detected.Early after infection at 3 dpi, vRNA was detectable in the gonad and seminal vesicle/cervical tissue of a majority of both male (gonad: 13/20, 65%; seminal vesicle: 6/9, 66%) and female (ovary: 21/21, 100%; cervix: 7/9, 78%) mice. By terminal timepoints (4–8 dpi) vRNA was detectable in both tissues in 100% of male (45/45) and 96% of female (50/52) mice. Viral RNA copy number peaked at terminal timepoints averaging 1.3E+07 (range: 3.18E+04 to 1.26E+08) and 2.9E+07 (range: not detected [ND] to 3.71E+08) S genome copies/µL in the gonad (Figure 1B), and 4.7E+06 (range: 1.52E+04 to 5.72E+07) and 6.9E+06 (range: ND to 5.69E+07) S genome copies/µL in seminal vesicle/cervical tissue from male and female mice, respectively. In addition to vRNA, high titres of infectious CCHFV were also isolated from whole homogenized reproductive tissue of a majority of both male (mean: 1.30E+05 [range: ND to 8.45E+05] TCID50/g) and female (mean: 6.33E+05 [range: ND to 4.58E+06] TCID50/g) mice at terminal timepoints but, notably, could not be isolated at early timepoints (3 dpi) (Figure 1C). We also found that tropism for reproductive tissue did not change based on mouse age at the time of inoculation, which ranged from 6 to 83 weeks (terminal IbAr10200-infected mice only); mean vRNA levels were not significantly different across age groups (Supplemental Figure 1).Viral RNA was frequently detected in urogenital swabs from female mice at 3 dpi and at terminal timepoints (3 dpi: 4/6, 67%; terminal: 40/40, 100%). In contrast, detection in males was less frequent (3 dpi: 0/6, 0%; terminal: 28/41, 68%), likely reflecting the superficial nature of preputial swabbing compared with the intravaginal collection used in females. High copy numbers of vRNA were detected in swabs from both males (mean: 1.99E+05 [range: ND to 7.56E+06] S genome copies/µL) and females (mean: 4.55E+06 [range: 2.74E+02 to 1.55E+08] S genome copies/µL) at terminal timepoints (Figure 1 D). Importantly, infectious virus could be isolated from the urogenital swabs of female mice at 3 dpi and terminal timepoints; none was isolated from males (Figure 1C). Higher vRNA values were associated with higher likelihood of isolation of infectious virus from urogenital swabs (Figure 1D).Infection with lethal IbAr10200 was characterized by histopathologic changes in reproductive tissues at 3 dpi and terminal timepoints (4–6 dpi), regardless of inoculation route, that included primarily serosal histiocytic or mixed inflammation, as well as occasional foci of necrosis or granulomatous/pyogranulomatous inflammation attributed at least in part to intraperitoneal (IP) injection of mAb (MAR1-5A3) and/or IP inoculation of virus (Figure 2). One terminal (5 dpi) female had necrotizing granulomatous inflammation with possible intralesional foreign material in the visceral fat, also attributed to IP injection. In males, there was also typically mild, mixed inflammation of the epididymal fat pad, and occasionally, of the epididymal or accessory sex gland interstitium. In females, mixed inflammation was present in adipose tissue around the oviduct and uterus.
Figure 2.Detection of CCHFV antigen (red) by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in reproductive tissues of C57BL/6J mice infected with lethal strain IbAr10200 at 3 dpi or at the terminal timepoint (meeting euthanasia criteria or succumbing to disease; (representative images from 5 dpi). Note absence of mucosal epithelial staining in all tissues. [A] 3 dpi male with immunostaining in inflammatory infiltrate between the surfaces of the testis (T) and epididymis (E). [B] 5 dpi male with immunostaining in the serosal tissue of the accessory sex gland, including intravascular leukocytes (arrowheads). [C] 5 dpi male with immunostaining of the epididymal interstitium and fibrovascular connective tissue, including endothelial cells (arrows) and intravascular leukocytes (arrowheads). [D] 5 dpi male with immunostaining among interstitial cells and in intravascular leukocytes (arrowheads) in the testis. [E] 3 dpi female with immunostaining in mesenchymal cells associated with mesonephric duct remnants. [F] 5 dpi female with widespread immunostaining in the ovary (Ov), Uterus (U), and surrounding fibroadipose tissues; Oviduct (Od). [G] Higher magnification of ovary in [F] showing staining in the ovarian stroma and in thecal cells (arrowheads) of a tertiary follicle (*). [H] Higher magnification of uterus in [F] showing immunostaining within the endometrial and myometrial layers. [I] 3 dpi male with immunostaining of cells in the subcapsular sinuses of a reproductive tract-associated lymph node. Polyclonal anti-nucleoprotein (NP) CCHFV antibody, naphthol fast red chromogen. Original magnifications: × 20 [A-E, G-I]; × 2.5 [F].⁣Immunohistochemistry confirms infection of reproductive tissues in mice with lethal diseaseImmunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed on a representative subset of reproductive tissues from animals infected with lethal IbAr10200 (Figure 2). CCHFV antigen (nucleoprotein) was detected in reproductive tissues by IHC at 3 dpi for both SC and IP infection routes and was most extensive in the serosa of IP-inoculated mice. Overall staining was more widespread, but with a similar distribution, in tissues from mice reaching endpoint criteria (4–6 dpi). Antigen was primarily localized to serosal mesothelium and inflammatory cells, interstitial stromal and inflammatory cells, intravascular leukocytes, and endothelial cells. There was also staining of histiocytes in reproductive tract-associated lymph nodes. In males, there was staining of the tunica vaginalis and the testicular and epididymal interstitium. In females, staining was in the ovarian bursa, stroma, and thecal cells, in oviductal and uterine interstitium, and in the myometrium. There was no staining of mucosal epithelium in male or female reproductive tissues.Nonlethal and lethal CCHFV infections exhibit similar reproductive tissue tropism and pathology during acute diseaseC57BL/6 mice immunosuppressed with mAb MAR1-5A3 and infected (IP or SC) with CCHFV strain Turkey04 exhibit mild weight loss (<15% from baseline measured on day 0) but no other signs of clinical disease, and all animals recover from infection (100% survival at ≥14 dpi, n = 54/54) (Figure 3A) [19]. Here, groups of mice were transiently immunosuppressed, infected (IP or SC) with Turkey04, and serially euthanized during acute infection, at 3 or 7 dpi. Samples collected from lethal IbAr1200-infected mice described above were similarly collected from Turkey04-infected mice.
Figure 3.Groups of male and female C57BL/6J mice were transiently immunosuppressed with an anti-IFNAR1 monoclonal antibody (MAR1-5A3; intraperitoneally [IP]) infected with nonlethal CCHFV strain Turkey04 (IP or subcutaneously [SC]), and serially euthanized at 3- and 7-days post infection (dpi). (A) Historical data from the CCHFV transient immunosuppression (IS) model [19] demonstrating that CCHFV Turkey04-infected mice transiently lose weight (<15% from baseline measured on day 0) and all recover from infection (≥14 dpi) with no other signs of clinical disease (100% survival, n = 54/54). (B) Tissues including gonad (1 × testis or ovary) and seminal vesicle or cervix (∼100 mg section) were collected to determine levels of CCHFV viral RNA (vRNA) via RT-qPCR. (C) Remaining reproductive tissue (males: 1× testis, seminal vesicle; females: 1 × ovary, uterus) was collected for evaluation of infectious CCHFV titre. (D) Urogenital swabs (preputial for males, intravaginal for females) were collected from each animal at the time of euthanasia for evaluation via RT-qPCR and virus isolation. ND, not detected.During acute infection Turkey04 vRNA was detectable in both the gonad and seminal vesicle/cervix of most mice. At 3 dpi 87% (13/15) males and 100% (15/15) females had vRNA present in the gonad, and 67% (2/3) of males and 100% (3/3) females had vRNA present in the seminal vesicle/cervix. By 7 dpi vRNA was detectable in 100% of both tissues (gonad [15/15] and seminal vesicle/cervix [3/3]) in males and females. Viral RNA copy number peaked at 7 dpi, and mean titres (gonad, males: 6.21E+08 [range: 1.36E+06 to 5.14E+09], females: 6.53E+08 [range: 1.39E+02 to 5.19E+09] S genome copies/µL; seminal vesicle/cervix, males: 3.14E+08 [range: 7.11E+07 to 4.78E+08], females: 5.85E+08 [range: 3.11E+08 to 1.08E+09] S genome copies/µL) were comparable to those in the lethal IbAr10200 model (Figure 3B). In contrast to the lethal model, and despite high levels of vRNA, no infectious virus was isolated from reproductive tissues (Figure 3C).Viral RNA was detectable in urogenital swabs early after infection at 3 dpi from female (2/3, 67%; mean: 8.4E+03 [range: ND to 2.19E+04] S genome copies/µL) but not male (0/3, 0%) mice. At 7 dpi 100% of urogenital swabs from both female (3/3) and male (3/3) mice had detectable vRNA; mean titres were significantly higher in females (4.38E+08 [range: 5.79E+07 to 1.03E+09] S genome copies/µL) compared to males (9.69E+04 [range: 6.38E+04 to 1.35E+05] S genome copies/µL). Rarely, infectious virus could be isolated from the urogenital swabs of female mice at 7 dpi (1/3, 33%). The single swab positive for infectious virus also corresponded to the highest level of vRNA detected in urogenital swabs (Figure 3D).Histopathologic changes and viral antigen localization in reproductive tracts of Turkey04-infected mice at 3 and 7 dpi were similar to those observed in lethal IbAr10200-infected mice (Figure 4). Findings were characterized predominately by mixed inflammation of serosal surfaces and visceral connective tissues, including pyogranulomatous inflammation, which was again more prominent in IP-inoculated animals. There was again occasional involvement of parenchymal interstitium by mild, mixed inflammation. Viral antigen was localized by IHC to the same tissues and cell types as in lethally infected mice. There was also a lack of epithelial staining in male and female tissues, except for in one terminal (7 dpi) male that had epithelial staining in discrete segments of the head of the epididymis.
Figure 4.Detection of CCHFV antigen (red) by immunohistochemistry (IHC) in reproductive tissues of C57BL/6J mice infected with nonlethal strain Turkey04 in early infection (3 or 7 dpi). Note absence of mucosal epithelial staining in all tissues. [A] 3 dpi male with immunostaining in inflammatory infiltrate (*) in the epididymal fat pad. [B] 3 dpi male with immunostaining along the outer wall of the epididymal tubules and in the tunica vaginalis (Tv). [C] 7 dpi male with focal immunostaining among interstitial cells in the testis. [D] 7 dpi male with immunostaining along the surface of the epididymis (arrowheads) and in the adjacent inflamed connective tissue (*). [E] 7 dpi male with widespread immunostaining in densely inflamed adipose tissue surrounding reproductive tissues. [F] 3 dpi female with immunostaining in the ovarian parenchyma (*) and bursa (arrow). [G] 3 dpi female with immunostaining in the uterine endometrium, myometrium, and serosa (arrowhead). [H] 7 dpi female with widespread immunostaining in the ovary (Ov) and bursa, Oviduct (Od), outer myometrium of the uterus (U), and the surrounding adipose tissue (*). [I] Higher magnification of ovary in [H] showing immunostaining in the ovarian stroma. Polyclonal anti-nucleoprotein (NP) CCHFV antibody, naphthol fast red chromogen. Original magnifications: × 20 [A, B, D, E, G, I]; × 40 [C], × 10 [F], × 5 [H].CCHFV is largely cleared from reproductive tissues during convalescenceTo investigate whether CCHFV could be detected in the reproductive tissues of survivors after convalescence, C57BL/6J mice infected with Turkey04, as previously described, were serially euthanized after recovery from mild acute disease (defined as weight loss) at 14, 21, and 28 dpi. One IbAr10200-infected female that recovered from severe disease and survived to 14 dpi was also included in histopathologic analyses.In surviving Turkey04-infected mice, vRNA decreased incrementally between 14 and 28 dpi but remained detectable at 28 dpi in the gonad of males (mean: 4.67E+04 [range: ND to 1.39E+05] S genome copies/µL) and females (mean: 8.15E+04 [range: 7.45E+02 to 2.35E+05] S genome copies/µL), and in the seminal vesicle of males only (mean: 4.88E+02 [range: ND to 1.38E+03] S genome copies/µL) (Figure 5A). Interestingly, levels of vRNA did not significantly decrease in the cervical tissue of female mice between 14 (mean: 5.90E+05 [range: 4.82E+05 to 7.49E+05] S genome copies/µL) and 28 dpi (mean: 1.68E+05 [range: 3.20E+04 to 3.62E+05] S genome copies/µL). Urogenital swabs were rarely positive for vRNA in male mice at 14 (1/3, 33%) and 21 (1/6, 17%) dpi, and vRNA was no longer detectable at 28 dpi (0/6, 0%). In female mice, urogenital swabs were positive for vRNA through 28 dpi but frequency decreased over time (14 dpi: 3/3 [100%], 21 dpi: 5/6 [83%], 28 dpi: 1/6 [17%]). Infectious virus was not isolated from reproductive tissues or urogenital swabs of convalescent animals (Figure 5B-C).
Figure 5.Groups of male and female C57BL/6J mice were transiently immunosuppressed with an anti-IFNAR1 monoclonal antibody (MAR1-5A3; intraperitoneally [IP]), infected with nonlethal CCHFV strain Turkey04 (IP or subcutaneously [SC]), and serially euthanized at 14-, 21-, and 28 days post infection (dpi). (A) Tissues including gonad (1 × testis or ovary) and seminal vesicle or cervix (∼100 mg section) were collected to determine levels of CCHFV viral RNA (vRNA) via RT-qPCR. (C) Remaining reproductive tissue (males: 1 × testis, seminal vesicle; females: 1 × ovary, uterus) was collected for evaluation of infectious CCHFV titre. (D) Urogenital swabs (preputial for males, intravaginal for females) were collected from each animal at the time of euthanasia for evaluation via RT-qPCR and virus isolation. ND, not detected.Among Turkey04-infected mice at 14 dpi, mild chronic inflammation was occasionally present in serosal and interstitial tissues, but CCHV antigen was not detected (Figure 6A-F) except focally in the testes of two males, where it localized to a cluster of inflamed seminiferous tubules, including apparent spermatogenic precursors (Figure 6G). Tissues from the one IbAr10200-infected female that survived to 14 dpi had focal lymphocytic infiltrates in the periovarian connective tissue and scattered lymphocytes in the myometrium. Antigen localized to the inflammatory infiltrate around mesonephric duct remnants in the periovarian fat, and focally within the ovarian stroma and rare individual endometrial stromal cells (Figure 6H-I). No viral antigen was detected in reproductive tissues from Turkey04-infected survivors at 21 or 28 dpi.
Figure 6.Immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CCHFV antigen (red) in reproductive tissues of convalescent C57BL/6J mice infected with strain Turkey04 [A-G] or IbAr10200 [H-I], 14 dpi. [A-C]: Reproductive tissues from 14 dpi males infected with CCHFV strain Turkey04 show absence of viral antigen in testes (T), epididymides (E), epididymal fat (F), and accessory sex glands (A). [D-F] Reproductive tissues from 14 dpi females infected with CCHFV strain Turkey04 show absence of viral antigen in ovaries (Ov), oviducts (Od), and uterus (U). [G] Testis from 14 dpi male infected with CCHFV strain Turkey04 shows focal staining of inflamed seminiferous tubules, including apparent seminiferous epithelium (arrowheads). [H, I] Reproductive tissues from the single survivor of CCHFV strain IbAr10200 infection with rare immunostaining in the ovary [H] and uterus [I] at 14 dpi. Polyclonal anti-nucleoprotein (NP) CCHFV antibody, naphthol fast red chromogen. Original magnifications: × 5 [A-F]; × 40 [G-I].In situ hybridization using strain-specific probes is more sensitive than IHC for CCHFV detection and localization in tissuesTo maximize sensitivity and confirm that IHC methods did not miss low levels of CCHFV that may be present during convalescence, in situ hybridization (ISH) assays were developed to investigate the cellular localization of CCHFV mRNA/cRNA in mouse reproductive tissues. The assays were performed systematically on tissues from a subset of animals to compare the sensitivities of ISH and IHC for CCHFV detection in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. ISH using strain-specific probes (i.e. IbAr10200 or Turkey04) showed similar overall distribution, but more abundant staining and sometimes differences in cellular localization within individual tissues than IHC in reproductive tissues from mice infected with the corresponding strain. ISH using heterologous strain probes showed less extensive staining than both ISH using homologous strain probes and IHC (Figure 7). Despite this increased sensitivity of strain-specific ISH compared to IHC, staining by ISH was not identified in any tissue section that did not also have some, albeit less, staining by IHC, for tissues that had both assays performed.
Figure 7.Comparison of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and in situ hybridization (ISH) for detection and localization of CCHFV in formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded C57BL/6J mouse reproductive tissues. Top row: ovary from a mouse inoculated with CCHFV strain IbAr10200, 7 dpi. Bottom row: epididymis from a mouse inoculated with CCHFV strain Turkey04, 7 dpi. Left column: IHC using anti-CCHFV NP pAb, naphthol fast red chromogen. Middle column: ISH using IbAr10200-specific probe to detect NP mRNA/cRNA. Right column: ISH using Turkey04-specific probe to detect NP mRNA/cRNA. Epididymis from a mouse inoculated with CCHFV-Turkey04 shows strongest staining by Turkey04-specific ISH, while ovary from a mouse inoculated with CCHFV-IbAr10200 shows strongest staining by IbAr10200-specific ISH. IHC shows less staining than the matched-strain ISH but more staining than the opposite-strain ISH for both tissues. Note that epididymis shown in the bottom row has prominent staining in tubular epithelial cells and is the only tissue from any animal in the study that had mucosal epithelial staining. Original magnifications: × 10.DiscussionHere, we evaluated CCHFV loads (vRNA and infectious titre) in reproductive tissues and urogenital swabs from both lethal (strain IbAr10200) and survivor (strain Turkey04) mouse models of CCHF [19]. Viral RNA in reproductive tissues was detected in at least a subset of mice at all timepoints examined, irrespective of virus strain, with the highest levels detected during acute disease (3 and 7 dpi) or at terminal endpoint (4–8 dpi). In urogenital swabs, evaluated as a proxy for virus transmission, vRNA was detected in animals infected with both IbAr10200 or Turkey04; it was first detected in females (3 dpi) and present in all mice at 7 dpi (Turkey04) or at terminal sampling (IbAr10200). Viral RNA levels in reproductive tissues and urogenital swabs from terminal IbAr10200-infected mice were consistent across age groups and advanced age, known to be a risk factor for Ebola virus persistence in human survivor semen, was not associated with higher vRNA levels [23].In tissues, infectious virus was only isolated from IbAr10200-infected mice at terminal timepoints. However, high levels of vRNA were also detected during mild disease after infection with Turkey04, suggesting that while isolation may be rare in these animals, additional studies with larger cohorts are warranted to more accurately determine the frequency of infectious virus recovery. Like tissues, virus isolation from urogenital swabs was more frequent following lethal IbAr10200 infection than nonlethal Turkey04 infection. Infectious virus was recovered only from intravaginal swabs at 7 dpi (Turkey04) or terminal sampling (IbAr10200); no virus isolates were obtained from males, sampling was limited to preputial surface swabs which may not fully reflect shedding risk.In both lethal and nonlethal models, immunostaining during acute infection was primarily associated with inflammation of visceral connective tissues and adjacent serosal surfaces, and within the parenchymal interstitium, which was often only minimally inflamed. Serositis in these animals was interpreted to be due at least in part to intraperitoneal inoculation of virus (for IP-inoculated animals) and/or IP injection of mAb (all animals). Viral antigens and RNA localization by IHC and ISH, respectively, within serosal infiltrates of both IP- and SC-inoculated animals supports the possibilities of viral dissemination to the serosa by both direct inoculation and through viremia or leukocyte trafficking. Mucosal epithelium appeared generally spared in both males and females, with segmental epididymal epithelial staining seen in only one male (7 dpi), and no mucosal epithelial staining seen in any female reproductive tissue. These findings are consistent with prior reports in female IFNAR -/- mice infected with CCHFV IbAr10200 which demonstrated focal staining in the lamina propria of the terminal oviduct and the ovarian medullary stroma [18].In other viral infections where sexual transmission is known to occur, such as Zika virus, infection of germ cells and epididymal epithelium are well characterized [24,25]. Interestingly, our findings are more consistent with findings from EBOV-infected mice and macaques during acute infection, where epithelial cell staining is rare and antigen is primarily detected in reproductive tract interstitium, stromal connective tissue, and macrophages, rather than parenchymal cells [26,27]. These data suggest that rare epithelial cell infection during CCHF does not preclude the possibility of sexual transmission, and even uncommon findings in disease models may translate into substantial public health consequences, including severe disease and resurgent outbreaks, as have been reported with EBOV transmission from survivors [6,9]. These data also support that the mechanism of sexual transmission for viral hemorrhagic fevers may be different than those traditionally described for other viruses, and further work is needed to elucidate this mechanism.In convalescent animals, no virus was isolated from swabs or tissues despite continued detection of vRNA until 28 dpi, suggesting low risk for persistence of infectious virus and sexual transmission during convalescence. However, rare immunostaining was observed in a small subset of animals at 14 dpi. Notably, in two male convalescent mice, antigen distribution differed from that seen during acute infection, with staining present in seminiferous tubules in addition to the interstitium. This raises the possibility that, although uncommon, direct infection of spermatogenic precursors may occur. These findings parallel observations in nonhuman primates infected with EBOV, a virus known to persist in reproductive tissues, where interstitial staining is the primary finding after convalescence [28]. Thus, while we cannot exclude the potential for viral shedding in a subset of animals, its apparent rarity indicates that confirmation would require investigation with larger cohorts.Given the large numbers of human CCHF cases and survivors each year, even rare shedding from the reproductive tract of survivors could have significant implications for sexual transmission [1,2]. Importantly, tissue localization and isolation of infectious virus from urogenital swabs in both models suggest the potential for sexual transmission during acute infection, even during mild disease. Urogenital swab vRNA levels corresponded with likelihood of isolating infectious virus, underscoring the value of investigating this association in human patients. If validated, vRNA detection from urogenital swabs could be used clinically to assess transmission risk in CCHF patients prior to hospital discharge. Ultimately, structured survivor programmes for CCHF, modelled after those established for EBOV [29,30], would be highly valuable.Limitations of this work include smaller cohort sizes for non-lethal infection, particularly for acute urogenital swabs and convalescent tissues and swabs, which reduced our ability to detect rare instances of infectious virus. In addition, urogenital swab sampling in males was less invasive, likely leading to an underestimation of shedding in this sex. Finally, detection of vRNA or infectious virus in tissues and swabs does not provide conclusive evidence of direct sexual transmission, though it does indicate a potential risk. In this study, we focused on indices of viral presence and infectivity in association with infection outcome, without considering host factors that may also influence replication kinetics and transmission risk. In previous work examining these mouse models, we demonstrated that proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines were significantly elevated in non-survivors, implicating inflammatory responses in disease outcome [19]. Such responses, together with other factors, including underlying conditions, are likely to affect both the incidence and duration of viral persistence in human disease.While the evidence for CCHFV sexual transmission in humans remains anecdotal, it is notable that a single report from 1968 provided the only evidence of filovirus sexual transmission (Marburg virus) prior to the 2016 and 2021 EBOV outbreaks, where sexual transmission played a critical role [6,10,11,31]. The findings herein underscore the need for further research on human CCHFV infection to critically assess the risk of sexual transmission and the potential for viral persistence in reproductive tissue during and after disease resolution and identify optimal measures to monitor patients and mitigate subsequent exposure.Supplementary MaterialRepro Manuscript_Main text_resub_v4_Marked.docxSupplemental Figures_CCHFV Repro.docx


Title: Differential Cell Line Susceptibility to Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever Virus

IntroductionCrimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a severe infectious disease across a vast geographic area in Asia, Africa, and Europe with fatality rates of 5–30% in humans (Spengler et al., 2018). The aetiological agent CCHF virus (CCHFV) is a highly pathogenic tick-borne virus belonging to the genus Orthonairovirus of family Nairoviridae. CCHF severity and CCHFV infection/exposure in humans have been described based on clinical findings and epidemiological studies (Bente et al., 2013; Ozsoy et al., 2015); however, the molecular mechanism underlying CCHF pathogenesis is not well described. CCHFV may be asymptomatic in animals (Spengler et al., 2016). To date, the disease development upon CCHFV infection has been demonstrated in only a subset of immunocompromised mice and a cynomolgus macaque model (Haddock et al., 2018; Mendoza et al., 2018). The limits of appropriate animal models, as well as the requirement for high biosafety level containment may slow down the progress in developing CCHFV anti-viral drugs and vaccines.Suitable in vitro models for investigating CCHFV infection and replication may promote defining of the molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis and benefit the assessing of drug candidates for antiviral effects. Monocytes, endothelial cells, hepatocytes, and renal cells have been shown to be permissive to CCHFV (Connolly-Andersen et al., 2009; Bente et al., 2010; Peyrefitte et al., 2010; Connolly-Andersen et al., 2011; Rodrigues et al., 2012; Foldes et al., 2020). However, susceptibility differences to CCHFV in cell lines originating from these cell types, as well as from other human and/or animal tissues, have not been extensively described.In the current study, we characterized the cell susceptibility of various cell lines to CCHFV, including 16 human cell lines derived from the brain, blood vessels, liver, kidney, uterus, immune system, lung, muscle, and skin and 6 animal cell lines derived from monkey, pig, dog, and hamster. Viral load in culture supernatants, viral antigen expression in cells, virus growth properties, and cell morphology changes were assessed following CCHFV infection.Materials and MethodsCells and VirusHuman rhabdomyosarcoma (RD) cells, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC), human hepatocarcinoma (Huh7) cells, and epidermal carcinoma (A431) cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA). Baby hamster kidney (BHK-21) cells, human embryonic kidney (HEK-293) cells, human cervix adenocarcinoma (HeLa) cells, African green monkey kidney (Vero) cells, African green monkey kidney, clone E6 (Vero E6) cells, Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, U-87 MG, HMC3, HepG2, SH-SY5Y, MRC-5, PK-15, and DH82 cells were cultured in Eagle’s minimum essential medium (EMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS. Human lung carcinoma (A549) cells were cultured in F12 medium supplemented with 10% FBS. SW-13 cells were cultured in L-15 medium supplemented with 10% FBS. HULEC-5a cells were cultured in MCDB131 supplemented with 10% FBS. THP-1 and Raji cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% FBS. Huh7, HUVEC, A549, MRC-5, and PK-15 cell lines were obtained from the National Virus Resource Center (NVRC, Wuhan, China). RD, A431, BHK-21, HEK-293, HeLa, Vero, Vero E6, U-87 MG, HMC3, HepG2, SH-SY5Y, MDCK, DH82, SW-13, HULEC-5a, THP-1, and Raji cell lines were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Manassas, VA, USA). All cell lines were tested negative for mycoplasma using EZ-PCR Mycoplasma test kit (Biological Industries, Kibbutz Beit Haemek, Israel). All cell line details are summarized in 
Table 1
. All cell lines were grown at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator.Table 1Cell lines tested for CCHFV infection susceptibility.Cell lineSourceCell typeTissueThe first round of infectionThe second round of infectionPermissiveness to CCHFV&
CCHFV NP expressionViral loads (copies/mL)Times of viral loads normalized to baseline CCHFV NP expression Viral loads (copies/mL)Times of viral loads normalized to baseline 
Human
SW-13ATCC no. CCL-105EpithelialKidney+++1.4 × 1011
4527++9.2 × 109
289Highly permissiveHEK-293ATCC no. CRL-1573EpithelialKidney+++2.0 × 1010
620++1.0 × 1010
331Highly permissiveHeLaATCC no. CCL-2EpithelialCervix++2.2 × 1010
688++3.4 × 109
106PermissiveHuh7NVRC: IVCAS 9.005HepatomaLiver+++1.0 × 1011
3169+++3.6 × 1010
1136Highly permissiveHepG2ATCC no. HB-8065EpithelialLiver−3.0 × 1010
943+3.4 × 1010
1065Non-permissiveA549NVRC: IVCAS 9.096EpithelialLung++8.0 × 109
252+1.1 × 109
36PermissiveMRC-5NVRC: IVCAS 8.003FibroblastLung++1.9 × 1010
593+1.6 × 109
49PermissiveHULEC-5aATCC no. CRL-3244EndothelialLung+2.2 × 1010
687−2.9 × 109
93PermissiveTHP-1ATCC no. TIB-202MonocytePeripheral blood−1.6 × 1010
505−5.9 × 109
186Non-permissiveRajiATCC no. CCL-86B lymphocyteLymphoblast++1.4 × 109
440+2.7 × 109
85PermissiveU-87 MGATCC no. HTB-14EpithelialBrain+++4.1 × 1010
1297++1.6 × 1010
519Highly permissiveHMC3ATCC no. CRL-3304MicrogliaBrain+1.6 × 1010
322+4.2 × 109
132PermissiveSH-SY5YATCC no. CRL-2266EpithelialBone marrow+1.8 × 109
57−1.4 × 109
45PermissiveRDATCC no. CCL-136RhabdomyosarcomaMuscle++2.2 × 1010
682++1.6 × 1010
362PermissiveHUVECNVRC: IVCAS 9.133EndothelialUmbilical+++7.1 × 109
225+++2.7 × 109
84Highly permissiveA-431ATCC no. CRL-1555EpithelialSkin/epidermis−1.7 × 1010
522−6.7 × 108
21Non-permissive
Monkey
VeroATCC no. CCL-81EpithelialKidney+++9.5 × 109
298+++7.4 × 109
232Highly permissiveVero E6ATCC no. CRL-1586EpithelialKidney+++1.9 × 1010
603+++3.4 × 1010
1078Highly permissive
Dog
DH82ATCC no. CRL-10389MacrophageMacrophage+++1.7 × 1011
5215++6.5 × 1010
2043Highly permissiveMDCKATCC no. CCL-34EpithelialKidney++1.2 × 1010
372++3.5 × 109
109Permissive
Pig
PK-15NVRC: IVCAS 8.027EpithelialKidney++1.5 × 1010
481−8.0 × 109
253Permissive
Hamster
BHK-21ATCC no. CCL-10FibroblastKidney++1.4 × 1011
431−6.8 × 109
214PermissiveCCHFV, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus; ATCC, American Tissue Culture Collection; NVRC, National Virus Resource Center, Wuhan, China.
&Permissiveness to CCHFV was defined based on the viral loads of fold changes > 100 times in culture supernatants in addition to detectable NP expression.−, the expression of CCHFV NP was undetectable; +, the expression of CCHFV NP was detected in a few of single cells or foci of less than three cells; ++, the expression of CCHFV NP was detected in confluent cells while NP-negative cells could also be observed in the dish; +++, the expression of CCHFV NP was detected in almost all cells and NP-negative cells could hardly be noted.Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV) strain YL16070 (GenBank accession: KY354082) used in this study was originally isolated from Hyalomma asiaticum ticks by inoculating suckling mice with tick homogenates via both intracranial and intraperitoneal routes as previously described (Guo et al., 2017). A batch of CCHFV-positive brains from diseased mice was obtained from the National Virus Resource Center (IVCAS 6.6329) and homogenized in PBS using the Tissue Cell-Destroyer (NZK Biotech, Wuhan, China), followed by centrifugation at 5000 × g for 5 min to clarify cell debris. Then the clarified homogenates were filtered through a 0.22-μm filter, sub-packaged, and stored at -80°C until further experiment. All experiments using CCHFV were performed in a biosafety level 3 laboratory at Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.Virus Infection AssayViral titer of CCHFV in filtered supernatant from mouse brain homogenates was determined using end-point dilution assay as described previously (Zhang et al., 2018). Briefly, Vero E6 cells were cultured in 96-well plates to 50% confluence and infected with ten-fold serial dilutions of the supernatants. At 5 days post-infection (d p.i.), cells were fixed and evaluated by immunofluorescence assay (IFA) to determine the viral titers (TCID50/mL). Viral titer endpoints were calculated using the Reed–Muench method.Cells (5 × 105 cells per well) were seeded in 6-well plates one night before the infection assay. Briefly, the growth medium was discarded and the cells infected with 10 μL cleared supernatant from mouse brain homogenates (diluted to 500 μL/well with appropriate medium containing 2% FBS) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01. After 1 h of viral adsorption at 37°C, the cells were supplemented with 1500 μL/well of appropriate medium containing 2% FBS and then incubated at 37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. This infection was designated as the first round of infection. Supernatants of the first round of infection were collected at 4 d p.i. based on the growth property of CCHFV on Vero cells in the previous study (Zhang et al., 2018), and were clarified by centrifuge (5000 × g for 5 min). A 1 mL aliquot of clarified supernatant of the first round of infection from each cell line was used to inoculate fresh cells (37°C for 1 h) followed by supplemented to 2 mL with fresh growth medium, which was designated as the second round of infection. Supernatants at 4 d p.i. were also collected and clarified as mentioned above. All supernatants were frozen at −80°C until Real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis. The infected cells from the first and second rounds of infection were fixed and evaluated by IFA to analyze CCHFV nucleoprotein (NP) expression in the cells.Detection of CCHFV InfectionReal-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis was performed to determine viral loads. Total RNA was extracted from culture supernatants of all 22 cell lines infected by CCHFV at 4 d p.i. using TRIzol reagent (Takara, Kusatsu, Japan) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. One-step qRT-PCR was used to determine the viral loads using a One Step PrimeScript™RT-PCR Kit (Takara) and a StepOnePlus Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The primers, probes, and RNA standards were prepared as previously described (Zhang et al., 2018). The viral RNA copies in the diluted supernatant that was prepared from mouse brain homogenates and inoculated with cells was defined as the viral load baseline. To evaluate the efficiency of virus proliferation from each cell line, viral loads in supernatants from infected cells were normalized to the baseline as fold changes.The expression of CCHFV NP in cells at 4 d p.i. was detected by IFA as previously described (Guo et al., 2017). Based on the expression of NP, the cell lines were classified into 3 levels (−, the expression of CCHFV NP was undetectable; +, the expression of CCHFV NP was detected in a few of single cells or foci of less than three cells; ++, the expression of CCHFV NP was detected in confluent cells while NP-negative cells could also be observed in the dish; +++, the expression of CCHFV NP was detected in almost all cells and NP-negative cells could hardly be noted).For some cells, the expression of NP was further quantified by flow cytometry using a BD LSRFortessa flow cytometer (BD Biosciences). Briefly, infected or mock-infected cells were detached with trypsin at 2 d p.i., and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The fixed cells were incubated in 0.2% Triton X-100-PBS for permeabilization and then blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin (BSA). The cells were then stained with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated CCHFV NP monoclonal antibody (NZK Biotech, Wuhan, China) at room temperature for 1 h. The cells were washed three times with PBS containing 0.5% BSA prior to analysis.Growth Curve AnalysesViral growth properties of CCHFV in different cell lines were characterized by growth curve analysis. Briefly, cells (5 × 105) were seeded in the 6-well plates overnight and were then incubated with the filtered supernatant from mouse brain homogenates at an MOI of 0.01. After 1 h of adsorption at 37°C, the cells were washed three times with PBS and the appropriate medium was added. Cells were then incubated for the indicated time at 37°C. Supernatants (50 μL) were harvested from each sample at the indicated time points and used to determine the viral titers by end-point dilution assays as described above.Electron MicroscopyVero E6 cells were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01. The culture supernatants (20 mL) were collected at 4 d p.i., inactivated with β-propiolactone (1:2000 v/v), cleared of cell debris and concentrated to 1 mL using Amicon Ultra concentrators (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). The clarified supernatants were then centrifuged at 13000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. The pellets were resuspended in 10 μL PBS. Virus suspension were adsorbed onto formvar-coated copper grids for 5 min, negatively stained using 2% phosphotungstic acid (PTA) for 1 min and then examined with a transmission electron microscope (H-7000 FA; Hitachi, Japan).ResultsCCHFV infection in each cell line was characterized by IFA. During the first round of infection, 14 of the 16 human cell lines were infected with CCHFV at different efficiencies, including HUVEC, HULEC-5a, Raji, Huh7, HepG2, SW-13, HEK-293, A549, MRC-5, U-87 MG, HMC3, SH-SY5Y, HeLa and RD (
Figure 1A
 and 
Table 1
). To reflect the infectivity of progeny virus generated in the supernatants from the first round of infection, 1 mL of cell debris-clarified supernatant was used to inoculate with fresh cells for the second round of infection. During the second round of infection, the expression of NP was also detected in 12 cell lines, including HUVEC, Raji, Huh7, HepG2, SW-13, HEK-293, A549, MRC-5, U-87 MG, HMC3, HeLa, and RD (
Figure 1A
).Figure 1Human cell line susceptibility to CCHFV. (A) Human cell line susceptibility to CCHFV as determined by immunofluorescence assay (IFA). Cells were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01 and CCHFV nucleoprotein (NP) expression was detected at 4 days post-infection (d p.i.) using IFA. Infected cells exhibited green fluorescence (NP). Bars, 30 μm. (B) Human cell line susceptibility to CCHFV as defined by fold change of viral loads. Various cell lines were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01. Supernatants were harvested at 4 d p.i. and used for qRT-PCR. All experiments were performed in duplicate. Fold-change of viral loads were normalized to baseline viral load. (C) Flow cytometric analysis of CCHFV-infected cells. Different cell lines were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01. Cells were harvested at 2 d p.i. and expression of CCHFV NP was detected using fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated CCHFV NP monoclonal antibody and analyzed using flow cytometry. The shaded area represents the control. The mean florescence intensity (MFI) of mock-infected/CCHFV-infected were 837/10200, 44/6491, 179/5528 and 375/839 for SW13, HEK293, Huh7 and HepG2 cells respectively. At least 10000 cells were used for analysis. (D) Viral characteristics of CCHFV in 6 human cell lines. The different cell lines were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01. Supernatants were harvested at the indicated time points post infection. Viral titers in the supernatants were determined using end-point dilution assays. Means ± SD of three represented independent experiments are shown. (E) SW-13 cells were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01. Cytopathic effects of cell rounding and detachment were evaluated at 4 d p.i. using an inverted microscopy. Mock, uninfected SW-13 control.Viral loads varying from 1.8 × 109 to 1.4 × 1011 copies/mL were detected in culture supernatants of all the 16 human cell lines in the first round of infection. These levels were 50–4,000 times higher than the baseline viral load of 3.2 × 107 copies/mL (
Figure 1B
 and 
Table 1
), suggesting virus replication in these cell lines. High viral loads exceeding 1,000-fold increases above baseline were detected in supernatants of Huh7, SW-13, and U-87 MG cells, while viral loads less than 100 times that of baseline were observed in SH-SY5Y cells. Viral titers in supernatants from HUVEC, HeLa, and HepG2 were determined at 96 hours post infection (h p.i.) which showed that higher viral titers were generated from HUVEC cells (3.2 × 104 TCID50/mL) than those from HeLa (3.2 × 103 TCID50/mL) and HepG2 (4 × 102 TCID50/mL). When the supernatant was used to inoculate fresh cells for the second round of infection, CCHFV RNA was detected in supernatants from all cell lines, but the levels were significantly reduced except for HepG2 cells having comparable virus loads between the first and second rounds (
Figure 1B
).Based on the viral loads in supernatants and viral NP expression in cells during the first round of infection, we defined CCHFV-permissive cell lines as having viral loads of fold changes > 100 times in culture supernatants in addition to detectable NP expression (
Table 1
). Of the 16 tested human cell lines, HUVEC, Huh7, SW-13, HEK-293, and U-87 MG were CCHFV-highly permissive cell lines; HULEC-5a, Raji, A549, MRC-5, HMC3, SH-SY5Y, HeLa, and RD were CCHFV-permissive cell lines; THP-1, HepG2, and A431 were CCHFV-non permissive cell lines (
Table 1
). HepG2 and HEK-293 cells, which are derived from the same tissues as Huh7 and SW-13 cells, respectively, showed different susceptibility to CCHFV infection. Especially for HepG2 cell, the infection efficiency of CCHFV was lower than that in Huh7 cell. This was further supported by quantitative analyses using flow cytometry (
Figure 1C
). CCHFV growth properties were subsequently characterized by determining infectious progeny virus yields in supernatants of CCHFV-highly permissive cell lines (HUVEC, Huh7, SW-13, U-87 MG, and HEK-293), CCHFV-permissive cell lines (A549, HeLa, and RD), and CCHFV-non permissive cell line (HepG2) to better illustrate CCHFV permissiveness to different cell lines. Virus titers from each cell line increased rapidly during the initial 24 h p.i. with the highest titer (1.4 × 105 TCID50/mL) generated in Huh7 cells (
Figure 1D
). After 24 hours of infection, virus yields were sustained in supernatants of HUVEC, U-87 MG, A549, HeLa, RD and HepG2 cells, but decreased in supernatants of SW-13, HEK-293, and Huh7 cells. At 72 h p.i., virus titers in supernatants from HUVEC, U-87 MG, A549, and HeLa cells arrived peak with the highest titer (2.0 × 105 TCID50/mL) generated in U-87 MG cells. However, viral titers in supernatants from RD and HepG2 cells still increased slightly from 72 h p.i. to 96 h p.i. Virus titers in supernatants from CCHFV-non permissive cell line HepG2 was only around 3.2 × 102 TCID50/mL, but that from CCHFV-highly permissive cell lines (HUVEC, Huh7, SW-13, HEK-293, and U-87 MG) could reach at least 104 TCID50/mL and from CCHFV-permissive cell lines (A549, HeLa, and RD) could reach at least 103 TCID50/mL (
Figure 1D
). In addition, SW13 cells showed the most prominent cytopathic effects (CPE) including cell rounding and detachment (
Figure 1E
).CCHFV susceptibility was characterized for six animal cell lines. During the first round of infection, CCHFV infection was detected in all animal cell lines using IFA (
Figure 2A
) and viral loads in supernatants from different cell lines were 200–5,000 times greater than baseline (
Figure 2B
 and 
Table 1
). Similar to that in human cell lines, when the supernatant was used to inoculate fresh cells for the second round of infection, CCHFV infection could be detected in all the 6 cell lines with decreased infection efficiency except for Vero E6 cell (
Figure 2B
). CCHFV virions having typical bunyavirus morphology of spherical and enveloped particles with a diameter of 80-100 nm were observed from culture supernatants of Vero E6 (
Figure 2C
), further suggesting sustainable CCHFV proliferation in Vero E6 cell line. Of the 6 tested animal cell lines, DH82, Vero E6 and Vero were CCHFV-highly permissive; MDCK, BHK-21 and PK-15 were CCHFV-permissive cell lines (
Table 1
).Figure 2Animal cell line susceptibility to CCHFV. (A) Animal cell line susceptibility to CCHFV was determined by IFA. Cells were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01 and CCHFV NP expression was detected at 4 d p.i. using IFA. Infected cells exhibited green fluorescence (NP). Bars, 30 μm. (B) Animal cell line susceptibility to CCHFV as defined by fold-change of viral loads. The different cell lines were infected with CCHFV at an MOI of 0.01. Supernatants were harvested at 4 d p.i. and evaluated using qRT-PCR. All experiments were performed in duplicate. Fold-change of viral loads were normalized to baseline viral load. (C) Electron micrographs of negative staining of CCHFV particles in cell culture supernatants from Vero E6. Bar, 50 nm.DiscussionCCHFV is one of the prioritized pathogens requiring urgent research of the World Health Organization due to its risk to public health and national security (Mehand et al., 2018); however, knowledge about its pathogenesis are very limited. Studies of cell susceptibility to CCHFV is limited although a wide range of cells originating from human and animals has so far been demonstrated to be susceptible to CCHFV (Connolly-Andersen et al., 2009; Connolly-Andersen et al., 2011; Rodrigues et al., 2012; Spengler et al., 2017; Foldes et al., 2020). In this study, we characterized viral load, viral antigen expression, virus growth properties, and CPE in 22 cell lines derived from different tissues during CCHFV infection, for a comparative assessment of the cell susceptibility to CCHFV.The cell line susceptibilities to CCHFV were summarized in 
Table 1
 based on viral loads in culture supernatants and NP expression in cells during the first round of infection. Due to the limited residual brain homogenate in culture supernatants during the first round of infection, in addition to newly amplified virus, the supernatants also contained remaining progenitors. To compare the efficiency of virus proliferation between different cell lines, we defined the initial viral RNA copies in mouse brain homogenates used to inoculate with cells as viral load baseline and viral RNA copies in cell lines were normalization against it. Among these cell lines, HUVEC, Huh7, SW-13, HEK-293, U-87 MG, DH82, Vero E6 and Vero were CCHFV-highly permissive; HULEC-5a, Raji, A549, MRC-5, HMC3, SH-SY5Y, HeLa, RD, MDCK, BHK-21 and PK-15 were CCHFV-permissive cell lines; THP-1, HepG2, and A431 were CCHFV-non permissive cell lines. To reflect the infectivity of progeny virus generated in the supernatants from each cell line, 1 mL of the collected culture supernatants were also used to infect new cells for the second round of infection. However, viral loads and the expression of NP decreased in most cell lines (
Figures 1
 and 
2
). This could be correlated to the viral titers generated from the first round of infection resulting in comparatively low MOIs used for second round of infection (MOIs for HUVEC: 6.4 × 10-2, HeLa: 6.4 × 10-3, and HepG2: 8 × 10-4). In addition, the different IFN-competence of each cell line may also be involved. Previous studies have shown that CCHFV is a potent inducer of the interferon response and upregulate the interferon signaling pathway in A549, Huh7, HepG2, Vero cells and primary macrophages (Andersson et al., 2008; Peyrefitte et al., 2010; Papa et al., 2015; Kozak et al., 2020). The RNA-seq data of HUVEC and SW-13 cells, which are highly permissive to CCHFV, showed CCHFV infection induced robust IFN response (unpublished data). Since the old medium transferred from the first round of infection were not removed from the second round of infection, a number of factors, such as interferon and cell degradations, may be present in supernatants of second infection, which may affect the infection efficiencies.CCHFV causes severe peripheral circulation viraemia, hemorrhage, and tissue lesions, ultimately resulting in multi-organ failure. It initially replicates in blood, liver, and spleen and then systemically spreads to kidney, brain, and lung (Bente et al., 2010; Akinci et al., 2013; Ozsoy et al., 2015; Haddock et al., 2018). To better understand the differential susceptibilities of cell lines to CCHFV, we summarized tissue origins of the human cell lines used in this study in correlation with the tissue targets for CCHFV infection and respective clinical manifestations. As shown in 
Figure 3
, the tissue tropisms of CCHFV were consistent with the origins of most permissive cell lines. Vascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) are susceptible to CCHFV, which could be activated to increase vascular permeability and initiates inflammatory responses (Connolly-Andersen et al., 2011). The monocyte cell lines THP-1 could not support CCHFV replication well, probably because virus replication in monocytes is controlled by an efficient interferon-induced response (Connolly-Andersen et al., 2009; Peyrefitte et al., 2010). CCHFV infects hepatocyte cells, which induces ER-stress and triggers apoptosis (Rodrigues et al., 2012). The high susceptibility of the human hepatocyte cell line Huh7 to CCHFV could correlate with the salient clinical features of hepatic injury (Ergonul et al., 2006; Bente et al., 2013). In contrast, the hepatoma cell line HepG2 was unable to sustain efficient CCHFV proliferation. We speculate that HepG2 cells provided CCHFV RNA transcription and replication as high viral loads were detected in supernatants, but produced defective virus particles as indicated by very few infected cells and reduced yields of infectious viruses. This was also suggested by calculating viral RNA copies over TCID50, which showed that HepG2 cells generated virus of 7.5× 107 copies to induce infection of 1 TCID50, while these for HUVEC and HeLa were 2.28 × 105 copies/TCID50 and 7.05× 106 copies/TCID50, respectively. Huh7 and HepG2 cells respond differentially to CCHFV, which was supported by the different gene expression in HepG2 and Huh7 cells infected with CCHFV according to RNA-Seq (Kozak et al., 2020). The IFN status of cell lines may correlate with the permissiveness of CCHFV. Huh7 cells in lack of IFN-β expression (Li et al., 2005) could better support CCHFV replication than the IFN-β competent HepG2 cells. Previous studies demonstrated that viral replication occurs in adrenal gland and kidney (Bente et al., 2010; Haddock et al., 2018), which was consistent with our findings of CCHFV tropism in renal cells (SW-13 and HEK-293). CCHFV infection inducing CPE in SW-13 cells may trigger a host-encoded necrotic program as anti-CCHFV response, as viral CPE may be largely attributed to host defenses and viral anti-defenses but not directly coupled to viral reproduction (Agol, 2012). Central nervous system (CNS) infection and neurological involvement have been reported in CCHF (Spengler et al., 2017). In our study, the neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y was non-permissive to CCHFV infection, while the glial cell lines U-87 MG and HMC3 responsible for immune surveillance in brain were susceptible to CCHFV infection. Cerebral hemorrhage observed in clinical cases (Ozsoy et al., 2015) may be not attributed to CCHFV invasion of neurocytes but increased vascular permeability. CCHFV is unable to spread via the respiratory tract. The lung-derived epithelial cell line A549, and fibroblast deriving MRC-5 cells were permissive to CCHFV, but infection was limited.Figure 3Graphic representation summarizing the correlation between CCHFV susceptibility of human cell lines tested in the current study and tissue origins as well as respective clinical manifestations in human body. The main targeting tissues of CCHFV are indicated in red font as previously reported (Akinci et al., 2013; Ozsoy et al., 2015). The main clinical manifestations in the organs or systems are presented in grey italics. CCHFV-permissive human cell lines were indicated by blue font as defined in our current study. The five cell lines (U-87 MG, HUVEC, Huh7, HEK293 and SW-13) of high susceptibility to CCHFV as suggested for the use of ex vivo fundamental studies are highlighted in bold. Non-permissive cell lines are shown in black.CCHFV growth kinetics were characterized and are distinguishable between the CCHFV-highly permissive cell lines (HUVEC, Huh7, SW-13, HEK-293, and U-87 MG) and CCHFV-permissive cell lines (A549, HeLa, and RD) as well as CCHFV-non permissive cell line (HepG2). Virus titers from all tested cell lines increased rapidly at the initial 24 hours of infection. The highly-permissive cell lines had comparatively titers of 1.8 × 104 to 1.4 × 105 TCID50/mL significantly higher than those of the non-permissive and permissive cell line (1.4 × 102 to 5.4 × 102 TCID50/mL). Viral titers generated from highly-permissive cell lines decreased significantly after 24 h, which may be related to IFN level and virus degradation over time. Decrease of viral titers was also observed in the permissive cell lines after 72 h, but was not significant probably due to the low yields of infectious viruses. Therefore, the IFN production and competence of these cell lines in response to CCHFV infection need to be further evaluated systematically so as to clarify the effect on the amplification of CCHFV. Meanwhile, the decrease of virus titers from the cell lines after 72 h would also explain the reduced infection as evidenced by IFA assays in the second round of infection. Therefore, we recommend harvesting virus culture supernatants at 24 or 48 h post infection for better use of the viruses in further in vitro assay with the highly-permissive cell lines like SW13, HEK293, and Huh7.CCHFV infects various domestic livestock and wild animals. Most remain asymptomatic, even though they may develop severe viraemia (Spengler et al., 2016). CCHFV infection in renal cell lines derived from dogs, monkeys, hamsters, and pigs, although with varied susceptibilities, suggest these animals may serve as reservoirs and play a role in CCHFV dissemination. Tick cell lines and animal cell lines derived from major hosts of Hyalomma ticks, including cattle, sheep, and camels were not investigated. Further studies on cell lines derived from these and other animals may shed light on whether these animals serve as potential reservoirs, and provide an ex vivo approach for investigating the molecular mechanisms of infection in animal hosts.There are limitations in this study and factors that may affect the results. First, the CCHFV strain YL16070 used in our study was isolated from Hyalomma asiaticum ticks in China. It is phylogenetically divergent from the prototype strain IbAr10200 which was isolated from Hyalomma excavatum ticks in Nigeria (Sanchez et al., 2002; Guo et al., 2017). Based on geographic distributions, YL16070 strain belongs to Asia groups and IbAr10200 strain belongs to Africa group (Guo et al., 2017). The evolutionary differentiation of these two strains may suggest amino acid variations of viral proteins and different infectivity. Besides, in the virus life cycle, the use of different principal vector tick hosts and virus-amplifying vertebrate species in the different geographic regions may reflect difference in cell line susceptibility (Sanchez et al., 2002). However, we failed to compare susceptibility of these two strains due to the lack of strain IbAr10200. Second, the growth kinetics could only present CCHFV growth during the conventional amplification process. Because the growth kinetics was determined using a low amount of viruses like 0.01 MOI in this study, which is commonly used for virus amplification, whereas of the high amount of viruses like 5 MOI was commonly used for one-step growth curve analysis. This was because the substantial titer of CCHFV (5 × 105 TCID50/mL) in the mouse brain homogenate was insufficient to support the infection assays with high dose of viruses. In the growth curves, CCHFV titer was measured with TCID50, but not PFU, which may also cause different understanding of infectivity. Third, despite the cell lines were obtained from ATCC, the different batches of the cell lines in individual laboratories may also affect the efficiency of detection.This study compared the susceptibility to CCHFV in human and animal cell lines derived from different tissues. The findings provide an important reference for the use of cell lines in ex vivo studies and highlight the need for careful consideration based on their host and tissue origin, necessity of CPE observation, and other characteristics that may be involved. Taken together, cell lines of vascular, hepatic, renal, and cerebral origins, which represent the targeting tissues of CCHFV invasion in vivo, exhibited high viral load in supernatants. Based on our findings, we suggest that U-87 MG, SW-13, HEK293, Huh7, and HUVEC are useful for investigating CCHFV pathogenesis and evaluating the effects of antiviral drugs specific to respective tissues, and Vero E6 is applicable for virus isolation and culture as sustainability of CCHFV proliferation. In summary, our findings provide information to be considered for optimizing ex vivo experiments for fundamental studies on CCHFV and developing CCHF disease control and prevention strategies.Data Availability StatementThe raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.Author ContributionsSS and FD conceived and designed the study. SD, QW, XW, and CP performed the experiments. SD, QW, and SS analyzed the data. SD drafted the manuscript. SS, FD, JL, ST, and TZ reviewed and edited the manuscript. SS, FD, and ST acquired the funding. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.FundingThis work was supported by the National Program on Key Research Project of China (2018YFE0200402, 2019YFC1200700), the National Science and Technology Major Project on Important Infectious Diseases Prevention and Control (2018ZX10734-404), and the Strategic Biological Resources Capacity Building Project of Chinese Academy of Sciences (KFJ-BRP-017-06).Conflict of InterestThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HANTAVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: The fundamental role of endothelial cells in hantavirus pathogenesis

INTRODUCTION TO HANTAVIRUSES AND THE ASSOCIATED DISEASEHantavirus is a genus of rodent- and insectivore-borne (shrews, moles, and bats) viruses of the family Bunyaviridae. Hantaviruses cause two human diseases: hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) in Eurasia and Hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS) in the Americas. The infection in reservoir hosts is chronic and asymptomatic, and infected animals secrete the virus in their excreta. Thus far only rodent-borne hantaviruses have been associated with human disease. Hantaan (HTNV) and Dobrava–Belgrade hantaviruses (DOBVs) cause a severe form of HFRS (mortality 5–15%) in Asia and Balkans, respectively, whereas Puumala (PUUV) virus cause a milder form of HFRS (mortality <0.1%) in Northern and Central Europe. Seoul virus (SEOV), carried by urban rats, causes a moderate HFRS worldwide. Sin nombre (SNV) and Andes (ANDV) viruses are the main causative agents of HCPS (mortality ∼40%) in Northern and Southern America, respectively. Also non-pathogenic or less virulent rodent-borne hantavirus species such as Prospect Hill (PHV) and Tula (TULV), which both genetically cluster close to PUUV, have been recognized (Jonsson et al., 2010; Vaheri et al., 2011, 2013; Klempa et al., 2013).The incubation period of HFRS is commonly 2–4 weeks but it may vary from 10 days up to 6 weeks. The course of HFRS is divided into five phases: febrile, hypotensive, oliguric, polyuric, and convalescent. The febrile phase of 3–6 days starts with rapid onset of fever accompanied with myalgia, headache, prostration, thirst, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, blurred vision, dizziness, and flushed face. In severe cases fever is followed by decline in blood pressure (the hypotensive phase) that is accompanied by thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis and signs of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Vascular leakage, commonly occurring at this phase, is manifested as petechiae, periorbital edema, hemoconcentration, and hypotension. The most severe cases may even lead to a fatal shock within 4–5 days after onset of symptoms. Hemorrhages continue with ecchymosis, melena, hematemesis, and epistaxis. Oliguria, hematuria, proteinuria, and polyuria are signs of renal failure and they precede the convalescent phase that may require several weeks (Lee, 1989; Peters et al., 1999; Jonsson et al., 2010). In mild HFRS the phases are not easily distinguished and signs of vascular leakage may be absent. Typically 10% of PUUV- and 30–70% of HTNV-infected patients show hemorrhages (Lahdevirta, 1971; Lee, 1989).Similarly to HFRS, the incubation period in HCPS is rather long, ranging from 1 to 5 weeks. The course of HCPS is divided into febrile, cardiopulmonary, diuretic, and convalescent phase. The symptoms begin with non-specific febrile phase of 3–5 days that may be include headache, dizziness, nausea, anorexia, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Pulmonary and/or cardiogenic complications follow the febrile phase. Symptoms of pulmonary edema include dyspnea, tachypnea, and non-productive cough, which are likely due to leakage of lung capillaries. Resulting hypoxia may cause tachycardia and shock, which may be fatal (Peters et al., 1999; Jonsson et al., 2010). The pulmonary edema formed during cardiopulmonary phase is cleared during diuretic phase. Like in HFRS, thrombocytopenia, oliguria, renal failure, and hemorrhages are often diagnosed in HCPS caused by South American viruses such as ANDV but are strikingly often missing in SNV-caused HCPS (Macneil et al., 2011). Due to the fact that some HFRS cases involve pathological findings similar to HCPS cases a common name (hantavirus disease) for both diseases has been suggested (Vaheri et al., 2013).MECHANISMS OF ENDOTHELIAL CELL PERMEABILITY IN HANTAVIRUS DISEASESPlasma leakage from vasculature into tissues is a hallmark of hantavirus infection. Clinically, this is presented by hemorrhages (the presence of plasma fluid in tissues), hemoconcentration (relative cell number increase in plasma), and hypotension (decreased blood pressure). Vascular leakage can be caused by either enhanced endothelial cell (EC) permeability or by direct injury to the vasculature. In HFRS, widespread EC swelling, perivascular edema, diapedesis of erythrocytes, and mononuclear cell infiltrates without evidence of EC damage have been observed by microscopy (Tsai, 1987). This suggests that endothelial barrier function is lost due to enhanced permeability rather than by direct cellular cytotoxicity or injury of the vasculature. Hantavirus antigens are present in ECs during HFRS (Cosgriff, 1991) and in ECs of lung capillary during HCPS (Zaki et al., 1995), but based on in vitro studies hantavirus infection of ECs does not induce direct cytopathic effects (Yanagihara and Silverman, 1990; Pensiero et al., 1992; Valbuena and Walker, 2006; Mackow and Gavrilovskaya, 2009; Vaheri et al., 2013). However, virus-induced general inflammation may compromise the barrier function of the endothelium and induce vascular leakage. If so, similar mechanisms could be behind the hemorrhages seen in other viral infections. On the other hand, the infection of ECs might lead to virus-specific promotion of permeability. Evidence in favor for both scenarios is discussed in the following paragraphs. Hypotheses on increased vascular permeability in hantavirus diseases are presented in Figure 1.FIGURE 1Mechanisms of vasculopathy in hantavirus infections. The recognition of hantaviruses by macrophages (Mφ) or dendritic cells (DCs) induces proinflammatory cytokines, which evoke a change from anti- to pro-adhesive phenotype of endothelial cells (ECs). Pro-adhesive ECs bind monocytes (MOs) through ICAM-1 – integrin β2 interaction, and platelets (PLTs) through vWF through αIIbβ3 integrin interaction. Activated MOs and PLTs then respectively promote coagulation through tissue factor (TF) and contact activation pathway (factor XII), to restrict the spread of the virus. Simultaneously hantavirus-infected ECs display viral glycoproteins on their surface, which respectively bind β2 and β3 integrins of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) and PLTs. The binding results in the release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) from PMNs and increased activation of PLTs. These virus-induced events enhance inflammation and may result in an excessive formation of immunothrombosis. Complement and contact pathway activations, both associated with immunothrombosis, contribute to vascular leakage through anaphylatoxins C5a and C3a, membrane attack complex (MAC) and bradykinin (BK).INFLAMMATIONEndothelial cell activation occurs in HFRS. Upregulated levels of soluble EC receptors: E-Selectin (Takala et al., 2000), intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM; Han et al., 2010), and tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-1 (Kyriakidis and Papa, 2013) are released into circulation during acute HFRS. While there is no evidence on EC activation in HCPS, the upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines: interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and interferon (IFN-γ) that all are capable of activating the endothelium, have been reported in both hantavirus diseases (Linderholm et al., 1996; Peters et al., 1999; Klingstrom et al., 2002; Abel Borges and Figueiredo, 2008; Sadeghi et al., 2011; Saksida et al., 2011; Korva et al., 2013; Kyriakidis and Papa, 2013). Especially high-levels of TNF-α is linked with a more severe disease (Kanerva et al., 1998; Makela et al., 2001; Borges et al., 2010; Korva et al., 2013). Pro-inflammatory cytokines are mainly produced by activated macrophages. It is known that macrophages can be infected by hantavirus which could lead to their activation (Vaheri et al., 2013). These cytokines induce EC permeability either directly or via EC activation, which leads to leukocyte recruitment and subsequent EC gap formation (Marcos-Ramiro et al., 2014). Leukocytosis is common in hantavirus diseases and probably relates to the inflammatory response against the pathogen. Interestingly, a recent report indicated that neutrophil activation through extracellular trap formation occurs in the mild form of HFRS (Raftery et al., 2014). Hantaviruses can activate neutrophils in vitro by direct binding but also pro-inflammatory ECs will recruit neutrophils. The role of pro- or anti-inflammatory response to hantavirus infection in the rodent host respectively promote either viral clearance or tolerance (Easterbrook and Klein, 2008; Guivier et al., 2010; Li and Klein, 2012). Therefore, it seems that while the pro-inflammatory response of the host is required for virus clearance, its excessive activation will lead to EC permeability and subsequent vascular leakage.COMPLEMENT ACTIVATIONComplement activation occurs in acute HFRS, as judged by decreased C3 and increased membrane attack complex (MAC) levels in plasma (Guang et al., 1989; Paakkala et al., 2000; Sane et al., 2012; Laine et al., 2014), and it correlates with upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines and disease severity (Laine et al., 2014). Complement activation produces circulating anaphylatoxins, C3a and C5a, which may cause EC activation and permeability in addition to direct MAC-mediated vascular injury (Kerr and Richards, 2012). Complement activation could be inflammation-dependent (Takano et al., 2013). However, complement might be activated also by virus-related immune complexes that are seen on the surface of ECs and platelets in HFRS (Penttinen et al., 1981; Guang et al., 1989). We recently reported upregulation of galectin-3 binding protein (Gal-3BP) in acute HFRS, and found a correlation between Gal-3BP and MAC levels (Hepojoki et al., 2014). We also demonstrated that hantavirus infection induces Gal-3BP production in ECs (Hepojoki et al., 2014), and such overproduction could sensitize the infected cells for complement attack. Furthermore, our unpublished data show that Gal-3BP interacts with hantavirus particle, and thus also the binding of Gal-3BP to either virions or to the surface of infected cells may promote complement activation. Glomerular ECs are the prime site of complement attack (Takano et al., 2013). Interestingly, we found that Gal-3BP is produced in the glomeruli and tubular epithelium of PUUV-infected macaques. The complement attack against glomerular EC could contribute to kidney dysfunction in hantavirus diseases. Decay-accelerating factor (DAF or CD55) acts as a controller of complement activation on cell surfaces. Curiously, DAF also interacts with both New and Old World hantaviruses (Krautkramer and Zeier, 2008; Buranda et al., 2010; Popugaeva et al., 2012), and the interaction might affect DAFs physiological functions resulting in increased complement activation. On the other hand, hantavirus infection of renal glomerular (e.g., podocytes) and tubular cells results in disruption of cell-cell contacts that could directly lead to decreased kidney barrier function and subsequent proteinuria (Krautkramer et al., 2011). Also, soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (suPAR), elevated in the plasma and urine of HFRS patients, could affect podocyte integrity (Outinen et al., 2013, 2014).IMPAIRED HEMOSTASISIncreased coagulation is associated with hemorrhages especially in HFRS. Laboratory findings such as increased bleeding time, prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and thrombin time together with decreased plasma activity of several coagulation factors, and the presence of fibrin degradation products are indicative of DIC in severe HFRS (Guang et al., 1989; Lee et al., 1989). The decreased levels of coagulation factors compromise the barrier function of vasculature and lead to increased bleeding times. Additionally, the increased activity of thrombin can directly induce EC permeability (Kleinegris et al., 2012). Both increased coagulation and fibrinolysis are present also in the mild form of HFRS, even though hemorrhages are not commonly observed (Lahdevirta, 1989; Laine et al., 2010, 2011, 2014). Although coagulation abnormalities are recognized in HCPS (Duchin et al., 1994), they have not been comprehensively studied. Given the central role of platelets in coagulation, it is likely that thrombocytopenia in hantavirus diseases is due to increased peripheral consumption. On the other hand, the loss of platelets from circulation could be due to platelet binding of infected ECs as suggested by in vitro studies (Gavrilovskaya et al., 2010).Extrinsic and contact system pathways can induce coagulation. Increased activity of plasma kallikrein in HFRS patients (Guang et al., 1989) is suggestive of contact system activation. Corroborating this notion, one severely ill patient with NE was successfully treated with icatibant, a bradykinin receptor antagonist (Antonen et al., 2013; Vaheri et al., 2014). Bradykinin is a peptide produced in plasma through kallikrein–kinin system and it promotes vascular permeability. Furthermore, the surface of hantavirus-infected ECs promotes kallikrein activation, bradykinin formation, and increased permeability when incubated with proteins involved in the kallikrein–kinin pathway of plasma (Taylor et al., 2013). A shift from anticoagulant to procoagulant-state is seen in the endothelium of HFRS patients. In acute HFRS von Willebrand factor (vWF) and coagulation factor VIII, normally residing in Weibel–Palade bodies of ECs (Rondaij et al., 2006), are released in to the circulation (Guang et al., 1989; Laine et al., 2011). The exocytosis of Weibel–Palade bodies is further corroborated by the detection of increased levels of angiopoetin-2, a protein promoting vascular permeability (Eklund and Saharinen, 2013) in HFRS (Krautkramer et al., 2014).The activation of ECs together with complement and coagulation pathways in hantavirus diseases is suggestive of immunothrombosis (Engelmann and Massberg, 2013), which is a form of innate immunity that acts by trapping blood-borne pathogens to a “mesh” of fibrin and chromatin. Fibrin is a product of thrombin activity and extracellular chromatin is released from activated neutrophils and monocytes. Failure of immunothrombosis to restrict the spread of the virus may trigger DIC via unrestricted formation of microvessel thrombi and the excessive activation of inflammation. Immunothrombosis could thus represent the first physiological stage in the development of severe hantavirus disease.CYTOTOXIC T CELLS AND HUMORAL IMMUNE RESPONSEThe possible role of the cytotoxic T cells (CTLs, also referred to as CD8+ T cells) in hantavirus pathogenesis is extensively reviewed elsewhere (Terajima and Ennis, 2011). It is clear that CTLs are upregulated in both acute HFRS and HCPS (Huang et al., 1994; Kilpatrick et al., 2004; Wang et al., 2009; Lindgren et al., 2011; Rasmuson et al., 2011). One mechanism on how CTLs might enhance vascular permeability is direct killing of hantavirus-antigen positive ECs. However, cell death is not obvious in patients. Lately, hantavirus-infected ECs were found to block CTL and natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity in vitro (Gupta et al., 2013), thus providing an explanation for the discrepancy. Despite this, CTLs as well as other hematopoietic cells may contribute to the increased EC permeability by releasing pro-inflammatory cytokines. The upregulation of Gal-3BP, a potent stimulator of CTLs and NK cells (Ullrich et al., 1994), in acute hantavirus infection (Hepojoki et al., 2014) might play a role in the pathogenesis of hantavirus disease.Hantavirus infection also induces a strong antibody response against the structural proteins of the virus (Vapalahti et al., 1995, 2001). Curiously, the appearance of antibodies against the viral proteins coincides with the occurrence of symptoms. Also rheumatoid factor (RF) is present at the same time (Penttinen et al., 1981). Both RF and antibodies could contribute to complement activation, which in turn could compromise vasculature’s barrier functions.INFECTION OF ECsPro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators of both complement and coagulation cascades are mainly produced by activated monocyte/macrophages or cleaved from plasma proteins. But what is the role of replication in ECs for hantavirus pathology? Hantavirus infection of ECs induces interferon (IFN-β) and chemokines RANTES (regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted) and IP-10 (IFN-γ inducible protein) in vitro (Sundstrom et al., 2001; Geimonen et al., 2003; Kraus et al., 2004; Khaiboullina et al., 2013). However, the majority of reports indicate that hantavirus infection per se does not alter EC permeability (Yanagihara and Silverman, 1990; Pensiero et al., 1992; Khaiboullina et al., 2000; Sundstrom et al., 2001; Gavrilovskaya et al., 2008), although vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-dependent permeability increase occurs in ANDV infection (Shrivastava-Ranjan et al., 2010). Interestingly, there is a decrease in the level of the tight junction protein ZO-1 in HTNV-infected glomerular ECs that likely affects the barrier function of glomerulus (Krautkramer et al., 2011). Except for innate immunity activation, very little data supports EC activation in response to hantavirus infection in vitro, suggesting that EC infection would not contribute to inflammation.It seems widely accepted that pathogenic hantaviruses differ from non-pathogenic viruses by their ability to delay early innate immunity induction (i.e., IFN-β), which would selectively restrict replication of apathogenic viruses (Geimonen et al., 2003; Spiropoulou et al., 2007; Matthys and Mackow, 2012). These observations are mainly based on PHV and could in the future be complemented by studies with other apathogenic or low-virulent hantaviruses. This would be very interesting, since even different isolates of the same virus markedly differ in replication kinetics and in recognition by the innate immunity machinery (Sundstrom et al., 2011). Integrins have been, according to in vitro studies, declared as the cellular receptors of hantaviruses, and PHV is distinct from all pathogenic hantaviruses studied in its ability to use α5β1 instead of αVβ3 integrin on ECs (Mackow and Gavrilovskaya, 2009). However, since the virulence of HFRS- and HCPS-causing hantaviruses (both claimed to use β3-integrin) differs dramatically, the role of integrin-receptor on virulence is scanty. In fact Sangassou hantavirus, capable of infecting humans (Klempa et al., 2010), was shown prefer β1 integrins for entry in vitro (Klempa et al., 2012). Integrins of hematopoietic cells (platelets and neutrophils), interact in vitro with hantaviruses to mediate adherence of platelets on infected ECs and release of chromatin from neutrophils (Gavrilovskaya et al., 2010; Raftery et al., 2014). Such interactions could directly contribute to thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy and EC permeability.Endothelial cell infection could lead to viremia, which has been postulated to play an important role in the vascular dysfunction (positive correlation with hemoconcentration and thrombocytopenia) and worsened disease outcome in SNV-caused HCPS (Terajima et al., 1999). In concordance, more viral RNA has been found in plasma of patients with DOBV (severe HFRS) as compared to PUUV (mild HFRS; Korva et al., 2013). Similarly, more DOBV than PUUV is found in their respective carrier rodents (Korva et al., 2009). These findings suggest, possibly trivially, that the actual amount of infecting virus could be an important factor for pathogenesis. This is also supported by in vitro infections where the initial viral load negatively correlates with cell survival (Strandin et al., 2008).VASCULAR ENDOTHELIAL GROWTH FACTORVascular endothelial growth factor induces angiogenesis, which is accompanied by increase in vascular permeability. In vitro observations show that hantavirus infection renders ECs hypersensitive to the permeabilizing effects of VEGF and VEGF levels are increased in both HFRS and HCPS (Shrivastava-Ranjan et al., 2010; Gavrilovskaya et al., 2012; Ma et al., 2012; Tsergouli and Papa, 2013; Krautkramer et al., 2014), but at different kinetics. While in HCPS the VEGF levels return to normal in the recovery phase, the VEGF level may remain high in HFRS from the febrile to early convalescent phase. This suggests that VEGF would not contribute to disease development in HFRS, but would rather mediate angiogenesis and vasculature repair in the recovery. Increased levels of circulating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs), correlating with disease recovery, are observed in NE (Krautkramer et al., 2014).CONCLUSIONHuman hantavirus infection is a dead-end for the virus. Humans and the different reservoir hosts differ genetically, and the genetic differences in receptors, and in the mediators of immune response likely contribute to the course of the disease. The degree of homology and molecular mimicry between the reservoir host and human might partially explain the varying degree in disease severity between different hantaviruses. The same factors could also explain the differences in pathogenesis between different hantaviruses. All human hantaviruses initially enter the lung. The HCPS causing hantaviruses predominantly cause the disease already in the lung, whereas HFRS causing hantaviruses find their way into kidneys. The degree of disease severity is also affected by individual differences in for instance immune activation. In overall it seems that there are several simultaneously occurring factors, which contribute to the permeability increase, in hantavirus infection.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Potential Geographic Distribution of Hantavirus Reservoirs in Brazil

IntroductionHantaviruses (family Bunyaviridae, genus Hantavirus) are zoonoses that have been appreciated increasingly in the last two decades, particularly across the Americas. Human infections occur by inhalation of aerosolized viral particles from excreta of infected wild rodents. The disease manifests in different clinical forms: hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) and hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS); HCPS is an emerging disease, particularly in the Americas [1]. The first documented cases of HCPS emerged apparently as a result of weather phenomena that favored exposure of human populations to wild rodents [2,3]. In Brazil, the first recorded occurrence of HCPS was in 1993, in the city of Juquitiba, state of São Paulo [4]. Since then, knowledge of the disease has expanded and its range is now known to extend to all regions of the country [5]. Among rodent species found infected with hantavirus in Brazil, Necromys lasiurus and Oligoryzomys nigripes are widely distributed in the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest biomes, respectively [6,7]. Some studies indicate that regional distributions of hosts and pathogen are related to climatic and environmental factors [8-11]; these studies also show associations between occurrence of human cases of hantavirus and areas of high probability of occurrence of rodent reservoirs, suggesting that analysis of ecological niche models of hosts could offer valuable information. Therefore, assessment of potential distributions of rodent reservoirs in different biomes and analysis of the influence of environmental factors on hantavirus transmission can be useful in understanding spatial patterns of transmission risk of the disease. This study explores a series of approaches. We estimated ecological niches and geographic distributions for N. lasiurus and O. nigripes in the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest regions, and analyzed environmental factors associated with their occurrence. We estimated the ecological niche for hantavirus transmission in Brazil based on the distribution of infected rodents detected during 2000-2010. Finally, we compared distributions with respect to climatic conditions for the two rodent species and for HPCS cases in humans, to ascertain whether they occur under distinct environmental circumstances. Materials and MethodsOccurrence dataAll data were obtained from public databases; full names and information for accessing data (websites) are provided below. All data were anonymized. Distributional data for N. lasiurus and O. nigripes were obtained from speciesLink (http://splink.cria.org.br), Global Biodiversity Information Facility (http://data.gbif.org) and VertNet (http://www.vertnet.org); our searches included the old name of N. lasiurus (Bolomys lasiurus). We also consulted various published studies on these rodent species [12-33]. When only textual georeferences were provided we georeferenced them based on two internet resources (http://www.fallingrain.com/world/ and http:// www.ibge.gov.br/). Records were georeferenced with an uncertainty of ≤5 km to the nearest 0.01° (records presenting greater uncertainty were removed). We eliminated duplicate records and records presenting obvious errors of georeferencing or identification (e.g., records in the ocean). We also excluded records in oversampled locations based on subsampling among very close pairs of points to reduce sampling bias [34]. Based on occurrence data, we created buffers of 400 km around known occurrences, which were used as a hypothesis of the accessible area M [35] which is the area most appropriately used for model calibration.For information on rodents infected with hantavirus, we used technical reports of research activities undertaken by the Brazilian Ministry of Health. We also extracted occurrence data from published records of infections in these two rodent species during 2000-2010 [7,30,36-48].Finally, we included records of HCPS cases reported from municipalities falling within the bounds of the Atlantic Forest and Cerrado biomes, reported by the Brazilian Ministry of Health during 2000-2010. We considered in particular suspected infection location, where human infection by the pathogen apparently occurred. Locations for infected rodents and humans were georeferenced as described above.Environmental dataTo characterize environmental variation across Brazil, we used seven climatic variables: annual mean temperature, diurnal temperature range, maximum temperature in the warmest month, minimum temperature in the coldest month, annual precipitation and precipitation in the wettest and driest months. We obtained these variables from the WorldClim project (worldclim.org), which were developed via interpolation of mean monthly climatic data from meteorological stations over 30-50 (1950-2000) years, depending on data availability at stations [49]. To summarize aspects of vegetation and land cover, we used multitemporal (monthly) normalized difference vegetation index values (NDVI, a “greenness” index) drawn from the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) satellite (http://daac.gsfc.nasa.gov/avhrr/) (1982-1992). All environmental databases used in our analyzes covered areas of accessibility for each of the rodent species (see above), resampled to a spatial resolution of 2.5’ (~5 km).Ecological niche modelsEcological niche models were produced using Maxent version 3.2.1 [50]. We used a random seed to generate 10 replicate analyses based on bootstrap subsampling. We used median output grids as a hypothesis of suitability, and imported the results into ArcView 3.3 for assessment and analysis.Distributional data for N. lasiurus and O. nigripes were separated into two sets: one for model calibration (75% of points) and one for model evaluation (25% of points). For infected rodents, in light of smaller sample sizes, we considered all points in the analysis. Raw Maxent outputs were converted into binary maps of suitability or unsuitability for each species based on a threshold that includes 95% of the records of each species used in model calibration [51]. This threshold takes into consideration an estimate of the likely amount of error among the occurrence data (E = 5%) [52]. Model evaluationWe assessed model accuracy by examining omission rates associated with test points [53]. To test model significance, we compared predictive success of models against null expectations using a cumulative binomial test [34]. In particular, we assessed whether each test point fell in areas identified by the model as suitable, and compared this success rate with overall proportions of pixels identified as suitable or unsuitable for that species. Statistical significance was assessed via a cumulative binomial probability calculation in Excel. We also used Maxent’s jackknife test to identify variables that most influenced model predictions [50]. Finally, we used randomization tests to assess the degree to which the environmental footprint of distributions of the two putative rodent reservoirs and human cases differed. That is, if one or the other of the rodents were not involved in transmission of the virus to humans, its ecological niche might differ from that of human cases. We used the background similarity tests of Warren et al. [54], on the basis that these tests allow specification of an accessible area (M) particular to each of the species involved, which is key in erecting appropriate tests [55]. Specifically, we compared ecological niche model outputs thresholded at minimum training presence in terms of the similarity indices D and I [54], and compared these observed similarities to a distribution of ‘background’ similarities, in which one species’ occurrences were replaced by a similar number of random points drawn from across its M. All resampling and similarity calculations were performed in ENMTools version 1.3 [56]. Smaller numbers of variables were generated for this analysis through a principal component analysis (PCA) of the environmental variables used for niche modeling using NicheA version 1.2 [57]. For a visualization of rodent and human cases environmental use, niches were determined by a minimum-volume ellipsoid calculated around occurrences with a strict threshold (E = 10%; H. Qiao, pers. comm.).ResultsWe obtained 114 records for N. lasiurus and 30 records of hantavirus-infected N. lasiurus (Figure 1). For O. nigripes, we found 105 unique records and 19 records of hantavirus-infected O. nigripes (Figure 1). 10.1371/journal.pone.0085137.g001Figure 1Distribution of rodent species.
Necromys lasiurus (circles) and Oligoryzomys nigripes (squares). The access area "M" is approximated by buffers of 400 km. Distribution of hantavirus-infected rodents (N. lasiurus, red triangles and O. nigripes, yellow stars) is also shown.Niche models generated for rodents were statistically robust. For N. lasiurus, only one test point fell outside the predicted area of presence (3% omission error), such that binomial tests indicated statistical significance (p = 0.02). In O. nigripes comparisons, all test points were included in the predicted suitable area (0% omission), and models were thus highly statistically significant (p < 0.01). When niche models were displayed in geographic space N. lasiurus showed a wide potential distribution in Brazil. Highest climate suitability for O. nigripes was observed along the Brazilian Atlantic coast (Figure 2). 10.1371/journal.pone.0085137.g002Figure 2Ecological niche models projected as potential distributions for rodent reservoirs of hantavirus in Brazil (gray shading).
Necromys lasiurus (left) and Oligoryzomys nigripes (right). Areas identified as suitable based on all occurrence records are shown in pale gray, whereas areas identified as suitable based only on infected rodents database are shown for N. lasiurus (red) and O. nigripes (yellow). Bold lines indicate the range of the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest. Cases of human infections with hantavirus in Cerrado (circles) and Atlantic Forest (squares) were superimposed on the models.When contribution of environmental variables was explored, maximum temperature in the warmest months was the variable that most influenced models of N. lasiurus; NDVI had low contribution. For O. nigripes annual precipitation was the variable that most influenced models, and NDVI data showed low contribution. Models based on occurrences of infected rodents estimated a broad area of hantavirus transmission in southeastern and southern Brazil, coinciding with the distribution of 280 and 188 human cases of HCPS in the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest respectively (Figure 2). Parts of northern and northeastern areas of Brazil were also suitable for occurrence of N. lasiurus and O. nigripes (Figure 2), yet show few human HCPS reports.Background similarity tests, in all comparisons, failed to reject the hypothesis of niche similarity (Table 1). That is, observed similarity values fell within the null distribution of background similarity values. In this sense, no evidence was available that suggested that these two rodent species could not be involved in hantavirus transmission. The first three axes from PCA analyses explained 90% of the variance; visualization of niches in the environmental space allows appreciation of overlap between rodent species and human cases (Figure 3), this overlap corroborated our similarity test results.10.1371/journal.pone.0085137.t001Table 1Background similarity test results for two similarity metrics (I and D) for comparisons of Necromys lasiurus and Oligoryzomys nigripes (putative reservoirs) and human cases.
Observed overlap


I


D

 Target versus background

I

D
5%95%5%95%Human cases versus Necromys lasiurus background0.8950.849 0.8610.9470.8090.929Human cases versus Oligoryzomys nigripes background0.9250.9090.8690.9440.8110.929
Necromys lasiurus versus Oligoryzomys nigripes background0.9180.8560.8460.9190.8340.867
Oligoryzomys nigripes versus Necromys lasiurus background0.9180.8560.8820.9610.8400.940Observed overlap values can be compared against the 5% (dissimilar) and 95% (similar) values for the null distributions. As can be appreciated, all observed values fell within null expectations; i.e., the hypothesis of niche similarity could not be rejected.10.1371/journal.pone.0085137.g003Figure 3Visualization of niches of hantavirus in rodents and humans.White points indicate environments in the study area (background). Ellipsoids are the representation of niches for hantavirus in N. lasiurus (red), O. nigripes (blue), and human cases (yellow). Environmental space based on components 1 to 3 from a principal component analysis (PCA) of climatic and NDVI variables. Note that, while the ellipsoids for the different species do show some difference, so also do the environments represented within each species’ M; here, the results of the background similarity test become key. DiscussionThis study updates the picture of the geographic distribution of N. lasiurus. Bonvicino et al. [6] showed only limited occurrence of N. lasiurus in the Atlantic Forest biome. We found records of N. lasiurus in many municipalities of Atlantic Forest, albeit largely on the interior slopes of the coastal mountain ranges. These occurrences could be favored by presence of Brachiaria spp. as has been suggested [7,58], in open areas or near remnants of Atlantic Forest. N. lasiurus can be found in many habitats, but prefer open and dry areas, being absent or infrequent in moist forest environments [59,60]. Occurrence of N. lasiurus has also been observed in areas of agricultural and urban expansion [58], suggesting that deforestation over recent years favors occurrence of the species in the Atlantic Forest biome. The reproduction of N. lasiurus occurs throughout the year with seasonal peaks. Litter sizes of these species are similar, varying from 1 to 13 new individuals [61]. Annual population fluctuations appear to be regulated by food availability, influenced by rainfall [62].Our results also extend the limits of the distribution of O. nigripes in Brazil, including areas in the extreme south (Rio Grande do Sul), northeast (Ceará) and Midwest (Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul) of the country. Predictive models indicated favorable conditions for occurrence of the species outside the limits of the Atlantic Forest within the Cerrado and Pantanal biomes. In these areas, O. nigripes is associated with gallery forest, secondary forest, and forest edges [63].Our model results agree with analyses carried out in Argentina by Carbajo & Pardiñas (2007) [8], indicating that aspects of both temperature and precipitation were essential to explain the distribution of O. longicaudatus. Those authors also found an association between occurrences of human hantavirus cases in areas with a higher suitability for O. longicaudatus. Recently, Donalísio & Peterson [10], seeking to identify environmental factors influencing occurrence of hantavirus cases in southern Brazil, found that winter precipitation and high photosynthetic mass were most closely related to distributions of cases of HCPS; the authors explored distributions of four species of Oligoryzomys in relation to areas of hantavirus transmission in southern Brazil. NDVI showed low contribution to our models, in contrast with results of Donalísio & Peterson [10]. We found a broad potential distributional area for infected rodents in Mato Grosso do Sul, in the southwestern Cerrado region, where only one HPCS case was registered. Low reporting owing to diagnostics by local health services may be involved in the low incidence of HPCS in the predicted area. Future studies should evaluate rates of infection in rodents, using records collected via careful planned sampling in areas with lack of information but with suitable environments predicted by our models in order to fill epidemiological gaps. Most HCPS cases in Brazil (85%) occurred within the Cerrado and Atlantic Forest biomes. These biomes cover 37% of the area of Brazil, where ~140 million people live, representing 73% of the population of the country (http://www.ibge.gov.br). Our exclusion of the Amazon Basin from analyses was owing to unavailability of information on reservoirs and their occurrences. Recent studies in Mato Grosso showed that Oligoryzomys utiaritensis [64] is involved in hantavirus transmission to humans [65]; indeed, studies showing involvement of Calomys callidus [66] and O. fornesi in transmission [66] indicate that these species are also involved in the virus cycle in Brazil.Considering the high rodent species richness in the Cerrado (78 species) and Atlantic Forest (98 species) [67] biomes, with little knowledge of enzootic cycles of hantavirus in these biomes, it is clear that we are still far from fully understanding the natural history of hantaviruses in Brazil. Our ecological niche models for N. lasiurus and O. nigripes indicate that climatic variables are fundamental to explaining distributions of these species, at least over the broad extent of this study. At the spatial scale explored, niches of N. lasiurus and O. nigripes, and human hantavirus reports were not significantly different, highlighting a role for N. lasiurus and O. nigripes, at least in part, in the host-parasite cycle of hantavirus and eventual transmission to humans. We stress the importance of knowledge of true participation of these rodents in epidemiological cycles of the disease, because the predictive model of infected rodents included sites of HCPS cases in Cerrado and Atlantic Forest. 


Title: Depletion of Alveolar Macrophages Does Not Prevent Hantavirus Disease Pathogenesis in Golden Syrian Hamsters

INTRODUCTIONHantaviruses are enveloped members of the family Bunyaviridae that contain a trisegmented, negative-sense, single-strand RNA genome. The three gene segments, L, S, and M, encode the RNA polymerase, nucleoprotein (NP), and envelope glycoproteins (G1 and G2), respectively. While these pathogens are carried chronically and asymptomatically in rodent hosts, in humans hantaviruses cause two unique vascular-leak syndromes that cover a spectrum of severity ranging from proteinuria to pulmonary edema and frank hemorrhage (1–4). Old World hantaviruses, including Puumala virus (PUUV), Dobrava virus (DOBV), Seoul virus (SEOV), and Hantaan virus (HTNV), have been associated with a mild-to-severe disease known as hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS). HFRS has a case-fatality rate between <0.1% and 15% and is characterized by fever, vascular leakage resulting in hemorrhagic manifestations, and renal failure. New World hantaviruses have been associated with a highly lethal disease, hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS). HPS caused by the most prevalent North American and South American hantaviruses, Sin Nombre virus (SNV) and Andes virus (ANDV), respectively, has a case-fatality rate of 30 to 50% and is characterized by fever and vascular leakage resulting in noncardiogenic pulmonary edema followed by shock. Hantaviruses alter the barrier properties of the microvascular endothelial cells that they infect, causing vascular leakage in the kidneys or lungs (5). The specific mechanism underlying this endothelium dysfunction remains unknown, but hantavirus infection of endothelial cells is nonlytic, suggesting that other factors, possibly host derived, render the endothelium unable to regulate barrier integrity, leading to pulmonary edema (6).While hantaviruses are known to cause disease by multiple routes of infection (5), the predominant route of human exposure is thought to be inhalation of excreta from infected rodent hosts (reviewed in references 6 and 7), suggesting that cells in the alveoli may play an important role in clearing, or alternatively, contributing to disease caused by aerosolized hantaviruses. Alveolar macrophages (AMθ) are found in the alveoli and alveolar ducts of the lung and represent the first line of defense against many airborne pathogens (8). Not only are they crucial regulators of immune system activity through their secretion of either pro- or anti-inflammatory cytokines, but also they are vitally important in the maintenance and remodeling of lung tissue via the production of growth factors, cytokines, and proteinases and can play a key role in the generation of protective cellular immune responses following intranasal vaccination (9–11). Activated AMθ are known to provide a critical element of protection against pathogens (12, 13) by releasing chemokines that recruit other innate immune cell types to areas of infection and secreting antiviral cytokines. However, activation of AMθ can also contribute to pathology by releasing the same cytokines that are important in providing protection from pathogens (14–17). Alveolar macrophages secrete multiple cytokines when activated, including interleukin-1 (IL-1), IL-6, IL-8, transforming growth factor β (TGF-β), inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α). Notably, the production of TNF-α further upregulates the release of other proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-8, which contribute to the initiation of adaptive immune responses (18). While these cytokines and chemokines act locally to choreograph immune responses that are important for protection against pulmonary pathogens, a number of these cytokines have been shown to promote vascular permeability and pulmonary edema, which are the hallmarks of pathogenic hantavirus infection (19–23). Correspondingly, studies of humans infected with hantavirus have detected high titers of proinflammatory and vasoactive cytokines in lung tissue of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome patients and high numbers of cytokine-producing cells correlated with the severity of HPS pathology (24). Moreover, systemic levels of inflammatory cytokines have also been reported in plasma of patients with hemorrhagic fever with renal symptoms (25), suggesting a role for these cytokines in disease pathogenesis.Alveolar macrophages are known to be permissive to hantavirus infection (26, 27) but do not appear to be primary targets of infection, as hantavirus replication in alveolar macrophages is less efficient than in endothelial cells. Furthermore, AMθ have been found to be associated with hantavirus antigen in cases of human HPS (28) caused by SNV or in cases of “European HPS” following PUUV infection (29), but it isn't clear if that is a result of direct infection of alveolar macrophages or a result of phagocytosis. Despite these associations, hantavirus infection of human AMθ induced only modest antiviral responses and cell culture supernatants from SNV-infected AMθ failed to cause increased permeability of endothelial cell monolayers (27), suggesting that soluble mediators secreted by infected AMθ do not contribute to hantavirus disease.ANDV causes a lethal disease in adult Syrian hamsters (30) that resembles HPS in humans, including the clinical signs of dyspnea, fluid in the pleural cavity, histopathology in the lungs and spleen, the disease incubation period, and the rapid progression from first signs to death (31). To determine if AMθ contribute to hantavirus disease in hamsters, we depleted AMθ using clodronate-encapsulated liposomes, delivered prior to ANDV challenge. Clodronate treatment significantly reduced the percentage and number of AMθ in hamster bronchial alveolar lavage (BAL) fluid during intramuscular (i.m.) and intranasal (i.n.) ANDV challenge but had little effect on disease pathogenesis. Depletion did result in a slightly more rapid and uniform disease course during intranasal infection, suggesting that AMθ may provide some protection against exposure to airborne ANDV, but overall, these data suggest that AMθ do not directly contribute to hantavirus disease pathogenesis in the Syrian hamster model of human hantavirus pulmonary syndrome.MATERIALS AND METHODSVirus, cells, and medium.ANDV strain Chile-9717869 (30) was propagated in Vero E6 cells (Vero C1008, ATCC CRL 1586). The preparation of twice-plaque-purified ANDV stock has been described previously (30). Cells were maintained in Eagle's minimum essential medium with Earle's salts containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 1× penicillin-streptomycin (Invitrogen), and gentamicin sulfate (50 μg/ml) at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator.Challenge with hantavirus.Female Syrian hamsters 6 to 8 weeks of age (Harlan, Indianapolis, IN) were anesthetized by inhalation of vaporized isoflurane using an IMPAC 6 veterinary anesthesia machine. For i.m. challenges, anesthetized hamsters were injected with 80 PFU (10 50% lethal doses [LD50]) of virus diluted in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 0.2 ml, caudal thigh) delivered with a 1-ml syringe with a 25-gauge, five-eighths-inch needle. For i.n. challenges, anesthetized hamsters were administered 50 μl delivered as 25 μl per naris with a plastic pipette tip (total amount of ANDV, 4,000 PFU; 42 LD50). Groups of 8 hamsters were typically used for experimental treatments, unless otherwise stated. All work involving hamsters was performed in an animal biosafety level 4 (ABSL-4) laboratory. Hamsters were observed two to three times daily. Euthanasia was performed on animals meeting early endpoint criteria.Macrophage depletion.Clodronate-encapsulated liposomes (5 mg/ml clodronate; Clodrosome) (referred to here as liposomal clodronate) and control PBS-encapsulated liposomes (Encapsome) (referred to here as control liposome) were purchased from Encapsula Nano Sciences. Hamsters were anesthetized using 0.2 ml/100 g of body weight rat KAX (ketamine-acepromazin-xylazine) administered by i.m. injection. Each animal was then placed in a dorsal recumbent position, and an otoscope (Welch Allyn) was used to visualize the vocal folds. The vocal folds were numbed by topically administering a 2% lidocaine HCl jelly (Akorn), and then a 16-gauge 1.25-in Surflo catheter (Terumo) was passed between the vocal folds. Hamsters were then treated with either 0.2 ml liposomal clodronate or 0.2 ml control liposome by attaching a loaded syringe to the catheter and aspirating the contents into the lung.Flow cytometry analysis.Hamsters were deeply anesthetized (0.4 ml Rat KAX/100 g) and then extensively perfused with sterile saline (Baxter) before being euthanized. To isolate alveolar macrophages, animals were placed in a dorsal recumbent position, and then a midline neck incision was made and downward dissection was performed carefully so that the trachea was exposed. A second incision was made near the xyphoid process, and scissors were used to remove the rib cage and expose the lungs. Care was taken to ensure the lungs were not damaged. A 16-gauge 1.25-in catheter was inserted into the trachea, and the lungs were lavaged 3 times using 1 ml of a 0.02% EDTA solution. BAL samples were then centrifuged at 514 × g for 5 min. Cells were then collected and washed twice in PBS containing 2% FBS. In some experiments, cells were incubated at 4°C for 15 min in a blocking buffer consisting of PBS containing 2% FBS and 2% normal rat serum (Sigma-Aldrich) prior to staining with antibody. Approximately 106 cells were stained with mouse-anti-hamster MARCO (32) (clone PAL-1; 10 μg/100 μl; AbD Serotec) followed by anti-mouse IgM (clone RMM-1; 0.4 μg/ml; BioLegend) for 15 to 20 min at 4°C. Stained cells were then fixed in Cytofix buffer (BD Biosciences) for 15 min at 4°C before being analyzed on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) using CellQuest software (BD Biosciences) or FACSCanto II flow cytometer (BD Biosciences) using FACsDiva software (BD Biosciences). AM and neutrophil cell numbers in BAL fluid preparations were mathematically determined by comparing cell numbers to numbers of PKH26 reference microbeads (Sigma) using the following formula: Ncells/ml = (Ncell events × dilution factor/Nbead events × dilution factor) × Nbeads/ml, where Ncells/ml is the number of cells per milliliter, Ncell events is the number of cell events, Nbeads/ml is the number of beads per milliliter, and Nbead events is the number of bead events. Data were analyzed using FlowJo software (Treestar).Plaque assay.Hantavirus plaque assays were performed as previously described (33).Isolation of RNA and real-time PCR.Approximately 250 mg of lung tissue was homogenized in 1.0 ml TRIzol reagent using gentleMACS M tubes and a gentleMACS dissociator on the RNA setting. RNA was extracted from TRIzol samples as recommended by the manufacturer. The concentration of the extracted RNA was determined using a NanoDrop 8000 instrument and raised to a final concentration of 10 ng/μl. Real-time PCR was conducted on a Bio-Rad CFX thermal cycler using an Invitrogen Power SYBR green RNA-to-CT one-step kit according to the manufacturer's protocols. Primer sequences are as follows (26): ANDV S 41F, 5′-GAA TGA GCA CCC TCC AAG AAT TG-3′; ANDV S 107R, 5′-CGA GCA GTC ACG AGC TGT TG-3′. Cycling conditions were 30 min at 48°C, 10 min at 95°C, and 40 cycles of 15 s at 95°C and 1 min at 60°C. Data acquisition occurred following the annealing step.Hamster cytokine ELISAs.Anti-hamster MIP-1α (MBS033532), MIP-2 (MBS006761), TNF-α (MBS046042), and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A) (MBS024541) enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits were purchased from MyBioSource and were used according to the manufacturer's recommendations.Preparation of tissues for histology.Tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, trimmed, processed, embedded in paraffin, cut at 5 to 6 μm, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) for histopathology analysis. To determine the presence of ANDV antigens in association with alveolar macrophages or colocalized with endothelial cells, serial sections were then stained as follows. For ANDV immunohistochemistry, a monoclonal antibody (USAMRIID number 1244) against ANDES virus was used on all tissue slides. Normal mouse IgG was used as the negative serum control for the control slides. Briefly, the unstained sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and pretreated with Tris-EDTA buffer for 30 min at 95 to 100°C. Slides were rinsed, and a serum-free protein block with 5% horse serum was applied for 30 min. The monoclonal antibody was then applied to the tissue at a dilution of 1:1,200 and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The slides were then treated with alkaline phosphatase-labeled secondary mouse IgG antibody (catalog number MP-5402; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) for 30 min at room temperature. All slides were exposed to ImmPACT Vector Red (catalog number SK-5105; Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) substrate-chromogen for 30 min, rinsed, counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and coverslipped with Permount (catalog number SP15-500; Fisher). For CD31 immunohistochemistry, an immunoperoxidase assay was performed using a rabbit anti-CD31 polyclonal antibody (catalog number ab28364; Abcam). A normal rabbit IgG was used as the negative serum control for the control slides. Briefly, the unstained sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, subjected to a methanol hydrogen peroxide block, rinsed, and pretreated with Tris-EDTA buffer for 30 min at 95 to 100°C. Slides were rinsed, and a serum-free protein block with 5% goat serum was applied for 30 min. The polyclonal antibody was then applied to the tissue at a dilution of 1:75 and incubated overnight at room temperature. The slides were then treated with the EnVision horseradish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibody (catalog number K4007; Dako, Carpinteria, CA) for 30 min at room temperature. All sections were exposed to a DAB (3,3-diaminobenzidine) substrate-chromogen for 5 min, rinsed, counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated, and coverslipped with Permount.Statistical analysis.Survival curves were compared with Kaplan-Meier survival analysis with log rank comparisons and Dunnett's correction. Comparisons of viral genome, infectious virus, alveolar macrophage, and neutrophil percentages and numbers and ELISA cytokine titers were done using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey's multiple-comparison test. P values of less than 0.05 were considered significant. Analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism (version 5).Ethics statement.Research at the U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases (USAMRIID) was conducted under an Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC)-approved protocol in compliance with the Animal Welfare Act, PHS Policy, and other federal statutes and regulations relating to animals and experiments involving animals. The facility where this research was conducted is accredited by the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International, and adheres to the principles stated in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, National Research Council, 2011.RESULTSDepletion of AMθ does not prevent disease following intramuscular ANDV challenge.Liposomal clodronate has been used extensively to deplete AMθ in many animal models, including the Syrian hamster (34). In the Syrian hamster, AMθ were identified as high forward light scatter, high side light scatter (FSChiSSChi), MARCO-expressing cells in hamster BAL fluid (Fig. 1a) and intratracheal administration of clodronate-encapsulated liposomes was found to effectively reduce the number of AMθ in hamsters during ANDV infection as determined by a reduction in either MARCO+ cells (Fig. 1b and d) or FSChiSSChi cells (Fig. 1c and d) and histolopathologic analysis of hamster lung tissue (Fig. 1e) during ANDV infection of hamsters. To begin to understand the role that AMθ play during ANDV disease pathogenesis, hamsters were treated intratracheally with clodronate-encapsulated liposomes (Clodrosomes) or control PBS-encapsulated liposomes (Encapsomes) on days −3 and −1. One group of hamsters was left untreated. Hamsters were then challenged with 80 PFU (10 LD50) ANDV i.m. Ten days later, the number and percentage of AMθ in hamster BAL fluid were determined. Control liposome treatment did induce an increase in the number of alveolar macrophages (Fig. 2a), but by comparison, clodronate treatment resulted in a significant reduction in the total number of alveolar macrophages (Fig. 2a). Macrophage depletion did not prevent disease in hamsters (Fig. 2b) or significantly alter the mean time to death (liposomal clodronate, 12.88 days; control liposome, 13.13 days; untreated, 11.38 days). The mean time to death following control liposome treatment was significantly longer than that in untreated animals (13.13 days versus 11.38 days; P = 0.05) but not longer than that in clodronate-treated animals. Depletion of AMθ also did not result in increased ANDV titers in the lung as measured by PCR (Fig. 2c). These data suggest that despite becoming activated, AMθ are not important for protection against an intramuscular ANDV challenge, nor do they contribute to disease pathogenesis following intramuscular challenge.FIG 1Identification and depletion of AMθ in Syrian hamsters. (a) AMθ from Syrian hamster BAL fluid were analyzed for the expression of the MARCO scavenger receptor by flow cytometry. Hamsters were treated intratracheally with liposomal clodronates or control liposomes on days −3 and −1 prior to an 80-PFU ANDV i.m. challenge. Ten days post-ANDV challenge, the ability of Encapsome or liposomal clodronate treatment to deplete AMθ was determined by analyzing the percentage of MARCO+ cells (b) or FSChi/SSChi cells (c) in hamster BAL samples. The percentage of MARCO+ cells or FSChi/SSChi cells was then quantified (d) (*, P < 0.05; ***, P < 0.001). (e) Staining of lungs of day 10 ANDV-infected hamsters with H&E (total magnification, ×400). Sections (5 to 6 μm) of one of the cranial lung lobes was stained with H&E to visually determine if the number of alveolar macrophages is affected when treated with liposomal clodronate or control liposome or when left untreated. Black arrows indicate alveolar macrophages.FIG 2Depletion of AMθ does not prevent disease following intramuscular ANDV challenge. Hamsters were treated intratracheally with liposomal clodronate or control liposome on days −3 and −1 or were left untreated. On day 0, all hamsters were challenged with 80 PFU ANDV by intramuscular infection. (a) Ten days post-ANDV challenge, the number of AMθ was determined by flow cytometry by gating on FSChi/SSChi cells (as described for Fig. 1) in hamster BAL samples (**, P < 0.01; ****, P < 0.0001). (b) The depletion of AMθ did not prevent disease in hamsters. Lung tissue specimens isolated from all hamsters 10 days postchallenge were evaluated for viral genome (c) by real-time (RT)-PCR (not significant).Serial sections of lung tissue from these groups further revealed the presence of ANDV antigen colocalized to CD31-positive endothelial cells in both capillaries and larger vessels (Fig. 3a to d). Regardless of treatment, no differences were observed in the pathogenesis of HPS-like disease in ANDV-infected hamsters. Hamsters in all groups exhibited signs of mild to moderate inflammation, interstitial pneumonia, alveolar fibrin deposition, and edema characteristic of ANDV infection.FIG 3Depletion of AMθ does not alter the localization of ANDV NP to CD31 positive endothelial cells. Serial sections (5 to 6 μm) from one of the cranial lobes of day 10 i.m. ANDV-infected hamsters treated with liposomal clodronate (a) or control liposome (b), untreated ANDV-infected hamsters (c), or normal uninfected hamsters (d) were stained with antibodies specific for CD31 (DAB; brown) or ANDV NP (alkaline phosphatase; red). ANDV NP staining colocalized to CD31-positive cells in adjacent serial sections. Normal hamster tissue remained negative for ANDV NP. No differences were seen in the pattern of CD31 and/or ANDV NP staining across treatment groups. (e) Alveolar macrophages from untreated ANDV-infected hamsters were evaluated for the presence of ANDV NP and CD31. All were found to be CD31 positive, but no evidence of positive staining for ANDV NP was detected.Also noticed were multifocal foci of neutrophilic inflammation, along with mesothelial hypertrophy and atelectasis. The presence of necrotic/apoptotic debris was rare. Consistent with the detection of viral genome by PCR, immunohistochemistry analysis revealed little to no difference in overall viral load within endothelial cells following clodronate treatment. Interestingly, all identifiable alveolar macrophages found in ANDV-infected hamsters were negative for Andes virus although positive for cytoplasmic CD31 staining (Fig. 3e).Depletion of AMθ does not prevent disease following intranasal ANDV challenge.Alveolar macrophages are more likely to be involved in the defense against airborne pathogens. To understand the protective or pathogenic responses that AMθ elicit to inhaled hantaviruses, AMθ were depleted prior to intranasal ANDV challenge. Groups of hamsters were treated intratracheally with liposomal clodronate or control liposome on days −3 and −1. One group of hamsters were left untreated. Hamsters were then challenged with 4,000 PFU (42 LD50) ANDV i.n. Ten and 17 days later, the number and percentage of AMθ in hamster BAL fluid were determined. Similar to what was seen after intramuscular challenge, 10 days after intranasal challenge the percentage and total number of AMθ in untreated or control liposome-treated animals were comparable (Fig. 4a). control liposome treatment resulted in a trend toward increased numbers of AMθ compared to untreated animals, but this difference was not significant. By comparison, liposomal clodronate treatment resulted in a significant reduction in both the percentage and total number of AMθ. The percentage of AMθ remained significantly reduced following liposomal clodronate treatment 17 days after intranasal challenge (Fig. 4b). Surprising, though, was the observation that the number of AMθ at day 17 in the untreated group was significantly lower than the number of AMθ in the untreated group at day 10 (Fig. 4c). This phenomenon was seen only in the untreated groups, as the number of AMθ in the control liposome-treated animals remained similar between days 10 and 17. Although the total number of AMθ in the liposomal clodronate-treated animals was lower on day 17 than on day 10, the difference between the number of AMθ in the liposomal clodronate-treated animals and untreated animals on day 17 was not significant. However, the difference in the number of AMθ in the control liposome-treated animals and untreated animals on day 17 was significant. The reduction in AMθ did not prevent disease in hamsters (Fig. 4d), but depletion did result in a more uniform and slightly more rapid disease course (mean time to death: liposomal clodronate, 14.75 days; control liposome, 21.43 days; no treatment, 19.13 days). ANDV titers in the lung were not significantly different in liposomal clodronate-treated hamsters at either day 10 or day 17 as determined by the presence of viral genome measured by PCR (Fig. 4e). However, there was a trend toward increased ANDV M copy number in the lungs of liposomal clodronate-treated animals 10 days postchallenge.FIG 4Depletion of alveolar macrophages does not prevent disease following intranasal ANDV challenge. Hamsters were treated intratracheally with liposomal clodronate or control liposome on days −3 and −1 or were left untreated. On day 0, all hamsters were challenged with 4,000 PFU ANDV by intranasal infection. (a and b) Ten days (a) and 17 days (b) post-ANDV challenge, the number of AMθ was determined by flow cytometry by gating on FSChi/SSChi cells (as described for Fig. 1) in hamster BAL samples (**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ns, not significant). (c) The numbers of AMθ on days 10 and 17 in untreated, ANDV-challenged hamsters were directly compared (**, P < 0.01). (d) The depletion of AMθ did not prevent disease in hamsters. All surviving animals seroconverted, indicating that they had been exposed to virus (data not shown). (e) Lung tissue isolated from all hamsters 10 and 17 days postchallenge were evaluated for viral genome by RT-PCR.TNF-α levels in hamster BAL samples were significantly higher at the peak of disease than at earlier time points (Fig. 5a; day 17 versus day 10), but AMθ depletion affected TNF-α expression only early after infection. Interestingly, treatment with either liposomal clodronate or control liposome resulted in an increase in detected TNF-α compared to that in untreated hamsters, which could reflect the higher numbers of neutrophils and AMθ present in the BAL samples from these groups, respectively (Fig. 4b and 6d). The reduction in AMθ did not reduce the amount of TNF-α detected in BAL samples 10 days after intramuscular challenge (Fig. 5b), which was similar to the amount of TNF-α detected in BAL samples 10 day after intranasal challenge. Remarkably, TNF-α levels at the peak of disease following intranasal challenge (day 17) were nearly twice those detected at the peak of disease following intramuscular challenge, possibly reflecting the differences in AMθ activation when virus is administered directly to the lung. These data suggest that AMθ do not contribute to disease pathogenesis but may contribute some degree of protection against intranasal ANDV challenge.FIG 5Depletion AMθ alters TNF-α expression but only early after intranasal ANDV challenge. Hamsters were treated intratracheally with liposomal clodronate or control liposome on days −3 and −1 or were left untreated. On day 0, all hamsters were challenged either with 4,000 PFU ANDV by intranasal infection or with 80 PFU ANDV by intramuscular infection. BAL samples were collected from all hamsters 10 and 17 days after intranasal challenge (a) or 10 days after intramuscular challenge (b), and TNF-α expression was analyzed by ELISA. The depletion of AMθ resulted in increased TNF-α levels 10 days after intranasal ANDV challenge (a) (**, P < 0.01) but did not affect TNF-α levels 17 days after intranasal challenge or 10 days after intramuscular ANDV challenge (b). (c) TNF-α expression levels in BAL samples from untreated ANDV-challenged hamsters following either intranasal or intramuscular virus challenge were directly compared (****, P < 0.0001).FIG 6Depletion of AMθ alters neutrophil recruitment and neutrophil chemoattractant expression early after intranasal ANDV challenge. BAL samples were collected from all hamsters 10 days after intramuscular challenge (a to c) or 10 and 17 days after 4,000 PFU intranasal ANDV challenge (d to g) and were analyzed for the presence of neutrophils by flow cytometry and MIP-1α and MIP-2 by ELISA. Both liposomal clodronate and control liposome treatments resulted in a decrease in MIP-1α (a) but did not alter MIP-2 expression (b) or the number of neutrophils (c) compared to untreated hamsters after intramuscular challenge. liposomal clodronate and control liposome treatments resulted in a decrease in both MIP-1α (d) and MIP-2 expression (e). liposomal clodronate treatment resulted in an increase in the number of neutrophils in hamster BAL fluid on day 10 (f) but not on day 17 (g) after intranasal challenge (*, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001; ns, not significant).Depletion of AMθ alters neutrophil recruitment early, but not late, after intranasal ANDV challenge.Alveolar macrophages coordinate many aspects of immune responses to airborne pathogens, including the recruitment of other immune cell types such as neutrophils. At the peak of hantavirus disease following intramuscular infection with ANDV (day 10), we observed a decrease in the neutrophil chemoattractant MIP-1α in BAL samples from AMθ-depleted hamsters compared to untreated ANDV-infected hamsters, suggesting that AMθ may be an important source of MIP-1α during hantavirus infection in the lung (Fig. 6a). However, the expression of the neutrophil chemoattractant MIP-2 in BAL samples from all hamsters remained unchanged (Fig. 6b), and, correspondingly, there was also little significant change in the number of neutrophils found in hamster BAL samples 10 days after intramuscular challenge (Fig. 6c). By comparison, when we investigated the role of AMθ in the recruitment of neutrophils following intranasal challenge, we found that early in disease pathogenesis (day 10), MIP-1α and MIP-2 expression were reduced in both liposomal clodronate- and control liposome-treated hamsters compared to untreated ANDV-infected hamsters (Fig. 6d and e). We also found that control liposome treatment resulted in increased numbers of recruited AMθ (Fig. 4b) while liposomal clodronate treatment resulted in an increased number of neutrophils (Fig. 6f). At the peak of disease following intranasal ANDV challenge (day 17), the expression of MIP-1α and MIP-2 was reduced approximately 50% compared to the expression seen on day 10. Moreover, the expression of MIP-1α and MIP-2 was not dependent on treatment, as equivalent amounts of MIP-1α and MIP-2 were detected in BAL samples from all hamsters (Fig. 6d and e). Neutrophil numbers were reduced in liposomal clodronate-treated animals by day 17 compared to the numbers observed on day 10, but neutrophil numbers in the control liposome-treated and untreated hamsters remained virtually unchanged between days 10 and 17 (Fig. 6g). In contrast, AMθ numbers in control liposome-treated hamsters remained elevated on days 10 and 17 despite an overall drop in AMθ numbers in untreated hamsters (Fig. 4a and b). These data suggest that AMθ may regulate neutrophil recruitment to the lung early after hantavirus infection but do not contribute significantly to neutrophil recruitment toward the peak of disease pathogenesis.Depletion of AMθ alters VEGF-A expression early after intranasal ANDV challenge.Recently, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has been hypothesized to play a role in hantavirus disease pathogenesis. Moreover, AMθ are known sources of VEGF. We therefore asked whether VEGF expression in the lungs of hamsters infected with ANDV was dependent on the presence of AMθ. Compared to normal uninfected hamsters, VEGF-A expression in the BAL of hamsters 10 days after intranasal ANDV challenge was only slightly, but not significantly, elevated (Fig. 7). Interestingly, at the time of peak disease on day 17, there was almost a 2-fold increase in VEGF-A protein. Macrophage depletion did not further enhance VEGF-A in BAL samples late into infection (day17), as we observed no difference in VEGF titers in ANDV-infected hamster BAL samples in the presence or absence of AMθ. However, when AMθ were depleted, VEGF-A expression in the BAL fluid on day 10 was equivalent to the amount of VEGF-A detected in all hamster BAL samples on day 17. A similar increase in VEGF was observed in control liposome-treated hamsters. These data demonstrate that VEGF expression is enhanced in hamsters infected with ANDV but suggest that while AMθ may regulate the expression of VEGF by other cell types in the lung, they are not a major source of VEGF during hantavirus disease pathogenesis.FIG 7Depletion of AMθ alters VEGF-A expression early after intranasal ANDV challenge. BAL samples were collected from all hamsters 10 and 17 days after 4,000 PFU intranasal ANDV challenge and were analyzed for the presence of VEGF-A by ELISA. Both liposomal clodronate and control liposome treatments resulted in increased VEGF-A expression 10 days post-ANDV challenge comparable to VEGF-A levels found in all hamsters 17 days postchallenge (**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; ****, P < 0.0001; ns, not significant).DISCUSSIONThe human lung has a surface area of approximately 70 m2 and contains, on average, 480 million alveoli (35), which are in constant contact with the outside world. In this environment, homeostasis along the endothelial/epithelial border must be maintained to allow oxygen and carbon dioxide to freely exchange; however, these homeostatic mechanisms must remain pliable enough to allow immune responses to clear invading pathogens. Often considered the first line of defense against respiratory pathogens, the estimated 2 billion AMθ residing in the alveoli of the human lung (36) are uniquely juxtaposed to maintain lung homeostasis as well as orchestrate protection against airborne viruses and bacteria (37). In the case of hantaviruses, the predominant route of human exposure is thought to be inhalation of excreta from infected rodent hosts (reviewed in references 6 and 7), suggesting that alveolar macrophages may play an important role in clearing or, alternatively, contributing to disease caused by aerosolized hantaviruses. Albeit rare, several cases of hantavirus disease have been reported in humans following parenteral exposure resulting from the bite of infected rodents. In these cases, the disease resulting from parenteral infection is virtually identical to the disease following aerosol infection, the only differences being slight differences in disease kinetics. Similarly, Syrian hamsters experimentally infected with ANDV by intramuscular challenge develop a disease that is indistinguishable from the disease exhibited following intranasal exposure, the only differences being slight differences in disease kinetics and the number of PFU needed to develop uniformly lethal disease. Given the extensive similarities in disease, it is likely that the mechanism of disease or the cell type responsible for disease is identical regardless of the route of exposure. Consistent with this hypothesis, we demonstrate here that alveolar macrophages play only a marginal role in protecting hamsters from lethal hantavirus infection but do not contribute to the disease caused by either intranasal or intramuscular hantavirus infection.Alveolar macrophages contribute to the defense against many aerosolized pathogens, and in many cases, these responses are critical for host protection. In models of vaccinia virus, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and influenza virus infection, the depletion of alveolar macrophages results in greater viral replication and dissemination and an overall increase in the severity of infection (9, 38–40). In some cases, the reduced levels of protection in the absence of alveolar macrophages are likely due to the impaired initiation of antiviral responses that result in abolished early cytokine and chemokine release and inhibited immune cell activation and recruitment (40, 41). In addition, Schneider et al. (42) demonstrated that when alveolar macrophages were depleted in mice prior to infection with influenza virus, the mice exhibited lower percent oxygen saturation (sO2) and oxygen partial pressure (pO2), arguing that AMθ are important for maintaining lung function during infection. However, the same mechanisms that alveolar macrophages use to protect against pathogens have also been implicated in causing disease and increased vascular permeability in models of acute lung injury caused by infectious disease agents, such as human metapneumovirus (hMPV) (43) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (44), as well as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (45) and nonischemic inflammatory lung injury (46). Alveolar macrophages may also serve as a reservoir for pathogens such as hMPV (43), measles virus (47), and Legionella pneumophila (48) and may indirectly contribute to the pathogenesis of the different diseases caused by these pathogens by allowing their replication and dissemination. Still, the enhancement of disease in the presence of alveolar macrophages may not always reflect a direct contribution by AMθ by way of proinflammatory cytokines or angiogenic factors but may indirectly be the result of increased immune cell recruitment by AMθ as seen in mouse models of mouse hepatitis virus type 1 (MHV-1) infection (49).The role that AMθ play in disease caused by classical hemorrhagic fever viruses is less well understood. Alveolar macrophages express the primary and secondary receptors (50) for both hantaviruses (αvβ3 integrin [51] and complement receptors 3 and 4 [CR3/CR4] [52]) and Ebola virus (DC-SIGN and DC-SIGNR [53]) and, correspondingly, are known to be permissive to hantavirus (26, 27) and Ebola virus infection (54). However, in these cases, infection is less efficient than, or fails to induce a sustained inflammatory response compared to, the primary targets of infection for these viruses, and there is no evidence that hantavirus infection of AMθ induces apoptosis. Antigens of yellow fever virus, which is transmitted by the bite of the Aedes aegypti mosquito, can be found inside the rough endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi complex of AMθ, suggesting that viral replication can occur in these cells (55, 56), but it is unknown whether AMθ play any role in disease pathogenesis other than acting as a virus reservoir. It is also unknown whether other hemorrhagic fever viruses that commonly target monocyte lineage cells, such as dengue virus and Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever virus, target AMθ in a way that contributes to human disease. Alveolar macrophages are known to be permissive to hantavirus infection (26, 27), but it has been less clear to what extent AMθ act as a reservoir for hantaviruses. In some of the earliest characterizations of HPS, Mori and colleagues described finding viral antigen in only a low number of “large cells,” identified as macrophages, in the lung (24). Similarly, Li and Klein further demonstrated that while Norway rat alveolar macrophages could be infected with Seoul virus, their ability to support efficient replication of the virus was significantly reduced compared to endothelial cells (26).Our analysis of ANDV nucleoprotein (NP) associated with AMθ was limited to intramuscular challenge, but a similar trend has been reported by Safronetz and colleagues, who noted that even during the end stages of hantavirus disease in hamsters infected intranasally with ANDV, only occasional alveolar luminal cells, most likely alveolar macrophages, were found to stain positive for hantavirus antigen (57). Coupled with this, we see no difference in HPS pathology in hamsters following either i.n. or i.m. challenge, and our analysis was done at the peak of disease pathogenesis following i.m. challenge (day 10), when ANDV NP staining of the lung endothelium was nearly continuous, suggesting that the likelihood of ANDV/AMθ interactions would be as high as that following intranasal challenge. Taken together, our observation that the depletion of AMθ resulted in no significant change in lung ANDV titers (Fig. 2c and 4e) and our inability to detect the presence of ANDV NP associated with hamster AMθ (Fig. 3e) suggest that AMθ do not serve as a primary reservoir for hantavirus replication and AMθ dysfunction due to direct hantavirus infection is unlikely.How hamster AMθ respond to ANDV infection is not entirely clear. Alveolar macrophages, in general, need to walk a fine line between homeostasis and host defense to protect the host while preventing catastrophic inflammation. One way AMθ contribute to lung protection is by phagocytizing most of the particulate matter that enters the lungs. This suggests that they may also contribute to the clearance of ANDV from the lungs of hamsters. Early after intranasal ANDV challenge, we saw a trend toward increased detection of viral genome in hamsters that were depleted of AMθ, although depletion of AMθ does not significantly alter the amount of live virus or viral genome detected in lung tissue at late time points after infection (Fig. 3e and f). Hamsters devoid of AMθ also developed disease faster than untreated or control-treated ANDV-infected hamsters. Interestingly, the highest number of surviving animals was found in control liposome-treated animals (Fig. 3d). Correspondingly, this group also had greater numbers of AMθ than liposomal clodronate-treated or untreated animals (Fig. 3a to c). Like other models, this could suggest that early after infection, AMθ help prevent the spread of infection by reducing infectious virus in the lung and by so doing may help control the rate at which disease pathogenesis progresses. At later times after infection, similar levels of viral genome and/or infectious virus were found in the lung of all hamsters, supporting the argument that AMθ contribute more substantially to the immune response against ANDV early after infection but less so at later times once ANDV is primarily replicating in endothelial cells. This is also consistent with the reduced numbers of AMθ detected on day 17 compared to day 10.A second way AMθ contribute to lung protection is by modulating immune responses in the lung (37, 58). In the presence of harmless particulates such as dust, they may go as far as suppressing antigen-specific adaptive immune responses either by directly suppressing tissue-resident T cells (59, 60) or by suppressing lung-resident dendritic cells (61), thus preventing them from migrating to draining lymph nodes and initiating immune responses. However, in the case of aerosolized pathogens, activation of AMθ results in a change in phenotype from a regulator of lung homeostasis to that of a cell capable of coordinating and participating in inflammatory immune responses (62, 63). Human AMθ make little TNF-α when exposed to SNV compared to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (27), suggesting that hantavirus may be ineffective at activating AMθ. Correspondingly, we noticed little difference in the amount of TNF-α in the BAL fluid of hamsters in the presence or absence of AMθ following infection with ANDV intramuscularly (Fig. 4a) or at late times after intranasal infection (Fig. 4b). In the case of intramuscular injection of virus, it is not clear whether AMθ would be effectively stimulated since it is assumed that infection of the endothelium would occur directly via the blood and not by inhalation. We did observe an increase in the amount of TNF-α in BAL samples between day 10 and day 17 postintranasal challenge, indicating that an inflammatory response was occurring. However, at late times, depletion of macrophages did not reduce the amount of TNF-α detected, suggesting that AMθ are not a major source of TNF-α that late in infection. Somewhat surprisingly, at early times (day 10) after intranasal challenge, the depletion of AMθ resulted in an increase in TNF-α in BAL samples. One explanation is that in hamsters, AMθ are more prone to an immunosuppressive phenotype and by depleting them, other cell types, including neutrophils, endothelial cells, T cells, and epithelial cells are no longer prevented from producing TNF-α. The fact that control liposome-treated animals also had increased levels of TNF-α may be reflected in the increased numbers of AMθ induced by control liposome treatment. Resident AMθ at the time of control liposome treatment may retain their immunosuppressive phenotype, but any newly recruited AMθ could be expected to have a markedly different phenotype prior to adopting suppressive functions (64).As immune sentinels, one of the primary roles of AMθ is to orchestrate immune responses by recruiting other immune cell types to the lung. In some models of acute lung injury (46, 65, 66), including pneumonia induced by LPS or P. aeruginosa pneumonia infection, depletion of AMθ attenuates the recruitment of neutrophils to the lung, indicating that AMθ can be a key source of neutrophil chemoattractants. Conversely, in other models, AMθ appear to play a greater role in the negative regulation of neutrophil migration in that the depletion of AMθ amplifies neutrophil recruitment (38, 44, 67–71). Neutrophils migrate in response to a number of chemoattractants (72) including CXCL2 (MIP-2 [mouse]/GROβ [human]) and CCL3 (MIP-1α), of which AMθ can be a major source (40, 73–75). Liposomal clodronate treatment resulted in a decrease in MIP-1α detected in BAL samples on day 10 following intramuscular ANDV challenge (Fig. 5a) and also resulted in a decrease in MIP-1α and MIP-2 on day 10 following intranasal challenge (Fig. 5b). Surprisingly, the decrease in MIP-1α and MIP-2 in liposomal clodronate-treated animals following intranasal challenge was accompanied by an increase in BAL neutrophils (Fig. 5d). Moreover, control liposome treatment also resulted in decreases in MIP-1α and MIP-2 but recruitment of new AMθ rather than neutrophils. One possible explanation for this apparent paradox is that AMθ are an important source of MIP-1α and MIP-2 in the hamster but hamster neutrophils preferentially respond to other chemokines, such as monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) or KC, that may be more abundant in the absence of MIP-1α and MIP-2. Alternatively, MIP-1α and MIP-2 are preferentially secreted by cell types other than neutrophils in the hamster and the presence of AMθ suppresses neutrophil migration. When alveolar macrophages are depleted, neutrophils freely migrate to the lung and act as a MIP-1α/MIP-2 “sponge” that soaks up free chemokine and reduces the overall levels of bioavailable MIP-1α/MIP-2. A similar explanation could hold true for the decreased abundance of MIP-1α and MIP-2 following control liposome treatment in which newly arrived AMθ act as the chemokine sponge. A closer analysis of the kinetics of MIP-1α and MIP-2 expression following alveolar macrophage depletion would be necessary to elucidate these possibilities. The expression of MIP-1α and MIP-2 on day 17 following intranasal ANDV challenge was similar across all treatment groups and substantially lower than that detected in ANDV-alone hamsters on day 10. Whether this reflects decreased numbers of AMθ at day 17 versus day 10 or whether this is a natural attempt by the hamster to downregulate lung inflammation has yet to be determined.IL-8 (CXCL8) is another potent neutrophil chemoattractant that can be produced by a number of cell types in the respiratory tract, including activated alveolar macrophages, airway epithelial, airway smooth muscle, and airway endothelial cells responding to inflammatory stimuli (76, 77), but like MIP-1a, MIP-2, and MCP-1, there are only limited data on how these chemokines are regulated during human hantavirus infection. Neither Sin Nombre virus nor Hantaan virus induces IL-8, MCP-1, MIP-1a, or MIP-1b within 72 h of in vitro infection of human lung microvascular endothelial cells (78), and only HTNV induces IL-8 at times later than 72 h (79), suggesting that IL-8 may be more relevant to HFRS than to HPS. Analysis of sera from human HPS cases failed to detect changes in MIP-2, MIP-1a, IL-8, or MCP-1, although significant increases in granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and M-CSF were detected (80). As myeloid cell differentiation, growth, and activation factors, GM-CSF and M-CSF could implicate such as macrophages and dendritic cells in disease (81, 82), although these results suggest that it is not necessarily due to the recruitment of other cell types by macrophages. Intriguingly, higher concentrations of IL-8 and GM-CSF in serum are found in female HFRS patients infected with PUUV than in their male counterparts, potentially linking IL-8 expression with HFRS severity (83). However, more males than females are likely to develop clinical HFRS following PUUV infection (84, 85) and there is no difference in HFRS disease severity in humans infected with PUUV (86), rendering the link between IL-8 and HFRS disease suspect. Whether chemokines such as MCP-1, MIP-1a, or MIP-2 follow a similar pattern of expression during human HFRS has yet to be determined.We believe that this is the first report of hamster-specific ELISA kits from a commercial vendor to be used with the Syrian hamster animal model. Given the relatively short time interval between the publishing of the Syrian hamster genome and the commercial availability of these ELISA kits, we cannot discount the possibility that the cytokine expression patterns that we see following liposomal clodronate/control liposome treatment of ANDV-infected hamsters are related to the specificity of these kits. As such, while these measurements are reproducible, they should be interpreted within the context of the other parameters measured in these experiments (e.g., survival and AMθ numbers) until verified by other independent reports.The potential role of VEGF in hantavirus disease pathogenesis has recently received a great deal of attention. In vitro, hantavirus infection sensitizes endothelial cells to VEGF, rendering them hyperpermeable (87) in a process involving VE-cadherin (88, 89) and potentially β3 integrin (90). Similarly, increased levels of VEGF can be detected in pleural effluent from patients with acute HPS (91) or in serum samples of acute-phase HFRS patients (92). Alveolar macrophages are known to express VEGF during pulmonary infection and other forms of acute lung injury (93–98), suggesting that AMθ may respond similarly to hantavirus infection. Still, the fact that all hamsters infected with ANDV developed disease (Fig. 2e and 3d) suggests that AMθ do not significantly influence the expression of VEGF in hamsters. A significant increase in VEGF expression in the BAL fluid of ANDV-infected hamsters late after infection (day 17) was observed compared to what was seen in normal hamsters, but as expected, the levels of VEGF detected in the BAL fluid of ANDV-infected animals were nearly identical at later times after infection (day 17) regardless of the presence or absence of AMθ (Fig. 6). However, contrary to our expectations, the depletion of AMθ resulted in a significant increase in the level of VEGF in the BAL fluid of ANDV-infected hamsters at early times after intranasal challenge. Interestingly, when macrophages were depleted in animals prior to intranasal challenge, those animals developed disease faster than either untreated ANDV-infected animals or animals receiving control liposome treatments. This would seem to support the suggestion that VEGF contributes to hantavirus disease, but it would argue that AMθ are not the sole source of VEGF. Pulmonary epithelial cells (99, 100) and neutrophils (101, 102) are other known sources of VEGF in the lung and could be contributing to the increased levels of VEGF seen in ANDV-infected hamsters. Epithelial cells are not the primary targets of hantaviruses and are thus unlikely to be expressing VEGF as a result of direct infection, but expression could be induced by inflammatory cytokines produced by other cells during infection or by hypoxia caused during HPS (103). Recently, a role for neutrophils in vascular leakage caused by HTNV infection of SCID mice has been suggested (104). Correspondingly, liposomal clodronate treatment resulted in a significant increase both in BAL fluid VEGF and in neutrophil numbers early after infection (day 10). Whether the depletion of neutrophils in hamsters alters hantavirus disease pathogenesis and the expression of VEGF in hamsters remains to be determined.The role that immune cell types may play in disease pathogenesis may not be limited to direct antiviral responses or cytokines. As cells such as neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes are recruited to sites of infection, they undergo the process of transendothelial cell migration, which is highly regulated by integrins, cadherins, and junctional adhesion molecules to prevent vascular leakage during the process (105, 106). Hantaviruses inactivate and dysregulate beta 3 integrins and VE-cadherin (88, 89), making it possible that infected endothelial cells may not be able to reform junctional complexes following paracellular diapedesis, leading to vascular leakage. Presumably, this would lead to visible gaps between endothelial cells, not borne out in electron microscopy (EM) analysis of hantavirus-infected endothelium from humans or hamsters (28, 33). Alternatively, neutrophils also possess the ability to migrate directly through endothelial cells via transcellular migration. During this process, endothelial cells form a dome, controlled by RhoA and F-actin (107), over the neutrophil to prevent vascular leakage. Endothelial cells to which polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) adhered often display many vesicles that can extend continuously between the cell membranes of the endothelial cells (108) similar to those seen in endothelial cells from hantavirus-infected hamsters (33). Dysregulation of dome formation could potentially allow for the direct flow of serum proteins through infected endothelial cells in a manner irrespective of noticeable gap formation in the endothelium.Small-animal models are invaluable tools to study the pathogenesis of diseases caused by neglected infectious disease agents such as Andes virus. However, the utility of the hamster model, as well as the role of the immune response in hantavirus disease pathogenesis, is contentious. Previously, we and others have demonstrated that the ablation of adaptive T and B cell responses to ANDV infection in hamsters does not alter the course of disease (109, 110). Here, using the Syrian hamster/Andes virus lethal disease model, we demonstrate that another component of the immune system is not directly responsible for the HPS-like disease cause by ANDV in hamsters. The mechanism by which hantaviruses cause disease in humans and hamsters alike is not clear, and many mechanisms of disease, both immune related and virus intrinsic, have been proposed. Making this more difficult is that aspects of the immune response to hantavirus infection are likely to be important for protection and viral clearance, even as they are viewed as contributing to disease. Still, it will be necessary to continue to evaluate other immune cell types, as we seek to understand their role in contributing to disease or protection following hantavirus infection.


Title: Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome outbreaks associated with climate variability in Northwestern Argentina, 1997–2017

IntroductionThe genus Orthohantavirus (family Hantaviridae) [1] includes zoonotic species of RNA virus found in Eurasia, the Americas, and Africa; associated with mammals species of rodents bats and shrews [2]. Rodent borne hantaviruses are the etiologic agents causing two human diseases: hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS), which is transmitted by rodent subfamilies Arvicolinae and Murinae in Euroasia; and the hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) transmitted by the subfamilies Neotominae and Sigmodontinae in North and South America [3, 4]. Fatality rates of HPS can reach up to 35%–50% in South America [5]. In Argentina, there are 4 endemic regions of HPS: northwestern, northeastern, central and southwestern (Fig 1). The mortality rate varies depending on the endemic region. The overall mortality rate in Argentina during the period 1995–2017 ranged from 21.4% to 25.8%. The highest case-fatality rate (40.5%) occurred in the southwestern endemic region, which is shared with southern Chile [6]. The northwestern endemic region has the lowest mortality rate (15%–17%) but the highest prevalence, near 50% of all reported cases in the country. The main causative agent of HPS in Argentina is the Andes orthohantavirus (ANDV). Several variants or genotypes of this viral species were identified. In Northwestern Argentina, the Oran virus (ORNV) is the main circulating variant associated with HPS, but the Bermejo (BEMV) variant and Laguna Negra orthohantavirus (LANV) were also identified in human cases [7–9].10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.g001Fig 1Distribution of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS).(A) The cumulative number of HPS cases in the 4 endemic regions of Argentina indicated by rectangles and grayscale for every second-level administrative division. (B) Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome cases in Northwestern Argentina; the circles indicate the location of HPS cases and the size of each circle is proportional to the number of cases. Localities are listed in Table S1 Table. The 4 biogeographic regions are represented by the colors indicated in the reference key. Map built with QGIS 3.1 Geographic Information System. Open Source Geospatial Foundation Project (http://qgis.osgeo.org).The transmission to humans occurs mainly via inhalation of aerosolized excreta from infected rodents, although cases of human to human transmission have been demonstrated in Argentina and Chile [10–13]. Several risk factors have been identified, such as outdoor rural work, recreational activities, deforestation, non-aerated buildings, and virus survival out of their hosts [6, 14,15]. But the epidemiology of human HPS is necessarily linked to the geographic distribution and ecology of the rodent host. Climatic factors are environmental regulators of rodent-borne virus prevalence and transmission rates through their effect on reproductive success in the host population [16]. Because hantaviruses are transmitted horizontally, interaction among individuals is essential to spread the infection in the rodent population; thus changes in rodent density may affect odds of virus spillover into the human population [16–20]. The climate has a strong influence on hantavirus reservoir population dynamics. Particularly the precipitation and the temperature regulates primary production of food resources as well as survival and reproduction of rodent populations [16–23]. These studies showed how climatic variables influencing rodent population dynamics may be used as an indicator for the risk of hantavirus transmissions. Studies reporting environmental correlates of human hantavirus infections in Argentina found factors such as vegetation cover [24, 25], evapotranspiration and human demography [26], rainfall and temperature [25, 27], in addition to rodent distribution [24–27] as explanatory variables. Longitudinal studies on rodents host infections in central [28–30] and south Argentina [31–33] reported a seasonal pattern for rodent density and viral antibody prevalence, although generally not synchronic. Additionally, a higher abundance of rodent reservoirs was associated with warm and rainy weather in central [34, 35] and southern Argentina [36]. However, the relationship between climatic variability and the transmission of hantavirus has not been fully explored, particularly in northwestern Argentina, where the highest HPS prevalence of the country occurs.In this paper, we investigate human hantavirus infection temporal dynamics related to rainfall and temperature in Northwestern Argentina endemic region for the 1997–2017 period. We test the trophic cascade hypothesis, which states that outbreaks of hantavirus disease are preceded by events of high rainfall and temperatures, which increases resource input for rodents host and the consequent increase in rodent abundance and viral transmission. We aim to move forward on the control and prevention of this disease through an early warning system of potential hantavirus outbreaks based on these ecologically relevant climatic factors.Materials and methodsStudy siteArgentina has a great latitudinal extension (ca. 3,700Km) from the tropic of Capricornia (ca. 22° latitude S) southward to the uttermost continental land of America (ca. 55° latitude S). The country also has a large elevation gradient, from sea level in the Atlantic coast up to 6960 m above sea level in the Andes, where the highest summit of America (the Aconcagua) is located. This setting determines a variety of bioclimatic regions, ranging from rainy tropical forest and frosty temperate forest to savannas, grasslands and, deserts. In Northwestern Argentina, most of these biomes are present: 1) savannas-like semi-arid woodlands (Chaco biogeographic province) in the eastern lowlands; 2) montane rainforest, montane temperate forest, and grasslands follow one another on a steep elevation gradient on eastern Andes slopes (Yungas biogeographic province); 3) the western rain shadow slopes and valleys in Northwest Argentinean Andes are xeric scrub deserts (Monte biogeographic province); 4) on the mountain tops above 4000 m.a.s.l. frosty highland steppes occur (Puna biogeographic province). Hantavirus in Argentina occur mainly in humid biomes [14,37]. In northwestern Argentina, the majority of HPS cases occur in the northernmost Yungas rainforest, an area that has been identified as a discrete biogeographic unit based on rodent endemism [38]. Our study area includes part of 2 political provinces of Argentina: Salta and Jujuy (Fig 1B). Within this area, 2 orthohantavirus species were identified: Laguna Negra orthohantavirus (LNV), carried by Calomys laucha, Calomys callosus; and 2 variants of Andes orthohantavirus (ANDV): Oran (ORNV) and Bermejo (BEMV) virus carried by Oligoryzomys chacoensis and Oligoryzomys flavescens respectively.Climatic dataThe climate in northwestern Argentina is seasonal with a monsoonal precipitation regimen concentrated during summertime of the Southern Hemisphere. Due to the orographic effect of the Andes, moisture is partly released in the form of intense rainfall at the eastern flanks of the tropical/subtropical Andes. This results in a rainfall gradient between the humid low-elevation (1200 mm/yr) close to the mountain (Yungas) and eastern semi-arid (Chaco) plain regions eastward (500 mm/yr). The mean annual temperature in our study area is 21°C, with minimum values of -2°C in Oran (Northern Salta) and -5°C in Perico (southern Jujuy) and maximum of 43°C and 41°C respectively, during the studied period (Fig 1B). For the statistical analysis, we obtained monthly climatic data of near-surface mean temperatures and total precipitation from the Climate Research Unit (CRU TS 4.01, http://www.cru.uea.ac.uk/) at the University of East Anglia, UK. This dataset corresponds to interpolated data of instrumental records from a dense network of local meteorological stations (Table S2 Table) with homogeneity tests and scaled to a 0.5-degree square network [39]. We used the gridded monthly average temperature and total precipitation centered at 24.25°S; 64.75°W (Yuto city, Jujuy province; Fig 1B).Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome casesA patient who resides in the Northwest region presenting, in the prodromic phase, persistent fever (>48hs), headache, myalgias and/or gastrointestinal manifestations (abdominal pain, vomiting and/or diarrhea) and adding respiratory compromise in the advanced stage of the illness was defined a suspected HPS case. For this study, we included all suspected cases that were confirmed by laboratory tests according to the diagnostic algorithm of the Hantavirus National Reference Laboratory [14]. Cases were laboratory-confirmed by the presence of both IgM and IgG antibodies; cases with IgM titers but not IgG were confirmed verifying IgG seroconversion in second samples and/or by viral RNA detection by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RTqPCR) and/or RT-PCR followed by nucleotide sequencing [14]. The confirmation was done at the National Reference Laboratory from The National Institute of Infectious Disease "Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Infecciosas Dr. C. G. Malbrán " (INEI) of the Administración Nacional de Laboratorio e Institutos de Salud (ANLIS). Because HPS is a reportable disease, we also considered cases that were reported through the National Health Surveillance System (SIVILA/SISA) by independent laboratories. However, cases reported through SIVILA by independent laboratories performing diagnostic tests not validated by the National Reference Laboratory were not taken into account for this study. We compiled HPS cases from northwestern Argentina that occurred from summer 1997 to summer 2017.Ethics statementData reported by the National Health Surveillance System are completely anonymous. Additionally, National Institute for Infectious Diseases "Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Infecciosas" (INEI) and the National Health Surveillance System (SIVILA/SISA) follows the principle of ethics in research for the collection of data-keeping with the Declaration of Helsinki on human study and the Research in Human Beings Guide of the National Ministry of Health.Statistical analysisGiven the climatic regimen in the studied area, we first grouped HPS cases and climatic data into 6-month periods representing the rainy season (October-March) and the dry season (April-September). To analyze the relationship in a finer time scale, we also grouped the number of hantavirus human infections and climatic data into a 3 and 2-month period. We used log10 transformed number of HPS cases to stabilize the variance. Alternatively, we removed outliers (2 observations for the biannual data arrangement; and 5 observation for the quarterly and bimestrial data arrangement (3 in 2006/2007 and 2 in 2015). We standardized all data to allow comparison of different magnitude scores and applied 1 seasonal difference to achieve stationarity, checked using the Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test. We used dynamic regression to evaluate the relationship of HPS prevalence with rainfall and temperature. This technique involves a regression model that relates to delayed values of the explanatory variables (rainfall and temperature) with the response variable (HPS cases). Time series data frequently exhibit correlation with its own past values (autocorrelation), leading a standard regression method to return incorrect coefficients and invalid significance tests. To overcome this problem, the autocorrelation is accounted for by a specific error term which includes estimated coefficients for the autoregressive (AR) and moving average (MA) components. These coefficients represent the contribution of the previous values (AR) and innovations (MA) to the present observed value. The number past values (lags) to be included are specified by the order "p" for the AR process and "q" for MA, denoted by (p, d, q). The "d" represents the degree of differencing (subtracting its current and previous values d times) used to stabilize the series when the stationarity assumption is violated. This is known as regression with ARIMA errors [40]. The regression part and the ARIMA part of the model are computed separately and then both results are combined. We built models for all possible combinations of lagged rainfall and temperature from the previous season (t-1) to a delayed time lag of 6 periods (t-6), equivalent to 3 years for the biannual data arrangement, and of 8 periods (t-8) equivalent to the previous 2 years for the quarterly data arrangement and 1 year for the bimestrial data. We used the corrected Akaike Information Criterion (AICc) for model selection and checked for random residuals. The model with the lowest ACIc value was selected as the best one, and the differences in the scores between each model and the best one (ΔAICc) was calculated. Models with ΔAICc<2 were considered equally parsimonious and essentially as good as the best model [41]. We also calculated the adjusted coefficient of determination (R2 adj) as a measure of model fit and the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) as a measure of the model forecast accuracy for the training set one step ahead. All statistical analyses were performed in R using the forecast package [42].ResultsWe recorded 902 HPS cases for the 20 years analyzed, of which 602 were in Salta province and 300 in Jujuy province (Fig 1B). The accumulated number of HPS cases for each time interval, as well as the average and range of rainfall and temperature, are summarized in Table 1. Variation in HPS cases, rainfall, and temperature for the studied period are shown in Fig 2. There were 2 clear abrupt increments in HPS case numbers from spring 2006 through autumn 2007 and during the summer and autumn in 2015.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.g002Fig 2Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) cases and climate variability for the 20 years analyzed.Variation in the number of HPS cases for Salta and Jujuy provinces (Northwestern Argentina), and total rainfall and mean temperature estimated for (A) biannual data arrangement, (B) quarterly and (C) bimestrial data arrangement. Climatic variables were estimated for Yuto city (Jujuy) during the 20 years analyzed starting in the summer of 1997.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.t001Table 1Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) cases and climatic variables.The accumulated number of HPS cases and climatic variation in rainfall and temperature for biannual, quarterly, and bimestrial data arrangement.BiannualHPS casesMean rainfall mmRainfall rangeMean temperature C°Temperature rangeApr-Sep37392.236.5–184.418.413.2–28.8Oct-Mar528765.4528.7–964.425.914. -28.5QuarterlyJul-Sep1124.50–38.818.313.2–23.2Oct-Dic24789.812.6–267.525.823–28.8Jan-Mar281167.151.6–313.82623–28.5Apr-Jun26125.90.3–122.621.414.0–23.6BimestrialJul-Aug584.30–14.716.713.2–18.0Sep-Oct14257.412.8–126.12318.9–26.7Nov-Dic160221.190.7–331.426.323.7–28.8Jan-Feb154354.7225.5–518.826.724.7–28.5Mar-Apr238205.958.9–338.923.119.5–26.2May-Jun1491.92.7–39.816.914–20The results of model comparison for hantavirus infections dynamics related to the rainfall and the temperature in Northern Argentina are listed in Table 2. The results of model comparison when the 2006/7 and 2015 outbreaks were eliminated are listed in Table S3 Table.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.t002Table 2Model selection.List of best models for different combinations of lagged rainfall, temperature, and ARIMA error according to the corrected Akaike Information Criterion (AICc).Biannual ModelsAICcΔAICCcRMSER2adjRainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-1), AR 297.7400.870.69Rainfall(t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-2) AR 2100.092.390.860.68Rainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-0) AR 2101.293.590.910.64Rainfall(t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-1, t-2), AR 2101.824.080.840.70Rainfall (t-1) AR 4102.094.350.860.68Quarterly ModelsRainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-2), AR 1, MA 4206.100.880.71Rainfall(t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-2), AR 4208.52.390. 900.69Rainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-0, t-2), AR 4208.72.590.880.70Rainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-1), AR 1 MA 4210.03.990.790.69Rainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-4), AR 1 MA 4210.03.990.780.70Rainfall(t-2), Temperature(t-2), AR 1 MA 5210.14.000.780.69Rainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-3), AR1 MA 4211.25.090.790.69Bimestrial ModelsRainfall(t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-1, t-2), MA 5284.700.780.61Rainfall(t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-2), AR 1, MA 2285.81.060.810.58Rainfall(t-0, t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-0, t-1, t-2), AR 1, MA 2286.51.710.780.60Rainfall(t-1), Temperature(t-2) AR 1, MA 2289.54.790.830.56Temperature(t-1), MA 3291.46.680.840.54For the biannual data arrangement, a single model was the most parsimonious (AICc = 97.74) which explained 69% of the variation in HPS cases (Table 2, Fig 3A). This model included the rainfall and the temperature in the previous 6 months (1 lagged period) as explanatory variables, both positively related to HPS infections and statistically significant (Table 3). The ARIMA model accounting for serial dependence was a second-order autoregressive possess. Ljung-Box test (Q* = 2.25, df = 3, p-value = 0. 52) showed there is no significant structure remaining in model residuals. The 3 following most parsimonious models were equivalent (ΔAICc range 2.9–4.0) and should be considered relevant models as well (Table 2). All these models included a combination of the rainfall with 1 and 2 lagged periods and the temperature with 0, 1, or 2 lagged periods as explanatory variables (see Table 3). When the 2 outbreaks were removed from the data set, 4 models appeared as equally parsimonious which explained 35 to 50% of the variation in HPS cases (Table S3 Table). These models included a direct relationship with the rainfall for 1 or 2 delayed periods and temperature with none or 1 delayed period. Additionally, we found a significant inverse relationship for hantavirus infections with 2 or 3 lagged periods of temperature for these models (Table S3 Table).10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.g003Fig 3Plots of observed and fitted hantavirus infections.Observed values versus the predicted by the selected model for hantavirus infections in northwestern Argentina. (A) Biannual data arrangement with rainfall (t-1) and temperature (t-1) as explanatory variables. (B) Quarterly data arrangement with rainfall (t-1) and temperature (t-2) as explanatory variables. (C) Bimestrial data arrangement with rainfall (t-1, t-2) and temperature (t-1, t-2) as explanatory variables.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.t003Table 3Coefficients estimated for the best-fitting model of hantavirus infections and the two explanatory climatic variables in northwestern Argentina.Only significant coefficients are listed, all estimated for standardized z- values in first seasonal difference and log10 transformed number of hantavirus infections. AR: Autoregressive and MA: Moving average component of the ARIMA error term component.Biannual ModelRainfall(t-1), Temperature (t-1)EstimatedStandard errorp-valueRainfall(t-1)1.510.50>0.01Temperature (t-1)3.851.09>0.01AR 10.290.13>0.01AR 2-0.660.12>0.01Quarterly ModelRainfall(t-1), Temperature (t-2)Rainfall (t-1)0.620. 23>0.01Temperature (t-2)1.000.50>0.05AR 10.380.12>0.02MA 4-1.000.11>0.01Bimestrial ModelsRainfall(t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-1, t-2)Rainfall(t-1)0.340.15>0.05Rainfall(t-2)0.300.13>0.05Temperature (t-1)0.300.12>0.01Temperature (t-2)-0.580.16>0.01MA 10.480.11>0.01MA 2-0.660.14>0.01MA 3-0.260.13>0.05MA 5-0.250.11>0.05Rainfall(t-1, t-2), Temperature(t-2)Rainfall(t-1)0.570.11>0.01Rainfall(t-2)0.320.13>0.01Temperature (t-2)-0.610.16>0.01AR 10.510.10>0.01MA 2-0.900.06>0.01Rain(t-0,-1, -2), Temperature (t-0, -1, -2)Rainfall(t-1)0.450.18>0.01Rainfall(t-2)0.420.18>0.05Temperature (t-1)0.160.18>0.05Temperature (t-2)-0.700.23>0.05AR 10.540.10>0.01MA 2-0.910.06>0.01For the quarterly data arrangement, the model with the lowest AICc (206.11) explained 71% of the variation in hantavirus infections (Table 2, Fig 3B). The best model included the rainfall in the previous period and the temperature with 2 periods of delay as explanatory variables. Both positively related to hantavirus infections and statistically significant (Table 3). The ARIMA model of the error term accounted for the autocorrelation in the time series with a 1st order AR component and a 4th order MA component. The estimated coefficients for the model are listed in Table 3. Ljung-Box test (Q* = 5.38, df = 3, p-value = 0.15) showed there is no significant structure remaining in residuals of the model. All the following most parsimonious models also included a positive relationship of mean rainfall with 1or 2 lagged period and mean temperature with 1 to 3 lagged periods (Table 3). When outbreaks were not taken into account, 2 best models appeared as equally simplest models, explaining 50 to 53% of hantavirus transmission. In both models, HPS cases were positively related to rainfall for 1 and 3 lagged period, but negatively related to temperature for the same time intervals (Table S3 Table).For the bimestrial data arrangement 3 models were equally parsimonious (ΔAICc<2) accounting for 58% to 61% of the variance in HPS cases (Fig 3C). The first model (AICc = 284.7) included the rainfall and the temperature with 1 and 2 lagged periods respectively as explanatory variables. A fifth-order moving average term accounted for serial dependence in this model (Ljung-Box test: Q* = 7.5, df = 3, p-value = 0.07). The following simpler model (AICc = 285.8) was similar, but only included the second lagged period for the temperature, and a first-order autoregressive and second-order moving average component in the ARIMA error term (Ljung-Box test: Q* = 7.4657, df = 4, p-value = 0.1132). The third one (AICc = 286.5) included the present and two lagged periods for both the rainfall and the temperature for both. A first-order autoregressive and second-order moving average error term accounted for serial dependence in this model (Ljung-Box test: Q* = 7.24, df = 3, p-value = 0.07). However, the relationship between HPS cases and both climatic variables without temporal delay was not significant. On the contrary, for all these models HPS cases were positively and significantly related to the rainfall for all past time lags as well as the temperature for 1 delayed period but inversely related to temperature for the second lagged period (Table 3). When outliers were eliminated a similar couple of selected models explained for 58 and 55% of hantavirus infections variability. Identically, both models indicate a positive relation of HPS cases with the rainfall and a negative relations with the second lagged period for temperature (Table S3 Table).DiscussionIn this study, we investigate the relationship between human hantavirus infections and climatic variability for 20 years in northwestern Argentina. We divided our data into 3 different time periods to allow annual and shorter time delays to be observed, and found a significant association between hantavirus transmission and lagged rainfall and temperature with a delay of 2 to 6 months. Additionally, we removed extreme values of 2006 and 2015 outbreaks, to look for the underlying dynamic in hantavirus transmission and found a very similar set of candidate models. These results are valuable for the development of an early warning tool for public health policies based on climatic parameters. However, the risk of human hantavirus infection is determined by multiple level interactions of environmental, ecological, behavioral, and anthropological factors that may affect the rodent host population, the viral transmission from one host to another, and finally, the spillover to humans [43]. Notwithstanding our study revealed the importance of climatic variability in determining the dynamic of hantavirus disease transmission. In this sense, our results are consistent with the reports of several researchers worldwide [see reviews 44–46].Our analyses showed a significant positive relationship between human hantavirus infections and the delayed rainfall for all selected models and lagged periods (see Table 3). The connection between high average precipitation and HPS outbreaks has been interpreted as the consequence of an increased resource input for rodents host via plant primary productivity, raising the carrying capacity of the ecosystem and the consequent increase in rodent abundance and viral transmission [19, 21]. However, the reservoir host and pathogen dynamics are complex and outbreaks depend on several factors, such as a critical host population density necessary to maintain infections and enough time to sustain a chain of transmission after an increase in the carrying capacity [47]. Although low antibody prevalence was frequently reported in periods of high rodent density, when juveniles not yet infected individuals prevailed in the population [28, 30]; the highest absolute numbers of antibody-positive animals were associated with the highest population densities, thus the relatively higher risk to humans in central Argentina [34, 35, 37]. Despite this complexity, the rainfall and/or rodent abundance has been associated with an increased risk of viral transmission to human populations even without any knowledge about hantavirus dynamics in the host populations [17–19, 21]. Unfortunately, there are no available data on the temporal variation in rodent abundance from northwestern Argentina. However, a meta-analysis on rodent outbreaks "ratadas" in South America showed that most rodent species respond quite soon to rainfall peaks, about 3 to 6 months after the rains [48]. Similarly, the accumulated precipitations in the previous months positively affected rodent abundance in central Argentina [34, 35]. The present study corroborates the significance of the rainfall in the transmission of hantavirus to human populations, probably related to a bottom-up trophic cascade effects on potential rodent hosts. Notoriously, 2 geographical outliers of hantavirus infections occurred by the time of both outbreaks. One in 2006 close to the eastern border of Salta, in the neighbor Formosa province [6]. The other one in 2016 was the southernmost HPS case of northwestern Argentina in Tucumán province [49] (Fig 1B). This suggests a probable broad-scale environmental influence on ecosystems productivity.Our results also indicate that the temperature has a significant relationship with hantavirus transmission dynamics. All our bests models included a positive relationship of HPS incidence with delayed temperature (Table 3). The outbreaks in 2006 and 2015 were presided by increasing winters temperatures (see Fig 2). As an environmental regulator, the temperature may also affect the transmission and persistence of hantavirus at the rodent population level. Because of the horizontal transmission of hantavirus in the reservoir populations, the longevity of even a small proportion of the host population in cold months may provide a trans-seasonal mechanism for virus persistence [29]. Empirical studies in central Argentina found the highest rodent abundances were preceded by warmer winters [34, 50]; the larger the overwintered cohort the higher of population peaks [50]. Because seasonal breeding in most mammals is related to the physiological stress associated with thermoregulatory energetic demand that produces reproductive suppression to keep up energy balance, warm winter temperatures may modify the reproductive period to the degree of winter breeding [51, 52]. This hypothesis should be tested by rodent population dynamics data from nonwestern Argentina.Remarkable, our models revealed somehow contradictory findings on the relationship of temperature with hantavirus transmission. For the bimestrial data arrangement, the 3 bests models included a significant inverse relationship between hantavirus infections and the temperature 4 months before (see Table 3). We found an identical relationship for hantavirus infections with the lagged temperature for the bimestrial data without the outliers (Table S3 Table). In our study site the highest HPS incidence occurred in March-April (late summer early fall). During the previous 4 month-period, in November-December (late spring) the temperature is as high as in January—February (summer) but with much less rainfall (Fig 4). A possible explanation was that the high temperature makes unfavorable the environment for virus survival, together with a reduced frequency of rodents and rodent-human contacts [53]. Experiments with Puumala (PUUV) and Tula (TULV) viruses demonstrated that low temperatures prolonged virus survival outside the host, which still infective even without direct contact between rodents, or between rodents and humans [54]. However, evidence for a role of low temperatures on the indirect Andes virus (ANDV) transmission in rodents reservoirs still not conclusive, given that infection was not observed between wire mesh-separated animals nor from excrement-tainted bedding in an experimental study on wild sigmodontine rodents [55]. Similarly, the role of low temperatures in the transmission to humans appears as not plausibly given the 4-month time lag indicated by our models and the estimated incubation period of 9 to 40 days for this disease [6, 56]. Noteworthy, studies on Neotropical rodents showed that daily activity decreases with rising temperature [57, 58], but increase when combined with rain [59]. Note that all our bimestrial best models also included a significant positive relationship with rainfall in the second lagged period (Table 3). It should be also noted that effects of heat stress range from disruptions in spermatogenesis and oocyte development, oocyte maturation, early embryonic development, fetal growth, and lactation [60]. Thus, in addition to a heat-induced reduction in rodent activities, which could reduce potential infectious contact between rodents, a heat-induced delayed reproductive season may also be considered as a hypothesis to be explored. Although the mechanism should be deeply investigated, our models suggest a strong inverse relationship of the temperature, and/or direct evaporative cooling effect of rainfall, for the transmission of hantavirus in northwestern Argentina (see Table 3).10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.g004Fig 4Bimestrial distribution of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) cases, mean temperature and rainfall for the (1997–2017).Numbers above bars indicate accumulated HPS cases, red circles indicate mean temperature, and green circles indicate mean rainfall.Beyond the ecological response of the rodent hosts to climatic variability, human activities may be directly related to hantavirus infections via potential contact with infected rodents. In northwestern Argentina, the majority (64.2%) of the cases were occupational affecting mainly rural workers [14]. The climate can affect the dynamics of hantavirus infections through multiple pathways. For instance, the activities in the forest harvesting industry, which involve several days' work in precarious camps, are almost null during the summer due to the heavy rainfall. Similarly, the horticulture is an intensive labor activity with a significant number of temporary workers, especially at harvest time from late summer to late autumn. Human contact with infected rodents is likely to be higher during periods of intense field labor, therefore contributing to the seasonal dynamics in humans hantavirus infections. Additionally, the agriculture frontier rapidly expanded since the 2000s associated with soybean production [61]. The outbreak in 2006–2007 may be related to an accelerated deforestation process driven by Argentina’s National Congress treatment of the “Forest Law” (National Low N° 26331), to regulate the management and conservation of native forests, which was finally approved in November 2007. However, the higher deforestation rates were in the Chaco during 2003–2005 [61, 62] and with a marked increase in 2008 (Fig 5). On the contrary, most HPS cases occurred in the Yungas Forest with a few cases in the Chaco (see Fig 1) [6]. It should be noted, however, a possible geographical bias toward the urban centers, which are located in the Yungas Forest, given that many reports only were recorded at the departmental geographical level. Furthermore, there is no evidence of an increase in tree loss cover and the 2015 outbreak. However, an assessment of the relationship between deforestation and hantavirus infections should be specifically designed.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008786.g005Fig 5Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) cases and tree cover loss in Northwestern Argentina.The circles indicate the annual variations in HPS cases whereas the bars indicate year-by-year tree cover loss (millions of hectares) for Jujuy Province (green) and 3 northeastern Departments of Salta province: Anta (red), San Martín (pink), Oran (yellow). Note that tree cover loss does not need to be human-caused. Source: Global Forest Watch. “Tree Cover Loss in Salta and Jujuy, Argentina”. Accessed on 13/05/2020 from www.globalforestwatch.org.The limitations of our data and analysis should be also be noted. First, climatic and HPS data were pooled into a single interpolated square of 0.50°. There is a clear latitudinal gradient in hantavirus infections which is lost by our approach. Second, extreme climatic events, which may have important biological and social consequences, were overlooked due to the use of averaged temperature; and the few rainfall meteorological stations covering the entire studied time period. Third, the response variable accuracy is a limitation in this study. Several misdiagnoses or incomplete diagnoses of HPS, as well as data obtained through independent laboratories and provincial laboratories without the supervision of the National Reference Laboratories could not be included in this analysis. Finally, the prevalence of hantavirus antibodies in the human population in the studied area averaged 6.5% [63,64] denoting frequent and close contact with host rodents. The number of HPS cases might go unreported because of milder clinical symptoms. It is likely that all these limitations influence the precision of our results.Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome is a serious disease in northwestern Argentina. Most of the reported cases (75%) developed severe respiratory insufficiency with hemodynamic compromise, of which 30% required mechanical ventilation and 15% developed a refractory to treatment hemodynamic compromise with a fatal outcome [14]. Particularly in the studied region, there is a great proportion of the population with high levels of social vulnerability. In Salta province 45% of the population is below the poverty line and 37% in Jujuy province [65]. The rural areas, where most infections occur, receive scant public investment on social infrastructures, education, health, and individuals are least likely to have appropriate healthcare. Since there are no vaccines currently available nor specific therapeutic treatments, prevention of hantavirus infection involves mainly environmental management practices and educational campaigns. Therefore, our models are valuable for the planning and implementation of public health prevention campaigns. In this sense, our results provide a framework to advance on an early warning of potential hantavirus outbreaks based on the significant relationship between delayed climatic variables and the hantavirus transmission. However, a specifically designed HPS surveillance program, including a standardized data repot of HPS through Hantavirus National Laboratory Network would enhance surveillance in Argentina. Also, surveys on rodent population and virus dynamics will lead to a more accurate models to forecast HPS outbreaks in northwestern Argentina.Supporting informationS1 TableList of localities of known occurrence of HPS cases in Northwestern Argentina.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableStation list, location, and time cover used by Climatic Research Unit TS 4.02 in the gridded temperature and precipitation data.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S3 TableList of best models for different combinations of lagged rainfall, temperature and ARIMA error according to corrected Akaike Information Criterion (AICc) for HPS infections without outliers.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Influence of Climatic Factors on Human Hantavirus Infections in Latin America and the Caribbean: A Systematic Review

1. IntroductionHantaviruses are single-stranded (SS) negative-sense RNA viruses from the Hantaviridae family, order Bunyavirales [1]. The typical virions range from 80–120 nm in diameter but atypical elongated virions 170 nm in length can occur [2,3]. The hantavirus genome is comprised of three RNA segments, the Small (S) segment which encodes the nucleocapsid protein (N), the Medium (M) which encodes the precursor polyprotein that yields glycoproteins Gn (formerly G1), Gc (formerly G2) and the Large (L) segment which encodes the L protein or viral transcriptase/replicase [4,5]. Members of the family Hantaviridae are classified into seven genera accordingly with their particular evolutionary history and distinct host-reservoir: Actinovirus (fish), Aganathorvirus (jawless fish), Loanvirus (bat), Mobatvirus (bat or mole), Orthohantavirus (rodent), Thottimivirus (shrew) and Reptillovirus (reptile) [1]. Thus far, members of the genus Orthohantavirus are the only known hantavirus species to cause clinical disease in humans through aerosolized virus particles present in rodent excreta, by direct contact with rodent blood or bites [1,6]. Hantavirus infections are an emerging infectious disease and a zoonotic threat in the Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) region. Hantavirus infection causes hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) or hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome (HCPS) and haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS). It is estimated that 150,000 to 200,000 annual hantavirus cases occur globally [7]. The endemicity of other infectious diseases with similar clinical symptomology to hantavirus disease can make accurate clinical diagnosis of febrile acutely infected patients in the LAC region difficult. Dengue virus, Chikungunya virus, Mayaro virus, Zika virus and Leptospira infections are all endemic to both Latin America and the Caribbean. These regions consist of rich biodiversity hotspots (especially Neotropical rodents) and Neotropical climates that can result in new knowledge of hantavirus transmission that is different from the traditional and better-known hantavirus transmission models in Europe, Asia and North America [8]. The links to cyclic rodent populations and hantavirus disease outbreaks have been established in Europe with bank voles. The first evidence of hantavirus infections in the Caribbean was observed in Barbados among human cases suspected of leptospirosis and also in rodents (Rattus spp.) but the identity of the hantavirus strain(s) remain(s) unknown [9]. Later studies provided further evidence of hantavirus circulation in other countries within the region including Grenada, Trinidad & Tobago, and a single exported human case from Cuba [10,11,12,13]. In Latin America, instances of human-to-human transmission with a hantavirus strain, the Andes hantavirus (ANDV), were observed among HCPS cases in Argentina and Chile [14,15,16]. To date, there are two main species of hantavirus in South America: Andes orthohantavirus (ANDV), considered one of the most lethal hantaviruses, and Laguna Negra orthohantavirus (LANV) [1]. However, these species possess great diversity and represent the highest diversity observed in the world [17,18]. Within ANDV, five genotypes have been described: Araraqurara orthohantavirus (ARQV), Castelo dos Sonhos orthohantanvirus (CASV), Juquitiba orthohantavirus (JUQV), Lechiguanas orthohantavirus (LECV), and Orán orthohantavirus (ORNV); and within LANV there are four genotypes: Anajatuba orthohantavirus (ANJV), Maripa orthohantavirus (MARV), Rio Mearim orthohantavirus (RIOMM) and Rio Mamoré orthothantavirus (RIOMV) [1,17]. This diversity is due mainly to the distribution of opportunistic rodent-host species that live sympatric, where spillover phenomena favour maintenance and transmission [17]. In LAC regions, rodent hosts of hantaviruses belong to the families Cricetidae and Muridae; however, pathogenic hantaviruses belong mainly to the family Cricetidae, subfamily Sigmodontinae and Rattus spp. [6,19,20]. Sigmodontinae rodents are distributed from Tierra del Fuego, in South America, to the United States, in North America [19]. These rodents inhabit several types of ecosystems in the Americas, including desert-like biomes, equatorial and tropical forests, swamps, savannas, high altitude fields, and salt marshes [19,20]. Some Sigmodontinae rodents are highly sensitive to ecosystem disruption, while others adapt easily. These rodents are known as opportunistic/generalist and are mainly from the genera Akodon, Calomys, Necromys, Oligoryzomys and Zygodontomys. Generalist rodents inhabit mostly open vegetated environments utilizing an omnivorous feeding habit which likely influences their successful distribution in disturbed landscapes, especially those converted into agricultural monocultures [21]. Rodent species diversity, distribution and abundance seem to be negatively influenced by the percentage of native forest cover [17,22]. Climate change and environmental degradation increase the contact areas between rodent-hosts and humans, creating a suitable scenario for hantavirus infection [17,18,23]. Other potential hantavirus hosts such as bats, opossums and shrews are present in LAC, thus more research in understanding their potential roles in clinical disease within LAC is needed [23,24,25].Rainfall patterns in the Caribbean are usually characterized by a dry season (December-May) and a wet season (June-November). The El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), which is associated with a sea surface temperature (SST) gradient anomaly between the eastern Tropical Pacific Ocean and Caribbean Sea, directly affects this rainfall distribution [26,27,28]. El Niño is associated with warmer SST in the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean, which has been linked to notable drought events in the Caribbean in 1997–1998, 2009–2010, and 2014–2016 [29,30,31,32,33,34]. Climate change predictions for the LAC region are for more intense hydrometeorological events, which will require adequate preparation by public health authorities for potential hantavirus disease outbreaks, increased transmission and spread.Climate change can affect the hantavirus mode of transmission and circulation in nature, through impacts on the hantavirus reservoir host rodent population densities [35]. Rodent population dynamics are usually affected by weather and climate. The best example within the Americas is the US Four Corners outbreak in 1993, which was preceded by a dramatic increase in rainfall associated with the 1992–1993 El Niño. This led to increased rodent food resources and a 20-fold increase in the rodent population, followed by the invasion of buildings by rodents, and an increased risk of human hantavirus infections [36,37,38]. The possible effects of climate change may vary from no impact at all to dramatic changes in the size and frequency of hantavirus outbreaks, changes in the spectrum of hantavirus host species, and geographical distribution. These could lead to a major global public health threat. For example, if the consequence of climate change (e.g., increased temperatures) in South America favours the long-tailed pygmy rice rat (Oligoryzomys longicaudatus), this could lead to a significant increase in the frequency of human infections by ANDV, found in the mountains of Chile and Argentina, with potentially high mortality rates. ANDV has a high mortality rate (up to 40%) [7,39], and is the only hantavirus strain for which person-to-person transmission has been documented [14,40,41]. Humans become infected primarily through inhalation of contaminated aerosols containing excreta (urine and or feces) from infected rodents [42,43].To understand the association of various climatic factors with human hantavirus infections, HPS/HCPS and HFRS, we conducted a systematic review to analyse the bibliographic evidence from studies conducted in LAC. This specific type of systematic review has not been previously conducted for LAC. Given the climate predictions for LAC, a greater understanding of the potential impacts of climate change on the dynamics of human hantavirus infections in these regions is strongly desired.2. Results2.1. Bibliographic SearchTo facilitate this systematic review, a detailed bibliographic search was conducted following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist (Box A1) guidelines among the relevant MEDLINE (via PubMed) and Web of Science databases. This resulted in the collection of 236 findings primarily retrieved via MEDLINE via PubMed and 147 findings using the Web of Science database [40]. After application of the relevant inclusion criteria, which included studies involving (1) human hantavirus infections only, available as full-text articles, with relevant abstracts or study titles (with climate and human hantavirus infections), and (2) analysis of exposure to climate factors including temperature, rainfall, humidity, and seasonality, only 13 studies were selected from various LAC countries (Figure 1A and Table 1).2.2. Selected StudiesStudies from seven (7) different LAC countries were included for this systematic review investigating the association of climatic factors with human hantavirus infections (Figure 1B and Table 1). Each selected study was analysed for the associated climatic factor(s) and human hantavirus infections in LAC. Rainfall exhibited the highest positive association with human hantavirus infections (10/13, 76.9%), followed by temperature (4/13, 30.8%). However, temperature exhibited the highest negative association (3/13, 23.1%) with human hantavirus infections, then rainfall (2/13, 15.4%) and finally humidity (1/13, 7.7%). A positive association indicated that human hantavirus cases increased as the climatic factor measure increased. A negative association indicated that there was an inverse relationship between human hantavirus cases and the climatic factor. Other associated co-factors included demographic, socioeconomic, geospatial, and biotic factors. Only one study did not specify the sample size of the human population [41], and five studies did not detail the specific statistical test(s) employed to analyze the results [44,45,46,47,48].The quality level of selected studies published between 2008 and 2021 was assessed by two independent researchers. An overview of the selected studies is given in Table 1 and the analysis of the metrics used in each study summarised in Table 2. Seven (7) studies obtained a very high quality score (++) [49,50,51,52,53,54], three (3) obtained a high quality score (+) [20,49,55], and three (3) studies obtained a low quality score (−) (Table 1 and Table 2) [46,47,48]. The majority of studies took place in South America–five had been conducted in Brazil [41,44,45,49,54], three in Argentina [50,51,52], and one each in Chile [53], Paraguay [48], and Bolivia [47]. One study was conducted in Central America (Panama) [46] and one in the Caribbean (Barbados) [56]. All selected studies were conducted with various model designs using aggregated data sets. Two studies performed descriptive and Bayesian regressional data analyses [41,45], one study utilised a zero inflated model tailored to count data with excessive zero counts [49], and another used an ecological niche model (ENM) examining the relationships between humans, rodent species and the environments where they occur [44]. Other studies used GLMs and a MaxEnt model [50,51], ARIMA and dynamic regression models [52,53], a cross-sectional epidemiology method [56], and outbreak investigation designs [46,47,48], respectively (Table 1 and Table 2). The time span of study data ranged from one to 23 years, based on monthly, seasonal, or annual climate data with varying time lags (Table 1). Rainfall or precipitation (including snow) was the climatic factor or exposure assessed in all selected studies, while temperature appeared in all selected studies except seven, namely Donaliso [44], Donaliso [45], Andreo [50], Montgomery [47], Bayard [46], Williams [48] and Douglas et al. [56]. Nsoesie et al. [53] analysed relative air humidity. Donaliso et al. [45] investigated winter precipitation as a climatic factor, whilst Prist et al. [54] analysed the Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5 (RCP4.5) and Representative Concentration Pathway 8.5 (RCP8.5) climate scenarios and their associations with human hantavirus infection risk. Wind speed, sunshine, air pressure and other different climate factors were not investigated in any of the selected studies. For assessing the incidence of HPS, HCPS or hantavirus infections, the selected studies relied on national register data (monthly or annual number of reported and confirmed hantavirus cases). Other related co-factors assessed included altitude, HDI, age, gender, rodent host distribution, topography, vegetation, geographical information systems (GIS) location, farming and sugarcane cultivation (Figure 2).2.2.1. BrazilThere were multiple studies from Brazil (5/13, 38.4%) examining climatic and other related co-factors and human hantavirus infections (Table 1 and Figure 2) [41,44,45,49,54]. Donalisio et al. investigated the influence of spatial distribution and climatic patterns on reported hantavirus cases in São Paulo State, Brazil (n = 80), from 1993 to 2005 [44]. An increase in hantavirus cases during this period may have been due to increased diagnostic capacity and the higher sensitivity of attending physicians. A marked seasonal variation in hantavirus infections was observed in the cerrado (savannah) areas, where a higher incidence occurred in drier months compared to mean rainfall levels in wetter months [44]. The process of harvesting and storing grains increased human exposure to rodents and exposure to aerosols contaminated by rodent excreta. The authors concluded that local transmission risk markers should include both climatic and ecological factors to aid in epidemiological monitoring and disease control.Another study by Donalisio et al. assessed specific environmental factors and identified areas of hantavirus transmission risk in forested areas in Southern Brazil [45]. The use of an ENM was employed to understand the influence of specific environmental factors including monthly precipitation, monthly minimum and maximum temperatures and bioclimatic factors, land cover and vegetation phenology on 264 HCPS cases between 1993–2008. The notable study limitation was the absence of rodent studies. However, the ENM used offers the opportunity to explore the influence of climatic and landscape factors on HPS over broad regions. This study was useful in illustrating broad areas at elevated risk of hantavirus infections using geospatial factors, rainfall, and vegetative cover. Prist et al. examined the associations between annual HCPS incidence and climatic factors (annual precipitation, annual mean temperature), landscape features (native habitat cover, number of forest fragments, area planted with sugarcane), and social factors (number of men older than 14 years and Human Development Index-HDI) across the state of São Paulo, Brazil (1993–2012) [54].A follow-up study investigated the influence of land use and climatic factors on HCPS incidence in São Paulo, Brazil using HCPS cases from 2000–2010 [41]. The HCPS data was collected from every hospital in the state Sao Paulo [41]. The cases were transformed into binary factors due to the high frequency of zero case counts. A socioeconomic factor, HDI, was added as a cofactor, as was landscape composition or habitat cover including sugarcane cultivation (percentage cover and density of fragments. Future scenarios were predicted for sugarcane expansion and climate change. A Bayesian model was chosen to calculate the probability of HPS case risk in Brazil assessing landscape, social and climatic factors. The landscape was segregated into two biomes: Atlantic and Cerrado given the occurrence of reservoir hosts species and hantavirus strains with each being modelled separately. Model HCPS risk predictions were made using a Bernoulli distribution with seven predictor factors as covariates, namely proportion of sugarcane, proportion of native vegetative patches, human development index (HDI), mean annual temperature, total annual precipitation, and rural male population > 14 years old. Statistical analysis included centering all estimated parameters on their mean and dividing by two standard deviations (SD) for standardization. Spatial autocorrelation was assessed using Moran’s I and Queen’s case neighbourhood relation. A non-spatial model was chosen since no spatial autocorrelation was observed. Comparison of the estimated probability of HCPS infections from baseline were modelled with predicted probability in five scenarios: two climate change scenarios, sugarcane expansion and a combination of one climate change scenario and sugarcane expansion. One assumption that used suggested precipitation was not relevant for HCPS risks, however this may not be translatable throughout South America. HCPS risk was categorized as small (<5%), medium (≥5% to ≤10%), high (10 to 20%) and extremely high (>20%) and the assignment of actions was attributed to risk > 5% or medium to extremely high. Current and future HCPS infection risks were predicted and estimations of the number of persons at risk in each scenario were made. Temperature was identified as the climatic factor associated with increased HCPS infection risk, whereas climate change scenarios led to increased HCPS infection risk in a specific geospatial region (Midwest region). Considering a sugarcane expansion scenario, the number of persons at risk for HCPS infection increased by 20% for two climate change scenarios RCP4.5 and RCP8.5. In conclusion, this study suggested that climate change effects will bear more severe consequences on both HCPS infection risks and the number of persons exposed to hantavirus infection. Climate affects host population densities, food availability, virus survival and ultimately human disease transmission. The influence of precipitation was not considered based on one referenced study due to the absence of a positive association with hantavirus infection risk. However, in several other studies in South America, the converse is true. The strong increase in HCPS infection risk with climate change scenarios also warrants the consideration of the role of precipitation on HCPS infection risk for Brazil. Preventative measures including educational programs, land use management, forest restoration and targeting public health and health care in high-risk areas are notable recommendations to mitigate against the impact of climate change on HCPS infection risk in Brazil.Muylaert et al. examined the contribution of rodent host diversity, climatic factors, social vulnerability, and land use change on hantavirus disease risk in Brazil [49]. Human notified cases between 1993–2016 from the Ministry of Health were modelled using ENM with several biotic and abiotic factors. Zero inflated modelling was used with geographical precision at the municipal level. Statistical analysis included the use of spatial correlation Moran’s I, temporal term (rw2) + Besag Intrinsic Conditional Auto-Regressive (ICAR) spatial model. Land use change and increased HCPS cases were observed during the study period with a higher concentration of HCPS cases in the Central and South Brazil. In conclusion, increased fauna amounts (maize, forest, and sugarcane) were associated with higher hantavirus disease probability and number of cases per municipality. Temperature, however, showed a negative association with hantavirus cases. Additionally, for the number of HCPS cases, the factors of rainfall, forests and the number of rural workers all showed a positive association.2.2.2. ArgentinaThere were three studies (3/13, 23.1%) obtained from Argentina which examined the association of climatic factors on human hantavirus infections (Table 1 and Table 2 and Figure 2).Andreo et al. (conducted an analysis of HPS and rodent species occurrence (O. longicaudatus) in southern Argentina to elucidate the systematic distribution of the risk of HPS transmission [50]. Utilising a species distribution model (SDM) and geographical information system (GIS) software, they estimated areas with the highest human HPS infection risks, specifically regarding the competent rodent host distribution maps. This approach considers the environment (and human factors in describing human infection/exposure risks. This bears relevance as vector-borne diseases often display patterns consistent with the following spatial factors: (1) biotic distribution of flora, fauna (humans and rodent hosts) and microbiota, and (2) abiotic factors, which influence biotic distribution. Previous diagnostic testing of the 149 HPS cases in the study ranging from 1995–2009 indicated that the causative hantavirus was ANDV (the only hantavirus known to cause human-to-human transmission), all of which occurred within four areas of Argentina. The majority of confirmed HPS cases were in Patagonia along the Andes range. Using a GLM, the precipitation-related factors showed a positive association with HPS confirmed cases, whereas temperature related factors showed a negative association [50]. The methods in the study utilized confirmed HPS case data (use of antibody tests), which is one of the study’s main strengths. WorldClim datasets were utilized to produce climatic data layers in this study, but the use of actual climatic data from Argentina would have been more desirable. Two modeling approaches were utilized: GLM with binomial error and a MaxEnt algorithm. This was inclusive of the use of Kruskal-Wallis tests to compare environmental factors with and without HPS, with the significance of factors determined using a t-test. Collinearity was evaluated among independent variables using variance inflation factors (VIFs) and pairwise Pearson correlation coefficients. Four intervals of risks based on probability of hantavirus infection were identified. The occurrence of ANDV in Argentina, the only hantavirus strain with the potential of human-to-human spread, makes this study of particular importance.Ferro et al. examined 902 reported and confirmed HPS cases between 1997–2017 in Northwestern Argentina and their relationship with mean temperature and precipitation using biannual, quarterly, and bimestrial time periods [52]. Lagged temperatures and rainfall (two to six months delay) were significantly associated with HPS cases. This was consistent with the trophic cascade hypothesis indicating that HPS cases followed high precipitation and temperature events. These caused increased food availability for rodent hosts, increased rodent host populations and an increased likelihood of human-rodent contact resulting in higher numbers of human hantavirus infections. The HPS cases included in the study were confirmed by laboratory testing (antibody and molecular tests) with cases that were not reported through the main public health system nor validated by the National Reference Laboratory being excluded, which increased the rigour of this study. Statistical analysis involved the standardization of HPS cases through logarithmic transformation and the use of the Augmented Dickey-Fuller Test. Using dynamic regression, the relationship of HPS prevalence with rainfall and temperature was examined with the ARIMA model and AIC being used to select the appropriate model. The models generated indicated HPS cases were positively and significantly related to rainfall for all time lags but for temperature this was only true for one delay period only. The association of temperature with HPS cases was contradictory, as association was observed with 1 delayed period but inversely associated for 2 delayed periods. This strong association with lagged rainfall and temperature could infer the link of these climatic factors on biotic factors such as food availability for rodent hosts and rodent host population growth.Vadell et al. examined the relationship between HPS cases and climatic, vegetation, landscape, reservoir population, and rodent community characteristics in Entre Ríos, Argentina between 2004 and 2015 using GLMs [51]. In combination with GIS, hantavirus risk maps were created for this region. The HPS infection risk increased with tree cover and decreased with distance to rivers. Climatic factors assessed included annual mean temperature and annual precipitation. Land cover data were obtained from the MODIS Vegetation Continuous Fields, which provided estimations of surface vegetation cover as gradations of percentage tree cover, nontree vegetation, and bare soil. Three separate response variable models were done. A positive association was found with human hantavirus infection risk and areas with a high percentage of tree cover and locations near rivers. No association of human hantavirus infections with annual precipitation and mean annual temperature was observed.2.2.3. ChileA single study (1/13, 7.7%) was conducted in Chile investigating the association of climatic factors and human hantavirus infections (Table 1 and Figure 2). Nsoesie et al. examined the relationship of 667 confirmed HPS cases between 2001–2012 in Chile with temperature, precipitation, and humidity [53]. The models utilized in this study included ARIMA and regression with ARIMA errors to investigate the relationship between HPS cases and temperature, rainfall, and humidity. Only lags of up to four months were considered, and humidity was excluded from modeling. Six different models were developed, including a baseline model that used past HPS case incidence to forecast future HPS cases and the other models included climatic factors as covariates. The quality of the statistical models was assessed using an AIC metric and prediction accuracy by the coefficient of variation (R2) and root mean square error (RMSE). HPS epidemic peaks followed peaks in mean temperature whereas a correlation of troughs in HPS cases with periods of increased precipitation and relative humidity was observed. Of the five models selected, the model with lagged rainfall (one and four months) and the models with precipitation were the best fits, indicative of this climatic factor as a critical predictive climatic factor. Limitations to this study included the resolution of climatic factors, the exclusion of the influence of rodent host population distribution and underreporting of HPS in high-risk rural areas. In conclusion, this study provided an association of HPS cases with precipitation and temperature and is robust given the data resolution and availability. Future updates to the modeling approach can enhance sensitivity and prediction accuracy since risk is an evolving entity and constantly changing, thus risk management should likewise mirror such fluidity.2.2.4. BoliviaA single study (1/13, 7.7%) was conducted in Bolivia investigating a hantavirus outbreak, which also observed the impact of a climatic factor on human hantavirus infections (Figure 2, Table 1 and Table 2). Montgomery et al. assessed the epidemiological characteristics and the public health risks involving HCPS cases in Santa Cruz, Bolivia during a 2002 hantavirus outbreak [47]. Intense precipitation observed during the outbreak year was higher than in the two preceding years and was associated with the high hantavirus infection rate recorded during the outbreak.2.2.5. ParaguayA single study (1/13, 7.7%) was conducted in Paraguay investigating a hantavirus outbreak, which also observed the impact of climatic factors on human hantavirus infections (Figure 2, Table 1 and Table 2). Williams et al. examined HCPS patients in Paraguay during 1995, and an analysis of climate factors found rainfall in May 1995 was tenfold greater than that observed in the preceding 11 years [48]. This study investigated an HCPS outbreak during 1995–1996 in Paraguay which involved 17 human cases. Given the low number of HCPS cases and the shorter duration of study (~1 year) this study was evaluated as weak. Nonetheless, it represents the sole study from Paraguay investigating the association of a climatic factor with HCPS disease. Future modeling studies would be most helpful to elucidate the influence of climate on hantavirus disease in Paraguay.2.2.6. PanamaA single study (1/13, 7.7%) conducted in Panama investigated a single hantavirus outbreak which also observed the impact of a climatic factor on human hantavirus infections (Table 1 and Table 2 and Figure 2). Bayard et al. reported the association of 2–3-fold higher seasonal rainfall with the 1999–2000 hantavirus outbreak (strain) in Panama [46]. This outbreak involved nine persons with notable morbidity but fortunately no mortalities. The length of the study spanned only 1999–2000, the length of the outbreak, but did not extend any further except for the analysis of rainfall data from the two preceding years. This study is thus weaker than other included studies in providing strong associations with climatic factors. Its inclusion facilitates a wider discussion outside of South America and the Caribbean into Central America regarding climatic factors associated with human hantavirus infections.2.2.7. Barbados (Caribbean)Barbados is the only country (1/13, 7.7%) in the Caribbean where human hantavirus infections over a specified time interval have been identified (Table 1 and Table 2 and Figure 2). Douglas et al. investigated 852 human hantavirus cases between 2008–2016, which often had milder symptoms without the full clinical presentation consistent with HPS, HFRS or HCPS [56]. The association of hantavirus cases and the rainy season (June to November) was observed with the peak of hantavirus cases observed in August to September with a potential 3-month lag with the start of the rainy season. Other co-factors associated with increased hantavirus cases included age, gender, and geographical location (urban areas). The statistical analysis conducted involved the use of 95% confidence intervals. No modelling of hantavirus infection risk was attempted in this study, but it would have been valuable for predicting future epidemics based on climate change scenarios. Rodent studies in Barbados have demonstrated serological evidence of hantavirus infection from various parishes of the island [9,57]. Hantavirus infection prevalence among rodents could be incorporated into future models and the creation of hantavirus infection risk maps. However, more intensive rodent studies with larger sample sizes, greater rodent diversity, and a longitudinal design would lend more accuracy prior to inclusion into such modelling studies.3. DiscussionWe aimed to examine the associations of climate (including seasonality) factors with the occurrence and risks of human hantavirus infections in Latin America and the Caribbean. Multiple factors including climatic, geospatial, abiotic, and biotic factors were associated with increased human hantavirus infection risks in LAC. 3.1. Rainfall or Precipitation FactorThis was the common climatic factor (75%) consistently positively associated with increased hantavirus infection risk in LAC among the selected studies. This factor was associated with a variable lag period of one to four months, which could be related to the influence of rainfall in creating ideal conditions for sustained rodent host population growth. Studies in other regions also support the association of rainfall/precipitation with hantavirus infection risk including Asia, North America, and Europe [8,55,58,59,60]. A study providing serological evidence of human hantavirus infections in Barbados using data from 2008 to 2016 observed increased human hantavirus transmission during the wet season compared to the dry season [56]. In Latin America, the ENSO phenomenon, and its influence on the temporal dynamics of rainfall is an important consideration. La Niña ENSO events coincide with below average SST leading to wet episodes and increased risk of hantavirus outbreaks as observed during 2010–2011 in Barbados [56], in southern Argentina [50], and other countries in the LAC region [61,62,63,64]. Climate effects from rainfall include floods and droughts which can alter rodent host population sizes and their distribution through displacement. Extended wet periods can increase soil moisture, the proliferation of vegetation and food for rodents, which facilitates burrowing and breeding, population increases, and fighting among adult male rodents, which increases hantavirus transmission among rodents from wounding [65,66,67,68,69]. Displaced rodent populations can lead to higher human-rodent contact rates, resulting in a higher risk of human hantavirus infections. Droughts can reduce predation risks for rodents and lower food availability; however, the storage of grains during droughts can also attract rodents. Projections from global circulation models (GCMs) and regional circulation models (RCMs) suggest a general drying trend in the Caribbean with between 20–35% and changes in rainfall extremes, with more heavy rainfall events and more extended drier periods [70]. These projected dry periods followed by intense rainfall events can indicate increased future human hantavirus infection risks for LAC countries [62,63]. Some selected studies showed a negative association of rainfall with human hantavirus infections in LAC [44,54]. This could be due to drier conditions and lower food availability causing rodents to forage closer to human habitats in search of food (stored grains and agricultural produce), thus increasing the risk of human-rodent contact [44]. El Nino, an ENSO phenomenon, is associated with reduced rainfall and warmer temperatures. Drier conditions could result in dustier environments, increasing the risk of human inhalation contact with aerosols contaminated by infected rodent urine and or faeces. Additionally, given the low number of selected studies (15.4%) with this negative association of rainfall and HPS cases, other possible factors are likely involved. 3.2. Temperature FactorTemperature was the most negatively associated climate factor with hantavirus disease among the selected studies but similar rates of positive and negative associations of temperature with HCPS or HPS cases were observed. Temperature can influence rodent abundance and hantavirus disease risk as it promotes vegetation growth, reproduction and survival rates of small rodents [71,72,73], which all affect the survival time of infectious hantaviruses in the environment [74]. Several studies have shown an association of increased temperatures and hantavirus disease [66,75,76], as increased temperatures can also increase aerosol generation, respiratory rates of both humans and rodents [77,78,79]. However, the daily activity of Neotropical rodents decreases with rising temperatures but can increase in combination with rainfall [80,81,82]. High temperatures create unfavorable environments for virus survival but can also cause rodents to seek shelter from heat stress in human habitats increasing hantavirus infection risk [60]. Conversely, low temperatures can prolong virus survival outside the host, which remain infective even without direct inter-rodent contact, or rodent-human contact [74]. Thus, the role of temperature both on rodent host activity and virus survival is critical in human hantavirus transmission. Climate projections for the Caribbean indicate that temperatures in the region will be warmer by between 1.0°C and close to 3.5°C [75]. The implication of this warming trend is an increase in evapotranspiration, which reduces soil moisture and, in turn, plant productivity. Excessive warming, heat waves and low precipitation can result in drought conditions, wildfires, and land degradation, which leads to rodent displacement and increased rodent-human contact and the generation of dust aerosols [34,76,83,84,85,86]. Wildfires impact climate with CO2 emissions and increased particulate matter (PM) levels, which can contribute to the global warming effect potentially exacerbating the effects of climate change in LAC regions. [83]. A few studies have found an association of PM levels with human hantavirus infections in the USA and South Korea [87,88]. Wildfires (brush and sugarcane fires) are thus a potential abiotic factor influencing rodent host distribution and lowering species richness enhancing human-rodent contact risk and human hantavirus infection risk. Future studies should examine the association of temperature and wildfires on the incidence of human hantavirus cases in LAC. 3.3. Humidity FactorInhalation of hantavirus infected aerosols which are contaminated via infected rodent excreta is the main route of human infection [74]. Humidity can affect aerosol formation and aerosol dynamics [89,90,91], thus potentially influencing hantavirus transmission and its association with increased risk of hantavirus transmission to humans [74,92,93,94,95]. However, this climatic factor was not extensively explored by all of the selected studies, though the single study that did found a negative association with increased hantavirus risk [53]. Humidity can also impact on plant and vegetation growth, particularly in warm climates like those encountered in the Neotropics [96,97]. This can influence food availability for rodents, increase breeding potential and likely increase rodent population sizes.3.4. Multiple Co-FactorsGeospatial, social, abiotic, and biotic factors such as location, land use management, farming activity, rodent host distribution, habitat type, location away from roads, and human development index (HDI) have been associated with human hantavirus infections among the selected studies in Latin America and the Caribbean. The main risk factors in biosecurity can be classified as human, environment, and infrastructure and this can be applied to human hantavirus infections in LAC. Human and socioeconomic factors were identified as being positively associated with hantavirus infections among the selected studies and included HDI, age, gender, social vulnerability, residential location, and population density [17,45,50,51,56]. This highlights the need to include interdisciplinary approaches to future hantavirus infection-climate risk modelling studies and other infectious disease-climate risk modelling studies. The exposure of humans to infected rodents is likely to be complex, thus multivariate models which incorporate several key factors along with climatic factors will likely be more representative of reality and possibly contribute to greater accuracy. Two key environmental factors include rodents and land use management. The association of land use management and human hantavirus infections has been observed previously including the proximity of agricultural activity such as planted pasture, sugarcane cultivation and natural forests [98,99]. In addition, the location of animal farms (horse, chicken, pigs, etc.) can encourage the proliferation of wild rodents, possibly attracted to the animal feed stores they can consume, which increases the risk of rodent-human contact and human hantavirus infection risk particular for persons involved in farming activities [12,100,101,102]. In LAC, sugarcane cultivation has been known to influence rodent population and activity due to lower species richness and can lead to increased human contact and increased risks of hantavirus transmission [21,103].Two biotic factors that strongly influence human hantavirus infection in LAC are rodent host distribution and density. The expansion of agricultural lands has been related to a decrease in meso- and large predators, favouring a greater abundance of generalist rodents infected with hantavirus since these rodent hosts can use monocultures as corridors for nesting and as foraging sites [17,23,55]. This increases the potential risk of human interaction with hantavirus infected rodents [17,104]. Other Neotropical vertebrate species have been shown to be infected with hantaviruses including bats and opossums [23,24,25], while the presence of shrews, another potential vertebrate host, in LAC is noteworthy. They can potentially shed hantavirus in their excreta and be involved in the maintenance, circulation, and transmission of hantaviruses in LAC. Therefore, future studies on hantavirus ecology in LAC should include these other potential vertebrate hosts to elucidate their role in human hantavirus disease risk.Infrastructure is another factor that can influence hantavirus transmission. There are four factors involved that generate biosecurity risks: trade, travel, tourism and transport [105]. Maritime trade and transportation may also influence hantavirus risk in the LAC region, as it has in spreading the Seoul hantavirus (SEOV) worldwide [106,107,108]. Sewers and stormwater drainage systems can harbour rodents, particularly in urban areas with poor solid waste management, increasing hantavirus infection risks [109,110,111]. Travel is another factor that could influence hantavirus transmission in LAC countries as travel-related human hantavirus infections in LAC have been reported from Cuba [13] and Panama [112]. A review of imported HFRS cases revealed the occurrence of 23 separate travel- or immigration-associated HFRS cases in the published literature [113]. In Barbados, there may also be the possibility of the importation of a hantavirus case from the UK [56]. These biotic factors of land use, rodent host distribution and density, infrastructure, maritime trade, and travel are all influenced by climate and can either increase or decrease human hantavirus infections or infection risks in LAC. Future research should consider them in predictive model development. 3.5. Temporal and Spatial Modelling Approaches The inexorability of climate change and its inextricable link to infectious diseases necessitates modelling to provide quantitative risk metrics. These risk metrics are of the utmost importance to decision-makers in public health who are faced with making difficult decisions in a data scarce region that is one of the most vulnerable to the effects of climate change. While there have been modelling studies in Latin America aimed at elucidating the spatiotemporal dynamics of HPS/HCPS incidence rates and risks, there are no known studies for the Caribbean. Table 1 and Table 2 provide a summary of the modelling studies found in the peer-reviewed literature for the LAC region. The main modelling approaches used in these studies were the ARIMA and GLM approaches, and Bayesian and ecological niche models. The most common climatic explanatory factors used in the models are temperature and rainfall, while the major non-climatic co-factors considered were land-use related. Commonly used performance metrics to assess the quality of models were the coefficient of correlation (R2), the Akaike information criterion (AIC), area under the curve (AUC), and root mean square error (RMSE). The purpose of a study largely drives the modelling approach utilised. For investigating temporal infectious disease dynamics, ARIMA models are appropriate [53], whereas GLM and ecological niche models are targeted for a spatial understanding of risk [44,50,51]. An ARIMA model was used to estimate and forecast HPS activity in Chile [53]. The predictor variable was the number of HPS cases, while the explanatory variables included temperature, rainfall, and humidity. The ARIMA approach demonstrated promising results, showing a correlation between outbreak peaks preceded by mean temperature peaks capturing the temporal behaviour of rainfall and relative humidity correlated with confirmed HPS cases [53]. Given the relative simplicity of the ARIMA approach and current data availability, this class of model constitutes perhaps the most feasible starting point for the Caribbean. The risk maps generated from modelling could be critical in assisting public health authorities to better target surveillance efforts. The main challenge that stymies the ability to take the lessons learned from spatial risk modelling in Latin America and apply them to the Caribbean is data availability. To the best of our knowledge, the data available for hantavirus infections in the Caribbean support studies on temporal dynamics is very limited; furthermore, there is a lack of information required to do robust spatial modelling studies. 3.6. Selected Studies: LimitationsThere are limitations noted in the selected studies including the resolution of climatic factors (typically monthly or weekly), low HPS cases numbers, short duration of study, source of data (climate databases rather than local climatic datasets), partial absence of rodent host population and hantavirus infection dynamics data, absence of other specific climatic/abiotic factors such as sea surface temperature (SST) and particulate matter levels. These could all impact on the accuracy of predictive models for human hantavirus infections. The bibliographic search is also limited by the existing peer reviewed studies present on the databases searched namely PubMed and Web of Science. Other pertinent studies not currently indexed at the time of conducting the bibliographic search may exist so the list of selected studies may not be all inclusive.3.7. Knowledge Gaps & Future ResearchThere is not enough impact-based forecasting for infectious diseases and climate conducted in the Caribbean, and given the current predictions for climate change, mitigation plans for potential impacts will be critical in reducing the damage and negative impacts felt in multiple sectors. This would also extend to Latin America, though more research has been conducted here than in the Caribbean. More research is needed to understand the influence of climatic factors and future climate change scenarios on infectious disease transmission dynamics and disease risks. The role of trade and traffic in increased hantavirus infection risks, probably through increased food availability [114,115], and even introducing non-native rodent hosts into virgin areas, has not been fully explored in LAC. Additionally, the role that the built environment and infrastructure (leaking water distribution networks, vegetative growth, and increased food availability to rodent hosts), international trade and travel can play in increased human hantavirus infection risk requires more work to better simulate real world scenarios with the various cultural and environmental nuances in LAC. The impacts of other climatic factors such as particulate matter (PM2.5 and PM10) levels on hantavirus infection risks, though explored with studies in other regions such as Asia and North America, have not been explored in LAC [87,88]. This requires investigation in this region where significant Saharan dust activity, indiscriminate burning of refuse, vehicular exhaust and brake dust, all significant generators of particulate matter, are commonplace [116,117,118,119,120].4. Materials and Methods4.1. Bibliographic SearchUsing a previous method based on patient, intervention/exposure, comparator, outcomes study design (PECOS) criteria and a PRISMA checklist, we conducted a systematic review by performing a bibliographic search for all relevant peer-reviewed journal publications on climate and hantavirus infections in Latin America and the Caribbean using a pre-established search strategy (Table 3 and Figure 3) [8,46]. For this systematic review we defined the population of interest as humans of all ages and sexes, the exposure as short- and long-term climate variability, and the outcome as HFRS, HPS, HCPS or serologically or reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed human hantavirus infections.4.2. Selection CriteriaFor the defined inclusion criteria, only peer-reviewed studies involving human hantavirus infections, available as full-text articles, with relevant abstracts or study titles (with climate and human hantavirus infections) were considered (with no limits on age or gender). Exposures were variability of different climatic factors over the short- and long- term (a minimum of a one-year period of observation), and finally the outcome was acute hantavirus infections with limitations to Latin America and the Caribbean. This one year minimum was established to mitigate against the impact of seasonality and short-term weather changes. However, instances of hantavirus outbreaks with an association with rainfall or rainfall seasonality were also included due to the sporadic nature of hantavirus outbreaks in LAC, the few studies conducted, and to highlight the need for more future studies in wider parts of the LAC region. An acute hantavirus infection was defined in accordance with the CDC definition of a non-HPS case and an HPS case [121]. The exclusion criteria for the systematic review included (1) non-primary research studies, (2) studies outside of the LAC region, and (3) studies investigating only hantavirus infections in rodent hosts and associations with climate factors but not human hantavirus infections or human hantavirus infection risk. Studies investigating the association of climatic factors and acute human hantavirus infections and or disease in Latin America and the Caribbean were all included for collection and analysis.4.3. Search StringThe development of a suitable search string was completed inclusive of the search terms framed by the relevant inclusion and exclusion criteria [122]. This search string was designed as follows: (climate OR hantavirus OR human) (climate OR weather OR drought OR season* OR rain* OR precipitation OR flood OR temperature or humidity AND hantavirus OR hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome OR HFRS OR hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome OR HCPS OR Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome OR HPS) similar to a previous study [8]. Searches were conducted on MEDLINE using PubMed and Web of Science databases. Notably, this bibliographic search lists studies in these databases updated as of 15th July 2021. 4.4. Study Selection and Quality AssessmentTwo independent reviewers selected the studies for which full texts were obtained and the two readers then decided independently about the final inclusion of articles. In cases of disagreement, an arbiter was involved. In addition, using relevant review journal articles on climate and human hantavirus infections and additional studies meeting the inclusion criteria were added to the list of selected studies. Each methodology of the selected studies was analysed for quality, including risk of bias using Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) and Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) guidelines. The outcome measurement was included in the checklist, with higher ratings for serologically confirmed hantavirus cases in preference to self-reported or symptomatic diagnoses. The influence of confounders was also accounted for as previously done [8]. Assessments were conducted and recorded for each selected study using a three-point scale prescribed by SIGN which indicates ++ as very high quality, + as high quality and − as low quality. This quality rating followed the range of fulfillment of the criteria regarding validity of results. The complete checklist is shown in Appendix A and the scoring system is available in Table S1.Data from these selected studies were extracted independently to compile an evidence table (Table 1) which provided pertinent information of study location, number of human cases, study period, exposure, outcome, and notable results related to climate and related co-factors. In addition, metrics and statistical assessments used to assess the models and analyses and the assigned quality of each study were noted (Table 2). Given the varied nature of methodologies utilized in the selected studies and varied geographical locations, a qualitative synthesis of study data was conducted rather than a quantitative analysis that is done for meta-analysis. Other associated co-factors included other social, demographic, socioeconomic, geospatial, and biotic factors. For human hantavirus infections, a serological and or molecular test confirmation of infection was the outcome, and the effect measure was variable given the heterogeneity of the study methods used in the selected studies. For missing summary statistics, the evaluation of the study design, outcome and results were used to deduce the vigour of the study under examination to determine aptness and accuracy.5. ConclusionsClimatic factors, namely rainfall or precipitation, humidity, and temperature, have been linked to human hantavirus cases in Latin America and one Caribbean country. Rainfall is the climate factor most often positively associated with human hantavirus infections in LAC. However, more research with robust examination of longer temporal spread and enhanced hantavirus monitoring and surveillance in humans and rodents would aid in refining the predictive power of models. The climate change scenarios advanced by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) indicate more climatic variability and intensity for the LAC region. A more thorough understanding of both the role of host population dynamics, other abiotic and biotic factors, and hantavirus infections due to the influence of climate is imperative to achieve better modeling of human hantavirus infections and the risk prediction of future outbreaks and or epidemics. This is very useful in LAC, where such hantavirus outbreaks or epidemics can occur simultaneously with other infectious disease epidemics like dengue, Zika and Chikungunya fevers.This systematic review was registered with PROSPERO under the registration number CRD42021283357 on 17 December 2021.


Title: Hantaviruses and a neglected environmental determinant

1IntroductionViruses of the family Bunyaviridae (the bunyaviruses) share several molecular characteristics. Based on their differences, they have been classified into five genera: Orthobunyavirus, Hantavirus, Nairovirus, Phlebovirus and Tospovirus
[1]. Within the bunyaviruses, the genus Hantavirus contains the most important zoonotic pathogens of humans, attracting studies worldwide. These RNA viruses are associated with multiple species of rodents, shrews, moles and bats [2]. Hantaviruses are the etiologic agents of Hemorrhagic Fever with Renal Syndrome (HFRS) in Europe and Asia, and Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome (HPS)/Hantavirus Cardiopulmonary Syndrome (HCPS) in the Americas [3], [4]. Hantaviruses are an emerging global threat to public health, affecting about 30,000 humans annually [4].The first HFRS outbreak was reported among U.S. soldiers deployed to fight in the Korean War in the 1950s, and was blamed on the high level of contact between carrier rodents and soldiers residing outdoors [5], [6]. More than 60 years after the first reported outbreak of human disease, hantavirus infections have been reported in many countries in Europe/Asia, with highly variable annual case numbers. In the period from 2000 to 2009, probably more than 300,000–400,000 human disease cases occurred in European and Asian countries [7], [8], [9], [10]. The outbreak of the hantavirus infections in North America and the subsequent occurrence of HPS/HCPS in South America was a great challenge after the discovery of HFRS caused by Old World hantaviruses. In the Americas, the diversity and distribution of hantaviruses are highly complex, with more than 40 hantavirus genotypes described, nearly half of them pathogenic to humans [11]. More than 4000 HPS/HCPS cases had been reported in South America up to 2013, with high case-fatality ratios for the most common viral genotypes (between 30% and 40%) [12].Unlike other members of the Bunyaviridae, hantaviruses are not vector-borne but are instead transmitted between their vertebrate hosts through aggressive interactions or the inhalation of excreta [3]. Rodents, shrews, moles and bats act as reservoir hosts of hantaviruses, and their infection is chronic and nearly asymptomatic [13], [14], [15]. However, hantavirus infection has been shown to impair the survival of some reservoir animals [16], [17]. Therefore, it is not surprising that the ecology and geographical distribution of hantaviruses are related to the distribution of their natural reservoir species. An increasing number of outbreaks and the possibility of cases spreading over international borders has led to increased interest in these viruses and the environmental determinants that facilitate transmission. Ecological studies that evaluate the risk factors for human infection contribute significantly to understanding the dynamics of hantavirus transmission.2Environmental determinantsHantaviruses are transmitted horizontally within reservoir populations, either directly through aggressive interactions or indirectly through the environment [18], [19], [20]. In the latter situation, infection occurs when susceptible individuals inhale infectious particles released into the environment, resulting in spillover events or cross-species transmission [21], [22], [23], [24]. Within the hantavirus transmission flow, the prevalence and distribution of infection in rodent hosts are influenced by a range of factors. The multifactorial landscape of the hantavirus infection system is complex due to factors that are both direct and indirect modifiers of prevalence in populations. Therefore, both the number of infected rodents, related to their density and virus prevalence, and abiotic properties determine the environmental viral load and thus human risk of acquiring infection [25]. Studies with local geographical scale are important, especially when environmental factors differ. For example, in some areas there are more cases of HCPS in the autumn/winter, but the seroprevalence in rodents is higher in the summer. The possible explanation for this is that despite the lower seroprevalence in winter, there is greater approximation of humans to rodents, due to lower supply of food, dry climate and grain harvest [26], [27], [28]. In other studies, the highest incidence of HCPS cases was found in November and December and was associated with the higher number of animals infected with hantavirus [29], [30]. Understanding the interplay of landscape, climate and factors associated with hantavirus transmission is vital to resolve the determinants of HCPS cases at local and larger scales.2.1Landscape and climateThe ecology and factors driving hantavirus emergence will likely be altered by the various changes occurring on the planet. The El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) and the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) are three key climate cycles likely to have impacts on hantavirus-reservoir interactions. These cycles influence plant productivity, small mammal reproduction, and vertebrate predator activity [31]. Rodents, shrews, moles and bats, which act as reservoir hosts for hantaviruses, are vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and habitat disturbance. Therefore, the persistence of the virus outside of the reservoir depend on temperature and humidity, so as temperature regimes change, so will the environmental abundance of viruses [21], [32].The relation of landscape, climate and social factors associated with hantavirus transmission has been widely studied. The factor “precipitation” is the most studied climatic predictor of HCPS outbreaks, with several authors indicating a positive correlation with rodent densities and prevalence of hantavirus [33], [34], [35], [36], [37], [38]. High rainfall increases vegetation growth, raising rodent densities and increasing the probability of human-rodent encounters and consequent hantavirus transmission [39], [40]. For example, studies in semiarid environments of the southwestern United States have demonstrated relationships between increased precipitation and vegetation growth and subsequent deer mouse abundance, infection prevalence, and HCPS cases [37], [41], [42], [43]. These effects are more evident following ENSO events in this particular region, lead to aggravation of unfavorable arid conditions, increase and expansion of local populations and the dispersal of hosts from nearby suitable habitat [41], [43], [44]. However, this positive relation may apply only in environments where water is a limiting factor of native flora growth. Therefore, while precipitation can positively affect HCPS, it can also have no or negative effects, depending on its magnitude and region [35], [45]. Recently, Prist and collaborators highlighted there is a large gap in studies concerning the relations of HCPS and landscape configuration, temperature and the interaction between climate and landscape variables. Overall, despite many remaining questions, current evidence indicates that when the landscape remains above a certain structural threshold, which allows preserving the integrity of small mammal community, the prevalence and risk of HCPS are lower, but this still needs to be tested empirically [46].In Europe, both the amplitude and the magnitude of outbreaks of HFRS have increased. The mechanisms that drive the incidences are complex and multi-factorial. Most articles have investigated associations between two dependent variables (rodent reservoir seroprevalence and HFRS incidence) and numerous factors, including food availability, habitat characteristics or climate factors, considering both direct and indirect (through virus survival outside the host) transmission pathways [25], [44], [47]. Monchatre and collaborators reviewed and compiled the current knowledge of the key environmental drivers of hantavirus infection in rodents and humans in Europe [47]. This review gave strong support that food availability and temperature of previous autumn/winter influence both HFRS incidence and host seroprevalence. HFRS incidence was positively associated with these two drivers, whereas reservoir seroprevalence was positively associated with food availability and negatively associated with temperature. More specifically, although not observed in all studies, the normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI), or NDVI-based food availability indices, appears to positively influence reservoir seroprevalence and HFRS at different spatial and temporal scales, regardless of the type of statistical analysis, highlighting the robustness of this result. In contrast, results of the relations between HFRS incidence and/or reservoir seroprevalence and other independent variables (e.g., precipitation) appear less robust [47].These studies deal only with deciduous biomes, where weather-induced mast events drive bank vole fluctuations and consequently PUUV induced HFRS epidemiology. In temperate Europe, bank vole populations display seasonal fluctuations and occasional irregular eruptions, caused by masting, i.e., a heavy seed crop of oak and beech [48]. Masting has been linked to human nephropathy epidemics, likely brought about by growth of the local vole population [48], [49], [50]. However, a considerable proportion of HFRS in Europe occurs in northern Europe (northern Sweden, Finland, northern Russia) in the boreal coniferous taiga zone, where masting effects do not occur. In boreal forests of northern Europe, deciduous trees do not undergo masting events and vole population abundance cycles of 3 to 5 years are assumed to be driven by predators [51], [52]. This dichotomy, whereby within one host-virus system (like the bank vole and PUUV) there are biome-specific epidemiologies, is well-established. Even if these vole fluctuations may superficially look similar in northern and central Europe, their underlying causes are totally different. Cycles in the north are a top-down process while fluctuations in the temperate zone are a bottom-up process [53], [54].2.2Dilution effectHuman activities, land use change and habitat destruction contribute to reducing biodiversity and disruption of natural processes [55], [56]. Biodiversity, including the number, abundance, and composition of genotypes, populations, species, functional types, communities, and landscape units, strongly influences the frequency and severity of pathogen infections in humans [57], [58], [59], [60], [61]. The dynamics of zoonotic pathogens can be affected by genetic diversity within host populations, species diversity within host communities, and diversity among communities. In principle, diversity can either increase or decrease pathogen transmission and disease risk. The dilution effect suggests that where species vary in susceptibility to infection by a pathogen, higher diversity often leads to reduced disease risk. The basic idea behind the dilution effect hypothesis is that biodiversity (typically measured by species richness, or the number of different species present in a particular spatially defined locality) protects against infection by zoonotic pathogens. That is, high host diversity “dilutes” disease risk [62], [63], [64].Field studies have demonstrated that the does occur in many natural systems. A dilution effect is probable because: (a) reservoirs differ in quality for pathogens or vectors; (b) higher quality reservoirs tend to occur in species-poor communities, whereas lower quality reservoirs tend to occur in more diverse communities; and (c) lower quality reservoirs regulate abundance of high-quality reservoirs or of vectors, or reduce encounter rates between these reservoir hosts and pathogens or vectors [65]. To test the dilution effect in hantaviruses, Dizney and Ruedas examined 17 ecological variables associated with prevalence of the directly transmitted Sin Nombre virus (SNV) in its wild host, the deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus). The prevalence of Sin Nombre hantavirus increased from 2 to 14% as non-host species diversity decreased, showing that the transmission of an agent can significantly increase after loss of species [66]. Clay and collaborators investigated the mechanisms by which diversity influenced the prevalence of SNV. They monitored both intra and interspecific encounters of deer mice using foraging arenas at five different sites with disparate levels of species diversity to examine two probable mechanisms that may contribute to the dilution of SNV prevalence: (1) reduced frequency of encounters between deer mice, or (2) reduced duration of contacts between deer mice. They showed that species diversity influences the dynamics of SNV by reducing encounters between deer mice in a trade-off between intra and interspecific interactions [67]. However, Voutilainen and collaborators also paid attention the importance of reservoir population structure. They found true dilution in spring, when small mammals breed and are territorial, but no dilution in autumn, when populations are dominated by young non-territorial non-breeding subadults. It is noteworthy that population structure has not usually been taken into account in small mammal dilution studies, so the results of these studies may include a lot of noise [68].Recently, Khalil and collaborators, in a well-studied system, investigated the dilution of the Puumala hantavirus (PUUV) in bank voles (Myodes glareolus) by two competitors and a predator. The field vole (Microtus agrestis) and the common shrew (Sorex araneus) are bank vole competitors and Tengmalm's owl (Aegolius funereus) is a main predator of bank voles. In this study, the infection likelihood in bank voles decreased when common shrew density increased, suggesting that common shrews reduced PUUV transmission. Field voles suppressed bank vole density in meadows and clear-cuts and indirectly diluted PUUV infection. Further, the decline in the population of Tengmalm's owl in 1980–2013 may have contributed to higher PUUV infection rates in bank voles in 2003–2013 compared to 1979–1986 [69]. Another study investigated whether voles (Microtus spp.), which occur intermittently, influenced estimated standing antibody prevalence to SNV among deer mice, whose populations are persistent. They found a reduction in deer mice antibody prevalence associated with the presence of voles, independent of vole abundance [70]. Blasdell and collaborators analyzed the relationship between hantavirus seroprevalence and rodent species diversity. They also found that hantavirus seroprevalence increased as rodent biodiversity decreased, to the risk of human disease may also potentially increase [71].3Predation as a neglected environmental determinantHantaviruses and others pathogens responsible for zoonotic diseases use the same basic pathways to spread within host populations as they use to infect humans. They exit a reservoir host, either in excreta (feces, urine or saliva) or via a bite, and enter a new host – rodent or human – through inhalation, swallowing or skin punctures [19], [21], [32], [72], [73]. It seems logical to assume that the greater the abundance of reservoirs, the higher the potential infection rate of pathogens, and therefore the higher the risk will be of people's contracting the disease [74]. If this is true, then any factor that influences reservoir density should help diminish or increase the incidence of zoonotic diseases such as those caused by hantaviruses (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Analysis of environmental determinants, landscape, climate, dilution effect, among others, it has been a source of wide debate. However, looking at this scenario, what is the importance of predation in the dynamics of hantavirus transmission?Fig. 1Wildlife populations participate in ecological interactions with various other populations that occupy the same habitat, thus building an ecological community. Commonly, the species in the community form a complex web of trophic interactions called the food web. Because food webs can represent a random sample of all species found in natural communities, theoretical studies of community ecology often concentrate on subunits of a web [75]. This is far from ideal because these data typically ignore parasites and diseases and restrict the findings to either parasitoid-host communities or predator-prey communities [76]. Many reservoir-pathogen interactions are embedded in a web of other interspecific interactions. In natural communities, pathogens and their reservoirs are typically embedded within a web of interactions with other species, which can indirectly affect the pathogen. Among these interactions, predation is a central process that contributes to the structure and function of ecological communities [77], [78].Predators have a diversity of direct and indirect effects within food webs and also influence infectious disease dynamics because pathogens rely on the biological networks in which they live. Predators can directly and indirectly influence reservoir-pathogen interactions by consuming infected individuals, by removing infectious pathogens stages and by changing reservoir traits. For example, predation can increase or decrease the prevalence of infectious diseases depending on how it affects the frequency of infected individuals or high-quality hosts in the population [79], [80]. Predation intensity on reservoir populations can alter host–pathogen dynamics [81], [82] and even affect pathogen persistence in the reservoir population [83], [84]. In general, predation often has major impacts, directly influencing the prey by suppression of population [78], [85], [86], [87], [88].Wild carnivores are part of food webs and “preserved” ecosystems and interact with both reservoir and non-reservoir species. As human activities continue to increase “degraded” ecosystems, interest about the role of species diversity in modifying zoonotic cycles is growing. Small mammals are an important part of ecosystems and their monitoring can indicate whether an ecosystem is preserved or degraded [89]. Understanding small mammals' response to disturbances and habitat modifications is fundamental to understanding infectious disease dynamics. Therefore, as “degraded” ecosystem intensity increases, host species gradually become the dominant species [90]. It seems logical to assume that the greater the abundance of rodent reservoirs, the higher the prevalence will be of infected rodents, and therefore the higher the risk of human contact with the virus. The argument that predators can protect human health through reduction of host densities or by selectively preying on infected individuals from the population is plausible. Within this context, rodents are the preferred prey of many taxa of predators, including mammals, birds and reptiles, and these predators can be strong limiting factors and regulators of reservoir density and consequently the prevalence of hantavirus infection.Carnivora is an order of mammals that includes canids (e.g., wolves and dogs); felids (cats); ursids (bears); mustelids (weasels); procyonids (raccoons); pinnipeds (seals); and others, making up 12 families and 270 species in all [91]. While some carnivores do eat only meat, some carnivores also supplement their diets with vegetation on occasion. For example, Felidae (cats) and Mustelidae (members include weasels, stoats, polecats, minks, martens, fishers, wolverines, otters, badgers and others), are unusual mammalian groups whose members are all obligate carnivores (hypercarnivores) [92].Mustelids are primarily carnivorous, but some species may at times eat plant material. Many animal taxa are preyed upon by various members of this family. However, many mustelids are especially adept at capturing small mammalian prey. Weasels, for example, are capable of chasing and capturing rodents in their burrows [93], [94], [95]. The small mustelids, the least weasel (Mustela nivalis nivalis) and the stoat (Mustela erminea), are key predators in the boreal vole cycle, the principal host of PUUV (Myodes glareolus) in Europe [96]. They are small and highly adapted to preying on voles even in their nests and under snow cover, and can be the main cause of mortality in vole populations [97]. Predation by the small mustelids in the southwest and by the whole predator guild in the north is an essential contributor to the regular, high-amplitude vole cycle in northern Europe. The observed strengthening of delayed density dependence in vole populations coincides with strengthening small mustelid influence on the summer population growth rates of voles. A strong impact of these small mustelids during summers appears important to cyclic vole dynamics [51].The crab-eating fox (Cerdocyon thous) is a small canid with twilight and nocturnal habits from savannas and forests of South America. This animal is essentially carnivorous, with more than 87% of prey composed of vertebrates. Small rodent species compose the most important food source of the crab-eating fox, with up to 52% relative frequency, including hantavirus reservoir genera (Akodon and Oligoryzomys) [98], [99]. Among other animals, coatis (Nasua nasua) are omnivores whose diet consists of small vertebrates, invertebrates and fruit. Rodents are the most frequently ingested mammals (42%) among the total of small vertebrates consumed [100]. However, few studies have evaluated the importance of these animals, either regarding ecological factors or the dynamics of hantavirus infection. Escutenaire and collaborators investigated in Belgium the susceptibility of a predatory species of bank voles (Clethrionomys glareolus), the reservoir of Puumala hantavirus in Europe. Blood samples of 125 red foxes (Vulpes voles) were serologically tested and 20 presented serum reactivity (16%) [101].Raptors, or “birds of prey”, are a group of predatory birds including hawks, owls, eagles and falcons. Some species of owl are widely distributed throughout the world. Owls feed primarily on small vertebrates, particularly rodents. In the Brazilian Cerrado biome, a study evaluated the diet of the barn owl (Tyto alba, family Tytonidae) based on regurgitated pellets. In total, small mammals corresponded to 86% of food items, and the second most preyed species was N. lasiurus, which is the reservoir of Araraquara hantavirus [102]. In Europe, rodents, especially voles (Arvicolinae), make up at least 70% of the biomass eaten by barn owls. A typical barn owl consumes one to five rodents per night, and a family of barn owls eats about 3000 rodents each year [103], [104].In Belgium, Heyman and collaborators evaluated data from the population of barn owls, the most widely distributed owl species in Europe. In the late seventies, the barn owl appeared on the Red List of endangered species in Belgium. For this study, they analyzed the data provided by surveillance of owl populations and the human hantavirus infection data provided by the national reference laboratory for hantavirus infections in Brussels, Belgium. Although the authors considered the time series relatively short (1982–2009), they reported a correlation was present between the number of hantavirus infections in a certain year and the breeding success of the barn owl. In closing, they recommended the monitoring barn owl populations since the species can be a sentinel marker for predicting the risk of hantavirus infection in the human population [103]. In Chile, in an attempt to reduce numbers of rice rats (Oligoryomys longicaudatus) and therefore reduce the risk of infection in humans, the Chilean Forest Service increased efforts to promote breeding of Chilean white owls and Magellanic horned owls in the Valparaíso region, a natural focus of hantavirus infection. Since 2002, they have been placing nest boxes in the area, providing habitat for these owls to reproduce and monthly censuses have revealed that up to 30 chicks are produced a year, which then disperse into neighboring regions [105].Khalil and collaborators showed that Tengmalm's owl (Aegolius funereus) selectively preys on hantavirus-infected individuals of the bank vole (Myodes glareolus), which is the reservoir host of Puumala hantavirus. The authors suggested a complex relationship between zoonotic disease prevalence in hosts, their predators, and landscape structure [106]. In turn, Camelo-Neto and collaborators, through mathematical models, found the possibility of controlling the spread of hantavirus epidemics by introducing predators in areas of mice colonies in an appropriate way so that control does not kill all the mice, but allows lower spread of hantaviruses [107]. More recently, a study analyzed research investigating different aspects of avian predation on rodent populations in order to increase understanding of the impact and effectiveness of avian predation on rodent pests. The authors identified 28 studies where the success of avian predator attraction methods for the purpose of rodent control had been evaluated. The study highlighted three key issues: (i) the number of studies was small, indicating the need for more research concerning avian predation on agricultural rodent pests; (ii) the majority of studies lacked proper experimental designs (multiple time series design, control, replication) to allow for informative analysis; and (iii) the majority of studies relied on simple indexes to quantify rodent and avian predator abundance [108].It is important to highlight interactions over several trophic levels linked to predation and pathogen transmission to understand hantavirus dynamics in “degraded” systems. Domestic dogs and cats are the species most closely related to humans, and consequently are the most abundant and widespread carnivorous mammals in the world. Domestic dogs and cats are present in altered environments and disturbed ecosystems (agricultural and rural areas) that have suffered loss of biodiversity and where the composition of rodent communities is restricted to generalist species. These generalist species are frequently reservoirs of hantavirus. For example, Necromys lasiurus and Oligoryzomys nigripes are the main reservoirs of hantavirus in the Atlantic Forest and Cerrado (savanna-like) biomes in South America [30], [109], [110], [111]. The two species have wide geographic distribution, great abundance and generalist habit, and their dominance in agricultural and peridomestic areas increases the absolute risk of hantavirus infection [2].Domestic dogs and cats may have an important role in reducing human disease risk (possible barriers) in agricultural and peridomestic areas. However, few data are available about hantavirus in domestic dogs and cats. In the 1990s in New Mexico and northeastern Arizona, serum samples of cats, dogs, horses, cattle and coyotes were analyzed for hantavirus antibodies by western immunoblot assays. All samples from horses, cattle and coyotes were nonreactive and sera from 4 of 145 (2.8%) cats and 4 of 85 (3.5%) dogs were reactive to full-length Sin Nombre virus-encoded nucleocapsid proteins [112]. In Austria, Nowotny evaluated 200 feline serum samples and found a seroprevalence of 5% [113]. A study conducted in Canada evaluated the infection by several agents, including hantavirus, in 240 dog and 242 cat samples. The overall serological prevalence of hantavirus antibodies in cats was 2.9%, but no dog was reactive [114]. In two regions of Belgium, hantavirus antibodies were found in both species, with significantly higher seroprevalence in cats than dogs (16.9% vs. 4.9%) [115].4ConclusionClimate change and landscape alteration are affecting hantavirus transmission, but the outcomes can differ among different hantaviruses. However, it is evident that the underlying mechanisms that mediate hantavirus transmission are largely unknown so that much work remains to be done to investigate the transmission dynamics of hantaviruses. The establishment of long-term ecological studies of hantaviruses should be encouraged, since these studies will be critical in predicting future human risk, mainly the effect of predation. Unfortunately, studies of predators are scarce, making it impossible so far to know their true impact on hantaviruses. Overall, our review highlights the importance of examining interactions over several trophic levels and the underlying mechanisms (density and trait-mediated indirect effects) linking predation risk and hantavirus transmission, to enable developing an ecological framework for understanding disease in natural systems. The argument is that predators limit rodent numbers, rodent numbers limit pathogen numbers, and pathogen numbers in rodents then determine disease incidence in people. Because such interactions can affect infection positively or negatively, understanding the net effects of predation on hantavirus transmission under natural conditions is important.Conflicts of interestThe authors declare no conflict of interest.


Title: Estimating pathogen‐spillover risk using host–ectoparasite interactions

1INTRODUCTIONZoonotic diseases originate in animals and infect humans, posing significant threats to public health worldwide (Cutler et al., 2010; Holmes, 2022). Cross‐species spillover transmission, where a pathogen or parasite is transmitted from its reservoir host species (i.e., original or donor host) to a novel species (i.e., recipient host), is a critical precursor to zoonotic disease emergence (Kreuder Johnson et al., 2015; Olival et al., 2017). The possibility of pathogen spillover into novel species depends on many factors, some of which are directly associated with the reservoir host, including host distribution, density, and interactions with other potential hosts (Plowright et al., 2017). Understanding the underlying factors and mechanisms that drive pathogen transmission cycles in wildlife is crucial for identifying novel hosts and uncovering the ecological patterns that contribute to the emergence of diseases in humans (Alexander et al., 2018; Sánchez et al., 2021).One group of zoonotic pathogens with global concern is hantaviruses. Hantaviruses are members of the family Hantaviridae and are primarily transmitted to humans through contact with infected rodents or their excreta (Laenen et al., 2019; Vial et al., 2023). Human infections can result in severe illnesses, including hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) and hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HCPS), which can be fatal (Jiang et al., 2017; Vial et al., 2023). Hantaviruses have a worldwide distribution and are prevalent in Asia, Europe, and the Americas, causing approximately 20,000–100,000 cases annually (Avšič‐Županc et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2010). In the Americas, hantaviruses cause approximately 300 cases of HCPS annually (Vial et al., 2023). Although the seroprevalence and case rates of hantaviruses in the Americas are lower than in other regions, the case mortality and disease severity are higher (Vial et al., 2023). Andes orthohantavirus (ANDV), present in Argentina and Chile, is the only hantavirus with documented human‐to‐human transmission and has comparatively high case mortality rates (Hjelle & Torres‐Pérez, 2010; Vial et al., 2023). In Chile, there is one known reservoir rodent species for ANDV, Oligoryzomys longicaudatus, and six other known rodent hosts (Abrothrix olivaceus, Phyllotis darwini, Abrothrix longipilis, Rattus rattus, Loxodontomys micropus, and Rattus norvegicus) that have shown evidence of infection or exposure (Llanos‐Soto & González‐Acuña, 2019). Cross‐species transmission of hantavirus from the primary reservoir host to secondary hosts has been documented in various hantaviruses (Delfraro et al., 2008; Medina et al., 2009; Vapalahti et al., 1999; Weidmann et al., 2005) and may play a role in human disease emergence (Kreuder Johnson et al., 2015; Olival et al., 2017).For hantaviruses to spread from one rodent species to another, there must be ecological interaction between individuals of different rodent species, which can constitute aggressions, sharing of resources, or co‐habitation (Palma et al., 2012). In Chile, the primary transmission mode for ANDV between rodent species is through saliva, but can also include urine and feces, which are shared when rodents interact (Padula et al., 2004). In the case of ANDV, uncovering the ecological factors underlying cross‐species viral transmission could be particularly informative because the mode by which hantaviruses have diversified in South America is still unclear (Kuhn & Schmaljohn, 2023; Rivera et al., 2015). The limited understanding of hantavirus evolution in South America restricts our capacities to anticipate zoonotic and cross‐species spillover transmission.Understanding the factors driving pathogen transmission and identifying potential hosts in the hantavirus transmission cycle in wildlife is essential for mitigating the risk of zoonotic spillover (Cleaveland et al., 2007; Hjelle & Torres‐Pérez, 2010). Network analysis has emerged as a valuable tool in ecology, offering insights into the complex species interactions within ecosystems (Poulin, 2010; Proulx et al., 2005). Network analysis provides a framework for studying ecological systems by representing the relationships among different components and can be a valuable tool for studying wildlife disease ecology and pathogen transmission (Craft & Caillaud, 2011; Silk et al., 2017). Ecological networks depict communities by representing parts of the community as nodes (individuals or groups) that are connected by edges (an interaction or shared characteristic linking nodes; Craft & Caillaud, 2011). Factors contributing to pathogen transmission and spillover can be explored by reconstructing host networks (Bordes et al., 2017; Craft & Caillaud, 2011).One challenge in constructing ecological networks is determining how nodes, in this case, potential hosts, should be connected to best represent species or individual interactions (Craft & Caillaud, 2011). Sharing of ectoparasites can serve as an informative link between two hosts in a network (Poulin, 2010) because it serves as a proxy for ecological interaction between hosts (Nieberding & Olivieri, 2007). Ectoparasites can be generalists (i.e., parasitizing many host species) or specialists (i.e., parasitizing one or very few host species) (Poulin, 2007). Host biology is an essential factor in whether an ectoparasite can successfully parasitize the host (Poulin, 2007). When hosts have an ectoparasite association in common, it indicates interaction or similarity between hosts (Poulin et al., 2011). Phylogenetic relatedness, habitat or range overlap, morphology, and phenology are some similarities that hosts may share when they share ectoparasites (MacDonald & Brisson, 2022; Poulin et al., 2011; Runghen et al., 2021; Sun et al., 2023). Ectoparasite sharing between hosts differs based on the parasite species. Nevertheless, parasite sharing can be broadly categorized into parasite species that require direct contact to be shared, such as lice, nidicolous ticks, and some mites, and species that can be shared indirectly through shared environments, such as non‐nidicolous ticks, some mites, and fleas (Di Giovanni et al., 2021). Regardless of how ectoparasites are transmitted between host species, the sharing or trait of being parasitized by two of the same ectoparasite species can indicate ecological similarity between hosts.Based on ecological, biogeographic, or evolutionary similarities, estimating ectoparasite sharing between potential host species in a pathogen transmission network could be a powerful tool to infer host interaction. In the case of ANDV cross‐species spillover transmission, ectoparasite sharing may be particularly relevant because ANDV transmission between rodents requires direct host contact or sharing of resources which can be well represented by sharing ectoparasite species. Beyond ANDV, the approach of using a parasite‐sharing network can help translate data from one study system into another. The parasite‐sharing network is specifically useful for pathogen transmission systems, especially those that depend on ectoparasites, because there may be little data on how potential hosts interact due to the difficulty of collecting behavioral data. At the same time, there can be an abundance of other ecological data (i.e., ectoparasite associations for those hosts) that can help bridge the gap for understanding host interactions. Using host–parasite interactions to create a network structure and study interactions is not novel (Bordes et al., 2017; Dáttilo et al., 2020; Runghen et al., 2021). Nevertheless, previous approaches tend to include ectoparasites in the network in the same way that hosts are included (i.e., both parasites and hosts are included as nodes; Dáttilo et al., 2020, Runghen et al., 2021). Here, we demonstrate how known ectoparasite associations can be utilized to infer host interactions, as connections between nodes, to infer pathogen transmission. This novel transmission network provides a framework for viewing ectoparasite sharing as a host trait independent of which specific parasite species are being shared. In this framework, we lose knowledge of which ectoparasite species are contributing to interactions, but we gain the ability to more clearly visualize how hosts interact, how a host and parasite species ensemble is structured, and the strength of interactions between hosts.In this study, we investigated the evolutionary and ecological factors that predict known and potential novel hantavirus hosts using network analysis on a dataset of rodent–ectoparasite records in Chile. To uncover interactions and possible transmission dynamics between hosts, we hypothesize that shared ectoparasites are a proxy for the ecological interactions among host species which can be used to build a host interaction network. By examining the connections and centrality of rodent species within the ectoparasite network, we aim to uncover the ecological, phylogenetic, and biogeographic drivers of host centrality and cross‐species transmission events. Ultimately, this research adds to a growing body of work showing the applications of network analysis in disease ecology which can inform targeted surveillance efforts to specific rodent species and in specific regions and inform the mitigation of hantavirus emergence.2MATERIALS AND METHODS2.1Host–parasite association datasetWe constructed an updated dataset of published rodent–ectoparasite associations in Chile. We conducted a search of rodent–ectoparasite reports in Chile published from January 2015 to March 2023 in PubMed and Web of Science. We conducted our search on March 10, 2023. We used the same search terms as the original review: ((“Acari” OR “Ixodida*” OR “Phthiraptera*” OR “Siphonaptera*” OR “tick*” OR “mite*” OR “lice” OR “louse”) AND (Chile)) AND (Rodent* OR Rodentia). Our inclusion criteria required reports to be original (i.e., not a review), conducted in Chile, and include collection of rodents and ectoparasites. We used Covidence software (www.covidence.org) to streamline the filtering, eligibility, and data extraction process. Findings were used to complement and update the Landaeta‐Aqueveque et al. (2021) dataset of host–ectoparasite associations in Chile. We corrected rodent names according to the taxonomic standing in the Integrated Taxonomic Information System (ITIS, 2023; www.itis.gov) and removed any genus‐level ectoparasite or rodent record.2.2Host geographical rangeWe obtained geographic range data of rodents of Chile using the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN, 2023) database with the search criteria to include results with taxonomy set to “Rodentia” and land area to “Chile.” We used the administrative boundary for Chile from DIVA‐GIS (http://www.diva‐gis.org/gdata) to restrict the IUCN ranges to Chile. For the seven rodent species with documented ectoparasite associations that did not have distributional range data available in IUCN, we searched GBIF (GBIF.org, 2024) for occurrence data to build an approximate distributional range.We directly downloaded range data from IUCN for the rodent species available. For those from GBIF (datasets: GBIF.ES, 2023; Oyaneder et al., 2023), we used the R package gbif.range (Chauvier et al., 2022.) to generate approximate distributional ranges. Occurrence data from GBIF were downloaded on March 6, 2024. Using spatial analysis packages sf (Pebesma & Bivand, 2023), raster (Hijmans, 2023), and phyloraster (Alves‐Ferreira et al., 2024) in R version 2022.12.0 (R Core Team, 2023), we constructed species richness maps for the 67 rodent species recorded in Chile and the subset of 45 rodent species with ectoparasite associations. We then calculated the geographic overlap for rodent species using Jaccard's similarity index (Jaccard, 1901) with the sf package in R where we used the function, “st intersection” (Pebesma & Bivand, 2023), to obtain the area of overlap between the two species. Following the equation for Jaccard's similarity, we divided the intersection by the total of both ranges minus the intersection. We also used the sf package in R to calculate geographic distance using range centroids between rodent species.2.3Host phylogenetic relatednessTo calculate the pairwise phylogenetic distance for the rodent species in our network, we accessed the mammalian phylogeny (Upham et al., 2019) through the VertLife project (https://vertlife.org/). We used the subset tool to request 1000 trees for only the rodent species in our rodent–ectoparasite network (50 rodents in the network and 48 available through VertLife). Using the ape package in R, we built the most probable tree based on the 1000 trees from for the species available in VertLife. Using ape, we also calculated the pairwise phylogenetic (patristic) distance, with the “cophenetic” function, for the rodents in our network for downstream analysis.2.4Ectoparasite sharingWe assessed how geographic and phylogenetic factors influence rodent connections using two methods: (1) probability as a function of geographic and genetic relatedness to share ectoparasites using logistic regressions and (2) correlation of phylogenetic and geographic distances with network path distances using Mantel tests (see Section 2.5). We used R software version 2022.12.0 (R Core Team, 2023) for all statistical analyses and considered results with p < 0.05 to be significant. First, we calculated the probability of rodent species to share an ectoparasite based on pairwise phylogenetic distance, geographic overlap, and geographic distance between rodent species using the geotax package in R version 2022.12.0 (Robles, 2023; Robles‐Fernández & Lira‐Noriega, 2017). We excluded ectoparasites associated with less than three rodent species from the probability analysis to mitigate uncertainty related to low sample size, as in Robles‐Fernández and Lira‐Noriega (2017), which used the same threshold and similar to Dáttilo et al. (2020), which excluded those with less than one association. Then, we constructed pairwise interaction matrices representing the phylogenetic distance, geographic overlap, and geographic distance between rodent species. We then constructed binary interaction matrices between ectoparasites and rodent species with “1” representing a documented association between a rodent and an ectoparasite and “0” representing no interaction. Using these interaction matrices, we calculated logistic regression coefficients drawn from a distribution of 1000 permutations with phylogenetic distance, geographic overlap, or geographic distance as the predictor variable for the sharing of ectoparasites, the binary interaction, between two rodent species. We calculated logistic regression coefficients for each ectoparasite species and for the overall species pooled for each predictor. With the logistic regression coefficients, we calculated the probability of rodent species to share ectoparasites based on each predictor. We used the geotax package in R version 2022.12.0 (Robles, 2023; Robles‐Fernández & Lira‐Noriega, 2017) to create the binary interaction matrices and to calculate logistic regression coefficients and probability vectors.2.5Network analysisWe built a network estimating how rodents were connected through the ectoparasites they share using Gephi software (Bastian et al., 2009). We first built a weighted interaction matrix to show the number of ectoparasites shared by each pair of rodents. With this, we built a weighted network in Gephi using Fruchterman Reingold followed by Force Atlas 2 visualization algorithms with rodents as nodes and shared ectoparasites as edges (Bastian et al., 2009). In our bipartite network structure, the rodent hosts are included as nodes and the ectoparasites they share are the edges connecting them. With this network structure we lose the information of which ectoparasite species are being shared and all species are treated equally in their contribution to the relationship between two rodents. We chose this structure because we are primarily focused on the rodent hosts, using the ectoparasites as a tool by which to connect them as a proxy of likely direct or indirect interaction.From the rodent–ectoparasite network model, we extracted the closeness centrality of each rodent species in Gephi. The closeness centrality measures the average distance from one node to all other nodes in the network and provides a concept for how central or key a species is in the community (Brandes, 2001). Closeness centrality is an appropriate metric as a proxy of interaction because we are using a diverse set of ectoparasite species as edges, which are shared directly and indirectly. Each connection may not have to be direct for rodents to share ectoparasites but could happen through the environment or shared habitat. Our pathogen of interest, ANDV, may be transmitted between rodent species through habitat or resource sharing and not necessarily only through direct contact. This supports the use of closeness centrality in both cases because closeness centrality goes beyond traditional network metrics and considers spread through a network in a mode that is not entirely reliant on immediate interactions (Bloch et al., 2023).We also generated a path distance matrix for the network using the package igraph in R which calculates the shortest path between each pair of nodes (Nepusz, 2006). The path distance matrix is a pairwise matrix with rodents as column and row headers, where the interaction between columns and rows is the number of ectoparasite species (edges) needed to connect each pair of rodent hosts (nodes). Using this pairwise path matrix, we tested for correlation between path length with both phylogenetic and geographic distance using a Mantel test in the R package vegan (Oksanen et al., 2022). We tested correlation from the pairwise matrices of path length versus phylogenetic distance, path length vs. geographic distance, and geographic vs. phylogenetic distances.2.6Spillover potentialWe tested how the closeness centrality of our network model predicted hantavirus hosts using a phylogenetic logistic regression for binary‐dependent variables with closeness centrality as a continuous predictor and hantavirus host status as the binary‐dependent variable (Ives & Garland Jr., 2010). This regression model accounts for the non‐independence of the host species and evaluates how a binary trait, in this case being a hantavirus host, changes and is correlated according to both the phylogeny and the continuous variable, closeness centrality. We implemented this model using the package phylolm in R with the algorithm from Ho and Ané (2014). To explain the model summary, we follow the interpretation of α from the example in Ives and Garland Jr. (2010) as well as that suggested by Cooper et al. (2016) using the phylogenetic half‐life. We also applied a quantile threshold to closeness centrality to split rodents into four groups of similar closeness centrality. Based on these groups, we predicted that the high centrality would represent likely hantavirus hosts and tested this using cumulative binomial probability. For the cumulative binomial probability test (Loader, 2000), the number of species in the highest quantile was considered the number of trials, the rodent species known to be hantavirus host were the successes, and the proportion of species in the highest quantile from the entire number of rodent species studied was considered the probability of success.2.7Hantavirus in the networkWe examined the relationship between rodent‐hantavirus sharing with geographic overlap and distance, and phylogenetic distance using the same methodology as described for ectoparasite sharing. For this, we added the hantavirus associations between each rodent host to the rodent–ectoparasite dataset. From this, we obtained logistic regression coefficients and probability vectors for the relationships between hantavirus host status with phylogenetic relatedness, geographic distance, and geographic overlap. We compared how hantavirus sharing and ectoparasite sharing are related to the geographic overlap and distance and phylogenetic relatedness of their rodent hosts.3RESULTSOur search resulted in six new reports of ectoparasites on rodents in Chile, with a total of 33 papers between the original review (Landaeta‐Aqueveque et al., 2021) and our update (Table S1). This created a dataset with 50 rodent species parasitized by 131 ectoparasites (91 fleas, 18 mites, 17 lice, and five tick species) and 376 unique interactions between them (Table S1). From the review, we updated seven species names according to valid ITIS names (Table S2). Of the 50 rodent species documented with ectoparasites, data were available to construct a species richness map for 45 rodents (43 from IUCN and two from GBIF; Figure 1a) and a phylogenetic tree for 48 rodents (Figure 1b). We found that the highest rodent species richness in Chile covered latitudes of 30° S to 55° S (Figure 1a; Figure S1). Our phylogenetic tree included 26 genera representing 48 species of rodents.FIGURE 1Rodent species diversity in Chile. (a) Rodent species richness for species with documented ectoparasite associations. (b) Rodent phylogeny for species with documented ectoparasite associations with maximum likelihood bootstrap percentages.3.1Ectoparasite sharingWe found that phylogenetic distance, geographic overlap, and geographic distance were predictors for rodents to share ectoparasites (Table 1). More closely related rodent species were overall more likely to share ectoparasite species and each individual ectoparasite also followed this trend with negative slopes for each regression (Table 1: overall models, all ectoparasites: Table S4). Sharing of ectoparasites was also strongly predicted by geographic overlap and geographic distance between rodent species (Table S4). The overall trends followed for each individual ectoparasite with positive slopes for geographic overlap and negative slopes for geographic and phylogenetic distance (Figure 2). For the phylogenetic regression, 37 species of ectoparasites and 48 species of rodents were included and for the geographic regressions 37 species of ectoparasites and 45 species of rodents were included based on available data and our limiting the analysis to ectoparasites with three or more rodent host associations. Based on the slopes of the regression model, phylogenetic distance was the strongest predictor for sharing ectoparasites, followed by geographic overlap, and then geographic distance. Individual ectoparasites followed the trends to different degrees, indicating strong or weak relationships with geographic and genetic factors.TABLE 1Logistic regression coefficients and summary for ectoparasite sharing.Geographic overlapGeographic distancePhylogenetic distance
β0
−2.82881254−0.6467294−0.769268852Std. Error0.118420250.108900830.133686998
z value−23.8897436−5.9419812−5.75342839Pr(>|z|)1.66E−1247.21E−073.41E‐062.50%−3.06091196−0.8601711−1.03129055297.50%−2.59671312−0.4332877−0.507247152
β1
3.07615777−0.1541742−0.021322972Std. Error0.204413260.014462150.002463259
z value15.0478327−10.63058−8.637090339Pr(>|z|)8.95E−443.77E−181.06E−102.50%2.67551514−0.1825195−0.02615087197.50%3.47680041−0.1258289−0.016495074
Note: The overall logistic regression model coefficients for each of the predictor variables (phylogenetic relatedness, geographic distance, and geographic overlap) are reported with their summary statistics.FIGURE 2Association between sharing of ectoparasites and potential transmission drivers. Each panel shows the logistic regression curves for each ectoparasite (gray) and the overall model (red). We considered ectoparasites with three or more associations, using phylogenetic distance, geographic distance, or geographic overlap as the predictor variable. (a) Ectoparasites sharing based on phylogenetic distance between rodents. (b) Ectoparasites sharing based on geographic distance between the centroid of two rodent species. (c) Ectoparasites sharing based on the geographic overlap of rodent distributions.3.2Rodent–ectoparasite networkWe included all 50 rodent and 131 ectoparasite species, with 376 unique interactions between rodents through ectoparasites, in our network model (Figure 3). In the rodent–ectoparasite network, we found that individual rodent species were parasitized by up to 46 ectoparasite species with a maximum of 186 unique relationships to other rodents through ectoparasites. The strongest connection in our model was between A. olivaceus and A. longipilis, which shared 24 ectoparasite species (Figure 4). The overall dataset indicated a median ectoparasite‐to‐relationship ratio of 4.3, meaning that on average, each ectoparasite species connects its host to about four other hosts (Figure 5). Quantiles of network closeness centrality (CC) varied from CC = 0 (Ctenomys osgoodi, one ectoparasite, and no relationships) to CC = 0.78 (A. olivaceus, 46 ectoparasites, 184 relationships). Similarly, for matrix correlations, we found that path length in the rodent–ectoparasite network was correlated with both geographic distance (Mantel test, n = 44 rodent species, p = .001, r = .363) and phylogenetic distance (Mantel test, n = 47 rodent species, p = .025, r = .115). We found no association between geographic and phylogenetic distance (Mantel test, n = 44 rodent species p = .945, r = −.071). Although we had geographic data for 45 species and phylogenetic for 48 species, we did not include Ctenomys osgoodi in the mantel tests because it had no ectoparasite connections to other rodent species, making the total species included one less than that which we had available data.FIGURE 3Interaction network model. The network model depicts the 376 unique interactions (edges) between 50 rodent hosts (nodes) through shared ectoparasites where interactions are weighted on the number of shared ectoparasites between rodents. Node size: Closeness centrality of each rodent Edge size: Number of shared ectoparasites between two rodent species. Yellow‐Green‐Blue‐Dark Blue: Decreasing closeness centrality quantiles based on levels of rodent‐parasite sharing.FIGURE 4Interaction matrix among rodent species. The number of shared ectoparasites between each pair of rodents in Chile are ordered from those sharing the most ectoparasites (red) to those sharing the least (blue) or none (gray).FIGURE 5Rodent–ectoparasite association. Left axis: rodent species Bottom axis: Total number of parasite associations represented by the gray points for each rodent Top axis: Total number of connections to other rodents through ectoparasites. The gray point shows the number of ectoparasite associations each rodent has individually (bottom) and the colored point represents the total number of relationships to other rodents through shared ectoparasites (top). Blue points indicate that the rodent is connected to more than average (~4 connections per ectoparasite), red indicated less than average, and black is average.3.3Spillover predictionCloseness centrality was a significant predictor for rodents to be hantavirus hosts and there was very little phylogenetic signal for this trait (Closeness centrality: p = .002, Phylogenetic signal: α= 0.0005, a = − 3.340, t12 = 1498, mean tip height = 40.367). Closeness centrality quantiles identified rodents prone to cross‐species hantavirus transmission, including 12 highly connected rodents (Figure 6; A. olivaceus, P. darwini, A. longipilis, O. longicaudatus, R. rattus, L. micropus, Reithrodon auritus, Aconaemys porteri, Phyllotis xanthopygus, Octodon degus, Chelemys macronyx, and R. norvegicus). Independent data from our rodent–ectoparasite network revealed that known hantavirus hosts were successfully predicted better than by chance according to a cumulative binomial probability test (p(x = 7) = 0.009). Mapping the predicted hantavirus hosts revealed hotspots of spillover transmission risk found in Chile between latitudes 45° S and 55° S in Chile (Figure S1A).FIGURE 6Spillover transmission risk categories based on the centrality of hosts in the rodent–ectoparasite network. Rodent species are grouped based on closeness centrality quantiles from the rodent–ectoparasite network which is used to predict spillover transmission risk. Rodent species quantile groups are shown in order of decreasing closeness centrality quantile by color: yellow, green, light blue, and dark blue. The highest quantile group in yellow includes all known hantavirus hosts (Brown dots: known hantavirus hosts) and five potential hosts (Question mark: predicted potential hantavirus hosts).Considering known relationships between rodents and hantaviruses revealed that this interaction follows the same trends as the rodent–ectoparasite interactions. That is, the probability for a pair of rodent species to share hantavirus increased with geographic overlap and decreased with geographic and phylogenetic distance. Hantavirus sharing had stronger relationships to all three predictor variables than overall ectoparasite sharing (Table S4).4DISCUSSIONHost networks have been used in wildlife disease ecology to understand pathogen transmission, but often rely on social interactions between hosts, which can be difficult to define or collect in many systems (Craft & Caillaud, 2011). We posit that ectoparasites can act as a proxy for ecological interaction between hosts, which has been proposed previously (Nieberding & Olivieri, 2007) and is based on literature that ectoparasites are indicative of host phenology (MacDonald & Brisson, 2022), phylogenetics and geographic distribution (Poulin et al., 2011), morphology (Sun et al., 2023), and other traits (Poulin, 2007; Runghen et al., 2021). We built a host network using this concept of ecological interaction through ectoparasites to understand how other parasites or pathogens may move through a host species assemblage. Using a well‐understood rodent system in the Neotropics, we identified underlying predictors for rodents to share ectoparasites, built a weighted interaction network, and used network centrality to predict hantavirus hosts. We successfully predicted all known hosts of hantavirus in Chile and identified five rodent species as potential hantavirus reservoirs. Proximity in geographic range and phylogenetic relatedness are strong predictors for rodents to share ectoparasites and to be more connected in the network. Our findings revealed hotspot areas to inform surveillance of hantavirus in rodents in Chile.A pair of rodent species were more likely to be parasitized by the same ectoparasite if they were closely phylogenetically related, overlapped more in range, and had a shorter distance between the center of their ranges. The trends between geographic and genetic factors with parasite sharing in the rodent–ectoparasite system are similar to trends in other systems, including viruses in bats (Wang et al., 2023), helminth and microparasites in rodents (Bordes et al., 2017), Bartonella in bats (McKee et al., 2019), avian malaria in bird communities (Clark & Clegg, 2017), plants and beetle species (Robles‐Fernández & Lira‐Noriega, 2017), and small mammals and ectoparasites (Dáttilo et al., 2020; Martinů et al., 2018). We expand on the understanding of how evolutionary and ecological factors influence host interactions by exploring their role in a network of hosts versus in individual host relationships. Based on our regression analysis, we found that ectoparasite sharing between individual rodents had a stronger relationship with geographic distance and overlap than with phylogenetic distance. In agreement, the network path distances were also shorter for rodents that were more geographically proximal than those that were more closely phylogenetically related. These findings contribute to both general frameworks for understanding ectoparasite–host communities and parasite sharing, and specifically to the hantavirus system in Chile.From the rodent–ectoparasite network, we found that closeness centrality can infer hantavirus host status. Closeness centrality showed a significant correlation with hantavirus host status when there was very little phylogenetic signal, implying that using the ectoparasite‐network model is a significantly better tool than phylogenetic relationships alone for predicting hantavirus host status. We found that the 12 rodent species grouped in the quantile of high closeness centrality included all seven known hantavirus hosts and five potential hosts. It has been suggested previously that highly connected rodents in a network may play a role in zoonotic disease spillover (Bordes et al., 2017). We support high network centrality as a driver of spillover in the rodent‐hantavirus system. Using the 12 most central rodents, we identified the south‐central region of Chile as having the greatest richness of known and potential hantavirus host and reservoir species. This area has previously been defined as a mammalian biodiversity hotspot (Hernández‐Mazariegos et al., 2022), which could place it at a higher risk for emerging zoonotic diseases (Allen et al., 2017). The rodent species and areas identified can be used to inform surveillance programs aiming to identify novel hosts and regions where the virus could emerge. Identifying novel hosts and high‐risk areas for hantavirus spillover in Chile is critical as the ANDV hantavirus circulating in Chile has revealed a risk of human‐to‐human transmission (Martinez‐Valdebenito et al., 2014) and is also associated with the second highest case mortality rate for all hantaviruses worldwide (Vial et al., 2023). Anticipating and assessing for cross‐species transmission events of hantavirus in Chile can allow assessment of ANDV evolution in transmissivity and virulence, which is fundamental for early detection of enhanced pathogenicity and pandemic risk.Pathogens and parasites can be specialists, exploiting one or few hosts, or generalists, exploiting many hosts. Phylogenetic relatedness and geographic distance can influence the ability of a pathogen or parasite to exploit multiple hosts (Poulin et al., 2011). Within the generalist–specialist framework, some pathogens and parasites act as generalists regarding one factor while they are specialists with regard to another. This means that a parasite or pathogen can be a generalist in terms of host range but a specialist in terms of restricted geographic range, which makes classifying a parasite or pathogen into only one role reductive of its multiple interactions (Poulin et al., 2011). For emerging diseases, the definition of generalist and specialist are relevant because an understanding of parasite or pathogen specificity is essential in identifying where or in what species a parasite or pathogen has the potential to expand. For example, in our rodent–ectoparasite network, the flea Plocopsylla crypta, had a strong relationship with geographic proximity of hosts, but a weak relationship with phylogenetic relatedness. This indicates that P. crypta is more of specialist in terms of parasitizing hosts in a restricted geographic area, but within that area it can act as a generalist by parasitizing a wide range of distantly related host species. Although the majority of ectoparasites in our analysis were fleas, the next largest group, mites, notably had stronger relationships with phylogenetic relatedness and geographic proximity than fleas in general did. This may be because it is more beneficial for directly transmitted parasites, like fleas, to parasitize many different host species while it can be detrimental for indirectly transmitted parasites to do the same (Poulin et al., 2007). Using this framework can help expand the definition of generalist and specialist parasites because it considers multiple factors that influence the ability of parasites to exploit hosts.Our findings may also be informative in deciphering how hantaviruses have diversified in South America. There are over 28 hantaviruses that can cause human disease and others of unknown zoonotic risk found in a wide range of wildlife species, including rodents, bats, moles, shrews, reptiles, and fish (Avšič‐Županc et al., 2019; Vial et al., 2023). Hantaviruses were previously thought to have co‐evolved with their hosts. Nevertheless, recent discoveries on new hosts, new viral strains, and the evolution rate of hantaviruses do not entirely support this idea (Kuhn & Schmaljohn, 2023). The possibility of preferential host switching has been proposed but is not supported in hantaviruses in South America, for which geographic proximity is a potential explanation of hantavirus diversification (Rivera et al., 2015). Using the known hantavirus hosts in Chile, we found that geographic proximity, phylogenetic relatedness, and centrality in the rodent–ectoparasite network were predictors for rodents being known hantavirus hosts. Hantavirus host status was more dependent on geographic proximity and phylogenetic relatedness than the average for ectoparasites, indicating that it is more of a specialist than most ectoparasite species. We found that hantavirus had a stronger relationship with geographic overlap and geographic distance between rodents than with phylogenetic distance. The relationships between geography and phylogeny to explain infection provide support for exploring the hypothesis that the geographic proximity of hosts has influenced the diversification of hantaviruses in South America. Host sympatry may suggest a host interaction leading to cross‐species spillover and viral diversification. Of the five species predicted to be unknown ANDV hosts, two are non‐Myomorph species (O. degus and A. porteri). Both species are in close geographic proximity and share considerable numbers of ectoparasites with known ANDV hosts, suggesting the potential for direct interaction necessary for ANDV transmission between rodents. If these species are found infected or seropositive to ANDV, such findings would validate our predictions and would represent spillover into phylogenetically distinct hosts, providing significant context to how hantaviruses have diversified in South America.The interpretation of our results must be considered in the context of data availability and geographic extent. Rodent–ectoparasite associations were based on documented associations and may be biased toward rodent species of known health concern and not fully represent all ectoparasite associations in Chile. Geographic range and genetic data did not fully represent the 50‐rodent dataset, with five species missing geographic data and two species missing genetic data. Notably, IUCN failed to include R. rattus or R. norvegicus distributions in Chile. Nevertheless, both species have documented hantavirus infections in Chile (Lobos et al., 2005). The rodent species names and taxonomic standing that we included are according to the ITIS and may not represent recent advances in Chilean rodent taxonomy (D'Elía et al., 2020). A comprehensive dataset geographic ranges would improve our understanding of hantavirus transmission dynamics. Additionally, we limited our study area to the geographic extent of Chile. We chose this limited extent to facilitate clear boundaries for our literature review and to account for differences in sampling efforts country‐country in South America. Also, although many administrative country boundaries may not be ecologically relevant, the boundaries of Chile correspond to biogeographic regions due to the Andean cordillera on the east, the Pacific Ocean on the west, ice fields in the south, and the Atacama desert in the north (Morrone, 2018). Hantaviruses, however, are distributed globally and our approach may not scale to a global extent or in every ecosystem where hantaviruses are present.We demonstrated that ecological networks based on shared ectoparasites can elucidate how wildlife host species interact in the transmission of parasites and pathogens. Host interactions can be challenging to estimate due to logistical or biological constraints. Our findings reveal that cross‐species transmission dynamics are influenced by host phylogeny and geographic range, which together culminate in ectoparasite sharing. To validate the predictive power of our approach we suggest expanding the species tested for hantavirus in Chile, and even targeting capture and sampling of potential hosts identified in our study. Similarly, future research should account for environmental filtering as a potential confounding factor to determine the extent to which parasite and pathogen‐spillover transmission across species and geographies is influenced by climate. Although shared ectoparasites are not a direct measure of interaction, they offer a less laborious method for connecting hosts while still being ecologically relevant. Further studies focused on multiple pathogens or parasites could use similar methods and include network communities to understand how more specialized pathogens or parasites cluster within specific hosts. Ectoparasite associations are indicative of host biology and using known interactions can help disease ecologists predict spillover transmission.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Reilly N. Brennan: Conceptualization (supporting); data curation (equal); formal analysis (lead); investigation (lead); methodology (lead); visualization (lead); writing – original draft (lead); writing – review and editing (equal). Sally L. Paulson: Investigation (supporting); writing – review and editing (equal). Luis E. Escobar: Conceptualization (lead); data curation (supporting); formal analysis (supporting); funding acquisition (lead); investigation (supporting); methodology (supporting); supervision (lead); writing – review and editing (equal).CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENTWe declare no competing interests.OPEN RESEARCH BADGESThis article has earned Open Data and Open Materials badges. Data and materials are available at https://github.com/reillybren/ChileRodents.Supporting information
Data S1



Title: Hantavirus: The Next Pandemic We Are Waiting For?

The Biology of HantavirusesHantaviruses, albeit reported more than 40 years ago, are now considered emerging viruses' because of their growing importance as human pathogens. [1]. Hantaviruses are single-stranded RNA viruses (negative sense) capable of infecting species (shrews, moles and bats) including humans [2]. They invade the cells through the transmembrane receptors, the integrin’s, proliferating in the endothelium, by making the mRNA, proteins and replicating the viral genome—the virion, comprising of genome encapsulated in glycol-ribonucleoprotein capsule, with an integral constituent enzyme RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase (RdRp). The genome of the Hantavirus encodes three essential proteins such as precursor glycoprotein which eventually matures into two mature components known as Gn and Gc, nucleocapsid (N) protein, and the replicatory machinery RdRp [3, 4]. These three segments are called small (S), medium (M), and Large (L) based on their size. The viral polymerase is encoded in the L segment.In contrast, the M and S elements encode the precursor (GPC) for two viral surface glycoproteins (G1 and G2, or Gn and Gc) and nucleocapsid (N) proteins, respectively[5]. The two different components of the S glycoprotein (four G1 spikes and four G2 spikes) encoded by the M segment may interact with the β-integrin and pave the way for the entry of Hantavirus to the host cell[6]. With a C-terminal domain, the two S glycoproteins form a globular shape with transmembrane helices. This S protein directly interacts with the N protein through a conserved Zinc finger (residues 543–599) tail of the G1 component and play a role in the Hantavirus assembly[7]. In supplying natural antiviral defence the primary effector cells of the innate immune response and type I interferons (IFNs) play a pivotal role[8]. To evade from the host response, the production of IFN-β is inhibited by the G1 portion of the S glycoprotein of the Hantavirus by binding to TRAF3 and preventing RIG-I/TBK1-directed IRF3 phosphorylation[9]. This phosphorylation of IRF3 is vital in IFN-β induction. This potential differentiates pathogenic hantaviruses from non-pathogenic ones, as they are unable to inhibit the induction of IFN-β[10].On the other hand, the primary target of the host immune system is the N protein which is a small and highly conserved protein among the hantaviruses[11]. The N protein is a primary detection marker for the diagnosis of Hantavirus’ disease[12]. By shaping viral RNPs, the N protein also defends viral genomic RNA from degradation by the cellular nucleases through encapsulating vRNA (negative-sense genomic) and cRNA (positive sense anti-genomic)[13]. The important role of the N protein is to interact with the host (Human) MxA(p78) Protein and forms a MxA-N protein complex and evade the host immune system[14]. The efficiency of Hantavirus replication has been shown to be inversely proportional to the ability of infected cells to enable the expression of MxA. Induction of the type I IFN against the viruses is the primary function of the MxA protein which poses immune resistance against the viral infections[15]. It has been reported that the N protein of the Hantavirus binds to the MxA protein and this complexes is potentially reported as the mechanism of MxA inhibition and eventually the host immune response[16, 17]. The multi-domain RNA-dependent RNA-polymerase is a usual replicatory machinery for the Hantaviruses. Hence, this data suggest that the Hantaviruses possess similar biology to most of the other RNA viruses. Therefore, applying the already practiced technology could aid the development of vaccine and other medications.The Pathogenesis and Immunology of HantavirusesThe Hantavirus reservoir infection hosts are not affected (probably due to immunosuppression of the host), but in humans, it is causing hemorrhagic fevers, including the “hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome” (HFRS) and “hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndromes” (HCPS)[18]. Pathologically these syndromes are described as aggravated immune reactions having augmented production of cytokines and cytotoxic T lymphocytes, with amplification in the permeability (vascular trickle) of the endothelial cells in the capillaries[19].Electron micrograph illustrations of hantavirus reveled that it possesses a typical viral architecture, comprised of a genome enclosed in a nucleocapsid with spikes of glycoproteins. The virion is replicated by RNA-dependent RNA-polymerases in the host endothelium cells. In due course of infection, the virus particle on attachment to the cell surface through the receptor is endocytosed by the cell, forming a clathrin-coated vesicle. (evidence suggests multiple pathways for the entry of virus particle in the cell [20]. After endocytosis, the virion forms and early endosome and finally the late endosome (a change in PH triggers this transition) after which the viral ribonucleoproteins are released, and possible the initial transcription occurs at this release site. The viral replication is believed to occur Golgi compartment, from where the newly synthesized virus particles are transported to the cell membrane for budding (Fig. 1) [21].Fig. 1The schematic representation of viral attachment and multiplication within the host cell. Image adapted from [22]In humans, the hantavirus infection occurs by inhalation of aerosols contaminated with virus particles from rodent waste or as reported the human to human transmission possible by aerosol or contaminated blood and fluid transmission [23]. Like typical viral infections, hantavirus infection is characterized by high fever, body aches and nausea [2, 23], in renal infection Proteinuria, hematuria and nephritis.Hantaviruses can cause acute or long term infection complications, comprising HFRS & HCPS, affecting multiple organ systems including cardio-pulmonary, nephritic and neural systems. Upon the infection, immune system activation triggers innate and adaptive responses of variable intensity with either lethal or non-lethal effects. The severity of the infection is also critically dependent on the genotype of the host and the and the strains of the hantavirus. The HFRS follows five distinct phases which are febrile, hypotensive, oliguric, polyuric and convalescent. At the same time, A sudden onset of respiratory failure due to pulmonary oedema and cardiogenic shock, myalgia, cough and diarrhoea is frequently associated with HCPS [3].The cell surface antigens, human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) responsible for presenting viral associated antigens to T lymphocytes. The variations in the HLA alleles in different populations were reported to have different severity of infections with different strains of viruses. For example, the Finnish population with particular HLA variants were susceptible to have the most severe form of Puumala virus (PUUV) infection, while in Chinese, Slavonian and in united states populations different threshold of severity in infections with different strains of viruses are reported[24].Similarly, the immune response generated by different species of hantavirus is different, upon infection and detection by the immune system of the host, secretions of type I interferons (IFNs) IFN-β interferons are triggered. In the adaptive immune response, the cytotoxic T lymphocytes, CD4 + T lymphocytes and activated plasma B cells activation is elicited. However, the plasma volume of the adaptive immune cells is variable according to different species of the virus (In PUUV infection raised levels of CD8 + and CD4 + T lymphocytes are reported) [25, 26].The adaptive immunity obtained against hantaviruses by the hosts lasts the entire life, and hence there is no relapse of the infection in the lifetime after the primary infection. Correspondingly, the inflammatory symptoms developed in the infection is due to the Cytokines like interleukin-1 (IL-1) IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), specifically, the raised levels of IL-6 are reported to be associated with thrombocytopenia and renal failure. In general, the pathophysiology of hantavirus is a bit diverse and varies according to the genotypes of human populations and strains of the viruses [27]. Hantavirus infection varies in clinical manifestations, variance in illness severity, from mild to extreme, depending on the environmental and physical characteristics of the individual. Therefore, precision-based approaches are the best alternatives to tackle such emerging diseases.Epidemiological PerspectiveHantavirus created focal news when the paradoxical spread was reported during the world’s pandemic battle of the COVID-19, killing a man in Yunnan province of China, further jeopardizing the existing of the human race on the planet earth. More than 1,500 cases of HCPS have been documented caused by 15 genetically distinct strains of hantaviruses in the Americas, all correlated with sigmodontine rodents. The lethalness and the gravity of the hantavirus are higher compared to SARs-CoV-2 virus, because of its high death rate of 50%. As in HFRS & HCPS, the targets are vital organs, including lungs and kidneys. Globally, the reported hantavirus cases in countries including; Germany (2017) 1,713, Canada 109 (with estimated death rate 29%), and the United States 728 cases (Fig. 2) [28]. Approximately 1,50,000 HFRS cases are estimated to occur worldwide annually. The spread of hantavirus in the Asian countries is also notable and specifically in the People’s Republic of China. It is considered a severe public health threat in China because it has been reported in 30 provinces of China. Over the past ten years, 112,177 HFRS cases while 1,116 deaths are reported in China among which 84.16% are from the only nine provinces. It has also been reported that 10,000 cases were reported in 2014–2015. With these statistics, China is reported to contribute 40–50% to the worldwide cases [29].Fig. 2Geographical illustration and per year country wise incidences reported by Douglas Goodin, Kansas State University[37]On the other hand, in Russia and South Korea, similar outbreaks are reported with an estimated death rate of 1% [30, 31]. In Europe, more than 3,000 HFRS cases are diagnosed per year, and this figure continues to grow exponentially. In Europe Puumala Orthohantavirus (PUUV) and Dobrava hantavirus (DOBV) species are the most frequently reported to be involved in human infections. With a case fatality rate of 12 per cent, DOBV is Europe's most life-threatening hantavirus. It is liable over almost all the fatal HFRS cases in Europe [32, 33]. Since 1995, HCPS has been classified among the notifiable diseases in the United States. Six hundred twenty-four cases of HCPS were registered in the United States during the period 1993–2013. About 100–200 HCPS cases are registered annually in Argentina. During 2013, Chile reported 837 HCPS incidents, with a 36.1 per cent mortality rate. Before 2013, Brazil reported 1,600 cases of HCPS; the number of seropositive patients, nonetheless, is estimated to be much higher. Hantavirus infections are projected to show a steady rise with the rapid growth of cities in South America and increased production of agriculture [34, 35]. In African countries, Hantavirus infections are reported before 2006 [36]. These figures are adequate to alarm the concerns, to implement tangible measures for containment of the disease before its foul ramifications. The most impenetrable scenario is the human-to-human transmission, reported in 2005 and 2019, having the tendency to cause another global pandemic of more lethal virus compared to the corona virus.Future Perspective and Policy RecommendationOur understandings of hantavirus related pandemics and syndrome are limited, the contributing environmental factors, the cellular and viral dynamics in transmission from natural reservoirs to humans and finally, the virology in humans is quite intricate. Potentially further serological variants of this virus will be characterized with more than 36 species reported, the diversity in the evolutionary array of these viruses are more diverse.Before it is too late precautionary measurements should be considered. Setting up scientific collaboration, the funding, and encouragement of health ministries and the research institutes should take admirable steps to build an understanding of this virus. Before the war begins, efforts are explicitly needed to grasp the transmission of this virus from animals to humans and human-to-human, which will eventually help to come up with prevention strategies. As speculated, the Asian population is protected from the severity of recent coronavirus due to the advantage of Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccination. So, looking into the same nature of diseases, respiratory illness caused by both the hantavirus and coronaviruses, the practice of BCG vaccination throughout the world should be exercised to develop the immune response against such attacks. With these, ecological factors should be identified, which accelerates the transmission and infection. The most important point is to exercise the practice of drug repurposing and other therapeutic agents at first hand. Discovering new drugs or other therapeutic molecules such as vaccines takes a longer time. Thus with the recent artificial intelligence (AI) technology, the rifle for new impending drugs should be hastened. Last but not least, a data-sharing platform should be provided where all the researchers should share and make available all the necessary information such as genomics, proteomics, host-factors, and other epigenetics information, which will encourage the research collaboration in the preparation against the Hantaviruses. In conclusion, genuine efforts are needed to ensure human lives safety and to get ready for the battle against any Hantaviruses outbreak.


Title: Natural infection of Neotropical bats with hantavirus in Brazil

IntroductionHantaviruses (family Hantaviridae) are membrane-enveloped viruses. Their genomes are small and consist of three segmented negative single-stranded RNAs designated large (L), medium (M), and small (S). These segments encode the virus polymerase, glycoproteins (Gn and Gc) and the nucleocapsid (N) protein, respectively1,2. Within natural hosts, hantaviruses do not cause apparent pathogenic effects3. However, transmission to humans can lead to severe diseases and death4–6; especially in South America, where hantavirus lethality rate reaches more than 40%7.Hantaviruses are predominantly rodent-borne pathogens, although insectivore-bat-associated hantaviruses have been reported in the last decade6,8. Until 2012, only two human pathogenic hantaviruses have been reported in bats. The first report found viral antigens and isolated Hantaan orthohantavirus (HTNV) from two broadly distributed insectivorous species: Eptesicus serotinus and Rhinolophus ferrumequinum9. Recently, evidence of a lethal genotype of Andes orthohantavirus (ANDV), Araraquara orthohantavirus (ARQV), was documented by de Araujo et al.10 and Sabino-Santos Jr et al.11 among several Neotropical bats in Brazil. All the remaining reports of Hantavirus infection in bats involved genotypes not known to be pathogenic to humans.Bats (order: Chiroptera) have highly social behavior that favors the maintenance, evolution, and dissemination of pathogenic viruses12,13. Bats are ranked second when considering top reservoirs of zoonotic viruses, and they host more zoonotic viruses per species than the first place order, rodents14,15. Therefore, the understanding of how these pathogens are transmitted and cause disease in humans is important in public health. Here, we show a systemic infection of hantavirus in Neotropical bats for the first time.ResultsBats sampling and hantaviral detectionWe caught 270 bats from February 2012 to April 2014 with a sampling effort of 56,160 m2h, in southeastern Brazil (Fig. 1). In accordance with legal and ethical statements, whole blood from 53 of the 270 captured bats were screened for antibodies by indirect ELISA using a recombinant N protein of ARQV as antigen11,16,17. Nine phyllostomids bats representing seven species had antibodies to hantaviral N protein antigen and were selected for RT-PCR: Artibeus lituratus (n = 1), A. obscurus (n = 1), A. planirostris (n = 1), Carollia perspicillata (n = 1), Chiroderma villosum (n = 1), Chrotopterus auritus (n = 1), and Desmodus rotundus (n = 3) (for more details see Sabino-Santos Jr et al.)11. Blood, excreta (feces and urine), saliva and organs (heart, liver, kidneys, lungs, and spleen) of all seropositive animals had RNA extracted and screened. Hantaviral RNA was detected only in the blood of two phyllostomids species: the frugivorous Carollia perspicillata and the sanguivorous common vampire bat Desmodus rotundus (Figure S2 and Table S1). In the vampire bat, we amplified a partial S-fragment from the urine, heart, liver, lungs, spleen, and kidneys (Table S1 and Figure S1). Both bats were captured in a riparian forest surrounded by sugarcane monoculture in Batatais County, at sampling point number 3 (Fig. 1A).Figure 1Study area, sampling points in Southeastern Brazil; Desmodus rotundus range and one tested bat. (A) The map highlights the five ecologically distinct trap sites in the Northeast of São Paulo State and North region of Minas Gerais State. In green, areas with native vegetation. (B) Distribution area of the common vampire bat D. rotundus34. (C) Photo of D. rotundus captured and tested in the study labeled as GSJ174. Bat picture was taken by Maia FGM. This map was created by Muylaert RL and Sabino-Santos Jr G, and generated using ArcGIS 9 version 9.1 (Environmental Systems Research Institute, USA).Evidence of active hantaviral infectionWe assayed all organ tissues of the Neotropical bats C. perspcillata and D. rotundus by an immuno-histochemistry assay (IHC) detecting the viral nucleocapsid protein. Active infection was suggested in the organs of only D. rotundus. The monoclonal antibody to N protein of HTNV showed an intense cytoplasmic staining in myocardial cells and hepatocytes (Fig. 2B,C,E and F). Organ fragments of Desmodus rotundus were lysed and submitted to western blot (as described in Material and Methods section). Hantavirus nucleocapsid protein, the most synthesized viral protein, was found in all tested organs (except kidneys and liver) from the infected vampire bat, which indicates viral replication (Figs 3, S3).Figure 2Immuno-histochemistry (IHC) hantavirus-infected tissues of Desmodus rotundus. (A) Fragment of heart tissue, used as negative control, from a non-infected D. rotundus immune-staining for the virus nucleocapsid in striated cardiac muscle cells. (B) Fragment of heart tissue of D. rotundus showing positive brown immune-staining for the virus nucleocapsid in striated cardiac muscle cells. (C) Represent inset of the same heart section in a higher magnification of a definite area from Fig. 2B. (D) Fragment of liver tissue, used as negative control, from a non-infected D. rotundus immune-staining for the virus nucleocapsid in hepatocyte cells. (E) Liver tissue of D. rotundus showing positive brown immune-staining for the hantavirus nucleocapsid in hepatocyte cells. (F) Represent inset of the same liver tissue section in a higher magnification of a positive area in Fig. 2E. IHC was counterstained with hematoxylin.Figure 3Organs tissues lysate from Desmodus rotundus.(A) Negative control and (B) infected organs were lysed as described in Material and Methods and submitted to western blot analyses. Tissue samples were equalized according to the total amount of protein shown by Ponceau (lower pannels) and viral protein was detected using a polyclonal anti-hantavirus hyperimmune murine ascitic fluid against N protein of ARQV (upper panels). *is showing detection of N protein in infected sample.Phylogenetic relationship of hantaviruses detectedTo determine phylogenetic relationships of the hantaviruses detected in D. rotundus and C. perspicillata, a phylogenetic tree based on partial S segment sequences was inferred using Maximum Likelihood (ML) (Fig. 4). In the tree, eight well-supported clades corresponded to already established hantavirus groups: Sigmodontinae, Neotominae, Arvicolinae, Murinae, Soricomorpha, Talpinae, Soricidae and Chiroptera18. Surprisingly, the phylogenetic analysis revealed that the strain detected in C. perspicillata and D. rotundus formed a monophyletic clade closely related to the ARQV variant of ANDV instead of grouping with the “Chiroptera clade,” as shown in Fig. 4. Additionally, the sequence from D. rotundus and C. perspicillata showed over 94% and 99% identity with ARQV respectively, compared to 43.4% averaged identity with hantavirus in the “Chiroptera clade” (Table 1).Figure 4Maximum likelihood tree based on partial S segment nucleotides (~264 bp) showing evolutionary relationships of hantaviruses. The scale bar indicates evolutionary distance in numbers of substitutions per nucleotide substitutions per site, and the prime bootstrap support levels were designated. Phylogenies are midpoint rooted for clarity of presentation. Colors on hantaviruses branches indicate viruses described as human pathogen or unknown, as shown in the legend. Hantavirus sequenced in this study is highlighted with green color.Table 1Distribution of identical nucleotide sites for the partial genome (~264 bp) of S segment.GenbankVirusgsj169gsj174†EF57189Araraquara orthohantavirus*99.55%93.72%AF324902Andes orthohantavirus84.68%79.23%U52136Rio Mamore orthohantavirus82.43%79.71%L37904Sin Nombre orthohantavirus76.13%73.71%X61035Puumala orthohantavirus73.42%68.60%GQ274944Seoul orthohantavirus62.16%59.42%M14626Hantaan orthohantavirus63.96%62.80%KM102247Laibin orthohantavirus62.16%59.42%KF704711Xuan Son orthohantavirus59.91%54.11%JX465419Longquan orthohantavirus57.75%55.22%AY526097Thottapalayam orthohantavirus56.76%53.62%MF094269gsj169—93.72%*This virus is a genotype of Andes orthohantavirus.†GenBank accession number MF094267.DiscussionViruses are the most abundant biological entities on the planet Earth, and those originating in animal world cause most of emerging diseases of humans14,15,19. Viruses from bats can become zoonoses that are transmitted to domestic animals and humans presumably due to their ability to fly vast distances disseminating these viruses15. In our study, we found hantaviral RNA closely related to ARQV in urine of the common vampire bat Desmodus rotundus. This vampire bat could be transmitting ARQV-like through contaminated aerosol of its urine that could be inhaled thus infecting other animals20. However, this transmission mechanism should be confirmed by isolation of the hantavirus from urine to investigate if the pathogen shedding by the vampire bat is viable and infectious21.Lungs are a primary target of infection in rodents and humans since the first detection of HTNV in lung tissue of the striped field mouse (Apodemus agrarius) and bats9,22; although, hantaviruses can also be found in other organs12,23,24. In the present study, we detected the N protein in almost all organs of D. rotundus, particularly in heart and liver, indicating virus replication (Figs 2 and 3). Similarly, other studies have shown liver as a target of infection12,25,26. ARQV-like RNA was present in the blood of the frugivorous bat Carollia perspicillata, and in almost all organs and secretions of the common vampire bat Desmodus rotundus (Figures S1 and S2). This suggests that the vampire bat could be chronically infected, as observed in rodents and soricomorphs6,20.Although compelling evidence is provided that the vampire bat had viral RNA and antigen in many tissues, this could merely be a spillover infection from ARQV’s natural host, Necromys lasiurus (hairy-tailed bolo mouse). Guo et al.18 suggested that hantaviruses originated in bats and then dispersed among other mammalian reservoirs. However, due to the apparently common evolutionary history of bats with insectivores (shrews and moles), it is more likely that insectivores were the original reservoirs, and from these the virus has spread to bats and rodents6,27,28. There are reports of Sigmondontinae rodents infected in this same trap site region as the bats in the current study7,29,30. It is thought that small rodents may feed in the monocultures, but not necessarily nest in these monocultures. These rodents are more likely to live in the fragments where the vegetation is most preserved, thus sharing the same environment as bats, which depend on natural landscapes to survive environmental degradation31–33. D. rotundus feeds on blood of large and medium-sized mammals, including livestock, feral pigs, tapirs and red brocket deer. The bats potentially “take a ride” with the animals and disperse over long distances34,35. D. rotundus is broadly distributed over Latin America and in Brazil in particular, and considered commensal with humans and animals (Fig. 1B). Therefore, gathering our results with those already published, we propose a scheme illustrating the dynamics of transmission of hantavirus in nature in the study region (Fig. 5). In this way, as soricomorphs (shrews and moles) are not present in South America, infected bats could transmit hantavirus to rodents through their excreta. However, viremia of viruses in bats is believed to be low36. On the other hand, it is possible that hantaviruses are still in the stage of adaptation in rodents, as they still suffer a fitness cost3 in which case they would have become infected from bats as suggested by Guo et al.18. In our scenario, rodents would be acting as amplifying hosts where viruses would replicate, increase their load, and then be transmitted to humans via aerosols from their excreta (Fig. 5). Nonetheless, despite low viremia, direct transmission from vampire bats cannot be ruled out since they are in constant contact with humans (Fig. 5). Thus, there are still some questions that need to be addressed. More studies such as a large scale ecological and evolutionary survey of bats for ARQV may clarify how the virus managed to get into a vampire bat, how these bats transmit it, and ultimately if bats can serve as potential reservoirs of ARQV.Figure 5A schematic figure illustrating the transmission dynamics of hantavirus, in nature, in the study region, southeastern Brazil.In short, we show herein that Neotropical bats Carollia perspicillata and Desmodus rotundus can be naturally infected with hantavirus in southeastern Brazil. In our survey, we found the circulating strain to be closely related to ARQV, one of the most virulent and lethal among all hantaviruses in humans. The N protein and/or the partial genome of an ARQV-like were detected in different organs and in the urine of the common vampire bat suggesting that this animal may play a role in hantavirus transmission and dissemination in the study region. These results show that bats are probably playing an under-appreciated part on the maintenance, circulation, and transmission of hantavirus in nature. This report expands the information available to public health authorities for establishing mitigation and surveillance strategies and understanding Hantavirus epidemiology and outbreak risks.Material and MethodsLegal and Ethical StatementsCaptured bats were handled following the guidelines of the American Society of Mammalogists for the use of wild animals in research and biosafety recommendations for working with animals potentially infected with hantavirus37,38. All procedures and protocols performed in the field as part of this study are in accordance with Brazilian environmental and wildlife protection laws and regulations. The study has been approved by the Brazilian Ministry of Environment (protocols 19838-5 and 41709-3). It has also been approved by the Ethics Committee for Animal Research of the University of São Paulo (020/2011) and the Federal University of Minas Gerais (333/2013). The research was approved by state laws (licenses IF-SP/COTEC 260108-007.043 and IEF-MG 012/2014). All laboratory procedures, until viral inactivation, were conducted in our BSL-3 + facility.Study areas and bat samplingBats were captured at five ecologically distinct sites in the northeast region of Sao Paulo State and northern region of Minas Gerais State, in southeastern Brazil (Fig. 1A). Site 1: Jatai Ecological Station, 21°37′ 16″S and 47°49′ 12″W, located at Luis Antonio county, encompasses an area of 9,000 ha and currently is the largest protected area in Sao Paulo State, with continuous cerrado vegetation (a Brazilian savanna-like vegetation) in addition to small enclaves of semideciduous forest patches. Site 2, located in Cajuru county, 21°16′ 31″S and 47°18′ 15″W, with most of the original vegetation (cerrado) converted into mono-specific cultivars. Site 3, located in Batatais county, 20°53′ 28″S and 47°35′ 06″W, is characterized by large sugar cane plantations with small patches of other types of vegetation. Site 4 was located at Sapucaia Ecological Park, which has an area of 37.66 ha and karst topography. Site 5 was located at Lapa Grande Ecological Station with an area of 9,600 ha, where a high concentration of caves and shelters can be found. Both sites 4 and 5 are located in Montes Claros county, 16°43′ 41″S and 43°51′ 54″W, and have a predominant vegetation of cerrado with patches of deciduous seasonal forest (dry forest), and stretches of transition to caatinga (a Brazilian desert-like vegetation). Field trips were conducted from February 2012 to April 2014. Places were sampled twice: in dry season (April to September) and in rainy season (October to March). We used 12 mist-nets in sites 1–3 and 6 mist-nets in sites 4 and 5 (model 716/12 P, 12 × 2,5 m; denier 75/2, 16 × 16 mm net; Ecotone, Gdynia, Poland). Bats were identified following standard ecological taxonomic keys34,39,40 and supplemented when needed by molecular data (e.g., based on a fragment of cyt-b gene)41,42. Vouchers specimens positive for hantaviral RNA, D. rotundus and C. perspicillata, were deposited in the Collection of Mammals from the Center for Taxonomic Collections from the Federal University of Minas Gerais, under numbers: 6948 and 6949, respectively. Saliva and excreta (feces and urine) were collected from all captured bats. According to ethical statements, only one specimen per species per trap-night could be anesthetized and euthanized. Thus, using Halothane TM (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) selected bats were anesthetized, and had blood collected by cardiac puncture. Next, bats were euthanized by deepening anesthesia and had organs collected: spleen, liver, kidneys, lungs, and heart. Organs were collected using sterilized tweezers, one for each specific organ to avoid cross-tissue contamination, washed with sterilized nuclease-free water. One-half of each sample was stored in cryovials with cell culture medium (DEMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1% antibiotic and antimycotic, and 15% nuclease free glycerol) for viral molecular screening, RT-PCR (Reverse Transcription-Polymerase Chain Reaction). The other half sample was placed into cryovials containing paraformaldehyde 4% (Merck, Germany), for immuno-histochemistry assays. All samples, except those in 4% paraformaldehyde, were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen.RNA extraction, purification, and sequencingThe RNA was extracted from plasma, feces, urine, and tissues of bats with the QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Tissues were homogenized in TissueLyser II (QIAGEN, Germany) as recommended by manufacturer. RNA extracts were quantified in NanoDrop ND1000 (USA) spectrophotometer. For cDNA synthesis, we used the High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. PCRs were performed according to Moreli and others43, for further purification and sequencing. PCR products were purified with ExoSap-TI (Affymetrix, USA) and used for nucleotide sequencing in an Applied Biosystems® - 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Thermo Fisher, USA).Control plasmidsRio Mamore orthohantavirus (strain HTN-0007-TPV 4645) were amplified as previously described43. These PCR products (~ 324 bp and ~ 264 bp for Gn and S, respectively) were purified and cloned into pGEM-T Easy Vector (Promega Corporation, WI, USA), according to manufacturers’ guidelines, and used to transform DH10β E. coli cells. Colonies of bacteria were selected in LB medium supplemented with ampicillin 100 ng/ul and confirmed by PCR using same primers of product amplification. Plasmid preparation, from positive clone colonies, was isolated with Plasmid Mini Kits (QIAGEN, Germany) and used as positive controls for PCR reactions.Immuno-histochemistry assayTo determine the presence of the structural nucleocapsid protein of ARQV in tissue samples from PCR positive bats a protocol previously standardized was performed44. Tissues from bat organs fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (Benchekroun et al., 2004) were dehydrated in increasing concentration ethanol solutions (50%, 70%, 80%, 90%, and 100%). Then, followed by xylene (1:1 xylene: ethanol and 100% xylene), embedded in paraffin, and 4 μm sections of tissue were obtained in a Leica microtome (Leica RM2125RTS, Heidelberger, BW, Germany). Slides were mounted with Entellan (Merck, Germany). Antigen retrieval in tissue slides was conducted by immuno-histochemistry. First, we used a monoclonal antibody (1:300 dilution in PBS/BSA 1%) against the N protein of HTNV (ab34757, Abcam plc, Cambridge, UK). The tissue in the slide had endogenous peroxidase blocked by 10% hydrogen peroxide and was incubated in humidified chamber at room temperature, for 60 min, washed with PBS, and incubated for 30 minutes with a biotinylated secondary horse antibody (1:300 dilution in PBS/BSA 1%) (BA-2000) (Vectastin® ABC Kit, Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) at room temperature (RT). The signal amplification was obtained by incubation with a polymer conjugated with streptavidin-peroxidase (s2438, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), at RT. Samples were counterstained with Harris hematoxylin (Vector). Positive staining was visualized by Nova Red peroxidase system with Vector Nova Red Substrate kit (SK-4800, Vector Laboratories, USA). Based on comparison with infected HeLa cells as positive control and uninfected heart tissues of Desmodus rotundus used as negative control, tissues showing red-brown cytoplasmic staining were considered as positive for hantaviral antigen.Western blotTissues were incubated in a lysis buffer [10 nM Tri-HCl (pH 8.0), 50 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 1% Triton X-100, 0,1% SDS and 6 mM sodium deoxycholate] supplemented with a protease inhibitor mixture (Sigma-Aldrich, USA). Simultaneous disruption and homogenization were achieved through a high speed shaking of samples in micro-centrifuge tubes with stainless steel beads using TissueLyser II equipment (QIAGEN, Germany). Each of ten cycles of high-speed shaking, samples were followed by ice incubation for 1 min. The supernatant was collected after the lysates were centrifuged at 16.000 g for 20 min at 4 °C to remove tissue debris. Samples were mixed with loading buffer [4% SDS, 160 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 20% glycerol and 0,1% bromophenol blue] and boiled at 95 °C for 5 min. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue; and densitometry analyses of protein bands were calculated to be equalized to same amounts using Image Lab™ Software (Bio-Rad Laboratories, USA). Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane (Millipore, USA), and blocked with PBS-T (PBS and 0,1% Tween 20) and non-fat dry milk, for one h. Primary antibody (1:500 dilution in PBS/BSA 1%), a hyperimmune murine anti-hantavirus ascitic fluid against the recombinant N protein of ARQV, was incubated overnight at 4 °C. After three washes with PBS-T, membranes were incubated with HRP-conjugated antibody anti-mouse (1:2000 dilution in PBS/BSA 1%) for one h at RT. After washing out the antibodies, proteins were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence ECL (GE Healthcare, USA).Phylogenetic analysisMaximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree was constructed using partial S sequences obtained from Desmodus rotundus (urine, blood, and heart) and Carollia perspicillata (blood) and an additional 47 nucleotides of S segment from representative hantaviruses. Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) was conducted by using combinations of Mafft v.745 and Muscle v.3.746. Phylogenies were inferred with IQ-TREE version 1.4.3 software that automatically obtained the best-fit model based on Bayesian Information Criterion. All segments were analyzed under the GTR + I + G4 model substitution model with 1,000 replicates47. Statistical supports for individual nodes were estimated using bootstrap value. The phylogenetic tree was visualized using the FigTree software v.1.4.2. The identity distance for the partial S segment was calculated using Genious 9.1.6 (Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand). All sequences generated in this study can be retrieved from GenBank under accession numbers MF094267, for D. rotundus and MF094269 for C. perspicillata.Electronic supplementary material
Supplementary file



Title: Evidence for Human-to-Human Transmission of Hantavirus: A Systematic Review

The 1993 hantavirus outbreak in the southwest of the United States [1] led to 27 cases identified as hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) and sparked considerable research in the years that followed. To date, much is known and generally accepted about hantaviruses. While more hantavirus research will no doubt continue to emerge, thereby deepening our understanding of the subject matter as a whole, there remains a somewhat controversial and contestable issue, namely the claim that a particular hantavirus strain can cause human-to-human transmission of HPS.Hantaviruses (family Hantaviridae, genus Orthohantavirus) cause 2 zoonotic diseases in humans, which are clinically manifested in 2 distinct forms: (1) hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (HFRS), which occurs in Europe and Asia; and (2) HPS in the Americas. Typically, HFRS causes a mild-to-moderate infection presenting fever, headaches, and gastrointestinal symptoms, with a progression to hypotension and acute renal failure, but with a low fatality rate (1%–15%) [2, 3]. HPS, by contrast, shows a noncardiogenic pulmonary edema and subsequent respiratory compromise, without the renal component of HFRS and a fatality rate of up to 60% [4, 5].Both diseases are carried by rodents (family Muridae, subfamily Sigmodontinae) and each particular species of hantavirus has a particular rodent as its intermediate host. Environmental conditions that favor the reproduction and spread of rodents in endemic areas are known to increase the incidence of the disease. Humans typically acquire the disease through the inhalation of aerosolized excreta or secreta from infected rodents.Human-to-human transmission of the Andes virus (ANDV) was first claimed to have occurred as part of the 1996 outbreak in southern Argentina [6–8], and since then a number of studies have reported more cases and suggested the involvement of this form of transmission in both Argentina and Chile [9–11]. Importantly, however, there have been no reports of human-to-human transmission from Europe, Asia, and most countries in the Americas where the disease exists, and other studies in Argentina [12, 13] and Chile [14, 15] did not find evidence of it.It is important to determine whether there is in fact sufficient evidence for human-to-human transmission of the disease. If so, this may require recommendations regarding infection prevention and control measures in health facilities and in household settings. Thus, the objective of this systematic review was to assess the evidence for human-to-human transmission of hantavirus.METHODSHigh-quality systematic review methods were used [16] and the protocol was registered on the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) [17]. Reporting of the systematic review follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) statement for reporting [18].Search Strategy and Selection CriteriaWe searched Cochrane Central, Embase, Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS), PubMed, and Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO) from inception to date of search (3 July 2020). The PubMed search was updated 28 February 2021. In addition, Google was searched using the same key words for gray literature. Reference lists of included studies, key literature reviews, and Pan American Health Organization/World Health Organization documents, such as country-level guidelines, were scanned for relevant studies. Google Scholar was used to search for articles that cite key articles. Contact was made with known hantavirus experts to identify both published and unpublished studies, though the response was poor, possibly due to the fact that many of the key studies were published >20 years ago.The search terms included medical subject heading (MeSH) terms (where relevant for the database) and text words. Searches were conducted by 1 review author (M. M. H.) and references were imported into Endnote. The search strategy and results for each of the databases are included in Supplementary File 1.The screening of the titles and abstracts against the inclusion criteria (Table 1) was conducted by 2 review authors independently (M. M. H. and L. S. L.). The full text of any potentially relevant papers identified by either reviewer was retrieved and assessed against the inclusion criteria by 2 reviewers (M. M. H. and L. S. L.) independently. Disagreements regarding eligibility of studies were resolved via discussion and consensus, with consultation with a third reviewer if needed (J. T./L. R.).Table 1.Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion of StudiesElementInclusion CriteriaaParticipantsStudies focused on individuals (humans) of any age with a laboratory diagnosis of hantavirus infection and people in contact with them, including healthcare workers.ExposureInterpersonal contact with a person with laboratory-confirmed hantavirus infection within the incubation period from exposure to illness onset. Studies that only focus on human contact with infected rodents were excluded.ComparisonsNo exposure to a human with a laboratory diagnosis of hantavirus infection; low level of exposure; exposure only to infected rodents; or no comparison.OutcomesTransmission of hantavirus from 1 human to another. Studies were included if they had at least 1 of the following transmission outcomes measured in human contacts: • Genetic sequence analysis of the hantavirus RNA between human index and contact cases, showing homology OR • Laboratory diagnosis of hantavirus infection, including 1 of virology, serology, or immunohistochemistry OR • Signs and symptoms consistent with the clinical case definition of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome or hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (as defined by the country in which the study was conducted).Study typeThe evidence was prioritized by strength of study design as follows: (1) randomized controlled trials; (2) nonrandomized comparative studies (controlled trials, cohort studies, case-control studies, and cross-sectional studies); (3) noncomparative studies (eg, an epidemiological investigation of hantavirus clusters, case series, seroepidemiological studies of exposed populations only). Single case reports, modeling studies, animal-only studies, and environmental studies (ie, with no measurement of humans) were excluded. Literature reviews on the topic were also excluded but the reference list was checked for possible studies.
aOther criteria: Both published and unpublished (gray literature) studies in any language were included, with no date of publication limitations.Data Extraction, Risk of Bias Assessment, and Data AnalysisTwo reviewers independently extracted all relevant data from the included papers (M. M. H. and L. S. L.) into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet. Differences were resolved by discussion and consensus, with consultation with a third reviewer (J. T./L. R.) if needed.Data extracted included study ID, year of study, country, region/city, setting of study, hantavirus species, mouse species, study type, type of outbreak, participants (number, age, sex, diagnostic criteria for hantavirus infection, disease, clinical case definition for suspected and confirmed cases), exposure (definition, setting, confounders measured), outcomes, results, and other relevant information (eg, case fatality rate, possible conflicts of interest).The risk of bias (RoB) of included studies was assessed by 1 reviewer (M. M. H.) and verified by a second (L. S. L.), with consultation with a third reviewer in the case of disagreements (J. T./L. R.). The Risk of Bias in Non-randomized Studies—of Exposures (ROBINS-E) tool was used for nonrandomized comparative studies [19, 20]. The 7 RoB items include bias due to: (1) confounding, (2) selection of participants into the study, (3) classification of exposures, (4) departures from intended exposures, (5) missing data, (6) measurement of outcomes, and (7) selection of reported results. Judgments for each RoB item and for the overall judgement of the study can be low RoB, moderate RoB, serious RoB, or critical RoB [19]. No suitable tool for assessing noncomparative studies could be found in the literature and similar systematic reviews of human-to-human or animal-to-human transmission of infectious agents that we could find did not undertake a RoB assessment [21–24]. Thus, for noncomparative studies that met our inclusion criteria, no RoB assessment was undertaken. However, given the lack of a control group, the high possibility of selection bias, and inability to control for confounding, these studies are considered to be at critical RoB.Data were synthesized in both tabular and narrative formats. A meta-analysis was not possible due to heterogeneity in the studies and outcomes measured.RESULTSWe identified 1321 records after removal of duplicates (Figure 1). The initial search resulted in the inclusion of 26 articles and the updated search of PubMed identified 1 additional article [25]. Thus, we included 22 primary studies in the systematic review reported in 21 articles [8–15, 25–38] and 6 supporting references 6, 7, 28, 39–41. The most common reasons for exclusion of studies at the full-text stage were due to the exposure not being interpersonal contact (n = 47) or study type (n = 36) (Figure 1 and Supplementary File 2).Figure 1.Study selection flow diagram - human-to-human transmission of hantavirus.Characteristics of Included StudiesNo randomized controlled trials were found. The studies included a total of 5190 participants: 4179 in the comparative designs (Table 2) and 1011 in the noncomparative designs (Supplementary Table 1). The majority of studies were conducted in Central and South America (n = 16), including 8 in Argentina and 5 in Chile. Only 8 studies used a comparative design [12, 15, 27, 29, 34, 36, 38], with 6 of these being cross-sectional serological studies [12, 15, 27, 36, 38], 1 a cohort study [29], and 1 combining both a cross-sectional and cohort design [34]. The remaining 14 studies used noncomparative designs, 10 of which involved the investigation of 1 or more clusters of cases [8–11, 25, 26, 32, 33, 35, 37], 2 were serological surveys of contacts [13, 14], and 2 investigated pregnant women with hantavirus infection for the possibility of vertical transmission of infection to their babies [30, 31].Table 2.Characteristics of Included Studies: Comparative DesignsStudya,b [Reference]Country, Year of StudyVirusStudy TypeParticipantsExposure Definition (or Actual)cOutcomes MeasureddBayard 2004a [27]Panama 2000ChocloCross-sectional seroprevalence and epidemiological study among household and neighborhood members of index HPS patientsN = 311 (age range 1–79 years, 57% male)Household contact (n = 10)Serology: IgG; plus IgM in those positive for IgGBayard 2004b [27]Panama 2000ChocloCross-sectional seroprevalence and epidemiological study among HCW contacts of index cases compared to an unexposed group of HCWs from another department within the hospital.N = 77; 38 exposed and 39 unexposedHealthcare contact: medical staff who provided direct medical care (ie, <1 m from the patient) to infected patients in the emergency room and intensive care unit.Serology: IgG; plus IgM in those positive for IgGChaparro 1998 [15]Chile 1997AndesCross-sectional seroprevalence and epidemiological study of HCW in the Coyhaique Regional Hospital, where the majority of HPS patients were admitted.N = 319; 140 exposed and 179 unexposedHealthcare contact: delivering clinical care or administrative or housekeeping services within 2 m of a patient with HPS, working with laboratory specimens from patients with HPS, or participating in an autopsy of a patient with HPS.Serology: IgM and IgGFerres 2007 [29]Chile 2001–2005AndesProspective cohort study of recent household contacts of persons with HPS. Data collection included a clinical evaluation, blood samples, and a questionnaire at baseline. The clinical evaluation and blood samples were repeated weekly for 28 days. The comparison was degree and type of contact with index case.N = 552; 76 index cases (age range 0–77 years, 74% male); 16 household contact cases (age range 2–67 years; 37.5% male); 460 seronegative household contacts (age range 2–94 years, 51.7% male)Household contacts >2 years of age who had resided in the same house for at least 1 night at any point from 30 days before to 7 days after the onset of symptoms in the index case patient.Virology: RT-PCR Serology: IgM and IgGPini 2003 [12]Argentina 2000?Cross-sectional seroprevalence and epidemiologic survey of residents of the area, in conjunction with a serologic study in rodents.N = 341 (all ages, 44% male)ND. Actual: responded yes to a survey question about previous contact with a confirmed HPS patient.Serology: IgGRuo 1994 [34]China 1987–1988Hantaan & SeoulCross-sectional seroprevalence study in April 1987. Follow-up in April 1988 of all seronegative residents from this group (cohort): serology and questionnaire regarding their activities within the prior year. Rodent studies in 1987 to ascertain the species.N = 1811 in 1987 (all ages >1 year, 51.2% male). In 1988, 1325 of 1592 hantavirus antibody–negative residents in 1987 were revisited.ND. Actual: responded yes to a survey question about caring for others with HFRS.Serology: IgGVitek 1996 [36]United States 1993Sin Nombre virusCross-sectional serological and epidemiological study of HCWs in 4 institutions that cared for HPS patients, processed their laboratory specimens, or conducted autopsies compared to those unexposed to HPS cases.N = 396 HCWs (age range 16–67 years, 25.4% male)Healthcare contact: delivering clinical care or housekeeping services within 5 ft (1.5 m) of a patient with HPS, working with laboratory specimens from patients with HPS, or participating in an autopsy on a patient with HPS.Signs and symptoms; Serology: IgM and IgGWilliams 1997 [38]Paraguay 1995–1996Sin Nombre virusCross-sectional epidemiological investigation, including review of medical records, serosurvey, environmental evaluation and rodent trapping following an outbreak (July 1995 to January 1996). Comparison of household contacts with area residents.N = 372; 27 household contacts and 345 area residents (age range 7–75 years; 54% male)ND. Actual: household contact.Serology: IgM and IgGAbbreviations: HCW, healthcare worker; HFRS, hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome; HPS, hantavirus pulmonary syndrome; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglobulin M; ND, not defined; RT-PCR, reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction.
aIf a study had >1 reference, we awarded 1 reference the status of primary reference.
bNo conflicts of interest were apparent in any of the studies.
cFor all studies, the comparison was no exposure or less exposure.
dNone of the studies conducted genetic sequencing.Risk of Bias in Included Studies (Comparative Designs Only)Of the 8 comparative study designs, 6 were classified as having a critical RoB [12, 15, 27, 36, 38] and 2 as serious RoB [29, 34] (Table 3; Supplementary File 3). The most serious issues influencing the RoB assessment were bias due to confounding and bias due to classification of the exposure.Table 3.Summary of the Risk of Bias AssessmentBayard 2004a [27]Bayard 2004b [27]Chaparro 1998 [15]Ferres 2007 [29]Pini 2003 [12]Ruo 1994 [34]Vitek 1996 [36]Williams 1997 [38]Domains ConfoundingCriticalCriticalCriticalSeriousCriticalSeriousCriticalCritical SelectionSeriousSeriousLowModerateModerateModerateModerateCritical Measurement of exposuresCriticalCriticalCriticalModerateCriticalSeriousCriticalCritical Departures from exposuresSeriousSeriousSeriousModerateSeriousSeriousSeriousSerious Missing dataModerateSeriousModerateModerateModerateSeriousLowModerate Measurement of outcomesModerateModerateLowLowLowLowModerateLow Reported resultsModerateLowLowLowLowLowLowLowOverall biasCriticalCriticalCriticalSeriousCriticalSeriousCriticalCriticalEvidence for Human-to-Human Transmission From the Comparative DesignsThree of the 8 comparative designs were conducted in Argentina [12] or Chile [15, 29], of which 1 cohort study conducted in Chile but with a serious RoB showed increased risk of human-to-human transmission of ANDV in household contacts for sex partners and with exposure to saliva (deep kissing) [29] (Table 4). Of 476 household contacts, only 16 (3.4%) developed HPS and seropositivity. The remaining 460 (96.6%) were seronegative. Only 3 of the 16 were claimed to be definite human-to-human transmission because co-exposure to rodents was unlikely. Another 9 were probable for human-to-human transmission. Unfortunately, an unexposed group was not included in the study [29]. The other 2 studies showed no evidence for human-to-human transmission. The first, a cross-sectional study of healthcare workers in the Coyhaique Regional hospital, southern Chile, that coincided with an outbreak and where the majority of HPS patients were admitted did not show any difference in prevalence of immunoglobulin G (IgG) to hantavirus between those exposed compared to those unexposed (4.3% vs 3.4%, P = .66) [15]. The second, a cross-sectional study of residents of Yuto, Jujuy Province in northern Argentina (specific hantavirus not clear), did not find any difference in prevalence of IgG to hantavirus in those with previous contact with a known HPS patient compared to those without previous contact (6.1% vs 6.6%; χ 2 = 0.03, P = .86) [12]. While the hantavirus species was not clearly identified in this study, it may be Laguna Negra, Bermejo, or Orán virus rather than ANDV [42]. The 5 comparative designs conducted in Panama [27], Paraguay [38], China [34], and the United States [36] showed no evidence for increased prevalence of IgG and/or immunoglobulin M to hantavirus between those exposed and unexposed.Table 4.Results: Comparative DesignsStudya [Reference]Confounders MeasuredResultsBayard 2004a [27]Co-exposure to infected rodentsNo evidence for human-to-human transmission. Two of 10 household members of confirmed patients had IgG antibodies (20%); 38 of 301 neighborhood residents had IgG antibodies (12.6%).Bayard 2004b [27]Co-exposure to infected rodents, use of PPENo evidence for human-to-human transmission. No IgM antibodies were present in the 77 healthcare workers. Only 1 of 38 exposed workers had IgG antibodies: 1/38 (2.63%) vs 1/39 (2.56%) of unexposed workers. Use of PPE was variable. Co-exposure to rodents is uncertain.Chaparro 1998 [15]Co-exposure to infected rodentsNo evidence for human-to-human transmission. None of the HCWs had evidence of recent hantavirus infection, as measured by the presence of IgM hantavirus antibodies. Twelve (3.8%) had IgG hantavirus antibodies interpreted as evidence of past hantavirus infection. There was no difference in the percentage with IgG antibodies between those exposed (6/140 [4.3%]) compared to those unexposed (6/179 [3.4%]), P = .66. Of the exposed participants, 5 (3.6%) experienced at least 1 febrile respiratory illness episode requiring hospitalization during their lifetime vs 12 (6.7%) among those unexposed (χ 2, 1 df = 1.53; P = .21). Use of PPE was variable.Ferres 2007 [29]Co-exposure to infected rodentsOf 476 household contacts, 16 (3.4%) developed HPS; 32.6% of the 92 cases occurred in 14 household clusters. 460/476 contacts remained seronegative. The risk of HCPS was 17.6% among sex partners of index case patients vs 1.2% among other household contacts (P < .001). For sex partners: adjusted OR, 9.71 (95% CI, 1.72–54.67). For exposure to saliva (deep kissing): adjusted OR, 5.05 (95% CI, .89–28.52). Human-to-human transmission appeared definite in 3 (ie, no environmental co-exposure, urban residence), probable in 9 (ie, close contact with the index case patient, including 7 of 9 who were sex partners, and a lack of major risk factors for environmental exposure), and possible in 2 of the 16 additional household case patients. The remaining 2 had a shared environmental exposure.Pini 2003 [12]Co-exposure to infected rodentsNo evidence for human-to-human transmission. Hantavirus IgG was found in 22/341 (6.5%) serum samples tested. Hantavirus antibodies among persons who had previous contact with known HPS patients vs those who did not were 6/98 (6.1%) vs 16/242 (6.6%) (χ 2 = 0.03, P = .86). Rural occupation was the risk factor that showed a significant difference between antibody-positive and -negative persons with 20/201 (10%) IgG positive vs 1/97 (1.03%) for urban or suburban occupations (χ 2 = 7.95, P = .004). No hantavirus antibodies were found among 61 students or 20 healthcare workers, including physicians, nurses, health agents, and a dentist. The presence of rodents was reported by 77% of hantavirus antibody–positive and 79% of hantavirus antibody–negative persons (χ 2, P > .05), both in peridomestic and workplace settings. 28.7% reported contact with a confirmed HPS case patient.Ruo 1994 [34]Co-exposure to infected rodentsNo evidence for human-to-human transmission. Family clustering was analyzed by binomial distribution fit procedure in the cross-sectional sample in 1987; no clustering was found (χ 2 = 0.59, 1 df, P = .44). Thirty of 1325 (2.3%) residents who were IgG-seronegative in 1987 seroconverted between 1987 and 1988. A multivariate analysis of risk factors in each of the cross-sectional and cohort studies found a significant risk for 3–4 factors associated with rodent exposure. Caring for others with HFRS did not show a significant relationship with IgG positivity in the univariate analysis (data not shown) and was not included in the multivariate analysis.Vitek 1996 [36]PPENo evidence for human-to-human transmission. None of the 396 participants had serological evidence of recent or past hantavirus infection. There were no statistically significant differences between exposed and unexposed HCWs in the percentage reporting any symptoms of illness since 1 April 1993. Use of some form of PPE was high (eg, 82% reported using gloves and 80% reported using some type of mask [but no mention of characteristics] in all their encounters with HPS patients). 70.6% reported exposure to patients with HPS.Williams 1997 [38]Co-exposure to infected rodentsNo evidence for human-to-human transmission. Forty-four of 345 (12.8%) area residents included in the convenience sample and 4/27 (14.8%) household contacts had IgG antibodies to SNV antigen. All 4 of the SNV antibody-positive household contacts were linked to case #1, which had evidence of rodent exposure at home. Six of the 78 (7.7%) tested rodents had IgG antibodies to SNV antigen.Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; df, degrees of freedom; HCW, healthcare worker; HPS, hantavirus pulmonary syndrome; IgG, immunoglobulin G; IgM, immunoglobulin M; OR, odds ratio; PPE, personal protective equipment; SNV, Sin Nombre virus.
aIf a study had >1 reference, we awarded 1 reference the status of primary reference.Evidence for Human-to-Human Transmission From the Noncomparative DesignsOf the 14 noncomparative studies, 7 were conducted in Argentina (6 analyses of clusters and 1 seroprevalence study) [8–10, 13, 25, 26, 32] and 3 in Chile (2 analyses of clusters and 1 seroprevalence study) [11, 14, 35] (Supplementary Table 2). None of the 4 noncomparative studies conducted outside of Argentina and Chile found evidence for human-to-human transmission [30, 31, 33, 37]. In Argentina, all but 1 of the studies showed some evidence of human-to-human transmission in investigations of clusters [8–10, 25, 26, 32], with up to 16 likely cases of human-to-human transmission reported between 1996 and 2014. The number of likely cases of human-to-human transmission from the 2018–2019 outbreak in Chubut province of Argentina cannot be determined due to lack of detailed epidemiological and environmental investigation [25]. While the authors claim that there were 33 cases of human-to-human transmission and genetic sequencing showing 99.8%–100% identity of the ANDV sequences between cases, the identical sequences can also be explained by exposure to the same viral variant within the local rodent populations [10, 32] (most of the cases lived in the same town), and co-exposure to rodents cannot be ruled out. Furthermore, some of the claimed events had minimal contact with a known case. The genetic sequencing conducted as part of 5 of the studies of clusters supported human-to-human contact in a maximum of 12 cases (2 for Iglesias et al [9], 2 for Martínez et al [32], 2 for Wells et al [8], and up to 6 for Martínez et al [25]—but with the limitation of no investigation of rodent exposure) due to identical sequences but likely different geographic area of infection. The seroprevalence study conducted 1–2 months following the 1996 outbreak in Rio Negro province did not support the finding of human-to-human transmission [13]. It found a very low prevalence of IgG to hantavirus (1%) in 294 community members and 0% in 152 healthcare workers [13]. Interestingly, the authors of this article make reference to a case-control study conducted as part of the outbreak, but we could not find any further details in the published literature, nor from the authors contacted.Similar to the case in Argentina, the 2 studies investigating clusters in Chile did find some evidence of human-to-human transmission, with up to 5 likely cases of human-to-human transmission reported [11, 35]. However, the seroprevalence study conducted in Temuco, Chile, did not support the finding of human-to-human transmission [14]. It found a prevalence of IgG to hantavirus of 1.9% in 106 family contacts and 0% in 109 healthcare worker contacts, which are both lower than the seroprevalence of 2.5%–7.5% in the rural communities where they live [14].DISCUSSIONThis systematic review presents a comprehensive and systematic evaluation of the research on human-to-human transmission of hantavirus. Despite claims of authors from Argentina and Chile of the existence of human-to-human transmission of ANDV, the balance of the evidence does not support this claim. Evidence from comparative studies (the strongest level of evidence available) does not support human-to-human transmission of hantavirus infection [12, 15, 27, 34, 36, 38], with the exception of 1 prospective cohort study in Chile with serious RoB and no unexposed comparison group [29]. For the noncomparative studies, the evidence for human-to-human transmission is limited to analyses of clusters in Chile [11, 35] and Argentina [8–10, 26, 32] and these findings are not supported by seroprevalence studies conducted in these countries after hantavirus outbreaks in the population [13, 14]. By design, noncomparative studies are severely limited in their power to make causal inferences due to common selection biases and confounding [43, 44].The absolute number of cases that may be attributable to human-to-human transmission is low and needs to be contrasted with the much larger number of cases that did not lead to human-to-human transmission, even with similarly close contact in community or health facility settings. For example, the cohort study by Ferres and colleagues included 476 household contacts, of which only 16 subsequently developed HPS, 3 of which were claimed to be definitely due to human-to-human transmission and 9 probably due to human-to-human transmission; the remaining 460 household contacts did not [29]. Their multivariate logistic regression model showed that the odds of infection among contacts were increased for sex partners and with exposure to saliva (deep kissing). However, the possible confounding effect of environmental exposure to the excreta/secreta of infected rodents, which is a known cause of infection, was not considered in this model, though it was considered qualitatively [29].Analysis of the evidence from noncomparative studies suggests a possibility of human-to-human transmission of ANDV in some parts of Argentina and Chile. However, as noted above, these studies are not able to make causal inferences and are limited to a few outbreaks, and the findings of some outbreaks have been published across different reports, with some inconsistencies in the accounts (see, eg, Supplementary File 4 [6–8, 28]). Furthermore, despite the known limitations of investigations of cases (without any suitable control group), some authors have made some rather alarming claims, such as the existence of “super-spreaders,” a term that is currently in vogue due to the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic but was also used for outbreaks caused by Ebola virus, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus, and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus—all viruses that are proven to be caused by human-to-human transmission and with combined modes of transmission [25]; this is not the case for hantavirus in the face of the current knowledge and available data. The authors of the “super-spreaders” article investigated a cluster of 34 cases and claim that all 33 cases resulting from the index case were caused by human-to-human transmission, but do not consider alternative explanations for the cases. No investigation of possible co-exposure to the excreta/secreta of infected rodents in the environment seems to have been conducted and the possibility of environmental exposure is not even considered as a possible limitation of the study. Moreover, despite the finding of Ferres et al in Chile that infection due to interpersonal contact is rare and was only found among close relatives in their study (9 of which were married or cohabiting couples) [29], Martínez and colleagues even suggest that crossing paths on the way to the restroom at a party without any physical contact was enough to result in transmission (as was the case for patient 4 with the index case; see Figure 1B and Supplementary Figure 3 in Martínez et al [25]). Yet, there is no discussion as to why the person sitting next to the febrile index case did not become infected, nor the other ≥6 people sitting less than a meter away from him at the party.While the use of genetic sequencing data to confirm human-to-human transmission has been used in investigations of clusters in Argentina and Chile [7–11, 25, 26, 32, 35], it has the limitation of only providing strong evidence when cases that occur in different geographic areas have identical sequences. “When all case-patients remain in the disease endemic area … molecular dissimilarities rule out person-to-person transmission, but identical sequences do not support it” [10].A key strength of this review was the use of high-quality systematic review methods [16] that included the use of 2 reviewers for all methodological stages of the review and a comprehensive search strategy. However, this review is limited by the study designs and high RoB of all but 1 of the included studies. Furthermore, the lack of response from most of the authors of the included studies limited our ability to check methodological issues or to determine why the case-control study referred to in conjunction with the 1996 Rio Negro outbreak in El Bolsón and Bariloche was never published [13].The RoB in included studies is a particular concern when trying to determine whether human-to-human transmission of hantavirus is the best explanation for infection in other human contacts. A randomized controlled trial, where subjects are randomized to exposure to another human with hantavirus or to a nonexposure control group, in theory, would constitute the ideal study design. However, ethical and feasibility concerns make this kind of study impractical at this stage of our understanding of the problem. The next best study designs fall in the observational design category but also require the use of a control (or comparison) group, such as in a cohort or case-control design—which are commonly used designs for outbreak investigations [44]. These would need to include the conduct of a multivariate analysis to control for potential confounders, especially environmental exposure to the excreta/secreta of infected rodents and the correct and consistent use of personal protective equipment (for studies of healthcare workers). The possibility of confounding due to co-exposure of the contact to the excreta/secreta of rodents with hantavirus and bias due to measurement of the exposure (interpersonal contact with a person with hantavirus infection) require particular attention for this research question. Furthermore, all but 1 of the comparative studies [29] had serious risk of differential misclassification of the exposure due to limited information about the duration, type or time of contact with the infected person, and environmental co-exposure to the excreta/secreta of infected rodents. Thus, the investigation of cases and contacts should include the characterization of the type of activity during the interpersonal contact (including the possibility of exposure to bodily fluids or aerosolized virus particles) and the duration and frequency of the interpersonal contact. In addition, environmental investigation of all places frequented by each case and contact (workplace, home, leisure) should be undertaken.What are the public health implications of these findings? Given the high case fatality rate for HPS, the precautionary principle could be invoked to recommend action to implement infection prevention control containment measures in cases of suspected hantavirus infection in health facilities and household settings where ANDV is present. This could include the implementation of standard precautions and rational and optimized use of personal protective equipment, including the use of filtering facepiece respirators, or respirators by health workers to prevent possible infection by inhalation of droplets or aerosolized virions. However, given the limited number of cases and the high RoB in included studies, it may be prudent to accompany such a recommendation with a strategy to gather better research evidence to answer the question.Future studies should include a control group, such as in a cohort or case-control design, and conduct a multivariate analysis to control for potential confounders, especially factors related to the potential risk of environmental exposure to the excreta/secreta of infected rodents. Care should be taken to measure the duration, type, and timing of contact with the infected person and with infected rodents. Outcome measures should include laboratory measures such as virology, serology, or immunohistochemistry. Molecular epidemiology analysis, including genetic sequencing of rodent and human specimens, may also be useful when cases have occurred outside the affected geographic area.In conclusion, this systematic review has shown that the evidence for human-to-human transmission of hantavirus is weak, specific to ANDV, and limited to some parts of Argentina and Chile. Due to the high case fatality rate for HPS, it may be prudent to recommend infection prevention and control measures in cases of suspected hantavirus infection—but this needs to be accompanied by the gathering of better research evidence.Supplementary DataSupplementary materials are available at The Journal of Infectious Diseases online. Supplementary materials consist of data provided by the author that are published to benefit the reader. The posted materials are not copyedited. The contents of all supplementary data are the sole responsibility of the authors. Questions or messages regarding errors should be addressed to the author.
Supplementary File 1. Search terms and results
Supplementary File 2. List of excluded studies
Supplementary File 3. Risk of bias assessment
Supplementary File 4. Description of HPS cases, Rio Negro Province, Argentina 1996
Supplementary Table 1. Characteristics of included studies—noncomparative designs by country of study
Supplementary Table 2. Results—noncomparative designs by country of studyjiab461_suppl_Supplementary_MaterialsClick here for additional data file.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: MEASLES VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: From Mosquito Bites to Sexual Transmission: Evaluating Mouse Models of Zika Virus Infection

1. IntroductionDespite the discovery of Zika virus (ZIKV) nearly 70 years ago, ZIKV emerged in the 2010s as a significant health threat [1]. The most recent outbreak in 2015–2016 in Latin America unveiled several devastating outcomes of ZIKV infection, including Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) in adults and ZIKV-induced microcephaly in the developing fetus, resulting in long-term cognitive impairments [1,2,3]. ZIKV is now endemic in many countries in Southeast Asia, Africa, and South America [4]. Several local outbreaks of ZIKV infections have also been reported in India, with concerns that a future ZIKV outbreak could be devastating in densely populated areas of India and other countries [5].Although ZIKV infections are largely believed to be transmitted via infected Aedes aegypti and A. albopictus mosquitos, several studies have demonstrated that ZIKV can also be sexually transmitted and is capable of vertical transmission to the developing fetus [1,6,7]. Sexual transmission of ZIKV disproportionately affects women, with approximately 90% of sexually transmitted ZIKV infections being male-to-women transmission [8]. Furthermore, ZIKV RNA has been detected up to 188 days post-infection in semen, presenting a large window of opportunity for sexual transmission [8,9]. Pregnancy is also known to increase susceptibility and adverse outcomes to many viral infections, and these immunological alterations may also increase susceptibility to vaginal ZIKV infections [10,11]. In South America, greater consideration of public health protocols and planned pregnancy during months of lower risk of mosquito-borne infection has been suggested to reduce the risk of harm to the developing fetus [12]. However, the longevity of ZIKV infection in males extends the risk of ZIKV infection beyond the seasonal and geographical range of mosquito-borne transmission. Thus, sexually transmitted ZIKV infections remain a risk in countries where ZIKV is endemic and pose significant risk for microcephaly and other ZIKV-induced harm to the developing fetus.With ZIKV outbreaks reoccurring every 5–10 years and no vaccines or effective treatments available, ZIKV is likely to result in outbreaks of increasing severity until the development of an effective vaccine. Following the 2016 outbreak, many immunodeficient and immunocompetent mouse models have been used to investigate ZIKV tropism, immunity, and potential treatments or vaccines. However, several questions remain unanswered regarding natural ZIKV infection and the impact of the route of infection on host immune responses and disease outcomes. While several animal models in hamsters, rhesus macaques, and pigtail macaques have been established [13,14,15], mouse models remain the most widely used models of ZIKV infection and have informed the majority of our knowledge of ZIKV-induced disease. In this review, we will examine the current knowledge regarding mosquito-borne vs. sexually transmitted ZIKV infections, examine the advantages and disadvantages of mouse models of ZIKV infection, and discuss how these can be used to answer these timely questions.2. Models of Mosquito-Borne Zika Virus (ZIKV) InfectionFollowing the 2016 outbreak in Latin America, a mouse model for ZIKV infection was crucial to begin investigating ZIKV-induced immunity and disease. Several models have been established to model mosquito-borne ZIKV infection, including both immunocompromised and immunocompetent mouse models. These mainly employ footpad, subcutaneous, and intraperitoneal injection to mimic vector transmission, with footpad infection being most common [16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. As these routes of infection may elicit different trafficking patterns through the draining lymph nodes, use of footpad infection may elicit more consistent immune responses [23]. It has been well-established that ZIKV and other flaviviruses utilize the viral NS5 protein to bind to and degrade STAT2 proteins downstream of type I interferon receptor (IFNAR) signaling, inhibiting expression of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes and induction of innate antiviral responses [24,25]. Consequently, ZIKV evades host defense mechanisms and can efficiently replicate in human cells. ZIKV NS5 protein cannot target murine STAT2 to evade IFN signaling, which hinders the use of wild-type (WT) mice in studying ZIKV-induced disease [24,26]. Ifnar−/− mouse models and other similarly immunocompromised mouse models, including Stat2−/− mice, exhibit enhanced susceptibility to ZIKV infections and remain most frequently used for the study of ZIKV infection and pathogenesis in vivo. Mouse models lacking IFN signalling are more susceptible to ZIKV infection and display higher viral titers and viral persistence in tissues compared to WT mice [16,17,21,27,28,29,30]. As ZIKV infections have been associated with increasing rates of GBS and other neurological disorders, IFNAR-deficient models on a C57BL/6 background have demonstrated ZIKV dissemination to the CNS, accompanied by neurological deficits, and can be useful for studying the mechanism of ZIKV-induced neuropathology [16,18,30,31]. For example, Lazear et al. demonstrated that Ifnar−/− and Irf3−/−Irf5−/−Irf7−/− triple knockout (TKO) mice inoculated subcutaneously with ZIKV sustained higher levels of infection in the testes, spinal cord, and brain compared to WT mice and exhibited signs of neurological disease, such as hind limb weakness and paralysis, starting around 6 days post-infection (dpi). By 10 dpi, mice in both Ifnar−/− and TKO groups were either moribund or dead, in contrast to ZIKV-infected WT mice that displayed no signs of disease throughout the duration of the experiment. Similarly, Morrey et al. recently described an aged Ifnar−/− mouse model, where infection of 4-month-old mice was not as lethal as infection of younger mice and elicited transient paralysis that may facilitate further investigation of GBS [32].A129 mice (lacking the type I IFN receptor) and AG129 mice (lacking both type I and type II IFN receptors) on a 129Sv/Ev background have also been used as a model of ZIKV infection with a variety of ZIKV strains [17,27,28,33,34,35]. Despite neuroinvasion by ZIKV in A129 and AG129 mice, neurological outcomes, such as hindlimb paralysis, are less commonly observed in mice of the 129Sv/Ev background compared to reports in C57BL/6 mice. Thus, the mouse strain background is an important factor that must be considered in investigations of immunity during ZIKV infection as well as development of novel vaccines or therapeutics. Ifnar−/− mice on both backgrounds have been shown to develop sufficient adaptive immunity, including memory T cells and neutralizing antibodies in response to infection or vaccination, and can be employed to investigate potential vaccines [18,36,37,38,39,40]. However, vaccine-induced reduction in ZIKV viremia seen in A129 and AG129 mice may not necessarily indicate sufficient prevention of CNS invasion and subsequent disease. It is critical that while vaccines and therapeutics may function in A129 or AG129 mice, they should also be evaluated for protection against ZIKV-induced neurological disease in Ifnar−/− mice of the C57BL/6 background.2.1. Monoclonal Antibody Blockade of Type I Interferon Receptor (IFNAR) Elicits Similar Clinical Outcomes to IFNAR-Deficient Mice and May Be an Ideal Model for Evaluation of VaccinesAlthough Ifnar−/− models provide a good basis to study pathogenesis of ZIKV-induced disease, defective innate immune responses may impact the development of adaptive immunity through impaired antigen presentation and B and T cell priming, which may underestimate the efficacy of therapeutic interventions and vaccines that rely on these immune responses. To establish models that better represent human antiviral immune responses, several groups have administered anti-IFNAR monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to immunocompetent mice as opposed to using transgenic Ifnar−/− models [31,39,41,42,43,44]. Smith et al. established a partially immunocompetent model of ZIKV infection that demonstrated severe ZIKV-induced disease, neuroinflammation, and mortality following administration of anti-IFNAR in C57BL/6 WT mice 1 day before ZIKV inoculation [31]. Both subcutaneous and intraperitoneal inoculations led to weight loss, viremia, and neuropathologic changes [31]. These results demonstrated similar neurological disease in mAb treated mice as IFN-deficient models previously mentioned, suggesting antibody blockade against IFNAR may be a suitable model to further study neurological damage caused by ZIKV infections using transgenic mice of the same background. Importantly, antibody blockade has not elicited consistent neurological disease in other studies, perhaps due to incomplete blockade and inability for the antibody to cross the blood–brain barrier, thus the dose and resulting clinical symptoms should be verified before use [16]. Compared to a completely IFN-deficient mouse model, the use of anti-IFNAR antibody blockade allows the mice to maintain normal innate immune responses during the vaccination period until suppression of IFN signalling during the time of ZIKV challenge. However, several studies have demonstrated strong efficacy of candidate vaccine-induced adaptive immunity in the absence of IFNAR signaling for both HSV-2 and ZIKV, suggesting that use of an IFNAR-deficient mouse model may be sufficient to evaluate vaccine strategies against ZIKV [36,37,38,40,45].2.2. Alternative Models to Immunocompromised Mice May Not Accurately Represent Natural InfectionDue to limitations of completely IFNAR-deficient models, some groups have attempted to circumvent IFN-deficiency by use of neonatal models and intracranial injections. Studies have shown that neonatal mice can be infected by ZIKV since their immune system is not yet fully functional and exhibits reduced IFN signaling [44,46,47,48,49]. For example, Manangeeswaran et al. established a model of neonatal infection of WT mice at postnatal day one [46]. While WT mice were susceptible to infection and developed mild neurological disease, the infected neonatal Ifnar−/− mice displayed higher viral titers in the CNS, liver, and spleen and developed lethal neurological disease, such as hind limb bilateral paralysis [46]. They also observed differences in immune cell infiltration in the CNS, where WT mice exhibited higher levels of CD8+ T cells and Ifnar−/− mice displayed increased macrophage and neutrophil infiltration. Interestingly, these results contrast studies in adult IFNAR-deficient mice, where CD8+ T cells comprise the majority of infiltrating immune cells [18,19,20,30]. Using immunocompetent neonatal mice may also have its disadvantages, as the immune system is still being developed and may not recapitulate the maturity of immune responses observed in adults [50]. Regardless, neonatal mice may be a viable option for investigating questions regarding neurological disease or testing antiviral drugs without a complete lack of type I IFN signaling capabilities.While immunocompetent mouse models have provided critical understanding of ZIKV epitopes and development of effective adaptive immunity during vaccination, they are not capable of modeling ZIKV infection and replication without some form of IFN-deficiency [20,22,29]. Several groups wishing to investigate mechanisms of ZIKV-associated neurological disease and potential therapeutics have opted to employ intracranial inoculation to bypass clearance by the immune system in the periphery before reaching the CNS. Studies using intracranial injections have spanned investigations of T cell and microglia interactions to altered metabolic states in neurons during ZIKV infection [51,52,53,54]. However, evading the peripheral immune system through intracranial infection may drastically alter immune responses in the CNS that can contribute to protection or neuropathology following ZIKV infection. Figueirdo et al. observed ZIKV RNA escape to the periphery following intracranial infection, which has essentially reversed the order of natural ZIKV infection [51]. This reversed order of dissemination does not account for the involvement of peripheral innate and adaptive immune cells in ZIKV dissemination to the CNS or subsequent CNS infiltration and immune-mediated damage following natural infection. Intracranial infection may be beneficial in testing antivirals that can reduce replication in the CNS, but studies of the immune response should be interpreted with caution and confirmed in other models that more closely mimic natural ZIKV infection. Overall, while alternative models to IFNAR-deficient mice can provide helpful insight and understanding of ZIKV infections, the immunocompromised Ifnar−/− mouse model remains the model that most closely resembles natural infection via mosquito-borne transmission (Figure 1).3. Models of Sexually Transmitted ZIKV InfectionWhile vector-borne ZIKV infections are a major concern, ZIKV emerged in the South American epidemic as a novel sexually transmitted virus. With few travel restrictions, many infected individuals returned to their home countries, where they presented symptoms of infection or were suspected to have transmitted the virus via unprotected sexual intercourse [9,55,56]. The spread of ZIKV beyond its vector-restricted geographical range presents a risk for future outbreaks of sexually transmitted ZIKV, and mouse models that consider the impact of sexual transmission are necessary to develop vaccines, therapeutics, and public health strategies to protect women impacted by this disease.3.1. Sexual Transmission May Be More Harmful Than Mosquito-Borne Infection during PregnancyThe recent ZIKV outbreaks demonstrated the severity of ZIKV infections, as neonates from infected mothers presented with microcephaly and other neurological impairments [2,3,57]. Models of ZIKV infection during pregnancy have been a critical focus since 2016, with significant research directed towards the impact of mosquito-borne ZIKV infection and timing of infection during pregnancy [58,59,60,61,62,63,64,65]. These models have also been used to evaluate vaccines that prevent against ZIKV-induced damage to the developing fetus [37,66,67,68,69]. However, the discovery that ZIKV can be sexually transmitted has complicated efforts to study ZIKV infections of pregnant mice. Although subcutaneous or intraperitoneal injections effectively model mosquito-borne ZIKV, women are also at risk of sexual exposure to ZIKV by infected males [6,7,8,70]. Studies of both subcutaneous/footpad and intravaginal infection have demonstrated that pregnant WT or Ifnar+/− mice can be infected through both routes, although partial or complete IFN deficiency is necessary for sustained replication [11,58,65].Studies using vaginally administered ZIKV following mating of uninfected pairs have provided clarity regarding consequences of ZIKV infection at different timepoints during pregnancy [11,71,72]. For example, Yockey et al. show that intravaginal (IVAG) infection at embryonic day 4.5 (E4.5), during early pregnancy, results in reduced fetal weights at E18.5 in both WT and Irf3−/−Irf7−/− breeding pairs [11]. Meanwhile, mating of Ifnar−/− dams with a WT sire, intended to resemble the immune status of the human fetus, resulted in resorption of the fetus following IVAG E4.5 infection, and E8.5 IVAG infection significantly reduced fetal weight at E18.5 [11]. However, this model does not reflect simultaneous conception and ZIKV infection by infected males. In Ifnar−/− mice, Uraki et al. demonstrated male-to-female transmission resulting in simultaneous infection and pregnancy and observed fetal growth restriction and ocular deformities at E18.5 [73]. Similarly, Winkler et al. established a mouse model of sexual transmission from anti-IFNAR treated Rag1−/− (AIR) mice to Ifnar−/− or AIR dams [43]. Mating of AIR sires and dams resulted in vertical transmission measured by infection of the placenta and fetus, although clinical outcomes of fetal development were not assessed. This study further demonstrated the ability to use antibody blockade with a variety of transgenic mice, which may be an ideal method since it uses partial IFNAR blockade for closer resemblance to human infection and does not require extensive breeding.It has been suggested that pregnancy may impair development of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell responses following ZIKV infection, although neutralizing antibody production is not significantly altered [39]. However, Duggal et al. did not observe any significant difference in survival between infected pregnant and non-pregnant AG129 mice, suggesting that the timing of infection during pregnancy may determine the clinical relevance of this impairment [35]. However, this research group also observed greater dissemination of infectious ZIKV to the uterus in pregnant females compared to non-pregnant females, indicating some differences in susceptibility to infection in pregnant individuals that may be mediated by decreased cellular immunity [35,74]. Additionally, Duggal et al. observed increased dissemination to the fetus following sexual transmission compared to mosquito-borne infection, but they did not assess clinical outcomes of disease in the fetus [74]. Further research is necessary to conclude if the route of infection does differ in its impact on fetal development. Consequently, models of varying routes and timepoints of infection of pregnant mice must be considered when testing vaccines and therapeutics to ensure optimal efficacy in preventing all causes of infection.3.2. Models of Sexual Transmission in Non-Pregnant Mice Demonstrate Different Kinetics of ZIKV Infection and DiseaseWhile the vast majority of research investigating ZIKV as an STI in mouse models has been focused on pregnant females, few have investigated how sexual transmission of ZIKV impacts ZIKV dissemination and disease outcomes in non-pregnant mice. Soon after the ZIKV outbreak in 2016, Tang et al. reported the use of diestrus-induced type I and type II IFN receptor-deficient AG129 mice to model IVAG ZIKV infection [75]. They further demonstrated the necessity of IFNAR deficiency on myeloid-derived cells on a C57BL/6 background for IVAG-infected mice to establish a systemic ZIKV infection [75]. Yockey et al. similarly demonstrated that IVAG-infected Ifnar−/− mice on a C57BL/6 background succumb to ZIKV-induced hindlimb paralysis and weight loss [11]. Administration of a monoclonal blocking antibody against IFNAR renders mice infected via intravaginal inoculation or sexual transmission susceptible to infection [36,43]. As previously described, anti-IFNAR mAb treatment may not represent a complete blockade and does not always result in neurological disease as is observed in Ifnar−/− mice. These anti-IFNAR treatments may facilitate investigation of sexually transmitted ZIKV kinetics and dissemination in mouse models lacking lymphocytes or other components of the immune system, as described by Winker et al. with footpad infections [39].Immunocompetent mice have also been employed to investigate how immune responses in the vaginal tract may differ from other routes of infection. Several studies have indicated that WT mice are susceptible to IVAG ZIKV infection during progesterone-induced diestrus, but these mice are incapable of developing a systemic ZIKV infection due to their functioning type I IFN signaling [11,76]. Khan et al. demonstrated a dampened immune response in the vaginal tract of ZIKV-infected WT mice, likely due to low expression of the pattern recognition receptors RIG-I, MDA5, TLR3, and TLR7 in the lower female reproductive tract compared to the upper female reproductive tract and the iliac lymph node [76,77]. This results in minimal type I IFN production and sustained but low detection of ZIKV RNA for 3 days [76]. However, the use of qPCR to detect ZIKV RNA cannot convincingly determine if this sustained, but low, viral replication produces infectious ZIKV particles. Because the authors used an immunocompetent mouse model, they were unable to assess how sustained replication in the vaginal tract impacts dissemination of infectious ZIKV particles or disease outcomes. Furthermore, although they demonstrate a delay in CD8+ T cell priming and control of LCMV replication in the vaginal tract, the impact of dampened adaptive immunity on ZIKV replication and neurological disease cannot be assessed using WT mice [76].Thus far, one research group has attempted to investigate how the route of ZIKV infection might impact ZIKV viremia or dissemination to other tissues. Duggal et al. show that sexual transmission of ZIKV in AG129 mice resulted in more rapid and severe weight loss and shorter mean survival compared to mice subcutaneously or intravaginally infected [74]. Interestingly, non-pregnant IVAG and sexually infected mice appeared to exhibit worse survival than pregnant mice, although this was not directly compared. They further observed that IVAG infection resulted in a 4-day delay in viremia compared to subcutaneous infection or sexual transmission in both pregnant and non-pregnant mice, although this may be due to inconsistent or impaired IVAG infection due to the use of mice at random stages of the estrous cycle [74]. They further demonstrate that sexual transmission in non-pregnant female mice resulted in infection of the uterus and ovary at the time of euthanasia, while they observed little to no infection in these organs in non-pregnant mice with the other routes of infection. These results should be interpreted with caution, as the mice that were subcutaneously and intravaginally infected also survived much longer than the sexually infected mice and may have cleared the infection by that time. Although the impact of the route of infection on neurological disease cannot be assessed in this model, these results suggest that the route of infection may impact ZIKV kinetics and disease in non-pregnant mice and may help us to better understand how to combat sexually transmitted ZIKV and associated disease in women.As described, Duggal et al. demonstrated that there may be some differences in kinetics and dissemination of ZIKV between the sexual exposure and IVAG infection models used to represent sexually transmitted ZIKV infections in both pregnant mice and their fetuses as well as non-pregnant mice [74]. Several studies have established models of sexually transmitted ZIKV by intraperitoneal or subcutaneous/footpad-infected males deficient in IFN signaling and mating them with uninfected dams of various genetic backgrounds [35,43,73,74]. While many of these studies were previously described in the context of pregnancy, many have also used these models to investigate the effects of semen and infected sperm that may be more representative of natural infection. Clancy et al. have established in A129 and AG129 mice that ZIKV infects all parts of the male reproductive system, with titers of 103 PFU per ejaculate observed, and vaginal inoculation of female mice with epididymal flush or seminal plasma results in ZIKV infection and viremia [35,78,79,80]. A129 mice may be a more suitable model than AG129 mice to recapitulate ZIKV infection of the human male reproductive tract, as these mice exhibited mild lesions similar to humans and histologically normal sperm for studying sexual transmission [79]. Furthermore, the differences in kinetics and dissemination of ZIKV following sexual exposure vs. IVAG infection may be attributed to micro-abrasions facilitating more rapid viral dissemination or components of ejaculate, including semen, that may alter inflammatory responses and promote ZIKV replication, as seen with other viruses [81,82]. However, sexual exposure models remain difficult to control, as mating infected males with naïve dams or inoculation with seminal plasma results in inconsistent viral titers for inoculation that may influence ZIKV kinetics and immune responses. While IVAG inoculation controls for viral titer and is unlikely to alter inflammation in the vaginal tract, this model may not capture all aspects of sexual exposure that may influence ZIKV replication and dissemination. Overall, each model possesses several advantages and disadvantages that should be considered in future investigation of sexually transmitted ZIKV infections (Figure 2).4. Looking into the Crystal Ball: The Future of ZIKV Mouse ModelsAlthough it has been suggested that kinetics and dissemination of ZIKV differ in IVAG and sexually transmitted models of ZIKV compared to subcutaneous/footpad or intraperitoneal injections, it remains unclear why this occurs and how it impacts development of ZIKV-induced disease in non-pregnant mice. Despite their limitations, immunodeficient mice, deficient in type I IFN receptor signaling or select ISGs, will be necessary to investigate the clinical relevance of differing routes of ZIKV infection. Antibody blockade of IFNAR offers flexibility to investigate ZIKV infection kinetics and disease in other models rather than requiring additional breeding to establish double knockout mice.The mechanism of dissemination of ZIKV from the primary site of infection, including the role of semen and the impact of sexual transmission in ZIKV dissemination, remain poorly understood. Although humanized mouse models have only recently been established for ZIKV infection, they further corroborate evidence that immune cells are required for dissemination and development of systemic ZIKV infection following subcutaneous or intraperitoneal infection [83,84]. Humanized mouse models may provide a new avenue to investigate the role of the immune system in ZIKV dissemination from the female reproductive system, assuming that this is largely mediated by infected immune cells. However, these models cannot facilitate infection of structural cells with functional IFN signaling. Studies in humanized mice should be carefully compared to current immunodeficient models and knowledge from studies using human samples to evaluate their accuracy in depicting human ZIKV infection, particularly for sexually transmitted infection models. A more physiologically relevant model may be transgenic human STAT2-expressing (hSTAT2) mice. Gorman et al. established a model of hSTAT2 mouse infection, rendering the mouse susceptible to ZIKV evasion of type I IFN signaling, and observed increased ZIKV replication and mortality in 3-week-old mice infected with a mouse-adapted African ZIKV Dakar strain first isolated in 1984 [85]. Several studies have indicated differences in clinical disease outcomes of African strains and those isolated in the French Polynesian and South American epidemics [30,48,49,85]. Use of this hSTAT2 mouse model with more relevant strains from the recent South American outbreak or those currently circulating in ZIKV-endemic countries may provide the most accurate representation of human ZIKV-induced disease and open avenues to investigate both mosquito-borne and sexually transmitted ZIKV infections as well as vaccine and antiviral development.5. ConclusionsTransgenic IFNAR-deficient mouse models remain the most employed model of ZIKV infection, despite their limitations. Several alternatives, including use of anti-IFNAR antibodies, immunocompetent mice, neonatal mice, and intracranial injections have been investigated but possess their own limitations that must be carefully considered. Advances in humanized mouse models of ZIKV may provide the ability to answer specific questions regarding ZIKV infection of hematopoietic cells and their role in dissemination of ZIKV. Use of human STAT2 transgenic mice with clinically relevant ZIKV isolates should be further investigated, as they may represent the most relevant model of human infection thus far.Although significant research focus has been channeled towards understanding mosquito-borne ZIKV and establishing mouse models of ZIKV infection, our understanding of sexually transmitted ZIKV infections remains limited. In the context of pregnancy, we are only beginning to understand the effects of simultaneous conception and sexual transmission of ZIKV in fetal development. With the potential for future outbreaks of ZIKV, an STI that breaks the geographical confines of vector-borne infection, it is critical to consider sexual transmission in mouse models of ZIKV infection and develop vaccines and treatments that will prevent against both mosquito-borne and sexually transmitted ZIKV.


Title: Delineating morbillivirus entry, dissemination and airborne transmission by studying 

IntroductionMorbilliviruses are enveloped, non-segmented, negative strand RNA viruses that belong to the family Paramyxoviridae [1]. They are highly contagious, spread via the respiratory route, cause profound immune suppression but also elicit lifelong immunity in surviving hosts, and have a propensity to cause large outbreaks associated with high morbidity and mortality in previously unexposed populations. Measles virus (MV) is the prototype morbillivirus and remains a significant cause of childhood morbidity and mortality in the developing world. Measles is characterized by fever, skin rash, cough and conjunctivitis, followed by a transient immune suppression [2]. The resulting increased susceptibility to secondary infections can lead to life-threatening complications [3]. In spite of the availability of safe and effective live-attenuated MV vaccines, measles outbreaks continue to occur in the industrialized world due to inadequate vaccination coverage and importations of this highly transmissible virus from endemic regions [4, 5].The narrow host range and long incubation period of MV have restricted the characterization of its pathogenesis since patients are not recognized as having measles until onset of rash, and animal studies predominantly rely on experimental infections of non-human primates (NHPs). A surrogate model for MV pathogenesis is infection of ferrets with canine distemper virus (CDV), a morbillivirus that can infect a wide range of carnivores [6, 7]. However, CDV in carnivores is highly neurotropic and often leads to fatal disease [8–12], which is in sharp contrast to MV infection of humans and NHPs.Morbilliviruses are amongst the most contagious viruses known and are primarily transmitted by aerosols or respiratory droplets. Once inhaled, virions establish primary infection by receptor-dependent fusion at the plasma membrane [13]. Two cellular receptors involved in morbillivirus infection have been identified: signaling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 1 (SLAM/F1, or CD150), expressed by subsets of thymocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), hematopoietic stem cells, macrophages, T- and B-lymphocytes [14], and nectin cell adhesion molecule 4 (nectin-4, previously known as poliovirus receptor-related 4), expressed at the adherens junction complex of epithelial cells [15, 16]. Both receptors play a crucial role in viral pathogenesis (reviewed in [17]), with CD150-mediated infection being critical for entry and dissemination [18, 19] and nectin-4-mediated infection critical for virus transmission [20, 21].A number of aspects of morbillivirus pathogenesis remain unresolved. Studies in mice and NHPs have shown that MV initially infects alveolar macrophages and DCs in the lungs, instead of epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract [22–24]. Even though this is a possible entry route, it seems unlikely that a highly contagious virus with an R0 of 12–18 [25] and of which infection with one 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) is sufficient to cause productive infection in macaques [26], exclusively depends on infection of target cells in the alveoli. Additional routes of entry into a susceptible host have been postulated, including infection of CD150+ immune cells within the epithelium of the respiratory tract [18, 27]. As DCs are abundant within this epithelium, and DC-SIGN was previously identified as an attachment receptor for MV [28, 29], it is suggested that DCs could play a crucial role in this entry route [30]. Additionally, damage to the upper respiratory tract epithelium by mechanical injury [31] or respiratory co-infections potentially exposes nectin-4 as a cellular entry receptor. Another potential route of entry for morbilliviruses involves CD150+ and/or DC-SIGN+ cells present in the conjunctiva of the eye [32, 33]. However, direct in vivo evidence from animal models for these alternative entry strategies is lacking.Recombinant (r) viruses expressing fluorescent reporter proteins have allowed sensitive assessment of morbillivirus entry and dissemination in vivo [18, 34, 35]. Multicolored viruses have been used to demonstrate MV polyploidy [36], ribonucleoprotein trafficking [37], superinfection immunity [38], potential of segmenting the genome [39] and a cross-genomic cooperation modulating phenotype [40]. Recognizing the power of this approach for in vivo competition studies, we simultaneously administered three rCDVs expressing green (Venus), red (dTom) or blue (TagBFP) fluorescent proteins to ferrets to assess viral entry, intra-host dissemination and inter-host transmission. We show that CDV enters the host efficiently if delivered to the nose or lung, and that infection of the host through conjunctival administration, although less efficient, is also possible. In vivo competition showed that the route of entry had no influence on viral dissemination. However, exclusive single-color virus transmission of the systemically dominant virus to recipient ferrets was observed, suggesting a bottleneck during transmission.ResultsRecombinant CDVs stably express different fluorescent reporter proteinsPlasmids containing full-length CDV strain Snyder-Hill (CDVSH) antigenomes were modified to encode rCDVs expressing fluorescent reporter proteins from an additional transcription unit (ATU). Three fluorescent reporter proteins (Venus, dTom and TagBFP) were selected on basis of spectral discernibility, brightness, photo-stability, lack of oligomerization and potential to be detected by in-house flow cytometer and confocal microscope. These viruses, rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) were rescued and grown on Vero cells modified to express canine (c) CD150 (Vero-cCD150) in which they produced high levels of fluorescence in multinucleated syncytia (Fig 1A). Infection of concanavilin A (ConA)-stimulated white blood cells (WBC) isolated from CDV-naive ferrets resulted in large numbers of fluorescent cells, as detected by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, Fig 1B) and flow cytometry.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g001Fig 1In vitro validation and in vivo experimental design.(A, top panel) Three rCDVs expressing a fluorescent reporter protein as an ATU from the 6th position in the genome were generated (rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6), rCDVSHTagBFP(6)), rescued and (A, bottom panel) grown on Vero-cCD150 cells. (B) rCDVs were shown to efficiently infect ConA-stimulated ferret WBC. (C) Donor ferrets 1–6 (D1-6) were simultaneously inoculated with a low dose of the three indicated rCDVs delivered via Oc, IN and IT inoculation in different administration route combinations, divided over three sequential experiments.Simultaneous inoculation with three rCDVSHs causes lethal disease in ferretsSix donor ferrets (D1 –D6) were simultaneously inoculated in three consecutive experiments via the ocular (Oc), intra-nasal (IN) and intra-tracheal (IT) routes with a low dose of the indicated rCDVSH (3.3 x 103 TCID50/route), depositing viruses in the eyes, nose or lungs. Even though the viruses had been engineered to have identical genome lengths to prevent subtle differences in fitness impacting the outcome of the in vivo experiment, the rCDVs were alternated over the three route combinations to mitigate any unforeseen effect on pathogenesis (Fig 1C). All donor ferrets developed fever with a biphasic pattern, with temperature peaks around 5–7 and 12–14 days post-inoculation (DPI) (Fig 2A). The first fever peak corresponded with the onset of lymphopenia: peripheral lymphocyte counts were strongly reduced by the end of the first week after infection, and did not recover during the second week (Fig 2B). All donor ferrets became lethargic and were euthanized 14–16 DPI. Virus could be isolated from WBC of all ferrets from 4 DPI, with peak viremia levels observed around 6–8 DPI (Fig 2C). The decline in viral load in WBC during the second week was likely due to the virtual absence of lymphocytes in peripheral blood, resulting in exhaustion of susceptible CD150-positive cells. Virus was isolated from eye, nose, throat, and rectal swabs, in most ferrets with progressively increasing virus loads during the second week after inoculation (Fig 2D).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g002Fig 2Inoculation with rCDVs leads to systemic infection and disease.Simultaneous inoculation of donor ferrets (D1-6) via multiple administration routes with three reporter viruses resulted in systemic disease. (A) Body temperature was measured using an intra-peritoneal probe and a biphasic fever pattern was observed. (B) WBC counts measured in EDTA blood showed that animals became lymphopenic. (C) Systemic virus replication was detected by virus isolation from WBC on Vero-cCD150 cells, while (D) local virus replication was demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs.Simultaneous inoculation of ferrets with three rCDVs results in systemic replication of one or multiple virusesExpression of fluorescent proteins within WBC throughout the course of the experiment, or in single cell suspensions prepared from lymphoid tissues collected at necropsy, was assessed by flow cytometry (Fig 3A). In one ferret (D5) only one fluorescent protein was detected, in three ferrets (D1, D3, D4) a combination of two fluorescent proteins was detected and in two ferrets (D2, D6) all three inoculated viruses had initiated productive infections as shown by simultaneous detection of red, green and blue fluorescent proteins. Interestingly, in ferrets showing systemic infection with two or three viruses, all fluorescent proteins were already detectable in WBC collected at 6 DPI. This demonstrates that even though viruses were administered via multiple inoculation routes, parallel onset of viremia occurred within one week after inoculation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g003Fig 3Microscopic and macroscopic detection of fluorescence in donor ferrets.(A) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in directly inoculated (D1-6) ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. The circular inset shows which reporter virus was administered to a donor ferret via which route. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions of lymphoid tissues were determined by flow cytometry. rCDVs were detected in all lymphoid tissues (man LN: mandibular lymph node; ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; mes LN: mesenteric LN; GALT: gut-associated lymphoid tissue; PP: Peyer’s patches; BM: bone marrow; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 5/6 ferrets the IT delivered virus became dominant (D2 –D6). (B, C) Donor ferrets D1 and D2 were chosen as representative examples. Virus was isolated from WBC, BAL, CSF and throat, nose, eye and rectal swabs by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. (Left panels) Screening of virus isolations by CLSM allowed determination of the dominance of rCDVs at 8 DPI. (Centre panels) Relative contribution of the various reporter viruses to the total amount of rCDV present in the sample collected 8 DPI or at necropsy (CSF and BAL). (Right panels) Direct CLSM of various tissues at necropsy revealed fluorescence in the epithelium of the trachea (dotted line marks basement membrane, Lu marks lumen), and B-cell follicles in lymphoid tissues (delineated by dotted line). (D) Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was directly detected in live ferrets and during necropsy at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin. The inset in the second panel clearly shows that green and red foci of infected cells can be discerned (#). During necropsy, macroscopic fluorescence was detected in the tongue (arrows show tonsils), lungs and Peyer’s patches. Again, the inset in the third panel shows separate foci of green and red cells (#).rCDV uses multiple routes of entry in parallelIn all donor ferrets IT inoculation resulted in viremia, confirming that direct inoculation into the lower respiratory tract is a highly efficient entry route for morbilliviruses (Fig 3A). In five out of six donor ferrets, IN inoculation also resulted in viremia, demonstrating that morbilliviruses can also efficiently invade a host when 3300 TCID50 in a low volume (25μl/nostril) was deposited in the upper respiratory tract (Fig 3A). Finally, in two out of six ferrets the morbillivirus directly inoculated into the conjunctival sac behind the lower eyelid (again using a low volume inoculum) caused viremia, demonstrating this is a functional route for morbillivirus entry, although apparently less effective than entry through the respiratory route (Fig 3A).Multi-route delivery of rCDVs results in widespread systemic replicationNext we focused on the period between onset of viremia and euthanasia of the donor ferrets to assess morbillivirus dissemination. In one ferret (D1) the virus inoculated via the IN route became dominant, while in all other ferrets the virus given by IT inoculation became dominant. Likewise, viruses that predominated in WBC were in most cases also present at the greatest level in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues (Fig 3A).Detection of fluorescent protein expression in WBC (Fig 3A) showed a good correlation with virus isolation from WBC (Fig 3B and 3C, left panel). Ferrets D1 and D2 illustrate this since these animals represented two extremes of the study. In ferret D1 two viruses were detected systemically (rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6)), however one virus (rCDVSHdTom(6)) became dominant. In ferret D2 all three viruses replicated at comparable levels. Virus isolation from WBC in Vero-cCD150 cells resulted in predominantly red plaques for D1, and in multicolored plaques for D2. Photomicrographs in the left panels of Fig 3B and 3C show a high resolution CLSM image of a representative well, while the large pie charts show the relative color distribution produced by viruses isolated from WBC collected at 8 DPI. The smaller pie charts show the color distribution of virus isolated from other samples, including swabs of the conjunctivae, nose, throat and rectum collected at 8 DPI (see also Fig 2D), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) collected at necropsy. Interestingly, the proportion of green fluorescent virus in ferrets D1 and D2 was higher in BAL than in all other tissues, corresponding to IT inoculation of these two ferrets with rCDVSHVenus(6). In ferret D1, low systemic detection of green fluorescent cells, was contrasted by a relatively high percentage of green fluorescent cells in the tracheo-bronchial lymph node (TB LN) which drains the lungs (Fig 3A). At necropsy, CLSM analysis of respiratory tract tissues and lymph nodes of ferret D1 revealed a predominance of red fluorescent cells (Fig 3B, right panels), whereas the same tissues collected from ferret D2 contained a mixture of different colored fluorescent cells (Fig 3C, right panels).Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was imaged both in living ferrets and at necropsy. Macroscopic detection of blue fluorescence was not technically possible using the available apparatus. Both green and red fluorescence were detected in the head of ferret D2 (Fig 3D, fluorescence was detected mainly at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin). Use of the light emitting diode (LED) lamp to detect green fluorescence, allowed detection of separate green and red foci of infected cells (Fig 3D, inset in second panel at (#)). Macroscopic imaging of tissues during necropsies is illustrated by photos of the tongue, lungs and Peyer’s patches (PP) of ferret D2, again showing a clear separation of green and red fluorescent foci of infection (Fig 3D, inset in third panel at (#)).Double- and triple-rCDV-infected cells in vivo during disseminationMorbillivirus viremia is mediated by circulation of infected cells rather than cell-free virions. As a consequence, morbilliviruses predominantly disseminate by cell-to-cell spread within the host. It has been hypothesized that superinfection immunity is a significant barrier to dual infections of cells. Unexpectedly, during virus isolation procedures from WBC we not only observed green, blue or red syncytia, but also syncytia that contained two or three fluorescent proteins, pseudo-colored as yellow (Venus / dTom), purple (dTom / TagBFP), cyan (Venus / TagBFP) or white (Venus / dTom / TagBFP) following image acquisition by CLSM (Fig 4A). Since it may be possible that double- and triple-positive syncytia could have been caused by fusion of single-infected cells, thus not representing true double or triple infections of single cells, we performed direct CLSM of tissues collected during necropsy. This confirmed the presence of double-infected cells in the epithelium of the trachea (Fig 4B, upper panel, Venus / TagBFP cell shown as cyan [*] and Venus / dTom cell shown as yellow [#]) and in the spleen (Fig 4B, lower panel). In the spleen, single-infected cells were observed throughout the section in red, green and blue, whereas many double-positive cells were observed in cyan, yellow and purple. Finally, double and triple infections were confirmed by flow cytometry. As an example, WBC obtained from ferret D2 at 8 DPI were gated for positive events for a single reporter protein (Fig 4C, left panels), for which subsequently the other two reporter proteins were plotted (Fig 4C, right panels). This demonstrated the presence of single-infected cells (lower-left quadrant), but double- (lower-right and upper-left quadrant) and triple-infected (upper-right quadrant) lymphocytes were also commonly detected. Although triple-infected cells were only detected in 2/6 animals, double-infected cells were more common and were detected in 5/6 animals. To confirm these in vivo observations, we performed in vitro competition experiments in canine B-lymphoblastoma (CLBL-1) cells [41], and confirmed that double infections were also achieved in vitro (Fig 4D). Moreover, in vitro double infections were also observed when the second virus infection was performed six hours after the first infection (S1 Fig).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g004Fig 4Detection of rCDV double- and triple-infected cells.(A) Virus isolation from WBC by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells revealed syncytia that were simultaneously positive for two reporter proteins (i.e. Venus/dTom [yellow], dTom/TagBFP [purple] or Venus/TagBFP [cyan]) or all three reporter proteins (Venus/dTom/TagBFP [white]). (B, upper panel) Direct confocal analysis of the trachea from ferret D2 showed that single infected cells (Venus, dTom or TagBFP) were dominant, but sparse Venus/TagBFP and Venus/dTom double-positive cells were detected as cyan (*) or yellow (#), respectively. (B, lower panel) Direct confocal analysis of the spleen from ferret D2 revealed the presence of single-infected and all possible combinations of double-infected cells. (C) Direct flow cytometry of WBC collected from ferret D2 on 8 DPI indicated that single-, double- and triple-positive cells were present in peripheral blood. Similar results were obtained at different time-points. (C, upper panel) When Venus+ cells were selected (as indicated by red gate), dTom-/TagBFP- (single-infected cells), dTom+/TagBFP- or dTom-/TagBFP+ (double-infected cells) and dTom+/TagBFP+ (triple-infected) cells were detected. (C, middle and lower panel) Similar results were obtained when the analysis was performed by initially gating dTom+ or TagBFP+ cells. Percentages of positive cells are indicated in the plots. (D) Canine lymphoma B-cells (CLBL-1) were inoculated with rCDVSHVenus(6) and/or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) in the presence of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4. Green and blue fluorescence levels were determined 24 hours post infection by flow cytometry. Venus and TagBFP single positive cells are shown in green and blue, respectively, while double-positive cells are shown in cyan.rCDV dissemination results in widespread infection of the nasal cavity and CNSSince airborne transmission of respiratory viruses is assumed to be associated with virus shedding from the upper respiratory tract [42, 43], we assessed the distribution of CDV-infected cells in the nasal cavity of ferrets D4 (Fig 5) and D5 (S2 Fig). Since CDVSH is highly neurotropic, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of slides containing a sagittal section of the entire ferret head which permitted assessment of infected cells in both the nasal cavity and brain. CDV-infected cells were mainly detected in the nasal cavity of ferret D4 (Fig 5A), and few positive cells were observed in the meninges. Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*) (Fig 5B). Very few cells within the olfactory epithelium were CDV positive (Fig 5C), whereas the respiratory epithelium contained many CDV-infected cells (Fig 5D), including ciliated epithelial cells and macrophage-like cells (Fig 5D, macrophages indicated by arrow and shown in inset). Throughout the nasal cavity the majority of CDV-positive cells was found in the submucosa and included fibroblasts, large macrophage-like cells, and lymphocyte-like cells. In the nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT) the majority of lymphoid cells were CDV positive (Fig 5E). In addition, CDV- infected glands were occasionally observed in the nasal cavity, mainly in the tip of the nose (Fig 5F). CDV-infected squamous epithelial cells were observed in the soft palate (Fig 5G), mimicking similar observations in MV-infected macaques.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g005Fig 5rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D4.Immunohistochemistry detecting CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed abundant rCDV in the nasal turbinates (Nt, delineated by dotted line). In this ferret rCDV was only observed in few meningeal cells and not in the cerebrum (Br) and olfactory bulb (Ob). In general, CDV-positive cells were mainly found in the submucosa of the respiratory and olfactory mucosa and nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT). (B) Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*). (C) Few CDV-positive cells were detected in the olfactory epithelium, and many CDV-positive cells were present in the submucosa of the olfactory epithelium. Positive cells had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in the respiratory epithelium of the nasal turbinates, although most positive cells within the epithelium appear non-epithelial (arrows and insert). Again, CDV-positive cells were abundant in the submucosa and had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (E) Positive stretch of CDV-positive cells, including NALT with infected lymphocytes and fibroblasts. CDV-positive macrophages were also detected in the epithelial layer. (F) Submucosal nasal glands stained occasionally positive for CDV predominantly in the tip of the nose (arrow). (G) Squamous epithelium of the soft palate stained positive for rCDV.In ferret D5, rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity and CNS (S2A Fig). In the nasal cavity, the number of CDV positive cells was lower in comparison to ferret D4, and consisted predominantly of fibroblasts and macrophage-like cells in the submucosa. In the CNS, CDV-infected cells were frequently observed in the meninges, predominantly in the meninges surrounding the cerebellum. Positive ependymal cells were detected in the choroid plexus, responsible for the production of CSF (S2B Fig), which corresponds to the isolation of virus from the CSF from this ferret. In the cerebellum, meninges surrounding the cerebellum and brainstem, endothelial cells and cells adjacent to blood vessels were occasionally CDV positive (S2C Fig). This suggests hematogenous spread of CDV into the CNS. In both the olfactory bulb and cerebrum foci of CDV positive cells, including neurons and glial cells, were detected (S2D and S2E Fig). Finally, CDV-positive cells were observed within the bone marrow.rCDV infection of donor ferrets results in airborne transmission to recipient ferretsTo assess airborne transmission, CDV-naive recipient (R1 –R6) ferrets were placed in transmission cages at 2 DPI. Donor and recipient ferrets were sampled every other DPI and followed for a maximum of 16 or 22 DPI respectively (Fig 6A and 6B). Ferrets were housed in pairs, meaning that recipient ferret R1 was placed in a cage adjacent to donor ferret D1. Body temperature was measured in 4 out of 6 recipient ferrets. Fever was not observed in the recipient ferrets tested up to the time point of euthanasia (Fig 6C). However, the majority of recipient ferrets showed decreased lymphocyte counts shortly before euthanasia (Fig 6D). Airborne transmission was confirmed in all donor-recipient pairs and infectious rCDV was isolated from WBC (Fig 6E), nose, throat, eye and/or rectal swabs collected from recipient ferrets (Fig 6F). By using flow cytometry, rCDV replication was detected in WBC of 5 out of 6 ferrets (Fig 6G). For recipient ferret (R4) in which CDV-infected cells were not detected by flow cytometry, rCDVSHdTom(6) was isolated from throat and eye swabs. In all cases, only a single colored rCDV transmitted to the recipient ferret, which was also found in the lymphoid tissues at euthanasia and always was the virus that predominated in the corresponding donor animal (Fig 3A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g006Fig 6In vivo transmission of rCDV to recipient ferrets.(A, B) Susceptible recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed pairwise in neighboring cages of the donor ferret at 2 DPI. Arrows indicate airflow. All directly inoculated ferrets were euthanized at 14 to 16 DPI, whereas recipient ferrets were euthanized 21 or 22 DPI. (C) Fever was rarely detected in recipient ferrets, but these animals developed (D) lymphopenia and (E) systemic virus replication as detected by virus isolation from WBC as well as (F) local virus replication demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs. In panels E and F, grey lines represent the respective virus loads in donor ferrets (as shown in Fig 2). Transmission was detected in 6/6 animal pairs. (G) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in recipient ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues were determined. rCDV was detected in most lymphoid tissues (ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 6/6 ferrets the single-color virus dominant in the donor animal transmitted to the recipient ferret.DiscussionWe have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies in ferrets with virologically identical but spectrally distinct rCDVs administered simultaneously via multiple routes. Our aim was to study the temporal and spatial interplay of viruses during the early, intermediate and late stages of CDV infection. These “rainbow CDV” studies are the first to show that morbilliviruses can use multiple entry routes in parallel. Detection of circulating or lymphoid tissue-derived lymphocytes expressing multiple fluorescent reporter proteins was common, demonstrating that in vivo superinfection immunity is not a restrictive phenomenon. Airborne transmission to recipient ferrets was detected in all animal pairs, underpinning the highly infectious nature of morbilliviruses.Animal models of human viral diseases provide the bedrock of much of the current understanding of tropism and pathogenesis, and are essential for the development and licensure of drugs and vaccines. Ideally the human pathogen under study should not need to be adapted to the animal and the disease process should recapitulate the full clinical spectrum in people. This is challenging and oftentimes either the pathogen or host must be genetically altered to produce disease. Therefore, related animal pathogens infecting natural host species provide useful surrogates in the pathogenesis toolkit. For example, Sendai virus infection of mice [44], bovine respiratory syncytial virus infection of calves [45] and simian immunodeficiency virus infection of NHPs [46] have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of closely related human viruses. Likewise, experimental CDV infections of ferrets have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of MV and other morbilliviruses [47–50].Both measles [51] and canine distemper [47] are recognized as highly infectious diseases that are spread via the respiratory tract. The availability of rMVs expressing fluorescent proteins allowed us to identify alveolar macrophages and DCs in NHPs as early target cells following aerosol inhalation [24]. In that study, substantial numbers of MV-infected cells were not detected in the upper respiratory tract even though minuscule numbers of macrophages and DCs were detected in the deep lung at early time points after inoculation. This fitted well with our experience of IT inoculation as a highly reliable and standardized route of experimental MV infection [26]. The majority of CDV pathogenesis studies in ferrets has used IN inoculation, delivering the virus to the upper respiratory tract. Although it is important to note that IN inoculation of relatively large volumes can easily result in deposition of virus in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts [52], we also hypothesized that it was unlikely that morbilliviruses exclusively used the lower respiratory tract as a portal of entry [30]. Therefore, we simultaneously inoculated ferrets with multicolor rCDVs via the IN and IT routes, ensuring delivery to only the upper and lower respiratory tract, respectively. Since the conjunctivae have also been suggested as a portal of entry for many respiratory viruses [33], including MV [32], ocular inoculation was used as a third possible route of entry. IN and IT delivery resulted in viremia in 5 out of 6 and 6 out of 6 ferrets, respectively, within a week after inoculation. The fact that the IT-delivered virus became dominant in 5 out of 6 ferrets suggests that this is the most efficient port of entry, confirming previous observations with MV infection of NHPs [26]. This could be explained by the fact that in the lungs the potential target cells (alveolar macrophages and/or DCs) are directly accessible and not shielded by an epithelial barrier. However, since virus delivered by IN inoculation in a low volume also resulted in viremia in the majority of the ferrets, this demonstrated that multiple routes of entry can be used in parallel. Inoculation of the virus onto the conjunctivae resulted in infection in only 2 out of 6 ferrets, demonstrating that this is a legitimate, albeit less efficient entry portal. However, since there is a direct connection between the eyes and the upper respiratory tract via the nasolacrimal duct, transport of virus particles to the upper respiratory tract after conjunctival delivery cannot be excluded. Moreover, it is important to note that this study was not designed to assess statistically significant differences between these routes of entry.CDV dissemination is mediated by infected circulating and tissue-resident B- and T-lymphocytes [35], and results in lymphopenia and fever. During dissemination the infection remains highly cell-associated, and few virions are detected in plasma. Spread is mediated mostly by direct cell-to-cell transmission, e.g. by the formation of virological synapses [34, 53, 54]. Here, we show that regardless of the route of entry, all donor ferrets developed a similar course of fatal disease, and severity was independent of the number of circulating rCDVs. Interestingly, significant numbers of lymphocytes co-expressed two or three fluorescent reporter proteins, demonstrating that they were infected with viruses inoculated at different sites. Although it has been shown that morbillivirus infection induces superinfection immunity in vitro [38], the incredibly rapid dissemination of CDV (with percentages of infected WBC rising from undetectable to more than 50% within 2 days in some animals) leads to lymphocytes being double- or triple-infected. We consider serial, direct cell-to-cell transmission of rCDVs from different donor cells to single acceptor cells the most likely explanation of the existence of double or triple infections. In fact, double infection was readily reproduced in vitro by exposing a B-lymphoblastic canine cell line to two rCDVs, and was also reproduced when the second infection was performed six hours after the first.Multi-route delivery of virologically identical but phenotypically distinct viruses is a powerful approach to dissect the complex interplay in evolving pathogenesis. None of the data suggest that the expression of different fluorescent reporter proteins had an effect on virus fitness and we have done our utmost to ensure that rCDVs were genetically identical in terms of genome length and ATU design. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that genes encoding Venus, dTom and TagBFP contain secondary or tertiary RNA structures or immune-activating sequences. Alternating the rCDVs and administration routes in three subsequent experiments further mitigated this risk.Although epidemiological observations have demonstrated that CDV is a highly contagious virus, surprisingly few experimental studies have examined transmission. In 1926, Dunkin and Laidlaw meticulously described precautions taken to perform experimental CDV infections of ferrets and keep their breeding stock of animals free of canine distemper [47]. Three transmission pathways: direct contact between sick and healthy animals, housing a healthy animal in a cage from which a moribund animal had been removed several hours earlier, and airborne transmission were described [47]. The timespan between onset of disease in the donor and recipient animals was around ten days. Subsequent direct transmission studies documented a period of 6 to 11 days for development of disease in recipient animals [55] and experimental CDV outbreak studies in ferrets support a role for airborne transmission [56]. The observed time period required for CDV transmission in our experiment was in good accordance with these previous reports [47, 56].Even though we could not determine the exact tissue origin of transmitted virus due to widespread dissemination of different colored viruses throughout the donor ferrets, the dominant virus of the donor always was the only virus transmitted to the recipient. The added value of our study was that the transmission of a single color rCDV, even when two or three rCDVs were detected in donor ferrets, suggested a bottleneck event during airborne transmission: apparently only one or a few infectious units were transmitted from donor to recipient ferret. This mirrors influenza airborne transmission between ferrets, in which virus populations in recipient ferrets proved to be genetically much more homogeneous than those of the donor ferrets [43, 57, 58]. However, in this model transmission was restricted to airborne transmission, so the situation could be different for indirect and direct contact transmission. Overall, this illustrates the utility of gaining a comprehensive understanding of transmission in this important animal model, which is also being developed for Ebola virus and Nipah virus [59–61].Here, we have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies with rCDVs discernable on basis of their fluorescent reporter proteins. We believe that this model will prove its use in the future for in vivo competition studies to identify factors associated with viral fitness.Materials & methodsEthics statementAnimal experiments were conducted at Erasmus MC, in strict compliance with European guidelines (EU directive on animal testing 2010/63/EU) and Dutch legislation. The study protocol was approved by Stichting Dier Experimenten Commissie Consult (DEC Consult, permit number EMC3043), a Dutch independent animal experimentation ethics review board. The manuscript was prepared in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines [62].CDV-naive ferrets were housed in groups prior to rCDV infection, received standard feed on a daily basis and had access to water ad libitum. Cages contained several sources of environmental enrichment. During the infection and transmission studies, ferrets were housed in transmission cages [63]. Briefly, ferrets were housed individually in perspex cages, with paired donor (D) and recipient (R) ferrets being separated by two stainless steel grids. The bottom of the cages was covered with carpet and cages were not cleaned during the course of the experiment to prevent aerosolizing bodily excretions. Transmission cages were placed in HEPA-filtered, negatively pressurized biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) isolators. Animal welfare was checked on daily basis, and all animal handling was performed under light anesthesia using ketamine and medetomidine. After handling, atipamezole was administered to antagonize the effect of medetomidine.CellsVero cells stably expressing the CDV receptor canine SLAM (Vero-cCD150) (kind gift of Dr. Y. Yanagi, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan) were cultured as described previously [64]. To obtain primary ferret white blood cells (WBC), small-volume blood samples were collected from CDV-naive ferrets in Vacuette tubes (Greiner) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant. Red blood cells in blood were subsequently lysed with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 10% (V/V) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 μg/ml). The canine B-cell lymphoma cell line CLBL-1 [41] (kind gift of Dr. Barbara Rütgen, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria) was grown in complete RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% (V/V) FBS.Generation of rCDVs expressing Venus, dTom and TagBFP fluorescent proteinsRecombinant CDV strain Snyder-Hill (SH) viruses were generated as described previously [10]. Genes encoding the fluorescent reporter proteins Venus, dTom or TagBFP were added as an ATU at the sixth (6) position of the genome (between H and L) (Fig 1A). Importantly, TagBFP and dTom were modified by the addition of six (GGSGSG) and five (GSGSG) amino acids, respectively, to the carboxyl terminus to make them identical in size to Venus (239 amino acids). This ensured that the viral genome lengths were identical from the perspective of replication and transcription by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The three viruses were designated rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6). Fluorescence produced in cells infected with these viruses can be readily discerned by flow cytometry, UV epifluorescence microscopy and CLSM. Virus stocks were grown in Vero-cCD150 cells (Fig 1A) and tested negative for contamination with Mycoplasma species. Virus titers were determined by endpoint titration in Vero-cCD150 cells and expressed in TCID50/ml. Susceptibility of ferret WBC with the reporter viruses was determined in vitro. ConA stimulated ferret WBC were inoculated in quadruplicate with rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3 for 1 hour, washed and subsequently cultured for 48 hours. Susceptibility of ferret WBC was analyzed directly by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM with a LSM700 system fitted on an Axio Observer Z1 inverted microscope (Zeiss) (Fig 1B) and by flow cytometry on a FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences).In vitro double infection of CLBL-1 cellsCLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 150μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 5x104 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide) and cultured for 23 hours in 96-well flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (Fig 4D).In a second experiment, CLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 1.2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 1.2x105 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide). Five hours later (i.e. six hours after infection 1), cells were centrifuged again and a second infection was performed in the presence or absence of PHCSK4. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide), and cultured for 23 hours in 96-wells flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (S1 Fig).Animal study designTwelve CDV-seronegative ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) were used for the rCDV infection and transmission studies. A temperature probe was implanted intraperitoneally 2 weeks before the beginning of the experiments to monitor body temperature noninvasively. Six donor ferrets (randomly selected, D1-6) were inoculated with 104 TCID50 rCDV, divided in three equal parts of rCDVSHVenus(6): rCDVSHdTom(6): rCDVSHTagBFP(6) (each 3.3 x 103 TCID50). Each reporter virus was administered via a different route, which were alternated over three experiments. Ferrets D1 and D2 received rCDVSHTagBFP(6) ocularly (Oc), rCDVSHdTom(6) intra-nasally (IN) and rCDVSHVenus(6) intra-tracheally (IT); ferrets D3 and D4 received rCDVSHVenus(6) Oc, rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IN and rCDVSHdTom(6) IT; ferrets D5 and D6 received rCDVSHdTom(6) Oc, rCDVSHVenus(6) IN and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IT (Fig 1C). Oc administration was performed by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) directly onto each of the conjunctivae, IN inoculation by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) into the nostrils while the ferret was held on its back to prevent spread to the trachea and IT inoculations by direct instillation of virus suspension (1ml) into the lower respiratory tract after intubation with a flexible catheter. Following inoculation, the six donor ferrets were placed individually in purpose built cages specifically designed to allow airborne transmission over a 10 cm divide. Donor ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 14–16 DPI. Six CDV-seronegative recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed in the transmission cages (Fig 6A) at 2 DPI of the donor ferret. Recipient ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 21/22 DPI (Fig 6B). The animal protocol specified that recipient animals had to be euthanized no later than 22 days after inoculation of the donor animals, which made it impossible to assess the full spectrum of disease in the recipient ferrets.Clinical specimensSmall-volume blood samples were collected in Vacuette tubes (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant every other DPI of donor ferrets, or every other day after placement of recipient ferrets in transmission cages. Recipient ferrets were always sampled first to prevent direct contamination of recipient animals by sampling of the donor animals. Total WBC and lymphocyte counts were obtained using an automated counter (pocH-100iV; Sysmex). WBC were obtained by lysis of whole blood with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium as described above. Cells were counted using a hemocytometer and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The percentages of WBC infected by different reporter viruses were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for cytopathic effect (CPE) by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 6 days and results were expressed as the number of virus-infected cells/106 total cells. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by screening virus isolations on Vero-cCD150 cells for Venus, dTom and TagBFP expression by CLSM.Throat and rectal swabs (cytobrush plus; Medscand Medical) and nose and eye swabs (polyester-tipped minitip urethral swab; Copan) were collected every other DPI from donor ferrets, or every other day after placement from recipient ferrets, in transport medium (Eagle's minimal essential medium [EMEM] with Hanks' salts, supplemented with lactalbumin enzymatic hydrolysate, penicillin, streptomycin, polymyxin B sulfate, nystatin, gentamicin, and glycerol) and frozen at −80°C. After being thawed, samples were vortexed, the swab was removed, and the remaining transport medium was used for virus isolation. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for CPE by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 7 days and results were expressed as TCID50/ml. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by separately screening virus isolations for Venus, dTom and TagBFP by CLSM.NecropsyFerrets were euthanized by exsanguination under deep ketamine/medetomidine anesthesia. Macroscopic detection of Venus and dTom was performed with an LED lamp and the appropriate filters as described previously [10, 18]. Post-euthanasia, CSF was obtained by lumbar puncture. Virus isolation from CSF was performed by direct titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. A broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed postmortem by direct infusion of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 5 ml) into the right-hand side of the lung. BAL cells were resuspended in culture medium with supplements as described above, counted, and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The infection percentages of BAL cells were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Virus isolation was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells as previously described for MV on Vero cells expressing human CD150 [18]. During necropsy, multiple tissues including brain, trachea, primary bronchus, lungs and spleen were harvested and screened directly for expression of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM. The left lung was inflated with 2% (W/V) low-melting-point agarose before being screened, as described previously [24, 67]. After screening, non-lymphoid tissues were transferred to 10% neutral-buffered formalin (FA). From two ferrets (D4 and D5), the complete head was stored in 10% neutral-buffered FA for immunohistochemistry. Lymphoid tissues were collected in PBS for preparation of single-cell suspensions using cell strainers with a 100 μm pore size (BD Biosciences, Erembodegem, Belgium) and directly used for flow cytometry. The infection percentages of single cell suspensions by different reporter viruses were determined by flow cytometry.Histological and immunohistochemical analysisAfter fixation in 10% formalin, ferret heads were decalcified in 10% EDTA (pH 7.4) for at least a month. After decalcification heads were embedded in paraffin. CDVSH was detected using a monoclonal antibody (VMRD Inc., Pullman, WA, USA). Briefly, 3μm paraffin sections were deparaffinized and antigens were retrieved by boiling slides for 15 minutes in citric acid buffer (10mM, pH 6.0). Sections were incubated with the anti-CDV antibody for 1 hour at RT. Binding of the primary antibody was detected using a biotinylated rabbit-anti-mouse Ig (DAKO), after which tissue sections were incubated with ABComplex-HRP (DAKO) for 30 minutes. Peroxidase was revealed using 3-Amino-9-ethyl-carbazole (AEC, Sigma) resulting in a bright red precipitate. In each staining procedure an isotype control was included as a negative control.Supporting informationS1 FigIn vitro single and double infections of canine B-lymphoblastoid cell line CLBL-1.(A) Experimental design: CLBL-1 cells were infected at T = 0 and / or T = 6 hours. One hour after the infections (or incubation with culture medium as mock control), cells were washed to remove unbound virus. At T = 30 hours infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry. (B) List of the conditions (#) applied for infection 1 (I1) or 2 (I2). All infections were performed in triplicate, using a multiplicity of infection of 1, in the presence or absence of the infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [63]. (C) Infection percentages (irrespective of which reporter protein was expressed) ranged from 14.5 to 51.3% or from 64.1 to 84.8% when performed in the absence (top) or presence (bottom) of infection-enhancing lipopeptide, respectively. (D) Examples of confocal scanning laser microscopy (top) or flow cytometry (bottom) measurements of conditions 1 (mock), 2 (Venus), 3 (dTom) and 6 (Venus + dTomOM) 30 hours post-infection in the presence of PHCSK4. In the FACS plots, single positive cells are shown in green (Venus) or red (dTom), while double-positive cells are shown in yellow. (E) Distribution of single- or double-positive cells in the infected cell populations of conditions 2–8.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigrCDV was detected in the central nervous system (CNS) and nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D5.Immunohistochemistry for the detection of CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed rCDV presence in the CNS (cerebellum [Cl], cerebrum and olfactory bulb). (B) CDV-positive cells within the ependyma and choroid plexus (arrow). (C) CDV was detected in endothelial cells and cells surrounding the blood vessel, suggestive of a hematogenous spread of rCDV to the brain. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in neurons and glial cells of the olfactory bulb. (E) CDV-positive neurons and glial cells in the cerebrum.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Modeling of the Transmission of Coronaviruses, Measles Virus, Influenza Virus, 

IntroductionThe epidemic of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has a global impact on public health and health care workers (Wang et al. 2020). Pandemics are unique, but seasonal regional outbreaks of highly contagious airborne pathogens have occurred in previous years. Most frequently reported infectious agents causing airborne infections are influenza virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and measles virus.Dental health care workers (DHWs) are frequently in close contact with a large number of patients. These patients may unknowingly carry airborne transmitted infectious diseases, so they may infect DHWs during dental treatment. This may lead to the transmission of infectious diseases to the DHWs during dental treatment (Feller et al. 2009; Petti 2016). Sneezing, coughing, talking, and breathing induce the production of spatters and aerosols. Especially during seasonal epidemics or disease outbreaks, airborne pathogens are likely to reach the dental practice and contaminate DHWs. In addition to exposure to potentially infected patients, DHWs are at risk of acquiring infections from dental unit waterlines, which can harbor pathogens such as nontuberculous Mycobacterium spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Legionella pneumophila (Dutil et al. 2007). These pathogens can be transmitted through aerosols and splatters produced by dental instruments (Leggat and Kedjarune 2001).The transmission of airborne pathogens to DHWs can be prevented by applying infection control strategies. A face mask, for instance, functions as a physical barrier against splatters arising from dental unit water and blood and saliva from patients (Coia et al. 2013). A face mask prevents the inhalation of part of the aerosols. The proportion of filtered pathogens, however, depends on the filter efficiency of the face mask and its face fit. Additionally, the microbial contamination of air can be reduced by improving ventilation or by removing the infectious source, meaning to postpone the treatment of patients with respiratory symptoms that may be associated with an infectious disease. The transmission probability of airborne pathogens in health care and non–health care settings was the subject of previous studies (Aliabadi et al. 2011).One way of estimating this probability is to build a mathematical model with the use of relevant parameters and available data that provide an estimation of the probability for transmitting specific pathogens under different scenarios. The latter is currently of relevance concerning the COVID-19 outbreak. Airborne infection transmission can be modeled with the aid of the Wells-Riley equation as proposed by Rudnick and Milton (2003). This equation has been used to understand the dynamics of the transmission of airborne pathogens and to estimate the probability of the transmission of these airborne pathogens in a confined setting (Rudnick and Milton 2003; Sze To and Chao 2010). The equation allows one to estimate the probability based on differences in indoor CO2 values, number of infectious particles, and different levels of respiratory protection, among others. DHWs are exposed to air- and waterborne pathogens. Even though the risk of catching an infectious disease for DHWs seems to be low, the risk of transmission of airborne or waterborne pathogens in the dental practice is unknown. Therefore, the aim of this study was to model the probability of the transmission of coronaviruses, measles virus, M. tuberculosis, influenza virus, and L. pneumophila with a modified version of the Wells-Riley equation.MethodsModelWe adopted the Wells-Riley equation (see equation 1; Rudnick and Milton 2003). We extended the model by adding a respiratory protection factor (Sze To and Chao 2010):
(1)P=1−exp(−Itqfn)R.
Here, P represents the transmission probability of a specific microorganism for 1 person per hour; I is the number of infectious sources in 1 space; t is the time of exposure to a certain microorganism in hours; q is the quanta generated per hour; f is the equivalent of the fraction of indoor air that is exhaled breath, which is also called the rebreathed fraction; and n is the number of people exposed to the infectious source. R represents the filtration capacity (i.e., the fraction of airborne particles that do not penetrate a device for respiratory protection). Parameter f is calculated with equation 2:
(1)f=C−CoCa.
Here, C is the carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration in indoor air; Co is the CO2 concentration in outdoor air; and Ca is the CO2 concentration in exhaled breath—all in parts per million.The adopted Wells-Riley equation is based on several assumptions:Well-mixed airspace: meaning that once the infectious particle is generated, it can be anywhere within the room’s airspace.Steady state condition: meaning that the quantum concentration and the CO2 concentration in outdoor air remain constant within the observed time.The elimination of infectious particles caused by loss of viability, filtration, or other mechanisms is small when compared with removal by ventilation (Rudnick and Milton 2003).ParameterizationSelected PathogensThe risk of transmission was assessed for 4 person-to-person transmitted airborne pathogens: M. tuberculosis, SARS virus, influenza virus, and measles virus. The choice for these pathogens was based on the severity of the associated infectious disease and the plausibility of exposure of DHWs to a patient who is positive for any of the aforementioned pathogens. From environmentally acquired airborne pathogens, we chose L. pneumophila, based on clinical relevance.Quanta EstimationThe input values for q were extracted from studies that estimated quanta from outbreaks (Appendix Box 1). In the model, it is assumed that a quantum (infectious dose) is randomly distributed throughout the air of confined spaces and that each quantum has an equal chance of being anywhere within the space (Wells 1955; Chen et al. 2006). It is also assumed that the quantum concentration remains constant over time (Chen and Liao 2008).Currently, quanta for SARS-CoV-2 cannot be estimated. Although definite evidence has yet to be established, the current causative agent of COVID-19 is expected to be transmitted in a similar way as other coronaviruses (van Doremalen et al. 2020). Moreover, epidemiologic data of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 are similar (see Appendix), so with the best available evidence, we used the quanta data from the SARS-CoV-1 virus as a proxy for the current SARS-CoV-2. The quanta for L. pneumophila are unavailable and were calculated per the assumed ID50 and the number of Legionella colonies sampled in the air of dental clinics (Appendix Box 1).Rebreathed Fraction of Air That Is Exhaled BreathThe equation assumes a non–steady state condition of airborne pathogens (Sze To and Chao 2010). Rudnick and Milton (2003) incorporated the concentration of CO2 in the room that is exhaled breath as parameter f in the equation to estimate the probability of transmission, in which all subparameters are steady over time (Sze To and Chao 2010). The input values of f are adapted from literature. The outdoor CO2 concentration (Co) is set at 400 ppm (ASHRAE 2016). The fraction of CO2 in exhaled breath (Ca) is adapted from Rudnick and Milton (see Table 1). The measured range and average indoor CO2 (C) values were adapted from a study conducted in a dental clinic and categorized according to the ASHRAE standard (Helmis et al. 2007).Table 1.Overview of the Parameter Values.Input Parameter ValuesSensitivity Analysis ValuesParameterDescriptionLow RiskIntermediate RiskHigh RiskLower Limit (–75%)Upper Limit(+75%)Sources
R
Mask protection factor, %85240642
Skaria and Smaldone 2014

t
Time in hour1110.251.75
C
Indoor CO2, ppm7741,1352,375283.751,986
Helmis et al. 2007

Co
Outdoor CO2, ppm400400400
ASHRAE 2016

Ca
Fraction of CO2 in exhaled breath, ppm37,50037,50037,500
Rudnick and Milton 2003

f
Fraction of indoor air that is exhaled breath0.0099730.01960.05264
Rudnick and Milton 2003

qm
Quanta for measles virus10612448031217Riley et al. 1978; Chen et al. 2006; Liao et al. 2008
qs
Quanta for SARS coronavirus11.428.94295.57.2350.65Liao et al. 2008; Qian et al. 2009
qi
Quanta for influenza virus1576.1812819133.32Rudnick and Milton 2003; Chen and Liao 2008; Liao et al. 2008
qt
Quanta for Mycobacterium tuberculosis1.278.212.72.0514.35Escombe et al. 2007; Nardell 2015
ql
Quanta for Legionella pneumophila5.458.3911.322.114.68Armstrong and Haas 2007; Dutil et al. 2007CO2, carbon dioxide; ppm, parts per million; SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome.Respiratory ProtectionWe modeled the transmission prevention effect of a face mask by incorporating the respiratory efficiency from different masks. In case of no respiratory protection (no mask or a mask not perfectly fitting the face), R = 0. From literature, it is known that a regular surgical medical face mask has an efficacy of 24%—meaning that 24% of the airborne particles <2.0 μm are prevented from inhalation by the user of the mask (Skaria and Smaldone 2014). For an FFP2 mask, it was reported that 85% of the airborne particles are prevented from inhalation (Skaria and Smaldone 2014). In the model, it is assumed that the face mask respiratory efficiency remains stable over time (i.e., is replaced before its efficacy decreases).Number of Susceptible Persons and Infectious SourcesWe based the number of infectors and susceptible persons on an average general dental clinic in the Netherlands, in which on average between 20 and 30 patient visits occur every day. We assumed that the number of susceptible persons in a closed single-chair room would be the dentist and dental nurse. We added 1 infectious source that was either the patient, for the human-transmitted pathogens, or the dental unit, for the transmission of environmental pathogens.The parameter t (time) was set to 1 h and kept constant to calculate the risk per hour.Plan of AnalysesModeled ScenariosWe created 3 scenarios to assess the probability of pathogen transmission. The input values per scenario are presented in Table 1, and the description of the scenarios is found in Box 2 (Appendix).Uncertainty and Sensitivity AnalysesThe mean transmission probability and its 95% uncertainty interval were estimated by conducting a multivariate uncertainty analysis. The analysis was performed with the Monte Carlo simulation, which calculates possible probabilities of transmission within the range of input parameter values (see Table 1). The simulation uses different random combinations of input parameter values, a total of 5,000 combinations, from a triangular distribution. The triangular distribution was chosen because it allows for the definition of the minimum, the maximum, and the most likely values. A triangular distribution ensures that the most likely values have the highest frequency in the simulation.A sensitivity analysis was conducted to reveal which parameter mainly drove variations in the estimated transmission probability. The sensitivity analysis was conducted by individually varying 1 of the parameters from the model over the sensitivity interval. The sensitivity interval was calculated as ±75% for each scenario value input.ResultsThe transmission probability for each scenario and the estimated mean transmission rates with the corresponding 95% uncertainty interval are reported in Table 2. The highest transmission probability was found in the high-risk scenarios for measles virus (100%), SARS-CoV (99.4%), influenza virus (89.4%), and M. tuberculosis (84.0%). The probability of the transmission of all modeled pathogens was low in the low-risk scenario; there was only a small risk for transmitting measles virus (4.5%). The transmission probabilities were higher for viral airborne pathogens as compared with the bacterial pathogens. The transmission probabilities were higher in the intermediate- and high-risk scenarios (Figure).Table 2.Pathogen Transmission Probability for Each Modeled Pathogen Presented in Mean (95% UI) and for Each Scenario.Infection Transmission Probability, %PathogenMean (95% UI)aLow RiskIntermediate RiskHigh RiskMeasles virus41 (5.9 to 46.6)4.542.299.98SARS coronavirus28.6 (1.3 to 45.2)0.013.199.44Influenza virus27.8 (1.8 to 36.0)0.029.889.4
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
3.8 (0 to 6.7)0.04.084.0
Legionella pneumophila
4.1 (0 to 6.8)0.14.0818.0SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome; UI, uncertainty interval.aEstimated from uncertainty analysis.Figure 1.The probability of infection transmission of measles virus (A), severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus (B), influenza virus (C), Mycobacterium tuberculosis (D), and Legionella pneumophila (E). The bars represent the indoor carbon dioxide concentrations, indicative for the level of ventilation. The values for q represent the 3 levels of patient infectivity, while the R values stand for the 3 levels of personal protection.There is an increased risk of acquiring measles virus as soon as the patient infectivity and indoor CO2 value increased. The transmission probability remained >20% once the indoor CO2 reached intermediate values, regardless of respiratory protection and patient infectivity. In certain situations, the transmission risk was as high as 90% (Figure). When a DHW was exposed to a patient who generates low influenza virus quanta, the transmission risk remained 0% when the room had low indoor CO2 concentration, regardless of respiratory protection. A high transmission probability of 89.4% at most for influenza virus occurred in case of intermediate to high quanta generation and high indoor CO2 concentration. The transmission of coronaviruses remained <20% when the DHW was exposed to a patient with low infectivity, regardless of the mask protection and indoor air CO2. However, once the infectivity of a pathogen and the indoor CO2 concentration increased, the transmission risk increased to 52.6% and 99.4%, respectively.The transmission probability for M. tuberculosis was as high as 84.0% when DHWs were exposed to a patient with high quanta production (q = 12.7) in a space with high indoor CO2. However, in case of exposure to a patient with low quanta generation, the transmission risk remained <3.0% regardless of respiratory protection. Moreover, if the indoor CO2 concentration remained low, the probability of M. tuberculosis transmission would be <3.5% regardless of the quanta and respiratory protection used. The highest infection transmission probability of L. pneumophila was 18.0% in a high-risk scenario. As long as the indoor air quality was good, the risk remained <3% regardless of quanta and respiratory protection.The sensitivity analysis estimated that changes in indoor air quality had the strongest influence on the probability of pathogen transmission. Improved indoor air quality resulted in 0% probability of transmission if all other parameters remained fixed at intermediate-risk values. A decrease of the indoor air quality led to the highest probability of transmission for all pathogens (Table 3).Table 3.Sensitivity Analysis for the Transmission Probability If Only 1 Parameter Was Changed at the Time.Mask Protection Factor, RQuanta, qIndoor CO2, fTime, tPathogenMean Probability, PLower LimitUpper LimitLower LimitUpper LimitLower LimitUpper LimitLower LimitUpper LimitLow-risk scenarioMeasles virus4.50.00.01.36.90.08.91.36.9SARS coronavirus0.69.916.20.11.00.01.40.01.0Influenza virus0.70.00.00.21.30.01.80.01.3
M. tuberculosis
0.03.04.90.00.00.00.20.00.1
L. pneumophila
0.20.00.00.00.40.00.50.00.4Intermediate-risk scenarioMeasles virus41.032.252.213.957.60.062.813.957.6SARS coronavirus13.19.916.23.521.40.025.43.521.4Influenza virus27.817.331.48.944.20.050.022.744.2
M. tuberculosis
3.83.14.10.966.60.08.01.06.7
L. pneumophila
4.11.11.50.42.60.03.20.42.6High-risk scenarioMeasles virus99.9932.252.2087.81000.010087.8100SARS coronavirus99.49.916.272.71000.010072.7100Influenza virus89.4322.736.743.098.00.098.943.098.8
M. tuberculosis
19.983.04.95.432.30.034.65.432.3
L. pneumophila
13.851.113.93.723.00.024.74.023.0Based on lower and upper limits (±75%). Values are presented as percentages.CO2, carbon dioxide; L. pneumophila, Legionella pneumophila; M. tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; SARS, severe acute respiratory syndrome.DiscussionIn the dental clinic, spatters and aerosols are generated by patients when coughing, sneezing, and talking and with high-speed dental equipment. About 20 to 30 patients visit a dental room every day, making the transmission of pathogens plausible. However, the relative risk of the transmission of several airborne pathogens in the dental clinic is not known. Our study shows that the probability of transmission was low for M. tuberculosis and L. pneumophila, while the probability was high for the measles virus. The CO2 concentration of the air in the dental practice had the highest influence on the transmission risk.The CO2 concentration of indoor air acts as an indicator for poor air quality and ventilation. Improved ventilation, leading to a decreased concentration of CO2, will therefore reduce the transmission probability. The importance of the indoor air quality in the prevention of airborne pathogen transmission is supported by a previous study that associated a low ventilation rate to an increased transmission rate of M. tuberculosis (Menzies et al. 2000). The importance of continuous air changes was stressed in health care and non–health care settings (Nardell et al. 1991; Li et al. 2007; Hobday and Dancer 2013; Escombe et al. 2019). Nevertheless, the transmission of the measles virus is very likely to occur in case of high quanta, even when the indoor air quality is good.The level of respiratory protection had a minor influence on the probability of transmission because the protection level is fairly low. Regular medical face masks filter about 24% of particles <2.0 μm. This protection rate is applicable only for closely fitting masks, while face seal leakage leads to reduced respiratory protection (Pankhurst et al. 2005; Grinshpun et al. 2009). A mask that is saturated with moist, what occurs usually after 20 to 30 min of use, provides no protection against bacteria or viruses. If the transmission probability was modeled with an FFP2 mask (N95 mask), a decrease of transmission probability was visible. However, using FFP2 masks in the dental clinic is not regularly practiced because of the low average risk for pathogen transmission and the difficulty breathing while wearing such a mask. Virus particles <2.0 μm are able to penetrate different types of mask and be inhaled by the wearer, although an FFP2/N95 mask reduces the risk for viral transmission to a factor of 1.5 to 2. However, a proportion of released viruses can be trapped in large aerosol particles and be prevented for inhalation through a medical face mask (Makison Booth et al. 2013).The transmission probability is reported per hour, although the sensitivity analysis includes different exposure times. In dental practice, not every patient is in the treatment room for a whole hour. Regular check-ups may last about 10 to 15 min, and regular treatment may take about 30 to 40 min. So, the transmission probability is substantially lower if the contact time is less. However, if the treatment time is extended, for instance in the case of endodontic treatment, extended restorative treatment, or surgical treatment, the transmission probability becomes higher. A similar argument can be used for the number of patients per day in the clinic: the more patients are treated, the higher the risk.The transmission probability was modeled on the basis of direct available or estimated quanta. These quanta were derived from disease transmission rates from studies in different environments, such as hospitals, public markets, and aircrafts. The specific circumstances in these environments had an influence on the derived quanta and are the best currently available. The same applies to quanta estimation of SARS-CoV-1, which was used as a proxy for SARS-CoV-2. Although the latter is similar in many ways, there are differences. The transmissibility, the infectious period, and the fatality rate seem to differ slightly; however, exact data are not available yet (Chen 2020; van Doremalen et al. 2020; Wilder-Smith et al. 2020). Extrapolation of the data generated for the SARS-CoV-1 into assumption for SARS-CoV-2 should thus be performed with caution. The results regarding L. pneumophila must also be interpreted with caution because the ID50 in humans is still unknown. L. pneumophila is a clinically relevant pathogen; as such, we decided to use the best available data for our study.We assessed the transmission probability in case that a DHW is exposed to an infectious patient, regardless of the local disease prevalence rates. However, the risk of meeting an infected person is higher in disease-endemic areas. So, the actual risk of contracting an infectious disease for DHWs is higher in disease-endemic areas. Moreover, the virulence of each pathogen varies among strains, influencing the infection risk for DHWs. Asymptomatic or presymptomatic carriers may still excrete viral particles or bacteria via aerosolized saliva. They may be contagious, but the microbial load is usually lower; consequently, the risk of transmission is possibly also lower.Besides the transmission risk, virulence differences, and number of contagious persons in the direct environment, the risk of acquiring an infectious disease depends on the individual immune status. Immune-compromised people, such as people with HIV or cancer, are more susceptible to acquiring an infectious disease. There is currently not sufficient data available to include these confounders in the calculation of transmission probabilities.The applied Wells-Riley equation comes with some limitations (Sze To and Chao 2010). The equation assumes that the infectious dose (quanta) is constant over time and has a homogenous spatial distribution. Yet, the number of infectious particles is higher in close proximity to the patient and dilutes in time and farther away from the source. Additionally, each pathogen has its own survival time depending on the indoor humidity and temperature (Phin et al. 2014). This influences the average produced quanta over time and results in an under- or overestimation of the transmission probability. Another assumption of the model is that not only droplets but also exhaled breath is infectious. The latter is not the case for patients carrying SARS-CoV-2 or influenza virus (Leung et al. 2020). Only patients who sneeze or cough may be infectious and contribute to the risk of transmission. However, during a treatment, aerosol will be produced that may contain a similar number of pathogens as compared with coughing or sneezing, so it is assumed that this transmission route is included in the equation. Although exact numbers of viral pathogens in aerosols from infectious patients are not known yet, we assume that this model applies to the situation of SARS-CoV-2- or influenza-infectious patients in the dental clinic. Other pathogens, such as nontuberculous Mycobacterium and P. aeruginosa, may be transmitted in the dental clinic. Unfortunately, quanta values are not available for these airborne pathogens.We conclude that the risk for the transmission of the bacteria M. tuberculosis and L. pneumophila in the dental clinic was low, while the risk for the measles virus was high. Risk for transmission of coronaviruses was comparable to that of influenza. The CO2 level in the dental clinic had the strongest influence on the transmission probability.Author ContributionsC. Zemouri, contributed to conception, design, data analysis, and interpretation, drafted the manuscript; S.F. Awad, contributed to conception, design, data analysis, and interpretation, critically revised the manuscript; C.M.C. Volgenant, W. Crielaard, A.M.G.A. Laheij, contributed to conception and design, critically revised the manuscript; J.J. de Soet, contributed to conception, design, and data analysis, drafted and critically revised the manuscript. All authors gave final approval and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.Supplemental MaterialDS_10.1177_0022034520940288 – Supplemental material for Modeling of the Transmission of Coronaviruses, Measles Virus, Influenza Virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Legionella pneumophila in Dental ClinicsClick here for additional data file.Supplemental material, DS_10.1177_0022034520940288 for Modeling of the Transmission of Coronaviruses, Measles Virus, Influenza Virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and Legionella pneumophila in Dental Clinics by C. Zemouri, S.F. Awad, C.M.C. Volgenant, W. Crielaard, A.M.G.A. Laheij and J.J. de Soet in Journal of Dental Research


Title: Evidence of Mpox clade IIb infection in primary human alveolar epithelium

IntroductionSince its identification in monkeys in 1958 and the first human case in 1970, monkeypox (Mpox) has been known for its dermatological symptoms particularly lymphadenopathy and rash lesions which concentrated on the face, distal extremities, and sexual organs [1]. Mpox belongs to the Poxviridae family and the Orthopoxvirus genus and currently has been classified into two clades. Clade I and Clade II, each subdivided into subclades Ia, Ib, IIa, and IIb [2]. While Clade Ia and IIa remain endemic in Africa with exclusively zoonotic transmission, clade IIb emerged from the West African lineage and has become the 2022 pandemic and linked to the recent global pandemic of Mpox virus [3,4]. Furthermore, a recently identified subclade Ib has been located outside of Africa, with instances recorded in Thailand, Sweden, Germany, and the UK [5–7], raising further concerns within the global health community, as clade I was proven to be more fatal and virulent than clade II [8]. As of Oct 15, 2024, 110,570 cases have been identified and 237 death cases have been reported worldwide [9].Several in vitro and in vivo models have been used for studying Mpox susceptibility [10–12]. Although skin is the primary target [11], infectivity reports in animal models demonstrated transmission via intranasal and inhalation suggesting possible airborne transmission [12]. Therefore, concern on Mpox infectivity in human lung and its potential respiratory pathology has been raised. Recent clinical evidence came from patients who had positive PCR results of the nasal swabs and autopsy which accompanied by respiratory symptoms including cough, sore throat, dyspnea nasal congestion [13] and the evidence from the autopsy, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT), and chest X-ray which were pulmonary nodules, nodular consolidations, pleural effusion and reticular opacities, particularly in immunocompromised patients [14–18]. However, there is no evidence confirming the infectivity of the Mpox virus clade IIb in the human distal lung particularly at the airliquid alveolar epithelium layer – the first-line target of airborne transmission pathogens. Consequently, the current evidence of Clade IIb Mpox infection in human alveoli solely has relied on the A549 cell line which may not simulate the authentic phenotype of alveolar epithelial cells because of its deficiencies of the important identities such as lung surfactants and surfactant protein secretion [19,20]. Although stem cell-derived hAECs are regularly available, the derived hAECs cannot accurately replicate the function of isolated primary hAECs [21] that play a decisive role against pathogen infection [22]. Human alveoli are occupied by alveolar epithelial type 1 cells (hAEC1), alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (hAEC2), and alveolar macrophages (AMs). The hAEC1 inhabits ∼95% of the alveolar surface area and helps with gas exchange [23], while the hAEC2 inhabits the remaining ∼ 5% of the alveolar surface area and secretes lung surfactant to protect against lung collapse [24,25]. AMs involve in body homeostasis by removing foreign particles and microorganisms from the lungs. Neither of the previous studies have focused on Mpox tropism nor pathology within the human alveoli [8,26,27]. Therefore, it is crucially important to develop a robust patient-derived air-liquid epithelium model fabricated from hAEC to decipher this mystery. This result will help us to understand the persistence of the Mpox virus within the respiratory zone in human lungs as well as its potential to cause pulmonary complications.This work is aimed to confirm if the Mpox has the ability to infect human distal lungs or not using patient derived ALE model and to explore its inflammatory consequences after the infection. Isolated hAECs have been employed to develop ALE model to resemble the actual alveolar architecture. Our pioneered work demonstrated that the developed ALE model robustly provides solid evidence of Mpox clade IIb virus infection and its pathogenesis in human alveoli, as well as potential use of the developed model for antiviral drug screening and exploring the interactome between pathogens and human alveolar cells.MethodsIsolation, characterization, and fabrication of patient-derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium using primary hAECsProcedure for tissue collection was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital (approval number: MURA2021/620). All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Primary hAECs were isolated based on our previous protocol [28]. Cells were divided into 2 sets. The first set of ∼50,000 cells were diluted in DCCM-1 media (Sartorius, Germany) containing 10% (v/v) serum, 4 µM GlutaMAX™, and 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Gibco, US) and were seeded onto an apical side of the collagencoated transwellTM for 1–3 days at 37°C and 5% CO2 until hAECs attached and covered all surface area of the cell culture membrane (90-95% confluence). Complete DCCM-1 media was filled in both sides of Transwell™ during the culture period. After cell attachment, the media were discarded from the apical chamber to establish an airliquid interface (ALI) culture before viral infection in BSL-3 on day 7. The media in the basolateral side was replaced every 3 days.The second set of cells isolated from human lungs was cultured in a similar way as described for the first set, but the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay kit (Abcam, US) was used to characterize hAEC type 2 (hAEC2) and their transdifferentiation kinetics for the quality control process. Generally, the isolated cells are presented as hAEC2. As human progenitor cells, once they are attached to the membrane in an apical chamber of the transwellTM; they can transform into hAEC1. This in-house control set of cells was employed to confirm the ratio between hAEC1 and hAEC2 population (50%:50%) during the infection period. The ALP protocol of the assay kit is based on the manufacturer’s instructions. The presence of cell transdifferentiation was routinely measured before the Mpox virus inoculation. Briefly, isolated hAEC2 from individual donors was aimed to culture for 16 days in DCCM-1 media in the same condition as mentioned above. The percentage of alkaline phosphatase positive (ALP+) cells was assessed every 2 days until day 16 of the culture period. After fixing with 2.5% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in DPBS solution, equal volumes of the staining solution A and the staining solution B were mixed together and stained on the hAEC layer for 30 minutes incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2. The supernatant was discarded, and the cells were washed again with 1X DPBS two times and the sample was mounted using glycerol onto the microscope slides. The images were taken at 10x magnification using Olympus CKX53SF inverted microscope (Olympus, Japan).Mpox virus isolation, collection, infection, and viral titre analysisThe Mpox virus specimen was obtained from a leftover nasopharyngeal swab of a confirmed patient at Ramathibodi Hospital, Thailand, in late 2023, with ethical approval granted by the Human Research Ethics Committee (approval number: hMpxV/THA/V241-0053/2023). All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. A leftover swab underwent isolation procedures beginning with filtration through a 0.45 µm filter. The filtrate sample was then cultured in Vero cells (ATCC, USA) in MEM containing 2% FBS, 100 units/mL, penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin as previously described. By day 3, cytopathic effects were observed, leading to cell harvest and three freeze-thaw cycles [29]. Post-centrifugation, the supernatant was again filtered (0.45 µm) and propagated for three passages in Vero cells. Titration of the virus stock utilized plaque assays in Vero cells under a 1% agarose overlay in MEM with 2% FBS and 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin, visualizing plaques using crystal violet staining at day 6 post-infection. All procedures involving the live Mpox virus were performed in a certified biosafety level 3 facility, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University.At 48 h post-infection (hpi), cell culture was observed for cytopathic effect under Nikon TS100 inverted microscope (Nikon, Japan) before cells and cell supernatants were collected for the viral titre analysis. Initially, hAECs were washed once with DPBS and then trypsinized for 10 minutes. The cell suspension was washed with PBS, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 100 µL/well before storing at – 80°C. Vero cells were used to determine viral titres, and they were plated in a 96-well plate and maintained at 37°C in the incubator with 5% CO2 overnight. The frozen hAEC samples were, then, thawed and subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles, as mentioned previously to release the virus from the infected cells [29]. The samples were then four-fold serially diluted in duplicated wells of a 96-well plate and allowed to be absorbed onto the Vero cell monolayer for 1 hour at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. After absorption, the cell monolayer was washed once with 1X DPBS and then supplemented with MEM, 2% FBS, and antibiotics. The plate was further incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 6 days. The virus titre, expressed as the 50% Tissue Culture Infectious Dose (TCID50), was determined by observing CPE on day 6. TCID50/mL was calculated with a TCID50 calculator based on the Reed-Munch method [30].Statistical analysisExperiments with the isolated hAECs on ALE models were done independently using tissues from 11 different donors. The difference between infected and uninfected samples was analysed by the paired t-test for samples that passed the normality test, and the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test for samples that failed the normality test. Viral titres from different compartments of Transwell™ were analysed by a repeated measures ANOVA test applying Greenhouse-Geisser correction to account for potential violations of sphericity, followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test. On the other hand, viral titres from the same compartment but compared between an infected sample and a control sample were analysed by Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test. hAEC transdifferentiation kinetics were analysed by Friedman test followed by the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli for multiple comparisons, controlling the desired false discovery rate set at 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 9.0.0. Statistical difference was considered at P < 0.05.Details of other methodsDue to word limitation, detail of other methods used in this experiment include Mpox viral sequencing and phylogenetic analysis, immunofluorescence imaging, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay for determining transdifferentiation kinetic of hAEC2, western blot, real-time PCR, assessment of innate immune response and inflammatory cytokines using Milliplex and ELISA, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis, and transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) were described in the supplementary material.ResultsFabrication of patient derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium using primary hAECA model of patient-derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium model using primary hAEC cells has been successfully developed. This model allowed customization of the populations of hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells. Although, in the normal human lung, the ratio between the number of hAEC1 and hAEC2 is 1:1–1:2 [31,32]; we therefore selected a ratio at 1:1 (hAEC1:hAEC2) to provide an equal probability of Mpox infection for both cell types. The study of the in-house culture (quality control set) established the transdifferentiation kinetic of the hAEC2 into hAEC1 in the developed ALE model as showed by the significant decrease in ALP positive cells (n = 5, Figure 1(A–I)) at the longer culture period. The behaviour paralleled the significant decline in pro-surfactant protein C (Pro-SFTPC) expression (Figure S1(A–C)), whereas a significant increase in expression of caveolin-1 was observed suggesting the presence of hAEC1 in the model (Figure S1(D–F)). The major advantages of the developed model are the customization of cell population between hAEC1 and hAEC2 from the same donor, and the presence of a lung surfactant layer at the air-liquid interface within the model which genuinely replicates in vivo condition.
Figure 1.Transdifferentiation kinetic of hAEC2. Visualization of ALP positive cells by inverted light microscope at 10x magnification from Day 2 to Day 16 (A–H). Pinkstained represents ALP expression. Bar plot visualization of the percentages of ALPexpressed cells over 16 days (I). Data represents a mean percentage of ALP positive cells ± SEM, n = 5.Confirmed evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox clade IIb and pathogenesisThe consensus sequence of the Mpox culture isolates from nasal left-over specimen of a confirmed patient showed 100% genome coverage with an average coverage depth of 17,113.3x. Phylogenetic result of the Mpox genome revealed that the isolated virus used in the current study was within Lineage C.1, in clade IIb, which corresponds to the globally circulating clade IIb at the time of the sample collection (indicated with red lettering in Figure S1).The confirmed evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox was analysed on a developed ALE model following 48 hours of viral inoculation. Baseline information of all donors was addressed in Table S1 comprising 7 females and 4 males and a mean age of 68 years old. The first 5 donor samples (no.1-5, Table S1) were employed for determining hAEC2 transdifferentiation kinetics. The rest (no.6-11, Table S1) were used for Mpox infection analysis. The results revealed a clear exhibition of cytopathic effect (CPE) across a layer of hAECs, characterized by cell rounding morphology, cell detachment, and cell death using light microscopy (Figure 2(A)). The evidence of Mpox infection and replication was also confirmed by western blot of protein A29 (Figure 2(B)) and rt-PCR of Mpox TNF gene at 2 and 48 hours (Figure 2(C, D)).
Figure 2.Confirm evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox in patient-derived ALE model at 2 and 48 hpi. (A) Cytopathic effect of Mpox on hAECs morphology. (B) Western blot of patient-derived ALE model infected with Mpox virus Clade IIb at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (C) Ct value of Mpox TNF receptor normalized with GADPH as a housekeeping gene at 2 and 48 hpi. (D) Log2 fold change of Mpox TNF receptor at 2 and 48 hpi.For the analysis of Mpox pathogenesis, 42.82 ± 6.88% of hAECs were infected compared with the control (Figure 3(A)). Additionally, the formation of syncytia characteristics in hAECs had simultaneously been observed in Mpox-infected samples where the infected cells were agglomerating and enlarging. High content analysis results illustrated a significant increase in cell surface area from 942.63 ± 80.03 µm2 (noninfected cells) to 1366.17 ± 54.55 µm2 (infected cells, Figure 3(B)). Within 42.82% of the infected cells, 45.13 ± 1.06% of these cells were found to exhibit multinucleated character or “syncytia structure” (Figure 3(C, D)) while this structure was not observed in the control (Figure 3(E)). We also found that the cell nuclei of the infected cells appeared to lose their intact shape and formed an unusual structure. Overall examination of the entire epithelium layer revealed a disruption of the monolayer identified by the leakage of cell culture media from the basolateral side towards the apical surface.
Figure 3.Mpox pathogenesis and Mpox tropism in patient-derived ALE model at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Mpox infectivity, (B) cell size comparison between infected and non-infected cells, (C) percentages of multinucleated cells observed in infected and non-infected cells, (D-E) immunofluorescent imaging of A29-positive cells in infected and control samples, (F) colocalization analysis of A29 against RAGE or SFTPC, (G) high content imaging analysis of A29+RAGE+ cells or A29+pro-SFTPC+ cells. Data represents a mean percentage of cell population ± SEM from 16 individual images of cells on the Transwell™ at 10x magnification. (H-I) Immunostaining images of A29 against RAGE or pro-SFTPC. A29 (Mpox; Green), RAGE or pro-SFTPC (hAEC1 and hAEC2 marker, respectively; Orange), and DAPI (Nuclei, Blue). The image was taken at 63x Magnification, scale bar at the bottom.To determine the tropism of the Mpox virus in alveolar epithelial cells, the colocalization analysis was utilized to investigate the spatial association between the viral A29 protein and cellular markers of hAEC1 (RAGE) /hAEC2 (SFTPC). Pearson's coefficients indicated substantial colocalization for both A29-RAGE (0.6636) and A29SFTPC (0.6140). However, no significant difference between these Pearson's coefficients was observed (p = 0.2854) (Figure 3(F)). Analysis from high-content screening also revealed a high degree of colocalization between the A29 and both markers, suggesting that both cell types have comparable infection levels (61.10% vs 62.19%, Figure 3(G)). This result corresponds to the observation from the immunofluorescent analysis in Figure 2(H, I), indicating that the Mpox virus exhibited no preference for infection between hAEC1 and hAEC2.Ultrastructure analysis inside hAECFurther insights were gained through TEM analysis, which delineated the biogenesis of the Mpox lifecycle within 24 h infected period including (i) Crescent Structure – the earliest identifiable viral structure that self-assembles into a crescent-shaped membrane (Figure 4(A1, A2)); (ii) Immature Virion – the previous crescent structure gradually transformed into a full spherical shape (Figure 4(A3)) before the viral DNA becomes more concentrated within the enclosed area and forming a visible nucleoid (Figure 4(A4)); (iii) Mature Virion – the stage where the viral genome is tightly condensed into brick or dumbbell structures in the core and flanked by two lateral bodies (Figure 4(A5)); and (iv) Wrapped Virion – one of the mature virion forms that has been wrapped at the Golgi compartment (Figure 4(A6)). The intracellular Mpox particles found were essential for cell-to-cell transmission. These stages involved early replication sites, maturation sites, and enveloped virions providing an in-depth understanding of the virus-host intracellular behaviour and lifecycle progression within both hAEC1 and hAEC2. Since the developed ALE model helped to preserve authentic features of hAECs and their interconnection and communication, we found all stages of Mpox particles distributed throughout the cytosol (Figure 4(B–G)). Figure 4(H–J) illustrated that the wrapped virion of Mpox virus could enter the cell by fusion through cellular membranes, facilitating the delivery of viral genetic material into the hAECs. Similar trends of Mpox infection were observed in both types of hAECs using TEM. This finding supports the previous evidence from immunofluorescence imaging that Mpox can infect both cell types with no selectivity (Figure 4(K–M)). This implied a broad cellular tropism for Mpox in distal human lungs. Furthermore, cell syncytium between hAEC type 1 and type 2 cells was shown as the formation of a fusion site between two cells as depicted in Figure 4(N–P). Tight junction was reduced in the infected sample and the forming of a fusion pore that allowed the transportation of Mpox virus between each cell was observed.
Figure 4.TEM image analysis of Mpox biogenesis in primary human air-liquid alveolar epithelium constructed from hAECs. (A) TEM images visualized different forms of Mpox virus showing Mpox biogenesis in hAEC at 5 MOI, 48 hpi: (A1, A2) Mpox’s crescent structure, (A3) immature virion, (A4) the immature virion with visible nucleoid, (A5) the mature virion with a brick-shaped core and (A6) the wrapped virion with a double layer of a lipid bilayer. The scale bar at the top in Figure 4(A) is 200 nm. (B) Different regions of Mpox tropism at low magnification. (C) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(B) represents hAEC2 infected cell and (D) the higher magnification of the purple square in Figure 4(C). (E-G) Mpox tropism within human alveolar epithelial. The green, turquoise, and yellow squares in Figure 4(D) highlight the presence of the mature and wrapped virions (E–G) as well as the crescent structure and the immature virion (F) in hAEC2 cell. (H) Mpox virus fusion with the host cell plasma membrane was clearly observed and (I) the high magnification of the yellow square in Figure 4(H) shows the viral and host cell membrane fusion process. (J) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(H) shows intracellular Mpox virions at mature status. (K) Mpox tropism within hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells. (L) High magnification of the yellow square in Figure 4(K) shows the ultrastructure of lamellar bodies and the area of the viral factory in hAEC2. (M) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(K) shows mature Mpox virions. (N) Syncytium formation between infected hAEC1 and infected hAEC2. (O) Selected regions at higher magnification from Figure 3(N) revealed a fusion site between hAEC1 cell and microvilli of hAEC2 cell where the tight junction (P) was observed. Scale bars between 200 nm–2 µm. Cre = Crescent Structure. IV = immature virion. MV = mature virion. WV = wrapped virion. LB = lamellar body. TJ = tight junction. We also depicted the illustration of Mpox life cycle through our developed patient-derived air-liquid epithelium (ALE) model as can be seen in Figure S3.Viral titre and cytokine responseViral titre analysis from 3 sampling positions of the TranswellTM demonstrated the highest number of viral particles inside the cell followed by the viral particles in the apical and basolateral sides, respectively (Figure 5(A)). This result suggested that Mpox cloud robustly replicates inside the cell more than being released into the extracellular space and preferentially budding into the apical side rather than the basolateral side. Although the Mpox titre was established, there were no significant differences (p > 0.05) in the levels of inflammatory mediators including IL-6, MIP-1α, TNF-α, and galectin-9 between infected and control cultures (Figure 5(B–F)). However, significant was observed with the level of IL-1β. Therefore, these findings suggested that Mpox clade IIb infection in patient-derived ALE model may not trigger a broad pro-inflammatory cytokine response as measured by IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α, although IL-1β were subtly elevated (mean difference = 3.310 pg/mL, p = 0.0174). Galectin-9 levels, which can be potentially involved in an immune response against viral infection, also did not show a significant change upon Mpox virus infection.
Figure 5.Mpox titre and cytokines, chemokines, and galectin-9 from apical chamber of the Transwell™ in Mpox-infected and control ALE model at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Mpox titre, (B) IL-1β, (C) IL-6, (D) MIP-1α, (E) TNF-α and (F) Galectin-9. Data represents a mean Log10(TCID50/mL + 1) ± SEM for viral titre and represents a mean concentration (pg/mL) ± SEM for the level of cytokines and chemokines, six replicates (n = 6).Compromising of alveolar barrier integrity during Mpox infectionMpox infection decreased the expression of ZO-1 at the tight junctions (yellow in Figure 6(A, B)) along with the disruption of the alveolar epithelium layer as evident in Figure 6(A) compared with the control non-infected sample in Figure 6(B). This led to a weakening of the barrier of human alveoli. In addition, the TEER analysis provided insight into the integrity and permeability of cell monolayers in the air-liquid human alveolar epithelium model. Initially, both Mpox infected, and control non-treated samples exhibited similar TEER values of 132–137 Ω·cm², indicating healthy and intact epithelium barriers. Over the course of the infection for 48 hours, a significant decline of TEER values was observed in the Mpox-infected samples, the TEER was dropped to 24.22 ± 4.37 Ω·cm². In contrast, the control samples maintained a TEER value of around 88.56 ± 8.59 Ω·cm² (n = 5), indicating that the integrity of the epithelial barrier remained largely intact in the absence of viral infection (Figure 6(C)). The decrease in TEER by 82.25% in the infected samples from 136.49 Ω·cm² is a direct consequence of viral pathogenicity. In summary, here we provide systematic observation of immunostaining, western blot, TEM and TEER analysis indicates that Mpox virus infection may lead to damage at the air-liquid alveolar epithelium barrier.
Figure 6.Alveolar epithelial barrier analysis in hAEC ALI culture at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Immunostaining images of Mpox-infected sample (B) and control sample. A29 (Mpox; Green), ZO-1 (Tight junction; Yellow and DAPI (Nuclei, Blue). The image was taken at 63x Magnification, scale bar at the bottom. Red arrows indicate the TNTs between cells. Yellow arrows indicate cell syncytium character. TEER analysis comparing Mpox-infected sample and control sample (C). Data are presented as means of TEER value (Ω·cm2) ± SEM with five replicates (n = 5).Our experiment also observed the unique behaviour of the infected hAECs, where they appear to extend towards the neighbour cells and create tunnelling nanotubes (TNTs, red arrow in Figure 6(A)). We found that TNTs can facilitate cell-to-cell transmission of the intercellular Mpox virions, as visualized by the fluorescent A29 protein along these interconnections in Figure 6(A) (yellow arrows). Nonetheless, TNT is absent in the control non-treated group. This is the first time we observed TNT formation in the hAECs initiated by Mpox virus infection.DiscussionMost of the previous in vitro human distal lung models recruited human lung cancer cells to study host-pathogen interactions. However, the limitation of this approach lies in the genotype disparity between the human lung cancer cell lines and the isolated patient-derived hAECs [20]. The approach of using the induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) to derive alveolar epithelial cells (iAECs) needs to be standardized and provides mature alveolar epithelial cells at the desired number. In fact, when comparing barrier function and expression of alveolar epithelial cell markers between cultured iAEC and hAEC, the hAEC exhibited a greater degree of alveolar maturity than iAEC. This is making hAECs a reliable model for studying alveolar epithelium pathology [33]. In addition, since hAEC2s can transdifferentiate into hAEC1s in vitro, we revealed the transdifferentiating kinetics over a 16-day culture period to find a point where both cell types were present in relatively equal proportions. This was important for our Mpox infection experiments, as hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells may have different susceptibility to the virus and found that hAEC on around 8 days offered an equal proportion of both cell types. We, therefore, selected this time point for studying the Mpox infection in the patient-derived ALE model. Importantly, the environment of the developed ALE model could initiate in vivo physiological conditions than that of the previous 2D and 3D models [34]. Furthermore, the developed ALE model can offer a tight junction barrier, lung surfactant layer [19], and a stable alveolar maturity at the comparable level to in vivo conditions where the apical side is exposed to air and the basolateral side is exposed to the liquid medium. Our study clearly demonstrated that patient-derived ALE model can be used to study the transmission, and pathogenesis of Mpox virus by observing cytopathic characteristics (e.g. cell rounding, detachment, syncytium, and death). These findings were confirmed by both light microscopy, confocal microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. The presence of the Mpox virus was qualitatively and quantitatively analysed by qPCR, western blot, and TEM. Results also supported the potential transmission via the airborne through the presence of viable Mpox virus in the saliva droplets or the aerosols in the air by recent studies from the UK and Spain [35–37] and from the primate models [38–40]. Moreover, our results also illustrated the risk of alveolar layer disruption by Mpox infection.In human alveoli, hAEC1 and hAEC2 play different key roles. The hAEC1 acts as a gas exchanger and prevents the leakage of fluid from blood vessels and interstitial space into the alveolar sac. The hAEC2, on the other hand, acts as a lung surfactant factory which is extremely crucial for maintaining surface tension at the air-liquid interface, as well as, preventing fluid accumulation in the alveoli. Interestingly, hAECs displayed a low Mpox infection rate, suggesting that hAECs may possess some level of innate immunity protective role for Mpox infection. The presence of body homeostasis, including the secretion of lung surfactants and the production of surfactant proteins by hAEC2 may be one of the reasons for the low level of Mpox infection [22]. This finding emphasizes the importance of using relevant cell models, the patient-derived ALE model, to accurately assess Mpox infectivity and pathogenesis. We, next, explored Mpox tropism inside human alveoli by comparing hAEC1 and hAEC2 derived from the same donor, and we found no specific preference between both cells. Connecting the dots, our finding aligns with the clinical observations from autopsy [14], CT, and chest X-ray [15,18] of fatal Mpox patients and may potentially help explain the mechanisms. The death was reported to be initiated by extensive cell death and disruption of the alveolar epithelium layer together with the disruption of adjacent blood capillaries which led to exudative pleural effusion. Cell death and syncytium formation in human alveoli could increase permeability as evidenced by a significant reduction of TEER value and the loss of tight junction protein, allowing fluid accumulation within the alveolar sacs, and potentially contributing to alveolar oedema as a last resort (Figure 7).
Figure 7.Proposed pathogenesis of Mpox-related alveolar oedema. Healthy State (Panel 1): The alveolar structure remains in a healthy state. Early Infection State (Panel 2): The Mpox begins to infect the alveolar epithelial cells without any noticeable disruption in gas exchange. Moderate Damage State (Panel 3): The infection progresses to moderate damage within the human alveoli. The presence of multinucleated cells, an indicative of viral-induced syncytium, and exudates start to accumulate in the alveolar space with a noticeable impairment in the gas exchange. Severe Damage State (Panel 4): Accumulated alveolar-resident cell death results in the formation of alveolar gaps and extensive pleural effusion, causing critical respiratory failure.Results revealed significantly higher viral titre within the infected cells compared to both the apical and basolateral supernatants. This data implied that the Mpox virus replicates robustly intracellularly, with less efficient release into the surrounding media. The apical supernatant exhibited the second-greatest viral titre, indicating that the virus was preferentially released towards the airway surface. This is consistent with the behaviour of many respiratory viruses, which infect and shed from the apical surface of airway epithelial cells, allowing airborne transmission by coughing or sneezing [41,42].However, our findings showed no significant change in pro-inflammatory cytokine levels (IL-6, MIP-1α, TNF-α, and Galactin-9) in Mpox-infected cells compared to controls. Only the IL-1β was subtly increased. The lack of cytokine response points to the potential to evade early immune defenses in the distal lung of the Mpox virus. This immune evasion could challenge the diagnosis and hinder the event of Mpox-related alveoli damage. However, this evidence is contradictory to the previous studies that reported significant elevation of IL-6, MIP-1α, and TNF-α after the Mpox infection. This discrepancy might be attributed to the differences in the clade of the Mpox virus and the source of materials used for cytokine measurement where our study utilized cell supernatants from hAEC ALI cultures, and the previous research groups employed patient serum samples [43,44]. Moreover, we hypothesize that the indifferent levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines between the control and infected cells could be a direct consequence of multiple cell-to-cell transmission mechanisms that Mpox utilized for immune evasion.Our results clearly demonstrated that the Mpox virions could cumulatively replicate within the infected cell and infect the nearby cells in human alveoli by releasing mature virion only from the disrupted infected cell or by the budding wrapped virion from the host cell. These can minimize their exposure time to the extracellular environment, as the mature virion will quickly infect adjacent cells, and the wrapped virion can be disguised in the host-derived additional membrane. Importantly, the genome and proteins of Mpox virion can be transported between each cell through the TNT. Intracellular Mpox contents that transport across this projection can evade the immune response by circumventing the immune system in the extracellular environment. This ultrastructure, therefore, offers two additional advantages to viruses. Firstly, this structure may allow the virus to easily infect the non – or less-permissive cells as demonstrated before with SARs-CoV-2, HIV, and influenza by circumventing the receptor-mediated entry.Secondly, TNTs may also facilitate the spread of viruses in the presence of drugs and neutralizing antibodies [45,46]. The new finding mechanism is that the occurrence of syncytium formation may promote cell-to-cell or transcellular infection. Unlike TNTs, the typical syncytium process could fuse cells into a single entity accelerating viral infection. This process involves fusogenic proteins on the surface of the infected cells binding to receptors on adjacent uninfected cells. Upon receptor binding, the fusogenic proteins can undergo a conformational change and bring the membranes of the infected and target cells into proximity. Such a process destabilizes the membrane bilayers and facilitates cell fusion [47]. Although the result from cell syncytium formation by Mpox virus has not yet been fully understood, we hypothesized that Mpox virus may initialize this phenomenon for the energy distribution among the fused cells. This could create a more favourable environment for robust viral replication and potentially prepare the virus for extrapulmonary invasion. Further study on the presence of syncytium and TNTs in Mpox-infected cells may provide the reason why Mpox expresses no specific favourite to infect a specific type of hAEC. However, our study is limited by a number of the obtained isolated cells which did not allow us to perform the time-course analysis nor the cocultured immune response analysis. Thus, additional study on these subjects will help us to understand Mpox replication kinetics in hAECs as well as the protection against Mpox on hAEC.In conclusion, we developed a robust model of primary human air-liquid alveolar epithelium model for Mpox pathological study and tropism. Our findings provide strong evidence supporting the potential respiratory transmission of Mpox virus clade IIb beyond the skin and traditional sexual transmission routes using patient-derived ALE model. Additionally, this study also sparks a discussion on how the evolution of the Mpox virus could alter its pathogenesis and enhance its transmission globally [48]. Recent evidence supported such evolution including the report of the sexual transmission of Mpox Clade Ib which was once believed to be initiated only by Clade IIb [49]. Further research is warranted. Exploration of the Mpox infection and shedding in different lung compartments and Mpox aerosol stability will be important in refining our understanding of the Mpox respiratory transmission dynamic.Supplementary MaterialFigure S3.tifSupplementary.pdfFigure S1.tifFigure S2.tif


Title: Measles Virus Host Invasion and Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionMeasles virus (MV) is the prototype member of the genus Morbillivirus, the subfamily Paramyxovirinae and the family Paramyxoviridae. MV is an enveloped virus with a single strand, non-segmented negative sense RNA genome and exclusively causes disease in old- and new-world non-human primates (NHPs) and humans. Like all morbilliviruses, MV is highly contagious and is transmitted via the respiratory route [1]. Once the virus is inhaled and a primary target cell is infected, systemic spread ensues and clinical signs appear after 9–19 days. The prodromal stage starts with fever and malaise associated with cough, coryza and conjunctivitis, colloquially the three “C’s”. During this stage Koplik’s spots can be observed on the buccal mucosa. On the subsequent days patients develop a maculopapular skin rash that starts behind the ears and spreads to the face, trunk and extremities [2,3]. MV infection is usually self-limiting, due to the clearance of virus-infected cells by the immune system. Recovery is followed by lifelong immunity to measles. In rare cases, severe measles-associated central nervous system (CNS) complications may develop: Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), measles inclusion body encephalitis (MIBE) or subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE). MV infection paradoxically also results in a transient immune suppression that may last over two years after infection and leads to opportunistic infections and increased mortality risk [4]. The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimated that approximately 114,900 people, mostly children under five years of age, died of measles and resulting sequelae in 2014 [5].Signalling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 1 (SLAMF1, also known as CD150), which is expressed by subsets of thymocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), macrophages, T- and B-cells, has been identified as a cellular receptor for MV [2,6,7]. Infection of NHPs with recombinant MV (rMV) derived from the wild-type Japanese IC323 strain and engineered to express a fluorescent reporter protein identified CD150+ lymphocytes and DCs as predominant target cells of MV infection in vivo [8]. Nectin cell adhesion molecule 4 (nectin-4, previously also known as poliovirus receptor-related 4 or PVRL4) has been identified as another cellular receptor for MV that is expressed by epithelial cells [9,10]. This protein is part of the adherens junction complex, which is located at the basolateral side of the epithelium, underneath the tight junctions. Nectin-4 is also expressed by keratinocytes [11,12] and endothelial cells [13], suggesting a potential role for these cell types in the pathogenesis of the characteristic measles skin rash [13,14,15].Both CD150 and nectin-4 play crucial roles in the pathogenesis of measles. Vaccine and laboratory-adapted MV strains can utilise CD46 as an additional cellular receptor in vitro, but this receptor does not seem to play a major role during infection with these viruses in vivo [16,17]. The C-type lectins DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN) and Langerin, expressed by DCs and Langerhans cells, respectively, have been identified as attachment receptors for MV. However, these molecules do not mediate MV entry, but are thought to “capture” MV particles and facilitate CD150-mediated virus-to-cell fusion of DCs or lymphocytes [18,19]. The following review of MV entry, dissemination, transmission and immune suppression is largely based on observations from experimental MV infections of NHPs.2. EntryRespiratory epithelial cells have classically been considered as the early target cells of MV infection in the respiratory tract. However, the lack of CD150 or nectin-4 expression on their apical surface renders this entry mechanism unlikely. NHPs infected with rMV that was unable to recognise nectin-4 (referred to as “nectin-4-blind” virus) still led to the establishment of systemic infection [20], whereas animals infected with an rMV that was unable to recognise CD150 (“CD150-blind”) failed to develop clinical signs or viremia [21]. These findings highlight the importance of CD150 during viral entry and exclude respiratory epithelial cells as the primary target cells, although it cannot be excluded that receptor-binding modifications have led to a generalized attenuation and loss of viral fitness.In vivo studies with NHPs experimentally infected with rMV expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) identified CD11c+ myeloid cells, most likely alveolar macrophages and DCs, in the lungs and respiratory submucosa as potential early target cells [8,22,23]. Two mechanisms of MV entry were proposed based on these findings: infection of CD150+ cells in the alveolar spaces or binding to dendrites of DC-SIGN+ submucosal DCs in the lumen of the respiratory tract, followed by migration to tertiary lymphoid tissues, such as the bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue [24], and draining lymph nodes [8,25,26], where the infection is subsequently amplified by massive replication in abundantly present CD150+ B- and T-cells [8,27]. These potential routes of entry are illustrated in Figure 1.Another possible, but probably less important, route of MV entry is through MV infection of myeloid or lymphoid cells in the conjunctiva. The lamina propria of the conjunctiva is rich in DCs, Langerhans cells, macrophages, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and B-cells, providing a suitable site of replication for the virus [28]. This infection and the ensuing MV-specific immune response may subsequently lead to prodromal conjunctivitis [29]. In addition to the conjunctiva, MV has been shown to infect human corneal rim epithelial cells ex vivo [30]. It has been reported that eye protection during contact with measles patients can reduce the risk of contracting infection by MV [31].Invasion of the respiratory tract by bacteria or other pathogens causing damage to the epithelial layer could be advantageous for MV entry. MV inoculated onto the apical side of well-differentiated ciliated bronchial epithelial cell cultures did not result in infection. However, wounding of the human bronchial epithelial cell in vitro resulted in numerous foci of infection along the lines of the wound, possibly due to the disruption of the tight junctions at cell-to-cell contacts and the subsequent exposure of nectin-4 as a cellular receptor [30,32]. It is possible that MV can infect the respiratory tract through similar epithelial disruption in vivo, either as a result of infection or mechanical damage [30,33]. However, the highly efficient transmission of MV from infected to naive individuals and the susceptibility of every measles-naive human to MV infection suggests that infectious predisposition is not a requirement for efficient MV entry.3. DisseminationPrimary (bone marrow and thymus), secondary (spleen, tonsils, lymph nodes) and tertiary (e.g., bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT)) lymphoid tissues are rich in CD150+ lymphocytes and are major sites of MV replication in vivo [8,25,27,34,35,36,37]. Analysis of lymphoid tissues of experimentally infected NHPs showed prominent MV replication in B-cell follicles [8,25]. Multinucleated giant cells or syncytia, known as Warthin-Finkeldey cells, were especially observed in lymphoid tissues in the upper respiratory tract [25,38,39,40] and consisted of fused B-cells [8,27]. In addition to B-cells, widespread MV infection of both CD4+ and CD8+ CD150+ memory T-cells was observed in these tissues.Viral dissemination is predominantly mediated by cell-to-cell transmission of virus [32,41,42]. In MV-infected NHPs, infected cells in peripheral tissues were mostly interconnected by dendrites. Widespread infection of lymphoid tissues is followed by infection of lymphocytes and DCs in the skin and the epithelial submucosa (Figure 2A). Here, infected lymphocytes or DCs transmit the virus to the neighbouring nectin-4+ epithelial cells [30,43,44] or keratinocytes. Nectins can form both homodimers and heterodimers at cell-to-cell junctions, but the heterodimer interactions have been shown to be more stable. The disruption of nectin-4 and nectin-1 heterodimers by MV has been suggested to facilitate viral spread [45].MV spreads systemically to other organs and tissues, such as the gastrointestinal tract, kidney, liver and skin through infected circulating CD150+ immune cells (Figure 2B), and, in some rare cases, infects endothelial cells, neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in vivo [3,46]. MV infection stimulates the expression and activation of the leukocyte integrins lymphocyte function associated antigen-1 and very late activation antigen-4 [47]. These molecules allow adherence of infected migrating cells to the endothelial cells and subsequent trans-migration into the tissues [46,47]. Infection of endothelial cells with MV in vitro stimulates the production of colony-stimulating factor and thus increases the adhesion of granulocytes to infected epithelial cells [48]. MV antigens were found in the capillary endothelium of lymph nodes and thymus in patients who died from the infection [49].MV can also infect permissive cells through receptor-independent mechanisms [50], although these mechanisms are much less efficient than receptor-mediated entry. One of the possible mechanisms is through an in-cell infection. This mechanism has been identified in allowing Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) spread from infected B-cells to epithelial cells by internalisation of the EBV-infected B-cells into carcinoma cells, resulting in activation and transfer of the virus to the carcinoma cells in vitro and in vivo [51]. It is tempting to speculate that MV-infected lymphocytes can also be internalised by receptor-negative cells, leading to infection.Clinical measles starts with the emergence of Koplik’s spots on the buccal mucosa and culminates a few days later in the appearance of the maculopapular skin rash (Figure 2C) [3]. Histological examinations showed that the characteristics of the Koplik’s spots were similar to those of the skin rash and they may contain syncytia [52]. The rash can potentially be explained by infection of the dermal endothelial cells and keratinocytes, which are subsequently cleared by the virus-specific host cellular immune response [3]. Several studies reported that viral antigens were found in the corneal layer, spongiotic epidermal keratinocytes and even more in the dermal papillary layer [15]. The skin lesions were characterised with spongiosis, cell necrosis and mononuclear cell infiltration of the epidermal keratinocytes [14,15]. The crucial role of the host immune response in the pathogenesis of the skin rash is illustrated by the fact that immunocompromised patients often do not develop skin rash following MV infection, although the course of a MV infection in these patients is typically severe and can be lethal [53].Although most measles cases resolve without complications, the virus can remain persistent and infect the CNS on rare occasions. One of the neurologic complications, known as the ADEM, is immune-mediated and has a higher incidence and severity than the other complications (~1:1000). Although the induction of this autoimmune response is poorly understood, “molecular mimicry” based on structural similarities between MV proteins and myelin has been suggested as a pathogenic mechanism [54,55]. The disease is hallmarked by demyelination, which results in ataxia, motor and sensory loss and mental status changes [56] and can result in death.A second neurologic complication stemming from systemic MV infection is MIBE. The risk of developing MIBE increases when the MV infection occurs in young infants or immunocompromised individuals, who are unable to clear the infection. The symptoms of MIBE often include mental status changes, focal seizures and occasionally visual or hearing loss within one year of acute measles infection or live-virus vaccination [57,58]. The disease progresses rapidly to coma and death in the majority of patients [54].A third and very rare neurological complication of measles is SSPE. Symptoms develop several years after a normal episode of measles and usually start with a decline of school performance and a slight change of behaviour, progressively followed by myoclonic seizures, ataxia and death within one to three years [25,59]. SSPE is exclusively associated with infections with wild-type MV, and has never been observed in association with genotype A vaccine viruses. Where the virus persists and how it spreads in the CNS remains unknown. It has been suggested that the virus spreads from one neuron to the other through interconnecting processes in vitro and in vivo, without the release of infectious particles [60,61,62]. This infection may rely on membrane fusion between infected and uninfected neurons, allowing trans-synaptic transmission of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) [25,63,64]. The RNP consists of genomic viral RNA encapsidated with the viral nucleoprotein and associated with the viral polymerase, and is the minimal unit of infection [3]. MV-positive oligodendrocytes and astrocytes were also found in the white matter of SSPE cases. The virus may spread from one glial cell to another via interconnected processes [25].It is still unclear how MV enters the CNS, however in recent years it has become apparent that the blood-brain-barrier allows entry of lymphocytes into the brain [65,66]. Moreover, it has been shown that the brain even contains lymphatic vessels [67]. Therefore, infected lymphocytes circulating in peripheral blood during viremia could carry the virus into the CNS, where the virus could be transmitted via a yet unknown cellular entry receptor or receptor-independent entry mechanisms.4. TransmissionThe basic reproductive number (R0) reflects the average number of secondary cases that would arise when an infectious agent is introduced into a completely susceptible population [68]. MV is released into the air as cell-free or cell-associated virus particles, predominantly by coughing [9,10,69]. The virus is highly infectious: the estimated R0 is 12 to 18 [68]. In specific cases individual patients have been reported to more than 200 new patients [70], often referred to as “superspreading” events [71].The high infectivity of MV can be attributed to three crucial transmission properties. First, measles patients must efficiently shed MV. Tracheo-bronchial epithelial cells have been reported to be susceptible to MV infection [10,25,43,44], associated with epithelial damage in the bronchi and bronchioles [27,43]. Whereas epithelial cells are infected from the basolateral side, budding occurs exclusively at the apical cell surface due to sorting signals in the viral glycoproteins. Whilst MV particles produced in the lymphoid tissues can rapidly bind to neighbouring CD150+ cells that are highly abundant in the environment, MV particles produced by the respiratory epithelial cells will be shed into the mucus lining the lumen of the respiratory tract where cells expressing MV receptors are scarce. Hence, virions remain in the mucus as cell-free particles, and are moved to the upper respiratory tract (URT) by the mucocilliary escalator [43] and discharged into the environment by coughing. MV can be transmitted by large respiratory droplets (by direct contact) or in small aerosols transported through the air over long distances [72]. The release of new MV particles from the host into the air is illustrated in Figure 3.Second, the virus must remain infectious until it reaches a new host. Large droplets may increase the stability of cell-bound MV particles or cell debris that are expelled from the body, allowing the virus to survive long enough until it comes into contact with the eyes, nose or mouth of a susceptible person. Alternatively, cell-free virions transmitted airborne as small aerosols through a turbulent airflow may survive in air for at least one hour, as demonstrated during the outbreaks of measles in a paediatric practice in 1981 and at an International Special Olympics Games in 1995 [72,73]. One of the factors that influence survival of MV in the air is relative humidity: in aerosols, the virus is most stable below 40% or above 80% [74].The last vital transmission property concerns the infectious dose of the virus. In NHPs, a single 50% tissue culture infectious dose was shown to be sufficient to establish a productive infection associated with systemic dissemination [75]. However, measles patients shed large amounts of virus, resulting in transmission of numerous infectious units. The combination of large inoculum and low infectious dose may increase the chance of rapid deposition of virus particles in the respiratory tract of the next host, especially in a crowded and poorly ventilated environment [73].5. Immune SuppressionMV infection results in a transient and profound immune suppression, which leads to increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections and increased childhood mortality [4]. The virus efficiently replicates in lymphoid tissues. Tertiary lymphoid tissues, such as BALT and gut associated lymphoid tissues (GALT), can be induced by bacterial or viral infection that leads to the accumulation and proliferation of lymphocytes and the formation of germinal centres. CD11c+ DCs and follicular DCs are present within to maintain the structure of these tissues [76,77]. The presence and interaction of CD150+ lymphocytes and DC-SIGN+ DCs in these tissues consequently makes them the perfect site for MV infection and amplification [8,27]. Since BALT and GALT are known to enhance protective immunity against mucosal pathogens, obliteration of these lymphoid tissues that are present in major entry portals for opportunistic infections (the airways and gut) can facilitate infiltration of the mucosa by previously encountered viruses or bacteria.MV infection leads to lymphopenia during its acute phase, in which the number of T- and B-cells, both circulating and lymphoid tissue homing, decreases extensively (Figure 2C) [27,78]. Peak numbers of MV-infected cells in lymphoid tissues of experimentally infected NHPs coincide with the peak of viremia, rapidly followed by B-cell exhaustion in the germinal centres [27], as previously also reported in humans [38]. The infection induces an expansive effector phase, leading to the clearance of MV-infected cells by cytotoxic T-cells [79] and subsequently a lifelong measles-specific immune response [80]. Following viral clearance, the number of lymphocytes returns to normal within approximately one week. However, while the lymphopenia lasts for a week, the immune suppression may last variably from several weeks to up to more than two years [4]. This led to the initial dismissal of the role of immune cell depletion in causing measles-induced immune suppression [81]. Instead, functional impairment of the immune cells has often been proposed to explain the mechanism of the immune suppression. However, there is limited evidence that this is the case and it has proven difficult to identify a cell surface receptor that mediates suppression of proliferation in immune cells. Reduced proliferative responsiveness of peripheral blood lymphocytes to antigenic or mitogenic stimulation has also been suggested as a mechanism of measles immune suppression. Although this impairment is indeed detected in vitro, measles is associated with dramatic levels of lymphoproliferation in vivo [27]. Other mechanisms have been proposed to explain the nature of the measles-induced immune suppression, such as altered cytokine profiles [82,83,84,85] or inhibited haematopoiesis [86,87], but none of these fit with the measles paradox: Prolonged increased susceptibility to infectious disease and coinciding induction of strong MV-specific immune responses.Based on observations in experimentally infected NHPs we proposed an alternative model explaining measles immune suppression, based on the preferential infection and subsequent immune-mediated depletion of CD150+ memory T- and B-cells, resulting in “immune amnesia” [27,88]. The loss of memory lymphocytes is masked by a massive expansion of new MV-specific and bystander lymphocytes, explaining the short duration of lymphopenia and yet the long duration of immune suppression. This finding thus revives the importance of immune cell depletion as a key mechanism for measles-associated immune suppression.Mechanisms underlying MV entry, dissemination, transmission and immune suppression as discussed in this review are illustrated with images from experimentally infected NHPs in Figure 4.6. ConclusionsMeasles has caused a high number of fatalities throughout history. Recombinant viruses expressing fluorescent reporter proteins have given us the means to study and understand the virus and its pathogenesis from a new perspective. However, these advances not only leave some old mysteries concerning measles pathogenesis unexplained, but also give birth to new questions. Since global eradication of measles is planned for the near future, studies on MV tropism and pathogenesis not only remain important, but also become urgent [89].


Title: Illumination of Parainfluenza Virus Infection and Transmission in Living Animals Reveals a Tissue-Specific Dichotomy

IntroductionThe parainfluenza viruses (PIVs) are non-segmented, negative-strand RNA viruses of the family Paramyxoviridae. The paramyxoviruses include not only the PIVs but also a number of other important human pathogens transmitted via the respiratory route such as human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV), metapneumovirus, measles virus, and mumps virus [1], [2]. The human PIVs (HPIVs) consist of four serotypes (HPIV1-4), are a common cause of upper respiratory tract (URT) infections, and are a leading cause of lower respiratory tract (LRT) disease in infants and children [3]. The HPIVs are efficiently transmitted by direct contact and exposure to nasopharyngeal secretions [4], and nearly all children are infected with HPIV3 by age 2 and with HPIV1 and HPIV2 by age 5 [5], [6]. No licensed anti-PIV vaccines or drugs are available, and therefore non-pharmaceutical interventions are currently the only means of control. In view of these facts, an understanding of how PIV infection spreads within the respiratory tract, promotes pathogenesis, elicits immunity, and is transmitted to naïve hosts would greatly advance the development of novel vaccines and therapeutics.Experimental studies of HPIV infection in tissue culture and animal models have helped reveal basic replication mechanisms and evaluate preclinical vaccine candidates [7]–[9]. However, knowledge about the spread of PIV infection in individual, living animals that are fully susceptible to PIV-associated disease would allow more thorough investigations of PIV virus-host interactions and transmission. Mice are poorly permissive to infection by the HPIVs, and HPIV infection in cotton rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, and ferrets is usually asymptomatic with minimal or undetectable pathology [1]. As a result, a number of studies have used Sendai virus (SeV) infection of mice as a model to investigate pathogenesis in an experimental setting [10], [11]. SeV is the murine counterpart of HPIV1, the leading cause of laryngotracheobronchitis (pediatric croup) [12]. SeV and HPIV1 have 78% amino-acid sequence identity [13], elicit cross-protective immunity [14]–[16], and have similar tissue tropism and epidemiology [1], [11]. Moreover, SeV shows promise as a Jennerian vaccine for HPIV1 [17] and as a vaccine vector for HRSV, HPIV3, and HPIV2 [18]–[20].Although SeV and the HPIVs were first isolated in the 1950s and have been studied for more than 50 years [1], fundamental aspects of PIV infection and immunity that remain unknown are directly relevant to our understanding of pathogenesis and transmission. For example, the spatial and temporal spread of natural infection in the respiratory tract after SeV transmission remains poorly understood because of the ambiguous results (marked inter-animal variability and error) of classical experiments measuring virus titers in sacrificed mice [21], [22]. It is also unknown how HPIV and SeV infection after transmission often results in immunity without causing severe pathology. The contribution of LRT infection to transmission is unknown. Finally, while infection of the lungs and the concomitant immune response are clearly associated with disease severity [1], [11], [23], [24], many questions remain about the contribution of infection in the URT and trachea to clinical outcome and protective immunity [25], [26]. For example, we are unaware of any reports of studies investigating the effect of the dose of virus inoculum, the replicative fitness of the virus, or the genetic susceptibility of the host on the growth and clearance of SeV in the URT and trachea.To measure the dynamics of PIV infection in living animals, we generated three luciferase-expressing SeVs that allow non-invasive in vivo bioluminescence imaging in mice. Analogous systems have previously been reported for DNA and positive-strand RNA viruses [27] but have been elusive for negative-strand RNA viruses, largely due to virus attenuation [28] or genetic instability resulting from reporter gene insertion [29]. We considered SeV an ideal candidate for non-invasive imaging because (i) foreign-gene expression by paramyxovirus vectors is usually genetically stable [30], (ii) in vivo imaging of a non-replicating SeV in intact mice has been successfully demonstrated [31] and (iii) the match of SeV and the murine host allows pathogenesis studies [11]. The reporter virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) described here was found to express high levels of luciferase yet replicate and promote disease in mice similar to wild-type (WT) virus. We imaged the dynamics of SeV infection in living, intact mice after direct inoculation and after contact transmission, varying both the virus dose and mouse strain. Unexpectedly, we observed a dichotomous tissue tropism in which the URT and trachea supported robust virus growth, efficient transmission, and protective immunity even under conditions that resulted in little infection in the lungs.Results
In vitro properties of luciferase-expressing virusesTo develop a model in which PIV infection could be visualized non-invasively in living, intact mice, we generated three recombinant Sendai viruses (rSeVs) in which a firefly luciferase reporter gene was inserted into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions, respectively, of SeV (Figure 1A, Figure S1). Insertion of the firefly luciferase gene and gene junction into the SeV genome was expected to unacceptably decrease downstream viral gene expression and, consequently, virus replication [32]. To generate a luciferase-expressing SeV expected to suffer little or no attenuation, the rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus was constructed to contain both the luciferase reporter gene and a more efficient transcription start sequence AGGGTGAAAG upstream of the F gene (Figure S1). Therefore, the attenuating effects of reporter gene insertion could be counteracted by optimization of the naturally inefficient gene start sequence upstream of the F gene [33]. For the rSeV-luc(P-M) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) constructs, in which the luciferase gene was inserted into the P-M and F-HN gene junctions, respectively, the natural transcription start sequence upstream of the F gene was left intact (Figure S1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g001Figure 1
In vitro and in vivo phenotypes of luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses.(A) Recombinant Sendai viruses that contain the firefly luciferase gene (luc) inserted into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions were generated. (B) Multiple-step replication kinetics of wild-type (WT) and luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses in LLC-MK2 cell cultures infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 PFU/cell and incubated at 33°C (closed symbols) and 37°C (open symbols). (C) Kinetics of luciferase reporter gene expression in LLC-MK2 cells infected with recombinant Sendai viruses at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell, as measured by luminescence. (D) Changes in mean body weight after intranasal inoculation of Sendai viruses. (E) Percent survival after intranasal inoculation of Sendai viruses. (F) Total lymphocyte counts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) 10 days after infection. (G) Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers in sera collected 10 days after infection, as measured by reciprocal endpoint dilutions in ELISA assays. For panels D–G, groups of five 8-week-old 129/SvJ-strain mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus or phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and the experiments were performed twice. Cumulative data are shown in panels D and E, and representative data are shown in panels F and G.Multiple-step growth curves were measured at 33°C and 37°C in LLC-MK2 cells that had been infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 PFU/cell (Figure 1B). Titers of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) were similar at both temperatures and similar to SeV WT, showing that these two luciferase-expressing viruses were not substantially attenuated or temperature restricted. In contrast, the rSeV-luc(P-M) virus showed reduced growth kinetics at 33°C and grew even more slowly at 37°C. To compare luciferase reporter gene expression by the recombinant SeVs, we measured in vitro luciferase activity in LLC-MK2 cell lysates (MOI 5 PFU/cell) (Figure 1C). Upstream insertion of luciferase in rSeV-luc(P-M) resulted in greater luciferase activity than did downstream insertion in rSeV-luc(F-HN), consistent with the results of previous studies of SeVs using secreted alkaline phosphatase as the reporter gene [32]. Luciferase expression by rSeV-luc(M-F*) exceeded that of rSeV-luc(P-M) within 6 h post-infection (p.i.), showing that the enhanced gene start sequence engineered into the M-F* virus (Figure S1) increased reporter-gene transcription at later time points, perhaps due to greater downstream transcription of the L polymerase gene. To determine how the reporter gene insertions might have altered SeV protein expression, LLC-MK2 cells were infected at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell and lysates were subjected to radioimmunoprecipitation and SDS-PAGE analysis. Low levels of expression of the M, F, HN and presumably L proteins by the rSeV-luc(P-M) virus (Figure S2A) most likely contributed to the attenuation of this virus. Viral protein expression by rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) was sufficient to generate virions with WT-like compositions (Figure S2C), consistent with the in vitro growth of these two reporter viruses to levels similar to that of WT virus (Figure 1B).Virulence of the luciferase-expressing virusesAn ideal luciferase-reporter virus for non-invasive bioluminescence imaging and pathogenesis studies would express high levels of luciferase without altering virus replication and disease severity. To assess the virulence of the luciferase-expressing SeVs, 129/SvJ mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and inoculated intranasally with 30 µl containing 7,000 PFU of virus. This method of inoculation delivers ∼1/3 of the volume to the nasopharynx and ∼1/2 to the lungs [34]. Infection with SeV WT, rSeV-luc(M-F*), and rSeV-luc(F-HN) resulted in a mean weight loss of ∼25% and mean mortality rates of 80% (Figure 1D,E). Thus, these two luciferase-expressing viruses remained fully virulent at a dose of 7,000 PFU. In contrast, 129/SvJ mice inoculated with 7,000 PFU of the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus experienced only 12% weight loss and no mortality. All mice inoculated with 70,000 or 700,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(P-M) also survived (data not shown), further demonstrating that the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus is avirulent.Acute viral pneumonia by SeV induces high levels of lymphocyte infiltration that show a peak in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) at ∼10 d p.i. [35]. To compare lymphocyte influx caused by the luciferase-expressing viruses and WT virus, we sacrificed 129/SvJ mice that had been infected with 7,000 PFU at 10 d p.i. and collected BALF. Similarly large total numbers of lymphocytes, CD4+ T-lymphocytes, and CD8+ T-lymphocytes were detected in BALF after infection with WT, rSeV-luc(M-F*), or rSeV-luc(F-HN) virus (Figure 1F; Figure S3A–B), whereas mice inoculated with the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) had total lymphocyte counts only 10% as high. To determine the extents to which the reporter viruses elicited SeV- or luciferase-binding antibodies, ELISA assays were performed on sera collected at 10 d p.i. The anti-SeV antibody titers elicited by all three rSeVs were similar to that induced by WT virus (Figure 1G). The three reporter viruses also induced similar anti-luciferase antibody titers (Figure S3C). Thus, despite being attenuated and avirulent, rSeV-luc(P-M) elicited a robust antibody response. rSeV-luc(M-F*), which induced WT-like morbidity and mortality while expressing high levels of luciferase, was identified as the best suited surrogate for WT virus for use in subsequent bioluminescence imaging experiments.Dynamics of infection in living animalsIn studies to determine whether non-invasive bioluminescence accurately reflected in vivo infection, 129/SvJ mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU, imaged with a Xenogen IVIS instrument, and immediately euthanized. Respiratory tissues were promptly collected for ex vivo measurement of luminescence and viral titers. As in previous studies in immunocompetent mice [36], [37], viral titers and bioluminescence were limited to the respiratory tract. As shown in Figure S4, in vivo bioluminescence intensity levels in living animals were well correlated with ex vivo luminescence (R
2 0.878) and with viral titers in the nasopharynx (R
2 0.864), trachea (R
2 0.915), and lungs (R
2 0.961). The correspondence of these data validates the technique as a means of noninvasive measurement of infection in vivo. To determine whether the luciferase-reporter genes were genetically stable in the three rSeVs, we recovered lung tissues from 129/SvJ mice inoculated with 7,000 PFU of virus at 7 d p.i., homogenized the samples, and conducted plaque assays in LLC-MK2 cells. Five plaques of each of the three luciferase-expressing viruses were picked, amplified by one round of replication in eggs, RT-PCR transcribed, and sequenced. All of the individual viral clones contained the luciferase insert, which had no amino acid mutations, and expressed luciferase when grown in LLC-MK2 cells.We next measured the kinetics and tropism of bioluminescence in living 129/SvJ mice and compared the results to conventionally measured viral titers in dissected tissues (Figures 2 and 3). Just as rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) had in vitro replication rates and in vivo pathogenicity similar to those of WT virus, they also had WT-like titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea, and lungs. In the nasal turbinates, high virus titers (>105 PFU) were detected by day 2 p.i. and were maintained until day 9 p.i., after which rapid clearance occurred (Figure 3B). Between days 2 and 9 p.i., high levels of in vivo bioluminescence were similarly observed in the nasopharynx (>108 photons/s) of 129/SvJ mice infected with rSeV-luc(M-F); bioluminescence peaked at about 5 d p.i. (Figure 3A). In the lungs, the titers of all three luciferase-expressing viruses and of WT SeV peaked by day 5 p.i. and fell to low levels by day 9 p.i. Infection with the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) resulted in peak lung titers of ∼104 PFU (approximately 5% of the WT titer) at day 5 p.i. (Figure 3D). Similarly low levels of rSeV-luc(P-M) bioluminescence were observed in the lungs (Figure 3A), consistent with the attenuated and avirulent virus phenotype. On the other hand, rSeV-luc(P-M) reached high peak titers (∼105 PFU, similar to the WT titer) in the nasal turbinates at 7 d p.i. (Figure 3C), and high levels of bioluminescence were observed in the nasopharynx between days 3 and 7 p.i. (Figure 3A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g002Figure 2Non-invasive bioluminescence imaging of Sendai virus infection in the respiratory tracts of living mice.Eight-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(P-M), rSeV-luc(F-HN), or rSeV-luc(M-F*). Every 24 hours the mice were intraperitoneally injected with luciferin substrate, anesthetized with isoflurane, imaged with a Xenogen IVIS device, and then allowed to recover. Bioluminescence in one experiment is shown on day 2 (A) and day 7 (B) post-infection (p.i.) in 129/SvJ mice infected with rSeV-luc(P-M), rSeV-luc(F-HN), or rSeV-luc(M-F*). Bioluminescence in a second experiment is shown on day 2 (C) or day 7 (D) for 129/SvJ, DBA/2, BALB/c, or C57BL/6 mice infected with rSeV-luc(M-F*). The data are displayed as radiance (bioluminescence intensity) on a rainbow log scale with a range of 1×106 (blue) to 1×109 (red) photons/s/cm2/steradian. Red circles indicate regions of interest (ROI) used to calculate the total flux (photons/s) in the nasopharynx, and red rectangles indicate the ROI areas for the trachea and lungs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g003Figure 3Kinetics of Sendai virus spread and clearance in the respiratory tracts of 129/SvJ mice.(A) The extent of infection was determined by non-invasive bioluminescence imaging of living, anesthetized mice every 24 h. Each data point represents the mean bioluminescence of 6 mice. The total flux (photons/s) of bioluminescence intensity is calculated as the sum of radiance in the region of interest. (B–D) Viral titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea, and lungs were determined by sacrificing groups of 3 mice at the reported days and performing plaque titrations of tissue homogenates in LLC-MK2 cells. Both experiments were repeated, and representative data are shown.Tissue tropism and viral doseThe high permissivity of the URT and trachea to infection by the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus was unexpected. We next investigated whether these tissues were also highly permissive to infection by the WT-like virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) at a low inoculating dose. Our preliminary studies showed that the 50% mouse infectious dose (MID50) of rSeV-luc(M-F*) was 9 PFU and that a 70-PFU dose resulted in 100% infection, similar to results obtained for WT SeV in mice [38] and HPIV1 in humans [39]. We inoculated 129/SvJ mice intranasally with 70, 700, or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) in equal 30 µl volumes and then measured bioluminescence and viral titers. After inoculation with 70 PFU, viral titers and bioluminescence in the lungs were ∼10% of that induced by a 7,000-PFU dose (Figure 4A,B), and weight loss was far less (Figure 4C). In contrast, infection in the nasopharynx and trachea after a 70-PFU inoculation was delayed ∼1 d compared to 7,000-PFU inoculation, reached a similar level by ∼5 d p.i. (Figure 4A,B), and induced relatively high titers of SeV-specific antibodies (>105) (Figure 4D). Therefore, low-dose inoculation of the WT-like rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus resulted in preferential infection of the URT and trachea, inducing a robust antibody response without causing much weight loss.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g004Figure 4Virus replication and pathogenesis as a function of virus dose and mouse strain.After intranasal inoculation of 129/SvJ mice with 70 to 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*), the total flux of bioluminescence intensity (A) and viral titers (B) were measured as described in Figure 3. (C) Percent body weight change was measured in groups of ten 129/SvJ mice after inoculation with 70 to 7,000 PFU. The experiment was performed in duplicate; representative data are shown. (D) Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers in sera of 129/SvJ mice collected 10 days after inoculation with 70 to 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). Titers are reported as the reciprocal endpoint dilutions in ELISA assays. Five infected and two control mice were used in the experiment, which was performed in duplicate. Representative data are shown. (E) The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs after 7,000-PFU intranasal inoculation of 129/SvJ, DBA/2, BALB/c, or C57BL/6-strain mice with rSeV-luc(M-F*). Values are the mean from six animals. The experiment was performed in duplicate, and the results from a representative experiment are shown. (F) Mean percent weight change in groups of 10 mice after infection with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). The experiment was performed in duplicate; representative data are shown.Tissue tropism and host geneticsWhile it is known that 129/SvJ and DBA/2 mice are highly susceptible to lung infection by SeV and BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice are highly resistant [40]–[43], the effect of host genetics on SeV replication in the URT and trachea has not been reported. Therefore, we measured the in vivo dynamics of SeV infection in 129/SvJ, DBA/2, C57BL/6, and BALB/c strains of mice that had been intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). As expected from previous studies, the extent of pulmonary infection and weight loss correlated with each other and followed the trend C57BL/6<BALB/c<<DBA/2<129/SvJ (Figure 4). In contrast, similarly high levels of bioluminescence were observed in the URT and trachea in all four strains of mice. The titers of rSeV-luc(M-F*) in BALB/c mice correlated with bioluminescence in intact mice (Figure S5A), as they were in 129/SvJ mice. Therefore, use of the bioluminescence technique to measure respiratory tract infection in living mice was validated in both 129/SvJ and BALB/c strains.Dynamics of infection during contact transmissionSeV, the HPIVs, and HRSV are thought to be transmitted primarily via contact with respiratory secretions as opposed to long-range transmission of these secretions as small-particle aerosols [21], [22], [24], [44], [45]. It has also been shown that growth of SeV [21] and influenza virus [46] in the URT promotes transmission. Two fundamental questions about PIV transmission that have long remained unanswered are (i) how growth of virus in the lungs of donors influences transmission and (ii) how infection spreads in the respiratory tracts of contact animals after transmission. To address these fundamental questions about SeV transmission, we inoculated BALB/c or 129/SvJ donor mice with 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then at 1 d p.i. we placed 1 donor mouse in a “clean” cage with 3 naïve contact mice. We measured bioluminescence daily in inoculated and contact mice until primary infection was cleared. We then collected sera on day 60, challenged the mice with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) on day 63, and subsequently imaged the mice daily to detect reinfection (Figures 5 and 6). Transmission to every naïve contact mouse was observed by nasopharyngeal bioluminescence and seroconversion, including resistant BALB/c mice exposed to donor animals inoculated at the lower dose of 70 PFU (Figure 5). The timing of transmission was not influenced by the extent of lung infection in donors, as lung titers were ∼10 times lower in BALB/c than in 129/SvJ donor mice after 7,000-PFU inoculation (Figure S5C), yet the timing of transmission (time between detection in inoculated animals and contact animals) was similar (3.3 and 3.4 days, respectively) (Figure 6F). While LRT infection occurred in both strains of mice and may have contributed to transmission, the primary determinant of transmission appeared to be virus shedding in the URT and trachea. For example, both high-titer (>105 PFU) shedding in the nasal cavities and trachea of 129/SvJ donor mice (Figure 4A,B) and contact transmission (Figure 6E,F) occurred ∼1 day earlier after 7,000-PFU inoculation than after 70-PFU inoculation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g005Figure 5Sendai virus infection and immune response after contact transmission.Donor mice were directly inoculated with 70 PFU (A,C,E) or 7,000 PFU (B,D,F) of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then introduced into a cage with 3 naïve animals one day later. The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in the nasopharyngeal cavities of individual 129/SvJ (A–B) and BALB/c (C–D) mice are shown. Serum was collected on day 60 and contact mice were challenged with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) on day 63 to monitor for re-infection by bioluminescence. Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers were measured as reciprocal endpoint dilutions of sera collected on day 60 from mice co-housed with animals inoculated with 70 PFU (E) or 7,000 PFU (F). Open bars represent mice inoculated on day 0 and solid bars represent the contact mice. The experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ mice (3 donor and 9 contact mice) and duplicate for BALB/c mice (2 donor and 6 contact mice).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g006Figure 6Timing and tissue-tropic spread of Sendai virus infection after contact transmission.The co-housing of contact mice with mice inoculated with rSeV-luc(M-F*) is described in Figure 5. The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in individual, representative 129/SvJ (A–B) and BALB/c (C–D) mice is shown for the nasopharynx (triangles), trachea (circles), and lungs (squares). Time to detection of bioluminescence (>6 log10 photons/s) in the nasopharynx after inoculation of donors with either 70 PFU (E) or 7,000 PFU (F) of virus. Mean percent weight change in BALB/c (G) and 129/SvJ (H) mice. The contact transmission experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ mice and in duplicate for BALB/c mice. Open symbols and bars represent directly inoculated mice and solid symbols and bars represent contact mice. In panels G and H, the symbol X indicates PBS-inoculated control mice.Under all four conditions tested (129/SvJ or BALB/c donor mice infected with 70 or 7,000 PFU of virus), the tropism and magnitude of infection in contact animals was similar to that observed after direct intranasal inoculation with 70 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). After contact transmission, bioluminescence was first observed in the nasopharynx and then spread to the trachea and lungs an average of 0.8 and 1.0 days later, respectively (Figure S6A–D). Robust infection was observed in the nasopharynx and trachea after transmission (Figure 6A–D, Figure S6E–H). In contrast, low levels of infection in the lungs were observed after transmission, consistent with low weight loss (Figure 6G–H). In all four groups of mice, SeV-specific antibody titers on day 60 were similarly high (∼106) and all animals were protected from challenge on day 63 (Figure 5). After challenge, a low level of bioluminescence (<106 photons/s), but no weight loss, was detected in only 1 of the 30 contact mice; this animal had shown the lowest level of bioluminescence on days 5–12 after primary infection (Figure 5B, solid black circles). As this animal also had the lowest level of SeV-specific antibodies at day 60 before challenge, a threshold level of infection may be required to induce the highest levels of protective immunity. Overall, SeV infection after transmission was observed to be sufficiently robust in the URT and trachea, yet sufficiently limited in the lungs, to induce protective immunity without causing severe pathogenesis.DiscussionIn this study, we generated and used luciferase-reporter viruses to study the kinetics of SeV infection in living mice after direct inoculation or contact transmission. WT SeV virus and the luciferase-expressing virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) had a similar replication rate in vivo and elicited similar levels of weight loss, mortality, bronchoalveolar lymphocyte influx, and serum antibody titers. Both susceptible (129/SvJ) and resistant (BALB/c) strains of mice were intranasally inoculated with 70- and 7,000-PFU doses of rSeV-luc(M-F*), and the spread of infection was measured by both in vivo bioluminescence in intact mice and ex vivo virus titers in the tissues of sacrificed animals. The consequences of infection in the URT and trachea were found to be distinct from those of infection in the lungs. Unexpectedly, under all conditions tested, including 70-PFU inoculation of resistant BALB/c mice, the URT and trachea supported robust SeV growth, efficient contact transmission, and protective immunity independently of the extent of infection in the lungs. In contrast, the extent of infection in the lungs varied with the virus dose and mouse strain and was highly correlated with weight loss and mortality. Overall, the results reported here reveal a tissue-specific dichotomy in the respiratory tract in which robust infection in the URT and trachea supports efficient transmission while the extent of infection in the lungs and the host response determines disease severity.Here we describe for the first time the development of a non-invasive bioluminescence imaging system to visualize negative-strand RNA virus infection throughout the bodies of living animals, using the respiratory paramyxovirus SeV as a model. The development of a non-attenuated paramyxovirus that expresses sufficiently high levels of a reporter gene to allow non-invasive imaging of small animals has been challenging because of the polarized transcription mechanism of these non-segmented negative-strand RNA viruses [2]. A significant advance described here is the generation of the rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus, in which the attenuating effect of reporter-gene insertion [32] is counteracted by enhancement of the naturally occurring but suboptimal start sequence upstream of the F gene [33]. Expression of the F gene, a virulence factor [47], [48], is also downregulated by HPIV1 [49], HPIV3 [50], PIV5 [51], measles virus [52] and canine distemper virus (CDV) [47] by readthrough transcription or long untranslated regions. Therefore, we predict that other WT-like reporter paramyxoviruses that express high levels of luciferase can be engineered by inserting the reporter gene into the M-F junction and maintaining F gene expression through compensating mutations. Reporter gene expression without attenuation of SeV has also been achieved by construction of a bicistronic gene that contains an internal ribosome entry site [53], although it is not yet clear whether this approach yields sufficient luciferase expression to allow non-invasive imaging of in vivo infection.The use of the luciferase reporter gene in the present work enabled the measurement of infection throughout the entire respiratory tracts of intact animals, allowing us to measure the spread and clearance of infection after direct inoculation or transmission. eGFP-expressing reporter viruses have also been used to study the dynamics of CDV infection in ferrets [54], [55] and measles virus infection in monkeys [56], [57]. The eGFP reporter gene provides the advantage of allowing the tropism of infection to be studied at the cellular level in dissected tissues. Moreover, eGFP-expressing viruses can also be used to quantify and type infected cells in the peripheral blood, skin, and mouths of living animals. eGFP-expressing HPIV3 and Sendai viruses have been used to study the cellular tropism of PIV infection in well differentiated, primary epithelial cultures. In the case of HPIV3, infection was found to be restricted to ciliated epithelial cells and to cause little cytopathology [58]. In contrast, SeV was found to infect ciliated and non-ciliated cells, but not goblet cells, and was observed to induce ciliostasis, cell sloughing, apoptosis, and cellular degeneration [59]. It is unknown whether cell-free virus or cell-associated virus is associated with SeV transmission.A major finding reported here is that the efficiency and timing of SeV transmission are independent of the extent of pulmonary infection, clinical symptoms, and host genetics. HPIV1 transmission from asymptomatic human donors has also been observed in an experimental setting [39] and is consistent with epidemiological observations for PIV outbreaks in general [23], [24]. These observations suggest that LRT infection and the severity of clinical symptoms are poor predictors of transmission potential in surveillance and infection control efforts. As in previous work [21], [38], we observed that SeV transmission coincides with high-titer virus growth in the URT and is remarkably efficient because of the high infectivity of the virus (e.g., the MID50 of SeV is <10 PFU). HPIV1, HPIV3, and HRSV are similarly highly infectious and also transmit predominantly by direct contact or indirect exposure to nasal secretions [44], [45], [60]–[62]. In the absence of an available prophylactic drug for uninfected individuals in high-risk groups (e.g., premature infants and the immunocompromised), the results described here suggest that efforts to control PIV infection should focus on reducing URT shedding from infected individuals, disinfecting contaminated surfaces, and hand washing. In contrast to infection control, which would be best served by limiting URT infection, therapeutic antivirals would be better targeted to the LRT to control clinical manifestations of PIV-associated disease.Genetic factors have been identified that modulate viral susceptibility and disease severity in humans [63]–[65] and in the lungs of mice [40], [42], [43], [66]–[70]. Our results show for the first time that genetic factors limiting virus growth in the lungs of resistant BALB/c mice, compared to susceptible 129/SvJ mice, do not limit robust virus growth in the URT and trachea and, consequently, do not limit transmission. Furthermore, BALB/c and 129/SvJ mice showed a similarly high extent of infection in the URT and trachea and a similarly low extent of infection in the lungs after exposure to cagemates inoculated with high or low virus doses. This finding shows that host genetics do not play a major role in SeV transmission, at least in these strains of mice. These observations reinforce our inference that transmission and pathogenesis are independent consequences of URT versus LRT infection, respectively. Additional experiments are needed to delineate the mechanisms responsible for the higher permissivity of the URT and trachea than of the lungs to SeV infection. Possible mechanisms include the site of inoculation in the nasal cavity, lower temperature in the URT, tissue-specific differences in virus replication and innate immunity, and antiviral mechanisms, such as surfactant proteins in the lungs. Reduced replication in the lungs may be associated with lower levels of the secreted tryptase Clara, which is required for cleavage of the F protein to allow viral entry [71], [72].Asymptomatic infection that promotes immunity and transmission represents a balanced relationship that benefits both the virus and the host. Such has been the case in several enzootic (clinically unapparent) epidemics of SeV in which subclinical infections were maintained in mouse and hamster colonies for years with no increase in pathogenicity, causing apparent disease only occasionally in suckling and old animals [73], [74]. These epidemiological observations are reminiscent of the low virulence yet high transmissibility of the reverse-genetics engineered SeV described here, which was derived from a modified Enders strain that had been passaged in embryonated chicken eggs. Our results show that the level of virus replication in the lungs affects neither the timing nor the efficiency of transmission; thus, SeV replication in the lungs may offer no selective advantage. Instead, we suggest the following mechanism for symbiotic virus-host interplay in enzootic epidemics of SeV: natural infection after transmission is sufficiently limited in the lungs to avoid clinical signs of disease yet is sufficiently robust in the nasopharynx and trachea to promote efficient transmission and induce protective immunity.Epizootic (clinically apparent) outbreaks of SeV have caused morbidity and high rates of mortality in mouse colonies [75]–[77]. Two closely related, highly pathogenic field isolates of SeV are the Ohita and Hamamatsu strains [78], [79]. While inoculation with only a few PFU of unpassaged Hamamatsu strain SeV results in mortality in mice, the MLD50 of the virus was attenuated by as much as 400-fold after 50 passages in eggs [80]. When the highly pathogenic Ohita and Hamamatsu strains were adapted to LLC-MK2 cells and chicken eggs, they were found to have selected for mutations in the C protein and untranslated leader region, respectively, which increase replication in cultured cells but attenuate replication and pathogenesis in the lungs of mice [81]–[83]. The bioluminescence imaging system described here would be useful in determining whether the mutations that attenuate replication in the lungs also attenuate replication in the URT and trachea, thereby reducing transmission, or whether they actually promote sustained transmission by supporting nasal and tracheal shedding of virus while reducing pathogenesis in the lungs. Such experiments may also reveal whether our observations about the spread and transmission of the egg-adapted SeV extend to unpassaged, highly pathogenic field isolates.SeV is a promising Jennerian vaccine against HPIV1 [1], [13], and recombinant SeV vaccine vectors containing an envelope gene from HRSV, HPIV3, or HPIV2 inserted into the F-HN gene junction have been shown to elicit both B- and T-cell responses that lead to protection from challenge in small-animal models [18]–[20]. While SeV is pathogenic in mice, an ongoing clinical trial has demonstrated SeV to be well tolerated in humans [17]. In non-human primates, SeV has been shown to protect against HPIV1 challenge with no associated adverse events [15], [84]. This result is likely due in part to the sensitivity of SeV to human IFN-mediated innate immunity [85]. As SeV is developed further as a vaccine vector, the luciferase-expressing SeVs, imaging system, and methods described here will be useful in investigating the effect of vaccine dose, volume, and position of foreign antigen insertion in the SeV genome on tissue-specific vector growth and the immune response in small animal models. Of course, replacing the luciferase reporter gene in SeV with a vaccine antigen could alter in vivo replication of the vector. For example, three different recombinant HPIV3 vectors expressing HPIV1 HN, HPIV2 HN, or measles virus HA inserted into the P-M gene junction were found to replicate to different levels in hamsters [86].In summary, we have described the development of the non-attenuated reporter virus rSeV-luc(M-F*), which can be used to quantify tissue-specific SeV infection in living mice. Our results reveal how infection by SeV spreads in individual, living animals after direct intranasal inoculation and after transmission. Importantly, infection in the URT and trachea were found to be associated with contact transmission while infection in the lungs was found to be associated with pathogenesis. The imaging tools developed here will provide a method to study the effect of viral factors, host genetics, host age, immune status, environmental conditions, and inoculation mode on the dynamics of infection and transmission. For example, infection can be tracked non-invasively in WT and knockout mice before immune responses are measured ex vivo and then interpreted in light of the preceding infection. Methods similar to those reported here could also be developed to image infection by other paramyxoviruses in small-animal models. Overall, our model system and results suggest tissue-targeted approaches to PIV infection control and vaccine development, while our non-invasive bioluminescence imaging technique is expected to advance the preclinical testing of candidate vaccine vectors and experimental therapies.Materials and MethodsEthics statementAll animal studies were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and were performed in compliance with relevant institutional policies, the Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines, the National Institutes of Health regulations, and local, state, and federal laws.Cell cultureMonolayer cultures of LLC-MK2 cells were grown in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% L-glutamine, 1% penicillin, and 1% streptomycin at 37°C, 5% CO2.Recombinant Sendai virusesUnique NotI recognition sites were cloned into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN intergenic junctions of an Enders-based pSeV viral genome plasmid using cloning sites described previously [32]. The firefly luciferase gene was amplified by PCR using the pGL3 Basic vector (Promega) and a pair of AscI tagged primers, subcloned into a shuttle plasmid containing a SeV intergenic junction and flanking NotI restriction sites [32], and then subcloned into the unique NotI site of each of the pSeV viral genome plasmids. Within the pSeV-luc(M-F*) plasmid, the start signal upstream of the F protein was changed from AGGGATAAAG to AGGGTGAAAG by using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene Corp). The rSeVs were rescued from the pSeV genome plasmids as described previously [20].Luciferase expression in vitro
rSeV-infected LLC-MK2 cells (MOI, 5 PFU/cell) were incubated at 33°C, 5% CO2, and lysates were collected at various times p.i.. Luciferase assays were performed using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega) and expression was measured on an automated luminometer (Turner Biosystems, Inc.) as described previously [87].Viral titers and bioluminescence imagingVirus titers from multistep growth curves (MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell) and homogenized tissues were determined by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells as described previously [48]. Eight week-old female 129/SvJ mice or BALB/c mice (Jackson Laboratories) were anesthetized with isoflurane (Baxter Health Care Corp.) and inoculated intranasally (i.n.) with 30 µl of PBS or PBS containing virus. Animals were monitored daily for weight loss, morbidity, and mortality. Before imaging, mice were injected intraperitoneally with luciferin (Xenogen Corp) at a dose of 150 mg/kg of body weight and anesthetized with isoflurane for 5 min. In vivo images were acquired with a Xenogen IVIS CCD camera system (Caliper Life Sciences) and analyzed with Living Image 3.2 software (Caliper Life Sciences) using an exposure of 60s, 30s, or 5s (binning 4; f/stop 1). Pseudocolor images (representative of bioluminescence) of mice were displayed using a binning of 4 on a colorimetric scale ranging from 1×106 to 1×109 surface radiance (photons/s/cm2/steradian), which is defined as the number of photons that leave a cm2 of tissue and radiate into a solid angle of one steradian. To quantify bioluminescence, regions of interest (ROI) were defined manually and graphed data were expressed as total flux (photons/s), which is defined as the radiance within each pixel summed over the ROI area (cm2)×4π. For experiments shown in Figures 1D, 1E, 2, 3, 4E, 4F, and S4, mice were anesthetized by IP injection of 300 µl 2,2,2-Tribromoethanol (300 mg/kg) and chest hair was removed by shaving and application of a depilatory cream 3 d before inoculation.ImmunologySera and BALF were collected from euthanized animals on day 10 or day 60 p.i.. BALF samples (3 ml) were centrifuged to collect cellular material and plated in a tissue culture dish for 1 h at 37°C to remove adherent cells. Suspension cells were harvested, total lymphocytes were counted microscopically, and red blood cells were lysed. For analyses by flow cytometry, cells were stained with FITC-conjugated anti-CD4 (RM4-4) and PE-conjugated anti–CD8b (53-5.8) antibodies (BD Biosciences Pharmingen). Lymphocytes were gated based on forward and side scatter, and the percentages of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations were measured within this gate. ELISAs were used to measure the levels of SeV-specific or luciferase-specific antibodies present in the sera. Briefly, 96-well plates were coated overnight with disrupted, purified SeV (10 µg/ml) or firefly luciferase (1 µg/ml, Abcam). Plates were blocked with PBS containing 1% BSA and then incubated with 10-fold serially diluted serum samples. After incubation, plates were washed, incubated with HRP-Goat anti mouse IgG (Southern Biotechnologies) and then washed further. To quantify levels of antibodies, TMB substrate (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories) was added to the wells followed by stop solution and absorbance was read at a wavelength of 450 nm. GraphPad Prism non-linear regression software was used to calculate antibody titers.Contact transmissionDonor animals were inoculated intranasally with 30 µL of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and were individually placed into cages containing 3 naïve contact mice at 24 h p.i. Bioluminescence was monitored daily until it remained consistently at background levels (∼15 days). Sera were collected on day 60 so that SeV-specific antibody levels could be measured as described above. On day 63, mice were challenged with 7000 PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*) administered i.n. and bioluminescence was measured daily.Supporting InformationFigure S1Construction of luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses. (A) Nucleotide sequence of the firefly luciferase gene cassette. A pGEM3 cloning plasmid was engineered to contain flanking NotI restriction sites, the firefly luciferase reporter gene, gene end, and gene start sequences. (B) To insert the luciferase reporter gene cassette into three gene junctions, three pSeV genome plasmids were cloned to contain a unique NotI restriction site in each of the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions. For the pSeV-luc(M-F*) genome plasmid, the naturally occurring suboptimal start signal AGGGATAAAG was also mutated to the more efficient start signal AGGGTGAAAG to compensate for expected attenuation due to the addition of the foreign gene and additional gene junction. The firefly luciferase gene cassette (panel A) was subcloned from the pGEM3 plasmid into the pSeV genome plasmids using the NotI restriction sites. (C) Design of pSeV cDNA plasmids for the rescue of WT and recombinant Sendai viruses containing the luciferase reporter gene (luc). The locations of the Sendai virus genes nucleoprotein (N), polymerase (P), matrix (M), fusion (F), hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN), and large (L) protein are shown, as well as the T7 RNA polymerase promoter (T7) and hepatitis delta virus ribozyme sequence (ribo). Gene start sequences are shown in green and the naturally occurring, suboptimal AGGGATAAAG gene start sequence between the M and F genes of WT Sendai virus is shown in yellow. Gene end sequences are shown in red. The 3′ leader sequence upstream of the N gene and the 5′ trailer sequence downstream of the L gene are not shown for simplicity.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2Sendai virus protein expression and incorporation into virions. (A) Sendai virus protein expression in LLC-MK2 cells. Confluent monolayers of LLC-MK2 cells were infected with recombinant Sendai viruses at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell and incubated for 16 h before radiolabeling with 50 µCi [35S]Promix (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Supernatant was incubated overnight at 4°C with mouse anti- NP, P, M, F, and HN monoclonal antibodies, and immune complexes were adsorbed on protein G-Sepharose (GE Healthcare), fractionated on 12% NuPAGE bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen), and visualized with a phosphorimager. (B) Ratios of Sendai virus protein expression. Protein expression was quantified with ImageQuant 5.2 software and normalized to the expression level of the N protein. The data represent the means (+/− standard deviation) from three experiments. (C) Sendai virus composition. Recombinant Sendai viruses were inoculated into 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs. Allantoic fluid was harvested 72 h p.i. and centrifuged for 45 min at 3000 rpm to remove cellular debris. Supernatants were layered over a 60%–20% sucrose gradient and centrifuged at 24,000 rpm for 3.5 hrs to isolate virions. Isolated virions were diluted in TNE buffer and further purified by centrifugation over a 20% sucrose cushion at 24,000 rpm for 15 h. Virus pellets were resuspended in RIPA buffer and total protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Sci.). Equal quantities of protein were separated on a 4%–12% SDS-PAGE gel, stained with Blue BANDit protein stain (Amresco), and dried in a BioRad gel dryer at 60°C for 45 minutes.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S3Immune responses of mice to infection with recombinant Sendai viruses. Groups of five 8-week-old 129/SvJ mice were intranasally inoculated with 30 µl containing 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus or PBS. On day 10 p.i., serum was collected and the mice were euthanized to recover bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Experiments were performed twice with representative data shown. Each data point represents an individual animal and horizontal bars show group means. The numbers of CD4+ (A) and CD8+ (B) T cells recovered from BALF were determined by flow cytometry. (C) Luciferase-specific binding antibody titers in sera were determined by ELISA assays and are expressed as reciprocal endpoint dilutions. Firefly luciferase protein (Abcam) was used.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S4Bioluminescence and Sendai virus titers in the respiratory tracts of 129/SvJ mice. Groups of three 8-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus. (A) In vivo bioluminescence was measured for all three luciferase-expressing viruses on days 4 and 6 p.i., after which lungs were immediately harvested and homogenized so that ex vivo luciferase activity could be measured. A fit of the data with a least squares linear regression model yielded an R
2 value of 0.878. RLU denotes relative light units. (B) Comparison between light detected by the camera and viral titers of homogenates from the nasopharynx (triangles), trachea (circles), and lungs (squares). Each point represents data from a single mouse infected with rSeV-luc(M-F*) and studied on day 2, 3, 5, or 7 p.i.. Least squares linear regression yielded R
2 values of 0.864, 0.915 and 0.961 for the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S5Bioluminescence and viral titers in the respiratory tracts of BALB/c and 129/SvJ mice. Groups of three 8-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). (A) In vivo bioluminescence was measured in BALB/c mice infected with 7,000 PFU of virus on days 2, 3, 5, and 7 p.i., after which the animals were euthanized and tissues were harvested so that virus titers from tissue homogenates could be measured by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells. Correlations between virus titers in tissue homogenates and light detected by the camera were found with R
2 values of 0.928, 0.656, and 0.846 for the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively. Virus titers in homogenates from the nasopharynx (B) and lungs (C) of both BALB/c- and 129/SvJ-strain mice infected with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) were measured by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells. The data represent the mean virus titers of six mice (+/− standard deviation).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S6Tissue-specific timing and magnitude of Sendai virus spread in the respiratory tracts of intact mice after inoculation and contact transmission. In each group, one BALB/c or 129/SvJ mouse was inoculated intranasally with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and three contact animals were co-housed one day later as described in Figure 5. (A–D) Time until detection of bioluminescence in the nasopharynx (nasop.), trachea, and lungs (limit of detection: >6 log10 photons/s) after direct inoculation (open bars) and after contact transmission (solid bars). (E–H) Overall magnitude of infection after direct inoculation (open bars) and after contact transmission (solid bars) as determined by integration of daily measurements of total flux with respect to time using IgorPro software (Wavemetrics). The areas under the curve (AUC) of bioluminescence are expressed as the total amount of photons on a log10 scale. The experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ-strain mice (3 donor animals and 9 transmitted) and duplicate for BALB/c-strain mice (2 donor animals and 6 transmitted).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Dengue Virus Virulence and Transmission Determinants

IntroductionDengue virus (DENV) pathogenesis seems to be determined by numerous, interacting factors: viral virulence, host immunity and immune status, host genetics and possibly others (e.g., preexisting diseases). Because we have no models of severe dengue disease (DHF), all associations of viruses with increased pathogenesis have been indirect and painstakingly slow in being developed. Transmissibility has also been measured indirectly: the successful isolation of viruses from patients and the preponderance of one serotype over another have been documented in numerous countries but this has also introduced biases in our sampling. We do not have available a fully representative set of DENV genomes to study and understand what truly constitutes the natural range of DENV variation; many samples from mosquitoes or less-ill human infections are missing, in addition to those from countries lacking the laboratory and public health infrastructure necessary for detecting and isolating viruses. Virus-mosquito interactions also add a layer of complexity to the determination of which genotype is being transmitted and we are only beginning to measure the effects of this selection. However, many new methods have been applied to the study of DENV genetic variation, replication fitness and their effects on transmissibility and pathogenesis in humans. None of these methods are perfect and we must still regard them as surrogates for measurements of the natural viral determinants of disease. Thus, understanding this complex system will probably require multidisciplinary approaches to solving the mysteries of the interaction of the many factors that contribute to DENV epidemiology. Other, nonviral factors contributing to DENV pathogenicity and transmission are discussed in accompanying chapters.Controversies Over Virulence and EvolutionThe first descriptions of DENV virulence differences came from epidemiologic and entomologic studies done in the South Pacific by Rosen and Gubler, in the 1970s (Gubler et al. 1978; Rosen 1977). It was noted that some outbreaks in this region had fewer or no cases of DHF and the transmitted viruses were considered of low virulence; other outbreaks had many cases of DHF, after primary infection and these viruses were therefore more virulent. However, it took the development of RNA nucleotide sequencing techniques and the use of these sequences to generate phylogenetic trees of evolutionary relationships among viruses to discover that specific variant groups, or genotypes, were more frequently associated with dengue epidemics and severe disease (Chungue et al. 1995; Lanciotti et al. 1997; Lanciotti et al. 1994; Messer et al. 2003; Rico-Hesse 1990; Rico-Hesse et al. 1997). More recently it has been shown that some genotypes associated with DHF have been introduced and become established (endemic) in other continents, sometimes displacing the less-virulent DENV already being transmitted in those regions (causing DF only). “Virulent” genotypes have been described for serotypes 2 and 3 and it remains to be seen if further evolutionary studies will pinpoint similar groups in serotypes 1 and 4 (Rico-Hesse 2003).In the case of DENV, there is no evidence for rapid evolution and selection as in HIV, influenza or SARS viruses; for DENV, man-made ecologic disruption or increments in the number of mosquitoes or hosts are more important than evolution towards more virulent genotypes. There has yet to be evidence for the circulation of a recombinant DENV and those recombinant genomes described to date have been the product of enzymatic amplification techniques and are thus probably lab artifacts (Aaskov et al. 2007; Holmes and Twiddy 2003; Worobey et al. 1999); no one has isolated and fully characterized a recombinant DENV that is being transmitted in nature, causing disease. Although there is evidence for recombination in other, positive-strand viruses, specific steps in DENV replication might keep this event from occurring, although ample opportunities seem to exist in multiply-infected humans and mosquitoes (Monath et al. 2005). Also, there is no evidence for the epidemic transmission of the sylvatic genotype viruses from West Africa or Malaysia. These older, seemingly less-virulent viruses are transmitted mainly by canopy-dwelling mosquitoes to monkeys and they do not cause outbreaks in the human populations inhabiting those areas. The viruses isolated from dengue patients during outbreaks belong to genotypes imported from other continents (in the case of serotype 2, a genotype originating in the Indian subcontinent was introduced to Africa) (Rico-Hesse 2003). Some researchers, with ample field experience in tropical areas, believe that these zoonotic cycles will eventually disappear, because of the constant reduction of natural forests; thus, these cycles have practically no importance as reservoirs of human dengue (Rodhain 1991).Although we have not detected increases in replication fitness for any given genotype, some of the evolutionary events leading to more virulent strains seem to have already occurred and by the time these viruses rapidly spread from Southeast Asia to other areas of the world (1940s), they were already virulent or replicatively fit (Gubler 2002). We have yet to measure any specific genetic changes that are fixed in the viral population as virulent genotypes are successfully dispersed to other continents and we do not know whether there have been any changes imposed by selection in their new environments (e.g., for serotype 2, Southeast Asian genotype introduced into the Americas; for serotype 3, Sri Lankan genotype III introduced to the Americas). That is, these viruses had increased fitness at their origin, in that they are directly linked to the appearance of DHF and they are transmitted more efficiently by mosquitoes. However, some researchers believe differences in clinical presentation and severity of epidemics are a function of only immunologic and genetic differences between the human populations in both continents (Southeast Asia and Americas) (Halstead 2006) or that nonneutralizing antibodies formed during DENV infection play a role in gradually selecting for more pathogenic viruses in humans (Morens and Fauci 2008).Controversies Over TransmissionOf special concern lately has been the effect of global warming on the incidence and spread of dengue disease. Although there are probably no effects on DENV replication in humans, if environmental temperatures rise, many investigators presume there might be an effect on virus transmission by mosquitoes. This is derived from the fact that increases in temperature (along with increases in rainfall) directly affect mosquito development (from larval to adult stages) and their populations can increase dramatically. Also, increases in average temperatures in new climes might make conditions favorable for mosquito breeding and the establishment of new populations. This could surely lead to more chances of exposure to mosquito bites for the human population and thus for infection by mosquito-borne viruses. However, the reason why many mosquito-borne diseases have yet to affect large populations in developed nations seems to be a lack of exposure to mosquito bites; air-conditioning and human behavior have been shown to reduce DENV transmission in the southern United States (Reiter et al. 2003). That is, human activities and their impact on local ecology have generally been more significant in increasing dengue prevalence; thus, dengue disease seems to be influenced more by economic than climatic factors (Gubler et al. 2001; Reiter 2001). Also, research described below has shown that increases in temperature might have more of an impact on selecting for those virulent genotypes that are already being transmitted by mosquitoes. Mosquito survival rates and the time it takes for a virus to infect and be transmitted by the mosquito seem to be more important in this context.Another subject that has received renewed attention is the possibility of human modification or management of viral virulence by impacting transmission dynamics. This is important for the application of rapid public health measures in the event of the emergence of new strains of parasites, bacteria or viruses (Lipsitch and Moxon 1997). We presume we can influence virulence by the application of changes in human habits or by the use of control factors such as vaccines – and there are numerous precedents of how public health measures have changed the population dynamics of microorganisms (e.g., there are now more cases of vaccine-induced polio or yellow fever in some countries). Efforts to understand the relationship between parasite adaptation to hosts, virulence and transmission have developed into a small industry in evolutionary biology (Bull and Dykhuizen 2003). Although most discussion is still theoretical, the relationships between virulence and transmission have been weighed, presuming that there is an evolutionary trade-off for optimizing either factor within an organism (Ebert and Bull 2003). That is, to increase its chances of transmission to another host, an organism will limit its replication or virulence in so far as to not kill its host. For example, highly virulent, zoonotic viruses such as Ebola and rabies are less transmissible than measles or common cold viruses, which rarely kill their human host. However, this is overly simplistic when it comes to the evolution of viruses that have multiple strains (multiple infections, with some cross-protection), where virulence involves immunopathology, or where there is another host or an amplifying vector involved in transmission (Day et al. 2007). Thus, the main goal for disease control is to understand how we can reduce virulence in a virus population without making its level of transmission higher. However, this seems a daunting task if we include the effects of evolution by individual versus group selection, bottlenecks and changes in fitness trade-offs. The concern here is whether we will shift DENV evolution and population dynamics by applying incomplete control strategies (e.g., nonsterilizing vaccination or vector transformation).Methodologic Advances and FindingsThe controversies mentioned above point to factors we should consider or understand in the control of dengue disease: evolutionary studies of DENV have helped us concentrate on detection (diagnosis and sampling), analysis (genetic and phenotype) and control (transmission dynamics in host and mosquitoes) of those genotypes already shown to be the culprits (Rico-Hesse 2007). The methods described below could help us reach these goals.Rapid Sequence AnalysisThe determination of viral RNA sequences from different areas of the genome has now become routine and numerous laboratories around the world have this capability; this has added exponentially to the number of DENV samples available for comparison in GenBank. The comparison of these nucleotides and their encoded amino acids can be done with sophisticated computer algorithms that can tell us much about the rates and sites of mutation or evolution in the viral genome. These data can then be matched with patient viral loads, diagnoses, outbreak characteristics and transmission distribution, to look for specific associations. The RT-PCR technique has allowed for the enzymatic amplification of these sequences from very small amounts of viral RNA from almost any type of tissue but many researchers have now avoided virus isolation and characterization, thus introducing mistakes in some of the banked information (e.g., from amplification, sequencing, or cloning artifacts) and without information on viability or antigenicity. Therefore, it is also important to have access to classic virology techniques, especially if one is to derive information about virus phenotype.The comparisons of full genome sequences of many DENV have helped pinpoint differences that could be involved in virulence: the comparison of viruses from two different genotypes associated with DHF or DF only (Southeast Asia and Americas, respectively) showed that there were consistent differences in the 5′-untranslated region (UTR), one envelope protein site (aa390) and the 3′-UTR of the DENV serotype 2 genome (Leitmeyer et al. 1999). Comparisons within the Southeast Asian genotype did not identify any specific nucleotides associated with producing DHF (Mangada and Igarashi 1998; Pandey and Igarashi 2000), so we assume all viruses of this genotype have the potential to produce severe disease. This has also been the case with other DENV, where recent studies have suggested that differences in 5′- and 3′-UTR in the genome can alter levels of replication (Miagostovich et al. 2006; Sirigulpanit et al. 2007; Tajima et al. 2007), which can be extrapolated to viral load in blood or disease presentation (Wang et al. 2006). Another chapter in this volume describes how these influences may occur.Infection of Primary Human CellsThe first targets of DENV replication, after mosquito bite, were postulated to be monocytes or macrophages and numerous studies focused on these cell types. However, more recent studies, using newer technologies for cell identification (mainly flow cytometry) have shown that DENV infects human monocytes poorly compared to dendritic cells, including Langerhans cells and monocyte-derived dendritic cells (Marovich et al. 2001; Wu et al. 2000). Primary dendritic cell cultures can be derived from human peripheral blood donations to banks and this is the usual source for studies to compare the replication of low-passage DENV from patients. Because these samples are obtained anonymously, we must be careful to obtain them from blood banks in areas where there is no DENV transmission (i.e., no antigenic priming of cells) and we cannot determine the human genetic background that might lead to differences in virus replication. However, studies reported in 2003 and 2005 (Cologna et al. 2005; Cologna and Rico-Hesse 2003) were able to show consistent differences in replication of DENV of two genotypes of serotype 2, demonstrating that there is an ex vivo correlation to the virulent phenotype derived from evolutionary studies. Although there seem to be innate, probably genetic differences in the yields of virus produced by cells from individual donors, this variation could be accounted for statistically and the correlations with virulence of patient-derived viruses were established (and note that these differences occur in the absence of antibodies). These primary cell cultures were also used to test recombinant viruses, to determine the influence of specific genome regions on virus replication and yields from human cell targets. These studies confirmed that the exchange of three genomic regions (5′ and 3′ UTRs, and E390) could reduce the levels of replication and virus yields of a Southeast Asian virus to those of wild-type, less virulent viruses of the American genotype (Cologna and Rico-Hesse 2003). Other uses for cultured primary human cells include the identification of specific cells that are producing more virus (tropism) and whether virus replication is even required for pathologic effects.Infection of Field-Collected MosquitoesAnother step in determining if a virulent genotype had an increased transmission fitness phenotype was to study differences in replication and dissemination (i.e., the possibility of transmitting virus by bite) in the natural mosquito vector, Aedes aegypti. Laboratory-reared colonies of mosquitoes (e.g., Rexville or Rockefeller strains) seem to have lost their selectivity for infection and it is recommended that mosquitoes used in these experiments be from the F4 generation or lower (F0 = field-collected eggs). The virulent, Southeast Asian strains of serotype 2 were shown to infect a larger proportion of mosquitoes than the less virulent, American genotype strains, after feeding mosquitoes on blood containing the same titer of virus (Armstrong and Rico-Hesse 2001); also, a greater proportion of mosquitoes develop disseminated infections with the virulent genotype (Armstrong and Rico-Hesse 2003). If mosquitoes were fed both genotypes simultaneously, they were much more likely (sevenfold) to develop an infection with the virulent strains (Cologna et al. 2005). When the dynamics of virus replication and dissemination were compared for both genotypes, the virulent strains had reached the salivary glands up to 7 days earlier than the less virulent viruses (Anderson and Rico-Hesse 2006). This means that virulent strains may replicate and be transmitted much sooner to human hosts, outcompeting the less virulent viruses and causing many more cases of disease, thus ecologically displacing those that cause less severe dengue. This efficiency of transmission by the vector could explain how certain genotypes have displaced others, shifting the evolution of dengue disease towards more virulence (i.e., more DHF).Mouse Models of DiseaseDuring this decade, major advances have been made in the development of new mouse breeds and their transplantation with human stem cells (from umbilical cord blood cells) that may effectively mimic the human immune system or show human signs of disease upon infection. The combination of studies in these mice with those in mice that are defective in interferon production or receptors have led to insights into the mechanisms of dengue pathogenesis (Bente et al. 2005; Kuruvilla et al. 2007; Kyle et al. 2007; Shresta et al. 2006). Thus far, none of these models develop DHF and the production of DENV-specific antibodies has been low or undetectable. However, others have shown that mice engrafted with human hematopoietic cells can be effectively used to study pathogenesis of viruses for which no other models exist (Melkus et al. 2006; Watanabe et al. 2007). It is anticipated that after adaptation of this system to DENV infection by multiple strains, with the acquisition of DENV-specific, functional B and T cells, that the signs of DHF might appear in these “humanized” mice. This would finally allow for the measurement of the many effects of immunopathogenesis, including the protective cross-immunity created by serial infection and the evaluation of many basic questions, such as dose-dependence of infection, the relevance of mosquito factors to infection (e.g., salivary gland proteins) and the role of other cells as primary targets of infection (e.g., endothelial cells). Most importantly, this model could allow for the immediate testing of antivirals and vaccine candidates, where effective systems for testing products before human use have been lacking.Mathematical Models of TransmissionAnother promising new field has been the development of mathematical models of DENV transmission, including “evolutionary epidemiology” and virulence management. These models are being used to estimate the effect of changing host immunity or mosquito transmission on the amount of virus circulating and the risks to a hypothetical human population and epidemic “topology.” These analyzes have suggested that DENV cross-serotype immunity and mosquito demographics, rather than immune enhancement, are the most important determinants in the dynamics of specific serotype cycles or genotype replacement during epidemics and that the application of incomplete control strategies might actually increase the incidence of severe disease (Adams et al. 2006; Cummings et al. 2005; Nagao and Koelle 2008; Wearing and Rohani 2006). Although these models are complex and still require many basic measurements for their refinement, some of the details are being added as they become available from laboratory or ecological studies (e.g., quantification of cross-protection by various DENV strains and many different measurements of mosquito transmission dynamics, including vector genetics and their effect on competence and capacity, etc.). Other applications of computer modeling have involved measuring the importance of host genetics over parasite contributions to virulence. For virology, the importance of host genetics in disease pathogenesis has been discussed for many years but recent technologies have allowed researchers to weigh the influence of virus virulence over human host genetics, in the case of pandemic influenza A (Gottfredsson et al. 2008; Pitzer et al. 2007). However, these approaches are extremely controversial at this point, as other investigators have reached opposing conclusions when using similar methods and results (Albright et al. 2008).PerspectiveOnly recently have public health officials in developed countries become concerned about the increased transmission and geographic spread of DENV. In many cases this is due to the increase in cases imported by tourists from less-developed tropical regions. For the United States, there has been a marked increase in imported cases and autochthonous transmission in Texas and Hawaii during this decade (Morens and Fauci 2008) and for the first time we have been able to document the introduction of a virulent DENV genotype into this country (CDC 2007; Rico-Hesse 2007). This has added a sense of urgency to research using some of the models described here and a hope for additional support for studies of this long-neglected tropical disease.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Camelids and Cattle Are Dead-End Hosts for Peste-des-Petits-Ruminants Virus

1. IntroductionPeste-des-petits-ruminants (PPR) is a highly contagious notifiable transboundary disease caused by PPR virus (PPRV, species: small ruminant morbillivirus [1]) that mainly affects small ruminants. Since the worldwide eradication of the closely related rinderpest virus (RPV, species: rinderpest morbillivirus) in 2011, PPRV has spread considerably across African and Asian countries, in particular lineage (L)IV of the four known PPRV lineages (LI to IV) [2]. Clinical signs in small ruminants, particularly in goats, include fever, erosions of mucosal membranes, nasal and ocular discharge, respiratory distress, diarrhea, and death [3,4]. In sheep and other wild or domestic species within the Artiodactyla order (even-toed ungulates), disease expression associated with PPRV-infection may vary between subclinical infection to severe clinical signs and death, similar to goats [5]. The high morbidity and mortality rates of up to 100% in small ruminants threatens the livelihood of the poorest people that depend on small ruminant production and results in considerable economical losses of affected countries around the globe. Therefore, the eradication of PPRV is targeted for 2030 [2,6]. For RPV, reservoir hosts including various wildlife species had been determined [7,8], while for the spread of PPRV the possible role of atypical hosts of other domestic and wild artiodactyls still remains largely unknown [5]. The identification of reservoir hosts that may contract the disease particularly by silent spread over large distances and across borders without expression of obvious clinical signs is of major concern. For example, sheep subclinically infected with PPRV are a known possible source of silent PPRV-spread [5,9]. PPRV RNA, antigen or infectious virus was detected in blood or tissue samples from different wild animal species [5,10], camels [11,12], buffaloes [13], and cattle [14], but no transmission to susceptible contact animals or shedding of infectious virus has so far been reported in any sound study for these Artiodactyla species. Additionally, due to multiple disease outbreaks in camels, which were associated with PPRV-infection with any of the lineages LII, LIII [15], or LIV, PPR has been discussed an emerging disease in camels [12,16,17,18]. El-Hakim [19] reports transmission of a PPRV LI strain from camels to goats, but the study design does not preclude natural infection with PPRV or other pathogens causing PPR-like clinical signs, because infection route, biosafety, and sanitary measures have not been described. Similar to cattle, pigs were previously considered dead-end hosts for PPRV [18]. However, PPRV transmission from pigs to a contact pig and a contact goat, and the excretion of infectious PPRV by pigs and wild boar after experimental intranasal infection with the virulent PPRV LIV strain Kurdistan/2011 showed recently that suids may indeed act as a potential source of PPRV infection [9]. Similarly, transmission of RPV to contact cattle was recorded for pigs [20], but not for camels experimentally infected with RPV, despite of using different inoculation routes (intravenous (i.v.), subcutaneous (s.c.), contact to RPV-infected cattle) and the detection of infectious PPRV in the blood of some camels [21]. Taken together the unclear host traits of various species indicates that single or multiple species together may be a potential additional source of PPRV-infection depending on various host, virus and/or environmental factors in an ecosystem. For example, stress, concurrent infections, abundance, density and behavior/interaction of host species, virulence, shedding patterns and survival of a virus strain, climate, and anthropogenic practice (e.g., transhumance, land use) [9,22,23,24,25,26,27]. In general, the basic reproductive number (R0; expected number of secondary infections caused by a typical infected individual in a susceptible population) determines whether a pathogen can cause (i) a major epidemic by sustained transmission (R0 > 1; maintenance/reservoir host), (ii) a self-limiting outbreaks (0 < R0 < 1; spillover/recipient host), or (iii) a single event of transmission (R0 = 0; dead-end spillover/recipient host) [26]. For PPRV, goats and sheep are recognized reservoir hosts that may transmit PPRV, show typical PPR disease and a similar pathogenesis after PPRV infection [2,3,4,9,28]. The host traits of other species susceptible to PPRV-infection according to serological or virological evidence is still under investigation or unknown. We therefore suggest the terms “typical” hosts for domestic small ruminants and “atypical” hosts for other susceptible host species of PPRV, similar to Bataille, et al. [29] and Abdullah, et al. [30]. Variations in receptor specificity influence host range, tissue tropism, pathogenicity and transmissibility of different viruses [31]. Morbilliviruses are negative-sense single stranded RNA viruses. The six transcriptional units of the PPRV-genome encode for six structural proteins: Nucleoprotein (N), phosphoprotein (P), matrix protein (M), the fusion (F) and hemagglutinin (H) membrane glycoproteins, and the polymerase (L). The P gene also encodes for the two non-structural proteins C and V [32,33]. Similar to PPRV, a wide host range for the other animal morbilliviruses (canine distemper virus (CDV), cetacean morbillivirus (CeMV) and RPV that infect respectively carnivores, cetaceans and artiodactyls) has been reported [7,8,32,34,35,36,37]. Attachment of morbilliviruses to cell surfaces is mediated via their H glycoprotein by direct protein–protein interaction with the two major natural host receptors involved in morbillivirus infection: CD150 (signaling lymphocyte activation molecule, SLAM) and nectin-4 [32]. Fusion activity of the F protein allows virus entry into the cell cytoplasm [32]. SLAM receptors are present on activated lymphocytes, macrophages and dendritic cells (DC) and lead to systemic morbillivirus infection, while the infection of epithelial cells via nectin-4 receptors plays an important role in disease development and virus transmission [37,38,39,40]. The tropism of morbilliviruses for immune cells and lymphoid organs may lead to immune suppression and a higher susceptibility to secondary infections and disease expression [9,39]. The limited inherent capacity for antigenic variation of morbillivirus glycoproteins [37], and the high conservation of the SLAM and nectin-4 receptors across mammalian species facilitate cross-species transmission of animal morbilliviruses between related mammalian species [35,38]. We aimed to scrutinize the contradictory reports of PPRV-infection associated with and without clinical signs in camelids and cattle and to elucidate their potential role in the epidemiology and eradication of PPRV. Furthermore, PPRV-infection of South American camelids (SAC) has never been reported. Accordingly, in light of our results from three independent transmission experiments with cattle, SAC and dromedaries using the PPRV/Kurdistan/2011 strain virulent in small ruminants and suids [3,9,41], we conducted a comprehensive literature review. The results suggest cattle and camelids are dead-end hosts for PPRV.2. Materials and Methods2.1. VirusThe small ruminant morbillivirus lineage IV (PPRV-LIV) strain Kurdistan/2011 was isolated on CHS-20 (goat-SLAM) cells [42] from a lung sample from a wild goat (bezoar ibex, Capra aegagrus) in Iraq [3,9,41] (lab submission no. BH15/11-5; Accession no. JF969755.1, KF648288, KF648287.1). The virus was passaged twice on vero.dog.slam.tag cells [43] (10^4.83 TCID50/mL, quantification cycle (Cq) value 15.01) and this virus stock (PPRV Kurdistan/2011/BH15-11_5/1CHS/2VDS 11/06/14) was used for all transmission trials as described previously [9]. The full-coding genome of the PPRV-LIV strain Kurdistan/2011 was obtained by next generation sequencing according to [44,45] and published in GenBank (Accession no. MK408669). The highest identity (98%) and alignment score of the Kurdistan/2011 strain was found with PPRV LIV strain Turkey/2000 (Accession no. AJ849636) (BLASTN 2.8.1+; http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi). 2.2. Animals and Study DesignAll animal experiments conducted in Germany were approved by the competent authorities of the Federal State of Mecklenburg–Western Pomerania and are in accordance with European legislation concerning animal welfare in particular directive 2010/63/EU. The experimental protocol of the trial with dromedaries was reviewed and approved by the ethics commission at the Central Veterinary Research Laboratory (Dubai, United Arab Emirates). To investigate whether PPRV-infected cattle and camelids may transmit infectious PPRV to PPRV-naïve contact goats or animals of the same species, PPRV transmission trials were conducted with cattle, South American camelids (SAC) and dromedaries (Table 1). Prior to experimental PPRV-infection, all animals were confirmed to be free of a previous PPRV infection with cELISA, they were checked by veterinarians that declared them clinically healthy and naïve to PPRV (trials 1 to 3; Figure 1), and animals of trials 1 and 2 were dewormed. PPRV transmission trials with cattle (trial 1) and SAC (trial 2) were conducted separately in the containment facility of the Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Isle of Riems, Germany. The cattle (C1–C3), alpacas (A1–A3), and llamas (L4–L6) (Table 1) were intranasally (i.n.) infected with 2 mL of approximately 10^4.5 TCID50/mL (1 mL in each nostril) using nasal atomizers (LMA MADTM 100, Wolfram Droh GmbH, Mainz, Germany). Two to three days after experimental infection (dpi), contact-control animals were added to the same enclosures of the cattle or SAC (see details in Table 1) and fed from the same feeding trough. The PPRV transmission trial with ten dromedaries (trial 3) was conducted at the Central Veterinary Research Institute, Dubai, United Arab Emirates. Three young (D.6A5, D.DBO, D.54A) and three old (D.F7B, D.No2, D.No4) dromedaries (D) and one positive control (pc)-goat (G.8682) were i.n. infected using Pocket Nebulizer, Micro A-I-R, Omron, Germany (D.6A5, D.DBO, D.No4, pc-goat) or Pasteur pipette (D.54A, D.F7B, D.No2). The three experimentally infected young adult dromedaries and two young adult contact control dromedaries (D.204, D.O5E) were kept in the same enclosure outdoor (pen 1). Two contact control goats (G.9499, G.9500) were kept in a small enclosure separated by a fence from pen 1 (to avoid serious injury of the goats by aggressive behavior of the dromedaries), which allowed direct nasal contact between dromedaries and goats. In pen 2, three experimentally infected old dromedaries and two old contact control dromedaries (D.No1, D.No6) were kept. The pc-goat was completely separated from the other two pens indoor (pen 3). For all animals, rectal body temperature and clinical score was recorded daily (trials 1 and 2) or in regular intervals (trial 3) from a few days before experimental infection until the end of the experiments (Figure 1H,I). Clinical signs were evaluated using the clinical score sheet published by Pope, et al. [4] for small ruminants. For cattle [46] and camelids [47] the score sheet was adapted (Table S1a respectively Table S1b). Clinical signs were scored cumulatively (see further details in Table S1a,b) and graded as follows: None obvious (clinical score (CS) 0), mild (CS 1 to 4), moderate (CS 5 to 9), and severe (CS ≥ 10). The clinical score of the cattle and SAC was assessed by the same veterinarian, the dromedaries and goats of trial 3 by multiple veterinarians. Oronasal (cattle, SAC) or nasal (dromedaries, pc-goat), conjunctival and fecal swab samples as well as serum and EDTA-treated whole-blood samples (all animals) were collected at regular intervals (Figure 1A–E). Swab sample collection, processing and storage was conducted according to Schulz, et al. [9]. 2.3. Serological and Hematological AnalysesSerological and hematological analyses were generally conducted as described previously [9]. Briefly, serum samples collected at regular intervals (Figure 1F,G) were tested with competitive ELISA (ID Screen® PPR competition, ID.vet, France) [48] and selected samples with a standard microneutralization test against the PPRV Kurdistan/2011 isolate used for experimental infection. Low, moderate and high neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers were distinguished according to [9] (<1.5, 1.5, to 2.5 respectively >2.5 log10 ND50 (ND50: virus neutralization in 50% of the replicates [49])). Leucocytes from cattle, SAC and the respective contact animals were counted in a Neubauer counting chamber after lysis of erythrocytes by diluting whole blood 1:100 in 3% acetic acid. The full blood count from dromedary and the pc-goat whole blood samples (trial 3) was automatically analyzed using a hematological analyzer (CELL-DYN 3700, Abbott, IL, USA).2.4. Virological AnalysesVirological analyses of serum, whole-blood, swab samples collected at regular intervals (Figure 1A–E) and of tissue samples were conducted as previously described [9]. Briefly, we used NucleoMagVET kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) on a KingFisher platform (KingFisher Flex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany) for extraction and the real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-qPCR) assay of Batten et al. [50] for PPRV-RNA quantification. An internal control system was used to verify proper RNA extraction and detection as described [51], as well as negative and positive controls. PPRV-RNA loads were differentiated to high (quantitative cycle value (Cq) 18-24.999), moderate (Cq 25-29.999), low (Cq 30-34.999), weak (Cq 35-42), and negative (no Cq). All samples collected in trials 1 and 2 were analyzed by RT-qPCR. Of the 6 experimentally PPRV-inoculated dromedaries, RT-PCR analysis was conducted with samples from 4 dromedaries that showed seropositive results (D.6A5, D.DBO) by cELISA or a slight transient rise in antibody levels below the cut off at 20 dpi (D.54A, D.F7B) (Figure 1F). PCR-positive samples from SAC and cattle were subjected to endpoint dilution assays for virus quantification using Vero.dog.slam.tag (green monkey) (VDS) cells [43] and CHS-20 (monkey CV1) (CHS-20) cells [42] in parallel as described [9]. All swab samples collected from all dromedaries and goats of trial 3 were proceeded to virus isolation on CHS-20 cells. An anti-PPRV-nucleoprotein (Np) purified monoclonal mouse antibody (Mab anti-PPR, concentration 1 mg/mL, 50% Glycerin, ID.vet) and Alexa 488 (goat anti-mouse) fluorophore were used for indirect immunofluorescence staining.2.5. Pathological AnalysesSelected animals were examined post-mortem for gross pathological lesions. Dromedaries were not euthanized at the end of the trial. Representative tissue samples of 24 (PCR) and 19 (IHC) organs from the three cattle as well as 29 (PCR) and 24 (IHC) organs from the seven SAC and ten (PCR) organs from the one pc-goat were processed for RT-qPCR (PCR) and/or for immunohistochemical (IHC) (see Table 2 for results of selected samples) and histopathological (HP) analyses, respectively, according to [9]. Briefly, before HP and IHC examination, tissue samples were fixed in 10% buffered formalin (4% solution of formaldehyde) and embedded in paraffin. For IHC, a primary anti-PPRV-Np purified monoclonal mouse antibody (Mab anti-PPR, stock concentration 1 mg/mL, 50% Glycerin, ID.vet) was used in a dilution of 1:100 in Tris-buffered saline. Subsequently, 3 μm sections were cut, deparaffinised and rehydrated. Endogenous peroxidase was blocked by 3% H2O2/methanol incubation and antigen was retrieved with high temperature in the microwave in citrate buffer (pH 6.0, 20 min at 600 W). As secondary antibody Mouse Envision HRP (Dako Diagnostics, Dako Deutschland GmbH, 22047 Hamburg, Germany) and as a substrate diaminobenzidine were used. All tissues (for a summary see Table 2) were investigated with a light microscope and scored according to the proportion of positive cells in the different samples: from negative (0% positive cells), weak (1–5% positive cells), mild (6–25% positive cells), moderate (26–75% positive cells) to severe (>75% positive cells).2.6. Comparison of Performance Characteristics of Different Virological MethodsFour different virological diagnostic methods were compared for their performance characteristic to detect a PPRV infection in (n = 20, whole blood, serum, swabs, tissue) from cattle and SAC (Table 3) as described previously [9] using RT-qPCR, virus isolation (VDS and CHS-20 cells) as well as antigen-capture ELISA (ag-ELISA) and lateral flow device (LFD) (see details in Table 3). Only samples positive by PPRV-PCR assay were included in this evaluation.3. Results3.1. Clinical and Hematological Results Suggest Resistance of Camelids and Cattle to PPR-Induced DiseaseWe observed no or only transient mild and unspecific clinical signs in all experimentally PPRV-infected dromedaries, SAC and cattle (peak clinical scores of 0, 1, or 2 to 3, respectively, Figure 1H), while the positive control (pc)-goat showed mild to moderate clinical signs with a peak clinical score of 5, similar as reported previously for goats [4,9]. No fever was recorded in any animal, except the pc-goat (from 5 to 7 dpi). In camelids, no clinical signs were observed, except in one alpaca (A2) that showed a mild, paste-like diarrhea at 7 dpi (PPRV-RNA negative). Mild unspecific clinical signs in the three heifers included transient mild ocular or nasal discharge at single or a few consecutive days between 3 and 13 dpi, prolonged recumbency in two cattle (C1 and C2 at 6 dpi) and thin, paste-like feces in C1 (before infection at 0 dpi and between 8 to 10 dpi). A marked transient leucocytopenia (<50% to 0 dpi) during the first or second week pi was found in one llama and the pc-goat, but in no other animal (Figure 1G).3.2. Humoral Response to PPRV Is Weak in Camelids but Pronounced in CattleIn SAC, low antibody levels and a prolonged time until seroconversion (12 to 21 dpi) were detected in all animals with the used competition ELISA (cELISA). Low neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers (1.1–1.8 log10 ND50) were detected in the three alpacas and llama (L) 6, but none in L4 and L5 at the end of the experiment (28 dpi). Of the six experimentally infected dromedaries, two young adult dromedaries (D.6A5, D.DBO) inoculated with a nebulizer seroconverted by showing low antibody levels around the cut-off values of the used cELISA between 20 dpi and the end of the experiment at 74 dpi (Figure 1F). However, the three older dromedaries inoculated with nebulizer (D.No4) or Pasteur pipette (D.F7B, D.No2) and the one young adult dromedary inoculated with Pasteur pipette (D.45A) showed no seroconversion. NAb titers were not analyzed for dromedaries. All experimentally inoculated cattle seroconverted at 10 dpi and NAb titers were moderate to high (1.95–2.56 log10 ND50) at the end of the experiment (16 dpi).No seroconversion was detected in any of the contact-control animals of the three animal trials. 3.3. Molecular Detection of PPRV-RNA in Swab Samples from Camelids and Cattle Weak to low PPRV-RNA loads (quantification cycle value [Cq] Cq ≥ 33.85) were detected in oronasal swabs in all three alpacas (A1–3) (3 to 10 dpi; Cq 39.24–33.85) and in one of three llamas (L5) (4 to 10 dpi; Cq 38.37–37.51), and weak loads in one llama fecal swab (L6 at 14 dpi; Cq 38.61) and in one whole-blood sample (Cq 37.68) from one alpaca (A3 at 8 dpi). Conjunctival swabs from all SAC were PCR-negative. No PPRV-RNA was detected in any of the serum, whole-blood or swab samples from L4 and the serum, whole-blood or swab samples from the four tested dromedaries that showed a weak serological antibody response at 20 dpi. Of the pc-goat, blood (3 to 20 dpi) and swab samples (3 until 20 dpi or euthanasia at 27 dpi) were positive by PCR (Figure 1A–E). In cattle, PPRV-RNA loads were weak to moderate in oronasal (1–9 dpi; Cq 38.37–28.22), weak to low in conjunctival (5–10 dpi; Cq 41.90–32.23) and weak in fecal swabs (7–8 dpi; Cq 38.28–35.48). Whole-blood and serum samples of C1–3 were all PCR-negative (Figure 1A–E). PPRV-RNA excretions ceased in cattle and SAC after seroconversion. No virus was isolated from any of the PCR-positive swab and tissue samples from both cattle and SAC. Similarly, PPRV was not isolated from any swab sample from the six dromedaries and two contact control goats of trial 3, but a few swab samples from the pc-goat were positive by virus isolation (Figure 1A–C). 3.4. PPRV-Antigen or RNA Detection in Lymphoreticular Tissue from SAC and Cattle3.4.1. Gross Pathological ResultsDromedaries were not euthanized at the end of the experiment. Hence, no tissue samples were available for virological analyses. In accordance with the absence of obvious clinical signs in SAC and cattle at the end of the animal trials, no gross pathological alterations or lesions typical for a PPRV infection were detectable at post-mortem examination. In SAC, gross examination revealed a tonsillitis in one llama (L4) and a severe (L5) or mild to moderate (L6) follicular hyperplasia of the tonsils in two llamas. One alpaca (A3) showed a conjunctivitis and the contact control llama (L7) showed an ecchymosis of the conjunctiva. 3.4.2. Molecular, Histopathological, and Immunohistochemical ResultsIn general, about half of the organ samples of SAC positive by PCR (24.1%, 7/29) were also positive by IHC (12.5%, 3/24) at 28 dpi. In contrast, a considerably higher proportion of organs of the infected cattle were positive by PCR (50.0%, 12/24), while no organ samples were positive by IHC (0.0%, 0/19) at 17 dpi.South American CamelidsIn general, weak to low PPRV-RNA loads were detected in tonsil (A1), head (A1 to A3, L6), lung associated lymph nodes (A1, L6), and in jejunal Peyer’s patches (A1). With IHC, weak to mild staining reactions against PPRV-ag were obtained in the tonsils of two alpacas (A2, A3) (Figure 2, Table 2). Interestingly, tonsils of the alpacas A2 and A3 showed an unspecific mild, acute, necrotizing tonsillitis, which in A2 was associated with an immunohistochemical PPRV-ag detection in crypt epithelium and lymphoreticular tissue. Although PPRV-ag in both alpacas was mainly found sub-epithelially (A2) or in the sinus (A3) in mononuclear cells, a few follicles were also IHC-positive (Figure 2A). Mild loads of PPRV-ag were found in parenchymal or lymphoreticular cells in the caecum of A2 and in the colon of A3 (Table 2). In addition, single lymphocytes and plasma cells in the intestinal mucosa (A2, A3) or submucosa (A3) were IHC-positive. In the caecum of A2, a few follicles showed IHC-positive results in lymphocytes of the germinal center. An eosinophilic enteritis associated with the detection of parasites (protozoa, nematodes) was found in all SAC (including the contact control L7). CattleWeak to low PPRV-RNA loads were detected by PCR in the lymphoreticular system: PPRV-RNA was detected in the buccal mucosa (C3), follicular area of the third eye lid, palatine tonsils, and retropharyngeal lymph nodes, head and lung associated lymph nodes and in Peyer’s patches of the small intestine (C1, C2, C3) (Table 2). The three cattle showed an eosinophilic enteritis—indicating a subclinical, mild endoparasitosis—as well as an unspecific mild, lymphohistiocytic conjunctivitis and unspecific lesions in nasal and conjunctival tissue. In accordance to the mild to absent clinical signs in cattle, no obvious evidence of a PPRV infection was found by histopathological analyses or IHC. IHC staining consistently revealed negative results for all cattle tissue examined. 3.5. RT-qPCR Is the Most Sensitive Virological Method for Diagnosis of PPRV-Infection in SAC and CattleOf the ten cattle and the ten SAC samples of different matrices (swab, tissue, blood) positive for PPRV-RNA by RT-qPCR, the antigen-capture (ag)-ELISA detected only one oronasal swab sample from one animal (cattle C1, 6 dpi; Cq 30.73) as positive (1 of 20), but another oronasal cattle sample with a higher PPRV-RNA load (cattle C3, 5 dpi; Cq 28.22) tested negative with this assay. None of the PCR positive samples were detected positive by LFD and virus isolation (Table 3). 4. DiscussionCattle are considered dead-end hosts for PPRV [2,18,52]. Furthermore, multiple disease outbreaks and fatalities in camels associated with PPRV-infection with lineages LII, LIII [15], and LIV strains [12,16,17] have suggested PPR is an emerging disease in camels [12,15,16,17]. However, clinical and virological results of field and experimental studies of PPRV-infection in camels and cattle are contradictory [11,14,17,52,53,54]. There is no scientifically sound evidence that cattle or camelids may transmit the disease to other susceptible animals and act as reservoir hosts for PPRV to our knowledge. To elucidate the potential role of cattle and camelids in the epidemiology of PPRV, we herein combine the results of the transmission trials with cattle, SAC and dromedaries with a comprehensive literature review of experimental and field studies of PPRV-infection in cattle and camelids. 4.1. Clinical Signs Associated with PPRV-InfectionWe observed no or only transient mild or unspecific clinical signs in PPRV-infected cattle and camelids using the PPRV LIV strain Kurdistan/2011 that was found virulent in wild and domestic goats and sheep and also in pigs and wild boar [3,9,41]. The positive control (pc)-goat showed mild to moderate clinical signs (Figure 1H) as reported previously for goats [4,9]. The eosinophilic enteritis in all cattle and SAC (including the contact control llama L7) indicates an association of the short transient soft feces in one cattle (C1) before (0 dpi) and after infection (8–10 dpi; 7–8 dpi weak PCR-positive; Figure 1C) and one alpaca (A2) at 7 dpi (PCR-negative) with a previous infection with endoparasites in the intestinal tract rather than by PPRV-infection. The transient and mild nasal (PCR-positive between 1 and 9 dpi) and ocular secretions (PCR-positive between 5 and 10 dpi) in cattle (between 3 and 13 dpi) as well as the histopathologically determined conjunctivitis (PCR and IHC-negative swab and tissue samples) in one alpaca (A1) and the contact control llama (Figure 1) could have been caused by repeated swab sampling. Hence, due to histopathological, IHC and PCR results (Table 2, Figure 1), an association of the mild, unspecific clinical signs with PPRV-infection cannot be determined. Furthermore, rectal body temperatures remained physiologically normal in cattle and camelids (Figure 1I), while body temperatures are often increased during the acuteness of PPRV infection in other hosts such as small ruminants and suids [4,9]. Mornet, et al. [55] described fatalities in two of six cattle after PPRV-infection with organ suspensions (by unknown inoculation route) obtained from PPRV-infected goats, but the cause of fatality of the two cattle was attributed to their poor general condition, not to PPRV-infection. The other four cattle showed no obvious PPR-like clinical signs [55]. The lack of PPR-like clinical signs in cattle reported by Mornet, et al. [55] is in accordance with our study results and previous reports by Couacy-Hymann, et al. [52] and Sen, et al. [14] about subclinical PPRV-infection in cattle experimentally s.c. infected with PPRV strains from any one of the four lineages [52] and cattle experimentally infected s.c. or by contact with PPRV-infected goats with a LIV strain [14], respectively (Table S2a). In accordance with the published [14,52,55] and our experimental study results of PPRV-infection in cattle, no clinical signs associated with PPRV infection have so far been reported or observed in cattle or buffaloes in the field (Table S2b) to the knowledge of the authors. In dromedaries, i.v. or s.c. infection with virulent PPRV field (LIV, LIII) or attenuated PPRV vaccine (LIII) strains did not result in clinical signs [54,56]. Similarly, camels experimentally infected with different RPV strains of varying degrees of virulence by different inoculation routes (s.c., i.v., contact infection by RPV-infected camels) showed no obvious clinical signs but a transient increase in body temperature in some animals as reported by Taylor [21] and Singh and Ata [57] (Table S2a).In field studies that reported disease outbreaks in camels associated with or without the detection of PPRV-infection, clinical signs described in camels varied considerably, but were generally similar to those reported in domestic and wild small ruminants. Accordingly, clinical signs in camels included sudden death, fever, respiratory distress, nasal discharge, diarrhea, and abortion [5,12,15,16,41,58,59]. On the other hand, the detection of PPRV antibodies in up to 14% of camels as well as the detection of PPRV, PPRV antigen and RNA in lung samples (see Section 4.2. PPRV-detection in camels) without the report of clinical signs in different field studies suggest that camels are susceptible to PPRV-infection but are resistance to PPRV-induced disease [11,53,60]. Clinical signs of PPR disease are generally not specific and differential diagnoses or concurrent diseases such as bluetongue (BT), food and mouth disease (FMD), contagious ecthyma (orf), contagious caprine pleuropneumonia (CCPP), pasteurellosis, heartwater, and coccidiosis have to be considered [18]. 4.2. PPRV Detection in CamelsConfusion about the impact of PPRV-infection on clinical disease expression in camels might have been caused by a sampling bias, differences in the methods used for the detection of PPRV-infection (Table S2) and the possible influence of concurrent infections. A small number of camels were tested and found positive for infectious PPRV, PPRV-RNA, or PPRV-antigen during large PPR-like disease outbreaks in camels [15,16,17,61,62] (Table S2b) that complicate the interpretation of the study results concerning the epidemiological significance. A high mortality rate (up to 70%) was associated with the isolation of PPRV LII (96 CAMEL 1) and LIII (96 CAMEL 2) from two camels and Streptococcus equi isolation from two lung samples from camels in Ethiopia [15]. PPRV LIV strains were isolated from 3/3 camel lungs [12] and 1/6 lung or lymph nodes [16] during PPR-like disease outbreaks, while Intisar, et al. [11] isolated unknown strains of PPRV from 5/10 lungs obtained from clinically healthy camels that showed lesions in their lungs upon post-mortem examination at the slaughterhouse [11]. Similarly, a low number of PPRV-RNA or antigen positive samples were reported during large PPR-like disease outbreaks by various authors: PPRV LIV strain in Iran in two camels [17], PPRV-RNA detection of a LIII strain (Kenya_PPRV_Camel_Mandera) in an unknown sample matrix from 1/25 camels with clinical signs in Kenya [61], and antigen or RNA of PPRV LIV strains in 6/6 and 5/6 lungs and lymph nodes, respectively, in camels in Sudan [16]. A higher proportion of camel samples were found positive by Kwiatek, et al. [12] who sequenced PPRV LIV-RNA from 38/49 lung, liver or spleen from 80 field samples from camels with PPR-like clinical signs in Sudan. In slaughterhouse studies, Intisar, et al. [11] found 33.6% of 220 (locally up to 48.5%) lung samples positive for PPRV antigen in clinically healthy camels with lesions in their lungs, and Saeed, et al. [53] detected PPRV antigen in 45.1% (214 of 474) lung samples showing pneumonia from clinically healthy camels. Interestingly, PPRV-antigen detection in 32/214 PPRV-antigen positive lungs was associated with the detection of antigen of one or two other respiratory viruses (bovine virus diarrhea virus, parainfluenza virus 3, respiratory syncytial virus, bovine herpes virus-1, adenovirus) in the study of Saeed, et al. [53] (Table S2b). However, whether these pathogens may also be detected in lung samples without lesions or pneumonia was not evaluated in the two slaughterhouse studies [11,53]. Nevertheless, the field studies of Roger, et al. [15], Intisar, et al. [11] and Saeed, et al. [53] demonstrated that mixed infections with different respiratory pathogens should be considered when evaluating possible causes of respiratory disease expression in PPRV-infected camels. Whether clinical signs may be reproduced in camels by experimental infection using PPRV strains isolated from camels to prove causal relationship according to Koch’s postulates, has never been investigated so far to our knowledge. Contradictory reports about the susceptibility and role of camels in RPV epidemiology are also available for RP field studies speculating about potential RP disease in camels during RP outbreaks in cattle despite the lack of diagnostic evidence [57,63]. However, RP disease could not be reproduced in camels experimentally infected with different virulent and attenuated strains of RPV [21,57]. Concurrent infections with other pathogens, general condition and nutrition status and breed may also influence the susceptibility of individual hosts of PPRV [4,9,64]. An association of a poor body condition score with a higher PPRV seroprevalence rate (poor 16.67%, fair 3.43%, and good 2.39%) was reported in a field study with 1517 camels in Nigeria [64], and PPRV-RNA (by RT-PCR and sequencing). Furthermore, PPRV-antigen detection was associated with Streptococcus equi isolation from lung samples from camels during a large disease outbreak in Ethiopia (see earlier) [15]. Immune suppression evident by severe leukocytopenia is a typical cause of infection with various morbilliviruses including PPRV [4,9,39]. Indeed, in the present study, one llama and the pc-goat showed leukocytopenia (<50% of 0 dpi) (Figure 1G), although we cannot exclude that immune suppression was caused by other factors. Differences in the susceptibility to PPRV-infection by species or breed have not been investigated so far for dromedaries and Bactrian camel species or species hybrids. Dromedaries are resistant to FMD and do not contract the disease, while Bactrian camelids show obvious clinical signs and can contract FMD [65], which might also be attributable to PPRV. Unfortunately, many studies lack information about the camel species or breed involved (Table S2). 4.3. PPRV-TransmissionSo far, no isolation of infectious PPRV or of PPRV-RNA from se- or excretions from camels or cattle has been documented: No PPRV-RNA could be detected in secretion or excretion of cattle subcutaneously (PPRV LI to IV [52]; PPRV LIV [14]) or dromedaries intravenously (PPRV LIV [54]) infected with PPRV. Also in our study, we could not isolate infectious PPRV from any of the PCR-positive swab and tissue samples from cattle and SAC. Although in cattle the highest PPRV-RNA load in an oronasal swab sample (Cq 28.22) was found below the cut-off value of Cq ≤ 31 that correlated with a successful isolation of PPRV in cell culture for samples from suids and small ruminants experimentally infected and analyzed with the same PPRV strain and PCR assay, respectively [9].Accordingly, no proof of contact transmission of PPRV from cattle (PPRV LI-IV) [52] or camels (PPRV LIV) [54] experimentally infected with PPRV to susceptible contact goats or other artiodactyls has been described in any sound experimental or field study (Table S2). El-Hakim [19] described subclinical or mild respiratory disease with cough, nasal discharge and fever associated with or without PPRV infection in some camels in Saudi Arabia and the transmission of a PPRV LI strain (of at least three tested PPRV lineages) from camels to goats. The source of PPRV infection in the camels and goats as well as biosafety and sanitary measures applied, if any, to preclude natural or concurrent infections with PPRV or especially other pathogens, remain unclear. We found no contact transmission of the virulent PPRV LIV strain from cattle to contact control goats and from SAC and dromedaries to contact control goats and a llama or dromedaries (Figure 1), respectively, confirming the results of Couacy-Hymann, et al. [52] for cattle and of Fakri, et al. [54] for camels. A possible reason for the detection of PPRV-RNA in nasal, conjunctival or fecal swab samples of cattle and SAC in the present study might be attributed to using the more natural intranasal route of infection, while Couacy-Hymann, et al. [52] and Fakri, et al. [54] used s.c. and i.v. infection, respectively. On the other hand, no PPRV-RNA was detected in swab samples collected between 0 and 14 dpi from Indian cattle that were infected by contact to PPRV-infected goats [14], and no PPRV-RNA was detected in swab samples from dromedaries that were intranasally inoculated with PPRV in the present study (Figure 1A–C). Therefore, besides the inoculation route and virus dose, the virulence of different virus strains and the susceptibility of a host may influence the pathogenesis in different animal species [26] (see also Section 4.5. Pathogenesis, virus and host factors). Subcutaneous vaccination of camels with a PPRV LIII vaccine [56], infection of cattle with a mild PPRV LII strain [52] and vaccination of camels with an RPV vaccine [57] revealed lower seroconversion rates compared to animals infected by s.c., i.v. or by contact infection using virulent PPRV (LI, LIII, LIV in cattle and LIII and LIV in dromedaries), and RPV strains [21,52,54,56,57]. This indicates that the virulence of a PPRV strain plays a more important role than the inoculation route for at least the humoral immune response. For our transmission trials, we used the same virus stock (PPRV LIV Kurdistan/2011), intranasal inoculation route, dose and volume (2 x 10^4.5 TCID50/ml) for experimental infection of both cattle and camelids—which has been proven before to be virulent in small ruminants and suids in previous experiments [3,9]. Nevertheless, in contrast to suids and small ruminants [3,9], PPRV-RNA excretion in cattle and SAC ceased after seroconversion and dromedaries (Figure 1A–C) shedded no PPRV-RNA. The considerable differences in PPRV-RNA loads in oronasal, conjunctival and, in particular, in fecal swab samples from cattle and SAC over time by animal species in comparison to recent data sets from suids and small ruminants [9] were in accordance with results of the statistical analysis using a linear mixed-effects (lme) model and independent 2-group Mann–Whitney test with Bonferroni correction (details in Table S3). Fecal shedding of PPRV-RNA over time was significantly lower by cattle than from other artiodactyls, except from SAC using the lme model. Interestingly, PPRV excretion in fecal samples from suids and small ruminants seem to be a major source of PPRV transmission [9], while the lack or short-time PPRV-RNA excretion in feces from camelids and cattle, respectively, indicate that PPRV-spread by feces is not a likely source of PPRV-infection (Table S3, Figure 1C). 4.4. PPRV Antibody Response and Performance of Diagnostic MethodsIn the present study, the time of seroconversion in cattle (10 dpi) and antibody levels as measured by competitive ELISA (cELISA) were comparable with the antibody progression reported for suids and small ruminants [9]. NAb titers in cattle were similarly moderate to high (1.95–2.56 log10 ND50) at 17 dpi than in sheep (1.76–2.56 log10 ND50) at 21 dpi but generally lower than those in suids between 16 and 30 dpi and goats at 11 to 15 dpi (2.16–2.96 log10 ND50) [9]. In SAC, low antibody levels and a prolonged time until seroconversion were detected in all animals using the cELISA (seroconversion between 12 and 21 dpi). Low NAb titers (1.1–1.8 log10 ND50) were detected in the three alpacas and L6 but no NAbs at all in L4 and L5 at 28 dpi. Of the six experimentally infected dromedaries, two young animals (D.6A5, D.DBO) seroconverted with antibody levels around the cut-off of the cELISA at 20 dpi. However, none of the other four dromedaries seroconverted showed a clear increase in antibody levels. Similarly, Fakri, et al. [54] found a prolonged seroconversion between 14 and 18 dpi in five dromedaries experimentally infected with a virulent LIV strain and low to moderate (1.02–2.46 log10 ND50) NAbs after 35 dpi.Intisar, et al. [11] reported a considerably lower seroprevalence in a field study of PPRV infection in Sudanese camels of 2.1% (41 of 1988) despite a considerably higher proportion of camel lungs detected positive for PPRV-antigen (33.6% of 220). Differences in populations of immunoglobuline G (IgG) isotypes including the additional heavy-chain antibodies found in camel blood but not in other mammals was suggested as a possible reason for the lower seroprevalence by Intisar, et al. [11]. Indeed, lower antibody levels were found in SAC compared to domestic ruminants infected with BTV, SBV, or WNV, respectively [11,66,67]. The comparison of virological test systems with swab, tissue or blood samples from cattle and SAC revealed that a validated RT-qPCR targeting the N segment of PPRV is the most sensitive method for the detection of a recent PPRV-infection in these animals until seroconversion (Table 3). In contrast, the used PPRV-antigen ELISA targeting the N protein, the LFD targeting the H gene of PPRV and endpoint dilution assays for analysis of virus titers in animal serum samples were not found suitable diagnostic methods for cattle and SAC. One likely reason is the transcription gradient resulting in higher transcription rates of the N compared to the H gene [32]. 4.5. Pathogenesis, Virus, and Host FactorsPCR-results obtained from samples taken during gross examination confirmed that a combination of different samples collected from head and lung associated lymph nodes, palatine tonsils, mesenterial lymph nodes and small intestinal Peyer’s patches is also most suitable for post-mortem PPRV-diagnosis in cattle and SAC (Table 2) as suggested for suids and small ruminants [4,9]. Albeit PPRV-RNA loads were low or not detectable in the examined tissue from cattle and SAC, the generally similar tissue distribution of PPRV-RNA in tissue of cattle and camelids compared with small ruminants and suids contrast the considerable variations particularly of virological results between cattle and camelids with the other artiodactyl species, including the lack of viremia (see earlier). Interestingly, the pathogenesis found in cattle and camelids (particularly in SAC) in the present study resembles the pathogenesis in ferrets experimentally infected with SLAM-blind CDV [37]. None of the ferrets transmitted the virus to CDV-naïve contact-control ferrets, they presented no clinical signs and no viremia, except for one ferret that showed a transient mild viremia probably due to three compensatory mutations in the H gene of the SLAM-blind virus [37]. Nevertheless, all ferrets elicited a solid humoral immune response that was attributed to low-level replication of CDV in nectin-4 expressing epithelial cells [37]. Cattle experimentally infected with PPRV also developed a rapid and solid humoral immune response, while camelids developed a prolonged and lower or no antibody response possibly due to species-specific differences in the immune response (see section humoral immune response) or a lower susceptibility, particularly of dromedaries, to PPRV-infection than cattle. Whether morbilliviruses initially infect immune cells via the SLAM-receptor and/or initially infect epithelial cells via the nectin-4 receptor has been controversially discussed [4]. Nevertheless, the results of the ferret trial with SLAM-blind CDV suggest that local replication in the respiratory epithelium may facilitate low-efficiency transmission [37]. Consequently, if PPRV infection of dead-end hosts resembles infection of typical hosts with a SLAM-blind virus, virus shedding and transmission cannot totally be excluded for dead-end hosts of PPRV, for example cattle and camelids, but is not very likely. By definition, a dead-end host is a host in which a pathogen may cause disease, but not maintain transmission, thus, the pathogen is not efficiently transmitted to other hosts [27,68,69]. In typical/maintenance hosts, morbillivirus-infection of (i) SLAM-expressing immune cells (in particular DC, activated lymphocytes, and macrophages) leads to systemic virus dissemination via blood and lymph to other lymphoid organs and (ii) infection of epithelial cells via nectin-4 receptor results in virus shedding without the need of additional exit receptors [4,33,37]. Morbillivirus-infection of immune cells may also lead to their destruction and a consequent immune suppression [4,39]. Leukocytopenia and immune suppression in animals or humans is a typical consequence of infection with different morbilliviruses, such as PPRV, CDV and measles virus (MeV, species: measles morbillivirus), respectively [4,9,39,70]. Whether the severe leucocytopenia in one llama and the pc-goat was due to PPRV-infection, remains unknown (Figure 1G). Since cattle and SAC showed a similar pathogenesis for PPRV-infection than ferrets infected with a SLAM-blind virus, infection of epithelial cells in the respiratory tract via nectin-4 appears reasonable. The SLAM receptor gene is less conserved than the nectin-4 receptor gene among species [35], further supporting the hypothesis that the H glycoprotein of PPRV is not (efficiently) binding to the cattle and camelid SLAM-receptors. PPRV-RNA detection in more distantly located lymphoid organs of cattle and SAC, such as small intestinal Peyer’s patches (Table 2), suggest that other host cell receptors are involved in PPRV uptake and dissemination—e.g., the C-type lectin dendritic cell-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN) receptor expressed on DC [71]. A dual role of DC was described for MeV infection since MeV may infect or is captured by DC via DC-SIGN or SLAM receptor [71]. Pope, et al. [4] suggested that tonsils and lymph nodes draining the site of PPRV-inoculation are initial sites of PPRV replication. Indeed, we found PPRV-RNA or antigen in head and lung associated lymph nodes and palatine tonsils (Tonsilla veli palatini in suids) in all animal species (goat, sheep, pig, wild boar [9], cattle, and SAC) (Table 2, Figure 2), although post-mortem examination was conducted during or after the peak of PPRV-infection (16 to 30 dpi). The IHC comparison of the palatine tonsil sections from alpaca A2 and the positive control goat (Figure 2) revealed a considerably reduced proportion of PPRV-ag in the alpaca tonsil (mild versus severe). However, the alpacas were euthanized late after experimental infection (28 dpi) in comparison to the goat (9 dpi). A mild proportion of PPRV-ag was detected in the palatine tonsil of a goat during the reconvalescence phase (15 dpi with Kurdistan/2011 strain) after showing moderate clinical signs [9]. In goats intranasally infected with a PPRV LIII strain (CI/89), clinical signs were mild, but moderate to marked proportions of PPRV-ag were detected at 7 dpi or 9 dpi in the follicle/mantel zone, germinal center, diffuse lymphoid tissue, and crypt epithelium of the palatine tonsil. Hence, PPRV-ag may be detected in similar tissue than in goats, but PPRV-ag distribution in alpaca tonsils in the early stage after infection remains to be investigated. 4.6. Possible Impact of Ecology on PPRV Infection and SpreadFor multi-host pathogens, pathogen dynamics, persistence (R0 > 1) or extinction (R0 < 1) in an ecosystem are determined by the community composition as well as the movement and behavior of hosts by space and time that affect intra- or inter-species contact and therefore pathogen transmission [26,27]. Dromedaries kept separately from PPRV-infected domestic ruminants showed no seroconversion to PPRV [59,72], while a considerable proportion of camels, cattle, and buffalo can be found seropositive where reared together with small ruminants (one epidemiological unit) [73]. No seropositive cattle was found in Turkey despite PPRV-infection detected in local small ruminant herds [74], which was attributed to a lack of infection and circulation of PPRV in cattle [74]. In field studies, seroprevalence rates were generally similar or lower in camels and cattle compared to small ruminants. This indicates spillover from PPRV-infected small ruminants to cattle and camels by contact-infection and may explain the varying seroprevalence rates in different regions (see details in Table S2b). The turnover rate of cattle (10%) and likely also of camels is considerably lower than in small ruminants (30%) [33,75,76], indicating that the overall PPRV-infection rate and, therefore, susceptibility to PPRV-infection might be even lower in cattle and camels compared to small ruminants than suggested by the relative seroprevalence rates detected in field surveys. 5. ConclusionsThe transmission trials revealed (i) absent or low PPRV-RNA loads in swab samples until seroconversion, (ii) no shedding of infectious PPRV, (iii) lack of PPRV transmission, and (iv) generally subclinical PPRV-infection in experimentally PPRV-infected cattle, SAC and dromedaries. Together with the results of the literature review, we suggest that cattle and camelids are dead-end hosts that generally do not contribute to the spread of PPRV, possibly due to species-specific physiological constraints such as differences in the major natural host cell receptors SLAM on immune cells that considerably impair the infection of cattle or camelid by PPRV. However, additional studies would be helpful to further investigate the course of disease and the capability of PPRV-transmission by cattle and camelids influenced by critical factors such as virus-host interaction, breed, stress (e.g., long desert journeys) or concurrent infections and to finally prove the impact of dead-end hosts. In addition, of all compared methods, RT-qPCR and cELISA were found most reliable to confirm PPRV-infection in cattle and camelids before and after seroconversion, respectively. An antigen-ELISA and a pen-side test (lateral flow device, LFD) that allow non-invasive sampling and PPRV-detection in the field were not suitable for PPRV-diagnosis in cattle and camelids (Table 3)—probably due to the low PPRV-RNA loads in their excretions (Figure 1A–E). 


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: MUMPS VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Monkeypox virus (MPXV): A Brief account of global spread, epidemiology, virology, clinical features, pathogenesis, and therapeutic interventions

1IntroductionThe emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic has raised public awareness of zoonoses and the global hazards posed by new emerging pathogens [1]. The COVID-19 pandemic has prompted a surge in investment in wildlife virology worldwide, and new surveillance programs are expected to uncover hundreds of novel viruses that could 1 day threaten human health [2]. In 2021, experts predict there will be 887 zoonotic viruses, which primarily harm animals, with the potential to cause a global pandemic [3]. Both the monkeypox virus (MPXV) and the cowpox virus (CPXV) belong to the poxviridae family and are recorded as the top 50 most dangerous viruses [4]. MPXV is an enveloped double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) virus, that belongs to the Orthopoxvirus (OPXV) genus similar to that of vaccinia, variola, and cowpox virus (CPXV). Although the virus was initially found in Africa, it has since spread to new areas that have no ties to West or Central Africa. According to WHO MPX data, a total of 89,752 positive cases with 157 death cases were recorded. The majority of reported cases have involved homosexual and bisexual men between the ages of 20 and 50; nevertheless, it is unclear whether sexual practices are the primary factors in its transmission [5]. The important way of transmission of MPX is sexual contact with an infected individual [[6], [7]]. Most of these positive cases related to traveling history who previously traveled from Europe and North America or contact with positive patients. According to the MPX risk assessment conducted by the World Health Organization, various regions of the United States are categorized as high-risk groups. However, no sufficient data supports the respiratory transmission route for this virus [8]. Poxviruses contain lower lipid content in the envelope, so they are more resistant to environmental conditions. A total of 179 samples were tested from MPX-positive patients' rooms with high-efficiency particulate air filters (HEPA), where 1 week of contamination was found that declined after 3 weeks [9]. It is also presumed that the MPX virus enters human body through different channels such as broken skin, respiratory tract, or mucosal surfaces (e.g. oral, pharyngeal, ocular, genital, anorectal). In 1958, MPXV was identified in a vesicular disease outbreak in captive African monkeys shipped to Copenhagen, Denmark, from Central and West Africa [10]. Rats, mice, prairie dogs, squirrels, and possibly even humans are all considered natural reservoirs in Africa. In addition, the Gambian pouched rat (Cricetomys gambianus), the dormice (Graphiurus spp.), and the African squirrels (Heliosciurus, and Funisciurus) were all found to be carriers of this virus. Although the 2022 outbreak spread from human to human, these animals earlier also worked as a transmission source [11].After the first identification of MPX in monkeys in 1958 from Denmark, several cases were recorded. In 1970, the first incidence in humans was documented. Initially, MPX cases were familiar in the African countries where the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Cameroon, Nigeria, Gabon, Central African Republic, South Sudan, Sierra Leone, and Liberi were notably documented [12]. In 2022, the number of positive individuals increased in all 5 continents. MPX is classified as an emerging disease by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) due to its high infectivity and rapid dissemination [13]. However, the characteristics of the 2022 MPX outbreak have changed its nature, including clinical manifestation, severity, and epidemiology. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) have approved the use of the antiviral drugs Tecovirimat and Cidofovir for treating MPX infection [14]. One vaccination has been approved for use against MPX in the European Union (EU) since July 22, 2022. The Jynneos Smallpox and Monkeypox Vaccine, Live, Non-Replicating, was given FDA approval in September 2019. However, 3 vaccines, Imvanex (Jynneos or Imvamune), ACAM2000, and LC16m8, have enhanced efficacy against Orthopoxvirus infections while adequately stimulating antibody production in severely immunocompromised patients [15].On May 10, 2023, the WHO declared that a global outbreak of MPX did not constitute a public health emergency on a global scale [16]. However, further MPX waves and outbreaks might appear, and the committee suggested being concerned about new, significant cases. On June 22, 2023, the first reported case of Mpx in Israel was a 50-year-old Portuguese tourist [17]. Despite receiving the vaccination, the Ministry of Health confirmed that this individual had contact with infected people. Following public health regulations and MPX disease prevention and control strategies is vital. Health worker personnel related to MPX patients should follow adequate precautions, hygiene, and maintain personal protective equipment (PPE) when handling patients, and educational programs may be useful to increase public awareness. MPX-positive cases must be isolated in a separate room with proper care and treatment. In the hotspot locations, serological surveillance, contact-based surveillance, and surveillance based on wastewater can all be started for confirmed cases [18] Mass vaccination campaigns may be implemented in the outbreak areas to reduce cases. This review article provides a concise overview of MPX viral history, epidemiology, genomic dissemination, symptoms and signs, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and therapeutic interventions, as it may benefit bench researchers and practitioners.2Historical backgroundIn 1958, a vesicular rash resembling smallpox (SPX) was observed in African cynomolgus monkeys that had been transported to Copenhagen, Denmark, for research endeavors. After this event, this rash was named “MPX” [4]. From 1981 to 1986, DRC reported over 300 confirmed instances of MPX in humans. Since its reappearance in 1996, another 400 cases have been recorded, with over 80% of patients related to human-to-human transmission. At least 47 cases were confirmed during the 2003 outbreak in the United States 6 Midwestern states—Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, Ohio, and Wisconsin [19]. It is also found that no deaths were reported for MPX in Central or West Africa between 1970 and 2019 [7]. An epidemic was documented in 2005 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. More than 200 human cases of MPX were reported in Nigeria between 2017 and 2018, with positive cases confirmed in the United Kingdom (UK) in 2018 [20]. The case fatality rate (CFR) observed during the monkeypox outbreak in Nigeria from 2017 to 2018 was approximately 6%. From 2018 to 2021, no instances of fatalities were reported inside the geographical boundaries of the United Kingdom.Several MPX outbreaks were also observed in the different countries of Central and West Africa. However, maximum positive cases were reported from outside Africa, linked with infected travelers directly or indirectly. The first MPX report in the USA appeared in 2003. In 1 shipment, there were 800 animals from 9 species carried for laboratory experiments. Some of the MPX-affected animals were housed at the facilities of an Illinois animal trader alongside prairie dogs after they were imported to the United States. Before they showed any sickness symptoms, these prairie dogs were sold as pets. Prairie dogs living close to imported rodent species from Ghana, West Africa, had this outbreak. As a result, the prairie dogs transmitted MPXV to about 40 human cases, later confirmed in laboratories as human MPX [21]. Rodents, carnivores, insectivores, nonhuman primates, and other mammals worldwide have been documented to acquire MPXVor by experimental means. Although African squirrels and/or other rodents are the strongest contenders, these findings have made it more challenging to identify the natural host. Therefore, it is unclear which mammal(s) serves as the virus reservoir(s).In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a young boy, the only unvaccinated member of his family, reported the first human case of monkeypox in 1970 [22]. The next decade witnessed widespread reports of monkeypox among youngsters across several countries in Central and Western Africa, including the DRC, with a mortality rate of 11% among those who hadn't been vaccinated against smallpox [21]. On April 4, 1971, a little girl from the south-eastern Nigerian town of Ihie-Imuduru came down with a high fever and vesiculopustular skin lesions [23]. Her 24-year-old mother also developed a fever and a rash. This young girl was identified as Nigeria's first confirmed case of monkeypox following laboratory testing, and her mother's sickness was reported as the first suspected case of human-to-human transmission of monkeypox. In the 2017 MPX outbreak reported in Nigeria, most infected individuals were young adult men (69%). Since 2017, Nigeria has observed an increase in MPX cases, with over 500 instances reported. These cases have been linked to travel from the UK, Israel, Singapore, and the United States [24]. The first report in Europe was found in the UK on May 6, while the first case in the US was detected in Boston, Massachusetts, on May 17.3EpidemiologyThe 2022 outbreak exhibits several atypical characteristics in terms of positive cases. As of September 04, 2023, there were 89,752 confirmed cases of MPVX infection, resulting in 157 fatalities across 113 countries, making it a significant focus due to its infectiousness and role in numerous human health complications (Table 1). Before 1970, the MPXV was only known to infect nonhuman primates and had also been found in African rodents [25]. From 1971 to 2017, the MPXV was predominant in the West and Central African regions, where the different animals served as intermediary hosts. In 2022, MPX suddenly extended to nonendemic locations beyond the African continent, causing a multicountry outbreak with high fatalities. The sudden rise in viral exposure and subsequent infections in several continents predominate scientific focus since it was primarily contained in Africa since its inception [25]. The analysis of WHO 2022, commonly abbreviated as MPX Outbreak: Global trends, reveals that the number of new positive to MPX cases increased by 76% (n = 280 cases) from January 30 to February 5 compared to the previous week (n = 159 cases), with the highest incidence occurring in the Region of the Americas (83%) (Table 1) (WHO, 2022) [26].Table 1Number of confirmed cases, deaths and case fatality rate of MPX outbreak from January 2022 to July 2023 (WHO 2022) [26].Table 1RegionsConfirmed casesDeathsCase fatality rate (%)Week-old cases (Last week)Week-old cases (Preceding week)Cases (%) weeklyAmerica59,6381200. 20%846725%Europe25,93570.02%23225%Africa1802211.16%067−Western Pacific89100%7079−11%Eastern Mediterranean9011.11%00South-East Asia14710.68%633391%Total88,5031500.16%240268−10%According to WHO data, the highest concentration of cases occurred in people aged 27–41 (3780/4777; 79.1%), the vast majority of patients were male (81,150/84,258; 96.3%), 52.5% were HIV-positive (17,827/33,954), and 96% of men identified had a history of sexual activity with other men. According to the latest weekly report (July 3–July 9, 2023) data, global MPX cases increased by 9.2% (n = 83) between weeks 35 (August 28–September 3) and 34 (August 21–August 27). In the first 4 weeks of 2023, 3561% of MPX cases were in the Western Pacific Region, while 28.6% were in Africa. United States of America (30,564), Brazil (10,967), Spain (7565), France (4150), Colombia (4090), Mexico (4055), Peru (3812), the UK (3777), Germany (3696), and Canada (1,496) are the top ten nations affected (Supplemental Table S1). It is found that MPXV clades affect the patients’ mortality rate. Clade IIa (which corresponds MPX to one of the “West Africa Clades”) has lower fatality rates than Clade I (formerly known as the “Congo Basin Clade”), which is more clinically severe. At least 47 recorded human cases of MPX between 1970 and 1979 in West and Central Africa had 49% severe disease, and 17% of the patients passed away from acute sickness. The overall death rate for children who had not had a smallpox vaccination in the central parts of the DRC between 1981 and 1986 was as high as 9.8%. With clade IIb disease, mortality is a serious worry in pediatric clade I infections (clade I, mortality of about 10%, clades IIa, 1%–3%, and clade IIb, 0.05%), is incredibly rare.Since May of 2022, the number of reported cases of MPXV has skyrocketed over the globe. Although it has decreased, new cases are still counting in the few areas of the world. MPXV, a DNA virus with a genome size of 197 kbp and more than 190 open-reading frames (ORFs), forms mainly 2 clades in phylogeny analysis: The central African clade (Clade I) and the West African clade Clade II (IIa and IIb) [27]. Fig. 1 depicts the global genomic transmission of MPX [28]. After reviewing the timeline of the phylogeny in Nextstrain, B.1 variant was first screened and deposited from the United Kingdom in April 2022. It was later identified in other European countries and in North America, namely the USA, indicating a global transmission route. However, lineage B.1, B.1.1, and B.1.2 were first identified in Germany, whereas, lineage B.1.17 originated in the USA. In contrast, B.1.16 lineage was the first to be sequenced and deposited from Columbia and it contained 62 mutations in the genome when compared to the reference sequence. Strain B.1.10 which originated in Spain, was also frequently found in Colombia.Fig. 1Transmission of genomes of MPX worldwide. (A) Phylogenetic lineage of MPX; (B) Distribution of MPX clades; (C) Continental transmission of MPX genome (Genomic epidemiology of MPXV-https://nextstrain.org/mpox/all-clades).Fig 1During the early stages of the 2022 outbreak, a study of clinical samples of MPVX by phylogenetic analysis indicated a significant genetic similarity among these samples, thereby classifying them under the clade IIb. The present study has shown evidence suggesting a common source for the ongoing epidemic [24]. A proposal was put forth to designate clade IIb as hMPXV1 in order to emphasize its status as a human virus, distinct from other largely zoonotic MPXV strains. This distinction is warranted due to the ongoing human-to-human transmission observed during the 2022 outbreak [25]. Based on the study conducted, it has been determined that all the identified hMPXV1 sequences associated with this epidemic are attributed to a solitary lineage (B.1), which can be traced back to its predecessor A.1.1. The A.1.1 lineage can be traced back to the A.1 lineage, which was responsible for a substantial outbreak in Nigeria from 2017 to 2018. Furthermore, lineage B.1, which is the current lineage, has a divergence of approximately 50 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from lineage A.1, the lineage linked to the Nigerian outbreak in 2017. The genomic analysis of hMPXV1 sequences from the current outbreak has identified a mutational bias towards the substitutions GA > AA (26 mutations) and TC > TT (15 mutations) [27]. Therefore, several transmission routes may have existed for spreading different strains of the human MPXV (Fig. 1). With a fatality rate of 10.6% compared with the 3.6% for Clade I, Clade IIa, and IIb are found to be more virulent and deadly and responsible for the recent outbreak [29]. Lineage A.1 of MPX contains unique mutations in C23564T, C83326T, and G148412A belonging to clade IIb, formerly the West African clade. According to Nextstrain data, the majority of A.1 lineage members were centered in Africa with less than 5% detected and sequenced in Singapore and Europe, namely the UK [19]. North America, namely the USA and Canada, as well as European countries (Spain, Portugal, Canada, Germany, Belgium, France, and others), were infected mostly by B.1, B.1.1, B.1.1.2, and B.1.3 strains belonging to West African variants [30]. B.1 Strain is associated with 46 and 24 synonymous and nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), crucial for the lineage's recent upheaval [31].Moreover, whether the A3 subfamily of APOBEC, which is intricately linked to the deamination of cytidines into uridines, is gone under gene editing is also circulated for further discussion [30]. Genetic analysis suggests that APOBEC-mediated editing is accountable for the very high number of mutations found in hMPXV1 genomes. B.1 was found to be the most prevalent variation after studying the mutation profiles of 1624 hMPXV1 sequences. Most MPX mutations were C-to-T and G-to-A transitions, and they typically occurred in a sequence context (5′-TC-3′) indicative of the preferences of several human APOBEC3 enzymes [32]. Although researchers found no evidence of a transcriptional imbalance, Forni et al. (2023) noticed a bias toward mutation clustering in highly expressed viral genes [33]. According to an article, glycoprotein-based receptor B21R, which harbors 3 nonsynonymous SNPs in M17411, D209N, and P722S is linked to viral infectivity of B.1, responsible for the majority of infections around the globe. Strain B.1.17, a subset of B.1 also made up the significant proportion of infection in the USA while B.1.14, B.1.15, and B.1.16 contribute to some infections in USA and Germany [27].The question of whether or not droplets can spread monkeypox remains open. Due to the short half-life of respiratory droplets, direct contact between people requires more time for transmission. Notably, there has been no confirmed case of this disease being transmitted by air travel [34]. One observational study was conducted for air and surface samples across Monkeypox hospitals. Using RT-qPCR, 93% of surface samples (n = 60) and 25% of air samples (n = 20) were detected as positive.  PPE was also observed following clinical interaction. This study showed that the MPXV was present in the air and the surface [35]. Another study used aerosol suspensions to test the virus's vulnerability from inside a circulating chamber in a class III biosafety cabinet. This virus was identified after 90-hour using viral culture and RT-PCR found a correlation between viral load and both body surface area and saliva [[36], [37]]. This report also recommends additional investigation into the 2022 MPX outbreak's respiratory route of infection.The first MPX case was confirmed in Islamabad, Pakistan, on April 21, 2023. The patient, a Pakistani guy of 25 years old, had returned from Saudi Arabia and was now showing signs of illness. The patient was admitted to hospital isolation to undergo diagnostic testing due to the severity of his illness. Health officials released no further information about the guy, but people with confirmed cases of monkeypox were screened for contacts and encouraged to self-quarantine.4Clinical featuresMPX is a viral infection that can be transmitted to humans; its clinical signs resemble those of smallpox but are milder. However, the severity may vary widely from patient to patient and from condition to condition. Upon exposure and infection, an incubation stage lasts about 4–21 days [38]. This is followed by a prodrome step that lasts about 1–3 days, wherein patients begin to experience general viral infection signs and symptoms, and usually, the disease clears itself within 2–4 weeks [21]. Patients with the MPXV outbreak in 2022 have been seen to have high fever, rash, asthenia, fatigue, headache, enlarged lymph nodes, sore throat, chills nausea, breathlessness, dysphagia, angina, myalgia, genital necrosis, weaken digestive tracts, inguinal lymphadenopathy, exanthema, conjunctivitis, eye damage resulting from corneal infection, diarrhea, and vomiting resulting in dehydration, encephalitis, tonsillitis, pharyngitis and, uncommonly, bronchopneumonia [39]. The first phase of MPX infection is observed anywhere from 7 days to 17 days (with an average of 12 days) after the first exposure. Although there are no outward symptoms during this time, the MPXV virus is actively replicating and spreading throughout the host. Prodromal phase symptoms typically linger for many weeks, making it a lengthier time span. The nature of the illness and the degree to which patients are affected may differ [38].According to clinical data-based evidence, men are more likely to be infected (99%), have homosexual tendencies (94%), and make up a substantial portion of infections in the USA across people of color [40]. The overall death rate varies based on patient age, viral clade, and epidemic location. The majority of recorded deaths have been in immunocompromised patients, young adults, and children, with a rate of 1%–10% and higher fatality, stronger rash, and more severe clinical manifestations in unvaccinated patients [41]. It is estimated that the overall MPX case fatality rate was 8.7%, with a substantial variation between clades: 10.6% (95% CI: 8.4%–13.3%) in Central Africa vs. 3.6% (95% CI: 1.7%–6.8%) in West Africa [19]. The majority of male patients were between the ages of 27 and 41 (780/4777; 79.1%), and the majority of male patients were also HIV-positive (48.4%; 17,558/36,308) and had a history of having sex with other men [26]. The virus is also associated with severe complications during the pregnancy period among women, including premature miscarriage, congenital infection, skin inflammation in the fetus, weight loss, and maternal death [42]. It has been observed that MPX can be passed from mother to child, even though there is very little clinical data regarding MPX during pregnancy [43]. Numerous unwanted side effects, miscarriages, and stillbirths have been linked to MPX. Positive cases in neonates and preterm births have also been documented [44].It is observed that the ongoing outbreak is a little more distinct than the previous one. It has changed its infectivity to mild and spread in a limited part of the human body. It is reported that 94% of MPX patients with anogenital lesions and 56% of those with lymphadenopathy had a fever [45]. Five people (or 9%) were admitted to the hospital, and 13 people (or 24%) were living with HIV; all were on antiretroviral medication (ART) and had normal CD4 cell counts; 11 had undetectable HIV RNA, and the rest had just started ART [45]. Almost 86% of the patients reported clinical fever, 62% swollen lymph nodes, 58% and muscle aches and pain (32%) (Fig. 2). In contrast with previous reports suggesting that such symptoms precede skin lesions, the British researchers found that 38% of patients developed lesions prior to systemic illness and 14% only developed lesions. All 197 patients in a single descriptive MPX case study exhibited skin lesions, with 56.3% located in the genital area and 41.6% in the perineal region, indicating that this outbreak was mostly a skin disease. The most prevalent symptoms reported by more than eighty percent of patients who reported sickness back were fever, lymphadenopathy, and myalgia [46].Fig. 2Comprehensive scenario of Monkeypox. (A) Virology (B) Transmission cycle (C) Symptoms [32].Fig 2:In contrast to earlier outbreaks of MPX, the majority of cases in the 2022 epidemics have exhibited minor signs of the disease. However, it is important to note that MPXV has the potential to induce serious illness in specific demographic subsets, such as small children, pregnant women, and those with compromised immune systems. Among the cases in which individuals reported experiencing at least one symptom, the prevailing symptom is the presence of a rash, which is recorded in 90% of cases with at least one documented symptom. It should be noted that the task of selecting accurate denominators for symptomatology is challenging due to several factors. These factors include a general absence of negative reporting and variations in symptom classifications across different countries' reporting systems.5DiagnosisIt is difficult to distinguish morphologically between MPX and SPX, as both are almost similar. The incubation time for both monkeypox and smallpox is between 4 and 21 days, and the symptoms are very similar [47]. A laboratory-confirmed diagnosis of MPXV is essential for detecting MPVX infection based on clinical symptoms; therefore, healthcare professionals clinically test for MPX with fluid samples swabbed from the rash [48]. It is difficult to differentiate between monkeypox and smallpox since both diseases exhibit nearly identical signs and symptoms, except for vesiculopustular rash, lymphadenopathy, and crop-like, less centrifugally dispersed lesions. Further, different positive samples showed MPXV genes from surface lesions/ rash/ exudates /rusts using skin swabs, which could be screened by PCR, RT-PCR, cell culture, and whole genome sequencing [14].The patient's saliva, urine, stool, and semen could also be tested for viral detection, containing viral genetic materials. Swabs, scabs, and aspirated lesion fluid should be used for PCR rather than blood due to the short duration of monkeypox viremia. Swab samples taken in a fluid medium from the rash are the most often used samples. PCR, RT-PCR, cell culture, and whole genome sequencing can be used to screen the remaining samples [49]. Thus, an organized laboratory with skilled persons requires to screen MPXV DNA. Serologic cross-reactivity across orthopoxviruses is a substantial obstacle to the epidemiologic characterization of disease outbreaks and laboratory identification of specific orthopoxvirus infections. Rapid antigen and antibody tests are also preferable with low specificity rather than other tests [50]. As the outbreak of this new zoonosis continues, it is critical to expand the laboratory network's global reach, increase laboratory capacity, and better the ability to report foreign specimens [51].Although RT-qPCR is counted as a gold standard tool, this process is costly and needs an expert person with laboratory facilities [18]. Low and middle-income countries need a cheap diagnostic solution. Point-of-care (POC) is easier and easy to reach patients in critical countries [52]. LAMP or loop-mediated isothermal amplification is one kind of isothermal procedure using a designed primer and a probe can be used for MPX. It is a quick, low-cost, simple, and powerful approach for rapid nucleic acid amplification at a single and isothermal temperature (for example, 60°C–65°C) [53]. This assay can be conducted without the use of costly instruments. Moreover, the process requires just a few minutes to complete.In addition, tests based on CRISPR-Cas systems can also be employed for quick diagnostic testing at the point-of-care by employing isothermal amplification methods. SHERLOCK activates the guide RNA-Cas13a complex after target sequence binding through isothermal amplification and cleavage [53]. It adjacently cleaves nearby reporter RNA coupled to a quenched fluorophore to identify pathogens. DETECTR CRISPR guide RNA-Cas12a complexes to activate upon target single-stranded or dsDNA binding. Cas12a randomly cleaves single-stranded DNA attached to a fluorescent reporter or lateral flow assay (LFA) [41].One research group used a nanoparticle and multiple cross-displacement amplification device to test MPX and isolate variants [54]. MPXV-MCDA-LFB applied 2 primer groups focusing on the D41L and ATI genes of Central and West African MPXV isolates, using 64°C for 30 minutes. Penn State researchers created the Nanoparticle-Based Rapid Test Penn State researchers developed the first rapid monkeypox nanoparticle-based diagnostic using a molecular sensor [55].NAAT (nucleic acid amplification tests) are used for detecting MPX to target DNA polymerase E9L, an Envelope protein (B67). Polymerase Chain Reaction or PCR can be performed from lesion samples. WHO suggested using the surface of patient lesions with swab sticks, exudates, or crusts [56]. In addition, blood, semen, urine, genital, and rectal swabs also can be collected for MPX diagnosis. Alternative to NAAT test Immunological techniques such as ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay) may be used for immunoglobulin IgG and IgM antibody detection [51]. However, immunohistochemical staining, electron microscopy, and serum tests can also be used to detect this virus. Cell culture-based tests cannot be performed for routine tests due to time and cost. Although diagnostic procedures have advanced, they are not without their flaws. Serologic cross-reactivity amongst orthopoxvirus is just one example. Even though their specificity is poor, rapid antigen and antibody tests are nonetheless often employed. The collection, storage, transportation, processing, interpretation, and reporting of laboratory results all require better infrastructure [57].6PathogenesisMonkeypox is highly contagious and can spread from person to human or animal to human through intimate contact, which is the first step in the virus's pathogenicity and pathogenesis. The first step of viral pathogenesis in humans is the entry of virus particles into host cells. Extensive research has been conducted on the interaction between the virus and the host cell's response, revealing notable genetic variability in the genes encoding Clade I and II. This finding contributes to elucidating the aforementioned variations in pathogenicity exhibited by these entities. The genomes of monkeypox comprise multiple genes that encode host-response modifier (HRM) proteins. These proteins, namely poxviral inhibitors of complement enzymes (PICEs) and the MOPICE protein, are recognized as virulence factors of monkeypox. The MOPICE protein has been documented as a contributing factor to the increased pathogenicity observed in Clade I, while it is absent in Clade II. The introduction of MPXV into the human body has been envisioned via several different routes, including the respiratory (such as oropharyngeal nasopharyngeal), intradermal, or sexual routes [58]. This virus can spread from person to person in a number of ways, including by direct contact with a virus-positive person's rash, lesion, or respiratory droplets. Indirect transmission of this virus from contaminated objects is also possible. The virus multiplies at the inoculation site and spreads immediately to the local lymph nodes and certainly in blood to the spleen, tonsils, and bone marrow, causing primary viremia and transfer to tertiary organs like skin and testes [39]. In vivo studies confirmed that MPXV replicates in lymphoid tissues in the neck and throat, and after primary lymphatic spread, it infects the spleen and liver [27]. When skin-based blood cells like macrophages, dendrites, and Langerhans cells become infected, the resulting inflammation affects skin cells including fibroblasts and keratinocytes [59]. It has also been noted that some cases of MPX only cause vaginal lesions, which may point to a preferred MPXV tropism in the testes as a potential site for latent MPXV infection. Fusion and macropinocytosis are 2 ways that MPXV can enter or invade the host cell. The entry and release of MPXV are complicated by the coexistence of 2 distinct viral forms, internal mature virus (IMV) and extracellular enveloped virus (EEV), which are encased by diverse different lipid membranes and also exhibit distinctive surface proteins [60].7Pharmacological measures for prevention and treatmentHistorically, MPX immunization with vaccinia virus (another orthopoxvirus) provided 85% protection. However, following the eradication of smallpox (SPX) in 1980, routine vaccination against orthopoxvirus was no longer mandatory [19]. As MPX and SPX viruses are genetically related and have minimal polymorphic antigens on their surfaces, cross-reactive antibodies can protect against MPXV infection [15]. Bavarian Nordic's tradename JYNNEOS is a Live, Non-Replicating Virus Vaccine, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has qualified it and another vaccine, ACAM2000, for use in the United States to prevent MPX [61]. Developed from the vaccinia Ankara-Bavarian Nordic (MVA-BN strain), this vaccine is effective against smallpox and monkeypox in people aged 18 and over. JYNNEOS, a smallpox vaccine administered in 2 doses, has been licensed for use in both children and adults [62]. Suppose you are homosexual, bisexual, or multisexual and have had sex with males. In that case, you can get vaccinated against mumps if you are at risk of coming into contact with an infected person or if your sex partner has tested positive for the virus [63].The proposed therapeutics used for MPX include antiviral drugs, such as astecovirimat, cidofovir, and brincidofovir approved by FDA and EMA, along with 3 recommended vaccines (Imvanex or ACAM2000 or LC16m8) [64]. Prior vaccination may also reduce or prevent monkeypox due to its long incubation period. Imvanex is an attenuated, nonreplicating, SPX vaccine made by the Bavarian Nordic Co., Denmark, and commercialized as Imvanex (Europe), Jynneos (USA), or Imvamune (Canada) that is effective at minimizing the risk of acquiring MPX infection and requires only 2 doses subcutaneously [65]. ACAM2000, a second-generation vaccinia virus vaccine developed from a plaque-purified SPX strain, is provided in a single percutaneous dosage with a booster dose every 3 years or at least every 10 years by Sanofi Pasteur Biologics Co., USA. Conversely, the US CDC does not suggest it for adults with inherited or acquired immune deficiency diseases (particularly AIDS), skin problems like atopic dermatitis/eczema, cardiac disorders, infants under 12 months old, or pregnant women [66].The third vaccine, LC16m8, is an attenuated SPX vaccine developed from the Lister vaccinia strain produced by KM Biologics in Japan for use in healthy persons against biological terrorism. It was developed to lack the B5R envelope protein gene of the vaccinia virus to attenuate its neurotoxicity. It produced neutralizing antibodies to vaccinia, MPX, and variola major and widespread T-cell responses [15]. The recommendation on behalf of the CDC to apply Tecovirimat as a potential therapeutic intruder in pregnant women was justified in the sense that animal studies concluded no significant adverse effects would be observable in the case of the fetus. Cidofovir blocks viral DNA polymerase-mediated DNA synthesis, whereas, brincidodofovir is an upgraded form of cidofovir with a better renoprotective profile when administered orally, promoting the inhibition of viral DNA synthesis [38]. Nucleosides can be categorized into acyclic nucleoside phosphates and liquid cidofovir conjugates. The future directives when coming to therapeutic strategies of MPX are promising. The genomic similarity of MPX is 96.3% with other pox viruses [67]. There is insufficient data to support tecovirimat's effectiveness in treating human monkeypox patients, but a human clinical trial revealed it to be safe and acceptable, per the CDC report [68].8Key measures to prevent future monkeypox outbreaksIn order to swiftly detect cases of monkeypox and prevent its spread, it is necessary to develop and distribute effective diagnostic assays worldwide. Unnoticed cases can only be found by wastewater-based surveillance, which is also important for keeping tabs on problems and alerting relevant parties so that postexposure prophylaxis can be administered [14]. The detection of MPXV at an early stage may be facilitated by monitoring MPXV nucleic acids in sewer water and on surfaces [69]. Testing must be widely available, especially in low and middle-income countries, and a universally recognized case definition for MPX is required. Additionally, it's essential to perform surveillance on animals in close contact with infected patients to prevent the establishment of animal reservoirs [70].The distribution of information about the dangers of MPX and how to stop it among the general public is also essential. Maintaining proper hygiene practices, such as regular hand hygiene, proper wound or sore inspection, and minimizing contact with wildlife, particularly mice and primates, are crucial preventive strategies [71]. Training health organizations and individuals to identify, isolate, and treat cases of MPX is also crucial, as early detection and immediate treatment can help mitigate the disease's effects and slow its spread. The health and safety of individuals and communities can be safeguarded from the spread of MPX by raising public awareness and encouraging preparation for potential outbreaks [72]. The most effective non-pharmaceutical measure to prevent the spread of MPX is to avoid close contact with infected individuals. Patients and their households should be advised on proper hygiene and disinfection protocols. Surface disinfectants with proven “virucidal activity against enveloped viruses” can be used for disinfection [73].Controlling any disease requires better laboratory and diagnosis facilities and knowledgeable staff. Because of the potential for infection, a Biosafety Level 3 (BSL-III) laboratory is suggested for work with this virus. Exporting laboratories should strictly adhere to Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) [74]. The use of full PPE (gloves, face shields, goggles, head cover, and foot protection) is required in the lab at all times. Proper waste management calls for planning and adherence to established procedures. It is recommended that those working with infectious materials in laboratories get vaccinated [75].9Recommendation and conclusionA rare and infectious MPX can cause mild to life-threatening illness in humans. This brief review article provided an overview of disease, virology, epidemiology, and treatment. The MPXV, an emerging global health concern, may be contained through the cumulative efforts of the governing authorities and the general public, who are responsible for the majority of transmission. A few things can be attributed to the recent multicountry outbreak, such as increased international trade, travel from regions where the virus is endemic to other nations, genetic changes in the virus, unprotective sex with men, ecological factors, wildlife habitats, limited diagnosis resources, a lack of surveillance, and adequate and proper treatment. Human-to-human transmission is a concern not only for family members but also for medical professionals. Academicians in relevant fields should make arduous efforts to investigate novel concepts of preventive measures and therapeutics to protect against outbreaks of emerging variants. To control this current multicountry outbreak, interdepartmental measures must be taken, beginning with the exploration of rapid diagnosis, screening out hotspot areas, and funding additional research for the development of vaccines. It is essential to have tangible measures that can be put into place to effectively address the epidemic if one wants to prevent, reduce, or control the spread of zoonotic diseases. For instance, one may propose the formation of rapid response teams, an increase in the capacity of laboratories, or the distribution of diagnostic kits that are specifically designed for MPX detection. Clinicians must be informed of the current treatment regime and the mode of disease transmission to prevent the disease's further spread by themselves and others. Water-based surveillance needs to be robust for MPXV surveillance in the risk areas, encompassing controls and preventive measures. Expanding lab facilities, open data sharing, following one health rules, developing dashboards, and raising public awareness through social media or other digital channels might also be prioritized. Research-based studies must be carried out to create new antiviral medications, vaccines, and other therapeutic interventions. The implementation of these policies requires the cooperation of many different groups, including government officials, public health organizations, researchers, and healthcare professionals. Although MPXV vaccines can provide immunity against this disease, the lack of vaccines forces the authorities to adopt a different strategy that must include appropriate public health regulations, such as safe sex practices. More MPX-based research is necessary to advance the development of efficient antiviral medicines, vaccines, and therapeutic interventions.


Title: Detection of mumps virus RNA in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with neuromyelitis optica

IntroductionNeuromyelitis optica (NMO) is an idiopathic inflammatory CNS disorder preferentially involving the optic nerve and spinal cord [1–3]. A substantial body of evidence has accumulated suggesting that NMO is distinct from multiple sclerosis (MS) and that its pathogenesis is determined by humoral immune mechanisms differing from MS, which, mainly, is mediated by cellular immune mechanisms [4–6].A wide variety of infectious agents: viruses, spirochetes, mycoplasma, mycobacteria and toxoplasma have been discussed as potential contributors to immune dysfunction in MS [7]. Among the viruses, rabies, herpes simplex, parainfluenza, measles, coronaviruses and others have been implicated in the etiology of MS [7]. The interaction between NMO and infectious agents, however, is not clear.Most spinal cord lesions of NMO are located centrally, involving gray matter [8], where is preferentially involved in acute poliomyelitis. The aim of this study was to investigate using nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) the relationship between NMO and the two causative agents of polio-like disease, mumps virus [9] and enteroviruses, which have specific affinity for the central nervous system.Patients and methodsSubjectsThe study comprised eight patients with NMO and 13 with MS who were seen at Chiba University Hospital. The NMO patients fulfilled the revised diagnostic criteria for NMO [10]. MS patients fulfilled the revised diagnostic “McDonald” criteria for MS [11]. Demographic and clinical characteristics of patients are shown in Table 1. NMO-IgG was assayed for all 21 patients with NMO or MS at the Mayo Medical Laboratories (Rochester, MN). Anti-aquaporin-4 antibody was measured by an ELISA, as described elsewhere [12]. Eighteen patients with other neurological diseases (ONDs), 10 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 3 with Parkinson disease, 2 with multiple system atrophy and 3 with other degenerative disorder served as the disease controls. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were obtained from all the patients. For those with NMO or MS, serum and CSF samples were obtained from patients who did not receive any immunosuppressive treatments at the time of relapse in active phase and stored at −80°. All the participants gave their informed consents to the study procedures. Ethics approval was granted by the Ethics Committee of Chiba University School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.Table 1Demographic and clinical characteristics of subjectsNeuromyelitis opticaMultiple sclerosisOther neurological diseases(n = 8)(n = 13)(n = 20)Men:women0:84:911:9Median age, years (range)48.5 (26–68)30.0 (17–49)65.0 (52–87)Median age at onset, years (range)38 (25–56)22 (10–39)―EDSS (range)8.5 (6.0–9.0)6.5 (0–9.5)―Positive NMO-IgG8/80/13―Positive anti-AQP4 Ab8/80/13―EDSS Expanded Disability Status Scale; anti-AQP4 Ab anti-aquaporin-4 antibody
PCR tests for detection of the mumps virus and the enterovirus genomesCSF samples were tested for the presence of the mumps virus and enterovirus genomes by a nested PCR method (PCR-FMU), as described elsewhere [13, 14], blindly with respect to clinical information and the results of NMO-IgG or anti-aquaporin-4 antibody assays. In brief, RNA was extracted from 250 μl of each viral sample using Isogen-LS (NipponGene, Tokyo, Japan; an acid guanidinium thiocyanate kit). First-strand cDNA was synthesized from 3 μl of resuspended RNA, using 2.5 U of Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). A 10-μl aliquot of the cDNA product was the template in the amplification with Taq DNA polymerase (Perkin–Elmer, Norwalk, CT). Primers targeted the 5′ non-coated region of mumps virus and enterovirus sequences. A list of the primer sequences used is given in Table 2. The PCR product was run on a 2% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide, and the gel was photographed under ultraviolet light. A positive PCR reaction was expected to produce a 223-base pair (bp) band for mumps virus and a 155-bp band for enterovirus. The sensitivity of PCR-FMU calculated from extraction of serial dilutions of titrated reference viruses was 10-2 TCID50 /ml for mumps virus, and 10-3 TCID50 /ml for enterovirus.Table 2Nested PCR primer sequences for mumps virus and enterovirusVirusFa (forward primer)Ra (reverse primer)Primer referenceb
Mumps virus1a AACCAACTCGTTGAGCAAGGCTATCTTAGCCAATTCCACA2a CTCATTGGCAATCCAGAGCAATGAACCTGTTGGTTGGATAEnterovirus1 CAAGCACTTCTGTTTCCCCGGATTGTCACCATAAGCAGCCA2 TCCTCCGGCCCCTGAATGCGATTGTCACCATAAGCAGCCAHosoya et al. (1997)aPrimer F1 and R1 for each virus used in first-round PCR and primer F2 and R2 in second-round PCRbReference given for a primer pair taken or adapted from published PCR results
Patients whose CSF samples showed a positive PCR test in the acute phase of NMO or MS underwent follow-up examinations of CSF in the clinical remission phase and serum in the acute phase for the presence of virus by the same PCR method.StatisticsThe significance of differences in percentages was determined by Fisher’s exact probability test. Statistical analyses were performed using the SPSS statistical package (version 11.0.1 J, SPSS Japan Inc., Tokyo, Japan). P < 0.05 was considered to be significant. One of the authors (M. Mori) conducted all the statistical analyses.ResultsPresence of the mumps virus RNA and enterovirus using PCRThe mumps virus genome was detected by the PCR method in 2 (25%) of the 8 patients with NMO, but in none of the 13 MS and 18 ONDs patients. Differences in percentage were marked between NMO and 31 non-NMO including 13 MS and 18 ONDs (P = 0.038). The enterovirus genome was detected in none of the patients with NMO, MS or ONDs. The mumps virus genome was not detected in the CSF of the two mumps PCR-positive NMO patients during remission or in serum from acute phase of NMO. In Fig. 1, the results obtained for 9 of 39 clinical samples tested in the nested PCR to detect mumps virus RNA are reported; sample 6 was considered positive since a 223-bp band corresponding to the expected size of viral amplicon was found.Fig. 1Nested PCR analysis of viral RNA from representative CSF samples. Amplification yielded a band of 223 bp (Arrow). Positive control (PC); negative control (NC); clinical samples, lane 1–9; molecular weight marker (M)

Clinical features of mumps virus-positive NMO patientsBoth mumps virus-positive patients were women who had clinical and laboratory features consistent with typical NMO. Both had optic neuritis and transverse myelitis, age at onset being 43 and 27 years. Disease durations were 5 months and 18 years when serum or CSF samples were obtained, respectively. The Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) [15] value for those patients was 8.0. Cerebrospinal fluid examination at relapse revealed a mildly elevated level of protein and increased cell counts, and absence of oligoclonal bands. Spinal MRI showed long spinal cord lesions that extended for more than three vertebral segments and involvement of the central part of the spinal cord (gray matter). NMO-IgG and anti-aquaporin-4 antibody were detected in the sera of both patients. Anti-mumps virus antibody was assayed in one of the mumps virus-positive patients by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Serum IgG antibody was positive, but serum IgM antibody, CSF IgG and IgM antibody were all negative.DiscussionAnti-aquaporin-4 antibody in the sera of NMO patients has been considered to be pathogenetic in NMO [5], but why it is elevated in the sera of NMO patients is not clear. Although cases of NMO with infection by human immunodeficiency virus type 1, dengue virus, Helicobacter pylori and human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 have been reported [16–19], as in MS the relationship between infectious agents and NMO is not clear.The relationships between infectious agents, such as measles, rubella, varicella, mumps, pertussis or scarlet fever, and MS have been discussed [20, 21]. It has also been debated whether the mumps virus is a pathogenetic infectious agent in MS. A number of publications support such a relationship based on epidemiological research and studies of serum and CSF, including the oligoclonal band [22–25]. However, recent studies have negated such a relationship. Childhood infection by mumps virus has been reported not to be associated with increased risk of MS later in life [21], and mumps virus genome has been not been detected in autopsy specimen lesions [26].Viral infection of the central nervous system is often difficult to diagnose, because conventional laboratory methods, such as virus culture and serology, are not sufficiently sensitive. Use of a PCR to check for viral infection has resulted in increased viral identification in neurological disorders [13, 27]. In addition, a more specific method, nested PCR, is reported to be highly sensitive for the diagnosis of mumps virus CNS infection [27]. We used the nested PCR method to detect the mumps virus.The mumps virus, a member of the Rubulavirus genus of the family Paramyxoviridae, consists of single-stranded negative-sense genomic RNA with a virion [28]. The virus usually causes a benign childhood infection. Parotitis is the most common clinical symptom, and the most common complication of infection is aseptic meningitis. Other central nervous system complications include acute and chronic encephalitis, transverse myelitis, hydrocephalus and acute cerebellar ataxia [27]. Transverse myelitis [29, 30] and optic neuritis [31], both symptoms of NMO, have been reported subsequent to mumps infection or mumps virus vaccination. Some reports have suggested an association of optic neuritis [22, 32] with mumps virus. Because patients with NMO often have optic neuritis or transverse myelitis as the initial symptom [12], cases of NMO might be included in those reports. No reports have described an association between NMO and mumps virus, but one case report has described a patient who presented transverse myelitis and optic neuritis after mumps virus meningoencephalitis [33].In conclusion, the detection of mumps virus in the CSF samples obtained from patients with NMO in this study may indicate that mumps virus may have a role in the pathogenesis of at least a part of NMO.


Title: Repeated introductions and intensive community transmission fueled a mumps virus outbreak in Washington State

IntroductionIn 2016 and 2017, mumps virus swept the United States in the country’s largest outbreak since the pre-vaccine era (CDCMMWR, 2019). Washington State was heavily affected, reporting 889 confirmed and probable cases. Longitudinal studies (Davidkin et al., 2008), epidemiologic outbreak investigations (Cardemil et al., 2017), and epidemic models (Lewnard and Grad, 2018) suggest that mumps vaccine-induced immunity wanes over 13–30 years, consistent with the preponderance of young adult cases in recent outbreaks. Like with other recent mumps outbreaks, most Washington cases in 2016/17 were vaccinated. Unusually though, while most US outbreaks in 2016/2017 were associated with university settings (Albertson et al., 2016; Bonwitt et al., 2017; Donahue et al., 2017; Golwalkar et al., 2018; Iowa Mumps Outbreak Response Team et al., 2018; Wohl et al., 2020), incidence in Washington was highest among children aged 10–18 years, younger than expected given waning immunity. The outbreak was also peculiar in that approximately 52% of the total cases were Marshallese, an ethnic community that comprises ~0.3% of Washington’s population. These same phenomena were also observed in Arkansas. Of the 2954 confirmed and probable Arkansas cases, 57% were Marshallese, and 57% of cases were children aged 5–17 (Fields et al., 2019). Among the infected school-aged children in Arkansas and Washington, >90% had previously received two doses of MMR vaccine (Fields et al., 2019). The high proportion of vaccinated cases, younger-than-expected age at infection, disproportionate impact on the Marshallese community, and epidemiologic link to Arkansas suggest that factors beyond waning immunity are necessary to explain mumps transmission during this outbreak in Washington.The US and the Marshall Islands are closely linked through a history that continues to impact the health of US-residing Marshallese to this day. Between 1947 and 1986, the United States occupied the Republic of Marshall Islands and detonated the equivalent of >7000 Hiroshima size nuclear bombs as part of its nuclear testing program (Barker, 2012). The effects were devastating, precipitating widespread environmental destruction, nuclear contamination, and dire health consequences (Hallgren et al., 2015; Niedenthal, 1997; Palafox et al., 2007; Simon, 1997; Takahashi et al., 1997). Marshallese individuals inhabiting the targeted atolls were forcibly moved to other islands, and many were exposed to nuclear fallout (Abella et al., 2019) that persists on the Islands today (Bordner et al., 2016). Significant concern remains within the community regarding long-term health impacts of nuclear exposure and its potential impacts on immune function. Marshallese individuals living on and off the Islands experience significant health disparities including a higher burden from infectious diseases and chronic health conditions (Adams et al., 1986; Wong et al., 1979; Yamada et al., 2004). Compounding these disparities, from 1996 to 2020 (Hirono, 2019), Marshallese individuals were specifically excluded from Medicaid eligibility despite legal residency in the US permitted under the Compact of Free Association (COFA) Treaty. As a result, many US-residing Marshallese are uninsured, with poor access to healthcare (McElfish et al., 2015). Marshallese households are more likely to be multigenerational and tend to be larger on average (Harris and Jones, 2005; US Census Bureau, 2021), potentially increasing the number and intensity of interactions among individuals. These factors combined mean that Marshallese individuals may be at increased risk of respiratory virus infection.Clarifying the determinants of infectious disease transmission is important for prioritizing prevention and mitigation resources. However, sampling bias presents a persistent challenge for elucidating source-sink dynamics from genomic data (De Maio et al., 2015; Dudas et al., 2018; Frost et al., 2015; Kühnert et al., 2011; Lemey et al., 2020; Stack et al., 2010), which may undermine the utility of genomic epidemiological studies in some situations. Here, we formulate a set of genomic epidemiological approaches that are robust to sampling frame and apply them to investigate patterns of mumps transmission in Washington. We sequenced 110 mumps viral genomes obtained from specimens collected from laboratory-confirmed mumps cases in Washington State and another 56 from other US states collected between 2006 and 2018. We employ a novel application of phylogeographic methods to detailed epidemiologic data on age, vaccination status, and community membership, and develop a new statistic for quantifying transmission in the tree. By combining these phylodynamic approaches with community health advocate interviews that contextualize our results, we provide a framework for investigating viral transmission dynamics that is sensitive to community health priorities and readily applicable to other viral pathogens.ResultsOutbreak characteristics and data set compositionWe generated genome sequences for 110 PCR-positive mumps samples collected throughout Washington State during 2016/2017, and 56 samples collected in Wisconsin, Ohio, Missouri, Alabama, and North Carolina between 2006 and 2018 (Supplementary file 1a). The Washington State outbreak began in October 2016 and peaked in winter of 2017, culminating in 889 confirmed and probable cases across Washington (Figure 1). Individuals aged <1 to 64 years were affected, but incidence was highest among children aged 10–14 (44.9 cases per 100,000) and 15–19 (47.0 per 100,000) (Supplementary file 1b). Among outbreak cases 5–19 years of age, 91% of individuals were considered up-to-date on mumps vaccine. Adults in the age group most likely to be parents of school aged children (20–39 years old) were infected at a rate of only 12.9 cases per 100,000, but comprised a significant proportion (29%) of total cases (Supplementary file 1b). While Marshallese individuals comprise only ~0.3% of Washington’s total population, they accounted for 52% of reported mumps cases (Supplementary file 1c). Among Marshallese cases aged 5–19, 93% were up-to-date on vaccination, suggesting that this over-representation is not attributable to poor vaccine coverage.Figure 1.Genomic sampling covers the duration of the outbreak.The first mumps case in Washington was reported on October 30, 2016, and case counts peaked in the winter of 2017. Here we show recorded numbers of confirmed and probable cases by epidemiologic (epi) week. Blue dots above the epidemiologic curve represent the number of Washington genome sequences sampled from viruses collected during that epi week.
Figure 1—source data 1.Washington State mumps case counts in 2016–2017.

Figure 1—source data 2.Metadata for sequences generated in this manuscript with collection dates.
Outbreaks across North America are relatedWe combined our sequence data with publicly available full genome sequences sampled from North America between 2006 and 2018 and built a time-resolved phylogeny, inferring migration history among 27 US states and Canadian provinces (Figure 2, Figure 2—figure supplement 1; Figure 2—figure supplement 2). Sequences from samples collected between 2006 and 2014 clustered with other North American mumps viruses sampled from the same times. Nine Washington sequences were highly divergent from other North American genotype G viruses, with a time to the most recent common ancestor (TMRCA) of ~22 years (Figure 2, blue tips with long branches clustered toward the top of the tree). To place these genomes in context, we built a divergence tree using all publicly available global full genome mumps sequences (Figure 2—figure supplement 3). Seven of these divergent Washington sequences cluster with viruses sampled from New Zealand (Figure 2—figure supplement 3), suggesting they could be travel-related. The other two sequences cluster with other divergent genotype G viruses sampled from geographically disparate locations (Figure 2—figure supplement 3). The remaining Washington sequences nest within the diversity of other North American viruses, and descend from the same mumps lineage that has circulated in North America since 2006 (Figure 2). We observe substantial geographic mixing along the tree. While viruses from the northeast (teal tips and branches) seeded outbreaks in the Northeast and Midwest, we also infer transmission from the Northeast to Southern US states and British Columbia. Despite the close geographic proximity between British Columbia and Washington, most British Columbia sequences form a distinct cluster on a long branch (Figure 2), suggesting seeding from an unsampled location. Although viruses from Washington are scattered throughout the phylogeny, most cluster within a clade of viruses sampled in Arkansas (Figure 2).Figure 2.North American mumps outbreaks are related.We combined all publicly available North American mumps genomes and built a time-resolved phylogeny. We inferred geographic transmission history between each US state and Canadian province using a discrete trait model, but have grouped these locations into regions for plotting purposes. A tree colored by the full geographic transmission history across all 27 locations is shown in Figure 2—figure supplement 2. Here, we display the maximum clade credibility tree, where color represents geographic location. We grouped the US states by geography as follows: non-Washington West include California and Montana; Midwest USA includes North Dakota, Kansas, Missouri, Iowa, Wisconsin, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and Illinois; South USA includes North Carolina, Alabama, Virginia, Georgia, Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana; Northeast USA includes New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, and New Jersey. Canadian provinces are also grouped by geographic area. The x-axis represents the collection date (for tips), or the inferred time to the most recent common ancestor (for internal nodes). The internal node coloring represents the sum of the posterior probabilities for each inferred geographic division within the most probable region. For example, since we group Manitoba and Ontario into the same Canadian region, if a node was inferred with highest probability to circulate in Manitoba, then the node would be colored red to represent that Canadian region. The opacity of the color then corresponds to the sum of the probabilities that the node circulated in Manitoba or that the node circulated in Ontario. The posterior probability is expressed by the color gradient, where increasingly gray tone represents decreasing certainty of the inferred geographic state. The ancestral state at the root was poorly resolved and is therefore colored mostly gray.
Figure 2—source data 1.XML file to run discrete trait phylogeographic analysis of North American mumps transmission shown in Figure 2, with combined mcc tree and output log files.

Figure 2—source data 2.Divergence trees with metadata for divergence trees shown in Figure 2—figure supplement 4 and Figure 2—figure supplement 5.
Figure 2—figure supplement 1.Mumps genomes accumulate mutations linearly over time.We inferred a maximum likelihood phylogeny using IQTREE for all available complete mumps genomes of genotype G, sampled from North America between 2006 and 2018. We inferred the root-to-tip distance with TempEst and plot the root to tip divergence vs. sample collection date. Color represents geographic location (either Canadian province or US state), with colors corresponding to those in Figure 2. We infer that mumps genomes accumulate mutations at a rate of 3.75 × 10–4 substitutions per site per year.Figure 2—figure supplement 2.Phylogeographic history inferred with the full, 27-state discrete trait model.The same phylogenetic tree as shown in Figure 2, except that each color represents a single US state or Canadian province. The full transmission history was inferred between each US state and Canadian province using a discrete trait model. The color of each internal node represents the posterior probability that the ancestral node was inferred to be labelled that US state or province.Figure 2—figure supplement 3.Placement of divergent Washington and non-genotype G genomes on a global phylogeny.To place the divergent Washington genomes and non-genotype G Washington and Wisconsin genomes in the context of global mumps diversity, we generated a full genome divergence phylogeny using all publicly available mumps genotypes collected from anywhere in the world. The branch point for genotype G viruses is marked with a black circle and annotated with text. Color indicates the geographic region from which the sample was collected and the x-axis represents substitutions per site. For ease of viewing, we have collapsed all sequences that fall within the main genotype G lineage of North American mumps that is shown in Figure 2 into the blue triangle. This includes all sequences descending from the 2006 midwest outbreak sequences, but does not include the divergent Washington lineages shown at the top of Figure 2. The genotype H and A genomes from Wisconsin are highlighted in callouts 1 and 2. The Washington genotype K sequence is shown in callout 3, while the nine divergent Washington genomes shown in Figure 2 are highlighted here in callouts 4 and 5.Figure 2—figure supplement 4.The full genome divergence tree closely matches the time-resolve phylogeny.We inferred a maximum likelihood phylogeny using IQTREE for all available complete mumps genomes of genotype G, sampled from North America between 2006 and 2018. Color represents geographic location, and the x-axis displays divergence in substitutions per site per year. To reduce the number of displayed colors, we grouped the US states by geography as follows: non-Washington West include California and Montana; Midwest USA includes North Dakota, Kansas, Missouri, Iowa, Wisconsin, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and Illinois; South USA includes North Carolina, Alabama, Virginia, Georgia, Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana; Northeast USA includes New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, and New Jersey. Canadian provinces are also grouped by geographic area.Figure 2—figure supplement 5.SH gene sequences are inadequate for fine-scale resolution of mumps transmission.To compare whether we would recover similar tree topologies if we had only sequenced the SH gene, we downloaded all available complete mumps genomes of genotype G, sampled from North America between 2006 and 2018 and truncated our sequences to include only the coding region for SH. We then inferred a maximum likelihood phylogeny using the same procedure as in Figure 2—figure supplement 2. The vast majority of North American mumps sequences are identical and form a single polytomy, suggesting that SH sequencing alone provides limited resolution for inferring geographic spread. Color represents geographic location, and the x-axis displays divergence in substitutions per site per year. To reduce the number of displayed colors, we grouped the US states by geography as follows: non-Washington West include California and Montana; Midwest USA includes North Dakota, Kansas, Missouri, Iowa, Wisconsin, Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, and Illinois; South USA includes North Carolina, Alabama, Virginia, Georgia, Texas, Arkansas, and Louisiana; Northeast USA includes New York, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, New Hampshire, and New Jersey. Canadian provinces are also grouped by geographic area.Mumps is classified into 12 genotypes (labeled A–N, excluding E and M) based on its SH gene sequence. There is some evidence that mumps genotypes are geographically associated (Nomenclature, 2020), and the vast majority of mumps viruses circulating in North America since 2006 have been genotype G viruses. Although most samples in our data set are also genotype G, we did sequence three viruses that group in different genogroups. One sample from Wisconsin in 2006 grouped with genotype A viruses, another sample from Wisconsin in 2015 grouped with genotype H viruses, and one sample from Washington in 2017 grouped with genotype K viruses (Figure 2—figure supplement 3). The Washington genotype K virus (Washington.USA/9.17/FH94/K) is closely related to a genotype K mumps virus collected during a mumps outbreak in Massachusetts from an individual who reported international travel (Wohl et al., 2020; Figure 2—figure supplement 3). These divergent, non-genotype G genomes were excluded from further phylogenetic analysis.Mumps was introduced into Washington multiple independent timesEstimating the number and timing of viral introductions is important for estimating epidemiologic parameters and evaluating public health surveillance systems, but detecting these dynamics may be challenging with case count data alone (Faria et al., 2017; Grubaugh et al., 2017). The Washington Department of Health had identified a single potential index case infected in October 2016. To determine whether the genomic data similarly supported a single introduction of mumps to Washington state, we separated each introduction inferred in the maximum clade credibility tree and plotted each as its own transmission chain (Figure 3a). We enumerated the number of transitions into Washington in each tree in the posterior set, and plotted the distribution of Washington introductions consistent with the phylogeny (Figure 3b).Figure 3.The mumps outbreak in Washington was seeded by approximately 13 introductions.(a) We separated each introduction into Washington inferred on the maximum clade credibility tree (Figure 2) and plotted them independently. Large, colored dots represent the inferred geographic location that the Washington introduction was seeded from. Branches that extend further back in time than April 2016 (approximately 6 months prior to the first reported case in Washington) are dotted to represent that transmission likely occurred via other, unsampled locations. The nine tips at the very top without inferred geographic ancestry represent the highly divergent nine Washington genomes with a TMRCA of ~22 years that are highlighted in Figure 2—figure supplement 3 and shown in Figure 2. For reference, the cumulative case counts from Arkansas and Washington are plotted below. (b) For each tree in the posterior set, we inferred the number of introductions into Washington. We plot the proportion of trees in the posterior set in which that number of introductions was inferred.
Figure 3—source data 1.Inferred introductions into Washington State across posterior distribution.
Genomic data show that mumps was introduced into Washington State approximately 13 independent times (95% highest posterior density, HPD: 12–15), from geographically disparate locations (Figure 3). In addition to the nine highly divergent Washington tips (Figure 2—figure supplement 3), we detect one introduction from Massachusetts that descends from a long branch. Prior to being sampled in Washington, this lineage was last inferred to circulate in Massachusetts in late 2015. Thus rather than representing a direct introduction from Massachusetts to Washington, this lineage likely moved through other geographic locations that lack genomic sampling. We infer introductions from Ontario and Missouri that each lead to one to three sampled cases (Figure 3b), suggesting limited onward transmission following these introductions. In contrast, four introductions from Arkansas account for 92/110 sequenced cases, suggesting that these introductions led to more sustained chains of transmission following introduction (Figure 3b). We refer to the largest cluster as the ‘primary outbreak clade', and infer its introduction from Arkansas to Washington around August 2016 (August 7, 2016, 95% HPD: July 11, 2016 to September 19, 2016, Figure 3b), 3.5 months before Washington’s first reported case. These data reveal that what had appeared to be a single outbreak based on case surveillance data was in fact a series of multiple introductions, primarily from Arkansas, sparking overlapping and co-circulating transmission chains.SH gene sequencing is insufficient for fine-grained geographic inferenceMumps virus surveillance and genotyping rely on the SH gene (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019a), a short, 316 bp gene that is simple and rapid to sequence. To determine whether SH gene sequencing would have produced similar results, we built a divergence tree using our set of North American full genomes (Figure 2—figure supplement 4), and then truncated that data to include only SH gene sequences (Figure 2—figure supplement 5). Almost all North American SH genes were identical, resulting in a single, large polytomy (Figure 2—figure supplement 5). This indicates that SH sequences lack sufficient resolution to elucidate fine-grained patterns of geographic spread, consistent with previous findings (Gouma et al., 2016; Wohl et al., 2020).Quantifying differences in transmission patterns within WashingtonIn both Arkansas and Washington, Marshallese individuals comprised over 50% of mumps cases, despite accounting for a much lower proportion of the population in both states. Phylogenetic reconstruction links the outbreaks in Washington and Arkansas, placing most sampled mumps genomes in Washington as descendant from Arkansas. We sought to investigate how mumps transmission may have differed within Marshallese and non-Marshallese communities within the same outbreak. Phylogenetic trees reflect the transmission process and can be used to quantify differences in transmission patterns among population groups. If transmission rates were distinct between Marshallese and non-Marshallese mumps cases, we would expect the following: 1. Sequences from the high-transmitting group should be more frequently detected upstream in transmission chains. 2. Introductions seeded into the high-transmitting group should result in larger and more diverse clades in the tree. 3. The internal nodes of the phylogeny should be predominantly composed by members of the high-transmitting group, while members of the low-transmitting group should primarily be found at terminal nodes, since less propagated transmission will cause the lineage to die out.Marshallese cases are enriched upstream in transmission chainsWe developed a transmission metric to quantify whether Marshallese cases were enriched at the beginnings of successful transmission chains. We traverse the full genome divergence phylogeny (Figure 2—figure supplement 4) from root to tip. When we encounter a tip that lies on an internal node, we enumerate the number of tips that descend from its parent node. We then classify each tip in the phylogeny as either a ‘basal tip’ (i.e., there are tips detected downstream of that tip) or a ‘terminal tip’ (there are not tips detected downstream), and compare the proportion of basal and terminal tips among groups (Figure 4a, see Materials and methods for more details). Given our sampling proportion (110 sequences/889 total cases, ~12%), we do not expect to have captured true parent/child infection pairs. Rather, we expect to have preferentially sampled long, successful transmission chains within the state. This allowed us to test whether community membership, vaccination status, and age were associated with sustained transmission via logistic regression (see Materials and methods for details and statistical model). While those with unknown vaccination status were more likely to be basal in the tree than those with known up-to-date vaccination, the confidence interval could not exclude a null or positive association between vaccination status and basal/terminal status (Table 1). Having an age of at least 20 years predicted a mean lowered odds of being basal in the tree, but a wide range of effects is plausible given our sample. Resolving the precise effects of vaccination status and age would likely require a larger data set. However, we do find evidence for community status as a strong predictor for being basal on the phylogeny. Marshallese cases were significantly more likely to be basal than non-Marshallese cases (odds ratio = 3.2, p=0.00725, Table 1). While only 27% (14/52) of non-Marshallese tips were ancestral to downstream samples, 56% (32/57) of Marshallese tips were ancestral in lineages with sampled propagated transmission (Supplementary file 1d). These results suggest that community membership was a significant determinant of sustained transmission while controlling for vaccination status and age.Table 1.Associations between basal tip position in the phylogeny and possible predictors of transmission.Predictor variableEstimated coefficient (standard error)Odds ratio (95% CI)p-valueNot up-to-date−0.76 (0.69)0.47 (0.11, 1.73)0.27Vaccination status unknown0.72 (0.77)2.04 (0.47, 10.15)0.35Age ≥20 years−0.38 (0.51)0.69 (0.25, 1.86)0.46Community status1.21 (0.42)3.36 (1.49, 7.91)0.0042Figure 4.Marshallese individuals sustain longer transmission chains.(a) A schematic for quantifying tips that lie ‘upstream’ in transmission chains. For tips that lie on an internal node, meaning that they have a branch length separating them from their parent internal node of less than one mutation, we infer the number of child tips that descend from that tip’s parental node. For each tip in the example tree, its classification as either a ‘basal tip’ or a ‘terminal tip’ is annotated alongside it. All tips that have a nonzero branch length are annotated as terminal tips. We can then compare whether sequences of particular groups (here, blue vs. red) are more likely to be basal or terminal via logistic regression. (b) We separated all Washington tips and classified them into Marshallese and not Marshallese. We then performed a rarefaction analysis and plotted the number of inferred Washington clusters (y-axis) as a function of the number of sequences included in the analysis (x-axis). Dark blue represents not Marshallese sequences, and light blue represents Marshallese sequences. Each dot represents the number of trials in which that number of clusters was inferred, and the solid line represents the mean across trials. (c) The exploded tree as shown in Figure 3a is shown, but tips are now colored by whether they represent Marshallese or non-Marshallese cases. For reference, the number of Washington cases (y-axis) is plotted over time (x-axis), where bar color represents whether those cases were Marshallese or not.
Figure 4—source data 1.Rarefaction results for community status analysis shown in Figure 4b.
Figure 4—figure supplement 1.Rarefaction results by vaccination status.We repeated the rarefaction analysis shown in Figure 4b for vaccination status. We separated all Washington tips and classified them by vaccination status into up-to-date, not up-to-date, or unknown vaccination status. We then performed a rarefaction analysis and plot the number of inferred Washington clusters (y-axis) as a function of the number of sequences included in the analysis (x-axis). Dark green represents unknown vaccination status, light green represents not up-to-date, and green represents up-to-date. The majority of sequences in our data set were derived from individuals who were up-to-date for mumps vaccine. Each dot represents the number of trials in which that number of clusters was inferred, and the solid line represents the mean across trials.
Figure 4—figure supplement 1—source data 1.Rarefaction results for vaccination status analysis shown in Figure 4—figure supplement 1.
We evaluated the impact of vaccination status, age, and community membership on the probability that a sampled virus was basal in the tree. Coefficients represent the increase in the log odds of being basal in the tree for each given predictor variable while controlling for the others. Coefficients were exponentiated to produce odds ratios. We evaluated the impacts of having an unknown vaccination status, having a vaccination status that is not up-to-date, having an age of at least 20 years, and being Marshallese as binary predictor variables.Longer transmission chains are associated with community statusIn the absence of recombination, closely linked infections will cluster together on the tree, while unrelated infections should fall disparately on the tree, forming multiple smaller clusters. We inferred the number of Washington-associated clades in the tree as a function of whether sampled infections came from Marshallese or non-Marshallese individuals. Using the full North American phylogeny, we removed all Washington sequences and separated them into viruses sampled from cases noted as Marshallese or non-Marshallese. Then, separately for each group, we added sequences back into the tree one by one, until all sequences for that group had been added. For each number of sequences, we performed 10 independent trials (see Materials and methods for complete details), and at each step, we enumerated the number of inferred Washington clusters in the phylogeny. For comparison, we also grouped tips by vaccination status and repeated this analysis.For viruses sampled from non-Marshallese individuals, the number of inferred clusters increases linearly as tips are added to the tree (Figure 4b). This suggests that these infections are not closely related and are therefore not part of sustained transmission chains (Figure 4b). In contrast, the number of inferred clusters for Marshallese tips stabilizes after ~10 tips are added, even as almost 50 more sequences are added to the tree. This pattern likely arises because many Marshallese infections are part of the same long transmission chain, such that newly added tips nest within existing clusters. We do not observe similar differences among vaccination groups (Figure 4—figure supplement 1). These findings are consistent with distinct patterns of transmission among Marshallese versus non-Marshallese cases: transmission among Marshallese individuals resulted in a small number of large clusters, while transmission among non-Marshallese individuals are generally the result of disparate introductions that generate shorter transmission chains.We next separated each Washington introduction and colored each tip by community membership. Every introduction that was not seeded from Arkansas led to exclusively non-Marshallese infections, while introductions from Arkansas defined lineages that circulated for longer and were enriched with Marshallese tips (Figure 4c). The primary outbreak clade is particularly enriched, containing 43 Marshallese tips and 26 non-Marshallese tips, hinting that transmission chains are longer when Marshallese cases are present in a cluster.Mumps transmitted efficiently within the Marshallese communityInternal nodes on a phylogeny represent ancestors to subsequently sampled tips, while terminal nodes represent viral infections that did not give rise to sampled progeny. If the mumps outbreak was primarily sustained by transmission within one group, the backbone of the phylogeny and the majority of internal nodes should be inferred as circulating in that group. We selected the four introductions that contained both Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips (Figure 4c, the four Arkansas introductions), and reconstructed ancestral states along the phylogeny and migration/transmission rates between Marshallese and non-Marshallese groups using a structured coalescent model.Of 88 internal nodes, 74 were inferred to circulate within the Marshallese community with posterior probability of at least 0.95 (Figure 5a,b). Movement of a lineage from the Marshallese deme into the non-Marshallese deme subsequently caused the lineage to die out quickly (Figure 5a, dark blue branches). This suggests that transmission was overwhelmingly maintained within the Marshallese community, and that infections seeded into the non-Marshallese community did not sustain prolonged transmission chains. We estimate substantially more transmission from Marshallese to non-Marshallese groups than the opposite: within the primary outbreak clade, we estimate 29 transmission events from Marshallese to non-Marshallese groups (95% HPD: 21, 37), and only 6 (95% HPD: 0, 14) from non-Marshallese to Marshallese groups (Figure 5d). This strongly suggests that transmission predominantly occurred in one direction: transmission events leading to non-Marshallese infections usually died out and did not typically re-seed circulation within the Marshallese community. These results hold true regardless of migration rate prior (Figure 5—figure supplement 1).Figure 5.The Washington outbreak was sustained by transmission in the Marshallese community.(a) Using the four Washington clusters that had a mixture of Marshallese and non-Marshallese cases, we inferred phylogenies using a structured coalescent model. Each group of sequences shared a clock model, migration model, and substitution model, but each topology was inferred separately, allowing us to incorporate information from all four clusters into the migration estimation. For each cluster, the maximum clade credibility tree is shown, where the color of each internal node represents the posterior probability that the node is Marshallese. (b) For each internal node shown in panel (a), we plot the posterior probability of that node being Marshallese. Across all four clusters, 74 out of 88 internal nodes (84%) are inferred as Marshallese with a posterior probability of at least 0.95. (c) The posterior distribution of the number of ‘jumps’ or transmission events from Marshallese to not Marshallese (light blue) and not Marshallese to Marshallese (dark blue) inferred for the primary outbreak clade.
Figure 5—source data 1.XML file to run structured coalescent analysis and combined output log and tree files with a migration rate prior of 1 (shown in Figure 5, identifiable metadata have been removed).
Figure 5—figure supplement 1.Inferences are similar under a higher migration rate prior.The results are shown for the exact same analyses displayed in Figure 5, except inferred under a model with a higher migration rate prior (mean of 10 instead of mean of 1). (a) Using the four Washington clusters that had a mixture of Marshallese and non-Marshallese cases, we inferred phylogenies using a structured coalescent model. Each group of sequences shared a clock model, migration model, and substitution model, but each topology was inferred separately, allowing us to incorporate information from all four clusters into the migration estimation. For each cluster, the maximum clade credibility tree is shown, where the color of each internal node represents the posterior probability that the node is Marshallese. (b) For each internal node shown in panel (a), we plot the posterior probability of that node being Marshallese. Across all four clusters, almost every internal node is inferred as Marshallese with high probability. (c) The posterior distribution of the number of ‘jumps’ or transmission events from Marshallese to not Marshallese (light blue) and not Marshallese to Marshallese (dark blue) inferred for the primary outbreak clade.
Figure 5—figure supplement 1—source data 1.XML file to run structured coalescent analysis and combined output log and tree files with a migration rate prior of 10 (shown in Figure 5—figure supplement 1, identifiable metadata have been removed).
Figure 5—figure supplement 2.Structured coalescent analyses are robust to sampling differences.To ensure that our results were robust to differences in sampling of Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips within the clusters used for this analysis, we subsampled our data set three independent times, and ran three independent chains per unique subsampling. In each subsampled data set, the number of Marshallese tips was randomly subsampled to be equal to the number of non-Marshallese tips in each of the four clusters. We then ran each of these subsampled data sets with the exact same model as run with the full data set. In subsampled data sets 1 and 2, two out of three chains converged, and results were combined and displayed here. In the third subsampled data set, none of the three chains converged, so those results are not shown. (a) For each subsampled data set, we plot the inferred maximum clade credibility tree from the combined tree outputs from the two converged chains. The color of each tip represents whether that sample was derived from a Marshallese or non-Marshallese case, and the color of the internal node represents the posterior probability of that internal node being Marshallese. (b) For each tree shown in (a), the posterior probability that each internal node is labeled as Marshallese is shown. The number of the subsampled data set is shown on the x-axis and the posterior probability is shown on the y-axis.
Figure 5—figure supplement 2—source data 1.XML files and combined output files to run structured coalescent analysis where clades were subsampled to have equal numbers of Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips (shown in Figure 5—figure supplement 2, identifiable metadata have been removed).
To ensure that our results were not driven by unequal sampling within the analyzed clades, we generated three data sets in which the number of Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips were subsampled to be equal. For each of these three subsampled data sets, we ran three independent chains under the same model described above. Chains converged for two of the three subsampled data sets. In the converged chains, we recover very similar tree topologies (Figure 5—figure supplement 2a) with equivalent phylogenetic reconstructions of lineage circulation within Marshallese and non-Marshallese demes. We also recovered maximum clade credibility trees in which the vast majority of the internal nodes are inferred to circulate within the Marshallese deme (Figure 5—figure supplement 2a,b), confirming that our findings are robust to sampling, consistent with the past observations of model performance (De Maio et al., 2015; Dudas et al., 2018; Vaughan et al., 2014).The above structured coalescent model requires both groups to be present in each cluster, which meant that we had to exclude several small Washington introductions composed entirely of non-Marshallese tips (Figure 4c). To assess whether our findings would change if we analyzed all sequenced samples, we performed an additional analysis incorporating all Washington genotype G sequences in our data set and estimated a single tree using an approximate structured coalescent model (Müller et al., 2018). All Washington sequences were annotated as either Marshallese or not Marshallese. To provide a ‘source’ population for the extensive diversity among our disparate Washington introductions, we also specified a third, unsampled deme, for which migration was only allowed to proceed outward. As above, we inferred very few non-Marshallese internal nodes (Figure 6 and Figure 6—figure supplement 1). All internal nodes in the primary outbreak group are inferred as Marshallese with high probability, while non-Marshallese cases are present as terminal nodes. We recovered support for a single non-Marshallese cluster, indicating limited sustained transmission in the non-Marshallese population.Figure 6.Including all Washington sequences recovers majority of transmission in Marshallese.To ensure that excluding non-Marshallese clusters did not skew our findings, we inferred a single tree using all Washington sequences. We performed a structured coalescent analysis specifying three groups: Marshallese, not Marshallese, and not Washington. Each internal node is colored by its most probable group, with its opacity specifying the posterior probability of being in that group (fully opaque being probability = 1, fully transparent being probability = 0).
Figure 6—source data 1.XML file and output files to run structured coalescent analysis with unsampled ‘ghost’ deme shown in Figure 6 (identifiable metadata have been removed).
Figure 6—figure supplement 1.Posterior probabilities of internal node states.(a) For the tree shown in Figure 6, each internal node is plotted. For each internal node, its color and placement on the x-axis represent its inferred most probable group (Marshallese, not Marshallese, or not Washington). The posterior probability of being labeled its most probable group is shown on the y-axis. We recover moderate support for a small number of non-Marshallese internal nodes, while the vast majority of internal nodes remain inferred as Marshallese. (b) The 95% highest posterior density intervals of the inferred effective population sizes for Marshallese, non-Marshallese, and not Washington demes.Structured coalescent models infer the effective population size (Ne) for each group, which reflects the number of infections necessary to generate the observed genetic diversity. Differences in Ne can result from different transmission rates or different numbers of infected individuals (Volz, 2012) and can therefore approximate differences in disease frequency between groups. While the total number of Marshallese and non-Marshallese cases reported through the public health surveillance system were similar (Supplementary file 1b), we estimate that Ne for the non-Marshallese group is approximately three times higher than that of the Marshallese group. Assuming the same number of infected individuals in each group, lower Ne’s suggest higher transmission rates (Volz, 2012), suggesting more transmission within the Marshallese deme. Taken together, our results suggest that the outbreak was primarily sustained by transmission within the Marshallese community. While we do observe spillover into the non-Marshallese community, transmission was generally not as successful there, resulting in short, terminal transmission chains.Viruses infecting individuals in different vaccination groups are genetically similarAlthough only 9.7% of reported mumps cases in Washington were not up-to-date for mumps vaccination, infection of these individuals could have disproportionately impacted transmission in the state. Emergence of an antigenically novel strain of mumps could also allow infection of previously vaccinated individuals, and result in different virus lineages infecting individuals in different vaccination categories. We colored the tips of all Washington cases in our phylogeny to represent whether they were derived from individuals who were up-to-date, not up-to-date, or whose vaccination status was unknown. Mirroring overall vaccination coverage in Washington, the vast majority of samples in our data set were from up-to-date individuals. The not up-to-date individuals present in our data set are dispersed throughout the phylogeny and do not cluster together (Figure 7), suggesting that there is no genetic difference between viruses infecting individuals with different vaccination statuses.Figure 7.Individuals in different vaccination groups are infected by genetically similar viruses.The exploded tree as shown in Figure 3a is shown, but tips are now colored by whether they represent cases from individuals who are up-to-date for mumps vaccination, not up-to-date, or cases for which vaccination status was unknown. The color of the large dot represents the inferred geographic location from which the Washington introduction was seeded.DiscussionThe resurgence of mumps in North America has ushered renewed attention toward understanding post-vaccine era mumps transmission. While many studies have used phylodynamic approaches to elucidate viral patterns of geographic spread (Dudas et al., 2017; Gouma et al., 2016; Grubaugh et al., 2017; Stapleton et al., 2019), using genomics to distinguish transmission patterns among epidemiologically distinct groups is novel. We employ a phylogenetic method (Vaughan et al., 2014) traditionally applied to geography that is robust to sampling bias (Dudas et al., 2018) to investigate drivers of mumps transmission in Washington. We show that the Washington State outbreak was fueled by approximately 13 independent introductions, primarily from Arkansas, leading to multiple co-circulating transmission chains. Within Washington, transmission was more efficient within the Marshallese community. Marshallese individuals were more often sampled at the beginnings of transmission chains, contributed to longer transmission chains on average, and were overwhelmingly enriched on internal nodes within the phylogeny. We were unable to evaluate the precise effects of age and vaccination status on transmission in our outbreak. Future, larger studies will be necessary to disentangle the interplay between contact patterns, waning immunity, and vaccination status during mumps transmission. However, our data do suggest that social networks can be critical determinants of mumps transmission. Future work exploring how social and economic disparities may amplify respiratory disease transmission will be necessary for updating outbreak mitigation and prevention strategies. By combining detailed metadata, novel metrics of transmission in the tree, and robust controls for sampling, we provide a framework for investigating source-sink dynamics that is readily applicable to other viral pathogens.Sampling bias presents a persistent problem for phylodynamic studies that can complicate inference of source-sink dynamics (De Maio et al., 2015; Dudas et al., 2018; Frost et al., 2015; Kühnert et al., 2011; Lemey et al., 2020; Stack et al., 2010). Sampling bias can arise from unequal case detection or from curating a data set that poorly represents the underlying outbreak. Washington State uses a passive surveillance system for mumps detection and case acquisition, which is known to result in underreporting. Because the WA Department of Health did not perform active mumps surveillance, it is difficult to assess whether different epidemiologic groups have different likelihoods of being sampled. Marshallese individuals are less likely to seek healthcare (Towne et al., 2021), which may have resulted in particularly high rates of underreporting in this group. If the number of cases within the Marshallese community were in fact higher than reported, this would increase the magnitude of the patterns we describe, making our estimates conservative. Given a distribution of cases, composing a data set for analysis also requires sampling decisions. Uniform sampling regimes in which sampling probability is equal across groups have been shown to perform well for source-sink inferences (Hall et al., 2016). By selecting sequences that matched the overall attributes of the outbreak, including a near 50:50 split between Marshallese and non-Marshallese cases, we adhere to this recommendation. We then specifically employed structured coalescent approaches which have been shown to be robust to sampling differences (Dudas et al., 2018; Müller et al., 2018; Vaughan et al., 2014), rather than using other common approaches that treat sampling intensity as informative of population size (Lemey et al., 2009). Within this framework, we further explore the possibility that unequal sampling within Washington clades could skew internal node reconstruction by forcing the sampling within each Washington clade to be equal between Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips. In doing so, differences within each clade must necessarily be driven by differences in transmission dynamics, rather than sampling. By combining careful sample selection with overlapping approaches to evaluate sampling bias, we were able to mitigate concerns that our source-sink reconstructions are driven by sampling artifacts.Our results highlight the utility of genomic data to clarify epidemiologic hypotheses. While genomic data and epidemiologic investigation (including case interviews and contact follow up) suggested an Arkansas introduction as the Washington outbreak’s primary origin, sequence data revealed repeated and ongoing introductions into Washington, similar to patterns observed in Massachusetts, and the Netherlands (Gouma et al., 2016; Wohl et al., 2020). We also find widespread geographic mixing across the phylogeny, consistent with investigations from the US (Wohl et al., 2020), Canada (Stapleton et al., 2019), and Europe (Gavilán et al., 2018; Gouma et al., 2016). Like others (Gouma et al., 2016; Wohl et al., 2020), we confirm that SH genotyping alone is insufficient for fine-grained resolution of geographic transmission patterns. While CDC guidelines currently recommend SH-based genotyping specifically for tracking transmission pathways (Clemmons et al., 2020), building public health capacity for full-genome sequencing may be more useful for resolving local mumps transmission patterns.Our finding that most introductions sparked short transmission chains suggests that mumps did not transmit efficiently among the general Washington populace. We suspect that more diffuse contact patterns may help explain this. Mumps has historically caused outbreaks in communities with strong, interconnected contact patterns (Barskey et al., 2012; Fields et al., 2019; Nelson et al., 2013), and in dense housing environments (Snijders et al., 2012), highlighted most recently by outbreaks in US detention centers (Lo et al., 2021). In 2016, most outbreaks in the US were associated with university settings (Albertson et al., 2016; Bonwitt et al., 2017; Donahue et al., 2017; Golwalkar et al., 2018; Iowa Mumps Outbreak Response Team et al., 2018; Wohl et al., 2020), including a separate, smaller outbreak in Washington State associated with Greek housing (Bonwitt et al., 2017). Outside of university settings, other outbreaks in 2016 were reported within close-knit ethnic communities (Fields et al., 2019; Marx et al., 2018). We speculate that while waning immunity may promote outbreaks by increasing susceptibility among young adults, outbreaks in younger age groups may be possible in sufficiently high-contact settings. Provision of an outbreak dose of mumps-containing vaccine to high-risk groups may therefore be especially effective for limiting mumps transmission in future outbreaks. Others have reported success in using outbreak dose mumps vaccinations to reduce mumps transmission on college campuses (Cardemil et al., 2017; Iowa Mumps Outbreak Response Team et al., 2018) and in the US army (Arday et al., 1989; Eick et al., 2008; Green, 2006; Kelley et al., 1991), and the CDC currently recommends providing outbreak vaccine doses to individuals with increased risk due to an outbreak (Marlow et al., 2020). Future work to quantify the interplay between contact rates and vaccine-induced immunity among different age and risk groups should be used to guide updated vaccine recommendations.Recent research has focused on identifying groups at risk for mumps infection due to their age (Lewnard and Grad, 2018), with less attention to other factors that may make populations vulnerable. While a combination of waning immunity and dense housing settings make college campuses ideal for mumps outbreaks, the Washington and Arkansas outbreaks show that populations other than young adults are at risk. Soliciting feedback from the Marshallese community allowed us to contextualize our genomic results with the lived experience of individuals most heavily affected during the outbreak and to identify reasonable hypotheses for efficient transmission. Based on these interviews and previously published studies, we speculate that within the Marshallese community, a combination of factors likely led to a high force of infection. The following paragraph outlines contributing factors that were brought to light during our interviews with a collaborating community activist, along with corroborating citations from the literature. Each of these factors were specifically cited as important and directly stem from our interviews with her.Multigenerational living is common in the Marshallese community (Fields et al., 2019), and Marshallese households tend to be larger on average (average household size = 5.28 (Harris and Jones, 2005), average household size for entire US populace = 2.52 US Census Bureau, 2021). Having more household contacts may have facilitated a greater number and higher intensity of interactions among individuals, allowing the force of infection to overcome pre-existing immunity. The Marshallese community is often described as close-knit, with frequent and close interactions among individuals, a strong sense of community, and a broader sense of family than the single-family unit typical of broader American culture (Barker, 2012; Embassy of the Republic of the Marshall Islands to the United States of America, 2021). Contacts within the community could therefore be more frequent or intense, which may facilitate transmission. It is also possible that infection intensity within the Marshallese community was exacerbated by low rates of insurance coverage and poor access to healthcare (McElfish et al., 2017; Towne et al., 2021), hesitancy to seek medical care (Williams and Hampton, 2005), and health disparities stemming from US occupation, nuclear testing, and exclusion from healthcare services. As part of reparations for US nuclear testing, the US signed the Compact of Free Association Treaty (COFA)(Congress 108th United States, 2003) with the Marshall Islands in 1989, permitting Marshallese residents to live and work in the US without visas. However, eligibility for Medicaid was revoked for COFA immigrants in 1996, and US-residing Marshallese remain economically disadvantaged and under-insured (McElfish, 2016; McElfish et al., 2017, McElfish et al., 2015). The passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) has not ameliorated these issues. Interviews with US-residing Marshallese note confusion among ACA staff regarding the legal status of COFA recipients, leading to drawn out enrollment processes that often leave individuals uninsured, frustrated (McElfish et al., 2016), and far less likely to access care (Towne et al., 2021). A study of healthcare-seeking behavior among patients with diabetes showed that while multiple factors contribute to foregone care in the US populace, 77% of surveyed Marshallese individuals reported recent forgeone care and lack of insurance was the primary reason (Towne et al., 2021). Marshallese trust in US medical institutions was seriously undermined by the unconsented use of Marshallese individuals for experiments on health impacts of nuclear exposure, with effects lingering today (Barker, 2012). Banked historical samples confirm uptake of radioactive materials in Marshallese inhabitants of affected Islands (Simon et al., 2010), but there has been limited published data on long-term health impacts of nuclear exposure, and significant concern remains within the community (Bordner et al., 2016). Finally, when Marshallese individuals do access care, they report experiencing disdain from healthcare workers (Duke, 2017) and sub-optimal care (McElfish et al., 2016). Interviews with medical workers show that blame for poor Marshallese health outcomes is sometimes placed on host genetics or cultural practices (Duke, 2017), poor health literacy (McElfish et al., 2018), or choosing to delay care (McElfish et al., 2018), with less consideration given to how the economic and legal impacts of US occupation affect the health of Marshallese individuals. These factors compound, and Marshallese individuals report hesitation to seek medical care, even when sick (McElfish et al., 2016). Hesitancy to seek care could have contributed to mumps transmission if sick individuals were primarily cared for at home without knowledge of or the ability to implement community-isolation protocols.Our findings highlight that social networks can be the primary risk factor for a respiratory virus outbreak, even when a vaccine is effective and widely used. This finding is especially pertinent as SARS-CoV2 continues to disproportionately impact populations who live and work in high-risk settings, including the Marshallese (Center et al., 2020; McElfish et al., 2021), and for whom vaccine licensure and distribution alone may not be a panacea. Future work should explore whether nuclear exposure has impacted Marshallese immune function and susceptibility to infectious disease. The passing of federal legislation remedying the exclusion of Marshallese individuals from Medicaid access (Hirono, 2019) in December 2020 marks an important step toward improving healthcare access. Future work to evaluate whether this change improves Marshallese access to healthcare and mitigates increased disease risk will be crucial follow-up. The findings of this paper demonstrate the importance of expanding our understanding of populations at risk for mumps re-emergence, so that rapid and comprehensive outbreak response strategies can be implemented to mitigate negative health impacts for all affected communities. Finally, future work to disentangle the complex interplay between healthcare access, social and economic disparity, and respiratory virus risk will be essential for mitigating health impacts of mumps and other respiratory viruses.Materials and methodsKey resources tableReagent type (species) or resourceDesignationSource or referenceIdentifiersAdditional informationBiological sample (Mumps virus)110 buccal swabs from mumps positive patients in WashingtonWashington StateDepartment of HealthSequences were deposited in Genbank under accessions MT859507-MT859672. Raw reads were deposited under SRA project number PRJNA641715Full metadata for each sequence is available in the manuscript in Supplementary file 1aBiological sample (Mumps virus)56 buccal swabs from mumps positive patients from other US statesWisconsin State Lab of HygieneSequences were deposited in Genbank under accessions MT859507-MT859672. Raw reads were deposited under SRA project number PRJNA641715Full metadata for each sequence is available in the manuscript in Supplementary file 1aBiological sample (Mumps virus)Publicly available mumps genomesNIAID Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource (ViPR) (Pickett et al., 2012)
http://www.viprbrc.org/
Sequence- based reagentmumps_1.5 kb primersThis paperPCR primersFull list of PCR primer sequences is available in the Materials and methods section under ‘Viral RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and amplicon generation’Commercial assay or kitQiAmp Viral RNA Mini KitQiagen, Valencia, CA, USACat #: 52904Commercial assay or kitProtoscript II First strand synthesis kitNew England Biolabs, Ipswich MD, USACat #: E6560LCommercial assay or kitQ5 Hotstart DNA polymeraseNew England Biolabs, Ipswich, MD, USACat #: M0493LCommercial assay or kitAmpure XP beadsBeckman CoulterCat #: A63881Commercial assay or kitNextera XT DNA Library Prep KitIllumina, San Diego, CA, USACat #: FC-131–1096Software, algorithmBowtie2
Langmead and Salzberg, 2012

http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml
RRID:SCR_016368Software, algorithmMAFFT
Katoh et al., 2002

https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/
RRID:SCR_016368Software, algorithmTreeTime
Sagulenko et al., 2018

https://github.com/neherlab/treetime
Software, algorithmBEAST (versions 1.8.4 and 2.6.2)Drummond et al., 2012, Lemey et al., 2009, Bouckaert et al., 2019https://beast.community/ and https://www.beast2.org/RRID:SCR_010228Software, algorithmIQTREE
Nguyen et al., 2015

http://www.iqtree.org
Software, algorithmGithub repo with protocols for generating mumps sequences from buccal swabsThis paper
https://github.com/blab/mumps-seq
This github repository contains documentation and protocols for all lab procedures and bioinformatics pipelines used to generate consensus genomes from mumps buccal swabsSoftware, algorithmGithub repo with scripts used to analyze data and generate figures for this manuscriptThis paper
https://github.com/blab/mumps-wa-phylodynamics
This github repository contains all of the code used to generate figures and perform the analyses described in this manuscript. This repository also contains xml files used for input for BEAST analyses and alignments and tree files used to generate and plot phylogenetic treesData and code availabilityAll code used to analyze data, input files for BEAST, and all code used to generate figures for this manuscript are publicly available at https://github.com/blab/mumps-wa-phylodynamics; swh:1:rev:b8358a0d49d70670dbab9eeffa9972c277b3021b; Moncla, 2021b. Raw FASTQ files with human reads removed are available under SRA project number PRJNA641715. All protocols for generating sequence data as well as the consensus genomes are available at https://github.com/blab/mumps-seq; swh:1:rev:3309d1535804a71e6d9e7cc55295b6ea61bde730; Moncla, 2021a. Consensus genomes have also been deposited to Genbank under accessions MT859507-MT859672.Community feedbackIn order to ensure that this study was faithful to the experience of the Marshallese community in Washington State, we sought paid consultation from a local Marshallese community health advocate. We conducted video and telephone interviews to directly address the impacts of mumps transmission on the Marshallese community, community healthcare goals and priorities, and the impacts of the mumps outbreak on stigmatization. This feedback informed what is being presented herein, provided crucial context for understanding mumps transmission, and allowed us to work with the community to determine how best to discuss Marshallese involvement in the outbreak.Mumps surveillance in Washington StateMumps is a notifiable condition in Washington State. Therefore, per the Washington Administrative Code (WAC), as specified in WAC Chapter 246-101 (Washington State Legislature, 2014), healthcare providers, healthcare facilities, and laboratories must report cases of mumps or possible mumps to the local health jurisdiction (LHJ) of the patient’s residence. LHJ staff initiate case investigations and facilitate optimal collection and testing of diagnostic specimens. Buccal swabs and urine are acceptable specimens for real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), a preferred diagnostic test for mumps. Most mumps rRT-PCR tests for Washington State residents are performed at the Washington State Public Health Laboratories, where all positive specimens are archived.Individuals testing positive for mumps ribonucleic acid (RNA) by qRT-PCR are classified as confirmed mumps cases if they have a clinically compatible illness (i.e., an illness involving parotitis or other salivary gland swelling lasting at least 2 days, aseptic meningitis, encephalitis, hearing loss, orchitis, oophoritis, mastitis, or pancreatitis). During case investigations, case-patients or their proxies are interviewed. Information about demographics, illness characteristics, vaccination history, and potential for exposure to and transmission of mumps are solicited from each case-patient. In concordance with CDC guidelines (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2019b), only vaccine doses for which there was written documentation with the date of vaccine receipt were considered valid. Individuals for whom such documentation could not be provided were classified as having an unknown vaccination status. For individuals with documented vaccine doses, they were further characterized as up-to-date or not up-to-date based on their age. The Washington State Department of Health (DOH) receives, organizes, performs quality control on, and analyzes data from, LHJ case reports and supports investigations upon request.Sample collection and IRB approvalThis study was approved by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (FHCRC) Institutional Review Board (IR File #: 6007–944) and by the Washington State Institutional Review Board, and classified as not involving human subjects. Samples were selected for sequencing to maximize temporal and epidemiologic breadth and to ensure successful sequencing. As such, samples were chosen based on the date of sample collection, the PCR cycle threshold (Ct), case vaccination status, and community status (Marshallese or non-Marshallese). Samples were selected for sequencing in two batches. In the first, samples were selected based on covering a wide geographic range within Washington, a full range of dates covering the outbreak, and having a Ct value <36. This initial sampling regime resulted in a sample set skewed slightly toward samples from Marshallese individuals. To ensure that the proportion of samples in our data closely matched the distribution of cases in the outbreak, we then selected a second batch of samples using the same criteria as above, but excluded samples from Marshallese individuals. We then randomly sampled an additional 30 samples from non-Marshallese individuals. This sampling regime resulted in a data set that closely mirrors the distribution of metadata categories in the outbreak overall. All metadata, including case vaccination status, were transferred from WA DOH to FHCRC in a de-identified form.We also sequenced an additional set of 56 samples collected in Wisconsin, Ohio, Missouri, Alabama, and North Carolina provided by the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene. Ten of these samples were collected in Wisconsin during the 2006/2007 Midwestern college campus outbreaks, six samples were collected in 2014, and the rest were collected between 2016 and 2018. For these samples, we received metadata describing sample Ct value and date of collection. All metadata were received by FHCRC in de-identified form.Viral RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, and amplicon generationViral RNA was extracted from buccal swabs using either the QiAmp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA) or the Roche MagNA Pure 96 DNA and viral NA small volume kit (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). For samples extracted with the QiAmp Viral RNA Mini Kit, 500 μl of buccal swab fluid was spun at 5000 × g for 5 min at 4°C to pellet host cells. The supernatant was then removed and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 90 min at 4°C to pellet virions. Excess fluid was discarded, and the pelletted virions were resuspended in 150–200 μl of fluid. Resuspended viral particles were then used as input to the QiAmp Viral RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), following manufacturer’s instructions, and eluting in 30 μl of buffer AVE. For extraction with the MagNA Pure, we followed manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA was generated with the Protoscript II First strand synthesis kit (New England Biolabs, Ipswich MD, USA), using 8 μl of vRNA as input and priming with 2 μl of random hexamers. vRNA and primers were incubated at 65°C for 5 min. Following this incubation, 10 μl of Protoscript II reaction mix (2×) and 2 μl of Protoscript II enzyme mix (10×) were added to each reaction and incubated at 25°C for 5 min, then 42°C for 1 hr, followed by a final inactivation step at 80°C for 5 min. To amplify the full mumps genomes, we used Primal Scheme (http://primal.zibraproject.org/) to design overlapping,~1500 base pair amplicons spanning the entirety of the mumps virus genome, where each tiled set of primes overlapped by ~100 base pairs. Primers are listed below.PrimerPrimer sequenceForward/reversePrimer poolmumps_1.5 kb_1F
ACCAAGGGGAAAATGAAGATGGG
Forwardpool 1mumps_1.5 kb_1R
TAACGGCTGTGCTCTAAAGTCAT
Reversepool 1mumps_1.5 kb_2_F
TTGTTGACAGGCTTGCAAGAGG
Forwardpool 2mumps_1.5 kb_2_R
TTGTTCAAGATGTTGCAGGCGA
Reversepool 2mumps_1.5 kb_3_F
TGCAACCCCATATGCTCACCTA
Forwardpool 1mumps_1.5 kb_3_R
AGTTTGTTCCTGCCTTTGCACA
Reversepool 1mumps_1.5 kb_4_F
AGTGAGAGCAGTTCAGATGGAAGT
Forwardpool 2mumps_1.5 kb_4_R
CCCTCCATTAGACCGGCACTTA
Reversepool 2mumps_1.5 kb_5_F
AACAACAGTGTTCCAGCCACAA
Forwardpool 1mumps_1.5 kb_5_R
GGTGGCACTGTCCGATATTGTG
Reversepool 1mumps_1.5 kb_6_F
TGCCGTTCAATCATGAGACATAAAGA
Forwardpool 2mumps_1.5 kb_6_R
CGTAGAGGAGTTCATACGGCCA
Reversepool 2mumps_1.5 kb_7_F
TGTCTGTGCCTGGAATCAGATCT
Forwardpool 1mumps_1.5 kb_7_R
CGTCCTTCCAACATATCAGTGACC
Reversepool 1mumps_1.5 kb_8_F
CCAAAAGACAGGTGAGTTAACAGATTT
Forwardpool 2mumps_1.5 kb_8_R
ACGAGCAAAGGGGATGATGACT
Reversepool 2mumps_1.5 kb_9_F
TTTGGCACACTCCGGTTCAAAT
Forwardpool 1mumps_1.5 kb_9_R
TGACAATGGTCTCACCTCCAGT
Reversepool 1mumps_1.5 kb_10_F
ACTCGCACAGTATCTATTAGATCGTGA
Forwardpool 2mumps_1.5 kb_10_R
GCCCAGCCAGAGTAAACAAACA
Reversepool 2mumps_1.5 kb_11_F
GCCAAGCAGATGGTAAACAGCA
Forwardpool 1mumps_1.5 kb_11_R
GGCTCTCTCCAACATGCTGTTC
Reversepool 1mumps_1.5 kb_12_F
GCGGGGCCTCTATGTCACTTAT
Forwardpool 2mumps_1.5 kb_12_R
CCAAGGGGAGAAAGTAAAATCAAT
Reversepool 2Primers were pooled into two pools as follows: the first contained primer pairs 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, and 11, all pooled at 10 μM. The second pool contained primer pairs 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, and 12. All primers in pool two were pooled at 10 μM, except for primer pair 4, which was added at a 20 μM concentration.PCR was performed with the Q5 Hotstart DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MD, USA), using 11.75 μl of nuclease-free water, 5 μl of Q5 reaction buffer, 0.5 μl of 10 mM dNTPs, 0.25 μl, 2.5 of pooled primers, and 5 μl of cDNA. Amplicons were generated with the following PCR cycling conditions: 98°C for 30 s, followed by 30 cycles of: 98°C for 15 s, then 67°C for 5 min. Cycling was concluded with a 10°C hold. PCR products were run on a 1% agarose gel, and bands were cut out and purified using the QiAquick gel extraction kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA, USA), following the manufacturer's protocol. All optional steps were performed, and the final product was eluted in 30 µl of buffer EB. For samples extracted on the MagNA Pure, amplicons were cleaned using a 1× bead cleanup with Ampure XP beads. Final cleaned amplicons were quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA).Library preparation and sequencingFor each sample, pool 1 and pool 2 amplicons were combined in equimolar concentrations to a total of 0.5 ng in 2.5 µl. Libraries were prepared using the Nextera XT DNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), following manufacturer’s instructions, but with reagent volumes halved for each step, for the majority of samples in our data set. For samples processed in our last sequencing run, several samples had higher Ct values. We therefore chose to process these samples using the standard 1× reagent volumes for the library preparation step. All libraries were purified using Ampure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA), using a 0.6× cleanup, a 1× cleanup, and a final 0.7× cleanup. At each step, beads were washed twice with 200–400 µl of 70% ethanol. The final product was eluted off the beads with 10 µl of buffer EB. Tagmentation products were quantified with the Qubit dsDNA HS Assay kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA), and run on a Tapestation with the TapeStation HighSense D5K assay (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) to determine the average fragment length. All but eight samples and negatives were pooled together in 6 nM libraries and run on 300 bp × 300 bp v3 kits on the Illumina MiSeq, with a 1% spike-in of PhiX. The remaining eight samples (MuVs/Washington.USA/1.17/FH77[G], MuVs/Washington.USA/12.17/FH78[G], MuVs/Washington.USA/16.17/FH79[G], MuVs/Washington.USA/19.17/FH80[G], MuVs/Washington.USA/20.17/FH81[G], MuVs/Washington.USA/20.17/FH82[G], MuVs/Washington.USA/29.17/FH83[G], and MuVs/Washington.USA/2.17/FH84[G]) were pooled to a 1.2 nM library, and run as a 50 pM library with 2% PhiX on the Illumina iSeq, with a 151 bp × 151 bp v3 kit.Negative controlsA negative control (nuclease-free water) was run for each viral RNA extraction, reverse transcription reaction, and for each pool for each PCR reaction. These negative controls were carried through the library preparation process and sequenced alongside actual samples. Any samples whose negative controls from any step in the process resulted in >10× mumps genome coverage were re-extracted and sequenced.Bioinformatic processing of sequencing readsHuman reads were removed from raw FASTQ files by mapping to the human reference genome GRCH38 with bowtie2 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012)(RRID: SCR_016368) version 2.3.2 (http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml). Reads that did not map to the human genome were output to separate FASTQ files and used for all subsequent analyses. Illumina data was analyzed using the pipeline described in detail at https://github.com/lmoncla/illumina_pipeline. Briefly, raw FASTQ files were trimmed using Trimmomatic (Bolger et al., 2014) (http://www.usadellab.org/cms/?page=trimmomatic), trimming in sliding windows of 5 base pairs and requiring a minimum Q-score of 30. Reads that were trimmed to a length of <100 base pairs were discarded. Trimming was performed with the following command: java -jar Trimmomatic-0.36/trimmomatic-0.36.jar SE input.fastq output.fastq SLIDINGWINDOW:5:30 MINLEN:100. Trimmed reads were mapped to a consensus sequence from Massachusetts (Genbank accession: MF965301) using bowtie2 (Langmead and Salzberg, 2012) version 2.3.2 (http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml), using the following command: bowtie2 -x reference_sequence.fasta -U read1.trimmed.fastq,read2.trimmed.fastq -S output.sam --local. We selected this Massachusetts sequence as an initial reference sequence because at the time, it represented one of the only available genomes of a genotype G mumps virus that had been sampled during a US outbreak in 2016. Mapped reads were imported into Geneious (https://www.geneious.com/) for visual inspection and consensus calling. To avoid issues with mapping to an improper reference sequence, we then remapped each sample's trimmed FASTQ files to its own consensus sequence. These bam files were again manually inspected in Geneious, and a final consensus sequence was called, with nucleotide sites with <20× coverage output as an ambiguous nucleotide (‘N’). All genomes with >50% Ns were discarded. In total, we generated 140 genomes with at least 80% non-N bases, and 26 genomes with 50–80% non-N bases. Our median completeness (percent of bases that are not Ns) across the data set is 90%. All genomes used in these analyses are available at https://github.com/blab/mumps-seq/tree/master/data.Data set curation and maximum likelihood divergence tree generationWe downloaded all currently available (as of June 2020), complete mumps genomes from North America, and separately from any country in the world, from the NIAID Virus Pathogen Database and Analysis Resource (ViPR) (Pickett et al., 2012) through http://www.viprbrc.org/. We also obtained mumps genomes from British Columbia, Ontario, and Arkansas. We obtained written permission from sequence authors for any sequence that had not previously been published on. In total, this data set includes 437 full mumps genomes from North America. Sequences and metadata were cleaned and organized using fauna, a database system that is part of the Nextstrain platform. Sequences were processed using Nextstrain’s augur software (Hadfield et al., 2018), and filtered to include only those with at least 8000 bases and were sampled in North America in 2006 or later. Genomes were aligned with MAFFT (Katoh et al., 2002)(RRID: SCR_016368) and trimmed to the reference sequence (MuV/Gabon/13/2[G], GenBank accession: KM597072). We inferred a maximum likelihood phylogeny using IQTREE (Nguyen et al., 2015) with a GTR nucleotide substitution model, and inferred a molecular clock and temporally resolved phylogeny using TreeTime (Sagulenko et al., 2018). Sequences with an estimated clock rate that deviated from the other sequences by >4 times the interquartile distance were removed from subsequent analysis. We inferred the root-to-tip distance with TempEst version 1.5.1 (Rambaut et al., 2016) with the best fitting root by the heuristic residual mean squared function. Trees were output in JSON format and are available at https://github.com/blab/mumps-wa-phylodynamics/blob/master/auspice.Phylogenetic analysis of full North American mumps genomesUsing the same set of genome sequences used for divergence tree estimation, we aligned sequences with MAFFT and inferred time-resolved phylogenies in BEAST version 1.8.4 (Drummond et al., 2012)(RRID: SCR_010228). We used a skygrid population size prior with 100 bins, and a skygrid cutoff of 25 years, allowing us to estimate four population sizes each year. We used an HKY nucleotide substitution model with four gamma rate categories, and a strict clock with a CTMC prior. We used a discrete trait model (Lemey et al., 2009) and estimated migration rates using BSSVS and ancestral states with 27 geographic locations. Here, ‘state’ refers to the inferred ancestral identity of an internal node, where the inferred identity could be any of the 27 geographic locations (US states and Canadian provinces) in the data set. For the prior on non-zero rates for BSSVS, we specified an exponential distribution with a mean of 26. As a prior on each pairwise migration rate, we used an exponential distribution with mean 1. All other priors were left at default values. We ran this analysis for 100 million steps, sampling every 10,000, and removed the first 10% of sampled states as burn-in. A maximum clade credibility tree was summarized with TreeAnnotator, using the mean heights option. All tree plotting was performed with baltic (https://github.com/evogytis/baltic). Input XML files and output results are available at https://github.com/blab/mumps-wa-phylodynamics/tree/master/phylogeography.Quantifying transmission in divergence trees using basal and terminal tips: formulation and rationaleTo determine whether specific groups were more likely to be part of sustained, serially sampled transmission chains, we developed a statistic to quantify transmission in the tree. Our aim was to develop a heuristic method that would capture patterns similar to those captured by more complex structured coalescent models. In a population with high rates of transmission and high sampling intensity, it is possible that sampled individuals may represent true ancestors to subsequent infections (Gavryushkina et al., 2014). While this is theoretically possible in our data set, we expect this to be rare. Because viruses accumulate mutations at a constant rate over time, a tip’s branch length should correlate with its position along the underlying transmission chain, that is, a short branch length should indicate that the tip is closer to the true ancestral infection than a longer branch. Plotting the number of mutations on each branch vs. its estimated branch length in time units confirms that mutations and time-calibrated branch length are correlated (Figure 8). This suggests that on average, branches with fewer mutations also tend to represent shorter periods of time. For our data set, most tips with an estimated branch length within the mumps serial interval of ~18 days Vink et al., 2014 have 0 mutations (Figure 8, circles below dashed line). In a population with high rates of transmission in which true ancestral infections are not directly sampled, we therefore expect that tips that are genetically closer to the ancestral node should be closer to the true ancestral infection than tips that are genetically dissimilar.Figure 8.Mutations vs. estimated branch length in days.For each Washington tip in the full North American phylogeny with an estimated branch length in time units of ≤1 year, we show the number of mutations on that branch on the x-axis vs. the mean estimated branch length in days on the y-axis. The dashed line at 18 represents the mumps serial interval.Either time or genetic divergence could be used to categorize how close tips are to their parental node. Here, we have opted to use divergence for two main reasons. Mumps has a relatively slow substitution rate and a long serial interval, resulting in stacks of identical genomes at several points in the divergence phylogeny (Figure 2—figure supplement 4). In time-resolved phylogenies, branching among identical genomes is resolved by sampling date, and the x-coordinate of the internal node is inferred based on time information. Because the internal node location is based not on actual genetic information, there is variability in the estimated placement of the internal node on the tree, resulting in branch lengths that may vary among realizations of the tree. This is reflected in the 95% confidence interval of internal node dates. Plotting the estimated branch length from each Washington tip to its internal node and incorporating the 95% confidence interval of the internal node date show that a wide range of branch lengths are plausible for most tips (Figure 9). This complicates setting a simple branch length threshold based on the serial interval. In contrast, divergence trees have branch lengths expressed in the number of mutations arising along on that branch, which is intrinsic to the sequences themselves. Second, higher transmission in one group could result in shorter serial intervals within that group, which complicates defining a branch length cutoff based on serial interval. For these reasons, we have opted to use genetic divergence as our metric of ‘closeness’ to avoid arbitrary time cutoffs and issues of uncertainty in timetree internal node placements.Figure 9.Washington tip branch lengths in days.For each Washington tip in the full North American phylogeny with an estimated branch length in time units of ≤1 year, we show the estimated branch length in days with the 95% confidence interval. The solid line at 18 represents the mump serial interval. For most tips, the estimated branch length is variable, depending on the placement of its parental internal node. This variability in internal node placement complicates setting a clear threshold for branch lengths based on time.Given a divergence tree, we next categorized tips by how close they are to their parental node. To maximize the similarity between the tip and its inferred ancestral node, we classified tips as ‘close’ to their ancestral node if no mutations occurred on the branch leading to that tip, that is, the branch length was less than 1 divided by the alignment length. This cutoff can be set to the lower bound of the tree software (for IQTree, this cutoff is ~<1 × 10−16) with the same results. Using the JSON for the North American full genome mumps tree output from the Nextstrain pipeline (shown in Figure 2—figure supplement 2; Hadfield et al., 2018), we traversed the tree from root to tip. We collapsed very small branches (branches with no mutations) to obtain polytomies, and then classified tips as either ‘basal’ (i.e., there were tips in the tree that descended from that internal node) or ‘terminal’ (meaning that no sampled tips descended from that branch). Here, we define a ‘descendant’ tip as a tip that occurs in any downstream portion of the tree, that is, it falls within the same lineage but to the right of the parent tip. A diagram of what we classify as basal vs. terminal tips is shown in Figure 4a.We expect that requiring branches to have 0 mutations should be robust regardless of mutation rate and serial interval, because a branch length of 0 will always be the closest in sequence to the true ancestor. However, variation in the substitution rate will impact the power of the analysis for detecting associations. Because mumps has a low substitution rate, some internal nodes contain stacks of identical genomes that cannot be ordered in terms of their placement along the underlying transmission chain. Instead, we treat each of these nodes as basal with equal probability of being upstream in the transmission chain. A higher substitution rate would jitter these polytomies and increase resolution, while a lower substitution rate would further reduce power. Our application is therefore conservative, but likely underpowered. Future work will be necessary to define the precise interaction between mutation rate, serial interval, sampling intensity, and effect sizes in determining the power of this test.Regression model for quantifying a tip’s probability of being basalFor each Washington tip in the tree, we classified it as either being basal (coded as a 1) or being terminal (coded as 0). For each tip, we coded its corresponding age, vaccination status, and community membership as a predictor variable input into a logistic regression model. We coded these attributes as follows: For community membership, non-Marshallese tips were coded as 0 and Marshallese tips were coded as 1. For age, we split our data set into adults and children, with individuals aged <20 coded with a 0 and ≥20 coded with a 1. In our data set, there were three classifications for vaccination status: up-to-date, not up-to-date, and unknown vaccination status. According to the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) (McLean, 2013), individuals aged 5–18 had to have received both recommended doses of mumps-containing vaccine, children aged 15 months to 5 years required one dose of mumps-containing vaccine, and adults over 18 had to have received at least one dose of mumps-containing vaccine to be classified as up-to-date for mumps vaccination. Individuals under 15 months are considered up-to-date without any doses of mumps-containing vaccine. Not up-to-date individuals are those with a known vaccination status who did not qualify under criteria to be classified as up-to-date. Individuals who could not provide documentation regarding their MMR vaccination history were considered to have ‘unknown’ vaccination status. Individuals with ‘known’ vaccination status could either be fully up-to-date, undervaccinated, or unvaccinated. To ensure that we measured the effect of vaccination among individuals who knew their vaccination status, we coded vaccination information using two dummy variables in our logistic regression, one signifying whether vaccination status was known or not, and one indicating whether vaccination was up-to-date or not. We then fit a logistic regression model to this data using the glm package in R (https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/stats/versions/3.6.2/topics/glm), specifying a binomial model as:Pr(beingbasal)∼β0+β1×1+β2×2+β3×3+β4×4,where x1 represents 0 or one value for member of Marshallese community (not Marshallese coded as a 0, Marshallese coded as a 1), x2 represents a 0 or one value for age, where individuals were classified as adults (≥20 years of age, coded as a 1) or children (<20 years of age, coded as a 0). x3 represents a 0 or one value for whether vaccination status is unknown (having a known vaccination status coded as a 0, having an unknown vaccination status coded as a 1), and x4 represents 0 or one value for whether vaccination status is up-to-date (up-to-date coded as a 0 and not up-to-date coded as a 1). Under this formulation, an individual with unknown vaccination status would be coded as x3 = 1, x4 = 0, an individual who is up-to-date would be coded as x3 = 0, x4 = 0, and an individual who is not up-to-date is coded as x3 = 0, x4 = 1. This encoding allows us to evaluate the effects of having an unknown vaccination status and a vaccination status that is not up-to-date.p-values were assigned via a Wald test, and inferred coefficients were exponentiated to return odds ratios. All codes used to parse the divergence tree and formulate and fit the regression model are available at https://github.com/blab/mumps-wa-phylodynamics/blob/master/divergence-tree-analyses/Regression-analysis-on-descendants-in-divergence-tree.ipynb.Rarefaction analysis to estimate transmission clustersUsing the full set of North American mumps sequences, we designated all non-Washington North American sequences as ‘background’ sequences. We then separated Washington sequences into Marshallese tips (57 total sequences) and non-Marshallese tips (52 total sequences). For this analysis, we excluded the genotype K sequence in our data set due to its extreme divergence from other viruses sampled in Washington, which were all genotype G. For each group (Marshallese vs. non-Marshallese), we then generated subsampled data sets comprised of a random sample of 1 to n sequences, where n is the number of total sequences available for that group. For each number of sequences, we performed 10 independent subsampling trials. Subsampling was performed without replacement. So, for community members, we generated 10 data sets in which one community member sequence was sampled, then 10 data sets in which two community members sequences were sampled, etc. up to 10 data sets in which all 57 community members sequences were sampled. For each subsampled data set, we then combined these subsampled data sets with the background North American sequences, and reran the Nextstrain pipeline. For each subsample and trial, we infer geographic transmission history across the tree and enumerate the number of introductions into Washington. Geographic transmission history was inferred using a discrete trait model in TreeTime (Sagulenko et al., 2018). For each number of sequences tested, n, we report the number of trials resulting in that number of inferred introductions, and the mean number of inferred introductions across the 10 trials. Each resulting ‘cluster’ consisted of a set of sequences that are related to one another that descend from a single inferred introduction of mumps into Washington.Inference of community transmission dynamics using a structured coalescent modelTo infer the rates of migration between community and non-community members and to infer ancestral states of Washington internal nodes, we employed a structured coalescent model. Here, ‘state’ refers to the inferred ancestral identity of an internal node, where the identity could be inferred as ‘Marshallese’ or ‘not Marshallese’. The multitype tree model (Vaughan et al., 2014) in BEAST 2 v2.6.2 (Bouckaert et al., 2019) infers the effective population sizes of each deme and the migration rates between them. Because the multitype tree model requires that all partitions contain all demes, we could only analyze four clades that circulated in Washington State and included both Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips. We generated an XML in BEAUti v2.6.2 with four partitions and linked the clock, site, and migration models. We used a strict, fixed clock, set to 4.17 × 10−4 substitutions per site year and used an HKY substitution model with four gamma-distributed rate categories. This clock rate was set based on the inferred substitutions per site per year from all North American mumps genomes on nextstrain.org/mumps/na. Migration rates were inferred with the prior specified as a truncated exponential distribution with a mean of 1 and a maximum of 50. Effective population sizes were inferred with the prior specified as a truncated exponential distribution with a mean of 1, a minimum value of 0.001, and a maximum value of 10,000. All other priors were left at default values. In order to improve convergence, we employed three heated chains using the package CoupledMCMC (Müller and Bouckaert, 2019), where proposals for chains to swap were performed every 100 states. The analysis was run for 100 million steps, with states sampled every 1 million steps. We ran this analysis three independent times, and combined log and tree file output from those independent runs using LogCombiner, with the first 10% (1000 states) of each run discarded as burn-in. We then summarized these combined output log and tree files. A maximum clade credibility tree was inferred using TreeAnnotator with the mean heights option. To ensure that results were not appreciably altered by the migration rate prior, we also repeated these analyses with migration rates inferred with the prior specified as a truncated exponential distribution with a mean of 10 and a maximum of 50.Although our complete data set contains approximately equal numbers of sequences from Marshallese and non-Marshallese cases, the four clusters analyzed above are enriched among Marshallese tips. To assess the impact of uneven sampling within these clusters on ancestral state inference, we performed a subsampling analysis. For each cluster, we subsampled down the number of Marshallese tips to be equal to the number of non-Marshallese tips, and reran the analysis as above. While the original analysis used four subclades containing both Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips, one of these subclades only has five tips. Subsampling this particular subtree would have resulted in a subtree with only two tips, thus we excluded this clade from the subsampling analysis. For this sensitivity analysis, the three subsampled data sets had the following tip composition: primary outbreak clade: 26 Marshallese and 26 non-Marshallese tips; 10-tip introduction: three Marshallese and three non-Marshallese tips; 8-tip introduction: four Marshallese and four non-Marshallese tips. We generated three randomly subsampled data sets, and for each one ran three independent chains, with each chain run for 50 million steps, sampling every 500,000. For one of the subsampled data sets, none of the chains converged after 20 days. In each of the remaining two subsampled data sets, two out of three chains converged. We combined these converged chains using LogCombiner, with the first 10% of each run discarded as burn-in. We then summarized these combined output log and tree files, and inferred a maximum clade credibility tree using TreeAnnotator with the mean heights option.The analysis as described above assumes that each introduction into Washington State is an independent observation of the same structured coalescent process, and that the data set represents a random sample of the underlying population. Additionally, this approach requires a priori definition of which sequences are part of the same Washington State transmission chain. Finally, the above analysis could only make use of the four Washington introductions with both Marshallese and non-Marshallese tips, and excludes other transmission chains. Because of these issues, we supplemented the above approach with an additional analysis using the approximate structured coalescent (Müller et al., 2017) in MASCOT (Müller et al., 2018). Using all of the Washington sequences, we specified three demes: Marshallese in Washington, non-Marshallese in Washington, and outside of Washington. To account for any transmission that happened outside of Washington State, the ‘outside of Washington’ deme acted as a ‘ghost deme’ from which we did not use any samples. The effective population size of this ‘outside of Washington’ deme then describes the rate at which lineages between any location outside of Washington share a common ancestor. Including specific samples from outside of Washington would bias the inferred effective population size toward the coalescent rates of the sampled locations, by incorporating local transmission dynamics of other locations. We then estimated migration rates and effective population sizes for all three demes, but fixed the migration rates such that the unsampled deme (‘outside of Washington’) could only act as a source population. This is motivated by not having observed obvious migration out of Washington State in our previous analysis here. We ran this analysis for 10 million steps, sampling every 5000, and discarded the first 10% of states as burn-in.


Title: Molecular characterization of mumps viruses from the 2022–2023 outbreak reveals circulation of multiple genotypes in Uganda

IntroductionMumps is a highly contagious viral infection characterized by swelling of the parotid (parotitis) or other salivary gland(s), although up to 30% of infections may be asymptomatic [1, 2]. Parotitis may be unilateral or bilateral and usually lasts about 3 to 7 days with most cases resolving within 10 days. Although generally mild, it poses a significant public health threat due to its potential to cause outbreaks and serious complications including orchitis (inflammation of the testicles), oophoritis (inflammation of the ovaries), mastitis (inflammation of breast tissue), pancreatitis, hearing loss, meningitis, and encephalitis [3]. In Africa, mumps is significantly under-reported, with only a few published cases from Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) [4], Zambia [5], Tanzania [6], and South Africa [7]. Despite the scarcity of published reports, the World Health Organization (WHO) through the WHO/UNICEF Joint Reporting Form on Immunization (JRF) collects and reports cases and incidences of mumps annually with the African region reporting an incidence of 766 per 1,000,000 total population in 2023 [8]. Unfortunately, no data has been reported from Uganda despite having nationwide outbreaks.Mumps is caused by the mumps virus (MuV), a member of the genus Orthorubulavirus in the family Paramyxoviridae. Its genome is comprised of a single stranded RNA of 15,384 nucleotides, which encodes two surface glycoproteins; fusion (F) and haemagglutinin - neuraminidase (HN), four core proteins; nucleoprotein (NP), virion/phospho (V/P), matrix (M) and large protein (L), and the putatively membrane associated small hydrophobic (SH) protein [9]. MuV is serologically monotypic although distinct genetic lineages have been described. Genotype assignment for MuV is based on sequence analysis of the entire 316 nucleotides of the highly variable SH gene and 12 genotypes, designated A to N (excluding E and M) are recognized [8, 9].Despite the availability of an effective vaccine, mumps outbreaks continue to occur globally, affecting both vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals. Complications may occur in the absence of parotitis, and the frequency of complications is lower in vaccinated patients. In Uganda, the mumps vaccine is not part of the routine national immunization schedule despite outbreaks occurring. In addition, there is no information regarding the genotypes and epidemiology of mumps virus strains circulating in the country. This lack of genomic surveillance limits understanding of local transmission dynamics and delays evidence-based decision making for outbreak control and vaccine introduction [2]. This report sought to characterize mumps virus strains following a nationwide outbreak.Materials and methodsCase identificationSamples were taken from patients who met the standardized case definition criteria [10], which included unilateral or bilateral swelling of the parotid or other salivary glands without apparent cause, lasting for at least 2 days. Demographic and clinical data were collected including age, gender, symptoms, the date of onset of symptoms, and the specimen collection date.Sample collection and processingInitially, blood and oropharyngeal samples were collected by the district surveillance focal persons and transported at room temperature via the national samples transportation system to the Uganda Virus Research Institute and stored at + 2–8 °C before testing. Following standardisation of the sample collection methods, trained laboratory staff conducted subsequent sample collections. Buccal swabs were collected as described by the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention [11] and placed into sterile tubes containing growth media (Minimum Essential Medium [MEM] containing 10% foetal bovine serum, 1% 1 M HEPES buffer, 1% 200 mM L-Glutamine, 1.5% sodium bicarbonate (7.5% w/v), antibiotics (100U/mL Penicillin and 100 µg/mL Streptomycin) and fungizone (2.5 µg/mL Amphotericin B)). The tubes were then sealed, mixed briefly, and immediately transported to the laboratory in a specimen carrier with frozen ice packs. At the laboratory, the buccal swabs were processed by vortexing for 60 s within a class II biological safety cabinet and all the material thoroughly extracted from the sponge. The resultant extract for each specimen was aliquoted into two labelled nunc tubes and stored at −80 °C until testing.RNA extraction and real-time PCRRNA was extracted from both clinical samples and isolates using the Qiagen Viral RNA Mini Kit following the manufacturer’s guidelines [12]. The detection of the mumps virus N gene was performed using the QuantiTect kit [13] and primers described previously [14]. Briefly, 2 µL of RNA template was added to 18 µL of master mix containing 10 µl of 2X Qiagen RT-PCR mix, 2 µl of primer/probe mix, 0.2 µL of RNAse inhibitor, (at final concentrations of 1X, 0.03 µM, and 0.2 U/µL respectively) and 0.2 µL of QuantiTect RT mix. The quantitative real-time PCR amplification was carried out with an initial reverse transcription step at 50 °C for 20 min, followed by an inactivation step at 95 °C for 15 min and 40 PCR cycles of 95 °C for 5 s and 60 °C for 1 min. All positive samples, with Ct values below 40 were then sequenced.Virus isolationVirus isolation was carried out for only the twenty-three buccal swabs. T25 flasks containing healthy WHO Vero cells (WHO) (ECACC 88020401) [15]with 75–80% confluency were used for virus isolation. Briefly, the growth media in the flasks was decanted off, and the cells washed twice with 5 mls of 1X phosphate buffer saline (PBS) to remove dead cells and the cell culture medium. One ml of the buccal swab extract was inoculated onto the flasks and for quality control, 1 ml of FBS was inoculated onto the negative control flask. The inoculated flasks were then placed in an incubator at 37 °C for 1 h and thereafter, observed under a Primovert inverted microscope for signs of toxicity before addition of 4 mls of maintenance media (Minimum Essential Medium [MEM] containing 2% foetal bovine serum, 1% 1 M HEPES buffer, 1% 200mM L-Glutamine, 1.5% sodium bicarbonate (7.5% w/v), antibiotics (100U/mL Penicillin and 100 µg/mL Streptomycin) and fungizone (2.5 µg/mL Amphotericin B). The cultures were incubated at 37 °C and observed daily for cytopathic effect (CPE) for up to 14 days with a blind passage performed after 7 days. Flasks showing characteristic CPE (plaque formation or multinucleated giant cells) were harvested when ≥75% CPE was observed. The harvested flasks were stored at −80 °C until further testing. Only two of the ten isolates were carried on for sanger sequencing; one as a positive control to confirm CPE and the second for a sample whose sequencing had been unsuccessful using the clinical sample.Sanger sequencing of the SH geneFor genotype determination, the SH gene was amplified using primers SH1 (5’ AGTAGTGTCGATGATCTCAT 3’) and SH2R (5’ GCTCAAGCCTTGATCATTGA 3’) at 20 µM as described previously [16]. Briefly, 5 µL of RNA was added to 45 µL of master mix containing 25 µL of 2X SuperScript reaction mix, 0.5 µL per primer, 0.5 µL of RNAse inhibitor (at final concentrations of 1X, 0.2 µM each, and 0.2 U/µL respectively) and 2 µL of SuperScript enzyme mix. Amplification was carried out at 55 °C for 30 min, 94 °C for 2 min, followed by 40 PCR cycles of 94 °C for 15 s, 55 °C for 30 s, and 68 °C for 30 s. This was followed by holding steps of 68 °C for 5 min and 4 °C until visualization on a 2% agarose gel.All samples that had visible and correct sized bands following gel electrophoresis had their PCR products cleaned up using the ChargeSwitch PCR cleanup kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions [17]. Sequencing was conducted with the ABI v3.1 BigDye sequencing kit following the manufacturer’s instructions [18]. The sequencing reaction products were purified using Agencourt magnetic beads [19] and loaded onto an ABI 3500xL genetic analyser [18].Phylogenetic analysisThe SH sequences obtained were analysed using Sequencher version 5.4.6 [20] and genotypes assigned based on phylogenetic clustering of study sequences with the 24 WHO mumps reference sequences [21]. Select SH sequences belonging to genotypes D, H and G as of May 16, 2024, were downloaded from GenBank, and together with the study and mumps reference sequences were aligned using the ClustalW method in MEGA v12 [22]. A maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree was generated using the Tamura-Nei substitution model, bootstrap support values were calculated from 1,000 replicates, and the tree was subsequently visualized and annotated in MEGA v12 [22].ResultsForty-five samples: twenty-three buccal and twenty-two oropharyngeal swab samples were collected from five districts (Kabale, Oyam, Obongi, Wakiso and Masindi) in Uganda. One patient experienced onset of disease in Rubanda district however the sample was collected from Kabale district. The twenty-two oropharyngeal swabs were collected by district surveillance focal persons from Obongi, Wakiso and Masindi districts prior to standardization of the sample collection procedures. The remaining twenty-three buccal swabs from Oyam and Kabale districts were collected by the EPI laboratory staff following the standardized and recommended protocol.Patient demographicsOf the forty-five patients, only twenty-three patients (51.1%) investigated by the laboratory staff had complete clinical data. Of these, 18 (78.3%) were female. These patients were aged 60 to 192 months (mean 126.2 months, SD 30.1 months). The onset of symptoms among these patients occurred in either July or November 2023.PCR resultsOf the forty-five samples tested, twenty-five (25/45; 55.5%) samples were positive on real-time RT-PCR. Of these, fifteen (15/25; 60%) were buccal swabs and ten (10/25; 40%) were oropharyngeal swabs. These were subjected to genotyping of the SH gene. Thirteen samples (buccal swabs) had strong bands, four samples (one buccal and three oropharyngeal swabs) had weak bands, and seven samples (oropharyngeal swabs) were negative on gel electrophoresis. The buccal swab with the weak band was successfully cultured, and its isolate used for Sanger sequencing. In total, seventeen samples (17/25; 68%) were positive and subsequently subjected to sequencing. Fourteen sequences were obtained, all buccal swab samples. To note, an isolate from one of the successfully sequenced buccal swabs was used as a positive control and its sequence submitted instead of that from the clinical sample. The clinical and demographic information for these fourteen patients is shown in Table 1.
Table 1Characteristics of the patients with successful mumps virus characterizationSequence IDSexAge (months)District of onsetDate of onset of parotitisAccession numberMuVs/Kabale.UGA/30.23/3Female84Kabale27-07-2023PX126613MuVs/Kabale.UGA/30.23/2Female156Kabale27-07-2023PX126612MuVi/Kabale.UGA/29.23Male120Kabale20-07-2023PX126609MuVs/Kabale.UGA/30.23/1Female132Kabale26-07-2023PX126611MuVi/Kabale.UGA/30.23Male84Kabale25-07-2023PX126610MuVs/Rubanda.UGA/30.23Female60Rubanda26-07-2023PX126622MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23/6Female132OyamMissingPX126620MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23/5Male120Oyam23-11-2023PX126619MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23/2Female108Oyam21-11-2023PX126616MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23/4Male156Oyam22-11-2023PX126618MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23FemaleMissingOyam20-11-2023PX126614MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23/7Female192OyamMissingPX126621MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23/3Female133Oyam21-11-2023PX126617MuVs/Oyam.UGA/47.23/1FemaleMissingOyam20/11/2023PX126615
Virus isolation resultsA total of ten (10/23; 43.5%) viruses were successfully isolated. These showed the characteristic mumps virus CPE within 4–14 days of sample inoculation (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1Cytopathic effect observed in WHO Vero cells following inoculation with extract from suspected mumps patient, showing the formation of distinct viral plaques characteristic of mumps virus infection
Phylogenetic analysesFourteen (14) sequences with 316 nucleotides each were obtained, and phylogenetic analysis yielded 3 genotypes, D, G and H. Eleven sequences belonged to genotype D, 2 sequences belonged to genotype G and 1 sequence belonged to genotype H. Genotypes G and H clustered with viruses circulating in Europe while genotype D viruses formed an independent monophyletic cluster with sequences from North America despite presence of sequences from Africa (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2A maximum likelihood tree showing mumps genotypes obtained from Uganda (with black diamonds), mumps reference sequences and selected sequences of similar genotypes obtained. The tree was inferred in MEGA v12 using the Tamura–Nei substitution model, with bootstrap support values calculated from 1,000 replicates and rooted using MuVi/Pennsylvania.USA/13.63/A VAC. Bootstrap values greater than 70% are shown at the nodes
Geographical distribution of mumps viruses in UgandaOyam district in Northern Uganda had genotypes D, G and H while Kabale district found in Southern Uganda had genotypes D and G (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3Map of Uganda showing distribution of the mumps virus genotypes obtained
DiscussionThis study presents the first genetic characterization of mumps viruses from Uganda revealing the notable genetic diversity of circulating strains. The inability to successfully obtain genotypes from oropharyngeal swab samples collected in Obongi, Wakiso and Masindi districts could be due to several reasons including poor sample collection procedures, specimen quality, timing of collection of specimens, storage and handling of specimens. Despite Sanger sequencing being attempted for the oropharyngeal samples with weak bands on electrophoresis, it was unsuccessful, possibly due to RNA degradation considering that their Ct values were 31 and 34. Optimization was done for the sample with Ct value 31, however, the quality of the resulting chromatograms was unacceptable. For successful mumps virus detection with RT-PCR testing, it is recommended to collect buccal swab specimens within 3 days of parotitis onset and after massaging the parotid gland for approximately 30 s [23].Phylogenetic analysis of the study sequences identified three distinct mumps virus genotypes D, G and H that clustered with sequences from Europe (genotypes G and H) and North America (genotype D). Interpretation of these clustering patterns should however be made cautiously as the scarcity of representative sequences from the African region limits the extent to which transmission patterns can be confidently inferred. That said, this diversity, observed within a limited sample size, shows the potential complexity of mumps virus transmission and evolution within the country. Co-circulation of different genotypes has similarly been reported in India [24], China [25], Spain [26] and USA [27], highlighting that the existence of various strains within outbreaks is not uncommon and indicates either numerous introductions or concurrent transmission chains.Majority of the sequences in this study belonged to Genotype D. This genotype has previously been reported in an outbreak in Zambia [5] suggesting potential regional circulation in parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. The Uganda genotype D sequences shared a high similarity forming a closely related sub-cluster. This indicates limited genetic variation within this genotype and points to a recent, localized transmission. In contrast, Genotypes G and H were each represented by two and one sequence respectively. The predominance of genotype D shown in this study contrasts findings from elsewhere that report genotype G prevalent [2, 26, 28]. This, however, can be attributed to the fact these reports are from a select number of countries. In Canada, genotype G was predominantly detected in 96% of specimens with other genotypes more likely to be detected in cases that had reported travel or were linked to imported cases [29]. In Pakistan, all eleven samples sequenced belonged to genotype G albeit with unique lineage specific variations [30]. And, although China has reported genotype F predominance, they have also reported local mumps outbreaks caused by genotype G strains [31]. In Africa, Gabon reported a single genotype G sequence in a vaccinated child [32]. The limited detection of genotype G in the Ugandan outbreak suggests that, although globally predominant, it played a minor role in local transmission. However, it is possible that genotype G was circulating more widely than observed but was under-represented due to the small number of samples tested.Mumps virus molecular data in Africa remains limited with only a handful of reports [5, 32]. The Uganda sequences thus contribute to the global mumps virus databases, enhancing our understanding of the virus evolution and geographic distribution. This will allow for better tracking of virus strains across regions and over time and ultimately contributing to more effective global public health strategies. This study, however, had one major limitation that is the sequences analysed were from a small number of samples from two districts in the country. Thus, the study likely underestimates the full diversity of genotypes circulating within the broader population. A larger, more geographically expansive sample set could reveal additional genotypes or sub-lineages within the identified genotypes that remain undetected in this analysis, providing a more comprehensive picture of mumps virus circulation within the country.ConclusionThis study presents the first molecular characterization of mumps viruses in Uganda, identifying three distinct genotypes (D, G, and H) within the sampled population. Although the study was based on a relatively small sample size and limited geographic scope, these findings provide a crucial genomic baseline for future mumps virus surveillance in the country. The observed genotypic diversity suggests the circulation of multiple transmission chains, emphasizing the need for country-wide genomic surveillance to capture the full extent of mumps virus circulation and evolution. The study highlights the importance of integrating virus sequencing into Uganda’s public health infrastructure, not only for mumps but for other vaccine-preventable diseases, to enhance outbreak monitoring, response, and control strategies.


Title: “Mpox in MSM: Tackling stigma, minimizing risk factors, exploring pathogenesis, and treatment approaches”

1IntroductionThe exact origin of the monkeypox virus (MPV) is yet to be fully understood. However, it is thought to be circulating among wildlife in Central and West Africa [1], and it was proposed that some species of wild squirrels may be the natural host [[2], [3], [4]]. The MPV likely spread to humans through direct contact with infected animals. Hunting, handling, and/or consuming bushmeat may have been associated with humans contracting MPV [5]. MPV can also be transmitted from person-to-person through close contact via respiratory droplets, bodily fluids, or skin lesions of infected individuals [5]. While mpox is primarily endemic to Central and West Africa, sporadic cases and outbreaks have been occurring outside Africa [6]. These cases have been generally associated with travelers returning from endemic regions or importing infected animals. It is important to note that the natural reservoir of the MPV is not defined [7,8]. The exact transmission dynamics and reservoir and/or hosts involved in maintaining and spreading the MPV in nature continue to evolve.During the 2022 mpox outbreak, most infections were transmitted through close, intimate contact with symptomatic individuals, and male-to-male sexual contact has been a significant transmission mode [[9], [10], [11], [12]]. However, heterosexual transmission, transmission to children through nonsexual skin-to-skin contact with caregivers, needlestick injuries, body piercing, tattooing, and occupational exposures without proper personal protective equipment have also been reported [13,14]. The predominant symptom of MPV infection is skin rashes, often accompanied by anogenital or oropharyngeal/perioral mucosal lesions [15]. Fever, chills, headache, and lymphadenopathy are other commonly reported symptoms among mpox patients. Unlike previous outbreaks, where these symptoms usually preceded skin rashes, up to half of the patients in the current outbreak reported rash as their initial symptom. It has been observed that individuals are infectious from the beginning of the symptoms, and some individuals can transmit the virus before displaying symptoms [16].Until 1980, vaccination against the variola virus provided approximately 85% protection against mpox [17]. With the discontinuation of vaccination against the variola virus in 1980, a significant portion of the population lacked immunity against variola virus and MPV viruses, rendering them susceptible to MPV infection. Additionally, no specific treatment is available for mpox [18]. During the 2022 outbreak, mucosal transmission through sexual contact emerged as one of the major modes of MPV transmission, other than close contact with pustules or pustular material, which has not been reported in previous outbreaks [10,19]. The mucosal transmission is often linked to recto-genital lesions in men, vaginal lesions in women, and pharyngeal lesions in both genders. Although the mechanism of mucosal transmission of MPV remains poorly understood and requires further investigation, the discovery of these novel transmission routes may have important implications, e.g. the risk of co-infections with HIV and the impact on vaccine responses. In this review, we discuss the role of social stigma associated with men who have sex with men (MSM) in increasing their risk of acquiring infectious diseases, including mpox, the risk factors related to the spread of MPV, the disease pathogenesis of mpox among MSM, as well as currently known prevention and treatment options.2Social stigma of MSM: increased risk of infectious diseases including mpoxThe term ’stigma’ is used to describe the pervasive presence of negative beliefs, judgments, and biases that individuals or societies hold against specific groups, characteristics, or behaviors [20]. It encompasses the act of labeling and devaluing individuals based on perceived differences or deviations from societal norms. Stigma often leads to discriminatory actions, exclusion, and the marginalization of affected individuals, harming their mental and physical well-being and resulting in social isolation [21]. Stigma can manifest in various contexts, including mental health, race, sexual orientation, gender identity, and other personal attributes [22]. Those who experience stigma commonly perceive themselves as being distinct and undervalued compared to others.Sexual orientation refers to a lasting pattern of emotional, romantic, and or sexual attraction towards individuals of the same, opposite, or both sexes. Sexual orientation encompasses a spectrum ranging from individuals exclusively attracted to the opposite sex to those attracted solely to the same sex [23]. Sexual orientation is broadly categorized into three main groups: heterosexual, gay/lesbian, and bisexual. These categories of sexual orientation are observed across various cultures globally. It is important to distinguish sexual orientation from other aspects of sex and gender, such as biological sex, gender identity, and social gender roles defined as cultural expectations of feminine and masculine behavior [24]. Thus, sexual orientation is closely connected to intimate relationships that fulfill deep emotional needs for love, affection, and intimacy. In addition to sexual behaviors, these relationships involve nonsexual physical affection, shared values, mutual support, and long-term commitment [25,26]. Various factors have been suggested to contribute to developing an individual's sexual orientation, including genetic, hormonal, developmental, social, and cultural influences [27,28]. It is often believed that nature and nurture play intricate roles in shaping the sexual orientation of an individual [29]. Gender identity and sexual orientation are shaped by a combination of factors at early events of brain development, including hormonal, genetic, and maternal factors [30]. Animal studies have supported the role of hormones and the genetic makeup of a person in shaping sexual orientation [30,31].Homosexuality has been a subject of societal controversy [32]. It has evoked different attitudes depending on the type of society cultural, moral, and political circumstances from the beginning of the civilization [33]. Even in contemporary society, homosexual behaviors, desires, and identities are often stigmatized and perceived as negative, immature, or inferior compared to heterosexuality, which promotes social exclusion [34]. Social exclusion is a complex set of interconnected processes that emerge from economic, political, and societal factors [34,35]. Over time, these processes create a sense of distance and marginalization, placing individuals, groups, and communities in a position of inferiority compared to a society's dominant values and norms. Homophobia is considered pervasive globally, posing significant threats to the rights of homosexual individuals through discrimination, harassment, and even criminalization of their sexual orientation [36]. This intolerance often extends to interference in their personal lives, perpetuating social exclusion and increasing the risk of discrimination and hate crimes [37]. Insufficient legal safeguards and support from state institutions further compound the issue, impeding the prevention of discrimination and violence based on sexual orientation.Social and familial expectations often clash with personal preferences among MSM individuals. This conflict can lead to psychological distress, including symptoms of depression and anxiety, and indulge in high-risk sexual behaviors [38]. Due to fear of social exclusion and stigma related to their sexual orientation, MSM individuals exhibit poor health-seeking behaviors, which increases their risk of acquiring sexually transmitted infections (STIs) [39]. The expressions of social exclusion of MSMs were reflected through their ‘conditioned’ support in the family at the cost of giving up their identity or facing expulsion from family ties and property, exclusion from community participation, denial of decent employment opportunities, lack of legal protection and social security system. They are also at an elevated risk of HIV transmission, stemming from the reuse of needles during substance abuse to alleviate mental distress and engaging in unprotected sexual encounters under the influence of substance use within both heterosexual and homosexual relationships [40]. The criminalization of homosexuality, including severe penalties like imprisonment and death, has contributed to the higher rate of high-risk activities and increased prevalence of HIV among MSM individuals [41]. The fear of disclosure and social stigma associated with their sexual behaviors further prevent them from accessing crucial HIV-related testing, treatment, care, and support services, leaving them hidden and marginalized.Mental health issues are frequently observed among MSM populations at risk for HIV infection [42]. The mental health challenges not only hinder the effectiveness of HIV prevention efforts but also pose challenges to existing conceptual models [43]. Traditional individual-based risk reduction programs, public health campaigns, and community-based interventions may not adequately serve the MSM, who also manage comorbid mental health issues [44]. To escalate the efficacy of the HIV prevention programs, it is crucial to integrate individual-based approaches to address mental health issues that can hinder prevention efforts [45]. Addressing the mental health challenges of at-risk MSM individuals can serve as a foundation for multiple prevention initiatives and empower those most vulnerable to high-risk sexual behaviors and transmitting infectious diseases.According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), an estimated 2.9% of adult men identified as gay or bisexual in the United States in 2019 [46]. The MSM community faces social stigma related to both mpox and HIV infections [[47], [48], [49], [50], [51]]. This stigma can create barriers to accessing healthcare services, proper diagnosis, and availing treatment. Therefore, it is crucial to address and combat this stigma to ensure the well-being of individuals within the MSM community [52]. The risk factors associated with MPV and HIV mono-infection, as well as co-infection among MSM, include engaging in unprotected sexual activities, having multiple sexual partners, and genital or oral mucosal lesions [53]. These factors increase the risk of transmission of both viruses (HIV and MPV) and underscore the importance of comprehensive sexual health education, use of barrier protection during sexual encounters, regular testing for HIV and other STIs, access to pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention, combinational antiretroviral therapy for PLWH, and access to mpox vaccines. Establishing a nurturing and non-judgmental atmosphere that fosters open dialogue, promotes awareness, and embraces acceptance is crucial for the MSM community to tackle their high-risk behaviors and prevent disease outbreaks within the community [54]. The interconnection between the social exclusion experienced by the MSM community that led to their high-risk sexual encounters, the high prevalence of HIV transmission among the MSM community, and their vulnerability in the 2022 Mpox outbreak is depicted in [Fig. 1].Fig. 1The interlinked between the men who have sex with men (MSM) and the 2022 Mpox outbreak. The sexual orientation of MSM makes them vulnerable to exclusion from contemporary society, which in turn indulges them in frequent participation in saunas, and private or public sex clubs, where intimate and frequently anonymous sexual contact occurs. Along with that in the MSM community, the proportion of people living with HIV is much higher compared to the general population. Therefore, during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, initial introduction of the MPV infection among MSM make the entire community at higher risk of contracting the disease.Fig. 13The consequences of neglecting mpox endemic in sub-Saharan AfricaFollowing the mass vaccination program against the variola virus, during the 33rd World Health Assembly in 1980, smallpox was declared eradicated globally [55]. This was followed by WHO's recommendation to end the global vaccination program against the variola virus. As a result, a significant portion of the world's population lacks immune protection against variola virus [56] and closely related poxviruses, including MPV. Without cross-species protection, the lesser-known mpox became endemic in many West and Central African countries, including Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and South Sudan, among others, with sporadic reports outside of the endemic regions [56,57]. The lack of awareness about mpox due to the geographic confinement of the disease within endemic African countries has resulted in a knowledge gap regarding the transmission mechanism of MPV [58]. Most mpox cases were known to be self-limiting without reports of community transmissions [59]. In the early 1980s, serological investigations were conducted for MPV antibodies on over 10,000 unvaccinated children in Central and West Africa. The surveys revealed that fewer than 1% of the children were positive for the MPV antibody, signifying the rarity of the disease [60]. During subsequent decades, reported mpox cases kept on increasing [61]. Notably, in 1986, for the first time in history, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a chain of human-to-human transmission of MPV was reported [62]. Prior to the 2022 outbreak, epidemiological data indicated a higher risk of mpox among unvaccinated individuals, with the cases predominantly among kids and young adults [63]. The severity of mpox cases during the 2022 outbreak has mostly been mild, and the genomic surveillance data indicates the presence of West African clad B1 lineage with mutations in virulence proteins.Additionally, APOBEC3-mediated GA > AA and TC > TT mutations reported in the genomes of MPV isolates during the 2022 outbreak are hypothesized to be responsible for the attenuated pathogenicity of the virus [[64], [65], [66]]. Future outbreaks might follow different patterns, particularly considering the potential introduction of the more pathogenic Clade I MPV due to ever-increasing intercontinental travel and trade [61]. With the passage of time and lack of attention by global public health watchdogs, mpox, once an endemic in a couple of West and Central African countries, has evolved into a worldwide health emergency [67]. During the 2022 outbreak of mpox, cases of human-to-animal transmission of the MPV were reported [45]; this reverse zoonotic transmission has the potential to expand the natural reservoirs of the virus in the future [68,69]. Unlike the variola virus, it is more challenging to eradicate MPV due to natural zoonotic reservoirs [67]. While cooperation is appreciated, the collaborative clinical research between resource-limited African countries and developed nations was key to the success during the Ebola and Zika epidemics [70,71]. On the contrary, setting up a surveillance program (the “parachute research”) for mpox in DRC in the early 2000s [72], which enabled foreign scientists to gather data and specimens for analysis in their own countries, failed to address the required capacity building for an emergency response to future outbreaks [71,73]. Therefore, efforts should be prioritized to build public health infrastructure in resource-limited African countries and train their front-line responders to address emerging and reemerging viral outbreaks [74].4Monkeypox virus (MPV) in human samples and implications for transmission among MSMThe 2022 outbreak of mpox became notable in May 2022, and showed a significant increase in human-to-human transmission, specifically among MSMs [75]. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) is the recommended method of detecting MPV infection [76]. Before the 2022 outbreak, cases reported in Europe and the USA lacked information on the distribution of the MPV in the various organs and tissues in humans as there was no report of fatalities [77,78]. However, during the 2022 outbreak, several studies have detected MPV DNA in anal and oral swabs, semen, and to a lesser extent, urine samples [79]. The concentration of viral DNA has been found to correlate with the amount of replication-competent virus, indicating viral burden, as determined by qPCR being a predictor of infectivity. In a study conducted in France on fifty male (n = 50) patients with confirmed MPV infection, samples were tested from skin, throat, anus, blood, urine, and semen. It was found that a significant proportion of oral and anal swabs were positive for MPV (71–77%), lower proportions of positivity in blood and urine samples (22–31%), and just over half of the semen samples were positive for MPV [79]. The detection of high concentrations of the MPV in the anal region, mouth, and semen aligns with the sexual practices potentially associated with the MPV spread among MSM and skin contact related to sexual or nonsexual proximity.Following the 2022 outbreak, WHO prioritized research on transmission dynamics, containment strategies, and response measures against mpox [80]. Mathematical modeling studies on MPV transmission were limited and have not adequately considered vaccine efficacy, coverage, and population heterogeneity [81]. A study using mathematical modeling predicted the reproduction number of mpox among MSM at 3.11 globally, 3.57 in Germany, and 3.14 in the UK, respectively [81], which is much higher than the predicted R0 (less than one) in endemic countries in Africa [17,[82], [83], [84]]. Without public health interventions, the model predicts an exponential increase in the number of new infections in major outbreak pockets in the UK and USA, which is expected to regress with increased public interaction and implementation of a vaccination strategy, especially among high-risk populations. The study also reports that the majority of the current mpox cases among MSM are concentrated in a few pockets of North America and Europe that have lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) friendly federal laws and routinely organize pride events, gay sauna, and other gatherings, that have a higher risk of close contacts through anal or genital sexual activity compared to general populations. Another systemic review reports that compartmental, branching process, Monte Carlo (stochastic), agent-based, and network-based modeling techniques were used to study the human-to-human and between-human and animal transmission dynamics of mpox [83]. In the majority of the compartmental models, the following compartments were included: susceptibility (S), exposed (E), infected (I), vaccinated (V), recovered (R), quarantined (Q), and investigate the endemic equilibrium points using a SIR framework [[85], [86], [87]].The prediction of this model suggests that the conditions for persistence and eradication differ from the deterministic models, which indicates that reproduction number dictates the disease trajectory. In the ‘branching process model’ offspring distributions are utilized to generate a model for the propagation of mpox disease [88,89]. In another study, the Monte Carlo stochastic model was used to simulate the MPV transmission from infected patients to their exposed close contacts by tracking the generation order for successive secondary cases. The study demonstrated that without smallpox vaccination, the frequency of new cases increased but did not reach pandemic levels [84]. These studies highlight the utility of diverse mathematical modeling approaches historically used to study MPV transmission. However, these models' applicability to the 2022 outbreak is limited due to underlying assumptions and data constraints. To address this, new empirical epidemiological studies are needed, accounting for disease complexities and global ramifications.The 2022 mpox outbreak emphasizes the importance of research focusing on neglected zoonoses and allocating resources to manage and contain emerging diseases worldwide. A recent study on the 2022 outbreak of mpox used a transmission model fitted to actual sexual partnership data using Weibull distributions [90], demonstrating that a heavy-tailed sexual partnership distribution, where a few individuals have significantly more partners, can account for the disproportional higher rate of spread of mpox among MSM. This pattern was not evident in previous outbreaks. These findings indicate that the basic reproduction number (R0) for mpox within the MSM sexual network might be significantly higher than 1, presenting difficulties in containing outbreaks within these communities compared to the general population. Therefore, targeted support and tailored messaging are essential to enhance prevention and early detection efforts among MSM with multiple partners [89].5Risk group for the 2022 mpox outbreakAfter the 2022 outbreak, MPV infection in the United States declined significantly. However, the risk of resurgence remains high in most jurisdictions if vaccination efforts are not sustained, as modeling analyses indicate that without continued vaccination of high-risk individuals, the likelihood and size of future mpox outbreaks are expected to increase over time [[91], [92], [93]]. The overall risk of mpox is determined by combining the infection probability with the disease impact on the affected population [94]. During the 2022 outbreak, most diagnosed human mpox cases were observed among MSM within the age group of 21–55 years [95], and the presenting genital lesions indicate a potential transmission during sexual intercourse [96]. While transmission through intact skin contact is less likely, it cannot be completely ruled out. Most cases within interconnected sexual networks among the MSM community might be considered a plausible source for the outbreak's initiation.5.1MSM-associated riskA significant proportion of the MSM population remains at risk of MPV infection. Specific sexual behaviors, such as engaging in multiple casual sexual partners within interconnected sexual networks, attending sexual events during the spring and summer months, and participating in chemsex parties, can further facilitate disease transmission [97]. Mpox transmission thrives in enclosed settings such as back rooms, saunas, and private or public sex clubs, where intimate and frequently anonymous sexual contacts occur. These settings create favorable conditions for the rapid spread of MPV infection [98]. During the 2022 outbreak, most MSM mpox patients did not have a recent travel history to the endemic regions in Central and Western African countries [99], affirming that human-to-human close contact is likely the primary transmission route [96]. While a majority of reported mpox cases among MSMs have been described as mild, the high likelihood of infection results in a moderate overall threat. It is important to emphasize that this moderate risk may be higher for vulnerable groups such as the elderly, PLWH, or those with compromised immune systems [100]. [Fig. 2] describes the percentage of MSM and people living with HIV who reported positive for MPV during the 2022 mpox outbreak.Fig. 2MSM community at higher risk of 2022 Mpox outbreak. (A)The pie chart describes the percentage of MSM reported positive for MPV. Out of the total cases of MPV reported during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, 32.00% were MSM, 6.47% were not MSM, and 61.53% did not disclose their status. (B) The pie chart describes the percentage of people living with HIV (PLWH) who reported positive for MPV. Out of the total cases of MPV reported during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, 20.73% were HIV positive, 18.60% were negative for HIV, and 60.66% did not disclose their status. (Source: https://worldhealthorg.shinyapps.io/mpx_global/accessed on 11-05-2023).Fig. 25.2Risk for the general populationThe risk of mpox transmission among the general population has been estimated to be low. Large gatherings increase the risk of MPV infection due to the close and frequent interactions among attendees. The data on the spread and pattern of MPV infection among the general population is limited, which warrants continuous monitoring of new cases globally [101].5.3Risk for health care workers (HCWs) and laboratory personnelOccupational exposure to the MPV is a significant concern as it can persist on surfaces for extended periods [102]. HCWs equipped with proper personal protective equipment (PPE) face a low risk of MPV transmission due to the disease's estimated low impact [103]. Medium risk arises during activities involving contact with a mpox patient's skin lesions or bodily fluids without appropriate PPE [104]. Conversely, unprotected HCWs face high risk if exposed to mpox patients' bodily fluids, inhalation of droplets, or experiencing penetrating sharps injuries. To mitigate mpox risk among HCWs, it is crucial to conduct thorough risk assessments and provide counseling on self-monitoring, timely reporting, and isolation protocols without neglecting the ongoing outbreak response.Risk among laboratory individuals: The MPV has been classified as an ACDP Category 3 pathogen by the Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (ACDP) [105]. If the recommended biosafety procedure are followed, the laboratory personnel have a low chance of occupational vulnerability. To ensure safety, each laboratory should conduct site- and activity-specific risk assessments for MPV infections, ensure enhanced safety precautions, and follow the WHO/US-CDC guidelines for specimen collection, handling, shipment, and testing [[106], [107], [108]]. This will require the collaboration of laboratory managers, testing personnel, and occupational health officers at each facility.5.4Risk of human-to-animal spillover eventsThe probability of cross-species spillover of the MPV is influenced by various barriers and bottlenecks, including differences in cellular receptors, immune responses, and other host restriction factors. The risk of MPV transmission from humans to pets is low as the reported cases of reverse zoonosis are limited. While in the USA, the Animal Health Authorities have assessed the risk of human-to-animal spillover of mpox to be very low [109], evidence of human-to-animal transmission of MPV has been reported in France and Brazil during the 2022 outbreak [69,110]. Therefore, monitoring and managing the potential risks associated with human-animal transmission is essential to prevent further transmission and possible disease establishment in wildlife.6Pathogenesis of mpox among MSMsThe common and nonspecific symptoms of mpox include fever, swollen lymph nodes, and muscle pain, which start appearing about one to two weeks after getting infected and can be mistaken for seasonal flu or a cold [111]. The immune system is triggered during this stage, leading to the enlargement of inguinal, maxillary, and cervical lymph nodes and the onset of fever [1]. Rashes typically appear in one to three days after the fever and lymph node swelling and follow a centrifugal distribution across the body, suggesting that the rashes appear more prominently on the extremities and face than on the abdomen and trunk [112]. The rash is a crucial feature of mpox and goes through different stages, starting with minor bumps and progressing to vesicles and pustules before finally crusting over [77].The rashes may sometimes damage the skin, making patients susceptible to secondary opportunistic infections. In rare cases, MPV can cause lung tissue damage and bronchopneumonia, especially in individuals co-infected with the influenza virus [113]. Severe inflammation and bronchopneumonia can make it difficult for patients to breathe and eat. In severe cases, mpox can lead to complications like corneal infection, resulting in scarring and permanent vision loss [114]. During the second week of illness, some patients develop gastrointestinal symptoms like vomiting and diarrhea that can lead to significant dehydration [77]. The accumulation of mutations within the MPV replication complex is predicted to play an important role in the 2022 mpox outbreak [115]. A recent report from the USA showed that during the 2022 outbreak of mpox, patients living with HIV were more prone to experience symptoms like rectal pain and bleeding, tenesmus, pus and blood in stool, and proctitis [15]. This indicates the requirements of close monitoring of PLWH for MPV infection and the development of severe diseases. In addition, the disease pathogenesis of the MPV/HIV co-infected persons needs special attention because the contraction of the body fluids from mpox lesions among MSM makes them more vulnerable to HIV infection. The pathogenesis of MPV/HIV co-infection among MSM is complex and needs to be studied in greater detail using animal models [116]. Additionally, MPV infection can compromise the immune system, making MSM individuals more susceptible to HIV acquisition and worsening the progression of the HIV disease. Furthermore, the presence of HIV can potentially increase the severity of mpox due to the presence of a compromised immune system.7Vaccine recommendation for mpox and its efficacy among MSMJYNNEOS (developed by Bavarian Nordic) is a Modified Vaccinia Ankara-Bavarian Nordic (MVA-BN) based vaccine initially developed as a 3rd generation smallpox vaccine [117] is approved by the FDA against MPV in people aged 18 years and above [91]. To ensure optimal protection against mpox, individuals must receive two doses of the vaccine within four weeks intervel. In animal studies, JYNNEOS demonstrated robust protection against MPV, with most of the animals receiving the vaccines developing sterilizing immunity, effectively preventing the disease without showing any symptoms [118]. As of August 2, 2023, the current guidelines from the CDC recommend vaccination against mpox for individuals who meet the following criteria: (1) if someone has known or suspected exposure to a person with mpox, (2) If someone has had a sex partner diagnosed with mpox within the past two weeks, (3) For gay, bisexual, or men who have sex with men (MSM), as well as transgender, nonbinary, or gender-diverse individuals who, in the past 6 months, have been diagnosed with sexually transmitted diseases (e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis), or have had more than one sexual partner. (4) If someone has engaged in any of the following within the past 6 months: had sex at a commercial sex venue, such as a sex club or bathhouse, or engaged in sexual activities related to a large commercial event or in an area (city or county) where monkeypox virus (MPV) transmission is occurring, or engaged in sex in exchange for money or other items, or has a sexual partner who belongs to any of the high-risk groups mentioned above, or has HIV or other causes of immune suppression and has had recent or anticipated future risk of monkeypox exposure from any of the scenarios mentioned above, or works in settings where there is a chance of monkeypox exposure, and persons who work with orthopoxviruses in a laboratory [119].A recent study from Israel included 2054 males who met the eligibility criteria for vaccination. Of these, 1037 individuals (50%) received a single dose of the JYNNEOS (MVA-BN) vaccine during the study recruitment period and completed at least 90-day follow-up, the other 50% served as placebo control. Over the study duration, five infections occurred in vaccinated individuals, whereas 16 infections were confirmed in the unvaccinated group. Utilizing a Cox proportional hazards regression model with time-dependent covariates and accounting for sociodemographic and clinical risk factors, the study reports that the estimated vaccine effectiveness was 86% (95% confidence interval, 59–95%). These findings indicate that a single dose of MVA-BN in a high-risk cohort is significantly associated with a reduced risk of MPV infection [91]. Another case-control study using a nationwide Epic electronic health record (EHR) database (Cosmos) in the USA estimated the efficacy of JYNNEOS during the period from August 15 to November 19, 2022 [120]. Case patients were identified based on having either a diagnosis code for MPV or a positive laboratory result for orthopoxvirus or MPV.On the other hand, control patients were selected if they had a new diagnosis of HIV infection or a prescription for preexposure prophylaxis against HIV. Out of 2193 case-patients, 25 individuals, and 8319 control patients, 335 received two vaccine doses. The estimated adjusted vaccine effectiveness for complete vaccination in these groups was 66.0%. Additionally, 146 case patients and 1000 control patients received only one dose of the vaccine, with the estimated adjusted vaccine effectiveness calculated at 35.8%. In another case-control study among MSM and transgender adults aged 18–49 years between August 19, 2022–March 31, 2023, the vaccine efficacy (VE) was estimated among a total of 309 case-patients (diagnosis of confirmed or probable MPV or Orthopoxvirus infection, made on or after August 19, 2022) with a matched 608 control patients (patients attended a clinic for sexually transmitted infections (STI), HIV care, or HIV preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) on or after August 19, 2022) [121]. The adjusted VE was 75.2% for partial vaccination (1 dose) and 85.9% for complete vaccination (2 doses). Among the full vaccination group, the adjusted VE was 70.2% among immunocompromised participants and 87.8% among immunocompetent participants, respectively. Overall, these studies indicate that although the smallpox vaccine comes out to help trim the rapid spread of the current outbreak of Mpox among MSM, this vaccine cannot provide sterilizing protection against the MPV and has blunted efficacy for immune-compromised patients [122]. Additionally, the current vaccines are not available in mpox-endemic countries in Africa, which keeps the possibility of spreading the infection in non-endemic locations.Meanwhile, caution should be exercised while administering the smallpox vaccines to immunocompromised persons as the live attenuated vaccine may cause severe and potentially life-threatening complications in immunocompromised individuals like PLWH, people undergoing chemotherapy for cancer treatment, and organ transplant patients [123]. Furthermore, considering the likely mucosal transmission of the MPV, mucosal immunity could play a crucial role in establishing long-lasting immune responses. It is unclear whether the available vaccines can effectively generate robust mucosal immunity. The mucosal dendritic cells (DCs) and IgA secretion at the mucosal interface need further investigation to better understand their role in protecting mucosal transmissions. Case reports of mpox in individuals with a history of smallpox vaccination suggest that smallpox vaccines may not provide lifelong immunity against MPV [124]. As a result, booster doses might be necessary, especially for individuals with ongoing exposure risk factors. The optimal timing for booster vaccinations must be determined using pre-clinical animal models.Additionally, a uniform vaccination approach is required to address the global problem effectively, and it is logical to provide vaccinations on a priority bases to the high-risk groups like MSMs with interconnected social and sexual networks in newly impacted countries. However, the vaccination strategies in endemic regions, like parts of the Africa, may need to focus on populations at the most significant risk of animal exposure. Alongside vaccination, there is an urgent requirement for improved treatments for those affected by the disease. These initiatives should be prioritized alongside traditional infection control and prevention methods to foster trust within the affected communities.8Treatment optionsIn the 2022 outbreak of mpox, the MSM community got a disproportionally higher infection rate than the general population. It is also well known that the prevalence of HIV is higher among MSMs due to several comorbid conditions. Whether HIV is an independent risk factor for acquiring MPV infection remains unknown. However, PLWH with unsuppressed viremia remains at higher risk of developing severe mpox disease if they are infected with MPV [[125], [126], [127]]. In the general population, mpox is self-limiting and only requires symptomatic care to prevent dehydration, and in rare cases antibiotics to prevent/treat secondary bacterial infections [128]. There are no approved antivirals to treat mpox. USA-FDA recommends use of tecovirimat in immunocompromised persons along with brincidofovir, and vaccinia immune globulin intravenous (VIGIV) as required [129]. Tecovirimat, referred to as TPOXX or ST-246, has received FDA approval to treat smallpox in both adults and children [130]. Tecovirimat binds with orthopoxviruses VP37 (a phospholipase protein), and blocks its interaction with cellular Rab9 GTPase and TIP47, essential for creating enveloped virions. Thereby halting the cell-to-cell and long-distance spread of the virus.A retrospective study reviews the efficacy of tecovirimat for severe mpox among HIV-positive and negative people under the CDC EA-IND protocol. Out of 154 people who received the treatment, 82 were HIV-negative, and 72 were positive for HIV. The overall treatment outcome was similar between the groups [125]. It must be noted that tecovirimat may lower the plasma concentration of rilpivirine, an essential component of CAB/RPV long acting treatment as part of the combinational antiretroviral therapy (cART) for PLWH [131]. Brincidofovir (Lipid-conjugated analog of cidofovir) or cidofovir (inhibits OPXV DNA polymerase) should be added to tecovirimat in critically ill patients or to patients in whom tecovirimat is contraindicated. While prescribing Brincidofovir among PLWH, it should be considered that HIV Protease inhibitors and cobicistat can boost its plasma concentration [131]. VIGIV (vaccinia immune globulin intravenous) is recommended for immunocompromised patients unable to mount desirable immune responses due to HIV infection or solid organ transplant. For patients receiving VIGIV infusion, vaccination with live viruses (varicella, measles, mumps, and rubella) should be deferred for three months [132]. In a comprehensive review, we discussed the use of all EUA-granted drugs against mpox, their limitations in inhibiting viral replication in strains having the signature mutations reported in the 2022 MPV, and the importance of the development of MPV-specific therapeutics for the current and future mpox outbreaks [133].9ConclusionThis review sheds light on the complex web of challenges of mpox 2022 outbreak within the context of the MSM community. It underscores the pressing need to address the medical aspects of mpox and the socio-cultural stigma that often surround it. By considering the multifaceted nature of the risk factors and pathogenesis, we have discussed the need to develop more inclusive and effective preventive strategies and personalized treatment interventions for the MSM community. As we navigate the intersection of healthcare and social dynamics among the sexual minorities like MSM, by fostering inclusivity, education, and collaboration of them with general population, we can aspire to a future where stigma is replaced by empathy, risk factors are mitigated through knowledge, and treatment approaches are grounded in a deep understanding of the challenges faced by the MSM community in the context of mpox and any future outbreaks of sexually transmitted diseases.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


Title: Rocio Virus: An Updated View on an Elusive Flavivirus

1. IntroductionRocio virus (ROCV) is an arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) in the genus Flavivirus (family Flaviviridae). As with other members of the genus Flavivirus, ROCV has a linear, positive-sense single-stranded RNA genome, approximately 11 kilobases in length encapsulated in virions of 43 nm in diameter [1]. It is the etiological agent of a potentially fatal neurological infection affecting humans in Brazil. The virus was first identified in the 1970s [2], during a series of outbreaks in coastal communities in the State of Sao Paulo resulting in the largest meningoencephalitis epidemic, causing fear and panic among the population [2,3]. Until then only two neurotropic flaviviruses, Saint Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV) and Ilheus virus (ILHV), were known to circulate in South America, causing sporadic human cases [4,5]. The first cases of meningoencephalitis were reported in April 1975, in several areas located on the coast of Sao Paulo State, and over the following months more than 1000 cases of encephalitis were reported, with a fatality rate of 13% as well as development of permanent severe neurological sequelae in 20% of the survivors [3,6]. However, a retrospective serosurvey suggested that the onset of the epidemic probably occurred earlier, between 1973–1974 [7]. The first virus isolate (strain SPH 34675) was isolated from suspensions of cerebellum and spinal cord from a fatal case of a male patient in December 1975, months after the onset of the outbreak, and the virus was named after the neighborhood of Rocio, located in the city of Iguape [2]. Nine ROCV strains were also recovered from CNS tissues of 17 other patients who died with encephalitis [2], sentinel mice [2], an Andean sparrow (Zonotrichia capensis) [2] a pool of Psorofora ferox [8], and partial virus fragments were detected bio-banked human sera collected during an outbreak of dengue fever in Goiânia in 2011 [9]. Subsequent serosurveys detected the presence of ROCV-specific antibodies in migratory birds (e.g., double-collared seedeater (Sporophila caerulescens) and creamy-bellied thrush (Turdus amaurochalinus)) [10,11], horses [12], water buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis) [13] and humans [14,15], suggesting undetected ROCV circulation in large geographic areas outside the State of Sao Paulo [9]. Interestingly, attempts at the time to better understand the epidemiology of encephalitis in patients with a history of febrile illness [7] were overshadowed by a widespread epidemic of meningococcal meningitis affecting the state of Sao Paulo, resulting in their misdiagnosis (reviewed in [16]). These observations highlight the emergence potential of ROCV to cause outbreaks and epidemics but also diagnostic challenges in accurately accessing the true burden of ROCV disease in the human population. In this review, we summarize our current understanding of ROCV’s host range, transmission cycles, epidemiology, pathogenesis and clinical outcomes of infection.2. Genome Organization and ReplicationTo date Tanaka et al. [1] remains the only study to have examined the replication of ROCV by electron microscopy, demonstrating that ROCV particles share the morphological characteristics common to members of the genus Flavivirus; spherical particles of 43 nm in diameter having an electron dense core surrounded by a host-derived lipid bilayer membrane [1]. The positive polarity single stranded flavivirus RNA genome is approximately 10.7 kb in length, encodes a single open reading frame (ORF), flanked by a type 1 capped 5′-terminal non-coding region (NCR), and a 3′-terminal NCR and lacking a poly-adenylation site [17,18]. The single ORF encodes three structural and seven nonstructural (NS) proteins, flanked by short non-coding regions: three structural proteins—capsid pro-tein (C), pre-membrane/membrane protein (prM/M) (formed by cleavage from its precursor prM) and envelope glycoprotein (E)—and seven non-structural proteins—NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B and NS5 (Figure 1, insert).Details of the ROCV replication cycle are limited [1], but the replication cycle of members of the genus Flavivirus begins with the binding to host cell receptors and entering the cell through clathrin-mediated endocytosis. Following trafficking through endosomal compartments, envelope protein-mediated fusion of viral and cellular membranes, and dis-assembly of the virus particles, single-stranded viral RNA is released into the cytoplasm where translation occurs. Translation of the viral RNA into a polyprotein occurs at the ribosomes, which is further processed by host and viral proteases to non-structural (NS) and structural proteins, forming the replication complex within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to replicate the viral RNA. Viral particle assembly occurs on the membrane of the ER and particles bud into the ER as immature virus particles [19]. During egress of the progeny virus particle through the secretory pathway, pre-membrane (prM) protein is proteolytically cleaved by a host encoded furin protease [20] and mature virus particles are released into the extracellular space (reviewed in [21]) (Figure 1).3. Transmission Cycles and Host RangeTo date the transmission cycle of ROCV is not well understood. Based on surveillance and experimental studies it is likely that ROCV is maintained in nature in a mosquito–bird–mosquito transmission cycle, where humans are incidental dead-end hosts [8,16] (Figure 2). Comprehensive entomological surveillance during the outbreak of 1975–1976, implicated Ps. ferox as a transmission vector with the isolation of ROCV [8]. Interestingly in the study of Lopes et al [8], two of the Ps. ferox mosquitoes were engorged with canine blood. Ps. ferox is a floodwater mosquito species native to most of North and South America, typically found in woodland environments with pools that intermittently fill with rain or flood water [22,23]. It is a strong flyer with a long dispersal range, as far as 11 km from the point of release [24]. It is a competent virus of transmission for several arboviruses, including St. Louis encephalitis [25], Una [26], Ilheus [26] and Venezuelan equine encephalitis [27] and exhibits opportunistic feeding behavior, although mammalian blood sources are preferable to avian [28,29]. Coupled with the mosquito’s aggressive feeding behavior, this highlights its potential threat for public health.The studies of Forattini et al [30,31,32] on culicine mosquitos in the Ribeira valley region in the state of Sao Paulo were seminal in shedding light on ROCV transmission cycles, by mapping the distribution and biting activity of Psorophora, Aedes and Culex (Melanoconion) species at an ecologic gradient, spanning sylvatic, transition and peri-domestic ecotypes (Figure 3). At the same time Mitchell et al were able to demonstrate the transmission potential of Ps. ferox and Ae. scapularis with experimental infection on viremic chickens [33,34]. Like Ps. ferox, Aedes scapularis mosquitoes have an exceptionally broad distribution, occurring from the Rio Grande Valley and the Florida Keys of the southern Unites States down to central Argentina, and throughout the Caribbean, except Puerto Rico [35,36]. It is an important mosquito vector competent for transmitting a diverse number of arboviruses, including yellow fever [37,38], Ilhéus [34,39] and Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus [5,40,41]. It is a generalist in its use of habitats (both sylvatic and peri-domestic), whose larval habitats are commonly found in temporary pools filled by rain or floodwater. Adults exhibit an opportunistic feeding behavior, preferring to feed in endothermic hosts [42,43,44,45], as well as synanthropic behavior, such as entering human dwellings and blood-feeding on humans indoors [46]. Collectively these studies establish the critical role played by Aedes scapularis as possible bridge vector between sylvatic and peri-domestic environments.The virus was isolated from rufous-collared sparrows (Zonotrichia capensis) [2] in Sete Barras, a region that at the time was covered by primary forest. Rufous-collared sparrows have the largest distribution of any Neotropical passerines, ranging across southern Mexico, Central America, several Caribbean Islands and nearly the entire South America [47,48] and their migratory habits exhibit significant variations ranging, from sedentary to altitudinal to long distance latitudinal migrations [49]. An additional survey of wild birds (58 species belonging in 51 genera) at the time of the 1975 epidemic in the coastal counties of Peruibe and Itanhaem in 1975 showed nearly 25% seropositivity to flaviviruses, whereas seropositivity in wild (rodents, bats, marsupials, and pigeons) and domestic (chickens and ducks) animals ranged from 7.3–60% [3] (Figure 3). A subsequent longitudinal survey of wild birds from 1978 to 1990 in the counties of Salesopolis, Itapetininga and Ribeira Valley demonstrated monotypic seropositivity in 9/26,765 sampled birds, representing eight species of which two considered migratory (Sporophila caerulescens and Turdus amaurochalinus) [11] (Figure 3). These observations suggest that ROCV circulates among birds in the forest, brush and peri-domestic habitats in the state of Sao Paulo and that migratory birds may disperse the virus throughout the state or to other Brazilian states or countries along migratory routes. Experimental studies on house sparrows (Passer domesticus), a common bird throughout the Americas, demonstrated their susceptibility to ROCV infection, with viremia peaking at 4.3 log10/mL and duration of 2–3 days, suggesting its low potential for ROCV transmission [50]. One significant observation of this study was the heterotypic protection afforded by prior infection with SLEV, an enzootic virus in Brazil, against challenge with ROCV, which could play a role in determining ROCV distribution and transmission given the well-documented cross-protection between flaviviruses of the same antigenic complex [51,52].More recent serological studies have also demonstrated evidence of ROCV infection in equines [12] and water buffaloes [13] in rural regions across Brazil. Surprisingly, monotypic exposure to ROCV was significantly high at 6.1% (46/753), whereas in water buffaloes this was 0.3% (2/654) of animals sampled (Figure 3). These animals are exposed to thousands of mosquito bites in places that may serve as transmission foci for ROCV. The high levels of ROCV seropositivity in horses, large domesticated animals living in close proximity to humans, combined with the lack of epizootic reports by veterinarians, strongly suggests the presence of asymptomatic or subclinical infections and should serve as a warning to the public health authorities regarding increased surveillance. It is also raising questions about their possible role as hosts in ROCV transmission. Naturally, the role of any vertebrate host in viral transmission must be assessed not only by their response to infection, but also by the relative efficiency of the vector and their respective densities. Therefore, a biologically poor vertebrate host(s) (e.g., house sparrows) could become epidemiologically important in areas with high population densities and presence of efficient vectors with low thresholds of infection (e.g., Ps. ferox or Ae. scapularis). Collectively, the transmission cycles of ROCV are not well understood and humans, horses and other vertebrates may serve as incidental dead-end hosts.4. Human EpidemiologyThe human epidemiology remains largely unknown, and the reasons of the virus periodic emergence remain a mystery. To date all the detected cases of ROCV in humans have been reported in three states (Table 1), although serologic evidence suggests that ROCV geographic range may extend to the state of Amazonas (see section above). Between March and June 1975 8 cities in the Santista Lowlands (Baixada Santista) and 23 cities in the Ribeira Valley, both in the state of Sao Paulo, reported 465 cases of febrile illness associated with encephalitis, with 61 deaths [3]. At the time of the outbreak, these regions were considered poor, with low per capita income, derived from the cultivation of bananas and tea. The region remains to date highly forested with currently approximately 14.4% of land cover is used for agricultural cultivation and cattle pasture (http://arquivo.ambiente.sp.gov.br/cpla/2018/05/proposta_zee_-valedoribeira_2014.pdf, accessed on 5 March 2021) and the rest is designated as a protected ecologic area (Atlantic rainforest). Most of the population (65.8%) lived in rural areas and 65.2% of the economically active population worked in rural activities (e.g., cultivation and ranching). The study showed an increased prevalence to flavivirus-specific antibodies [53,54] from previous years in the population, with males working in close contact with forested areas having a higher attack rate than females, suggesting that exposure to ROCV was more likely to occur away from home [3]. Critically, the study also demonstrated no evidence of person-to-person transmission in ROCV spread, reinforcing the notion of spread by hematophagous insects and that humans serve as incidental dead-end hosts. Subsequent serology surveys in the Ribeira Valley consistently demonstrated high prevalence of infection to arboviruses, with prevalence progressively increasing with age. Interestingly, ROCV prevalence was high in fishermen with two of showing evidence of recent infection, as well as in children living in coastal cities, suggesting urban transmission of ROCV [55,56,57].Subsequent to the 1975–1977 outbreak, there was a precipitous decrease in the number of cases [58], with two IgM positive cases in school children reported in 1987 [15] and 6 IgG positive cases in residents at the Juréia-Itatins Ecological Station in 1990 [59] (Table 1). Interestingly, in a 1984 arbovirus serosurvey of 288 rural inhabitants in the state of Bahia, 4.3% were positive to arbovirus exposure, with a 12 year-old schoolgirl positive to ROCV with no previous travel history outside the state [60]. In 1995, three ROCV positive IgM cases were identified in Salvador, state of Bahia, during a dengue epidemic, which were initially misidentified as dengue infections, while a contemporaneous serologic survey of 689 serum samples collected in the cities of Ipupiara and Prado identified five additional patients positive for exposure to ROCV [14]. These were the first detections of the virus in the northeastern region of the country (Table 1), documenting the active circulation of ROCV outside the state of Sao Paulo. The virus remained undetected for nearly 17 years, until a recent retrospective serologic survey of 647 serum samples collected during a DENV epidemic in the state of Goias retrieved partial ROCV genetic sequences from two samples [9]. The patient samples had originally been misclassified as DENV, but further examination by molecular methods clearly identified them as ROCV. Review of the clinical records indicated non-specific febrile illness, presented with fever, myalgia, and arthralgia, and both reported no recent travel history [9].Collectively, the data suggest an extended range of ROCV transmission in Brazil and reinforce the urgent need for improved diagnostic capabilities as well as sustainable arbovirus surveillance networks for the early and accurate detection of arboviral outbreaks.5. Clinical Presentation and Pathogenesis of ROCV InfectionClinical manifestations of infection include fever, malaise, severe headache, lower-extremity weakness, and severe neurologic disorders, with permanent sequelae observed in 20% of surviving patients [2,7,9,15,61]. The clinical features of ROCV infection are depicted in Figure 4. The incubation period lasts 7 to 14 days, with patients presenting with abrupt onset of fever, severe headache, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, myalgia, and malaise, and in severe cases stupor and coma with respiratory complications [3]. Late signs of encephalitis included confusion, reflex disorders, motor impairment, meningeal irritation, cerebellar syndrome, and seizures. Neuropsychiatric sequelae were observed in 20% of the patients: visual, olfactory, and hearing disorders, lack of motor coordination, disturbance of balance, difficulty in swallowing, urinary incontinence and memory defects [3]. ROCV infections were lethal in 10% of cases. Autopsies of fatal encephalitis cases showed histopathological lesions in the brain and signs of thalamic inflammation [61].The pathogenesis of ROCV infection is not fully understood. Within the genus Flavivirus, ROCV has been classified within the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) serogroup, whose members include St. Louis encephalitis virus (SLEV) and Ilhéus virus (ILHV). To date several rodent (BALB/c mice, C57BL/6 mice and golden hamster (Mesocricetus auratus)) studies have been performed, seeking to elucidate ROCV pathogenesis [1,62,63,64,65,66]. Electron microscopy of ROCV-infected suckling swiss mice brain tissues showed ROCV exclusively located in the lumen of membranous cytoplasmic organelles, principally within hypertrophic Golgi membranes and endo-plasmatic reticulum, intracytoplasmic vesicles, and the nuclear envelope [1], observations commonly seen in neurotropic flavivirus infections [67,68,69]. Virions were found in rows within organelles, but individually scattered particles were also common. Virions were absent in tissues collected prior to 40 h post infection (h.p.i.), and virus accumulation in infected sections increased rapidly in tissues collected subsequently, reaching a maximum in tissues collected from moribund animals of 73 h.p.i. Inclusion bodies consisting of electron dense masses were found in the cytoplasm of infected cells and were likely to be associated with virus replication [1].ROCV-infected young adult BALB/c mice developed meningo-encephalomyelitis presenting with hind limb paralysis, muscle weakness, tremors, loss of balance and death 9 days post infection (d.p.i.) [63]. Significant amounts of inflammatory infiltrates (lymphocytes, NK cells, neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages) were observed starting at 4 d.p.i in the spinal cord and peaking at 9 d.p.i. in the brain, coinciding with the presence of the virus and development of acute flaccid limb paralysis and death, respectively. Immunohistochemistry showed viral antigen expression in neurons, astrocytes, microglia, endothelium, and macrophages in the spinal cord at 4 d.p.i. and in the brain at 8 d.p.i. Significant neuron degeneration was observed in the dentate gyrus and CA3 region of the hippocampus, likely to be due to ROCV infection and apoptosis induced by cytokines produced by glial and macrophage activated cells leading to necrosis and cell death, suggesting a critical role for macrophages in the pathogenesis of ROCV infection. [63]. Chavez et al further explored the immunopathogenesis of ROCV infection by demonstrating the significant role of the CC-chemokine receptor 5 (CCR5) and its interaction with the ligand macrophage inflammatory protein (MIP-1a). Using CCR5 and MIP-1a knockout mice they demonstrated increased survival rates compared to wild-type (wt) ROCV-infected animals, as well as significantly reduced inflammation and viral loads in the brains of the knockout mice, suggesting CCR5/MIP-1a mediates lymphocyte recruitment in the brain leading to disease severity [64]. Recently, Amarilla et al [66] investigated the role of monocytes in the ROCV-induced inflammatory response in the brain. Migration of monocytes into the brain is heavily dependent on the interaction between the C-C Motif Chemokine Ligand 2 (CCL2) and its receptor C-C Motif Chemokine Receptor 2 (CCR2). Using wt C57BL/6 mice they showed that ROCV infection induces the production of CCL2 in the blood and brain, resulting in the increased infiltration of macrophages and CD8+ T lymphocytes into the brain. Similarly, to the observations of de Barros et al [63], virus infiltration of the spinal cord occurred earlier than infiltration of the brain with the highest viral loads present in the cortex and hippocampus. This is in agreement with the histopathologic damage Rosemberg observed in the same regions of autopsied human brains infected with ROCV [61]. Conversely, the use of CCR2 knockout (Ccr2−/−) C57BL/6 mice, demonstrated that CCR2 is required for efficient infiltration of macrophages into the brain, which is associated with a reduction in disease severity and mortality [66].Collectively, the rodent models described above demonstrate the neurotropic (spinal cord and brain) nature of ROCV infection, but they have not shed any light in the mechanism of neuro-invasion, reiterating the notion that ROCV pathogenesis remains poorly understood, and begging the urgent need of a suitable animal model mimicking human disease.6. Diagnosis, Treatment and Prevention OptionsThe clinical presentation of ROCV infection is indistinguishable from the symptoms of other mosquito-borne flaviviruses, including neurotropic flaviviruses such as Japanese encephalitis, West Nile, and St Louis encephalitis viruses. As discussed earlier, ROCV infections have been often misdiagnosed with other arboviral infections endemic to Brazil, often as dengue or St. Louis encephalitis, therefore differential diagnosis of ROCV infection must be established in the laboratory. Diagnosis of infection with ROCV is possible with a variety of methods, including genetic (RT-PCR, qPCR) [70,71] and serologic (IgM and IgG ELISA, hemagglutination inhibition (HI) and plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT)]). However, caution should be exercised in the utility of serologic tests in the differential diagnosis of ROCV, given the high level of antibody cross-reactivity among flaviviruses and the lack of routine laboratory serological assays that complicate accurate diagnosis of arboviruses, including ROCV. Therefore, there is an urgent need for the employment of new and affordable technologies [72,73] for the development of more accurate diagnostic assays.There is no licensed vaccine or antiviral therapy available for ROCV infections, thus patient care protocols include stabilization and admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) for severe cases. Long term supportive care is recommended for survivors with long term sequalae. A three dose formalin inactivated vaccine developed in 1977 by Butantan elicited low rates of seroconversion in early phases of human trials and further development was discontinued [74]. Therefore, current efforts are centered around prevention strategies which are based on vector control strategies (door and window screens and elimination of breeding sites) and personal protection measures, such as protective clothing, use of insect repellents and behavior modification to minimize human contact at peak mosquito activity. Moreover, even after 50 years, ROCV’s transmission cycles are not well understood and thus any intervention will remain a formidable challenge. Complete eradication or control of the enzootic transmission cycle is nearly impossible since it is not amenable to typical control interventions (reviewed in [75]). Disrupting spillover into human agricultural and urban habitats may require novel approaches such as dynamic modelling and machine learning that take advantage of a multitude of available empirical data (e.g., host range, vectors of transmission and ecotypes) that have been acquired over time during documented ROCV spillover investigations [2,3,7,8,9,11,12,14,15,30,31,32,34,42,46,50,53,58,59,60,76]. These methods have been employed recently to provide insights into the risk factors and drivers of zoonotic pathogen emergence [77,78,79,80,81]. Nonetheless, history has shown that sustainable vector control programs are the most effective method in controlling mosquito populations [82], however their success hinges on continuous governmental financial support as well as buy-in and enforcement at the community level.7. Conclusions and Future ProspectsROCV is an emerging flavivirus responsible for the largest outbreak of arboviral encephalitis in Brazil. Despite several pioneering studies in the mid-1970s to late 1980s that provided some clarity on the epidemiology and clinical presentation of ROCV infections, its transmission cycles are not fully understood. Extensive serologic and ecologic surveillance studies on ROCV have not been carried out since then and the shortage and paucity of data has hindered our appreciation of the burden that ROCV infections may have on public health systems across Brazil and beyond. ROCV circulates in several regions of the country, infecting wildlife as well as animals important to agricultural and peri-domestic activities. As shown in the sections above, it is likely that the virus circulates undetected and most infections with mild symptoms are either underreported or attributed to other common arboviruses, such as dengue. The abundance of its mosquito vectors (Psorophora. and Aedes species) and vertebrate and amplification hosts (Zonotrichia capensis) provide the required conditions for ROCV’s potential to emerge and become an urgent public health issue. Furthermore, this review reiterates the urgent need for the establishment of comprehensive surveillance networks that are geographically broad, encompass hotspots of biodiversity as well as human cohorts, and are well integrated with appropriate modeling techniques that can mitigate the threat posed by emerging zoonotic and resurging arboviruses. It is essential that sound public health policy to contain and control zoonotic pathogens must also invest in the development of more accurate diagnostic assays using new and affordable technologies and effective vaccine or antiviral countermeasures.


Title: Combining genomics and epidemiology to track mumps virus transmission in the United States

IntroductionAn unusually large number of mumps cases were reported in the United States in 2016 and 2017, despite high rates of vaccination [1,2]. In the prevaccination era, mumps was a routine childhood disease, with over 150,000 cases reported in the US annually [1]. After the mumps vaccine was introduced in 1967, mumps incidence declined by more than 99% [1]. Case counts rose again briefly in the mid-1980s and then continued to decrease after a national outbreak of measles prompted the recommendation of 2 Measles-Mumps-Rubella (MMR) vaccine doses in 1989 [3]. In the early 2000s, only a few hundred cases of mumps were reported annually in the US [1], attesting to the success of vaccination, possibly combined with decreasing clinical suspicion. This apparently low nationwide incidence was interrupted by an outbreak of >5,000 cases in the Midwestern US in 2006 [4], followed by a period of low incidence with minor outbreaks until 2016. This recent resurgence in mumps is partially explained by waning vaccine-induced immunity [5], but the extent to which genetic changes in circulating viruses have contributed is not yet clear.In Massachusetts, over 250 cases were reported in 2016 and over 170 in 2017, far exceeding the usual state incidence of <10 cases per year [6]. As seen in other recent outbreaks, most cases were associated with academic institutions [4] and other close-contact settings, including prisons [7] and tightly-knit ethnic and religious communities [8,9]. Mumps was reported to the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (MDPH) by 18 colleges and universities in the state, including Harvard University (Harvard), University of Massachusetts Amherst (UMass), and Boston University (BU)—the 3 institutions with the largest numbers of reported cases. Of the individuals infected, 65% had the recommended 2 doses of the MMR vaccine (S1 Table).We used whole genome sequencing, phylogenetic analysis, and transmission reconstruction to investigate the spread of mumps at multiple geographic scales, including within a college campus, more widely in Massachusetts, and across the US. Pathogen sequence data have become an important tool for understanding the spread of infectious diseases in near real time, allowing researchers to pinpoint outbreak origins [10,11], resolve transmission patterns [12], and detect changes throughout the genome that could affect disease severity or the effectiveness of vaccines and diagnostics [13–16]. Such data have been shown to be most useful when analyzed alongside epidemiological data [12,17,18], although the field is still exploring in detail how genomics can contribute to understanding and controlling outbreaks [19]. Mumps outbreaks in 2016 and 2017 in the US, particularly those in universities, provided an opportunity to apply these ideas to the mumps virus and to further this exploration in the context of a closely monitored, largely self-contained campus setting.Results and discussionWe generated 203 whole mumps virus genomes from buccal swabs from patients who tested positive by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for mumps virus (Fig 1A), of which 158 were from Massachusetts during the 2016 and 2017 outbreak (Fig 1B), with 92 from Harvard, BU, or UMass in particular. The remaining 43 genomes were from 15 other states, collected between 2014 and 2017 (Table 1). These 203 genomes come from 259 PCR-positive samples, 56 of which were excluded because they did not produce data that met our definition of a complete genome (see Materials and methods) because of low viral loads, often caused by collecting the samples too late in the course of infection (S1A and S1B Fig). These 56 samples that did not produce genomes were well distributed across the 2016 through 2017 study period and showed no geographic clustering (Massachusetts versus elsewhere).10.1371/journal.pbio.3000611.g001Fig 1Massachusetts mumps outbreak overview.(A) Maximum clade credibility tree of 225 mumps virus genotype G whole genome sequences, including 200 generated in this study. Labels on internal nodes indicate posterior support. Clades I and II contain 91% of the samples from the 2016 and 2017 Massachusetts (MA) outbreak; I-outbreak and II-outbreak are the largest clades within them that contain only samples from the outbreak. Clade 0-UM contains samples associated with UMass other than those in Clades I and II; the same is true for 0-BU (BU) and 0-HU (Harvard). II-community contains primarily samples associated with a local Massachusetts community. (B) Number of reported mumps cases in 2016 by epidemiological week in Massachusetts (gray) and in this study (blue). (C) Probability distributions for the date of the most recent common ancestor (computed from tMRCA) of selected clades (see S2 Table for additional clades). Dotted line is the mean of each distribution. BU, Boston University; HU, Harvard Univeristy; tMRCA, time to the most recent common ancestor; UM, University of Massachusetts Amherst; UMass, University of Massachusetts Amherst.10.1371/journal.pbio.3000611.t001Table 1Summary of samples and genomes.Counts of samples sequenced and genomes generated by source (MDPH or CDC), date, and mumps virus PCR result. [G] indicates genotype G genomes. Two genomes are from a second sample of a patient already included in the data set.SourceDatesPCR resultSamplesGenomesGenomes(unique patients)Genomes [G](unique patients)CDC2014–2015+26181818CDC2016–2017+33252525MDPH2014–2015+6222MDPH2016–2017+194158156155MDPH2016–2017–29000Total288203201200Abbreviations: CDC, US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MDPH, Massachusetts Department of Public Health; PCR, polymerase chain reactionThe median sequencing depth of the 203 successful genomes was 176x (first quintile: 42.4x; fourth quintile: 651.8x; S1C Fig) and all were >82% complete (182 genomes were >99% complete). These full genomes provide substantially more data than sequences of the small hydrophobic (SH) gene alone (accounting for <3% of the genome), which is conventionally used for classifying mumps virus [20,21]. For the Massachusetts samples, epidemiological data (including university affiliation and vaccination status) and contact tracing data collected by the MDPH and local universities were also available (S1 Table; see S1 Data for full line list). We note that 2 of the individuals in the Massachusetts data set had paired samples from 2 timepoints; in both cases, we excluded the genome from the later sample in subsequent analyses, leaving 201 genomes from unique patients. Of these 201 individuals from Massachusetts, 72% had known vaccination status, of whom 93% had 1 or more MMR doses. We also sequenced 29 PCR-negative samples from suspected mumps cases; in only one was there limited evidence for mumps virus, but we did identify 4 other viruses (one in each of 4 of these samples; S3 Table), 2 of which are known to cause parotitis [22], a characteristic symptom of mumps [23].The viral whole genome data led to 2 key findings about the origin and spread of the recent outbreaks. First, our analysis revealed that the outbreaks—in Massachusetts and also more broadly in the US—were largely the product of a single mumps lineage and that this lineage was responsible for most if not all US mumps outbreaks since at least 2006. This lineage belongs to mumps virus genotype G [20,21] as do all but 1 of the 201 genomes from unique patients in our data set. Unless otherwise stated, all subsequent analyses refer only to these 200 genotype G genomes (Table 1).Phylogenetic analysis of these 200 genomes, along with the other 25 publicly available genotype G genomes, shows that almost all (192 of the 200 samples in our data set; 211 of the 225 total) belong to a single lineage within genotype G, despite having been collected from all over the country (Fig 1A; also supported by a principal component analysis; see S2 Fig). This lineage descends from the US mumps outbreak in 2006. Single-gene data (see discussion of SH gene below) show no evidence for extensive transmission of this lineage outside the US, suggesting that most mumps cases in the US since 2006 are the result of ongoing transmission of a single lineage within the United States; specifically, this connects previously unassociated cases (with published genomes) between 2006 and 2016 [1,8,24]. This also suggests that unreported infections may be common and may be driving ongoing transmission [23,25].The distribution of cases within the phylogenetic tree further suggests geographic movement of mumps virus on short time scales. For example, clade I (Fig 1A) contains virus genomes collected in 2015 through 2017 from Massachusetts, from elsewhere in the Northeast, from the South, and from the Midwest. The date of the most recent common ancestor of this clade was most likely in 2013 or later (Fig 1C and S3 Table), which implies that the virus spread to all of those regions in less than 5 years. Similarly, clade II contains genomes from all of those regions as well as one from the western US, all collected during the same time period. Clade II likely dates from no earlier than 2014, suggesting spread to these regions occurred in an even shorter amount of time. Together, these observations provide strong evidence for regional circulation in the Northeast, coupled with at least occasional movement to more distant geographic regions. Further sampling of these other regions may reveal additional long-distance dispersal events, which would indicate widespread geographic movement of mumps. This would not be surprising if transmission frequently occurs through college students, many of whom reside in close-contact settings and also travel long distances to return home.The second key finding about the recent spread of mumps virus relates to its origins in Massachusetts. Although this 2006 lineage dominated the Massachusetts outbreak, the outbreak was not caused by a single introduction of mumps virus into the state but rather is comprised of at least 6 distinct viral clades (Fig 1A). Several of these were sublineages of the dominant 2006 lineage, including the 2 largest, Clades I and II, which comprise more than 90% of samples from Massachusetts (13% and 77%, respectively). These 2 clades diverged before the 2016 outbreak began (Fig 1C and S2 Table), indicating that they independently contributed to it. The remaining 4 clades (0-UM, 0-HU, 0-BU, plus one genotype K genome) likewise represent independent introductions, one of which (0-BU) also falls within the 2006 lineage. Such multiple introductions, indicating widespread transmission of mumps virus, have been observed elsewhere in the US [25] and are also seen in this data set within individual universities: samples from UMass span 2 clades (II and 0-UM), Harvard samples span 3 clades (I, II, and 0-HU), and BU samples span 3 clades (I, II, 0-BU) (S3 Fig). This emerging pattern of complexity, which has only become apparent with viral genomic data, provides a previously inaccessible look into the degree to which mumps is moving within and between states and communities in the US.Epidemiological investigation showed that each of the 4 minor clades described above contains at least one sample from a patient with foreign travel history during the incubation period of the virus (12–25 days before symptom onset [26]; S1 Data). Together, the genomic and epidemiological data suggest that most mumps virus cases in the US belong to the primary 2006 lineage but that small clusters of cases can be attributed to repeated importation of the virus from outside the country. These imported cases do not appear to be important contributors to the overall burden of mumps in the US.The finding that a single mumps lineage has been successful in a highly vaccinated population [2], despite repeated introductions of other lineages, raised the possibility that mutations within this lineage have contributed to its success, perhaps by enabling vaccine escape. Because mutations contributing to the success of the entire lineage necessarily occurred early in the evolution of that lineage, we note here the differences between fixed mutations in our data set and the strain used in the mumps vaccine.We found that there were numerous fixed differences between samples from the 2016 outbreak and the Jeryl Lynn vaccine strain in regions of immunological significance (S4A Fig and S1 Text), consistent with a recent similar analysis [27]. In the hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) protein, the primary target of neutralizing antibodies [28], we observed 32 sites with fixed amino acid substitutions between our sequences and the Jeryl Lynn strain. Thirty of these sites were conserved between our sequences and a cell-passaged clinical strain that was isolated from Iowa in 2006 (accession: JX287385), near the beginning of mumps resurgence in the US. The Iowa 2006 strain was previously shown to be neutralized by sera from both vaccinated and naturally infected individuals, but to a lower degree than neutralization of the Jeryl Lynn strain itself [29–31], raising the possibility that some of these mutations may confer partly reduced neutralization susceptibility. In addition, we observed 2 positions at which our sequences differed from both the Jeryl Lynn and the Iowa 2006 strains. At these 2 positions, the variant observed in our sequences was also present in most other genotype G sequences published to date, including in sequences from a recent study from the Netherlands [28]. Further studies are warranted to test the neutralization susceptibility of strains containing these variants, because the Iowa 2006 sequence may not be fully representative of most currently circulating genotype G viruses.We also looked for any evidence of ongoing adaptation to the vaccine during the outbreak. We considered this as a possibility because the vaccine was introduced relatively recently in the history of the mumps virus, recently enough that the virus could still be adapting to it. Additionally, in the absence of widespread natural infection, vaccination now constitutes the largest immunological selective force on mumps virus in the US. To investigate this, we paired genomic data with vaccination records to look for any evidence of changes in the mumps virus genome during the outbreak that led to antigenic variation from the Jeryl Lynn vaccine strain.We first tested whether nucleotide substitutions in genomes from the Massachusetts outbreak clustered by time since vaccination, or whether vaccinated individuals clustered on certain branches of the phylogenetic tree; neither was the case (S4B and S4E Fig). Second, we looked for signals of positive selection (using the dN/dS statistic) in the 225 genotype G genomes in our data set; a signal here would suggest that nonsynonymous mutations in a particular gene were being favored by ongoing selective pressure. We found no evidence for selection in any gene or at any specific site (S4C and S4D Fig). Thus, we did not find direct evidence of genetic variants arising within this outbreak that contributed to vaccine escape, although we note that both tests have quite limited statistical power in this data set. This finding is consistent with a recent study that proposed waning vaccine-induced immunity as a driving factor in recent US mumps outbreaks [5]; this hypothesis is also supported by our own data, in which we find that time since vaccination differs between Massachusetts individuals testing positive and negative for mumps virus by PCR in 2016 through 2017, with longer times since vaccination observed in mumps-positive patients (S5 Fig).Understanding transmission routes can be crucial in guiding the public health response to an outbreak—for example, whether efforts should be directed toward controlling mumps spread within a university or preventing virus importation. In the Massachusetts mumps outbreak, detailed genomic data allowed us both to confirm connections suggested by public health investigation and to identify new links between cases. The phylogeny described above shows that mumps samples from different Massachusetts universities were genetically similar and fell within the 2 primary clades (S3 Fig), consistent with the epidemiological interpretation that these contemporaneous cases were part of 1 large mumps outbreak in 2016 through 2017. It also showed an unexpected connection between mumps cases in a local, nonacademic community (Clade II-community) and those at Harvard: the II-community cases fall within the predominantly Harvard Clade II, suggesting a spillover event from the university into the wider community (Fig 2A). Cases in these 2 clades were classified as distinct outbreaks during initial public health investigation based on epidemiological data [32], different demographic makeup of the 2 populations (older adults with no obvious university connection versus mostly college-aged students), and a 5-month gap between the last confirmed cases at Harvard and the cases in the local community. However, the genomic data clearly suggests a connection, supported by additional epidemiological investigation that identified 3 individuals affiliated with both Harvard and the local community who could have acted as transmission links.10.1371/journal.pbio.3000611.g002Fig 2Epidemiological modeling and transmission reconstruction.(A) Zoom view of Clade II-community and its ancestors (see Fig 1A). Arrows: individuals affiliated with both II-community and Harvard. (B) Number of importations into Harvard calculated without (left) and with (right) viral genetic information as input. Each point represents a sample from the posterior distribution of RE(t = 0) and the number of introductions, based on simulated transmission dynamics. (C) Transmission reconstruction of individuals within Clade II-outbreak; samples are colored by institution affiliation (light purple: other institution; n/a: no affiliation; question mark: unknown affiliation). Left: reconstruction using epidemiological data only; all individuals in Clade II-outbreak with known epidemiological links (red arrows) are shown. Right: reconstruction using mumps genomes and collection dates. Arrow shading indicates probability of direct transmission between individuals (minimum probability shown: 0.3); cases with 1 or more inferred links are shown and are colored by institution. Arrows outlined in red represent transmission events identified by both genomic and epidemiological data. Faded nodes are those only connected by shared activity links (i.e., no inferred or known direct transmission). BU, Boston University; Harvard, Harvard University; RE, effective reproduction number; UMass, University of Massachusetts Amherst.Because of the large number of cases reported and sequenced and the contact tracing information available, we were able to quantify mumps transmission dynamics within Harvard. We first used an epidemiological model (S6 Fig) [5] without genomic data to estimate transmission within the university, but it did not permit us to distinguish between a single mumps introduction followed by high transmission and multiple introductions followed by low transmission (Fig 2B left). We then modified the model to incorporate the number of viral lineages (Clades 0-HU, II-community, and 2 subclades within Clade II) observed within Harvard. This markedly improved our ability to distinguish these scenarios, supporting an estimate of 5 (95% CI: 4–18) distinct introductions to Harvard and an effective reproduction number (RE) of 1.70 (95% CI: 1.50–1.91; Fig 2B right). An RE well above 1.0 means that the outbreak could be self-sustaining, which highlights the importance of controlling on-campus transmission during mumps outbreaks.The high-resolution data from Harvard allowed us to estimate transmission links between individual cases, which can aid in targeting containment efforts aimed at high-risk individuals or groups. For this purpose, we focused on Clade II-outbreak because it was largely contained within a single institution (Harvard) and had dense sampling. When we attempted to link individual mumps cases within this clade using contact tracing data alone, we could only infer direct mumps transmissions (“contact links”) between 2 pairs of individuals (Fig 2C left). We then used the genomic data to validate genetic distance as a proxy for epidemiological linkage (S7A and S7B Fig) and, based on these results, used genomic data and sampling dates to reconstruct possible mumps transmissions. The reconstruction (Fig 2C right, see also S7C Fig), which estimates and assigns a probability to direct transmission links, supports 1 of the 2 pairs of direct mumps transmissions as well as 2 “shared activity links” (see Materials and methods) and also suggests many new links between individuals without any known contacts. Indirect links, however, are difficult to identify using genomic data alone, illustrating the complementary contributions of genomic and epidemiological data for reconstructing detailed transmission, which can guide response efforts for mumps and other outbreaks in close-contact settings.Conventional sequence-based mumps surveillance has been limited to the SH gene. The SH gene is a small (316-nucleotide), convenient target for sequencing [20,33] and is thus the region for which the most sequence data are available. We used the 3,646 publicly available SH sequences from mumps cases around the world (Fig 3A) to assess whether SH sequences would be adequate to distinguish the lineages and transmission patterns identified above. To do this, we constructed the mumps phylogeny using the SH sequence alone and compared it to the whole genome phylogeny. There was limited variation within each genotype (genotype G shown in Fig 3B), and neither of our main phylogenetic conclusions based on whole genome data could be ascertained from SH alone: we could not determine the relationship between the spillover into the local community and its source in Harvard (other than that they belonged to the same clade), and we were unable to determine the relationship between the 2016 and 2017 outbreak and the 2006 lineage (S8 Fig). Our other key findings, such as the detailed picture of transmission within Harvard and a refined RE estimate, rely on these 2 conclusions. Nevertheless, SH data were sufficient to resolve population structure on a global scale and to confirm that the 11 known clinically relevant genotypes are associated with particular world regions (Fig 3C) [34]. Moreover, an analysis of global migration reveals significant movement of mumps virus between the US and Europe. For details on the global SH analysis, including a discussion of its limitations, see S1 Text, S9 and S10 Figs.10.1371/journal.pbio.3000611.g003Fig 3Global spread of mumps virus based on SH gene sequences.Colors in all panels are by region (legend in bottom right). (A) Number of SH sequences in our data set from each of the 15 regions. (B) Identical genotype G sequences over time from 1995 through 2017. Each dot represents a sample; each row contains samples with identical SH sequences, except the bottom, which includes samples with sequences distinct from those in the above 5 categories. Numbers on the right: percentage of all genotype G samples found in that row. (C) Maximum clade credibility tree of 3,646 publicly available SH gene sequences, including 193 complete SH sequences generated in this study. SH, small hydrophobic.The combination of high-quality genomic and epidemiological data from the Massachusetts mumps outbreak revealed the extent to which mumps is circulating in the US, connected previously unrelated outbreaks, and allowed us to trace transmission within and between individual communities. Given the high-quality genomic data we were able to produce from mumps clinical samples, as well as the limited information that can be gleaned from SH sequencing, it is worth considering whether future public health surveillance of mumps should incorporate whole genome sequencing. The collection of these detailed data, which we have made available to the community (see Materials and methods), was only possible through extensive collaboration between state and national public health agencies, academic researchers, and affected universities throughout the greater Boston, Massachusetts area. We hope that these partnerships, fostered in response to a surge in mumps cases in Massachusetts in 2016 and 2017, will facilitate real-time genomic and epidemiological data generation, analysis, and sharing in future outbreaks of any pathogen.Materials and methodsEthics statementThe study protocol was approved by the MDPH, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Institutional Review Boards (IRB) (MDPH IRB 00000701, project 906066). Harvard University Faculty of Arts and Sciences and the Broad Institute ceded review of sequencing and secondary analysis to the MDPH IRB through authorization agreements. The MDPH IRB waived informed consent given this research met the requirements pursuant to 45 CFR 46.116 (d). The CDC IRB determined this project to be nonhuman subjects research as only deidentified leftover diagnostic samples were utilized. In compliance with the IRB agreement, Harvard University, University of Massachusetts Amherst, and Boston University granted approval for publication of their institution names in this paper.Sample collections and study subjectsBuccal swab samples were obtained from suspected and confirmed mumps cases tested at MDPH and CDC. Samples from MDPH (“Cases in Study,” Fig 1B) include all cases with a positive mumps PCR result (see “PCR diagnostic assays performed at MDPH and CDC” below) collected between 1 January 2014 and 30 June 2017. Demographic information for all cases reported in Massachusetts (Fig 1B and Table 1) includes all confirmed and probable mumps cases reported to MDPH in that time period. Probable cases include cases with a positive mumps IgM assay result or those with an epidemiological link to a confirmed case [35]. Samples from CDC are a selection of PCR-positive cases submitted to the CDC for testing between 2014 and 2017. See S1 Data for deidentified information, including metadata, about study participants.Viral RNA isolationSample inactivation and RNA extraction were performed at the MDPH, Broad Institute, and CDC. At MDPH, viral samples were inactivated by adding 300 μL Lysis/Binding Buffer (Roche) to 200 μL sample, vortexing for 15 seconds, and incubating lysate at room temperature for 30 minutes. RNA was then extracted following the standard external lysis extraction protocol from the MagNA Pure LC Total Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Roche) using a final elution volume of 60 μL. At the Broad Institute, samples were inactivated by adding 252 μL Lysis/Binding Buffer (ThermoFisher) to 100 μL sample. RNA was then extracted following the standard protocol from the MagMAX Pathogen RNA/DNA Kit (ThermoFisher) using a final elution volume of 75 μL. At CDC, RNA extraction followed the standard protocol from the QiaAmp Viral RNA mini kit (Qiagen).PCR diagnostic assays performed at MDPH and CDCDiagnostic tests for presence of mumps virus were performed at the MDPH and CDC using the CDC Real-Time (TaqMan) RT-PCR Assay for the Detection of Mumps Virus RNA in Clinical Samples [8,36]. Each sample was run in triplicate using both the Mumps N Gene assay (MuN) and RNase P (RP) assay using this protocol. RT-PCR was performed on the Applied Biosystems 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR system or Applied Biosystems Prism 7900HT Sequence Detection System instrument.PCR quantification assays performed at Broad InstituteMumps virus RNA was quantified at the Broad Institute using the Power SYBR Green RNA-to-Ct 1-Step qRT-PCR assay (Life Technologies) and CDC MuN primers. The 10 μL assay mix included 3 μL RNA, 0.3 μL each of mumps virus forward and reverse primers at 5 μM concentration, 5 μL 2x Power SYBR RT-PCR Mix, and 0.08 μL 125x RT Enzyme Mix. The cycling conditions were 48 °C for 30 minutes and 95 °C for 10 minutes, followed by 45 cycles of 95 °C for 15 seconds and 60 °C for 30 seconds with a melt curve of 95 °C for 15 seconds, 55 °C for 15 seconds, and 95 °C for 15 seconds. RT-PCR was performed on the ThermoFischer QuantStudio 6 instrument. To determine viral copy number, a double-stranded gene fragment (IDT gBlock) was used as a standard. This standard is a 171 bp fragment of the mumps genome (GenBank accession: NC_002200) including the amplicon (sequence: GGA TCG ATG CTA CAG TGT ACT AAT CCA GGC TTG GGT GAT GGT CTG TAA ATG TAT GAC AGC GTA CGA CCA ACC TGC TGG ATC TGC TGA TCG GCG ATT TGC GAA ATA CCA GCA GCA AGG TCG CCT GGA AGC AAG ATA CAT GCT GCA GCC AGA AGC CCA AAG GTT GAT TCA AAC).23S rRNA content in samples was quantified using the same Power SYBR Green RNA-to-Ct 1-Step qRT-PCR assay kit and cycling conditions. Primers were used to amplify a 183 bp universally conserved region of the 23S rRNA (fwd: 93a - GGG TTC AGA ACG TCG TGA GA, rev: 97ar—CCC GCT TAG ATG CTT TCA GC) [37]. To determine viral copy number, a double-stranded gene fragment (IDT gBlock) was used as a standard. This standard is a 214 bp fragment of the Streptococcus HTS2 genome (accession: NZ_CP016953) (sequence: AGC GGC ACG CGA GCT GGG TTC AGA ACG TCG TGA GAC AGT TCG GTC CCT ATC CGT CGC GGG CGT AGG AAA TTT GAG AGG ATC TGC TCC TAG TAC GAG AGG ACC AGA GTG GAC TTA CCG CTG GTG TAC CAG TTG TCT CGC CAG AGG CAT CGC TGG GTA GCT ATG TAG GGA AGG GAT AAA CGC TGA AAG CAT CTA AGT GTG AAA CCC ACC TCA AGA T). Data from both assays—each performed only on a subset of samples—is reported in S1 Data.Bacterial rRNA depletionBacterial rRNA was depleted from some RNA samples (see S1 Data) using the Ribo-Zero Bacteria Kit (Illumina). At the hybridization step, the 40 μL reaction mix included 5 μL RNA sample, 4 μL Ribo-Zero Reaction Buffer, 8 μL Ribo-Zero Removal Solution, 22.5 μL water, and 0.5 μL synthetic RNA (25 fg) used to track potential cross-contamination (gift from M. Salit, NIST). Bacterial rRNA-depleted samples were purified using 1.8x volumes Agencourt RNAClean XP beads (Beckman Coulter) and eluted in 10 μL water for cDNA synthesis.Illumina library construction and sequencingcDNA synthesis was performed as described in previously published RNA-seq methods [38]. In samples in which bacterial rRNA was not depleted, 25 fg synthetic RNA was added at the beginning of cDNA synthesis to track sample cross-contamination. Positive control libraries were prepared from a mock mumps virus sample in which cultured Enders strain (ATCC VR-106) mumps was spiked into a composite buccal swab sample from healthy patients and diluted to mumps virus RT-qPCR Ct = 21. This mock sample was extracted using the viral RNA isolation protocol described above, except that total nucleic acid was eluted in 100 μL. Negative control libraries were prepared from nuclease-free water. Illumina Nextera XT was used for library preparation: indexed libraries were generated using 16 cycles of PCR, and each sample was indexed with a unique barcode. Libraries were pooled equally based on molar concentration and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 (100 or 150 bp paired-end reads) platform.Hybrid captureViral hybrid capture was performed as previously described [38] using 2 different probe sets. In one case, probes were created to target mumps and measles virus (V-MM probe set), and in one case, probes were created to target 356 species of viruses known to infect humans (V-All probe set) [39]. Capture using V-All was used to enrich viral sequences primarily in samples in which we could not detect mumps virus, as well as in other samples (see S1 Data for a list of which samples were captured using which probe set). As described in the work by Metsky and colleagues [39], the probe sets were designed to capture the diversity across all publicly available genome sequences on GenBank for these viruses. Probe sequences can be downloaded here: https://github.com/broadinstitute/catch/tree/cf500c69/probe-designs.Genome assemblyWe used viral-ngs version 1.18.1 [40] to assemble genomes from all sequencing runs. Viral-ngs is freely available under a BSD license (https://viral-ngs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). We used a set of mumps sequences (accessions: JX287389.1, FJ211586.1, AB000386.1, JF727652.1, AY685920.1, AB470486.1, GU980052.1, NC_002200.1, AF314558.1, AB823535.1, AF467767.2) to taxonomically filter these reads. We de novo assembled reads and scaffolded against the mumps genome with accession JX287389.1 to assemble a genome for each replicate. Then, we pooled read data from all sequencing replicates of each sample and repeated this assembly process to obtain final genomes. Each time we ran viral-ngs, we set the “assembly_min_length_fraction_of_reference” and “assembly_min_unambig” parameters to 0.01. Technical replicates had high concordance: in 27 samples prepared more than once, only 2 base calls differed across replicates.We replaced deletions in the coding regions with ambiguity (“N”). In one sample, MuVs/Massachusetts.USA/11.16/5 [G], with an insertion at position 3,903 (based on a full 15,384-nucleotide mumps virus genome, e.g., accession JN012242.1) we removed a poorly supported (<5 reads covering the site) extra “A” in a homopolymer region.To calculate sequencing metrics (S1 Fig), we used SAMtools [41] to downsample raw reads for each replicate to 1 million reads and then reran assembly as described above. Samples from 1 contaminated sequencing batch were excluded, as were all replicates from PCR-negative samples. In cases in which samples from 2 time points were sequenced from a single patient, we included only the first time point in the collection interval analysis (S1D Fig).Metagenomic analysisWe used the V-All probe set for capture on all samples from suspected mumps cases with a negative mumps PCR result (n = 29). A subset of PCR-positive samples was also sequenced with this probe set (n = 145; without capture = “unbiased,” n = 111). We used the mock Enders strain mumps sample as a positive control on a sequencing run containing all PCR-negative samples, as well as a water sample as a negative control. We used the metagenomic tool Kraken version 0.10.6 [42] via viral-ngs to identify the presence of viral taxa in each sample. We built a database similar to the one described in the work by Metsky and colleagues [39], except without insect species. This database encompasses the known diversity of viruses known to infect humans. It is publicly available, in 3 parts, at https://storage.googleapis.com/sabeti-public/meta_dbs/kraken_full_20170522/ [file], where [file] is database.idx.lz4 (595 MB), database.kdb.lz4 (75 GB), and taxonomy.tar.lz4 (66 MB). Because of the possibility of contamination, we prepared a second, independent sequencing replicate on all PCR-negative samples with evidence for mumps or another virus and required both replicates to contain reads matching the virus detected in the sample. We found no evidence of pathogenic viruses other than mumps in PCR-positive samples.We required the total raw read count for any genus in any sample to be twice (in practice, 7 times) that in any negative control from any sequencing batch. For any sample that had one or more pathogenic viral genera that passed this filter and had deduplicated reads well distributed across the relevant viral genome, we attempted contig assembly: we used viral-ngs to filter all sample reads against all NCBI GenBank [43] entries matching the identified species and then de novo assembled reads using Trinity [44] through viral-ngs and scaffolded against the closest matching full genome identified by a blastn query [45]. We report all viruses identified via this method in S3 Table.In parallel, we used SPAdes [46] within viral-ngs to de novo assemble contiguous sequence from all de-duplicated, depleted reads. We used the metagenomic tool DIAMOND version 0.9.13 [47] with the nr database downloaded 29 May 2017, followed by blastn [45] of DIAMOND-flagged contigs. Using this method, we confirmed the presence of all previously identified viruses except influenza B virus, for which we never assembled a contiguous sequence. We found no evidence of additional pathogenic viruses using this method.Criteria for pooling across replicatesWe prepared one or more sequencing libraries from each sample and attempted to sequence and assemble a genome from each of these replicates. We required a replicate of a sample to contain 3,000 unambiguous base calls for its read data to be included in that sample’s final genome assembly. This threshold was based on the maximum number of unambiguous bases (2,820) observed in negative controls across all uncontaminated sequencing batches. One sequencing batch showed evidence of contamination: we were able to assemble 7,615 unambiguous mumps bases from a water sample, with a median coverage of 4x. For samples prepared in this batch only, we implemented an additional requirement for including a replicate in pooling: the assembly must have a median depth of coverage of ≥20x, 5 times the median depth of coverage of the water sample.Multiple sequence alignment of genotype G whole genomesWe required a mumps genome to contain 11,538 unambiguous base calls (75% of the total 15,384-nucleotide genome with GenBank accession JN012242.1) for inclusion in the alignment of whole genome sequences that we used for downstream analysis. For 2 patients with samples taken at 2 time points (MuVs/Massachusetts.USA/19.16/5 [G] (1) and MuVs/Massachusetts.USA/19.16/5 [G] (2–20.16); MuVs/Massachusetts.USA/16.16/6 [G] (1) and MuVs/Massachusetts.USA/16.16/6 [G] (2–17.16)), we only included the earlier sample in downstream analyses. The final alignment of whole genome sequences contains only samples belonging to genotype G; we did not include MuVs/Massachusetts.USA/24.17/5 [K], which belongs to genotype K, in the alignment.In this alignment, we also included 25 mumps virus genomes published on NCBI GenBank [43]. These comprise all of the sequences with organism “Mumps rubulavirus” available as of September 2017 that meet the following criteria: sequence length ≥14,000 nucleotides, belong to genotype G, sample collection year and country of origin reported in GenBank, no evidence of extensive virus passaging or modification (for vaccine development, for example). The accessions are KY969482, KY996512, KY996511, KY996510, KY680540, KY680539, KY680538, KY680537, KY006858, KY006857, KY006856, KY604739, KF738114, KF738113, KF481689, KM597072, JX287391, JX287390, JX287389, JX287387, JX287385, JN012242, JN635498, AF280799, EU370207.We aligned mumps virus genomes using MAFFT version 7.221 [48] with default parameters. We provide the sequences and alignments used in analyses at http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3338599.Visualization of coverage depth across genomesWe plotted aggregate depth of coverage across the 200 samples whose genomes were included in the final alignment (S1C Fig) as described in the work by Metsky and colleagues [49]. We aligned reads against the reference genome with accession JX287389.1 and plotted over a 200-nt sliding window.Analysis of within- and between-sample variantsWe ran V-Phaser 2.0 [50] via viral-ngs on all pooled reads mapping to a sample assembly to identify within-sample variants (S2 Data). To call a variant, we required a minimum of 5 forward and reverse reads, as well as no more than 10-fold strand bias, as previously described [51]. Samples with genomes generated by the sequencing batch that showed evidence of contamination (see “Criteria for pooling across replicates” above) were not included in within-host variant analysis. When analyzing variants in known contacts, we used pairs of samples designated as “contact links,” as described in “Relationship between epidemiological and genetic data” below.Between-sample variants were called by comparing each final genome sequence to JX287385.1, the earlier of the 2 available whole genomes from the 2006 mumps outbreak in Iowa, US (S2 Data). We ignored all fully or partially ambiguous base calls and excluded sequences that did not descend from the USA_2006 clade from this analysis. When examining amino acid changes in HN given vaccination status (see “SH and HN multiple sequence alignment” below), we ignored sequences from patients with unknown vaccination history.Maximum likelihood estimation and root-to-tip regressionWe generated a maximum likelihood tree using the whole genome genotype G multiple sequence alignment. We used IQ-TREE version 1.3.13 [52] with a GTR substitution model and rooted the tree on the oldest sequence in this data set (accession KF738113.1) in FigTree version 1.4.2 [53].To estimate root-to-tip distance of samples in the primary US lineage, we subsetted the full genotype G alignment to include only samples descendent of the USA_2006 clade, including samples in this clade (see Fig 1A) and used TempEst version 1.5 [54] with the best fitting root (heuristic residual mean squared function) to estimate distance from the root. We used scikit-learn version 0.14.1 [55] in Python to perform linear regression of distances on dates.We also generated maximum likelihood trees using the SH gene only (full 316-nucleotide mRNA), HN (coding region only), F (coding region only), and a concatenation of the aforementioned SH, HN, and F regions (S8 Fig). For each tree, we started with the whole genome genotype G alignment (225 sequences) and extracted the relevant region(s). We then removed any sequence with 2 or more consecutive ambiguous bases (“N”s) in any of SH, HN, or F, leaving 209 sequences in each alignment. We used IQ-TREE version 1.5.5 with a GTR substitution [56] model to generate maximum likelihood trees.Molecular dating using BEASTWe performed all molecular clock analyses on whole genome sequences using BEAST version 1.8.4 [57]. We excluded from the CDS the portion of the V protein after the insertion site [58] because of reading frame ambiguity in that region. On the CDS, we used the SRD06 substitution model [59], which breaks codons into 2 partitions (positions [1+2] and 3) with HKY substitution models [60] and allows gamma site heterogeneity [61] (4 categories) on each. We used a separate partition on noncoding sequence with an HKY substitution model and gamma site heterogeneity. To accommodate inexact dates in 7 sequences from NCBI GenBank, we used sampled tip dates [62].We tested 6 models as described in the work by Metsky and colleagues [49]. Each was a combination of one of 2 clock models (strict clock and uncorrelated relaxed clock with log-normal distribution [63]) and 1 of 3 coalescent tree priors (constant size population, exponential growth population, and Bayesian Skygrid model [64] with 20 parameters). On each model, we estimated marginal likelihood with path-sampling (PS) and stepping-stone sampling (SS) [65,66] (S2 Table) after sampling 100 path steps each with a chain length of 2 million.We sampled trees and other parameters on each model by running BEAST for 200 million MCMC steps, sampling every 20,000 steps, and removing 20 million steps as burn-in. We report the mean clock rate as the substitution rate for relaxed clock models. On the sampled trees, we used TreeAnnotator version 1.8.4 to find the maximum clade credibility (MCC) tree and visualized it in FigTree version 1.4.3 [53]. To estimate tMRCAs (Fig 1C and S2 Table), we ran BEAST again for each of the 6 models, drawing from these same sets of sampled trees (without any parameters), for 10,000 steps, sampling every step. We selected a relaxed clock and Skygrid model for plots of tMRCA distributions (Fig 1C) and MCC trees over the whole genome genotype G sequences.Additionally, we plotted (S11 Fig) a Skygrid reconstruction of the scaled population size (Neτ) using results from the selected model. The earliest time point on this plot is the lower (more recent) 95% HPD bound on the estimated root height.Gene- and site-specific dN/dS analysesWe used BEAST version 1.8.4 [57] to estimate dN/dS per-site (S4C Fig and S3 Data) and per-gene (S4D Fig) using the same alignment of 225 whole genome sequences described above (again, removing the portion of the V gene after the insertion site).For site-specific dN/dS estimation, we used the CDS as input and created a separate partition for each codon position (3 partitions). We used an HKY substitution model [60] on each partition and an uncorrelated relaxed clock with log-normal distribution [63] for branch rates. Here, we sampled from the same set of trees that were sampled as described above in “Molecular Dating using BEAST” (relaxed clock with Skygrid tree prior). We ran BEAST for 10 million MCMC steps, sampling every 10,000 steps. We estimated site-specific dN/dS at each sampled state using renaissance counting [67,68] and show summary statistics at each site after discarding 1 million steps as burn-in.For per-gene estimation, we created 8 separate partitions: 7 correspond to the CDS of a gene (F, HN, L, M, NP, SH, partial V), and the last corresponds to noncoding sequence. For each gene partition, we used a Goldman-Yang codon model [69] with its own parameters for dN/dS (omega) and clock rate. For the noncoding partition, we used an HKY substitution model [60] and gamma site heterogeneity [61] (4 categories). We sampled tip dates as with the molecular clock analyses above and used a Bayesian Skyline tree prior [70] (10 groups). We ran BEAST for 200 million MCMC steps to sample trees and parameter values, discarded 20 million steps as burn-in, and plotted the posterior distribution of omega for each gene partition.Principal component analysisThe data set for PCA consisted of all SNPs from sites with exactly 2 alleles in the set of all genotype G genomes. We imputed missing data with the R package missMDA [71] and calculated principal components with the R package FactoMineR [72]. We discarded 14 samples as outliers based on visual inspection, leaving 211 samples in the final set.Relationship between epidemiological and genetic dataWe obtained detailed epidemiological data for samples shared by MDPH from the Massachusetts Virtual Epidemiologic Network (MAVEN) surveillance system, an integrated web-based disease surveillance and case management system [73]. We defined 2 types of epidemiological links: “contact links,” between individuals who were determined to be close contacts during public health investigation and had symptom onset dates 7 to 33 days apart (individuals with mumps are usually considered infectious 2 days before through 5 days after onset of parotid swelling, with a typical incubation period of 16–18 days, ranging from 12–25 days) [26]; and “shared activity links,” between individuals who participated in the same extracurricular activity (e.g., a sports team or university club) or frequented a specific residence or athletic facility. When we refer to epidemiological links without specifying link type, we include both types of links.We calculated pairwise genetic distance between all pairs of samples in the whole genome genotype G alignment. For each pair, the genetic distance score is s/n, in which s is the number of unambiguous differing sites (both sequences must have an unambiguous base at the site, and the called bases must differ) and n is the number of sites at which both sequences have an unambiguous base call.To visualize the similarity between genomes and its relationship to epidemiological linkage, we performed a multidimensional scaling on sequences in Clade II-outbreak (Fig 1A). This clade is comprised of mostly cases from Harvard and the related community outbreak. Using their pairwise genetic distances, we calculated a metric multidimensional scaling to 2 dimensions in R with cmdscale [74]. We then evenly split the range of the output coordinates into a 100 × 100 grid and collapsed each point into this grid and plotted the number of points at each grid coordinate; this improves visualization of nearly overlapping points (identical or near-identical genomes). We plotted curves that represent epidemiological links between cases within each of the grid coordinates. This is shown in S7A Fig.To determine the ability of genetic distance to predict epidemiological linkage, we again looked specifically at cases within Clade II-outbreak (Fig 1A). Using the Python scikit-learn package [55], we constructed a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve using pairwise distance between II-outbreak cases as the predictor variable and presence or absence of an epidemiological link as the binary response variable. This is shown in S7B Fig.Model of mumps transmission in a university settingWe developed a stochastic model for mumps virus transmission accounting for the natural history of infection, vaccination status, and control measures implemented in response to the outbreak at Harvard. Our stochastic model of mumps virus transmission included the stages after initial infection, the durations of which we inferred using data from previous clinical studies (S6A and S6C Fig). These included the gamma-distributed incubation period from infection to onset of mumps virus shedding in saliva [75]; the gamma-distributed period of latent infection from shedding onset to parotitis onset [75,76]; and the log-normally distributed time from parotitis onset to the cessation of shedding (defined in the work by Polgreen and colleagues [77]). For asymptomatic cases, we defined the total duration of shedding (γ) as the sum of independent random draws from the durations of shedding before and after parotitis onset, based on the lack of any reported difference in durations of shedding for symptomatic and asymptomatic cases [75]. To account for case isolation interventions implemented at Harvard, we modeled the removal of symptomatic individuals one day after onset of parotitis. In comparison to the 70% probability for symptoms given infection among unvaccinated individuals [78], we modeled the probability of symptoms given infection as uniformly distributed between 27.3% and 38.3% [5,79].We used previous estimates of the effectiveness and waning rate of mumps vaccination [5] and of the vaccination status distribution of individuals on a university campus [80] to account for susceptibility to infection among the Harvard population (N = 22,000). We scaled risk for mumps infection, given exposure, to time since receipt of the last vaccine dose, yielding the hazard ratio
ξi=eω0τiω1
for an individual i who received their last dose τi years previously, relative to an unvaccinated individual. For fitted values from the work by Lewnard and Grad [5], estimates were below 1.0 for individuals vaccinated since 1967, when the Jeryl Lynn vaccine was introduced (S6D Fig).Given the instantaneous hazard of infection for an as yet uninfected individual i exposed to I(t) infected individuals
λi(t)=βξiI(t)N-1,
the probability of evading infection over the course of a 1-day simulated time step was exp(−λi (t)). The per-contact transmission rate (β) was measured from the initial (preintroduction) value of the effective reproductive number:
β=RE(0)γ¯ξ-1.Inferring transmission dynamicsThe number of cases (71) and identification of multiple, distinct viral clades within Harvard suggested limited permeation of mumps after any introduction. We simulated dynamics of individual transmission chains to understand the epidemiological course of introduced viral lineages and to infer values of RE(0) and the number of importations of mumps virus. We used the simulation model to sample from the distribution of the number of cases (X, including the index infection if symptomatic) resulting from a single introduction over a 1.5-year time course:
f{xi|RE(0)}=P[X=xi|RE(0)].We resampled according to f{xi|RE(0)} to define the distribution of the cumulative number of cases (Z) resulting from Y introductions, conditioned on RE(0):
g{zk|RE(0),Y}=P[Z=zk=∑i=1yjxi|RE(0),Y=yj].Of the 71 cases at Harvard, 66 had mumps genomes in our data set, so we ran simulations where Z ≥ 66, drawing k = 66 cases at random to determine the number of distinct lineages (S, defined by the index infection) expected to be present within such a sample. The probability of obtaining 66 sequences and observing S = sm lineages among them is
h{sm|RE(0),Y,K=66}=P[S=sm|RE(0),Y=yj,K=66]×P[Z≥66|RE(0),Y].The posterior density of our model also accounted for the probability of observing 71 symptomatic cases in total. Defined in terms of the number of introductions and the initial reproductive number, the model posterior was proportional to
h{4|RE(0),Y,K=66}×g{71|RE(0),Y},
where 4 is the number of viral lineages in the 66 Harvard cases (representing clades 0-HU, II-community, and 2 subclades within Clade II). We measured this probability from 100,000 iterates for each pairing of RE(0) ∈ {0.10, 0.11, …, 2.50} and Y ∈ {1, 2,…, 200}.Last, we defined the minimum necessary third-dose vaccine coverage (C) to bring the effective number below unity using the relation
[1-VE(0)]×CRE(t=0)≤1
sampling from previous estimates [5] that mumps vaccination protects against infection, prior to waning of immunity (here defined as VE(0)).Transmission reconstruction using outbreakerWe used the R package outbreaker version 1.1–7 [81] to reconstruct transmission for samples included in Clade II-outbreak. We estimated the generation interval by fitting a gamma distribution, via maximum likelihood, to the time between symptom onset dates for cases with confirmed epidemiological links (S6E Fig). We used the same distribution for the colonization time and set the maximum number of generations between a case and its most recent sampled ancestor to 40. The resulting estimates are nearly identical to those reported in previous studies [82]. We ran outbreaker 6 times in parallel, each with 1 million MCMC steps, and discarded the first 10% of states as burn-in. We assessed run convergence and combined results for 5 of the 6 parallel runs to determine the reconstructed transmission tree (Fig 2C right). For each link in the reconstruction, the support is the frequency of the link in the samples from the posterior (excluding the burn-in). To reconstruct transmission using SH sequences only (S7C Fig), we extracted the SH gene from the II-outbreak alignment and ran outbreaker as described above, using the results from all 6 parallel runs in the analysis.SH and HN multiple sequence alignmentTo analyze all published SH and HN mumps sequences, we searched NBCI GenBank in July 2017 for all nucleotide sequences with organism “Mumps rubulavirus.” We performed a pairwise alignment between each sequence si and a reference genome (accession: JX287389.1) using MAFFT version 7.221 [48] with parameters: “—localpair—maxiterate 1000—preservecase.” We then extracted the SH sequence from each si based on the reference coordinates in the alignment, removing all SH sequences without the full 316-nucleotide region and all SH sequences with an insertion or deletion (“indel”) relative to the reference. We then used MAFFT with parameters “—localpair—maxiterate 1000—retree 2 –preservecase” to create a multiple sequence alignment of the extracted SH gene sequences and removed any sequences with indels in this final alignment. We repeated the same process for the HN region, requiring the full 1,749-nucleotide coding region.In both the SH and HN alignments, we removed sequences from vaccine strains (i.e., genotype N, or another genotype marked as “(VAC)” or “vaccine”). We also removed sequences with GenBank records indicating extensive passaging. In the SH alignment only, we removed sequences with no reported collection date or country of origin, because these data are required for phylogeographic analyses. In samples with a collection decade (e.g., 1970s) but not a specific year, we assigned the first year of the decade; in samples with only a collection year, we assigned a decimal year of year + 0.5 (e.g., 1970.5); in samples with year and month but no day, we used the day halfway through the given month (e.g., 2015–03 becomes 2015-03-15) to calculate the decimal year; and in samples with an epidemiological week but no specific day, we approximated the decimal year as year + (epi week / 52), except samples collected in epidemiological week 52 were relabeled as week 51.999 to avoid confusion with year-only samples.In both the SH and HN alignments, we relabeled outdated genotypes (M, E, and any subgenotypes [21]) and constructed a maximum likelihood tree (using IQ-TREE with a GTR substitution model, as described above) to assign a genotype if one was not reported on GenBank. We preserved genotypes designated as “Unclassified” [21].To each alignment, we added all SH or HN sequences from individual patients generated in this study, except those with 2 or more consecutive ambiguous bases (“N”s) in the SH or HN region. The sequences used in the SH and HN analyses are listed in S4 Data.SH phylogeographic analysisTo perform phylogenetic and phylogeographic analyses of the SH gene sequence, we first sampled trees using BEAST version 1.8.4 [57]. We used constant size population and strict clock models and used the HKY substitution model [60] with 4 rate categories and no codon partitioning. We ran BEAST in 4 replicates, each for 500 million states with sampling every 50,000 states, and removed the first 150 million states as burn-in. We verified convergence of all parameters across the 4 replicates and then combined the 4 replicates using LogCombiner.We used TreeAnnotator to determine the MCC tree (Fig 3C) from a resampling of 350 trees and visualized the result in FigTree version 1.4.3 [53]. We computed a kernel density estimate of the probability distribution of the tMRCA over all sampled states for the 11 genotypes in this data set (S9 Fig).To construct distributions of estimates, we used resampling on the input sequences, similar to prior work facing sampling biases [83]. To perform this resampling, we focused on only samples that were collected both within a window of time and from a geographic region with sufficient sampling. Namely, we considered only sequences sampled in 2010 or afterward and collapsed the locations shown on the full data set (Fig 3A) to just 4 global regions: US (consisting of only samples from the US), Europe (consisting of samples whose location was labeled as Eastern Europe, Northern Europe, Southern Europe, Western Europe, or the United Kingdom), East Asia (consisting of samples whose location was labeled as Eastern Asia or Japan), and South/Southeast Asia (consisting of samples whose location was labeled as Southeast Asia or Southern Asia). These 4 regions encompass 3,541 of the 3,646 SH gene sequences used in our analysis. We ignored samples from 5 locations: Canada; Caribbean, Central America, and South America; Middle and Eastern Africa; Northern Africa; Middle East. See S10A Fig for a visual representation of these 4 regions. Then, we randomly sampled 10 sequences (without replacement) from each region for each year (i.e., 2010–2011, 2011–2012, etc.). We resampled the input sequences with this strategy 100 times.See S1 Text for a description of limitations of this resampling strategy.For each of the 100 resamplings of the input sequences, we ran BEAST to sample trees, as described above, for 100 million states sampling every 10,000 states; we removed 10 million states as burn-in and resampled to obtain 1,000 sampled trees.Then, we performed phylogeographic analyses on each of the 100 samplings of input sequences by drawing from their sampled trees. We used a discrete trait substitution model [84] on location in BEAST version 1.8.4. To estimate transition rates between locations we used a nonreversible CTMC model with 42 − 4 = 12 rates. Furthermore, to evaluate the significance of routes in the diffusion process, we added indicator variables to each rate through Bayesian stochastic search variable selection (BSSVS); we set the number of nonzero rates to have a Poisson prior with a mean of 3.0, placing considerable prior probability on having the fewest rates needed to explain the diffusion. We ran BEAST with 10 million states, sampling every 1,000 states, and removed the first 1 million as burn-in. At each sampled state, we logged the complete Markov jump history [85,86], as well as a tree with the reconstructed ancestral location of each node.To determine an MCC tree across the 100 samplings of input sequences, we ran TreeAnnotator on the sampled trees from each of the 100 samplings and then selected the MCC tree, from the 100 options, with the highest clade credibility score. We show this one, colored by reconstructed ancestral locations, in S10B Fig.For each sampling xi of the 100 samplings of input sequences, we counted the number of jumps between each pair of locations at each state using the complete Markov jump history after resampling the jump history every 10,000 states. For each xi, at each state, we calculated the fraction of migrations between each region pair by dividing the number of migrations between the pair by the total number of migrations at that state. To quantify support for migration routes in each xi, we calculated Bayes factors (BFs) on the rate indicator variables. We calculated the posterior probability that a rate is nonzero as the mean of the indicator variable over the MCMC states, thereby providing a posterior odds. We calculated the prior probability that a rate is nonzero as the expected number of nonzero rates divided by the number of rates, which reduces to 1/N, where N is the number of locations; thus, the prior odds is 1/(N-1) or, in this case, 1/3. We set an upper limit of 10,000 on the BF and a lower limit of 1.0. To estimate the proportion of ancestry for each xi, we used skyline statistics via PACT [87] to calculate proportion of ancestry at each location from each other location: in particular, for each xi, we used the sampled trees with ancestral locations as input (after resampling them every 10,000 states), padded the trees with migration events, broke the trees into temporal windows of 0.1 year going back 5 years prior to sampling, and estimated the proportion of history from tips in each time window.To summarize phylogeographic results across the 100 resamplings xi of the input sequences, we show probability distributions across the xi. When plotting the fraction of migrations to each region from each other (S10C Fig), we calculated the mean of this fraction across all the sampled states in each of the 100 runs to produce a point estimate for each xi and show the distribution of these means across the 100 xi. We calculated the BFs on migration routes between the 4 regions by combining the sampled indicator variables across all 100 xi to compute the posterior odds (S10D Fig). Similarly, the proportion of ancestry plotted between a pair of locations in a time window (S10E Fig) is the mean across the 100 xi of the mean proportion for that pair in that time window from each xi. We calculated the pointwise percentile bands in S10F Fig from the mean proportions in each xi across the xi (i.e., they are percentiles across the resamplings of the input sequences).Supporting informationS1 FigSequencing results and predictors of outcome.(A) Distribution of mumps virus (MuV) RT-qPCR Ct value, taken at sample source, for all sequencing replicates prepared with both depletion and capture (see Materials and methods). Genome (blue): a replicate produces a genome passing the thresholds described in Materials and methods. MuV RT-qPCR serves as a predictor of sequencing outcome. (B) Distribution of collection interval (days between symptom onset and sample collection) for all samples prepared with both depletion and capture. Genome (blue) is defined as in panel A. Samples taken more than 4 days after symptom onset did not produce genomes in this study [88]. (C) Relative sequencing depth of coverage aggregated across 203 mumps genomes. (D) Number of unambiguous bases in the genome assembly of each sample by MuV:23S ratio (MuV copies by MuV RT-qPCR divided by 23S copies by 23S RT-qPCR; see Materials and methods). Each point is a replicate, colored by sequencing preparation method. (E) Normalized MuV reads (unique MuV reads divided by raw sequencing depth) in each sample by MuV:23S ratio. Points are as in panel D. Nine points with fraction mumps reads >0.04 are beyond the y-axis limits. In panels A, B, D, and E, reads from each replicate were downsampled to 1 million prior to assembly (see Materials and methods). In panels D and E, 1 point with a MuV:23S ratio <10−8 and 3 points with a MuV:23S ratio >10−3 are beyond the x-axis limits. Ct, cycle threshold; MuV, mumps virus; RT-qPCR, real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigMaximum likelihood tree, root-to-tip regression, and principal component analysis.(A) Maximum likelihood tree of the 225 mumps virus genotype G genomes used in this study. Tips are colored by sample source (MDPH or CDC); previously published genomes are indicated by unfilled circles. (B) Root-to-tip regression of genomes shown in panel A, rooted on GenBank accession KF738113 (Pune.IND, 1986). (C) Root-to-tip regression of genomes in the clade containing the two USA 2006 sequences (USA_2006; see Fig 1A) as well as their descendants. (D) Principal component analysis of genetic variants from the genomes in panel A. Each point is a genome colored by its geographic location. CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; MDPH, Massachusetts Department of Public Health.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigPhylogenetic tree colored by institution.MCC tree of the 225 mumps virus genotype G genomes used in this study, colored by academic institution. Clades are labeled as in Fig 1A. MCC, maximum clade credibility.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 FigAmino acid substitution in the mumps virus genome.(A) Variation in genomes generated in this study. Each row represents one of the 119 mumps HN amino acid sequences from the individuals in our study who had known vaccine status. Samples are displayed in order of descending time since last MMR vaccine dose. Colored variants indicate variation from the consensus of all included sequences. (B) Variation in all published genotype G HN sequences. Each row represents one of the 456 publicly available mumps genotype G HN sequences (including from genomes generated in this study). Identical sequences are collapsed and then grouped by hierarchical clustering. In both panels, amino acid substitutions relative to the Jeryl Lynn vaccine strain are highlighted in blue, with orange indicating a second variant allele and green indicating a third. Light red bars indicate possible neutralizing antibody epitopes, and dark red bars indicate potential N-glycosylation sites. (C) Estimate of dN/dS at each amino acid site in MuV coding regions, calculated across all 225 genotype G genomes used in this study. At each site, the mean estimate and 95% credible interval (not corrected for multiple testing) is shown. (D) Posterior density of dN/dS in each gene, using the same data set. (E) MCC tree of the 225 mumps genotype G genomes used in this study, colored by vaccination status. Clades are labeled as in Fig 1A. HN, hemagglutinin gene; MCC, maximum clade credibility; MMR, Measles-Mumps-Rubella; MuV, mumps virus.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigComparison of PCR-positive and PCR-negative Massachusetts samples.Comparison between 521 mumps PCR-negative samples tested in Massachusetts between 2016-01-01 and 2017-06-30, and 198 mumps samples from unique patients in Massachusetts in the same time period. In all panels, percentages have been recalculating after removing unknowns. (A) Vaccination status of positives (n = 198) and negatives (n = 309) with known vaccination status. A chi-square test suggests there is no relationship between PCR result and vaccination status (p = 0.012). (B) Years since vaccination for positives (n = 198) and negatives (n = 309) with known vaccination status. A chi-square tests suggests there is a relationship between PCR result and vaccination status (p = 1.19 × 10−7), and the plot shows that most recently vaccinated individuals were PCR-negative. (C) Collection interval for positives (n = 196) and negatives (n = 477) with known symptom onset and known collection date. A chi-square test suggests there is no relationship between PCR result and collection interval (p = 0.918). PCR, polymerase chain reaction.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S6 FigParameters used in epidemiological models.We illustrate fitted distributions of parameters of the modeled natural history of mumps infection. (A) We calibrate a gamma distribution to the duration of the incubation period—defined from the time of mumps virus exposure to the onset of shedding—using data from experimental human mumps virus infections with known exposure times [75]. (B) Onset of mumps shedding generally precedes onset of symptoms in the clinical course. We fit a gamma distribution describing the period of latent shedding to pooled data from 2 studies [75] and (C) apply previous estimates of the distribution of the duration of shedding after parotitis onset [77]. (D) We obtain estimates of the distribution of vaccine protection within a university protection by pairing previous estimates of the association between the strength of vaccine protection and time since receipt of the last dose [5] to data on vaccine coverage in a large university [80]. (E) We infer the distribution of the generation interval length in the Harvard using data from 10 cases with known exposure sources (“contact link”). A gamma distribution fitted by maximum likelihood recovers mean and dispersion estimates nearly identical to those reported in earlier mumps outbreaks [82].(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S7 FigConnection between epidemiological and genetic data.(A) Multidimensional scaling applied to samples in Clade II-outbreak (see Fig 1A). Each point is a mumps genome and pairwise dissimilarities are based on Hamming distance (see Materials and methods). Genomes with known epidemiological links are connected with a red line. (B) ROC curve for samples within Clade II-outbreak using pairwise genetic distance (calculated as in panel A) as a predictor of epidemiological linkage. (C) Transmission reconstruction using individuals within Clade II-outbreak, using the SH gene or whole genome sequences. Inferred links with probability ≥0.7 are shown; arrows are colored by data set. Nodes with one or more inferred links are shown and are colored by institution. See also Fig 2C, right. ROC, receiver operating characteristic; SH, small hydrophonic.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S8 FigTrees produced with single-gene and multigene sequences.Maximum likelihood trees using (A) the SH gene only, (B) the HN protein only, (C) a concatenation of the HN protein, the F coding region, and the SH gene, and (D) the complete mumps genome. In all panels, tips are colored by clades as defined in Fig 1A and S2 Table. The HN protein sequence does a significantly better job at capturing the epidemiologically-relevant clades than the SH gene, and the tree created from SH+HN+F (nearly 25% of the genome) closely resembles the tree created from whole genome sequences. F, fusion protein; HN, hemagglutinin-neuraminidase; SH, small hydrophobic.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S9 FigtMRCA probability distributions for mumps genotypes using SH gene sequences.The date of the most recent genotype A clinical sample is indicated, excluding samples that closely resemble a mumps vaccine strain. SH, small hydrophobic; tMRCA, time to the most recent common ancestor.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S10 FigAdditional analyses of global mumps spread using SH gene sequences.(A) World map indicating number of SH sequences in our data set from each of 15 regions; the 4 circled global regions represent the 4 regions from which we resampled input for migration analyses (see Materials and methods for details regarding geographic and temporal resampling of sequences). (B) Tree with the highest clade credibility across all trees generated on resampled input from 4 global regions. Branch line thickness corresponds to posterior support for ancestry (indicated by branch color). (C) Migration between the 4 global regions shown in panel A. Each plot shows a posterior probability density, taken across resampled input, of the fraction of all reconstructed migrations that occur to the destination (indicated in upper right) from each of the other 3 sources. (D) Migration between the 4 global regions shown in panel A. Shading of each migration route indicates its statistical support (quantified with BF) in explaining the diffusion of mumps virus. (E) Average proportion of geographic ancestry of samples in each of the 4 global regions (labeled) from each of the 4 regions (colored), going back 5 years from sample collection. (F) Average proportion of Europe in geographic ancestry of US samples, and vice-versa. Shaded regions are pointwise percentile bands (2.5% to 97.5%) across 100 resamplings of the input sequences. Colors for panels B,C,D,E,F are by global region, as shown in the bottom right. BF, Bayes factor; SH, small hydrophobic.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S11 FigSkygrid reconstruction of population size.The scaled population size (Neτ) according to a Skygrid reconstruction. Dark line represents the median population size across samples from the posterior, and shaded area represents the 95% HPD interval. HPD, highest posterior density.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableSample metadata.Demographic information of all mumps cases in Massachusetts between 2016-01-01 and 2017-06-30, and the subset of these included in this study.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableModel selection and tMRCA estimates across models.(A) Marginal likelihoods estimated in 6 models: combinations of 3 coalescent tree priors (constant size population, exponential growth population, and Skygrid) and 2 clock models (strict clock and uncorrelated relaxed clock with log-normal distribution). Estimates are with PS and SS. The BF are calculated against the model with constant size population and a strict clock. (B) Mean estimates of clock rate, date of tree root, and tMRCAs of the clades shown in Fig 1A (excluding Clade 0-HU, which consists of one sample). USA-4 corresponds to “Clades I and II” in Fig 1A. Below each mean estimate is the 95% highest posterior density interval. tMRCAs of additional unlabeled nodes are available at http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3338599. BF, Bayes factor; PS, path sampling; SS, stepping-stone sampling; tMRCA, time to the most recent common ancestor.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 TableViruses identified in mumps PCR-negative samples.Influenzavirus B is the only segmented virus listed, and we identify 51 reads mapping to 6 of the 8 segments: in order, 2, 6, 0, 0, 8, 10, 4, 21 reads to each segment. PCR, polymerase chain reaction.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 DataSample metadata.Information and metadata regarding all mumps PCR-positive and PCR-negative samples on which sequencing was attempted. PCR, polymerase chain reaction.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S2 DataSingle nucleotide polymorphisms.List of identified nonsynonymous SNPs, including the frequency of each SNP. Separate list of identified within-host variants above 2% frequency. Separate list of SNPs in possible immunogenic regions of HN and NP in US samples from 2016 to 2017 (all positions relative to the relevant gene). HN, hemagglutinin-neuraminidase; NP, nucleoprotein; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S3 DatadN/dS values.Calculated dN/dS value and confidence interval for each amino acid position across the mumps virus genome.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S4 DataPublicly available SH and HN sequences.List of SH and HN sequences and corresponding metadata used in analysis, as well as SH sequences available for resampling. HN, hemagglutinin-neuraminidase; SH, small hydrophobic.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S1 Text(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Illumination of Parainfluenza Virus Infection and Transmission in Living Animals Reveals a Tissue-Specific Dichotomy

IntroductionThe parainfluenza viruses (PIVs) are non-segmented, negative-strand RNA viruses of the family Paramyxoviridae. The paramyxoviruses include not only the PIVs but also a number of other important human pathogens transmitted via the respiratory route such as human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV), metapneumovirus, measles virus, and mumps virus [1], [2]. The human PIVs (HPIVs) consist of four serotypes (HPIV1-4), are a common cause of upper respiratory tract (URT) infections, and are a leading cause of lower respiratory tract (LRT) disease in infants and children [3]. The HPIVs are efficiently transmitted by direct contact and exposure to nasopharyngeal secretions [4], and nearly all children are infected with HPIV3 by age 2 and with HPIV1 and HPIV2 by age 5 [5], [6]. No licensed anti-PIV vaccines or drugs are available, and therefore non-pharmaceutical interventions are currently the only means of control. In view of these facts, an understanding of how PIV infection spreads within the respiratory tract, promotes pathogenesis, elicits immunity, and is transmitted to naïve hosts would greatly advance the development of novel vaccines and therapeutics.Experimental studies of HPIV infection in tissue culture and animal models have helped reveal basic replication mechanisms and evaluate preclinical vaccine candidates [7]–[9]. However, knowledge about the spread of PIV infection in individual, living animals that are fully susceptible to PIV-associated disease would allow more thorough investigations of PIV virus-host interactions and transmission. Mice are poorly permissive to infection by the HPIVs, and HPIV infection in cotton rats, hamsters, guinea pigs, and ferrets is usually asymptomatic with minimal or undetectable pathology [1]. As a result, a number of studies have used Sendai virus (SeV) infection of mice as a model to investigate pathogenesis in an experimental setting [10], [11]. SeV is the murine counterpart of HPIV1, the leading cause of laryngotracheobronchitis (pediatric croup) [12]. SeV and HPIV1 have 78% amino-acid sequence identity [13], elicit cross-protective immunity [14]–[16], and have similar tissue tropism and epidemiology [1], [11]. Moreover, SeV shows promise as a Jennerian vaccine for HPIV1 [17] and as a vaccine vector for HRSV, HPIV3, and HPIV2 [18]–[20].Although SeV and the HPIVs were first isolated in the 1950s and have been studied for more than 50 years [1], fundamental aspects of PIV infection and immunity that remain unknown are directly relevant to our understanding of pathogenesis and transmission. For example, the spatial and temporal spread of natural infection in the respiratory tract after SeV transmission remains poorly understood because of the ambiguous results (marked inter-animal variability and error) of classical experiments measuring virus titers in sacrificed mice [21], [22]. It is also unknown how HPIV and SeV infection after transmission often results in immunity without causing severe pathology. The contribution of LRT infection to transmission is unknown. Finally, while infection of the lungs and the concomitant immune response are clearly associated with disease severity [1], [11], [23], [24], many questions remain about the contribution of infection in the URT and trachea to clinical outcome and protective immunity [25], [26]. For example, we are unaware of any reports of studies investigating the effect of the dose of virus inoculum, the replicative fitness of the virus, or the genetic susceptibility of the host on the growth and clearance of SeV in the URT and trachea.To measure the dynamics of PIV infection in living animals, we generated three luciferase-expressing SeVs that allow non-invasive in vivo bioluminescence imaging in mice. Analogous systems have previously been reported for DNA and positive-strand RNA viruses [27] but have been elusive for negative-strand RNA viruses, largely due to virus attenuation [28] or genetic instability resulting from reporter gene insertion [29]. We considered SeV an ideal candidate for non-invasive imaging because (i) foreign-gene expression by paramyxovirus vectors is usually genetically stable [30], (ii) in vivo imaging of a non-replicating SeV in intact mice has been successfully demonstrated [31] and (iii) the match of SeV and the murine host allows pathogenesis studies [11]. The reporter virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) described here was found to express high levels of luciferase yet replicate and promote disease in mice similar to wild-type (WT) virus. We imaged the dynamics of SeV infection in living, intact mice after direct inoculation and after contact transmission, varying both the virus dose and mouse strain. Unexpectedly, we observed a dichotomous tissue tropism in which the URT and trachea supported robust virus growth, efficient transmission, and protective immunity even under conditions that resulted in little infection in the lungs.Results
In vitro properties of luciferase-expressing virusesTo develop a model in which PIV infection could be visualized non-invasively in living, intact mice, we generated three recombinant Sendai viruses (rSeVs) in which a firefly luciferase reporter gene was inserted into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions, respectively, of SeV (Figure 1A, Figure S1). Insertion of the firefly luciferase gene and gene junction into the SeV genome was expected to unacceptably decrease downstream viral gene expression and, consequently, virus replication [32]. To generate a luciferase-expressing SeV expected to suffer little or no attenuation, the rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus was constructed to contain both the luciferase reporter gene and a more efficient transcription start sequence AGGGTGAAAG upstream of the F gene (Figure S1). Therefore, the attenuating effects of reporter gene insertion could be counteracted by optimization of the naturally inefficient gene start sequence upstream of the F gene [33]. For the rSeV-luc(P-M) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) constructs, in which the luciferase gene was inserted into the P-M and F-HN gene junctions, respectively, the natural transcription start sequence upstream of the F gene was left intact (Figure S1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g001Figure 1
In vitro and in vivo phenotypes of luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses.(A) Recombinant Sendai viruses that contain the firefly luciferase gene (luc) inserted into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions were generated. (B) Multiple-step replication kinetics of wild-type (WT) and luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses in LLC-MK2 cell cultures infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 PFU/cell and incubated at 33°C (closed symbols) and 37°C (open symbols). (C) Kinetics of luciferase reporter gene expression in LLC-MK2 cells infected with recombinant Sendai viruses at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell, as measured by luminescence. (D) Changes in mean body weight after intranasal inoculation of Sendai viruses. (E) Percent survival after intranasal inoculation of Sendai viruses. (F) Total lymphocyte counts in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) 10 days after infection. (G) Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers in sera collected 10 days after infection, as measured by reciprocal endpoint dilutions in ELISA assays. For panels D–G, groups of five 8-week-old 129/SvJ-strain mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus or phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and the experiments were performed twice. Cumulative data are shown in panels D and E, and representative data are shown in panels F and G.Multiple-step growth curves were measured at 33°C and 37°C in LLC-MK2 cells that had been infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 PFU/cell (Figure 1B). Titers of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) were similar at both temperatures and similar to SeV WT, showing that these two luciferase-expressing viruses were not substantially attenuated or temperature restricted. In contrast, the rSeV-luc(P-M) virus showed reduced growth kinetics at 33°C and grew even more slowly at 37°C. To compare luciferase reporter gene expression by the recombinant SeVs, we measured in vitro luciferase activity in LLC-MK2 cell lysates (MOI 5 PFU/cell) (Figure 1C). Upstream insertion of luciferase in rSeV-luc(P-M) resulted in greater luciferase activity than did downstream insertion in rSeV-luc(F-HN), consistent with the results of previous studies of SeVs using secreted alkaline phosphatase as the reporter gene [32]. Luciferase expression by rSeV-luc(M-F*) exceeded that of rSeV-luc(P-M) within 6 h post-infection (p.i.), showing that the enhanced gene start sequence engineered into the M-F* virus (Figure S1) increased reporter-gene transcription at later time points, perhaps due to greater downstream transcription of the L polymerase gene. To determine how the reporter gene insertions might have altered SeV protein expression, LLC-MK2 cells were infected at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell and lysates were subjected to radioimmunoprecipitation and SDS-PAGE analysis. Low levels of expression of the M, F, HN and presumably L proteins by the rSeV-luc(P-M) virus (Figure S2A) most likely contributed to the attenuation of this virus. Viral protein expression by rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) was sufficient to generate virions with WT-like compositions (Figure S2C), consistent with the in vitro growth of these two reporter viruses to levels similar to that of WT virus (Figure 1B).Virulence of the luciferase-expressing virusesAn ideal luciferase-reporter virus for non-invasive bioluminescence imaging and pathogenesis studies would express high levels of luciferase without altering virus replication and disease severity. To assess the virulence of the luciferase-expressing SeVs, 129/SvJ mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and inoculated intranasally with 30 µl containing 7,000 PFU of virus. This method of inoculation delivers ∼1/3 of the volume to the nasopharynx and ∼1/2 to the lungs [34]. Infection with SeV WT, rSeV-luc(M-F*), and rSeV-luc(F-HN) resulted in a mean weight loss of ∼25% and mean mortality rates of 80% (Figure 1D,E). Thus, these two luciferase-expressing viruses remained fully virulent at a dose of 7,000 PFU. In contrast, 129/SvJ mice inoculated with 7,000 PFU of the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus experienced only 12% weight loss and no mortality. All mice inoculated with 70,000 or 700,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(P-M) also survived (data not shown), further demonstrating that the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus is avirulent.Acute viral pneumonia by SeV induces high levels of lymphocyte infiltration that show a peak in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) at ∼10 d p.i. [35]. To compare lymphocyte influx caused by the luciferase-expressing viruses and WT virus, we sacrificed 129/SvJ mice that had been infected with 7,000 PFU at 10 d p.i. and collected BALF. Similarly large total numbers of lymphocytes, CD4+ T-lymphocytes, and CD8+ T-lymphocytes were detected in BALF after infection with WT, rSeV-luc(M-F*), or rSeV-luc(F-HN) virus (Figure 1F; Figure S3A–B), whereas mice inoculated with the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) had total lymphocyte counts only 10% as high. To determine the extents to which the reporter viruses elicited SeV- or luciferase-binding antibodies, ELISA assays were performed on sera collected at 10 d p.i. The anti-SeV antibody titers elicited by all three rSeVs were similar to that induced by WT virus (Figure 1G). The three reporter viruses also induced similar anti-luciferase antibody titers (Figure S3C). Thus, despite being attenuated and avirulent, rSeV-luc(P-M) elicited a robust antibody response. rSeV-luc(M-F*), which induced WT-like morbidity and mortality while expressing high levels of luciferase, was identified as the best suited surrogate for WT virus for use in subsequent bioluminescence imaging experiments.Dynamics of infection in living animalsIn studies to determine whether non-invasive bioluminescence accurately reflected in vivo infection, 129/SvJ mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU, imaged with a Xenogen IVIS instrument, and immediately euthanized. Respiratory tissues were promptly collected for ex vivo measurement of luminescence and viral titers. As in previous studies in immunocompetent mice [36], [37], viral titers and bioluminescence were limited to the respiratory tract. As shown in Figure S4, in vivo bioluminescence intensity levels in living animals were well correlated with ex vivo luminescence (R
2 0.878) and with viral titers in the nasopharynx (R
2 0.864), trachea (R
2 0.915), and lungs (R
2 0.961). The correspondence of these data validates the technique as a means of noninvasive measurement of infection in vivo. To determine whether the luciferase-reporter genes were genetically stable in the three rSeVs, we recovered lung tissues from 129/SvJ mice inoculated with 7,000 PFU of virus at 7 d p.i., homogenized the samples, and conducted plaque assays in LLC-MK2 cells. Five plaques of each of the three luciferase-expressing viruses were picked, amplified by one round of replication in eggs, RT-PCR transcribed, and sequenced. All of the individual viral clones contained the luciferase insert, which had no amino acid mutations, and expressed luciferase when grown in LLC-MK2 cells.We next measured the kinetics and tropism of bioluminescence in living 129/SvJ mice and compared the results to conventionally measured viral titers in dissected tissues (Figures 2 and 3). Just as rSeV-luc(M-F*) and rSeV-luc(F-HN) had in vitro replication rates and in vivo pathogenicity similar to those of WT virus, they also had WT-like titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea, and lungs. In the nasal turbinates, high virus titers (>105 PFU) were detected by day 2 p.i. and were maintained until day 9 p.i., after which rapid clearance occurred (Figure 3B). Between days 2 and 9 p.i., high levels of in vivo bioluminescence were similarly observed in the nasopharynx (>108 photons/s) of 129/SvJ mice infected with rSeV-luc(M-F); bioluminescence peaked at about 5 d p.i. (Figure 3A). In the lungs, the titers of all three luciferase-expressing viruses and of WT SeV peaked by day 5 p.i. and fell to low levels by day 9 p.i. Infection with the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) resulted in peak lung titers of ∼104 PFU (approximately 5% of the WT titer) at day 5 p.i. (Figure 3D). Similarly low levels of rSeV-luc(P-M) bioluminescence were observed in the lungs (Figure 3A), consistent with the attenuated and avirulent virus phenotype. On the other hand, rSeV-luc(P-M) reached high peak titers (∼105 PFU, similar to the WT titer) in the nasal turbinates at 7 d p.i. (Figure 3C), and high levels of bioluminescence were observed in the nasopharynx between days 3 and 7 p.i. (Figure 3A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g002Figure 2Non-invasive bioluminescence imaging of Sendai virus infection in the respiratory tracts of living mice.Eight-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(P-M), rSeV-luc(F-HN), or rSeV-luc(M-F*). Every 24 hours the mice were intraperitoneally injected with luciferin substrate, anesthetized with isoflurane, imaged with a Xenogen IVIS device, and then allowed to recover. Bioluminescence in one experiment is shown on day 2 (A) and day 7 (B) post-infection (p.i.) in 129/SvJ mice infected with rSeV-luc(P-M), rSeV-luc(F-HN), or rSeV-luc(M-F*). Bioluminescence in a second experiment is shown on day 2 (C) or day 7 (D) for 129/SvJ, DBA/2, BALB/c, or C57BL/6 mice infected with rSeV-luc(M-F*). The data are displayed as radiance (bioluminescence intensity) on a rainbow log scale with a range of 1×106 (blue) to 1×109 (red) photons/s/cm2/steradian. Red circles indicate regions of interest (ROI) used to calculate the total flux (photons/s) in the nasopharynx, and red rectangles indicate the ROI areas for the trachea and lungs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g003Figure 3Kinetics of Sendai virus spread and clearance in the respiratory tracts of 129/SvJ mice.(A) The extent of infection was determined by non-invasive bioluminescence imaging of living, anesthetized mice every 24 h. Each data point represents the mean bioluminescence of 6 mice. The total flux (photons/s) of bioluminescence intensity is calculated as the sum of radiance in the region of interest. (B–D) Viral titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea, and lungs were determined by sacrificing groups of 3 mice at the reported days and performing plaque titrations of tissue homogenates in LLC-MK2 cells. Both experiments were repeated, and representative data are shown.Tissue tropism and viral doseThe high permissivity of the URT and trachea to infection by the attenuated rSeV-luc(P-M) virus was unexpected. We next investigated whether these tissues were also highly permissive to infection by the WT-like virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) at a low inoculating dose. Our preliminary studies showed that the 50% mouse infectious dose (MID50) of rSeV-luc(M-F*) was 9 PFU and that a 70-PFU dose resulted in 100% infection, similar to results obtained for WT SeV in mice [38] and HPIV1 in humans [39]. We inoculated 129/SvJ mice intranasally with 70, 700, or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) in equal 30 µl volumes and then measured bioluminescence and viral titers. After inoculation with 70 PFU, viral titers and bioluminescence in the lungs were ∼10% of that induced by a 7,000-PFU dose (Figure 4A,B), and weight loss was far less (Figure 4C). In contrast, infection in the nasopharynx and trachea after a 70-PFU inoculation was delayed ∼1 d compared to 7,000-PFU inoculation, reached a similar level by ∼5 d p.i. (Figure 4A,B), and induced relatively high titers of SeV-specific antibodies (>105) (Figure 4D). Therefore, low-dose inoculation of the WT-like rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus resulted in preferential infection of the URT and trachea, inducing a robust antibody response without causing much weight loss.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g004Figure 4Virus replication and pathogenesis as a function of virus dose and mouse strain.After intranasal inoculation of 129/SvJ mice with 70 to 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*), the total flux of bioluminescence intensity (A) and viral titers (B) were measured as described in Figure 3. (C) Percent body weight change was measured in groups of ten 129/SvJ mice after inoculation with 70 to 7,000 PFU. The experiment was performed in duplicate; representative data are shown. (D) Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers in sera of 129/SvJ mice collected 10 days after inoculation with 70 to 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). Titers are reported as the reciprocal endpoint dilutions in ELISA assays. Five infected and two control mice were used in the experiment, which was performed in duplicate. Representative data are shown. (E) The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs after 7,000-PFU intranasal inoculation of 129/SvJ, DBA/2, BALB/c, or C57BL/6-strain mice with rSeV-luc(M-F*). Values are the mean from six animals. The experiment was performed in duplicate, and the results from a representative experiment are shown. (F) Mean percent weight change in groups of 10 mice after infection with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). The experiment was performed in duplicate; representative data are shown.Tissue tropism and host geneticsWhile it is known that 129/SvJ and DBA/2 mice are highly susceptible to lung infection by SeV and BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice are highly resistant [40]–[43], the effect of host genetics on SeV replication in the URT and trachea has not been reported. Therefore, we measured the in vivo dynamics of SeV infection in 129/SvJ, DBA/2, C57BL/6, and BALB/c strains of mice that had been intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). As expected from previous studies, the extent of pulmonary infection and weight loss correlated with each other and followed the trend C57BL/6<BALB/c<<DBA/2<129/SvJ (Figure 4). In contrast, similarly high levels of bioluminescence were observed in the URT and trachea in all four strains of mice. The titers of rSeV-luc(M-F*) in BALB/c mice correlated with bioluminescence in intact mice (Figure S5A), as they were in 129/SvJ mice. Therefore, use of the bioluminescence technique to measure respiratory tract infection in living mice was validated in both 129/SvJ and BALB/c strains.Dynamics of infection during contact transmissionSeV, the HPIVs, and HRSV are thought to be transmitted primarily via contact with respiratory secretions as opposed to long-range transmission of these secretions as small-particle aerosols [21], [22], [24], [44], [45]. It has also been shown that growth of SeV [21] and influenza virus [46] in the URT promotes transmission. Two fundamental questions about PIV transmission that have long remained unanswered are (i) how growth of virus in the lungs of donors influences transmission and (ii) how infection spreads in the respiratory tracts of contact animals after transmission. To address these fundamental questions about SeV transmission, we inoculated BALB/c or 129/SvJ donor mice with 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then at 1 d p.i. we placed 1 donor mouse in a “clean” cage with 3 naïve contact mice. We measured bioluminescence daily in inoculated and contact mice until primary infection was cleared. We then collected sera on day 60, challenged the mice with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) on day 63, and subsequently imaged the mice daily to detect reinfection (Figures 5 and 6). Transmission to every naïve contact mouse was observed by nasopharyngeal bioluminescence and seroconversion, including resistant BALB/c mice exposed to donor animals inoculated at the lower dose of 70 PFU (Figure 5). The timing of transmission was not influenced by the extent of lung infection in donors, as lung titers were ∼10 times lower in BALB/c than in 129/SvJ donor mice after 7,000-PFU inoculation (Figure S5C), yet the timing of transmission (time between detection in inoculated animals and contact animals) was similar (3.3 and 3.4 days, respectively) (Figure 6F). While LRT infection occurred in both strains of mice and may have contributed to transmission, the primary determinant of transmission appeared to be virus shedding in the URT and trachea. For example, both high-titer (>105 PFU) shedding in the nasal cavities and trachea of 129/SvJ donor mice (Figure 4A,B) and contact transmission (Figure 6E,F) occurred ∼1 day earlier after 7,000-PFU inoculation than after 70-PFU inoculation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g005Figure 5Sendai virus infection and immune response after contact transmission.Donor mice were directly inoculated with 70 PFU (A,C,E) or 7,000 PFU (B,D,F) of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and then introduced into a cage with 3 naïve animals one day later. The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in the nasopharyngeal cavities of individual 129/SvJ (A–B) and BALB/c (C–D) mice are shown. Serum was collected on day 60 and contact mice were challenged with 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) on day 63 to monitor for re-infection by bioluminescence. Sendai virus-specific binding antibody titers were measured as reciprocal endpoint dilutions of sera collected on day 60 from mice co-housed with animals inoculated with 70 PFU (E) or 7,000 PFU (F). Open bars represent mice inoculated on day 0 and solid bars represent the contact mice. The experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ mice (3 donor and 9 contact mice) and duplicate for BALB/c mice (2 donor and 6 contact mice).10.1371/journal.ppat.1002134.g006Figure 6Timing and tissue-tropic spread of Sendai virus infection after contact transmission.The co-housing of contact mice with mice inoculated with rSeV-luc(M-F*) is described in Figure 5. The total flux of bioluminescence intensity in individual, representative 129/SvJ (A–B) and BALB/c (C–D) mice is shown for the nasopharynx (triangles), trachea (circles), and lungs (squares). Time to detection of bioluminescence (>6 log10 photons/s) in the nasopharynx after inoculation of donors with either 70 PFU (E) or 7,000 PFU (F) of virus. Mean percent weight change in BALB/c (G) and 129/SvJ (H) mice. The contact transmission experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ mice and in duplicate for BALB/c mice. Open symbols and bars represent directly inoculated mice and solid symbols and bars represent contact mice. In panels G and H, the symbol X indicates PBS-inoculated control mice.Under all four conditions tested (129/SvJ or BALB/c donor mice infected with 70 or 7,000 PFU of virus), the tropism and magnitude of infection in contact animals was similar to that observed after direct intranasal inoculation with 70 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). After contact transmission, bioluminescence was first observed in the nasopharynx and then spread to the trachea and lungs an average of 0.8 and 1.0 days later, respectively (Figure S6A–D). Robust infection was observed in the nasopharynx and trachea after transmission (Figure 6A–D, Figure S6E–H). In contrast, low levels of infection in the lungs were observed after transmission, consistent with low weight loss (Figure 6G–H). In all four groups of mice, SeV-specific antibody titers on day 60 were similarly high (∼106) and all animals were protected from challenge on day 63 (Figure 5). After challenge, a low level of bioluminescence (<106 photons/s), but no weight loss, was detected in only 1 of the 30 contact mice; this animal had shown the lowest level of bioluminescence on days 5–12 after primary infection (Figure 5B, solid black circles). As this animal also had the lowest level of SeV-specific antibodies at day 60 before challenge, a threshold level of infection may be required to induce the highest levels of protective immunity. Overall, SeV infection after transmission was observed to be sufficiently robust in the URT and trachea, yet sufficiently limited in the lungs, to induce protective immunity without causing severe pathogenesis.DiscussionIn this study, we generated and used luciferase-reporter viruses to study the kinetics of SeV infection in living mice after direct inoculation or contact transmission. WT SeV virus and the luciferase-expressing virus rSeV-luc(M-F*) had a similar replication rate in vivo and elicited similar levels of weight loss, mortality, bronchoalveolar lymphocyte influx, and serum antibody titers. Both susceptible (129/SvJ) and resistant (BALB/c) strains of mice were intranasally inoculated with 70- and 7,000-PFU doses of rSeV-luc(M-F*), and the spread of infection was measured by both in vivo bioluminescence in intact mice and ex vivo virus titers in the tissues of sacrificed animals. The consequences of infection in the URT and trachea were found to be distinct from those of infection in the lungs. Unexpectedly, under all conditions tested, including 70-PFU inoculation of resistant BALB/c mice, the URT and trachea supported robust SeV growth, efficient contact transmission, and protective immunity independently of the extent of infection in the lungs. In contrast, the extent of infection in the lungs varied with the virus dose and mouse strain and was highly correlated with weight loss and mortality. Overall, the results reported here reveal a tissue-specific dichotomy in the respiratory tract in which robust infection in the URT and trachea supports efficient transmission while the extent of infection in the lungs and the host response determines disease severity.Here we describe for the first time the development of a non-invasive bioluminescence imaging system to visualize negative-strand RNA virus infection throughout the bodies of living animals, using the respiratory paramyxovirus SeV as a model. The development of a non-attenuated paramyxovirus that expresses sufficiently high levels of a reporter gene to allow non-invasive imaging of small animals has been challenging because of the polarized transcription mechanism of these non-segmented negative-strand RNA viruses [2]. A significant advance described here is the generation of the rSeV-luc(M-F*) virus, in which the attenuating effect of reporter-gene insertion [32] is counteracted by enhancement of the naturally occurring but suboptimal start sequence upstream of the F gene [33]. Expression of the F gene, a virulence factor [47], [48], is also downregulated by HPIV1 [49], HPIV3 [50], PIV5 [51], measles virus [52] and canine distemper virus (CDV) [47] by readthrough transcription or long untranslated regions. Therefore, we predict that other WT-like reporter paramyxoviruses that express high levels of luciferase can be engineered by inserting the reporter gene into the M-F junction and maintaining F gene expression through compensating mutations. Reporter gene expression without attenuation of SeV has also been achieved by construction of a bicistronic gene that contains an internal ribosome entry site [53], although it is not yet clear whether this approach yields sufficient luciferase expression to allow non-invasive imaging of in vivo infection.The use of the luciferase reporter gene in the present work enabled the measurement of infection throughout the entire respiratory tracts of intact animals, allowing us to measure the spread and clearance of infection after direct inoculation or transmission. eGFP-expressing reporter viruses have also been used to study the dynamics of CDV infection in ferrets [54], [55] and measles virus infection in monkeys [56], [57]. The eGFP reporter gene provides the advantage of allowing the tropism of infection to be studied at the cellular level in dissected tissues. Moreover, eGFP-expressing viruses can also be used to quantify and type infected cells in the peripheral blood, skin, and mouths of living animals. eGFP-expressing HPIV3 and Sendai viruses have been used to study the cellular tropism of PIV infection in well differentiated, primary epithelial cultures. In the case of HPIV3, infection was found to be restricted to ciliated epithelial cells and to cause little cytopathology [58]. In contrast, SeV was found to infect ciliated and non-ciliated cells, but not goblet cells, and was observed to induce ciliostasis, cell sloughing, apoptosis, and cellular degeneration [59]. It is unknown whether cell-free virus or cell-associated virus is associated with SeV transmission.A major finding reported here is that the efficiency and timing of SeV transmission are independent of the extent of pulmonary infection, clinical symptoms, and host genetics. HPIV1 transmission from asymptomatic human donors has also been observed in an experimental setting [39] and is consistent with epidemiological observations for PIV outbreaks in general [23], [24]. These observations suggest that LRT infection and the severity of clinical symptoms are poor predictors of transmission potential in surveillance and infection control efforts. As in previous work [21], [38], we observed that SeV transmission coincides with high-titer virus growth in the URT and is remarkably efficient because of the high infectivity of the virus (e.g., the MID50 of SeV is <10 PFU). HPIV1, HPIV3, and HRSV are similarly highly infectious and also transmit predominantly by direct contact or indirect exposure to nasal secretions [44], [45], [60]–[62]. In the absence of an available prophylactic drug for uninfected individuals in high-risk groups (e.g., premature infants and the immunocompromised), the results described here suggest that efforts to control PIV infection should focus on reducing URT shedding from infected individuals, disinfecting contaminated surfaces, and hand washing. In contrast to infection control, which would be best served by limiting URT infection, therapeutic antivirals would be better targeted to the LRT to control clinical manifestations of PIV-associated disease.Genetic factors have been identified that modulate viral susceptibility and disease severity in humans [63]–[65] and in the lungs of mice [40], [42], [43], [66]–[70]. Our results show for the first time that genetic factors limiting virus growth in the lungs of resistant BALB/c mice, compared to susceptible 129/SvJ mice, do not limit robust virus growth in the URT and trachea and, consequently, do not limit transmission. Furthermore, BALB/c and 129/SvJ mice showed a similarly high extent of infection in the URT and trachea and a similarly low extent of infection in the lungs after exposure to cagemates inoculated with high or low virus doses. This finding shows that host genetics do not play a major role in SeV transmission, at least in these strains of mice. These observations reinforce our inference that transmission and pathogenesis are independent consequences of URT versus LRT infection, respectively. Additional experiments are needed to delineate the mechanisms responsible for the higher permissivity of the URT and trachea than of the lungs to SeV infection. Possible mechanisms include the site of inoculation in the nasal cavity, lower temperature in the URT, tissue-specific differences in virus replication and innate immunity, and antiviral mechanisms, such as surfactant proteins in the lungs. Reduced replication in the lungs may be associated with lower levels of the secreted tryptase Clara, which is required for cleavage of the F protein to allow viral entry [71], [72].Asymptomatic infection that promotes immunity and transmission represents a balanced relationship that benefits both the virus and the host. Such has been the case in several enzootic (clinically unapparent) epidemics of SeV in which subclinical infections were maintained in mouse and hamster colonies for years with no increase in pathogenicity, causing apparent disease only occasionally in suckling and old animals [73], [74]. These epidemiological observations are reminiscent of the low virulence yet high transmissibility of the reverse-genetics engineered SeV described here, which was derived from a modified Enders strain that had been passaged in embryonated chicken eggs. Our results show that the level of virus replication in the lungs affects neither the timing nor the efficiency of transmission; thus, SeV replication in the lungs may offer no selective advantage. Instead, we suggest the following mechanism for symbiotic virus-host interplay in enzootic epidemics of SeV: natural infection after transmission is sufficiently limited in the lungs to avoid clinical signs of disease yet is sufficiently robust in the nasopharynx and trachea to promote efficient transmission and induce protective immunity.Epizootic (clinically apparent) outbreaks of SeV have caused morbidity and high rates of mortality in mouse colonies [75]–[77]. Two closely related, highly pathogenic field isolates of SeV are the Ohita and Hamamatsu strains [78], [79]. While inoculation with only a few PFU of unpassaged Hamamatsu strain SeV results in mortality in mice, the MLD50 of the virus was attenuated by as much as 400-fold after 50 passages in eggs [80]. When the highly pathogenic Ohita and Hamamatsu strains were adapted to LLC-MK2 cells and chicken eggs, they were found to have selected for mutations in the C protein and untranslated leader region, respectively, which increase replication in cultured cells but attenuate replication and pathogenesis in the lungs of mice [81]–[83]. The bioluminescence imaging system described here would be useful in determining whether the mutations that attenuate replication in the lungs also attenuate replication in the URT and trachea, thereby reducing transmission, or whether they actually promote sustained transmission by supporting nasal and tracheal shedding of virus while reducing pathogenesis in the lungs. Such experiments may also reveal whether our observations about the spread and transmission of the egg-adapted SeV extend to unpassaged, highly pathogenic field isolates.SeV is a promising Jennerian vaccine against HPIV1 [1], [13], and recombinant SeV vaccine vectors containing an envelope gene from HRSV, HPIV3, or HPIV2 inserted into the F-HN gene junction have been shown to elicit both B- and T-cell responses that lead to protection from challenge in small-animal models [18]–[20]. While SeV is pathogenic in mice, an ongoing clinical trial has demonstrated SeV to be well tolerated in humans [17]. In non-human primates, SeV has been shown to protect against HPIV1 challenge with no associated adverse events [15], [84]. This result is likely due in part to the sensitivity of SeV to human IFN-mediated innate immunity [85]. As SeV is developed further as a vaccine vector, the luciferase-expressing SeVs, imaging system, and methods described here will be useful in investigating the effect of vaccine dose, volume, and position of foreign antigen insertion in the SeV genome on tissue-specific vector growth and the immune response in small animal models. Of course, replacing the luciferase reporter gene in SeV with a vaccine antigen could alter in vivo replication of the vector. For example, three different recombinant HPIV3 vectors expressing HPIV1 HN, HPIV2 HN, or measles virus HA inserted into the P-M gene junction were found to replicate to different levels in hamsters [86].In summary, we have described the development of the non-attenuated reporter virus rSeV-luc(M-F*), which can be used to quantify tissue-specific SeV infection in living mice. Our results reveal how infection by SeV spreads in individual, living animals after direct intranasal inoculation and after transmission. Importantly, infection in the URT and trachea were found to be associated with contact transmission while infection in the lungs was found to be associated with pathogenesis. The imaging tools developed here will provide a method to study the effect of viral factors, host genetics, host age, immune status, environmental conditions, and inoculation mode on the dynamics of infection and transmission. For example, infection can be tracked non-invasively in WT and knockout mice before immune responses are measured ex vivo and then interpreted in light of the preceding infection. Methods similar to those reported here could also be developed to image infection by other paramyxoviruses in small-animal models. Overall, our model system and results suggest tissue-targeted approaches to PIV infection control and vaccine development, while our non-invasive bioluminescence imaging technique is expected to advance the preclinical testing of candidate vaccine vectors and experimental therapies.Materials and MethodsEthics statementAll animal studies were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and were performed in compliance with relevant institutional policies, the Association for the Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care guidelines, the National Institutes of Health regulations, and local, state, and federal laws.Cell cultureMonolayer cultures of LLC-MK2 cells were grown in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1% L-glutamine, 1% penicillin, and 1% streptomycin at 37°C, 5% CO2.Recombinant Sendai virusesUnique NotI recognition sites were cloned into the P-M, M-F, and F-HN intergenic junctions of an Enders-based pSeV viral genome plasmid using cloning sites described previously [32]. The firefly luciferase gene was amplified by PCR using the pGL3 Basic vector (Promega) and a pair of AscI tagged primers, subcloned into a shuttle plasmid containing a SeV intergenic junction and flanking NotI restriction sites [32], and then subcloned into the unique NotI site of each of the pSeV viral genome plasmids. Within the pSeV-luc(M-F*) plasmid, the start signal upstream of the F protein was changed from AGGGATAAAG to AGGGTGAAAG by using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene Corp). The rSeVs were rescued from the pSeV genome plasmids as described previously [20].Luciferase expression in vitro
rSeV-infected LLC-MK2 cells (MOI, 5 PFU/cell) were incubated at 33°C, 5% CO2, and lysates were collected at various times p.i.. Luciferase assays were performed using the Luciferase Assay System (Promega) and expression was measured on an automated luminometer (Turner Biosystems, Inc.) as described previously [87].Viral titers and bioluminescence imagingVirus titers from multistep growth curves (MOI of 0.01 PFU/cell) and homogenized tissues were determined by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells as described previously [48]. Eight week-old female 129/SvJ mice or BALB/c mice (Jackson Laboratories) were anesthetized with isoflurane (Baxter Health Care Corp.) and inoculated intranasally (i.n.) with 30 µl of PBS or PBS containing virus. Animals were monitored daily for weight loss, morbidity, and mortality. Before imaging, mice were injected intraperitoneally with luciferin (Xenogen Corp) at a dose of 150 mg/kg of body weight and anesthetized with isoflurane for 5 min. In vivo images were acquired with a Xenogen IVIS CCD camera system (Caliper Life Sciences) and analyzed with Living Image 3.2 software (Caliper Life Sciences) using an exposure of 60s, 30s, or 5s (binning 4; f/stop 1). Pseudocolor images (representative of bioluminescence) of mice were displayed using a binning of 4 on a colorimetric scale ranging from 1×106 to 1×109 surface radiance (photons/s/cm2/steradian), which is defined as the number of photons that leave a cm2 of tissue and radiate into a solid angle of one steradian. To quantify bioluminescence, regions of interest (ROI) were defined manually and graphed data were expressed as total flux (photons/s), which is defined as the radiance within each pixel summed over the ROI area (cm2)×4π. For experiments shown in Figures 1D, 1E, 2, 3, 4E, 4F, and S4, mice were anesthetized by IP injection of 300 µl 2,2,2-Tribromoethanol (300 mg/kg) and chest hair was removed by shaving and application of a depilatory cream 3 d before inoculation.ImmunologySera and BALF were collected from euthanized animals on day 10 or day 60 p.i.. BALF samples (3 ml) were centrifuged to collect cellular material and plated in a tissue culture dish for 1 h at 37°C to remove adherent cells. Suspension cells were harvested, total lymphocytes were counted microscopically, and red blood cells were lysed. For analyses by flow cytometry, cells were stained with FITC-conjugated anti-CD4 (RM4-4) and PE-conjugated anti–CD8b (53-5.8) antibodies (BD Biosciences Pharmingen). Lymphocytes were gated based on forward and side scatter, and the percentages of CD4+ and CD8+ T cell populations were measured within this gate. ELISAs were used to measure the levels of SeV-specific or luciferase-specific antibodies present in the sera. Briefly, 96-well plates were coated overnight with disrupted, purified SeV (10 µg/ml) or firefly luciferase (1 µg/ml, Abcam). Plates were blocked with PBS containing 1% BSA and then incubated with 10-fold serially diluted serum samples. After incubation, plates were washed, incubated with HRP-Goat anti mouse IgG (Southern Biotechnologies) and then washed further. To quantify levels of antibodies, TMB substrate (Kirkegaard and Perry Laboratories) was added to the wells followed by stop solution and absorbance was read at a wavelength of 450 nm. GraphPad Prism non-linear regression software was used to calculate antibody titers.Contact transmissionDonor animals were inoculated intranasally with 30 µL of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and were individually placed into cages containing 3 naïve contact mice at 24 h p.i. Bioluminescence was monitored daily until it remained consistently at background levels (∼15 days). Sera were collected on day 60 so that SeV-specific antibody levels could be measured as described above. On day 63, mice were challenged with 7000 PFU rSeV-luc(M-F*) administered i.n. and bioluminescence was measured daily.Supporting InformationFigure S1Construction of luciferase-expressing Sendai viruses. (A) Nucleotide sequence of the firefly luciferase gene cassette. A pGEM3 cloning plasmid was engineered to contain flanking NotI restriction sites, the firefly luciferase reporter gene, gene end, and gene start sequences. (B) To insert the luciferase reporter gene cassette into three gene junctions, three pSeV genome plasmids were cloned to contain a unique NotI restriction site in each of the P-M, M-F, and F-HN gene junctions. For the pSeV-luc(M-F*) genome plasmid, the naturally occurring suboptimal start signal AGGGATAAAG was also mutated to the more efficient start signal AGGGTGAAAG to compensate for expected attenuation due to the addition of the foreign gene and additional gene junction. The firefly luciferase gene cassette (panel A) was subcloned from the pGEM3 plasmid into the pSeV genome plasmids using the NotI restriction sites. (C) Design of pSeV cDNA plasmids for the rescue of WT and recombinant Sendai viruses containing the luciferase reporter gene (luc). The locations of the Sendai virus genes nucleoprotein (N), polymerase (P), matrix (M), fusion (F), hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN), and large (L) protein are shown, as well as the T7 RNA polymerase promoter (T7) and hepatitis delta virus ribozyme sequence (ribo). Gene start sequences are shown in green and the naturally occurring, suboptimal AGGGATAAAG gene start sequence between the M and F genes of WT Sendai virus is shown in yellow. Gene end sequences are shown in red. The 3′ leader sequence upstream of the N gene and the 5′ trailer sequence downstream of the L gene are not shown for simplicity.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2Sendai virus protein expression and incorporation into virions. (A) Sendai virus protein expression in LLC-MK2 cells. Confluent monolayers of LLC-MK2 cells were infected with recombinant Sendai viruses at an MOI of 5 PFU/cell and incubated for 16 h before radiolabeling with 50 µCi [35S]Promix (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech). Supernatant was incubated overnight at 4°C with mouse anti- NP, P, M, F, and HN monoclonal antibodies, and immune complexes were adsorbed on protein G-Sepharose (GE Healthcare), fractionated on 12% NuPAGE bis-Tris SDS-PAGE gels (Invitrogen), and visualized with a phosphorimager. (B) Ratios of Sendai virus protein expression. Protein expression was quantified with ImageQuant 5.2 software and normalized to the expression level of the N protein. The data represent the means (+/− standard deviation) from three experiments. (C) Sendai virus composition. Recombinant Sendai viruses were inoculated into 10-day-old embryonated chicken eggs. Allantoic fluid was harvested 72 h p.i. and centrifuged for 45 min at 3000 rpm to remove cellular debris. Supernatants were layered over a 60%–20% sucrose gradient and centrifuged at 24,000 rpm for 3.5 hrs to isolate virions. Isolated virions were diluted in TNE buffer and further purified by centrifugation over a 20% sucrose cushion at 24,000 rpm for 15 h. Virus pellets were resuspended in RIPA buffer and total protein concentrations were determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Sci.). Equal quantities of protein were separated on a 4%–12% SDS-PAGE gel, stained with Blue BANDit protein stain (Amresco), and dried in a BioRad gel dryer at 60°C for 45 minutes.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S3Immune responses of mice to infection with recombinant Sendai viruses. Groups of five 8-week-old 129/SvJ mice were intranasally inoculated with 30 µl containing 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus or PBS. On day 10 p.i., serum was collected and the mice were euthanized to recover bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Experiments were performed twice with representative data shown. Each data point represents an individual animal and horizontal bars show group means. The numbers of CD4+ (A) and CD8+ (B) T cells recovered from BALF were determined by flow cytometry. (C) Luciferase-specific binding antibody titers in sera were determined by ELISA assays and are expressed as reciprocal endpoint dilutions. Firefly luciferase protein (Abcam) was used.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S4Bioluminescence and Sendai virus titers in the respiratory tracts of 129/SvJ mice. Groups of three 8-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with 7,000 PFU of recombinant Sendai virus. (A) In vivo bioluminescence was measured for all three luciferase-expressing viruses on days 4 and 6 p.i., after which lungs were immediately harvested and homogenized so that ex vivo luciferase activity could be measured. A fit of the data with a least squares linear regression model yielded an R
2 value of 0.878. RLU denotes relative light units. (B) Comparison between light detected by the camera and viral titers of homogenates from the nasopharynx (triangles), trachea (circles), and lungs (squares). Each point represents data from a single mouse infected with rSeV-luc(M-F*) and studied on day 2, 3, 5, or 7 p.i.. Least squares linear regression yielded R
2 values of 0.864, 0.915 and 0.961 for the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S5Bioluminescence and viral titers in the respiratory tracts of BALB/c and 129/SvJ mice. Groups of three 8-week-old mice were intranasally inoculated with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*). (A) In vivo bioluminescence was measured in BALB/c mice infected with 7,000 PFU of virus on days 2, 3, 5, and 7 p.i., after which the animals were euthanized and tissues were harvested so that virus titers from tissue homogenates could be measured by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells. Correlations between virus titers in tissue homogenates and light detected by the camera were found with R
2 values of 0.928, 0.656, and 0.846 for the nasopharynx, trachea, and lungs, respectively. Virus titers in homogenates from the nasopharynx (B) and lungs (C) of both BALB/c- and 129/SvJ-strain mice infected with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) were measured by plaque titration in LLC-MK2 cells. The data represent the mean virus titers of six mice (+/− standard deviation).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S6Tissue-specific timing and magnitude of Sendai virus spread in the respiratory tracts of intact mice after inoculation and contact transmission. In each group, one BALB/c or 129/SvJ mouse was inoculated intranasally with either 70 or 7,000 PFU of rSeV-luc(M-F*) and three contact animals were co-housed one day later as described in Figure 5. (A–D) Time until detection of bioluminescence in the nasopharynx (nasop.), trachea, and lungs (limit of detection: >6 log10 photons/s) after direct inoculation (open bars) and after contact transmission (solid bars). (E–H) Overall magnitude of infection after direct inoculation (open bars) and after contact transmission (solid bars) as determined by integration of daily measurements of total flux with respect to time using IgorPro software (Wavemetrics). The areas under the curve (AUC) of bioluminescence are expressed as the total amount of photons on a log10 scale. The experiment was performed in triplicate for 129/SvJ-strain mice (3 donor animals and 9 transmitted) and duplicate for BALB/c-strain mice (2 donor animals and 6 transmitted).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Evaluation of the Interactions between Mumps Virus and Guinea Pig

INTRODUCTIONMumps is an acute, highly infectious viral disease. Mumps orthorubulavirus (MuV) belongs to the genus Orthorubulavirus of the family Paramyxoviridae, which includes enveloped, nonsegmented, negative-strand RNA viruses (1). Two MuV envelope glycoproteins, hemagglutinin-neuraminidase (HN) and fusion (F) protein, are involved in receptor binding and mediate membrane fusion with target cells (2, 3). HN specifically recognizes sialic acid (SA)-containing glycoconjugate structures present on the host cells, preferring unbranched α2,3-sialylated glycans, which therefore play a key role in virus entry into host cells and infectivity (4).The primary site of virus replication is the epithelium of the upper airway mucosa. After crossing the epithelial barrier, the virus accesses the regional lymph nodes and exploits mononuclear cells for further dissemination (5).Lymphocytic infiltration and destruction of periductal cells lead to obstruction of the ducts in the salivary glands and seminal tubules of the testes, thus inducing the classic symptoms of MuV infection (6). Virus is excreted in the saliva from approximately 1 week before to 1 week after the onset of salivary gland swelling, although MuV has also been identified in the saliva of asymptomatic persons (6). In addition, the virus can be excreted in the urine at least for 10 to 14 days (7).Among serious complications of mumps in childhood is meningoencephalitis (6, 8), which can be fatal (6), as well as orchitis, which occurs in all age groups and can lead to fertility disorders and even sterility. In addition, the inflammation of other organs (pancreas, thyroid, ovaries, kidneys, and heart muscle) is frequently associated with MuV infection (9).Following the introduction of the mumps vaccine in the routine vaccination of children (two-dose measles-mumps-rubella [MMR] vaccine), the occurrence of mumps has been drastically reduced. However, in recent years, an increased number of mumps outbreaks has been observed in vaccinated populations (10), one likely reason being an ineffective immune response to available vaccines (11–13). Also, epidemiological studies have shown that certain mumps vaccines are not completely harmless and can lead to significant neurological side effects (14).The reemergence of MuV infections makes it worthwhile to review the complex virology of mumps and immunity achieved after vaccination, as well as the prospects for developing MuV vaccines with enhanced immunity in the future (11). Unfortunately, understanding of MuV pathogenesis and the immune responses required for protection against MuV infection is limited, one of the reasons being the lack of adequate and relevant animal models (15).The search for an animal model for mumps has been going on for decades. Experimentally, only primates can show symptoms of the disease after MuV infection (16). Monkeys are evolutionarily closer to humans, but they are extremely expensive to breed, and it is impossible to secure them in sufficient numbers for basic research. Therefore, researchers resort to more affordable animal species such as cats, dogs, guinea pigs, cotton rats, hamsters, ferrets, rabbits, and rats, as well as various mouse models (16–19). Each animal model comes with its own unique set of advantages and limitations; nevertheless, the biggest problem arises when investigating the viruses to which animals are not susceptible.In our study, we aimed to investigate the interaction between guinea pigs and MuV from different aspects. First, we investigated the possibility of replication of wild-type, vaccine, and recombinant MuV strains within different tissue homogenates and primary cell cultures of guinea pigs (in vitro condition). Then, we evaluated the susceptibility of guinea pigs to intranasal (i.n.) and intratesticular (i.t.) MuV infection (in vivo condition). We monitored the sites of virus persistence and virus excretion in tissues and in body secretions and/or fluids following different routes of infection, the development of cellular or humoral immune responses, and virus pathology in infected tissues as well as the possibility of virus transmission among animals.RESULTSInfection of guinea pig tissue homogenates by various MuV strains.To assess the ability of MuV to infect and replicate in guinea pig tissues, tissue homogenate samples of lungs, brain, kidney, and testicles were infected with 12 different MuV strains (3 vaccine strains, 5 wild-type strains, and 4 recombinant viruses based on the L-Zagreb strain). High susceptibility of all analyzed tissue homogenates to infection with different MuV strains was found (Fig. 1). The achieved titers were in the range of 3.1 to 6.8 log cell culture 50% infective dose (CCID50)/mL in the lungs, 2.5 to 6.4 log CCID50/mL in the brain, 3.1 to 6.4 log CCID50/mL in the testes, and 2.3 to 7.3 log CCID50/mL in the kidneys.FIG 1Virus titer after infection of guinea pig tissue homogenates by various MuV strains: JL2, Urabe AM9, L-Zagreb, ZgA/Cro69, ZgB/Cro69, MuVi/Split.CRO/05.11, Du/CRO05, 9218/Zg98, Vdeopt-MRV2, MRV2, MRV3, and F-RSV-MRV2. Tissue homogenates (1 g/mL) were infected with 6 log CCID50 of each virus and incubated at 37°C for 2 h. Infected tissues were centrifuged at 400 × g for 5 min at 24°C and washed 2 times with R10 medium to remove unbound virus. The infected suspensions were placed into 75-cm2 flasks, and 30 mL of medium was added prior to incubation (at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 10 days).MuV infection of characterized guinea pig primary cell cultures.Primary cell cultures of tissue homogenates from naive animals were cultivated, and adherent cells were subcultivated twice in vitro, using nondirecting, very basic cell culture medium. Microscopic inspection of cell morphology implied that mostly fibroblasts were cultivated, since the majority of cells were flat with big round to ellipsoid nuclei. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining also showed fibroblast-like cell morphology (Fig. 2A). Moreover, immunostaining confirmed that primary cells, isolated from all four organs, were positive for fibroblast-specific markers (vimentin and S100B). In contrast, there were no cells positive for nestin (neural stem cell marker) or glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (astrocytes and glia-progenitor cell marker) (data not shown).FIG 2Characterization of primary cell cultures obtained from brain, lung, kidney, and testicles of guinea pig. (A) Uninfected guinea pig primary cell cultures. First column, the HE-stained cells show fibroblast-like morphology; second column, S100B (expressed in fibroblasts-positive cells); third column, vimentin (specific fibroblast marker-positive cells); fourth column, cells stained with DAPI; last row, negative control. (B) Guinea pig primary cell cultures 3 to 4 days following infection with MRV3 (MOI of 2).The same morphology was observed in the primary cell cultures of all four organs, after infection with MRV3 (recombinant MuV carrying a green fluorescent protein [GFP] gene which enables visualization of infected cells under a fluorescence microscope [Fig. 2B]). Within 3 to 4 days postinfection (dpi), all primary cells in the culture were infected. Round fluorescent formations visible in all infected cultures after 4 days were dead, infected cells (Fig. 2B).These results demonstrate that all guinea pig primary cell cultures were highly susceptible to MuV infection.Expression of SAs at the surface of guinea pig primary cells.Since it was shown that a trisaccharide containing α2,3-linked sialic acid at the cell surface acts as a receptor for MuV (2, 3), the expression of SAs at the surface of guinea pig primary cell cultures from brain, testicles, lung, and kidney was measured. SAs were released by treatment with α2,3-sialidase (removes α2,3-sialyl groups) and Arthrobacter ureafaciens sialidase (removes the following sialyl groups at rate α2,6→α2,3→α2,8-linkage). The latter treatment released more N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac) than α2,3-sialidase in all tested samples (Fig. 3). If sialidase treatments for 2 h released all susceptible surface Neu5Ac, then A. ureafaciens sialidase released both α2,3- and α2,6-linked Neu5Ac, while α2,3-sialidase released only α2,3-linked Neu5Ac. Therefore, by comparison of released Neu5Ac with both sialidases, it can be assumed that in all analyzed cells α2,3-linked Neu5Ac contains about 70% of total Neu5Ac present at the cell surfaces. The presence of both α2,3-linked and α2,6-linked SAs, with α2,3-linked SAs being more abundant, was additionally confirmed by flow cytometry analysis (Fig. 4).FIG 3The amount of Neu5Ac released from the surface of guinea pig primary cells by treatment with A. ureafaciens (removes sialyl groups at rate α2,6→α2,3→α2,8-linkage) and α2,3-sialidase (removes α2,3-sialyl groups) followed by fluorescent labeling of SAs and gradient HPLC analysis.FIG 4Determination of the SAs at the surface of primary cells obtained from different guinea pig organs by flow cytometry. (A) Untreated control cells; (B) cells stained with biotinylated MAL; (C) cells stained with biotinylated SNA lectin (SNL).Experimental i.n. and i.t. infection of guinea pigs with MuV.After observing that different MuV strains replicate well in different guinea pig tissue homogenates and that cells from different tissues possess α2,3-linked SAs on their surfaces, we experimentally infected guinea pigs to examine if MuV replication could be detected in vivo. One group of animals was i.n. infected with MRV3 (1 × 106 PFU) (to mimic the natural route of MuV infection), and another group of animals was i.t. infected with the same virus dose (as an iatrogenic route of infection of the tissue that is naturally susceptible to MuV infection).Infected guinea pigs exhibited no clinical signs of disease such as weight loss, fever, or swelling of testes, head, or neck throughout the experiment. On days 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 10 after infection, animals were euthanized and different tissues, organs, and samples were collected (brain, lung, trachea, parotid gland, testis, spleen, kidney, draining lymph nodes, urine, feces, sera, and nasal and oral swabs) for virus detection (Fig. 5A).FIG 5Experimental i.n. and i.t. infection of guinea pigs (GP) with MRV3. (A) Scheme of experimental i.n. and i.t. infection of guinea pigs with MRV3. (B) Evidence of virus replication in infected lungs, trachea, testicles, and nasal swab depending on the time postinfection. (C) Tissue homogenate of infected lung at 7 dpi: (1) infected lung tissue (there were no proliferated cells in the area); (2) lung cell images without fluorescent labels; (3) lung cell images with fluorescent labels. (D) Tissue homogenate of infected testicles at 5 dpi: (1) testis cell images without fluorescent labels; (2) testis cell images with fluorescent labels; (3) virus spread from infected tissue to surrounding cells.Tissue homogenates were prepared and cultured as described previously to determine if a replicative virus was present in the culture of infected tissue (ex vivo monitoring). After the incubation period of 10 days, the virus was detected only in the culture of lungs and trachea obtained from i.n.-infected animals and in the testis tissue homogenates originating from i.t.-infected animals (Fig. 5B). Viral shedding to any other tissue or organ was not detected. The virus could be isolated from the lungs and trachea for up to 4 dpi and from the testicles for up to 5 dpi.The replication-competent virus was also isolated from the nasal swabs of all tested animals and from only several mouth swab samples. On the other hand, virus could not be isolated from the urine, feces, sera, or draining lymph nodes.These results indicate that guinea pigs are susceptible to MuV infection which is asymptomatic. I.n.-inoculated MuV reaches through the trachea to the guinea pig lungs, where it replicates to a limited extent, and it is cleared within 4 to 5 dpi.In addition, to address potential virus transmission through direct contact among animals, each of four groups of guinea pigs i.n.-infected the previous day was cohoused with one naive guinea pig. Oral and nasal swabs from naive guinea pigs were collected every day from days 1 to 7 during cocaging with infected animals. Despite the high viral pressure, no direct contact transmission of MuV among guinea pigs was observed.Activation of immune responses in guinea pigs infected with MuV.To obtain more insight into immune responses mounted in infected animals, first a flow cytometry analysis was used to address potential changes in the composition of the leukocyte cell populations from the whole blood or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). Two test points were chosen: 3 dpi, when the presence of the virus was demonstrated in the lungs and trachea, and 7 dpi, when replication-competent virus was no longer detected.On day 3 postinfection (p.i.), significantly reduced numbers of CD8+ T cells (P = 0.0067) were found in the whole blood of infected animals compared to the control animals (Fig. 6A). On the other hand, the bronchoalveolar immune response in MuV-infected guinea pigs showed a substantially different immune profile; the percentage of CD8+ and total T cells significantly increased (P = 0.0002 and P = 0.0063, respectively) from day 3 to day 7 p.i. (Fig. 6B). The CD4+ T cells were also increased (P = 0.0328) in infected compared to control animals. Additionally, significant change in the number of MIL4 positive cells (granulocytes and monocytes/macrophages) was recorded in infected animals; after a slight increase on day 3 p.i., there was a strong decrease on day 7 p.i. (P < 0.0001). There were no changes in the number of B cells in infected animals compared to controls.FIG 6Flow cytometry analysis of lymphocyte and leukocyte subsets in MuV-infected guinea pigs on days 3 and 7 postinfection in whole blood (A) and BALF (B). Results for each group are shown as median with 95% confidence interval (n = 6 to 17).To further investigate the capability of guinea pigs to mount a MuV-specific adaptive immune response, 3 guinea pigs per group were i.n. infected with 1 × 106 PFU of each of the 3 wild-type MuV strains (ZgA/Cro69, Du/CRO05, and 9218/Zg98) (Fig. 7A). Three control animals received saline only. During the entire infection protocol (28 days), guinea pigs did not display any obvious signs of illness, such as weight loss, fever, or behavioral changes. Blood samples were collected on days 7, 14, 21, and 28 p.i., and antibody titers against MuV were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). As shown in Fig. 7B, all wild-type MuV strains were able to induce antibody responses in guinea pigs. Throughout the follow-up period, a significant increase in mumps-specific IgG antibodies was observed up to day 28 postinfection. The largest increase in antibody titer was caused by strain Du/CRO05, followed by ZgA/Cro69, while the smallest increase was observed for strain 9218/Zg98 (Fig. 7B). In addition, we could not detect any changes in the complement activity in samples obtained from infected animals compared to controls (data not shown).FIG 7Humoral and cellular responses in infected guinea pigs. (A) Schematic diagram of infection protocol. Guinea pigs were infected with 1 × 106 PFU of 3 MuV wild-type strains (ZgA/Cro69, Du/CRO05, and 9218/Zg98) or medium (control group) via the intranasal route. Blood samples (whole blood and sera) were collected on days 7, 14, 21, and 28 postinfection. (B) MuV-specific antibody response against different strains was measured by ELISA. Mean values ± standard deviations (n = 3) are shown. (C) The induced T-cell (IFN-γ) response was measured by ELISpot assay. Mean values ± standard deviations (n = 3) are shown. (D) MuV challenge assay. Unvaccinated control animals and animals s.c. vaccinated with 1 × 106 PFU of L-Zagreb vaccine strain or recombinant MuV (MRV2) were i.n. challenged with 1 × 107 PFU of MuV MRV3. The presence of infective virus in BALF from each animal was determined 3 days later by CCID50 assay. The median value for each animal group (n = 5) is shown by a solid line.Splenocytes were collected in the terminal test point and analyzed for T-cell responses by performing the enzyme-linked immunosorbent spot (ELISpot) assay to measure IFN-γ production. Splenocytes from 4 treatment groups (control group and groups infected with ZgA/Cro69, Du/CRO05, or 9218/Zg98) were stimulated in vitro with the respective viruses (multiplicity of infection [MOI] of 2). All wild-type MuV strains induced detectable cellular immune responses (Fig. 7C).Efficacy of immune response was assessed by measuring the presence of an infectious virus in BALF on the 3rd day after MuV challenge of previously vaccinated guinea pigs. Guinea pigs (5 per group) were subcutaneously (s.c.) immunized (two times with 1 × 106 PFU per animal in a 3-week interval) and then challenged with MRV3 at a 10-fold-higher dose (1 × 107 PFU per animal) 2 weeks later. In the group of guinea pigs immunized with the recombinant virus (MRV2), only one animal after the challenge showed the presence of the virus in a low titer (Fig. 7D). In the group of guinea pigs immunized with the vaccine strain (L-Zagreb), no infectious virus was detected in any animal. On the other hand, in the control group of animals, the infectious virus was detected in all BALF samples except for one (Fig. 7D).The obtained results clearly show that animals i.n. infected with MuV develop detectable antibody titers and cellular immune responses during 28 days. Also, animals immunized with the mumps virus develop a protective immune response that effectively shields them from challenge with the live virus.Histopathological analysis of the lungs and testicles from MuV-infected guinea pigs.Histopathological examination of the lungs of i.n.-infected guinea pigs at the terminal test point (28 dpi) showed that all lung lobes were affected by inflammatory changes (Fig. 8). In all infected animals, similar lesions were found in the trachea and lungs, regardless of the strain used. Lungs were affected with multifocal to confluent interstitial pneumonia characterized by thickened interalveolar septa due to mild pneumocyte hypertrophy and moderate, rarely severe infiltration of lymphocytes, few plasma cells, and heterophils with subsequent reduction of alveolar spaces. Occasionally, mild mucinous and heterophilic bronchiolitis was noticed. Interstitial pneumonia was of slightly higher intensity in groups infected with ZgA/Cro69 and Du/CRO05 than with 9218/Zg98.FIG 8Histopathological findings of MuV activity in guinea pig lungs. (A) Lung of control guinea pig shows thin interalveolar septa with clear intra-alveolar spaces (1) and bronchioles lined with columnar epithelium and empty lumen (2). (B) Lung of MuV-infected guinea pig shows interstitial pneumonia (marked with asterisks) with thickened interalveolar septa with subsequent reduction of alveolar spaces (1). The bronchioles are lined with an attenuated epithelium that exfoliates into the lumen, where it is admixed with mucinous material (marked with arrow) (2).Histopathological examination of the testicles of the i.t.-infected guinea pigs at 7 dpi showed that testicular lesions were characterized by mild, predominantly lymphocytic interstitial orchitis (Fig. 9). The seminiferous tubules were lined predominantly with Sertoli cells and spermatogonia with rare spermatocytes, while other developmental stages of germ cells were missing. In the epididymis there was mild to moderate necrotizing and lymphocytic epididymitis (Fig. 9).FIG 9Histopathological findings of MuV activity in guinea pig testicles. (A) Testicle of control guinea pig. (B) Testicle of MuV-infected guinea pig showing mild to moderate necrotizing and lymphocytic epididymitis; the tubules of the epididymis are filled with necrotic cellular debris (marked with arrow), and a lymphocytic infiltrate is visible in the interstitium (marked with asterisk). Spermatozoa are not visible (1). Testicle of MuV-infected guinea pig showing seminiferous tubules lined mostly with Sertoli cells, spermatogonia, and rare spermatocytes (marked with asterisks). In the interstitium, predominantly perivascular, there is a lymphocytic infiltrate (marked with arrow) (2).DISCUSSIONMumps is a highly contagious disease which spreads through direct contact with saliva or respiratory droplets from the mouth, nose, or throat. After more than a half-century of declining mumps incidence due to the widespread use of vaccines, even populations with good vaccination coverage are again experiencing small or large outbreaks of mumps (11, 20). It is not entirely clear whether immune protection is weakening or whether existing vaccines inadequately protect against new circulating MuV strains. The scientific community is faced with a lack of a good animal model for testing MuV pathogenesis as well as the existing or new mumps vaccines and their efficacy.The sensitivity of guinea pigs to infections and the similarities of their immune system to that of humans have made this animal model important in the study of human infectious diseases (21–23). Between the 1950s and 1990s, the guinea pig was used as a model for MuV research. However, to date, only a few studies have been conducted in which the interaction between guinea pig and MuV has been studied to a very limited extent. In those experiments, animals were infected with MuV intraocularly or intracerebrally or in the animal’s ear (24–27). Unfortunately, none of the routes of infection in the mentioned studies are relevant to the natural route of infection. Furthermore, the only immunological parameter that was investigated was the humoral immune response. However, with the development of new generations of transgenic mouse strains that are much less expensive to maintain as well as the lack of established procedures and reagents for comprehensive immunological analysis on the guinea pig, the guinea pig as a model for MuV research has been almost abandoned (28, 29). The only promising model for evaluating mumps immunity in mice was type I interferon (IFN) alpha/beta receptor knockout mice (29) deficient for normal immune response.More recently, researchers have willingly returned to guinea pigs as a model for mumps vaccine research, despite its robustness to severe infection that would include the onset of symptoms (30). The guinea pig is the choice for research on immunogenicity of MuV or new mumps vaccine candidates (30–33). However, in all of those studies the only immunological parameter that was investigated was the humoral immune response. Development of new tools for detection of humoral and cellular immune responses such as guinea pig-specific IFN-γ ELISpot assay (34) or improving antibody selection for flow cytometry analysis (23) provided a better insight into the development of cellular immunity in guinea pigs during experimental MuV infection, as well as long-term immunity. For all the above reasons, in this study we decided to examine the guinea pig and its interaction with MuV in more detail.First, we demonstrated the high susceptibility to MuV infection for different guinea pig tissue homogenates (brain, lung, kidney, and testis), as well as their primary cell cultures, regardless of the strain used. Several different recombinant viruses were used in this study to investigate whether targeted changes in the genome (introduction of foreign genes or modification of existing genes) can have an effect on the infectivity and replicative capacity of MuV in guinea pig cells. MRV3 virus was used to unequivocally visualize and confirm the presence and replication of the virus in tissues and primary cell cultures. In addition, we wanted to see if the different origins of the viruses with the same consensus sequence (L-Zagreb produced in the traditional way by passaging in chicken fibroblasts and MRV2 prepared by the rescue process) have an effect on the infectivity of the virus in guinea pig cells. Despite the changes they have in the genome, the recombinant viruses infected the primary cells of guinea pigs with the same degree of ubiquity and, like the original strain L-Zagreb, successfully replicated.In the history of mumps research, cells originating from guinea pigs have been used. Gavitt and Bird (26) showed that MuV replicates in guinea pig heart cells. Two MuV strains (Sofia 6 and Leningrad-3) were prepared in primary cultures of guinea pig kidney cells and used as vaccine strains in Bulgaria and Russia in the middle of the last century (35). Also, Parker in his work (36) used a continuous cell line of guinea pig lungs for MuV infection (JH4 Clon 1 fibroblast-like cells) but did not obtain a titer higher than 3.3 log PFU/mL.Our analysis showed the presence of both α2,3-linked and α2,6-linked SAs at the surface of guinea pig primary cells of all analyzed organs (brain, lungs, kidney, and testes), with α2,3-linked SAs being more abundant. The same finding was obtained by Sun et al. (37), but only on respiratory tissue. In our study, the amounts of SAs in the samples were determined by comparing the response in the sample to a curve from Neu5Ac and N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc) standards. In all tested samples, high levels of Neu5Ac and only low concentrations of Neu5Gc were found (see Fig. S1 in the supplemental material). Possible causes of this finding are that the sialidases used generally have higher affinity for Neu5Ac than for Neu5Gc residues or that only a small amount of Neu5Gc is present at the surface of tested guinea pig primary cells (38). Our data show that, due to ubiquitous surface expression of α2,3-linked SAs, guinea pig cells meet a main prerequisite for successful MuV cell entry and spread.Furthermore, we have confirmed that guinea pig tissue homogenates grown in cell culture basic medium yield primary cultures mostly made of fibroblasts. It is known that fibroblasts are a heterogeneous population of cells (5, 39) with specific roles depending on their tissue origin. The high affinity of MuV toward fibroblast cells is interesting The high affinity of MuV for fibroblast cells is interesting because of the role of fibroblasts in the inflammatory processes (39). On the other hand, based on the current knowledge of MuV pathogenesis, epithelial cells are the primary targets of MuV in humans (5). This finding opens up space for investigating the susceptibility of other tissue- or organ-specific cells to MuV, as well as the potential for the development of an in vitro model for examining the cellular pathogenesis of MuV in mixed cell cultures.To investigate MuV pathogenesis in guinea pig, we infected guinea pigs in 2 ways, intranasally and intratesticularly. All in vivo experiments were performed using MRV3 (fluorescently labeled MuV) at a dose of 1 × 106 PFU, allowing us to more easily monitor virus replication. Within the first 7 days of infection, we monitored the retention of the virus in the infected organs, the development of the clinical picture, and different parameters of cellular and humoral immunity. Guinea pigs exhibited no clinical signs of disease, but live MuV was recovered from nasal swab or tissue homogenates of testes, trachea, and lung up to 5 dpi. In contrast to the previous finding by Tokuda (25), our data show that i.t.-inoculated virus persists in the testes for more than 3 days. Also, MRV3 was detected in nasal swabs of infected animals up to 5 days. Despite this, we were unable to demonstrate MuV transmission from infected to naive guinea pigs in a cocaging experiment, as demonstrated for influenza virus infection (40, 41).Dynamic changes in the guinea pig cellular immune responses to MuV infection were observed on day 7 p.i., but only in BALF. An increase in CD8+ T cells and total T lymphocytes indicated an acute viral infection. CD8+ T cells are critical for mediating clearance following many acute viral infections in the lungs (42, 43). Furthermore, a slight increase in MIL4 positive cells, mainly neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages (44), in BALF on day 3 p.i. suggests an influx of granulocytes into infected organs (45) and thereby supports active infection of the guinea pigs’ respiratory system following i.n. infection. Together, these data suggest that MuV infection activated cellular immunity mechanisms within the first 7 dpi.In the experimental infection of guinea pigs with 3 wild-type MuV strains (ZgA/Cro69, Du/CRO05, and 9218/Zg98), we also demonstrated that animals develop detectable humoral response after only one encounter with MuV at a dose of 1 × 106 PFU. All guinea pigs showed a clear increase in mumps-specific antibody titer between days 21 and 28 p.i.The observation of increased levels of IFN-γ in spleen and activation of T lymphocytes in BALF and whole blood is consistent with the viral infection (46) and suggests they had been infected. Activated CD8+ T cells are also known to acquire effector functions after viral infection (42, 47). Virus-specific CD8+ T cells rapidly produce cytokines, including IFN-γ and tumor necrosis factor (TNF), that can directly or indirectly induce cell death of virus-infected cells (42).To confirm the efficiency of preexisting immunity, a challenge test was performed in immunized guinea pigs that clearly showed the absence of virus in BALF of immunized animals. This also confirmed the potential of guinea pigs as a model for vaccine development and testing.Finally, the pathological changes in infected organs (moderate to severe pneumonia and interstitial orchitis) are indisputable evidence of MuV infection and replication, which is the first such evidence in guinea pigs.An important component of the innate immune response to viruses is the complement system, which has the ability to recognize and eliminate viruses (48). We, therefore, wanted to investigate whether complement is involved in the acute MuV infection in guinea pig tissues. However, analysis of the total complement did not reveal any changes in its activity.Taken together, our results demonstrate that (i) guinea pigs can be infected in vivo with MuV after intranasal inoculation, (ii) infectious MuV can be detected in lungs 4 days after infection, and (iii) it induces both cellular and humoral immune response in infected animals. A finding that MuV replicates and induces pathology in the animal’s organs (lung and testicles) and replicates in the primary cell cultures of different animal tissues relevant to the pathology of this virus in humans presents the basis for using this model in further investigation of largely unexplained MuV pathogenesis. Induction of both cellular and humoral immune responses after the natural route of infection also gives the possibility for better characterization of the immune response induced by immunization or natural MuV infection.MATERIALS AND METHODSCells and viruses.Vero cells (African green monkey kidney cells; European Collection of Animal Cell Cultures [ECACC]) were maintained in culture using minimal essential medium with Hanks’ salts (MEM-H) (Capricorn Scientific, Ebsdorfergrund, Germany) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (PAN-Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany) and penicillin/streptomycin and l-glutamine (both from Capricorn Scientific, Ebsdorfergrund, Germany) at 37°C and 5% CO2.MuV strains used in this study included: ZgA/Cro69 (genotype D) (49), ZgB/Cro69 (unclassified) (49), 9218/Zg98 (genotype C) (50), L-Zagreb (genotype N) (Institute of Immunology, Inc.), Urabe AM9 (genotype B) (1st International Reference Reagent for Mumps Vaccine, National Institute for Biological Standards and Control [NIBSC]), JL2 (genotype A) (a kind gift from B. K. Rima), Du/CRO05 (genotype G) (50), and MuVi/Split.CRO/05.11 (genotype G) (isolated in Croatia in 2011). Recombinant viruses MRV2, Vdeopt-MRV2, F-RSV-MRV2, and MRV3 (NCBI GenBank accession numbers MZ929423, MZ964864, MZ964861, and MZ929424, respectively) were based on the L-Zagreb strain with several modifications and generated as described in the work of Slović et al. (51).All viruses were propagated in Vero cells for up to 3 passages. Viruses were grown in MEM-H containing 5% FBS, penicillin/streptomycin, and l-glutamine at 35°C and 5% CO2 until the cytopathic effect (CPE) was observed. Virus titer was determined by CCID50 or plaque assay (PFU) according to the work of Forčić et al. (52).Animals.Animal experimentation was approved by the Croatian Ministry of Agriculture, Veterinary and Food Safety Directorate (UP/I-322-01/17-01/74, permission no. 525-10/1315-20-11, date 29 April 2020) and performed in accordance with the Croatian Law on Animal Welfare, which complies with EU Directive 2010/63/EU. Hartley guinea pigs of both sexes, 4 to 6 weeks of age, weighing 300 to 500 g, were provided by the Institute of Immunology Inc., Croatia. The animals were housed in groups in standard cages (4 per cage), in air-conditioned rooms, at 22 ± 3°C and 55% ± 5% humidity with 12-h light and 12-h dark cycles. For the entire period of each experiment, animals had access to standard diet for guinea pigs (Muchedola Srl., Italy) and water ad libitum and received daily a hay and environmental enrichment (Tapvei, Estonia).Preparation of tissue homogenates and cultivation of guinea pig primary cell cultures.The guinea pigs were deeply anesthetized by an intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (60 mg/kg of body weight) (Ketamidor 10% solution; Richter Pharma, Austria) and xylazine (5 to 10 mg/kg) (Xylased bio, 20 mg/mL; Bioveta a.s., Czech Republic) and then euthanized with euthanasia solution (Euthasol, 400 mg/mL; Genera, Croatia). The brain, lung, kidney, and testicles were removed immediately and washed in sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.3 to 7.4) (Capricorn Scientific, Ebsdorfergrund, Germany) containing 1% penicillin and streptomycin. The tissue processing was carried out in a biosafety cabinet. Each organ was cut into small pieces (1 mm2) and homogenized. Tissue homogenates were centrifuged and cells were resuspended in 3 to 5 mL R10 medium (Capricorn Scientific, Germany) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin and streptomycin, and 1% l-glutamine. Depending on the organ, 500 to 1,000 μL of tissue homogenate was seeded in a 150-cm2 flask and cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2 and saturated humidity. When primary cells reached 80 to 90% confluence, the cell culture was dissociated using 0.25% trypsin and further grown for up to 2 additional passages. Tissue homogenates of infected animals were prepared in the same manner.Characterization of guinea pig primary cell cultures.Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining was performed using a commercially available kit (HEMM-OT-100, EOY-05-OT-1L; Biognost) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Immunostaining was performed according to the work of Alić et al. (53). Briefly, cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde solution and rinsed with PBS. Permeabilization and blocking were carried out in 3% donkey serum with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 h at room temperature (RT). The cells were incubated with primary antibody diluted in 1% donkey serum with 0.2% Triton X-100 in PBS overnight at 4°C. The cells were washed with PBS and incubated with secondary antibody solution for 2 h at RT. Cells were rinsed with PBS and counterstained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) for 10 min at RT and then rinsed three times with PBS and mounted with Dako fluorescent mounting medium. As a negative control for all antibody combinations, incubation with secondary antibody alone was carried out. Lists of primary and secondary antibodies used in the study are shown in Table S1 and Table S2 in the supplemental material, respectively. Stained coverslips were analyzed using an EVOS FL Auto System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), a fluorescence microscope (HE staining), and an Olympus FV 3000 confocal microscope.Infection of guinea pig tissue homogenates with MuV strains.Suspensions of tissue homogenates (lung, brain, kidney, and testicles) were infected separately with 12 previously described MuV strains. Tissue homogenates (1 g/mL) were infected with 6 log CCID50 of each virus and incubated at 37°C for 2 h. Infected tissues were centrifuged at 400 × g for 5 min at 24°C and washed 2 times with R10 medium to remove the unbound virus. The infected suspensions were placed into 75-cm2 flasks, and 30 mL of medium was added prior to incubation (at 37°C and 5% CO2 for 10 days). On day 10, supernatant aliquots were removed, centrifuged, and stored at −80°C until virus titration by CCID50 assay.Removal of SAs from the surface of guinea pig primary cells.The first passage of primary cell cultures originating from different guinea pig tissues was seeded and cultured in 6-well plates (1.0 × 106 cells/well) in R10 medium for 24 h. The sialidase cloned from A. ureafaciens (Merck, USA) was added to the culture medium at 20 mU/mL to remove both α2,3- and α2,6-linked SAs on glycoproteins and glycolipids. Then, an α2,3-sialidase cloned from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium LT2 (TaKaRa Bio, USA) was added to the culture medium at 200 mU/mL to remove α2,3-linked SAs. The treated cells were incubated at 37°C for 2 h. The supernatants were aspirated and centrifuged for 10 min at 2,000 × g for high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis.Fluorescent labeling of SAs and HPLC analysis.Released SAs from primary cell cultures and SA standards (Neu5Ac and Neu5Gc, obtained from Tokyo Chemical Industry, Tokyo, Japan) were fluorescently labeled with 1,2-diamino-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene dihydrochloride (DMB) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) at 50°C for 3 h in the dark (54).The procedure was performed with certain modifications according to the product guide for the LudgerTag DMB sialic acid release and labeling kit (54). Freshly prepared DMB labeling reagent (20 μL) was added to each sample of free SAs (25 μL of sample and 5 μL of 8.4 M acetic acid) and to each SA standard (2.5 μL of 0.5 mM Neu5Ac or Neu5Gc and 2.5 μL of 2.8 M acetic acid). The tubes with samples and standards were mixed using a vortex mixer and heated in a thermomixer at 50°C for 3 h in the dark. The reaction of fluorescence labeling of SAs was terminated by adding 450 μL of water to each sample and 600 μL of water to each SA standard. After termination, the tubes with samples and standards were centrifuged at 3,000 × g for 5 min. Standards were diluted for standard curves. Six standard solutions were obtained by appropriate dilution of 2 μM Neu5Ac or Neu5Gc with water in the concentration range of 2 to 0.025 μM Neu5Ac and 1 to 0.004 μM Neu5Gc. Samples and standards were transferred to vials for HPLC analysis.The quantification of DMB-labeled SAs was determined by a gradient HPLC method with fluorescence detection after optimizing the conditions for separation and quantification of SAs in tested samples (Fig. S1 and S2). Briefly, HPLC analyses were carried out using the Shimadzu Prominence LC-20AD with an RF-10A XS fluorescence detector, a SIL20AC HT autosampler, and LabSolutions software (Kyoto, Japan). The chromatographic separation was performed on the LudgerSep R1 HPLC column, 4.6 by 150 mm, 3 μm (Abingdon, UK), with a 2-SAV5 in-line filter (Neston, UK). The mobile phase consisted of a mixture of acetonitrile-methanol-water at 9:7:84 (A) and acetonitrile (B). The percentage of acetonitrile at 0, 19, 19.5, 23.5, 24, 30, and 37 min was 0, 0, 90, 90, 0, 0, and 0, respectively. The injection volume was 25 μL. Analyses were run at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min at RT, and eluates were monitored using a fluorescence detector. A fluorescence detector was set at 373 nm for excitation and 448 nm for emission.Analysis of surface SAs by lectin staining.Surface SAs were measured using the biotinylated Maackia amurensis lectin II (MAL II) specific for binding to α2,3-linked SAs and biotinylated Sambucus nigra (elderberry) bark lectin (SNA, EBL), which preferentially binds to SAs attached to the terminal galactose via α2,6 - linkage. Lectins were purchased from Vector Laboratories (Burlingame, CA, USA). Primary cultures of guinea pig cells (lung, testes, and brain) were washed with PBS, detached using 0.25% trypsin-EDTA, and washed once in R10 medium and twice with 1% bovine serum albumin (BSA)-PBS. The cells (1 × 106 per 100 μL) were divided into three 1.5-mL Eppendorf tubes and incubated with 1% BSA-PBS for 30 min at RT. These aliquots were incubated with biotinylated MAL II (10 μg/mL 1% BSA-PBS with Ca2+), biotinylated SNA (10 μg/mL 1% BSA-PBS with Ca2+), or the lectin-free medium (1% BSA-PBS) for 30 min at 4°C with gentle shaking. The cells were washed and incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-avidin (Ultra avidin fluorescein; Leinco Technologies) in 1% BSA-PBS for 30 min at 4°C with occasional gentle shaking. After washing with 1% BSA-PBS, the cells were analyzed on a Guava easyCyte flow cytometer (Luminex, TX, USA).Guinea pig experiments.Fifty-six guinea pigs were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of ketamine (20 mg/kg) and xylazine (1 mg/kg). Anesthetized guinea pigs were infected i.n. or i.t. with 300 μL of MRV3 (150 μL per nostril or testis) (1 × 106 PFU). Animals were monitored daily for clinical signs of disease. On days 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, and 10 after inoculation, 2 animals from each group were euthanized and lung and testes were collected. Two independent tests were performed. Additionally, at two terminal test points (3 and 7 dpi), BAL was performed and the lungs were removed to isolate the virus from the tissue homogenates.Processed and purified oral and nasal swabs, BALF supernatants, and urine samples from infected guinea pigs were analyzed for the viral load. Briefly, nasal and oral samples were collected by gently running a sterile swab under the animal mouth and nose. Swabs were placed immediately into 1 mL of R10 medium. All samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 800 × g and sterile filtered (syringe filter, 0.45 μm, cellulose acetate [CA]; Sartorius). The Vero cells (1 × 106) in 3 mL MEM-H with 5% FBS per well were seeded in 6-well cell culture plates (TPP, Switzerland) and inoculated with supernatant. Prepared test samples were incubated at 35°C and 5% CO2 for 10 days and examined daily for signs of CPE.The close contact transmission experiments were performed according to described protocols (40, 41). The group of 16 guinea pigs was inoculated with MRV3 (1 × 106 PFU per animal) by the i.n. route. The infected animals were separated in 4 cages. One naive guinea pig was cocaged on day 1 postinfection into each group, and animals were kept together until day 7 postinfection. Oral and nasal swabs from naive guinea pigs were collected every day from days 1 to 7 during cocaging with infected animals. On days 4 and 7 p.i., animals were euthanized. Lungs and trachea were taken from all naive guinea pigs at the terminal point of the test and grown in the culture for 10 days as described above.For the estimation of humoral and cellular immune responses in MuV-infected guinea pigs, 12 6-week-old animals were divided into 4 groups: control group (which received saline solution) and 3 groups i.n. infected with different wild-type MuV strains (1 × 106 PFU). Blood samples from the lateral saphenous vein were collected on days 7, 14, 21, and 28 p.i. On day 28 p.i., necropsy was performed and lung and trachea were harvested and subjected to histopathology assays.For evaluation of protection against MuV replication in the lungs, three groups (n = 5 animals per group) were formed, two experimental and one control group. The experimental groups were immunized subcutaneously (s.c.) with vaccine (L-Zagreb) or recombinant MuV (MRV2) in a volume of 500 μL (1 × 106 PFU/animal). The animals in the control group were injected s.c. with 500 μL of saline solution. On day 21 after the prime immunization, guinea pigs were boosted in the same manner as described above. To check the effect of protective immunity, guinea pigs were challenged on day 14 after immunization with 1 × 107 PFU of MuV MRV3 via the intranasal route. Animals were euthanized 3 days postchallenge, and BALFs were harvested for detection of viral load.IFN-γ ELISpot assay.Ninety-six-well multiscreen HTS plates (Millipore, Billerica, MA) were coated with 100 μL primary anti-IFN-γ antibody solution per well (5 μg/mL in PBS, pH 7.4, V-E4) for 24 h at 4°C. The second day after washing with 250 μL PBS, specific binding was blocked with 200 μL blocking buffer (10% sucrose and 2% BSA in PBS) for 2 h at RT. After blocking and washing, 1 × 105 splenocytes in 100 μL of RPMI were mixed with 50 μL stimulant (100 μL of no-stimulation dimethyl sulfoxide [DMSO] control [PBS-5% DMSO], positive control concanavalin A [ConA] at 20 μg/mL, or different MuV strains at an MOI of 2) in triplicate. Unstimulated cells served as negative controls, with ConA-stimulated cells serving as a positive control. On the 3rd day after incubation at 37°C for 18 h, cells were removed by washing and 100 μL of biotinylated secondary anti-IFN-γ antibody (2 μg/mL, N-G3) in blocking buffer was added to each well. Following 2 h of incubation and washing, alkaline phosphatase-conjugated streptavidin (SEL002; R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, MN) was diluted 1:100, and then 100 μL was added to each well for 1 h at RT. Following washes, cells were incubated for 20 min at RT with 100 μL of BCIP-NBT (5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolylphosphate–nitroblue tetrazolium) detection reagent (SEL002; R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, MN), and spots were counted under a microscope (Zeiss Stemi 508 Greenough stereomicroscope; Zeiss, Germany). To ensure accuracy and reliability of the data, two independent operators performed the counting. Mouse monoclonal anti-guinea pig IFN-γ antibodies (N-G3 and V-E4) for guinea pig IFN-γ ELISpot assay were kindly provided by Hubert Schafer, Robert Koch Institute, Berlin, Germany.ELISA.Humoral responses were monitored by ELISA as previously described (48) with some modifications. High-binding 96-well plates (Costar, USA) were coated with 100 μL of ultracentrifuged MuV (vaccine strain) in carbonate buffer (pH 9.6) and left overnight at RT. The next day, after washing and blocking with 2% BSA in PBS/T (0.05% Tween 20 in PBS) buffer (200 μL/well) for 2 h at 37°C, the investigated sera (2-fold diluted) were added in duplicates and incubated for the next 2 h. After washing, plates were incubated with anti-guinea pig IgG-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) for 2 h at 37°C. Finally, after washing, the o-phenylenediamine (OPD) solution (0.6 mg/mL in citrate-phosphate buffer, pH 5.0) containing 30% H2O2 (0.5 μL/mL of OPD solution) was added and incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark. The enzymatic reaction was stopped with 12.5% H2SO4 (50 μL/well), and absorbance was measured at 492 nm using a microplate reader (BioTek Synergy HTX multimode reader; Agilent, USA). The quantity of anti-mumps virus immunoglobulin G (IgG) in guinea pig sera was determined by parallel line assay comparing each serum with positive serum (declared to 100 arbitrary units [AU]/mL) and negative-control serum from nonimmunized guinea pig. The results are presented in arbitrary units per milliliter.Flow cytometry.Blood cells were hemolyzed by adding RBC lysis buffer (BioLegend, USA). The cells were washed twice and resuspended in a PBS staining buffer with 1% BSA. To collect BALF, the trachea was cannulated, the lungs were lavaged with 3-mL fractions of 10 mM PBS with EDTA, and cells from BALF were centrifuged and resuspended in the staining buffer (PBS with 1% BSA). Prepared whole blood and cells from BALF were stained with the following mouse monoclonal antibodies (MAbs): anti-guinea pig CD45 (IH-1; Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), anti-guinea pig CD8 (CT6; Bio-Rad), anti-guinea pig CD4 (CT7; Bio-Rad), anti-guinea pig B cells (Msgp9; Bio-Rad), anti-guinea pig T cells (Msgp7; Bio-Rad), and anti-porcine granulocyte (MIL4; Bio-Rad). Cell suspensions from each individual guinea pig were incubated with the antibodies at 4°C for 30 min in the dark, and then cells were washed with PBS containing 1% BSA. Data acquisition and analysis were done using a Guava easyCyte flow cytometer (Luminex). Analyses were performed with an acquisition of at least 100,000 total events. Guinea pig leukocytes were initially gated into 4 fractions by flow cytometry using MIL4/side scatter (SSC) parameter (44). The lymphocyte subpopulations were further studied with the adjusted lymphocyte population using various guinea pig antibodies as described above.Analysis of complement system activation.The hemolytic activity of complement (the classical pathway method, CH50 [the CH50 measures the total hemolytic activity of a test sample and is the reciprocal of the dilution of serum complement needed to lyse 50% of a standardized suspension of sheep erythrocytes coated with antierythrocyte antibody]) was used to assess the inhibition or consumption of complement components in infected guinea pigs. Guinea pig sera from control and infected animals were collected on day 3 p.i. and immediately stored at −80°C in small aliquots until analysis. A commercial kit (CH50 test; HaemoScan, Netherlands) was used according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.Tissue preparation and histological examination.For histopathology, the lung samples were collected from infected guinea pigs on day 28, and testicles were collected on day 7 p.i. The samples were fixed in 4% neutral buffered formalin (Claro-Prom d.o.o., Zagreb, Croatia) embedded in paraffin, sectioned, and HE stained.Statistical analysis.Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism v.9.3.1. A two- or one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s multiple-comparison test was used for normally distributed data. A two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test or a Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s post hoc test was used when data were not normally distributed. Significance is indicated as follows: *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001; and ****, P < 0.0001.Ethical statements.Animal experimentation was approved by the Croatian Ministry of Agriculture, Veterinary and Food Safety Directorate (UP/I-322-01/17-01/74, permission no. 525-10/1315-20-11, date 29 April 2020). The approval was based on the positive opinion of the National Ethical Committee (EP 109/2017). The protocols for animal care and handling were in accordance with the guidelines of the Croatian Law on Animal Welfare (2017), which strictly complies with EC Directive 2010/63/EU. All animal procedures were performed by fully trained and licensed staff, with obtained education and training according to the category B or C of the Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: RUBELLA VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Delineating morbillivirus entry, dissemination and airborne transmission by studying 

IntroductionMorbilliviruses are enveloped, non-segmented, negative strand RNA viruses that belong to the family Paramyxoviridae [1]. They are highly contagious, spread via the respiratory route, cause profound immune suppression but also elicit lifelong immunity in surviving hosts, and have a propensity to cause large outbreaks associated with high morbidity and mortality in previously unexposed populations. Measles virus (MV) is the prototype morbillivirus and remains a significant cause of childhood morbidity and mortality in the developing world. Measles is characterized by fever, skin rash, cough and conjunctivitis, followed by a transient immune suppression [2]. The resulting increased susceptibility to secondary infections can lead to life-threatening complications [3]. In spite of the availability of safe and effective live-attenuated MV vaccines, measles outbreaks continue to occur in the industrialized world due to inadequate vaccination coverage and importations of this highly transmissible virus from endemic regions [4, 5].The narrow host range and long incubation period of MV have restricted the characterization of its pathogenesis since patients are not recognized as having measles until onset of rash, and animal studies predominantly rely on experimental infections of non-human primates (NHPs). A surrogate model for MV pathogenesis is infection of ferrets with canine distemper virus (CDV), a morbillivirus that can infect a wide range of carnivores [6, 7]. However, CDV in carnivores is highly neurotropic and often leads to fatal disease [8–12], which is in sharp contrast to MV infection of humans and NHPs.Morbilliviruses are amongst the most contagious viruses known and are primarily transmitted by aerosols or respiratory droplets. Once inhaled, virions establish primary infection by receptor-dependent fusion at the plasma membrane [13]. Two cellular receptors involved in morbillivirus infection have been identified: signaling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 1 (SLAM/F1, or CD150), expressed by subsets of thymocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), hematopoietic stem cells, macrophages, T- and B-lymphocytes [14], and nectin cell adhesion molecule 4 (nectin-4, previously known as poliovirus receptor-related 4), expressed at the adherens junction complex of epithelial cells [15, 16]. Both receptors play a crucial role in viral pathogenesis (reviewed in [17]), with CD150-mediated infection being critical for entry and dissemination [18, 19] and nectin-4-mediated infection critical for virus transmission [20, 21].A number of aspects of morbillivirus pathogenesis remain unresolved. Studies in mice and NHPs have shown that MV initially infects alveolar macrophages and DCs in the lungs, instead of epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract [22–24]. Even though this is a possible entry route, it seems unlikely that a highly contagious virus with an R0 of 12–18 [25] and of which infection with one 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) is sufficient to cause productive infection in macaques [26], exclusively depends on infection of target cells in the alveoli. Additional routes of entry into a susceptible host have been postulated, including infection of CD150+ immune cells within the epithelium of the respiratory tract [18, 27]. As DCs are abundant within this epithelium, and DC-SIGN was previously identified as an attachment receptor for MV [28, 29], it is suggested that DCs could play a crucial role in this entry route [30]. Additionally, damage to the upper respiratory tract epithelium by mechanical injury [31] or respiratory co-infections potentially exposes nectin-4 as a cellular entry receptor. Another potential route of entry for morbilliviruses involves CD150+ and/or DC-SIGN+ cells present in the conjunctiva of the eye [32, 33]. However, direct in vivo evidence from animal models for these alternative entry strategies is lacking.Recombinant (r) viruses expressing fluorescent reporter proteins have allowed sensitive assessment of morbillivirus entry and dissemination in vivo [18, 34, 35]. Multicolored viruses have been used to demonstrate MV polyploidy [36], ribonucleoprotein trafficking [37], superinfection immunity [38], potential of segmenting the genome [39] and a cross-genomic cooperation modulating phenotype [40]. Recognizing the power of this approach for in vivo competition studies, we simultaneously administered three rCDVs expressing green (Venus), red (dTom) or blue (TagBFP) fluorescent proteins to ferrets to assess viral entry, intra-host dissemination and inter-host transmission. We show that CDV enters the host efficiently if delivered to the nose or lung, and that infection of the host through conjunctival administration, although less efficient, is also possible. In vivo competition showed that the route of entry had no influence on viral dissemination. However, exclusive single-color virus transmission of the systemically dominant virus to recipient ferrets was observed, suggesting a bottleneck during transmission.ResultsRecombinant CDVs stably express different fluorescent reporter proteinsPlasmids containing full-length CDV strain Snyder-Hill (CDVSH) antigenomes were modified to encode rCDVs expressing fluorescent reporter proteins from an additional transcription unit (ATU). Three fluorescent reporter proteins (Venus, dTom and TagBFP) were selected on basis of spectral discernibility, brightness, photo-stability, lack of oligomerization and potential to be detected by in-house flow cytometer and confocal microscope. These viruses, rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) were rescued and grown on Vero cells modified to express canine (c) CD150 (Vero-cCD150) in which they produced high levels of fluorescence in multinucleated syncytia (Fig 1A). Infection of concanavilin A (ConA)-stimulated white blood cells (WBC) isolated from CDV-naive ferrets resulted in large numbers of fluorescent cells, as detected by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, Fig 1B) and flow cytometry.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g001Fig 1In vitro validation and in vivo experimental design.(A, top panel) Three rCDVs expressing a fluorescent reporter protein as an ATU from the 6th position in the genome were generated (rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6), rCDVSHTagBFP(6)), rescued and (A, bottom panel) grown on Vero-cCD150 cells. (B) rCDVs were shown to efficiently infect ConA-stimulated ferret WBC. (C) Donor ferrets 1–6 (D1-6) were simultaneously inoculated with a low dose of the three indicated rCDVs delivered via Oc, IN and IT inoculation in different administration route combinations, divided over three sequential experiments.Simultaneous inoculation with three rCDVSHs causes lethal disease in ferretsSix donor ferrets (D1 –D6) were simultaneously inoculated in three consecutive experiments via the ocular (Oc), intra-nasal (IN) and intra-tracheal (IT) routes with a low dose of the indicated rCDVSH (3.3 x 103 TCID50/route), depositing viruses in the eyes, nose or lungs. Even though the viruses had been engineered to have identical genome lengths to prevent subtle differences in fitness impacting the outcome of the in vivo experiment, the rCDVs were alternated over the three route combinations to mitigate any unforeseen effect on pathogenesis (Fig 1C). All donor ferrets developed fever with a biphasic pattern, with temperature peaks around 5–7 and 12–14 days post-inoculation (DPI) (Fig 2A). The first fever peak corresponded with the onset of lymphopenia: peripheral lymphocyte counts were strongly reduced by the end of the first week after infection, and did not recover during the second week (Fig 2B). All donor ferrets became lethargic and were euthanized 14–16 DPI. Virus could be isolated from WBC of all ferrets from 4 DPI, with peak viremia levels observed around 6–8 DPI (Fig 2C). The decline in viral load in WBC during the second week was likely due to the virtual absence of lymphocytes in peripheral blood, resulting in exhaustion of susceptible CD150-positive cells. Virus was isolated from eye, nose, throat, and rectal swabs, in most ferrets with progressively increasing virus loads during the second week after inoculation (Fig 2D).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g002Fig 2Inoculation with rCDVs leads to systemic infection and disease.Simultaneous inoculation of donor ferrets (D1-6) via multiple administration routes with three reporter viruses resulted in systemic disease. (A) Body temperature was measured using an intra-peritoneal probe and a biphasic fever pattern was observed. (B) WBC counts measured in EDTA blood showed that animals became lymphopenic. (C) Systemic virus replication was detected by virus isolation from WBC on Vero-cCD150 cells, while (D) local virus replication was demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs.Simultaneous inoculation of ferrets with three rCDVs results in systemic replication of one or multiple virusesExpression of fluorescent proteins within WBC throughout the course of the experiment, or in single cell suspensions prepared from lymphoid tissues collected at necropsy, was assessed by flow cytometry (Fig 3A). In one ferret (D5) only one fluorescent protein was detected, in three ferrets (D1, D3, D4) a combination of two fluorescent proteins was detected and in two ferrets (D2, D6) all three inoculated viruses had initiated productive infections as shown by simultaneous detection of red, green and blue fluorescent proteins. Interestingly, in ferrets showing systemic infection with two or three viruses, all fluorescent proteins were already detectable in WBC collected at 6 DPI. This demonstrates that even though viruses were administered via multiple inoculation routes, parallel onset of viremia occurred within one week after inoculation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g003Fig 3Microscopic and macroscopic detection of fluorescence in donor ferrets.(A) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in directly inoculated (D1-6) ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. The circular inset shows which reporter virus was administered to a donor ferret via which route. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions of lymphoid tissues were determined by flow cytometry. rCDVs were detected in all lymphoid tissues (man LN: mandibular lymph node; ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; mes LN: mesenteric LN; GALT: gut-associated lymphoid tissue; PP: Peyer’s patches; BM: bone marrow; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 5/6 ferrets the IT delivered virus became dominant (D2 –D6). (B, C) Donor ferrets D1 and D2 were chosen as representative examples. Virus was isolated from WBC, BAL, CSF and throat, nose, eye and rectal swabs by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. (Left panels) Screening of virus isolations by CLSM allowed determination of the dominance of rCDVs at 8 DPI. (Centre panels) Relative contribution of the various reporter viruses to the total amount of rCDV present in the sample collected 8 DPI or at necropsy (CSF and BAL). (Right panels) Direct CLSM of various tissues at necropsy revealed fluorescence in the epithelium of the trachea (dotted line marks basement membrane, Lu marks lumen), and B-cell follicles in lymphoid tissues (delineated by dotted line). (D) Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was directly detected in live ferrets and during necropsy at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin. The inset in the second panel clearly shows that green and red foci of infected cells can be discerned (#). During necropsy, macroscopic fluorescence was detected in the tongue (arrows show tonsils), lungs and Peyer’s patches. Again, the inset in the third panel shows separate foci of green and red cells (#).rCDV uses multiple routes of entry in parallelIn all donor ferrets IT inoculation resulted in viremia, confirming that direct inoculation into the lower respiratory tract is a highly efficient entry route for morbilliviruses (Fig 3A). In five out of six donor ferrets, IN inoculation also resulted in viremia, demonstrating that morbilliviruses can also efficiently invade a host when 3300 TCID50 in a low volume (25μl/nostril) was deposited in the upper respiratory tract (Fig 3A). Finally, in two out of six ferrets the morbillivirus directly inoculated into the conjunctival sac behind the lower eyelid (again using a low volume inoculum) caused viremia, demonstrating this is a functional route for morbillivirus entry, although apparently less effective than entry through the respiratory route (Fig 3A).Multi-route delivery of rCDVs results in widespread systemic replicationNext we focused on the period between onset of viremia and euthanasia of the donor ferrets to assess morbillivirus dissemination. In one ferret (D1) the virus inoculated via the IN route became dominant, while in all other ferrets the virus given by IT inoculation became dominant. Likewise, viruses that predominated in WBC were in most cases also present at the greatest level in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues (Fig 3A).Detection of fluorescent protein expression in WBC (Fig 3A) showed a good correlation with virus isolation from WBC (Fig 3B and 3C, left panel). Ferrets D1 and D2 illustrate this since these animals represented two extremes of the study. In ferret D1 two viruses were detected systemically (rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6)), however one virus (rCDVSHdTom(6)) became dominant. In ferret D2 all three viruses replicated at comparable levels. Virus isolation from WBC in Vero-cCD150 cells resulted in predominantly red plaques for D1, and in multicolored plaques for D2. Photomicrographs in the left panels of Fig 3B and 3C show a high resolution CLSM image of a representative well, while the large pie charts show the relative color distribution produced by viruses isolated from WBC collected at 8 DPI. The smaller pie charts show the color distribution of virus isolated from other samples, including swabs of the conjunctivae, nose, throat and rectum collected at 8 DPI (see also Fig 2D), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) collected at necropsy. Interestingly, the proportion of green fluorescent virus in ferrets D1 and D2 was higher in BAL than in all other tissues, corresponding to IT inoculation of these two ferrets with rCDVSHVenus(6). In ferret D1, low systemic detection of green fluorescent cells, was contrasted by a relatively high percentage of green fluorescent cells in the tracheo-bronchial lymph node (TB LN) which drains the lungs (Fig 3A). At necropsy, CLSM analysis of respiratory tract tissues and lymph nodes of ferret D1 revealed a predominance of red fluorescent cells (Fig 3B, right panels), whereas the same tissues collected from ferret D2 contained a mixture of different colored fluorescent cells (Fig 3C, right panels).Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was imaged both in living ferrets and at necropsy. Macroscopic detection of blue fluorescence was not technically possible using the available apparatus. Both green and red fluorescence were detected in the head of ferret D2 (Fig 3D, fluorescence was detected mainly at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin). Use of the light emitting diode (LED) lamp to detect green fluorescence, allowed detection of separate green and red foci of infected cells (Fig 3D, inset in second panel at (#)). Macroscopic imaging of tissues during necropsies is illustrated by photos of the tongue, lungs and Peyer’s patches (PP) of ferret D2, again showing a clear separation of green and red fluorescent foci of infection (Fig 3D, inset in third panel at (#)).Double- and triple-rCDV-infected cells in vivo during disseminationMorbillivirus viremia is mediated by circulation of infected cells rather than cell-free virions. As a consequence, morbilliviruses predominantly disseminate by cell-to-cell spread within the host. It has been hypothesized that superinfection immunity is a significant barrier to dual infections of cells. Unexpectedly, during virus isolation procedures from WBC we not only observed green, blue or red syncytia, but also syncytia that contained two or three fluorescent proteins, pseudo-colored as yellow (Venus / dTom), purple (dTom / TagBFP), cyan (Venus / TagBFP) or white (Venus / dTom / TagBFP) following image acquisition by CLSM (Fig 4A). Since it may be possible that double- and triple-positive syncytia could have been caused by fusion of single-infected cells, thus not representing true double or triple infections of single cells, we performed direct CLSM of tissues collected during necropsy. This confirmed the presence of double-infected cells in the epithelium of the trachea (Fig 4B, upper panel, Venus / TagBFP cell shown as cyan [*] and Venus / dTom cell shown as yellow [#]) and in the spleen (Fig 4B, lower panel). In the spleen, single-infected cells were observed throughout the section in red, green and blue, whereas many double-positive cells were observed in cyan, yellow and purple. Finally, double and triple infections were confirmed by flow cytometry. As an example, WBC obtained from ferret D2 at 8 DPI were gated for positive events for a single reporter protein (Fig 4C, left panels), for which subsequently the other two reporter proteins were plotted (Fig 4C, right panels). This demonstrated the presence of single-infected cells (lower-left quadrant), but double- (lower-right and upper-left quadrant) and triple-infected (upper-right quadrant) lymphocytes were also commonly detected. Although triple-infected cells were only detected in 2/6 animals, double-infected cells were more common and were detected in 5/6 animals. To confirm these in vivo observations, we performed in vitro competition experiments in canine B-lymphoblastoma (CLBL-1) cells [41], and confirmed that double infections were also achieved in vitro (Fig 4D). Moreover, in vitro double infections were also observed when the second virus infection was performed six hours after the first infection (S1 Fig).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g004Fig 4Detection of rCDV double- and triple-infected cells.(A) Virus isolation from WBC by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells revealed syncytia that were simultaneously positive for two reporter proteins (i.e. Venus/dTom [yellow], dTom/TagBFP [purple] or Venus/TagBFP [cyan]) or all three reporter proteins (Venus/dTom/TagBFP [white]). (B, upper panel) Direct confocal analysis of the trachea from ferret D2 showed that single infected cells (Venus, dTom or TagBFP) were dominant, but sparse Venus/TagBFP and Venus/dTom double-positive cells were detected as cyan (*) or yellow (#), respectively. (B, lower panel) Direct confocal analysis of the spleen from ferret D2 revealed the presence of single-infected and all possible combinations of double-infected cells. (C) Direct flow cytometry of WBC collected from ferret D2 on 8 DPI indicated that single-, double- and triple-positive cells were present in peripheral blood. Similar results were obtained at different time-points. (C, upper panel) When Venus+ cells were selected (as indicated by red gate), dTom-/TagBFP- (single-infected cells), dTom+/TagBFP- or dTom-/TagBFP+ (double-infected cells) and dTom+/TagBFP+ (triple-infected) cells were detected. (C, middle and lower panel) Similar results were obtained when the analysis was performed by initially gating dTom+ or TagBFP+ cells. Percentages of positive cells are indicated in the plots. (D) Canine lymphoma B-cells (CLBL-1) were inoculated with rCDVSHVenus(6) and/or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) in the presence of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4. Green and blue fluorescence levels were determined 24 hours post infection by flow cytometry. Venus and TagBFP single positive cells are shown in green and blue, respectively, while double-positive cells are shown in cyan.rCDV dissemination results in widespread infection of the nasal cavity and CNSSince airborne transmission of respiratory viruses is assumed to be associated with virus shedding from the upper respiratory tract [42, 43], we assessed the distribution of CDV-infected cells in the nasal cavity of ferrets D4 (Fig 5) and D5 (S2 Fig). Since CDVSH is highly neurotropic, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of slides containing a sagittal section of the entire ferret head which permitted assessment of infected cells in both the nasal cavity and brain. CDV-infected cells were mainly detected in the nasal cavity of ferret D4 (Fig 5A), and few positive cells were observed in the meninges. Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*) (Fig 5B). Very few cells within the olfactory epithelium were CDV positive (Fig 5C), whereas the respiratory epithelium contained many CDV-infected cells (Fig 5D), including ciliated epithelial cells and macrophage-like cells (Fig 5D, macrophages indicated by arrow and shown in inset). Throughout the nasal cavity the majority of CDV-positive cells was found in the submucosa and included fibroblasts, large macrophage-like cells, and lymphocyte-like cells. In the nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT) the majority of lymphoid cells were CDV positive (Fig 5E). In addition, CDV- infected glands were occasionally observed in the nasal cavity, mainly in the tip of the nose (Fig 5F). CDV-infected squamous epithelial cells were observed in the soft palate (Fig 5G), mimicking similar observations in MV-infected macaques.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g005Fig 5rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D4.Immunohistochemistry detecting CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed abundant rCDV in the nasal turbinates (Nt, delineated by dotted line). In this ferret rCDV was only observed in few meningeal cells and not in the cerebrum (Br) and olfactory bulb (Ob). In general, CDV-positive cells were mainly found in the submucosa of the respiratory and olfactory mucosa and nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT). (B) Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*). (C) Few CDV-positive cells were detected in the olfactory epithelium, and many CDV-positive cells were present in the submucosa of the olfactory epithelium. Positive cells had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in the respiratory epithelium of the nasal turbinates, although most positive cells within the epithelium appear non-epithelial (arrows and insert). Again, CDV-positive cells were abundant in the submucosa and had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (E) Positive stretch of CDV-positive cells, including NALT with infected lymphocytes and fibroblasts. CDV-positive macrophages were also detected in the epithelial layer. (F) Submucosal nasal glands stained occasionally positive for CDV predominantly in the tip of the nose (arrow). (G) Squamous epithelium of the soft palate stained positive for rCDV.In ferret D5, rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity and CNS (S2A Fig). In the nasal cavity, the number of CDV positive cells was lower in comparison to ferret D4, and consisted predominantly of fibroblasts and macrophage-like cells in the submucosa. In the CNS, CDV-infected cells were frequently observed in the meninges, predominantly in the meninges surrounding the cerebellum. Positive ependymal cells were detected in the choroid plexus, responsible for the production of CSF (S2B Fig), which corresponds to the isolation of virus from the CSF from this ferret. In the cerebellum, meninges surrounding the cerebellum and brainstem, endothelial cells and cells adjacent to blood vessels were occasionally CDV positive (S2C Fig). This suggests hematogenous spread of CDV into the CNS. In both the olfactory bulb and cerebrum foci of CDV positive cells, including neurons and glial cells, were detected (S2D and S2E Fig). Finally, CDV-positive cells were observed within the bone marrow.rCDV infection of donor ferrets results in airborne transmission to recipient ferretsTo assess airborne transmission, CDV-naive recipient (R1 –R6) ferrets were placed in transmission cages at 2 DPI. Donor and recipient ferrets were sampled every other DPI and followed for a maximum of 16 or 22 DPI respectively (Fig 6A and 6B). Ferrets were housed in pairs, meaning that recipient ferret R1 was placed in a cage adjacent to donor ferret D1. Body temperature was measured in 4 out of 6 recipient ferrets. Fever was not observed in the recipient ferrets tested up to the time point of euthanasia (Fig 6C). However, the majority of recipient ferrets showed decreased lymphocyte counts shortly before euthanasia (Fig 6D). Airborne transmission was confirmed in all donor-recipient pairs and infectious rCDV was isolated from WBC (Fig 6E), nose, throat, eye and/or rectal swabs collected from recipient ferrets (Fig 6F). By using flow cytometry, rCDV replication was detected in WBC of 5 out of 6 ferrets (Fig 6G). For recipient ferret (R4) in which CDV-infected cells were not detected by flow cytometry, rCDVSHdTom(6) was isolated from throat and eye swabs. In all cases, only a single colored rCDV transmitted to the recipient ferret, which was also found in the lymphoid tissues at euthanasia and always was the virus that predominated in the corresponding donor animal (Fig 3A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g006Fig 6In vivo transmission of rCDV to recipient ferrets.(A, B) Susceptible recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed pairwise in neighboring cages of the donor ferret at 2 DPI. Arrows indicate airflow. All directly inoculated ferrets were euthanized at 14 to 16 DPI, whereas recipient ferrets were euthanized 21 or 22 DPI. (C) Fever was rarely detected in recipient ferrets, but these animals developed (D) lymphopenia and (E) systemic virus replication as detected by virus isolation from WBC as well as (F) local virus replication demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs. In panels E and F, grey lines represent the respective virus loads in donor ferrets (as shown in Fig 2). Transmission was detected in 6/6 animal pairs. (G) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in recipient ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues were determined. rCDV was detected in most lymphoid tissues (ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 6/6 ferrets the single-color virus dominant in the donor animal transmitted to the recipient ferret.DiscussionWe have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies in ferrets with virologically identical but spectrally distinct rCDVs administered simultaneously via multiple routes. Our aim was to study the temporal and spatial interplay of viruses during the early, intermediate and late stages of CDV infection. These “rainbow CDV” studies are the first to show that morbilliviruses can use multiple entry routes in parallel. Detection of circulating or lymphoid tissue-derived lymphocytes expressing multiple fluorescent reporter proteins was common, demonstrating that in vivo superinfection immunity is not a restrictive phenomenon. Airborne transmission to recipient ferrets was detected in all animal pairs, underpinning the highly infectious nature of morbilliviruses.Animal models of human viral diseases provide the bedrock of much of the current understanding of tropism and pathogenesis, and are essential for the development and licensure of drugs and vaccines. Ideally the human pathogen under study should not need to be adapted to the animal and the disease process should recapitulate the full clinical spectrum in people. This is challenging and oftentimes either the pathogen or host must be genetically altered to produce disease. Therefore, related animal pathogens infecting natural host species provide useful surrogates in the pathogenesis toolkit. For example, Sendai virus infection of mice [44], bovine respiratory syncytial virus infection of calves [45] and simian immunodeficiency virus infection of NHPs [46] have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of closely related human viruses. Likewise, experimental CDV infections of ferrets have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of MV and other morbilliviruses [47–50].Both measles [51] and canine distemper [47] are recognized as highly infectious diseases that are spread via the respiratory tract. The availability of rMVs expressing fluorescent proteins allowed us to identify alveolar macrophages and DCs in NHPs as early target cells following aerosol inhalation [24]. In that study, substantial numbers of MV-infected cells were not detected in the upper respiratory tract even though minuscule numbers of macrophages and DCs were detected in the deep lung at early time points after inoculation. This fitted well with our experience of IT inoculation as a highly reliable and standardized route of experimental MV infection [26]. The majority of CDV pathogenesis studies in ferrets has used IN inoculation, delivering the virus to the upper respiratory tract. Although it is important to note that IN inoculation of relatively large volumes can easily result in deposition of virus in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts [52], we also hypothesized that it was unlikely that morbilliviruses exclusively used the lower respiratory tract as a portal of entry [30]. Therefore, we simultaneously inoculated ferrets with multicolor rCDVs via the IN and IT routes, ensuring delivery to only the upper and lower respiratory tract, respectively. Since the conjunctivae have also been suggested as a portal of entry for many respiratory viruses [33], including MV [32], ocular inoculation was used as a third possible route of entry. IN and IT delivery resulted in viremia in 5 out of 6 and 6 out of 6 ferrets, respectively, within a week after inoculation. The fact that the IT-delivered virus became dominant in 5 out of 6 ferrets suggests that this is the most efficient port of entry, confirming previous observations with MV infection of NHPs [26]. This could be explained by the fact that in the lungs the potential target cells (alveolar macrophages and/or DCs) are directly accessible and not shielded by an epithelial barrier. However, since virus delivered by IN inoculation in a low volume also resulted in viremia in the majority of the ferrets, this demonstrated that multiple routes of entry can be used in parallel. Inoculation of the virus onto the conjunctivae resulted in infection in only 2 out of 6 ferrets, demonstrating that this is a legitimate, albeit less efficient entry portal. However, since there is a direct connection between the eyes and the upper respiratory tract via the nasolacrimal duct, transport of virus particles to the upper respiratory tract after conjunctival delivery cannot be excluded. Moreover, it is important to note that this study was not designed to assess statistically significant differences between these routes of entry.CDV dissemination is mediated by infected circulating and tissue-resident B- and T-lymphocytes [35], and results in lymphopenia and fever. During dissemination the infection remains highly cell-associated, and few virions are detected in plasma. Spread is mediated mostly by direct cell-to-cell transmission, e.g. by the formation of virological synapses [34, 53, 54]. Here, we show that regardless of the route of entry, all donor ferrets developed a similar course of fatal disease, and severity was independent of the number of circulating rCDVs. Interestingly, significant numbers of lymphocytes co-expressed two or three fluorescent reporter proteins, demonstrating that they were infected with viruses inoculated at different sites. Although it has been shown that morbillivirus infection induces superinfection immunity in vitro [38], the incredibly rapid dissemination of CDV (with percentages of infected WBC rising from undetectable to more than 50% within 2 days in some animals) leads to lymphocytes being double- or triple-infected. We consider serial, direct cell-to-cell transmission of rCDVs from different donor cells to single acceptor cells the most likely explanation of the existence of double or triple infections. In fact, double infection was readily reproduced in vitro by exposing a B-lymphoblastic canine cell line to two rCDVs, and was also reproduced when the second infection was performed six hours after the first.Multi-route delivery of virologically identical but phenotypically distinct viruses is a powerful approach to dissect the complex interplay in evolving pathogenesis. None of the data suggest that the expression of different fluorescent reporter proteins had an effect on virus fitness and we have done our utmost to ensure that rCDVs were genetically identical in terms of genome length and ATU design. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that genes encoding Venus, dTom and TagBFP contain secondary or tertiary RNA structures or immune-activating sequences. Alternating the rCDVs and administration routes in three subsequent experiments further mitigated this risk.Although epidemiological observations have demonstrated that CDV is a highly contagious virus, surprisingly few experimental studies have examined transmission. In 1926, Dunkin and Laidlaw meticulously described precautions taken to perform experimental CDV infections of ferrets and keep their breeding stock of animals free of canine distemper [47]. Three transmission pathways: direct contact between sick and healthy animals, housing a healthy animal in a cage from which a moribund animal had been removed several hours earlier, and airborne transmission were described [47]. The timespan between onset of disease in the donor and recipient animals was around ten days. Subsequent direct transmission studies documented a period of 6 to 11 days for development of disease in recipient animals [55] and experimental CDV outbreak studies in ferrets support a role for airborne transmission [56]. The observed time period required for CDV transmission in our experiment was in good accordance with these previous reports [47, 56].Even though we could not determine the exact tissue origin of transmitted virus due to widespread dissemination of different colored viruses throughout the donor ferrets, the dominant virus of the donor always was the only virus transmitted to the recipient. The added value of our study was that the transmission of a single color rCDV, even when two or three rCDVs were detected in donor ferrets, suggested a bottleneck event during airborne transmission: apparently only one or a few infectious units were transmitted from donor to recipient ferret. This mirrors influenza airborne transmission between ferrets, in which virus populations in recipient ferrets proved to be genetically much more homogeneous than those of the donor ferrets [43, 57, 58]. However, in this model transmission was restricted to airborne transmission, so the situation could be different for indirect and direct contact transmission. Overall, this illustrates the utility of gaining a comprehensive understanding of transmission in this important animal model, which is also being developed for Ebola virus and Nipah virus [59–61].Here, we have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies with rCDVs discernable on basis of their fluorescent reporter proteins. We believe that this model will prove its use in the future for in vivo competition studies to identify factors associated with viral fitness.Materials & methodsEthics statementAnimal experiments were conducted at Erasmus MC, in strict compliance with European guidelines (EU directive on animal testing 2010/63/EU) and Dutch legislation. The study protocol was approved by Stichting Dier Experimenten Commissie Consult (DEC Consult, permit number EMC3043), a Dutch independent animal experimentation ethics review board. The manuscript was prepared in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines [62].CDV-naive ferrets were housed in groups prior to rCDV infection, received standard feed on a daily basis and had access to water ad libitum. Cages contained several sources of environmental enrichment. During the infection and transmission studies, ferrets were housed in transmission cages [63]. Briefly, ferrets were housed individually in perspex cages, with paired donor (D) and recipient (R) ferrets being separated by two stainless steel grids. The bottom of the cages was covered with carpet and cages were not cleaned during the course of the experiment to prevent aerosolizing bodily excretions. Transmission cages were placed in HEPA-filtered, negatively pressurized biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) isolators. Animal welfare was checked on daily basis, and all animal handling was performed under light anesthesia using ketamine and medetomidine. After handling, atipamezole was administered to antagonize the effect of medetomidine.CellsVero cells stably expressing the CDV receptor canine SLAM (Vero-cCD150) (kind gift of Dr. Y. Yanagi, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan) were cultured as described previously [64]. To obtain primary ferret white blood cells (WBC), small-volume blood samples were collected from CDV-naive ferrets in Vacuette tubes (Greiner) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant. Red blood cells in blood were subsequently lysed with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 10% (V/V) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 μg/ml). The canine B-cell lymphoma cell line CLBL-1 [41] (kind gift of Dr. Barbara Rütgen, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria) was grown in complete RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% (V/V) FBS.Generation of rCDVs expressing Venus, dTom and TagBFP fluorescent proteinsRecombinant CDV strain Snyder-Hill (SH) viruses were generated as described previously [10]. Genes encoding the fluorescent reporter proteins Venus, dTom or TagBFP were added as an ATU at the sixth (6) position of the genome (between H and L) (Fig 1A). Importantly, TagBFP and dTom were modified by the addition of six (GGSGSG) and five (GSGSG) amino acids, respectively, to the carboxyl terminus to make them identical in size to Venus (239 amino acids). This ensured that the viral genome lengths were identical from the perspective of replication and transcription by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The three viruses were designated rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6). Fluorescence produced in cells infected with these viruses can be readily discerned by flow cytometry, UV epifluorescence microscopy and CLSM. Virus stocks were grown in Vero-cCD150 cells (Fig 1A) and tested negative for contamination with Mycoplasma species. Virus titers were determined by endpoint titration in Vero-cCD150 cells and expressed in TCID50/ml. Susceptibility of ferret WBC with the reporter viruses was determined in vitro. ConA stimulated ferret WBC were inoculated in quadruplicate with rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3 for 1 hour, washed and subsequently cultured for 48 hours. Susceptibility of ferret WBC was analyzed directly by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM with a LSM700 system fitted on an Axio Observer Z1 inverted microscope (Zeiss) (Fig 1B) and by flow cytometry on a FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences).In vitro double infection of CLBL-1 cellsCLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 150μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 5x104 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide) and cultured for 23 hours in 96-well flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (Fig 4D).In a second experiment, CLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 1.2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 1.2x105 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide). Five hours later (i.e. six hours after infection 1), cells were centrifuged again and a second infection was performed in the presence or absence of PHCSK4. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide), and cultured for 23 hours in 96-wells flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (S1 Fig).Animal study designTwelve CDV-seronegative ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) were used for the rCDV infection and transmission studies. A temperature probe was implanted intraperitoneally 2 weeks before the beginning of the experiments to monitor body temperature noninvasively. Six donor ferrets (randomly selected, D1-6) were inoculated with 104 TCID50 rCDV, divided in three equal parts of rCDVSHVenus(6): rCDVSHdTom(6): rCDVSHTagBFP(6) (each 3.3 x 103 TCID50). Each reporter virus was administered via a different route, which were alternated over three experiments. Ferrets D1 and D2 received rCDVSHTagBFP(6) ocularly (Oc), rCDVSHdTom(6) intra-nasally (IN) and rCDVSHVenus(6) intra-tracheally (IT); ferrets D3 and D4 received rCDVSHVenus(6) Oc, rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IN and rCDVSHdTom(6) IT; ferrets D5 and D6 received rCDVSHdTom(6) Oc, rCDVSHVenus(6) IN and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IT (Fig 1C). Oc administration was performed by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) directly onto each of the conjunctivae, IN inoculation by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) into the nostrils while the ferret was held on its back to prevent spread to the trachea and IT inoculations by direct instillation of virus suspension (1ml) into the lower respiratory tract after intubation with a flexible catheter. Following inoculation, the six donor ferrets were placed individually in purpose built cages specifically designed to allow airborne transmission over a 10 cm divide. Donor ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 14–16 DPI. Six CDV-seronegative recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed in the transmission cages (Fig 6A) at 2 DPI of the donor ferret. Recipient ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 21/22 DPI (Fig 6B). The animal protocol specified that recipient animals had to be euthanized no later than 22 days after inoculation of the donor animals, which made it impossible to assess the full spectrum of disease in the recipient ferrets.Clinical specimensSmall-volume blood samples were collected in Vacuette tubes (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant every other DPI of donor ferrets, or every other day after placement of recipient ferrets in transmission cages. Recipient ferrets were always sampled first to prevent direct contamination of recipient animals by sampling of the donor animals. Total WBC and lymphocyte counts were obtained using an automated counter (pocH-100iV; Sysmex). WBC were obtained by lysis of whole blood with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium as described above. Cells were counted using a hemocytometer and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The percentages of WBC infected by different reporter viruses were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for cytopathic effect (CPE) by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 6 days and results were expressed as the number of virus-infected cells/106 total cells. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by screening virus isolations on Vero-cCD150 cells for Venus, dTom and TagBFP expression by CLSM.Throat and rectal swabs (cytobrush plus; Medscand Medical) and nose and eye swabs (polyester-tipped minitip urethral swab; Copan) were collected every other DPI from donor ferrets, or every other day after placement from recipient ferrets, in transport medium (Eagle's minimal essential medium [EMEM] with Hanks' salts, supplemented with lactalbumin enzymatic hydrolysate, penicillin, streptomycin, polymyxin B sulfate, nystatin, gentamicin, and glycerol) and frozen at −80°C. After being thawed, samples were vortexed, the swab was removed, and the remaining transport medium was used for virus isolation. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for CPE by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 7 days and results were expressed as TCID50/ml. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by separately screening virus isolations for Venus, dTom and TagBFP by CLSM.NecropsyFerrets were euthanized by exsanguination under deep ketamine/medetomidine anesthesia. Macroscopic detection of Venus and dTom was performed with an LED lamp and the appropriate filters as described previously [10, 18]. Post-euthanasia, CSF was obtained by lumbar puncture. Virus isolation from CSF was performed by direct titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. A broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed postmortem by direct infusion of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 5 ml) into the right-hand side of the lung. BAL cells were resuspended in culture medium with supplements as described above, counted, and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The infection percentages of BAL cells were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Virus isolation was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells as previously described for MV on Vero cells expressing human CD150 [18]. During necropsy, multiple tissues including brain, trachea, primary bronchus, lungs and spleen were harvested and screened directly for expression of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM. The left lung was inflated with 2% (W/V) low-melting-point agarose before being screened, as described previously [24, 67]. After screening, non-lymphoid tissues were transferred to 10% neutral-buffered formalin (FA). From two ferrets (D4 and D5), the complete head was stored in 10% neutral-buffered FA for immunohistochemistry. Lymphoid tissues were collected in PBS for preparation of single-cell suspensions using cell strainers with a 100 μm pore size (BD Biosciences, Erembodegem, Belgium) and directly used for flow cytometry. The infection percentages of single cell suspensions by different reporter viruses were determined by flow cytometry.Histological and immunohistochemical analysisAfter fixation in 10% formalin, ferret heads were decalcified in 10% EDTA (pH 7.4) for at least a month. After decalcification heads were embedded in paraffin. CDVSH was detected using a monoclonal antibody (VMRD Inc., Pullman, WA, USA). Briefly, 3μm paraffin sections were deparaffinized and antigens were retrieved by boiling slides for 15 minutes in citric acid buffer (10mM, pH 6.0). Sections were incubated with the anti-CDV antibody for 1 hour at RT. Binding of the primary antibody was detected using a biotinylated rabbit-anti-mouse Ig (DAKO), after which tissue sections were incubated with ABComplex-HRP (DAKO) for 30 minutes. Peroxidase was revealed using 3-Amino-9-ethyl-carbazole (AEC, Sigma) resulting in a bright red precipitate. In each staining procedure an isotype control was included as a negative control.Supporting informationS1 FigIn vitro single and double infections of canine B-lymphoblastoid cell line CLBL-1.(A) Experimental design: CLBL-1 cells were infected at T = 0 and / or T = 6 hours. One hour after the infections (or incubation with culture medium as mock control), cells were washed to remove unbound virus. At T = 30 hours infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry. (B) List of the conditions (#) applied for infection 1 (I1) or 2 (I2). All infections were performed in triplicate, using a multiplicity of infection of 1, in the presence or absence of the infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [63]. (C) Infection percentages (irrespective of which reporter protein was expressed) ranged from 14.5 to 51.3% or from 64.1 to 84.8% when performed in the absence (top) or presence (bottom) of infection-enhancing lipopeptide, respectively. (D) Examples of confocal scanning laser microscopy (top) or flow cytometry (bottom) measurements of conditions 1 (mock), 2 (Venus), 3 (dTom) and 6 (Venus + dTomOM) 30 hours post-infection in the presence of PHCSK4. In the FACS plots, single positive cells are shown in green (Venus) or red (dTom), while double-positive cells are shown in yellow. (E) Distribution of single- or double-positive cells in the infected cell populations of conditions 2–8.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigrCDV was detected in the central nervous system (CNS) and nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D5.Immunohistochemistry for the detection of CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed rCDV presence in the CNS (cerebellum [Cl], cerebrum and olfactory bulb). (B) CDV-positive cells within the ependyma and choroid plexus (arrow). (C) CDV was detected in endothelial cells and cells surrounding the blood vessel, suggestive of a hematogenous spread of rCDV to the brain. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in neurons and glial cells of the olfactory bulb. (E) CDV-positive neurons and glial cells in the cerebrum.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Emerging Infectious Diseases and the Eye: Ophthalmic Manifestations, Pathogenesis, and One Health Perspectives

INTRODUCTIONOne Health is a collaborative, multisectoral approach that aims to optimize health outcomes by recognizing the close connection of human health to the health of animals and our shared environment.1 The One Health concept was first associated with animal-human transmission during the emergence of severe acute respiratory disease (SARS) in 2003 and demonstrated the significance of animal reservoirs with the potential to cause high mortality in urban populations.2
Recently, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) presented as isolated, bilateral conjunctivitis in the absence of systemic symptoms in humans who were exposed to dairy cows and poultry infected with H5N1. These unusual findings highlight the extreme relevance of human-animal interactions, as well as the ocular system in clinical disease detection and management.3–6 Zoonoses account for a large majority of emerging infectious diseases, and as interactions between humans, animals, and the environment continue to expand, monitoring these interactions to better control disease outbreaks is paramount.7
The eye is uniquely suited to harbor persistent pathogens, acting as a long-term reservoir for multiple pathogens that may lead to chronic indolent inflammation (eg, anterior uveitis due to rubella or cytomegalovirus) or aggressive, sight-threatening uveitis [eg, panuveitis due to Ebola virus disease (EVD)] (Fig. 1). Besides viruses, parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii that may lead to chorioretinitis further highlight these relevant human-animal relationships and the eye. While ophthalmologists often focus on the known host risk factors, ophthalmic disease findings, and targeted therapies for patients with eye disease, a more comprehensive understanding of the animal reservoir-host-environment relationships and One Health concepts can broaden the view of disease from an eye care provider’s standpoint (Fig. 2). Beyond an improved understanding of disease life cycle, pathogenesis and interactions, these insights provide opportunities for therapeutic considerations that extend beyond the patient’s visual system.FIGURE 1Reported ocular manifestations of zoonotic pathogens. Created in BioRender. Blyden, K. (2024). Biorender.com/e49s563FIGURE 2One Health concepts for emerging infectious diseases and the eye. Created in BioRender. Yeh, S. (2024). BioRender.com/n53n924This review aims to highlight One Health concepts that clinicians may also consider when dealing with emerging infectious diseases that affect the eye. This review focuses on clinically relevant risk factors, including pathogen-reservoir-host life cycle interactions, the environmental aspects of disease transmission, and ocular pathogenesis (Fig. 3). Utilizing this approach offers insights that inform methods of mitigating transmission and disease management that may eventually lead to improved clinical outcomes.8 Given the breadth and multifaceted nature of the One Health approach, this review is not meant to be exhaustive. Additional details related to implementation frameworks and One Health challenges, and other specialized reviews are available.9,10
FIGURE 3Ocular manifestations in zoonotic infections: host-pathogen dynamics. Created in BioRender. Blyden, K. (2024). Biorender.com/v80m899
Ebola Virus DiseaseEbola virus disease (EVD) is a deadly viral hemorrhagic fever caused by Ebolavirus (EBOV). EBOV is a negative sense, single-stranded RNA virus which belongs to the Filoviridae family and is endemic to regions of west and equatorial Africa.11 EVD was first discovered in 1976 when 2 simultaneous outbreaks occurred in South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).12 Since its discovery, over 30 outbreaks of Ebola disease have been recorded in sub-Saharan Africa, with a high case fatality rate exceeding 50%.13 Between 2014 and 2016, the largest EVD outbreak occurred in West Africa that ultimately exceeded 28,000 cases and over 11,300 deaths. Thousands of EVD survivors predominantly within Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea were found to be at-risk for sight-threatening ocular disease and systemic sequelae.14,15
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirEbolavirus enters cells via a viral surface fusion glycoprotein (GP)-mediated binding to a variety of potential host cell attachment factors, followed by micropinocytosis, a nonspecific cellular engulfing process. This viral endosome enters the endosomal/lysosomal pathway, where the proteases cathepsin B and L process GP, allowing for the interaction of Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC-1), subsequent fusion with the endosomal membrane and release of viral particle into the cytoplasm, allowing for viral replication, assembly, and budding.16,17 Here, it is proposed that the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex associated protein, VP24, is released, allowing for transcription by RNP complex proteins NP, VP35, VP30, and L. Host ribosomes translate viral mRNA, and virion assembly is coordinated by VP40 at the plasma membrane, with eventual release of the virus to the extracellular space.18
A review of literature suggests that the single natural reservoir of EBOV is yet to be identified, but suspected incidental animal reservoirs have tested positive for EBOV RNA and include duikers, gorillas, chimpanzees, and rodents.11,19–21 Multiple studies suggest that bats, specifically fruit bats that belong to the Pteropodidae family, are a natural reservoir of EBOV.22 These conclusions have been made based on the probable index cases of EVD outbreaks, which involve a history of contact with wild animals that lead to the transmission event.11
TransmissionMultiple outbreaks have begun by EBOV being introduced to humans through transmission from an unidentified, likely animal reservoir with subsequent human-to-human transmission through direct contact or contact with body fluids, infected tissues, or contaminated fomites.23,24 EBOV has been identified in multiple bodily fluids including breast milk, saliva, urine, semen, cerebrospinal fluid, and blood. During survivorship, EBOV has also been detected in the aqueous humor, cerebrospinal fluid, and semen.25–27 While uncommon, sexual transmission of EBOV by survivors has been reported, leading to novel transmission chains.28
Ocular ManifestationsDuring the 2014-2016 EVD outbreak, many survivors experienced sight-threatening ophthalmic complications ranging from anterior uveitis to panuveitis, which developed during convalescence. The range of inflammatory response can be mild to severe, resulting in secondary structural complications (ie, cataract, vitreous opacity) and resultant severe vision impairment or blindness.29,30 The PREVAIL longitudinal study of survivors of EVD demonstrated an increase in the prevalence and incidence of uveitis during the first year of follow-up.31 EBOV detection from an aqueous humor sample obtained from an EVD survivor with severe, sight-threatening panuveitis highlights the contribution of EBOV persistence to disease pathogenesis.One Health Mitigation of Ebola Virus DiseaseFactors that influence EVD spillover and transmission include ecological as well as socioeconomic challenges and civil conflicts as demonstrated in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where numerous deadly EVD outbreaks have occurred.32 While the specific, unique reservoir for EBOV has not been identified, it is speculated to originate in the rainforest,33 and the likelihood of EVD outbreaks is also related to the incidence of recent deforestation.34 EBOV spillover into African great apes has also been documented, threatening their populations and providing an additional potential source of human infection via bushmeat hunting and consumption. Great apes may serve as sentinels in EBOV-endemic areas, and consideration of veterinary interventions such as vaccination could provide reciprocal benefits to human and nonhuman health.35 Understanding the environmental and mammalian distribution of EBOV allows for the identification of possible zones that serve as an interface between susceptible mammalian subtypes, ecosystems, and humans.36 Robust monitoring, reduction of deforestation, health interventions for affected animal populations, and community education are some strategies that could be considered in a coordinated One Health approach to prevent EVD spillover and transmission among human populations and reduce the burden of vision impairment in resource-limited settings.34,37,38
Zika Virus DiseaseZika virus disease, caused by the Zika virus (ZIKV), is transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes. ZIKV is positive-sense, single-stranded RNA arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) in the genus Flavivirus and the family Flaviviridae. ZIKV was first identified in the Zika forest of Uganda in 1947 in a febrile rhesus macaque monkey, and was subsequently identified in humans in 1954 in Nigeria.39 Outbreaks of Zika virus disease have been recorded in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific. The first outbreak of Zika virus disease was reported in the Island of Yap (Federated States of Micronesia) in 2007, infecting over 70% of the population.40 This was followed by a larger outbreak in French Polynesia and other countries and territories in the Pacific in 2013. In March 2015, Brazil reported a large outbreak of Zika virus disease, where a surge in associated Guillain-Barré syndrome cases was observed.41
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe viral life cycle of ZIKV begins when an infected mosquito bites the host organism, from which the virus can then infect different cells, including skin cells (fibroblasts, keratinocytes).42 ZIKV also has tropism for retinal pericytes, retinal microvascular endothelial cells, and neural progenitor cells, as many of these cells contain cell surface receptors (Tyro3, DC-SIGN, AXL, and TIM01) that facilitate viral entry.43 ZIKV attaches to these host cell receptors using its envelope (E) protein and is then endocytosed by clathrin proteins.44 Mature virions exit the infected cell via exocytosis, where they can be picked up by another feeding Aedes mosquito.While ZIKV was first isolated from a febrile rhesus macaque monkey, the precise animal reservoir has yet to be identified.45 ZIKV is an arbovirus, maintained in nature through biological transmission between a susceptible vertebrate host and a hematophagous arthropod such as a mosquito. Anti-ZIKV antibodies have been observed in many nonhuman primates and other wild and domestic animals such as rodents, domestic sheep, goats, and orangutans, suggesting multiple animal reservoirs.44
TransmissionZIKV is usually transmitted when an infected female Aedes mosquito bites a human or a nonhuman primate and has distinct human and nonhuman primate transmission cycles.44 The most common mode of biological transmission is horizontal via a mosquito vector that has taken a viremic blood meal. ZIKV has been associated with intrauterine vertical transmission and congenital infections, resulting in severe microcephaly and cerebral atrophy with coarse subcortical calcifications. In mothers with clinical signs of ZIKV, studies have demonstrated intrauterine transmission with ZIKV RNA via reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) in the brain and placental tissues of fetuses and mothers, respectively.46,47 In addition, there have been reports of successfully cultured ZIKV particles from breast milk isolates, suggesting that breastfeeding may be a potential route of transmission.48 Sexual transmission has also been implicated. While ZIKV infections related to blood transfusions have not been reported, there is one case report of probable transmission of ZIKV through a platelet transfusion.49,50
Ocular ManifestationsZIKV-infected patients experience a range of ophthalmic manifestations, from common (eg, mild conjunctivitis, retrobulbar pain) to rarely reported findings (eg, chorioretinal lesions and uveitis). These findings are thought to develop as ZIKV infects blood-retinal barrier cells and cause an inflammatory response mediated by TNFα, IFNα, and interleukins.43 Up to 50% of infants with congenital Zika syndrome (CZS) present with ophthalmic manifestations.51 CZS presents with retinal findings including pigment mottling of the macula and well-circumscribed chorioretinal atrophy.52 In patients in whom anterior uveitis develops, patients may present with ocular hypertension, which may be treated with a combination of corticosteroid and anti-inflammatory medications applied topically.53,54 Cases of posterior uveitis have had varying presentations including bilateral neuroretinitis, optic disc edema, chorioretinal lesions, and outer retinal and retinal pigment epithelial architecture disruption.55
Studies in mice have confirmed the detection of ZIKV in tears, and ZIKV in conjunctival swab samples.56,57 ZIKV RNA can be detected in conjunctival swabs in the late convalescent phase as well, suggesting that the ocular surface may be a reservoir for the virus with a potential public health risk of transmission even after recovery.58
One Health Mitigation of Zika Virus DiseaseArthropod-borne viruses remain a continuing threat to humans living in endemic regions. One Health approaches to ZIKV prevention and control may utilize vector control strategies including physical alteration of environments to reduce mosquito breeding, mechanical traps that lure and kill mosquitoes, and chemical and biological measures. Environmental health interventions that focus on water-based viral surveillance and outbreak control may allow for early detection, vector control, and reduction in outbreak potential.59 The integrated vector management approach is a promising vector control strategy that focuses on making vector control more economically advantageous and ecologically sustainable.60 The use of plain language public health messaging regarding disease transmission is an additional consideration in the One Health approach to reducing the burden of ZIKV disease.61
Human Coronavirus InfectionThe human coronavirus (CoV) was first documented in 1965 and is known for its ability to cause acute upper respiratory tract infections in adults. Besides the recent COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2, CoV outbreaks of significant public health impact include severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), caused by SARS-CoV-1 and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), caused by MERS-CoV. These resulted from cross-species infections and spill-over events due to increased human-animal interactions.62,63 CoV are single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses that belong to the Coronaviridae family.64 To date, there are 7 coronaviruses that infect humans, with SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV associated with higher mortality.Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe coronavirus family is well-known for its spike protein, which facilitates viral entry into target cells by binding to an angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor. This interaction allows viral attachment to the surface of the target cell and subsequent fusion of viral and cellular membranes.65
Animal coronaviruses, including bovine coronavirus and feline infectious peritonitis virus, have been recognized since as early as the 1930s.66 The first CoV isolated was an avian infectious bronchitis virus in 1937. Bats are reservoir hosts for all CoVs, serving as gene pools and playing a crucial role in their evolutionary pathway.67,68
TransmissionHuman coronaviruses are typically transmitted via respiratory droplets, aerosol, fecal-oral route, and contact with contaminated surfaces.69 The precise mechanism of zoonotic transmission from the reservoir host to humans remains unclear, and it is speculated that intermediate hosts play an important role in viral transmission. The prevalence and genetic diversity of bat coronaviruses, along with the frequent recombination events within bats provide an ideal milieu for spillover to humans. In SARS-CoV-1, intermediate hosts, including civets and other mammals, allow for mutation acquisition with resultant spillover.70
Human coronavirus 229E (HCoV-229E), the first human CoV isolated, is closely related with CoVs that existed in African bats suggesting transmission to humans from these reservoir hosts.71 MERS-CoV strains responsible for MERS outbreaks have been associated with contact with dromedary camels.67 Even then, there is a phylogenetic gap between bat MERS-related CoV and human and camel MERS-CoV, indicating that viruses that have not yet been identified contributed to the emergence of MERS-CoV in humans and camels.Ocular ManifestationsThe eye is not a commonly known entry route for human CoVs and is rarely involved in infection despite the conjunctiva being exposed to pathogens and communicating with the upper respiratory tract via the nasolacrimal duct. While the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the tear film of patients with COVID-19 has been low in several studies, one hospital-based evaluation showed that 25% of hospitalized patients with acute illness tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.72–74
In animal populations, CoV may have unique and important ophthalmic findings.75 Feline CoV is a coronavirus that affects domestic and wild cats and has been associated with pyogranulomatous anterior uveitis, choroiditis with retinal detachment, and retinal vasculitis. Murine CoV mouse hepatitis virus is associated with a virus-induced retinal degeneration and is considered neurovirulent.14 While some of these specific ophthalmic findings associated with coronavirus have not been observed in humans, understanding the ocular manifestations of coronavirus and related pathogenesis in animals may help in identifying parallel mechanisms to understand and manage human ophthalmic disease in the future.One Health Mitigation of Human Coronavirus DiseaseOne Health actions to target human CoV disease include the development of diagnosis and treatment capacity, food safety measures, and surveillance strategies.63,76 Most of these One Health approaches to preventing human CoV disease address the animal-human interface, with relatively fewer approaches addressing the human-animal-environment interface despite having relevance to outbreak prevention and control. Further research is needed to evaluate the environmental drivers of spillover, the ecology of the viruses in the wildlife, and the effects of habitat loss and destruction.63,77
Avian Influenza Virus DiseaseAvian influenza viruses (AIVs) are type A influenza viruses and members of the Orthomyoxoviridae family infecting birds and mammals. Influenza A viruses are single-stranded, segmented RNA viruses with genes encoding 2 particular transmembrane proteins, hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), which are key players in infectivity as HA and NA facilitate viral entry and release, respectively.78 Among AIVs, 16 HA and 9 NA subtypes have been identified, creating a source of antigenic diversity and increasing outbreak potential.79
There are reports as early as 1878 of a nonbacterial disease of high mortality in domestic chickens and poultry, described as the “fowl plague.”80 It was not until 1955 that the type A influenza virus was identified as the causative pathogen of what is now known as avian influenza virus disease.81,82 Highly pathogenic AIVs (HPAI) consist of the H5 or H7 subtypes thought to arise from mutations in low pathogenic AIVs (LPAI) in poultry.83 The HPAI H5N1 virus strain found in geese in Guandong Province, China caused outbreaks in chicken farms in Hong Kong in 1997, with zoonic transmission resulting in human fatalities. Despite all poultry in Hong Kong being culled, H5N1 viruses re-emerged in 2001 and have since spread from Asia into Europe, Africa, the Mediterranean, Russia, and as of recently, Canada and the United States.3,81,82,84 Approaches to disease reduction and prevention in humans before the emergence of highly pathogenic disease outbreaks like H5N1 have either lapsed over time or were never implemented.81 Subsequent outbreaks of HPAI viruses from zoonotic transmission call for a One Health approach to bring awareness to this potentially fatal disease.81
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe life cycle of AIVs involves host cell entry via HA binding to host cell sialic acid residues and receptor-mediated endocytosis into an endosome.85 The acidic environment of the endosome allows for viral ribonucleoproteins (vRNP) to be released and enter the host cell cytoplasm. The nuclear localization signals associated with vRNPs lead the proteins to the nucleus for transcription and eventual exit from the nucleus via Exportin 1.86,87 The viral particles form in the cytoplasm alongside its segmented genome, and NA removes sialic acid residues, allowing for viral release from the plasma membrane.85
Wild aquatic birds like wild waterfowl (Anseriformes) and shorebirds (Charadriiformes) are considered natural hosts to all influenza viruses.TransmissionType A influenza viruses are transmitted from bird to bird via the fecal-oral route. Transmission to other intermediate hosts can occur via direct contact with an infected bird’s saliva, mucus, or feces, or indirectly from environmental contamination or an intermediate host.88 While direct transmission of AIVs from its natural host to humans is documented and associated with the 1997 outbreak in Hong Kong,89–91 transmission to humans typically requires an intermediate host.91 Transmission of AIVs to domestic birds and mammals offers additional avenues for reassortment and human spillover.92–94 Although HPAI H5N1 is rarely transmissible among mammals, the outbreak of HPAI H5N1 in lactating dairy cattle across multiple US states in March 2024 marks an unprecedented and sustained mammal-to-mammal transmission. Furthermore, cases of conjunctivitis in humans exposed to infected poultry and dairy cows highlight the potential for H5N1 to spill over into the human population, raising concern for another respiratory pandemic.3,95–97
The HA of AIVs recognize α-2,3-linked sialic acid receptors on the conjunctiva and ciliated nasal epithelial cells and allow viral entry and propagation.98–100 Influenza A viruses are prone to antigenic shifts that increase transmissibility and risk of pandemics due to the segmented nature of the viral genome, the ability for influenza A virus to undergo reassortment, and the error-prone RNA polymerase.79,101 Such antigenic shifts have been the cause of major influenza A outbreaks, including the Asian flu of 1957 (H2N2), and the Hong Kong flu of 1968 (H3N2).102
Ocular ManifestationsThe ocular surface is likely a portal of entry for AIV infection, as the virus has demonstrated replication within the corneal epithelium as well as an ocular surface tropism.103 Ocular involvement of HPAI H5N1 appears to be limited to isolated conjunctivitis with at least one report of a subconjunctival hemorrhage.6,104 Viral presence has been confirmed through positive RT-PCR results in conjunctival swabs from infected patients.3,105 In addition, H5N1-inoculated domestic ducks developed corneal opacification with keratitis and edema.106 Treatment with the antiviral oseltamivir inhibits virus replication in ocularly inoculated animal models; however, the persistence of HPAI in ocular tissue after infection resolution has not been shown.107,108
One Health Mitigation of Avian Influenza Virus DiseaseThe One Health approach to AIV disease largely involves controlling outbreaks in poultry populations with large-scale culling operations during outbreaks, surveillance of human exposure, and antiviral prophylaxis of those exposed while conducting depopulation operations.109 However, mitigating the spread of AIV is complicated by the influence of climate change, which alters the AIV ecology and transmission cycle due to shifts in bird migration patterns. These migrational changes facilitate interactions between host species and intermediate hosts, potentially driving AIV evolution and enabling interspecies transmission.110 Interspecies transmission events have been associated with the recent spillover of HPAI to dairy cattle, efficient cow-cow transmission, and cow-human transmission.111 This bovine HPAI facilitates the risk of infection and transmission in mammals, as AIV RNA has also been isolated in other animals on affected farms (eg, raccoons, domestic cats). Transmission of H5N1 virus from bovine milk-inoculated lactating mice to offspring as well as mice in proximity to H5N1 infected mice has been documented.112 This important discovery of mammal-to-mammal transmission emphasizes that following the spill-over of AIV, the public health risk and pandemic potential of HPAI is increased. Moreover, these data call for increased AIV research, surveillance, and multidisciplinary collaboration among relevant authorities including public health departments, the United States Food and Drug Administration, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, veterinary health organizations, etc.AIV persists in aquatic environmental reservoirs like ice lakes and ponds, also facilitates viral transmission among other species and increasing the risk for spillover.113 Areas of potential mitigation include enhanced biosecurity, hygiene, contact precautions with birds and poultry, and surveillance of environmental reservoirs.114 Transmission of AIV can be prevented by treatment of agricultural water supplies and avian protein sources, in addition to separation of animals with known transmissibility.101 In addition, an “all-in and/or all-out” approach can be applied to birds removed from their farm and taken to the market, or any transmission-susceptible environment, and they should not be returned back to the farm.114 A combination of clinical and veterinary surveillance along with human and veterinary collaboration will ultimately be needed to significantly reduce the probability of transmission.114
ToxoplasmosisToxoplasmosis is a global zoonotic disease caused by the single-celled protozoan Toxoplasma gondii and is a member of the Apicomplexa group of parasitic protozoans. T. gondii was first isolated in 1908, where it was proposed to have originated in South American felids and spread to domestic animals including cats, rats and mice through the transatlantic slave trade.115 It is estimated that around 2 billion people are chronically infected by this parasite globally, and it is recognized as the leading cause of posterior infectious uveitis worldwide.116,117 Toxoplasmosis can develop in those who are immunocompromised or pregnant.118 The most notable disease manifestation in the immunocompromised is encephalitis. Pregnant women with acquired infection are at risk for transplacental migration of the parasite and subsequent systemic congenital infection that is characterized by premature birth, intrauterine growth retardation, fever, pneumonia, hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, and fetal death.119,120 Congenital disease commonly affects the eyes and brain, resulting in chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, meningoencephalitis, seizures, microcephaly, cerebral calcifications, and/or deafness.Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe life cycle of T. gondii begins in its definitive, obligate felid host with spread into intermediate hosts, including homeotherm (warm-blooded) vertebrates like sheep, goats, pigs, chickens.119,121 Once T. gondii reaches its intermediate host, it can only reproduce sexually, excreting massive numbers of oocysts into the external environment by way of feces.122 The oocytes sporulate infectious sporozoites, and these sporulated oocysts are ingested or inhaled by an intermediate host and invade host tissues like the heart, lungs, and CNS beginning asexual reproduction. The life cycle is completed when the tissues of intermediate hosts are consumed by the definitive hosts. T. gondii has been shown to use host manipulation to attract intermediate hosts (eg, rodents) to cat urine by causing rodents to lose their innate fear of cats, thereby completing their life cycle.123
Transmission
T. gondii is easily transmitted between organisms via the fecal-oral route. Inoculation of T. gondii is associated with consumption of raw or undercooked meat containing parasitic cysts, or ingestion of contaminated water or other substance contaminated with feces containing oocysts. It is estimated that 30 to 80 million feral domestic cats exist in the United States, allowing for easy transmissability.119
T. gondii infection is also known to be associated with blood transfusions and organ transplants.124 The more common of the 2 is due to the transplantation of an organ containing parasitic cysts. A patient who receives a contaminated organ may succumb to an active infection due to their immunocompromised status.124 This parasite is also known to be transmitted vertically via transplacental migration to the fetus.Ocular ManifestationsInfection with T. gondii can cause ocular toxoplasmosis, with around 2% of immunocompetent adults developing ocular manifestations.125
T. gondii invades target tissues using what is likened to a trojan horse approach by utilizing immune cells.126 Once it has achieved intracellular access, it secludes itself from the host cytoplasm by forming a vacuole that protects it from potentially toxic host molecules and the acidic host phagolysosomes.127 In fact, pH plays a significant role in T. gondii invasiveness and host defense. Tachyzoites are very susceptible to acidic environments, and phagosome acidification likely serves as a primary immune defense against T. gondii in ocular tissues.128,129 This is further supported by the higher risk of being diagnosed with ocular toxoplasmosis in patients exposed to protein pump inhibitors or histamine 2 blockers, which suggests a possible mechanism of ocular parasite persistence.130
Though the details of retinal invasion are still being studied, Toxoplasma has been shown to cross retinal pigment epithelial cells in its free form using intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and using vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) in dendritic cells.131 The largest indicator of progression or recurrence of ocular toxoplasmosis seems to be the quality of the immune response.131 Due to the lack of proper lymphatic drainage of the eye, the presentation of ocular-derived antigens to T cells is significantly reduced. The posterior pole of the eye provides an ideal environment for chronic Toxoplasma ocular persistence as it is an immunosuppressed area due to the excretion of suppressive cytokines like TGFB2, a-MSH, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP).132
One Health Mitigation of ToxoplasmosisThough the global seroprevalence of T. gondii is high, its seroprevalence appears to be dependent on various regional factors including climate, diet, and hygiene that call for a One Health approach.133–135 Despite the prevalence and disease burden of toxoplasmosis, additional work that focuses on implementing strategies that explore the transmission and life cycle of T. gondii is needed. One Health mitigation strategy could be aimed at environmental control by improving the understanding of oocyst resistance, survival in environmental and tissue reservoirs, and the reduction of contamination of these reservoirs while improving hygienic practices.133 In addition, understanding the prevalence in other animal reservoirs of different environments may offer a continued refinement of the One Health approach to understanding and reducing the burden of Toxoplasmosis.136–138
MalariaMalaria is a mosquito-borne disease that is caused by parasites of the Plasmodium genus. There are 5 species known to infect humans: Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium malariae, Plasmodium ovale, and Plasmodium knowlesi. P. falciparum and vivax are the primary species responsible for the majority of malarial infections, with P. falciparum being the most prevalent in Africa and also the deadliest malaria species.139 Millenia of human exposure to many of these species have placed selection pressures that have led to a finely tuned human-parasite interaction.140
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe malaria parasite’s life cycle begins as a sporozoite in Anopheles spp. mosquito’s salivary gland. When the mosquito feeds on a human, the sporozoites in the mosquito’s saliva are released into the blood stream and undergo an asexual reproductive process known as schizogony to form merozoites once they reach target organs, like the liver. These merozoites enter the bloodstream and bind to red blood cells (RBCs) and undergo the erythrocytic phase to form the trophozoite. These trophozoites mature to their final mitotic replicative developmental stage called the schizont, then differentiate into merozoites and eventually gametocytes and oocytes. These oocysts mature before rupturing and releasing infectious sporozoites that migrate to the salivary gland for further transmission.141
TransmissionTransmission from mosquito to human is influenced by many factors including age, gametocyte density and sex ratio, antimalarial treatment, and host immunity. Malaria’s pathogenesis is primarily driven by asexual stages. However, about 0.1% to 5% of asexual parasites develop into male and female gametocytes, and this gametocyte is the only stage that is transmitted to the mosquito vector.141 The fertilization of the gametes leads to the development of sporozoites in the mosquito, making them infectious to humans.Ocular ManifestationsCerebral malaria is a serious and deadly complication of malaria, characterized by an unarousable coma. A pattern of retinal changes secondary to cerebral malaria were first described in Malawian children.142 These retinal changes present as a symmetrical retinopathy in both eyes and include retinal whitening, vessel discoloration, retinal hemorrhages resembling Roth spots, and optic disc edema.142 The solitary finding of optic disc edema suggests severe illness and possible co-infection.143 The diagnosis of cerebral malaria can be confirmed by examination of the retina for signs of malaria retinopathy, with retinal hemorrhages being a significant prognostic sign.144,145 Pathogenesis of ocular malaria involves small vessel occlusion by sequestered red blood cells in the microvasculature of the retina leading to hypoxia and ischemia.146 Recent studies in murine models have shown that malaria parasites cross the blood-brain barrier and infiltrate the neuroretina and can cause irreversible retinal neurodegeneration.147
One Health Mitigation of MalariaThe One Health approach to malaria largely relies on vector control and includes insecticide-mediated interventions such as insecticide-treated nets and indoor residual spraying.148 Economic development during periods when malaria burden is low has added incentive to vector control efforts, thus leading to a considerable decline in malaria cases.149 A campaign to prioritize malaria eradication called for by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation in 2007 focused on reduction of transmission.32–34 Current mitigation strategies focus on controlling the vector through insecticide-treated nets and antimalarial combination therapy including a transmission-blocking drug.141 In addition, methods of larval source management aimed at controlling environmental reservoirs and decreasing mosquito survival and breeding are also a crucial role in the One Health approach to malaria. These methods include alterations of aquatic habitats, habitat modification, larvicide, and the introduction of predatorial biological controls into such environments.150 Despite the efforts made toward vector control, the increase in insecticide resistance in Anopheles mosquitos and the morbidity and mortality of the disease are concerning.151 The vaccine landscape continues to develop with favorable potential, as the MosquirixTM vaccine and other candidate vaccines like R21/Matrix-M and PfSPZ have proved efficacious in clinical trials.152 While hopeful, vaccine deployment in addition to continued vector control improvements might enhance the One Health approach to malaria.Nipah Virus DiseaseNipah virus disease is caused by a virus from the family Paramyxoviridae and is a single stranded RNA virus.153 It was first discovered in 1998 in the village of Sungai Nipah in Malaysia after many pigs began dying from respiratory and neurological disease, accompanied by an outbreak of acute encephalitis in surrounding human populations.154 Nipah virus (NiV) then spread to Singapore in early 1999 after pigs were imported from Malaysia.153 Since then, there have been outbreaks in Malaysia, Bangladesh, and India, with nearly annual outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001.153 In India, the first reported case was in West Bengal with more recent outbreaks in Kerala. An epidemiologic study from the 2018 Kerala outbreak showed that 87% of cases showed respiratory symptoms with a fatality of 91%.153,154
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe life cycle of NiV starts when the virus attaches to the host cell. NiV infects host cells by 2 glycoproteins, G and F proteins. G protein aids with attachment to host cell receptors while the F protein allows fusion of virus to host.154 In addition, viruses can target the DNA-damage response pathway to increase Nipah virus production as well as encode accessory proteins to avoid immune detection.154,155
Pteropus fruit bats are the natural reservoir for the disease.153 These bats are endemic to tropical and subtropical areas of Asia, East Africa, and Australia. While the bats are asymptomatic carriers, they shed the virus in fluids such as saliva, urine, and excreta.153 Pigs can be an intermediate and amplifying source, allowing for zoonotic transmission.154
TransmissionNipah virus disease can be transmitted in many ways including indirectly from the bat reservoir, by intermediate hosts, or, in some instances, human-to-human.154 In Malaysia, Nipah virus was transmitted to humans through infected pigs.153 In Bangladesh and India, NiV has been transmitted from consumption of raw date palm sap contaminated by bat urine, excreta, or saliva. There have also been reports of human-to-human transmission associated with close contact with an infected person, although cases have been limited.153 The transmission of NiV has changed with variations in resources and landscapes that have altered the natural habitat for fruit bats leading to more unseasonal spillover in areas such as Bangaldesh.154
Ocular ManifestationsOcular manifestations are not well-studied in NiV disease, but some reports include blurry vision, photophobia, and double vision during the acute illness phase.156 There are also limited reports of transient blindness, Horner’s syndrome, and branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO).157 In some patients, doll’s eye reflex was also found, and this brainstem involvement indicated a poor prognosis and higher rate of mortality.One Health Mitigation of Nipah Virus DiseaseThe One Health approach to mitigating NiV disease outbreaks focuses on reducing transmission from bats to humans. While raw sap from fresh date palms is a popular delicacy in Southeast Asian countries, it is associated with the indirect transmission of NiV from bats to humans. Fruit bats also consume date palms, making it is easy for them to contaminate and spread NiV to humans who consume raw date palm sap. To reduce contamination, date palm juice can be boiled, fruits should be washed thoroughly before eating, and bat exposure to fruits and sap sources like bamboo sap skirts should be limited.158 Bat-human habitats continue to overlap due to deforestation and urbanization increasing the odds of spillover events with outbreak potential, emphasizing the effect that early detection systems can have on preparedness against future outbreaks. In addition, personal protection may decrease the risk of human-human and animal-human transmission, especially for those handling sick animals or humans.158,159 The limited availability of antiviral therapeutics and vaccines further emphasize the role of strengthening and integrating current One Health approaches that includes increased community awareness, early detection with the implementation of integrated data systems, and garnering resources to fund the comprehensive management of NiV disease.160,161
Dengue Virus DiseaseDengue virus is a member of the Flavivirus genus and is a single-stranded positive sense RNA virus that can be caused by 4 serotypes (DENV 1-4).162 Dengue was first reported in the late 1700s in Asia, Africa, and North America; however, a disease with similar symptoms was also reported during the Chin Dynasty in 265-420 ad.162 In the last 50 years, this virus has increased 30-fold in incidence,163 with outbreaks reported in tropical and subtropical areas with an increased spread with urbanization, global travel, and poor mosquito control measures. The epicenter of DENV is India although dengue is endemic to over 100 countries.163
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirSimilar to other viral processes, the dengue viral replication process initiates with attachment to the host cell and the formation of an endosome that seals around the virus to allow entry into the cell.164 Viral RNA is then released into the cytoplasm and the virus hijacks host cell mechanisms to further replicate and mature to then infect other cells. DENV is spread through the bite of an Aedes mosquito, which has a life cycle of around 8 to 10 days at room temperature and has both an aquatic and terrestrial phase.163 In addition, humans can serve as reservoirs for dengue in urban settings, while nonhuman primates are reservoirs in a sylvatic cycles.165
TransmissionDengue virus disease is transmitted to humans from the female Aedes mosquito into skin epithelium during a blood meal, where it infects and replicates in cells of mononuclear lineage.162,163 It can then spread into the lymph node and continue replicating, ultimately leading to a systemic infection. When viremia occurs in humans, Aedes mosquitoes can feed and become a dengue vector and continue to spread the disease. Transmission of dengue infection via a blood transfusion is rare, but has been documented.166
Ocular ManifestationsOcular symptoms usually include blurred vision, subconjunctival hemorrhages, eye pain, and photophobia167 with many of these symptoms presenting during the acute, self-limiting phase. More severe ophthalmic findings have been described including bilateral maculopathy, vasculitis, optic neuropathy, and endophthalmitis.168 Foveolitis may even persist and cause a chronic central scotoma.167 Notably, uveitis noted in Dengue survivors has responded well to topical corticosteroids.169
One Health Mitigation of Dengue Virus DiseaseDengue virus outbreaks are exacerbated by numerous determinants including urbanization, climate change, insufficient population immunity, and the rapidly evolving nature of DENV.170 Many of these factors have resulted in an increase in DENV vector distribution in addition to inadequate vector control.171 In fact, since the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a global resurgence in the number of Dengue cases, with cases in America reaching over 9.7 million as of June of 2024, which is more than double that of 2023.172 Climate change is believed to be a major factor in the recent resurgence of DENV cases, as rising global temperatures create warmer environments more conducive to DENV transmission, survival, and increased biting rates.173
Vector control strategies are crucial and provide a comparably practical approach to DENV management, and include interventions such as removing stagnant water, managing waste, manipulating vector habitats, and decreasing the reproducibility of mosquitoes.170 The incorporation of vector geographic distribution prediction models might also prove to be of use in public health planning.174,175 To reduce insecticide resistance, biological controls, like bacterial larvicide with Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis, can serve as alternatives to vector control strategies that rely on insecticides.176 Though the efficacy of the vaccines Dengvaxia (CYD-TDV) and Qdenga (TAK-003) still require more research, they are somewhat limited as Dengvaxia can only be used in someone with previous infection, while Qdenga vaccine protection in the setting of a highly mutable virus could result in more severe infection in the future.177,178
Chikungunya Virus DiseaseChikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arbovirus belonging to the family Togaviridae. It is an enveloped, single stranded positive sense RNA virus with four different genotypes that are separated by geographic regions: West African, East/Central/South African, Asian, and Indian Ocean.168 It was initially discovered in present day Tanzania in 1952 where the name Chikungunya originated, meaning “disease that bends up joints.”179 There have been cases internationally reported including in the Americas, Africa, Europe, and Asia. Large outbreaks include Comoros in 2005 with over 200,000 infections, Reunion Island with 3500 confirmed cases and more than 200,000 suspected cases,180 and Kenya in 2004.181 Outbreaks in Americas started in 2013 on Saint Martin Island in the Caribbean with nearly 1 million cases reported by the end of 2015.182 In addition, certain areas have been impacted with dual infection of CHIKV and either DENV or ZIKV. While mortality rates are low (0.1%),179 morbidity can be high. Outbreaks tend to correlate with periods of heavy rains, which can make a more opportune habitat for mosquitos.Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirCHIKV entry is clathrin-mediated endocytosis that requires an acidic environment for entry and fusion.183 The viral genome codes E1, a fusion protein, and E2, an attachment protein. These 2 proteins then form a complex by conformational change to enhance endocytosis. Fusion releases nucleocapsid into the cytosol where viral replication compartments named spherules form. Nucleocapsids then assemble and develop mature progeny.179 Infections can occur in human epithelial and endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and macrophages.181 This can then spread throughout the body to several organs including liver, muscle, joints and lymphoid tissue.Nonhuman primates such as chimpanzees and baboons have been implicated as natural reservoirs for disease in more rural areas.184 Other reservoirs include bats and rodents, although rodents do not exhibit clinical signs and may be dead-end hosts.185 In urban areas, mosquito-to-human-to-mosquito is the most common pattern of transmission with no animal reservoirs identified.186
TransmissionCHIKV can be transmitted to humans by mosquitos of the Aedes genus via blood meals. CHIKV can also be transmitted vertically intrapartum or peripartum, with rare reports of intrauterine transmissions.187,188 Two transmission cycles have been noted for chikungunya: rural/sylvatic and urban. The rural cycle involves mosquito-animal reservoir transmission with occasional spillover into humans.182 Nonhuman primates are the major reservoir in this cycle.181 Urban introduction has occurred largely via Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus, with a mosquito-to-human transmission cycle.179 In recent times, the virus has become adapted to urban cycles, which may result in large outbreaks even when lower levels of virus circulation are present.182
Ocular ManifestationsOcular symptoms can vary based on phase of the disease. In the acute phase, symptoms may include photophobia, retro-orbital pain, and redness of the eye.168 Later in the disease course, patients may have anterior uveitis and keratic precipitates, and there have been reports of retinitis with good recovery.168
One Health Mitigation of Chikungunya Virus DiseaseThe global spread of CHIKV has been heavily influenced by international travel.189–191 Ecological studies reveal an inverse relationship of a city’s spatial distribution of arbovirus incidence and sanitation, sewage-treatment networks, solid waste management, and urban water drainage. In addition, arbovirus incidence increases with an increase in rainfall depth. Aedes vector control systems utilize environmental methods that range from capturing, killing, or sterilizing mosquitos, including novel interfering RNA formulations used to kill mosquito larvae.192–195 In addition to these studies focused on vector spatial distribution surveillance, studies evaluating case surveillance data from domestic and imported cases of CHIKV disease may increase our knowledge in vector-human transmission dynamics, with possible implications in outbreak predictions and the development of outbreak mitigation strategies.196 The most advanced vaccine against chikungunya virus is VLA1553, which has proved to be well-tolerated and efficacious.197,198 However, since vaccine is a live, attenuated virus, the development of candidate vaccines that are more tolerable by immunocompromised and pregnant patients might prove to be beneficial in a vaccine that would need to be widely distributed.199
CONCLUSIONGiven the distinct ophthalmic manifestations observed within a range of emerging infectious diseases including viral hemorrhagic fevers and a number of vector-borne illnesses, it is evident that individual health care provider and public health response, as well as a broad understanding of the disease characteristics, pathogenesis, and a One Health perspective is needed. While clinicians require a keen understanding of the specific ophthalmic manifestations of diseases and existing treatments that address disease mechanism, improved understanding of transmission dynamics may improve the ability to detect risk factors and host-animal-environment interactions that also play a role in disease presentation. Ultimately, a One Health approach is required to address the multiplicity of factors that lead to disease that affect humans, animals, and their shared environments.The One Health approach may involve multisectoral collaboration to bridge animal and human health dynamics by bringing together experts who evaluate outbreak details from varying perspectives in fields including health, livestock, fisheries, wildlife, environment and disaster respose.32 Moreover, the inclusion of ecologists in One Health efforts can improve assessment and management of environmental risks in disease control and prevention.186,187
One Health approaches to research and global health efforts have improved our understanding of the interconnectedness of pathogens, humans, and the environment, allowing us to develop holistic strategies to prevent and mitigate disease outbreaks. Using this approach when considering ocular manifestations of emerging infectious etiologies may improve disease assessment and management with the broader goal of reducing disease burden and improving clinical outcomes.


Title: An Overview of Zika Virus and Zika Virus Induced Neuropathies

1. IntroductionFlaviviruses (family Flaviviridae) are small (approximately 50 nm in diameter), enveloped, icosahedral viruses that possess a positive sense single-stranded RNA genome of between 9–12 kb [1,2,3,4]. The viral genome consists of a single long ORF (open reading frame) encoding around ten proteins, which are formed by co- and post-translational processing and proteolytically processed into three structural (Cap, prM, and E) and seven non-structural (NS1, NS2A, NS2B, NS3, NS4A, NS4B, and NS5) proteins by a complex combination of host and viral proteases [5,6,7,8]. Currently, there are about 70 members in this genus, the majority of which are transmitted by arthropods [9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. The incidence of flaviviral infections has increased dramatically in the last seven decades [17,18]. These infections are associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. Factors responsible for the rapid increase in flaviviral infections are changes in the sizes and distributions of the vector arthropods that transmit the pathogens, further aggravated by climate change and a large number of potential vertebrate hosts [19,20,21,22]. Details of various neurotropic flaviviruses and their associated neuropathies are summarized in Table 1.ZIKV is a significant pathogen that poses an imminent global threat. It was first isolated from rhesus monkeys in Uganda in 1947 [53] (The genome organization of the Zika Virus is sketched in Figure 1). Later, in the 1950s, its detection continued in several other parts of Africa (Egypt, Nigeria) [54]. However, the first clinical infection in humans was not detected until 1964, when it was found that the ZIKV infection in humans is associated with mild fever and maculopapular rash [55]. From 1960 to 2000, ZIKV was detected in several countries in Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia and Pakistan) [54]. The first major ZIKV outbreak occurred in 2007 (in Yap Island), and then in March 2015, it caused a large outbreak in the Americas (particularly Brazil), and the first time was associated with severe disease and congenital illnesses such as infant microcephaly [56,57,58]. In November 2015, Brazil declared a national public health emergency, and in February 2016, the WHO (World Health Organization) declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern [59].The ZIKV employs multiple mechanisms to replicate (the ZIKV replication cycle is illustrated in Figure 2) and causes a variety of neurological diseases. It has been proposed that after viral entry through the crossing of the BBB (blood–brain barrier), ZIKV tends to infect the microglia, astrocytes, and endothelial cells [63,64,65]. Damage to the CNS can occur when ZIKV infects the CNS cells, and damage occurs either due to viral replication or because of a host-mediated immune (inflammatory) response [66,67,68]. Moreover, ZIKV infection is also associated with various neurological syndromes, e.g., Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS), Congenital Zika syndrome (CZS), and others [69,70,71]. Multiple mechanisms are known to cause damage to the CNS, which are also discussed in detail later in this review article. Collectively, in this review, we have summarized the observations on biology, transmission, control strategies (vaccines, antivirals, and vectors), oncolytic aspects, animal and cellular models, neuropathies, and neuropathogenesis associated with ZIKV.2. Transmission of Zika VirusThe principal mode of transmission of ZIKV is through mosquitoes; however, studies have found that various other routes may play an important role in the transmission of the disease. These include venereal transmission, vertical transmission, transmission to infants through mother milk, and blood transfusion This makes it very difficult to devise an appropriate strategy for the control of disease in countries where the disease is endemic. The transmission cycle of ZIKV is illustrated in Figure 3.2.1. Vector Borne TransmissionVector-borne transmission of ZIKV occurs through mosquitoes [13,80]. In the sylvatic transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between non-human primates and mosquitoes, while in the urban transmission cycle, ZIKV circulates between humans and mosquitoes. The presence of ZIKV has been reported from many species of mosquitoes in Africa and Asia (Aedes aegypti (Ae. aegypti), Ae. africanus, Ae. albopictus, Ae. apicoargenteus, Ae. furcifer, Ae. luteocephalus, Ae. opok, and Ae. vittatus) which may transmit the virus to humans [53,81,82,83,84,85,86,87,88,89,90]. However, in Yap and French Polynesia, the transmission of ZIKV was suggested to be through Ae. hensilli and Ae. Polynesiensis, respectively) [91,92,93]. The extrinsic incubation period is reported to be 10 days [84]. The vector competence (the ability of the vector to transmit the virus biologically) has not been determined for ZIKV transmission in most of these species [94] and it may be the area of future research. In the urban cycle, the transmission of ZIKV is mainly through the Ae. aegypti and Ae. albopictus. ZIKV has been detected/isolated from wild Ae. aegypti, and they have been demonstrated to be competent vectors in the laboratory where they can transmit the virus to mice and rhesus monkeys [82,86,88]. Recent studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission by Ae. albopictus as well [84,95]. Both of these mosquitoes remain active during the daytime, and they are prevalent in tropical and subtropical regions [96,97]. However, the geographical range of Ae. albopictus is further extended to the temperate regions [98,99,100]. In the USA, both of these mosquitoes have been found in southern and south-eastern states and their maximum numbers have been found from June to October [101].2.2. Sexual TransmissionMany cases of transmission of ZIKV have been observed following sexual contact. Several studies have demonstrated ZIKV transmission from males to females. In most cases, the male had a travel history to ZIKV-endemic countries, and when he returned, his partner became infected [102,103,104]. ZIKV’s presence has been detected in human semen [105]. It has been found that ZIKV can persist in semen for over 6 months following infection, suggesting the possibility for prolonged sexual transmission [106,107,108]. Later studies demonstrated that sexual transmission from male to male is also possible [109]. ZIKV RNA has also been detected in urine and saliva [110,111]. Experiments conducted on lab animals have demonstrated that ZIKV is able to replicate in vaginal and rectal mucosa, thus serving as a reservoir of infection [112].2.3. Vertical TransmissionZIKV has been reported to be transferred from mother to fetus during the gestation period. Normally the placenta acts as an effective barrier to curtail transmission of infections from mother to fetus. However, ZIKV is able to bypass these barriers by unknown mechanisms [113]. Studies conducted in a mouse model demonstrated that ZIKV damages the placenta and results in fetal death [114]. In Brazil, during the ZIKV outbreak, a large increase in the number of neonates with microcephaly was reported from mothers who were infected with ZIKV [115]. ZIKV antigen and RNA have been detected in the placenta, amniotic fluid, and fetal brain tissue [115,116,117]. Therefore, it can be postulated that ZIKV is transmitted from mother to fetus through a damaged placenta (induced by ZIKV) and then ZIKV damages the nervous system of the fetus.2.4. Venereal Transmission in MosquitoesThe maintenance of arboviruses in nature is significantly facilitated when venereal transmission occurs alongside other modes of transmission. Venereal transmission in mosquitoes has been reported for multiple arboviruses, including ZIKV [118,119]. ZIKV is found to be transmitted in the sexual fluids of mating mosquitoes. Intrathoracically ZIKV-infected Ae. aegypti males can transmit the virus to uninfected females during mating, and Ae. aegypti females who are orally infected with ZIKV have the potential to transmit the virus to uninfected males by copulation under laboratory conditions [120]. Furthermore, Aedes mosquitoes acquire and transmit Zika virus by breeding in contaminated aquatic environments [121]. The continuous venereal transmission in mosquitoes could pose a significant public health concern by boosting infection rates and virus spread.2.5. Transmission Through Breast MilkDetection of ZIKV RNA has been observed in the breast milk of ZIKV-infected mothers [122]. This makes it possible for the transmission of ZIKV from the infected mother to the neonates. Studies have demonstrated the presence of ZIKV RNA in babies whose mother’s serum and milk were positive for ZIKV RNA [123]. Transmission through breast milk has also been observed for the flaviviruses WNV and DENV [124,125].2.6. Transmission Through Ocular Fluid/TearsResearchers have found the existence of ZIKV in tears thirty days following ZIKV infection. Their study suggests the possible transmission of ZIKV through tears [126,127]. This is possible as previously a case study revealed that transmission through tears occurred from mother to her child [128].3. Zika Virus Associated Neurological DiseasesZIKV infection has been reported to be associated with a number of neurological diseases (illustrated in Figure 4) which are described in detail below.3.1. MicrocephalyCongenital microcephaly has been previously associated with viral infections, e.g., rubella and cytomegalovirus. However, it was unknown for ZIKV until the Brazilian outbreak [129]. ZIKV RNA was also detected in the amniotic fluid of these fetuses [130]. In 2015, Brazilian authorities reported that the incidence of microcephaly was twenty times higher compared to previous years. This led to further investigations, and in two years (2015–2016), more than 8000 cases of microcephaly were reported [131]. Later on, an analysis of an outbreak in French Polynesia also demonstrated a correlation between ZIKV and microcephaly [132,133]. Further investigations showed that aborted fetuses (during 1st and 2nd trimesters) contained ZIKV RNA in the amniotic fluid, meninges, CSF, and umbilical cord of the microcephalic newborn babies [57,134]. Several studies have been performed to identify the molecular mechanism of ZIKV-associated microcephaly. Cells associated with the BBB, such as pericytes, astrocytes, and endothelial cells, are susceptible to infection with ZIKV and their infection with ZIKV leads to upregulation of ICAM-1 and a variety of cytokines (IL-6, CCL5, and CXCL-10) that causes enhanced binding and subsequently crossing of the BBB by the immune cells. The access of immune cells to the CNS is associated with neuro-inflammation which contributed to the neuro-pathogenesis of ZIKV [135]. Neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV and undergo apoptosis following infection [136]. During pregnancy, the immune response directed against ZIKV leads to the inflammation of the fetal–maternal interface, causing inflammation and disruption of barrier functions. This allows the recruitment of various immune cells to the fetal tissue, releasing TNF-α (tumor necrosis factor) and IFN-γ (interferon) that lead to neuroinflammation, resulting in the damage and destruction of NPCs required for the neural development of the fetus [137]. The CNS is susceptible to ZIKV infection during all stages of pregnancy, but earlier infection results in severe damage. CNS infection with ZIKV may result in impaired multiplication and migration of neurons, myelination, synaptogenesis, and even apoptosis that may contribute towards ZIKV-associated microcephaly [138]. In cells infected with ZIKV, mitofusion 2 (MFN-2) expression is reduced. Normal expression of MFN-2 is required for the fusion of mitochondria. Therefore, in ZIKV-infected cells, mitochondrial fragmentation occurs. This leads to the activation of apoptosis through a p53-mediated pathway in NPC cells [139,140]. Recently, Gladwyn-Ng et al. [141] have demonstrated the mechanism of apoptosis in neuronal cells infected by ZIKV in mouse embryos and neuronal stem cells (human), showing that ZIKV infections trigger unfolded proteins in cells that lead to activation of the ER stress response Subsequently, these cells migrate to the cortex and undergo apoptosis.3.2. Ophthalmological ManifestationsZIKV infection during pregnancy has been associated with congenital abnormalities in the fetal eye. Neural crest cells (NCCs) are required for normal development of the corneal and uveal stroma, the corneal epithelium, and the trabecular meshwork. They also play an important role in the closure of the optic fissure [142,143]. NCCs express AXL and thus exhibit susceptibility to ZIKV. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV results in viral replication resulting in loss of NCCs [144]. ZIKV infection can also disrupt the normal differentiation of the NCCs leading to defective development of the anterior eye segment leading to micropthalmia [142,145,146,147]. The loss of NCCs during ZIKV infection has also been found to disrupt closure of the optic fissure leading to iris coloboma and abnormal development of the lens zonules. Infection of NCCs with ZIKV can also lead to reduced thickening of the corneal stroma causing corneal ectasia [142]. It can also contribute towards impaired development of trabecular meshwork causing glaucoma [144,148,149,150]. Neuronal depletion during ZIKV infection can also contribute to thinning of the retinal ganglion layer [151,152]. Apoptosis of NCCs during ZIKV infection can also lead to defects in axonal development [145].Ocular manifestations have been reported in approximately 50% of infants who have ZIKV-induced microcephaly. ZIKV infection has been reported to involve the eyes and this represents the viral ability to cross the blood–brain barrier (BBB), the blood–retinal barrier (BRB), and the blood–aqueous barrier (BAB). The first ZIKV-related eye abnormality was reported in 2016. More than sixty percent of people with ZIKV infections are reported to have conjunctivitis (the most common eye abnormality associated with ZIKV). Other abnormalities are associated with the anterior segment, the posterior segment, and the neuroophthalmic. The abnormalities associated with the anterior segment include microphthalmia, anterior uveitis (with or without raised intraocular pressure), and non-purulent conjunctivitis [153,154,155]. The posterior segment anomalies associated with ZIKV involve the retina and choroid and include maculopathy and multifocal choroiditis [153,156,157,158,159]. Neuro-ophthalmic conditions are related to the paresis of the abducens and oculomotor muscles and can cause ocular flutter, ophthalmoplegia, and papilledema [156,160,161,162,163]. ZIKV infection also causes optic nerve involvement, and this includes hypoplastic disk, enhanced cup-to-disk ratio, and nerve pallor. Viral entry into eyes is facilitated by both hematogenous and retrograde transport of ZIKV through the optic nerve and optic tract [164]. Although ocular tissue is immune privileged, it is more permissive to ZIKV infection because of the higher viral load [151]. Certain cells in the retina are relatively more permissive to ZIKV infection including RPE cells, pericytes, and endothelial cells [165]. Choriocapillaris (highly fenestrated) are highly susceptible to ZIKV infection and it can facilitate the ZIKV entry into the RPE cells, which are also permissive to ZIKV infection. RPE infection results in inflammation and this subsequently leads to breaking the BRB [108,166]. Normally, the immune response helps the host in eliminating the infection, however, in this case, immune-mediated injury to the eye tissue leads to pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated eye abnormality [167]. Infection of BRB with ZIKV leads to the generation of IL-1β, IL-6, IFN-α, IFN-β, TNF-α, CCL5 and CXCL-10. This leads to subsequent events that culminate in the atrophy of the retina and RPE mottling [168,169].Another mechanism of viral entry in ocular tissue is through ZIKV-infected monocytes, which possess the ability to cross the retinal microvasculature endothelium and subsequently cause retinal infection. Later on, ZIKV-infected monocytes become activated and release cytokines and chemokines that result in immune-mediated injury/damage to ocular tissue [170,171]. The cornea can also act as reservoir of ZIKV infection as it expresses RIG-1, MDA-5, and TLR 3 which facilitate the synthesis of IFN-I and III to mediate antiviral response [136,172]. Infection of the cornea with ZIKV leads to the synthesis of the IL-1β, TNF-α, CCL5, and CXCL-10 which recruits other cells of the immune system to the cornea and this promotes inflammation and damage to corneal tissue leading to keratitis [173]. Through the hematogenous route, ZIKV infects the iris and ciliary body. From here, the virus can infect BAB cells, which damages this barrier and results in viral entry into the aqueous humor [133]. From the aqueous humor, ZIKV gains entry to the trabeculae meshwork and results in the production of cytokines and chemokines including IL-1β, IL-6, IL-1, IFN-α, IFN-β, CCL5, and CXCL-10. This leads to the recruitment of the other immune cells such as Th1 and CD8+ cells that secrete TNF-α and IFN-γ, damaging the trabeculae meshwork and resulting in blockage of aqueous humor outflow, leading to enhanced intraocular pressure and causing glaucoma. Persistent glaucoma can damage the optic nerve and retinal ganglion cells leading to optic neuropathy [174].3.3. Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)GBS is a condition where there is immune-mediated polyradiculoneuropathy. The condition is characterized by the loss of reflexes and flaccid paralysis. The disease occurs in 1/100,000 persons. It has been observed that GBS typically occurs after certain infections such as Campylobacter jejuni, Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), Cytomegalovirus, and HIV. Sporadic GBS cases have also occurred following the flaviviral infections (WNV, DENV and JEV) [175]. In 2014, the first report was published about the occurrence of GBS following ZIKV infection in French Polynesia. It was reported that in ZIKV patients, 1/4000 people suffer from GBS (20 times increased incidence) [176]. In the recent ZIKV outbreak in the Americas, approximately 1500 cases were reported between 2014–2015. At the majority of locations, GBS incidence following ZIKV was reported to be 2–10 times higher than background [177]. In Colombia, more than 100 thousand cases of ZIKV were reported with 42 GBS cases/100,000 ZIKV cases. These findings indicate the possibility of the association of ZIKV with GBS [178]. Until now, no clear mechanism is known about the molecular pathogenesis of ZIKV-associated GBS. However, it is thought that the mechanism of molecular mimicry may be an important contributing factor in the pathogenesis of disease (i.e., antibodies formed against ZIKV cross-react with myelin sheath or other neural tissues). However, others have proposed that immune system dysregulation occurs (that is not directly against ZIKV) and that contributes towards its pathogenesis [176].3.4. Cerebrovascular InvolvementCertain viral diseases are associated with cerebral vascular abnormalities. Recently, ZIKV cases have also been reported to involve cerebral vascular abnormalities. A 10-month-old child infected with ZIKV was admitted to hospital with ischemic stroke and had serum positive for ZIKV [179,180,181]. The exact mechanism remains to be determined; however, it is thought that higher susceptibility of endothelial cells to be infected by ZIKV is a major factor and is responsible for cerebral vascular abnormalities [182].3.5. EncephalitisZIKV infection is considered a potential cause of encephalitis. An 81-year-old patient with a travel history to a ZIKV-affected area had reduced consciousness, limb paresis (upper right), and hemiplegia (left side). The patient was ZIKV positive by RT-PCR and viral culture and isolation. The patient was treated and survived. However, fetal cases of ZIKV-associated encephalitis have also been reported. In Brazil, a 37-year-old (y.o.) female was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of rash and joint pain. Later on, she suffered from weakness in her lower limbs, confusion, and difficulty with speech. RT-PCR was positive for ZIKV, while the serum analysis was negative. The patient later died due to brain swelling, leading to increased intracranial pressure [154]. In the Dominican Republic, a female was admitted to the hospital with complaints of neck stiffness and confusion. Her condition deteriorated, and seizures began. CSF examination revealed an increased number of WBCs (white blood cells), the majority of which were lymphocytes (80%). RT-PCR of urine was positive for ZIKV RNA (but negative in the CSF and serum). However, IgM antibodies against ZIKV were detected from CSF and serum, confirming ZIKV exposure. MRI examination revealed cortical edema, a common finding in meningoencephalitis [163]. In another study on ZIKV, subcortical hemorrhage and bilateral lesions were observed in the temporal and frontal regions [162].3.6. Myelitis and EncephalomyelitisZIKV infection has been associated with myelitis (inflammation of the spinal cord) and encephalomyelitis (inflammation of the brain and spinal cord), which can result in reduced consciousness, urinary retention, and paresis of lower limbs [183]. The first case of myelitis associated with ZIKV was reported in Guadeloupe in a girl (15 y.o.) who was admitted to the hospital with a complaint of headache and conjunctivitis. Later, her condition continued to deteriorate, and she suffered from left-sided weakness and urinary retention. MRI examination revealed a normal brain, whereas abnormalities were revealed in the spinal cord cervical area and thoracic region. CSF, urine, and serum were found to be positive for ZIKV by RT-PCR [184]. In another study, a 26 y.o. Brazilian male was admitted to the hospital with a major complaint of fever, malaise, and neck stiffness, CSF and urine examination revealed that the patient had a ZIKV infection. CSF analysis showed hyper-protein levels and 100 WBCs (white blood cells) per mL (95% mononuclear cells) [183]. Other studies have also indicated an association between ZIKV and myelitis/encephalomyelitis [183,184,185].4. Zika Virus Infection and Extracellular VesiclesViruses can employ extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate infection, pathogenesis, and transmission. EVs are particles surrounded by membranes that can be released into the extracellular space by living or dying cells. Various viral components may be packed inside the EVs [186]. One of the final fates of EVs is their release into blood circulation, through which they can reach distant cells and tissues [187]. It is important to note that EVs share most of the biochemical and biophysical properties of viruses. Both EVs and viruses (naked and enveloped) use the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required For Transport (ESCRT) complex [188,189]. Moreover, Rab GTPases (particularly Rab11, Rab35, and Rab27A/B) are also shared during the viral replication cycle as well as EV biogenesis [190]. Many studies have indicated that EVs play a facilitating role during viral infections. These effects can be due to EVs carrying viral receptors, carrying viral particles themselves, or carrying their genome, proteins, or miRNA. Ultimately, it can lead to the priming of the recipient cells and/or inhibiting IFN pathways, apoptosis of immune cells, and the transmission of viral genome and/or proteins to distant organs and tissues [188,191,192,193]. In the case of ZIKV, NS1 protein, viral E protein (inside and outside) and viral RNA can be packed inside the EVs [194]. Interestingly, mosquito cells (C6/36 cells) infected with ZIKV are found to release EVs (containing viral RNA and protein E), which was found to infect both naïve mosquito and mammalian cells (monocytes and endothelial cells) [195].Given ZIKV’s neurotropic nature, it is important to emphasize that ZIKV-derived EVs are found to disrupt the structure of human brain microvasculature endothelial cell junctions (hcMEC/D3), facilitating ZIKV entry into cells of the human CNS [196]. ZIKV can also spread to the CNS through autophagy (a process associated with viral infections and may be regulated by EVs [197,198,199]. In the case of ZIKV, the autophagic vesicles may play an important role in crossing the placental barrier. Normally, the placenta is protected from various pathogens (aided by the autophagy process); however, ZIKV can hijack this process [200,201]. A study using a mouse model has shown that chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine inhibits viral replication (autophagy-dependent) and also effectively prevents mother–fetal transmission of the virus [202,203].5. Models for Studying Zika Virus Infection and PathogenesisDeveloping appropriate cellular and animal models for studying ZIKV is becoming increasingly important to gain appropriate understanding of viral pathogenesis and host-related factors that aid or inhibit viral replication and to devise appropriate disease prevention and treatment strategies.5.1. Cell LinesThe cell lines are widely used to grow and study ZIKV because they provide a controlled environment for viral replication. These cell lines allow scientists to watch viral behavior, examine molecular interactions between ZIKV and host cells, and test antiviral agents. The use of cell lines is essential to virology as they provide a reliable, reproducible system for studying viral pathogenicity and mechanisms in a laboratory setting. The cells susceptible to Zika Virus infection are illustrated in Figure 5 and detailed comprehensively in Table 2.5.2. OrganoidsAlthough cell culture has been used to determine ZIKV replication and pathogenesis, this system is not without its downsides. Cells are unable to mimic in vivo conditions as they lack the cellular structure, composition, and physiology of an organ in which a virus replicates [222]. To overcome this drawback, people are now developing organ analogues in vitro where stem cells are used to generate 3D tissue structures resembling organs. These 3D models are known as organoids and are being used to model and better understand the molecular events that occur following viral invasion and replication in that organ [223]. Studies have provided confirmatory evidence of microcephaly following ZIKV infection by using organoids [224,225]. Qian et al. (2016) used a mini-bioreactor to generate brain organoids and demonstrated that ZIKV infection in brain organoids that mimic the first-trimester fetal brain resulted in ZIKV infection of NPCs, IPC, astrocytes, and neurons, while infection of brain organoids mimicking the second-trimester fetal brain exhibited ZIKV infection of the outer radial glial cells [224]. These findings are correlated with reduced cellular proliferation and enhanced apoptosis providing evidence of ZIKV-associated microcephaly [136]. Yoon et al. showed that the ZIKV NS2A protein is responsible for the alteration and reduced multiplication of the radial glial cells resulting in altered neuronal positioning in the brain [226]. Another study reported that ZIKV infection of NPCs during early pregnancy was associated with the upregulation of TLR-3 receptors, leading to apoptosis of NPCs, resulting in microcephaly [227]. Recently, brain organoid models have also been used to determine the various drug targets against ZIKV [228,229,230,231]. Organoids resembling the placenta have also been developed using first-trimester human chorionic placental villi where ZIKV established infection and proliferated in Hofbauer cells, villus cytotrophoblasts (CTB), and produced the NS3 and E protein [232,233]. To summarize, organoids offer a promising approach to studying the ZIKV viral pathogenesis and also to screening compounds’ antiviral activity in a system more relevant than in vitro cell culture.5.3. Animal ModelsAnimal models have been developed to study ZIKV replication and pathogenesis in vivo.5.3.1. Non-Human Primates (NHPs)Non-Human Primates (NHPs) exhibit significant similarities with humans (pregnancy physiology, long gestation periods, and hemomonochorial placenta) and offer a promising model to study ZIKV infection, neuropathogenesis, and drug discovery. They also exhibit vertical transmission from mother to fetus similar to humans [234]. Rhesus macaques, olive baboons, marmosets, and pigtail macaques have been employed to study ZIKV pathogenesis during gestation. Olive baboons have been able to demonstrate clinical infection when infected during the gestation period. When infected during 4th month of pregnancy, they developed conjunctivitis and moderate rash, with viremia peak at 7 dpi (days post-infection). Pro-inflammatory cytokines and immunoglobulins were also detected [235,236]. In other NHPs (i.e., rhesus macaques, marmosets, and pigtail macaques) no clinical infection occurs following ZIKV inoculation. However, in all NHPs, antibodies are formed following ZIKV infection, and placental and fetal ZIKV infection is observed. In rhesus macaques, fetal loss occurs following ZIKV infection, while marmosets and olive baboons exhibit viral RNA in amniotic fluid and placenta. Severe placental infection is observed during pregnancy in marmosets and rhesus macaques [237,238,239].5.3.2. MiceMany viral replication and pathogenesis studies involve the use of mice as animal models because they have large litter sizes and a short gestational period. However, variability in their placental structure and heterogeneity in gestation can be problematic [240]. Another complication occurs due to differences in the cell biology of mice as compared to humans. On viral entry, the viral NS5 protein is able to degrade the cellular STAT2 protein, thereby making IFN signaling ineffective, resulting in viral replication and the development of clinical disease. Degradation of STAT-2 is not observed in mouse cells infected with a virus, leading to unimpaired IFN signaling resulting in low viral titer and failure to develop clinical infection [241]. Therefore, biological modifications are needed to use mice for studying ZIKV replication and pathogenesis events. This can be achieved by using either immunocompromised mice or using alternative routes of inoculation.Immunocompromised MiceImmunocompromised mice are modified for interferon (IFN) insufficiency. This may be conducted by either creating knockout (KO) mice, e.g., interferon alpha receptor knockout (Ifnar-/-), or by using antibodies to block the IFN receptors (MARI-5A3) [242,243]. It has been found that pregnant Ifnar-/- mice exhibit high susceptibility to ZIKV infection with subcutaneous inoculation and are able to produce fetal and placental abnormalities [114]. The infection is established in homozygous as well as heterozygous mice, suggesting that partial deficiency in IFN signaling is sufficient to produce fetal neuropathology. As ZIKV infection can occur through venereal transmission; therefore, models have been developed for this purpose. Intravaginal inoculation of ZIKV from 5–8 days of conception results in high levels of viral RNAs in the placenta and fetal tissues in Ifnar-/- mice [244]. ZIKV infection (intravaginal) of IFN regulator factor (IRF) KO e.g., Irf3-/- Irf7-/- mice exhibit higher vaginal and fetal titers of the virus. This implies that inhibition of IFN signaling is a key factor in establishing different mice models.Immunocompetent MiceAs discussed previously, ZIKV infection often fails in immunocompetent mice. However, some researchers have used alternative strategies to produce ZIKV infection by using higher viral titer or other routes of inoculation. A Brazilian ZIKV strain has been used to produce successful fetal infection in SJL mice. In this study, high viral inoculation (1010 to 1012 pfu/mL) was used to produce uterine and fetal infection that ultimately resulted in fetal microcephaly [245]. However, these mice showed higher levels of T cells in the blood and later on developed autoimmunity and sarcoma [246]. The intraamniotic route has also been used for ZIKV inoculation in embryos and resulted in damage to the retina and blood–brain barrier and produced neuronal death and defects in motor neurons in the fetal brain. Intrauterine infection also resulted in ZIKV infection of placental endothelial and trophoblast cells and in the fetus, the virus localizes in the microglial, endothelial, and NPCs of the fetal brain [67,247,248]. Another model has also been developed to study the postnatal CZS progression by inoculating C57BL/6 mice intraperitoneally, and it was seen that the fetus had reduced body weight and microcephaly. Later on, these mice exhibited motor and memory deterioration in adulthood [249]. These studies pave a path towards viral replication and neuropathogenesis studies in immunocompetent mice models that may be deployed for further understanding of ZIKV neuropathogenesis and drug discovery.5.3.3. Farm AnimalsAlthough less common as animal models, pregnant sheep, and pigs may be used as a model for ZIKV replication and pathogenesis. They are widely available and exhibit susceptibility to the virus [250,251]. They can also be used as a model for human pregnancy and fetal growth [252]. ZIKV infection during the first trimester in sheep resulted in placental pathology, reduced fetal growth, and fetal loss [253]. Maternal ZIKV infection during the 4th to 5th week resulted in the detection of ZIKV RNA in the PBMCs of the mother; however, clinical infection failed to occur [253]. Similarly, in pigs, intrauterine infection during pregnancy resulted in placental abnormalities as well as microcephaly in piglets [254]. It has also been seen that following intrauterine ZIKV infection, the African ZIKV lineage was found to produce a more pronounced viral infection as compared to the Asian strain [255]. These findings clearly establish the role of sheep as a possible animal model to study fetal neuropathogenesis due to ZIKV.5.3.4. RatsAs rats become immunocompromised during the final stage of gestation, similar to humans, they may also be utilized as a model to investigate ZIKV neuropathogenesis [256]. Upon subcutaneous (S/C) inoculation of ZIKV to pregnant rat females, reduced cortical and hippocampus volumes were observed in rats, although no pathological findings and viral detection were observed in the maternal counterpart [114,257].5.3.5. HamstersInfection of immunocompetent females during pregnancy was unable to produce productive viral infection; ZIKV RNA was not found in fetal or placental tissue and fetus size remained unaffected [114]. However, ZIKV infection (Malaysia Strain) in immunocompromised hamsters (8 days post-mating) resulted in ZIKV infection of placental tissue and also caused vertical transmission of the ZIKV from mother to offspring [258].5.3.6. ChickenChicken embryos have been demonstrated to support ZIKV viral growth in the chicken brain and other tissues [259]. Intraamniotic inoculation of ZIKV resulted in stunted embryo growth and microcephaly [260]. Furthermore, comparison of the Asian and African ZIKV strains showed that the African strain caused more embryonic pathologies [261].6. Treatment and Prevention Against Zika Virus and Zika Virus Associated Neuropathies6.1. Prevention from Zika Virus Through VaccinesOne of the major methods for viral disease prevention and control is vaccination. Immediately after the outbreak of ZIKV, research began to find ideal vaccine candidates to prevent future ZIKV outbreaks [262]. Several vaccine candidates have emerged; however, very few have been used in clinical trials. The various ZIKV vaccine candidates are summarized in Table 3.6.1.1. Purified Inactivated Zika Virus Vaccines (PIZIKV)Several inactivated vaccines have been developed and tested by animal models. The majority of these vaccines have been able to demonstrate higher antibody titer, reduced viremia, successful passive transfer of antibodies, and protection in mice (interferon deficient) after homologous or heterologous vaccination [263]. In India, one vaccine has entered phase I clinical trials (CTRI/2017/05/008539) [291]. Using mice and non-human primates (NHPs), an aluminum hydroxide-based inactivated ZIKV vaccine has demonstrated promising antibody titers and protection against homologous antigen challenge [265]. Another PIZIKV provided complete protection in a dose-dependent manner (0.016 to 10 ug) and was found to be effective one year following vaccination in macaques [266]. A double-blind randomized controlled trial (Phase I) was performed to evaluate the safety and immunogenicity of PIZIKV, and it was found that the vaccine was safe for 52 h. However, protection was not found to be effective as only a single dose was given and for better immunogenicity, a double dose may be needed [268].6.1.2. Live Attenuated Vaccines:Live-attenuated vaccines (LAVs) are known for eliciting swift and long-lasting protective immunity and represent a crucial strategy for managing flavivirus diseases [292]. These are made by modifying the virus in such a way that it may replicate within the organism and stimulate the immune system without causing disease. Since 1938, they have been used as the gold standard as they exhibit good safety and effective protection from viral infection [293]. LAVs are known to stimulate the immune system for long-lasting periods (without the need for an adjuvant or any booster). Currently, three approaches are being used for generating ZIKV LAVs, which are (i) generating chimeric strains (using the backbone of an attenuated flavivirus), (ii) codon deoptimization, and (iii) mutagenesis. One of the most important advantages of using live vaccines is their ability to elicit robust humoral and cell-mediated immune responses (with a single dose of immunization); as the virus continues to multiply within the host cells, allowing continuous loading of MHC (I and II) with viral peptides. In addition, they are cost-effective (both during manufacturing as well as transportation). The past experiences of successful development of LAV against Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV) and Yellow Fever Virus (YFV) have clearly shown their potential to be used as safe viral vaccines [279,293]. However, manufacturing of live vaccines usually requires eggs or cell culture and also maintaining a cold chain during transportation. In countries having warm climates, maintaining cold chain only can account for up to 80% of the total vaccine cost [294]. Another major concern associated with the use of live vaccination is inadequate attenuation (once they are at the stage of the human clinical trials [295]. A variety of LAVs have been tested against the ZIKV [292], and the selective studies are summarized in Table 3.6.1.3. Nucleic Acid VaccinesDNA and RNA-based vaccines are being developed for different infectious diseases. They offer the advantage of prolonging immune response following vaccination and induce both humoral and cell-mediated immunity (CMI) [296]. However, one major disadvantage is that DNA vaccines often fail to elicit adequate immune response or offer protection from challenge [297]. Despite these advantages, DNA vaccines may have the risk of eliciting autoimmunity (by eliciting anti-DNA antibody production) and also causing insertional mutations [298]. Another point to keep in mind is that in the case of DNA vaccines, DNA must enter inside the nucleus of the cell, and then after transcription, mRNA must travel outside the nucleus (into the cytoplasm), where it is translated into the proteins. In contrast, for RNA vaccines, RNA can directly be translated into proteins in the cytoplasm, which are then secreted from the cells (into the extracellular matrix) where they can be presented to the antigen-presenting cells (APCs). mRNA vaccines have become more popular after the introduction of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is also important to note that storage of mRNA vaccine requires maintaining a cold chain, which may not be feasible in developing countries [299]. The summary of various DNA vaccines available against ZIKV is summarized in Table 3.6.1.4. Subunit VaccinesDue to their rapid production and stability, a variety of ZIKV vaccines have been developed. The majority of these vaccines have used the Envelope protein (E protein) and its different segments. These vaccines have been tested in various animal models, which are summarized in Table 3.6.1.5. Viral Vector-Based VaccinesViral vector-based vaccines are prepared by using a vector virus for the insertion of the genetic components of ZIKV, and they have been found to induce good humoral immunity. Lentovirus, adenovirus, and retroviruses are known to be good viral vectors. Various ZIKV vaccines have been developed using various viral vector systems, which have been summarized in Table 3.6.2. Zika Virus Prevention Through Vector ControlMosquitoes play a central role in the transmission of ZIKV. Therefore, reducing ZIKV transmission through vector control methods involves diverse and innovative strategies and tools designed to manage disease-spreading mosquito population. One of the most widely used strategies is the use of chemical insecticides (due to their cost-effectiveness and easy availability). However, due to the emergence of insecticide resistance and their deleterious effects on the environment, the focus is now diverted towards various other control methods [300,301]. Due to their eco-friendly nature, herbal-based control methods have now gained attention. Promising insecticide activities have been shown by extracts derived from the Illicium verum, Zanthoxylum limonella, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon winterianus, Eucalyptus citriodora, Eucalyptus camaldulensis, etc. [302,303,304,305,306,307,308]. Furthermore, nanoparticles derived from Ambrosia arborescens have also shown good larvicidal activity. However, their toxicity profile should be determined against other environment-friendly insects, animals, and humans [307]. Similarly, biological control methods are also being employed due to their minimal impact on the environment [309]. This includes the use of entomopathogenic bacteria and fungi. Various species of entomopathogenic fungi (Metarhizium anisopliae, Beauveria bassiana, Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Aspergillus terreus) and bacteria (Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis (Bti), Wolbachia) have been tested against ZIKV-transmitting mosquitoes [310,311,312,313,314,315]. Particularly, the introduction of Wolbachia in mosquitoes has demonstrated the ability to disrupt the reproductive potential of disease-transmitting vectors. Similarly, the use of various natural predators, i.e., Toxorhynchites mosquitoes, fishes, tadpoles, and copepods, have also been used against the mosquitoes and have shown varying degrees of efficacy in controlling the mosquito population [316]. Moreover, genetic engineering principles have been applied to release genetically modified mosquitoes into the environment [317]. Furthermore, the use of the sterile insect technique is also an innovative approach to control the mosquito population [318]. When used in combination, these strategies offer an integrated approach to vector control, addressing both short and long-term goals of reducing ZIKV and its induced neuropathies. A summary of vector control strategies developed so far is provided in Table 4.6.3. Treatment for Zika Virus6.3.1. Antivirals Against Zika VirusSince the outbreak of ZIKV, many compounds have been proposed to possess antiviral activity against ZIKV. However, in the majority of cases, treatment is symptomatic, and no specific antiviral has been approved for ZIKV treatment. A myriad of approaches are being adopted for searching for anti-ZIKV drugs. These strategies include the screening of different compounds for their anti-ZIKV activity or through repurposing drugs that are already being used for the treatment of other viral infections. In addition, the anti-ZIKV activity of several herbal/plant extracts is also being evaluated. Broadly, anti-ZIKV compounds have been divided into 2 major categories: (a) direct-acting antivirals, which inhibit the viral replication cycle; (b) antivirals targeting host cells [75]; both of these are summarized in Table 5. The former drugs act on the viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp); NS5. Polymerase inhibitors and nucleoside analogs are included in this category. They act by targeting the catalytic domain of NS5. The other category of drugs (host-targeting antivirals) targets the host cell processes (that play an important role in viral replication). Viruses need host nucleosides for their genome replication. The host-acting antivirals can act on various steps of viral replication (host cell binding, entry, replication complex formation, viral maturation, and release from the host cell). An advantage of targeting host processes is that they are less susceptible to developing drug resistance [75].6.3.2. Medicinal Plants as Zika Virus AntiviralsModern scientific research has found numerous synthetic antiviral medications that are effective against a variety of viral infectious disorders throughout the past few decades. Unfortunately, a wide range of negative consequences associated with these synthetic medications have been documented. They may occasionally lose their potency against newly arising virus resistance strains [381]. Furthermore, people in developing nations cannot afford expensive synthetic medications for the treatment of viral infections. Medicinal plants may offer economical and efficient antiviral medications. To date, no plant-derived antiviral has been approved for clinical use against ZIKV. Various research has been conducted to identify medicinal plants possessing anti-ZIKV activity, and they have been summarized in Table 6.7. Zika Virus and Its Potential Oncolytic ActivitiesZIKV exhibits tropism for a variety of cell types including normal neural stem/progenitor cells (NSCs/NSPs), microglial cells, astrocytes, and oligodendrocyte precursor cells [406,407,408]. Following the entry into cells, the virus disrupts growth and development, causing cell death. Studies in various animals have also supported the association between ZIKV infection and neurodegeneration. Inoculation of ZIKV in rhesus monkeys during early pregnancy has been shown to result in the aberrations of the microglial cells and also cortical plate thinning (3 weeks post-inoculation) [409,410]. Therefore, ZIKV is a promising virus that may be used as an oncolytic virus against glioblastoma as it infects the tumor cells. Particularly, in vitro studies have shown that the ZIKV NS5 protein inhibits the migration, proliferation, and invasion of glioblastoma. Studies in mice have shown that it increases the survival of C57/B6 mice with intracranial glioblastoma [411]. Another study in C57/B6 mice has shown that ZIKV increases the survival of mice with glioblastoma (with the suppression of tumor volume as well as the absence of clinical signs) [412]. Further molecular studies have revealed that ZIKV protease causes the cleavage of human cellular gasdermin D (GSDMD), which causes the activation of pyroptosis (caspase-independent) [413]. ZIKV infection in immunocompetent dogs (suffering from glioblastoma) has also been shown to decrease the tumor mass volume and ameliorate neurological signs. Further investigations revealed an increase in the number of immune cell infiltration in the tumor microenvironment [414]. This increase in the numbers of immune cells (CD4+ and CD8+ T cells) has also been observed in C57BL6/J mouse models (suffering from glioblastoma) infected with ZIKV. This infiltration of T cells into the tumor microenvironment provides enhanced protection to mice. ZIKV infection is associated with enhanced activation of the type I interferon signaling pathway in glioblastoma cells and increases the glioblastoma sensitivity to the PD-L1 blockade, which is an important immune checkpoint [415,416,417].8. Future Perspectives in Zika Virus ControlSince its emergence in 1947, ZIKV has only caused widespread epidemics in the last two decades. The outbreaks of ZIKV also suggest the dynamics of transmission variability of ZIKV. The outbreak of ZIKV in the Americas caused a rapid increase in studies of ZIKV pathogenesis and its control measures and treatment strategies. It is of prime importance to continue working on establishing virological and immunological diagnostics kits for ZIKV with enhanced specificity and sensitivity. Another area of focus is ZIKV pathogenesis. Finally, prevention and treatment strategies remain pivotal to curtail ZIKV-related morbidity and mortality. Currently, many vaccines are being tested on animal models, but very few have entered into clinical trials, there is a dire need to improve the quality of good vaccine candidates. Plus, the development of genetically modified mosquitoes could be a groundbreaking tool for controlling Zika virus transmission.


Title: Measles Virus Host Invasion and Pathogenesis

1. IntroductionMeasles virus (MV) is the prototype member of the genus Morbillivirus, the subfamily Paramyxovirinae and the family Paramyxoviridae. MV is an enveloped virus with a single strand, non-segmented negative sense RNA genome and exclusively causes disease in old- and new-world non-human primates (NHPs) and humans. Like all morbilliviruses, MV is highly contagious and is transmitted via the respiratory route [1]. Once the virus is inhaled and a primary target cell is infected, systemic spread ensues and clinical signs appear after 9–19 days. The prodromal stage starts with fever and malaise associated with cough, coryza and conjunctivitis, colloquially the three “C’s”. During this stage Koplik’s spots can be observed on the buccal mucosa. On the subsequent days patients develop a maculopapular skin rash that starts behind the ears and spreads to the face, trunk and extremities [2,3]. MV infection is usually self-limiting, due to the clearance of virus-infected cells by the immune system. Recovery is followed by lifelong immunity to measles. In rare cases, severe measles-associated central nervous system (CNS) complications may develop: Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), measles inclusion body encephalitis (MIBE) or subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE). MV infection paradoxically also results in a transient immune suppression that may last over two years after infection and leads to opportunistic infections and increased mortality risk [4]. The World Health Organisation (WHO) estimated that approximately 114,900 people, mostly children under five years of age, died of measles and resulting sequelae in 2014 [5].Signalling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 1 (SLAMF1, also known as CD150), which is expressed by subsets of thymocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), macrophages, T- and B-cells, has been identified as a cellular receptor for MV [2,6,7]. Infection of NHPs with recombinant MV (rMV) derived from the wild-type Japanese IC323 strain and engineered to express a fluorescent reporter protein identified CD150+ lymphocytes and DCs as predominant target cells of MV infection in vivo [8]. Nectin cell adhesion molecule 4 (nectin-4, previously also known as poliovirus receptor-related 4 or PVRL4) has been identified as another cellular receptor for MV that is expressed by epithelial cells [9,10]. This protein is part of the adherens junction complex, which is located at the basolateral side of the epithelium, underneath the tight junctions. Nectin-4 is also expressed by keratinocytes [11,12] and endothelial cells [13], suggesting a potential role for these cell types in the pathogenesis of the characteristic measles skin rash [13,14,15].Both CD150 and nectin-4 play crucial roles in the pathogenesis of measles. Vaccine and laboratory-adapted MV strains can utilise CD46 as an additional cellular receptor in vitro, but this receptor does not seem to play a major role during infection with these viruses in vivo [16,17]. The C-type lectins DC-specific intercellular adhesion molecule-3-grabbing non-integrin (DC-SIGN) and Langerin, expressed by DCs and Langerhans cells, respectively, have been identified as attachment receptors for MV. However, these molecules do not mediate MV entry, but are thought to “capture” MV particles and facilitate CD150-mediated virus-to-cell fusion of DCs or lymphocytes [18,19]. The following review of MV entry, dissemination, transmission and immune suppression is largely based on observations from experimental MV infections of NHPs.2. EntryRespiratory epithelial cells have classically been considered as the early target cells of MV infection in the respiratory tract. However, the lack of CD150 or nectin-4 expression on their apical surface renders this entry mechanism unlikely. NHPs infected with rMV that was unable to recognise nectin-4 (referred to as “nectin-4-blind” virus) still led to the establishment of systemic infection [20], whereas animals infected with an rMV that was unable to recognise CD150 (“CD150-blind”) failed to develop clinical signs or viremia [21]. These findings highlight the importance of CD150 during viral entry and exclude respiratory epithelial cells as the primary target cells, although it cannot be excluded that receptor-binding modifications have led to a generalized attenuation and loss of viral fitness.In vivo studies with NHPs experimentally infected with rMV expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) identified CD11c+ myeloid cells, most likely alveolar macrophages and DCs, in the lungs and respiratory submucosa as potential early target cells [8,22,23]. Two mechanisms of MV entry were proposed based on these findings: infection of CD150+ cells in the alveolar spaces or binding to dendrites of DC-SIGN+ submucosal DCs in the lumen of the respiratory tract, followed by migration to tertiary lymphoid tissues, such as the bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue [24], and draining lymph nodes [8,25,26], where the infection is subsequently amplified by massive replication in abundantly present CD150+ B- and T-cells [8,27]. These potential routes of entry are illustrated in Figure 1.Another possible, but probably less important, route of MV entry is through MV infection of myeloid or lymphoid cells in the conjunctiva. The lamina propria of the conjunctiva is rich in DCs, Langerhans cells, macrophages, CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells and B-cells, providing a suitable site of replication for the virus [28]. This infection and the ensuing MV-specific immune response may subsequently lead to prodromal conjunctivitis [29]. In addition to the conjunctiva, MV has been shown to infect human corneal rim epithelial cells ex vivo [30]. It has been reported that eye protection during contact with measles patients can reduce the risk of contracting infection by MV [31].Invasion of the respiratory tract by bacteria or other pathogens causing damage to the epithelial layer could be advantageous for MV entry. MV inoculated onto the apical side of well-differentiated ciliated bronchial epithelial cell cultures did not result in infection. However, wounding of the human bronchial epithelial cell in vitro resulted in numerous foci of infection along the lines of the wound, possibly due to the disruption of the tight junctions at cell-to-cell contacts and the subsequent exposure of nectin-4 as a cellular receptor [30,32]. It is possible that MV can infect the respiratory tract through similar epithelial disruption in vivo, either as a result of infection or mechanical damage [30,33]. However, the highly efficient transmission of MV from infected to naive individuals and the susceptibility of every measles-naive human to MV infection suggests that infectious predisposition is not a requirement for efficient MV entry.3. DisseminationPrimary (bone marrow and thymus), secondary (spleen, tonsils, lymph nodes) and tertiary (e.g., bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue (BALT)) lymphoid tissues are rich in CD150+ lymphocytes and are major sites of MV replication in vivo [8,25,27,34,35,36,37]. Analysis of lymphoid tissues of experimentally infected NHPs showed prominent MV replication in B-cell follicles [8,25]. Multinucleated giant cells or syncytia, known as Warthin-Finkeldey cells, were especially observed in lymphoid tissues in the upper respiratory tract [25,38,39,40] and consisted of fused B-cells [8,27]. In addition to B-cells, widespread MV infection of both CD4+ and CD8+ CD150+ memory T-cells was observed in these tissues.Viral dissemination is predominantly mediated by cell-to-cell transmission of virus [32,41,42]. In MV-infected NHPs, infected cells in peripheral tissues were mostly interconnected by dendrites. Widespread infection of lymphoid tissues is followed by infection of lymphocytes and DCs in the skin and the epithelial submucosa (Figure 2A). Here, infected lymphocytes or DCs transmit the virus to the neighbouring nectin-4+ epithelial cells [30,43,44] or keratinocytes. Nectins can form both homodimers and heterodimers at cell-to-cell junctions, but the heterodimer interactions have been shown to be more stable. The disruption of nectin-4 and nectin-1 heterodimers by MV has been suggested to facilitate viral spread [45].MV spreads systemically to other organs and tissues, such as the gastrointestinal tract, kidney, liver and skin through infected circulating CD150+ immune cells (Figure 2B), and, in some rare cases, infects endothelial cells, neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in vivo [3,46]. MV infection stimulates the expression and activation of the leukocyte integrins lymphocyte function associated antigen-1 and very late activation antigen-4 [47]. These molecules allow adherence of infected migrating cells to the endothelial cells and subsequent trans-migration into the tissues [46,47]. Infection of endothelial cells with MV in vitro stimulates the production of colony-stimulating factor and thus increases the adhesion of granulocytes to infected epithelial cells [48]. MV antigens were found in the capillary endothelium of lymph nodes and thymus in patients who died from the infection [49].MV can also infect permissive cells through receptor-independent mechanisms [50], although these mechanisms are much less efficient than receptor-mediated entry. One of the possible mechanisms is through an in-cell infection. This mechanism has been identified in allowing Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) spread from infected B-cells to epithelial cells by internalisation of the EBV-infected B-cells into carcinoma cells, resulting in activation and transfer of the virus to the carcinoma cells in vitro and in vivo [51]. It is tempting to speculate that MV-infected lymphocytes can also be internalised by receptor-negative cells, leading to infection.Clinical measles starts with the emergence of Koplik’s spots on the buccal mucosa and culminates a few days later in the appearance of the maculopapular skin rash (Figure 2C) [3]. Histological examinations showed that the characteristics of the Koplik’s spots were similar to those of the skin rash and they may contain syncytia [52]. The rash can potentially be explained by infection of the dermal endothelial cells and keratinocytes, which are subsequently cleared by the virus-specific host cellular immune response [3]. Several studies reported that viral antigens were found in the corneal layer, spongiotic epidermal keratinocytes and even more in the dermal papillary layer [15]. The skin lesions were characterised with spongiosis, cell necrosis and mononuclear cell infiltration of the epidermal keratinocytes [14,15]. The crucial role of the host immune response in the pathogenesis of the skin rash is illustrated by the fact that immunocompromised patients often do not develop skin rash following MV infection, although the course of a MV infection in these patients is typically severe and can be lethal [53].Although most measles cases resolve without complications, the virus can remain persistent and infect the CNS on rare occasions. One of the neurologic complications, known as the ADEM, is immune-mediated and has a higher incidence and severity than the other complications (~1:1000). Although the induction of this autoimmune response is poorly understood, “molecular mimicry” based on structural similarities between MV proteins and myelin has been suggested as a pathogenic mechanism [54,55]. The disease is hallmarked by demyelination, which results in ataxia, motor and sensory loss and mental status changes [56] and can result in death.A second neurologic complication stemming from systemic MV infection is MIBE. The risk of developing MIBE increases when the MV infection occurs in young infants or immunocompromised individuals, who are unable to clear the infection. The symptoms of MIBE often include mental status changes, focal seizures and occasionally visual or hearing loss within one year of acute measles infection or live-virus vaccination [57,58]. The disease progresses rapidly to coma and death in the majority of patients [54].A third and very rare neurological complication of measles is SSPE. Symptoms develop several years after a normal episode of measles and usually start with a decline of school performance and a slight change of behaviour, progressively followed by myoclonic seizures, ataxia and death within one to three years [25,59]. SSPE is exclusively associated with infections with wild-type MV, and has never been observed in association with genotype A vaccine viruses. Where the virus persists and how it spreads in the CNS remains unknown. It has been suggested that the virus spreads from one neuron to the other through interconnecting processes in vitro and in vivo, without the release of infectious particles [60,61,62]. This infection may rely on membrane fusion between infected and uninfected neurons, allowing trans-synaptic transmission of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) [25,63,64]. The RNP consists of genomic viral RNA encapsidated with the viral nucleoprotein and associated with the viral polymerase, and is the minimal unit of infection [3]. MV-positive oligodendrocytes and astrocytes were also found in the white matter of SSPE cases. The virus may spread from one glial cell to another via interconnected processes [25].It is still unclear how MV enters the CNS, however in recent years it has become apparent that the blood-brain-barrier allows entry of lymphocytes into the brain [65,66]. Moreover, it has been shown that the brain even contains lymphatic vessels [67]. Therefore, infected lymphocytes circulating in peripheral blood during viremia could carry the virus into the CNS, where the virus could be transmitted via a yet unknown cellular entry receptor or receptor-independent entry mechanisms.4. TransmissionThe basic reproductive number (R0) reflects the average number of secondary cases that would arise when an infectious agent is introduced into a completely susceptible population [68]. MV is released into the air as cell-free or cell-associated virus particles, predominantly by coughing [9,10,69]. The virus is highly infectious: the estimated R0 is 12 to 18 [68]. In specific cases individual patients have been reported to more than 200 new patients [70], often referred to as “superspreading” events [71].The high infectivity of MV can be attributed to three crucial transmission properties. First, measles patients must efficiently shed MV. Tracheo-bronchial epithelial cells have been reported to be susceptible to MV infection [10,25,43,44], associated with epithelial damage in the bronchi and bronchioles [27,43]. Whereas epithelial cells are infected from the basolateral side, budding occurs exclusively at the apical cell surface due to sorting signals in the viral glycoproteins. Whilst MV particles produced in the lymphoid tissues can rapidly bind to neighbouring CD150+ cells that are highly abundant in the environment, MV particles produced by the respiratory epithelial cells will be shed into the mucus lining the lumen of the respiratory tract where cells expressing MV receptors are scarce. Hence, virions remain in the mucus as cell-free particles, and are moved to the upper respiratory tract (URT) by the mucocilliary escalator [43] and discharged into the environment by coughing. MV can be transmitted by large respiratory droplets (by direct contact) or in small aerosols transported through the air over long distances [72]. The release of new MV particles from the host into the air is illustrated in Figure 3.Second, the virus must remain infectious until it reaches a new host. Large droplets may increase the stability of cell-bound MV particles or cell debris that are expelled from the body, allowing the virus to survive long enough until it comes into contact with the eyes, nose or mouth of a susceptible person. Alternatively, cell-free virions transmitted airborne as small aerosols through a turbulent airflow may survive in air for at least one hour, as demonstrated during the outbreaks of measles in a paediatric practice in 1981 and at an International Special Olympics Games in 1995 [72,73]. One of the factors that influence survival of MV in the air is relative humidity: in aerosols, the virus is most stable below 40% or above 80% [74].The last vital transmission property concerns the infectious dose of the virus. In NHPs, a single 50% tissue culture infectious dose was shown to be sufficient to establish a productive infection associated with systemic dissemination [75]. However, measles patients shed large amounts of virus, resulting in transmission of numerous infectious units. The combination of large inoculum and low infectious dose may increase the chance of rapid deposition of virus particles in the respiratory tract of the next host, especially in a crowded and poorly ventilated environment [73].5. Immune SuppressionMV infection results in a transient and profound immune suppression, which leads to increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections and increased childhood mortality [4]. The virus efficiently replicates in lymphoid tissues. Tertiary lymphoid tissues, such as BALT and gut associated lymphoid tissues (GALT), can be induced by bacterial or viral infection that leads to the accumulation and proliferation of lymphocytes and the formation of germinal centres. CD11c+ DCs and follicular DCs are present within to maintain the structure of these tissues [76,77]. The presence and interaction of CD150+ lymphocytes and DC-SIGN+ DCs in these tissues consequently makes them the perfect site for MV infection and amplification [8,27]. Since BALT and GALT are known to enhance protective immunity against mucosal pathogens, obliteration of these lymphoid tissues that are present in major entry portals for opportunistic infections (the airways and gut) can facilitate infiltration of the mucosa by previously encountered viruses or bacteria.MV infection leads to lymphopenia during its acute phase, in which the number of T- and B-cells, both circulating and lymphoid tissue homing, decreases extensively (Figure 2C) [27,78]. Peak numbers of MV-infected cells in lymphoid tissues of experimentally infected NHPs coincide with the peak of viremia, rapidly followed by B-cell exhaustion in the germinal centres [27], as previously also reported in humans [38]. The infection induces an expansive effector phase, leading to the clearance of MV-infected cells by cytotoxic T-cells [79] and subsequently a lifelong measles-specific immune response [80]. Following viral clearance, the number of lymphocytes returns to normal within approximately one week. However, while the lymphopenia lasts for a week, the immune suppression may last variably from several weeks to up to more than two years [4]. This led to the initial dismissal of the role of immune cell depletion in causing measles-induced immune suppression [81]. Instead, functional impairment of the immune cells has often been proposed to explain the mechanism of the immune suppression. However, there is limited evidence that this is the case and it has proven difficult to identify a cell surface receptor that mediates suppression of proliferation in immune cells. Reduced proliferative responsiveness of peripheral blood lymphocytes to antigenic or mitogenic stimulation has also been suggested as a mechanism of measles immune suppression. Although this impairment is indeed detected in vitro, measles is associated with dramatic levels of lymphoproliferation in vivo [27]. Other mechanisms have been proposed to explain the nature of the measles-induced immune suppression, such as altered cytokine profiles [82,83,84,85] or inhibited haematopoiesis [86,87], but none of these fit with the measles paradox: Prolonged increased susceptibility to infectious disease and coinciding induction of strong MV-specific immune responses.Based on observations in experimentally infected NHPs we proposed an alternative model explaining measles immune suppression, based on the preferential infection and subsequent immune-mediated depletion of CD150+ memory T- and B-cells, resulting in “immune amnesia” [27,88]. The loss of memory lymphocytes is masked by a massive expansion of new MV-specific and bystander lymphocytes, explaining the short duration of lymphopenia and yet the long duration of immune suppression. This finding thus revives the importance of immune cell depletion as a key mechanism for measles-associated immune suppression.Mechanisms underlying MV entry, dissemination, transmission and immune suppression as discussed in this review are illustrated with images from experimentally infected NHPs in Figure 4.6. ConclusionsMeasles has caused a high number of fatalities throughout history. Recombinant viruses expressing fluorescent reporter proteins have given us the means to study and understand the virus and its pathogenesis from a new perspective. However, these advances not only leave some old mysteries concerning measles pathogenesis unexplained, but also give birth to new questions. Since global eradication of measles is planned for the near future, studies on MV tropism and pathogenesis not only remain important, but also become urgent [89].


Title: Mapping the Shapes of Phylogenetic Trees from Human and Zoonotic RNA Viruses

IntroductionTrees have long been used as a metaphor for making sense of a diverse living world. The modern phylogenetic tree is a model of the evolutionary relatedness of populations or individuals, which is increasingly based on the similarity of their genetic makeup. Phylogenies have become an indispensable tool for the study of biological variation by providing a framework for modelling evolutionary processes along lineages of descent from common ancestors. In particular, phylogenies are used extensively in the study of viruses. Viruses, especially those with RNA genomes, exhibit some of the fastest rates of molecular evolution in the natural world, driven by high rates of mutation [1], large population sizes and short generation times. Many viral lineages can proliferate on time scales measured in days, as opposed to the millions of years it would require for many branches on the macroscopic ‘Tree of Life’ to grow to the same extent. The substantial variation in the shapes of RNA virus phylogenies (Figure 1) may be determined by epidemiological processes that operate at the scale of the host population. These processes may in turn be shaped by the ongoing evolution of the virus. The study of this multi-level interaction is known as ‘phylodynamics’ [2].10.1371/journal.pone.0078122.g001Figure 1Diversity in phylogenetic tree shapes for animal RNA viruses.These phylogenies were generated from samples of genetic sequences from HIV-1 subtype B (HIV1-B), dengue virus serotype 1II (DEN-1II), influenza A virus serotype H3N2 (IAV-H3), and coxsackievirus A24 variant (CA24v).Identifying the reproducible shape characteristics among virus phylogenies and the epidemiological and evolutionary determinants of these shapes are key research questions of phylodynamics [3]. For instance, the stark contrast between phylogenies generated respectively from influenza A virus (IAV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) type 1 sequences is a prototypical example of how virus phylogenies can be shaped by phylodynamic processes [4], [5]. A phylogeny reconstructed from sequences of IAV hemagglutinin, a receptor-binding glycoprotein which is a primary target of the host immune system, has a distinctively pectinate (‘comb-like’) shape (Figure 1) that is hypothesized to be driven by the short infectious period and antigenic drift of IAV, in which very few lineages persist between successive epidemics [6]. In contrast, the life-long nature of HIV infection and ongoing transmission among hosts has enabled rapidly diverging lineages to proliferate and persist over time, leading to ‘star-like’ phylogenies with short branches near the root and long branches at the tips (Figure 1).Until recently, our understanding of phylodynamics through the comparative study of virus phylogenies has been generally limited to conspicuous differences in tree shape, such as that between HIV and IAV phylogenies, because tree shapes are inherently difficult to quantify. A phylogenetic tree is an acyclic graph in which the nodes represent either observed entities (leaf nodes) or their common ancestors (internal nodes) which must be reconstructed from the variation observed at the leaf nodes. These nodes are linked by branches whose lengths represent either the passage of time or the amount of evolutionary change that has occurred between nodes. As a result, the shape of a phylogenetic tree is a complex object that incorporates both the lengths and distribution of branches among nodes. There is an abundance of descriptive statistics of tree shape that focus on the concept of ‘tree balance’, which refers to the skewed distribution of internal nodes in a tree due to variation in rates of branching [7]. For example, the Sackin index [8] counts the number of internal nodes along the path from each leaf node to the root of the tree. When branching events occur preferentially along specific lineages, the corresponding phylogeny should tend to have a higher Sackin index. However, tree balance statistics are notoriously sensitive to sample size [9] and capture only one abstraction of tree shape; for example, differences in branch lengths are generally not taken into consideration.Here, we present a new approach to the study of phylodynamics using a versatile method from machine learning [10]. We begin with a function  that maps an object  into a representation space  that is more amenable to analysis than . A well-conceived  can be extremely useful for dealing with structured data such as trees, which otherwise have no direct numerical representation. For example, Sackin’s index is a function that maps from the space of all possible tree shapes to the set of all positive integers. While integer representations of tree shape are far more convenient for analysis, this choice for  is not adequate for our purposes because it captures only a small fraction of the variation among tree shapes. When dealing with complex data, it is more appropriate to use a function that maps objects into a representation space with many dimensions. For example, one could devise a function to be applied to blocks of text that counted the occurrence of substrings of any length. Every possible substring adds a new dimension to the feature space, as  is referred to in the field of pattern recognition. As the data become larger and more complex, the number of possible features (and thereby the dimensionality of ) may become enormous. Thus, while  can provide a detailed representation of complex objects, it also becomes infeasible to operate within. Because we are interested specifically in finding linear relations between objects that have been mapped to , we bypass the difficult task of explicitly mapping each object to  by defining a function that efficiently evaluates the inner product between two representations of objects in :  where . This procedure is known as the kernel trick and  is referred to as the kernel function [11]. As kernel functions are generally designed to take larger values when  and  have a greater number of features in common, they can each be interpreted as a non-linear measure of similarity.To provide an intuition to this use of the kernel trick, imagine a person who has encountered three texts written in English – specifically, the texts contained in Agapow and Purvis [12], Huelsenbeck et al.
[13], and Robinson and Foulds [14]. Moreover, suppose this person has absolutely no knowledge of the English language, let alone phylogenetics. Realizing that there are discrete shapes (words) and that many of them appear repeatedly, he or she carries out the lengthy task of cataloguing the number of times that each shape appears in each text. (For the sake of example, we ignore such complications as punctuation and typography.) While there are many shapes that are unique to a given text, there is a much smaller subset of shapes that appear in two or more texts. Therefore, in order to compare two of these lists, it is convenient to multiply the counts of shapes that appear in both lists (knowing that unique shapes would multiply to zero) and sum these products to generate a similarity score. Multiplying the counts has the useful effect of emphasizing shapes that appear in both texts at roughly equal frequencies. For example, ‘tree’ appears 37 times in both [12] and [14], which contributes a score of 1369. In contrast, if all but one of the 74 occurrences of ‘tree’ appeared in one of the two texts, then the score would have increased by only 73. This exercise yields three numbers corresponding to the pairwise comparisons: 264630 [12], [13], 141470 [12], [14], and 277008 [13], [14]. However, [13] is a much lengthier text that the other two, which has inflated the scores for pairwise comparisons that included this text. It is necessary to normalize each score for the size of the corresponding texts [15]; upon doing so, our imagined person is able to conclude that [12] and [14] are the most similar (0.84) without knowing that these papers are, in fact, both on the subject of phylogenetic tree shape, whereas [13] (with normalized scores of 0.82 and 0.78, respectively) concerns the problem of inferring the root of a phylogeny.To construct a kernel function on phylogenetic tree shapes, we adapted a natural language processing kernel function [16] that was originally designed to classify text on the basis of its syntactic structure (a generative tree in which words descend from linguistic precursors [15]). Our modified kernel function  extracts all the subset trees that are the common features of two phylogenetic trees  and  (Figure 2). A subset tree is a contiguous collection of descendants of a specific node, but unlike a subtree, it does not necessarily include all of the descendants. Thus, our approach is similar to the Robinson-Foulds metric [14] which compares alternative trees for a given set of taxa by counting the number of subtrees in common. Unlike the Robinson-Foulds metric, however, our kernel function not only allows us to compare trees relating different numbers and kinds of taxa, but it also accounts for differences in the branch lengths between matching subset trees. We assess the performance of our kernel function against nine measures of tree shape at classifying simulated phylogenies with varying rates of speciation, and then apply our function to a large collection of human and zoonotic RNA virus phylogenies.10.1371/journal.pone.0078122.g002Figure 2Kernel-assisted comparison of two tree shapes.For trees comprising  and  nodes, respectively, there are  pairs of nodes to evaluate. (A) Starting from a given pair of nodes (indicated in figure by circles with double-outlines), the algorithm finds the largest common subset tree rooted at these nodes. First, we find that for both nodes, neither of the branches terminate at a ‘leaf node’ (marked with ‘‘). This match contributes a relatively small amount to our kernel score, not only because the matching subset trees (highlighted in thick blue lines) comprise only one node each, but also because their discordant branch lengths lead to a substantial penalty. (B) Next, we descend down the left branch in both trees. The current nodes (open circles) in both trees spawn one leaf node and one internal node; therefore, the subset trees continue to match. In addition, their branch lengths are similar, so their contribution to the cumulative kernel score is given greater weight. (C) Finally, we descend down the right branch in both trees and find that the subset trees no longer match beyond this point. We also proceed down the right branch of the reference nodes and find no match, so our traversal of the two trees from these nodes is complete and we restart our search at the next pair of nodes.MethodsData CollectionA working list of RNA viruses associated with human pathologies was obtained from the ViralZone web resource (http://viralzone.expasy.org/all_by_species/678.html) [17]. For each virus, we attempted to gather as many sequences as available covering a region of the genome with extensive genetic variation, based on prior knowledge or phylogenetic studies in the literature. When available, we used curated virus-specific sequence databases. HIV-1 nef gene sequences were obtained from the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) HIV Sequence database (http://www.hiv.lanl.gov/) using subtype-specific search queries excluding sequences annotated as recombinants, and restricting the result to one sequence per patient. Further screening for HIV-1 recombinant sequences was carried out using SCUEAL (Subtype Classification Using Evolutionary ALgorithms) [18]. Hepatitis C virus E1 sequences were obtained from the LANL HCV sequence database (http://hcv.lanl.gov) [19] using genotype-specific search queries excluding recombinants. Search results were reduced to one sequence per patient based on patient clone annotation in the sequence headers using a custom Python script, as this functionality was not available for the LANL HCV sequence database. Influenza A virus hemagglutinin (HA) sequences were obtained from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Influenza Research Database (http://www.fludb.org), using subtype-specific search queries excluding isolates from non-human hosts and laboratory strains.Gene sequences from all other viruses were obtained from the GenBank sequence database by primary organism taxonomy identifier (‘txid’). Queries yielding fewer than 100 records irrespective of gene were omitted at this stage. In all cases, sequence data were downloaded as FASTA formatted files; these published data were already anonymized and did not include any information about patients’ medical records. Sequences annotated as multiple clonal isolates from the same patient, sequences from patents or laboratory strains were excluded from these data. For all viruses other than HCV, HIV and IAV, we retrieved collection dates and host organism data, when available, for each sequence by its Genbank accession number using an automated query algorithm implemented in Python. By convention, Genbank records are annotated with this information in a ‘source’ field; however, this field is not always included in data submissions. For HCV, HIV and IAV sequences, which were already screened for human hosts, collection dates were parsed from sequence headers that were generated by the respective database engines.Sequence AlignmentFor each FASTA file, one sequence was selected as a reference for initial pairwise alignment of all other sequences using an implementation of the modified Gotoh algorithm in HyPhy [20], [21]. Sequences were trimmed to the aligned portion and converted to a multiple sequence alignment using MUSCLE [22] version 3.8 under default settings. All alignments were visually inspected and adjusted using Se-Al (Andrew Rambaut, http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/seal). Columns in the alignment comprising over 50% gaps were excluded. A table of all viruses, subtypes and genomic regions used for phylogenetic reconstruction is provided as Supporting Information (Table S1).Initial phylogenies were generated using FastTree (version 2.1.4) [23] under the general time-reversible model of nucleotide substitution. These phylogenies were used to identify clusters of sequences that could represent multiple isolates from the same individual, which we determined by evaluating the publications linked with sequences within putative clusters. Furthermore, the initial phylogenies were used to partition or filter alignments by genotype or subtype, because the Genbank sequence records were not consistently annotated with this information. The data sets that were partitioned or filtered using the initial phylogenies were: astrovirus, dengue virus type 1, hepatitis delta virus, hepatitis E virus, influenza A virus H1, Japanese encephalitis virus, Norwalk virus genotype II, poliovirus (wild and vaccine variants), rabies virus, rotavirus A, rubella virus, sapovirus, tick-borne encephalitis virus, and West Nile virus.Phylogenetic ReconstructionAlthough it is possible to apply our kernel method (described below) to an unrooted tree by counting subtrees from the deepest node outwards, phylodynamic studies of tree shapes have conventionally been carried out on rooted trees which can be more informative about evolutionary processes. The root of a phylogeny is a hypothesis on the location of most recent common ancestor (the earliest point in time) on the tree. We used an outgroup criterion [13] to infer rooted phylogenies from the alignments. This method relies on selecting an outgroup sequence that is sufficiently closely related to the true ancestor. For each alignment, we selected an outgroup sequence based on previous phylogenetic studies on the respective viruses in the literature, either a representative sequence from a closely-related virus genotype or subtype (e.g., HIV-1 subtype D), or the earliest/prototype virus isolate (e.g., West Nile virus isolate B956 [24]). A list of outgroup sequence accession numbers and literature citations is provided in Table S1. We assessed the suitability of the respective outgroup sequences by generating preliminary rooted trees using FastTree2. While results based on tree balance statistics were sensitive to outgroup rooting, our results based on the kernel analysis were robust to choice of outgroup (data not shown).For alignments with 200 or more sequences, we generated 100 replicate subsets of 100 sequences sampled at random without replacement from each data set for phylogenetic reconstructions. This resampling controlled for the effect of excessive variation in tree size (number of sequences) on comparisons of tree shape. Otherwise, a single phylogeny was generated for each alignment with fewer than 200 sequences (Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus; Chikungunya virus; encephalomyocarditis virus; HIV-1 subtype A; Hantaan virus; human rotavirus C; influenza A virus H2; influenza C virus; Murray valley encephalitis virus; mumps virus; Oropouche virus; human parainfluenza virus; Rift valley fever virus; rhinovirus A; rotavirus A genotypes 3, 4, and 12; rubella virus clade 2; sapovirus; tick-borne encephalitis virus, European and Far-Eastern strains; yellow fever virus). For data sets in which 200 or more sequences were annotated with collection dates, we generated 10 additional samples of 100 sequences drawn uniformly at random with respect to the year of collection. Phylogenies reconstructed from these latter samples provided a means to assess the sensitivity of our analyses to biased sample collection with respect to time.Phylogenetic reconstruction for every sample was carried out using a multithreaded implementation of RAxML (version 7.3.0) [25] under a general time-reversible model of nucleotide substitution with 25 rate categories across sites, followed by optimization under a discretized gamma distribution of rate categories (GTRCAT). All phylogenies contained a number of ‘soft’ polytomies, in which the phylogenetic reconstruction was unable to assign a non-zero branch length at an internal node due to inadequate genetic divergence. Because RAxML is limited to strictly bifurcating representations of phylogenetic trees (with the exception of the deepest node from which all branches are interpreted as descendants), soft polytomies were automatically resolved by the software into an arbitrary binary tree with branch lengths set to a small non-zero value. By randomizing the resolution of soft polytomies into binary trees, we found that our results were robust to this source of uncertainty in phylogenetic reconstruction (data not shown).For every phylogeny, we calculated two popular summary statistics of tree balance, Sackin’s index and Colless’ index following the formulae in [26]. Next, we generated a kernel matrix for all phylogenies using an implementation of our phylogenetic tree shape kernel as described in the following section.Kernel AnalysisTo apply the kernel function to these data, we needed to iterate through all internal nodes in two phylogenies and count all subset trees with the same topology (branching order) in both phylogenies (Figure 2). This is akin to quantifying the similarity of two manuscripts by counting the number of times that various words appeared in both texts, as illustrated by our example in the Introduction. Unlike a text, however, the shape of a tree is an ambiguous characteristic of a phylogeny. Rotating the branches around a node can produce a tree that has a different shape, despite remaining evolutionarily equivalent to the original. The number of different shapes for a tree of  tips (where we distinguish left from right and, for the moment, ignore branch lengths) is given by the Catalan numbers . For example, a tree of 100 tips has nearly  shapes. This presents a problem: how do we know which resolutions of shapes are being compared between two trees? We resolved this issue by ‘ladderizing’ the trees: rotating branches around every node so that branches leading to the larger number of descendants (tips) were always on the same side. This procedure, conventionally used to produce a more aesthetically pleasing visualization of a phylogeny, greatly increases the chance of finding matching subset trees between two phylogenies. Furthermore, we rotated branches around all ‘cherries’ (nodes that are the direct ancestor of two tips) such that the longer branch was always on the same side. Based on simulations (see below), we determined that this combination of ladderization and rotating cherries significantly improved our ability to correctly classify simulated trees (Table S2), indicating that these steps resolved different trees into shapes which could be compared in a consistent and meaningful way.Following Moschitti’s notation [16], we defined a phylogenetic tree shape kernel by:(1)where  is the set of all nodes from the  tree , and  is defined as follows:If  and  are leaf nodes, , where  is a constant decay factor.If the numbers of children descending from  and  are the same (always two for bifurcating trees) and, of these, the numbers of leaf nodes are also the same, then:
where  is the number of children descending from node ,  is the -th child of node , and  is a Gaussian radial basis function on the vectors of branch lengths descending from nodes  and , denoted as  and  respectively:
where  is the variance parameter that determines how strongly subset trees are penalized for discordant branch lengths.Otherwise, .Note that matching subset trees were weighted in proportion to their size (number of nodes). Because a tree will match its own shape exactly,  can take overwhelmingly large values. This ‘large diagonal’ effect [27] can severely curtail the effectiveness of subsequent analyses of the kernel matrix (), which is a symmetric matrix that is obtained by applying the kernel function to all pairs of  trees, . Therefore, the constant decay factor  served to penalize larger subset trees because it declined exponentially with tree size [15]. The Gaussian radial basis function  further penalized subset trees by the discordance in branch lengths for pairs of branches originating from the matching nodes (Figure 2). Although this incorporation of branch lengths is a significant departure from the original tree kernel for natural language processing, we prove that  is a valid positive semi-definite kernel function (Text S1).Phylogenies were imported from the Newick tree strings produced by RAxML into Python using the Phylo module from the Biopython package [28], [29]. Branch lengths in each phylogeny were normalized by the mean branch length to facilitate comparisons between viruses with different overall rates of evolution. A kernel matrix was computed from this collection of phylogenies using a custom Python module, which we have made publicly available on our webserver (http://bioinfo.cfenet.ubc.ca/pub/phylokernel). Although the kernel function can be computed quickly [16], we needed to compute the kernel matrix for 4153 phylogenies ( replicates +  samples by collection year + ) with over 8 million pairwise comparisons. To speed up this calculation, we performed parallel computation on a Linux cluster with a message-passing interface (MPI) environment [30]. The matrix was confirmed to be positive semi-definite by Cholesky decomposition. Following Collins and Duffy [15], all entries in the matrix were normalized by the formulaso that the resulting kernel matrix was less sensitive to differences in the sizes of the respective trees. Values of  for replicate sets of phylogenies generated from random samples were averaged for every pairwise comparison of viruses or virus clades, and the resulting group mean distance matrix was renormalized. Kernel principal components analysis and support vector machine classification were performed on this normalized kernel matrix using the R package kernlab
[31].Simulating PhylogeniesWe used the R package diversitree
[32] to simulate the growth of phylogenies under different evolutionary scenarios of branching or ‘speciation’ rates. Trees were generated under a Quantitative State Speciation and Extinction (QuaSSE) model [33] whereby speciation rates were determined by a continuous trait whose evolution was simulated by a Brownian motion (with zero drift and variance per unit time ) under two different mutation rates ( = 0.1 and 0.01). This continuous trait was mapped to a speciation rate by a sigmoidal function with a zero midpoint, exponential decay rate of 0.25, and minimum and maximum values of 0.05 and 0.25, respectively. We performed two sets of 100 replicate simulations under the different mutation rate scenarios. The simulated data were converted into Newick tree strings using a Python script derived from the Biopython Phylo module [29]. These strings are publicly available at http://bioinfo.cfenet.ubc.ca/pub/phylokernel. We calculated nine different tree balance statistics – Colless’ index, Sackin’s index, mean path length, variation in path length, Shao and Sokal’s  and , and the sum, total mean, and mean of the 10 earliest nodes of Fusco and Cronk’s imbalance statistic [34] – for all trees using functions written in Python. A kernel matrix was computed for all trees using the methods described above. We trained a -support vector machine classifier [35] using the R package kernlab on a random subset of half of the phylogenies, and then measured the sensitivity and specificity of classification by mutation rate on the remaining half. Likewise, the sensitivity and specificity of classifying trees by tree balance statistics was evaluated at varying cutoffs using the R package ROCR
[36].ResultsPerformance on Simulated TreesWe simulated two sets of 100 replicate phylogenies under different mutation rates (200 trees total) that influenced the branching rates in the phylogeny in an autocorrelated fashion [32]. In other words, the branching rate was allowed to evolve as each phylogeny grew from a common ancestor to 100 descendants. These simulations provide a reasonable approximation of the kind of evolutionary scenarios between which tree balance statistics were meant to differentiate [12], since preferential branching along fewer lineages will tend to produce an imbalanced tree. For all simulated phylogenies, we computed nine different balance statistics (the eight statistics assessed in [12] and Sackin’s index). In addition, we computed the kernel matrix for all simulated phylogenies using our phylogenetic tree shape kernel. Note that the kernel method does not function as a summary statistic; it cannot assign a value to a given tree in the absence of any other information. Consequently, we compared the kernel method to balance statistics by evaluating their performance at correctly classifying trees that had been generated under different models of speciation, which is analogous to the transmission of an infectious disease between hosts.The sensitivity and specificity of classifying the simulated phylogenies by mutation rates ( = 0.01 and  = 0.1) is summarized in Figure 3. Using our kernel method, we obtained a median sensitivity of 97.7% (interquartile range, IQR = 95.6%, 98.0%) and specificity of 90.8% (IQR = 89.1%, 92.8%) when averaged over 100 replicate training sets. These results were unambiguously superior to all nine balance statistics that were evaluated over the same simulated data. For instance, the sum of Fusco and Cronk’s imbalance statistic was the most effective among the balance statistics, but none could exceed a sensitivity of 80% without a corresponding drop in specificity below 80%. Thus, the kernel method is capable of providing a substantial advantage for recognizing virus trees that have evolved under different evolutionary and epidemiological scenarios.10.1371/journal.pone.0078122.g003Figure 3Classification of simulated phylogenies using nine balance statistics and the kernel function.We simulated the growth of two sets of 100 phylogenies relating 100 taxa under different scenarios in which rates of speciation (branching) evolved at different rates. Greater variation in speciation rates tended to produce more imbalanced trees. Nine different balance statistics, including eight from [12], were computed for all phylogenies: Colless’ index, Sackin’s index, the mean and variance in path lengths from tips to the root, Shao and Sokal’s  and  statistics, and the imbalance value () for the sum, total mean, and the mean of the earliest 10 internal nodes of the tree. This plot illustrates the trade-off between sensitivity and specificity of classifying phylogenies by applying a cutoff value each of these balance statistics. A single point (star) indicates the sensitivity and specificity attained by applying the phylogenetic kernel function (with  and ) to train a support vector machine (SVM) on a random subset (50%) of the phylogenies, and classifying the remaining half.To determine the sensitivity of the kernel function to  and , we evaluated our ability to classify simulated phylogenies under varying parameter settings. We found that both sensitivity and specificity were robust to different settings of  and  (Figure S1). For example, mean sensitivities varied by less than 1% (0.97 to 0.98) for values of  ranging from 1.0 to 20.0, given ; setting  conferred a slight advantage over this range in the classification of simulated phylogenies. These tests indicated that results from applying our kernel function to RNA virus phylogenies would be robust to varying parameter settings. This conjecture was supported in a comparison of kernel matrix projections under different settings (Figure S2; see below).Tree Balance in RNA VirusesWe used maximum likelihood-based heuristics to reconstruct phylogenies from 62 sequence alignments representing 38 different human and zoonotic RNA viruses from 12 different taxonomic families (Table S1). Genetic sequences from viruses with highly divergent clades, such as the human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) subtypes or influenza A virus serotypes, were grouped accordingly into separate multiple sequence alignments to allow for clade-specific epidemiological or evolutionary dynamics. Replicate phylogenies were generated from random samples of 100 sequences (given adequate sample size) to control for the well-documented confounding effect of variation in sample size on conventional tree shape statistics [9].For each alignment, we calculated the means across replicates of two tree balance statistics (Colless’ index and Sackin’s index), which quantify the asymmetry in rates of branching among ancestral lineages in each tree. Specifically, Sackin’s index [8] counts the number of ancestral nodes separating each tip to the root, while Colless’ index [37] evaluates the difference in the number of tips that descend from the left and right branches of each bifurcating ancestral node. The distribution of mean Colless’ indices is displayed in Figure 4. As expected, influenza A virus (IAV) serotype H3 assumed one of the highest mean Colless’ indices (0.544) indicating that the replicate trees were severely imbalanced; only Murray valley encephalitis virus (MVEV) presented a higher index (0.548). Only 39 published MVEV envelope sequences were available after culling 7 identical sequences; however, Colless’ index is expected to be biased downwards with decreasing sample size, suggesting that the mean index for 100-sequence MVEV trees could have been even greater still. MVEV is endemic to Australia and Papua New Guinea and comprised almost entirely of mosquito isolates sampled over six decades (1956–2008). The IAV H3 sequences were strictly human isolates from around the globe but also sampled over a period of several decades (1968–2012).10.1371/journal.pone.0078122.g004Figure 4Distribution of mean normalized Colless’ indices.Each label represents the mean index of a virus or virus clade. The vertical axis is used to elucidate the clustering of points by forcing overlapping labels (phylogenies with similar indices) to ‘pile up’ like a histogram. A higher Colless’ index corresponds to a less ‘balanced’ tree in which branching events tend to occur along the same lineage. A conventional histogram is displayed in the background. Labels are defined as follows: AstV = astrovirus; CCHF = Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus; ChikV = chikungunya virus; CA24v = coxsackievirus A24; DEN = dengue virus; E30 = echovirus 30; EMCV = encephalomyocarditis virus; EV71 = enterovirus 71; GBVC = GB virus C; HTNV = Hantaan virus; H[A-E]V = hepatitis [A-E] virus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus type 1; I[A-C]V = influenza [A-C] virus; JEV = Japanese encephalitis virus; MeV = measles virus; MuV = mumps virus; MVEV = Murray valley encephalitis virus; NV = Norwalk virus; OROV = Oropouche virus; hPIV-1 = human parainfluenza virus; PV = poliovirus; Rab = rabies virus; Rot = human rotavirus; RhiV = human rhinovirus; RSV = human respiratory syncytical virus; Rub = rubella virus; RVF = Rift valley fever virus; SapV = sapovirus; SeoV = Seoul virus; TBEV = tick-borne encephalitis virus; WNV = West Nile virus; YFV = yellow fever virus.This raises a concern of whether tree balance is an artefact of biased sampling of virus isolates over time, such that the overrepresentation of isolates from a narrow range of years might tend to yield balanced trees. To address this, we calculated the mean Colless’ indices for phylogenies generated from samples that were uniform with respect to sample collection years for alignments in which an adequate number of sequences were annotated with collection dates (). Using Lin’s concordance correlation coefficient () [38] to quantify the agreement between indices, where  indicates perfect agreement and  indicates no agreement, we found that the mean Colless’ indices for phylogenies whose tips were uniformly distributed over years were highly concordant with indices from random samples (, 95% C.I.). In other words, constraining the phylogenies of other viruses such as HIV to have evenly distributed tips over time did not make their Colless’ indices more IAV-like.In sum, the distribution of mean Colless’ indices was highly peaked in the interval between 0.15 to 0.2, such that this summary statistic did not discriminate substantially among the phylogenies of most RNA viruses in our study (Figure 4). For example, the third-highest mean index () derived from IAV serotype H1 phylogenies was similar to the index of a hepatitis C virus (HCV) genotype 2a phylogeny (), which would not seem to be consistent with the observation that phylogenies from HCV and IAV have conspicuously different shapes [2]. Specifically, we found that 6 out of 100 replicate samples of IAV-H1 sequences led to Colless’ indices that were less than the value observed for HCV-2a. Similarly, the relatively low Colless’ indices of phylogenies of influenza B virus (IBV, ), which together with IAV serotypes H1 and H3 is responsible for the majority of seasonal influenza outbreaks, implies that the imbalance of IBV-derived trees is no different from the bulk of animal RNA viruses (Figure 4). Furthermore, the mean Colless’ index did not differentiate the phylogenies of HIV and HCV from other RNA viruses. We obtained the same qualitative results from an evaluation of mean Sackin’s indices (Figure S3), which were highly correlated with the respective mean Colless’ indices (Pearson’s , ). There is much more to the conspicuously star-like shape of HIV and HCV phylogenies that remains unquantifiable by balance statistics. Consequently, relying too heavily on tree balance statistics potentially limits our ability to measure the diversity of human and zoonotic RNA virus phylogenies, and to link recurring shapes to epidemiological or evolutionary processes.Kernel Analysis of RNA Virus TreesHere, we develop and apply a new approach to comparing RNA virus tree shapes by using a method from machine learning known as the ‘kernel trick’ [10]. Rather than attempting to reduce a complex tree shape down to one or more summary statistics, like the tree balance indices examined above, we defined a kernel function (Figure 2) that efficiently computes inner products between phylogenies with respect to their tree shapes. By this approach, a tree’s shape is quantified only by its comparison to other trees. We have shown above that this method can be highly effective at discriminating between the shapes of phylogenies that were simulated under different evolutionary scenarios. We applied this phylogenetic tree kernel to our collection of RNA virus phylogenies to generate a kernel matrix that is akin to a pairwise similarity matrix. Entries in the kernel matrix were averaged across replicate phylogenies from the same alignments, and renormalized to yield a smaller kernel matrix with rows or columns corresponding to different viruses or virus clades and sampling schemes (completely at random or uniformly with respect to collection year). According to the eigenvalues of this projection, about 90% of the variance was explained by the first 2 principal components alone, with about 70% of the variance explained by the first component; these percentages varied slightly with different parameter settings of the kernel function (Figure S2). In all cases, the first component distinctly separated the phylogenies derived from HIV and HCV sequences from the rest of the RNA viruses. However, none of the remaining principal components were as readily interpretable. Furthermore, neither Sackin’s nor Colless’ indices were significantly correlated with any of the principal components based on a simple Pearson correlation test after adjusting for multiple comparisons. Additionally, we trained a support vector regression model using the kernel matrix and Colless’ indices for a random subset of the data. The mean concordance correlation coefficient [39] between the observed Colless’ indices and those predicted by this model for the remaining phylogenies was only 0.12 (interquartile range 0.07, 0.18), which is considered poor. These results, which were robust to varying  and , suggested that the kernel was manifesting aspects of phylogenetic tree shapes other than those captured by tree balance statistics.A scatterplot of the largest 2 principal components from the preceding analysis described a single arc in which HIV and HCV phylogenies comprised a distinct cluster from the other RNA viruses (Figure S2). However, the majority of the other viruses were agglomerated at the base of the arc, making it difficult to discern patterns from this visualization. This is a known issue in PCA in which the largest components are assumed to represent the important structure in the data whereas smaller components represent noise. To provide a clearer visualization, we generated another scatterplot (Figure 5) using a t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding algorithm (t-SNE) which attempts to preserve both global and local structure in a low-dimensional visualization of high-dimensional data [40]. Again, HIV and HCV comprised a distinct cluster in this visualization. Phylogenies derived from these viruses tend to feature long terminal branches and relatively short internal branches (Figure 1), which has been attributed to the exponential spread of these viruses and their propensity to establish persistent infections. This outcome was robust to partitioning sequences by clade; for example, a phylogeny comprised of all three HIV subtypes in our study mapped adjacent to the HIV subtype-specific phylogenies in both types of projections (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pone.0078122.g005Figure 5A visualization of RNA virus phylogenies in the tree shape kernel space (, ) using t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE).The t-SNE algorithm attempts to find the optimal map of high-dimensional data into a low-dimensional space while preserving the distances among points as much as possible. Thus, the distance between pair of viruses or virus clades (labelled by the same abbreviations as Figure 4) is approximately proportional to their mean kernel distance. Groups of virus clades of particular interest are highlighted with the corresponding colours: HIV, red; HCV, yellow; Dengue (DEN), green; IAV-H3, IAV-H1, and IBV (blue).GB virus C (GBVC), which is not known to be associated with any human disease, was consistently located within the cluster of HIV and HCV phylogenies in the kernel PCA projections. (Due to the stochastic nature of the -SNE algorithm, GBVC was not always embedded in the vicinity of HIV and HCV.) A close relative of HCV, GBVC can establish persistent infections in its human hosts and may inhibit HIV replication when an individual has become co-infected by both viruses [41]. Thus, the ability to establish persistent infections appears to be a common characteristic of viruses whose phylogenies map to this region of tree shape space. To test this hypothesis, we trained a support vector machine (SVM) classifier to differentiate between viruses having the ability to establish persistent chronic infections (HIV, HCV, and GBVC) and those without. We randomly selected half of the members from each category and used the corresponding rows and columns in the kernel matrix as training data. Validating the classifier on the remaining half of the kernel matrix, we consistently obtained a sensitivity and specificity of 1.0 irrespective of varying the kernel parameters  and , indicating that viruses that can establish persistent chronic infections were unambiguously separated from the other RNA viruses in the space defined by the tree kernel.The influenza viruses predominantly responsible for the seasonal epidemics around the world (IAV-H1, IAV-H3, and IBV) were located close together in both projections of the kernel matrix. In contrast, the Sackin’s and Colless’ indices for IBV were substantially lower than those of IAV-H1 and IAV-H3. This suggests that the kernel was more successful in identifying commonalities in the shapes of the phylogenies of these influenza viruses. On the other hand, these influenza viruses were located in the midst of many other RNA viruses in both projections, despite the strikingly pectinate shape of IAV-H3 (Figure 1). Phylogenies from the other influenza viruses in this study (IAV-H2, IAV-H5, and influenza C virus) mapped further away from the seasonal epidemic influenza viruses. These other phylogenies tended to have longer internal branches (relative to terminal branches) than the phylogenies of IAV-H1, IAV-H3, and IBV. Specifically, the ratio of the median branch lengths of internal and terminal branches, respectively, was significantly greater for the other influenza viruses than the seasonal epidemic influenza viruses (Wilcoxon rank sum test , ). A possible explanation for this pattern is that the H2 and H5 subtypes are infrequently re-introduced into the human population from under-sampled avian host populations; consequently, the evolving diversity of these viruses would be represented by only a small number of lineages in phylogenies.Our survey of animal RNA viruses included several examples of zoonotic viruses. One might anticipate that these viruses could map to one or more distinct regions in projections of the kernel matrix. We observed that mosquito-transmitted zoonotic viruses such as the highly divergent dengue serotypes (DEN-1 to -4), the arboviral encephalitides (Japanese encephalitis virus and West Nile virus), and yellow fever virus tended to map to a similar region in projections of the kernel matrix, although this region was not exclusive of other viruses for which humans are the only known natural hosts, such as rubella virus and poliovirus (Figure 5). Another interesting feature of this projection was that phylogenies representing clades of the zoonotic rabies virus (RabV-1 to -3) mapped to a similar region as the mosquito-transmitted zoonotic viruses. The majority of the rabies virus sequences were isolated from non-human hosts predominated by canine (numbered here as clades 1 and 3) and bat species (clade 2), with about 2%–9% sequences isolated from human hosts (Table S1).Finally, we observed that phylogenies from certain viruses shared a distinctive rapid proliferation of short terminal branches within one or more specific clades which may be a signature of sporadic outbreaks, as illustrated by the coxsackievirus A24 variant phylogeny (CA24v) depicted in Figure 1. For example, the majority of CA24v sequences within the highly unresolved clade of its phylogenies were sampled during outbreaks of acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis in Brazil and China. The proximity of the zoonotic viruses Hantaan virus (HTNV) and Murray Valley encephalitis virus (MVEV) to CA24v in projections of the kernel matrices (Figure S2) suggested that the shapes of the respective phylogenies may have also been shaped by sporadic outbreaks.To assess the potential bias of uneven sampling over time, we incorporated replicate phylogenies into the kernel matrix that were generated from samples of virus sequences drawn at random with respect to collection year. We found that the mean distances between phylogenies sampled completely at random and phylogenies sampled uniformly by collection year from the same virus or virus clade were significantly shorter (larger kernel scores) than the mean distances between phylogenies from different viruses or virus clades (Wilcoxon rank sum test, , ). Specifically, the mean normalized kernel score between phylogenies of the same virus obtained by different sampling schemes was 0.98, whereas the mean among phylogenies from different viruses was 0.84, where a normalized score of 1.0 indicates an exact match with respect to tree shape. On visually examining a PCA projection of this kernel matrix, we found that sampling uniformly by collection year tended to shift phylogenies along the same trajectory in the space of tree shapes (Figure S4). With the exception of HCV genotype 6a (for which about 50% of isolates were obtained in 2006 alone), the cluster of HIV and HCV viruses remained distinct from other RNA viruses including the influenza viruses.DiscussionIn this study, we have proposed a new framework for comparing phylogenetic tree shapes by extending a parse tree kernel from computational linguistics [16]. Our kernel function compares all subset trees shared by two phylogenies and weights this comparison by the concordance of branch lengths that comprise the respective subset trees (Figure 2). It therefore bears some similarity to the weighted Robinson-Foulds metric that is based on comparing the lengths of branches that descend from each ancestral node [14]. However, the Robinson-Foulds metric is restricted to comparing alternative trees relating the same taxa; in other words, the terminal branches must have the same labels. This requirement makes it impossible to use the Robinson-Foulds metric to compare phylogenies from different viruses. In contrast, our kernel is designed to compare trees from completely different sets of taxa because it discriminates among subset trees primarily by the number of terminal branches that descend from each ancestral node, regardless of what taxa occupy the tips of those branches. Moreover, if two phylogenies had a subset tree in common, that subset tree would have to occur in the same location of the trees to be counted towards the Robinson-Foulds metric. In contrast, since the tree shape kernel iterates over all internal nodes in both phylogenies, subset trees in different locations can contribute towards the kernel score. This is an important distinction because we are primarily interested in recurring motifs in tree shape, irrespective of where they appear in either tree, because this commonality may represent the imprint of a common epidemiological or evolutionary process acting on both viruses.Using conventional tree balance statistics, we found limited variation among phylogenies from different RNA viruses, with most viruses falling into a narrow range of Colless’ or Sackin’s indices after controlling for sample size variation. In contrast, our kernel function was able to separate the distinctively star-like phylogenies of HIV and hepatitis C virus. However, it was unable to distinguish the conspicuously pectinate shapes of IAV-H1 and -H3 phylogenies to the same extent as the tree balance statistics. This is most likely due to our use of a decay factor  in computing the kernel function to penalize larger subset tree matches. Unless we penalize subset trees by , large phylogenies would result in enormous values along the diagonal of the kernel matrix because a phylogeny will always match itself exactly, washing out any patterns from comparisons between different phylogenies. In other words, our use of a decay factor places greater emphasis on local than global similarities between the shapes of two phylogenies. Using a decay factor evidently prevents the full extent of the imbalance in the IAV-H1 or -H3 phylogenies from being expressed in the kernel matrix, since the longer subset trees that would represent this large-scale pattern are penalized more heavily.A common concern directed at studies of phylogenetic tree shapes is that variation in tree shapes may be an artefact of differences in sampling. For example, influenza A virus sequences in our data were sampled over a wide range of years from 1925 to 2012, with 72% of sequences sampled after 2001. It is possible that differences among viruses in the distributions of sample dates may introduce a bias to tree balance statistics or the kernel method. However, when we constrained samples across viruses to be sampled uniformly with respect to collection years, we found no significant effect on the distributions of RNA viruses for either tree balance or kernel-based methods. Analyses of tree shapes can be robust to temporal sampling biases because the internal structures of the phylogenies are often comprised of ancestors that are substantially further back in time. For example, there was very little clustering of HIV-1 subtype B sequences in the phylogeny with respect to collection year, implying that a phylogeny reconstructed a tree from sequences collected in a specific year will retain most of its deeper structure.The tree shape kernel presented here potentially represents an important new exploratory tool for studying RNA virus phylogenies. By extracting recurring local motifs in the internal structures of different phylogenies, it can complement the established tree balance statistics to provide a more complete description of the diversity of tree shapes among RNA viruses [3]. Our kernel is not a parametric model in itself; unlike recent advances in viral phylodynamics [42], it does not attempt to directly estimate epidemiological model parameters from tree shapes. Unlike a tree balance statistic, the kernel function cannot assign a numerical value to a single phylogeny in the absence of any other data. Without summary statistics to compare to reported values in the literature, it is necessary to have at hand all the phylogenies that one wishes to compare in order to compute the entire kernel matrix. On the other hand, the use of a kernel method presents opportunities to utilize other techniques from machine learning such as support vector machines (SVMs) to extract and analyze patterns in phylogenetic tree shapes. For example, we simulated phylogenies under two different evolutionary scenarios that influenced the asymmetry in branching rates among lineages, and we found that an SVM assisted by our kernel function clearly outperformed nine different tree balance statistics at predicting which phylogeny was generated under which scenario (Figure 3). Furthermore, we trained another SVM classifier on a random subset of phylogenies labelled by whether the respective RNA viruses could establish persistent chronic infections. The trained model consistently predicted these labels for the remaining phylogenies with very high sensitivity and specificity (see Results section).It is possible that a similar procedure could be used, for example, to determine the natural animal reservoir of an incompletely characterized zoonotic virus. This may not only require further development of kernel methods such as those presented here, but also greater coverage and more detailed annotation of published sequence data for RNA viruses that are under-represented in public databases. Additionally, the tree shape kernel may provide an effective distance measure for fitting complex phylodynamic models by approximate Bayesian computation [43], a rapidly emerging class of highly versatile and efficient computational methods in which a distance measure (such as the difference in summary statistics) is used to assess the congruence between model simulations and observed data.Supporting InformationFigure S1
Sensitivities (solid lines) and specificities (dashed lines) of classifying simulated phylogenies where the kernel matrix was generated under different settings of 

 and 

. Classification was performed using a kernel -support vector machine implemented in the R package kernlab
[31]. For a given kernel matrix, sensitivity and specificity were averaged over 1000 replicate cross-validations on random samples of trees stratified by evolutionary scenario. Note that the -axis is -transformed and the -axis is scaled to the range of the observed values, which all exceeded the performance of classifications based on tree balance statistics. Varying the decay factor  had little effect on either sensitivity or specificity; setting  conferred a very slight advantage in sensitivity over  or . Both sensitivity and specificity were fairly robust to a wide range of values for the Gaussian radial basis function variance parameter . For example, mean sensitivities varied by less than 1% for values of  ranging from 1 to 20.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2
PCA projections for kernel matrices generated from the RNA virus phylogenies under different settings for kernel function parameters 

 and 

. Labels corresponding to virus species and clades are the same in Figure 4. Viruses of particular interest (such as HIV and the common pandemic influenza A viruses) are highlighted with coloured convex hulls as in Figure 5. The proportion of variance explained by the first two principal components (roughly 90% to 95%), as determined by eigenvalues, are reported as percentages in the axes labels.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S3
Distribution of mean normalized Sackin’s indices. Each label represents the mean index of a virus or virus clade. The vertical axis is used to elucidate the clustering of points by forcing overlapping labels (phylogenies with similar indices) to ‘pile up’ like a histogram. A higher Sackin index corresponds to a less ‘balanced’ tree in which branching events tend to occur along the same lineage. Label annotations are identical to Figure 4.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S4
Visualizing the effect of resampling virus sequences uniformly at random with respect to year of collection. The kernel matrix calculated from the original sample phylogenies (black) and the additional phylogenies from uniform sampling by year (red) is projected onto the first two principal components. Arrows are drawn between phylogenies generated by different sampling schemes from the same set of virus sequences. Note that this PCA projection is slightly different from projection generated under the same settings (, ) depicted in Figure S2 because it incorporates the uniform sample points.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Table S1
A list of all animal RNA viruses in this study, grouped by taxonomic family (bold face). Abbrev. = abbreviation used in figures. N = number of sequences. %human = percentage of sequences isolated from human hosts. L = length of alignment in nucleotides. Outgroup accession = Genbank accession number of sequence used as outgroup. Reference = citation of article in peer-reviewed literature on which choice of outgroup is based; or a short note on the method used for outgroup selection.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Table S2
Performance of kernel support vector machine classifier on 200 simulated phylogenies. Trees were simulated with the R package diversitree by evolving a latent character state (with mutation rates  and ) which controlled the rate of speciation (branching). All trees were modified by rotating branches around nodes according to some predefined scheme, resulting in different but evolutionarily invariant shapes. Kernel matrices were generated with the parameter settings  and . Sensitivity and specificity values were generated by R package ROCR and averaged across 1000 cross-validations (using a random subset of 100 trees to train the kernel classifier and validating on the remaining 100). Empirical 95% confidence intervals (C.I.) were derived from the 25th and 975th-ranked cross validations. Randomly rotating branches in the trees did not significantly affect our ability to classify them by evolutionary scenario (Student’s -test, ). Ladderizing the trees, such that the most prolific branches were rotated to the same side, conferred a substantial and significant gain in sensitivity and specificity of classification relative to the unmodified trees (). Rotating ‘cherries’ (pairs of tips that descend directly from their common ancestor) of a ladderized tree, so that the longest branch was always to the same side, conferred a slight but significant advantage in classification (). However, we found no advantage to rotating branches around internal nodes according to any of the schemes we evaluated. ‘Ties’ refer to nodes that are not cherries and have the same number of descendant tips to the left and right, making them ambiguous to ladderization. Rotating branches ‘by subtree’ indicates that the branch with the largest total branch length in the descendant subtree was rotated to the same side.(PDF)Click here for additional data file.Text S1
Proof that 

 is a positive semidefinite kernel.
(PDF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Monkeypox Virus Subverts the Inflammatory Response of Macrophages at the Maternal‐Fetal Interface

1IntroductionMonkeypox virus (MPXV) is a Poxviridae virus closely related to smallpox virus, genus Orthopoxvirus, that was responsible of a Monkey smallpox or Monkeypox (MPX) epidemic in 2022 [1, 2]. Appearing mainly in Europe and North America, this viral zoonotic infection was detected in non‐endemic regions for a virus found in the forest area of Central and West Africa. MPXV infection causes a smallpox‐like illness in humans presenting as fever, headache, chills, exhaustion, swollen lymph nodes, myalgia, sore throat, rectal pain, proctitis, and anogenital lesions and localized rashes [3, 4, 5]. MPXV is transmitted through several routes, including respiratory droplets during human‐to‐human transmission or by direct contact with mucocutaneous lesions of infected humans or animals [1, 6, 7, 8, 9]. The pathogenesis and clinical manifestation are closely related to the host immune response.Following viral infection of humans, MPXV infects and replicates in immune cells including B and T lymphocytes, monocytes, dendritic cells and macrophages [10]. In Vitro and In Vivo studies reported that monocytes represent the first target cell of MPXV [11]. These latter cells may be potential vehicles for the dissemination of the virus in the body [12]. At site of MPXV infection, an infiltration of dendritic cells, T lymphocytes and macrophages was reported [11]. In reported cases of human infection, increased level of cytokines was reported with variation in the type of cytokines and concentrations depending on the severity of the disease [13, 14]. The severity of the disease ranges from mild to fatal. Mild cases are mainly skin lesions, while moderate to severe cases involve systemic damage, with the risk of secondary infection in the lungs or gastrointestinal tract. The most severe cases show encephalitis, septicemia or ocular damage, leading to permanent loss of vision and even death. The severity of the disease is also influenced by patient‐related factors such as age, immune status and access to quality healthcare. Severe forms and higher mortality rates are more frequent in young children, immunocompromised people and those infected with virulent clades of MPXV [14, 15, 16]. the innate immune response from MPXV infected‐humans, the roles for associated immune cells are currently unknown. Nevertheless, it was reported that human macrophages are permissive to MPXV contributing to cell‐cell spread [17], however little is known about the immunological and antiviral responses of phagocytes to infection.Cases of vertical transmission were reported in infected mothers to the developing fetus in utero resulting to abortion [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23] with the presence of a high viral load in the fetal tissue of the umbilical cord and placenta [18, 23], which suggests a tropism for placenta. The placenta is a target organ for numerous pathogens including virus responsible of vertical transmission including cytomegalovirus, zika virus, rubella virus or recently Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS‐CoV‐2) [24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. Trophoblasts, major cell type in the placenta, form barriers to viral infections in different anatomical structures of the placenta (decidua and chorionic part) [29]. Although trophoblasts are usually resistant to viral infections [30], we have previously shown that MPXV infects and replicates within them (JEG‐3 cell line and healthy primary trophoblast) [31]. The decidual and chorionic parts of the placenta house many immune cells that help in the protection of the placenta from infections. Fetus‐derived macrophages (Hofbauer cells) and decidual macrophages from maternal origin represent the first lines of defense during infections by presenting unique properties compared to other macrophages residing in tissues or monocytes within the systemic circulation [32, 33, 34, 35]. Macrophages from placenta present a high phenotype plasticity as they can adapt their phenotype in response to the environment. Macrophage activation, following different stimuli, lead to M1 or M2 polarization profile for pro‐inflammatory and immunoregulatory state, respectively [36, 37, 38]. During In Vitro and In Vivo viral infection, macrophages represent target cells for virus manipulating them to promote their replication and dissemination in the tissue [39, 40]. The role of macrophages at the maternal‐fetal interface against MPXV infection remains unknown.In this study, we show that macrophages are recruited at site of MPXV infection in full‐term placental explant model. We report that isolated naive macrophages are permissive to MPXV infection. Upon infection, tissue‐resident macrophages from placenta secrete high levels of pro‐inflammatory cytokines and has a strong M1 polarization profile that is not found with monocyte‐derived macrophages (MDM) as control. Analysis of antiviral gene expression reveals upregulation of IFNA, but not IFNB, gene and antiviral effectors genes showing that MPXV induces an antiviral response in macrophages that are unable to clear the virus. Our study highlights the role of macrophages at the foeto‐maternal environment during the vertical transmission of MPXV.2Materials and Methods2.1Cell Isolation and CultureVero E6 cells (ATCC CRL‐1586) were cultivated in minimal essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and 1% l‐glutamine (M10 medium) (Life Technologies).Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from healthy donors (buffy coats) by density‐gradient centrifugation using Ficoll (Eurobio) at 800 × g for 30 min as previously described [41]. PBMCs were cryopreserved at −80°C in 90% FBS supplemented by 10% dimethyl sulfoxide in isopropanol freezing container (Sigma‐Aldrich).Monocytes were purified from PBMCs using MACS magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec) coated with anti‐CD14 antibody and cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium (RPMI)−1640 containing 10% FBS, 2 mM l‐glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies) [42]. Monocytes were differentiated into macrophages (MDM) in RPMI‐1640 containing 10% inactivated human AB‐serum (MP‐Biomedicals), 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 50 μg/mL streptomycin for 3 days. After washes, cells were cultured for 4 additional days in RPMI‐1640 containing 10% FBS and 2 mM glutamine. MDM purity (98.2%) was assessed by flow cytometry.Macrophages were isolated from full‐term entire placenta tissue as previously described [43, 44]. Briefly, placenta tissue was digested in Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS, Life Technologies), DNase I 2.5 mM, and 2.5% trypsin (Life Technologies), twice 40 min under agitation. Cell suspension was filtered through 100‐μm pores to obtain total placental cells. Placental cells were deposited on a Ficoll cushion (Eurobio) and centrifuged at 700 × g for 20 min at 4°C to collect mononuclear cells. Macrophages were isolated using magnetic beads coated with anti‐CD14 antibodies. Macrophages were then cultivated in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM)‐F12 supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 50 μg/mL streptomycin for 24 h.2.2MPXV Production and Cell InfectionThe IHUMPXV8 strain was the eighth isolated from a rectal swab of a man infected during the 2022 monkeypox epidemic in Marseille. IHUMPXV8 strain was obtained after Vero E6 cells infection as previously described [31]. In some experiments, MPXV was heat‐inactivated at 65°C for 3 h.Monocyte, MDM, and macrophage at 1.105/well were infected with MPXV viral suspension at multiply of infection (MOI 1) of 1 for 24, 48 and 72 h using appropriate media without antibiotics.2.3Placenta Explants Culture and InfectionPieces of the entire placenta measuring approximately 1 cm3 were removed from the area between the umbilical cord insertion and the margin of the placenta, including the maternal and fetal sides. Biopsies were rinsed with PBS, cut into approximate 4 mm2 pieces and then transferred to six‐well plates (fetal part at the bottom of the well) containing DMEM F‐12, 10% FBS, 100 units/mL of penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin at 37°C overnight. Explants were infected with 1 × 105 plaque forming units (PFU)/explant during 24 h at 37°C and 5% of CO2, as previously reported [45, 46] Tissues were then harvested at different infection times (24, 48, 72 h), fixed in 4% formaldehyde for 24 h, dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. After deparaffinisation, permeabilization by 0.1% Triton X‐100, treatment with Fc Blockers at 10 μg/mL (FcR blocking Reagent, Miltenyi) for a blocking step during 10 min at room temperature, 2 µm tissue sections were incubated with antibodies directed against MPXV (ACRObiosystem, 1/250) and mouse anti‐CD163 (BioLegend, 1/250) for 1 h at room temperature. Alex Fluor 488‐conjugated phalloidin was used to label F‐actin cytoskeleton and 4′, 6‐diamidino‐2‐phenylindole (DAPI, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for nucleus staining. After extensive washing, tissue sections were incubated with Alexa Fluor 647 anti‐human and Alexa Fluor 488 anti‐mouse (Life Technologies) for 1 h. Coverslips were mounted with Mowiol (F4680, Sigma). Pictures were acquired using an LSM800 Airyscan confocal microscope (Zeiss). Quantification of macrophage and MPXV presence were evaluated with ImageJ, calculating the area of each channel, as well as the intensity of each image. For each fluorescence channel, images were split and threshold using the Otsu automatic thresholding method in ImageJ (version 2.16.0). Threshold values were adjusted to include all positive signals and exclude background, typically ranging from 30 to 255 on an 8‐bit scale. The threshold was applied to create a binary mask, and integrated area and density were measured using the “Analyze Particles” function, with size exclusion set to exclude noise. Background subtraction was performed before thresholding using a rolling ball radius of 30 pixels. For the colocalization quantification, the area of the yellow channel was calculated and plotted over all the MPXV and macrophage channels to obtain a colocalization percentage. The thresholds images were then analyzed using the Coloc2 plugin to calculate Pearson and Manders coefficients, applying the thresholds determined in the pre‐processing step.2.4Viral ReplicationThe infection of cells and virus replication were evaluated as follows. Viral DNA was extracted from infected cells or culture supernatants using EZ1 advanced XL Virus Mini kit v2.0 (Qiagen). Virus detection was performed using a specific program for viral qPCR presented in Table S1. The G2 gene was investigated for the MPXV detection (Table S2), and viral quantification was expressed as cycle threshold (Ct) values.2.5Cell ViabilityCell viability was evaluated using the 3‐[4,5‐dimethylthiazol‐2‐yl]−2,5 diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay (Thermofisher). After 24, 48, 72 and 96 h of MPXV stimulation, 10 μL of MTT (5 mg/mL, Sigma‐Aldrich) were added to the cell culture and incubated at 37°C for 4 h. The resulting formazan crystals were solubilized with 50 μl of dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO) for 30 min at 37°C and quantified using a Tecan infinite 200 plate reader at 570 nm (Tecan).2.6Quantitative Reverse Transcription‐ Polymerase Chain Reaction (qRT‐PCR)Total RNA was extracted from cells (1 × 106 cells/well) using the RNA extraction Kit (Zymo Research) and DNase I treatment as previously described [44]. The quality and quantity of the extracted RNAs were evaluated using a spectrophotometer (Nanodrop Technologies). Reverse‐transcription of isolated RNA was performed using a Moloney murine leukemia virus‐reverse transcriptase kit (Life Technologies) and oligo (dT) primers. The expression of polarization genes was evaluated using real time qPCR, Smart SYBR Green fast Master kit (Roche Diagnostics) and specific validated primers (Table S3). The qPCRs were performed using a CFX Touch Real‐Time PCR Detection System (Bio‐Rad). The results were normalized by the expression of ACTB housekeeping gene and are expressed as relative expression of investigated genes with ΔCt = CtTarget – Ct
ACTB
 as previously described [47].2.7Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM)For electron microscopy, virus‐infected cell cultures in microplates were processed according to Le Bideau et al. [48] Cells were fixed with glutaraldehyde (2.5%) in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer. Resin embedding was microwave‐assisted with a PELCO BiowavePro+ (Ted Pella Inc.), by exchanging 200 µL of the different solutions at each step. Samples were washed two times with a mixture of 0.2 M saccharose/0.1 M sodium cacodylate and post‐fixed with 1% OsO4 diluted in 0.2 M potassium hexa‐cyanoferrate (III)/0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer. After two washes with distilled water, samples were gradually dehydrated by successive baths in 30%, 50%, 70%, 90%, 96%, and 100% ethanol. Substitution with Epon resin (Embed 812 mixed with NMA, DDSA, and DMP‐30 hardener; Electron Microscopy Sciences) was achieved by incubations with 25%, 50%, 75% Epon resin in ethanol and incubations with 100% Epon resin. Polymerization was done in 100% fresh Epon for 72 h at 60°C. All solutions used above were 0.2 μM filtered. Resin blocks were placed in a UC7 ultramicrotome (Leica Biosystems), trimmed to pyramids, and ultrathin 100 nm sections were cut and placed on HR25 300 Mesh Copper/Rhodium grids (TAAB, Reading). Sections were contrasted according to Reynolds. Electron micrographs were obtained on a Tecnai G2 TEM (Thermo‐Fischer/FEI) operated at 200 keV equipped with a 4096 × 4096 pixels resolution Eagle camera (FEI).2.8Enzyme‐Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)Monocyte, MDM, and macrophage were stimulated with virus for 24 h. TNF‐α (Invitrogen), IL‐1β (R&D Systems), IL‐10 and IL‐6 (Clinisciences) levels were quantified in cell supernatants with appropriate immunoassays according to the manufacturer's instructions. The sensitivity was 8 pg/mL for TNF‐α, 0.125 pg/mL for IL‐1β, 15.4 pg/mL for IL‐6 and 3.9 pg/mL for IL‐10. Cytokine concentrations were normalized to protein content.2.9Statistical AnalysisStatistical analysis was performed using R software version 4.1.1 (R Foundation for Statistical Computing). Statistical comparisons were performed using nonparametric Mann‐Whitney U test or nonparametric Kruskal‐Wallis test. The Mann‐Whitney U test is used to compare two independent groups, and the Kruskal‐Wallis's test is an extension of the Mann‐Whitney test for more than two independent groups. Without the limitations of parametric testing, nonparametric tests are employed to ensure accurate analysis. RT‐PCR data including principal component analysis (PCA) and hierarchical clustering of gene expression were analyzed using the ClustVis webtool. All tests were two‐sided. Differences were considered statistically significant at p < 0.05.3Results3.1MPXV Infects Macrophages at the Maternal‐Fetal InterfaceAs fetal and placental lesions were reported following vertical transmission of MPXV in infected pregnant women [18], we investigated the local inflammatory response at the maternal‐fetal interface. First, we cultivated at term‐placental explants from healthy donors and infected them with MPXV. As illustrated in the Figure 1, we observed MPXV in the placenta tissue and recruitment of macrophages at the site of infection (Figure 1A). Over time, MPXV (Figure 1B) and macrophage (Figure 1C) increased suggesting that the infection of placental explants led to the recruitment of site of infection by macrophages. Interestingly, the virus burden and the number of macrophages over time were positively correlated (R = 0.9974, p = 0.0458) (Figure 1D). Also, we observed a colocalization between MPXV and macrophages, suggesting that recruited macrophages are infected (Figure 1E).Figure 1MPXV infects macrophages. At‐term placental explant from healthy woman was incubated ex vivo with MPXV with 1 × 105 plaque forming units (PFU) for 24, 48 and 72 h. (A) Representatives' illustrations of confocal microscopy of infected at‐term placental explants illustrating the presence of MPXV in red, macrophages (CD163+ cells) in green and nuclei in blue. White arrows illustrate infected macrophages. (B–D) The presence of (B) MPXV and (C) macrophages were monitored over time at 24‐, 48‐ and 72‐h postinfection. (C) Correlation between MPXV and macrophage fluorescent signaling was evaluated over time. (E) The presence of infected macrophages was evaluated through the quantification of the colocalization between the markers to identify MPXV and CD163.We then isolated macrophages from at term‐placenta of healthy donors and infected them In Vitro with MPXV. We used MDMs and monocytes as controls. We first confirmed the infection of the different cell types by transmission electron microscopy (Figure 2A). Monocytes, monocytes‐derived macrophages (MDM) and macrophages were incubated with the MPXV for 24 h. A1 we can see a monocyte with MPXV particles visible inside the cell. A2 (zoom in on image A1) we can clearly see 2 particles in vesicles (located with black arrows), one with a vesicle either forming or detaching to release the particle. A3 shows the infection of an MDM with MPXV particles. A4 (zoom in on image A3) also shows 2 particles in vesicles (localized with black arrows), one showing a possible release of the MPXV particle, and very close to mitochondria. A5 shows several MFMs with several particles inside a cell. C (zoom in on image A6) shows several particles in different vesicles (localized with black arrows), including one close to the nucleus, showing an invagination. As illustrated by confocal microscopy, MPXV was found inside macrophages as well as MDMs and monocytes (Figure 2B). Surprisingly, although macrophages were found infected, the virus load over time did not present significant differences (from 24 to 96 h, p = 0.333). In contrast, monocytes (p < 0.0001) and MDMs (p = 0.0004) infection increased over time (Figure 2C). Ninety‐6 h postinfection, MPXV replication was moderate for all investigated cells (Figure 2D) with 7.4% for macrophage (p = 0.0157), 3.8% for MDM (p = 0.0003) and 3.05% for monocytes (p = 0.0252) compared to 24 h postinfection. MPXV infection impacted on cell viability (all, p < 0.0001) (Figure 2E). A moderate cell mortality was observed for macrophage populations in contrast to monocytes. Over time, MPXV resulted in a 42% decrease in cell viability for monocytes, compared to 27% and 23% for MDMs and macrophages, respectively.Figure 2MPXV infects and replicates in macrophages. Monocytes, monocytes‐derived macrophages (MDM) and full‐term naïve macrophages were incubated with the MPXV (1 multiplicity of infection) during 24, 48 and 72 h. (A) Representative's illustrations of electron microscopy of infected cells during 24 h. (B) Representatives' illustrations of confocal microscopy of infected cells with MPXV in red, F‐actin in green and nuclei in blue. (C) Viral RNA was quantified at 24, 48 and 72 h in infected cells and expressed as Cycle threshold (Ct) values. Data from n = 3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. ≠≠
p < 0.001, ≠≠≠
p < 0.0001, ≠≠≠≠
p < 0.00001 (compared to 24 h), *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.0001 (between investigated cells). (D) Viral RNA was quantified at 24, 48 and 72 h in supernatants from infected cells and expressed as cycle threshold (Ct). Data from n = 3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. ≠
p < 0.05, ≠≠
p < 0.001, ≠≠≠
p < 0.0001 (compared to 24 h), *p < 0.05 (between investigated cells). (E) Cytopathic effect was quantified at 24, 48 and 72 h and expressed as percentage of cell viability. Data from n = 3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. ≠
p < 0.05, ≠≠
p < 0.001, ≠≠≠
p < 0.0001, ≠≠≠≠
p < 0.00001 (compared to 24 h), *p < 0.05, **p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 (between investigated cells).Compared to monocytes, macrophages infection (macrophage from placenta and MDM) led to moderate MPXV replication and cell cytotoxicity. These results suggest that MPXV infects myeloid cells including macrophages.3.2MPXV Induces Pro‐Inflammatory Cytokine Production by MacrophagesWe next assessed the ability of macrophages to produce pro‐inflammatory cytokines, IL‐6, TNF, IL‐1β and anti‐inflammatory cytokines such as IL‐10 in supernatants from infected cells. Following MPXV infection of macrophages, the pro‐inflammatory cytokines including IL‐6 (p < 0.0001) and TNF (p < 0.0001) were increased as compared to unstimulated cells (Figure 3A). Similar results were observed in monocytes (IL‐6, p < 0.0001; TNF, p < 0.0001) and in a more attenuated manner in MDMs (IL‐6, p = 0.0006; TNF, p = 0.0128). Surprisingly, IL‐1β level was significantly decreased in MPXV‐infected macrophages (p < 0.0001) and monocytes (p < 0.0001), but not in MDMs (p = 0.9550). Interestingly, only macrophages exhibited a significant decrease of IL‐10 (p = 0.0078) (Figure 3B). In contrast, MPXV led to increased secretion of IL‐10 by MDMs (p = 0.0085). These findings demonstrate that macrophages initiate a pro‐inflammatory response to MPXV infection.Figure 3MPXV induces pro‐inflammatory cytokine production by macrophages. Monocytes, monocytes‐derived macrophages (MDM) and macrophages were incubated with the MPXV (1 multiplicity of infection) during 24, 48 and 72 h. (A, B) (A) Pro‐ and (B) anti‐ inflammatory cytokine levels were determined in supernatants of infected cells by immunoassays 24 h postinfection. Data from n = 3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. **p < 0.001, ****p < 0.00001. The sensitivity was 8 pg/ml for TNF‐α, 0.125 pg/ml for IL‐1β, 15.4 pg/mL for IL‐6 and 3.9 pg/mL for IL‐10.3.3MPXV Infected‐Macrophages Exhibit M1 Polarization ProfileNext, we aimed to decipher the inflammatory state of MPXV infected‐macrophages by the investigation of the M1 and M2 polarization profile. The principal component analysis revealed that the response of macrophages to MPXV infection is different from MDMs (Figure 4A). Indeed, MPXV‐stimulated cells were offset from all other investigated conditions. Hierarchical clustering validated this finding (Figure 4B). Interestingly, resting macrophages clustered on the same branch as cells incubated with the heat‐inactivated MPXV. At the opposite, we observed the response of MDMs stimulated or not by MPXV (live and heat‐inactivated). In the middle and on a separate branch, we found the cluster of macrophages stimulated by MPXV. Focusing on this cluster, we showed a clear overexpression of M1 genes, IFNG, IDO1, CD86, NOS2, OAS1, CD80, IL6, TNF, except for IL1B and RSAD2, suggesting that MPXV infection led to a M1 profile for macrophages. Compared to resting macrophages, MPXV led to significant increase of M1 genes including IL6 (p = 0.0104), TNF (p = 0.0477), NOS2 (p = 0.0003), IDO1 (p = 0.0002), CD80 (p = 0.0052), CD86 (p = 0.0188) (Figure 4C). No differences were observed following the stimulation of macrophages by heat‐inactivated MPXV compared to resting cells. Nevertheless, macrophages stimulated by live MPXV was associated with significant increase of IL6 (p = 0.0098), TNF (p = 0.0254, NOS2 (p < 0.0001), IDO1 (p = 0.0002), CD80 (p = 0.0188), CD86 (p = 0.0188) compared to heat‐inactivated MPXV, suggested that inactivated virus retained the ability of macrophages to polarize into an M1 profile. Same profile was observed for two M1 genes specific for macrophage from placenta RSAD1 and OAS1 (Figure S1). We observed significant decreased expression of IL1B transcripts by MPXV infected‐macrophages (p < 0.0001), but not with heat‐inactivated virus, concordant with decreased IL‐1β secretion (Figure 4D and Figure 3A). Same observations were observed for MPXV‐infected monocytes (Figure S2A and Figure 3A) Of note, no differences were observed for IFNG transcripts for macrophages, but MPXV led to a significant increase of IFNG in monocytes (Figure S2A). Focusing on M2 polarization profile, MPXV infection led only to the under‐expressed of CD206 by macrophages stimulated by the inactivated virus thus amplifying the M1 profile (Figure 4D). This suppression of the expression of anti‐inflammatory genes is also observed by monocytes after infection with MPXV (Figure S2B). In contrast, MPXV infected‐MDMs presented significant increase of IL‐10 (p = 0.0279) and CD163 (p = 0.0006) expression. These results show that compared to MDM, macrophages respond to MPXV infection through initiation of a pro‐inflammatory state characterized by an M1 polarization profile.Figure 4MPXV infected‐macrophages present an M1 polarization profile. Monocytes, monocytes‐derived macrophages (MDM) and macrophages were incubated with the MPXV or heat‐inactivated MPXV (1 multiplicity of infection) for 8 h. (A, B) Gene expression data are presented as (A) principal component analysis and (B) hierarchical clustering obtained using the ClustVis webtool. (C, D) The expression genes of (C) inflammatory and (D) immunoregulatory genes are expressed as relative quantity (RQ). Data from n = 3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001, ****p < 0.0001.3.4MPXV Induces the Expression of Some Component of Antiviral Response of Maternal‐Fetal Interface MacrophagesFinally, we investigated if infection of macrophages was associated to an antiviral response against MPXV through the evaluation of expression of several antiviral effectors and type I IFN genes. Macrophages response to MPXV infection was distinct from that observed when cells were incubated In Vitro with heat‐inactivated MPXV or in resting conditions (Figure 5A). The principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering indicated that the response of macrophages to MPXV infection was also distinct from MPXV infected‐MDMs suggesting a specific modulation of component of the antiviral response for the placental population (Figure 5B). We observed increased expression of IFNA (p = 0.0096) transcripts while IFNB and IFNB1 were not modulated in macrophages following MPXV stimulation (Figure 5C). Interestingly, heat‐inactivated MPXV significantly modulated the expression in macrophages of IFNB (p < 0.0001) and IFNB1 (p = 0.0008) but in very small quantities compared to IFNA. Expression of IFIT1 (p = 0.0147), IFIT2 (p = 0.0118), IFIT3 (p = 0.0135) and IFIH1 (p = 0.0001) transcripts was induced in response to MPXV in macrophages (Figure 5D). No differences were observed in MDMs. In contrast, the virus induced a modulation of the antiviral response and type I IFN genes by infected‐monocytes (Figure S3A, S3B). These findings show that, compared to MDMs, macrophages respond specifically to MPXV infection through a modulation of some components of the antiviral response.Figure 5Macrophages present an antiviral reply against MPXV infection. Monocytes, monocytes‐derived macrophages (MDM) and macrophages were incubated with the MPXV or heat‐inactivated MPXV (one multiplicity of infection) for 8 h. (A, B) Gene expression data are presented as (A) principal component analysis and (B) hierarchical clustering obtained using the ClustVis webtool. (C, D) The expression genes of (C) type I IFN and (D) antiviral genes are expressed as relative quantity (RQ). Data from n = 3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.001, ***p < 0.0001, ****p < 0.00001.4DiscussionCases reported identify vertical transmissions of MPXV in infected pregnant woman to the fetus inducing fetal complications, such as diffuse skin lesions, hepatomegaly, hydrops, and signs of viral replication in several organs, and the presence of the virus at high rates within the placenta [18, 23]. Our study reports for the first time the ability of MPXV to infect and spread within placental tissue through an ex vivo placental explant infection model. Following the infection of the placental tissue, macrophages are largely recruited at the site of infection and that they are easily infected. It has been previously reported that other immune cells are present at the site of infection such as dendritic cells and lymphocytes (T and B) [11]. It would be interesting to investigate the recruitment of these cell populations and their role in controlling infection at the materno‐fetal interface.Using full‐term placental explant model, macrophages were recruited at site of infection. We have previously shown that trophoblasts, the main placental cells, represent a target of MPXV in placental tissue [31]. After MPXV infection of isolated primary trophoblasts we decipher the infection and replication cycle. Placental tropism of poxviruses has previously been reported. The full‐term trophoblasts infection by Vaccinia virus (VAC) has been identified with a deleterious impact on the infected cell like cytopathic change, cytoplasmic condensation and cell rounding [49]. In contrast to trophoblasts [31], we show that MPXV infection induces moderate mortality of macrophages in which we observed a moderate virus replication suggesting that macrophages could constitute a niche for virus.The polarization profile of macrophages is critical for an effective immune response against pathogen evasion. Interestingly, some pathogens can modulate the polarization profile of macrophages to facilitate their dissemination and pathogenesis. Here, we reported that MPXV lead to a clear M1 polarization of macrophages not found with MDMs. Several In Vitro and In Vivo studies of HIV‐1 infected macrophages reported a M1 polarization profile with a large secretion of pro‐inflammatory cytokines [50, 51, 52]. HIV‐1 infection of macrophages polarized in M1 (by IFN‐g or TNF‐a) before infection leads to significant containment of virus replication [51, 53]. Interestingly the restimulation by IFNγ or TNF‐α of M1‐polarized macrophages already infected with HIV‐1 lead to a quasi‐silent infection inhibiting virus replication down to very low levels for several weeks [54] suggesting a state of virus quiescence within activated macrophages. This M1 polarization of HIV‐1 infected macrophages is reversed to M2 polarization allowing the virus to use macrophages as a reservoir for dissemination [55, 56]. These different macrophage polarization states are related to acute and chronic forms found in HIV‐infected patients [56]. The strong M1 polarization of MPXV‐infected macrophages without elimination and with modest replication of the virus could suggest a control of macrophages with the pathogen profile whose mechanisms remain to be explored.Previous studies report that poxviruses (VACV and modified vaccinia virus Ankara [MVA]) induce direct apoptosis in macrophages (murine and human) [57, 58] suggesting an inflammasome activation [59] mediated by caspase 1 that converts the pro‐form of cytokine, IL‐1β [60]. MVA‐induced IL‐1β production has been reported as a function of the signaling of the inflammasome activating caspase 1 [61] reinforcing the link between IL‐1β and apoptosis in infected cells. Indeed, in a local infection model, MVA‐activated inflammasome following macrophages infection lead to inflammation and cell death [59]. Interestingly, MPXV induces an inhibition of transcriptomic IL‐1β expression and secretion by macrophages. In contrast, MPXV infection of MDM does not affect transcriptional expression and secretion of IL‐1β. These data suggest that MPXV prevents apoptosis of macrophages by blocking the IL‐1β pathway in macrophages to impair their apoptosis, reinforcing the hypothesis that these cells could be a niche for viral replication and dissemination as previously reported for VACV [17]. Further research is needed to investigate this hypothesis.Our study shows a specific antiviral response of macrophages following MPXV infection. The investigation of the IFN‐associated gene shows that MPXV infection induces a slight increase in the expression of these genes by the macrophages. This modulation is specific to macrophages because no differences are observed with MDM. IFNs type I are involved in the direct antiviral action of infected cells [62]. Our data indicate a MPXV impact of IFN type I genes with an increase in IFNA and not IFNB. Poxviruses present an ability to target this pathway via the expression of intracellular proteins such as eIF‐2α homologous K3 and the double‐stranded RNA‐binding protein E3 [63, 64]. This virus manipulates this IFN pathway by the expression IFNα/β‐binding protein (IFNα/βBP), a secreted IFN decoy receptor, which prevents interaction with cellular receptors by binding to IFNs [65, 66, 67] and protect cells from the antiviral effects of IFN. This may be related to the small decrease in viability of macrophages following MPXV infection. Finally, when macrophages are incubated with the attenuated virus, IFNA is decreased while IFNB is strongly expressed suggesting that the antiviral response mediated by type I IFN is dependent on the virulence of MPXV. Studies are needed to evaluate MPXV‐mediated activation and inhibition pathways that interfere on IFN‐associated genes including IFNs type I inducing a specific antiviral response as previously reported [68].In conclusion, our study showed that MPXV infects myeloid cells including macrophages. Compared to monocytes and MDM, viral replication and cellular cytotoxicity remains moderate in macrophages suggesting that these cells could serve as a niche for the virus. Interestingly, we reported a specific pro‐inflammatory state of macrophages with a modulation of some components of the antiviral response following MPXV infection. Future work will be required to determine the specificity of macrophages compared to myeloid cells during MPXV infection.Author ContributionsJonatane Andrieu, Margaux Valade realized experiments. Marion Lebideau, Bernard La Scola, Nathalie Wurtz provided virus strain and expertise. Florence Bretelle provided the placentas collection. Soraya Mezouar, Jean‐Louis Mège supervised manuscript preparation and mentorship.Ethics StatementThis prospective observational study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and the French law on research involving humans. The protocol of the study was approved by an independent national review board (number 08‐12).ConsentAll patients provided written informed consent. Patients were recruited at the Gynecology‐Obstetrics Department of the Conception Hospital (Marseille, France). The manipulation of the MPXV strain and its nucleic acids was carried out according to ANSM (French National Agency for the Safety of Medicines and Health Products), authorization AMO‐168522023.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.Supporting information
20250429_Supplemental tables.
Figure S1 M1 gene expression. Monocytes, monocytes‐derived macrophages (MDM) and macrophages were incubated with the MPXV or heat‐inactivated MPXV (1 multiplicity of infection) for 8 hours. The expression of investigated genes was expressed as relative quantity (RQ). Data from n=3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05, **p< 0.001.
Figure S2 Pro‐ and anti‐inflammatory genes expression by MPXV‐infected monocytes. Monocytes were incubated with the MPXV or heat‐inactivated MPXV (1 multiplicity of infection) for 8 hours. (A‐B) The expression genes of (A) inflammatory and (B) immunoregulatory genes are expressed as relative quantity (RQ). Data from n=3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05, **p< 0.001, ***p< 0.0001.
Figure S3 Antiviral and IFN genes expression by MPXV‐infected monocytes. Monocytes were incubated with the MPXV or heat‐inactivated MPXV (1 multiplicity of infection) for 8 hours. (A‐B) The expression genes of (A) type I IFN and (B) antiviral genes are expressed as relative quantity (RQ). Data from n=3 donors were expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05, **p< 0.001, ***p< 0.0001.


Title: Infections at the maternal–fetal interface: an overview of pathogenesis and defence

IntroductionInfections during pregnancy can be associated with devastating consequences to the pregnant mother and developing fetus. Vertical transmission, defined as infection of the fetus from the maternal host, is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in pregnancy. In some cases, bacterial, viral and parasitic infections induce dire outcomes in the fetus. The sequelae of infections in pregnancy include teratogenic effects, which cause congenital anomalies; growth restriction, stillbirth, miscarriage and neonatal death; prematurity; and maternal morbidity (Fig. 1). Vertical transmission of pathogens across the maternal–fetal interface can cause fetal infection, which can disrupt organogenesis and is associated with congenital anomalies of every major organ system (Table 1). Congenital anomalies are present in ~3% of live births and the proportion attributable to infection is poorly characterized1–3.Fig. 1Routes of transmission across the placenta and consequences of infection.a | TORCH (Toxoplasma gondii, other, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus) pathogens can access the intra-amniotic compartment through multiple mechanisms, including direct transplacental transmission, placental damage or disruption and/or fetal–maternal haemorrhage. In addition, pathogens can be transmitted by ascending the genital tract. b | Infections in pregnancy can affect the maternal host, fetus and/or the placenta itself. The results of infection and the inflammatory response have consequences at each site.Table 1TORCH pathogens and the hallmarks of their infectionsPathogenMode of transmissionHallmarks of congenital infectionBacteriaListeria monocytogenesContaminated foodStillbirth/pregnancy loss; preterm delivery; neonatal sepsisTreponema pallidumSexualStillbirth/pregnancy loss; low birthweight; fetal hepatosplenomegaly; developmental delay; saddle nose deformity; rhinitis; dental deformities; chorioretinitis; anaemia; rash; dilated bowel; skin thickening; periostitis; bone fractures and demineralizationStreptococcus agalactiaeCommensalNeonatal sepsisStaphylococcus aureusCommensalNeonatal sepsisEscherichia coliCommensalNeonatal sepsisVirusesCytomegalovirusFaecal–oralChorioretinitis; low birthweight; hearing loss; developmental delay; anaemia/thrombocytopenia; rash; stillbirth/pregnancy loss; ventriculomegaly; microcephaly; intracerebral calcification; echogenic bowel/abdominal calcifications; normalHerpes simplex virus 1 and 2Sexual or oral contactNeonatal meningitis; dermatological lesions; ventriculomegaly; microcephaly; intracerebral calcifications; chorioretinitis; optic atrophy; limb dysplasiaVaricella zoster virusRespiratory dropletsIUGR; limb abnormalitiesLymphocytic choriomeningitis virusFomites (rodent based)Ventriculomegaly/hydrocephalus; developmental delay; motor and sensory deficits; chorioretinitis; hearing lossZika virusArbovirus (Aedes species, sexual, blood borne)Microcephaly; IUGR; hepatosplenomegaly; intrahepatic calcifications; ventriculomegaly; intracerebral calcifications; echogenic bowel; stillbirth/pregnancy lossWest Nile virusArbovirus (Culex species)Chorioretinitis; meningitis/encephalitis; possible lissencephalyRift Valley fever virusArbovirus (Aedes species, Culex species, Anopheles and Mansonia species, contact with contaminated animal materials)Stillbirth/pregnancy loss; preterm deliveryHuman parvovirus B19Respiratory dropletsAnaemia; hydrops; stillbirth/pregnancy lossParasitesPlasmodium falciparumPlasmodium vivaxArthropod vector (Anopheles species)IUGR; preterm delivery; severe hypoglycaemiaToxoplasma gondiiIngestion of contaminated food or oocytesVentriculomegaly; hydrocephalus; intracerebral calcifications; choroid plexus cysts; hydrocephalus; ascites; IUGR; hepatosplenomegalyTrypanosoma cruziArthropod vector (Triatominae subfamily)IUGR; respiratory failure; hepatosplenomegaly; meningitis; heart failure; hydrops; heart disease; megacolonIUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; TORCH, Toxoplasma gondii, other, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus.Pregnancy loss through miscarriage or stillbirth (defined as intrauterine fetal death after 20 weeks) can also be caused by infection. Approximately 10–30% of all stillbirths have an infectious aetiology4–7, although the low rates of diagnostic testing for infections in pregnancy might result in an underestimation of this value. The rate of pregnancy loss is variable with gestational age at infection and by specific pathogen. For example, infection with Treponema pallidum causes pregnancy loss or fetal death in up to 50% of cases8 whereas parvovirus B19 infection causes pregnancy loss or stillbirth in <3%9. The mechanisms of pregnancy loss in the setting of ‘TORCH’ (Toxoplasma gondii, other, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus) infections can be pathogen mediated, placenta mediated and/or can be through inflammation-induced previable delivery. There are also outcomes of congenital infections that do not manifest until after delivery. These can include hearing loss, developmental delays and/or blindness as detailed below.Inflammation initiated by an infection of the maternal host is also a known cause of preterm labour and can result in previable delivery or sequelae of prematurity10 with lifelong consequences to the neonate. Neonates can have sequelae from maternal infections even with full-term development11, demonstrating that the fetal response to infection is not restricted to effects of prematurity. Early onset sepsis, an important cause of neonatal morbidity and mortality particularly in premature or low birthweight infants, is strongly associated with maternal infection12–14.In this Review, we highlight the molecular pathogenic mechanisms of select pathogens that have distinct effects during pregnancy. The acronym TORCH was coined to refer to pathogens known to traverse the maternal–fetal barrier and cause congenital disease in the fetus15. In addition to the traditional TORCH pathogens, we also describe the pathogenesis of emerging pathogens with important sequelae to the pregnant person, fetus and/or neonate.Placental structure and defencesTo understand the mechanisms of vertical transmission, it is crucial to understand the unique structure and function that exist at the maternal–fetal interface. The human placenta is a complex organ composed primarily of specialized fetus-derived cell types. As gestational age-specific differences in placental structure and cellular composition have been reviewed in detail elsewhere16,17, we provide a concise description of human placental structure and development below to provide a framework to address mechanisms of pathogenesis. An overview of the structure of the maternal–fetal interface is shown in Fig. 2a.Fig. 2Structure and cellular composition of the maternal–fetal interface.a | The structure of the maternal–fetal interface includes the maternal decidua and the fetus-derived placenta. The maternal uterine microvasculature is remodelled to form spiral arteries, which deliver blood to chorionic villi in the intervillous space. b | The placenta undergoes a series of rapid morphological changes throughout gestation. In early pregnancy (left), the blastocyst differentiates into the embryo and the trophectoderm, the earliest cell type that will form the placenta. The invasive trophoblasts begin to invade the decidua, where the early syncytiotrophoblast forms and infiltrates into the endometrium. Throughout the first trimester (middle), chorionic villi form and remain immature until the later stages of this trimester. Immature villi are covered in the syncytiotrophoblast layer, with a contiguous layer of cytotrophoblasts lying below this layer. The stroma of the villi in the first trimester contains fetal vessels, which begin to form at ~6–8 weeks of gestation. The maternal microvasculature undergoes extensive remodelling during the first trimester, with the placenta transitioning to haemochorial at the end of this stage of gestation. In the second and third trimesters (right), chorionic villi mature and remain covered by the syncytiotrophoblast. However, unlike the immature villi of the first trimester, the cytotrophoblast layer becomes discontinuous in the later stages of gestation. At this stage, the fetal microvasculature is fully developed, and the villous stroma becomes enriched in fetus-derived Hofbauer cells, which reduce in number closer to full-term.The human placenta develops when the fetus-derived trophoblasts, the main cell type that comprises the placenta, form the trophectoderm (Fig. 2b). The trophectoderm forms a cellular barrier early in development to prevent infection of the embryo. The process of placental development continues rapidly from that point onwards and is not fully complete until the end of the first trimester, undergoing a series of remarkable morphological changes (reviewed in ref.18). These changes result in the development of chorionic villi, which form the primary contact between the fetus-derived placenta and the maternal blood supply that will eventually bathe these structures.Trophoblast stem cells give rise to cytotrophoblasts (CTBs), the proliferative mononuclear cells of the placenta, and the syncytiotrophoblast (STB), a multinucleated contiguous cell layer that covers the entire surface of placental chorionic villi. During the first trimester, the placenta undergoes substantial morphological changes that result in the villous structure it will have for the remainder of pregnancy (Fig. 2b). The end of the first trimester also marks the crucial transition to a haemochorial placenta, wherein maternal blood directly contacts the fetus-derived placenta. This process requires extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) to remodel the maternal microvasculature, which will ultimately allow for delivery of maternal blood to the surface of the placental chorionic villi. This is a crucial point as we discuss mechanisms of microbial vertical transmission, which could differ markedly between the first trimester, when there is no direct contact between the placenta and maternal blood, and the later stages of pregnancy once the haemochorial placenta is established.The STB is the foremost barrier against the haemochorial spread of infectious agents, particularly from the point of the establishment of a haemochorial placenta. As the proliferative CTBs lie subjacent to the STB, they also benefit from the protection of this fused cell layer. Chorionic villi contain additional barriers to infection that reside in the villous stroma, including fetus-derived macrophages (Hofbauer cells) and the fetal microvasculature, which must be breached for an infectious agent to reach fetal blood. Recent work also suggests that maternally derived immune cell types are in close proximity to the fetus-derived placenta and may thus impart an additional layer of immune protection19. Thus, when considering mechanisms of microbial vertical transmission, it is important to remember that transmission to the fetus requires infection of multiple cell types and/or breaching of cellular barriers, the most formidable of which is the STB, as is discussed below. Given its central role in protecting the fetus, it is perhaps not surprising that the placenta has evolved highly efficient mechanisms of antimicrobial defence. In the following sections, we review key physical and immunological mechanisms of placental defence from infection.Physical defencesAs described above, the STB covers the entirety of the chorionic villous surfaces. The STB contains upwards of 60 billion nuclei and has a surface area of 5 m2 in mid-gestation and 11–12 m2 at full-term20 — a single cell layer roughly the size of a small bedroom! The very nature of the fused STB provides a powerful barrier to microbial transmission, given that many pathogens bypass other cellular barriers by directly or indirectly weakening cell–cell junctions (reviewed in ref.21). In addition to a complete lack of cell junctions, the surface of the STB also poses a barrier to microbial attachment and invasion given the presence of a dense cortical actin network subjacent to the brush border (Fig. 3). Thus, the shared physical nature of the STB provides common structural mechanisms to resist diverse microorganisms. However, it should be noted that the STB is not the sole cellular barrier present in the human placenta. The stroma of the placenta also contains defensive barriers, including the microvasculature of fetal blood vessels, which would also need to be breached for microorganisms to access fetal blood. The physical defences of the villous surface restrict the attachment and/or invasion of non-viral pathogens, including Listeria monocytogenes and T. gondii22–24, but viruses appear to be capable of entering primary trophoblasts, suggesting that some viruses might overcome the physical barriers to microbial entry25–28.Fig. 3Placental defences against pathogens.Given its role as a primary barrier to the haematogenous spread of infectious agents, the human placenta has evolved disparate and non-overlapping mechanisms of antimicrobial defence. These can be separated into at least three categories, physical defences (left), the constitutive release of antimicrobial effectors (middle) and/or robust innate immune response to infection (right). Physical defences include the lack of cell–cell junctions of the syncytiotrophoblast layer, preventing inflammation-mediated damage of intercellular junctions that could compromise the integrity of this barrier. Additional physical defences include the dense cortical actin network lying sub-apical to the dense brush border of the syncytiotrophoblast. Another form of defence involves the constitutive release of potent antimicrobial effectors such as antiviral microRNAs in extracellular vesicles, cytokines (for example, type III interferons), and antimicrobial peptides (middle). The placenta also responds to pathogens with potent innate immune signalling, which further enhances the release of antimicrobial defence substances (right).Immunological defencesThe deciduaThe maternally facing surface of the placenta is in direct contact with the decidual lining of the uterus, and this leukocyte-rich layer is one of the first lines of immune defence at the maternal–fetal interface. The maternal decidua is in direct and/or indirect contact with fetal membranes, placental villi and the maternal circulation. The decidua can be divided based upon these contact sites — the decidua parietalis lines the uterine wall; the decidua basalis is the site of implantation and villous contact; and the decidua capsularis encases the fetal membrane. The decidual layers contain cytotoxic, helper and regulatory T cells, natural killer (NK) cells, innate lymphoid cells, macrophages and neutrophils29,30. Up to 40% of all decidual immune cells are leukocytes in the first trimester, and a leukocyte-rich infiltrate is also seen in parturition30–32. The composition of decidual cell populations displays gestational age-specific variation and is important for trophoblast invasion and for maintaining and establishing the placental vascular bed33,34. As such, particularly in the first trimester, decidual cells remain in close proximity to invading EVTs, and provide maternally derived immune defences at these sites (reviewed in ref.35). Despite its composition as an immune cell-enriched site, the decidua has been suggested to be a key reservoir for TORCH pathogens. Use of decidual explants and data from pathological examinations of clinical specimens suggest that the decidua may be a primary site of replication for several TORCH pathogens including cytomegalovirus (CMV)36, Zika virus (ZIKV)37 and L. monocytogenes38, and could thus form a reservoir for pathogens at the key site of the maternal–fetal interface.The interaction of the decidua with various pathogens in vivo is complex, as decidual leukocytes have distinct phenotypic differences from those in the peripheral circulation. Maternally derived decidual macrophages exhibit unique properties compared with other macrophages resident in tissue or systemically circulating monocytes19,30,39,40. Studies suggest that the decidual composition of immune cells and their interaction with trophoblasts may alter their susceptibility to pathogens. For example, decidual NK cells possess the remarkable ability to transfer granulysins to trophoblasts to protect from L. monocytogenes infection without actively killing these cells41. These and other studies highlight the often unique and complex strategies of antimicrobial protection that exist at the maternal–fetal interface.The immune cells in the decidua are in contact with decidual stromal cells, which can influence immune cell behaviour. In particular, the immune cell-rich decidua has altered activity in models of co-culture, reflecting that the complex architecture of the immune cell network within the decidual stroma modulates the immune inflammatory response. For example, decidual stromal cell function is altered with co-culture with macrophages42, dendritic cells and NK cells in a prostaglandin-dependent manner43. Moreover, the response of decidual stromal cells to pathogen stimulation is different from that of endometrial stromal cells44–46, suggesting that the microenvironment of the placenta has a role in innate immune defences. Decidual explants have been used to demonstrate that CD8+ effector memory T cells and NK cells can regulate decidual stromal CMV47 and herpes simplex virus (HSV)48 infections. These multicellular interactions are difficult to dissect and model but have important implications for understanding the immune landscape at the maternal–fetal interface as each individual component (for example, stromal cell regulation, hormonal microenvironment, composition of leukocytes) might have a role in immune defence against infection.Chorionic villiFetal immune cell populations in placental development and in pregnancy-associated pathologies have been reviewed elsewhere49,50; therefore, we limit our discussion in this section to specific trophoblast-derived defensive strategies.In addition to providing a physical defence from infection, it is also clear that villous trophoblasts form a chemical barrier to microbial vertical transmission. Trophoblasts have robust innate immune activity and secrete immunomodulators that are important for restricting infection (Fig. 3). In the case of viral infection, human trophoblasts constitutively release antiviral interferons that restrict infection in both an autocrine and a paracrine manner51,52, which appears to be specific for the STB. The release of interferons is a highly unique feature of trophoblasts as interferons are generally only induced in response to the detection of a viral infection. As the antiviral effectors of the interferon pathway, interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), can exert potent cytotoxic and pro-inflammatory properties. Trophoblast-derived interferons are exclusively those of the type III interferon family: IFNλ1, IFNλ2 and IFNλ3. In mice, type III interferons also confer protection from viral infections, and deletion of the receptor for these interferons in the placenta sensitizes the fetus to ZIKV infection53. The type III interferon-mediated restriction of infection in mice is tightly associated with gestational age, with the greatest protection occurring after placentation53,54. Moreover, IFNλs delivered prophylactically or therapeutically in the setting of ZIKV infection in mice protect against vertical transmission53,54. In addition to interferons, human trophoblasts also secrete antiviral microRNAs that are packaged into placental exosomes, which confer broad antiviral protection in non-placental recipient cells and can be isolated from the serum of pregnant women25,51,55–57. Given these non-redundant and potent antiviral defences, it is perhaps not surprising that most viruses are unable to directly replicate in the STB. However, it should be noted that the effects of type I interferons (IFNα and IFNβ) may be distinct from those of the type III interferons. Induction of maternal type I interferon signalling has been shown to damage the placenta in mice in vivo and in human ex vivo tissue explants58. Although the mechanisms for these opposing effects have yet to be fully elucidated, at least one ISG, interferon-induced transmembrane protein (IFITM), inhibits fusion of CTBs with the STB59,60, which may indicate that the expression of this and perhaps other ISGs must be tightly regulated in the placenta to prevent interferon-mediated damage.In the case of bacterial or parasitic infection, many studies highlight the resistant nature of the STB, which has largely been attributed to physical barrier properties22–24,61. However, similar to the properties of antiviral resistance, it is clear that the human placenta also uses additional molecular pathways to resist infection by non-viral pathogens. In addition to the constitutive release of antiviral interferons, the human placenta secretes other cytokines that likely function to limit infections in both an autocrine and a paracrine manner. For example, the constitutive activation of the inflammasome in placental trophoblasts results in the constitutive release of cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-18 and IL-1α, which can be found circulating systemically in pregnant women62. In addition, infection of human placental explants with L. monocytogenes robustly induces inflammasome signalling, the inhibition of which sensitizes trophoblasts to infection62. Like the effects of interferons, the paracrine effects of inflammasome-associated cytokines also protect from infection, as placenta-derived IL-1β primes circulating immune cells for subsequent inflammasome activation and protects from L. monocytogenes infection62. By contrast, inflammasome activation in the STB has also been implicated in increased severity of neonatal outcomes associated with placental malaria63, suggesting that similar to interferon signalling, the balance of this signalling is crucial.There is no evidence to suggest that placenta-derived secreted products defend against parasite infections directly. In fact, the same placenta-derived factors that protect against viruses exert no effect on T. gondii infection56. Instead, in the case of T. gondii, the placenta releases diverse immunomodulatory factors including the regulatory T cell chemoattractants C-C motif chemokine 22 (CCL22) and CCL17 in response to infection23 (Fig. 3). However, the impact of this signalling on maternal and/or fetal consequences of infection has yet to be defined.TORCH pathogensAs discussed above, TORCH pathogens make up a limited number of microorganisms with known teratogenic effects. In the following sections, we review key members of this group that fall into the categories of bacteria, viruses and parasites, and the consequences of these infections (Table 1).BacteriaListeria monocytogenesL. monocytogenes is a small Gram-positive bacterium that is transmitted through contaminated food. Listeriosis in pregnancy causes prematurity and stillbirth and enhances maternal morbidity with increased rates of meningitis and sepsis during pregnancy (Table 1). In a recent outbreak in South Africa, the mortality rate for infants was 28% and for pregnant women it was 8%64. Pregnancy-associated morbidity during this outbreak was responsible for 50% of cases presenting to health care64. Despite the immaturity of the fetal immune system in early pregnancy, treatment of L. monocytogenes in the first trimester after exposure has been shown to improve fetal outcomes65–67. By contrast, treatment after the first trimester has not been definitively shown to change the course of the disease for the fetus but is recommended to improve maternal outcomes68. This is likely due to enhanced susceptibility of the fetus to L. monocytogenes infection after the first trimester and suggests that there are gestational age-specific differences in vertical transmission.After entry through the enteric mucosa, L. monocytogenes spreads cell to cell by manipulating actin polymerization. The mechanism of transplacental transmission of the bacterium remains unknown. In ex vivo cultures, the STB is highly resistant to infection24,62. The bacterial virulence factors required for entry into other cells (for example, listeriolysin O and internalin B) are not required for entry into human choriocarcinoma trophoblast cell lines69. The bacterial internalin protein InlA is important for binding to E-cadherin on primary trophoblasts70, but its role in crossing the placental barrier in vivo remains unclear, with differential effects in different animal models71,72. Together, these data suggest that transmission across the placental barrier may require additional, yet uncharacterized, bacterial virulence factors. Accordingly, there was minimal strain variation with respect to the ability to infect the placenta in studies using a competitive in vivo model in guinea pigs73, suggesting that the trophoblast-specific virulence factors are conserved in epidemic strains.After placental colonization, the bacterium spreads to fetal tissues and can be reseeded back to maternal organs74. In mice, actin polymerization through the bacterial protein ActA has been shown to be important for cell-to-cell spread and transmission across the maternal–fetal interface75. The secreted bacterial colonization factor internalin P is important for distorting cells and allowing the bacteria to traverse the basement membrane76, but the mechanisms of transport across the STB to the basement membrane have yet to be characterized. Importantly, fetal infection is associated with placental abscess development and innate immune cell recruitment to the maternal–fetal interface77. Studies in non-human primate models demonstrate that the bacterium is not required to traverse the maternal–fetal barrier to cause placental inflammation, fetal loss and compromise78, suggesting that pregnancy loss may also occur in the absence of bacterial colonization of the fetus.Treponema pallidumT. pallidum is a well-characterized teratogen. This bacterium is 6–20 µm in length, has a small genome of only 1,041 open reading frames and has an outer membrane covering a layer of peptidoglycan but minimal surface-exposed proteins and no lipopolysaccharide79. The lack of surface proteins may facilitate evasion of the immune response and the remarkable longevity of the bacterium in the human host79. T. pallidum can colonize and cause disease in all fetal organ systems and is the causative agent of congenital syphilis (Table 1). More than 50% of women with syphilis have adverse pregnancy outcomes80–82, and fetal transmission causes a wide variety of neonatal pathologies including meningitis, osteochondritis, bone marrow suppression and hydrops83–85 (Table 1). Congenital syphilis is on the rise in the United States, with a reported 1,306 cases in 2018 (ref.86) and is a major cause of infection-mediated fetal loss and neonatal morbidity in the developing world, causing an estimated 150,000 stillbirths, 60,000 neonatal deaths and 100,000 infections of infants annually81,82.The pathophysiology of T. pallidum congenital transmission remains largely unknown. The sequelae of the fetus with congenital syphilis depends both on the maternal stage of infection and the gestational age of the fetus84,85. Congenital transmission occurs less frequently with subsequent pregnancies, an observation known as Kassowitz’s law. This observation suggests that the maternal immune response to T. pallidum can limit the frequency of congenital syphilis, but the vertical transmission risk is never eliminated87–90. This has also been shown in a guinea pig model of congenital syphilis, which is the best-described model for this phenomenon90. Additionally, in the guinea pig model, the fetal IgM response corresponds more with vertical transmission than spirochaetal DNA91, suggesting that the fetal immune response is important in the pathogenesis of congenital syphilis.Inflammation and maceration of placental tissue has been demonstrated in cases of pregnancy loss or intrauterine fetal demise associated with congenital syphilis in the absence of congenital anomalies, suggesting that the up to 50% fetal loss rate associated with maternal syphilis might be attributed to the inflammatory response at the placenta itself92,93. Along with this, the Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction (heightened inflammatory responses that occur with antibiotic treatment of syphilis in pregnancy) is associated with preterm contractions and evidence of uteroplacental insufficiency94, suggesting that placental inflammation has a role in the pathogenesis of preterm delivery associated with syphilis.As discussed above, the placenta forms a barrier that effectively restricts many bacterial pathogens. Although there is evidence that systemic inflammation can cause preterm birth and fever itself can be teratogenic, there is no evidence that other bacterial pathogens (for example, Klebsiella species, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Escherichia coli) routinely traverse the placental barrier and cause fetal infection. These pathogens are important causes of maternal morbidity in the setting of systemic maternal infection (for example, pyelonephritis), but are not major causes of fetal infection, suggesting that the maternal–fetal barrier to multiple bacterial pathogens remains uncompromised in the case of maternal systemic illness and bacteraemia. The mechanisms underlying the antibacterial defences of the placenta in the setting of bacteraemia remain largely uncharacterized.By contrast, there is a subset of well-described bacterial pathogens that ascend the genital tract and cause chorioamnionitis (reviewed in refs95,96). Intra-amniotic infection classically occurs in the setting of ruptured membranes, which suggests that the bridge of the fetal membrane provides an important barrier to fetal infection. Pathogens endemic to the vaginal microflora such as group B Streptococcus (GBS), E. coli and Bacteroides species have been found in placental and neonatal cultures97. Both primate and murine models demonstrate that vaginal microorganisms can traverse the genital tract and cause disseminated disease in the fetal cavity. Typically, infections arise from genitourinary microbiota and can be polymicrobial97,98. To cause disease in the uterine cavity, these bacteria would have to ascend the vaginal microbial biofilm and the antimicrobial cervical mucous plug to contact the fetal membranes and cause an inflammatory response locally.The best-studied microorganism associated with ascending infection and neonatal disease is GBS, which can cause neonatal sepsis with transmission. Screening for colonization and intrapartum prophylaxis with antibiotics decreases the incidence of early onset neonatal sepsis99. GBS biofilms on fetal membranes have been observed100 and it is one of the most commonly cultured bacteria in the setting of intra-amniotic infections97. GBS colonizes the genital tract in ~10–30% of women101. The predilection of some isolates to cause neonatal disease remains unclear, but GBS activates the innate immune neutrophil and macrophage response to initiate cytokine release, cell migration and the development of extracellular traps and bacteriolysis102,103. The mechanisms of pathogenic switching and specific virulence determinants for ascending the genital tract include pili, adhesins and altered regulatory systems (reviewed in refs104,105). E. coli can also adhere to fetal membranes, although to a lesser degree than GBS106. E. coli, like GBS, inhabits the genital and gastrointestinal tract and is commonly isolated in the setting of intra-amniotic infection. With implementation of universal screening and intrapartum prophylaxis with antibiotics to GBS, E. coli has become the most common aetiological agent of late-onset sepsis in neonates97,107. In obstetric isolates, phylogenetic subgroups are variable but genes on pathogenicity islands for type 1 fimbriae and iron acquisition are enriched108, suggesting that horizontal gene acquisition is important to cause disease in pregnancy. Similar to other bacterial pathogens, the specific virulence factors that allow E. coli to cause clinical disease and ascend the reproductive tract during pregnancy remain under-studied.VirusesBoth DNA and RNA viruses can traverse the maternal–fetal interface and cause fetal disease. In the following sections, we discuss key teratogenic viruses and what is known regarding their routes of transplacental transmission and clinical outcomes. Although rubella virus was a major source of congenital disease before successful vaccination efforts, we have restricted our discussion to the most common viruses currently associated with contemporary congenital disease — CMV, HSV1 and HSV2, parvovirus B19, HIV and ZIKV (Table 1).CytomegalovirusCMV is a member of the Herpesviridae family and is one of the most common causes of vertical infections globally. It is the single most common cause of congenital hearing loss in the United States, and the global burden of disease is also high, although likely underestimated109. Like other herpesviruses, CMV enters a latent state after acute infection and can be subsequently reactivated. In the setting of maternal primary infection, there is a ~40% risk of fetal transmission. By contrast, the risk of transmission to the fetus after reactivation is <0.05%, but causes most of the clinical disease110,111. Gestational age-specific variation in infectivity and fetal consequences have been described112, suggesting that alterations in the maternal–fetal interface during gestation regulates the mechanisms of CMV vertical infection. Placental histology in congenital CMV infection ranges from normal to acute and chronic intervillositis113. The classic, owl’s eye viral inclusion bodies occur more frequently in the first and second trimesters than in full-term placentae114.Given that other recent reviews have provided thorough overviews of the mechanisms by which CMV might be vertically transmitted115–117, here we provide a more focused overview. CMV has been shown to infect trophoblasts, but with substantial gestational age-related differences in infectivity28. Given that human CMV does not readily infect rodents, in vivo studies of the mechanisms of CMV vertical transmission are limited to human placental primary cell cultures and/or explant models. Although guinea pig models of CMV infections in pregnancy have been described118, these do not fully recapitulate the phenotype of human CMV infections during pregnancy. Studies of CMV infection in human tissue demonstrate active replication in maternally derived decidua, which may generate a viral reservoir that could enhance the likelihood of CMV crossing the fetal barrier in the setting of primary infection36,119. Specifically, apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide-like 3A (APOBEC3A) has been implicated in control of CMV replication in the decidua, but not in placental villi37. Studies have also shown that CMV may preferentially infect placental pericytes to gain access to the fetus and that this might be a primary mode of infection in the setting of maternal viraemia120. The role that these cells have at the maternal–fetal interface remains largely uncharacterized, but they may represent an important site from which CMV can traverse the placenta and cause congenital infection particularly with advancing gestation.Herpes simplex virusHSV1 and HSV2 can be transmitted to the fetus via the transplacental route, but transmission through contact with a virus-shedding lesion in the genital tract is a far more common mode of vertical transmission. HSV1 and HSV2 are neurotropic and lie dormant in the dorsal root ganglion after primary infection. On reaching the fetus, these viruses are highly teratogenic and are associated with the classic triad of manifestations in skin (aplasia cutis, scarring, erosions), central nervous system (ventriculomegaly, microcephaly, intracranial calcifications) and eyes (chorioretinitis, atrophy), along with skeletal manifestations and fetal loss. A mouse model recapitulates vertical transmission, with fetal loss, congenital malformations and neurotropism, demonstrating that haematogenous dissemination (rather than ascending infection) is responsible for effects on the fetus121.The mechanisms of transplacental transfer of HSV1 and HSV2 are largely uncharacterized. The STB is resistant to HSV1 and HSV2 infection, but EVTs are permissive25,122. Although the HSV entry mediators HveA, HveB and HveC are expressed in EVTs, viral transmission is not blocked by antibodies to HveA122. The maternal surface of the placenta is positive for HSV1 or HSV2 in 9–28% of women who are asymptomatic at the time of delivery without evidence of fetal transmission123,124, suggesting that the placenta and/or maternal immune response presents a barrier to transplacental transmission in women with non-primary infection.Parvovirus B19Parvovirus B19 is a non-enveloped single-stranded DNA virus in the Parvoviridae family. Infection with parvovirus B19 is common during childhood, causing low-grade fever, maculopapular rash and slapped cheek facial rash. Humoral immunity is protective against infection, and 70% of the adult population is immune125. The rate of transmission of maternal parvovirus B19 infection to the fetus is 17–33%, and most fetuses have spontaneous resolution with no sequelae, although ~3% can go on to develop non-immune hydrops from fetal anaemia9. Fetal loss and stillbirth are associated with infection even in the absence of hydrops. The sequelae of infection vary with gestational age, such that infection after 20 weeks confers a 0.5% risk of fetal loss, whereas before 20 weeks the rate is increased 30-fold9.Parvovirus B19 exhibits strong tropism for erythroid precursors and immunohistochemistry demonstrates that after traversing the placenta the virus reaches the fetal endothelium126. The parvovirus B19 VP2 capsid protein has been shown to bind to globoside, which is present on the surfaces of the STB and CTBs127. The VP2 capsid protein has also been shown to bind to villous trophoblast cells through globoside glycolipids128. After viral entry, non-structural protein 1 (NS1) induces apoptosis in cells129. Consistent with this, apoptosis has also been demonstrated in the placenta in severely affected pregnancies, suggesting that fetal demise in the absence of hydrops may result from placental damage that directly affects function130. The rare but classic sequela of parvovirus B19 is non-immune fetal hydrops caused by transient, severe anaemia with loss of both erythrocytes and nucleated erythroid precursors129. Dichorionic twin discordance in infection and in clinical sequelae has been reported131,132, suggesting that the placental and fetal responses are important for limiting clinical disease, but the immune mechanisms by which this occurs are unclear.HIVCongenital transmission of HIV remains associated with global neonatal morbidity. HIV can be vertically transmitted via the transplacental route, during delivery and/or through breastfeeding postnatally. In the absence of antiretroviral therapy (ART), ~25% of infants born to HIV-positive women become infected compared with <2% of those whose mothers are on ART133. The relative contributions of the various routes of vertical transmission suggest that each has a role in congenital HIV infection, but the majority of congenital infections occur with intrapartum transmission and direct exposure to maternal secretions and blood. Ex vivo, chorionic villous explants isolated from both first trimester and full-term placentae support HIV infection, suggesting the possibility that the placenta could be infected during pregnancy134,135. However, although HIV proteins and/or nucleic acids can be detected in placental tissue collected from HIV-positive women, this occurs relatively infrequently, with studies demonstrating that the majority of placentae collected from HIV-positive women are negative for HIV136–138. These data concur with epidemiological data that suggest that, although transplacental transmission of HIV is possible, it is an infrequent (<1%) occurrence139,140. However, maternal co-infection with other pathogens such as CMV or malaria may further increase the risk of vertical transmission and/or adverse outcomes (reviewed in ref.141).Zika virusZIKV is a positive-strand RNA virus in the Flaviviridae family that caused a large outbreak of >2,000 cases of congenital disease in 2015–2016, with an epicentre in Brazil142,143. ZIKV is transmitted through vector-dependent (Aedes aegypti mosquitoes) and vector-independent (for example, sexual, blood transfusion and vertical transmission) routes. Maternal ZIKV infections are associated with a range of fetal clinical outcomes including ventriculomegaly, microcephaly and developmental delays (Table 1), which occur in ~10% of maternally infected patients144. The discrepancy between fetal infection and the diverse neurological sequelae of disease has led to the separation of congenital ZIKV infection and congenital ZIKV syndrome145. Since the initial outbreak, cases of ZIKV congenital disease have waned considerably, suggesting that pre-existing immunity is important for regulating ZIKV infection of the maternal host. ZIKV infection in human placental explants and mouse models suggests clear gestational age differences in transmission efficacy and fetal sequelae, with infection in the first trimester posing the greatest risk37,53,144. Interestingly, twin discordance for placental and neonatal infections has been demonstrated with up to 50% discordance in twin pairs146, and this susceptibility can be recapitulated in vitro after delivery147, suggesting that fetally or placentally derived factors are important for limiting vertical transmission.Like other TORCH pathogens, the mechanisms by which ZIKV crosses the placental barrier remain largely unknown (Fig. 4), despite considerable investigation. Some studies have associated placental cell tropism of ZIKV infection with receptor expression, but receptors that are important in flavivirus binding (for example, the TAM family of receptors) are not important for ZIKV infection in vivo148. In vitro mouse and ex vivo human studies have also suggested that pre-existing antibodies to the related flavivirus dengue virus (DENV), which is co-endemic with ZIKV, enhances ZIKV congenital infection149,150 and facilitates viral traversal across the placenta. However, data from human studies in endemic regions suggest that pre-existing DENV immunity is associated with reduced risk of ZIKV infection151,152, which is supported by work in non-human primate models153,154. By contrast, pre-exposure to ZIKV sensitizes to subsequent risk of severe DENV in humans155. Non-human primate models of ZIKV vertical transmission have provided important insights into the complex nature of maternal–fetal infections with this virus (reviewed in ref.156) and have also enabled studies that investigate neonatal and infant sequelae157. However, even these models have yet to elucidate the precise mechanisms by which the virus traverses the placental barrier. Both animal and in vitro models highlight the multifactorial complexity of vertical transmission of ZIKV and suggest that modelling this phenomenon may be difficult.Fig. 4Possible mechanisms of vertical transmission.The mechanisms by which many TORCH (Toxoplasma gondii, other, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus) pathogens access the fetus are unclear. However, studies suggest that some of these pathogens may use similar pathways to bypass the placental barrier. These mechanisms include infection of extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs; green cells) and/or infection of the maternally derived decidua, such as through direct infection of maternal immune cell populations. Other possible routes include direct infection of transmission across chorionic villi, through direct infection of the syncytium (SYN) or through inflammation-mediated damage of the syncytiotrophoblast layer that disrupts the barrier and allows transmission.Emerging virusesSeveral emerging viruses may have major impacts on the mother and fetus during pregnancy. Although pregnancy is often not well studied in the setting of emerging pandemics, there are data indicating increased severity of maternal infection with Ebola virus (EBOV) and reports of vertical transmission of Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV), severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), West Nile virus (WNV) and Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV).EBOV belongs to the Filoviridae family, which are negative-strand, enveloped RNA viruses. EBOV infections are associated with maternal haemorrhage, preterm labour, miscarriage and maternal and fetal death. Maternal death occurs in 85% of cases with near 100% loss of offspring (stillbirth, miscarriage and neonatal death)158. In addition to causing severe maternal disease, there are also reports suggesting vertical transmission of EBOV. During the 2013–2016 outbreak in West Africa, pregnant women were noted to survive EBOV disease even with clear viraemia, but delivered stillborn infants with elevated viral RNA levels in placental and fetal swabs, suggesting vertical transmission of EBOV159,160. In addition, EBOV antigen has been found in the STB by immunohistochemistry, although this localization alone is insufficient to demonstrate vertical transmission and may instead suggest that the STB successfully restricted access to fetal blood159.RVFV is an arbovirus in the Bunyaviridae family that is transmitted through an arthropod vector and is associated with severe disease in domesticated animals and livestock. In herds, RVFV outbreaks are associated with ‘abortion storms’, in which fetal loss and/or stillbirth are observed in as many as 90–100% of pregnant animals. A single case study has demonstrated vertical transmission in the third trimester in humans, and increased miscarriage and fetal demise in association with RVFV has also been described161,162. In human placental tissue ex vivo, viral replication has been demonstrated in both the STB and in CTBs163,164, but the specific route of vertical transmission in livestock and in humans, and whether these routes are similar, remains unclear.WNV is an arthropod-borne flavivirus associated with marked neurotropic pathology. There have been several case reports of vertical transmission in humans, and a case series demonstrated an association with central nervous system abnormalities (hydrocephalus, microcephaly and lissencephaly)165, but larger case studies are needed to confirm the association, and the frequency of vertical transmission remains unknown. In mouse models, WNV induces ZIKV-like fetal death and disease, suggesting a potential to cause congenital disease in vivo166. In addition, human explant tissue including decidua, chorionic villi and fetal membrane samples are permissive to varying degrees166. In placental villi, EVTs are preferentially infected166 and the STB remains largely resistant to infection166,167, similar to what is described for ZIKV infection. Similar findings with Powassan virus (POWV) suggest that some emerging neurotropic arboviruses have the potential to affect fetal development if vertically transmitted135. By contrast, other arboviruses including chikungunya virus (CHIKV) and Mayaro virus (MAYV) did not cause fetal disease in mice and replicated inefficiently in human placental explants, suggesting differences in the teratogenic potential of emerging arboviruses135.Most recently, the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has highlighted the need to focus on women’s health, particularly during pregnancy. Several case reports from COVID-19-positive pregnant women describe infection of the STB by immunohistochemistry accompanied by placental pathological lesions168,169. Importantly, the vast majority of cases do not demonstrate any evidence of vertical transmission170–173, suggesting that the placenta retains its barrier function even in the setting of severe maternal infection and disease. Thus, despite the magnitude of the pandemic, the risk to the fetus as a result of vertical transmission of SARS-CoV-2 appears to be minimal and there are no data to suggest that SARS-CoV-2 is in any way teratogenic itself.ParasitesThere are several relevant parasitic infections in pregnancy that cause fetal disease globally. These parasites differ in the mode of transmission to the maternal host, but all have substantial implications for global maternal and child health.Toxoplasma gondiiThere are more than 200,000 cases of congenital toxoplasmosis globally each year174. T. gondii infects ~6–70% of fetuses, with maternal infection depending on gestational age at infection, and can be associated with devastating consequences, including ventriculomegaly, intracranial calcifications, chorioretinitis and rarely hydrocephaly174–176. Maternal symptoms occur in only ~5% of cases and clinical sequelae are thus best characterized in studies in which routine antenatal screening is performed, as maternal infection is subclinical. Fetuses infected early in pregnancy are far more likely to display clinical disease. Only 9% of women with seroconversion at the end of pregnancy deliver children with neurodevelopmental delays (in comparison with 25% of those with seroconversion in the second trimester)177.T. gondii infection has been extensively studied at the cellular and molecular level in many non-placental cells. Infection is a multistep process that includes adhesion between T. gondii surface molecules and host cell surface proteoglycans, attachment that is driven by secretion of proteins into the host plasma membrane and invasion into the host cell that is mediated by interactions between parasite surface proteins and parasite proteins secreted onto the cell surface (reviewed in refs178,179). T. gondii also secretes protein effectors into the host cell during infection (reviewed in refs180,181). These diverse effectors alter many fundamental aspects of host cell biology, including innate immune pathways that are important for defensive signalling181. Despite characterization in non-placental cells, the mechanisms of T. gondii vertical transmission remain unclear. The STB displays distinct resistance to T. gondii infection, which occurs at the level of attachment and post-entry replication23,24,61. By contrast, CTBs and EVTs do not display the same degree of resistance23,24, suggesting cell-type specific differences in mechanisms of resistance. In addition to cell-intrinsic defences, trophoblasts also respond to T. gondii infection through the specific induction of various cytokines and chemokines, including the robust induction of the regulatory T cell chemokine CCL22 (ref.23). Remarkably, this induction is not driven by trophoblast sensing, but instead requires the delivery of the T.gondii-derived effector molecular GRA28 (refs23,182). However, it remains unclear what role placenta-derived cytokines or chemokines have in T. gondii pathogenesis and vertical transmission.Plasmodium speciesOf the four malarial species that cause disease in humans, Plasmodium falciparum causes the majority of disease in pregnancy. In areas of low transmission and low pre-existing immunity, congenital infection is symptomatic and causes cerebral malaria, respiratory distress syndrome, refractory hypoglycaemia, and miscarriage and stillbirth. In areas where the parasite is endemic and pre-existing immunity is high, malaria can cause severe maternal anaemia, preterm delivery and fetal growth restriction, and remains a major cause of neonatal mortality183–185. Congenital infection has been reported, and data suggest that perinatal acquisition through vertical transmission also occurs in endemic areas186–188.The Plasmodium parasite has a clear predilection for the placenta. Attachment of infected erythrocytes to the placenta allows the parasite to evade the maternal immune response by changing surface antigens (described in detail below), and histopathological specimens from pathogenic malarial infection contain a substantial number of erythrocytes in the intervillous space with parasites and acute and chronic intervillositis189,190. Owing to placental malarial burden, nutrient transport across the placenta is reduced, which highlights how placental function can be compromised by infection191,192 (Fig. 5).Fig. 5Placental malaria in endemic areas.Schematic of the maternal–fetal interface in an uninfected state (left panel). Schematic of the maternal–fetal interface in the setting of malaria (right panel). The parasite (yellow) accesses the placenta through the maternal circulation. The intervillous space then becomes a site of parasite replication where the parasite undergoes surface antigenic variation, ultimately leading to immune escape and further replication causing maternal anaemia. Maternal anaemia and parasitaemia substantially prevent nutrient transport across the placenta, which can lead to nutrient deprivation for the developing fetus.The mechanisms for placenta-specific binding and sequestration of infected erythrocytes have been relatively well characterized. Plasmodium-infected erythrocytes bind to endothelial receptors for tissue sequestration in non-placental tissues through parasite-encoded variant surface antigens (VSAs) that are expressed by the infected erythrocyte (reviewed in ref.193). Expression of the VSA gene family var varies over the course of an infection. var encodes ~60 erythrocyte surface proteins annotated P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1), which are responsible for adhesion to uninfected erythrocytes and other cell types193–195. During the course of infection, antigenic variation in expression of different family members in the gene family var occurs, allowing immune evasion. During pregnancy, the parasite adapts to the presence of the placenta, allowing placental sequestration and immune evasion as well as maternal and fetal disease (Fig. 5). The Plasmodium gene encoding VSA 2CSA (var2csa) is selectively transcribed in placental malaria and allows the infected erythrocyte to adhere to the STB195–197. Outside of pregnancy, CD36 is a major receptor for infected erythrocytes, but chondroitin sulfate A (CSA) on the STB becomes the major receptor for VAR2CSA and is important for placental sequestration198–200. The upregulation of VARCS2A by the parasite in infected erythrocytes during pregnancy allows evasion of a pre-existing immune response in endemic areas and explains how primigravidity (that is, being pregnant for the first time) is a risk factor for severe disease. Accordingly, antibodies to placenta-specific VSAs including VAR2CSA are not present in men and do not develop until later in pregnancy201–203. VSAs are primary targets for maternal IgG, and elevated levels and a higher affinity for VSAs are protective from severe disease204–206. Placental sequestration of infected erythrocytes leads to an influx of phagocytes and cytokines, which is thought to damage the adjacent STB and lead to adverse outcomes in the absence of fetal parasitaemia194,207,208 (Fig. 5). Recently, placental autophagy, a mechanism to maintain normal cellular homeostasis, has been demonstrated to be dysregulated in placental malaria infection, which leads to decreased amino acid transport to the fetus and has been implicated in the development of fetal growth restriction209,210.Trypanosoma cruziChagas disease is caused by infection of T. cruzi, typically from an arthropod vector. Most women of reproductive age in endemic areas are infected and ~5% transmit the parasite vertically211. Most congenitally infected infants are asymptomatic but can develop life-threatening and disabling disease later in life. Features of symptomatic congenital Chagas disease include a low Apgar score, neonates that are small for gestational age and signs of liver failure and hydrops212,213. Different strains of T. cruzi demonstrate differential tropism for placental tissue, although the mechanistic basis for this remains unknown. High maternal parasitaemia correlates with congenital transmission214,215. Despite the fact that placental pathology demonstrates a predilection of the parasite for the decidua, ex vivo placental explants demonstrated that the parasite interacts with the STB and causes local destruction and detachment, likely through apoptosis216,217. Interestingly, T. cruzi-derived exosomes, a marker of increased parasitic burden and severe disease, cause inflammation and histopathological damage to the STB in placental explants218, suggesting that these exosomes may lead to inflammation-mediated damage and allow the parasite to cross the syncytial barrier. The parasitic mechanisms responsible for tissue damage are an area of ongoing investigation, but it is thought that after the trypomastigote gains access to the intervillous extracellular matrix, its degradation promotes parasite access to the fetal circulation216.ConclusionsThere are substantial consequences resulting from infections in pregnancy. The complexity and unique features of the maternal–fetal interface have led to the discovery of multiple pathways of host–pathogen interactions unique to this niche. Yet, the molecular mechanisms of pathogenesis remain largely uncharacterized, in part owing to the complexities of defining the interactions that occur between the pathogen and maternal and/or fetal hosts during the context of pregnancy. Moreover, modelling the unique tissue architecture and immunology of the maternal–fetal interface creates additional complexities in delineating microbial vertical transmission strategies. Although the use of mouse models has provided important insights into various aspects of pregnancy, there are substantial differences in the placental architecture between human and mouse (reviewed in refs16,219) that limit direct correlates of these findings to humans. Although the placentae of primates and guinea pigs have a more similar architecture to that of humans, these models can be difficult to establish, and their lack of genetic tractability limits some mechanistic studies. Lastly, both clinical samples and primary tissues provide human-based models to study pathogenic mechanisms or vertical transmission of TORCH pathogens; however, there can be limited access to healthy placentae to generate these models. Recently, the development of stem cell-derived organoid models of both maternal and fetal cell types220,221 at the maternal–fetal interface has opened up exciting new avenues to model this interface. However, organoid models lack immune cell components and do not recapitulate the immunological crosstalk that undoubtedly alters antimicrobial defences. The fetal and maternal immune cell phenotypes at the maternal–fetal interface are still an area of active investigation and characterization. Further understanding of the contribution of the immune cell populations enriched at the interface will be essential to further define mechanisms of pathogenesis in pregnancy.Future studies elucidating the complexity of interactions between maternal and fetal tissues and how these interactions are modulated by pathogens are crucial to the development of targeted therapeutics. Moreover, understanding the mechanisms of microbial pathogenesis across the maternal–fetal interface has broader implications in the study of infertility, miscarriage and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy and parturition, which may share common aetiology. Although the complexity of pregnancy and the current gaps in understanding of many of the fundamental aspects of infections at the maternal–fetal interface represent a challenge, further investigation into this crucial aspect of human health will lead to strategies that could substantially improve maternal and child health.


Title: Persistent Human T‐Lymphotropic Virus Type 1 (HTLV‐1) Infection in the Placenta of Pregnant Women

1IntroductionMother‐to‐child transmission (MTCT) of human T‐lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV‐1) occurs predominantly via breastfeeding, accounting for 12%–25% of HTLV‐1 infection [1, 2, 3]. However, even among formula‐fed infants, a residual transmission rate of 2.4%–3.6% persists [4], suggesting intrauterine transmission or delivery‐associated exposure as critical routes. Emerging evidence implicates HTLV‐1 in placental dysfunction: a regional cohort of > 130 000 pregnant women identified 153 HTLV‐1‐positive mothers, exhibited high miscarriage rates of 22%–30%, with 6.7% of spontaneous abortions occurring in the first trimester [5]. Notably, placental inflammation underlies 50% of preterm deliveries [6], yet the mechanisms by which HTLV‐1 disrupts placental homeostasis remain poorly understood.HTLV‐1 establishes persistent, low‐level infection in placental trophoblasts, characterized by minimal viral DNA and RNA, indicative of restricted replication. Viral persistence may perturb the placental environment through interferon (IFN) pathway activation. While IFN cascades typically mediate antiviral defense, chronic inflammation can disrupt embryo implantation, angiogenic signaling, and fetal development. In HTLV‐1‐associated myelopathy (HAM), dysregulated pro‐inflammatory cytokine networks exacerbate tissue damage [7, 8, 9, 10, 11], raising the possibility that similar mechanisms compromise the tolerogenic state essential for pregnancy [12, 13].The syncytiotrophoblast layer serves as a major barrier to intrauterine transmission [14, 15]. Syncytin, a retroviral envelope protein highly expressed in trophoblast cells, facilitates syncytiotrophoblast formation through fusogenic activity. Decreased syncytin expression has been observed in the placenta affected by fetal growth restriction [16, 17, 18, 19]. HTLV‐1 viral protein expression, including Tax and basic leucine zipper factor (HBZ), induces inflammation in multiple systems in HTLV‐1‐infected women [20]. Notably, Tax and HBZ also play critical roles in HTLV‐1 infection and the survival and transformation of leukemic cells in the peripheral blood [21, 22].In response to the initial stage of viral infection, interferon‐induced transmembrane proteins (IFITMs) prevent viral fusion with cellular membranes [23, 24]. Elevated IFITM levels impair syncytiotrophoblast layer formation and inhibit syncytin‐mediated fusion. This may contribute to pregnancy complications observed in congenital infections and other IFN‐associated inflammatory conditions [24]. Th1 cytokines induce immune rejection, thereby disrupting pregnancy, while Th2 cytokines suppress Th1 activity and promote fetal‐maternal immune tolerance, essential for maintaining gestation [25]. For example, IFNγ inhibits extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invasion—a process critical for placental development—by inducing apoptosis in these cells [26].We hypothesize that HTLV‐1 infiltration into the placenta triggers inflammatory cascades that impair gestational progression. This imbalance may not only facilitate vertical transmission but also heighten risks of miscarriage, preterm birth, and fetal compromise in mothers living with HTLV‐1 (MLHTLV‐1). Our study investigates the interplay between HTLV‐1 persistence, syncytin‐1‐dependent entry, and IFN‐driven inflammation in placental dysfunction, offering insights into mechanisms linking viral infection to adverse pregnancy outcomes.2Materials and Methods2.1Human Research ParticipantsBefore April 2022, Brazil lacked widespread prenatal HTLV‐1 screening. Participants were recruited from the Institute of Infectology Emílio Ribas, which hosts the largest HTLV‐1 outpatient cohort globally, and Climerio de Oliveira Maternity Hospital, a referral center for high‐risk pregnancies in Salvador, Bahia. The latter performs approximately 1300 deliveries annually and identifies HTLV‐1 in an average of 10.8 pregnancies per year among seropositive mothers. Nine HTLV‐1‐seropositive mothers were enrolled between December 2019 and March 2024, with recruitment paused from February 2020 to February 2022 due to the COVID‐19 pandemic. A control group of nine HTLV‐1‐seronegative mothers was included, all aged ≥ 18 years (range: 19–42 years), with full‐term pregnancies, negative serology for hepatitis B/C, rubella, and toxoplasmosis, and no history of smoking or prolonged membrane rupture (> 8 h).No medical guidelines currently specify a preferred delivery mode for HTLV‐1‐seropositive mothers. Delivery mode (vaginal or cesarean) was determined through shared decision‐making between patients and clinicians. As no antivirals exist to suppress HTLV‐1 replication, none of the seropositive mothers received antiretroviral therapy. The complete clinical histories of all 18 participants, including one seropositive individual treated with methylprednisolone for HTLV‐1‐associated myelopathy (HAM), are detailed in Supporting Information S1: Table 1. The study protocol was approved by the Ethics Committees of the Institute of Tropical Medicine/Faculty of Medicine (University of São Paulo; CAAE: 43288720.4.1001.0068), the Institute of Infectology Emilio Ribas (CAAE: 43288720.4.3003.5543), and Climerio de Oliveira Maternity Hospital (CAAE: 43288720.4.3001.0061). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.2.2Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCS) HTLV‐1 DNA Load QuantificationQuantification of HTLV‐1 DNA load in PBMCs isolated from the participants was performed by real‐time PCR using primers and probes targeting the pol gene. For HTLV‐1 DNA quantitation, the forward primer SK110 (5′‐CCCTACAATCCAACCAGCTCAG‐3′; nucleotides 4758–4779, GenBank accession no. J02029) and reverse primer SK111 (5′‐GTGGTGAAGCTGCCATCGGGTTTT‐3′; nucleotides 4943–4920) were used. The internal HTLV‐1 TaqMan probe (5′‐CTTTACTGACAAACCCGACCTACCCATGGA‐3′) was designed using Oligo software (version 4; National Biosciences, Plymouth, MI, USA) and Primer Express (Perkin‐Elmer Applied Biosystems, Boston, MA, USA) and verified by GenBank search. The probe, located between positions 4829 and 4858 of the HTLV‐1 genome, carried a 5′ reporter dye FAM (6‐carboxyfluorescein) and a 3′ quencher dye TAMRA (6‐carboxytetramethylrhodamine). For quantification of the human albumin gene, the forward primer Alb‐S (5′‐GCTGTCATCTCTTGTGGGCTGT‐3′), reverse primer Alb‐AS (5′‐AAACTCATGGGAGCTGCTGGTT‐3′), and albumin TaqMan probe (5′‐FAM‐CCTGTCATGCCCACACAAATCTCTCC‐TAMRA‐3′) were used.Each 50 μL PCR reaction for HTLV‐1 or albumin amplification contained 10 μL DNA extract; primers SK110/SK111 or Alb‐S/Alb‐AS (200 nM each); 100 nM HTLV‐1 or albumin probe; 200 nM each of dATP, dCTP, and dGTP; 400 nM dUTP; 5 mM MgCl2; 0.5 U uracil DNA glycosylase; 1.25 U Platinum Taq DNA polymerase; and 1× PCR buffer. Thermal cycling conditions were: 50°C for 2 min; 95°C for 10 min; followed by 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 s and 65°C for 1 min. Amplification and data acquisition were performed on an iCycler Sequence Detector System (Bio‐Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).MT‐2 cells, containing one copy of HTLV‐1 DNA per cell (kindly provided by Dana Gallo, Viral and Rickettsial Disease Laboratory, Richmond, CA, USA), were used as the positive control and serially diluted to final concentrations of 105, 104, 103, and 102 cells. For the albumin control, serial dilutions of HTLV‐1‐negative DNA were prepared in parallel. Standard curves for both HTLV‐1 and albumin were accepted only when the slope ranged from −3.74 to −3.32 (corresponding to PCR efficiencies of 85%–100%) and the coefficient of correlation (r
2) exceeded 0.98. Assays were repeated if the difference between duplicate measurements of HTLV‐1 or albumin DNA copy numbers was greater than 30%. Normalized HTLV‐1 proviral load was calculated as:

Proviralload (copies/106 PBMCs)=HTLV−1DNAaveragecopynumberAlbuminDNAaveragecopynumber×2×106

2.3Placenta Collection and PreparationCotyledons (approximately 1 cm2 placental tissue) were excised from a randomly chosen central area immediately after placental withdrawal. They were then transported in either formaldehyde solution or DMEM/F12 (Gibco, CA, USA). To eliminate residual blood, samples were rinsed with a saline solution. A 50 mg section was obtained from both the deciduous (maternal side) and the villus (fetal side) after being fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin.2.4HTLV‐1 DNA or RNA Scope and CK7 ImmunostainingParaffin‐embedded placental blocks were sectioned into 6 μm slices, deparaffinized in xylene, and rehydrated through graded ethanol. For RNAscope assays, slides were processed using the RNAscope 2.5 HD Detection Reagent‐Red (ACD) following the manufacturer's protocol. For DNA detection, slides were pretreated with RNase A (100 μg/mL) to remove RNA, followed by Protease IV digestion (ACD) to expose target DNA. Slides were then incubated in RNAscope Hydrogen Peroxide (10 min, room temperature [RT]) and boiled (100°C) in 1×RNAscope Target Retrieval Buffer (30 min). After ethanol dehydration, slides underwent Protease Plus treatment (40°C, 30 min). A hydrophobic barrier was applied to confine reagents, and DNA was denatured (60°C, 10 min). Probes for HTLV‐1 RNA (HBZ: ACD #472861; Tax: ACD #472871) or DNA (gag‐pol: ACD #495061) were hybridized overnight at 40°C. Signals were visualized using RED‐A/RED‐B chromogens. For dual immunohistochemistry, slides were blocked with 15% goat serum and 1% Fc receptor blocking reagent (BioLegend) in TBST (45 min, RT). Anti‐CK7 antibody (Abcam, 1:200 in TBST) was applied overnight at 4°C. After TBST washes, biotinylated goat anti‐mouse IgG (1:800, 30 min, RT) and streptavidin‐HRP (1:500, 30 min, RT) were sequentially incubated. Staining was developed with ImmPACT DAB Peroxidase Substrate (Vector Laboratories, SK‐4105; 2 min, RT) and stopped with distilled water.2.5RNA Extraction From Paraffined TissuesFormalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded (FFPE) tissues were sectioned into 5–20 μm‐thick slices using a microtome and collected into 1.7 mL microcentrifuge tubes. RNA was isolated from sections using the PureLink FFPE Total RNA Isolation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Foster City, CA) following the manufacturer's protocol. RNA concentration and purity were assessed by measuring the A260/A280 absorbance ratio using a spectrophotometer (DeNovix). For downstream cDNA synthesis, RNA was standardized to a concentration of 50 ng/μL.2.6cDNA SynthesisRNA samples adjusted at 50 ng/μL were treated with DNase I, then incubated with Random primers at 300 ng/μL for 10 min. cDNA synthesis was performed in a 40 μL reaction mixture containing RT IV buffer (Invitrogen), deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs), RNase inhibitor (Invitrogen), reverse transcriptase, and water. cDNA was used for droplet digital polymerase chain reaction assay with triplicate wells.2.7Droplet Digital Polymerase Chain ReactionDroplet digital polymerase chain reactions (ddPCR) consisted of a 20 μL mixture per well containing 2× ddPCR Probe Supermix (Bio‐Rad, Hercules, CA, USA), 1.1 μL of 20× target primers 900 nM/250 nM of syncytin‐1, IFNα, IFNβ, IFNγ, or IFITM probe (Applied Biosystems), 1.1 μL of water, and 8.8 μL of cDNA. Droplets were generated in the QX‐200 droplet generator (Bio‐Rad) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Droplets were transferred to a 96‐well PCR plate (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) and the subsequent PCR amplification was performed in the thermal cycler C1000 Touch Thermal Cycler(Bio‐Rad) with the cycling parameters; 95°C for 10 min Ramp 2°C/s, 94°C for 30 s Ramp 2°C/s, 57°C for 1 min Ramp 2°C/s, Goto 2, 45X, 98°C for 10 min, and then incubated overnight at 4°C. Droplets were read in the QX200 droplet reader (Bio‐Rad) and visualized with QuantaSoft version 1.6.6 (Bio‐Rad). Each sample was analyzed in triplicate, and a no‐template control (NTC) was added for each reaction round. Only wells containing ≥ 1000 droplets were accepted for further analysis. Based on the background in the NTC, a threshold was set to define positive droplets and calculate the absolute concentration for each sample.2.8Flow CytometryMT‐2 cells were fixed and permeabilized using BD Cytofix/Cytoperm Fixation/Permeabilization Kit (BD bioscience). Then, cells were incubated with anti‐ASCT1 antibody (1:100, ATLAS Antibodies) or anti‐ASCT2 antibody (1:100, Cell Signaling) for 30 min at 4°C. Lastly, cells were incubated with anti‐rabbit FITC antibody (Abcam) for 30 min at 4°C. ASCT1 or ASCT2 expression was quantified by FITC expression using flow cytometry, and the data were analyzed using FlowJo Software.2.9Cell Culture and Coculture of MT‐2 Cells With BeWo Cells or Primary Cytotrophoblasts (PCTs)BeWo cells (human choriocarcinoma‐derived) were maintained in ATCC‐formulated F‐12K medium. PCTs were obtained from ScienCell Research Laboratories (Cat# 7120) and maintained in trophoblast medium (ScienCell Research Laboratories). MT‐2 cells were cultured in RPMI‐1640 medium. All media contained 10% heat‐inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM l‐glutamine, 10 mM HEPES, and 1% antibiotics (10 000 U/mL penicillin, 10 mg/mL streptomycin). All cell lines were incubated at 37°C under 5% CO2 and 95% humidity. Media were refreshed every 2–3 days. BeWo cells or PCTs (1.6 × 105 per well) were seeded into 6‐well plates and allowed to adhere for 24 h. Cells were then treated for 24 h with forskolin (20 μM or 50 μM for BeWo; 50 μM or 100 μM for PCTs; Sigma‐Aldrich) or left untreated. Following treatment, cells were washed with PBS (Gibco) to remove forskolin, and fresh medium was added. MT‐2 cells were incubated with mitomycin C (20 μg/mL; Sigma‐Aldrich) for 1 h at 37°C. For the HRB1 treatment group, target cells and MT‐2 cells were pretreated separately with HRB1 (10 μg/mL) for 1 h before coculture. HRB1‐pretreated or untreated MT‐2 cells were then added to BeWo cells or PCTs at a 1:10 ratio (MT‐2:target) and cocultured for 48 h. After coculture, non‐adherent MT‐2 cells were removed by gentle PBS washing, and fresh medium was added. BeWo cells or PCTs were cultured for an additional 72 h. Finally, BeWo cells or PCTs were detached using 0.25% trypsin‐EDTA (Gibco; 5 min, 37°C). Trypsin activity was neutralized with complete medium, and cells were pelleted by centrifugation (300g, 5 min), followed by one PBS wash [7].2.10HTLV‐1 p19 and Syncytin‐1 Detection by Western BlotTotal cell proteins from BeWo cells or PCTs were extracted with RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), containing a 1× protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Cell Signaling). Protein expression was assessed using the following antibodies: anti‐HTLV type I p19 clone 45/6.11.1.3 (1:2000, ZeptoMetrix), syncytin‐1 polyclonal antibody (1:3000, Bioss), and β‐actin antibody (1:2500, Cell Signaling).2.11Statistical AnalysisStatistical analyses were performed using Prism software (GraphPad, version 9). Parametric data were analyzed with t‐test, and non‐parametric data with the Mann–Whitney test. p values less than 0.05 were considered statistically significant.3Results3.1Characteristics of Study ParticipantsNine HTLV‐1‐seronegative mothers and nine HTLV‐1‐seropositive mothers were included in the study. The mean maternal age at delivery differed significantly between the two groups: 24.4 years in the seronegative group versus 32.1 years in the seropositive group (p = 0.04). No significant difference was observed in infant sex distribution: 44.4% (4/9) of infants born to seronegative mothers were male, compared to 66.6% (6/9) in the seropositive group (p = 0.63). Delivery modes varied markedly, with 88.8% of seronegative mothers having vaginal deliveries versus 33.3% in the seropositive group (p = 0.02). Reproductive history differed significantly: 88.8% of seronegative mothers reported no prior pregnancies, whereas 88.8% of seropositive mothers had previous pregnancies, including those resulting in spontaneous abortions (p = 0.003). Syphilis co‐infections and gestational diabetes were exclusively observed in the seropositive group. Most seropositive mothers were asymptomatic (88.8%), with one case of HTLV‐1‐associated myelopathy (HAM). Notably, 44.4% of seropositive mothers reported prior spontaneous abortions, compared to 11.1% in the seronegative group; however, this difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.29) (Table 1).Table 1Clinical characteristics of HTLV‐1‐uninfected mothers and MLHTLV‐1.HTLV‐1 [−]HTLV‐1 [+]OR [95% CI]
p valueTotal n. 189 (50.0%)9 (50.0%)Mother's age at delivery (years)Mean (±SD)24.4 (6.4)32.1 (8.2)0.04Baby sexMale4 (44.4%)6 (66.6%)0.4 [0.07–2.3]0.63Female5 (55.5%)3 (33.3%)DeliveryVaginal8 (88.8%)3 (33.3%)0.02Cesarean without labor05 (55.5%)Cesarean with labor1 (11.1%)1 (11.1%)Previous pregnancyNo8 (88.8%)1 (11.1%)64.0 [3.7–761.6]0.003Yes1 (11.1%)8 (88.8%)Coinfections/comorbiditiesNo9 (100.0)6 (66.6%0.06Syphilis01 (11.1%)Gestational diabetes02 (22.2%)HTLV‐1‐clinical outcome—(5.4%)Asymptomatic—8 (88.8%)—HAM—1 (11.1%)Previous spontaneous abortions4 (44.4%)No8 (88.8%)5 (55.5%)6.4 [0.57–86.3]0.29Yes1 (11.1%)4 (44.4%)Median HTLV‐1 proviral load (copies/106 PBMCs)036.9 (50%)
Note: A t‐test was used for comparing means, the Fisher test for bivariate variables, and the χ
2 trend test for trivariate. We did not proceed with multivariate analysis due to the presence of variables with a p value > 0.02.John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.3.2Detection of HTLV‐1 DNA/RNA and Evidence of Latent Infection in Placental TissuesTerm placental tissues from HTLV‐1‐seropositive mothers (n = 7) were analyzed using highly sensitive molecular methods. As reported previously [27], DNA in situ hybridization (DNAISH) and RNA in situ hybridization (RNAISH) techniques were adapted and refined here as HTLV‐1‐specific DNAscope and RNAscope assays to detect viral nucleic acids in different placental tissues. Co‐staining with cytokeratin 7 (CK7), a trophoblast biomarker [28], enabled precise localization of viral nucleic acids within placental sub‐regions. DNAscope assays detected HTLV‐1 gag DNA in all seropositive samples (7/7), with low abundance (maximum 24 dots per section) and regional variability (Figure 1A). Viral DNA localized predominantly to placental villi and decidua but was also observed in intervillous spaces and trophoblast layers (Figure 1B). No signal was detected in HTLV‐1‐seronegative controls (Figure 1A). RNAscope assays detected HTLV‐1 HBZ mRNA in all HTLV‐1‐seropositive mothers, albeit at low levels. HTLV‐1 HBZ mRNA localized specifically to the decidua, intervillous spaces, and intravilli but was absent in trophoblasts (Figure 2A,B). In contrast, HTLV‐1 Tax mRNA was observed in decidua, intervillous spaces, intravilli, and sporadically in trophoblasts, though trophoblast detection occurred only in three seropositive mothers (Figure 3A,B). Both transcripts exhibited low abundance (maximum 24 dots per section) and regional variability, mirroring the distribution pattern of HTLV‐1 gag DNA, which was predominantly localized to placental villi and decidua. These findings demonstrate that HTLV‐1 DNA/RNA localizes to placental villi, either within the trophoblast layers surrounding the villi or subjacent to these layers. Quantification of the viral RNA/DNA ratio revealed fewer than one viral RNA transcript per viral DNA across placental sub‐regions (Figure 3C). Low transcriptional activity, evidenced by the RNA/DNA ratio < 1, strongly suggests that HTLV‐1 persists in a latent state within the placenta.Figure 1The detection of HTLV‐1 gag DNA in the placenta. (A) HTLV‐1 gag DNA in different placental regions was visualized using in situ RNAscope hybridization in combination with immunofluorescence assay of trophoblast marker protein CK7 (Scale bar, 250 μm). Red, HTLV‐1 RNA; Green, trophoblast marker CK7. (B) HTLV‐1 gag DNA was quantitated in the decidua, intervillar space, villi, and trophoblasts (n = 7).Figure 2The detection of HTLV‐1 HBZ RNA in the placenta. (A) HTLV‐1 HBZ RNA in different placental regions was visualized using in situ DNAscope hybridization in combination with immunofluorescence assay of trophoblast marker protein CK7 (Scale bar, 250 μm). Red, HTLV‐1 RNA; Green, trophoblast marker CK7. (B) HTLV‐1 HBZ RNA was quantitated in the decidua, intervillar space, villi, and trophoblasts (n = 7).Figure 3The detection of HTLV‐1 Tax RNA in the placenta. (A) HTLV‐1 Tax RNA in different placental regions was visualized using in situ DNAscope hybridization in combination with immunofluorescence assay of trophoblast marker protein CK7 (Scale bar, 250 μm). Red, HTLV‐1 RNA; Green, trophoblast marker CK7. (B) HTLV‐1 HBZ RNA was quantified in the decidua, intervillar space, villi, and trophoblasts (n = 7). (C) The ratio of HTLV‐1 RNA/DNA in the placenta.3.3IFNβ Upregulation in the HTLV‐1‐Infected PlacentaElevated type I IFN signaling during pregnancy is associated with adverse outcomes, including intrauterine growth restriction, preterm birth, and fetal demise [29]. IFN‐induced interferon‐induced transmembrane proteins (IFITMs), a family of viral entry restriction factors, are implicated in these complications by impairing syncytiotrophoblast formation and inhibiting syncytin‐1‐mediated cell fusion [23]. Excessive IFITM activity may thus contribute to placental dysfunction during congenital infections or IFN‐driven pathologies. HTLV‐1 placental infection may trigger local immune responses, potentially disrupting syncytiotrophoblast layer formation through inflammation, with implications for maternal and fetal health. Syncytins, fusogenic proteins critical for placental development, are central to this process. To investigate these, we quantified mRNA levels of human endogenous retrovirus‐W1 (HERV‐W1) syncytin‐1, IFNα, IFNβ, IFNγ, and IFITM in placental samples from nine HTLV‐1‐seropositive and nine HTLV‐1‐seronegative mothers. Placental tissues from seropositive mothers showed significantly higher IFNβ expression compared to seronegative controls (p = 0.0201) (Figure 4C). However, no significant differences were observed in HERV‐W1 syncytin‐1, IFNα, IFNγ, or IFITM expression between seropositive and seronegative groups (Figure 4A,B,D,E). Taken together, these results suggest that HTLV‐1 infection selectively upregulates IFNβ, potentially driving placental inflammation without triggering a broader IFN‐I signaling pathway.Figure 4IFNβ enrichment in the placenta from HTLV‐1‐infected mothers. The expression of (A) syncytin‐1, (B) IFNα, (C) IFNβ, (D) IFNγ, and (E) IFITM in placental tissues from HTLV‐1‐seropositive and HTLV‐1‐seronegative mothers was analyzed by ddPCR (n = 9).3.4Previous Spontaneous Abortion (SAB) Cases Among MLHTLV‐1 Were not Associated With the Expression of HERV‐W1 Syncytin‐1, IFNα, IFNβ, IFNγ, and IFITMA high prevalence of prior SAB was observed among HTLV‐1‐seropositive mothers (44.4%, 4/9) compared with seronegative controls (Table 1), suggesting a possible association between HTLV‐1 infection and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Placental HERV‐W1 syncytin‐1 expression, assessed by immunohistochemistry, showed no marked difference between HTLV‐1–seropositive mothers with a history of SAB and those without (Figure 5A). Similarly, syncytin‐1 expression measured by ddPCR did not differ significantly between these two groups (Figure 5B). Excessive IFITM activity has been proposed to impair syncytiotrophoblast formation and syncytin‐1–mediated fusion, potentially contributing to pregnancy complications in congenital infections or IFN‐driven pathologies [29]. To investigate this, we compared IFNα, IFNβ, IFNγ, and IFITM levels between HTLV‐1–seropositive mothers with and without prior SAB. No significant differences in IFITM, IFNα, or IFNβ expression were observed between HTLV‐1–seropositive mothers with a history of SAB and those without (Figure 5B).Figure 5Previous spontaneous abortion (SAB) in HTLV‐1–infected mothers was not associated with placental expression of syncytin‐1, IFN‐β, IFN‐γ, or IFITM. (A) Syncytin‐1 in the human placenta was visualized by immunohistochemistry in the trophoblast border (Term placenta villi at 36–41 weeks of pregnancy) in the dark brown. Scale bar, 200 μm. (B) The expression of syncytin‐1, IFNα, IFNβ, IFNγ, or IFITM in the placenta from HTLV‐1‐infected women with or without previous SAB was measured by ddPCR.3.5Syncytin‐1 may Mediate HTLV‐1 Infection of Placental TrophoblastsSyncytin‐1, a protein naturally expressed in placental trophoblasts, plays a critical role in mediating cytotrophoblast fusion to form syncytiotrophoblasts [30]. We investigated whether endogenously expressed syncytin‐1 facilitates cell‐to‐cell transfer of HTLV‐1 from T cells to placental trophoblasts. Primary cytotrophoblasts (PCTs), located in the inner layer of the villous trophoblast, are the stem cells of the trophoblast lineage. PCTs give rise to the more differentiated syncytiotrophoblasts and extravillous trophoblasts [31]. The human placental choriocarcinoma cell line BeWo, widely used as an in vitro placental model, was also employed [32]. For viral delivery, we used MT‐2 cells, an HTLV‐1‐infected T‐cell line with regulatory T‐cell characteristics [33], which expressed the syncytin receptors ASCT1 and ASCT2, as confirmed by flow cytometry (Figure 6A) [34].Figure 6Syncytin‐1 may mediate HTLV‐1 infection of placental trophoblasts. (A) Expression of syncytin‐1 receptors ASCT1 and ASCT2 on MT‐2 cells was measured by flow cytometry. (B) A schematic diagram of the coculture protocol for HTLV‐1 transfer to trophoblasts. BeWo cells or PCTs were cocultured with MT‐2 cells (10:1 ratio of MT‐2 and target cells) for 48 h, followed by washing and further incubation. (C) Representative phase‐contrast images (scale bar = 200 μm) show reduced confluency in BeWo cells cocultured with MT‐2 cells. (D) Protein levels of HTLV‐1 p19, syncytin‐1, and β‐actin in BeWo cells and PCTs under basal conditions or after forskolin induction (20–50 μM for BeWo; 50–100 μM for PCTs), with or without HRB1‐mediated syncytin‐1 cell fusion blockade. The relative intensity of p19 expression is shown below with data normalized to the BeWo or PCT cocultured with MT‐2 cells without forskolin treatment. Syncytin‐1 expression was normalized to the corresponding group without forskolin treatment.PCTs or BeWo cells were cocultured with MT‐2 cells at a 10:1 ratio (MT‐2: target cells) for 2 days. After extensive washing with PBS to remove MT‐2 cells, the PCTs and BeWo cells were cultured for an additional 3 days before being harvested for protein analysis. (Figure 6B). Microscopic analysis demonstrated reduced confluency in BeWo cells cocultured with MT‐2 cells compared to controls by Day 5 post‐coculture (Figure 6C). Western blot analysis detected syncytin‐1 expression in both BeWo cells and PCTs, which was unaffected by coculture with MT‐2 cells. Strikingly, HTLV‐1 p19 was highly expressed only in target cells cocultured with MT‐2 cells, confirming viral transmission (Figure 6D).To assess syncytin‐1's role in HTLV‐1 transmission, we employed HRB1, a syncytin‐1‐specific fusion inhibitor [35]. HRB1 pretreatment blocked cell fusion in the coculture system, as observed microscopically by Day 5 (Figure 6C). However, under basal syncytin‐1 conditions, HRB1 minimally impacted p19 expression in BeWo cells and PCTs. As forskolin upregulates syncytin‐1 in trophoblasts [36], we pretreated BeWo cells and PCTs with forskolin (20 or 50 μM for BeWo; 50 or 100 μM for PCTs) for 24 h. This pretreatment enhanced syncytin‐1 expression in both cell types. Notably, subsequent addition of HRB1 reduced HTLV‐1 p19 protein levels by 30%–70% in forskolin‐pretreated BeWo cells (20 and 50 μM, respectively) and by 30% in forskolin‐pretreated PCTs cocultured with MT‐2 cells (Figure 6D). These findings demonstrate that syncytin‐1‐driven cell fusion is critical for HTLV‐1 cell‐to‐cell transmission in placental trophoblasts.4DiscussionOur study elucidates the persistent HTLV‐1 infection within placental villi, revealing a low‐level viral presence in trophoblasts that suggests partial evasion of placental barriers. Despite this, intrauterine transmission remains rare in the absence of breastfeeding, as evidenced by the lack of seroconversion in most non‐breastfed infants [3, 37, 38]. In addition, while some other mechanisms may exist to impede its transmission, HTLV‐1 is predominantly in a latent infection state in vivo. Thus, an active HTLV‐1 infection of placental cells is likely limited.A key virological trait of HTLV‐1 is its reliance on cell‐to‐cell contact for its transmission [39]. After infection, its replication entails clonal expansion in lymphocytes in the peripheral blood [40]. HTLV‐1 replication may be self‐restrained, characterized by high‐fidelity replication, resulting in high genetic stability with elevated immune escape [41, 42]. Our data demonstrated that HTLV‐1 infection in the placenta is largely latent. Thus, the infection of trophoblastic cells by HTLV‐1 is not as productive as in the peripheral blood.Placental susceptibility to viral infections often arises from immune dysregulation [43], and HTLV‐1 persistence may disrupt the delicate inflammatory balance critical for a healthy pregnancy. Notably, 44.4% (4/9) of HTLV‐1‐seropositive mothers enrolled in this study reported prior SAB, aligning with a 2–3‐fold elevated SAB risk observed in Peruvian cohorts [44, 45]. While our small sample size precluded deeper mechanistic insights, this association underscores the need for expanded studies on HTLV‐1‐associated placental pathology.Elevated IFNβ levels in HTLV‐1‐positive placentas are particularly concerning, as excessive IFNβ can trigger placental apoptosis [29], potentially compromising fetal viability. IFN‐induced transmembrane proteins, such as IFITM inhibit virus infection by preventing virus membrane fusion with cells and inhibiting the fusion of infected cells [43, 46, 47]. Paradoxically, IFITM1—a viral entry inhibitor—showed no differential expression, suggesting alternative pathways drive placental inflammation. While they are tightly regulated during healthy pregnancies [48, 49], dysregulation of cytokines such as IL‐4, IL‐6, and TNF may contribute to placental inflammation. HTLV‐1 proteins Tax and HBZ further perturb immune homeostasis: Tax induces pro‐inflammatory IL‐2 and IL‐15 [22], while HBZ amplifies TGFβ signaling to modulate regulatory T cells [50, 51]. The balance of the placental environment is essential for the proper health and growth of the fetus. Apoptosis in the placenta of HTLV‐1‐seropositive pregnant women has been demonstrated as a possible defense mechanism against transmission from mother to fetus [52]. The difference in mean mother's age at delivery, number of previous pregnancies, among mother's groups can impact the expression of inflammatory markers.The presence of HTLV‐1 DNA was extended beyond the trophoblast layers and was detectable in deeper placental cell layers. Since HTLV‐1 can directly infect multiple host cell types, including immune cells, trophoblasts, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts [53], it is conceivable that alternative pathways may facilitate the HTLV‐1 entry to the placental trophoblasts [54]. This might not involve specific steps of the viral replication cycle but serves as an entry mechanism for HTLV‐1 into trophoblasts. We demonstrated that inhibition of syncytin‐1‐mediated cell‐to‐cell fusion prevented HTLV‐1 infection in trophoblasts in vitro, but only in BeWo cells and PCTs pretreated with forskolin. This pretreatment increased syncytin‐1 expression in both cell types. Because forskolin may also stimulate HTLV‐1 LTR activity during viral transmission [55], we only pretreated trophoblasts, that is, BeWo cells and PCTs with forskolin for 24 h and washed out prior coculture with MT‐2. Therefore, MT‐2 cells were not exposed to forskolin. We found that HTLV‐1 p19 was enhanced by forskolin but reduced by the syncytin‐1–specific fusion inhibitor HRB1, indicating that syncytin‐1 contributes to HTLV‐1 transmission from T cells to trophoblasts, analogous to its role in HIV infection of the placenta [54]. Nevertheless, unaddressed confounders—such as syphilis coinfection and gestational diabetes in asymptomatic carriers—warrant future investigation. And the small number of placentas in this study could be a limiting factor for our statistical analyses. Also, around one‐third of the infected mothers had comorbidities and coinfection status in this cohort, which could skew the results. Thus, a higher number of placentas is needed to make a more convincing interpretation of the results in the future.Together, the physiological placenta is competent to block intrauterine HTLV‐1 transmission. However, rather than directly transmitting the virus to the fetus, the latent HTLV‐1 infection in the placenta leads to a persistent but low level of inflammation, potentially increasing the risk of SAB. Further studies are warranted to comprehend the mechanisms of SAB, which may help develop interventions for the treatment of MLHTLV‐1.Author ContributionsJorge Casseb, Yuyang Tang, and Guochun Jiang conceived the initial concept. Victor Folgosi, George Souza, Sandy Teixeira, Carlos Apoliano, Fernanda Grassi, Jorge Casseb, Jerusa Smid, Michel E. Haziot, Rosa Maria N. Marcusso, Augusto C. P. de Oliveira, and Tatiane Assone helped to coordinate the clinic study, cohort recruitment, and tissue collection. Gabriela Prates did ddPCR, DNA/RNAscope, IHC, and Western blot. Xiaoyi Li performed Western blot and Flow cytometry analysis. Hongjie Chen reanalyzed the statistics. Yuyang Tang helped syncytin‐1 studies. Gabriela Prates and Jorge Casseb organized the initial data. Gabriela Prates and Guochun Jiang prepared the initial manuscript. Xiaoyi Li helped with the manuscript revision. Guochun Jiang finalized the data analysis, initial submission, and manuscript revision.Conflicts of InterestThe authors declare no conflicts of interest.Supporting information
Supplementary Table 1: Characteristics of 18 mother participants in this study.


Title: “Mpox in MSM: Tackling stigma, minimizing risk factors, exploring pathogenesis, and treatment approaches”

1IntroductionThe exact origin of the monkeypox virus (MPV) is yet to be fully understood. However, it is thought to be circulating among wildlife in Central and West Africa [1], and it was proposed that some species of wild squirrels may be the natural host [[2], [3], [4]]. The MPV likely spread to humans through direct contact with infected animals. Hunting, handling, and/or consuming bushmeat may have been associated with humans contracting MPV [5]. MPV can also be transmitted from person-to-person through close contact via respiratory droplets, bodily fluids, or skin lesions of infected individuals [5]. While mpox is primarily endemic to Central and West Africa, sporadic cases and outbreaks have been occurring outside Africa [6]. These cases have been generally associated with travelers returning from endemic regions or importing infected animals. It is important to note that the natural reservoir of the MPV is not defined [7,8]. The exact transmission dynamics and reservoir and/or hosts involved in maintaining and spreading the MPV in nature continue to evolve.During the 2022 mpox outbreak, most infections were transmitted through close, intimate contact with symptomatic individuals, and male-to-male sexual contact has been a significant transmission mode [[9], [10], [11], [12]]. However, heterosexual transmission, transmission to children through nonsexual skin-to-skin contact with caregivers, needlestick injuries, body piercing, tattooing, and occupational exposures without proper personal protective equipment have also been reported [13,14]. The predominant symptom of MPV infection is skin rashes, often accompanied by anogenital or oropharyngeal/perioral mucosal lesions [15]. Fever, chills, headache, and lymphadenopathy are other commonly reported symptoms among mpox patients. Unlike previous outbreaks, where these symptoms usually preceded skin rashes, up to half of the patients in the current outbreak reported rash as their initial symptom. It has been observed that individuals are infectious from the beginning of the symptoms, and some individuals can transmit the virus before displaying symptoms [16].Until 1980, vaccination against the variola virus provided approximately 85% protection against mpox [17]. With the discontinuation of vaccination against the variola virus in 1980, a significant portion of the population lacked immunity against variola virus and MPV viruses, rendering them susceptible to MPV infection. Additionally, no specific treatment is available for mpox [18]. During the 2022 outbreak, mucosal transmission through sexual contact emerged as one of the major modes of MPV transmission, other than close contact with pustules or pustular material, which has not been reported in previous outbreaks [10,19]. The mucosal transmission is often linked to recto-genital lesions in men, vaginal lesions in women, and pharyngeal lesions in both genders. Although the mechanism of mucosal transmission of MPV remains poorly understood and requires further investigation, the discovery of these novel transmission routes may have important implications, e.g. the risk of co-infections with HIV and the impact on vaccine responses. In this review, we discuss the role of social stigma associated with men who have sex with men (MSM) in increasing their risk of acquiring infectious diseases, including mpox, the risk factors related to the spread of MPV, the disease pathogenesis of mpox among MSM, as well as currently known prevention and treatment options.2Social stigma of MSM: increased risk of infectious diseases including mpoxThe term ’stigma’ is used to describe the pervasive presence of negative beliefs, judgments, and biases that individuals or societies hold against specific groups, characteristics, or behaviors [20]. It encompasses the act of labeling and devaluing individuals based on perceived differences or deviations from societal norms. Stigma often leads to discriminatory actions, exclusion, and the marginalization of affected individuals, harming their mental and physical well-being and resulting in social isolation [21]. Stigma can manifest in various contexts, including mental health, race, sexual orientation, gender identity, and other personal attributes [22]. Those who experience stigma commonly perceive themselves as being distinct and undervalued compared to others.Sexual orientation refers to a lasting pattern of emotional, romantic, and or sexual attraction towards individuals of the same, opposite, or both sexes. Sexual orientation encompasses a spectrum ranging from individuals exclusively attracted to the opposite sex to those attracted solely to the same sex [23]. Sexual orientation is broadly categorized into three main groups: heterosexual, gay/lesbian, and bisexual. These categories of sexual orientation are observed across various cultures globally. It is important to distinguish sexual orientation from other aspects of sex and gender, such as biological sex, gender identity, and social gender roles defined as cultural expectations of feminine and masculine behavior [24]. Thus, sexual orientation is closely connected to intimate relationships that fulfill deep emotional needs for love, affection, and intimacy. In addition to sexual behaviors, these relationships involve nonsexual physical affection, shared values, mutual support, and long-term commitment [25,26]. Various factors have been suggested to contribute to developing an individual's sexual orientation, including genetic, hormonal, developmental, social, and cultural influences [27,28]. It is often believed that nature and nurture play intricate roles in shaping the sexual orientation of an individual [29]. Gender identity and sexual orientation are shaped by a combination of factors at early events of brain development, including hormonal, genetic, and maternal factors [30]. Animal studies have supported the role of hormones and the genetic makeup of a person in shaping sexual orientation [30,31].Homosexuality has been a subject of societal controversy [32]. It has evoked different attitudes depending on the type of society cultural, moral, and political circumstances from the beginning of the civilization [33]. Even in contemporary society, homosexual behaviors, desires, and identities are often stigmatized and perceived as negative, immature, or inferior compared to heterosexuality, which promotes social exclusion [34]. Social exclusion is a complex set of interconnected processes that emerge from economic, political, and societal factors [34,35]. Over time, these processes create a sense of distance and marginalization, placing individuals, groups, and communities in a position of inferiority compared to a society's dominant values and norms. Homophobia is considered pervasive globally, posing significant threats to the rights of homosexual individuals through discrimination, harassment, and even criminalization of their sexual orientation [36]. This intolerance often extends to interference in their personal lives, perpetuating social exclusion and increasing the risk of discrimination and hate crimes [37]. Insufficient legal safeguards and support from state institutions further compound the issue, impeding the prevention of discrimination and violence based on sexual orientation.Social and familial expectations often clash with personal preferences among MSM individuals. This conflict can lead to psychological distress, including symptoms of depression and anxiety, and indulge in high-risk sexual behaviors [38]. Due to fear of social exclusion and stigma related to their sexual orientation, MSM individuals exhibit poor health-seeking behaviors, which increases their risk of acquiring sexually transmitted infections (STIs) [39]. The expressions of social exclusion of MSMs were reflected through their ‘conditioned’ support in the family at the cost of giving up their identity or facing expulsion from family ties and property, exclusion from community participation, denial of decent employment opportunities, lack of legal protection and social security system. They are also at an elevated risk of HIV transmission, stemming from the reuse of needles during substance abuse to alleviate mental distress and engaging in unprotected sexual encounters under the influence of substance use within both heterosexual and homosexual relationships [40]. The criminalization of homosexuality, including severe penalties like imprisonment and death, has contributed to the higher rate of high-risk activities and increased prevalence of HIV among MSM individuals [41]. The fear of disclosure and social stigma associated with their sexual behaviors further prevent them from accessing crucial HIV-related testing, treatment, care, and support services, leaving them hidden and marginalized.Mental health issues are frequently observed among MSM populations at risk for HIV infection [42]. The mental health challenges not only hinder the effectiveness of HIV prevention efforts but also pose challenges to existing conceptual models [43]. Traditional individual-based risk reduction programs, public health campaigns, and community-based interventions may not adequately serve the MSM, who also manage comorbid mental health issues [44]. To escalate the efficacy of the HIV prevention programs, it is crucial to integrate individual-based approaches to address mental health issues that can hinder prevention efforts [45]. Addressing the mental health challenges of at-risk MSM individuals can serve as a foundation for multiple prevention initiatives and empower those most vulnerable to high-risk sexual behaviors and transmitting infectious diseases.According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), an estimated 2.9% of adult men identified as gay or bisexual in the United States in 2019 [46]. The MSM community faces social stigma related to both mpox and HIV infections [[47], [48], [49], [50], [51]]. This stigma can create barriers to accessing healthcare services, proper diagnosis, and availing treatment. Therefore, it is crucial to address and combat this stigma to ensure the well-being of individuals within the MSM community [52]. The risk factors associated with MPV and HIV mono-infection, as well as co-infection among MSM, include engaging in unprotected sexual activities, having multiple sexual partners, and genital or oral mucosal lesions [53]. These factors increase the risk of transmission of both viruses (HIV and MPV) and underscore the importance of comprehensive sexual health education, use of barrier protection during sexual encounters, regular testing for HIV and other STIs, access to pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention, combinational antiretroviral therapy for PLWH, and access to mpox vaccines. Establishing a nurturing and non-judgmental atmosphere that fosters open dialogue, promotes awareness, and embraces acceptance is crucial for the MSM community to tackle their high-risk behaviors and prevent disease outbreaks within the community [54]. The interconnection between the social exclusion experienced by the MSM community that led to their high-risk sexual encounters, the high prevalence of HIV transmission among the MSM community, and their vulnerability in the 2022 Mpox outbreak is depicted in [Fig. 1].Fig. 1The interlinked between the men who have sex with men (MSM) and the 2022 Mpox outbreak. The sexual orientation of MSM makes them vulnerable to exclusion from contemporary society, which in turn indulges them in frequent participation in saunas, and private or public sex clubs, where intimate and frequently anonymous sexual contact occurs. Along with that in the MSM community, the proportion of people living with HIV is much higher compared to the general population. Therefore, during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, initial introduction of the MPV infection among MSM make the entire community at higher risk of contracting the disease.Fig. 13The consequences of neglecting mpox endemic in sub-Saharan AfricaFollowing the mass vaccination program against the variola virus, during the 33rd World Health Assembly in 1980, smallpox was declared eradicated globally [55]. This was followed by WHO's recommendation to end the global vaccination program against the variola virus. As a result, a significant portion of the world's population lacks immune protection against variola virus [56] and closely related poxviruses, including MPV. Without cross-species protection, the lesser-known mpox became endemic in many West and Central African countries, including Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and South Sudan, among others, with sporadic reports outside of the endemic regions [56,57]. The lack of awareness about mpox due to the geographic confinement of the disease within endemic African countries has resulted in a knowledge gap regarding the transmission mechanism of MPV [58]. Most mpox cases were known to be self-limiting without reports of community transmissions [59]. In the early 1980s, serological investigations were conducted for MPV antibodies on over 10,000 unvaccinated children in Central and West Africa. The surveys revealed that fewer than 1% of the children were positive for the MPV antibody, signifying the rarity of the disease [60]. During subsequent decades, reported mpox cases kept on increasing [61]. Notably, in 1986, for the first time in history, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a chain of human-to-human transmission of MPV was reported [62]. Prior to the 2022 outbreak, epidemiological data indicated a higher risk of mpox among unvaccinated individuals, with the cases predominantly among kids and young adults [63]. The severity of mpox cases during the 2022 outbreak has mostly been mild, and the genomic surveillance data indicates the presence of West African clad B1 lineage with mutations in virulence proteins.Additionally, APOBEC3-mediated GA > AA and TC > TT mutations reported in the genomes of MPV isolates during the 2022 outbreak are hypothesized to be responsible for the attenuated pathogenicity of the virus [[64], [65], [66]]. Future outbreaks might follow different patterns, particularly considering the potential introduction of the more pathogenic Clade I MPV due to ever-increasing intercontinental travel and trade [61]. With the passage of time and lack of attention by global public health watchdogs, mpox, once an endemic in a couple of West and Central African countries, has evolved into a worldwide health emergency [67]. During the 2022 outbreak of mpox, cases of human-to-animal transmission of the MPV were reported [45]; this reverse zoonotic transmission has the potential to expand the natural reservoirs of the virus in the future [68,69]. Unlike the variola virus, it is more challenging to eradicate MPV due to natural zoonotic reservoirs [67]. While cooperation is appreciated, the collaborative clinical research between resource-limited African countries and developed nations was key to the success during the Ebola and Zika epidemics [70,71]. On the contrary, setting up a surveillance program (the “parachute research”) for mpox in DRC in the early 2000s [72], which enabled foreign scientists to gather data and specimens for analysis in their own countries, failed to address the required capacity building for an emergency response to future outbreaks [71,73]. Therefore, efforts should be prioritized to build public health infrastructure in resource-limited African countries and train their front-line responders to address emerging and reemerging viral outbreaks [74].4Monkeypox virus (MPV) in human samples and implications for transmission among MSMThe 2022 outbreak of mpox became notable in May 2022, and showed a significant increase in human-to-human transmission, specifically among MSMs [75]. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) is the recommended method of detecting MPV infection [76]. Before the 2022 outbreak, cases reported in Europe and the USA lacked information on the distribution of the MPV in the various organs and tissues in humans as there was no report of fatalities [77,78]. However, during the 2022 outbreak, several studies have detected MPV DNA in anal and oral swabs, semen, and to a lesser extent, urine samples [79]. The concentration of viral DNA has been found to correlate with the amount of replication-competent virus, indicating viral burden, as determined by qPCR being a predictor of infectivity. In a study conducted in France on fifty male (n = 50) patients with confirmed MPV infection, samples were tested from skin, throat, anus, blood, urine, and semen. It was found that a significant proportion of oral and anal swabs were positive for MPV (71–77%), lower proportions of positivity in blood and urine samples (22–31%), and just over half of the semen samples were positive for MPV [79]. The detection of high concentrations of the MPV in the anal region, mouth, and semen aligns with the sexual practices potentially associated with the MPV spread among MSM and skin contact related to sexual or nonsexual proximity.Following the 2022 outbreak, WHO prioritized research on transmission dynamics, containment strategies, and response measures against mpox [80]. Mathematical modeling studies on MPV transmission were limited and have not adequately considered vaccine efficacy, coverage, and population heterogeneity [81]. A study using mathematical modeling predicted the reproduction number of mpox among MSM at 3.11 globally, 3.57 in Germany, and 3.14 in the UK, respectively [81], which is much higher than the predicted R0 (less than one) in endemic countries in Africa [17,[82], [83], [84]]. Without public health interventions, the model predicts an exponential increase in the number of new infections in major outbreak pockets in the UK and USA, which is expected to regress with increased public interaction and implementation of a vaccination strategy, especially among high-risk populations. The study also reports that the majority of the current mpox cases among MSM are concentrated in a few pockets of North America and Europe that have lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) friendly federal laws and routinely organize pride events, gay sauna, and other gatherings, that have a higher risk of close contacts through anal or genital sexual activity compared to general populations. Another systemic review reports that compartmental, branching process, Monte Carlo (stochastic), agent-based, and network-based modeling techniques were used to study the human-to-human and between-human and animal transmission dynamics of mpox [83]. In the majority of the compartmental models, the following compartments were included: susceptibility (S), exposed (E), infected (I), vaccinated (V), recovered (R), quarantined (Q), and investigate the endemic equilibrium points using a SIR framework [[85], [86], [87]].The prediction of this model suggests that the conditions for persistence and eradication differ from the deterministic models, which indicates that reproduction number dictates the disease trajectory. In the ‘branching process model’ offspring distributions are utilized to generate a model for the propagation of mpox disease [88,89]. In another study, the Monte Carlo stochastic model was used to simulate the MPV transmission from infected patients to their exposed close contacts by tracking the generation order for successive secondary cases. The study demonstrated that without smallpox vaccination, the frequency of new cases increased but did not reach pandemic levels [84]. These studies highlight the utility of diverse mathematical modeling approaches historically used to study MPV transmission. However, these models' applicability to the 2022 outbreak is limited due to underlying assumptions and data constraints. To address this, new empirical epidemiological studies are needed, accounting for disease complexities and global ramifications.The 2022 mpox outbreak emphasizes the importance of research focusing on neglected zoonoses and allocating resources to manage and contain emerging diseases worldwide. A recent study on the 2022 outbreak of mpox used a transmission model fitted to actual sexual partnership data using Weibull distributions [90], demonstrating that a heavy-tailed sexual partnership distribution, where a few individuals have significantly more partners, can account for the disproportional higher rate of spread of mpox among MSM. This pattern was not evident in previous outbreaks. These findings indicate that the basic reproduction number (R0) for mpox within the MSM sexual network might be significantly higher than 1, presenting difficulties in containing outbreaks within these communities compared to the general population. Therefore, targeted support and tailored messaging are essential to enhance prevention and early detection efforts among MSM with multiple partners [89].5Risk group for the 2022 mpox outbreakAfter the 2022 outbreak, MPV infection in the United States declined significantly. However, the risk of resurgence remains high in most jurisdictions if vaccination efforts are not sustained, as modeling analyses indicate that without continued vaccination of high-risk individuals, the likelihood and size of future mpox outbreaks are expected to increase over time [[91], [92], [93]]. The overall risk of mpox is determined by combining the infection probability with the disease impact on the affected population [94]. During the 2022 outbreak, most diagnosed human mpox cases were observed among MSM within the age group of 21–55 years [95], and the presenting genital lesions indicate a potential transmission during sexual intercourse [96]. While transmission through intact skin contact is less likely, it cannot be completely ruled out. Most cases within interconnected sexual networks among the MSM community might be considered a plausible source for the outbreak's initiation.5.1MSM-associated riskA significant proportion of the MSM population remains at risk of MPV infection. Specific sexual behaviors, such as engaging in multiple casual sexual partners within interconnected sexual networks, attending sexual events during the spring and summer months, and participating in chemsex parties, can further facilitate disease transmission [97]. Mpox transmission thrives in enclosed settings such as back rooms, saunas, and private or public sex clubs, where intimate and frequently anonymous sexual contacts occur. These settings create favorable conditions for the rapid spread of MPV infection [98]. During the 2022 outbreak, most MSM mpox patients did not have a recent travel history to the endemic regions in Central and Western African countries [99], affirming that human-to-human close contact is likely the primary transmission route [96]. While a majority of reported mpox cases among MSMs have been described as mild, the high likelihood of infection results in a moderate overall threat. It is important to emphasize that this moderate risk may be higher for vulnerable groups such as the elderly, PLWH, or those with compromised immune systems [100]. [Fig. 2] describes the percentage of MSM and people living with HIV who reported positive for MPV during the 2022 mpox outbreak.Fig. 2MSM community at higher risk of 2022 Mpox outbreak. (A)The pie chart describes the percentage of MSM reported positive for MPV. Out of the total cases of MPV reported during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, 32.00% were MSM, 6.47% were not MSM, and 61.53% did not disclose their status. (B) The pie chart describes the percentage of people living with HIV (PLWH) who reported positive for MPV. Out of the total cases of MPV reported during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, 20.73% were HIV positive, 18.60% were negative for HIV, and 60.66% did not disclose their status. (Source: https://worldhealthorg.shinyapps.io/mpx_global/accessed on 11-05-2023).Fig. 25.2Risk for the general populationThe risk of mpox transmission among the general population has been estimated to be low. Large gatherings increase the risk of MPV infection due to the close and frequent interactions among attendees. The data on the spread and pattern of MPV infection among the general population is limited, which warrants continuous monitoring of new cases globally [101].5.3Risk for health care workers (HCWs) and laboratory personnelOccupational exposure to the MPV is a significant concern as it can persist on surfaces for extended periods [102]. HCWs equipped with proper personal protective equipment (PPE) face a low risk of MPV transmission due to the disease's estimated low impact [103]. Medium risk arises during activities involving contact with a mpox patient's skin lesions or bodily fluids without appropriate PPE [104]. Conversely, unprotected HCWs face high risk if exposed to mpox patients' bodily fluids, inhalation of droplets, or experiencing penetrating sharps injuries. To mitigate mpox risk among HCWs, it is crucial to conduct thorough risk assessments and provide counseling on self-monitoring, timely reporting, and isolation protocols without neglecting the ongoing outbreak response.Risk among laboratory individuals: The MPV has been classified as an ACDP Category 3 pathogen by the Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (ACDP) [105]. If the recommended biosafety procedure are followed, the laboratory personnel have a low chance of occupational vulnerability. To ensure safety, each laboratory should conduct site- and activity-specific risk assessments for MPV infections, ensure enhanced safety precautions, and follow the WHO/US-CDC guidelines for specimen collection, handling, shipment, and testing [[106], [107], [108]]. This will require the collaboration of laboratory managers, testing personnel, and occupational health officers at each facility.5.4Risk of human-to-animal spillover eventsThe probability of cross-species spillover of the MPV is influenced by various barriers and bottlenecks, including differences in cellular receptors, immune responses, and other host restriction factors. The risk of MPV transmission from humans to pets is low as the reported cases of reverse zoonosis are limited. While in the USA, the Animal Health Authorities have assessed the risk of human-to-animal spillover of mpox to be very low [109], evidence of human-to-animal transmission of MPV has been reported in France and Brazil during the 2022 outbreak [69,110]. Therefore, monitoring and managing the potential risks associated with human-animal transmission is essential to prevent further transmission and possible disease establishment in wildlife.6Pathogenesis of mpox among MSMsThe common and nonspecific symptoms of mpox include fever, swollen lymph nodes, and muscle pain, which start appearing about one to two weeks after getting infected and can be mistaken for seasonal flu or a cold [111]. The immune system is triggered during this stage, leading to the enlargement of inguinal, maxillary, and cervical lymph nodes and the onset of fever [1]. Rashes typically appear in one to three days after the fever and lymph node swelling and follow a centrifugal distribution across the body, suggesting that the rashes appear more prominently on the extremities and face than on the abdomen and trunk [112]. The rash is a crucial feature of mpox and goes through different stages, starting with minor bumps and progressing to vesicles and pustules before finally crusting over [77].The rashes may sometimes damage the skin, making patients susceptible to secondary opportunistic infections. In rare cases, MPV can cause lung tissue damage and bronchopneumonia, especially in individuals co-infected with the influenza virus [113]. Severe inflammation and bronchopneumonia can make it difficult for patients to breathe and eat. In severe cases, mpox can lead to complications like corneal infection, resulting in scarring and permanent vision loss [114]. During the second week of illness, some patients develop gastrointestinal symptoms like vomiting and diarrhea that can lead to significant dehydration [77]. The accumulation of mutations within the MPV replication complex is predicted to play an important role in the 2022 mpox outbreak [115]. A recent report from the USA showed that during the 2022 outbreak of mpox, patients living with HIV were more prone to experience symptoms like rectal pain and bleeding, tenesmus, pus and blood in stool, and proctitis [15]. This indicates the requirements of close monitoring of PLWH for MPV infection and the development of severe diseases. In addition, the disease pathogenesis of the MPV/HIV co-infected persons needs special attention because the contraction of the body fluids from mpox lesions among MSM makes them more vulnerable to HIV infection. The pathogenesis of MPV/HIV co-infection among MSM is complex and needs to be studied in greater detail using animal models [116]. Additionally, MPV infection can compromise the immune system, making MSM individuals more susceptible to HIV acquisition and worsening the progression of the HIV disease. Furthermore, the presence of HIV can potentially increase the severity of mpox due to the presence of a compromised immune system.7Vaccine recommendation for mpox and its efficacy among MSMJYNNEOS (developed by Bavarian Nordic) is a Modified Vaccinia Ankara-Bavarian Nordic (MVA-BN) based vaccine initially developed as a 3rd generation smallpox vaccine [117] is approved by the FDA against MPV in people aged 18 years and above [91]. To ensure optimal protection against mpox, individuals must receive two doses of the vaccine within four weeks intervel. In animal studies, JYNNEOS demonstrated robust protection against MPV, with most of the animals receiving the vaccines developing sterilizing immunity, effectively preventing the disease without showing any symptoms [118]. As of August 2, 2023, the current guidelines from the CDC recommend vaccination against mpox for individuals who meet the following criteria: (1) if someone has known or suspected exposure to a person with mpox, (2) If someone has had a sex partner diagnosed with mpox within the past two weeks, (3) For gay, bisexual, or men who have sex with men (MSM), as well as transgender, nonbinary, or gender-diverse individuals who, in the past 6 months, have been diagnosed with sexually transmitted diseases (e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis), or have had more than one sexual partner. (4) If someone has engaged in any of the following within the past 6 months: had sex at a commercial sex venue, such as a sex club or bathhouse, or engaged in sexual activities related to a large commercial event or in an area (city or county) where monkeypox virus (MPV) transmission is occurring, or engaged in sex in exchange for money or other items, or has a sexual partner who belongs to any of the high-risk groups mentioned above, or has HIV or other causes of immune suppression and has had recent or anticipated future risk of monkeypox exposure from any of the scenarios mentioned above, or works in settings where there is a chance of monkeypox exposure, and persons who work with orthopoxviruses in a laboratory [119].A recent study from Israel included 2054 males who met the eligibility criteria for vaccination. Of these, 1037 individuals (50%) received a single dose of the JYNNEOS (MVA-BN) vaccine during the study recruitment period and completed at least 90-day follow-up, the other 50% served as placebo control. Over the study duration, five infections occurred in vaccinated individuals, whereas 16 infections were confirmed in the unvaccinated group. Utilizing a Cox proportional hazards regression model with time-dependent covariates and accounting for sociodemographic and clinical risk factors, the study reports that the estimated vaccine effectiveness was 86% (95% confidence interval, 59–95%). These findings indicate that a single dose of MVA-BN in a high-risk cohort is significantly associated with a reduced risk of MPV infection [91]. Another case-control study using a nationwide Epic electronic health record (EHR) database (Cosmos) in the USA estimated the efficacy of JYNNEOS during the period from August 15 to November 19, 2022 [120]. Case patients were identified based on having either a diagnosis code for MPV or a positive laboratory result for orthopoxvirus or MPV.On the other hand, control patients were selected if they had a new diagnosis of HIV infection or a prescription for preexposure prophylaxis against HIV. Out of 2193 case-patients, 25 individuals, and 8319 control patients, 335 received two vaccine doses. The estimated adjusted vaccine effectiveness for complete vaccination in these groups was 66.0%. Additionally, 146 case patients and 1000 control patients received only one dose of the vaccine, with the estimated adjusted vaccine effectiveness calculated at 35.8%. In another case-control study among MSM and transgender adults aged 18–49 years between August 19, 2022–March 31, 2023, the vaccine efficacy (VE) was estimated among a total of 309 case-patients (diagnosis of confirmed or probable MPV or Orthopoxvirus infection, made on or after August 19, 2022) with a matched 608 control patients (patients attended a clinic for sexually transmitted infections (STI), HIV care, or HIV preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) on or after August 19, 2022) [121]. The adjusted VE was 75.2% for partial vaccination (1 dose) and 85.9% for complete vaccination (2 doses). Among the full vaccination group, the adjusted VE was 70.2% among immunocompromised participants and 87.8% among immunocompetent participants, respectively. Overall, these studies indicate that although the smallpox vaccine comes out to help trim the rapid spread of the current outbreak of Mpox among MSM, this vaccine cannot provide sterilizing protection against the MPV and has blunted efficacy for immune-compromised patients [122]. Additionally, the current vaccines are not available in mpox-endemic countries in Africa, which keeps the possibility of spreading the infection in non-endemic locations.Meanwhile, caution should be exercised while administering the smallpox vaccines to immunocompromised persons as the live attenuated vaccine may cause severe and potentially life-threatening complications in immunocompromised individuals like PLWH, people undergoing chemotherapy for cancer treatment, and organ transplant patients [123]. Furthermore, considering the likely mucosal transmission of the MPV, mucosal immunity could play a crucial role in establishing long-lasting immune responses. It is unclear whether the available vaccines can effectively generate robust mucosal immunity. The mucosal dendritic cells (DCs) and IgA secretion at the mucosal interface need further investigation to better understand their role in protecting mucosal transmissions. Case reports of mpox in individuals with a history of smallpox vaccination suggest that smallpox vaccines may not provide lifelong immunity against MPV [124]. As a result, booster doses might be necessary, especially for individuals with ongoing exposure risk factors. The optimal timing for booster vaccinations must be determined using pre-clinical animal models.Additionally, a uniform vaccination approach is required to address the global problem effectively, and it is logical to provide vaccinations on a priority bases to the high-risk groups like MSMs with interconnected social and sexual networks in newly impacted countries. However, the vaccination strategies in endemic regions, like parts of the Africa, may need to focus on populations at the most significant risk of animal exposure. Alongside vaccination, there is an urgent requirement for improved treatments for those affected by the disease. These initiatives should be prioritized alongside traditional infection control and prevention methods to foster trust within the affected communities.8Treatment optionsIn the 2022 outbreak of mpox, the MSM community got a disproportionally higher infection rate than the general population. It is also well known that the prevalence of HIV is higher among MSMs due to several comorbid conditions. Whether HIV is an independent risk factor for acquiring MPV infection remains unknown. However, PLWH with unsuppressed viremia remains at higher risk of developing severe mpox disease if they are infected with MPV [[125], [126], [127]]. In the general population, mpox is self-limiting and only requires symptomatic care to prevent dehydration, and in rare cases antibiotics to prevent/treat secondary bacterial infections [128]. There are no approved antivirals to treat mpox. USA-FDA recommends use of tecovirimat in immunocompromised persons along with brincidofovir, and vaccinia immune globulin intravenous (VIGIV) as required [129]. Tecovirimat, referred to as TPOXX or ST-246, has received FDA approval to treat smallpox in both adults and children [130]. Tecovirimat binds with orthopoxviruses VP37 (a phospholipase protein), and blocks its interaction with cellular Rab9 GTPase and TIP47, essential for creating enveloped virions. Thereby halting the cell-to-cell and long-distance spread of the virus.A retrospective study reviews the efficacy of tecovirimat for severe mpox among HIV-positive and negative people under the CDC EA-IND protocol. Out of 154 people who received the treatment, 82 were HIV-negative, and 72 were positive for HIV. The overall treatment outcome was similar between the groups [125]. It must be noted that tecovirimat may lower the plasma concentration of rilpivirine, an essential component of CAB/RPV long acting treatment as part of the combinational antiretroviral therapy (cART) for PLWH [131]. Brincidofovir (Lipid-conjugated analog of cidofovir) or cidofovir (inhibits OPXV DNA polymerase) should be added to tecovirimat in critically ill patients or to patients in whom tecovirimat is contraindicated. While prescribing Brincidofovir among PLWH, it should be considered that HIV Protease inhibitors and cobicistat can boost its plasma concentration [131]. VIGIV (vaccinia immune globulin intravenous) is recommended for immunocompromised patients unable to mount desirable immune responses due to HIV infection or solid organ transplant. For patients receiving VIGIV infusion, vaccination with live viruses (varicella, measles, mumps, and rubella) should be deferred for three months [132]. In a comprehensive review, we discussed the use of all EUA-granted drugs against mpox, their limitations in inhibiting viral replication in strains having the signature mutations reported in the 2022 MPV, and the importance of the development of MPV-specific therapeutics for the current and future mpox outbreaks [133].9ConclusionThis review sheds light on the complex web of challenges of mpox 2022 outbreak within the context of the MSM community. It underscores the pressing need to address the medical aspects of mpox and the socio-cultural stigma that often surround it. By considering the multifaceted nature of the risk factors and pathogenesis, we have discussed the need to develop more inclusive and effective preventive strategies and personalized treatment interventions for the MSM community. As we navigate the intersection of healthcare and social dynamics among the sexual minorities like MSM, by fostering inclusivity, education, and collaboration of them with general population, we can aspire to a future where stigma is replaced by empathy, risk factors are mitigated through knowledge, and treatment approaches are grounded in a deep understanding of the challenges faced by the MSM community in the context of mpox and any future outbreaks of sexually transmitted diseases.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: VARICELLA-ZOSTER VIRUS (VZV)
================================================================================
Title: Varicella caused by airborne transmission of a localised herpes zoster infection in a family

BackgroundVaricella, also known as chickenpox, can be easily spread via airborne transmission.1 Herpes zoster, also known as shingles, is caused by reactivation of the varicella-zoster virus (VZV) that reached the sensory ganglia during varicella. Localised herpes zoster infections spread by direct contact with an active lesion, which is usually a rash, and it will not spread through the air unless it becomes a disseminated infection.2Varicella is a vaccine-preventable disease. However, in Japan, there are many patients who have never been vaccinated against varicella because routine VZV vaccinations only started in 2014, which was later than other developed countries. For people over 50 years old, a zoster vaccine is available, but it is not generally well accepted.In this case report, the patient had never been vaccinated against VZV because the vaccination programme was voluntary when he was a child. His father, whom the patient was living with, developed a localised herpes zoster infection first. The patient developed varicella 2 weeks after his father’s herpes zoster infection. This case suggests that for unvaccinated patients living in a house where the distance between people is very close, a localised herpes zoster infection can spread through the air.Case presentationThe patient is a 15-year-old adolescent boy without a previous medical history. He lives with his parents and his 8-year-old brother. His mother developed varicella in her childhood, and the patient’s brother had been vaccinated against VZV. However, the patient was never vaccinated against VZV, as confirmed in his vaccination record book, because the vaccine programme was voluntary when he was a child. A fever and sore throat started and continued for 4 days before the patient came to our hospital. His fever was over 38°C, and he experienced chills. Two days later, he visited a clinic with his father because his stomachache had not improved for the past 2 weeks. His father was diagnosed with a localised herpes zoster in his left abdomen. The patient also had rashes and blisters all over his body. Varicella was suspected, and acetaminophen and valaciclovir hydrochloride were prescribed. However, he developed a headache and nausea and was subsequently referred to our hospital for a more detailed examination. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 102/67 mm Hg, heart rate of 71/min, respiratory rate of 12/min, body temperature of 36.7°C, SpO2 of 99% (on ambient air). Although the patient appeared to be sick, his Glasgow Coma Scale was 15/15, and his cognition was clear. On physical examination, both pupils were 5 mm with a normal light reflex. No papilloedema was observed. There were no signs of a rash on his eye conjunctiva and in his mouth. His neck was easily movable and nuchal rigidity was negative. There were rashes and blisters around his forehead (figure 1), body (figure 2) and four limbs. Part of his rashes became crusty.Figure 1Image of blisters and rashes on patient’s forehead and chest from suspected varicella.Figure 2Image of blisters and rashes on patient’s forehead and chest from suspected varicella.TreatmentBased on the patient’s medical history and the state of his rash, his clinical diagnosis was varicella. Because his cognition was clear, herpes zoster-associated meningitis or encephalitis was not suspected. We continued treatment with valaciclovir hydrochloride, as initially prescribed.Outcome and follow-upThe patient’s IgG and IgM levels for VZV were positive, and the diagnosis of varicella was confirmed. After he continued taking valaciclovir hydrochloride for a few days, his fever resolved and the rash disappeared. He denied direct contact with his father’s herpes zoster lesions. His mother and brother did not become sickened with varicella.DiscussionIn this case, airborne transmission of VZV from a localised herpes zoster infection of the patient’s father spread to the unvaccinated patient in the house. This caused the patient to become sickened with varicella.In Japan since 1999, around one million patients sickened with varicella were estimated to visit a doctor each year. After routine vaccination against VZV started in 2014, reported varicella cases decreased less than one-fourth.3 However, unvaccinated patients still exist, and the number of them with no previous exposure to VZV is unknown.Varicella’s incubation period is 14–16 days on average.1 In this case, the patient’s father had left-side abdominal pain from the herpes zoster 2 weeks before the patient was diagnosed with varicella. He did not touch his father’s herpes zoster rash. This suggests that VZV is very likely to spread via airborne transmission at home. Almost all cases of herpes zoster are associated with a viremia, which would carry virus to the nose and throat.4 In one report, individuals with herpes zoster who had covered rashes on the trunk and those who had exposed rashes on the arms or hands were equally likely to spread VZV.5 Therefore, a localised herpes zoster infection anywhere on the body can be the cause of airborne transmission.6 7 This is an important issue for isolation precautions in hospitals. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines, last updated in 2007, call for only standard precautions and covering of zoster lesions in patients with localised herpes zoster. However, some reports have appealed for stricter quarantine measures to be applied as they are for other diseases with airborne transmission.8–10To decrease the number of patients affected with varicella, a national immunisation programme for unvaccinated children is essential. To identify unvaccinated people, an antibody screening test may be optional, for example, when these individuals enrol at a university or when they are employed. Furthermore, middle-aged and elderly individuals are recommended to take the zoster vaccine. Some countries have already introduced VZV vaccination programmes for the elderly.11 12 In Japan, the VZV live vaccine called Zostavax is available to individuals over 50 years old, but the use of vaccine is limited. The morbidity rate for adult patients with herpes zoster is suspected to remain relatively high and will increase as the population continues to become older. Many people suffer from complications associated with herpes zoster including postherpetic neuralgia. To decrease herpes zoster infections and also to protect individuals who have not yet received the vaccine, routine zoster vaccinations for individuals 50 years and older are highly recommended, because a localised herpes zoster infection can easily be transmitted via the airborne route to unvaccinated members of a family living in the same home. However, adults who are immunosuppressed generally should not receive live zoster vaccine bacause of the risk of disseminated infection. Three deaths have occurred after Zostavax immunisation of immunocompromised elderly people.13 Instead, a new inactivated vaccine called Shingrix has become available since 2020 in Japan.Learning pointsUnder very close distances, such as in one’s home, people who are not vaccinated against varicella can be infected from a localised herpes zoster infection via the airborne route.To decrease varicella cases, routine administration of the varicella vaccine in children and the zoster vaccine in adults is highly recommended.


Title: Fraternal Twins: The Enigmatic Role of the Immune System in Alphaherpesvirus Pathogenesis and Latency and Its Impacts on Vaccine Efficacy

1. Introduction It is evident that primates have harbored their herpes virus pathogens for millions of years and, perhaps not surprisingly, neither party now typically suffers more than minor inconvenience from this interaction. As leading HSV authority Bernard Roizman observed long ago: “unlike love herpes is forever”. However as with love, even in its passionate phase, there can be ups and downs with the virus causing episodes of discord that are almost invariably resolved satisfactorily—at least in hosts with a fully functional immune system. The viral party trick that mostly accounts for the harmony of the long-term tolerated relationship is the adoption by the virus of an alternative lifestyle called latency. During latency, the virus is not multiplying and not causing overt tissue damage, nor is it being spread to other hosts. Indeed, with both HSV and VZV latency, which mainly occurs in the peripheral nervous system, the latently infected neurons express few if any virally encoded proteins and thus would be expected to evade the attention of the immune system. However, the latent HSV virus does express RNA transcripts that are not found when the virus is undergoing productive viral replication. These so-called latency-associated transcripts (LAT) are somehow involved in the maintenance and perhaps the establishment of latency. While LAT is critical to this phenomenon, latency is far more complicated, involving multiple molecular and immunological co-factors. The topic has enthralled and caused debate among herpes virologists for decades and the definitive story has yet to be written. However, there are many excellent reviews composed by the main participants in the latency saga and several should be read to obtain a balanced idea of what is likely to be occurring [1,2,3,4]. LAT involvement seems to be a critical component, but viral mutants unable to produce the LAT transcripts can still establish and maintain latency in animal models. Such mutants, however, do have difficulty re-entering the productive replication cycle when exposed to stimuli that normally cause reactivation and that terminates latency in individual nerve cells [1]. A complicating issue is that mice are not men and many studies have been and continue to be performed in mice. Moreover, even studies in animal models employing their homologous alphaherpesvirus may not faithfully reflect how HSV sets up and maintains latency in mankind [4].VZV latency was initially believed to differ substantially from HSV latency due to observations that as many as nine viral proteins were readily demonstrated in latently infected neurons [5]. The discovery of varicella latency transcript (VLT) implied that VZV latency probably more closely resembles that of HSV [6,7]. Whether or not any viral proteins are produced during VZV latency remains to be formally demonstrated. In addition, it was determined with more sophisticated technology that VZV, previously believed to produce no LAT transcript, did in fact express high levels of VZV LAT (VLT) during latency [6]. This brings up a common fact in science. It is generally more difficult to be confident about negative data than it is for positive findings. Explaining how alphaherpesviruses set up, maintain and breakdown latency has commanded the attention of (and not infrequently frustrated) the brightest minds in the herpes virology field. The truth is that, while impressive progress has been made toward understanding latency, we are nowhere close to putting a final period on the stories for either HSV or VZV. In this opinion article, our mission is to emphasize the role that the immune system may be playing during the establishment, maintenance and breakdown of latency. Along the way, we plan to shed light on the reasons why vaccines against the closely related human viruses HSV and VZV have had remarkably different results. Against HSV viruses HSV-1 and HSV-2, in spite of enormous effort, we still lack a vaccine that is in any meaningful sense effective. In contrast, against its VZV cousin, with far less effort and a dearth of experimental animal models to evaluate approaches, we enjoy effective prophylactic vaccines as well as vaccines that successfully diminish the risk for developing the painful curse of shingles. These vaccines are somehow either preventing or containing reactivation of VZV from latency. 2. Review2.1. The Highlights of HSV PathogenesisThe two species of herpes simplex viruses are prevalent human pathogens around the world. Estimates are that 3.7 billion persons are seropositive for HSV-1 and 500 million for HSV-2 [8]. Both agents infect surface tissues, with HSV-1 characteristically the oro-labial mucosa and sometimes the eye and HSV-2 the genital surface. However, this location preference is changing with HSV-1 now a common genital infection in many societies and HSV-2 infections are also found on the face [9]. HSV infections result from close contact with the usually abraded surface. The virus primarily infects epithelial cells and most often causes an inflammatory reaction that is dominated initially by components of the innate immune system. These innate responses usually succeed in controlling the infection and resolving lesions, including interferons, neutrophils, macrophages, dendritic cells and natural killer cells [10]. Indeed, HSV infections are more severe and can be lethal in patients with genetic deficiencies of innate immunity, especially those involving the production of or response to interferons [11]. The adaptive immune response is also induced following infection and likely plays a role in resolving lesions. This point is emphasized when HIV patients with suppressed immunity are infected with HSV. Such patients often suffer severe and more prolonged herpetic lesions [12]. Suppression of T cell mediated responses appears to be more consequential than suppressed antibody production, a finding supported by observations of primary immunodeficiencies in humans and some animal models [13]. However, viral-specific antibodies resulting from a previous infection likely play a major role in palliating reinfection, although it has been well documented in reports on genital herpes from the Wald group that reinfection does occur [14]. Additionally, the HSV virus does possess several immune evasive mechanisms [15] that impair but do not entirely suppress antibody and T cell effector activity against the virus.No patient infected with HSV succeeds in extirpating the virus from their body. Thus, inevitably in the course of primary infection the virus gains entrance to sensory nerve endings and is transported retrograde by physiological axonal transport mechanisms to the nerve cell body. Much is now known, thanks especially to the Enquist and Cunningham groups [16,17], about the transport process and it seems that viral parts rather than intact virions are transported. Once within the axon, the virion is inaccessible by the immune system and there are no known practical approaches to interrupt axonal transport. The end of the viral journey has received much investigation since the outcome differs from one neuron to another for reasons still being explored. Some neurons support a productive cycle, which leads to the destruction of the neuron and many nearby satellite cells. Other neurons signal the virus in some incompletely understood fashion to adopt the latency lifestyle, which means expression of LAT transcripts, but usually no viral protein production [1,2]. The latent state is not permanent at least for individually infected neurons among the large number affected. However, just as we cannot explain how the lion in the African savannah selects a victim from countless wildebeest candidates, we do not understand why reactivation on a single occasion from latency occurs in only a tiny fraction of latently infected neurons. There are many reviews that exhaustively cover the controversial topic of latency and multiple articles should be read to obtain a balanced understanding of the latency saga [1,2,3,4]. However, for those interested mainly in immunity, an excellent review was recently published that describes and debates in an even-handed way the influence of intrinsic, innate and adaptive aspects of immunity on the establishment, maintenance and breakdown of ganglionic latency [18]. In this opinion article, we only strive to provide some take home consensus messages about the role of immunity during HSV latency with emphasis on observations that might explain why controlling HSV infections with vaccines has largely failed, which is not the case for the fellow alphaherpesvirus VZV.For many years the paradigm was that during HSV latency no viral proteins were made by infected neurons. This idea made it difficult to consider any role for the adaptive immune system in controlling latency. However, times and technology have changed and now it seems that minimal protein expression can occur either continuously or more likely sporadically in some latently infected neurons [18]. Immunologists welcomed this idea since it means that the immune system could be participating in latency decision events and that conceivably these could be usefully redirected by the armory of immune manipulators now available. Some years back, some investigators began looking at the trigeminal ganglion (TG) in mice infected in the eye with HSV. They made the surprising observation that a pronounced inflammatory response was present in the TG. This became evident a few days after ocular infection and could remain for a prolonged period [19,20]. Initially, the reaction was mainly composed of innate cells, but subsequently T cells, particularly CD8 T cells, dominated the inflammatory reactions [18]. In C57/B6 mice, the majority of these CD8 T cells were viral antigen-specific and many were shown to surround neurons. Subsequently, reports from the Verjans group, who had access to human cadavaric material showed that inflammatory cells were common in human trigeminal ganglia and that in some cases [19], T cells cloned from ganglia showed reactivity to HSV specific peptides [10].These observations raise questions whether the viral-specific T cell response in the TG, known now to involve CD4 and CD8 T cells, plays a role in latency decision events. Such T cell or even antibody responses are likely to occur too late following primary infections to influence the initial decision between establishing a latent or lytic outcome in neurons. However, the adaptive responses do serve to limit the extent of neural infection and in preventing its spread to the CNS [21]. Thus, SCID mice infected with HSV invariably die of encephalitis, although if infected with a low viral dose their TG neurons can be shown to support a latent infection [22]. Studies on the extent of neuronal latency in the TG in knockout mouse models with compromised aspects of adaptive immunity aimed at defining the critical mechanisms involved have been difficult to interpret since such animals usually develop compensating immune activities [23].Adaptive immune activities might not have an impact on initial events after primary neuronal infection, but the responses are likely to act to limit virus spreading to satellite cells during the initial period and after reactivation, perhaps resulting in the expansion of latency in the TG. It is also conceivable that once latency is established, immune T cells responding to stimulation from transiently antigen expressing neurons or satellite cells, particularly DC [24], could conceivably signal reactivating neurons to stop progressing to productive replication. If and how this latter effect could occur is not known, but if it does happen it is likely to be mediated by cytokines such as interferon gamma acting to modulate molecular events in the neurons that sustain latency. This might imply that immunomodulators could be designed to maintain the latent state and avoid the misery of reactivated lesions. Hope springs eternal when it comes to dealing with herpes recurrences!Another useful function of the inflammatory reaction, especially the T cell response in the TG, could be to prevent the derepressed virus from any reactivating neuron from anterograde passage in the axon to infect the brain. The outcome can be encephalitis, often a fatal consequence when it happens with HSV infections [25]. Fortunately, encephalitis is a rare outcome with HSV infections in mankind, but a frequent event in monkeys infected with HSV as is infection of humans with the macaque alphaherpesvirus (MHV-1) [26]. There is at least circumstantial evidence that the immune response in latently infected TG participates in constraining virus from entering the brain. In our own studies for example, we could show that if the metabolic function of T cells was compromised by treating animals with 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2DG) soon after they received ocular infection with HSV, many of the animals developed encephalitis and needed to be euthanized [27]. We could show that there were fewer activated cells in the TG of 2DG treated animals and pronounced reduction in the number of IFN-γ-producing cells. We surmised that the compromised T cells were unable to prevent the virus from spreading anterograde to the brain, but could provide no empirical evidence for this conjecture. However, using an in vitro system of viral reactivation, we could show that metabolic inhibition of T cell function with 2DG served to accelerate reactivation [27].Although herpes may be forever, neuronal latency for HSV in the natural host decidedly is not. Latency breaks down periodically in response to a range of stimuli, but never in all latently infected neurons at the same time. Potential triggers for reactivation include emotional stress, hormonal changes, UV light exposure, among others. The consequences of reactivation also vary in different individuals and at different times. On most occasions, reactivation is unnoticed and subclinical, but at other times is overt, often troublesome, with lesions occurring usually at the primary site of infection. We suspect the variables that impact on lesion severity and frequency are multiple and include the efficacy of local immunity at the peripheral site and the load of the virus that the immune system has to deal with. We know from the elegant work of Zhu in the Corey group that waiting close to the nerve endings from which virus emerges during reactivation are antigen specific CD8 T cells that are members of the resident memory constituency [28]. These cells are believed to limit the extent of viral replication [29]. Additional components of immune defense, such as antigen-specific CD4 T cells and other protective antiviral participants such as NK cells, are also involved in affecting the outcome of reactivation, but these have received less study. The mystery is why are the defense participants more effective at certain times, but not at others. One likely reason could be that the numbers or state of activation and function of the immune participants responsible for control could vary. Conceivably, the variability could be explained, at least in part, by differences in host metabolism and nutrient supply as has been suggested by Zhu and colleagues [30].We need to provide mechanistic explanations for the variable outcome since then it may become possible to manipulate the local sites to recruit and expand the relevant participants to the site and make them function more effectively. We are enthralled by the prospect that this might be achievable using the recently developed mRNA vaccine approach using vaccines composed of multiple mRNA species. These components could include molecules that recruit immune effectors as well as those that activate and expand the appropriate specificities of T cells, which Koelle and colleagues have demonstrated are involved in local lesion control [31]. If the explanation involves metabolic factors, these might be readjusted by nutritional changes or by local administration of drugs that change metabolic events [32]. Should this therapeutic vaccine approach achieve success against HSV recurrences, we shall be one step closer to achieving the accomplishments of our VZV colleagues who have devised successful vaccines that blunt the consequences of VZV reactivation [31].2.2. Immunity and VZV LatencyIt has long been understood that VZV establishes latency in cranial and dorsal root ganglia (DRG), and that reactivation from that state is characterized by the intra-ganglionic transit of the virus to the skin, producing a dermatomally restricted rash illness. The study of the establishment, maintenance and reactivation of VZV from latency has proven very difficult for a number of reasons. Firstly, VZV is an extremely fastidious virus and can only be effectively propagated in culture in a limited number of human cells and, less successfully in a few animal cells. A second and related issue is that there are no practical animal models. For example, the cotton rat model is of limited use, since it is not possible to reactivate VZV from infected neurons, and this likely reflects an abortive rather than a latent infection [33]. Similarly, while embryonic guinea pig cells are among the few non-primate cells that can be productively infected with VZV (passage in guinea pig cells was part of the process for attenuating the Oka vaccine strain), and neuronal tissue can be infected with VZV, it has not been possible to stimulate reactivation of the virus from these tissues [34]. Studies of the closely related simian varicella virus (SVV) in African green monkeys and macaques have provided many useful observations, but this model also has limitations [35]. One animal model that has provided many useful insights has been the SCID-hu mouse. Fetal DRG can be implanted under the kidney capsule and has been shown to retain most of the characteristics of normal DRG. Infection of these implanted DRG with VZV resulted in a transient viremia that resolved completely within weeks [36]. VZV-infected ganglia could be detected months later. Since these mice lack an acquired immune system, this indicated that establishment of VZV latency and shut-down of neuronal gene expression are not dependent on components of acquired immunity. SCID mice do have intact activities of the innate immune system, such as NK cells. Infiltration of macrophages and NK cells into VZV-infected ganglia suggest that components of the innate immune system may be involved in controlling VZV replication in neurons [37]. Introduction of human VZV-immune T cells resulted in similar DRG infiltration to that observed in post-mortem-excised DRG. Efforts to study ganglia removed quickly post-mortem have been complicated by rapid initiation of viral transcription induced by hypoxia [38]. Consequently, much of the characterization of VZV latency, including the role of infiltrating immune cells, must be inferred by observations made for HSV, not a desirable situation.As noted earlier, older studies supported the notion that VZV latency was fundamentally different than that of HSV-1 and HSV-2 [39]. It has now been established that neurons latently infected with VZV do indeed liberally express a transcript (VLT) that is antisense to the ORF61 gene, an important transactivator and homolog to HSV ICP0 [7]. In addition to its apparent role in VZV latency, VLT is also expressed in some lytically infected cells [6,7]. A microRNA (VZVsncRNA13) antisense to the leader sequence of ORF61 promotes VZV growth and spread in VZV-infected epithelial cells, possibly by inhibiting VLT [40]. To a lesser extent, the ORF63 gene is also transcribed in latently infected neurons, but no other VZV transcripts and no VZV proteins are detectable. Early reports of multiple VZV proteins in latently infected cells were called into question when it was discovered that several ascites-derived anti-VZV reagents cross-react with the blood group A antigens [41]. Moreover, analysis of the complete VZV transcriptome in trigeminal ganglia obtained immediately post-mortem among VZV latently infected subjects produced no viral transcripts for up to 9 hours post-mortem (39). Thus, current observations imply that expression of LAT and shutdown of viral transcription are consistent among the human alphaherpesviruses. Again, although the transient partial gene expression observed in HSV-infected neurons has not been demonstrated for VZV, it can probably be predicted that a similar bi-/multi-trigger requirement for emergence from latency is also the modus operandi for VZV latency.Symptomatic reactivation of VZV leads to a dermatomally distributed painful rash illness called herpes zoster. It has been well established that the single greatest risk factor for developing herpes zoster is advancing age, and this in turn correlates with an age-related decline in the immune system [42,43,44]. While it can be argued that this risk factor reflects the relatively lower capacity of the geriatric immune system to contain reactivation, the actual defect(s) that permits the emergence of varicella from the latent state has not been identified. On the other hand, multiple immune cells infiltrate latently infected ganglia and remain resident during latency [45,46,47]. Both innate immune cells (notably NK cells and macrophages) and T cells can be found in latently infected ganglia. Unlike HSV, there has, as yet, been no success in determining whether or not the infiltrating T cells (both CD4+ and CD8+) are antigen-specific for VZV. Innate immune cells, specifically NK cells and macrophages may play important roles in establishing and maintaining latency [46,47]. VZV infection of fetal dorsal root ganglia in the SCID-hu mouse model leads to a transient uptick in viral replication, followed by a reduction in the level of viral DNA and restricted viral transcription [48]. This observation implies that innate immunity plays a role in establishing VZV latency. Satellite glial cells (SGC) and microglia obtained from trigeminal ganglia of cadavers are induced by toll-like receptor ligands for TLR1-6 to produce IL-6 and TNF-α, both of which have regulatory effects on T cells [49]. Intraganglionic cytokines produced following SVV or VZV infection enhance T cell activity, including upregulation of both MHC I and II antigens, and secretion of IFN-α and IL-6 [45,46,47]. In a study of human whole fetal dorsal root ganglia, it was shown that bystander uninfected neurons, but not VZV infected neurons, produce the chemokine CXCL10, which is presumably the impetus for drawing immune cells into the infected ganglion [50]. In SVV-infected monkey ganglia, IFN-I-stimulated genes are upregulated in the infected neurons themselves, and type I interferon expression is upregulated in VZV-infected human DRG. These findings implicate neurons as participants in the control of viral replication. It has also been shown in the SVV model that reduction in viral transcription is accompanied by the infiltration of CD8+ T cells [46].An increase in MHC-II expression on satellite glial cells also implies a critical role for MHC-II-restricted T cell responses. Depletion of CD4+ T cells or CD8+ T cells following SVV infection produced sustained lytic viral gene expression in 30–60% of infected ganglia, indicating that T cells infiltrating ganglia contribute to the control of SVV replication and potentially to the establishment of latency [51].One promising avenue for studying latency and reactivation for VZV has been the development of in vitro assays using cultured neurons. Two general types of systems have been employed: (1) non-stem cell-derived neurons and (2) stem cell-derived neurons [52]. The first category involves using cell cultures of human neurons obtained from ganglia removed post-mortem. This approach has the fatal limitation that the majority of human ganglia already carry latent VZV infections. As such, it is not possible to use these cells to study the establishment of latent VZV infection. This shortcoming could conceivably be overcome by using ganglionic tissue from aborted fetuses, since such cells would be unlikely to carry a latent infection [5,7,53]. However, given that the MRC-5 cell line, established more than half a century ago from the lung tissue of an aborted fetus and still under attack today by anti-vaccine and religious groups—an approach using human neuronal cell cultures from this source is certain to be deluged with ethical objections. It has also not been possible to achieve reactivation from latency with the release of infectious progeny in fully differentiated neuronal cells. The model has, however, played a crucial role in identifying the VZV VLT transcript and in establishing the presence of ORF63 transcript in latently infected cells [7]. The use of stem cell-derived neurons in tissue culture has led to more promising results. This approach offers a number of advantages, e.g., the cells can be expanded and maintained in culture and, derived from the same volunteer, do not exhibit the genetic heterogeneity of other in vitro systems [52,53]. Moreover, sufficient knowledge about the factors required to drive the development of neurons has made it possible to impel in vitro differentiation to produce specific neuronal subtypes [54,55,56,57,58]. Human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived neurons have already been successfully used to both establish VZV latency and to induce reactivation with the production of infectious VZV [54,56]. Not all stem-cell-derived neurons are capable of supporting a latent VZV infection. Induced pluripotent human stem cells (iPSC) could be productively infected with VZV, but it was not possible to establish a persistent infection in these cells [55]. If stem cell-derived human neuronal cells can be combined with other cells in culture to better mimic the microenvironment of ganglia, it may provide a valuable tool for evaluating the role of immune cells in establishing, maintaining and reactivating the latent virus. The immune system appears to play important roles in controlling the latent state, but of course the overall process is much more complicated. The LATs produced by both HSV and VZV play an important role [7]. In addition, extensive modifications to the viral genome by histone deposition, base methylation and acetylation produce a state of repressed transcription that requires orchestrated reversal before full reactivation can occur [58,59]. MicroRNAs have now been identified in these viruses with evidence that one or more of them are involve in regulating latency [60]. This is necessarily a multi-factor process, which probably explains periodic limited transcription and translation in HSV-infected neurons; these episodes represent abortive attempts to emerge from latency.2.3. The Quest for an Efficacious HSV VaccineFor multiple decades, we have searched for an effective vaccine approach to prevent and control HSV infections in mankind. The rationale for developing an HSV vaccine is predicated on several factors. It is estimated that half a billion people are genitally infected with HSV, and it is the leading cause of genital ulcer disease [61]. Available evidence indicates that HSV elevates the risk of acquiring and transmitting HIV [62]. Finally, there are currently no effective strategies for substantially impacting the incidence of HSV infection. There are two main strategies for developing an HSV vaccine, each of which is dependent on the desired public health impact of the vaccine. The first strategy is for a prophylactic vaccine. A prophylactic vaccine would be administered prior to HSV infection, with the goal of inducing a broad immune response, ideally including a neutralizing antibody and both CD8+ and CD4+ activities. The goals of a prophylactic vaccine would be to reduce genital ulcer disease, to prevent or reduce the extent of latent infection, and/or to reduce shedding and transmission. The ultimate and likely unattainable goal would be to prevent HSV infection altogether. The second strategy is developing a therapeutic vaccine. A therapeutic vaccine would be administered to persons with a history of symptomatic genital ulcer disease or virus reactivating in the eye that ultimately causes blindness. The goals of a therapeutic vaccine are the same as for a prophylactic vaccine with the obvious exception of preventing HSV infection [63]. Vaccine development generally proceeds through a series of experimental trials, failure in any one of which might result in the abandonment of the vaccine candidate. Initially, candidate vaccines are evaluated in one or more animal model systems to (1) establish that the vaccine is not toxic and (2) that it induces an immune response. This phase of vaccine evaluation typically involves a rather cursory look at the immune response and more often than not meets expectations with flying colors. Vaccines that successfully complete their evaluation in animals then proceed through as many as four trial phases in human volunteers. Modeling studies have provided some useful insights into the requirements for a putative HSV vaccine [63]. For example, an HSV vaccine would not be required to simultaneously impact susceptibility to infection, disease severity and likelihood to shed and transmit the virus to be effective at the population level. Elaborating on that point, breakthrough effects of a prophylactic vaccine are most important when vaccine susceptibility effects are limited. In addition, catch-up vaccination is likely to be important to optimal vaccine impact. In populations with high prevalence of HSV-1, a vaccine needs to be effective in persons already HSV-1-infected. Last but not least, even if a vaccine is effective in only one sex, it could provide herd immunity for the other sex assuming that coverage levels are sufficiently high. A modeling study of HSV-2 and HIV transmission in sub-Saharan Africa concluded that a prophylactic vaccine just 75% effective against infection would be expected to reduce HSV-2 incidence >55% over 10 years, assuming 50% coverage of 14-year-olds with catch-up up to age 29. It was also predicted to prevent approximately 10% of HIV infections in the same time frame [64].The track record for HSV vaccines has been perfectly abysmal. At least 20 vaccines have been attempted, with some still in various stages of trial. Without going into detail, these have included live-attenuated vaccines (with selected deletions), adjuvanted and unadjuvanted subunit vaccines, replication-defective vaccines (again with selected deletions and/or mutations), and adjuvanted or unadjuvanted DNA vaccines [65]. Candidate vaccines for HSV have generally failed fairly early on in phase 2 trial or earlier. Only gD2 subunit vaccines have completed large phase 3 trials (by different companies and using different adjuvant systems), but provided limited protection at best. No HSV vaccine has been licensed by the FDA. One problematic issue with evaluating prophylactic vaccines against HSV is that (unlike with animal models) an unambiguous history of HSV infection in humans can only be established using type-specific serology. At least half of HSV infections are asymptomatic. A US seroprevalence study published in 2014 found that 65% of people were HSV-1 seropositive by the age of 49, and 26% were HSV-2 seropositive [66]. In a study of 29,000 US women who were unaware if they had an HSV infection, 57% were infected with one or both viruses [67]. While a phase 3 trial of 30,000 participants is not particularly daunting for the performance of modern semi-automated serologic methods, the very high prevalence of both symptomatic and asymptomatic HSV prevalence complicates the screening and recruitment of a sufficient number of uninfected participants for a phase 3 clinical trial. It will be necessary to exclude adults with a history of HSV infection or, alternatively, to include four different subgroups in a trial (HSV-1+, HSV-2- HSV-1-, HSV-2+; HSV-1+, HSV-2+; HSV-1-, HSV-2-). Such an expanded study design would likely require a prohibitively large number of participants, making it effectively practical to recruit only persons seronegative for both viruses. Pre-existing immunity to either or both viruses might be expected to blunt the efficacy of vaccine-induced immunity. Another issue is that it is probably unrealistic to expect a vaccine to impose sterile immunity against HSV infection, since infection with HSV-2 occurs commonly in persons latently infected with HSV-1 and reinfection with both viruses can occur [68]. There is extensive evidence that all herpesviruses have a history of intra-strain recombination; thus, not only reinfection occurs but superinfection of the same cell occurs with some frequency [69]. Existing neutralizing antibodies are expected to blunt the development of lesions, but almost certainly do not prevent entrance into peripheral nerves and the establishment of neuronal latency. It has also been understood for decades that HSV can symptomatically reactivate despite high levels of circulating antibody [70,71]. This brings the conversation to the most relevant consequence of being HSV infected, namely recurrent lesions. Recrudescent HSV disease normally results from the reactivation of latent infection rather than from reinfection. Accordingly, any control of HSV using vaccines might be applied with most benefit by devising vaccines that reduce the frequency and tissue damaging effects of reactivation from latency. We argued previously that the mRNA vaccine approach might be useful in this regard by redirecting the quality of the immune response and incorporating additional components that can recruit and activate immune components responsible for lesion resolution.2.4. What Differences Account for the Difficulty in Developing Effective HSV Vaccines Contrasted with the Success of VZV Vaccines?This raises the issue of why prophylactic vaccines have achieved striking success against the cousin virus VZV in stark contrast to HSV vaccine efforts. A logical place to begin is by delineating some of the salient differences between the two viruses (Table 1).VZV is a highly prevalent virus in temperate climates such as the US; history of VZV infection is higher than HSV-1 and HSV-2 combined [72]. VZV seroprevalence data for the US prior to the implementation of the varicella vaccine revealed that 96% of adults 20–29 years of age, 99% of persons >30 years old had serologic evidence of VZV infection [73]. Varicella vaccine coverage is more than 90% and outbreaks of varicella are now practically unknown, although this situation could change if vaccine hesitancy catalyzed by the COVID-19 pandemic, becomes more common. A study conducting active VZV statewide outbreak surveillance in six states managed to identify only a single substantial outbreak in one state over the 2-year duration of the study [74], (unpublished data). However, since the first dose of varicella is given at between 12 and 18 months of age, most recipients remain VZV seronegative at the time of inoculation. Primary infection with VZV leads to a transient T cell-associated viremia that in turn results in a generalized skin rash unlike HSV, which is usually local [75]. The transient viremic phase of VZV infection might be more relevant to T cell and antibody remediation if vaccination adequately induces these responses and establishes long-term memory. VZV invariably sets up latency and this usually involves more peripheral nerve ganglia than is usually the case with HSV. Given the apparently disparate rates of reactivation from latency for VZV and HSV, it may be that peripheral ganglia provide a more favorable site for maintaining latency, with limited leakage requiring ganglionic immunological activity. It is also well known that reactivation in the case of VZV usually involves relatively few latently infected ganglia. Possibly when reactivation does occur the slower replication kinetics of VZV compared to HSV provides a longer window of opportunity for immune defenses to be marshalled and limit the extent of viral replication. This concept is reinforced by the fact that providing vaccines to latently infected individuals dramatically diminishes their likelihood to suffer the recurrent lesions of shingles (a risk reduction of 97% for the recombinant adjuvanted subunit vaccine (RSV)) [76]. Finally, it is also possible that the virus itself has evolved a more robust system for the establishment and maintenance of latency, making it more refractory to reversal.2.5. What Factors Have Contributed to the Success of VZV Vaccines?The availability of two licensed and approved vaccines for the prevention of shingles afforded a unique opportunity to conduct extensive evaluations of the cell-mediated and humoral immune responses to each vaccine. This was particularly useful in this instance because the efficacy of the two vaccines was very different. A cohort study of several hundred participants examined cytokine responses in multiple subsets of T cells, both CD4+ and CD8+, as well as other measures of the cell-mediated response over a five-year period post-immunization [77,78,79]. The humoral immune responses were evaluated beyond simply measuring virus-specific IgG levels, including IgG avidity to both purified gE and to a mixture of all VZV glycoproteins, and neutralizing antibody titers [80]. Effector and memory T cell responses to recombinant vaccine were more than 10-fold higher than in those receiving the live-attenuated vaccine. The avidity results revealed that nearly all of the participants in the study had moderate to low avidity to gE, either due to a waning of high-affinity antibodies or a failure to attain high levels when primary infection occurred. Nearly every recipient of the recombinant vaccine experienced boosts in gE IgG avidity to the maximum level measurable by the assay, compared with largely unremarkable boosts from live vaccine recipients. For neutralizing antibody, the average increases in titer for live virus recipients was eight-fold, compared with 22-fold for recombinant vaccine recipients. Since affinity maturation is crucially dependent on specific forms of T cell help in the germinal centers, these results also reflect a preferential boosting of B cell memory by recombinant vaccine [81,82]. This was also reinforced by the duration of observed boosting. At the end of five years, most of the boosts in avidity due to live virus vaccination had returned nearly to baseline, whereas most recombinant vaccine recipients retained 70–80% of their boosts [80]. These aspects of the responses to the two vaccines would have gone unnoticed while the vaccines were in clinical trial. Broader studies of the immunologic responses to vaccines would be expected to provide more robust guidance on decisions to proceed with large-scale advanced vaccine trials. Many herpes virologists were surprised, even skeptical when the press release describing the outcome of the recombinant shingles vaccine phase 3 trial appeared. The CDC was visited in 1987 by Jonas Salk, who asked about the prospects for a subunit vaccine. At that time, he was interested in HIV, another problem child from a vaccine standpoint that might benefit from this discussion. The answer he got was that there was little percentage in anticipating that less would be more. Now along comes the recombinant adjuvanted subunit vaccine. How on Earth was it possible that this vaccine that included only a single (albeit highly immunogenic) protein from VZV so greatly outperformed a live-attenuated vaccine? Attenuated vaccines were an effective solution for the prevention of measles, mumps, rubella, varicella, polio, smallpox, rotavirus and yellow fever. What accounts for the difference in these two shingles vaccines?One obvious contributing factor is the adjuvant system, ASO1. ASO1 is a liposome-based adjuvant with two immunostimulatory components: MPL is a detoxified derivative of lipopolysaccharide A of Salmonella Minnesota and QS-21 is a saponin obtained from the South American soap bark tree Quillaja Saponaria. Upon injection, MPL induces a broad innate immune response, transiently activating a variety of antigen-presenting cells. MPL and QS-21 operate synergistically to both stimulate and modulate both T and B cell responses [83]. It is believed to be involved in skewing the immune response toward long-term effector and memory. The downside is that the adjuvant system is quite reactogenic. The effects are transient and largely confined to injection site swelling, but can also cause fatigue, muscle pain, headache, shivering, fever and nausea.That said, it seems unlikely that the ASO1 adjuvant alone accounts for the “less is more” aspect of the recombinant vaccine. Why would a single viral antigen induce a more effective immune response than live-attenuated vaccine, since the latter enters and replicates in cells, and probably engages a more complete T cell response including both CD4+ and cytotoxic CD8+ responses? The answer may reside in the capacity of most viruses to defend themselves by evading the immune response. Herpesviruses are the uncontested monarchs of immune evasion. Varicella has at least six immune evasion mechanisms at its disposal; cytomegalovirus at last count encodes at least 30 proteins involved in impairing multiple facets of the immune response. Vaccines that offer only a single viral protein (or several proteins) as an immunogen deprive the virus of its arsenal, freeing the immune response to respond without impairment. This possible trick for bypassing viral immune evasion tactics may be particularly important for controlling herpesvirus infections: (1) the zoster vaccines are limited to inducing components of the immune system; (2) since herpes zoster is a symptomatic reactivation of a pre-existing VZV infection from latency, an effective immune response must be capable of stabilizing the latent state and/or containing a reactivation event, and finally (3) the live-attenuated zoster vaccine—with intact immune evasion mechanisms—is far less effective at preventing zoster than the adjuvanted subunit vaccine. Nucleic acid vaccines previously had a disappointing history, proving immunogenic in small animal models but failing to scale up to humans. With the advent of the COVID-19 mRNA vaccines in 2020, all of that changed. Two highly effective vaccines were developed independently and simultaneously by different pharmaceutical firms. It should be readily apparent that such vaccines potentially offer great advantages. A carefully designed mRNA could offer both the advantage of fully engaging the T cell response (protein translation occurs necessarily in cells) and would be as free of viral anti-immune weaponry as a subunit protein vaccine.3. CodaVaccines have had a remarkable impact on public health. Smallpox has been eradicated from the globe, and polio eradication is within reach. Measles and rubella have been eliminated from the Western hemisphere and in developed countries in other parts of the world. Varicella incidence has been reduced by over 90% in the US and varicella outbreaks are as uncommon as hen’s teeth. Illnesses that were considered a rite of childhood passage 60 years ago are now practically unheard of.Unfortunately, however, organized opposition to vaccination has been a countervailing force for centuries, beginning with the practice of variolation in the 16th century—a practice originating in China that involved inoculating people with dried, aged and powdered material obtained from mild cases of smallpox. Vaccines can produce adverse events and these can provide the necessary fodder to fuel vaccine resistance, typically accompanied by advocacy for scientifically unproven (to say nothing of ridiculous) alternative treatments. The production of insufficiently safety-controlled batches of polio vaccine by Cutter Laboratories very nearly torpedoed the polio vaccination program. Thankfully, the program continued and polio incidence was reduced in the US by 90% in only 5 years. A falsified report by an unscrupulous and self-serving British physician falsely claimed a link between the measles vaccine and autism. Even after the physician was stripped of his license to practice medicine and several large studies unequivocally demonstrated that no such association exists, the claim that measles vaccine causes autism still persists today. This sort of resistance can have a devastating impact on public confidence in vaccines, potentially increasing the number of susceptibles in the population and causing diseases that have been brought under control to reemerge. Most recently, vaccine hesitancy regarding the COVID-19 vaccines has unnecessarily delayed and complicated the emergence from this pandemic.The development of a highly effective vaccine, such as the recombinant adjuvanted shingles vaccine, should not automatically be accepted as perfect. The reactogenicity of that vaccine has resulted in some hesitancy in receiving the shot, despite the logical argument that a few days of discomfort are far preferable to developing shingles. The live-attenuated varicella vaccine had dramatically reduced the incidence of varicella, but the vaccine virus can establish latency. Among children, shingles is rare but does occur. One study documented cases of childhood shingles caused by the vaccine strain, although those cases occurred about one-quarter as frequently as shingles due to the wild type virus [84]. It is still too early to know how frequently vaccine shingles will occur in persons over the age of 50.The point is an argument can be made that addressing the shortcomings of successful approved vaccines may have a positive impact on the public perception and acceptance of vaccines. For example, it might be possible to devise a shingles subunit vaccine that utilizes a less reactogenic adjuvant but provides equivalent protection to the currently approved vaccine. The expense of ushering a vaccine through the evaluation and approval process is a non-trivial obstacle to a philosophy of continuous vaccine improvement. The current road map to vaccine development and approval has placed pharmaceutical firms in the position of trying to recoup their investment by pricing vaccines at levels that are likely to discourage uptake. Multiple considerations must be taken into account in future vaccine development strategies, perhaps even obtaining competitive grant-based support for developmental phases.So, the future of vaccine development looks bright, but special consideration must be given to the tough nuts such as HIV and HSV. Firstly, reliance on the conventional limited protocols for evaluating the immune response to prospective vaccines will likely need to be abandoned for problematic pathogens, opting instead for a much more comprehensive and granular evaluation of innate, cell-mediated and humoral immunity. It may well also be that we will need to lower our expectations with respect to viruses that are able to reinfect people and that do a particularly good job of hiding themselves from harm. Outright prevention of HSV infection is almost certainly an unobtainable goal. But consider that the most relevant consequence of being HSV infected is recurrent lesions or silent viral shedding. Latently infected persons can experience either manifestation; conceivably, boosting or reshaping the nature of adaptive immunity could be effectively directed to the goal of reducing the rate and duration of shedding episodes or possibly prevent shedding altogether. Such immunological management would be greatly appreciated by those many persons who experience frequent problems with recurrent herpetic lesions, especially when these affect the eye and genitalia. Rather than relying on a single viral mRNA, there should be no obstacle to designing vaccines with multiple mRNAs, broadening the immune response without compromising the advantage of disarming viral defense mechanisms. New experimental approaches to determine whether vaccines early in development are addressing the targeted outcome measures would also be important.In conclusion, new technologies offer hope that vaccines effective at reducing disease for agents that have proven refractory to prevention appear to be on the horizon. Regrettably, the authors of this review will not be engaged in the process of developing them, as we have retired from the game!


Title: Periodicity of varicella-zoster virus in the presence of immune boosting and clinical reinfection with varicella

BackgroundVaricella-zoster virus (VZV) is first manifested as varicella (also known as chickenpox), a rash that turns into open lesions. In the absence of vaccination, this usually happens when a person is young. While the symptoms clear within a week or so, VZV remains latent in the nervous system and may reactivate to cause a rash called herpes zoster (HZ) or shingles. Why this reactivation happens remains unclear, although it is generally assumed that onset is related to reduced levels of cellular immunity [1-3].Clinical reinfection with varicella is thought to be rare and is typically not accounted for in epidemiological models of VZV transmission [4]. However, observational studies suggest that this may be inaccurate, with a number of literature reports suggesting that reinfection occurs with moderate frequency. In particular, two US studies [5,6] based on active surveillance data indicate that a substantial proportion of varicella cases (between 4.5% and 25%) report a prior history of varicella infection. A smaller study demonstrated laboratory evidence of prior infection in 8 out of 115 (7%) patients with clinical varicella infection [7]. There are also case reports of multiple varicella attacks in healthy children [8]. Hence, it appears that prior infection does not always result in sustained protective immunity against subsequent varicella reinfection and there is a case for considering this process more closely in models.Repeat HZ attacks in immunocompetent individuals have also typically been excluded in epidemiological modelling studies [4,9,10], under the assumption that repeat attacks primarily occur in immunocompromised individuals. However, second attacks were observed by Hope-Simpson [1] with 8 out of 192 cases recorded in his series being a repeat event. Repeat cases were also observed by Wilson in a rural UK practice with 6 out of 151 cases identified as repeat events [11]. More recently, a US study found that 95 out of 1,669 individuals with a medically documented episode of HZ had two or more attacks (8 individuals had three or more attacks) [12]. While immunocompromised patients had a higher incidence of recurrence, the rate of recurrence in immunocompetent patients was similar to the rate of first attacks reported in other studies.The Hope-Simpson hypothesis that the immune response of someone who has been exposed to varicella can be strengthened (boosted) via subsequent exposure to VZV [1] has been supported by both clinical and modelling studies [3,13] although there are studies which failed to observe evidence of boosting [14]. The degree of exposure that would be required to provide an immune boost remains unknown. The VZV modelling studies of which we are aware implement boosting by assuming that individuals with weakened immunity are boosted to full immunity at a fraction of the rate of at which they would be becoming infected with varicella (this rate is often referred to as a force of infection) [4,10,15-17]. In a recent work on the transmission of pertussis, the potential for the rate of boosting to exceed the force of infection was explored and shown to induce both cyclical behaviour and the potential for disease recurrence following immunisation [18]. It was suggested that immune boost could occur even if the exposure dose is too small to be likely to cause clinical infection. This is supported by the observation that immune memory cells respond more rapidly and to lower doses of antigen when primed through previous exposure than in naive individuals [19,20].In this paper, we consider a simple mathematical model of varicella-zoster virus transmission incorporating clinical reinfection with varicella, immune boosting requiring either more or less exposure to VZV than primary infection, and HZ recurrence. Our aim is to investigate whether the behaviour of this model qualitatively changes when its parameters are varied within ranges selected based on current knowledge of VZV. Specifically, we are interested in identifying conditions whereby there is switching from stable equilibrium behaviour (that modelling studies normally focus on) to periodic behaviour. While varicella is known to exhibit periodicity [3,21], the evidence for HZ periodicity is still unclear, with studies both supporting periodically-varying incidence [22,23] and failing to find evidence of it [24,25]. The majority of epidemiological modelling studies have not explicitly incorporated periodic VZV transmission (e.g. transmission rates modelled as sinusoid) or observed VZV-related periodicity, although extensive investigations of this periodicity have been conducted in the context of chaotic dynamics (see e.g. [26]).MethodsWe consider a compartmental model as illustrated schematically in Figure 1. This model describes VZV transmission in a large population (i.e. transmission characteristics are averaged over large groups of individuals) and is adapted from the basic structure of existing varicella models but with some additional components. The model is of SEIR-type, with these compartments corresponding to susceptible, exposed, infected or immune to varicella infection individuals, respectively. The model also includes additional states representing reduced immunity and susceptibility to zoster (W), infection with zoster (IZ), recovery from zoster and immunity (RZ) and, finally, susceptibility to varicella and zoster following the loss of immunity acquired after recovery from zoster (SZ). This structure is essentially identical to the basic set of states in the absence of vaccination in the model of Brisson et al. [4], which has been used as the basis for a number of subsequent studies [10,16,17]. However, we also introduce 4 additional features, which we describe in turn here. First, we allow for recurrence of HZ, with residence in the state RZ set to be temporary (it is permanent in the papers derived from [4]) with an exit rate parameter θ. Second, we allow for individuals in the reduced immunity state W to be boosted at a rate that is higher than the force of infection (i.e. the boosting weight parameter κ is allowed to be >1). This is based on the observation that individuals previously exposed to infection make immune responses to lower infectious doses than naive individuals and is included to test whether this can produce periodicity in varicella incidence. Finally, we make two further changes that deal with repeated varicella infections. The first of these allows for recurrence of varicella from the reduced immunity state W, a transition that is supported by the evidence of second varicella attacks described in the introduction (proportional to the varicella force of infection λ with relative hazard ζ). The final change also allows for new primary infection with varicella from the SZ state (with relative hazard α) which does not appear implausible given rates of zoster recurrence. The latter suggest that loss of immunity may be sufficient to experience a second primary VZV infection (although we are not aware of any published data that would clearly support possibility of the SZ to E transition).
Figure 1Schematic diagram of a simple VZV model. The included compartments contain the susceptible to varicella (S), individuals exposed to varicella (E), those who are infected with varicella (I), who have recovered and are protected from VZV (R), who are weakly immune (W), i.e. individuals partly susceptible to varicella and HZ, individuals infected with zoster (IZ) and those who have recovered from zoster and are immune to VZV (RZ) and individuals who lost immunity after recovery from zoster and are susceptible to VZV (SZ). The arrows indicate movements between compartments at the rates marked by Greek letters. The rates are explained in Table 1.Table 1
Model parameters

Parameter

Notation

Base value, refs.

Range
Varicella transmission coefficient
β
325 [27]120–500Rate of becoming infectious with varicella
ω
26 [21]20–32
the base value corresponds to the average latent period of ≈ 14 days
Varicella recovery rate
γ
50 [21]40–60
the base value corresponds to the average infectious period of ≈ 7.3 days
Loss of full immunity rate
σ
0.10 [4,9,17]0.0125–4.0
the base value corresponds to the average duration of “full” immunity of 10 years
Varicella force of infection reduction coefficient for those
ζ
0.10 [assumed]0.0–1.0who become reinfected following clearance of varicellaVaricella force of infection reduction coefficient for those
α
0.90 [assumed]0.0–1.0who become reinfected following HZ attackBoosting coefficient
κ
3.0 [assumed]0.0–20.0Birth/death rate
μ
0.0122 [29]0.01–0.05
the base value corresponds to the average life expectancy of ≈ 82 years
HZ reactivation rate
η
0.05 [4,15,17]0.0001–2.0HZ recovery rate
ρ
52 [17]46–58
the base value corresponds to the average infectious period of ≈ 7 days
Rate of HZ reactivation after loss of immunity following recovery from HZ
δ
0.01 [12,23]0.00–0.10Rate of loss of immunity to VZV after recovery from HZ
θ
4.0 [assumed]0.00–12.0
the base value corresponds to immunity lasting 3 months on average
Relative VZV infectiousness of HZ
p
0.001 [10,17]0.00–0.10All rates in this table are per year. Note that β and p are used to define the force of infection (2).As we aim to make our model reasonably parsimonious to facilitate understanding of its equilibrium behaviour in the presence of the above-mentioned new features, we assume a very simple demography with a constant death rate μ in all states, which is balanced by births so that the population size is conserved. This clearly makes our model less realistic but also reduces the number of model parameters by at least a dozen as compared with age-stratified models (see, for example, [4]). Hence, the model is described by the following system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations:
(1a)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{S}}&=-(\lambda+\mu)\mathbf{S} +\mu \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}S˙=−(λ+μ)S+μ(1b)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{E}}&=-(\omega+\mu)\mathbf{E}+\lambda \mathbf{S}+\zeta\lambda \mathbf{W}+\alpha\lambda\mathbf{SZ} \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}E˙=−(ω+μ)E+λS+ζλW+αλSZ(1c)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{I}}&=-(\gamma+\mu) \mathbf{I}+\omega \mathbf{E} \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}I˙=−(γ+μ)I+ωE(1d)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{R}}&=-(\sigma+\mu) \mathbf{R}+\kappa\lambda \mathbf{W}+\gamma \mathbf{I} \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}R˙=−(σ+μ)R+κλW+γI(1e)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{W}}&=-((\kappa+\zeta)\lambda+\eta+\mu)\mathbf{W}+\sigma \mathbf{R} \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}W˙=−((κ+ζ)λ+η+μ)W+σR(1f)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{IZ}}&=-(\rho+\mu)\mathbf{IZ}+\eta \mathbf{W}+\delta \mathbf{SZ} \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}IZ˙=−(ρ+μ)IZ+ηW+δSZ(1g)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{RZ}}&=-(\theta+\mu)\mathbf{RZ}+\rho\mathbf{IZ} \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}RZ˙=−(θ+μ)RZ+ρIZ(1h)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\begin{array}{*{20}l} \dot{\mathbf{SZ}}&=-(\delta+\alpha\lambda+\mu)\mathbf{SZ}+\theta\mathbf{RZ} \end{array} $$ 
					\end{document}SZ˙=−(δ+αλ+μ)SZ+θRZwhere it is assumed that
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$\mathbf{S}+\mathbf{E}+\mathbf{I}+\mathbf{R}+\mathbf{W}+\mathbf{IZ}+\mathbf{RZ}+\mathbf{SZ}=1, $$ 
					\end{document}S+E+I+R+W+IZ+RZ+SZ=1, and the varicella force of infection is defined as
(2)\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$  \lambda=\beta (\mathbf{I}+p \mathbf{IZ}).  $$ 
					\end{document}λ=β(I+pIZ).The system coefficients are described and supporting references supplied in Table 1. The base values should be understood as some values from the specified ranges (i.e. plausible values) convenient as the starting point for bifurcation analysis. Concretely, we would like to be able to vary any parameter value keeping other parameters at their base values to obtain an initial Hopf point. The base value for varicella transmission coefficient β has been specified based on the reported average basic reproductive ratio (R0=6.5) for 11 European countries [27]. It can be easily verified (using, for example, the next generation approach described in [28]) that for system (1)
\documentclass[12pt]{minimal}
				\usepackage{amsmath}
				\usepackage{wasysym} 
				\usepackage{amsfonts} 
				\usepackage{amssymb} 
				\usepackage{amsbsy}
				\usepackage{mathrsfs}
				\usepackage{upgreek}
				\setlength{\oddsidemargin}{-69pt}
				\begin{document}
						 $$R_{0}=\frac{\omega\beta}{(\omega+\mu)(\gamma+\mu)}. $$ 
					\end{document}R0=ωβ(ω+μ)(γ+μ).Hence, using the base values for ω,μ and γ provided in Table 1, we see that β≈325 year−1. The rate of loss of full immunity σ is unknown but attempts to estimate it have been made previously, hence we cite three relevant modelling studies. We set a base value for σ corresponding to the average duration of full immunity of 10 years and let σ take a range of possible values from 0.0125 (“full” immunity for 80 years) to 4.0 (“full” immunity for only 3 months). The boosting coefficient κ can be interpreted as a measure of how much exposure is required for immune boosting as compared with that required for primary infection. We allow it to vary from 0 to 20. The birth/death rate μ has been set to correspond to the current Australian life expectancy at birth [29]. There are no readily available data to directly inform parameter p, which characterises the contribution of HZ to the varicella force of infection. Some VZV modelling studies have assumed that this contribution is so small that it can be ignored [30] while others attempted to estimate it. In particular, p=5.4×10−7 was estimated in [4] and [16], while p=3.11×10−6 was estimated in [31]. A substantially larger value of 0.05 was used in [17]. Hence, we allow p to vary between 0 and 0.1. The rate of HZ reactivation after loss of immunity following recovery from HZ δ is allowed to take values between 0 (no reactivation) and 0.1. Loss of immunity to VZV after recovery from HZ is characterised by parameter θ which ranges from 0 (no loss of immunity) to 12.0 (immunity lost after only 1 month). Finally, parameters ζ and α have been introduced to allow for reinfection with varicella. In the base case we assume that α=0.90 (i.e. the force of varicella infection on those who have recovered from HZ is reduced by only 10% as compared to that on someone susceptible to primary varicella infection) and allow α to take values from 0 (those who have had HZ cannot be reinfected with varicella) to 1. The base value for α is high not due to epidemiological considerations but because we determined that for substantially lower values of α system (1) does not deviate from stable equilibrium behaviour no matter what values the other parameters take. This is evident from the results presented in the next section. We set the base case value for ζ at 0.1, which means that the force of varicella infection on those who have recovered from varicella and have not had HZ is reduced by 90% as compared to that on individuals susceptible to primary infection.In order to detect the periodic dynamics we systematically searched for Hopf points using the XPPAUT [32] bifurcation analysis software. A Hopf point is a point where a bifurcation from a branch of stable equilibrium to a branch of periodic oscillation occurs [33,34]. This point can be detected by varying a single model parameter while the other parameters are kept fixed. Having found the Hopf point, we can investigate where it would be if another parameter were given a different value. In this way we obtain a set of Hopf points which form a so-called Hopf curve.ResultsWe constructed the Hopf curves for all pairs of model parameters. Four examples of these curves are shown in Figure 2 while the complete set of curves (78 figures in total) can be found in Additional file 1. The shaded areas in each plot represent regions of each two-parameter space in which solutions are periodic (with other parameters fixed at base-case values as in Table 1), while the complementary area corresponds to solutions converging to a (globally) stable equilibrium. Example of solutions corresponding to either area are shown in Figure 3.
Figure 2Hopf curves for selected parameter pairs: (a)
β is a varicella transmission coefficient and ζ is a varicella force of infection reduction coefficient for those who become reinfected following clearance of varicella; (b)
σ is a loss of full immunity rate and δ is a rate of HZ reactivation after loss of immunity following recovery from HZ; (c)
θ is a rate of loss of immunity to VZV after recovery from HZ and κ is a boosting coefficient; (d)
α is a varicella force of infection reduction coefficient for those who become reinfected following HZ attack and η is a HZ reactivation rate. Shaded areas limited by these curves correspond to periodic solutions of (1).Figure 3Varicella and zoster incidences produced by (1) reach a steady equilibrium (i.e. they are both straight lines) if ζ=0.05,κ=0.6,α=0.01 and other parameter values are as in Table 1; if instead we take ζ=0.01,κ=3.0,α=0.95, varicella and zoster incidences exhibit a steady periodic behaviour.We found that for certain parameters it was easy to obtain periodic behaviour for most or all of their values taken from within the ranges given in Table 1. Specifically, for all values of β under 400 we could normally observe oscillations, and this was also the case for β under 500 when η and/or σ were increased or μ and/or ζ were decreased as compared to their base values. This is illustrated in Figure 2a, where one can pick any value of β and for that value there is always a range of values of ζ to select to ensure periodic behaviour. For the rate of becoming infectious with varicella, ω, oscillations were possible for all values except when the HZ recovery rate ρ was at the bottom of its range (around 46-48) and δ was approaching 0.017. Similarly, the entire range for the varicella recovery rate γ values allowed for oscillatory solutions except when δ and θ were varied. The HZ recovery rate, ρ, behaved in the same way. Note that β,ω,γ and ρ are considered well informed.Another group of parameters turned out to be unnecessary to support oscillatory behaviour. One of these parameters was ζ: it usually had to be under 0.02, i.e. the force of varicella infection on those who cleared varicella previously had to be reduced by at least 98%. This means that ζ could as well be zero, as shown in Figure 2a. Parameter δ (the rate of HZ reactivation following recovery from HZ) tended to be under 0.07 unless κ,μ,ζ and σ were manipulated. As shown in Figure 2b, δ can be as large as 0.1 if σ is somewhere between 0.2 and 0.55, but it can also be zero. Similarly, p was consistent with oscillations when small (of the order 10−3) or equal to zero in line with the values estimated in [4,16,31] but much less than p=0.05 used in [17].At last, there were six parameters that allowed for oscillatory behaviour when the ranges of values they could vary in were narrowed to some extent. Specifically, the boosting parameter κ had to exceed 2.5. Figure 2c illustrates that in the grey area where the values of κ and θ corresponding to oscillations are, κ is clearly much larger than 1. Parameter μ was restricted to under 0.015 (the corresponding life expectancy of at least 66.7 years) unless η increased and then μ could even be 0.04. The loss of full immunity rate, σ, had to exceed 0.1 (duration of immunity under 10 years) but was usually limited by 0.8 (or 1.1 if κ was approaching 8). The values of θ under about 2 or a little less were not compatible with oscillations (see Figure 2c) and neither was the HZ reactivation rate η under 0.05, which is evident from Figure 2d. At last, α had to be over 0.7 in most cases - a notable exception is shown in Figure 2d where α can approach 0.3 assuming that η is around 0.5.The period of oscillation itself tended to vary between 4 and 5 years for most parameter combinations that are consistent with periodic solutions, which is illustrated in Figure 4. We were unable to obtain solutions with a period close to 1 year using parameter values from the ranges given in Table 1. This period would be of interest because varicella incidence has been reported to exhibit yearly peaks (see, for example, [23]).
Figure 4Changes in the period of steady oscillations for selected values of κ.It is pertinent to note that periodic solutions typically corresponded to repeat varicella incidence that we would call substantial. For example, varying ζ while all other model parameters are fixed results in detection of a Hopf point at ζ=0.01314. This point corresponds to the yearly incidence of repeat varicella periodically reaching a maximum of 1.05% of the modelled population. The yearly HZ incidence is also periodic in this circumstance averaging 0.00215% and peaking at around ±0.0023%.DiscussionIn this study, we developed a simple VZV transmission model with novel features to explore the influence of boosting and disease recurrence on the potential for periodicity in varicella and zoster disease incidence. We relied upon bifurcation analysis of this model to assess the relationship between key parameters and the existence of periodic solutions.In comparison with other published VZV transmission models, our model has four additional features: repeated HZ attacks and rates of boosting exceeding the force of infection are allowed, while we also include the possibility of clinical reinfection with varicella from a waned immunity state and in individuals who have experienced zoster.We verified that our model can produce oscillations in both varicella and zoster which is similar to the situation described in an extensive Japanese study covering a total of 48,388 patients with zoster [23]. However, some of the model features were shown to be redundant in the context of periodicity (i.e. periodic solutions could still be obtained if these features were removed from the model):
reinfection with varicella for individuals who recovered from varicella and are in the weakly immune state W (as mentioned in Results, ζ can be zero);reactivation of HZ following recovery from zoster (δ=0 is possible);contribution of HZ to varicella force of infection (p can be zero).On the other hand, the following requirements turned out essential to produce stable periodic solutions:
duration of full immunity to VZV is no longer than 10 years (σ>0.1);duration of immunity to VZV following recovery from HZ should not exceed 6 months (θ>2)immune boosting requires less exposure than primary varicella infection (κ≥2.5);unless the average HZ reactivation rate η is only slightly under 0.2 (that is 4 times its base value), those who have had HZ and are in contact with individuals infected with varicella have little or no added protection against varicella as compared with individuals never infected with VZV (α>0.7).It is not immediately clear how to assess plausibility of these requirements. The existing data can only give some indications regarding the average time needed to return from I to I or progress from I to IZ. Since the immunity in question is the full immunity corresponding to the average time needed to progress from I to W and the latter is included to implement the Hope-Simpson hypothesis (i.e. the very existence of this state is not an established fact), we should note that there is no data to suggest that σ>0.1 may be unrealistic. There is also not enough data to clarify the average duration of staying in the RZ compartment.The exposure required for boosting VZV immunity is not well understood but the Hope-Simpson hypothesis is widely applied in modelling studies with κ≤1. Nonetheless, we are not aware of any strong evidence in support of this restriction which precludes κ≥2.5 (a relevant discussion on why κ>1 is likely to be valid for pertussis can be found in [18]).Based on the Hope-Simpson hypothesis, our model makes individuals recovered from HZ immune but we do not know how long this immunity should last on average. Our analysis shows that we can obtain periodicity if this duration is under 6 months which we can not consider implausible until there is evidence to prove otherwise. One would also expect that being in the post-zoster state individuals may be able to strengthen their immunity when exposed to varicella and our results do not contradict this expectation. However, they indicate that the onset of oscillatory behaviour would occur if this protection, if gained at all, were insignificant: α>0.7 means that someone who have had HZ, then was immune for a while and then became susceptible to VZV is becoming reinfected with varicella at an average rate reduced by up to 30% at best or much less, as compared with a rate this individual would be becoming infected with varicella at if he or she was exposed to varicella for the first time. As those who have had HZ are most often elderly and their immunity is weakened by age, there is a reason to believe that they may become susceptible to varicella reinfection via contact with infectious varicella cases and the immune boosting mechanism may not work for these individuals very well. The absence of a strong evidence base for such cases does not necessarily preclude them being common. For example, routine reporting schemes are frequently recording numerous “unspecified VZV” diagnoses [35] which could be either HZ or varicella. Separating varicella and HZ diagnoses can be difficult. Laboratory testing is infrequent, and the ability to differentiate re-infection from reactivation is therefore based on the disease syndrome rather than confirmation through viral testing. As discussed by Volpi et al. [36] the clinical diagnosis of HZ is subject to error, with the Shingles Prevention Study reporting that 24% of clinical HZ diagnoses were not confirmed to have HZ by laboratory testing [13] and a UK study found 17% (48 out of 278) of GP clinical HZ diagnoses to be incorrect [37]. Thus, while reinfection with varicella is suspected to be infrequent, confirmation of this fact is difficult given errors in reporting and diagnosis.Hence, while other sources of periodicity, including seasonally varying transmissibility may appear more likely explanations of varicella periodicity, outcomes from our model appear to accord with data on recurrence and reinfection, suggesting a role for these processes in enhanced models of VZV transmission.We must acknowledge substantial limitations in relation to the realism exhibited by our model. It is generally accepted that age-dependent transmission is important in the context of varicella and HZ transmission and disease incidence but we do not include this here. Instead we include only a basic demographic process involving a constant birth/death rate μ as our approach aimed to isolate the impacts of recurrence and reinfection in a prototype model via minimising the total number of model parameters (a similar approach was used in, for example, [18]). A more realistic model would incorporate age-dependent transmission rates and age-dependent risks of HZ reactivation, with potential to consider more subtle differences such as gender related risks of disease. Other models also implement the assumption that breakthrough varicella is milder and less contagious than primary infection, based on experience with vaccine trials and implementation. Consideration of the impact of vaccination is also ignored here, given that the focus is on qualitative behaviours in a simple model. Note that as a result of the mentioned limitations, varicella incidence in the entire population produced by our model is higher than zoster incidence (see Figure 3). This is typical in the absence of vaccination, while in the post-vaccination period one often observes zoster incidence increasing and exceeding that of varicella (see, for example, [17,38]). The increase in zoster could be further facilitated by the ageing of population as discussed in [23].Periodicity of varicella and HZ as such do not seem to be of major consequences to public health. This is partly because periodicity of zoster has yet to be firmly substantiated. For example, an Italian study found an annual cycle in HZ notifications with significant peaks in May-June [22]. On the other hand, HZ periodicity was not detected by a number of population-based studies and long-term analyses of data [24,25]. However, there has been a steady interest in gaining a better understanding of the reasons for VZV reactivation - should that be successful, practical implications are likely to follow. It is possible that seasonal variations in the incidence of immunologically related diseases may be related to circannual variations in immune response [39] or, in the case of HZ, to the effects of ultraviolet (UV) [40]. We suggest that varicella and zoster periodicity may be potentially explained solely by VZV natural history and including clinical reinfection with varicella and the possibility that only a limited exposure is needed for immune boosting in modelling studies may result in more accurate predictions.Additional fileAdditional file 1
Supplementary materials. Hopf curves for all parameter pairs (78 figures).


Title: Development of Robust Varicella Zoster Virus Luciferase Reporter Viruses for In Vivo Monitoring of Virus Growth and Its Antiviral Inhibition in Culture, Skin, and Humanized Mice

1. IntroductionVaricella-zoster virus (VZV) is the human neurotrophic alphaherpesvirus that causes varicella (chickenpox) during primary infection, and herpes zoster (shingles) upon the reactivation from latency in the sensory nerve ganglia. Zoster is particularly morbid, as it is frequently complicated by acute and chronic pain. While vaccines for both varicella (targeted to children) and zoster (targeted to adults 50+ years old) have decreased the incidence of the disease in the countries where they are used [1,2], VZV disease prevalence remains high worldwide. The vaccines are far from global use, and zoster vaccines still have low uptake in the countries where it can be obtained [3,4,5]. Several antiviral drugs are available to treat VZV infections, including acyclovir, foscarnet, and brivudine [6,7,8]. Much remains to be learned about VZV pathogenesis, and there is still a need for more effective and improved antiviral therapies.The human-restricted nature of VZV greatly complicates its study, particularly as there are no effective animal models for the latency, reactivation, or reactivated disease [9,10]. Furthermore, the genetic manipulation of VZV has proven problematic, as the classical approaches that have been used for the related neurotropic virus, herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), do not work for VZV without strong selection [11]. The VZV infectivity in culture is highly cell-associated and yields low titers of cell-free virus, which are often composed of many infectious particles per plaque forming unit. This makes the purification of rare recombinants from a wild-type background difficult without a strong selection process [12,13]. The development of isogenic cloned DNA systems has provided the means to develop recombinant viruses more easily, starting with the overlapping cosmids for the vaccine virus strain (vOka) [12], and then for the parent strain of Oka (pOka) (wild type; [14,15]). Cosmid systems use 4–6 cloned DNAs that contain the complete genome as large overlapping fragments [14,15]. VZV genes are manipulated by DNA fragment subcloning, plasmid-based mutagenesis, and the rebuilding back into the cosmid. The co-transfection into permissive cells with other overlapping cosmid DNAs covering the entire VZV genome results in recombination to yield full genomes and virus, which eliminates the need for plaque purification [12].The cosmid systems were improved with the development of VZV bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs), where the entire VZV genome is present as a single DNA replicon [16,17]. The replication in E. coli required the insertion of a ~10 Kbp replicon into the genome. Two pOka BACs were developed with the insertion of the replicon into the same pOka cosmid set, which was followed by virus derivation and the retransformation of E. coli with circular DNA from virus-infected cells [18,19]. The VZV pOka BAC that was developed by Tischer et al. contained the BAC replicon in an internal repeat region of the genome (BAC-T1) [18]. BAC-T1 was used to generate several viruses, including VZV where VZV ORF23 and ORF62 were fluorescently tagged [20]. BAC-T1 was further refined by adding repeat sequences that flank the replicon elements to allow the self-excision of the F1 replicon (BAC DX) [18,21]. A second VZV BAC was developed by Zhu and colleagues, where the replicon was placed in the large intergenic noncoding region between ORF60 and 61 of the pOka cosmids [19,22]. However, recent studies suggest that this VZV region contains a promoter-driving mRNA that is expressed during lytic infection and viral latency [23], and it is not clear how the insertion affects the VZV replication. BAC systems have permitted the development of many recombinant viruses, which have helped inform researchers which genes are required for growth in culture, tissue, and the human host. For instance, specific gene deletions across the VZV genome suggest that the 17 to 20 ORFs are not required for growth in cell culture [24]. Many genes that are not required for growth in culture have been found to be important for growth in specific cell types or in organized tissues, such as skin and T cells [24].The goal here was to refine the use of VZV reporter viruses for use in cultured cells, tissue explants, and humanized mouse models. Tissue explant and humanized mouse models are often limited in supply or are prohibitively costly. Thus, the use of bioluminescence to track the virus spread helps overcome the need for large numbers of mice. Firefly luciferase (fLuc) can be measured in the same sample or mouse at multiple times by using bioluminescence imaging [25]. Previously, we used a VZV that is termed VZV-BAC-Luc, which expresses the firefly luciferase from the constitutively active SV40 promoter [19,26]. Unfortunately, the luciferase expression from VZV-BAC-Luc does not necessarily reflect the VZV replication rates in tissues, as it is expressed independently of viral gene expression. Thus, we sought to identify a kinetically late promoter to drive the expression of luciferase that more accurately reflects viral replication. During this work, we also identified and corrected two unexpected mutations in the BAC-T1 and BAC-DX systems that map to ORF40, which encodes the major capsid protein; and to ORF50, which encodes glycoprotein gM. We then used a corrected BAC containing luciferase that was driven by the ORF57 gene to construct VZV lacking thymidine kinase (TK) and thymidylate synthase (TS). An analysis of the VZV ∆TK and ∆TS reporter viruses reveals insights that are important for antiviral drug development, and an unexpected phenotype for VZV TS in human skin organ culture.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Cells and VirusesHuman foreskin fibroblasts (HFFs) (CCD-1137Sk; American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA, USA) were used up to passage 20. The human retinal pigment epithelial cell line, ARPE-19 (CRL-2302; ATCC), was grown to passage 36–40. Human malignant melanoma cells (MeWos; HTB-65; ATCC) were grown to passage 40–50. Human Tert-immortalized retinal epithelial cells (htRPE) (CRL4000; ATCC) were passaged likewise to 40. All cells were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 4.5 g/L glucose, L-glutamine, and sodium pyruvate (DMEM 1X, Corning, Manassas, VA, USA), supplemented with up to 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Benchmark FBS; Gemini Bio Products, West Sacramento, CA, USA), penicillin–streptomycin (5000 IU/mL), and amphotericin B (250 μg/mL). For the MeWo cell cultivation, the medium was supplemented with nonessential amino acids (Mediatech, Herndon, VA, USA). The viruses used in this study include: VZV pOka (parental Oka) (accession number: AB097933) [14]; VZV-BAC-Luc (from H. Zhu [19]) and VZV-ORF57-Luc [27]; VZV-ORF9-Luc; VZV-ORF14-Luc; VZV-ORF17-Luc; VZV-ORF57-∆TK; VZV-ORF57-∆TS; and VZV-ORF57-∆TK∆TS. The construct development and the viruses are shown in Figure 1. All recombinant VZV, except for VZV-BAC-Luc, were developed from BAC constructs by using the pOka BACs detailed previously [18,21].2.1.1. Generation of Luciferase Reporter VirusesVZV luciferase reporter viruses were generated by placing the coding region of the luciferase downstream of the selected ORFs as the in-frame C protein fusions separated by a sequence encoding the T2A-directed “ribosome skipping” motif. For this purpose, a plasmid construct was developed in which the ORF for the firefly luciferase was amplified by PCR from the plasmid pGL3basic (Promega Corp) by using the primers, fLucF and fLucR (all primer sequences are presented in Table 1). The resulting DNA fragment was digested with EcoRI and BamHI (sites underlined) and was cloned into the vector, pmCherryC1 (Clontech Inc., San Jose, CA, USA), and was cut with EcoRI and BglII in order to place it in-frame with pmCherry. The resulting plasmid, pmCherryT2ALuc, contained mCherry fused in-frame to luciferase, separated by the 22 amino acid T2A motif, and it expressed functional luciferase activity from the luciferase with a single proline residue on the amino terminal end in plasmid-transfected HEK293T cells (data not shown). This plasmid was modified by cutting with EcoRI and BglII (sites downstream of the mCherry-T2A-luciferase ORF) to insert a bacterial promoter-driven zeomycin resistance gene cassette, which was amplified by PCR with primers to add BglII and terminal EcoRI flanking sites (primers: ZeoF and ZeoR; Table 1). The resulting plasmid (pmCherry-T2A-Luc-Zeo) was used as a template for the PCR amplification of the entire T2A-Luc-Zeo cassette, using primers with long 5′ extensions that added 38–40 bp flanking homology arms to the PCR product to direct the recombination into the VZV BAC-mediated l-red site-specific recombination. The methods of recombineering have been detailed by us and others previously [28,29].The in-frame fusion to gC (encoded by ORF14), with the alteration of its stop codon to a coding residue, used the primers, gClucF2 and gClucR3. The PCR product was amplified, and the gel was purified and transformed for recombineering into pOka-DX BAC after 20 min of 42 °C heat induction by using the pGS1783 bacterial host (the kind gift of Gregory Smith, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA), as detailed previously [29]. Bacterial colonies resistant to chloramphenicol and zeomycin were then validated for the BAC DNA integrity and for the correct in-frame insertion into ORF14 by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analyses and Sanger sequencing across the fusion insert join. Virus was derived by the co-transfection of the BAC-purified DNA in MeWo or hTRPE cells, as recently described [28,29]. A similar strategy was used to generate VZV containing the T2A-luciferase-zeor that is: fused to the C terminus of ORF9, using the primers, ORF9-lucF2 and ORF9lucR3; fused to the C terminus of ORF17, using the primers, ORF17lucF2 and ORF17lucR2; and fused to the C terminus of ORF57, using the primers, 57lucF and 57lucR.2.1.2. Correction of Spurious MutationsORF14, 9 and 17- luciferase reporter viruses were derived from the pOkaDX BAC background and were detailed previously [18,21]. The ORF57 luciferase reporter virus was derived from a corrected version of this BAC (named, pOka DX-RR), which had been corrected for two newly identified spurious mutations that were revealed by pOka BAC DX sequencing (Table 2). One mutation in pOka DX was in ORF40, which encodes the major capsid protein and causes A428T nonsynonymous change. The ORF40 SNP was also present in the nonexcisable version of the BAC [18] but was not found in the pOka cosmids that were used to derive the Tisher BAC [14], nor in the independently derived Zhu BAC that was used to generate VZV-BAC-Luc [19]. It was not found in any other VZV sequence (of 93 genome sequences analyzed).A second nonsynonymous mutation in ORF50, which encodes glycoprotein gM, caused V26A. The ORF50 mutation may reflect a naturally arising variant, since it was found in 4 VZV-reported sequences of the 93 scanned. The correction of the two mutations used primers that were designed to add silent restriction sites near the SNPs for the rapid identification of positive constructs, specifically a novel noncoding EcoRI site for ORF40 and a novel noncoding HindIII site for that in ORF50. The primers were used to amplify the kanamycin resistance cassette from pEPSkan2, and the gel-purified PCR products were recombined into their respective sites and were then reversed [29]. The BACs were verified for the inserted restriction sites introduced at each step and were verified by DNA sequencing across the mutations. ORF40 was corrected first, followed by the correction of ORF50, using the primers, 40REPF + 40REPR, and 50REPF + 50REPR, respectively.2.1.3. Deletion of ORF13 and ORF36 in the BAC DXRR 57luczeo BackgroundThe partial deletion of the VZV thymidine kinase (ORF36), and the full deletion of thymidylate synthase (ORF13), used a strategy in which the genes were replaced with the mturq2blue (mT2B) fluorescent reporter gene. We first developed the plasmid, p-mTurq2Blue-KAN-in, which contained a recombination-reversable kanamycin resistance cassette derived from the plasmid, pEPS-kan2 [18]. The entire Turq2Blue-KANin cassette was then PCR amplified with the primers, TS-T2B-For and TSendR2 (to delete TS), and the primers, TKT2BFor and TKendR3 (to delete part of TK). The gel-purified PCR fragments were independently recombined into pOka BAC DX-RR57luczeo and were reversed to remove the kanr cassette and to restore the mT2B ORF. This strategy placed the mT2B reporter under the control of the TS and TK promoters in each virus, respectively, when the VZV was derived as detailed above. As expected, the plaques were blue-fluorescent when illuminated with 434 nm. The partial ORF36 replacement recombined the mT2B gene in-frame with the 43rd codon of the TK ORF because the start of TK is very close to ORF35 and was suspected to contain regulatory sequences that regulate the ORF 35 expression. The partial gene replacement strategy preserved 220 bp of the sequence upstream of ORF35. To delete both the TK and TS, a kanamycin resistance cassette from pEPSkan2 was PCR amplified with the primers, TKkan-delF and TKkan-delR, and was then recombined into the BAC containing the replacement of TS with mT2B and selected for the gain of kanamycin resistance. The viruses from the BACs were derived from at least two independently derived constructs and they all showed the same phenotype in subsequent studies.2.2. CompoundsThe compounds used include commercially purchased cidofovir (CDV) (BEI Resources, Manassas, VA, USA), foscarnet (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA), acyclovir (Millipore Sigma, Burlington, MA, USA), and brivudine (BVdU) (Fisher Scientific, Hampton, NH, USA). For the cell-based assays, dry compounds were dissolved in water or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and were stored at −20 °C. Stocks were diluted in complete tissue culture medium to working concentrations (CDV = 0.078–5 µM; BVdU = 0.000027–0.02 µM; ACV = 0.0026–40 µM; foscarnet = 1 mM). For the mouse experiments, CDV was prepared in water (2.5 mg/mL) and stored at 4 °C.2.3. Virus Growth Kinetics in CellsThe virus growth kinetics were evaluated in HFFs or ARPE-19 cells, as previously described [26,30]. Briefly, cells were grown to confluence and were then infected with cell-free VZV at a ratio of 1:50 or 1:100, and were incubated at 37 °C. At 2 h post-infection, additional media were added to each well. The virus spread was measured with daily bioluminescence imaging. Prior to scanning, the media were removed and replaced with D-luciferin (300 µg/mL in PBS; XenoLight™ D-Luciferin Potassium Salt, Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA, USA) for 40 min. The medium was replaced daily after imaging. The bioluminescent signal has been significantly correlated to the viral spread (pfu) in previous studies [19] and is confirmed here. VZV was added to HFF monolayers and imaged daily for bioluminescence. Cells were then harvested after imaging to determine the virus yield, measured by standard infectious center assays [19].2.4. Total Flux Half-Life in Cells Infected with VZV-ORFx-Luc VirusesEach VZV-ORFx-Luc virus and the parental VZV-BAC-Luc virus were evaluated for decay in the luciferase activity, measured as the Total Flux, in the presence of 1 mM of viral DNA replication inhibitor, foscarnet. Trypsinized and counted HFFs were resuspended in tissue culture medium and mixed with VZV-infected HFFs at a 1:50 ratio. Approximately 5 × 105 HFFs with VZV in 2 mL of medium were added to 42 individual 35 mm tissue culture dishes (Corning, Corning, NY, USA) and were incubated at 37 °C in a humidified CO2 incubator for 36–40 h. Three dishes were scanned to measure the Total Flux at time zero (0 h). Then, 1 mM of foscarnet was added to the media in all dishes to inhibit the viral DNA polymerase and the dishes were returned to the incubator. At 2–12 h intervals, three dishes were selected at random and individually scanned by IVIS over 12–14 timepoints, which varied for each VZV reporter virus, with many clustered around the expected time when the Total Flux signals neared 50%. At each timepoint, the media were removed and replaced with D-luciferin (300 µg/mL in PBS) for 40 min at 37 °C, and were then scanned in the IVIS™ 50 instrument to record the bioluminescence, measured as the Total Flux. The triplicate values at each timepoint were divided by the average Total Flux at 0 h to calculate the percent change in the Total Flux. The time when the Total Flux reached 50% was determined by using nonlinear regression analysis to fit a dose vs. response curve (F constrained to 50).2.5. Efficacy in Cultured CellsAntiviral activity against VZV-ORF57-Luc, VZV-ORF57-∆TK, and VZV-ORF57-∆TS was evaluated by previously established dose response assays [31,32]. Briefly, ARPE-19 cells were seeded in 24-well tissue-culture-treated plates for 3 d prior to infection. Cells were infected with up to 500 pfu per well and were incubated at 37 °C with 5% CO2. Cidofovir and brivudine were added at varying concentrations 2 h post infection and were returned to 37 °C. Infected and treated cells were incubated for 3 d post infection. Prior to scanning, the medium was replaced with D-luciferin (300 µg/mL in PBS) for 40 min at 37 °C. The bioluminescence was measured using the IVIS™ 50 instrument (Caliper Life Sciences/Xenogen, Hopkinton, MA, USA). The virus yield, reported as the fold change, was calculated as the Total Flux (photons/sec/cm2/steradian) at each concentration divided by the Total Flux for the untreated wells.2.6. Preparation of SkinHuman skin from fetal and adult sources was used. Fetal skin (18–20 weeks gestational age) (Advanced Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA, USA) was obtained according to all local, state, and federal guidelines. Adult human skin was obtained with informed consent from healthy adults who were undergoing reduction mammoplasty surgeries at SUNY Upstate Medical University in Syracuse, New York. The adult human skin collection was managed under approved Institutional Review Board protocols and procedures (SUNY Upstate, Institutional Review Board #1140572), as well as all local, state, and federal guidelines. Fetal and adult skin preparation has been described previously [27,33]. Briefly, skin was cleaned with povidone iodine and ethanol and washed in sterile media. Adult skin was thinned using a Weck knife and Goulian guard (0.028”) to remove any underlying adipose and excess dermal tissue. Prepared skin was then cut into approximately 1 cm2 pieces and cultured on NetWells for the skin organ culture (Corning, NY, USA), or was implanted into mice, as previously described [26,34,35].2.7. Skin Organ CultureFetal or adult human skin was cultured on NetWells (Corning, NY, USA), which hold tissue at the air–liquid interface. The skin was infected with VZV by scarification and was cultured as previously described [26,27,33]. The infected skin was incubated at 37 °C for fetal tissue, and at 35 °C for adult tissue. Virus spread was measured by bioluminescence imaging every day, or every other day, by scanning the skin in the IVIS™ 50. Prior to scanning, skin tissue was submerged in D-luciferin (300 µg/mL in PBS) for 40 min. The medium was replaced every other day after imaging.2.8. Animal ProceduresAnimal procedures were performed as previously described [26,35], with approved protocols, and were monitored by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at SUNY Upstate Medical University. All studies were performed in accordance with all state and federal laws and regulations. Briefly, fetal human skin xenografts were introduced subcutaneously above the left flank of 5–6-week-old male scid-beige (CB.17; CB17/Icr-Prkdcscid/IcrIcoCrl) mice (Charles River, Wilmington, MA, USA). Three to four weeks postimplantation, xenografts were exposed through an incision on the mouse back and were inoculated by intradermal injection with cell-associated VZV (1 × 104–105 pfu/mL; 60 µL injection; grown in HFFs). Prior to imaging, mice were injected with D-luciferin (15 mg/mL in PBS) for 10 min. Virus spread was monitored by daily bioluminescence imaging with the IVIS™ 200 for 9 d. Mice were monitored daily for weight loss and signs of distress.2.9. Bioluminescence ImagingThe imaging procedure was previously described in [26]. Briefly, for skin organ culture, tissue was scanned with the IVIS™ 50 instrument and images acquired for 30 s–1 min (Caliper Life Sciences/Xenogen, Hopkinton, MA, USA). For mouse studies, animals were scanned with the IVIS™ 200 instrument and images acquired for 5 min, maximum. The VZV infection was measured as the Total Flux (photons/sec/cm2/steradian) in a region-of-interest (ROI) encircling each skin piece or drawn over the xenograft(s). The fold change was calculated as the daily Total Flux divided by the lowest and/or initial Total Flux value.2.10. Statistical AnalysisAll calculations and graphs were created using GraphPad Prism (Graph-Pad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). The dose response curves were analyzed using nonlinear regression analysis. All other data was analyzed using one-way ANOVA and various post hoc tests or a Student’s t-test. A p ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant.3. Results3.1. Construction of Robust Reporter VZV VirusesVZV-BAC-Luc was the “gold standard” reporter virus in our previous work assessing antivirals against VZV [26,35]. The luciferase reporter allows the virus growth to be measured over time in the same sample by using IVIS, which is useful in cases where considerable sample-to-sample variability may exist, or when the availability of skin pieces or mice is limited or prohibitively costly. Unfortunately, the luciferase gene in VZV-BAC-Luc is under the control of the constitutively active SV40 promoter [19], which was suspected to be rapidly transcribed upon the genome insertion into the nucleus so that the luciferase expression was not reliant on viral gene expression, and likely occurred before viral DNA replication. Here, we aimed to create improved reporter VZVs, in which the luciferase was expressed with late kinetics and, thus, was sensitive to the inhibition of viral DNA synthesis. The construction of the reporter viruses is described in detail in the methods (see Methods 2.1; Figure 1). Briefly, the luciferase gene was inserted in-frame with the C terminal residue of the VZV open reading frames (ORFs), 9, 14, 17, and 57, by using an in-frame T2A ribosome skipping motif between the VZV ORF and the luciferase gene. As luciferase is not active as a fusion protein, the T2A motif releases active luciferase with a single N terminal proline that does not affect the activity. The first-generation virus set (VZV-ORF9-Luc; VZV-ORF14-Luc; and VZV-ORF17-Luc) was found to contain mutations in ORF40 and ORF50, which were also found in the pOkaDX BAC [18]. The second-generation of VZV had the two spurious mutations of corrected and contained luciferase inserted after ORF57 (VZV-ORF57-Luc, previously described in [27]). VZV-ORF57-Luc was eventually selected as the optimal reporter virus on the basis of the experiments to follow. The third generation of VZV reporter viruses were developed from the VZV-ORF57-Luc BAC and with either VZV ORF36 (thymidine kinase (TK)), ORF13 (thymidylate synthase (TS)), or both genes, deleted to be used in drug discovery/activation mechanism studies. All viruses were viable and were assessed for the growth kinetics in cells, skin, and in SCIDhu mice to identify those with high levels of luciferase activity that would extinguish upon the cessation of viral DNA replication (such as from treatment with antiviral compounds).3.2. Comparison of VZV-BAC-Luc to VZV-ORFx-Luc Reporter Viruses in Cells and SkinIt is well documented that mutations or changes to VZV ORFs can affect virulence in skin that is not necessarily observed in cell culture [15,34,36,37,38]. Thus, we conducted a comprehensive study of the VZV reporter viruses in cell culture and organized skin in order to identify virulence differences that might be a consequence of the insertion of luc. First, HFF cells were inoculated with cell-free VZV reporter viruses, at an approximate MOI of 0.01. In a second experiment, human fetal skin organ culture (SOC) explants were inoculated by scarification with a suspension of VZV-infected HFFs for each virus (cell-associated virus; 60 µL; 1 × 104–105 pfu/mL) and placed on NetWells at the air–media interface. The VZV spread in the HFFs and SOC was measured daily by bioluminescence imaging and was reported as the fold change of the Total Flux. The Total Flux (photons/sec/cm2/steradian) is a measure of the radiance that reflects the number of VZV-infected cells and the level of luciferase activity per cell. As expected, VZV-BAC-Luc spread exponentially during the first 4 d post infection in HFFs (Figure 2A), and the reporter activity increased through approximately 5–7 d post infection in the SOC (Figure 2B). VZV-ORF17-Luc showed a similar growth pattern that was equivalent to VZV-BAC-Luc in both the cell culture and the SOC, while both VZV-ORF14-Luc and VZV-ORF57-Luc reached a much higher Total Flux than VZV-BAC-Luc in the HFFs (Figure 2A; p < 0.0001; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test). In the SOC, there was no apparent growth difference, with the exception that, while VZV-ORF9-Luc reached a significantly higher Total Flux in the HFFs (Figure 2A; p < 0.001; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test), the activity was considerably lower in the SOC and declined over time (Figure 2B; not significant; p = 0.068; one-way ANOVA with Kruskal–Wallis post hoc test). This result suggests that the VZV ORF9-Luc virus may have growth impairments in organized skin tissue, but the other late promoter luciferase viruses were considerably improved in the signal reporter activity over the previously used VZV BAC-Luc.We previously reported that VZV-BAC-Luc bioluminescence significantly correlated with VZV pfu [19]. We considered it necessary to confirm that the bioluminescence from the cells infected with each of the new VZV-ORF reporter viruses similarly reflected the virus spread. As such, the correlation between the Total Flux and the VZV infectivity (infectious foci or pfu) was analyzed in the HFFs daily for 4 days (Figure 2C). After the bioluminescence measurements were collected, the cells were harvested with trypsin, and the ability to form infectious centers was determined by an infectious center assay [19]. For all the VZV reporter viruses, the bioluminescence was highly correlated with the VZV spread (Figure 2C; nonlinear regression analysis with log–log line; R2 > 0.90). However, the pattern of luciferase activity varied for each virus. For VZV-ORF9-Luc, VZV-ORF14-Luc, and VZV-ORF17-Luc, the bioluminescence increased sharply with a marginal level of virus spread. However, for VZV-ORF57-Luc, the bioluminescence and virus spread increased gradually and in tandem, similar to VZV-BAC-Luc. This suggests that ORF57 had the optimal correlation to infectivity, where luciferase was driven by a VZV-specific late viral promoter.It was then deemed necessary to determine the effects of halting the viral DNA synthesis on the bioluminescence from each reporter virus. The luc gene in VZV-BAC-Luc is under the control of the constitutively active SV40 promoter [19], and we have observed that bioluminescence persists for an extended period after the DNA synthesis is halted by antiviral compounds (data not shown). If the expression of a VZV late gene was dependent on viral DNA synthesis, then we would predict that its promoter activity might stop or decline when the replication was inhibited. To determine the Total Flux half-life after blocking the viral DNA synthesis, the HFFs were infected with VZV reporter viruses for 36–40 h, and then 1 mM of foscarnet (phosphonoformate) was added to inhibit the viral DNA polymerase during the exponential growth phase. The cultures were then scanned over an additional 96 h to measure the decrease in the Total Flux as an indicator of the luciferase activity decay. Intriguingly, the Total Flux half-life varied, depending on the ORF promoter that was regulating the luciferase expression (Figure 2D). In line with previous observations, VZV-BAC-Luc had the longest half-life, at 74.6 h, and the VZV-ORF14-Luc half-life was nearly as long, at 64 h. However, the Total Flux half-life for VZV-ORF17-Luc was intermediate, at 51 h, while VZV-ORF9-Luc and VZV-ORF57-Luc had the shortest half-lives, at 43.5 and 41.9 h, respectively. On the basis of these results and the growth patterns in the HFFs and the SOC, VZV-ORF57-Luc was selected as the optimal VZV reporter virus.3.3. Comparison of VZV-BAC-Luc and VZV-ORF57-Luc in a SCIDhu Mouse ModelWhile VZV-ORF57-Luc performed as well as VZV-BAC-Luc in skin organ culture (Figure 2B), it was not known whether the viruses replicated equally in skin xenografts, nor if it would be responsive to in vivo antiviral treatment. We previously showed that VZV-ORF57-Luc can infect skin xenografts in SCIDhu mice [27], but the relative growth kinetics were not assessed. SCIDhu mice with human fetal skin xenografts were inoculated by intra-xenograft injection with equivalent levels of VZV-BAC-Luc or VZV-ORF57-Luc, and the spread was measured daily by bioluminescence imaging with the IVIS™ 200 instrument. The groups were vehicle alone or were treated with cidofovir (10 mg/kg), which is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug that inhibits VZV DNA polymerase [39]. The treatment was administered by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection from DPI 3-9. The fold change in the VZV yield was calculated as the daily Total Flux divided by the average Total Flux on the lowest day for each individual mouse (typically, DPI 2 or 3). VZV-BAC-Luc grew efficiently in vivo, reaching its highest point on DPI 8, with a final fold change of 21.8 ± 8 (Figure 3A; mean ± SEM). The VZV-ORF57-Luc reporter activity was still increasing, which suggests that the virus was still growing at DPI 9, and that it had a significantly higher fold change, reaching 164 ± 63 (Figure 3B) (mean ± SEM; p = 0.0374; Student’s t-test). As expected, cidofovir significantly reduced the yield for both viruses (Figure 3; p < 0.05; Student’s t-test). VZV-ORF57-Luc’s reporter activity indicated that it replicated better in SCIDhu mice and that it was responsive to antiviral treatment, which suggests that it is robust and an optimal reporter VZV virus.3.4. VZV Thymidylate Synthase (TS), but Not Thymidine Kinase (TK), Is Required for VirulenceWe then used the VZV-ORF57-Luc background to construct a set of reporter viruses lacking the TK (from ORF36) and/or TS (from ORF13) genes, to evaluate the role of these nucleotide-modifying enzymes in the activation of novel antiviral compounds, and to understand their mechanism of action (Figure 1). VZV ORF36 encodes the thymidine kinase, which is required to phosphorylate many nucleoside analogs [40], while ORF13 encodes thymidylate synthase, which is involved in increasing the pool of thymidine in quiescent cells and may be involved in some nucleoside activation mechanisms [41]. Both enzymes play key roles in pathways that are affected by antiviral compounds. ORF13, ORF36, or both, were deleted and replaced with marker genes, which resulted in VZV-ORF57-∆TK, VZV-ORF57-∆TS, and VZV-ORF57-∆TK∆TS. After the genotypes were confirmed by RFLP and regional sequencing, the phenotypes were evaluated in cells and adult human skin organ culture. We previously showed that VZV grows similarly in fetal versus adult skin (data not shown) [27]. The ARPE-19 cell monolayers were inoculated with cell-free VZV at an approximate MOI of 0.01, whereas the skin explants were infected by scarification through cell-associated VZV that was placed on the skin surface (30 µL inoculum; 1 × 104–105 pfu/mL). The skin explants were then placed on NetWells at the air–media interface. As expected, VZV-ORF57-Luc grew well in ARPE-19 cells over 4 d, and in adult skin explants over 7 d (Figure 4). VZV-ORF57-∆TK had equivalent growth kinetics in cells and skin (Figure 4A,D). VZV-ORF57-∆TS was slightly impaired in ARPE-19 cells, but was significantly impaired in skin compared to VZV-ORF57-Luc (Figure 4B,D; p < 0.01; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test). When both the VZV TK and TS were deleted, the growth in the cell culture was slightly less but did not reach significance (Figure 4C). However, similar to VZV-ORF57-∆TS, VZV-ORF57-∆TK∆TS showed minimal spread in skin organ culture (Figure 4D; p < 0.05; one-way ANOVA with Dunnett’s post hoc test). Together, these results indicate that, while TK was dispensable for skin growth under these conditions, the expression of TS may facilitate the growth and spread of VZV in confluent ARPE-19 cells and it is required for spread in skin. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of a growth phenotype for a VZV TS-deletion mutant.3.5. VZV TS Deletion Increases Sensitivity to Antiviral DrugsMutations in VZV TK have long been associated with antiviral resistance to acyclovir and brivudine (BVdU), which are antivirals that require an initial phosphorylation by VZV TK for activation [42]. Cidofovir does not require TK phosphorylation because of its phosphonate moiety. It is also known that blocking viral or cellular thymidylate synthase can improve the potency of nucleoside analogs, such as acyclovir [43]. However, it was not known how deletions in TK and TS would affect the antiviral sensitivity of the VZV-ORF57-Luc virus. Thus, the potency (50% effective concentration (EC50)) of acyclovir, brivudine, and cidofovir against VZV-ORF57-Luc, VZV-ORF57-∆TK, and VZV-ORF57-∆TS was evaluated in confluent ARPE-19 cells. The antiviral activity was assessed by bioluminescence imaging at 3 d post infection (DPI), which was previously shown to be highly correlated to the VZV pfu [19] (Figure 2C). The EC50 for each antiviral compound was calculated as the average Total Flux at each concentration divided by the average Total Flux of the untreated wells [26]. Here, VZV-ORF57-Luc was sensitive to both brivudine and cidofovir, with EC50 values of 3.0 nM and 1.7 µM, respectively (Figure 5A). As expected, VZV-ORF57-∆TK was resistant to brivudine but sensitive to cidofovir, with an EC50 value of 0.81 µM. Notably, VZV-ORF57-∆TS showed considerably enhanced sensitivity to both brivudine and cidofovir, with EC50 values of 1.9 nM and 0.81 µM, respectively. Similar to brivudine, VZV-ORF57-Luc and VZV-ORF57-∆TS were sensitive to acyclovir, with EC50 values of 7.6 µM and 0.37 µM, respectively (dose response curves not shown).To further explore this phenomenon, we extended this study and evaluated the sensitivity of VZV-ORF57-∆TS to brivudine. The dose response curves indicate that the enhanced sensitivity was greatest around the EC50 value. ARPE-19 monolayers were inoculated with cell-free VZV, treated with 1.25, 2.5, or 5 nM of brivudine for 3 d, and the VZV yield was measured as the reporter activity. VZV-ORF57-Luc was increasingly sensitive to higher concentrations of brivudine, while VZV-ORF57-∆TK was resistant at all concentrations (Figure 5B). VZV-ORF57-∆TS was significantly more sensitive to brivudine than the parent virus at 1.25 and 2.5 nM but did not show significance at 5 nM (Figure 5B; p < 0.001; one-way ANOVA; Tukey post hoc test). These data further demonstrate that the absence of VZV TS enhances the antiviral sensitivity to brivudine. Given that the TK and TS deletion viruses are isogenic, and that VZV-ORF57-Luc has a robust phenotype in all the models tested, we are now poised to study the mechanism of action of the novel antivirals as they develop. These viruses should prove to be highly useful to the field.4. DiscussionHere, we constructed a series of robust VZV reporter viruses by using a BAC recombineering system for use in cell culture, skin organ culture, and in SCIDhu mice, and we validated their robustness in each system. We identified a specific strong viral promoter (a VZV-unique ORF57 gene of unknown function), where the luciferase activity was linked to viral replication and had a relatively short half-life. This virus was then used to evaluate the contribution of the VZV TK and TS genes to the viral replication in the cell and skin organ culture, which identified an unrecognized role for the VZV TS gene in human skin. This work sets the stage for the further analyses of the contribution of viral genes to the VZV growth in various model systems, and for the development and testing of novel antivirals to VZV.Several luciferase reporter VZVs have been detailed previously. These reporters are beneficial tools, as the expression of luciferase can be used with IVIS systems for the imaging of the same samples over time. Firefly luciferase is particularly useful when the tissue or host platform are heterogenous, limited, prohibitively costly, or difficult to generate, such as human skin cultures and in xenotransplants harbored in SCIDhu mice. Oliver et al. detailed the development of VZV that reported growth in SCIDhu mice by expressing luciferase fused to the ORF68 (gE) and IE63 genes [44]. However, VZV with luciferase fused to ORF68 rapidly lost its reporter activity, which is likely because of the C terminal fusion of the gE lay in the reiterated elements of the genome. The stable reporter fusion to ORF63 required the addition to both ORF63 and its duplicated gene, ORF70 [44]. When only added to ORF63, the reporter was lost. In addition, IE63 is strongly suspected to be an immediate early gene, so it may be expressed from the genome rapidly and without the need for viral replication [45]. We previously reported an alternative strategy to express luciferase, in which viral-promoter-luciferase cassettes were placed at an ectopic locus, and specifically at the ORF65-ORF66 intergenic region, in recombinant viruses [46]. While this approach was successful, we could not eliminate the possibility that the ectopic placement of the promoter region did not contain a sufficient promoter sequence to confer full regulation in the context of the virus. We also could not eliminate the possibility that the ectopic site may have influenced the regulation and expression kinetics. An advantage of the system that was developed and used here is that the native promoter at its natural locus is employed to drive the luciferase expression, which minimizes the concerns of the positional contributions to the activity. In addition, the separation of the luciferase from the viral protein with a T2A motif avoids the intolerance of the luciferase-to-protein fusion, and it ensures minimal interference with the viral protein. When fully active, the T2A ribosome skipping motif results in a 21–23 residue that is a remnant of the motif that is left attached to the viral protein, and a single proline attached to the downstream luciferase gene.There are, however, a few potential disadvantages to this strategy, but we have yet to encounter them. Specifically, the BAC system may develop spurious mutations, or regions of the genome may be unstable in E. coli. Indeed, we identified two spurious mutations in the pOka DX BAC that were not present in the pOka cosmids that were used to derive the BAC, but that were present in the earlier nonself-excising version of the BAC [18,21]. We expect that this arose during the derivation of the BACs from circular viral DNA. While the deletion of the sequences has not been identified specifically for the VZV, it is recognized that part of the UL origin of the replication in the HSV genome is deleted in most E. coli strains [47,48], and that it may affect HSV pathogenesis in a mouse model [49]. Additionally, the potential for sporadic SNP mutations to arise is always a concern, since each recombineering step requires a clonal step, and such changes are unlikely to be detected by restriction analyses. Such mutations could accumulate with multiple recombination events, which is most often conducted by using “scarless” sequential recombineering methods, as detailed by Tischer et al. [18,21], and as employed here. Here, we acknowledge that the robust ORF57 luciferase virus underwent five sequential recombination steps (1 = the luciferase insertion; 2 and 3 = the correction of ORF40 and its reversal; 4 and 5 = the correction of ORF50 and its reversal), but we did not identify any spurious or unexpected mutations in the genome.An important consideration when designing VZV reporter strains is the location of the luc insertion and the gene to which it is fused. We have found that the insertion of fluorescent proteins within VZV ORFs may alter the infectivity and virulence in skin (authors’ observations). This phenomenon has been described for other viruses, where the insertion of fluorescent reporter proteins interfered with the growth kinetics [50,51]. Thus, we specifically chose certain ORFs for the virus development. We found that luc insertion after the VZV ORFs, 14, 17, or 57, did not alter the growth kinetics in cells or human skin. By contrast, the luc insertion after the ORF9 reduced the VZV growth in skin, despite the T2A ribosome skipping motif that releases fLuc from the ORF9 protein. ORF9 interacts with IE62 to form complexes that are involved in tegument formation [52], and ORF9 is required for VZV replication [38]. It is possible that the luc insertion altered the ORF9 protein, thereby preventing it from interacting with the IE62 protein and performing its function during replication. Another possibility is that the luc sequences interrupted the mRNA and the noncoding RNA transcription through the ORF9 region [53]. While it is outside of the scope of this study, it would be interesting to create a library of VZV reporter strains with the T2A-luc (or other reporter genes) inserted after other candidate VZV ORFs. Such a library could potentially reveal phenotypes not previously described for different VZV ORFs. For this, the recent detailed transcriptional map of the VZV genome will be important to take into consideration [53].A goal of this project was to construct a reporter virus with luc expression under the transcriptional control of a late viral promoter. The annotation of the VZV transcriptome and the kinetics of the expression, as predicted from HSV, prompted the selection of the ORF17; the true late genes, ORF9 and ORF14; and the leaky late gene, ORF57, as potential regulators of the luc expression [53]. Transcript abundance was also considered, since high levels would produce a brighter bioluminescence signal. ORF9 is one of the most abundant VZV proteins, it is packaged into the virion tegument, and it is detected in the cytoplasm as soon as 2 h post infection [54]. We [29] and others [55] have reported the successful tagging of ORF9 at its C terminal end, and, thus, we expected it to be a good candidate for driving luciferase. The VZV transcription kinetics of ORF14, which encodes glycoprotein C, is atypical and unpredictable in cultured cells and it may be very delayed, with little protein detected until 3 DPI, after 4–6 rounds of VZV replication [56]. ORF17, a putative host shut-off protein, is required for VZV replication at 37 °C, but not at 33 °C [24,57], although this functional role is contested [58]. ORF17 can also be detected as early as 6–12 h post infection in cells [58]. ORF57 is a very short ORF that is unique to VZV and has no known function, but it is detected in the Golgi at 48 h post infection [59]. In this study, infected cells or skin explants were first scanned at 24 h post infection, at which time there was a strong bioluminescent signal. This indicates that the fLuc protein was synthesized from the viral mRNAs that were driven by these ORFs within the first 24 h.VZV-BAC-Luc has long been the gold standard reporter virus. Strong luciferase activity enables the bioluminescence imaging of the VZV spread, which has been instrumental in understanding VZV pathogenesis and in evaluating the antiviral compounds in cells, skin, and in vivo [19,26,27,44]. Unfortunately, luc is controlled by the SV40 promoter [19], which is normally considered to be constitutively expressed and may not respond to the antiviral effects of novel compounds in the context of the virus. Here, we showed that the bioluminescence half-life for VZV-BAC-Luc in the presence of the DNA polymerase inhibitor, foscarnet, is 74.6 h, or just over 3 days (Figure 2C). This is problematic during the standard antiviral dose response studies that are conducted over 72 h because the bioluminescent signal may only decrease by half in the treated infected cells. This could potentially mask the effects of an antiviral compound that is evaluated by using the VZV-BAC-Luc strain. In skin organ culture and SCIDhu mice with skin xenografts, bioluminescence imaging usually coincides with the initiation of antiviral treatment. If the bioluminescent signal is sustained for 3 days, it may conceal how quickly a novel antiviral prevents the virus spread. Thus, a new VZV reporter strain, with a shorter bioluminescent signal half-life, was needed. Here, VZV-ORF57-Luc appears to be a superior and optimal reporter strain. It had the shortest bioluminescence half-life of 41.9 h, or less than 2 days, it produced a strong bioluminescent signal, and it was virulent in skin and SCIDhu mice. The characterization of VZV-ORF57-Luc is a promising step forward and will improve the evaluation of novel antivirals.Acyclovir and its derivatives are the first-line antiviral therapy for VZV infections, and they are activated by TK phosphorylation. Mutations in the TK gene are the most common cause of resistance to acyclovir and other nucleoside analogs that lack a phosphonate group [6,60,61]. Nucleoside analogs remain the focus of most antiviral drug development, and so we constructed VZV-ORF57-Luc-∆TK as a tool to study how nucleoside analogs are processed in VZV-infected cells. Here, we show that VZV-ORF57-∆TK was resistant to acyclovir and brivudine, which must be phosphorylated in the cell to their active form, but not to cidofovir, which has a phosphonate group. The deletion of TK had no discernable phenotype on this strain. This reporter virus is isogenic with VZV-ORF57-Luc, and it will be invaluable for screening nucleoside analogs for activity against clinical strains that are resistant to acyclovir.VZV encodes several proteins for nucleic acid metabolism that may impact the mechanism and activity of antiviral nucleoside analogs. VZV ORFs 18 and 19 encode a ribonucleotide reductase that generates deoxyribonucleotides, and the deletion of these genes potentiates the activity of acyclovir [62]. VZV ORF8 encodes a dUTPase that converts dUTP to dUMP [63], which is a substrate for ORF13 thymidylate synthase. The TS enzyme converts dUMP to dTMP in quiescent cells [41], which is then phosphorylated by VZV TK and cellular kinases to increase the dTTP pool for viral DNA synthesis. Nucleoside analogs are also substrates of VZV TK and compete with deoxythymidine and dTMP for the enzyme. It has long been noted that inhibiting TS increases the activity of acyclovir by reducing the dTMP levels. In cells that are infected with HSV-1, blocking the viral and cellular TS activity with 5-fluorouracil increases the potency of acyclovir [43]. We found a similar effect in this study, in that the potency of brivudine increased against VZV-ORF57-∆TS. This enhancing effect was also observed for CDV and ACV, although they were not analyzed in depth. We also found that VZV-ORF57-∆TS was impaired for virus spread in skin. The cells in adult skin are mostly quiescent, with little to no cellular TS. In this environment, VZV TS may be important for generating dTMP and adequate dTTP. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time a growth phenotype has been described for a VZV TS mutant. It would be interesting to test the VZV-ORF57-∆TS growth in replicating and quiescent cells, to measure the dTTP pools, and to discern the impact on the VZV replication and antiviral activity of nucleoside analogs. Such studies could fully resolve the VZV TS phenotype uncovered here.In summary, we detail a strategy to generate VZV reporter viruses to assess the gene contributions to virulence in cells and skin, as well as to evaluate novel antiviral compounds. The reporter viruses were constructed from a recombinant pOka strain with a T2A ribosome skipping motif between the VZV ORF and the luc gene. VZV-ORF57-Luc appears to be an ideal reporter virus for its maintenance of the virulence in a human skin model and for the responsiveness to inhibition of DNA replication. We used this background to develop isogenic reporter viruses with deletions in ORF36 and ORF13 as additional tools for antiviral research. In cells and skin, we show that TK was dispensable, while TS was found to have an unprecedented requirement for virulence. Furthermore, the loss of TS enhanced the antiviral sensitivity to certain nucleoside analogues. Taken together, this work lays the foundation for the probing of the viral gene contributions to pathogenesis in human skin and for the evaluation of novel antiviral compounds.


Title: Varicella-zoster virus ORF7 interacts with ORF53 and plays a
role in its trans-Golgi network localization

No full text body available.


Title: Implementation of Hospital Policy for Healthcare Workers and Patients Exposed to Varicella-Zoster Virus

INTRODUCTIONVaricella-zoster virus (VZV), a double-stranded DNA virus belonging to the family Herpesviridae, causes one of the most communicable diseases in humans.12 There are two distinct clinical diseases caused by VZV: varicella (or chickenpox) which is caused by the primary VZV infection as well as herpes zoster (or shingles), caused by the endogenous reactivation of the latent infection.234 Although VZV infection is generally a benign, self-limited illness in immunocompetent children, serious and life-threatening complications occur more commonly in certain groups of patients, particularly neonates, pregnant women, adults, and immunocompromised persons.56789101112 For these reasons, infection control of VZV is important in hospital settings where patients are at higher risk of severe morbidity and mortality. In addition to patients, healthcare workers (HCWs) have the potential of exposure to VZV from infected patients. Furthermore, VZV can be transmitted to and from HCWs and other susceptible patients in the hospitals. To prevent the transmission of VZV infection in the hospital settings, the development and implementation of hospital policies for appropriate infection control is warranted. This article focuses on the healthcare-associated transmission of VZV, the infection control measures in the hospital settings, and summarizes the key points of the recommendations on the management of patients and HCWs exposed to VZV.EPIDEMIOLOGY AND CLINICAL MANIFESTATIONSPrimary VZV infection causes varicella (also known as chickenpox), which typically occurs during childhood.3 After the primary infection, VZV characteristically establishes lifelong latency in the dorsal root or cranial nerve ganglia. Reactivation of the latent virus can occur years or decades later, resulting in herpes zoster, commonly called shingles.1314VaricellaVaricella is endemic worldwide, occurring mainly in children, and affects persons of both sexes and all races equally.15 Although the disease occurs throughout the year in temperate climates, it has a seasonal variation, with peak incidence during late winter and early spring.10 The epidemiology of varicella has changed dramatically with the implementation of the childhood varicella vaccination program. In many countries including the United States of America (USA), Germany, Australia, Greece, and Saudi Arabia, the incidence of varicella has declined following the National Immunization Program (NIP) implementation for varicella vaccine; and vaccinated persons presents with milder disease.161718192021 In Korea, a live attenuated varicella vaccine was first introduced in 1988 and the NIP recommended a universal one-dose varicella vaccination for children aged 12 to 15 months since 2005.2223 Seroprevalence, in subjects aged 1 to 79 years, determined via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, is about 90% in Korea.24 However, seroprevalence increased with age from 67% in those aged 1 to 4 years to > 98% in subjects aged over 20 years.24 However, the decline in incidence of varicella reported in other countries has not yet been shown by the National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System in Korea; rather, it seems to have been increasing over time.25 In the Korea Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention Infectious Diseases Surveillance Report, varicella has continued to increase from 22 cases per 100,000 population in 2006 to 155 cases per 100,000 population in 2017.25 This increase could have resulted from a number of factors including a change in the disease reporting rate due to improvement in diagnostics and surveillance, vaccine effectiveness, and waning of immunity after the only one-dose vaccination; thus, further investigation is warranted to elucidate these factors.Varicella is characterized by a generalized pruritic rash that begins to appear on the face and trunk, then, rapidly spread to the extremities and other areas of the body. A prodrome of low-grade fever, headache, malaise, and flu-like symptoms may occur 1 to 2 days before the onset of exanthem. The skin lesions, the hallmark of varicella, are usually pruritic, and evolve from maculopapules to vesicles, pustules, and eventually scabs, over hours to days. As a result, the lesions, at all stages of evolution are found early in the disease. Most blisters would have fully crusted within one week of the onset of infection.The severity of disease varies in certain population groups. Approximately 15%–20% of one-dose vaccinated persons may develop varicella if exposed to VZV.26 When varicella develops in vaccinated persons, the symptoms are often mild, with little or no fever. The skin lesions are fewer in number and atypical in nature, predominantly maculopapular rather than vesicular in this population. In contrast, immunocompromised patients have more numerous skin lesions, often with hemorrhagic base, and take nearly three times longer to heal. Complications occur more commonly in the following high-risk groups: neonates, adolescents, adults, pregnant women, and immunocompromised persons (including transplant recipients, patients with human immunodeficiency virus [HIV] or cancer, and patients on anti-cancer chemotherapy, immunosuppressive medications, or long-term use of steroids).592728293031 Consequently, varicella in these patients causes significant morbidity and mortality. Varicella during pregnancy affects both the mother and the fetus or newborn.112732 Maternal varicella is associated with increased risk of varicella pneumonia, which can be life threatening.11122733 If a pregnant woman has varicella during the early gestational period, the fetus is at risk of congenital varicella syndrome. Newborns who have varicella within 2 weeks of delivery from peripartum exposure or from acquisition in healthcare facilities have the highest risk of neonatal varicella.32 The mortality rate of neonatal varicella is up to 30%.632Herpes zosterHerpes zoster is a sporadic disease that occurs in persons who are seropositive for VZV. The mechanisms of latency and reactivation of VZV are not well known. A decline in the level of T-cell immunity to VZV presumably correlates with the reactivation of latent VZV, resulting in herpes zoster. The most important risk factor for herpes zoster is increasing age. Herpes zoster afflicts about 20% or more of the population overall, but the incidence rates progressively increase with age, particularly after 50 years of age.152434353637 Patients with medical conditions or medications that suppress the immune system also have an increased risk of herpes zoster, including patients with HIV, cancer, or autoimmune disease, transplant recipients, and patients on anti-cancer chemotherapy, immunosuppressive medications, or steroids.38394041424344 Some studies found that herpes zoster occurred more in women than in men and less in Blacks than Whites.45 Recurrence of disease is uncommon, but immunocompromised patients can experience a second and even third episode of herpes zoster.4647 The incidence rates of herpes zoster have shown a gradual increase over a long period of time in the United States.48 This trend is similarly observed in Korea. The annual number of clinical visits due to herpes zoster in Korea was reported to have increased from 7.93 cases per 1,000 population in 2003 to 12.54 cases per 1,000 population in 2007.49 The reason for this increase remains unknown. Some experts are concerned that mandatory childhood varicella vaccination could have led to the increase in herpes zoster incidence.5051 However, there are currently no data available to support this. The disease burden of herpes zoster in Korea is considerably higher than that reported for other countries.354952 The reason for this difference is not clear and further studies are needed. There are two types of vaccines licensed for the prevention of herpes zoster in the USA: Zoster Vaccine Live (live attenuated vaccine containing the Oka VZV strain with at least 14 times the potency of varicella vaccine) and Recombinant Zoster Vaccine (adjuvanted, recombinant subunit vaccine containing VZV glycoprotein E).53 In Korea, only Zoster Vaccine Live has been available since 2013. Zoster Vaccine Live is contraindicated in immunocompromised patients especially in transplant recipients because of the potential risk of disseminated VZV infection.5354The typical clinical manifestation of herpes zoster includes painful and unilateral vesicular eruption, with a dermatomal distribution. Generally, pain precedes the erythematous maculopapular rash by 48 to 72 hours, then, the skin lesions rapidly evolve into vesicles or bullae. Although the lesions crust within 7 to 10 days in immunocompetent patients, it could take longer to heal in immunocompromised patients. Postherpetic neuralgia, the most common complications of herpes zoster, may occur in up to 50% of patients older than 50 years and can persist for more than 1 month after the skin lesions resolves.55 Occasionally, herpes zoster can become disseminated, with > 20 skin lesions beyond the primary and adjacent dermatomes or with visceral involvements.2856 Like varicella, herpes zoster in immunocompromised patients is more severe, and the risk of complications and developing disseminated zoster is higher.30435758TRANSMISSION IN HEALTHCARE SETTINGSVZV is highly contagious and the disease is more severe in immunocompromised patients. That is why transmission of VZV in hospitals, where potentially susceptible immunocompromised patients are housed, is a serious problem. The risk of transmission is highest in pediatric patients, and seronegative adult patients and HCWs are also at high risk for acquisition.5960 Transmission of VZV to previously vaccinated persons (breakthrough varicella) can occur.6162 A patient with either varicella or herpes zoster can be a source of transmission in healthcare settings.63646566676869 The incubation period of VZV is generally 14 to 16 days, with a range of 10 to 21 days after exposure to the characteristic rash.3 Secondary attack rates of varicella among susceptible persons within a household are between 70% and 90%.1570 There are no available data concerning the attack rate of varicella in hospital settings. Although herpes zoster is less contagious than varicella, it may however be a more frequent cause of healthcare-associated infection.6768Transmission of VZV in hospital settings can occur via airborne route or through contact with contaminated environment or hands of HCWs. Healthcare-associated transmission from an index case with either varicella or disseminated zoster to susceptible patients or HCWs appears to be primarily through the airborne route. The virus spreads by droplets and aerosols from the nasopharynx 1 to 2 days before the onset of rash and from vesicular lesions containing large amount of virus particles. Patients with either varicella or disseminated zoster are regarded as being infectious, 48 hours before the onset of rash until all vesicles are crusted. Susceptible hosts may also acquire the virus by direct or indirect contacts with skin lesions of patients with either varicella or herpes zoster. Although rare, there have been reports of airborne transmission of VZV in hospital settings from patients with herpes zoster.697172 Some studies reported that aerosolized VZV DNA is rapidly and widely spread to the environment even from patients with herpes zoster.6973PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF HEALTHCARE-ASSOCIATED EXPOSURESIn healthcare facilities, both HCWs and patients should be evaluated to determine the appropriate management approach for prevention and infection control of VZV infections. The major measures of infection control include isolation, varicella vaccine, varicella-zoster immune globulin (VZIG) or intravenous immune globulin (IVIG), and antiviral agents.1174757677 Definitions of key terms are summarized in Table 1.Table 1Definitions of key termsTermDefinitionExposureHospital• Varicella or disseminated zoster: face-to-face contact for at least 5 minutes, or contact in the same room for at least 1 houra• Herpes zoster: intimate contact, for example touching or hugging; or direct contact to open cutaneous lesionsNewbornsWhen a mother has varicella 5 days before to 2 days after deliveryHCWsWorkers who have direct contact with patients (including both clinical and non-clinical HCWs)Incubation periodUsually 10 to 21 daysIndex caseThe first person with VZV infection identified in a chain of transmissionPeriod of infectivity• Varicella: from 48 hours prior to the onset of the exanthem until all lesions are crusted• Herpes zoster: from the appearance of vesicles until all lesions are crustedSusceptible to VZVAt risk of developing VZV infection because of no antibodies to VZV (usually no history of both varicella and vaccination)HCW = healthcare worker, VZV = varicella-zoster virus.aThe contact should be non-transient. Experts differ in the opinion about the duration of contact; some suggest 5 minutes and others up to 1 hour.28Pre-exposure management of HCWsHCWs with incubating or clinical varicella are significant sources of exposure to primary VZV infection in healthcare facilities. On the other hand, HCWs are at risk of acquisition of VZV infection from patients who have varicella or herpes zoster. Therefore, the first step in the prevention of healthcare-associated transmission of VZV is to minimize the number of susceptible HCWs.78 The history of prior varicella or vaccination should be determined at the time of initial employment in all HCWs. The seroprevalence of varicella among HCWs born in Korea before 1988 is reported as 96%.79 Serologic screening, such as VZV immunoglobulin G (IgG), before vaccination is indicated for persons with no or uncertain history of varicella.808182 All HCWs without evidence of immunity to VZV should receive two-doses of varicella vaccine, 4 to 8 weeks apart, unless they are contraindicated.23808183 Evidence of immunity for HCWs includes one of the followings: 1) written documentation with two-doses of vaccine, 2) laboratory evidence of immunity or laboratory confirmation of disease, 3) diagnosis or verification of history of varicella or herpes zoster by a healthcare provider.81 However, routine serologic testing after vaccination is not recommended.84
Table 2 shows the contraindications for varicella vaccination.788586Table 2Contraindications to varicella vaccinationSevere allergic reaction (such as anaphylaxis) after a previous dose of varicella vaccine or to any component of varicella vaccinePregnancy or possibility of pregnancy within 1 monthSevere immunosuppression• Solid tumors and hematologic malignancies• Current receipt of anti-cancer chemotherapy• Primary or acquired immunodeficiency• Immunosuppressive agents administered to patients who have undergone solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplant• Biologic agents for autoimmune conditions• HIV infection with CD4 cell count < 200 cells/mm3• Long-term high-dose systemic corticosteroids (prednisone ≥ 20 mg/day or 2 mg/kg/day or its equivalent for 14 days or more)Active, untreated tuberculosisCurrent febrile illnessHIV = human immunodeficiency virus.Management of HCWs exposed to VZVFor all exposures, the potential of VZV acquisition should be assessed as soon as feasible. HCWs with evidence of immunity can be allowed to continue working and should be monitored daily for symptoms or signs of varicella, within 8 to 21 days of exposure.81 All susceptible HCWs exposed to VZV should be screened to assess their immunity to VZV. HCWs without evidence of immunity should receive two-doses of varicella vaccine within 3 to 5 days of exposure, if there are no contraindications to varicella vaccination.8187 If HCWs who have received only one dose of varicella vaccine are exposed to VZV, the second dose of vaccine is recommended within 3 to 5 days after exposure, at least 4 weeks after the first dose. Seronegative HCWs who are immunocompromised or pregnant should be considered for VZIG as soon as possible within 10 days of exposure (Table 3).81868889 Furthermore, seronegative HCWs should be considered for reassignment to low-risk areas or be placed on administrative leave from day 8 to day 21 of the exposure. VZIG may prolong the incubation period by one week, thus HCWs who receive VZIG should be excluded from work from day 8 to day 28 of the exposure. If VZV infection is suspected, the HCWs must be excluded from work immediately.6281 Suggested algorithm for the evaluation and management after exposure to VZV in healthcare settings is shown in Fig. 1.Table 3Indications for VZIG after an exposure to VZVImmunocompromised patients without evidence of immunity to VZVPregnant women without evidence of immunity to VZVNewborn infants whose mothers had signs and/or symptoms of varicella 5 days before to 2 days after deliveryHospitalized premature infants (≥ 28 weeks of gestation) whose mother had no evidence of immunity to VZVHospitalized premature infants (< 28 weeks of gestation or ≤ 1,000 g birth weight), regardless of maternal immunityVZIG = varicella-zoster immune globulin, VZV = varicella-zoster virus.Fig. 1Suggested algorithm for the evaluation and management after exposure to VZV in healthcare settings.VZV = varicella-zoster virus, IVIG = intravenous immune globulin, VZIG = varicella-zoster immune globulin.aFor immunocompromised patients, a 7-day course of acyclovir or valacyclovir may be considered if both VZIG and IVIG are not available.Management of patients exposed to VZVFirst, the immunologic status of all patients exposed to VZV should be assessed. Susceptible patients who are exposed to VZV should be placed on airborne and contact precautions from day 8 to day 21 of the exposure. If VZIG or IVIG is administered, these precautions should be maintained until day 28 of the exposure.90Immunocompetent patientsThe principle of management in immunocompetent patients is the same as in HCWs. In general, immunocompetent patients who have immunity to VZV need no further follow-up. All susceptible immunocompetent patients, who are 12 months of age or older, may be candidates for varicella vaccination. Varicella vaccine should be administered as soon as possible, preferably within 3 to 5 days after exposure.All exposed patients without evidence of immunity should be discharged as soon as possible.285983 If a susceptible patient could not be discharged, the patient should be placed in isolation until day 21 of the exposure.Immunocompromised patientsSerologic testing should be performed in all immunocompromised patients as soon as possible. Patients without evidence of immunity to VZV and who are at high risk of complications should be administered with VZIG (Table 2).28838891 Some experts also recommend VZIG as postexposure prophylaxis for highly immunocompromised patients, such as hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients, regardless of serologic test results. This is because the sensitivity and specificity of serologic tests are unavailable and VZV IgG may not be protective in these patients. Intramuscular administration of VZIG (1 vial [125 units] per 10 kg body weight; maximum of 5 vials) is recommended as soon as possible within 10 days.89 If VZIG is not available, IVIG (≥ 400 mg/kg) can be an alternative.2875 A 7-day course of acyclovir (800 mg 5 times daily) or valacyclovir (1 g 3 times daily), beginning 7 to 10 days after exposure may be considered as chemoprophylaxis for immunocompromised patients if both VZIG and IVIG are not available.28 However, there are no studies on postexposure chemoprophylaxis for immunocompromised patients. All susceptible patients should be placed in isolation until day 21 of exposure. In patients who receive VZIG, isolation should be continued until day 28 of exposure.Pregnant womenVaricella vaccine is contraindicated in pregnant women and VZIG is recommended in all susceptible pregnant women exposed to VZV as soon as possible, within 10 days.111228888992 The use of VZIG could reduce both the severity of maternal disease and the risk of fetal infection. There are no studies on whether the use of acyclovir is effective in the prevention of varicella in pregnant women after exposure to VZV. Because maternal varicella infection complicated with pneumonia is a medical emergency, careful follow-up for signs of active disease despite passive immunization is needed. If maternal disease occurs despite VZIG, patients should be treated with antiviral agents. Susceptible pregnant women who do not develop varicella should receive varicella vaccine after delivery.1112NeonatesNewborns may be infected with VZV by peripartum maternal infection or by postnatal exposure. Routine screening for maternal immunity to VZV is recommended during early pregnancy.1112 If the maternal immune status is not known, the mother should have a serologic testing for VZV as soon as possible. Because varicella vaccine has been approved for children aged 12 months through 12 years, VZIG is recommended to prevent varicella and ameliorate the disease course in neonates.88 Indications for VZIG in newborns with significant exposure to VZV are shown in Table 2.28888993 If VZIG is unavailable, IVIG or chemoprophylaxis with acyclovir could be considered.28Infants whose mother has active varicella within 21 days prior to delivery should be isolated from other infants. If a mother has symptoms of varicella within 5 days before or 2 days after delivery, the infant should be isolated from the mother until she is no longer infectious.28TREATMENT OF CONFIRMED OR SUSPECTED INFECTIONWork restriction and isolation precautionsAll HCWs who develop varicella or disseminated zoster should be excluded from work until all lesions are crusted. Although immunocompetent hosts with dermatomal herpes zoster with covered lesions may continue to work, advice for reassignment to low-risk patients should be offered, until all lesions are crusted.59Unvaccinated susceptible HCWs should avoid contact with patients who have confirmed or suspected varicella or herpes zoster. All patients with varicella or disseminated zoster should be placed on airborne and contact precautions until all lesions are crusted. For immunocompetent patients with dermatomal herpes zoster, standard precautions and complete covering of the skin lesions are recommended.Antiviral therapyHCWs and patients who develop clinical symptoms despite active or passive immunization should be appropriately treated with antiviral therapy. Antiviral therapy can shorten the duration of disease, reduce the total number of new lesions, accelerate cutaneous healing, and reduce acute neuritis.2 Acyclovir is approved for the treatment of both varicella and herpes zoster, and both oral (800 mg 5 times daily for 7 to 10 days) and intravenous (10 mg/kg every 8 hours for 7 to 10 days) forms are available. Oral valacyclovir (1 g 3 times daily for 7 to 10 days) and famciclovir (250 to 500 mg 3 times daily for 7 to 10 days), the prodrugs of acyclovir and penciclovir, have been licensed for the treatment of herpes zoster.CONCLUSIONDespite implementation of routine childhood varicella vaccination NIP program in Korea, varicella and herpes zoster continue to occur. VZV is highly contagious and can cause serious complications in high-risk populations. Healthcare-associated transmission of VZV is also well documented from both varicella and herpes zoster. The prevention and control of VZV infection in hospital settings is important for both HCWs and in-hospital patients. All HCWs should be screened for immunity to VZV at the time of initial employment, then varicella vaccines are recommended to all seronegative HCWs, if there are no contraindications to vaccine use. Susceptible HCWs and patients exposed to VZV should be isolated from other members of staff or patients, appropriately. Active immunization should be performed when it is safe, and passive immunization can be considered, based on specific indications.


Title: Varicella zoster virus transmission dynamics in Vojvodina, Serbia

IntroductionVaricella (chickenpox), the primary disease caused by varicella zoster virus (VZV) is normally a mild childhood illness with characteristic vesicular rash [1]. Complications of the infection are associated with age extremes, pregnancy and immunocompromised conditions [2]. In Europe, the estimated burden of varicella in the pre-vaccine era was significant as reflected by the >5 million new cases annually, of which more than half sought physician consultation and ~20,000 led to hospitalizations and up to 80 deaths [3]. Although infected adults are at higher risk of hospitalization and death, varicella mainly affects previously healthy children, underscoring the importance of not dismissing varicella as a disease of little clinical relevance [2,3]. After chickenpox, VZV persists asymptomatically in the body to reactivate later causing a secondary disease, herpes zoster (HZ, shingles), typically in older individuals with impaired cellular immunity [1,3].Live attenuated varicella vaccines proved to be safe and efficacious in preventing varicella [4]. However, uncertainties over the potential impact of varicella immunization on the epidemiology of VZV infections pose obstacles to reaching a consensus on vaccination policy [5]. Most European Union/European Economic Area (EU/EEA) countries have varying recommendations for varicella vaccination. Only a few countries have opted for routine childhood immunization, while most countries (17/29) recommend vaccination solely for susceptible teenagers and/or susceptible risk groups [4]. In spite of the high incidence of varicella and the availability of vaccine, immunization against varicella has been just recently introduced into national legislation, in the Republic of Serbia. Immunization against HZ is recommended by the same law [6,7].Population immunity against vaccine-preventable infections may be estimated through cross-sectional studies of antibody prevalence [8]. To allow for international comparisons, the European Sero-Epidemiology Network (ESEN2) introduced standardized serological surveillance to a number of vaccine-preventable infections, including VZV [9,10]. The VZV ESEN2 data from 11 participating countries, together with newly available serology for Poland and Italy, were re-analyzed by Santermans et al. who corroborated that primary VZV infection most often occurs in early childhood across Europe, but with a substantial variation in the country-specific transmission potential [10,11].Serological data may be modelled to obtain unbiased estimates of key parameters in infectious disease epidemiology [12]. Three pivotal parameters need to be estimated to quantify the VZV transmission potential in a population: the force of infection (FOI), basic reproduction number (R0) and herd immunity threshold (H) [10,11]. The FOI, symbolized by [λ], is the rate at which susceptible individuals acquire infection. This parameter, which reflects the contagiousness of an infectious agent, may be estimated from seroprevalence data and used to compare the transmission rate of the infection between different age groups. R0 represents the number of secondary cases that result from the introduction of a single infectious case in a totally susceptible population during the infectiousness period. To eliminate endemic transmission of infection, and thus eradicate the disease, a proportion of the population, the herd (H), needs to be immunized [10].The elucidation of the interplay between virus transmission patterns and the immune status of the population using traditional serological studies in conjunction with state-of-the-art modelling approaches can guide vaccination policy most efficiently. Herein, we use the age-specific VZV seroprevalence data we have recently obtained (data not shown) to estimate key epidemiological parameters. Seroprevalence and modelling data were assessed comparatively to those obtained from 11 countries participating in ESEN2 [10], with the ultimate goal to design the most effective immunization strategy in Serbia. This work constitutes an important milestone towards this goal.Materials and methodsSeroprevalence dataIn this article, we analyze the VZV seroprevalence data from Vojvodina, Serbia that had been obtained during the 2015–2016 serosurvey (S1 File) using the ESEN2 data on VZV published by Nardone et al. [10] as a basis for comparisons. At the time of sera collection (between 1995 and 2003), universal VZV immunization had not been introduced in any of the eleven countries participating in ESEN2. Serbian seroprevalence data were generated from the testing of 3570 anonymised residual diagnostic sera from patients of all ages (age range: 29 days-83 years, with 52 samples from children <6 months), and predominantly (59.4%) from urban areas, collected as part of routine care in the Autonomous Province of Vojvodina (S1 File). Vojvodina is a northern Serbian province with a population of about two million (~27% of the population of Serbia excluding Kosovo), extending over an area of 21,506 km2. Immunocompromised individuals and recent recipients of blood and blood products were excluded. Available information for each patient included the following: sex, age, area of residence in Vojvodina and sample collection date. The age stratification of the sera was according to the specifications of ESEN2 [10]. Accordingly, ~100 samples were collected for each year band in the age group 0–19 years and 200 samples for each of the age groups ≥20 years (20–24, 25–29, 30–34, 35–39, 40–49, 50–59, and ≥60), with about equal numbers of samples by gender. Samples were tested using anti-VZV ELISA (IgG) [EUROIMMUN AG, Germany] according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Obtained results were standardized into common, ESEN2 units, with equivocals (low positives) included as seropositives [9,10]. Written informed consent of study participants, or their parents or legal guardians if they were <15 years, was obtained. The study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the Institute of Public Health of Vojvodina, in accordance to the Declaration of Helsinki of 1975, as revised in 2008.Estimation of age-specific force of VZV infectionTo overcome the limitations of any given method for the estimation of the rate at which susceptible individuals acquire infection (i.e. the FOI or λ), we used two different, but complementary approaches: the so called catalytic model assuming a piecewise constant force of infection and Farrington's exponentially damped linear model. The latter approach allows the estimation of such additional key epidemiological parameters as R0 and H, on the basis of obtained age-specific FOI. Moreover, international comparisons within the European region, originally undertaken by Nardone et al. [10], were thus rendered possible. Passive immunity of infants, acquired by the transfer of maternal antibodies, declines rapidly by the age of 6 months, leading to low FOIs in the <1 year age group [4,13]. To avoid this confounding factor, seroprevalence data from infants <1 year (N = 100, anti-VZV seropositivity = 75%) were excluded from further analysis. Secondly, our data do not represent a random sample of the population, which should be considered when interpreting the results.Farrington's exponentially damped linear catalytic modelA catalytic model, as applied by Farrington [14] and Socan et al. [13] on the basis of Griffiths’ study [15], was used for the estimation of age-specific FOIs. Age-specific FOIs were estimated by modelling the average proportion of seropositive subjects F(x) in the respective age group x, where the model for F(x) is based on the so-called catalytic model. F(x) of childhood diseases has been shown to be well fitted by the equation:
F(x)=1−exp(abxe−bx+1b[ab−c][e−bx−1]−cx)
where a, b and c are the parameters to be estimated (a, b, c ≥ 0). After a graphical validation of the appropriateness of the model for our data, the model was fitted using the nonlinear least squares method [13]. Modelling and data analyses were performed using Statistica 13 [16].The FOI is defined as the negative derivative of the logarithm of the survival function S(x) = 1-F(x) [12,14], i.e. as
λ(x)=−ddxln(1−F(x)),
thus yielding the following expression:
λ(x)=axe−bx−ce−bx+c.Catalytic model assuming a piecewise constant force of infectionAge-specific FOIs were calculated for three different age groups (0.5–4, 5–9 and ≥10 years). For our calculations we assumed closed populations of N persons, mortality as type I developed countries with a life expectancy of L = 75 years and passive immunity in all infants until the age of A = 0.5 years [17]. Here, the FOIs were estimated by maximizing the log-likelihood function [10,18–20].
L=∑j=1nMxjlog[F(xj)]+(Nxj−Mxj)log[1−F(xj)]
For each age group j, xj denotes the average age in group j, Nxj denotes the total number of persons and Mxj the number of seropositive persons in group j. The function F(x) represents the estimated proportion of individuals at age x (in years) who are anti-VZV-positive, and is given by the following expression [20]:
F(x)={1,x<0.51−exp(−l1x),0.5≤x<51−exp(−l1(5)−l2(x−5)),5≤x<101−exp(−l1(5)−l2(9−5)−l3(x−9)),10≤x
Where l1, l2, l3 are constants. Estimations of the constants were obtained by maximizing the log-likelihood L.The FOIs were computed as above by the negative derivative of the logarithm of the corresponding survival functions. The upper and lower 95% confidence intervals (CI) for each age-specific FOI were obtained assuming a normal approximate distribution using the deviance between the saturated and the fitted model.Estimation of basic reproductive number (R0)To calculate R0 we proceeded as follows. It has been shown that the average age-specific force of infection λ(x) in the discrete age intervals [ai
ai+1) are given by [19]:
λi=NDL∑j=1Jβij[exp(−∑k=1j−1λk(a[k+1]−a[k]))−exp(−∑k=1jλk(a[k+1]−a[k)))]
where βij denotes the effective contacts per person of an individual of age class j with a person of age class i, per year, and D is the mean duration of infectiousness; a[1]
= A and a[J+1]
= L [15]. Note that the estimation of the FOI is based on the maximization of the maximum likelihood function and hence an explicit knowledge of N is not required; instead, the ratio NDL is used.The transmission rates βij make up a J × J matrix, the so-called “Who Acquires Infection From Whom”, WAIFW-matrix. Estimating the WAIFW matrix, reflecting the heterogeneous mixing between the three different age groups, we employed the age-specific transmission rates βij as described below [10,21].                            < 5 years     5 − 9 years       ≥ 10 years< 5 years             β1                 β3                     β35 − 9 years         β3                 β2                     β3≥ 10 years          β3                 β3                     β3R0 is defined by the dominant eigenvalue of the J × J next generation matrix with elements (i, j = 1… J) [19,22]:
NDL(a[i+1]−a[i])βij
95% CI were also estimated based on the corresponding FOI.Estimation of herd immunity threshold (H)H was calculated as described in [23]:
H=1−(1R0)
and the 95% CI were obtained by the upper and lower estimate of R0.All modelling and data analyses were performed in Python.ResultsComparative VZV seroepidemiology in EuropeThe age-specific VZV seroprofiles of Vojvodina, Serbia and the 11 ESEN2 participant countries are shown in Fig 1.10.1371/journal.pone.0193838.g001Fig 1Age-specific (<30 years) standardized seroprevalence of VZV in Vojvodina, Serbia (2015–16), and in 11 ESEN2 countries where samples had been collected either from residual sera (A), or from population sampling (B), 1995–2003. The figure is similar but not identical to the original image from [10], and is therefore for illustrative purposes only.Antibodies to VZV are acquired in childhood in Europe, but with differing rates of local transmission. Serbia is one of the countries in which anti-VZV are acquired at an earlier age in relation to others (e.g. Italy). Serbia follows the general transmission pattern of most countries, with 41.2% seropositivity in children <5 years (60% at the age of 5 years); nonetheless, the percentages of seropositive 5-9-year-old children and 10-14-year-old adolescents in Serbia (73.6% and 87.5%, respectively) are lower than in other countries apart from Italy. Serbian data for the 5–9 years age group are close to the seroprevalence obtained in Slovakia (69.9%) and Spain (75.9%), while for the 10–14 age group they are similar to the rates in England and Wales (89.7%) (Fig 1 and Table 1).10.1371/journal.pone.0193838.t001Table 1Percentage of VZV-seropositive individuals ≤29 years by age group in Vojvodina, Serbia (2015–2016) and in 11 ESEN2 countries (1995–2003)a.CountryPercentage seropositive for VZV by age group (%)<5 years5–9 years10–14 years15–19 years20–29 yearsBelgium51.287.494.294.996.8England & Wales47.678.389.791.992.9bFinland30.977.193.196.797.0Germany32.686.295.694.197.7Ireland41.381.791.994.393.8Israel49.090.695.389.295.1Italy21.761.181.781.988.8Luxemburg73.0c90.196.697.296.8Netherlands50.797.898.898.7100Serbia (Vojvodina)41.273.687.592.794.0Slovakia32.969.991.295.196.3Spain33.275.991.793.893.1a ESEN2 data have been adopted from [10].b Samples tested for 20-year-olds only.c Samples tested for 4-year-olds only.In Serbia, as in all other countries except Italy, >90% (92.7%) of adolescents aged 15–19 years possess VZV-specific antibodies. Still, a substantial proportion (6%) of young adults aged 20–29 years remains seronegative, matching more closely the susceptibility profiles of Ireland (6.2%), Spain (6.9%), and England and Wales (7.1%). Seronegativity of Serbian females of childbearing age (defined as 15–39 years old) was 5.83% (data not shown).Force of VZV infection estimatesEstimation of the maximum FOIThe overall fitting of the model was good (R2 = 0.90, residual mean square was 0.16). All parameters a, b and c were statistically significant, with estimated values as follows: a = 0.27, (95% CI: 0.18–0.36), b = 0.55, (95% CI: 0.18–0.91), and c = 0.11, (95% CI: 0.07–0.14). The maximum FOI λmax = 0.25 (95% CI: 0.06–0.63) was obtained at x=a+bcab = 2.23 years of age (95% CI: 0.57–15.6) (Fig 2).10.1371/journal.pone.0193838.g002Fig 2Proportion of seropositive FX, fitted curve FX model and force of infection curve lambda (λ).Estimated FOIs, R0 and HIn most (9/12) compared countries, the highest FOIs are observed in the 5–9 years age group (Table 2).10.1371/journal.pone.0193838.t002Table 2Estimates of age-specific forces of infection (FOI, λ)a, basic reproduction number (R0) and herd immunity threshold (H) for VZV in Vojvodina, Serbia and in 11 ESEN2 countriesb.Age-specific FOI (λ) (95% CI)CountryYears of datacollectionAge rangeSamplesizeλ1<5 yearsλ25–9 yearsλ3≥10 yearsR0 (95% CI)H (95% CI)Belgium20020–71.532510.31 (0.28–0.34)0.27 (0.24–0.31)0.05 (0.03–0.08)6.47 (5.62–7.55)84.5 (82.2–86.8)England & Wales19961–20.920320.21 (0.19–0.23)0.23 (0.19–0.26)0.04 (0.04–0.04)3.83 (3.32–4.49)73.9 (69.9–77.7)Finland1997–19981–79.824710.16 (0.14–0.18)0.36 (0.32–0.40)0.10 (0.07–0.13)4.85 (3.89–6.04)79.4 (74.3–83.4)Germany1995–19980–7943980.19 (0.18–0.20)0.43 (0.41–0.45)0.04 (0.03–0.05)5.46 (5.16–5.76)81.7 (80.6–82.6)Ireland20031–6024300.23 (0.21–0.26)0.29 (0.26–0.33)0.02 (0.00–0.04)5.22 (4.53–6.14)80.8 (77.9–83.7)Israel2000–20010–7915430.31 (0.28–0.35)0.28 (0.24–0.34)0.00 (0.00–0.00)7.71 (6.01–10.06)87.0 (83.4–90.1)Italy1996–19970.1–5031100.10 (0.09–0.11)0.20 (0.18–0.22)0.07 (0.06–0.09)3.31 (2.82–3.83)69.8 (64.5–73.9)Luxemburg2000–20014–8226400.33 (0.28–0.37)0.36 (0.31–0.41)0.05 (0.020.09)8.28 (6.74–10.42)87.9 (85.2–90.4)Netherlands19960–7919670.35 (0.30–0.40)0.67 (0.54–0.83)0.00 (0.00–0.06)16.91 (11.5–24.18)94.1 (91.3–95.9)Serbia (Vojvodina)2015–20160.1–8335700.22 (0.10–0.34)0.20 (0.18–0.22)0.05 (0.03–0.06)4.12 (2.69–7.07)75.7 (62.8–85.8)Slovakia20020–7035150.16 (0.14–0.17)0.25 (0.22–0.29)0.14 (0.11–0.16)5.72 (4.72–6.81)82.5 (78.8–85.3)Spain19962–3935900.15 (0.14–0.17)0.33 (0.30–0.35)0.05 (0.05–0.05)3.91 (3.53–4.38)74.4 (71.7–77.2)a The highest FOI values are highlighted.b ESEN2 data have been adopted from [10,11].The exceptions are Belgium, Israel, and Serbia (0.31, 0.31, and 0.22, respectively, in the <5 category). However, the estimated Serbian FOI were only slightly lower (0.20) in the 5–9 years group, where the largest FOI were found in all other countries. Interestingly, the lowest FOI values (0.20) in this age group (5–9 years) were obtained only in Serbia and Italy. The ratio of FOI between the youngest and the oldest age groups is about four in Serbia (0.22/0.05), similarly to several other countries. It is, however, considerably higher in Netherlands (0.35/0.00), Israel (0.31/0.00), or Ireland (0.23/0.02), and lower in Slovakia (0.16/0.14) or Finland (0.16/0.10).The estimated R0 and H for Serbia, compared to the corresponding data of the 11 ESEN2 participant countries, are also shown in Table 2. The estimated R0 varies widely within a five-fold difference between the extremes observed in the Netherlands (16.9) and Italy (3.31). Values <5 were estimated in Italy (3.31), England and Wales (3.83), Spain (3.91), Finland (4.85) and Serbia (4.12). However, even if these extremes are ignored, R0 differs more than twofold, from >8 in Luxemburg to <4 in England & Wales. Serbia is close to the lower end of this range, with an estimated 4.12 new infections originating from a single case. Estimates of H are less scattered. Netherlands (94.1) and Italy (69.8) are again positioned at the two extremes. As before, Serbia (75.7%) ranked ninth of 12 countries, next to England and Wales (73.9%), and Spain (74.4%).DiscussionThe two-tiered mathematical modelling approach revealed that the highest VZV transmission in Vojvodina, Serbia occurs in children of preschool age, with a peak FOI at 2.23 years. A similar pattern was found in Belgium and Israel, whereas in all other ESEN2 countries the largest FOI values were found in the 5–9 years age group. The percentages of seropositive children <5 years were nonetheless higher in Belgium and Israel (~50%) compared to Serbia (41.2%). A comparable value for the peak FOI (λ = 0.282), only at a later age (5 years), was obtained in the Slovenian population a decade ago [13]. The early exposure to VZV and consequent acquisition of natural immunity may be explained by the currently increasing trend of nursery attendance in Serbia, a common practice in countries like Belgium [24].In most European countries in the pre-vaccine era, the highest age-specific annual incidence rates of varicella, as derived from seroprevalence data, were recently observed in children aged <5 years [3]. The detection of the highest FOIs in the 0.5–4 years age group agrees with the 2015 surveillance data for Vojvodina: the age-specific incidence of varicella was highest in the 1–4 years age group (6482/100 000), a rate 1.4 times higher than in the 5–9 years group (4569/100 000), and three times higher compared to infants ≤1 year of age (2190/100 000)[25].Kindergarten and preschool mixing patterns constitute the major driving force of virus transmission among 0.5–4 year olds [13,20,26]. National statistics point to an almost 3% increase in the number of children aged 1–6 years that attended childcare or preschool institutions in Serbia in the period 2009–2014; the increase was 12.2% for children <3 years, whilst for children aged 3–5.5 years there was a 0.8% decrease [27]. According to a study conducted by UNICEF in 2012 [28], 48% of children aged ≤5 years attended preschool facilities in Serbia (25% more than in 2005). Increasing nursery attendance might have an impact on varicella disease dynamics through violating the assumption of time homogeneity. To avoid this limitation, longitudinal data or repeated cross-sectional data would be required, but this is not feasible.A considerable share of susceptible adults has a profound impact on varicella disease burden [29]. Serbian adolescents and young adults were found to be susceptible at somewhat higher percentages (7.3% and 6%, respectively) compared to other ESEN2 countries [4,10]. The proportion (5.83%) of Serbia’s women of childbearing age (15–39 years) is only matched by Ireland (5.4%) and Israel (7.6%) [2,4,10]. Interestingly, the proportion of susceptible women aged 15–49 years (5.46%) in Serbia was almost double to that in Slovenia (2.8%), but almost three times lower than in the neighboring Croatia (16% of women aged 16–45 years) [13,30]. Differences in local assay utilization and study methodology might contribute to these variations. Different assays were used in these studies: Enzygnost (Dade Behring) was employed in Slovenia [13], Virotech in Croatia [30] and EUROIMMUN in Serbia (S1 File). Several papers produced during ESEN2 have shown that results produced by diverse, even well-established assays, or by the same assay in different laboratories, can differ and standardization can help alleviate this problem [9,10]. Furthermore, methodological differences, such as the age limits/definition of reproductive age and time period of sera collection (e.g. 16–45 years between 2007 and 2011 in the Croatia and 15–39 years between 2015 and 2016 in Serbia), could contribute to the differing proportions of susceptible women in these neighboring countries. Collection sites of sera (e.g. urban vs. rural areas, from one area only vs. geographically representative of the country) could also be contributing factors.The estimated values of R0 (4.12) and H (75.7%) for Serbia tend to be somewhat lower compared to most ESEN2 countries. The observed international variations of R0 and H may reflect differences in population mixing patterns rather than sampling methodologies; still, they should be taken into account when designing immunization strategies [10]. We employed a WAIFW matrix, considered to mirror the heterogeneous mixing between three age groups, to determine age-specific VZV transmission rates. Using the effective reproduction number R that provides a measure of the average number of secondary cases that may occur in a partially immune population in addition to R0, could have enhanced our analysis [22]. Santermans et al. [11] recently used R to determine factors affecting the between-country heterogeneity in R0 among ESEN2 participants. Positive associations with R0 pertained to childhood immunization coverage, kindergarten attendance, population density and average living area per person, while income inequality and poverty, breast feeding, and the proportion of children <14 years showed negative associations. Xiao et al. [31] demonstrated that physical contacts among school age children are most relevant to VZV transmission in the five European countries involved in the POLYMOD survey.Recommendations of VZV serologic screening of women of childbearing age without a history of varicella and immunization of seronegatives, prior to pregnancy or post-partum, are widely accepted policies [32]. The recent Serbian Rulebooks [7,33] recommend serologic testing for VZV in pregnancy and passive immunisation of exposed seronegative pregnant women. Nevertheless, anti-VZV testing and immunization of seronegative non-pregnant women of childbearing age are not officially recommended. Current Serbian immunization policy [6,7] prioritises the immunization of high-risk groups although past experience in most EU/EEA countries shows that this strategy was accompanied by lower vaccine coverage rates [13] and had no potential to interrupt VZV transmission compared to universal childhood immunization [4,24]. Universal childhood varicella immunization proved to be cost-effective and efficient in reducing disease burden [1,2,24]. If such a policy were adopted in Serbia, an accelerated two-dose vaccine schedule, vs. one dose could enhance vaccine coverage and diminish the risk of “breakthrough” varicella [24]. The standard schedule (first dose at 12–24 months and second dose at 3–7 years) would allow immunization with combined measles-mumps-rubella-varicella (MMRV) vaccine since the MMR vaccine is already obligatorily scheduled at seven years of age [6,7]. In either case, the first dose of the vaccine should be administered ideally at 12–18 months, given that the maximal FOI was observed at 2.23 years. Preferably administration of both doses of varicella vaccine should be scheduled during the second year of life in order to increase vaccine coverage, reduce the number of VZV susceptible children and minimize the risk of breakthrough disease due to the relatively high rate of primary vaccine failure [34]. In this case, there would be no need for a further visit to the doctor in view of the two planned revaccinations in the second year of life (combined vaccine against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, haemophilus influenzae B and polio as well as pneumococcal conjugate vaccine) and given that varicella vaccine can be given simultaneously [7]. Considering the substantial share of susceptible adolescents, targeted catch-up campaigns would be required [10,24].Despite predictions, most studies in countries with successful coverage rates after the implementation of universal varicella childhood immunization have not shown an accompanying increase in HZ incidence [12,24]. On the contrary, HZ incidence was found to be reduced; the hypothesis that gained ground was that the percentage of individuals harboring latent VZV declined due to the decreased incidence of varicella [24]. Baxter at al. [35] established a ∼40% decrease of HZ incidence in vaccinated children over the first 14 years after varicella vaccination compared with unvaccinated children of the same age who acquired varicella naturally. This evidence further reinforces the introduction of universal varicella immunization in childhood.Taking into account the estimated value of H (76%) and varicella vaccine effectiveness, the recommended vaccine coverage should be at least as recommended by WHO (≥ 80%); a lower coverage may shift varicella cases to older age with consequent increases in complications and mortality [29]. However, recent, below the 95% target MMR vaccination coverage in Serbia [36], underscores the need for creating stable preconditions for the introduction of MMRV vaccine. Re-introduction of both varicella and HZ surveillance to follow up on the impact of the current risk-group and future routine childhood varicella immunization strategies on VZV disease burden is also necessary.ConclusionsConsidering that varicella stems from a common airborne infection, it is not surprising that Serbian seroprevalence data from Vojvodina, along with estimated key epidemiological parameters, generally fit into the dynamic VZV transmission patterns of most European countries in the pre-vaccine era. However, the Serbian VZV seroprofile is characterized by most intense viral transmission in pre-school children aged <4 years and epidemiologically relevant gaps in immunity of young adults. Obtained over a decade ago, the results of the ESEN2 study continue to serve as a cornerstone for comparisons of VZV epidemiological parameters in Europe. The ability of each country to meet the necessary financial preconditions and provide optimal immunization coverage, varies considerably. The data collected in this survey provide an important basis for analysing costs and benefits, priorities with respect to other vaccine-preventable illnesses in light of financial constraints and vaccine acceptability. Further studies for the quantification of the burden of varicella and HZ in Serbia are deemed necessary to design the most appropriate immunization policy.Supporting informationS1 FileThe Serbian 2015–2016 VZV serosurvey.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Varicella-Zoster Virus Transfer to Skin by T Cells and Modulation of Viral Replication by Epidermal Cell Interferon-α

IntroductionVaricella-zoster virus (VZV) is an alphaherpesvirus that causes varicella (chickenpox), establishes latency in sensory ganglia, and reactivates as zoster. Primary VZV infection begins with respiratory mucosal inoculation, but the characteristic chickenpox rash does not appear for 10–21 d (1). Understanding initial events during human herpesvirus infections is challenging because animal models are often not available, or infection in other species may not fully reproduce the characteristics of human disease. In the absence of experimental data, it has been suggested that the progression of VZV infection during the incubation period of varicella may resemble the stages of infection associated with the pathogenesis of mousepox (2). According to this hypothesis, VZV infects mononuclear cells in regional LNs, causing a primary viremia that carries virus to reticuloendothelial organs, such as the liver. Detection of VZV-infected mononuclear cells in peripheral blood at the end of the incubation period is considered to represent a secondary viremia, resulting from viral amplification in reticuloendothelial tissues. VZV transport to skin has been attributed to this late secondary viremia and is presumed to be followed by the rapid appearance of the classical vesicular skin rash.VZV infects primary human T cells in vitro and exhibits tropism for T cells in thymus/liver xenografts in our severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mouse model in vivo (3–5). In previous experiments, we found that VZV preferentially infected activated memory CD4+ T cells in vitro, which are abundant in tonsillar tissues adjacent to the respiratory epithelial sites of VZV inoculation (3–5). The purpose of these experiments was to use SCID mice with human skin xenografts (SCIDhu) to examine whether VZV-infected tonsil T cells have the capacity to deliver infectious virus from the venous circulation and cause the development of cutaneous lesions in vivo. Since we found that VZV was transferred to skin, the phenotypes of immune cells recovered from skin xenografts in mice given uninfected and VZV-infected cells were compared. Memory CD4+ T cells predominated under both conditions, suggesting that these cells may be important for VZV transfer because memory CD4+ T cells are inherently more likely to traffic to skin. The contribution of memory CD4+ T cells to VZV pathogenesis may be further enhanced by the 3:1 increase in VZV infectivity for this subpopulation compared with naïve CD4+ T cells (5). Our investigations further indicate that the pathogenesis of VZV infection during the incubation period is modulated by potent innate immune responses, especially IFN-α, mounted by epidermal cells within their differentiated tissue microenvironment in vivo. These observations suggest that viral replication in reticuloendothelial organs, although not excluded, is not necessary to account for the 10–21-d incubation period of varicella. Whereas VZV spreads rapidly from cell to cell and causes cytolysis within 24–48 h in vitro, our experiments suggest that innate epidermal immune mechanisms may prevent an incapacitating infection of the host that would otherwise limit opportunities for VZV transmission to other susceptible individuals.Materials and MethodsVZV Infection of SCIDhu Mice.Skin xenografts were made in homozygous CB-17scid/scid mice using human fetal tissue obtained according to federal and state regulations; animal use was approved by the Stanford University Administrative Panel on Laboratory Animal Care. Human T cells were isolated from tonsil tissue, obtained according to an approved protocol, and infected by coculture of 5–10 × 106 T cells with VZV-infected primary human lung (HEL) cells (5). Infected T cells were injected into SCIDhu mice with skin xenografts by tail vein; xenografts were harvested at intervals after T cell transfer and tested for infectious virus yields and by immunohistologic analysis (5). In other experiments, skin xenografts were inoculated directly with VZV-infected HEL cells (10 μl) (4). To recover immune cells from skin xenografts, tissues were minced, expressed through a 190-μm-pore-size sieve (Sigma-Aldrich), and centrifuged in Ficoll-Hypaque medium (Promega, Inc.) (6). Total numbers of immune cells were counted, and phenotypes were assessed by flow cytometry using anti-CD3 (cone S4.1, IgG2a), anti-CD4 (clone 3.5, mIgG2a), anti-CD19 (clone SJ25-C1, mIgG1), anti-CD45RA (clone MEM56, mIgG2b) (Caltag Inc.), and anti–cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA) (HECA-452, rat IgM; BD Biosciences). Data for 50,000 events was collected for each marker.Anti–IFN-α/β Receptor Antibody Blocking.Immediately after direct inoculation of bilateral skin xenografts with VZV-infected HEL cells, animals were given mouse mAb to human IFN-α/β receptor β chain (IFNα/βRβ) (PBL Biomedical Laboratories) by i.p. injection (25 μg). Administration of anti–IFN-α/β receptor antibody was maintained by s.c. delivery (50 μg) through an Alzet osmotic pump (model 1007D; 0.5 μl/h, 7 d) (Alzet, Cupertino). Skin xenografts were harvested after 7 d.VZV Lesion Biopsies.Punch biopsies were obtained from patients with varicella (n = 3) or zoster (n = 2) according to an approved protocol. Specimens were collected between 36–96 h after rash onset, embedded in OCT compound (TissueTec; Miles Laboratories), frozen in isopentane, and stored at −70°C.Immunohistochemistry.Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded skin sections (5 μm) were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and treated with antigen retrieval reagent (Vector Laboratories). Frozen sections were fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde, treated with 1% Triton X-100 (vol/vol) and 1% sodium citrate (wt/vol), washed in TBS followed by biotin blocking (Vector Laboratories), and treated with 3% hydrogen peroxidase. Primary antibodies included: anti-CD3ɛ (Ab-1, rabbit polyclonal), anti-CD4 (clone KT69-7, mIgG1), anti-CD8 (rabbit polyclonal), anti-CD20 (Ab-1, clone L26, mIgG2aκ), anti-CD45RA (Ab-1, clone 111-1C5, mIgG1κ), and anti-CD31/PECAM (clone JC/70A, mIgG1κ) (Lab Vision); anti-CLA (HECA-452, rat IgM) (BD Biosciences); anti-CD45RO (clone OPD4, mIgG1), anti–E-selectin (clone 1.2B6, mIgG1κ), anti–intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 (CD54, clone 6.5B5, mIgG1κ), and anti–vascular adhesion molecule (VCAM)-1 (clone 1.4C2, mIgG1κ) (DAKO); anti–IFN-α (rabbit polyclonal) (PBL Biomedical Laboratories); and anti–IL-1α (clone c-18, goat polyclonal), anti–TNF-α (clone 1E8-G6, mIgG1), and anti-pStat1 (Tyr705, rabbit polyclonal) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.). Anti-CCR4 (clone 1G1, mIgG1) mAb was a gift from David Andrew (Millennium Inc., Boston, MA). VZV proteins were detected with human polyclonal anti-VZV IgG or mouse mAb to gE (gpI, mIgG2b; Chemicon). Staining was done with biotinylated secondary antibody and HRP-conjugated streptavidin (Lab Vision). Signals were developed with DAB chromagen (brown) or Vector VIP (purple) and counterstained with hematoxylin (for DAB) or methyl green (for Vector VIP) (Vector Laboratories).ResultsTransfer of VZV to Skin.VZV-infected tonsil T cells were given i.v. to SCID mice with human skin xenografts that were shown to be vascularized by human CD31+ endothelial cells (Fig. 1 A). 15–30% of CD3+ T cells in the inoculum expressed VZV glycoproteins (Fig. 1 B). CD3+ T cells were detected within the epidermis, dermis, and around hair follicles within 24 h (Fig. 1 C, left). VZV was recovered from skin within 7 d in three experiments. Progression to characteristic VZV lesions, with epidermal thickening, cellular degeneration, and keratin disruption, occurred in 10–21 d (Fig. 1 C, middle). Localized VZV lesions destroyed basement membranes and extended through the epithelial surfaces (Fig. 1 C, right).Figure 1.Transfer of VZV by CD3+ T cells. Column-purified CD3+ T cells from tonsils were cocultured with VZV-infected HEL cells for 48 h before i.v. transfusion into SCID mice with human skin xenografts. Skin implants were harvested at various times after T cell transfer, snapped frozen, and sectioned. (A) Human fetal skin xenografts differentiated in SCID mice at 4 wk expressed human CD31 on the endothelial cells (magnification: 100×; insert, 200×). (B) 15–30% of tonsillar T cells used to inject SCIDhu mice expressed VZV glycoproteins as shown in a representative flow cytometric analysis. (C) CD3+ T cells were detected around hair follicles and along basement membranes 24 h after i.v. injection (left, arrows; insert, rabbit IgG control); VZV-induced cytopathology was shown by hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) stain 21 d after T cell transfer compared with uninfected control (middle) and by anti-VZV IgG (brown, top right; bottom right, VZV nonimmune IgG control) (magnification: left, 400×; middle and right, 100×).Since T cells were infected with VZV in vitro by coculture, some VZV-infected HEL cells might have remained within the T cell inoculum after Ficoll gradient centrifugation and could have been a source of VZV transfer to skin xenografts. Therefore, mice were injected with a high inoculum of VZV-infected HEL cells (5.0 × 106 cells). Infected HEL cells did not transfer VZV to skin.After i.v. injection of VZV-infected T cells, memory CD45RO+ T cells were common in skin xenografts, whereas no CD45RA+ T cells were detected in >20 serial skin sections. To further investigate these observations, patterns of migration of uninfected mononuclear cells into skin xenografts were analyzed in animals given 5.0 × 106 cells by tail vein infusion. Prior to transfer, the percentages of cells that expressed CD3, CD19, or CD4/CD45RA were 88, 8, and 31%, respectively. The total number of CD3 T cells recovered from skin xenografts (n = 8) was 0.1–1.0% of the initial i.v. inoculum. When the phenotypes of cells recovered from skin xenografts at 48 h after transfer were examined, 90–96% were CD4+ and 97–100% were memory CD4+ T cells, whereas only 0.3–0.5% expressed CD19 (Table I). Whereas the initial percentage of naïve T cells was 31%, only 0.7–3% of CD4+ T cells recovered from the xenografts were CD45RA+. These observations suggested that memory CD4+ T cells predominated in skin xenografts after the inoculation of VZV-infected mononuclear cells because this subpopulation of immune cells had enhanced capacity to traffic to skin independently of VZV infection. The percentage of CLA+ CD4+ T cells recovered from skin was also enriched from 0.7% to 1.5–3.6% after transfer of uninfected mononuclear cells but remained a relatively low frequency subpopulation, as it was in the experiments in which VZV-infected mononuclear cells were transferred (Tables I and II). Based on the expected survival of 5–10% of T cells after adoptive transfer (7), ∼20% infection of T cells in the inoculum and the recovery of 0.1–1.0% of T cells from skin xenografts, we estimate that <50–500 VZV-infected T cells reach the skin xenografts in this model.Table I.Total Numbers of CD3 T Cells and Phenotypes of Uninfected Mononuclear Cells Recovered from Skin Xenografts after i.v. Transfer to SCIDhu MiceAnimala

CD3+
T cells

CD4+

Naive CD4

Memory CD4

CLA+CD4+

CD19+





%

%

%

%

%

11.4 × 103
923.0971.50.323.8 × 103
961.0993.30.334.0 × 103
9001003.60.343.6 × 104
920.799.32.00.5aData represent means for two xenografts from each animal; n = 8 skin xenografts.Table II.Identification of Mononuclear Cell Populations in VZV-infected Skin SpecimensType of skin

Surface markers expressedby infiltrating cells

VZV-infectedskin xenografts

VZV patientskin biopsies

CD20 –+CD3 ++CD4 ++CD8 ++CD45RA –+CD45RO ++CLA+, <1%+CCR4 –+Results represent cell phenotypes observed in at least three frozen sections from the same skin xenograft or VZV patient lesion biopsy specimen upon testing with each of the markers listed. –, not detected; +, abundantly present.IL-1α and IFN-α Expression in Uninfected and VZV-infected Skin Xenografts.Since VZV causes rapid cytolysis of cultured cells in vitro (1), the slow replication of VZV in vivo suggested possible innate immune modulation. IL-1α was expressed constitutively in the cytoplasm of epidermal cells in uninfected skin. In VZV-infected xenografts, IL-1α expression persisted and underwent nuclear translocation within infected cells (Fig. 2, middle), although retaining its cytoplasmic localization in uninfected cells within the epidermal tissues (Fig. 2, right). TNF-α was not detected in uninfected or VZV-infected skin xenografts (not depicted).Figure 2.IL-1α expression in VZV-infected and uninfected epidermal cells. In this representative figure, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of VZV-infected skin xenografts were stained with anti-VZV IgG, detected with DAB chromagen (brown) as shown in the left panel (magnification, 100×). Serial sections of these samples were stained with anti–IL-1α and detected with DAB as illustrated in the middle and right panels (magnification, 630×). IL-1α expression was analyzed in cells expressing VZV proteins as shown within the area outlined in the left panel and in neighboring uninfected epidermal cells in the same section. IL-1α was activated and translocated to the nuclei of VZV infected cells (middle) but showed a diffuse cytoplasmic stain in neighboring uninfected cells (right).Like IL-α, IFN-α was expressed constitutively in uninfected skin cells. In VZV-infected skin xenografts, IFN-α was down-regulated consistently within VZV infected cells, whereas it was expressed prominently in neighboring uninfected epidermal cells (Fig. 3 A). Phosphorylation of Stat 1 protein was examined to confirm this evidence of inhibition of the IFN-α pathway in VZV-infected cells and its activation in uninfected cells. IFN-α ligation to IFN-α receptors induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat1 by JAK kinases (8). IFN-α is inhibited if Stat1 does not undergo phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. Nuclear, phosphorylated Stat1 was detected in uninfected epidermal cells near VZV-infected cells but not in cells expressing VZV proteins (Fig. 3 B). Although IFN-α was expressed constitutively, Stat1 was not phosphorylated and remained cytoplasmic in uninfected skin xenografts (Fig. 3 B). These observations indicated that a VZV gene product(s) blocks Stat1 activation in order to inhibit IFN-α production in foci of infected skin cells in vivo.Figure 3.IFN-α expression and Stat1 phosphorylation in VZV-infected and uninfected epidermal cells. Formalin- fixed, paraffin-embedded sections of VZV-infected skin xenografts were pretreated and double stained with anti-VZV IgG, detected with DAB (brown), and anti–IFN-α or anti-pStat1 antibody detected with Vector VIP (purple). Sections are shown at magnification 200×. (A) Infected cells were identified by VZV protein (brown) expression. In double labeled skin sections, IFN-α (purple) expression was prominent in adjacent uninfected cells but not in VZV-infected cells (top) compared with sections stained with rabbit IgG as a control for IFN-α (bottom). (B) In double labeled sections, phosphorylated Stat1 (purple) was up-regulated in adjacent uninfected cells but absent in VZV-infected cells (top); pStat1 was not detected in uninfected skin (bottom right) compared with rabbit IgG control stain (bottom left).Inhibition of Type I IFN Signaling.To document the relevance of these observations about IFN-α and Stat1 phosphorylation to VZV pathogenesis, skin xenografts in five mice (n = 10 xenografts) were inoculated with VZV and mice were given neutralizing antibody against the IFN-α/β receptor, which blocks type I IFN activity (9). Four skin xenografts were harvested from mice in the antibody-treated and control groups 7 d after VZV inoculation for viral titrations. The titer of infectious VZV was 10-fold higher in skin from antibody-treated animals (Fig. 4 E). VZV was recovered from all xenografts from mice given anti–IFN-α/β receptor antibody compared with three of four xenografts from controls. In the other xenografts examined by immunohistochemistry, diminished IFN signaling was shown to result in substantially larger cutaneous lesions (Fig. 4, C and D). Stat1 was activated and localized to nuclei of neighboring uninfected cells in control animals (Fig. 4 A). Phosphorylated Stat1 was detected in some cells, primarily at the margins of VZV lesions, in mice given anti–IFN-α/β receptor (Fig. 4 B).Figure 4.Blocking of IFN-α signaling enhanced VZV replication in skin. Skin xenografts were infected with VZV by direct inoculation in mice treated with anti-IFNα/βRβ antibody or controls and harvested at day 7 after infection. Half of the skin implant was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for histological analysis, and the other half was disassociated into cell suspension to measure virus titers by infectious focus assay. (A and B) Shown are representative results from skin sections examined at 7 d (large arrow, VZV lesion); phosphorylated Stat1 (purple; small arrow) was translocated to nuclei in adjacent cells but not within VZV lesions (magnification, 200×). (C and D) Skin lesions shown by staining with anti-VZV IgG (purple) were larger at day 7 in animals given anti-IFNα/βRβ antibody (right) than controls (left) (magnification, 100×). (E) Mean VZV titers in four skin xenografts from two mice were 10-fold higher in anti-IFNα/βRβ antibody-treated animals compared with controls (P < 0.05, unpaired t test).Migration of Mononuclear Cells into VZV-infected Skin.In these experiments, one of two bilateral skin xenografts was inoculated with VZV-infected HEL cells and the other with uninfected fibroblasts. 10 d later, uninfected mononuclear cells were injected i.v., and skin xenografts were harvested after 24–48 h. Mononuclear cells within VZV-infected skin xenografts expressed CD3, whereas no CD20+ B cells were detected in three experiments (Table II). CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were distributed uniformly with no evidence of increased numbers near VZV lesions. Infiltrating cells were exclusively CD45RO+ T cells (Table II). T cells expressing CLA were detected at low frequencies (<1%), but CCR4+ T cells were not identified. Total numbers of T cells recovered from VZV-infected skin were slightly higher than corresponding uninfected xenografts, but surface marker profiles were comparable by flow cytometry. The relative percentages of subpopulations were as observed when uninfected mononuclear cells were transferred (Table I). Thus, T cell migration into skin was not influenced by VZV protein expression or cellular proteins, IL-1α or IFN-α, in the absence of other signals.The analysis of lesion biopsies from VZV-infected patients showed many infiltrating mononuclear cells, most of which expressed CD4 or CD8; a few CD20+ B cells and IFN-α–expressing cells, probably macrophages, were also detected (Table II). CD45RO+ memory T cells, naive CD45RA+ T cells, and CLA+ and CCR4+ T cells were present in comparable numbers (Table II). The differences in cell profiles between VZV lesion biopsies and VZV-infected skin xenografts after adoptive transfer suggested that recruitment and/or retention of skin homing T cells, naïve T cells, B cells, and macrophages required host immune-mediated signals.Expression of Endothelial Cell Adhesion Molecules.Since skin homing of memory T cells is regulated by adhesion molecules and chemoattractant receptors (10), adhesion molecule expression was examined to explain differences between T cell subpopulations detected in biopsies of VZV lesions and VZV-infected skin xenografts. Expression of E-selectin, ICAM-1, or VCAM-1 by endothelial cells was not detected in VZV-infected skin xenografts, indicating that VZV replication, which is associated with the expression of all kinetic classes of viral proteins, and altered IL-1α and IFN-α expression alone did not induce adhesion molecules (Fig. 5, left). In contrast, all adhesion molecules were expressed extensively in VZV lesion biopsies when host cellular immunity was intact (Fig. 5, right).Figure 5.Expression of adhesion molecules by cutaneous endothelial cells in VZV-infected skin xenografts and biopsies of VZV skin lesions. Serial frozen sections of VZV-infected skin xenografts (left) or lesion biopsies from patients with varicella or herpes zoster (right) were stained with antibodies against adhesion molecules expressed by endothelial cells. Signals were detected with Vector VIP (purple) and counterstained with methyl green. Representative results from one of three VZV-infected skin xenografts and one of five VZV lesion biopsies are shown for expression of CD31, E-selectin, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1. E-selectin, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 were highly expressed by CD31-positive dermal endothelial cells in patient lesion biopsies but were not detected in VZV infected skin xenografts (asterisk, VZV skin lesion). Magnification, 100×.DiscussionAlthough the signs and symptoms of infections caused by human herpesviruses are well documented, much less is known about critical events in pathogenesis that precede the onset of the clinical illness. These experiments using the SCIDhu mouse model of VZV pathogenesis provide evidence that infectious VZV can be transferred by T cells through the circulation to sites of replication in skin, resulting in the formation of typical cutaneous lesions. The observations suggest that VZV tropism for T cells, which has been shown in vitro and in T cell xenografts in SCIDhu mice, contributes to the pathogenesis of primary VZV infection in vivo (3–5). The adoptive transfer of uninfected and VZV-infected human mononuclear cells was associated with enrichment of memory CD4+ T cells within human skin xenografts in the SCIDhu mouse model. Therefore, we suggest that VZV tropism for T cells permits the virus to take advantage of the usual pathways for T cell migration through skin during immune surveillance. Whereas naïve T cells enter LNs through the high endothelial venules, exit through efferent lymphatics, and return to the blood, memory T cells traffic through skin and other tissues. In our experiments, the percentage of naïve CD4+ T cells recovered from skin xenografts was only 0.7–3% compared with ∼30% in the infused population. In previous work, we reported that VZV preferentially infects memory T cells compared with naïve CD4+ T cells at a ratio of 3:1 in vitro (5). Lymphoid tissues of the upper respiratory tract, including tonsils and adenoids, contain activated, memory T cells, which may become infected when VZV infects respiratory mucosa. Together, these observations suggest that two factors, which are the intrinsic propensity of memory CD4+ T cells to migrate into skin tissue and the enhanced susceptibility of memory CD4+ T cells to VZV infection, may combine to create an important role for memory CD4+ T cells in VZV pathogenesis. Thus, memory CD4+ T cells that become infected at sites of respiratory epithelial inoculation may be more likely to deliver VZV to epidermal cells and initiate the cutaneous phase of infection than other circulating cells of the immune system, such as naïve CD4+ T cells. As a clinical correlate, VZV dissemination to skin may be modulated in young children, who have few memory T cells, whereas adults with varicella who have >75% memory CD4+ T cells usually develop many cutaneous lesions (1).Memory T cells that express CLA or CCR4 are targeted to skin through interactions with adhesion molecules and chemoattracts when inflammation is triggered (11). We detected a two- to fivefold enrichment of CLA+ CD4+ T cells in skin when SCIDhu mice were given uninfected human mononuclear cells, but the percentage remained ≤3.6 of CD4+ T cells. We did not demonstrate any increase in the numbers of CLA+ or CCR4+ CD4 T cells in skin after the adoptive transfer of VZV-infected T cells. These observations suggest that VZV pathogenesis does not depend on a selective infection of memory CD4+ T cell subpopulations that express specific skin homing markers. Since the epidermis should be in its resting state during the initial transfer of VZV to skin by infected T cells, trafficking of CLA+ or CCR4+ T cells should not be selectively involved in the initial phase of VZV pathogenesis. A second clinical correlate is that skin trauma, such as sunburn acquired during the incubation period, is associated with a much more severe varicella rash. Under such conditions, the twofold increase in infectivity of VZV for CLA+ T cells that we observed in vitro, combined with the increased migration of these cells to damaged skin, could facilitate more efficient transfer of VZV to the epidermis. The down-regulation of MHC class I molecules that we have observed on VZV-infected T cells may also contribute to successful VZV transport to skin (12).VZV transmission to other susceptible individuals requires enough replication to create lesions that contain infectious virus at the skin surface (Fig. 6). However, cell–cell spread in vivo at the rate characteristic of VZV replication in human fibroblasts in vitro would be life threatening to the host and would therefore diminish opportunities for person-to-person transmission. Examining VZV lesion formation in parallel with innate antiviral responses in skin xenografts in vivo showed IFN-α down-regulation in VZV-infected cells and no induction of adhesion molecules on capillary endothelial cells. These conditions favor the pathogen during the early phase of skin infection. At the same time, IFN-α production by epidermal cells adjacent to VZV-infected cells appears to provide an innate barrier against aggressive spread of VZV from cell to cell in skin.Figure 6.A model of the pathogenesis of primary VZV infection. T cells within the local lymphoid tissue of the respiratory tract may become infected by transfer of VZV from its initial site of inoculation in respiratory epithelial cells. T cells may then transport the virus to the skin immediately and release infectious VZV. The remainder of the 10–21-d incubation period appears to be the interval required for VZV to overcome the innate IFN-α response in enough epidermal cells to create the typical vesicular lesions containing cell-free virus at the skin surface. The signaling of enhanced IFN-α production in adjacent skin cells may prevent a rapid, uncontrolled cell–cell spread of VZV. Secondary “crops” of varicella lesions may result when T cells traffic through early stage cutaneous lesions become infected and produce a secondary viremia. Intact host immune responses appear to be required to trigger up-regulation of adhesion molecules, facilitating the clearance of VZV by adaptive immunity.Our analysis of IFN-α and IL-1α in VZV-infected and uninfected skin xenografts revealed a subtle interaction between VZV and epidermal cell cytokine responses. Type I interferons, IFN-α, and to a lesser extent, IFN-β, are the predominant mediators of innate antiviral activity. Constitutive IFN-α/β expression occurs in some cells or tissues, allowing an immediate antiviral response (13). IFN-α/β activation is induced by the Jak/Stat pathway when ligands bind to IFN-α/β receptors and stimulate transcription of the IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) (8). IRF3 and IRF7 are crucial for maximal expression of IFN-α/β (14, 15). Constitutive IFN-α/β signaling is thought to sustain IRF7 expression and enhance IFN-α/β production in a positive feedback loop in response to viral infection (16). Most viruses have mechanisms to inhibit synthesis of IFNs or evade downstream antiviral effects in order to allow viral spread before adaptive immunity develops. HSV, a human alphaherpesvirus closely related to VZV, has several such mechanisms (17).We found that IFN-α was expressed constitutively in the epidermis, independently of Stat1 activation in uninfected skin xenografts. After VZV infection, IFN-α expression was down-regulated in VZV-infected cells concurrently with inhibition of Stat1 phosphorylation. In contrast, Stat1 was phosphorylated and translocated to nuclei, accompanied by IFN-α up-regulation in neighboring, uninfected cells. The capacity of VZV to block IFN-α in some cells enables the virus to replicate, spread from cell to cell, and create focal cutaneous lesions, whereas IFN-α activation protects the adjacent cells. Blocking the IFN-α/β receptor enhanced VZV replication and lesion formation in vivo, showing that these patterns of IFN-α expression and Jak/Stat signaling have biological importance for regulating VZV pathogenesis. Experiments are in progress to identify VZV proteins that have the capacity to disrupt the IFN-α pathway. Overall, the innate IFN-α response appears to modulate VZV growth, providing a substantial barrier against cell–cell spread in skin during the prolonged varicella incubation period. Our observations suggest that VZV gradually overcomes this barrier in order to form polykaryocytes, eventually creating a vesicular lesion that penetrates the skin surface (Fig. 6).IL-1α is synthesized constitutively and stored in suprabasal layers of the epidermis as a 31-kD precursor molecule, pre–IL-1α (18, 19). When cells die, pre–IL-1α is released and cleaved into a 17-kD IL-1α molecule by extracellular proteases. IL-1α can also be released by the calcium-dependent cysteine proteases called calpains, which are ubiquitously but weakly expressed in all cell types (20). Mature IL-1α displaces the IL-1 receptor antagonist and binds to IL-1αR. Internalization and accumulation of the IL-1α–IL-1 receptor complex in the nucleus induces genes involved in skin cell proliferation and other inflammatory changes (21, 22). We found that IL-1α was expressed constitutively in skin but remained in the cytoplasm of uninfected cells adjacent to and distant from VZV lesions. In contrast, IL-1α accumulated in nuclei of VZV-infected cells. This pattern suggests that IL-1α is activated directly or indirectly by VZV replication within epidermal cells. However, IL-1α is apparently not released, or its release into the local skin microenvironment fails to trigger IL-1α activation or enhanced IL-1α production by neighboring cells.Expression of cellular adhesion molecules on endothelial cells increases the efficiency of T cell trafficking. Their expression can be regulated by inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1α, TNF-α, and IFN-γ, which were produced by cells infected with some viral pathogens (23–26). In our experiments, VZV-infected T cells migrated into skin and released infectious virus for entry into and replication in epidermal and dermal cells without preexisting expression of E-selectin, ICAM-1, or VCAM-1 on endothelial cells, and without eliciting the expression of these inflammatory proteins. Although IL-1α was activated in VZV-infected cells, it remained cytoplasmic in uninfected cells and did not have the capacity to induce adhesion molecules on endothelial cells in skin xenografts. VZV replication did not induce TNF-α production by skin cells. In contrast, widespread expression of E-selectin, ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 by endothelial cells was observed in biopsies of clinical VZV lesions. CLA+ T cells were enriched in lesion biopsies compared with VZV-infected skin xenografts, which is consistent with a requirement for host immune mechanisms to up-regulate adhesion molecules. This comparative analysis indicated that endothelial cell activation was not stimulated by VZV gene products alone, despite their extensive expression during lytic infection of epidermal and dermal cells, but required host immune mechanisms.Infectious VZV can be recovered from peripheral blood mononuclear cells during the last few days of the incubation period of varicella in the healthy host and for 2–3 d after the rash appears. We speculate that this secondary viremia results from infection of migrating T cells by virus produced in lesions that are not yet visible at the skin surface (Fig. 6). This hypothesis is suggested by our finding that many T cells entered VZV-infected skin xenografts after adoptive transfer. Thus, viral amplification could result from progressive VZV infection in skin without requiring a phase of replication in reticuloendothelial tissues during the incubation period. Our experiments do not exclude some VZV replication in liver or other reticuloendothelial organs, which might contribute to pathogenesis by increasing the viral load. However, our data indicate that the interval required for VZV to overcome innate immune barriers in skin is sufficient to account for the prolonged incubation period. Continued VZV replication in skin would also be predicted to sustain the viremia associated with malignant varicella, which leads to pneumonia, hepatitis, and encephalitis in immunocompromised children who fail to develop VZV-specific adaptive immunity (1). Further, the transfer of VZV from infected epidermal cells into migratory T cells may also explain how VZV causes viremia and dissemination in high-risk patients with herpes zoster.Based on these SCIDhu mouse experiments, we offer a new paradigm of primary VZV infection which suggests new directions for the analysis of events in VZV pathogenesis. According to this model, infectious VZV is transferred to skin shortly after inoculation of the respiratory mucosa. Although other cell types may be involved, memory CD4+ T cells play a prominent role in this process because of their intrinsic pattern of skin trafficking and their increased susceptibility to VZV infection. VZV gene products modulate innate epidermal cell defenses, down-regulating IFN-α to ensure localized replication in skin. Epidermal cell infection appears to occur without activating endothelial cell adhesion molecules, thereby delaying the invasion of antiviral inflammatory cells at the early stage of cutaneous lesion formation. At the same time, uninfected epidermal cells are signaled to mount a potent innate IFN-α response, which counters an overly aggressive cell–cell spread in skin (Fig. 6). This model helps to explain how VZV replication may be restricted by the host even though VZV-specific T cell immunity is not detected until after the appearance of vesicular skin lesions (1). Acquisition of T cells that recognize VZV proteins correlates with cessation of skin replication, which we suggest is necessary to stop continued, secondary T cell viremia. A benign infectious process during the initial phase of VZV pathogenesis and a circumscribed clinical illness provides the optimal strategy for VZV to be sustained within the human population (27).


Title: The live attenuated varicella-zoster virus vaccine vOka: Molecular and cellular biology of its skin attenuation

IntroductionVaricella-zoster virus (VZV) is a human alphaherpesvirus. Infection with VZV causes chickenpox (varicella) and, upon reactivation from latency, herpes zoster (HZ), also known as shingles.1 In immunocompetent individuals, chickenpox manifests as a generalized skin blistering rash, whereas HZ is accompanied by a painful blistering rash, limited to the region of the skin innervated by the sensory ganglion from which latent virus has reactivated.1VZV transmission to naïve hosts occurs through contact with skin lesions and/or inhalation of the aerosolised infectious cell-free virus, which is shed by the skin blisters or, to a lesser extent, by the upper respiratory tract mucosa. Transmitted virus is inhaled by susceptible contacts, resulting in infection of the upper respiratory tract epithelia. Transportation of virus by epithelial dendritic cells (DCs), to lymphoid organs leads to uptake by skin-homing T lymphocytes, which traffic the virus to skin.2,3 There, the virus appears to initially infect cells of the hair follicles (HFs) and the keratinocytes which populate the basal immature layer of the epidermis.4–6 VZV replicates in the epidermal keratinocytes and this process culminates with the formation of cutaneous blisters, which are laden with infectious cell-free virus. The formation of cell-free virus in cutaneous blisters is critical to VZV transmission to new hosts, as well as for establishment of latency; cell-free virus, which is only present in blisters, is required for establishment of latency in sensory ganglia through infection of sensory nerve endings in the skin and retrograde spread.7,8Although in immunocompetent children chickenpox is usually self-limiting, this may not be the case for immunocompromised individuals or even healthy adults, where chickenpox may cause severe complications, including as a result of bacterial superinfections. HZ is also potentially debilitating, with postherpetic neuralgia (PHN), which manifests as prolonged pain, continuing for months after rash presentation. PHN occurs in about 15% of HZ cases.9 Both HZ and PHN occur more frequently later in life and are associated with declining cell-mediated immunity (CMI).9,10 HZ is also more common in immunocompromised populations including those with HIV, transplant recipients and others with reduced CMI.9,11In 1974, Takahashi and colleagues12 developed the live attenuated vOka-strain vaccine, for prevention of varicella. In those countries that have adopted routine vaccination since, the incidence of chickenpox has highly declined, and several post-licensing studies have confirmed the vaccine’s efficacy, as well as its safety.9,13,14 A therapeutic vaccine for HZ has also been developed, which contains higher concentration of the vOka virus.15 More recently, an adjuvanted HZ subunit vaccine based on the VZV glycoprotein gE has been developed.16 Because the vOka vaccine is based on live attenuated VZV virus, concerns were initially raised about its safety in the long term if the vaccine virus became latent and could then reactivate to cause HZ. However, it was demonstrated that, even though it can establish latency in sensory nerves, vOka rarely reactivates causing HZ (reactivation occurs at least seven times less frequently).14,17,18 The vOka vaccine can also cause rashes, but this occurs less frequently (less than 5% of cases) and where it does happen, there are few lesions.18 Transmission of the vaccine virus to susceptible hosts is also much more infrequent than with wild-type VZV.13Sequencing analyses of the vOka vaccine preparations have shown them to be genetically highly heterogenous with multiple mutations, mostly occurring at low frequency. Fixed vaccine mutations have consistently been observed in some key genes like the major VZV transcriptional transactivator ORF62 and ORF0.19–21 However, the functional implications of these mutations are still poorly understood. The vOka strain replicates significantly less efficiently than wild-type VZV in keratinocytes and skin tissues,22,23 but similarly to wild-type in T lymphocytes or neurons.2,24 Reduced vOka epithelial replication with less cell-free virus results in the clinically attenuated vOka phenotype with interrupted transmission and establishment of latency while maintaining immunological priming. Nevertheless, the exact molecular and cellular mechanisms behind vOka skin attenuation remain largely unknown. The aim of this review is to gather the existing evidence on the epithelial signaling and other pathways that are altered by the vOka virus, compared to wild-type VZV and highlight gaps in existing knowledge. To this end, the review will provide an overview of what is currently known about the molecular biology of the vOka vaccine, its genetic heterogeneity and how this may influence the way vOka interacts with host skin pathways with which wild-type VZV is known to interconnect, thereby exposing possible mechanisms of skin attenuation.History of the vOka vaccineThe first vaccine against varicella was developed in 1974 at the University of Osaka, Japan, by Takahashi and colleagues, with the aim of protecting children at high risk of developing severe complications from the disease. A VZV strain was isolated from an infected child, the so-called parental Oka strain (pOka), named after the patient. This strain was attenuated in vitro using the traditional method of passaging the virus multiple times at varying temperatures (including low temperatures to which the wild-type virus is not adapted) and in different cell lines (including non-human cells). Specifically, the isolate was passaged 11 times in human embryonic lung cells, followed by 12 passages in guinea pig embryonic fibroblasts and a few more passages in human diploid cells (WI-38).12 This attenuation procedure resulted in the vaccine Oka strain (vOka).Early clinical trials were conducted in Japan and included healthy and sick or immunocompromised children.12,25 Notably, in the very first study using vOka, the vaccine was administered to 23 hospitalized and seronegative children in contact with a child manifesting varicella symptoms.12 All the vaccinated children seroconverted, including those on immunosuppressive steroid regimens. Similarly, in a follow-up study, vaccination of 11 children before or following a case of varicella in a children’s hospital ward prevented the spread of the infection to other susceptible children.25 Early studies in Japan also included household contacts that had no history of varicella and were seronegative.26 Collectively, these initial studies showed that the live attenuated vaccine was effective in inducing an immunological response in all vaccinees, without any significant clinical reactions in either healthy or high-risk individuals. Follow-up studies, up to 2 y after administration of the vaccine in Japan, confirmed the development of immunity against varicella in both healthy and immunocompromised children.27Further clinical trials were carried out in subsequent years, mainly in the US. In 1984, Wiebel et al. demonstrated in the first in-kind USA study that vaccination using the live attenuated vOka vaccine protects healthy children from varicella.28 Later that year, a study demonstrated the vaccine’s safety and efficiency in preventing the emergence of severe varicella symptoms in children suffering from leukemia.29 Despite multiple studies exhibiting its high safety and efficacy, the vOka vaccine was met with concern that the latent virus could potentially be harmful in the long term.9 The first countries to license the use of the live attenuated vaccine were Germany and Sweden in 1984,30 followed by Korea and Japan in 1988.31 In 1995, the live attenuated vaccine was licensed in the USA,31 where carefully conducted post-licensing surveillance studies have shown a drop in the incidence of varicella, as well as hospitalizations due to the infection.32,33 Follow-up of vaccinees for up to 7 y post-vaccination shows efficacy levels of up to 94.4% after a single dose and 98.3% after two doses of the vaccine.34 There is an ongoing debate regarding the optimal vaccination program, and whether one or two doses of the vaccine should be administered. One-dose vaccinations are proven to be highly effective in preventing severe varicella. At the same time, with one-dose vaccination, sufficient circulating varicella is maintained to boost immunity in both vaccinees and naturally infected individuals. This is important because, according to the model of HZ pathogenesis first illustrated by Hope-Simpson,10 CMI to VZV is boosted either by endogenous exposure to VZV through silent reactivation of the virus or by exogenous exposure to the virus, through the contact with a case of varicella. Notwithstanding, higher antibody count and seroconversion rates have been reported for individuals receiving two doses of the vaccine (with the second dose administered 3 months after the first) with fewer breakthrough infections35,36 and this led the USA to a shift toward two-dose vaccination in 2007.37Currently, the licensed, commercially available vaccines against varicella, which are based on the live attenuated vOka strain include VarilRix® (GSK), VariVax® (Merck), OkaVax® (Biken), and Baike® (Chanchung Biotechnology). A combined vaccine against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella (MMRV) is also licensed and distributed by Merck (ProQuad®) or GSK (Priorix-Tetra®).Apart from vaccines based on the Oka strain, in South Korea, a vaccine based on the MAV/06 strain is distributed by GC Biopharma under the name Barycela® (previously called Suduvax®). SuduVax® was first licensed in 1994. The parental strain was isolated in South Korea from a young child with chickenpox, and like the Oka strain was passaged multiple times in different cell lines (including guinea pig embryonic lung cells) and under different conditions until it was attenuated.38 In 2019, another vaccine was licensed in South Korea; the SKY Varicella® which is distributed by SK Bioscience. This live attenuated vaccine strain is called Oka/SK and is based on yet another VZV isolate. However, the Oka/SK strain appears to be genetically more similar to pOka than to vOka, and to be associated with increased numbers of adverse reactions to the vaccine.39The successful creation of a live attenuated vaccine against varicella laid the foundation for the development of a vaccine against herpes zoster. This vaccine is based on the same vOka strain as the varicella vaccine but contains a much higher concentration of plaque forming units (pfu) per dose (~14 times more). This is a therapeutic and not a prophylactic vaccine because it is administered to individuals who have already been infected with VZV in order to prevent reactivation of the latent virus and the occurrence of HZ and PHN caused by age-associated decrease in the CMI to VZV.9,10,15 The Shingles Prevention Study showed that this zoster vaccine reduces by half the incidence of HZ and by more than 60% the incidence of PHN.15 A subsequent study tested the effectiveness of one dose of the zoster vaccine (which was by then licensed and distributed with the name of Zostavax® from Merck) directed to younger people (50–59 y old) and found that the vaccine had even higher efficacy (69,9% efficacy).40 More recently, a non-live vaccine has been developed for prevention of HZ.16 This is an adjuvanted glycoprotein gE subunit vaccine, called Shingrix® (GSK), which has been shown to be more effective than the live attenuated vaccine Zostavax in preventing HZ and PHN, as well as being indicated for administration to immunocompromised individuals. As a result, in a number of countries, like the USA, the Shingrix vaccine has now largely replaced Zostavax.41The genetics of the vOka vaccine virusThe process of creating the vOka attenuated virus included multiple passaging, sometimes in unnatural conditions (e.g. lower temperatures or unnatural hosts), which lead to accumulation of high number of genetic mutations. The vOka virus consists of a mixture of genotypes bearing several mutations, for example, VariVax vOka contains 292 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs).21,42The comparative analysis of three commercially available VZV vaccines, VariVax (and Zostavax for HZ) from Merck, VarilRix from GSK and OkaVax from Biken, has identified 137 SNPs that are shared between all vaccine preparations.21 Most of the reported mutations are represented with low allele frequencies, except for six, which are fixed or near-fixation (allele frequency > 90%) (Table 1). Of these, five lie in ORF62, which encodes the immediate-early protein IE62, the major VZV transcriptional transactivator.3 Of these five mutations, four have allele frequency > 98%. Two are non-synonymous (NS) (16262 (R958G), 17252 (S628G)) and two synonymous (18111 (P341) and 105,705 (A1143))21 (Figure 1 and Table 1). Notably, the two NS mutations are in the highly conserved regions 2 and 4 of the ORF62 gene. Importantly, these four mutations are also observed in vOka virus retrieved from vaccine-caused skin rashes.20 The sixth near-fixed mutation is located at position 560 of ORF0, which abolishes a stop codon (*130 R) leading to the expression of a variant protein which is 92 amino acids longer.21,43
Figure 1.Schematic of ORF62 gene in the vOka virus. Red vertical lines indicate the four near-fixed mutations with allele frequency >98%. Of these, the dashed lines indicate the two non-synonymous mutations, which both lay in the highly conserved regions 2 and 4 (indicated in blue). The main known functional domains in the IE62 protein and viral or host proteins binding regions are indicated in pink (the provided co-ordinates refer to the VZV Dumas strain). DBD, DNA binding domain; NLS, nuclear localisation signal.Table 1.Allele frequency of near-fixed mutations in the Varivax, VarilRix and Oka/Vax vaccines.NucleotidePositionAmino AcidPositionORFpOkavOkaAmino Acid SubstitutionsMean allele frequency VarivaxMean allele frequency VarilRixAllele frequency Oka/Vax (Biken)5601300TC*130R94.3%98.8%96.2%15544119762AGV1197A93.4%99.5%97.6%15705114362TC 99.5%99.9%100%1626295862TCR958G100%100%100%1725262862TCS628G98.7%100%100%1811134162TC 98.7%100%100%Interestingly, most of these mutations are similarly found in the live attenuated vaccines Baike,44 and Suduvax.38 Intriguingly, three of these mutations (560 in ORF0; 16262 and 107,252 in ORF62) are also found in the VZV high-passage laboratory strain Ellen.43It is important to note that in the rare cases of vaccine breakthrough, the distribution of genotypes in breakthrough infections was similar to the distribution of genotypes circulating at the time, confirming that the vaccine protects equally against all genotypes. Furthermore, there is no evidence of an association of particular SNPs with more severe disease.20,45To understand whether this vast accumulation of mutations in vOka may be caused by the extensive virus passaging performed to develop the vaccine, Kim et al.46 passaged two VZV strains, YC01 and YC02 (originating from herpes zoster and varicella patients respectively) more than 100 times in cell culture. The resulting high-passage viruses were sequenced and compared to low-passage equivalents. Intriguingly, ORF62 was found to be highly mutated with the four SNPs, which are fixed or near-fixation in the vOka vaccine strain, also present in at least one of the high passaged viruses, along with the stop codon mutation in ORF0. Furthermore, high-passage viruses, in contrast to low-passage ones, were able to grow in non-human cells (guinea pig cells). This indicates that serial passaging, under unnatural conditions, is probably responsible for the emergence of mutations, as the cells try to adapt to the new growth environment. These mutations could in turn render the virus attenuated in the natural host and probably change the ability or the way the virus interacts with certain host pathways, which are normally essential for the virus life cycle.The vOka vaccine skin attenuationIt is now well established that the attenuation of vOka relies on reduced replication in skin22 and the next paragraphs will provide a picture of what is currently understood on the mechanisms underlying the vOka skin attenuation.The skinThe human skin is composed of three layers in ascending order from the innermost to the outermost: hypodermis (mainly composed of subcutaneous white adipose tissue, SWAT), dermis (mostly a connective tissue) and epidermis (epithelial tissue).47,48 Of these, both the dermis and the epidermis are permissive to VZV infection, however the epidermis is the main location of viral replication and the site of formation of blistering lesions, which harbor the infectious VZV virions necessary for virus transmission.The dermisThe dermis contains a component of adipose tissue, which is adjacent to the hypodermis, called dermal white adipose tissue (DWAT); however, its major component is connective tissue, which also houses nerve terminations, blood vessels, HFs and sebaceous and sweat glands.47,48 The major cell type populating the dermis is fibroblasts. Dermal fibroblasts secrete proteins, notably among them collagen, which form the extracellular matrix (ECM), an essential constituent which provides elasticity, as well as firmness to the dermis.47,49 Other cell types in the dermis are immune cells, for instance, dendritic cells and macrophages, which contribute to most of the immune responses in the skin.49The epidermisDermis and epidermis are separated by the basement membrane, a layer made up of ECM proteins, which include a number of collagen proteins, notably collagen IV and VII47 (Figure 2).
Figure 2.Schematic of human skin with focus on the epidermis. The epidermis of the skin is made up of keratinocytes organised in layers (basal, spinous, granular, upper-granular and cornified, in ascending order), based on the cellular and protein expression changes that they undergo during differentiation. The dashed lines underline some of the major genes/proteins, which are differentially expressed during differentiation.Keratinocytes represent the preeminent cell type in the epidermis, however other cell types are sporadically present, including Merkel cells, melanocytes and Langerhans cells.47In the epidermis, keratinocytes are distributed in layers based on their differentiation status. These organize as the basal, spinous, granular, upper-granular and cornified layers (in ascending order from the basement membrane). The basal layer is populated by a small number of epidermal stem cells and by undifferentiated keratinocytes, which still retain their ability to proliferate. As keratinocytes receive stimuli to differentiate, they cease to proliferate and to express certain genes (typically, but not exclusively, keratin 5 (K5) and keratin 14 (K14)), and start to express genes specific of the differentiated status (such as K1, K10, involucrin (IVL), loricrin, small proline-rich proteins (SPRRs), trichohyalin (TCHH) and filaggrin (FLG)50,51 (Figure 2). Terminal differentiation is also accompanied by a program of cell death called cornification, which starts at the level of the granular layer and leads to the loss of nuclei and organelles and the formation of the cornified envelope, a lining made of keratins and other proteins crosslinked together and embedded in a matrix of insoluble lipids.50,52 It is the insoluble and rigid nature of the cornified envelope that guarantees the physical barrier necessary for protection from external factors (such as pathogens or chemical factors), as well as to prevent water loss.A number of keratins are expressed in the skin of specific epithelia, for instance, keratins K2 and K9 are expressed in the differentiated keratinocytes of thickened or palmoplantar skin regions, respectively.51 Keratins are a crucial component of the epidermal barrier function, they assemble in filaments called keratin intermediate filaments (KIFs), which run from the nuclei to the cell–cell desmosomes and provide the foundation around which the cornified envelope is formed.50 Importantly, more and more evidence is emerging about keratins not having solely a structural role in the epidermis, but also being involved in other functions, such as working as signaling molecules.53 For instance, this has been demonstrated for K17, which is involved in the skin DNA damage response (DDR)54 and we have observed that the degradation of K10 by VZV has a signaling role in inducing activation of autophagy pathways.55VZV skin replicationVZV is transported to the skin by T lymphocytes expressing skin-homing markers after initial infection of the upper respiratory tract mucosa epithelium.2,3 In the skin, VZV appears to first infect HFs cells5,6 and, in the interfollicular epidermis, VZV infects undifferentiated basal keratinocytes.4 The predilection of VZV for infecting undifferentiated rather than differentiated keratinocytes has been confirmed in the calcium-switch model of VZV infection where it was also demonstrated that VZV copy number increases when keratinocytes move from an undifferentiated to a differentiated status.56 This is concomitant with an increase in the expression of early and late viral proteins with differentiation, indicating that VZV requires epidermal differentiation to fully mature into infectious cell-free virions that ultimately will be released by epidermal blisters.56 However, which cells VZV specifically targets in the HFs is still unclear. Furthermore, how the virus moves from the HFs to the interfollicular basal keratinocytes is yet to be determined.The skin epidermis is crucial to VZV life cycle; it is the major location of VZV replication, but also the site of virus transmission to new hosts, as well as the place where VZV gets access to the terminal endings of the sensory ganglia to establish latency. Despite its importance in the VZV life cycle, the mechanisms of VZV interaction with the skin host are still considerably unexplored. This is largely because VZV infectivity is restricted to humans and this limits the availability of suitable models of VZV infection. The Arvin group developed an in vivo model based on the infection of human skin tissues xenografted onto SCID-hu mice.2,22,57 Models developed in vitro include the calcium-switch model of VZV infection, which is based on infection of human primary or immortalized keratinocytes, which are then differentiated by addition of calcium to the cells culture23,55,56 and 3D in vitro models have been established based on infection of organotypic human skin cultures or human skin explants.55,56,58The known mechanisms of VZV infection and replication in the skin have been recently extensively reviewed.8,59 Here, we summarize only the hitherto established interactions of VZV with epidermal pathways, which include interaction with epidermal proteins, autophagy and apoptosis pathways, as well as epidermal innate immunity pathways (Figure 3a).
Figure 3.Schematic of the main host changes in keratinocytes infected with pOka and vOka. a) Following VZV infection, there is upregulation of a number of kallikreins, accompanied by downregulation of some of their targets, corneodesmosomal proteins DSG1 and DSC1. Keratins K1 and K10 are downregulated at the gene level. K10 downregulation is concomitantly caused by protein degradation, which is mediated by increased levels of MDM2. Decrease of K10 in turns determines upregulation of NR4A1, which induces autophagy. The autophagic flux is not completed and lysosomal proteins are downregulated. Other keratins are upregulated by VZV, notably K4, K13, K19 and K15. K17 appears to be upregulated at the protein level, although this was not observed at the gene level (#). In VZV-infected keratinocytes inhibitors of apoptosis pSTAT3 and survivin are upregulated, whereas the innate immunity mediators IFNα, pSTAT1 and PML-NB are downregulated. b) Keratin K15 is not upregulated by vOka in infected keratinocytes. The autophagic flux appears not to be as downregulated as by wild-type VZV in vOka infection of fibroblasts, but this remains to be confirmed in keratinocytes (*).RNAseq transcriptional analysis of primary keratinocytes in the calcium-switch model of VZV infection has highlighted a number of changes in the host epidermis characteristic of skin blistering diseases60; downregulation of the spinous keratins K1 and K10 and of cell–cell adhesive junctions, notably the corneodesmosomal proteins desmoglein-1 (DSG1) and desmocollin-1 (DSC1).56 This was associated with a generalized increase in the expression of serine proteases called kallikreins, of which two of the most upregulated, kallikrein 5 (KLK5) and KLK7, are proteases responsible for epidermal desquamation. The upregulation of KLK5 and KLK7 may account for a desquamation phenotype, which may facilitate the virus release from the epidermal cornified layer.56Notably, it has been demonstrated that keratin K10 downregulation in VZV infection is not only caused by a decrease in gene expression but also by proteosomal degradation following MDM2-mediated ubiquitination. MDM2 cytoplasmic expression is increased by KLK6, which is not normally associated with epidermal desquamation and yet was one of the most highly upregulated kallikreins in VZV infection of keratinocytes.55,56 Moreover, K10 plays a signaling role in VZV infection of keratinocytes; lack of K10 upregulates the transcription factor nuclear receptor subfamily 4 group A member 1 (NR4A1), which in turn induces activation of autophagy pathways.55 Autophagy has been reported both in keratinocytes and fibroblasts to be proviral for VZV and therefore suggested as a mechanism that VZV exploits for its life cycle.55,61,62 In keratinocytes, the autophagy flux appears to be incomplete; lysosomal proteins have a reduced expression, suggesting that the autophagic flux is not terminated with the fusion of autophagosomes/amphisomes with lysosomes.55Transcriptomic analysis of VZV-infected keratinocytes also revealed a number of other alterations in the host cells, such as increase in the expression of K15 and K19 and the mucosal keratins K4/13. K15 is expressed by stem cells of the HFs and, in the interfollicular epidermis, by basal keratinocytes,51,56,63 whereas K19 is expressed mainly by simple epithelia, but an association with stem cells has also been suggested.51,64 While the importance of K15 upregulation in VZV skin replication has been further demonstrated by knockdown or overexpression of K15, which led, respectively, to decreased or increased viral replication,23 the relevance of K4/13 and K19 upregulation in VZV infection has yet to be addressed. It may be that some of these keratins are upregulated as a compensatory response to K10 downregulation. Further investigation is also required to understand whether wound healing pathways may be involved in VZV skin replication, as it has been found that K17 (expression of which increments during wound healing65) and WNT5a proteins are upregulated in VZV-infected skin of SCID-hu mice.66 However, K17 was not increased at the mRNA level in the transcriptomic analysis of VZV-infected keratinocytes.56It has been demonstrated in investigations of VZV-infected skin tissues from SCID-hu mice that in the keratinocytes surrounding the epidermal blister, there is increase in the expression and activity of interferon-α (IFNα) along with other associated innate immunity regulators (e.g. phosphorylated signal transducer and activator of transcription 1, pSTAT1). Conversely, these are inhibited in correspondence of the lesion, suggesting that while VZV represses innate immunity pathways in the host cells, the uninfected surrounding keratinocytes mount an immune barrier, to keep the lesion contained (reviewed in3,59). Moreover, VZV inhibits the host promyelocytic leukemia-nuclear bodies (PML-NB), which confine the nascent virions in the cell nuclei to preclude them from completing their life cycle.67 VZV also interferes with the host cell apoptotic pathways, by increasing the levels of phosphorylated STAT3 (pSTAT3), and therefore of its downstream protein survivin, which is a cellular apoptosis inhibitor.68vOka skin replicationThe attenuation of vOka for replication in skin was demonstrated in vivo by Moffat et al.22 in SCID-hu mouse skin xenografts and in vitro in human primary keratinocytes,23 but not in other cell types, such as T lymphocytes,2 human neurons,24 lung fibroblasts or melanoma cells,22,69 confirming that the attenuation is likely to be keratinocyte-specific.What mechanisms are at the basis of vOka epidermal attenuation is still the subject of ongoing investigation. Immunity may play a role, as suggested by a study performed in dermal immune cells derived from human skin biopsies, where it was demonstrated that while VZV inhibits the signaling from pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) expressed by dendritic cells (DCs), vOka fails to do so, suggesting vOka may not evade immune responses as successfully as wild-type VZV.70 However, further studies will be required to understand how vOka interconnects with innate immunity in the epidermis.Because VZV interacts with specific epidermal immune and cellular pathways for its replication, understanding how the vOka strain interacts with these same pathways may uncover its attenuation mechanism. With this vision, some of the pathways and gene/protein expression changes described in the previous paragraph and summarized in Figure 3a, have been analyzed in the context of vOka skin infection (Figure 3b). Investigation into autophagy pathways in MRC-5 fibroblasts showed that the inhibition of the late stages of autophagic flux in vOka infection, is not as marked as in the wild-type VZV infection,71 however this remains to be confirmed in keratinocytes. Recently, it was shown in human primary keratinocytes in the calcium-switch model of VZV infection that K15 expression is not upregulated by vOka. Moreover, exogenous increase in K15 expression was sufficient to increase vOka replication and bring it to levels similar to pOka, suggesting that the failure of vOka to upregulate K15 may be one of the factors underpinning its attenuation.23 It may be speculated that both innate immune and cellular mechanisms may be involved in the attenuation; the vOka virus may not be as capable as the wild-type counterpart of inhibiting/evading the innate immune responses erected by the host and at the same time it may not be as capable of harnessing certain epidermal cellular pathways for replication. In both cases, very little is known, and further investigation is warranted.vOka mutations and skin attenuationSince, as described in paragraph “The genetics of the vOka vaccine virus”, distinct sequencing-based studies19–21,43,44,46 have concurred in the description of the same core mutations in ORF62 and the same stop codon mutation in ORF0, and being both these ORFs essential to VZV replication,3,72 ORF62 and ORF0 have been the primary focus in attempts to find cues for vOka attenuation. Nevertheless, non-sequencing-based studies have also identified two additional ORFs, ORF14 (gC) and ORF31 (gB), possible candidates.Below, we provide an overview of the current understanding of the putative involvement of ORF0, ORF14, ORF31 and ORF62 in vOka skin attenuation.ORF0 stop codon mutationORF0, also known as ORF S/L, was discovered later than the other VZV ORFs,73 and to date not much is known about its physiological function in VZV life cycle and pathogenesis. ORF0 contains a signal for VZV DNA packaging72 and is considered to be essential for VZV replication, as its deletion caused reduced viral growth in infected MeWo cells and the skin of SCID-hu mice.74The mutation at position 560 of ORF0 removes a stop codon and the extended C-terminus of the ORF0 protein is present in the virion surface where it gets N-glycosylated, a feature that is not shared with pOka-ORF0.75 However, in studies performed in MeWo cells, replacing ORF0 in the pOka strain with the vOka variant did not lead to an attenuated phenotype nor did the deletion of the extended glycosylated C-terminus of vOka-ORF0.75 This may suggest that other mutations may have a synergistic effect and warrants further investigations. Furthermore, a study focusing on the VZV Ellen strain, which bears the same ORF0 stop codon mutation, has suggested that this mutation may have a role in attenuation, but this has not been evaluated in skin.43ORF14 reduced expressionORF14 encodes the VZV glycoprotein gC (initially named gpV), which was first described in 1990, and whose function is still under investigation. Since its discovery, it has been observed that the vaccine strain vOka accumulates low levels of gC compared with its parental strain, raising questions regarding the possible involvement of gC in the skin attenuation of vOka.76 In support of this hypothesis Moffat et al. 22 showed that the absence of gC expression is associated with diminished replication of VZV in the skin of SCID-hu mice. The same study demonstrated that although not required for viral growth in vitro, gC might be critical for VZV virulence in vivo. Nevertheless, a direct correlation between reduced expression of gC and the attenuation of vOka in skin has not yet been demonstrated.In mutational analysis studies of the vOka vaccine strain (and commercial vaccine derivates), ORF14 was not found to include any significant SNPs; of the four reported, the only SNP leading to NS mutation (aa position 499) has low allele frequency (2.08%), two SNPs lead to synonymous mutations (aa 490 and 360 with allele frequency of 1.02% and 1.69%, respectively) and one leads to a change from ocher stop codon (TAA) to amber stop codon (TAG) (aa 561 with 14.58% allele frequency).19–21 Of note, the latter is shared by the majority of the live attenuated vaccines (Suduvax, Varilrix, Varivax20,21,77 and Baike).44 However, this being a stop codon mutation, it appears unlikely that this may play a role in attenuation. This raises the question as to what determines low gC expression in vOka. It was hypothesized that this could be caused by the promoter of ORF14 being under the influence of the major transactivator IE62, which is well recognized to be highly mutated in the vaccine variant. This theory was, however, disproven, as the ORF14 promoter was found not to be regulated by IE62.19 Another possible explanation is based on the observation that gC is expressed late in the VZV life cycle (at about 72 h post-infection, whereas other glycoproteins such as gE and gB are already synthesized within 4–6 h after infection). Therefore, multiple passaging of the virus (process used for the creation of the vaccine) may lead to the diminished expression of gC, as the virus does not have enough time to start gC synthesis. Additionally, gC expression was found to be enhanced by treatment with hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) and retinoic acid, by acting on the PBX/HOX transcription factors. All in all, these observations indicate that the gC content of a given VZV strain could heavily depend on the cell culture conditions and the production methods of the vaccine.78,79The G-quadruplex (G4) structure is a type of secondary structure that DNA and RNA nucleic acids can form in guanine-rich sequences. Four guanine bases interact with each other forming a square plane (or tetrad). Up to four guanine tetrads can associate further, forming stacks. The G4 structures are hypothesized to be involved in a number of cellular processes spanning from regulation of transcription and translation to epigenetic regulation.80 In the VZV genome (Dumas or pOka sequences references used), ORF14 is predicted to be enriched with stable G4 structures, which suppress the expression of gC. Mutations that disrupt some of the G4 structures led to increased expression of gC, while they reduced viral growth and cell-to-cell spread in MeWo cells and human foreskin fibroblasts.81 The observation that increased expression of gC leads to an attenuated phenotype disagrees with the hypothesis that decreased gC expression could be one of the factors responsible for the attenuation of the vaccine strain and therefore necessitates further investigations. Notably, the area of the VZV genome where G4 structures have been predicted to form (nt 20,601–20,925 of the pOka sequence) is outside the region containing SNPs in ORF14 in the vOka genome. Overall, the findings on the putative role of gC in vOka attenuation are not clear and require further study.ORF31 mutationORF31 encodes the VZV glycoprotein gB, which forms a trimer by associating with the gH-gL heterodimer. Together they form the membrane fusion complex necessary for viral entry into the cells by mediating the fusion of the viral envelope with the target cell’s membrane. The fusion complex also mediates cell-to-cell fusion, which leads to syncytia formation, a characteristic phenotype of VZV cells infection (reviewed in82).A recent study has highlighted the implication in vOka attenuation of the SNP located at nucleotide position 2096 of the ORF31 coding sequence. In pOka, at nucleotide 2096, almost half of the genome sequences harbor a guanine base (G), while the other half an alanine base (A); G leads to the translation of an arginine at amino acid position 699 (699 R), whereas A results in a glutamine (699Q). Interestingly, this equilibrium between G and A is disturbed in the vOka genome, where most of the bases (>99.98) at this position are represented by A, hence gB carries almost exclusively a glutamine at position 669. A pOka strain engineered to express only the 699Q variant displayed a vOka-like phenotype; the 699Q variant was less efficient in allowing viral entry into neurons and replicated less in skin fibroblasts.83 Additionally, it was shown that in cell-free viruses expressing both SNP variants in equal amount, after entry into neuronal cells, the 669 R variant was favored over 699Q.83 These results strongly suggest that the change in the dominant amino acid at position 669 of vOka gB could contribute to the vOka attenuation in skin. Interestingly, this seems to affect fibroblasts and not keratinocytes.83 More work will be required to understand how this aminoacidic change could mechanistically disfavor the vOka growth and whether this would represent a mechanism of attenuation in the dermis, rather than the epidermis.ORF62 mutationsORF62 encodes the immediate early protein IE62, which is essential for viral replication in skin. IE62 is the major transactivator of VZV; it induces gene transcription of immediate early, early, and late viral genes, by interacting with the host transcription factor SP1.3,84 As described in Paragraph “The genetics of the vOka vaccine virus”, ORF62 is the most highly mutated ORF in the vOka vaccine and its commercial derivatives, but also in other attenuated vaccines developed from different parental strains, as well as in vaccine-associated rashes.19–21,38,44,46,77 Moreover, some of the mutations in the ORF62 gene were found to be reverted to wild-type allele in the virus recovered from vaccine rashes, compared to the vOka inoculum, further suggesting that mutations in this protein may be critical for vaccine attenuation.85The fact that distinct studies have all converged on reporting the same core of mutations in ORF62 and the fact that these include five out of the six fixed or near-fixed mutations in all the vOka preparations (Figure 1 and Table 1) identifies the mutated ORF62 as a likely player in vOka attenuation. A number of investigations have researched whether and how the vOka ORF62 mutations may affect vOka replication in skin and therefore account for its attenuated phenotype. Because of IE62 role as transactivator, many studies have initially focused on whether vOka IE62 transcriptional activity is impaired.Gomi et al. 2002 employed a luciferase assay and ectopically expressed IE62, either wild-type or mutated. The mutated IE62 included the eight NS substitutions that were identified by the same study at the time. The assay showed that the mutated variant exhibited less transactivation activity.19 Another study showed that vOka infection of MRC-5 fibroblasts leads to decreased transcription of ORFs 62, 65, 66 and 67. It was suggested that IE62 mutations may lead to decreased expression of proteins important for viral spread and thereby cause attenuation.86 Nevertheless, luciferase-based assays from the same study, using either pOka or vOka IE62 did not demonstrate a statistically significant difference in the expression of those ORFs.In a study investigating the Suduvax vaccine, it was found that, in infected MeWo cells, Suduvax IE62 could transactivate ORFs 4, 28, 29, and 68 less efficiently compared to its wild-type equivalent. However, no significant effect on its activity was observed upon introducing the individual mutations.87 Interestingly, although the Suduvax vaccine is not based on the vOka strain, it shares with it six NS mutations, of which two 107,252 (S628G) and 106,262 (R958G), are the two most fixed NS mutations present in vOka ORF62 (Figure 1). This evidence reinforces the hypothesis that reduced transactivation activity of IE62 caused by the acquired mutations could represent one of the drivers of viral attenuation.As described in paragraph “vOka skin replication” and Figure 3b, we have observed in work performed in human primary keratinocytes, that vOka (VariVax strain) does not increase the expression of the keratin K15, which is on the other end essential for successful VZV replication in the epidermis.23 IE62 appears to be the VZV protein responsible for the upregulation of K15 during VZV infection, therefore we investigated whether its vOka-mutated version may fail in this role. The vOka version of ORF62 containing all the five near-fixed mutations (and four additional ones present at various levels in the different vOka-based vaccine preparations), was not able to upregulate K15 expression. This was accompanied by inability of vOka IE62 to rescue viral replication in cells that were infected with the vOka virus, compared to cells infected with vOka and expressing the pOka version of IE62.23 This evidence suggests that the vOka-mutated IE62 may have lost its ability to interact with certain host epidermal pathways, for example, K15 (and downstream pathways) and this may contribute to the virus not being able to replicate as well in skin. Because the observations regarding IE62 reported in this paragraph are based on transfection studies of the mutated IE62 protein, further investigations using infection with the VZV virus carrying single mutations in IE62 may prove valuable to better elucidate the role of mutated IE62 in vOka attenuation.In a recent publication, the 3D structure of IE62 was analyzed using the artificial intelligence algorithm AlphaFold2. The currently licensed live attenuated vaccines against varicella based on three different parental strains, pOka (VariVax, VarilRix), Oka/SK (SKY Varicella), and MAV/06 (Suduvax) were studied, and the IE62 structure from each was predicted and compared to the pOka strain. The IE62 protein from SKY Varicella was predicted to have the same structure as IE62 from the non-attenuated pOka strain, whereas the structure analysis of IE62 proteins from VariVax, VarilRix or Suduvax displayed a conformational change of an alpha-helix located in the region 1 of the protein. It could be hypothesized that such conformational change might hinder the IE62 interactome and lead to diminished virulence.39 Nevertheless, further research is required to better understand how such a conformational change would affect the interaction of VZV with certain host pathways and lead to attenuation, as well as to test this in skin models.Conclusions and future perspectivesSeveral studies on the genetics of vOka have exposed the highly mutated nature of the vOka virus compared to the parental VZV and highlighted that fixed or near-fixed mutations in all the vOka vaccine preparations lie in ORF62 and ORF0, both essential genes in VZV replication. However, much of the focus to date has been on the molecular biology of the virus, rather than on the cell biology of the host with which it needs to interconnect to replicate. Understanding how host epidermal pathways are altered upon vOka infection and how this differs from its wild-type counterpart, will shed light on the mechanisms of vOka attenuation.Of the most highly mutated genes in vOka, ORF62, being the only mutated gene with a regulatory function in the VZV life cycle and being the gene containing five out of the six near-fixed mutations among all the vOka strains, has been the most closely interrogated. In a keratinocyte model of VZV infection, correlation between mutations in ORF62 and reduced vOka viral growth has been demonstrated, along with a defective interaction with the epidermal protein keratin K15, which is normally increased by VZV to facilitate replication in the epidermis.23 However, it is plausible that more than one mechanism accounts for the vOka attenuated phenotype, as also demonstrated by an investigation that used recombinant chimeric viruses containing different areas of the pOka or vOka genomes but was not able to attribute attenuation to a single area of the genome.69 Therefore, further studies on other genes that are highly mutated in vOka, such as ORF0 and ORF31, or genes that have differential expression such as ORF14, are warranted.Modern technologies, such as single cell sequencing and spatial omics techniques, associated with the use of models of human skin cultures that closely mimic epidermal differentiation (e.g. skin organotypics/organoids, skin explants or the calcium-switch keratinocytes models) may allow better understanding of how vOka interacts with specific epidermal pathways (innate immunity, keratinocyte differentiation, autophagy), in distinct epidermal layers and at specific times of the vOka life cycle. This, combined with the generation of vOka derivatives bearing single mutations (e.g. each of the single NS mutations in ORF62) may pinpoint the mutation/mutations responsible for the attenuation and their functional impact.Understanding how the vOka vaccine is attenuated for skin replication will pave the way for the development of new non-live vaccines, which will minimize possible, although rare, vaccine-associated adverse effects. This will also, by comparative studies, provide a better understanding of the wild-type VZV skin pathogenesis.


Title: Nosocomial transmission of chickenpox and varicella zoster virus seroprevalence rate amongst healthcare workers in a teaching hospital in China

BackgroundVaricella zoster virus (VZV) causes two clinically distinct forms of disease: varicella (chickenpox), as a primary infection, and zoster (shingles) due to reactivation of latent VZV [1–3]. The transmission of VZV occurs via inhalation of airborne droplets or direct contact with vesicular fluid from skin lesions. VZV infection is considered an occupational hazard for susceptible healthcare workers (HCWs), as it can spread to other susceptible coworkers and patients [4]. Transmission of VZV among HCWs and patients has been reported [5–7]. Current policy in China for prevention of nosocomial transmission of VZV is prompt recognition of patients with suspected VZV infection with airborne isolation in negative pressure single room if possible, however mandatory VZV IgG testing is still not yet implemented. Thus HCWs with negative history of chickenpox and VZV vaccination should be screened for VZV antibodies. Immune status to VZV can be assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), or fluorescent antibody to membrane antigen (FAMA) assays [8]. Seronegative HCWs are considered susceptible to varicella, therefore VZV vaccination is recommended [4].Primary VZV infection is usually self-limiting in immunocompetent hosts, however, the severity increases with age. Furthermore, as HCWs care for patients in different wards and units, there is a high potential of nosocomial transmission among HCWs and patients if the HCW is infected, especially when the infectious period of VZV starts 2 days before the onset of rash. The situation would be worse if the infected HCW is involved in taking care of pregnant women and immunocompromised individuals (such as patients receiving high dose immunosuppressant or history of transplantation), as primary VZV infection in immunocompromised patients can be fulminant, and it can present as encephalitis, pneumonitis and hepatitis. The mortality rate of primary VZV infection could be up to 7% if left untreated. As a result, nosocomial transmission of VZV should never be overlooked.As nosocomial transmission of varicella is seldom reported in China, this study aims to report three nosocomial transmissions of chickenpox, and investigate the seroprevalence rate of VZV among healthcare workers in a tertiary teaching hospital in China.MethodsOutbreak investigation and management of nosocomial transmission of chickenpoxRetrospective case finding for nosocomial transmission of chickenpox was conducted, with specific attention being paid to infection control measures and outbreak investigations between January 1, 2013 and December 31, 2017. The clinical definition of varicella is “an illness with acute onset of diffuse (generalized) papulovesicular rash without other apparent cause”. All contacts in the hospital were followed up by the infection control unit staff to determine the number of susceptible contacts (non-immune to varicella) by contact tracing. Susceptible contacts were put under self-medical surveillance and requested to refrain from patient contact from Day 8 after 1st exposure to Day 21 after last exposure. Individuals were considered susceptible if they did not fulfill any one of the following criteria: 1) History of varicella; 2) Completion of varicella vaccine according to recommended schedule; 3) Positive serum VZV IgG. Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for susceptible contacts were administered according to CDC recommendations [2].Seroprevalence study of HCWs VZV antibodiesA cross-sectional study on the seroprevalence rate of VZV among healthcare workers (HCWs) was conducted between January 1, 2014 and December 31, 2017 in a tertiary teaching hospital in China, with 1804 hospital staff including doctors, nurses, technicians and non-clinical workers participated in this study. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the hospital. Through questionnaire, information including demographic data, history of varicella and vaccination were collected from the participants. Blood samples were collected from each individual and the serum VZV antibodies were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using commercial kit (Beier, Beijing, China; based on manufacturer’s data, the positive cutoff was defined as 0.15 if mean of absorbance of negative control < 0.05, while 0.1 + mean of absorbance of negative control if mean of absorbance of negative control ≥0.05, with sensitivity and specificity quoted as 96.1 and 100% respectively).Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 20 software. Categorical variables were compared using Chi-square test. A P-value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) of a self-reported history of varicella were calculated, with a positive serum VZV IgG considered as the gold standard of immunity against VZV.Economic evaluation of nosocomial transmissionIn order to assess the economic impact of nosocomial transmission of VZV, two important parameters, person-days of work lost and infection control unit person-hours, were assessed. Person-days of work lost is defined as the total number of days of work loss in clinical staff for both susceptible contacts and infected cases. Infection control unit person-hours is defined as the number of hours required for infection control unit for outbreak investigation and control. The cost of performing VZV IgG ELISA was also calculated based on the price of equipment together with the manpower required to perform the test.ResultsOutbreak investigation and controlThere were three episodes of nosocomial transmission of varicella involving 8 individuals, in which 4 HCWs (including one doctor, one non-clinical worker and two nursing students) were infected nosocomially. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the 8 cases of varicella, and Fig. 1 shows the epidemic curve and chain of transmission in these episodes.Table 1Characteristics of 8 chickenpox cases in three nosocomial transmissions, 2013–2017EventCase no.OccupationUnderlying disease or PregnancyDate of rash onsetSymptomsTransmission settingTotal contactsfevergeneralized vesicular rashsore throatNosocomial transmission 1231NA (Patient)No15/04/2013++–Community2Doctor (HCW)No05/05/2013+++HospitalNosocomial transmission 2173Non-clinical staff(HCW)No10/08/2013–+–Community4Non-clinical staff(HCW)No22/08/2013+++HospitalNosocomial transmission 3875Nursing student(HCW)No20/03/2017++–Community6Nursing student(HCW)No20/03/2017++–Community7Nursing student(HCW)No05/04/2017++–Hospital8Nursing student(HCW)No07/04/2017++–HospitalFig. 1Timeline illustrating epidemic curve and chain of nosocomial transmission of chickenpox in our study, 2013–2017Nosocomial transmission 1On May 5, 2013, a paediatrician (Case 2) presented with fever followed by generalized vesicular rash. She recalled contacting a patient (Case 1) with chickenpox on April 18, 2013 in the hospital, and she was susceptible to VZV, i.e., she was neither vaccinated nor previously infected with VZV. She was diagnosed to have varicella and requested self-isolation to prevent ongoing transmission. Contact tracing was initiated by the hospital infection control unit and a total of 23 healthcare worker contacts were identified with advice on prodromal symptoms to ensure they were not exposed to other susceptible HCWs or patients. No further new cases were identified after the above infection control measures. After this incident, serum VZV IgG testing for HCW was introduced by hospital health direction.Nosocomial transmission 2On August 22, 2013, a non-immune operator from the hospital reception center (Case 4) presented with fever, generalized vesicular rash and sore throat. She recalled one of her colleagues (Case 3), who worked with her in the same office, developed chickenpox during August 10–17, 2013. She was subsequently diagnosed to have varicella. The infection control unit was informed of the incident, with 17 healthcare worker contacts identified through contact tracing. Further history taking and laboratory testing suggested 4 of the 17 contacts were susceptible, therefore they all received post-exposure prophylaxis with oral acyclovir. No further new cases were identified after the above infection control measures.Nosocomial transmission 3On March 20, 2017, two nursing students (Case 5 and Case 6) from hospital outsourcing company reported to have fever and generalized vesicular rash. They worked as nursing assistants in the hospital and lived in a 8-person dormitory room. They were diagnosed to have varicella and requested self-isolation. The infection control unit was informed, with 42 healthcare worker contacts identified through contact tracing. Thorough investigation suggested 5 out of 42 contacts were susceptible. All susceptible contacts received VZV vaccination as Post-exposure Prophylaxis (PEP), with recommendation on self-isolation during incubation period provided.On April 5, 2017 and April 7, 2017, two nursing students (Case 7 and Case 8), who lived with Case 5 in the same dormitory, presented with similar clinical manifestations as Case 5, with VZV DNA detected from the vesicular fluid of skin lesions in both nursing students by PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction). These two infected individuals were not classified as susceptible contacts during the first round of contact tracing, because both of them volunteered previous history of VZV vaccination. A further 45 healthcare worker contacts were identified through second round of contact tracing, and 4 out of 45 contacts were classified as susceptible individuals, with subsequent post-exposure prophylaxis provided. No further new cases were identified after the above infection control measures.Seroprevalence of VZV in HCWsOf the 1804 HCWs participated, there were 215 (11.9%) male and 1589 (88.1%) female HCWs, with their ages ranging from 17 to 60 years (median age: 27 years). Table 2 shows the demographic characteristics of the participated HCWs. The overall seroprevalence rate of VZV was 88.4%. The seroprevalence rates of HCWs with different genders and occupations showed no statistically significant differences. HCWs aged ≥36 years were found to have the highest seroprevalence rate (92.6%), while HCWs aged ≤25 years were found to have the lowest seroprevalence rate (85.2%).Table 2Demographic data and VZV serostatus of 1804 healthcare workersVariableTotal no. (%)VZV antibodies resultsPositive no.(%)Negative no.(%)P valueGender0.353 Male215 (11.9)186 (86.5)29 (13.5) Female1589 (88.1)1409 (88.7)180 (11.3)Age< 0.01 ≤25809 (44.9)689 (85.2)120 (14.8) 25–35859 (47.6)780 (90.8)79 (9.2) ≥36136 (7.5)126 (92.6)10 (7.4)Occupation0.382 Physician153 (8.5)133 (86.9)20 (13.1) Nurse1238 (68.6)1097 (88.6)141 (11.4) Technician221 (12.3)190 (86.0)31 (14.0) Non-clinical workers192 (10.6)175 (91.1)17 (8.9)Total18041595 (88.4%)209 (11.6%)Table 3 shows the positive and negative predictive values of a self-reported history of varicella, with a positive serum VZV IgG considered as the gold standard of immunity against VZV. Of the 1804 participants, 214 (11.9%) HCWs reported history of varicella, with 173 (80.8%) tested positive and 41 (19.2%) tested negative for serum VZV IgG; while 1590 (88.1%) HCWs reported no history of varicella, with 1422 (89.4%) tested positive and 168 (10.6%) tested negative for serum VZV IgG. The PPV and NPV of a self-reported history of varicella were 80.8 and 10.6% respectively.Table 3VZV serological test results and history of varicella among 1804 HCWsHistory of VaricellaVZV antibody resultsTotal (no.)Positive no.(%)Negative no.(%)PPVNPVPositive214173 (80.8)41 (19.2)80.810.6Negativea15901422 (89.4)168 (10.6)aincluding uncertain historyEconomic evaluation of nosocomial transmissionA total of 20 person-days of work were lost by infected clinical staff during the above episodes, based on the fact that immunocompetent persons are unlikely to be infectious after day 5 of rash. Isolating susceptible healthcare worker contacts from duty from days 8 to 21 after last exposure would result in further working hours lost, with 470 person-hours loss for the above three episodes. Therefore, a total of 490 person-hours were lost during the above described three transmissions, with an estimate of 163.3 person-hours being lost per nosocomial transmission.During the first two transmissions, infection control unit required 40 h per transmission to contact trace, follow up and provide counseling to all involved healthcare workers. As the third transmission involved more clinical staff, infection control unit required 180 h for infection control measures. Therefore, a total of 260 infection control unit person-hours were required for the three transmissions, with 86.7 infection control unit person-hours required per transmission.The cost of each VZV IgG ELISA commercial kit is 11 RMB (equivalent to 1.59 USD), and manpower for performing each ELISA kit is 2.5RMB (equivalent to 0.36 USD) in our laboratory. With a total of 127 tests performed as a result of nosocomial transmissions, the total cost of VZV IgG ELISA screening is 1714.5 RMB (around 248 USD), with around 83 USD per nosocomial transmission.DiscussionVaricella zoster virus (VZV) is a highly contagious herpesvirus with potential for nosocomial transmission, with the infectious period starting 2 days before the onset of rash, and lasting for 5–7 days after the appearance of rash [9–11]. Several studies have demonstrated varicella can be transmitted to susceptible individuals through airborne route [12, 13]. Susceptible individuals can acquire primary infection from contacting patients with dermatomal zoster [12–18]. It is shown in our study that nosocomial transmission is possible.Nosocomial outbreaks of varicella involving both healthcare workers and patients are reported in other countries [5, 19–22]. Common measures for prevention of varicella transmission in the hospital setting include rapid isolation of patient in negative pressure room together with administration of post-exposure prophylaxis to susceptible individuals in the form of varicella zoster vaccine, varicella zoster immunoglobulin, and oral acyclovir. Majority of the studies showed difficulty in prevention of secondary cases after an index case of varicella was identified in the hospital. Common difficulties encountered include improper isolation facilities and non-specific symptoms during initial presentation, especially when the infectious period of VZV infection starts 2 days before the onset of rash [5]. Furthermore, secondary cases still occurred with post-exposure prophylaxis despite it was given within timeframe [20]. Studies in developing countries such as Indonesia also encountered the problem of lack of supply of varicella zoster immunoglobulin [22]. With the multiple difficulties encountered from previous studies and our experience, routine screening of serum VZV IgG in healthcare workers might be required to reduce the chance of nosocomial transmission in the future.The seroprevalence rate of VZV in healthcare workers varies according to different geographical areas, with the prevalence of seronegativity ranging from < 5% in the USA, 8.9% in Taiwan, 19% in Saudi Arabia, 26% in India to approximately 50% in Sri Lanka [23, 24]. In our study, the serum VZV antibodies of 1804 HCWs were measured with 88.4% found to be seropositive. The results showed that a considerable proportion (11.6%) of HCWs were still susceptible to varicella, and HCWs can be a potential source of nosocomial transmission, indicating the importance of the screening of serum VZV IgG and vaccination of susceptible HCWs, as exemplified by the three episodes of nosocomial transmissions documented in our hospital in the past 5 years. All the 4 HCWs involved were not screened for serum VZV IgG prior to employment, as a result, they were involved in the three episodes of nosocomial transmission. Nosocomial VZV infection has great economic impact, as laboratory testing, contact tracing and self-isolation of HCWs could represent both an increase in laboratory cost and a decrease in manpower. A reasonable estimate of 163.3 person-days of work were lost as a result of each nosocomial transmission and 86.7 infection control unit person-hours were required during each outbreak investigation and control, together with an estimated laboratory cost of 83 USD per nosocomial transmission, depending on the size of the outbreak.In our study, the seroprevalence rate of VZV in HCWs significantly increased with age, and this could be explained by accumulated time of exposure to VZV during lifetime in elderly. The seroprevalence rates of HCWs with different genders and occupations showed no statistically significant differences.In order to investigate whether self-reported history could replace serum VZV IgG screening in HCWs, self-reported history of varicella in HCWs was compared with the serum VZV IgG result to assess the reliability of self-reported history. Our study suggested that a positive history of varicella provided by HCWs is not a good predictor of positive serum VZV IgG, as our study demonstrated a false positive rate of 19.2%. On the other hand, 89.4% of HCWs with a negative history of varicella turned out to be seropositive, suggesting negative self-reported history could not rule out existing immunity towards VZV. Review of literature from different countries suggested a self-reported history of varicella has a positive predictive value of 92.5–99.5% and a negative predictive value of 2.5–14.4% [24–27]. Comparison of the above data suggested that the negative predictive value from our study is similar to that reported in the literature. However, the positive predictive value is only 80.8% in our study. As natural varicella usually occurred during childhood, healthcare workers could only rely on their parents for the history of varicella. One possible postulation for the above discrepancy could be due to the lower level of education in the past in China, as it may be difficult for parents to distinguish between varicella and other febrile exanthematous diseases, leading to lower positive predictive value in this case. Hence, self-reported history of varicella is not a reliable predictor of VZV immunity in our locality, therefore screening of serum VZV IgG for all HCWs is indicated, and susceptible workers should be vaccinated so as to prevent nosocomial transmission of varicella.The limitation of our study is that not all HCWs participated in our study, as 244 HCWs refused screening of serum VZV IgG, which may in turn lead to selection bias. However, further statistical analysis did not reveal any statistical differences by chi-square test between these HCWs and those who participated. Furthermore, this present study included a large number of HCWs with a wide age range and diverse occupations, therefore it still could provide a convincing approximation of the situation of VZV immunity in HCWs in China.With the advancement in the field of transplantation and medicine, we are encountering more immunocompromised patients in our daily practice. Our study clearly demonstrated that assuming seropositivity based on self-reported history of varicella is unreliable, and significant proportion (10.6%) of existing HCWs are still susceptible to VZV. Further intervention should be implemented in the health care system to prevent hospital transmission of varicella. It is time for us to implement routine serum VZV IgG testing and immunization of HCWs if serum VZV IgG result turns out to be negative, not only to reduce the cost of outbreak investigation, but more importantly to ensure safety of both HCWs and our patients. Such intervention should not only be performed on newly recruited members, but also to existing healthcare workers in the hospital.ConclusionsNosocomial transmission of VZV occurred repeatedly in the hospital setting. An alarming 11.6% of HCWs were seronegative for VZV, which might increase the risk of nosocomial infection and outbreak for other susceptible co-workers and patients. This is especially important in the setting of a teaching hospital where many immunocompromised patients were managed. Furthermore, the positive predictive value of self-reported varicella on seroprevalence rate in our study was lower than those reported in other countries, therefore serological testing of VZV antibodies with subsequent vaccination for all non-immune HCWs should be considered.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS (EBV)
================================================================================
Title: Epstein-Barr virus-positive iris diffuse large B-cell lymphoma detected by metagenomic next-generation sequencing

IntroductionIntraocular lymphoma is a rare type of ocular malignancy and has two types: primary and secondary. Primary intraocular lymphoma (PIOL), a subset of primary central system lymphoma (PCNSL), affects the vitreous, retina, iris, ciliary body, choroid, or optic nerve, without systemic lymphoma (PCNSL). Most patients diagnosed with PIOL have diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) [1]. However, diagnosing PIOL remains challenging. Differential diagnoses should be made by identifying the infectious and non-infectious etiologies, particularly common masqueraders such as sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, and viral retinitis. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive DLBCL in older adults is a new subtype of DLBCL according to the 2008 World Health Organization classification. However, this subtype is extremely rare. Herein, we report a case of a patient with EBV-positive iris DLBCL after undergoing penetrating keratoplasty.Case presentationA 72-year-old male patient presented to our hospital due to progressive blurring of vision in the left eye for the past 4 months. Thirty-two years ago, the patient had undergone left eye cataract phacoemulsification without intraocular lens implantation due to high myopia. Eight months ago, the patient was diagnosed with corneal endothelial decompensation, corneal leukoplakia, and aphakia of the left eye after undergoing examination in our eye center. Penetrating keratoplasty, intraocular lens implantation in the ciliary groove by suturing, and anterior vitrectomy of the left eye were performed. Corticosteroid eye drops and anti-immunological rejection therapy were administered as maintenance therapy for 6 months postoperatively. The patient’s visual acuity substantially improved. However, 4 months later, the patient presented with blurred vision and redness in the left eye.Physical examination: The left eye was only sensitive to hand movements and had an intraocular pressure of 18 mmHg. The left eye presented with conjunctival hyperemia, mild edema of the grafted cornea, 3 + cells and fibrin in the anterior chamber, and superior and temporal iris defects (Fig. 1). Small white nodule lesions were noted on the iris and retinal surface, while a white cloud-like opacity was observed in the vitreous cavity. Infectious endophthalmitis, especially fungal infections, was strongly suspected.
Fig. 1Anterior segment photo shows graft cornea display transparency and residual iris with thick, pink, and whitish small nodules on the surface
Vitrectomy was performed on the left eye owing to the probable diagnosis of infectious endophthalmitis. During surgery, retinal vascular sheath and retinal hemorrhage spots were observed. White cloudy vitreous opacities and diffuse nodule lesions arranged in a carpet-like appearance on the retinal surface were noted. Patchy atrophy of the choroid and retina was also detected at the posterior pole due to myopia (Fig. 2). Part of the iris tissue was removed. Hence, aqueous humor and undiluted vitreous humor samples were collected to examine the presence of bacteria, viruses, cells, and other pathological agents.
Fig. 2Vitreous and retina images during surgery: (A) white cloudy vitreous opacity, (B) white dense nodules on the inferior retinal surface, (C) section of white dense nodules, and (D) white sheath-like exudates can be observed after the removal of white nodules from the retinal surface
Aqueous humor virus polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test showed an EBV deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) level of 3.82 × 107 copies/ml. The interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-10 levels in the aqueous humor were 7.7 × 104 pg/ml and 171.29 pg/ml, respectively. Microbial cultures of vitreous samples were negative for bacteria and fungi. The final pathological test showed an iris EBV-positive DLBCL. Immunohistochemical tests revealed CD20(+), CD3(−), Muml(+), CD10(−), Bcl-6(−), Melan A(−), S-100(−), HMB45(−), EMA(−), CD68(−), Ki-67 (70%+), BCL2(>90%+), c-Myc(40%+), CD5(−), Cyclin D1(−), CD19(+), CD30(70%+), and EBV-EBER(80%+). The fluorescence in situ hybridization assay showed absence of c-Myc.Considering the possibility of a tumor arising from the left eye, copy number variation analysis was performed using homo-reads in the sequencing data. Unexpectedly, the vitreous sample obtained from this patient showed an obvious loss of chromosome 6. This finding suggests that the patient may have had cancer (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3CNV analysis of the vitreous sample from this patient shows an obvious loss of chromosome 6
To further explore other possible pathogens, metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) was performed. Briefly, 50 uL of vitreous body was used for nucleic acid extraction, followed by fragmentation, adapter ligation, and library purification. The purified library was loaded in the NextSeq 550Dx system to perform sequencing. After removing the adapter self-ligation and filtering low-quality reads, 16.6 million reads were obtained. These data were then entered into a standardized metagenomic analysis pipeline. A total of 8, 307 EB reads were obtained with a relative abundance of 95.59%. Other microbes common in the environment, such as Pseudomonas fluorescens and Acinetobacter johnsonii, were detected in small amounts.After diagnosing iris EBV + DLBCL through pathological and immunohistochemical examinations, systemic positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) was performed. Postoperative changes in the left eye were identified on PET/CT, with a maximum standardized uptake value of 7.1. No abnormalities were noted in other organs. Results of routine blood tests, liver and kidney assays, and coagulation function tests were normal. Particle agglutination test detected the presence of Treponema pallidum. Viral PCR testing of corneal transplant donors was also performed, which yielded negative results for herpes simplex virus I, II, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, and EBV.The patient was treated with oral valacyclovir for 3 months. Levofloxacin, ganciclovir gel, tacrolimus, and loteprednol ophthalmic suspensions were administered for 3 weeks. Following the diagnosis of DLBCL by pathological, immunohistochemical, and metagenomic tests, 400 micrograms/0.1 ml of methotrexate (MTX) was injected into the vitreous cavity of the left eye twice every two weeks. After receiving two intravitreal injections, the patient refused to continue the MTX treatment.Four months later, the BCVA of the left eye increased to 20/400, but the intraocular pressure remained normal. The graft cornea displayed approximate transparency, the retinal vasculitis subsided, and the white surface nodules were no longer detectable on the colorful fundus picture (Figs. 4 and 5).
Fig. 4Graft cornea image of a graft cornea with approximate transparency

Fig. 5The white nodules on the retinal surface and retinal vessel white sheath completely disappeared; the choroid and retina at the posterior pole appeared patchy atrophy within 4 months after undergoing vitrectomy and after receiving antiviral treatment and two intravitreal injections of MTX
The content of this article was submitted after the patient’s verification, and an informed consent form was signed. The study design was approved by Peking University Third Hospital Medical Science Research Ethics Commitee.DiscussionOcular EBV infections have various clinical manifestations, including scleritis, posterior uveitis, retinal vasculopathy, retinitis, acute retinal necrosis, and intraocular lymphoma [2]. Although rare, the incidence of intraocular lymphoma has increased in recent years, but its etiology remains unknown. Herein, we report a case of a patient with EBV-positive DLBCL in the iris after undergoing penetrating keratoplasty. Through analysis of this special case, we were able to identify the cause of intraocular lymphoma.First, the incidence of EBV-induced lymphoid or epithelial malignancies is well recognized [3]. Transmission of the virus occurs mainly through exposure to oral secretions, but EBV infection through organ transplantation has also been reported. The two main physiological targets of EBV are the epithelial cells and B lymphocytes. EBV replication occurs primarily in the epithelial cells and establishes a latent infection in the B lymphocytes, where it expresses limited sets of proteins called EBV transcription programs to efficiently transform B cells into lymphoblastic cells. In immunocompetent individuals, the levels of viral titers are determined by measuring the amount of EBV-specific cytotoxic T cells [4]. In normal histological structures, the iris possesses several epithelial cells and lymphocytes; therefore, it is prone to developing EBV-related lymphoma.PIOL is considered to be a part of PCNSL. 15–20% of all PCNSL patients have PIOL at presentation; 50–90% of patients with PIOL develop a CNS and/or spinal cord disease after 16–24 months [5]. In 2011, the International PCNSL Collaborative Group published therapeutic principles for VRL. According to the group, systemic therapy is required if lymphoma lesions occur in the CNS and local therapy may be used if the disease is limited to the eye [6]. There is currently no standardized treatment plan for Epstein-Barr virus positive iris lymphoma in the literature [7, 8]. Because the lesion in our patient was relatively limited without systemic metastasis, the visual acuity of the left eye improved, and the white dense opacity in the vitreous cavity and retinal surface nodules completely disappeared after performing vitrectomy combined with long-term antiviral therapy and two intravitreal injections of MTX. In the subsequent treatment process, the patient was unwilling to cooperate with the examination and treatment due to personal reasons, and ultimately lost follow-up.In addition, the patient received long-term ocular immunosuppressive therapy, including steroids and tacrolimus eye drops, after undergoing penetrating keratoplasty. Steroid eye drops can compromise the ocular immunity. Additionally, tacrolimus eye drops comprehensively inhibit the T-cell function in the eye. Collectively, these factors predisposed our patient to EBV infection in the ocular region.Aside from ocular immune depression, aging-related systemic immunological deterioration is also one of the causes of EBV-positive DLBCL. The median age of patients with EBV-positive DLBCL was 71 years (range: 50–91 years) [9]. Age-related decline in cellular immunity is caused by several factors, including thymic atrophy, reduced output of new T lymphocytes, accumulation of anergic memory cells, deficiency in cytokine production, and uncertain antigen presentation [9]. Therefore, a decline in age-related immune function may also play a role in the occurrence and development of this disease.To our knowledge, this case report is the first to document a case of a patient with an EBV-positive iris DLBCL; the diagnosis was established not only through pathological and immunohistochemical analyses, but also through metagenomic tests. In recent years, with the emerging of pathogen detection technology, mNGS has been increasingly used for the detection of various infections, such as bloodstream infection, [10] central infection, [11] and respiratory infection [12]. In eye infections, metagenomics also has some valuable applications, facilitating the prompt initiation of treatment with an optimal antimicrobial regimen [13, 14]. Metagenomic data do not only contain microorganism reads. Human sequences accounted for more than 95% of the mNGS data. Gu et al. [15, 16] reported that the homo reads in mNGS data could be used to identify tumor clues in body fluid and cerebrospinal fluid samples by conducting a copy number variation analysis. Based on the dual-analysis pipeline, mNGS can simultaneously analyze clues of infection and tumors. In this study, we identified a large number of EBV viruses using a metagenomic microbial analysis pipeline. Meanwhile, obvious chromosomal abnormalities, such as monosomy 6, were also identified in this sample, and the pathological results confirmed that the patient had EBV-positive iris DLBCL.Although the patient’s diagnosis was confirmed, there was a need to differentiate it from other disorders. Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a malignancy with life-threatening complications occurring in recipients of both solid organ and hematopoietic stem cell allografts [17]. Lymphoma occurs as a result of B-cell proliferation after transplantation and is mostly caused by EBV infection [18]. The use of immunosuppressants leads to the depletion of EBV-specific T cells and disruption of the immune system balance, which eventually causes PTLD in transplant recipients [19]. Chen reported a case of a young patient who developed an iris tumor with mutton-fat keratic precipitates after undergoing a liver transplantation surgery; anterior uveitis and iris nodules were the most common ocular manifestations of PTLDs [20, 21] No study has reported a case of post-keratoplasty lymphoproliferative disorders; the clinical manifestations in our patient were not consistent with those of PTLD. Although the diagnosis of PTLD can be excluded, the negative effects of ocular immunosuppressants on the activation of intraocular viruses and the disruption of intraocular immune balance should be considered.There are still some limitations in this case report, such as the short follow-up time in patients who have been treated and not been treated regularly in the hematology department. In this case, EBV infection, drug immunosuppression, and age-related immune deterioration may have played a role in the pathogenesis of EBV-positive iris DLBCL. EBV infection and the existence of chromosomal abnormalities in tumor cells were confirmed for the first time through metagenomic sequencing. This is a novel method for the diagnosis of intraocular tumors.


Title: Barrier-to-autointegration factor 1 promotes gammaherpesvirus reactivation from latency

IntroductionGammaherpesviruses are widespread oncogenic human pathogens with significant disease burden. Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) causes human malignancies such as Kaposi sarcoma (KS), primary effusion lymphoma (PEL), and multicentric Castleman disease (MCD)1–3. Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) is the etiological agent of cancers such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), gastric carcinoma, and various lymphomas4, as well as multiple sclerosis (MS)5,6. Gammaherpesviruses persist in a latent state of minimal gene expression with chromatin-tethered viral episomes replicating and dividing in synchrony with the cell. Latency is periodically disrupted by lytic replication, which involves broad viral gene expression, viral DNA amplification, and virion production7,8. Both lifecycle phases contribute to gammaherpesvirus persistence and disease pathogenesis8,9.Lytic reactivation exposes gammaherpesviruses to detection by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)10,11. Viral stimulation of PRRs activates innate immune signaling pathways that drive antiviral gene transcription, interferon production, or apoptosis7,12. Gammaherpesvirus infection and reactivation stimulates various PRRs, such as nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors (NLRs)13,14, retinoic acid-inducible gene I protein (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs)15–19, absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2)-like receptors (ALRs)17,20–22, Toll-like receptors (TLRs)23–27, interferon-gamma inducible protein 16 (IFI16)20,28, and cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)29. Thus, evading these innate immune pathways is essential for gammaherpesvirus persistence and replication.cGAS is an innate immune DNA sensor in the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments30,31. After binding to dsDNA, cGAS catalyzes the synthesis of cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate (cGAMP), a second messenger molecule that activates stimulator of interferon genes (STING)32. STING induces TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1)-mediated phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), which promotes type I interferon gene transcription33. KSHV and EBV encode factors which target the cGAS-STING DNA-sensing pathway. KSHV ORF52 (KicGAS) and its EBV homolog, BLRF2, block cGAMP production by binding cGAS and inhibiting enzymatic activity34. KSHV latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) also binds cGAS, preventing downstream TBK1 phosphorylation and activation35. KSHV viral interferon regulatory factor 1 (vIRF1) binds STING to prevent TBK1 recruitment29. Gammaherpesviruses also co-opt host factors to subvert cGAS-STING signaling. KSHV recruits protein phosphatase Mg2+/Mn2+ dependent 1G (PPM1G) to STING, shutting down cGAS-STING signaling36. EBV infection upregulates tripartite motif-containing protein 29 (TRIM29), which ubiquitinates and degrades STING, dampening innate immunity37.To prevent autoimmunity, cells encode factors that regulate cGAS-STING signaling. Barrier-to-autointegration factor 1 (BAF), encoded by BANF1, is a singular DNA-binding protein (distinct from the chromatin remodeling SWI/SNF complex of the same name) with various functions, including regulating nuclear assembly, DNA damage responses, and recruitment of transcription factors or epigenetic modifiers38–40. BAF competes with cGAS for access to DNA in the nucleus and the cytoplasm, thereby preventing sensing of host DNA41. Since cGAS-STING signaling is critical for detecting gammaherpesviruses29,34,35,37,42,43, we investigated the role of BAF in the lifecycle of KSHV and EBV. We demonstrate that BAF plays a pro-viral role in gammaherpesviral reactivation from latency. BAF depletion in KSHV-infected cells led to impaired lytic gene transcription during reactivation and defects in the production of lytic proteins and infectious virions. BAF depletion during reactivation increased type I interferon responses in a cGAS-STING-IRF3-dependent manner. BAF overexpression rendered cells more permissive to KSHV lytic reactivation. In addition, BAF knockdown limited lytic reactivation of a related herpesvirus, EBV, through a similar mechanism, suggesting that BAF-mediated innate immunosuppression facilitates the gammaherpesvirus lifecycle.ResultsBAF is required for optimal KSHV reactivation from latencyTo investigate a potential role for BAF in KSHV lytic reactivation, we employed the iSLK.219 cell line, which is latently infected with a recombinant KSHV virus (rKSHV.219) that constitutively expresses GFP and conditionally expresses RFP upon lytic reactivation using the KSHV polyadenylated nuclear RNA (PAN) promoter44. As an orthogonal method, we employed the TREx-BCBL1-RTA cell line, a KSHV-infected primary effusion lymphoma-derived B-cell line45. Both cell lines express key viral lytic transactivator KSHV replication and transcription activator (RTA) using a doxycycline-inducible promoter. Hence, although cells contain latent KSHV, viral reactivation can be induced by doxycycline treatment. We transfected iSLK.219 cells with siRNA targeting BANF1 transcripts or non-targeting control (NTC) siRNA and 48 h later induced them to reactivate the virus by treating them with doxycycline. At 72 h post-induction, we detected significantly less RFP signal in BAF-depleted cells compared to the control, suggesting a defect in reactivation (Fig. 1A, B). Transfection with BANF1 siRNA rather than NTC siRNA led to defects in the expression of lytic KSHV transcripts, such as vIL6 and ORF57, in iSLK.219 cells and in TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells (Fig. 1C and Supplementary Fig. 1A). BAF was depleted in TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells via infection with lentiviruses encoding two independent shRNAs targeting BANF1 transcripts prior to reactivation. This also resulted in significantly decreased lytic KSHV mRNA production compared to cells infected with non-specific (NS) shRNA lentivirus (Fig. 1C).Fig. 1BAF is required for optimal KSHV reactivation from latency.iSLK.219 cells were transfected with non-targeting control (NTC) siRNA or BANF1 targeting siRNA 48 h prior to the addition of 25 ng/mL doxycycline. TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells were transduced with lentiviral shRNA for 72 h prior to the addition of 1000 ng/mL doxycycline. A Fluorescent microscopy imaging of iSLK.219 cells for RFP and GFP signal at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment. B The fluorescence was quantified by plate reader. C Cells were harvested for RNA at 72 h (iSLK.219) or 96 h (TREx-BCBL1-RTA) post-doxycycline treatment and subsequent RT-qPCR was performed to quantify expression of viral mRNA transcripts. D iSLK.219 cDNA was prepared from cells harvested at 0 h and 72 h post-doxycycline treatment. Global KSHV gene expression profiling was performed. Data shown are the Z-score of the fold change (2-ΔΔCt) over the geometric mean expression of three housekeeping genes averaged over two independent biological replicates. The heatmap was prepared using Partek Flow. E Cell lysates were prepared at 72 h (iSLK.219) or 96 h (TREx-BCBL1-RTA) post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibodies. F Cells were harvested and RNA isolated at 48 h post-siRNA transfection and RT-qPCR was subsequently performed to quantify BANF1 mRNA transcripts. G Cell lysates were prepared at 48 h post-siRNA transfection or 72 h post-shRNA transduction and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibody. P values are the result of two-tailed Student’s T tests unless otherwise specified. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three independent biological replicates. Source data are provided as a source data file.A KSHV genome RT-qPCR profiling array revealed impaired expression of most viral transcripts at 72 h post-reactivation in BAF-depleted iSLK.219 cells (Fig. 1D). Reduced KSHV lytic transcript expression correlated with reduced expression of KSHV lytic proteins, such as ORF45 and K8α, in BAF-depleted iSLK.219 and TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells compared to control cells. A similar phenotype was observed with lentiviral BAF shRNA knockdown in TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells (Fig. 1E and Supplementary Fig. 1B). BAF knockdown by siRNA treatment or lentiviral shRNA transduction was confirmed by RT-qPCR for BANF1 mRNA transcripts and western blotting for BAF protein (Fig. 1F, G and Supplementary Fig. 1C, D). Strikingly, BAF knockdown correlated with increased cGAS protein levels in KSHV-infected cells (Fig. 1G and Supplementary Fig. 1D). These data suggest a role for BAF in facilitating optimal KSHV reactivation that involves the cGAS-STING pathway.BAF antagonizes the cGAS-STING response to KSHV reactivationSince BAF knockdown restricted KSHV reactivation and elevated cGAS protein expression, we investigated the activation of the entire cGAS-STING-IRF3 pathway. BANF1 siRNA transfected iSLK.219 cells produced more cGAMP, the enzymatic product of cGAS, than NTC siRNA-treated cells during KSHV reactivation (Fig. 2A). Increased cGAMP production correlated with increased TBK1 and IRF3 phosphorylation, evidencing activation of downstream effectors of cGAS (Fig. 2B). Increased pathway activation resulted in increased secretion of IFNβ protein, a type I interferon, into the medium of reactivating cells with reduced BAF expression (Fig. 2C). This, in turn, increased expression of ISGs, such as genes encoding interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats (IFIT) proteins, oligoadenylate synthase (OAS) proteins, and IFNβ protein in iSLK.219 and TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells treated with siRNA targeting BANF1 (Fig. 2D and Supplementary Fig. 2A). Lentiviral BAF shRNA transduction of TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells prior to lytic reactivation similarly increased ISG expression during reactivation compared to cells containing control shRNA (Fig. 2D). We also profiled interferon responses in BAF-depleted cells using an RT-qPCR array (Qiagen, GeneGlobe ID: PAHS-016Z). The type I interferon response to KSHV reactivation was broadly augmented when BAF expression was suppressed by siRNA treatment in iSLK.219 cells (Fig. 2E). These results demonstrate that BAF antagonizes the cGAS-STING response to KSHV reactivation.Fig. 2BAF antagonizes the cGAS-STING response to KSHV reactivation.iSLK.219 cells were transfected with NTC siRNA or BANF1 targeting siRNA for 48 h prior to the addition of 25 ng/mL doxycycline. TREx-BCBL1-RTA cells were transduced with lentiviral shRNA for 72 h prior to the addition of 1000 ng/mL doxycycline. A iSLK.219 cell lysates were collected at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by 2’3’-cGAMP ELISA. B iSLK.219 cell lysates were collected at 48 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibodies. C iSLK.219 culture supernatant was harvested at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by IFNβ ELISA. D Cells were harvested for RNA at 48 h (iSLK.219) or 96 h (TREx-BCBL1-RTA) post-doxycycline treatment and RT-qPCR was subsequently performed to determine ISG mRNA expression levels. E iSLK.219 cDNA as prepared in (D) was analyzed by Human Type I Interferon Response RT2 Profiler PCR Array (Qiagen, GeneGlobe ID: PAHS-016Z). Data shown are the Z-score of the fold change (2-ΔΔCt) over the geometric mean expression of four housekeeping genes averaged over two independent biological replicates. The heatmap was prepared using Partek Flow. F Culture supernatants were harvested at either 72 h (iSLK.219) or 96 h (TREx-BCBL1-RTA) post-doxycycline treatment and DNase treated prior to DNA extraction. DNase-resistant KSHV genomes were quantified by real-time qPCR. G iSLK.219 culture supernatants were transferred to naive HEK293 cells at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment. GFP + infected cells were measured at 48 h post-infection by fluorescent microscopy and (H) quantified by flow cytometry. P values are the result of two-tailed Student’s T tests unless otherwise specified. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three independent biological replicates. Source data are provided as a source data file.Augmented antiviral responses corresponded with a reduction in encapsidated KSHV genomes in BAF-depleted iSLK.219 or TREx-BCBL1-RTA cell supernatants compared to control cell supernatants (Fig. 2F and Supplementary Fig. 2B), indicating inhibition of virion assembly and maturation. Direct comparison of variables measured in different cell types, such as viral titer, are graphically represented on a common axis in Supplementary Fig. 8. Similarly, lentiviral transduction with shRNAs targeting BANF1 transcripts prior to reactivation resulted in significantly decreased encapsidated KSHV genome production compared to cells infected with non-specific shRNA lentivirus (Fig. 2F). To extend these results, we measured changes in infectious particles. Supernatant transferred from reactivated BAF-depleted iSLK.219 cells displayed significantly less KSHV infection of naive HEK293 cells as assayed by GFP positivity than supernatant transferred from reactivated NTC siRNA transfected cells (Fig. 2G, H and Supplementary Fig. 2C). These data demonstrate that the pro-viral role of BAF in KSHV reactivation involves downregulating cGAS-STING innate immune responses.Increased BAF expression promotes KSHV reactivationTo independently confirm the role of BAF in viral reactivation, we overexpressed BAF using an HA-tagged BANF1 expression plasmid. Transfecting iSLK.219 cells with the BAF-expressing plasmid prior to KSHV lytic reactivation led to decreased cGAMP production compared to cells transfected with empty vector (EV) (Fig. 3A). Phosphorylation levels of cGAS-STING pathway components, TBK1 and IRF3, were reduced in cells overexpressing BAF, indicating a decrease in signaling (Fig. 3B). Suppression of this pathway correlated with a decrease in ISG mRNA expression, including IFNB1, and reduced amounts of IFNβ in cell supernatants (Fig. 3C, D). Decreased antiviral signaling in BAF-overexpressing iSLK.219 cells resulted in increased KSHV transcriptional activity, as assayed by RFP reporter signal and RT-qPCR for signature KSHV lytic mRNA transcripts such as vIL6 and ORF57 (Fig. 3E–G). KSHV lytic proteins, such as ORF45 and K8α, were increased in iSLK.219 cells consequent to BAF overexpression (Fig. 3H), and supernatants from iSLK.219 cells transfected with a BAF-expressing plasmid contained more encapsidated KSHV genomes and displayed greater infectivity upon transfer to naive HEK293 cells than supernatants from cells transfected with an empty vector control plasmid (Fig. 3I–K and Supplementary Fig. 3). Strikingly, increased BAF expression correlated with a reduction in expression of cGAS protein (Fig. 3L). These data confirm that BAF plays a pro-viral role in KSHV reactivation by suppressing the cGAS-STING innate immune response.Fig. 3Increased BAF expression promotes KSHV reactivation.iSLK.219 cells were transfected with either pCMV6 (EV) or pCMV6-BANF1-HA (BAF) expression plasmid for 48 h prior to the addition of 25 ng/mL doxycycline. A Cell lysates were collected at 96 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by 2’3’-cGAMP ELISA. B Cell lysates were collected at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibodies. C Cells were harvested and RNA was isolated at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and subsequent RT-qPCR was performed to determine ISG mRNA expression levels. D Culture supernatant was harvested at 96 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by IFNβ ELISA. E Fluorescent microscopy imaging of RFP and GFP signal was conducted at 96 h after doxycycline treatment and quantified (F) by plate reader. G Cells were harvested for RNA at 96 h post-doxycycline treatment and subsequent RT-qPCR was performed to quantify the expression of viral mRNA transcripts. H Cell lysates were prepared at 96 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibodies. I Culture supernatants were harvested at 96 h post-doxycycline treatment and DNase treated prior to DNA extraction. DNase-resistant KSHV genomes were quantified by real-time qPCR. J At 96 h post-doxycycline treatment, culture supernatants from iSLK.219 cells were used to infect naive HEK293 cells. GFP + infected cells were measured at 48 h post-transfer by fluorescent microscopy and (K) quantified by flow cytometry. L Cell lysates were prepared at 48 h post-siRNA transfection and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibody. P values are the result of two-tailed Student’s T tests unless otherwise specified. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three independent biological replicates. Source data are provided as a source data file.BAF promotes KSHV reactivation through a cGAS-dependent mechanismTo ensure that the suppression of antiviral signaling by BAF was specifically mediated through the cGAS-STING-IRF3 signaling axis, we conducted BAF knockdown experiments in iSLK.219 cells either with or without simultaneous cGAS knockdown. Transfection of iSLK.219 cells with siRNA targeting cGAS facilitates KSHV lytic reactivation29. Consistent with these prior findings, cGAS depletion led to significantly less cGAMP production in reactivating iSLK.219 cells but was not significantly increased by simultaneous BAF knockdown (Fig. 4A). Likewise, IFNB1 mRNA levels in cells transfected with cGAS siRNA were consistently lower and unaffected by co-transfection with BANF1 siRNA (Fig. 4B). This was mirrored by IFNβ protein levels observed in the supernatant of reactivating iSLK.219 cells, where there was no significant difference between transfection with cGAS siRNA alone or with a combination of cGAS and BANF1 siRNA (Fig. 4C). These results support the model that cGAS is epistatic to BAF, i.e., both operate in the same pathway with respect to KSHV reactivation.Fig. 4BAF promotes KSHV reactivation through a cGAS-dependent mechanism.iSLK.219 cells were transfected with NTC, BANF1, cGAS, or BANF1 and cGAS targeting siRNA at a total siRNA concentration of 100 nM for 48 h prior to the addition of 25 ng/mL doxycycline. A Cell lysates were collected at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by 2’3’-cGAMP ELISA. B Cells were harvested for RNA at 48 h post-doxycycline treatment and subsequent RT-qPCR was performed to determine IFNB1 mRNA expression levels. C Culture supernatant was harvested at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by IFNβ ELISA. D Fluorescent microscopy imaging of RFP and GFP signal was conducted at 72 h after doxycycline treatment. E The fluorescence was quantified by a plate reader. F Cell lysates were prepared at 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibodies. G Culture supernatants were harvested 72 h post-doxycycline treatment and DNase treated prior to DNA extraction. DNase-resistant KSHV genomes were quantified by real-time qPCR. H At 72 h post-doxycycline treatment, culture supernatants from iSLK.219 cells were used to infect naive HEK293 cells. At 48 h post-transfer, GFP + infected cells were quantified by flow cytometry. I The cells were also analyzed by fluorescent microscopy. J Cell lysates were prepared at 48 h post-siRNA transfection and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibody. P values are the result of two-tailed Student’s T tests unless otherwise specified. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three independent biological replicates. Source data are provided as a source data file.KSHV lytic transcriptional activity in iSLK.219 cells, as measured by PAN promoter-dependent RFP signal and levels of KSHV lytic mRNA transcripts (vIL6 and ORF57), was uniformly higher when cGAS was knocked down whether or not BAF was simultaneously knocked down (Fig. 4D, E and Supplementary Fig. 4A). BAF depletion reduced KSHV lytic protein levels in reactivating iSLK.219 cells, but lytic protein expression was uniformly higher when cGAS was depleted whether or not BAF was simultaneously depleted (Fig. 4F). Levels of encapsidated virions and infectious titer were reduced in BAF-depleted cells compared to control cells and were increased in cGAS-depleted cells compared to control cells. When BAF and cGAS were both depleted, the results mirrored the cGAS depletion phenotype. (Fig. 4H, I and Supplementary Fig. 4B). Downregulation of BAF, cGAS, or both was verified by western blotting and RT-qPCR for BANF1 and cGAS mRNA transcript levels (Fig. 4J and Supplementary Fig. 4C). These data confirm that the pro-viral role BAF plays in KSHV reactivation is cGAS-dependent.BAF suppresses the antiviral state in uninfected, latent, and lytic cells by altering cGAS stabilityWe next sought to investigate the mechanism by which cGAS protein levels are regulated by BAF expression in iSLK.219 cells. BAF overexpression prior to treatment with cycloheximide, a protein synthesis inhibitor, caused existing cellular cGAS pools to decay at an increased rate compared to EV transfected cells (Fig. 5A and Supplementary Fig. 5B), while BANF1 siRNA treatment had the opposite effect when compared to NTC (Supplementary Fig. 5A, C). To determine the mechanism by which BAF induces the degradation of cGAS, we overexpressed BAF in HeLa cells treated with either MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, or DMSO control. While BAF overexpression induced degradation of cGAS in the DMSO control cells, it had no such effect in the context of MG132 treatment, suggesting that BAF-mediated cGAS degradation requires the proteasome (Fig. 5B). Direct binding of myc-tagged cGAS to HA-tagged BAF was not observed via immunoprecipitation assays performed under stringent conditions with RIPA buffer (Supplementary Fig. 5D). When immunoprecipitations were performed under less stringent conditions using NP40 buffer, an interaction was observed between myc-tagged cGAS and HA-tagged BAF. However, treatment of the lysate with DNase prior to immunoprecipitation abolished this interaction, suggesting that the complex observed was indirect, mediated by mutual DNA binding (Supplementary Fig. 5E). These results are consistent with the literature demonstrating that BAF and cGAS both bind DNA41. These data confirm that BAF expression contributes to cGAS degradation via a proteasomal mechanism in the unprimed, equilibrium state.Fig. 5BAF suppresses the antiviral state in uninfected, latently infected, and lytically infected cells.A iSLK.219 cells were transfected with EV or BANF1 expression plasmids for 48 h prior to the addition of 100 μg/mL cycloheximide. Cell lysates were prepared at the indicated timepoints and analyzed by western blotting. B HeLa cells were transfected with EV or BANF1 expression plasmids for 48 h prior to treatment with 10 μM MG132 or DMSO control. Cell lysates were prepared 12 h post-treatment and analyzed by western blotting. C Naive SLK cells were infected with equivalent units of concentrated cell-free KSHV or PBS (mock). Cell lysates were prepared 6 h post-infection and analyzed by western blotting. D Naive SLK cells were transfected with BANF1 or NTC siRNA for 48 h prior to infection with equivalent units of concentrated cell-free KSHV. Lysates were prepared pre-infection and analyzed by western blot. Blots are representative of three independent biological replicates. E GFP + infected cells were analyzed at 48 h post-infection by fluorescent microscopy. F Cells were also quantified by flow cytometry. G Cells were harvested and RNA isolated at 48 h post-siRNA transfection and RT-qPCR was subsequently performed to quantify BANF1 mRNA transcripts. iSLK.219 cells were transfected with NTC siRNA or BANF1 targeting siRNA for 48 h prior to the addition of 25 ng/mL doxycycline. Cells from two biological replicates were harvested for RNA (H) at 0 h and (I) at 48 h post-doxycycline treatment and subjected to RNA-Seq analysis. Interferon-stimulated genes were identified using Interferome (http://www.interferome.org)70. Data were visualized with VolcaNoseR (https://huygens.science.uva.nl/VolcaNoseR/)69. Adjusted P values were calculated using the two-tailed Wald test with adjustments for multiple comparisons, and significantly enriched GO terms were determined by the one-tailed Fisher exact test with adjustments for multiple comparisons. P values are the result of two-tailed Student’s T tests unless otherwise specified. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three independent biological replicates. Source data are provided as a source data file.We hypothesized that BAF-mediated cGAS degradation may potentially be co-opted by the virus for immune evasion during primary infection to establish latency. We infected uninfected SLK cells with rKSHV.219 virus. Six hours post-infection with cell-free rKSHV.219, BAF protein levels were increased compared to mock infection in SLK cells (Fig. 5C). Efficient infection of the SLK cell population was confirmed by fluorescent microscopy for GFP expression and western blotting for LANA expression (Supplementary Fig. 5F, G).Since BAF contributed to cGAS degradation and was upregulated early in primary infection, we hypothesized that a BAF knockdown may also protect naive cells from subsequent primary infection with KSHV. When SLK cells were treated with BANF1 or NTC siRNA prior to infection with rKSHV.219, the cGAS expression of BANF1 siRNA transfected cells was increased compared to NTC (Fig. 5D). This correlated with a smaller percentage of BAF-depleted cells becoming infected as assayed by GFP positivity compared to control cells (Fig. 5E, F and Supplementary Fig. 5H). BAF depletion was confirmed by western blotting and RT-qPCR for BANF1 mRNA transcripts (Fig. 5D, G).To further characterize the BAF-cGAS-KSHV interplay, we compared RNA-Seq profiles of BANF1 or NTC siRNA-treated iSLK.219 cells before and after KSHV reactivation (0 h and 48 h post-doxycycline induction). Prior to lytic reactivation (0 h), BAF-depleted cells already exhibited a stronger antiviral state, with the top three significantly enriched gene ontology (GO) analysis terms relating to antiviral responses (Fig. 5H). Five of the seven genes that were significantly upregulated greater than twofold were ISGs (Supplementary Data 1). IFIT proteins play a role in the type I interferon response to KSHV infection, while HECT and RLD domain containing E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 5 (HERC5) is the E3 ubiquitin ligase for ISG15 ubiquitin-like modifier (ISG15), an antiviral post-translational modification known to target KSHV proteins46,47. The reduced expression of some genes in BAF-depleted cells, e.g., RNA Polymerase III Subunit A (POLR3A), was associated with induction of host defense responses to viruses, while many of the other downregulated genes corresponded to GO terms unrelated to the pro-viral phenotype. At 48 h after lytic induction, differences in antiviral gene expression between BANF1 or NTC siRNA transfected iSLK.219 cells were even larger than those observed in latency (Fig. 5I). Thirty-two of the thirty-six genes that were significantly upregulated greater than twofold were ISGs (Supplementary Data 1). Genes encoding known KSHV antagonists such as OAS proteins, interferon-induced protein 44 (IFI44), and DExD/H-Box helicase 60 (DDX60) were upregulated in lytically reactivating BAF-depleted cells, in addition to IFIT- and ISG15-related transcripts that were also upregulated in latent BAF-depleted cells46,48. These data underscore that BAF plays a role in suppressing cGAS-STING innate immune defenses in all stages of viral infection: in uninfected cells promoting primary infection, in latently infected cells, and in lytically reactivating cells.BAF facilitates EBV reactivation from latencySince we had established that BAF plays a pro-viral role in KSHV lytic reactivation by suppressing cGAS-STING-IRF3 signaling, we were interested if this finding was generalizable to other gammaherpesviruses, such as EBV. Since EBV is associated with gastric cancers, we used the AGS-EBV cell line, a gastric cancer epithelial cell line latently infected with GFP-expressing recombinant EBV that can be stimulated to lytically reactivate via 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol 13-acetate (TPA)-induced protein kinase C (PKC) activation49,50. First, after stimulation with TPA, lytically reactivating AGS-EBV cells transfected with BANF1 siRNA produced significantly more cGAMP than cells transfected with NTC siRNA (Fig. 6A). Second, increased cGAS signaling was correlated with higher cGAS protein expression prior to reactivation (Fig. 6J). Third, increased activation of the type I interferon response in BAF-depleted reactivating AGS-EBV cells was evident from increased ISG (IFIT3 and OAS1) mRNA expression, as well as increased expression of IFNB1 mRNA, which correlated with increased levels of IFNβ protein in the supernatant (Fig. 6B, C). Fourth, this correlated with lower expression levels of EBV mRNAs (BALF2 and BRRF1) and proteins (LMP1 and BZLF1) in reactivated AGS-EBV cells transfected with BANF1 siRNA compared to cells transfected with NTC siRNA (Fig. 6D, E). Fifth, restriction of viral gene and protein expression in BAF-depleted and reactivated AGS-EBV cells led to a reduction in encapsidated genomes and infectious potential of the supernatant when transferred to naive HEK293 cells compared to the control (Fig. 6F–H and Supplementary Fig. 6A). BAF depletion in AGS-EBV cells was validated by RT-qPCR for BANF1 mRNA transcripts and western blotting (Fig. 6I, J). These experiments confirmed a general role for BAF in gammaherpesvirus reactivation. To investigate whether BAF expression changed during EBV primary infection, we infected naive AGS cells with cell-free EBV. Six hours post-infection with cell-free EBV, BAF protein levels were increased compared to mock infection in AGS cells (Fig. 6K), suggesting that co-option of BAF-mediated immune evasion during primary infection is common for both KSHV and EBV. Efficient infection of the AGS cell population was confirmed by fluorescent microscopy for GFP expression and western blotting for Epstein–Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA1) expression (Supplementary Fig. 6B, C).Fig. 6BAF facilitates EBV reactivation from latency in epithelial cells.AGS-EBV cells were transfected with NTC or BANF1 targeting siRNA for 48 h prior to the addition of 5 ng/mL TPA. A Cell lysates were collected at 72 h post-TPA treatment and analyzed by 2’3’-cGAMP ELISA. B Cells were harvested and RNA was isolated at 48 h post-TPA treatment. RT-qPCR was subsequently performed to determine ISG mRNA expression levels. C Culture supernatant was harvested at 72 h post-TPA treatment and analyzed by IFNβ ELISA. D Cells were harvested and RNA was isolated at 72 h post-TPA treatment and RT-qPCR was performed to quantify viral mRNA transcripts. E Cell lysates were prepared at 72 h post-TPA treatment and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibodies. F Culture supernatants were harvested at 72 h post-TPA treatment and DNase treated prior to DNA extraction. DNase-resistant EBV genomes were quantified by real-time qPCR to assess viral load. G At 72 h post-TPA treatment, culture supernatants were used to infect naive HEK293 cells. Forty-eight h post infection, GFP + infected cells were analyzed by fluorescent microscopy. H Cells were also quantified by flow cytometry. I Cells were harvested for RNA at 48 h post-siRNA transfection and subsequent RT-qPCR was performed to quantify BANF1 mRNA transcripts. J Cell lysates were prepared at 48 h post-siRNA transfection and analyzed by western blotting with the indicated antibody. K Naive AGS cells were infected with equivalent units of concentrated cell-free EBV or PBS (mock). Cell lysates were prepared 6 h post-infection and analyzed by western blotting. P values are the result of two-tailed Student’s T tests unless otherwise specified. Error bars indicate the standard error of the mean of three independent biological replicates. Source data are provided as a source data file.Since EBV is also an etiologic agent of B-cell lymphomas, we were interested in whether BAF played a pro-viral role in lytic reactivation of EBV-infected B cells as well51. To test this hypothesis we used the Burkitt lymphoma cell line Akata-BX1, which latently harbors a recombinant GFP-expressing EBV and whose B-cell receptor can be targeted with anti-human IgG to trigger EBV reactivation52. After treatment with anti-human IgG, Akata-BX1 cells transfected with BANF1 siRNA accumulated significantly higher levels of type I interferon response-related mRNAs, such as IFNB1 itself and ISGs, IFIT2 and OAS2 (Supplementary Fig. 7A). Increased antiviral gene expression in BAF-depleted reactivating Akata-BX1 cells correlated with decreased EBV gene (BALF2 and BRRF1) transcription and protein (LMP1 and BZLF1) expression (Supplementary Fig. 7B, C). Moreover, reactivated Akata-BX1 cells that had been transfected with BANF1 siRNA produced fewer encapsidated EBV virions and the culture supernatant was less infectious when transferred to naive HEK293 cells compared to supernatant from NTC siRNA-treated cells (Supplementary Fig. 7D–G). BAF knockdown efficiency in Akata-BX1 cells was confirmed by RT-qPCR for BANF1 mRNA transcripts and western blotting (Supplementary Fig. 7H, I). Altogether, these data suggest that BAF plays a similar pro-viral role in EBV and KSHV lytic reactivation in various physiologically relevant cell types by suppressing type I interferon responses, positioning BAF as an important facilitator of the gammaherpesviral lifecycle.DiscussionEvading nucleic acid sensors is important for gammaherpesviruses, which possess large dsDNA genomes that encode many genes and establish latency in the nucleus. Gammaherpesviruses target innate immune signaling using virally- and host-encoded factors, e.g., KSHV evasion of RLR sensing: KSHV ORF64 de-ubiquitinates RIG-I, hampering activation, while host factors e.g. adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1 (ADAR1) and NOD-like receptor X1 (NLRX1) decrease interferon activation by preventing RLR-stimulatory dsRNA from forming or inhibiting the RLR adapter, mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS)16,53,54. Similarly, EBV recruits E3 ligase C-terminus of Hsc70-interacting protein (CHIP) to degrade the RIG-I sensor55, while EBV protein BPLF1 mediates ubiquitination of RIG-I cofactor tripartite motif-containing protein 25 (TRIM25) to block pathway activation56. For DNA viruses, evading cGAS-STING signaling is also important, as evidenced by the many herpesviral factors that suppress cGAS-STING signaling, such as KSHV KicGAS, EBV BLRF2, and KSHV LANA34,35. However, the role of regulatory components of the cGAS-STING pathway in facilitating the gammaherpesviral lifecycle had not yet been well-characterized.BAF was initially discovered as a host cofactor for the integration of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)57. BAF inhibits vaccinia virus replication through its DNA-binding capability58 and BAF depletion was associated with decreased replication of multiple viruses59,60. The role of BAF during gammaherpesviral latency and the switch to lytic replication had not been explored. Here, we demonstrate that BAF suppresses type I interferon responses during KSHV and EBV lytic reactivation. We found, in agreement with previously published reports34,61,62, that the type I interferon response to KSHV reactivation was limited, likely due to suppression by virally-encoded factors. However, reduced levels of BAF made the type I interferon response to KSHV reactivation more pronounced. BAF acted upstream of the cGAS-STING-IRF3 pathway by promoting cGAS protein decay through the proteasomal pathway, decreasing cGAMP production and downstream signaling. cGAS mRNA expression was not significantly different between NTC and BANF1 siRNA-treated cells, confirming a post-transcriptional role for BAF in regulating cGAS protein levels (Supplementary Fig. 4C). cGAS is found at various subcellular sites, such as the nucleus, cytoplasm, and plasma membrane30,31. Herpesviral infections produce immunostimulatory DNA that cGAS can detect, such as DNA fragments in the cytoplasm released via herpesviral capsid proteasomal degradation, stress-induced cytoplasmic mitochondrial DNA, or nuclear replicating viral DNA29,63,64. BAF restricts cGAS from detecting nuclear and cytoplasmic DNA sources through competitive DNA binding, which is consistent with our findings of DNA-dependent BAF and cGAS-containing complexes (Supplementary Fig. 5E)41.We further demonstrate that BAF plays a role in downregulating antiviral activity in latently KSHV-infected and uninfected cells. Antiviral gene expression signatures in latently infected and reactivating iSLK.219 with minimal BANF1 expression have commonalities with those of uninfected BANF1-KO microglial cells, involving upregulation of genes encoding IFIT, OAS, MX dynamin-like GTPase (MX), radical S-adenosyl methionine domain containing 2 (RSAD2), and ISG15 proteins59. Other genes upregulated during BAF depletion were unique to KSHV-infected cells. HERC5, which encodes the ISG15 E3 ubiquitin ligase mediator that antagonizes KSHV reactivation47, was upregulated in latently infected and lytically reactivating BAF-depleted iSLK.219 cells. Genes encoding known KSHV reactivation antagonists, such as IFI44 and DDX6048, were upregulated in reactivating BAF-depleted iSLK.219. Genes encoding cytokine receptors such as interleukin 7 receptor (IL7R) and IL15RA were also induced in BAF-depleted reactivating iSLK.219 cells, which is intriguing since KSHV-infected monocytes upregulate IL-7 and IL-15 expression65. IL-7 and IL-15 induce JAK-STAT signaling in B cells, which are relevant in gammaherpesvirus-associated diseases66. We also demonstrated a pro-viral role for immunosuppressive BAF activity in uninfected cells in promoting primary infection with KSHV through its impact on cGAS.The cGAS-STING pathway is also involved in controlling EBV reactivation. EBV infection in airway epithelial cells suppresses signaling downstream of STING through upregulation of tripartite motif-containing protein 29 (TRIM29), an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates and degrades STING37. However, host factors controlling cGAS-STING signaling in B cells have not been well studied. The increased type I interferon-stimulated gene expression in BAF-depleted Akata-BX1 cells with reactivating EBV was less dramatic than in the AGS-EBV epithelial cell model, likely due to previously reported dysfunction in cGAS-STING signaling induced by EBV infection in B cells being only partially reversed by BAF depletion67.Altogether, this study demonstrates that the immunosuppressive effect of BAF on the cGAS-STING-IRF3 signaling axis is important for supporting gammaherpesvirus lytic reactivation, which could make it a valuable therapeutic target. Though most cells in gammaherpesvirus-driven tumors exhibit latency, lytic reactivation of infected cells has been implicated in the pathogenesis of KSHV- and EBV-associated disease8,68. Since BAF inhibition increases type I interferon responses in a cGAS-dependent manner in multiple cell types, targeting BAF may be a viable approach for treating viral infections and malignancies.MethodsBiosafety statementAll experiments with cell lines and viral infections were carried out in a Biosafety Level 2 facility under the approval of the Biosafety Office in the Department of Environment, Health and Safety and the Institutional Biosafety Committee at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The laboratory undergoes annual inspections by the Biosafety Office and all personnel undergo annual training in accordance with applicable regulations.Cell cultureHEK293 (ATCC), HeLa (ATCC), and SLK cells were maintained in DMEM (Thermo Fisher) containing 10% FBS (VWR), 1% Pen-Strep (Thermo Fisher), and 1% l-glutamine (Thermo Fisher). 293TT cells (a kind gift from Dr. Cary Moody) were maintained in in DMEM containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% Pen-Strep. iSLK.219 cells were maintained in DMEM containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% Pen-Strep, 1% l-glutamine, 10 μg/mL puromycin (Corning), 250 μg/mL Geneticin (Thermo Fisher), and 400 μg/mL hygromycin B (Corning). BCBL1-TREx-RTA cells (a kind gift from Dr. Jae Jung) were maintained in RPMI 1640 (Corning) containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% Pen-Strep, 1% l-glutamine, 1% sodium bicarbonate (Thermo Fisher), 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol (Thermo Fisher), and 200 μg/mL hygromycin. AGS-EBV cells (a kind gift from Dr. Lindsey Hutt-Fletcher) were maintained in F-12 media (Thermo Fisher) containing 10% FBS (VWR), 1% Pen-Strep, 1% l-glutamine, and 500 μg/mL Geneticin. Akata-BX1 cells (a kind gift from Dr. Lindsey Hutt-Fletcher) were maintained in RPMI 1640 containing 10% FBS (VWR), 1% Pen-Strep, 1% l-glutamine, 0.05 mM mercaptoethanol, and 500 μg/mL Geneticin. AGS cells (ATCC) were maintained in F-12 media containing 10% FBS (VWR), 1% Pen-Strep, and 1% l-glutamine. All cells were maintained at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in a regularly cleaned and decontaminated laboratory incubator.VirusesCell-free concentrated KSHV (rKSHV.219) and EBV were isolated from latently rKSHV.219-infected iSLK.219 cells or latently EBV-infected Akata-BX1 cells, respectively. Virus production was stimulated by replacing iSLK.219 maintenance media with DMEM containing 10% FBS (Clontech), 1% Pen-Strep, 3 μg/mL doxycycline (Thermo Fisher), and 1 mM sodium butyrate (Sigma-Aldrich) for KSHV, and Akata-BX1 maintenance media with RPMI containing 10% FBS (Clontech), 1% Pen-Strep, 25 µg/mL goat anti-human IgG (Jackson Labs) for EBV. The supernatant was harvested 72 h or 120 h after induction, centrifuged to pellet cell debris, and filtered through a sterile 0.45 μm filter (Millipore Sigma). In total, 30 mL of the filtered supernatant was layered over a 5 mL cushion of 20% sucrose (Sigma-Aldrich), and the virus was pelleted by ultracentrifugation in a SW32Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) at 114,000 × g for 2.5 h at 4 °C. After decanting the supernatant, virus pellets were resuspended in 3 mL PBS (Thermo Fisher).siRNA transfection and reactivationiSLK.219 cells in phenol red-free DMEM (Thermo Fisher) containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine or AGS-EBV cells in F-12 media containing 10% FBS (VWR) and 1% l-glutamine were reverse transfected with a total concentration of 100 nM siRNA (Horizon) using Lipofectamine RNAiMax (Thermo Fisher) in Opti-MEM (Thermo Fisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 48 h, iSLK.219 media was replaced with phenol red-free DMEM (Thermo Fisher) containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% l-glutamine, and 25 ng/mL doxycycline, while AGS-EBV media was replaced with F-12 media containing 10% FBS (VWR), 1% l-glutamine, and 5 ng/mL TPA (Sigma-Aldrich). Cells and supernatants were harvested at various timepoints post-reactivation for downstream analysis. BCBL1-TREx-RTA and Akata-BX1 cells were transfected with 200 nM siRNA using the Cell Line Nucleofector Kit V (Lonza) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and subsequently plated in RPMI 1640 containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% l-glutamine, 1% sodium bicarbonate, and 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol (siRNA sequences can be found in Supplementary Data 2). Forty-eight hours post-nucleofection, BCBL1-TREx-RTA media was changed to 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% l-glutamine, 1% sodium bicarbonate, 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and 1 ng/mL doxycycline, while Akata-BX1 media was changed to 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% l-glutamine, 1% sodium bicarbonate, 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol, and 10 μg/mL goat anti-human IgG. Cells and supernatants were harvested at various timepoints post-reactivation for downstream analysis.Plasmid constructionFor pYNC352-BANF1-shRNA construction, 2 μg of pYNC352 was digested with BamHI-HF and MluI-HF (NEB) overnight at 37 °C according to the manufacturer’s protocol and subsequently separated on a 0.8% agarose gel and purified using a gel extraction kit (Qiagen). shRNA duplexes were generated by annealing 100 μM forward and reverse primers in annealing buffer (100 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 1 mM EDTA) at 95 °C for 4 min, 70 °C for 10 min, and then allowing the reaction to cool to room temperature over the next 2 h (shRNA target sequences are found in Supplementary Data 3). Duplexes were phosphorylated using T4 polynucleotide kinase (NEB) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Phosphorylated duplexes and linearized pYNC352 were ligated using T4 DNA ligase (NEB) according to the manufacturer’s protocol overnight at room temperature. DH5α cells (NEB) were transformed with the ligation product, and colonies were screened for intact clones by XhoI digestion (NEB) of isolated plasmids according to the manufacturer’s protocol followed by agarose gel electrophoresis. Intact clones were isolated for each independent shRNA (pYNC352-shBANF1-1 and pYNC352-shBANF1-2). The pCMV6-BANF1-HA plasmid was generated by Q5 mutagenesis (NEB) on the pCMV6-Entry BANF1 Human-Tagged ORF Clone (Origene) to replace the original Myc-DDK tag with HA according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Oligonucleotide sequences used for Q5 mutagenesis are found in Supplementary Data 3.Lentivirus generation293TT cells were plated in DMEM containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) 16 h prior to the addition of transfection mixture containing FuGENE HD (Promega) transfection reagent, 8 μg pYNC352-shRNA plasmid NS, shBANF1-1, or shBANF1-2, 6 μg psPAX2, and 2 μg pMD2.G diluted in Opti-MEM according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 6 h, media was changed to DMEM containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% Pen-Strep, and cells were incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for an additional 48 h. Supernatants were harvested, spun at 2000×g for 5 min to remove cells and debris, and put through a 0.45 μm filter. Lentivirus was pelleted by ultracentrifugation in a SW32Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) at 114,000×g for 2.5 h at 4 °C. After decanting the supernatant, virus pellets were resuspended in 3 mL DMEM containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and incubated at 4 °C overnight before aliquoting and storage at −80 °C.Lentiviral transduction and reactivationTREx-BCBL1-RTA cells were plated in 12-well plates in 500 μL RPMI 1640 containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% l-glutamine, and 100 μL lentiviral stock. Eight hours later, the media was changed to 1 mL RPMI 1640 containing 20% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine. After 40 h, 1 additional mL RPMI 1640 containing 20% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% L-glutamine was added to the wells. Twenty-four h later, cells were counted and equivalent numbers were re-plated in RPMI 1640 containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% l-glutamine, and 1000 ng/mL doxycycline. After 24 h of stimulation, the cells were washed and the media was changed to RPMI 1640 containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine. Cells and supernatants were harvested 4 days post-lytic reactivation.Plasmid transfection and reactivationiSLK.219 cells in phenol red-free DMEM (Thermo Fisher) containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine were plated 24 h prior to the addition of transfection mixture containing 6 µg X-tremeGENE 9 DNA transfection reagent (Sigma) and 2 µg pCMV6-BANF1-HA in Opti-MEM. After 48 h, the media was replaced with phenol red-free DMEM (Thermo Fisher) containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech), 1% l-glutamine, and 25 ng/mL doxycycline. Cells and supernatants were harvested at various timepoints post-reactivation for downstream analysis.DNase-resistant viral genome assayCell supernatants were centrifuged at 2000 × g to remove cells and debris and filtered through a 0.45-μm filter (Millipore Sigma). Filtered supernatants were treated with 100 U TURBO DNase (Thermo Fisher) per mL supernatant and supplemented to a final concentration of 1× TURBO DNase Buffer (Thermo Fisher). The DNase reaction was allowed to proceed at 37 °C for 1 h before inactivation with 10 mM EDTA (Corning) at 70 °C for 15 min. DNA was extracted using a DNEasy Blood and Tissue Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Absolute quantification of genome copy number was accomplished by real-time qPCR amplification of ORF39 (KSHV) or BMRF1 (EBV) in SensiFast Lo-Rox SYBR (Bioline) with a final primer concentration of 500 nM on a QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR System. Standard curves were created using dilutions of pCDNA4/TO-ORF39−2XStrep (a kind gift from Dr. Britt Glaunsinger) or pSG5-BMRF1 (Addgene). Primers used for qPCR are found in Supplementary Data 3. Viral titers were compared statistically using two-tailed homoscedastic Student’s T tests to obtain P values.Viral supernatant transferHEK293 cells were plated in six-well plates in phenol red-free DMEM (Thermo Fisher) containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine. Twenty-four hours later, supernatants were harvested from reactivated cell cultures and centrifuged at 2000×g to pellet cells and debris. Equivalent volumes of supernatant were transferred to the naive HEK293 cells. The negative control and experimental sample wells were equilibrated with serum-free DMEM to a final volume of 2.5 mL and supplemented with 10 μg/mL polybrene (Sigma-Aldrich) before spinfection at 985×g for 1.5 h at 30 °C. Wells were supplemented with 1 mL phenol red-free DMEM containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine and incubated overnight at 37 °C and 5% CO2 before the media was changed to 2 mL phenol red-free DMEM containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine. Forty-eight hours post-spinfection, cells were analyzed for GFP positivity by fluorescent microscopy and subsequent mechanical lifting, collection at 2000×g, and resuspension in 1 mL PBS for flow cytometry analysis using a MACS-Quant VYB. GFP + cell populations were gated based on negative control samples using FlowJo. Relative sizes of cell populations were compared statistically using two-tailed homoscedastic Student’s T tests to obtain P values. Supplementary Fig. 9 exemplifies the gating strategy used.KSHV and EBV primary infectionSLK cells were plated in a 24-well plate in phenol red-free DMEM containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine and reverse transfected with a total concentration of 100 nM siRNA (Horizon) using Lipofectamine RNAiMax in Opti-MEM according to the manufacturer’s protocol. After 48 h, media was replaced with 500 μL serum-free DMEM and either 0.5 μL concentrated cell-free KSHV or PBS for negative control wells. Aliquots of the same virus preparation were used for each of the three biological replicates. Alternatively, SLK or AGS cells were plated in a 24-well plate in phenol red-free DMEM containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine or F-12 media containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% l-glutamine, respectively. After 24 h, media was replaced with 500 µL serum-free DMEM or serum-free F-12 media and either 0.5 μL concentrated cell-free KSHV or 100 μL concentrated cell-free EBV, with equivalent volumes of PBS added to negative control wells. Cells were spinfected at 1420 × g for 100 min at 30 °C before the media was changed to 500 μL phenol red-free DMEM containing 10% Tet-free FBS (Clontech) and 1% l-glutamine or F-12 media containing 10% FBS (Sigma-Aldrich) and 1% l-glutamine. Forty-eight hours post-spinfection, cells were analyzed for GFP positivity by fluorescent microscopy and subsequent trypsinization (Thermo Fisher), collection at 2000 ×g, and resuspension in 1 mL PBS for flow cytometry analysis using a MACS-Quant VYB. GFP + cell populations were gated based on negative control samples using FlowJo. Relative sizes of cell populations were compared statistically using two-tailed homoscedastic Student’s T tests to obtain P values. Alternatively, infection was confirmed by fluorescent microscopy for GFP signal 72 h post-spinfection prior to lysis and western blotting for latent gammaherpesviral proteins.Fluorescent microscopyGFP and Phase images were taken of HEK293 cells 48 h post-supernatant transfer and of SLK or AGS cells 48 h or 72 h post-primary infection using a Leica Dmi8-inverted microscope. GFP and RFP images were taken of iSLK.219 cells 72 h or 96 h post-reactivation using a Leica Dmi8-inverted microscope. Plates were subsequently scanned on a ClarioStar Plus (BMG) plate reader for RFP and GFP signal to quantify the RFP/GFP intensity ratio. Intensity ratios were compared statistically using two-tailed homoscedastic Student’s T tests to obtain P values. Images shown are representative of three fields per triplicate well across three biological replicates.Western blotting and ELISACell lysates were prepared in RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 30 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 50 mM NaF, 100 μM Na3VO4) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher) or NP40 lysis buffer (0.1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 30 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 50 mM NaF, 100 μM Na3VO4) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Cell lysates were sonicated and centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C to pellet cell debris. The protein concentration of the clarified lysate was calculated using a BCA Assay kit (Thermo Fisher). For coimmunoprecipitation assays, lysates containing 1 mg of protein were treated with 100 U TURBO DNase (Thermo Fisher) per mL lysate (or mock PBS) and supplemented to a final concentration of 1× TURBO DNase Buffer (Thermo Fisher). The DNase reaction was allowed to proceed at 37 °C for 1 h. Lysates were pre-cleared by rotating incubation at 4 °C with 40 μL Protein A/G agarose beads (Santa Cruz) and 2 μL mouse IgG (Fisher Scientific) for 45 min prior to centrifugation at 635×g for 5 min. In total, 50 μL of anti-HA agarose antibody beads (Sigma-Aldrich) were washed four times by centrifugation at 635×g for 5 min, aspiration of supernatant, and addition of 1 mL RIPA or NP40 lysis buffer. Pre-cleared lysates were added to the washed beads and subjected to rotating incubation at 4 °C overnight prior to centrifugation at 635×g for 5 min. The supernatant was removed, and the beads were washed four times by addition of 1 mL NP40 or RIPA lysis buffer, rotating incubation at 4 °C for 5 min, centrifugation at 635×g for 5 min, and subsequent removal of the supernatant. Washed beads were treated with 40 μL 2× Laemmli sample buffer (Sigma-Aldrich), heated at 95 °C for 10 min, and centrifuged at 8200×g for 30 s prior to collection of the eluted protein. For western blotting, equivalent amounts of protein were separated by SDS-PAGE and subsequently transferred to PVDF membrane (Thermo Fisher). The membrane was blocked with 5% nonfat milk or BSA in TBS-T (Tris-buffered saline containing 0.1% Tween 20) prior to incubation with the primary antibody on a rocker at 4 °C overnight. All antibodies were used at 1:1000 dilution unless otherwise specified. Antibodies used were cGAS (Cell Signaling Technology), Phospho-TBK1/NAK (Ser172) XP (Cell Signaling Technology), TBK1/NAK (Cell Signaling Technology), Phospho-IRF-3 (Ser396) (Cell Signaling Technology), β-actin (used at 1:5000) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), HA-Tag HRP Conjugate (Cell Signaling Technology), Myc-tag (9B11) mouse mAb (Cell Signaling Technology), KSHV ORF45 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), KSHV K8α (Santa Cruz Biotechnology), BANF1/BAF (Abcam), EBV EBNA1 (Abcam), EBV LMP1 (Abcam), and EBV ZEBRA (Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Western band intensities were quantified for protein stability assays using ImageJ and statistically compared using a nonlinear one-phase decay regression in GraphPad Prism to obtain P values. Quantification and blots are included in the source data file. For cGAMP ELISA, clarified lysates were quantified using a 2’,3’-cGAMP ELISA kit (Cayman Chemical) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. cGAMP concentration was calculated by comparison to the standard curve, enabling the calculation of the cGAMP/protein ratio. For IFNβ ELISA, supernatants were concentrated using 3000 kDa molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filters (Millipore Sigma) and subsequently assayed by Human IFN-beta DuoSet ELISA kit (R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Comparison to the standard curve enabled calculation of the culture supernatant IFNβ level. Molecular concentrations were statistically compared using two-tailed homoscedastic Student’s T tests to obtain P values.RT-qPCRCell pellets were extracted for RNA using the RNEasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA was generated from the extracted RNA using the SensiFAST cDNA synthesis kit (Bioline). Quantification of target gene expression was accomplished by qPCR in SensiFast Lo-Rox SYBR (Bioline) with a final primer concentration of 500 nM on a QuantStudio 6 Flex Real-Time PCR System (primer sequences can be found in Supplementary Data 3). Expression levels were normalized to the housekeeping gene ACTB, and the data displayed are average fold changes (2-ΔΔCt). Gene expression values were statistically compared by two-tailed heteroscedastic Student’s T tests on ΔCt values to obtain P values. For KSHV genome profiling, cDNA from two biological replicates was submitted to the UNC School of Medicine Vironomics Core for real-time qPCR using the KSHVv2.0 viral array (Dittmer, 2003). Viral gene expression was normalized to the geometric mean of three housekeeping gene controls (ACTB, B2M, and GAPDH), and the data displayed are Z-scores of average fold changes (2-ΔΔCt) visualized with Partek Flow. For characterization of type I interferon-stimulated gene expression, RT2 First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Qiagen) was used to amplify cDNA from two biological replicates for analysis via the RT2 Type I Interferon Response PCR Array (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. ISG expression was normalized to the geometric mean of four housekeeping gene controls (ACTB, B2M, GAPDH, and HPRT1), and the data displayed are Z-scores of average fold changes (2-ΔΔCt) visualized with Partek Flow.RNA-SeqRNA samples were subjected to RNA sequencing by GeneWiz (AZENTA Life Sciences) using Illumina NovaSeq technology. Differential gene expression analysis was conducted by GeneWiz. Read counts in libraries from different samples were normalized to control for factors such as sequencing yield. Differentially expressed genes were called using DESeq2. P values and log2 fold changes were generated using the two-tailed Wald test with adjustments for multiple comparisons and graphically displayed in a volcano plot generated using VolcaNoseR (https://huygens.science.uva.nl/VolcaNoseR/)69. Gene ontology analysis was conducted and significant enrichment values were determined using the one-tailed Fisher exact test with adjustments for multiple comparisons, which were then visualized in Prism. The RNA-Seq data are available using GEO accession # GSE200781.Statistics and reproducibilityError bars in figures represent the SEM of at least three biological replicates unless otherwise stated. Statistical significance was defined as P < 0.05 using a two-tailed Student’s T test in Microsoft Excel. RNA-Seq adjusted P values were calculated using the two-tailed Wald test with adjustments for multiple comparisons, and the significance of gene ontology terms was determined using the one-tailed Fisher exact test with adjustments for multiple comparisons. Half-lives of nonlinear fit exponential decay models were calculated and decay constants (K) were statistically compared using the Extra sum-of-squares two-tailed F Test with no adjustment for multiple comparisons in GraphPad Prism. No data were excluded from the analyses. The experiments were not randomized or blinded as all experiments were performed in vitro.Supplementary information
Supplementary Information
Description of Additional Supplementary Files
Supplementary Data 1
Supplementary Data 2
Supplementary Data 3



Title: Molecular Pathogenesis of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Associated Disease of Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium

1. IntroductionFour decades ago, the HIV/AIDS pandemic began. Global spread led to 75 million infections and 32 million deaths. Today, highly effective prevention strategies are available to reduce the likelihood of HIV transmission via sexual intercourse. Furthermore, antiretroviral therapy for people living with HIV/AIDS can reduce viral loads to levels that cannot be detected or transmitted. However, despite the availability of these highly effective agents, HIV/AIDS continues to be a lethal disease. HIV/AIDS was responsible for one death each minute in 2021; every two minutes, a young woman becomes newly infected with HIV. Likewise, approximately 200,000 cases of mother-to-child transmission are reported each year. Thus, HIV/AIDS remains an unsolved problem; additional new knowledge may help improve treatment and prophylaxis.The surface of the oropharyngeal cavity is covered with a multilayer stratified squamous epithelium supported by the lamina propria, which is a layer of fibrous connective tissue [1,2]. Stratified oropharyngeal epithelial cells from the parabasal to the granulosum layers have well-developed lateral adherens and tight junctions, indicating a polarized organization [3,4,5,6]. The lateral localization of adherens and tight junctions between neighboring cells of oral epithelium contribute to a physical barrier that protects the body from penetration by viruses and other pathogens [4,5]. The oropharyngeal mucosa also contains a broad population of adaptive and innate immune cells, including T and B cells, macrophages, dendritic/Langerhans cells (DC/LCs), and natural killer (NK) cells that are distributed within the epithelium and lamina propria [2,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Intraepithelial DC/LCs and macrophages in the oral mucosa are critical components of the innate immune system. These cells defend against pathogens that enter the body via the oral cavity [2,13,14,16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. Intraepithelial macrophages and DC/LCs are also antigen-presenting cells that are capable of activating an adaptive immune response. Thus, these cells may serve as “bridges” between the innate and adaptive immune systems [2,14,23,24,25]. In addition, oral mucosal epithelial cells express toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9, which are critical facilitators of innate immune responses against numerous pathogens [26,27]. Intraepithelial oral mucosal DC/LC and macrophages originate from peripheral blood CD14+ monocytes [28,29]. Recruitment of circulating monocytes into the mucosal epithelium is mediated by monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), MCP-2, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α), and MIP-1β [30,31,32]. Expression and secretion of these mediators in the mucosal epithelium are modulated by multiple chemokine/cytokines, including interferon-ɣ (IFN-ɣ), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interleukins (ILs), including IL-1, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL10, IL-13, and IL-15 [14,32,33,34,35,36]. MCP-1 is secreted from the basolateral membranes of polarized epithelial cells [37,38]; the polarized release of MCP-1 may generate a gradient toward blood vessels that serve to recruit monocytes into the epithelium. Once they have transited across the endothelial layer, monocytes differentiate into macrophages and DC/LCs [11]. Further traffic of monocytes/macrophages, DCs, and T lymphocytes within the mucosal epithelium is coordinated by the formation of transient tight junctions between immune and epithelial cells [39,40,41,42]. Migrating immune cells, particularly DC/LCs, express the tight junction proteins known as claudin-1 and occludin. Transient association of these proteins with cell junctions promotes the migration of immune cells without disrupting epithelial barrier functions [39,41,43,44]. This allows DC/LCs to reach the mucosal surface [39,43]. The absence of epithelial junctions may reduce the efficiency of epithelial–lymphocyte interactions, thereby leading to dysfunction (i.e., little to no retention of interepithelial lymphocytes and DC/LCs and thus their depletion) [45,46,47]. Interactions of polarized mucosal epithelial cells with DC/LCs and other cells of the adaptive and innate immune systems are critical for maintaining oral mucosal immune homeostasis.The oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium and its intraepithelial and subepithelial adaptive and innate immune cells play critical roles in promoting protection against numerous pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and fungi. However, in HIV/AIDS, various chronic disorders can develop with a significant impact on the oral mucosal epithelium. These include inflammation, necrotizing mucosal ulcers, and malignant and nonmalignant lesions that may impair the barrier as well as the innate and acquired immune functions of the oral mucosa [48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55].Systemic HIV/AIDS is accompanied by the spread of cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 in the oral mucosal environment. There are several reports of viral DNA/RNA, cell-free HIV-1 virions, and tat and gp120 proteins isolated from oral mucosal tissue and saliva of HIV/AIDS patients [6,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64]. HIV-infected DC/LCs, lymphocytes, and macrophages were also detected in the mucosal and submucosal layers of the oropharyngeal epithelium [6,56,57,62,63,65]. Electron microscopy revealed that HIV virions could be found within the tight junctions of the oral epithelium [62]. The presence of both cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 both around and within oropharyngeal mucosa may result in numerous changes that impair its innate immune and barrier functions. 2. Role of Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium in HIV-1 Transmission in Adults and ChildrenOral HIV-1 transmission in the adult population may occur during oral sex, in newborn children and infants during delivery and breastfeeding [66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73]. The rate of adult oral HIV-1 transmission has been estimated at ~0.004% per exposure (i.e., not a highly efficient process) [66,67,68]. By contrast, the rate of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HIV-1 in the absence of antiretroviral therapy (ART) may be as high as 15% in Europe and 25–30% in Asian and African countries [74,75,76]. The oropharyngeal and tonsillar mucosal epithelium may express one or more co-receptors or non-canonical HIV-1 receptors that may facilitate virus binding and entry, including CC chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5), CXC chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4), heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), mannose receptor, galactosylceramide (GalCer), and T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 (TIM-1) [3,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84]. Results of studies featuring ex vivo adult and fetal/infant tissue explants revealed that HIV-1 transmission through the adult oral epithelium was less efficient than fetal/infant epithelial tissues, which supported rapid viral transmigration through the mucosal epithelium and infection of virus-susceptible intraepithelial and subepithelial cells [3,85]. The resistance provided by the adult tissues was primarily due to the presence of multiple epithelial layers and tissue stratification (20–30) with highly-effective tight junctions (Figure 1). The highly stratified adult oral epithelial cells limit viral penetration more efficiently than the less stratified fetal/neonatal/infant counterparts (i.e., with 3–5 layers) [3].Furthermore, adult oral epithelial cells express high levels of anti-HIV-1 innate proteins, including human beta-defensin (hBD)2 and hBD3. These cells also express secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor that inactivates intraepithelial virions and reduces oral transmission of HIV-1 [79,82,85]. By contrast, fetal/infant oral epithelial cells do not express high levels of these proteins, which may be among the factors contributing to the comparatively high rate of HIV-1 MTCT [79,82,85]. HBDs tagged with the HIV-1 protein transduction domain known as Tat were delivered to HIV-1-infected infant tonsillar epithelial cells, which facilitated efficient penetration and virus inactivation [85]. PTD-mediated internalization of these proteins in infant tonsillar epithelial cells was followed by their penetration into MVBs and vacuoles containing HIV-1. PTD also promoted the fusion of HIV-containing vesicles with lysosomes which led to the degradation of gp120 and p24 and viral inactivation [85]. Ex vivo PTD-mediated internalization of hBD2 and hBD3 into tonsillar tissue explants from infants also reduced virus spread from epithelial cells to CD68+ macrophages, CD4+ T lymphocytes, and CD1c+ DCs [85].HIV-1 internalization through the apical surface into infant tonsillar epithelial cells can be initiated by multiple entry pathways, including micropinocytosis as well as clathrin and caveolin/lipid raft-associated endocytosis [83]. An evaluation of HIV-1 transmission through polarized tonsillar epithelial cells revealed that approximately 0.05% of inoculated virions underwent transcytosis across the epithelium [86]. More than 90% of the internalized virions were sequestered in epithelial endosomes that included multivesicular bodies (MVBs) and vacuoles. Sequestration of HIV-1 in the endosomal compartment of tonsillar epithelial cells was observed both in the single layer of polarized cells as well as ex vivo in explants of tonsillar epithelial tissue [83,85,86]. Intraepithelial HIV-1 remained infectious for several days, although no virion release was observed [86]. Interactions of HIV-1-containing epithelial cells with activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and CD4+ T lymphocytes led to the disruption of epithelial cortical actin and the spread of the virus from epithelial cells to the lymphocytes. IFN-ɣ and TNF-α treatment of tonsillar epithelial cells also induced reorganization of cortical actin and intracellular virion release [86]. The release of HIV-1 from oropharyngeal mucosal epithelial cells may result in the virus spreading into intraepithelial and subepithelial macrophages, DC/LCs, and CD4 T+ lymphocytes. This is the first step in establishing systemic HIV-1 infection. Mucosal macrophages, DC/LCs, and intraepithelial T lymphocytes, DC/LCs may then transmit HIV-1 across the mucosal epithelium into regional lymph nodes [87,88,89,90,91,92]. Oral transmission of HIV-1 may also result from paracellular virus penetration if the integrity of the oral mucosal epithelium is impaired. HIV-1 gp120 binding to GalCer can result in elevated levels of intracellular calcium and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and PI3K signaling [93,94,95]. In addition, HIV-1 envelope protein gp120-induced activation of MAPK and NF-κB signaling reduced the expression of ZO-1, occludin, and claudin-1 in oral epithelial cells, leading to the disruption of tight junctions [96,97,98]; this may facilitate paracellular penetration of HIV-1 virions. HIV/AIDS-associated production and release of proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α and IFN-γ, may also disrupt tight junctions of oral epithelial cells and lead to paracellular penetration of HIV-1 [4,5].Oral epithelial cells may also support non-replicative HIV-1 infection and virus transfer to CD4+ T lymphocytes [99] and immobilize the infectious virions on their surfaces to facilitate their transfer to permissive cells [100]. Likewise, ex vivo HIV-1 infection of tonsillar explants can lead to a productive infection of intraepithelial and submucosal macrophages and lymphocytes [65,96,101,102].3. Manifestations of HIV/AIDS in the Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium3.1. HIV/AIDS Reactivates Opportunistic Infections of the Oral Mucosa The oral cavity of a healthy individual maintains abundant flora, including many commensal and potentially opportunistic organisms. Inflammatory lesions and opportunistic infections are relatively infrequent, suggesting that the oral mucosa has highly efficient biological and immunological barrier functions [14,16,103,104]. The innate immune and barrier functions of the oral mucosal epithelium may become severely impaired in individuals with HIV/AIDS, which will permit the development of opportunistic infections. Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) are common oral pathogens that can lead to various chronic disorders in the oral mucosal epithelium, including necrotizing mucosal ulcers and nonmalignant lesions [48,49,50,51,52,53,105]. All three of these viruses can infect children early in life via the oral mucosa and persist throughout their lifetimes [106,107,108]. Reactivation of EBV, HSV-1, and HCMV in individuals diagnosed with HIV/AIDS leads to viral shedding into various body fluids, including saliva and cervicovaginal secretions [55,109,110,111,112]. Numerous human herpes viruses (including EBV, HSV-1, and HCMV) were detected in the saliva of HIV-infected individuals despite the availability of ART [109]. These viruses can be transmitted to neonates and infants through maternal saliva and/or breast milk [106,113,114,115,116,117]. Oropharyngeal shedding of HSV and HCMV was also reported in HIV-infected children [118,119].3.1.1. Synergistic Contributions of HIV-1 and EBV to the Nonmalignant Oral Lesion, Hairy LeukoplakiaWhite epithelial lesions on the side of the tongue, a condition known as hairy leukoplakia (HL), are well-known oral mucosal manifestations of HIV/AIDS. These lesions, which feature epithelial acanthosis and hyperkeratosis without inflammation [120,121,122], are associated with high-level replication of EBV [120,121,122]. HL lesions consistently demonstrate severe depletion of intraepithelial LCs, suggesting the critical role of these cells in disease pathogenesis [123,124,125]. Ex vivo experiments targeting buccal explants and tongue tissue revealed that EBV infection occurs first in submucosal CD14+ monocytes. The virus then spreads via migration to the epithelium. This series of events will initiate a productive EBV infection within terminally-differentiated cells of the spinosum and granulosum layers [126]. Exposure of EBV-infected oral explants or EBV-infected monocytes with specific antibodies that target CC chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) and MCP-1 prevented monocyte entry and blocked keratinocytes infection. Interestingly, EBV-infected B-lymphocytes played only a small role in EBV spread to keratinocytes in an ex vivo oral tissue explant model [126]. However, co-cultivation experiments performed in vitro revealed that infected B-lymphocytes may promote EBV spread to previously uninfected monocytes. Circulating EBV-positive monocytes are present in most HIV-infected individuals. This finding is consistent with a pathway in which EBV spreads from B-lymphocytes to monocytes. Infected monocytes entering the epithelium will then differentiate into macrophages and/or LCs. These cells will elicit a productive keratinocyte infection and thus promote the development of the characteristic HL lesions [126] (Figure 2). It is also possible that CD14-negative precursors of LCs may disseminate EBV within oral mucosal epithelial cells [127].Both EBV and HIV-1 can infect macrophages, monocytes, and DCs [65,128,129,130,131,132,133,134]. Circulating monocytes serve as reservoirs for HIV-1 infection [135]. Circulating monocytes in patients undergoing highly active ART (HAART) may harbor replication-competent, non-latent HIV-1 [128]. EBV-infected macrophages were also detected in healthy asymptomatic individuals. This finding suggested that macrophages may be a reservoir for this opportunistic pathogen [136].HIV-1 infection of monocytes may increase the surface transport of adhesion molecules and integrins, including the α5β1 and αvβ3 integrins [137,138,139,140,141]. The EBV envelope protein BMRF-2 uses β1 and α5β1 integrins as receptors to infect polarized oral epithelial cells [142,143]. EBV entry into monocytes may also be mediated by an EBV BMRF-2– integrin interaction because monocytes do not express the primary EBV receptor, CD21 [144]. Thus, HIV/AIDS-associated activation of surface integrin expression in peripheral blood monocytes may facilitate their infection by EBV. In addition, the HIV tat protein induces endothelial cell expression of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule (E-selectin) [145]. The synergy between HIV tat protein and TNF-α detected in elevated levels in association with HIV/AIDS increases β2 integrin expression in monocytes; these responses may lead to active translocation of monocytes from the circulation into tissue sites where they differentiate into LCs [146,147]. This may lead to the migration of HIV-1 and/or EBV-infected monocytes from the circulation into mucosal sites, thereby initiating EBV spread from LCs to differentiated epithelial cells capable of supporting productive virus replication [126,127]. EBV BMRF-2/BDLF-2 facilitates virus spread between oral epithelial cells and establishes foci of virus-infected epithelial tissue [148,149]. This may promote epithelial cell proliferation and lead to the development of HL. EBV BHRF-1 delays or inhibits apoptosis of cells in the differentiated granulosum layers, which may permit enhanced proliferation of epithelial cells, thereby increasing the thickness and hyperplasia characteristic of the HL epithelium [150].HIV-1 infection of monocytes/macrophages and DC/LCs may impair their critical functions, including activation, maturation, antigen presentation, and interactions with T cells [151,152,153,154,155]. HIV and/or EBV infection of DC/LCs may ultimately result in their dysfunction. This may lead to the depletion of oral mucosal intraepithelial LCs, as has been shown for HIV/AIDS-associated HL lesions [123,124,125,156]. HIV-1 gp120 and tat proteins are also capable of disrupting epithelial adherens and tight junctions [96,97,98]. This may reduce the intraepithelial retention of LCs and lead to local depletion [39,41,43,44,157].ART for HIV-1 and treatments effective against EBV typically lead to the resolution of HL in most patients [124,158]. These findings indicate the synergistic roles of HIV and EBV in the development of HL. However, although the introduction of ART has reduced the frequency of HL, this lesion has not been completely eliminated [159,160]. This suggests that residual HIV-associated mechanisms may contribute to HL development. 3.1.2. HIV-Induced Disruption of Tight and Adherens Junctions of Oral Epithelial Cells Facilitates the Spread of HSV-1Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 and HSV type 2 are both opportunistic infections that are frequently associated with HIV/AIDS [105]. HSV-1 reactivates and replicates in the oral epithelium of HIV/AIDS-associated immunocompromised individuals and can lead to oral ulcers, gingivitis, and necrotic lesions [55]. HSV-1 reactivation may occur despite ongoing HAART [161,162]. Although the increased risk of developing HSV infection may be mediated in part by HIV-induced immune dysfunction, they may also be associated with direct and/or indirect molecular interactions between these two viruses. HIV-infected LC/DCs, CD4+ T lymphocytes, and macrophages infiltrating the mucosal epithelium can release virions as well as the viral proteins, gp120 and tat. Interactions of virions and viral proteins with one or more HIV-coreceptors (i.e., CXCR4, CCR5, HSPG, and/or GalCer), TLR-2/4, integrins, and/or mannose receptors on epithelial cells induces the activation of PI3K, MAPK, TLR, and NF-κB signaling pathways, resulting in the expression of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IFN-ɣ, IL-1, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-13), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs-2 and -9), and caspases (caspase-3 and -6) [6,98,163,164,165]. In addition, activation of these pathways will downregulate the expression and/or promote aberrant internalization and degradation of epithelial adherens and tight junctions.Prolonged interactions of polarized epithelial cells from the oral cavity with tat and gp120 can lead to the disruption of adherens and tight junctions via activation of the MAPK signaling pathway [97]. HIV-associated activation of MAPK leads to upregulation of MMP-9 and NF-κB which induces the disruption of adherens and tight junctions [98]. Furthermore, HIV-induced disruption of oral epithelial junctions facilitates the paracellular spread of HSV-1 [97] (Figure 3). The HSV-1 envelope glycoprotein gD binds to nectin-1, which is a cell adhesion protein [166] sequestered within the intercellular junctions and limits HSV access to mucosal epithelial cells [167]. HIV-mediated disruption of adherens junctions will liberate nectin-1, thereby promoting HSV-1 binding to gD. HSV-1 infection is substantially increased in epithelial cells whose junctions have been disrupted compared to those with junctions that remain intact [97]. Exposure of nectin-1 due to disruptions in adherens junctions may also accelerate the cell-to-cell spread of HSV-1 from oral epithelial cells infected to those uninfected. Exposure to anti-nectin-1 and anti-HSV-1 gD antibodies will result in a substantial reduction in the extent of HSV-1 infection as well as cell-to-cell spread. Collectively, these findings suggest that HIV-1-mediated HSV spread and ongoing infection are facilitated by HSV gD interactions with exposed nectin-1 [97]. HSV is latent in sensory neurons in healthy individuals with intact immune function [168]. HIV/AIDS may induce HSV reactivation in neurons, thereby leading to the development of mucosal disorders [161]. In addition, HIV-mediated release of nectin-1 from cells with disrupted adherens junctions may also promote the spread of HSV-1 from neurons to epithelial cells (Figure 3). Thus, HIV-mediated disruption of intercellular junctions potentiates HSV-1 infection as well as cell-to-cell and paracellular spread within the oral mucosal epithelium. This mechanism may contribute to the rapid development of HSV-associated oral lesions in HIV-infected individuals.3.1.3. HIV-1 and HCMV Mother-to-Child Transmission (MTCT) through the Infant tonsillar Epithelium Synergistically Promote the Spread of Both HIV-1 and HCMVDespite the availability of effective ART, 100,000–240,000 cases of MTCT of HIV-1 are reported each year [76,169,170,171,172]. Most cases of MTCT (40–50%) result from breastfeeding [76]. Breast milk may contain cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 [69,70,71,72,73], which may initiate mucosal transmission of the virus via the child’s oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal mucosae [3,6,79,173]. Breast milk may also contain HCMV that has been activated in response to HIV/AIDS [174], which can promote the development of oral mucosal lesions, retinitis, hepatitis, esophagitis, pneumonia, encephalopathy, and/or gastrointestinal inflammation [175,176,177,178,179]. Nearly all HIV-infected individuals, including pregnant women, exhibit HCMV co-infection [108,180]. MTCT of HCMV can occur in utero via the placenta and during labor by exposure to secretions from the cervix and the vagina [119,181]. However, most HCMV MTCT is observed postpartum by virion transfer in infected breast milk and transmission through the oral and/or gut mucosal epithelium [119,181,182]. Almost all cases of HCMV activation in HCMV-seropositive, HIV-uninfected women occur secondary to lactation [183]. The virus can be found in breast milk for only a few weeks postpartum [184,185]. By contrast, HCMV shedding into breast milk of HIV-infected women may increase significantly during the postpartum period and can last for six months or longer. Persistent viral shedding can facilitate MTCT via the infant’s oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal mucosal epithelium [186]. Low maternal CD4+ T cell counts and high levels of HIV RNA in breast milk correlate with comparatively high levels of HCMV genomic DNA in breast milk [186,187]. HCMV transmission (perinatal and postnatal) may occur in as many as 90% of children who acquire the virus during early childhood [119,176,188,189]. Primary HCMV infection or disease reactivation in HIV-infected pregnant women may also contribute to the MTCT of HIV-1. Several groups have shown that elevated levels of HCMV in breast milk are associated with an increased risk of postpartum MTCT of HIV-1 [186,189,190,191]. Exposure to cell-free forms of HIV-1 or HIV-1 proteins gp120 and tat will lead to the disruption of the tight junctions characteristic of epithelial cells from the tonsils. This will also increase paracellular transfer through polarized epithelial cells from infant tonsils as well as ex vivo tissue explants. This will also facilitate HCMV spread within the tonsil epithelial cells [96]. Furthermore, HIV-1 gp120 and tat-induced activation of NF-κB and MAPK signaling in these cells increases the extent of HCMV infection. NF-κB activation is a requirement for transactivation of the major immediate early HCMV promoter and promotes the expression of viral IE proteins [192,193,194]. By contrast, MAPK activation is required for HCMV replication and the generation of viral progeny [195].HCMV infection of epithelial cells from human tonsils may also result in the disruption of tight junctions. This will increase paracellular transfer and thus facilitate HIV-1 spread into the mucosal layers [96] (Figure 4). HCMV-induced paracellular spread of HIV-1 in tonsil tissue also enhances virus access to macrophages, dendritic cells, and CD4+ T lymphocytes. In addition, HIV-1-enhanced HCMV infection via paracellular spread to epithelial cells will also lead to HCMV infection of tonsillar DCs and macrophages. Thus, HIV-1- and HCMV-mediated disruption of the tight junctions of the infant tonsillar mucosal epithelial cell tight junctions may impair their barrier function, thereby facilitating paracellular penetration and the initiation of MTCT (Figure 4). HIV-1- and HCMV-co-infected tonsillar explant tissues showed higher levels of target cell infection with both viruses than was observed in tissues infected independently with either virus alone [96]. These results highlight the synergistic effects of both HIV-1 and HCMV with respect to promoting infection. This synergism may result in critical contributions to HIV-1 and HCMV transmission via breast milk when both viruses are present [186,187] and can interact simultaneously with the infant/newborn oral mucosa.4. HIV-1 Proteins gp120 and Tat Promote Invasiveness of Both Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-Positive and HPV-Negative Neoplastic Oral and Genital Epithelial Cells HIV/AIDS may increase the risk of developing cancer. Results from recent studies have revealed that the incidence of HPV-associated oropharyngeal, cervical, and anal cancer is 6, 22, and 80 times higher, respectively, in HIV-infected compared to HIV-uninfected individuals [196,197,198]. HPV is the etiological agent of most oral-genital epithelial carcinomas [199,200]. Although anti-HPV vaccination strategies are effective in preventing virus infection, the value of this approach is limited in people living with HIV (PLWH) because most of these individuals have experienced multiple HPV exposures. HIV-1 may also be a risk factor associated with head and neck as well as HPV-negative oral cancer [201,202,203,204,205]. HIV may increase the risk of developing HPV-associated cancers by attenuating local and systemic immune responses. Moreover, HIV-associated epithelial disruption may promote HPV infection of oral and genital epithelial cells [6]. The addition of HPV-16 pseudovirions (PsVs) to the mucosal surfaces of disrupted tissues led to their paracellular penetration into the epithelium [6]. HPV-16 PsV entry into the basal/parabasal cells (i.e., the site of initiation of the HPV life cycle) was observed. These findings suggest that HIV-associated disruption of mucosal epithelial junctions facilitates paracellular spread by oncogenic HPV virions through strata spinosum and granulosum layers, leading to the infection of basal/parabasal cells. Initiation of this infection can lead to HPV-associated neoplasia. HIV-1-induced disruptions of the tight and adherens junctions in mucosal epithelial cells may also lead to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [206]. EMT, which is a physiologic process, regulates the development of cell lineage identity and cell differentiation associated with embryonic development [207]. EMT also promotes neoplasia, including the growth and metastasis of invasive epithelial cancers [208]. EMT associated with the development of epithelial cell cancer involves multiple steps, beginning with the loss of apicobasal polarity. This event may be followed by loss of adherens and tight junctions as well as critical cell-adhesive properties. Cells in transition develop a spindle cell-type shape. During the final stages of EMT, these cells will also express mesenchymal markers [209,210,211,212,213,214]. While in the intermediate stages of EMT, the cells may express both mesenchymal (i.e., vimentin) and epithelial (i.e., E-cadherin) markers, which are critical factors contributing to cancer cell invasiveness [209,210,211,212,213,214]. The dominant network involving the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling pathway regulates EMT leading to cancer [215]. The mature form of TGF-β binds to TGFβ−R2 and promotes a signaling cascade leading to Smad family transcription factor complex activation. These events lead to the activation of several specific transcriptional regulators, including Slug, Twist1, and Snail. Activation will be followed by the upregulation of N-cadherin, fibronectin, and vimentin and the downregulation of E-cadherin [216,217]. Prolonged interactions (five to seven days) with HPV-16-immortalized anal AKC-2 and cervical CaSki epithelial cells with cell-free-HIV-1 virions and/or viral proteins gp120 and tat leads to the development of increased invasiveness and EMT [218] (Figure 5). Furthermore, adding these viral proteins to cultures of oral epithelial cells, including HPV-16-infected SCC-47 and HPV-16-negative HSC-3 cells, resulted in similar responses. While gp120- and tat-induced EMT resulted in the detachment of poorly-adherent cells, these same cells could undergo reattachment under appropriate conditions. Reattached cells co-expressed vimentin and E-cadherin. This result suggested that these cells had reached the intermediate stage of EMT [218]. Reattached cells also expressed stem cell markers CD44 and CD133 that may contribute to cancer-associated metastasis and invasion. Once E-cadherin expression was restored, and vimentin expression was inhibited, the HIV-induced EMT was reduced, as well as the invasiveness of HPV-16 immortalized anal epithelial and cervical cells [218]. Taken together, these results suggest that direct interactions of extracellular HIV-1 virions and/or gp120 and tat with neoplastic genital or oral mucosal epithelial cells may lead to the development of an EMT phenotype that accelerates the development of HPV-associated malignancies (Figure 5). Recent findings also suggest that the HIV-1 tat protein contributes to the induction of EMT and the increased invasiveness of HPV-negative cancer cells derived from the lung epithelium [219]. In addition, other studies have highlighted the impact of HIV-associated reductions in adherens and tight junction protein expression in both lung and intestinal epithelial cells [220,221]. Collectively, these results suggest that HIV-1 infection may promote the development of malignancy in both HPV-negative and HPV-infected neoplastic epithelial cells. 5. ConclusionsThe multi-layer adult oral mucosal epithelium expresses high levels of anti-HIV innate immune proteins hBD2, hBD3, and secretory leukocyte protease inhibitors that inactivate the virus and thus reduce the rate of oral transmission. By contrast, the oral mucosal epithelia of newborns and infants cannot efficiently prevent HIV-1 penetration because of its minimal stratification and inability to produce sufficient innate immune proteins. HIV-1 infection leads to EBV infection of circulating monocytes, followed by their migration into the oral mucosal epithelium and differentiation into DC/LCs. The spread of EBV from macrophages and LCs into differentiated oral epithelial cells may lead to productive viral replication and extensive cell-to-cell spread of virus progeny within the stratum granulosum of the oral mucosal epithelium, thereby initiating the development of HL. MAPK activation in oral epithelial cells by HIV-1 gp120 and tat leads to the upregulation of NF-κB and MMP-9, thereby disrupting tight and adherens junctions and facilitating HSV-1 paracellular spread. In addition, HIV-induced disruption of epithelial junctions also liberates sequestered nectin-1 and thus facilitates its binding to HSV-1 gD, which promotes HSV-1 spread within the epithelial cells. Disruption of infant tonsil epithelial tight junctions by HIV-1 and HCMV may impair the barrier function of mucosal epithelium and permit paracellular penetration of both viruses and the initiation of MTCT. Extended interactions between HIV-1 cell-free virions or the HIV-1 proteins gp120 and tat with HPV-positive and -negative oral neoplastic epithelial cells increase their EMT phenotype and invasiveness. Altogether, these studies show the molecular mechanism of the interaction between HIV-1 and other pathogens, including EBV, HCMV, HSV-1, and HPV, in the oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium. These interactions impair the barrier and innate immune functions of oropharyngeal epithelium, leading to the increased spread of these viruses within the oral mucosal environment and the progression of existing neoplastic processes of epithelial cells. Additional research may help improve treatment and prophylaxis for HIV/AIDS infection. New approaches could eliminate/reduce the reactivation and spread of opportunistic infections in the oral cavity and maintain the barrier and innate immune functions of the oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium


Title: Air-Liquid Interface Method To Study Epstein-Barr Virus Pathogenesis in Nasopharyngeal Epithelial Cells

INTRODUCTIONEpstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a human pathogen that results in lifelong persistence, with more than 90% seroconversion in the adult population (1). EBV infects epithelial cells and B-lymphocytes, maintaining a latent reservoir in circulating memory B-cells with sporadic reactivation and transmission from oral secretions (2). Unlicensed replication in B-cells can manifest clinically as infectious mononucleosis, while productive replication in epithelial cells can be associated with immune suppression in AIDS patients in a disease known as oral hairy leukoplakia (OHL) (3). Latent infection is linked to all forms of EBV-associated cancers, including nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) (1, 4, 5). EBV genomes are typically not integrated in the host cell, existing as circular episomal genomes in latently infected cells or as linear genomes in lytically replicating cells (6). During latency, the variable numbers of terminal repeats at the ends of the EBV genome fuse to produce uniquely sized BamHI-digested bands, which can be analyzed by Southern blotting in a termini assay to differentiate the states of infection (latent versus lytic and polyclonal versus monoclonal) (7). The state of EBV genomes in NPC tumors is latent and monoclonal, strongly supporting the hypothesis that EBV infection is present at the inception of neoplastic transformation (7, 8). Expression of the EBV oncoprotein latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) in epithelial cells and rat-1 fibroblasts can promote oncogenic properties, including anchorage-independent growth and increased motility, and can also result in the formation of tumors in nude mice (8–12). Despite the association with oncogenic properties, it has been more difficult to elucidate the early events that lead to the establishment of latency and infection persistence in NPC (5, 13–15). The development of a robust in vitro method to mimic differentiation-induced lytic reactivation in polarized epithelia, in primary or immortalized airway epithelial cell lines, could significantly advance our interrogation of EBV pathogenesis in preneoplastic mechanisms.The conventional method to reactivate EBV is by chemical induction with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors and protein kinase C inhibitors (12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate [TPA] and sodium butyrate) (6, 16). Alternatively, the lytic cascade can be triggered by transfecting the immediate early gene product zebra and late glycoprotein gB (6, 17). However, these methods do not recapitulate differentiation-induced reactivation and, depending on the cell line, can be abortive without production of progeny virus to appreciable titers (16, 18, 19). Moreover, not all cell lines are efficiently transfected and chemical induction inadvertently affects global host and viral epigenetics. The organotypic raft culture model established for studies in human papillomavirus (HPV) replication was recently applied to trigger EBV reactivation, resulting in the efficient production of infectious progeny virus that spreads in stratified primary keratinocytes (20). The organotypic raft culture can also be applied to the study of EBV infection in human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT)-immortalized keratinocyte cell lines but is not always as robust a model for viral spread (21). One of the triumphs of the organotypic raft model for the study of EBV reactivation is that it is amenable to many standard DNA/RNA/protein molecular virology techniques evaluated either at the population level or at single-cell resolution by immunostaining and imaging methods (22). Nonetheless, the organotypic raft culture method selects for keratinocytes and is not yet a widely adopted technique. A method that can be applied to additional epithelial cell types and could be readily adopted for widespread use is the air-liquid interface (ALI) culture method, which is conventionally used to polarize primary airway epithelial cells of nasal or bronchial origin (23, 24).The air-liquid interface (ALI) culture method establishes apical and basolateral surfaces by seeding cells on a collagen-coated (or equivalent extracellular matrix-coated) transwell membrane (25). Once an intact epithelium is established, the apical medium is removed and cells are fed through a porous membrane from the basolateral surface (Fig. 1A). Originally, the ALI method was used to establish pseudostratified cultures of primary airway epithelial cells with apical cilia and basolateral nuclei, which can preserve the diversity of cell types resembling native airway epithelium (23, 24). The ALI method can also be applied to immortalized cell lines (26, 27). ALI culture conditions have been routinely used for both primary and immortalized cells to study the pathogenesis of airway microbial pathogens (27, 28). Several studies have used the ALI method to define EBV infection parameters in polarized epithelia (26, 29, 30). However, only the organotypic raft culture has undeniably demonstrated that infection of stratified keratinocytes yields a permissive and productive infection (18, 20). While those few studies have been recognized as crucial and complementary, these intricate culture methods have yet to be widely adopted (31–33).FIG 1 (A) Schematic and (B) timeline of the ALI culture model. Epithelial cells (primary or immortalized) are seeded on a collagen-coated transwell membrane. The polarized cells are fed from the basolateral surface.There are a limited number of authenticated NPC cell lines that continue to harbor latent EBV in culture (14, 34–36). In the present study, the ALI culture method was evaluated for induction of the EBV lytic cascade and production of progeny virus in EBV-infected nasopharyngeal and NPC-derived cell lines that are ordinarily latent in monolayer culture (37–39). The HK1 cell line, described as having originated from a differentiated NPC tumor biopsy specimen and infected with a recombinant (Akata) EBV strain, was amenable to ALI-induced culture conditions (38, 40). Lytic reactivation was then monitored by assessing lytic gene induction, EBV genome replication, and the production of infectious progeny virus. The results of this study demonstrate that the ALI method is proficient at reactivating EBV from the established HK1-EBV cell line, yielding high titers (~106 packaged genome equivalents per ALI culture [1.12 cm2]) that are secreted and infectious, thus providing an alternative method to interrogate EBV permissive replication from polarized epithelia in an established NPC-derived cell line and allowing the elucidation of EBV pathogenesis in nasal epithelia.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONInduction of the EBV lytic cascade.The NPC HK1 cell line is derived from a squamous carcinoma of the nasopharynx (40). The primary biopsy specimen was too small for EBV DNA analysis, but the outgrowing HK1 cell line did not show evidence of EBV infection as determined by staining for EBNA1 or by imaging of virus particles (40). The HK1-EBV cell line was established by in vitro infection of a recombinant EBV originating from the EBV Akata strain (38). In proliferating monolayer cultures, the EBV-infected HK1 cell line does not show induction of the lytic cascade and expresses a type II latency profile characterized by the expression of EBNA1, EBER1/2, LMP1, LMP2A, LMP2B, and BART transcripts (38). In this cell line, expression of lytic genes can be induced by the HDAC inhibitor suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) but is primarily abortive and does not yield progeny virus (16). Epithelial differentiation is a physiological trigger for EBV reactivation and can be induced by culturing cells at the air-liquid interface (32). Therefore, the HK1-EBV cell line was tested using the ALI epithelial cell polarization method for EBV reactivation and the timeline presented in Fig. 1B. Upon removal of apical media, harvest time points begin 1 day after lifting to the air-liquid interface (denoted week 0) and at weekly intervals for a total of 3 weeks. One additional hTERT-immortalized nasopharyngeal cell line (NP460hTERT-EBV) and one natively infected NPC cell line (C666-1) were also evaluated (37–39), but only the HK1-EBV cell line could be maintained under ALI growth conditions and could preserve an intact epithelium under polarized conditions (data not shown).To assess the induction of EBV lytic proteins, HK1 uninfected and EBV-infected cell lysates were harvested at weekly intervals for 3 weeks after lifting to the air-liquid interface. Lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting for expression of immediate early protein zebra, early protein EaD, and the late viral capsid antigen (VCA) p18 protein, as well as the cellular differentiation markers involucrin, keratin 10, and filaggrin (Fig. 2A). Although the HK1 cell line is described as having originated from a differentiated squamous carcinoma biopsy, involucrin was not evident in monolayer culture but was robustly induced in ALI culture, consistent with the hypothesis that the ALI method triggers terminal differentiation. At early time points, involucrin and keratin 10 levels were induced as early as day 1, corresponding to induction of the EBV immediate early switch protein zebra (Fig. 2A). Processed filaggrin levels were not affected and were weak, requiring long exposures, which may reflect the low abundance and variable detection in nasal mucosa (41, 42). The induction of involucrin was strongest in EBV-infected HK1 cells compared to uninfected cells, but both the infected and uninfected cell lines displayed consistent induction of involucrin and keratin 10, supporting the idea that ALI culture triggers differentiation (Fig. 2A). In comparison to the undetectable levels in monolayer culture, the EBV zebra, EaD, and VCA p18 proteins were induced beginning at week 1 to week 2 post-ALI culture (Fig. 2A). Moreover, chemical induction by treatment with TPA and sodium butyrate in monolayer culture triggered lytic reactivation but did not result in the production of progeny virus as determined by the green Raji unit (GRU) assay (Fig. 2A; see also Table S1 in the supplemental material). Late lytic proteins, particularly glycoproteins, are notoriously difficult to probe by immunoblotting; therefore, expression of EBV zebra and EaD and of an additional late glycoprotein, gp350, was also analyzed by immunofluorescence staining. Nuclear staining of EBV zebra and EaD proteins and the cytoplasmic staining of gp350 further support the induction of the lytic cascade (Fig. 2B). Cells that stain positively for gp350 represent cells that have completed induction of the lytic cascade. Only sporadic cells stained positively for gp350 in monolayer culture when reactivated with TPA and sodium butyrate (Fig. 2C). However, gp350-positive cells were much more frequently detected in ALI-cultured cells (~25% to 40%) and were often detected as a group of cells in focal areas of staining (Fig. 2C). These data support the idea that the ALI culture method is more efficient at completing induction of the lytic cascade than chemical reactivation in monolayer culture.10.1128/mSphere.00152-18.1TABLE S1 EBV monolayer culture titers analyzed by the green Raji unit assay. 293 cells are efficiently transfected by zebra (Z) and gB constructs. HK1 and NP460 transfection efficiencies were suboptimal. TPA/sodium butyrate (40 nM/5 mM) treatment lasted up to 5 days. Download TABLE S1, DOCX file, 0.01 MB.Copyright © 2018 Caves et al.2018Caves et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.FIG 2 Induction of EBV lytic proteins in HK1-EBV ALI culture. (A) Immunoblot analysis for the expression of differentiation markers (involucrin, keratin 10, and processed filaggrin) and EBV lytic proteins (zebra, EaD, and VCA p18) in EBV-infected and uninfected ALI-cultured HK1 cell lines. Monolayer HK1 and HK1-EBV cultures with or without TPA/sodium butyrate induction were included for comparison and loaded at 1/10th of total protein lysates. Data for different antibodies are separated by horizontal white lines, and results from the same gel are grouped by a black border. Gels with intervening lanes that were cropped for labeling purposes are indicated by a vertical dotted line. (B) Immunofluorescence staining of HK1 and HK1-EBV cells at week 2 of ALI culture for the EBV lytic antigens zebra, EaD, and gp350 (red). (C) To reflect the frequency of reactivation, three representative fields of view are shown for the gp350 stain of HK1-EBV ALI cultures. For comparison, monolayer cultures were treated with TPA (200 nM) and sodium butyrate (5 mM) for 3 days to induce reactivation. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar, 50 µm. Images were acquired on an Olympus Provis epifluorescence microscope.In addition to analysis of protein levels, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed to assess the global induction of EBV lytic transcripts. Of the 78 open reading frames (ORFs) annotated in the NCBI database, 65 were analyzed (Table S2) and 62 were represented as a heat map (Fig. 3A). Three ORFs, EBER1, EBER2, and BNLF2A, had extremely high numbers of reads and were not represented on the heat map but are illustrated in Table S2. The lytic genes were globally induced by week 2 to 3 in ALI culture, except for LMP1, LMP2B, EBER1/2, and BNLF2a, which showed a consistently decreasing trend overall (Fig. 3A). By comparison, host genes that were differentially regulated by at least 2-fold did not show an overall increase but a decrease in transcript levels which likely represented host shutoff (Fig. 3B; see also Table S3).10.1128/mSphere.00152-18.2TABLE S2 FPKM values of EBV transcripts. RNA-seq processed data from ALI-cultured HK1-EBV cells at weeks 0, 1, 2, and 3. *, high FPKM values not displayed in the heat map (Fig. 3B) are provided in this table. Download TABLE S2, XLSX file, 0.05 MB.Copyright © 2018 Caves et al.2018Caves et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.10.1128/mSphere.00152-18.3TABLE S3 FPKM values of differentially regulated host transcripts. Transcripts with ≥2-fold change between week 3 and week 0 of the HK1-EBV ALI culture are displayed. Upregulated transcripts are not highlighted; highlighted transcripts are downregulated at week 3. Download TABLE S3, XLSX file, 0.03 MB.Copyright © 2018 Caves et al.2018Caves et al.This content is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.FIG 3 Induction of EBV lytic transcripts in HK1-EBV ALI culture. (A) RNA-seq profile of EBV latent and lytic transcripts collected from HK1-EBV cells at week 0 to week 3 of ALI culture. FPKM, fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mappable reads. (B) FPKM values of differentially regulated EBV and host transcripts with ≥2-fold change in HK1-EBV cells between week 3 and week 0 of ALI culture. Sequence reads were aligned separately to the EBV genome or the human genome and represented as FPKM, which takes into account the total number of mapped reads, and the data can be compared between week 0 and week 3 but cannot be compared between EBV and host values.The majority of EBV transcripts are expressed at up to 104 fragments per kilobase of transcript per million mappable reads (FPKM), but the abundant expression of EBERs at 106 to 107 FPKM is intriguing (Table S2). EBERs are noncoding nuclear transcripts that are abundantly expressed in all EBV-associated cancers and latencies, with up to 106 copies per cell in B-cell infections (43). Therefore, the abundant expression of EBERs is exploited for the diagnosis of EBV-associated cancers and diseases by EBER in situ hybridization (EBER-ISH) (44). One understanding of EBER function is that EBER2 can serve as a ribonucleoprotein complex to recruit DNA binding proteins to the terminal repeats on the EBV genome (45). The only disease pathology known to be associated with permissive replication in epithelial infection is the AIDS-associated nonmalignant lesion known as OHL that manifests on tongue and gingival tissues (3, 32, 44). Paradoxically, EBER transcripts are suppressed and sometimes not detected in OHL formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues, which has called into question the function of EBERs during EBV reactivation (46, 47). The diagnosis of OHL may require secondary confirmation by staining for zebra (48). The presence of highly abundant EBER transcripts detected in the ALI culture method is consistent with the recent discovery that EBER transcripts are also detected by EBER-ISH throughout the layers of the stratified epithelium in organotypic raft cultures, which would suggest that EBERs are indeed expressed during EBV reactivation in the differentiated apical layers (20). These findings, combined with observations from the present study, would seem to imply that the suppression of EBERs may be unique to OHL.EBV genome replication and amplification.EBV genome amplification and replication were assessed by quantitative PCR (qPCR) and Southern blot analyses. Encapsidated genomes from DNase-resistant Hirt-purified extrachromosomal DNA were measured by qPCR. Total (encapsidated and nonencapsidated) EBV genomes increased more than 2 log10, beginning at 6.1 × 104 EBV genomes per ALI culture at week 0 and reaching 2.5 × 107 EBV genomes per ALI culture at week 3 (Fig. 4A). The majority of genomes were encapsidated with less than 1 log10 difference, starting at 1.1 × 104 EBV genomes per ALI culture at week 0 and reaching 3.0 × 106 EBV genomes per ALI culture at week 3 (Fig. 4A).FIG 4 Measuring EBV genome amplification and replication in HK1-EBV ALI culture. (A) Quantitative PCR measuring EBV genome equivalents in HK1 ALI-cultured EBV-infected cells. The averaged value was calculated from three biological triplicates, and each biological triplicate value and each error were determined from three technical replicates. Encapsidated genomes are DNase resistant (+DNase), and total (encapsidated and nonencapsidated) genomes were determined in the absence of DNase treatment (-DNase). (B) Termini assay of ALI-cultured HK1-EBV cells in comparison to zebra (Z)- and gB-transfected monolayer-cultured cells. Shown is a Southern blot of BamHI-digested genomic DNA hybridized to a random-primed and radiolabeled Xho1.9 fragment DNA probe located on the BamHI-digested fragment leftward of the EBV terminal repeats. Data are displayed from the same blot and exposure time. Intervening lanes were cropped for labeling purposes and are demarcated by a vertical dotted line.EBV latent genomes are circular and are detected as a single band (>10 kb) by Southern blotting (7). Replicating EBV genomes are linear and differ by 500-bp increments corresponding to the number of tandem terminal repeats (7, 48). At week 0 and week 1, a single band indicative of latent genomes greater than 10 kb in size was detected (Fig. 4B). In comparison at weeks 2 and 3, multiple bands smaller than 10 kb in size were detected with an overall increase in hybridization intensity for all detected bands, indicative of amplified replicating genomes (Fig. 4B). However, only one band associated with latent genomes was detected in monolayer culture and there was no appreciable increase in band intensity, indicating that EBV genomes were not replicating as efficiently as in ALI culture (Fig. 4B).Production of EBV progeny virus.Production of EBV progeny virus was analyzed by determining the titers of infectious virus with the GRU assay and by imaging with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Raji cells are a Burkitt lymphoma cell line that can be readily superinfected with EBV, but the endogenous EBV genome is truncated and will not replicate, thus enabling the determination of the titers of ALI culture-derived green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing virus (49, 50). Overall titers, including extracellular and cell-associated virus titers, increased from week 0 to week 3. Extracellular virus titers were consistently 2 log10 higher than cell-associated virus titers, as would be expected from immature cell-associated virions. By week 3, there was a total value of 1,675,933 GRUs per ALI, demonstrating that abundant and infectious EBV virions were produced (Fig. 5A). This increase at week 3 was ~30-fold higher than the values measured at week 0, when production of progeny virus began. In comparison to the ALI culture results, no infectious units were measured in uninduced HK1-EBV monolayer-cultured cells (Table S1). Despite the expected loss of sample from Hirt purification, at week 2 to 3 of ALI culture there were 3.0 × 106 to 4.3 × 106 DNase-resistant encapsidated EBV genomes per ALI culture (1.12 cm2), which corresponds to 1.425 × 106 to 1.676 × 106 total GRUs per ALI culture (Fig. 4A and 5A). These data support the idea that the majority of encapsidated virions produced from ALI culture are indeed infectious.FIG 5 Production of infectious virus in HK1-EBV ALI culture. (A) Green Raji unit (GRU) titers measuring numbers of infectious units were determined for extracellular and cell-associated virus from HK1-EBV ALI cultures. Error bars were calculated from four replicate green Raji titers. Analyses of titers from week 2 were repeated in three biological replicates with the following values: 1.15 × 106 ± 3.8 × 105 GRU/ml (extracellular) and 4,000 ± 949 GRU/ml (cell associated). (B) Transmission electron micrograph (TEM) of HK1-EBV cells at week 2 of ALI culture. Herpesvirus-like particles (~250 nm) were visually identified by an independent microscopist. A packaged mature virion (arrow) and unpackaged immature virions (arrowhead) are illustrated.HK1-EBV ALI cultures harvested at week 2 were imaged for evidence of EBV virions by TEM and assessed by an independent microscopist. Although extracellular virions are largely washed away during TEM processing, intracellular virions can be captured. The TEM images show an encapsidated herpesvirus-like virion of 200 to 250 nm and two immature virions in the cytoplasm (Fig. 5B). Additionally, 1 to 2 cells layers were observed in the TEM images, illustrating that the HK1-EBV ALI cultures were polarized but not necessarily stratified (Fig. 5B), which is representative of the pseudostratified differentiated ALI cultures of primary nasal epithelia (24). These data support the idea that the ALI method is a robust method for inducing fulminant EBV lytic reactivation without the need for chemical induction. The outcome of this study from an NPC-derived cell line perhaps appears to contradict the observation of latent infection in NPC tumors (7). Given that there was no evidence of EBV infection in the original NPC biopsy specimen from which HK1 cells were derived, it is plausible that the outcome of infection might differ from that seen with NPC tumor cells that have evolved to sustain latent infection in vivo (40). Despite the paucity of authenticated NPC cell lines, it would be interesting to test additional NPC cell lines that originate from tumors with confirmed EBV positivity (34). Furthermore, since HK1 cells can be recombinantly modified and stably selected, the HK1-EBV ALI culture model offers the potential to test host and viral factors which may predispose a neoplastic cell to EBV latent infection (25, 38). The ALI polarization culture method has been established for primary nasal epithelial cells (24). Furthermore, EBV infection as defined by the presence of latent or lytic markers is not detected in nasal biopsy specimens of histologically normal areas, likely reflecting rare or focal airway epithelial infections in asymptomatic carriers (51, 52). Due to the absence of detection of EBV infection in situ from nasal biopsy specimens of healthy tissue, in theory it is possible to study de novo EBV infection in ALI-cultured primary nasal epithelial cells. Ultimately, the creation of an EBV infection model and analytical methods to study (widespread or focal) infection in polarized ALI cultures of primary nasal epithelial cells would be the most relevant system to evaluate EBV de novo infection in mucociliated epithelia (53). Given the limited availability of primary nasal cells, the ALI culture method described for the HK1-EBV cell line thus offers a widely accessible alternative for the study of EBV permissive replication in polarized epithelia.To date, there have been a few exemplar studies that have explored the effect of EBV proteins on differentiation, or differentiation-induced effects on EBV infection (18, 54–56). These experimental models include calcium-induced differentiation, suspension of cells in methylcellulose, and organotypic raft cultures (57). Keratinocytes grown in monolayer can be induced to differentiate by high levels of calcium, which has been applied to EBV studies by treatment with fetal bovine serum (FBS) and/or by the direct addition of calcium (18, 21, 56). A second method to differentiate keratinocytes is by suspending cells in methylcellulose, which has been applied to the study of EBV-infected cells and of the effect of the EBV latent protein, LMP2A, on differentiation (21, 57). The methylcellulose method can recapitulate differentiation in a three-dimensional (3D) culture model, but the analysis of these cells in a semisolid matrix is often limited to protein lysates harvested from the cell population (21, 57). Organotypic rafts provide single-cell resolution by formalin-fixed paraffin-embedding (FFPE) sectioning and staining and serve as a robust model for culturing fully stratified squamous keratinocytes, but the keratinocyte-enriching media used to establish organotypic rafts may not culture all NPC cell types (22). In principle, organotypic rafts, originally established for the study of EBV infection in oral keratinocytes, can also be developed for nasal keratinocytes (18, 20). The ALI culture method ultimately extends the application of polarization to other epithelial cell types. When applied to primary cells, ALI culture preserves the diversity of cell types represented in airway epithelium, including ciliated, mucosecretory, and basal cells (22). The ALI method described in this study for an NPC cell line (HK1) permits the analysis of protein expression at the population level but also with single-cell resolution (Fig. 2), demonstrating that the ALI culture method, as in the use of organotypic rafts, is amenable to a variety of molecular virology analytical techniques, including those involving DNA, RNA, protein, imaging, and the collection of infectious virus. Therefore, ALI culture is a method complementary to the use of organotypic rafts that can model EBV infection for the additional cell types represented in polarized airway epithelium.MATERIALS AND METHODSSetup of the ALI culture.The overall setup of the ALI culture for the HK1 cell line has been previously described (25). Detailed experimental parameters are as follows. A total of 0.5 × 106 cells are seeded on thin-coat collagen-coated polyester membrane transwells (Corning) (0.4 µm pore size, 12-mm diameter) in 0.5 ml apical medium. Cells are fed from the basolateral surface with 1 ml of media used for the propagation of HK1 cells (RPMI 1640 supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum). Thin-coat collagen is prepared by diluting 0.1 mg/ml stock of fibrous collagen (IV) from human placenta (Sigma) in water supplemented with 200 µl glacial acetic acid (100% [vol/vol]), with rocking overnight at 4°C to facilitate solubility. The stock collagen solution is sterile filtered and further diluted 1:10 in 0.1 M Na2CO3 to a working concentration. Collagen stocks can be aliquoted and frozen at −20°C, but diluted stocks should be made fresh. For a 12-well plate, 250 µl of the collagen working stock is used to coat the apical surface of the transwell at 37°C for a minimum of 30 min and up to 1 h. Before the cells are seeded, the collagen solution is aspirated and gently rinsed once with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). At 1 to 2 days postseeding, a confluent layer should form. The apical medium is removed, and the basolateral medium is replenished. Beginning as early as the next day, a successful ALI culture is established when there is no medium leakage into the apical surface, and that day is noted as day zero. Cells at the ALI are fed twice a week from the basolateral compartment and cultured for up to 3 additional weeks. The uninfected cells should have minimal apical leakage over the 3-week period and should be gently removed at every feeding. The ALI culture of EBV-infected cells increasingly disrupts the monolayer, and apical leakage is expected to increase over the 3-week period, but the integrity of the monolayer should still be apparent by visual inspection with phase microscopy.Analysis of EBV protein induction by immunoblotting, immunofluorescence, and RNA-seq.The subsequent procedures are described for a 12-well plate transwell configuration. At weekly intervals, protein lysates were harvested. The basolateral media and apical leakage were removed. Cells were gently rinsed once in PBS and lysed in 50 µl of radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer supplemented with 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 2 mM activated sodium orthovanadate, and a 1:100 dilution of protease and phosphate inhibitor cocktails (Sigma). The cells were lysed directly in the transwell by rocking at 4°C for 30 min followed by scraping and were clarified at ≥20,000 × g for 5 min at 4°C. Protein concentration, separation by SDS-PAGE, and immunoblotting was performed as previously described (25). Antibodies for immunoblotting were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnologies (EBV zebra clone BZ1; EaD clone 0261; filaggrin clone AKH1; HSC70 clone B-6), Thermo Scientific (EBV VCA p18; keratin 10 clone Ab-2), and Sigma (involucrin clone SY5).For immunofluorescence staining, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature and punched out of the transwell with the lid of a cryovial (or by the use of the top end of a P1000 tip cut to the size of the transwell). The use of a scalpel is not recommended since this can wrinkle the membrane and create an uneven surface for imaging. Cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100–PBS for 5 min and washed in wash buffer (0.05% Tween 20–PBS) followed by blocking with 1% bovine serum albumin–PBS for 1 h at room temperature. Cells were probed with primary antibody diluted in blocking buffer and incubated overnight at 4°C in a humidified chamber. Following three rinses in wash buffer, cells were incubated with secondary antibody diluted in PBS for 1 h at room temperature. For EBV zebra (clone BZ1), EaD (clone 0261), and gp350 (clone 0221) stains, all primary antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) were diluted 1:100. EBV zebra and EaD were detected with Cy3-conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch) at 3.75 µg/ml. EBV gp350 was detected with biotin-conjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG diluted at 3 µg/ml and rhodamine red-conjugated streptavidin at 0.78 µg/ml (Jackson ImmunoResearch). Cells were counterstained in DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) and mounted in aqueous mounting media. Epifluorescence images were acquired on an Olympus Provis microscope with Q-Capture software. All images were adjusted for equal levels of intensity and brightness.Total RNA was isolated using Trizol (Invitrogen) from HK1-EBV cells after induction of the lytic cycle at the indicated time points (week 0, week 1, week 2, and week 3). Briefly, cells were lysed in 1 ml of Trizol, purified with chloroform, precipitated with isopropanol followed by two washes of 75% ethanol, and resuspended in water. DNase-treated RNA (Turbo DNA-free kit; Ambion) was submitted to the Health Sciences Sequencing Core at the Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh for quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) analysis and quantitation on an Agilent TapeStation and Qubit. rRNA is susceptible to degradation during EBV reactivation; therefore, the expected RNA integrity number (RIN) can range from 2.4 to 5.5, with an expected total RNA yield in the range of 0.2 to 7 µg per ALI culture sample, decreasing as reactivation progresses. A more accurate measure of transcript integrity should be determined by the percentage of nucleotide fragments larger than 200 bp or by Northern blotting for intact EBV transcripts such as the abundant nonpolyadenylated EBERs.Following QA/QC analysis, DNase-treated RNA samples were subjected to rRNA depletion using a Ribo-Zero Epidemiology kit (Illumina) and were converted into a deep sequencing library using Illumina’s Truseq stranded total RNA kit. Deep sequencing was performed on a NextSeq500 platform using a Mid-output kit and a 2 × 75-cycle paired-end run. We obtained 47.1, 49.4, 46.9, and 47.7 million reads for samples at week 0, week 1, week 2, and week 3, respectively. Sequence reads were trimmed by 10 nucleotides based on read quality and subsequently aligned to the EBV Akata genome (GenBank accession number KC207813.1) or to human reference genome hg38 using TopHat2 (58) and the options “—no-novel-juncs -r 300—library-type fr-firststrand.” Among the total reads, 0.4%, 0.2%, 0.8%, and 0.8% aligned to the EBV genome for sample week 0, week 1, week 2, and week 3, respectively; the alignment rates for hg38 were 82.7%, 84.1%, 80.0%, and 82.2%, respectively.To generate a heat map of EBV transcript abundance, Cufflinks (59) was used to calculate FPKM values of EBV genes, which were then applied to the heatmap.2 tool in the gplots package (60). For analyzing differential host gene expression, the algorithm CuffDiff2 (61) was used to compare week 0 transcriptomes and week 3 transcriptomes with the options “—library-type fr-firststrand—compatible-hits-norm—max-bundle-frags 1000000000000.” Table S3 in the supplemental material includes data from host genes that exhibited a 2-fold change between the week 0 and week 3 samples.Analysis of EBV DNA genome replication by qPCR and Southern blotting.Cells were harvested by scraping in 100 µl of PBS followed by three cycles of rapid freezing-thawing to release virions. Cellular debris was pelleted at ≥20,000 × g for 5 min, and the supernatant was harvested and split for subsequent experiments performed with or without DNase treatment. Half of the sample was treated with a Turbo DNA-free kit (Ambion) to isolate encapsidated genomes. Both the samples subjected to DNase treatment and those left untreated were subjected to Hirt purification for isolation of extrachromosomal EBV genomes (22). For every 25-µl sample, 415 µl Hirt buffer, 5 µl of 20 mg/ml proteinase K, and 25 µl of 10% SDS were added and incubated for 2 h at 37°C. This was followed by phenol-chloroform extraction (470 µl phenol-chloroform-isoamyl alcohol [25:24:1]) and separation into the aqueous phase by spinning at ≥20,000 × g for 10 min, followed by washing the aqueous layer with 470 µl of chloroform and collecting the aqueous layer by spinning at ≥20,000 × g for 10 min. DNA was precipitated with 0.1× 3 M sodium acetate and 2.5× 100% ethanol and was incubated overnight at −20°C. To pellet DNA, samples were spun at ≥20,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, washed with 300 µl 70% ethanol, and pelleted again at ≥20,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C. The DNA pellet was air dried and resuspended in 12.5 µl of water. Of note, it would also be possible to perform the qPCR procedure using column-purified total genomic DNA and normalization to a cellular target but the procedure would need to be empirically optimized for sensitivity and template quantity.For qPCR, 2 µl of the Hirt-purified DNA was analyzed by the Sybr green absolute quantitation method. A standard curve was generated with 100 to 109 copies per reaction using a BALF5 plasmid (7,782 bp) as the template (62). Reaction mixtures were assembled with a Maxima SYBR green qPCR master mix kit (Thermo Scientific) with 0.3 µM of each primer, using recommended cycle conditions with ROX as a passive reference dye in a total reaction volume of 10 µl. Primer sequences are as follows: for qBALF5-F, 5′ GAGCGATCTTGGCAATCTCT 3′; for qBALF5-R, 5′ TGGTCATGGATCTGCTAAACC 3′. Reactions were amplified on a StepOnePlus instrument (Applied Biosystems) and analyzed with StepOne software (v2.3). Average values and standard deviations were calculated from triplicate technical replicas and three independent experiments. Water and uninfected HK1 ALI culture cells from corresponding weeks were used as negative controls. End values were represented as BALF5 copy number per ALI culture.For Southern blotting, total genomic DNA was harvested from Trizol-lysed cells or could also be harvested by column purification (GeneJET genomic DNA purification kit with RNase treatment; Thermo Scientific). Total DNA was isolated from the nonaqueous phase according to manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). The DNA harvested from each ALI culture was digested with BamHI, ethanol precipitated in the presence of 5 to 10 µg of glycogen, and loaded on an agarose gel. A linearized Xho1a (1.9-kb) probe was generated by random-prime synthesis, radiolabeled, and hybridized as previously described (63).Measuring EBV titers.Residual media on the apical side were collected. Intracellular and extracellular virus was harvested by scraping cells in 100 µl of RPMI media followed by an additional 50-µl rinse and was collected to reach a total volume of 200 µl. The sample was clarified by spinning at 500 × g for 5 min, and the supernatant was collected and stored at 4°C as extracellular virus. The cell pellet was resuspended in 200 µl of RPMI media followed by three cycles of rapid freezing-thawing to release intracellular virus. Disrupted cells were spun down at 500 × g for 5 min, and the supernatant was collected and stored at 4°C as cell-associated virus.Infectious titer was determined by the green Raji Unit (GRU) assay (50). In a 96-well plate, 90 µl of RPMI medium was added to 10 µl of virus stock and titrated in 10-fold serial dilutions (100 to 109). Ten thousand Raji cells in 10 µl media were added to each well and, after a 48-h inoculation period, reactivated with 200 nM TPA and 5 mM sodium butyrate overnight. A fluorescence microscope was used to count the number of GFP-positive cells in each well to determine the number of GRU per milliliter.TEM.HK1 and HK1-EBV ALI cultures harvested at week 2 were fixed in cold 2.5% glutaraldehyde–0.01 M PBS. Specimens were rinsed in PBS, postfixed in 1% osmium tetroxide with 1% potassium ferricyanide, rinsed in PBS, dehydrated through a graded ethanol series, and embedded in Poly/Bed 812 (Luft formulations). Semithin (300-nm-thick) sections were cut on a Leica Reichart Ultracut ultramicrotome, stained with 0.5% toluidine blue–1% sodium borate, and examined under the light microscope. Ultrathin sections (65 nm thick) were stained with uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead citrate and examined on a JEOL 1011 transmission electron microscope with a side-mount AMT 2-k digital camera (Advanced Microscopy Techniques).


Title: EBV Association with Lymphomas and Carcinomas in the Oral Compartment

1. IntroductionEpstein–Barr virus (EBV) is a ubiquitous human tumor virus that resides as a lifelong infection in the oral epithelium and B lymphocytes that involves latency and productive viral replication (Figure 1). B lymphocytes support the latent phase of the viral lifecycle exemplified by a restricted viral gene expression program that supports viral evasion of immune surveillance and long-term persistence [1]. Latently infected EBV-positive B lymphocytes can be reactivated into the productive lifecycle, referred to as viral reactivation.Epithelial cells also support the productive phase of the viral lifecycle following a coordinated viral gene expression cascade resulting in amplification of the viral genome and production of progeny virions [2]. Latency in epithelial cells is observed in carcinomas and in basal tonsillar epithelial cells [3,4].Infection with EBV is typically acquired asymptomatically in childhood. However, delayed infection until adolescence often causes infectious mononucleosis, a self-limiting lymphoproliferative response to primary EBV infection [5]. Although long-term carriage of the virus is generally benign, EBV is a tumor virus associated with several epithelial and lymphoid malignancies that reflect the tissue tropism of the virus. EBV linked malignancies occur more frequently in immunosuppressed individuals but also develop in immunocompetent persons. EBV-associated cancers include nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), gastric carcinoma (GC), oral squamous carcinoma, Burkitt’s lymphoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, diffuse large B cell lymphoma, NK/T-cell lymphomas, and post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease. This review will focus on oral lymphomas and carcinomas associated with EBV infection.EBV is primarily transmitted through saliva. Early studies showed that infectious EBV is secreted in saliva from patients with infectious mononucleosis and in healthy adults [6]. In healthy individuals, EBV can be detected intermittently over a period of 15 months, with 25% of healthy adults secreting EBV at every sampled time point [7]. The level of viral shedding tends to be stable for days to months and is quickly replaced within 2 min after swallowing [8]. Patients recovering from infectious mononucleosis typically shed higher viral loads for at least 6 months after convalescence [9]. HIV-infected individuals shed higher EBV loads in saliva than HIV-negative individuals. Anti-retroviral therapy to improve the immune status of HIV-infected individuals decreases EBV loads suggesting an additional benefit of anti-retroviral therapy in limiting oral EBV transmission [10]. However, HIV infected individuals on anti-retroviral therapy are at a higher risk of developing an EBV-associated cancer compared to the general population [11].Epithelial cells in the oral cavity are the major producers of EBV found in saliva [8]. EBV infects and replicates in various epithelial tissues in the oral cavity that include the gingiva, tongue, and tonsillar epithelium [12]. EBV can directly infect an epithelial cell or be transcytosed through polarized oral epithelial cells [13]. Entry is mediated by direct fusion at the plasma membrane or internalized by endocytosis [14]. Various binding interactions between viral glycoproteins and cellular receptors allow for entry into epithelial cells include binding of gH/gL to either integrins, ephrinA2 receptor, and non-muscle myosin heavy chain IIA, viral gB with neuropilin 1. BMRF-2, a viral glycoprotein, can bind to αvβ1 integrins on basolateral surface of polarized epithelial cells, and viral gp350/220 can bind to complement receptor 2 (CR2/CD21) in cases when CR2 is expressed on epithelial cells [15]. Following entry and nuclear delivery of the viral DNA, the linear EBV genome circularizes by recombination of its terminal repeats and is maintained as an extrachromosomal DNA that can be amplified through rolling circle replication [16]. The cell type that produces EBV virions alters the tropism of the virus based on HLA class II interactions with gp42 [17]. Epithelial derived virions have higher levels of the gH/gL/gp42 complex than B cell derived virions, which increases the efficiency of B cell infection [17].The importance of epithelial cells in the lifecycle of EBV has proven difficult to study due to challenges associated with in vitro epithelial infection. Infection of primary epithelial cells in monolayer culture typically is not efficient and viral DNA is rapidly lost within days [18]. In addition, a non-permissive EBV infection is observed with growth arrest of infected primary nasopharyngeal epithelial cells [19]. In contrast, primary epithelial cells grown in organotypic raft culture, which model the differentiated and stratified layers of the epithelium, indicate that differentiated epithelial cells support robust EBV replication and spread [20]. Differentiation-induced transcription factors (KLF4 and PRDM1) have been identified in regulating the expression of EBV immediate early genes, BZLF1 and BRLF1 [21]. BZLF1 and BRLF1 encode the Z and R transactivators, respectively, that initiate the productive EBV replication cycle. Infection of carcinoma cell lines requires selective pressure to retain the viral genome achieved by using EBV recombinants that carry antibiotic resistance markers and typically results in a latent EBV infection. EBV-positive carcinomas also exhibit a latent EBV infection, which is not typically observed in normal oral epithelial and may reflect the poor differentiation state of tumors. Laser capture microdissection of tonsillar basal epithelial cells detected latent EBV encoded RNAs (EBERs) by quantitative reverse transcription PCR in the absence of EBV immediate early transcripts, supporting the possibility of transient latency in tonsillar basal epithelial cells [4].EBV infection of circulating resting B lymphocytes in the oral cavity initiates a journey for life-long persistence in the memory B cell compartment. It is also important to note that EBV may directly infect germinal center or memory B cells [22]. Entry into B lymphocytes is mediated by attachment of viral glycoprotein gp350/220 to the complement receptor 2 (CR2/CD21) and interaction of the tripartite glycoprotein complex of gH/gL/gp42 with HLA class II [23]. Endocytosis is required for internalization and gB mediates membrane fusion for viral escape from the acidified endosome. Following viral genome circularization, the viral genome is maintained as an episome [24]. When B cells proliferate and divide, the EBV episome is replicated once per cell cycle by DNA replication licensing at the latent origin of DNA replication, OriP [25]. In the first week after infection, a pre-latent phase is observed with expression of EBV nuclear antigens (EBNAs) and lytic genes [26]. The viral genome is epigenetically silenced using the host epigenetic machinery. DNA methylation and repressive histone modifications deposited on the viral genome restrict viral gene expression [27]. As the EBV-infected B lymphocyte navigates through the B cell maturation/differentiation states, various latency programs are established that support B cell growth and survival of the infected B cells, while avoiding immune surveillance [28]. Infected resting B cells exhibit the growth/latency III program characterized by expression of all EBV nuclear antigens (EBNA-1, -2, -3A, -3B, -3C and -LP), the latent membrane proteins (LMP1, -2A, -2B), and EBV non-coding RNAs: the EBV encoded RNAs (EBERs), BamHI fragment A rightward long non-coding transcripts (BARTs) and BART microRNAs. EBV-infected germinal center B cells express the default/latency II program restricted to EBNA1, LMP1, LMP2, and non-coding RNAs. Infected memory B cells that are dividing express only EBNA1 and viral non-coding RNAs (latency 1), while non-viral gene products are detected in non-dividing memory B cells (latency 0). The infected memory B cells provide a long-lived cellular reservoir for EBV persistence and life-long infection. Terminal differentiation of the memory B cell to a plasma cell in response to antigenic stimulation reactivates the EBV productive lifecycle [29] Expression of differentiation-induced plasma cell transcription factors (PRDM1 and XBP-1) activate the expression of EBV immediate early genes BZLF1 and BRLF1 [30].2. Mechanisms of EBV OncogenesisEBV infects over 90% of adults worldwide, and EBV is associated with 1% of all cancers [31]. EBV immortalizes B lymphocytes into lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) [32]. However, intrinsic and extrinsic tumor suppression protects the host from developing EBV-associated cancers. Immunosurveillance, an extrinsic tumor suppressor activity, effectively eliminates EBV-infected lymphoblasts, such that immunocompromised individuals are more prone to developing EBV-associated cancers [33]. In contrast, primary epithelial cells are not readily immortalized by EBV without prior genetic alterations [19]. Such transformed epithelial cell become latently infected with EBV in vitro and acquire oncogenic phenotypes similar to what is seen in EBV-associated carcinomas [34]. Thus, the cellular context of genetic and epigenetic alterations can influence the oncogenic outcome in the presence of EBV. EBV infection not only can initiate oncogenic processes as demonstrated by B cell immortalization, but also could contribute to tumor progression and tumor evolution. Thus, EBV likely exerts distinct oncogenic activities depending on the tumor context.EBV latent infection is a shared feature among EBV-associated malignancies (Table 1). The EBV latent genes have been shown to contribute to various oncogenic phenotypes supported by LMP activation of signaling pathways and by EBNA transcriptional activation that combined act to reprogram host gene expression [35]. In addition to promoting growth, EBV infection and latent proteins contribute to resistance to apoptosis, attenuated responsiveness to differentiation, and enhancement of cellular invasion [36]. Table 2 summarizes known functions encoded by EBV latent genes.High viral loads due to deregulated viral replication can also contribute to the tumorigenic process. Individuals with infectious mononucleosis typically exhibit higher viral loads in blood and saliva for months after diagnosis and are at an increased risk for developing Hodgkin’s lymphoma [37]. Furthermore, elevated EBV antibody titers frequently precede tumor onset by a few years, a phenomenon observed in EBV-associated Burkitt’s lymphoma, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, and nasopharyngeal carcinoma [38,39]. Although not well understood, the elevated EBV antibody titer likely reflects increased viral loads and viral reactivation. In the context of viral opportunism, higher EBV loads likely increase the risk of infecting premalignant or malignant cells with the infection process inducing a rapid tumor progression.EBV infection has been shown to increase genomic instability by various mechanisms [40]. EBNA-1 can induce the production of reactive oxygen species promoting DNA damage. LMP-1 inhibits DNA damage responses and DNA repair. EBNA-3C interferes will mitotic spindle checkpoint allowing DNA damage to propagate into the next generation of cells [41]. In addition, EBV infection induces the activation-induced family of cytidine deaminases/apolipoprotein B mRNA editing catalytic polypeptide-like (AID/APOBEC), enzymes with mutagenic activities. AID is responsible for somatic hypermutation (SHM) of B cell immunoglobulin genes undergoing class switch recombination in the germinal center [42]. EBV induced AID activation has been implicated in the translocation of MYC into the immunoglobulin heavy chain or light chain loci, resulting in the overexpression of the c-Myc oncogene. APOBEC deaminates viral RNA/DNA to restrict viral replication but can alter the host genome as well [43].EBV induces epigenetic alterations that regulate the expression of tumor suppressor expression and apoptotic responses. Nasopharyngeal carcinoma and EBV-associated gastric carcinoma display CpG island hypermethylator phenotypes that silence tumor suppressor gene expression. Common tumor suppressors silenced in NPC and EBV-associated gastric cancer include: RASSF1, CDKN2A/p16, CDH1, and PTEN [44]. Importantly, EBV-associated gastric carcinoma is classified as having an extremely high DNA hypermethylation epigenotype [45]. EBNA-3A and EBNA-3C epigenetically repress BIM, p14, p15, p16, and p18 gene transcription by recruiting polycomb repressive complex 2 [46]. LMP-1 and LMP-2 signaling have been shown to activate the DNA methyltransferases 1, 3A, and 3B, that subsequently leads to tumor suppressor gene silencing [47]. Additionally, LCLs, Burkitt’s lymphoma, and EBV infected B cells display similar tumor suppressor gene silencing due to targeted promoter DNA hypermethylation, despite the observation of global hypomethylation [48]. Alterations in histone modifications are also observed. The repressive histone H3K27 trimethylation mark is elevated in NPC, but not in other EBV associated cancers; while H3K27me3 and H4K20 trimethylation is reduced in EBV-positive lymphoblastoid cells compared to activated EBV-negative B cells [49]. Unlike mutations, epigenetic modification are reversible and identify a potential target for treatment of EBV-associated cancer.In this review, we will describe various molecular mechanisms utilized by EBV to promote oncogenesis. Specifically, we will direct our attention to EBV-associated lymphomas and carcinomas affecting the tissues and organs of the oral compartment either directly or indirectly. While many of the precise mechanisms remain unclear our goal is to present a current summation of established links between EBV and cancer development and to identify the questions that remain. EBV driven malignancy is a complex process that differs between the various EBV-associated cancer types. It is important to understand both the similarities and differences in the role of the virus across different cancers to prevent and treat EBV-related neoplasms.3. EBV-Associated Oral LymphomaLymphoma is a disease of the lymphatic system characterized by malignant outgrowth of lymphoid cells or lymphoid precursors [50]. Oral lymphomas can arise in the oral cavity or in Waldeyer’s ring, a ring of lymphoid tissue surrounding the oropharynx and nasopharynx. Oral lymphomas are not common, constituting 3% of total lymphomas and 4% of those in patients with AIDS [51]. Although EBV is a potent growth transforming agent of B cells, lymphomagenesis likely results from the complex interaction of viral gene expression and host genetic alterations. The three major types of B cell lymphomas etiologically linked with EBV infection are Burkitt’s lymphoma (BL), Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL) and diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL). DLBCL and BL are most commonly observed in the oral compartment, but also frequently at other sites [51]. Manifestations of EBV-associated non-Hodgkin lymphomas such as DLBCL and BL include swelling or ulcerations of the gingiva, tonsils, buccal mucosa, tongue, palate, tooth mobility (alveolar bone loss), and pain. These cancers are often misdiagnosed as symptoms can mimic periapical abscesses/endodontic inflammation.3.1. Burkitt’s LymphomaBurkitt Lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive non-Hodgkin B cell lymphoma currently classified into three variants based on both clinical features and cancer epidemiology: Endemic, sporadic and immunodeficiency-associated [52]. Dennis Burkitt initially described endemic BL in equatorial Africa and Papua New Guinea which led to the discovery of EBV as first human tumor virus [53]. Geographically, endemic BL is restricted to regions where malarial transmission is year-round [54]. Endemic BL is a pediatric cancer accounting for 30–50% of all childhood cancers in these regions [55,56,57]. The peak incidence is between 6–9 years of age presenting twice more often in males than females [52]. Endemic BL presents as an extranodal tumor at various anatomical sites that includes the jaw, abdomen, thyroid, kidney, adrenal glands, breast, and ovaries and is almost always positive for the Epstein–Barr virus [55]. Sporadic BL is a rare cancer that occurs throughout the world, appearing 3 times more often in males than females across a wide age group. Sporadic BL comprises 50% of pediatric lymphomas and less than 2% of adult lymphomas [52,58]. EBV is less frequently detected in sporadic BL, with 10–30% of cases being EBV-positive [59]. Although, in some areas such as NE Brazil, EBV association can be as high as 80% [60]. Sporadic BL is three times higher in males than females and frequently manifests within the abdominal region both in lymph nodes and extranodally [61]. Other affected sites include the oropharynx, sinus tract, kidneys, and breast. The third variant of BL was described in persons infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and termed immunodeficiency-associated BL. These tumors can present at various anatomical sites as nodal or extranodal tumors [52]. Despite anti-retroviral therapy and maintenance of normal CD4 T cells, immunodeficiency-associated BL constitutes 20–40% of lymphomas in HIV-infected individuals with 30 to 40% of these being EBV-positive [62].Common to all BL variants is translocation of MYC into the immunoglobulin heavy chain or light chain loci. MYC is placed under the control of the immunoglobulin enhancer resulting in overexpression of the MYC oncogene. Translocation of MYC on chromosome 8 into the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus on chromosome 14 is the most frequent, occurring in 75% of cases [52]. The translocation event results from double strand breaks induced by activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID). AID deaminates cytosines to uracil resulting in error prone DNA repair and formation of double strand breaks. AID activity is involved in antibody class switch recombination or somatic hypermutation, a process that occurs in germinal center B cells to promote diversity of the antibody pool [63]. Interestingly, EBV infection of resting B lymphocytes has been shown to induce AID, and EBV LMP1 and EBNA3C independently can induce AID expression [42,64]. C-Myc is a transcription factor that as an oncogene promotes proliferation but also apoptosis. Alterations in MYC alone are not sufficient for lymphomagenesis [65]. Additional mutation such as TP53 found in 40% of BL and EBV latency proteins have been suggested to counter the apoptotic activities of c-Myc [66]. In addition, high levels of c-Myc block activation of EBV lytic replication preventing chromatin looping interactions between the lytic origin of replication and the BZLF1 promoter [67].EBV is detected in the majority of endemic BL cases carrying a clonal EBV genome in tumor cells indicating that viral infection preceded cellular transformation [68]. How EBV contributes to the BL lymphomagenesis is still being defined due to challenges posed by studying a human pathogen in animal models. However, loss of the viral genome renders many BL cell lines sensitive to apoptotic cell death [69]. EBNA1 and the EBV non-coding RNA expressed in BL have been shown to mediate cell survival. EBNA1 interaction with the deubiquitinase USP7, known to stabilize p53 and Mdm2, lowered p53 levels and protected cells from p53-mediated apoptosis [70]. The transforming capacity of EBNA1 in promoting lymphoma have yielded conflicting results in transgenic mice due to inherent differences in the mouse strain and expression construct used [71]. Instead, pharmacological inhibition of EBNA1 as a druggable target has shown growth inhibition in vitro and anti-tumor activities in animal xenografts [72]. Reintroduction of EBER1 noncoding RNA into BL lines that lost EBV restored apoptotic resistance by increasing BCL2 activity [73]. Similarly, re-introduction of the EBV BART derived miRNAs protected BL cells that lost EBV from apoptosis by directly interfering with CASP3 [74].The malarial Plasmodium parasites have been epidemiologically linked to endemic BL. The mechanistic interplay between malaria, EBV, and BL is complex and still unresolved. Repeated malarial infections have been suggested to impair cytotoxic T cell responses potentially affecting immune control of EBV [75]. Chronic malaria in children is associated with increased EBV viral loads that can also promote tolerized/exhausted T cell responses to EBV-infected B cells [76]. Loss of immune surveillance is also consistent with the higher EBV-positivity in immune-associated BL. Another role of malaria in promoting BL may involve B cell activation and aberrant activation of AID [77]. Plasmodium falciparum infected mice exhibited abnormal expression of AID in B cells apart from the reactions of the germinal center [78]. Extracts from P. falciparum infected red blood cells were also shown to enhance AID transcription and protein levels in tonsillar B cells [79]. Importantly, consecutive infections of p53 deficient mice with Plasmodium chabaudi induced mature B cell lymphomas with AID-dependent translocations that included MYC/IgH [80]. Thus, EBV and malarial infections are likely synergistic interactions that lead to the rapid progression of BL in children. From these observations, the presence of EBV in BL is suggested to confer resistance to apoptosis and enhance genomic instability through AID activation.Whether EBV is essential for the development of BL has been questioned by the prevalence of EBV-negative sporadic BL and immune-associated BL cases. However, two recent studies identified EBER-negative cases that where EBV microRNAs were detected, raising the possibility that EBV-negative BL may be derived from EBV-infected B cells [81]. An alternate possibility is that EBV is present early in lymphomagenesis but mutations that complement EBV oncogenic activity allow for viral loss [82]. Such genetic changes can be seen in EBV-negative BL having a higher frequency of mutations that interfere with apoptosis (TP53 and USP7) and mutations in TCF3 and ID3 enhance B cell receptor signaling [52]. However, differences in mutational landscape between EBV-positive and -negative BL argues that these tumors may be distinct entities. EBV-positive BL show increased AID expression, an AID mutational signature, higher mutation load, but few driver mutations [83]. Mutations in chromatin modifiers such as Swi/Snf complex subunits ARID1A and SMARCA 4 were more frequent in EBV-positive BL [84]. Together these observations support EBV selecting for distinct genetic and epigenetic alterations that contribute to lymphomagenesis. EBV also serves as an important biomarker to guide prognostic outcome and future therapeutic approaches.3.2. Diffuse Large B Cell LymphomaDiffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, accounting for 30% of all lymphoma cases [85]. DLBCL comprise a collection of heterogeneous and aggressive cancers that present at extranodal sites at the time of diagnosis. In the oral compartment, DLBCL manifests in Waldeyer’s ring and salivary glands. Other anatomic sites involved include gastrointestinal tract, bone, spleen, testes, thyroid, liver, and the kidneys [86]. Molecular classification based on mutation and gene expression profiles has grouped DLBCL into various subtypes based on features of the cell of origin. Two main subtypes are the germinal center B cell (GCB) DLBCL and activated B-cell like (ABC) DLBCL [85]. GCB DLBCL has features of germinal center B cells, while ABC DLBCL has features of post-germinal center, plasmablast B cells. In the DLBCL classification scheme, EBV-positive DLBCL not otherwise specified (NOS), previous referred to as EBV- positive DLBCL of the elderly, has been classified as a separate clinical subtype [87]. The “not otherwise specified (NOS)” is used to exclude the diagnosis of other EBV-associated large B cell tumors such as primary effusion lymphoma, EBV-positive plasmablastic lymphoma or EBV-positive mucocutaneous ulcer.EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) are rare malignancies that typically present in immunocompetent individuals over 50 years of age, but this cancer can also affect children and younger adults. EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) accounts from 3–15% of DLBCL cases, being more prevalent in Asia and Latin America [88]. EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) has two subtypes: monomorphic and polymorphic subtypes. The monomorphic subtype is more frequently associated with advanced age and carries a poor prognosis [86]. EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) tumors are derived from a clonal B cell expansion as noted by a clonal immunoglobulin rearrangement in up to 60% of cases [89]. EBV positivity is based on EBER detection by in situ hybridization methods in greater than 80% of the malignant cells. However, various studies have used different thresholds for EBER positivity with cut-off values as low as 10% to define EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS). The significance of partial EBV association is not well understood and could suggest a “hit-and-run” mechanism where genetic changes and viral epigenetic reprogramming compensate for loss of the viral genome. Alternatively, malignant EBV-positive cells may support oncogenic phenotypes of EBV-negative cells through cell communication or by establishing an immunosuppressive tumor environment. In the infected tumor cells, EBV exhibits a type II/III latency expression pattern, with latency III being more frequently detected [90]. Other EBV positive lymphomas that arise due to immunodeficiency (e.g., post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease) also display a type III latency pattern, suggesting that diminished T cell surveillance may fail to control the EBV-infected B cells. Indeed, PDL1 and PDL2 ligands are increased in EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) as a mechanism that can inhibit T cell anti-tumor responses [91].EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) display unique molecular features compared to EBV-negative DLBCL. Overall, EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) have a lower mutational burden suggesting that EBV can replace mutations otherwise required to drive the oncogenic phenotype [92]. Consistent with this, EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) display fewer MYC, BLC2, and BL6 rearrangements [93]. The recurrent mutations detected in EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) affected NF-kB, IL6/JAK/STAT, and WNT signaling pathways, known to be activated by expression of EBV latency proteins [94]. Loss of function mutations in MYD88, CD79B, and CKDN2A are also frequently observed in EBV-negative DLBCL but not present in EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS). Moreover, EBV-positive DLBCL have a higher frequency of mutations involving chromatin regulators (ARID1A, KMT2A, KMT2D, TET2, and DNMT3A), indicating genome-wide alterations in epigenetic regulation of gene expression [92,95]. Deletions at chromosome 6q, which encompasses regions that encode PRDM1 required for plasma cell differentiation and the anti-inflammatory TNF induced protein 3 (A20) also occurred in EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS). PRDM1 is a differentiation-dependent transcription factor that is required for transcriptional activation of the EBV immediate early genes, BZLF1 and BRLF1 [96]. The loss of PRDM1 not only disrupts B cell terminal differentiation into plasma cells but may also help maintain EBV in a latent state. Altogether, the distinct mutation landscape in EBV-positive DLBCL (NOS) enforces the notion that EBV guides the etiology of this unique DLCBL entity. Understanding the molecular features in various age groups and geographical regions will identify novel therapeutic approaches to improve the poor prognosis associated with EBV-positive DLBDL (NOS).3.3. Hodgkin LymphomaHodgkin lymphoma is a B cell malignancy characterized by the presence of few malignant cells surrounded by many non-neoplastic inflammatory cells. Based on histological and immunophenotype presentation, Hodgkin’s lymphoma (HL) is classified into two major types: known as classical HL and nodular lymphocyte predominant HL. In classical HL, the malignant cell is the Hodgkin and Reed/Sternberg cell (HRS). In nodular lymphocyte predominant HL, the malignant cell is the lymphocyte predominant cell (LP) [97]. As nodular lymphocyte predominant HL is rarely associated with EBV, this review will discuss only the classic HL type.Classical HL account for 90% of all HL. The HRS malignant cell is derived from a germinal center B cell that has undergone somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes and clonal expansion [98]. The HRS cell is described as large (>50 micron diameter), multinucleated cells containing an eosinophilic cytoplasm and infected by EBV [99]. HL tumors typically affect the lymph nodes but can also occur at extranodal sites. Oral manifestations occur at the tonsils, tongue, Waldeyer’s ring, and palate [100] HL accounts for approximately 10% of all lymphoma cases diagnosed. HL is more common in males and the most prevalent cancer among 15- to 19-year-old adolescents [101].EBV is associated with approximately 20 to 50% of classical HL cases. The presence of the virus in HRS cells is typically identified via in situ hybridization (ISH) to EBV DNA or EBV EBER RNA. Among the classical HL subgroups, EBV is common in the nodular sclerosis and mix cellularity classical HL subtypes, with rare detection in lymphocyte rich or depleted types [102]. An EBV latency II pattern is observed in HRS tumor cells. An increased risk for EBV-positive HL has been observed following infectious mononucleosis [103]. HL incidence is significantly elevated in HIV-infected individuals despite anti-retroviral therapy, and most cases are EBV-positive [104]. These observations suggest a causal link between EBV and escape from immune surveillance in the development of classical HL.Although the HRS cells originate from germinal center B cells carrying clonal immunoglobulin rearrangements [98], these HRS tumor cells have lost several B cell markers and B cell receptor signaling. Crippling mutations are detected in the immunoglobulin genes that rendered the B cell receptor (BCR) nonfunctional [105]. All cases with crippling BCR mutations are EBV-positive, suggesting that EBV may rescue HRS cells with nonfunctional BCR mutations [106]. Loss of BCR activity also can result from transcriptional silencing of BCR expression, downregulation of B cell specific transcription factors (OCT2, BOB1, and PU1), and upregulation of repressors of B cell genes [107]. A functional BCR is required for B cell survival and to escape elimination following somatic hypermutation in the germinal center. Thus, a pivotal event in classical HL oncogenesis is the acquisition of mechanisms that counter the loss of BCR signaling. As such, HRS tumor cells have various mutations that promote constitutive activation of JAK/STAT signaling and NF-kB signaling.EBV latency factors has been suggested to compensate for the loss of BCR and support tumor growth and survival. High levels of LMP1 are detected in classical HL. LMP1 mimics CD40 signaling and activates JAK/STAT, PI3K, and NF-kB signaling pathways [108]. Forced expression of LMP1 in germinal center B cells transcriptionally reprogrammed gene expression similar to that of HRS tumor cells [109]. LMP1 was also shown to disrupt B cell terminal differentiation into plasma cells by downregulating PRDMI/BLIMP1 [110]. LMP2 mimics BCR signaling and can directly substitute for the loss of BCR in HRS tumor cell [111,112]. However, LMP2 requires many of the downstream BCR signaling factors that are absent in HRS tumor cells. Thus, LMP2 may act independently of BCR signaling by activating PI3K signaling and reprogram B cells to support cell growth and survival. In addition, EBV latent gene products can also alter immune cell activities and promote tumor microenvironments conducive to oncogenesis. LMP1 suppresses cytotoxic T cell responses via the induction of PD-L1 expression [113]. EBV BART microRNAs as well as other EBV gene products can be packaged and released by cellular exosomes to affect distant cells [114]. Exosomes derived from EBV-positive classical HL were reported to alter TNF-α and IL-10 cytokine profiles of host macrophages [115].The tumor microenvironment in classical HL is composed of inflammatory cell infiltrates suggested to create an immunosuppressive environment for HRS cells to escape immune surveillance and/or support the growth and survival of HRS cells [116]. T cells are a major component. Activated CD4-positive T helpers cells (Th1 and Th2) and regulatory T (Tregs) cells are present without detection of CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells or NK cells [117]. Activated Th1 cells displaying CD40L and CD30L markers were suggested to support growth and survival of HRS cells, while Th2 and Tregs cells maintained an immunosuppressive environment. Compared to EBV-negative classical HL, EBV-positive cases display increased number of regulatory T cells, and tumor associated macrophages likely mediating a more immunosuppressive tumor environment that prevents immune-mediated elimination of the tumor cells [118].Although EBV has been implicated in supporting HRS and development of HL, the presence of EBV-negative HL has suggested multiple avenues that can lead to lymphoma. EBV may substitute for mutations and promote oncogenic phenotypes that support growth, survival, and immune evasion. EBV-positive classical HL display distinct genetic alterations from EBV-negative classical HL, similar to what is observed in EBV-positive DLBCL [119]. Whether EBV-negative classical HL has a distinct etiology from EBV-positive cases is possible. However, detection of traces of EBV in EBER-negative cases or loss of the viral genome following epigenetic reprogramming suggest a role for EBV in the early stages of HL lymphomagenesis [120].4. EBV-Associated Oral CarcinomasOver 90% of oral cancers are squamous cell carcinomas [121]. Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is a type of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) that arises from the epithelial mucosa lining the oral cavity and oropharynx. In the oral compartment, EBV is associated with lymphoepitheliomas of the salivary glands and is the causative agent in the benign hyperplastic lesion known as oral hairy leukoplakia. Although EBV is often detected in carcinomas from the oral cavity and oropharyngeal tract, incomplete association of EBV in histologically similar tumors has questioned the viral contribution in OSCC. The following section will describe EBV in oral carcinomas, oropharyngeal carcinomas, lymphoepitheliomas of the salivary gland and oral hairy leukoplakia.4.1. Oral Squamous Cell CarcinomaOral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) comprise a heterogenous group of carcinomas that arise at various anatomical sites in the oral cavity. Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OCSCC) arises from lips, anterior tongue, roof and floor of mouth, gingiva, and buccal mucosa. Oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OPSCC) involves the tonsils, posterior third of tongue, and soft palate. OPSCC due to infection with human papillomavirus has rapidly emerged as a distinct entity and will be discussed separately.OSCC accounts for an estimated 2.5% of all cancers worldwide [122]. Based on various epidemiological studies, various carcinogenic factors have been implicated in the development of OSCC that include chewing and smoking tobacco, alcohol consumption, chewing betel quid, environmental pollution, poor oral hygiene, sun exposure in lip cancer, and infection with human papillomavirus [123]. OSCC occurs more frequently in males than females and individuals over the age of 60. Immune competency is an important factor in OSCC as HIV-infected individuals develop OSCC earlier in life [124]. Diagnosis of OSCC occurs often at advanced stages of disease with evidence of regional or distant metastasis. In the United States, the relative 5-year survival is estimated at 68%, but improved survival up to 86% is observed in patients with localized tumors [125]. However, treatment modalities (surgery, radiation and chemotherapy) often leave patients with severe morbidities affecting their appearance and ability to eat, drink, and speak [126]. Thus, identifying biomarkers for early detection and new therapeutic approaches are needed to reduce the morbidity and mortality of OSCC worldwide.EBV has been detected at higher levels in OSCC compared to healthy tissues with many studies detecting EBV DNA, RNA and protein in tumor cells [127,128]. However, an etiological role for EBV in OSCC is still debated due to an incomplete viral association. The oncogenic process in OSCC is complex involving various cofactors and alternative genetic pathways that combined increase the risk for cancer. As OSCC is comprised of a heterogenous assortment of cancers, the molecular features and subtypes are still being defined [129]. Studies comparing the genomic landscape in EBV-positive and -negative OSCC are needed to provide a better understanding of the drivers in these cancers.The viral gene expression program in EBV-positive OSCC is not well established. Various studies have detected EBER expression in OSCC tumor cells [130,131]. Although detection of EBERs is the standard for assigning EBV positivity, it is unclear if EBERs are a reliable marker in OSCC. EBER expression pattern in OSCC can be patchy and weak with a mixture of nuclear and cytoplasmic signals. Epithelial differentiation may influence EBER expression with reduced levels noted in more differentiated areas of NPC tissue [132]. Whether EBERs are a reliable marker in OSCC warrants further evaluation. In support of an association, other EBV markers such as EBNA2 and LMP1 protein levels have been detected in OSCC at higher levels than normal tissues. LMP1 positivity was also detected at higher levels in dysplastic tissue than in OSCC, implicating EBV in the early stages of tumor progression [130,133].In the oral cavity, the microbiome can influence the prevalence of herpesviruses (EBV, HCMV, HSV) as well as the degree of inflammation [134]. In chronic periodontitis, a significant increase in EBV-infected gingival epithelium was observed compared to healthy gingival tissue [12]. Mechanistically, presence of bacteria such as Porphyromonas gingivalis and Porphyromona endodalis have been shown to produce butyric acid, an HDAC inhibitor that can reactivate latent EBV [135]. Such microbial interactions may increase EBV viral loads and promote a pro-inflammatory environment. High EBV viral loads provide EBV the opportunity to infect hyperplastic/dysplastic cells and contribute to the progression to carcinoma.Although EBV infection is not sufficient to immortalize epithelial cells in culture, viral infection can confer oncogenic features to already immortalized/transformed cells lines similar to what is observed in EBV-associated NPC and gastric carcinoma. EBV infection of hTERT-immortalized gingival epithelial cells induced a DNA hypermethylator phenotype [136], which is also observed in NPC and EBV-associated gastric carcinoma tumors. Both LMP1 and LMP2A can induce DNA methyltransferases (DNMTs) and subsequent silencing of tumor suppressor genes [130]. Expression of LMP2A is sufficient to interfere with epithelial differentiation in spontaneously transformed HaCaT cells [137]. Moreover, EBV-infected epithelial cells displayed an attenuated response to differentiation [136,138]. In addition, EBV-infected epithelial cells acquire an invasive cellular phenotype that correlates with the metastatic nature of NPC [34,139]. LMP1 expression is sufficient to enhance cellular motility and migration via activation of PI3K, NF-kB and ERK-MAPK signaling pathways in NPC [140,141,142,143]. These EBV-induced oncogenic phenotypes are retained following loss of the viral genome suggesting a role for EBV-induced viral epigenetic modifications in these processes [34,136,139].4.2. HPV-Positive Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell CarcinomaReductions in smoking and alcohol consumption has decreased OSCC incidence worldwide. Nonetheless, the past thirty years has seen the emergence of OPSCC associated with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection in developed countries [144,145,146]. HPV is the leading cause of cervical carcinoma worldwide and a causal agent for various anogenital carcinomas. However, the cases of HPV-positive OPSCC have equaled and will surpass cases of cervical carcinoma in developed nations [147,148,149]. Ninety percent of HPV-positive OPSCC are due to HPV16 [150,151]. HPV infection is rarely detected in OCSCC [152]. A shift in the demographics of HPV-positive OPSCC have also been observed. Historically HPV-positive OPSCC appeared more frequently in white males in their late 50s and 60s [153]. However, in the past decade, HPV-positive OPSCC includes older age groups (> 70 years of age) with marked increases observed in females and racial groups [146]. HIV-infected individuals show an increased risk for HPV-positive OPSCC with higher frequency of recurrence and worse outcomes despite anti-retroviral therapy.The majority of HPV-positive OPSCC occur at the tonsils or base of tongue, lymphoid rich regions where EBV also resides. Moreover, HPV-positive OPSCC has distinct clinical features not evident in other HPV associated cancers [151]. HPV-positive cervical cancer results in a slower progression to carcinoma with early HPV productive lesions detected. In contrast, HPV-positive OPSCC lack these typical premalignant lesions and appear to progress rapidly such that patients are often diagnosed at advanced stages. Despite the advanced staging of the tumor, HPV-positive OPSCC have better outcomes than HPV-negative cases. These features have classified HPV-positive OPSCC as a distinct entity and suggest a role for additional cofactors in tumor development.As a potential cofactor, EBV is detected in 5–20% of HPV-positive OPSCC [154,155,156,157]. Specific capture of tumor cells devoid of lymphocytic infiltrates detected EBV EBER transcripts by reverse-transcription PCR in 25% of tonsillar and 80% of HPV-positive base of tongue tumors [158]. Using EBER in situ hybridization in the same patient cohorts proved less sensitive but identified 20% of base of tongue tumors as being co-infected [158]. As a correlate to HPV-positive OPSCC, EBV has also been detected in HPV16 and HPV18-positive cervical carcinomas (ranging between 12–80% EBV positive) being more often detected in cervical carcinoma than in low grade intraepithelial lesions [159,160,161]. EBV was also more frequently found in cervical carcinomas with integrated HPV [160,162]. Interaction of EBV and HPV in the epithelium may have unintended effects on each viral lifecycle that combined may accelerate tumor development.Although the contribution of EBV to HPV-positive OPSCC carcinogenesis still needs to be defined, similar mechanisms suggested for EBV driven NPC carcinogenesis may be involved. EBV is a well-established etiological agent in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), a HNSCC occurring in the nasopharynx. The proximity to the oropharynx and presence of a lymphoid infiltrate in NPC tumors provide EBV access to nasopharyngeal epithelial cells [163]. Early genetic changes can predispose dysplastic cells to latent EBV infection rather than the productive lytic replication that typically occurs in the epithelium. Loss of CDKN2A and overexpression of cyclin D1 have been shown to facilitate stable, latent EBV infection of nasopharyngeal epithelial cells [19]. EBV-positive carcinomas generally exhibit a latency II viral gene expression program (EBNA1, LMP1, LMP2, BARF1, EBERs, BART miRNAs and long noncoding RNAs). Evidence of clonal expansion is also observed based on EBV episomes having unique number of terminal repeats as a maker of clonality, where the length of the terminal repeats inversely correlates to LMP1 and LMP2 expression [164,165,166].HPV-immortalization of epithelial cells may create an environment that favors latent EBV infection rather than productive replication. Epithelial interactions between EBV and HPV have been studied in epithelial organotypic raft culture, a physiologically relevant culture producing stratified and differentiated epidermal layers that support HPV and EBV productive lifecycle. HPV-immortalized keratinocytes grown in organotypic rafts inhibited EBV replication following de novo infection [167]. An abortive pattern of infection was observed where the immediate early transactivator BZLF1 was expressed in the absence of replicative factors. A slight increase in EBER levels was also noted [167]. The HPV16 oncogene E7 was sufficient to block EBV replication [167]. One of the functions of E7 is to facilitate the proteasomal degradation of the retinoblastoma pocket proteins (pRb, p107, and p130) [168]. Recent studies show that EBV replication within differentiated epithelium requires pRb (Myers et al., submitted). pRb is a tumor suppressor that inhibits cell cycle progression at the S-phase checkpoint, and deregulation of these pathways may enhance the oncogenic potential of EBV. A separate study indicated a different outcome when EBV infection preceded HPV immortalization. In this case, HPV appeared to increase the maintenance of EBV latent genomes and enhanced EBV lytic reactivation in organotypic rafts [169]. The different outcomes between the studies suggest that the outcome of EBV infection may depend on the order of infection, the physical and epigenetic state of the viral genome, and/or EBV-induced epigenetic alterations that support viral replication. Such EBV-induced epigenetic reprogramming of epithelial cells was shown to attenuate epithelial differentiation and enhance cellular invasiveness [136,138,139].At the molecular level, HPV-positive OPSCC display distinct genetic changes compared to HPV-negative OSCC [170]. HPV16-positive OPSCC typically have high levels of p16, which is often used as a surrogate marker for HPV-positivity in OPSCC [171,172,173]. p16 is an inhibitor of cell cycle progression that prevents cyclin-dependent kinases 4 and 6 (CDK) phosphorylation of the retinoblastoma pocket protein, pRb. HPV16 E7 directly inactivates retinoblastoma pocket protein family bypassing the regulatory p16 checkpoint [174]. In addition, HPV-positive OPSCC typically have wildtype TP53 that is functionally inactivated by HPV E6. When TP53 mutations occur in HPV-positive OSCC, these tumors carry a poorer prognosis. TP53 is frequently mutated in HPV-negative OPSCC [175]. HPV-positive OPSCC also exhibit an apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide (APOBEC) mutational signature. The APOBEC cytosine deaminase is an innate antiviral response to viral infection that is elevated in HPV-infected cells [176]. Other less frequent mutations in HPV-positive OSCC include PIKCA, ZNF750, CASZ1, PTEN < CYLD, and DDX3X, while mutations in FAT1, CDKN2A, NOTCH1, CASP8, and HRAS are associated with HPV-negative OSCC [175]. The distinct genomic landscape of HPV-positive and HPV-negative OSCC likely influences the outcome of EBV infection supporting the virus as a cofactor in the progression of these cancers.4.3. Oral Hairy LeukoplakiaOral hairy leukoplakia (OHL) are benign oral lesions that presents as elevated white patches on the dorsum and lateral borders of the tongue, and in rare cases the soft palate, pharynx, or esophagus are involved [177]. Other features include hyperkeratosis, epithelial hyperplasia, ballooning degeneration, acanthosis, and mild or moderate inflammatory infiltrate [178]. OHL affects individuals with severe immunodeficiency such as acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) due to HIV infection, organ transplant recipients, and following chemotherapy. Treatment for OHL is important as these lesions can be precursors to squamous cell carcinomas [179]. OHL can occur in up to 50% of individuals presenting with AIDS and occurs more frequently in males than females [180]. Some rare cases of OHL have been reported in HIV-negative individuals on long term steroid treatments [181]. Diagnosis is based on histopathological findings and the presence of EBV using in situ hybridization (EBER-ISH) [182]. However, EBER RNAs are not typically expressed in OHL, with EBER-ISH detecting the high viral DNA content in the lesions [183].OHL is a result of productive EBV replication within oral epithelial cells. EBV infects oral squamous epithelial cells and replicates in the absence of cell-mediated immunity. Manifestation of OHL is one of the earliest signs of AIDS, and OHL is strongly correlated with decreased CD4+ counts [184]. A deficiency of Langerhans cells has been reported in OHL tissues that may allow escape from immune surveillance [185]. Langerhans cells are antigen-presenting immune cells required for mounting an immune response against viral infection in the epithelium. Furthermore, circulating EBV-positive monocytes have been detected in HIV-positive individuals [186]. These infected monocytes have been shown to enter the epithelium and allow for infection of keratinocytes [186]. Antiviral treatment with nucleoside analogs (acyclovir, valacylovir, and famicyclovir) resolves these lesions in several weeks [187]. HIV-positive individuals receiving treatment to improve immune function and antiretroviral treatment reduces OHL as well, but recurrence is commonAlthough OHL is associated with lytic EBV replication, several latently associated factors (except the EBERs) are expressed simultaneously with lytic genes [188]. EBNA2 is expressed in almost all OHL cases [189]. LMP1 and the viral Bcl2 homolog, BHRF1, are also expressed to promote cell survival and stimulation of epithelial proliferation. LMP1 induces anti-apoptotic genes such as A20 and activates NF-kB, MAPK, and JNK signaling, while BHRF1 plays a role in delaying epithelial differentiation as well as inhibiting apoptosis [190]. Altogether these transforming genes extend the life of infected cells and promote the unique characteristics of OHL. A distinct attribute of OHL is co-infection with multiple different EBV types and strain variants [191]. EBV type 1 and type 2 are identified by sequence variations in EBNA2. Sequence differences at LMP1 has identified several variant strains. Based on LMP1 genotyping, OHL lesions can be infected with multiple variant strains [192]. Superinfection of multiple EBV strains has been suggested to be due to transcription of EBNA2 which upregulates expression of EBV receptor, CR2/CD21 [193].Although EBV growth promotion is frequently associated with latent gene products, OHL epithelial hyperplasia implicates replicative gene products in promoting carcinogenesis. This is supported by B cell immortalization being less efficient in the absence of BZFL1. Presence of BZLF1 also enhanced lymphoma development in humanized mice models [194]. Several paracrine factors, such as VEGF growth factor, IL6, and IL10 cytokines, are produced in cells undergoing lytic replication to modulate the tumor microenvironment to support the growth of the tumor cells [195].4.4. Lymphoepitheliomas of the Salivary/Parotid GlandLymphoepitheliomas are undifferentiated carcinomas associated with a dense lymphoid infiltrate that occur at various anatomical sites being associated with EBV. These epitheliomas resemble undifferentiated NPC also having a lymphoid infiltrate. Salivary gland lymphoepitheliomas involving the parotid gland are rare oral tumors that are associated with EBV. A high incidence is observed among native people in Greenland, Alaska, and some Asian populations [196]. In these endemic areas, all tumors are associated with EBV, while tumors arising in nonendemic areas are sporadically associated with EBV [197]. Histological and pathological characteristics are comparable to undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma and association of EBV is described as a latent infection [198].EBV EBERs are detected strictly in malignant epithelial cells and not significantly detected in the infiltrating lymphocytes or surrounding benign tissues [196]. Detection of EBV in salivary tumors is determined by EBER expression in tumor cells and detection of the viral DNA by PCR [199]. LMP1 protein has been detected in a subset of salivary gland epitheliomas and LMP1 sequence variants are often found in the endemic population [200].5. ConclusionsIn the more than 55 years since its discovery, EBV has been shown to play a complex role in the pathogenesis of several human malignancies. Though EBV associated oral cancers are rare, the oral cavity is central to the life cycle of the virus within its human host. The oral anatomy provides proximity between the B lymphocytes and epithelial cells in which the virus completes its life cycle. The persistence of EBV within the tissues of the oral cavity is a risk factor for cancers in the oral compartment and at other anatomical sites. The current understanding of EBV mediated oncogenesis is summarized in Figure 2. EBV can directly alter apoptosis, proliferation, and other major signaling pathways (NF-kB, JAK-STAT). However, a commonality observed among the EBV-associated cancers is the existence of additional oncogenic co-factors. Examples include host genetic alterations or the presence of additional pathogens (HPV, HIV, Malaria). EBV-mediated perturbation of the host may complement the effect of these co-factors, or EBV may provide an alternate route to the evolution of the tumor cell. EBV is not always present in histologically similar tumors, but genetic and epigenetic alterations are different when comparing EBV-positive and negative states. As potent epigenetic modifier, EBV manipulation of the host epigenome provides another oncogenic mechanism through reprogramming of host gene expression. Such epigenetic changes can be retained following loss of the viral genome as a viral mechanism for “hit-and-run” oncogenesis. In addition, EBV has a demonstrated ability to alter the tumor microenvironment and interfere with host immune surveillance. Future studies will continue to elucidate and define the role of EBV in tumorigenesis and establish EBV as prognostic factor in cancer. Better control or elimination of EBV infection with vaccination will likely reduce the burden of EBV-associated cancers.


Title: Burkitt's lymphoma: The Rosetta Stone deciphering Epstein-Barr virus biology

1IntroductionHaving characterised a childhood lymphoma that is endemic in geographically restricted areas of equatorial Africa, Denis Burkitt originally hypothesized that this tumour might be caused by an insect-borne vector [1,2]. That hypothesis seemed to be borne out by the subsequent discovery, by Epstein and co-workers, of a novel herpesvirus in a tumour cell line established from a Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) patient [3]. There is now a substantial body of evidence implicating a role for this virus, the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), in the pathogenesis of most cases of BL (reviewed in [4]). EBV is not, however, an insect-borne agent. That role in BL belongs to Plasmodium falciparum malaria, which is transmitted by mosquitoes [5]. Furthermore, the key event in the pathogenesis of BL is now known to be the acquisition of a chromosomal translocation, involving the immunoglobulin gene loci on chromosomes 14, 22 or 2 and the c-myc oncogene on chromosome 8. This results in deregulated expression of the c-myc protein, and is a characteristic of all BL tumours including the minority that are not EBV-associated [6–8]. Through mechanisms that are only partially understood, malaria and EBV together exert effects on the human host to increase the likelihood of this genetic accident, and to synergize with the deregulated c-myc to enhance the survival and proliferative capacity of the tumour.It has been suggested previously [9] that EBV is a metaphorical Rosetta Stone for understanding the role of viruses in immunopathological disorders and human carcinogenesis. To a large extent, it is true that the association of EBV with malignant diseases has become paradigmatic for viral oncology. Conversely, it is also the case that the study of BL has yielded many clues to the biology of EBV. In this review we shall highlight some of the observations that have profoundly enhanced the wider understanding of the interaction of EBV with normal and malignant cells.2EBV latent gene expressionInfection of resting primary B cells in culture leads to the establishment of growth-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) [10,11]. This potent growth-transforming property of EBV, together with seroepidemiological data [12,13] and the demonstration of EBV DNA in the tumours of nearly all African BL patients [14–16], seemingly provided incontrovertible evidence for a role of EBV in the pathogenesis of BL. A critical assumption was made, however, that LCLs were good experimental models for the uncontrolled proliferation of BL tumours. As methods became available to analyse EBV gene expression in more detail, it was unexpectedly found that BL tumours express a much more restricted pattern of viral genes than do LCLs established from the normal B cells of the same patients [17–19]. In fact, EBV-transformed LCLs are a better model for B cell lymphoproliferations arising in immunosuppressed patients [20–22], which underlines the different etiologies of two EBV-associated tumours of B cell origin. The observation, that EBV can establish different latent states (i.e. infections not leading to replication of new virus particles) in normal and malignant B cells [18,23,24], had repercussions for understanding the role of EBV not only in BL, but also in other EBV-associated malignancies and in normal persistence in healthy infected individuals (see below).2.1Latency I and Latency IIIMore than 20 years after the first realization that EBV gene expression in BL cells differs from that in EBV-transformed normal LCLs, details are still emerging with the discovery of new forms of latency [25,26], new latent genes [27], and several virally encoded micro-RNAs [28–31].It is now known that EBV transformed LCLs express at least 6 nuclear antigens (EBNA1, EBNA2, EBNA3A, EBNA3B, EBNA3C and EBNA-LP) and three membrane proteins (LMP1, LMP2A and LMP2B); in contrast, the majority of BL tumours express only one virally encoded protein, EBNA1. These two patterns of gene expression are often referred to as Latency III and Latency I, respectively [24], and they are achieved by the use of different promoters to generate alternative primary transcripts from which the different EBNA mRNAs are spliced (Fig. 1). In Latency I BL lines, EBNA1 transcripts are driven by the Qp promoter in the BamHI Q region of the genome [32,33], whereas in Latency III LCLs the EBNA transcripts are driven by either of two upstream promoters, Cp or Wp, in the BamHI C or W regions of the genome [34–37]. As we shall discuss later, expression of the BHRF1 protein (a Bcl-2 homologue with anti-apoptotic properties) is also associated with Latency III type infection, but is not expressed in Latency I [27].2.2Latency IIAn intermediate pattern of viral gene expression was originally identified in undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) [38–40], and subsequently in EBV-associated gastric carcinomas [41,42], Hodgkin's lymphomas [43,44], and T cell lymphomas [45]. In this Latency II type of infection, transcripts for the LMP1 and LMP2A/B proteins are expressed in addition to Qp-driven EBNA1, and none of the other EBNAs is expressed (Fig. 1). It should be noted that Latency II type infection defines a spectrum from EBNA1 expression with low levels of LMP2, typical of gastric carcinomas, to EBNA1 expression with high levels of both LMP1 and LMP2 that is typical of Hodgkin's lymphoma. Whilst B cells have the potential to support any of these three types of latent infection, non-B cells generally display either a Latency I or Latency II type of infection. This is due at least in part to the fact that activation of the Wp/Cp promoters necessary for Latency III is regulated by a B cell-specific transcription factor, BSAP (alternatively called PAX-5) [46].In growth-transformed B cells displaying Latency III type infection, LMP1 and LMP2A/B expression are dependent upon expression of EBNA2 [47–49], whereas in epithelial cells supporting a Latency II type infection, these membrane proteins are expressed independently of EBNA2. Despite extensive study, the control of the LMP genes in different latent states is not well understood. One contributory mechanism is the use of alternative promoters. In B cells, expression of LMP1 and LMP2B in Latency III type infection is mediated by a bi-directional promoter that is proximal to the LMP1 gene; this promoter, known as ED-L1p, is activated by an EBNA2-dependent mechanism involving the transcription factors RBP-Jκ, PU.1, POU, and AP-2 [47,50,51]. In epithelial cells a distal LMP1 promoter, known as TR-L1p or ED-L1Ep, is activated independently of EBNA2 via STAT3, Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors [52–54]. However, the EBNA2-dependent expression of LMP1 in B cells and the EBNA2-independent expression in epithelial cells cannot be explained simply by the use of different promoters, since the proximal ED-L1p can be also activated in epithelial cells, and LMP1-induced signalling pathways have been shown to auto-activate LMP1 transcription from the ED-L1p independently of EBNA2 [55,56]. It should also be noted that the levels of LMP1 and LMP2 in Latency II type infection can be quite variable even within a type of malignancy. For example, whilst LMP2A transcripts are consistently expressed in NPC tumours, LMP1 transcripts are detected in only a proportion of cases [38,39,57]. In this context, it may be relevant that LMP2A expression has been reported to inhibit LMP1 transcription in epithelial cells [58].2.3Other types of latent infection in BLAt least two other types of latent gene expression are associated with BL. One, which involves expression of all six EBNAs but not LMP1 or LMP2, is probably very rare and may be a consequence of integration of the viral genome into the cellular chromosome [59]. Another type of latent infection, in which all of the EBNAs except EBNA2 are expressed in the absence of LMP1 or LMP2 (Fig. 1), is more common and may be exhibited by more than 15% of endemic BL cases [25,26,59]. This latter type of latency arises because the tumours carry an episomal viral genome with a deleted sequence that removes the EBNA2 gene. For reasons that are not yet understood, the Wp promoter rather than the Qp promoter is activated for expression of EBNA transcripts, hence they are designated ‘Wp-restricted latency’ BLs. Most importantly, the Wp-restricted latency BL cells express BHRF1, a viral protein not previously associated with latency [27]. This homologue of cellular Bcl-2 [60,61], was previously regarded as being a lytic cycle gene product but is regularly expressed in Wp latency and confers a survival advantage to the tumour cells [27]. EBNA2-deleted viruses can arise, albeit rarely, in cancer-free people [62,63] but since they cannot express essential transforming genes, these deleted viruses cannot replicate by growth-transforming normal B cells and cannot therefore efficiently colonize the normal B cell pool. That Wp-restricted latency BLs are comparatively common amongst endemic BL tumours, suggests that there must be some selection advantage during the pathogenesis of BL; this is despite the expression of immunodominant target antigens for CD8+ immune T cell responses such as EBNA3A, EBNA3B and EBNA3C. We shall return to this issue later in the review.Some BL tumours will successfully adapt to tissue culture and establish as cell lines. During early passages, EBV-positive BL lines typically display the same pattern of EBV latency as the original tumour in vivo, but during longer-term culture many lines drift towards Latency III [18,23]. Concomitant with the broadening of EBV latent gene expression, BL lines acquire a more differentiated phenotype with a loss of germinal centre markers, such as CD10 and Bcl-6, and an upregulation of activation markers, such as CD40 and various adhesion molecules [18,23,64]. The drift of BL lines towards Latency III is unlikely to be just an in vitro phenomenon, as immunohistochemical staining of some BL biopsies suggest that isolated cells within a predominantly Latency I expressing tumour may in fact express LMP1 and EBNA2 [65]. Why these Latency III cells do not go on to dominate the tumour mass, could be a result of the decreased rate of proliferation and the increased immunogenicity of these cells [23,66,67].The BARF1 protein is a second putative oncoprotein of EBV [68,69]. Originally, BARF1 was thought to be exclusively an early lytic cycle product, although there is now evidence that it can be expressed during latency (e.g. [70,71]). BARF1 expression has been detected in BL biopsies [70,72], NPC [73], and gastric cell carcinoma [74]. In some of these studies it cannot be excluded that that BARF1 expression is due to a small number of cells in lytic cycle, but whether or not it is expressed in latency or in a small subpopulation of cells in lytic cycle, BARF1 could still contribute to the malignant phenotype since it is secreted as a soluble molecule.2.4Limitations of Latency nomenclatureThe Latency I, II, III nomenclature was originally defined on the basis of the pattern of EBNA and LMP protein expression in BL and EBV-transformed normal B cell lines [24]. Since EBNA1 is essential for replication and maintenance of the viral episome, the most restricted form of latency possible in this system is Latency I. In non-dividing cells, however, there is no longer a strict requirement for EBNA1 expression. Consequently, a ‘Latency 0’ in which no viral antigens are expressed is an additional option for asymptomatic EBV persistence in healthy carriers.An alternative nomenclature was recently suggested which has the merit of simplifying EBV gene-expression patterns and fitting them into an elegant hypothesis for how EBV persists in the healthy infected host [75]. In this alternative nomenclature, the terms “growth program”, “default program” and “latency program” roughly correspond to Latency III, Latency II, and Latency 0 (no EBV protein expression), respectively. However, when the alternative nomenclature is applied to EBV-induced malignancies, it is inadequate to cope with the complexity of EBV gene expression, a situation that is exacerbated further as new patterns of EBV gene expression are identified.Whichever nomenclature is used, care must be taken to recognize their limitations. It would be inappropriate, for example, to classify a tumour as Latency III when immunohistochemistry showed that all the malignant cells were EBNA1+ but only rare cells were also EBNA2+ and LMP1+. Analysis of the same tumour sample by immuno-blot or by RT-PCR is inherently more prone to misleading interpretations. Nevertheless, quantitative RT-PCR for the complete range of latent genes in the tumour, and comparison with expression in standard control cell lines, coupled with careful analysis of Cp/Wp/Qp promoter usage, will usually indicate the correct interpretation [76].2.5Non-coding RNA transcriptsIn addition to protein-coding transcripts, EBV generates abundant non-coding transcripts (Fig. 2). The best studied are the RNA polymerase III transcribed small non-polyadenylated RNAs, termed EBER1 and EBER2, which are the most abundant viral transcripts in latently infected cells [77–79]. Although it has been reported that some lytically infected cells may not express EBERs [80], they are abundantly expressed in all types of latent infection. Indeed, the levels of EBERs are such that their detection by in situ hybridisation is considered to be one of the most reliable indicators of latent EBV infection at the single cell level in normal and diseased tissues.A complex cluster of non-polyadenylated RNAs map to the BamHI A region [40,81], and are collectively known as BARTs (BamHI A rightward transcripts). It is not clear whether these rightward transcripts encode protein [82], but they do give rise to several micro-RNA (miRNA) species. Mature miRNAs are small (about 21–24 nucleotides) single-stranded RNAs processed from stem-loop containing double-stranded RNA precursors, and they regulate gene expression by binding to complementary sequences in the 3′ untranslated regions of target mRNAs to inhibit their translation or to direct their degradation [83]. It was first reported in 2004 that EBV encodes miRNAs [29]. They map to two regions of the genome: the BamHI H region (EBV-miR-BHRF1s in 5′ and 3′ sequences flanking the BHRF1 open reading frame), and the BamHI A region (EBV-miR-BARTs, processed from the introns of the BARTs). The virus encodes at least 3 EBV-miR-BHRF1 and 21 miR-BART miRNAs [29–31,84]. Additional low-abundant species exist, mostly arising from less efficient processing of the complementary 5′ or 3′ arm of the short hairpin pre-miRNAs.The BARTs are transcribed across a region of the viral genome which includes an 11.8 kbp sequence that is deleted in the prototype B95.8 EBV [85], thereby limiting B95.8 EBV to just 5 (miR-BART-1, -2, -3, -4, 15) of the 21 most abundant miRNAs from this region of the genome. The miR-BARTs are expressed in all forms of latency and in lytic cycle. Some studies suggest that miR-BARTs are more highly expressed in epithelial cells than in B cells, and that in B cells the miR-BARTs may be more highly expressed in Latency III than in Latency I (e.g. [30,86–88]). However, accurate interpretation of these data is difficult because assays with different degrees of sensitivity and quantitation have been used in different studies, and mostly with a small number of long-established cell lines.In contrast to the miR-BARTs, the BamHI H-derived miRNAs (miR-BHRF1-1, 1-2 and 1-3) show a more restricted expression pattern. BHRF1 transcripts in latent infection are mostly, if not exclusively, activated from the Cp/Wp promoters [29,30] and, therefore, no miR-BHRF1s are detected in latently infected epithelial tumours [88]. As for the miR-BARTs, the available evidence from quantitative analysis of miR-BHRF1 expression in different types of latency in B cell lines (e.g. [30,84,86]) does not yet allow conclusive inferences to be made with regards to a possible correlation between the type of EBV latency and the expression of miR-BHRF1s. In lytic cycle, BHRF1 transcripts initiate from a promoter proximal to the BHRF1 open reading frame, and overlapping the miR-BHRF1-1 sequence, so that only miR-BHRF1-2 and miR-BHRF1-3 can be processed [30].3EBV gene expression and the pathogenesis of BLThe concept, that the ability of EBV to growth-transform normal B cells is directly responsible for the pathogenesis of BL, was weakened by the demonstration that BL tumours have a more restricted pattern of gene expression than EBV-transformed LCLs. The validity of the concept was further questioned following a series of studies with recombinant EBV lacking expression of individual latent genes, which revealed that the loss of expression of any one of EBNA1, EBNA2, EBNA3A, EBNA3C or LMP1 was sufficient to substantially or completely abrogate the ability to generate LCLs following infection of primary B cells in culture (reviewed in [89,90]).It is generally accepted that deregulated expression of the c-myc proto-oncogene, resulting from the chromosomal translocations that are characteristic of all BLs, is the primary oncogenic event in the pathogenesis of BL irrespective of the association with EBV. What, then, is the role of EBV? There are two broad (and not mutually exclusive) hypotheses: (i) EBV might increase the likelihood of genetic accidents giving rise to the translocation, and (ii) EBV might complement the activity of c-myc. The fact that BL tumours have phenotypic characteristics of germinal centre cells [91] provides one clue to the pathogenesis of BL that is supported by what is known about two other co-factors for BL; malaria and HIV.In areas of endemic BL, an important co-factor with EBV for lymphomagenesis is P. falciparum malaria (reviewed in [92]). Two features of malarial infection likely to be relevant to BL are an immunosuppressive effect on EBV-specific T cell immunity [93–96], and a mitogenic effect on B cells [97,98]. The immunosuppressive effect may be responsible for the fact that children in areas of holoendemic malaria have very high loads of EBV in the peripheral blood, and these levels are further elevated during acute malarial infection [99–101]. The mitogenic effect of P. falciparum malaria on B cells, leading to increased germinal centre activity, is also likely to be critical since BL displays many markers of germinal centre cells and the c-myc/Ig gene translocations are likely to be accidents of immunoglobulin gene rearrangements in the germinal centre. In normal circumstances, cells carrying illicit immunoglobulin gene recombinations would be programmed to self-destruct, but the elevated EBV loads in malarial patients would increase the likelihood of such cells being infected with EBV and rescued from cell death. Another major co-factor for BL, is HIV. In contrast to malaria-associated BL, AIDS-associated BL arises in patients who remain relatively immunocompetent [102]. HIV patients do not show the same high EBV loads that are found during malarial infection, and only 30–40% of AIDS-associated BL tumours are EBV-positive. Similarly to malaria, however, HIV infection also activates the B cell system [103]. Together, these observations are consistent with a mechanism where increased germinal centre activity is the critical factor for the generation of c-myc translocations. The increased EBV load associated with malarial infections increases the likelihood that such cells will be rescued from the pro-apoptotic effects of activated c-myc by infection with EBV.That EBV complements the functions of c-myc in BL, is consistent with experimental evidence (see below). Furthermore, if an activated c-myc is experimentally over-expressed in EBV-transformed LCLs, then proliferation of the cells becomes independent of EBNA2 and LMP1. In addition, inhibition of EBNA2 function and, therefore, LMP1 expression causes the LCLs with activated c-myc to assume many of the phenotypic characteristics of BL lines [104,105]. Indeed, expression of the full Latency III set of EBV genes, particularly EBNA2 and LMP1, appears to be incompatible with activated c-myc [105]. On the other hand, one or more of the restricted set of genes expressed in BL appears to be able to complement activated c-myc in BL.Over-expression of c-myc is a common feature of many cancers. It is a transcription factor that can bind to around 15% of promoters on the human genome [106]. Consequently it influences many facets of cell behaviour, including proliferation and apoptosis (reviewed in [107]). In normal cells, c-myc expression is tightly regulated and its functions that promote proliferation (including upregulation of cyclin D and E, and downregulation of p27) are counterbalanced by c-myc-induced apoptotic checkpoints which include the ARF/MDM2/p53 and RB pathways. Genes involved in the p53 pathway are frequently mutated in BL (reviewed in [108]). More recently, animal models of c-myc induced tumours have implicated the pro-apoptotic BH3-only protein (Bim) as a p53-independent apoptotic checkpoint [109,110].Against this background, it is tempting to speculate that EBV might complement c-myc in BL by ablating the apoptotic activity of the oncoprotein. Exactly how the EBV genes might effect this complementation is currently under investigation in a number of laboratories, but one important clue is provided by observations on Bim, which is downregulated in normal B cells following infection and growth-transformation with EBV in vitro[111]. Bim is highly expressed in Latency I BL but is substantially downregulated in Wp-restricted BLs [27,112]. This suggests that downregulation of Bim might be a complementing factor in the Wp-restricted subset of BLs. Although downregulation of Bim is not seen in Latency I BLs, and therefore is not likely to be involved in most cases of BL, the observation with Wp-restricted BLs does lend credence to the idea that the pro-apoptotic checkpoints which regulate c-myc-induced proliferation in normal cells are targeted by secondary genetic changes and/or by EBV genes in the pathogenesis of BL.3.1EBV promotes survival and tumourigenicity in BL linesWhat, then is the evidence that EBV might regulate apoptosis pathways in BL? An important tool for answering this question was provided by the fortuitous discovery that the maintenance of the viral episome in some BL lines is unstable, so that it is possible to establish rare EBV-loss subclones in culture. EBV-positive lines in Latency I show a small but reproducible survival advantage over EBV-loss subclones when subjected to apoptotic triggers [59,113,114]. The mechanism of this protection is not yet known, even though the number of EBV genes potentially involved is very limited. Interestingly, EBV-positive BL lines displaying a Wp-restricted form of latency show a substantially enhanced protection from apoptotic triggers [27,59,112].3.2Contribution of EBNA1 to BLEBNA1 is expressed in all EBV-positive BLs. It is essential for the replication of the EBV episome in proliferating cells [115,116]. In addition, the glycine-alanine repeat sequence of EBNA1 limits its own translation efficiency and to some extent modulates antigen processing to impair its own recognition by EBNA1-specific CD8+ T cells [117,118]. While the episomal maintenance and immune-modulating functions of EBNA1 are both relevant to BL pathogenesis, they cannot themselves account for the enhanced survival and tumourigenicity of EBV-positive BL lines relative to rare subclones that have lost the EBV genome in culture. Nevertheless, EBNA1 appears to have additional functions. Thus, expression of a dominant-negative mutant molecule in EBV-transformed LCLs and in BL cells, to specifically inhibit the transcriptional functions of EBNA1 while retaining the episome maintenance function, resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in cell survival [119]. Conversely, expression of EBNA1 in some EBV-negative lines was shown to inhibit p53-dependent apoptosis [119].3.3Contribution of BARF1 to BLBARF1 has been shown to enhance cell survival, clonability, and tumourigenicity of EBV-loss subclones of the Akata BL line [120]. However, while the parental EBV-positive Akata cells expressed abundant BARF1 transcripts, immunostaining for BARF1 protein showed that it was actually expressed in only a small subpopulation of cells; i.e. cells in lytic cycle. Furthermore, the anti-apoptotic effect of BARF1 appears to be mediated via induced expression of Bcl-2, which is not expressed in the parental EBV-positive Akata cells nor in other Latency I BLs.3.4Contribution of EBERs to BLThe EBERs have been reported to restore a tumourigenic phenotype to BL cells that have lost the EBV genome in culture [121–123]. Through interaction with RIG-1 (retinoic acid-inducible gene-1), the EBERs can induce anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL10 [124] and type I interferon production [125]. They may also confer resistance to interferon-α induced apoptosis through binding to PKR (RNA-activated protein kinase) and inhibiting its phosphorylation [126,127]. The contribution of EBERs to the tumourigenicity of BL lines is independent of the inhibition of PKR [122] but might be related to induced expression of Bcl-2 [121]. It has been suggested that EBERs induce expression of IL-10, which can act as an autocrine growth factor to enhance survival of BL cells [128]. The generality of some of these observations is questioned by other studies: Bcl-2 is not normally expressed in BL tumours [129]; and cells infected with EBER-negative recombinant EBV or wild-type EBV did not differ in their sensitivity to interferon-mediated inhibition of proliferation nor the inhibitory effect of interferon on vesicular stomatitis virus replication [130]. Nevertheless, recombinant EBV lacking EBERs is less efficient at transforming normal B cells [131]. In conclusion, whilst the EBERs undoubtedly have the potential to influence cellular phenotype and immune-responses, the molecular mechanisms and their exact roles in the normal life-cycle of EBV and in the pathogenesis of EBV-associated malignancies remain unclear.3.5Contribution of miRNAs to BLThe functions of some EBV miRNAs are beginning to be identified, and their roles in EBV-associated malignancies may soon be become apparent. The miR-BARTs are regularly expressed in BLs, albeit often at lower levels than in EBV-associated epithelial tumours. It should be noted, however, that the BARTs are not essential for EBV transformation of normal B cells to LCLs [132], and that a deletion in the prototype B95.8 strain of EBV removes most of the miR-BARTs [30] while retaining transformation function. In addition, the miR-BHRF1s may not be regularly expressed in BL tumours. Nevertheless, there remains the possibility that specific EBV miRNAs might enhance certain functions of EBV or c-myc in BL, as EBV miRNAs have been shown to modulate expression of other EBV genes [133,134] as well as cellular genes [135,136]. Regarding the regulation of cellular genes by EBV miRNAs, the effect of miR-BART5 on PUMA (the p53 Up-regulated Modulator of Apoptosis) is of immediate interest since PUMA regulates apoptosis via p53 dependent and independent mechanisms [136]. However, even in NPC where miR-BART5 is highly expressed [88,136], 40% of tumours do not show a reduction in PUMA expression [136], suggesting that an effect of miR-BART5 on cell survival through regulation of PUMA is not a consistent feature of this NPC. Evidence for a role for EBV-miRNAs in BL has yet to be reported.3.6Contribution of BHRF1 and EBNA3 proteins to BLThe identification of a subset of endemic BLs which carry EBV in a Wp-restricted latency, and are concomitantly strongly resistant to apoptotic triggers, adds further weight to the idea that the role of EBV in BL is to counteract the pro-apoptotic influence of deregulated c-myc [25]. While a Latency I infection appears to provide low level protection from apoptotic triggers, the broadening of viral antigen expression in Wp-restricted latency BLs to include the viral Bcl2 homolog, BHRF1, and the EBNA3 family of proteins is associated with much stronger protection from apoptosis and a complementation of c-myc induced lymphomagenesis [27,59,112].The detection of BHRF1 expression in Wp-restricted BL cells, resulting from the close proximity of the BHRF1 gene to the highly active BamHI W promoter as a consequence of the intervening EBNA2-deleted sequences, provided a clear explanation for their survival advantage. BHRF1 is a Bcl2 homologue known to be capable of protecting B cells from growth factor withdrawal, TRAIL death receptor signalling, irradiation and chemotherapeutic drugs [61,137,138]. Until recently, however, BHRF1 expression was thought to be restricted to the lytic replication cycle of EBV, and had not been detected in malignant cells. There is now growing evidence that the two viral Bcl2 homologues encoded by EBV (BHRF1 and BALF1) play important roles not only in lytic cycle, but also in latently infected cells where they contribute to the initial stages of growth transformation [139] and possibly also, in the case of BHRF1, to the continued growth or survival of EBV-transformed cells [27]. In the context of BL, it was shown that ectopic expression of low levels of BHRF1 in EBV-negative and Latency I BLs was sufficient to confer almost complete protection from ionomycin and anti-IgM induced apoptosis, suggesting that the natural expression of BHRF1 in Wp-restricted BLs contributes to the enhanced resistance of this subset of BLs to these apoptotic triggers [27].A role for EBNA3A and EBNA3C together in apoptosis protection has also been reported and has implications for Wp-restricted BL cells [140]. Here, EBV-negative BL cells were infected with recombinant EBV genomes and, using drug selection, stable converted cell lines were established. Although the BL phenotype was not fully recapitulated since infection with recombinant EBV genomes results in a Latency III-like infection with expression of antigens not normally expressed in BL cells, such as EBNA2 and LMP1, it was noted that BL cells infected with either EBNA3A-deleted or EBNA3C-deleted recombinant EBVs were sensitized to death induced with nocodazole, cisplatin or roscovitine [140]. This suggests that EBNA3A and EBNA3C can act co-operatively to protect BL cells from these apoptotic triggers, and it reveals a second mechanism through which EBV can complement c-myc actions in BL lymphomagenesis. The relative contributions of BHRF1 and EBNA3A/EBNA3C to Wp-restricted BL pathogenesis will become clearer with detailed investigations into their mechanisms of action, including the apoptotic pathways they influence. Further investigations will also reveal to what extent BHRF1 and EBNA3A/EBNA3C co-operate with, or mediate their effects through, downregulation of Bim.4Immune modulating mechanisms in BLT cell immune responses play an important role in preventing the outgrowth of EBV-transformed B cells in healthy infected individuals (reviewed in [4]), but they are clearly ineffective at preventing tumour growth in BL patients. To some extent, this may be due to the immunosuppressive effects of P. falciparum malarial infections in regions where BL is endemic [93,94,96], although the potency of some EBV-specific EBV responses is restored following recovery from an acute malarial attack [94]. More importantly, perhaps, BL tumour cells display an inherent resistance to EBV-specific CD8+ immune effectors [17,141,142].The identification of restricted Latency I EBV expression in BL tumours offered a simple explanation for the resistance to CD8+ T cell responses. The repression of immunodominant viral target antigens [143,144] that are expressed in LCLs, and the partial protection offered to EBNA1 by its glycine-alanine domain [117,118,145] would surely enable these tumours to evade immune responses? More recent studies have questioned the extent to which the processing defect of EBNA1 might render this protein immunologically silent [146–148]. Furthermore, Wp-restricted BLs (which do express the immunodominant EBNA3A, 3B, 3C family of latent genes) are also poorly recognized by CD8+ immune effectors [25]. This latter result in particular highlights the fact that BL cells have a more general impairment of antigen presenting function irrespective of EBV status. Notably, BL cells express reduced levels of adhesion molecules [64] that are required for efficient conjugate formation with effector T cells, and of HLA class I molecules [19,141,142] which present antigenic peptides at the cell surface for recognition by the T cell receptor of CD8+ effector T cells. In addition to a general reduction in cell surface HLA class I molecules, certain HLA alleles are selectively downregulated to a greater degree [149]. BL cells also show reduced levels of the TAP1/TAP2 transporter complex [67,150] which mediates transport of antigenic peptides from the cytosol to the ER where they associate with MHC class I molecules. Together, these features of the BL cell phenotype render the tumour cells resistant to CD8+ effector T cell recognition even when appropriate endogenous target antigens are expressed. This resistance is reversible following expression of LMP1, which upregulates expression of the adhesion molecules, TAP1/TAP2 transporters and HLA class I molecules [67,151,152].The effect of the BL tumour phenotype on HLA class II antigen presentation is less well studied. Early work showed that the ability of BLs to process antigen via HLA class II and stimulate CD4+ T cell responses was impaired in BL tumour lines [153]. More recent work, however, shows that BL cells can be killed by EBNA1-specific CD4+ effector T cells [154], and Wp-restricted BLs can present EBNA3C epitopes to CD4+ T cells [155]. Such CD4+ immune responses to EBNA1 appear to be relatively common in healthy infected individuals, and an animal model demonstrated that these immune responses are potentially able to prevent the growth of BL tumours in vivo[156]. Interestingly, however, EBNA1-specific CD4+ responses are selectively impaired in children with endemic BL [157].5Lessons from BL for the biology of EBVBL was the first well-documented example of a human tumour showing a consistent impairment of antigen presenting function [19,67,142,150] and has become a paradigm for immune-escape by tumour cells of both viral and non-viral associated cancers. There is also the possibility that defects in HLA class I antigen presentation in BL and other cancers might directly enhance tumour growth by affording protection from apoptotic stimuli [158].One important lesson from studies on BL lymphoma was that neither the viral gene expression nor the cellular phenotype is a unique feature of malignant cells. This was speculated before restricted forms of latency were identified in long-term healthy carriers [159–162], and before the cell surface marker expression of BL tumour cells was shown to have a normal counterpart in the germinal centre [91].This lesson, together with the observation that the virus:cell interaction in BL was effectively immunologically silent for CD8+ T cell responses (see previous section), provided the foundation for our current understanding of how EBV normally colonizes the B cell compartment and persists in healthy carriers (Fig. 3). Thorley-Lawson's group has been particularly active in elucidating the mechanisms of EBV persistence, and one of their key observations was that EBV-infected cells in the blood of long-term carriers are confined to the memory B cell subset and are absent from the larger, naïve B cell subset [163,164]. This led to the development of a model for EBV colonization of the B cell pool which reflects the normal physiological process of normal B cell development [75] and is broadly supported by a large body of evidence from the Thorley-Lawson group and others. The fact that LMP1 can reverse the antigen presentation defect in BL tumour cells [67] suggests that this viral oncoprotein provides an immunological check to counter the uncontrolled growth of LCL-like cells in immunocompetent infected individuals. In long-lived memory B cells carrying EBV as a latent infection in vivo, the cells do not need to proliferate and so they can support the more restricted types of latency where critical transformation-associated latent genes are not expressed [162], and where there is no need for LMP1 to enhance immunogenicity.A corollary of the hypothesis for EBV persistence in normal carriers is that the stage of B cell development determines EBV gene expression and that mechanisms must exist for switching infected cells between different forms of latency. There is undoubtedly a correlation between EBV gene expression and cellular gene expression both in normal and in malignant cells, although most studies have used experimental models that demonstrate EBV genes driving the cellular phenotype, rather than vice versa. Thus, transfection of individual EBV latent genes, particularly LMP1 and EBNA2 into primary B cells or EBV-negative or Latency I BL cells drives the cellular phenotype towards a more differentiated activated lymphoblast phenotype (reviewed in [90]). Reversal of the lymphoblastoid phenotype in a conditional LCL model to a germinal centre phenotype can be achieved by inhibiting the function of EBNA2, and thus also the expression of LMP1, provided that activated c-myc is constitutively expressed [105]. There is, however, also evidence to support the view that the cellular phenotype can determine EBV gene expression. For example, activation of the Wp and Cp promoters immediately following infection of resting B cells in vitro is dependent upon expression of the BSAP/PAX-5 transcription factor whose expression is B cell specific [46], and the silencing of latent gene promoters can occur by epigenetic mechanisms mediated by cellular genes [165–171]. Furthermore, infection of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia B cells with EBV in vitro results in an unusual type of latent gene expression where the EBNAs are expressed in the absence of LMPs and the cells are not growth-transformed [172,173], whereas prolymphocytic leukaemia B cells express the full Latency III spectrum of EBV genes and are transformed [173]. Infection of an EBV-negative Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line (KMH2), which has germinal centre characteristics, results in a Latency I or Latency II type of EBV gene expression [174,175]. The mechanisms by which the differentiation state of the host B cell determines viral gene expression remain to be elucidated, but this information is critical for a more complete understanding of the normal carrier state.The impairment of HLA class I antigen presentation in BL provides an explanation for how BL tumours grow in the face of relatively intact T cell responses, and the enhancement of antigen presentation in Latency III type infection might explain why immunocompetent long-term carriers of EBV do not usually succumb to B cell lymphoproliferations arising from growth-transformation of normal B cells. Until recently, the enhanced antigen presentation of normal primary B cells following infection in vitro suggested that EBV was somewhat distinct from other herpesviruses which encoded genes that directly interfered with antigen presentation. However, the immune-modulating genes of other herpes viruses are generally expressed during lytic cycle, and we now know that EBV similarly encodes immune evasion genes during its own lytic cycle. Thus, immune recognition of EBV target antigens during lytic cycle is impaired through BGLF5, BNLF2a, BILF1 (vGPCR), and BCRF1 (vIL10) acting at different points of the HLA class I antigen presentation pathway, and BZLF1, BZLF2 and BGLF5 acting on the HLA class II antigen presentation pathway (reviewed in [176]). This highlights a point that although lytic cycle gene products are the most frequent targets for EBV-specific CD8+ immune-T cells in healthy carriers, it does not necessarily follow that those responses effectively eliminate infected cells that have entered lytic cycle. In fact, NK cells might be more important for preventing the excessive production of virus progeny in primary infection and healthy carriers [177,178].Another key lesson from BL was that protection from apoptosis, which is important for the growth of this tumour, can be induced by EBV latent genes [179]. The first EBV gene that was identified as having anti-apoptotic properties was LMP1, which acts by inducing the anti-apoptotic proteins, Bcl-2, Mcl-1, and bfl-1 [129,180,181]. To varying extents, EBNA2 [182], LMP2A [183] and EBNA3A/C [140] can also enhance cell survival. These latent gene products are all essential for the ability of EBV to growth-transform primary B cells. This indicates that EBV-induced growth transformation is not simply a matter of triggering proliferation by activating cell cycle, but critically it also involves modulation of apoptosis pathways to enhance cell survival. With regards to BL, the latent genes LMP1, LMP2A, and EBNA2 are not normally expressed in the tumour cells, yet EBV does confer a survival advantage in Latency I BLs; particularly so in Wp-restricted Latency BLs. The study of Wp-restricted BLs has highlighted an important role for BHRF1, both as a contributor to the pathogenesis of a subset of BL tumours and also as a gene involved in the establishment of in vitro transformed LCLs. Altmann and Hammerschmidt showed that immediate inhibition of apoptosis is an essential requirement following in vitro infection of primary B cells and that the two viral homologues of Bcl-2, BHRF1 and BALF1, were transiently expressed during the early stages of transformation [139]. This remarkable result was unexpected since both BHRF1 and BALF1 were considered to be lytic cycle genes. Their expression was attributed to promiscuous expression of the unmethylated EBV genome shortly after viral entry. However, more recent results [27] show that latent BHRF1 transcripts are driven from the Wp-promoter so that this protein is co-expressed with EBNA-LP and EBNA2 shortly after infection. Furthermore, low levels of BHRF1 protein continue to be expressed in some established LCLs where some Wp promoter activity is retained.From the examples illustrated here, it is clear that the study of BL has provided us with invaluable clues to the biology of EBV in asymptomatic carriers and to its association with malignant disease. EBV and BL have together provided paradigms for understanding the intricate interactions of viruses and tumours with the immune system. Fascinatingly, this well-worn model continues to surprise us with new details that have important implications for EBV and the wider field of viral oncology.Conflict of interest statementNone.


Title: Epstein-Barr virus reactivation induces divergent abortive, reprogrammed, and host shutoff states by lytic progression

IntroductionViral infections lead to heterogeneous cell fate outcomes including resistance, abortive infection, latency, or full virion amplification often leading to cell death. Cells that resist viral infection often display elevated pre-existing anti-viral responses [1–4]. Likewise, cell responses that enable survival following virus replication can prime for further anti-viral responses [5,6]. Herpesviruses are large double-stranded DNA viruses that provide a unique and complex infection paradigm to model the heterogeneity of viral infection as they reactivate from a latent state in response to diverse stimuli.Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was the first oncogenic human virus to be discovered [7]. Since its isolation from endemic Burkitt Lymphoma (BL) cells in 1964, EBV infection has been linked to an expansive set of human cancers and, more recently, autoimmune diseases [8–11]. EBV infection in immunosuppressed individuals can lead to post-transplant lymphoproliferative disease (PTLD) [12] and HIV-related diffuse large B cell lymphomas (DLBCL) [13] as well as up to 40% of Hodgkin Lymphoma (HL) [14]. and rare individuals with chronic active EBV (CAEBV) can develop T and NK cell lymphomas [15,16]. Beyond these hematologic malignancies, EBV infection is associated with epithelial cancers such as nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) [17] and gastric carcinomas [18]. Collectively, EBV causes is or otherwise associated with nearly 2% of all cancers diagnosed annually [8].This prevalence in malignant disease vastly underrepresents the success of EBV as a human pathogen. Globally, it is estimated that over 95% of adults are infected with EBV [19]. EBV is transmitted via saliva, which enables the virus to traverse oral epithelial tissues and infect B lymphocytes within the tonsils [20]. EBV infects B cells via the surface receptor CD21 (CR2) [21,22] and rapidly induces B cell adaptive immune programs to mimic germinal center (GC)-like dynamics [23–26]. Successful evasion of antiviral defenses, immune tolerance checkpoints, and growth-induced damage [27–29] allows memory B cells latently infected with EBV to exit from this virus-manipulated GC reaction. Viral latency establishment within the memory B cell compartment yields lifelong persistence [30, 31]. Lytic reactivation from this latent state triggers the production of new virions and is essential to the replicative cycle and transmission between hosts. The lytic gene program is transcriptionally orchestrated by two immediate early (IE) lytic genes: BZLF1 (encodes for the transcription factor Zta / Z / ZEBRA) and BRLF1 (encodes for the transcription factor Rta / R) [32–34]. While Zta and Rta both play essential roles in lytic reactivation, Zta is the master lytic transactivator in B cells. BZLF1 expression is induced upon cell differentiation and stress [35,36], a prototypical example being post-GC B cell differentiation into plasmablasts [37]. Host cell transcriptional regulators of plasma cell generation including XBP1 and BLIMP1 (PRDM1) induce EBV lytic reactivation via direct transactivation of the BZLF1 promoter [38–40]. Zta then transactivates subsequent expression of early and late lytic genes by binding at Z-responsive elements (ZREs) throughout the viral genome [41]. As an AP-1 family homolog [33], Zta also binds loci throughout the host genome [42] and has characteristics of a ‘pioneer’ transcription factor. Consistent with this, BZLF1 expression and the early stages of EBV reactivation cause considerable alterations to the host cell epigenome and resulting gene expression [43,44].Prior work suggests that lytic gene expression is functionally important for tumorigenesis. Notably, viral strains that carry the NFATc1-responsive Z promoter variant Zp-V3 exhibit increased lytic replication and are enriched in EBV-associated cancers relative to strains with prototypical Zp [45]. In SCID and NSG mouse models with reconstituted human immune systems, significantly fewer animals developed EBV+ lymphomas after infection with BZLF1 knockout virus versus a wild-type (WT) control strain [46]. Further, infection with a Zta-overexpressing strain that failed to complete reactivation (i.e., abortive lytic) promoted tumor growth in mice similar to WT EBV [47]. Recent experiments in immunocompromised mice confirmed the tumorigenic role of abortive lytic infection by using EBV lacking the BALF5 gene, which encodes a viral DNA polymerase subunit essential for lytic replication [48]. These studies demonstrated that expression of BZLF1 (and possibly other early lytic genes) contributes to tumorigenesis in vivo regardless of the potential for horizontal infection of bystander cells by new virions. While detailed insights regarding the oncogenic effects of successful or abortive lytic replication are limited, tumor microenvironment inflammatory conditioning by cytokines secreted from reactivating cells has been proposed [49–53].Another complication in the relation between viral reactivation and oncogenicity stems from observations that a significant proportion of EBV-infected tumor cells are resistant or otherwise refractory to lytic reactivation. In BL-derived P3HR1 and Akata cells, high expression of the oncoprotein c-Myc promotes viral latency maintenance and suppresses lytic reactivation via direct interaction with the origin of lytic replication (oriLyt) and inhibition of chromatin looping to activate BZLF1 expression [54]. Accordingly, MYC suppression facilitates BZLF1 expression and the subsequent induction of viral lytic genes. It is noteworthy that constitutive oncogene expression favors viral genome propagation through proliferation of latently infected host cells whereas lytic replication becomes a more advantageous strategy in its absence. Similarly, BL-derived cells refractory to lytic reactivation have also been found to express high levels of STAT3 [55–57], which functions as an oncogene in B cells and inhibits apoptosis via induction of BCL2 expression. Beyond simply being expressed by refractory cells, STAT3 antagonizes lytic reactivation of EBV+ cells through the functions of its transcriptional targets [56]. In fact, LCLs derived from patients with autosomal dominant hyper-IgE syndrome (AD-HIES), a disease that leads to non-functional STAT3 activity, went lytic at a higher rate than LCLs derived from healthy donors [58]. Given the therapeutic potential of drug-induced lytic reactivation followed by viral DNA synthesis inhibition to treat EBV-latent cancers, investigators are actively exploring means to make refractory cells more sensitive to lytic induction [59–61]. However, such efforts should be weighed against the known associations between the EBV lytic cycle and oncogenesis, which remain to be fully elucidated.Many EBV gene products contribute to virus-driven malignancies by mediating functions associated with cancer hallmarks including uncontrolled proliferation, tumor suppressor inhibition, epigenetic reprogramming, genome instability, apoptotic resistance, and immune evasion [62]. EBV+ cells with cancer stem cell (CSC) features have also been reported in NPC and gastric carcinoma [63, 64], suggesting the potential for cellular self-renewal associated with infection. In the CSC model, a small subset of tumor cells retain the capacity for self-renewal and proliferation through activation of signaling pathways (e.g., Wnt, Notch), transactivators of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal (EMT) transition, and critical regulators of pluripotency (e.g., SOX2, OCT4). CSCs may serve as progenitors for other tumor cells, especially in lymphoid malignancies that are derived from cells of origin that intrinsically retain self-renewal properties to support immunologic memory [65–67]. Aberrant expression of self-renewal genes and other CSC biomarkers [68] may originate from significant (epi)genomic reprogramming and result in cellular phenotypic plasticity. Lytic replication of EBV (and DNA viruses from several other families [69]) clearly constitutes a major reprogramming event for the host cell. Nuclear chromatin is globally disrupted by IE gene expression, the formation of viral replication compartments, and the accumulation of viral DNA [43,70]. Moreover, preferential binding of BZLF1 to methylated promoters can reverse epigenetic silencing of both EBV and cellular genes through nucleosome eviction, resulting in heterochromatin-to-euchromatin conversion [44,71–73]. While evidence for stem-like reprogramming and CSC gene expression during the EBV lytic cycle has not been reported to our knowledge, it is noteworthy that reactivation of HSV-1 (another herpesvirus) induces embryonic development programs including Wnt/β-catenin activity that licenses late viral gene expression [74].These previous studies demonstrate that EBV reactivation from latency is a complex process that culminates in heterogeneous host cell responses germane to the progression of virus-associated cancers. Single-cell sequencing techniques are particularly well suited to dissect the inherent complexity of host-virus interactions and their effects on cell fate [74–77]. In recent studies of early EBV infection [25,26] and established latency [78,79], we have used single-cell sequencing to successfully resolve and study diverse phenotypes arising from complex host-pathogen dynamics. We reasoned that a similar high-resolution experimental and informatic approach would clarify distinct courses of lytic reactivation, provide essential data for future studies of viral pathogenesis, and inform potential therapeutic strategies to address EBV-driven oncogenesis. To this end, we performed time-resolved single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), flow cytometry, and RNA Flow-FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) in P3HR1-ZHT cells to define initial cell state diversity, differential fate trajectories, and previously unknown lytic response phenotypes. We further extended and validated these studies with scRNA-seq in the B958-ZHT LCL and the Akata BL cell line thereby defining common mechanisms across diverse viral strains and reactivation stimuli.ResultsHeterogeneous responses to EBV lytic reactivation in individual cellsP3HR1-ZHT cells are an inducible model of EBV lytic reactivation (Fig 1A). This model system constitutively expresses the EBV immediate early lytic transactivator Zta (encoded by the BZLF1 gene) fused with a modified murine estrogen receptor hormone binding domain. While the encoded fusion protein is normally rapidly degraded, addition of 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT) stabilizes it and promotes its nuclear translocation, whereupon the Zta domain binds and transactivates Zta-responsive elements (ZREs) in both host and viral genomes. Because Zta has positive regulatory control of its own promoter via ZRE binding [80], 4HT treatment also leads to expression of endogenous BZLF1, thus initiating viral lytic reactivation. Although all cells in the P3HR1-ZHT line express the inducible construct, it has been observed that complete EBV lytic reactivation occurs only in a subset of 4HT treated cells [81,82].We confirmed inducible yet non-uniform viral reactivation of P3HR1-ZHT cells in response to 4HT treatment using FACS staining for the viral glycoprotein gp350, which was expressed in cells that reached the late stage of lytic reactivation. Unstimulated P3HR1-ZHT cells expressed minimal gp350 (1.1%), but treatment with 100 nM 4HT for 24 hours resulted in gp350 expression in 19.2% of cells. When we simultaneously treated cells with 4HT and PAA, an inhibitor of viral DNA replication, we observed a significant reduction in gp350 expression by 24 hours (Figs 1B and S1). These results indicated that cells exhibited heterogenous responses to viral lytic reactivation and that completion of the full lytic cycle was dependent upon successful viral DNA replication, which has been previously described in herpesviruses [83–87]. We expanded upon these gp350 FACS results using RNA Flow-FISH assays to detect viral RNAs from genes expressed at different stages of the lytic cycle: the immediate early lytic gene BZLF1, the early lytic gene BGLF4, and the late lytic gene BLLF1. After 24 hours of 4HT treatment, we observed a significant increase in expression of all three lytic transcripts compared to mock treated cells. However, there was a stepwise decrease in expression level between early and late lytic genes (Figs 1C and S2). These results confirmed that a significant proportion of Z-HT induced P3HR1 cells were refractory to full lytic reactivation.Since we observed heterogeneous responses upon lytic reactivation, we applied time-resolved single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to study the concurrent cellular responses in the P3HR1-ZHT system after 24, 48, and 72 hours of 4HT treatment compared to untreated cells (Fig 1D). UMAP projection of samples by timepoint demonstrated that substantial transcriptomic changes occurred after 4HT stimulation (Fig 1E). Cells expressing high levels of viral reads clustered together, however there was a distinction between cells expressing immediate early, early, and late viral transcripts (Fig 1F). Analysis of all EBV transcripts identified genes with high, moderate, and low expression; however, all 4HT-treated samples expressed more viral transcripts compared to untreated cells (Fig 1G). These results confirmed heterogeneous responses to lytic reactivation observed by flow cytometry and enabled subsequent genome-wide analyses.10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.g001Fig 1EBV lytic reactivation in the P3HR1-ZHT Burkitt Lymphoma line at single-cell resolution.(A) Schematic of 4HT-inducible BZLF1 (Zta) expression initiating lytic reactivation in the Burkitt Lymphoma-derived P3HR1-ZHT cell line. (B) Flow cytometry validation 24 h after 4HT-induced lytic reactivation and inhibition of complete reactivation by phosphonoacetic acid (PAA) in P3HR1-ZHT. Cellular expression of the viral glycoprotein gp350 (encoded by the late lytic gene BLLF1) serves as a proxy for successful reactivation. Co-treatment with the viral DNA polymerase inhibitor PAA prevents complete reactivation by blocking viral DNA replication, which is required for expression of late viral genes / gene products including gp350. (C) RNA Flow-FISH validation of select immediate early (IE), early, and late lytic gene expression in P3HR1-ZHT. The majority of cells express detectable BZLF1 24 h after 4HT treatment. Substantial fractions express early genes including the EBV DNA polymerase (BGLF4) and late genes including BLLF1. However, not all BZLF1+ cells exhibit early and late gene expression, indicating variable progression of reactivation in individual cells. Asterisks denote significantly higher expression in 4HT-treated samples versus DMSO controls (n = 3 per condition; two-tailed Welch’s t-test; ***p<0.001). (D) Experimental design schematic for time-resolved scRNA-seq study of EBV reactivation in P3HR1-ZHT. Single-cell libraries were prepared from unstimulated cells and from cells at three timepoints (24 h, 48 h, and 72 h) after 4HT treatment. Libraries were sequenced, mapped to a multispecies reference genome, integrated into a single data object, and analyzed. (E) UMAP representation of single cells captured across the experimental timecourse. Plots display the number of cells in each library after QC filtering. (F) EBV gene expression overview in merged timecourse scRNA-seq data. (From left to right) Viral fraction of captured transcripts per cell; scores for an immediate early (IE) expression module (BZLF1, BRLF1); scores for an early gene expression module (BRRF1, BBLF4, BALF1, LF3, BARF1, BaRF1, BVLF1, and BALF3); scores for a late gene expression module (BZLF2, BLLF1, BILF2, BBRF3, BcLF1, BRRF2, BSRF1, BCRF1, and BBRF1). Modules were curated based on viral expression kinetics determined by CAGE-seq [162]. (G) Hierarchically clustered average expression of all detected viral genes by timepoint.Identification of distinct EBV reactivation response clustersCells from integrated timecourse scRNA-seq libraries were hierarchically clustered by host and viral transcriptome similarity, which led to the identification of five main clusters (Fig 2A). Unstimulated cells were mostly present in clusters A and B, while clusters C, D, and E primarily comprised 4HT-treated cells across the experimental time course (Fig 2B) and displayed elevated viral gene expression compared to clusters A and B (S3 Fig). Further examination of these clusters revealed differences in the number of total and unique RNAs, the percentage of viral RNAs, and the percentage of mitochondrial RNAs (Fig 2C). These differences in unique and total RNA features suggested major phenotypic differences both in unstimulated and reactivated cells. Therefore, we scored the clusters based on cell cycle state and found that there was a decrease in G2/M specific gene expression and an increase in G1 gene expression after 24 hours of 4HT treatment, consistent with EBV lytic reactivation occurring in a pseudo-S phase [88, 89] (S4A Fig). We confirmed this finding using BrdU/7-AAD staining of untreated versus 4HT-treated cells (S4B Fig). Consistent with induced cell cycle arrest, lytic reactivation upon 4HT treatment led to a reduction of S phase cells (43.2% vs. 54.3%) and modest increase in G0/G1 cells. Because pulsed BrdU staining does not discriminate cellular and viral DNA synthesis, a portion of S phase 4HT-treated cells were likely undergoing viral but not cellular DNA synthesis. This was further evidenced by a significant fraction of gp350+ cells within the gated S phase population (S4B Fig). We also assayed MitoTracker signal stratified by gp350 expression and found that gp350+ cells had lower mitochondrial content (S4C Fig).10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.g002Fig 2P3HR1-ZHT phenotypic heterogeneity and response trajectories during lytic induction.(A) P3HR1-ZHT cell clusters identified in merged timecourse data via unsupervised methods. (B) Cluster composition of cells from individual timepoints. Cluster colors are coded as in 2A. (C) QC feature distributions by cluster. The total number of mapped reads per cell is given by nCount_RNA. The number of unique RNA features (i.e., genes, lncRNAs) per cell is given by nFeature_RNA. The viral fraction of mapped reads per cell (viral.pct) and mitochondrial transcript fractions (percent.mt) were calculated using the PercentageFeatureSet() function in Seurat [154]. (D) Differential gene expression by cluster. Genes are annotated by their known biological roles and functions derived from gene ontology (GO) analysis and primary literature. Dot size represents the percentage of cells in each cluster that express a given gene and color encodes average expression across the cluster. (E) UMAP expression profiles (top row) and pairwise correlation plots (bottom row, Pearson R) for BZLF1, MYC, and STAT3. Correlation plots depict individual cells colored by cluster. (F) RNA Flow-FISH validation of reduced MYC expression in BZLF1+BLLF1+ cells (top panel). Asterisks in the middle panel bar plot denote significantly reduced frequency of MYC+ P3HR1-ZHT cells and increased frequencies of BZLF1+
and BLLF1+ cells after 4HT treatment (n = 3 per condition; two-tailed Welch’s t-test; ***p<0.001). Asterisks in the bottom panel bar plot denote significantly increased frequencies of BZLF1+MYC+ and BZLF1+MYC- cells after 4HT treatment (n = 3 per condition; two-tailed Welch’s t-test; **p<0.01). (G) UMAP of graph-based pseudotime trajectory calculation for timecourse-merged scRNA-seq data. Trajectory root cells were selected from both clusters A and B, which were present in the unstimulated (day 0) P3HR1-ZHT library (top panel). Viral read content in individual cells ordered by pseudotime and coded by cluster (bottom panel). (H) Cluster- and pseudotime-informed annotated cell state model of EBV lytic reactivation in P3HR1-ZHT. Solid line arrows denote cell response trajectories supported by time-resolved scRNA-seq data. The dashed line denotes a putative state interconversion. (I) Gene expression dynamics along distinct pseudotime trajectories in the lytic reactivation timecourse. Highlighted genes were selected from those differentially expressed across unstimulated, abortive, and fully lytic cells.Cells traverse heterogeneous biological response trajectories during lytic reactivationNext, we analyzed differentially expressed genes by cluster and grouped them by ontology using a combined approach with software-based annotation tools [90] and primary literature searches (Fig 2D). Unstimulated cells were almost exclusively present in clusters A and B, which were distinguished from each other by total transcripts and unique features per cell (Fig 2B and 2C). Unstimulated cells with high RNA and feature counts (cluster A) exhibited a germinal center (GC) B cell profile including MME (CD10) [91], BCL6 [92,93], BCL11A [94], POU2F2 (OCT2) [95], and AICDA (AID) [96,97]. Along with high MYC expression, this phenotype is consistent with the profile of endemic BL from which P3HR1-ZHT is derived. In contrast, unstimulated cells with low RNA and features counts (cluster B) exhibited a cell stress expression signature that included slight enrichment of genes for ribosomal subunits (RPL34, RPS27), nuclear-encoded components of mitochondrial respiratory complexes (COX7C), and the apoptotic resistance genes PTMA [98] and GSTP1, the latter of which also mediates oxidative stress [99]. Cluster C, which was comprised of 4HT-treated samples, displayed antiviral restriction (APOBEC3G, PPP1R15A, TRIM14, FURIN), inflammatory (CCL4L2, CCL3L1, NKG7), and NF-κB signaling (NFKBIA, ICAM1, CD83, BCL2, BCL2A1) signatures. Cluster D had a similar gene expression pattern to cluster B with the addition of lytic transcripts and several long noncoding RNAs from R-loop “hot spots” (C1orf56, AC092069.1, AC005921.2, AC106707.1) associated with genomic instability related to unscheduled gene expression or DNA synthesis (in contexts including herpesviral reactivation) [100–104]. Finally, cluster E primarily contained cells that had entered the lytic cycle after 4HT treatment. Lytic cells expressed known host biomarkers of reactivation (SGK1, NHLH1, PRDM1) [105], downregulation of genes targeted by virus-induced host shutoff (HLA-A, ACTB, B2M) [106] mediated by EBV BGLF5 [107], expression of genes that escape host shutoff (e.g., GADD45B, IL6, CCND1, JAG1, SERPINB2, FOXC1, ATF3) [108–110], and numerous IE, early, and late lytic genes. Furthermore, an extended list of EBV genes expressed across all clusters highlights that most lytic transcripts are highly expressed in cluster E, while there is some limited expression of select genes in clusters C and D (S6 Fig).We next focused on individual genes that are differentially expressed between the clusters. We specifically chose STAT3 and MYC because they have been established as key regulators of EBV lytic reactivation [54,56,57,59] (Fig 2E). In line with these published results, MYC expression was strongly anti-correlated with BZLF1 induction (Fig 2E, bottom left panel). STAT3 expression, which has been previously shown to be upregulated in cells refractory to lytic reactivation [59], was likewise anti-correlated with expression of BZLF1 (Fig 2E, bottom middle panel). STAT3 and MYC expression were positively correlated and highest in unstimulated (cluster A) and abortive (cluster C) cells (Fig 2E, bottom right panel). Prediction of transcription factor activities based on gene regulatory network (GRN) enrichment likewise identified enhanced STAT3 (and NF-κB) target expression in cluster C (S5 Fig). RNA Flow-FISH detection of BZLF1 and MYC validated scRNA-seq data and provided additional insight with respect to partial versus complete reactivation indicated by expression of the late lytic gene BLLF1 (Fig 2F). Specifically, 4HT treatment induced significant increases in BZLF1+and BLLF1+ cells and a concomitant decrease in MYC+ cells relative to DMSO-treated controls (Fig 2F, top and middle panels). Moreover, the majority of BLLF1+ cells were BZLF1+/MYC- (Fig 2F, bottom panel).Given the observed heterogeneity of phenotypic states before and after lytic induction, we aimed to better understand the distinct response trajectories of EBV-infected cells using pseudotemporal ordering (Fig 2G). Pseudotime analyses [111] are preferable over purely chronologic sampling for studying biological state transitions due to initial state variability and asynchronous responses to infection among individual cells [26]. Root cells (pseudotime = 0) for the reactivation trajectory graph were chosen within clusters A and B since both of these phenotypes were represented by unstimulated cells (Fig 2G, top panel). As shown by per cell viral fractions of captured mRNA transcripts, reactivation generally progresses in pseudotime, with limited viral expression in abortive cells at intermediate coordinates and high viral expression in fully lytic cells in late pseudotime (Fig 2G, bottom panel). Notably, trajectories from both clusters A and B pass through incomplete reactivation states (C and D, respectively) before convening within the lytic phenotype (cluster E) at late pseudotime (Fig 2G).Collectively, cluster-resolved expression, MYC and STAT3 profiles, and pseudotime trajectory analysis enabled us to construct a state model for lytic reactivation in the P3HR1-ZHT system (Fig 2H). Unstimulated cells express elevated MYC and STAT3 and may undergo abortive reactivation in response to 4HT in which BZLF1 expression is minimal while MYC and STAT3 levels are largely maintained. Alternatively, cells may proceed to lytic reactivation, during which both MYC and STAT3 expression are severely diminished. Although clusters C and E were connected by a bridge of cells in the UMAP embedding, we cannot make definitive conclusions from these data alone regarding possible interconversion between abortive and lytic states. While global mRNA levels decrease along the transition from A to E consistent with host shutoff, the trajectory from cluster B (unstimulated) through D (intermediate) toward E (lytic) was characterized by relative increases in total and unique host and viral mRNA content. However, reduced MYC expression was also observed along the B to E trajectory. Overall, these results indicated that heterogeneity in unstimulated cells and differential responses to BZLF1 induction each contributed to the generation of distinct cell states during lytic reactivation. Analysis of gene expression along state-specific pseudotime trajectories captured these distinct biological response coordinates (Fig 2I). For example, trajectories starting from clusters A and B both exhibited upregulated BZLF1 and net MYC reduction. However, STAT3 expression was consistently low across B, D, and E while STAT3 increased from A to C and decreased from A to E. Likewise, dynamic expression of GC B cell and NF-κB signature genes along A➔(C)➔E were not observed along B➔D➔E.Abortive lytic cells are characterized by high NF-κB pathway gene expressionAbortive lytic replication, or the initiation of the lytic cycle without expression of late lytic genes / proteins, has been identified in various systems [47,112]. We sought to characterize this replication sub-state further through analysis of the abortive lytic cells in the cluster C phenotype. Using markers identified in Fig 2D we were able to clearly distinguish unstimulated, abortive lytic, and lytic cells using CD38, BCL2A1, and BLLF1 expression, respectively (Fig 3A). STAT3+ cells in the BZLF1+ abortive lytic state (cluster C) notably co-expressed BCL2A1 and other NF-κB pathway target genes (Fig 3B). RNA Flow-FISH for CD38, BCL2A1, and BLLF1 in cells treated with DMSO (control), 4HT (lytic), and 4HT + PAA (an abortive lytic model due to inhibited viral DNA synthesis) confirmed these distinct response states (Figs 3C and S7). This experiment confirmed that CD38 RNA was primarily expressed in unstimulated cells and decreased upon 4HT treatment. BLLF1 (gp350) RNA was almost exclusively expressed in 4HT treated cells, and its expression was blocked upon PAA treatment as expected. BCL2A1 RNA was significantly elevated in 4HT + PAA-treated cells, especially by 48 hours post-treatment (Fig 3D). Thus, these markers reliably delineated latent, abortive, and lytic phenotypes identified from scRNA-seq as clusters A, C, and E.10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.g003Fig 3Validation of an abortive response with elevated NF-κB activity distinct from full lytic reactivation.(A) Identification of CD38, BCL2A1, and BLLF1 as respective biomarkers for unstimulated, abortive, and lytic P3HR1-ZHT cells. (B) Co-detection of BZLF1 and NF-κB pathway transcriptional targets in abortive cells (co-positive cells in red) by timepoint. (C) RNA Flow-FISH validation of full (BLLF1+) and abortive (BCL2A1+) reactivation as orthogonal responses at 48 h post 4HT treatment. DMSO control-treated cells are predominantly CD38+ and exhibit minimal spontaneously lytic (full or abortive) cells (top panel). 4HT treatment induces distinct full lytic and abortive subsets (middle panels). Inhibition of viral DNA synthesis with PAA blocks full lytic reactivation and increases the frequency of BCL2A1+ abortive cells (bottom panels). Colored circles denote predicted corresponding model states defined from scRNA-seq. (D) Frequencies of CD38+ and BCL2A1+ cells presented in 3C by treatment condition at 24 h and 48 h. Asterisks denote significantly decreased frequencies of CD38+ cells and increased frequencies of BCL2A1+ cells upon 4HT and 4HT+PAA treatment versus respective control treatments (n = 3 per condition; two-tailed Welch’s t-test; **p<0.01). (E) EBV LMP-1, which encodes a potent activator of NF-κB signaling, is expressed in late lytic cells (left panel) but not associated with abortive cells that exhibit upregulated NF-κB transcriptomic signature including BCL2A1 (right panel, Pearson R = -0.06). (F) Flow cytometry analysis of protein biomarkers of full lytic reactivation (gp350) and NF-κB activity (ICAM1) at 48 h post 4HT treatment. Consistent with mRNA measurements, separate gp350+ and ICAM1+ populations are induced following 4HT treatment. Co-treatment with PAA reduces gp350+ cell frequency and increases ICAM1+ fractions. IKK inhibitor co-treatment reduces ICAM1+ cell frequency but does not substantially affect gp350+ cell frequency.Because EBV LMP-1 partially mimics the activated CD40 receptor that induces NF-κB signaling, we reasoned that LMP-1 might be associated with the abortive lytic phenotype. However, LMP-1 expression was largely restricted to cluster E (Fig 3E), consistent with its transcription during the lytic cycle [113,114]. This observation suggested that the abortive lytic phenotype and associated NF-κB signaling was not dependent upon LMP-1 expression. We confirmed this finding through FACS detection of gp350 (lytic cells) and ICAM1, a surface-expressed proxy for NF-κB pathway transcriptional activation (and in this context, abortive reactivation). Untreated P3HR1-ZHT cells did not express gp350 or ICAM1 (Figs 3F and S8). Treatment with 4HT induced expression of both gp350 and ICAM1; notably, expression of these proteins was observed in distinct cell subpopulations, supporting our finding that NF-κB signaling was primarily active in cells that had not entered the full lytic cycle. Accordingly, co-treatment with 4HT + PAA to induce an abortive lytic state by blocking viral DNA synthesis led to increased ICAM1+ cell frequency consistent with the BCL2A1 upregulation observed in Fig 3D. Conversely, co-treatment with 4HT and an inhibitor of IKKβ (a key component of NF-κB signaling) eliminated ICAM1 expression, but did not increase gp350 expression. These results demonstrated that NF-κB signaling is a feature of abortive lytic cells that is independent of LMP-1 activity, but does not restrict late viral gene expression.Lytic subpopulations are reprogrammed to stem-like plasticity during EBV reactivationWe next focused on the lytic fate by analyzing cells in cluster E. Paradoxically, lytic cells in cluster E collectively expressed the most unique genes (i.e., transcript diversity) of any cluster despite having low mRNA density per cell consistent with host shutoff (Fig 4A). In addition to differences in early and late lytic gene expression across cluster E (Fig 1F), this observation was consistent with enhanced cell-to-cell variability in gene expression. We therefore subclustered cells at higher resolution to examine heterogeneity among lytic subpopulations (Fig 4B). This yielded three subclusters of BZLF1+ cells–one with high late gene expression corresponding to complete reactivation (cluster E1) and two with comparatively lower late gene expression (clusters E2 and E3). Differential expression analysis by subcluster revealed remarkably broad cellular plasticity and developmental pluripotency signatures in E2 and E3 (Fig 4C). Although MYC was downregulated, the master pluripotency regulators POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, KLF4, NANOG, and LIN28A were expressed in E2 and E3 [115–120]. Intriguingly, many essential transcriptional regulators of pluripotency exit and germ layer specification were also co-expressed with BZLF1+ in E2 and E3 lytic subpopulations. Expression of ALDH1A1, ALPL, ITGA6, CD44, PROM1 (CD133), LGR5, and YAP1 upregulated in the E2 and E3 phenotypes was consistent with cancer hallmarks including cell plasticity, self-renewal, and drug-tolerant persistence [68,121–126]. Related to YAP1 expression, we identified distinct Hedgehog [127], Notch [128], and Wnt [129, 130] signaling pathway signatures in E2 and E3 lytic phenotypes as well as Hippo-independent YAP pathway [131] components reported in cancer. E3 cells also expressed genes encoding several PIWI-like family proteins, which protect germline cell genomes from transposable element insertion, maintain stemness, and are upregulated in some cancers [132–135].10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.g004Fig 4Cancer-associated cellular plasticity and self-renewal signature identification in EBV lytic cell subsets.(A) Total mapped RNA reads per cell (top panel) versus total unique genes expressed across each cluster (bottom panel). (B) Unsupervised identification of high-resolution subclusters across P3HR1-ZHT time course scRNA-seq data. (C) Differentially expressed genes upregulated in lytic subclusters (E1, E2, and E3). Genes were identified by comparing each subclusters versus all others, summarized by gene ontology methods, cross-referenced against primary literature, and curated by biological annotation. (D) Co-expression of BZLF1 and genes associated with cellular pluripotency and cancer stemness (SOX2, ALDH1A1) in single cells (co-positive cells in red) by timepoint. (E) RNA Flow-FISH validation of ALDH1A1 and SOX2 expression in BZLF1+ cells (top panel) at 24 h post 4HT treatment. Frequencies of ALDH1A1+ and SOX2+ cells significantly increase in response to 4HT induction of the lytic cycle versus DMSO control treatment (bottom panel; n = 3 per condition; two-tailed Welch’s t-test; ***p<0.001; **p<0.01). (F) Flow cytometry protein level validation of elevated CD44 and CD133 expression in gp350+ versus gp350- P3HR1-ZHT cells. (G) RNA Flow-FISH analysis of ALDH1A1 expression by lytic cycle progression at 24 h post 4HT treatment. Rare spontaneously reactivated BZLF1+BLLF1+ cells express ALDH1A1 without lytic induction treatment (left panel). The frequency of BZLF1+BLLF1+ALDH1A1+ cells increases upon 4HT treatment (middle panel). ALDH1A1+ P3HR1-ZHT cells are significantly enriched after 4HT treatment but not in the context of co-treatment with PAA to block viral DNA synthesis (right panel; n = 3 per condition; two-tailed Welch’s t-test; ***p<0.001; **p<0.01; *p<0.05).In total, 6,900 of 26,728 cells (25.8%) across all sampled timepoints expressed BZLF1 transcripts. Co-expression of genes including ALDH1A1 and SOX2 in a subset of BZLF1+ cells demonstrated an association between cellular plasticity and EBV lytic reactivation (Fig 4D). GRN analysis further supported a role for SOX2 transcriptional activity in a fraction of lytic cells (S10 Fig). RNA Flow-FISH validated ALDH1A1 and SOX2 expression in BZLF1+ cells in 4HT treated P3HR1-ZHT cultures (Figs 4E and S9). To validate these findings at the protein level, we performed intracellular flow cytometry for the SOX2 protein and BMRF1 and confirmed that a small percentage of lytic cells express SOX2 (S10 Fig). We also used flow cytometry to validate increased expression of the CSC biomarkers CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM) at the protein level in gp350+ cells (late lytic) relative to gp350- subsets across treatment conditions (Figs 4F and S11).We next examined whether lytic cycle initiation was sufficient to induce CSC-associated pluripotency expression or if successful viral DNA synthesis was required. To do so, we used RNA Flow-FISH to detect BZLF1, ALDH1A1, and BLLF1. ALDH1A1 was expressed in BZLF1+BLLF1+ cells following 4HT treatment, consistent with its expression in late stages of lytic reactivation (Fig 4G, left and middle panels). Consistent with a role for viral DNA replication in CSC gene induction, co-treatment with PAA and 4HT diminished BZLF1+BLLF1+ cell frequency and ablated ALDH1A1 expression (Fig 4G, right panel). Collectively, these data support a unique program of cellular plasticity induced in the late phase of EBV lytic reactivation.Host shutoff escapees in lytic subclusters exhibit distinct ontologiesBecause lytic subclusters identified at high resolution displayed distinct cellular transcriptomes, we asked whether host shutoff responses differed among lytic cells. RNA for BGLF5, an early EBV lytic gene that mediates host shutoff [107], was detected at variable levels across lytic cells and inversely correlated with per cell mRNA feature density as expected (Fig 5A). We also observed an increase in expression of BSLF2/BMLF1 (EBV SM) across lytic cells (S6 Fig). EBV SM mediates a change from the preferential export of spliced mRNAs to non-spliced viral mRNAs, which leads to an overall reduction in functional cellular gene product expression [136]. Moreover, transcripts for genes previously found to escape host shutoff [109, 110] were identified in each lytic subcluster (E1, E2, and E3) (Fig 5B and 5C). Host shutoff escapee expression could be broadly categorized by two patterns–some escapees (e.g., C19orf66, CDKN1B) were expressed in unstimulated P3HR1-ZHT cells and retained across abortive and lytic cells, whereas other escapees (e.g., IL6, SERPINB2, LHX1, JAG1) were exclusively expressed in lytic cells (Fig 5C). Intriguingly, lytic subclusters exhibited different host shutoff escapee profiles. Anecdotally, we also noted that several escapees in clusters E2 and E3 were related to inflammatory responses and overlapped with CSC and developmental pluripotency signatures (Fig 5D). We applied gene ontology (GO) analyses to differentially expressed genes among lytic subclusters to further investigate potential biological differences. Cells in E2 displayed significant enrichment of GO terms related to mRNA splicing and post-transcriptional regulation and epigenetic regulation versus cells in E3 (Fig 5E, top panel). RNA processing GO terms were also upregulated in E2 when compared jointly against clusters E3 and A to filter out differences related to transcripts basally expressed in unstimulated cells (Fig 5E, bottom panel). Conversely, the top enriched GO terms in cluster E3 versus E2 were related to cell-cell adhesion, morphogenesis, and diverse tissue-specific developmental programs (Fig 5F). Relatively few cellular GO terms were enriched in fully lytic cells (E1), consistent with extensive host shutoff and predominantly viral gene expression (Fig 5G).10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.g005Fig 5Distinct virus-mediated host shutoff responses and escapees in lytic subclusters.(A) UMAP representation of host shutoff mediator BGLF5 expression (left panel) and per cell feature RNA (right panel) in P3HR1-ZHT timecourse scRNA-seq data. (B) Module scores for a curated set of genes that escape host shutoff (GADD45B, IL6, CCND1, IL1R1, JAG1, SERPINB2, EPHB2, FOXC1, ATF3, ZNF526, P2RY11, and HES4) by high resolution cluster. (C) Subcluster-level expression of host shutoff escapees curated from primary literature. (D) Detail of distinct host shutoff escapee signatures in two lytic subclusters (E2 and E3). (E) Biological process gene ontology (GO) analysis for genes upregulated in lytic subcluster E2 versus E3 (top panel) and E2 versus E3 + A (unstimulated cells). (F) Biological process GO analysis for genes upregulated in lytic subcluster E3 versus E2. (G) Biological process GO analysis for genes upregulated in lytic subcluster E1 versus E2 and E3.Phenotype validation across viral strain and host backgroundFinally, we confirmed key findings through additional independent scRNA-seq experiments capturing responses of B958-ZHT cell lines to 4HT treatment (Fig 6), the BL line Akata to anti-Ig stimulation (Fig 7), and technical replication in P3HR1-ZHT (S14 Fig). Unstimulated and 24 h post-4HT B958-ZHT cell libraries were generated and analyzed as in previous experiments (Fig 6A). High-resolution cluster annotations from P3HR1-ZHT scRNA-libraries were mapped to B958-ZHT cells by anchor feature identification and transfer to evaluate the preservation of biological phenotypes across cell systems (Fig 6B). Cells corresponding to each high-resolution cluster were identified in the B958-ZHT dataset. Viral IE, early, and late gene expression modules were also scored across B958-ZHT cells and compared against scores for the three lytic subclusters (Fig 6C). As in the P3HR1-ZHT system, E1 cells exhibited high late gene expression consistent with complete reactivation while E2 and E3 cells displayed reduced late gene scores. In B958-ZHT, the E3 cluster most closely associated with plasticity and self-renewal signatures had the lowest IE, early, and late expression relative to other cells in lytic clusters. Prior findings of viral gene anticorrelation with MYC, STAT3, and BCL2A1 (Fig 6D) and lytic cell upregulation of cancer-associated stem-like pluripotency and host shutoff escapees were conserved in B958-ZHT (Figs 6E, S12, and S13).10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.g006Fig 6Lytic subset reprogramming and host shutoff escape signatures are conserved in B958-ZHT lymphoblastoid cells.(A) UMAP representation of scRNA-seq data from the inducible lytic marmoset lymphoblastoid cell line B958-ZHT before (Unstim) and 24 h after 4HT treatment. (B) Mapping of cell subclusters defined from P3HR1-ZHT analyses to B958-ZHT scRNA-seq data via transfer anchor integration (left panel). Subcluster composition is presented for unstimulated and 4HT-treated cell libraries (right panel). (C) Viral expression module (IE, early, late) and mapped lytic subcluster scores in timecourse merged B958-ZHT data. Of note, the assigned subclusters in 6B represent qualitative classifications based on maximum annotation signature scores for each cell. Accordingly, a given cell may score highly for more than one related signature while being assigned to a single classification. The underlying quantitative signature scores for E1, E2, and E3 presented here thus reflect a lytic phenotypic continuum rather than purely discrete states. (D) Conserved anticorrelation between EBV gene expression (Viral_1 module score) and genes characteristic of unstimulated and abortive phenotypes (MYC, STAT3, BCL2A1). Values denote pairwise Pearson R coefficients. (E) Conservation of key gene expression signatures identified from P3HR1-ZHT (a BL cell line) within B958-ZHT (a lymphoblastoid cell line) during EBV lytic reactivation.In Akata cells, unstimulated and 24 h post anti-Ig cell libraries were generated as in previous experiments (Fig 7A). We again mapped annotations from the P3HR1-ZHT scRNA-libraries to Akata cells by anchor feature identification, both at the cluster and subcluster level (Fig 7B). As in the P3HR1-ZHT and B958-ZHT systems, STAT3, MYC, and BCL2A1 expression were anticorrelated with successful lytic reactivation (Fig 7C and 7D). Viral gene expression and expression of plasticity markers like ALDH1A1 were co-expressed (Fig 7C and 7D). Gene ontology enrichment for differentially expressed genes in the lytic cluster also highlights the presence of plasticity and developmental factors (Fig 7E). Thus, our findings in the P3HR1-ZHT system are applicable across EBV strains, host cell genetic backgrounds, and reactivation stimuli.10.1371/journal.ppat.1012341.g007Fig 7Validation of abortive and reprogramming gene expression signatures in Akata BL cells stimulated by anti-Ig.(A) Integrated scRNA-seq data from Akata cells without stimulation (blue) and 24 h after anti-Ig treatment to induce lytic reactivation (rose). (B) Cluster and subcluster mapping from P3HR1-ZHT data to Akata data via transfer anchor integration. Clusters are colored as for P3HR1-ZHT and B958-ZHT datasets. Colors represent the reference phenotype with the maximal integration score for each cell. (C) Cluster-resolved expression in integrated Akata scRNA-seq dataset. (D) UMAP visualization of viral read fraction and representative markers of abortive (yellow) and reprogramming (red) signatures. LHX1 and IL1R1 are known escapees of host shutoff. (E) GO enrichment of DE genes upregulated in anti-Ig-induced Akata lytic cells.DiscussionThe single-cell data presented herein substantially expand and refine transcriptome-wide contours of host-virus dynamics during the EBV lytic cycle. Prior studies discovered that EBV-infected BL cells are prone versus resistant to reactivation dependent on STAT3 expression, activity, and functions of its downstream transcriptional targets [56,57,59]. A population of STAT3-/lo cells in unstimulated P3HR1-ZHT revealed by scRNA-seq (cluster B), which exhibits globally reduced mRNA levels consistent with cellular quiescence, may be more permissive to successful reactivation than cells with basally elevated STAT3 (cluster A). Additionally, cells that undergo abortive lytic reactivation retain STAT3 expression (and predicted transcriptional activity) after stimulation, while STAT3 and host transcript loads are drastically reduced in fully lytic cells, consistent with host shutoff functions exhibited by diverse viruses [137–141]. Single-cell data are also consistent with the functional importance of c-MYC in regulating EBV latency versus lytic reactivation [54]. MYC expression exhibits cluster-level patterns similar to STAT3, with the notable exception that MYC is more strongly expressed in cluster B cells–likely due to constitutive expression resulting from the chr8:chr14 (Ig-MYC) translocation in BL. Single-cell sequencing and RNA-FiSH results further identify unique upregulation of NF-κB and IRF3 pathway transcriptional targets in abortive lytic cells. Inhibition of viral DNA synthesis by PAA treatment accentuates this abortive phenotype, though we recognize that this model may not truly recapitulate an abortive lytic state in vivo. Regardless, paired with STAT3 and MYC activity, we speculate that this concerted response might sustain viability and reinforce latency in cells that fail to meet the lytic switch threshold.Acquisition of cellular plasticity within lytic cell subsets in multiple EBV+ B cell models is particularly striking. Several aspects of the lytic cycle could conceivably contribute to host cell plasticity through reversing epigenetic repression of lineage-ectopic genes. As observed across several DNA virus families, EBV genome replication within intranuclear compartments induces dramatic reorganization of host chromatin [69,70,73,142]. Along with this alteration to nuclear architecture, Zta binding at accessible AP-1 recognition sequences [33] (particularly methylated sites [71,72]) may reverse epigenetic silencing through supporting nucleosome eviction, enhancement of chromatin accessibility, and recruitment of transactivators to facilitate aberrant gene expression [43, 44]. ChIP-seq for Zta has revealed many such potential sites throughout the host genome, including POU5F1 (Oct-4) [42,43]. From the viral perspective, Zta binding across the cellular genome may function as a “sink” that supports bimodal control of the switch between latency (Zta absence or noise-level expression) and lytic reactivation (high Zta) [43]. From the host perspective, our findings suggest that these BZLF1 interactions with cellular DNA and nuclear chromatin remodeling during later stages the lytic cycle have substantial–and potentially pathogenic–collateral effects on biological reprogramming. Along these lines, developmental reprogramming associated with Wnt/β-catenin signaling has been observed in a single-cell study of HSV-1 lytic infection [74].Additionally, DNA damage, antiviral nucleic acid sensing, cytoskeletal rearrangements, and other major mechanobiological changes that manifest during reactivation may activate intrinsic responses to cellular injury leading to NF-κB and IRF3 signaling in the abortive population [143–145]. Paired with lytic-mediated growth arrest [146,147], we speculate that this process may engage cellular senescence and injury responses that promote autocrine and paracrine cellular reprogramming. An essential feature of damage-associated induction of cellular pluripotency is upregulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6 [148]. In both P3HR1-ZHT and B958-ZHT scRNA-seq datasets, IL6 expression was exclusive to fully lytic cell subsets. However, IL6R was expressed in abortive cells in P3HR1-ZHT and most latently infected cells in B958-ZHT. In the Akata scRNA-seq dataset, IL6R was exclusively expressed in the lytic cluster. Expression of JAK1/2 and STAT3 in latently infected cells from both lines was suggestive of an IL-6 response axis (IL6(R)/JAK/STAT3) known to be activated in hematologic malignancies [149]. This raises the intriguing possibility that cells from one reactivation trajectory and viral replication mode (fully lytic cells) might reinforce the survival and proliferation of tumor cells resulting from an alternative response (abortive, latently infected) through paracrine mechanisms. In addition to its escape from host shutoff [110], IL-6 autocrine support for latent EBV+ B cell proliferation and its depletion in BZLF1- and BRLF1-deificient tumors in murine models of EBV-driven lymphoproliferative disease are especially noteworthy [53,150,151]. A similar effect has been observed during infection with KSHV, which encodes a viral IL-6 homolog. Thus, the developmental pluripotency profiles and responses of lytic cell subsets may be associated with cellular DNA damage responses that have inadvertent pathogenic effects in EBV+ tumors. Notably, cytokine production by EBV-infected tumor cells (including abortive lytic cells) has also been proposed to support oncogenesis through microenvironment conditioning, polarization of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, and evasion of T-cell surveillance [49,50].In summary, our findings support a model of differential response trajectories to EBV lytic induction. The first determinant in this model is initial cell state, where ground-state STAT3 and MYC expression and activity predict a ‘high-resistance’, low-probability path to full reactivation. Conversely, cells with globally reduced transcription and reduced expression of STAT3 (and MYC) at the time of lytic reactivation traverse a ‘low-resistance’ path with high probability of complete reactivation. These data have potentially important clinical implications, as they suggest that quiescent EBV+ tumor cells may be more sensitive to lytic induction therapies. However, a critical second fate determinant that manifests in lytic cells may complicate this pursuit. To this point, our scRNA-seq and RNA Flow-FISH results are consistent with the previously identified role of lytic cycle induction in tumorigenesis [46,47,53]. Most cells that undergo full reactivation and new virion release are likely to die. However, some lytic cells undergo profound reprogramming to plastic CSC-like states that may promote malignancy through multiple mechanisms, even independent of their own survival. For example, we found transcript-level evidence that lytic cells could reinforce viral latency and survival of abortive or refractory cells via IL6/JAK2/STAT3 signaling. Additional studies are necessary to explore, dissect, and therapeutically perturb the IL-6/JAK/STAT3 pathway in EBV+ lymphomas.Furthermore, it is important to note that while there were many overlapping findings between our three datasets, there are key differences to be acknowledged for studies moving forward. The P3HR1-ZHT model is a BL-derived line with constitutive MYC expression that lacks functional EBNA2. The B958-ZHT line was transformed in vitro with a strain of EBV that contains functional EBNA2. These differences will lead to natural variation in phenotypes present in each model. Additionally, both lines are engineered to express a mutant estrogen receptor binding domain fused to the Zta protein. While this model is useful for studying lytic reactivation, we recognize that it is not a true physiologic trigger for lytic reactivation. To add breadth to our observations, we compared Z-HT to stimulation of the Akata BL cell line with anti-Ig, which leads to reactivation through BCR signaling. While reactivation efficiency was relatively low in the Akata system, we confirmed our overarching findings in all three models.Given these findings, subsequent examinations of the epigenetic consequences of early EBV reactivation at high resolution should be prioritized, and the possibility of double-edged consequences of oncolytic therapies should be specifically examined in detail. Future single-cell approaches should interrogate the frequency of viable abortive lytic cells [152] and the particular changes in chromatin accessibility as well as other epigenetic features of this phenotype. Similar experimental approaches should be applied to study clinical EBV+ tumor specimens to understand oncogenic correlates of lytic reactivation in situ.Materials and methodsEthics statementHuman cell lines used in this study were not accompanied with HIPAA identifiers or PHI. All experiments were thus categorized as non-human subjects research and approved by a Duke University IRB “Mechanisms of Epstein-Barr virus transformation using adult peripheral blood from the Red Cross” (eIRB #Pro00006262).Cell lines, culture, and treatmentsP3HR1-ZHT cells (derived from the Type 2 EBV+ [P3 strain] Jijoye eBL line) and B958-ZHT (a marmoset lymphoblastoid cell line transformed with Type 1 EBV [B95-8 strain]) were used in this study. Each cell line was cultured at 37°C with 5% CO2 in RPMI + 10% FBS (R10) media (Gibco RPMI 1640, ThermoFisher). To induce lytic gene expression, 4x105 cells/mL for a given cell line in log-phase growth were treated with 25 nM, 50 nM, or 100 nM 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4HT) in methanol (4HT, Millipore Sigma). Phosphonoacetic acid (PAA, 1 μM) was included in parallel with lytic induction treatments to inhibit viral DNA synthesis and prevent complete reactivation in separate experimental groups (i.e., abortive lytic replication). Control groups were prepared via treatment with 0.1% DMSO (and DMSO + PAA). All treatments for flow cytometry and RNA Flow-FISH experiments described below were performed in triplicate (technical replicates) in 6-, 12-, or 24-well culture plates.Flow cytometryFlow cytometric cell cycle analysis of unstimulated and 4HT-treated P3HR1-ZHT cells was performed using pulsed BrdU incorporation (20 min) and nuclear staining with 7-AAD in fixed cells (Invitrogen eBioscience BrdU staining kit, cat #8811-6600-42; 7-AAD, cat #00-6993-50) in addition to surface staining for gp350 (mouse anti-gp350 antibody clone 72A1 prepared in house then conjugated to Alexa 647 by Columbia Biosciences). Mitochondrial content versus gp350 expression in 4HT-induced cells was assayed using MitoTracker Green (ThermoFisher, cat #M46750). Flow cytometry was also used to assay surface expression of gp350, CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM). With the exception of the gp350 antibody, antibodies were purchased from BioLegend (anti-CD44_FITC, cat #397517; anti-CD133_PE, cat #397903; anti-CD166_PE-Cy7, cat #343911). In these experiments, removal of lytic inducing and control treatments at 6, 12, or 24 h via media replacement all yielded similar results. Cell were also stained and gated by viability (ZombieAqua, ThermoFisher, cat #L34965).RNA Flow-FISHRNA Flow FISH analysis of unstimulated and 4HT-induced P3HR1-ZHT cells (24 and 48 h post-treatment) was performed using RNA PrimeFlow reagents (ThermoFisher RNA PrimeFlow Kit Catalog #: 88-18005-210) and validated RNA probes (ThermoFisher. Type 1 probes: BLLF1_A647. Type 4 probes: BZLF1_A488, BCL2A1_A488. Type 10 probes: BGLF4_A568, CD38_A568, ALDH1A1_A568, SOX2_A568). PrimeFlow sample preparation was completed per ThermoFisher protocol with no adjustments. Briefly, cells were washed, fixed, and permeabilized. Cells were then incubated with target probes for 2 h in a 40°C water bath. Cells were washed and stored overnight at 4°C and then incubated with a Pre-amplification buffer for 1.5 h in a 40°C water bath followed by a 1.5 h incubation in amplification buffer. Cells were then incubated in label probes for 1 h in a 40°C water bath, washed with FACS buffer and subsequently analyzed on a Cytek Aurora. Spectral flow unmixing was performed with SpectroFlo software and uniformly applied to all samples. Further analysis and gating was completed in FlowJo.Single-cell sample and library preparationP3HR1-ZHT cells were plated at 4 x 105 cells/ mL in 5 mL R10 then treated with methanol (mock- 0 h) or with 25 nM 4HT (4-hydroxytamoxifen). The cells incubated in 4HT for 72, 48, and 24 hours then all cells were harvested for library preparation at the same time. The viabilities of the 0, 24, 48, and 72 h samples at time of collection were approximately 90%, 80%, 75%, and 75%, respectively. Harvested cells were resuspended at the recommended concentration to collect approximately 10,000 cells per sample during GEM generation. Single-cell transcriptomes from all four samples were captured and reverse transcribed into cDNA libraries using the 10x Genomics Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3’ gene expression kit with v3.1 chemistry and Chromium microfluidic controller according to recommended protocols (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA). All cDNA gene expression libraries were pooled for sequencing.Sequencing, read alignment, and QCPooled single-cell libraries were sequenced across two lanes of an S2 flow cell on a NovaSeq6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA) with 50 bp paired-end reads at a target sequencing depth of 50,000 reads per cell. Output base calls (.bcl) were assembled into sample-demultiplexed reads (.fastq) using cellranger mkfastq with default settings (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA). Reads were mapped to a concatenated reference genome package (hg38 + NC_009334 [type 2 EBV]; prepared via cellranger mkref) to generate single-cell expression matrices by running cellranger count (10x Genomics, Pleasanton, CA). Cellranger output files (genes.tsv, barcodes.tsv, matrix.mtx) were used to create Seurat data objects in R [153–155], which were subsequently pre-processed using QC filters. Cells and features were included if they met the following criteria: feature (gene) expression in a minimum of three cells; mitochondrial genes accounting for < 25% of all transcripts; a minimum of 200 unique expressed genes; < 65,000 total transcripts to exclude non-singlets. The elevated mitochondrial transcript and total transcript cutoffs relative to those used for resting PBMC samples [156] were chosen because of the highly proliferative nature of the P3HR1 cell line, the expectation of apoptosis as one outcome to lytic reactivation, and the implementation of viability enrichment prior to library preparation described above. A total of 26,728 cells across the timecourse passed all QC filters (nuntreated = 10,196; n24h = 7,905; n48h = 5,841; n72h = 3146).Data pre-processing, dropout imputation, analysis, and visualizationA complete list of loaded packages and versions (RStudio sessionInfo() output) is provided as a supplementary file (S1 File). Single-cell expression data were analyzed and visualized with R (v4.0.5) / RStudio (v2022.07.1+554) using Seurat v4.1.0. Data from each timepoint were analyzed, separated, and merged into a single object to support time-resolved analysis. Raw count data were normalized and scaled prior to feature identification (NormalizeData and ScaleData functions). Cell cycle scores and phases were assigned based on annotated gene sets provided in the Seurat package (CellCycleScoring function). Expression data were dimensionally reduced using principal component analysis of identified variable features (RunPCA), and the first 30 principal components were used for subsequent UMAP dimensional reduction (FindNeighbors, RunUMAP). Cell clusters were identified at multiple resolutions for phenotype identification and comparative analysis (FindClusters).Biological zero-preserving imputation was applied to correct technical read dropout using adaptive low-rank approximation (ALRA) of the RNA count matrix [157]. Data presented throughout this study was generated from imputed read data. Differential gene expression analysis of the merged timecourse RNA and imputed (ALRA) assays was performed at multiple clustering resolutions. Outputs from this analysis are provided as supplementary tables (S1–S4 Tables). Single-cell gene expression, co-expression, and cluster-averaged expression were visualized with Seurat functions (e.g., DimPlot, FeaturePlot, FeatureScatter, VlnPlot, DotPlot, DoHeatmap). Additional visualization of multi-gene co-expression was generated with the UpSetR package [158].Pseudotime analysisPseudotime trajectories were calculated for day 0 and merged timecourse datasets using Monocle3 [111,159]. Briefly, Seurat objects were adapted as cell dataset objects and used to learn and order cells along pseudotime graphs anchored at manually determined root cells. Calculated pseudotime values were added as a feature to original Seurat objects and used for subsequent gene expression analyses. Pseudotime-gene correlation was plotted and fit via smoothing splines to visualize expression dynamics across clusters (cell phenotypes).Gene ontology and gene regulatory network analysesLow and high-resolution cluster gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis for biological processes was performed using the enrichGO function in clusterProfiler [90]. Statistically significant enrichment results were visualized using the barplot, pairwise_termism, and emapplot functions. Cluster-level gene regulatory network (GRN) inference of transcription factor activities was conducted using CollecTRI in the R package decoupleR [160,161].Statistical analysesRaw and adjusted p values (Bonferroni correction) were calculated and provided for all identified differentially expressed genes from scRNA-seq data (S1–S4 Tables). For conventional flow cytometry and RNA flow-FISH experiments, statistically significant differences between treatment groups were determined via two-tailed Welch’s t test (n = 3 replicates per condition).Supporting informationS1 FigFlow cytometry replicates for gp350 expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.(A) Lymphocyte, singlet, live-cell, and gp350+ gating for unstimulated cells. (B) The same gating strategy as above applied for 4HT-treated cells. (C) The same gating strategy as above applied for cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.(TIF)S2 FigRNA Flow-FISH replicates for IE, early, and late lytic gene expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.(A) Co-expression of BZLF1 with BGLF4 or BLLF1 in DMSO control treatment and 4HT-induced reactivation. (B) Co-expression of BZLF1, BGLF4, and BLLF1 (red cells) in DMSO control treatment and 4HT-induced reactivation.(TIF)S3 FigDot plot of cluster-resolved EBV expression annotated by latent and lytic genes.(TIF)S4 FigCell cycle and mitochondrial features of P3HR1-ZHT cells.(A) Cell cycle phase annotations in P3HR1-ZHT scRNA-seq data. (B) Flow cytometry cell cycle analysis in unstimulated and 4HT-treated P3HR1-ZHT cells with gp350+ cells highlighted. (C) MitoTracker staining by gp350 status in 4HT-treated P3HR1-ZHT cells.(TIF)S5 FigTranscription factor activity prediction in abortive P3HR1-ZHT cells.(TIF)S6 FigExtended dot plot of EBV transcripts expressed across all clusters.(TIF)S7 FigRNA Flow-FISH replicates for CD38, BCL2A1, and BLLF1 expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.(A) Technical controls, 24 h, and 48 h responses to DMSO, 4HT, and 4HT+PAA for BCL2A1 versus BLLF1 expression. (B) Technical controls, 24 h, and 48 h responses to DMSO, 4HT, and 4HT+PAA for CD38 versus BLLF1 expression. (C) Technical controls, 24 h, and 48 h responses to DMSO, 4HT, and 4HT+PAA for BCL2A1 versus CD38 expression.(TIF)S8 FigQuantification and statistical analysis of gp350+ cell frequencies in P3HR1-ZHT dependent on 4HT-induced reactivation, PAA inhibition of viral DNA synthesis, and NF-κB pathway inhibition.Statistical comparisons between groups (n = 3 replicates per treatment condition) were evaluated via Welch’s two-tailed t tests (***p<0.001)(TIF)S9 Fig RNAFlow-FISH replicates for ALDH1A1 and SOX2 expression in BZLF1+ P3HR1-ZHT cells with and without 4HT treatment.(TIF)S10 FigPrediction of transcription factor activity associated with reprogrammed pluripotency in lytic P3HR1-ZHT cells.(A) SOX2 scRNA-seq expression and gene regulatory network activity. (B) Hierarchical clustering of predicted TF activities by P3HR1-ZHT subcluster. (C) Flow plots of untreated and treated P3HR1-ZHT cells 24 h post stimulation. Flow plots show that a small percentage of induced cells express SOX2 and that most of these cells are lytic (BMRF1+). (D) Bar graph depicting the percentage of cells that expressed SOX2 between treatment groups, in biological triplicate.(TIF)S11 FigFlow cytometry replicates for CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM) expression in P3HR1-ZHT cells.(A) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in unstimulated cells. (B) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in 4HT-treated cells. (C) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.(TIF)S12 FigFlow cytometry replicates for gp350 expression in B958-ZHT cells.(A) Controls, gating, and gp350 expression in unstimulated cells. (B) Controls, gating, and gp350 expression in 4HT-treated cells. (C) Controls, gating, and gp350 expression in cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.(TIF)S13 FigFlow cytometry replicates for CD44, CD133 (PROM1), and CD166 (ALCAM) expression inB958-ZHT cells.(A) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in unstimulated cells. (B) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in 4HT-treated cells. (C) Controls, gating, and stemness biomarker expression by gp350 status in cells co-treated with 4HT and PAA.(TIF)S14 FigIndependent scRNA-seq replicate validation of key heterogeneous responses in P3HR1-ZHT cells.(A) Overview of P3HR1-ZHT replicate experiment treatments (methanol control and 4HT) and identified clusters. (B) UMAP visualization of global QC metrics (top row), differential abortive and lytic responses correlated with STAT3 and MYC levels (2nd and 3rd rows), and upregulated pluripotency signature in lytic cell subsets (4th and 5th rows).(TIF)S1 TableDifferentially expressed genes by cluster.List of differentially expressed genes separated by each unique cluster. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes gene name, average log2 fold change, percentages of cells expressing the gene in the cluster versus all other clusters, and adjusted p value.(XLSX)S2 TableDifferentially expressed genes by cluster imputed with ALRA.List of differentially expressed genes separated by each unique cluster and data was imputed with ALRA in Seurat. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes gene name, average log2 fold change, percentages of cells expressing the gene in the cluster versus all other clusters, and adjusted p value.(XLSX)S3 TableGene ontology by cluster.List of GO terms separated by each unique cluster. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes GO ID, description, adjusted p value, counts, and gene IDs.(XLSX)S4 TableGene ontology by cluster imputed with ALRA.List of GO terms separated by each unique cluster and data was imputed with ALRA in Seurat. Each sheet is a separate cluster and includes GO ID, description, adjusted p value, and gene IDs.(XLSX)S1 FileList of R packages and versions used in the analysis of scRNAseq data.(R)


Title: Epstein Barr Virus Associated Lymphomas and Epithelia Cancers in Humans

IntroductionHuman gammaherpes virus 4 (HHV-4) or Epstein Barr virus (EBV) is a ubiquitous oncogenic virus belonging to the family Herpesviridae
1, 2, which is further classified into the subfamilies alpha, beta, and gammaherpes virus. EBV is a classical member of the subfamily Gammaherpesvirinae and among nine viruses that have been identified to solely infect humans 3, 4. The virus was first discovered and isolated in cells from African Burkitt's lymphoma by Epstein Barr and Achong in 1964 5, 6, and have been reported to establish latent asymptomatic infection in about 90% of the world's adult human population 7. Socioeconomic and developmental factors have been shown to influence the age at which primary infection can occur. For instance, in Sub-Saharan African countries where standard of living is poor, primary infection occurs in early childhood and most infected children seroconvert by the age of 3 years, whereas in developed or affluent countries, primary infection is delayed until late childhood or young adulthood 8. To establish primary infection, the virus is transmitted through oral route where it exhibits dual tropism by infecting two main physiological targets, epithelial cells and B lymphocytes 3. In addition to infecting the epithelia and B cells, the virus has also been shown to infect unnatural targets such as T lymphocytes and natural killer (NK) cells 9.Lytic replication of the virus occurs in the epithelial cells, but the virus can establish latency by infecting B cells found in the pharyngeal lymphoid tissues of the Waldeyer's ring 7, 10. Upon entering the B cells, the viral genome either gets integrated into the host genome and persist as a provirus 11 or remain in the nucleus as a non-integrated circular episome and expresses restricted set of genes that drive latency and survival of the host cell 12, 13. The expression of the latency stage genes, known as latency programs, in the B cells lead to B cell-derived lymphomas as a result of the transformation of the cells into lymphoblastic lines (Figure 1). The virus can be reactivated from latency in the B cells by a mechanism that is yet to be elucidated. In immunocompetent individuals, viral titres are held in check by EBV specific cytotoxic T cells 14. Although EBV undergoes lytic replication in the epithelial cells, where lytic stage genes are expressed, the virus can switch to the expression of latency stage genes, and lead to the transformation of the epithelial cells into permanently proliferating cells and resulting in epithelial cell derived malignancies (Figure 1) 15.In this review, we have summarized the current updates on EBV associated epithelial and B cell derived malignancies, and the role of EBV latency gene products in the pathogenesis of the cancers. In addition, we suggested areas that can be explored by researchers in future studies when considering therapeutic measures against these malignancies.Genome structure of EBVThe genome of EBV is a linear, double stranded DNA, approximately 172 Kbp with more than 85 protein coding genes (Open reading frames (ORF)) 16, 17. The ORFs encode proteins involved in regulation of DNA replication and gene expression, and maintenance of genome integrity in daughter cells 18. The nomenclatures of the ORFs were determined based on the Bam HI restriction fraction map in which the genes were in decreasing order according to their sizes 19. The protein coding genes are divided into lytic and latent genes which play structural and non-structural roles. The viral genome is further divided into long and short unique sequence domains which are separated by a series of 0.5 Kbp terminal direct repeats that are found at the end of each sequence domain 20. The terminal direct repeats increase the coding capacity of the genome and serve as a biomarker to determine the progenitor origin of EBV in the infected cells 17, 21.Classification and geographical distribution of EBVEBV can be classified into two main genotypes, A and B, or types 1 and 2, based on sequence divergence in the nuclear proteins, Epstein Barr Nuclear Antigen (EBNA)-1, -2, -3A, -3B, and 3C 22. However, EBNA-2 is generally used for the classification because the protein has the least percentage of sequence homology between the two genotypes 23, 24. The two EBV genotypes occur worldwide but vary in geographical distribution; EBV type 1 is found globally but predominant in American, Chinese, European and South-East Asian (SEA) populations whereas type 2 is predominantly found in Africa 25. The two genotypes also vary in biological properties; EBV type 1 is more efficient in immortalizing B cells and the type 2 has a higher lytic ability 26, 27. The virus is further classified into seven different strains: China 1 (C1), China 2 (C2), China 3 (C3), Mediterranean with (Med+) or without (Med-) deletions, Alaskan (AL), and North Carolina, based on nucleotide polymorphism, 30 bp deletions, or signature amino acid changes in the LMP1 gene as compared to the sequence of a prototype EBV, B95-8 22, 28. The different strains show diversity in tumorigenic activity; a 30 bp deletion at the carboxyl terminal, for example, has a higher tumorigenic activity and poor immunogenicity compared to the undeleted variant 29.Biological activities of EBV-encoded latency gene productsEstablishment of latent infection by EBV has been implicated in several malignancies 30 due to the expression of limited sets of latent proteins, shown to play various biological roles discussed in Table 1.Epstein Barr nuclear antigens (EBNAs)Six EBNAs (1, 2, 3A, 3B, 3C and LP) are expressed during latent infection in host cells, and their biological functions have been reported by researchers worldwide 31, 32. Figure 2 shows the biological activities of EBV nuclear antigens (EBNA) in tumorigenesis. The expression of these antigens varies across the latency programs establish by EBV in infected cells. During latency III, all the six EBNAs are expressed, however in latency II and I, only one EBNA (EBNA-1) is expressed, but no EBNA protein is expressed during latency 0 8, 32. All the EBNAs are involved in regulation of transcription and also participate in transcriptional activation of viral LMP genes (LMP-1 and -2) in infected cells 33, 34.EBNA-1 is a sequence specific DNA-binding protein that interacts with three unique palindromic sequence target sites (family of repeat elements (FR), dyad symmetry element (DS), and sequences found downstream Q promoter (Qp)), which are repeated multiple times on the viral genome 35. EBNA-1 binds to FR elements, which act as enhancer for viral C promoter, to direct the transcription of all the six EBNAs. Whereas engaging the DS elements by EBNA-1 leads to regulation of S-phase associated viral DNA replication, interaction with Qp down-regulates the transcription of Qp-driven EBNA-1 36, 37. EBNA-1 also ensures the segregation of the viral genome in daughter cells and up-regulates LMP promoter, sustaining cell survival or immortalization of infected cells 32. A more recent study has reported that EBNA-1 derived from nasopharyngeal cancer is required for the maintenance of EBV episome and DNA replication during latent infection 38. EBNA-1 protein is made up of N and C termini which are separated from each other by variable repeats of glycine-alanine sequences. The amino acid sequence repeats hide EBNA-1 from immune recognition by a cis-acting inhibitor of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and preventing antigen presentation through ubiquitin- proteosome pathway 39, 40.Unlike EBNA-1 which binds to DNA, EBNA-2 does not interact with DNA but engage cellular transcription factors such as CBF1/RBP-Jk, PU.1, and other proteins to up-regulate the expression of both viral and cellular genes 41. The cellular genes that are up-regulated by EBNA-2 include CD 23 and c-myc found in B cells. Activation of c-myc leads to expression of proteins such as D-type cyclins and cyclin E, which are associated with cell division 42. EBNA-2 also interacts with other transcription factors such as Cp, LMP-1, and -2 binding factors for up-regulation of viral genes that are responsible for immortalization of B cells 41, 43, 44.EBNA-3 family of nuclear proteins consist of three large nuclear phosphoproteins, EBNA-3A, -3B, and -3C 44. All the EBNA-3 proteins share few sequence homologies at the N terminus region, with the conserved domain used to engage cellular transcription factors such as CBF1/RBP-Jk 45. By binding to CBF1/RBP-Jk, EBNA-3 acts as a repressor of EBNA-2-mediated transactivation of cellular and viral proteins 46. In vitro genetic studies have shown that only EBNA-3A and -3C are required for immortalization of EBV-infected cells 47, 48. Although EBNA-3 B is dispensable, a report has shown that the protein regulates B cell homing by altering the expression of chemokine receptor 4 (CXCR4) 49.Epstein Barr nuclear antigen leader protein (EBNA-LP) also known as EBNA-5 is a nuclear phosphoprotein that is co-expressed with EBNA-2 upon EBV infection of target cells 50. The co-expression of EBNA-LP and EBNA-2 has been shown to enhance EBNA-2 transcriptional activation of both cellular and viral proteins 44, 51. EBNA-LP plays a key role in B cell transformation into a permanently proliferating lymphoblast based on the observation that cells expressing the mutant genes were less transformed as compared to cells with wild type EBNA-LP gene 52, 53. The leader protein interacts with cellular proteins, some of which are oncogenic and tumor suppressors (pRb, p53, p14ARF, and Fte1/S3a), cell cycle regulators (DNA-PKcs and HA95), and an anti-apoptotic protein (HAX-1) 54-56. EBNA-LP up-regulates the expression of thymus and activation regulated chemokine (TARC) gene, which has been proposed to play a key role in B cell transformation and survival 57, 58. Previous studies have reported that EBNA-LP stimulates EBNA-2 transactivation of viral proteins such as latent membrane proteins 1 and -2B (LMP-1 and -2B) in immortalized cells 51, 59, 60.Latent membrane protein (LMP)Three latent membrane proteins, LMP-1-2A, and -2B, are expressed by EBV during latency II and III in EBV infected cells 61. All the three proteins are expressed as cell surface membrane proteins and are required for survival and transformation of the infected cells into permanently proliferating cells (Figure 3).LMP-1 gene is an essential oncogene, which is expressed as a constitutively active receptor in a majority of EBV associated tumor cells 62. LMP-1 is a 356-amino acid protein with a short cytoplasmic N-terminal domain, six transmembrane spanning domains, and a 200 amino acid long C-terminal cytoplasmic domain 63. The N-terminal domain tethers the LMP-1 on the surface of the plasma membrane, and oligomerization as well as self-aggregation of the protein is mediated by the six trans-membrane spanning domain. The C-terminal is the biologically active region of LMP-1, with two functional domains, namely, C-terminal activating regions (CTAR)-1 and -2, which are needed for efficient EBV-mediated B cell transformation 64. Previous reports have shown that these two functional domains interact with intracellular signaling proteins such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor (TRAF)-1, -2, -3, -4, -5, and -6 found in tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) signaling pathway in B cells and epithelia cells 65, 66. By interacting with these adaptor molecules, CTAR constitutively activates major signaling pathways such as the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs), PI3K/Akt, AP-1, Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK), the p38 and canonical and non-canonical NF-κB, and JAK/STAT pathways 67-69. The activation of these major signaling pathways results in the up-regulation of expression of antiapoptotic proteins such as A 20, Bcl-2, and down-regulation of tumor suppressor protein, p53, promoting cell growth and survival 70, 71. LMP-1 activates the Janus kinase 3 (JAK3)/Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) pathway, which increases the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and promotes tumor metastasis and invasiveness 72. LMP-1 also promotes proliferation of EBV infected cells through the activation of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and AKT/protein kinase B signaling pathways with downstream activation of cyclin E and telomerase, respectively 73. A more recent study has shown that the activation of AP-1, JAK/STAT, and NF-κB pathways by CTAR resulted in increased expression of programmed cell death protein 1 ligand (PD-L1), a key immune checkpoint suppressor in tumor immunology 74.LMP-2 is made of two variants, LMP-2A and -2B, which are expressed during latency II and III in EBV infected cells 8. Structurally, both proteins have 12 trans-membrane domains and a 27 amino acid cytoplasmic C-terminal domain, however, LMP-2A has an additional 119 amino acid cytoplasmic N-terminal domain, which is not found in LMP-2B 75. The N-terminal cytoplasmic domain of LMP-2A contains immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM), which mediate B cell receptor (BCR)-like signaling cascade in EBV infected cells 76, 77. The BCR-like signaling, mediated by LMP-2A, provides strong survival signal which rescues BCR-negative cells from apoptosis 78, 79 and inhibit signaling that leads to lytic reactivation 80. LMP-2A has been shown to be essential for activation, proliferation, and survival of EBV infected B cells at early times, after which it is required for long term growth of B cells 81. Further study has shown that LMP-2A helps EBV infected cells to escape elimination by CD8+ T cells by down regulating (i) the expression of CD8+ T cells specific latent stage genes, especially EBNA-1, (ii) the expression of MHC class 1 proteins to prevent antigen presentation, and (iii) the expression of coactivatory receptor NKG2D to evade T cell recognition 82. The function of LMP-2B on the other hand, is not clearly known 81, but a previous report has shown that it interacts with LMP-2A to modulate the activities of the latter 75.EBV-microRNAs (EBV-miRNA)MicroRNAs (miRNA) are small non-coding RNA molecules, usually 18-24 nucleotides in length, which transcriptionally down-regulate expression of complementary mRNAs 83. miRNAs have been identified in different organisms such as mammals, plants, algae and worms, and EBV was one of the first viruses that was identified to express these small non-coding RNA molecules 84, 85. The virus has been found to express 44 miRNAs in all forms of latency and tumor tissues, regulating both cellular and viral genes 86. The 44 miRNAs are produced from two miRNA coding regions: the BamHI fragment H rightward open reading frame 1 (BHRF1) region which encoded 4 miRNAs, and the BamHI A rightward transcript (BART) region which encodes the remaining 40 miRNAs 87. Since EBV miRNAs are detected in EBV associated tumors, it is thought that they play important roles in the pathobiology of the life cycle of EBV and tumors associated to EBV 88. miRNAs help the virus to escape immune surveillance by down-regulating the expression of both immunogenic viral antigens and host immune proteins 83. For instance, Lung and colleagues in 2009 reported that BART 22, encoded by the BART miRNA region, down-regulated the expression of LMP-2A, an immunogenic viral protein, and enhanced NPC tumorigenesis 89. Impotin 7 (IPO7), which is a cellular receptor responsible for transporting transcription factors into the nucleus and plays a key role in innate immunity, has been shown to be inhibited by EBV miR-BART3 and miR-BART16 90, 91, and miR-BART2-5p protects EBV-infected cells from immune recognition by natural killer (NK) cells through the inhibition of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I chain-related molecule B (MICB) 92, 93. Other studies have also demonstrated that EBV miRNA BART 16 disrupt Type I IFN signaling pathway by down-regulating the expression of CREB-binding protein, a transcriptional activator of IFN, and hence suppressing host immune response against the virus 94, and EBV produces BART6-3p which interacts with miR 97, a cellular microRNA, to synergistically suppress the expression of interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R), which is a receptor for several antiviral cytokines such as IFN-α, IL-12 and IL-27 95, to promote tumor progression in both epithelia cancers and lymphomas.Aside targeting cellular cytokines, EBV miRNAs inhibit the destruction of B cell and epithelia cell derived cancers by down-regulating expression of tumor suppressor genes; miR-BHRF1-2 has been reported to silence the expression of PRDM1/Blimp1which is a tumor suppressor in B cells, hence promoting lymphogenesis 96. The virus also targets the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway, which suppresses tumor formation by producing BART 22 and shown to inhibit MAP kinase kinase kinase 5 (MAP3K5) expression 97.Detection of EBVEBV is implicated in several malignancies ranging from epithelial and lymphoid origins. Biochemical, serological, and molecular methods to detect EBV have increasingly become necessary in the diagnosis and monitoring of patients with EBV-associated diseases 98. Serological assays, that are used to identify the virus in infected individuals, involve the detection of antibodies against EBV specific antigens such as viral coat antigen (VCA), EBNA-1, early antigen (EA) and viral nucleic acids 99-101. Immunohistochemistry, which involves the staining of key EBV latency proteins such as LMP-1, LMP-2A, EBNA-1, and -2 in tumor biopsies, is used to confirm the presence of the virus and distinguish between EBV-associated and non EBV-associated tumors 102. Epstein Barr encoded RNA (EBER) in situ hybridization (EISH) assay is considered as the gold standard for the detection and diagnosis of EBV infection 103. The EISH technique employ the use of nucleic acid probes, either label or unlabeled, which can hybridize with EBER on paraffin sections of EBV infected tissues 104. EBER is a small non-coding and non-polyadenylated RNA which is highly expressed in all EBV latently infected cells, irrespective of cell phenotype. Detection and quantification of EBV nucleic acids in body fluids and tissues using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) have also been exploited for diagnosing and monitoring of EBV-associated diseases 105.Malignancies caused by EBV infectionEBV is linked to the pathogenesis of lymphomas such as Burkitt's lymphoma (BL), Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and post-transplant lympho-proliferative disorder (PTLD). Epithelial malignancies that are associated with EBV in epithelia cells include nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC), gastric cancer (GC) and breast cancer (BC) 34. In rare cases, EBV has been shown to infect NK and T cells; causing extranodal nasal-type NK/T cell lymphoma 106. The different malignancies are shown in Figure 4. Upon entering the host, EBV has tropism for two main targets, namely B cell and epithelia cells as well as unnatural targets such as NK/T cells. The virus in the various target cells expresses different patterns of latency genes and these determines the type of cancer that would be developed. B cell derived lymphomas include Burkitt lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, and posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders which are caused by the expression of latency I, II, and III, respectively, gene products. Infection of epithelia cells by EBV results in cancers such as nasopharyngeal, breast, and gastric cancers, caused by the expression of latency II, II, I, respectively, gene products. The virus can also invade unusual targets such as natural killer (NK) cells and T lymphocytes to cause extranodal nasal-type T/NK lymphoma due to the expression of latency II gene products. Full details of each tumor are further described below.Burkitt's lymphoma (BL)Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) is a highly aggressive non-Hodgkin B cell neoplasm and is the world's commonest pediatric cancer; endemic in Sub-Saharan Africa 107. The pathogenesis of BL has been linked to EBV infection as a result of the isolation of the virus from cultured BL cell lines in 1964 5. The virus has since been implicated in 95% of BL cases from high risk regions and less than 30% from low risk regions 108. BL occurs in children living in areas that are both holo-endemic and hyper-endemic for malaria and suggesting that Plasmodium falciparum plays a role in the etiology of the cancer 109, 110. BL is classified into three different forms based on clinical observations and disease epidemiology 111. Endemic BL (eBL) has an annual incidence of about 5-10 cases per 100 000 and contributes 50% of all pediatric cancers in malaria endemic regions such as Equatorial Africa and Papua New Guinea, where EBV is found in about 95% of all diagnosed cases 112, 113. Common sites of tumor occurrence of eBL are the jaws and abdomen 114. Sporadic Burkitt's lymphoma (sBL), on the other hand, has a wide global distribution, but is at a much lower frequency and mostly diagnose in both children and young adult. In US and Western Europe, sBL is responsible for 30-50% of all pediatric neoplasms and less than 1% in adult 115. EBV is rarely linked to sBL cases diagnosed in the western world, however in other places like North East Brazil, the frequency of EBV in sBL exceeds 80% 7, 116. In contrast, immunodeficiency-associated Burkitt's lymphoma (iBL) has been found in HIV carriers who develop the lymphoma before progressing to AIDS. The incidence of iBL is 10 to 100-fold higher than the sporadic form of the disease, and about 30-40% of iBL are positive for EBV 117. Immune compromise, which occurs as a result of HIV infection, accounts for reactivation of EBV from latently infected B cells and eventually causing rapid progression to iBL 118. CD4+ T cells prime CD8+ T cells against circulating EBV in immunocompetent individuals, and thereby bringing the virus under immune surveillance. However, in HIV infected individuals the CD4+ T cell count is drastically reduced, and therefore reduces the priming of the EBV specific CD8+ T cells in these individuals 119, 120.The expression of EBV genes in BL is strictly latent and restricted to the type I latency default programs. Only EBNA-1 and EBER are expressed in EBV positive cells in BL tumors 121. Whiles some studies have reported the detection of LMP-1 and EBNA-2 in rare cases of eBL and LMP-1 in many sBL cancers, these detections were not observed in all occurrences 122-124. Even though the role of EBV in the pathogenesis of BL is still unclear, evidence have shown that the expression of EBNA-1 in BL cell lines promotes cell proliferation by inhibiting apoptosis 125. Recent reports suggest that EBNA-1 inhibits apoptosis in BL cell lines by interacting with host proteins such as survivin, an anti-apoptotic protein and p53-regulator USP7 38, 126.All BL tumors, regardless of variants or EBV status, are morphologically and immunophenotypically identical and are related by sharing a general gene expression patterns which resemble that of centroblasts 127, 128. The BLs, in general, undergo chromosomal translocation of c-myc proto-oncogene on chromosome 8 or on chromosome 14 to one of the three immunoglobin loci, notably the heavy chain immunoglobin (Ig) 129. This brings the c-myc under the control of highly active Ig gene promoter leading to constitutive expression of c-myc proteins at high levels in BL cells. The expression results in uncontrolled cell growth in BL 130.Hodgkin lymphoma (HL)Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a lymphoid neoplasm which originates from B cell and characterized by the presence of few multinucleated giant cells known as Hodgkin/Reed Sternberg (HRS) cells, which are surrounded by a non-neoplastic inflammatory infiltrate 131. The incidence of HL varies depending on geographical distribution, sex, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status; the incidence is higher in developed countries compared to under-developed ones. 132. There is however lower mortality due to HL in developed countries compared to the less developed ones; an observation that has been ascribed to improved health facilities in the developed countries 133. About 30-40% of HL cases in North America and Europe were reported to be EBV positive, while in other parts of the world such as Latin America, Asia and Africa, EBV was found in almost 100% of all HL cases 134. Despite the association of EBV to HL cases, the role of EBV in the pathogenesis of this malignancy remains unknown 135.There are two variants of HL based on clinical and morphological differences 136. The first variant, known as nodular lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin lymphoma (NLPHL), is rarely EBV associated 137, hence would not be discussed in this review. The second variant, known as classical Hodgkin lymphoma (CHL), has been reported to account for about 95% of all HL cases and is mostly linked to EBV 138. Association between EBV and CHL has been suggested due to elevated antibody titres against EBV latent antigens, which proceeded the development of the lymphoma after several years of infection 139. Detection of EBV latent stage genes and RNA from biopsies of CHL patients was further used to confirm the association between the disease and EBV 140. CHL can further be divided into four histological subtypes, namely, mixed cellularity (MC), nodular sclerosis (NS), lymphocyte-rich (LR), and lymphocyte depleted (LD) 138. About 96% of all MC cases are EBV associated, whereas NS is less frequently linked to EBV infection 141. On the other hand, LR and LD are rarely associated with EBV 142.Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD)Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a type of malignancy with life-threatening complications in transplant recipients of both solid organ and hematopoietic stem cell allografts 143. The lymphoma occurs as a result of increase proliferation of B cells after transplant, and it is mostly EBV driven 144. The genome of the virus has been found in more than 90% of B cells from PTLD patients, either after primary infection, or reactivation of EBV from latently infected cells after treatment with immunosuppressant to avoid allograft rejection 145. The use of immune suppressive drugs after organ transplant reduces the number and function of T cell to influence the success of the transplant. The use of the immunosuppressant leads to depletion of EBV-specific T cells and disruption of the balance between the immune system and latent virus, and consequently, there is reactivation of EBV from latency 146. The impairment of EBV-specific T cell mediated immune surveillance results in uncontrolled lymphoproliferative blast, which eventually causes PTLD in transplant recipients 147, 148.The prevalence of EBV- associated PTLD ranges from 1-20%, with incidence varying according to the type of allograft, age, and pretransplant EBV-serostatus of transplant recipient. PTLD cases are highest (32%) in small intestine transplant recipients, and 3-12% incidence is observed in heart, lung, liver and pancreas transplant recipients. The lowest incidence (1-2%) is reported in renal transplant recipients 146, 149. At the ages of 5, 18, and 40, about 50, 20, 5-10% of the general population, respectively, have not been exposed to EBV, hence are seronegative. These groups of people develop primary infection after receiving transplant from a donor who is EBV seropositive, predisposing them to PTLD 150, 151. The overall incidence of PTLD is found to be higher in children than in adults due to increased pretransplant EBV seronegative status among children 146.Nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC)Nasopharyngeal cancer (NPC) is a malignant tumor of epithelia squamous cell which arises from the lateral wall of nasopharynx, notably, fossa of Rosenmüller and superior posterior wall 152. Globally, the disease shows remarkable variation in ethnic and geographical distribution, with about 80% of a total of 65,000 new cases that are reported worldwide, occurring in Southern China and Southeast Asia. 153. The annual incidence of NPC in Southern China varies between 20-30 per 100,000 person-year among Cantonese living in Hong Kong and Guangdong province, while the incidence in other parts of the world, such as Europe and the United State, are below 1 per 100,000 persons/year 154, 155. In Africa, specifically, Northern Africa, the incidence of NPC varies between 5 to 7 per 100 000 persons/year 156. Based on histology, the World Health Organization (WHO) classified NPC into types I, II, and III, which are known as keratinizing squamous cell, differentiated non-keratinizing, and undifferentiated non-keratinizing carcinomas, respectively 157. An alternatively simpler system of classification has been proposed which groups NPC into two histological variants, namely squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs) and undifferentiated carcinomas of the nasopharyngeal type (UCNT) 158. In a non-endemic region like North America, about 63% of all NPC cases are UCNT, while in Southern China, about 95% of all the cases are UCNT 159.EBV, which is the main cause of UCNT, has been classified as group 1 carcinogenic agent by the International Agency for Research and Cancer (IARC) 22. The viral infection in NPC epithelia cells is clonal in origin; developing from clonal proliferation of single EBV infected epithelia cell. NPC tumors express three EBV latency type II gene products (LMP-1, LMP-2, EBNA-1), which are found in EBV implicated epithelial cancers, in addition to the expression of viral encoded small RNAs such as EBER and microRNAs (miRNAs) 22, 100, 160. Of all EBV latency gene products, LMP-1 has been found in about two-thirds of NPC cases, indicating the key role this protein plays in tumorigenesis.As previously mentioned, the infection of epithelia cells by EBV is mainly lytic, and hence default lytic programs are expressed. However, the switch to latency default programs during epithelia infection by EBV represents a key step in the pathogenesis of NPC, although some studies have reported the involvement of both lytic and latent stages EBV genes in transformation of epithelia cells, the role of lytic genes remains unclear 15, 161, 162.EBV-associated gastric cancer (EBVaGC)Gastric cancer (GC) is the third leading cause of cancer-related mortality globally, with a worldwide annual incidence of over 950 000 cases. EBV-associated gastric cancer (EBVaGC) accounts for about 10% of all GC reported cases 163, 164. The incidence of EBVaGC shows variation in geographical distribution across the globe, with a pooled estimate in Europe, Asia, and North and South America, being 9.2%, 8.3% and 9.9%, respectively (Huang et al., 2014), whereas in Africa, a country like Zambia has a frequency of 23% 165. EBVaGC is classified into three histological subtypes namely: lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma (LELC)-type, conventional type adenocarcinoma (CA)-type, and carcinoma Crohn's disease- like lymphoid reaction (CLR)-type 166. The LELC-type is a poorly differentiated carcinoma with dense infiltration of lymphocytes, similar to that of NPC. More than 80% of EBVaGCs show LELC-type morphology 167. CA-type on the other hand, morphologically resembles EBV negative GCs by infiltration of variable lymphocytes with prominent desmoplasia in the absence of lymphoid follicles 168. CLR-type is characterized by the presence of three or more lymphoid follicle with active germinal centers located at the advancing edge of the neoplasm 168.One of the unique features which distinguishes EBVaGC from non-EBVaGC is the monoclonal proliferation of gastric epithelia cells latently infected with EBV and suggesting the presence of the virus in the early stages of tumorigenesis 169. In contrast to EBV-negative GCs, which mainly occur in the antrum as the predominant pathological site, EBVaGC occurs predominantly in the proximal stomach including the cardia, fundus and body 168. At early stages of tumorigenesis, EBVaGC forms a well-defined nodular ulcer in the submucosa with less fibrosis as compared to non-EBVaGCs, and this pathological feature is essential for endoscopic submucosal resection of the tumor 170.The genome of EBV, mainly Latency I default programs (EBER, EBNA-1, and BART), was found in the GC cells and adjacent dysplastic epithelium cells, but could not be found in surrounding lymphocytes, stromal cells, normal mucosa, and intestinal metaplasia, and therefore suggests a key role of EBV in the pathogenesis of GC 171.Extranodal nasal-type NK/T-cell lymphomaExtranodal nasal-type NK/T lymphomas are infrequent tumors that are regularly associated with EBV infection 172. The tumor is characterized by extensive angio-invasion and necrosis in the upper aerodigestive tract, including the nasal cavity, nasopharynx, paranasal sinus and the palate 173. The disease shows remarkable variation in geographical and sex distribution, with the highest incidence occurring in East Asia, Mexico, and South/Central America 174. The lymphoma has been shown to be predominant among men than woman, with 2-3:1 ratio of male to female, and the mean age at diagnosis being 50 years 175, 176.EBV expresses type II latency programs (EBNA-1, LMP-1 and -2) in the extranodal NK/T-cell lymphomas, and the genome of the virus exists as a clonal episome in the infected cells 177. The expression of these genes has been shown to constitutively activate several signaling pathways including JAK/STAT and NF-κB, to promote cell growth and survival 178. LMP-1 expression in extranodal NK/T-cell lymphomas has also been reported to promote tumor immune escape through the up-regulation of programmed cell death receptor 1 (PD-1) and PD ligand 1, which are both important immune checkpoint molecules in tumor immunology 179.Genome wide analysis have reported chromosomal abnormalities, notably, deletions in 6q21 in extranodal NK/T-cell lymphomas 180, which leads to the loss of expression of many tumor suppressor genes such as ATG5, PRDM1, FOXO3, AIM1, and HACE 1. For instance, the loss of FOXO3 and HACE1 in EBV-positive NK/T-cell lymphomas result in apoptosis resistance through the prevention of BIM and PUMA induction, and the suppression of TNF-driven NF-κB activation, respectively 181.Breast cancerBreast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed female malignancy globally and accounts for about 25% of incident cancer cases among women 182. In underdeveloped regions such as sub-Saharan Africa, frequency of breast cancer is relatively lower, characterized by aggressive course and targets female of younger age compared to the Western World 183.While genetic factors, such as inheritance of breast cancer associated gene 1 and 2 (BRCA1/2) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), in addition to non-genetic factors, have been shown to influence the development of breast cancer, the etiology remains unknown 184. Viral agents including EBV, mouse mammary virus (MMV), human papilloma virus (HPV), and cytomegalovirus have been implicated in breast cancer cases 185-187. Association between EBV and breast cancer have been reported from different parts of the world including Asia 188, Africa 189, and Europe 190, with a prevalence of 30-50%. Subsequently, EBV latency II gene products such as LMP-1, -2, EBNA-, and EBER have been detected in breast cancer cells 102, 191, 192, and a meta-epidemiological study have also shown that EBV infection was highly associated with the risk of breast cancer development 193.In keeping with the association between EBV and breast cancer, a proposed potential mechanism for the transformation of mammary epithelia cells (MEC) suggests that EBV infects cells that express CD21 as cell surface receptor, leading to tumorigenesis that occurs through LMP-1 mediated activation of c-MET signaling pathway 194.Summary and future studiesEpstein Barr virus is an oncogenic virus with global distribution and infecting about 90% of the world's population. Humans are the only natural host of EBV, and the virus is transmitted by ingesting infected saliva. In the host, the virus has tropism for two main cells, namely epithelia cells and B lymphocytes, although unnatural targets such as natural killer cells and T lymphocytes have been shown to contain the virus. The presence of EBV in B cells has been linked to lymphomas, which include Burkitt's lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma, and posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders. On the other hand, infection of epithelia cells is implicated in the pathogenesis of epithelia cell derived malignancies such as nasopharyngeal cancer; EBV associated gastric cancer, and breast cancer. The pathogenesis of both B cell and epithelia cell derived neoplasms has been due to the expression of EBV transcription programs or latency stage genes. The programs are divided into latency I (EBNA-1, EBER, and BARF0), latency II (EBNA-1, EBER, LMP-1, and -2), and latency III (EBER, EBNA-1,-2,-3,-4,-5, and LMP-1 and -2A), and their expression varies depending on the differentiation, type, and activation status of the target cell. Latency I programs are implicated in Burkitt's lymphoma and gastric cancer, whereas the expression of latency II default programs is linked to nasopharyngeal cancer, Hodgkin lymphoma, and NK/T-cell lymphomas. The pathogenesis of posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders has however been associated with the expression of latency III default programs. Tumorigenesis occurs by (1) upregulating the expression of antiapoptotic genes, (2) constitutive activation of major intracellular signaling pathways responsible for cell growth and survival, and (3) creation of tumor microenvironment for malignant cells to escape immune recognition.EBV have been linked to the pathogenesis of different malignancies, but the mechanism underlying the pathogenesis has not been fully elucidated. Host and environmental factors are thought to play key roles in the malignancies, making it difficult to clearly map out the mechanism involved in the pathogenesis of EBV-associated cancers. With current progress in genomic research, future studies should focus on how host genes and environmental factors interact with viral genes, and how the interaction influences the pathogenesis of EBV-associated malignancies. Due to overlapping symptoms, many EBV implicated cancers are only diagnosed at the advance stage of the disease. Genome-wide association studies and whole genome sequencing of large population of patients are therefore recommended to identify polymorphism in genes which predisposes individuals to the above mentioned EBV-associated cancers. Results from these studies will help identify high risk-populations for further prognostic evolution and increase the chances of detecting the cancers at early stages of development. Future studies must be done on anticancer drugs that selectively regulate the expression of EBV oncogenes involved in antiapoptosis, cell proliferation and invasion. Finally, selective inhibition of various signaling pathways activated by EBV proteins, offers promising anticancer therapy. All the proposed recommended studies will help understand the disease mechanism, and ultimately lead to the development of therapeutic agents that will help slow down disease progression and increase survival.


Title: Functional Implications of Epstein-Barr Virus Lytic Genes in Carcinogenesis

1. IntroductionEBV is the most prevalent virus infection in humans with approximately 95% of the world’s population sustaining an asymptomatic life-long persistent infection. The discovery that EBV is the causative agent of infectious mononucleosis (IM) represented a breakthrough in our understanding of primary EBV infection in healthy individuals [1]. A wealth of data demonstrates that EBV is transmitted through saliva with subsequent infection of naïve B cells in the naso/oropharynx. EBV induces proliferation of these B cells into activated B blasts that escape primary T-cell responses and undergo a germinal centre reaction driven through a series of viral latency programs. This culminates in EBV residing in the resting memory B cell pool, thereby establishing a persistent latent infection [2,3]. The EBV lytic cycle is switched on when EBV-infected memory B cells differentiate into plasma cells or when the virus enters differentiating epithelial cells, and this results in the production of new virions for transmission to other hosts [4].Disruption of this intimate host-viral interaction can lead to malignant transformation. Unlike the pathogenic process in EBV-induced lymphomagenesis where the virus appears to be the initiator, EBV contributes to the development of epithelial tumors, namely nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and EBV-associated gastric carcinoma (EBVaGC), as a consequence of the aberrant establishment of virus latency in epithelial cells with existing pre-malignant changes that disable the normal differentiation process [5].The EBV genome comprises approximately 172 kb and encodes around 100 open reading frames that are generally divided into two categories, latent and lytic genes. A limited subset of viral gene products, the so-called latent proteins, consists of six nuclear antigens (EBNAs 1, 2, 3A, 3B, 3C, and -LP) and three latent membrane proteins (LMPs 1, 2A, and 2B). Over the years, these latent proteins have been regarded as key molecules in the pathogenesis of EBV-associated cancers by regulating various critical cellular processes and pathways [5]. The contribution of these latent proteins to the oncogenic process remains the subject of intense study. By contrast, although there are more than 80 EBV lytic genes, for the majority of these genes far less attention has been paid to their possible roles in oncogenesis. Nonetheless, it is now becoming increasingly clear that the EBV lytic phase also plays an important role in EBV-driven carcinogenesis. In particular, an early lytic gene, BARF1, is now recognized as being consistently expressed in NPC and EBVaGC, highlighting the need to be more open-minded about the possible contribution of EBV genes outside of those traditionally associated with latent infection. This also stresses the need to obtain more comprehensive EBV gene expression profiles in EBV-associated cancers. The advent of next generation sequencing technology has allowed the discovery and interrogation of exogenous pathogens associated with various types of cancers. RNA sequencing (RNAseq) captures genetic and transcriptional profiles of cancer cells, which can be leveraged to examine not only the host genome but also pathogen genomes infecting host cells. In recent years, an increasing number of research groups have used RNAseq analysis to determine the transcriptomic profiles of EBV-associated cancers [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. Although the pattern of EBV gene expression varies between malignancies, these studies consistently demonstrated that a number of EBV lytic genes are more widely expressed than previously recognized, and the expression levels of some of these genes are similar to those of latent genes. Here, we provide an overview of known mechanisms by which EBV lytic genes could contribute to the oncogenic process. We focus our attention on early and late lytic genes whose expression has consistently been detected in biopsies from different EBV-associated tumors using RNAseq analyses.2. EBV Lytic CycleAs with many viruses that can establish a persistent infection, the switch from a latent to lytic EBV infection leads to virus replication with the production of new viral particles, and eventually the lysis of productively infected cells. The EBV lytic cycle can be activated in virus-infected B cells and epithelial cells by diverse stimuli in vitro, including phorbol ester and histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACs) [20,21]. While the precise in vivo conditions responsible for this process remain to be explored, it is intimately related to the differentiation of both B cells and epithelial cells. The lytic cycle is characterized by the expression of a large number of viral proteins and is divided into three temporal and functional stages: immediate early, early, and late [22]. Zta (encoded by BZLF1) and Rta (encoded by BRLF1) are the immediate early transcription factors in charge of activating the cascade of EBV lytic gene expression. Early genes mostly encode proteins associated with virus DNA replication, and late gene products mainly support the formation of viral particles (Figure 1).Zta and Rta synergistically stimulate the expression of multiple early lytic genes, including those that encode the components of the core replication machinery: BALF5 (the DNA polymerase), BALF2 (the single-stranded DNA-binding protein homolog), BMRF1 (the DNA polymerase processivity factor), BSLF1 (the primase homolog), BBLF4 (the helicase homolog) and BBLF2/3 (a potential homolog of the third component of the helicase-primase complex) [23]. In addition to its function as a transactivator, Zta binds to oriLyt (lytic origin of DNA replication) to initiate EBV DNA replication [24].Traditionally, it has been thought that the latent and lytic cycles are two mutually exclusive mechanisms that contribute to lifelong infection by EBV. The expression of a restricted set of latent genes is compatible with persistent infection because it allows the virus to escape from host immunity. By contrast, the expression of lytic genes during viral replication is primarily found in the epithelium of oropharynx and salivary glands and it is thought to promote the spread of new viral particles [25,26]. It also likely that full lytic infection can occur periodically in B cells, but this has not been demonstrated in vivo. There is a significant immune response, both humoral and cell-mediated, to EBV lytic antigens in all individuals who are infected with EBV. This demonstrates that lytic infection is a continuous feature of virus infection, providing a constant stimulus to the immune system.A possible tumorigenic role for lytic genes has emerged since the concept of “abortive lytic cycle” was proposed [27]. Zta preferentially binds and transactivates methylated promoters [28]. While a complete lytic cycle (i.e., production of progeny virus) immediately post-infection cannot be achieved while the viral genome is not methylated, Zta is still able to induce the expression of several early genes. The expression of BZLF1 together with one or more early genes in the absence of lytic genes primarily encoding late structural proteins is termed the abortive lytic cycle (Figure 1).3. Expression of EBV Lytic Genes in TumorsThe co-existence of latency and abortive lytic cycles has been documented in EBV-associated malignancies, including NPC, EBVaGC, and BL [29,30,31]. These studies consistently reported the presence of BZLF1/BRLF1 and early genes, while late genes were either detected at low frequency or low levels. Unexpectedly, despite evidence for an incomplete lytic cycle, the expression of some late lytic genes has been detected in tumor samples by RNAseq analyses [6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19]. Some late genes have been classified as “leaky” because they are expressed at low levels early in the lytic phase and further increased following EBV DNA replication [32]. However, this does not explain the presence of some “true late genes” in tumor samples whose expression is usually dependent upon lytic DNA replication. Whether EBV acquires a yet-to-be-identified strategy to express late genes that could contribute to the development of disease remains to be determined.Although there have been reports demonstrating the detection of lytic proteins in a variety of EBV tumors, comprehensive characterization of EBV transcriptomic profiles has only been made possible with the advent of RNAseq analysis. Due to technical and/or clinical challenges, most previous studies have used bulk tumor tissues. Thus, it remains to be determined whether such virus lytic RNA expression was derived from EBV-positive tumor cells or surrounding EBV-positive B cells that happen to be undergoing lytic cycle. Nonetheless, given that several independent research groups reported similar observations across different cancer types, it is now clear that EBV-associated tumors often express a wide-range of lytic genes that could play pivotal roles in EBV oncogenesis. This notion is reinforced by single-cell transcriptomic analysis showing co-existence of EBV latent and lytic genes in tumor cells isolated from primary NPC tissues [17]. The EBV lytic genes that have consistently been detected in biopsies from different tumor types using RNAseq are listed in Table 1. Of these, a number have also been detected at the protein level in tissues or cell lines, or antibodies against them detected in patient specimens (Table 2). As the tumorigenic roles of the two immediate early genes BZLF1 and BRLF1 have been discussed and reviewed previously [33,34], we focused our attention on early and late genes with known mechanisms that are relevant to EBV oncogenesis.4. Functional Implication of EBV Lytic Genes in Tumorigenesis4.1. Immunomodulation and Immune EvasionEBV has developed mechanisms to regulate and evade immune detection, and this is believed to be a critical component of its oncogenic capability. For example, reactivation of the EBV lytic cycle is accompanied by decreased expression of MHC class I and class II molecules at the cell surface, protecting cells harboring replicating EBV from recognition and lysis by virus-specific cytotoxic T cells (CTLs) [64,65]. There is convincing evidence showing that an impaired MHC class I antigen processing pathway during the lytic cycle is an important mechanism to compromise the recognition of EBV-infected cells by CD8+ T cells [65,66,67]. A number of lytic genes are thought to contribute to these immunoregulatory effects.4.1.1. BNLF2aIt was shown in 2005 that the CD8+ T cell recognition of EBV-infected B cells undergoing the lytic cycle was dramatically reduced with progress through the lytic cycle, accompanied by a reduction in transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) function and surface expression of HLA class I [64,67]. Screening of EBV gene products for their involvement in this process identified BNLF2a, which efficiently disrupted CTL-mediated cell lysis through HLA-A, -B, and -C alleles [66]. This study also showed that BNLF2a down-regulated levels of MHC class I at the cell surface and significantly blocked TAP function. TAP is a member of the family of ABC transporters that translocate peptides from the cytosol into endoplasmic reticulum (ER) for binding to newly synthesized MHC class I molecules and for subsequent presentation to CD8+ T-cells [68]. TAP is composed of two subunits, TAP1 and TAP2, that form a structure consisting of a C-terminal domain mediating ATP binding. The transport of peptides across the ER membrane by TAP depends on ATP hydrolysis [69]. BNLF2a directly interacted with the TAP complex and inhibited both its peptide- and ATP-binding functions, resulting in the failure of TAP to transport peptides into ER lumen [66]. Subsequent experiments showed that BNLF2a is an early lytic protein which co-localizes with TAP primarily in the ER [53]. More specifically, BNLF2a was characterized as a tail-anchored (TA) protein where a cellular protein called Asna1 was responsible for integration of BNLF2a into the ER membrane, and thereby required for BNLF2a-mediated HLA-I down-regulation [70]. The knockout of BNLF2a led to better CTL recognition of immediate early and early antigens, but not the late antigens, suggesting that BNLF2a expression is stage-specific and predominantly hampers the presentation of immediate early and early proteins [71].Several research groups have independently showed that BNLF2a is expressed in the early phase of the lytic cycle in B cells, and that its expression is regulated by Zta [53,71,72,73]. Unexpectedly, Strong and colleagues demonstrated that BNLF2a is expressed in a substantial proportion of EBVaGCs and that this is independent from lytic gene expression [54]. This was the first report describing BNLF2a expression along with EBV latent genes and prompted the researchers to propose a new form of the type II latency program, latency IIc (EBNA1, LMP2 and BNLF2a). Subsequently, BNLF2a has also been shown to be expressed in primary NPC biopsies and patient-derived NPC xenografts [12,17,74]. Somatic aberrations in genes related to innate and adaptive immunity were identified through whole genome profiling of primary NPC [74]. Interestingly, a trend for mutual exclusivity between BNLF2a expression and these somatic alterations was observed, suggesting a host-viral cooperation for NPC cells to avoid immune detection. In accordance with these observations, single-cell transcriptomic analysis also identified a strong correlation between the expression of BNLF2a/2b and the host genes involved in immune responses [17]. By analyzing publicly available RNAseq datasets, 4 out of 1017 non-small cell lung cancer were found to be EBV-positive [75]. Notably, high expression of BNLF2a was detected in the sample with the highest EBV read number in the absence of other lytic gene expression. In addition to carcinomas, BNLF2a was also expressed in extra nodal natural killer T cell lymphoma (ENKTCL) and angio-immunoblastic T cell lymphoma (AITL) that exhibit latency IIc [6,13,16]. Taken together, these data strongly implicate BNLF2a in the oncogenic process aside from its contribution to the immune evasion of lytically-infected cells.4.1.2. BGLF5A novel nuclease activity mapping to BGLF5 gene was originally reported in a Burkitt lymphoma (BL) cell line, P3HR-1 [76], with a subsequent study identifying the BGLF5 gene product as an alkaline exonuclease [77]. Following the discovery that Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF37 encodes a host shutoff function [78,79,80], BGLF5 was also found to inhibit cellular protein synthesis [81]. Viral host shutoff (vhs) is an important mechanism exploited by viruses to curb cellular protein production thereby favoring the synthesis of viral proteins. Herpesviruses use this mechanism to down-regulate surface expression of MHC class I and II molecules, perturbing T cell recognition to achieve immune evasion [82]. Indeed, BGLF5 was capable of causing a widespread shutoff of cellular gene expression by enhanced mRNA degradation, including HLA class I and class II molecules [81]. Consequently, a marked impairment of HLA class I-restricted CD8+ T cell recognition was evident [83]. Although the shutoff function of BGLF5 was originally found to be genetically separable from its exonuclease activity [83], subsequent mutational analysis showed that its DNase and RNase activities share a catalytic site, and some mutations were more selectively affecting either DNA degradation or shutoff [84]. It was also shown that BGLF5 expression leads to nuclear relocalization of cytoplasmic poly(A) binding protein (PABPC), a protein involved in mRNA stabilization, thereby augmenting its shutoff phenotype [84]. Further detailed investigations revealed that BGLF5 is a component of virus-induced nodular structures (VINORCs) that contribute to the vhs-associated blockade of nuclear export of cellular mRNA while facilitating selective processing and export of viral mRNAs [85].Cross-talk between the innate and adaptive immune system is required for the successful elimination of most pathogens. Upon the recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns, toll-like receptors (TLRs) activate intracellular signaling networks to either achieve direct antiviral activity or orchestrate the adaptive immune response [86]. Notably, BGLF5 was found to downregulate TLR9 levels through RNA degradation, a mechanism by which EBV could obstruct the host’s innate response [87]. Knockdown of BGLF5 in reactivated Akata BL cells restored the levels of several immunologically relevant molecules, such as TLR2, HLA class I/II molecules and CD1d [88]. In addition to its ability to facilitate immune evasion, BGLF5 also directly contributes to viral DNA replication and virion assembly [89]. It was found that knockout of BGLF5 resulted in a significant reduction of virus production by impairing virus nucleocapsid maturation, reducing primary egress and viral DNA synthesis. BGLF5 is expressed early in the viral replicative cycle [81,83]. Antibodies against BGLF5 were detected in sera from NPC patients [90] and BGLF5 protein expression, as well as nuclease activity, have been documented in both NPC biopsies and transplanted tumor lines [91]. In support of these observations, recent RNAseq analysis also revealed BGLF5 expression in primary NPC tissues [12], but the precise levels and proportion of tumor cells expressing BGLF5 remain to be determined. It is noteworthy that so far, there is no report describing BGLF5 expression in other EBV-associated malignancies. It remains to be determined whether the expression of BGLF5 is restricted to EBV-associated epithelial malignancies. 4.1.3. BILF1BILF1 was initially identified as a putative G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) based on its homology with the equine herpesvirus 2 E6 viral GPCR gene [92], but its functional role as a GPCR was not examined until 2005 [93,94]. These studies revealed that BILF1 is a constitutively active GPCR which signals through Gαi, classifying it as an “orphan” receptor. BILF1 contains seven transmembrane (TM) helices and displays conserved cysteine residues in the N-terminus and in the extracellular loops (ECLs). However, unlike most rhodopsin-like GPCRs (Class A GPCRs) which comprise a DRY (aspartic acid, arginine, tyrosine) motif in TM-III that is essential for receptor signaling, BILF1 has an alternative DRY motif, EKT (glutamic acid, lysine, threonine) [94]. Functioning as a ligand-independent GPCR, BILF1 is capable of modulating a number of intracellular pathways, including NF-kB and cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB) pathways [93,94]. BILF1 was originally identified as an early lytic gene [95], but its expression has also been detected in various primary tumor biopsies alongside the predominant latent mode of EBV infection [9,11,12,15,16,17,18,96,97].The contribution of BILF1 to immune evasion was initially suggested by the observation that its expression resulted in the reduction of RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) activation [93]. This interferes with the cellular antiviral defense system in which PKR functions by shutting down host protein synthesis and inducing apoptosis of infected cells to halt virus spread [98]. Subsequently, BILF1 was found to down-regulate MHC class I molecules on the surface of host cells, making it the third EBV lytic gene identified to subvert the antigen presentation pathway [99]. BILF1 physically interacts with MHC-I molecules through its C-terminal tail that leads to accelerated internalization and lysosomal degradation, resulting in reduced levels of MHC-I at the cell surface and consequently abrogation of T-cell recognition [95,99]. The underlying mechanism for this effect is rather complex, but the conserved residues in both the EKT motif and ECL domains appear to play important roles [100,101]. Significantly, BILF1 can selectively reduce cell surface levels of HLA-A, -B, and -E alleles, while only marginally affecting HLA-C [95]. Through this refined modulation, BILF1 could interfere with HLA-A and –B presentation to CD8+ T-cells while enabling the infected cells to retain the inhibitory effect of HLA-C on NK cells, evading both adaptive and innate immune responses. In addition to the enhanced endocytosis of surface MHC-I molecules, BILF1 also diverts newly synthesized MHC-I/peptide complexes during exocytosis, resulting in a significant reduction of processed target peptides presented to CD8+ T-cells [100].There is evidence to show that heterodimerization of two different GPCRs can alter the functional features of the individual partners, including signaling and trafficking [102]. Interestingly, BILF1 has been shown to form heterodimers with several human chemokine receptors [103], a strategy that EBV might use to hijack cellular communication for its own benefit. In particular, BILF1 hetero-oligomerizes with human CXCR4 to disrupt binding of CXCL12 to CXCR4 in a constitutive manner, resulting in the impairment of CXCL12-mediated CXCR4 signaling [104]. Whist the functional significance of this effect has yet to be explored, the authors postulated that the migration of BILF1-expressing plasma B cells to CXCL12 gradients could be suppressed, and this might provide an advantage for EBV by homing to sites that are most optimal for viral replication and dissemination. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that CXCR4 has been shown to cause a reduction of MHC class I levels at the cell surface [105]. The involvement of CXCR4 in BILF1-mediated down-regulation of MHC-I warrants further investigation.In the context of oncogenesis, another intriguing property of BILF1 is its function as an oncogene [106]. BILF1 was shown to induce foci in NIH3T3 cells in vitro, as well as tumor formation in vivo through EKT-dependent Gαi signaling. BILF1 also stimulated vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) secretion in a constitutively active manner [106]. The contribution of VEGF to tumor angiogenesis is well-defined, and its up-regulation has been reported in many tumors, including NPC and non-Hodgkin lymphoma [107,108]. In support of its tumor-promoting properties, BILF1 has been demonstrated to up-regulate intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) [109]. The up-regulation of ICAM-1 has been described in various types of cancer [110] and can promote cancer metastasis [111]. Site-directed mutagenesis of the NF-kB binding sites on the ICAM-1 promoter significantly diminished the ability of BILF1 to up-regulate ICAM-1, suggesting BILF1 exerts its function through a mechanism involving the NF-kB pathway [109]. Further experiments demonstrated that BILF1 decreased the cellular levels of IkBα (an inhibitory molecule of NF-kB), and this likely resulted in the translocation of NF-kB from cytoplasm to nucleus. Taken together with the detection of BILF1 in EBV-associated tumors, these results imply a significant role for this protein in the pathogenesis of these malignancies.During EBV replication, CD8+ T cell responses to EBV immediate-early and some early antigens are more frequently observed than responses to late antigens. This hierarchy of immunodominance seems to correlate with the phase-specific efficiency of antigen presentation that is modulated by the viral immuno-evasins. Knockdown experiments in LCLs have shown that BNLF2a impairs antigen presentation with decreasing efficiency as the lytic cycle progresses while subversion by BILF1 increases with progression through lytic cycle [112]. In contrast, BGLF5 has a relatively minor effect on CD8+ T cell recognition of antigens expressed in any phase of lytic cycle [112].4.1.4. BCRF1The BCRF1 gene encodes viral interleukin-10 (vIL-10), a human homolog of interleukin-10 (hIL-10) that is commonly regarded as an immunosuppressive cytokine [113,114]. BCRF1 was originally thought to be expressed only during the late phase of the lytic cycle, however, its expression has also been detected immediately after the infection of primary B cells [73,115]. A viral pre-initiation complex (vPIC) comprising several early lytic proteins (also known as “late gene regulators”) is required for the transcription of late genes [116]. Interestingly, BCRF1 and another late gene, BPLF1, are transcribed independently of the vPIC [117], a mechanism different from that regulating late genes encoding structural proteins. Notably, the BRLF1-encoded transcription activator (Rta) selectively binds to eight late promoters, including BCRF1, suggesting the expression of BCRF1 is likely regulated by BRLF1 [117]. Significantly, an early in vitro study showed that vIL-10 was present in EBV-transformed cell lines and that BCRF1 antisense oligonucleotides inhibited B cell transformation, pointing to a critical role for BCRF1 in EBV tumorigenesis alongside the well-established latent genes [115]. However, a study published around the same time reported that vIL-10 was not essential for B cell transformation in vitro [118]. Nonetheless, the expression of BCRF1 was reported in primary tumors of NK/T lymphoma and BL [31,119] and is now evidenced in various types of EBV-associated malignancies (Table 1). Notably, Badya and colleagues [16] reported that most AITL patients co-express BNLF2a and BCRF1, supporting a previous in vitro study showing that co-expression of these two genes facilitated immune evasion during the early phase of EBV lytic infection [73].The immunosuppressive properties of vIL-10 were revealed by a number of studies in the 1990s. In a murine model, infection with a recombinant vaccinia virus expressing vIL-10 resulted in reduced NK and CTL responses, suggesting that BCRF1 may facilitate the establishment of latent infection in B lymphocytes [120]. These results were supported by subsequent experiments, showing that vIL-10 protected EBV-infected B cells from NK cell-mediated killing [73]. Similar to hIL-10, vIL-10 functions as a cytokine synthesis inhibitory factor that blocks interferon-γ (IFN-γ) synthesis by activated lymphoid cells [121]. Furthermore, vIL-10 was shown to interfere with the antigen presentation pathway by down-regulating TAP1 to hamper the transport of peptide antigens into the ER, which in turn reduced the surface levels of MHC-I levels, thereby contributing to the evasion of T cell recognition [122]. In addition, vIL-10 significantly inhibited antigen-specific CD4+ T-cell activation by impairing the antigen-presenting capacity of monocytes through down-regulation of MHC class II expression as well as adhesion/costimulatory molecules ICAM-1, CD80, and CD86 [123,124]. In accordance with these observations, vIL-10 has been shown to abrogate the ability of autologous T cells to inhibit EBV-induced B cell transformation [125]. This effect appeared to be mediated through an augmentation of the growth of infected cells and the suppression of IL-2 and IFN-γ production induced by activated T cells [125]. In addition, vIL-10 prevented the secretion of anti-viral cytokines and diminished CD4+ effector T cell functions [73]. Collectively, these results indicate that EBV appears to have captured a human cytokine gene and retained activities necessary to enhance cell transformation during initial infection and to suppress host immune responses triggered by subsequent viral reactivation.4.2. Genomic InstabilityGenomic instability is generally defined by an increased frequency of genetic changes including nucleotide-excision repair-associated instability, microsatellite instability (MSI) and chromosomal aberration-associated instability [126]. Genetic instability is a well-recognized hallmark of cancer and, in this regard, EBV-associated malignancies are no exception [127,128]. Genomic instability results from defects in a variety of processes, including increased rates of DNA damage, impairment of repair systems, and defects in chromosomal segregation. It has been shown that EBV lytic replication induces the genetic instability of epithelial and B cells [129,130], and that this could contribute to the development of tumors even in situations where EBV infection is subsequently lost [130]. The mechanisms underlying EBV-induced genomic instability remain to be fully elucidated, although a number of lytic genes have been shown to promote this phenomenon in different ways.4.2.1. BGLF5 and BALF3Both BGLF5 and BALF3 gene products possess DNA cleavage activity and have been shown to promote genomic instability through similar mechanisms. It has been shown that the degree of genomic instability (measured by micronuclei formation) and chromosomal aberration in NPC cells are proportional to the frequencies of EBV lytic reactivation upon chemical treatment [129,131]. Examination of a panel of EBV early genes that might contribute to genomic instability in NPC cells identified BGLF5 as a potent inducer of DNA double-strand breaks, and the formation of micronuclei [129]. Subsequent experiments confirmed that BGLF5 alone was able to trigger genomic instability in epithelial cells by directly inducing DNA damage and indirectly repressing DNA repair, leading to increased chromosomal aberrations, MSI, and genetic mutations [132].BALF3 is a terminase that cleaves newly synthesized viral DNA and translocates unit length viral genomes into procapsids during EBV lytic cycle [133]. It plays an important role in mature virion production by simultaneously involving in DNA synthesis and packaging. Using NPC cells as a model system, BALF3 was shown to induce DNA strand breaks, formation of micronuclei, and accumulation of chromosomal aberrations [134]. These effects of BALF3 were dependent upon its nuclease activity. Notably, BALF3 also contributed to a number of malignant phenotypes of NPC cells, such as enhanced cell migration, invasion, and spheroid formation in vitro as well as the promotion of tumor growth in vivo [134]. 4.2.2. BNRF1BNRF1 is a virion tegument protein that facilitates the transfer of virus particles containing the nucleocapsid from the endosome to the nucleus [89]. A role for BNRF1 in inducing chromosomal instability was demonstrated when infection of primary B cells with a wild-type EBV resulted in centrosome amplification and aneuploidy compared to cells infected by a lytic-defective variant [130]. Further experiments revealed that BNRF1 was responsible for these effects and, specifically, BNRF1 induced centrosome over duplication during the S phase. However, the mechanisms that underlie BNRF1-mediated chromosomal instability was unclear, although sucrose gradient fractionation experiments found BNRF1 to be enriched in the centrosomal fraction and BNRF1 increased the production of the truncated form of PARP1 (a protein in centrosome) generated by caspase cleavage within the centrosome. The structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) 5/6 play major roles in chromosome maintenance and DNA damage repair [135]. Recently, BNRF1 was reported to target SMC5/6 for proteasomal degradation via Cullin 7 and calpain [136].BNRF1 is originally thought to be expressed exclusively in late lytic cycle [137]. In a study that set out to examine the issue of immunodominance among EBV lytic proteins in CD8+ T cell memory, it was unexpectedly found that BNRF1-specific T cell clones also recognized latently-infected, growth transformed LCLs, implying that BNRF1 was also expressed in EBV-infected B cells and possibly virus-associated lymphoproliferative disease [137]. It is noteworthy that BNRF1 has been shown to counteract the cellular antiviral defense machinery to facilitate the establishment of viral latency [63,138,139]. BNRF1 was shown to bind to the histone H3.3 chaperone DAXX and disassemble the DAXX-ATRX complex, in which DAXX and ATRX are cellular proteins that repress viral gene expression during latency. The BNRF1-DAXX interaction was also responsible for localizing BNRF1 to promyelocytic leukemia (PML)-nuclear bodies that are involved in host antiviral resistance and transcriptional repression, as well as promoting the expression of selective viral latent cycle genes required for EBV-induced B-cell proliferation and immortalization [63,138,139]. In support of these observations, BNRF1 expression has been consistently detected in various EBV-driven malignancies by RNAseq analysis (Table 1). Notably, BNRF1 appears to be an immunodominant target recognized by EBV-specific cytotoxic CD4+/CD8+ T cells and CD4+T helper (Th) cells [137,140,141]. Interestingly, the EBV subtypes that are strongly associated with the risk of NPC in China contain four amino acid substitutions (BALF2 V317M, BNRF1 G696R, V1222I, and RPMS1 D51E) [142]. In particular, BALF2 V317M and BNRF1 V1222I showed the strongest evidence of positive selection, implying that the virus might have evolved with these genetic alterations to avoid host immune surveillance and promote carcinogenesis.4.3. Cell SurvivalApoptosis and autophagy are biological processes that contribute to cellular defense against intracellular pathogens. Many pathogens have evolved complex molecular strategies to escape these defense mechanisms by inhibiting apoptosis and/or promoting autophagy. EBV encodes two viral homologs of the cellular anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 oncoprotein (vBcl-2), BHRF1, and BALF1 [143,144]. Both BHRF1 and BALF1 are classified as early lytic genes that prevent apoptosis during early infection of primary B cells, and function redundantly in driving the transformation of B cells [145]. However, accumulating evidence points to a role for these proteins in latently infected cells.4.3.1. BHRF1Although BHRF1 is classified as a lytic gene, its transcripts have also been detected during the latent phase of EBV infection. Early studies described the expression of BHRF1 mRNA in tissue samples of Hodgkin, NK/T cell lymphoma and NPC [146,147]. However, it was thought that BHRF1 was most likely expressed by rare cells in the tumors that had entered lytic cycle. The first evidence showing BHRF1 expression during latency came from research on BL [148]. It was shown that the expression of BHRF1 early during infection of B cells is independent of BZLF1 and EBNA2 [148]. Significantly, BHRF1 was constitutively expressed as a latent protein in Wp-restricted BL cells that unusually exhibited strong resistance to apoptosis, suggesting it might contribute to EBV-driven lymphoma genesis. The expression of BHRF1 was also subsequently demonstrated in biopsies of DLBCL, NPC, and EBVaGC [48,100,149,150].The anti-apoptotic properties of BHRF1 were identified by a series of studies. BHRF1 was initially shown to function in a way similar to Bcl-2 by suppressing apoptotic cell death induced by DNA damaging agents [151,152]. Subsequent studies showed that BHRF1 protected human epithelial cells from apoptosis induced by a wide range of stimuli, such as cisplatin, tumor necrosis factor alpha, anti-Fas, activated monocytes, and serum deprivation [153,154,155]. It also delayed the terminal differentiation of epithelial cells through the prevention of apoptosis [153], implicating a role in enhancing the survival of EBV-infected epithelial cells leading to the development of malignancy. In the context of BL, BHRF1 expression conferred potent resistance to multiple chemotherapeutic agents and the underlying mechanism has been ascribed to its ability to interact and inhibit several cellular pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins, Bim, Bid, Puma and Bak [156,157,158]. Further, expression of BHRF1 in mouse hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells accelerated MYC-induced lymphoma development in a model of BL [158], further supporting a role for BHRF1 in tumorigenicity and the survival of tumor cells.The impact of BHRF1 on promoting cell survival through mitochondrial regulation has also been described. Mitochondria play a central role in cell homeostasis by regulating both cell death and cell survival [159]. Apoptosis can be triggered intrinsically through mitochondrial pathways that are tightly controlled by Bcl-2 family members [160]. On the other hand, autophagy is a “self-eating” physiological pathway that promotes cell survival [161]. Mitochondrial autophagy is termed “mitophagy” [162]. It was found that BHRF1 preferentially localized to mitochondria and interacted with Bim to confer mitochondrial stability under apoptosis-inducing conditions [163]. In NPC cell lines, BHRF1 was able to induce mitochondrial membrane permeabilization transition (MMPT), resulting in intensified reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and subsequent activation of mitophagy [150]. This molecular scenario prevented apoptosis and favored NPC tumorigenesis. In addition, mitochondria are essential in the activation of IFN pathways against viral infection as the first line of the defense response in innate immunity [164]. It has been shown that BHRF1 disturbed mitochondrial dynamics by inducing mitochondrial fission and hyperacetylation of the microtubules (MT) that regulate movement of mitochondria in the cytoplasm [165,166]. Consequently, these effects led to the stimulation of mitophagy, resulting in the inhibition of IFN production. These data are in agreement with studies describing the ability of EBV to subvert autophagy thereby enhancing viral replication and counteracting host anti-viral immune responses [167,168]. 4.3.2. BALF1Compared to BHRF1, BALF1 has been less studied, and its anti-apoptotic function remains to be confirmed. BALF1 was initially found to inhibit α-FAS/IFN-γ-induced apoptosis by interacting with Bax and Bak [144]. However, another study showed that BALF1 lacked anti-apoptotic activity and impaired the anti-apoptotic activity of BHRF1 [169]. It was speculated that like cellular Bcl-2 that can inhibit or induce apoptosis in part by counteracting the activity of other Bcl-2 family members, EBV also encodes an antagonist of its own Bcl-2. However, unlike the cellular Bcl-2 antagonists, BALF1 lacked pro-apoptotic activity [169]. Despite these conflicting observations, subsequent experiments demonstrated that BALF1 reduced the serum-dependence of cells and significantly increased cell survival under serum-starved conditions by suppressing apoptosis, but not promoting cell cycle progression [170,171]. In addition to its effects on apoptosis, BALF1 was shown to enhance cell migration and invasion in vitro and to promote tumor growth and metastasis in vivo [171]. Interestingly, similar to BHRF1, Shao and colleagues have highlighted the involvement of BALF1 in autophagy [172]. In addition to its role as a self-eating process, autophagy also emerged as a microbial clearance mechanism by presenting pathogenic antigens to the immune system [173]. It was shown that BALF0/1 can modulate autophagy during the EBV lytic cycle, possibly to favor the formation of viral particles. The potential contribution of BALF1 to immunomodulation via autophagy manipulation deserves further investigation. Due to the unavailability of a specific anti-BALF1 antibody, the expression of BALF1 protein in EBV-infected cells has never been confirmed. Nonetheless, BALF1 mRNA has previously been documented in BL cell lines and NPC biopsies [170], and readily found in tumor samples of EBVaGC and NPC by RNAseq (Table 1). Perhaps more importantly, anti-BALF0/1 antibodies were detected in plasma samples of NPC patients, providing indirect evidence for the existence of BALF1 in vivo [172]. 5. Conclusions RemarksEvidence is accumulating to suggest that EBV-encoded lytic genes could contribute to the oncogenic process through several coordinated mechanisms (Figure 2). Upon initiation of the lytic cycle, BNLF2a is produced to shut down TAP-mediated transport of antigenic peptides into the ER, thereby preventing peptide-loading of MHC-I molecules. BGLF5 acts synergistically to block the synthesis of new MHC-I molecules. BCRF1-encoded vIL-10 further compromises antigen presentation via the class I pathway. MHC-I complexes that have reached the cell surface are down-regulated by BILF1. Collectively, these events ensure effective interference with T cell recognition to avoid the elimination of viral infected cells. BGLF5 and BALF3 trigger genomic instability by inducing the formation of micronuclei and DNA strand breaks, while BNRF1 stimulates centrosome amplification resulting in chromosomal aberration. EBV-infected cells carrying genetic abnormalities escape host defense mechanisms by inhibiting apoptosis and modulating autophagy. BHRF1 and BALF1 promote the survival of EBV-infected cells by inhibiting several pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 proteins. Further, BHRF1 hijacks mitochondrial dynamics to stimulate mitophagy that favor cell survival. The effect of lytic gene expression in the carcinogenic process may not be restricted to the above genes/processes because the expression of several other lytic genes, such as LF1-3, is also frequently detected in EBV tumors (Table 1). However, limited information is available regarding the function of LF1-3, and further studies are warranted to explore the roles of these genes in EBV biology and oncogenesis.The ability of EBV-encoded lytic genes to influence fundamental processes associated with carcinogenesis such as immune evasion, genomic instability, and cell survival challenges the conventional acceptance that only virus latent genes contribute to EBV-associated cancers. The degree to which EBV lytic genes contribute to the initiation of the oncogenic process versus the maintenance of the transformed phenotype remains to be determined. Nevertheless, variation of EBV lytic gene expression within the tumor microenvironment could impact local immune recognition and tumor cell survival. These effects could also be manifest in tumors that are predominantly EBV negative, but where a small proportion of carcinoma cells are susceptible to virus infection and sustain a lytic infection. This may explain the controversial association of EBV with breast cancer where abortive lytic infection has been reported, particularly in cases from Asian countries [174].EBV strain variation in NPC also provides support for the role of the lytic cycle in carcinogenesis. Aside from the association of BALF2 variants with increased risk of NPC [175], genetic differences have also been observed in the Zp promoter and the EBNA1 gene. Previous work has shown that a polymorphism in the promoter (Zp) driving expression of the BZLF1 immediate early gene of EBV is common in virus isolates from NPC [176]. Subsequent works showed that this polymorphism, the so-called Zp-V3 variant, enhances EBV lytic reactivation to various stimuli [177]. Another study has demonstrated that EBNA1 derived from EBV strains present in NPC are less efficient at supporting replication and maintenance of the virus episome, leading to increased lytic virus replication [178]. These observations are consistent with work on a NPC-derived EBV strain (M81), which is more lytic and also displays enhanced tropism for epithelial cells [179]. Thus, it appears that the EBV strain present in NPC may be more replication-competent than previously considered, and that virus replication, aside from increasing the number of infected cells, may contribute to the carcinogenic process by virtue of the function of certain lytic genes. The presence of a more replicative form of EBV in NPC may explain why elevated antibody titres to late viral antigens have diagnostic and prognostic value in this tumor [180].The evidence implicating EBV lytic genes in the pathogenesis of NPC and other virus-associated tumors is overwhelming. The precise contribution of EBV replication and lytic gene expression to the development and maintenance of the transformed phenotype requires more detailed studies using better reagents to assess expression within tumor biopsies and exploiting novel in vitro systems using recombinant forms of EBV. The most significant question is whether lytic gene expression within tumors influences the response to therapy, and whether targeting lytic genes has any therapeutic benefit. Future studies need to focus on how EBV gene expression relates to other factors within the tumor microenvironment (e.g infiltrating lymphocytes, cancer-associated fibroblasts) and how these impact the response to novel interventions such as immune checkpoint inhibition. This understanding offers exciting prospects for the development of individualized treatment strategies for patients with NPC and other EBV-associated tumors.


Title: Co-infection of 

INTRODUCTIONGastric cancer (GC) is a significant global health issue, ranking fifth among all cancer types, with nearly 1.1 million new cases reported in 2020. GC is frequently diagnosed at an advanced stage and has a high mortality rate, making it the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide (1, 2). The etiology of GC is intricate and involves a broad range of risk factors, including demographic variables (e.g., sex, age, and family history) and environmental influences (e.g., high-salt diets and secondhand smoke) (3–5). Notably, Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection is considered the most critical risk factor for GC (6). In 1994, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) designated H. pylori as a Class I carcinogen. In 2022, the United States Department of Health and Human Services confirmed it as a definitive carcinogen, underscoring the urgent need for preventive strategies and early detection methods to combat this devastating disease.H. pylori is a gram-negative bacillus that causes chronic gastritis. Chronic inflammation can result in gastric mucosal atrophy and intestinal epithelial hyperplasia over time. These conditions can eventually evolve into severe gastroduodenal lesions, such as peptic ulcers, gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas, and GC (7, 8). The pathogenesis of H. pylori infection is attributed to colonization and virulence factors, along with their interactions with the host immune system and environmental elements. Through its helical structure and flagellar motility, H. pylori can penetrate the gastric mucus layer and colonize the gastric mucosa. However, the pathogenicity of H. pylori is not exclusively dependent on its flagella. Additional crucial virulence factors include cytotoxin-associated protein A (CagA) and vacuolar toxin A (VacA), both of which play a role in the pathogenicity of H. pylori (7, 9). CagA, a macromolecular terminal gene product synthesized in the bacterial cytoplasm, is directly injected into host cells via the Cag Type IV secretion system (Cag T4SS) (10). Upon delivery, CagA undergoes tyrosine phosphorylation at its Glu-Pro-Ile-Tyr-Ala (EPIYA) motif, which is typically located in its C-terminal region (11, 12). Irrespective of its phosphorylated state, CagA can activate various signaling pathways within host cells, influence cell growth and polarity, and stimulate epithelial cell proliferation and inflammatory responses, all of which are closely linked to the progression of GC (13, 14).GC is a highly heterogeneous malignant tumor categorized into four subtypes: microsatellite instability (MSI), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated, chromosomal instability (CIN), and genomically stable (GS) (15). EBV-associated gastric cancer (EBVaGC) is distinguished by an EBV-CpG island methylation phenotype and constitutes approximately 10% of all GCs. EBVaGC is characterized by frequent mutations in PIK3CA, overexpression of PD-L1/2, and methylation of the CDKN2A/p16INK4A promoter while lacking hypermethylation of MLH1 (16). This highlights the significance of EBV as another key pathogen contributing to the development of GC.EBV, or human herpesvirus type 4 (HHV-4), is carried by more than 95% of healthy adults worldwide and closely linked to the development of nasopharyngeal carcinoma and Burkitt’s lymphoma (17). The incidence of EBVaGC varies across regions, ranging from 1.3 to 30.9%, with a global clinical average of 10%. Recent studies have demonstrated that the mechanisms by which EBV infection contributes to gastric tumorigenesis primarily involve inflammatory responses in the gastric mucosal epithelium, inhibition of T-cell proliferation through high expression of PD-L1 via the IFN-γ signaling pathway, and hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes (18, 19). Although both EBV and H. pylori have been confirmed as causative agents for gastric tumor formation, whether these two pathogens synergistically promote the development of GC remains under investigation largely due to the scarcity of effective ex vivo research models (20–22).Organoids are three-dimensional (3D) cell culture systems that closely resemble the structure and function of the original tissue or organ in vivo. Depending on their cellular origin, organoids can be classified into three types: embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived organoids, induced-pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived organoids, and patient-derived organoids (PDO). PDOs, or patient-derived tissue-like mini-organs, represent a promising innovation for enhancing the efficiency of new drug development and improving tumor therapy outcomes. Composed of a three-dimensional cell mass cultivated from self-renewing stem cells in culture dishes, PDOs can mimic the in situ structure and function of tissues (23, 24), which have become increasingly utilized in disease modeling, high-throughput drug screening, and genetic manipulation (25–31). In this study, we established patient-derived tumor or normal gastric organoids (T/NGOs) in vitro and investigated the interaction between H. pylori co-infection with EBV and the host by using NGOs as a model and employing high-precision microinjection techniques. We found that the co-infection of H. pylori and EBV causes significant structural changes and promotes cell proliferation, which not only provides a better understanding of the pathogenesis of GC but also represents a potential system for evaluating drug efficacy and developing new therapeutic approaches.RESULTSIn vitro constructed patient-derived NGOs and TGOs can highly simulate gastric tissueTo determine the role of H. pylori co-infection with EBV in the development of GC, we used our previously reported mechanical separation method to extract gastric epithelial stem cells from both tumor and adjacent normal tissues from patients with GC (32). These stem cells were then cultured in a growth factor-rich medium to promote their differentiation into mature tumor or normal gastric organoids (T/NGOs) in Matrigel to maintain the three-dimensional structure of the cells (Fig. 1A). Upon mechanical stress, both tumor and normal gastric epithelial cells released elongated, U-shaped glandular structures (Fig. 1B).Fig 1In vitro generation of patient-derived gastric organoids. (A) Workflow of human gastric organoid generation by mechanical isolation. The collection of gastric tumor and normal epithelium tissues, gland isolation, Matrigel matrix embedding, seeding, and growth factor supplement medium were included for culture of normal gastric organoid (NGO) and tumor gastric organoid (TGO), followed by micro-injection. (B) Representative morphology of gastric glands isolated from tumor and normal tissues. Scale bar, 1 cm (right panel) or 100 µm (left panel). (C) Representative morphology of primary TGO and NGO culture generation from panel B for 8 days post-seeding. Scale bar, 200 µm. Bottom panel: the growth curve of TGOs and NGOs (n = 3) evaluated by cross-section diameter in the first passage. ns, not significant. (D) Expression levels of different biomarkers in gastric adjacent tissues, TGOs, and NGOs. The total RNA extracts from TGOs and NGOs in panel C at day 3 were subjected to detection by reverse transcription PCR analysis for different biomarkers of parietal cells (Amphiregulin), endocrine cells (Chromog A), neck mucous cells (TFF2), surface mucous cells (TFF1), intestinal epithelial cells (MUC2), and intestinal specific nuclear transcription factors (CDX1, CDX2), along with GAPDH as an internal control. (E) Immunofluorescence analysis of TGOs and NGOs in panel C. DAPI is staining for the nuclei. TRITC phalloidin is staining for the membrane structure F-actin. Scale bar, 70 µm.Workflow for isolating and culturing gastric organoids; tissue and gland images from tumor and normal samples; time-course growth of NGOs and TGOs; and immunofluorescence showing structural and marker differences between organoid types.To determine whether there were morphological differences between TGOs and NGOs, human primary gastric organoids were seeded and continuously cultured for 8 days to determine tissue morphology and size. The results showed that the vast majority of both gastric organoid structures, regardless of their origin, exhibited a three-dimensional morphology with a spherical shape and no significant difference in their growth patterns (Fig. 1C).To determine whether both TGOs and NGOs can mimic the functions of gastric epithelial cells in vitro, we extracted mRNAs from NGOs and TGOs and performed PCR amplification to detect the expression profile of genes related to the cell types intrinsic to the gastric mucosa, including Amphiregulin (for parietal cells), Chromog A (for endocrine cells), TFF2 (for neck mucous cells), and TFF1 (for surface mucous cells), with intestinal markers, such as MUC2, CDX1, and CDX2, as internal controls. The results showed that the expressions of biological markers for parietal cells, surface mucus cells, neck mucus cells, and endocrine cells were similar in both NGOs and TGOs (Fig. 1D), albeit the slightly higher levels of Amphiregulin and ChromogA in NGOs than TGOs. In contrast, no expression of MUC2, CDX1, and CDX2 was observed. These findings indicate that both NGOs and TGOs effectively expressed biological markers specific to gastric mucus cells, and the gastric organoids we constructed were viable and did not undergo intestinal metaplasia. In the immunohistochemical analysis of nuclear and cytoplasm staining, including Amphiregulin, Chromog A, TFF2, and TFF1 biomarkers, we observed that the majority of human gastric organoid tissues had a spherical structure with a single layer of cells lining the interior and central lumen (Fig. 1E), which are capable of performing the functions of gastric glands.H. pylori strain NCTC11637 co-infection with EBV impairs gastric organoid morphology and growthTo investigate the effects of H. pylori (particularly the role of CagA as a key virulence factor) and EBV co-infection on GC, we used NGOs stably established in vitro as a “host” model with a high-accuracy microinjection technique to introduce different H. pylori strains of SS1, NCTC11637, and NCTC12908 (carrying with or without CagA) in the presence or absence of EBV virion particles into the lumen of organoids and visualize subsequent growth of the organoids for 24 h after infection. The results showed that both H. pylori strains SS1 (CagA+/VacA+), NCTC11637 (CagA+/VacA+), and NCTC12908 (CagA−/VacA+) and EBV infection alone or co-infection led to reduced growth of NGOs compared to the mock group (Fig. 2A and B). Notably, the H. pylori strain NCTC11637 (CagA+/VacA+), but not SS1 or NCTC12908, resulted in a significant loss of the normal spherical structure (displaying a loss of structural integrity, with crumpling, folding, and curling into a ball) of NGOs after co-infection with EBV at 6 h post-microinjection (Fig. 2A and B, middle panels). Nevertheless, despite this initial loss of structure, the organoids presented the capacity to grow and significantly increase in cell density along with the prolongation of infection time within 24 h compared to the EBV- or H. pylori-only groups (Fig. 2C).Fig 2Effect of H. pylori co-infection with EBV via micro-injection on gastric organoid morphology and growth. (A) NGOs were individually micro-injected with GFP-tagged EBV virion particles (MOI = 10), different strains of H. pylori [SS1 (Cag A＋/Vac A＋), NCTC11637 (Cag A＋/Vac A＋), or NCTC12908 (Cag A−/Vac A＋)], or both, as indicated in the left panel, and the organoid morphology is visualized by microscopy analysis at 0, 6, 12, and 24 h post-infection (hpi). Scale bar, 100 µm. (B) The diameter ratio of NGOs micro-injected with H. pylori and GFP-EBV from panel A was evaluated by cross-section diameter analysis. (C) The relative density of NGOs micro-injected with GFP-EBV and H. pylori was evaluated based on the organoid morphology from panel A. (D) The cell cycle population percentage of NGOs micro-injected with GFP-EBV and H. pylori from panel A at 24 hpi was detected by flow cytometry analysis. The statistical analysis was done by ANOVA. **, P < 0.01, ***, P < 0.001, ns, not significant.Time-course images of organoids injected with EBV and H. pylori strains; diameter change graphs depict reduced growth with co-infection, relative density increase in NCTC11637 + EBV, and cell cycle analysis indicating sub-G1 population with co-infection.To further address the effects of EBV and H. pylori co-infection on the growth of gastric organoids, we detected the cell cycle of NGOs infected with different strains of H. pylori (SS1, NCTC11637, and NCTC12908) in the presence or absence of EBV at 24 h post-microinjection. The results showed that co-infection of the H. pylori strain SS1 with EBV resulted in a prolonged sub-G1 phase in NGOs, whereas the co-infection of strain NCTC12908 with EBV led to a prolonged G2/M phase in NGOs (Fig. 2D). Intriguingly, the co-infection of strain NCTC11637 with EBV resulted in a significant increase in the G2/M population and a reduction in the sub-G1 and G1 populations compared to infection with the strain NCTC11637 alone (Fig. 2D, middle panels). This indicates that the impact of EBV and NCTC11637 co-infection on the growth of NGOs may be attributable to the stimulation of cell division and proliferation, which leads to a relative increase in organoid cell density. In contrast, the low proportion of subG1/G1 in NGO infection with NCTC12908 alone compared to that with SS1 and NCTC11637 could be attributable to the absence of the VacA virulence factor in NCTC12908.Morphology and cell density of NGO co-infected with EBV are related to H. pylori toxicityThe H. pylori strain NCTC11637, which contains the complete virulence gene, exhibits a distinctive alteration of morphology and cell density in NGOs co-infected with EBV. We speculated that the effect of co-infection of EBV with distinct strains on NGOs could serve as a means to evaluate the virulence of the clinical strain H. pylori. Four strains (CHP1, CHP2, CHP3, and CHP4) of H. pylori from gastric tissues of patients, who exhibited disparate clinical symptoms and tumor types, were isolated and tested for co-infection (Fig. 3A). Interestingly, the results showed that each H. pylori strain (CHP1, CHP2, CHP3, and CHP4) infection alone or co-infection with EBV led to reduced growth of NGOs, when compared to the mock group (Fig. 3B and C). In contrast, co-infection of each H. pylori strain, including CHP1, CHP2, CHP3, and CHP4, with EBV consistently induced changes in morphology and higher organoid cell density along with prolongation of infection time within a 24 h period when compared to the infection of EBV or H. pylori alone control groups (Fig. 3D). Unexpectedly, the infection alone of CHP3 and CHP4, which is related to carcinoma, displayed a similar phenomenon, indicating that NGOs may represent a potential system to evaluate the toxicity of H. pylori strains with or without EBV co-infection in the clinic.Fig 3Effect of different H. pylori clinical strains co-infected with EBV via micro-injection on gastric organoid morphology and growth. (A) Resource of different clinical strains of H. pylori. (B) NGOs were individually micro-injected with GFP-tagged EBV virion particles (MOI = 10) and different clinical strains of H. pylori from panel A or both as indicated in the left panels, and morphology was visualized by microscopy analysis at 0, 6, 12, and 24 h post-infection (hpi). Scale bar, 100 µm. (C) The diameter ratio of NGOs micro-injected with H. pylori and GFP-EBV from panel B was evaluated by cross-section diameter analysis. (D) The relative density of NGOs micro-injected with GFP-EBV and H. pylori was evaluated based on the organoid morphology from panel B. The statistical analysis was done by ANOVA. **, P < 0.01, ***, P < 0.001, ns, not significant.Table of clinical H. pylori strains, time-lapse images of infected organoids, growth inhibition curves, and density measurements. Co-infection with EBV and CHP2–CHP4 strains leads to reduced organoid growth and higher density.EBV co-infection promotes the entry of H. pylori into NGOsTo further address the role of EBV co-infection in the H. pylori-induced development of gastric cancer, we infected NGOs with the H. pylori strain NCTC11637 in the presence or absence of EBV, followed by three-dimensional stereoscopic imaging at 24 h post-infection. As shown in Fig. 4A, NGOs presented a complete three-dimensional spherical structure consisting of tightly interconnected gastric gland cells. Interestingly, when NGOs were infected with EBV alone, we observed that EBV infection within the lumen of the NGOs displayed a biased distribution, which tended to cluster in a particular region of the lumen of the NGOs and rarely on the other side (Fig. 4B, left panels). In contrast, when infected with the H. pylori strain NCTC11637 alone, H. pylori showed a non-biased infection on the surface of the organoid lumen, which tended to locate uniformly across the surface of the organoid lumen (Fig. 4B, middle panels). Interestingly, when the NGOs were infected with both EBV and H. pylori, although EBV still presented a biased infection status, the pattern of H. pylori location shifted from the majority of the surface to inside of the organoid and predominantly co-localized with the EBV-infected cells (Fig. 4C). To further confirm this phenomenon, we also performed transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis of NGOs with similar infections. Consistent with previous discoveries, the results revealed structures—morphologically reminiscent of EBV-like particles—and H. pylori cells apparently tethered to the apical (luminal) surface of the organoids; some of these structures seemed to breach the membrane, undergo apparent replication, and become enclosed in vesicles, suggestive of phagocytosis (Fig. 5A and B). Meanwhile, NGOs appeared to accumulate micro-villi and enzyme particles at the site where EBV-like structures colonized with H. pylori in the co-infection group, but did not appear in the H. pylori alone group (Fig. 5C). Collectively, these images tentatively suggest that EBV co-infection may augment H. pylori association with gastric epithelia, although definitive identification of the virus-like structures awaits further investigation.Fig 4Co-infection of EBV promotes the internal localization of H. pylori from the gastric organoid surface. (A) Three-dimensional image of NGOs stained with TRITC phalloidin and DAPI for the nuclear compartment by immunofluorescent ZEISS Airyscan microscopy. (B) Co-infection of EBV promotes the internal localization of H. pylori in organoids. Bottom panel: three-dimensional images of NGOs micro-injected with GFP-tagged EBV and red CMTPX-dyed H. pylori strain NCTC11637 or both by immunofluorescent ZEISS Airyscan microscopy at 24 h post-microinjection. Scale bar, 40 µm. (C) Enlarged dissection images of 3D NGOs co-infected with GFP-EBV and H. pylori strain NCTC11637 in panel B. The co-location dots of H. pylori with EBV were highlighted by arrows.3D and confocal images of organoids reveal epithelial structure with actin staining, localization of GFP-EBV and H. pylori individually and in co-infection, and Z-stack sections of overlapping regions, indicating spatial interaction between pathogens.Fig 5Transmission electron microscopy analysis of gastric organoids infected with EBV and H. pylori. NGOs were individually micro-injected with (A) GFP-tagged EBV virion particles (MOI = 10), (B) H. pylori strain (NCTC11637), or (C) both and subjected to transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis at 24 h post-infection (hpi). V-like patl: EBV-like particles; H. p: H. pylori. The locations of H. pylori and EBV-like particles are depicted by arrows.TEM images reveal virus-like particles (V-like patl) in GFP-EBV–injected samples, intact H. pylori cells near host membranes, and co-localization of both pathogens in co-infected samples, indicating intracellular presence and interaction.H. pylori co-infection enhances expressions of both EBNA1 and ZTA encoded by EBVSince the infection of EBV in host cells has latent and lytic replication, to determine the status of EBV latent or lytic replication in NGOs co-infected with H. pylori, we first detected the expression levels of both EBNA1 (the key latent antigen) and BZLF1 (the master lytic activator) in NGOs infected with different dosages of EBV by quantitative PCR analysis. The results showed the high dosage (MOI = 10) of EBV infection could dramatically enhance the expression of EBNA1 when compared to low dosage (MOI = 2.5), while no significant difference in BZLF1 expression was found (Fig. 6A). Then, we carried out an immunofluorescence analysis of NGOs infected with EBV (at MOI = 10) alone or co-infected with H. pylori. Consistently, the results revealed that EBV alone predominantly expressed EBNA1 instead of the lytic activator ZTA (the protein encoded by BZLF1) when infecting NGOs (Fig. 6B, upper panels). In contrast, H. pylori co-infection in NGOs significantly enhanced the ZTA expression (Fig. 6B, lower panels), which was further supported by the results of the quantitative PCR analysis revealing that the expression level of EBNA1 in the co-infected group was consistently higher than that in the EBV alone group at different time points of infection (24, 48, 72, and 96 hpi) and peaked at 48 h post-infection, where the expression of BZLF1 was also significantly enhanced (Fig. 6C). These indicate that co-infection of H. pylori will enhance EBV latent infection and activate viral lytic replication during primary infection.Fig 6Expressions of EBNA1 and BZLF1 are enhanced in the EBV-infected gastric organoids with H. pylori co-infection. (A) Total RNA extracts from NGOs individually micro-injected with GFP-tagged EBV virion particles at low (MOI = 2.5) or high (MOI = 10) doses at 24 h post-infection were subjected to quantitative PCR analysis of EBNA1 and BZLF1. (B) Representative immunofluorescence images of NGOs immunostained with EBNA1, ZTA (BZLF1), and CagA. Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI. NGOs infected with EBV alone and co-infected with EBV and H. pylori are shown. MOI = 10. Scale bar, 12.5 µm (GFP-EBV only) and 25 µm (GFP-EBV co-infected with H. pylori strain NCTC11637). (C) Total RNA extracts from NGOs individually micro-injected with GFP-tagged EBV virion particles (MOI = 10) alone or co-infected with H. pylori strain (NCTC11637) at 24, 48, 72, and 96 h post-infection (hpi) were subjected to quantitative PCR analysis of EBNA1 and BZLF1. The statistical analysis was done by t-test. ***, P < 0.001, ns, not significant.Bar graphs plot EBNA1 and BZLF1 expressions increasing with higher EBV MOI and time. Co-infection with H. pylori enhances EBNA1 at 24 and 72 hpi and BZLF1 at 48 hpi. Confocal images confirm EBNA1 and ZTA localization and co-staining within organoids.Co-infection of H. pylori with EBV significantly impairs the expression of host genes related to cell proliferation and morphogenesisSince H. pylori strain NCTC11637 co-infection with EBV impairs the growth of and morphology change in NGOs, we attempted to examine the expression of host genes related to glands and tumor biomarkers, including MUC5AC and TFF1 (for surface mucous cells), MUC6 and TFF2 (for neck mucous cells), PGC (for chief cells), CDH1, ACTB, and EPCAM (for cytoskeleton), Lgr5 (for stem cells), and IL8 (for inflammatory), as well as Axin2, CTNNB1, OLFM4, VIL1, MYC, and CD44 (for tumor genes). Consistently, the results showed that NGOs displayed a significant upregulation of TFF1, VIL1, and Lgr5 at 24 h after co-infection of H. pylori with EBV and a downregulation of CD44 and Axin 2 compared to the H. pylori or EBV-alone groups (Fig. 7A and B). Functional cluster analysis further revealed that co-infection of H. pylori with EBV was involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and tissue morphogenesis (Fig. 7C), supporting our speculation that co-infection of EBV promotes H. pylori-mediated morphology and cell density changes in NGOs.Fig 7Expression profiles of the key biomarkers of gastric glands in gastric organoids infected with EBV and H. pylori. Total RNA extracts from NGOs individually micro-injected with GFP-tagged EBV virion particles (MOI = 10), H. pylori strain (NCTC11637), or both at 24 h post-infection were subjected to quantitative PCR analysis of biomarkers of (A) intrinsic gland components and (B) tumor-related molecules, stem cells, and inflammation. The statistical analysis was done by t-test. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001, ns, not significant. (C) Functional enrichment of target genes with significant changes in expression in gastric organoids with co-infection of EBV and H. pylori.Bar graphs plot gene expression changes in gastric cell markers, tumor-associated, stem cell, and inflammatory genes under EBV and/or H. pylori infection. Network analysis depicts LGR5, CD44, and VIL1 as key nodes in cell proliferation and morphogenesis.To further confirm the role of EBV and H. pylori co-infection in NGOs, the morphology and growth status of NGOs and the expression patterns of key molecular markers, including Lgr5, VIL1, and CD44, were monitored every day for 4 days after single or co-infection. Compared to the EBV or H. pylori-only group, the results showed that NGOs underwent significant structural collapse within 24 h in the co-infected group; however, the three-dimensional organization of the cells gradually recovered the baseline morphology and continued to rapidly grow, which was supported by the evidence that the proliferation rate of NGOs exhibited a significant increase after 48 h post-infection and reached the most substantial growth at 96 h (Fig. 8A, lower panels). Using quantitative PCR analysis, the results showed that the expressions of Lgr5 and VIL1 gradually increased, peaking at 48 and 72 h in the co-infection of the EBV and H. pylori groups, respectively (Fig. 8B). In contrast, the expression pattern of CD44 exhibited no significant change within 96 h after co-infection when compared to the EBV-only group, supporting the notion that co-infection of H. pylori with EBV significantly impairs the expression of host genes related to cell proliferation and morphogenesis.Fig 8Real-time impact of H. pylori-EBV co-infection via microinjection on gastric organoid morphology, growth, and expression of key glandular biomarkers. (A) NGOs were individually micro-injected with GFP-tagged EBV virion particles (MOI = 10), H. pylori strain (NCTC11637), or both, and the organoid morphology is visualized by microscopy analysis at 0, 24, 48, 72, and 96 h post-infection (hpi). Scale bar, 100 µm. Bottom panel, the diameter ratio of NGOs micro-injected with H. pylori, GFP-EBV, or both was evaluated by cross-section diameter analysis. The statistical analysis was done by ANOVA. *, P < 0.05. (B) Total RNA extracts from NGOs individually micro-injected with GFP-EBV, H. pylori, or both from panel A were subjected to quantitative PCR analysis for the expression of key glandular biomarkers (Lgr5, VIL1, CD44).Brightfield images and growth curves plot reduced organoid expansion over 96 h with H. pylori + EBV co-infection. Line plots reveal peak expressions of LGR5, VIL1, and CD44 at 72 hpi in co-infected organoids, indicating epithelial remodeling.DISCUSSIONThe gastrointestinal tract is a harsh environment that is typically inhospitable to most microorganisms. To adapt to this environment, microorganisms must tolerate extreme acidity, evade the action of digestive enzyme particles, and breach the self-protective barrier of the gastric mucosa to interact with the gastric epithelium and establish lifelong persistent infection. H. pylori, as a primary etiological agent, has been demonstrated to cause chronic inflammation and contribute to the development of GC, with a prevalence of >50% globally (33). The correlation between EBV and GC was initially reported in lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma and gastric adenocarcinoma (34, 35), and increasing studies appear to suggest that H. pylori may play a synergistic role in the context of EBV-associated gastric cancer, which may involve potential mechanisms, including the following: (i) H. pylori-induced chronic inflammation and gastric mucosal lesions that create a microenvironment for EBV infection; and (ii) EBV and H. pylori co-infection promotes carcinogenesis by enhancing inflammatory responses and epigenetic alterations (20, 21, 36, 37). Nevertheless, the existence of synergistic mechanisms remains a contentious issue, as evidenced by the presence of site of action differences or independent/antagonistic effects (38). Moreover, the precise mechanism by which they co-infect the stomach remains to be elucidated due to the lack of suitable cell and animal infectious models in vitro and in vivo. In this study, for the first time, we infected patient-derived gastric organoids with EBV, H. pylori, or both using microinjection technology. Our results revealed that the co-infection of H. pylori with EBV not only dramatically enhances the expression of the EBV latent antigen EBNA1 and the key activator ZTA (encoded by BZLF1) for lytic replication, but also leads to a significant change in tissue structure (enhanced phagosome-like vesicle size, with co-localization of both H. pylori and EBV-like particles, and the accumulation of enzyme-like particles) and upregulates the expression of host genes, including VIL1 and Lgr5, which are related to cell proliferation and tissue morphogenesis (Fig. 9).Fig 9Schematic showing the role of H. pylori co-infected with EBV in cell proliferation and morphogenesis of gastric organoids. The co-infection of H. pylori with EBV promotes internal location of H. pylori and cell proliferation and morphogenesis of gastric organoids (NGO) via upregulating expressions of VIL1 (tumor-associated molecule) and Lgr5 (biomarker of stem cells) but downregulating the expression of CD44 (tumor-associated molecule).Schematic of H. pylori and EBV co-infection in gastric organoids illustrates microinjection process and downstream effects. Co-infection enhances cell proliferation, stemness, tumor markers, surface mucous cells, and G2/M cell cycle progression.Some groups have previously reported that H. pylori could play a role in facilitating EBV-induced proliferation of gastric epithelial cells by targeting epigenetic regulation of tumor suppressor genes (20) or by SHP1 phosphatase antagonizing the role of H. pylori CagA protein downregulation by EBV (36). We did observe a significant difference in the cell morphology of NGOs within 24 h post-infection in the H. pylori strain NCTC11637 instead of the SS1 group when they were co-infected with EBV, indicating that CagA is not a key factor involved in cooperating with EBV or innate immune response to induce cell morphogenesis in an organoid model. Nevertheless, the potential mechanisms underlying how co-infection with EBV and H. pylori accelerates tumor development and NGO morphology remain to be elucidated.The advent of organoid technology has enabled the establishment of three-dimensional culture systems derived from a range of epithelial tissues, including the intestines (39, 40), esophagus (41), pancreas (42, 43), and liver (44–46). The gastric organoid model derived from the patient tissue exhibits a spherical structure that faithfully recapitulates the in vivo epithelial structure of the stomach’s monolayer columnar epithelium and its tissue-specific features; this allows the pathogen infection size to be manipulated in a specific location by micro-injection, as we have done in the central lumen compartment in this study. Furthermore, NGO can mimic the glandular structure and biological functions observed in vivo (47), making it an optimal choice for in vitro disease modeling in studying GC pathogenesis.Although H. pylori is typically regarded as an extracellular bacterium, increasing evidence suggests that it is also capable of entering host cells, evading the host immune system attack, forming stable intracellular ecological niches, and being re-released into the extracellular milieu, which can result in recurrent infections (48–50). The initial objective of our study was to determine the localization of EBV and H. pylori, either as standalone infections or in a co-infected state, within the organoids. Unexpectedly, we found that EBV infection could result in altered localization of H. pylori within organoids and an increase in intracellular infection of H. pylori, which is consistent with the observations from the electron microscopy analysis showing structures morphologically suggestive of virus-like particles in close association with intracellular H. pylori. These findings further support the notion of bacterial internalization. Notably, we found that co-infection of EBV and H. pylori leads to an increased phagosome-like vesicle size and greater population of enzyme-like particles than that in the EBV infection alone group.In addition, although it has been shown that H. pylori primarily relies on CagA for its virulence in the development of GC (10, 51, 52), and EBV can induce gastric mucosal lesions through the hypermethylation of CpG islands in the promoter regions of various cancer-associated genes (53), it is still largely unclear how the co-infection of H. pylori with EBV induces GCs. Our study showed for the first time that H. pylori co-infection with EBV markedly disrupted the globular structure of organoids, resulting in the curling and folding of organ tissues into irregular and disorganized shapes at the early stage (within 24 h post-infection) while increasing cell proliferation along with continued culture (up to 96 h post-infection). It is noteworthy to mention that the dramatically increased level of BZLF1 was observed in the co-infected group of H. pylori and EBV, which is distinct from the speculation that H. pylori may block EBV reactivation by inhibiting TGF-β1 from the clinic sample analysis (54). These findings indicate that co-infection with EBV and H. pylori has a deleterious effect on organ tissues. Moreover, the biomarkers of glandular intrinsic components (TFF1) and tumor-associated genes (VIL1 and Lgr5) were significantly upregulated, providing further evidence that host aberrations and tumor progression are triggered by co-infection of EBV with H. pylori.In summary, a three-dimensional co-infection system of EBV and H. pylori was constructed for the first time using gastric organ tissues derived from patients as an infection model. Similar to that, the organoid co-infection system has the potential to be employed for disease modeling, the evaluation of pathogen virulence, and the prediction of disease trends (11, 25, 55–57). Our findings not only offer new insights into basic and clinical translational research on the co-infection of different pathogens, but also have the potential to be employed as a tool to assess the virulence of H. pylori strains, developing treatment and predicting the progression of GC in clinics.MATERIALS AND METHODSHuman subjectsGastric tissues from gastric cancer patients (aged 55 to 86) were collected from Cancer Hospital of Fudan University. Redundant usage for research purposes was approved by the Hospital Medical Ethics Committee of Cancer Hospital of Fudan University. Sample size was based on the feasibility and availability of human excess tissue collections.Antibodies and reagentsMouse antibody to Chromog A (60135-1-Ig, Proteintech), Amphiregulin (sc-74501, Santa Cruz), EBNA1 (sc-81581, Santa Cruz), ZEBRA (sc-53904, Santa Cruz), or CagA (sc-28368, Santa Cruz) was utilized. Rabbit antibody to TFF1 (13734-1-AP, Proteintech) or TFF2 (136811-1-AP, Proteintech) was used in this study. Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (H + L) (Cat#A11029) and Alexa Fluor 594-conjugated goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) (Cat #A-11012) antibodies were purchased from Invitrogen Co., Ltd. Multiple immunofluorescence with TSA fluorescent dye labeling was used for four-color development. The 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (Cat #C006, Solarbio), 2-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA, Sigma), sodium butyrate (S615175, J&K), and TRITC Phalloidin (Yeasen) were used in this study.Bacterial strainsHelicobacter pylori strains SS1 (CagA+/VacA+), NCTC11637 (CagA+/VacA+), and NCTC12908 (CagA−/VacA+) were grown on columbia blood agar base (Oxoid) plates with 5% sheep blood (Jushi Biotech) in sealed anaerobic jars (MGC) with AnaeroPack-MicroAero bags (MGC) providing a micro-aerobic condition. To isolate a clinical strain of H. pylori, gastric surgery specimens were placed immediately in 250 µL 1× phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Meilunbio) at 4°C and homogenized using a tissue grinder. Fifty microliters was plated onto 5% sheep blood agar plate and incubated for 96 h under micro-aerobic conditions, as described. To count bacteria, H. pylori were scraped from blood agar plates and washed with PBS three times.Purification and quantitation of EBV virionAkata EBV-positive cell lines carrying a GFP marker were used to generate virion particles of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Briefly, cells were sufficiently expanded in flasks and then cultured with 0.02 µg/mL TPA and 330 µg/mL sodium butyrate in 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humidified atmosphere for 3–4 days to lyse cells and release virus particles, followed by centrifugation at 2,000 ×g for 5 min and filtering through 0.45 µm membrane (Thermo). The supernatant was ultra-centrifuged at 29,000 ×g at 4°C for 2 h, and the virus pellet was re-suspended without serum or antibiotics, aliquoted, and stored at −80°C before use.In vitro cultivation of patient-derived gastric organoidsHuman gastric organoids derived from patients were processed and obtained as described previously (32). Briefly, stomach surgery specimens were immersed and transferred in a balanced saline solution on ice. Micro-vessels, fatty tissue, and mesangium were removed under the microscope, and tissues were cut off into 2–5 mm2 and covered with 1× cold chelating buffer (5.6 mM Na2PHO4 [Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co.]), 8.0 mM KH2PHO4 (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co.), 96.2 mM NaCl (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co.), 1.6 mM KCl (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co.), 43.4 mM sucrose (Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co.), 54.9 mM D-sorbitol (Sangon Biotech), and 0.5 mM DL-dithiothreitol (AMRESCO) in sterile ddH2O, and then washed. The tissue pieces were pressed for three to five times until the supernatant became clear and incubated at room temperature after shaking (20–30 rpm) for 10 min supplemented with 2 mM EDTA in 1× chelating buffer. For gland isolation, the tissue pieces were gently pressed for three to five times using a sterile glass slide. The tissue debris was then suspended with basal medium (Advanced DMEM/F12 [Gibco]) added with 1% HEPES (Meilunbio), 1% penicillin/streptomycin, and 1% L-glutamine (Meilunbio), filtered through a 70 µm strainer (Thermo), and centrifuged at 400 ×g at 4°C for 5 min. For embedding and seeding, the gland debris was re-suspended with 1× Matrigel matrix (pheno-red free, Corning) and seeded in a pre-warmed plate. The plate was reversed and placed back in the incubator for Matrigel matrix three-dimensional structure solidifying. The organoids were cultured in growth medium of 50% WRN-conditioned medium supplemented with 50 ng/mL human recombinant EGF (Stemcell), 200 ng/mL human recombinant FGF (Stemcell), 1 nM Gastrin I (Stemcell), 2 µM A83-01 (Stemcell), 10 µM Y-27632 (Stemcell), 2% NeuroCult SM1 neuronal supplement (Stemcell), 1% N2 Supplement-A (Stemcell), and 1 mM N-acetyl-L-cysteine (Sigma). The medium was changed every 3 days. Transmitted light photographs were imaged with an inverted fluorescence microscope (EVOS).Immunofluorescence assaysThe gastric organoids were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, Sigma) at room temperature for 1 h and immersed with 0.3% Triton X-100 (Beijing Lablead Biotech) at room temperature for 30 min or at 4°C overnight, followed by incubation with 0.05% fish skin gelatin (#G-7765, Sigma) at room temperature for 1 h or at 4°C overnight for blocking. The organoids were incubated with the indicated primary and secondary antibodies and nuclear staining with DAPI and then visualized with a laser scanning confocal microscope (TCS SP8, Leica).Quantitative PCRTotal RNA from gastric organoids was extracted and purified by using EZBioscience EZ-press RNA Purification Kit (EZB) and reverse-transcribed to cDNA using Hifair III First-Strand cDNA Synthesis SuperMix for qPCR Kit (Yeasen) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The cDNA was amplified in a 20 µL total volume with 10 µL SYBR green, 0.4 µL each primer (10 µM), 4.2 µL H2O, and 5 µL cDNA by using Hieff qPCR SYBR Green Master Mix Kit (Yeasen) with specific primers. A melting curve analysis of the amplified products was carried out on a CFX Maestro System (Bio-Rad). Relative levels of gene expression were calculated using the threshold cycle (ΔΔCT) method with GAPDH as reference gene. The PCR amplification products were electrophoresed (120 V, 40 mA) in 3% agarose gel with nucleic acid dye for 40 min and visualized by the imager equipment (Tanon, Shanghai).MicroinjectionPatient-derived gastric organoids were sub-cultured in homogenization before microinjection. Briefly, organoids were collected as normal sub-culturing procedures and centrifuged at 400 ×g at 4°C for 5 min, and then organoid pellets were incubated with 1× TrypLE Express (Gibco) in 37°C for 20 min to disassociate organoids into single cells (>80%). Cells were embedded with Matrigel matrix and cultured with 50% WRN-conditioned medium without antibiotics in the incubator for 2 days. The homogenized gastric organoids were microinjected with different pathogens by using a microinjection platform system (Eppendorf).Calculation of multiplicity of infection (MOI)For calculation of the MOI, the organoids were disrupted into single cells by EDTA to count the cell number (approximately 4,000 cells per organoid). Bacterial counts were determined by measuring the optical density at 550 nm (OD550 = 0.1 equals to H. pylori concentration of 1 × 107 CFU/mL). Viral particles were quantified by quantitative PCR targeting the EBNA1 gene, and the resulting concentrations were calculated according to the protocol described previously (58). The bacteria and virions were diluted to the appropriate concentrations and injected in the corresponding volumes (approximately 0.2 µL per organoid).Transmission electron microscopyThe gastric organoids were fixed, dehydrated, permeabilized, embedded, and imaged using a transmission electron microscopy system (Tecnai G2 Spirit TWIN; FEI). For the sample preparation, the organoids with the Matrigel matrix in the plate were pipetted gently for two to three times (not to break organoids), and the plate was put on ice for 10 min (for gel melting). The organoid suspension was then transferred to a conical tube (Thermo), centrifuged at 300 ×g (4°C, 5 min), and washed with cold 1× PBS for three times. Gastric organoids were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde, post-fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide, subjected to graded dehydration with ethanol and acetone, cured in an oven, cut into ultrathin sections (50–60 nm) using LEICA UC7, stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate, and examined in a PHILIPS CM-120 TEM.Cell cycle assayThe cell cycle assays of organoids were carried out as described previously (59). Briefly, the organoid cells were harvested, washed twice with PBS and resuspended, and fixed in 70% ethanol. The fixed cells were washed twice with PBS, and then 1 mL propidium iodide (PI) staining solution (50 µg/mL) and RNase A were added to the cell pellet for incubation for 20 min at room temperature. The 1.5 × 104 PI-stained cells were subjected to flow cytometry by using BD FACS Calibur and analyzed by FlowJo software.Function enrichment analysis of target genesThe expression of target genes with significant change (including TFF1, VIL1, Lgr5, Axin2, and CD44) after co-infection of H. pylori and EBV was subjected to analysis using the STRING database (https://cn.string-db.org/). The input gene symbol was converted to the Entrez Gene ID of Homo sapiens using Metascape (http://metascape.org/) prior to subsequent bioinformatics analysis. The Gene Ontology (GO) of the biological process pathway was employed to extract annotation data from the gene list. Functional enrichment analysis was conducted to ascertain the prevalence of these genes within specific biological processes. The following criteria were established for the screening process: the minimum of three genes, the P-value cutoff of 0.01, and the minimum enrichment value of 1.5. The application of these criteria resulted in the identification of the top 20 significantly enriched biological pathways. The key functional pathways related to target genes were visualized using Cytoscape software (v3.10.1) to construct network diagrams illustrating the interactions between the genes.Statistical analysesStatistical analyses were performed using the unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test (GraphPad Prism 9.0 and ImageJ software) or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) in the presence of a time factor. Each experiment was performed at least three times, and the mean and standard deviation were calculated. Differences were considered significant at P < 0.05.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: CYTOMEGALOVIRUS (CMV)
================================================================================
Title: Severe acquired cytomegalovirus infection in a full-term, formula-fed infant: Case Report

BackgroundCytomegalovirus (CMV) is a ubiquitous agent that determines a wide spectrum of diseases in children and adulthood. Severe cytomegalovirus infection is often reported when disease is congenital [1], acquired in premature infants [2] or in immuno-compromised patients.Cases of CMV gastrointestinal disease have been exceptionally observed in immuno-competent infants. Congenital origin could not be ruled out in all reported cases. Infants were breast fed and most of them presented CMV-disease between 5 to 8 weeks after birth, with severe diarrhoea and fever. Possibly, the CMV transmission occurred at birth or soon after, as the incubation period of CMV infection generally ranges between 4 and 12 weeks.Risk factors and pathogenesis of CMV gastrointestinal disease which affects term infants during the first months of life are poorly defined.Case PresentationA Chinese male infant was delivered at term by emergency caesarean section because of foetal distress. The mother was at first pregnancy and presented with membrane rupture 24 hours before delivery. Maternal CMV primary infection was diagnosed at the 27th week of gestation (negative serum specific CMV IgG in early pregnancy. Positive serum specific CMV IgM at 27th weeks of gestation. Positive CMV IgG antibodies 2 weeks later).Family pedigree was negative for atopy, immuno-deficiencies and gastrointestinal diseases. Birth weight was 3255 g, cranial circumference 34 cm and length 51 cm; APGAR score was 9 and 10 at the 1st and 5th minute respectively. An urine polymerase chain reaction (P.C.R.) was CMV negative at birth.Fourteen hours after birth the newborn presented with a severe abdominal distension and breast feeding was soon and permanently discontinued. When 2 days old the newborn was referred to our neonatal intensive care unit because of acute intestinal occlusion and ileum-cecal valve atresia. Two consecutive urine shell vial assays, obtained after admission, were CMV early antigen negative as like as specific serum CMV-IgM antibodies. In the 4th day of life the baby underwent intestinal resection. No blood products were administered and no inclusion bodies were found in the intestinal biopsy. Three weeks later the baby was discharged home; he was formula-fed and healthy appearing.When aged 10 weeks the infant showed fever, irritability and decreased milk intake. Physical examination revealed a lethargic infant, pale-greyish skin, marbled limbs, severe hepato-splenomegaly and tachycardia. Blood analysis showed: white blood cell count 7.63 per 109/L (31% neutrophils; 61% lymphocytes; 7% monocytes), haemoglobin 6.8 g/dl, hematocrit 21%, platelet count 181 per 109/L, aspartate-aminotransferase 62 U/L, alanine-aminotransferase 39 U/L, albumin 1.8 g/dl, with normal clotting time test. Serum specific CMV immunoglobulin levels (IgG and IgM) were consistent with a primary infection.The infant showed a clinical improvement by therapy (intravenous fluids, broad spectrum antibiotics, albumin and packed erythrocytes), but 6 days after admission he presented a severe haemorrhagic diarrhoea. No parasites were found by stool examination and Rotavirus/Adenovirus chromatographic immunoassay was negative. Stool cultures for Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter and Yersinia species were also negative.A large intestine biopsy showed a chronic inflammation with lymphatic hyperplasia and colic crypt lesions.Urine shell vial assay was CMV early antigen positive. P.C.R. was positive in the biopsy (quantitative CMV-DNA 2620 copies/100.00cells), in bone marrow (quantitative CMV-DNA 2275 copies/ml) and in peripheral blood (determined 7 days after start of antiviral therapy: quantitative CMV-DNA 240 copies/ml).Brain ultrasound scans, cranial computed tomography, ophthalmologic examination and auditory brainstem responses were normal.Intravenous ganciclovir (GCV) (10 mg/kg/day) was administered for 3 weeks. The diarrhoea improved after 3 days of GCV. Formula-feeding was rapidly increased and the baby was discharged 37 days after admission.Detailed investigation did not reveal any underlying primary immunodeficiencies (normal lymphocyte subsets studies, serum immunoglobulin and IgG sub-class levels). Urinary shedding of CMV ceased during the second year of life and neuro-developmental outcome at 2 years of age is normal.ConclusionsIn immuno-competent host, acquired CMV infection is usually asymptomatic or may determine a mild disease. Severe gastrointestinal disease can be observed in congenital infections [1], in children with AIDS, or in children receiving immunosuppressive therapy post-transplantation.CMV may also cause relapses of intestinal disease in infants affected by inflammatory bowel diseases [3]. Additional sources are blood transfusions or contact with genital tract secretions at delivery, whereas viral shedding from maternal pharynx or urinary tract, during the first months after birth, is not associated with perinatal transmission [4].Finally, breast feeding is a recognized source of CMV in the perinatal period and an important cause of "sepsis-like" infection in very preterm infants [2]. Cheong and co-workers [5] reported 11 cases of postnatal CMV infection with gastrointestinal manifestations. All infants were breast fed, 10 were delivered preterm (range 24 to 32 wks of gestation) and one, low birth weight newborn, was affected by Rothmund-Thomson syndrome. Premature newborn is an immunocompromised host and CMV gastrointestinal disease may result from enteral acquisition after infected fresh milk feeding.In contrast, severe CMV gastrointestinal disease have been exceptionally reported in immunocompetent infants [6-10]. Congenital origin could not be ruled out, therefore the pathogenesis is still unclear. Common findings include breast feeding, the need of antiviral therapy (4 of 5 cases) and the onset of symptoms between 5 to 8 weeks after birth (Table 1). The incubation period of CMV infections generally ranges between 4 and 12 weeks; it is therefore likely that most of these infants acquired infection at or soon after birth.Table 1Severe gastrointestinal cytomegalovirus infection in immuno-competent infants born at termReferenceAge at onsetBreast feedingClinical findingsDiagnosisMode of transmissionAntiviral therapyJonkhoff-Slok (8)5 weeksYes°Bloody diarrhoea Rectal bleedingInclusion bodies at intestinal biopsyPerinatal ? Cow's milk allergy ?NoFox (7)5 weeksYesFever, Lymphoadenopathy Intractable diarrhoea Occult blood in stoolsInclusion bodies at duodenum biopsyCongenital ? Perinatal ?i.v. GCV for 5 weeksQuiros-Tejeira (9)2 monthsYesFever, watery diarrhoeaSevere colonic inflammatory changes, inclusion bodiesPerinatal ?i.v. GCV for 2 weeksRongkavilit (10)8 weeksYesProfuse watery diarrhoeaInclusion bodies in duodenum and sigmoid colonPerinatal ? Postnatal (breast-feeding ?)i.v. GCV for 4 weeksBuonuomo (1)8 weeksYesFever Anaemia Melena §Positive PCR at duodenum biopsyPerinatal ?Oral VGCV for 5 weeksGCV = Ganciclovir; VGCV = Valganciclovir; PCR = polymerase chain reaction; i.v. = intravenous° The infant was breast fed for 4 weeks, then he was formula fed§ Melena occurred at the age of 7 monthsThe infant here described had no clinical signs of the disease at birth and laboratory testing for CMV (at birth) were negative, therefore we could firmly exclude congenital infection. No recognizable underlying illness or risk factor for CMV were found. Unlike previous reports, the infant was breast-fed for a few hours at birth, and then formula-fed.Horizontal CMV transmission from another child in the household was unlikely, as the infant was an only child.The mother, who suffered from primary infection in late pregnancy, was the likely source of CMV (perhaps at birth, as a consequence of prolonged membrane rupture). Perhaps intestinal surgery during the first week of life increased disease severity. We speculate that mucosal injury possibly led to increased permeability with a massive intestinal and blood CMV invasion. The hypothesis of mucosal injury is supported by the observation of CMV colitis in immunocompetent children with inflammatory bowel disease [3] or cow's milk allergy [8]. Further, the disease could have been worsened by the lack of breast milk and maternal protective factors (namely IgA antibodies).Biopsies and P.C.R. assays confirmed severe bone marrow and intestinal CMV involvement, which promptly recovered after antiviral therapy.This study has some limitations. Indeed, we could not demonstrate a molecular identity between the CMV-isolate of the infant and the maternal virus. Therefore the source of CMV remains speculative, though a transmission from the maternal source it is likely.Further, no amniocentesis was performed and some information on maternal infection (DNAemia, viral shedding in urine or saliva) was lacking. The characterization of maternal primary infection during pregnancy was therefore incomplete.Nevertheless, this case report contribute to understand CMV end-organ-disease and related symptomatic infection of term infants during the first months of life. It shows that severe disease may be acquired after birth, even in immunocompetent, formula-fed, full-term infant. Intractable diarrhoea may need ganciclovir therapy.AbbreviationsCMV: cytomegalovirus; P.C.R.: polymerase chain reaction; GCV: ganciclovir; VGCV: Valganciclovir.Competing interestsThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsAll authors contributed to conception and design, acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data and gave final approval of the version to be published. In detail:AB and FV drafted the manuscript; CR, VF, CR and NG conceived of the study, participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript; PP and TL carried out the immunoassays and molecular studies; FF have been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content.Pre-publication historyThe pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2431/11/52/prepub


Title: Pathogenesis and vertical transmission of a transplacental rat cytomegalovirus

BackgroundCytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is the most frequent congenital infection in humans worldwide, with an incidence of 0.2–2.2% of live births [1,2]. One major concern of CMV congenital infection is birth defects including mental retardation, microcephaly, epilepsy, and blindness. However, little is known on how the virus is transmitted to the fetus during pregnancy [3]. The possible routes of transmission of human CMV (HCMV) to the offsprings are vertical via germ line cells or transplacentally; perinatally and postnatally. There are several reports strongly supporting the hypothesis that placental infection precedes viral transmission to the fetus [3-6].Due to the strict species-specificity of HCMV, it has not generally been possible to study this virus in experimental animals. A number of natural CMV infections in various animal species have been utilized for modeling HCMV infection. Among the animal CMVs, transplacental transmission has been reported for rhesus macaque CMV [7], porcine CMV [8] and guinea pig CMV (GPCMV) [9]. However, the expenses of the primates and pigs, as well as the rarity of their CMV seronegative animals make these models impractical for large-scale vaccine studies. For these reasons, rats, mice, and guinea pigs came into favor because of their small size, low cost, short life span, ease of handling and high reproductive rate. More importantly, these CMVs (RCMV, MCMV and GPCMV) closely resemble HCMV. For studying the transplacental hypothesis, it is important to consider the great diversity in the placental structures among human and model. Favorably, these three animals have similar discoidal hemochorial placentation to that of human [10]. However, none of the existing MCMVs and RCMVs demonstrated a clear involvement of the placenta in vertical transmission [11,12] and are therefore, less suitable for the study of CMV congenital infection [13,14]. Although GPCMV provides a well-characterized model of transplacental viral infection, studies in this system have been hampered by a lack of genetic knowledge of the animal itself. In addition, the cost of guinea pigs is less practical for large-scale vaccine and long-term maintenance studies as compared to mice and rats. Meanwhile, the desirable features of rat biology include more human-like physiological responses for disease process, an extensive behavioral database, and larger size (better suited to surgical manipulation and repeated blood sampling) are the major advantages of the rat model over the mouse model. Besides, following human [15,16] and mouse [17], rat is the third mammalian for which the complete genome has been determined. Almost all human genes noted to be associated with disease have known counterparts in the rat genome [18]. This genetic explorer for the rat provides an unprecedented opportunity to take advantage of the rich and robust history of experimental studies utilizing this species to study HCMV disease. Hence, the rat system is a significant advance on the guinea pig or mouse model for studying various aspects of viral pathogenesis, the effect of therapeutic intervention as well as the evaluation of vaccine candidates for CMV congenital infection in humans.In our previous study, we have discovered a new RCMV isolate (ALL-03) obtained from placenta and uterus of the house rat, Rattus rattus diardii [19]. The involvement of the placental and uterine tissues during virus isolation indicates that the virus has the ability to cross the placenta and infect the fetus. Therefore, an attempt was made to study the maternofetal involvement in the pathogenicity of RCMV infection. In this report, we demonstrate a natural model of acute RCMV infection, which includes the characteristic organ distribution of RCMV in male rats and female rats with or without pregnancy as well as the immune response to the infection. More importantly, this is the first RCMV infection study capable of presenting a clear evidence of transplacental transmission in pregnant rats.ResultsThe rats were challenged with RCMV and sampled at different time point, i.e. day 21 p.i. for Experiment A, B and D, meanwhile, day 13–14 p.i. for Experiment C. The presences of infectious virus, viral DNA and antigen, virus particles as well as seroconversion were assessed by employing techniques such as histological and immunohistological stainings including H&E, IIP and IIF; virus assay; protein blotting; PCR; TEM and indirect ELISA.Clinical observationThe animals in the four experiments were observed twice daily until the time for sampling. No abnormality was observed in all control groups throughout the study. All treatment groups showed no clinical signs from day 1 to day 5 p.i. After an incubation period of 6 to 21 days, the RCMV infection became symptomatic especially the immunocompromised groups. The infected rats of all immunocompromised groups in Experiment A, B, C and D as well as immunocompetent groups in Experiment C and D became less active. The clinical signs such as hemorrhages at the extremities of the limbs and tails, and ruffling of hair coat were obvious. There were absences of abortion and mortality in rats up to day 21 p.i. The post-partum neonates in Experiment C did not show any apparent abnormality as compared to the control groups except the litter size in treatment groups (7–8 pups) was slightly smaller than that of control groups (8–9 pups).Gross pathologyNo abnormalities were observed in the organs of all control animals in the four experiments. The lesions such as congestion of renal cortex and corticomedullary junction, generalized hemorrhage of the lung and marked splenomegaly were common and observed mostly in immunosuppressed and pregnant rats. Mild hemorrhage was found in the uterus serosal surface of an infected immunosuppressed dam (Experiment D) carrying seven conceptuses.Histological and immunohistological pathologyThe presences of the characteristic histopathological changes in the organs of animals in the four experiments were determined by H&E staining and further confirmed by IIP test. No specific lesions caused by RCMV disease were observed in all control groups. The organs that appeared normal histologically and did not show characteristics of infection in all treatment groups were brain, heart, testes and ovary. The immunoreactivity of IIP test of the treatment groups is presented in Table 1. The histopathological and immunopathological findings are described in the following:Table 1Positive immunoreactivity of IIP test on different tissue sections of treatment groups.Experiment/OrganA (Day 21 p.i.)B (Day 21 p.i.)C (Day 13–14 p.i.)D (Day 21 p.i.)GroupvpvvpvvpvvpvBrain0/30/30/30/30/30/30/30/3Salivary gland0/31/30/31/30/30/31/32/3Heart0/30/30/30/30/30/30/30/3Lung0/32/31/33/32/33/33/33/3Spleen0/31/30/32/32/33/32/33/3Liver0/31/30/32/31/33/31/33/3Kidney0/32/30/32/32/33/32/33/3Testes0/30/3------Ovary--0/30/30/30/30/30/3Uterus--1/33/32/33/33/33/3Neonate----6/1512/15--Placenta------12/158/10Fetus------9/156/10Embryo*-------5/5Note: Abbreviations: v = virus-infected and pv = virus-infected with immunosuppression.* = eroded placenta and developing embryo in uterus at ≤ 7 days of pregnancy.0/3 = no detectable positive result over triplicate sample trials in all three rats.Salivary glandLocalization of RCMV infection in all salivary glands, i.e. parotid, submandibular and sublingual glands was observed. However, the submandibular gland was stained more frequently than the other types of salivary glands. The positive findings were established in immunosuppressed rats in Experiment A and B; in pregnant rats of both treatment groups in Experiment D. No positive features of RCMV infection in all groups of Experiment C were evident. The RCMV infection in the salivary glands was confined to the striated ducts, secretory acini (Figure 1a) and trabeculae connective tissues. The histological abnormalities such as the swollen and enlarged mucous cells and acinar cells were evident but not frequently.Figure 1Positive IIP-stained tissue sections of infected immunosuppressed rats. (a) secretory acinar cells (arrows) of sublingual gland (D; day 21 p.i.; × 400), (b) bronchioles (arrows) and lung parenchyma (D; day 21 p.i.; × 200), (c) splenic cells (arrow; D; day 21 p.i.; × 400), (d) nucleus (arrow) and cytoplasm (arrowhead) of hepatocytes (C; day 13 p.i.; × 400), (e) renal tubules (arrows; D; day 21 p.i.; × 400), (f) stratum basalis (arrows) of endometrium (C; day 13 p.i.; × 200).LungThe parenchyma particularly the bronchioles and alveoli was solely permissive for CMV infection (Figure 1b). Intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies stained extensively by IIP were found in the swollen bronchiolar and alveolar cells. The macrophages and occasional pneumocytes in alveolar wall as well as ciliated bronchiolar epithelia were immunoreactive to CMV. The common pathological features included the congested and hemorrhagic interstitium, accumulation of proteinaceous fluid with infected and uninfected monocytes and macrophages in alveoli and bronchioles, thickened alveolar septa, perivascular inflammatory cell cuffings and lymphocytic hyperplasia.SpleenSome of the infected immunocompetent animals showed reactive hyperplasia of spleens though IIP test did not show positive staining. In contrast, the splenic tissue of immunosuppressed animals especially those with splenomegaly was notably stained by IIP (Figure 1c). Most of the infected areas were less extensive and often scattered at a distance in red pulps. The periarterior lymphocyte sheaths of immunosuppressed animals had shrunk to some extent. The splenic sinusoids were infiltrated with numerous macrophages, many of which contained viral antigens. Numerous lymphocytes and plasma cells were often present in both white and red pulps.LiverThe intensity of immunostaining was marked in liver tissues of immunosuppressed animals in Experiment C, which involved almost entirely the tested sections (two cases; Figure 1d). Most of the immunoreactive cells were located in the liver lobules adjacent to the capsule. Numerous hepatocytes showed characteristic inclusion bodies. The hepatocytes and many Kupffer cells contained viral antigens. The cytoplasm of hepatocytes stained more frequently than the nucleus (Figure 1d). The parenchyma showed patchy necrosis and degeneration. Hepatitis seen as infiltration of inflammatory cells in the parenchyma was one of the lesions found.KidneyAlmost all treatment groups had animal(s) with signs of infection except the immunocompetent groups in Experiment A and B. In the kidney, infected cells were seen in both the cortex and medulla regions whereby the cortex region adjacent to the renal capsule was predominantly infected. Viral antigens were profound in the proximal and distal tubules, loop of Henle, and collecting tubules (Figure 1e), but less intensive in the renal corpuscles. The infection was predominant in cytoplasm rather than the nucleus. The mesangial cells were swollen and displayed characteristic nuclear inclusions, which contained the viral antigens. Tubulonephrosis in the form of ballooning degeneration was evident. Hypercellularity of the glomerulus was one of the lesions showing adhesion between the glomerular tuft and Bowman's capsule.UterusAll immunosuppressed female rats in the three experiments (B, C and D) regardless of presence or absence of pregnancy demonstrated signs of infection in particularly the endometrium. The immunoreactive cells were found majority in the stroma and surface epithelia, i.e. stratum basalis and stratum functionalis. The predominant localization of viral antigen was slightly different from one rat to another even within a group receiving identical treatment. Two rats in Experiment B and one in Experiment C had positive stromal cells for the immunostaining but not epithelial cells of glands. Meanwhile, three pregnant rats in Experiment D had viral tropism in epithelial cells only. Nevertheless, the majority of the rats showed immunoreactivity in the two regions and with more extensive staining in the stratum functionalis and stratum basalis (Figure 1f).PlacentaBoth immunocompetent and immunosuppressed groups in Experiment D gave 80% of positivity in IIP staining. Meanwhile, the placenta sections (categorized as Embryo* in Table 1) of the two dams with about 7-day pregnancy, gave the most intensive stains i.e. 100% of positivity, which far surpassed those with pregnancy length greater than 14 days. The immunoreactive sites of the placenta were mostly at the decidual basalis, junctional zone and labyrinth zone (Figure 2a, 2b, 2c, 2d) but scarcely in the embryonic sites. However, the placenta with shorter gestation period showed more signs of infection in decidual basalis and junctional zone as compared to those with longer gestation period by which infections were found in the labyrinth zone predominantly. The chorionic villi anchoring to the decidual basalis concomitantly passing infection to junctional zone of placenta was observed (Figure 2c). These cells of maternal (decidual basalis) and fetal (chorionic villi and junctional zone) portions of placenta, were confirmed to be infected. The infected regions were found to be associated with intranuclear and intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies mostly of trophoblast cells in junctional and labyrinth zones (Figure 2b, 2d).Figure 2Positive IIP-stained placental and fetal tissue sections of infected immunosuppressed dams. Seven-day old placenta (D; day 21 p.i.): (a) decidual epithelia (arrows; × 200), (b) junctional zone (arrows; × 200), (c) chorionic villi (arrow) anchored to the decidual basalis concomitantly passing infection to junctional zone (arrowhead; × 400), and (d) trophoblast cells (arrows) in labyrinth zone (× 400); (e) fetal renal tubules (arrows) of 17-day pregnancy (D; day 21 p.i.; × 200), (f) fetal liver (arrow) of 18-day pregnancy (D; day 21 p.i.; × 400).Neonate and fetusThe fetal tissues of those dams beyond 14 days of pregnancy in Experiment D, especially liver and kidney showed a significant presence of viral antigen (Figure 2e, 2f). For neonatal rats, no immunoreactivity was observed in salivary gland, however, positive results were found in the kidney and liver. The renal tubules were stained more frequently than the glomeruli. The proportion of immunoreactivity in a tissue was found generally greater in fetus rather than neonate.Virus assayVirus was isolated from tissues of animals in Experiment C and D, namely the uterus, placenta, embryo, neonate and fetus; examined by culture in rat embryonic fibroblasts (REF). The virus produced typical herpesvirus-like CPE in REF inoculated with infected tissue homogenates beginning from 3 days p.i. and was identified as RCMV infection by IIP technique at day 5 p.i. The CPE and IIP results were similar as previously mentioned in Loh et al [19]. However, these features were not observed in mock-infected REF cells. The quantity of positive observations in different tissues is tabulated in Table 2.Table 2Positivity of CPE development and protein blotting of treatment groups in Experiment C and D.TestVirus assay (CPE)Protein blottingExperiment/OrganC (Day 13–14 p.i.)D (Day 21 p.i.)C (Day 13–14 p.i.)D (Day 21 p.i.)GroupGroupvpvvpvvpvvpvUterus5/55/55/55/55/55/55/55/5Neonate11/1816/18--12/1815/18--Placenta--16/2010/10--14/208/10Fetus--14/207/10--12/206/10Embryo*---8/8---8/8Note: Abbreviations: v = virus-infected and pv = virus-infected with immunosuppression.* = eroded placenta and developing embryo in uterus at ≤ 7 days of pregnancy.Protein blottingIn the system, we used RCMV-infected cell lysate and mock-infected cell lysate, respectively for the positive and negative controls. The system was employed on the same samples for virus assay i.e. uterus and neonatal tissues collected from Experiment C as well as uterus, placenta and fetal tissues collected from Experiment D. The purified virus protein blots of uterus, placenta, embryo, neonate and fetus reacted positively in different frequency with HIS raised against RCMV (Table 2).PCR detection of IE1 geneSimilar samples tested in protein blotting were transversely analyzed by PCR amplification of viral DNA. Pure RCMV DNA serving as the positive control showed a distinct band of 569 bp in molecular size. Significant positive results in uterine, placental, neonatal and fetal samples were obtained (Figure 3). One heart sample, which had no immunostain in IIP test showed positive result in PCR. In contrast, no similar DNA band was detected in any tissue samples of control rats. The magnitude of positive observations is shown in Table 3.Figure 3PCR profile of IE1-specific products. Viral DNA extracted from (i) infected immunosuppressed rats: uterus (C; day 14 p.i.; lane 2), 17-day old placenta (D; day 21 p.i.; lane 3), one-day post-partum neonatal tissues (C; day 14 p.i.; lane 4) and 17-day old fetal tissues (D; day 21 p.i.; lane 5); (ii) mock-infected immunosuppressed rats: uterus (C; day 13 p.i.; lane 6) and 17-day old placenta (D; day 21 p.i.; lane 7). Lane 1: GeneRuler™ 1 kb DNA ladder (Fermentas).Table 3Positivity of PCR amplification of IE1 gene on viral DNA of treatment groups.Experiment/OrganA (Day 21 p.i.)B (Day 21 p.i.)C (Day 13–14 p.i.)D (Day 21 p.i.)GroupvpvvpvvpvvpvBrain0/30/30/30/30/30/30/30/3Heart0/30/30/30/30/31/30/30/3Testes0/30/3------Ovary--0/30/30/30/30/30/3Uterus----5/55/55/55/5Neonate----12/1815/18--Placenta------16/2010/10Fetus------14/208/10Embryo*-------8/8Note: Abbreviations: v = virus-infected and pv = virus-infected with immunosuppression.* = eroded placenta and developing embryo in uterus at ≤ 7 days of pregnancy.0/3 = no detectable positive result over triplicate sample trials in all three rats.TEM examinationTEM revealed virions exhibiting typical herpesvirus morphology in the placenta samples of the infected rats in Experiment D. None of the control groups established similar findings. Figure 4a shows the negatively stained naked virion with a size of about 106 nm. The virions were found either naked or enveloped (Figure 4b) in ultrathin section and mostly assembled near the mitochondria, golgi apparatus and endoplasm reticulum. The enveloped virions with a size of larger than 200 nm were found in a dense or light and sometime coreless capsid form.Figure 4Electron micrographs. (a) negatively-stained herpesvirus-like naked nucleocapsid isolated from placenta sample of an infected immunosuppressed rat of 17-day pregnancy (D; day 21 p.i., × 168k), and (b) ultrathin sectioned placenta of the same rat (D; day 21 p.i.) showing enveloped virions with light capsid (thick arrow) and hollow core (thin arrow) present adjacently to nucleus and mitochondria (× 63k). All bar markers represent 100 nm.ELISA for antibody detectionThe humoral response of the animals at the end of the study is presented in Figure 5. The control groups of all experiments were devoid of RCMV-specific antibody. However, all the infected immunocompetent and immunosuppressed rats seroconverted and their antibody titers were significantly (p < 0.05) different to those of control groups. Meanwhile, the immunocompetent groups had significantly (p < 0.05) higher mean antibody titers than those of immunosuppressed groups.Figure 5The mean antibody titers of control and treatment groups in all experiments. Abbreviations: c = mock-infected; v = virus-infected; pc = mock-infected with immunosuppression and pv = virus-infected with immunosuppression in Experiment A, B and D (day 21 p.i.); C (day 13–14 p.i.).Fluorescent-antibody technique on buffy coat cellsThe buffy coat cells of the two infected groups of rats in Experiment D were stained positively when observed under fluorescence microscope. Three categories of cells were differentiated based on their sizes, i.e. leukocytes, red blood cells and platelets in a descending order. The positive fluorescence-stained cells were the leukocytes of the infected rats especially those with immunosuppression.DiscussionThe RCMV strain ALL-03 was first isolated from placenta and uterus of rats [19]. There was an urgent need to investigate and confirm the virus capability to infect the fetus. An attempt was made by Priscott and Tyrrell [12] to isolate RCMV from wild conceptuses. The failure of CPE observation during two weeks of culture concluded no evidence of transplacental infection in the single pregnancy of a naturally infected female [12]. However, in our study, an analogous procedure using conceptuses from Experiment D (about 7-day of gestation) was carried out. Interestingly, a delayed type CPE resembling characteristics that previously mentioned in our previous study [19] was observed.Like HCMV, RCMV is poorly pathogenic in the immunocompetent host. The transient suppression in host immunity induced by cyclophosphamide is necessary for the induction of disease and the severity of disease always reflects the level of virus localization in the organs. The incubation time of symptomatic infection varied but commonly started at day 6 and onwards. This was similar to a previous study, which reported the emergence of clinical signs and absence of mortality in the immunocompromised groups [13]. The pregnant rats (Experiment C and D) seem to have partial immunosuppressive effect similar to that of other groups receiving cyclophosphamide as they were more permissive to RCMV infection than non-pregnant rats. Gould and Mims [20] showed that the virus could be reactivated during pregnancy. As a result of immunosuppression caused by the pregnancy alone or in conjunction with RCMV, the virus may have a better conducive environment for growth. In fact, one characteristic of CMVs is that the infection may have an immunosuppressive effect to the host during the acute phase. This has been observed in man, mice and rats [13,21,22].Disease symptoms correlated well with the presences of infectious virus, viral antigen and DNA, which were found highest concentration in uterus, placenta, embryo and fetus; abundantly in lung, kidney, spleen and liver; less in salivary gland; even rare in heart (one case) but none in brain, ovary and testes. The detection of the RCMV in the spleen and liver was consistent with that of many previous studies [12,13,23,24]. The incidence of splenomegaly coincided with detection of RCMV in spleen. The finding is similar to that of mouse model [25]. The occurrence of RCMV immunoreactive monocytes and macrophages with characteristic inclusions in the spleen is consistent with the symptomatic infection. This parallels the situation in man where the involvement of the spleen is common in CMV infections [26]. The finding of RCMV particles in the liver parenchyma of immunocompromised rats is similar to that observed in HCMV infections, whereby the occurrence of hepatitis in immunocompromised patient is frequent [27]. The findings of the present study do closely resemble the pathological changes in the HCMV hepatitis, for example, the extensive liver damage with numerous inclusion bodies in hepatocytes, Kupffer cells as well as focal liver cell necrosis [28,29]. In our study, more viral antigens detected in the tubular epithelia than the glomeruli contrast to a previous study of RCMV strain Maastricht which localized predominantly in glomeruli and hardly ever in the tubular epithelia [24]. The finding that the renal capsule contained immunoreactive cells mimics that of the CMV infection in humans and rats [24].Pneumonitis is the leading cause of death in CMV-infected transplant patients [14]. In RCMV-infected rats numerous immunoreactive cells were found in the lungs, including alveolar macrophages and interstitial mononuclear cells, resembling the histopathology of HCMV induced pneumonitis. Such damages caused by extensive virus replication in rats injected with cyclophosphamide are similar to that observed in the mouse model [30]. The virus persistence in the salivary glands resembles the typical characteristic of CMV in rat [23], mouse [25], guinea pig [31] and human [32]. The salivary gland is believed to be the principal route by which the virus is spread within the population of susceptible hosts [33]. The absence of a case in Experiment C may due to the fact that infectious RCMV (Maastricht strain) in salivary glands is detected at a later time than in all other organs, starting at day 14 p.i. [33]. In addition, the subcutaneous route and duration of infection (13–14 days) carried out in Experiment C would most probably decrease the severity of the disease. The submandibular gland was the preferred organ for tropism of the virus. These characteristics conformed to the previous study of Kloover et al [33].The detection of viral antigen was not success in brain, heart, testes and ovary. Only one heart sample was found to contain viral DNA. This positive result was, most likely, due to contamination from infected blood cells. These four organs were reported to be involved in CMV infection in previous studies. A similar work studying acute infection of RCMV conducted previously [24] showed the brain tissue was negative for RCMV antigen. In contrast, a significant infection in brain was demonstrated in mouse model [34]. In fact, CNS involvement is a frequent feature of congenital infection [35]. MCMV infections were reported to be associated in the development of myopericarditis and dystrophic cardiac calcification [36] but cardiac infection in rat model was transient [13]. The recovery of infectious virus from sperm [37] and the detection of latent viral genomes in the prostate gland, testes, and spermatogonia of infected mice suggested that transmission of virus was by sexual contact [38,39]. With the congenital infection, inclusion-bearing cells are found also in testes and ovary after reactivation of latent infection. Nevertheless, the tropism of CMV in these germ line organs was in more chronic phase than the visceral organs [40]. Thus, it is reasonable to argue that the viral antigen as well as DNA of these germ line organs was untraceable.The presence of RCMV infection in the endometrium of uterus regardless of pregnancy or different stages of pregnancy suggested that the uterus is one of the target organs. The current finding showed RCMV infection localized in different sites of uterus of different rats treated identically. One explanation might be that the different degree of susceptibility of an individual to the infection by which is largely affected by the host's physiology and immune response. Besides, CMV is evident by its asynchronous development in vitro [41]; it might also happen in vivo. The uterine infection extends to adjacent cell type during more advanced dissemination, i.e. from stromal cells to epithelial cells. This observation is similar to CMV infection in human and contiguous endometrial cells dissemination plays an important role in congenital infection where HCMV can establish active and latent infection to the placenta subsequently [3].High un-natural dosage of infection at titer 106 TCID50 per rat has no effect on abortion and severe fetus wastage as observed in Experiment C and D. These findings contrast to guinea pig CMV infection by which the highest rates of fetus resorption/abortion and mortality are correlated well with the increase of infection dosage [42]. This might suggest that RCMV strain ALL-03 is either a benign virus for the offsprings naturally or somewhat attenuated throughout the subsequent tissue culture passages or when infecting a different rat strain. If the attenuation of tissue culture passage is the case, it can be reversed by a few in vivo passages and the pathogenicity of this 'virulent' virus can be determined in future investigation. On the other hand, one explanation, which is more fascinating, might be that the current experiments performed using a virus isolated from the black rat, Rattus rattus diardii, in a laboratory rat, R. norvegicus. This different host strain may contribute to the mild effects of the fetal and neonatal infections. Nevertheless, a definite answer for this speculation cannot be given presently since we realize that there is no SPF colony of R. rattus available for the moment.Although virus infection in Experiment C was conducted via s.c. route (less infective than i.p. route) and in shorter incubation period (about 13–14 days), the signs of infection were closely resembling those of Experiment D. These indicate maternal virus dissemination had started earlier than 2 weeks time. The in utero virus transmission was more promising when one-day old neonates and conceptuses (fetuses and embryos) had already harbored the virus. In fact, there was no probable virus transmission from the female rats to them perinatally or postnatally by close contact. This is due to the slow growth of RCMV which is normally detected in organs such as kidney and salivary gland starting on day 4 and 10 p.i., respectively [12,13]. Therefore, it is believed that the virus transmitted either by direct passage of the virus across the placenta to the fetus or through germ cells as proposed by Brautigam and Oldsone [43], Chantler et al [44], and Osborn [45]. However, the precise localization of the virus in tissue section for IIP test had elucidated that the infections occurred in placenta, uterus, embryo, fetus and neonate, but not in testes and ovary. The presence of infectious viruses in the aforementioned sites suggests the RCMV infection was successive and responsible for the vertical transmission. Furthermore, electron microscopy showing visible typical herpesvirus-like particles in infected placenta, had further confirmed the transplacental transmission route of RCMV strain ALL-03 without doubt. Generally, the frequency and concentration of virus infection were predominantly in the uterus, placenta and offspring differing from those reported previously in other RCMVs. It is believed that this unique infection preference was indeed the nature of ALL-03 virus.The presence of CMV infection in the placental parenchyma and membrane had been confirmed in a previous study [5]. It is likely that CMV or CMV DNA could be detected in the villi, including the mesenchyme and trophoblasts, extravillous trophoblast, and decidual cells. Consistent with their study [5], the IIP staining in our study showed immunogenic sites containing RCMV antigen were the decidual basalis, junctional and labyrinth zones. The likely cells involved were the trophoblast and decidual cells. The placenta of earlier gestation (about 7 days) showed more signs and intensities of infection than that with lengthier gestation period. Furthermore, the intensity of infection in placenta surpassed that in fetal tissues. However, at later stage (> 14 days) of pregnancy, the fetal tissues such as liver and kidney showed a more significant infection. The most likely explanation of the events might be the differences in the degree of permissiveness to RCMV in various tissues during development. The virus may subsequently infect the fetus following direct crossing of the labyrinth zone of placenta after a successive virus replication period.The exact mechanism of how RCMV crosses the placenta to infect fetus has yet to be elucidated. It is either caused by viremia, transportation of the virus by maternal leukocytes entering the placenta, direct passage of the virus from uterus into the placenta or direct invasion of placenta and fetus. The preliminary study employing immunofluorescence staining on buffy coat cells of rats in Experiment D found that the infected rats suffered a leukocyte associated-viremia. The circulation of infected leukocytes in the blood had most probably promoted the spread of the virus throughout the animal body. This finding was in agreement with that of Bruggeman et al [13]. Similar observation had also been made for HCMV [46]. During the viremic phase, the virus circulates and disseminates as it has been carried in leukocytes [47].The findings obtained from Experiment D with absolute uterine infection in relation to 70–100% of placental infection illuminate the important intersection of maternal uterus for the congenital infection. Indeed, the earlier in vitro study in which leukocytes infected with a clinical HCMV strain VR1814 (thus reproducing the in vivo phase of acute viremia) was used to infect either explants of floating and anchoring villi or differentiating cytotrophoblast cells, no infection was observed [6]. On the other hand, the same study showed that HCMV-infected leukocytes could productively infect uterine endothelial cells, which in turn, were able to transmit the infection to cytotrophoblast cells. In this context, the infected anchoring villi, which extended into the uterine wall passing the infection to the placenta, were well demonstrated in our study. Concurrent to the aforementioned in vitro model and our findings, congenital infection is acquired only during primary maternal infection whereby uterine infection must take place preconceptionally or periconceptionally.Another intriguing aspect of the natural history of HCMV infection during pregnancy concerns the transmission rate during different gestation period. In particular, while primary HCMV infection acquired either before or around conception carries the lowest risk of transmission [48], maternal infections acquired during the first and second trimester of gestation can be transmitted at a similar rate (approximately 45%). On the other hand, during the third trimester, maternal infection has the highest probability of being transmitted to the fetus (78.6%). These data clearly indicate that: (i) the virus is transmitted efficiently from mother to fetus despite the presence of an innate barrier; (ii) mechanisms of protection are more effective during the first two-thirds of gestation, becoming less effective in late pregnancy [49]. In parallel to these reports, the dams of Experiment D and Experiment C by which infections occurred in preconception and during the midterm (about 10 days) showed transmission to offsprings in 65–81% and 59–84%, respectively. It agreed that the infection to offsprings was more effective in dams of Experiment C occurring in earlier time interval (day 13–14 p.i.). Since placental infection has been detected either in the presence or absence of fetal infection, the placenta is considered as the most important site of either protection (by sheltering the fetus from CMV infection) or transmission (by acting as a viral reservoir and allowing the infection to reach the fetal compartment). Nevertheless, whenever an infection of the fetus occurred, virus could be found in the associated placenta at different degree of infection. Moreover, the discrepancy of the number of positive virus infection in placenta to that of fetus was only 10–30%. Hence, it is suggested that the placenta more likely serves as a reservoir rather than protective barrier in which the virus replicates first prior reaching the embryo or fetus in our study. As discussed earlier, the human placenta is not an effective barrier to HCMV transmission in the same way [3].ConclusionsThe current study exhibits a widespread systemic RCMV infection. The maternal viremia, uterine infection, placental infection and direct dissemination to the fetus are the most likely sequence of events leading to congenital infection after a primary maternal infection mimicking the features of congenital CMV infection in human. We believe that RCMV strain ALL-03 has the potentials to provide predictable information on the pathogenesis and manifestations of congenital CMV infection, rational designs of new antiviral therapies as well as in utero vaccine to specifically prevent prenatal infection in future investigations.MethodsPreparation of virus working stock and hyperimmune serum (HIS)Virus stock of RCMV strain ALL-03 was prepared and titrated by mean of TCID50/ml prior to animal inoculation. Hyperimmune serum (HIS) was prepared in mice according to standard procedure using heat-inactivated purified RCMV suspension (107 TCID50/ml). The antibody titers were determined using indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).Design of the experimentsTwo-month old SPF Sprague-Dawley rats were assigned into four different experiments (A, B, C and D). The rats from each experiment were subdivided into immunocompetent and immunosuppressed groups. Each immunosuppressed rat was induced by subcutaneous (s.c.) injection with cyclophosphamide at a dosage of 40 mg, a day before the virus inoculation. All treatment groups were infected with 106 TCID50 RCMV suspensions in either intraperitoneal (i.p.) or s.c. route. Five rats were allotted for each treatment group, whereas, three rats which inoculated with PBS in similar route served as the control group. Blood samples were collected before and after the experiments for antibody titration. The animals were observed twice daily for clinical signs and mortality.The male and non-pregnant female rats employed in Experiment A and B respectively, were inoculated i.p. route with RCMV suspensions. These rats were sampled at day 21 p.i. The brain, salivary gland, heart, lung, spleen, liver, kidney, testes and uterus were processed for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, and indirect immunoperoxidase (IIP) test.In Experiment C, female rats of about 10-day pregnancy (determined by vaginal plug observation) were inoculated via s.c. route. The inoculation was carried out in s.c. route rather than i.p. in order to prevent abortion that may be caused by the injection. The sampling was carried out at one day post-parturition of the neonates, i.e. day 13–14 p.i. of the dams. The brain, salivary gland, heart, lung, spleen, liver, kidney, uterus, ovary and the one-day old neonatal tissues (salivary gland, liver and kidney) were subjected to H&E staining and IIP test. Additional neonatal tissues and uterus were assigned for virus assay to isolate the infectious virus as determined by cytopathic effect (CPE) development (as described in Loh et al [19]); protein blotting as well as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification.In Experiment D, non-pregnant female rats were inoculated via i.p. route. The rats of each group were housed together with a male rat and observed for pregnancy. The pregnant rats were sacrificed at day 21 p.i., i.e. just before delivery. The salivary gland, heart, lung, spleen, liver, kidney, uterus, ovary, placenta and fetal tissues (liver and kidney) were prepared for H&E staining and IIP test. Additional uterus, placenta and fetal tissues were further tested by virus assay, protein blotting and PCR analyses. The remaining placenta was processed for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) examination.Indirect immunoperoxidase (IIP) testAfter deparaffinization, the sections were blocked for endogenous peroxidase and covered with 1% SDS/PBS for 5 minutes. Following washing thrice with PBS containing 1% Triton X-100 (PBSTx), the sections were immersed in 5% BSA/PBSTx for 1 hour. The diluted mouse HIS (1:200) with additional 2% normal rat serum (only for neonatal tissues) was added and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. The sections were washed and incubated with diluted peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:250). After stopping the stain development of DAB substrate (KPL), the sections were counterstained with hematoxylin, washed in dH2O, dehydrated and then mounted.Protein blottingThe test strips (Millipore) pre-treated with transfer buffer, were blotted with purified intracellular virus (from tissue homogenates). The air-dried test strips were immersed in 5% BSA/PBS and then incubated with diluted mouse HIS (1:500) for 1 hour. After washing in PBST (0.2% Tween 20), the test trips were incubated with diluted peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:2000) for 1 hour and then washed again. DAB substrate was added. The test strips were rinsed in dH2O and then air-dried.Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)The sequences of the gene-specific primers flanking on immediate-early 1 (IE1) gene region of RCMV strain ALL-03 were 5'-CACAGAGATCTCACTAACCTGCCACCTATAACCAC-3' (Forward) and 5'-TCCAGCAGACTTCTGTATCCTGATTCAAG-3' (Reverse). The PCR reaction contained 100 ng DNA extracted from each tissue sample, 0.5 μM of each primer, 1X optimized buffer, 0.2 mM dNTP mix, 2 unit of DyNAzyme™ II DNA polymerase (Finnzymes) and nuclease-free H2O. The protocol included an initial denaturation step at 95°C for 5 minutes, 40 cycles of 1-minute denaturation at 94°C, 30-second annealing at 69°C and 1-minute extension at 72°C. This was followed by a final extension step at 72°C for 1 minute.Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) examinationIntracellular virus from placenta was purified and subjected to negative staining. For ultrathin sectioning, the placenta was processed accordingly to the procedures described in Loh et al [19] and subjected to TEM examination.Indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)Pre-immune and hyperimmune sera were used as negative and positive controls, respectively. Microtiter plates (Dynatech) were coated with purified virus (3.2 μg/ml). Reaction wells were rinsed thrice with PBST (0.05% Tween 20 in PBS) and blocked with 5% BSA/PBST. After incubation with diluted test sera (1:50) at 37°C for 2 hours, the bound antibodies were reacted with diluted peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rat IgG (1:2000) for another 2 hours. Following washings, TMB substrate (KPL) was added. The absorbance of a sample was determined using an ELISA reader.Statistical analysisData were expressed as mean ± SD, and statistical analysis was performed using two-tailed Student's t-test. Differences between groups were considered statistically significant at P < 0.05.Fluorescent-antibody technique on buffy coat cellsA test to assess cell-associated viremia was conducted on buffy coat cells of animals in Experiment D. The buffy coat cells were fixed on a chamber slide and subjected to an indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) procedure as mentioned in Loh et al [19] with a few modifications, i.e. using mouse HIS at dilution 1:200 (in 1% BSA/PBS) and FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG at dilution 1:250. The normal mouse sera were used as negative controls.Abbreviationscytomegalovirus (CMV), cytopathic effect (CPE), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), hyperimmune serum (HIS), immediate-early 1 (IE1), indirect immunofluorescence (IIF), indirect immunoperoxidase (IIP), intraperitoneal (i.p.), murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV), polymerase chain reaction (PCR), post-infection (p.i.), rat cytomegalovirus (RCMV), rat embryonic fibroblast (REF), subcutaneous (s.c.), transmission electron microscopy (TEM).Competing interestsThe author(s) declare that they have no competing interests.Authors' contributionsHSL participated in the experimental design, performed all experiments and drafted the manuscript. MAML participated in the experimental design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. SOAR conceived of the study and participated in its design and interpretation of data. LJK participated in part of the experiments and assisted in post-mortem investigation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Title: The Pathogenesis and Diagnosis of 

1. IntroductionPneumocystis is an ascomycetous fungus, formerly classified as a protozoan but re-classified based on ribosomal RNA analysis that showed greater homology with the fungi [1,2]. The natural reservoir of infection remains unknown. Pneumocystis carinii, renamed P. jiroveci (or jirovecii), was first described as a human pathogen in 1942 by van der Meer and Brug, who described three fatal cases of interstitial pneumonia in two infants and one young adult [3]. This was followed by a report of interstitial plasma cell pneumonia in malnourished infants in 1952 by Vanek and Jirovec [4]. Several case reports of the infection in premature infants were reported in the pediatric literature of the 1950s. By the 1970s, Pneumocystis pneumonia was reported in patients with congenital immunodeficiencies, hematologic malignancies, hypogammaglobulinemia and in patients receiving corticosteroids or cytotoxic agents for the treatment of lymphoproliferative disorders [5,6,7,8]. Many cases were described with childhood malnutrition in the wake of war. In 1981, PJP (abbreviated as PCP or Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia until that time) became the first AIDS-defining opportunistic infection by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [9]. In the early days of solid organ transplantation, PJP was diagnosed post-mortem in solid organ recipients at a time when high doses of prednisone were employed for immunosuppression [10]. Although Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (PJP) is common in immunocompromised hosts, the pathogenesis of infection remains incompletely understood. This review will discuss host factors that predispose to PJP, review available diagnostic methods and propose areas for future investigation.2. PhylogenyControversy has existed with the phylogenetic assignment of P. jiroveci to the taxonomic kingdom of fungi. This occurred based on ribosomal RNA and mRNA sequences, including the separate genes encoding the thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase of P. jiroveci and β-glucan in the cyst cell wall. Such observations should have implications for disease transmission and therapy. The environmental reservoir remains unknown. The neutral lipid fraction of P. jiroveci includes a variety of phytosterols shared by plants and fungi, including the plasmodial slime molds such as Physarum species [11]. The plasmodial slime molds form a diverse group of heterotrophic, mobile and largely unicellular organisms that are abundant in nature. Many such organisms, including Pneumocystis, develop genetic rearrangements as occur for the species-specific major surface glycoprotein genes (gp120, gpA, MSG) [12,13,14]. It is unclear whether MSG shifts in Pneumocystis are driven by the host immune response or by additional factors, such as the availability of nutritional resources from the host cells to which they bind [15,16,17,18,19,20]. The cell wall contains glucose, mannose, cholesterol and phytosterols but no ergosterol, accounting for the absence of susceptibility to azole and polyene antifungal antibiotics [11,21]. In Pneumocystis, the absence of protein mannosylation found in other fungi may help avoid uptake via mannose-binding receptors [22,23].3. Pathogenesis3.1. Pneumocystis Life Cycle and Transmission of InfectionLittle is known about the natural reservoir of Pneumocystis jiroveci. In mammalian lungs, Pneumocystis exists in three morphologically distinct forms: trophic forms (or trophozoites), sporozoites and mature cysts. The infectious process begins with the attachment of the trophozoites to the alveolar type I pneumocytes. Trophozoites are eukaryotic cells with cytoplasmic projections (filopodia), which mediate attachment to alveolar type I pneumocytes. Trophozoites represent the predominant form of the organism in in vivo and in vitro culture systems. In the lungs, Pneumocystis has a biphasic life cycle featuring (a) an asexual phase, which consists of the binary fission of trophozoites, and (b) a sexual phase, during which trophozoites fuse, leading to the formation of cysts. Haploid trophozoites conjugate into diploid early sporozoites, which undergo meiotic division followed by mitotic replication. This results in the formation of late sporozoites containing eight nuclei (or spores). The maturation of late sporozoites leads to the evolution of thick-walled cysts [14,24]. β-(1,3)-D-glucan synthetase generates cyst walls rich with β-(1,3)-D-glucan, which is a target of binding, activation, and phagocytosis by macrophages. β-1,3-glucan is absent in trophozoites [22,23].In rodent models of PJP, treatment with anidulafungin (an echinocandin that inhibits β-(1,3)-D-glucan synthase) selectively depleted cysts but not trophozoites. Anidulafungin-treated mice were unable to transmit infection, suggesting that cysts may be the agents of disease transmission [25]. In inoculated murine models using Pneumocystis murina [26], prophylaxis with the echinocandin rezafungin reduced both trophozoites and cysts (called asci) in infected mice and was effective in preventing infection in steroid-treated mice [27,28].Animal data support transmission via the airborne route [29,30]. This has been demonstrated in both immunocompetent and immunocompromised murine models when Pneumocystis-infected and uninfected mice are housed together [31,32,33]. The observation of Pneumocystis replication in the lungs of immunocompetent animals without causing disease has led to the hypothesis that immunocompetent hosts can act as a reservoir for the infection [33]. In humans, nosocomial outbreaks of PJP have been reported among solid organ transplant recipients; in several studies, genetic sequencing has demonstrated human-to-human transmission, including from asymptomatic carriers [34,35,36,37,38,39]. Data are inconclusive regarding the possible role of healthcare workers in the nosocomial spread of PJP [40,41].3.2. Primary Infection versus Reactivation of Latent InfectionIn an early study of immunocompetent children, two-thirds had positive IgG against Pneumocystis by age four, suggesting primary infection in early childhood [42]. Similarly, in a 2-year prospective cohort of healthy newborns, Pneumocystis jiroveci DNA was isolated from nasopharyngeal samples obtained upon clinical suspicion of upper or lower respiratory tract infection in the study population. Further, 84.8% of infants had seroconverted at the conclusion of the study [43]. Such observations led to the hypothesis that PJP is a result of the reactivation of latent infection from childhood. On the other hand, genetic typing studies of the Pneumocystis jiroveci ribosomal RNA in patients with recurrent PJP PNA showed both reinfection and reactivation of a previously acquired infection can occur [44,45]. In steroid-treated rats, the infection does not recur despite immunosuppression in animals maintained in air-filtration cages following adequate treatment of infection, suggesting that reinfection is an important mechanism of disease (J. Fishman and M. Bartlett, unpublished data).3.3. Host Risk FactorsClinically significant PJP is observed only in hosts with congenital or acquired immune deficits. T-lymphocyte deficiencies, as well as defects in macrophage function, are implicated in the pathogenesis of PJP. Congenital, acquired, or idiopathic CD4+ T cell lymphopenia is a known risk factor for PJP [46,47,48,49,50,51]. In patients with HIV, the evolution of highly effective antiretroviral therapy (ART) has led to a decline in the incidence of PJP [52,53]. Prophylaxis against Pneumocystis is generally recommended in patients with a CD4+ cell count of <200 cells/mL [54]. Nevertheless, recent data from the Collaboration of Observational HIV Epidemiological Research Europe (COHERE) cohort have demonstrated that both primary and secondary PJP prophylaxis can be safely withdrawn (or withheld) in virologically suppressed patients on ART and CD4+ counts of 100–200 cells/mL as the incidence of PJP in this population is low [55,56].In non-HIV patients, the most common risk factor for PJP is steroid therapy [57]. The correlation between steroids and PJP was described as early as the 1960s in a case series of children who developed PJP 50–90 days after the onset of steroid treatment for lymphoproliferative disease [6]. The author of the series noted that clinically apparent infection manifested when the steroid dose was reduced or steroid treatment was completed, suggesting clinical signs due to re-emerging immune responses; conversely, resumption of prior steroids led to clinical improvement in some subjects. In animal models, severe PJP was reproduced in rats inoculated with Pneumocystis jiroveci following systemic steroids [58]. The risk of PJP in steroid-treated patients is dose-dependent; high doses (>30 mg/day of prednisone) or lower doses (15–30 mg/day) for more prolonged periods (≥4 weeks) have been associated with PJP [59,60].In patients with lymphoproliferative diseases, humoral and cellular immune dysfunction related to the underlying disease, as well as immunosuppression related to treatment, are major predisposing factors for PJP. Absolute lymphopenia and prolonged neutropenia are known risk factors for PJP [61]. Among hematological malignancies, patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and patients who have undergone allogeneic stem cell transplantation are among the highest risk groups for PJP [62,63]. In the latter group, established risk factors include immunosuppressive treatment for graft-versus-host disease (GVHD). Guidelines recommend extending PJP prophylaxis beyond the first 6 months post-transplantation with GVHD therapy [64]. Immunosuppressive medications such as purine and pyrimidine analogues (fludarabine, cytarabine) are associated with lasting T cell lymphopenia and increased risk for PJP. PJP prophylaxis is recommended for patients who are receiving these agents [62,65]. Lymphocyte-depleting agents, including the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies (e.g., rituximab, obinutuzumab, ofatumumab) and the combined T and B cell-depleting anti-CD52 alemtuzumab have been associated with PJP [66,67,68,69,70]. Anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies are associated with protracted B cell depletion through complement-mediated and cell-mediated cytotoxicity, lasting at least 6 to 9 months after each infusion [71]. Rituximab is also associated with late-onset neutropenia [72,73]. In a small retrospective case-control study including HIV-negative patients hospitalized with PJP, PJP was found to be independently associated with the use of rituximab, suggesting a role for antibodies in protection against PJP [67]. European guidelines recommend PJP prophylaxis in patients receiving alemtuzumab and rituximab either alone or in combination with other immunosuppressants for cancer-directed treatment (e.g., R-CHOP) [64,74]. Prolonged B cell depletion due to CD19-targeted chimeric antigen receptor-modified T cell (CAR-T) immunotherapies has also been associated with some cases of PJP [75,76]; prophylaxis may limit the incidence of PJP in this group. Among newer agents, the phosphoinositide 3-kinase inhibitors (e.g., idelalisib, duvelisib, copanlisib) may be associated with a higher risk of PJP [77], especially in combination with bendamustine and rituximab [78]. Venetoclax, which promotes apoptosis in malignant cells via inhibition of the B cell lymphoma 2 (BCL-2) protein, causes significant neutropenia and has been associated with fungal infections, including PJP [79]. On the other hand, ibrutinib, which inhibits Bruton’s tyrosine kinase and thus B cell proliferation, is less frequently associated with PJP [80,81,82].In the solid organ transplant population, the risk of PJP relates to the intensity of the immunosuppression. Without PJP prophylaxis, this risk is highest in the first six months post-transplant, during periods of augmented immunosuppression (e.g., high-dose steroids or anti-thymocyte globulin for management of allograft rejection) and up to 3–6 months afterwards. The routine use of PJP prophylaxis in the early post-transplant period has dramatically decreased the incidence of PJP in the first six months to a year after transplantation. The risk seems to increase in the second-year post-transplantation, especially in the setting of allograft rejection, CMV infection, age ≥ 65 years and lymphopenia; the association between CMV infection and PJP has been found to be statistically significant in several studies [37,83,84,85,86,87,88]. Further, in a large retrospective cohort study of Pneumocystis jiroveci and respiratory co-infections, only CMV co-infection was independently associated with 90-day mortality [89]. With regards to other risk factors, in a recently published case-control study, the co-stimulatory blocker belatacept was associated with an increased risk of PJP, though it is unclear whether this association is independent of other risk factors, including viral co-infections [90]. The syndrome of “rapamycin lung” is a diffuse pneumonitis observed with mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin) inhibitors (e.g., everolimus, sirolimus and temsirolimus), generally in concert with other infections, including community-acquired respiratory viruses and Pneumocystis. Resolution requires cessation of the mTOR agent and treatment of infection.PJP has also been described in association with the anti-tumor necrosis factor-α (TNFα) monoclonal antibody infliximab, which is broadly used in patients with autoimmune disease and inflammatory bowel disease [91,92,93,94]. In the largest available series [91], PJP occurred at a mean of 21 days after the administration of the drug and was associated with significant mortality (27%).4. Diagnosis4.1. Clinical PresentationPJP should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any immunocompromised individual with fever, dyspnea with hypoxemia beyond the radiographic appearance, and a nonproductive cough. Recent changes in immunosuppression or viral co-infections are common, as are comorbid conditions such as pulmonary edema or lung allograft dysfunction. Progression is acute to subacute in non-AIDS patients, while the initial episode of PJP in AIDS often has a more gradual evolution (often 2 to 5 weeks) with prominent constitutional symptoms. Extrapulmonary pneumocystosis is uncommon and is seen most often in untreated AIDS.4.2. RadiographyThe radiographic appearance of PJP is classically a bilateral interstitial pneumonia with diffuse patchy consolidative and ground-glass opacities (Figure 1). PJP often presents with atypical features with cavitary or nodular features; atypical features are amplified with co-infections such as CMV or adenovirus. In general, no radiographic pattern is pathognomonic for PJP, and radiographic mimics exist. Those include but are not limited to drug-induced pneumonitis associated with mTOR inhibitors, immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy-related pneumonitis [95], severe viral pneumonia, radiation pneumonitis, and eosinophilic pneumonia associated with chimeric antigen receptor T cell (CAR T) therapy [96].4.3. MicrobiologyPneumocystis is grown in vitro on a feeder cell layer of pulmonary epithelial cells [97]; this system is not useful for routine microbiological diagnosis. Traditionally, diagnosis has relied on direct microscopic visualization of Pneumocystis in induced sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage specimens, and transbronchial or open lung biopsy specimens (Figure 2). Both conventional polychrome stains and immunofluorescent staining via monoclonal antibodies to Pneumocystis, also known as direct immunofluorescent antibodies (DFA), are employed. Conventional stains include Gomori methenamine silver (GMS), toluidine-blue O, calcofluor white and Gram–Weigert, which stain the cell wall of the cysts. Other available stains (Giemsa, Diff-Quik, and Wright) detect the sporozoites and trophozoites but do not stain the cyst wall. DFA performed on induced sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage is the diagnostic modality of choice; conventional stains are seldom used in resource-rich settings. Immunofluorescent antibody stains require less technical skill for test interpretation, stain both cysts and trophozoites and are more reproducible than conventional stains [98]. Older data suggested that conventional stains were adequate with the heavier organism burdens found in patients with HIV/AIDS compared to other immunocompromised patients [99]. In a multicenter study assessing the performance of three conventional staining methods (calcofluor white, Diff-Quik, GMS) vs. DFA for the detection of Pneumocystis in 313 respiratory specimens (mostly BAL), the DFA was most sensitive (90.8% as opposed to 50–80% for the conventional stains) but less specific (94.7% as opposed to >99% for the conventional stains) [100].PCR-based amplification assays for the detection of Pneumocystis were introduced in the 1990s, allowing for higher sensitivity when compared to DFA [101,102,103]. Data suggest that the superior sensitivity of PCR over DFA and conventional stains is notable with the lower organism load of induced sputum or oral wash specimens rather than BAL [102,104,105]. However, PCR cannot differentiate between infection and colonization, leading to higher rates of false positive assays; further, assay sensitivity depends on gene target selection [103,106]. In order to improve the specificity and positive predictive value of molecular assays, real-time quantitative Pneumocystis PCR (qPCR) assays were developed, with the rationale that the detection of a higher organism burden would be associated with true infection as opposed to colonization [107]. Some studies have proposed cut-off values of >1450 or >1900 pathogens/mL for the diagnosis of PJP, with positive predictive values of 98% and 100%, respectively [108,109]. However, these cut-offs are not standardized, and prospective studies are needed to validate such results. Some experts recommend using P. jirovecii qPCR as an adjunct in conjunction with microscopy on BAL to increase the diagnostic yield [110,111].In several small retrospective cohorts, next-generation sequencing enables the diagnosis of co-infections from the same specimen (e.g., CMV and PJP) [112,113,114,115,116]. A recent study investigated the diagnostic accuracy of the non-invasive blood cell-free DNA (cfDNA) PCR assay in a large cohort of immunocompromised patients. Using the DFA as the gold standard (“proven PJP”), the authors found that the Pneumocystis jiroveci cfDNA test was 100% sensitive and 93.4% specific in a small cohort with proven disease [117]. However, performance was less robust in patients with lower organism burdens. This modality may provide adjunctive information in patients unable to tolerate sputum induction, bronchoscopy or lung biopsy.Figure 2Approach to the diagnosis of Pneumocystis pneumonia. In immunocompromised patients at risk for Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP), early antimicrobial therapy is initiated based on clinical signs and symptoms, radiology, and available laboratory data [118,119]. Microbiological demonstration of organisms on bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) or induced sputum specimens should not delay treatment. Other processes, including co-infections, may alter the radiologic picture or mimic PJP clinically.4.4. Other Laboratory EvaluationNon-specific tests useful as adjuncts include the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and the serum (1,3)-β-D-glucan assay (BDG). Serum LDH is usually elevated (>300 IU/mL) in patients with PJP reflecting diffuse pneumonia (Figure 2). BDG is a non-specific fungal marker that has high sensitivity but low specificity for PJP and may be used as a surrogate (rather than a stand-alone) test for a suspected diagnosis of PJP. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 22 studies including both patients with and without HIV, the pooled overall sensitivity of BDG was 91% (94% in patients with HIV vs. 86% in patients without HIV). A negative predictive value of BDG at <80 pg/mL (the manufacturer’s recommended cut-off) was 95% when the pre-test probability was intermediate (50%) [118]. In a large study of patients with cancer and a clinical syndrome consistent with PJP for patients with a positive BAL PJP PCR, a BDG > 200 pg/mL had 100% specificity and 100% positive predictive value for PJP [119].4.5. HistopathologyThe classic histologic appearance of PJP involves foamy eosinophilic exudates within the alveoli. Rarely, Pneumocystis can trigger a granulomatous inflammatory response and the formation of necrotizing (or less commonly non-necrotizing) granulomas. Histologic findings of “granulomatous PJP” include Pneumocystis organisms found within the granulomas, epithelioid histiocytes and a surrounding rim of lymphocytes [120]. Most organisms are trophozoites (not seen with fungal silver stains). Macrophage dysfunction due to CMV co-infection or GCSF deficiency (in mice) increases cyst counts.5. Conclusions and Future DirectionsSeveral aspects of the pathogenesis of PJP remain poorly understood. These include the unknown natural reservoir of the fungus and the potential role of immunocompetent hosts as reservoirs or intermediate hosts of infection. With studies reporting nosocomial outbreaks of PJP amongst immunocompromised hosts, optimal monitoring and prevention strategies merit consideration. The landscape of primary and secondary PJP prophylaxis is changing. The COHERE study demonstrated the efficacy of virologic suppression for primary and secondary PJP prevention in patients with advanced, treated HIV [56]. In immunocompromised patients without HIV, tools are required for the individualization of prophylaxis based on an assessment of the net state of immunosuppression; such assays are under development. Newer immunosuppressive agents, including new biologics, cellular therapies, and oncology drugs, merit study. In solid organ transplant recipients, most transplant centers have institutional policies regarding routine PJP prophylaxis to prevent early onset PJP. However, further research is required to better understand the optimal deployment of prophylaxis for late-onset PJP during periods of increased susceptibility (e.g., after allograft rejection or CMV infection). The pharmacotherapy of PJP has not changed substantially in the past few decades; a phase III clinical trial (ReSPECT) is investigating rezafungin for the prevention of PJP in patients undergoing allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. An international consensus could be developed for standardized diagnostic criteria and prophylactic strategies for PJP as for other invasive fungal infections. The diagnosis of PJP requires a high index of suspicion in immunocompromised patients with compatible clinical syndromes and laboratory and radiographic findings.


Title: Development of the coronavirus reverse genetic system: Core technology for pathogenesis mechanisms research and vaccine/drug development

IntroductionCoronaviruses (CoVs), belonging to the Coronaviridae family in the Nidovirales order, mainly cause functional disorders of the digestive tract, respiratory and nervous system of humans and animals, and may even lead to death. CoVs are subdivided into four genera: Alphacoronavirus (α-CoV), Betacoronavirus (β-CoV), Gammacoronavirus (γ-CoV) and Deltacoronavirus (δ-CoV) [1]. In recent years, emerging and re-emerging CoVs have been constantly breaking out. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV), Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) all belong to β-CoVs, and have caused epidemics and pandemics [2,3]. Moreover, CoVs threaten livestock and poultry industries worldwide. Emerging porcine enteric coronaviruses, including swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV), porcine deltacoronavirus (PDCoV), and porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), have caused substantial economic losses to the pig industry with severe diarrhea and high mortality in piglets [4,5]. In particular, it has been proven that PDCoV has the potential for cross-species transmission and can infect various mammals and poultry [6–8], including humans [9]. Efficient vaccines and drugs are still lacking because of the continuous mutation of CoVs. Therefore, it is urgent to study the biological characteristics and pathogenic mechanisms of CoVs in depth to lay a foundation for the development of prevention and control agents. Reverse genetic technology provides a powerful tool to manipulate the viral genome and further study pathogenic mechanisms, which will contribute to the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines. There are several articles that review the reverse genetic technologies of CoVs for now [5,10,11]. However, some new emerging technologies have been exploited with the development of biotechnology. In response to newly emerging viruses and their rapid mutations, these novel reverse genetic systems can be used to rapidly engineer viruses with desired mutations for research on the pathogenesis and development of vaccines and drugs. In this review, we summarize and update the research progress of reverse genetics systems for CoVs and their applications in pathogenesis, tropism and cross-species transmission research, which will contribute to a better understanding of pathogenesis, provide new ideas and strategies for developing novel vaccines and drugs, and guide researchers to use the most efficient and convenient technologies to deal with newly emerging CoVs.Molecular biology of CoVsGenome structure and viral protein functionCoVs are composed of multiple open reading frames (ORFs) with a single-stranded positive-sense RNA genome of ~ 30 kb. Two-thirds of the genome encode two polyproteins pp1a and pp1ab. The pp1a and pp1ab are processed by viral proteases into 15 or 16 non-structural proteins (nsps), involved in viral replication and transcription [1]. The remaining one-third of the genome encodes four structural proteins: spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), nucleoprotein (N), and accessory proteins [12]. Additionally, the genome contains a methylated cap at the 5” end and an untranslated region (UTR), and the 3” end includes a poly (A) tail along with a 3’ UTR (Figure 1) [13].
Figure 1.Genomic organization of representative α, β, γ and δ-CoVs. The open reading frame 1a (ORF1a) and ORF1b are posited in the two-thirds of the 5’ end of genome. The structural genes spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), nucleoprotein (N), and accessory proteins are placed in the one-third of the 3’ end of genome. The genes encoding accessory proteins are shown as gray boxes. The schematic diagram below shows the structural and accessory proteins in the regions of α-CoVs (TGEV), β-CoVs (SARS-CoV-2), γ-CoVs (IBV), and δ-CoVs (PDCoV). The sizes and positions of accessory genes are drawn, relative to the basic genes S, E, M, and N. The size of the genome and individual genes is not drawn to scale. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).The CoV S protein is a type I fusion membrane protein located on the surface of viral particles and plays an important role in entering host cells [14]. The S protein consists of the N-terminus of the S1 subunit and C-terminus of the S2 subunit. The S1 subunit comprises the N-terminal domain (NTD) and C-terminal domain (CTD), both of which can act as receptor-binding domains (RBD) for binding to host cell receptors [15]. The S2 subunit contains a fusion peptide (FP) and two heptad repeat regions (HR1 and HR2) that mediate membrane fusion between the host cells and viruses [16]. Therefore, S protein can serve as a crucial target for studying viral pathogenicity, cross-species transmission, tissue tropism, and vaccine development. The CoV N protein is a highly conserved and phosphorylated protein that binds to the viral RNA genome to form the viral nucleocapsid. Additionally, it is involved in viral particle assembly, RNA replication, and mRNA transcription [17]. The M protein is the most abundant constituent of the viral envelope and is involved in virus particle assembly and budding [18]. However, M proteins must interact with other structural proteins to initiate viral particle assembly. The E protein is the smallest protein in the viral envelope and is crucial for the formation and release of mature viral particles [19,20].Non-structural proteins of CoVs are involved in viral replication and transcription, virion assembly, and immune evasion. Nsp3 and nsp5 cleave pp1a and pp1ab at specific sites to generate mature viral proteins [21–23]. Therefore, nsp3 and nsp5 are important targets for the development of antiviral drugs. Nsp12, an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), is highly conserved in CoVs and is the central enzyme in the viral replication-transcription complex [24]. In SARS-CoV-2, nsp7 and nsp8 are co-factors that assemble the RdRp complex to complete viral genome replication and transcription [25]. Nsp13 is an RNA helicase capable of unwinding double-stranded nucleic acid substrates, facilitating the replication of viral RNA [26]. Nsp14 functions as a 3'-5' exoribonuclease (ExoN) to avoid mismatches during viral replication [27]. In addition, it works as an N7-methyltransferase (N7-MTase), which can inhibit the host nuclear RNA export and nuclear mRNP maturation by generating 7-methyl-GTP to interfere with the function of the nuclear cap-binding complex. Thus, nsp14 can inhibit the expression of host genes, particularly interferon [28,29]. Moreover, nsp14 and nsp16 are involved in mRNA cap modification and contribute to the maintenance of viral RNA [30]. Nsp15 can degrade dsRNA as an endoribonuclease [31]. Therefore, these proteins collectively play crucial roles in preventing virus recognition by RNA sensors and inhibiting interferon expression.CoVs encode a range of accessory proteins, and these proteins are species-specific. Accessory proteins have been generally considered not to be necessary for viral replication in vitro [32–34], but play important roles in viral virulence. Various accessory proteins of CoVs have been proven to impede the innate immune response. ORF3a, 6, 7, and 8 of SARS-CoV-2 were involved in inhibiting IFN-activated signaling [35]. PDCoV NS6 could interact with RIG-I/MDA5 to impede their binding with dsRNA, reducing IFN-β production [36]. Beurden et al. rescued rIBV strains with deletion of accessory proteins (rIBV-ΔORF3ab, rIBV-ΔORF5ab, and rIBV-ΔORF3ab5ab) using reverse genetic system, and found the virulence of rIBVs in chickens was attenuated [37]. A mutant strain of TGEV with numerous deletions in ORF3 gene, named TGEV-VET-16, was isolated in Vietnam, which could cause mild enteritis and diarrhea symptoms in piglets. It is speculated that ORF3 is an important virulent protein of TGEV [38]. Moreover, accessory proteins are involved in modulating inflammatory cytokine expression. SARS-CoV ORF8b triggered intracellular stress pathways and activated NLRP3 inflammasomes [39]. However, PEDV ORF3 inhibited NF-κB activation through interfering with nuclear factor p65 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation, resulting in the inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and IL-8 production [40]. Research on viral proteins is necessary for a deeper understanding of pathogenic mechanisms, providing a foundation for the prevention and control of CoVs.Replication and transcription of CoVsLike other positive-sense RNA viruses, CoV genomes are used as templates to translate two large polyproteins, pp1a and pp1ab. Subsequently, pp1a and pp1ab proteins undergo autocleavage to generate nsps, among which nsp3, nsp4, and nsp6 assemble double-membrane vesicles (DMVs) along with some host factors [41,42]. Replication and transcription of the viral genome occur in DMVs by a replication-transcription complex (RTC), which is composed of the core protein, nsp12, and two co-factors, nsp7 and nsp8 [43,44]. RTC binds to the 3” end of viral genomic RNA (gRNA) to generate negative-strand gRNA intermediates through continuous transcription. Negative-strand gRNA intermediates are then used as templates to synthesize positive-strand viral gRNA, thus completing the replication of the viral genome [45]. Viral gRNA can also undergo discontinuous transcription to produce negative-strand subgenomic RNAs (sgRNAs) [46]. This discontinuous transcription process is mediated by the leader transcription-regulating sequence (TRS-L) located at the 5‘ end of the viral genome and the body TRS sequence (TRS-B) upstream of each coding gene [47]. RTC binds to the 3’ end of viral RNA to initiate the synthesis of sgRNA [48]. When the RTC recognizes the TRS-B sequence, extension of the nucleic acid chain pauses. Then, the RTC separates from the 3” end of the gRNA to allow the newly synthesized TRS-B of the sgRNA to form a complementary pair with the TRS-L of the genome, leading to the skipping of a large part of the internal genome [49,50]. Subsequently, the synthesis of -sgRNA continues through template switching, and -sgRNA will be further used as a template to produce positive-strand sgRNA for the translation of structural and accessory proteins [49]. Therefore, all sgRNAs share identical 5’and 3’ ends to form a set of nested RNAs [48].Cross-species transmission of CoVsCoVs can infect a diverse variety of birds and mammals, including humans, and have a broad host spectrum. However, according to the comparative genome and phylogenetic analysis, it was deduced that α- and β-CoVs originate from bat hosts, while γ- and δ-CoVs are more associated with avian hosts [51,52]. The underlying mechanisms of interspecies barrier breaking have recently become a hotspot, and they have been considered key for the prevention and control of CoVs. Studies have found that the successful binding of the S protein with different host cell receptors is the basis for cross-species transmission. For example, SARS-CoV can infect multiple species, including civets, cats, monkeys, ferrets, hamsters and human, and it has been confirmed to originate from bats [53,54]. K479N in the SARS-CoV RBD is the key mutation in the transmissibility of SARS-CoV from civets to humans, while the S487T mutation facilitates the transmission of SARS-CoV from humans to humans [55]. The development of structural biology has accelerated research into the cross-species transmission mechanisms of CoVs. RaTG13 is an animal-origin CoV with the highest homology with SARS-CoV-2 in its genomic sequence. RaTG13 RBD can bind to human ACE2 (hACE2), but its affinity is reduced by approximately 100 times compared to that of SARS-CoV-2 RBD. However, the affinity between RaTG13 RBD and hACE2 can increase to a level similar to that of SARS-CoV-2 RBD after mutation of six residues of RaTG13 RBD. Continuous attention must be paid to whether RaTG13 can break through interspecies barriers in the future [56]. PDCoV is a swine enteropathogenic virus that is capable of infecting calves, chickens, turkey poults, and humans, and can also infect cell lines derived from diverse species, including humans, pigs, cats, and chickens [6–8]. Studies have found that PDCoV S RBD can bind to APN (aminopeptidase N, the receptor of PDCoV) in the above-mentioned animal cells [57]. In addition, the binding regions of PDCoV RBD with human and porcine APNs are highly similar, and Y316, K379, E426, and W429 of the APN receptor are the key residues that affect cross-species transmission of PDCoV [58]. Cross-species transmission of CoVs will further accelerate the mutation of viruses and may lead to the outbreak of new diseases. Therefore, revealing the cross-species transmission mechanism of CoVs will contribute to the development of drugs that can interact directly with the viral RBD as a competitive inhibitor of the RBD and cell receptors. However, current studies mainly focus on the key residues in the binding of the S protein to host receptors by pseudovirus systems and structural biology techniques. Whether the above-identified key receptor-binding sites play the same role in live virus particles still requires further verification, which relies on reverse genetic technology.Reverse genetics systems for CoVsReverse genetics is a technique that involves manipulating the viral genetic material (full-length complementary DNA infectious clone of the viral genome) to rescue infectious live virus. Reverse genetic technology is indispensable in viral research. Viral genome can be edited at the DNA level by reverse genetic technology, so that to modify genome including site-directed mutations, fragment deletions, and insertions. However, the construction of full-length cDNA infectious clones for CoVs is challenging owing to the large viral genome and toxicity of viral sequences to E. coil. With the rapid development of molecular biology techniques, several experimental techniques have been established to successfully rescue recombinant CoVs (Table 1), including targeted RNA recombination, in vitro ligation, bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) systems, yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) systems, circular polymerase extension reactions (CPER), vaccinia virus vectors, and infectious subgenomic amplicons (ISA).Table 1.Advantages and disadvantages of reverse genetic systems in this study.Reverse Genetics SystemsAdvantagesDisadvantagesTargeted RNA recombinationIt can repair genetic mutations and deletions.1. It can not manipulate non-structural proteins.2. It requires two rounds of electroporation, and the selection and purification of recombinant viruses from different cell lines.Bacterial artificial chromosomeBAC plasmid is low-copy, leading to the high stability of exogenous sequences in E. coli.1. Limited by the restriction enzyme cleavage sites.2. It is impossible to completely avoid the toxicity of the CoVs genome to bacteria.In vitro ligationWithout considering the toxicity of the viral genes to bacteria.1. A large number of restriction enzyme cleavage sites need to be modified.2. ligation efficiency is low.3. CMV promoter can not be used.Vaccinia virus vectorWithout considering the toxicity of the viral genes to bacteria.Complicated manipulations and time-consuming.Transformation-associated recombination cloning in yeast1. The viral rescue process is short and convenient.2. High cloning efficiency.The cost of yeast cultivation is high.Circular polymerase extension reaction1. Without cloning steps.2. Manipulation easily.It is easy to introduce unintended mutations into viral cDNA.Infectious subgenomic ampliconsIt enables rapid rescue of viruses without cloning steps and in vitro construction of the entire genome.It is possible to generate genetically diverse viral populations.Reverse genetics system using targeted RNA recombinationTargeted RNA recombination is the earliest established reverse genetic system for CoVs, utilizing the characteristic of the 1/3 region at the 3’ end of the CoV genome that undergoes recombination at a high frequency during their replication [59]. This method was initially used to obtain recombinant mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) [60]. The Alb4 strain was a thermolabile mutant of MHV, with 87 nt deletion of the N gene. The transcript of the MHV N gene containing the leader sequence of the MHV was acquired by T7 RNA transcription in vitro. The transcript was co-transfected with purified Alb4 genomic RNA into 17CL–1 cells (Figure 2). Finally, a recombinant MHV Alb4 strain containing the complete N gene was successfully rescued by homologous recombination.
Figure 2.Reverse genetic construction strategy of MHV based on targeted RNA recombination [60]. The synthetic subgenomic RNA7 contains the MHV leader sequence, MHV N gene and 3’ UTR, and is flanked by the T7 promoter and Poly(A) tail at its termini. Repairing the deletion in Alb4 could be achieved through targeted RNA recombination with the Alb4 genome in 17CL–1 cells. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).Later, recombinant PEDV without ORF3 was successfully rescued. The method is as follows. First, MHV S gene transcripts containing the upstream and downstream homologous arms of the PEDV S gene were electroporated into Vero cells, which were then infected with PEDV. Mouse L cells were then co-cultured with Vero cells to screen for recombinant mPEDV. In the second stage, the transcripts containing the upstream and downstream homologous arms of the PEDV S-ΔORF3 gene were electroporated into mouse L cells, and the mouse L cells were then infected with mPEDV. Viruses underwent recombination in the electroporated cells, and positive clones (PEDV-ΔORF3) were selected through Vero cells [61] (Figure 3).
Figure 3.Reverse genetic construction strategy of PEDV deleting ORF3 gene based on targeted RNA recombination [61]. The transcripts containing the upstream and downstream homologous arms of the PEDV S gene and MHV S gene were electroporated into PEDV-infected Vero cells. The infected Vero cells were overlaid onto L cells to generate recombinant mPEDV virus. Then, the transcripts containing upstream and downstream homologous arms of the PEDV S-ΔORF3 gene were electroporated into mPEDV-infected L cells. The infected L cells were overlaid onto Vero cells to obtain recombinant PEDV-ΔORF3 virus. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).Targeted RNA recombination technology can repair genetic mutations and deletions as well as introduce genomic modifications into the genome. However, recombination of CoVs mainly occurs in the 1/3 region of the 3’ end of the genome, making it impossible to manipulate non-structural proteins. Additionally, the protocol of the method is relatively complicated because it requires two rounds of electroporation and the selection and purification of recombinant viruses from different cell lines.Reverse genetics system based on bacterial artificial chromosomeBacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) is a synthetic vector based on Escherichia coli (E. coli) F-factor that is capable of carrying DNA inserts of up to 300 kb [62]. The strictly replication-controlled E. coli F-factor ensures only one to two copies of BAC per cell, which stabilizes large DNA inserts and minimizes the toxicity of CoV sequences in bacteria.In 2000, the first full-length cDNA infectious clone of CoV was constructed based on the BAC system. The specific steps are as follows: The transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) genome was divided into five fragments based on the distribution of restriction sites. Meanwhile, the Cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter was added at the 5’ end of the TGEV genome, the Hepatitis Delta virus ribozyme (HdvRz) and bovine growth hormone (BGH) terminator sequence was inserted behind the viral poly (A) tail to precisely obtain the 3’ end of the viral genome sequence. Subsequently, DNA fragments of TGEV were cloned into the BAC plasmid to obtain full-length cDNA infectious clones, which were then transfected into susceptible cells to rescue TGEV [63] (Figure 4).
Figure 4.Reverse genetic construction strategy for TGEV based on BAC vector [63]. The TGEV genome was amplified as five DNA fragments by RT-PCR. And the TGEV cDNA was flanked by the CMV promoter at 5’ end, and flanked by the poly(A) tail, the HdvRz and the BGH terminator at 3' end. Then, the DNA fragments was ligated to pBelobac11 to obtain the infectious TGEV clone plasmid. Then the plasmid was transfected into susceptible cells to rescue virus. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).Subsequently, more and more CoVs have been constructed using BAC systems, including SARS-CoV, human coronavirus OC43 (HCoV-OC43), feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIPV), MERS-CoV, PEDV, SARS-CoV-2 [64–69]. In 2019, Qi et al. used CRISPR/Cas9 technology to optimize the BCA system and successfully rescued a stable passaging recombinant rAJ1102-ΔORF3-EGFP, providing an effective platform for manipulation of the PEDV genome [70]. However, the BAC system requires many mutations to obtain a sufficient number of restriction sites. In addition, it is infeasible to assemble the full-length cDNA of CoV into a BAC vector in one step. Thus, plasmid intermediates must be constructed to obtain full-length infectious clones through segmented cloning. Moreover, there is a risk of failure in rescuing the virus because of the toxicity of certain DNA fragments to E. coli.Reverse genetics system based on in vitro ligationThe reverse genetics system based on in vitro ligation involves ligation of multiple cDNA fragments in vitro to generate full-length viral cDNA. Yount et al. successfully created a full-length TGEV infectious clone using this strategy [71]. The TGEV genome was divided into five DNA subclones, each flanked by the BglI restriction site. In addition, a T7 promoter was inserted at the 5’ end of fragment A, and a poly (A) tail and its downstream NotI restriction site were engineered at the 3’ end of fragment F (Figure 5). The ligated full-length DNA was used as a template for in vitro transcription using T7 RNA polymerase to generate capped full-length RNA transcripts. The presence of the N protein can increase the efficiency of rescue recombinant viruses [71]. Therefore, full-length RNA transcripts of TGEV and capped N gene transcripts were co-electroporated into cells to rescue TGEV. Subsequently, Yount et al. obtained MHV infectious clones using type IIS restriction endonucleases [72]. Unlike the BglI restriction sites, the enzymes can recognize non-palindromic sequences and cleave outside their recognition sequence to produce cohesive ends and discard restriction sites.
Figure 5.Reverse genetic technology for TGEV based on in vitro ligation [71]. The TGEV genome was divided into five DNA fragments (A-E). The T7 promoter was inserted at the 5' end of the fragment A, and a poly (A) tail at the 3' end of the fragment E. The unique BglI restriction sites were flanked at the junctions of each cDNA fragment by the primer-mediated PCR mutagenesis. in vitro ligation was performed to obtain the full-length cDNA, which was further used as a template for in vitro transcription. The obtained full-length RNA transcripts were electroporated into cells to rescue TGEV. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).In addition to TGEV and MHV, other coronaviruses, such as infectious bronchitis virus (IBV), human coronavirus strain NL63 (HCoV-NL63), SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, PEDV, and SARS-CoV-2 have been successfully rescued by in vitro ligation [73–79]. This strategy can manipulate the entire viral genome and construct full-length infectious clones without constructing plasmid intermediates containing viral genome segments, thereby avoiding the instability of coronavirus toxicity genes in bacteria. However, the in vitro ligation strategy requires complicated manipulations before electroporation, including enzymatic digestion of subclones, in vitro ligation of DNA fragments, and purification of full-length cDNA. In addition, the T7 transcription system may lead to RNA mismatch due to the instability of RNA polymerase and RNA degradation during the RNA purification process [80].Reverse genetics system based on vaccinia virus vectorPoxvirus vectors, especially vaccinia virus vectors, can clone at least 25 kb of foreign DNA [81]. There was no difference in infectivity, growth kinetics, or stability between the recombinant vaccinia virus and parental virus. Merchlinsky et al. constructed vNotI/tk vaccinia virus vectors containing a single restriction site designed to clone the full-length cDNA of CoVs, thereby avoiding the construction of plasmid intermediates carrying partial genomic cDNA [82].Casais et al. utilized a vaccinia virus vector to successfully rescue recombinant IBV. First, cDNAs covering the entire IBV genome containing a T7 promoter and a poly(A) tail were assembled in vitro and ligated to vNotI/tk vaccinia virus DNA that had been cleaved by NotI. The recombinant DNA was transfected into Fowlpox virus-infected CV-1 cells to rescue the recombinant vaccinia virus. The recombinant vaccinia virus DNA was purified and cleaved using ASCI or SalI enzyme to obtain IBV cDNA. Finally, capped RNA transcripts obtained using T7 RNA polymerase in vitro were transfected into CK cells to rescue recombinant IBV [83] (Figure 6). Subsequently, other CoVs, such as HCoV-229E, MHV, FIPV, and SARS-CoV, have been successfully rescued using vaccinia virus vectors [84–87].
Figure 6.Reverse genetic technology for IBV based on poxvirus vectors [83]. The IBV genome was divided into three fragments (F1–F3), which were then used to construct three plasmids. The T7 promoter was added to the 5' end of F1, and a poly (A) tail was added to the 3' end of F3. These plasmids were digested by the enzymes shown in the figure, and then were ligated to obtain the full-length IBV cDNA using the T4 ligase. The acquired ligation products were ligated into the linearized genome of vaccinia virus vector vNoti/tk digested by NotI to acquire the recombinant vaccinia virus. After linearization of the vaccinia virus genome by NotI digestion, the IBV cDNA was obtained. Finally, the infectious mRNA that was transcribed through in vitro transcription was electroporated into cells to rescue IBV. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).There are several significant advantages of this approach: 1) incorrect nucleotide changes introduced by RT-PCR can be repaired by vaccinia virus-mediated homologous recombination [85,87]; and 2) vaccinia virus replicates in the cytoplasm of host cells, which can reduce the risk of RNA degradation and maintain the stability of foreign genes. 3) Toxicity of CoV cDNAs sequences in bacterial plasmids was avoided. However, purification and screening of the recombinant vaccinia virus may take more time during virus rescue.Reverse genetics system based on transformation-associated recombination cloning in yeastThe yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) is a vector capable of cloning DNA fragments of up to 400 kb, which can stably replicate and express in yeast cells. Transformation-associated recombination (TAR) cloning exploits the ability of yeast to efficiently perform homologous recombination [88]. In TAR cloning, overlapping viral DNA fragments and linearized TAR cloning vector overlapping the 5’ and 3’ ends of the viral DNA fragments were transformed into Saccharomyces cerevisiae to obtain YAC containing the full-length viral genome. The assembled full-length cDNA contained a T7 or CMV promoter at the 5'end and a unique cleavage site downstream of the poly(A) tail at the 3’ end [89].Our laboratory has constructed PDCoV successfully and rapidly using TAR cloning. They acquired six overlapping DNA fragments that covered the PDCoV genome and linearized the TAR cloning vector. The correct assembly of YAC containing the full-length PDCoV genome was obtained using TAR cloning. They then linearized the YACs using ASCI and used T7 RNA polymerase for in vitro transcription to generate capped infectious RNA (Figure 7). The viral RNA transcripts together with the mRNA of the PDCoV N protein were then co-electroporated into LLC-PK1 cells to rescue the recombinant virus [90]. Moreover, Thao et al. also cloned several other CoVs (SARS-CoV-2, MHV, HCoV-229E, HCoV-HKU1, and MERS-CoV) and viruses from other families, such as ZIKA virus (family Flaviviridae) and human respiratory syncytial virus (family Pneumoviridae) [91].
Figure 7.Reverse genetic technology for PDCoV based on yeast TAR cloning [90]. The PDCoV genome was amplified as six overlapping fragments by RT-PCR (A-F). The T7 promoter was added at the5' end of fragment A, and a poly (A) tail and ASCI restriction sites were followed by the fragment F. Then, these fragments and the linearized TAR cloning vector were assembled into the correct assembly of YAC through TAR cloning in yeast. The YAC plasmids were linearized for in vitro transcription. Finally, the infectious mRNA was electroporated into cells to rescue PDCoV. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).The T7 promoter, derived from the T7 phage, specifically recognized and bound by T7 RNA polymerase. It is the most widely used promoter in E. coli system [92]. However, T7 RNA polymerase does not exist in most host cells. It is necessary to use T7 RNA polymerase in vitro to achieve the transcription. CMV promoter is a highly effective promoter for recombinant proteins expression in mammalian cells [92]. Utilizing CMV promoter can directly transfect the plasmid into host susceptible cells, avoiding the in vitro transcription step or co-culturing the T7 RNA polymerase expressing cells (BSR-T7 and BHK-T7) with susceptible cells. Meanwhile, the efficiency of DNA transfection is higher than RNA electroporation. Thus, CMV promoter greatly improved the virus rescue efficiency and reduced the cost. Cao et al. successfully constructed an infective cDNA of feline coronavirus (FCoV) by replacing the T7 promoter with the CMV promoter to make it more convenient [93].Yeast-based TAR cloning can rapidly generate full-length cDNA for large RNA viruses and possesses superior cloning efficiency in reassembling fragments. In addition, compared to bacteria, yeast is less sensitive to viral toxic sequences, resulting in a high survival rate of the recombinant virus. The entire construction process takes only approximately a week, without tedious cloning processes. However, the cost of yeast cultivation is higher than that of bacteria cultivation.Reverse genetics system based on circular polymerase extension reactionCircular polymerase extension reaction (CPER) is a PCR-based and bacterium-free strategy for the assembly of infectious cDNAs. Edmonds et al. successfully obtained full-length infectious flavivirus cDNA using CPER [94]. Recently, CPER was used to generate infectious clones of SARS-CoV-2 [95,96]. PCR was performed to amplify overlapping fragments encompassing the entire SARS-CoV-2 genome using high-fidelity DNA polymerase. There was a linker fragment containing an overlapping sequence with the 3’ UTR, a poly(A) tail, an HdvRz sequence to obtain the authentic 3’ end of the viral genome sequence, a BGH sequence for transcription termination, a CMV promoter for in vivo transcription of viral RNA, and an overlapping sequence with the 5’ UTR of SARS-CoV-2. Then, circular full-length viral cDNA was obtained using CPER to assemble these fragments, which were directly transfected into susceptible cells to rescue the virus without purification [95,96] (Figure 8).
Figure 8.Reverse genetic technology for SARS-CoV-2 based on CPER [95,96]. The SARS-CoV-2 genome was divided into six overlapping fragments (F1-F6). A linker fragment contains an overlapping sequence with the 3’ UTR, a poly(A) tail, HdvRz, a BGH terminator, the CMV promoter and an overlapping sequence with the 5’ UTR of SARS-CoV-2. The linker sequence and overlapping DNA fragments were assembled through CPER to generate circular full-length viral cDNA. Then, the CPER assembly was transfected into susceptible cells to rescue SARS-CoV-2. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).The CPER method can manipulate large viral genomes easily and rapidly and does not require plasmid DNA propagation in bacteria/yeast or in vitro RNA transcription. However, the efficiency and accuracy of cDNA clone generation are unstable because unpredictable mutations may be introduced into the DNA products during the PCR process.Reverse genetics system based on infectious subgenomic ampliconsInfectious subgenomic amplicons (ISA) are a simple and rapid reverse genetics technology for generating recombinant infectious RNA viruses directly from cDNA without additional cloning or in vitro construction of the entire RNA. Several overlapping DNA fragments are transfected into susceptible cells, and the complete cDNA can be assembled automatically to produce viral RNA genomes through cellular machinery. The generation of infectious viruses can be accomplished within days by ISA [97].This method was initially developed for viruses with relatively short RNA genomes, such as the flaviviruses. Recently, Mélade et al. successfully rescued SARS-CoV-2 infectious clone using the ISA method. Eight overlapping DNA fragments (F1–F8) were designed and amplified using PCR (Figure 9). The CMV promoter was added to the 5” end of F1, and a sequence including HdvRz followed by the simian virus 40 polyadenylation signal (SV40pA) was added to the 3” end of F8. After transfection of these DNA fragments into BHK-21 cells and two passages in Vero E6 cells, infectious particles of SARS-CoV-2 were produced [98]. Mélade et al. further verified the practicality of the ISA method for reconstructing the FCoV and SARS-CoV-2 variants.
Figure 9.Reverse genetic technology for SARS-CoV-2 based on ISA [98]. The SARS-CoV-2 genome covered eight overlapping fragments (F1-F8). The CMV promoter was inserted to the 5’end of F1, and the HdvRz and SV40pA were added to the 3’ end of F8. Then, these cDNA fragments were transfected into BHK-21 cells, and the infected BHK-21 cells were passaged on Vero E6 cells to acquire infectious viruses.However, PCR amplification may introduce unpredictable nucleotide mutations into the viral sequence. Driouich et al. improved this method by constructing intermediate plasmids containing overlapping DNA fragments of the viral genome. These plasmids were then digested and the DNA fragments were transfected into cells to generate infectious viruses (Figure 10) [99]. This modified method can produce engineered viruses with lower genetic diversity and retains the advantages of the ISA method, including rapidity, flexibility, and versatility.
Figure 10.Reverse genetic technology for SARS-CoV-2 based on ISA using digested plasmids [99]. Schematic representation of digested plasmids were shown in the figure. The fragments were cloned into the plasmids. After digestion with specific enzymes at unique restriction sites avr ii and NotI, the digested fragments were obtained, and then they were transfected into susceptible cells to rescue infectious viruses. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).Recently, Kipfer et al. designed a platform using high-fidelity DNA polymerases and optimized PCR conditions to enhance the integrity and fidelity of the viral genome sequences. This technology can directly rescue viruses from clinical isolates by adding a linker fragment carrying all expression elements required for intracellular transcription and replication: poly (A) tail, HdvRz, SV40pA downstream of the 3’ UTR, and CMV promoter upstream of the 5’ UTR (Figure 11). The 5’ and 3’ termini of the linking fragment were flanked by homologous regions, resulting in recombination with viral genome fragments through intracellular recombination. Therefore, viral RNA can serve directly as a template for the rescue of mutant viruses. In addition, the system has been proven to successfully rescue viruses from various cells using different transfection approaches, making it highly efficient and broadly applicable [100].
Figure 11.Reverse genetic technology for SARS-CoV-2 based on ISA using the linker fragment [100]. Schematic representation of the linker fragment was shown in the figure. The linker fragment contains, from left to right, poly(A) tail, HdvRz, SV40pA downstream of the 3’ UTR, and CMV promoter upstream of the 5’ UTR. SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragments and the linker fragment were transfected into susceptible cells to rescue infectious viruses. This figure was created by BioRender.com accessed on 17 May 2025 (BioRender, Toronto, on, Canada).Application for reverse genetics system in coronavirus researchResearch on the pathogenesis of CoVsReverse genetic technology can be used to manipulate the genome of CoVs, which will contribute to understanding the function of viral proteins and clarifying their pathogenesis.Continuous passage of CoVs into cells leads to attenuation of viral virulence. Reverse genetic technology can be used to explore this mechanism. Hou et al. obtained a low-pathogenic PEDV strain (PC177) by serial passage of virulent PC21A in Vero cells. Compared to PC21A, PC117 contains a 197-aa deletion in the N-terminal domain of the S protein. Thus, we deleted the same 197-aa of the PC22A strain to generate icPC22A-S1Δ197. Compared to icPC22A, the virulence of icPC22A-S1Δ197 was attenuated in newborn piglets, as characterized by no mortality, milder diarrhea, and lower titers of viral shedding [101]. In addition, Suzuki et al. rescued chimeric viruses (rPEDVGFP-S-OKN1 and rPEDVGFP-S1-OKN) by substituting the S and S1 genes of rPEDVGFP-CV777 with the corresponding gene from the highly virulent PEDV strain OKN-1/JPN/2013. The recombinant strains showed severe clinical symptoms in piglets, similar to OKN-1/JPN/2013 [102]. These data confirmed that the S gene is related to viral virulence. The furin cleavage site in the S protein is essential for mediating cell fusion. To investigate the effect of the furin cleavage site on the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV-2, Johnson et al. rescued SARS-CoV-2-ΔPRRA by deleting the furin cleavage site. The replication of SARS-CoV-2-ΔPRRA increased in Vero E6 cells, but its pathogenesis was attenuated in hamsters and K18-hACE2 transgenic mice [103]. Sasaki et al. also rescued SARS-CoV-2 variants carrying mutations at the furin cleavage site [104]. Hamsters infected with variants showed no weight loss, attenuation in the airway tissues, and mild inflammatory response in the lungs, demonstrating the critical role of the furin cleavage site in SARS-CoV-2 infection and pathogenesis [104].Reverse genetics technology also plays an important role in studying the functions of nonstructural proteins in CoVs. Jin et al. introduced mutations at the key residues of nsp12 and nsp14 to diminish the activities of RdRp, exonuclease, and N7-MTase, which decreased the quantity of sgRNAs and gRNAs, demonstrating that nsp12 and nsp14 play crucial roles in the genome replication and transcription of CoV [25,105,106]. Nsp1 can inhibit host gene expression, and many studies have explored the regulatory mechanisms of β-CoV virulence by suppressing host gene expression. However, the regulatory mechanism of α-CoVs nsp1 is not fully understood. Shen et al. found that a specific motif (residues 91–95) of α-CoV nsp1 plays a crucial role in inhibiting host gene expression. They then used TGEV as a model to engineer a mutant (deletion of residues 91–95) using reverse genetics technology based on CRISPR/Cas9. The mutant strongly reduced viral pathogenicity in piglets, indicating that nsp1 of α-CoVs is important for viral virulence [107]. Later, Niu mutated PEDV nsp1 at conserved residues to generate the recombinant N93/95A virus using the infectious clone of a highly virulent PEDV strain (PC22A). The mutant induced higher interferon expression and replicated at lower titers, indicating that nsp1 is a virulence-related gene of PEDV [108].The accessory proteins of CoVs are not essential for viral replication but play important roles in viral pathogenicity. To investigate the role of PDCoV NS6 in viral replication and pathogenesis, Zhang et al. manipulated a PDCoV infectious clone lacking the NS6 protein to generate PDCoV-ΔNS6. Recombinant PDCoV displayed markedly lower replication efficiency, indicating that the NS6 protein is related to PDCoV replication. Piglets infected with PDCoV-ΔNS6 did not show any clinical signs, suggesting that the NS6 protein is an important virulence factor of PDCoV [109]. The role of SARS-CoV-2 accessory proteins in its pathogenesis has also been studied. To understand the relationship between SARS-CoV-2 accessory genes and virulence, Bello et al. generated several mutants with deletions of accessory genes of SARS-CoV-2 based on the BAC vector and evaluated their virulence in K18-hACE2 mice. The results showed that the mutants with deletion of ORF8 (SARS-CoV-2-Δ8) or in combination with other proteins (SARS-CoV-2-Δ[6,8], SARS-CoV-2-Δ[6,7,8]) led to reduced lethality and lung histopathological lesions, indicating that SARS-CoV-2 ORF8 is a virulence gene [110].Research on tropism and cross-species transmission of CoVsThe S protein can bind to cell receptors and mediate viral invasion and infection; thus, it is the main factor affecting virus tropism and cross-species transmission. Casais et al. replaced the S protein of the IBV Beaudette strain with the corresponding region of the pathogenic IBV M41-CK strain, and produced a recombinant IBV, BeauR-M41 (S), which had the same cell tropism as M41-CK [111]. Later, Bickerton introduced the S2 gene of the Beaudette strain adapted to Vero cells into the genome of the M41-CK strain without replication competence in Vero cells and found that the recombinant IBV had the ability to grow on Vero cells, showing that the S2 subunit of IBV is responsible for cell tropism [112]. Similarly, Li et al. demonstrated that the S gene is the key gene that determines PEDV adaptation to Vero cells by exchanging the S gene of the rCH/SX/2015 strain adapted to Vero cells and that of the rCH/SX/2016 strain unadapted to Vero cells [113]. Porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV) is a naturally occurring mutant of TGEV without enteric tissue tropism. PRCV contains a large gene fragment deletion and mutations in the S protein, which suggests that the S protein of TGEV is important for enteric tropism. Subsequently, Sanchez rescued the recombinant virus by substituting the S gene from a respiratory virus (rTGEV-SPTV) into an enteric isolate (rTGEV-SC11). The recombinant virus only exhibited respiratory tropism and lost enteric tropism, further elaborating that tissue tropism is determined by the S protein [114]. Studies have shown that many SARS-CoV-2 variants have D614G substitution in the S gene [115]. Plante et al. obtained two recombinant viruses based on an infectious cDNA clone of SARS-CoV-2, one with D614 and the other with G614 in the S protein. Compared with rSARS-CoV-2-D614, rSARS-CoV-2-G614 replicated at a higher level in primary human upper airway tissues, and hamsters infected with the G614 variant produced higher infectious titers in the nasal washes and trachea, showing that G614 exhibited a stronger respiratory tropism [116]. Taken together, these data suggest that S protein significantly affected virus tissue tropism.Other CoV proteins also contribute to viral tropism. SARS-CoV-2 genomes with D614G are accompanied by a P323L substitution in nsp12. Goldswain et al. used the Wuhan-Hu-1 strain with a G614 background as the backbone to generate two rSARS-CoV-2 (Wuhan/G614/P323 and Wuhan/G614/L323) based on reverse genetics system. Wuhan/G614/L323 mutant showed higher abundance in relative viral RNA and protein levels of ACE2-A549 cells, inferring that nsp12 was involved in viral tropism [117]. MHV isolates JHM.WU were highly hepatotropic, whereas JHM.SD strains were non-hepatotropic. Zhang et al. rescued chimeric recombinant viruses by exchanging fragments of the genomes and identified that the hepatotropism of MHV depends on a combination of M, nsp1, and nsp13 proteins [118]. Meanwhile, rWU.nsp1K194R with a single amino acid substitution in nsp1 attenuated replication in the liver, while the reverse substitution (R194K) in the rSD genome replicated at a higher titer in the liver. Stokes et al. used a reverse genetic system based on a vaccinia virus vector to create several viruses with mutations in the MHV-A59 ns2 gene. The ns2-H46A and ns2-H126R mutants are highly attenuated for replication in the liver compared to the parental strain, which demonstrated that the ns2 protein of MHV-A59 plays an important role in viral hepatotropism [119].Reverse genetic techniques are necessary and vital important in studying the cross-species transmission of CoVs. The previous study has proved [120]. Edwards et al. generated an indicator virus (rSADS-CoV) by replacing the ORF3 gene with red fluorescent protein (RFP) gene. The rSADS-CoV can replicate efficiently in various cell lines from different species including pig, monkey, cat and human, even in primary human intestinal and lung cells. The results revealed that SADS-CoV has the potential for cross-species transmission and the risk of infecting human [121]. PDCoV strain OH-FD22 can infect poultry and shares high nucleotide identity with sparrow deltacoronavirus (SpCoV) ISU73347 and HKU17 strains [122]. Niu et al. generated two chimeric PDCoVs containing the S protein of HKU17 (icPDCoV-SHKU17) or the RBD of ISU73347 (icPDCoV-RBDISU) based on an infectious cDNA clone of PDCoV OH-FD22 strain (icPDCoV) [122]. Then, newborn piglets were inoculated with the two recombinant viruses or parental strain. Pigs in PDCoV-inoculated groups displayed clinical signs in the respiratory and intestinal tracts. However, the recombinant viruses both showed an attenuated phenotype in the respiratory tract and lost intestinal tropism, indicating the S protein plays a crucial role in cross-species transmission of PDCoV. MERS-CoV is a zoonotic virus from camels. Chu et al. identified nsp6 L232F substitution occurs in human MERS-CoV. To further investigate the effect of the nsp6 L232F substitution in host adaptation, a pair of isogenic recombinant viruses carrying nsp6-232F (rGD01-nsp6-232F) and nsp6-232 L (rGD01-nsp6-232 L) were rescued, utilizing a human clade B MERS-CoV strain, ChinaGD01, as the backbone. The rGD01-nsp6-232F mutant led to higher replication ability in the human respiratory tract, indicating that the nsp6 L232F mutation was an adaptive mutation relevant to human adaptation of MERS-CoV [123]. Besides, other CoVs, like SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 can also infect multiple animals [124–126].Application on developing antiviral drugsRecombinant viruses carrying reporter genes are important for high-throughput screening of antiviral drugs. PDCoV is a novel emerging enteropathogenic coronavirus that causes diarrhea and vomiting in piglets, leading to large economic losses to the pig industry due to the lack of effective vaccines and drugs. We have generated a PDCoV reporter virus expressing enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) using TAR cloning for high throughput screening anti-PDCoV drugs [90]. Fahnøe et al. constructed a full-length SARS-CoV-2 clone using a BAC system, and the ORF7 region was replaced by reporter genes GFP, nanoluciferasen (nLuc) and fireflyluciferase (Fluc) for the high-throughput screening of drug candidates [127]. SARS-CoV-2 nirmatrelvir-resistant mutants carrying GFP reporter gene were generated by reverse genetics technology based on CPER. rSARS-CoV-2- GFP was used to assess the antiviral efficacy of C5N17B, which was a candidate for anti-SARS-CoV-2 [128].Application on developing novel vaccinesOne of the most promising applications of reverse genetics systems is the development of live attenuated vaccines (LAVs). Compared to conventional methods, this approach has a higher production efficiency and a lower rate of virulence recovery by directly replacing or deleting virulence genes.The S protein of CoVs can induce neutralizing antibodies, which are an important factor in viral pathogenicity. Therefore, there is a need for research on novel vaccines. Hou et al. rescued a recombinant PEDV by deleting both the YxxΦ and KVHVQ motifs of the S protein in the infectious clone of the PEDV PC22A strain (a highly virulent PEDV strain) and found that the viral virulence of the recombinant PEDV was reduced in piglets [129]. Thus, inactivation of both YxxΦ and KVHVQ motifs of the S protein could be applied in the design of PEDV vaccines. Wei et al. developed recombinant IBV, rBeau-H120 (S1e), by replacing the S1 gene of the IBV Beaudette strain with the corresponding sequence of the IBV H120 strain. rBeau-H120 (S1e) remained non-pathogenic but had excellent propagation properties and immunogenicity, and was able to act as a vaccine candidate for the protection of chickens against the virulent IBV M41 strain [130]. Moreover, most IBV vaccines can only be produced in chicken embryos, whereas rBeau-H120 (S1e) retains its ability to grow on Vero cells. Thus, the costs could be greatly reduced. The E protein of CoVs plays an important role in the assembly and maturation of the viral particles. It has also been shown to inhibit the stress response of the host cells. Almazán et al. rescued the recombination of MERS-CoV lacking the E gene (MERS-CoV-ΔE) and found that MERS-CoV-ΔE is a replication-competent, propagation-defective virus, which is a potentially safe and promising vaccine candidate to prevent MERS-CoV infection [68]. Due to the crucial role of accessory proteins in viral pathogenicity, deletion of accessory proteins in viruses using reverse genetics techniques is employed to generate attenuated vaccine candidates. Menachery et al. demonstrated that the absence of four MERS-CoV accessory ORFs (ORF3, ORF4a, ORF4b, and ORF5) attenuated viral replication and pathogenesis based on a previously generated mutant (MERS-ΔORF3–5) using a reverse genetics system [78]. Moreover, they found that MERS-ΔORF3–5 has the potential to be a live-attenuated vaccine candidate because it prompts robust interferon and inflammatory response [131]. Liu et al. developed a SARS-CoV-2 live-attenuated vaccine candidate with deletion of ORF 3, 6, 7, and 8, which can protect against the WT-SARS-CoV-2 challenge and transmission. SARS-CoV-2-Δ3678 was highly attenuated in both hamster and K18-hACE2 mouse models, and elicited robust neutralization in hamsters [132]. Later, Ye et al. also generated three potential SARS-CoV-2 LAV candidates by simultaneously lacking two accessory protein ORFs (Δ3a/Δ6, Δ3a/Δ7a, Δ3a/Δ7b) using a reverse genetic system based on BAC. Among these, rSARS-CoV-2 Δ3a/Δ7b was completely attenuated in vivo. This can provide complete protection against SARS-CoV-2 challenge in K18-hACE2 mice. Moreover, the mutant was able to prevent viral transmission in golden hamsters [133].Research on the replicons of CoVsViral RNA replicons are self-amplifying RNA molecules generated by deleting structural proteins based on full-length infectious clones using reverse genetics technology [134]. The replication-defective or propagation-defective viruses retain the capability of genome or subgenome replication, but cannot produce infectious viral particles. Therefore, replicons provide a safer alternative to full-length infectious cDNA. Especially considering that working in biosafety level (BSL) 3 facilities to study highly pathogenic CoVs, such as SARS-CoV-2, is expensive and sometimes not available. Thus, replicons can be used in the BSL-2 laboratory safely.Jin et al. developed a SARS-CoV-2 replicon by replacing the S gene with a reporter gene in a BAC vector. The SARS-CoV-2 replicon led to robust replication in cells but did not produce infectious virus particles owing to the absence of the S gene. They found that the replicon was sensitive in detecting the antiviral effects of various known anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs [105]. Besides, Nguyen et al. rescued a SARS-CoV-2 replicon (pSARS-CoV-2-Rep) that lacked the coding genes for the S, E and M protein but retained the sequences essential for replication, such as the 5’and 3’ UTR and the N gene. Then, the nLuc reporter gene was inserted into the pSARS-CoV-2-Rep to generate pSARS-CoV-2-nLuc-Rep, which could replicate in Vero E6 cells. Furthermore, the nsp15 gene was removed from the replicon to generate pSARS-CoV-2-nLuc-Rep Δnsp15. After transfecting the pSARS-CoV-2-nLuc-Rep Δnsp15, the nLuc activity decreased significantly, indicating that nsp15 plays an important role in SARS-CoV-2 replication [135]. Thus, the replicon systems will facilitate screening antiviral drugs and studying gene function.Conclusions and future prospectsIn the last two decades, three zoonotic CoVs (SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2) have infected hundreds of millions of people and caused millions of deaths. In addition, emerging porcine enteric CoVs cause diarrhea, vomiting, and high mortality in piglets, posing a serious threat to the swine industry. Moreover, several emerging CoVs have been shown to have the potential for cross-species transmission, which threatens public health. Unfortunately, the high-frequency mutation and genetic recombination characteristics of CoVs contribute to the continuous generation of new variants, leading to a tremendous impact on disease prevention. Therefore, it is crucial to uncover the mutation, transmission, and pathogenic mechanisms of CoVs. Reverse genetic technology is a powerful tool for investigating the effect of viral protein domains and key amino acids on viral pathogenesis and replication. In addition, the continuous mutation and recombination of CoVs have posed difficulties for vaccine development. Reverse genetics offers a powerful platform for developing rational vaccines such as LAVs. Furthermore, it is possible to develop a recombinant viral vector vaccine that expresses foreign antigens derived from any emerging veterinary or zoonotic viral pathogens for the rapid development of new vaccines against prospective variants emerging in the future [136]. Moreover, the rescued viruses containing a reporter gene reconstructed via reverse genetics is a valuable screening tool for antiviral drugs. In addition to full-length cDNA infectious clones, replicons are safe and efficient platforms for screening antiviral drugs, allowing researchers to study on BSL-3 viruses under BSL-2 conditions. However, the artificially modified viruses obtained by reverse genetic technology have biosafety risks such as malicious misuse or leaks. Therefore, researchers must strictly comply with some laws and regulations to ensure that the biosafety risks are under control.In conclusion, the reverse genetic system will make significant contributions to the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines and the prevention and control of CoVs, taking advantage of their efficient gene editing capabilities.


Title: Molecular Pathogenesis of Human Immunodeficiency Virus-Associated Disease of Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium

1. IntroductionFour decades ago, the HIV/AIDS pandemic began. Global spread led to 75 million infections and 32 million deaths. Today, highly effective prevention strategies are available to reduce the likelihood of HIV transmission via sexual intercourse. Furthermore, antiretroviral therapy for people living with HIV/AIDS can reduce viral loads to levels that cannot be detected or transmitted. However, despite the availability of these highly effective agents, HIV/AIDS continues to be a lethal disease. HIV/AIDS was responsible for one death each minute in 2021; every two minutes, a young woman becomes newly infected with HIV. Likewise, approximately 200,000 cases of mother-to-child transmission are reported each year. Thus, HIV/AIDS remains an unsolved problem; additional new knowledge may help improve treatment and prophylaxis.The surface of the oropharyngeal cavity is covered with a multilayer stratified squamous epithelium supported by the lamina propria, which is a layer of fibrous connective tissue [1,2]. Stratified oropharyngeal epithelial cells from the parabasal to the granulosum layers have well-developed lateral adherens and tight junctions, indicating a polarized organization [3,4,5,6]. The lateral localization of adherens and tight junctions between neighboring cells of oral epithelium contribute to a physical barrier that protects the body from penetration by viruses and other pathogens [4,5]. The oropharyngeal mucosa also contains a broad population of adaptive and innate immune cells, including T and B cells, macrophages, dendritic/Langerhans cells (DC/LCs), and natural killer (NK) cells that are distributed within the epithelium and lamina propria [2,7,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,16]. Intraepithelial DC/LCs and macrophages in the oral mucosa are critical components of the innate immune system. These cells defend against pathogens that enter the body via the oral cavity [2,13,14,16,17,18,19,20,21,22]. Intraepithelial macrophages and DC/LCs are also antigen-presenting cells that are capable of activating an adaptive immune response. Thus, these cells may serve as “bridges” between the innate and adaptive immune systems [2,14,23,24,25]. In addition, oral mucosal epithelial cells express toll-like receptors (TLRs) 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9, which are critical facilitators of innate immune responses against numerous pathogens [26,27]. Intraepithelial oral mucosal DC/LC and macrophages originate from peripheral blood CD14+ monocytes [28,29]. Recruitment of circulating monocytes into the mucosal epithelium is mediated by monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), MCP-2, macrophage inflammatory protein-1 alpha (MIP-1α), and MIP-1β [30,31,32]. Expression and secretion of these mediators in the mucosal epithelium are modulated by multiple chemokine/cytokines, including interferon-ɣ (IFN-ɣ), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interleukins (ILs), including IL-1, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL10, IL-13, and IL-15 [14,32,33,34,35,36]. MCP-1 is secreted from the basolateral membranes of polarized epithelial cells [37,38]; the polarized release of MCP-1 may generate a gradient toward blood vessels that serve to recruit monocytes into the epithelium. Once they have transited across the endothelial layer, monocytes differentiate into macrophages and DC/LCs [11]. Further traffic of monocytes/macrophages, DCs, and T lymphocytes within the mucosal epithelium is coordinated by the formation of transient tight junctions between immune and epithelial cells [39,40,41,42]. Migrating immune cells, particularly DC/LCs, express the tight junction proteins known as claudin-1 and occludin. Transient association of these proteins with cell junctions promotes the migration of immune cells without disrupting epithelial barrier functions [39,41,43,44]. This allows DC/LCs to reach the mucosal surface [39,43]. The absence of epithelial junctions may reduce the efficiency of epithelial–lymphocyte interactions, thereby leading to dysfunction (i.e., little to no retention of interepithelial lymphocytes and DC/LCs and thus their depletion) [45,46,47]. Interactions of polarized mucosal epithelial cells with DC/LCs and other cells of the adaptive and innate immune systems are critical for maintaining oral mucosal immune homeostasis.The oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium and its intraepithelial and subepithelial adaptive and innate immune cells play critical roles in promoting protection against numerous pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and fungi. However, in HIV/AIDS, various chronic disorders can develop with a significant impact on the oral mucosal epithelium. These include inflammation, necrotizing mucosal ulcers, and malignant and nonmalignant lesions that may impair the barrier as well as the innate and acquired immune functions of the oral mucosa [48,49,50,51,52,53,54,55].Systemic HIV/AIDS is accompanied by the spread of cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 in the oral mucosal environment. There are several reports of viral DNA/RNA, cell-free HIV-1 virions, and tat and gp120 proteins isolated from oral mucosal tissue and saliva of HIV/AIDS patients [6,56,57,58,59,60,61,62,63,64]. HIV-infected DC/LCs, lymphocytes, and macrophages were also detected in the mucosal and submucosal layers of the oropharyngeal epithelium [6,56,57,62,63,65]. Electron microscopy revealed that HIV virions could be found within the tight junctions of the oral epithelium [62]. The presence of both cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 both around and within oropharyngeal mucosa may result in numerous changes that impair its innate immune and barrier functions. 2. Role of Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium in HIV-1 Transmission in Adults and ChildrenOral HIV-1 transmission in the adult population may occur during oral sex, in newborn children and infants during delivery and breastfeeding [66,67,68,69,70,71,72,73]. The rate of adult oral HIV-1 transmission has been estimated at ~0.004% per exposure (i.e., not a highly efficient process) [66,67,68]. By contrast, the rate of mother-to-child transmission (MTCT) of HIV-1 in the absence of antiretroviral therapy (ART) may be as high as 15% in Europe and 25–30% in Asian and African countries [74,75,76]. The oropharyngeal and tonsillar mucosal epithelium may express one or more co-receptors or non-canonical HIV-1 receptors that may facilitate virus binding and entry, including CC chemokine receptor type 5 (CCR5), CXC chemokine receptor type 4 (CXCR4), heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs), mannose receptor, galactosylceramide (GalCer), and T-cell immunoglobulin and mucin domain 1 (TIM-1) [3,77,78,79,80,81,82,83,84]. Results of studies featuring ex vivo adult and fetal/infant tissue explants revealed that HIV-1 transmission through the adult oral epithelium was less efficient than fetal/infant epithelial tissues, which supported rapid viral transmigration through the mucosal epithelium and infection of virus-susceptible intraepithelial and subepithelial cells [3,85]. The resistance provided by the adult tissues was primarily due to the presence of multiple epithelial layers and tissue stratification (20–30) with highly-effective tight junctions (Figure 1). The highly stratified adult oral epithelial cells limit viral penetration more efficiently than the less stratified fetal/neonatal/infant counterparts (i.e., with 3–5 layers) [3].Furthermore, adult oral epithelial cells express high levels of anti-HIV-1 innate proteins, including human beta-defensin (hBD)2 and hBD3. These cells also express secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor that inactivates intraepithelial virions and reduces oral transmission of HIV-1 [79,82,85]. By contrast, fetal/infant oral epithelial cells do not express high levels of these proteins, which may be among the factors contributing to the comparatively high rate of HIV-1 MTCT [79,82,85]. HBDs tagged with the HIV-1 protein transduction domain known as Tat were delivered to HIV-1-infected infant tonsillar epithelial cells, which facilitated efficient penetration and virus inactivation [85]. PTD-mediated internalization of these proteins in infant tonsillar epithelial cells was followed by their penetration into MVBs and vacuoles containing HIV-1. PTD also promoted the fusion of HIV-containing vesicles with lysosomes which led to the degradation of gp120 and p24 and viral inactivation [85]. Ex vivo PTD-mediated internalization of hBD2 and hBD3 into tonsillar tissue explants from infants also reduced virus spread from epithelial cells to CD68+ macrophages, CD4+ T lymphocytes, and CD1c+ DCs [85].HIV-1 internalization through the apical surface into infant tonsillar epithelial cells can be initiated by multiple entry pathways, including micropinocytosis as well as clathrin and caveolin/lipid raft-associated endocytosis [83]. An evaluation of HIV-1 transmission through polarized tonsillar epithelial cells revealed that approximately 0.05% of inoculated virions underwent transcytosis across the epithelium [86]. More than 90% of the internalized virions were sequestered in epithelial endosomes that included multivesicular bodies (MVBs) and vacuoles. Sequestration of HIV-1 in the endosomal compartment of tonsillar epithelial cells was observed both in the single layer of polarized cells as well as ex vivo in explants of tonsillar epithelial tissue [83,85,86]. Intraepithelial HIV-1 remained infectious for several days, although no virion release was observed [86]. Interactions of HIV-1-containing epithelial cells with activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells and CD4+ T lymphocytes led to the disruption of epithelial cortical actin and the spread of the virus from epithelial cells to the lymphocytes. IFN-ɣ and TNF-α treatment of tonsillar epithelial cells also induced reorganization of cortical actin and intracellular virion release [86]. The release of HIV-1 from oropharyngeal mucosal epithelial cells may result in the virus spreading into intraepithelial and subepithelial macrophages, DC/LCs, and CD4 T+ lymphocytes. This is the first step in establishing systemic HIV-1 infection. Mucosal macrophages, DC/LCs, and intraepithelial T lymphocytes, DC/LCs may then transmit HIV-1 across the mucosal epithelium into regional lymph nodes [87,88,89,90,91,92]. Oral transmission of HIV-1 may also result from paracellular virus penetration if the integrity of the oral mucosal epithelium is impaired. HIV-1 gp120 binding to GalCer can result in elevated levels of intracellular calcium and activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and PI3K signaling [93,94,95]. In addition, HIV-1 envelope protein gp120-induced activation of MAPK and NF-κB signaling reduced the expression of ZO-1, occludin, and claudin-1 in oral epithelial cells, leading to the disruption of tight junctions [96,97,98]; this may facilitate paracellular penetration of HIV-1 virions. HIV/AIDS-associated production and release of proinflammatory cytokines, including TNF-α and IFN-γ, may also disrupt tight junctions of oral epithelial cells and lead to paracellular penetration of HIV-1 [4,5].Oral epithelial cells may also support non-replicative HIV-1 infection and virus transfer to CD4+ T lymphocytes [99] and immobilize the infectious virions on their surfaces to facilitate their transfer to permissive cells [100]. Likewise, ex vivo HIV-1 infection of tonsillar explants can lead to a productive infection of intraepithelial and submucosal macrophages and lymphocytes [65,96,101,102].3. Manifestations of HIV/AIDS in the Oropharyngeal Mucosal Epithelium3.1. HIV/AIDS Reactivates Opportunistic Infections of the Oral Mucosa The oral cavity of a healthy individual maintains abundant flora, including many commensal and potentially opportunistic organisms. Inflammatory lesions and opportunistic infections are relatively infrequent, suggesting that the oral mucosa has highly efficient biological and immunological barrier functions [14,16,103,104]. The innate immune and barrier functions of the oral mucosal epithelium may become severely impaired in individuals with HIV/AIDS, which will permit the development of opportunistic infections. Herpes simplex virus-1 (HSV-1), Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV), and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) are common oral pathogens that can lead to various chronic disorders in the oral mucosal epithelium, including necrotizing mucosal ulcers and nonmalignant lesions [48,49,50,51,52,53,105]. All three of these viruses can infect children early in life via the oral mucosa and persist throughout their lifetimes [106,107,108]. Reactivation of EBV, HSV-1, and HCMV in individuals diagnosed with HIV/AIDS leads to viral shedding into various body fluids, including saliva and cervicovaginal secretions [55,109,110,111,112]. Numerous human herpes viruses (including EBV, HSV-1, and HCMV) were detected in the saliva of HIV-infected individuals despite the availability of ART [109]. These viruses can be transmitted to neonates and infants through maternal saliva and/or breast milk [106,113,114,115,116,117]. Oropharyngeal shedding of HSV and HCMV was also reported in HIV-infected children [118,119].3.1.1. Synergistic Contributions of HIV-1 and EBV to the Nonmalignant Oral Lesion, Hairy LeukoplakiaWhite epithelial lesions on the side of the tongue, a condition known as hairy leukoplakia (HL), are well-known oral mucosal manifestations of HIV/AIDS. These lesions, which feature epithelial acanthosis and hyperkeratosis without inflammation [120,121,122], are associated with high-level replication of EBV [120,121,122]. HL lesions consistently demonstrate severe depletion of intraepithelial LCs, suggesting the critical role of these cells in disease pathogenesis [123,124,125]. Ex vivo experiments targeting buccal explants and tongue tissue revealed that EBV infection occurs first in submucosal CD14+ monocytes. The virus then spreads via migration to the epithelium. This series of events will initiate a productive EBV infection within terminally-differentiated cells of the spinosum and granulosum layers [126]. Exposure of EBV-infected oral explants or EBV-infected monocytes with specific antibodies that target CC chemokine receptor 2 (CCR2) and MCP-1 prevented monocyte entry and blocked keratinocytes infection. Interestingly, EBV-infected B-lymphocytes played only a small role in EBV spread to keratinocytes in an ex vivo oral tissue explant model [126]. However, co-cultivation experiments performed in vitro revealed that infected B-lymphocytes may promote EBV spread to previously uninfected monocytes. Circulating EBV-positive monocytes are present in most HIV-infected individuals. This finding is consistent with a pathway in which EBV spreads from B-lymphocytes to monocytes. Infected monocytes entering the epithelium will then differentiate into macrophages and/or LCs. These cells will elicit a productive keratinocyte infection and thus promote the development of the characteristic HL lesions [126] (Figure 2). It is also possible that CD14-negative precursors of LCs may disseminate EBV within oral mucosal epithelial cells [127].Both EBV and HIV-1 can infect macrophages, monocytes, and DCs [65,128,129,130,131,132,133,134]. Circulating monocytes serve as reservoirs for HIV-1 infection [135]. Circulating monocytes in patients undergoing highly active ART (HAART) may harbor replication-competent, non-latent HIV-1 [128]. EBV-infected macrophages were also detected in healthy asymptomatic individuals. This finding suggested that macrophages may be a reservoir for this opportunistic pathogen [136].HIV-1 infection of monocytes may increase the surface transport of adhesion molecules and integrins, including the α5β1 and αvβ3 integrins [137,138,139,140,141]. The EBV envelope protein BMRF-2 uses β1 and α5β1 integrins as receptors to infect polarized oral epithelial cells [142,143]. EBV entry into monocytes may also be mediated by an EBV BMRF-2– integrin interaction because monocytes do not express the primary EBV receptor, CD21 [144]. Thus, HIV/AIDS-associated activation of surface integrin expression in peripheral blood monocytes may facilitate their infection by EBV. In addition, the HIV tat protein induces endothelial cell expression of intercellular adhesion molecule (ICAM), vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), and endothelial leukocyte adhesion molecule (E-selectin) [145]. The synergy between HIV tat protein and TNF-α detected in elevated levels in association with HIV/AIDS increases β2 integrin expression in monocytes; these responses may lead to active translocation of monocytes from the circulation into tissue sites where they differentiate into LCs [146,147]. This may lead to the migration of HIV-1 and/or EBV-infected monocytes from the circulation into mucosal sites, thereby initiating EBV spread from LCs to differentiated epithelial cells capable of supporting productive virus replication [126,127]. EBV BMRF-2/BDLF-2 facilitates virus spread between oral epithelial cells and establishes foci of virus-infected epithelial tissue [148,149]. This may promote epithelial cell proliferation and lead to the development of HL. EBV BHRF-1 delays or inhibits apoptosis of cells in the differentiated granulosum layers, which may permit enhanced proliferation of epithelial cells, thereby increasing the thickness and hyperplasia characteristic of the HL epithelium [150].HIV-1 infection of monocytes/macrophages and DC/LCs may impair their critical functions, including activation, maturation, antigen presentation, and interactions with T cells [151,152,153,154,155]. HIV and/or EBV infection of DC/LCs may ultimately result in their dysfunction. This may lead to the depletion of oral mucosal intraepithelial LCs, as has been shown for HIV/AIDS-associated HL lesions [123,124,125,156]. HIV-1 gp120 and tat proteins are also capable of disrupting epithelial adherens and tight junctions [96,97,98]. This may reduce the intraepithelial retention of LCs and lead to local depletion [39,41,43,44,157].ART for HIV-1 and treatments effective against EBV typically lead to the resolution of HL in most patients [124,158]. These findings indicate the synergistic roles of HIV and EBV in the development of HL. However, although the introduction of ART has reduced the frequency of HL, this lesion has not been completely eliminated [159,160]. This suggests that residual HIV-associated mechanisms may contribute to HL development. 3.1.2. HIV-Induced Disruption of Tight and Adherens Junctions of Oral Epithelial Cells Facilitates the Spread of HSV-1Herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 and HSV type 2 are both opportunistic infections that are frequently associated with HIV/AIDS [105]. HSV-1 reactivates and replicates in the oral epithelium of HIV/AIDS-associated immunocompromised individuals and can lead to oral ulcers, gingivitis, and necrotic lesions [55]. HSV-1 reactivation may occur despite ongoing HAART [161,162]. Although the increased risk of developing HSV infection may be mediated in part by HIV-induced immune dysfunction, they may also be associated with direct and/or indirect molecular interactions between these two viruses. HIV-infected LC/DCs, CD4+ T lymphocytes, and macrophages infiltrating the mucosal epithelium can release virions as well as the viral proteins, gp120 and tat. Interactions of virions and viral proteins with one or more HIV-coreceptors (i.e., CXCR4, CCR5, HSPG, and/or GalCer), TLR-2/4, integrins, and/or mannose receptors on epithelial cells induces the activation of PI3K, MAPK, TLR, and NF-κB signaling pathways, resulting in the expression of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IFN-ɣ, IL-1, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-13), matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs-2 and -9), and caspases (caspase-3 and -6) [6,98,163,164,165]. In addition, activation of these pathways will downregulate the expression and/or promote aberrant internalization and degradation of epithelial adherens and tight junctions.Prolonged interactions of polarized epithelial cells from the oral cavity with tat and gp120 can lead to the disruption of adherens and tight junctions via activation of the MAPK signaling pathway [97]. HIV-associated activation of MAPK leads to upregulation of MMP-9 and NF-κB which induces the disruption of adherens and tight junctions [98]. Furthermore, HIV-induced disruption of oral epithelial junctions facilitates the paracellular spread of HSV-1 [97] (Figure 3). The HSV-1 envelope glycoprotein gD binds to nectin-1, which is a cell adhesion protein [166] sequestered within the intercellular junctions and limits HSV access to mucosal epithelial cells [167]. HIV-mediated disruption of adherens junctions will liberate nectin-1, thereby promoting HSV-1 binding to gD. HSV-1 infection is substantially increased in epithelial cells whose junctions have been disrupted compared to those with junctions that remain intact [97]. Exposure of nectin-1 due to disruptions in adherens junctions may also accelerate the cell-to-cell spread of HSV-1 from oral epithelial cells infected to those uninfected. Exposure to anti-nectin-1 and anti-HSV-1 gD antibodies will result in a substantial reduction in the extent of HSV-1 infection as well as cell-to-cell spread. Collectively, these findings suggest that HIV-1-mediated HSV spread and ongoing infection are facilitated by HSV gD interactions with exposed nectin-1 [97]. HSV is latent in sensory neurons in healthy individuals with intact immune function [168]. HIV/AIDS may induce HSV reactivation in neurons, thereby leading to the development of mucosal disorders [161]. In addition, HIV-mediated release of nectin-1 from cells with disrupted adherens junctions may also promote the spread of HSV-1 from neurons to epithelial cells (Figure 3). Thus, HIV-mediated disruption of intercellular junctions potentiates HSV-1 infection as well as cell-to-cell and paracellular spread within the oral mucosal epithelium. This mechanism may contribute to the rapid development of HSV-associated oral lesions in HIV-infected individuals.3.1.3. HIV-1 and HCMV Mother-to-Child Transmission (MTCT) through the Infant tonsillar Epithelium Synergistically Promote the Spread of Both HIV-1 and HCMVDespite the availability of effective ART, 100,000–240,000 cases of MTCT of HIV-1 are reported each year [76,169,170,171,172]. Most cases of MTCT (40–50%) result from breastfeeding [76]. Breast milk may contain cell-free and cell-associated HIV-1 [69,70,71,72,73], which may initiate mucosal transmission of the virus via the child’s oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal mucosae [3,6,79,173]. Breast milk may also contain HCMV that has been activated in response to HIV/AIDS [174], which can promote the development of oral mucosal lesions, retinitis, hepatitis, esophagitis, pneumonia, encephalopathy, and/or gastrointestinal inflammation [175,176,177,178,179]. Nearly all HIV-infected individuals, including pregnant women, exhibit HCMV co-infection [108,180]. MTCT of HCMV can occur in utero via the placenta and during labor by exposure to secretions from the cervix and the vagina [119,181]. However, most HCMV MTCT is observed postpartum by virion transfer in infected breast milk and transmission through the oral and/or gut mucosal epithelium [119,181,182]. Almost all cases of HCMV activation in HCMV-seropositive, HIV-uninfected women occur secondary to lactation [183]. The virus can be found in breast milk for only a few weeks postpartum [184,185]. By contrast, HCMV shedding into breast milk of HIV-infected women may increase significantly during the postpartum period and can last for six months or longer. Persistent viral shedding can facilitate MTCT via the infant’s oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal mucosal epithelium [186]. Low maternal CD4+ T cell counts and high levels of HIV RNA in breast milk correlate with comparatively high levels of HCMV genomic DNA in breast milk [186,187]. HCMV transmission (perinatal and postnatal) may occur in as many as 90% of children who acquire the virus during early childhood [119,176,188,189]. Primary HCMV infection or disease reactivation in HIV-infected pregnant women may also contribute to the MTCT of HIV-1. Several groups have shown that elevated levels of HCMV in breast milk are associated with an increased risk of postpartum MTCT of HIV-1 [186,189,190,191]. Exposure to cell-free forms of HIV-1 or HIV-1 proteins gp120 and tat will lead to the disruption of the tight junctions characteristic of epithelial cells from the tonsils. This will also increase paracellular transfer through polarized epithelial cells from infant tonsils as well as ex vivo tissue explants. This will also facilitate HCMV spread within the tonsil epithelial cells [96]. Furthermore, HIV-1 gp120 and tat-induced activation of NF-κB and MAPK signaling in these cells increases the extent of HCMV infection. NF-κB activation is a requirement for transactivation of the major immediate early HCMV promoter and promotes the expression of viral IE proteins [192,193,194]. By contrast, MAPK activation is required for HCMV replication and the generation of viral progeny [195].HCMV infection of epithelial cells from human tonsils may also result in the disruption of tight junctions. This will increase paracellular transfer and thus facilitate HIV-1 spread into the mucosal layers [96] (Figure 4). HCMV-induced paracellular spread of HIV-1 in tonsil tissue also enhances virus access to macrophages, dendritic cells, and CD4+ T lymphocytes. In addition, HIV-1-enhanced HCMV infection via paracellular spread to epithelial cells will also lead to HCMV infection of tonsillar DCs and macrophages. Thus, HIV-1- and HCMV-mediated disruption of the tight junctions of the infant tonsillar mucosal epithelial cell tight junctions may impair their barrier function, thereby facilitating paracellular penetration and the initiation of MTCT (Figure 4). HIV-1- and HCMV-co-infected tonsillar explant tissues showed higher levels of target cell infection with both viruses than was observed in tissues infected independently with either virus alone [96]. These results highlight the synergistic effects of both HIV-1 and HCMV with respect to promoting infection. This synergism may result in critical contributions to HIV-1 and HCMV transmission via breast milk when both viruses are present [186,187] and can interact simultaneously with the infant/newborn oral mucosa.4. HIV-1 Proteins gp120 and Tat Promote Invasiveness of Both Human Papillomavirus (HPV)-Positive and HPV-Negative Neoplastic Oral and Genital Epithelial Cells HIV/AIDS may increase the risk of developing cancer. Results from recent studies have revealed that the incidence of HPV-associated oropharyngeal, cervical, and anal cancer is 6, 22, and 80 times higher, respectively, in HIV-infected compared to HIV-uninfected individuals [196,197,198]. HPV is the etiological agent of most oral-genital epithelial carcinomas [199,200]. Although anti-HPV vaccination strategies are effective in preventing virus infection, the value of this approach is limited in people living with HIV (PLWH) because most of these individuals have experienced multiple HPV exposures. HIV-1 may also be a risk factor associated with head and neck as well as HPV-negative oral cancer [201,202,203,204,205]. HIV may increase the risk of developing HPV-associated cancers by attenuating local and systemic immune responses. Moreover, HIV-associated epithelial disruption may promote HPV infection of oral and genital epithelial cells [6]. The addition of HPV-16 pseudovirions (PsVs) to the mucosal surfaces of disrupted tissues led to their paracellular penetration into the epithelium [6]. HPV-16 PsV entry into the basal/parabasal cells (i.e., the site of initiation of the HPV life cycle) was observed. These findings suggest that HIV-associated disruption of mucosal epithelial junctions facilitates paracellular spread by oncogenic HPV virions through strata spinosum and granulosum layers, leading to the infection of basal/parabasal cells. Initiation of this infection can lead to HPV-associated neoplasia. HIV-1-induced disruptions of the tight and adherens junctions in mucosal epithelial cells may also lead to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [206]. EMT, which is a physiologic process, regulates the development of cell lineage identity and cell differentiation associated with embryonic development [207]. EMT also promotes neoplasia, including the growth and metastasis of invasive epithelial cancers [208]. EMT associated with the development of epithelial cell cancer involves multiple steps, beginning with the loss of apicobasal polarity. This event may be followed by loss of adherens and tight junctions as well as critical cell-adhesive properties. Cells in transition develop a spindle cell-type shape. During the final stages of EMT, these cells will also express mesenchymal markers [209,210,211,212,213,214]. While in the intermediate stages of EMT, the cells may express both mesenchymal (i.e., vimentin) and epithelial (i.e., E-cadherin) markers, which are critical factors contributing to cancer cell invasiveness [209,210,211,212,213,214]. The dominant network involving the transforming growth factor (TGF)-β signaling pathway regulates EMT leading to cancer [215]. The mature form of TGF-β binds to TGFβ−R2 and promotes a signaling cascade leading to Smad family transcription factor complex activation. These events lead to the activation of several specific transcriptional regulators, including Slug, Twist1, and Snail. Activation will be followed by the upregulation of N-cadherin, fibronectin, and vimentin and the downregulation of E-cadherin [216,217]. Prolonged interactions (five to seven days) with HPV-16-immortalized anal AKC-2 and cervical CaSki epithelial cells with cell-free-HIV-1 virions and/or viral proteins gp120 and tat leads to the development of increased invasiveness and EMT [218] (Figure 5). Furthermore, adding these viral proteins to cultures of oral epithelial cells, including HPV-16-infected SCC-47 and HPV-16-negative HSC-3 cells, resulted in similar responses. While gp120- and tat-induced EMT resulted in the detachment of poorly-adherent cells, these same cells could undergo reattachment under appropriate conditions. Reattached cells co-expressed vimentin and E-cadherin. This result suggested that these cells had reached the intermediate stage of EMT [218]. Reattached cells also expressed stem cell markers CD44 and CD133 that may contribute to cancer-associated metastasis and invasion. Once E-cadherin expression was restored, and vimentin expression was inhibited, the HIV-induced EMT was reduced, as well as the invasiveness of HPV-16 immortalized anal epithelial and cervical cells [218]. Taken together, these results suggest that direct interactions of extracellular HIV-1 virions and/or gp120 and tat with neoplastic genital or oral mucosal epithelial cells may lead to the development of an EMT phenotype that accelerates the development of HPV-associated malignancies (Figure 5). Recent findings also suggest that the HIV-1 tat protein contributes to the induction of EMT and the increased invasiveness of HPV-negative cancer cells derived from the lung epithelium [219]. In addition, other studies have highlighted the impact of HIV-associated reductions in adherens and tight junction protein expression in both lung and intestinal epithelial cells [220,221]. Collectively, these results suggest that HIV-1 infection may promote the development of malignancy in both HPV-negative and HPV-infected neoplastic epithelial cells. 5. ConclusionsThe multi-layer adult oral mucosal epithelium expresses high levels of anti-HIV innate immune proteins hBD2, hBD3, and secretory leukocyte protease inhibitors that inactivate the virus and thus reduce the rate of oral transmission. By contrast, the oral mucosal epithelia of newborns and infants cannot efficiently prevent HIV-1 penetration because of its minimal stratification and inability to produce sufficient innate immune proteins. HIV-1 infection leads to EBV infection of circulating monocytes, followed by their migration into the oral mucosal epithelium and differentiation into DC/LCs. The spread of EBV from macrophages and LCs into differentiated oral epithelial cells may lead to productive viral replication and extensive cell-to-cell spread of virus progeny within the stratum granulosum of the oral mucosal epithelium, thereby initiating the development of HL. MAPK activation in oral epithelial cells by HIV-1 gp120 and tat leads to the upregulation of NF-κB and MMP-9, thereby disrupting tight and adherens junctions and facilitating HSV-1 paracellular spread. In addition, HIV-induced disruption of epithelial junctions also liberates sequestered nectin-1 and thus facilitates its binding to HSV-1 gD, which promotes HSV-1 spread within the epithelial cells. Disruption of infant tonsil epithelial tight junctions by HIV-1 and HCMV may impair the barrier function of mucosal epithelium and permit paracellular penetration of both viruses and the initiation of MTCT. Extended interactions between HIV-1 cell-free virions or the HIV-1 proteins gp120 and tat with HPV-positive and -negative oral neoplastic epithelial cells increase their EMT phenotype and invasiveness. Altogether, these studies show the molecular mechanism of the interaction between HIV-1 and other pathogens, including EBV, HCMV, HSV-1, and HPV, in the oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium. These interactions impair the barrier and innate immune functions of oropharyngeal epithelium, leading to the increased spread of these viruses within the oral mucosal environment and the progression of existing neoplastic processes of epithelial cells. Additional research may help improve treatment and prophylaxis for HIV/AIDS infection. New approaches could eliminate/reduce the reactivation and spread of opportunistic infections in the oral cavity and maintain the barrier and innate immune functions of the oropharyngeal mucosal epithelium


Title: Modeling of vertical transmission and pathogenesis of cytomegalovirus in pregnancy: Opportunities and challenges

IntroductionAmong its many roles, the placenta serves to protect the developing fetus from potential teratogens and microbes. Congenital infections can occur when the placental barrier is breached, allowing pathogens to enter fetal circulation and exert deleterious effects on growth, organ development, and even survival. Study of congenitally acquired infections has focused on the maternal-fetal interface, where pathogens derived from multiple sources including the bloodstream and reproductive tract cause disruption of the placental barrier and transmission across the fetal membranes, reaching the developing fetus (1).In this mini-review, we focus on vertical transmission of cytomegalovirus (CMV), a double-stranded DNA herpesvirus that is the most prevalent congenital infection, occurring in an estimated 0.6 to 6% of pregnancies depending on the population (2, 3). The virus can cause a spectrum of teratogenic effects, from asymptomatic infection to neurocognitive impairment, microcephaly, ventriculomegaly, and growth restriction, and is the most common nongenetic cause of sensorineural hearing loss in higher income nations (4, 5). Studies of basic placental biology have been used to decipher how and under what conditions CMV crosses from maternal to fetal circulation and how such effects can occur.The human placenta forms from cytotrophoblasts creating anchoring villi into the uterine decidua basalis beginning during the second and third weeks of pregnancy (6). Humans have hemochorial, villous, discoid placentas, in which fetal and maternal circulations are separated by a single layer of trophoblast cells, facilitating efficient exchange of oxygen and nutrients (7). Indeed, the placenta becomes the sole source of gas, nutrients, antibodies, and waste exchange between maternal and fetal circulation (8). This also renders the fetus vulnerable to potentially harmful substances and pathogens that are capable of placental crossing, especially through such a thin maternal-fetal interface.Current understanding of cytomegalovirus vertical transmissionTo understand how CMV breaches the placental barrier, it is first important to understand the basics of placental immunology. Maternal leukocytes lie within the decidua, and within the chorionic villi, fetally-derived macrophages known as Hofbauer cells are present (9). In the first trimester of pregnancy, about one third of decidual cells are leukocytes, which can be subdivided into uterine natural killer (uNK) cells, macrophages, dendritic cells, and T lymphocytes (both natural killer and regulatory) (9, 10). In humans, uNK cells represent the most abundant placental leukocyte in early pregnancy, diminishing in number by term, and under physiological conditions are responsible for spiral artery remodeling via disruption of vascular smooth muscle cells and extracellular matrix, critical steps for proper placentation (11, 12). In humans, CMV replicates in the decidua, and so it is unsurprising that the first line of defense against CMV are decidual CD8+ effector memory T cells and natural killer (NK) cells, with apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing enzyme catalytic polypeptide 3A (APOBEC3A) serving to curb viral replication (1). In the setting of maternal viral infection, uNK cells are largely responsible for limiting spread into fetal circulation, likely explaining the low rate of vertical transmission of CMV in the first trimester (Figure 1) (13). Indeed, uNK cells have been shown in co-culture experiments to efficiently eliminate human CMV-infected autologous fibroblasts using immune synapses (13). On the other hand, Hofbauer cells (CD68+, CD64+, CD32+, CD16+), upon encountering viral pathogens, become polarized and secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines to recruit peripheral immune cells to the site of infection, also inflicting damage to the placenta in the process and likely leading to a host-inflicted compromise of the placental barrier (14).As alluded to above, early pregnancy is a particularly immune-privileged time period during gestation, due in large part to the maternal innate immune system. In fact, following primary infection with CMV, vertical transmission of the virus occurs in 30–40% of cases during the first and second trimesters, with up to 70% of cases being transmitted in the third trimester (15, 16). The reasons why advancing pregnancy is associated with increased susceptibility to vertical transmission of CMV are likely multifactorial. Decreasing numbers of uNK cells in addition to CMV evasion of NK cell recognition via downregulation of MHC class 1 complexes and upregulation of MHC decoy UL18 on infected NK cells renders the placenta more vulnerable to pathogenic invasion (17).Experimental animal models of congenital CMV vertical transmissionOur understanding of the mechanisms by which viruses evades the cell-mediated immune response resulting in vertical transmission and human fetal infection has been greatly aided through the development of model systems. In terms of model organisms, three major animal models have emerged in this field of investigation: guinea pig, mouse, and non-human primate. The guinea pig model of congenital CMV infection came about after the findings by Connor and Johnson reported in 1976 that direct guinea pig CMV (gpCMV) inoculation in weanling guinea pigs resulted in high-titer infection in the salivary glands, thymus, and resulted in multifocal inclusion cell encephalitis with intracerebral inoculation (18). Like humans, guinea pigs also exhibit hemochorial placentation, although they utilize a labyrinth rather than villous strategy, with a dense meshwork of maternal and vascular channels (7, 19). Transplacental transmission of gpCMV in guinea pigs was subsequently demonstrated two years later, with successful fetal infection occurring in 24% of pregnancies in which maternal primary infection occurred during what would correspond to the second and third trimesters of human gestation (20). Since these foundational studies, investigators have used the guinea pig model to demonstrate that gpCMV enters host cells via a glycoprotein complex whose receptor is PDGFRA (21, 22).The gpCMV pentameric complex (PC) consisting of virion envelope proteins gH, gL, UL128, UL130, and UL131A has been the focal point in the development of a vaccine against human CMV (hCMV). Specifically, Schleiss et al. used the the guniea pig model of congenital CMV infection to show that a two-dose vaccine series with live, attenuated gpCMV (either genetically modified to lack PC or with intact PC) protected against maternal viremia compared to placebo (23). Importantly, the vaccine harboring the PC led to improved immunogenicity and decreased vertical transmission in the model (23). Another vaccination strategy has been to use purified gpCMV glycoproteins to provoke a host antibody response prior to conception (24). Despite these advances, we still lack a vaccine against CMV that is approved for use in humans to protect against congenital CMV infection.Understanding the pathogenesis of congenital CMV vertical transmission has been further aided by mouse models, which may improve our ability to engineer targeted and effective vaccination or treatment of the disease in humans. Like humans and guinea pigs, mice also display hemochorial placentation and like guinea pigs and other rodents, mice use a labyrinth rather than villi (7). Vertical transmission of murine CMV (mCMV) was first demonstrated in 1979, just as other animal models of the disease were coming into the arena. Chantler et al. inoculated young adult non-pregnant mice with high-titer mCMV intraperitoneally, then waited one year and allowed them to become pregnant before studying their embryos (25). They found that cultured embryonic cells contained mCMV particles and mCMV-associated histopathological changes.Unlike the guinea pig model, however, the murine CMV model has been limited back resistance to vertical transmission in immunocompetent mice. For this reason, an immunocompromised (severe combined immunodeficient, SCID) mouse model has been the staple for congenital CMV investigation in mice. For instance, Woolf et al. (26) performed time pregnancy in SCID mice inoculated with high-titer mCMV on embryonic day 0 (E0) or E3-E5 and demonstrated both transplacental cross of mCMV and characteristic fetal changes including microcephaly and growth restriction along with upregulated fetal cerebral interleukin-1alpha (IL-1alpha) expression suggestive of neuroinflammation. Despite its benefits at aiding to elucidate the pathogenesis of congenital CMV disease, the SCID mouse model of vertical transmission of CMV is limited by the immunocompromised nature of the host. In the immune-intact condition, the maternal immune response to viral pathogens relies importantly on both peripheral and decidual CD8+ effector-memory T cells, which likely serve overlapping and complementary functions of killing virus-infected cells and effecting a memory response, respectively (27, 28). Thus, the SCID mouse model of congenital CMV disease may serve as a good representation of infection under immunocompromised conditions (for instance, in pregnant women co-infected with HIV/AIDS or who are transplant recipients on immunosuppression), but likely does not recapitulate the complex interplay between host and pathogen in immunocompetent individuals.Approaching the human condition more closely would likely require a non-human primate (NHP) model of congenital CMV infection. Similarities between humans and NHPs with regard to pregnancy anatomy and physiology include both relying on hemochorial, villous discoid placentation, and having similar immune systems (7). While no NHP model of congenital CMV has yet been described, we do have a basic understanding of CMV pathogenesis in NHP in general, based on several seminal studies.Rhesus CMV (RhCMV) infects rhesus mecaques (Macaca mulatta), and thus this host-pathogen interaction has been utilized experimentally to model the disease in humans. Lockridge et al. (29) exposed heatlhy juvenile rhesus mecaques to oral or intravenous RhCMV and observed clinical symptoms, plasma levels, and immune response following inoculation. They found that inoculated animals exhibited splenic tissue that was polymerase chain reaction (PCR) positive for CMV DNA in all animals examined, and multiple other tissues (pancreas, ileum, kidney, lung, thymus, submandibular gland and mesenteric lymph nodes in one animal. In addition, a monocytosis was noted by 4 weeks post injection (wpi) accompanied by a decreased CD4/CD8 T lymphocyte ratio at 2 wpi. Further, anti-RhCMV IgG antibodies were first detected at 2 wpi, with a majority of animals exhibiting a response by 4 wpi and a peak of IgG titers between 10 and 25 wpi. Clinically, IgG avidity testing is used to temporally differentiate acute primary infection from distant primary infection. Low CMV IgG avidity indicates primary infection within the past 3 to 4 months, while high avidity excludes recent infection within the prior 3 months (30). In rhesus macaques, increased avidity was noted between 2 wpi and 25 wpi, consistent with findings in humans (29). Investigating the viral replication of RhCMV in rhesus epithelial cells, Lilja and Shenk (31) identified genetic loci implicated in viral entry and efficient viral replication. These studies aid in our understanding of CMV infection and pathogenesis in an immunocompetent postnatal host closely related to humans.While we lack a robust evidence base for congenital CMV transmission in NHP models, there are lessons to be learned from vertical transmission primate research related to other infectious diseases. For instance, Terzian et al. identified natural Zika virus (ZIKV) infection among two species of NHP, Callithrix and Sapajus species from Brazil (32). ZIKV infection induces both humoral and cell-mediated immune responses in NHP, and transplacental transmission of this virus in pregnant NHPs leads to fetal cerebral white matter lesions and periventricular gliosis as well as axonal and ependymal damage as measured histopathologically on autopsy (33, 34). This fundamental work in congenital ZIKV infection has led to a preclinical study in rhesus macaques testing sofosbuvir, a viral RNA synthesis inhibitor (currently Food and Drug Administration, FDA, approved for the treatment of hepatitis C), in an effort to prevent vertical transmission. Gardinali et al. (35) inoculated healthy, pregnant macaques with a viral suspension of ZIKV strain ES 2916/2015/ID 250 during the first and second trimesters of gestation. They then treated half the animals with sofosbuvir (or no treatment as control) and measured maternal weight, creatine kinase (CK) elevation, rash, and fetal death. They observed similar clinical courses, including weight loss, CK elevation, rash, and fetal death in both groups. The untreated group exhibited placental calcifications, with variable fetal manifestations from mild abnormalities to severe congenital ZIKV-associated defects (e.g. skull and thorax abnormalities) and fetal death. Immune phenotyping in untreated dams included high numbers of Hofbauer cells in untreated but not treated dams, and lower numbers of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in untreated compared to treated dams in placental samples, While the untreated group exhibited ZIKV RNA in placental samples, ZIKV RNA and replication were undetectable in sofosbuvir -treated dams. Importantly, sofosbuvir treatment protected four fetuses against ZIKV transmission, pointing to this pharmacological agent as a potentially viable option for ZIKV congenital infection prophylaxis, Whether similarly focused antiviral interventions would prevent spread of CMV in a primate preclinical model remains to be determined. These studies provide mechanistic insight into the pathogenesis of vertical transmission of viral vectors as well as suggesting how such infections may be prevented, yet more work will be needed to validate these findings in humans and to use these results for the development of targeted therapeutics.Placental organoids to model viral infectionWe have reviewed the most widely used model organisms for CMV vertical transmission and pathogenesis, highlighting the relative strengths and limitations of each (see Figure 2 for summary). One criticism of any animal model is that it can never fully replicate the physiology of human tissue. An emerging technology that goes beyond animal modeling and may be used to study vertical transmission of viral pathogens (as well as a myriad of other questions of mammalian pregnancy physiology) is the human placental organoid. Once the native microarchitectural structure of the human placenta was characterized and the technology to isolate and culture trophoblast cells became available, it became possible to design models of human-derived tissue of in vitro placentation. The first human trophoblast organoids consisted of a two-dimensional layer of villous cytotrophoblast and extravillous trophoblast cells (36). This in vitro system displays similar transcriptomic and DNA methylation profiles as compared to in vivo placenta, forms placental villi-like structures, and produces hormones and proteins much like the in vivo placenta (36). More recently, the same group of investigators has established a three-dimensional (3-D) human trophoblast-derived organoid (37). Using first trimester derived human placental tissue, these investigators dissected off chorionic villi, digested the tissue and deposited the digested tissue in Matrigel droplet, with organoids forming over the ensuing days (37).Independently, Karvas et al. (38) developed a trophoblast organoid model of the human placenta using human trophoblast stem cells (hTSCs). They found that hTSCs seeded into 3D Matrigel droplets form 3D organoids with similar tissue architecture and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) production as in vivo human placenta. These investigators finally exposed their 3D trophoblast organoids to the emerging pathogens ZIKV and SARSCoV-2 to test placental transfer. They found that both viruses were successfully able to enter trophoblast cells and produce key surface proteins, demonstrating tractability for modeling of human placental infection in vitro. A subsequent investigation employing human placenta-derived trophoblast organoids and dedicua organoids discovered that both types of organoids secrete cytokines and chemokines, and that trophoblast organoids constitutively secrete antiviral type III interferon IFN-l2 (39) To address the question of how hCMV is transmitted across the placenta and how the placenta responds immunologically to this invader, Yang et al. (39) infected trophoblast and decidua organoids with hCMV strains AD169r (GFP-tagged) and TB40E (mCherry-tagged), and found that while trophoblast organoids, representing the fetal contribution to the placenta, were highly resistant to infection, decidual organoids, representing the maternal contribution, were susceptible to infection, as quantified by high GFP and mCherry expression in organoids. These results imply a robust innate immune response by trophoblast organoids, and indeed the investigators identified differences in transcriptome profiles between trophoblast and decidual organoids, including a greater number of differentially expressed genes in response to hCMV infection in the former compared to the latter. In particular, hCMV induced H3Y1 (H3.Y Histone 1), KHDC1L (KH Domain Containing 1 Like), members of the PRAME family, and TRIM49A and B (Tripartite Motif Containing 43) in trophoblast but not decidual organoids, potentially explaining the relative resistance to infection in the former.This set of carefully conducted experiments demonstrates how human placental organoids can be used to dissect the individual contributions of fetal and maternal immune components to defense against viral pathogens, as just one example of the power of this tool. Altogether, these findings open up the possibility of in-depth molecular characterization of human placental response to CMV and other viral pathogens as well as potential high throughput drug screens for prevention of viral pathogen vertical transmission.While human placental organoids are a new technology with many potential applications, the limits of this technology must be contemplated. One potential drawback is that these organoids are derived from first trimester samples, and as mentioned above, hCMV transplacental transmission most commonly occurs in the latter two trimesters of pregnancy. Another potential limitation is lack of the maternal peripheral immune milieu, including circulating cytotoxic and regulatory T lymphocytes important in host response. It is also unclear whether trophoblast organoids retain any of the native uNK cells or fetal Hofbaur cells of the in vivo condition, calling into question whether this model could be used to study the host-pathogen interaction from an immunological standpoint. Thirdly, the integrity of the placental barrier at the maternal-fetal interface has yet to be rigorously tested in this model, leaving open the possibility of a “leaky” or disrupted barrier function in vitro. Thus, carefully designed experiments, perhaps co-culturing placental organoids with maternal immune cells prior to viral inoculation, will be needed if these organoids are to be used to model vertical transmission of CMV or other microbes.ConclusionIn summary, we have reviewed the current progress towards a model of vertical transmission of CMV, which have been used not only to better understand the disease, but also to provide clues for developing a treatment or even a possible vaccine. For instance, placental organoids can provide a platform for high-throughput drug screening to determine candidate compounds that prevent hCMV entry into cells, viral replication, or viral protein production. Further, in vivo animal models can be used to test safety and efficacy of candidate compounds for either prevention (e.g. vaccination or cellular entry inhibition) or treatment of acquired congenital CMV. While more work is needed to be done on this front, with no currently Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved treatment or prevention strategy for congenital CMV infection, our current tools and refinements in our ability to approach the in vivo human condition will likely allow us to reach these goals.


Title: Mixed cytomegalovirus genotypes in HIV-positive mothers show compartmentalization and distinct patterns of transmission to infants

IntroductionHuman cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the commonest infectious cause of congenitally acquired disability (Morton and Nance, 2006). Between 0.2% and 2% of all live births have congenital CMV infection (cCMVi), and of these, an estimated 15–20% develop permanent sequelae ranging from sensorineural hearing loss to severe neurocognitive impairment (Boppana et al., 2013; Dollard et al., 2007). Maternal coinfection with HIV, even when mitigated by antiretroviral treatment, is associated with higher CMV viral loads in plasma, saliva, cervix, and breast milk, and a greater risk of both congenital and postnatal CMV transmission (Gantt et al., 2016a; Gantt et al., 2016b; Slyker et al., 2017; Richardson et al., 2016). Numerous studies have highlighted the negative health impacts of CMV on both HIV-infected and HIV-exposed uninfected (HEU) infants and children (Garcia-Knight et al., 2017; Gompels et al., 2012; Hsiao et al., 2013).Primary maternal CMV infection during pregnancy confers a 30–40% risk of transmission to the foetus (Kenneson and Cannon, 2007). Pre-existing maternal CMV immunity appears to reduce the risk of cCMVi, though it is clearly imperfect (Britt, 2017). Over two-thirds of infants with cCMVi are born to seropositive women, which constitute 88.4% of women in the Kenyan community from whom these study participants were drawn (Maingi and Nyamache, 2014). Moreover, the overall risk of cCMVi is directly proportional to the maternal seroprevalence in a population (de Vries et al., 2013). Increasing evidence points to the importance of maternal CMV reinfection with new antigenic strains during pregnancy as a major risk factor for non-primary cCMVi (Britt, 2017; Boppana et al., 1999). Evidence that household children may be a source of maternal reinfection provides additional support for this hypothesis (Boucoiran et al., 2018; Barbosa et al., 2018).The CMV genome is the largest of the human herpesviruses. Regions of extensive sequence variability, together with high levels of recombination between different strains, result in high diversity for a DNA virus (Lassalle et al., 2016; Pokalyuk et al., 2017; Sackman et al., 2018). Individuals are often infected with multiple CMV strains. We have recently demonstrated that separate CMV haplotypes can be resolved from high-throughput sequencing data (Cudini et al., 2019). This advance, by enabling tracking of individual genomes within mixed CMV infections, has already revealed the impact of mutation, recombination, and selection in shaping the course of infection (Cudini et al., 2019). Here we apply these methods to CMV genomes sequenced from samples from five HIV-infected Kenyan women and their infants that were collected between 1993 and 1998 originally for studies of maternal–infant HIV transmission (Richardson et al., 2016). By reconstructing genome-wide haplotypes from these longitudinal samples, we are able to examine the diversity of CMV shed by HIV-infected women and the specific genotypes that are transmitted in congenital and postnatal infections, and to reconstruct the likely chronology with which specific CMV variants were transmitted from mothers to infants.ResultsParticipant characteristics, sampling, and depth of sequencingDetails of the study cohort, follow-up, sample collection, and HIV and CMV infection status and transmission have been previously described (Drake et al., 2012; Roxby et al., 2014; Slyker et al., 2014). Sufficient residual sample was available from the five families analysed here. To maximize the chance of recovering near full genomes, we selected samples reported in the original publication (Roxby et al., 2014) to have >103 copies/ml, as this is the limit at which we generally can generate whole genomes from blood. Of the five mother–infant pairs analysed, four infants were HEU (infants 22, 123, 41, 14), and one was HIV infected (infant 12).CMV viral loads and sequencingCervical, breast milk, and infant blood CMV viral loads; mother blood plasma HIV viral loads; and time of sample collection for the five mother–infant pairs studied are shown in Figure 1. The percentage of genome coverage and mean read depths are shown in Table 1. While breast milk samples had greater than 70% coverage at depths of 10× or more, the cervical and infant samples were generally of lower depth, likely due to degradation of DNA due to the age and handling of the samples; genome coverage and mean de-duplicated read depth were directly related to actual CMV genome copy number present in the input material (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). For all subsequent analysis, we removed samples with genome coverage of less than 20%. Fourteen of the remaining 20 cervical and baby samples had genome coverage above 70% and read depths of greater than 10× (Table 1).Figure 1.Cytomegalovirus (CMV) viral loads of longitudinal samples for each family from breast milk (red), baby blood spots (green), and cervix (blue), and HIV viral loads from mother’s blood plasma.Vertical line indicates date of delivery. Horizontal line indicates minimum threshold of detection. Red circles indicate the samples that were submitted for whole-genome sequencing.Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Scatter plots showing relationship between input viral load and (A) mean read depth and (B) genome coverage, respectively.Table 1.Sequencing characteristics for samples from each family.% OTR, % of on target read; % Genome, % of genome coverage; % Dup, % of duplicated reads. Samples with genome coverages too low to be included in any analysis are shaded in grey. Cervical or baby samples with good coverage and read depth are highlighted in yellow.Sample% OTR% Genome% DupMean depthViral loadFamily 12Breast milk 2W26.419929.49224.451,235,136.63Breast milk 6W68.999913.84578.5614,926,741Breast milk 14W76.4995.02683.047,309,960Breast milk 6M77.47998.07730.0410,876,521Breast milk 12M77.81997.68779.726,135,712.5Cervix 38W pregnant14.739947.56325.9795,842Baby delivery1.357682.2731.8627,393.9395Baby 6W0.02281.790.294067.86694Baby 10W0.11277.772.631959.9679Baby 9M1.17879.4128.532501.75195Family 14Breast milk 2W13.549865.41101.66232,442.219Breast milk 6W60.329849.85656.4720,485,190Breast milk 14W11.159765.7780.09345,851.781Cervix 38W pregnant0.226356.044.341377Baby 6W1.49169.3521.3555,400.7148Baby 14W3.339678.59113.923960.64233Baby 6M0.346674.1111.42154.414169Baby 12M0.02775.970.753054.47485Family 22Breast milk 2W6.089634.2254.3455,000.2891Breast milk 6W43.189844.57352.49107,861.141Breast milk 14W6.49744.4138.356,883.9805Cervix 34W pregnant0.164654.952.971125Cervix 38W pregnant0.166747.914.141377Baby 2W0.01146.340.031703.49292Baby 6W0.08143.610.0322,082.6465Baby 14W2.299279.4246.5310,962.7197Baby 6M0.33379.365.982124.86548Baby 9M0.222579.335.0182,937.5Family 41Breast milk 2W43.339860.89224.537,163,743Breast milk 6W37.059861.89289.61323,325.531Breast milk 14W48.159868.02438.052,697,832.75Cervix 38W pregnant0.619147.5312.6122Baby 14W0.123274.474.671848.62402Family 123Breast milk 2W16.119860.11117.25518,071.875Breast milk 6W16.969864.77107.35262,400.719Breast milk 14W13.959864.01122.08518,071.875Breast milk 6M15.819863.07101.92678,250.313Cervix 34W pregnant2.459749.4641.917931Cervix 38W pregnant1.369649.6128.074326Baby delivery0.218410.936.1939.190735Baby 10W2.199178.6443.9693,297.3047Baby 6M0.132077.673.15428.83545Baby 12M1.368580.1340.566205.88281CMV genome sequence relatedness and diversityWe used multidimensional scaling to cluster CMV genomic sequences by nucleotide similarity (Figure 2), as use of phylogenetic trees is problematic due to the high levels of CMV recombination. Sequences from families 12, 14, and 41 all clustered by family. Families 22 and 123 clustered in two distinct spaces, suggesting infection with more than one strain. In all five cases, the first sample from each infant (indicated by an arrow) clustered most closely with that of its mother, indicating the likelihood of recent maternal–infant transmission.Figure 2.Multidimensional scaling showing clustering of consensus genome sequences for each sample by family.Arrows indicate that the first baby blood spot clusters with their own maternal sequences in all cases.Figure 2—figure supplement 1.Within sample nucleotide diversity shown by family (colour) and sample type (symbol).BM, breast milk; CV, cervix; BS, baby blood spot. The figure shows that most cervical and blood spot samples are of low diversity, while most breast milk samples are of high diversity. Diversity of breast milk versus cervix; p=1.619e-07 versus baby blood spot; p=9.69e-6 (Mann–Whitney test).Figure 2—figure supplement 2.Effect of down-sampling on estimated diversity.Samples tested include family 14: 14W BS (green squares), family 41: 14W BM (blue dots), family 14: 6W BM (green triangles), family 12: 12M BM (maroon diamonds) all of which had initial read depths of 150 or more. The estimated diversity is relatively insensitive to read depth; in particular, down-sampling of high-read-depth samples shows no tendency of the analysis to underestimate the diversity of low-read-depth samples. This indicates that the low diversity observed in many of the CV and BS samples is not an artefact but is rather consistent with the presence of significant bottlenecks.To further investigate the possibility of mixed infections, we calculated the within-sample nucleotide diversity, a metric that we have shown previously can be used as a proxy for the likelihood of mixed strain infections (Cudini et al., 2019). It has previously been reported that a nucleotide diversity of 0.005 or above is likely to indicate a mixed infection (Cudini et al., 2019). Figure 2—figure supplement 1 shows that almost all the breast milk samples were highly diverse and therefore likely to contain multiple virus strains, a finding consistent with previous analyses of breast milk from HIV-infected women (Suárez et al., 2019). In contrast, the cervical and infant samples, with the exception of one cervical sample from family 12, showed lower diversity. We used subsampling to demonstrate that computed nucleotide diversities are robust down to sequencing depths of >10 (Figure 2—figure supplement 2). Low diversity was also observed in cervical and blood spots with higher coverage and read depths (Table 1).Reconstruction of individual haplotypes reveals CMV compartmentalizationTo resolve the individual viral sequences (haplotypes) within each sample, we used our previously described method HaROLD (Pang et al., 2020a). Figure 3 shows that haplotypes for each sample tended to cluster by family group albeit with clear evidence of distinct clusters even within a family, for example family 22.Figure 3.Multidimensional scaling showing clustering of haplotype sequences by family.Colours indicate the families; shapes indicate the types of sample.Figure 3—figure supplement 1.Pairwise differences between haplotypes within a family.Distances are compared with random GenBank sequences and sequences previously analysed by the same pipeline and reported (Cudini et al., 2019). Higher values are similar to those seen between unrelated database sequences and indicate the presence of distinct strains.Figure 3—figure supplement 2.Maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree to show haplotypes clusters (genotypes).By convention, the genotype most prevalent in cervix was coloured red for each family. Genotypes were designated where a distinct cluster of related haplotypes (pairwise distance ≤ 0.017) occurred with a bootstrap value of 100 (see Materials and methods and Figure 3—figure supplement 3). The genotype containing the most abundant haplotype present in the cervix is coloured red for each family. Thereafter, sequences that are genetically closest to the red genotype are coloured magenta. Genotypes that are as distant from the cervical genotype as unrelated GenBank sequences are coloured shades of green, blue, and purple. The number of clusters between 18 and 34 did not affect subsequent conclusions about genetic similarity between cervical versus other strains (see Figure 5—figure supplement 2).Figure 3—figure supplement 3.Distribution of pairwise evolutionary distances for haplotypes within families.Black, observed distribution of pairwise evolutionary distances; green, gamma distribution; blue, exponential distribution; orange, sum of gamma distribution plus exponential distribution. The chosen cut-off distance to differentiate small variations from large differences is the crossing point of the two distributions, at 0.017.The presence of mixed infections within a single family was supported by data showing that a subset of the sequence haplotypes within each family had pairwise distances as great as those between unrelated GenBank sequences (Figure 3—figure supplement 1). Within-family phylogenetic analysis (Figure 3—figure supplement 2) shows distinct clusters of the phylogenetically related sequence haplotypes recovered from breast milk, cervix, and baby, likely to represent variants forming distinct viral strains (Figure 3—figure supplement 2). Based on the distribution of pairwise distances (see Materials and methods, Figure 3—figure supplement 3), we clustered similar haplotypes together into strains henceforth termed genotypes, so that all members of a cluster have a pairwise evolutionary distance with all other members less than 0.017, resulting in 26 clusters that we refer to as genotypes. In no cases did haplotypes from different families fulfil our clustering criterion confirming that haplotypes were not shared between unrelated families.For ease of reference, genotypes were coloured differently, with the genotype predominating in the first cervical sample of each family coloured red (Figure 3—figure supplement 2). Other genotypes were coloured by their phylogenetic and pairwise distances from this genotype (Figure 3—figure supplement 2). From our data, we identified at total of 26 genotypes with between 3 and 9 genotypes for each family (Figure 3—figure supplement 2).To elucidate the relationship between maternal and infant genotypes, we plotted the abundance of each within a sample over time (Figure 4). All five mothers were infected with multiple genotypes in breast milk. In many cases, genotypes within a single maternal sample were as genetically distant as unrelated database sequences, suggesting the presence of multiple distinct CMV strains (Figure 3—figure supplement 2, Figure 4). Relative genotype abundances present in breast milk changed over time. One unique genotype appeared in the breast milk of mother 22 at 6 weeks, disappearing from a subsequent sample (Figure 4). This genotype was genetically distinct not only from other genotypes in family 22 but also from genotypes in all other families, reducing the likelihood that it was a contaminant and may therefore have represented a new reinfection or reactivation of pre-existing latent infection. All cervical samples showed a single dominant genotype (Figure 4), including mother 12, whose sample was more diverse and found to contain low levels of other genotypes. Overall, the data point to compartmentalization of CMV populations between cervix and breast milk.Figure 4.Abundance of haplotypes within each sample plotted for breast milk (BM), cervix (CV), and blood spots (BS).The timing of sampling is shown along the x axis. For ease of reference, the genotype containing the most abundant haplotype present in the cervix is coloured red for each family. Thereafter sequences that are genetically closest to the red genotype (Figure 3—figure supplement 2) are coloured magenta. Genotypes that are as distant from the cervical genotype as unrelated GenBank sequences are coloured shades of green, blue, and purple. Single variants are coloured in shades of the nearest genotype.Figure 4—figure supplement 1.Boxplot showing number of haplotypes reconstructed in relation to read depth.Analysis was performed on the 12 month breast milk sample from family 12.Transmission bottlenecksCMV genomes from individual infant blood spots also showed lower diversity (Figure 2—figure supplement 1), and predominance of one genotype (Figure 4), including samples with good sequence read depth, for example Baby12 DEL and 9M; Baby14 6W, 14W, and 6M; Baby22 14W; and Baby123 10W and 12M (Table 1), indicating the likelihood of a bottleneck in mother-to-child transmission. Two infants (families 12 and 123, Figure 1) who tested positive at birth were first infected with the genotype present in the greatest abundance in the cervix (Figure 4 and Figure 3—figure supplement 2). The same pattern was found in a third infant (family 22) whose first sample at 2 weeks of age tested positive (Figure 2, Figure 3—figure supplement 2, and Figure 4). Interestingly, all three of these congenitally infected infants were subsequently re-infected with distinct genotypes present in breast milk (Figure 4). Two infants with initially two (family 14) and three (family 41) negative tests from birth onwards, first became positive at 6 and 10 weeks, respectively. The genotypes detected in the blood spots from both of these infants were present in breast milk and differed from the most abundant genotype in cervix (Figure 4).Subsampling to control for the impact of read depthsTo determine the degree to which results were affected by the quality of sequence, we subsampled reads of different samples to show that sample diversity calculations are robust at read depths of ≥5 (Figure 2—figure supplement 2); eight of the 18 blood spots and four of seven cervical samples had mean read depth of ≥10 (Table 1) and all except one were of low diversity (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). To determine the extent to which read depth affected haplotype frequencies, the 12 month breast milk sample from mother 12, which had a mean read depth of 779.72 and five haplotypes (Figure 3—figure supplement 2), was subsampled down to mean read depth of <4 (Figure 4—figure supplement 1). All of the haplotypes in this sample were present for read depths of 22 or more, with three haplotypes identified even at the lowest read depth. Nine of 10 cervical and blood spot samples from four families with read depths of >20 (Table 1) had either single genotypes or multiple closely related variants (Figure 4), supporting previous conclusions around compartmentalization and transmission bottlenecks (Renzette et al., 2011).Genotype compartmentalizationGiven the observation of multiple haplotypes in each of the mother–baby pairs, we can ask whether certain genotypes are more likely than others to be found in different compartments and whether there are common characteristics of the genotypes observed in similar compartments in different individuals. In order to address this question, we considered all possible subsets of between two and five genotypes where each genotype was derived from a different mother–baby pair. We then used fixation index (FST) to compare the genetic similarities of all of the genotypes in this set relative to the remaining genotypes. p-Values and false discovery rates (FDRs) for each pair were calculated using non-parametric bootstrapping. In order to compare various subsets, we computed a confidence-weighted sum of FST (cwsFST) values for each subset. The distribution of cwsFST values is shown in Figure 5—figure supplement 1. As can be seen, there are a large number of subsets with significant cwsFST values, far in excess of what is observed for scrambled sequences (black line).The sum weighted FST value for the subset of five genotypes that predominated in the cervical samples was not significantly different from other subsets, suggesting overall that genotypes that predominated in the cervix of these women were less closely related than most other comparisons (Figure 5—figure supplement 1, black arrow). Intriguingly, however, the subset of cervical genotypes from mother–baby pairs 12, 22, and 123 had a sum weighted FST with a value greater than 99.6% of the other subsets (Figure 5—figure supplement 1, blue arrow), indicating a strong signal of inter-patient viral convergence. These genotypes were from the three mother–baby pairs with proven congenital infection based on first detection of CMV in the baby at ≤2 weeks of age, and in whom the baby’s genotype was identical to that predominating in cervix. In contrast, the predominant cervical genotypes from mothers 14 and 41 showed low levels of relatedness (Figure 5—figure supplement 1, red arrow). The infant strains from 14 and 41 were most closely related to those from their mothers’ breast milk (Figure 3—figure supplement 2 and Figure 4).The FST analysis identified 19 genes as likely to be contributing to the genetic similarity between congenitally transmitted genotypes from mothers 12, 22, and 123 (FDR < 0.05) (Figure 5). The comparison between these congenitally transmitted and other genotypes generally yielded the same genes when the pairwise difference was varied to cluster haplotypes into more or fewer genotypes (Figure 5—figure supplement 2), suggesting that this finding is not an artefact of decisions about haplotype clustering.Figure 5.The magnitude of fixation index (FST) values plotted for each gene (x axis).p-Values, adjusted with false discovery rate, are shown in red for p<0.01, grey for p>0.05, and turquoise for p=0.01–0.05.Figure 5—figure supplement 1.Distribution of confidence-weighted sums of FST (cwsFST) values for all subsets of two (cyan), three (purple), four (green), and five (magenta) genotypes from different mother–baby pairs.For comparison, we also show the distribution obtained when the genotype sequences corresponding to each mother–baby pair are scrambled (black line). Arrows mark the values for the five genotypes that predominated in the cervical samples (black), the three predominant genotypes from cervical samples for mother–baby pairs 12, 22, and 123 (blue), and the two predominant genotypes from cervical samples for mother–baby pairs 14 and 41 (red).Figure 5—figure supplement 2.Heatmap showing genes identified as significant in FST analysis are robust to changes in the number of clusters.Colours indicated the false discovery rate value: red = <0.001; magenta = 0.001–0.01; pink = 0.01–0.05; purple = 0.05–0.1; blue = 0.1–0.2; grey = >0.2.DiscussionWe used next-generation sequencing and haplotype reconstruction of individual CMV genomes, obtained from samples of HIV-infected women and their infants, to identify mixed infections, compartmentalization, and distinct viral-genotype associations with transmission of CMV from mother-to-infant. Breast milk CMV showed high nucleotide diversity and, as has been previously reported (Suárez et al., 2019), contained a mixture of viral genotypes, some of which were as genetically distant from each other as unrelated GenBank sequences and can therefore be considered distinct viral strains. Cervical samples were of low nucleotide diversity and dominated by a single viral genotype that was, with one exception, present in lower abundance in breast milk. Our data fit with most but not all (Puchhammer-Stöckl et al., 2006) previous reports of CMV within-host compartmentalization based on genotyping of subgenomic fragments (Hage et al., 2017; Kadambari et al., 2017; Ross et al., 2011; Renzette et al., 2013). We found little evidence for widespread new superinfecting or reactivating viruses in these mothers. In line with the findings from the immunosuppressed RhCMV monkey model of congenital infection, cCMVi (Vera Cruz et al., 2020) genotypes (strains) comprised families of closely related haplotypes. However, unlike the finding for congenitally transmitted gB and gL RhCMV variants, even where we found transmission of one genotype, maternal and infant haplotypes were not completely identical either in early, potentially congenital CMV infections or in postnatally transmitted viruses from breast milk. Neither were haplotypes sampled at different times from maternal breast milk conserved, suggesting a measure of de novo mutation in this patient group, in line with the previous findings (Sackman et al., 2018).Our method of reconstructing viral haplotypes in serial samples provides insights into the natural history of CMV infection. While all mothers had mixtures of genotypes in breast milk, the proportions changed over time for some (families 22 and 41) and remained more stable in others. Whether expanding genotypes in mothers 22 and 41 had been recently acquired is not known but would be consistent with incident reinfection. In contrast, all infants were initially infected with a single genotype (Figure 4), supporting a bottleneck to CMV transmission (Cudini et al., 2019; Vera Cruz et al., 2020; Stanton et al., 2010). Apparent reinfection by viruses present in breast milk occurred in all four infants with multiple samples (Figure 4). We posit that the appearance of a new strain in an infant sampled from birth can confidently be interpreted as a newly acquired exogenous virus rather than reactivation of a previously undetected one. In all cases, the reinfecting strains were genetically distant from and replaced the previously dominant strain (Figure 4). Taken together with the rise and fall of infant CMV viral loads over time (Figure 1), this pattern is consistent with immunity against the infants’ first CMV strain not being protective against reinfection with antigenically distinct strains, a concept that can be further tested. Of note, reinfection with the closely related strains also appears to occur readily with both human CMV and animal models (Boucoiran et al., 2018; Hansen et al., 2010). Repeated reinfection with distinct strains may explain the high genetic variability observed between sequential samples in early sequencing studies of CMV genomes from congenitally infected infants (Pokalyuk et al., 2017; Renzette et al., 2013).Those infants who tested positive at <3 weeks from birth were congenitally infected by definition (Boppana et al., 1999). In contrast, we cannot formally rule out cCMVi in the two others who were classified as having postnatal infection, since sensitivity of PCR detection of CMV DNA in newborn blood spots is only approximately 84% (Wang et al., 2015), and newborn saliva or urine were not available. However, this is unlikely given that only a small minority of infants have cCMVi, even among those born to HIV-infected women. Furthermore, it is striking that genotypes in babies with proven cCMVi were highly similar to maternal cervical genotypes, while those with negative tests for the first 6 weeks of life were not, and the strains detected later in the blood of these two infants were most similar to those in their mothers’ breast milk.While it has previously been noted that a severe genetic bottleneck occurs during CMV transmission from mother to foetus or infant (Sackman et al., 2018; Renzette et al., 2013; Mayer et al., 2017), it remains unknown whether CMV transmitted/founder virus populations share genotypic features that confer a fitness advantage for establishing an initial infection, such as seen in HIV (Joseph et al., 2015). Notwithstanding the apparent dominance of one genotype in each of the cervical samples, our analysis did not show evidence for inter-patient convergence of cervical genotypes per se. Rather the three cervical genotypes that were detected in babies 12, 22, and 123, who were infected at birth showed a higher level of genetic similarity than over 99.6% of other subset comparisons and much greater than would be expected by chance (black line) (Figure 5—figure supplement 1). Nineteen genes (Figure 5, Table 2) had particularly high (p<0.01) similarity scores. Twelve of the 19 genes with the highest similarity scores (Figure 5) are part of the highly diverse RL11 gene family. Uniquely, RL11 genes form an island of linkage within the otherwise highly recombinant CMV genome (Lassalle et al., 2016). Phylogeny of primate CMV RL11 complexes recapitulates the evolutionary history of the cognate host, suggesting it to be a potential driver of CMV co-evolution and speciation (Lassalle et al., 2016). It is intriguing that RL11 family proteins influence tissue tropism (Stanton et al., 2010) or are immunomodulatory (Stanton et al., 2010; Cortese et al., 2012; Van Damme and Van Loock, 2014; Pérez-Carmona et al., 2018; Bruno et al., 2016; Gabaev et al., 2014). Together with its functional properties (Table 2) and extreme diversity (Lassalle et al., 2016), the possibility that within-species CMV RL11 gene-family variation may also influence within-host viral adaption to different compartments and/or transplacental transmission presents a tractable hypothesis that can now be tested. cCMVi is thought to occur primarily through maternal viremia followed by replication in placental cytotrophoblasts resulting in spread to the foetus (Pereira et al., 2017). The three mothers who transmitted their viruses congenitally had higher cervical viral loads than mothers whose babies become infected postpartum (Figure 1). Analysis of data from the whole cohort of mothers confirmed that women who transmitted CMV in utero had mean cervical CMV vial loads at 38 weeks that were 0.83 log10 copies/ml (SD = 1.0, p=0.02) higher than women who did not transmit CMV in utero (data not shown) (Roxby et al., 2014). We therefore speculate that virus sampled in the cervix is representative of CMV populations that infect and cross the placenta and that a possible explanation for our findings is that the properties that promote replication to higher titres in genital tissue may also predispose to transplacental infection.Table 2.Open reading frames (ORFs) identified by fixation index (FST) as being significantly more similar in strains transmitted prenatally.LD: Found to contain one of 33 hotspots of genetic linkage disequilibrium (Lassalle et al., 2016).ORFLDFunctionUL10YPutative membrane glycoprotein. Immunosuppressive, Impairs T cell function (Bruno et al., 2016)UL11YMembrane glycoprotein. Modulates T cell signalling/function (Gabaev et al., 2014; Arcangeletti et al., 2015)UL13Unknown functionUL4YPutative membrane glycoprotein (Van Damme and Van Loock, 2014)UL5Putative membrane glycoprotein (Van Damme and Van Loock, 2014)UL6YPutative membrane glycoprotein (Van Damme and Van Loock, 2014)UL7YMembrane glycoprotein. Modulates chemo- and/or cytokine-signalling function (Pérez-Carmona et al., 2018)UL8YTransmembrane glycoprotein. Inhibits proinflammatory cytokines (Pérez-Carmona et al., 2018)US26Unknown functionUS27YMembrane glycoprotein. Activates CXCR4 signalling to increase human cytomegalovirus replication (Frank et al., 2019)UL150AFibroblast and epithelial cell entry (Houldcroft et al., 2016)UL2Putative membrane glycoprotein (Van Damme and Van Loock, 2014)RL11YMembrane glycoprotein. Binds IgG Fc domain involved in immune regulation (Van Damme and Van Loock, 2014)UL147α-Chemokine homologue (Katoh and Standley, 2013; Paradis and Schliep, 2019)UL40Control of NK recognition (Heatley et al., 2013)RL13YGlycoprotein, repression of replication, binds IgG domain immune regulation (Stanton et al., 2010; Cortese et al., 2012)RL10Membrane glycoproteinUL57Ss DNA binding protein (Van Damme and Van Loock, 2014)UL50Nuclear Egress complex. Reduces interferon-mediated antiviral effect (DeRussy et al., 2016)Other genes with high similarity (FST) scores include US27, which codes for a G-protein-coupled receptor homologue that modulates signalling of the CXCR4 chemokine and may have a role during viral entry and egress (Frank et al., 2019), and US26 whose function is unknown. Less marked but still significantly different from non-congenitally transmitted strains, UL40 protein (Heatley et al., 2013) modulates natural killer (NK) cell function. NK cells are the most abundant lymphocytes in placental tissue (Pereira et al., 2017), while UL50 is also immunomodulatory (Lee et al., 2018; DeRussy et al., 2016). Finally, UL74, coding for glycoprotein O, which is highly significantly similar in all bar one comparisons (Figure 5—figure supplement 2), is part of the glycoprotein complex that is critical for tropism and entry into both fibroblasts and epithelial cells (Wu et al., 2017). Of interest, gB and gL, which showed considerable diversity in the congenital RhCMV model, were, as might be expected, not represented among the genes sharing significant genetic similarity in our analysis. One possibility that would unite our findings and those of the congenital RhCMV model is that CMV transmission bottlenecks are agnostic of variation in genes not implicated in transmission.Being born to HIV-infected women is a major risk factor for cCMVi as well as long-term CMV-related complications, whether or not the child acquires HIV (Garcia-Knight et al., 2017; Gompels et al., 2012). We show here that, irrespective of the route of first infection, HEU children frequently acquire repeated infections with different CMV viruses within the first year of life. Preliminary evidence suggests that breast milk of HIV-uninfected women may have lower CMV viral loads and carry fewer strains (Arcangeletti et al., 2015). If this is true, the possibility that HEU, as well as HIV-infected, infants are exposed to greater numbers of CMV strains during infancy when compared with HIV-uninfected infants may provide an explanation for their worse clinical outcomes, a hypothesis that can now be tested in prospective studies. Similarly, these methods promise to be invaluable for studying the role of maternal CMV reinfection during pregnancy, a question of central importance in the field (Britt, 2017).This study potentially provides several new insights into the pathogenesis of CMV infection. However, the study is limited by the small number of subjects, the fact that all women were HIV-1 infected and the lack of samples and data to absolutely confirm the route of CMV acquisition by these infants. Because we were only able to analyse maternal breast milk, cervical samples, and infant blood, and only intermittently, it is possible that some transmitted viral variants were not captured. Some, particularly cervical and blood spot samples, had low CMV viral loads and, as a result, suboptimal genome coverage. Mapping data confirmed that in these cases, sequence loss was random, excluding the possibility of systematic bias. To further address this potential bias, we subsampled samples with good coverage to identify read-depth thresholds above which the diversity estimation is robust and haplotype frequency to 5% and above is preserved (Figure 2—figure supplement 2 and Figure 4—figure supplement 1). Analysis of only those samples with read depths above the identified thresholds supported our overall conclusions. The quality of the sequence and the numbers of samples allowed for conclusions to be drawn at gene level only and precluded robust identification of putative motifs or single-nucleotide polymorphisms associated with biological differences.In summary, by reconstructing the individual CMV haplotypes, we found evidence for mixed CMV infection in HIV-infected women, and compartmentalization of viral strains between cervical and breast milk. Infants appeared usually to acquire one virus genotype initially, indicating a transmission bottleneck, though subsequent reinfection with a second virus from maternal breast milk was common. We also found that viruses transmitted congenitally resembled the virus genotypes that were present at highest abundance in cervix, and shared genetic features that distinguished them from CMV strains predominating in breast milk and in the cervices of women whose infants were apparently first infected post-partum. These data provide new testable insights into the pathogenesis of CMV transmission from mothers to their infants, as well as tools to unravel the importance of viral diversity for reinfection and congenital transmission, questions that are central to the development of a vaccine to prevent the global burden of disease due to CMV.Materials and methodsSamples were approved for research by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Washington and the Ethics and Research Committee of Kenyatta National Hospital IRB NCT00530777 and sequenced under the ULCP Biobank REC approval. Approval for use of anonymized residual diagnostic specimens was obtained through the University College London/University College London Hospitals (UCL/UCLH) Pathogen Biobank National Research Ethics Service Committee London Fulham (Research Ethics Committee reference: 12/LO/1089). Informed patient consent was not required.Patient specimensMother–child pairs were selected from a randomized, placebo-controlled trial to determine the impact of twice-daily valacyclovir (500 mg) on breast milk HIV RNA viral load in HIV-1/HSV-2 co-infected women (NCT 00530777). Trial design, participant characteristics, and follow-up have been reported elsewhere (Drake et al., 2012; Roxby et al., 2014; Slyker et al., 2014) and the University of Washington Institutional Review Board and Kenyatta National Hospital Research and Ethics Committee approved the research. Women received short course antiretrovirals for prevention of mother-to-child HIV transmission, but no women or infants received combination antiretroviral therapy, as the study was conducted before recommendations for universal treatment. All women were HIV-1, HSV-2, and CMV co-infected. For this CMV genomics study, we selected five mother–infant pairs from the placebo arm, who had well-defined timing of infant CMV infection. All infants were HIV exposed, and one was HIV infected. Women had cervical swabs and blood specimens collected at 34 and 38 weeks gestation. Maternal blood and infant dried blood spots were collected delivery, then postpartum at 2, 6, 10, 14, 24, 36, and 52 weeks. Breast milk was collected at all times after delivery. Blood plasma, cervical swabs, and breast milk supernatant (whey) were cryopreserved at –80°C for the study of HIV and other co-infections.DNA extraction and CMV DNA measurementViral nucleic acids were extracted from blood plasma, dried blood spots, breast milk supernatant, and cervical swabs as previously described using the Qiagen UltraSens Viral Nucleic Acid extraction kit (Roxby et al., 2014). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to measure CMV DNA levels in these specimens (Roxby et al., 2014).Sure-select sequencingHybridization and library preparation were performed as previously described (Houldcroft et al., 2016). Briefly, extracted DNA was sheared by acoustic sonication (Covaris e220, Covaris Inc). DNA fragments underwent end-repair, A’-tailing, and (Illumina) adaptor ligation. DNA libraries were hybridized with biotinylated 120-mer custom RNA baits designed using all available CMV full genomes in GenBank for 16–24 hr at 65°C and subsequently bound to MyOne Streptavidin T1 Dynabeads (ThermoFisher Scientific). Following washing, libraries were amplified (18 cycles) to generate sufficient input material for Illumina sequencing. Paired-end sequencing was performed on an Illumina MiSeq using the 500 cycle v2 Reagent Kit (Illumina, MS-102–2003). Samples were sequenced in four different batches by family group.Reads generated were quality checked and mapped to the Merlin reference sequence followed by removal of duplicates using the CLC Genomics Workbench ver. 10.1. Consensus sequence was extracted with a minimum coverage of 2×. All consensus sequences along with other GenBank reference sequences were aligned using MAFFT 7.212 (Katoh and Standley, 2013) and refined by manual editing.ClusteringPairwise distances between sequences were calculated using the dist.dna function from R package Ape v.5.3 (Paradis and Schliep, 2019). Sequences were clustered using multidimensional scaling as implemented by the cmdscale function from R package Stats v.3.6 (Team, 2012).Nucleotide diversityNucleotide diversity was calculated by fitting the observed variant frequency spectrum to the mixture of two distributions, one representing sequencing errors (represented by a Beta distribution) and the other representing true diversity (represented by a four-dimensional Dirichlet distribution plus delta function, the latter representing invariant sites). The parameters for these two distributions were optimized by maximizing the log likelihood. This framework allows all of the sequencing data to be used and does not require pre-filtering the data to remove sites with low read depth or few variants resulting in the favourable robustness to read depth, as shown in Figure 2—figure supplement 2. Software is available for download at GitHub Repository, https://github.com/ucl-pathgenomics/NucleotideDiversity (copy archived at swh:1:rev:20814eda934c539608b30e8fe21ead282046fa8b; Pang et al., 2020b).Haplotype reconstructionHaplotype reconstruction was accomplished using HaROLD with default settings (Pang et al., 2020a). Details of this procedure are described in the associated publications. In brief, HaROLD employs a two-step process. The first step is based on the assumption that there are a limited number of haplotypes that are the same for all of the samples from a given mother/child data set, so that the differences in the frequencies of polymorphisms represent different mixtures of these haplotypes. HaROLD creates a set of haplotypes from each data set by selecting the set of haplotypes whose linear combinations optimally accounts for the observed variant frequencies. The number of haplotypes is chosen to maximize the log likelihood of the observed frequencies. The second step involves relaxing the assumption of constant haplotypes, with each sample treated individually. For each sample, reads are assigned probabilistically to the various haplotypes generated by the first step. These haplotype sequences and frequencies are then adjusted based on the assigned reads. The reads are then re-assigned to these adjusted haplotypes, and the procedure is repeated until convergence. During this process, haplotypes can be merged if that decreases the Akaike information criterion (Akaike, 1973). This procedure results in a set of haplotypes for each sample, loosely based on the haplotypes derived from the first step.Haplotype treesMaximum-likelihood trees of the haplotypes from each family were computed using RaxML v8.2.10, implementing the GTR model, with 1000 bootstrap replicates (Stamatakis, 2014).Haplotype clusteringThe haplotypes for each mother/baby data set were divided into genotypes. We calculated the pairwise evolutionary distance (the sum of distances on the evolutionary tree between the haplotypes and their latest common ancestor) for all pairs of haplotypes in each family. As shown in Figure 3—figure supplement 3, the observed distribution of such pairwise distances fits the sum of a gamma distribution (69.3%, alpha = 19.5, beta = 0.0015) and an exponential distribution (30.7%, mean = 0.01), indicative of two classes of relationships – pairs of sequences that are highly similar, modelled by the exponential, representing small accumulated variations, and pairs that are more distinct, represented by the gamma distribution. We chose the crossing point of these two distributions, at a cut-off distance of 0.017, as differentiating small variations from larger differences (Figure 3—figure supplement 3). We then grouped the haplotypes into clusters so that all members of a cluster have a pairwise evolutionary distance with all other members less than 0.017, resulting in 26 clusters that we refer to as genotypes. We used these groups to assign colours to the different haplotype clusters (genotypes) in Figure 4 and Figure 3—figure supplement 2.We used FST to identify sequence characteristics associated with sets of genotypes. Consensus sequences were constructed for each genotype. FST values, representing the genetic difference between a subset of genotypes and the other genotypes, were calculated for each gene. p-Values and corresponding FDRs were estimated by non-parametric bootstrapping, through scrambling the bases at each position amongst the clusters. The results are shown for the 26 genotypes obtained with a cut-off distance of 0.017; changing this cut-off resulted in increased or decreased numbers of genotypes, but yielded similar results, especially for the more confident identifications (Figure 5—figure supplement 2).Evaluating the similarity between subsets of genotypesWe use FST values to identify similarities between individual genes from subsets of genotypes compared with the other genotypes. In order to compare the magnitude of the similarities of different subsets, we would like to take the sum of the FST values for all genes where the similarities are real and not the result of random associations. As we cannot definitively identify these genes, we instead consider the sum of the FST values for all genes weighted by our confidence that the FST value is significant, represented as one minus the FDR.Data availabilitySequence reads have been deposited in NCBI Sequence Read Archive under BioProject ID PRJNA605798.All software used are available for download at GitHub Repository, https://github.com/ucl-pathgenomics/NucleotideDiversity and https://github.com/ucl-pathgenomics/HAROLD.


Title: Neuropilin-1 expression modulates infection susceptibility to murine cytomegalovirus at the materno-fetal interface

INTRODUCTIONHuman cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a large dsDNA virus and a member of the Betaherpesvirinae subfamily. It is highly prevalent in the human population and generally regarded as an opportunistic pathogen. During pregnancy, vertical transmission of the virus from the mother to the fetus may cause significant clinical symptoms, and HCMV is the leading pathogen responsible for permanent disabilities in neonates (1). Determinants responsible for the high variation in vertical transmission events of HCMV-infected pregnant women and origin of clinical symptoms are currently under investigation and likely include both host defense mechanisms and viral pathogenicity factors.Several animal models are applied to study cytomegalovirus (CMV)–host interaction. The primary advantage of the rhesus macaque CMV and guinea pig CMV models for studying CMV pathogenesis lies in their capacity to replicate fetal infection within their respective species (2–4). Nevertheless, the use of these models is restricted to a limited number of research centers, primarily due to ethical restraints, the complexity of animal husbandry, and the limited availability of species-specific tools. As a result, murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection in mice remains the most widely used in vivo model for CMV research. However, vertical transmission in utero does not occur in the commonly used inbred mice and laboratory MCMV strains (5–9). Infection of fetal membranes has been observed in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice (10) and the offspring of latently infected mice (11). Therefore, current models for in utero MCMV infection involve invasive procedures such as direct injection of virus into the placenta or the fetal brain (12–14). Alternatively, infection of neonatal mice with MCMV is a well-established surrogate model for congenital CMV disease (12, 13, 15).The materno-fetal interface is the site defined by the implantation and invasion of the blastocyst-derived placenta into the uterine stroma, the decidua. The placenta serves not only as a conduit for nutrients and waste but also as a critical immunological barrier that protects the developing fetus from maternal pathogens (16). Although the structural and organizational features of the human and mouse placenta differ, each species has evolved to maintain an optimized immunological equilibrium essential for sustaining a healthy pregnancy (17). Thus, mechanisms of placental resistance—structural, cellular, and immunological—are likely involved in limiting vertical transmission of MCMV. A range of host molecules, including epidermal growth factor receptor, integrin αvβ3, CD90, CD147, neuropilin-2 (NRP2), and platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRα), have been characterized as receptors or co-receptors mediating HCMV entry into fibroblasts, epithelial cells, and endothelial cells (18–23). Less is known about host receptors relevant to MCMV infection. NRP1 and the major histocompatibility complex I (MHC-I) were described as crucial host factors for MCMV infection of endothelial cells and macrophages, respectively (24, 25). The roles of other putative receptors, such as Integrin β1 subunit (ITGβ1) and PDGFRα, remain to be defined (26, 27).Here, we addressed tissue-specific features of the murine materno-fetal barrier that could play a role in interfering with vertical MCMV transmission. Infection events were tracked in the materno-fetal barrier lining cells, including trophoblast cells, in vivo and ex vivo. A trophoblast cell line and murine trophoblast stem cells (mTSCs) were used to identify tissue-specific host factors for MCMV replication. The results of this study suggest that a combination of both host immunity and intrinsic properties of tissue cells contributes to MCMV resistance in the materno-fetal interface.RESULTSTissue-specific MCMV replication in placenta and maternal liver under conditions of immune suppressionLymphocytes, such as T and natural killer (NK) cells, as well as type I interferons, are well established to interfere with MCMV infection. Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- mice are deficient in functional B, T, and NK cells, while Ifnar1-/- mice lack a crucial subunit of the type-I IFN receptor, resulting in defective interferon signaling. These models of immunodeficiency exhibit augmented MCMV replication in Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- (28, 29) or Ifnar1-/- (30) mice. To address whether impaired immunity impacts viral replication in placental tissue, Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- and Ifnar1-/- or wild-type (WT) pregnant mice were infected intravenously (i.v.) with MCMV-3DR, here referred to as MCMV, which is a recombinant expressing mCherry and Gaussia luciferase (see Materials and Methods). The biological fitness of this virus has been demonstrated in several in vivo studies (24, 28, 31, 32) and is used throughout the present investigation. The dams were sacrificed on 3–9 days post-infection (dpi) to prevent a reduced health status normally occurring in Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- and Ifnar1-/- pregnant mice upon infection with high MCMV doses. The average observation time after infection was 5.3 days (Table 1). Maternal livers and conceptuses (embryo/fetus, placenta, and associated membranes) were investigated to monitor infection events in tissue by means of mCherry expression in single cells.TABLE 1Overview of MCMV exposure and detection in conceptusesaGenotypeWT
Rag2
-/-
Il2rg
-/-

Ifnar1
-/-
Dams4(#1, #2, #3, #4)5(#1, #2, #3, #4, #5)3(#1, #2, #3)Gestational day9-12(9, 10, 12, 12)11–14(11, 11, 14, 14, 14)10–12(10, 12, 12)Days post-infection4-7(7, 6, 4, 4)3–9(7, 9, 3, 3, 5)5–6(6, 5, 5)Conceptus analyzed31(8, 10, 8, 5)25(3, 5, 9, 3, 5)22(7, 5, 10)Sections analyzed203(64, 80, 31, 28)148(21, 29, 36, 26, 62)98(46, 20, 32)MCMV+ sections0 (0 %)(0, 0, 0, 0)11 (7.4 %)(0, 8, 1, 0, 2)0 (0 %)(0, 0, 0)

a

This table provides the time of MCMV application during pregnancy (gestational day), the time of analysis post-infection (days post-infection), the number of conceptuses analyzed per dam, the number of histology sections analyzed per dam, and the number of sections where MCMV-infected cells were detected. Values in parentheses correspond to data obtained from individual dams.This method holds the advantage of minimizing false-positive results, which are more likely to occur with nucleic acid amplification techniques or luciferase activity assays due to contamination with maternal blood. Expression of MCMV-encoded mCherry and Gaussia luciferase correlates with virus titers in vitro (31) and in vivo (28). Histology sections of maternal livers were used to establish a standardized algorithm (see Materials and Methods) to analyze the frequency of mCherry+ MCMV-infected cells per DAPI+ nuclei to estimate the magnitude of virus load in tissue (Fig. 1A). Both Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- and Ifnar1-/- mice exhibited more infected cells in the liver as compared to WT mice, confirming that reduced host immunity allowed increased virus replication in pregnant mice (Fig. 1B). In contrast, histological analysis of conceptuses revealed low numbers of MCMV-infected cells in the visceral yolk sac and placenta (Fig. 1C and D). These data suggested that, unlike the liver, the placenta exhibited biological resistance to MCMV infection.Fig 1Differential MCMV susceptibility of placenta and liver. WT, Rag2-/-Il2rg-/-, or Ifnar1-/- dam was intravenously infected with MCMV (1 × 106 PFU/dam) and livers as well as conceptuses were analyzed 5 (for Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- mice) or 6 (for WT and Ifnar1-/- mice) days post-infection (dpi) by fluorescence microscopy for the number of mCherry+ MCMV-infected cells. (A) Microscopy images of maternal livers illustrate MCMV-infected (mCherry+) cells (red) and nuclear staining (blue) before (raw images) and after data processing (binary images). Numbers indicate automated counting events of fluorescence signals for nuclei (DAPI), mCherry+ cells (MCMV), and the mCherry / DAPI ratio. Scale 100 µm. (B) Quantification of MCMV-infected cells per parenchyma cells of maternal livers. The data were pooled from various dpi (from Table 1), and medians are depicted. (C) Representative image of a conceptus as acquired for data analysis. Red arrows and rectangles indicate the position of observed areas of infection in the visceral yolk sac and placenta of a Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- conceptus. MCMV-infected cells are shown in red, and autofluorescence (AF) of the tissue in green. Plac: placenta; dec: decidual stroma; myo: myometrium. Scales 2,000 µm (left for conceptus) and 100 µm (right for visceral yolk sac and placenta). (D) Quantification of MCMV-infected cells per conceptus applying the same data processing setup as in (A). The data were pooled from various dpi (from Table 1), and medians are depicted. (B + D) P-values were calculated using the Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric unpaired test and Dunn’s multiple comparisons test.Fluorescent micrographs depict liver and conceptus tissues with DAPI nuclei and MCMV-positive cells plus binary masks for quantification. Bar graphs depict mCherry-positive cell percentages across genotypes, with highest infection in Ifnar1-/- samples.Placental and decidual cells exhibit intrinsic resistance to MCMV infection ex vivoThe materno-fetal interface consists of the blastocyst-derived placenta and the decidua. The placenta is composed of successive layers of trophoblast cells, followed by fetal endothelial capillaries that separate the maternal from the fetal blood circulation (33). To assess the susceptibility of materno-fetal interface-lining cells to MCMV infection, placental and decidual cells were obtained from the progeny of WT dams mated to homozygous actb-Egfp male mice. The offspring and placentas generated by this mating strategy are heterozygous for actb-Egfp, exhibit ubiquitous GFP expression, and thus allow for distinction between maternal decidual stroma and placenta cells. Cell suspensions obtained from the decidua-lined placenta were analyzed for GFP and CD45 expression to classify cells as fetal/placental (GFP+) or maternal (GFP−) and hematopoietic (CD45+) or non-hematopoietic (CD45−) cells (Fig. 2A and B). As the placenta invades the maternal decidua at the implantation site, in these tissue preparations, cells of maternal origin outnumbered those of fetal origin, including both hematopoietic and non-hematopoietic cells (Fig. 2C). There was a distinct CD45− placental cell population but only very few fetal hematopoietic cells (Fig. 2C). These primary cell suspensions were infected with MCMV directly after isolation and analyzed 1 day post-infection for MCMV-encoded mCherry expression. A small fraction of the cultured cells was susceptible to MCMV infection (Fig. 2D and E). MCMV-infected cells almost exclusively belonged to the placental non-hematopoietic cell population, whereas very few maternal decidual cells were mCherry+ (Fig. 2F and G). Hence, ex vivo decidua and placenta cells exhibited a significant resistance to MCMV as observed in vivo in WT and immunocompromised animals.Fig 2Placental and decidual cells exhibit intrinsic resistance to MCMV infection ex vivo. Primary murine materno-fetal barrier lining cells were isolated and analyzed for their susceptibility to MCMV infection. (A) Gating strategy for (B–-G) flow cytometry analysis of primary cells obtained from decidua-lined placentas from WT dams mated with actb-Egfp male mice. L/D: live/dead staining. (B) Flow cytometry dot plots of cells (A) directly after isolation. GFP+ cells are cells of placental/fetal origin, and CD45+ cells are of hematopoietic origin. (C) Percentage of the indicated cell subpopulations as in (B). White depicts cells of maternal and green cells of placental/fetal origin. Data shown are medians from n = 6 placenta preparations of n = 2 dams. (D–G) Primary cells were infected directly after isolation with MCMV (MOI 0.5). (D) Flow cytometry dot plots and (E) percentage of MCMV-infected (mCherry+) among viable cells after 1 dpi are shown. (F) Flow cytometry dot plot gated on MCMV-infected (mCherry+) subpopulation, and (G) frequency of MCMV-infected among the four different subpopulations identified by GFP or CD45 expression is shown. Representative dot plots and medians of two independent experiments with n = 12 pooled placenta preparations of n = 4 dams are depicted. Significance was calculated with the parametric paired one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.Flow cytometry plots depict gating of viable placental fetal and maternal cells by GFP and CD45 plus detection of mCherry-positive MCMV-infected cells in mock and infected samples. Bar graphs depict infection percentages across gated subsets.Placental SM9-1 cells display marked resistance to MCMV compared with diverse cell linesTo assess the relative susceptibility of placental cells to MCMV infection, the SM9-1 placental trophoblast cell line (34) was comparatively analyzed alongside a panel of cell lines derived from diverse mouse tissues. Cell lines that were described to be permissive for MCMV or even used to propagate the virus to generate virus stocks, such as the 10.1 murine embryo fibroblasts (35), M2-10B4 bone marrow stromal cells (36), SVEC4-10 lymphatic endothelial cells (37), and NMuMG mammary gland epithelial cells (38), were included in the analysis. In addition, the Hepa1-6 liver cell line (39) was added as MCMV infection of the liver was in distinct contrast to placental tissue in vivo (Fig. 1). High and robust expression of MCMV-encoded Gaussia luciferase was found in cell culture supernatants of all but the SM9-1 cell lines after 1 and 2 days of MCMV infection (Fig. 3A). On average, MCMV infection of known permissive cells led to a 40-fold and a 141-fold higher luciferase activity than infection of SM9-1 cells at 24 h and 48 h post-infection, respectively. Similarly, high percentages of mCherry+ cells were detected in all cell types except for SM9-1 cells at 2 dpi (Fig. 3B). Only a small fraction of SM9-1 cells expressed the MCMV-encoded fluorophore (Fig. 3C). These data indicated that SM9-1 trophoblast cells are poorly infectible and therefore relatively resistant to MCMV infection.Fig 3SM9-1 trophoblast cells are resistant to MCMV infection. Cell lines of diverse tissue origins were comparatively infected with MCMV (MOI of 0.5), and (A) luciferase activity in cell culture supernatants was measured 1 or 2 dpi as indicated. The dotted line indicates the detection limit determined by the mean background luciferase activity of uninfected 10.1 cells. Medians of n ≥ 3 independent experiments are shown. P-values were calculated using a two-way ANOVA with Šídák’s multiple comparisons test. (B) Flow cytometry dot plots of MCMV-encoded mCherry expression in uninfected (mock) cells of different lines and at 2 dpi. mCherry+ cells are MCMV-infected. Representative dot plots of n ≥ 3 independent experiments are depicted. (C) Percentage of mCherry+ MCMV-infected cells at 2 dpi. Medians of n = 3 independent experiments are shown.Bar graphs depict RLU responses and MCMV-positive percentages across cell lines at one and two days post-infection. Flow cytometry plots depict mCherry-positive infected cells with high infection in most lines and minimal infection in SM9-1.Absence of NRP1 in SM9-1 trophoblast cells correlates with resistance to MCMV infectionMCMV infection is established through successful viral entry into host cells and ultimately leads to the production of infectious progeny. To understand potential mechanisms of resistance to MCMV, SM9-1 trophoblast cells were analyzed for surface expression of the putative MCMV entry receptors ITGβ1, PDGFRα, β2-microglobulin (β2-M) as part of the MHC-I, and NRP1. SM9-1 trophoblast cells exhibited membrane expression of ITGβ1 and PDGFRα, whereas β2-M was barely detectable, and NRP1 was not expressed (Fig. 4A). NRP1 expression could be confirmed in MCMV-susceptible cell lines 10.1, M2-10B4, SVEC4-10, NMuMG, and Hepa1-6 cells, but not in SM9-1 trophoblast cells (Fig. 4B).Fig 4Absence of NRP1 in SM9-1 trophoblast cells correlates with resistance to MCMV infection. SM9-1 cells were characterized for expression of MCMV host factors, transfected with NRP1-encoding plasmids, and analyzed for MCMV susceptibility. (A) Flow cytometry histograms of SM9-1 cells stained for putative entry receptors as indicated. FMO: fluorescence minus one. Representative data of n ≥ 3 experiments are depicted. (B) Cell lysates of different cell lines were harvested and analyzed by immunoblot. Recombinant NRP1 (rNRP1) served as a positive control and GAPDH as a loading control. Representative blots from n ≥ 2 experiments are shown. (C) SM9-1 cells were left untreated (control) or transfected with GFP or NRP1-GFP-encoding plasmids. Cell lysates were harvested at 2 days post-transfection and analyzed by immunoblot. rNRP1 serves as a positive control, and GAPDH as a loading control. Representative blots from n ≥ 2 experiments are shown. (D) Flow cytometry dot plots of GFP expression by SM9-1 cells transfected with plasmid-encoding GFP or NRP1-GFP at 2 days after transfection. Transfected cells were mock infected or infected with MCMV (MOI 0.5) and analyzed at 1 dpi. (E) Flow cytometry dot plots of MCMV-encoded mCherry expression among the transfected cells (GFP+) 1 dpi are shown. (F) The percentage of MCMV-infected (mCherry+) among the transfected cells (GFP+) at 1 dpi is shown. For (D–F) representative dot plots and medians of four independent experiments are provided. P-values were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U test.Flow cytometry histograms depict ITGβ1, PDGFRα, β2-M, and NRP1 staining. Immunoblots depict NRP1 and GAPDH across cell lines and rescue conditions. Flow cytometry plots depict GFP and mCherry signals with MCMV infection increased in NRP1-GFP cells.NRP1 is a transmembrane glycoprotein involved in the nervous and vascular system during embryogenesis (40) and was identified as a critical host factor for MCMV infection (25).In a reanalysis of a recently reported single-nucleus RNA sequencing data set of gestational day 12.5 murine placental cells (41), Itgb1 was ubiquitously expressed in all cell types. Pdgfra and some B2m expression were found in decidual stroma cells and trophoblasts. In contrast, Nrp1 was found to be expressed only in fetal mesenchymal and endothelial cells but virtually absent in decidual stroma and placental trophoblast cells (Fig. S1). Hypothesizing that the lack of NRP1 expression in SM9-1 cells might be responsible for the resistance to MCMV infection, the cells were transfected with plasmids expressing GFP or NRP1-GFP and subsequently infected with MCMV. NRP1 protein was detected in cells transfected with NRP1-GFP but not in cells transfected with GFP or untransfected SM9-1 cells (Fig. 4C). SM9-1 cells transfected with NRP1-GFP were more susceptible to MCMV infection than cells transfected with GFP (Fig. 4D and E), leading to a substantially higher percentage of mCherry+ cells at 1 dpi (Fig. 4F). These results suggested that the resistance of SM9-1 trophoblast cells to MCMV infection may be due to a lack of NRP1 expression.NRP1 expression overcomes the resistance of SM9-1 trophoblast cells to MCMVAs plasmid transfection allowed vigorous but only transient overexpression of NRP1 (Fig. 3), the impact of stable NRP1 expression on the infectability of SM9-1 trophoblast cells was tested. To do this, NRP1-GFP and GFP coding sequences were inserted into a lentiviral vector that expresses BFP and a puromycin resistance marker. SM9-1 cells were transduced with these lentiviral vectors and selected with puromycin. Using the NRP1-GFP-encoding construct for transduction led to a lower frequency of BFP-expressing cells than the GFP-encoding control (Fig. 5A and B). NRP1 cell surface expression was detected by flow cytometry in cells transduced with NRP1-GFP but not in cells transduced with GFP (Fig. 5C and D). SM9-1 cells transduced with NRP1-GFP were more susceptible to MCMV infection than cells transduced with GFP (Fig. 5E), leading to a 17-fold increase in mCherry+ cells at 1 dpi (Fig. 5F). To test whether NRP1-expressing SM9-1 cells are permissive for MCMV replication, we used transduced and non-transduced SM9-1 cells and 10.1 fibroblasts for multistep replication kinetics. As expected, 10.1 fibroblasts were highly permissive and produced high titers of viral progeny (Fig. 5H). By contrast, SM9-1 cells transduced with GFP or non-transduced produced relatively low MCMV titers. However, NRP1-GFP-expressing SM9-1 cells produced up to 100-fold higher titers (Fig. 5H). Together, these results demonstrated that the resistance of SM9-1 trophoblast cells to MCMV infection could be overcome by NRP1 expression.Fig 5MCMV infection of SM9-1 trophoblast cells transduced with NRP1. Stable expression of GFP or NRP1-GFP was introduced in SM9-1 trophoblast cells using lentiviral vectors with subsequent analysis for MCMV susceptibility. (A–D) SM9-1 cells were transduced with lentiviral vectors expressing GFP or NRP1-GFP and BFP-puro as a selectable marker. (A) Flow cytometry dot plots and (B) quantification of transduction efficacy (BFP expression) of GFP and NRP1-GFP-encoding constructs. (C) Flow cytometry histogram and (D) quantification of NRP1 expression on transduced cells as indicated. Representative flow cytometry images and medians of n = 9 independent experiments are shown. P-values were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U test. (E and F) Transduced cells, as in (A–D), were infected with MCMV (MOI 0.5) and analyzed at 1 dpi. (E) Flow cytometry dot plots and (F) quantification of MCMV-infected (mCherry+) cells gated on the transduced (BFP+) cells. Representative dot plots and medians of n = 5 independent experiments are shown. P-values were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U test. (G) Multistep replication kinetics of MCMV on 10.1 fibroblasts (infected at MOI 0.1) and SM9-1 cells transduced and not transduced as indicated (infected at an MOI of 1). The virus released into the supernatant was titrated on M2-10B4 cells. Mean ± SEM of triplicates is shown. The dotted line indicates the detection limit.Flow cytometry plots depict BFP gating and NRP1 expression in GFP and NRP1-GFP cells. Additional plots depict mCherry-positive MCMV infection with higher infection in NRP1-GFP cells. Growth curves depict increased viral titers in NRP1-GFP and 10.1 cells.Murine trophoblast stem cells lack NRP1 expression and are resistant to MCMV infectionmTSCs represent cells of the trophoblast lineage and retain the capacity to differentiate in vitro (33, 42). In the present study, previously described mTSCs isolated from E3.5 blastocysts were used (43). For quality control, visual confirmation by microscopy was performed together with cellular marker gene expression analysis by quantitative real-time RT-PCR (Fig. S2). Next, cell surface expression of putative MCMV entry receptors in mTSCs was analyzed by flow cytometry. Similarly to the SM9-1 cell line, mTSCs expressed both ITGβ1 and PDGFRα but little β2-M and no NRP1 (Fig. 6A). A small fraction of the mTSCs was susceptible to MCMV infection (Fig. 6B and C), leading to low levels of progeny production in replication kinetics experiments (Fig. 6D).Fig 6Absence of NRP1 expression in mTSCs and resistance to MCMV infection. mTSCs were characterized for the expression of MCMV host factors, transfected with NRP1-encoding plasmids, and analyzed for MCMV susceptibility. (A) Flow cytometry histograms of mTSCs stained for the receptors as indicated. FMO: fluorescence minus one. Representative data of n = 3 independent experiments is depicted. (B and C) mTSCs were infected with MCMV (MOI 0.5) and analyzed at 1 dpi. (B) Flow cytometry dot plots and (C) quantification of MCMV-infected (mCherry+) mTSCs. Representative flow cytometry images and medians of n = 6 independent experiments are shown. P-values were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U test. (D) Multistep replication kinetics of MCMV on mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) (MOI 0.1) and mTSCs (MOI 1). The virus released into the supernatant was titrated on M2-10B4 cells. Mean ± SEM of triplicates is shown. The dotted line indicates the detection limit. (E-H) mTSCs were transfected with plasmids encoding GFP or NRP1-GFP and analyzed at 1 day post-transfection. (E) Flow cytometry dot plots and (F) percentage of GFP-expressing cells in the indicated populations. Representative flow cytometry images and medians of n = 6 independent experiments are shown. (G) Flow cytometry histogram and (H) quantification of NRP1 expression among the transfected (GFP+) cells. Representative flow cytometry image and medians of n = 6 independent experiments are shown. P-values were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U test. (I and J) mTSCs were transfected with plasmids encoding GFP or NRP1-GFP, infected at 1 day post-transfection with MCMV (MOI 0.5), and analyzed at 1 dpi. (I) Flow cytometry dot plots and (J) quantification of MCMV-infected (mCherry+) among transfected (GFP+) cells. Representative flow cytometry images and medians of n = 6 independent experiments are shown. P-values were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U test.Flow cytometry histograms depict ITGβ1, PDGFRα, β2M, and NRP1 staining. Plots depict mCherry-positive MCMV infection and viral growth with higher titers in MEF. Additional plots depict GFP and NRP1-GFP gating with increased infection in NRP1-GFP cells.To test whether enforced NRP1 expression can increase MCMV infection, mTSCs were transfected with plasmids expressing GFP or NRP1-GFP (Fig. 6E and F) and subsequently infected with MCMV. Flow cytometric analysis confirmed NRP1 surface expression in mTSCs transfected with NRP1-GFP but not with GFP (Fig. 6G and H). NRP1-GFP transfection increased MCMV susceptibility in mTSCs, leading to a significantly higher percentage of mCherry+ cells at 1 dpi than in control cells (Fig. 6I and J). These findings demonstrate that mTSCs lack NRP1 expression and are resistant to MCMV infection, paralleling the phenotype observed in SM9-1 trophoblasts and primary placental cells.Inducible NRP1 expression increases MCMV infection in mTSCsNRP1 is involved in vessel sprouting, and global deletion of NRP1 leads to lethality in mice due to impaired yolk sac vascularization (44). Overexpression of this protein may thus negatively impact placenta development. To assess whether transient expression of NRP1 is sufficient to increase MCMV infection in mTSCs, a doxycycline-inducible expression system was used. As several attempts to transduce mTSCs with lentiviral vectors were unsuccessful in our hands, a piggyBac transposon system allowing doxycycline-inducible transgene expression was applied (45). The transgene is followed by an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) and GFP. PiggyBac transposon plasmids encoding NRP1-IRES-GFP or BFP-IRES-GFP were constructed and used for the transfection of mTSCs. After puromycin selection, doxycycline-inducible transgene expression was analyzed by flow cytometry (Fig. 7A). Doxycycline led to GFP expression in cells transfected with either construct (Fig. 7A and B), whereas NRP1 expression was observed in cells transfected with the NRP1-IRES-GFP but not the BFP-IRES-GFP construct (Fig. 7C and D). MCMV infection led to a significant increase in the percentage of mCherry+ cells in doxycycline-treated mTSCs expressing NRP1, when compared to the BFP control cells (Fig. 7E and F). These data demonstrated that transposon-mediated genetic modification of placental trophoblast cells allowed increased MCMV infection via NRP1 expression.Fig 7Doxycycline-induced NRP1 promotes MCMV infection in mTSCs. Inducible expression of NRP1 in mTSCs was performed using the piggyBac transposon system, followed by analysis for MCMV susceptibility. (A) Flow cytometry dot plots and (B) percentage of GFP expression in non-transfected, BFP-, or NRP1-transfected mTSCs at 48 h after induction with doxycycline. Representative flow cytometry dot plots and medians of n = 2 biological replicates in n = 2 independent experiments. (C) Flow cytometry histogram of NRP1 surface expression and (D) percentage of NRP1+ cells among the GFP+ cells at 24 h after induction with doxycycline. Representative flow cytometry histogram and medians of n = 2 independent experiments with n = 2 biological replicates are shown. (E and F) NRP1- or BFP-transfected mTSCs were induced with Doxycycline for 48 hpi before being infected with MCMV (MOI 0.5). (E) Flow cytometry dot plots of mCherry+ cells and (F) percentage of MCMV-infected (mCherry+) among the GFP+ doxycycline-induced mTSCs transduced with BFP or NRP1 at 1 dpi. Representative flow cytometry dot plots and medians of n = 3 independent experiments are shown. All P-values depicted were calculated using the Mann-Whitney U test.Flow cytometry plots depict GFP induction by doxycycline in BFP and NRP1 groups plus NRP1 staining in GFP-positive cells. Additional plots depict mCherry-positive MCMV infection higher in NRP1 cells, and bar graphs depict GFP and infection percentages.DISCUSSIONCongenital CMV infection causes a significant health burden worldwide (46). Unfortunately, the most widely used and well-established animal model for CMV disease has limited applicability for studying virus-host interactions in the fetus. Although infection of neonatal mice with MCMV models aspects of congenital CMV disease, MCMV cannot be used to study CMV transmission to the fetus in utero and congenital CMV infection. In the present study, we addressed tissue-specific features of the murine materno-fetal barrier interfering with vertical MCMV infection. We employed an intravenous high-dose MCMV infection model, which, while limiting the observation period due to high viral loads in organs such as the liver, enabled direct exposure of cell-free virus to the materno-fetal interface. In immunocompromised mice, MCMV replicated to considerably higher virus loads in the livers than in WT mice. However, even under these conditions, MCMV-infected cells were hardly detected in cells of the materno-fetal barrier. In line, ex vivo exposure of primary placental cells, SM9-1 trophoblasts, and mTSCs to MCMV revealed a cell type-specific resistance to infection. NRP1 expression reversed this phenotype and increased MCMV susceptibility.NRP1 was recently identified as a critical host factor for MCMV, and genetic deletion of NRP1 in SVEC4-10 cells abrogated MCMV infection and gene expression (25). MHC-I expression was described to be required for MCMV infection of macrophages (24), and we found β2-M, as part of the MHC-I, was very low in SM9-1 cells and mTSCs. How enforced MHC-I expression impacts infectibility in these cells remains to be tested in future studies. We found NRP1 to be expressed in MCMV-susceptible cell lines but not in resistant SM9-1 cells and mTSCs. Expression of NRP1 abrogated the resistance toward MCMV infection in these placental cells. Interestingly, transfection or transduction of SM9-1 cells or mTSCs with NRP1 led to a lower frequency of reporter fluorophore expression than the respective controls. This may result from the detrimental effects of NRP1 expression in trophoblasts and warrants further investigation. NRP1 is one of two homologous transmembrane proteins with a short cytoplasmic domain and a large extracellular region, which is divided into three domains. The extracellular domain allows binding to several ligands, including members of the semaphorin and vascular endothelial growth factor families, and thus NRP1 can form complexes with other transmembrane receptors to act as a co-receptor in various biological processes (40). NRP1 has been reported to act as an entry receptor for human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (47, 48), Epstein-Barr virus (49), Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (50), and the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (51, 52). The related NRP2 has been identified as a host factor for Lujo virus infection (53). Importantly, NRP2 is also a receptor for HCMV, allowing virus entry into epithelial and endothelial cells (22). The HCMV pentameric envelope glycoprotein complex, which is necessary for viral infection of several cell types, including epithelial cells, has been identified as the interaction partner for NRP2 (22, 54), and more recently, NRP2 has been suggested to facilitate guinea pig CMV infection (55). It seems likely that NRP1 serves as a receptor for MCMV entry into specific cells, but this has not been formally demonstrated yet. Hence, NRP1 has merely been called a host factor required for infection of particular cells (25). Interestingly, the MCMV-encoded chemokine 2 (MCK2), a part of the gH-gL-MCK2 glycoprotein complex that is analogous to the HCMV pentameric complex (56), was reported not to be involved in NRP1-dependent MCMV infection (24, 25). Further studies will be necessary to determine how NRP1 facilitates MCMV infection, whether it acts as an entry receptor, and which viral glycoproteins bind to it.CMVs are known to cross the placenta in humans, non-human primates, and guinea pigs but not in rodents such as mice or rats (13). The microanatomy of the materno-fetal interface is composed of various cell layers with maternal and fetal origin and is substantially different in the aforementioned species. Humans, non-human primates, and guinea pigs are hemomonochorial, whereas mice are hemotrichorial, meaning that one versus three trophoblast layers separate the chorion from maternal blood, respectively (57, 58). There are several possibilities for MCMV vertical transmission to the fetus such as (i) infection of trophoblast cells and further infection of fetal cells via cell-to-cell spread, (ii) cell-free virus or infected maternal cells passing through leaks of the materno-fetal barrier, (iii) virus penetrating the intact syncytiotrophoblast by transcytosis, and (iv) virus-infected maternal cells penetrating the barrier by transmigration. Accordingly, together with fetal vascular endothelial cells, a virus would need to infect or permeate only two cell layers in humans, non-human primates, and guinea pigs to penetrate the materno-fetal barrier, but four cell layers in mice. In addition, CMV is a slowly replicating virus, indicating that the production of virus particles for tissue penetration may require a certain amount of time to allow infection of the placenta and transmission from mother to fetus. Indeed, it has been reported that not until 10 days after intraperitoneal MCMV application, there is evidence of virus replication in placental tissue (7). In this respect, a major difference between species where vertical CMV transmission has been observed versus mice is the comparatively short gestational time of approximately 3 weeks in mice versus ~40, ~23, and ~10 weeks in humans, rhesus macaques, and guinea pigs, respectively (59, 60). Thus, although not addressed in the present study, the combination of anatomical differences together with a short gestation period presumably reduces the chance of vertical MCMV transmission.In the murine placenta, trophoblasts provide a multilayered defense against viral infection, combining structural, receptor-level, and immune mechanisms. The hemotrichorial murine placenta could reduce cell-to-cell spread in the materno-fetal interface. Resistance is further supported by restricting the expression of viral entry receptors. While human and guinea pig trophoblasts exhibit expression of NRP2 (55, 61), murine trophoblasts display low levels of NRP1. The role of adaptive immune response was observed by MCMV infection of pregnant SCID mice bearing the Prkdcscid mutation, where increased infection in E18 fetal membranes was observed (10). Likewise, we found a few placental cells to be infected in Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- mice, which lack T and NK cells (62, 63). Thus, lymphocytes likely interfere with materno-fetal MCMV infection. When viruses bypass receptor-level restriction, murine trophoblasts themselves mount innate immune responses. Trophoblasts can sense and respond to their microenvironment through pattern recognition receptors, and placenta-derived type I interferon, together with their downstream interferon-stimulated genes, contributes to protecting against viral infection (64). The role of type I interferons for placental antiviral defense is supported by the observation that pregnant Ifnar1⁻/⁻ mice exhibited Zika virus infection in trophoblasts (65). Further studies are needed to decipher the role of adaptive and innate immune responses and what the underlying mechanisms are.The present study suggests that the absence of NRP1 expression in murine placental trophoblast cells confers resistance against MCMV infection, reducing tissue damage in the materno-fetal barrier and potentially decreasing the risk of vertical transmission to the fetus.MATERIALS AND METHODSAnimalsAll mice were on a C57BL/6 background and kept in individually ventilated cages under specific pathogen-free conditions according to the recommendations of the FELASA (66). Pasteurella pneumotropica, Helicobacter species, and murine norovirus 1 were detected in sentinel animals tested in this breeding barrier. Food and water were provided ad libitum. Rag2-/-Il2rg-/- (B6(Cg)-Rag2tm1.1Cgn/J—JAX008449 crossed with B6.129S4-Il2rg2tm1Wjl/J—JAX003174), Ifnar1-/- (B6(Cg)-Ifnar1tm1.2Ees/J—JAX028288), and actb-EGFP (C57BL/6-Tg(CAG-EGFP)131Osb/LeySopJ-JAX006567) were bred locally, C57BL/6J WT mice (JAX000664) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Sulzfeld).Cell linesSM9-1 cells, an immortalized trophoblast cell line, were a kind gift from Joan Hunt (University of Kansas Medical Center, USA) and Margaret Petroff (Michigan State University, USA). They originated from a gestational day 9 Swiss-Webster mouse placenta, and the non-adherent trophoblastic cell outgrowths from the placental explants were transferred for 5–6 passages. These cells are immortalized but not transformed. In this study, SM9-1 cells were grown in RPMI 1640 containing antibiotics and supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS) and 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol at 37°C, 5% CO2 as previously described (34). All cell lines were cultured under identical conditions to allow comparability.mTSCs were isolated and cultured as previously described (43). Briefly, the cells were kept undifferentiated in 30 vol% TS medium (RPMI 1640 containing 20% FCS, 100 IU/mL penicillin, 100 mg/mL streptomycin, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 0.1 mM β-mercaptoethanol) and 70 vol % MEF-conditioned medium (TS medium harvested from mitomycin C-treated primary MEFs) supplemented with 30 ng/mL FGF4 and 1.2 μg/mL heparin. To induce differentiation, mTSC cells were cultured in TS medium only.Statistical analysisWe performed statistical tests as indicated and provided levels of significance directly for each analysis of interest. Data were processed using Prism software (GraphPad).MCMV infectionThe MCMV-3DR recombinant, which was used in all experiments, was generated from the pSM3fr bacterial artificial chromosome by BAC recombineering. It encodes Gaussia luciferase, mCherry, contains a sequence within the m164 ORF encoding the SIINFEKL peptide, and contains the complete Mck2 ORF, but its m157 ORF is replaced by the sequences for the reporter proteins (31, 67, 68). Virus stocks were produced on 10.1 immortalized mouse embryonic fibroblasts (69), purified by centrifugation through a sucrose cushion, and titrated on M2-10B4 mouse bone marrow stromal cells (ATCC CRL-1972). To ensure consistent infectious unit concentrations in virus stocks, plaque assays were routinely performed using both the previous and newly prepared stocks in parallel. For in vivo infection experiments, animals were anesthetized (isoflurane) and received a single intravenous injection of 106 PFU MCMV-3DR.Histology and data processingOrgans were fixed in PBS-buffered 2% paraformaldehyde with 30% sucrose. Organ slices (7 µm thick) were prepared and stained with DAPI. Images were acquired with an AxioScan Slide Scanner (Carl Zeiss) using the Colibri 7 LED light source and processed as TIFF-formatted files with ZEN (Carl Zeiss) and ImageJ (NIH) software. Single-channel exports were converted into binary images, and particles were counted as nuclei (50–200 µm2 area for DAPI+ signals) or MCMV-infected cells (90–600 µm2 mCherry+ signals), applying the “classic watershed” plugin. Ratios of mCherry+ to DAPI+ signals were determined for each image.Luciferase assayCell culture supernatants were measured for luciferase expression by quantification of luminescence after the addition of native coelenterazine (Synchem) with a Centro XS³ LB 960 luminometer (Berthold Technologies) essentially as described previously (15).Primary cell isolationSingle-cell suspensions were prepared from the placenta at gestational day 12.5. Placenta cells were generated as described in references (70, 71). Briefly, after macroscopic dissociation from the fetus, placenta fragments were digested in collagenase type II-S (Sigma-Aldrich) and then passed through a 70 µm cell strainer before further separation via a Percoll (Sigma-Aldrich) gradient and subsequent resuspension in DMEM/F12 medium supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 IU/mL Penicillin, 100 µg/mL Streptomycin, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, and 0.05 mM β-mercaptoethanol.Quantitative real-time RT-PCRTotal RNA was extracted from the cells using the innuPREP RNA Mini Kit (Analytik Jena), and contaminating DNA was removed using the TURBO DNA-free Kit (Ambion). cDNA was synthesized from 1 to 5 µg of the extracted RNA by using the RevertAid H Minus Reverse Transcriptase, oligo-dT primers, and the RNase inhibitor RiboLock (Thermo Fisher Scientific). qPCR was performed on a QuantStudio 3 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and the PowerTrack SYBR Green Mastermix (Fisher Scientific). To amplify mouse transcripts, the following primers were used: Gapdh (GGAGAAACCTGCCAAGTATGATG and GACAACCTGGTCCTCAGTGTAGC), Cdx2 (AGACAAATACCGGGTGGTGTA and CCAGCTCACTTTTCCTCCTGA), Pl1 (GACTACCCTGCTTGGTCTGG and GAAAGACAACTCGGCACCTC), and Tpbpa (CAGAGAGTGGCGATGGGTTTT and GACAATGGCACAGTGGCTGTT). Transcript levels were normalized to a housekeeping gene (Gapdh).Immunoblot analysisFor immunoblot analysis, cells were lysed in NP-40 buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Nonidet P-40, and Complete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche]), separated by SDS-PAGE, and subsequently transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane by semi-dry blotting. Target proteins were detected using monoclonal antibodies against NRP1 (D62C6, Cell Signaling Technology) or GAPDH (14C10, Cell Signaling Technology) and combined with HRP-coupled secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch). Recombinant mouse NRP1 (R&D Systems) was included as a positive control. Images were acquired with the Fusion Capture Advance FX7 16.15 (Peqlab) camera.TransfectionSM9-1 trophoblast cells were transfected with expression plasmids pEGFP-C1 (Clontech) or pCMV3-NRP1-GFPSpark (SinoBiological) plasmids using Lipofectamine 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, 3 µg of plasmid was mixed with 10 µL of Lipofectamine 2000 in Opti-MEM (GIBCO) for 10 min at room temperature before being added dropwise to 3 × 105 SM9-1 cells seeded the day before in a six-well plate.mTSCs were transfected with expression plasmids pEGFP-C1 and pCMV3-NRP1-GFPSpark using GenJet transfection reagent (SignaGen). Briefly, 1 µg of plasmid was mixed with 3 µL of GenJet in DMEM for 15 min at RT before being added dropwise to 1 × 105 mTSCs seeded the day before in a 12-well plate.Transduction with lentiviral expression vectorsNRP1-GFPSpark or GFPSpark coding sequences were PCR-amplified from the pCMV3-NRP1-GFPSpark plasmid using forward (TATAGAATTCATGGAGAGGGGGCTGCCG or TATAGAATTCATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGAGC) and reverse (TTAAGAATTC
TTACTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATGCCG) primers containing EcoRI restriction sites. The PCR product was cleaved with EcoRI and inserted into the lentiviral vector pLeGO-iB2-puro (72). This vector contains an SFFV promoter driving the expression of the insert, followed by IRES2-BFP-P2A-puromycin. Lentiviruses were generated using standard third-generation packaging vectors in HEK-293T cells. SM9-1 cells were transduced with the lentiviral vectors expressing NRP1-GFPSpark or GFPSpark in the presence of polybrene (Sigma). Transduced SM9-1 cells were selected with 2.5 µg/mL puromycin (Sigma), and GFP-positive cells were sorted using FACS Aria Fusion.PiggyBac transposon systemNRP1- and BFP-coding sequences were PCR amplified from the pCMV3-NRP1-GFPSpark plasmid or from the pLEGO-iB2 plasmid using forward (ATGGAGAGGGGGCTGCCG or ATGAGCGAGCTGATTAAGG) and reverse (TCACGCCTCTGAGTAATTACTCTG or TTACTTGTACATCAGGCGC) primers and inserted into the Tet-on piggyBac vector (Addgene # 97421) modified as described in reference (73). The vector contains a doxycycline-inducible TREG3 promoter driving the expression of the insert, followed by IRES-GFP, while the EF-1α promoter drives the expression of the reverse tetracycline-controlled transactivator and puromycin resistance marker. 2 × 105 mTSCs were seeded in a six-well plate the day before transfection. mTSCs were transfected with 2 µg PB-NRP1 or PB-BFP and 1 µg of pCMV-HyPBase (Sanger Plasmid Repository) encoding a hyperactive BP transposase (74) using 6 µL GenJet transfection reagent. 72 h post-transfection, cells were selected with 0.5 µg/mL of puromycin. NRP1 or BFP and GFP expression was induced by adding 2 µg/mL doxycycline (Biomol).Viral replication kineticsSM9-1 or mTSC cells (3 × 104) were infected at an MOI of 1 with MCMV-3DR in triplicates. The input virus was removed 4 h later, and fresh medium was added. The supernatants were harvested at different times post-infection and titrated by plaque assay on M2-10B4 cells.Flow cytometryCells were acquired on a LSRFortessa Cell Analyzer or FACSymphony A1 Cell Analyzer (BD Biosciences). The following antibodies were used for stainings: CD45-APC (30-F11), NRP1-PE (3E12), PDGFRα-PerCP-Cy5.5 (APA5), β2-microglobulin-APC (A16041A), integrin β1-PE-Cy7 (HMβ1-1), and NRP1-APC (3E12). Data were processed with FlowJo version 10 (BD Biosciences). Cells were pre-gated in a forward to sideward scatter plot, and cell duplicates were excluded in a second forward scatter high to area plot. Dead cells were identified by the use of a cell viability marker (Zombie Violet or NIR) and excluded from analysis.Reanalysis of a single-nuclei RNA-sequencing data setA single-nuclei RNA sequencing data set (NCBI GEO [GSE152248]) (41) was reanalyzed using the R package Seurat (v 4.3.0.1). The cell subsets were annotated according to the original report. For analysis, only placentas isolated at gestational day 12.5 were included.


Title: Tetherin Inhibits Cell-Free Virus Dissemination and Retards Murine Leukemia Virus Pathogenesis

INTRODUCTIONTetherin is an antiviral gene product that inhibits the release of nascent HIV-1 particles (1, 2) and other enveloped viruses (3–7). Tetherin entraps virions at the cell surface by the partitioning of its two membrane anchors between the budding virion envelope and the plasma membrane (8–12). However, while the effects of tetherin on cell-free virus release are well established, its effects on virus transmission between cells in direct contact are less clear, as experiments conducted in vitro have yielded various results (13–18). Moreover, in vitro studies cannot recapitulate the anatomy of virus-infected tissues in an animal host.Many studies have described the antiviral activity of tetherin in vitro, but far fewer have examined the effects of tetherin in vivo, as studies of the in vivo effects of tetherin are often confounded by the antiviral effects of other interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISGs). In mice, tetherin is constitutively expressed on only a few cell types, but it is strongly upregulated in response to type I IFN in many cells (19). LP-BM5 murine leukemia virus (MLV) infection in mice induces an IFN response (20), and replication and pathogenesis of this virus are enhanced in tetherin-knockout mice (21). Conversely, Moloney murine leukemia virus (MoMLV) does not induce a strong type I IFN response, and tetherin knockout enhances its replication only under conditions of artificial IFN induction (21). However, a naturally occurring tetherin polymorphism that results in higher constitutive surface expression levels correlates with reduced Friend retrovirus replication in mice (22).In the present study, we reexamined the effects of tetherin on the spread of two enveloped viruses (MoMLV and vesicular stomatitis virus [VSV]) in vitro by using a novel live-cell imaging analysis of the simplest model of a tissue, a cell monolayer. We also examined its effects on MoMLV dissemination in vivo by using mice engineered to carry an inducible human tetherin (hTetherin) transgene. We found that tetherin severely limits cell-free virus spread to distal cells in a monolayer, while the rate of dissemination to proximal cells is largely unaffected. In the case of MoMLV, the predominant mode of spread through a monolayer is via direct cell-to-cell transmission, irrespective of tetherin expression. In vivo, we found that ubiquitous hTetherin expression resulted in runt development and premature lethality, but mice with hematopoietic cell-restricted hTetherin expression displayed normal growth. Notably, hTetherin-expressing, MoMLV-infected mice had nearly wild-type (WT) numbers of infected cells in spleen and thymus tissues but markedly reduced plasma viremia and a delayed progression of MoMLV-induced leukemia. These results suggest that MoMLV spread within tissues and cell monolayers largely involves direct cell-to-cell transmission but that dissemination of cell-free virions via plasma is required for the full pathogenic effects of MoMLV infection.RESULTSEffects of tetherin on viral spread in cell monolayers.To examine the effects of tetherin on cell-to-cell and cell-free retroviral dissemination in vivo, we first established an in vitro viral replication assay in which the two modes of virus spread could be measured and discriminated. For the initial development of assays in cultured cells, we took advantage of the known capacity of VSV to spread rapidly in monolayer cultures via both direct cell-to-cell contact and long-distance diffusion of cell-free virions (23). Because of this property, VSV titers are typically measured in PFU, using cell monolayers that are overlaid with soft agar soon after infection to block virion diffusion through the cell culture supernatant. Under agar, virions generated by an initially infected cell are propagated only to adjacent cells in the monolayer, generating a roughly circular plaque whose diameter increases with time.The release of cell-free VSV particles from infected cells is inhibited by tetherin (4); thus, an initial question was whether tetherin could inhibit cell-free and/or cell-to-cell virus spread in a monolayer. We generated NIH 3T3 cells stably expressing either mouse tetherin (21) or human tetherin (Fig. 1B) and confirmed that both reduced the level of virions in the cell-free culture supernatant by 10- to 100-fold during a VSV replication assay over ∼2 days (Fig. 1A). Next, we took advantage of the ability of an agar overlay to dissect the contributions of cell-free and direct cell-to-cell viral transmission to VSV spread. Specifically, we measured the dynamics of VSV spread through a cell monolayer in which virus propagation was either unrestricted or restricted to adjacent cells by an agar overlay and compared viral propagation under these two conditions to viral propagation in cells expressing tetherin. To accomplish this, we used a live-cell imaging approach. Cell monolayers were infected with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-expressing VSV at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10−4 (∼50 PFU per 35-mm dish). After 1 h, the culture medium was replaced with either a liquid or agar overlay. The cultures were then inspected periodically for the next 6 to 8 h, and when individual GFP-positive cells were detected, they were centered in a field of observation. Infection of cells that did or did not express human or mouse tetherin proteins yielded approximately equal numbers of GFP-positive cells, consistent with previous findings that tetherin specifically inhibits virion release but not the other steps in VSV replication (4). VSV-GFP spread in the monolayer was recorded by acquiring images every 10 min for the ensuing 24 to 40 h (Fig. 1D; see Movies S1 and S2 in the supplemental material). Under each condition, VSV-GFP spread from the initially infected cell to neighboring cells formed a focus of contiguous infected cells. Additionally, under unrestricted conditions (i.e., no tetherin expression and no agar overlay), VSV-GFP infection also became evident in cells that were not in direct contact with the central focus of infection (Fig. 1D; Movies S1 and S2, upper left panels), consistent with the notion that some cells become infected via diffusion of virions in the extracellular culture medium. These distally infected cells were observed beginning at approximately 20 h postinfection and were especially evident by 29 h postinfection, and at a lower magnification (Fig. 1D). As expected, the distal population of infected cells was not observed in the presence of an agar overlay (Fig. 1D; Movies S1 and S2, upper right panels). Notably, expression of either mouse or human tetherin was also able to inhibit VSV-GFP spread to distal cells but did not appear to greatly inhibit infection of cells that were proximal to infected cells. Thus, tetherin appeared to inhibit distal propagation in a manner similar to that of the restriction imposed by an agar overlay (Fig. 1D; Movies S1 and S2, lower panels). Tetherin also appeared to enhance cell syncytium formation (which does not ordinarily occur during VSV replication at neutral pH) and cell death within infected foci. We speculate that these effects may have been caused by virion accumulation on cell surfaces in contact with neighboring cells.FIG 1Effects of tetherin on VSV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) NIH 3T3 cells stably expressing empty vector (control) or either mouse or human tetherin (mTetherin or hTetherin) were infected with VSV (MOI = 0.0001), and viral titers (PFU per milliliter) in the culture supernatant were measured over 2 days. (B) NIH 3T3 cells were transduced with pLHCX containing hTetherin and selected with hygromycin. Single-cell clones were isolated and tested for hTetherin expression by flow cytometry. Cells were either left unstained (gray filled histogram), stained for hTetherin (red filled histogram), or stained with an isotype control antibody (dashed black line). (C) Designation of the region in which GFP fluorescence was measured to quantify viral spread for Fig. 2A and 4A. (D) Imaging of plaques after VSV-GFP infection of NIH 3T3 cells which were otherwise unmanipulated (control), were overlaid with agar after infection, or expressed mTetherin or hTetherin. The upper three rows (0, 20, and 24 h) depict a single representative focus for each condition, while the lower two rows (29 and 40 h) show different representative foci from separate experiments, at a lower magnification.We quantified these observations by measuring the integrated GFP fluorescence in an ∼0.5-mm region corresponding to the centrally located focus or plaque (region 1) (Fig. 1C). The accumulations of GFP fluorescence within this central focus were similar under the different conditions (Fig. 2A and B), suggesting that neither an agar overlay nor tetherin expression significantly inhibited VSV transmission between cells in direct contact. In contrast, quantitation of the total GFP intensity in a larger microscopic field at various time points postinfection revealed a different pattern. By 40 h postinfection, there was significantly more GFP fluorescence in the larger field under unrestricted growth conditions than in the presence of an agar overlay or tetherin (Fig. 1D and 2C), indicating that outward VSV spread included a component that was diffusible through the culture medium to distal cells. Thus, tetherin can restrict the spread of VSV by acting on cell-free virions but does not greatly inhibit VSV spread between cells that are in direct contact in a cell monolayer.FIG 2Quantitation of VSV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) Quantitation of VSV-GFP growth in region 1 under each condition. The green line represents the average integrated GFP signal for 6 to 10 movies per condition, with error bars (in gray) indicating 1 standard deviation. (B) VSV-GFP integrated intensity in region 1 at 15 h postinfection. Each dot represents one movie, with the horizontal lines showing the averages for all movies and error bars indicating 1 standard deviation. P values were determined by Student's t test. (C) Quantitation of total GFP intensity in each large, low-magnification field (∼2.5 mm × 2 mm, as depicted in Fig. 1D). Columns represent the average GFP intensities under each condition at the indicated time points, with error bars representing 1 standard deviation. P values were determined using Student's t test.We next used the same approach to determine the mode by which MoMLV spreads through monolayer cultures and whether its spread is inhibited by tetherin. First, we confirmed that human tetherin, like mouse tetherin, is able to restrict the generation of cell-free MoMLV by infecting NIH 3T3 cells and monitoring the accumulation of infectious virions in culture supernatant over the course of 5 days. As expected, both tetherin proteins inhibited the generation of extracellular MoMLV virions (Fig. 3A).FIG 3Effects of tetherin on MoMLV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) NIH 3T3 cells expressing empty vector (control) or either mouse or human tetherin (mTetherin or hTetherin) were infected with MoMLV (MOI = 0.01), and viral titers (focus-forming units [FFU] per milliliter) in the culture supernatant were measured over 5 days. (B) Schematic representation of a replication-competent MoMLV construct in which an EGFP cDNA was inserted into the pNCS molecular clone at the 3′ end of env, following an FMDV 2A site, generating MLV-2A-GFP. (C) Replication of MLV-2A-GFP and the parental virus generated from pNCS (MLV) in NIH 3T3 cells following infection at an MOI of 0.05. (D) NIH 3T3 cells were infected with MLV-2A-GP (MLV-GFP) as described in the legend to Fig. 1D and imaged for 72 h. The upper three rows (0, 45, and 72 h) depict a single representative focus for each condition, and the bottom row (72 h) shows different representative foci from separate experiments.To enable the measurement of MoMLV spread through monolayers, we constructed a replication-competent MoMLV construct that expresses GFP (MLV-GFP) in infected cells. This was accomplished by the insertion of sequences encoding a foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) 2A site and GFP at the 3′ end of the env gene (Fig. 3B). Importantly, MLV-GFP replicated in cultured NIH 3T3 cells with kinetics that were nearly the same as those of wild-type MoMLV (Fig. 3C). We measured MLV-GFP spreading through a monolayer by monitoring the growth of foci of MLV-GFP-infected cells, commencing observation when individual MLV-GFP-infected cells were detected in monolayers ∼12 h after infection. As was the case with VSV infection, MoMLV infection of cells that did or did not express the human or mouse tetherin protein yielded approximately equal numbers of GFP-positive cells, suggesting that MoMLV entry and gene expression were not affected by tetherin. Because the MoMLV replication rate is lower than that of VSV, we recorded MLV-GFP infections over the course of 72 h following the initial detection of infected cells. In contrast to the pattern observed with VSV-GFP, MLV-GFP appeared to spread only to adjacent cells, even under unrestricted growth conditions (Fig. 3D, left column; Movies S3 and S4, upper left panels).Notably, the growth rates of MLV-GFP-infected foci appeared to be similar in the presence and absence of an agar overlay (Fig. 3D; Movies S3 and S4, upper right panels), suggesting that cell-free dissemination of virions does not contribute substantially to MoMLV spread through a monolayer. Moreover, expression of either mouse or human tetherin did not noticeably affect the growth of an MLV-GFP focus (Fig. 3D; Movies S3 and S4, lower panels), indicating that tetherin does not inhibit MLV spread between cells that are in direct contact. Quantitation of MLV-GFP infection by the aforementioned methods confirmed that the growth of foci of MLV-GFP infection was not measurably inhibited by either an agar overlay or tetherin expression (Fig. 4A and B), and unlike the results with VSV-GFP, this was also true for the total GFP intensity in a larger microscopic field (Fig. 4C). Thus, while MoMLV generated significant titers of diffusible cell-free virions in monolayer cultures, the apparently greater efficiency with which the virus spread from infected cells to proximal rather than distal uninfected cells means that direct cell-to-cell transmission constitutes the dominant mode of MoMLV propagation in cell monolayers in vitro.FIG 4Quantitation of MoMLV spread in a cell monolayer. (A) Quantitation of MLV spread in region 1, as described in the legend to Fig. 2A. (B) MLV-GFP integrated intensity in region 1 at 48 h postinfection. Each dot represents one movie, with each horizontal line showing the average for each population and error bars indicating 1 standard deviation. P values were determined by Student's t test. (C) Quantitation of total GFP intensity in each field (∼2.5 mm × 2 mm) as described in the legend to Fig. 2C.Generation of mice with ubiquitous or tissue-specific tetherin expression.Although cultured cell monolayers have been considered models of the simplest tissues, neither they nor any other cocultivation scenario can recapitulate the anatomical and fluid-dynamic complexity of the environment confronting a virus as it replicates in an animal host. Therefore, we next sought to determine the effects of tetherin and cell-free virions on MoMLV dissemination in an animal. To determine the effects of tetherin expression in vivo without the confounding effects of the expression of many hundreds of ISGs, we generated a mouse line in which the expression of an hTetherin transgene could be induced in a cell-type-dependent manner in the absence of IFN. Specifically, a lox-STOP-lox cassette was positioned between a constitutive promoter (CAG) and an hTetherin cDNA sequence (Fig. 5A), preventing hTetherin expression unless the transgene encountered Cre recombinase. Mice that were hemizygous for the inducible hTetherin transgene were crossed with mice hemizygous for a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter-driven Cre recombinase transgene (CMV-cre), generating offspring that were either wild type (WT), carried the hTetherin transgene alone (Tg), carried the CMV-cre transgene alone (cre), or carried both transgenes (Tg; cre). Importantly, hTetherin expression was detected only in animals carrying both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes (Fig. 5B).FIG 5Generation of inducible hTetherin-transgenic mice. (A) Schematic of the targeting cassette. A human tetherin transgene (Tg) was inserted into the pCTV targeting vector 3′ to the loxP (triangles)-flanked transcription stop signal (STOP) and 5′ to an FRT-flanked internal ribosome entry site (IRES)-EGFP sequence. The entire cassette was targeted to the mouse Rosa26 locus. (B) Peripheral blood leukocytes were stained for human tetherin expression and analyzed by flow cytometry. Mice carried both the human tetherin and cre transgenes (red) or either transgene alone (black and gray lines). Wild-type animals were also analyzed (gray filled histogram).Mice homozygous for the hTetherin transgene were mated to mice that were hemizygous for CMV-cre, resulting in litters in which ∼50% of the offspring carried both hTetherin and CMV-cre, while the remainder carried hTetherin in its uninduced configuration. Most of these litters contained one or more mice that were noticeably smaller than their littermates, some of which died prematurely (Fig. 6A and B). Flow cytometric analysis of splenocytes and thymocytes from mice that carried both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes revealed various levels of hTetherin expression (Fig. 6C). In fact, there was a striking inverse correlation between the level of tetherin expression and body weight (Fig. 6D). A similar analysis of the progeny of matings between hTetherin and zona pellucida 3 (Zp3) promoter-driven cre (Zp3-cre) transgenic mice revealed ubiquitous hTetherin transgene expression in the offspring of females carrying both transgenes, as expected. Notably, the relationship between hTetherin expression and body weight was the same as that observed for the CMV-cre-expressing mice, indicating that the effect was specific to tetherin and did not require ongoing cre expression (Fig. 6E). Examination of postmortem mouse tissues revealed no specific pathology in hematopoietic or other tissues that could explain the runt development that was associated with ubiquitous hTetherin expression.FIG 6Characterization of mice carrying an inducible hTetherin transgene. (A) Typical appearance of mouse littermates at 21 days old. The smaller animal carried both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes, while the larger animal carried only the hTetherin transgene. (B) Weights of littermates that did or did not constitutively and ubiquitously express hTetherin over time. The two charts represent two different litters. The asterisk indicates an animal that died. (C) FACS analysis of hTetherin expression on splenocytes and thymocytes from one litter of mice. A “+” indicates the presence of both the hTetherin and CMV-cre transgenes. (D and E) Weights and mean fluorescence intensities (gMFI) of hTetherin expression on splenocytes from mice generated by hTetherin × CMV-cre (D) and hTetherin × Zp3-cre (E) crosses for 2 litters of mice at ∼7 weeks of age. (F) hTetherin expression (colored lines) on splenocytes from hTetherin Tg mice crossed with mice bearing the CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre transgene, after gating for T cells (CD3), B cells (CD19), dendritic cells (CD11c), and macrophages (CD11b). Data for control mice (hTetherin Tg alone, without cre) are depicted by gray and black histograms. (G) Human PBMCs stimulated with IFN-α were either left unstained (black filled histogram), stained with an isotype control (IC) antibody (gray filled histogram), or stained for hTetherin (red filled histogram). Splenic lymphocytes from mice carrying both the hTetherin and Vav1-cre transgenes were left unstained (black dashed line), stained with an isotype control antibody (gray dashed line), or stained for hTetherin (red dashed line). (H) Weights of mice bearing either the uninduced hTetherin Tg alone or a Vav1-cre-induced hTetherin Tg over time.By crossing mice carrying the inducible hTetherin transgene and mice carrying cre driven by the CD4, CD2, or Vav1 promoter (CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre), we generated mice specifically expressing hTetherin only in T cells (CD4-cre), in both T and B cells (CD2-cre), or in all hematopoietic cells (Vav1-cre), respectively (Fig. 6F). The level of hTetherin Tg expression on mouse cells was then compared to the level of endogenous tetherin induced by IFN-α treatment of human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) (Fig. 6G). Although the level of hTetherin expression on mouse cells was more variable, the majority of the cells expressed hTetherin at a level nearly identical to that found on the IFN-α-stimulated human PBMCs (Fig. 6G). Importantly, expression of hTetherin on T and B cells, or indeed on all hematopoietic cells, did not have the same adverse effects on growth that were observed with ubiquitously expressed hTetherin (Fig. 6H). Together, these data show that ubiquitous expression of hTetherin profoundly reduces the fitness of mice, with marked dose-dependent adverse effects on growth and survival, perhaps explaining why tetherin has evolved to be IFN inducible in most cell types. However, hTetherin expression on hematopoietic cells was not responsible for these defects.Tetherin expression in hematopoietic cells reduces MoMLV plasma viremia.Analysis of viral infection in mice in which hTetherin expression was induced in all tissues would be complicated by the confounding growth and survival defects. Therefore, we limited our viral infection studies to mouse lines in which hTetherin expression was induced only in subsets of hematopoietic cells. Specifically, neonatal mice harboring the hTetherin transgene and expressing cre in (i) T cells only, (ii) T and B cells, or (iii) all hematopoietic cells were infected with MoMLV. The numbers of infected splenocytes and thymocytes, as well as plasma viremia, were measured 2 weeks after infection. For mice expressing hTetherin either in T cells alone or in both T and B cells, the numbers of infected cells and levels of plasma viremia were indistinguishable from those of control (cre-negative) littermates that lacked hTetherin expression (Fig. 7A). However, expression of hTetherin in all hematopoietic cells caused a significant reduction (P = 0.02) in plasma viremia (Fig. 7A). Notably, the numbers of infected splenocytes were indistinguishable in hTetherin-expressing and control animals, while the numbers of infected thymocytes were only marginally reduced as a consequence of hTetherin expression (Fig. 7A).FIG 7Effect of hematopoietic cell hTetherin expression on MoMLV replication in vivo. (A) MoMLV loads in the plasma (FFU per milliliter) and the spleen and thymus (numbers of infected cells per 106 cells) 14 days after infection of mouse neonatal littermates bearing the hTetherin Tg and the indicated cre inducers (+) or the hTetherin Tg alone (−). (B) MoMLV loads in mice bearing the hTetherin Tg alone (−) or the hTetherin Tg and Vav1-cre, grouped according to hTetherin expression level (low or high).Because the hTetherin levels varied among mice in which its expression was induced (Fig. 6C and F), we segregated hTetherin-expressing animals into those with high and low expression levels. This analysis revealed that the hTetherin expression level inversely correlated with plasma viremia (Fig. 7B). There was a marginal, statistically ambiguous inverse correlation between the tetherin expression level and the infected thymocyte number, and there was no apparent effect of tetherin on infection of splenocytes (Fig. 7B).In addition to exerting a direct antiviral effect by inhibiting virion release, hTetherin has been shown to facilitate antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) of infected cells in vitro by causing antigen retention on the surfaces of those infected cells (24). In principle, therefore, reduced plasma viremia may potentially be the result of a shorter infected cell life-span due to ADCC. We therefore determined whether anti-MoMLV antibodies were detectable in mice during acute infection at the time at which the plasma viremia levels and infected cell numbers were determined. A mouse litter derived from mating hTetherin transgenic and Vav1-cre mice was infected with MoMLV and monitored for the presence of anti-MoMLV antibodies. None of the mice had detectable levels of anti-MoMLV antibodies in the blood at 2 weeks postinfection (Fig. 8), excluding antibody-mediated effects as an explanation for the influence of tetherin on plasma viremia at this time point.FIG 8Lack of anti-MoMLV antibodies during acute infection. Plasmas from hBst2 × Vav1-cre littermates infected with MoMLV were isolated at 14 days postinfection and used to probe lysates of uninfected (−) or MoMLV-infected (+) NIH 3T3 cells. All animals were either hTetherin transgene hemizygous alone (Teth−) or hTetherin transgene hemizygous and Vav1-cre hemizygous (Teth+). The same lysates were also probed with plasma from an uninfected animal as well as with antibodies to either the MLV p12 or p30/CA protein. Membranes were probed with an antibody against tubulin as a loading control.To determine the effects of tetherin on MoMLV pathogenesis, parallel cohorts of mice bearing the inducible hTetherin transgene in its uninduced state versus those also carrying either a CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre transgene were maintained for approximately 1 year, and leukemia-induced deaths were monitored. Mice expressing hTetherin in T cells only (CD4-cre) or in T and B cells (CD2-cre) exhibited no difference in MoMLV-induced mortality compared to that of littermates carrying the uninduced hTetherin transgene (Fig. 9A and B). In contrast, animals expressing hTetherin on all hematopoietic cells exhibited a significant (P = 0.0085) delay in MoMLV-induced mortality (Fig. 9C). Thus, the inhibitory effect of hTetherin on the generation of cell-free virus correlated better with its ability to delay leukemia than did its lack of effect on the number of MoMLV-infected splenocytes or thymocytes.FIG 9Effect of hematopoietic cell hTetherin expression on MoMLV pathogenesis. Mice born from matings between mice homozygous for the hTetherin transgene and mice expressing either CD4-cre (A), CD2-cre (B), or Vav1-cre (C) were infected with MoMLV and monitored for morbidity and mortality. Black, no tetherin expression; red, cre-induced tetherin expression.DISCUSSIONAlthough neither VSV (4) nor MoMLV is inhibited by tetherin at early steps in the replication cycle, the ability of tetherin to inhibit the release of virions from infected cells into the extracellular milieu of cultured cells is well established. However, whether tetherin can inhibit the dissemination of infection among cells in contact with each other, as would occur in solid tissues, is less well understood. We developed a live-cell imaging assay by which we could monitor multicycle VSV and MoMLV replication in the simplest two-dimensional model of a tissue, namely, a cell monolayer. The results of these experiments clearly showed that neither VSV nor MoMLV spreading between adjacent cells was greatly inhibited by tetherin expression.The inability of agar or tetherin to inhibit the spread of MoMLV within a monolayer and the lack of an effect of tetherin on the numbers of MoMLV-infected cells in spleen and thymus tissues suggest that the majority of virus spread in monolayer cultures and in tissues in vivo occurs between neighboring cells. This finding is consistent with previous studies indicating that transfer of MLV from transfected cells to recipient cells in a single cycle was not inhibited by methyl cellulose (25). Nevertheless, expression of hTetherin in hematopoietic cells caused a significant reduction in MoMLV plasma viremia and, crucially, a delay in the onset of disease and mortality. These findings suggest a key role for cell-free virions in the dissemination of viral infection in vivo.In mice, tetherin is expressed on a small subset of cells in the absence of IFN or another inductive signal (19). Presumably, tetherin would present a more effective antiviral defense if it were ubiquitously and constitutively expressed. However, our data suggest that a dramatic fitness cost is associated with such expression, though it is not yet clear why. When constitutive hTetherin expression was limited to hematopoietic cells, or subsets thereof, mice developed normally, suggesting that adverse effects of hTetherin on growth and survival are due to its expression on nonhematopoietic cell types.Tetherin expression on all hematopoietic cells reduced plasma viremia and delayed disease, while expression on lymphocytes alone did not. This finding strongly suggests that hematopoietic cells other than lymphocytes constitute a major source of plasma virions, even though MoMLV induces tumors primarily in lymphocytes (26, 27). Importantly, however, the types of tumors induced by MoMLV appear to be determined not by the inherent susceptibility of a particular hematopoietic lineage to MoMLV infection but by the U3 sequences. Indeed, tumors of myeloid lineage cells (erythroleukemias and monocytoid leukemias) are induced if U3 sequences are exchanged with those from MLV strains that induce this type of leukemia. Moreover, promonocyte tumors occur at a low frequency in mice infected with unmodified MoMLV (28–31). Thus, it is unsurprising that nonlymphocyte hematopoietic cells appear to represent a significant source of plasma virions.Despite the above considerations, it is formally possible that hTetherin expression on nonlymphoid hematopoietic cells leads indirectly to a reduction in viral yield from other cells (e.g., lymphocytes). The consequences of tetherin-induced virion retention on infected cell surfaces may be more complex than simply restricting infection to proximal cells and directly reducing the cell-free virion titer. Accumulation of entrapped virions can also have indirect antiviral effects, including tetherin-driven stimulation of proinflammatory signaling pathways (32–35), enhancement of antiviral immune responses (36, 37), and enhancement of ADCC (24, 38). Given that we did not detect anti-MoMLV antibodies concomitant with reductions in plasma viremia and that equal numbers of infected cells were measured in hTetherin-expressing and non-hTetherin-expressing mice, it is unlikely that ADCC contributed to the effects that we observed. In a Friend MLV (FV) infection model, the tetherin allele found in B6 mice was observed to promote cellular antiviral immune responses, including increased NK and T cell activity, when the allele was expressed in combination with the MHC H-2b haplotype found in B6 mice (36, 37). At early time points of infection (5 to 7 days postinfection), there was no apparent tetherin-dependent effect on either plasma viremia or the number of infected splenocytes, but increased dendritic cell (DC) and NK cell activation was observed in WT compared to tetherin-deficient mice (37). Conversely, at 2 weeks postinfection, decreases in plasma viremia and infected splenocytes were observed in WT compared to tetherin-deficient mice (36), as would be expected in the presence of potent antiviral cellular immune responses. In contrast, we observed a decrease in plasma viremia, but not in infected splenocytes or thymocytes, in tetherin-transgenic mice, suggesting that a different mechanism is operative. Among several differences in the two studies, a key difference is that MoMLV is a single replication-competent virus, while FV is an immunosuppressive complex of replication-defective and -competent viruses that may easily lead to the elicitation of different host responses to infection. The reduction in plasma viremia observed herein correlated with tetherin surface expression levels, which is more consistent with a direct tethering mechanism in infected cells as the means by which tetherin prevents virus dissemination and pathogenesis.Although retroviruses appear to spread in vitro primarily via direct cell-to-cell transmission in a manner that is not affected by tetherin, many enveloped viruses, including some retroviruses, such as HIV-1, have evolved tetherin antagonists. This fact, in addition to observations reported herein, indicate an important role for tetherin in the host defense against retroviruses. Moreover, our current findings suggest that both cell-to-cell transmission and cell-free virion particles are key mediators of viral dissemination in vivo.MATERIALS AND METHODSGeneration of transgenic mice carrying an inducible hTetherin transgene.The human tetherin gene was cloned into the AscI site of pCTV (Addgene plasmid 15912) and targeted to the Rosa26 locus (Fig. 5) of C57BL/6J mice to generate the mouse line B6.Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-BST2)Bsz/J. Mice that were hemizygous for the transgene Gt(ROSA)26Sortm1(CAG-BST2)Bsz (abbreviated hBST2) were intercrossed to generate mice homozygous for hBST2 and then mated to mice hemizygous for a Cre recombinase transgene under the control of one of several promoters (all from The Jackson Laboratory), as follows: CMV-cre, Zp3-cre, CD4-cre, CD2-cre, or Vav1-cre. Mice were genotyped by PCR for the hBST2 transgene or the wild-type allele by use of the following primers (5′ to 3′): RL267, GGCATCTACTTCGTATGACTATTGCAGA (hBST2 forward); RL268, GAGGCCCAGCAGCACAATCAGCAGCT (hBST2 reverse); RL286, AGTTCTCTGCTGCCTCCTGGCTTCT (WT forward); and RL340, CTGAAAATTAAGGATCAAGGCAAAGGAT (WT reverse). The hBST2 PCR yields a 522-bp product, and the WT reaction yields a 720-bp product. The CMV-cre, Zp3-cre, and CD4-cre transgenes were amplified by use of JAX primers oIMR1084 (GCGGTCTGGCAGTAAAAACTATC) and oIMR1085 (GTGAAACAGCATTGCTGTCACTT), yielding a 100-bp product. The CD2-cre and Vav1-cre transgenes were amplified by use of JAX primers oIMR9266 (AGATGCCAGGACATCAGGAACCTG) and oIMR9267 (ATCAGCCACACCAGACACAGAGATC), yielding a 236-bp product. Mice were housed in a pathogen-free facility and maintained in accordance with Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines. All animal studies were approved by the Rockefeller University IACUC (protocol number 15785-H) in accordance with the Animal Welfare Act (USDA) and the Public Health Services Policy of the Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare (OLAW).Tetherin-expressing cell lines.NIH 3T3 (ATCC; CRL-1658) cells were stably transduced with the empty pLHCX (Clontech) vector or with pLHCX containing either mouse or human tetherin cDNA. The cells expressing mouse tetherin have been described previously (21). For the human tetherin-expressing cell lines, single-cell clones were selected with hygromycin and analyzed by flow cytometry for hTetherin expression (phycoerythrin [PE]-anti-CD317/Bst2; BioLegend).Viruses and infections.The MoMLV-GFP construct was generated by inserting an FMDV 2A sequence followed by the enhanced GFP (EGFP) sequence between the 3′ end of env and the long terminal repeat (LTR) in the infectious plasmid clone of MoMLV, pNCS (39). Specifically, a PmeI site and a NotI site were introduced into pNCS, a MoMLV molecular clone, between the 3′ end of env and the 3′ LTR. Subsequently, the Env stop codon was removed and an FMDV 2A sequence flanked by PmeI and EcoRI sites was inserted. Finally, the EGFP gene was inserted between the EcoRI and NotI sites, resulting in pNCS ENV-2A-GFP. MoMLV and MoMLV-GFP stocks were generated by transfecting NIH 3T3 cells with proviral plasmids. Harvested supernatant was filtered, and viral stocks were titered on NIH 3T3 cells by a focal immunoassay as described previously (21). For in vivo MoMLV infections, measurements of plasma viremia and infected cell numbers in spleen and thymus tissues were performed as previously described (21). VSV carrying an EGFP gene (40) was kindly provided by Kartik Chandran (Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY). VSV-GFP stocks were generated in Vero cells (ATCC; CCL-81) and titrated by plaque assay.Western blot analysis.Uninfected or MoMLV-infected NIH 3T3 cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Igepal, 1% sodium deoxycholate). Plasma samples were obtained from blood collected from animals at 14 days post-MoMLV infection and diluted 1:100 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Plasma antibody was detected with an anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (Li-Cor). The anti-p12 (CRL-1890) and anti-p30 (CRL-1912) antibodies were obtained from ATCC.Live-cell imaging and quantitative analysis.All live-cell imaging was performed with a VivaView FL incubator fluorescence microscope imaging system (Olympus). Cells were infected with VSV-GFP or MoMLV-GFP at an MOI of 0.0001 or 0.001, respectively, and transferred to the VivaView incubator. Single infected, GFP-positive cells were centered in a field, and images were acquired at 5- to 15-min intervals for 24 to 72 h. Images were analyzed with MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices). Images taken at a magnification of ×4 were acquired on an Evos FL microscope and quantitated with ImageJ software.Flow cytometry.For fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis of mouse primary cells, single-cell suspensions were made from spleen, thymus, or peripheral blood, resuspended in red blood cell lysis buffer (150 mM NH4Cl, 10 mM KHCO3, and 0.05 mM EDTA), washed in FACS buffer (PBS, 0.2% bovine serum albumin [BSA]), incubated with purified anti-CD16/CD32 (Fc Block), and then stained with the following antibodies (all from BD Biosciences): peridinin chlorophyll protein (PerCP)–Cy5.5–anti-CD3, V450–anti-CD19, allophycocyanin (APC)–Cy7–anti-CD11b, APC–anti-CD11c, PerCP–Cy5.5–anti-CD4, and V450–anti-CD8. Adherent cell lines were harvested in PBS plus 5 mM EDTA, pelleted, and stained in FACS buffer. Human PBMCs were stimulated with 1,000 U/ml human IFN-α for 24 h. Human tetherin expression on primary cells and stable cell lines was detected with PE–anti-human CD317/Bst2 (BioLegend), and PE-mouse IgG1 (BioLegend) was used as an isotype control. Dead cells were excluded by DAPI (4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) staining. All data were acquired on an LSR II flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson) and analyzed with FlowJo software (Tree Star).Supplementary MaterialSupplemental material


Title: SARS-CoV-2 Variant Spike and accessory gene mutations alter pathogenesis

IntroductionIn December of 2019, a cluster of viral pneumonia cases were observed in Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.1 The etiologic agent of this infection was found to be a novel coronavirus that we now call severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).2 By early 2020, the virus was rapidly spreading, leading to infections on all seven continents and in every country around the world. There have since been over 420 million cases and almost six million deaths from this virus.3 Despite the rapid development and deployment of vaccines, the pandemic persists.SARS-CoV-2 is a single-stranded positive-sense RNA virus that is 79% identical in sequence to SARS-CoV-1, the virus responsible for localized epidemic outbreaks beginning in February 2003.4 The genome of this and other beta coronaviruses is composed of Open Reading Frames (ORFs) which are functionally divided between replicase proteins, structural proteins, and accessory proteins, the latter of which are unique to each CoV species.5, 6 From the 5′ to 3′ end, the virus encodes the replicase (ORF1a/b) and the four ORFS for the structural proteins spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N). The replicase is responsible for encoding sixteen nonstructural proteins that compose the replicative machinery of the virus. Additionally, interspersed with the structural proteins at the 3′ end of the genome is a variety of accessory ORFs. The accessory ORFs encode proteins which are not essential for viral replication in vitro but generally contribute to viral pathogenesis. The accessory ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 are very similar to those of SARS-CoV-1, and many of the functions of these ORFs have been inferred based on the previously identified functions of the SARS-CoV-1 accessory ORFs.5The functions of the accessory ORFs of SARS-CoV-2 involve modulation of several different host pathways including antagonism of the innate immune response. For example, SARS-CoV-2 ORF3b has been shown to antagonize interferon signaling and ORF7a has been shown to interfere with the interferon-stimulated gene (ISG) BST2.7, 8, 9 SARS-CoV-2 ORF6 also participates in this antagonism of the innate immune response as it has been shown to antagonize the IFN-induced nuclear translocation of STAT1 which results in the reduced expression of ISGs.10The continuation of the COVID-19 pandemic is largely due to the emergence of mutated strains or “variants” of SARS-CoV-2. The variants differ most notably in the sequence of their spike proteins, which bind to the receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) to allow for internalization of the virus. As the spike protein is the immunodominant antigen, the emergence of variants has raised concerns regarding the breadth of protection of the SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. However, it is important to note that many of the variants of SARS-CoV-2 possess mutations in one or more of the accessory proteins. The impact of such mutations outside of the spike protein on pathogenesis of these variants remains understudied.To elucidate the role of the accessory proteins of SARS-CoV-2 in pathogenesis, we developed a synthetic genomics assembly approach based on transformation-associated recombination (TAR) in yeast for the creation of infectious clones of SARS-CoV-2.11–14 We then synthesized deletion viruses of ORFs 3a/3b, 6, 7a/7b, and 8 in the prototype SARS-CoV-2 (isolate USA/-WA1/2020 or WA-1) strain of SARS-CoV-2. We then investigated the replicative fitness of these viruses in vitro before proceeding to characterization of the effect of these accessory deletions on pathogenesis in a murine model. To begin to characterize the impact of naturally occurring accessory mutations found in the variants on pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2, we developed recombinant variant spike proteins in the WA-1 backbone (B.1.1.7, B.1.351, and P.1). We then compared the replicative fitness in vitro of these recombinant viruses to the parent variants and characterized differences in pathogenesis in a mouse model.MethodsInfectious Clone Construction and RescueTAR-cloning SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragments:To clone each SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragment, each of the target PCR amplicons of the genome was cloned into a TAR vector backbone for replication in budding yeast and Escherichia coli. TAR vectors consist of the vector backbone flanked by restriction sites to release the genomic region and homologous “hooks” of sequence. To assemble DNA fragment clones, the TAR vectors were PCR amplified from pCC1BAC-his3 with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA) using the construction primers (labeled “Con”, Table S1).15 40 bp of homology and an I-SceI restriction site were introduced by the Con primers to each end of the vector backbone. Each DNA fragment was amplified with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA) using cDNA from SARS-CoV-2/human/USA/WA-CDC-WA1/2020 and contains 80 bp of homology to its adjacent fragments for assembly. PCR products were digested with DpnI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) before transformation as per the manufacturer’s directions.The SARS-CoV-2 WA1 genome was cloned as 7 individual DNA fragments: 1a-1, 1a-2, 1a-3, 1b-1, 1b-2, S and AP. 50 fmol of each WA1 PCR amplicon was transformed with 15 fmol of the appropriate amplified YCpBAC vector into Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain VL6–48N spheroplasts (MATα, his3-Δ200, trp1-Δ1, ura3-Δ1, lys2, ade2–101, met14, cir°) as described in.13–15 Transformants were patched on synthetic dropout medium plates without histidine (SDhis). After sufficient growth, yeast cells were lysed by incubation in 25 mM NaOH at 95°C for 30 min. Detection PCR amplification, with Q5 polymerase (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), lysed cell supernatant as template, and detection primers (RCO493 + “Det-F” or RCO495 + “Det-R” primers, Table S2), was used to confirm correct junctions between the fragment and vector. Sanger sequencing of PCR products (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ) across the SARS-CoV-2 regions was used to verify the DNA fragment clone. DNA of sequenced-validated clones was extracted from yeast patches and electroporated into E. coli DH10B (Thermo Fisher).13
E. coli transformants were screened by colony PCR amplification for correct junction sizes with the appropriate “F” and “R” detection primers (Table S2). Plasmid DNAs from the DNA fragment clones were isolated from E. coli by the Purelink HiPure Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) and modified or used for full-length genome assembly.DNA fragment modifications:In vitro CRISPR-Cas9 digestion and TAR assembly were used to make accessory ORF deletions in the AP DNA fragment. Cas9 target sites near the desired mutant coordinate were identified using Benchling’s CRISPR guide RNA design tool (www.benchling.com/crispr/). Single guide RNA (sgRNA) was transcribed from a PCR amplicon, generated as described in PMID: 28928148, containing 18 bp of specific target sequence upstream of the PAM sequence. The AP DNA fragment was digested in vitro using Cas9 nuclease, Streptococcus pyogenes (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), as described previously13 An oligonucleotide containing 40 bases of homology to either side of the target accessory ORF was TAR-assembled with each appropriate Cas9-digested AP DNA fragment in yeast by spheroplast transformation. Yeast transformants were screened for the desired mutation by Sanger sequencing of PCR amplicons (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ) using lysed yeast culture supernatant as template. DNA was then extracted from yeast, transformed into E. coli, screened for correctness, and isolated from E. coli as with DNA fragment clones described above.SARS-CoV-2 variant spike genes were generated as described previously.25 Briefly, to generate SARS-CoV-2 variant spike genes, short fragments were amplified with Platinum SuperFi II DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) using the wild-type S DNA fragment clone as template. Variant mutations (Table S6) were introduced by primers into each amplicon, which had 30–35 bp homology at each end between the adjacent fragments. Amplicons were digested with DpnI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) to remove template DNA and purified with a Qiagen PCR purification kit. 50 fmol of each amplicon and 15 fmol of YCpBAC vector were assembled using a standard Gibson assembly reaction (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA), transformed into E. coli DH10B competent cells (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA), and plated on LB medium with 12.5 mg/ml chloramphenicol. Assembled plasmids were confirmed to have the desired mutations by colony PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing (GeneWiz, Inc., South Plainfield, NJ), and then isolated from E. coli using the Purelink HiPure Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). Table S3 lists the primers used for the construction of the variant S DNA fragments.Full-length genome assembly:The TAR vector for assembly of the full-length genome was amplified from pCC1BAC-ura3 using primers ConCMVpR and ConBGHtermF with KOD Xtreme Hot Start DNA polymerase (Millipore, Burlington, MA).15 The CMV promoter was amplified from HCMV Toledo genomic DNA using primers CMVpromF and CMVpromR. Hepatitis delta virus ribozyme (HDV Rz) with bovine growth hormone (BGH) terminator fragment was obtained as a gBlock (IDT), Hu1-34. A fragment to introduce a BamHI restriction site and a fragment with a polyA region were synthesized by IDT (Pcmv-BamHI fix and PA35-HDV fix, Table S4). Each fragment has 40 bp of homology at each end to its adjacent fragments. To generate the TAR vector for the complete genome, the pCC1-ura3 amplicon, the CMV amplicon, the BamHI fragment, the polyA fragment, and the HDVR+BGH region were assembled into circular DNA in yeast by TAR.SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragments, isolated from E. coli, were digested with I-SceI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, Ma) to release the overlapping DNA fragments from the vector whereas the full-length TAR vector was linearized by BamHI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) digestion. 50 fmol of each fragment and 15 fmol of full-length genome TAR vector were mixed with yeast spheroplasts for TAR-assembly.12, 13 Transformants were patched on SD-URA plates, and positive clones were screened by PCR amplification with the detection primers listed in Table S5. The subsequent DNA isolation from yeast, transformation into and isolation from E. coli were performed as described for the SARS-CoV-2 DNA fragment clones.Virus Reconstitution:24 hours prior to transfection, 5e4 VeroE6 cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were plated per well in 1mL of VeroE6 media (DMEM (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD), 10% FBS (Gibco, Waltham, MA), 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Gemini Bio Products, Sacramento, CA), 1% L-Glutamine (Gibco, Waltham, MA)). For transfection, 5μg of the infectious clone and 100ng of a SARS-CoV-2 WA-1 nucleoprotein expression plasmid were diluted in 100μL of OptiMEM (Gibco, Waltham, MA). 3μL of TransIT-2020 (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI) was added and the reactions were incubated for 30 minutes prior to addition to the cells in the BSL-3. Cells were checked for cytopathic effect (CPE) 72–96 hours after transfection and the supernatant collected for plaque purification. For plaque purification, 6e5 VeroE6 cells were plated in a 6-well plate in 2mL of VeroE6 media 24 hours prior to infection. 25μL of this supernatant was then serial diluted 1:10 in DMEM and 200μL of this supernatant was added to the VeroE6 cells. The cells were rocked every 15 minutes for 1 hour at 37°C prior to overlay with 2mL of a solid agarose overlay (EMEM (Quality Biological, Gaithersburg, MD), 10% FBS, 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin, 1% L-Glutamine, 0.4% w/v SeaKem agarose (Lonza Biosciences, Morrisville, NC). Cells were incubated for 72 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2 and individual plaques were picked and then transferred to a well of a 6-well plate with 4e5 VeroE6 cells in 3mL VeroE6 media. After 48 hours, successful plaque picks were assessed by presence of CPE. 1mL of a well showing CPE was transferred to a T175 with 8e6 VeroE6 cells in 30mL of VeroE6 media and the virus stock was collected 48 and 72 hours after. The stocks were then titered by plaque assay.Titering of Virus Stocks, Growth Curve Samples, Tissue Homogenates by Plaque AssayThe day prior to infection, 2e5 VeroE6 cells were seeded per well in a 12-well plate in 1mL of VeroE6 media. Tissue samples were thawed and homogenized with 1mm beads in an Omni Bead ruptor (Omni International Inc., Kennesaw, GA) and then spun down at 21,000×g for 2 minutes. A 6-point dilution curve was prepared by serial diluting 25μL of sample 1:10 in 225μL DMEM. 200μL of each dilution was then added to the cells and the plates were rocked every 15 minutes for 1 hour at 37°C. After 1hr, 2mL of a semi-solid agarose overlay was added to each well (DMEM, 4%FBS, 0.06% UltraPure agarose (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). After 72 hours at 37°C and 5% CO2, plates were fixed in 2% PFA for 20 minutes, stained with 0.5mL of 0.05% Crystal Violet and 20% EtOH, and washed 2× with H2O prior to counting of plaques. The titer was then calculated. For tissue homogenates, this titer was multiplied by 40 based on the average tissue sample weight being 25mg.Growth Curve Infection and Sample ProcessingThe day prior to infection, 1.5e5 VeroE6 cells were seeded in a 12-well plate in 1.5mL of VeroE6 media. The day of infection, cells were washed with 500μL of DMEM and the volume of virus needed for an M.O.I. of 0.01 was diluted in 100μL DMEM and added to a well in triplicate. The plates were rocked every 15 minutes for 1hr at 37°C. After 1hr, the inoculum was removed, the cells were washed with 500μL of VeroE6 media and then 1.5mL of VeroE6 media was added to each well. 300μL of this supernatant was taken as the 0hr timepoint and replaced with fresh media. 300μL of supernatant was pulled and replaced with fresh media at 0hr, 6hr, 24hr, 48hr, 72hr, and 96hr timepoints. This supernatant was then titered.Infection of BALB/c and hACE2/k18 MiceAll animals were cared for according to the standards set forth by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Maryland-Baltimore. On Day 0, 12-week old BALB/c (Charles River Laboratories, Wilmington, MA) and 12-week old hACE2 transgenic K18 mice (K18-hACE2) (Jackson Labs, Bar Harbor, ME) were anesthetized interperitoneally with 50μL ketamine(1.3mg/mouse)/ xylazine (0.38mg/mouse). The BALB/c mice were then inoculated with 1e4 PFU of each virus in 50μL PBS. The K18-hACE2 mice were inoculated with 1e3 PFU of each virus in 50μL PBS. The mock infected mice received 50μL PBS only. Mice were then weighed every day until the end of the experiment. Mice were euthanized with isoflurane on Day 2 and Day 4. From each mouse, the left lung was collected in PFA for histology and the right lung was split in half with one half placed in PBS for titer and one half placed in TRIzol for RNA extraction. For the K18-hACE2 mice, the brain was also collected, with half of the brain in PBS for titering and the other half in TRIzol for RNA extraction.RT-qPCR of Tissue HomogenatesSamples were homogenized in an Omni Bead ruptor in TRIzol and then the RNA was extracted from 300μL of each sample using the Direct-zol RNA miniprep kit (Zymo Research, Irvine, CA). 2μL of isolated RNA from each sample was then converted to cDNA using the RevertAID first strand cDNA synthesis kit (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) in a 20μL volume. For qPCR for SARS2 Rdrp, 20μL reactions were prepared using 2μL cDNA, 1μL of 10mM Rdrp Forward primer (10006860, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), 1μL of Rdrp Reverse primer (10006881, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), and 10μL of 2x SYBR Green (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA). The reactions were then run on a 7500 Fast Dx Real-Time PCR Instrument (4357362R, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). For qPCR for murine GAPDH, 20μL reactions were prepared using 2μL cDNA, 1μL of a 20x murine GAPDH primer (MM.pt.39a.1, Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA), and 10μL of 2x SYBR Green. The reactions were then run on a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR Instrument (A28133, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA).H/E Staining of Lungs and Pathological ScoringLungs were scored in a blinded fashion with a 0–5 score given, 0 being no inflammation and 5 being the highest degree of inflammation. Interstitial inflammation and peribronchiolar inflammation were scored separately then scores were averaged for the overall inflammation score.Cytokine ArraysThe concentration of lung RNA was quantified using a Nanodrop (NanoVue Plus). 400ng of RNA was converted to cDNA using the Qiagen RT2 First Strand Kit (330404, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The cDNA was analyzed with the Qiagen RT2 Mouse Cytokines and Chemokines array (PAMM-150Z, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Reactions were run on a QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR Instrument (A28133, Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA). The results were analyzed with the Qiagen analysis spreadsheet provided with the kit.Statistical AnalysisAll statistical analyses were carried out using the GraphPad Prism software. The statistical tests run were unpaired t-tests assuming unequal variances. The cutoff value used to determine significance was p≤0.05.Biosafety approvalAll virus experiments and recombinant virus creation was approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee at The University of Maryland, Baltimore. At their request, the P.1 S in WA-1 virus has been destroyed due to it increased in vivo pathogenesis compared to the clinical P.1 strain.ResultsInfectious Clone SystemTo enable rapid and combinatorial modification of SARS-CoV-2, we established a yeastbased assembly approach using transformation-associated recombination (TAR) to assemble a complete genome from overlapping DNA fragments. This approach is based on one that we previously used to engineer human herpesviruses.13, 14 It involves first, generating a set of sequence-validated DNA fragments that encompass a complete genome which can then be modified individually and in parallel to obtain DNA fragments containing the desired changes. The modified fragments can be mix and matched with unmodified DNA fragments for assembly into complete genomes to generate the desired mutant viruses. For SARS-CoV-2, the genome was deconstructed into 7 individual DNA fragments: 3 for ORF1a (1a-1 to 1a-3), 2 for ORF1b (1b-1 and 1b-2), 1 for Spike (S) and 1 for the accessory protein 3’ genome region (AP) [Figure 1A]. Each individual fragment was TAR-cloned by transforming into yeast each target fragment amplified by PCR using SARS-CoV-2 WA1 cDNA as template with primer pairs listed in Table S1 together with a PCR-amplified YCpBAC vector that contains each set of appropriate homologous sequences at either end (Table S1). Each individual DNA fragment was confirmed by junction PCR amplification using a primer homologous to the YCpBAC vector and a primer homologous to the target DNA fragment (Figure S1, Table S2). Positive yeast clones were then transformed into Escherichia coli to enable isolation of large amounts of DNA and again confirmed by junction PCR amplification (Figure S1). Finally, each individual DNA fragment, which was validated by Sanger sequencing, is flanked by I-SceI sites and contains 80 base pairs of homologous sequence to its adjacent fragments. Deletion of the accessory genes were performed at the DNA fragment level (AP) by cleaving with Cas9 protein in vitro guided by guide RNAs specific to each accessory gene and then transforming into yeast each cleaved DNA fragment together with the appropriate “fix” that contains 40 bases of homology to either side of the coding region of the target accessory gene (Table S3). Positive clones were identified by PCR amplification across the target gene and then transformed into E. coli for large quantity isolation of DNA (Figure S2). The Spike ORFs from select SARS-CoV-2 variants were generated by rebuilding the WA1 S DNA fragment by Gibson assembly in E. coli from PCR amplified products using primers to introduce the changes where needed and the WA1 S DNA fragment as template (Table S3). Each of the SARS-CoV-2 S variant generated was validated by Sanger sequencing. Finally, to generate the different full-length genomes by TAR assembly, the appropriate sets of DNA fragments (1a-1 to AP) were cleaved with I-SceI to separate the SARS-CoV-2 fragment from the YCpBAC vector and then transformed into yeast together with a YCpBAC vector that contains a CMV promoter and homology to DNA fragment 1a-1 at one end and homology to DNA fragment AP, Hepatitis delta virus ribozyme sequence as well as bovine growth hormone terminator at the other end (Figure 1A, Table S4). Correct assembly of the full-length genomes were confirmed by junction PCR amplification (Figure 1B) using primer pairs that span the SARS-CoV-2 genome (Table S5). Positive clones were transferred to E. coli for isolation of SARS-CoV-2 full-length genome DNA.Following confirmation of the successful synthesis of each full-length genome clone, VeroE6 cells were transfected with each isolated YCpBAC. 72–96 hours later, the cells were monitored for CPE, supernatant was collected. The virus was then plaque-purified and stocked. The accessory ORF deletion viruses of WA-1 were successfully recovered and sequence-verified prior to use in experiments.Replication of SARS-CoV-2 deletion viruses in cells.The growth of the wildtype SARS-CoV-2 (WA-1) and the accessory ORF deletion series was analyzed. To evaluate the replicative kinetics of the deletion viruses in vitro, VeroE6 cells were infected with an M.O.I. of 0.01 of WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a/b, WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b, and WA-1ΔORF8. Supernatant was titered at 0, 6, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours post infection by plaque assay. Compared to the wildtype WA-1 virus, WA-1ΔORF3a/b was the only accessory gene deletion virus to show an attenuated phenotype, demonstrating significantly attenuated growth at 48 and 72 hours (Figure 2A p=0.0027 and p=0.0014).WA-1 Accessory Deletion Viruses in K18-hACE2 mice.We sought to identify the role of the accessory proteins in SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis using a mouse model of COVID-19. C57BL/6 K18/hACE2 (K18-hACE2) are highly permissive to SARS-CoV-2 due to the widespread expression of human ACE2 (hACE2). This hACE2 is expressed under the control of the keratin 18 (K18) promoter, leading to hACE2 expression in almost all cells of the mouse. Previous reports have shown this mouse strain to be permissive to wildtype SARS-CoV-2 infection without the need for any adaptations or mutations in the Spike protein. We utilized these mice in the comparison of wildtype and deletion strains so that no alteractions to the Spike protein would be needed for replication. To evaluate the role of each accessory protein, 12-week old K18-hACE2 mice were infected with 1e3 pfu of each virus, weighed daily, and euthanized at 2 and 4 days post-infection (dpi) for collection of tissue samples. Wildtype WA-1 displayed ~12% weight loss through 4 days of infection, with similar weight loss for WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b and WA-1ΔORF8 viruses (Figure 2B). However, infection with WA-1ΔORF3a/b resulted in an attenuated weight loss phenotype in the mice, with these mice losing less than 4% of their starting weight (Figure 2B).Lung titers for wildtype and deletion viruses were analyzed at day 2 and 4 post infection to determine if there were differences in replicative fitness between the mutants and WA-1. Lung titers for WA-1 reached 7e7 and 8e6 pfu/g lung at day 2 and 4, respectively (Figure 2C). The mutant viruses WA-1ΔORF6, WA-1ΔORF7a/b and WA-1ΔORF8 had similar lung titers to WA-1 at day 2. This was also found with infection of WA-1ΔORF6 and WA-1ΔORF7a/b at day 4. WA-1ΔORF8 did exhibit a one log reduction in lung titer at day 4, although this reduction was not significant (Figure 2C). Consistent with the observed attenuation in weight loss, mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b had significantly attenuated lung titers at both day 2 and 4 with one log lower lung titer at day 2 (p=0.012) and three logs lower titer at day 4 post infection (p=0.0030) compared to WA-1 (Figure 2C).Lung viral RNA was analyzed for WA-1 and each mutant virus at day 2 and 4 post infection. The levels for viral RNA for each of the deletion viruses were compared to the RNA levels by fold change in the lungs of the mice infected with the wildtype virus. Although none of the fold changes were significant, mice infected with the deletion viruses for ORF6, ORF7a/b, and ORF8 showed higher viral RNA levels compared to WA-1 while mice infected with the ORF3a/b deletion virus showed slightly lower lung RNA levels compared to WA-1 (Figure 2E).Due to the over-expression of hACE2 in neural tissues in the K18-hACE2 mice, SARS-CoV-2 can invade and replicate in the brain of these mice. We therefore assessed the replication of WA-1 and the accessory deletion viruses in brain tissue as well. For all of the accessory deletion viruses, there were undetectable live virus titers in the brain at day 2 and day 4 post-infection (Figure 2D). Despite there being little virus in the brain by plaque assay, there was viral RNA detected in the brain in levels that were not significantly different between the accessory deletions when compared to WA-1 (Figure 2F).Lungs were fixed and stained with H&E to determine whether inflammation and lung damage were different between the wildtype WA-1 and deletion mutants. They were scored in a blinded fashion with a 0–5 score given, 0 being no inflammation and 5 being the highest degree of inflammation. Interstitial inflammation and peribronchiolar inflammation were scored separately then scores were averaged for the overall inflammation score. Despite the attenuation of weight loss with infection with WA-1ΔORF3a/b, there is no significant difference in lung pathology in the mice when compared to WA-1 (Figure 3A, 3B). Across the accessory deletion panel, there were no significant differences in lung pathology seen with any of the accessory deletion viruses except for an unexpected increase in lung pathology scores for mice infected with WA-1ΔORF8 at day 4 (p=0.0037, Figure 3A, 3B). The increased pathology of WA-1ΔORF8 is intriguing because of the reported immunomodulatory role of the secreted ORF8 protein in pathogenesis. This finding is being studied in future experiments.Creation of infectious clones of variant spikes in a WA-1 (icWA-1) background and analysis in cellsThe Spike ORFs from selected SARS-CoV-2 variants were cloned into the icWA-1 clone to replace the WA-1 Spike ORF. The goal of these mutant viruses is to dissociate the effects of the variant Spike ORF from the other mutations in the genomes and to determine if differences exist in pathogenesis in the mouse model. This allows for the identification of whether the variant viruses replicate and have similar pathogenesis to a virus containing only the Spike mutations alone on the same background SARS-CoV-2 virus.The Spike variant viruses were cloned, rescued, sequenced and analyzed for their replication in vitro and in vivo. Upon successful recovery and sequence verification of the variant spikes in WA-1 viruses, the replication of these viruses was compared to the parent variants at an M.O.I. of 0.01 in VeroE6 cells. The variant spike and parental variant pairs, B.1.351 and B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1, showed no difference in supernatant viral titers at all timepoints tested (Figure 4A). The supernatant titer for P.1 S in WA-1 was significantly lower than the parent variant P.1 at only the 72hr timepoint (Figure 4A, p=0.0015).Variant spike in WA-1 viruses compared to variant clinical isolates in K18-hACE2 miceThe variant Spike viruses were then tested to determine if their pathogenesis in mice was different than the parent clinical isolates that have the Spike mutations and the full composition of non-spike mutations. To investigate differences in pathogenesis in vivo, 12-week old K18-hACE2 mice were infected with 1e3 pfu of each virus. Mice were weighed every day and were euthanized at either day 2 or day 4 post-infection for collection of lung tissue and brain tissue. Reflective of the in vitro results, mice infected with B.1.351 and mice infected with B.1.351 S in WA-1 displayed similar weight loss of around 12%. Mice infected with B.1.1.7 and mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 also exhibited similar weight loss of around 10% (Figure 4B). However, mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 showed a weight loss ~12% despite there being very minimal weight loss in mice infected with the P.1 parent variant (Figure 4B). The lung titers of the mice reflected the weight loss, with mice infected with B.1.351 S in WA-1 or B.1.17 S in WA-1 displaying similar lung titers of around 108 on day 2 and 106 on day 4 which was seen in the mice infected with the parent variants (Figure 4C). Mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 had significantly higher lung titers at day 2 compared to mice infected with P.1, which lung titers being roughly one log higher at this time (Figure 4C, p=0.00057).As with the accessory deletion viruses, viral titers in the brain were also analyzed. Although none of the infected mice had measurable titer in the brain at day 2, the brain titers for day 4 trended with the lung titer results, with B.1.351 and B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showing similar titers of ~107 – 108 at day 4 (Figure 4D). P.1 S in WA-1 showed 100X higher titer in the brain at day 4 compared to P.1, although this was not statistically significant (Figure 4D).Viral RNA levels were quantified in lung and brain to compare to live virus titer results. The viral RNA levels in the lung and in the brain are reflective of the titers (Figure 4E and Figure 4F), with the only significant difference being between the day 2 lung RNA levels of P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 (Figure 4E, p=0.00070).Lung inflammation was also analyzed across clinical isolates and Spike mutant viruses. The lungs for the variant spike in WA-1 mice looked similar in terms of inflammation to the lungs of the mice infected with the parental variant viruses (Figure 5A). Although there were no significant differences in lung inflammation between the parent variant viruses and the variant spike in WA-1 viruses, the P.1 S in WA-1 lungs had higher lung pathology scores on both day 2 and day 4 when compared to the P.1 mice, which trends with both the titer and the weight loss data (Figure 5B).Variant Spikes in WA-1 in BALB/c MiceThe wildtype SARS-CoV-2/WA-1 virus does not replicate in wildtype mice due to poor interactions with mouse ACE2. The N501Y mutation in Spike does however allow for replication in wildtype mice. Interestingly, the variants examined in this study do have the N501Y mutation allowing for comparison of pathogenesis between recombinant viruses variants and their parent strains in BALB/c mice. For this comparison, 12-week old BALB/c mice were infected with 1e4 pfu of each virus and euthanized at either Day 2 or Day 4 post-infection for analysis. As we observed with the K18-hACE2 mouse experiment, infection with P.1 S in WA-1 resulted in increased weight loss of around 5% compared to infection with P.1 which produced no weight loss. Both B.1.1.7 and B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 infection produced minimal weight loss in these mice. Unlike the results from the infection in K18-hACE2 mice, mice with B.1.351 S in WA-1 showed attenuated weight loss of around 7% compared to B.1.351, which produced roughly 12% weight loss (Figure 6A).The viral titers in the lung homogenates were mostly reflective of the weight loss findings, with infection with B.1.351 S in WA-1 producing significantly lower lung titers by about two logs at day 2 and day 4 as compared to infection with B.1.351 (Figure 6B, p=0.008 and p=0.014). Despite there being no differences in weight loss, B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 infection resulted in significantly higher lung titers by two logs at day 2 post infection (p=0.013) compared to B.1.1.7, with both viruses being nearly cleared by day 4 post infection (Figure 6B). Infection with P.1 S in WA-1 resulted in higher lung titers by two logs at day 2 and one log at day 4 as compared to infection with P.1, although only the day 4 titers differed significantly (Figure 6B, p=0.011).The viral RNA levels in the lungs at these timepoints correlated to the viral titer levels, although none of these findings were statistically significant (Figure 6C). Lung pathology was also analyzed. The lungs of mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showed similar pathology to the mice infected with B.1.1.7 and this was also reflected by the pathology scores (Figure 7A/B). The lungs of mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 showed increased inflammation compared to the lungs of mice infected with P.1 on both day 2 and day 4 (Figure 7A/B) post-infection. Despite B.1.351 S in WA-1 producing attenuated weight loss, the lung pathology scores for these mice were higher compared to mice infected with B.1.351, although none of the lung pathology differences were statistically significant (Figure 7A/B).Lung Cytokine Profiling for WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a, P.1, and P.1 S in WA-1We then analyzed the host response to selected viruses that showed the most significant differences in weight loss and titer when compared to the parent strains. We compared the inflammatory cytokine and chemokine profile by qPCR on both the Day 2 lungs and the Day 4 lungs of the K18-hACE2 mice infected with WA-1, WA-1ΔORF3a/b, P.1, and P.1 S in WA-1 (Table S7). It is interesting to note that for both the WA-1ΔORF3a/b to WA-1 comparison and the P.1 S in WA-1 to P.1 comparison, the majority of significant cytokine and chemokine changes were seen at Day 2. For this reason, we will focus on the changes we saw at Day 2.For K18-hACE2 mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b, the majority of significant fold changes in cytokine and chemokine levels compared to mice infected with WA-1 were less than 1. The top five significantly downregulated genes are Ccl7, Csf3, Cxcl1, Cxcl3, and Cxcl5, which are key cytokines involved in neutrophil production and recruitment (Table 1). There was a small subset of genes which were significantly upregulated. These genes are Adipoq, Bmp7, Ctf1, Cxcl11, Il4, and Il5, which are mostly cytokines involved in cell survival and the early stages of T-cell activation (Table 1).As was seen with the WA-1ΔORF3a and WA-1 comparison, the majority of significant fold changes occurred at Day 2 for the P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 comparison. There were few differences in gene induction when comparing P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1 in relation to the WA-1ΔORF3a/b and WA-1 differentially expressed genes. The top five upregulated genes were Ccl1, Ccl20, Csf3, Cxcl5, and Osm, which are involved in the attraction of neutrophils and lymphocytes (Table 2). All of the downregulated genes had similar fold changes. These genes include Csf2, Il12a, and Il21, which are known to be secreted by innate immune cells, including natural killer cells (Table 2).DiscussionA unique characteristic of coronaviruses is the inclusion of genes in the 3’ end of the genome that are unique to each coronavirus family.16 These genes are called “accessory genes” because, while unique to each family, they are not essential for replication.17 Many of these genes across the coronavirus family have been shown to alter host pathways including interferon signaling, cell cycle progression, and other assorted anti-viral responses to viral infection that enhance replication and pathogenesis.9, 10, 18, 19We designed two ways to analyze the functional consequences of the accessory genes in SARS-CoV-2 in vivo. First, we produced deletion viruses that deleted each ORF from our infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2. Second, we produced mutant SARS-CoV-2 viruses that contained the spike of each previously circulating variant. As variants of SARS-CoV-2 have emerged, the increasing incidence of mutations both within spike and outside of spike were noted. Although, the mutations in spike may enhance entry and kinetics of infection, the mutations observed in the other genes may alter disease severity through interactions with the host immune system. In our experiments we sought to differentiate between the role of spike mutations in each variant and those in other genes of the variant genome. As many of these non-spike mutations in the genome are in the accessory ORFs, we decided to couple our work with our variant spikes in WA-1 viruses with our work with accessory deletion viruses. This allows us to determine which accessory ORFs contribute significantly to pathogenesis through infection with our deletion viruses, and to link mutations in the corresponding variant ORFs to impacts on ORF function and pathogenesis.Our work with the accessory deletion viruses has revealed that ORF3a and ORF3b contribute significantly to viral replication in K18-hACE2 mice. Mice infected with a WA-1ΔORF3a/b deletion virus demonstrated attenuated weight loss and significantly reduced lung titers at both day 2 and day 4. Our finding that an ORF3a/b deletion virus is attenuated in mice is supported by previously published work as does our finding that WA-1ΔORF6 is not attenuated in mice.20 This paper also found that deletions of ORF7a, ORF7b, and ORF8 show reduced lung titer, which we did not find in our experiments. This may be due to inoculation differences in our model where mice were infected with a non-lethal dose of 103 pfu instead of 105 pfu as used in the previous study. It is possible that we may see attenuation in weight loss and viral replication of WA-1ΔORF7a/7b, and WA-1ΔORF8 at higher doses or in different mouse backgrounds, which were not studied here.The lung cytokine and chemokine profiles of mice infected with WA-1ΔORF3a/b demonstrated reduced expression of inflammatory cytokines and chemokines compared to WA-1. This difference is most likely attributed to the fact the WA-1ΔORF3a/b virus demonstrates attenuated replication in mice. As expected, the attenuated replication of WA-1ΔORF3a/b results in the downregulation of cytokines and chemokines involved in neutrophil recruitment, including Ccl7, Csf3, Cxcl1, Cxcl3, and Cxcl5. There is a small subset of genes that are upregulated in the WA-1ΔORF3a/b lungs. Two of these upregulated genes are Il4 and Il5, which function to drive the Th2 response. Interestingly, COVID-19 is known to skew to a Th2 response through stimulating the production of Il4 and Il5.21 Given that the WA-1ΔORF3a/b virus is attenuated compared to WA-1, we would expect a downregulation of these cytokines. The downregulation of Il4 might in part be explained by its role in the tissue remodeling process, with the faster clearance of WA-1ΔORF3a/3b allowing for tissue repair to take place.22 Another of these upregulated genes, adipoq, encodes the insulin-sensitizing hormone, adiponectin. Interestingly, reduced adiponectin levels are associated with severe respiratory failure in COVID-19 patients.23 Future work to characterize the role of these cytokines and chemokines SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis will focus on how these pathways interact with the accessory genes of the virus.As the emergence of variants of SARS-CoV-2 occurred, we noted the appearance of point mutations in the accessory genes of SARS-CoV-2. To elucidate the impact of non-spike mutations on viral pathogenesis, we synthesized variant spikes in the WA-1 backbone. We focused on the synthesis of the B.1.351, B.1.1.7, and P.1 lineages. When comparing the in vitro replication of the parent variants to their paired variant spikes in WA-1, we did not see many significant differences in replication in VeroE6 cells. The only significant difference we saw was a significant decrease in supernatant viral titer at 72 hours of P.1 S in WA-1 when compared to P.1.In the K18-hACE2 mice, the absence of in vitro replicative differences for B.1.351 S in WA-1 and B.1.1.7 in WA-1 were reflected. Mice infected with B.1.351 in WA-1 exhibited no differences in weight loss, lung titer, and brain titer compared to mice infected with B.1.351. This was also true for mice infected with B.1.1.7 when compared to mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1. Results from the BALB/c experiment differed significantly for the B.1.351 S in WA-1/B.1.351 pairing, with B.1.351 S in WA-1 showing attenuated weight loss and lung titers compared to B.1.351. The mice infected with B.1.1.7 S in WA-1 showed an increase in lung titer on day 2, but no difference in weight loss was seen when compared to B.1.1.7.The most significant replicative differences in both BALB/c and K18-hACE2 mice was seen with P.1 and P.1 S in WA-1. In both sets of mice, mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1 demonstrated increased weight loss and significantly higher lung titers by plaque assay and qPCR than mice infected with P.1. In the K18-hACE2 mice, the brain RNA and brain titers trended with this data as well, although the values were not significant.Given the significant differences in P.1 S in WA-1 and P.1 replication in vivo, we analyzed cytokine and chemokine gene expression on both the day 2 and day 4 lungs of these mice. Compared to P.1, the P.1 S in WA-1 cytokine and chemokine profiled differed the most on Day 2. Most of the significant changes seen involved the upregulation of genes involved in neutrophil recruitment. The most upregulated gene was cxcl5, which has been implicated as the major chemoattractant for neutrophils in SARS-CoV-2 and a major cause of inflammation.24 It is therefore not unexpected that this gene would be upregulated due to the increased lung titer of P.1 S in WA-1 compared to P.1. The downregulated genes of interest include thpok and Il5, which are important for driving the differentiation of CD4+ T-cells. This finding could suggest that there is some inhibition of the CD4+ T-cell recruitment pathway by the non-spike genes in WA-1 that is attenuated or absent in P.1. There is also evidence of the loss of early interferon antagonism in the non-spike genes in P.1, as IFNγ levels in lungs from the P.1 S in WA-1 mice were reduced at day 2 compared to the P.1 mice despite the higher lung titers in the mice infected with P.1 S in WA-1. However, this difference was not seen at Day 4.Together this work demonstrates that ORF3a/b have substantial roles in pathogenesis and host responses to SARS-CoV-2. It is interesting to note that two of the variant spike in WA-1 viruses studied here, B.1.351 and P.1, possess mutations in ORF3a. This points to the fact the emergence of mutations in the variant accessory ORFs, particularly ORF3a, contribute to viral pathogenesis. The possible advantageous effects on viral fitness and likelihood of transmission of these mutations is supported by the continued identification of mutations in these ORFs in new variants. We interpret this data to suggest that mutations outside of spike may be driving critical phenotypes of SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease. Although spike mutations may allow for better engagement of ACE2 to facilitate entry into cells as well as evasion of antibodies, the mutations in the accessory proteins may actually be negatively impacting disease leading to less severe clinical phenotypes. The balance of these two strategies may confer longer courses of virus replication and spread in the lungs while allowing for increased time for virus transmission from one infected person to their contacts. We hypothesize that this balance is critical for further evolution of SARS-CoV-2 and, as more variants emerge, we will identify additional mutations outside of spike that contribute significantly to viral replication, transmission, and pathogenesis.Supplementary Material1


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: ROSEOLOVIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Porcine Cytomegalovirus/Porcine Roseolovirus, Previously Transmitted During Xenotransplantation, Does Not Infect Human 293T and Mouse Cells with Impaired Antiviral Defense

1. IntroductionXenotransplantation using genetically modified pigs offers a promising solution to the shortage of allogeneic donor organs and is steadily advancing toward clinical application. Long-term survival has been achieved in non-human primates transplanted with hearts and kidneys from genetically modified pigs, and the first transplantations of pig hearts, kidneys, and livers into human patients and brain-dead individuals have been reported [1]. However, xenotransplantation carries the potential risk of transmitting porcine microorganisms, particularly viruses, to the recipient, and preventing such transmission is of critical importance [2,3].The transmission of a porcine herpesvirus, porcine cytomegalovirus, more accurately classified as porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV) and officially designated Suid herpesvirus 2 (SuHV-2) [4], to the first human recipient of a pig heart transplant, where it contributed to the patient’s death [5], highlights the critical importance of ensuring viral safety in xenotransplantation. In addition to viral transmission, a combination of complications—including drug effects, immunosuppression, surgical stress, and the patient’s poor pre-transplant condition—contributed to the patient’s death.PCMV/PRV is widespread in pigs, being detected in both wild boars [6,7] and slaughterhouse pigs [8,9], with nearly all slaughterhouse animals carrying the virus. Despite this broad distribution, no cases of PCMV/PRV transmission to healthy, ill, or immunocompromised humans have been reported, indicating that the virus is not zoonotic. This contrasts with hepatitis E virus genotype 3 (HEV3), which is zoonotic and causes chronic HEV infections, hepatitis, and manifestations of extrahepatic diseases in infected individuals [10,11]. The risks associated with acquiring HEV3 include occupational exposure to infected pigs and consumption of undercooked pork or pork products. Pig caretakers and swine veterinarians are at an increased risk of HEV infection [12].At present, it remains unclear whether PCMV/PRV can infect human cells. One study reported infection of human fibroblasts [13], whereas another showed that co-cultivation of PCMV-infected pig macrophages with two human cell lines (293 and Raji) did not result in virus transmission [14]. In our own preliminary infection studies, using PBMCs from PCMV/PRV-positive pigs and human 293 cells, no evidence of infection was observed.Therefore, additional experiments are needed to determine whether PCMV/PRV can infect human cells. It is also of interest to assess whether mouse cells are susceptible to PCMV/PRV. Although herpesviruses are generally considered species-specific, this notion has been shown to be not entirely correct [15]. For this reason, we used hygromycin-resistant human and mouse cells, co-incubated them with porcine fallopian tube (PFT) cells producing PCMV/PRV, and subsequently eliminated the pig cells by adding hygromycin selection medium. Whereas uninfected PFT cells could be infected with PCMV/PRV produced by infected PFT cells, either through co-cultivation or exposure to cell-free virus-containing supernatant, human and mouse cells could not be infected.2. Materials and Methods2.1. PCMV/PRV-Producing PFT CellsPFT cells infected with PCMV/PRV were kindly supplied by Dr. N.J. Mueller, University Hospital Zurich, University of Zurich, Switzerland. PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV were derived from the inner lining of the pig oviduct, also evident by the presence of Barr bodies in these cells. They were adherent and had both epithelial- and fibroblast-like morphology. These cells were characterized by increased nuclear–cytoplasmic ratio as well as increased size and number of nucleoli [16,17,18,19]. A total of 17 of 24 RNA viruses and 8 of 9 DNA viruses replicate in this cell line [20]. They were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM) (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (PAN Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany), 2mM L-Glutamine (PAN Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany), 1x non-essential amino acids (NEAs) (Biochrom GmbH, Berlin, Germany), 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 60 µg/mL penicillin (PAN Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany) in an incubator (Heracell, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with 5% CO2 at 37 °C. Upon confluency, cells were detached using Accutase (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) and split for expansion.2.2. Hygromycin-Resistant Human CellsHuman embryonic kidney 293T cell line harboring a construct expressing p15E-NHR-His, a part of the transmembrane envelope protein of the porcine endogenous retrovirus (PERV) together with the hygromycin resistance gene (293Thyg) [21], were cultured in DMEM with 10% heat-inactivated FBS, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, and 60 µg/mL penicillin in 5% CO2 incubator at 37 °C.2.3. Hygromycin-Resistant Mouse CellsEmbryo fibroblasts from double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) knockout mice were treated according to the 3T3 protocol [22]. These 3T3-like cells are immortal. In these cells the induction of type I interferon (IFN) as well as the activation of NF-kB by poly(I)-poly(C) (pIC) were strongly impaired [23]. The cells were transfected with a plasmid, pY3, having a hygromycin resistance gene. One clone, MI4Y-3/8, was cultured in low-glucose DMEM GlutaMAX (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (PAN Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany) in 5% CO2 incubator at 37 °C.2.4. Transfection of PFT CellsPFT cells were seeded at a cell density of 2 × 105 per well in a 6-well plate in 2 mL of serum-free DMEM media a day before transfection. Then, 1 µg of pVITRO-eGFP plasmid [24] DNA was mixed with sterile water up to 20 µL in a microfuge tube. The tube was gently flicked for mixing. Afterward, 200 µL of Opti-MEM (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was added to the tube containing the plasmid and vortexed mildly, followed by a short spin. Subsequently, 8 µL of polyethylenimine (PEI; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) was added to the tube and vortexed mildly again, followed by incubation at room temperature for 20 min. The transfection mixture was added to the cells overnight. The next day, the medium was removed and replaced with fresh serum containing DMEM. After 2 days, 400 µg/mL hygromycin was added. Cells were monitored for the expression of eGFP under a fluorescence microscope (Zeiss Axio, Oberkochen, Germany). Upon enrichment of transfected cells and removal of non-transfected ones, they were expanded for subsequent experiments.2.5. Co-Cultivation and SelectionPFT cells producing PCMV/PRV were co-cultured with 293Thyg cells and MI4Y-3/8 cells (Figure 1), respectively, at a cell density of 0.5 × 106 cells for each cell line/5 mL in a T25 flask (Sarstedt AG & Co. KG, Numbrecht, Germany) at 37 °C in a 5% CO2 incubator. At day 3, when cells became confluent, they were split into two T25 flasks, followed by another round of splitting the cells upon reaching confluency. Post attachment of the cells to the flask surface, 400 µg/mL hygromycin was added to the flask for selection of 293Thyg and MI4Y-3/8 cells. After 2 days, cells were split again and maintained in 400 µg/mL hygromycin (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) containing complete DMEM until confluency. Co-cultured cells with 293Thyg became confluent in 2 days, whereas cells co-cultured with MI4Y-3/8 became confluent in 4 days. Cells were washed twice with PBS to remove any remaining PFT-producing PCMV/PRV cells. Cells were detached using Accutase (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA) and processed for DNA isolation and real-time PCR to test for PCMV/PRV, human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (hGAPDH), as well as short interspersed nuclear element (SINE) sequences.As a positive control for the assay, PFT cells transfected with the pVITRO-eGFP vector were also co-cultured with PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV. After 5 days, 400 µg/mL hygromycin was added to the flask for selection of PFT-pVITRO-eGFP cells. They were monitored under a fluorescence microscope and real-time PCR for PCMV/PRV.2.6. Cell-Free InfectionSupernatant from PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV was centrifuged twice (300 rpm, 10 min, and 500 rpm, 15 min, at room temperature) to remove any remaining cells. It was filtered using a 0.2 µm filter (Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA) and added repeatedly to the uninfected PFT cells after splitting.2.7. Virus PelletingSupernatant from PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV was collected in a similar way as described in Section 2.6. and ultracentrifuged at 30,000 rpm, 4 °C for 1.5 h using SW32 Ti-rotor (Beckmann Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). The pellet was resuspended in 200 µL PBS, and DNA was isolated and analyzed by PCR.2.8. DNA IsolationDNA was isolated from the cell lines and the virus pellet using DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA was quantified using a NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Worcester, MA, USA).2.9. Real-Time PCR for PCMV/PRV, GAPDH, and SINEReal-time PCRs using specific primers and probes (Table 1) were performed with DNA isolated from the respective cell lines to test for PCMV/PRV infection. They were performed using a SensiFAST Probe No-ROX kit (Meridian Bioscience, Cincinnati, OH, USA) in a reaction volume of 16 µL plus 4 µL (100 ng) of DNA template. All real-time PCRs were carried out as duplex PCRs, simultaneously testing the virus gene of interest and hGAPDH/murine SINE (SINE B1)/porcine SINE (PRE-1)/porcine GAPDH (pGAPDH) as the internal control for each sample. Real-time PCR reactions were carried out with a qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany).For PCMV/PRV, hGAPDH, pGAPDH, and murine SINE, the temperature–time profile consisted of an initial inactivation step at 50 °C for 2 min, followed by denaturation at 95 °C for 10 min, and 45 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 15 s, and annealing/extension at 60 °C for 1 min. For porcine SINE, the temperature–time profile consisted of an initial inactivation step at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 45 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 15 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 30 s.2.10. MicroscopyA total of 1 × 106 cells were seeded in a T25 cell culture flask (Sarstedt AG & Co. KG, Numbrecht, Germany) and imaged using a Zeiss Axio microscope using ZEN 2.3 software (Oberkochen, Germany) with a 10× objective. Brightfield and fluorescent images were acquired. Images were processed using ImageJ [25].viruses-18-00021-t001_Table 1Table 1Primers and probes.Primers and Probes Used for Real-Time PCRSequence 5′-3′Nucleotide PositionAccession NumberReferencePCMV/PRV fw PCMV/PRV rev PCMV/PRV probeACTTCGTCGCAGCTCATCTGA GTTCTGGGATTCCGAGGTTG 6FAM-CAGGGCGGCGGTCGAGCTC-BHQ145,206–45,22645,268–45,24945,247–45,229AF268039Mueller et al., 2002 [26]hGAPDH fw hGAPDH rev hGAPDH probeGGCGATGCTGGCGCTGAGTACTGGTTCACACCCATGACGA HEX-CTTCACCACCATGGAGAAGGCTGGG-BHQ13568–35873803–3783 3655–3678AF261085Behrendt et al., 2009 [27]pGAPDH fwpGAPDH revpGAPDH probeGATCGAGTTGGGGCTGTGACTACATGGCCTCCAAGGAGTAAGAHEX-CCACCAACCCCAGCAAGAG-BHQ1083–11041188–11681114–1137NM_001206359.1Duvigneau et al., 2005 [28]PRE-1 fwPRE-1 revPRE-1 probeGACTAGGAACCATGAGGTTGCGAGCCTACACCACAGCCACAGFAM-TTTGATCCCTGGCCTTGCTCAGTGG-BHQ137–5861–85151–170Y00104Walker et al., 2003 [29]SINE B1 fwSINE B1 revSINE B1 probeTGGCGCACGCCTTTAATCTGGCCTCGAACTCAGAATCC6FAM-ACTCGGGAGGCAGAGG-BHQ1n.a.n.a.Gualtieri et al., 2013 [30]PERV-C fwPERV-C revCTGACCTGGATTAGAACTGGATGTTAGAGGATGGTCCTGG6606–66256867–6886AM229312Takeuchi et al., 1998 [31]n.a., not applicable.3. Results3.1. Characterization of PCMV/PRV Used in the Infection StudiesPFT cells and PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV are well characterized; both were found to be positive for porcine endogenous retrovirus (PERV), and the latter were positive for PCMV/PRV [16,17,18,19,20]. The cell line was originally derived from the inner lining of the pig oviduct, also known as porcine fallopian tubes (PFTs) or uterine tubes [16]. This line was susceptible to 17 of 24 porcine RNA viruses and 8 of 9 porcine DNA viruses, among them was PCMV/PRV [20]. PCMV/PRV-infected cells showed a cytomegalic cytopathogenic effect and intranuclear inclusion [17]. Recently, virus particles were isolated from a culture supernatant and characterized by electron microscopy [32]. The virus released from PFT cells was shown to infect uninfected PFT cells [18,19,32], as well as porcine aortic endothelial cells (PAECs) in vitro, leading to the activation of these cells, as demonstrated by increased expression of porcine tissue factor [33].The PFT cells used here were PCMV/PRV-negative, and the PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV (Figure 2) were positive, as confirmed by real-time PCR analysis (Table 2). Both cell lines were like all porcine cells positive for porcine endogenous retroviruses PERV-A and PERV-B, but they were negative for PERV-C (Table 2).In the PCMV/PRV-producing cell line, large round cells were visible (Figure 2b), which should represent PCMV/PRV-producing cells, as has been shown previously by Fischer et al. [32] using immunological methods.To determine whether PCMV/PRV is released into the supernatant of PCMV/PRV-positive PFT cells, DNA was repeatedly isolated directly from the culture supernatant and analyzed by real-time PCR for the presence of viral DNA. In all cases, PCMV/PRV was not detected. Therefore, the supernatant was first centrifuged to remove cells, filtrated, and then ultracentrifuged to pellet viral particles. PCMV/PRV was subsequently detected in the virus pellet (Table 3). A total of 50 ng DNA was extracted from the virus pellet; the measured 102.4 viral copies corresponded to 5 mL of supernatant.3.2. PCMV/PRV Infection of Hygromycin-Resistant PFT CellsIn order to obtain hygromycin-resistant PFT cells, PFT cells were transfected with pVITRO-eGFP, and selection was performed with hygromycin. The selected cells showed expression of GFP in all cells and hygromycin resistance (PFThyg) (Figure 3). PFThyg cells were co-cultivated with PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV, as shown in Figure 1. Upon selection with hygromycin, virus-producing PFT cells were eliminated, followed by screening for PCMV/PRV and porcine SINE by real-time PCR (Table 4). The presence of the SINE sequence indicates the porcine origin of the cells. The PFThyg cells were PCMV/PRV-positive, demonstrating proof of concept for PCMV/PRV infection experiments.In both the PCMV/PRV-producing PFT cells as well as the PFT cells freshly infected with PCMV/PRV, we found, by real-time PCR, 104 copies per 100 ng DNA. Since 100 ng DNA corresponds to 1.7 × 104 cells (assuming 6 pg DNA per cell), approximately 58.8% of the cells were infected, assuming that each infected cell carries only one viral copy.3.3. Failure to Infect Human CellsHuman 293T cells were made resistant to hygromycin (293Thyg) by transfecting them with a construct expressing, in addition to hygromycin, a fragment of the transmembrane envelope protein p15E of PERV used for other purposes [21]. These cells were co-cultured with PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV by splitting the cells in between upon confluency, followed by screening for PCMV/PRV by real-time PCR. A schematic representation of the co-culture experimental set-up is shown in Figure 1. At day 21, both PCR assays—the one detecting PCMV and the one detecting pig SINE—were negative, indicating that no pig cells remained and that human cells were not infected (Table 4). To detect virus infection, we used the detection of viral DNA by real-time PCR. Since this method is highly sensitive (10 copies/100 ng DNA [9]) and the results were negative at different time points after starting selection, there was no need to screen for viral transcripts or proteins. To note, brightfield microscopy images of 293Thyg cells after co-cultivation and selection (Figure 2) demonstrated the absence of morphologically PFT-PCMV/PRV-specific cells.3.4. Failure to Infect Mouse CellsMouse cells derived from RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) knockout mice, which were made hygromycin-resistant [23] (Figure 2), were co-cultivated with PFT cells producing PCMV/PRV in a similar manner as with 293Thyg cells (Figure 1). After removal of the pig cells by adding selection medium containing 400 µg/mL hygromycin, the mouse cells were tested for PCMV/PRV and pig SINE, where both PCRs were negative (Table 4). As an additional control, murine SINE B1 was detected in the treated cells.3.5. Infection of PFT Cells by Supernatant from PCMV/PRV-Producing PFT CellsTo assess whether PFT cells can be infected by cell-free PCMV/PRV, the supernatant from PCMV/PRV-positive PFT cells was centrifuged to remove residual cells, filtered through a 0.2 µm filter, and repeatedly added to uninfected PFT cells at each passage together with fresh medium. This procedure was performed every four days over a period of 25 days. At each passage, the cells were washed with PBS, and part of them was analyzed by real-time PCR for the presence of PCMV/PRV. Although PCMV/PRV was not detected directly in the supernatant, likely due to a low viral copy number, it was present in the pelleted virus fraction (Table 3) and was capable of infecting PFT cells (Table 5). This indicates that PCMV/PRV can establish cell-free infection, although the infection rate is lower compared with the rate after co-culture (15% vs. 58.8%).4. DiscussionPCMV/PRV has been shown to reduce the survival time of xenotransplants when transmitted by an organ from virus-infected donor pigs. This was shown in the case of pig thymokidneys in baboons [33], pig kidneys in baboons [35], pig kidneys in cynomolgus monkeys [36], and pig hearts in baboons [37]. Notably, PCMV/PRV was transmitted to the first human recipient of a pig heart and contributed to the patient’s death [5].In baboon recipients, PCMV-expressing cells were found in all organs by immunohistochemistry, indicating the presence of cells expressing viral proteins [38]. High levels of PCMV/PRV DNA, detected by PCR in all baboon organs, confirmed this finding [38]. The concurrent identification of porcine SINE sequences in the same samples [34] suggests that these corresponded to disseminated pig cells.Since humans have not been reported to be infected with PCMV/PRV under natural conditions, and the virus causes disease only in the context of xenotransplantation, it is not considered zoonotic but should instead be classified as xenozoonotic [39]. This indicates that humans face no occupational or dietary exposure risks. In baboons, in the context of xenotransplantation, the virus induced consumptive coagulopathy and thrombocytopenia [33]. Analyzing the cytokine levels in the blood, an increase in IL-6 and TNFα in baboons with PCMV/PRV-positive hearts was observed [36]. Furthermore, high levels of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (tPA-PAI-1) complexes were found, suggesting a complete loss of the pro-fibrinolytic properties of the endothelial cells [36].Only two studies have addressed the question of whether PCMV/PRV can infect human cells. In one, human nasal fibroblasts were inoculated with supernatants from persistently infected porcine turbinate cells (PT-K75 cells), and infection was demonstrated by a cytopathic effect by 7 days post-infection, and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction sequencing identified PCMV/PRV RNA polymerase transcripts in these infected cells [13]. However, this study lacked critical controls, and the possibility of transmission of virus-producing pig cells could not be excluded. Surprisingly, a monoclonal antibody to human CMV (HCMV) glycoprotein B was used to detect PCMV/PRV. In our studies no cross-reaction between PCMV/PRV and HCMV was observed using the recombinant gB protein of PCMV/PRV [40]. A second study used persistently infected primary porcine alveolar macrophages (PAMs) as a source of PCMV/PRV, which were co-cultivated, for up to 15 passages, with human B (RAJI) and 293 cells. No PCMV/PRV infection was observed by PCR [14]. Consistently, our preliminary infection experiments using PBMCs from PCMV/PRV-positive pigs and human 293 cells also revealed no infection.In addition to our finding that PCMV/PRV does not infect human cells with impaired antiviral defense, and the report by Tucker et al. [14] showing that PCMV/PRV does not infect human cells in vitro, strong in vivo evidence also indicates that PCMV/PRV does not infect non-human primate or human cells. First, in baboons transplanted with PCMV/PRV-positive pig hearts, PCMV/PRV DNA was detected by PCR in all analyzed organs [36]. Only very few cells expressing PCMV/PRV proteins were identified in baboon organs by immunohistochemistry [37]. Porcine SINE sequences were detected by PCR in these organs [38], indicating the presence of disseminated pig cells. Second, single-cell RNA sequencing demonstrated that PCMV/PRV transcripts were present only in pig cells, and not in baboon cells from these same animals (Reichart D. et al., Department of Medicine I, University Hospital, LMU Munich, personal communication). Third, in the patient who received the first pig heart transplant, detection of PCMV/PRV was consistent with the presence of porcine cell microchimerism in the examined organs [41]. Although PCMV/PRV transcription was identified in the transplanted porcine heart—indicating active viral replication—recipient tissues, including the liver, spleen, and kidney, tested negative for PCMV/PRV transcription [41].Herpesviruses were traditionally considered strictly species-specific and incapable of crossing species barriers. However, this view has changed with accumulating evidence demonstrating transspecies transmission in several herpesviruses [42]. For example, baboon cytomegalovirus (BaCMV) has been shown to infect human cells in vitro and was detected in human recipients of baboon liver transplants [43,44]. Similarly, human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) has been reported to infect pig cells [45]. In contrast, PCMV/PRV appears to remain strictly species-specific. Previous work has demonstrated that PCMV/PRV failed to replicate in rabbits, mice, hamsters, chick embryos, or cattle [46], reinforcing its species specificity. Since cell-free transmission was less efficient than cell-to-cell spread, PCMV/PRV relies heavily on direct membrane contact, a feature that would further limit its ability to jump species in vivo.We deliberately selected cell lines with impaired antiviral defense mechanisms for our infection experiments. In 293T cells, a downregulation of several genes involved in viral sensing and restriction has been reported, including apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme catalytic subunit 3G (APOBEC3G), stimulator of interferon genes (STING), Janus kinase 3 (JAK3), IFI16, guanylate-binding protein 5 (GBP5), bone marrow stromal cell antigen 2 (BST2), and MX2 [47,48]. Moreover, 293 cells are deficient in Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and Nod2 [49]. These cells are profoundly defective in cytosolic DNA sensing and interferon induction, and multiple HEK293 cell lines—regardless of their source—naturally lack detectable cGAS or STING protein expression [50,51].The functions of these factors are well characterized. APOBEC3G functions as a cytidine deaminase that introduces cytidine-to-uridine mutations, thereby compromising viral coding sequences and replication capacity. STING detects viral nucleic acids and triggers the production of interferons α and β. JAK3, a member of the Janus family of tyrosine kinases associated with cytokine receptors, mediates downstream signaling upon cytokine binding; its inhibition is known to exert immunosuppressive effects, for instance, in organ transplantation. The interferon-inducible protein IFI16 contributes to viral DNA sensing [52], whereas GBP5, a dynamin-like GTPase, promotes NLRP3 inflammasome activation and plays an important role in innate immunity. BST2, better known as tetherin, prevents the release of budding viral particles from the cell surface. The interferon-induced GTP-binding protein Mx2 displays antiviral activity against HIV-1 and herpesviruses [53]. Finally, cyclic GMP–AMP synthase (cGAS) acts as a cytosolic DNA sensor that activates type I interferon responses; notably, cGAS-deficient mice are more susceptible to lethal infections caused by both DNA and RNA viruses [54].Mouse target cells were derived from mice lacking functional double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) [23]. PKR has been implicated in the induction of interferons (IFNs) and in the antiviral response. In these mice, the antiviral activity induced by IFN-γ and poly(I:C) (pIC) was reduced; however, the induction of type I IFN genes by pIC and viral infection remained unimpaired. In contrast, embryonic fibroblasts derived from PKR knockout mice exhibited a pronounced impairment in both type I IFN induction and NF-κB activation following pIC stimulation.Most interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) encode signaling molecules that enhance cellular responsiveness to pathogens and propagate immune signals from localized sites of infection. PKR serves as an effector molecule that mediates antiviral responses through the phosphorylation of protein substrates, thereby activating signaling pathways involved in homeostasis, immune regulation, and—under sustained activation—apoptosis [55]. IFN signaling induces PKR expression; however, PKR remains inactive until activated by binding to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) [56,57]. Interaction with dsRNA triggers PKR dimerization and autophosphorylation, leading to kinase activation. Activated PKR then catalyzes serine/threonine phosphorylation of various substrates, most notably the α-subunit of eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2α) [58,59]. Phosphorylation of eIF2α by PKR inhibits both host and viral mRNA translation, effectively suppressing viral replication [59]. The absence of PKR in the mouse cells used for our infection experiments, therefore, resulted in a substantial reduction of antiviral activity.Since the target cells used in both assays exhibited a reduced capacity to mount antiviral defenses, our findings strongly indicate that PCMV/PRV is inherently unable to infect human or mouse cells, which are equipped with functional antiviral mechanisms. This observation is consistent with previous reports showing that PCMV/PRV does not infect human 293 or B cells [14], as well as with findings from non-human primate and human recipients of PCMV/PRV-positive xenotransplants, in whom no evidence of infection has been detected [5,36,37].For the infection assay, a highly efficient co-incubation method was applied in which PCMV/PRV-producing cells were directly mixed with target cells resistant to a specific selection marker [60]. The resistance gene enables selective elimination of virus-producing cells upon addition of the appropriate selection medium. This assay supports both infection by cell-free virus and cell-to-cell transmission, while allowing complete removal of the virus-producing pig cells. To verify full elimination of pig cells, detection of the porcine SINE PRE1 sequence was employed as a highly sensitive confirmation method. In Sus scrofa, approximately 1.7 million SINE copies have been reported [61], of which more than one million are PRE1 elements [62]. In Chinese pig breeds, 1.98 million PRE1 copies have been detected [63]. Our finding of 108 SINE PRE1 copies in the PFT cells (Table 4) falls within a comparable range. Similar to porcine SINEs, very high copy numbers have also been reported in mice, with approximately 564,000 B1 copies in the mouse genome when sequencing the genome of a female C57BL/6J mouse [64,65]. We found 106.9, i.e., 7,940,000, cells in the immortalized MI4Y-3/8 cells from PKR knockout mice with a 129/Sv(ev)XC57BL/6J genetic background, indicating that the copy number may be even higher. It is well known that sequencing analyses usually underestimate the true number of repetitive sequences [66].If PCMV/PRV does not infect non-human primate or human cells, how does it contribute to transplant dysfunction and severe recipient complications, such as disseminated microvascular hemorrhage? We previously proposed [67] that PCMV/PRV replicates efficiently in the transplanted pig heart, as reflected by the markedly higher viral copy numbers in the explanted pig heart compared with all other baboon organs [36], and by the continuously increasing viral load observed in the first patient who received a pig heart [5,41]. Viral replication within the graft likely enables viral proteins to interact directly with immune and endothelial cells, leading to elevated IL-6 and TNF-α levels, increased concentrations of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and tPA–plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) complexes [36], and upregulation of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II expression in the graft endothelium [34]. Such interactions are consistent with known mechanisms whereby viral proteins modulate host responses even in the absence of productive infection; for example, retroviral transmembrane envelope proteins can interact with immune cells and induce immunosuppression both in vivo and in vitro (reviewed in [68]).5. ConclusionsPCMV/PRV has been transmitted in numerous preclinical xenotransplantation studies and in the first transplantation of a pig heart into a human patient, where it contributed to the death of the recipient. Here, we demonstrate that PCMV/PRV does not infect human or mouse cells. Given that these cells exhibit a markedly reduced antiviral defense capacity, it can be concluded that the virus is intrinsically unable to infect human or mouse cells, which are equipped with functional antiviral mechanisms. Consequently, PCMV/PRV likely acts indirectly on recipient immune and endothelial cells to induce pathological changes.


Title: Murine roseolovirus does not accelerate amyloid-β pathology and human roseoloviruses are not over-represented in Alzheimer disease brains

BackgroundIn the past decades, major strides have been made to uncover the heterogeneous factors that contribute to the etiology of Alzheimer Disease (AD). Recent advancements in biomarker studies predict that amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques begin to aggregate in the brains of AD patients 15–20 years before the onset of cognitive symptoms. Aβ accumulation triggers a local inflammatory response in the central nervous system (CNS) and promotes subsequent intracellular tau accumulation in the neocortex [1]. However, the initial events that drive Aβ seeding remain under debate and recently, pathogens have been raised as contributing factors. Although the mechanistic contributions of pathogens are unclear, multiple pathogens have been associated with AD. Recent studies have suggested that Aβ may act as an antimicrobial peptide that binds to pathogens and limits their entry [2–6]. In these studies, Aβ seeding was proposed to accelerate as part of an immune response to infection, and repeated or chronic infection results in persistent inflammation and Aβ accumulation.Herpesviruses have been considered in the pathogenesis of AD because they are ubiquitous in the population, cause chronic infections that periodically reactivate, and several herpesviruses, including herpes simplex viruses (HSV-1 and HSV-2), cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and the human roseoloviruses infect the CNS and cause neuroinflammation [7, 8]. Indeed, the herpesviruses have been associated with AD [9–14]. The human roseoloviruses, HHV-6A, HHV-6B and HHV-7, have received particular attention given their link with CNS diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and encephalitis [15, 16]. Moreover, there are reports of increased HHV-6 DNA in AD brains compared to non-AD controls [17], decreased HHV-6 IgG titers in the blood of AD patients compared to controls [6], and a human leukocyte antigen subtype associated with increased susceptibility to HHV-6A infection that was suggested to be an AD genetic risk factor [18]. A recent publication by Readhead, et al. utilizing transcriptomic, genomic and proteomic analysis of several brain banks suggested a link between human roseoloviruses, specifically HHV-6A and HHV-7, and AD [19]. Furthermore, another study observed Aβ aggregating around HHV-6 in vitro [5]. However, a reanalysis of the study published by Readhead, et al. using a different statistical methodology [20], as well as an additional cohort study of brain banks using transcriptomics and digital droplet PCR [14], both suggested a lack of association between human roseoloviruses and AD.Establishing a causal link between human roseoloviruses and AD is hindered by the high prevalence and chronicity of infection [21, 22]. The beta-herpesviruses demonstrate species-specific tropism, therefore in vivo studies of human roseoloviruses have been limited to immunodeficient humanized mice or transgenic mice expressing the receptor for HHV-6A, CD46 [23–25]. While these are useful models to study human roseoloviruses, there are clear restraints. The humanized mouse models are immunodeficient and infection is limited to transferred human cells, whereas the CD46 transgenic mouse models utilize intracranial infection and are limited to HHV-6A infection [23–25]. On the other hand, murine roseolovirus (MRV) is genetically and morphologically highly-related to the human roseoloviruses and likely has high prevalence in wild mouse populations [26–28]. Neonatal infection with MRV results in transient failure to gain weight, thymic atrophy and CD4+ T cell depletion [26, 29]. We have previously shown that viral DNA was observed in the CNS after neonatal infection, although viral replication was not evaluated [26]. Furthermore, MRV DNA appeared to persist at low levels into adulthood, suggesting it establishes life-long latency similar to other herpesviruses.Given the similarities of MRV to human roseoloviruses and its ability to infect the CNS, herein we investigated the impact of MRV on Aβ accumulation in vivo using the 5XFAD mouse model that overexpresses human APP and PSEN1 transgenes with five AD-linked mutations [30]. We demonstrated that 5XFAD mice are susceptible to MRV infection and observed expression of late viral transcripts in the brain during acute infection, suggesting active viral replication. Additionally, we detected inflammation in the brain after peripheral and direct central nervous system (CNS) infection. Furthermore, Aβ interacts with MRV particles in vitro and, subsequent to this interaction, can disrupt infection. Despite the presence of MRV in the brains of 5XFAD mice, we did not detect increased accumulation of Aβ aggregates. Moreover, when we used RNA-sequencing (RNAseq) to evaluate a cohort of brains from Knight-ADRC research participants who either were cognitively unimpaired without AD or who had dementia due to AD at time of death, we found there was no association between HHV-6 infection frequency and AD. Taken together, our data demonstrate that although MRV infects the brain and induces both an acute peripheral and central inflammatory response, MRV does not increase Aβ aggregation in the brains of 5XFAD mice. Similarly, we found no association of HHV-6 RNA prevalence in AD human brains.MethodsAnimals5XFAD (B6SJL-Tg (APPSwFlLon,PSEN1*M146L*L286V)6799Vas/Mmjax) and B6SJLF1/J mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories. BALB/c mice were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. Mice were bred in house under pathogen-free conditions. Mice that were MRV-infected were housed in separate cages from mock-infected mice to avoid horizontal transmission. For all neonatal infections, male and female mice were infected and included in the experiments (sex ratio overall was ~ 50%). For infection of adult mice, female mice were used for all studies. These studies were conducted in accordance with institutional ethics guidelines in place through institutional animal care and use committee (IACUC) protocols approved by the Animal Studies Committee of Washington University in St. Louis.Virus stock and infectionMRV stocks were prepared from in vivo passaging in BALB/c mice as described previously [26]. For peripheral infection, mice received intraperitoneal (i.p.) inoculation using a 30-guage needle with 50 μL of a 1:5 dilution of viral stock in serum-free DMEM for a dose of ~ 2 × 107 MRV genome copies. Mock infection was performed similarly with 50 μL of serum-free DMEM.For intracranial intrahippocampal injections, virus stock was semi-purified through a sorbitol cushion as described previously [31, 32], with several modifications. Briefly, MRV virus stocks were prepared from minced thymus. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation, then were lysed using a cup horn sonicator. Large cellular debris was pelleted by centrifugation and supernatant was removed and layered onto a 20% sorbitol cushion (20% d-sorbitol, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.2, 1 mM MgCl2) at 55,000×g for 1 h using an ultracentrifuge. The remaining pellet was resuspended in 1% fetal bovine serum (FBS) in DMEM or PBS. For intracranial infection with semi-purified MRV stocks in 1% (FBS), six-week-old 5XFAD received bilateral, intrahippocampal injections of MRV with a 5 μL Hamilton syringe with a 30-gauge needle attached to a Kopf stereotaxic instrument (4 × 106 MRV genome copies; 2 μL/site; AP: -2.0, ML: + 1.6/− 1.6, DV: − 2.0; 0.15 μL/min infusion rate). The needle was left undisturbed for 5 additional minutes after the injection before withdrawal. All mice were sacrificed 72 h post infection. To evaluate the impact of Aβ on infection, semi-purified viral stock in PBS was incubated with DMSO control or oligomeric-Aβ42 at a concentration of 10 μM for 2 h, then diluted 1:5 in PBS and 50 μL was injected intraperitoneally into postnatal day 0 (P0) BALB/c mice.Nanogold-labeled Aβ sample preparationHuman Aβ42 peptides (Cat#: 107761–42-2, GenScript) were resuspended with 1 mL of 1,1,1,3,3,3-Hexafluoro-2-propanol (HFIP). HFIP was then evaporated in a chemical hood overnight to obtain dry monomeric Aβ42 layer that was stored at − 20 °C in aliquots. On day of use, one 100 μg aliquot was dissolved with 5 μL of DMSO and diluted with sodium bicarbonate buffer (pH = 8.0) to make 10 μM monomeric Aβ42. Next, 10 nmol of Mono-Sulfo-N-Hydroxy-Succinimido- Nanogold® Labeling Reagent (Cat#: 2025, Nanoprobes) was added to the solution and incubated at RT overnight. Excess nanogold molecules were removed via three-day dialysis in H2O with 3.5 kDa cut-off tube at 4 °C. After dialysis, dry nanogold-labeled or unlabeled Aβ42 was obtained after overnight speed vacuum centrifugation at RT. The nanogold-labeled Aβ42 was dissolved with 5 μL of DMSO and used for preparation of monomeric, oligomeric Aβ42 and Aβ42 fibrils following a published protocol [33]. Briefly, oligomeric Aβ42 was formed using F12 media at 4 °C and Aβ42 fibrils were formed in 10 mM HCl at 37 °C for at least 24 h.Negative staining transmission electron microscope (NS-TEM) imagingBefore NS sample preparation, 10 μM of monomeric, oligomeric and fibrillar nanogold-labeled Aβ42 was mixed with purified MRV samples and incubated for 2 h. Afterwards, all NS samples were vortexed and prepared following standard uranyl formate negative staining protocol. At least 50 TEM images containing viral particles per sample were obtained with JEOL JEM-1400 120 kV TEM with 80,000x magnitude. The quantification of nanogold-labeled Aβ42 interaction with MRV particles was conducted by a blinded reviewer scoring for nanogold negative or positive viral particles.Tissue harvestingPerfusionMice were anesthetized with Fatal-Plus (pentobarbital, 200 mg/kg, intraperitoneal) and transcardially perfused for three minutes with chilled phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solution containing 0.3% heparin.Brain extractionBrains were hemisected: one hemisphere was dissected for specific brain regions, flash-frozen on dry ice, and stored at − 80 °C for biochemical and gene transcript analyses; the other hemisphere was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24–48 h and cryoprotected in 30% sucrose at 4 °C before sectioning for histology.Spleen and thymus collectionSpleen and thymus dissection was performed as described previously [29]. Briefly, for nucleic acid analysis tissue was dissected and stored at − 80 °C or prepared for flow cytometry as described below.Histology and quantificationSectioningHemibrains were sectioned coronally at 50 μm into six series using a freezing, sliding microtome (Leica). Brain slices were then stored at − 20 °C in cryoprotectant solution (0.2 M PBS, 15% sucrose, 33% ethylene glycol) until use. All histological studies were conducted by staining for two to three tissue slices from each mouse, separated by 300 μm (bregma − 1.5, − 1.8, and − 2.1 mm or − 1.8, and − 2.1 mm).Immunostaining with DABBrain tissue staining was performed at room temperature and on a shaker as previously described [34]. Briefly, tissue sections were rinsed 3 times for 5 min each with Tris-buffered saline (TBS) and then blocked for nonspecific binding with 3% milk in TBS containing 0.25% Triton-X100 (TBS-X) for 30 min. Sections were then incubated at 4 °C overnight using primary antibodies (biotinylated anti-Aβ1–13 monoclonal antibody HJ3.4B (produced in-house, 2 μg/mL) for Aβ, mouse monoclonal anti-tau (gift from L. Binder, Northwestern University, 1:500) for Tau5, mouse monoclonal anti-phospho-tau Ser202, Thr205 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 1:500) for AT8 phosphorylated tau, and rabbit anti-Iba1 (Wako, 019–19,741, 1:5000) for microglia with biotinylated goat anti-rabbit IgG secondary antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 31,820, 1:1000). The following day, tissue sections were rinsed 3 times for 5 min each with TBS and incubated for 1 h in VectaStain Elite ABC-HRP Kit, Peroxidase (Vector Laboratories, PK-6100) and developed with DAB Eqv Peroxidase (HRP) Substrate (Vector Laboratories, SK-4103) following the manufacturer protocols. Glass slides were cover-slipped with cytoseal60 and allowed to air dry at room temperature for at least 24 h. Stained brain sections were scanned using a Nanozoomer 2.0-HT slide scanner (Hamamastu Photonics) at 20X magnification, courtesy of the Hope Center Alafi Neuroimaging Core.QuantificationImages were quantified using Fiji software version 1.52v (ImageJ). The percent area covered by immunostaining was calculated by setting a single threshold per staining experiment to traced cortical and hippocampal regions. Two to three brain sections per mouse were averaged for an individual biological replica.Tissue lysate extraction and ELISABrain homogenizationMouse posterior cortices were first homogenized in chilled PBS containing Complete Protease Inhibitor and phosSTOP Phosphatase Inhibitor (“Soluble fraction”), and then in 5 M guanidine-HCL buffer, pH 8.0 (“Insoluble fraction”) using magnetic beads (Next Advance, Bullet Blender Storm 24).ElisaELISAs were performed using 96-well, half-well plates and concentrations were normalized to brain tissue weight. All antibodies were made in-house: anti-Aβ35–40 HJ2 (capture antibody for Aβ40), anti-Aβ37–42 HJ7.4 (capture antibody for Aβ42), biotinylated anti-Aβ13–18 HJ5.1B (detection antibody for Aβ40 and Aβ42). Aβ sandwich ELISAs were performed as previously described and concentrations were measured using Gen5 software version 1.11 with Synergy 2 (BioTek) [35] Samples were loaded in duplicates, averaged per mouse for an individual biological replicate.Nucleic acid preparation and analysisDNA was extracted from organs using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) while RNA was extracted from organs using the RNeasy Plus Kit (Qiagen) per manufacturer protocols. qPCR of DNA was performed using TaqMan Universal Master Mix II (Applied Biosystems). RNA was treated with DNase prior to being analyzed by qPCR using TaqMan RNA-to CT 1-Step Kit (Applied Biosystems). qPCR was analyzed on a StepOnePlus real time PCR machine (Applied Biosystems). For MRV ORF69 standard curves were created using a plasmid of known base pairs in order to calculate copies/mL. For all other, relative expression compared to Actb (beta-actin) was calculated using ∆∆Ct. Primers used included: ORF69, Actb, IL-6, Iba1, ApoE, IL-1b, TREM2, GFAP.Flow cytometrySpleen and thymus were prepared for flow cytometry by first crushing through a 70-μm cell strainer to obtain single cell suspensions. Red blood cells were lysed then cells were counted on a hemocytometer. Cells were stained with fixable viability dye (eBioscience) then incubated with 2.4G hybridoma supernatant to block Fc receptors. Surface staining was performed with the following fluorescent labeled antibodies: anti-CD3ε (145-2C11), anti-CD4 (RM4–5), anti-CD8α (53–6.7), and anti-CD44 (IM7) from Fisher Scientific, anti-CD19 (6D5), anti-NKp46 (29A1.4) and anti-CD62L (MEL-14) from Biolegend, and anti-CD45.2 (104) from eBioscience. Flow cytometry was performed on a FACS Canto (BD Biosciences) and analyzed using FlowJo v10 (TreeStar, Ashland, OR).RNA-seq data pre-processingHuman parietal RNA-seq was generated from the Charles F. and Joanne Knight Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (Knight-ADRC) participants in two batches using Ribo-zero 150 × 2 pair-end reads. A detailed description of the sample selection criteria, extracted brain tissues, and the pipeline used for pre-processing and analyzing the human bulk RNA-seq data from this cohort is described elsewhere [36–39]. For this study, we used a subset of samples that are either definitive AD or controls. Precisely, the subset of samples retrieved from the Knight-ADRC consisted of 350 samples diagnosed with AD and 31 healthy controls. The obtained sequence files were in .bam format and already mapped to GENCODE [40] annotated human reference genome (GRCh38) using STAR software [41] in chimeric read detection mode. Unaligned reads from these aligned bam files were extracted using the “view -b -f 4” command supported in the samtools suite (http://samtools.sourceforge.net/). An unmapped BAM (uBAM) was created including these reads by using the “RevertSam” command supported in the picard tool suite (https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/).Viral screening using RNA-seq dataThe unaligned RNA-seq reads (uBAM) files were screened for a collection of microbes including HHV-6A and HHV-6B by using the “PathSeq” tool developed by the BROAD Institute (http://software.broadinstitute.org/pathseq/), using the pre-built microbe reference files (pathseq_microbe.fa.img). The total number of microbes screened for observing their abundance in the selected RNA-seq samples was 25,799 together with 118 human viruses. We used the “PathSeqPipelineSpark” command supported in the gatk tool suite (https://software.broadinstitute.org/gatk/download/) for running the “PathSeq” tool. The command was executed with default parameters (https://gatkforums.broadinstitute.org/gatk/discussion/10913/how-to-run-the-pathseq-pipeline) and required pre-built references were downloaded from the BROAD Institute (https://software.broadinstitute.org/gatk/download/bundle). The virus detection scores per individual sequence file output from the “PathSeq” tool were then imported into R (https://cran.r-proiect.org/), collated by cohort and virus types, visually inspected and plotted using “ggplot2” R package (version 3.3.3) [42].Statistical analysis of PathSeq resultsBased on the number of samples that were positive and negative for HHV-6A and HHV-6B, two vectors were produced containing normalized viral abundance scores, and a non-parametric Wilcoxon Rank Sum test [43] was performed to determine if there was any relationship between viral abundance and AD classification. The Wilcoxon Rank Sum test implementation in the base R packages (version 3.5.2) [44] was used for this purpose.Statistical analysisFigures 1, 2, 3, 4, Supplementary Figs. 1, 2, 3: GraphPad Prism 8.0.2 was used to perform statistical analyses. Data are presented as means ± SD/SEM. No other statistical comparisons were significant unless otherwise indicated. For two groups: Statistical significance with normally distributed data was performed using a Student’s t-test (two-tailed). For data with unequal standard deviations, a t-test with Welch’s correction was performed. For three or more groups: Gaussian distribution of data was checked with the Anderson-Darling, D’Agostino and Pearson, and Shapiro-Wilk normality tests. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s post hoc test was used to determine statistical significance. Asterisks represent P values as follows: * = P < 0.05, ** = P < 0.01, *** = P < 0.001, *** = P < 0.0001.
Fig. 1MRV infects the CNS and elicits a peripheral and central inflammatory response in 5XFAD mice. A Schematic of experimental paradigm. B, C, Copies/mL of MRV DNA B and ORF69 RNA C in cortex of 5XFAD mice infected with mock or MRV 7 dpi (i.p.). D, E,  Flow cytometry of absolute number of CD45+CD19−NKp46− CD4+ or CD8+ thymocytes D and CD45+CD19−NKp46−CD3+ CD4+ or CD8+ T cells in the spleen E. F Inflammatory gene expression changes in cortical tissue. *P < 0.05 between WT mock and 5XFAD MRV. DP: CD4+CD8+ double positive. DN: CD4−CD8− double negative. ø represents below levels of detection. Dpi: days post infection. Data expressed as mean ± SD, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test (two-sided) (b, c, d, e, f). P < 0.05. ns = not statistically significant. No other statistical comparisons are significant unless indicatedFig. 2Aβ interacts with MRV in vitro and limits infection in vivo. A Interactions between purified MRV stock incubated for 2 h with PBS, Tris-nAu control, monomeric Aβ42 (mAβ42), oligomeric Aβ42 (oAβ42), or fibrillar Aβ42 (fAβ42) labeled with nanogold. Blue arrowhead: Viral particle. Red arrowhead: nanogold+ labeling. Green arrowhead: Fibrillar Aβ. A representative image with scale bar = 50 nm shown for each image with 5X increased magnification inset (white box represents area of inset) in the bottom left of image for viral particles or right of image for fibril. B Quantification of viral particles positive for nanogold (at least 50 particles were scored for each condition). C, D, Purified MRV stock incubated with PBS (MRV control) or oligomeric Aβ42 (MRV Aβ42) for 2 h, then i.p. injected into P0 BALB/c mice. Thymus was collected 7 dpi and evaluated for absolute number of CD4+, CD8+, DP (CD4+CD8+ double positive) or DN (CD4−CD8− double negative) C, or MRV DNA load as copies/mL in the thymus D. ø represents below levels of detection. Data expressed as mean ± SD, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test (two-sided). *P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, and **** P < 0.0001. No other statistical comparisons are significant unless indicatedFig. 3Peripheral MRV infection in adult 5XFAD mice does not affect Aβ plaque burden. A Schematic of experimental paradigm. B Absolute number of CD3+, CD4+, or CD8+ T cells in the spleen of 6-months-old 5XFAD mice infected with mock or MRV (i.p.). C Copies/mL of MRV DNA in cortex at 6-months-old or 7 dpi in thymus. D, E, Representative images of HJ3.4B staining for pan-Aβ immunoreactivity D and quantification of percent area coverage in the cortex E. Scale bar: 500 μm. F–I, Protein concentrations of PBS-soluble Aβ40 (f) and Aβ42 (g), or 5 M guanidine-soluble (“insoluble”) Aβ40
H and Aβ42
I in the cortex. J–L, Representative images of Iba1 staining for microglia J and quantification of percent area coverage in cortex K and hippocampus L. Scale bar: 500 μm. ø represents below levels of detection. Data expressed as mean ± SEM ,  –, multiple t-tests using Holm-Sidak method B, one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test (two-sided) C. *P < 0.05. No statistical comparisons are significant unless indicatedFig. 4CNS MRV infection in adult 5XFAD does not accelerate Aβ formation but induces neuroinflammation. A Schematic of experimental paradigm. B Copies of MRV ORF69 DNA 72 hpi of mock or MRV, delivered bilaterally into the hippocampus of 6-week-old 5XFAD mice. C–E, Representative images of HJ3.4B staining for pan-Aβ immunoreactivity (Aβ-IR) with insets depicting intracellular Aβ-IR C and quantification of percent area coverage in the cortex D or hippocampus E. F Quantification of extracellular Aβ plaque deposits in cortex overlaying hippocampus. G–H, CNS inflammatory response to MRV in the hippocampus measured by gene transcript changes G and Iba1+ immunostaining for microglia (H, I). hpi: hours post injection. Scale bar: 500 μm. Data expressed as mean ± SEM, student’s t-test (b, d, e, f, h), and multiple t-tests F. *P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01. ns = not statistically significant. No statistical comparisons are significant unless indicatedResults5XFAD mice are susceptible to MRV infection and develop neuroinflammationWe previously demonstrated that neonatal, peripheral MRV infection of BALB/c and C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) mice resulted in MRV DNA in the CNS, depletion of CD4 single positive (SP) and CD4CD8 double positive (DP) thymocytes, CD4+ T cells in the periphery, and peripheral inflammation as measured by an increase in activated CD8+ T cells [26, 29]. To examine the consequences of MRV infection in 5XFAD mice, we first investigated whether MRV infects the brains of neonatal 5XFAD mice after peripheral infection using intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection (Fig. 1a). We evaluated MRV DNA in the brains of 5XFAD mice compared to WT B6.SJL mice at 7 days post infection (dpi) and found similar levels in the cortex (Fig. 1b). Studies of herpesviruses have demonstrated that expression of late viral transcripts is correlated with viral replication [45]. We therefore utilized expression of the putative late viral transcript, ORF69, as a proxy of viral replication and found similar levels of expression in 5XFAD and WT mice (Fig. 1c). We then tested whether 5XFAD mice are susceptible to CD4+ thymocyte and peripheral CD4+ T cell depletion after neonatal MRV infection. Indeed, we determined that 5XFAD mice develop depletion of CD4 SP and DP thymocytes as well as CD4+ T cell depletion and an increase in activated CD8+ T cells in the periphery (Fig. 1d, e). Finally, since our data suggested active MRV replication in the brain, we evaluated expression of multiple inflammatory genes from the cortex of infected 5XFAD and WT mice compared to uninfected WT mice. We detected an increase in certain transcripts for microglia (Iba1), disease-associated microglia (Trem2), disease-associated astrocytes (Gfap), and proinflammatory cytokines (Il6, Il-1b) (Fig. 1f) [46, 47].. Together, these data demonstrate 5XFAD mice are equally susceptible to MRV infection as WT mice, with functional peripheral effects (T cell depletion) and viral replication in the brain inducing increased expression of inflammatory genes.Aβ interacts with MRV particles in vitro and disrupts infection in vivoStudies proposing Aβ as an antimicrobial peptide are predicated on the findings that, like other antimicrobial peptides, Aβ interacts with pathogens to disrupt infection [2–4, 48]. Furthermore, Aβ has been demonstrated to interact with herpesvirus particles, including HHV-6, and inhibit HSV infection in vitro [3, 5]. We therefore evaluated Aβ interactions with MRV. We generated monomeric, oligomeric or fibrillar Aβ42 in a 10 μM suspension to differentiate which form of Aβ42 may interact with MRV particles from purified viral stocks. We incubated viral particles with Aβ42 for 2 h, then used negative staining transmission electron microscopy (NS-TEM) to identify nanogold-labeled Aβ (> 1.4 nm). We found that compared to PBS (Blank) and nanogold controls, all forms of Aβ42 interacted with viral particles (Fig. 2a). This was true for the majority of viral particles imaged, although the percent of interaction was lowest for monomeric Aβ42 (Fig. 2b). Interestingly, in general there were no large aggregates of Aβ42 associated with viral particles, nor was there direct interaction of Aβ42 fibrils with viral particles even though the monomers/oligomers in the suspension did interact (Fig. 2a). Our data does not differentiate if the nanogold-labeled Aβ interacting with MRV particles in the oligomeric and fibrillar Aβ42 preparations was oligomeric or monomeric. Although we did not observe MRV interactions with large Aβ42 aggregates as previously reported [5], these data demonstrate that MRV does interact with certain forms of Aβ42 in vitro.We next evaluated whether Aβ42 has antimicrobial properties against MRV. Inhibitory properties of antimicrobial peptides, including Aβ42, were suggested to be associated with Aβ oligomerization, which is the preparation of Aβ42 we observed to have the highest percentage of interaction with MRV (Fig. 2b) [2, 5, 49–51]. We therefore tested the impact of oligomeric-Aβ42 on MRV infection. Purified viral stock was incubated with 10 μM purified oligomeric-Aβ42 for 2 h, then BALB/c mice were infected on postnatal day 0 (P0). We observed that compared to control infection, oligomeric-Aβ42 incubation with MRV resulted in a marked reduction in CD4 SP and DP depletion as well as a reduction in MRV DNA in the thymus (Fig. 2c, d). These findings confirm that Aβ42 interacts with MRV particles in vitro and then subsequently disrupts MRV infection in vivo.MRV infection does not increase cortical Aβ deposition of 5XFAD mice after peripheral infectionHuman roseoloviruses infections typically occur in childhood and demonstrate high seroprevalence in adulthood [21]. The impact and incidence of reinfection and frequency of reactivation of roseoloviruses is unknown, including for MRV. We therefore took several different approaches to evaluate the influence of MRV infection on the development of Aβ load. Because human roseoloviruses infections typically occur early in life, we performed neonatal i.p. infection of P0 neonatal 5XFAD mice and assessed Aβ load at 6 months (Fig. S1a). While we observed that the percentage of peripheral CD4+ T cell per total T cells was decreased at 10 dpi (Fig. S1b) similar to what we have published previously in other mouse strains [26, 29], this effect was transient and no longer present at 6 months post infection (mpi) (Fig. S1c). Importantly, we did not observe a change in Aβ plaque load in the cortex 6 mpi after neonatal MRV infection (Fig. S1d, e). Since accumulation of tau can also be pathogenic, we evaluated immunostaining for total tau and phosphorylated tau (p-tau) levels in mock and MRV infected mice and did not observe increased levels of either after MRV infection (Fig. S1f-i). One possibility for the absence of an effect of MRV on Aβ plaque load could be explained by a saturation effect of Aβ by 6 months of age. We therefore tested whether neonatal MRV infection could accelerate the seeding of Aβ plaques in 6-week-old 5XFAD mice, a timepoint before the formation of extracellular Aβ plaques (Fig. S1j) [30]. After neonatal i.p. infection, we did not detect a difference in Aβ immunoreactivity in the cortex of mock- and MRV-infected mice (Fig. S1k, l). These findings suggest that neonatal MRV infection did not facilitate Aβ deposition when assessed at two timepoints (pre- and post-plaque).Extracellular Aβ plaque formation begins at around 8 weeks in 5XFAD mice in the cortex [30]. It may be possible that pre-existing plaques in conjunction with viral infection are required to trigger downstream neuropathogenesis. We therefore also performed i.p. infections at 9 weeks, after the onset of plaque formation, and evaluated Aβ plaque load at 3 mpi, at 6 months of age, a timepoint characterized by high Aβ plaque burden (Fig. 3a). Although we previously observed CD4+ T cell depletion at 10 dpi, we did not observe prolonged CD4+ T cell depletion in the periphery or significant levels of MRV DNA in the cortex of 5XFAD mice at 3 mpi (Fig. 3b, c). Moreover, there was no change in cortical Aβ plaque pathology between mock- and MRV-infected mice when assessed using two methodological approaches, histology and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Fig. 3d–i). Similarly, there was no difference in Iba1+ microglial coverage in the cortex and hippocampus of mock- and MRV-infected mice (Fig. 3j–l). These results suggest that adult MRV infection does not facilitate Aβ progression and formation in a mouse model of amyloidosis. Taken together, these data suggest that peripheral infection with MRV did not accelerate or increase Aβ formation in 5XFAD mice, despite an acute inflammatory response in the CNS and periphery.Adult CNS infection with MRV results in acute inflammation but does not increase Aβ loadOne possible explanation for the discrepancy between our findings and previous work on the effects of viral pathogens on Aβ deposition could conceivably be differences in the route of infection [5]. One study that demonstrated enhanced Aβ aggregation in 6-week-old mice after HSV-1 infection was performed using direct, intracranial hippocampal infection [5]. Therefore, we performed a similar experiment in which we injected MRV (4 × 106 genome copies of virus stock) bilaterally into the hippocampus and evaluated Aβ load 72 h post infection (hpi) (Fig. 4a). We used a semi-purified viral stock, which showed similar infection characteristics compared to unpurified stocks, to reduce any impact of non-viral components on Aβ load and inflammation (Fig. S2). We detected MRV DNA in the hippocampus of all infected mice (Fig. 4b). However, we detected no change in Aβ immunoreactivity in the hippocampus and cortex (Fig. 4c–e), or formation of extracellular Aβ plaques (Fig. 4f). Similar to neonatal, peripheral infections, MRV intracranial infection stimulated an acute, inflammatory response marked by an upregulation in microglial, astrocytic, and pro-inflammatory cytokine-related gene transcripts (Fig. 4g). These data were supported by an increase in Iba1+ microglial coverage in the hippocampus of MRV-infected brains (Fig. 4h, i). There was also an increase in total tau immunoreactivity in the cortex (Fig. S3a–c), which was potentially a response to focal inflammation [52–54]. There was not a statistically significant increase in total tau immunoreactivity in the hippocampus or phosphorylated tau in the cortex or hippocampus (Fig. S3e-g). Our findings suggest that MRV can induce inflammation in the brain after direct CNS infection, but neither MRV nor inflammation secondary to infection are sufficient to rapidly increase Aβ deposition in the brain.HHV-6 abundance is similar between human AD and control brainsRNAseq data from the Knight-ADRC cohort was available from frozen brain parietal cortex tissue for 381 individuals. Only a subset of the Knight-ADRC cohort was considered for this study where clinical data for each individual included Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) score at the time of death and neuropathological assessment (Table 1). We performed RNA-seq analysis similar to previously described studies [36–39], aligning reads to the human genome followed by alignment of unmatched reads to 25,799 pathogens, including 118 human viruses [19]. Identification of HHV-6 transcripts was rare in non-AD control and AD samples (HHV-6A: 1/31 in non-AD controls and 2/350 in AD; HHV-6B: 1/31 in non-AD controls and 3/350 in AD) (Fig. 5a). HHV-7 transcripts were not identified in either the non-AD or AD samples. Upon arranging individuals based on their PathSeq scores, we observed no clear distinction of viral abundance between the individuals with AD vs. the controls (Fig. 5b). The normalized PathSeq score was based on the number of reads that align with a references taxon and indicates the amount of evidence that a taxon is present in a particular individual [44]. Moreover, upon checking the relationship between viral abundance and AD classification using the non-parametric Wilcoxon Rank Sum test, we observed no significant difference for either HHV-6A (P-value = 0.11) or HHV-6B (P-value = 0.22) between AD and controls groups (Fig. 5a). Therefore, our data, similar to a recent study [14], does not support an association between human roseolovirus infection and AD in the analysis of this cohort.
Table 1Demographics of RNAseq samples from Knight-ADRC cohort. Abbreviations: SD, standard deviation; APOE4+, apolipoprotein E4 carriers; CDRe, Clinical Dementia Rating at death; Braak DLB, Braak stages for dementia Lewy body; PMI, postmortem interval in hours; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; CO, controls; AAO, age at disease onset in years; AOD, Age of death in yearsFig. 5Relationship between viral abundance and AD status. A Comparisons of HHV-6A and -6B viral abundance between AD (N = 350) and non-demented controls (N = 31) in the Knight-ADRC cohort. Diamonds in violin plot: mean of group. Shape of violin plot: distribution of normalized PathSeq scores across each group. The p-values representing the significance of difference between the viral abundance in AD and controls groups for HHV-6A and -6B are shown at the top of corresponding violin plots. The p-values were obtained by performing a non-parametric Wilcoxon Rank Sum test in order to determine if there was any relationship between viral abundance and AD classification. Abbreviations: AD, Alzheimer Disease; CO, controls; HHV, human herpes virus. B Abundance of HHV-6A and HHV-6B in Knight-ADRC. HHV-6A and HHV-6B normalized PathSeq scores displayed in an increasing order for all the samples (AD and controls) in the Knight-ADRC cohort. Normalized PathSeq score based on the number of reads that align with a references taxon and indicates the amount of evidence that a taxon is present in a particular individualDiscussionThe relationship between the human roseoloviruses and AD has been of significant recent interest. While several studies have reported an association between HHV-6 or HHV-7 and AD [6, 17–19, 55], others have provided data that there is not a relationship [14, 20, 56, 57]. Currently, mouse models of human HHV-6 are limited. MRV is a natural murine pathogen and is highly related to HHV-6 and HHV-7, sharing genetic, morphologic and disease homology [26]. Moreover, our studies demonstrate that MRV enters the CNS and replicates in the cortex. Studying MRV therefore affords an opportunity to perform in vivo studies to model human roseolovirus neuropathogenesis, especially its relation to neuropathological features of AD-like disease in mice.The antimicrobial protection hypothesis of Aβ posits that pathogens causing persistent or recurrent infections in the CNS are sequestered by Aβ, triggering a hyperreactive innate immune response that results in Aβ fibrillization and consequently contributes to AD [50]. Indeed, we found that purified Aβ42 interacted with MRV particles in vitro and, subsequent to this interaction, disrupted infection in vivo. We therefore evaluated Aβ deposition after MRV infection to test the antimicrobial hypothesis for MRV infection. Natural infection with MRV likely occurs through secretions [58], but i.p. infection would similarly require MRV to enter the CNS from the periphery, which we found did indeed occur after neonatal infection. However, in our studies, we did not observe an increase in Aβ after MRV infection of 5XFAD mice. It is important to note that, similar to other recent studies [5, 59], we focused on expression of human transgenic Aβ and did not evaluate endogenous mouse APP expression, which has been suggested to have antimicrobial properties [4]. Factors such as the impact of MRV infection on APP expression driven by the endogenous mouse promoter compared to the Thy-1 promoter remain to be explored. We approached investigating the impact of infection in multiple ways, including utilizing two routes of infection (peripheral, i.p. or direct CNS, intracranial), infecting at various timepoints (pre- or post-Aβ plaque development), as well as multi-timepoint assessments post-infection (acute or chronic). None of these scenarios resulted in increased Aβ load, suggesting that MRV does not facilitate the progression of Aβ accumulation over time.Eimer et al. demonstrated that high dose intracranial HSV-1 infection in 5XFAD mice induced Aβ plaque formation by 72 h in 6-week-old-mice, with colocalization of Aβ plaques with HSV-1 viral particles [5]. A subsequent study that attempted to repeat these results with defined HSV-1 strains, albeit with potentially lower multiplicity of infection, did not observe colocalization of HSV-1 and Aβ plaques [60]. Neither study quantified the Aβ plaque load after infection, an important analysis given the rapid plaque formation reported in the former study. We therefore performed similar intracranial infections of 6-week-old 5XFAD mice with MRV and did not observe extracellular Aβ plaque formation. A caveat of these studies is intracranial injection was not performed at a later time point when Aβ plaques have begun to accumulate, which conceivably could be further seeded by a virus. Our studies were limited by the current lack of tools available to evaluate localization of MRV in tissues such as MRV-specific antibodies. Although we cannot compare doses between MRV and HSV-1, we cannot rule out that higher doses of MRV could induce Aβ formation.The association between AD and human roseolovirus has been the focus of numerous multi-omics studies. A study of multiple cohorts utilizing genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic data reported an association between AD and human roseoloviruses, especially HHV-6A and HHV-7 [19]. Furthermore, the data suggested that certain pathways associated with inflammation and viral immune response were differentially expressed in AD patients compared to non-AD controls. Two subsequent studies have called these findings into question. One study performing a reanalysis of the data with different statistical methods showed no difference [20]. An additional study of three AD cohorts using RNAseq and digital droplet PCR analysis did not establish differences in human roseolovirus detection between AD and control samples [14, 20]. Similar to the study by Allnut, et al., we did not identify an association between human roseoloviruses and AD in our RNAseq analysis of the Knight-ADRC cohort. HHV-6A and HHV-6B were only detected in a few patients in both the AD and non-AD control samples. Moreover, given the small number of positive patients, we could not establish a statistically significant PathSeq score between the AD and non-AD groups. Although our data do not rule out a potential contribution of human roseoloviruses in the pathogenesis of AD, especially at an individual level, it does support recent data suggesting that roseoloviruses are not associated with AD at the population level.Although herpesviruses have garnered interest as causative contributors to development of AD due to their neurotropism and chronic infections with periodic reactivation, utilizing -omics analysis from a single time point does not allow for evaluation of the viral load during, and frequency of reactivation. Moreover, selectively sampling CNS tissue at times of reactivation is not possible under most circumstances in human subjects. Several recent studies have suggested that treatment with antivirals for herpesvirus infections was associated with a decreased risk of dementia later in life compared to untreated patients [61–64]. In these studies, treatment generally was given in relatively short intervals considering the lifelong nature of herpesvirus infections, and many patients were treated with acyclovir, which has low efficacy against HHV-6 [65–67]. Prospective randomized control trials will likely address the use of herpes-specific antivirals for AD, although studying the impact of antiviral on reactivation in mice could provide a means to test efficacy in vivo. Indeed, a recent study using thermal stress to serially reactivate HSV-1 in mice demonstrated that intermittent stress resulted in HSV-1 reactivation, inflammation, and increased Aβ deposition in the brain [59]. While MRV reactivation has not been examined in detail, it is possible that MRV also requires induced reactivation through intermittent stress to promote Aβ accumulation. Additionally, reinfection with roseoloviruses in general is not well understood, including in the context of AD. Further evaluation of reinfection could provide important information regarding the role of roseoloviruses in AD. An important consideration for our studies and future studies is that the mechanism of MRV spread within tissue could impact Aβ accumulation. Human roseolovirus infection is thought to be largely cell-associated or through exosomes, which could make them less accessible to extracellular Aβ aggregation [68]. Perhaps higher viral loads resulting in increased extracellular MRV-Aβ interaction is necessary to increase Aβ plaque formation, which may be why we did not observe Aβ accumulation in 5XFAD mice that have an intact immune system.While MRV infection did not result in increased Aβ, we determined that MRV interacts with Aβ, and that it infects the brain and acutely induces neuroinflammation. Whether MRV has cell-specific tropism is also unknown. It is possible that Aβ entrapment of viral pathogens facilitated Aβ seeding, but upregulation of disease-associated microglia rapidly assisted in the phagocytosis and removal of Aβ plaques before further seeding and spreading of Aβ could occur. However, as there were no differences between viral load in the cortex of WT and 5XFAD mice, if Aβ indeed sequestered MRV, it likely did not neutralize sufficient viral load to prevent further replication. Additional research could provide insight into CNS cell types that are especially vulnerable to infection which may result in Aβ-independent toxic effects. Furthermore, it has been suggested that genetic variation resulting in an altered immune response to pathogens could contribute to viral load and reactivation in AD [19, 69]. Our study utilized inbred mouse strains (5XFAD mice on a B6SJL background) that do not have immunodeficiency, but it is possible that MRV infection of mice with defects in genes involved in viral immune response could cause increased Aβ load due to higher viral burden during acute infection or reactivation. For example, miR-155 knockout mice crossed to an APP/PS1 mouse developed increased Aβ load in the cortex compared to APP/PS1 controls [19]. miR-155 has been suggested to be important in controlling herpesvirus latency and is downregulated during lytic HHV-6 replication in NK cells [70, 71]. MRV infection of miR-155 knockout, or other mice with altered viral immune response mice could provide new insight into the relationship between immune control of roseolovirus lytic and latent infection and AD.Our findings in this study do not support or refute the antimicrobial protection hypothesis of Aβ. However, our results suggest that HHV-6 is not a main contributor for increased AD risk in humans at a population level. MRV infections, like human roseolovirus infections, are well controlled in immunocompetent hosts and do not result in mortality. Neonatal infection of WT and 5XFAD mice resulted in similar levels of MRV DNA and RNA in the cortex 7 dpi, suggesting Aβ has minimal, if any, antiviral properties towards neutralizing MRV after infection in 5XFAD mice. Although some markers of inflammation trended higher in the 5XFAD mice compared to WT littermates, these differences were not statistically significant. Despite this, a major finding in the current study was that MRV actively infects the brain and stimulates an inflammatory response, even after peripheral infection. Moreover, we found that Aβ interacts with MRV in vitro and, subsequent to this interaction, inhibits in vivo infection. In addition to further studies of the relationship between MRV and AD-like phenotypes in mice, MRV could be studied in other diseases characterized by CNS inflammation. Human roseoloviruses have been associated with several other inflammatory and autoimmune CNS diseases, including viral encephalitis, multiple sclerosis, and Rasmussen encephalitis [72–74]. Given the limitations of current mouse models of roseolovirus infection, MRV could be highly useful for performing deliberate, controlled studies to uncover the mechanistic role of a roseolovirus in CNS disease.ConclusionHuman roseoloviruses, HHV-6 and HHV-7 have recently been investigated for their role in AD, although studies in humans have provided controversial results. MRV is highly related to the human roseoloviruses, allowing for evaluation of the role of a natural murine roseolovirus in neuroinflammation and Aβ accumulation. Although Aβ interacted with MRV and disrupted infection, we found that MRV did not induce increased Aβ load after peripheral or direct CNS infection. However, we demonstrated that MRV actively infects the brain and induces neuroinflammation, providing a suitable in vivo system for further studies of the impact of roseolovirus infection of the brain.Supplementary Information
Additional file 1: Supplementary Fig. 1. Peripheral, neonatal MRV infection in 5XFAD mice does not accelerate Aβ plaque burden. A, Schematic of experimental paradigm (6 mpi). B, C, Percent of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells in plasma 10 dpi (B) or 6 mpi (C). D, E, HJ3.4B+ immunostaining for Aβ plaque load in the cortex. F–I, Staining and quantification for Tau5+ total tau (F, G) and AT8+ phosphorylated tau in the cortex (H, I). J, Schematic of experimental paradigm (6 wpi). K, L, Percent area HJ3.4B+ Aβ immunoreactivity (Aβ - IR) in cortex. Dpi: days post infection. Mpi: months post infection. Wpi: weeks post infection. p-tau: phosphorylated tau. Scale bar: 500 μm. Data expressed as mean ± SEM, student’s t-test (B, C, E, G, J, M). No statistical comparisons are significant unless indicated.Additional file 2: Supplementary Fig. 2. Comparisons between MRV purified and unpurified stocks. A – C, Stocks were created from in vivo passage and collection of 7 day post neonatal infection thymi and were used directly (MRV Stock) or semi-purified (MRV Purified). BALB/c mice were mock- or MRV-infected with MRV Stock or MRV Purified via i.p. injection on P0 then were evaluated by flow cytometry for percent CD4+ cells per total CD3+ cells from the spleen at 7dpi (A) or weight at 7dpi (B). C, Copies of MRV DNA per mL of stock were evaluated by qPCR.Additional file 3: Supplementary Fig. 3. Effects of acute, intrahippocampal MRV infection on tau pathology. A, Schematic of experimental paradigm. B – G, Staining and quantification for Tau5+ total tau (B, C, D) and AT8+ phosphorylated tau in the cortex (E, F, G). p-tau: phosphorylated tau. Scale bar: 500 μm. Data expressed as mean ± SD, student’s t-test. *P < 0.05. ns = not statistically significant. No statistical comparisons are significant unless indicated.


Title: Porcine Lymphotropic Herpesvirus (PLHV) Was Not Transmitted During Transplantation of Genetically Modified Pig Hearts into Baboons

1. IntroductionXenotransplantation using cells or organs from genetically modified pigs is progressing toward clinical application. Following numerous successful preclinical trials involving the transplantation of pig organs into non-human primates, the first transplantations of pig hearts and kidneys into human patients have been performed [1]. In addition to challenges such as immune rejection and physiological incompatibility, the risk of transmitting porcine microorganisms remains a significant hurdle [2]. The transmission of porcine cytomegalovirus, a porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV), to the first human recipient of a pig heart [3] highlighted the need for highly sensitive methods to detect porcine viruses in donor pigs and effective strategies to prevent such transmissions.Porcine lymphotropic herpesviruses -1, -2, and -3 (PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3), also called suid gammaherpesviruses 3, 4, and 5 (SuHV-3, SuHV-4, and SuHV-5), are viral species of the Macavirus genus, Gammaherpesvirinae subfamily, within the Herpesviridae family. SuHV-3/PLHV-1 and SuHV-4/PLHV-2 were first reported by Ehlers et al. in 1999 [4]. Later, another suid gammaherpesvirus was found with considerable genomic differences relative to PLHV-1 and PLHV-2 and named suid gammaherpesvirus 5 (porcine lymphotropic herpesvirus 3—PLHV-3) [5]. For the sake of simplicity, we will stick to the designations PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3.Under natural conditions there were no reports that PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3 represent primary pathogens of pigs or co-factors in other viral infections [6]. Despite their high prevalence, PLHVs’ relevance for the pig industry appears low. Their transmission occurs mainly horizontally, but vertical transmission is possible [7,8].PLHV-1 has been associated with a form of post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) in immunosuppressed pigs undergoing experimental allogenic bone marrow transplantations [9,10,11]. The clinical symptoms of experimental porcine PTLD, such as fever, lethargy, anorexia, high white blood cell count, and palpable lymph nodes, are similar to those of human PTLD, a serious complication of solid human organ and allogeneic bone marrow transplantation linked to Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) (human herpesvirus-4, HHV-4) [11].In studies published to date analyzing the prevalence of PLHV [12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26] (Table 1), both PCR-based methods and immunological assays have been employed. The publications were selected based on their screening for PLHV or reporting on PLHV prevalence. The PCR approaches used primers and probes targeting sequences of the DNA polymerase and glycoprotein B genes. Immunological methods, including Western blot and ELISA, were used to detect antibodies against PLHV as indirect indicators of infection. For example, ELISA-based testing revealed seropositivity rates ranging from 38% in piglets to 90% in gilts and 100% in breeding sows and pigs intended for slaughter [27]. The presence of high antibody titers in newborn piglets, which decline over time, indicates the transfer of virus-specific antibodies via colostrum from infected mother sows [27]. This pattern has also been observed in cases involving PCMV/PRV [28].PLHVs are closely related to alcelaphine herpesvirus type 1, AlHV-1, and ovine herpesvirus type 2, OvHV-2, two gammaherpesviruses, which are apathogenic in their natural hosts but cause serious lymphoproliferative diseases in other species [29]. Accordingly, PLHV may be apathogenic in pigs but pathogenic in other species, including humans. Here, we demonstrate that although PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3 were present in the donor pigs, they were not transmitted to the baboon recipient of the pig heart.2. Results2.1. Presence of PLHV in Donor Pigs for Heart XenotransplantationThirteen donor pigs and the corresponding baboon recipients were tested for PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3. The immunosuppressive regimen was based on a co-stimulation blockade targeting the CD40/CD40 L pathway, as previously described in detail [30]. For induction therapy, animals additionally received a B cell–depleting monoclonal antibody and a T cell–directed immunomodulatory agent. Maintenance therapy consisted of continued co-stimulation blockade in combination with an antiproliferative compound and corticosteroids. PCMV/PRV from the donor pig was transmitted to three of the 10 baboons. The presence of the porcine cytomegalovirus, which is actually a roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV) [31] (in some pigs and baboons at very high virus loads) contributed to a short survival time of these transplants [32] (Table 2). Whereas only three donor pigs were PCMV/PRV positive, all pigs were tested positive for PLHV-1 or -2, but none of them were positive for PLHV-3. To test for PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3, two conventional PCR methods, one detecting PLHV-1 and PHLV-2 and the other PHLV-3, were performed. Although PLHV-1 or PHLV-2 were found in all donor pigs, no virus was found in the recipient baboons (Table 2). The following baboon tissues were analyzed: spleen, liver, lung, and kidney. None of these tissues tested positive for PLHV-1 or PLHV-2.2.2. Real-Time PCR-Based Detection of PLHV in Donor PigsTo investigate the situation in greater detail, real-time PCR assays were developed and employed to detect PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3. Samples were collected from the liver and spleen of three new donor pigs (7649, 7654, and 7687), as well as from tissues of the corresponding baboon recipients (A, B, and C). These animals had survival times over 150 days, with the exception of baboon B, with only one day. The tissues analyzed included the liver and spleen of the baboons—except for baboon B, for which no tissues were available—and the left and right ventricles of the explanted pig hearts retrieved post-mortem (Table 3). Importantly, one donor pig, animal 7649, tested negative for all three PLHV viruses. This pig was the only one among the 11 animals tested to be completely free of PLHV. In contrast, pig 7654 was positive for PLHV-2 in both the liver and spleen. Pig 7687 was found to be co-infected with PLHV-1 and PLHV-3, with both viruses present in both organs.None of the PLHV viruses were detected in any of the transplanted baboons or in the explanted pig hearts. This indicates that PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3 were not transmitted to the baboons. Although the presence of PLHV might be expected in the transplanted pig hearts—given the viral detection in the donor liver and spleen—the viral load was probably below the detection threshold of our assay.The detection limit of the real-time PCR method used was 1 copy per 100 ng of total DNA for all three PLHV targets [18]. PCMV/PRV was not detected in any of the donor pigs, the transplanted baboons, or the explanted pig hearts.To assess the presence of pig cells in baboon tissues (microchimerism), we performed a Short Interspersed Nuclear Elements (SINE) PCR and detected pig-specific sequences in all baboon tissue samples (Table 3). This indicates that pig cells were present in all analyzed baboon organs. These findings are consistent with previous results obtained using the same SINE PCR assay [34], as well as in a case of transplantation of a PCMV/PRV-positive heart, with immunohistochemical analyses employing a PCMV/PRV-specific antibody [35]. The high load of SINE sequences in the right and left ventricles is not surprising, as the tissue is of pig origin. Surprisingly, the ventricles explanted from baboon A show a particularly low load of SINE sequences—levels even lower than those observed in the baboon’s liver and spleen. This discrepancy suggests that incorrect material may have been submitted for testing.However, if any of the pig cells present in the baboon tissues were positive for PLHV, their number was likely below the detection threshold of our assay, and thus the viruses could not be detected.The results clearly indicate that all three PLHV, PHLV-1, PHLV-2, and PHLV-3, were not replicating in the transplanted pig heart and were not infecting baboon cells.3. DiscussionWe demonstrated that although PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3 were present in the donor pigs, these viruses were not transmitted to the non-human primate recipients of the pig hearts. This contrasts sharply with the case of PCMV/PRV, which was consistently transmitted to recipients regardless of the species (baboon or cynomolgus monkey), the transplanted organ (kidney or heart), or the transplantation method (heterotopic or orthotopic) [32,36,37,38]. Although a Western blot assay which we had established at the Robert Koch Institute in Berlin to screen for antibodies against PLHV [13], was not available, it is unlikely that this assay would have produced a different result. PCMV/PRV transmission significantly reduced graft survival. Notably, in orthotopic heart transplantations, survival time dropped from 195 days to fewer than 20 days [32]. PCMV/PRV was identified as the cause of multiorgan failure, altered cytokine profiles, and coagulation abnormalities [32]. The virus was also transmitted to the first human patient who received a pig heart transplant in Baltimore, where it likely contributed to the patient’s death [3,39]. Importantly, PCMV/PRV transmission occurred even when the virus was undetectable in the donor pig by PCR due to its latent state—this was observed both in a baboon case [40] and in the first human xenotransplantation patient [3,39]. Although PCMV/PRV does not infect human or non-human primate cells in vitro and does not affect healthy humans in contact with pigs or consuming undercooked pork, it causes disease specifically in the context of xenotransplantation [41].When Mueller et al. [21] conducted transplantations of thymokidneys, kidneys, and hearts from Large White/Landrace cross-breed pigs transgenic for human decay-accelerating factor, as well as from Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH) miniature swine, they found that 78% of the donor pigs were positive for PLHV-1 and 25% for PLHV-2. All donor animals tested positive for PCMV/PRV. In the recipient baboons, the authors observed strong replication of PCMV/PRV in the explanted pig organs. However, no increase in PLHV-1 viral load was detected in xenografts that were PLHV-1–positive. PLHV was primarily localized to lymphoid tissues. Despite immunosuppression and the presence of xenogeneic immune responses, neither PLHV-1–positive xenotransplants nor those negative at baseline showed signs of PLHV-1 activation. The authors suggested that the lack of PLHV replication may be due to the absence of a sufficient number of target cells capable of supporting PLHV-1 replication within solid-organ xenografts.When Issa et al. [42] transplanted organs from pigs transgenic for human decay-accelerating factor or from alpha-1,3-galactosyltransferase gene-knockout miniature pigs into baboons, PLHV-1 DNA was detected in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 6 out of 10 transplanted baboons. However, there was no evidence of productive PLHV-1 infection, as viral loads in the serum did not increase over time, even with prolonged transplant survival. The authors concluded that the presence of viral DNA likely resulted from persistent pig cell microchimerism rather than active viral replication. While PCMV/PRV can be effectively eliminated from source animals through early weaning of piglets [43,44], this strategy failed to exclude PLHV-1 [43]. This difference underscores the distinct mechanisms of infection and latency between PCMV/PRV and PLHV-1, two unrelated herpesviruses.In our first experiment, summarized in Table 2, PLHV-3 was not detected in any of the donor pigs, PLHV-1 was detected in eight and PLHV-2 in two pigs. In contrast, in the second experiment (Table 3), all three PLHV types were detected. Notably, this experiment marked the first time a PLHV-free animal was identified in our facility, as well as the first documented case of co-infection with PLHV-1 and PLHV-3 (Table 3).Co-infections with two or even all three PLHV types are not uncommon. In a screening of 21 indigenous Greek black pigs, six animals were infected with all three viruses, and the remaining animals were infected with two [18]. Among them, six pigs carried PLHV-1 and PLHV-3, while nine were infected with PLHV-2 and PLHV-3 [18]. In contrast, all 10 German slaughterhouse pigs tested were positive for PLHV-1 and PLHV-3, but not for PLHV-2 [20]—the same combination found in animal 7687 (Table 3).The absence of PLHV in the explanted pig hearts after prolonged survival times of more than 150 days indicates that the virus present in the donor pig was not replicating in the xenotransplant, even under conditions of immunosuppression and extended survival.Regarding the genetic relatedness of the three PLHV viruses, PLHV-3 is significantly more distantly related to PLHV-1 and PLHV-2 than PLHV-1 and PLHV-2 are to each other [5].As mentioned in the introduction, the gene content of porcine lymphotropic herpesviruses (PLHVs) is highly similar to that of alcelaphine herpesvirus 1 (AlHV-1), associated with wildebeests, and ovine herpesvirus 2 (OvHV-2), associated with sheep [5,26,45]. These viruses cause malignant catarrhal fever (MCF), a lymphoproliferative and inflammatory disease that is typically fatal in susceptible species. PLHVs are also related to bovine lymphotropic herpesvirus (BLHV), which is associated with bovine leukemia [46], and caprine herpesvirus 2 (CprHV-2), which has been linked to chronic disease in sika deer [47,48]. While BLHV is believed to contribute to the pathogenesis of bovine leukemia virus (BLV) infection [46], and CprHV-2 is implicated in chronic illness in cervids [49], AlHV-1 and OvHV-2 are well adapted to their natural hosts—wildebeests and sheep, respectively—and remain apathogenic in those species. However, when transmitted to non-natural hosts such as cattle or deer, they can cause MCF [29]. Therefore, the potential for PLHVs to cause disease in xenotransplantation recipients cannot be excluded.PLHV-1, -2, and -3 are also related to the human gammaherpesviruses Epstein–Barr Virus (EBV or human herpesvirus 4, HHV-4) and the human Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV, or human herpesvirus 8, HHV-8). Moreover, they are related to EBV and KSHV in terms of B cell tropism, and sequence similarity of conserved genes [4,5,50]. Although PLHV, HHV-4 and HHV-8 belong to the Gammaherpesvirinae subfamily, they fall into different genera within that subfamily. PLHV are macaviruses, HHV-4 is a lymphocryptovirus, and HHV-8 is a rhadinovirus. PLHV-1 is more closely related to the rhadinoviruses (the genus that includes HHV-8) than to lymphocryptoviruses like HHV-4. The sequence homology is limited and mostly confined to conserved core genes (e.g., DNA polymerase, terminase, and capsid proteins).PLHV-3 was found in the permanent porcine B cell line L23 and two other lymphoma cell lines, 1B2 and 2F8 [5,33]. EBV is associated with a post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) occurring in the setting of iatrogenic immune suppression following hematopoietic or solid organ transplant [51,52]. A similar disorder was observed in PLHV-1-positive minipigs after experimental allogenic bone marrow transplantations [12,13,14]. In the genome of PLHV-1, three genes encoding for putative immediate-early gene (IE) transactivators (ORF50, ORFA6/BZLF1 h, and ORF57) were found which are homologous to transactivators of HHV-8 and EBV [53], demonstrating the relationship of these viruses.Several herpesviruses contain open reading frames that encode viral G protein-coupled receptors (vGPCRs), which they acquired from the host. BILF1 is the vGPCR encoded by EBV; it is a molecule with immunoevasive properties associated with MHC-I cell surface downregulation [54,55,56], thereby preventing recognition of EBV-infected cells by CD8+ T cells [57]. BILF1 has not only an immunoevasive properties, but also acts as an oncogene [58,59]. The BILF1 orthologues from PLHV1–3 are similar to EBV-BILF1 regarding cell surface localization, constitutive internalization, and ability to downregulate MHC-I [60]. PLHV1-BILF1 was found upregulated in lymphatic tissue from diseased miniature pigs with PTLD [60]. This data suggests that like EBV-BILF1, PLHV1–3-BILFs could have cell-transforming properties.Given these findings and given that PLHV-1 transactivators are capable of upregulating EBV and HHV-8 promoters [61], it is advisable to use PLHV-free donor pigs for xenotransplantation. However, eliminating PLHV-1 to -3 from donor herds poses significant challenges. Early weaning has proven ineffective [43], there are currently no antiviral treatments or vaccines available, and although cross-placental transmission of PLHV is extremely rare, it remains possible [11]. Nonetheless, as demonstrated in this study, PLHV-negative animals—such as pig 7649—do exist and can be selectively bred for use in xenotransplantation.4. Materials and Methods4.1. Animals and Tissue SamplesPigs 5528, 5415, 5420, 5623, 5803, 5807, and 6249, all of which were triple genetically modified, served as heart donors for baboons J, K, L, M, O, N, P, and Q, as previously described [30]. Pigs 6827 and 7094 served as donors for baboons X and Y, respectively (Table 2). Donor pigs were screened using blood samples, while formalin-fixed tissues were used for testing the baboon recipients [32].Similarly, pigs 7649, 7654, and 7687, which were also triple genetically modified (α1,3-galactosyltransferase-knockout and expressing human CD46 and thrombomodulin), were used as heart donors for baboons A, B, and C. Orthotopic pig-to-baboon cardiac xenotransplantation using continuous non-ischemic preservation and pharmacological growth inhibition was performed as previously described in detail [30]. The immunosuppressive regimen was based on a co-stimulation blockade targeting the CD40/CD40 L pathway, as previously detailed [30]. For induction therapy, animals additionally received a B cell–depleting monoclonal antibody and a T cell–directed immunomodulatory agent. Maintenance therapy consisted of continued co-stimulation blockade in combination with an antiproliferative compound and corticosteroids.4.2. Blood CollectionBlood sampling from adult sows was performed without sedation under manual fixation. Whole blood was drawn from the jugular vein with single-use needles (Ehrhardt Medizinprodukte, Geislingen, Germany) into lithium heparin and serum Monovettes (Sarstedt, Nümbrecht, Germany).4.3. DNA IsolationFormalin-fixed tissues from baboons J, K, L, M, O, N, P, and Q were cut into small pieces, and DNA was isolated according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) [32].DNA was isolated from frozen tissue samples according to the manufacters’ instructions using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). DNA concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Worcester, MA, USA).4.4. PCR and Real-Time PCRPigs and baboons listed in Table 2 were tested using a conventional PCR detecting PLHV-1 and PLHV-2 (PLHV-1 gives a 400 bp band, PLHV-2 gives a 343 bp band) and a conventional PCR detecting PLHV-3 (Table 4) as described [5,32,62]. PCMV/PRV was screened using a real-time PCR [32]. Animals listed in Table 3 were tested using real-time PCRs with specific primers and probes. The sensitivity to detect PCMV/PRV (sensitivity 10 copies/100 ng DNA), PLHV-1 (1 copy/100 ng DNA), PLHV-2 (1 copy/100 ng DNA), and PLHV-3 (1 copy/100 ng DNA) was described previously [18]. The primers and probes are listed in Table 4. All protocols were performed using the SensiFAST Probe No-ROX Kit (Meridian Bioscience, Cincinnati, OH, USA) in a reaction volume of 16 μL plus 4 μL (100 ng) of DNA template. Duplex real-time PCRs were performed, testing simultaneously the viral gene of interest and porcine/human glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (p/hGAPDH) as an internal control. The functionality of the PCRs was verified using virus-specific gene blocks containing the sequence of the primers and the probe [17]. Real-time PCR reactions were carried out using a qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany) and the real-time PCR conditions as previously described [18].5. ConclusionsPLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3 are widely distributed among pigs, including those bred specifically for xenotransplantation. These viruses can be readily detected using PCR-based methods. Although PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3 have been identified in donor pigs, no transmission to transplanted baboons has been observed to date using PCR-based methods. Nevertheless, it is recommended to use virus-free animals, as some related gammaherpesviruses have been shown to cause severe disease following trans-species transmission.


Title: Presence of porcine cytomegalovirus, a porcine roseolovirus, in wild boars in Italy and Germany

IntroductionPorcine cytomegalovirus (PCMV) has a misleading name. It is a herpesvirus that is closely related to human herpesviruses 6A, 6B, and 7 (HHV-6A, -6B, and -7), but it is only distantly related to human cytomegalovirus (HCMV, also called human herpesvirus 5, HHV-5) [1, 2]. It is, rather, a roseolovirus and should, more precisely, be called PCMV/porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV) to indicate the difference. According to the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV), it is also called suid betaherpesvirus 2 or suid herpesvirus 2 (SuHV2) [3]. The appearance of cytomegalic cells with characteristic basophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies in the mucosal glands of turbinates of pigs was likely the reason for the misleading name [4]. Pulmonary macrophage cultures derived from three- to five-week-old piglets have been shown to be the most sensitive system for both primary isolation and propagation of this virus [5]. Cytomegaly and intranuclear inclusions developed 11 to 14 days after inoculation [6]. Like HHV-6A, -6B, and 7 and another related roseolovirus, murine roseolovirus (MRV), PCMV/PRV is present throughout the world, and nearly 90% of the animals in some pig herds are infected [7–9]. Western blot assays detected PCMV/PRV-specific antibodies in most of the animals from a German slaughterhouse, indicating viral infection [10]. Using a newly developed one-tube nested real-time PCR assay, 38.6% of Chinese pigs were found to be PCMV positive [11]. Infection usually occurs early in life [12, 13].In the context of xenotransplantation, PCMV/PRV is the second known zoonotic (disease-inducing) pig virus after hepatitis virus E genotype 3 (HEVgt3 or HEV-3) [14]. PCMV/PRV has been shown to be responsible for a drastically reduced survival time of pig kidney or heart xenotransplants in non-human primates [15–21]. For example, the survival time of pig hearts orthotopically transplanted into baboons was less than 30 days when they were infected with PCMV/PRV, whereas the survival time of virus-free pig hearts was up to 195 days [19]. PCMV/PRV was also transmitted during the first transplantation of a pig heart to a human in Baltimore and apparently contributed to the death of the patient [22]. The method used for testing the donor animal was not suitable.Wild boars can serve as reservoirs for a number of bacteria, viruses, and parasites that are transmissible to humans and domestic animals through direct interaction with the animals, through contaminated food, or indirectly through contamination in the environment [23, 24]. Numerous viruses have been detected in European wild boars, such as porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2) in Italy [25, 26], Ukraine [27], and Portugal [28], porcine circovirus 3 (PCV3) in Germany [29], Spain [30], Italy [25, 26, 31], and Austria [32], HEV-3 in Spain [33, 34], Germany [35, 36], Italy [37–39], Poland [40, 41], Bulgaria [42], and Serbia [43], porcine lymphotropic herpes viruses 1, 2, and 3 (PLHV-1, -2, -3) in Austria [32], porcine parvovirus 1 (PPV1) in Italy [44], and suid herpes virus 1 (SuHV-1 or pseudorabies virus, PrV) in Italy [45], Slovenia [46], Switzerland [47], and Germany [48, 49].In contrast, the prevalence of PCMV/PRV in wild boars is not well studied. The first time PCMV/PRV was detected in a wild boar was in Japan in 2013 [50]. PCMV/PRV has also been found in wild boars in Argentina and Russia [51, 52]; however, there are no reports on PCMV/PRV in wild boars in Western Europe.In order to fill the gap in our knowledge concerning PCMV/PRV in wild boars in Europe, we used real-time PCR and Western blot analysis to determine, for the first time, the prevalence of PCMV/PRV in two European countries: Italy and Germany.Materials and methodsAnimalsSera from 74 wild boars from different locations in northern Italy – 50 from the Euganean Hills, 10 from the Veneto Alps, 12 from the Friuli Venezia Giulia Alps, and two from the Lombardian Alps (Table 1, Supplementary Fig. S1) were collected in the years 2017, 2018, and 2020, most of them in 2017 and 2018. The age of the animals was estimated by dentition characteristics and ranged from two months to 36 months. After that age, dentition is no longer an accurate indicator of an animal's age, and therefore, older pigs were classified in a single category. Most of the animals were approximately 12 months old. The animals were then divided into two categories for the analysis: Up to 22 months (54 pigs) and older that 22 months (18 pigs). For two animals, the age was not established. The weight of the animals ranged from 11 to 96 kg.Table 1Results of the testing of wild boars from different locations in ItalyLocationAll animalsUp to 22 monthsOlder than 22 monthsNumber Western blot positive /number tested (%)Number real-time PCR positive/number tested (%)Number Western blot positive/number tested (%)Number real-time PCR positive/number tested (%)Number Western blot positive/number tested (%)Number real-time PCR positive/number tested (%)Euganean Hills26/50 (52)15/50 (30)19/38 (50)11/38 (29)4/12 (33)4/12 (33)Veneto Alps7/10 (70)8/10 (80)3/6 (50)4/6 (67)4/4 (100)4/4 (100)Friuli Venezia Giulia Alps3/12 (25)3/12 (25)3/10 (30)3/10 (30)0/2 (0)0/2 (0)Lombardian Alps1/2 (50)1/2 (50)----Total40/74 (54)27/74 (36)25/54 (46)16/54 (30)8/18 (44)8/18 (44)Sera from 50 German wild boars were collected at different locations in the state of Brandenburg in northeastern Germany (Table 2, Supplementary Fig. S2). Most of these sera were collected in autumn 2021, but some were collected in 2022. Forty-six of the 50 animals were female. The age of the animals was estimated based on their size and weight: 13 animals were 24 months old, 16 were 12 months old, and 21were less than twelve months old.Table 2Results of the testing of wild boars from different locations in GermanyLocationNumber of Western blot positive/number tested (%)Number of real-time PCR positive/number tested (%)Wittstock11/12 (92)11/12 (92)Döberitzer Heide7/7 (100)4/7 (57)Lehnin4/5 (80)4/5 (80)Rauen-Zerwelin8/8 (100)6/8 (75)Ihlandsee-Wilkendorf0/1 (0)0/1 (0)Lehnitz0/1 (0)0/1 (0)Horstwalde3/3 (100)2/3 (67)Niederlehme-West3/6 (50)1/6 (17)Grubenmühle/Storkow3/5 (60)1/5 (20)Rüthnicker Heide1/1 (100)1/1 (100)Güterfelde1/1 (100)0/1 (0)Total41/50 (82)30/50 (60)DNA extractionDNA/RNA was purified from the samples using an innuPREP Virus DNA/RNA Kit (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. RNA/DNA was eluted in 60 µl of nuclease-free water. The samples were stored at -20°C until further processing.Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)The detection of PCMV/PRV was performed using a real-time PCR assay with specific primers and a probe [53, 54] (Table 3) as described previously [15, 55, 56]. All experiments were performed using a SensiFAST Probe No-ROX Kit (Meridian Bioscience, Cincinnati, OH, USA) and a qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany). All assays were performed in a duplex real-time PCR format with a specific primer-probe mixture (Table 3) and using the porcine glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (pGAPDH) gene as a reference. A reaction volume of 20 µl was prepared containing 1.8 µl of PCMV/PRV-FAM mix with 1.8 µl of pGAPDH-HEX mix as an internal control and 4.0 µl of extracted DNA. The reaction conditions for the PCMV/PRV real-time PCR were 2 min at 50°C for activation, then 10 min at 95°C, followed by 45 cycles of 15 s at 95 °C for denaturation and 60 s at 60 °C for annealing and elongation. As a positive control, a PCMV/PRV-specific gene block was used as described [55].Table 3Primers and probes used in this study. The PCMV real-time PCR was modified and performed as duplex PCR. PCR, polymerase chain reaction, PCMV, porcine cyteomegalovirus; pGAPDH, porcine glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; Fwd, forward primer; Rev, reverse primer; 6FAM, 6-carboxyfluorescein; BHQ, black hole quencher; HEX, hexachlorofluoresceinPCR assayAccessionnumberPrimer/probeSequence (5‘-3’)Location(nucleotidenumber)ReferencesPCMVAF268040.2PCMV-FwdGTT CTG GGA TTC CGA GGT TG5074-5093[15, 54, 55]PCMV-RevACT TCG TCG CAG CTC ATC TGA5036-5116PCMV-Probe6FAM-CAG GGC GGC GGT CGA GCT C-BHQ5095-5113pGAPDHNM_001206359.1pGAPDH-FwdACA TGG CCT CCA AGG AGT AAG A1083–1104[53]pGAPDH-RevGAT CGA GTT GGG GCT GTG ACT1188–1168pGAPDH-ProbeHEX-CCA CCA ACC CCA GCA AGA GCA CGC-BHQ1114–1137Western blot analysisWestern blot analysis was performed as described previously [55, 56]. Briefly, for the detection of antibodies against PCMV/PRV, the Western blot assay described by Plotzki et al. [10] was used, but only the C-terminal fragment R2 of the gB protein of PCRV/PRV was used as an antigen. The R2 fragment of the gB of PCMV/PRV was produced in Escherichia coli BL21 cells using the pET16b expression vector encoding PCMV-R2 as described previously [10, 56]. Gene expression was induced by the addition of 1 mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranoside (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), and when the cells were harvested, they were lysed in 10 mL of a solution containing 8 M urea, 0.5 M NaCl, 15 mM imidazole, and 20 mM Tris, pH 7.5. After centrifugation, the supernatant was applied to a HisTrap HP column installed on an Äkta Prime Plus system (both GE Healthcare, Chicago, Illinois, USA), washed, and eluted using a solution containing 6 M urea, 0.5 M NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, and 20 mM Tris, pH 7.5. The purified R2 protein was characterized by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) as follows: The protein was dissolved in sample buffer (375 mM Tris-HCl, 60% glycerol, 12% SDS, 0.6 M dithiothreitol (DTT), 0.06% bromophenol blue) and denatured for 5 min at 95 °C prior to electrophoresis. SDS PAGE was carried out in a Mini-Protean Tetra Vertical Electrophoresis Cell (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Incs., Hercules, CA, USA) using a 12% polyacrylamide gel and a PageRuler prestained protein ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The protein was transferred for 100 min to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (ROTI PVDF, 8989.1, Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) by electroblotting at 100 mA, using the electroblotting device of peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH. The membrane was then blocked for 1 h at 4 °C in 5% non-fat dry milk (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) in PBS with 0.05% Tween 20 (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) phosphate-buffered saline (PBS-T) (blocking buffer). The membrane was cut into strips and incubated overnight at 4°C with sera diluted 1:300 in blocking buffer. The strips were then washed three times with 0.05% PBS-T for 10 minutes each. The strips were incubated for 1 h at room temperature in polyclonal goat anti-pig immunoglobulin G (IgG) Fc Secondary Antibody HRP (Invitrogen by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) diluted 1:20,000 in blocking buffer followed by three washing steps for 10 minutes each. The signal appearing after incubation with ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Cytiva, Amersham) was detected using a FUSION-SL 3500 WL imaging device (peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH).ResultsAll sera from Italian and German wild boars were screened for PCMV/PRV-specific antibodies using a Western blot assay that we established several years ago [10]. We used only the R2 fragment of the gB protein of PCMV because testing with this C-terminal recombinant fragment was more effective than using the N-terminal R1 fragment [10]. We were surprised to see such a high percentage of positive reactions (Tables 1 and 2) and such strong reactivity of the sera (Fig. 1). We used a 1:300 or 1:150 dilution of the sera but suggest that the number of positive sera may have been even higher with higher concentrations.Fig. 1(A) Results of Western blot analysis of sera from German and Italian (Euganean Hills) wild boars using the recombinant fragment R2 of the gB of PCMV/PRV as an antigen. P, positive control. German pigs 4, 5, and 8 and Italian pig 2 were negative, and all other animals were positive. (B) Titration of the serum from a wild boar from the Euganean Hills against the recombinant fragment R2 of the gB of PCMV/PRV. P, positive control. (C) Repetition of the testing of the German sera 1, 2, 3, 6, and 7 using a higher concentration of polyacrylamide in the gel (17% instead of 12%) and a higher concentration of serum (a 1:150 dilution instead of 1:300).To analyze whether the DNA genome of PCMV/PRV could also be detected in the serum, DNA was isolated, and real-time PCR was performed using primers and a probe described by Mueller et al. [15], recognizing a conserved region in the DNA polymerase (DPOL) gene of PCMV. The real-time PCR was modified as a duplex real-time PCR using porcine GAPDH as a control [55, 56].When we tested Italian wild boars using our Western blot assay, 54% of the animals were found to be positive. Using real-time PCR, 35% of the animals were positive, with the lowest Ct value indicating that the highest virus load was 30. There were differences in the positivity rates of animals from different geographical regions. The largest number of positive animals was found in the Veneto Alps (70% by Western blot, 80% by PCR) (Table 1), while the lowest percentage was found in the Friuli Venezia Giulia Alps (25% by both methods). In animals less than 22 months old, the detection rates by Western blot and real-time PCR were similar to the detection rates of the overall population (46% by Western blot and 30% by PCR). In animals more than 22 months old, no differences were observed in the detection rate by Western blot and PCR (in both cases 44%) (Table 1). A 1:4800 dilution, the serum from one wild boar from the Euganean Hills was still positive in a Western blot assay based on the R2 fragment of the gB of PCMV/PRV (Fig. 1B). This result is comparable with the situation in German slaughterhouse animals, where the highest positive dilution was 1:9600 [10].When German wild boars were tested, a higher infection frequency was observed, with 82% of the animals positive by Western blot assay and 60% by real-time PCR (Table 2). In comparison with Italian wild boars, the Ct values were lower in many animals (as low as 22), indicating higher virus loads in these animals. In Wittstock, Döberitzer Heide, and Rauen-Zerwelin, 92, 100, and 100% of the animals were positive by Western blot assay, respectively. These results clearly show that the virus is broadly distributed. In addition, in all locations, the Western blot analysis detected more PCMV/PRV-positive animals than did real-time PCR.DiscussionHere, we describe a broad distribution of PCMV/PRV in European wild boars in Italy and Germany. Whereas 82% of German wild boars were found positive using a Western blot assay and 60% were positive using real-time PCR, 54% of Italian wild boars were found positive using Western blot and 36% were positive using real-time PCR. In Italy, the number of positive animals was higher in the Veneto Alps (70% by Western blot, 80% by PCR) compared to the Friuli Venezia Giulia Alps (25% by both methods). The Veneto Alps and the Friuli Venezia Giulia Alps have a similar density of animals and environmental and ecological features. An intermediate percentage of positive animals was found in the Euganean Hills, where animal density is much higher and the wild boar population is more isolated. These findings are in contrast with the prevalence of other viruses, such as PCV3 and HEV-3 [31, 57]. These viruses were detected more often in the Friuli Alps than in the in Euganean Hills Regional Park. In the Euganean Hills, a large number of individuals (approximately 2000 animals) are gathered in a small area (187 km2). This feature allows contact between animals and the transmission of viruses excreted by infected wild boars (31, 57). HEV-3 has been found in bile, liver, and feces, and wild boars can be considered excretors of this virus [57]. In contrast, PCMV/PRV, which exists in a latent state with a little excretion into the environment, is not distributed in this way. During latency PCMV/PRV can be found only in some organs, e.g., lung, liver, salivary gland, and kidney [12]. The frequency of reactivation is unknown, and additional studies are needed to get a deeper insight into this phenomenon.There are indications that most infections occur in young animals, with possible transmission between mothers and piglets. The detection rate of PCMV/PRV by Western blot is slightly lower in pigs older than 22 months (44%) than the average detection rate for animals of all ages (54%). We recently showed that detection by PCR is easier in young piglets and more difficult in older animals when the virus is latent [56]. Why this was not the case in the present study (44% in animals older 22 months, 30% in younger animals) remains unclear. It is possible that some of the animals were otherwise ill, and this might have activated the virus.Therefore, PCMV/PRV transmission is likely to occur during close sow-to-piglet contact after farrowing stress. The smaller number of virus-positive animals among older pigs also indicates that increased contact among individuals in a population over time probably does not lead to an increase in the infection rate. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that the antibody titer decreases with age or that infected animals die earlier than uninfected animals. PCMV/PRV is a herpesvirus that is able to establish a latent infection and is thus difficult to detect by PCR. We recently repeatedly tested a small group of landrace pigs for PCMV/PRV by real-time PCR and were able to detect the virus until week 17 [56]. Thereafter, the virus went into latency and the PCR tests from blood were negative. This result is in agreement with previous findings that the infectious titer, if any, is low in adult animals [12]. Testing of inbred miniature swine demonstrated that lung, liver, salivary gland, and kidney were PCR positive, but the gut tissue was consistently PCR-negative. However, the viral loads in the liver and salivary gland were below the threshold of quantification and were given an arbitrary value of less than 10 PCMV genome copies/mg of DNA. The kidney contained 38 genome copies/mg of DNA, and the lung contained 97 genome copies/mg of DNA [58].As mentioned above, in young piglets, the virus can easily be detected by PCR. In adult animals, however, the detection of antibodies is the most effective approach to verifying virus infection, even if PCR yields negative results. For this reason, we used two different methods: (i) real-time PCR, which detects the viral DNA in an active infection, and (ii) a Western blot assay with viral antigen to screen for PCMV/PVR antibodies, indicating previous exposures and latent virus.The first case of a pathologically and virologically diagnosed PCMV/PRV infection in a wild boar was reported in Japan [50]. In Northeastern Patagonia, Argentina (Buenos Aires and Río Negro Provinces), PCMV/PRV screening using a nested PCR assay on tonsil tissues from 62 free-living wild boars showed an overall infection rate of about 56% [51]. A significantly higher level (nearly 90%) was determined for animals less than 6 months old. In 2007, it was published that wild boars in some regions of Russia were carriers of Aujeszky's disease virus, porcine parvovirus, porcine circovirus type 2, lymphotropic herpesvirus 1, PCMV/PVR, Mycoplasma hyopneumoniae, and Pasteurella multocida [52].The overall rate of PCMV/PVR infection in wild boars is in the same range as that reported for herds of domestic pigs in Asia, Europe, North America, and South America [8–10, 58]. In contrast, the seroprevalence of PCMV/PRV in pigs from Hunan province, China, was much higher, 96% (482/500), with the highest percentage found in breeding sows (97%) [59]. Either the infection rate in this province is indeed so high, or the antigen used in the ELISA contained bacterial contamination, and antibodies against these bacterial proteins may have caused false-positive results. A comparison of different study results is challenging, since different populations, tissues, and methods have been used for screening: either tonsils or tonsil swabs [8, 51] or sera [9, 10, this study]. When we analyzed 30 German slaughterhouse pigs, 52% were positive in a real-time PCR and 83% were positive in a Western blot assay using the same fragment (R2) of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV as used here [10]. In that study, the N-terminal fragment R1 of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV was also used as an antigen, but only 11% of the sera were positive, indicating that the R2 fragment is the better target of the immune system. For this reason, only the R2 fragment was used in the present study (Fig. 1).There is evidence that PCMV/PVR infection occurs transplacentally when pregnant sows are inoculated experimentally with the virus [60, 61]. However, this was not observed in a study under natural conditions. Despite mother sows having PCMV/PRV DNA detectable in their spleen, neither transplacental infection in their offspring nor postnatal transmission was detected [12]. Furthermore, the authors showed that piglets that were delivered by caesarean section from PCMV/PRV-positive sows and subsequently barrier reared did not acquire PCMV/PVR [12].Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) affects up to three-quarters of all solid organ transplant human recipients [62]. As mentioned above, PCMV/PRV is not closely related to HCMV [1, 2]. However, human herpesviruses closely related to PCMV/PRV, HHV-6, and HHV-7 can cause common opportunistic infections in the post-transplantation period and have also been associated with transplant rejection in human solid organ transplant recipients [63–65].This study on the prevalence of PCMV/PRV is important for xenotransplantation, since PCMV/PRV has been shown to drastically reduce the survival time of pig organs in non-human primates [17–21] and because PCMV/PRV contributed to the death of a patient in Baltimore [20]. However, there are sensitive detection methods and test strategies to prevent transmission of PCMV/PRV in future clinical trials [66, 67]. Our data indicate that facilities for raising pigs for xenotransplantation, which are PCMV/PRV-free, need to be protected from introduction of this virus not only by commercial pigs but also by wild boars. The pigs should be protected from contact with infected animals or materials from infected animals.ConclusionPCMV/PRCV is broadly distributed in European wild boars in Italy and Germany. The number of PCMV/PRV-positive wild boars was found to be higher in Germany than in Italy. The Western blot assay detected more PCMV/PRV-positive animals than did the real-time PCR assay. Facilities for breeding pigs for xenotransplantation should be protected from contact with materials from infected commercial pigs as well as from wild boars.Supplementary InformationBelow is the link to the electronic supplementary material.Supplementary file1 (PPTX 187 KB)Supplementary file2 (PPTX 102 KB)


Title: Application of Methods Detecting Xenotransplantation-Relevant Viruses for Screening German Slaughterhouse Pigs

1. IntroductionXenotransplantation is under development to alleviate the shortage of human organs for transplantation [1]. Pigs are the species of choice, and multiple genetically modified pigs have been generated to prevent hyperacute and acute rejection of pig organs [2]. In preclinical studies with non-human primates using organs from such pigs and novel immunosuppressive drugs, considerable survival times for the xenotransplant were achieved in the last several years. Based on these studies, a heart from a pig with 10 genetic modifications (10 GE pigs) was transplanted into a patient at the University of Maryland in Baltimore (UMB) in 2022. The patient survived for 2 months [3]. In the year before, surgeons from the New York University (NYU) Langone Transplant Institute xenotransplanted α GalT-KO pig thymo-kidneys into a brain-dead human recipient, which lasted for 54 h [4,5]. In a study at the University of Alabama in Birmingham (UAB), decedent recipients were nephrectomised and bilaterally transplanted with kidneys from 10 GE pigs. Patients received conventional immunosuppression, and the first case was monitored for 74 h, during which urine production was poor and creatinine clearance did not improve [6]. Furthermore, at NYU, 10 GE pig hearts were transplanted into brain-dead patients [7]. In China, a 50-year-old clinically dead man was the first person to receive a liver from a pig [8]. Also in China, at the Xijing Hospital of the Air Force Medical University in Xian, the kidney of a multi-gene-edited pig was transplanted into a brain-dead human. The kidney was functioning well for more than 13 days [9]. At the UMB, a second heart was transplanted into a patient, who died after 6 weeks [10]. Recently, pig kidneys with 69 genetic modifications were transplanted at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. The patient was in excellent health and had been discharged from hospital [11]. He died after 7 weeks from a heart attack; the kidneys worked well at that time. At the NYU Langone Transplant Institute, a left ventricular assist device and a pig kidney with only one genetic modification, a knockout of the gene responsible for the production of alpha-gal residues, were transplanted in a living person [12].Xenotransplantation could result in the transmission of potentially pathogenic microorganisms to the recipient. The fact that the porcine cytomegalovirus, a porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV), was transmitted to the pig heart recipient in Baltimore [3], and that the virus obviously contributed to the death of the patient, demonstrates how important it is to prevent virus transmission [13]. In the past, it was shown in several studies that transmission of PCMV/PRV with pig heart and kidney transplants into non-human primates (NHP) resulted in a significant reduction in the survival time of the xenotransplant [14,15,16,17]. It is important to be aware that microorganisms, including viruses such as the human immunodeficiency virus, human cytomegalovirus, and rabies virus, have also been transmitted in allotransplantations [18].The data mentioned above underline the importance of safety research in this field. Consequently, in the last few years, numerous PCR-based and immunological methods have been developed to detect porcine viruses [19,20,21,22]. At present, it is still unclear which viruses may pose a risk during xenotransplantation, i.e., which viruses are xenotransplantation relevant [23,24]. On one hand, there are known zoonotic viruses (zoonosis means inducing disease in the recipient), such as the hepatitis E virus, genotype 3 (HEV3). On the other hand, we now know viruses that do not harm healthy people but harm patients in the context of xenotransplantation, such as PCMV/PRV. These viruses should be called xenozoonotic [25]. Unfortunately, tests for these pig viruses are not available at most veterinary diagnostic institutes, but only in very few specialized laboratories [26].Altogether, assays for more than 11 viruses were developed [21]. In addition to HEV3 and PCMV/PRV, discussed above, porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2), PCV3, and PCV4 were included. PCV2 induces an entire complex of diseases called PCV2-related disease (PCVD) (for review, see [27]). PCV3 is also pathogenic in pigs, whereas PCV4 is new, was for the first time detected in China, and was recently also found in wild boars and commercial pigs in Europe [28]. Porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERVs) were included because they are integrated in the genome of all pigs and may infect human cells. Retroviruses are known to induce immunodeficiencies and/or tumors, and the closest relatives of PERV, murine leukemia viruses, feline leukemia viruses, and koala retroviruses have been shown to induce immunodeficiencies or tumors in the infected hosts [29]. The other viruses were selected based on the recommendations of the Federation of European Laboratory Animal Science Associations (FELASA) [30], the list of viruses tested by Ellegaard Göttingen Minipigs A/S, Dalmose, Denmark, providing Göttingen Minipigs for biomedical research wordwide [31], and the list of viruses declared by Fishman as “not permitted in swine with designated pathogen-free status” [13].To test the developed methods under field conditions, we have used them in the past for screening not only pigs generated for xenotransplantation and the corresponding non-human primate recipients [16,32], but also for a comprehensive screening of pig breeds such as the indigenous Greek black pigs [33], the Göttingen minipigs [24,34,35,36], the Aachen minipigs [37], the Mini LEWE minipigs [38], Göttingen minipigs with dippity pig syndrome [39], and Greek pigs with erythema multiforme [40]. Here, we screen German slaughterhouse pigs using PCR-based and immunological methods able to detect pig viruses and demonstrate again the robust functionality of these methods. Furthermore, we compare the data to previously tested pig breeds.2. Materials and Methods2.1. Animals and TissuesTissue samples from spleen, liver, and clotted blood were obtained from pigs presenting a breeding between Duroc-boars Danish landrace x Danish Large White (Edelschwein) hybrid sows from a slaughterhouse near Berlin; their age was 6 months. Sex and weight are shown in Table 1. The samples were frozen at −80 °C until analyzed.2.2. Isolation of DNA and RNADNA and RNA were isolated from the tissues and purified PBMCs according to the manufacturer’s instructions using the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit as well as the RNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). DNA and RNA concentrations were determined using a NanoDrop ND-1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Worcester, MA, USA) or Qubit device (Invitrogen, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Worcester, MA, USA).2.3. Real-Time PCR for the Detection of DNA VirusesReal-time PCRs using specific primers and probes were performed with a defined sensitivity to detect PCMV/PRV (sensitivity 10 copies/100 ng DNA), PLHV-1 (1 copy/100 ng DNA), PLHV-2 (1 copy/100 ng DNA), PLHV-3 (1 copy/100 ng DNA), PCV2 (1 copy/100 ng DNA), PCV3 (10 copies/100 ng DNA), PCV4 (100 copies/100 ng DNA), and PPV1 (10 copies/100 ng DNA) as described previously [33]. The primers and probes are listed in Table 2. All protocols were performed using the SensiFAST Probe No-ROX Kit (Meridian Bioscience, Cincinnati, OH, USA) in a reaction volume of 16 µL plus 4 µL (100 ng) of DNA template. Duplex real-time PCRs were performed, testing simultaneously the viral gene of interest and porcine glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (pGAPDH) as an internal control. The functionality of the PCRs was verified using virus-specific gene blocks containing the sequence of the primers and the probe [38]. Real-time PCR reactions were carried out using a qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany) and the real-time PCR conditions as previously described [33].2.4. Real-Time Reverse Transcriptase PCR for the Detection of HEV3To detect hepatitis E virus genotype 3 (HEV3), a real-time reverse transcriptase-PCR (real-time RT-PCR) was carried out. This method was first described by Jothikumar et al. [41]. The reactions were performed in a reaction volume of 16 µL using the SensiFAST Probe No-ROX One-Step Kit (Meridian Bioscience, Cincinnati, OH, USA) plus 4 µL (100 ng) of template RNA. A reaction without reverse transcriptase was performed to demonstrate the absence of DNA contamination. A qTOWER3 G PCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany) was used and A reverse transcriptase step of 30 min at 50 °C, was followed by an activation step of 15 min at 95 °C and 45 cycles comprising a step of 10 s at 95 °C, followed by a step of 20 s at 55 °C and 15 s at 72 °C.2.5. Conventional and Real-Time PCR for the Detection of PERVsTo determine the presence of PERV-C, a conventional PCR (described as PCR4 in [49]) was performed using a set of primers, which resulted in an amplicon of a length of 288 bp. AmpliTaq DNA Polymerase (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) was used, and the reaction was set up in a Biometra TRIO cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany). An activation step of 95 °C for 10 min was followed by 45 cycles composed of denaturation steps (95 °C for 15 s), annealing steps (55 °C for 30 s), extension steps (72 °C for 30 s), and a final extension at 72 °C for 5 min.To determine the presence of human-tropic PERV-A/C, a conventional PCR was set up using specific primer pairs (Table 2), which produces an amplicon of 1266 bp length [50]. AmpliTaq DNA Polymerase (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA) was used, and the reaction was set up in a Biometra TRIO cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany). The following temperature-time profile was used: An activation step of 95 °C for 10 min was followed by 45 cycles composed of denaturation steps (95 °C for 15 s), annealing steps (55 °C for 30 s), extension steps (72 °C for 90 s), and a final single cycle at 72 °C for 5 min.In addition, real-time PCR was established using specific primers and probes (Table 2) [49]. The reaction was performed in a 20 µL reaction volume containing 100 ng DNA and the SensiFAST Probe No-ROX Kit (Meridian Bioscience Cincinnati, OH, USA). The cycling conditions used were initial denaturation for 5 min at 95 °C, followed by 45 amplification cycles at 95 °C for 15 s, annealing at 58 °C for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 30 s in a qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany).2.6. Western Blot AnalysisPlasma samples were derived from the thawed blood probes. The Western blot was performed as described previously in detail using the recombinant R2 fragment of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV [19,51]. The samples were tested at a dilution of 1:150.3. Results3.1. Results of the PCR-Based ScreeningDNA was isolated from the spleen and liver samples, and real-time PCRs were performed to screen for DNA viruses (Table 3). In addition, a conventional PCR and a real-time reverse transcriptase PCR were performed to test for PERV-A/C and HEV3, respectively (Table 3). PCMV/PRV was found in the spleen of 6 and in the liver of one of the 10 animals tested. PLHV-1 was found in all 10 animals, both in the spleen and the liver. The same result was obtained for PLHV-3. PCV3 was found in the spleen and the liver of one animal. PERV-C was found integrated in the genomes of all animals using a real-time PCR method and in 9 of 10 animals using conventional PCRs designated PCR1 and PCR4 [49]. The real-time testing for PERV-C was positive in all 10 animals. The animals were negative for the other viruses (PLHV-2, PPV-1, PCV2, PCV4, PERV-A/C, and HEV) in both organs (Table 3).3.2. Results of the Western Blot-Based ScreeningPlasma samples from the slaughterhouse pigs were screened for antibodies against PCMV/PRV by Western blotting using the recombinant R2 domain of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV as antigen. All animals were antibody positive, indicating that all animals were PCMV/PRV infected, either latently or an active infection (Table 1, Figure 1).4. DiscussionTo apply our methods developed to detect xenotransplantation-relevant porcine viruses, we screened 10 German slaughterhouse pigs. Surprisingly, the animals contained four DNA viruses: PCMV/PRV, PLHV-1, PLHV-3, and PCV3, although the animals were healthy and intended for consumption. There are hundreds of publications investigating the prevalence of pig viruses in slaughterhouse pigs worldwide. In most cases, they were screened for HEV [52,53,54], influenza virus [55,56], porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRSV) [57], and Aujeszky’s disease virus [56]. For example, in the case of PRRSV, 74.3% of 1039 serum samples were seropositive, and 1.9% of the 1027 meat samples were positive by PCR in Canadian abattoirs. The virus was infectious when meat was ingested by uninfected pigs [57].When we recently screened indigenous Greek black pigs using the same methods as described here, we found PCMV/PRV, PLHV-1, PLHV-2, PLHV-3, PCV2, and PCV3 [33] (Table 4). These animals were, among all the pigs we tested, the breed containing the highest number of pig viruses (Table 4). Since the animals were healthy and their meat was indented for consumption, it is possible that the animals have a natural resilience to virus infections, e.g., due to antiviral restriction factors [33]. Whether the German slaughterhouse pigs also have such restriction factors remains unclear.All German slaughterhouse pigs had antibodies against PCMV/PRV, indicating that all were infected, despite the fact that virus DNA was not found in the liver and spleen of all animals by real-time PCR. This confirms previous results that PCMV/PRV, like all herpesviruses, establishes latency, during which it can no longer be detected using PCR methods [51]. This was the case for four animals when testing the DNA from the spleen and nine animals when testing the DNA from the liver. This is the only virus where differences between the detection in the liver and the detection in the spleen were observed; all other viruses were found in both organs concurrently. Obviously, at this stage of infection, more cells containing PCMV/PRV DNA remained in the spleen compared to the liver. Whether these cells are still expressing PCMV/PRV genes or even produce virus particles, or whether the DNA is derived from circulating latently infected cells, remains unknown.As a rule, PCMV/PRV can be detected by PCR using nasal swabs only when an animal is freshly infected and suffers from rhinitis. PCMV/PRV can only be detected in the blood and organs of young animals by PCR only until approximately 19 weeks after infection [51]. In older animals, only the detection of virus-specific antibodies provides reliable data. For this, a Western blot analysis using recombinant proteins corresponding to the glycoprotein B (gB) of PCMV was developed [19,51]. PCMV gB is a transmembrane glycoprotein that plays a major role in fusion and adhesion when the virus enters cells. Since gB has good immunogenicity, as shown by us [19], it is well suited as antigen. Two fragments of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV, one N-terminal (R1) and one C-terminal (R2), were used in initial experiments, and since we could show that R2 was a better immunodominant region compared with R1 [19], we routinely used only R2. This was recently confirmed when ELISAs were performed using synthetic peptides derived from the same R2 region of gB [58]. Both methods, the Western blot assay using R2 and the ELISA using R2-derived peptides, gave comparable results [59]. We also produced the tegument proteins U54A (position 70307–72304, GenBank No. KF017583) and U54B (position 72345–73541) of PCMV/PRV and found antibodies against both proteins in infected pigs [60].Antibodies against PCMV/PRV can also be detected in the blood of young animals. However, these antibodies are mostly from the infected mother sow, transmitted to the piglet by colostrum [51]. The transmission of PCMV/PRV to the first patient receiving a pig heart in Baltimore showed that screening for PCMV/PRV is not trivial. In this case, unfortunately, only nasal swab samples were taken from the donor animal and analyzed by PCR [3]. However, nasal swabs will only be positive when the animal is freshly infected and do not allow detection of latently infected animals [51,61].Although PCMV/PRV is widely distributed in pigs worldwide and nearly all German slaughterhouse pigs are PCMV-positive [19] and this manuscript, the impact of PCMV/PRV on pig breeding seems to be low. PCMV/PRV infection is mostly acquired early in life, and infection results in seroconversion and life-long latent infection [62]. Fatalities were mainly observed in piglets less than 3 weeks old, and virus-infected sows are prone to abortion [62]. There are no antiviral drugs and no vaccines against PCMV/PRV. However, the virus can be easily removed from a pig population by early weaning [63]. Since PCMV/PRV is a roseolovirus closely related to human herpesviruses 6 and 7 (HHV6, 7) and only distantly related to the human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), all drugs effective against HCMV do not act against PCMV/PRV [64,65]. Various drugs against HCMV that were used to treat the first patient receiving a pig heart in Baltimore did not reduce the PCMV/PRV load in the patient’s blood [66].When we screened for porcine lymphotropic herpesviruses, PLHV-1 and PLHV-3 were found in all animals. PLHV-1/3 are gammaherpesviruses widely distributed in pigs (up to 80% in single farms), but have not been associated with any pig disease (for review, see [67]). At present, there are no antiviral drugs or vaccines available. In contrast to PCMV/PRV, Caesarean delivery was not or only partially successful in eliminating these viruses [68,69]. PLHV was detected in all eight genetically modified pigs used for orthotopic heart transplantation; however, the virus was not transmitted to the baboon recipients [16].When we screened for circoviruses, we found only one pig, which was infected with PCV3. The virus was found in both the liver and the spleen of animal 4. PCV1 is not pathogenic for pigs and was therefore not included into the screening. However, since we do not know whether it may be pathogenic for humans, it should be included in future testing of pigs intended for xenotransplantation. PCV2 induces an entire complex of porcine circovirus diseases (PCVD). There exist several vaccines against PCV2 that are able to prevent diseases, but in most cases, they do not prevent the transmission of the virus (for review, see [27]). PCV3 was discovered in 2016; it is common in domestic pigs and wild boars worldwide (for review, see [28]). Although PCV3 was also found in healthy pigs, there is clear evidence that PCV3 is pathogenic since virus clones were able to induce porcine dermatitis and nephropathy syndrome (PDNS) in specified pathogen-free animals [70]. PCV3 was also found in Greek pigs with erythema multiform [40] and in Göttingen minipigs with dippity pig syndrome [39]. In contrast to our findings in a German slaughterhouse, the prevalence of PCV2, PCV3, and PCV4 in slaughterhouses in one province in China was 56.8, 80, and 9.4%, respectively [71]. PCV3 was also found in pigs generated for xenotransplantation, which appeared clinically healthy, and the virus was transmitted in a few cases to baboons after transplantation of hearts from these pigs [72].When we screened for HEV, all animals were negative. This is remarkable because in other slaughterhouses, higher amounts of positive animals were found. For example, HEV IgG was detected in sera from 167 pigs among 250 tested animals (67.6%), and HEV RNA was detected in 25 (11.0%) liver samples in Dutch slaughterhouses [54]. HEV RNA was detected in 6.3% and HEV IgG in 40% of 5033 serum samples from market-weight pigs at 25 slaughterhouses in 10 US states [53]. HEV is of great importance for xenotransplantation because it represents a proven zoonotic virus. It may induce diseases in humans, mainly moderate hepatitis and neurological syndromes (for review, see [73,74]). HEV was found in Göttingen minipigs, which are produced under specified pathogen-free conditions using real-time PCR and antibody detection by Western blot assays, and transplacental mother-to-piglet transmission was demonstrated [34].Since all pigs carry PERV-A and PERV-B proviruses in their genomes, we only tested for PERV-C and recombinant PERV-A/C. PERV-C was found in all German slaughterhouse pigs as well as in all other pig breeds screened for it, with the exception of the Göttingen minipigs at Göttingen University (Table 4). It is interesting that in the German slaughterhouse pigs PERV-C was detected in all pigs using real-time PCR, but PERV-C was not detected in animal 3 using conventional PCR (Table 3). The PCR used was designated PCR4 by Kaulitz et al. [49]. PCR4 was shown to be highly reliable in the detection of PERV-C, comparable in reliability to PCR1 developed by Takeuchi et al. [75]. The reason for the discrepancy between PCR1 and PCR4 on the one hand and the real-time PCR on the other hand is under investigation [76]). Recombinants of PERV-A with PERV-C (PERV-A/C), which are characterized by higher virus titers and the ability to infect human cells, were not found in all investigated animals. This confirms previous findings that PERV-A/C recombinants are rare and found mainly in minipigs (for review, see [77]).The methods used here and in previous investigations (Table 4) can not only be used for screening animals generated for xenotransplantation. They should also be used to screen all pigs used for biomedical research, because the presence of these viruses may interfere with the results of numerous biomedical experiments. Most importantly, these methods can also be used to eliminate these viruses from pig herds produced for consumption. This would improve the health of the animals, minimize losses in pig breeding, and lead to higher profits in meat production. Since xenotransplantation using pig cells, tissues, and organs may save and prolong the lives of patients but may also be associated with the transmission of porcine microorganisms to the recipient, eventually resulting in emerging infectious diseases, and since the methods developed here can also be used to reduce the virus load in pigs produced for consumption, the health of both the donor animals and the human recipients represents a special and sensitive case of the One Health concept [78].5. ConclusionsPCR-based and immunological methods were used to screen German slaughterhouse pigs for eleven xenotransplantation-relevant viruses, including PERV. All pigs, with the exception of one, contained PERV-C in their genome. In addition, four DNA viruses were found. Together with previous screening of numerous other pig breeds, this indicates that these detection methods work well under field conditions. These diagnostic tests will be used to screen multiple genetically modified pigs designated for clinical trials of xenotransplantation. Furthermore, they can also be used to screen pigs used in biomedical research to prevent the viruses from influencing the resulting data. In pork production they may be used to reduce losses from these virus infections.


Title: Porcine Lymphotropic Herpesviruses (PLHVs) and Xenotranplantation

1. Xenotransplantation: Progress and Virus SafetyXenotransplantation using pig cells, tissues and organs is under development in order to alleviate the lack of human transplants. For example, in the USA 107,000 men, women, and children are on the national transplant waiting list, as of February 2021. However, only 39,000 transplants were performed in 2020 and 17 people die each day waiting for an organ transplant [1]. To alleviate the shortage of human organs, xenotransplantation is under development. For several reasons, pigs are the most suited donor animals and rejection of pig xenotransplants will be prevented by genetic modifications of the animals [2]. Thanks to these genetic modifications and new powerful immunosuppressive regimens, remarkable survival times have been achieved in preclinical trials with non-human primates [3,4]. For example, pig islet cells for the treatment of diabetes survived 950 days [5] and pig hearts transplanted heterotopically survived 945 days [6]. Whereas in 2011, the survival time of orthotopic (life-supporting) heart transplants was 57 days [7], but thanks to a better strategy, the survival time was 192 days in 2020 [8] and 9 months in 2021 [9]. This improved experimental strategy also included screening for and eliminating the porcine cytomegalovirus (PCMV), which is actually a porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV) [10]. It has been shown in numerous preclinical trials that the presence of PCMV/PRV in the pig organ significantly decreases the survival time of the xenotransplant in non-human primates (for review see [11]). PCMV/PRV, also called suid herpesvirus 2 (SuHV-2), is ubiquitous and may cause foetal or neonatal deaths in pigs and it has been associated with runting, rhinitis and pneumonia in piglets. PCMV/PRV was repeatedly found transmitted with pig kidneys and heart transplantations to non-human primates, which were always associated with a significant reduction in the survival time of the xenotransplant. Transmission of PCMV/PRV reduced the survival time of pig kidneys, on average, from 53 days to 14 days in baboons [12], from 28 to 9 days in cynomolgus monkeys [13] and reduced the survival of orthotopically transplanted pig hearts in baboons from 195 days to less than 30 days [14]. These studies also showed for the first time that PCMV/PRV is obviously able to decrease the survival time of the pig transplant without infecting the host, modulating cytokine release and coagulation by interactions with the immune system and endothelial cells [14].These data show that the transmission of potentially zoonotic viruses from the donor pig to the recipient, and in the near future to human patients, may pose a significant risk for the recipient and therefore donor animals without zoonotic viruses, including herpesviruses, should be used.2. PLHVs: Biology and PrevalenceHerpesviruses (family Herpesviridae) are pathogens that infect a wide variety of animals, including humans, monkeys, birds, frogs, and fish. The Herpesviridae family contains three subfamilies: alphaherpesvirinae, betaherpesvirinae, and gammaherpesvirinae. Nine human herpesviruses (HHV) have been identified that cause a wide spectrum of human diseases: herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) (HHV-1) causes herpes genitalis and labialis, encephalitis, vision loss and others; HSV-2 (HHV-2)—genital herpes; varicella zoster virus (VZV) (HHV-3)—chickenpox and shingles; Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) (HHV-4)—infectious mononucleosis; cytomegalovirus (CMV) (HHV-5)—mononucleosis and pneumonia; HHV-6A and HHV-6B are the causative agents of roseola (exanthema subitum); HHV-7 is associated with several syndromes, including exanthema subitum and the Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus is HHV-8.During the course of evolution, most herpesviruses have adapted to a single or a limited number of host species. However, herpesviruses are not so species-specific as previously thought [15], and in recent years, numerous trans-species transmissions of several members of the Herpesviridae family have been reported, which have often resulted in severe or fatal outcomes in the new hosts [16]. For example, herpes B virus is a zoonotic herpesvirus that infects macaques and causes approximately 80% mortality in untreated humans [17].In pigs, suid herpesvirus 1 (SuHV-1), also known as pseudorabies virus (PRV), causes Aujeszky’s disease in both wild and domestic swine. SuHV-1 has a broad host range and causes disease in distantly related mammals such as sheep, dogs, cattle, mink, and puma [18,19]. SuHV-2 is the above mentioned PCMV/PRV [10].Porcine lymphotropic herpesviruses -1, -2, and -3 (PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3), also known as SuHV-3, SuHV-4, and SuHV-5, are gammaherpesviruses assigned to the genus Macavirus. Their role as primary pathogens of swine, or as co-factors in other viral infections, is largely unknown. They were found in domestic and wild pig populations and their frequency is comparable between healthy and diseased animals. The prevalence of PLHV-1, PLHV-2, and PLHV-3 varies between 29% and 80%, between 11% and 41%, and between 5 and 65%, respectively, in various studies performed in Germany, Italy, Spain, France, USA, and Ireland, and their prevalence has not changed significantly in the last 20 years [20,21,22,23]. Despite their high prevalence, PLHVs’ relevance for the swine industry appears low. Their transmission occurs mainly horizontally, but vertical transmission is possible [24,25,26]. PLHVs were found in different pig tissues and in the persistently infected porcine B cell line L23 [20,27]. PLHV-1 causes a post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) in minipigs after experimental allogenic bone marrow transplantations [28,29,30]. This disorder is similar to human PTLD, a serious complication of solid human organ transplantation linked to EBV (HHV-4).Porcine lymphotropic herpesviruses (PLHVs) are closely related to alcelaphine herpesvirus type 1, AlHV-1, and ovine herpesvirus type 2, OvHV-2, two gammaherpesviruses. These viruses are apathogenic in their natural hosts but cause serious lymphoproliferative diseases in other species [31]. Accordingly, PLHV could be apathogenic in pigs but pathogenic in other species.3. Detection MethodsTo detect PLHVs, PCR tests and to quantify them, real-time PCRs have been used [20,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,42]. The primers and probes were located in the DNA polymerase gene and in the gene encoding the glycoprotein B.To detect an antibody response in the infected animals, a Western blot assay and ELISA were established using the recombinant glycoprotein B [43,44]. Antibodies were found in slaughterhouse pigs, which were all PLHV-3 positive by PCR, but not in Göttingen minipigs [44].4. No Transmission of PLHV in Preclinical and Clinical Xenotransplantation TrialsAs described above, PLHVs are very common in slaughterhouse pigs, but they were also detected in pigs generated for xenotransplantation, e.g., in miniature swine and large white pigs [25]. Although caesarean derivation and barrier maintenance significantly reduced the incidence of PLHV infection, in comparison with conventionally reared pigs (from 80% down to 3 to 12.8%), it was not sufficient to eliminate the virus [25]. PLHVs were not found in Göttingen minipigs [35,36,44], which will be used for islet cell transplantation in a German trial and were consequently not transmitted when islet cells of these animals were transplanted in a preclinical trial to rhesus monkeys [37]. In a large study, piglets with the genetic background Landrace x Yorkshire, obtained by somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) and derived via caesarean section, were analysed for 30 different porcine viruses using real-time PCR methods [26]. PLHV-3 was detected in five of nine and PLHV-2 in three of nine piglets, whereas no other viruses were found, with the exception of influenza B virus. This study shows that caesarean section can remove PLHVs but is not 100% safe. In another large study, large White-Yorkshire x Landrace F1 animals, used as pancreas donor animals, were screened for more than 30 known viruses [38]. Islets cells from these animals were transplanted into cynomolgus monkeys and none of the donor pigs and recipients had PLHV-1, -2 or -3. In another study, pig kidneys and hearts were transplanted into immunosuppressed baboons [39]. All donor animals carried PCMV, and 55% of them carried PLHV. An increased expression (activation) of PCMV was detected in all recipients, but in contrast to PCMV and despite immunosuppression and transplant rejection, neither transplants that were carrying PLHV-1, nor those that were negative, developed an increased expression (activation) of PLHV-1 [39]. Replication of PLHV was not observed in the baboon recipient despite prolonged pig cell microchimerism [40].Although PLHV was found in eight out of eight genetically modified pigs used for orthotopic pig heart transplantation, it was not detected in the baboon recipients [14]. PLHVs were not transmitted in the first clinical trials transplanting encapsulated islet cells from Auckland Island pigs, because the donor animals were PLHV negative [41,42].Reactivation of latent herpesviruses is an important cause of morbidity and mortality in human transplantation. It remains unclear whether zoonotic pig viruses could be reactivated in the transplanted tissue and interact with related human viruses. PLHV-1 encodes several genes with a strong transactivating effect on virus reactivation and replication, which are conserved in gammaherpesviruses, and it was shown that PLHV-1 transactivators upregulated HHV-8 and EBV promoters [45], supporting the hypothesis that PLHV-1 might have pathogenic relevance in the course of xenotransplantation.5. Treatment, Vaccination and EliminationAt present, there is no treatment and no vaccination against all three PLHVs. In addition, other methods such as early weaning and colostrum deprivation, failed [24], although they had been successfully used in the case of PCMV [24,46]. Unfortunately, caesarean derivation was only partially successful [24,25,26]. Therefore, most of the elimination programs proposed for other viruses [47] cannot be used for PLHV. Only caesarean derivation and selection of the negative animals using sensitive detection methods described above will be successful and can be applied to eliminate PLHV from donor pigs if necessary.6. ConclusionsEvidence has accumulated that herpesviruses are not as species-specific as thought in the past and that trans-species transmissions of members of the Herpesviridae family resulted in severe or fatal outcomes in the new host. On the other hand, although PLHV was found in genetically modified donor pigs used in preclinical xenotransplantations, it was not, in contrast to PCMV, transmitted to the recipients. Nevertheless, it seems important to use PLHV-free pigs in order to achieve safe xenotransplantation.


Title: Comprehensive Protocols for Detecting Xenotransplantation-Relevant Viruses

1. IntroductionXenotransplantation using pig cells and organs has made significant progress in recent years. First, there has been a remarkable increase in the survival time of pig xenotransplants in preclinical trials involving transplantation into non-human primates [1,2,3]. Second, successful transplantations of pig kidneys and hearts into brain-dead human recipients have been achieved [4,5]. Third, pig islet cells, as well as pig kidneys and hearts, have been transplanted for the first time into living human patients [6,7,8,9,10]. The donor pigs are genetically modified to reduce hyperacute and cell- and antibody-mediated rejection of the xenotransplant. To prevent transmission of porcine viruses, more or less comprehensive screening procedures have been implemented. Despite this effort, porcine viruses have been transmitted to non-human primate recipients during preclinical trials; these transmitted porcine viruses include the porcine cytomegalovirus, which is actually a porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV) [11,12,13], and the porcine circovirus 3 (PCV3) [14]. The transmission of PCMV/PRV has been associated with fatal consequences. In non-human primates, it significantly reduced the survival time of transplanted pig organs [11,12,13]. PCMV/PRV was also transmitted to the first human recipient of a pig heart and contributed to the patient’s death despite the fact that the virus does not directly infect non-human primate or human cells [7].On the other hand, viruses such as porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV), porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV), porcine parvovirus (PPV), swine encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) and equine encephalomyelitis viruses (Venezuelan, Western and Eastern; VEEV, WEEV and EEEV) were found present in pigs used for the transplantation of encapsulated islet cells into diabetic cynomolgus monkeys [15], and PHLV1/2 were detected in pigs used for pig heart transplantation into baboons [13], but no transmission of these viruses was observed in the trials.To ensure the safety of xenotransplantation, it is essential to first eliminate all viruses pathogenic to pigs, such as PRRSV, foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV), porcine parvovirus (PPV), porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) and swine vesicular disease virus (SVDV), among others. In addition, viruses known to infect both pigs and humans must also be targeted for elimination. These include influenza virus, Nipah virus, hepatitis E virus, and various arboviruses such as Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). However, it is important to note that most of these viruses are not endemic in Europe and North America [16].Particularly important are viruses known to cause zoonotic infections in humans, such as hepatitis E virus genotype 3 (HEV3) [17]. Most HEV3 infections in humans are asymptomatic, especially in healthy individuals. When symptoms do occur, they can include fever, fatigue, nausea and jaundice. Humans are typically infected through consumption of undercooked or raw pork products (e.g., liver, sausages) or through direct contact with infected animals or their waste. However, immunocompromised individuals (e.g., organ transplant recipients) may develop chronic HEV infection, potentially leading to progressive liver disease or cirrhosis. Patients with pre-existing liver conditions are at greater risk of severe outcomes (for review, see [17]). Different RT-PCRs for detecting HEV3 were generated and compared [18], and the most sensitive methods were applied later [19]. In addition, an immunological method, a Western blot assay using different recombinant viral proteins, was established and applied [18].PCMV/PRV does not infect healthy humans under normal conditions. Hence, it is not zoonotic, but it can cause disease in the context of xenotransplantation. Therefore, it should be classified as a xenozoonotic virus. We recognized early on that this virus significantly reduced the survival time of non-human primates transplanted with PCMV/PRV-positive organs [13]. In 2016, we reported the transmission of PCMV/PRV to a baboon following heart transplantation, even though the virus had not been detected in the donor animal—an occurrence later mirrored in the first human heart transplant involving a virus-positive organ [20].We developed PCR-based methods, including conventional PCR, nested PCR and, most notably, real-time PCR, which proved to be the most sensitive and specific method for virus screening [21,22]. In addition, we introduced an immunological method in 2016 capable of detecting latent infections [23]. We also determined the optimal time points for applying each detection method [22].Regarding all other viruses, their role in xenotransplantation remains unclear. Porcine circovirus 1 (PCV1) is non-pathogenic in pigs but was nonetheless included in the analysis. In contrast, porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2) can cause serious diseases in pigs, known collectively as PCV2-associated diseases (PCVDs), and should therefore be eliminated [23]. Although PCV2 has been found as a contaminant in rotavirus vaccines, evidence suggests it does not infect immunocompetent humans and is not considered zoonotic (for review, see [24]). Porcine circovirus 3 (PCV3), on the other hand, is pathogenic and has been linked to porcine dermatitis and nephropathy syndrome (PDNS), reproductive failure and multisystemic inflammation [25]. Recently discovered human circoviruses [26] are closely related to PCV3, which is of particular concern.Although PLHV-1 to -3 are widespread in pigs, no association with any pig diseases has been reported so far (for review, see [24]). PLHV-1 has been detected in genetically modified donor pigs used in preclinical xenotransplantation studies; however, unlike PCMV/PRV, it was not transmitted to the recipient [13]. Given that PLHVs are related to bovine and ovine gammaherpesviruses—which, like PLHVs, are apathogenic in their natural hosts but can cause severe disease when transmitted to other species (for review, see [27])—it is advisable to use PLHV-free donor pigs to ensure safety of xenotransplantation.Porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERVs), which are integrated into the genome of all pigs, cannot be eliminated using conventional elimination strategies. However, several approaches have been developed to prevent PERV transmission, including vaccines, small interfering RNA (siRNA) and genome editing techniques that inactivate all proviral copies in the pig genome [28]. Notably, no PERV transmission has been observed in any preclinical trials involving non-human primates or in clinical trials—despite the fact that the above-mentioned prevention strategies were not employed [28]. Meanwhile, all proviruses in pig cells have been inactivated using CRISPR/Cas [29], and using this method, healthy pigs have been generated [30].When testing recipients for PERV infection, it is essential to consider microchimerism—the presence of pig cells, which naturally carry PERV sequences in their genome, distributed throughout the recipient’s body [31]. To distinguish a true PERV infection from mere microchimerism, sophisticated PCR methods and immunological assays have been developed and validated [32].Provided that pig-pathogenic viruses have been eliminated due to their detrimental effects on donor pig health, we selected the following viruses as xenotransplantation-relevant [33]: PCMV/PRV, HEV, porcine circoviruses (PCV1-4), porcine lymphotropic herpesviruses (PLHV-1-3) and porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERVs). In addition, we developed detection methods for porcine parvovirus (PPV) [33], Torque teno sus virus (TTSuV1,2) [33], atypical porcine pestivirus (APPV) [34] and SARS-CoV-2 [19]. It was subsequently shown that SARS-CoV-2 does not infect pigs; however, this may change [35].It is important to emphasize that our comprehensive detection systems not only employ highly specific and sensitive methods, either PCR-based or immunological, but also rigorously address critical factors such as sample generation, sample preparation, sample origin, timing of sample collection and the inclusion of appropriate negative and positive controls [36]. Since most veterinary laboratories focus primarily on viruses that are pathogenic to pigs and cause economic losses in the pig industry, specialized virological diagnostic units are required to screen for xenotransplantation-relevant viruses [37]. These specialized screening methods have been previously described and validated using pigs bred for xenotransplantation and their recipients [13,14], German slaughterhouse pigs [19] and various minipig breeds [18,33]. Special attention has been paid to the development of methods for detecting PCMV/PRV [21,22,33], PERV [28,38] and HEV3 [18]. In particular, the detection of PERV-C, which should be eliminated to prevent the emergence of high-titer PERV-A/C recombinants, is difficult, but reliable methods were developed [38].In addition to the real-time PCR methods for detecting PCMV/PRV described here, a highly sensitive nested PCR method was also developed, and it can be used in parallel [21]. As these methods have been continuously refined, we present here a comprehensive and up-to-date collection of all detection methods for all relevant viruses in detailed form, enabling their effective use in screening pigs designated for xenotransplantation.2. Experimental DesignThese protocols have been developed for sensitive detection of porcine viruses relevant for xenotransplantation in cell cultures, donor pigs and recipients.2.1. Samples from the AnimalsIn general, blood, isolated PBMCs and tissue samples can be used for detecting viruses by PCR-based methods. In some cases, non-invasively taken samples such as oral swabs and anal swabs can also be used; the details of the collection of the samples and the isolation of DNA from anal and oral swabs were described earlier [39]. However, the limitations of using oral and anal swabs are well known [40]. Blood is the best available material to analyze; it should be collected in EDTA tubes to prevent coagulation. Isolation of PBMCs will concentrate the cellular test material. Upon arrival of the blood, it should be immediately processed for PBMC isolation, and the plasma can be stored at −20 °C. For some viruses, such as PCMV/PRV [41] and PERV [42], stimulation of the PBMCs with mitogens may enhance the detection of the viruses. The methods used to treat PBMCs with mitogens in order to increase virus expression and facilitate virus detection are described in [41,42]. However, in the case of latent herpesviruses such as PCMV/PRV and PLHV, the virus may not be detected in blood or tissue samples by PCR methods. In this case, immunological methods such as immunohistochemistry can be used to detect PCMV/PRV antigens [41] and should be used to detect antibodies in sera, which might indicate infection [22,23]. Sera from donor pigs and recipients can be used for detection of antibodies in Western blot assays and ELISAs. Tissues, cells and sera can be stored frozen until testing.2.2. MaterialsThe main materials are listed here; further details of the materials required for the PCR-based and immunological assays will be described in the descriptions of the procedures.Pancoll human medium (PAN-Biotech GmbH, Aidenbach, Germany).DNA and RNA isolation kits (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany):
2.1DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit;2.2QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit;2.3RNeasy DSP FFPE Kit;2.4RNase-Free DNase Set;2.5RNeasy Plus Mini kit.Ethanol, methanol (both from Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany).DreamTaq DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).PVDF membrane (0.2 µm; Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany).2.3. EquipmentThe main equipment required for the PCR-based and immunological assays is listed here; further details will be described in the descriptions of the procedures.Microcentrifuge Heraeus FRESCO 21 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA);NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH, Erlangen, Germany);Biometra TRIO cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany);qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany);Gel electrophoresis chamber (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA);Semi-dry electro blotter (Peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH, Erlangen, Germany);Imaging device (Peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH).3. Procedure3.1. Nucleic Acid Isolation3.1.1. Isolation of PBMCs from Blood SamplesPlace 5 mL of lymphocyte separation medium (Pancoll human medium, PAN-Biotech GmbH, Aidenbach, Germany) in a 15 mL reaction tube. Hold the tube at a 45° angle. CRITICAL STEP: Slowly layer 5 mL of diluted blood (1:1 ratio of media to blood) on top using the pipetting aid, release very slowly and close the lid. CRITICAL STEP: Centrifuge at 900× g, 25 min, 21 °C (switch off the brake).Deceleration should be 0, as it is important for gradient formation. 4.The following layers are obtained after centrifugation (from bottom to top):
-Erythrocytes;-PBMCs, white milky layer;-Plasma, yellow liquid.5.If desired, transfer the plasma without disturbing the PBMC layer to a 1.5 mL reaction tube and store it at −20 °C.6.Carefully aspirate the PBMC layer with a pipette and transfer it into a new 15 mL reaction tube.7.Wash the PBMC fraction with PBS.8.Centrifuge at 350× g, 10 min, 21 °C with brakes.9.Discard the supernatant and resuspend the PBMCs (visible as pellet) in PBS.10.Repeat the PBS wash step.11.Resuspend the PBMC pellet in an appropriate volume of PBS, aliquot in 1.5 mL reaction tubes and store them at −20 °C.If PBMCs are to be cultured, all procedures must be carried out under sterile conditions in a cell culture hood.3.1.2. DNA Isolation from Blood Samples and Cell CulturesDNA isolation was performed using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) following the manufacturers’ instructions.As test material, blood, PBMCs, primary cells or cell lines can be used. When using a frozen cell pellet, cells were allowed to thaw before PBS was added.3.1.3. DNA Isolation from Tissue SamplesHere, the DNeasy Blood & Tissue kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was used, too. After 25 mg of tissue was cut into small pieces, the pieces were disrupted using a rotor–stator homogenizer for efficient DNA extraction.3.1.4. Nucleic Acid Extraction from Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) TissueThe QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was used for the DNA extraction of FFPE tissue sections, while the RNeasy DSP FFPE Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was used for RNA extraction of these samples. All protocols were carried out according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.3.1.5. Nucleic Acid Extraction from Pig SkinFor DNA extraction, the DNeasy Blood and Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To extract the RNA of the pre-incubated samples, the RNeasy Lipid Tissue Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was applied, and a DNase digestion was carried out using the RNase-Free DNase Set (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). The pig skin was cut into small pieces, treated with a mix of collagenase (final concentration 125 U/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and hyaluronidase (final concentration 100 U/mL, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with shaking at 500 rpm, and finally centrifuged for 5 min at 1000× g. For more details, see [21].3.1.6. Nucleic Acid Quality Control and QuantificationDNA and RNA concentration and purity were measured by a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH).Open the NanoDrop software (Nano Drop 1000, version 3.8.1) on the connected computer.Initialize the instrument by loading 2 μL of nuclease-free water.Perform a blank measurement using 2 μL of elution buffer.Load 2 μL of the DNA sample and measure its concentration.Record the DNA/RNA concentration as well as the 260/280 and 260/230 ratios to evaluate sample purity.The absorbance ratio at 260 nm and 280 nm is commonly used to assess DNA purity. A ratio of approximately 1.8 is generally considered indicative of pure DNA and 2.0 for RNA. Lower values may suggest protein contamination. The 260/230 ratio is a secondary measure of nucleic acid purity. Ideal 260/230 values typically range from 2.0 to 2.2. Lower ratios may indicate the presence of contaminants such as EDTA, phenol or guanidine hydrochloride, which absorb strongly at 230 nm.3.1.7. RNA IsolationFor the isolation of RNA, the RNeasy Plus Mini kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) was used following the kit manufacturer’s instructions. A maximum of 1 × 107 cells and less than 30 mg tissue can be used; the tissues have to be homogenized.3.2. PCR Methods3.2.1. Primers and Probes RequiredPrimers and probes specific to the virus of interest were used to monitor their detection (Table 1). As a positive control, lab-based gene blocks were used as described in detail [22]. Four gene blocks were synthesized for specific virus genes. PERV-C was tested by conventional PCR, while all other viruses were tested by qPCR.The following xenotransplantation-relevant viruses need to be tested in the donor animals: PCMV/PRV, PLHV-1, PLHV-2, PLHV-3, PCV1, PCV2, PCV3, PCV4, HEV, PERV-C, PPV, TTSuV1, TTSuV2, APPV and SARS-CoV-2. Testing for SARS-CoV-2 may not be necessary, as pigs are not susceptible to infection with this virus at present. However, this may change [35]. The recipient should be tested for any viruses known to be present in the donor pig. Even if the donor pig tests negative, additional testing of the recipient can help rule out the possibility that the virus was present in the donor at levels below the detection limit of the assay used. The recipient should be tested for PERV using the PERVpol PCR. To discriminate between true infection and the presence of PERV sequences in disseminated pig cells, screening for pig cells using the short interspersed nuclear element (SINE; PRE-1) PCR should be performed. The rationale of application and the enormous efficacy of this method were demonstrated when analyzing baboons transplanted with pig hearts [31].3.2.2. Conventional PCRConventional PCR was performed to determine the presence of PERV-C using a set of primers mentioned in Table 1. DreamTaq DNA polymerase (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used. All reactions were set up with a Biometra TRIO cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany).Briefly, the sample was subjected to an initial denaturation for 10 min at 95 °C, followed by 45 amplification cycles of 95 °C for 15 s, annealing at 55 °C for 30 s, extension at 72 °C for 30 s and a final extension time at 72 °C for 5 min. As a positive control, liver tissue from a PERV-C-positive indigenous Greek black farm pig was used. Water served as a no-template control. A 1.5% agarose gel was used to detect the amplified DNA fragment of approximately 281 bp.3.2.3. Real-Time PCRPerform the following steps in a clean master-mix-only room.Clean the surface with DNase/RNase solution. Use filter tips all the time.Prepare the primer–probe mix for the virus to be detected (Table A1).Also prepare primer–probe mix for the internal control, i.e., GAPDH gene (Table A1).Prepare a master mix in a new vial by adding SensiFAST probe no-ROX mix followed by virus primer–probe and GAPDH primer–probe, and top up the volume with nuclease-free water (Table A2).Vortex the master mix vial and give it a short spin.From now on, perform steps in a clean hood. Take a 96-well qPCR plate. Dispense 16 µL of master mix in each well, followed by 4 µL (100 ng) of DNA sample, making a total volume of 20 µL per well (prepare triplicates for each sample).Also include a positive control, which is gene block DNA, and a no-template control (NTC), which is nuclease-free water.Seal the plate carefully using the plastic sheet provided.Give the plate a short spin in the centrifuge to spin down the liquid and to remove any air bubbles.Place the plate in a qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany)Set up the protocol for the respective virus (Table A3) and run it. At the end, observe the graph and calculate the Ct (threshold cycle) value.3.3. Western Blot Analysis3.3.1. SDS-PAGEWestern blot analyses were performed to detect antiviral antibodies; their detection is especially important for herpesviruses such as PCMV/PRV, which may be in latency.The Western blot analyses were performed using the corresponding recombinant viral proteins. The recombinant protein samples were dissolved in SDS-PAGE gel loading dye (Table A4), heated to 98 °C for 10 min, and centrifuged for 5 min at maximum speed.The protein samples were run in SDS-PAGE gels with a suitable gel concentration, e.g., 17% for the glycoprotein B (gB) of PCMV/PRV and the p15E of PERV or 12% for the glycoprotein gp70 of PERV along with the protein marker. A Bio-Rad gel electrophoresis chamber (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) was used with the following conditions: 80 V for 30 min, 120 V for 90 min. For blotting, the PVDF membrane (0.2 µm; Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) needed to be activated with absolute methanol for a few seconds and washed with transfer buffer (Table A4). Blotting was performed in a semi-dry electroblotter (Peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH, Erlangen, Germany) for 70 min at 40 mA. The membrane needed to be blocked with 5% milk powder-Tris-buffered saline with Tween20 (TBS-T) (Table A4) for 1 h at 4 °C with slow shaking. After blocking, the membrane was incubated with primary antibodies (i.e., serum or plasma samples prepared in blocking buffer, 1:50 up to 1:3000 dilution with TBS-T) overnight at 4 °C with slow shaking. Previously tested positive pig serum was used as a positive control (1:300 dilution); another pig serum that tested negative was used as a negative control. The membrane was washed 3 × 10 min with TBS-T and incubated with secondary antibody solutions prepared in blocking buffer for 1 h at room temperature with shaking. After this, the membrane was washed 3 × 10 min with TBS-T. The blot was developed using an ECL solution (i.e., 1:1) and a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (Peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH).3.3.2. Western Blot Analysis PCMV/PRVThe recombinant R2 fragment of the PCMV/PRV glycoprotein (gB) was used to detect PCMV/PRV-specific antibodies as described [22,23]. The selection, cloning, production, purification and characterization of the recombinant proteins were described earlier [23]. Positive and negative control sera from infected and non-infected pigs were used. Goat anti-pig horseradish peroxidase (HRP) labeled antibodies (1:15,000 dilution) were used as secondary antibodies.3.3.3. Western Blot Analysis PLHVRecombinant gB1 antigen of PLHV-1 was used to detect PLHV-1-specific antibodies as described [56]. Positive and negative control sera from infected and non-infected pigs were used. Polyclonal goat anti-pig immunoglobulin G (IgG)-HRP was used as a secondary antibody. Goat serum 3426, obtained by immunization with the purified gB1 antigen of PLHV, was used as a positive control serum.3.3.4. Western Blot Analysis PERVPurified recombinant PERV proteins p15E and gp70 were used as antigens. The selection, cloning, production, purification and characterization of the recombinant proteins as well as the preparation of the positive control sera were described earlier [57]. For SDS-PAGE, 12% and 17% gels were prepared for gp70 and p15E, respectively. Pig and transplanted baboon sera were analyzed. Positive and negative control sera from goats immunized with the corresponding recombinant p15E and gp70 were used. As secondary antibodies, donkey anti-goat IgG HRP (1:20,000; MilliporeSigma, Bedford, MA, USA) and peroxidase AffiniPure goat anti-human IgG (H + L) (1:10,000; Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, USA), respectively, were used.3.3.5. Western Blot Analysis HEVA recombinant genotype 3 (GT3) ORF2 HEV antigen (aa326–608, GT3-Ctr, 32 kDa) [18] containing the immunodominant region and a recombinant 44.5 kDa protein with a glutathione-S transferase (GST) tag fused to the ORF2 fragment (aa 452–617) (Prospec, Ness Ziona, Israel) as well as goat anti-pig IgG or goat anti-human IgG alkaline phosphatase-conjugated antibodies were used. Sera from an HEV-infected pig and an HEV-infected patient were used as positive controls, and sera from non-infected pigs were used as a negative control [18].4. Expected Results4.1. Results of PCR AnalysisSamples are classified as either positive or negative for a virus based on the Ct (cycle threshold) value. Regardless of the presence or absence of the target virus, the internal control gene (GAPDH) should always be detected. If GAPDH is not amplified, this indicates a failure in the assay—most likely due to the absence of DNA or poor sample quality.The Ct value refers to the number of PCR cycles required for the fluorescent signal to exceed the background threshold, indicating detectable levels of DNA or RNA. A lower Ct value (e.g., 20) means that the target nucleic acid is abundant in the sample and requires fewer cycles to reach the detection threshold. Conversely, a higher Ct value (e.g., 30) indicates a lower initial amount of DNA or RNA, as more amplification cycles would be needed for detection.Using gene blocks with the corresponding virus sequence, the sensitivity of the real-time PCRs is determined and has to be considered when analyzing donor pigs or recipients (Table 2). The standard curves can also be used to express the results in virus copy number/100 ng of DNA.When we tested three pigs from a barrier facility, all animals were found negative using real-time PCRs for all tested viruses (Table 3). In addition, the animals were PERV-C-positive as detected using conventional PCR (Figure 1).4.2. Results of Western Blot Analysis4.2.1. PCMV/PRVSera from pigs positive for PCMV/PRV will react with the recombinant protein and display a band at approximately 18 kDa. This corresponds to the band observed with the positive control serum. Since the intensity of the band reflects the antibody level, a semiquantitative statement is possible: stronger bands indicate higher antibody titers. In young piglets, a positive band may result from maternal antibodies acquired through colostrum, which wane over time when the piglet is not infected. To distinguish passive immunity from active infection, piglets should be tested at regular intervals. A positive result in an adult pig indicates an active or latent PCMV/PRV infection, and such animals should be excluded from use in xenotransplantation. Post-transplantation monitoring of the recipients should include testing of serum samples for signs of PCMV/PRV reactivation or new infection of the recipient.When we tested the three piglets for antibodies against PCMV/PRV, all three showed a strong reaction (Figure 2). In line with the age of the pigs, these antibodies were certainly obtained from the mother pig, which was also found to be positive (Figure 2). If the antibody titer decreases with time, the piglet is not infected.4.2.2. PLHVIf a pig is positive for PLHV antibodies, its serum will react with the recombinant glycoprotein B and show a band at approximately 35 kDa, consistent with the band observed in the positive control serum.4.2.3. PERVPigs do not produce antibodies against PERV; they are tolerant to these endogenous sequences. To make sure that the Western blot assay is functioning when screening recipients of pig organs, control sera have to be used; these control sera are obtained by immunization of goats with recombinant p15E or gp70 of PERV, which recognize the corresponding recombinant protein and show bands at approximately 12 kDa or 54 kDa, respectively [57].4.2.4. HEVIf a pig or a recipient is positive for HEV, the sera will react with one of the two related antigens representing parts of the capsid protein used as targets in Western blot analysis: first, a recombinant genotype 3 (GT3) ORF2 HEV antigen (aa 326–608, GT3-Ctr, 32 kDa) containing the immunodominant region, and second, a recombinant 44.5 kDa protein with a glutathione-S transferase (GST) tag fused to the ORF2 fragment (aa 452–617) [18].


Title: Persistent Roseoloviruses Infection in Adult Patients with Epilepsy

1. IntroductionEpilepsy is a common chronic neurological disease characterized by recurring unprovoked seizures [1] due to abnormal excessive or synchronous neuronal activity in the brain. It is also characterized by the neurobiologic, cognitive, psychological and social consequences of this condition [2]. The disease can occur at any age and affects 1% of the human population worldwide [3]. Despite over 20 antiepileptic drugs being available, seizures remain uncontrolled in about 30% of patients [4] that can be related with the complex and multifactorial nature of epilepsy and its heterogeneity [5,6,7,8]. Viral infections of the CNS are among major risk factors for development of epilepsy [9].Human herpesvirus (HHV)-6A, HHV-6B and HHV-7 belong to the Herpesviridae family, Betaherpesvirinae subfamily and Roseolovirus genus [10]. They are ubiquitous, lymphotropic, immunomodulating and potentially pathogenic to the nervous system [11,12].The viruses enter in the brain via the olfactory pathways [13,14]. The process of the virus entry into the host cell is a complex interplay of multiple viral envelope proteins and cellular structures, prior studies [15], showed that both HHV-6A and B use CD46 as cell receptor. It has been observed that these viruses induce a cytokine imbalance with a switch from an antiviral T helper (Th)-1-polarized cytokine profile to a Th-2 profile [16,17] and significantly modulate the chemokine system both by affecting chemokine production and by expressing viral chemokines and chemokine receptors [18].HHV-7 virus utilizes the CD4+ molecule as its essential receptor for entry into target cells [19] and induces the cytopathic effects in productively infected cells and apoptosis in uninfected or non-productively infected cells [20]. The routes of the virus entry into the CNS is unclear. Likewise, HHV-6, HHV-7 also can modulate the cytokine secretion from human PBMC and significantly modulate the chemokine system [21,22]. Primary infection with HHV-6B and HHV-7 occurs during infancy and can manifest as the febrile illness exanthema subitum (roseola) [23,24] which results in different symptoms or diseases, ranging from asymptomatic infection to acute febrile illness with severe neurological complications. Primary infection with HHV-6B may be the cause of approximately 30% of the febrile convulsions in children [25] and was associated with complications such as hemiplegia, meningoencephalitis and residual encephalopathy of primary infection [26,27]. Symptomatic HHV-6A primary infection is not that well documented. Some data suggest that HHV-6A may be more neurotropic and neurovirulent [28].The pathogenic role of HHV-7 is not clear. HHV-7 primary infection has the potential for severe complications similar to HHV-6 [29,30,31,32,33] and may cause several clinical complications such as febrile seizures and encephalopathy in children, encephalitis and flaccid paralysis in immunocompetent [33] and immunocompromised adults.The association of HHV-6B and HHV-7 primary infection with febrile status epilepticus has been underscored [30,34]. The viral primary infection proceeds with encephalitis and early seizures present an increased risk of late unprovoked seizures and epilepsy development [35,36,37,38].After primary infection, the viruses establish a state of life-long sub-clinical persistence or latency in various sites and cells of the organism, including the CNS [39,40] and can be reactivated under a variety of stimuli especially in case of an immunodeficiency. The complications and encephalitis, in particular which is associated with reactivated roseoloviruses infection, has been observed in immunocompetent [41,42,43] as well as in immunocompromised adults [41,44] suggesting that the complications are due to viral invasion of the brain [12,32,40]. Late unprovoked epileptic seizures may be sequelae of viral encephalitis. The clinical manifestations show that seizures occurred more frequently in case of reactivated infection [45].Controversial link of HHV-6B to the future development of intractable temporal lobe epilepsy and hippocampal sclerosis, in both children and adults have been shown [46,47,48,49,50,51,52,53]. A possible association between HHV-7 positivity and drug-resistant epilepsy, especially hippocampal sclerosis has been suggested [54], however, no association between HHV-7 and epilepsy has been confirmed. Although, the pathogenic potential of HHV-7 reactivated infection is unclear, however it can reactivate HHV-6 from latency and thus contributes to severe pathological conditions associated with HHV-6 [55,56].HHV-6 and HHV-7 has been associated with neurological pathologies such as multiple sclerosis [57,58,59,60,61,62,63], myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome [57,64,65,66,67], Alzheimer’s disease [68], as well as with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis [69,70]. Although a significant number of studies have suggested that the CNS can be a site for persistent HHV-6 and HHV-7 infection, the causal relationship and possible pathological role of these viruses in the human CNS disease and epilepsy are to be elucidated.The objectives of this study were to (1) examine the presence of HHV-6 and/or HHV-7 DNA in whole peripheral blood (WPB) DNA samples from adult patients with different forms of epilepsy; (2) determine HHV-6A and HHV-6B; (3) compare HHV-6 and HHV-7 load in WPB DNA samples between the patients with epilepsy and apparently healthy controls; (4) reveal active roseoloviruses infection.2. Materials and Methods2.1. SamplesPeripheral blood samples of patients and healthy control group individuals were obtained during the period from 2014 to 2016. Clinical and virologic (including immunology and molecular biology) features were examined in the 53 patients having a confirmed clinical diagnosis of different forms of epilepsy (35 females and 18 males; median age 50, IQR 38–60; range 22–83) with various duration of epilepsy (1 year in 18.2%, 1–5 years in 25.5%, 6–10 years in 12.7%, 10–20 years in 23.6% and >20 years in 20.0%). As control group was used randomly selected 104 gender- and age-matched voluntary, apparently healthy blood donors (44 females and 60 males; median age 29, IQR 22–37; range 18–57). Ethylinediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) anticoagulated peripheral blood samples were collected once at State Blood Donor Center during ordinary blood donation at the same time period as patient samples. The patients with epilepsy were recruited at the Neurology Department of Riga East Clinical University Hospital “Gailezers” after admission with epileptic seizures. There was at least 24 h seizure-free period before recruitment of patients. Inclusion criteria for epilepsy group were as follows: (1) drug-resistant epilepsy, (2) status epilepticus on admission to hospital, (3) seizure frequency which is not typical for a patient (at least 100% increment in seizure frequency during the last month before admission). Exclusion criteria were as follows: (1) newly diagnosed epilepsy, (2) acute symptomatic seizure(s), (3) nonadherence to epilepsy treatment, (4) typical seizure in a patient with no evidence of drug resistance. Out of 53 epilepsy patients, the focal epilepsy was diagnosed in 85.0% (n = 45), genetic generalized epilepsy—in 5.6% (n = 3) and epilepsy of unknown type—in 9.4% (n = 5) of patients. Most common etiologies of epilepsy were: remote traumatic brain injury–in 26.4% (n = 14), cerebrovascular disease—in 20.7% (n = 11), cerebral palsy- in 13.2% (n = 7), postinfectious epilepsy- in 9.4% (n = 5), hippocampal sclerosis- in 5.7% (n = 3). Two patients had remote intracranial surgery due to anaplastic meningioma and meningosarcoma with no evidence of recurrence. One patient was diagnosed with autoimmune epilepsy caused by NMDA-receptor encephalitis, one- with focal cortical dysplasia and chronic alcohol-related brain damage was etiology of epilepsy in a single patient. Only one patient received immunosuppressive treatment with prednisone (Table 1). All of the patients received specific anti-epileptic treatment with monotherapy in 43.4% (n = 23) and polytherapy in the rest (56.6%, n = 30). Drug-resistant epilepsy was determined in 32.1% (n = 17) of the patients, others reported partial seizure control, and there were no patients experiencing seizure freedom within the last year before recruitment. Status epilepticus was a reason for hospital admission in 28.3% (n = 15). All subjects gave their informed consent for inclusion before they participated in the study. The study protocol was approved by Ethics Committee of the Rīga Stradiņš University (30.05.2013.) code- Nr 28 and written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to the examination.2.2. HHV-6 and HHV-7 SerologyTesting for HHV-6 and HHV-7 IgG class antibodies in blood plasma samples was carried out using HHV-6 IgG ELISA kit (Advanced Biotechnologies, Columbia, MD, USA) and HHV-7 using IgG IFA kit (Advanced Biotechnologies, Columbia, MD, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations.2.3. Nested Polymerase Chain ReactionNested polymerase chain reaction (nPCR) was used to amplify specific virus DNA sequences in DNA isolated from WPB (a marker of virus persistence) and cell-free blood plasma (a marker of persistent infection in active phase). Total DNA was isolated from fresh WPB by phenol-chloroform extraction method. The QIAamp DNA Blood Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used to extract DNA from blood plasma. The fresh plasma samples were treated with deoxyribonuclease I before DNA purification. To assure the quality of the WPB DNA as well as exclude contamination of plasma DNA by cellular DNA, β-globin gene analysis was performed by PCR. nPCR amplification for the viruses was carried out in the presence of 1 µg of WPB DNA and 10 µL of plasma DNA (corresponding to 100 µL of plasma). HHV-6 and HHV-7 DNA were detected in accordance with Secchiero et al. (1995) [71] and Berneman et al. (1992) [10], respectively. Used primers were complementary to the gene that encodes major capsid proteins for both HHV-6A and HHV-6B and U10 gene for HHV-7 [72]. Positive controls (HHV-6 and HHV-7 genomic DNA; ABI, Columbia, MD, USA) and negative controls (DNA obtained from practically healthy HHV-6 and HHV-7 negative blood donors), as well as water controls were included in each experiment. The sensitivity of HHV-6-specific primers corresponded to three copies of the HHV-6 genome and the sensitivity of HHV-7-specific primers to one copy of the HHV-7 per reaction [63,73].2.4. Restriction Endonuclease AnalysisObtained nPCR amplification products were digested with HindIII restriction endonuclease (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) which cleaves HHV-6B 163 bp amplification product into 66 bp and 97 bp fragments, whereas does not cleave HHV-6A [71].2.5. Reverse Transcription PCR assaysRNA was extracted from PBMC samples positive on HHV-6 and/or HHV-7 DNA of the patients with epilepsy and control individuals using TRI Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized with reverse transcription (RT) using commercially available Revert First Standard cDNA synthesis Kit (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to manufacturer´s recommendations. PCR was used to amplify virus specific DNA sequences in cDNA samples. HHV-6 U89/90 regulatory immediate-early or α gene expression was detected according to Van den Bosch et al. (2001) [74] using primers complementary to both HHV-6A and HHV-6B. HHV-7 U57 gene expression coding the major capsid protein was detected according to Ito et al. (2013) [75].2.6. Quantitative Real-Time PCRHHV-6 and HHV-7 loads were detected in all WPB samples positive for viral genomic sequences of the patients with epilepsy and control individuals using HHV-6 Real-TM Quant kit (Sacace, Biotechnologies, Como, Italy) and Realquality RQ-HHV-7 kit (AB ANALITICA, Padova, Italy) with BioRad CFX96 Real-time PCR System (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations.2.7. HHV-6 Encoded Proteins Expression by Indirect ImmunofluorescenceTo determine HHV-6-encoded protein expression, indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) was performed on PBMC by specific monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) against HHV-6. PBMC were separated by Histopaque-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) gradient centrifugation. The cells were fixed in a mixture of cold methanol and acetone (1:1 at −20 °C) on microscope slides. Prior the staining, cells were rehydrated in phosphate buffer saline. The following primary mouse MoAb were used: anti-p41 (clone 6A5D12), HHV-6A and HHV-6B-specific, reacts in the nucleus of the cell; anti-gH (gp100) (clone OHV-3), HHV-6B specific and anti-gB (gp116) (clone OHV-1), specific for HHV-6A and HHV-6B, both associated with viral replication [76]. The antibodies were diluted 1:50 in the blocking buffer. Rabbit anti-mouse FITC-conjugated (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) serum was used as secondary antibody. Hoechst 33,258 (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) was added in a concentration of 0.4 µg/mL to the secondary antibody for DNA staining. The images were captured using Eclipse 80i microscope with a cooled charge-coupled device camera (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan).2.8. Cytokines Detection by Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent AssayLevel of cytokines was analyzed with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) in blood plasma samples, according to manufacturers’ protocols. TNF-α level was estimated using Biorbyt Human TNFα ELISA kit (Biorbyt, United Kingdom) with detection limit of <1 pg/mL. Level of IL-12 (p70) was detected with eBioscience Human IL-12p70 Platinium ELISA and IL-10–with eBioscience Human IL-10 Platinium ELISA (eBioscience Europe/International, Vienna, Austria) with detection limits–2.1 pg/mL and 1 pg/mL, respectively.2.9. Statistical AnalysisAll the graphs, calculations and statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software version 8.02 for Mac (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). To test whether the collected numerical data are normally distributed, the D’Agostino and Pearson, Anderson–Darling and Shapiro–Wilk normality tests were applied. Homogeneity of variances was tested using F or Brown–Forsythe and Bartlett’s tests and, in a case of unequal SDs comparison of medians between different groups was performed using nonparametric Mann–Whitney (MW) test (for the analysis of HHV-6 and HHV-7 load) or Kruskal–Wallis (KW) test (for the analysis of plasma cytokine levels) followed by two-stage step-up method of Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli as post hoc procedure. Quantification limit (QL) of the viral load was set up as 10 viral DNS copies/106 cells, for cytokines assessment—as 2 pg/mL. Viral load and cytokine levels below QL were uniformly set up as randomized values around (viral load) or above (cytokines) QL/2 [77]. Categorical data (detection frequency of HHV-6 and/or HHV-7 genomic sequences in the DNA isolated from WPB samples of the individuals with epilepsy and the control group) were assessed by Fisher’s exact (F) or chi-squared (Chi2) test. In order to better understand the differences between the groups and to better visualize them, the model of n equalization of subject groups was applied. For the characterization of the central tendency of variables and their distribution, median with interquartile range (IQR) was used. A two-tailed P-value less than 0.05 (p < 0.05) was considered as statistically significant for all tests.3. Results3.1. SeroepidemiologySpecific anti-HHV-6 IgG class antibodies were found in 81.1% (43/53) and specific anti-HHV-7 IgG class antibodies in 83.0% (44/53) of plasma samples from the patients with epilepsy. No difference in the presence of anti-HHV-6 and anti-HHV-7 IgG class antibodies between epilepsy patients and control group individuals (78.8%, 82/104 and 81.7%, 85/104, respectively) was detected (p = 1.0).3.2. Presence of HHV-6 and/or HHV-7 Genomic SequencesThe presence of HHV-6 and/or HHV-7 genomic sequences in WPB and cell-free blood plasma DNA samples detected by nPCR is summarized in Table 1. Roseoloviruses genomic sequences in DNA samples from WPB were found in 86.8% (46/53) of patients with epilepsy versus 54.8% (57/104) in control group individuals (p < 0.0001). Although no difference in the detection rate of single HHV-6 and single HHV-7 DNAs between the groups was detected, the simultaneous presence of both virus DNA (co-infection) was slightly higher in WPB samples from the patients with epilepsy (p = 0.011). Plasma viremia (marker of infection active phase) was revealed only in patients with epilepsy (9/46, 19.6%) (Table 1).HHV-6A was identified in two and HHV-6B in 13 out of 15 WPB samples from patients with epilepsy positive for HHV-6 genomic sequences. HHV-6B was identified in all HHV-6 positive DNA samples from control individuals. In reality in our case we are speaking about HHV-6 reflecting both HHV-6A and HHV-6B because in the study and control groups we have detected only two cases with HHV-6A.3.3. HHV-6 U89/90 Gene ExpressionUsing RT-PCR, HHV-6 U89/90 immediate early gene expression in PBMC was found in 73.3% (11/15) of the patients with epilepsy with previously detected HHV-6 genomic sequence in WPB DNA samples by nPCR, between them also four patients with HHV-6 plasma viremia. HHV-6 U89/90 gene expression was not found in any of HHV-6 positive samples from the control individuals.3.4. HHV-6 LoadQuantitative PCR analysis of HHV-6 in WPB DNA samples showed a statistically significant (p < 0.0001, Chi2) difference between the patients with epilepsy and control group individuals, when number of individuals with low loads (10 copies/106 cells) and loads >10 copies/106 cells were compared (Figure 1a).The frequency of HHV-6 load >10 copies/106 cells was detected in 66.7% (10/15) of the patients with epilepsy and in one out of 10 or 10% of the control group individuals (p < 0.0001, Chi2) both with positive results of viral DNA detection in WPB samples by nPCR (Figure 1b).The median HHV-6 load in the patients with epilepsy was significantly higher than in control group individuals (174 (IQR: 7–699) and 5 (IQR: 4–6 copies/106 cells, respectively, p = 0.0008, MW) (Figure 1b). Higher median load was detected in the WPB samples from patients with epilepsy with a persistent viral infection in an active phase (plasma viremia) in comparison to the patients with persistent infection in latent phase (1178 (IQR: 442–1777) and 389 (IQR: 115–630) copies/106 cells, respectively, p = 0.016, MW). Median viral load >10 copies/106 cells in WPB (672 (IQR: 174–1757)) was determined in 81.8% (9/11) of the patients with previously estimated HHV-6 U89/90 gene expression.3.5. HHV-6-Encoded Proteins ExpressionUsing the IFA test HHV-6-encoded proteins expression was demonstrated in 53.3% (8/15) PBMC samples from the patients with epilepsy with previously detected HHV-6 genomic sequences in WPB DNA. Presence of HHV-6 p41, an early protein, encoded by the U27 gene was detected in one PBMC sample of the patient that was positive on HHV-6 U89/90 gene expression and with viral load <10 copies/106 cells. Simultaneous presence of HHV-6 p41 and gH (gp100) (encoded by the U48 gene) proteins was observed in two samples and simultaneous p41, gH and gB (gp116) (encoded by U39) —in 5 of PBMC samples from the patients that were positive for U89/90 gene expression with median viral load 671.9 (IQR: 173.8–1757.0). Plasma viremia was detected in four out of eight (50.0%) patients with HHV-6-encoded proteins expression (two—p41+gH and two—p41+gH+gB).3.6. HHV-7 U57 Gene ExpressionUsing RT-PCR, HHV-7 U57 gene expression, coding the late major capsid protein, was detected in 37.5% (15/40) of PBMC samples from patients with epilepsy positive for HHV-7 genomic sequences and in one out of 53 control samples (p = 0.0001, F). “From these 15 patients with U57 gene expression 12 (80%) were only with HHV-7 genomic sequences in WPB DNA, others 3 were with HHV-6 and HHV-7 specific sequences presented in WPB DNA samples.3.7. HHV-7 LoadSignificantly higher frequency of the HHV-7 load >10 copies/106 cells (22/40, 55.0% vs 14/53, 26.4%, respectively; p < 0.0001, Chi2; Figure 2a,b) as well as the median viral load (in a subjects with viral load >10 copies/106 cells) 502 (IQR: 193–2087) vs 174 (IQR: 113–248) copies/106 cells was found between the patients with epilepsy and control group individuals (p = 0.012, MW; Figure 2c).Higher median load was detected in the WPB samples from patients with epilepsy with a persistent viral infection in an active phase (plasma viremia) in comparison with persistent infection in latent phase (1145 (IQR: 377–1530) and 323 (IQR: 154–414) copies/106 cells, respectively; p = 0.01, MW). In 9 out of 15 samples (60.0%) from the patients with epilepsy and in one control individual that were positive for HHV-7 U57 gene expression in PBMC, median HHV-7 load was 285 and 237 copies/106 cells, respectively. HHV-7 mRNA expression was detected also in 6 patients with epilepsy in whose WPB DNA samples virus specific sequences were presented with load <10 copies/106 cells.3.8. Level of CytokinesMedian level of TNF-α in the control group individuals without HHV-6A/B and HHV-7 infection markers was determined as 4.4 (IQR: 2.8–5.2) pg/mL. The median TNF-α level above QL (121.4, IQR: 66.5–205.5 pg/mL) in plasma samples from the patients with infection markers and elevated median HHV-7 load (>10 copies/106 cells) was significantly higher (p = 0.0001, KW) in comparison to the patients without elevated HHV-7 load (<10 copies/106 cells) (15.0, IQR: 10.6–27.5 pg/mL), as well as in comparison to control individuals without HHV infection (p< 0.0001, KW). Similar, but less pronounced difference (p = 0.042, KW) between both groups (<10 and >10 copies/106 cells) and in comparison to control (p = 0.0023, KW) was observed in a case of HHV-6 infection–median plasma TNF-α concentration was established at the level of 29.7 (IQR: 22.3–109.0) pg/mL in patients with elevated (>10 copies/106 cells) HHV-6 load and at the level of 8.0 (IQR: 2.8–16.0) pg/mL in the patients without elevated HHV-6 load (<10 copies/106 cells. Comparing groups with elevated (>10 copies/106 cells) HHV-6 and HHV-7 viral load, in HHV-7 group significantly higher (p = 0.025, MW) median level of TNF-α was established (Figure 3a,b).The median IL-12(p70) plasma level in samples from the patients with detectable viral infection markers (>10 copies/106 cells) was similar in HHV-6 and HHV-7 groups (17.5, IQR: 14.9–24.8 and 16.1, IQR: 14.6–24.6, pg/mL, respectively), but both significantly differ (p = 0.019 and p = 0.032, respectively) from the control one (10.0, IQR: 9.8–12.1–pg).Median levels of IL-12(p70) in the patients without elevated (<10) HHV-6 load (5.8, IQR: 3.9–7.9 pg/mL) was significantly lower in comparison to the group with elevated (>10) HHV-6 load (p = 0.0002, KW). In contrast, between patient groups with and without elevated HHV-7 load—(16.1, IQR: 14.6–24.6 and 10.0, IQR: 8.5–15.5 pg/mL, respectively) the difference was less pronounced (p = 0.048, KW) (Figure 4a,b).Significant difference (p = 0.015, KW) between median levels of IL-10 in samples from epilepsy patients with (>10 copies/106 cells) and without (<10 copies/106 cells) elevated HHV-7 load (34.5, IQR: 21.0–40.3 and 22.0, IQR: 8.5–30.5, respectively) was detected. Statistically significant difference of median IL-10 levels was also observed between control group individuals without roseoloviruses infection and patient group with HHV-7 infection (>10 copies/106 cells) (15.5, IQR: 7.3–22.0 and 34.5, IQR: 21.0–40.3 pg/mL, respectively, p = 0.013, KW). In patients with elevated (>10) and without elevated HHV-6 load (<10 copies/106 cells), the level of IL-10 was similar (19.3, IQR: 12.3–26.5 and 18.9, IQR: 6.7–37.8 pg/mL, respectively) and did not differ from control one. However, the median level of IL-10 was a little higher (p = 0.024, KW) in epilepsy patients with HHV-7 (>10 copies/106 cells) in comparison to epilepsy patients with HHV-6 (>10 copies/106 cells) (Figure 5a,b).4. DiscussionEpilepsy is considered as a public health problem worldwide and is the most frequent neurological disorder. Viruses such as HHV-6A, HHV-6B and HHV-7 are hypothetical candidates for the involvement in epilepsy pathogenesis. Clarification of the relationship between causative role of HHV-6 and HHV-7 with chronic diseases of CNS, epilepsy in particular, is difficult due to the ubiquitous nature of the viruses, chronic persistent infection, two distinct species of HHV-6A and HHV-6B and limitations of current investigational tools that note many researchers [11,78]. The detection of active HHV-6 and/or HHV-7 infection is important for distinguishing between reactivation and latency of the viruses in patients with epilepsy.In this study only HHV-6 and HHV-7 specific IgG class antibodies were measured. Taking into account the fact that primary (acute) infection with these viruses mainly occurs in early childhood and IgM antibodies appear only during an active infection or for 2–3 months after an active infection, serologic assays currently used for the detection of HHV-6 and HHV-7 specific IgM class antibodies have limited usefulness in the management of adult infection and especially in detection of active beta-herpesvirus infection. Therefore, use of methods such as RT-PCR to detect viral late genes expression and quantitative PCR to reveal viral load can help to receive more information on current status of the HHV-6/HHV-7 infection. It is known that the absence of an IgM antibody does not mean you do not have an active phase of persistent infection. Chronic infections in various tissues can persist with no evidence of IgM.In this study, the presence of HHV-6 and HHV-7 IgG class antibodies in plasma samples from adult patients with epilepsy and control group individuals show high frequency of seroprevalence in both groups of individuals (81.1% and 83.0% vs 78.8% and 81.7%, respectively) that conforms to the data of other researchers [31,79].The technique of nPCR was used for the detection of HHV-6 and HHV-7 genomic sequences in DNA isolated from WPB (marker of persistent infection) and cell-free blood plasma (marker of persistent infection in active phase). The results of this study show significantly higher frequency of a persistent roseoloviruses infection in the patients with epilepsy than in control group individuals without neurologic pathology (86.8% vs 54.8%, respectively; p = 0.003). The presence of HHV-6 DNA in WPB is detected significantly more often in the patients with epilepsy than controls (28.3% and 9.6%; p = 0.0048), similar effect was observed in a case of HHV-7 DNA presence in both groups (75.5% and 51%, respectively; p = 0.0035). Persistent roseolovirus infection in active phase is revealed only in patients with epilepsy (17.0%, p < 0.0001). The results confirm the possibility of this test to be used as one of the methods for diagnosis of active viral infection. However, negative findings of viral DNAs in the plasma of patients with epilepsy does not exclude active viral replication in different organs with no trace of HHV-6 and HHV-7 DNA in the plasma as usually these viruses have cell to cell spread tactic.The comparative analysis of the data of quantitative HHV-6 PCR DNA test on WPB showed a significant difference between the means of HHV-6 load (p = 0.0008) and ratios of number of the individuals with load <10 and >10 copies/106 cells (66.7% and 10.0%, respectively; p < 0.0001) in the patients with epilepsy and control group individuals (Figure 1a,b). In addition, IFA results of PBMC samples from the patients with epilepsy with elevated HHV-6 load in WPB also demonstrated expression of HHV-6 early (p41), glycoproteins gH(gp100) and gB(gp116) antigens in 63.6% of patients, indicating active viral replication. These results confirm that the quantitative method for determining viral load can be used to identify active viral infection. These results are in accordance with the data obtained by Donati et al. (2003) [46] on the surgical brain resection samples from patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy.To confirm whether HHV-6 reactivation occurs in the patients with epilepsy, the detection of HHV-6 U89/90 gene expression in PBMC, HHV-6 load in WPB DNA, and the presence of HHV-6 encoded early (p41) and late virion envelope glycoproteins gH (gp100) and gB (gp116) expression in PBMC was done. Our results show that HHV-6 U89/90 regulatory immediate early or α gene expression in PBMC, which is believed to play an important role in virus latency and reactivation, are found only in the patients with epilepsy, but not in samples from the control individuals both with previously detected HHV-6 genomic sequence in WPB DNA by nPCR. This means that HHV-6 U89/90 gene transcript play an important role in the viral replication cycle and may be expressed not only during persistent infection in latent phase, but also during persistent infection in active phase, which coincides with the other researchers’ data [40,74,80]. However, additional study should be applied to make general conclusions. In 86.7% of the WPB samples from epilepsy patients and in all the samples from control group individuals HHV-6B was detected, indicating that either HHV-6A occurs infrequently in these individuals or that there is a difference in HHV-6A and HHV-6B geographical distribution, and HHV-6B in our area is predominant [39,66].In our study we have used the HHV-6 IgG ELISA kit not allowing distinguish HHV-6A and HHV-6B which could be a possible reason for the insignificant difference in serology levels that does not agree with the results of the nested PCR. There are methods available now that can be used to distinguish between HHV-6A and B (IFA from Biocell Diagnostics, for example). The pathogenic role of HHV-7 in adult patients with epilepsy is not clear. A possible association between HHV-7 positivity and drug-resistant epilepsy, especially hippocampal sclerosis has been suggested, however no association between HHV-7 and epilepsy has been confirmed [54].According to our study, the detection frequency of HHV-7 DNA in WPB significantly differs between the control group individuals (75.5% and 51.0%, respectively; p = 0.0035), however only in 15.0% of patients’ plasma viremia is revealed. Elevated viral load has 55.0% of the patients and 26.4% of control group individuals (p = 0.0094).HHV-7 U57 gene expression, coding the major capsid protein, is detected significantly often among patients with epilepsy than control group individuals (p < 0.0001). From patients with positive results of this gene expression, single HHV-7 infection is diagnosed in most (80.0%) of the patients and half from them have elevated viral load. These results show higher activity rate of HHV-7 in patients with epilepsy-peripheral blood and thus it is indicating on HHV-7 possible involvement in the disease development, however, to make final conclusions additional research is required. The ability of HHV-7 to persist in brain tissues from encephalopathy patients’ autopsies has been previously demonstrated by our study group [39]; whenever herpesviruses persist in solid tissues, virions are rarely present in blood stream. It could be at least partial explanation for the absence of significant differences in nPCR results between patients and control group. Therefore, investigation of brain tissues for more detailed study of HHV-7 possible involvement in epilepsy development is required.Pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α is produced following activation of nuclear factor–kappa B that controls inflammatory genes. Inflammation is stated to be involved in epilepsy. Meta-analysis reveals many studies of elevated TNF-α level in patients with epilepsy in serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), however not in all reports [81].In this study, significantly higher median TNF-α level is determined in patients with elevated HHV-7 load (>10 copies/106 cells) comparing to the patients without elevated HHV-7 load (p < 0.0001), as well as to patients with elevated load of HHV-6 (p = 0.02) and patients without roseoloviruses infection (p < 0.0001). In addition, level of TNF-α is higher in patients with elevated HHV-6 load than without it (p = 0.028), also in comparison with patients without infection (p = 0.019). Among worldwide research, higher expression of TNF-α in CD4+ lymphocytes is reported in patients with temporal lobe epilepsy than controls [82]. In addition, elevated level of TNF-α is revealed in mice models for epilepsy [83]. However, some investigators find no significant changes of TNF-α level within various subgroups of patients and controls [16,84].Elevated level of IL-12 is observed in CSF of patients with epilepsy [81]. Moreover, level of IL-12 is reported to be significantly increased in serum samples from experimental mice models of temporal lobe epilepsy compared to control group [83]. Current study shows significant difference in median levels of IL-12(p70) between the patients with elevated HHV-6 and HHV-7 viral load and without roseolovirus infection (p = 0.027 and p = 0.04, respectively), as well as the patients with and without elevated viral load of HHV-6 and HHV-7 (p = 0.0021 and p = 0.048, respectively). A bit higher level of IL-12(p70) have patients without roseolovirus infection than with HHV-6 <10 copies/106 cells.More often pro-inflammatory cytokines are found to be elevated in patients with epilepsy, however some researchers report increase of such anti-inflammatory cytokine as IL-10 in patients CSF. Patients with temporal lobe epilepsy have more IL-10 producing cells than control group individuals, and further immune cells show effector T-cells activation with low-grade inflammation [82]. In this study, a bit higher median level of IL-10 is revealed in epilepsy patients with elevated HHV-7 load comparing to the patients without elevated HHV-7 load (p = 0.015), elevated HHV-6 load (p = 0.024) and without roseoloviruses infection (p = 0.013). Statistically proven higher level of IL-10 in CSF is reported by several published studies elsewhere [81].Despite a great deal of effort to understand whether a viral infection led to epilepsy or whether epilepsy caused viral activation, thus further deepening the clinical course of the disease, is challenging and unlikely to answer at this time, as further study of viral pathomechanisms and interplay with the disease is needed. Knowing the fact that primary infection with HHV-6B and HHV-7 occurs during infancy and can manifest as the febrile illness exanthema subitum (roseola) which results in different symptoms or diseases, ranging from asymptomatic infection to acute febrile illness with severe neurological complications and that the median age for acquisition of HHV-6 is nine months and 26 months for HHV-7, corresponding to the peak incidence of febrile seizures and febrile status epilepticus, and that the HHV-6 A, HHV-6B and HHV-7 are lymphotropic immunomodulating and potentially pathogenic to the nervous system, one of the speculations could be that HHV-6 and/or HHV-7 are among the infectious agents that can provoke development of epilepsy. For sure that further studies should aim at completing the picture on the interplay among those viruses and for sure the groups should be larger.5. ConclusionsResults on frequent active HHV-6 and HHV-7 infection in patients with epilepsy peripheral blood indicate on possible involvement of these viruses in the disease development, however, more evidences are required, such as data on viral presence in tissue from specific regions of the brain.


Title: Detection of porcine cytomegalovirus, a roseolovirus, in pig ovaries and follicular fluid: implications for somatic cells nuclear transfer, cloning and xenotransplantation

BackgroundPorcine cytomegalovirus (PCMV) is a porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV) [1], which poses a considerable risk for xenotransplantation using pig cells, tissues and organs. Xenotransplantation is one solution to alleviate the shortage of human transplants and it has achieved great success in the last years with long survival times of pig hearts, kidneys and other organs in non-human primates [2, 3]. However, PCMV/PRV transmission to the recipients drastically reduced the survival time of the xenotransplant, in the case of orthotopic heart transplantation into baboons from 195 days to less than 30 days [4], in the case of kidney transplantation into baboons from to 53 to 14 days [5] and in the case of kidney transplantation into cynomolgus monkeys from to 28 to 9 days [6]. For review and schematic presentation of the results see [7, 8]. In the baboons which received a PCMV/PRV-positive heart, an increase of certain cytokines such as interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) was observed [4]. Furthermore, high levels of tissue plasminogen activator–plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (tPA–PAI‑1) complexes were found in the transplanted baboons, suggesting a complete loss of the pro‑fibrinolytic properties of the endothelium [4]. The presence of PCMV/PRV was usually associated with consumptive coagulopathy (CC) [9], but when PCMV/PRV-free transplants were used, CC was significantly reduced [10]. PCMV was also transmitted by the first transplantation of a pig heart into a human patient, who survived for remarkable 2 months [11]. The clinical features observed in the patient were similar to the features seen in the baboons which received a PCMV/PRV-positive pig heart [4], suggesting that the virus may have contributed among other factors to the death of the patient.The donor animal of the heart for the patient had 10 genetic modifications (10-GE pigs), including targeted insertion of two human complement inhibitor genes (human decay-accelerating factor, hDAF or hCD55; and human membrane cofactor protein, hCD46), two human anticoagulant genes (human thrombomodulin, hTM, and human endothelial protein C receptor, hEPCR), and two immunomodulatory genes (human signal regulatory protein alpha, hCD47, and human heme oxygenase 1, hHO1), as well as knockouts (KO) of 3 enzymes creating the porcine carbohydrate antigens: α1,3-galactosyltransferase (GGTA1), cytidine monophosphate-N-acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase (CMAH), and β-1,4-N-acetyl-galactosaminyl transferase 2 (B4GALNT2) as well as the porcine growth hormone receptor (GHR). These 10-GE pigs do not express red blood cell antigens and are therefore universal donors with respect to blood type [11]. For the genetic modification and the cloning of the pigs, oocytes had to be used for SCNT. As each SCNT requires hundreds of oocytes, almost all laboratories use oocytes from slaughterhouse pigs. For maturation and modifications, these oocytes are cultivated in vitro, based on follicular fluid culture media in the past, which meanwhile has been replaced by fully synthetic maturation media. After having performed the desired modifications, e.g., by microinjection or SCNT, these oocytes are transferred to a surrogate mother to give birth to gene-modified piglets. We recently summarized the literature clearly showing the risk of viral transmission, including herpesviruses, by oocytes or follicular fluid in numerous cases [12]. In order to analyze, whether this may happen in the case of PCMV/PRV, ovarian tissues, oocytes with and without cumulus cells, follicular fluid and other tissues were screened for the presence of PCMV/PRV.MethodsPigs and porcine tissuesPorcine oocytes and tissues were collected at a local slaughterhouse. As this slaughterhouse receives pigs from Germany, Austria and Czech Republic, animals had several genetic backgrounds including among others Deutsche Landrasse, two-breed crossing out of Edelschwein and Pietrain, and three-breed crossing of Edelschwein, Deutscher Landrasse and Pietrain. Ovaries from this slaughterhouse have been regularly used by several groups to isolate oocytes and to perform genetic modifications. The age of the pigs was about 6 months with a weight between 100 and 120 kg.Isolation of oocytesOvaries from prepubertal gilts were isolated and transported to the laboratory at 38 °C in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) supplemented with antibiotics and antimycotics. Ovaries were rinsed several times with warm PBS, supplemented with 1% cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB), an antiseptic solution with various antibacterial, antifungal and antiviral properties. Subsequent washing steps were performed with warm PBS solution. Ovaries were placed in warm PBS and kept at 38 °C. Follicles with a diameter of 3–6 mm were punctured using a 10 ml syringe and a 18G needle. Porcine follicular fluid was extracted and stored at 38 °C. Oocytes with cumulus cells complexes settled at the bottom of the tube were subsequently isolated. 6–8 ml of working medium (WM), which consists of medium 199 and 10% FCS supplemented with 1% amphotericin B and 1% penicillin–streptomycin, were mixed with the cells and transferred to a petri dish for collection. High quality oocytes with dark, evenly granulated cytoplasm and several compact layers of cumulus cells were identified under a stereomicroscope. Oocytes were rinsed twice in WM to remove cell debris. Oocytes were transferred with a mouth pipette and self-made glass capillaries of about 300 µm diameter, also to make washing steps as efficient as possible.In vitro maturationFor in vitro maturation, oocytes were transferred to a triple gas incubator (5% O2, 5% CO2, 90% N2, set to 38.5 °C humidified atmosphere). Oocytes were rinsed with maturation medium and transferred to a separate maturation well. After 45 h, successful maturation was confirmed by visual assessment of polar body extrusion from a sample group of ovaries. Maturation was carried out in a chemically defined maturation medium which consists of 500 ml medium 199, 27.5 mg glucose, 5 mg sodium pyruvate, 0.5 mL penicillin–streptomycin and 1 mL 3% polyvinyl alcohol.Denuding and parthenogenesisMature oocytes were denuded in WM supplemented with 1 mg/ml hyaluronidase and rinsed twice in working medium. They were controlled for granulated cytoplasm and extrusion of the first polar body. Chemical activation was conducted in WM supplemented with 25 µm ionomycin (calcium ionophore) for 10 min. Oocytes were washed twice in WM and once in PZM5, a defined medium for embryos, and subsequently placed in the incubator in 500 µl of PZM5 supplemented with 5 µg/ml of cytochalasin for 3 h. Afterwards they were rinsed twice in working medium and once in PZM5. Parthenotes were used for our assays to increase the extractable DNA amount from single oocytes and to avoid possible PCMV/PRV viral transfer by sperm.Sample storageSamples of porcine ovaries and follicular fluids were frozen and stored at − 20 °C. Oocytes with cumulus cells, denuded oocytes and parthenotes were collected in PBS and stored at − 20 °C.DNA extractionDNA was isolated from ovarian tissues (20 mg), follicular fluid (200–400 µl), maturation medium (200 µl), oocytes with or without cumulus cells (5–250 oocytes per sample) and parthenotes (5–15 cells per sample) using the innuPREP Virus DNA/RNA Kit (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany). The DNA/RNA was eluated in 30 or 60 µl nuclease-free water. Samples were stored at − 20 °C until further processing.Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR)The detection of PCMV/PRV was performed using a real-time PCR assay with specific primers and a probe developed by Mueller et al. [13] (Table 1). All assays were performed as duplex real-time PCR using as reference gene porcine glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate-dehydrogenase (pGAPDH) with a specific primer–probe mixture (Table 1) [14] running 45 cycles as described previously [15–17]. All experiments were performed with the SensiFAST Probe No-ROX kit (Meridian Bioscience, Cincinnati, OH, USA) and the qTOWER3 G qPCR cycler (Analytik Jena, Jena, Germany). A reaction volume of 20 µl was prepared containing 1.8 µl of PCMV/PRV-FAM mix with 1.8 µl of pGAPDH-HEX mix as internal control and 4.0 µl of extracted DNA. The reaction for the PCMV/PRV real-time PCR was carried out for 2 min at 50 °C for activation, 10 min at 95 °C followed by 45 cycles comprising 15 s at 95 °C for denaturation and 60 s at 60 °C for annealing and elongation. As positive control a PCMV/PRV-specific gene block, as negative control water or medium were used as described [15].Table 1Primers and probes used in this studyPCR assayAccession numberPrimer/probeSequence 5′–3′Location (nucleotid number)ReferencesPCMV*AF268040.2PCMV-FwdGTT CTG GGA TTC CGA GGT TG5074–5093[13, 15–17]PCMV-RevACT TCG TCG CAG CTC ATC TGA5036–5116PCMV-Probe6FAM-CAG GGC GGC GGT CGA GCT C-BHQ5095–5113pGAPDHNM_001206359.1pGAPDH-FwdACA TGG CCT CCA AGG AGT AAG A1083–1104[14, 46]pGAPDH-RevGAT CGA GTT GGG GCT GTG ACT1188–1168pGAPDH-ProbeHEX-CCA CCA ACC CCA GCA AGA GCA CGC-BHQ1114–1137PCR Polymerase chain reaction, PCMV Porcine cytomegalovirus, pGAPDH Porcine glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, Fwd forward primer, Rev Reverse primer, nt nucleotide, 6FAM 6-carboxyfluorescein, BHQ Black hole quencher, HEX hexachlorofluorescein*The PCMV real-time PCR was modified and performed as duplex PCR.Western blot analysisWestern blot analysis was performed as previously described [16, 18]. Briefly, for the detection of antibodies against PCMV/PRV, the Western Blot assay designed by Plotzki et al. [18] was re-established, but only the C-terminal fragment R2 of the gB protein of PCRV/PRV was used as antigen because the R2 protein was shown to be immunodominant [18]. The R2 fragment of the gB of PCMV/PRV was produced in E. coli BL21 cells using the pET16b expression vector encoding PCMV-R2 as described in detail [16, 18]. Cell were induced with 1 mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactopyranosid (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), harvested, and dissolved in 10 mL 8 M urea, 0.5 M NaCl, 15 mM imidazole, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5. The supernatant after centrifugation was applied to a HisTrap HP column installed on a Äkta Prime Plus system (both GE Healthcare, Chicago, Illinois, USA), and eluted after washing using 6 M urea, 0.5 M NaCl, 500 mM imidazole, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5. The purified R2 protein was characterized by a sodium dodecylsulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using 12% gels and to obtain sharper bands 17% gels. The protein was dissolved in sample buffer (375 mM Tris–HCl, 60% glycerol, 12% SDS, 0,6 M DTT, 0.06% bromophenol blue) and denatured for 5 min at 95 °C prior to electrophoresis. The SDS PAGE was run in a Mini-Protean Tetra Vertical Electrophoresis Cell (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Incs., Hercules, CA, USA) using a 17% polyacrylamide gel and the PageRuler prestained protein ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The protein was transferred for 100 min to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane (ROTI PVDF, 8989.1, Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) by electroblotting (100 mA) using the electroblotting device of peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH. After electroblotting the membrane was blocked for 1 h at 4 °C in 5% non-fat dry milk (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) in PBS with 0.05% Tween 20 (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) (PBS-T) (blocking buffer). The membrane was cut into strips and incubated over night at 4 °C with sera diluted 1:150 in blocking buffer. Afterwards, washing was performed with 0.05% PBS-T three times for 10 min each. Polyclonal goat anti-pig immunoglobulin G (IgG) Fc Secondary Antibody HRP (Invitrogen by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) was diluted 1:15.000 in blocking buffer and strips were incubated for 1 h at room temperature, followed by three washing steps for 10 min each. Detection of the signal following incubation with the ECL Western Blotting Substrate (Cytiva, Amersham) was done with the FUSION-SL 3500 WL imaging device (peqlab Biotechnologie GmbH).ResultsDetection of PCMV/PRV in different tissues by RT-PCROvarian tissues, follicular fluid, and ocytes with or without cumulus cells were collected from up to 20 slaughterhouse animals. In addition, parthenotes were obtained as described in Methods. As negative control, a commercial maturation medium was analyzed, which is used for the cultivation of oocytes instead of a medium containing follicular fluid. DNA was isolated and a duplex real-time PCR was performed using PCMV/PRV-specific primers and a probe. It is important to note that the target sequence of the real-time PCR is a sequence in the polymerase gene which is highly conserved among all PCMV/PRV. Primers and a probe specific for porcine GAPDH were used to control the presence of porcine DNA. Three samples out of 20 samples from 20 animals were PCMV/PRV-positive when ovarian tissues were analyzed (Table 2). The results of the GAPDH testing showed that sufficient DNA was present in all samples and that the DNA input was identical in all samples (Table 2, Additional file 1: Figure S1). Two out of 20 samples of follicular fluid were positive. 40 oocytes with cumulus cells from eight samples, 40 denuded oocytes from 8 samples and 30 parthenotes from 6 samples were negative in this assay. Parthenotes are oocytes that can be activated, among others, by high calcium concentrations or electric stimuli. As no sperm is required for oocyte activation, this excludes the risk of sperm-mediated PCMV/PRV transmission. Due to the higher cell number of parthenotes compared to oocytes, the DNA amount that can be obtained is much higher for subsequent PCR analysis.Table 2Results of the real-time PCR testingTested materialNumber PCMV/PRV-positive/number testedCt values of the PCMV/PRV-positive samplesCt values of all pGAPDH-positive samples, median ± SDOvarian tissue3/2034.6; 36.2; 38.120.5 ± 1.0Follicular fluid2/2033.4; 33.717.8 ± 1.3Oocytes with cumulus cells0/6No ct28.7 ± 1.7Denuded oocytes0/8No ct35.7 ± 1.1Parthenotes0/6No ct37.4 ± 0.6Maturation medium0/3No ctNo ctMost importantly, when higher amounts of oocyte DNA (50 ng DNA per PCMV/PRV real-time PCR in triplicates) from 100 pooled oocytes was used, a positive reaction was found with the oocytes, as well as in 50 ng DNA per PCMV/PRV real-time PCR from 150 pooled oocytes, indicating that PCMV/PRV is present in or on oocytes despite the several washing steps (Table 3) (Additional file 1: Figure S1). As expected, the control maturation medium was negative (Table 2).Table 3Results of the extended real-time PCR testing of oocytesTested materialNumber of tested cellsCt values of the PCMV/PRV-positive samplesCt values of all pGAPDH-positive samples, median ± SDOocytes with cumulus cells40No ct28.7 ± 1.7Denuded oocytes40No ct35.7 ± 1.1Parthenotes30No ct37.4 ± 0.6100 oocytes pooled10035.927.6150 oocytes pooled15036.926.0Detection of antibodies against PCMV/PRV by Western blotIn order to analyze whether antibodies against the PCMV/PRV can be found in the follicular fluid, a Western blot assay was performed. As antigen the C-terminal R2 fragment of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV was used [18]. The R2 fragment was found to be immunodominant: In comparison with the N-terminal R1 fragment more sera were detected positive [18]. 19 of 20 samples of follicular fluid were positive in this assay (Fig. 1), indicating that these animals were infected by PCMV/PRV as shown by the positive antibody reaction. The antibodies found in the follicular fluid were either present in the follicular fluid or coming from contaminating blood when collecting the follicular fluid. The latter is unlikely because the follicular fluid was carefully collected avoiding blood contaminations.Fig. 1Western blot analysis of 18 follicular fluids (1–18). A a 12% gel was used for SDS-PAGE, B, C a 17% gel was used. The molecular weight marker (M), a serum from a positive control animal (P) and the location of the recombinant R2 protein of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV are indicated. The serum dilution was 1:150DiscussionFor the generation of genetically modified pigs, usually SCNT is the method of choice, as prescreening of modified cells is possible, thereby strongly reducing the number of incorrectly modified pigs. We showed here that in PCMV/PRV positive pigs from slaughterhouses, the ovarian tissue and oocytes are infected with the virus and that PCMV/PRV is also present in the follicular fluid. Although RT-PCR analysis only could detect PCMV/PRV in a limited number of samples, almost all samples turned out to be positive for antibodies against PCMV/PRV detected by Western blot analysis. As oocytes have initially to be isolated from the follicles together with follicular fluid and all isolations are regularly pooled, even only one PCMV/PRV positive pig could potentially infect all other oocytes during or after isolation.This data indicates that PCMV/PRV is able to infect piglets created by SCNT and this may explain how animals got infected even in previously virus-negative facilities. Usually infection with PCMV happens early in live of the piglets by contact with the infected mother [19, 20]. PCMV is found in most tissues but mainly in the nose of newly infected newborn piglets where it causes rhinitis, in addition it also causes conjunctivitis in the eyes. Most infections are sub-clinical, clinical disease is rare. Clinical signs are only seen if PCMV infects a sow for the first time when she is late in pregnancy. In this case, fetal deaths, mummified fetuses, stillbirths, and weak piglets are observed. The virus is shed from the nose and eyes, by urine and farrowing fluids, and semen of the young pig. In experimental settings, but not under natural conditions, the virus was shown to cross the placenta [21]. Therefore, the presence of PCMV/PRV in ovarian tissue and in the follicular fluid is not surprising. The fact that oocytes are virus-positive is of importance. The oocytes are usually surrounded by the zona pellucida (ZP), an extracellular matrix of glycoproteins building a three-dimensional structure which should prevent virus infection [22]. It is widely recognized that a virus infection is only possible after damaging the ZP. After infection of ZP-damaged pig oocyte with porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2) infected embryos were detected [23]. However, transmission of viruses was also observed in the presence of an intact ZP (for review see [12]). The fact that PCMV/PRV was still found in oocytes despite several washing steps indicates that these steps are not sufficient to remove the virus, either because it is already inside the oocyte or firmly attached to the glycoproteins of the ZP. Additional decontamination techniques, for example treatment with trypsin, were also not successful in the case of some viruses such as the porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV), the porcine parvovirus (PPV), the porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2) and the encephalomyocarditis (EMCV) [24]. Treatment with hyaluronidase was more successful [24]. Since antiviral drugs effective against human cytomegalovirus such as ganciclovir are not so effective against PCMV/PRV [25], because it is a roseolovirus [1], treatment with these toxic substances is not recommended.Although meanwhile synthetic maturation mediums are used, previously, when follicular fluid was added to the medium, the presence of PCMV/PRV in the follicular fluid as shown here could lead to an infection of the oocytes, especially after SCNT when the ZP is disrupted.To use pigs from slaughterhouses as source of oocytes has many disadvantages. In addition to the high prevalence of PCMV/PRV [18], numerous other viruses were found in slaughterhouse pigs, among them hepatitis E virus (HEV) [26–28], parvoviruses [29], Torque teno sus virus [30], porcine lymphotropic herpes viruses [31] and circoviruses [32]. Whether these viruses (with exeption of HEV, which is a well-known zoonotic virus (for review see [33])) pose a risk for xenotransplantation and whether they can be transmitted via SCNT is unclear. However, currently the use of slaughterhouse pigs is the only feasible solution to obtain the high number of oocytes which are regularly required to perform SCNT.PCMV/PRV was transmitted during the first pig heart transplantation to a patient in Baltimore [11]. Since the supplier of the 10-GE pig used for this transplantation, Revivicor, supplies cloned animals, it cannot be excluded that the origin of the virus was in oocytes used for cloning. PCMV/PRV is a latent herpesvirus [34] and for the detection of latent viruses special detection strategies are needed [16]. When these detection strategies will be applied and techniques of elimination of the virus from infected herds such as early weaning will be used [35], xenotransplantation could even be safer [36, 37].Limitations of the studyTo detect PCMV in our study, we used a modified real-time PCR originally developed by Mueller et al. [13], which was modified by us into a duplex real-time PCR. This PCR detects a conserved region in the polymerase gene of PCMV and was used by many laboratories, including ours [4, 13, 14, 16, 38, 39]. To improve the diagnostic, an additional PCR would be useful, either detecting another sequence in the polymerase genes as described by us [17, 40], or detecting a sequence in another gene, e.g., in the gene encoding the gB protein. This gene also contains regions which are conserved among all PCMV [41] and therefore can be used for the detection of the virus. The gB protein of PCMV/PRV contains even sequences which are related to HHV-6 to an extend that a cross-reactivity of antibodies was observed [42].Another limitation of the study is that we did not investigate the presence of viral mRNA. In a productive infection there should be more mRNA than viral DNA and therefore mRNA could have been detected if the virus is expressed.For the antibody testing we used a linear recombinant protein. Although recombinant proteins and even peptides are generally used for screening for virus infections, for example commercial tests for the detection of a HIV-1 infection [43, 44], the use of a properly folded protein may be more meaningful. When we used two recombinant fragments of the gB protein of PCMV/PRV, the N-terminal R1 and the C-terminal R2, we found that sera from most infected pigs recognized R2 [18]. Therefore, in later investigations, including this study, only R2 was used for testing [10, 16, 38].Furthermore, it is unclear whether PCMV/PRV is replicating in the oocytes or whether it established latency. At present it remains unclear in which cells, tissues and organs PCMV/PRV establishes latency in pigs. When studying infected animals, the virus was found in different organs and the organ with the highest virus load was different in different animals [45]. The presence of PCMV/PRV sequences in different organs may be due to the presence of infected lymphocytes where the virus is replicating and also may establish latency.ConclusionThe presence of PCMV/PRV in ovarian tissue, oocytes and follicular fluid of PCMV/PRV-positive pigs indicates that using oocytes and follicular fluid from these animals for SCNT may lead to PCMV/PRV-positive piglets. Therefore, it is advised to use PCMCV/PRV-negative animals as oocyte donors or to use effective decontamination techniques.Supplementary Information
Additional file 1: Demonstration of real-time PCR testing of pig oocytes for PCMV/PRV. As positive control a gene block was used.


Title: Virus Safety of Xenotransplantation 

1. IntroductionThe transmission of a pig virus, the porcine cytomegalovirus/porcine roseolovirus (PCMV/PRV), during the first pig heart xenotransplantation to a human patient [1], demonstrates that aspects of virus safety have been partially neglected in this clinical transplantation. There is no doubt that the virus contributed to the death of the patient, because the pig heart was still functional at the time of death. Clinical features observed in the patient were similar to features that had been described previously in non-human primates receiving pig organs infected with PCMV/PRV. In these preclinical trials, the transmission of PCMV/PRV significantly reduced the survival time of the pig transplant in comparison with transplants free of PCMV/PRV [2,3,4,5,6]. In all cases, it remains unclear whether PCMV/PRV infects primate cells, including human cells. It was proposed that the virus interacts with endothelial and immune cells of the recipient to induce cytokine modulation and defects in coagulation [6]. However, there are good arguments that this accident could be prevented when experienced virologists are involved in future clinical trials [7].Besides the hepatitis virus E genotype 3 (HEVgt3 or HEV-3), PCMV/PRV is now the second pig virus known to cause a zoonosis in the human recipient. Whether other pig viruses are zoonotic for the human xenotransplant recipient is still unknown. Since comprehensive reviews on PCMV/PRV [2,3,7], HEV [8,9], porcine lymphotropic herpes viruses [10], and porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERVs) [11,12] were recently published in the context of xenotransplantation, this study will concentrate on pig viruses that have not yet been analyzed in such detail.2. Potential Zoonotic Pig VirusesA zoonosis is an infectious disease caused by a pathogen transmitted from an animal species to humans. Such infectious pathogens may be bacteria, viruses, parasites, or prions. There are many examples of zoonosis in history, the latest is the transmission of the monkeypox virus, which originated from rodents in Africa. The one before was the SARV-CoV-2 pandemic, caused by a corona virus most likely transmitted from bats to humans. The one before that was the transmission of two simian immunodeficiency viruses (SIV), which were apathogenic in their natural hosts. In humans, these viruses, now called humans immunodeficiency viruses 1 and 2 (HIV-1 and HIV-2), induce severe and fatal acquired immunodeficiencies (AIDS).These recent examples suggest that zoonotic viruses from pigs used as donors for xenotransplantation may be transmitted by the xenotransplant to the (immunosuppressed) recipient. Pigs have been, for many reasons, selected as donor animals. However, it is largely unknown, which of the numerous pig viruses detected in the pig virome can be zoonotic (inducing a disease) for humans. At present, this is known only for HEV-3 and PCMV/PRV.HEV-3 is widely distributed in wild boars and domestic pigs [13,14,15]. An infection of humans with HEV-3 is, in most cases, the result of consumption of undercooked liver or meat from pork or wild boar, or of direct contact with infected animals [15,16,17]. Acute hepatitis E generally resolves on its own and rarely progresses to acute liver failure or chronic hepatitis, however a majority of HEV infections in immunosuppressed patients, such as organ transplant recipients, progress into chronicity [18]. A vaccine against HEV is available in China, but not in other countries [19], and an HEV-specific antiviral is still lacking, although pegylated interferon and ribavirin have been used to treat chronic HEV infections with mixed results [20].PCMV/PRV, a roseolovirus closely related to the human herpes viruses 6A, 6B, and 7, is widely distributed in pig populations and most of the infections are sub-clinical [2,3].The impact of some pig viruses was discussed in numerous reviews (Table 1), however, the potential impact of other viruses was not well analyzed.The first clinical trials had been performed with islet cells from Auckland Island pigs [44,45,46]. Auckland Island pigs represent an inbred population of feral pigs isolated on the subantarctic island for over 100 years. The animals have been maintained under pathogen-free conditions in New Zealand, they are well characterized virologically (Table 2) [47,48,49], and have been used as donor source in clinical trials, transplanting encapsulated porcine neonatal islet cells for the treatment of human diabetes patients in New Zealand and Argentina. In these trials, no transmission of porcine viruses was observed, including porcine endogenous retroviruses (PERVs) [50,51,52]. Absence of transmission in these cases means that no viral genetic information was found in the recipient.When a new pig facility was opened at the Center for Innovative Medical Models (CiMM) at the Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, the animals were tested for a number of microorganisms (Table 3). All testing is repeated continuously every 6 months on a representative proportion of the current pig population within CiMM to ensure adequate hygiene monitoring [53]. The animals are vaccinated against porcine circovirus 2 (PCV2), porcine parvovirus (PPV), and Erysioelothrix rhusiopathiae. The source animals were made PCMV/PRV-free by early weaning. They were transferred to a commercially available Rescue Deck system dedicated to motherless rearing of piglets and the sows were removed from the facility. The PCMV/PRV status of F1-generation animals was determined by a sensitive real-time PCR-based detection method testing blood, nasal swabs, and cultured peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) [53]. This report shows that the elimination of PCMV/PRV from a pig herd is easy to achieve.In order to generate designated pathogen-free (DPF) pigs to serve as donors for xenotransplantation into clinical patients, a new facility at the Spring Point Project, Minneapolis, MN, USA, was populated with caesarian derived, colostrum deprived piglets. The animals were tested negative for numerous microorganisms (Table 4) [54].A similar screening was performed with pigs generated for islet cell transplantation at another institution. Screening was performed for more than 30 viruses, including not only PCR-based and immunological methods, but also infection assays and transmission electron microscopy [55]. It is important to note that for some of the pig microorganisms, effective vaccines are available and have been used (Table 5).The alphaherpesvirus pseudorabies virus (PrV), also called Suid herpesvirus 1 (SuHV-1) or Aujeszky’s disease virus (ADV), is the causative agent of Aujeszky’s disease, an infection of major economic impact in animal husbandry [56]. The disease is highly contagious, transmitted by nose-to-nose contact, and airborne. Eradication of the PrV infection from the national pig populations has been achieved using ‘marker’ vaccines that allow serological differentiation between infected and vaccinated animals. Though the virus is eradicated in domestic swine populations in many countries, it is still present in wild boars [57]. Young pigs are the most severely affected by PrV infection and typically exhibit symptoms of central nervous infection, whereas older swine exhibit symptoms of respiratory disease [56]. PrV can infect a wide variety of mammals, including pigs, sheeps, cattles, etc., thereby causing severe clinical symptoms and acute death [58]. The fact that this virus also infects humans [59] makes it a risk factor in xenotransplantation. This virus is also an excellent example of herpes viruses being not species-specific, and of their ability to cross species barriers.Other viruses with potential zoonotic potential are the porcine enteric viruses encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV), the porcine astrovirus (PAstV), the porcine norovirus (PNoV), and the porcine sapovirus (PSaV) [60]. ECMV is another example of pig viruses can overcoming species barrier, for example in zoo outbreaks (for review see [60]). Although ECMV infections have been observed in humans, these originated mainly from mice and primates, not from pigs. Alternately, antibodies against ECMV have been found in humans with close contact to pigs, e.g., swine veterinarians. Therefore, pigs may serve as potential reservoirs of transmission of ECMV to humans.Attention should also be paid to rotaviruses (RVs). Among ten groups of RVs, RV group A (RVA), RV group B (RVB), and RV group C (RVC) show the highest prevalence. Similar to human RVAs, porcine RVAs are widely distributed worldwide. Zoonotic transmission of RVAs have been proven by epidemiological and experimental studies [60]. There are effective vaccines against human RVs and polyvalent vaccines for pigs, e.g., the Prosystem RCE vaccine (Table 5).Porcine endogenous retroviruses represent a special risk because these viruses are integrated in the genome of all pigs [37]. There are multiple copies in the genome, ranging to 60 or more [39]. It is important to note that the overall number of integrated proviral copies has no significance for the risk posed by these viruses. Only the number of human-tropic infectious viruses is relevant [61]. Most interestingly, the copy number is different in different organs of a single pig, indicating that PERVs are active in living animals [39].3. Detection of Porcine VirusesThere are numerous publications that describe PCR-based, immunological, and other methods to screen for virus infection, especially for some selected xenotransplantation-relevant viruses [62] (Table 6).The detection systems used for screening the donor pigs and recipients include, along with the specific detection methods, either PCR-based, cell-based, or immunological methods, as well as the sample generation, sample preparation, sample origin, time of sampling, and the necessary negative and positive controls [62,70] (Table 7). The methods should be sensitive, specific, and should be validated as described [62].It is important to know whether the virus is replicating or latent (Figure 1). Both replication-competent and latent viruses cannot be detected in the beginning of the infection, however they can be detected later. Whereas the amount of the replicating virus soon rises above the detection limit of the detection methodused, the latent virus goes into latency and cannot be detected any longer (Figure 1). However, after transplantation, the virus may be activated again, and replicates are consequently unrestricted in the transplanted pig organ and are able to harm the recipient. This exact scenario happened in the case of the first pig heart transplantation in Baltimore.PCMV/PRV is an excellent example of a latent herpes virus. The infection normally happens early in life, and at that time, PCMV/PRV can be detected easily by PCR-based methods. In adult animals, when the virus is in its latent stage, it cannot be detected by PCR. However, the detection of antibodies as an indirect method to detect infection is possible [80]. It is important to note that young piglets may have antibodies against PCMV/PRV derived from the colostrum of their mothers, if they were positive [80]. Based on these results, a strategy should be selected to screen for PCMV/PRV in young and in old animals [80]. It is also important to note that PCMV/PRV is widely distributed, not only in production pigs, but also wild boars [79]. Therefore, pigs in facilities for xenotransplantation should not only be protected from contact with production pigs, but also with wild boars. Furthermore, for the generation of cloned and genetically modified pigs for xenotransplantation, oocytes and follicular fluid, which may be infected with PCMV/PRV, are used for somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT), and this may introduce the virus [115].4. Elimination of Porcine VirusesMost pig viruses can be eliminated from the pig herd (Figure 2). Negative animals can be used directly for xenotransplantation, whereas infected animals with a high virus load should be eliminated. In the case where no negative animals are available, animals with a low virus load should be selected, and the viruses can be eliminated by vaccination, if a vaccine is available, or by antiviral drugs, if available. If neither are available, viruses can be eliminated by early weaning to prevent transmission of the virus from the infected mother by milk. Viruses can be eliminated by colostrum deprivation or, in extreme cases, by caesarean delivery or embryo transfer (Figure 2). Once the virus is eliminated, the animal should be kept in isolation to avoid de novo infection or re-entry. Using sensitive detection methods, the animal should be screened before, during, and after elimination of the virus. Early weaning has been shown to be a successful approach for eliminating PCMV/PRV from pig herds [53,116].Whereas most pig viruses can be eliminated using the above-mentioned strategies, PERVs, which are integrated in the genome of all pigs, cannot be eliminated this way. PERV-A and PERV-B are integrated in the genome of all pigs, PERV-C is present in many, but not all pigs. In addition, PERVs are active in their hosts, and their copy number increases with time (for review see [39]). This also leads to recombinations between PERV-A and PERV-C, the recombinant PERV-A/C viruses are characterized by high replication rates, and they are able to infect human cells. They are found integrated in the genome of certain somatic cells, but not in the germ line of the animals [35,117,118]. The isolation of replication-competent PERVs able to infect human cells (human-tropic) is rare [105]; It is important to note that PERV-A/C were found predominantly in minipigs [119].Since PERVs are integrated in the pig genome, and cannot be eliminated as can all other viruses, several strategies have been developed in order to prevent the transmission of PERVs to the recipient (Table 8).Since xenotransplantation surgeries are planned long in advance, the recipients could be vaccinated against PERV to prevent transmission, if necessary. At the moment, there is convincing evidence that no PERV has been transmitted in any transplantation or infection experiments in small animals, as well as in non-human primates, with or without pharmaceutical immunosuppression (for review see [12]). High titer antibodies neutralizing PERVs were produced, immunizing different species (goat, mice, rats, hamsters) with the recombinant ectodomain of the transmembrane envelope protein p15E and the entire surface envelope protein gp70 of PERV [120,121,122,123]. Since there is no animal model of a PERV infection available, in which the vaccine could be tested in vivo, we developed a model using the same principle vaccines based on the envelope proteins of the closely related feline leukaemia virus (FeLV), and showed that immunizing cats with our vaccine could protect the animals from a FeLV-induced leukaemia [136,137,138], suggesting that the PERV vaccine may also work in vivo.Gene editing is a perfect way to inactivate PERVs in the genome. However, because the number of integrated proviruses may reach more than 60, there is risk that the numerous interventions in the cell genome may destroy the genome and kill the cell, as was observed when using the ZFN [133]. More successful was the inactivation of PERV using CRISPR/Cas [134,135] (Figure 3). Since PERV has not been transmitted until now, and since the off-target effects and the problems when breeding large numbers of CRISPR/Cas-treated animals are still unknown, it remains unclear whether this strategy should be used, or even if it can be used at all [41,139,140].5. Future Clinical TrialsBased on the results of the first transplantation of a pig heart to a human patient, and on all preclinical trials performed with non-human primates, the following recommendations for future clinical trials are important [7]: First, in the study design, competent virologists should be involved. Second, the donor animals have to be analyzed with sensitive methods and appropriate strategies, especially in the case that latent viruses, such as herpes viruses, are under investigation. The Federal Drug Administration (FDA), with involvement from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in the US, and the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) in Europe, must ensure that these methods are used.6. ConclusionsRecent findings have shown that virus safety is as important for a successful xenotransplantation as the genetic modifications of the donor pig, the effectiveness of the immunosuppressive, and the skill of the surgeons. In the last several years, sensitive and specific methods to detect potential zoonotic pig viruses have been developed, and using these detection methods an elimination of most of theses viruses from genetically modified pig breeds generated for xenotransplantation, is possible. PERVs, which are integrated in the genome of all pigs, have not been transmitted in any of the many preclinical and clinical xenotransplantation trials performed so far, nor in any of the numerous experimental PERV infection experiments. To prevent PERV transmission after xenotransplantation, a range of different strategies has been developed, including the selection of PERV-C-free animals to prevent recombination between PERV-A and PERV-C. In order to prevent the transmission of latent viruses, mainly herpes viruses such as PCMV/PRV, appropriate sensitive detection methods and detection strategies must be used. In future clinical trials, competent virologists should be involved.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: RABIES VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Recent Aspects on the Pathogenesis Mechanism, Animal Models and Novel Therapeutic Interventions for Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Infections

IntroductionThe coronaviruses such as HCoV-229E, HCoV-NL63 (α-coronavirus) and HCoV-OC43 and HKU1 (β-coronavirus) circulated in the human population and caused mild respiratory infections (Hamre and Procknow, 1966; Fouchier et al., 2004; van der Hoek et al., 2004; Woo et al., 2005). Over the last two decades, there have been two zoonotic emergence of coronaviruses into the human population, both linked with Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (SARS-CoV) (Drosten et al., 2003; Kuiken et al., 2003) and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV) (Zaki et al., 2012; Chafekar and Fielding, 2018).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus belonged to β-coronavirus, clade-c (van Boheemen et al., 2012; de Groot et al., 2013) and was initially known as Human Coronavirus Erasmus Medical Center/2012. or HCoV-EMC/2012 (Chan et al., 2012). MERS-CoV infections resulted high mortality rate in human, and till date, very limited therapeutic intervention or vaccine are available for the treatment of infections caused by the virus (Mustafa et al., 2017; Hui et al., 2018).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus found in various natural hosts such as the dromedary calves (Camelus dromedarius), bats (Vespertilio superans and Neoromicia capensis), and European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) (Zhang et al., 2016; Lau et al., 2017). The replication of the virus has observed in various other animals such as rabbit, goat, civet, pig, camelid, and horse (Muller et al., 2012; Chan et al., 2013a; Al-Tawfiq et al., 2014; Eckerle et al., 2014; Meyer et al., 2015). The prevalence MERS-CoV was recently reported in non-camelid domestic mammals such as sheep, goat, donkey, and cow that were in contact with camels (Kandeil et al., 2019). The origin of human MERS-CoV is considered to be from the bats. Several coronaviruses were isolated and found that which were genetically similar to human MERS-CoV. Phylogenetic analysis of MERS-CoV showed that a close relationship to Pipistrellus bat coronavirus HKU5 and Tylonycteris bat coronavirus HKU4 (Selinger et al., 2014). Studies have suggested that there were few evidences where the virus showed camel origin (Zhang et al., 2016). Studies revealed that the sero-prevalence of the virus was greater among the people those who were exhibited direct and indirect contact with dromedary camels when compared to those who were exhibited with the general population (Watson et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2015; Conzade et al., 2018). Recent study revealed that the prevalence of MERS-CoV infection in camel workers was found to be very high in Saudi Arabia (Alshukairi et al., 2018). Thus, this review provide the recent perspectives on the epidemiology and genome composition of MERS-CoV with a special emphasis on the viral entry, clinical manifestations, mechanism of pathogenesis, animal models, detection, and development of vaccines with an insight on various computational biology perspectives.EpidemiologyThe first case of MERS-CoV infection was reported in Saudi Arabia in 2012 (Zaki et al., 2012). From the period of its emergence, the virus has infected and propagated across more than 20 countries, contributing to a wide number of laboratory-confirmed cases. In 2015, the MERS-CoV outbreak in South Korea involved 186 cases which included 38 fatalities. A total of 83% cases of transmission were due to five super spreaders, and 44% of 186 cases were in the patients those who were experienced nosocomial transmission at 16 hospitals. The epidemic lasted for 2 months and the government authorities quarantined 16,993 persons for 14 days to manage the outbreak. This outbreak provides an exclusive opportunity to seal the gap in our awareness of MERS-CoV infection (Oh et al., 2018). Recent statistics suggested that as of 31 December 2018, the total of 2,279 laboratory-confirmed cases of MERS-CoV with 806 associated deaths (case fatality rate: 35.4%) were reported in 27 countries [Harcourt et al., 2018; World Health Organization (WHO), 2018a]. Among various cases, 1901 confirmed cases with 732 related deaths (fatality rate 38.5%) were reported from Saudi Arabia [Harcourt et al., 2018; World Health Organization (WHO), 2018a].In a comprehensive report by WHO, 1841 laboratory cases were confirmed between 2012 and 2016 in which 80% of them were reported from Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The remaining cases were reported from 27 countries in Middle East, Asia, North Africa, United States of America, and Europe [World Health Organization (WHO), 2016a]. A total of 13 cases were reported between October to November 2017, amongst which 12 cases were reported in male and only one case was reported in female. Most of the infected individuals were hospitalized due to the contact with camels and consumption of camel milk with the virus [World Health Organization (WHO), 2017a]. Additionally, two laboratory cases were also reported in which the patients belonged to the countries such as Malaysia and United Arab Emirates [World Health Organization (WHO), 2018a]. The laboratory confirmed cases and deaths reported in several countries from the year 2012 to 2018 are shown in Table 1.Table 1Laboratory confirmed cases of MERS-CoV infections and deaths reported in several countries from the year 2012 to 2018.YearRegionMERS-CoV infectionsDeaths due to MERS-CoV infectionsReference2012Saudi Arabia, Qatar, and Jordan93World Health Organization, 20122013Saudi Arabia, United Kingdom, France, Tunisia, and Italy16771World Health Organization (WHO), 2013a2014Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Iran, and Egypt765273World Health Organization, 20142015Saudi Arabia, Republic of Korea, Jordan, Kuwait, The Philippines, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, Oman, Qatar, China, and Iran680237World Health Organization, 2015a,b2016Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Lebanon, and Oman24375World Health Organization (WHO), 2016b2017Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Lebanon, and Oman25881World Health Organization (WHO), 2017b2018Saudi Arabia and Malaysia, United Arab Emirates9641World Health Organization (WHO), 2018aThe Genome of MERS-CoVIn the early years of 2000, coronaviruses were not acquired great importance in research and development. With the emergence of SARS in the year 2002 and MERS in 2012, the interest of many researchers was stimulated toward coronavirus (Perlman, 2015).The morphology of coronavirus includes spherical or pleomorphic shapes with a diameter of 80–120 nm (Masters, 2006). The genome of the coronavirus consists of 6 and 7 open reading frames (ORFs). The ORF 1a and 1b encompass two-third of the viral genome which encodes the non-structural poly-proteins and the other four ORFs on the downstream side encode for the structural proteins such as envelope protein (E), Spike protein (S), nucleocapsid protein (N), and membrane protein (M). In some coronaviruses, hemagglutinin-esterase (HE) gene is present in the region between ORF 1b and S (Marra et al., 2003; Rota et al., 2003; Snijder et al., 2003). These structural proteins are folded and entered in to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and transported to the ER-Golgi transitional slot (Masters, 2006). During the replication of coronavirus, substantial amounts of structural proteins are synthesized in order to assemble the progeny virions (Fung and Liu, 2014). They occupy the RNA genome which encodes structural proteins such as S protein, M protein, and N protein (Snijder et al., 2003).The genome size of the first imported MERS-CoV strain was identified to be 30,114 nucleotide (nt) long, including the 3′and 5′ UTRs. This strain showed the genome structural ornaisation of typical betacoronavirus such as a 5′-untranslated region (UTR) (nt 1 to 272), replicase complex ORF1ab (nt 273 to 21508), S gene (nt 21450 to 25511), ORF3 (nt 25526 to 25837), ORF4a (nt 25846 to 26175), ORF4b (nt 26087 to 26827), ORF5 (nt26834 to 27508), E gene (nt 27584 to 27832), M gene (nt 27847 to 28506), N gene (nt 28560 to 29801), ORF8b gene (nt 28756 to 29094), and 3′UTR (nt 29094 to 30114). The two main poly-proteins such as pp1ab and pp1a are cleaved into 15/16 non-structural proteins (nsp) by 3C-like protease (3CLpro) and papain-like protease (PLpro). These proteases are cleaved from pp1ab along with other ORFs encoding nsp which are essential for activating RNA dependent RNA polymerase, helicase, exo-ribonuclease, endo-ribonuclease, and methyltransferase. These nsp were identified to be nsp12, nsp13, nsp14, nsp15, and nsp16. The nsp14 is necessary for proofreading the ubiquitous mutation of RNA virus (Ziebuhr et al., 2000; Snijder et al., 2003; Gorbalenya et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2013; Raj et al., 2014; Durai et al., 2015). Studies revealed that the accessory ORF proteins play an important role in MERS-CoV infection and pathogenesis (Menachery et al., 2017). This study showed that the absence of major accessory ORFs such as deletion of ORF3, -4a, -4b, and -5 (dORF3-5) played major role in the viral replication and pathogenesis. Further, the attenuation of the mutant dORF3-5 was found to be responsible for the dysregulated host responses such as augmented interferon (IFN) pathway activation, disrupted cell processes, and robust inflammation. Thus, the disruption of accessory ORFs probably provide platform to the attenuation of future emergent strains of MERS-CoV accessory ORF mutants. The accessory ORF functions can be targeted for both therapeutic and vaccine treatments in response to MERS-CoV and related group 2C corona viruses (Menachery et al., 2017). The graphical representation of the genome organization of MERS-CoV is illustrated in Figure 1. Coronaviruses have demonstrated the establishment of double membrane vesicles (DMVs) in the infected cells. Based on immune-histochemistry and electron microscopic studies, the coronavirus replicase proteins are co-localized with the DMVs and are assumed to be the site of replication/transcription complex (Fung and Liu, 2014).FIGURE 1(A) Graphical representation of the structure of the MERS-CoV. The schematic representation shows that the structure of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus, which contains the RNA enclosed in the nucleocapsid within the envelope that is embedded with spike proteins, glycoproteins and membrane proteins (van den Brand et al., 2015). (B) Genome organization of MERS CoV. The genomic organization of MERS-CoV displays the viral genes S, 3, 4a, 4b, 5, E, M, 8b, and N. The genome encodes for five unique accessory proteins such as 3, 4a, 4b, 5 and 8b and four major structural proteins which are illustrated in the genome scheme (Gao et al., 2016). (C) Experimental structure of MERS-CoV complexes with human DPP4 (PDB ID: 4L72). DPP4 is an extracellular RBD domain, which comprises of both N- and C-terminal. The N-terminal is the β-propeller domain and C-terminal is the α/β hydrolase domain (Wang et al., 2013). (D) Genome organization of receptor binding domain (RBD) that illustrates the S1 and S2 sub-domains (Zhang et al., 2015).An interesting fact of coronaviruses is that they display recombination, high rates of mutation, and propensity to cross species. One such event was reported during the 2002–2003 epidemic, where the transmission of SARS-CoV has occurred from Chinese horseshoe bats to human populations (Perlman and Netland, 2009). MERS-CoV has the capability to adjust new environments and acquire various virulence factors and enhance their ability to transfer these factors from human-to-human due to continues outbreak (Zumla et al., 2015). The phylogenetic analysis revealed that all human and camel MERS-CoVs were identified to be homologous to each other. Additionally, the hedgehog and bat MERS-CoVs demonstrated para-phyletic group to human and camel MERS-CoV clade (Zhang et al., 2016).Kim (2016) reported that the occurrence of a mutant strain of MERS-CoV toward the human CD26 receptor during the South Korean outbreak. Furthermore, they isolated 13 new viral genomes in which, 12 possessed point mutation in the receptor-binding domain (RBD) of S protein (Kim, 2016). The S protein is suggested to be essential for the host tropism through its interaction with the host CD26 receptor (van Doremalen et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2014).PathogenesisViral EntryThe entry of MERS-CoV to the host is facilitated by its type-I transmembrane glycoprotein known as S protein (Xia et al., 2014). The RBD of MERS-CoV consists of S1 subunit which ranged from 367 to 606 amino acids and can be grouped into an external sub domain and core domain as shown in Figure 1C,D. The receptor-binding motif, V484 – L567 of RBD is situated at the external sub domain and the core sub domain consists of anti-parallel β-sheet (five-stranded) and six helices in the center. The two small β-strands make a globular fold. The core domain structure is balanced by three disulfide linkages. The MERS-CoV RBD external sub domain contains a β-sheet along with one small and three large strands which are organized in anti-parallel manner. The RBD core is attached to this region by special intervening loops and it binds to the core sub-domain by a clamp at the lower and upper regions. Most of the connecting loops and two small 310 helices are located in the inner region of the sheet. The fourth disulfide linkage is stabilized among the residues starting from C503 to C526 and β6-strand linked with η3-helix. Three helices (HR1) at the center and three chains (HR2) near to the core promote the release of the viral particle into the cytoplasm and promote the progression of the infection (Durai et al., 2015).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus can also enter the cell through an auxiliary pathway on the cell surface via transmembrane proteases. The binding of MERS-CoV into host cell and replication of the virus is shown in Figure 2. The host protease cleaves coronavirus S protein into two functional domains distinctive to each other at the N-terminal region (denoted as the S1 subunit) which comprised of RBD, and C-terminal portion (S2 subunit) comprised of a fusion peptide, two heptad repeats (HR2 and HR1) and the transmembrane (TM) domain (Weiss and Navas-Martin, 2005). The membrane fusion is conciliated by main conformational rearrangement which exposed the fusion peptide resulting in the development of six-helix bundle (6HB). The core of 6HB consists of a triple-stranded coiled like structure constructed by HR1s of the three spike subunits forming trimers; the HR2 elements are found to be packed within the grooves of the coiled coil in an anti-parallel direction. Owing to their central role in membrane fusion, it was reported that various antiviral peptides interfere the formation 6HB (Forni et al., 2015).FIGURE 2Life cycle of MERS-CoV displaying fusion with plasma membrane. The fusion of S protein to the plasma membrane of host cell, formation of a double membrane vesicle in the host cell, eventually releasing the RNA enclosed in the nucleocapsid followed by genome transcription. The viral RNA undergoes replication and transcription followed by the 4, 5, and 6 RNA synthesis and translation; the endoplasmic reticulum aids the assembly and packaging of virus particle forming a complete double membrane vesicle and lastly through exocytosis and MERS-CoV is released out of the host cell (Du et al., 2009).Transmission and Clinical PresentationThe clinical presentation of MERS-CoV compasses from severe respiratory diseases to subclinical infections (Drosten et al., 2013; Hui et al., 2018). Infected patients often indicate the presence of hemoptysis, sore throat, fever, cough, shortness of breath, and other gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting (Albarrak et al., 2012; Assiri et al., 2013a,b; Guery et al., 2013; Health Protection Agency, 2013; Omrani et al., 2013). A low range of lower pulmonary infiltrate associated with viral pneumonia was observed in the radiograph of patients infected with MERS-CoV (Memish et al., 2013a; Wang, 2014). It was observed that greater than 60% of the initially reported cases of MERS-CoV infection, the patients experienced severe disease which demanded intensive care treatments like extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and mechanical ventilation. Hematological aberrations delineated for the clinical cases of neutrophilia (8%), lymphopenia (34%), thrombocytopenia (36%), and lymphocytosis (11%). While the conditions of kidney failure necessitate renal replacement therapy for a considerable number of MERS-CoV cases, several studies detected MERS-CoV antigens and particles in the renal tissues in vivo, which is the direct indication of the virus replication in renal tissues and long term acute infection (Yeung et al., 2016; Alsaad et al., 2018).The first evidence of human-to-human transmission of MERS-CoV was reported in few cases in United Kingdom, when an adult male traveled to Saudi Arabia and transferred the infectious virus to two of his family members (Perlman and Netland, 2009). It was suggested that MERS-CoV infections were due to the introduction of the virus in humans and the close contact with camels was one of risk factors for the transmission of MERS as reported by World Health Organization [World Health Organization (WHO), 2016b].The transmission of MERS-CoV is determined as spasmodic, often healthcare associated, intra-familial, and required prolonged and close contact (Memish et al., 2013a,b, Memish et al., 2014a,b; Puzelli et al., 2013; Drosten et al., 2014). In a domestic study conducted with MERS-CoV infected patients, 14 out of 280 contacts of 26 positively indexed patients (antibody positive or RNA) suggested that the frequency of the transmission even during outbreaks was approximately 3% (Drosten et al., 2014). Several studies suggested that the virus was not self-sustained, as during local epidemic of MERS-CoV, which has not been readily transmitted to more than one human and has been reported in majority of human related cases (Bauch and Oraby, 2013; Breban et al., 2013; Cauchemez et al., 2014; Chowell and Nishiura, 2014). The mode of transmission of the virus is illustrated in Figure 3.FIGURE 3Transmission of MERS-CoV and symptoms possessed by infected human. The figure shows the path by which the virus is transmitted from the infected camel to the human and camel to various animals (Kandeil et al., 2019); further, this virus is transmitted to other human population via human to human transmissions (Shehata et al., 2016).The serological analysis and extensive investigation of those potentially exposed to the patients suggested that there were no secondary infections [World Health Organization (WHO), 2013b]. As a minimum of 18 cases of asymptomatic MERS-CoV infections were reported in health care personals, the function of these subclinical cases in the transfer of infection was found to be uncertain (de Sousa et al., 2014).Molecular Mechanism of the PathogenesisWhile there were intensive studies on coronavirus research over the past 5 years, limited reports are available on the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV. Recent post-mortem histopathological studies revealed that the localization of viral particles in the pulmonary and extra pulmonary tissue of a 33-year-old male patient of T cell lymphoma, who acquired MERS-CoV infection (Ng et al., 2016; Alsaad et al., 2018). The histopathological analysis of the biopsies were collected from lung, brain, liver, heart, kidney, and skeletal muscle demonstrated that there were pulmonary diffuse alveolar damage, necrotizing pneumonia, acute kidney injury, portal and lobular hepatitis and myositis with muscle atrophic changes. Further, the viral particles were found to be localized in the pulmonary macrophages, pneumocytes, renal proximal tubular epithelial cells and macrophages infiltrating the skeletal muscles (Alsaad et al., 2018).Studies suggested that the pathogenesis of MERS-CoV in human and animals are mainly due to three mechanisms such as DPP4 (dipeptidyl peptidase-4) mediated mechanism, papain like protease PLpro mediated mechanism and accessory proteins like p4a and membrane M protein mediated mechanism. Hence, these proteins are probably considered as one of the potential therapeutic targets for MERS-CoV infections (Durai et al., 2015). The molecular mechanisms exhibited by various modes of pathogenesis are illustrated in Figure 4.FIGURE 4The molecular mechanism of pathogenesis by MERS-CoV in human and animals. The pathogenesis mechanism is mainly occurred by DPP4, papian like protease PLpro, and accessory proteins such as p4a and membrane M protein (Durai et al., 2015).DPP4 Mediated MechanismDPP4 is a type-II transmembrane glycoprotein consists of approximately 766 amino acids and function as major receptor for MERS-CoV. The three dimensional structural analysis revealed that this receptor has α/β-hydrolase domain and a β-propeller domain with eight blades that helped in the binding of receptor binding domain in MERS-CoV (Raj et al., 2014). The crystal structure of DPP4 is illustrated in Figure 1C. A DPP4 binding protein, adenosine deaminase, is considered as one of the major inhibitors of the S protein of MERS-CoV (Drosten, 2013).A number of cell lines such as human-derived HFL, Calu-3, Caco-2, Huh-7, HEK, His-1 cell lines, CD8+, and CD4+ that are susceptible to MERS-CoV were reported (Chan et al., 2013b; Shirato et al., 2013; Chu et al., 2016). Two S protein ecto-domains can be divided into fusion-catalyzing domains (FD) and RBD. The S RBDs bind to DPP4 after which the FDs are exposed through unfolding. Further, the cellular and viral membranes were joined together by refolding (Raj et al., 2013). The unfolding FD required the cleavage of S protein by host proteases. Out of various proteolytic cleavage sites between the FD and RBD, the cleavage at S1/S2 site is essential for the infection of Calu3 cells by MERS-CoV (Park et al., 2016).It has been revealed that upon infection, monocyte chemo attractant protein-1 and IFN-γ-inducible protein-10 were induced and suppressed the proliferation of human myeloid progenitor cells (Zhou et al., 2014). MERS-CoV can infect T-cells from human lymphoid organs and causes the peripheral blood inducing apoptosis by intrinsic and extrinsic pathways (Chu et al., 2016). A study conducted by Al-Qahtani et al. (2017) suggested that the inhibition of DPP4 mitigated the induction of PPARγ (the transcriptional repressor) and IRAK-M (negative regulator of TLR signaling) which indicated that the immunosuppressive action of S glycoprotein regulated by DPP4.Papain Like Protease PLpro Mediated MechanismUpon entry into the cells, two ORFs at the 5′-end of the viral genome are translated into two poly-proteins. They are processed by two viral proteases, PLpro and 3C-like proteinase (3CLpro) and form 16 nonstructural proteins which are necessary for the membrane-associated replication complex. PLpro is located in nonstructural protein 3. PLpro was found to be multifunctional enzymes with deISGylating (removal of ISG15 conjugates from host cell factors) and de-ubiquitinating (cleavage of ubiquitin from host cell factors) properties in addition to protease activity in many coronaviruses (Clasman et al., 2017). This resulted in the host antiviral immune response being antagonized and promoting the viral replication. PLpro can inhibit the mitochondrial anti-viral signaling protein induced IFN-β reporter activity and reduce TNF-α induced NF-κB reporter activity. Hence, MERS-CoV PLpro is considered to be important antiviral target (Mielech et al., 2014; Harrigan et al., 2018).The coronavirus genome is encoded by two ubiquitin-like domains (Ubl1 and Ubl2), out of which Ubl2 is considered to be an important component which influences the PLpro activity. Clasman et al. (2017) reported that PLpro has not showed the deISGylating, de-ubiquitinating or protease activities in the absence of Ubl2 domain. There were no variations in the process of inhibition, substrate specificity, catalytic efficiency and thermal stability (Clasman et al., 2017).Accessory Proteins Mediated MechanismThe viral genome is recognized by melanoma differentiation-associated protein-5 (MDA5), retinoic acid inducible gene-1 (RIG-1) and endosomal toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) as pathogen-associated molecular patterns. This recognition resulted in the formation of type-1 interferon (IFN1). As an evasion mechanism, virus synthesize proteins that hinder the production IFN1 in the pathway (Zinzula and Tramontano, 2013).In the absence of MDA5 and RIG-1, MERS-CoV used the protein such as 4a (p4a) which contain RNA-binding motif for binding (Rabouw et al., 2016). By a direct binding, this motif masks the dsRNA of MERS-CoV. The p4a possesses αβββα fold with the β1-β2 loop and α1 helix which bind to the minor groove of dsRNA. The mutational studies revealed that p4a-dsRNA complex stabilized by the amino acids such as K27, W45, K63, and K67 (Batool et al., 2017). In a study carried out by Canton et al. (2018) suggested that, NF-κB remained in the cytoplasm of MERS-CoV infected cells while 4b was found to be attached with the nucleus. In the absence of 4b, expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines was observed as NF-κB translocated to the nucleus. This was also observed in the case of 4b mutants that devoid of nuclear localization signal, indicating that nuclear localization signal mediated process of 4b is essential for NF-κB expression (Canton et al., 2018).As a component of the viral envelope, M protein is involved in various functions such as viral assembly along with other proteins such as E, S, N. The M, E, and S proteins interact with N protein in the ER-Golgi complex. This interaction hinders the fusion of viral and cellular membranes (Mustafa et al., 2018). It was observed that the expression of M protein in MERS-CoV might suppressed the type-I IFN expression in response to poly (I: C) induction or Sendai virus infection. This reaction was detected to be specific for the activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), however, not activated the nuclear factor-κB. The interaction of MERS-CoV M protein with TRAF3 and the association of disrupted TRAF3–TBK1 lead to reduced activation of IRF3 (Lui et al., 2016).Host Immune ResponseMiddle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus can readily infect human respiratory epithelial cells, macrophages, T-cells, dendritic cells and can influence the production and induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines (Zhou et al., 2015). Studies on ex vivo human lung tissue and respiratory epithelial cell lines showed that the induction of antiviral interferons followed by MERS-CoV infection by stimulated epithelial cells was found to be limited. A study by Menachery et al. (2014) described that the cells infected with MERS-CoV demonstrated distinctly altered chromatin structures such as repressive histone markers, that could limit the transcription factors from binding to the promoter regions of interferon-stimulated gene. The changes in DNA methylation found to be one of the reasons for down regulation of IFN-γ–associated antigen-presenting gene after the infection (Menachery et al., 2018). MERS-CoV proteins such as 4a, 4b, M, and PLpro were found to be suppressed the induction of interferons (Yang et al., 2013; Mielech et al., 2014; Canton et al., 2018). Further, the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokine response in these cells was found to be limited. A delayed induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines such as IL-6, IL-8, and IL-1β were observed upon the viral infection (Lau et al., 2013; Canton et al., 2018).Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus could infect and replicate in human monocyte-derived macrophages and immature monocyte-derived dendritic cells, while it failed to perform similar functions in mature monocyte-derived dendritic cells. This indicate that the maturation restrict the viral replication. Immature dendritic cells were unable to stimulate T-cell even after the antigen uptake, delaying the activation of T-cells and permitting further viral replication (Cong et al., 2018). The infection of human macrophages induced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines such as MCP-1/CCL-2, IFN-α2, IFN-γ, MIP-1α/CCL-3, IP-10/CXCL-10, RANTES/CCL-5, IL-8, TNF-α, IL-12p40, and IL-6 (Zhou et al., 2015; Cong et al., 2018). The infected dendritic cells induced the expression of IL-12, RANTES/CCL-5, IP-10/CXCL-10 and IFN-γ, however, showed low expression of IFN-α and no expression of IFN-β (Zhou et al., 2015).T-cells can be directed to the infection site by type-I IFN stimulated secretion of IL-10 and CXCL10. Due to their uncontrolled and strong expression, the expression of IFN-γ and IL-12 were inhibited and restricted the activation of T-helper cells. With the added effect of down-regulated antigen-presentation pathways, the activation of T cells is inhibited. Hence, the sequestered T cells failed to target the virus (Ying et al., 2016). Previous studies revealed that when the serum samples and bronchoalveolar lavage were analyzed from two patients, it was observed that the patients with low level secretion of IFN-α were failed to survive and the patients displayed high level secretion of type-I IFN were survived (Faure et al., 2014).Animal ModelsThe animal models are one of the vital components for translation of the findings from drug discovery process from bench to bedside. These animal models are indispensable for the deeper understanding of any diseases and safe and protective vaccine development process (Lorenzen et al., 2015). The main criteria for the validation of animal models in preclinical studies are face validity, predictive validity and target validity. The face validity means that the proper similarity between the animal model and the human disease in terms of the biology and symptoms of the disease. However, assessing face validity is a tedious task due to the lack of understanding on the core biology of the disease symptoms. Predictive validity means the display of clinical interventions which exhibited similar effect in the animal models. This is also very difficult to achieve due to the incomplete correlation between animal models, the mechanism of human diseases and the incapability of standard drugs to active in many animal models. Target validity is another essential component for the validation of animal models in which the target under study must have an analogous function in the disease model as in the clinical condition (Denayer et al., 2014).An ideal animal model is the one where an immunocompetent animal, on receiving the challenge virus at a realistic dose through a suitable inoculation route, is able to replicate the characteristics of a human disease as closely as possible (Doremalen and Munster, 2015). Ferrets, hamsters, mice and other small laboratory animals are not ideal animal models for MERS-CoV owing to the variations in DPP4 receptor. The rhesus macaque and the common marmoset are the first non-human primate species (NPS) to be used as the animal models for MERS-CoV. Glycosylation of mouse DPP4 (mDPP4) prevents its binding to S protein of MERS-CoV. Hence, transgenic hDPP4 (human DPP4) mice were developed as animal model (Peck et al., 2015). The major advantages and limitations of MERS-CoV animal models are listed in Table 2.Table 2Advantages and limitations of MERS-CoV experimental animal models.SpeciesAdvantagesLimitationsReferenceRabbitReadily available and easy to handleAnimal-to-animal transmission studies are not available No clinical disease, Low viral titers in tissues upon infection Develop mild pulmonary lesionsHaagmans et al., 2015; Vergara-Alert et al., 2017Rhesus macaquesHuman-specific reagents available for immunologic analysis Immune and respiratory systems similar to humans; clinical disease similar to humans Useful for confirming vaccine efficacy testingLimited availability and expensive Expert husbandry requirements Animal-to-animal transmission studies are not available Transient disease Ethical concernsBaseler et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2017Common marmosetModel severe, potentially fatal MERS-CoV infection Some human-specific immunological reagents cross-react Respiratory and immune systems similar to humans; clinical disease similar to humans Useful for confirming antiviral and vaccine efficacy testingLimited availability and expensive Expert husbandry requirements Ethical concerns Animal-to-animal transmission studies are not availableVergara-Alert et al., 2017; Yu et al., 2017hDPP4-transgenic miceModel severe, potentially fatal MERS-CoV infection Easy to handle Reagents available Useful for screening antivirals and vaccinesGlobal over expression of hDPP4Baseler et al., 2016; Coleman et al., 2017MiceStudies suggested that the glycosylation of certain amino acids prevented the binding of mouse DPP4 (mDPP4) to S protein of MERS-CoV (Doremalen and Munster, 2015). The first transgenic MERS-CoV mouse model was established by Agrawal et al. (2015). The mice expressed hDPP4 and developed severe respiratory MERS-CoV infections. The transgenic mice infected with an intra-nasal dose of 106 TCID50 of MERS-CoV developed pneumonia, weight loss, acute pulmonary viral infection, ruffled fur, squinting, and death within few days (Agrawal et al., 2015). A transgenic mouse model developed by Zhao et al. (2015) showed that limited utility for pathogenic studies due to the systemic dissemination and development of severe neurological diseases. The other lung infection models were lack mortality and weight loss, however, developed lung pathology in response to 50% TCID50 of MERS-CoV (Tao et al., 2015).Recent studies suggested that the transgenic mice models were developed where the full-length mDPP4 gene replaced by hDPP4 (Coleman et al., 2017). The infection and replication of MERS-CoV was observed in the lungs, however, disseminated slow impact to the other organs during the post injection with dose range of 102–105 PFU. The pathology of infected mice showed pneumonia-like symptoms (Coleman et al., 2017).The CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing tools were used to produce mice susceptible to MERS-CoV infection by modifying their genome sequence (positions 288 and 330) homologous to the sequence of hDPP4. In certain mice model the characteristic symptoms such as pulmonary hemorrhage, low survival, decreased pulmonary function and weight loss were observed. The 288-330+/+MERS-CoV mouse model demonstrated severe respiratory infection as observed in humans (Cockrell et al., 2016).Rhesus Macaques and MarmosetsUpon infection with MERS-CoV, rhesus macaques and marmosets were developed moderate respiratory disease which are comparable with mild human MERS-CoV infection. As observed in human cases, they also showed complete blood count abnormalities. Rhesus macaque and marmoset models were found to be suitable for pathogenic studies of mild infections. Both the models can be used for the efficacy testing of prophylactic and therapeutic countermeasures (Baseler et al., 2016).Yu et al. (2017) reported that when 2-3 old rhesus macaques and common marmosets were intra-tracheally injected with hCoV-EMC, hematoxylin and eosin stained tissues of the infected model demonstrated lesions primarily in the lungs with various degrees of inflammation, hemorrhaging, pulmonary oedema, interstitial pneumonia, eosinophil infiltration and necrosis in bronchial epithelial cells and pneumocytes. The lungs of the infected marmosets demonstrated widespread pulmonary oedema and hemorrhaging. The oedematous alveolar cavities showed fibrinous exudates and neutrophil infiltration. In both the cases, DPP4 was widely expressed in alveolar macrophages and type-I and II pneumocytes were also actively involved. The pathological changes as a result of viral infection were not observed in any other organs of the infected animal (Yu et al., 2017).RabbitsIn most cases, MERS-CoV causes severe infection in the lower respiratory tract in humans. Nasal swabs collected from the infected rabbits demonstrated the presence of MERS-CoV. They generally develop respiratory diseases such as asymptomatic and mild human infections as sometimes observed in immune-competent patients (Haagmans et al., 2015).Recently, Houser et al. (2017) revealed that the infected New Zealand rabbits were developed asymptomatic pulmonary infections with high levels of viral antigens and RNA. Multiple lung lobes showed peri-vascular inflammation. The antibodies developed by the rabbits lacked neutralizing activity, and as a result the animals were susceptible to re-infection. In fact, enhanced pulmonary inflammation was observed after re-infection. However, re-infection elicited the neutralizing antibodies (Nabs). Hence, it was suggested that upon re-infection, there might be greater risk of severe lung disease in those who do not develop neutralizing antibody response, or those whose neutralizing antibody titers have decreased after the initial infection (Houser et al., 2017). The clinical signs and lesions along with the occurrence of MERS-CoV RNA and antigens observed in MERS-CoV infected animal models are shown in Table 3.Table 3Clinical signs and lesions along with the occurrence of MERS-CoV RNA and antigens as seen in MERS-CoV infected animal models.Animal modelClinical signsLesionsOccurrence of MERS-Cov RNAOccurrence of MERS-antigenReferenceRabbitAsymptoticRhinitis with necrosisLung, upper respiratory tract, lymph nodesType I and II pneumocytesHaagmans et al., 2015Rhesus MacaquesMild to moderate respiratory diseaseInterstitial pneumoniaLung, lymph nodes, upper respiratory tractType I and II pneumocytes, alveolar macrophagesde Wit et al., 2013a,b; Yao et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2017Common MarmosetMild to severe respiratory diseaseBroncho-interstitial pneumoniaLung, blood, lymph nodes, visceral organs, upper respiratory tractType I pneumocytes, alveolar macrophagesFalzarano et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2017hDPP4- transgenic miceSevere fatal respiratory diseaseBroncho-interstitial pneumoniaLung, brain, visceralorgansType I and type II pneumocytesAgrawal et al., 2015Diagnostic ApproachesThe primary diagnosis of MERS-CoV infection was performed by molecular techniques such as real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) (Corman et al., 2012a), reverses transcription–loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-RTPA) (Shirato et al., 2014) and reverses transcription-recombinase polymerase amplification (RT-LAMP) (Abd et al., 2013). Numerous serological assays were used to detect MERS-CoV or closely related viruses in seropositive camels; these tests were protein microarrays like indirect enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), recombinant spike immunofluorescent assay, spike pseudoparticle neutralization and microneutralization assay (Buchholz et al., 2013; Perera et al., 2013). However, none of the serological assays showed evidence of the precise occurrence of MERS-CoV in camels (Song et al., 2015). Recent study reported that a rapid and specific assay for the detection of MERS-CoV such as nucleic acid visualization technique which combine the reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification technique and a vertical flow visualization strip (RT-LAMP-VF) to detect the N gene of MERS-CoV (Huang et al., 2018). The study suggested that in comparison with the real-time RT-PCR (rRT-PCR) method recommended by the World Health Organization, the RT-LAMP-VF assay is easy to perform and the rapid detection of MERS-CoV within 35 min was achieve by this approach (Huang et al., 2018).An assay was developed based on the detection of N protein of MERS-CoV (Song et al., 2015). The NP protein preferred as better target than the S protein. In this type of assay, firstly, the antigen binds to gold labeled monoclonal antibodies which lead to the formation of antigen-antibody complex. The complex further passed through nitrocellulose membrane and bind to monoclonal antibody at the test region and formed band which could be conveniently analyzed (Tang, 2014).Currently, multiple purified monoclonal antibodies are available in clinical and preclinical studies for the development of antimicrobials (Rockx et al., 2010). Studies suggested that two human antibodies (REGN3048 and REGN3051) are known to bind with MERS-CoV RBD and prevent the interaction of cellular receptor DPP4 with S protein and effectively neutralize MERS-CoV infection (Pascal et al., 2015). The antibodies such as REGN3048 and REGN3051 showed no binding with S protein, thus, employed as effective combination for inhibiting MERS-CoV (Aderem et al., 2011). REGN3048 and REGN3051 co-interact with MERS-CoV RBD, which suggested that these antibodies bind to discrete epitopes as they bind to regions of MERS-CoV S protein that are conserved during the natural evolution of the virus. These two antibodies were blocked entry of the virus into susceptible cell lines and neutralize the infection (Pascal et al., 2015).The diagnostically relevant variations in the neutralization activity have not been detected in several isolates of MERS-CoV. In order to detect the serological response to a specific type of single MERS-CoV serotype, specific protein based sero-assays are essential to be performed (Muth et al., 2015). The development of potential serological assays demand well delineated human or animal sera and antibodies specific to MERS-CoV (Meyer et al., 2014).Vaccines and TherapeuticsPrevious studies revealed that both cellular and humoral responses are required for the complete protection against MERS-CoV infections (Faure et al., 2014; Park et al., 2015; Corman et al., 2016). Nabs and T-cell responses are the main agents in providing protective immunity against coronaviruses. In a study by Zhao et al. (2014) reported that MERS-CoV cleared by mice which lack B-cells while those deficient in T-cells failed to perform similar functions. Further, since virus-specific humoral responses were decreased over time, developing a vaccine which could induce long-lived memory T-cell response considered to be beneficial. However, any vaccine compounds which are able to induce both T and B-cell responses are required for immune protection (Okba et al., 2017).Current Vaccine and Antiviral CandidatesMERS-CoV vaccine candidates are still under development with DNA based, protein based, live attenuated and vectored-virus based vaccines (Arabi et al., 2017). Out of the four structural proteins and sixteen non structural proteins encoded by the viral genome, S protein showed the highest immunogenicity which induced T-cell responses. In most of the MERS-CoV, Nabs target the RBD of the S protein. The variations in amino acid sequences of the S protein detected amongst MERS-CoV is limited, thus, designing a vaccine against one strain most likely to be protected against all the other circulating strains (Okba et al., 2017). The S1 protein located outside the RBD probably considered as potential drug target to develop therapeutic strategies against MERS-CoV. RBD-specific mAbs are considered to be displayed greater neutralizing activity than those were targeted the S1 or S2 region outside RBD (Du et al., 2013).DPP4-targeting therapeutic agents are capable of blocking the interaction between MERS-CoV RBD and DPP4, and therefore inhibit MERS-CoV infection. The anti-DPP4 (CD26) antibodies such as 1F7, 2F9, and YS110 prevent the entry of MERS-CoV into susceptible cells, obstructing the virus infection (Ohnuma et al., 2013). Additionally, DPP4-binding protein adenosine deaminase (ADA) competes the binding with MERS-CoV RBD to DPP4, specifically at crucial residues such as Q286 and L294, defining their role as a naturally occurring antagonist (Raj et al., 2014).Recent studies revealed that the DNA vaccines are the safest vaccines for immune-compromised patients. They possessed comparatively greater amounts of DNA (e.g., 0.5–2 mg) thus requires multiple inoculations to induce potent immune responses in rhesus macaques and mice (Wirblich et al., 2017). Chi et al. (2017) developed a DNA vaccine which encoded the first 725 amino acids of S protein in MERS-CoV which induced the cell mediated and antigen-specific humoral immune responses in mice. Post three immunizations, it was observed that high titers of Nabs (up to 1: 104) were produced without any adjuvant. A prophylactic DNA-plasmid vaccine known as GLS-5300, which encodes for S protein, is the first MERS-CoV vaccine to be considered for the human trials developed by GeneOne Life Inc., which has been enlisted in the on-going list of vaccines by WHO [Rabaan et al., 2017; World Health Organization (WHO), 2018b].The vaccines that imitate the natural infection, such as recombinant viral vectors or live-attenuated virus present the antigens in natural ways which further stimulate the activation of humoral and cell-mediated immunity to the native protein conformation. As the live attenuated viruses have been the most immunogenic platforms available, they exhibited the capability to present numerous antigens across the viral life cycle in their native conformations (Henderson and Moss, 1999). Agrawal et al. (2016) vaccinated the mice with an inactivated MERS-CoV vaccine and which demonstrated hypersensitivity risk factors in MERS-CoV infection. Although there were extensive research in the last few years, limited anti-MERS-CoV therapeutics have been approved for human use. Originally, conventional IFAs were employed in the human sero-surveys and these relied on the MERS-CoV infected cell cultures. These cell cultures were the primary antigen sources for detecting the presence of human anti-MERS-CoV Nabs, IgM, and IgG in human samples (Corman et al., 2012b). Further, it was reported that human monoclonal antibody m336 demonstrated significant neutralizing properties against MERS-CoV in vitro conditions (Houser et al., 2016).Recent studies revealed that there were few antiviral agents in the developmental stage. It was reported that the antiviral drug chlorpromazine demonstrated strong anti-MERS-CoV potential; however, the high cytotoxicity of the drug limiting the potential window for drug utilization. Similarly, another drug Toremifene showed moderate activity when tested in antigen presenting cells, however, the high cytotoxicity of this drug also narrowing its application as a therapeutic remedy against MERS-CoV (Cong et al., 2018). Further, studies suggested that a nucleoside analog GS-5734 known as Remdesivir, which showed potential antiviral activity against human and zoonotic CoVs in vitro and the drug inhibited MERS-CoV at 50% effective concentration values (EC50) (Agostini et al., 2018).Novel Therapeutic ApproachesThe conserved nature of the N protein was used to develop vaccines that can induce an adaptive immune response against these proteins. In a study by Zhao et al. (2016) reported that a vaccine candidate induced airway memory CD4+ T cell response against N-specific epitopes of MERS-CoV. In another study suggested that vaccination with recombinant N-terminal domain (rNTD) triggered greater T-cell response than the mice vaccinated with rRBD. The neutralizing activity was also observed in the sera (Jiaming et al., 2017). Recent study revealed that the combination of fusion inhibitory peptide which targets the protein HR1 domain of MERS-CoV S2 and a neutralizing antibody specific for the S1 protein RBD showed synergistic therapeutic activities against MERS-CoV (Wang et al., 2019). Further, the researchers have developed novel neutralizing nanobodies (Nb) which specifically bind to the RBD of MERS-CoV S protein. The Nb was found to be interacted with the conserved domain of MERS-CoV RBD with high affinity and blocked binding of RBD to the receptor of MERS-CoV (Zhao et al., 2018).Some immunodominant epitopes within the protein structure may contribute negatively to the neutralization activity of the vaccine. For example, a short region of RBD was able to induce higher titer of IgG when compared to other longer regions (Ma et al., 2014). The negative effects of these epitopes can be surmounted by immunofocusing; mapping of the most neutralizing RBD fragment and eliminating unnecessary fragments. This can help in focusing the immune response to important epitopes (Ma et al., 2014). Pallesen et al. (2017) suggested that the structure-based design of S proteins improved their immunogenicity where the high titers of Nabs were observed against MERS-CoV. The major categories of vaccines developed and tested against various animal models are shown in Table 4.Table 4Categories of vaccine developed against MERS-CoV, their potential candidate, and their target long with their immunological response and efficacy.Vaccine categoriesVaccine candidateTarget antigenAnimal modelImmunological responseEfficacyReferenceProtein basedS1S1MiceNabNot testedWang et al., 2015rRBD-FcS377-588Ad/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabProtectiveMa et al., 2014rNTDS18-353Ad/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabProtectiveJiaming et al., 2017Recombinant viral vectorsBNSP333-S1S1Ad/hDPP4-miceNabProtectiveWirblich et al., 2017S377-588-FcSAd/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabNot testedTang et al., 2015VRP-SS288/330+/+miceNabProtectiveCockrell et al., 2016DNA vaccinepcDNA3.1-S1S1Ad5/hDPP4-miceT-cell, NabProtectiveChi et al., 2017pVax1-SSNon human primatesT-cell, NabProtectiveMuthumani et al., 2015Therapeutic Screening by Computational BiologyThe technological progression is reflected upon a series of genome wide molecular screening platforms and computational biology approaches that provided novel insights to prompt response against emerging viral diseases. The prototype of these approaches included the in vivo animal model, tissue culture model, human challenge model, and vaccine studies. These model systems are anxious by challenges, preferably yielding a spectra of the severity of the diseases like lethal versus sub-lethal in order to increase divergence for downstream data mining and modeling (McDermott et al., 2011; Drosten et al., 2013; Law et al., 2013). A diversity of computational methodologies and network approach were used to detect the regulatory networks of various viral systems by de novo studies (Hou and Zhao, 2013; Mitchell et al., 2013).Recently, studies have shown that peptides can be utilized as highly potent signal transduction agents for various viral infections. It has been suggested that antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) can be used as potential therapeutic option against MERS-CoV infections (Mustafa et al., 2018). Computational biology approach in combination with virology can be employed to design novel peptide based therapeutics against various strains of MERS-CoV with high efficacy. Recent studies have suggested that repurposing of existing and clinically approved anti-viral peptides can be used as promising lead molecules for the development of novel anti-MERS-CoV agents (Mustafa et al., 2018).The RBD and S protein based vector vaccines are considered to be one of the efficient targets for designing MERS-CoV vaccine, as it comprised of multiple neutralizing epitopes which offer higher potential to prompt Nabs against the virus (Shi et al., 2015). The vast developments in computational biology have led to the new line of immunoinformatics databases and tools, which are other operative ways for vaccine development (Terry et al., 2015). The screening of dominant immunogens based on the availability of genome sequence data is crucial for designing novel vaccines, which is assisted by immunoinformatics (Firbas et al., 2006). The epitope directed lead design was one of the critical steps involved in the lead identification by immunoinformatics approaches (Shi et al., 2015). MHC-I restrained CD8+ cytotoxic T-lymphocytes (CTLs) identification provides profound insight in designing novel antiviral agents (Terry et al., 2015).In conclusion, MERS-CoV infection continued to be fatal disease and has emerged as one of the epidemic concern. Irrespective of the various studies conducted to determine the distribution, the exact intermediates remain unidentified. There are various animal models available which provided profound insight in understanding the transmission and pathogenecity of the virus in human. The common pathogenesis mechanisms of the virus such as DPP4, PLpro, accessory proteins like p4a and membrane M protein provided significant insight for the screening of novel drug targets for vaccine development. The detailed understanding of the binding mechanism of various inhibitors toward the structural, non-structural, and accessory proteins of the virus probably provide profound insight for lead development. The integration of genome analysis, proteomics studies, immunoinformatics, and systems biology approaches on various animal models have made the recognition of new targets and lead molecules much easier in than the approaches available during earlier time. By considering MERS-CoV infections as one of the great public threats, there is high demand for undertaking the coronavirus research at the deeper molecular level to understand the mechanism of viral infection, development of advanced and rapid detection methods and futuristic therapeutic strategies to combat MERS-CoV infections.Author ContributionsSS, SC, SP, SK, and VS collected data and prepared the complete manuscript. Further, SS reviewed, revised, and edited the manuscript.Conflict of Interest StatementThe authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.


Title: Novel role of SARM1 mediated axonal degeneration in the pathogenesis of rabies

IntroductionNeurons have an intrinsic molecular mechanism to self-destruct their axons and dendrites in response to injury or stress. This self-destruction serves as a defensive mechanism to remove injured or unhealthy neurites preventing further damage to the nervous system. However an aberrant or over-activation of this mechanism could result in the dysfunction of the nervous system and has been implicated in many neurodegenerative diseases [1, 2]. Primarily, axonal self-destruction is linked with the levels of an essential energy molecule, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), in the axons [2]. NAD loss corresponds with axonal degeneration and the overexpression of NMANT2, a NAD biosynthetic enzyme that has been shown to significantly delay axonal degeneration [3]. More importantly, Sterile Alpha and TIR Motif-containing 1 (SARM1) was recently found to be a key facilitator of axonal degeneration because of its direct ability to digest NAD [4, 5]. Current models suggest that when NAD levels in the axon fall below a critical threshold, a suicide signaling cascade is triggered by the accelerated digestion and loss of residual NAD by SARM1. Depletion of NAD triggers an influx of calcium ions into the axons, which then activates several calcium dependent calpains. These calpains in turn regulate the proteolytic digestion of dendritic and axonal cytoskeletal proteins such as microtubule associated protein 2 (MAP2) and neurofilament [6–10], resulting in the degeneration of both dendrites and axons. Morphologically this calpain-mediated axonal degeneration is characterized by the appearance of focal axonal swellings, followed by granular disintegration of axons [11]. While terms such as axonal degeneration or axonal self-destruction are broadly used to refer to this SARM1-mediated pathway, this mechanism could result in the degeneration of dendrites in addition to axons, causing an extensive pathology of neurites.Axonal self-destruction mechanism has been associated with neuronal trauma or stress, but its role in neurotropic viral infections remains unknown. It is particularly intriguing to examine the possible activation and consequence of axonal self-destruction during infection with viruses such as rabies, West Nile virus, Herpes simplex virus (HSV) and polio virus [12, 13], where axonal transmission of virus is involved.Rabies virus (Family Rhabdoviridae, genus Lyssavirus) is the most lethal among viruses which invade and infect the nervous system. Lyssaviruses infect the peripheral nerve endings and travel exclusively within the axons of the peripheral and central nervous system causing fatal encephalitis [14]. In humans, the majority of rabies infections (about 80%) are classified as the furious form, characterized by agitation, aggression, hallucination, hydrophobia and confusion. In animals, symptoms include aggression, disorientation, loss of fear and the urge to bite. Following the acute excitatory phase, the host lapses into coma and eventually death occurs due to cardio-respiratory arrest. In some cases (about 20%), rabies infection causes muscle weakness and ascending paralysis without the excitatory phase, resulting in the paralytic form of rabies, which is also almost invariably fatal [15–17]. In spite of the severe neurological signs, pathological lesions typical of other viral encephalitis such as gliosis, perivascular lymphocytic infiltration, phagocytosis of neurons or neuronal apoptosis are rarely observed in rabies patients during the acute disease [18–20]. However structural damage to neurites such as focal axonal swelling, segmental demyelination and impairment of synaptic transmission are observed in natural [21–25] and experimental rabies infections [26–31]. This evidence suggests that rabies infection could induce pathological damage to the axons and dendrites of neurons without affecting the neuronal cell body. Such a compartmentalized degeneration of neurites could underlie neurological dysfunction in rabies infection. However, the basic molecular mechanism of how the rabies infection causes selective neurite damage remains unknown.ResultsRabies infection induces selective degeneration of dendrites and axons in mouse neurons derived from the central and peripheral nervous systemThis study examines the neuronal pathogenesis of different field strain lyssaviruses originating from infected bats or dogs, which are subjected to minimal laboratory-adaptation. Unlike tissue culture adapted or attenuated rabies strains, these field isolates are expected to retain original pathogenicity [32–34]. Dog strain rabies virus isolated from domestic dogs from Zimbabwe (Z.Dog) and Thailand (T.Dog), and two bat lyssaviruses from a silver-haired bat (Lasionycteris noctivagans) from Canada (SHBRV) and an Australian bat Lyssavirus isolated from an infected horse (H.ABLV) are compared with mock infection (treatment with tissue culture supernatant from uninfected Neuro-2a cells used for viral stock amplification) or an uninfected control group. Infection of primary cortical neurons with all the strains at MOI of 1, induced focal swellings in the neurites of cortical neurons at 16 hours post infection (Fig 1A, S1A Fig). At 24 hours of infection, we observed complete loss of dendritic MAP2 staining (Fig 1B and 1C, S1B Fig). Specific degradation of key axon and dendritic structural protein was further observed by western blotting of neuronal lysates infected with lyssavirus strains. Western blotting showed that infection with lyssavirus resulted in significant degradation of MAP2 and neurofilament proteins (Fig 1D and 1E). To further confirm the loss of axons and dendrites in field strain rabies infection, we infected cortical neurons with parental viral stocks directly isolated from infected dog (T.Dog strain, P0) or after first passaging in sucking mouse brain (Z.Dog strain, P1). This infection resulted in distinct loss of both MAP2-positive dendrites and neurofilament-positive axons at 24 hours post infection (S2A Fig). While the structural proteins in the neurites were specifically degraded, the cell bodies, including the nucleus, were observed to be unaffected (Fig 1B, S1B Fig). This specific damage to neurites was also observed by live cell imaging of cortical neurons, which displayed swelling and granular disintegration of neurites within a timeframe of 20 hours post-infection with SHBRV lyssavirus (S1 Video). To examine whether the loss of neurites in rabies infection is due to the induction of apoptosis, TUNEL (Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labelling) staining was performed (S2B Fig, S2C Fig). This analysis showed no significant difference in the induction of apoptosis in neurons infected with all the lyssavirus strains compared to mock infection, despite the dramatic loss of neurites at 24 hours post-infection (S2C Fig).10.1371/journal.ppat.1008343.g001Fig 1Rabies infection induces selective degeneration of axons and dendrites in primary cortical and DRG neurons.(A) Rabies induced blebbing of MAP2-positive neurites (white arrows) in cortical neurons at 16 hours post infection (high magnification). Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red). Scale bar 10 μM. Images from other rabies strain infections are shown in S1A Fig. (B) Rabies induced loss of MAP2-positive neurites in cortical neurons at 24 hours post infection (low magnification). Fig 1B shows representative stitched tile images of mouse cortical neurons infected with Thai dog rabies. Scale bar 100 μM (images are maximum intensity projection of Z-stacks). Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green), anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red) and DAPI (blue). Images from other rabies strain infections are shown in S1B Fig. (C) Quantification of the loss of MAP2-positive neurites relative to cell nuclei in rabies infection. At least 500 neurons were quantified per sample. ****p < 0.0001 versus mock infection, n = 4. (D) Loss of axonal (neurofilament) and dendritic (MAP2) proteins in cortical neurons infected with rabies for 24 hours. Representative western blot images of cortical neuron lysates probed with anti-MAP2 antibody and pan-axonal neurofilament antibody. β-actin is shown as the loading control. (E) Quantification of MAP2 and neurofilament (heavy and medium chain) intensity in western blots relative to β-actin (loading control). ****p < 0.0001 versus controls, n = 3. (F) Mouse DRG neurons cultured in microfluidic devices were infected with different street strain rabies virus in the axon panel for 24 hours. Fig 1F shows axonal degeneration in DRG neurons infected with Thai dog rabies, compared with mock infection. The neurons were stained with pan axonal neurofilament antibody (NF, green), anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (magenta) and anti α-tubulin (red). Scale bar 100 μM (maximum intensity projection of Z-stacks). (G) Quantification of axonal degeneration as a ratio of disintegrated axons versus healthy (filamentous) (Axon degeneration index). ****p < 0.0001 versus mock infection, n = 4 (5 representative images quantified from each repeat). (H) Quantification of neurofilament immunostaining intensity in the axon panel images shown in Fig 1F & S4A Fig. ****p < 0.0001 versus mock infection, n = 4.Axonal degeneration in primary cortical neurons was then examined in microfluidic chambers, which allows the cell body and axons of neurons to be cultured in physically separate compartments [28] (S3A Fig, S3B Fig). This system enables the localized infection of axons with rabies virus and investigation of pathological events following axonal uptake and retrograde transport of rabies virus, as seen in physiological infection. Axonal infection of cortical neurons with rabies virus (Z.Dog strain) at MOI of 1 for 24 hours resulted in granular disintegration of neuronal axons as observed by tubulin staining (S3C Fig, S3D Fig). Furthermore, specific loss of neurofilament staining in the distal axons was observed at 24 hours post-infection, while the neurofilament staining could still be observed in the neuronal cell bodies and proximal axons (S3C Fig). This reaffirms that axonal loss in rabies infection is a locally executed mechanism independent of the neuronal cell body.Next, embryonic mouse dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neurons cultured in microfluidic chambers were used to examine whether rabies infection could induce axonal degeneration in neurons derived from the peripheral nervous system. Like the cortical neurons, the DRG neurons infected at the axons with all the strains of lyssavirus displayed granular disintegration of axons with tubulin staining and significant loss of neurofilament staining at 24 hours post-infection (Fig 1F, 1G and 1H and S4A Fig). In addition, live DIC imaging showed selective degeneration of neurites in DRG neurons infected with SHBRV (S2 Video). These data show that infection with rabies virus induces selective degeneration and loss of axons and dendrites in neurons derived from the central and peripheral nervous systems.Rabies-induced neurite degeneration is partially inhibited by the addition of NAD and inhibition of calpain activationThe morphological features of axonal and dendritic degeneration induced by rabies infection closely resembled calpain-mediated axonal degeneration (Fig 1, S1 Fig, S2 Fig, S3 Fig). Hence, it was next examined whether rabies induced degeneration involves NAD loss and calpain activation. A panel of cortical neuron cultures were generated, where infected neurons were treated with increasing concentrations of NAD to replace its loss during degeneration. Infected neurons were also treated with EGTA to block calcium influx [35] and calpain inhibitor-III, preventing calpain activation [8]. These studies showed that addition of NAD partially prevented the loss of MAP2-positive dendrites in rabies infection in a dose dependent manner (Fig 2A and 2C, S4B Fig, 24 hours post-infection). In addition, treatment with EGTA or calpain inhibitor-III resulted in significantly higher MAP2 staining compared to untreated controls (Fig 2A and 2C, S4B Fig). However, these infected neurites still displayed significant fragmentation and focal swellings (Fig 2B), suggesting that EGTA and caplain inhibitor-III were only effective in blocking the downstream calpain-mediated proteolytic digestion during axonal degeneration.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008343.g002Fig 2Pharmacological inhibition of neurite degeneration in rabies infection.(A) Effect of extracellular NAD addition and calpain inhibition on rabies induced loss of MAP2-positive neurites. Stitched tile images of mouse cortical neurons infected with Thai dog rabies for 24 hours and treated with NAD, EGTA or Calpain inhibitor III. Scale bar 100 μM (maximum intensity projection of Z-stacks). Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green), DAPI (blue) and anti-Rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red). (B) Higher magnification images of MAP2-positive neurites infected with rabies and treated with drugs. Images show significant blebbing in the neurites treated with calpain inhibitor III and EGTA. Scale bar 20 μM. (C) Quantification of MAP2-positive neurites relative to cell nuclei. At least 500 neurons were quantified per sample. ****p < 0.0001 versus mock infection, n = 4.SARM1 is required for the rapid execution of rabies induced axonal degenerationAs SARM1 is a chief facilitator of axonal degeneration by the accelerated digestion of NAD, it was then tested whether SARM1 is required for rabies induced axonal degeneration. Primary cortical neurons from SARM1 knockout mice [36] and wildtype mice were infected with lyssavirus strains. At 24 hours of infection, the wildtype neurons displayed complete loss of MAP2-positive neurites. The SARM1 knockout neurons, however, displayed only minimal loss of MAP2 staining, with intact neurites in a majority of the neurons (Fig 3A). But when the rabies infected SARM1 knockout neurons were cultured over several days, a gradual loss of MAP2 staining was observed (Fig 3A and 3B, S5A Fig). These data suggest that the deletion of SARM1 gene was able to significantly delay loss of neurites induced by rabies infection from 24 hours to beyond 7 days (Fig 3B). Western blotting was then performed on the lysates of wildtype and SARM1 knockout cortical neurons infected with rabies strains for 48 hours. These blots showed significantly higher levels of dendritic MAP2 and axonal neurofilament proteins in rabies infected SARM1 knockout neurons in comparison to wildtype neurons (Fig 3C and 3D). To specifically analyse the degeneration of axons, SARM1 knockout cortical neurons were then cultured in microfluidic chambers and infected with rabies virus (Z.Dog strain) in the axon panel. These neurons had intact axons without any granular disintegration at 24 hours post-infection (S5B Fig). This was in stark contrast to the infected wildtype cortical neurons (S3C Fig). Next primary DRG neurons from the SARM1 knockout mice were cultured in microfluidic chambers and infected with multiple rabies strains in the axon panel. In this study, significantly higher neurofilament staining and reduced axonal degeneration index were observed in the SARM1 knockout DRG neurons as compared to wildtype DRG neurons infected with all the strains of rabies virus used in this study (Fig 3E, 3F and 3G, S5C Fig). Hence, these results show that SARM1 is required for the rapid facilitation of axonal degeneration in response to rabies infection, both in cortical and DRG neurons.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008343.g003Fig 3Deletion of SARM1 gene significantly delays axonal degeneration in primary cortical and DRG neurons infected with rabies.(A) Time course analysis of neurite degeneration in SARM1 knockout neurons infected with rabies. Representative stitched tile images of mouse cortical neurons from wildtype (WT) and SARM1 knockout (SARM1-/-) mice infected with Thai dog rabies for 24 hours to 7 days. Images show intact MAP2-positive neurites in rabies infected SARM1-/- neurons at 24 hours, but a gradual loss of MAP2-positive neurites extending up to 7 days. Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green), anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red) and DAPI (blue). Scale bar 100 μM (maximum intensity projection of Z-stacks). (B) Quantification of MAP2-positive neurites relative to cell nuclei in WT, SARM1-/- cortical neurons infected with different strains of rabies virus from 24 hours up to 7 days. MAP2 intensity is quantified relative to the number of DAPI stained nuclei. At least 500 neurons were quantified per sample. ****p < 0.0001, ***p < 0.001 versus mock infection, n = 3. (C) Western blotting of MAP2 (dendritic) and neurofilament (axonal) proteins in cortical neurons from WT and SARM1-/- mice infected with different rabies strains for 48 hours. β-actin is shown as the loading control. (D) Quantification of MAP2 and neurofilament (heavy and medium chain) intensity in western blots relative to β-actin (loading control). ****p < 0.0001 versus mock infection and uninfected, n = 3. (E) Primary DRG neurons from WT and SARM1-/- mice cultured in microfluidic devices and infected with Thai dog rabies in the axon panel for 24 hours. The neurons are stained with pan axonal neurofilament antibody (green), anti α-tubulin (red) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (magenta). Scale bar 100 μM (maximum intensity projection of Z-stacks). Representative images show intact axons in SARM1-/- neurons but not in the WT DRG neurons infected with rabies. (F) Quantification of axonal degeneration as a ratio of disintegrated axons versus healthy (filamentous) (Axon degeneration index). ****p < 0.0001 versus mock, n = 4 (5 representative images quantified from each repeat). (G) Quantification of neurofilament immunostaining intensity in the axon panel images from experiments shown in Fig 3E & S5C Fig. ****p < 0.0001 versus mock infection, n = 4.Axonal degeneration impedes the transmission of rabies virus between neuronsSince we observed SARM1/NAD mediated axonal degeneration in neurons infected with lyssavirus, we hypothesized that this mechanism could be an intrinsic neuronal defense against neurotropic viral infections to block the spread of virus through synaptically-connected neurons. To examine this possibility for lyssavirus, a microfluidic system was used to generate an ex-vivo model of axonally-connected neuronal network. In this model, primary cortical neurons were cultured on neighboring panels, which were connected by the axons projecting through the adjoining microchannels. Neurons in the inoculated panel were infected with rabies virus and the spread of virus through the network of axons to the non-inoculated panel were examined. These neuronal cultures were stained with MAP2 antibody to visualize the dendrites and neuronal cell bodies in each panel. Wildtype cortical neurons infected with SHBRV lyssavirus at MOI of 1 for 24 hours showed extensive degeneration of neurites in the inoculated panel as observed by the loss of MAP2 staining (Fig 4A). This correlated with restriction of viral infection to the inoculated panel with limited spread of virus to the neurons in the non-inoculated panel (Fig 4A). However, when the same experiment was repeated with SARM1 knockout neurons, the SHBRV lyssavirus was able to efficiently spread from inoculated to non-inoculated panel. This was associated with intact MAP2-positive dendrites in the inoculated panel, unlike the wildtype neurons (Fig 4B). To quantify the amount of infectious virions in the panels, the culture media from both the inoculated and non-inoculated panels were collected for titration assays (Fig 4C) and the viral titre ratio between the panels were compared (Fig 4D). No significant difference in viral titre was observed in the culture media collected from inoculated panels of wildtype and SARM1 knockout neurons (Fig 4C). But the viral titre was significantly reduced in the non-inoculated panel of wildtype neurons compared to SARM1 knockout neurons (Fig 4C). Further analysis also showed a significantly higher titre ratio between non-inoculated and inoculated panels for SARM1 knockout neurons, compared with wildtype neurons (Fig 4D). These data demonstrate that SARM1 mediated axonal degeneration induced in response to rabies infection impedes the axonal transmission of rabies virus between interconnected neurons.10.1371/journal.ppat.1008343.g004Fig 4Axonal self-destruction impedes the spread of rabies virus among synaptically connected neurons.(A) Transynaptic transmission of rabies virus in WT neurons. Stitched tile confocal image (1.76 mm x 606.77 μM with maximum intensity projection of Z-stacks, 40 slices: 39.39 μM) showing the microfluidic chamber cultured with WT cortical neurons on both the panels (left side: non-inoculated panel and right side: inoculated panel). Neurons were infected with SHBRV Lyssavirus for 24 hours and a unidirectional flow of media from the non-inoculated panel into the inoculated panel, avoiding random diffusion of virus. After infection, neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red). Neurons on the inoculated panel show significant loss of MAP2 immunostaining indicative of axonal self-destruction, whereas neurons in the non-inoculated panel show restricted rabies infection and normal filamentous MAP2 immunostaining. Scale bar 200 μM. (B) Transynaptic transmission of rabies virus in SARM1-/- neurons. Stitched tile confocal image (1.76 mm x 606.77 μM with maximum intensity projection of Z-stacks, 40 slices: 34.18 μM) showing the microfluidic chamber cultured with SARM1-/- cortical neurons on both the panels. Unlike the WT neurons, SARM1-/- neurons in the infected panel show normal filamentous MAP2 immunostaining, indicating lack of axonal self-destruction and efficient spread of rabies virus to the non-inoculated panel. Scale bar 200 μM. (C) Quantification of infectious rabies virus by titration assays in the culture media collected from the inoculated and non-inoculated panels of WT and SARM1-/- neurons. (D) Ratio of viral titre in the culture media from non-inoculated and inoculated panels of WT and SARM1-/- neurons. Data shows increased virus spread to the non-inoculated panel in the chambers cultured with SARM1-/- neurons, as compared to WT neurons. *p < 0.05; SARM1-/- versus WT neurons infected with SHBRV rabies, n = 3.DiscussionThis study identifies a novel role of SARM1/NAD mediated axonal and dendritic degeneration in rabies infection. Our results show that rabies infection triggers axonal degeneration mediated by NAD loss and calpain activation in both DRG and cortical neurons. This study further illustrates that SARM1 is required for the accelerated execution of rabies induced axonal degeneration. This intrinsic defense response impedes the axonal transmission of rabies virus but results in morphological damage to the neuronal network in ex-vivo models.While SARM1 has been identified as a chief executor of axonal self-destruction, the mechanisms acting upstream of SARM1 activation remains unclear, although a few key regulators have recently been implicated. These include mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling [37] and Death Receptor 6 (DR6) [38] in mammals and Axundead in Drosophila [39]. In this study, deleting SARM1 gene significantly delayed axonal self-destruction in rabies infected ex-vivo neurons. However the degeneration of axons continued in the absence of SARM1, albeit at a much slower rate extending over several days. This implies that SARM1 acts as a rapid facilitator of axonal degeneration in viral infection by causing accelerated digestion of NAD molecules, similar to its role in axonal injury. However, it is still to be determined whether upstream molecules triggering the activation of SARM1 in viral infection are the same as those activating axonal self-destruction in injury (axotomy) or trophic withdrawal. Our identification of rabies induced axonal degeneration provides an alternate model to discover the activating mechanisms upstream of SARM1.This study describes a new anti-viral defense mechanism mediated by SARM1 in response to rabies infection. This adds on to previously established roles of SARM1 in innate immune response such as negative regulation of toll-like receptor (TLR3) signaling [40] and induction of neuronal apoptosis in response to viral infection [41]. SARM1 is also shown to regulate intrinsic neuronal chemokine and cytokine response in traumatic axonal injuries [42]. The functional relationship between these multifaceted roles of SARM1 in innate immunity remains to be investigated.The key pathological mechanisms associated with neurological dysfunction in rabies infection are yet to be fully defined. The paralytic form of rabies infection is linked to axonal neuropathy, muscle denervation, impaired nerve conduction and spinal paralysis [23, 43, 44]. In addition, features of axonal self-destruction such as focal axonal swellings, vacuolation, segmental demyelination and loss of nerve fibers are observed in the peripheral nerves of human patients with the paralytic form of rabies [21, 23, 25]. This peripheral nerve damage also correlates with reduced spread of virus to the brain in the paralytic form, in contrast to the furious form of rabies [24, 45, 46]. Thus, the pathological features of paralytic rabies are strongly in agreement with our findings in ex-vivo neuron cultures, including axonal self-destruction and impediment of viral spread. Our study suggest that SARM1/NAD mediated axonal self-destruction activated by neurons in response to rabies infection, could result in peripheral nerve damage and neurological dysfunction in the paralytic form of rabies.Interestingly, the degenerative axonal pathology in the peripheral nervous system is observed mainly in the paralytic form of rabies but not in the furious form [23]. Furious rabies is likely to be associated with dysfunction in the brain [47], as it affects higher neurological functions such as behavior and cognition [48]. Furthermore, there is usually minimal spinal paralysis in the furious form, at least in the initial stages of disease. This suggests a lack of or delayed axonal self-destruction in the furious form, allowing unhindered passage of virus to the brain. As observed in the cortical neurons in our study, axonal and dendritic degeneration could be induced by rabies infection in the brain at later stages of infection in the furious form. Indeed, by depleting SARM1 expression we show that axonal degeneration is delayed and degeneration occurs much later, allowing sufficient time for the virus to spread through the axons. However, it is unclear how in the furious form, which constitutes the majority of rabies infections, the virus is able to overcome SARM1 mediated axonal self-destruction in peripheral nerves and is able to spread through the nervous system. Many factors including differences in host-adaption of viral strains and the pre-existing immune status of the human host may contribute to the lack of peripheral axonal degeneration in the furious form of rabies. Improved animal models representing the two clinical forms of human rabies infection are therefore required in future studies, to conclusively validate the role of axonal self-destruction in determining rabies clinical outcome.In summary, our study identifies that axonal self-destruction may be activated by neurons in response to viral infection. To our knowledge, this presents the first identification of the role of SARM1 pathway in evoking axonal degeneration in rabies infection. This describes a novel signaling mechanism responsible for dysfunction of neurons in rabies infection. These results therefore warrant further examination of axonal self-destruction in viral infections other than rabies, which involve axonal trafficking of virions. This study significantly improves our understanding of intrinsic neuronal response to viral infection and opens the door to identification of new avenues for the treatment of neurotropic viral infections.Materials and methodsEthics statementAll experiments involving mouse embryos in this study were reviewed and approved by the Animal Ethics Committee (AEC) of the Australian Animal Health Laboratory (AAHL) (approval #1880, 1900 and 1901), following the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council Code of Practice for the Care and Use of Animals for Scientific Purposes.MiceWildtype C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Animal Resource Centre (Western Australia) and housed at the Small Animal Facility (SAF) of AAHL. SARM1 knockout mice on the C57BL/6 background developed previously [36], were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (USA) (stock number 018069, RRID:IMSR_JAX:018069). SARM1 knockout mice were housed and time-mated at SAF-AAHL in the same conditions as wildtype mice. Genotyping of SARM1-/- mice was performed following the standard PCR protocol provided by the Jackson Laboratories, using the following primer sequences (5’ to 3’); 23149: GGG AGAGCCTTCCTCATACC, 23150: TAAGGATGAACAGGGCCAAG, oIMR6916: CTTGGG TGGAGAGGCTATTC and oIMR6917: AGGTGAGATGACAGGAGATC.VirusesOriginal lyssavirus strains isolated from infected dog or bat were amplified in suckling mouse brain (Swiss mice) by intracerebral inoculation. The brain homogenates containing the virus were then used to infect Neuro-2a cells for further amplification. The viral strains were subjected to fewer than 3 passages in Neuro-2a cells during amplification. For infection with parental viral stocks, brain homogenates prepared from infected dog brain (P0) or after first passaging in sucking mouse brain (P1) were used. The brain homogenates were clarified and concentrated using Amicon 10kDa Ultra centrifugal filters (Merck). The viral titre of cell culture supernatants and clarified brain homogenates were determined by titration assays on BHK-21 cells. All experiments involving viruses were performed in the biosafety level 3 (BSL3) laboratories at AAHL, following protocols approved by AAHL’s institutional biosafety committee.Method detailsPrimary neuron culturesPrimary cortical neuron cultures were generated from embryonic day 15 (E15) embryos from both wildtype and SARM1-/- mice, based on previously published protocols [49]. Briefly, cortices from E15 embryos were separated under aseptic conditions, chopped into small pieces and digested with 0.125 mg/mL trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 15–20 mins at 37°C. The tissues were then treated with soybean trypsin inhibitor (STBI; Sigma-Aldrich) and DNase I (8000 units; ThermoFisher) and homogenised gently to form uniform cell suspensions. Cortical neurons were seeded at 120,000 cells per well on poly-L-ornithine (Sigma-Aldrich) coated glass coverslips (13mm; Menzel Glaser) in 24 well plates. Primary DRG neurons were generated from E13 or E14 embryos. The DRGs were isolated from the embryos and subjected to trypsin digestion and homogenisation as above. Both cortical and DRG neurons were cultured in neurobasal media with B27 supplement, glutamax (ThermoFisher) and gentamicin (Sigma-Aldrich).Neuronal culture in microfluidic chamberCompartmentalized axon chambers: For separating the neuronal cell bodies and axons, cortical and DRG neurons were cultured in xona microfluidic devices [28] (XONA Microfluidics, Cat#SND450) mounted on glass coverslips (24 x 40 mm; Menzel Glaser) coated with poly-L-ornithine (Sigma-Aldrich). Approximately 10 μL of cell suspension containing 120,000 cells were added to the cell body panel. The chambers were then incubated at 37°C for 10 min to allow attachment of neurons. Then 200 μL of neuronal culture media was added to the top and bottom wells of cell body panel and 150 μL of media was added to the wells in the axon panel. Approximately half the volume of media in each well was replaced with fresh media every two days and the higher volume of media on the cell body panel was maintained.Transynaptic microfluidic model: To model synaptically connected ex-vivo neuronal cultures, cortical neurons were extracted as above and seeded on to both the panels of microfluidic device (SND450, XONA microfluidics), each with 10 μL of cell suspension containing 120,000 cells.Viral quantificationViral titres of inocula were determined by direct fluorescent antibody test in BHK cells. Serial 10-fold dilutions of viral suspensions were prepared in cell culture media and were added to 96 well plates (4 replicates each), followed by BHK cell suspensions. The cells were then incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 5–6 days. The plates were fixed with 10% formalin for 30 minutes at room temperature and then stained with FITC conjugated anti-rabies monoclonal antibody (Fujirebio) at 1:10 dilution in 0.5% BSA/PBSA with 0.005% Evans blue. Plates were read with an Olympus BX51 inverted microscope and the median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) determined [50].Viral infection of primary neuron culturesPrimary DRG and cortical neuron cultures were infected after 7–10 days of culture. For infection of neurons cultured in 24 well plates and microfluidic chambers, viral inoculum containing the titre required to infect the neurons at MOI of 1 (based on the number of neurons originally seeded in each well or panel in microfluidic chamber, i.e. 120,000 cells) were added. For the microfluidic chambers media from the axon panel was removed and viral inoculum was added to the top well of the axon panel and allowed to flow through to the bottom well. Then the appropriate volume of media was added, so the total volume in each well in the axon panel was 150μL. Then 200 μL of media was added to the cell body panel, so a unidirectional flow of media from the cell body to axon panel was maintained. Similarly, to infect trans-synaptically connected neurons in microfluidic chambers, media from the panel to be inoculated was removed and the viral inoculum added. A unidirectional flow of media from the non-inoculated to inoculated panel was always maintained with higher volume of media in the non-inoculated panel. For mock infection, cell culture supernatant collected from uninfected Neuro-2a cells was added to the wells or chambers.Drug treatmentsDrug treatments were performed on infected primary cortical neurons cultured on coverslips in 24 well plates. Media from the wells was removed and replaced with fresh media with the appropriate volume of viral inoculum to infect the neurons at MOI of 1. After adding the viral inoculum containing media, appropriate dilutions of NAD (Sigma-Aldrich), EGTA (Sigma-aldrich) or calpain inhibitor III (ABCAM) were added to each well. The stock solution of these compounds was prepared as follows: NAD– 50mM and 200mM, dissolved in sterile water; EGTA– 200mM dissolved in 0.2M NaOH; Calpain inhibitor III - 20mM dissolved in DMSO. The neurons were fixed at 24 hours post-infection and analysed by immunostaining and confocal imaging.ImmunocytochemistryPrimary cortical neurons cultured on coverslips were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA, Sigma-Aldrich) in 0.05 M phosphate buffered saline (PBSA) for 1hour at room temperature. The coverslips were washed gently three times with PBSA and the cells were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 (Sigma-Aldrich) in PBSA for 5 min and then rinsed with PBSA. They were then blocked with 0.5% BSA in PBSA for 30 min and incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies diluted in 0.5% BSA in PBSA. They were washed three times with PBSA and incubated with species-specific fluorescent secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor, ThermoFisher) diluted at 1:200 in 0.5% BSA in PBSA for 1 hour at room temperature. Coverslips were then rinsed twice with PBSA, twice with sterile water and then stained with DAPI for 10 min, then were washed twice with sterile water and mounted on glass slides (ThermoFisher) with Vectashield mounting medium (Vector Laboratories).The following primary antibodies were used at the indicated dilutions: chicken anti-MAP2 (1:1000, ABCAM, cat#ab4674), rabbit anti-rabies nucleoprotein, 1:3000, in-house [51], mouse pan-axonal neurofilament antibody (SMI-312, 1:1000, BioLegend, cat#837904), Mouse anti- α tubulin (1:1000, Sigma-Aldrich, cat#T6199) and chicken anti- α tubulin (1:1000, ABCAM, cat#ab89984).Immunostaining of neurons in microfluidic chambersPrimary cortical and DRG neurons cultured in microfluidic chambers were fixed with 4% PFA after infection. 200μL of PFA was added to all four wells in the chamber and allowed to fix for at least an hour. After fixation, immunostaining with primary and secondary antibodies were performed in the microfluidic chamber as above, without disturbing the attachment to glass coverslips. For washing, PBSA was added to the top wells first, was allowed to flow through to the bottom wells, was incubated for 10 mins and then repeated three times. Primary and secondary antibodies were appropriately diluted (as above) in 0.5% BSA in PBSA and 200μL was added to each well of the chamber during incubation. After final washes, PBSA was added to all the wells in the chamber and stored at 4°C before confocal imaging.Confocal and live-cell imagingConfocal imaging was performed using a ZEISS LSM 800 inverted confocal microscope. To analyse neurite degeneration in MAP2-stained cortical neurons, images were acquired with the 20x objective using tiling function, covering an area of 998.28 x 673.84μM with Z-stacks (20 slices: 19–24μM), including at least 500 neurons in each image. The images were then stitched and a maximum intensity projection of z-stacks were generated. All the confocal imaging and processing were performed using ZEN 2.5 Blue software (ZEISS).For imaging the axon panels of DRG neurons, immunostained microfluidic chambers were placed carefully on the inverted microscope stage. Images of the axon panels were then taken with a 20x objective using tiling function, covering an area of 607.08 x 603.34μM with Z-stacks (40 slices: 14–18μM). Similarly, for imaging trans-synaptic neuronal cultures in microfluidic chamber, tile images were taken covering an area of 1.76 mm x 606.77μM with Z-stacks (40 slices: 34–40μM).Live-cell DIC imaging of rabies infected cortical and DRG neurons were performed using Leica SP5 confocal microscope in BSL3. Neurons were cultured in glass bottom dishes (μ-Dish 35 mm high glass bottom, Ibidi), infected with SHBRV lyssavirus at MOI-1 and imaged for 24 hours after infection.Image analysis of axonal and dendrite degenerationQuantification of MAP2-positive dendrites relative to DAPI stained nuclei was performed using stitched tile confocal images, using ImageJ [52]. Images were binarized, threshold normalized to mock-infected neuron images and the integrated density of MAP2 immunofluorescence was measured. This value was then divided by the total number of DAPI stained nuclei in the same image, counted using particle analyzer plugin with the following parameters: size (inch2)– 0.005-infinity and circularity– 0.00–1.00. “Watershed” function was applied to the DAPI stained images before analysis to avoid counting merged particles.The axon degeneration index from tubulin stained confocal images of axons in microfluidic chambers was calculated based on a method described previously [53]. The tubulin stained axon images were binarized and the total axon area was measured. Then the fragmented axons were quantified using particle analyzer plugin with the following parameters: size (inch2)– 20–15000 and circularity– 0.00–1.00. Axon degeneration index was then calculated as the ratio of fragmented axon area over total axon area. To quantify axonal degeneration by neurofilament loss in DRG neurons, the integrated density of neurofilament immunofluorescence in DRG axons were quantified from binarized images after normalizing threshold to mock-infected neuron images.Apoptosis assayTo quantify apoptotic cells in rabies infection, TUNEL staining was performed on the PFA fixed neurons on coverslips, according to manufacturer’s protocol using the in-situ cell death detection kit, TMR red (Sigma-Aldrich, cat#12 156 792 910). As a positive control for apoptosis, fixed and permeabilised neurons were treated with 3 units of DNase I in 50 mM Tris-HCL for 15 mins to induce DNA strand breaks. Confocal images of neurons stained with TUNEL TMR red and DAPI were taken as tile images covering an area of 998.28 x 673.84 μM with Z-stacks (20 slices: 19–24 μM), including at least 500 neurons in each image. The percentage of TUNEL-positive apoptotic bodies in these images (threshold normalized to controls), relative to DAPI stained nuclei were counted using imageJ particle analyzer plugin and watershed function, with the following parameters: size (inch2)– 0.003-infinity and circularity– 0.00–1.00.Western blottingFor western blotting, cortical neurons were lysed with RIPA buffer (Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.1% SDS and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). The protein lysates were heated at 56°C for 30 mins to inactivate rabies virus [54]. The protein concentration in the lysates were determined using DC protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). 30μg of lysates were mixed with NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (ThermoFisher), heated at 90°C for 5 mins and then loaded on to Bolt 4–12% Bis-Tris Plus Gels (ThermoFisher). The gels were run at 150 volts for 1hour in Bolt MOPS SDS running buffer (ThermoFisher). Proteins were then transferred onto PVDF membrane blots (Bio-Rad) using wet tank blotting system (Bio-Rad), blocked with 3% BSA in PBSA with 0.2% Tween 20 (Merck Millipore) and probed overnight at 4°C with the following concentrations of primary antibodies diluted in 1% BSA/PBSA: chicken anti-MAP2 (1:1000, ABCAM, cat#ab92434), mouse pan-axonal neurofilament antibody (1:1000, BioLegend, cat#837904) and mouse anti- β actin (1:2000, Sigma-Aldrich, cat#A2228). The blots were then washed with 0.5% Tween 20 in PBSA and incubated with appropriate species-specific fluorescent secondary antibodies (Alexa Fluor, ThermoFisher) for 1hour at room temperature. The blots were imaged using iBright FL1000 imaging system (ThermoFisher).Statistical analysisStatistical significance between two values was determined using a two-tailed t test, analyses of three or more values were performed by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s post hoc test using Prism 7 (GraphPad).Data are presented as mean ± SEM. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001.Supporting informationS1 FigEffect of rabies infection on primary cortical neurons.(A) Rabies induced blebbing of MAP2-positive neurites in cortical neurons at 16 hours post infection (high magnification). Representative confocal images of mouse primary cortical neurons infected with rabies strains (H.ABLV, SHBRV and Z.Dog), showing focal swellings in the MAP2-positive neurites (white arrows) at 16 hours post infection. Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (Red). Scale bar 10 μM. (B) Rabies induced loss of MAP2-positive neurites in cortical neurons at 24 hours post infection (low magnification). Representative stitched tile images of mouse cortical neurons infected with rabies strains (H.ABLV, SHBRV and Z.Dog) showing loss of MAP2 staining at 24 hours post infection, but not in mock infected neurons. Scale bar 100 μM. Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green), anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red) and DAPI (blue). Merged images of all three channels are shown.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigDegeneration of axons and dendrites in rabies infected neurons.(A) Representative confocal images of mouse primary cortical neurons infected with parental stocks of rabies strains (Z.Dog P1 and T.Dog P0). High magnification images of mock infected neurons show co-staining of shorter dendrites with MAP2 antibody (green) and longer axons with neurofilament antibody (red) in the same neurons. Infection with Z.Dog P1 and T.Dog P0 strains for 24 hours, show significant loss of filamentous dendritic and axonal staining in neurons. Rabies infection is identified by staining with anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (magenta) and nuclei are stained in blue. Scale bar 20 μM. (B) Examination of induction of apoptosis in primary cortical neurons infected with rabies for 24 hours. Representative stitched tile images of mouse cortical neurons infected with rabies strains and stained with TUNEL to detect apoptosis. As a positive control, neurons were treated with DNase I to induce apoptotic DNA fragmentation. Images show neurons stained with DAPI (blue-nuclei) and TUNEL (red-apoptotic neurons). Scale bar 100 μM. (C) Quantification of apoptotic neurons in rabies infected and mock infected cultures. Percentage of apoptotic neurons was calculated from experiments shown in S2B Fig using ImageJ. TUNEL positive neurons were identified as apoptotic and the percentage of apoptosis was calculated from the total number of DAPI stained nuclei. At least 500 neurons are quantified per sample. Data was found to be not significant versus mock infected neurons, n = 4. Images shown are maximum intensity projections of Z-stacks.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S3 FigAxonal infection of primary cortical neurons cultured in microfluidic chambers with rabies virus.(A) Immunostaining of mock infected primary cortical neurons cultured in microfluidic chamber. Stitched tile confocal image showing the microfluidic chamber seeded with cortical neurons on the cell body panel. As the neurons grow, axons extend through the micro-channels into the axon panel. The neurons were mock infected on the axon panel for 24 hours and a higher volume of culture media was maintained on the cell body panel to maintain the flow of media from cell body to axon panel and avoid random diffusion of inoculum from the axon panel. Neurons are stained with anti-neurofilament antibody (NF, green), anti α-tubulin (red) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (magenta). Scale bar 100 μM. (B) Higher magnification images of the axon panel from the mock infected neurons shown in S3A Fig. Images show intact neurofilament staining and filamentous tubulin stained axons. Scale bar 50 μM. (C) Immunostaining of primary cortical neurons cultured in microfluidic chamber and infected with Z.Dog rabies virus for 24 hours in the axon panel. Stitched tile confocal image show loss of neurofilament staining in the axons of neurons infected with rabies for 24 hours, while neurofilament staining can still be observed in the cell bodies and the proximal axons in the cell body panel. Similarly, tubulin staining in the axon panel show granular disintegration of distal axons. Rabies infection is identified by positive staining with anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody. Scale bar 100 μM. (D) Higher magnification images of axon panel from the Z.Dog rabies infected neurons shown in S3C Fig. Images show axonal degeneration as observed by the loss of neurofilament staining and granular disintegration of tubulin stained axons. Scale bar 50 μM. Images shown are maximum intensity projections of Z-stacks.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S4 Fig(A) Rabies induced axonal degeneration in primary DRG neurons cultured in microfluidic chambers. Mouse DRG neurons were cultured in microfluidic devices to separate the cell body and axons. The axon panels were then infected with different street strain rabies virus (H.ABLV, SHBRV and Z.Dog) for 24 hours. Figure shows stitched tile images of axon panel infected with rabies virus. The axons were stained with pan axonal neurofilament antibody (green), anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (magenta) and anti α-tubulin (red). Scale bar 100 μM. Axonal degeneration is observed by the loss of neurofilament staining and granular disintegration of tubulin stained axons. Images shown are maximum intensity projections of Z-stacks. (B) Pharmacological inhibition of neurite degeneration in rabies infection. Effect of extracellular NAD addition and calpain inhibition on rabies induced loss of MAP2-positive neurites. Stitched tile images of mouse cortical neurons infected with H.ABLV, SHBRV and Z.Dog rabies for 24 hours and treated with NAD, EGTA or Calpain inhibitor III. Scale bar 100 μM. Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green), DAPI (blue) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red). All three channels are merged together, which show reduced loss of MAP2-positive neurites in infected neurons treated with NAD, EGTA or calpain inhibitor III compared to no drug treatment. Images shown are maximum intensity projections of Z-stacks.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S5 FigDeletion of SARM1 gene significantly delays axonal degeneration in primary cortical and DRG neurons infected with rabies.(A) Time course analysis of neurite degeneration in SARM1 knockout neurons infected with rabies. Representative images of mouse cortical neurons from SARM1 knockout (SARM1-/-) mice infected with rabies virus (H.ABLV, SHBRV and Z.DOG) for 24 hours to 7 days. Images show intact MAP2-positive neurites in rabies infected SARM1-/- neurons at 24 hours, but a gradual loss of MAP2-positive neurites extending up to 7 days. Neurons are stained with anti-MAP2 antibody (green), anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (red) and DAPI (blue). Scale bar 100 μM. (B) Immunostaining of SARM1-/- cortical neurons cultured in microfluidic chamber and infected on the axonal panel with Z.Dog rabies virus for 24 hours. Stitched tile confocal image shows SARM1-/- neurons infected on the axon panel for 24 hours. Neurons are stained with anti-neurofilament antibody (NF, green), anti α-tubulin (red) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (magenta). Scale bar 100 μM. Image shows lack of axonal degeneration in SARM1-/- neurons infected specifically at the axons with rabies virus. (C) Inhibition of rabies induced axonal degeneration in SARM1-/- DRG neurons cultured in microfluidic chambers. Primary DRG neurons from WT and SARM1-/- mice cultured in microfluidic devices to separate the cell body and axons. The axon panels were then infected with different street strains of rabies virus (H.ABLV, SHBRV and Z.DOG) for 24 hours. Figure shows stitched tile images of axon panel of SARM1-/- neurons infected with rabies. The axons were stained with anti-neurofilament antibody (green), anti α-tubulin (red) and anti-rabies nucleoprotein antibody (magenta). Scale bar 100 μM. Images shown are maximum intensity projections of Z-stacks.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 VideoLive DIC imaging of primary cortical neurons infected with SHBRV Lyssavirus.Infected neurons were imaged from 2 hours up to 24 hours post-infection. Video shows axonal swellings, granular disintegration and loss of axons. Axons were imaged every 10 minutes. Scale bar 50 μM.(AVI)Click here for additional data file.S2 VideoLive DIC imaging of primary DRG neurons infected with SHBRV Lyssavirus.Infected neurons were imaged from 2 hours up to 22 hours post-infection. Video shows granular disintegration and loss of axons. Axons were imaged every 15 minutes. Scale bar 25 μM.(AVI)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Pathogenesis of bat rabies in a natural reservoir: Comparative susceptibility of the straw-colored fruit bat (

IntroductionRabies is an almost invariably fatal disease caused by rabies virus (RABV) or other members of the Lyssavirus genus, in the family of Rhabdoviridae of the order Mononegavirales. Rabies is predominantly transmitted by carnivores, in particular dogs, and causes more than 59,000 human fatalities annually [1]. As terrestrial rabies in domestic and wild carnivores is being brought under control by vaccination in high and middle income countries, the role of bats as a source of human infection has become more evident [2–4]. Additionally, although rare, the transmission of rabies from bats to terrestrial carnivores has been demonstrated as a driver for the generation of outbreaks in terrestrial mammals, as has been reported several times in North America [5–7]. Singular spill-over events of lyssaviruses other than RABV from bats to terrestrial mammals also have been reported [8–13]. Despite their increasing importance, we know relatively little about the dynamics of lyssavirus infections in bats [14] and how, for example, pathogenesis might differ from that in carnivores. This makes it difficult to assess the zoonotic risk of bat lyssavirus infections.Some aspects of the pathogenesis of lyssavirus infections in bats are known. This knowledge is mainly based on experimental infections with four lyssaviruses in natural bat reservoir hosts: rabies virus, Australian bat lyssavirus, and European bat lyssaviruses 1 and 2 [15]. These experimental infections have shown that—like rabies virus in carnivores—these lyssaviruses target the brains of bats [16–19] with infection typically leading to encephalitis and death [20–23].Other aspects of the pathogenesis of lyssaviruses in bats are poorly understood, such as mechanisms of virus excretion and transmission, the nature and duration of clinical signs, and the duration of virus excretion. An important limiting factor in this pathogenesis research is that oral excretion of virus is an uncommon event in experimentally infected bats [20–41].This study was an initial step to reach our overall goal of developing an experimental model that mimics natural lyssavirus infection in a natural reservoir bat host. With ‘natural reservoir host’ we mean a host that is naturally infected and has co-evolved with the pathogen. For the experimental model, we chose Lagos bat virus (LBV) and the straw-colored fruit bat (Eidolon helvum). Lagos bat virus, which is divided into four lineages, A to D [15], is endemic in the straw-colored fruit bat [42], a common and widespread bat species in sub-Saharan Africa, which is not considered as ‘Threatened’ by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (www.iucnredlist.org). Infections of LBV in mammals other than bats have been reported sporadically [11, 12, 43]. Infection of humans has never been demonstrated, but it should be noted that diagnostic analysis of human rabies cases in Africa, if undertaken, typically uses methods that do not distinguish RABV from LBV or other lyssaviruses [15]. While the impact of LBV on human health is currently unknown, the widespread distribution of the straw-colored fruit bat and the apparent high rate of exposure of this species to LBV across its range [44], the increasingly close association of people with this bat species [45] and the failure of rabies vaccination to immunize against LBV [46], indicate that this pathogen has the potential to be an important public health threat.The specific goal of this study was to choose the most suitable LBV strain, out of three that were available to us, for further studies. All three strains originally had been isolated from the brains of straw-colored fruit bats [47–49]. These strains differ in passage history and ability to cause infection in laboratory animals [11, 50–54]. To determine their ability to cause in vivo infection in a reservoir species, we inoculated these LBV strains into the cerebrum of straw-colored fruit bats. The bats we used were obtained from our closed captive breeding colony [55]. For each of the three strains, we determined the rate of infection, associated clinical signs, cell tropism, and pathologic changes.Materials and methodsEthics statementExperimental procedures were approved beforehand by the Wildlife Division of the Forestry Commission of Ghana, the Zoological Society of London Ethics Committee (license number WLE638) and the Institutional Review Board of Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, University of Ghana, Legon.Bats were anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine (5 mg/kg body weight [bw]; ketamine hydrochloride 115.36 mg/ml, Fort Dodge Animal Health Ltd, U.K.) and medetomidine (0.05 mg/kg bw; Laboratories SYVA S. A., Spain). Bats were euthanized by exsanguination under anesthesia with ketamine (5 mg/kg bw) and medetomidine (0.05 mg/kg bw), followed by cervical dislocation.Virus preparationVirus stocks of three LBV strains were prepared and titrated according to standard methods. [56] The first virus strain was a lineage A LBV isolated from a bat in Dakar, Senegal in 1985. [11, 49] This virus was kindly provided as a fourth passage in mouse neuroblastoma cells (N2A) by M. Lafon, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, and originally given to Institut Pasteur by J.P. Digoutte as a seventh passage in mouse brains. The virus was propagated three times in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells. It reached an infectious virus titer of 107.25 median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) per ml. The second virus strain was a lineage B LBV isolated from a bat in Lagos Island, Nigeria in 1956 [48]. It had a very large, but unknown, number of passages, primarily in BHK cells (including the last four passages). It reached an infectious virus titer of 105 TCID50 per ml. The third virus strain was a lineage A LBV isolated from a bat in Kumasi, Ghana in 2013 [47], and was propagated four times in BHK cells. It reached an infectious virus titer of 105.7 TCID50 per ml. All viruses were diluted to obtain a final inoculum dose of 103.5 TCID50 in 30 μl.Experimental set upWe inoculated each of the three available LBV strains into straw-colored fruit bats in order to find the most suitable virus strain for the development of a model for LBV infection in a natural reservoir host. Although not a natural route of infection, we chose intracranial inoculation because this is the most reliable method to infect the brain, by circumventing the need for the virus to spread from a peripheral inoculation site (e.g. skeletal muscle) to the brain. If we initially used peripheral inoculation and no CNS infection occurred, we would not be able to rule out that the virus was defective. Intracranial inoculation was performed by stereotactic surgery to minimize variation in the site of inoculation and to minimize damage to the brain. The course of infection in inoculated bats was followed until general paralysis was reached in order to provide maximum time for the virus to spread from brain to peripheral sites, including sites(s) of excretion, and to determine whether bats were able to survive infection.BatsBats were obtained from a captive breeding colony that is maintained in Ghana [55] that had been closed to new wild-caught bats since January 2010. The animals were held in a double-walled cage with a solid roof to prevent any direct or indirect contact with free-living bats. All bats born in this colony had tested negative for antibodies against LBV using a modified version of the fluorescent antibody virus neutralization test with a lineage B LBV as the challenge virus [56]. The bats used in this experiment were all captive-bred and again tested seronegative at the beginning of the study, which started in October 2013. A month prior to the inoculation, and throughout the study, each bat used in the experiment was housed individually in a wire-mesh cage (80 x 80 x 80 cm). These cages were suspended from the roof of the animal house and separated by approximately two meters of space and tin baffles to prevent direct physical contact between bats and indirect contact via droplets (urine, secretions, food, water). Bats received diced mixed fruits (e.g. mango, papaya, banana) and ad lib water, which were replaced every day. Twelve bats were randomly assigned to one of four groups (three in each). The age category (juvenile, adult) and the sex of each bat was assessed according to body size and development of the external reproductive organs (S1 Table). The bats in each of the three virus groups were inoculated intracerebrally with one of the LBV strains. The bats in the fourth (control) group were inoculated with 30 μl of cell culture supernatant harvested from uninfected BHK-21 cells.Stereotactic surgeryBats were anesthetized and their heads were placed in a ‘U’ frame stereotactic instrument (David Kopf Instruments, 902 Dual model). For pain relief and prevention of secondary bacterial infections, each bat was given a subcutaneous injection of butorphanol (0.2–2 mg/kg bw), buprenorphine (0.05 mg/kg bw), metacam (0.2 mg/kg bw; Meloxicam 2 mg/ml, Boehringer Ingelheim Vet medica GmbH, Germany) and enrofloxacin (0.2 ml/kg bw; Baytril 2.5%, Bayer plc, U.K). The cranium was exposed by skin incision and application of skin retractors. A 0.8 mm diameter dental drill was used to make a perforation in the parietal bone, unilaterally, 2 mm to the right of the midline, level with the lateral canthi of the eyes (approximately A/P, -2 to -4 mm; M/L, 2 mm; D/V, 4 mm from the Bregma point). The inoculum (see above) was injected at a depth of 5 mm, in a volume of 30 μl using a Hamilton syringe with a 36-gauge needle at a speed of 5 μl/min. After injection, the needle was kept in place for an additional 4 min before slow withdrawal. The skin was stitched back in the original position. A transponder chip for individual identification and for measurement of body temperature was placed subcutaneously in the interscapular region (Bio Medic Data system Inc.). Anesthesia was reversed with atipamezole (0.1 mg/kg bw; Veterinary Essentials, U.K.). Bats were given oral enrofloxacin (0.6 ml/kg bw/day) and metacam (0.1 mg/kg bw/day) for three days after the day of the surgery.Clinical examination and samplingBats were initially observed twice daily, at 07.00 and at 16.00 GMT for the presence of clinical signs. After the first occurrence of clinical signs, frequency of observations was increased to every two hours, day and night. Observers were unaware of the group the bat was in. Oral swabs (individually wrapped 2.5 mm diameter cotton tip [Fisher Ltd.]) were taken twice per week until the onset of clinical signs, when they were taken daily until death. This resulted in oral swabs being taken one to three times per bat in the period of four days prior to death. Oral swabs were collected in RNAlater (Ambion) for viral RNA detection. Euthanasia was delayed to a time point of severe clinical signs (generalized paresis) in order to determine whether bats could survive LBV infection. The mock-inoculated bats were euthanized after the last virus-infected bat had died (day 9 post inoculation).Pathological examinationNecropsies and tissue sampling were performed according to a standard protocol as soon as possible (approximately 1 to 6 hours after death) within a class 2 biological safety cabinet in a biosafety level 3 laboratory. At necropsy, a standard range of tissues (see below) was collected (1) fixed in neutral-buffered 10% formalin for histological examination, (2) in plain dry tubes for virus isolation, and (3) in tubes with RNAlater for RNA extraction. The following 14 tissue samples were collected: brain (hippocampus, cerebellum, medulla oblongata in separate tubes), and arbitrarily selected pieces of salivary gland, tongue, heart, lung, liver, kidney, spleen, submandibular lymph node, duodenum, jejunum and colon. Each tissue was collected using a new pair of disposable forceps and a new scalpel blade on an individual gauze pad to prevent possible cross-contamination. For the tissues for histological examination, the formalin was replaced once after two to three days to enhance fixation; the samples were stored at room temperature. The samples in RNAlater were allowed to fix overnight at 4 °C, and then stored at -70 °C until analysis, whereas plain samples in dry tubes were flash-frozen at -70°C.Virological examinationA range of tests were performed in biosafety level 3 laboratories at the Animal and Plant Health Laboratory Agency, U.K. and at the Friedrich Loeffler Institute, Germany, as described below:Hemi-nested reverse transcription-PCR. All tissues and oral swabs, were tested with hemi-nested reverse transcription PCR (hn-RT-PCR) according to a previously-described protocol [57]. This test has proven to be highly sensitive because amplification from a small number of target genomes is sufficient for detection [58, 59].Fluorescent antibody test Touch impressions on glass microscope slides of the three different parts of frozen brain were made and stained with fluorescein-isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-rabies mouse monoclonal antibody (Fujirebio Diagnostics, USA, anti-N) [56]. A rabies-virus-positive mouse brain was used as positive control. The brain of an uninfected mouse was used as negative control.Histology and immunohistochemistryThe formalin-fixed tissues were embedded in paraffin wax, cut in 4-μm-thick serial sections and routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin to detect microscopic lesions. Immunohistochemistry was performed to detect lyssaviral antigen [60]. Briefly, tissue slides were prepared for immunohistochemical staining by leaving slides in hydrogen peroxide 30% for 20 min to block endogenous peroxidase. Antigen retrieval consisted of boiling in citric acid buffer for 10 min. Virus antigen was detected with a goat anti-rabies N protein IgG (Rabies polyclonal DFA Reagent Goat IgG FITC conjugate; EMD Millipore; 1:500) as primary antibody, and rabbit anti-goat IgG-HRP (DAKO; 1:200) as secondary antibody. The brain of a mouse infected experimentally with silver-haired bat rabies virus (kindly provided by P. Koraka) was included as a positive control. The test was performed with goat serum (1:500) not containing antibodies against RABV as a negative control. Immunohistochemistry was performed on all tissues collected. Six coronal brain sections were made at equal intervals from the rostral to the caudal ends of the fixed brains, to be able to compare antigen presence in similar levels of the brain areas between bats. These brain sections were scored for frequency of lyssaviral antigen expression without prior knowledge of the identity of the bats. For this, the number of antigen-positive neurons relative to the total number of neurons was estimated in each of 10 arbitrarily selected, 40X objective (Olympus BX51) fields per brain section. The average percentages per brain section were placed in the following categories: 0–25% (category 1), 26–50% (category 2), 51–75% (category 3) and 76–100% (category 4).ResultsClinical signsBats in the Ghana and Senegal groups died or had to be euthanized earlier (four to six days after inoculation) than bats in the Nigeria group (8 days after inoculation) (Table 1). The time from onset of clinical signs to death was similar among all three groups: thus, although group sizes were small clear differences were observed between the three strains: the Ghana and Senegal strains had shorter incubation periods on average than the Nigeria strain. All virus-inoculated bats developed clinical signs only during the last 24 hours prior to death, with a rapid progression of neurological signs. Bats with clinical signs did not eat (9/9). The three groups differed in clinical presentation, although differences were not statistically significant due to the small group sizes. One of the initial clinical signs in the Senegal group was a marked sensitivity to external stimuli, such as approaching of the cage by a person, loud sounds, fast movement of an object (e.g. experimentator’s hand) near the cage (3 out of 3 bats), but this was not seen in any of the other groups. Muscle spasms were observed in the Senegal (3/3) and Nigeria (3/3) groups, but not in the Ghana group (0/3). Increased vocalization (3/3) and aggression (3/3) were seen only in the Ghana group. Foam around the mouth was seen in the Nigeria group (2/3) and in the Senegal group (1/3), but not in the Ghana group (0/3). The Nigeria bats showed lethargy throughout much of the clinical course of illness (3/3), but, if present, this was an agonal feature in the other bats. None of the bats experienced significant changes of body temperature except when they developed extreme paresis or paralysis at the terminal stage of the disease, when their body temperature decreased by 2–3°C compared to mock-inoculated bats. All mock inoculated bats remained clinically normal and survived until the end of the experiment (9 days post-inoculation). There was no apparent correlation between age or sex and any of the variables analyzed above.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006311.t001Table 1Presence (+) or absence (-) of clinical signs in bats inoculated with Lagos bat virus.Inoculum GroupBat no.Days to deathHindleg paresisWing paresisMuscle tremors or spasmsLethargy (not agonal)Lip smackingFoam around the mouthVocalizationAggressionHyperaesthesiacControl1naa---------2na---------3na---------Senegal134--+-----+56+-+-----+6b5--+--+--+Nigeria7b8++++-----88++++-+---98++++-+---Ghana105+---+-++-115+-----++-126+-----++-a na, not applicableb Spontaneous death (other bats were euthanized).c Increased sensitivity to external stimuli.Virological examinationAll parts of the brain (hippocampus, cerebellum, medulla oblongata) of all virus-inoculated bats tested positive by both hn-RT-PCR and fluorescent antibody test for lyssavirus RNA and antigen respectively, while the brains of all mock-inoculated bats tested negative. The spread of lyssavirus to organs outside the brain (extra-encephalic), based on hn-RT-PCR testing of 11 extra-encephalic tissues per bat, differed substantially among groups (Table 2). In the Ghana group, extra-encephalic tissues in three bats tested positive, and these had 8 to 10 positive tissues per bat. In the Senegal group, three bats tested positive, but these had only 3 to 6 positive extra-encephalic tissues per bat. In the Nigeria group, only one bat tested positive, and it had 2 positive extra-encephalic tissues. Thus the Ghana strain disseminated to more extra-encephalic tissues than either of the other two strains.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006311.t002Table 2Distribution of Lagos bat viral RNA and antigen in tissues of experimentally infected bats.Inoculum GroupBat no.Days to deathTissue (lyssaviral RNA by hn-RT-PCR/lyssaviral antigen by immunohistochemistry)Total no tissues positive hn-RT-PCR/ IHCBrainSalivary glandTongueLymph nodeaHeartLungDuodenumJejunumColonLiverKidneySpleenSenegal134+ b /++/- c+/--/--/--/--/-NAd-/--/--/--/-3/156+/++/--/--/-+/-+/--/--/-+/--/-+/--/-6/165+/++/--/-e-/-+/+f+/-+/--/--/--/--/--/-5/3Nigeria78+/+-/--/--/--/-g-/--/--/--/--/--/--/-1/188+/+-/--/--/--/--/--/--/--/--/--/--/-1/198+/+-/--/--/--/-g-/--/--/-+/-+/--/--/-3/1Ghana105+/+-/-+/-h+/-+/+f+/-+/+i+/+i-/-+/-+/-+/-10/5115+/++/--/--/-+/+f+/-+/+i+/-+/--/--/-+/-8/3126+/+-/+j+/+k-/-+/+f+/-+/+i+/-+/-+/-+/-+/-10/5Total positive9; 9l4; 13; 31; 05; 45; 04; 33; 14; 03; 03; 03; 0a Submandibular lymph node.b +, Positive.c -, Negative.d NA, Sample not available.e Taste buds positive, neurons in ganglia not.f Neurons in ganglia of the heart contained lyssavirus antigen.g Ganglia were not visible in heart section.h Surface epithelium positive, neurons in ganglion not.i Neurons in myenteric plexi positive.j Neurons in ganglion in the interstitium of the salivary gland positive.k Taste buds and neurons in ganglia positive.l x; y, x indicates total number of RNA positives; y indicates total number of antigen positives.All oral swabs tested negative by hn-RT-PCR. The virus was detected by hn-RT-PCR in salivary gland in all bats from the Senegal group, and in one bat from the Ghana group. However, virus was detected in just one salivary gland with immunohistochemistry, and this was in a bat’s salivary gland that had tested negative with hn-RT-PCR (see below).Pathological examinationAt necropsy, no gross lesions were observed in any of the virus-inoculated or mock-inoculated bats. On histopathological examination, all virus-inoculated bats had diffuse, mild to moderate meningoencephalitis. This was characterized by the presence of a few to moderate number of lymphocytes in the meninges, around blood vessels (Fig 1). In the brain parenchyma, there was a mild increase in the number of glial cells compared to the mock-inoculated bats, and occasional pyknotic or karyorrhectic cells of undetermined origin (ranging from one to eight per five 40X objective fields). There were perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates, of up to three cell layers thick, in most brain sections. Negri bodies were not observed. Outside the brain, the only nervous tissue lesion seen was in bat 12 (Ghana group): the wall of the colon had a mild lymphocytic infiltration surrounding a partly necrotic myenteric plexus (plexus of Auerbach), of which the remaining neurons were not positive by immunohistochemistry (see below). The colon of this bat, however, did test positive for lyssavirus by hn-RT-PCR (Table 2).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006311.g001Fig 1Inflammation in the meninges and brain parenchyma of a bat with Lagos bat virus infection (bat 10, Ghana strain).H & E staining. Original magnification: x10 (A), x40 (B) A: Perivascular cuffing surrounding blood vessels in the meninges. Cells surrounding blood vessels are mainly composed of small mononuclear cells with dense chromatin pattern (lymphocytes). B: Higher magnification of A.There were a few lesions in bats 6, 8 and 11, which we considered to be incidental and not directly caused by LBV infection. Bat 6 (Senegal group) had an acute, mild, multifocal fibrinopurulent pneumonia, characteristic of aspiration pneumonia. This bat was noted to have had paresis and muscle spasms during the terminal 24 hours of infection, which could have caused aspiration of water. This lesion, therefore, might have been indirectly caused by the LBV infection. Both bat 6 and bat 8 (Nigeria group) had a chronic, mild, multifocal lymphoplasmacytic interstitial nephritis. Bat 8 had an acute mild focal necropurulent hepatitis. Bat 11 (Ghana group) had deeply eosinophilic, homogeneous to laminated, irregularly shaped structures (interpreted as sialoliths) in the lumina of about half of the secretory ducts of the salivary gland. Occasionally these structures compressed the lining ductular epithelial cells. None of the mock-inoculated bats had histological lesions in any of the tissues examined, including the brain.ImmunohistochemistryCells positive for immunohistochemical staining, and thus positive for lyssavirus antigen, were found in a number of tissues. In most of these tissues, positively-stained cells could be clearly identified as neurons based on their morphology. When detected in neurons, antigen was located in the cytoplasm, with staining consisting of small (pinpoint to approximately 2 μm diameter) or large (approximately 5 μm diameter) granules. The number of granules per cell ranged from one to numerous. Neurons with multiple antigen granules were often found adjacent to neurons that did not contain any staining. Variation in the size and number of granules per neuron differed among groups. Stained neurons in the Senegal and Ghana group bats contained only small granules, with a high variation in the number of granules per neuron. In contrast, stained neurons in the Nigeria group bats contained large granules with little variation in the number of granules per neuron (Fig 2). Overall, the Ghana group had significantly fewer antigen-positive neurons than the Senegal or Nigeria group bats (p = 0.004, paired t-test; Table 3).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006311.g002Fig 2Lyssavirus antigen expression in neurons infected with different strains of Lagos bat virus.All sections immunostained for lyssavirus antigen. Original magnification: x100 (A, B and C). A: Senegal strain, relatively large number of neurons are infected, small cytoplasmic antigen (red) granules, infected neurons have variable numbers of granules (Bat 6). B: Nigeria strain, relatively large number of neurons are infected, large cytoplasmic antigen (red) granules, infected neurons have similar numbers of granules (Bat 9). C: Ghana strain, relatively few neurons infected, small cytoplasmic antigen (red) granules (Bat 12).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006311.t003Table 3Distribution of Lagos bat virus antigen in the brains of experimentally infected bats.Inoculum GroupBat no.Days to deathCategory of antigen-positive neurons per brain sectionAverage category of antigen-positive neurons per brainAverage category of antigen-positive neurons per brain, per groupAaBCDEFSenegal1341b1213325621211326534333332Nigeria7832114228811213229843332232Ghana1051111131115111123212611111211*Average222123a Brain section A corresponds to the most rostral part, section F to the most caudal part of the brain.b Category 1: 0–25% of the neurons antigen positive in 10, 40X objective fields arbitrarily selected in this brain section, 2: 26–50%, 3: 51–75%, 4:76–100%.* Significantly lower than the average score of Nigeria and Senegal groups (p = 0.004, paired t-test).In the brain, antigen-positive neurons were generally concentrated in the most caudal brain section examined, otherwise there were no clear patterns within or between groups comparing percentage of neurons infected across the six brain sections examined for each bat (Table 3). We could not exclude that a small number of positive cells in the brain were of other cell types, possibly glial cells. The majority of antigen positive cells in the brain did not show any signs of degeneration or necrosis; a few neurons showed evidence of cell shrinkage and loss of Nissl substance.In the extra-encephalic tissues examined, lyssavirus antigen was detected in neurons. Antigen-positive neurons were found only in ganglia in salivary gland, tongue, and heart, and in myenteric plexi (also called Auerbach’s plexi) in duodenum and jejunum (Fig 3A–3C; Table 4). Submucosal plexi (also called Meissner’s plexi) were visible in all samples of duodenum, jejunum and colon, but no lyssavirus antigen was detected in their neurons.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006311.g003Fig 3Lyssavirus antigen expression in neurons infected with different strains of Lagos bat virus.All sections immunostained for lyssavirus antigen. Original magnification: x 100 (A, B and C); x40 (D); x100 (inset of D) A: Taste bud (between short arrows) bordering the lumen of the oral cavity (indicated with asterisk) in cross section of tongue. Several neuroepithelial cells within the taste bud have small cytoplasmic antigen (red) granules. Epithelial cells directly adjacent to taste buds also occasionally have antigen granules (indicated with long arrow) (Bat 6). B: Three neurons in a ganglion within the connective tissue of a salivary gland. One neuron has small cytoplasmic antigen (red) granules (Bat 12). C: Neurons in a ganglion within the connective tissue of the epicardium (heart). One neuron has abundant small cytoplasmic antigen (red) granules. Directly adjacent one neuron with less antigen granules (Bat 6). D: Neurons within the myenteric plexus (intestine) have abundant small cytoplasmic antigen (red) granules. Asterisk indicates the serosa side of the intestinal wall (bat 11). Inset contains a higher magnification of the image in the square of D.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006311.t004Table 4Neuronal routes different Lagos bat viruses travelled from the intracranial inoculation site to the periphery.LBV strain(s)Peripheral locationDeduced route for centrifugal spread of LBVs from intracranial inoculation site to peripheryOrigin in CNSRoute (nerves & ganglia)Characteristics of neuronal routeSpecific nucleusGeneral location of nucleus in CNSNumber of synapses to passDivision of nervous system involvedGhanaTongue ganglionSalivatoryMotor medullaChorda tympani and glossopharyngeal nerves1Parasympathetic motorGhanaOtic ganglion (salivary gland)Inferior salivatoryMotor medullaChorda tympani and glossopharyngeal nerves1Parasympathetic motorGhana, SenegalCardiac plexi at base of heartaDorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerveMotor medullaVagus nerve1Parasympathetic motorCranial four to five segments thoracic spinal cordSpinal cordCervical paravertebral sympathetic trunk and postganglionic fibers2Sympathetic motorGhanaMyenteric plexi of duodenum and jejunumaDorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerveMotor medullaVagus nerve1Parasympathetic motorDorsal horn spinal cordSpinal cordSplanchnic nerve, celiac ganglion, and postganglionic fibers2Sympathetic motorGhana, SenegalTaste buds on tongueSolitary tractSensory medullaGeniculate, petrosal and nodosal ganglia2Special sensorya More than one route possible because of innervation of the nervous plexi by both parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system.In tongue sections, lyssaviral antigen was detected not only in neurons but also in epithelial cells. Three bats had one to three foci of lyssavirus antigen-positive epithelial cells at the tongue surface (Table 2). In bat 6 (Senegal group) and bat 12 (Ghana group), the antigen-positive cells were part of a taste bud. This initiated more detailed investigation for the presence of taste buds in the tongue sections: the tongue section examined from bat 6 had three taste buds, two of which were antigen-positive, and that from bat 12 had one taste bud, which was positive. Three other virus-infected bats also had taste buds present in their tongue sections (bat 13, two taste buds; bat 7, five taste buds; bat 8, two taste buds), but none were lyssavirus antigen-positive.Antigen was not detected in salivary gland epithelial cells of any virus-infected bat, although salivary gland sections were available for all nine. Antigen was not detected in any other tissues of the virus-infected bats, and was not detected in any of the tissues examined from the mock-inoculated bats.DiscussionOur results show that all three LBV strains are capable of infecting and replicating in the brain of the straw-colored fruit bat following intracranial inoculation. The predominant detection of virus in neurons confirms that LBV is neurotropic, similar to RABV and other lyssaviruses in other host species [61]. In many of our infected bats, virus antigen was detected in a large percentage (over 25%) of neurons at different levels throughout the brain at the time of death. The majority of infected neurons showed no visible pathological changes. The wide dissemination in the brain, an absence of severe neuronal lesions and the late development of neurologic signs suggest that, like RABV in other species [61], these LBV strains can replicate in neurons for some time before negatively affecting their function.Virus spread from the site of intracranial inoculation to peripheral tissues was detected most frequently in bats infected with the Senegal and Ghana strains of LBV. The rapidity of spread from brain to the periphery—centrifugal spread—within a few days post inoculation, was likely due to the high viral dose inoculated directly into the brain. The extra-encephalic detection of lyssavirus antigen nearly exclusively in neurons indicates centrifugal spread via peripheral nerves, and fits with the accepted pathogenesis of lyssavirus infections [61], although the occurrence of viremia cannot be excluded [62, 63]. The higher frequency of PCR-positive results than immunohistochemistry-positive results in the peripheral tissues is likely due to the higher sensitivity of PCR. As a consequence, we only were able to detect immunohistochemistry-positive neurons when their cell bodies, aggregated in ganglia, were present in tissue sections. For this reason, immunohistochemistry and PCR results corresponded better in those tissues in which ganglia were usually present (heart, intestine). Centrifugal spread is necessary for lyssaviruses to reach the oral cavity, from where they can be transmitted to new susceptible individuals via bites. As we could not detect the Nigeria strain of LBV in the peripheral nervous system by immunohistochemistry, this strain is possibly not suitable for further pathogenesis studies. A difference between the Nigeria strain and the other two strains is the large number of in vitro passages it has undergone.Although no marked lesions were present in the brain at the time of death, neuronal dysfunction was apparent from the neurological disease observed in our virus-inoculated bats. Although neurologic signs have not been previously described for LBV-infected bats, they correspond to those described previously for bats infected with other lyssaviruses [35, 64–66].The apparent consistency of the clinical presentation seen within each infection group, and the differences among the bat groups, suggests a link with the virus strain used. Specifically, all three bats inoculated with the Senegal strain developed marked sensitivity to external stimuli, and all three bats inoculated with the Ghana strain developed aggression and excessive vocalization. Interestingly, the Ghana LBV was reported to have been isolated from an apparently healthy straw-colored fruit bat in the frame of a non-targeted virus isolation study in a large colony comprising ca. 350,000 animals in Kumasi, Ghana [47]. Here, aggression and vocalization may have been overlooked or misinterpreted. All three bats inoculated with the Nigeria strain developed general weakness, while this was only seen as an agonal feature in the other groups (Table 1). A correlation between specific clinical signs and virus strain used has been observed for other lyssavirus infections [67]. In general, the mechanism through which lyssavirus infection causes clinical signs is still a subject of debate. Lyssaviruses can have both direct and indirect effects on the functionality of neurons. These effects can be due to a change in neuronal electrophysiology, a change in the function of ion channels, a change in neurotransmission, a change in the amount of hormone production, or presumably other, as yet undefined, mechanisms. A combination of these effects might occur at specific anatomical locations explaining specific neuronal deficits in rabies patients. So far, no single or dominant mechanism has been identified [61].All virus-infected, but no mock-inoculated, bats had a lymphocytic meningoencephalitis at death. This is similar to the histologic lesions seen in mice intracranially inoculated with lyssaviruses of different species [68]. The presence of lymphocytes in the absence of other cells, such as plasma cells or neutrophils, suggests that a Th1 or cell-mediated immune response occurred in these bats. This is surprising, as the direct inoculation of virus in the brain is not expected to incite an immune response at all: initiation of T cell responses are unlikely to occur within the central nervous system as naïve T cells do not cross the blood-brain barrier and lymph vessels and dendritic cells that are normally involved in picking up exogenous material are absent in the brain [69]. However, for rats and rabbits it has been shown that the grey matter interstitial fluid is drained via cervical lymph nodes, where antigen-presenting cells are triggered and where a subsequent adaptive immune response can develop [70]. It is also possible that some of the virus particles inoculated into the cerebrum in our bats entered the interstitial fluid, reached a lymph node, and triggered an adaptive immune response. It also is possible that the surgical procedure of intra-cranial inoculation damaged the blood-brain barrier, allowing virus to spill over into the blood, and immune cells from the blood to infiltrate the brain parenchyma, thus initiating a specific immune response. Whatever the mechanism of recruitment of lymphocytes to the brain in the virus-inoculated bats, due to our unnatural inoculation route this inflammatory response does not necessarily reflect the situation during natural LBV infection in the straw-colored fruit bat.In our study, several neurons in ganglia and other cells outside the central nervous system were lyssavirus antigen-positive. We used this information to deduce via which nerves the different LBV strains travelled from site of intracranial inoculation to extra-encephalic tissues (Table 4). The Ghana strain travelled via parasympathetic motor neurons to reach the tongue and salivary gland ganglia. The Ghana and Senegal strains travelled via parasympathetic or sympathetic motor neurons, or both, to reach ganglia in heart and intestine. The Ghana and Senegal strains also travelled via special sensory neurons to reach taste bud epithelial cells. The Nigeria strain, however, even with a longer period of time for dissemination, did not travel via any of these routes.For a lyssavirus to be suitable for use in pathogenesis studies, and specifically for causing infection in bats that leads to excretion of virus in the oral cavity, the virus needs to have the capacity to get to the excretion site. In straw-colored fruit bats that were naturally infected with LBV, salivary gland epithelial cells and tongue epithelial cells were shown to contain antigen [71]. These two cell types may thus be sites for virus excretion. Salivary gland epithelial cells are mostly innervated by parasympathetic motor neurons, and to a lesser extent by sympathetic motor neurons and by sensory neurons. Taste bud epithelial cells in the tongue are innervated by special sensory neurons. Although the salivary gland samples of some bats were positive by hn-RT-PCR, and the Ghana strain showed the capacity to infect neurons innervating the salivary gland, none of the infected bats in this study had antigen in salivary gland epithelial cells (Table 2). Possible reasons include the bats dying before the infection could reach the salivary gland epithelial cells, a different pattern of centrifugal spread to the salivary gland after intracranial inoculation than after natural infection, and the inability of our LBV strains to infect salivary gland epithelial cells. Some authors (e.g., [72, 73]) used viruses isolated from the oral cavity instead of from the brain for experimental infection studies; this may ensure that viruses are from a population that is able to infect cells important for excretion.Although virus was found in surface epithelial cells of the tongue of two bats (bats 12 and 13), virus was not detected in any of the oral swabs. There are several possible explanations for this. First, immunohistochemistry to detect virus antigen in oral tissues may be more sensitive than hn-RT-PCR to detect viral RNA in oral swabs. Second, although there was virus in tongue surface epithelium, there may have been no excretion into the oral cavity. This does not fit well with what is known of the pathogenesis of other lyssaviral infections. Third, it may be that excretion was intermittent and swabs were taken at a time when virus was not excreted. Intermittent excretion has been proposed to explain alternating positive and negative results of serially collected oral swabs in other experimental lyssavirus infections in bats [20]. However, virus was not detected by hn-RT-PCR in any of our oral swabs. Fourth, there may have been loss of viral RNA in oral swab samples during transport or processing. This seems less likely as viral RNA could be detected in tissue samples that were similarly transported and processed. LBV has been detected in an oral swab of a naturally infected straw-colored fruit bat previously [71], showing that this is technically possible.In conclusion, our study showed that intracerebral inoculation of each of three LBV strains into straw-colored fruit bats caused widespread infection of the brain, associated with meningoencephalitis, clinical signs consistent with rabies, progressing quickly to death of all virus-inoculated bats. Although group sizes were small, different clinical signs were observed and these were associated with the virus strains used. The distribution of virus antigen in extra-encephalic tissues indicated that the Ghana and Senegal LBV strains were able to utilize both sensory and motor neurons for dissemination to the periphery, and to infect epithelial cells of the tongue as a possible site of excretion. The Nigeria strain was rarely detected in any tissue outside the brain and may have lost the capability to use certain transport mechanisms in neurons, possibly due to multiple passages in cell culture. Based on the above results, both the Senegal and Ghana strains are suitable for further pathogenesis studies of LBV in the straw-colored fruit bat, a natural host of the virus. Now that we have shown that these strains are suitable, our next step will be to use a peripheral inoculation site, and thus a more natural route of transmission, for further pathogenesis studies in the straw-colored fruit bat.Supporting informationS1 TableSex, age category and body weight of bats inoculated with Lagos bat virus or mock-inoculated (control).(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


Title: Right Place, Wrong Species: A 20-Year Review of Rabies Virus Cross Species Transmission among Terrestrial Mammals in the United States

IntroductionRabies has one of the highest known infectious disease case fatality rates, with an estimated 55,000 deaths per year occurring primarily in developing countries where canine rabies has not been controlled [1]. Historically, rabies was responsible for hundreds of human deaths each year in the US, prior to the development of laws promoting responsible pet ownership, canine rabies vaccination campaigns, and increasing availability of effective rabies post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) [2]. By 1970 the majority of human rabies cases resulted from exposures to rabid wildlife rather than dogs. In paradoxical fashion, by the mid -1970's, when the rabies burden in the US was at presumptive post-European colonization lows, one of the largest recorded wildlife disease epizootics was beginning in rural West Virginia [2], [3].In 1977, translocation of raccoons from Florida to West Virginia for hunting purposes ignited a rabies epizootic in the local rabies-naïve raccoon populations [4]. Over the next 20 years raccoon variant rabies spread to all mid-Atlantic and northeastern states [2]. In stark comparison to the rabies epidemiology prior to 1970, over 90% of rabies cases are now reported from wildlife species and over 60% of these cases are reported from states that have enzootic circulation of the raccoon rabies virus variant [3], [4]. As evidence from this epizootic event, the introduction of novel rabies virus variants into naïve populations can have longstanding consequences on wildlife populations and human disease prevention. While domestically acquired human rabies deaths are at an historic low and canine rabies virus has been eliminated in the US, the risk of rabies transmission from wild animals remains substantial. More than four million animal bites are estimated to occur in the US each year [7]. Only a fraction of these are reported to public health officials [5], [6]. Despite poor reporting of animal bites, an estimated 35,000 persons (11/100,000 persons) still receive PEP each year due to potential rabies virus exposures [2], [10], [11].In the continental US, wildlife species in the orders Carnivora and Chiroptera are responsible for enzootic circulation of rabies virus. These include: foxes (Vulpes lagopus and Urocyon cinereoargenteus), raccoons (Procyon lotor), skunks (Mephitis spp), and bats (multiple species) [7]. Seven distinct antigenic rabies virus variants are associated with these four terrestrial species [4]. In addition, more than 10 rabies virus variants are associated with as many species of bats [8]. Each distinct rabies virus variant is maintained within a specific animal reservoir species [9]–[12]. The geographic boundaries of these terrestrial rabies virus variants are dynamic and well described. Nearly all rabid terrestrial mammals are infected with the predicted terrestrial rabies virus variant associated with the geographic region where infection occurred, and very few cases of terrestrial rabies occur in geographic regions with only bat rabies virus variants [10], [13], [14].Despite the apparent host adaptation and affinity displayed by rabies virus, all mammals are susceptible to this disease. Cross species transmission (CST) occurs when a rabies virus variant adapted to transmission in a specific reservoir animal is transmitted to a non-reservoir animal. Cross species transmission rarely results in successful propagation within a non-reservoir population, referred to as a host shift event [12], [15], [16]. However, the diversity of the seven terrestrial rabies virus variants in the US are apparently due to sustained host shifts from canine rabies virus variants introduced during colonization of the Americas as well as extant chiropteran variants [3]. More recently, repeated CST from bats into skunks and gray foxes in Northern Arizona has resulted in a focal region of sustained bat variant transmission within these terrestrial mammals [11]. Another recent study revealed possible molecular evidence of independent circulation of the California skunk variant in gray foxes following repeated CST events [17]. The impact of these and future potential host shift events are difficult to predict; however, it is possible that such events could impede or compromise current rabies management efforts and jeopardize the health and safety of people and their companion animals. Each instance of CST is an opportunity for viral adaptation resulting in sustained propagation in a non-reservoir species, and CST events are reported in the thousands each year [14]. Currently, public health surveillance is the primary approach for detecting potential host shift events. This study uses routinely collected surveillance data to describe spatiotemporal dynamics of rabies transmission among terrestrial mammals and serve as motivation for new evaluations and the development of techniques to better detect and predict areas at high risk of CST and subsequently where rabies virus host shift events may be more likely to occur.MethodsData SourceRabies in animals is a nationally notifiable condition in the U.S. Nearly all animals tested for rabies are submitted due to a bite or other concerning interaction with a human or domestic animal. A small proportion of animals (∼5% annually) are reported through enhanced rabies surveillance involving wildlife that have not exposed humans or domestic animals [14]. National reporting of rabid animals has been conducted since 1938. The CDC program maintains a national database of aggregate reported animal rabies cases by county since 1990. Individual level data including reports for all animals submitted for rabies diagnosis was available since 2006 as described previously [14]. Regional analysis was performed using Health and Human Services regional designations. County-level human population-based rates were calculated from U.S. Census Bureau population data, 2010 census [18].Data Selection and CategorizationReports of all rabid terrestrial mammals within the continental US were compiled from 1990–2011. Rabid bats and humans were excluded from the study, as were data from Alaska, Hawaii, and Puerto Rico. States where only bat rabies virus variants have been reported were also excluded from the analysis (Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Nevada, and Mississippi). Rabies virus variant typing was not available for the majority of reported rabid animals. However, the variant associated with a terrestrial rabies case was assumed based on the geographic location where the animal was reported (e.g. a rabid raccoon in Texas was assumed to be infected with a skunk rabies virus variant). This assumption is based on previously published reports that have found that nearly all rabid terrestrial mammals were infected with the terrestrial rabies variant associated with the geographic region in which the case was reported [10], [13], [14]. This assumption was confirmed by analysis of species and rabies virus variant for reported cases where rabies virus variant information was available (2007–2011). All rabid terrestrial mammals within the defined raccoon variant region were assumed to have the raccoon rabies virus variant [4], [10], [14], [19]. Terrestrial mammals diagnosed with rabies in Arizona and a small region of west Texas were assumed to have either a skunk or fox rabies virus variant, as both variants are present in these regions. Rabid terrestrial mammals in all other counties were assumed to have had one of three skunk rabies virus variants. The three skunk virus variants were analyzed as one group to accommodate instability in predicted geographic boundaries among two adjacent variants. Non-reservoir animals were grouped as raccoons (P. lotor), skunks (all species), foxes (all species), domestic animals (cats and dogs), cattle, and other terrestrial mammals (e.g. bobcats, non-cattle ungulates, lagomorphs, rodents, and others).Counties that reported fewer than three rabid reservoir animals during a 5-year period were excluded from analysis to control for jurisdictions with low surveillance activity. An epizootic of a Mexican canine rabies virus variant occurred in coyotes in southern Texas counties from 1990–1997, therefore rabid coyotes in select southern Texas counties in this time frame were excluded from analysis [20], [21]. In Tennessee, 17 counties were located in a region where the skunk and raccoon variant boundaries overlap. For these counties annual counts of rabid skunks and raccoons were compared and the reservoir was defined by the more frequent of the two potential reservoir species.Rate CalculationsThe reported rabies CST rate was defined as the rabid non-reservoir animals/rabid reservoir animals. These rates were calculated at the county and HHS regional level, annually and in 5-year aggregate time periods. Annual rates of animal submissions for rabies testing were calculated per 100,000 human population, 2007–2011; the only years when reliable submission data were available. To evaluate the impact of bias, a linear regression model was used to evaluate potential relationship between total submissions of reservoir animals for rabies diagnosis on the CST rate. All comparisons were evaluated at α = 0.05.Temporal and Spatial AnalysisTrends in CST rates from 1990–2011 were evaluated using a Monte Carlo permutation model, which detected up to three time intervals where the trend in CST changed significantly [22]. The annual percent change in CST and accompanying 95% confidence interval were reported for the most recent time interval trend identified in the model. Cross species transmission rates were mapped by county by 5-year intervals [23]. A spatial-temporal scan statistic was used to identify county level clusters with a higher than expected CST rate in the raccoon rabies enzootic region from 2007–2011.The scan statistic was run and presented at multiple levels (2, 4, 8, 12, 25, and 50 percent) for the maximum spatial cluster size parameter (MSCS; i.e. the maximum percentage of the population at risk included in a scanned cluster) to increase sensitivity in relation to this parameter setting [24].ResultsAnnual Trends in Rabies SpilloverRaccoon Variant RegionA total of 67,058 rabid raccoons and 30,876 other animals were reported with raccoon rabies virus variant from 1990–2011. The CST rate ranged from 0.31 in 1990 to a high of 0.73 in 2011, representing a 138% overall increase (Table 1). Three time intervals with distinct CST trends were identified. From 1990–1993, there was no change in the annual CST rate. From 1993–1998, the CST rate increased at 15.9% each year (95% CI: 7.5–25.0), but plateaued again from 1998–2011 (Figure 1). Skunks were the most common non-reservoir animal reported with the raccoon rabies virus variant (n = 16,600). Overall, the annual CST rate of raccoon rabies into skunks increased 118.0% from 1990–2011 (0.16 to 0.35 respectively). However, CST of raccoon rabies into skunks did not change from 1999–2011 (95% CI: −3.2–1.4) (Table 1).10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.g001Figure 1Annual Rates of Raccoon Rabies Virus Variant Cross Species Transmission, 1990–2011.10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.t001Table 1Trends in rabies cross species transmission (CST) by species or species grouping, 1990–2011.Cross Species TransmissionRabid Animals 1990–20111990 CST Rate2011 CST RateOverall CST ChangeLatest Trend Time PeriodModel APC*
95% CIP-Value
Raccoon

CST by Animal
Skunk16,6000.160.35118.0%1999–2011−0.9%−3.2, 1.40.4Fox6,5370.050.18251.0%1996–20114.0%3.0, 5.0<0.01Domestic5,0280.060.14139.7%1990–20115.2%4.5, 5.9<0.01Cattle6440.010.0277.8%1990–20114.0%2.5, 5.7<0.01Other2,0670.030.0457.1%1990–20112.7%1.7, 3.8<0.01
Total

30,876

0.31

0.73

138.2%

1998
–
2011

1.2%

−0.1, 2.6

0.06

CST by Region
Northeast12,5420.130.62376.2%1999–2011−3.9%−7.2, −0.60.03Mid-Atlantic11,1290.370.79110.5%1990–20112.7%2.0, 3.5<0.01Southeast7,2050.390.7694.9%1994–20115.8%5.0, 6.6<0.01
Skunk

CST by Animal
Raccoon1480.010.02183.3%1990–20116.3%2.4, 10.3<0.01Fox3090.020.0355.6%1998–20119.5%3.5, 15.8<0.01Domestic1,6010.100.07−35.9%1990–2011−1.0%−2.5, 0.50.19Cattle1,1400.110.02−83.0%1990–2011−5.7%−7.8, −3.4<0.01Other5800.050.04−13.3%1990–20110.50%−2.3, 3.30.73
Total

3,778

0.28

0.17

−40.3%

1990–2011

−2.0%

−3.6, −0.4

0.02

CST by Region
Midwest1,3050.480.20−59.0%1990–2011−1.5%−3.6, 0.70.16South1,2120.160.178.8%2001–20117.0%3.0, 11.1<0.01Southeast1680.280.18−36.4%2001–201113.6%1.9, 26.7<0.01West1,0930.220.11−48.8%1990–20111.1%−0.8, 3.10.25
*Modeled annual percent change in cross species transmission rates.Skunk Variant RegionA total of 19,247 rabid skunks and 3,778 other animals were reported from skunk rabies enzootic regions from 1990–2011. Overall, there was a 40.3% decrease in the CST rate of skunk rabies from 1990–2011 (0.28 to 0.17, respectively), with an average decrease of 2.0% (95% CI: −3.6–−0.4) per year (Figure 2).Domestic animals were the most commonly reported non-reservoir animal infected with skunk rabies (n = 1,601) (Table 1). Cross species transmission from skunk to raccoon was a rare event with only 148 occurrences reported from 1990–2011.10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.g002Figure 2Annual Rates of Skunk Rabies Virus Variant Cross Species Transmission, 1990–2011.Raccoon and Skunk Variant CST Rates, 2007–2011Reported CST of raccoon rabies into skunks was 18.7 times more frequent in comparison to skunk rabies transmitted into raccoons (95% CI 14.2–24.5) (Table 2). Transmission of the raccoon variant into foxes was 8.1 times more frequent when compared to skunk rabies virus variants (95% CI 6.3, 10.5). Transmission of the raccoon variant into domestic animals was 1.5 times more frequent than skunk variant transmission to domestic animals (95% CI 1.3, 1.7). In cattle, CST of the raccoon variant occurred less frequently than skunk variants (RR = 0.5, 95% CI 0.4, 0.6). Overall, CST of the raccoon variant was 3.7 times more frequent than skunk variants during the study period (95% CI 3.4, 4.0).10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.t002Table 2Animal Submission for Rabies Diagnosis and Cross Species Transmission of Rabies Virus by Non-Reservoir Animal, 2007–2011.Raccoon Variant RegionSkunk Variant RegionTesting SubmissionsNumber Rabid (Positive Test Rate)CST RateTesting SubmissionsNumber Rabid (Positive Test Rate)CST RateRaccoon: Skunk Rate RatioRaccoon53,87711,134 (20.7%)-4,13278 (1.9%)0.0218.7 (14.2, 24.5)Skunk10,6053,379 (31.9%)0.307,4853,329 (44.5%)-Fox5,4041,720 (31.8%)0.1569866 (9.5%)0.028.1 (6.3, 10.5)Domestic Animals100,1631,254 (1.3%)0.1136,234251 (0.7%)0.081.5 (1.3, 1.7)Cattle1,923154 (8.0%)0.011,05593 (8.8%)0.030.5 (0.4, 0.6)Other Animals19,422436 (2.2%)0.043,411101 (3.0%)0.031.3 (1.2, 1.4)
Total

191,394

18,077 (9.4%)

0.62

53,015

3,918 (7.4%)

0.17

3.6 (3.4, 3.9)
Spatial AnalysisRaccoon variant regionDuring 1992–2011, 741 raccoon variant counties met the criteria for inclusion and reported an average of 6.2 rabid terrestrial animals each year. The CST rate doubled during the study period to 0.62 non-reservoir animals diagnosed for every rabid raccoon for time period 2007–2011.During 2007–2011, 187 of 592 (31.6%) counties reported a rate ≥1.0, and increase from 75 counties during 1992–1996 (Figure 3). From 1990–1999, the CST rate trend in the Northeast region increased at 23.8% per year (95% CI 17.1–38.0). This trend changed from 1999–2011, when the CST rate in the Northeast decreased 3.9% per year (95% CI −7.2–−0.6) (Table 1). In its most recent trend time period, 1994–2011, the spillover rate in the Southeast region increased 5.8% per year (95% CI 5.0–6.6). From 1990–2011, the CST rate increased at 2.7% per year in the mid-Atlantic region (95% CI 2.0–3.5).10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.g003Figure 3Five-year aggregate spillover rates of raccoon rabies virus variant, by County: 1992–2011.Skunk Variant RegionDuring 1992–2011, 754 skunk variant counties met the criteria for inclusion and reported an average of 1.4 rabid terrestrial animals each year. During 1992–1996, 0.22 other terrestrial animals were diagnosed rabid for every reported rabid skunk, and 35 of 392 (8.9%) counties reported a CST rate ≥1.0. During 2007–2011, the CST rate fell to 0.18 and only 20 of 324 (6.2%) counties reported a CST rate ≥1.0 (Figure 4).10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.g004Figure 4Five-year aggregate spillover rates of skunk rabies virus variants by County: 1992–2011.In the Southeastern United States, the skunk rabies CST rate trend increased 13.6% per year from 2001–2011 (95% CI 1.9–26.7) (Table 1). In the most recent trend period in the southern United States from 2001–2011, the skunk rabies CST rate increased at 7.0% per year (95% CI 3.0–11.1). No significant changes in the trend or overall CST rate were identified for the Midwest and West regions.Space-Time Cluster AnalysisThree significant clusters of rabid non-reservoir animals were identified controlling for the number of reported rabid raccoons in the space-time scan statistic at a MSCS of 50% (Figure 5). The two clusters centered on New Hampshire and New York appear to remain fairly stable at lower MSCS levels. However, the risk levels appeared to be heterogenous across the large cluster centered on North Carolina. Additional smaller clusters were identified within this region starting at a MSCS level of 12%.10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.g005Figure 5Clusters of High Rates of Raccoon Variant Cross Species Transmission over Varying Spatial Cluster Values, 2007–2011.Validation of the Variant AssumptionPresence of variant typing data were examined for all 15,359 animals analyzed in this study between 2007–2011 (Figure 6). The study-defined raccoon variant region reported 13,044 rabid animals, of which 1,212 (9.3%) were variant typed. Of these 1,212 variant typed animals, 1,203 (99.3%) were infected with the predicted reservoir virus variant. The nine animals which did not have the predicted rabies virus variant were all found to have been infected with a skunk variant. These nine animals were from Tennessee, a state in which both skunk and raccoon rabies virus variants are present. The study-defined skunk variant region reported 2,315 rabid animals, of which 651 (28.1%) were variant typed. Of these 651 variant typed animals, 634 (97.4%) were infected with the predicted reservoir virus variant. Twelve of the 17 animals predicted to have skunk variant rabies virus were actually infected with a raccoon rabies virus variant. All 12 were from the state of Tennessee. The remaining five animals (0.8%) were infected with a bat variant. Of all variant typed animals, 98.6% had the study-defined, predicted rabies virus variant, 1.1% did not have the predicted variant but were from a state in which multiple variants are present, and 0.3% of animals were infected with a non-terrestrial variant.10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.g006Figure 6Comparison of Confirmed Rabies Virus Variant and Predicted Rabies Virus Variant, 2007–2011.Submission of Samples for Rabies TestingData on submission of rabies suspect animals for testing were available for 2007–2011. During this time period, 53,877 raccoons and 137,517 other terrestrial animals were submitted for rabies diagnosis in the raccoon variant region (20.7% and 5.0% rabid, respectively). The average annual number of submissions for rabies diagnosis was 57.9 per 100,000 persons residing in the raccoon variant region. From 2007–2011, 7,485 skunks and 45,530 other terrestrial animals were submitted for diagnosis from the skunk variant regions (44.5% and 1.3% rabid, respectively). The average annual number of submissions for rabies diagnosis was 67.9 per 100,000 persons residing in the skunk variant region.A linear regression model revealed a relationship between CST and submission of raccoons for rabies diagnosis in the raccoon variant region (P = 0.012) (Table 3). However, changes in the number of raccoons submitted had little impact on the CST rate (β = −0.00018). A similar trend was identified in the relationship in the skunk variant region, but with a slightly greater impact on CST rates when the number of skunk submissions is increased or decreased (β = −0.0015, P = 0.008).10.1371/journal.pone.0107539.t003Table 3Linear Regression of Reservoir Submission Rate and Cross Species Transmission Rate: Skunk and Raccoon Variant Regions, 2007–2011.VariableDFParameter EstimateStandard Errort ValuePr> |t|Raccoon Variant RegionRaccoon Intercept182.563.0460827.10<.0001Raccoon Submission Rate1−0.0180.00707−2.520.0118Skunk Variant RegionsSkunk Intercept127.832.2804612.20<.0001Skunk Submission Rate1−0.147280.05520−2.670.0080DiscussionInterspecies rabies transmission can be important in the process of virus adaptation and perpetuation in new hosts [3]. However, from a public health perspective, the more urgent concern is the role CST plays in potentially increasing the threat of rabies virus exposure to humans and domestic animals. The burden and frequency of CST appears to have increased in recent decades and was dramatically higher where the raccoon rabies virus variant is enzootic. This study provides epidemiologic evidence that the raccoon rabies virus variant may be more adept at infecting skunks than previously expected. Whether this is due to viral characteristics or host-host interactions requires further study. Furthermore, this study provides a unique analytic method for the prediction of rabies virus variant host shift events. Routine implementation of this analytic method to annual or real time data could be considered for incorporation into rabies surveillance programs.Changing CST TrendsThe rate of rabies virus transmission to non-reservoir animals was dynamic over the study period. Perhaps the most dramatic trend observed was the increase in CST of the raccoon rabies variant in the northeastern United States. This increase is most likely explained by the epizootic spread of this rabies virus variant into a previously rabies naïve region. The raccoon rabies variant did not expand into the Northeastern-Atlantic states until the mid-1980's, largely reaching its full northern distribution by 2000 [25]. Prior to the movement of rabies into this region, the raccoon population was rabies-naïve and populations had not experienced decimation due to the epizootic. During the epizootic, interspecies contact with the aberrantly high number of rabid raccoons likely accounts for a sizeable portion of the increasing CST rates observed in these northeastern states. In comparison, the second largest increasing trend in the CST rate was observed in Mid-Atlantic states where the raccoon rabies variant had been established for nearly two decades, and the smallest increase was found in Southeastern states where the variant has been established since the 1940's [26]. In contrast, the three skunk rabies virus variants have been established in the United States since at least the early 1800's; all three variants showed a decline in CST rates [27].The apparent relationship between the CST rate and length of enzootic status, suggests that the increases in CST in the mid-Atlantic and Northeastern states might be expected to stabilize over time. However, interpretation of this apparent association is difficult, as many potential confounding factors are not collected during routine rabies surveillance efforts. Regional differences in animal population densities and species diversity have the potential to alter disease transmission dynamics. Therefore, ecological studies focusing on inter and intra-species contact rates may help explain the differences in the observed CST trends. Climate change, specifically drought, may also affect CST rates; regions experiencing drought may drive animal populations together as water sources become scarce. Likewise, changes in land use characteristics, such as deforestation or human encroachment into wildlife habitats may also result in changes in animal behaviors. Studies focusing on changing environmental features may help to explain regional differences in rabies transmission dynamics. This analysis describes general trends observed over the past 20 years and is meant to serve as a guide for more focused studies, as described above, to aid in the control of rabies in wildlife reservoir species.Raccoons: Super Spreaders?Raccoons were four times more likely to transmit rabies to other species when compared to skunks. All animal groups, with the exception of cattle, were more likely to be infected with the raccoon variant. Host and environmental factors which facilitate CST are largely unexplored. However, certain behavioral and anthropogenic factors are well described in skunks and raccoons which may explain some of the differences observed in the CST rates of these two species.Transmission of diseases such as rabies that require direct contact are heavily influenced by the density of susceptible animals and their contact rate with infected animals [28]. Raccoon studies have recorded population densities of 1–250/km2, with higher densities occurring in urban settings [29]–[35]. These studies have also found frequent interspecies interactions. Fewer studies have examined skunk populations, but generally have reported lower population densities of only 3–6/km2 and discrepant reports of the impact of urban environments on population dynamics [36].Factors other than population density, such as predation or interspecies interactions at communal resources, play integral roles in disease transmission dynamics [37]. Inquisitive species, such as raccoons, and territorial species, such as foxes, may be more likely to physically confront a rabid animal, resulting in increased disease transmission [36], [38]. Raccoons are opportunistic omnivores and prefer den sites near bodies of water and often prosper in high food resource areas such as suburban environment where human refuse, pet food, and other sources of reliable sustenance are likely to be abundant. In these settings, congregations of multiple species at feeding sites are commonplace [39]. Raccoons also commonly utilize latrine sites, which may facilitate interspecies disease transmission, as studies have found that up to 14 different mammalian species may frequent these sites [40]. Skunks, in contrast, typically have lower population densities and are considered an aposematic species; pelage and chemical spray are used as a warning to other species to stay away, which may account for reduced interspecies interactions and thereby lower levels of CST [41], [42]. Aposematic species may be accustomed to being avoided, rather than relying on fight or flight, and therefore less likely to flee when a rabid animal approaches. Skunks also frequently share den sites with raccoons [43]. These ecological and behavioral traits may play a role in their high rate of raccoon variant CST. However, interpretation of these interactions are complicated when the animal in question has rabies, as these animals no longer conform to the behavioral customs attributed to the species [12].Cross species transmission of rabies among terrestrial animals is a complex interaction that likely depends on animal susceptibility to the virus, animal population densities, animal behavior, niche overlap, landscape characteristics, human population distribution, environmental conditions, and other factors. These multivariate associations can be difficult to evaluate over large geographic areas, even within a single virus variant region. Ecological studies of interspecies rabies transmission should focus on the geographic clusters of high CST rates to maximize detection of CST-related factors. Spatial models should be developed to evaluate the association of these factors with CST rates and identify significant factors that might provide insights which could be used to better understand local epidemiology of rabies and possibly targeted for interventions.One Species, One Variant?Classically, rabies virus variants have been associated with a single species which maintains the variant in nature by conspecific transmission. Cross species transmission of the raccoon variant was unexpectedly high, and the most commonly reported non-reservoir species were skunks. There are multiple theories for increased transmission of raccoon variant into skunks including aforementioned behavioral and ecological patterns that would cause increased interactions between the species [36], [37], [39]–[44]. However, it is not well described as to why these differences would result in increased transmission from raccoon to skunk, but not the inverse. There are potential virus virulence and host susceptibility differences that could affect transmission and result in increased transmission in only one direction, although these are not well studied either [38], [44]–[46].One potential theory for the unusually high rate of raccoon variant rabies diagnosed in skunks is that this virus has already undergone a host shift into the skunk population. This would artificially inflate the raccoon variant CST rates observed in this study [12], [16]. Propagation of new rabies virus variants occur, presumably on a rare basis, when a virus adapts to a new species resulting in a host-shift and independent circulation in a new species. Over time the virus can be recognized as an independent variant through molecular or antigenic characterization. Molecular analysis of recent host shift events from bats to local mesocarnivores (skunks and foxes) suggested that the rabies virus in those events may have been genetically competent for a host shift prior to transmission (pre-shift adaptation) rather than undergoing genetic adaptation in the new host [11]. Contact rates between bats and mesocarnivores are relatively low, suggesting that transmission of the virus was likely restricted in one direction (i.e. bat to mesocarnivore). However, where contact rates in both directions between two species are relatively high (e.g. skunks and raccoons), it would seem plausible that a pre-shift adapted virus may allow for routine bi-directional transmission between species as well as conspecific circulation. Maintenance of the rabies virus variant between two hosts may prevent selective pressure on the virus complicating detection of a distinct rabies virus variant associated with a specific species. This theory would need to be tested, likely using both mathematical modeling and deep sequencing of viruses from raccoons and skunks. A comparison of high CST regions to low CST regions within the raccoon rabies virus territory might be an effective comparison for evaluating molecular differences in the rabies virus.Limitations: Calculating CST Rates from Passive SurveillanceNationally, rabies virus variant typing is prioritized among non-reservoir animals or locations where there is increased concern for new variant introduction. Variant typing is an added cost and burden for public health programs, and has no direct treatment impact for the human or domestic animal that was exposed. Therefore, rabies virus variant typing is performed on only a subset of samples, nationally. A critical assumption of this study was that all terrestrial animals were infected with the predicted rabies virus variant based on geographic epidemiology. The validity of this assumption is supported by the finding that nearly all variant typed animals were infected with the predicted study-defined variant, as has been reported in the literature [10], [13], [14] (Figure 6).Public health testing of animals for rabies is directly related to the animal's probability of interacting with people or their companion animals. Differing state and local health department policies may also impact and bias animal submissions. Raccoons are often found at high population densities close to human habitats, which could potentially account for higher rates of submission for rabies testing [29]–[33], [47]–[49]. Contrary to this reasoning, our study found that on a per-capita basis, animal submission rates were similar between raccoon and skunk regions. Simple linear regression analysis indicated that the number of submissions of reservoir animals (skunk or raccoon) has little impact on CST rate. While there does appear to be some bias introduced due to surveillance activity it did not appear to be differential based on rabies virus variant and was of low magnitude, suggesting that submission and testing bias may not have a significant impact CST rates.ConclusionRabies virus host shift events could threaten the rabies prevention success achieved in the past several decades in the United States. Traditionally, host shift events have been detected through astute local health programs. Given the consequences of delayed host shift recognition, new surveillance methods must be developed to rapidly identify potential high risk areas. This study provides two such methods for further exploration; monitoring of CST trends and evaluation of high CST areas. The development of the unique CST analysis has provided epidemiologic support to the theory of independent skunk to skunk transmission of the raccoon rabies virus variant. The development of algorithms to analyze areas at high risk for CST could be incorporated into standard reporting systems to raise awareness for host shift events among relevant health departments, thereby improving early detection of such events. Dogs and cats may have frequent opportunities for encounters with rabid animals and remain a critical barrier to human rabies exposure. The finding that CST rates increased in cats and dogs is a reminder of the importance of maintaining current vaccination status to protect animal health and prevent human exposure. Currently available animal rabies vaccines are effective against all known rabies virus variants in North America. The higher CST rate in the raccoon variant region highlights the burden of rabies in this region and increased risk even when encountering non-reservoir species. Each CST event has the potential to result in the establishment of a new reservoir species; therefore advancing our understanding of the dynamics of CST may help to prevent the emergence of new terrestrial rabies reservoir species.


Title: Rabies virus transmission via solid organs or tissue allotransplantation

Multilingual abstractsPlease see Additional file 1 for translations of the abstract into the five official working languages of the United Nations.BackgroundSince the 1990s, solid organs or tissue transplantation have steadily increased, especially in developing areas such as Africa and Asia [1]. Organ transplantation extends life for tens of thousands of individuals. However, infections are common in the general population, so it is inevitable that some persons will die with a potentially transmissible disease and become organ donors. It is accepted in clinical practice that organs are vectors for infectious transmission but are still transplanted [2, 3]. Many of the ‘uncommon’ disease transmissions such as rabies have come with the use of organs from a previously healthy person who subsequently died with an undiagnosed/misdiagnosed neurologic event. Dozens of rabies virus transmissions to recipients via organs or tissues from donors with either undiagnosed or misdiagnosed inflammatory conditions of meningoencephalitis were reported [4–6].Rabies is an age-old infectious disease, but it remains an important public health problem today. Each year, approximately 59 000 individuals worldwide may die from an infection due to rabies virus, despite the existence of effective prophylaxis [7, 8]. Rabies is a zoonosis, associated with a mortality rate of nearly 100%, caused by neurotropic RNA viruses in the family Rhabdoviridae, genus Lyssavirus [7]. Classically, human rabies manifests in either the encephalitic (furious) or paralytic (dumb) form. Diagnosis is extremely difficult in the case of paralytic rabies and when the patient lapses into coma. Human-to-human transmission of rabies has never been confirmed, except extremely rarely as a result of infected organ or tissue transplantation. Undiagnosed or misdiagnosed rabid donors are the reason for rabies virus transmission via solid organ or tissue allotransplantation [9–11]. In 2015 and 2016, two cases of rabies virus transmission via solid organs or tissues allotransplantation (ROTA) were reported in China [6, 12]. In recent years the number of donations and clinical transplants of cornea, bone, skin, heart valve, and other tissues and solid organs increase sharply. In view of this circumstance, there will bound to be more ROTA cases, and we should pay sufficient attention and take appropriate measures to prevent the reoccurrence. In this review, we summary the previous cases, analyze relevant risks and put forward strategies to prevent the occurrence of ROTA.The epidemiological characteristics of ROTAThe pathway of human-to-human transmitted rabies virusMost cases of rabies are caused by the bite of rabid animals, among which the most common type is the dog, followed by other animals, including cats, ferret badgers, foxes, bats, etc. Rabies virus can infect all mammals, such as cattle, pigs, sheep, wildlife and humans. As a dead-end host of rabies, humans do not typically spread rabies in a human-to-human manner [8, 13–16]. Organ and tissue transplantation is the major way to transmit rabies virus from one human to another, which has been confirmed by laboratory results. The first case of tissue-transplant-related rabies was reported in 1978, and similar events continue to be reported [17]. Once the disease process initiates, it will inevitably lead to the death of the patient, which should focus sufficient attention on ROTA.Rabies virus transmission via ROTA occurs worldwideRabies is an infectious disease with a worldwide distribution. In Europe and other developed countries and regions, because of the large-scale use of animal vaccines, the perpetuation and spread of rabies is by wild carnivores and bats, and very few human rabies cases are reported yearly [16, 18]. Rabies remains a very serious illness in poor and developing areas, where it kills locally hundreds or even thousands of people each year [19]. Although organ transplantation requires good medical conditions and involves high surgical costs, an increasing number of people can afford it in various rapidly-developing countries and regions. The first rabies case caused by corneal transplantation in the United States was reported in 1978. Since then, additional cases of ROTA have been reported all over the world. After 2000, ROTA has been reported in countries where more organ transplant surgeries are completed, such as the United States and Germany [20–23]. In 2015 and 2016, two ROTA cases were reported in China [6]. Documented cases of ROTA are summarized in Table 1. To date, at least 13 cases of ROTA have been reported, with infection of 30 recipients overall, among whom 20 patients died and the remaining patients underwent post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) with survival reported for all but one patient, who was a heart recipient and died of lung infection. The transplanted tissues and organs included the corneas, kidneys, liver, heart, lungs, pancreas, and iliac artery. Similar to rabies, ROTA has a worldwide distribution (Fig. 1). ROTA has been reported in low-risk and high-risk areas; for example, in the United States and Europe, where organ transplant surgery is more prevalent, ROTA continues to be reported, although these are considered as endemic areas with a low risk [24, 25]. Cases of ROTA have begun to be reported in developing countries, such as China, where the number of organ transplant operations is increasing. Because of the weaker surveillance system and a small number of organ transplant surgeries recorded in Africa and other poor regions, there are no reports yet from those areas, but continuous monitoring should be carried out. However, no cases have been reported in Latin America, some measures can exclude patients with fever which is the typical symptom of rabies, mainly because pre-transplant screening for Chagas disease.Table 1Related reports and basic information of rabies virus transmission via solid organ or tissue allotransplantationLocationReported DateTransplant organ or tissueIncubation periodMorbidity periodPEPOutcomeReferenceUSA1978Corneal3012NOdeath[17]France1979Corneal338NOdeath[46]Thailand1981Corneal193NOdeath[42]1981Corneal312NOdeathIndia1987Corneal113NOdeath[28]India1988Corneal2585YESdeath[47]Iran1994Corneal393NOdeath[48]Iran1994Corneal251NOdeathUSA2004lilac arteryunknownunknownNOdeath[10]liverunknownunknownNOdeathkidneyunknownunknownNOdeathkidneyunknownunknownNOdeathGermany2004lungunknownunknownNOdeath[49, 50]kidneyunknownunknownNOdeathpancreasunknownunknownNOdeathcorneas––YESsurvivalliverunknownunknownNOsurvivalUSA2013kidney51027NOdeath[5]liver––YESsurvivalkidney––YESsurvivalheart––YESsurvivalChina2015kidney4246NOdeath[6]kidney4834NOdeathCorneal––YESsurvivalCorneal––YESsurvivalChina2016heart––NOdeathunpublishedkidney417NOdeathkidney454NOdeathKuwait2017Kidney105–NOdeath[12]Kidney91–NONo diagnosisCorneal––YESsurvivalCorneal––YESsurvivalNote: - means no data reportedFig. 1the occurrence of ROTA and the risk of rabies worldwide. The depth of the blue background indicates the incidence risk of rabies, and the red triangle shows the reported cases of ROTA. China and India are high-risk areas with the ROTA report. Europe and the United States are low - risk areas of rabies, however still with ROTA reports. Although the African region is also a high-risk area of rabies without reports of ROTA, sufficient attention should be paid to prevent the occurrence of ROTA, including enhanced surveillance. The background database came from WHO. http://www.who.int/rabies/Global_distribution_risk_humans_contracting_rabies_2013.png?ua=1Rabies virus transmission via ROTA occurs in clusters and aggregates with casesThe occurrence of rabies is characterized by aggregation and clustering. This is because a rabid animal may expose more than one person. Molecular biology methods can be used to find identity between the viral variants. ROTA represents the transmission of rabies virus caused by human activities. Organ transplant recipients are a population with a set of obvious medical characteristics. Different tissues and organs from one donor can be transplanted into multiple recipients, resulting in the aggregation of ROTA. In a case reported in Germany in 2004, a donor provided different organs to six recipients, resulting in the death of three patients. In a case reported in the United States in 2013, organs from the one donor were transplanted to four people [5, 26, 27]. Two cases occurred in China in 2015 and 2016, with four patients and three patients, respectively. The other characteristic of ROTA is the nature of the pathogen and the way in which the virus invades the host’s nervous system, i.e., the solid organ and the grafting, instead of the saliva and the bite. It is currently known that corneal transplantation, kidney transplantation, or even vascular transplantation, can cause rabies, and both the organ and the tissue can be used as a potential portal for rabies virus transmission.Susceptible population, incubation, and course of ROTAHumans are susceptible to rabies, but the development of the disease depends on several factors, such as the bite, severity, viral dose, wound care and PEP. Individuals with immune dysfunction or immunodeficiency are more likely to develop infectious disease. A higher incidence of rabies has been observed among organ transplant recipients infected with rabies virus, because of the use of immunosuppressive drugs, which may render them more susceptible to infection. Data from reported cases show that the incubation period of ROTA ranges from 11 days to more than 17 months. The fastest disease course in a case of ROTA occurred in 1987 in India: 11 days from surgery to the death of the patients [28]; whereas the longest corresponded to cases that occurred in 2013 in the United States: the period was 17 months, and another three patients did not develop the disease and survived before using PEP. Patients with rabies usually die within seven to 10 days, while the duration of the disease in ROTA cases varies by organ transplantation of rabies. Once rabies manifests itself clinically, all cases will end in death. The shortest case occurred in 1994 in Iran: the patient died within 1 day. The longest case was reported in China in 2015: the use of sedatives caused a deep coma, and the patient spent 46 days in the intensive care unit (ICU) before dying. Although sedation will extend the course of the disease, once the disease initiates, it leads to death, with very few exceptions. Table 1 also summarizes the case information of ROTA.Molecular pathogenesis of ROTARabies is caused by infection with a lyssavirus, such as the type species of the genus, rabies virus, usually through skin wounds or mucous membrane damage. Rabies virus replicates in muscle tissues, followed by invasion of nerve endings and reproduction of a large number of virions in nerve cells; virus is then reverse transmitted to the central nervous system through axons. Numerous copies of the virus spread to the whole nervous system and glands of the host that are innervated by the nervous system, such as the salivary glands. At the late stage of rabies, rabies virus can be observed in glandular cells and epithelial cells. According to clinical manifestations, rabies can be mainly divided into two types: furious and paralytic rabies [7, 8, 13, 29–31].In organ transplant recipients, it is necessary to use immunosuppressants to prevent rejection of heterologous organs. The use of these drugs reduces the ability of the body to resist foreign pathogens, thus providing an ideal environment for the replication and transmission of pathogens in heterologous organs. There are two main views on the molecular pathogenesis of ROTA. One is that rabies virus is neurotropic: donor organs contain the virus in the nerve endings at the late stage of disease, the virus continues to replicate after transplantation, and via the nervous system, it invades the central nervous system again and causes rabies. The other theory is that the virus exists not only in nerve endings, but also in gland cells and epithelial cells, which represent a reserve of a large amount of the virus in the transplanted organs. When rabies virus enters the recipient, it invades the nervous system to cause rabies in an environment where the host immune system is depressed. Studies have shown that rabies virus from bats can replicate in epithelial cells, which are predominantly paralytic [30]. It is a category III exposure in surgery during transplantation which will contaminate multiple new locations from the surgeon’s hands and instruments, but that’s not the main reason for the spread of the virus.The detailed molecular mechanism of ROTA is unclear, and the two views described above are consistent with the medical characteristics of rabies virus. The divergence between these two theories is whether the virus carried by the donor exists in nerve terminals or epithelial cells and gland cells. We believe that the two conditions are likely to occur. As a neurotropic virus, rabies virus is rare to replicate in epithelial cells.Traditionally, rabies virus is a quintessential neurotropic pathogen, with replication and transmission in the nervous system. However, rabies virus undergoes rapid replication and can replicate in selected epithelial or glandular cells. Rabies virus, especially the bat-transmitted type, can be found in epithelial cells, in which its replication and transmission has been confirmed. It has also been reported that significant replication of rabies virus replication occurs in the kidneys. The transplanted organs contain viruses in epithelial cells and nerve terminals, and, under appropriate conditions, rabies virus replicates in many locations and eventually causes the disease [15].Reports of rabies virus transmission via ROTA in ChinaIn 2015, a case of ROTA was reported for the first time in China. In Beijing, two patients who received kidney transplantation were diagnosed with rabies after the organ transplantation surgery. The organs received by these two patients were from the same donor, a 6-year-old boy from Guangxi, where about ten cases of rabies are reported per year, thus representing a high-risk rabies region in China. The organ donor had not been diagnosed with rabies, but he appeared to have some symptoms of rabies, such as fever, continuous decline in neurological condition, and progression to coma with progressive loss of all physiological and pathological reflexes. The recipients of the kidney transplants were diagnosed as being exposed to rabies virus using RT-PCR techniques in the laboratory. In 2016, the second case of ROTA was reported in China’s Southern region, which is considered as a high-risk area for rabies. The organ donor was a boy under 2 years old. After treatment in the primary hospital for high fever, coma, and other symptoms, he was transferred to the municipal hospital, where the physician suspected rabies; however, there was a misdiagnosis based on a false negative ELISA test for rabies virus antibody, which is a test with poor sensitivity. Subsequently, his organs were transplanted to three patients, two of whom developed rabies and eventually died. Another recipient died from other complications and was not tested for rabies. ROTA has posed the serious threat to China’s public safety which should be a wake-up call for public health [6, 12].Rabies is present in China, which is an area that has a high risk of rabies virus infection, as the number of deadly rabies cases per year in this country has been ranked second in the world. In China, the main route of transmission of rabies virus remains a dog bite, accounting for almost 90–95% of cases, followed by wildlife (about 3–5% of cases). Although the association with domestic animals is better appreciated, rabies virus transmission among wildlife is less understood. The prevalence of rabies in China has changed in recent years; the prevalence of rabies in high-incidence areas has decreased, and the occurrence of rabies in low-incidence areas has increased. Rabies remains the third major infectious disease-causing death in China. China will continue to be one of the countries where rabies is rampant for many years to come [18, 32].Many misdiagnoses have occurred in clinical practice because of the use of sedatives, which conceal the rabies-specific furious phenomenon, thus affecting the diagnosis of rabies. The patients’ personal habits also affect the diagnosis of rabies, such as the situation observed for a case reported in Germany in 2004. Because the organ donor had a history of drug addiction, the clinician believed that the patient’s mental problem was a delusion caused by drug abuse [22]. A clinical diagnosis of rabies should be considered in around one-third of patients with paralytic symptoms. Although the rabies detection network has been established to cover the whole country, China’s vast territory implies that economic development is not balanced; rabies cannot be diagnosed in many areas at present, which has led to the under-diagnosis of this condition. In China, only 1% of rabies cases are confirmed by laboratory tests.Measures for the prevention and control of ROTA in the futureStrengthen publicity and education and improving the diagnosis of rabiesIt is necessary to strengthen public and health-care professionals’ awareness of tissue and organ-transplant-related rabies, to improve the screening of organ donors, and to promote the appropriate prophylaxis of donors with suspected rabies for all types of transplant surgery. There should be awareness of the fact that any suspected animal bites are likely to cause rabies, which can also be transmitted through organ transplantation. China remains a country with a serious epidemic of rabies, and organ transplant patients and health-care professionals at all levels should recognize this possibility. Many infectious pathogens can be transmitted through solid organ transplants, e.g., West Nile virus, lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus, Balamuthia mandrill Aris amebae, and HIV [33]. Rabies virus is the only one that can lead to the death of the recipient directly, and there is no effective treatment for this disease. Rabies virus infection should receive more attention in the field of organ transplantation. Concomitantly, it has been proven that timely administration with PEP can prevent and control rabies. In tissue and organ transplant recipients, the use of PEP will also have a preventative effect [28, 34–36].Improving the screening of organ donorsViruses infecting the organ donors are the only source of infection in ROTA. It is necessary to strengthen the screening of donors, with the aim of rejecting solid organs and tissues that contain the virus, thus avoiding ROTA completely. The screening of organ donors should include epidemiological surveys of exposure history and laboratory rabies virus tests.Rabies has typical clinical symptoms, such as hydrophobia, aerophobia, pharyngeal muscle spasms, and progressive paralysis. Some patients with rabies present mainly with paralysis as the clinical manifestation, accompanied by symptoms of encephalitis, such as fever, headache, vomiting, and irritability. In advanced cases, coma, frequent convulsions, limb muscle flaccidity, and even paralytic symptoms appear. Therefore, donors who exhibit typical rabies symptoms must be screened for virus infection before organ transplantation. If the donor has symptoms of encephalitis, regardless of the presence or absence of exposure to rabies, screening should be performed before transplantation. Donors who have no encephalitis symptoms and for whom epidemiological studies show an absence of recent exposure to suspected sources of infection can be exempted from rabies screening [5, 12, 37, 38].The screening of organ donors presents many limitations regarding social, biological, and technical aspects. First, in humans, rabies is a rare infectious disease that can be caused by organ transplantation, which is under-detected. There is currently no country or institution that requires the screening of rabies among donors before organ transplantation surgery. Second, during the incubation period, rabies virus infection does not cause symptoms; thus, rabid humans cannot be distinguished from healthy individuals. Third, patients with rabies often use a variety of treatments, including sedatives, which mask the characteristic rabies symptoms, and drug addiction can also lead to a misdiagnosis.Among the laboratory-based diagnostic methods, RT–PCR is a rapid and sensitive method that has been used widely for the detection of rabies virus nucleic acids. A study reported that in cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, urine, and tear samples collected at different times after the onset of rabies, this method did not detect 100% of rabies virus. With the progress of the disease, the specificity of the detection decreased. In samples of paralytic rabies, the detection rate was lower than that observed for furious rabies, and only one among 14 samples used for testing was positive. In addition, as the presence of rabies virus in biological fluids (such as saliva, spinal fluid, tears and urine) is intermittent, it is necessary to repeatedly collect samples of different types and at different time points. A reliable method to improve the diagnosis of rabies in the laboratory is needed [39, 40].In China, many patients are in urgent need of organ transplantation. At the same time, there is a very short window of time between the announcement of brain death and transplantation surgery, which implies a limited time for testing the donors. Patients and medical personnel have a very superficial understanding of rabies virus transmission via solid organs or tissues allotransplantation and do not take rabies into account. These factors render ROTA a more serious situation in China.We strongly appeal for the improvement of screening for rabies among organ donors. We propose the establishment of a more reliable laboratory rabies diagnostic method and the addition of rabies testing to the mandatory list of organ transplant tests, to improve the detection of rabies before organ transplantation and avoid the occurrence of ROTA.Suspected cases were protected during surgeryIn cases of donors with suspected rabies, an essential biosafety level will be required during the operation. In the course of surgery, medical personnel will come in direct contact with body fluids (such as saliva, blood, and cerebrospinal fluid] of patients with rabies, which contain a large number of copies of virions, and can cause the spread of rabies. Surgical waste must be subjected to high-pressure sterilization procedures to ensure that rabies virus does not pollute the environment [1, 39–41].Assess exposure risk and initiate PEP to protect related populationsIn the event of ROTA, the appropriate measures should be taken immediately. The main principle is to actively prevent the disease, perform an assessment of personnel who are potentially at risk, and initiate the necessary PEP. In the United States, once a case of rabies has been reported, an epidemiological investigation and intervention by the Center for disease Control and Prevention, the Department of Homeland Security, and the health authorities at all levels is carried out immediately. Risk assessment and preventive measures are conducted, as well as the timely publication of information, to avoid causing social panic. China should learn from this example. The saliva, cerebrospinal fluid, urine, and tears of patients with rabies can contain virus. Contact with body fluids containing rabies virus can also cause transmission. After viral infection, patients should be followed using an acute retrospective epidemiological survey, to identify those who have had close contact with the community staff and relevant health-care workers. According to the exposure level, the risk of rabies among the personnel can be assessed, given the appropriate exposure to prevent the disposal. These steps should also be taken in cases of ROTA. As the recipients of organs from the same infected donor have a high risk of infection, these organs should be discarded immediately and risk assessments and other measures should be taken by contacting the other recipients. The initiation of PEP in patients with organ transplantation is also effective [1]. In cases of immunosuppressed donors (rabies immune globulin [RIG] should be used with vaccine), administration of RIG containing viral neutralizing antibodies, with the earliest such case being reported in 1981 [42, 43]. With the occurrence of corneal transplantation in France, when the donor was discovered to be a rabies patient, the timely removal of the cornea together with administration of RIG and rabies vaccination aided the survival of the recipient [44, 45]. In a case reported in the United States in 2013, the three related recipients received complete PEP and survived. In China, in two cases of corneal transplantation reported in 2015, the recipients received PEP, which resulted in a high level of neutralizing antibodies, and the patient survived. The use of PEP appears effective in cases of ROTA.ConclusionsRabies remains a serious but neglected public health problem all over the world. Together with economic development and the improvement of medical conditions, organ transplantation will save more lives. As a byproduct of organ transplantation, ROTA has begun to appear. In China, there have been two ROTA reports. In combination with the situation in China, ROTA will represent a serious threat to the organ transplant population, which should garner sufficient attention in this field. Canine rabies elimination by mass dog vaccination is still the main way to prevent the happen of rabies in human or ROTA. Currently, more direct measures can be taken to prevent the recurrence of ROTA. With the creation of guidelines relating to the improvement and introduction of new laboratory diagnostic technologies, the strengthening of the screening of organ donors, and the timely administration of PEP, the prevention and control of ROTA will be much improved.Additional file
Additional file 1:Multilingual abstracts in the five official working languages of the United Nations. (PDF 198 kb)



Title: Dengue Virus Virulence and Transmission Determinants

IntroductionDengue virus (DENV) pathogenesis seems to be determined by numerous, interacting factors: viral virulence, host immunity and immune status, host genetics and possibly others (e.g., preexisting diseases). Because we have no models of severe dengue disease (DHF), all associations of viruses with increased pathogenesis have been indirect and painstakingly slow in being developed. Transmissibility has also been measured indirectly: the successful isolation of viruses from patients and the preponderance of one serotype over another have been documented in numerous countries but this has also introduced biases in our sampling. We do not have available a fully representative set of DENV genomes to study and understand what truly constitutes the natural range of DENV variation; many samples from mosquitoes or less-ill human infections are missing, in addition to those from countries lacking the laboratory and public health infrastructure necessary for detecting and isolating viruses. Virus-mosquito interactions also add a layer of complexity to the determination of which genotype is being transmitted and we are only beginning to measure the effects of this selection. However, many new methods have been applied to the study of DENV genetic variation, replication fitness and their effects on transmissibility and pathogenesis in humans. None of these methods are perfect and we must still regard them as surrogates for measurements of the natural viral determinants of disease. Thus, understanding this complex system will probably require multidisciplinary approaches to solving the mysteries of the interaction of the many factors that contribute to DENV epidemiology. Other, nonviral factors contributing to DENV pathogenicity and transmission are discussed in accompanying chapters.Controversies Over Virulence and EvolutionThe first descriptions of DENV virulence differences came from epidemiologic and entomologic studies done in the South Pacific by Rosen and Gubler, in the 1970s (Gubler et al. 1978; Rosen 1977). It was noted that some outbreaks in this region had fewer or no cases of DHF and the transmitted viruses were considered of low virulence; other outbreaks had many cases of DHF, after primary infection and these viruses were therefore more virulent. However, it took the development of RNA nucleotide sequencing techniques and the use of these sequences to generate phylogenetic trees of evolutionary relationships among viruses to discover that specific variant groups, or genotypes, were more frequently associated with dengue epidemics and severe disease (Chungue et al. 1995; Lanciotti et al. 1997; Lanciotti et al. 1994; Messer et al. 2003; Rico-Hesse 1990; Rico-Hesse et al. 1997). More recently it has been shown that some genotypes associated with DHF have been introduced and become established (endemic) in other continents, sometimes displacing the less-virulent DENV already being transmitted in those regions (causing DF only). “Virulent” genotypes have been described for serotypes 2 and 3 and it remains to be seen if further evolutionary studies will pinpoint similar groups in serotypes 1 and 4 (Rico-Hesse 2003).In the case of DENV, there is no evidence for rapid evolution and selection as in HIV, influenza or SARS viruses; for DENV, man-made ecologic disruption or increments in the number of mosquitoes or hosts are more important than evolution towards more virulent genotypes. There has yet to be evidence for the circulation of a recombinant DENV and those recombinant genomes described to date have been the product of enzymatic amplification techniques and are thus probably lab artifacts (Aaskov et al. 2007; Holmes and Twiddy 2003; Worobey et al. 1999); no one has isolated and fully characterized a recombinant DENV that is being transmitted in nature, causing disease. Although there is evidence for recombination in other, positive-strand viruses, specific steps in DENV replication might keep this event from occurring, although ample opportunities seem to exist in multiply-infected humans and mosquitoes (Monath et al. 2005). Also, there is no evidence for the epidemic transmission of the sylvatic genotype viruses from West Africa or Malaysia. These older, seemingly less-virulent viruses are transmitted mainly by canopy-dwelling mosquitoes to monkeys and they do not cause outbreaks in the human populations inhabiting those areas. The viruses isolated from dengue patients during outbreaks belong to genotypes imported from other continents (in the case of serotype 2, a genotype originating in the Indian subcontinent was introduced to Africa) (Rico-Hesse 2003). Some researchers, with ample field experience in tropical areas, believe that these zoonotic cycles will eventually disappear, because of the constant reduction of natural forests; thus, these cycles have practically no importance as reservoirs of human dengue (Rodhain 1991).Although we have not detected increases in replication fitness for any given genotype, some of the evolutionary events leading to more virulent strains seem to have already occurred and by the time these viruses rapidly spread from Southeast Asia to other areas of the world (1940s), they were already virulent or replicatively fit (Gubler 2002). We have yet to measure any specific genetic changes that are fixed in the viral population as virulent genotypes are successfully dispersed to other continents and we do not know whether there have been any changes imposed by selection in their new environments (e.g., for serotype 2, Southeast Asian genotype introduced into the Americas; for serotype 3, Sri Lankan genotype III introduced to the Americas). That is, these viruses had increased fitness at their origin, in that they are directly linked to the appearance of DHF and they are transmitted more efficiently by mosquitoes. However, some researchers believe differences in clinical presentation and severity of epidemics are a function of only immunologic and genetic differences between the human populations in both continents (Southeast Asia and Americas) (Halstead 2006) or that nonneutralizing antibodies formed during DENV infection play a role in gradually selecting for more pathogenic viruses in humans (Morens and Fauci 2008).Controversies Over TransmissionOf special concern lately has been the effect of global warming on the incidence and spread of dengue disease. Although there are probably no effects on DENV replication in humans, if environmental temperatures rise, many investigators presume there might be an effect on virus transmission by mosquitoes. This is derived from the fact that increases in temperature (along with increases in rainfall) directly affect mosquito development (from larval to adult stages) and their populations can increase dramatically. Also, increases in average temperatures in new climes might make conditions favorable for mosquito breeding and the establishment of new populations. This could surely lead to more chances of exposure to mosquito bites for the human population and thus for infection by mosquito-borne viruses. However, the reason why many mosquito-borne diseases have yet to affect large populations in developed nations seems to be a lack of exposure to mosquito bites; air-conditioning and human behavior have been shown to reduce DENV transmission in the southern United States (Reiter et al. 2003). That is, human activities and their impact on local ecology have generally been more significant in increasing dengue prevalence; thus, dengue disease seems to be influenced more by economic than climatic factors (Gubler et al. 2001; Reiter 2001). Also, research described below has shown that increases in temperature might have more of an impact on selecting for those virulent genotypes that are already being transmitted by mosquitoes. Mosquito survival rates and the time it takes for a virus to infect and be transmitted by the mosquito seem to be more important in this context.Another subject that has received renewed attention is the possibility of human modification or management of viral virulence by impacting transmission dynamics. This is important for the application of rapid public health measures in the event of the emergence of new strains of parasites, bacteria or viruses (Lipsitch and Moxon 1997). We presume we can influence virulence by the application of changes in human habits or by the use of control factors such as vaccines – and there are numerous precedents of how public health measures have changed the population dynamics of microorganisms (e.g., there are now more cases of vaccine-induced polio or yellow fever in some countries). Efforts to understand the relationship between parasite adaptation to hosts, virulence and transmission have developed into a small industry in evolutionary biology (Bull and Dykhuizen 2003). Although most discussion is still theoretical, the relationships between virulence and transmission have been weighed, presuming that there is an evolutionary trade-off for optimizing either factor within an organism (Ebert and Bull 2003). That is, to increase its chances of transmission to another host, an organism will limit its replication or virulence in so far as to not kill its host. For example, highly virulent, zoonotic viruses such as Ebola and rabies are less transmissible than measles or common cold viruses, which rarely kill their human host. However, this is overly simplistic when it comes to the evolution of viruses that have multiple strains (multiple infections, with some cross-protection), where virulence involves immunopathology, or where there is another host or an amplifying vector involved in transmission (Day et al. 2007). Thus, the main goal for disease control is to understand how we can reduce virulence in a virus population without making its level of transmission higher. However, this seems a daunting task if we include the effects of evolution by individual versus group selection, bottlenecks and changes in fitness trade-offs. The concern here is whether we will shift DENV evolution and population dynamics by applying incomplete control strategies (e.g., nonsterilizing vaccination or vector transformation).Methodologic Advances and FindingsThe controversies mentioned above point to factors we should consider or understand in the control of dengue disease: evolutionary studies of DENV have helped us concentrate on detection (diagnosis and sampling), analysis (genetic and phenotype) and control (transmission dynamics in host and mosquitoes) of those genotypes already shown to be the culprits (Rico-Hesse 2007). The methods described below could help us reach these goals.Rapid Sequence AnalysisThe determination of viral RNA sequences from different areas of the genome has now become routine and numerous laboratories around the world have this capability; this has added exponentially to the number of DENV samples available for comparison in GenBank. The comparison of these nucleotides and their encoded amino acids can be done with sophisticated computer algorithms that can tell us much about the rates and sites of mutation or evolution in the viral genome. These data can then be matched with patient viral loads, diagnoses, outbreak characteristics and transmission distribution, to look for specific associations. The RT-PCR technique has allowed for the enzymatic amplification of these sequences from very small amounts of viral RNA from almost any type of tissue but many researchers have now avoided virus isolation and characterization, thus introducing mistakes in some of the banked information (e.g., from amplification, sequencing, or cloning artifacts) and without information on viability or antigenicity. Therefore, it is also important to have access to classic virology techniques, especially if one is to derive information about virus phenotype.The comparisons of full genome sequences of many DENV have helped pinpoint differences that could be involved in virulence: the comparison of viruses from two different genotypes associated with DHF or DF only (Southeast Asia and Americas, respectively) showed that there were consistent differences in the 5′-untranslated region (UTR), one envelope protein site (aa390) and the 3′-UTR of the DENV serotype 2 genome (Leitmeyer et al. 1999). Comparisons within the Southeast Asian genotype did not identify any specific nucleotides associated with producing DHF (Mangada and Igarashi 1998; Pandey and Igarashi 2000), so we assume all viruses of this genotype have the potential to produce severe disease. This has also been the case with other DENV, where recent studies have suggested that differences in 5′- and 3′-UTR in the genome can alter levels of replication (Miagostovich et al. 2006; Sirigulpanit et al. 2007; Tajima et al. 2007), which can be extrapolated to viral load in blood or disease presentation (Wang et al. 2006). Another chapter in this volume describes how these influences may occur.Infection of Primary Human CellsThe first targets of DENV replication, after mosquito bite, were postulated to be monocytes or macrophages and numerous studies focused on these cell types. However, more recent studies, using newer technologies for cell identification (mainly flow cytometry) have shown that DENV infects human monocytes poorly compared to dendritic cells, including Langerhans cells and monocyte-derived dendritic cells (Marovich et al. 2001; Wu et al. 2000). Primary dendritic cell cultures can be derived from human peripheral blood donations to banks and this is the usual source for studies to compare the replication of low-passage DENV from patients. Because these samples are obtained anonymously, we must be careful to obtain them from blood banks in areas where there is no DENV transmission (i.e., no antigenic priming of cells) and we cannot determine the human genetic background that might lead to differences in virus replication. However, studies reported in 2003 and 2005 (Cologna et al. 2005; Cologna and Rico-Hesse 2003) were able to show consistent differences in replication of DENV of two genotypes of serotype 2, demonstrating that there is an ex vivo correlation to the virulent phenotype derived from evolutionary studies. Although there seem to be innate, probably genetic differences in the yields of virus produced by cells from individual donors, this variation could be accounted for statistically and the correlations with virulence of patient-derived viruses were established (and note that these differences occur in the absence of antibodies). These primary cell cultures were also used to test recombinant viruses, to determine the influence of specific genome regions on virus replication and yields from human cell targets. These studies confirmed that the exchange of three genomic regions (5′ and 3′ UTRs, and E390) could reduce the levels of replication and virus yields of a Southeast Asian virus to those of wild-type, less virulent viruses of the American genotype (Cologna and Rico-Hesse 2003). Other uses for cultured primary human cells include the identification of specific cells that are producing more virus (tropism) and whether virus replication is even required for pathologic effects.Infection of Field-Collected MosquitoesAnother step in determining if a virulent genotype had an increased transmission fitness phenotype was to study differences in replication and dissemination (i.e., the possibility of transmitting virus by bite) in the natural mosquito vector, Aedes aegypti. Laboratory-reared colonies of mosquitoes (e.g., Rexville or Rockefeller strains) seem to have lost their selectivity for infection and it is recommended that mosquitoes used in these experiments be from the F4 generation or lower (F0 = field-collected eggs). The virulent, Southeast Asian strains of serotype 2 were shown to infect a larger proportion of mosquitoes than the less virulent, American genotype strains, after feeding mosquitoes on blood containing the same titer of virus (Armstrong and Rico-Hesse 2001); also, a greater proportion of mosquitoes develop disseminated infections with the virulent genotype (Armstrong and Rico-Hesse 2003). If mosquitoes were fed both genotypes simultaneously, they were much more likely (sevenfold) to develop an infection with the virulent strains (Cologna et al. 2005). When the dynamics of virus replication and dissemination were compared for both genotypes, the virulent strains had reached the salivary glands up to 7 days earlier than the less virulent viruses (Anderson and Rico-Hesse 2006). This means that virulent strains may replicate and be transmitted much sooner to human hosts, outcompeting the less virulent viruses and causing many more cases of disease, thus ecologically displacing those that cause less severe dengue. This efficiency of transmission by the vector could explain how certain genotypes have displaced others, shifting the evolution of dengue disease towards more virulence (i.e., more DHF).Mouse Models of DiseaseDuring this decade, major advances have been made in the development of new mouse breeds and their transplantation with human stem cells (from umbilical cord blood cells) that may effectively mimic the human immune system or show human signs of disease upon infection. The combination of studies in these mice with those in mice that are defective in interferon production or receptors have led to insights into the mechanisms of dengue pathogenesis (Bente et al. 2005; Kuruvilla et al. 2007; Kyle et al. 2007; Shresta et al. 2006). Thus far, none of these models develop DHF and the production of DENV-specific antibodies has been low or undetectable. However, others have shown that mice engrafted with human hematopoietic cells can be effectively used to study pathogenesis of viruses for which no other models exist (Melkus et al. 2006; Watanabe et al. 2007). It is anticipated that after adaptation of this system to DENV infection by multiple strains, with the acquisition of DENV-specific, functional B and T cells, that the signs of DHF might appear in these “humanized” mice. This would finally allow for the measurement of the many effects of immunopathogenesis, including the protective cross-immunity created by serial infection and the evaluation of many basic questions, such as dose-dependence of infection, the relevance of mosquito factors to infection (e.g., salivary gland proteins) and the role of other cells as primary targets of infection (e.g., endothelial cells). Most importantly, this model could allow for the immediate testing of antivirals and vaccine candidates, where effective systems for testing products before human use have been lacking.Mathematical Models of TransmissionAnother promising new field has been the development of mathematical models of DENV transmission, including “evolutionary epidemiology” and virulence management. These models are being used to estimate the effect of changing host immunity or mosquito transmission on the amount of virus circulating and the risks to a hypothetical human population and epidemic “topology.” These analyzes have suggested that DENV cross-serotype immunity and mosquito demographics, rather than immune enhancement, are the most important determinants in the dynamics of specific serotype cycles or genotype replacement during epidemics and that the application of incomplete control strategies might actually increase the incidence of severe disease (Adams et al. 2006; Cummings et al. 2005; Nagao and Koelle 2008; Wearing and Rohani 2006). Although these models are complex and still require many basic measurements for their refinement, some of the details are being added as they become available from laboratory or ecological studies (e.g., quantification of cross-protection by various DENV strains and many different measurements of mosquito transmission dynamics, including vector genetics and their effect on competence and capacity, etc.). Other applications of computer modeling have involved measuring the importance of host genetics over parasite contributions to virulence. For virology, the importance of host genetics in disease pathogenesis has been discussed for many years but recent technologies have allowed researchers to weigh the influence of virus virulence over human host genetics, in the case of pandemic influenza A (Gottfredsson et al. 2008; Pitzer et al. 2007). However, these approaches are extremely controversial at this point, as other investigators have reached opposing conclusions when using similar methods and results (Albright et al. 2008).PerspectiveOnly recently have public health officials in developed countries become concerned about the increased transmission and geographic spread of DENV. In many cases this is due to the increase in cases imported by tourists from less-developed tropical regions. For the United States, there has been a marked increase in imported cases and autochthonous transmission in Texas and Hawaii during this decade (Morens and Fauci 2008) and for the first time we have been able to document the introduction of a virulent DENV genotype into this country (CDC 2007; Rico-Hesse 2007). This has added a sense of urgency to research using some of the models described here and a hope for additional support for studies of this long-neglected tropical disease.


Title: Experimental Lagos bat virus infection in straw-colored fruit bats: A suitable model for bat rabies in a natural reservoir species

IntroductionRabies is an almost invariably fatal disease caused by rabies virus (RABV) or any other member of the Lyssavirus genus (family: Rhabdoviridae, order: Mononegavirales) [1,2]. Rabies virus is predominantly transmitted to people by carnivores, in particular the domestic dog (Canis familiaris), and causes more than 59,000 human fatalities annually [3]. As terrestrial rabies in domestic and wild carnivores is being brought under control by vaccination in high- and middle-income countries, the role of bats as a source of human infection has become more evident [4,5]. Also, bats are the main source of cattle rabies infections in South America [6]. In Latin America, an estimated 30 million US$ is spent annually on rabies preventive measures [7]. Although rare, the transmission of RABV from bats to terrestrial carnivores has been demonstrated as a driver of outbreaks in terrestrial mammals, as has been reported several times in the Americas [8–13]. Singular spill-over events of lyssaviruses other than RABV from bats to terrestrial mammals also have been reported [14–19]. Despite increasing recognition of their importance, relatively little is known about the dynamics of lyssavirus infections in their natural hosts, bats [13,20,21]. Based on the recurrent finding of high seroprevalences in some free-ranging bat populations (Table 3.2 in [22]), a number of researchers have hypothesized that bats, in contrast to other mammals, can survive a productive lyssavirus infection, i.e an infection where lyssavirus reaches the brain and is subsequently excreted from the oral cavity [23]. In contradiction, there is no indication from experimental infections in bats that this occurs [24–47] and bats seem, like other species, unable to survive infection of the brain, which appears to always result in fatal rabies [21,48]. Experimental infections in bats have been performed mainly with four lyssaviruses: RABV, Australian bat lyssavirus, and European bat lyssaviruses 1 and 2 [49]. These experimental infections have shown that—similar to RABV in carnivores—these lyssaviruses target the brain [50–52] with infection typically leading to encephalitis and death [26,32,35,37]. An important limiting factor in this previous bat-lyssavirus research is that oral excretion of virus was rarely observed in experimentally-infected bats making it difficult to test the hypothesis that bats are able to survive a productive lyssavirus infection [24–46]. The rare observation of oral excretion suggests experimental models for natural lyssavirus infections in bats need to be improved.The current study is a second step in the development of an experimental model that meets our goal of mimicking natural infection in a natural reservoir bat host. By ‘natural reservoir host’ we mean a host that is naturally infected and has co-evolved with the pathogen. Lagos bat virus (LBV), which comprises four lineages, A to D [49], is endemic in the straw-colored fruit bat (Eidolon helvum) [53,54], a common and widespread bat species in sub-Saharan Africa, which is not considered as ‘Threatened’ by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (www.iucnredlist.org). In a previous study, we tested different Lagos bat virus isolates in the straw-colored fruit bat [55]. Based on that study, a recent LBV isolate from Ghana [56] was selected as most appropriate because viral infection spread from the brain widely in the peripheral nervous system as expected for a natural productive lyssavirus infection [55].Infections of LBV in mammals other than bats have been reported sporadically [17,18,57]. Human infection has not been demonstrated, but diagnostic analysis of human rabies cases in Africa, if undertaken, typically uses methods that do not distinguish RABV from LBV or other lyssaviruses [49]. While the impact of LBV on human health is unknown, the widespread distribution of the straw-colored fruit bat and the apparent high rate of exposure of this species to LBV across its range [54,58], the increasingly close association of people with this gregarious bat species which often roosts in large human settlements and is consumed as food [59] and the failure of rabies immunization to protect against LBV [60], indicate that this pathogen has the potential to threaten public health.The specific goal of the current study was to identify the lowest inoculation dose of LBV that leads to a 100% rate of infection in straw-colored fruit bats after intramuscular inoculation. Additionally, the pathogenesis of LBV infection in these bats was investigated. The ultimate aim of this study was to develop a model that mimics a natural infection. Therefore, virus distribution, cell tropism and the lesions that developed in these experimentally-infected bats were compared with those of a naturally-infected bat, which also was the source of the LBV isolate we used for experimental inoculation [56].ResultsClinical signsOverall, 11 of 20 experimentally-inoculated bats died due to LBV infection and from now on these bats are referred to as having been rabid, whether or not clinical rabies was observed. Disease causation was confirmed as being LBV infection by positive reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR), rabies tissue culture infection test (RTCIT), fluorescent antibody test (FAT), and immunohistochemical (IHC) examination of their brains (see below). The 102.1 medium tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) virus dose was the most successful in causing lethal LBV infection (Fig 1, Table 1).10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.g001Fig 1Survival per inoculation group (n = 4 bats) over time, showing 100% mortality in the middle dose (102.1 TCID50) group.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.t001Table 1Association between clinical outcome and detection of lyssavirus in the brains of straw-colored fruit bats inoculated with different doses of Lagos bat virus.Virus dose group (TCID50)Bat no.Clinical signs observed?DoD pibOutcome of lyssavirus detection in brain by different methodsRT-qPCRRTCITFATIHC100.117Nonac----18Nona----19Noa61++++20Nona----101.113Yes12++++14Noa7++++15Nona----16Nona----102.19Yes10++++10Yes13++++11Yes17++++12Noa15++++103.15Nona----6Nona----7Yes8++++8Yes13++++104.11Noa8++++2Nona----3Nona----4Yes9++++a Bat was found dead, clinical signs were not observedb Number of days between date of inoculation and date of death (DoD) or euthanasia because of clinical signs.c Not applicable: bat remained healthy and was euthanized at the end of the experiment at day 160 or 161 post inoculation.Day of death post inoculation (pi) due to LBV infection ranged from 7 to 17, with one outlier (bat 14) from the 100.1 TCID50 group, that died on day 61 pi (Fig 1). Four bats died without clinical signs being observed, one each from the 100.1 TCID50, 101.1 TCID50, 102.1 TCID50 and 104.1 TCID50 groups, suggesting a short disease course. Seven bats developed clinical signs, of which six died or were euthanized within 12 hours, and one within 24 hours, of clinical signs first being observed. Clinical signs observed were increased vocalization, muscle spasms and tremors, increased saliva surrounding the mouth and aggression, and were the same as those noted in bats inoculated intracranially with this strain of LBV in a previous experiment [55]. There was no correlation between age (S1 Table) and infection status (χ2 [1, N = 20] = 0.90, p = .34), or between age and the development of antibodies (χ2 [1, N = 20] = 1.62, p = .20, an alpha level of .05 was used).No clinical signs were reported in the naturally-infected bat that was the host for the virus used within this study, although this animal was not observed for long as it was killed at the time of capture [56].SerologyFour of the six experimentally-inoculated bats that developed LBV-neutralizing antibodies in their serum were in the two highest virus dose groups (103.1 and 104.1 TCID50), and none of these six bats were in the lowest virus dose group (100.1 TCID50) (Fig 2). The development of antibodies thus seemed to be correlated with high virus dose, although the small number of bats per virus dose group precludes meaningful statistical analysis. The earliest that antibodies were detected in any bat was at 9 days pi.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.g002Fig 2Comparison of virus-neutralizing antibody response between straw-colored fruit bats that died or survived after inoculation with different doses of Lagos bat virus.The numbers on top of the stacked column are reciprocal VNA titers.Of the six bats that developed antibodies, four survived and remained clinically healthy to the end of the study (160 days post inoculation). The two seropositive bats that died, did so with clinical signs of rabies. However, the highest reciprocal antibody titer measured in these two bats was 27, which was lower than the highest titer measured in most of the bats that seroconverted and survived (Fig 2).In the naturally-infected bat used in this study no LBV-neutralizing antibodies were detected in serum using the modified rapid fluorescent focus inhibition test [56].VirologySeveral parts of the brain (rostral part, hippocampus, cerebellum, medulla oblongata) of each experimentally-inoculated bat that died without clinical disease being observed or that had clinical signs and was euthanized (n = 11), tested positive for LBV using RT-qPCR, RTCIT, and FAT, while the brains of bats that survived until the end of the experiment (n = 9) tested negative (Table 1). An analysis of variance (one-way ANOVA) showed that the (log transformed) Ct values, reflecting the quantity of virus present, of the four different brain areas did not differ significantly, F(1,62) = 5.94, p = .200 (an alpha level of .05 was used). The mean brain Ct value per LBV-positive bat ranged from 26 to 28 in all but one bat, in which the mean Ct value was 30 (Table 2). These data suggest that when the virus reached a certain threshold in the brain, the bat either died after a short disease duration, or developed end-stage clinical disease and was euthanized.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.t002Table 2Comparison of survival time and relative quantity of Lagos bat virus RNA in the brains of straw-colored fruit bats inoculated with different doses of Lagos bat virus.(Four bats in each virus dose group.)Virus dose group (TCID50)No. bats with fatal LBV infectionSurvival time (range, days post inoculation)Mean relative quantity of lyssaviral RNA in brain, per bat (Ct)a100.116126101.127–1226, 26102.1410–1727, 28, 27, 27103.128–1326, 30104.128–926, 27a Based on the relative quantity of LBV RNA, determined by RT-qPCR, in four different areas of the brain.Extra-encephalic tissues in 8 of the 11 bats (bats 19 [100.1 TCID50 group], 13, 14 [101.1 TCID50 group], 9, 10, 12 [102.1 TCID50 group], 7 [103.1 TCID50 group], and 1 [100.1 TCID50 group]) that died with LBV infection tested positive by RT-qPCR. The tissues that tested positive by RT-qPCR were tongue and salivary gland (Table 3), liver (bat 19, Ct 39, and bat 13, Ct 32), lung (bat 19, Ct 38) and intestines (jejunum of bat 19, Ct 40; colon of bat 19, Ct 39; and duodenum of bat 13, Ct 38). Virus isolation confirmed the presence of LBV in all these tissues, apart from the tongue of bat 8, livers of bat 13 and 19, and the duodenum of bat 13, from which virus could not be isolated. From bats that survived to the end of the study all extra-encephalic tissues tested negative by RT-qPCR. All oral swabs taken from bats that died during the study were tested, as well as the oral swabs taken on the day of termination of the study from healthy bats that survived to the end of the study. All oral swabs in RNAlater (n = 97) tested negative for the presence of lyssavirus RNA using RT-qPCR, and 14 (14%) tested negative for beta actin. MEM stored oral swabs (n = 81) tested negative for the presence infectious virus by RTCIT. The FAT was performed for salivary gland tissue, and was inconclusive because of nonspecific fluorescence, as has been described previously for glandular tissue [61].10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.t003Table 3Evidence for lyssavirus infection, based on different methods, at excretion sites in straw-colored fruit bats with Lagos bat virus-positive brains.Outcome of lyssavirus detection at excretion site by different methodsBat no.Salivary glandTongueOverallRT-qPCRaRTCITbIHCc neuronIHC epitheliumRT-qPCRRTCITIHC neuronIHC epithelium (taste bud/ surface)Naturally infected bat [56]nanadna++nana+++Experimentally infected batsVirus dose group (TCID50)100.11939e+f+-g36++++101.113--+-35++-+14----35+--+102.19----39++++10----36-+++11--+---+++12----39+--+103.1739++-33-+-+8------+-+104.11----33-+++4---------a RT-qPCR, reverse transcription quantitative PCR for detection of viral nucleic acidb RTCIT, rabies tissue culture infection test for detection of live virusc IHC, immunohistochemistry for detection of viral antigend na, not applicable, test not performed because sample not availablee Ct value, cycle threshold of RT-qPCRf+, positive cell culture, or cells staining positive with IHCg -, negative for RTCIT, no Ct value, or no cells staining positive with IHCThe brain of the naturally-infected bat had tested positive for LBV using a generic RT-PCR and FAT [56].PathologyAt necropsy, gross lesions were noted in 3 (nos. 12, 13, and 14) of the 20 bats from the experiment. All three were bats that died of rabies. Bat 13 and 14 had acute incision wounds on their tongue surfaces, likely because they had bitten their own tongues or the metal cages (biting of the metal cages by rabid bats had been observed). Bat 14 also had a fractured second digit. Bat 12 had enlarged lymph nodes.On histopathological examination, lesions directly associated with LBV infection were limited to the brain. All 11 rabid bats had diffuse meningo-encephalitis, ranging from mild to moderate in severity. In each case the meningo-encephalitis was characterized by the presence of few to a moderate number of lymphocytes around blood vessels in the meninges and brain parenchyma (perivascular cuffing). Lymphocytes surrounding blood vessels in the meninges and brain parenchyma were three cell layers thick at most. In the brain parenchyma, there was a mild increase in the number of glial cells and there were occasional pyknotic or karyorrhectic cells of undetermined origin (ranging from one to eight per five 40x objective fields). Negri bodies were not observed. None of the nine bats that survived until the end of the experiment had histologic changes associated with meningo-encephalitis.The naturally-infected bat [56] was not examined for the presence of gross lesions. On histopathological examination, this bat had a moderate diffuse meningo-encephalitis similar to that seen in the experimentally-inoculated bats that became rabid. The naturally-infected bat had inflammation of the salivary gland (sialoadenitis) which was characterized by multifocal aggregates of moderate numbers of lymphocytes within the interstitium surrounding the larger excretory ducts of the salivary gland. No experimentally-infected bat had this lesion and, as these lymphocytic aggregates were not co-localized with cells containing virus antigen (see below), it was not clear if this lesion was caused by LBV infection. There were several lesions that we considered to be incidental in the tissues of both the experimentally-infected bats and the naturally-infected bat (S1 Text).ImmunohistochemistryCells that stained positively for lyssavirus antigens using immunohistochemistry were found in a number of tissues. In all cell types in which antigen was detected, it was located in the cytoplasm and consisted of variable numbers of small (approximately 2 μm diameter) granules. The majority of antigen-positive cells did not show any signs of degeneration or necrosis; only a few antigen-positive neurons in the brain showed evidence of degeneration, characterized by cell shrinkage and loss of Nissl substance.Antigen-positive cells were present in the brains of all 11 experimentally-inoculated bats that died with rabies, but in none of the bats that survived to the end of the experiment. In most of the rabid bats, positively-stained cells could be clearly identified as neurons based on their morphology. In addition to neurons, it is possible that some glial cells were antigen-positive.In extra-encephalic tissues of experimentally-infected bats, antigen-positive cells were detected in the tongue, heart and salivary gland of some of the bats that died of rabies (Table 4). In the LBV-positive tongues, both neuroepithelial cells of taste buds and epithelial cells of the tongue surface were antigen-positive (Fig 3), in addition to neurons within ganglia. In the LBV-positive salivary glands and hearts, only neurons within ganglia were antigen-positive (Table 4). Bat 19 (100.1 TCID50 group), the bat with the longest incubation period, had the highest number of LBV-positive extra-encephalic tissues.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.g003Fig 3Microscopy figure of experimentally infected straw-colored fruit bat tongue.A. Circumvallate papilla characterized by a dome in the surface lined by epithelium. Salivary glands are present in the pit of the dome. HE stain. Original magnification 4x objective. B. Higher magnification of a taste bud that was present in the circumvallate papilla shown in A. The neuroepithelial cells of the taste bud express lyssavirus antigen (red granules). Lyssavirus IHC stain. Original magnification 100x objective. C. Higher magnification of another taste bud that was present in the circumvallate papilla shown in A. Surface epithelial cells near the taste bud express lyssavirus antigen (red granules). Lyssavirus IHC stain. Original magnification 100x objective.10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.t004Table 4Lyssavirus antigen expression in peripheral nerve ganglia and tongues of rabid bats, based on immunohistochemical analysis.No antigen was detected in the lung, kidney, liver, spleen, duodenum, jejunum or large intestine of any of these bats.Detection of lyssavirus antigen by immunohistochemical analysisBat no.Day of death (dpi)GangliaEpithelial cells (tongue)HeartSalivary glandTongueTaste budSurfaceNaturally infected bat [56]anabnana+c,d+na+Experimentally infected batsVirus dose group (TCID50)100.11961++++ (2/4)e+101.11312-f++naf-147na--na-102.1910+-++ (3/22)+1013+-++ (2/4)+1117na+++ (3/8)+1215na--- (0/6)-103.178na++na-813--+- (0/9)-104.118--+na+49+--na-Tropism (pos/total), ratio in%4/7, 57%4/11, 36%8/11, 72%4/6, 67%5/11, 45%a additionally ganglia in the intestines were positive in this batb na, not applicable, data not applicable, or cell types or ganglion was not present in the tissue slidec myoepithelial cells of the acini of the mucous salivary gland were positive in this batd +, antigen presente (x/y), x is number positive, y is number of taste buds present in the tissue slidef -, antigen not presentImmunohistochemistry results and RT-qPCR results did not match across the extra-encephalic tissues of the 11 experimentally-inoculated bats that died of rabies. This was especially the case for heart (4 of 7 tested did not match, 57%), tongue (4 of 11, 36%), and salivary gland (3 of 11, [27%] [S2 Table]).In general, the antigen distribution and staining pattern of the naturally-infected bat was similar to that seen in the experimentally-inoculated bats that died of rabies, with three differences. In the naturally-infected bat, but not in the experimentally-infected bats, antigen-positivity was seen in myoepithelial cells of the mucous salivary gland (S1 Fig), the myenteric ganglia of the intestines, and in the skeletal muscle of the tongue. The antigen-positive structures in tongue muscle of the naturally-infected bat were interpreted to be neuromuscular junctions, because virus antigen distribution was composed of multiple distinct aggregates (S2 Fig), and was not evenly spread throughout the cytoplasm of the muscle fibers, as would be expected if the muscle fibers themselves had been infected.DiscussionIn this experiment, inoculation of LBV into the masseter muscle caused rabies in 11 of 20 straw-colored fruit bats. The incubation period, duration of clinical disease, and clinical characteristics of the rabid bats were consistent with those described for lyssavirus infections in both bats and carnivores [26,38,45,62]. In our LBV-straw-colored fruit bat model, most bats became rabid within 2 weeks pi. According to our results, a relatively long incubation period seems to be the exception rather than the rule, with few individuals having incubation periods two to five times the mean of that of the others. As in our current study, exceptionally long incubation periods have been previously found to occur in low virus dose groups [26,38,45], the reasons for which are not clear. A possible explanation is that a low initial virus dose results in a small number of initially infected neurons, which consequently lowers the number of neurons infected in the brain in subsequent rounds of interneuronal transmission of virus, and in this way increases the time to development of clinical signs. For both experimental and natural lyssavirus infections, durations of disease of 1–28 days were described for insectivorous and frugivorous bats [33,38,63–66], and of 2–14 days for carnivores [62]. Thus, the duration of clinical disease seen in our study is within the previously-reported range for bats, but clearly at the lower end. We observed duration of disease of up to 24 hours, but it should be noted that six of the seven bats that developed clinical signs died, or were euthanized, within 12 hours of these signs first being seen. Also, four of the bats that developed rabies were found dead with no observed signs of disease. The clinical signs seen in our bats were similar to those described in our previous experiment with this strain of LBV [55], and are generally similar to those described for rabies in dogs [62].Our results show that out of five doses of LBV tested via intramuscular inoculation, the middle inoculation dose (102.1 TCID50) was most successful in causing infection in straw-colored fruit bats: all four bats inoculated with this dose became rabid, while for each of the lower and higher doses this was maximally two of four inoculated bats (Table 1). The optimal inoculation dose of LBV seemed to follow the so-called "Goldilocks principle": not too high, not too low, but just the right amount [67]. This may appear to be counterintuitive because, for experimental inoculations of most viruses, the rule is that a higher inoculation dose increases the likelihood of infection [68]. Our findings are partly corroborated by those reported by others that used multiple doses of lyssavirus (all RABV) via the intramuscular route. Turmelle et al [45] tested six doses where the middle two caused the highest mortality rates. Franka et al and Baer et al [26,31] tested two different doses and the lowest dose caused the highest mortality rate. In contrast, three other groups found that their highest dose, out of three or four doses tested, caused the highest mortality rate [25,38,69](Fig 4).10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.g004Fig 4Schematic overview of mortality and survival of bats in published experiments that used different lyssavirus doses, compared to the results of this study.Only studies conducted since 1960 and experiments using intramuscular inoculation routes are included. Each circle is a group inoculated with a certain dose. The size of the circle indicates the number of animals included in the group. Black indicates ratio bats in the group that died due to infection, grey means ratio that survived. Published experiments used rabies virus, our study used Lagos bat virus.One explanation for the survival seen with higher lyssaviral doses in our study is that a high dose increases the chance of triggering an effective immune response [70]. By this, we mean an immune response that stops the virus infection before clinical signs occur and the bat dies. Such an immune response could develop either due to the inoculum itself, or due to a limited infection that has not yet spread widely. The inoculum could contain, besides infectious virus, defective interfering viral particles that could trigger the development of an immune response [71]. We aimed to keep the level of defective interfering particles as low as possible by making a virus stock grown up from a low dose inoculum, and with minimal passage in cell culture. We used the same virus stock diluted to different final concentrations for the different groups. Therefore, we do not expect there to have been a different ratio of infectious virus particles to defective interfering particles in each inoculum. In our experiment, there was a trend for more frequent detection of virus neutralizing antibodies (VNA) against LBV in the serum of survivors from the high dose groups (103.1 and 104.1 TCID50, Fig 2), although this was not statistically significant. For two other research groups that performed experiments with different doses, VNAs were more often detected in the serum of survivors in high dose groups in one study [45], but not in the other [31]. Further experiments would be needed to determine whether high lyssavirus doses inoculated via a natural route have a vaccination-like effect in bats.A possible explanation for the survival observed with lower lyssavirus doses, when VNAs did not develop, is that these doses were approaching the minimal infectious dose for this virus via this inoculation route. The fact that, both in our study and those of others, lyssavirus dose appears to follow the Goldilocks principle, indicates the importance of selecting the appropriate virus dose when conducting lyssavirus animal experiments. It is important to take this principle into account when judging the pathogenicity of a virus strain based on mortality rate in experimental studies [72].In our experiment, it seemed that the majority of bats with VNA showed no clinical signs and survived. When combining the results of previous experiments with bats, using RABV [31,45], there is a positive correlation between survival, and the detection of VNA: of 30 bats that survived inoculation 16 (53%) developed VNA, while of 24 that died, 3 (13%) had developed VNA [X2 (2, N = 54) = 9.7, p = .0018]. In bats that survived RABV inoculation, clinical signs had not been observed, nor was excretion of virus detected. These bats also had no histologic lesions indicative of encephalitis. Therefore, there is no evidence that the virus had reached the brain before being cleared by the immune response. Thus, our findings and those of others strongly suggest that bats can develop an immune response without undergoing clinical disease from lyssavirus infection, or excreting virus. This could be an explanation for the high seroprevalence detected in free-ranging straw-colored fruit bat populations [54], as well as in some other bat species (Table 3.2 [22])[73]. In populations that have a high seroprevalence, protection against lyssavirus infection is thus high, so prevalence of virus infection is low, and the low level of lyssavirus detection reported can hence be expected [74]. We suggest that high seroprevalence in combination with low virus prevalence might occur when bats in roosts experience lyssavirus exposure in the absence of productive infection. This could be through exposure to high titers of virus (as in our high titer groups) or if multiple exposures to low virus titers occurred and stimulated high antibodies responses.In our experiment (Fig 2), and that of others using RABV [31,45], a minority of bats with VNA died. An explanation is that in these cases, VNA had developed too late relative to the extent of lyssavirus infection in the CNS. Besides the timing of VNA development, the ability of VNA to cross the blood-brain barrier might be important for the chance of survival. In a study with eight dogs experimentally infected with RABV, those that died only had VNA in the serum, while those that survived also had VNA in the CNS fluid [75]. In that study, dogs that had survived the experiment had lesions in the brain, suggesting RABV had reached the brain before being cleared by the immune response. In bats, the presence of lyssavirus-specific antibodies in the cerebro-spinal fluid has not been investigated.The method of dissemination of LBV within the straw-colored fruit bat is most likely similar to that of RABV in other mammals, i.e. via synaptically connected neurons. Virus was inoculated into the masseter muscle and was detected in the brains of bats that became rabid. Thus, possible routes of virus spread from the inoculation site (masseter muscle) to the brain (Table 5) can be deduced. A time course experiment would elucidate which of these routes are taken by LBV, and this would help us to understand where virus enters the central nervous system, which would help to explain or predict clinical signs [48]. Likewise, the detection of virus in certain peripheral structures away from the inoculation site can be used to infer which routes of spread the virus might have taken from the brain to these sites (Table 6). Virus detection in the otic ganglion of the salivary gland, and in the ganglion of the tongue indicates LBV spread from the brain to the periphery via parasympathetic motor neurons, which is consistent with the results of our previous experimental infection of straw-colored fruit bats with LBV [55]. Virus detection in the taste buds of the tongue indicates that LBV was also able to spread via special sensory neurons, from which it could infect the neuroepithelial cells that comprise the taste bud. A better understanding of the types of neurons and the types of synapses that lyssaviruses use for dissemination in the host will enable us to better predict the sequence of lyssavirus spread within the host’s body after exposure at a certain location. This could help in the management and costs of post exposure prophylaxis in people [48].10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.t005Table 5Possible neuronal routes for Lagos bat virus to spread from the intramuscular inoculation site to the brain (centripetal spread).Potential routes for centripetal spread of LBVs from intramuscular inoculation site to brainInnervation of masseter muscleCharacteristics of neuronal routePeripheral site of inoculationSpecific nucleusGeneral location of nucleus in CNSRoute (nerves & ganglia)Number of synapses to passDivision of nervous system involvedMasseter muscleMotor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the brainstemMotor medullaTrigeminal nerve (via neuromuscular junction)1Somatic motorRostral sensory mesencephalic nucleusSensory medullaTrigeminal nerve (via neuromuscular spindle)1Somatic sensoryMotor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the brainstemMotor medullaTrigeminal nerve2Parasympathetic motorMotor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve in the brainstemMotor medullaTrigeminal nerve2Sympathetic motorRostral sensory mesencephalic nucleusSensory medullaTrigeminal nerve1Visceral sensory10.1371/journal.pntd.0008898.t006Table 6Possible neuronal routes of spread of Lagos bat virus from the brain to the periphery (centrifugal spread).Potential routes for centrifugal spread of LBVs from brain to peripheryOrigin in CNSCharacteristics of neuronal routePeripheral location where Lagos bat virus was detected by immunohistochemistrySpecific nucleusGeneral location of nucleus in CNSRoute (nerves & ganglia)Number of synapses to passDivision of nervous system involvedTongue ganglionSalivatoryMotor medullaChorda tympani and glossopharyngeal nerves1Parasympathetic motorOtic ganglion (salivary gland)Inferior salivatoryMotor medullaChorda tympani and glossopharyngeal nerves1Parasympathetic motorCardiac plexi at base of heartaDorsal motor nucleus of vagus nerveMotor medullaVagus nerve1Parasympathetic motorCranial four to five segments thoracic spinal cordSpinal cordCervical paravertebral sympathetic trunk and postganglionic fibers2Sympathetic motorTaste buds on tongueSolitary tractSensory medullaGeniculate, petrosal and nodosal ganglia2Special sensoryMyoepithelium of parotid or submandibular salivary glandbIntermediate horn grey matter of spinal cord, T1 levelSpinal cordVentral root of spinal cord, cranial cervical ganglion2Sympathetic motorSalivatoryMotor medullaParotid gland: cranial nerve IX and otic ganglion; submandibular: cranial nerve VII and submandibular ganglion2Parasympathetic motora More than one route possible because of innervation of the nervous plexi by both parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems.b Virus antigen was detected here in the naturally infected bat, not in the experimentally infected bats.In general, the virus distribution pattern and lesions in our study were comparable to those of our naturally-infected bat (Table 4) [56]. The virus distribution pattern was most similar to the naturally-infected bat for bats infected with 102.1 and 100.1 TCID50 LBV doses. This indicates that, in addition to successfully resulting in productive infection, the middle dose results in a course of infection that may mimic natural LBV infection in the straw-colored fruit bat. There was one important exception regarding the antigen distribution pattern: salivary gland epithelium was positive in the naturally-infected bat, but not in any of our experimentally-infected bats. In another straw-colored fruit bat naturally infected with LBV, salivary gland epithelium was also positive [74]. Possible reasons for a lack of salivary gland epithelium infection in our experiment include the bats dying or being euthanized before the infection could reach the salivary gland epithelial cells, and an inability of our LBV strain to infect salivary gland epithelial cells. Some authors (e.g., [47,76]) used viruses isolated from the oral cavity instead of from the brain for experimental infection studies; this may ensure that viruses are from a population that is able to infect cells important for excretion [55].In general, detection of viral RNA and detection of viral antigen (RT-qPCR/ Immunohistochemistry) did not match closely for the diagnosis of LBV infection in extra-cephalic organs (S2 Table). Neither method seemed consistently more sensitive than the other. This is different from our previous experiment in which RT-qPCR seemed more sensitive than immunohistochemistry in extra-cephalic organs, and where these results generally matched those for tissues in which ganglia were usually present in microscopy slides, such as heart and intestine [55]. The inconsistency between the two different methods might be caused by the relatively abundant localization of the virus in neuronal cell bodies, which are not evenly spread in tissue samples. Hence the detection of virus is dependent on the chance that an infected neuron cell body ends up in the sample examined. This should be taken into account when the extra-cephalic spread of lyssaviruses is studied.Both salivary gland and tongue are expected to be virus excretion sites in lyssavirus-infected bats [48]. In our straw-colored fruit bat that was naturally infected with LBV [56], as well as another published report [74], salivary gland epithelial cells and tongue epithelial cells were antigen positive. For all but one of our rabid bats, we showed that virus was present in these organs (Table 3) through the detection of viral RNA, the detection of infectious virus by isolation or by the detection of virus antigen. Tongue (10 of 11) tested positive much more commonly than salivary gland (5 of 11) across all techniques. Also, Ct values were generally lower for tongue (mean 35) than for salivary gland (mean 39), suggesting that there was a higher number of virus copies in tongue than in salivary gland tissue. Data from vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) infected with RABV indicate the possibility that the tongue is the major site of virus shedding [77]. Also, lyssavirus was detected in the tongues of experimentally [32] and naturally-infected European bats [78]. On the other hand, Allendorf et al [50] showed salivary glands as being more often RT-hnPCR positive than tongues in bats of different species naturally infected with RABV. Davis et al [79] detected virus in tongue and salivary gland with a similar frequency and at similar Ct values in silver-haired bats (Lasionycteris noctivagans) experimentally infected with RABV. Overall, our results suggest that tongue is a more important tissue for virus excretion than salivary gland for LBV in the straw-colored fruit bat. Further studies of natural infection with this virus-host combination are needed to confirm our results.The finding of virus in the surface epithelium of tongues, especially, suggests virus shedding could have occurred in our bats, at least by the time of death. Still, it was not possible to confirm virus excretion via oral swabs that were taken shortly before, or at, the time of death and when the bats were rabid. This concurs with the results of our previous experiment in which we inoculated straw-colored fruit bats with LBV via the intra-cranial route [55]. Here, also, even though virus was detected in tongue surface epithelium, we were unable to detect virus in oral swabs. Our lack of detection of beta-actin in 14 (14%) of our samples, might suggest RNA extraction failed, but this would explain the lack of detection of lyssavirus in only a minor proportion of our samples. There are several other possible explanations for the lack of detection of viral excretion, as outlined previously by Suu-Ire et al [55]. First, IHC detection of lyssavirus antigen in oral tissues may be more sensitive than RT-hnPCR detection of lyssaviral RNA in oral swabs. Second, although there was virus in tongue surface epithelium, there might have been no excretion into the oral cavity, although this does not fit well with what is known of the pathogenesis of other lyssaviral infections [48]. Third, it might be that virus excretion was intermittent and oral swabs were taken at a time when virus was not being excreted. Intermittent excretion has been proposed to explain alternating positive and negative results of serially collected oral swabs in other experimental lyssavirus infections in bats [26]. However, virus was not detected by RT-hnPCR in any of our oral swabs. Fourth, there may have been loss or degradation of viral RNA in oral swab samples during transport or processing. LBV has been detected in an oral swab of a naturally infected straw-colored fruit bat previously [74], showing that this is technically possible. Because virus could not be detected in oral swabs, time taken post-inoculation until virus excretion, if it occurred, could not be ascertained or linked to the timing of other factors, such as antibody response, or onset of clinical signs.Overall, our results indicate that the outcomes of infection in straw-colored fruit bats are, in general, not different from those for RABV infection in other species. Hence, people exposed to LBV should be treated. RABV vaccination and PEP are not likely to protect against LBV, so there is a need to develop treatments that do work for exposure to LBV and other phylogroup 2 lyssaviruses [80]. The LBV dose that most commonly leads to infection in straw-colored fruit bats via the intramuscular (masseter muscle) route of inoculation follows the Goldilocks principle. With the middle virus dose, 102.1 TCID50, nearly the whole course of lyssavirus infection, from site of entry to site of exit, is replicated. Therefore, intramuscular inoculation of 102.1 TCID50 of the Ghana strain of LBV in straw-colored fruit bats is a promising experimental model to increase our understanding of the dynamics of lyssavirus infections in bats.Materials and methodsEthics statement (experiment)Experimental procedures were approved beforehand by the Wildlife Division of the Forestry Commission of Ghana, the Institutional Review Board of Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, University of Ghana, Legon and the Ethics Committee of the Zoological Society of London, U.K. (license number WLE638).Experimental set upWe inoculated five different virus doses, differing by ten-fold steps from 100.1 to 104.1 median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50), into straw-colored fruit bats in order to find the virus dose leading to the highest rate of infection. The pathogenesis of LBV infection was evaluated by observation for clinical signs, by the testing of oral swabs and tissue samples for virus presence, the sequential taking of blood for antibody detection and by the examination of tissues for lesions. If LBV infection occurred, lesions and virus antigen distribution were compared with those in a naturally-infected bat, to test if the observed experimental infection mimicked a natural infection.Although the natural routes of infection are not known for LBV in straw-colored fruit bats, we chose intramuscular inoculation because this is the most-commonly used route of inoculation for lyssavirus experiments [48]. The masseter muscle was chosen because it is easily identifiable and because we considered it a muscle likely to be bitten by fighting bats and, hence, a likely natural route of infection. The course of infection in inoculated bats was followed until general paresis was reached in order to provide maximum time for the virus to spread from muscle to brain and peripheral sites, including potential site(s) of excretion, and to determine whether bats were able to survive infection. Thus, virus antigen distribution was examined at the end stage of disease. Oral swabs and blood samples were taken regularly throughout the experiment, to be able to test when bats excrete virus in relation to the time of inoculation, the start of clinical signs, humoral immune response and death.Virus preparation (experiment)A virus stock was prepared and titrated according to standard methods [61]. The virus was from a phylogenetic lineage A of LBV. It was isolated from the brain of a naturally-infected straw-colored fruit bat in Kumasi, Ghana (GH 325, FLI lab. No.: 31225, INSDC sequence databases LN849915, GenBank: LN849915.1 [56]). The virus was passaged three times in baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells. It reached an infectious virus titer of 107.25 TCID50 per ml. The volume of the inoculation dose per bat was 30 μl. The neat dose was 104.1 TCID50. For each subsequent dose, the virus suspension was diluted 10-fold in minimal essential medium (MEM), until a dose of 100.1 TCID50 was obtained.Bats (experiment)Bats were obtained from a closed captive breeding colony that is maintained in Ghana [81] and which has tested free of LBV [55]. The bats used in this experiment were all captive-bred and each one tested negative for antibodies against LBV using a modified version of the fluorescent antibody virus neutralization test with a lineage A LBV as the challenge virus [54] at the beginning of the study. Age class was based on the approximate date of birth as per the microchip number: all captive bats were caught-up quarterly and any new pups or juveniles were microchipped. Housing and care were as described previously [55]. Twenty bats, all male and 1–2 years old, were randomly assigned to one of five groups (four bats in each group) (S1 Table). The bats in each of the five dose groups were inoculated intramuscularly in the left masseter muscle with 30 μl of one of the five different virus doses. Bats were implanted with transponders to allow individual identification.Clinical examination and sampling (experiment)Bats were initially observed twice daily, at 07.00 and at 16.00 GMT, for the presence of clinical signs. After the first occurrence of clinical signs, frequency of observations was increased to every two hours, day and night. Observers were unaware of the group the bat was in.Blood samples (0.5 ml) from the propatagial vein were taken at 2 days, 1 week, and 1½ weeks pi, and then at 2, 2½, 3½, 4½, 6½, 8½, 10½, and 12½ weeks pi (day 90 pi). Oral swabs (individually wrapped 2.5 mm diameter sterile cotton tip [Fisher Ltd.]) were taken once daily until 22 days pi, then at days 26, 33, 61, 90, 104, 117, and 146 pi and at the time of euthanasia or at the end of the experiment (day 160 or 161 pi).Oral swabs (individually wrapped 2.5 mm diameter cotton-tipped, Fisher Scientific Ltd.) were collected in RNAlater (Ambion) and in minimal essential medium, for virus RNA detection and virus isolation, respectively. Swabs were tested for the presence of virus RNA in the following ways: (1) if the bat died during the course of the experiment, all swabs available were tested; (2) if the bat survived until the end of the experiment, only the oral swabs taken at the time of necropsy were tested. The experiment was terminated at day 160 or 161 pi, which was 99 or 100 days after the last bat had died of rabies, at day 61 pi. Bats that survived until day 160 or 161 pi were euthanized and sampled according to the same protocol as clinically affected bats. Bats were euthanized with sodium pentobarbital (0.4 ml/kg body weight, Animal Care Ltd, UK).Serology (experiment)Blood samples were centrifuged (6000 g, 15 min; Eppendorf-Netherler-Hinz, GmbH, Germany). Serum was removed with a micropipette. Prior to freezing at -70°C, sera were heat-treated (56°C, 30 min) to inactivate pathogens and residual complement. A modified fluorescent antibody virus neutralization test [54] was used for the detection of LBV lineage A specific antibodies. The lack of accurately-titered control sera meant that all neutralizing antibody levels were expressed as reciprocal titers, which were calculated using the Spearman–Karber method. Rabbit sera containing antibodies directed against LBV lineage A were used as positive controls. We did not have access to true specific pathogen free bat sera, and as Lagos bat virus is absent in Europe, we used dog sera from unvaccinated healthy European dogs as negative controls. Bats were considered seropositive if their sera neutralized LBV lineage A at a reciprocal titer higher than 16.Pathological examination (experiment)Necropsies and tissue sampling were performed according to a standard protocol, approximately 1 to 6 hours after death. At necropsy, a standard range of tissues (see below) was collected (1) fixed in neutral-buffered 10% formalin for histological examination, (2) in plain dry tubes for virus isolation and viral RNA detection. The following tissue samples were collected: brain (rostral cerebrum, hippocampus, cerebellum, medulla oblongata in separate tubes for virological analysis, the remainder of brain for histological analysis), salivary gland (usually parotid, but sometimes submandibular), tongue, heart, lung, liver, kidney, spleen, submandibular lymph node, duodenum, jejunum and colon. Each tissue was collected using a new pair of disposable forceps and a new scalpel blade on an individual gauze pad to prevent cross-contamination. For the tissues for histological examination, the formalin was replaced after two or three days to enhance fixation; the formalin-fixed samples were stored at room temperature. The plain samples in dry tubes were flash-frozen at -70°C.Virological examination (experiment)A range of tests were performed in biosafety level 3 laboratories at the Animal and Plant Health Agency, U.K. and at the Friedrich Loeffler Institute, Germany, as described below:Reverse transcription-PCR To obtain RNA from tissues, a small piece (ca. 50μg) of each organ was homogenized with a 5 mm steel bead in 500 μl MEM with a homogenizer (Tissue Lyser II Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) at 3 minutes for 30 Hz. Homogenates were clarified by centrifugation (500 g, 5 min). The clarified supernatant was split and then subject to virus isolation (below) and RNA extraction. For RNA extraction the NucleoSpin RNA kit (Macherey-Nagel GmbH & Co. KG, Düren, Germany) was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions and RNA was stored at −80°C until use. To obtain RNA from oral swabs, oral swabs stored in RNAlater were used. Extraction was performed with High Pure RNA Isolation kit (with poly A), following manufacturer’s recommendations. All brain samples from all bats included in the experiment, and extra-encephalic tissues of clinically affected bats, were tested using RT-qPCR, according to previously described methods [82,83] with a probe specific for Lagos bat viruses from lineages A, B and C: [TxRd]AMAAGATTGTTTTCARGGTKCAYAATCA[BHQ2]. All oral swabs of clinically affected bats were tested using RT-qPCR according to Marston et al. [84]. As a positive internal control for RNA extraction, we performed RT-qPCR for beta actin on each extracted sample.Fluorescent antibody test Touch impressions on glass microscope slides of three different parts of frozen brain (hippocampus, cerebellum, medulla oblongata) of all bats were made and stained with fluorescein-isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated anti-rabies mouse monoclonal antibody (Fujirebio Diagnostics, USA, anti-N) [61]. A rabies-virus-positive mouse brain was used as a positive control. The brain of an uninfected mouse was used as a negative control.Rabies Tissue Culture Infection Test. The presence of viable virus was confirmed with the rabies tissue culture infection test (RTCIT) essentially as described [85]. Tissue samples were prepared as described (above). Supernatants were added to mouse neuroblastoma cells (Na 42/13, FLI Cat. No.0229) which were then incubated at 37°C in 5% CO2 in cell culture flasks and control dishes for three days. After three days the control dishes were fixed and checked for lyssavirus presence using the FAT. In case of negative results, supernatant was discarded and cells were passaged as above. Three consecutive passages with negative result ruled out the presence of viable virus in the sample.Histology and immunohistochemistry (experiment and natural infection)The formalin-fixed tissues were embedded in paraffin wax, cut in 4-μm-thick serial sections, routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin and examined using a light microscope for the detection of microscopic lesions. Immunohistochemistry was performed for the detection of lyssaviral antigen [86], as described previously [55]. The brain of an LBV-infected straw-colored fruit bat from a previous experiment [55] was included as a positive control. Immunohistochemistry was performed on samples of brain from all bats, and only on other organ samples of those bats that had positive RT-qPCR results for the brain.Naturally infected batAn apparently-healthy free-ranging straw-colored fruit bat was captured near the zoo of Kumasi on 4 May 2011 (GH235 & V15-373) [56]. It was anesthetized and euthanized by exsanguination. The bat was not examined for the presence of gross lesions. A range of tissue samples (brain, lung, intestine, salivary gland [not specified], tongue, kidney, liver, spleen) was fixed in neutral-buffered 10% formalin for histological examination and frozen at –70°C in plain dry tubes for virus isolation. This bat was part of a larger study to determine virus presence in a colony of straw-colored fruit bats in Kumasi, Ashantia Region, Ghana. The brain of this bat was the only one of 600 (frozen) bat brain samples that tested positive by RT-PCR for the presence of lyssavirus [56]. The Lagos bat virus that was cultured from the brain of this bat was the virus used to inoculate the bats in the current study. Formalin-fixed tissues were processed for the detection of lesions and virus antigen with light microscopy as described above (‘Histology and immunohistochemistry’). As tissues had been stored in formalin for over three years, antigen retrieval was increased by boiling slides in citric acid buffer for 20 minutes, in contrast to the 10 minutes for the tissues of the experimental bats. A small part of the brain, at the level of the hippocampus, was available for microscopy.Supporting informationS1 TextIncidental lesions detected in bats from the experiment and the natural-infected bats.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableAge category and body weight of bats inoculated with different doses of Lagos bat virus.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S2 TableVirus RNA and antigen detection (RT-qPCR/Immunohistochemistry) in extra-cephalic organs of bats from the experiment do not match well.(XLSX)Click here for additional data file.S1 FigMicroscopy figure of naturally infected straw-colored fruit bat salivary gland.Mucous salivary gland acini separated by septa are shown. One of the lining myoepithelial cells expresses lyssavirus antigen (red granules). Lyssavirus IHC stain. Original magnification 100x objective.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigMicroscopy figure of skeletal muscle in the tongue of a naturally infected straw-colored fruit bat.Antigen positive granules are interpreted as being localized in neuromuscular junctions, because the positive granules form discrete aggregates rather than being dispersed evenly throughout the cytoplasm of the myocytes. Lyssavirus IHC stain. Original magnification 40x objective.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Revealing the complexity of vampire bat rabies “spillover transmission”

BackgroundViruses have interacted with their hosts for at least thousands of years [1]. Indeed, most viruses are expected to be host-specialists—infecting a single host species, instead of host-generalists—infecting multiple host species [2]. This long-term host-virus relationship allows the virus to induce negligible damage to its host in a process-termed co-evolution [3]. Thus, host-virus co-evolution facilitates coexistence by reducing reciprocal harm: viruses modulate their virulence against the host and hosts modulate their immune response against the virus [4]. A stable host-virus relationship, however, can be disrupted by external forces, causing the manifestation of disease (i.e., detrimental effect of the virus over the host). Cross-species virus transmission, from the original host to a new host, occurs in fish, plants, and wildlife, which has also been referred as spillover transmission. Using an ecological framework, this comment article reveals the inherent complexities of spillover transmission, strictly defined as the processes that allow cross-species transmission of viruses causing disease (i.e., pathogens) in humans (i.e., zoonotic pathogens; Box 1). Nevertheless, the rationale could be useful for non-zoonotic and non-directly transmitted viruses and other infectious agents.More than 75% of emerging infectious diseases in humans have originated from spillover transmission events between hosts that do not share obvious evolutionary histories [5]. Thus, it has been proposed that evolutionary biology alone has failed to anticipate emerging infectious diseases [6]. This failure could be due in part to the confirmation bias of spillover transmission studies which have been historically focused on (1) viruses that had successfully established in a naïve host causing the emergence of novel transmission cycles, (2) viruses that are virulent to a naïve yet susceptible host causing conspicuous disease, and (3) zoonotic viruses [7–10]. Nevertheless, during spillover transmission events wildlife viruses are not guaranteed to establish in a naïve host, and may or may not affect humans in a negative way [10]. Thus, identifying or revealing factors at different scales of complexity associated with spillover transmission is key for the better understanding and forecasting of disease emergence.Defining spillover transmissionThe transmission of a virus from one species to another is termed “spillover transmission” [10, 11]. As such, “virus spillover” is a correct term commonly used in epidemiology of zoonoses to refer to cross-species or interspecies transmission events. “Disease spillover”, in contrast, is an incorrect term commonly used in the gray literature, to refer to the same phenomenon. Disease spillover is an erroneous use of the spillover term because diseases per se cannot be transmitted, only their causative agents (e.g., viruses). Many emerging infectious diseases have originated via spillover transmission of viruses from an original or primary wildlife hosts (i.e., reservoir host) to new, naïve domestic animal hosts followed by successful onward intraspecific transmission (Fig. 1). In some instances, wide host-range viruses transmitted from wildlife to domestic animals can reach humans through a secondary spillover transmission event (i.e., spillover transmission from new hosts, instead of the original host). For example, outbreaks from spillover transmission in the last two decades include: rabies virus (RABV; Lyssavirus) from vampire bats to cattle in Latin America [12, 13], swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus (SADS-CoV; Alphacoronavirus) from Rhinolophus spp. bats to pigs in China [14], Nipah virus (Henipavirus) from flying-fox bats to pigs in Bangladesh [15, 16], Marburg virus from the African fruit bat (Rousettus aegyptiacus) to primates in Africa, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV or SARS-CoV-1; Betacoronavirus) from bats to palm civets [17], Middle-East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV; Betacoronavirus) from bats to camels in the Middle East [18–20], Hendra virus (HeV; Henipavirus) from flying-fox bats to horses in Australia [21], and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2; Betacoronavirus) from bats to a yet unknown secondary host in Southeast Asia [22–25] (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Recent spillover transmission events. A native reservoir serves as the source of a virus to other host species, in which it could be virulent. This accidental cross-species transmission (i.e., spillover transmission) (red arrows), occurs between host species without evolutionary relatedness. Spillover transmission between two genetically unrelated species has been documented in recent emerging infectious where a pathogen from an original wildlife host (left) is transmitted (primary spillover; red arrows on the left) to another wildlife or domestic species (middle), and from them to a human (secondary spillover; right). SADS-CoV: swine acute diarrhea syndrome coronavirus. SARS-CoV: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. MERS-CoV: Middle-East respiratory syndrome. SARS-CoV-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2Strikingly, there are no known empirical indicators for predicting the likelihood of spillover events. Nevertheless, spillover transmission events are better characterized for some viruses, such as bat-borne rabies in Latin America, which offers opportunities to better understand spillover transmission and successful onward transmission to secondary susceptible hosts. A series of factors could contribute to the likelihood of spillover transmission and successful virus establishment across scales, from micro to macro. At the fine scale, susceptibility, immune status, genetics, population density, availability of resources (e.g., diet), sex, and age of the host reservoir could be linked to higher levels of viral shedding or higher contact rates to increase spillover transmission and successful virus establishment in a new species (Fig. 2). At an intermediate scale, biodiversity composition, expansion of agriculture, and intensification of livestock production could play a role in the likelihood of spillover transmission by facilitating interactions between species. Finally, at coarse scales, global climate and landscape change or expansion of species ranges could also influence the risk of spillover transmission.Fig. 2Factors potentially related to spillover transmission across scales. Different biological process act at different spatial scales and may have variables impacts across those scales. Which scale is appropriate to study specific patterns and parameters is still an unresolved question in disease ecology. Studies at fine scale provide high-detail and specificity, but cover small areas while coarse-scale studies cover large geographic areas at the cost of detailFurthermore, factors facilitating spillover transmission may act across scales and be interconnected. For example, paleontological evidence suggests that extinctions of large mammals due to climate change increased the endemicity of pathogens in the remaining wildlife community, which may conduce to increased spillover transmissions from wildlife to humans [26]. Furthermore, climate and landscape variation modulate mammal species composition, which shapes virus speciation and endemism altering viral spillover rates between primary hosts and sympatric naïve hosts [27–29]. As such, biodiversity losses due to global change could influence the propensity of viral spillover transmission [30], evidenced by previous studies on the influence of potential changes in wildlife species assemblages due to environmental change [31–34].Spillover transmission versus disease emergencePathogen virulence and pathogen-induced extinction risks are generally considered to be low in reservoir hosts [35]. Nevertheless, in the new host spillover transmission can have two different outcomes: successful and unsuccessful establishment (Fig. 3). In unsuccessful virus establishment, the virus fails to establish in the new host due to factors such as the new host having no cell receptor affinity [36], low intracellular compatibility (e.g., no compatible codon usage) [37], a robust immune response that clears the infection, or having behaviors which reduce exposure to the virus (e.g., solitary vs. social species) [38]. Similarly, the virus could fail to establish due to high virulence in the new host species, which results in the death of the infected host before sustained propagation or onward transmission among conspecifics can occur. New hosts which do not generate secondary infections or onward transmission among conspecifics during spillover transmission are termed “end hosts.” Alternatively, viruses may successfully establish and generate brief or sustained onward transmission, resulting in a “new” reservoir host. For example, new hosts could have an immune response which is insufficient to clear the infection, allowing the virus to multiply and be transmitted onward to new individuals of the same species before the death of the new individual host. Establishment of the virus can be achieved without the need for viral evolution or adaptation—“virulence conservatism”—or reflected as evolutionary change in the virus—“host shift”. Secondary onward transmission resulting from successful viral establishment, either with or without viral evolution, is the prelude to disease emergence [10, 39–46]. An important knowledge gap that has not yet been fully explored with regard to disease emergence includes the role of habitat conditions or biodiversity gradients that may limit or facilitate secondary onward transmission (Box 1).Fig. 3Diagram of spillover transmission events with successful and unsuccessful virus establishment in the new host. A geographical range shift of a host species may cause contact with a novel host species. This disturbance in host species assemblages may cause transmission of viruses from the primary host to a new, naïve host, resulting in the expression of disease or death of the new host. Alternatively, the new host infected with the virus could show complete innocuity due to the incompetence of the host to interact with the novel virus. a Pathogens generally fail to successfully establish in a naïve host (orange) due to the virus removal (e.g., the immune system clears the infection or there is no cell tropism compatibility to lack of affinity with cell receptors). b Pathogens could also fail to establish in a new host due to the host’s death (e.g., pathogen kills the naïve host). Failure of the pathogen to establish in a new host, also known as ‘end hosts’ (orange), will not generate secondary transmission. c In rare spillover transmission events, pathogens successfully establish in a naïve host in the absence of pathogen’s adaptation (Pathogen does not change; i.e., pathogen’s complete genome highly conserved, without adaptative mutations. Under this scenario pathogens mainly present neutral evolution). e Alternatively, the pathogen could develop adaptation (i.e., mutations) to modulate its virulence and escape or overcome the host’s immunity or increase cell receptor affinity (Pathogen change, i.e., host-shift). Successful pathogen establishment in a naïve host, also known as ‘new host’ is the prelude for disease emergenceBox 1 Defining spilloverIn this opinion article, spillover transmission does not necessarily implies onward transmission after the new host is infected. Instead, spillover transmission refers to an specific moment in space and time when a given viral agent established in its primary reservoir host, circumstantially meets a new host. Thus, spillover transmission can be strictly referred as the moment of encounter, which implies a virus, somehow, enters a new host. Nevertheless, entering a new host does not necessary implies a virus will be successful to establish an infection and therefore be able to get transmitted intra-specifically (i.e., among individuals of the same species) or inter-specifically (i.e., among individuals of different species). Both scenarios denote onward transmission, though with some subtle differences. Once spillover transmission occurs (the encounter), a onward transmission will depend on a successful infection (i.e., establishment of the virus in the new host). A successful infection will only happen if the virus finds an adequate permissive target cell and the virus possesses effective tools or mechanisms to evade the innate and adaptative host’s immune response of the host. Spillover could be considered as an stochastic event that may be governed by the probability a new host could get in touch with a virus from another species, regardless the virus’ ability to cause a successful infection with a consequent onward transmissionSpatial scaleDifferent biological process act at different spatial scales [47]. For example, while behavior may be relevant to explain transmission patterns at the local level, climate could be more important to explain transmission at the continental level [48]. The appropriate scale to study specific patterns and parameters is still an unresolved question in disease ecology [49, 50]. Studies at fine scale provide high-detail and specificity but cover small areas, while coarse-scale studies cover large geographic areas at the cost of detail (Fig. 4). Spillover and onward transmission from an original host to a naïve host has been studied at the molecular, individual, and population level. Nevertheless, there is a need for spillover-transmission research at coarser scales to untangle the biogeographic elements of cross-species transmission [51]. Different spatial scales allow for the use of data with different information and at different levels of detail (i.e., grain; Fig. 4). At fine spatial scales, spillover studies can analyze host-level data (e.g., sex, age, genetic variation, body size, etc.) to assess the role of reservoir features on spillover risk. At medium spatial scales, researchers should assess landscape-level data (e.g., land cover change, intensity of urbanization, livestock density) to understand these features’ impact on spillover propensity. At coarse spatial scales, future investigations should explore how biogeographic factors (e.g., temperature, precipitation, evapotranspiration) explain why virus spillover transmission occurs in some areas but not others and when onward transmission is more likely.Fig. 4Multiscale framework of spillover research. a Pathogen spillover studies across fine, medium, and coarse scales allow bottom-up and top-down assessments. b Different scales allow to cover different study area extents, from individuals, to ecosystems. Modified from [74]Bats and spilloverBats are known to be major reservoirs hosts for many viruses, and consequently the primary source (donor or source host) of microorganisms that can successfully establish in naïve species (recipient host) [52, 53]. The high number of bat species (~ 1200) inherently generates a proportionally high amount and diversity of viruses (virosphere) with the potential to infect humans and other mammals [54]. That is, more bat-borne viruses are expected to be discovered as research effort increases [55]. As such, global hotspots of bat diversity are expected to harbor a larger and more diverse plethora of microorganisms with pandemic potential.Viral establishment in the new host is dependent upon the frequency of spillover transmission events and demography of the new host [35]. Intermediate levels of virulence are also highly suitable for successful establishment in a naïve host species [35]. Pathogen virulence generally dependents upon the host affected [36] (Fig. 3). That is, a virus could be highly virulent for some host species or individuals, but not virulent for others. Molecular-level mechanisms of infection are well understood for many emerging diseases originated from spillover [3]; thus, one next frontier on spillover transmission research is a focus on the drivers of the spillover events themselves to understand why spillover occurs, which is neglected in many spillover transmission studies.Rabies as a model of spillover transmissionRabies is caused by all members of the Lyssavirus genus, and ranks among the best-understood and best-surveyed disease systems [56, 57]. RABV is the most widespread agent within the genus and its detection and identification are achieved with high certainty by continent-wide comprehensive surveillance systems [58]. RABV is distributed across the globe, with hotspots of viral diversity along the Neotropics [59, 60]. Rabies virus transmission requires direct contact, through bites and scratches [61], and distinct viral lineages have become established in different species and populations within the Carnivora and Chiroptera orders [55]. Furthermore, the study of rabies was foundational to the development of the idea of vaccination (i.e., by Louis Pasteur); modern molecular epidemiology; disease eradication under One Health approaches; development of oral vaccination strategies; and for understanding disease persistence, natural immunity, abortive infections, spillover transmission, disease ecology, and evolution [57, 61]. Rabies is also almost 100% fatal for infected individuals, killing ~ 59,000 people annually, and causes at least USD 8.6 billion in economic losses annually [62]. In summary, rabies is a well understood, data-rich disease with a high degree of host plasticity and a demonstrated history of viral conservatism across host lineages, resulting in disease persistence. These elements make the rabies system a unique opportunity for advancing the global understanding of spillover transmission across regions, host taxa, and periods.Spillover transmission of rabies virusWhile canine-rabies has been almost eradicated in the Americas, bat-borne rabies is now an emerging public health and agricultural problem [56, 63]. In Latin America, most rabies cases in humans and domestic animals originate from bites inflicted by the common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) (Fig. 5), one of the only three mammal species 100% dependent on blood to survive [56, 63]. The species has a broad geographic range, and feeds on the blood of a variety of prey species, including wildlife, livestock, pets, and humans [64]. Some of the southernmost D. rotundus populations in South America even feed on marine mammals (e.g., sea lions) and birds (e.g., penguins). During feeding, D. rotundus can transmit rabies virus to their prey (Fig. 5), which may result in primary spillover transmission or even secondary spillover to other species (e.g., rabies from D. rotundus to cats and then from cats to humans). Vampire bat-borne rabies virus (VB-RABV) outbreaks in humans suggest that mortality mainly occurs in tropical and subtropical regions. For example, Brazil reports about two cases of human rabies annually caused by bat-borne rabies viruses that have been laboratory-confirmed as antigenic variant 3, a RABV variant associated with D. rodundus. However, underreported cases that are not laboratory confirmed are probably much more common. Documenting how VB-RABV can spill from D. rotundus over to other species can inform and guide strategies to prevent VB-RABV spillover transmission to humans and domestic animals, and help prevent the potential spread of D. rotundus rabies from Latin America into the United States.Fig. 5Desmodus rotundus rabies virus spillover and onward transmission. Rabies virus is transmitted accidentally from one infected vampire to its prey Rabies virus is transmitted from an infected vampire bat (i.e., reservoir host) to other species, which may or may not maintain transmission (i.e., end host vs. new host; Fig. 3). Primary spillover transmission events are common in Latin America. Secondary spillover transmission also occurs and result in zoonotic spillover (i.e., human infections)In summary, VB-RABV has been documented for over a century [65], and as a system displays many interesting elements of spillover transmission. VB-RABV from wildlife species is regularly transmitted to domestic animals and humans [64, 66], has a conservative virus for which dramatic viral genomic change has not been observed during some spillover events [61], and possesses an original reservoir host species (bats from the New World) which is often times evolutionary distant from its receptor hosts (e.g., herbivores from the Old World) [60]. Furthermore, D. rotundus is one of the most well studied mammals in the Americas [57, 58, 64, 67] (Fig. 6; considerable availability of specimens of the species), and is distributed across tropical regions where well-studied species are scarce. Comprehensive documentation and available data on rabies virus and the vampire bat geographic distribution across the Neotropics is reasonably well collected in a continuous and standardized form. That is, bat hosts and virus detection and identification are attained with high certainty by a continent-wide comprehensive surveillance system. In Latin America alone, at least 23,536 outbreaks of VB-RABV spillover to cattle were reported between 1970 and 2021 [68]. For example, VB-RABV lineage antigenic variant 3, specific to D. rotundus, shows failure to establish onward transmission after spillover transmission to livestock. These elements make vampire bat borne rabies an extraordinarily unique wildlife-disease system for advancing the understanding of spillover transmission across large study areas.Fig. 6Large vampire bat records. Unpublished records of Desmodus rotundus and specimens are available across Latin America. For example, specimens are stored in biological collections in Latin America and available for future research to study spillover transmission and disease emergenceConclusionsVirus spillover transmission, as the prelude for disease emergence, is a poorly understood highly complex phenomenon [10]. Although spillover transmission is expected to increase in incidence and geographic range in the future years as a result of global change [6], the role of environmental factors at different scales of complexity has been rarely studied quantitatively [69]. As a result of these uncertainties, there is a poor mechanistic understanding of spillover transmission inherent processes (subtle stages) that limits humanity’s ability to predict virus spillover transmission across different regions. A persistently unsolved question in disease ecology, therefore, is the extent to which spillover transmission can be quantified and predicted at the local, regional, and continental levels (i.e., across spatial scales). Research is still needed on the ecological and biogeographic drivers leading to cross-species viral transmission to determine the mechanisms that facilitate host-virus dynamics across regions and environmental gradients [70–72]. Understanding where spillover transmission events are more likely to occur is the crucial first step where focused surveillance should take place, to anticipate effective early prevention and control programs before virus spillover transmission ends in disease emergence. The status quo in spillover transmission research reveals predictive limitations that fail to determine when a spillover transmission event could result in outbreaks, epidemics, and pandemics such as the COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2.Vampire-bat-borne rabies (VB-RABV) is an ideal biological system to study spillover transmission. For instance, RABV is well understood and there is an effective vaccine to reduce biosecurity risks for researchers. Additionally, VB-RABV spillover from D. rotundus to livestock is frequent and widespread in Latin America. Finally, VB-RABV primary spillover transmission to cattle results in end hosts, so that there are immense opportunities to better understand actual spillover transmission events that do not necessarily result in the establishment of new transmission cycles that may end up in long-lasting epidemics.Future research in this field should focus on five key questions. (1) What landscape conditions are needed for a spillover transmission event to occur in the first place? (2) How can biodiversity composition modulate the likelihood of spillover transmission? and (3) What type of mutations in viral genomes facilitate spillover transmission and subsequent disease spread across different species? (4) Are there any climatic drivers favoring or limiting spillover transmission? (5) How do landscape changes, such as changes due to emergent commodity or natural resources exploitation (e.g., lithium) or massive destruction after armed conflicts impact spillover transmission of wildlife viruses? These research lines are of critical public interest considering that the circulation of zoonotic viruses in wildlife is, in general, a threat to human health and social/economic development [73]. By understanding the specific drivers of zoonotic virus spillover transmission from wildlife, and by forecasting areas suitable for successful spillover transmission, health professionals could implement early detection, control, and elimination strategies for effective outbreak containment that will reduce economic impacts.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: MONKEYPOX VIRUS (MPOX)
================================================================================
Title: Exploring monkeypox virus proteins and rapid detection techniques

IntroductionMpox (formerly referred to as monkeypox) is a zoonotic infectious disease caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV) that belongs to the Orthopoxvirus (OPXV) genus of the Poxviridae family (Gubser et al., 2004). It results in symptoms that start with fever, headache, and back pain and are followed by systematic rash and blisters (Magnus et al., 1959; Cho and Wenner, 1973). These symptoms are similar to infections caused by other members of the same genus, such as the variola virus (VARV) and vaccinia virus (VACV). In addition, mpox resembles infections caused by viruses from other families. For example, chickenpox, caused by the varicella-zoster virus, a member of the Herpesvirus family, exhibits symptoms similar to MPXV infections (Chauhan et al., 2023). Since the clinical presentation of these diseases in humans shares similarities, diagnosing mpox relying on the observable symptoms is challenging.Mpox has the potential to lead to a fatal outcome, resulting in a mortality rate ranging from 1% to 10%, depending on the specific clade of the MPXV strain causing the infection and the level of access to advanced healthcare services (Adalja and Inglesby, 2022). At present, no specific treatment is available for the MPXV infection. However, supportive care plays a vital role in managing the symptoms, including using medications to alleviate fever and pain. The smallpox vaccine can provide partial protection (85%) against monkeypox, but its effectiveness is not guaranteed in all cases (Fine et al., 1988). Hughes et al. (2014) discovered a specific epitope of the MPXV through a monoclonal antibody designed for the heparan binding site on the MPXV envelope protein. Hence, this finding paved the way for more specific serologic assays for mpox detection (Al-Musa et al., 2022).Current MPXV detection methods include viral isolation, electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and PCR (polymerase chain reaction)/rtPCR (reverse transcription PCR) (Li et al., 2006; McCollum and Damon, 2014; Karagoz et al., 2023). However, these techniques require advanced technical skills, state-of-the-art laboratories, and specialized training and fail to meet the demand for timely and rapid identification of MPXV infection (McCollum and Damon, 2014; Halvaei et al., 2023). Consequently, there is a need for reliable detection approaches to accurately identify MPXV-infected individuals and control the spread of the disease. In this paper, our focus centers on the pathogenesis and biological traits of mpox while also detailing the characterization of MPXV envelope proteins, including A29L, H3L, E8L, M1R, L1R, C19L, A35R, B6R, and the profilin-like mpox A42R protein. These proteins are highlighted as potential targets for a range of detection methods. Additionally, we provide an overview of recent advancements in rapid detection techniques for mpox.EpidemiologyThe first case of mpox was found in a nine-month-old infant in 1970 in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Since 1970, there has been an increase in mpox outbreaks, mainly occurring on the African continent (Breman et al., 1980; Alakunle et al., 2020). Specifically, between 1970 and 1995, 388 out of 418 recorded cases of mpox were documented in Zaire (currently known as DRC) (Shchelkunov et al., 2001). Since May 2022, mpox cases have been reported in Europe and North America. As of February 29, 2024, the ongoing mpox outbreak has resulted in over 94,707 laboratory-confirmed cases, including 181 deaths. Approximately 715 cases have been reported worldwide monthly (World Health Organization, 2024). These cases are spread across 117 countries, of which only seven had previously reported cases of MPXV before 2022 (
Figure 1
). Due to the rising global cases, the World Health Organization (WHO) designated MPXV as a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) on July 23, 2022 (World Health Organization, 2022). According to the latest data received, the number of laboratory-confirmed cases reported monthly has increased by 1.6% compared to January, with the majority of cases originating from the USA (31.9%) and Europe (31.2%) (World Health Organization, 2024).Figure 1Distribution of confirmed MPXV cases worldwide as of February 29, 2024 (adapted with permission from World Health Organization, 2024).Biological featuresMPXV is characterized as an enveloped double-stranded (ds) DNA virus, and its genome size is approximately 197 kb, encoding nearly 190 proteins (Shchelkunov et al., 2002; Kumar et al., 2022). The virus structure includes a lipoprotein envelope, a viral core, and two lateral bodies, as depicted in 
Figure 2A
 (Witt et al., 2023). The genome comprises two variable regions on both the right and left sides and a conserved large central genomic region occupied with core genes. The variable regions are composed of genes responsible for encoding proteins related to virulence and determining host range, where significant differences between MPXV and VARV occur. Meanwhile, the core region encodes structural proteins and essential enzymes, which share 96.3% similarity with the core region of the VACV (Shchelkunov et al., 2001).Figure 2
(A) Structure of MPXV; (B) Schematic representation of an MPXV replication cycle, including (1) viral attachment, (2) fusion, (3) replication, (4) viral assembly, and (5) release from the host cell (created via BioRender.com).The ds nature of MPXV’s genetic material has advantages and disadvantages from a detection perspective. Unlike positive-sense single-stranded (ss) RNA viruses, like SARS-CoV-2, which can directly initiate the synthesis of viral proteins upon entering the host cell, DNA viruses need to first convert their DNA to RNA before expressing viral proteins (Durmuş and Ülgen, 2017). Consequently, MPXV can stay in the body longer before exhibiting noticeable symptoms in infected individuals (Bhalla and Payam, 2023). Hence, it can lead to the unnoticed spread of infection within the community. This phenomenon most likely played a role in the undetected spread of MPXV in various geographical areas, challenging researchers to develop new approaches, including diagnostic tools and biosensors. However, the advantage of DNA viruses is that they are comparatively more straightforward and more accurate in detecting using PCR tests than RNA viruses. DNA virus detection does not require reverse transcription before PCR (Bhalla and Payam, 2023).Poxviruses, including MPXV, are recognized for their distinctive structure, which is typically brick-shaped or oval, with a size ranging from 200 to 250 nm (Cho and Wenner, 1973). Based on the genome sequence, MPXV is phylogenetically classified into two clades: clade 1, which is found in central Africa and the Congo basin, and clade 2, which is from West Africa. However, the phylogenomic analysis, including those from the 2022 outbreaks, revealed that these outbreaks were caused by a recently evolved clade called “hMPXV-1A” lineage B.1 (Luna et al., 2022).PathogenesisThe virus can be transmitted from animals to humans or from humans to humans via direct and close contact, spreading through blood, body fluids, and dermal or mucosal injuries. During human-to-human transmission, MPXV enters through the upper respiratory tract, including the oropharynx and nasopharynx, or via intradermal routes (Li et al., 2022b). The clinical features of MPXV highly resemble smallpox disease, which also presents 10-14 days of incubation followed by two days of skin rash formation. Like smallpox, the development of rash includes phases such as macular, popular, vesicular, and pustular (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008; Hughes et al., 2014). Hence, the differentiation of these diseases by clinical presentation is quite challenging.As with other poxviruses, MPXV replication occurs in the cytoplasm and undergoes through virally encoded RNA polymerase. As depicted in 
Figure 2B
, MPXV pathogenesis includes viral particle attachment, fusion, viral genome replication, virion assembly, and release from the infected host cell. During these steps, two types of infectious forms of MPXV are produced: extracellular enveloped virus (EEV) and intracellular mature virus (IMV). The EEV is released through exocytosis and comprises a lipid membrane wrapped around the intracellular IMV particle originating from the Golgi apparatus or endosomes. On the other hand, the IMV is released during cell lysis and has a stable lipoprotein envelope, making it suitable for transmission between animals (Gong et al., 2022; Shi et al., 2022).The entry fusion step involves a complex interaction with multiple receptors, namely heparan sulfate, glycosaminoglycans, and chondroitin (Montanuy et al., 2011; Hughes et al., 2014; Khanna et al., 2017). It has also been proposed that genes responsible for viral replication enzymes and structural proteins are highly homologous among OPXVs (Shi et al., 2022). Senkevich et al. (2005) proposed that the fusion entry mechanism is conserved among the poxvirus family, which suggests that this primary mechanism developed early in their evolution and remains unchanged. Hence, MPXV can possess standard features in its entry-fusion step with other members, especially VACV.MPXV proteinsThe genes encoding the MPXV structural proteins are located within the highly conserved central genomic region and expressed in different forms of the mpox virus. The EEV form of MPXV expresses 25 membrane proteins, including C19L, A35R, and B6R (
Table 1
). In contrast, the IMV form expresses proteins such as A29, M1R, E8L, H3L, and L1R (Shchelkunov et al., 2002). According to Freyn et al. (2022), specific MPXV proteins, homologs of VACV, such as M1 and A29, are involved in the cellular entry process of mature virus (MV), and A35 and B6 are identified as contributors to the transmission mechanism on the enveloped virus (EV) surface. Among these proteins, A35 has been identified as an essential factor for poxvirus virulence. Studies have shown that the loss of A35 protein resulted in a 1000-fold attenuation in virulence (Freyn et al., 2022). Moreover, studies indicate that antibodies against the L1R protein, located in the outer membrane of MV, can prevent the virus from infecting cells, suggesting that L1R might also have a role in the viral entry step (Shi et al., 2022).Table 1MPXV proteins and their characteristics.LocationProteinLength(aa)Protein sequenceSequence alignment similarity (%) with VACVFunctionCellular localization (when expressed in 293T cells)ReferenceIMVA29L1101 mdgtlfpgdd dlaipateff stkaaknpet kreaivkayg ddneetlkqr ltnlekkitn61 ittkfeqiek cckrndevlf rlenhaetlr aamislakki dvqtgrhpyeA27L94.54%viral replication, viral recognition, regulation of cell entry and viral egressioncytosol
Shchelkunov et al., 2002; Yong et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2022; Fang et al., 2023; Gao et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a.H3L3241 maaaktpviv vpvidrppse tfpnvhehin dqkfddvkdn evmqekrdvv ivnddpdhyk61 dyvfiqwtgg nirdddkyth ffsgfcntmc teetkrniar hlalwdskff ielenknvey121 vviiendnvi editflrpvl kaihdkkidi lqmreiitgn kvktelvidk dhaiftytgg181 ydvslsayii rvttalnivd eiiksgglss gfyfeiarie nemkinrqim dnsakyvehd241 prlvaehrfe tmkpnfwsri gtvaakrypg vmytfttpli sffglfdinv iglivilfim301 fmlifnvksk llwfltgtfv tafiH3L 93.52%promotes binding to host cells and infectivity–
Lin et al., 2000; Kugelman et al., 2014; Yefet et al., 2023.E8L3041 mpqqlspini etkkaisdar lktldihyne skpttiqntg klvrinfkgg yisggflpne61 yvlstihiyw gkeddygsnh lidvykysge inlvhwnkkk yssyeeakkh ddgiiiiaif121 lqvsdhknvy fqkivnqlds irsanmsapf dsvfyldnll pstldyftyl gttinhsada181 awiifptpin ihsdqlskfr tllsssnheg kphyitenyr npyklnddtq vyysgeiira241 attspvreny fmkwlsdlre acfsyyqkyi egnktfaiia ivfvfiltai lflmsqrysr301 ekqnD8L97.74%surface attachment and viral entryendomembrane
Shchelkunov et al., 2002; Alkhalil et al., 2009; Yong et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2023.M1R2501 mgaaasiqtt vntlseriss kleqeanasa qtkcdieign fyirqnhgcn itvknmcsad61 adaqldavls aatetysglt peqkayvpam ftaalniqts vntvvrdfen yvkqtcnssa121 vvdnklkiqn viidecygap gsptnlefin tgsskgncai kalmqlttka ttqiaprqva181 gtgvqfymiv igviilaalf myyakrmlft stndkiklil ankenvhwtt ymdtffrtsp241 miiattdiqnL1R 98.40%viral particle assembling and entryplasma membrane or inclusion body-like structures
Senkevich et al., 2002; Yong et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2023.L1R1521 mdhnqylltm ffadddsffk yfasqddess lsdilqitqy ldfllllliq sknkleavgh61 cyeslseeyr qltkftdsqd fkklfnkvpi vtdgrvklnk gylfdfvisl mrfkkesala121 ttaidpvryi dprrdiafsn vmdilksnkv ek
viral particle entry, viral infection neutralization, virion assembly–
Su et al., 2005; Golden et al., 2008; Karki et al., 2018; Yong et al., 2020.EEVF13L (C19L)3721 mwpfvsvpag akcrlvetlp enmdfrsdhl ttfecfneii tlakkyiyia sfccnplstt61 rgalifdklk evsekgikii vlldergkrn lgelqshspd infitvnidk knnvglllgc121 fwvsddercy vgnasftggs ihtiktlgvy sdypplatdl rrrfdtfkaf nsaknswlnl181 csaacclpvs tayhiknpig gvfftdspeh llgysrdldt dvvidklksa ktsidiehla241 ivpttrvdgs syywpdiyns iieaainrgv kirllvgnwd kndvysmata rsldalcvqn301 dlsvkvftiq nntkllivdd eyvhitsanf dgthyqnhgf vsfnsidkql vseakkifer361 dwvsshsksl kiF13 99.9%viral packing and egression:formation of virus-specific wrapping complex; lipid metabolism–
Schmutz et al., 1995; Smith and Vanderplasschen, 1998; Bárcena et al., 2000; Shchelkunov et al., 2001, 2002; Shiryaev et al., 2021; Patel et al., 2023; Srivastava et al., 2023.A35R1811 mmtpendeeq tsvfsatvyg dkiqgknkrk rviglciris mvisllsmit msaflivrln61 qcmsankaai tdsavavaaa ssthrkvvss ttqydhkesc nglyyqgscy ilhsdyksfe121 dakancaaes stlpnksdvl ttwlidyved twgsdgnpit kttsdyqdsd vsqevrkyfc181 tA33R95.03%formation of actin-containing microvilli and effective cell-to-cell spread of viral particlesplasma membrane
Roper et al., 1998; Perdiguero and Blasco, 2006; Yong et al., 2020; Fang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a.B6R3171 mktisvvtll cvlpavvyst ctvptmnnak ltstetsfnd kqkvtftcds gyhsldpnav61 cetdkwkyen pckkmctvsd yvselydkpl yevnstmtls cngetkyfrc eekngntswn121 dtvtcpnaec qplqlehgsc qpvkekysfg eymtincdvg yevigvsyis ctanswnvip181 scqqkcdips lsnglisgst fsiggvihls cksgftltgs psstcidgkw npilptcvrs241 neefdpvddg pddetdlskl skdvvqyeqe iesleatyhi iimaltimgv iflisiivlv301 cscdknndqy kfhkllpB5R 96.53%efficient spreading of infection, regulation of complement system of the host cell, contribution in wrapping steps of IMV to formulate EEVperinuclear structures
Hooper et al., 2003; Bell et al., 2004; Fang et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a.Other proteinsA42R1331 maewhkiied isknnkfeda aivdykttkn vlaaipnrtf akinpgevip litnhnilkp61 ligqkfcivy tnslmdenty amelltgyap vspiviarth taliflmgkp ttsrrdvyrt121 crdhatrvra tgnA42R98%profilin-like, regulation and aggregation of the actin filaments–
Shchelkunov et al., 2002; Kugelman et al., 2014; Minasov et al., 2022.IMV, intracellular mature virus; EEV, extracellular envelope virus.IMV proteinsA29MPXV A29, the ortholog of VACV A27, is a protein found on the viral envelope, particularly on IMV. It plays a crucial role in viral replication, the fusion of the virus with the host cell membrane, and viral egress (Shchelkunov et al., 2002; Gao et al., 2023). Additionally, MPXV A29 is the primary target in immunoassays that aim to detect MPXV (Shi et al., 2022). Shi et al. (2022) demonstrated the interaction of MPXV A29 protein with glycosaminoglycans (GAGs). They proposed a model for MPXV host entry, which includes (1) attachment of MPXV virion to the host cell surface through binding to heparan sulfate (HS), (2) initiation of fusion by host cell protease, and (3) eventual entry of virions into the host cell.MPXV A29 shares a composition similarity of 94.54% with the VACV A27 (Wang et al., 2023a). Both proteins consist of 110 amino acids, which are categorized into functional parts, including an N-terminal signal peptide, a heparin-binding site (HBS), an α-helical coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal anchoring domain (Vaázquez and Esteban, 1999). The HBS sequences of VACV 27A (STKAAKKPEAKR) and MPXV A29 (STKAAKNPETKR) differ in a single amino acid that occurred in a specific “KKPE” sequence that is essential for heparin-binding (Shih et al., 2009; Shi et al., 2022). However, despite this slight difference in the HBS sequence, Hughes et al. (2014) demonstrated that MPXV A29 and VACV 27A have a similar binding affinity to heparin.H3LThe H3L antigen is expressed in the MV form, facilitating binding to host cells and enhancing infectivity (Lin et al., 2000). Additionally, it was discovered that anti-H3L antibodies can protect animals from a fatal attack (Davies et al., 2005). Moreover, H3L was identified as a target for T and B cells in vaccinated mice and humans (Davies et al., 2005). Specifically, H3L contains at least two recognized human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I-restricted T-cell epitopes that can trigger a potent interferon (IFN) response. This makes H3L a focus of cellular immune responses (Ostrout et al., 2007).
Yefet et al. (2023) demonstrated that MPXV antigen H3L stimulates the production of antibodies and B cells in MPXV recoverees. They also reported that such individuals have a higher frequency of H3L-specific IgG+ B cells than those recently vaccinated against the virus (Yefet et al., 2023). Meanwhile, a report by Khlusevich et al. (2022) suggests that substituting residue 233A in H3L may disrupt a B-cell epitope, making it unrecognizable by anti-VACV polyclonal antibodies.H3L is 93.52% homologous to VACV antigen H3L (Yefet et al., 2023). Yang et al. (2023a) chemically synthesized six MPXV protective antigens (PAs) and found that H3L had the lowest cross-reactivity compared to A29L, M1R, E8L, B6R, and A35R. Its cross-reactivity value against the VACV TianTan strain (VTT) - elicited anti-serum was 33%. They also reported that, upon examining the amino acid sequences of H3 and H3L, it was observed that the 233rd residue in H3L underwent a mutation from alanine to serine. This mutation likely contributed to the limited cross-reactivity of H3L against the anti-serum elicited by VTT. Mice vaccinated with recombinant H3L protein developed an elevated level of neutralizing antibodies (mean 50% plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT50) 1:3,760) against VACV, allowing them to withstand intranasal exposures with fatal virus concentrations (Davies et al., 2005). As a result, the H3L protein is one of the main focus areas for MPXV vaccine development (Wang et al., 2023a).E8LE8L is an IMV surface membrane protein of 304 amino acids (Shchelkunov et al., 2002). According to UniProt, E8L (Q8V4Y0) is made up of three domains, namely the virion surface (1-275), transmembrane (276-294), and intra-virion domain (295-304) (Fantini et al., 2022). In a recent study by Fang et al. (2023), the E8L antigen was chosen for a polyvalent mRNA vaccine, and it was observed that its expression in 293T cells led to localization in the endomembrane. E8L works as a cell surface binding protein and specifically binds to chondroitin, regulating viral entry (Alkhalil et al., 2009).It was previously shown that lipid rafts containing negatively charged gangliosides are one of the common entrance pathways OPXV uses (Byrd et al., 2013). Consequently, Fantini et al. (2022) identified the ganglioside-binding domain on the MPXV E8L protein. Using a multiparametric approach, they identified three linear epitopes overlapping with the annular ganglioside-binding motif of E8L, including amino acid sequences 43–62, 94–113, and 204–223. Consequently, these epitopes were suggested as immunogens in a vaccine formulation specific to the mpox.M1RM1R, an extensively preserved myristoylated surface membrane protein within IMV, plays a crucial role in the assembly and entry of viral particles (Tang et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023). As Yefet et al. (2023) highlighted, M1R is 98.4% homologous to the L1R of VACV. Meanwhile, Yang et al. (2023a) discovered that M1R has the most considerable cross-reactivity rate of 94% out of six MPXV PAs. This cross-reactivity may be due to B-cell epitopes, particularly those found in regions 69–91 aa and 137–155 aa regions, which overlap with those found in L1 (Heraud et al., 2006). Senkevich et al. (2002) mentioned that VACV L1R is found on the IMV membrane. In intracellular viruses, the outer domain of the L1R has three intramolecular disulfide bonds that face the cytoplasm.M1R and L1R are essential targets for neutralizing antibodies in smallpox and cowpox viruses (CPXV) (Papukashvili et al., 2022). Fang et al. (2023) reported that M1R can be found in structures resembling the plasma membrane or inclusion bodies. Another study by Franceschi et al. (2015) demonstrated that M1R is essential for safeguarding mice against challenges, but its efficacy needs to be improved through Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA) vaccination. Despite their protective potential, booster vaccinations are necessary to ensure adequate protection (Franceschi et al., 2015).L1RL1R is a myristoylated membrane protein with a molecular weight ranging from 23 to 29 kDa, which shows significant conservation across OPXV (Su et al., 2005). It is situated on the surface of IMV and positioned beneath the envelope on EEV and can affect particle entry (Franke et al., 1990; Ravanello and Hruby, 1994; Wolffe et al., 1995). The general structure of L1R common to OPXVs comprises a cluster of α-helices that wrap a pair of two-stranded β-sheets linked by four loops (Su et al., 2005). Research suggests the L1R protein might play a role in the viral entry-fusion process. However, according to the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis, the MPXV L1R exhibits notably low affinity for HS, resulting in an resonance unit (RU) value of -1.3, in contrast to the MPXV A29 protein, which showed an RU value of approximately 400. Similarly, the L1R’s affinity to other GAGs, such as DS, chondroitin sulfate A (CSA), and chondroitin sulfate E (CSE), was insignificant (Shi et al., 2022). Also, the L1R protein is in charge of virion assembly. Since it is present on the surface of IMV, it is also a potent subject for evoking neutralizing antibodies (Karki et al., 2018). Moreover, monkeys vaccinated with L1R exhibited low levels of MPXV-neutralizing antibodies at the challenge despite having elevated anti-L1R antibodies detected by immunogen-specific ELISAs. This suggests that the DNA vaccine-induced anti-L1R response may have included a significant proportion of non-neutralizing antibodies. Additionally, these sera demonstrated higher levels of VACV-neutralizing antibodies, suggesting that vaccination with the MPXV L1R ortholog might be advantageous for protecting against mpox (Hooper et al., 2004).By incorporating the tissue plasminogen leader sequence (tPA) into L1R, Golden et al. (2008) generated neutralizing antibody responses, demonstrating a geometric mean titer (GMT) of 489. Notably, this robust neutralization response was achieved with just two vaccinations. In the study conducted by Hooper et al. (2004), they investigated the efficacy of the L1R DNA vaccine in generating IMV-neutralizing antibodies and providing safety. The DNA vaccines were governed using a gene gun, and the results revealed increased levels of L1R-specific antibodies in the sera of the two vaccinated monkeys after the booster shot. Consequently, gene gun vaccination with either the 4pox DNA vaccine or the L1R DNA vaccine induced a lasting memory response, persisting for at least one to two years (e.g., monkey L201-1) (Hooper et al., 2004). Hence, alleviating the illness could result from lowering the effective challenge dose through neutralizing the challenging virus.EEV proteins F13F13 (P37) is a critical envelope protein that is comprised of 372 amino acids. The MPXV gene C19L encodes it and is also called F13 (Patel et al., 2023). The F13 protein is located on the inner surface of the EEV outer membrane (Schmutz et al., 1995; Smith and Vanderplasschen, 1998). It is responsible for viral packaging and release from the host cell, facilitating viral spread and multiplication (Srivastava et al., 2023). Additionally, studies have shown that the P37 protein interacts with host membrane proteins Rab9 and TIP47 to create a virus-specific wrapping complex that is essential for the enveloped virus (Shiryaev et al., 2021; Srivastava et al., 2023). In addition to its primary function, the F13 protein also serves as an enzyme and participates in lipid metabolism (Bárcena et al., 2000).Several studies emphasized the importance of the P37 protein in the MPXV virus as a potential target for FDA-approved drugs. Shiryaev et al. (2021) noted that it has some significant benefits for virtual screening, like its relatively small size and the fact that homologs are absent in humans. The study performed high-throughput virtual screening (HTVS) to identify FDA-approved drugs with higher binding affinity against MPXV. Similarly, Patel et al. (2023) predicted the 3D structure of the F13 envelope protein using Alphafold (
Figure 3A
), built a homology model, and evaluated it using docking, binding pose metadynamics, and molecular dynamics (MD). Likewise, another study found 15 multitargeting FDA-approved drugs that may inhibit P37 (viral packing and release), topoisomerase 1 (viral DNA replication and transcription), and thymidylate kinase (viral DNA synthesis) (Srivastava et al., 2023).Figure 3Predicted 3D structures of MPXV proteins: (A) F13 (adapted with permission from Patel et al., 2023); (B) A35R (adapted with permission from Zheng et al., 2022); and (C) A42R (adapted with permission from Minasov et al., 2022).
Li et al. (2022a) found that the F13 sequence is highly conserved in MPXV and VARV, and similarity ranges from 97.58% to 99.73%. Similarly, Srivastava et al. (2023) conducted a protein-protein blast analysis, revealing a sequence alignment similarity of 99.9% between MPXV and VACV. As a result, tecovirimat, formerly approved for treating smallpox, has shown potential for treating mpox. They identified the structure of the MPXV F13 protein and its residues interacting with tecovirimat through molecular simulations. Furthermore, MD analysis confirmed the drug’s efficacy against mpox (Li et al., 2022a). Additionally, there are recent studies that provide an overview of potential antivirals against P37 (Wang et al., 2023b; Ashley et al., 2024) and other mpox proteins (Bajrai et al., 2022; Kaur et al., 2023).A35RA35R, a homolog of VACV A33R, is an envelope glycoprotein of EV, contributing to the formation of actin-containing microvilli and facilitating the effective cell-to-cell spread of viral particles (Roper et al., 1998; Perdiguero and Blasco, 2006). According to Wang et al. (2023a), the A35R protein shares 95.03% similarity with the A33R protein from VACV. Su et al. (2010) found that VACV A33R is a homodimeric transmembrane protein that undergoes O- and N-glycosylation at the N-125 and N-135 sites, while MPXV A35R does not possess the corresponding N-125 site. Moreover, it was shown that a few amino acid differences between these two proteins could influence the effectiveness of the smallpox vaccine in providing cross-protection against mpox. For instance, the anti-A33 monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) 1G10 and 10F10 showed high specificity for VACV A33R. However, in the case of MPXV A35R, 10F10 demonstrated an affinity to MPXV A35R, while 1G10 resulted in no binding (Golden and Hooper, 2008). The 3D structure of MPXV A35R was predicted by Zheng et al. (2022) using AlphaFold2 (
Figure 3B
). Consequently, the study showed the structural similarity of MPXV A35R and VACV A33R, especially in their globular domains (Zheng et al., 2022).
Fang et al. (2023) generated a polyvalent mRNA vaccine candidate, MPXVac-097, using five MPXV antigens such as A35R, B6R, A29L, E8L, and M1R linked by tandem dimer peptide linkage. As a result, after the second and third doses of the MPXVac-097 vaccination, antibody titer levels of A35R and E8L increased significantly, indicating a robust antibody response. However, the response was moderate to M1R and low to A29L and B6R antigens. The localization of the A35R protein to the plasma membrane was identified after expressing the A35R antigen in 293T cells (Fang et al., 2023). Three anti-MPXV A35 nanobodies from a non-immunized alpaca heavy-chain antibody (VHH) library were recently designed (Meng et al., 2023). As a result, VHH-1 demonstrated the highest affinity and specificity against MPXV A35R, with a half-maximal effective concentration EC50 of 0.010 µg/mL. Similarly, as the result of analysis using the protein A biosensor, VHH-1 demonstrated binding to the mpox A35R protein with an affinity constant of 54 nM, determined via the biolayer interferometry (BLI) assay, thereby providing a fundamental basis for the potential advancement of the diagnostic instruments for the mpox virus (Meng et al., 2023).B6RB6R is a glycoprotein that undergoes reversible lipid modifications called palmitoylation (Tang et al., 2023). These modifications are considered a crucial mechanism of protein trafficking to the membrane. Hence, it is essential for localizing B6R on the surface membrane of infected cells and the EEV (Guan and Fierke, 2011; Tang et al., 2023). B6R is the homolog of VACV B5R, showing a similarity of 96.53% (Wang et al., 2023a). Like B5R, B6R is vital for the efficient spreading of infection and is involved in the regulation of the complement system of the host cell (Smith and Vanderplasschen, 1998; Tang et al., 2023). B5R also contributes to formulating EEV during the wrapping steps of IMV (Bell et al., 2004). Fang et al. (2023) selected the MPXV B6R antigen as one of the candidates for inclusion in a polyvalent mRNA vaccine candidate, MPXVas-097. As discussed earlier, they showed a low antibody titer after a three-dose vaccination. The same study identified that its expression in 293T cells led to localization in perinuclear structures. Moreover, the B6R protein was recognized as the primary target for rt-PCR assay targeting MPXV. Li et al. (2006) designed an rt-PCR assay, namely a B6R assay, specifically detecting B6R envelope protein. As a result, all 15 strains of MPXV were detected at 10 ng with the B6R assay, and no cross-reaction was observed with other OPXV and bacterial strains.Profilin-like proteinsA42RThe A42R protein is encoded by the gp153 locus of the MPXV virus, and its amino acid sequence highly resembles profilin proteins (Minasov et al., 2022). Profilins are actin-binding proteins that regulate and aggregate actin filaments (Pinto-Costa and Sousa, 2020). It was found that VACV A42R, homolog to profilin, shares 98% similarity with MPXV virus A42R, and it is a late synthesized protein that exhibits a weak affinity for actin (Minasov et al., 2022). In the previous studies, knockout of the open reading frames (ORF) for VACV A42R and CPXV A42R showed that they are not crucial for poxvirus replication in vivo (Blasco et al., 1991). However, according to the authors, they may play a vital role during viral replication in various cell lines (Minasov et al., 2022).
Minasov et al. (2022) identified the structure of MPXV A42R protein (
Figure 3C
) through the single-wavelength anomalous dispersion (SAD) technique using X-ray diffraction data collected from crystals of seleno-methionine derivatized protein at a resolution of 1.52 Å. The principle of X-ray diffraction lies in the interaction of X-rays with the electron clouds on the crystal atoms, creating the diffraction pattern (Liebschner et al., 2019). The protein has an asymmetric structure composed of two polypeptide chains, chains A and B. Chain A is a full-length chain containing 133 amino acid residues. It begins with N-terminus alanine, which originates from the tobacco mosaic virus protease. On the other hand, chain B lacks N-terminal alanine and starts from the second amino acid up to the 133rd. Generally, the structure contains a seven-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet encircled by three alpha helices and a partially formed helix (Minasov et al., 2022). Structural analysis of MPXV A42R with bovine and human profilin proteins uncovered notable differences in critical functional regions. Specifically, it was revealed that, unlike profilins, MPXV A42R has a weak affinity for actin and no affinity for poly (l-proline). In addition to this, A42R may establish specific interactions with phosphatidylinositol lipids. This suggests that understanding the function of cellular profilin may not be sufficient to predict the role of MPXV A42R (Minasov et al., 2022).Rapid detection techniquesSeveral detection techniques for mpox are being used nowadays. For instance, lateral flow assay (LFA), also known as immunochromatography, is driven by capillary action and provides quick detection employing colloidal gold nanoparticles as immunolabels, producing results in 10-15 minutes at a cheap cost and with simple standardization (Urusov et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2022; Ye et al., 2023). Immunology-based LFA assays are popular for quick test times and convenience (Qriouet et al., 2021). Ye et al. (2023) developed a colloidal gold immunochromatographic method for monkeypox virus detection that uses the A29 17-49 peptide sequence as the immunogen and produces monkeypox-specific mAbs. Rapid test strips were developed using the double-antibody sandwich approach, which has great specificity and sensitivity. It was found that two specific antibodies, namely mAb-7C5 and 5D8, resulted in the best sensitivity and detection of the limit of 50 pg mL−1 for the A29 protein (
Table 2
). Moreover, the test strips did not show cross-reactivity with other OPXVs, including VACV and CPXV, and other infections, such as SARS-CoV-2 and influenza A and B (Ye et al., 2023).Table 2Current approaches for rapid MPXV protein detection.MethodDescriptionTarget proteinDetection timeDetection limitReferenceLFAImmunochromotographic assay based on colloidal gold nanoparticles on the double-antibody sandwich principle for detection of mpoxA2915 min50.0 pg/mL
Ye et al., 2023
LFIAColorimetric-fluorescent dual-signal nanotag-based LFIA sensorA29L15 min0.5 and 0.0021 ng/mL
Yang et al., 2023b
SPRImmediate and non-labeled assessment of affinity and binding kinetics in real-timeA29-
K
D forHS 2.6 × 10−7 M;DS 6.2 × 10−7 M; CSA 8.4 × 10−7 M;CSE 3.1 × 10−7 M
Shi et al., 2022
C19L-
K
D between synthetic antibody 62 and C19L protein was 0.1 nM, and WT C19L antibody and C19L protein was 0.8 nM
Shabani et al., 2023
Label-free SERSEnhanced precision and sensitivity, along with quicker outcomes, achieved by integrating molecular data with the plasmonic characteristics of metallic nanostructuresA29L, M1R, B6R, and A35R in the serum5 min5 ng/mL (A29L)
Zhang et al., 2023
EISPaper-based highly porous AuNS-treated LSG electrochemical sensorA29L15 min3.0 × 10–16 g/mL
de Lima et al., 2023
LFA, Lateral Flow Assay; SPR, Surface Plasmon Resonance; K
D, dissociation constant; HS, heparan sulfate; DS, dermatan sulfate; CSA, chondroitin sulfate A; CSE, chondroitin sulfate E; SERS, Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy; LFIA, Lateral Flow Immunoassay; EIS, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy; AuNS, gold nanostructures; LSG, laser-scribed graphene.
Yang et al. (2023b) established a dual-signal nanotag-based lateral flow immunoassay (LFIA) system for swift and sensitive detection of the A29L protein. They investigated the ideal reaction time for LFIA, examining the T-line’s signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) across various time intervals. The findings indicated that a reaction period of 15 minutes proved adequate for quantitatively detecting MPXV. The dual-signal SiO2-Au core dual-QD shell (DQD) nanocomposite (Si-Au/DQD)-based LFIA has a colorimetric sensitivity of 0.5 ng/mL and fluorescence sensitivity of 0.021 ng/mL, outperforming the standard AuNP-based LFIA and ELISA procedures by 238 and 3.3 times, respectively (Yang et al., 2023b).Virus proteins, including mpox, were also analyzed using alternative techniques such as SPR. Shi et al. (2022) showed the interaction of MPXV A29 protein with GAGs, HS, dermatan (DS), CSA, and CSE using SPR. As a result, the obtained dissociation constant (K
D) values (
Table 2
) indicated that MPXV A29 exhibited a strong affinity for GAGs, including HS, DS, and CS. Likewise, the same study employed SPR to study the affinity of the MPXV L1R protein to GAG. Shabani et al. (2023) designed a new synthetic anti-MPXV C19L antibody (antibody 62) based on a heavy chain of human antibodies and a small peptide fragment at its beginning. The docking and molecular simulation analysis of the designed anti-MPXV C19L antibodies were applied to select the one with superior stability. The interaction between the C19L protein and the synthetic and wild-type anti-C19L antibodies was analyzed using SPR. The findings showed that synthetic antibodies’ K
D value was lower than wild antibodies, 0.1 and 0.8 nM, respectively, meaning that synthetic antibodies had a higher affinity for MPXV C19L protein (Shabani et al., 2023). In this manner, SPR enabled a label-free, direct, and real-time quantitative assessment of molecular interactions (Shi et al., 2022).Because of its low cost, speed, high sensitivity, specificity, and noninvasiveness, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) has been frequently utilized to detect harmful microorganisms (Huang et al., 2021). Unlabeled detection eliminates the need for attaching molecular markers like specific antibodies and nucleic acid sequences onto nanoparticle surfaces, simplifying the preparation of the enhanced substrate and allowing for rapid sample detection (Zhang et al., 2023). Zhang et al. (2023) also emphasized that despite SERS’s robust detection features, some technical hurdles in unlabeled virus identification must be overcome, such as the difficulty in recording signals and insufficient applicability because of the size distinction between SERS “hot spots” and viruses. Consequently, they used silver nanoparticles incubated with iodine ions and aggregated with calcium ions as substrates to resolve the limitation of unlabeled MPXV detection of the SERS. As a result, the new approach showed the detection of MPXV A29L protein at a concentration as low as 5 ng/mL and MPXV DNA at levels as low as 100 copies/mL within 2 minutes, which is close to the lower limit of PCR detection but faster. Furthermore, SERS has shown excellent potential for quantitatively detecting MPXV as it was able to identify four distinct MPXV proteins, including A29L, M1R, B6R, and A35R, in the serum in 5 minutes (Zhang et al., 2023).Electrochemical biosensors are another attractive approach that offer typical rapid testing times, convenient device portability, and compact device size, which lower sample volumes required for testing and remove sample pretreatment steps, making them suitable for point-of-care applications (POC). To ensure optimal use in POC settings, electrochemical devices must be reproducible and easily accessible, allowing them to be disposable and removing the requirement for trained personnel (Torres et al., 2021). de Lima et al. (2023) reported the first electrochemical POC assay for MPXV protein detection using a paper-based laser-scribed graphene (LSG) nanobiosensor (
Figure 4A
). The results showed that the test required a small amount of sample (2.5 µL), detection within 15 min, and a limit of detections (LODs) of 3.0 × 10–16 g mL–1 for A29 protein and 7.8 × 10–3 PFU L–1 for titered MPXV. The analytical curves for A29 protein and MPXV viral loads at various concentrations showed a linear correlation with a determination coefficient (R
2) of 0.998 and 0.996, respectively (
Figures 4B, C
). Additionally, no instances of cross-reaction were detected when the nanobiosensor was tested alongside other poxvirus and non-poxvirus strains (de Lima et al., 2023).Figure 4
(A) Schematic illustration of an LSG nanobiosensor-based electrochemical assay for MPXV detection linked to a portable potentiostat controlled via a smartphone; (B) The analytical curve presenting normalized resistance to charge transfer (R
CT) values against the logarithm of the A29 protein concentration; (C) The analytical curve presenting the normalized R
CT values against the logarithm of the titered MPXV sample (adapted with permission from de Lima et al., 2023).Conclusion and future directionsMpox, a zoonotic disease caused by MPXV, presents challenges in diagnosis due to symptom similarities with other infectious diseases. Despite the current decrease in confirmed infection cases, addressing the ongoing threat of mpox remains imperative, especially considering its potential emergence in previously non-endemic areas. Therefore, rapid and specific detection methods are crucial for controlling its global spread. Consequently, this review provided a comprehensive overview of the characterization of mpox proteins and the development of rapid techniques for MPXV detection. Specifically, we highlighted pathogenesis, the roles and structural characteristics of EEV (C19L, A35R, and B6R), IMV (A29, M1R, E8L, H3L, and L1R), and profilin-like proteins. Additionally, recent studies in diagnostic techniques such as LFA, LFIA, SPR, SERS, and EIS using these mpox proteins demonstrated promising paths for rapid detection of MPXV. Recently, viral detection methods based on aptamers have been developed with considerable success (Xi et al., 2021; Shola David and Kanayeva, 2022). Unlike protein biorecognition elements, including antibodies, nucleic acid aptamers can be readily paired with various electrochemical and optical sensing methods, opening new avenues for sensitive and rapid detection (Zhang et al., 2023). However, it is crucial to note that despite the advancements, there is still a gap in understanding most mpox proteins. Notably, while the 3D structure of A42R has been revealed, predicted 3D structures are available for proteins C19L and A35R, while others still need to be explored. This emphasizes the necessity for further research on mpox protein structure and function. Enhancing knowledge of mpox proteins is essential for improving diagnostic techniques to address emerging viral infections effectively.Author contributionsDK: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Supervision, Visualization, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. KS: Data curation, Visualization, Writing – original draft. AB: Data curation, Visualization, Writing – original draft.


Title: Evidence of Mpox clade IIb infection in primary human alveolar epithelium

IntroductionSince its identification in monkeys in 1958 and the first human case in 1970, monkeypox (Mpox) has been known for its dermatological symptoms particularly lymphadenopathy and rash lesions which concentrated on the face, distal extremities, and sexual organs [1]. Mpox belongs to the Poxviridae family and the Orthopoxvirus genus and currently has been classified into two clades. Clade I and Clade II, each subdivided into subclades Ia, Ib, IIa, and IIb [2]. While Clade Ia and IIa remain endemic in Africa with exclusively zoonotic transmission, clade IIb emerged from the West African lineage and has become the 2022 pandemic and linked to the recent global pandemic of Mpox virus [3,4]. Furthermore, a recently identified subclade Ib has been located outside of Africa, with instances recorded in Thailand, Sweden, Germany, and the UK [5–7], raising further concerns within the global health community, as clade I was proven to be more fatal and virulent than clade II [8]. As of Oct 15, 2024, 110,570 cases have been identified and 237 death cases have been reported worldwide [9].Several in vitro and in vivo models have been used for studying Mpox susceptibility [10–12]. Although skin is the primary target [11], infectivity reports in animal models demonstrated transmission via intranasal and inhalation suggesting possible airborne transmission [12]. Therefore, concern on Mpox infectivity in human lung and its potential respiratory pathology has been raised. Recent clinical evidence came from patients who had positive PCR results of the nasal swabs and autopsy which accompanied by respiratory symptoms including cough, sore throat, dyspnea nasal congestion [13] and the evidence from the autopsy, computed tomography (CT), positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT), and chest X-ray which were pulmonary nodules, nodular consolidations, pleural effusion and reticular opacities, particularly in immunocompromised patients [14–18]. However, there is no evidence confirming the infectivity of the Mpox virus clade IIb in the human distal lung particularly at the airliquid alveolar epithelium layer – the first-line target of airborne transmission pathogens. Consequently, the current evidence of Clade IIb Mpox infection in human alveoli solely has relied on the A549 cell line which may not simulate the authentic phenotype of alveolar epithelial cells because of its deficiencies of the important identities such as lung surfactants and surfactant protein secretion [19,20]. Although stem cell-derived hAECs are regularly available, the derived hAECs cannot accurately replicate the function of isolated primary hAECs [21] that play a decisive role against pathogen infection [22]. Human alveoli are occupied by alveolar epithelial type 1 cells (hAEC1), alveolar epithelial type 2 cells (hAEC2), and alveolar macrophages (AMs). The hAEC1 inhabits ∼95% of the alveolar surface area and helps with gas exchange [23], while the hAEC2 inhabits the remaining ∼ 5% of the alveolar surface area and secretes lung surfactant to protect against lung collapse [24,25]. AMs involve in body homeostasis by removing foreign particles and microorganisms from the lungs. Neither of the previous studies have focused on Mpox tropism nor pathology within the human alveoli [8,26,27]. Therefore, it is crucially important to develop a robust patient-derived air-liquid epithelium model fabricated from hAEC to decipher this mystery. This result will help us to understand the persistence of the Mpox virus within the respiratory zone in human lungs as well as its potential to cause pulmonary complications.This work is aimed to confirm if the Mpox has the ability to infect human distal lungs or not using patient derived ALE model and to explore its inflammatory consequences after the infection. Isolated hAECs have been employed to develop ALE model to resemble the actual alveolar architecture. Our pioneered work demonstrated that the developed ALE model robustly provides solid evidence of Mpox clade IIb virus infection and its pathogenesis in human alveoli, as well as potential use of the developed model for antiviral drug screening and exploring the interactome between pathogens and human alveolar cells.MethodsIsolation, characterization, and fabrication of patient-derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium using primary hAECsProcedure for tissue collection was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee, Faculty of Medicine Ramathibodi Hospital (approval number: MURA2021/620). All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Primary hAECs were isolated based on our previous protocol [28]. Cells were divided into 2 sets. The first set of ∼50,000 cells were diluted in DCCM-1 media (Sartorius, Germany) containing 10% (v/v) serum, 4 µM GlutaMAX™, and 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic (Gibco, US) and were seeded onto an apical side of the collagencoated transwellTM for 1–3 days at 37°C and 5% CO2 until hAECs attached and covered all surface area of the cell culture membrane (90-95% confluence). Complete DCCM-1 media was filled in both sides of Transwell™ during the culture period. After cell attachment, the media were discarded from the apical chamber to establish an airliquid interface (ALI) culture before viral infection in BSL-3 on day 7. The media in the basolateral side was replaced every 3 days.The second set of cells isolated from human lungs was cultured in a similar way as described for the first set, but the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay kit (Abcam, US) was used to characterize hAEC type 2 (hAEC2) and their transdifferentiation kinetics for the quality control process. Generally, the isolated cells are presented as hAEC2. As human progenitor cells, once they are attached to the membrane in an apical chamber of the transwellTM; they can transform into hAEC1. This in-house control set of cells was employed to confirm the ratio between hAEC1 and hAEC2 population (50%:50%) during the infection period. The ALP protocol of the assay kit is based on the manufacturer’s instructions. The presence of cell transdifferentiation was routinely measured before the Mpox virus inoculation. Briefly, isolated hAEC2 from individual donors was aimed to culture for 16 days in DCCM-1 media in the same condition as mentioned above. The percentage of alkaline phosphatase positive (ALP+) cells was assessed every 2 days until day 16 of the culture period. After fixing with 2.5% (w/v) paraformaldehyde in DPBS solution, equal volumes of the staining solution A and the staining solution B were mixed together and stained on the hAEC layer for 30 minutes incubation at 37°C and 5% CO2. The supernatant was discarded, and the cells were washed again with 1X DPBS two times and the sample was mounted using glycerol onto the microscope slides. The images were taken at 10x magnification using Olympus CKX53SF inverted microscope (Olympus, Japan).Mpox virus isolation, collection, infection, and viral titre analysisThe Mpox virus specimen was obtained from a leftover nasopharyngeal swab of a confirmed patient at Ramathibodi Hospital, Thailand, in late 2023, with ethical approval granted by the Human Research Ethics Committee (approval number: hMpxV/THA/V241-0053/2023). All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. A leftover swab underwent isolation procedures beginning with filtration through a 0.45 µm filter. The filtrate sample was then cultured in Vero cells (ATCC, USA) in MEM containing 2% FBS, 100 units/mL, penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin as previously described. By day 3, cytopathic effects were observed, leading to cell harvest and three freeze-thaw cycles [29]. Post-centrifugation, the supernatant was again filtered (0.45 µm) and propagated for three passages in Vero cells. Titration of the virus stock utilized plaque assays in Vero cells under a 1% agarose overlay in MEM with 2% FBS and 100 units/mL penicillin and 100 µg/mL streptomycin, visualizing plaques using crystal violet staining at day 6 post-infection. All procedures involving the live Mpox virus were performed in a certified biosafety level 3 facility, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University.At 48 h post-infection (hpi), cell culture was observed for cytopathic effect under Nikon TS100 inverted microscope (Nikon, Japan) before cells and cell supernatants were collected for the viral titre analysis. Initially, hAECs were washed once with DPBS and then trypsinized for 10 minutes. The cell suspension was washed with PBS, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 100 µL/well before storing at – 80°C. Vero cells were used to determine viral titres, and they were plated in a 96-well plate and maintained at 37°C in the incubator with 5% CO2 overnight. The frozen hAEC samples were, then, thawed and subjected to three freeze-thaw cycles, as mentioned previously to release the virus from the infected cells [29]. The samples were then four-fold serially diluted in duplicated wells of a 96-well plate and allowed to be absorbed onto the Vero cell monolayer for 1 hour at 37°C in a 5% CO2 incubator. After absorption, the cell monolayer was washed once with 1X DPBS and then supplemented with MEM, 2% FBS, and antibiotics. The plate was further incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 6 days. The virus titre, expressed as the 50% Tissue Culture Infectious Dose (TCID50), was determined by observing CPE on day 6. TCID50/mL was calculated with a TCID50 calculator based on the Reed-Munch method [30].Statistical analysisExperiments with the isolated hAECs on ALE models were done independently using tissues from 11 different donors. The difference between infected and uninfected samples was analysed by the paired t-test for samples that passed the normality test, and the Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed rank test for samples that failed the normality test. Viral titres from different compartments of Transwell™ were analysed by a repeated measures ANOVA test applying Greenhouse-Geisser correction to account for potential violations of sphericity, followed by Tukey's multiple comparisons test. On the other hand, viral titres from the same compartment but compared between an infected sample and a control sample were analysed by Wilcoxon matched-pairs signed-rank test. hAEC transdifferentiation kinetics were analysed by Friedman test followed by the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli for multiple comparisons, controlling the desired false discovery rate set at 0.05. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism version 9.0.0. Statistical difference was considered at P < 0.05.Details of other methodsDue to word limitation, detail of other methods used in this experiment include Mpox viral sequencing and phylogenetic analysis, immunofluorescence imaging, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay for determining transdifferentiation kinetic of hAEC2, western blot, real-time PCR, assessment of innate immune response and inflammatory cytokines using Milliplex and ELISA, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis, and transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) were described in the supplementary material.ResultsFabrication of patient derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium using primary hAECA model of patient-derived air-liquid alveolar epithelium model using primary hAEC cells has been successfully developed. This model allowed customization of the populations of hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells. Although, in the normal human lung, the ratio between the number of hAEC1 and hAEC2 is 1:1–1:2 [31,32]; we therefore selected a ratio at 1:1 (hAEC1:hAEC2) to provide an equal probability of Mpox infection for both cell types. The study of the in-house culture (quality control set) established the transdifferentiation kinetic of the hAEC2 into hAEC1 in the developed ALE model as showed by the significant decrease in ALP positive cells (n = 5, Figure 1(A–I)) at the longer culture period. The behaviour paralleled the significant decline in pro-surfactant protein C (Pro-SFTPC) expression (Figure S1(A–C)), whereas a significant increase in expression of caveolin-1 was observed suggesting the presence of hAEC1 in the model (Figure S1(D–F)). The major advantages of the developed model are the customization of cell population between hAEC1 and hAEC2 from the same donor, and the presence of a lung surfactant layer at the air-liquid interface within the model which genuinely replicates in vivo condition.
Figure 1.Transdifferentiation kinetic of hAEC2. Visualization of ALP positive cells by inverted light microscope at 10x magnification from Day 2 to Day 16 (A–H). Pinkstained represents ALP expression. Bar plot visualization of the percentages of ALPexpressed cells over 16 days (I). Data represents a mean percentage of ALP positive cells ± SEM, n = 5.Confirmed evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox clade IIb and pathogenesisThe consensus sequence of the Mpox culture isolates from nasal left-over specimen of a confirmed patient showed 100% genome coverage with an average coverage depth of 17,113.3x. Phylogenetic result of the Mpox genome revealed that the isolated virus used in the current study was within Lineage C.1, in clade IIb, which corresponds to the globally circulating clade IIb at the time of the sample collection (indicated with red lettering in Figure S1).The confirmed evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox was analysed on a developed ALE model following 48 hours of viral inoculation. Baseline information of all donors was addressed in Table S1 comprising 7 females and 4 males and a mean age of 68 years old. The first 5 donor samples (no.1-5, Table S1) were employed for determining hAEC2 transdifferentiation kinetics. The rest (no.6-11, Table S1) were used for Mpox infection analysis. The results revealed a clear exhibition of cytopathic effect (CPE) across a layer of hAECs, characterized by cell rounding morphology, cell detachment, and cell death using light microscopy (Figure 2(A)). The evidence of Mpox infection and replication was also confirmed by western blot of protein A29 (Figure 2(B)) and rt-PCR of Mpox TNF gene at 2 and 48 hours (Figure 2(C, D)).
Figure 2.Confirm evidence of human alveoli susceptibility to Mpox in patient-derived ALE model at 2 and 48 hpi. (A) Cytopathic effect of Mpox on hAECs morphology. (B) Western blot of patient-derived ALE model infected with Mpox virus Clade IIb at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (C) Ct value of Mpox TNF receptor normalized with GADPH as a housekeeping gene at 2 and 48 hpi. (D) Log2 fold change of Mpox TNF receptor at 2 and 48 hpi.For the analysis of Mpox pathogenesis, 42.82 ± 6.88% of hAECs were infected compared with the control (Figure 3(A)). Additionally, the formation of syncytia characteristics in hAECs had simultaneously been observed in Mpox-infected samples where the infected cells were agglomerating and enlarging. High content analysis results illustrated a significant increase in cell surface area from 942.63 ± 80.03 µm2 (noninfected cells) to 1366.17 ± 54.55 µm2 (infected cells, Figure 3(B)). Within 42.82% of the infected cells, 45.13 ± 1.06% of these cells were found to exhibit multinucleated character or “syncytia structure” (Figure 3(C, D)) while this structure was not observed in the control (Figure 3(E)). We also found that the cell nuclei of the infected cells appeared to lose their intact shape and formed an unusual structure. Overall examination of the entire epithelium layer revealed a disruption of the monolayer identified by the leakage of cell culture media from the basolateral side towards the apical surface.
Figure 3.Mpox pathogenesis and Mpox tropism in patient-derived ALE model at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Mpox infectivity, (B) cell size comparison between infected and non-infected cells, (C) percentages of multinucleated cells observed in infected and non-infected cells, (D-E) immunofluorescent imaging of A29-positive cells in infected and control samples, (F) colocalization analysis of A29 against RAGE or SFTPC, (G) high content imaging analysis of A29+RAGE+ cells or A29+pro-SFTPC+ cells. Data represents a mean percentage of cell population ± SEM from 16 individual images of cells on the Transwell™ at 10x magnification. (H-I) Immunostaining images of A29 against RAGE or pro-SFTPC. A29 (Mpox; Green), RAGE or pro-SFTPC (hAEC1 and hAEC2 marker, respectively; Orange), and DAPI (Nuclei, Blue). The image was taken at 63x Magnification, scale bar at the bottom.To determine the tropism of the Mpox virus in alveolar epithelial cells, the colocalization analysis was utilized to investigate the spatial association between the viral A29 protein and cellular markers of hAEC1 (RAGE) /hAEC2 (SFTPC). Pearson's coefficients indicated substantial colocalization for both A29-RAGE (0.6636) and A29SFTPC (0.6140). However, no significant difference between these Pearson's coefficients was observed (p = 0.2854) (Figure 3(F)). Analysis from high-content screening also revealed a high degree of colocalization between the A29 and both markers, suggesting that both cell types have comparable infection levels (61.10% vs 62.19%, Figure 3(G)). This result corresponds to the observation from the immunofluorescent analysis in Figure 2(H, I), indicating that the Mpox virus exhibited no preference for infection between hAEC1 and hAEC2.Ultrastructure analysis inside hAECFurther insights were gained through TEM analysis, which delineated the biogenesis of the Mpox lifecycle within 24 h infected period including (i) Crescent Structure – the earliest identifiable viral structure that self-assembles into a crescent-shaped membrane (Figure 4(A1, A2)); (ii) Immature Virion – the previous crescent structure gradually transformed into a full spherical shape (Figure 4(A3)) before the viral DNA becomes more concentrated within the enclosed area and forming a visible nucleoid (Figure 4(A4)); (iii) Mature Virion – the stage where the viral genome is tightly condensed into brick or dumbbell structures in the core and flanked by two lateral bodies (Figure 4(A5)); and (iv) Wrapped Virion – one of the mature virion forms that has been wrapped at the Golgi compartment (Figure 4(A6)). The intracellular Mpox particles found were essential for cell-to-cell transmission. These stages involved early replication sites, maturation sites, and enveloped virions providing an in-depth understanding of the virus-host intracellular behaviour and lifecycle progression within both hAEC1 and hAEC2. Since the developed ALE model helped to preserve authentic features of hAECs and their interconnection and communication, we found all stages of Mpox particles distributed throughout the cytosol (Figure 4(B–G)). Figure 4(H–J) illustrated that the wrapped virion of Mpox virus could enter the cell by fusion through cellular membranes, facilitating the delivery of viral genetic material into the hAECs. Similar trends of Mpox infection were observed in both types of hAECs using TEM. This finding supports the previous evidence from immunofluorescence imaging that Mpox can infect both cell types with no selectivity (Figure 4(K–M)). This implied a broad cellular tropism for Mpox in distal human lungs. Furthermore, cell syncytium between hAEC type 1 and type 2 cells was shown as the formation of a fusion site between two cells as depicted in Figure 4(N–P). Tight junction was reduced in the infected sample and the forming of a fusion pore that allowed the transportation of Mpox virus between each cell was observed.
Figure 4.TEM image analysis of Mpox biogenesis in primary human air-liquid alveolar epithelium constructed from hAECs. (A) TEM images visualized different forms of Mpox virus showing Mpox biogenesis in hAEC at 5 MOI, 48 hpi: (A1, A2) Mpox’s crescent structure, (A3) immature virion, (A4) the immature virion with visible nucleoid, (A5) the mature virion with a brick-shaped core and (A6) the wrapped virion with a double layer of a lipid bilayer. The scale bar at the top in Figure 4(A) is 200 nm. (B) Different regions of Mpox tropism at low magnification. (C) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(B) represents hAEC2 infected cell and (D) the higher magnification of the purple square in Figure 4(C). (E-G) Mpox tropism within human alveolar epithelial. The green, turquoise, and yellow squares in Figure 4(D) highlight the presence of the mature and wrapped virions (E–G) as well as the crescent structure and the immature virion (F) in hAEC2 cell. (H) Mpox virus fusion with the host cell plasma membrane was clearly observed and (I) the high magnification of the yellow square in Figure 4(H) shows the viral and host cell membrane fusion process. (J) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(H) shows intracellular Mpox virions at mature status. (K) Mpox tropism within hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells. (L) High magnification of the yellow square in Figure 4(K) shows the ultrastructure of lamellar bodies and the area of the viral factory in hAEC2. (M) High magnification of the red square in Figure 4(K) shows mature Mpox virions. (N) Syncytium formation between infected hAEC1 and infected hAEC2. (O) Selected regions at higher magnification from Figure 3(N) revealed a fusion site between hAEC1 cell and microvilli of hAEC2 cell where the tight junction (P) was observed. Scale bars between 200 nm–2 µm. Cre = Crescent Structure. IV = immature virion. MV = mature virion. WV = wrapped virion. LB = lamellar body. TJ = tight junction. We also depicted the illustration of Mpox life cycle through our developed patient-derived air-liquid epithelium (ALE) model as can be seen in Figure S3.Viral titre and cytokine responseViral titre analysis from 3 sampling positions of the TranswellTM demonstrated the highest number of viral particles inside the cell followed by the viral particles in the apical and basolateral sides, respectively (Figure 5(A)). This result suggested that Mpox cloud robustly replicates inside the cell more than being released into the extracellular space and preferentially budding into the apical side rather than the basolateral side. Although the Mpox titre was established, there were no significant differences (p > 0.05) in the levels of inflammatory mediators including IL-6, MIP-1α, TNF-α, and galectin-9 between infected and control cultures (Figure 5(B–F)). However, significant was observed with the level of IL-1β. Therefore, these findings suggested that Mpox clade IIb infection in patient-derived ALE model may not trigger a broad pro-inflammatory cytokine response as measured by IL-6, TNF-α, and MIP-1α, although IL-1β were subtly elevated (mean difference = 3.310 pg/mL, p = 0.0174). Galectin-9 levels, which can be potentially involved in an immune response against viral infection, also did not show a significant change upon Mpox virus infection.
Figure 5.Mpox titre and cytokines, chemokines, and galectin-9 from apical chamber of the Transwell™ in Mpox-infected and control ALE model at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Mpox titre, (B) IL-1β, (C) IL-6, (D) MIP-1α, (E) TNF-α and (F) Galectin-9. Data represents a mean Log10(TCID50/mL + 1) ± SEM for viral titre and represents a mean concentration (pg/mL) ± SEM for the level of cytokines and chemokines, six replicates (n = 6).Compromising of alveolar barrier integrity during Mpox infectionMpox infection decreased the expression of ZO-1 at the tight junctions (yellow in Figure 6(A, B)) along with the disruption of the alveolar epithelium layer as evident in Figure 6(A) compared with the control non-infected sample in Figure 6(B). This led to a weakening of the barrier of human alveoli. In addition, the TEER analysis provided insight into the integrity and permeability of cell monolayers in the air-liquid human alveolar epithelium model. Initially, both Mpox infected, and control non-treated samples exhibited similar TEER values of 132–137 Ω·cm², indicating healthy and intact epithelium barriers. Over the course of the infection for 48 hours, a significant decline of TEER values was observed in the Mpox-infected samples, the TEER was dropped to 24.22 ± 4.37 Ω·cm². In contrast, the control samples maintained a TEER value of around 88.56 ± 8.59 Ω·cm² (n = 5), indicating that the integrity of the epithelial barrier remained largely intact in the absence of viral infection (Figure 6(C)). The decrease in TEER by 82.25% in the infected samples from 136.49 Ω·cm² is a direct consequence of viral pathogenicity. In summary, here we provide systematic observation of immunostaining, western blot, TEM and TEER analysis indicates that Mpox virus infection may lead to damage at the air-liquid alveolar epithelium barrier.
Figure 6.Alveolar epithelial barrier analysis in hAEC ALI culture at 5 MOI, 48 hpi. (A) Immunostaining images of Mpox-infected sample (B) and control sample. A29 (Mpox; Green), ZO-1 (Tight junction; Yellow and DAPI (Nuclei, Blue). The image was taken at 63x Magnification, scale bar at the bottom. Red arrows indicate the TNTs between cells. Yellow arrows indicate cell syncytium character. TEER analysis comparing Mpox-infected sample and control sample (C). Data are presented as means of TEER value (Ω·cm2) ± SEM with five replicates (n = 5).Our experiment also observed the unique behaviour of the infected hAECs, where they appear to extend towards the neighbour cells and create tunnelling nanotubes (TNTs, red arrow in Figure 6(A)). We found that TNTs can facilitate cell-to-cell transmission of the intercellular Mpox virions, as visualized by the fluorescent A29 protein along these interconnections in Figure 6(A) (yellow arrows). Nonetheless, TNT is absent in the control non-treated group. This is the first time we observed TNT formation in the hAECs initiated by Mpox virus infection.DiscussionMost of the previous in vitro human distal lung models recruited human lung cancer cells to study host-pathogen interactions. However, the limitation of this approach lies in the genotype disparity between the human lung cancer cell lines and the isolated patient-derived hAECs [20]. The approach of using the induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) to derive alveolar epithelial cells (iAECs) needs to be standardized and provides mature alveolar epithelial cells at the desired number. In fact, when comparing barrier function and expression of alveolar epithelial cell markers between cultured iAEC and hAEC, the hAEC exhibited a greater degree of alveolar maturity than iAEC. This is making hAECs a reliable model for studying alveolar epithelium pathology [33]. In addition, since hAEC2s can transdifferentiate into hAEC1s in vitro, we revealed the transdifferentiating kinetics over a 16-day culture period to find a point where both cell types were present in relatively equal proportions. This was important for our Mpox infection experiments, as hAEC1 and hAEC2 cells may have different susceptibility to the virus and found that hAEC on around 8 days offered an equal proportion of both cell types. We, therefore, selected this time point for studying the Mpox infection in the patient-derived ALE model. Importantly, the environment of the developed ALE model could initiate in vivo physiological conditions than that of the previous 2D and 3D models [34]. Furthermore, the developed ALE model can offer a tight junction barrier, lung surfactant layer [19], and a stable alveolar maturity at the comparable level to in vivo conditions where the apical side is exposed to air and the basolateral side is exposed to the liquid medium. Our study clearly demonstrated that patient-derived ALE model can be used to study the transmission, and pathogenesis of Mpox virus by observing cytopathic characteristics (e.g. cell rounding, detachment, syncytium, and death). These findings were confirmed by both light microscopy, confocal microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. The presence of the Mpox virus was qualitatively and quantitatively analysed by qPCR, western blot, and TEM. Results also supported the potential transmission via the airborne through the presence of viable Mpox virus in the saliva droplets or the aerosols in the air by recent studies from the UK and Spain [35–37] and from the primate models [38–40]. Moreover, our results also illustrated the risk of alveolar layer disruption by Mpox infection.In human alveoli, hAEC1 and hAEC2 play different key roles. The hAEC1 acts as a gas exchanger and prevents the leakage of fluid from blood vessels and interstitial space into the alveolar sac. The hAEC2, on the other hand, acts as a lung surfactant factory which is extremely crucial for maintaining surface tension at the air-liquid interface, as well as, preventing fluid accumulation in the alveoli. Interestingly, hAECs displayed a low Mpox infection rate, suggesting that hAECs may possess some level of innate immunity protective role for Mpox infection. The presence of body homeostasis, including the secretion of lung surfactants and the production of surfactant proteins by hAEC2 may be one of the reasons for the low level of Mpox infection [22]. This finding emphasizes the importance of using relevant cell models, the patient-derived ALE model, to accurately assess Mpox infectivity and pathogenesis. We, next, explored Mpox tropism inside human alveoli by comparing hAEC1 and hAEC2 derived from the same donor, and we found no specific preference between both cells. Connecting the dots, our finding aligns with the clinical observations from autopsy [14], CT, and chest X-ray [15,18] of fatal Mpox patients and may potentially help explain the mechanisms. The death was reported to be initiated by extensive cell death and disruption of the alveolar epithelium layer together with the disruption of adjacent blood capillaries which led to exudative pleural effusion. Cell death and syncytium formation in human alveoli could increase permeability as evidenced by a significant reduction of TEER value and the loss of tight junction protein, allowing fluid accumulation within the alveolar sacs, and potentially contributing to alveolar oedema as a last resort (Figure 7).
Figure 7.Proposed pathogenesis of Mpox-related alveolar oedema. Healthy State (Panel 1): The alveolar structure remains in a healthy state. Early Infection State (Panel 2): The Mpox begins to infect the alveolar epithelial cells without any noticeable disruption in gas exchange. Moderate Damage State (Panel 3): The infection progresses to moderate damage within the human alveoli. The presence of multinucleated cells, an indicative of viral-induced syncytium, and exudates start to accumulate in the alveolar space with a noticeable impairment in the gas exchange. Severe Damage State (Panel 4): Accumulated alveolar-resident cell death results in the formation of alveolar gaps and extensive pleural effusion, causing critical respiratory failure.Results revealed significantly higher viral titre within the infected cells compared to both the apical and basolateral supernatants. This data implied that the Mpox virus replicates robustly intracellularly, with less efficient release into the surrounding media. The apical supernatant exhibited the second-greatest viral titre, indicating that the virus was preferentially released towards the airway surface. This is consistent with the behaviour of many respiratory viruses, which infect and shed from the apical surface of airway epithelial cells, allowing airborne transmission by coughing or sneezing [41,42].However, our findings showed no significant change in pro-inflammatory cytokine levels (IL-6, MIP-1α, TNF-α, and Galactin-9) in Mpox-infected cells compared to controls. Only the IL-1β was subtly increased. The lack of cytokine response points to the potential to evade early immune defenses in the distal lung of the Mpox virus. This immune evasion could challenge the diagnosis and hinder the event of Mpox-related alveoli damage. However, this evidence is contradictory to the previous studies that reported significant elevation of IL-6, MIP-1α, and TNF-α after the Mpox infection. This discrepancy might be attributed to the differences in the clade of the Mpox virus and the source of materials used for cytokine measurement where our study utilized cell supernatants from hAEC ALI cultures, and the previous research groups employed patient serum samples [43,44]. Moreover, we hypothesize that the indifferent levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines between the control and infected cells could be a direct consequence of multiple cell-to-cell transmission mechanisms that Mpox utilized for immune evasion.Our results clearly demonstrated that the Mpox virions could cumulatively replicate within the infected cell and infect the nearby cells in human alveoli by releasing mature virion only from the disrupted infected cell or by the budding wrapped virion from the host cell. These can minimize their exposure time to the extracellular environment, as the mature virion will quickly infect adjacent cells, and the wrapped virion can be disguised in the host-derived additional membrane. Importantly, the genome and proteins of Mpox virion can be transported between each cell through the TNT. Intracellular Mpox contents that transport across this projection can evade the immune response by circumventing the immune system in the extracellular environment. This ultrastructure, therefore, offers two additional advantages to viruses. Firstly, this structure may allow the virus to easily infect the non – or less-permissive cells as demonstrated before with SARs-CoV-2, HIV, and influenza by circumventing the receptor-mediated entry.Secondly, TNTs may also facilitate the spread of viruses in the presence of drugs and neutralizing antibodies [45,46]. The new finding mechanism is that the occurrence of syncytium formation may promote cell-to-cell or transcellular infection. Unlike TNTs, the typical syncytium process could fuse cells into a single entity accelerating viral infection. This process involves fusogenic proteins on the surface of the infected cells binding to receptors on adjacent uninfected cells. Upon receptor binding, the fusogenic proteins can undergo a conformational change and bring the membranes of the infected and target cells into proximity. Such a process destabilizes the membrane bilayers and facilitates cell fusion [47]. Although the result from cell syncytium formation by Mpox virus has not yet been fully understood, we hypothesized that Mpox virus may initialize this phenomenon for the energy distribution among the fused cells. This could create a more favourable environment for robust viral replication and potentially prepare the virus for extrapulmonary invasion. Further study on the presence of syncytium and TNTs in Mpox-infected cells may provide the reason why Mpox expresses no specific favourite to infect a specific type of hAEC. However, our study is limited by a number of the obtained isolated cells which did not allow us to perform the time-course analysis nor the cocultured immune response analysis. Thus, additional study on these subjects will help us to understand Mpox replication kinetics in hAECs as well as the protection against Mpox on hAEC.In conclusion, we developed a robust model of primary human air-liquid alveolar epithelium model for Mpox pathological study and tropism. Our findings provide strong evidence supporting the potential respiratory transmission of Mpox virus clade IIb beyond the skin and traditional sexual transmission routes using patient-derived ALE model. Additionally, this study also sparks a discussion on how the evolution of the Mpox virus could alter its pathogenesis and enhance its transmission globally [48]. Recent evidence supported such evolution including the report of the sexual transmission of Mpox Clade Ib which was once believed to be initiated only by Clade IIb [49]. Further research is warranted. Exploration of the Mpox infection and shedding in different lung compartments and Mpox aerosol stability will be important in refining our understanding of the Mpox respiratory transmission dynamic.Supplementary MaterialFigure S3.tifSupplementary.pdfFigure S1.tifFigure S2.tif


Title: An overview on monkeypox virus: Pathogenesis, transmission, host interaction and therapeutics

1Introduction to virusesViruses are organisms that cause infectious diseases globally and their infections to humans have been observed since ancient times (Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Studies on viruses and viral diseases began in 19th century (Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Reports have shown that at least 219 virus species can cause infections in humans (Woolhouse et al., 2012). The first virus to be identified by Iwanovsky and Beijerinck was the tobacco mosaic virus in 1892 and the foot-and-mouth disease virus by Loeffler and Frosch in 1898 (van Kammen, 1999; Woolhouse et al., 2012; Chappell and Dermody, 2015). In humans, the first discovery was the yellow fever virus in 1901 (Woolhouse et al., 2012; Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Since then, multiple viruses have been discovered.Several viruses have been infecting humans and posing a challenge in finding effective therapeutics (Wong et al., 2017), such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (Lloyd, 1996; Simon et al., 2006) and SARS-CoV-2 (Dhama et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a). Particularly, the SARS-CoV-2 has hampered the health system, and this virus also warrants the scientific community to be ready for future pandemics. One such infectious diseases is monkeypox, which has been recently spreading globally.2MonkeypoxMonkeypox (MP) is a zoonotic disease that demonstrates smallpox-like characteristics in humans and is related to variola virus, the causative agent of small pox (Bunge et al., 2022). Monkeypox virus (MPV) belongs to the family: Poxviridae, subfamily: chordopoxvirinae, genus: orthopoxvirus, and species: Monkeypox virus (Moore et al., 2022). Other members of this genus include cowpox, camelpox, and vaccinia (VV) (Pauli et al., 2010; McCollum and Damon, 2014; Silva et al., 2020). As on 14th October 2022, a total of 73,288 cases have been recorded according to https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/response/2022/world-map.htm. Distribution of MPV infection in different countries (
Figure 1
).Figure 1The global spread of monkey pox virus (MPV). The figure is prepared using PowerBI desktop.3Monkeypox and smallpoxInterestingly, variola virus (VARV) and MPV are related antigenically and genetically (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Cann et al., 2013). However, these viruses vary in the regions of their sequence for virulence and host-range factors at the genome termini (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Cann et al., 2013). Upon comparing the VARV strain Japan 1951 (Harper, Masterseed) and MPV strains (Zaire 96-I-16), the length of MPV genome was 10,678 bp larger than Variola virus (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Esposito et al., 2006; Cann et al., 2013). Furthermore, MPV has displayed mutations that influence the process of translation of interferon resistance genes that code for proteins C3L and E3L. The MPV genome also encodes a secreted interleukin (IL)-1β-binding protein, which is absent in VARV genomes. The absence of this vaccinia virus (VACV) - gene corresponds to amplified pathogenicity (Cann et al., 2013).4History of MPVThe advent of MPV was primarily observed in monkeys shipped from Singapore to Copenhagen in 1958 by von Magnus et al. (Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). The name monkey virus is coined after its first discovery from monkeys (Bunge et al., 2022). Approximately, 20-30% of animals have manifested clinical illness (Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). Notably, out of the 6 cases in 1970, the first human infection was reported in an infant (9 months old) from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Ladnyj et al., 1972; Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). Four other infections were observed in children from Bouduo, Liberia aged 4-9 years (Cho and Wenner, 1973), and the other case was in a male of 24 years from Sierra Leone (Cho and Wenner, 1973). In 2003, MPV cases were recorded in the USA that is outside Africa (Bunge et al., 2022). Notably, this is caused due to animal-to- human transmission (Reed et al., 2004). Between 2018 and 2021, the MPV spread was observed in the USA, the UK, Israel, and Singapore (Mauldin et al., 2022). By 2022, MPV reached 31 countries (Xiang and White, 2022) with no travel history to endemic countries, and the virus isolates are reported as West African clade (Xiang and White, 2022).5Genome and structure of MPVThe MPV genome is a linear genome with a size of approximately 197 kb (196,858-base pairs) (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Alkhalil et al., 2009) comprising ≈190 non-overlapping ORFs >180 nt in length (Kugelman et al., 2014). The central coding region sequence is positioned at ≈56000–120000 nucleotides (Kugelman et al., 2014). This conserved region is flanked by variable ends that comprise inverted terminal repeats (ITRs). The genome encodes biological machinery that is essential for the survival of the virus (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Genes in the central region are necessary for entry, self-replication, and maturation (Alkhalil et al., 2009). The less conserved terminal regions are useful for host-virus interaction (Alkhalil et al., 2009).At the ITR zone, a minimum of 4 ORFs are present (Kugelman et al., 2014).There are two clades present in the MPV: the Congo Basin strain and West African strain (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). The Congo Basin strain is also known as the Central African strain (ZAI-96). The West African strains are SL-V70, COP-58, and WRAIR-6 (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008). These clades demonstrate dissimilar virulence (Kindrachuk et al., 2012) and are geographically, clinically, and genetically different (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). The Congo Basin strain demonstrated a case fatality rates of approximately 10% noticed in the people who are non-vaccinated than the less lethal West African MPV clade (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). Furthermore, the fatality rate differs with the strain, with 3.6% with the West African clade and 10.6% with the Central African clade (Bunge et al., 2022).The West African strain is linked with lower transmission within the humans (Hutson et al., 2009), with a difference of 0.55-0.56% nucleotide between both the strains (Chen et al., 2005). A difference of 0.01–0.07% nucleotides is observed among the West African strains (Chen et al., 2005). A recent study conducted through shotgun metagenomics, showed that the MPV belongs to clade 3 and presumably has a single origin (Isidro et al., 2022). Another phylogenetic study was conducted on African monkeypox (Nakazawa et al., 2015). The authors examined fairly large genomic sequence data obtained from the MPV isolates across the area of their distribution to determine the relationship between the clades and among the isolates and further improve the phylogenetic analysis (Nakazawa et al., 2015).Furthermore, the amplified virulence observed in the Central African strains is believed to be due to D14L (complement inhibitor), D10L (host range protein), B14R (interleukin [IL]-1β binding protein), B10R (apoptotic regulator), and B19R (serine protease inhibitor-like protein) genes (Estep et al., 2011) (Karumathil et al., 2018). The West African strains are devoid of D14L (Estep et al., 2011). The orthologs of D10L and B19R orthologs are conserved in both clades (Chen et al., 2005). The orthologs of ZAI-96, B10R and B14R are absent in West African strain (Chen et al., 2005). Additionally, selective repression of the host response is noticed in Central African strain demonstrated by its ability to regulate apoptosis in the host (Kumar et al., 2022).MPV is one of the largest and most highly complex viruses (Barreto-Vieira and Barth, 2015) demonstrating a brick-shaped structure with a length of 220 - 450 nm and a width ranging from 140 - 260 nm (Hyun, 2022). It has four components: core, lateral bodies, outer membrane, and outer lipoprotein envelope (Sklenovská, 2020). The core is the central part, encompassed by core fibrils and double stranded viral DNA. This layer is encircled by a rigid structure called the palisade layer (Sklenovská, 2020). The outer membrane accommodates the palisade layer, lateral bodies and the central core (Sklenovská, 2020). The structures called the surface tubules and are present on the outer surface (Sklenovská, 2020) (
Figure 2
).Figure 2The structure of MPV particle.Typically two types of virions are noticed in the negatively stained preparations of orthopoxviruses, namely the M form (mulberry) and C form (capsule) (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). The M-type virions are undamaged, while the C forms are the damaged ones (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). In C type virions, the stain percolates the cell, exposing the outer membrane and partially exposing the internal structures (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). Clinically, the M-types is present in the vesicle fluid and the C type in dried scabs (Jezek and Fenner, 1988).6Reservoir and transmissionThe common reservoir for MPV is thought to be not only monkeys (Moore et al., 2022), but also other animals such as squirrels (Khodakevich et al., 1987), and sooty mangabey. (Radonić et al., 2014). Although the rate at which the virus resides among animals is still obscure, rodents are thought to be the reservoir hosts for this virus (Nolen et al., 2015; Wilson, 2017). Infections may also occur in mice, rats, humans (Learned et al., 2005; Nolen et al., 2016; Besombes et al., 2019), and prairie dogs (Tesh et al., 2004; Moore et al., 2022). MPV transmission may occur when a healthy individual comes into contact with the skin lesions, droplets, and bodily fluids of infected animals. Partially cooked food might also be a reason for the infection (Ahmed et al., 2022). The infection may also result from to contact with contaminated fomites (Moore et al., 2022). Additionally, the infections may also result due to activities that enhance exposure to animals, such as sleeping on the ground outside and habituating near the forest (Fuller et al., 2011; Guagliardo et al., 2020). The risk of infection may also be noted when eating bushmeat or wild game (Kmiec and Kirchhoff, 2022).In 2018, MPV transmission was observed from an infected patient to a healthcare assistant which might be due to contact with bedding that was contaminated (Vaughan et al., 2020). Human-to-human transmission has also been noted in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Nolen et al., 2016). Transmission within humans can also occur by sharing the same household and consuming food or water from the same dish as the patient (Bunge et al., 2022). In 2022, the United Kingdom witnessed an increase in MPV cases, categorized into three different events (Vivancos et al., 2022). The first case was in Nigerian imports, the second case was a cluster in a household, and the third case was reported in men with no reported link with previous cases or the travel history (Vivancos et al., 2022). One study reported the first case of MPV transmission from a human to dog (Seang et al., 2022). A recent report showed that out of 528 infections across 16 countries, 98% were bisexual or gay, 75% of the infections were seen within the white, and 41% were positive for HIV (Thornhill et al., 2022) (
Figure 3
).Figure 3Transmission modes of MPV from animals (reservoirs) to humans and humans to animals.7ReplicationTo gain insight onto MPV replication, we relied on pox virus replication. Poxvirus replication occurs in the cytoplasm in specific structures known as Guarnieri bodies (Kieser et al., 2020; Kaler et al., 2022). These bodies are also called factories obtained from infecting particles (Kieser et al., 2020). The count (number) of factories depends on the multiplication rate of infection (Moss, 2013). The factory is the site where transcription translation, and assembly of virions take place (Moss, 2013).Generally, there exists two types of infectious forms of MPV: the mature virion [MV, also called intracellular mature virions (IMV)] and the enveloped virion (EV, also called extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs)) and cell-associated enveloped virions (CEVs) (Chung et al., 2006; Moss, 2012). The MV has a single membrane, and the EV has an additional outer membrane that is cleaved before fusion. When the MV is enclosed within an endosomal membrane or trans-Golgi, it forms a triple-membrane. These are hence termed wrapped virions (WVs, also called intracellular enveloped virions (IEVs) (Moss, 2012). Unenclosed MVs remain free until cell lysis occurs (Chung et al., 2006; Moss, 2012). Both MV and EV are infectious and can spread the disease (Moss, 2012; Sklenovská, 2020). Comparatively, the stable MV transmits the infection between the host animals, while EVs with fragile external membranes are instrumental in spreading the disease within the host (Moss, 2012; Sklenovská, 2020).The proteins facilitate the attachment of the virus to the cell, fusion of the membrane and entry into the host cell (Kaler et al., 2022). The single membrane in MV and an extra outer membrane in the EV perform the disruption prior to fusion (Kaler et al., 2022). There are a total of four viral proteins connected to the MV that help in the process of attachment of MV to the host cell (Kaler et al., 2022).The virus attaches to the host via 11 to 12 non-glycosylated transmembrane proteins (4- to 43-kDa) (Moss, 2012; Kaler et al., 2022). In some pox viruses, laminin and heparine sulfate aid in the attachment (Kmiec and Kirchhoff, 2022). After infection DNA synthesis is initiated for no more than 2 hours (Moss, 2013). For replication, MV initially uncoats to gain entry into the cytoplasm (Sklenovská, 2020). The early genes are then expressed after the inactivation of the cells defence mechanisms. This inactivation is achieved by the generation of prepackaged viral proteins and the enzymatic factors (Sklenovská, 2020). Subsequently, the early messenger RNA (mRNA) is synthesized through the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the virus. The translated early mRNA assists another uncoating mechanism, replication of DNA, and generation of intermediate transcription factors. (Sklenovská, 2020). Then the transcription and translation of intermediate mRNA occurs to promote the late mRNAs expression. Further, the translation of late mRNAs into structural and nonstructural proteins initiates (Sklenovská, 2020). The proteins that are translated are gathered together with the concatemers of DNA that are processed in the earlier step of replication (Sklenovská, 2020). They are enclosed to form an immature virions (IMVs) that transform to MV which are devoid of external membrane and causes infection when liberated due to the disruption of the cell. (Hiller and Weber, 1985; Bray and Buller, 2004; Roberts and Smith, 2008) They then travel into the inner cell membrane aided by the microtubules and eventually fuses to from the cell-associated virions (CEVs). These trigger the actin polymerization and the development of the filaments. The CEVs exists the cell that are now called the extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs) (Roberts and Smith, 2008) (
Figure 4
).Figure 4The steps involved in the replication of MPV and the generation of new viral progeny.8Symptoms and clinical manifestations of MPThe symptoms of MP are similar to those of smallpox but are generally milder (Ligon, 2004). Once exposed to an infection, the incubation period is between 10 and 14 days and followed by a prodromal period of two days (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008). The individuals demonstrate, muscle aches, backache, headache, intense asthenia, fever between 38.5°C and 40.5°C (McCollum and Damon, 2014) with swollen lymph nodes. Often, patients experience discomfort and exhaustion (Ligon, 2004). The feature that separates monkeypox from smallpox is lymphadenopathy (Moore et al., 2022). Mucosal lesions are observed in the mouth (enanthem) (Kaler et al., 2022) after 1 or 2 days. The skin lesions appear on the face and extremities. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) the face is highly affected, as noticed in 95% of the cases. In 75% of the cases, the palms and soles are affected and in 75% of the cases the oral mucous membranes are affected. The affect is also noticed on genitalia and conjunctivae in 30% and 20% of the cases.The lesions progress through four stages namely, the macular (development of macular lesions), popular (the lesions are a slightly raised), vesicular (the lesions are raised clearly and filled with fluid), and pustula (lesions are filled with opaque fluid and forms a depression at the Centre and remain for about 5 - 7 days) in the next 2 - 4 weeks (Moore et al., 2022). After the pustular phase, the formation of the crust starts and desquamates in the next 7 - 14 day (Moore et al., 2022). Once the crusts are fallen off, the patients are no longer infectious (Moore et al., 2022). Lesions can cause dyspigmented scars in a few instances (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008).The distribution of the lesion is typically centrifugal and appears firm, deep, well-circumscribed and umbilicated (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Additionally, dissimilarities were observed in the morphology of lesions between vaccinated and unvaccinated people (McCollum and Damon, 2014). In individuals those who were vaccinated <20 years before the infection, the lesions were smaller and fewer, with the centrifugal spreading of the rash (McCollum and Damon, 2014). The skin of patients is firm, inflamed, and painful before the formation of crusts (McCollum and Damon, 2014) (
Figure 5
).Figure 5Infection with MPV. The symptoms and different stages observed in an infected individual.Sequelae and serious complications have also been noticed usually in unvaccinated individuals of approximately 74% compared to those in the vaccinated individuals (39.5%) (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Patients develop pulmonary distress or bronchopneumonia indicating that an infection of the lungs could be a secondary infection (McCollum and Damon, 2014). In others, vomiting or diarrhoea leading to acute dehydration was noticed (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Encephalitis, ocular infections and septicaemia were also recorded, with an average case-fatality rate of 11% in unvaccinated patients with children being highly vulnerable (McCollum and Damon, 2014).9Virus-host interactionIt has been reported that the MPV encompasses a substantial number of accessory genes and notably hasa broader host range (Bonilla-Aldana and Rodriguez-Morales, 2022; Xiang and White, 2022). Interestingly, the loss of an accessory gene in approximately 17% of samples from West African strain demonstrated an association with an upsurge in human-to-human transmission (Xiang and White, 2022).A gene-expression profile study was conducted to understand the viral-host biology (Alkhalil et al., 2010). The experiment was conducted on kidney epithelial cells (MK2) of Macaca mulatta using the GeneChip rhesus macaque genome microarrays (Alkhalil et al., 2010). The findings from this study demonstrate the function of ion channels, cell cycle regulators, histones, and actin play a role in MPV infection (Alkhalil et al., 2010).A recent bioinformatics study based on transcriptome analysis was conducted to identify biomarkers and signaling pathways in cells infected with monkeypox (Tang et al., 2022). GSE36854 and GSE11234 were retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (Tang et al., 2022). The results showed that from the GSE36854 dataset, 84 genes were significantly different. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) interactions and the identification of hub genes has revealed that the genes such as ZC3H12A, IER3, EREG, IFIT2, AREG, IL11, IFIT1 IER2, NFKBIE, and FST as the 10 hub genes. (Tang et al., 2022). The genes IFIT1 and IFIT2 (antiviral genes) were noticed to be remarkably repressed. Furthermore, upon searching the drugs that essentially target the hub genes, itraconazole and AP-26113 were found to stimulate the expression levels of IFIT1 and IFIT2 illuminating their ability as MP therapeutics (Tang et al., 2022).To discover variations in the expression of genes, co-regulated genes, and the pathways that are of concern during MP progression, another research group worked on in vitro models that were infected with MPV (Xuan et al., 2022). The two models on which several analysis were performed were, rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) kidney epithelial (MK2) cells and human immortal epithelial cancer (HeLa) cells (Xuan et al., 2022). The results showed that in the animal cell line model, the prominent regulators were histamine, plasmin and cluster of differentiation 40 (CD40), whereas in the human cell line model, the neutrophil-related signaling pathways and macrophages were noted (Xuan et al., 2022). Additionally, in both models, certain genes that were remarkably expressed during the progression of the infection including, TNFAIP3, IL11, ADORA2A, DUOX1, BIRC3, PTX3, CXCL1, LIF, IER3, IL6, ZC3H12A, EGR1, CSF2, and CCL2. Additionally, epigenetic regulators were also observed, namely, HIST1H3D and HIST1H2BJ (Xuan et al., 2022). Furthermore, a computational study uncovered the over-expression of some histones in both humans and monkeys infected with monkeypox-infected cells (Xuan et al., 2022). The elevated histone members are HIST1H2BB, HIST1H2AK, HIST2H2AB, HIST1H2AC, HIST1H2BM, HIST1H2BJ, HIST1H2BH, HIST1H2AD, HIST1H3D, and HIST1H1B highlighting the possibility of the role epigenetic regulators in monkeypox infection (Xuan et al., 2022).Another study also has identified the upregulation of histone genes namely, HIST1H2BJ, HIST4H4, HIST1H3I, HIST1H2AD, and, HIST1H1D, while H1F0, the linker histone was downregulated (Alkhalil et al., 2010). Certain genes such as MYCBP2, PRMT3, RARS2, FBXO11 and MYST2 were repressed (Alkhalil et al., 2010). During the infection, the repression of ten ion channels and transporters was observed. The cell cycle regulators and actin MPV infection were noticed to participate in MPV infection (Alkhalil et al., 2010). Furthermore, the disease biomarkers can be discovered through proteomics analysis (Wang et al., 2022).Bourquain et al, conducted an experiment to determine how poxviruses vary their host cell gene expression. HeLa cells were selected, and the changes were recorded using microarrays that are representative of the whole human genome (Bourquain et al., 2013). HeLa cells were treated with CPXV Brighton Red (BR) reference strain, central African MPV strain MSF-6, or the mouse-pathogenic VACV strain IHD-W (Bourquain et al., 2013). In particular to the MPV results, merely 321 (1.1%) transcripts showed 2-fold expression variations with 219 (68.2%) upregulated transcripts and 102 downregulated transcripts (Bourquain et al., 2013). Interestingly, the results also showed common transcripts among infections (Bourquain et al., 2013). The MPV has regulated 321 host transcripts of which 241 (75.1%) were observed with cowpox virus (CPXV) and 148 (46.1%) within VACV infection (Bourquain et al., 2013). Genes such as DUSP5/6, SPRED1/2, and SPRY2/4 are upregulated along with EGR1 and EGR2. After infection, the EGR1 upregulation was observed via the MAPK-ERK pathway (Bourquain et al., 2013).In MPV infection, the genes that take part in the negative regulation of MAPK activity and intracellular protein kinase cascade were enriched, and they induced genes associated with chemotaxis or leukocyte activation (Bourquain et al., 2013). Hammarlund et al, reported that monocytes infected with MPV do not recognize antiviral CD4+ and CD8+ T Cells (Hammarlund et al., 2008). MPV can cause infection in primary human monocytes without eliciting the production of inflammatory cytokines (IFNγ or TNFα) (Hammarlund et al., 2008). It was also reported that MPV impedes the activation of T- cell by VV, implying that MPV bears an immunomodulatory protein which is absent in VV (Hammarlund et al., 2008). This inhibition in trans can also obstruct the activation of T - cells by other virus-infected cells that are not precisely MPV-infected, suggesting that MPV is immunosuppressive and immune-evasive (Hammarlund et al., 2008). Cell-associated factor/factors generated in MPV hinder the activation of T - cells autonomously by MHC class I or class II processing or presentation (Hammarlund et al., 2008).10Treatments against MPV10.1Small molecule inhibitorsThe replication of MPV can be brought about by the RNA interference using genome-wide expression studies combined with a bioinformatics approach (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Accordingly 12 viral genes were targeted using small interfering RNA (siRNAs). Eventually, siA6-a inhibited replication of the virus for 7 days when administered at 10 nM (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Additionally, this study also demonstrated the significance of the A6R gene in replication (Alkhalil et al., 2009). The use of interferon-β (IFN-β) is another approach to curb MPV spread and multiplication (Johnston et al., 2012). IFN-β has been approved by the FDA for treating multiple sclerosis (Johnston et al., 2012). IFN-β administration after 6-8 hours after infection remarkably inhibited the production and spread of MPV, thereby highlighting the potential of IFN-β as an effective therapeutic option against MPV (Johnston et al., 2012). In previous studies, silver-based nanoparticles have been found to repress plaque formation of MPV with a diameter of 10 nm (Rogers et al., 2008), suggesting the role of silver-based nanoparticles as MPV treatment option (Rogers et al., 2008).Tecovirimat may offer improved survival when administered for up to 8 days after the lethal aerosol MPV challenge in cynomolgus macaques (Russo et al., 2018). It offers a shield from the clinical effects of the disease earlier than 5 days after the challenge (Russo et al., 2018). This FDA approved drug is used to treat smallpox (Smith et al., 2011; Grosenbach et al., 2018; Laudisoit et al., 2018; Russo et al., 2018). The compound tecovirimat is believed to repress the product of F13L gene which is present across orthopoxviruses (Matias et al., 2022) and is used for orthopoxvirus wrapping (Duraffour et al., 2008; Duraffour et al., 2015). The drug brincidofovir, a nucleotide analogue, has demonstrated promising results in animal models when assessed against MPV (Adler et al., 2022). Improved survival was observed in prairie dog models, administered with brincidofovir soon after monkeypox contact (Hutson et al., 2021; Siegrist and Sassine, 2022).Computational methods are paramount in the development and design of new drugs. The predominant methods include molecular docking (Morris and Lim-Wilby, 2008; Rampogu and Lee, 2021c; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a), and molecular dynamics simulation (Durrant and McCammon, 2011; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a). Pharmacophore modeling can also be adapted when there are any experimentally known ligands/inhibitors or when the X-ray structure of the target protein is present (Yang, 2010; Rampogu et al., 2020). Homology modeling can be used to build a structure when the X-ray structure is not resolved (Muhammed and Aki-Yalcin, 2019). In one study, five targets were investigated, and compounds, such as NMCT, rutaecarpine, nilotinib, simeprevir, hypericin, naldemedine, fosdagrocorat and lixivaptan (Lam et al., 2022), were found to have potential inhibitory activities. These five targets were A48R, A50R, D13L, F13L and I7L (Lam et al., 2022). An in silico study revealed that the compound fludarabine is a potential inhibitor of the MPV target DNA-dependent RNA polymerase subunit (A6R) along with two other targets, protein catalysing the envelopment of intracellular mature virus particles (F13L) and proteins involved in cell entry (D8L) (Altayb, 2022). Sahoo et al., identified four potential inhibitors, Tipranavir, Cefiderocol, Doxorubicin, and Dolutegravir towards the targets thymidylate kinase and D9 (decapping enzyme) (Sahoo et al., 2022) (
Table 1
).Table 1Current treatments/small molecules available for MPV therapeutics.InhibitorMethodActs onDosageReferencesiA6-agenome-wide expression, bioinformaticsA6R10 nM(Alkhalil et al., 2009)IFN-β
in vitro
MPV spread and multiplication–(Johnston et al., 2012)NMCT, Rutaecarpine, Nilotinib, Simeprevir, Hypericin, Naldemedine, Fosdagrocorat and LixivaptanComputationalA48R, A50R, D13L, F13L, I7L–(Lam et al., 2022)FludarabineComputationalA6R–(Altayb, 2022)Tipranavir, Cefiderocol, Doxorubicin, and DolutegravirComputationalThymidylate kinase and D9–(Sahoo et al., 2022)TecovirimatFDA-approved drug for smallpoxF13L–(Matias et al., 2022)BrincidofovirFDA-approved drug for smallpoxThe effect shown in prairie dogs(Adler et al., 2022)Vaccinia immune globulin (VIG)FDA-approvedintramuscular–(Siegrist et al., 2020)CRISPR/Cas9vaccinia virus (VACV) modelA17L, E3L, and I2L–(Siegrist et al., 2020)A study was conducted to evaluate the role of specific genes in viral replication and pathogenicity (Lopera et al., 2015). Correspondingly, a bioinformatics approach has been adapted to discover genomic regions in MPV possessing numerous virulence genes (Lopera et al., 2015). Following this, two regions were selected, and the study was conducted in vitro and in vivo after single deletion and double deletion of the selected genes. The results demonstrated that simultaneous deletion of both genes led to a decrease in replication observed in cell culture (Lopera et al., 2015). When either region was deleted, a remarkable amplified attenuation in vivo was observed (Lopera et al., 2015).10.2VaccinationIn addition to small molecules, vaccines are also widely used as a treatment option (Hooper et al., 2004). Notably, the smallpox vaccine has demonstrated protection in Nonhuman Primates against MPV (Hooper et al., 2004). It is reported that smallpox has provided approximately 85% protection against monkeypox (Bunge et al., 2022). JYNNEOS is a modified vaccinia ankara (MVA) vaccine that has been approved for MPV disease in adults ≥18 years of age (Rao et al., 2022). This was a subcutaneous injection administered at two doses with 28 days apart (Rao et al., 2022). In 2017, healthcare individuals were administered with IMVAMUNE® which is a smallpox vaccine (Petersen et al., 2019). This study aimed to understand the immunogenicity, effectiveness, and safety of IMVAMUNE® in patients at high risk for MPV (Petersen et al., 2019). Another smallpox vaccine, the live VACV Dryvax protects against monkeypox (Heraud et al., 2006; Earl et al., 2008). A multivalent DNA vaccine with eight VACVs virus (Western Reserve strain genes: A4L, A27L, A33R, A56R, B5R, F9L, H3L, and L1R) confers protection against MPV in nonhuman primates cynomolgus macaques (Hirao et al., 2011).It has been observed that, patients vaccinated for smallpox showed immunity (orthopoxvirus [OPXV], IgG and memory B cells) upon exposure to MPV (Nguyen et al., 2021). Interestingly, the smallpox vaccine triggers both humoral and cell-mediated responses towards OPXV which also includes MPV (Nguyen et al., 2021). They target a host of viral elements, thereby hindering viral replication (Nguyen et al., 2021). Vaccinia immune globulin is an approved medication used after contacting the MPV, which is administered intramuscularly (Lederman et al., 2012; Siegrist et al., 2020; Parker et al., 2021). In one study, CRISPR/Cas9 was used to treat orthopoxviruses with VACV, which was used as a model organism (Siegrist et al., 2020). This study focused on the indispensable conserved genes A17L, E3L, and I2L using an adeno-associated virus as a vector (Siegrist et al., 2020). The results have shown a reduction in the viral titre further protecting host cells (Siegrist et al., 2020). An assay based on CRISPR-Cas12a and real-time PCR was used to detect MPV (Li et al., 2006; Sui et al., 2022).In order to find effective therapeutics, few clinical trials have been conducted. Upon searching for clinical trial information, it was found that nine studies are currently being performed that are either on-going or completed (https://clinicaltrials.gov/)11Conclusion and future outlookViruses are notorious microorganisms that cause serious human infections. Pox viruses are not new as they exist in reptiles, birds, insects, and mammals. Hence, they are also known as ancient viruses (Alakunle et al., 2020). Human MP is a zoonotic disease that is recently spreading globally. In order to prevent the spread of the disease, the contact tracing is an important step (Titanji et al., 2022). If a person is in close proximity with a confirmed case of monkeypox, then that individual should be observed for development of symptoms for 21 days (Titanji et al., 2022).Since the treatment options for monkeypox are limited (Kaler et al., 2022), the available research methods, such as computational drug discovery, could be an effective method to identify drugs (Ou-Yang et al., 2012; Sliwoski et al., 2014). This approach is useful for discovering new drugs over a short period (Leelananda and Lindert, 2016). Drug repurposing is another approach that can be used to identify mmediate candidate compounds (Pushpakom et al., 2018; Begley et al., 2021). This approach has been proven to be promising for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2. Remdesivir is one such candidate (Li and Peng, 2021). To prevent the spread of virus in the developing countries the awareness on health hygiene is essentially important as the samples from the excreta are reported to have monkeypox virus DNA (Singla and Shen, 2022). Additionally, the knowledge and treat from the pandemics and similar kind of diseases should be widely spread among all the sections of the people (Poland et al., 2022). Countries need to review their approach and preventive measure are to be taken during the outbreaks and be prepared for any such kind in the future (Poland et al., 2022). To conclude, since the spread of MPV is swift, it demands extra awareness and thoughtfulness to control the transmission and thereby to mitigate the disease and further its future reappearance.Author contributionsSR and KW conceived the idea. SR wrote the manuscript. KW, S-WK, and YK reviewed the manuscript and revised. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.


Title: Monkeypox Transmission and Pathogenesis in Prairie Dogs

During May and June 2003, the first cluster of human monkeypox cases in the United States was reported (1–4). Most human case-patients with this febrile vesicular rash illness were believed to have acquired the infection from prairie dogs (Cynomys spp.) that became ill after contact with various exotic African rodents (Funiscuirus spp., Heliosciurus spp., Cricetomys spp., Atherurus spp., Graphiurus spp., and Hybomys spp.) shipped from Ghana to the United States in April 2003 (1,2). Some African rodents from this shipment became ill and died shortly after arriving in the United States. Culture and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) demonstrated monkeypox virus in two rope squirrels (Funiscuirus spp.), one Gambian rat (Cricetomys sp.), and three dormice (Graphiurus spp.) (2). The two prairie dogs described in this report came from the same wholesale pet store where other monkeypox virus–infected rodents were housed.In areas of Africa where monkeypox infections in humans have been documented previously, serologic surveys of wild animals have suggested that infection with monkeypox virus occurs in several species of African rodents (5). The virus has been isolated from skin lesions on a rope squirrel from Zaire (6). However, pathologic studies of naturally acquired monkeypox virus infections in animals have not been reported. Here we present pathologic, immunohistochemical (IHC), electron microscopy (EM), and molecular findings in two monkeypox virus–infected prairie dogs associated with the recent outbreak of the disease in humans in the United States. These results help elucidate the pathogenesis of naturally occurring monkeypox virus infections in mammals and shed light on possible routes of viral transmission between rodents and to humans during this outbreak.Materials and MethodsThe two prairie dogs from whom data are presented here came from a group of approximately 200 prairie dogs that were housed at a wholesale pet store with multiple species of exotic African rodents. About 110 prairie dogs were sold before 15 reportedly became ill. Of the 15 ill prairie dogs, 10 died rapidly, and 5 exhibited anorexia, wasting, sneezing, coughing, swollen eyelids, and ocular discharge. Initially, tularemia was suspected clinically, and two of the ill prairie dogs were euthanized for pathologic confirmation. The remaining prairie dogs were destroyed (3,4).Culture and Molecular AnalysisFresh lung tissue specimens were evaluated for the presence of viable infectious virus by injecting them into BSC-40 tissue culture and observing them daily for typical cytopathic effect. Fresh, unfixed tissues from lung were examined for specific signatures of monkeypox virus by using PCR. Samples were initially evaluated by single-gene PCR, followed by restriction-endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) identification of monkeypox-specific fragment patterns (7–9). An additional novel multiplex standard PCR assay (10) discriminated monkeypox from vaccinia and variola orthopoxvirus species on the basis of specific DNA polymerase gene amplicons. Real time (RT)-PCR assays included a specific monkeypox virus nucleic acid signature encoded in the envelope gene (monkeypox-B6R) and orthopoxvirus nucleic acid signatures in the DNA polymerase gene (E9L non var.). Controls included DNA from monkeypox virus, other orthopoxviruses, and no-template controls.Pathologic ExaminationTissues were examined grossly and microscopically. Hematoxylin- and eosin-stained slides were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of the central nervous system, conjunctivae, tongue, salivary glands, lungs, heart, liver, gastrointestinal tract, spleen, adrenal glands, kidneys, and lymph nodes. IHC assays were performed as previously described for other infectious agents in the DAKO autostainer (Dako Corp., Carpinteria, CA) (11–14). Briefly, 3-μm sections of the tissues were deparaffinized and rehydrated. Tissue sections were then digested with 0.1 mg/mL proteinase K (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) in 0.6 M Tris (pH 7.5)/ 0.1% CaCl2 (proteinase K buffer) for 15 min and later blocked with 20% normal sheep serum in Tris-saline-tween-20. Tissue sections were incubated for 60 min with a primary antibody. Primary antibodies included three polyclonal antiorthopoxvirus antibodies (rabbit antivariola virus, mouse antivaccinia virus, and rabbit antimonkeypox virus [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, GA]); in addition, a monoclonal anti-Francisella tularensis antibody (Naval Biodefense Program, Bethesda, MD), and a polyclonal anti–Yersinia pestis antibody (CDC, Fort Collins, CO). This was followed by sequential application of swine antimouse or swine antirabbit link antibody, avidin-alkaline phosphatase, and naphthol/fast red substrate (Dako Corp). Sections were then counterstained in Meyer’s hematoxylin (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA).Positive controls included formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cells infected with variola virus, vaccinia virus, and monkeypox virus. Negative controls included similar cells infected with influenza A virus and human herpesvirus 1 (herpes simplex) and 3 (varicella-zoster); animal tissue samples infected with Ebola virus, Y. pestis, and F. tularensis; human skin lesions known to have human herpesvirus 1 and 3; and human skin samples with noninfectious dermatitis caused by poison ivy or drug eruptions. Negative controls for the prairie dogs specimens consisted of sequential tissue sections incubated with normal rabbit or mouse serum.Electron Microscopy (EM)Specimens for EM were excised from paraffin-embedded blocks of lung and tongue in areas that corresponded to positive IHC results. Tissues were deparaffinized for 1 h in xylene warmed to 60°C, rehydrated through a graded series of alcohols, postfixed in phosphate-buffered 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1% osmium tetroxide, stained with 4% uranyl acetate, dehydrated through a graded series of alcohols and propylene oxide, and embedded in a mixture of Epon-substitute and Araldite. Ultrathin sections were stained with 4% uranyl acetate and Reynold's lead citrate.ResultsGross examination of both animals revealed yellow mucoid discharge in the eyelids. One animal had a 3- to 4-mm ulcer in the center of the tongue. The lungs showed patchy areas of red-brown consolidations involving about 50% of the pulmonary parenchyma. The livers were red with a few scattered, tanned, mottled areas. Typical orthopoxvirus sequences were revealed in lung tissue samples by use of a novel multiplex PCR assay, which detected the essential DNA polymerase gene; however, the standard single-gene PCR and RFLP analysis did not show the presence of monkeypox virus. Specific monkeypox virus sequences were also obtained with more sensitive RT-PCR assays. Viral cytopathic effects were observed at days 4 and 5 in cultures inoculated with fresh lung samples.Histopathologic examination of the eyelids showed a necrotic, ulcerated lesion of the palpebral conjunctiva. The ulcer bed consisted of necrotic debris and pyknotic epithelial cells. Columnar epithelial cells surrounding the ulcer were swollen and contained dense, eosinophilic, cytoplasmic granules of various sizes that suggested Guarnieri-like inclusions. The submucosa showed mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate, necrosis, and edema. Other areas of the palpebral conjunctiva and skin showed inflammatory foci in the epithelium without ulcer formation but with ballooning degeneration of epithelial cells, acantholysis, and occasional cell necrosis. Abundant orthopoxvirus antigens were detected in areas with grossly and microscopically identified lesions (Figure 1A, B) by using orthopoxvirus IHC assays. Viral antigens were present prominently in the squamous and columnar epithelium (Figure 1B) and in lesser amounts in fibroblasts and histiocytes in the ulcer bed or underlying the lesions. In epithelial cells, antigens were observed in the cytoplasm intensely staining the cytoplasmic Guarnieri-like inclusions.Figure 1Immunohistochemical staining of a prairie dog eyelid infected with monkeypox virus, showing orthopox virus antigen staining of the cytoplasm of the epithelium of the palpebral conjunctivae (assay using anti–variola virus antibody; original magnifications: A, 12.5X; B, 25X).Histopathologically, the tongue ulcer demonstrated necrosis and mixed inflammation at the ulcer bed (Figure 2A). Nonulcerated mucosa showed focal areas of lichenoid interface, mixed inflammatory infiltrate with necrosis, ballooning degeneration, and dense eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules (Guarnieri-like inclusions) in the squamous epithelium. IHC assays showed viral antigens only in lesions (Figure 2B); the antigens had a pattern similar to that described for the necrotic, ulcerated lesion of the conjunctivae. EM examination revealed abundant mature and immature poxvirus particles in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells (Figure 2C, D).Figure 2Ulcer on tongue of a prairie dog infected with monkeypox virus (A: hematoxylin and eosin stain, 12.5X original magnification). Orthopox viral antigens are abundant in the squamous epithelium, with lesser amounts in the ulcer bed (B: immunohistochemical stain using the anti-smallpox antibody, 12.5X original magnification). Tongue epithelial cell adjacent to epidermal basement membrane (small arrows) with Guarnieri-like inclusion (large arrow) (C: transmission electron microscopy, 2,400X original magnification). Higher magnification of the Guarnieri-like inclusion shows intracellular immature (arrowhead) and mature (arrows) orthopox virions. The mature virions consist of a dense core surrounded by several laminated zones and enclosed within an outer membrane. (D: transmission electron microscopy, 17,000X original magnification.)The lungs showed concentric, coalescing bronchioalveolar pneumonia. Airways showed necrosis and mixed infiltrate of neutrophils and histiocytes in the lumen and epithelium, and the bronchial epithelium showed a reactive proliferative response (Figure 3A). Inflammation extended through the bronchilolar walls into surrounding alveoli, which demonstrated fibrinous edema, necrosis, and marked infiltrate of macrophages, some having intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions, while others showed multinucleation. Adjacent arterioles showed reactive fibrinocellular edema in the adventitia and inflammatory infiltrate. The nonnecrotic areas of the lung demonstrated intraalveolar edema. IHC assays demonstrated abundant viral antigens in the areas with bronchioalveolar inflammation (Figure 3D). Viral antigens were observed in the cytoplasm of macrophages, bronchial epithelial cells, and fibroblasts; viral antigens were also present in the necrotic debris and interstitial connective tissue (Figure 3C). Immature and mature poxvirus particles were demonstrated inside bronchial epithelial cells by using EM (Figure 3B).Figure 3Lung of prairie dog infected with monkeypox virus, showing abundant intraalveolar mixed inflammatory infiltrate and necrosis (A: hematoxylin and eosin stain, 50X original magnification). Orthopox viral antigens are abundant in the cytoplasm of the bronchiolar epithelium (D: immunohistochemical assay anti–variola virus antibody, 100X original magnification). Macrophages, fibroblasts, and alveolar epithelial cells, as well as necrotic debris demonstrate orthopox viral antigens in pneumonic areas of the lung (C: immunohistochemical stain anti–variola virus antibody, 100X original magnification). Accumulation of intracellular mature virions (arrow) in bronchial epithelial cell (arrowhead pointing to cilia) (B: transmission electron microscopy, 2,400X original magnification).Except for mild portal inflammation in the liver and reactive hyperplasia in the spleen, no significant pathologic changes were noted in other organs. Viral antigens were not observed in other tissues, with the exception of occasional medullary and subcapsular sinusoidal histiocytes in a submandibular lymph node. No IHC evidence of F. tularensis and Y. pestis was observed in the tissues.DiscussionDuring the 2003 outbreak of human monkeypox in the United States, a shipment of African rodents that contained Gambian rats and dormice is thought to have resulted in secondary infection of prairie dogs (1–4). Exposure to infected prairie dogs resulted in 37 human infections involving exotic pet dealers, pet owners, and veterinary care workers in the United States (1–3). The mode of transmission of the monkeypox virus between infected animals and humans is not clearly defined, partly because histopathologic and immunohistochemical studies of animals with naturally acquired infection have not been published. The prairie dogs in this study demonstrated abundant viral antigens and mature poxvirus particles in the tongue and conjunctival lesions; hence, direct contact with saliva or exudates from these lesions could have inoculated monkeypox virus to skin or mucous membranes of other hosts. In addition, the lungs demonstrated abundant replicating monkeypox virus in the bronchi and lung parenchyma; thus, transmission to other rodents and humans may have occurred when the infected animal coughed and dispersed infective droplets. Furthermore, the pneumonic process in these prairie dogs suggests a respiratory route of infection between rodents. Thus, the pathologic study of severely ill prairie dogs in this outbreak provided evidence that direct mucocutaneous contact and respiratory routes played a role in transmission, as has been suggested in African outbreaks of human disease (15–19).Prairie dogs may be an excellent animal model for the further study of monkeypox infections because they are small, plentiful, and susceptible to severe monkeypox virus disease. In naturally or experimentally infected animals, a spectrum of clinical illness will develop; for example, of the nonhuman species that naturally acquire monkeypox virus infections, skin lesions have only been observed in some African primate species and rope squirrels (Funiscuirus spp.) (5,20). The pathologic features observed in prairie dogs, including a necrotizing bronchopneumonia, have been described in Cynomolgus monkeys infected experimentally by inhalation of monkeypox virus (21). In these animals, the lower respiratory epithelium was the target for primary replication of virus. Monocytes carried the virus to lymphoid tissues, where a secondary viral replication occurred and resulted in the seeding of other tissues, including skin, oral mucosa, gastrointestinal tract, and the tissues of the reproductive system. In this monkey model, secondary viral replication sites had necrotizing lesions. Necrotizing lesions with viral antigens in lymphoid tissues have been seen in other animals, including prairie dogs that fell ill and died during the U.S. outbreak (data not shown). The prairie dogs in this study did not have necrotizing lymphadenitis or splenitis, which may indicate that these rodents were euthanized relatively early in the disease course.Monkeypox virus infected predominantly epithelial cells in conjunctivae, tongue, and bronchi. Histopathologically, infected epithelial cells showed prominent ballooning degeneration and dense, eosinophilic, cytoplasmic granules that were difficult to distinguish from keratohyalin bodies. Epithelial cells occasionally coalesced, forming syncytia, and their nuclei showed eosinophilic, ground-glass staining that must be differentiated from herpetic inclusions for diagnostic purposes. By use of IHC, the eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules seen in infected epithelial cells were proven to be viral inclusions (Guarnieri-like inclusions), and EM examination corroborated these findings. In the prairie dogs studied, orthopoxvirus antigens were also demonstrated in other cells, including macrophages and fibroblasts in areas adjacent to infected epithelial cells. Histopathologic studies of human monkeypox skin vesicular lesions showed an IHC staining pattern similar to that found in the tongue and conjunctiva of the infected prairie dogs (1–4,22,23).The U.S. monkeypox virus outbreak demonstrated how new diseases can emerge due to facile movement of species from one location to another (including the illegal transporting of species). The investigation of human cases at the wholesale pet store that housed a variety of African rodents and the two prairie dogs studied revealed a spectrum of monkeypox-associated disease ranging from only serologic evidence of monkeypox infection to febrile vesicular rash illness (3). Differences in disease severity may relate to the source of exposure, transmission route (i.e., inhalational versus direct mucocutaneous contact), amounts of virus inoculated, virus strain, or host susceptibility. Epidemiologic studies of human monkeypox infections have shown that younger children and persons not vaccinated against smallpox can have severe disease and complications, which supports the importance of host susceptibility, including previous immunity (18,24,25). This outbreak of monkeypox virus infection in humans and nonhuman animals is an important reminder to monitor surveillance programs for febrile rash illnesses designed to detect potential bioterrorism attacks with smallpox virus, which may be beneficial for detecting emerging infections (26).A variety of methods were used to diagnose and study monkeypox virus infection in these prairie dogs. IHC studies permitted demonstration of the virus in the context of histopathology. EM and culture demonstrated viral replication, while molecular studies were essential for determining the specific signatures of monkeypox virus. In the prairie dogs studied, standard PCR and RFLP did not show monkeypox DNA. However, RT-PCR detected monkeypox viral DNA since RT-PCR is more sensitive and can be used to accurately titrate up to 4–10 DNA copies (27).Studying necropsied animal specimens was of great benefit during this monkeypox outbreak investigation. Research into the natural biology of monkeypox has been limited because the disease is rare in humans and no descriptions exist of naturally acquired animal infections. The pathologic findings in this study of prairie dogs can be used to better define possible transmission routes and pathogenesis of human and animal monkeypox, and such a model may help develop new vaccine and treatment strategies for orthopoxvirus infections.


Title: Mpox: An Overview of Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and Public Health Implications

1. IntroductionMonkeypox (Mpox) is a zoonotic infectious disease caused by the monkeypox virus (MPXV) and was first identified in 1970 in rural villages in the rainforest areas of Central and West Africa, when smallpox was in its final stages of eradication. MPXV is a double-stranded DNA virus belonging to the Poxviridae family, genus Orthopoxvirus (OPXV) (same genus as the variola virus that causes smallpox and the vaccinia virus that causes cowpox). There are two genetically distinct clades of MPXV: Clade I (formerly the Central African, Congo Basin clade) and Clade II (formerly the West African clade). Clade II is further subdivided into Clade IIa and IIb. Clade I is clinically more severe, with greater interhuman transmissibility and greater lethality. MPXV is widespread in particular among primates and small rodents, mainly in Africa. This includes squirrels, Gambian marsupial rats, dormice, non-human primates, and other species. However, uncertainties remain about what the virus’s natural reservoirs are and how its circulation in nature is maintained. Mpox is endemic in Central and West Africa, where outbreaks are regularly reported, especially in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC, formerly Zaire). In endemic countries, transmission occurs mainly from animals to humans. Until 2022, the rare cases that were reported in non-endemic countries were usually imported, while human-to-human transmission covered a limited percentage of cases. Mpox transmission in endemic countries occurs mainly from animals to humans through direct contact with infected animals, often during hunting, capture, and processing of infected animals or parts of infected animals and their fluids. Small mammals can carry the virus, sometimes without apparent symptoms, while non-human primates can get sick and have signs of the disease like humans. The natural reservoirs of the virus in endemic areas are not known. Person-to-person transmission occurs through close and prolonged contact with a symptomatic person. Close contact means prolonged face-to-face contact (such as talking, breathing, or droplets); skin-to-skin contact (through contact with skin lesions and during sexual intercourse); mouth-to-mouth contact; or mouth-to-skin contact, which could be another way of transmission. Additionally, MPXV can be transmitted via contaminated objects, such as sheets, towels, and clothing. Human-to-human transmission through close physical contact, including sexual activity, is a significant factor that can trigger an epidemic event.2. Epidemiological Surveillance: Data Availability, Management, and ModelingThe initial stages of an infectious disease outbreak resemble a small brush fire. The containment of such outbreaks relies on swiftly extinguishing chains of transmission before they escalate into widespread epidemics. To be of any help, epidemiological modeling should offer short-term forecasts of Mpox incidence, addressing pertinent queries such as “Time to worry or not?” and “Could it be another threat?” [1]. Analyses must be robust, avoiding misleading inference due to strong and unreliable modeling assumptions [2,3], and thus must employ statistical methodologies aligned with surveillance conditions and be designed to address data quality and management challenges for enhanced modeling efficacy [4]. This is particularly true for the Mpox case. Indeed, the Mpox outbreak underscored the pivotal role of data collection, management, and accessibility in statistical approaches for policy formulation, drawing essential lessons from the challenges encountered during the COVID-19 pandemic. Like the COVID-19 scenario, publicly available data for Mpox were frequently limited and inconsistent, particularly in the initial phase of the outbreak, and unfortunately, this issue persists. Access to more accurate information was impeded by challenges in data collection, ambiguous privacy policies, and institutional reluctance to share data, thereby impeding a comprehensive understanding of the dynamics of the Mpox outbreak [5] and hindering the implementation of effective, data-driven policy-making [6]. Thus, modeling endeavors should be largely directed toward managing unreliable, temporally and spatially misaligned, incoherent, and incomplete data related to Mpox. Addressing data quality issues necessitated the development of strategies that acknowledge relevant uncertainties in the estimation process. The inferior quality of the data posed challenges to the application of highly sophisticated statistical models, which ideally require timely and high-quality data to yield accurate and reliable results. To achieve this, data-driven approaches, selecting a suitable parametric count distribution and a logistic-type time trend for the available aggregated data, should be preferred for, e.g., compartmental models [7]. To facilitate comprehensive research, anonymized data from real-time surveillance systems, designed with privacy safeguards, should be made openly accessible to all researchers. Such an approach aligns with the principles of the open-data community, fostering the rapid scientific progress crucial in addressing public health crises like the Mpox outbreak. Good-quality data feed reliable models, which provide outputs useful to plan policy interventions. Efforts should be directed towards evaluating the impact of both pharmaceutical interventions (PIs) and non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs). Nevertheless, most analyses during this period adopted a rather simple and often spurious correlational approach, with a few exceptions. It is essential to caution against relying solely on correlational studies for decision-making, as they pose the risk of basing decisions on coincidental relationships. Conversely, conducting rigorous causal studies to assess the effectiveness of pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical interventions demands disaggregated or individual data for estimating counterfactual models. Unfortunately, such granular data were not readily available during the initial stages of the pandemic.3. Molecular Aspects of Viral Replication and Immune Response3.1. Molecular Mechanisms of Viral ReplicationViral replication represents a complex and highly orchestrated process involving a series of molecular events aimed at hijacking the host cellular machinery to facilitate the production of viral progeny [8]. Upon successful entry into the host cell, which is facilitated by specific interactions between viral surface proteins and cellular receptors, the MPXV genome is uncoated and released into the cytoplasm [9]. This genome, composed of linear double-stranded DNA, encodes numerous genes responsible for various stages of viral replication. One of the key steps in viral replication is the initiation of viral DNA synthesis, mediated by the viral DNA polymerase complex. This enzyme complex utilizes host cell nucleotides to synthesize complementary DNA strands, ultimately leading to the production of full-length viral genomes [10]. Concurrently, viral mRNA transcripts are generated through the process of transcription, mediated by viral RNA polymerases. These transcripts serve as templates for the translation of viral proteins essential for replication, including enzymes involved in DNA synthesis, such as DNA helicases and DNA primases, as well as structural proteins required for the assembly of new viral particles. As the infection progresses, a cascade of late gene expression occurs, leading to the synthesis of additional viral proteins necessary for the assembly and maturation of virions. This includes structural proteins such as the major capsid protein, membrane proteins, and proteins involved in virion assembly and morphogenesis. The orchestrated expression of these late genes ensures the efficient production of infectious viral particles. Once assembled, mature virions are transported to the cell periphery and released from the infected cell, ready to infect neighboring cells and propagate the infection. Notably, the process of viral replication is tightly regulated and coordinated, with viral proteins interacting with host cell factors to modulate cellular processes and favor viral replication. Additionally, viral replication occurs in discrete intracellular compartments known as viral factories, where viral proteins and nucleic acids are concentrated to facilitate efficient replication and assembly. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying viral replication is essential for the development of targeted antiviral therapies and vaccines against MPXV and related orthopoxviruses (OPXVs). By elucidating the intricate interactions between the virus and the host cell during replication, researchers can identify novel targets for therapeutic intervention and devise strategies to disrupt viral replication and prevent the spread of infection. Moreover, insights into the molecular basis of viral replication can inform the design of attenuated or vectored vaccines capable of eliciting robust immune responses against MPXV, thereby providing long-term protection against infection [11]. Continued research into the molecular virology of MPXV replication will be crucial for advancing our understanding of virus–host interactions and developing effective strategies to combat this emerging infectious disease.3.2. Molecular Mechanism of Host Immune ResponseThe host immune response orchestrates a multifaceted defense against MPXV infection, encompassing both innate and adaptive immune mechanisms [12]. Upon encountering viral components, innate immune cells including dendritic cells, macrophages, and natural killer cells are swiftly activated, triggering an inflammatory cascade. This response is characterized by the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-1 (IL-1), and interferons (IFNs), which recruit and activate other immune cells to the site of infection [13]. Dendritic cells, key sentinels of the immune system, play a pivotal role in initiating the adaptive immune response against MPXV [14]. They capture viral antigens and migrate to lymphoid organs where they present these antigens to T cells. This process leads to the activation and clonal expansion of antigen-specific T cells, including CD4+ helper T cells and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. CD4+ T cells provide crucial help to B cells, facilitating their differentiation into antibody-secreting plasma cells and enhancing the production of neutralizing antibodies [15]. Meanwhile, CD8+ T cells directly target and eliminate infected cells through the release of cytotoxic granules containing perforin and granzymes, thereby limiting viral spread within the host. In addition to cellular immunity, humoral immunity mediated by B cells and antibodies constitutes a vital component of the host defense against MPXV. B cells undergo activation and differentiation into plasma cells upon encountering viral antigens, resulting in the production of virus-specific antibodies [16]. These antibodies can neutralize the virus by binding to viral surface proteins, preventing viral attachment and entry into host cells. Furthermore, antibodies can facilitate the clearance of viral particles by opsonization, marking them for phagocytosis by macrophages and neutrophils. The adaptive immune response mounted against MPXV infection also leads to the generation of immunological memory, conferring long-term protection against reinfection [12]. Memory T and B cells persist in the host following resolution of the acute infection, enabling a rapid and robust response upon re-exposure to the virus. Memory T cells exhibit enhanced effector functions and can quickly proliferate and differentiate into cytotoxic T cells upon encountering viral antigens, providing immediate protection against viral spread. Despite the host’s formidable immune response, MPXV has evolved various strategies to evade immune detection and establish persistent infection. The virus can modulate host cell signaling pathways involved in antigen presentation, impairing the recognition and elimination of infected cells by immune effectors. Additionally, MPXV encodes proteins that interfere with cytokine signaling pathways, dampening the host’s antiviral response and facilitating viral replication and dissemination [12]. Understanding the dynamic interplay between MPXV and the host immune system is paramount for the development of effective vaccines and therapeutics against MPXV infection. By elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying immune evasion and identifying key targets for intervention, researchers can design strategies to bolster host immunity and curtail viral spread. Moreover, insights into the host immune response to MPXV infection can inform the development of next-generation vaccines capable of eliciting robust and durable immunity against this emerging infectious disease.3.3. Evasion Strategies of the VirusMPXV has evolved sophisticated strategies to evade immune detection and establish persistent infection within the host [10]. For details on the various mechanisms through which MPXV can evade the immune system, see Figure 1. These evasion tactics target various components of the host immune response, allowing the virus to subvert antiviral defenses and promote its survival and dissemination. One strategy employed by MPXV involves the modulation of host innate immune signaling pathways. Upon infection, the virus encodes a range of immunomodulatory proteins that interfere with the production and signaling of host antiviral cytokines, including interferons (IFNs) and proinflammatory cytokines [17]. For instance, MPXV produces soluble cytokine decoy receptors, which competitively bind to host cytokines, preventing their interaction with cellular receptors and dampening the immune response [18]. Additionally, the virus secretes proteins that disrupt downstream signaling pathways activated by cytokine receptor engagement, thereby inhibiting the expression of antiviral genes and promoting viral replication. Furthermore, MPXV can evade immune detection by modulating host cell signaling pathways involved in antigen presentation and recognition [19]. The virus interferes with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigen presentation, either by downregulating MHC class I expression on infected cells or by inhibiting the processing and presentation of viral antigens. This impairs the recognition of infected cells by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), allowing MPXV to evade immune surveillance and establish persistent infection. Moreover, MPXV can inhibit the expression of co-stimulatory molecules on antigen-presenting cells, impairing T cell activation and proliferation in response to viral antigens [20]. Additionally, MPXV has evolved mechanisms to evade detection by the host adaptive immune system. The virus can undergo antigenic variation, generating diverse viral variants with altered antigenic profiles that evade recognition by neutralizing antibodies and T cells. This antigenic diversity enables MPXV to escape immune surveillance and persist in the host population. Furthermore, the virus can modulate the expression of viral antigens on the surface of infected cells, either by downregulating antigen presentation machinery or by masking antigenic epitopes with viral proteins. This reduces the susceptibility of infected cells to recognition and elimination by immune effectors, allowing MPXV to establish persistent infection within the host. Moreover, MPXV has developed mechanisms to evade host cell apoptosis, prolonging the survival of infected cells and facilitating viral replication and dissemination. The virus encodes proteins that inhibit apoptosis, either by interfering with the activation of proapoptotic signaling pathways or by directly blocking the execution of apoptotic cell death. This prolongs the lifespan of infected cells, allowing MPXV to replicate to high levels and spread to neighboring cells without triggering immune-mediated clearance. Overall, the evasion strategies employed by MPXV underscore the virus’s remarkable ability to subvert host immune defenses and establish persistent infection [21]. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying immune evasion is crucial for the development of effective countermeasures against MPXV infection. By elucidating the interplay between the virus and the host immune system, researchers can identify novel targets for therapeutic intervention and devise strategies to enhance host immunity and control viral spread. Moreover, insights into MPXV immune evasion mechanisms may inform the design of next-generation vaccines capable of eliciting robust and durable immune responses against this emerging infectious disease. Continued research into the immunopathogenesis of MPXV infection will be essential for advancing our understanding of virus–host interactions and improving clinical outcomes for infected individuals.4. Diagnostic Methods for MPXV4.1. Mpox Laboratory-Based Testing MethodsIdentifying Mpox based on symptoms alone is challenging due to the similarity in clinical manifestations caused by different OPVs [23]. Early detection is crucial for identifying infected individuals, alerting them to take timely isolation and treatment measures, and thereby reducing the virus spread and mitigating the impact of an outbreak [24]. There is an increasing need to develop diagnostic techniques that are highly sensitive, accurate, and capable of fast detection rates. Specifically, the test should be able to distinctly detect MPXV, no other similar viruses, with high sensitivity to ensure accurate and reliable results. It should detect minuscule amounts of MPXV and be able to identify the virus in the early stages of infection for effective outbreak prevention [25]. After an Mpox outbreak, quickly diagnosing the disease and detecting the causative strain is necessary. Since different clades may have varying epidemiological characteristics, understanding these can help formulate relevant epidemic prevention measures and facilitate vaccine development. However, branch testing for specific Mpox clades should only occur after confirming the virus as MPXV to avoid false negatives due to the virus’s evolution and the emergence of new branches. Currently, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) remains the most common technique for MPXV testing, although other methods like immunological assays and virus isolation from cell culture are also available [26]. This article reviews current laboratory techniques for MPXV detection, discusses progress in method improvement, and compares the strengths and limitations of various diagnostic tests. It aims to assist medical professionals in selecting suitable assays for different contexts and proposes novel assays that could enhance diagnosis and facilitate the development of new diagnostic tools.4.2. Nucleic Acid Amplification Testing (NAAT)Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) encompasses both real-time and conventional PCR techniques for the confirmation of MPXV infections. These methodologies are integral for the identification of unique viral DNA sequences that are characteristic of MPXV [27]. PCR, whether applied alone or in conjunction with sequencing, is essential for the delineation of viral clades, effectively differentiating between the Congo Basin (Clade I) and West African (Clade II) virus strains [28]. The formulation of validated PCR protocols has been the result of collective efforts across various research entities, yielding approaches that not only detect OPXV but also specifically identify MPXV, facilitating the distinction of its clades. The academic community has contributed extensively to this field, providing a plethora of primer and probe sequence sets that enable the development of in-house assays in well-equipped laboratories. Certain protocols employ a bifurcated strategy where an initial PCR reaction discerns the presence of OPXV without specifying the species, followed by a secondary PCR-based or sequencing effort to precisely identify MPXV clades or lineages [26]. The emergence of commercial PCR test kits targeting OPXV and MPXV has been noted, with performance evaluations underscoring those exhibiting superior sensitivity and specificity. The incorporation of positive control material, procured through specialized initiatives, is advocated to affirm the assay’s analytical performance. Implementing appropriate controls is paramount in preserving specimen and assay integrity, thereby mitigating false negatives and fortifying the reliability of the diagnostic process.4.3. Electron MicroscopyElectron microscopy offers a technique for the visual identification of potential poxviruses within specimens. However, due to the need for specific technical expertise, requisite facilities, and the proliferation of more accessible molecular assays, its application in MPXV diagnosis is not widespread [29,30]. Consequently, electron microscopy is infrequently utilized in the routine diagnostic assessment of poxviruses.4.4. Virus Isolation and CultureVirus isolation and culture are time-honored methods integral to diagnosing viral diseases, including MPXV. This process is crucial for in-depth characterization through sequencing, enabling the testing of antivirals, vaccine development, and the formulation of clinical applications and research methodologies [31]. Isolating viruses from key cases aids outbreak investigation and containment efforts by identifying the virus’s origin, pinpointing mutations, and reconstructing transmission chains through genomic and phenotypic comparisons among isolates. MPXV demonstrates robust growth in mammalian cell lines such as HeLa, Vero, BSC-1, and RK-13, as well as in chicken embryos, which are notably susceptible to poxviruses [32]. The virus induces cytopathic effects in the chorioallantois membranes (CAMs) of chicken embryos, evident 1–4 days post-inoculation, including cell rounding, granulation, cytoplasmic bridging, and syncytium formation [33]. Conversely, when cultured in Vero cells, typical rounded and detached cells become observable within approximately 24 h, allowing for virus particle identification through immunofluorescence and specific antibodies. Despite its accuracy, this method’s extensive detection timeframe, the requirement for high-level biosafety labs (level 3 or higher), and the need for skilled personnel, alongside the risk of infection even with full personal protection, significantly constrain its widespread application.4.5. SerologyThe use of serology for the clinical diagnosis of MPXV, particularly via the detection of antibodies in plasma or serum, is advised against when conducted in isolation [34]. The efficacy of MPXV-specific serological tests is diminished by the potential for cross-reactivity with antibodies against other orthopoxviruses and those elicited by vaccination, whether recent or historical. It is suggested that serological testing be confined to reference laboratories until further substantiation is provided for the use of serological or antibody-detecting point-of-care (POC) tests outside such settings [17]. If a serologically validated test is available within a reference laboratory, the detection of IgM in recently acutely ill patients or IgG in paired serum specimens—collected at least 21 days apart from the initial sample obtained during the first week of illness—can augment diagnostic accuracy when other test results are inconclusive [35]. This approach emphasizes the nuanced role of serology in the diagnostic framework, underscoring its potential utility under specific conditions and within the confines of rigorous validation and application standards.4.6. Whole-Genome Sequencing (WGS)WGS, a pinnacle of next-generation sequencing technology, sequences an organism’s entire genome. It stands as the most precise method for differentiating MPXV from other orthopoxviruses (OPVs), offering expansive pathogen coverage beyond other molecular diagnostics [36]. WGS facilitates comprehensive bioinformatic analyses, promoting advanced virological study and the development of associated immunoassays. It excels in identifying specific strains and genetic variants, potentially elucidating outbreak origins, especially in cases of unknown transmission chains [37]. Additionally, WGS data can trace the virus’s genetic evolution, shedding light on its adaptation across diverse hosts and environments and identifying genetic markers for antiviral resistance or severe disease manifestations. Moreover, WGS enables the high-resolution mapping of MPXV phylogeny and biogeography, inferring virus migration patterns by comparing genome sequences from various outbreaks. Recognized increasingly as a vital tool in epidemiologic research, WGS’s contributions are instrumental in disease treatment, vaccine development, and the formulation of targeted outbreak prevention and control strategies. However, the technique’s demand for substantial computational resources, alongside high operational costs, limits its applicability to large-scale testing. The implementation of WGS faces challenges, including practical, ethical, and scientific considerations, requiring ongoing development and thoughtful policymaking [37]. While not suited for point-of-care testing due to these constraints, WGS’s insights are valuable for enhancing other diagnostic approaches. Its application primarily benefits research initiatives and specific case analyses, supported by the establishment of MPXV databases to consolidate findings.5. Public Health ImplicationsVaccination remains one of the most effective strategies to prevent and control Mpox outbreaks. The live-attenuated vaccine against Mpox, derived from vaccinia virus strains, has demonstrated its effectiveness in preventing severe disease and reducing transmission [38]. In endemic regions, targeted vaccination campaigns are essential to reach high-risk populations, including health workers, animal handlers, and individuals residing or traveling in affected areas [39]. In addition, routine immunization programs should be strengthened to ensure widespread vaccination coverage, particularly among children and adolescents [40]. Another crucial component is the early detection of Mpox cases, which is essential to initiate timely control measures and prevent further transmission. Strengthening surveillance systems, both nationally and internationally, is essential for early case identification and outbreak response [41]. Surveillance efforts should include syndromic surveillance, laboratory surveillance, and improved case-reporting mechanisms to facilitate rapid data collection and analysis [42]. In addition, the integration of One Health approaches that include animal health surveillance can provide early warning signals of potential spillover events from wildlife reservoirs to humans [43]. Moreover, strategic stockpiling and distribution of medical countermeasures are critical aspects of preparedness and response strategies for managing Mpox outbreaks. Adequate preparedness involves ensuring the availability of essential medical supplies, such as antiviral medications and personal protective equipment (PPE), to effectively mitigate the impact of outbreaks [44,45]. National and international collaboration is essential to ensure the timely procurement, stockpiling, and distribution of medical countermeasures. Health agencies at both levels should work together to assess the current stockpile levels, identify potential gaps, and coordinate procurement efforts to meet the anticipated demand during outbreaks. Furthermore, mechanisms for rapid deployment of medical supplies should be established to ensure swift response to outbreaks. This includes developing logistical plans for distribution, establishing communication channels for coordination among stakeholders, and implementing protocols for accessing and distributing medical countermeasures to affected areas [46]. Capacity-building efforts are also crucial to enhance preparedness and response capabilities. Healthcare workers should receive training on the proper use of PPE, including donning and doffing procedures, to minimize the risk of transmission during patient care [47]. Additionally, training programs should be implemented to ensure healthcare workers are proficient in administering vaccines and antiviral medications according to established guidelines. Community engagement and risk communication play pivotal roles in mitigating the impact of Mpox outbreaks by fostering awareness, building trust, and encouraging preventive behaviors within affected communities. Effective risk communication involves the dissemination of clear, culturally sensitive information about the signs and symptoms of Mpox, the significance of vaccination, and preventive measures like hand hygiene and avoiding contact with sick animals. Research indicates that tailored messaging delivered through various channels, including social media platforms [48] and news media [49], can effectively reach diverse populations and improve understanding of preventive measures. Public health authorities should collaborate with community leaders, religious institutions, and other stakeholders to develop and disseminate culturally appropriate educational materials and messages. Community-based organizations can serve as trusted sources of information and assist in reaching marginalized or hard-to-reach populations, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of risk communication efforts [50,51]. Furthermore, engaging with communities in a two-way dialogue fosters trust, addresses concerns, and promotes active participation in outbreak response efforts. Research suggests that involving community members in decision-making processes and soliciting feedback on intervention strategies can improve community acceptance and compliance with recommended measures [52,53]. Finally, international collaboration and coordination are indispensable components in managing Mpox outbreaks because of their propensity to spread across national borders. Such collaborative efforts are critical for pooling resources, sharing information, and coordinating response strategies among affected countries and international partners. Several key regional and global health organizations, including the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (Africa CDC), serve as crucial facilitators in this regard. For example, during the 2018 Mpox outbreak in Nigeria, the WHO collaborated with national health authorities to conduct epidemiological surveys, deploy rapid response teams, and assist with case management and surveillance. International cooperation in response to Mpox outbreaks should prioritize several key areas, including:Supporting outbreak response efforts: International partners can assist affected countries in deploying rapid response teams, establishing isolation and treatment facilities, and implementing control measures such as case detection, contact tracing, and vaccination campaigns [54].Strengthening laboratory capacity: Enhancing laboratory diagnostics and surveillance capabilities is crucial for the timely detection and confirmation of Mpox cases. International collaboration can support the establishment of laboratory networks, training of personnel, and procurement of diagnostic reagents and equipment [55].Conducting research: Research efforts should focus on advancing the understanding of Mpox epidemiology, transmission dynamics, and host–pathogen interactions. International collaboration enables the sharing of research findings, data analysis, and coordination of multicenter studies to address knowledge gaps and inform evidence-based interventions [56].6. DiscussionMpox is usually a self-limiting disease and typically lasts 2 to 4 weeks. Some people may develop more severe disease and require hospitalization. The prognosis of the disease depends on multiple factors including previous vaccination status, the person’s initial health status, concomitant diseases, and comorbidities. After an incubation period that can vary from 5 to 21 days, the disease is generally characterized by: a prodromal phase, which lasts between 0 and 5 days, with fever, intense headache, lymphadenopathy, myalgia, and intense asthenia. Lymphadenopathy is a distinctive feature of Mpox compared to other diseases that may initially appear similar (chickenpox), a rash that usually presents within 1–3 days of the onset of fever, typically starting on the face (involved in 95% of cases) and then spreading to other parts of the body, especially the extremities. The oral mucous membranes (in 70% of cases), the genitals (30% of cases), and the conjunctivae (20%) may also be involved. The rash generally progresses sequentially from macules to papules. The 2022–2023 Mpox outbreak marked a significant deviation from previous patterns of transmission, clinical presentation, and affected populations, highlighting the evolving nature of infectious diseases in a globalized world. The outbreak, first identified in the United Kingdom on 6 May 2022, quickly spread across 35 European countries and territories by 13 July 2022 [57], underscoring the rapidity with which Mpox can disseminate beyond traditionally endemic regions. A notable aspect of this outbreak was the change in the clinical picture of Mpox [58]. Historically, Mpox has predominantly affected children in endemic regions. However, the recent epidemic has shown a significant demographic shift, with most cases now occurring in adults. This change is partly attributed to transmission patterns and perhaps changes in immunity within the population over time. In particular, the epidemic has been particularly prevalent among men who have sex with men (MSM), suggesting new dynamics in the spread of the virus. The recent outbreak also observed changes in the typical distribution of the rash, with more frequent lesions on the face, genitalia, and mucous membranes. This differs from previous observations, in which the rash distribution was more widespread throughout the body. The concentration of lesions in more localized areas, including sensitive regions, underscores the need for healthcare providers to be alert and aware of these changes to make accurate diagnoses. Prodromal symptoms, which occur before the appearance of the characteristic rash, have also evolved. Patients often report experiencing a prodromal phase that includes fever, intense headache, lymphadenopathy (swelling of lymph nodes), myalgia (muscle pain), and intense asthenia (weakness). Lymphadenopathy, in particular, has been noted as a distinguishing feature of Mpox compared with similar diseases, such as chickenpox, and its presence may be a key differentiator in clinical diagnosis. A study conducted in an Italian research hospital [59] during the 2022 outbreak provided insights into the clinical presentation of Mpox. It showed mostly mild symptoms with complete resolution after 7–10 days without the need for antiviral therapy. This outbreak showed a shift in transmission routes, particularly through unprotected sexual intercourse, with most lesions concentrated in the genital and perianal areas. Interestingly, subjects vaccinated against smallpox showed milder symptoms, suggesting a protective effect.Our analysis tries to remark on the objectivity of an infectious disease mainly due to travel in notoriously endemic areas, a disease which can then be transmitted in different ways, including predominantly sexual ones without protection, regardless of sexual orientation. Our article emphasized on the need to inform people traveling in areas at risk to resort to vaccination, which exists and is available, moreover, at a territorial level widespread information on this disease and surveillance are important. In light of the evolving epidemiology of Mpox, as evidenced by the 2022–2023 outbreak, our work reiterates the need for continued research, surveillance, and adaptive public health interventions to effectively address this evolving threat. The knowledge gained from recent outbreaks should inform future strategies to mitigate the spread of Mpox, underscoring the importance of a coordinated international response to emerging infectious diseases. Moreover, the recent outbreak also emphasizes the critical role of vaccination and public health awareness in controlling the spread of Mpox. With vaccines available, efforts must be intensified to promote vaccination among high-risk groups, especially individuals traveling to endemic areas. Public health campaigns should focus on raising awareness about the modes of Mpox transmission, emphasizing the importance of preventive measures including vaccination, safe sexual practices, and personal hygiene.


Title: Mpox animal models: a comprehensive evaluation of susceptible species for pathogenesis studies and drug discovery

IntroductionMonkeypox virus (MPV), a member of the Orthopoxvirus genus in the Poxviridae family, was first isolated in 1958 from cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) after a pox-like illness was observed in a laboratory colony [1]. Although initially characterized in non-human primates (NHPs), MPV is now recognized as a zoonotic pathogen with a broad host range. It is capable of infecting various wildlife reservoirs and spilling over to humans, with the first documented human MPV infection occurring in 1970 in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo; DRC). Cross-species transmission is initiated following skin or mucosal contact between humans and an infected animal. Human-to-human transmission is mainly mediated by close contact, although airborne transmission has been reported in some cases [2]. In humans, mpox often presents with an initial prodrome of fever, headache, lack of energy, myalgia, lymphadenopathy, and sore throat following a 5- to 21-day incubation period (average 7–8 days). The characteristic rash that evolves through macular, papular, vesicular, and pustular stages usually occurs within a few days after the onset of fever and lymphadenopathy and usually resolves within 2–4 weeks. The number of lesions varies and can range from a few to several thousand [3]. More than 150,000 confirmed cases have been reported globally by the World Health Organization (WHO) since the beginning of 2022 with a case-fatality ratio (CFR) of 0.25%. Prior to 2022, the CFR for mpox has been reported to range between 1% and 10%, depending on the clade and availability of supportive care given the lack of mpox-specific treatments.Subsequent surveillance efforts, combined with the emergence of the first U.S. outbreak in 2003, have underscored the virus’s capacity to spread globally [4]. Early genomic investigations, conducted in 2005, revealed two distinct MPV clades, categorized by their Central African (Congo Basin) or West African origins [5]. However, the global mpox outbreak during 2022–2023 prompted concerns over stigma and led to a formal reclassification of MPV clades following a WHO–led meeting in August 2022. As a result, the traditional Congo Basin/Central African clade was redesignated as Clade I (encompassing subclades Ia and Ib), whereas the West African clade became Clade II (encompassing subclades IIa and IIb). Initially, the 2018–2022 outbreak was attributed to a West African–related virus (termed Clade 3), but by October 2022, it was more precisely defined as subclade Clade IIb [6]. In contrast, the historical 2003 U.S. outbreak – associated with imported rodents from Ghana – has now been placed within Clade IIa, which sparked infections in prairie dogs housed at a vendor facility in Illinois and led to human cases in six states, primarily through animal-to-person contact [7]. Notably, Clade IIa has demonstrated limited person-to-person transmission compared to Clade IIb, which has exhibited robust capacity for human-to-human spread [8]. This enhanced transmission has been associated mainly with sexual practices and as such, the clinical presentation associated with Clade IIb infection differs from the typical disease described above. Instead, clinical disease is often milder, with lesions limited to mucosal, perigenital, or perianal areas [9]. Similarly, Clade Ia represents the more established Central African MPV lineage, historically known to cause higher virulence and transmissibility, whereas Clade Ib is a recently characterized lineage circulating in the DRC [10]. These genomic and epidemiological distinctions are critical for understanding mpox pathogenesis, identifying transmission patterns, and informing public health interventions. Critically, tecovirimat (also known as TPOXX) is a drug approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of smallpox (caused by the variola virus) and hopes that it was efficacious for the treatment of mpox were high. Unfortunately, while shown in clinical trials to be safe, the drug has also proved ineffective at reducing symptoms intensity and duration against both Clade I and Clade II mpox [11,12]. Now, alternative therapies such as monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are being explored, and have been reviewed elsewhere [13].Given the substantial global burden of mpox and its potential for widespread outbreaks, research efforts to develop effective therapeutics and vaccines have intensified. The creation and refinement of animal models that accurately replicate human disease remain pivotal for evaluating potential countermeasures. In this review, we synthesize the most recent information on MPV cladistic distinctions and discuss the currently available animal models. We place particular emphasis on how these models are used to study pathogenesis, explore transmission dynamics, and test emerging therapeutics and vaccine candidates, thereby providing a comprehensive resource for investigators seeking to address mpox at the bench and bedside.Non-human primate models (NHPs)Cynomolgus macaques (CMs)MPV was originally identified in 1958, when laboratory workers observed diseased CMs in a research colony that developed a petechial rash. This rash rapidly evolved into maculopapular eruptions that frequently became umbilicated on the face, limbs, tail, and trunk of animals, with a predominance on the palms of their hands and the soles of their feet. No other clinical signs were apparent at necropsy or before the development of pox-like lesions. Following isolation of the virus, intradermal inoculation into a naïve animal resulted in a single pustule with surrounding edema 7 days post-infection (dpi) at the site of injection and a slight fever at 5–9 dpi [1]. In 1960, Prier et al. reported that intradermal (i.d.), intravenous (i.v.), and subcutaneous (s.c.) injection of MPV (Strain 1744, unknown clade) resulted in a more pronounced clinical disease with cutaneous lesions, laboured breathing, facial swelling, and lymphadenopathy in challenged NHPs [14–16]. In contrast with the limited clinical disease described above, an aerosol challenge of CMs with 6 × 105–9 × 105 egg infectious units of MPV resulted in coughing, cutaneous lesions, inappetence, and reduced activity, culminating in 50% (2/4) mortality. Upon necropsy, cytoplasmic inclusions in the respiratory epithelium were noted, as well as lymphoid depletion and necrosis in the spleen [17]. Given their historical relevance, CMs have been extensively characterized as a disease model. A thorough histopathological study by Wenner et al. showed that inoculation of MPV into the skeletal muscle resulted in swelling and induration of affected tissues, often resulting in inflammation and cellular destruction of the connective tissue. Spleens of infected animals were moderately enlarged, with diffuse and follicular hyperplasia, cell necrosis in germinal centres, and phagocytic cells within vascular sinuses. Gross examination of the kidneys did not reveal any abnormalities, but basophilic cells were found in the cortical zone of the medulla and the medullary ray [18,19]. Interestingly, a head-to-head comparison of challenged CMs and rhesus macaques (RMs, which are detailed further in the following section) highlighted a more pronounced disease course in CMs, with the onset of lesions occurring 18–48 h earlier and more frequently and apparent [20] than in RMs.Aerosol exposure, too, was established as a reliable challenge route for NHPs. Zaucha et al. reported that aerosol challenge of CMs with 1 × 104–1.41 × 105 plaque-forming units (PFU) of MPXV-V79-I-005 (Clade Ia) resulted in uniform death of animals 9–17 dpi. Initial clinical signs were noted 6–10 dpi and included cough, enanthema, exanthema, fever, inappetence, lesions, and nasal discharge. The main gross pathological findings included bronchopneumonia, colitis, dermatitis, glossitis, and stomatitis. Lungs were congested, failed to collapse, and necrosis was present throughout all lobes [21]. Of note, the uniform lethality of an aerosol challenge model using MPXV-V79-I-005 (Clade Ia) has not been reported consistently, with other studies reporting a lethality ranging between 33–83% for doses of 2.51 × 104–3.53 × 107 PFU. Nonetheless, the main clinical features and average time to death across studies was consistent, ranging between 8–16 dpi [22–26]. This challenge route was subsequently used to highlight virulence differences between different isolates (see Refs [27–30])Despite its usefulness for rapidly causing fulminant disease, the i.v.-challenge model has been criticized for the high inoculum required. Recent work by Mucker et al. attempted to reduce the dose of virus required for this challenge route by enriching the challenge virus in enveloped virions which have an extra lipid membrane and harbour different surface proteins, in opposition to mature virions which are released through a lysis process. However, they reported no differences in clinical disease or lethality and were unsuccessful in reducing the challenge dose [31,32]. An additional critique of the i.v.-challenge model is its lack of resemblance to human disease. As an alternative, intrabronchial (i.b.) challenge was evaluated in a dose-escalating challenge against the classical i.v. route. Ultimately, classical pox-like disease was observed for both routes when CMs were challenged with 5 × 106 PFU (i.b.) or 5 × 107 PFU (i.v.), although key clinical events, i.e. fever and lesion onset, peak viremia, viral shedding in nasal and oral swabs, and ultimately death, were delayed in i.b.-challenged NHPs [33]. In response to the mpox-associated public health emergency of international concern declared from 2022–2023, an additional refinement of the current CM model was proposed using a then-circulating strain, WIBP-MPXV-001 (Clade IIb). A challenge using 1.2 × 108 PFU delivered by the combined intraocular, intraoral, intrarectal, and s.c. routes resulted in a disease profile much closer to that observed in humans. NHPs exhibited inappetence and lesions by 3 dpi, with clinical signs worsening up to 7–11 dpi before convalescence [34]. Some NHP studies have also shown the feasibility and value of using advanced imaging to study MPV pathogenesis [35,36].As a key historical model for MPV, CMs have been extensively used for the evaluation of MCMs. Using the stringent i.v.-challenge model described above, Earl et al. showed the efficacy of both the Dryvax and Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA)-based vaccines in protecting CMs from the development of lesions, overall disease, and death. A homologous prime-boost using the MVA vaccine or heterologous vaccination using MVA then Dryvax, resulted in equivalent or higher binding and neutralizing antibodies, as well as T-cell responses. Interestingly, only vaccine regimens containing Dryvax provided complete protection from lesion development, a key marker of disease severity in this model [30]. Following this pivotal study, CMs have been extensively used for the evaluation of numerous vaccines (Refs [37–48]) and therapeutics (see Table 1 and Refs [49–57]).
Table 1.Non-human primate models of MPV infection.AnimalAge/weightVirusLethalityViral distribution and sheddingImmune responseClinical signsPathologyTransmissionRef  Isolate (Clade)RouteDose% (N)TTD      Cynomolgus macaquen/aCopenhagen (IIa)IDn/an/an/an/an/aEdema and local lesion at injection site, feverNonen/a[1]Cynomolgus macaquen/aStrain 1744 (n/a)ID, IV, SCn/an/an/an/an/aFacial swelling, laboured breathing, lesions, lymphadenopathy.n/an/a[14–16]Cynomolgus macaque3–6 lbsn/aAerosol6 × 105–9 × 105 egg infectious units50% (2/4)n/aEuthanasia: Liver, lung, lymph node, skin, spleen,n/aCoryza, coughing, fever, inappetence, lesions, reduced activityCytoplasmic inclusions in the respiratory epithelium, exanthem, lymphoid depletion and necrosis in the spleenn/a[17]Cynomolgus macaqueImmature/∼2.2kgn/aIDID + Conj.IMIVn/a0% (0/3)0% (0/3)0% (0/3)0% (0/3)n/a2–3 dpi: Blood; 6 dpi: Spleen; 7 dpi: Lungs, lymph node, thymus, testes; 11 dpi: CNSAntibodies detected by HI and neutralization assaysFever, lesions, weight lossEdema and necrosis of the lymph nodes andSentinel NHPs in the room developed antibodies[20]Cynomolgus macaquen/aStrain 10001 (n/a)IMn/an/an/an/an/an/aInflammation, cellular hyperplasia, cell degeneration and necrosis of the bone marrow, lymph nodes mucous membranes, ovaries, pancreas skeletal muscle, skin, spleen, testes, tonsilsn/a[16,18]Cynomolgus macaque∼1.8kgStrain 10001 (n/a)IM10−1–10−6 dilutions0% (0/5 per dilution)n/a4 dpi: Blood, gastrocnemius muscle; 6 dpi: Renal tissue, spleen, tonsil; 7 dpi: Bone marrow, lymph nodesAntibodies detected by HI and neutralization assaysFever, lesionsn/a3/4 sentinel animals developed lesions; antibodies detected in 4/4 sentinel animals by HI assay[19]Cynomolgus macaque1.5–2kgn/aIM100 ID5075% (3/4)15-–23 dpi5 dpi: BloodAntibodies detected by CF, HI, and neutralization assaysFever, lesions, torpor, weaknessCellular proliferation, degeneration, inflammation, and necrosis of the lymph nodes, mucous membranes, skin, spleen, and testesn/a[49]Cynomolgus macaqueJuvenile to adult/1.6-4.7kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)Aerosol1 × 104–1.41 × 105 PFU100% (15/15)9–17 dpiEuthanasia: Adrenal gland, kidney, liver, lung, spleenn/aCough, dyspnea, enanthema, exanthema, fever, inappetence, lesions, nasal dischargeBronchopneumonia, lymphadenitis, tonsillitis, tracheitisn/a[21]Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU33% (2/6)15–18 dpiPost-challenge: BloodAntibodies detected by ELISAFever, lesions, reduced activity, weight lossn/an/a[30]Cynomolgus macaqueJuvenile to adult/1.6-4.7kgMPXV-COP-58 (IIa)Aerosol110 PFU0% (0/3)n/an/an/an/an/an/a[27]    2 × 104 PFU0% (0/3)   Enanthem     MPXV-ZAI-79 (Ia) 90 PFU0% (0/3)   Cough, depression, enanthem, exanthem       5 × 104 PFU100% (3/3)9–11 dpi      Cynomolgus macaqueSubadultMSF#6 (Likely Ia)IT106 PFU0% (0/3)n/a4 dpi: Blood, throat swabn/aFever, lesions, reduced activityGlossitis, pulmonary lesions, reactive lymph nodes, tracheitisn/a[38]    107 PFU100% (3/3)15–19 dpi  Conjunctivitis, dyspnea, fever, inappetence, lesions, nasal discharge, reduced activityFibrinonecrotic bronchopneumonia, lymphadenitis, necrotizing glossitis, splenitis, tracheitis  Cynomolgus macaque2- to 4-year oldMPXV MSF#6 (Likely Ia)IT107 PFU100% (6/6)9–15 dpi5 dpi: Plasman/aDyspnea, inappetence, morbidity, lesions, low blood oxygen saturationn/an/a[50]Cynomolgus macaque3- to 4-year old/2.18-3.1kgLiberia (IIa)IN1 × 106 PFU0% (0/2)n/a4 dpi: PBMCsAntibodies detected by ELISA and PRNT assaysConjunctival discharge, diarrhea, inappetence, lesions, reduced activity, rhinorrhea, weight lossGranulomatous and nodular lesions in lungs, inflammatory cell accumulation and necrosis of the nasal cavity, lesions in lymph nodes, thymus, and tonsilsn/a[42,43]  Zr-599 (Ia)SC 100% (2/2) 3 dpi: PBMCs Lesions, weight lossLesions in bladder, liver, lymph nodes, ovaries, stomach, tonsils, thymus  Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-V-79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU33% (1/3)12 dpiPost-challenge: Bloodn/aFever, lesions, weight lossn/an/a[44]Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 106 PFU67% (4/6)12–14 dpin/aAntibodies detected by ELISAFever, inappetence, lesions, reduced activityn/an/a[41]    5 × 107 PFU100% (4/4)5–7 dpi      Cynomolgus macaque6.2 ± 0.7 years/6.2 ± 1.3kgZaire 79 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (n/a)7–15 dpi1–4 dpi: Bloodn/aFever, vesiculopustular rashLymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, pulmonary edeman/a[54]Cynomolgus macaque3- to 6-year old/2-4kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU66% (4/6)9–14 dpiEuthanasia: Lung, lymph node, skinAntibodies detected by ELISA and PRNT assaysDisseminated intravascular coagulation, inappetence, low body temperature, respiratory distress, severe lesions, shockLymphadenopathy, lung congestion and edema, splenomegalyn/a[51,52]Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (3/3)11–14 dpi3 dpi: Blood, bone marrow, brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, lymph nodes, spleen, testesn/aLesionsn/an/a[57]Cynomolgus macaque2.32–4.08kgLiberia (IIa)IN1 × 106 PFU0% (0/2)n/a8 dpi: BloodAntibodies detected by ELISADiarrhea, inappetence, lesionsn/an/a[28,29]   SC 33% (1/3)18 dpi3 dpi: Blood Diarrhea, fever, inappetence, lesions, weight loss     Zr-599 (Ia)IN 0% (0/2)n/a3 dpi: Blood Inappetence, lesions, reduced activity      SC 75% (3/4)13–18 dpi3 dpi: Blood Diarrhea, fever, inappetence, lesions, reduced activity, weight lossGranulomatous lesions in colon, small intestine, and stomach  Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV2 × 107 PFU100% (5/5)11–15 dpin/an/aDepression, lesions, reduced activityn/an/a[45]     100% (3/3)8 dpi      Cynomolgus macaqueAdultMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)Aerosol4 × 104 PFU67% (2/3)9–11 dpi4 dpi: Blood, throat swab; Euthanasia: Gonad, kidney, lung, lymph node, spleenn/aInappetence, fever, lesions, lymphadenopathy, reduced activityFibrinonecrotic bronchopneumonia, necrotic lesions in the gastrointestinal tract, gonads, lymphoid organs, mucosal surfaces, skinn/a[22,23]    1 × 105 PFU67% (4/6)8–10 dpi          4 × 105 PFU83% (5/6)8–11 dpi          1 × 106 PFU67% (2/3)8–9 dpi      Cynomolgus macaque10-year oldZaire 79 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (3/3)9–15 dpi3 dpi: Bloodn/aFever, lesions, weight lossn/an/a[46]Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)Aerosol3.42 × 106 PFU33% (1/3)12 dpi4 dpi: Bloodn/aFever, lesions, weight lossBronchopneumonia, lymphadenopathy, necrotizing or ulcerative lesions in the esophagus, stomach, and urinary bladdern/a[24]    8.37 × 106 PFU67% (2/3)12–16 dpi2 dpi: Blood         3.53 × 107 PFU67% (2/3)8 dpi      Cynomolgus macaqueAdultMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (8/8)8–14 dpiPost-challenge: Bloodn/aFever, lesions, weight lossn/an/a[47]Cynomolgus macaque3-6kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 104 PFU0% (0/3)n/an/an/aCoughing, dyspnea, fever, inappetence, lesions, lymphadenopathy, reduced activityn/an/a[33]    5 × 105 PFU0% (0/3)           5 × 106 PFU17% (1/6)15 dpi2 dpi: Blood; 4 dpi: Oral swab; 7 dpi: Nasal swab; Euthanasia: Lungs, lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, tongue, tracheaNeutralizing antibodies detected 5–6 dpi        5 × 107 PFU83% (5/6)7–13 dpi2 dpi: Blood, oral swab; 4 dpi: Nasal swab; Euthanasia: Lungs, lymph nodes, spleen, thymus, tongue, trachea  Edema and necrosis of the lungs     IB5 × 104 PFU0% (0/3)n/an/an/a n/a      5 × 105 PFU17% (1/6)9 dpi2 dpi: Blood; 5 dpi: Oral and nasal swabNeutralizing antibodies detected 7–8 dpi        5 × 106 PFU67% (2/3)19–21 dpi3 dpi: Blood; 5 dpi: Oral swab; 7 dpi: Nasal swab; Euthanasia: Lungs, lymph node, tongue  Edema, fibrin deposition and fibrosis, pleuritis, pulmonary consolidation, viral pneumonia  Cynomolgus macaque3–4kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IB5 × 105 PFU50% (1/2)17 dpin/an/aFever, lesions, lymphadenopathy, weight lossLymph node necrosis and lymphoid depletionn/a[35]   IV5 × 106 PFU50% (1/2)12 dpi   Lung consolidation  Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-Zaire-79 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (5/5)9–13 dpiPost-challenge: Bloodn/aFever, lesions, lymphadenopathyfocal necrosis of GI tract lining, pulmonary and spleen congestionn/a[36]  MPXV-Zaire-79/GFP (Ia)  100% (4/4)9–18 dpi      Cynomolgus macaquen/aMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV2 × 107 PFU75% (3/4)Euthanized by 15 dpi3 dpi: BloodAntibodies detected by PRNT assayFever, lesions, weight lossn/an/a[48]Cynomolgus macaque3.0–10.1kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)Aerosol2.51 × 104–9.28 × 105 PFU67% (4/6)7–10 dpi4 dpi: Blood, oral swab; Euthanasia: Brain, heart, lungsn/aLesions, lymphadenopathyEdema, hemorrhage, inflammation, and lymphoid necrosis in the bronchial lymph nodes, lungs, skin, tongue, lung discolorationn/a[26]Cynomolgus macaque2- to 4-year old/2.5-4.5kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)Aerosol2.6 × 105 PFU100% (6/6)7–11 dpi3 dpi: Throat swab; 6 dpi: Blood; Euthanasia: adrenal gland, brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, lymph node, spleen, tonsiln/aLesions, weight lossBronchopneumonia, enlarged spleen, focal necrosis in the lymph nodes, tonsils, and spleen, lung consolidationn/a[37]Cynomolgus macaque>2-year old/>2.5kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)Aerosol1 × 105 PFUSerial sacrifice study2 dpi: Lung; 4 dpi: Spleen, throat swab, tonsils; 6 dpi: CSF, lymph node, tongue; 8 dpi: Blood, heart, kidneyAntibodies detected by ELISA at 10 dpiCoughing, dyspnea, fever, inappetence, lymphadenopathy, weight lossInflammation and necrosis in the lungs, inflammatory cells in tracheobronchial lymph node, lesions in spleen and tonsilsn/a[25]Cynomolgus macaquen/aZaire 79 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (8/8)7–12 dpiPost-challenge: BloodAntibodies detected by PRNT assayFever, lesions, weight lossn/an/a[55]Cynomolgus macaque2- to 7-year oldMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)Aerosol1.83 × 104–3.23 × 105 PFU75% (6/8)9–13 dpi4 dpi: Bloodn/aHunched posture, lesions, minimal stool and urine output, reduced activity, respiratory distress (coughing, nasal discharge, sneezing), weight lossn/an/a[56]Cynomolgus macaque2- to 8-year old/2.55-8.08kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (3/3)8–11 dpiPost-challenge: BloodAntibodies detected by PRNT 6 dpiLesionsn/an/a[53]Cynomolgus macaqueAdultZaire (Likely Ia)IV2.8 × 105 PFU0% (0/3)n/aPost-challenge: Blood; 3 dpi: Oral swabn/aLesions, lymphadenopathyLymphoid hyperplasia in lymphoid organs, subpleural necrosisn/a[31]Cynomolgus macaque5- to 8-year old/3–9kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IT5.0 log10 PFU50% (2/4)9–12 dpi3 dpi: Blood; 6 dpi: Throat swabn/aLesions, weight lossn/an/a[39]Cynomolgus macaque2.5- to 5.5-year oldMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IT5 × 107 PFU83% (5/6)6–12 dpi3 dpi: BloodAntibodies detected by PRNTLesions, weight lossLung and lymph node inflammationn/a[92]Cynomolgus macaque6- to 8-year old/3.7–9.1kgMPXV Z79 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU83% (5/6)7–11 dpiPost-challenge: Blood; 1 dpi: Throat swabAntibodies detected by PRNT assayLesions, weight lossn/an/a[40]Cynomolgus macaque5- to 6-year oldWIBP-MPXV-001 (IIb)IOc + IOr + IR + SC1.2 × 108 PFU0% (0/3)n/a1 dpi: Nasal, oral, and rectal swab; 3 dpi: Blood; 7 dpi: Ocular secretions; Euthanasia: Brain, GI tract, LNs, lungs, skin, spleenAntibodies detected by ELISA and PRNT assays at 9 dpiHunched posture, inappetence, lesions, lymphadenopathy, reduced activityHemorrhagic ulcers, interstitial pneumonia, splenomegalyn/a[34]MarmosetAdult/>300gMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV48 PFU100% (3/3 per dose)14–15 dpiPost-challenge: BloodUnclear by PRNTMild weight loss, lesions, lymphadenopathy, reduced activityHemorrhage in the bladder and testes, hepatocellular degeneration, liver lesions, necrotic lymph nodes, white pleural lesionsn/a[71]    510 PFU 12–13 dpi          5 × 103 PFU 9–10 dpi          7.8 × 104 PFU 9 dpi          9.5 × 105 PFU 9–10 dpi          2.4 × 107 PFU 6–8 dpi      MarmosetAdult/233-437gMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IN100 PFU0% (0/3)n/an/an/aNonen/an/a[72]    1 × 103 PFU100% (3/3)15 dpi9 dpi: Blood; 12 dpi: Oral swab Dyspnea, edema, lesions, nasal discharge, photophobia, unresponsiveness       5 × 103 PFU100% (1/1)15 dpi      Rhesus macaquen/aCopenhagen (IIa)IDn/a0% (0/2)n/an/an/aNonen/an/a[1]Rhesus macaquen/aStrain 1744 (n/a)IVn/an/an/an/an/aGeneralized rashn/an/a[15]   Scar.     Local lesions   Rhesus macaquen/aCopenhagen (IIa)IMn/a0% (0/9)n/a6 dpi: Blood, spleen; 11 dpi: Lymph nodesAntibodies detected by HI and neutralization assaysExanthema, fever, lesionsn/an/a[20]Rhesus macaque3.8–8.4kgMPOV-Z79 (Ia)IV5 × 106 PFU0% (0/2)n/an/an/aFever, lesionsn/an/a[58]    5 × 108 PFU100% (2/2)6 dpi  Coagulation abnormalities, organ-hemorrhagic disease, rash       2 × 107 PFU100% (3/3)7–14 dpi2 dpi: Blood; 4 dpi: Throat swabAntibodies detected by ELISA and PRNT assaysCoagulation abnormalities, fever, lesions, lymphadenopathyBone marrow necrosis, hemorrhage in the bladder, digestive tract, heart, lungs, lymph nodes, and uterus, pulmonary edema  Rhesus macaquen/aZaire 79 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (2/2)13–14 dpi4 dpi: Blood and throat swabsn/aLesions, severe diseasen/an/a[64]Rhesus macaquen/aZaire 79 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFU100% (1/1)11 dpiPost-challenge: Bloodn/aLesionsn/an/a[67]Rhesus macaque4- to 7-year oldMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IB2 × 105 PFUn/an/an/an/an/an/an/a[59]Rhesus macaque4- to 9-year oldMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IB2 × 105 PFU0% (0/4)n/a4 dpi: Blood; 7 dpi: BALAntibodies detected by ELISA; B- and T-cell responses characterized by flow cytometryCoughing, fever, laboured breathing, lesionsn/an/a[60]Rhesus macaque3.9–7.1kgZaire 79 (Ia)IV2 × 107 PFU80% (4/5)7–12 dpiPost-challenge: Blood; 6 dpi: Throat swabn/aLesions, weight lossn/an/a[69]Rhesus macaque4–8kgZaire 79 (Ia)IV1.5 × 106 PFU0% (0/5)n/a2 dpi: BloodIncreased proliferation of NK cells in blood and LNsFever, lesions, weight lossn/an/a[63]    2.5 × 106 PFU0% (0/6)       Rhesus macaque4–8kgSierra Leone (Possibly IIa)IV1.5 × 107 PFU100% (4/4)4–14 dpin/aEarly granulocyte and monocyte staining by flow cytometry is a strong predictor for lethalityn/an/an/a[61]  Zaire 79 (Ia)  80% (4/5)         Sierra Leone (Possibly IIa) 2.5 × 108 PFU67% (2/3)         Zaire 79 (Ia) 5 × 107 PFU67% (2/3)       Rhesus macaque2.26- to 4.75-year old/3.50-7.72 kgMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IV5 × 107 PFUVaccine study, no control animalsn/an/an/an/an/a[53]Rhesus macaque8- to 12-year oldMPXV-USA-MA001-2022 (IIb B.1)IV106 PFU0% (0/4)n/a10 dpi: Peak viral loadAntibodies detected by ELISAHunched posture, lesions, loss of appetite, reduced activity, weight lossn/an/a[62,68]    107 PFU0% (0/4)  Antibodies detected by ELISA and PRNT assays        108 PFU25% (1/4)21 dpi         ID108 PFU0% (0/3)n/a7 dpi: Peak viral load        IR108 PFU0% (0/3)          IV108 PFUSacrifice study10 dpi: Peak viral loadn/a LesionsFollicular hyperplasia in the LNs, neutrophilic dermatitis  Rhesus macaque4- to 8-year oldMPXV-USA-MA001-2022 (IIb B.1)IV105 TCID500% (0/5)n/a1–2 dpi: BloodNeutralizing antibodies detectedLesionsn/an/a[70]BAL: Bronchial alveolar lavage; CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid; ELISA: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; GI: Gastrointestinal; HI: Hemagglutination-inhibition; IB: Intrabronchial; ID: Intradermal; IOc: Intraocular; IOr: Intraoral; IR: Intrarectal; IT: Intratracheal; n/a: Not available; LN: Lymph node; PBMC: Peripheral blood mononuclear cell; PRNT: Plaque-reduction neutralization test; TCID50: 50% tissue culture infectious dose.Rhesus macaques (RMs)Magnus et al. first identified the monkeypox virus in CMs, but an attempt to challenge RMs (Macaca mulatta) by the i.d. route in the palm of their hands with tissue culture material isolated from a pustule of naturally infected CMs (Copenhagen strain, Clade IIa) failed to result in any clinical signs [1]. Subsequently, Prier et al. reported that i.v. administration and skin scarification of RMs with MPV (Strain 1744, unknown clade) resulted in disseminated or local lesions, respectively [15]. Others reported that an intramuscular (i.m.) challenge results in fever around 3 dpi and the appearance of cutaneous lesions at 7–11 dpi. Of note, lesions were usually less pronounced in RMs than in CMs [20]. Subsequent work to define a lethal model of infection for vaccine studies led to the i.v. challenge of NHPs with 5 × 106 PFU of MPOV-Z79 (Clade Ia). Although animals developed a fever and cutaneous lesions on 2 and 6 dpi, respectively, no animals (0/2) succumbed to infection and lesions had resolved by 21 dpi. In contrast, the use of 5 × 108 PFU caused hemorrhagic manifestations, and animals succumbed (2/2) before the development of the typical exanthema at 6 dpi. This disease course is unlike that observed in naturally-occurring mpox, resulting in the selection of 2 × 107 PFU as an intermediate dose for i.v.-challenge studies. This dose resulted in milder disease, while still resulting in 100% (3/3) mortality within 7–14 dpi and significant morbidity characterized by coagulopathy, fever, cutaneous lesions, and lymphadenopathy [58]. Other studies have demonstrated the value of non-invasive methods for disease characterization, specifically sampling of the lung fluid following i.b. challenge using 2 × 105 PFU of MPXV-V79-I-005 (Clade Ia). This approach revealed a significant decrease of structural and metabolic proteins coinciding with an increase in inflammatory proteins, highlighting that inflammation may not be the sole contributor to disease progression and that maintaining pulmonary structural integrity is key for survival in this disease model [59].NHPs were also successfully used to shed light on cladistic differences. The monkeypox inhibitor of complement enzyme (MOPICE) is a protein expressed by Clade I, but not Clade II viruses, a factor believed to be responsible for the increased virulence of viruses from the former clade. NHPs infected using a MOPICE-knockout virus displayed increased viral loads, similar lesion kinetics with delayed scabbing, but a diminished immune response suggesting that this protein is likely not the sole virulence factor of Clade I viruses [60]. The availability of immunoreagents for NHP models was also used to study immune responses in relation to disease progression, highlighting the value of NHPs when compared to smaller animal models that lack such reagents [61,62]. For example, Song et al. demonstrated that following an i.v. challenge of RMs with 1.5–2.5 × 106 PFU of MPXV-Zaire 79 (Clade Ia), natural killer cells would increase by 23- and 46.1-fold in the blood and lymph nodes, respectively, but that functions associated with cytotoxicity and cytokine secretion were mostly compromised, clarifying MPV pathogenesis [63].Similar to CMs, RMs have shown value for evaluating MCMs against MPV (see Refs [53,64–68]). Following the 2003 USA outbreak, Hooper et al. demonstrated the ability of a single dose of Dryvax in protecting NHPs (2/2) against a 2 × 107 PFU i.v. challenge with MPOV-Z79 (Clade Ia), including protection from the development of lesions. Similarly, five doses of a DNA vaccine encoding for two intracellular mature virion proteins (i.e. L1 and A27) and two extracellular virion proteins (i.e. A33 and B5), resulted in survival of all animals (3/3), although mild-to-moderate clinical signs, including lesions, were apparent [58]. Further work using this DNA-based vaccine highlighted that a 2-dose regimen was sufficient to protect RMs (5/5) from a lethal i.v. challenge of 2 × 107 PFU of MPXV-Zaire 79 (Clade Ia), and that the resulting clinical disease was lessened compared to animals vaccinated using ACAM3000 [69]. Recently, thorough comparisons of the ACAM2000 vaccine, the MVA-BN vaccine, and an Adenovirus Type 35-based vaccine expressing either L1/B5 or L1/B35/A27/A33 proteins was conducted in RMs challenged with 105 median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) of MPXV-USA-MA001-2022 (Clade IIb B.1) by the i.v. route. Although all vaccines provided some level of protection, only ACAM2000 offered near complete protection, with no animal developing clinical signs, including cutaneous lesions or viremia, except for one animal that developed a single lesion. Additionally, this study reported that protection of RMs correlated with neutralizing antibody (NAb) titers, as well as L1/M1- and B5/B6-specific binding responses [70] (Table 1).MarmosetsThe establishment of the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) as an animal model for MPV infection is a result of the high inoculum and short incubation time often associated with NHP models of mpox disease. In an initial experiment, Mucker et al. infected adult male marmosets with decreasing doses (2.4 × 107, 9.5 × 105, 7.8 × 104, 5.0 × 103, 510, or 48 PFU) of V79-I-005 (Clade Ia) by the i.v. route. While the time to death followed a dose-dependent effect, all animals (18/18) succumbed to infection between 6–15 dpi. The appearance of clinical signs, e.g. rash, lymphadenopathy, and lethargy, also correlated with viremia and followed a dose-dependent pattern, unlike gross pathology and histopathologic lesions [71].In a follow-up study, the same group demonstrated the feasibility of a more natural route of exposure compared to the classic i.v. injection by administering 1000 PFU of V79-I-005 (Clade Ia) by the intranasal (i.n.) route in both male and female, adult marmosets. Overall, the manifestation of clinical signs occurred for the first time at 13 dpi and included laboured breathing, reduced activity, edema around the eyes, skin lesions, and nasal discharge. Animals were euthanized 15–17 dpi. While no vaccine studies have been conducted in this animal model, its value in evaluating therapeutics was successfully demonstrated by treating 3 animals using s.c. delivery of a 1:1 mixture of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs; c7D11 and c8A) at 20 mg/kg. Although all treated animals survived the critical period of disease without exhibiting any clinical signs, one animal succumbed to challenge at 25 dpi, exhibiting bloody stools and a single lesion on the chin [72] (Table 1).Rodent modelsCaviidae (Guinea pig)Published guinea pigs (Cavia porcellus) models are currently of limited relevance for studying MPV pathogenesis or its associated medical countermeasures (MCMs). An early report from 1959 established that neither an intraperitoneal (i.p.), i.v., or s.c. challenge of guinea pigs with either egg- or tissue culture-passaged MPV resulted in clinical disease [1]. Unfortunately, the specifics of this challenge model, such as dose and viral strain, were not described. Complementary studies from 1976 have reported comparable results, where oral, i.n., intracardiac (i.ca.), and footpad (f.p.) delivery of an unknown dose of MPV (Copenhagen strain, Clade IIa) failed to generate clinical signs, except for f.p.-challenged animals, which exhibited foot edema. Despite the lack of clinical manifestations, virus was detectable in the lungs of animals inoculated through the i.ca. route 7 dpi, which was undetectable by 21 dpi. However, guinea pigs infected by the i.n., i.ca., and f.p. routes seroconverted to some extent, as reported by the presence of hemagglutination-inhibiting (HAI) antibodies at titers between 16 and 64 [73] (Table 2).
Table 2.Rodent models of MPV infection.Animal (Species/strain)Age/weightVirusLethalityViral distribution and sheddingImmune responseClinical signsPathologyTransmissionRefIsolateRouteDose% (N)TTDGuinea pig (n/a)n/aCopenhagen (IIa)IV, IP, SCn/a0% (n/a)–n/an/a–n/an/a[1]Guinea pig (n/a)250–300gCopenhagen (IIa)Oral10E1–10E2 PoFU0% (0/5)––n/a–n/an/a[73]IN0% (0/5)9 dpi: HAI titers of 16–64ICa0% (0/5)7 dpi: LungsFP0% (0/5)–Foot oedemaCotton rat (n/a)Adult, 80–90gn/aIV10E5 PFU100% (10/10)4–5 dpi4–5 dpi: Blood, lungs, spleen, liver, kidneysn/aCough, cyanosis, laboured breathing, purulent conjunctivitis, rhinitis, sneezing, weight lossn/an/a[74]IN50% (6/12)n/an/aDeer mouse (n/a)>6-week oldMPXV-SP2833 (IIb B.1.4)IN106 PFU0% (0/12)n/a4 dpi: Heart, lung, nasal turbinate, oral and rectal swab, small intestine, spleenn/aNonen/an/a[75]MPXV-USA-2003 (IIa)0% (0/12)4 dpi: Heart, liver, lung, nasal turbinate, oral and rectal swab, small intestine, spleenMPXV-V79-1-005 (Ia)104 PFU0% (0/12)4 dpi: Heart, liver, lung, nasal turbinate, oral swab, spleen; 10 dpi: Rectal swabHamster (n/a)3-week oldCopenhagen (IIa)Oral1.5–5.9E7 PoFU0% (0/3)––n/a––n/a[16,73]IN0% (0/6)ICa0% (0/75)7 dpi: Lungs, liver and spleen; 21 dpi: KidneysFocal lesions in liver, kidney, brain. Perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate and damage to blood vesselsScar.0% (0/6)––Dormouse (Kellen's African)2- to 3-month oldMPXV-ZAI-79 (Ia)FP1.4E4 PFU92% (12/13)7–10 dpin/an/an/an/an/a[77]IN0.2 PFU0% (n/a)–Conjunctivitis, decreased activity, dehydration, hunched posture, unkempt hair coat2 PFU38% (n/a)12.3 ± 5 dpi20 PFU63% (n/a)12.0 ± 5 dpi200 PFU100% (n/a)8.7 ± 1 dpi2000 PFU100% (n/a)7.9 ± 1 dpiIN2E4 PFUn/an/a2 dpi: Nasal lavages. 3 dpi: Spleen. 4 dpi: Blood, liver, lung.n/aConjunctivitis, dehydrationHemorrhage and necrosis of the adrenal gland, liver, lungs, nasal mucosa, spleen, stomach, submandibular lymph nodes.n/aDormouse (Kellen's African)4- to 8-month oldMPXV-Z79-CB2 (Ia)IN0.05 PFU0% (n/a)–n/an/an/an/an/a[78]0.5 PFU0% (n/a)–5 PFU20% (n/a)12 dpi50 PFU100% (n/a)22–29 dpi500 PFU100% (n/a)10 dpi5000 PFU100% (n/a)8–10 dpiDormouse (Kellen's African)4- to 14-month oldMPXV-z06 (Ia)IN50 PFU60% (n/a)10–17 dpin/an/aLowered body temperature, reduced activity, ruffled coat, squinty eyes, stiffnessn/an/a[80]400 PFU100% (n/a)7–16 dpiEuthanasia: Liver, lung, ovary, spleen, turbinates500 PFU100% (n/a)10–13 dpin/aDormouse (Kellen's African)5- to 8-month oldMPXV-ZAI-1979-005 (Ia)IN0.05 PFU0% (n/a)n/an/an/an/an/an/a[79]0.5 PFU0% (n/a)n/a5 PFU20% (n/a)13 dpi50 PFU67% (n/a)22 dpi500 PFU100% (n/a)10 dpi5000 PFU100% (n/a)8–10 dpiMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)0.5 PFU0% (n/a)n/a5 PFU60% (n/a)10–24 dpi50 PFU80% (n/a)12–21 dpi500 PFU100% (n/a)11–14 dpi5000 PFU100% (n/a)10 dpiDormouse (Forest)4- to 5-month old/20 ± 2 ghMPXV/China/GZ8H-01/2023 (IIb C.1.1)IN103.5 PFUNo–5 and 10 dpi: Varying levels in liver, lung, spleen, and trachean/aAtaxia, diminished feeding behaviour, disheveled fur, reduced activity, respiratory distress, weight lossDark red lungs with edema, loss of elasticity, and softened texturen/a[81]104.5 PFUYes6–8 dpi105.5 PFUYes5–9 dpiNatal multimammate mouse (n/a)n/an/aIN, IPn/aHighly susceptiblen/an/an/an/an/a[74]Natal multimammate mouse (n/a)6- to 12-week oldhMPXV/USA/MA001/2022 (IIb B.1)Transdermal105 PFUSerial sacrifice study1–14 dpi: Varying levels in oral, rectal, urogenital swabs8 dpi: Varying levels in the bladder, blood, brain, colon, duodenum, faeces, ileum, kidney, liver, lung, reproductive organs, salivary gland, skin, spleen, urineAntibodies detected by ELISA at 14 dpi, flow cytometry performedLocalized skin lesionsLesions at injection site characterized by epidermal acantholysis and necrosis, ballooning degeneration, full-thickness ulcerationSeroconversion in 1/8 sentinel animals[98]RectalRedness and swelling of the rectumSeroconversion in 2/8 sentinel animalsVaginalRedness and swelling of the genitalsn/aAerosolNoneSeroconversion in 1/14 sentinel animalsIPNonen/aRat (White)AdultCopenhagen (IIa)IN, IV, Scar.10E1–10E2 PoFU0% (n/a)––n/a–n/an/a[73]1- to 3-day oldID100% (n/a)5–6 dpiEuthanasia: Liver, lungs.n/an/an/an/aPouched rat (African/Gambian)n/aMPXV-2003-044 (IIa)Scar.4 × 104 PFU25% (1/4)13 dpi3 dpi: Nasal swab; 6 dpi: Lesion, oral and rectal swab; 12 dpi: BloodAntibodies detected by ELISA at 6 or 12 dpiHypopigmentation, lesions, reduced activity, weight lossn/an/a[99]MPXV-2003-358 (Ia)0% (0/4)n/a3 dpi: Blood, lesion, nasal, oral, and rectal swabPouched rat (African/Gambian)AdultROC-2003-358/Luc + (Ia)ID106 PFU33% (1/3)17 dpiEuthanasia: Brain, intestine,, kidney, LNs, lung, ovaries, testes, tongueAntibodies detected by ELISAInappetence, lesions, reduced activity, weight lossn/aNone[100]IN0% (0/3)n/a––Marmot (Bobak)1- to 2-year oldMPXV-V79-1-005 (Ia)SC2.6 log10 PFU100% (4/4)12–18 dpiEuthanasia: Kidneys, lungs, lymph nodes, nasal septum, ovaries, testicles, trachean/aAggressiveness, blepharitis, conjunctivitis, hyperthermia, rash, rhinitis, ruffled fur, submandibular lymphadenitisDestruction of epithelial lining in the respiratory system, follicular hypoplasia and local necroses in the spleen, necrotization of the lymph nodes and skin.n/a[101]4.1 log10 PFU5.6 log10 PFU7.1 log10 PFUIN−1.8 log10 PFU0% (0/4)13–22 dpi5–12 dpi: Bifurcation lymph node, lungs, trachea. 7 dpi: Spleen. 9 dpi: Brain, duodenum, nasal septum, skin. 12 dpi: Adrenals, nasal septum, skin.Same as for s.c.-infected animals, but with a diminished rash0.2 log10 PFU0% (0/4)2.2 log10 PFU50% (2/4)4.2 log10 PFU25% (1/4)5.0 log10 PFU25% (1/4)6.6 log10 PFU50% (1/2)7.8 log10 PFU100% (1/1)Marmot (Bobak)1- to 2-year oldMPXV-V79-1-005 (Ia)IN3.7 log10 PFU50% (2/4)n/an/a28 dpi: PRNT titers of 1:625–1:3125Aggressiveness, blepharitis conjunctivitis, pyrexia, rash, rhinitis, ruffled fur, submandibular lymphadenitis, tremorsn/an/a[102]Ground squirrel (Thirteen-lined)AdultMPX 2003 (IIa)IP105.1 PFU100% (5/5)6–7 dpi3 dpi: Blood; Euthanasia: Brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, spleenn/aInappetence, reduced activityCentrilobular necrotic liver, necrotic spleen, thickening of the alveolar septan/a[120]IN100% (5/5)8–9 dpi2–4 dpi: Oropharynx swab; Euthanasia: Brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, spleenInterstitial inflammation in lungs, multifocal steatosis of the liver, necrotic spleenGround squirrel (Thirteen-lined)n/aMPX US03 (IIa)SC100 PFUSerial sacrifice study2 dpi: Spleen; 4 dpi: Blood, liver, lungn/aInappetence, reduced activityHemorrhagic lungs, necrotic liver and spleen, neutrophil infiltration of the bronchi/trachean/a[121]MPX Z79 (Ia)2 dpi: Blood, lung, spleen; 4 dpi: LiverInappetence, laboured breathing, nosebleed, reduced activity, respiratory distressAbscesses in the liver, fibrinoid and lymphoid necrosis in the spleen hemorrhagic lungs, pulmonary edemaGround squirrel (Thirteen-lined)Subadult/adultMPX-ZAI-1979-005 (Ia)SC100 PFU100% (9/9)6–8 dpi7 dpi: Blood, liver, lung, spleenNo antibodies detectedn/aEdema and hemorrhage in lungs, enlarged spleen and livern/a[122]Squirrel (Eurasian red)n/aMPXV Z-249 (Likely Ia)IN, oral, scar,106 PFU100% (n/a)7–8 dpin/an/aCough and laboured breathing, fever, inappetence, reduced activity, rhinitis.n/an/a[123]Squirrel (African - 6 species)n/a“Congo Basin” (Likely Ia)IN101–104 PFUn/aVaried based on speciesn/an/aMinor lesionsn/aAirborne or direct contact[123,124]105–106 PFUOral105 PFUn/aScar.105 PFUn/aSquirrel (African rope)n/aMPXV/Congo/Luc + (Ia)IN106 PFU75% (3/4)11–13 dpi3 dpi: Nasal and oral swabs; 6 dpi: Ocular and rectal swabs; Euthanasia: Bladder, brain, kidney, lip, lung, lymph node, spleen, tongueAntibodies detected by ELISA at 6 dpiNasal discharge, respiratory distress, ocular, oral, and skin lesionsInterstitial pneumonia, lymphadenitis, necrosis and ulceration in the oral epithelium, pericarditis, renal tubular necrosisn/a[125]ID50% (2/4)8–22 dpi3 dpi: Nasal, ocular, and oral swabs; 6 dpi: Rectal swabs; Euthanasia: Lesions, lungs, salivary glands.CF: Complement fixation; FP: Foot-pad; ICa: Intracardiac; ID: Intradermal; IN: Intranasal; IP: Intraperitoneally; IV: Intravenous; n/a: Information not provided; NAb: Neutralizing antibody; PFU: Plaque-forming units; PoFU: Pock-forming units; PRNT: Plaque-reduction neutralization test; SC: Subcutaneous; Scar: Scarification; (-): Negative.Cricetidae (Cotton rat, deer mouse, and hamster)Cotton ratIn a single study, the cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus) was found to be susceptible to MPV infection (unknown strain) when inoculated with 1 × 105 PFU, both by the i.v. and i.n. route, resulting in 100% (10/10) and 50% (6/12) mortality, respectively, within 4–5 days. Clinical signs were mainly respiratory (laboured breathing, coughing, rhinitis, and sneezing), as well as weight loss and purulent conjunctivitis [74] (Table 2).Deer mouseUnlike cotton rats, deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus rufinus) challenged i.n. with MPXV-V79-1-005 (Clade Ia), MPXV-USA-2003 (Clade IIa), or MPXV-SP2833 (Clade IIb B.1.4) were not susceptible to MPV infection, as neither clinical signs nor lethality were observed. Nonetheless, some low levels of replication were observed in the lungs and nasal turbinates at 4 dpi, with titers dropping by 10 dpi, suggesting an abortive, short-term infection in these rodents [75] (Table 2).HamsterGolden hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) inoculated with doses ranging from 1.5–5.9 × 107 pock-forming units (PoFU) on scarified skin, or by the i.n., i.ca., or oral route were refractory to MPV (Copenhagen strain, Clade IIa) infection. While no clinical signs were reported in any of the animals, MPV could be detected in the liver, lungs, and spleen of animals during the first week, and in the kidneys during the first three weeks following inoculation [73,74]. The authors described the presence of pathological alterations in the viscera of animals challenged through the i.ca. route, which they described in a follow-up report: focal lesions appeared in the liver, kidneys, and brain, including perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates and damaged endothelial blood vessels [16] (Table 2).Gliridae (Dormouse)African dormice (Graphiurus kelleni) gained prominence as an MPV model after PCR-positive animals were linked to the 2003 U.S. outbreak, during which infected dormice were suspected to have transmitted the virus to prairie dogs that subsequently spread mpox to humans [76]. In an initial experiment using 2- to 3-month-old animals, f.p.-delivery of MPXV-ZAI-79 (Clade Ia) at a dose of 1.4 × 104 PFU resulted in 92% lethality within 7–10 dpi. This animal model was found to be highly susceptible to i.n. infection, as doses of 2000, 200, 20, and 2 PFU were lethal in 100%, 100%, 63%, and 38% of infected dormice, respectively, with an established median lethal dose (LD50) of 12 PFU. Of note, i.n. injection of MPXV-COP-58 (Clade IIa) resulted in similar mortality and time to death in this animal model. Schultz et al. also have demonstrated the viability of this model in the context of vaccine studies [77] (Table 2).A study by Americo et al. showed similar results, where 4- to 8-month-old African dormice, divided in groups of 3–5 animals were challenged i.n. with 500 or 5000 PFU of MPXV-Z79-CB2 (Clade Ia), resulting in 100% lethality by 10 dpi. Interestingly, the calculated LD50 from this independent study was 12 PFU, the same value as reported by Schultz et al [78]. Similarly, the LD50 for MPXV-USA-2003-044 (Clade IIa) was found to be 5 PFU [79]. In a follow-up study, Earl et al. reported that bioluminescence imaging of live animals infected by the i.n. route presented with a variable dissemination pattern of MPV within dormice. Viral replication was often first detected in the head, with subsequent spread to the abdomen, although the opposite order was observed too. These results contrast with a parallel experimental group of CAST/EiJ mice, where replication was consistently observed first in the head [80]. Recent work also demonstrated the susceptibility of forest dormice (Dryomys nitedula) to MPV infection (hMPXV/China/GZ8H-01/2023; Clade IIb C.1.1), with doses of 104.5–105.5 PFU resulted in not only clinical signs (e.g. diminished feeding behaviour, reduced activity, weight loss), but also 80% mortality within 5–9 dpi [81] (Table 2).Muridae (Mouse, natal multimammate mouse, rat)MouseFollowing the isolation of MPV, Magnus et al. reported that intracerebral inoculation of the Copenhagen strain (Clade IIa) in adult mice (unspecified species and strain) resulted in encephalitis and 100% mortality. Similarly, i.n. challenge of 2-day-old mice also resulted in uniform lethality, with a reported time to death between 5–14 dpi [1]. These results are in accordance with subsequent work from Marennikova et al., which showed the susceptibility of 8-, 12-, and 15-day-old white mice to MPV challenge. In contrast, i.d. delivery resulted in infiltrates with 50% (5/10) mortality, while oral inoculation of 8- and 12-day-old mice resulted in 40% (4/10) and 14% (7/29) lethality, respectively. Nonetheless, following oral inoculation, live virus could be isolated from the blood and from major organs (kidneys, liver, lungs, and spleen) one- and three-week post-inoculation. Surviving animals also exhibited reciprocal HAI titers over 256 at 42 dpi [73]. Newborn Swiss mice (Webster strain) infected intracerebrally also were susceptible to MPV infection (unspecified dose) [49]. Subsequently, others have sought to provide a more detailed picture of MPV infection in mouse models. Numerous protocols studied the impact of MPV exposure to different mice strains, immunocompetency status, time of exposure, dose and other parameters. Although adult BALB/c and C57BL/6 display minimal clinical manifestations following MPV infection, other strains such as adult CAST/EiJ mice are highly susceptible to infection (see Refs [78,79,82–89]).Mice have also proved valuable in the evaluation of vaccines (see Refs [84,90–94]) and therapeutics. C57BL/6 stat1-/- treated with CMX001 (10 mg/kg on day 0 + 2.5 mg/kg every other day for 14 days) or tecovirimat (100 mg/kg daily for 10 days) and challenged i.n. with 5 × 103 PFU of MPXV-ZAI-79 (Clade Ia) resulted in 100% protection [84]. Similarly, ICR mice administered 60 µg/g of NIOCH-14, NIOCH-32, or tecovirimat resulted in 100%, 0%, and 83% protection from viral replication in the lungs following an i.n. challenge with MPXV-V79-I-005 (Clade Ia) [95]. Daily administration of tecovirimat for 5 days in CAST/EiJ mice at a dose of 100 mg/kg initiated −1 or 0 dpi and challenged by the i.n. route with 106 PFU of MPXV-SP2833 (Clade IIb B.1.4) resulted in a significant decrease in viral titers in the lungs of animals at 7 dpi [96]. Recently, Tamir et al. showed that CAST/EiJ mice challenged by the i.n. route with 3.5 × 106 PFU of MPXV-Israel-2018 (Clade IIb A.1) could successfully be treated using mAbs capable of targeting the mature and enveloped forms of MPV up to 3 dpi [97]. This result is encouraging given the prospect of mAbs for the treatment of infectious diseases and the recent failure of tecovirimat in accelerating recovery of individuals infected by MPV in the DRC [11] (Table 3).
Table 3.Mouse models of MPV infection.AnimalSpecies/strainAge/weightVirusLethalityViral distribution and sheddingImmune responseClinical signsPathologyTransmissionRefIsolateRouteDose% (N)TTDMouseWhiteAdultCopenhagen (IIa)ICen/a100% (n/a)n/an/an/an/aEncephalitisn/a[1]2-day oldIN100% (n/a)5–14 dpin/aMouseSwiss, Webster strainNewbornn/aIP300 ID50100% (12/12)−3.7 dpin/an/an/an/an/a[49]ICe10−1 of stock100% (12/12)n/a10−2 of stock100% (15/15)10−3 of stock100% (14/14)10−4 of stock21% (3/14)MouseWhite8-day oldCopenhagen (IIa)IP1.2 × 106 PoFU100% (10/10)n/an/an/aFlabbiness, inappetence, local infiltration (ID only), oedema of the foot (FP only)n/an/a[73]IN100% (n/a)Acute phase: Lungs and other organsID50% (5/10)n/aOral40% (4/10)7 dpi: Blood; 21 dpi: Kidney, spleen, lung liver42 dpi: HAI titers > 256FP6 × 102 PoFU100% (18/18)n/an/a12-day old60% (3/5)Oral1.2 × 106 PoFU24% (7/29)7 dpi: Blood; 21 dpi: Kidney, spleen, lung liver42 dpi: HAI titers > 25615-day oldIN100% (n/a)Acute phase: Lungs and other organsn/aMouseBALB/c4-week oldMPXV-2003-USA-044 (IIa)IPn/a0% (0/4 per virus)n/aEuthanasia: Kidney, liver, lung, ovaryn/aDecreased activity, inappetence, rough coatn/an/a[83]MPXV-2003-USA-044/Luc + (IIa)MPXV-2003-358 (Ia)MPXV-2003-358/Luc + (Ia)SCIDMPXV-2003-USA-044 (IIa)105 PFU100% (4/4)11 dpiAcanthosis, hyperkeratosis, and dermal inflammation, mild multifocal apoptosis in liver and pancreas, necrotic ovaryMPXV-2003-USA-044/Luc + (IIa)MPXV-2003-358 (Ia)9 dpiMPXV-2003-358/Luc + (Ia)MouseBALB/c6- to 7-week oldMPXV-2003-358 (Ia)FP105 PFU0% (0/5)n/a30 dpi: Liver, lung, kidneyAntibodies detected by ELISAFoot edema, ruffled hair coat, swollen leg and lymph noden/an/a[82]IN0% (0/5)n/aRuffled hair coat, weight lossMPXV-2003-044 (IIa)FP0% (0/5)Foot edemaIN0% (0/5)30 dpi: Blood, lung, lymph nodeNoneC57BL/6MPXV-2003-358 (Ia)FP0% (0/5)n/aFoot edemaIN0% (0/5)Weight lossMPXV-2003-044 (IIa)FP0% (0/5)30 dpi: LungFoot edemaIN0% (0/5)n/aNoneMouseBALB/c5- to 6-week oldMPXV-Z79-CB2 (Ia)IN102 PFU0% (n/a)n/an/an/aNonen/an/a[78]103 PFU0% (n/a)104 PFU0% (n/a)105 PFU0% (n/a)Weight loss106 PFU0% (n/a)Hunched posture, ruffled fur, weight loss107 PFU0% (0/3)Weight lossAKR/J, BALB/cByJ, BTBR T+ tf/J, BUB/BnJ, CBA/J, CE/J, C3H/HeJ, C57BR/cdJ, C57L/J, DBA/2J, FVB/NJ, I/LnJ, LP/J, MA/MyJ, NOD/ShiLtJ, NON/ShiLtJ, NZB/BINJ, RIIIS/J, SJL/J, SM/J, SPRET/EiJ, WSB/EiJ5- to 11-week oldMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia) or MPXV-Z79-CB2 (Ia)2 × 104 PFU0% (0/5 per strain)n/an/an/aNonen/an/aA/J, CZECHII/EiJ, C57BL/6J, C57BL/10J, C57BLKS/J, C58/J, NZW/LacJ, PL/J, PWK/PhJ, SEA/GnJ, SWR/J, 129S1/SvlmJWeight lossMOLF/EiJ75% (n/a)PERA/EiJ40% (n/a)CAST/EiJ5- to 6-week oldMPXV-Z79-CB2 (Ia)102 PFU0% (n/a)Weight loss103 PFU60% (n/a)104 PFU100% (n/a)8–10 dpiEuthanasia: Liver, lung, spleenHunched posture, reduced activity, ruffled fur, weight loss105 PFU5–8 dpin/a106 PFU9- to 11-week oldIP1 PFU0% (n/a) n/an/a10 PFU50% (n/a)10–13 dpi 33 PFU100% (n/a)8–10 dpi 100 PFU65% (n/a) 1000 PFU100% (n/a)6–8 dpiEuthanasia: Liver, lung, spleen n/aScar.2 × 103 PFU0% (0/4)n/an/aAntibodies detected by ELISALesion at injection site 2 × 104 PFU0% (0/4) FP2 × 103 PFU0% (0/4)Limping, lower leg swelling 2 × 104 PFU25% (1/4)14 dpiEuthanasia: Liver, lung, spleen 5- to 9-week oldMPXV-USA-C1 (IIa)IN102 PFU0% (n/a)n/an/an/aNonen/an/a 103 PFU13% (n/a)15 dpiMild weight loss 104 PFU50% (n/a)9 dpiEuthanasia: Liver, lung, ovary, spleenWeight loss 105 PFU100% (n/a)7–8 dpi 106 PFU100% (n/a)8 dpi MouseA/Ncr, BALB/c, C3HeJ, C57BL/6, DBA, IFN-γR-/-, Type 1 IFN-/-, 1294- to 8-week oldMPXV-ZAI-79 (Ia)FP, IN9.9 × 102–5 × 104 PFU0% (n/a)n/an/aAntibodies detected by ELISAn/an/an/a[84] SCIDIN27.5 PFU40% (n/a)31 ± 11.3 dpiNone 275 PFU100% (n/a)16.8 ± 0.8 dpi 129 stat1-/-470 PFU0% (n/a)n/aAntibodies detected by ELISA 4700 PFU40% (n/a)10 dpi C57BL/6 stat1-/-470 PFU90% (n/a)9.3 ± 0.7 dpi 4.7 PFU0% (n/a)n/an/a 47 PFU25-50% (n/a)12–21 dpiWeight loss 470 PFUn/an/a 4700 PFU100% (n/a)9 dpi IN4600 PFU100% (5/5)8 dpi: Liver, lung, spleen Enlarged spleen, inflammation in most tissues, leptomeningitis in cerebrum/optic nerve, red and mottled lungs MouseCAST/EiJn/aMPXV-Z79-I-005 (Ia)IN102 PFUSerial sacrifice study4 dpi: Lung, spleen; 8 dpi: Kidney, livern/an/an/an/a[86] 104 PFU2 dpi: Brain, liver, lung, spleen; 4 dpi: Kidney 106 PFU2 dpi: Kidney, liver, lung, spleen; 4 dpi: Brain BALB/c104 PFU2 dpi: Lung; 6 dpi: Liver 106 PFU2 dpi: Liver, lung, spleen; 4 dpi: Brain, kidney CAST/EiJn/a2 × 104 PFU100% (8/8)8–10 dpi Hunched posture, ruffled fur, weight loss B6.129S7-IFNγtm1ts, B6.129S7-IFNγrtm1agt, C57BL/6106 PFU0% (0/5 per strain)n/an/aWeight loss MouseCAST/EiJ9-week oldMPXV-ZFL-06 (Ia)IN2 × 103 PFU33% (1/3)11 dpiEuthanasia: Liver, lung, spleenn/aWeight lossn/an/a[80] 2 × 104 PFU25% (1/4)17 dpi 2 × 105 PFU100% (n/a)6–10 dpiHunched posture, ruffled fur, severe weight loss MouseNZW/LacJn/aMPXV-Z79-CB2 (Ia)IN104 PFU0% (0/5 per dose)n/an/an/aWeight lossn/an/a[85] 105 PFU 106 PFU C58104 PFU 105 PFU 106 PFU MOLF/EiJ103 PFU0% (n/a)n/a 104 PFU75% (n/a)7–9 dpi 105 PFU75% (n/a)5–7 dpi 106 PFU100% (n/a)4–7 dpi PERA/EiJ103 PFU0% (n/a)n/a 104 PFU0% (n/a)n/a 105 PFU20% (n/a)7 dpi CASA/RkJ102 PFU50% (n/a)10–13 dpi 103 PFU100% (n/a)9–13 dpi 104 PFU100% (n/a)6–8 dpi 105 PFU100% (n/a)7–8 dpi Mouse129 stat1-/-8-week oldMPXV-ZAI-79 (Ia)IN2 × 105 PFU100% (5/5)7–9 dpin/an/aWeight lossn/an/a[90] MouseICR8- to 10-day old/8-10gMPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)IN−1–5.5 log PFU0% (n/a)n/an/an/aBlepharitis, purulent conjunctivitis, ruffled furn/an/a[95] 3.8 log PFUSerial sacrifice study2 dpi: Blood cells, brain, duodenum, kidneys, liver, lungs, nasal septum, pancreas, spleen; 5 dpi: Serum, tracheaSevere damage to the lungs and trachea MouseCAST/EiJ9- to 13-week old/10–13gMPXV Z06/Luc + (Ia)IP92 PFU75% (3/4)7–9 dpin/an/an/an/an/a[87] MouseCAST/EiJ4- to 6-week oldMPXV/SP2833 (IIb B.1.4)IN104 PFU0% (0/8)n/an/an/aNonen/an/a[96] 106 PFU0% (0/8)n/a MPXV/V79-I-005 (Ia)104 PFU81% (13/16)n/aWeight loss MPXV/SP2833 (IIb B.1.4)106 PFUSerial sacrifice study3 dpi: LungsMild weight loss MouseCAST/EiJ5- to 7-week oldMPXV-ZAI-1979-005 (Ia)IN102 PFU0% (n/a)n/a5 dpi: Brain, liver, lung, nasal turbinates, spleen; 7 dpi: Ovariesn/aWeight lossn/an/a[79] 103 PFU20% (n/a)11 dpin/a 104 PFU100% (n/a)7 dpi 105 PFU100% (n/a)6–7 dpi MPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)102 PFU0% (n/a)n/a5 dpi: Liver, lung, spleen, nasal turbinates, ovaries,; 7 dpi: BrainNone 103 PFU0% (n/a)n/an/aWeight loss 104 PFU80% (n/a)7–11 dpi 105 PFU100% (n/a)6–7 dpi MPXV-ZAI-1979-005 (Ia)IP100 PFU75% (n/a)9–10 dpin/aWeight loss 101 PFU75% (n/a)9–14 dpi 102 PFU100% (n/a)8–9 dpi6 dpi: Kidney, liver, lungs, ovaries, spleen 103 PFU100% (n/a)7–8 dpin/a MPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)100 PFU0% (n/a)n/aNone 101 PFU0% (n/a)n/a 102 PFU0% (n/a)n/a6 dpi: Kidney, liver, lungs, ovaries, spleen 103 PFU50% (n/a)10–11 dpin/a MPXV-USA-2022-MA001 (IIb B.1)IN102 PFU0% (0/3)n/an/aNone 103 PFU0% (0/4) 104 PFU0% (n/a)7 dpi: Lungs, nasal turbinates 105 PFU0% (0/2)n/a IP102 PFU0% (0/3) 103 PFU0% (n/a) 104 PFU0% (0/6)7 dpi: Liver, lungs, spleen 105 PFU0% (n/a)n/a MouseBALB/c5- to 6-week oldWIBP-MPXV-001 (IIb)IN + IP1.12 × 108 PFUSacrifice study5 dpi: Lung, ovary, spleenAntibodies detected by PRNTNoneAlveolar cell necrosis and wall thickeningn/a[91] MouseCAST/EiJn/aMPXV-USA-MA001-2022 (IIb B.1)IN3 × 105 PFUSerial sacrifice study3 dpi: Lungsn/an/an/an/a[92] 9 × 106 PFU MPXV-V79-I-005 (Ia)1 × 105 PFU100% (10/10)5–11 dpin/aWeight loss MouseCAST/EiJ8- to 10-week old/10–15gIsrael 2018 (IIb A.1)IN3.5 × 106 PFU50% (5/10)12–20 dpin/an/aWeight lossn/an/a[97] MouseCast/EiJ11- to 13-week oldMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN1 × 105 PFU50% (3/6)6–8 dpin/an/an/an/an/a[93] IP1 × 104 PFU67% (4/6)7–8 dpi MouseCAST/EiJ12- to 20-week oldMPXV West Africa/Taï National Park/ Côte d’Ivoire/ 2012 (IIa)IN2 × 105 PFU100% (4/4)5–6 dpi4 dpi: Oropharyngeal swab; 5–6 dpi: Liver, lung, spleenIFN-α1, IFN-α2, and IFN-β increased expressionWeight lossn/an/a[88] MPXV muc IMB-1/Germany/2022 (IIb B.1)0% (0/6)n/aNoneNone MPXV West Africa/Taï National Park/ Côte d’Ivoire/ 2012 (IIa)ID2 × 104 PFU38% (3/8)8–12 dpiLiver, lung, oropharyngeal swab, skin, spleenIFN-α1, IFN-α2, and IFN-β increased expression, neutralizing antibodies detected by PRNT at 8 and 12 dpi1–2 skin lesion on tail, ruffled fur, weight loss 2 × 105 PFU38% (3/8)10–11 dpiHunched back, lesions, respiratory symptoms, ruffled fur, subdued behaviour, weight loss MPXV muc IMB-1/Germany/2022 (IIb B.1)2 × 104 PFU0% (0/8)n/a1–2 skin lesion on tail, ruffled fur, weight loss 2 × 105 PFU57% (4/7)7–11 dpiHunched back, lesions, respiratory symptoms, ruffled fur, subdued behaviour, weight loss MouseBALB/c3-week oldhMPXV/China/GZ8H-01/2023 (IIb C.1.1)IN1 × 106 PFUSacrifice study4 dpi: Lungsn/an/an/an/a[94] HLA-A*02:01/DR4- to 5-week old1 × 107 PFU Mousedb/db8-week oldhMPXV/China/GZ8H-01/2023 (IIb C.1.1)IN1 × 105 PFUSacrifice study5 and 10 dpi: Lungsn/aWeight lossAbnormal structure of lung tissue, increased epithelial cells, infiltration of inflammatory cells, thickened alveolar walls.n/a[89]  C57BL/6        Nonen/a   dpi: Days post-infection; FP: Foot-pad; ICe: Intracerebral; ID: Intradermal; IN: Intranasal; IP: Intraperitoneal; n/a: Not available; Scar: Scarification, PoFU: Pock-forming units; TTD: Time to death.Natal multimammate mouseWhile limited information has been published on this animal model, an early study reported that a laboratory strain of the natal multimammate mouse (Mastomys natalensis) was highly susceptible to inoculation of MPV by both the i.n. and i.p. routes [74]. More recently, Port et al. evaluated the pathogenicity of hMPXV/USA/MA001/2022 (Clade IIb B.1) following a transdermal, rectal, vaginal, aerosol, or i.p. challenge. Overall, no mortality was reported, and clinical signs were limited. While no challenge routes resulted in weight loss, localized skin lesions developed 7–8 dpi at the site of transdermal inoculation and resolved 1–2 days later, while swelling of the rectum and genital organs were observed in rectally- and vaginally-challenged animals, respectively. This work highlighted that mucosal challenge routes, i.e. aerosol, rectal, and vaginal, led to increased viral shedding, with rectal inoculation resulting in the highest transmission rates under these conditions and suggesting that this model may be used to mimic human-to-human transmission [98] (Table 2).RatAdult white rats (unspecified species) were found to be refractory to infection by MPV (Copenhagen strain, Clade IIa) through the i.n., i.v., or scarification routes. However, a mortality rate of 100% (24/24) could be achieved in 1- to 3-day-old rats infected by the i.n. route, with animals exhibiting reduced activity throughout disease. Death occurred at 5 or 6 dpi, and live virus could be isolated from the liver and lungs of animals at titers of 102–103 PoFU [73] (Table 2).Nesomyidae (African pouched rat)African pouched ratAfrican (Gambian) pouched rats (Cricetomys gambianus) were evaluated as a potential animal model for the study of MPV due to the potential implication of other members of this species in the 2003 outbreak linked to prairie dogs in the United States. Preliminary work revealed limited morbidity and mortality following infection by scarification using 4 × 104 PFU of either MPXV-2003-044 (Clade IIa) or MPXV-2003-358 (Clade Ia), where only the former virus resulted in mortality (25%; 1/4) at 13 dpi. Nonetheless, all animals experienced some form of disease with clinical signs ranging from skin hypopigmentation, lesions, reduced activity, and weight loss. Lesions developed as early as 3 dpi, and all lesions had resolved by 35 dpi in survivors [99]. Infection of animals with 1 × 106 PFU of ROC-2003-358 (Clade Ia) expressing luciferase by the i.d. and i.n. route resulted in similar results, where only i.d. injection resulted in death (33%; 1/3). Bioluminescent imaging highlighted viral replication at the site of inoculation for either route before spreading to the eyes, mouth, and eventually to distant sites of the skin, peaking at 8–14 dpi. Ultimately, all animals seroconverted, as detected by ELISA [100] (Table 2).Sciuridae (Marmot, prairie dog, and squirrel)MarmotThe bobak marmot (Marmota bobak) is one of the more recently developed medium-sized animal models used to study MPV. When inoculated by the s.c. route with 2.6, 4.1, 5.6, or 7.1 log10 PFU of MPXV-V79-1-005 (Clade Ia), animals exhibited a range of clinical signs starting 7–9 dpi with hyperthermia occurring concomitantly with submandibular lymphadenitis. The characteristic pox-like rash (macular to papular to vesicular to pustular) was visible on parts of the body and mucous membranes 1–2 days later. Finally, the animals exhibited aggressive behaviour, incoordination and tremor of the extremities, and a purulent rhinitis before succumbing to disease 12–18 dpi. Clinical signs in survivors resolved 12–18 days following their appearance. In animals that succumbed to infection, infectious MPV was recovered from multiple organs at various titers as early as 1–2 dpi: in the axillary and inguinal lymph nodes, kidneys, lungs, skin containing lesions, trachea, and testicles or ovaries (≥5.7 log10 PFU/mL); in the brain, submandibular and mesenteric lymph nodes, and pancreas (4.0–5.7 log10 PFU/mL); and in the heart, liver, and spleen (<4.0 log10 PFU/mL). In the context of an i.n. challenge with doses ranging from −1.8 to 7.8 log10 PFU, the severity and timing of clinical signs were no different than from the s.c. challenge. However, the disease was not uniformly lethal, as only 42% (5/12) of animals succumbed to infection 13–22 dpi, and marmots exhibited a reduced density of lesions on both the skin and mucous membranes. A follow-up i.n. challenge with 3.7 log10 PFU also revealed a diminished viral burden within organs of infected marmots, where the lungs and trachea were the first organs to test positive for MPV at 5 dpi [101]. Scientists have also used marmots successfully to evaluate therapeutic countermeasures, specifically NIOCH-14 and tecovirimat. In an i.n. challenge model using 3.7 log10 PFU of MPXV-V79-1-005 (Clade Ia), oral administration of these compounds daily at a dose of 40 mg/kg one day before infection and for the following 6 days resulted in 100% protection for both drugs. Alternatively, the mortality in untreated animals was reported to be 50% [101,102] (Table 2).Prairie dogDuring the United States outbreak of 2003, most patients affected by mpox reported close contact with sick pet prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus), making it a natural contender as an animal model [76]. Necropsies of animals responsible for this outbreak revealed an infection of the cells within the bronchi, conjunctivae, and tongue. Replicating virus was also isolated from the lungs, which was hypothesized at the time to be an amplification factor for transmission [103,104]. In an initial study, Xiao et al. reported infecting adult wild-caught prairie dogs by either the i.p. or i.n. route. Animals receiving 105.1 PFU of MPX 2003 (Clade IIa) by the i.p. route exhibited inappetence, reduced activity, and 100% mortality (3/3) with a time to death ranging between 8–11 days. Regarding viral kinetics, live MPV was readily detected in the blood and throat swabs of prairie dogs at 5–6 dpi. At necropsy, elevated titers were detected in the liver and spleen of animals and in the kidneys and lungs, to a lesser extent. Gross necropsy revealed centrilobular necrosis of the liver, moderate-to-severe necrosis of the spleen, and mild-to-moderate thickening of the lungs interstitium. A parallel experiment assessed the susceptibility of prairie dogs to an i.n. infection of 105.1 PFU of MPX 2003 (Clade IIa) per nostril. While this route achieved only 60% lethality (3/5), the clinical signs associated with infection were similar to those challenged by the i.p. route. Interestingly, the surviving animals displayed nasal congestion and mucopurulent discharge, as well as characteristic mpox lesions on the lips and tongue, in which infectious MPV was successfully isolated. These surviving animals appeared healthy when euthanized 25 dpi. In contrast with i.p.-infected animals, live virus was isolated consistently initially from the throat in i.n.-infected prairie dogs (3–6 dpi) before being detected in the blood (8–9 dpi) [105]. More work was performed to better understand MPV biology in prairie dogs, which is summarized in Table 4 (See Refs [106–108]). Of importance to those interested in using the prairie dog as an animal model, a study reported that the use of meloxicam (a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug), but not buprenorphine (an opioid) was associated with increased morbidity and mortality in prairie dogs challenged with 4 × 103 PFU of MPXV-USA-2003-044 (Clade IIa) [109].
Table 4.Prairie dog models of MPV infection.Animal (Species/strain)Age/weightVirusLethalityViral distribution and sheddingImmune responseClinical signsPathologyTransmissionRefIsolateRouteDose% (N)TTDPrairie dog (n/a)n/aNatural infection (IIa)n/an/a100% (2/2)n/aEuthanasia: Lungsn/aCoughing, inappetence, ocular discharge, sneezing, swollen eyelids, wastingMild portal inflammation of the liver, red-brown patchy areas in the lungs, red liver, spleen hyperplasia, tongue ulcerEvidence for role of mucocutaneous contact and respiratory routes[103]Prairie dog (n/a)12-week oldNatural infection (IIa)n/an/a100% (1/1)10 days post-disease onsetEuthanasia: Homogenized tissue pool of brain, intestine, kidney, liver, lung, spleen Depression, inappetence, nasal and ocular discharges, oral ulcers, respiratory distress, skin nodules, swollen eyesNecrotizing bronchopneumonia, swollen cervical and thoracic lymph nodes, tongue ulcern/a[104]Prairie dog (Black-tailed)AdultMPX 2003 (IIa)IP105.1 PFU100% (3/3)8–11 dpi5–6 dpi: Blood and throat; Euthanasia: Brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, spleen Inappetence, reduced activityCentrilobular necrosis of the liver, firm nodules in the omentum, milt-to-moderate thickening of lung interstitium, moderate-to-severe necrosis of the spleenn/a[105]IN60% (3/5)11–14 dpi3–4 dpi: Throat; 8–9 dpi: Blood; Euthanasia: Heart, kidney, liver, lung, spleen (One animal only)25 dpi: CF titers of 1:64; PRNT titers of 1:320Inappetence, reduced activity in all animals; mucopurulent nasal discharge and vesicular lesions on lips and tongues of survivorsEdema, hemorrhage, and necrosis of the lungsPrairie dog (Black-tailed)2-year old/535-842gMPX-2003-044 (IIa)IN104.5 PFU0% (0/4)n/a3 dpi: Oral; 6 dpi: Blood and nasal samples; 9 dpi: Ocular sample; 15 dpi: Fecal sampleAll surviving animals positive by ELISABloody oral swab, crusty nose, inappetence, lesions, nasal discharge, respiratory distressn/an/a[106]ID-Scar.0% (0/4)n/a3 dpi: Blood; 6 dpi: Oral and nasal samples; 9 dpi: Fecal and ocular samplesBlood oral swab, confusion, crusty lips and nose, inappetence, lesions, reduced activity2-year old/640-988gMPX-2003-358 (Ia)IN25% (1/4)13 dpi3 dpi: Fecal samples; 6 dpi: Blood, nasal, ocular, oral samples; 9 dpi: Secondary lesionsCrusty nose, elevated temperature, inappetence, lesions, nasal foam, periocular lesionID-Scar.50% (2/4)11–12 dpi3 dpi: Blood; 6 dpi: Fecal, oral, Scar. site; 9 dpi: Nasal, ocular, secondary lesionsDiarrhea, elevated temperature, inappetence, lesions, weight lossPrairie dog (Black-tailed)3-year old/728-1267gMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN6 × 102 PFU0% (0/4)n/a13–24 dpi: Oral swab25% (1/4) of surviving animals positive by ELISAInappetence, lesionsn/an/a[107]6 × 103 PFU25% (1/4)33 dpi6–24 dpi: Oral swabAll surviving animals positive by ELISAFacial edema, inappetence, lesions, reduced activity, swollen lymph nodes6 × 104 PFU25% (1/4)15 dpiInappetence, laboured breathing, lesions, nasal blood/pus6 × 105 PFU75% (3/4)13–17 dpi3–24 dpi: Oral swabDisorientation, facial/nasal edema, inappetence, laboured breathing, lesions, nasal blood/pus, reduced activity3-year old/727-1366gMPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Ia)8 × 102 PFU25% (1/4)11 dpi6–27 dpi: Oral swab33% (1/3) of surviving animals positive by ELISAInappetence, nasal pus8 × 103 PFU100% (4/4)11–17 dpi3–17 dpi: Oral swab75% (3/4) of deceased animals positive by ELISAInappetence, laboured breathing, nasal pus, neck/face edema, oral/nasal blood, reduced activity, swollen lymph nodes8 × 104 PFU50% (2/4)11–17 dpi3–24 dpi: Oral swab100% (2/2) of surviving animals positive by ELISA8 × 105 PFU50% (2/4)11–13 dpi3–31 dpi: Oral swabPrairie dog (Black-tailed)3-year old/752-1210gMPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Ia)IN3.8 × 105 PFU75% (3/4)10–12 dpi4–6 dpi: Blood, oral swab; 6–8 dpi: Anal and ocular swab; Euthanasia: Eyelid, heart, kidney, liver, lung, lymph node, skin, spleen, tongueOne animal positive by ELISABloody nose, facial swelling, inappetence, lesions, nasal crust and discharge, weight lossn/an/a[113]Prairie dog (Black-tailed)n/aMPXV-2003-358 (Ia)IN105 PFU0% (0/3)n/an/an/aLesions, weight lossn/an/a[116]106 PFU100% (2/2)11–28 dpi3 dpi: BloodLesions, nasal involvement, severe weight lossPrairie dog (Black-tailed)20-month old/904-982gMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN9 × 103 PFUTransmission study6 dpi: Blood and oropharyngeal swabInoculated animals positive by ELISA at 13 dpiInappetence, laboured breathing, lesionsn/aFomites/bedding (3/3), co-housing (3/3), respiratory secretions/nasal mucous secretion (2/2)[118]Prairie dog (Black-tailed)>4-year old/875–1250gMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN4 × 105 PFU50% (2/4)10–14 dpi2 dpi: Oral swab; 4 dpi: Blood, anal and ocular swab; Euthanasia: Eyelid, heart, kidney, lung, spleenAll surviving animals positive by ELISABloody oral swab, crusty nose, inappetence, laboured breathing, lesions, reduced activity, weight lossn/an/a[112]MPXV-USA-2003-044 + CCP (IIa)50% (2/4)18 dpi4 dpi: Oral swab; 6 dpi: Blood, anal and ocular swab; Euthanasia: Kidney, liver, lung, spleenMPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Ia)100% (4/4)12–16 dpi2 dpi: Ocular and oral swab; 4 dpi: Blood; 6 dpi: Anal swab; Euthanasia: Eyelid, gonad, heart, kidney, liver, lung, lymph node, spleenAll animals positive by ELISABloody oral swab, crusty nose, inappetence, laboured breathing, lesions, ocular lesions, reduced activity, severe weight lossMPXV-ROC-2003-358ΔCCP (Ia)0% (0/4)n/a4 dpi: Oral and anal swab; 6 dpi: Blood and ocular swabBloody oral swab, crusty nose, inappetence, lesions, lethargy, ocular lesionsPrairie dog (Black-tailed)9- to 12-month oldMPXV-ROC-2003-385 (Ia)IN2 × 105 PFUn/a (?/3)n/an/an/an/an/an/a[115]2 × 106 PFUn/a (?/1)Prairie dog (Black-tailed)2- to 3-year old/706-1365gMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN6 × 103 PFUTransmission study10 dpi: Blood, oral secretionsAntibodies detected by ELISA at 13 dpiCrusty nose, dehydration, inappetence, lesionsn/aNo transmission by respiratory secretions[119]MPXV-RCG-2003-358 (Ia)5 × 103 PFU3 dpi: Blood; 6 dpi: Oral secretions; Euthanasia: Lesion, liver, lymph node, spleen, tongueDehydration, inappetence, laboured breathing, lesions, nasal congestion, pus/blood in mouthFriable liver and spleen, lymphadenopathy, necrotic submandibular lymph nodeRespiratory secretions (1/4)7 × 102 PFU6 dpi: Blood; 10 dpi: Oral secretionsInappetence, laboured breathing, lesions, weight lossFriable kidneys, lymphadenopathy, mottled liver and spleenNo transmission by respiratory secretionsPrairie dog (Black-tailed)AdultMPXV-USA-2003/LUC (IIa)IN104 PFU100% (3/3)14–16 dpi3 dpi: Ocular and oral swab; 7 dpi: Blood, fecal, nasal swabn/aDiarrhea, distended abdomen, lesions, reduced activity, ocular dischargeLesions in the heart, lungs, LNs, tonsil, and tracheaContact transmission to naïve animal[111]Prairie dog (Black-tailed)10-month old/488-965gMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN8 × 103 PFUSerial sacrifice study2 dpi: Lymph nodes, salivary gland; 4 dpi: heart, liver, lungs, nasal cavity, oropharynx, spleen, stomach, tongue, tonsils; 6 dpi: Bladder, blood, brain, eye, kidney, pancreas, trachea9 dpi: Nab detected in 2 animals; 12 dpi: Animals positive by ELISAInappetence, lesions, nasal discharge, respiratory distressInflamed oviducts, lymphadenopathy, pale kidneys, pericarditisn/a[108]10-month old/549-899gMPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Ia)2 dpi: Nasal cavity, liver, oropharynx; 4 dpi: Eye, heart, lungs, lymph nodes, pancreas, salivary glands, spleen, tongue, tonsils, trachea; 6 dpi: Blood, brain, kidney; 9 dpi: BladderBloody nose/mouth, facial edema, inappetence, lesions, nasal dischargeFoci of parenchymal hemorrhage on lungs, hemorrhagic lesions in jejunum/periovarian adipose tissue, lymphadenopathyPrairie dog (Black-tailed)8-month old/360-620gMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN4 × 103 PFUSerial sacrifice study4 dpi: Blood, liver, lung, stomach; 6 dpi: Brain, lymph node, nasal cavity, oral swab, salivary glands, spleen; 9 dpi: Lesions12 dpi: Antibodies detected by ELISA and neutralizationLesions, nasal discharge, respiratory distress, ruffled furEnlarged gallbladder, lymph nodes, and spleen, firm liver, lymphadenopathyn/a[109]Prairie dog (Black-tailed)2-year old/940-1320gMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN5.9 × 104 PFUSerial sacrifice studyn/an/aInappetence, lesionsn/an/a[110]2-year old/890-1270gMPXV-USA-2003-044, luciferase + (IIa)4.3 × 104 PFU6 dpi: Gonad, heart, kidney, liver, lung, lymph node, nose, spleen, tonguePrairie dog (Black-tailed)n/aMPXV-2003-358 (Ia)IN2.25 × 104 PFU75% (3/4)16 dpi14 dpi: Peak in blood and oral swabsAntibodies detected by ELISA and neutralizationInappetence, lesions, weight lossn/an/a[117]4.31 × 106 PFU100% (10/10)9–15 dpiPrairie dog (Black-tailed)2- to 4-year oldMPXV-USA-2003-044 (IIa)IN8.8 × 105 PFU86% (6/7)10–14 dpin/aDetected by ELISAn/an/an/a[114]CF: Complement fixation; FP: Foot-pad; ICa: Intracardiac; ID: Intradermal; IN: Intranasal; IP: Intraperitoneally; IV: Intravenous; n/a: Information not provided; NAb: Neutralizing antibody; PFU: Plaque-forming units; PoFU: Pock-forming units; PRNT: Plaque-reduction neutralization test; SC: Subcutaneous; Scar.: Scarification; (-): Negative.Prairie dogs are also a useful animal model to evaluate the effect of recombinant viruses such as those expressing luciferase to study biodistribution [110,111], or to answer scientific questions specific to genomic differences between clades. The complement control protein (CCP), expressed by MPV, prevents the initiation of the classical and alternative pathways of the complement. Clade I viruses express CCP while Clade II viruses do not. In a recombinant MPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Clade Ia) virus lacking CCP, disease progression was slower, viral loads were lower, and mortality was reduced compared to animals infected with the parental virus. Alternatively, a recombinant MPXV-2003-USA-044 (Clade IIa) virus engineered to express CCP did not result in a significantly faster disease progression or increased mortality [112].Prairie dogs have also demonstrated their usefulness in evaluating MCMs. Regarding therapeutics, animals infected by the i.n. route with 3.8 × 105 PFU of MPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Clade Ia) and treated with tecovirimat either on day 0, 3 or following rash onset all showed 100% survival. In parallel, control animals showed only a 25% survival rate [113]. In a similar study, the efficacy of brincidofovir was evaluated for efficacy against MPXV, as the drug was originally approved to treat smallpox by the Food and Drug Administration. As such, animals were inoculated with 8.8 × 105 PFU of MPXV-USA-2003-044 (Clade IIa) and treated either on −1, 0, or 1 dpi, resulting in 57%, 43%, and 29% survival, respectively. In contrast, untreated animals exhibited a survival rate of 14% [114]. In the context of prophylactics, Townsend et al. showed that the antigenic profile of immune responses of prairie dogs to Dryvax, ACAM2000®, and IMVAMUNE® was fairly similar to those of humans, highlighting the value of this animal model for vaccine studies [115]. In a similar study, prairie dogs vaccinated with Dryvax (2 × 105 PFU), Acambis2000 (now ACAM2000®; 2 × 105 PFU), or IMVAMUNE® (1 × 108 TCID50) 60 days prior to an i.n. challenge with 1 × 105 or 1 × 106 PFU of MPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Clade Ia) showed a 100% protection from death and weight loss [116]. Post-exposure prophylaxis was also attempted with the Dryvax, ACAM2000®, and IMVAMUNE® vaccines. Ultimately, none of the prairie dogs challenged with 4.31 × 106 PFU of MPXV-ROC-2003-358 (Clade Ia) and then vaccinated 1 dpi survived infection, while only one animal from the Dryvax (25% survival; 1/4) and one from the IMVAMUNE® (20% survival; 1/5) groups survived when the vaccine was administered 3 dpi [117].Finally, prairie dogs challenged i.n. with MPXV-USA-2003-044 (Clade IIa) at a dose of 9 × 103 PFU served as a valuable model also in studying MPXV transmission, wherein bedding/fomites, co-housing, and respiratory secretions were all shown to be viable means of transmission. However, it should be noted that in the context of respiratory secretions, the authors could not guarantee that animals did not touch noses throughout the study, which could instead suggest transmission through nasal mucous secretions [118]. Further studies observed that only a high dose (5 × 103 PFU) of MPXV-RCG-2003-358 (Clade Ia) could result in transmission by the respiratory route, although not efficiently [119] (Table 4).Ground squirrelThe thirteen-lined ground squirrel (Spermophilus tridecemlineatus) was established by Tesh et al. as an animal model for mpox. The authors challenged the animals by the i.n. or i.p. route with 105.1 PFU of MPX 2003 (Clade IIa). Animals developed inappetence and reduced activity 4–5 dpi but in none of the groups did animals develop clinical signs comparable to those observed in prairie dogs, i.e. lesions, respiratory issues, or rhinitis. Animals challenged by the i.n. route succumbed to disease 8–9 dpi, with viral loads first detected 2–4 dpi in the oropharynx of animals. In contrast, i.p.-infected animals succumbed to infection 6–7 dpi, and MPV was first detected in the blood of ground squirrels at 3 dpi. However, regardless of challenge route, high titers of infectious MPV could be isolated in the liver, lungs, and spleen, with moderate levels also found in the brain, heart, and kidneys. In accordance with viral load data, centrilobular hepatocytic degeneration or necrosis could be observed in the liver, along with splenic necrosis and focal consolidations within the lungs [120]. The LD50 associated with MPXZ79 (Clade Ia) and MPX US03 (Clade IIa) were established in ground squirrels at 0.35 and 0.46 PFU, respectively [121]. Thirteen-lined ground squirrels have shown their relevance also as an animal model to evaluate therapeutics against MPV (see ref [122] and Table 2).Tree squirrelAdult Eurasian red squirrels (Sciurus vulgaris) were the first tree squirrels to be experimentally challenged with MPV. An i.n. or oral challenge of animals with 106 PFU of MPXV Z-249 (Likely Clade Ia) resulted in an accelerated disease progression compared to a scarification route, with clinical signs comparable to those observed in prairie dogs, such as cough and laboured breathing, fever, inappetence, reduced activity, and rhinitis resulting in death of all animals 7–8 dpi. However, unlike prairie dogs, the characteristic rash did not develop on these animals [123]. Unpublished work by Shelukhina et al. also reported a MPV challenge of six squirrel species belonging to the Funisciurus sp. (Rope squirrel), Heliosciurus sp. (Sun squirrel), and Protoxerus sp. (African giant squirrel) genera. Inoculation of animals with 105–106 PFU of a Congo Basin strain by the i.n., s.c., and oral route resulted in an overall acute disease presentation and 100% lethality. In contrast to common squirrels, some animals within this study that were given a non-lethal dose of virus developed a rash in areas of their body lacking fur or at the borders of mucous membranes and skin such as around the nose and lips. The authors also reported airborne and direct contact transmission of MPV to naïve animals [124].Rope squirrels (Funisciurus anerythrus) were further investigated for their susceptibility to infection by a recombinant MPV expressing firefly luciferase (Parental strain: MPXV-2003-Congo-358, Clade Ia). Animals were challenged by the i.n. or i.d. route with 1 × 106 PFU, resulting in mortality rates of 75% (3/4) and 50% (2/4), respectively. Animals challenged by the i.n. route exhibited respiratory distress as the main symptom and cause of death (11–13 dpi), with oral lesions appearing 8 dpi and the sole surviving animal exhibiting ocular lesions at 6–25 dpi. It should be noted that heavy shedding support the usefulness of this model for transmission studies, as a naïve animal housed in its own cage, but in the same room as the other animals developed clinical disease at 13 dpi. This contact animal displayed typical signs of MPV infection such as nasal discharge, oral lesions, and respiratory distress, requiring euthanasia at 18 dpi of the challenged animals. The authors attributed the transmission event to aerosols [125] (Table 2).Leporidae (Rabbit)Following the initial isolation of MPV in 1958 (Copenhagen strain, Clade IIa), rabbits were the first animal model to be evaluated for susceptibility. In adult rabbits (Unspecified species), i.d. injection of 8 × 107 PoFU resulted in localized necrosis of about 10 mm at the inoculation site, while an unspecified dose inoculated by scarification resulted in a single pustule. The authors reported a generalized infection 5–6 dpi by both routes, as well as through i.v. challenge, in some animals but an absence of lesions on any organs during autopsy. In 2-day-old rabbits, inoculation by scarification or the intracutaneous route was 100% fatal by 5–8 dpi, with the latter route resulting in an earlier time to death. Nevertheless, both routes resulted in grey-white spots in liver tissues, as well as hemorrhagic foci in the kidneys of animals [1].Similarly, Marennikova et al. showed that i.v. administration of 107 PoFU of MPV (Copenhagen strain, Clade IIa) in adult rabbits resulted in a mortality rate of 8% (1/12). The i.n. challenge resulted in rapid progression of the disease with death occurring 4–5 dpi, albeit in absence of the characteristic rash. Of note, when uninfected young rabbits of the same litter were kept with orally- and i.n.-infected animals, transmission occurred 6–8 dpi in naïve animals, resulting in four sick animals, three of which succumbed to infection [73]. Gispen et al. confirmed findings relating to transmission from i.d.-infected rabbits to naïve animals, resulting in hemorrhagic necrotic lesions. Of note, the authors also demonstrated neurovirulence when MPV was administered intracerebrally, with fatal meningoencephalitis leading to death at 6–9 dpi [126,127]. In line with the studies above, recent work by Shang et al. demonstrated the susceptibility of adult rabbits to hMPXV/China/GZ8H-01/2023 (Clade IIb C.1.1) following an i.v. or i.d. infection. In i.v.-challenged animals, the authors reported the development of fever and skin lesions, while i.d.-challenged animals experienced localized red lesions at the site of injection, with hemorrhage and dense infiltrates of necrosis at its centre. Similarly to the prior work, they also demonstrated the susceptibility of 10-day old rabbits to i.n. infection, with doses of 103.5–105.5 PFU resulting in lethality in 3–15 dpi [128]. Zhu et al. also demonstrated the value of this animal model for the evaluation of MCMs, showing that New Zealand rabbits vaccinated with gene-deleted live vaccinia virus (strain Tian Tan) exhibited reduced morbidity compared to unprotected animals [129] (Table 5).
Table 5.Rabbit and pig models of MPV infection.Animal (Species/strain)Age/weightVirusLethalityViral distribution and sheddingImmune responseClinical signsPathologyTransmissionRefIsolateRouteDose% (N)TTDRabbit (n/a)AdultCopenhagen (IIa)ID8E7 PoFUn/an/an/an/aNecrosis at injection siten/an/a[1]Scar.n/aGeneralized infection (5–6 dpi)–ICIV2-day oldScar., ICun/a5–8 dpin/aGreyish-white spots (liver tissue), hemorrhagic foci (kidneys)Rabbit (n/a)n/an/aScar., IV, ID, SCn/an/an/an/an/aGeneralized disease, pustular lesions.n/an/a[14]Rabbit (n/a)n/aCopenhagen (IIa), Strain 64-7255 (n/a)IDn/an/an/an/an/aHemorrhagic and necrotic lesionsn/aTransmission observed[126]ICe6–9 dpiMeningoencephalitisn/aITn/aOrchitisICoKeratitisRabbit (n/a)AdultCopenhagen (IIa), Strain 64-7255 (n/a), 64-7275 (n/a), 64-9411 (n/a)IDn/an/an/an/a Hemorrhagic and necrotic lesionsn/an/a[127]Rabbit (Chinchilla strain)Adult; 2.5–3 kgCopenhagen (IIa)IV10E7 PoFU8% (1/12)1 month (Cachexia)Early: Blood. 7 dpi: Lymph nodes and kidneys. 22 dpi: Testicles7 dpi: Ab by HAI; 14 dpi: Titers = 128–256; > 12 months = 40–80 + NAbs titers of 640Fever, conjunctivitis, rhinitis, rash (papules and pustules)n/an/a[73]Scar.10E5-10E6 PoFU0% (0/10)–n/an/aFever, rash, papulopustular eruption at injection siteID0% (0/10)–Dense infiltrates with hemorrhage and necrosisOral1.4E9 PoFU0% (0/2)–25 dpi: NAbs titer of 20-10-day oldOral10E6–10E7 PoFU85% (17/20)4–14 dpi4 dpi: MPV isolated from viscera, blood, lungs, liver, spleen. 7 dpi: Lungs, kidneysn/aAppetite loss, diarrhea (4–6 dpi), pustules, reduced activity, suppurative conjunctivitis, rhinitisn/aTransmission to litter by contact 6–8 dpiIN 83% (5/6)4–5 dpin/aInappetence, weight lossRabbit (New Zealand)2-month oldMPXV-China-GZ8H-01-2023 (IIb C.1.1)IV1 × 106.5 PFUSacrifice study7 dpi: Lungs, testesn/aElevated temperature, lesionsFocal hemorrhage and necrosis of the testes, damaged alveolar epithelium, thickened alveolar interstitium, and intra-alveolar hemorrhage of the lungsn/a[129]Rabbit (n/a)AdulthMPXV/China/GZ8H-01/2023 (IIb C.1.1)IV106.5 PFUSerial sacrifice study4 dpi: Throat swab; 6 dpi: Lung, skin lesion, testis2, 6, 10 dpi: Elevated levels of IFNAR1, IFN-γ, IL-6, TNF-α; 8 dpi: NAb titer of 90–190; 14 dpi: NAb titer of 213–537Fever, skin lesionsCellular necrosis in the testes and lung congestion, volume changes, and uneven surface featuresn/a[128]105.5 PFULung, skin lesions, testesn/aLung injuries104.5 PFUn/aNoneNoneID101.5–105.5 PFUNone– 6 dpi: SkinLocalized red patches with dense infiltrates of necrosis and hemorrhagesEdema in epidermal and dermal layersIN105.5 PFUNone–Nonen/aNoneNone 10-day oldIN105.5 PFUYes3–15 dpi5 dpi: Varying levels in brain, heart, intestine, kidney, liver, lung, spleenConjunctivitis, diarrhea, diminished feeding behaviour, reduced activity, weight lossCardiac myocytes, hepatocytes, intestinal tissue, lung tissue, red and white pulp of the spleen, renal glomeruli 104.5 PFUYes9–11 dpin/a 103.5 PFUNone– Pig (n/a)3- to 5-week oldMPXV-USA-MA001-2022 (IIb B.1)ID + IN + IV9 × 107 TCID50Serial sacrifice study1 dpi: Nasal and rectal swab; 3 dpi: Oral swab; 7 dpi: Nasal ethmoturbinates, skinAntibodies detected by ELISA at 7 dpiLesionsHyperkeratosis, nasal hyperemia, thickening of the epidermisObserved to sentinel animals[131] Ab: Antibody; dpi: days post-infection; HAI: hemagglutination inhibition; ICe: Intracerebral; ICo: Intracorneal; ICu: Intracutaneous; ID: Intradermal; IN: Intranasal; IT: Intratesticular; IV: Intravenous; MPV: Monkeypox virus; n/a: Information not provided; NAb: Neutralizing antibody; PoFU: Pock-forming units; SC: Subcutaneous; TTD: Time to death; (-): Negative.Suidae (Pig)Despite the variety of animal models available to study MPV infection, few domesticated species sustain replication or can transmit the virus. The domestic pig (Sus crofa) is a common livestock animal for numerous zoonoses of clinical relevance to human health, including influenza and Nipah viruses. Additionally, pigs are natural hosts for another pox virus, swinepox virus, and pig embryonic kidney cells have been used successfully to grow MPV in vitro following the identification of the first human case in 1970, highlighting their potential susceptibility to MPV infection [130]. To assess this, Mantlo et al. challenged piglets by the combined i.d., i.n., and i.v. route with a total dose of 9 × 107 TCID50 of MPXV-USA-MA001-2022 (Clade IIb B.1) and performed serial euthanasia to characterize disease progression. Although the disease presentation remained mostly subclinical, sparse skin lesions were observed on animals, mainly presenting as red macules around the nose and lips of pigs 12–18 dpi. Despite limited disease, inoculated animals were capable of transmitting MPV to contact animals. Indeed, viral shedding in inoculated animals could be detected as early as 1 dpi from nasal and rectal swab, with live virus or viral DNA being detected in the upper respiratory tract of all pigs included in the study [131] (Table 5).
Naturally susceptible or understudied species
In 1964, chimpanzees (Pan satyrus, old nomenclature) from the Rotterdam zoo presented with pox lesions during a local outbreak. In 1968, McConnell et al. reported the i.v. challenge of chimpanzees with MPV (U65-32 strain, likely Clade IIa), resulting in widespread lesions and lymphadenopathy [124]. More recently, others have shown that in wild chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus, new nomenclature) from the Taï National Park, mpox could manifest itself through the typical lesions, but also through a respiratory disease in absence of a rash, manifesting through coughing, breathing with an open mouth, as well as nasal and ocular discharge [132]. Heberling et al. reported the serial passage of MPV (Copenhagen strain, Clade IIa) in baboons (Papio cynocephalus) through skin scarification. Initial passages resulted in secondary lesions to the trunk, extremities, and face, along with typical clinical signs present in other NHP models, including fever and lymphadenopathy. Lethality was only observed in one of two experiments during passages 4–8, where animals succumbed to infection 9–17 dpi, exhibiting increasingly hemorrhagic scarified sites. Ultimately, MPV was isolated from rectal and throat swabs in most animals regardless of survival. In diseased animals, virus could also be identified from various organs, albeit inconsistently, including the heart, kidney, liver, lung, spleen, and various lymph nodes [133]. This group had previously reported a similar clinical disease using an i.m. injection, which also resulted in transmission to sentinel animals across the room [134]. Other animals found to be susceptible to MPV infection include sooty mangabeys (Cercocebus atys) [135], domesticated dogs although current evidence remains debated [136,137], orangutans [138], and shrews [139–140]. Finally, fire-footed rope squirrels (Funisciurus pyrropus) have been proposed as a reservoir for MPV, but the data has not been officially peer-reviewed at the time of writing [141].ConclusionsIn summary, we detailed the pathogenesis, transmission, and MCMs, where applicable, of the various animal models used in the context of mpox disease studies (Figure 1). As described throughout this review, MPV exhibits a broad host range, from classical laboratory animals (e.g. mice, rabbits, NHPs) to unconventional, wild-caught species (e.g. African pouched rats, prairie dogs, marmots) naturally susceptible to MPV. When investigating infectious diseases, the use of a specific animal model must be adapted to the study’s needs with careful consideration of the logistical advantages and disadvantages associated with the considered species. This includes not only animal species and strain, but animal sex and age, all in relation to the specific viral strain or clade, the dosage, inoculation route and transmission, the target organ and replication, the resulting immune response, clinical signs, pathology, and progression to include lethality. Additionally, reagent availability, project rationale and feasibility related to animal usage considerations, facility support, animal availability, and costs should be factored in.
Figure 1.Comparison of suitability and relevant features for commonly used animal models of MPV infection. Created in BioRender. de La Vega, M. (2025) https://BioRender.com/u2s38mh.As highlighted above, multiple rodent species have been evaluated with mixed success. Many species were found to be refractory to clinical disease and lethality, including guinea pigs, deer mice, hamsters, wild-type mice, and rats. However, other factors need to be considered during the selection process. Indeed, the age of the animal is critical, as juvenile mice, but not adults, will succumb to infection uniformly to multiple routes of infection. Wild-type mice, too, are refractory to disease, while immunocompromised mice such as CAST/EiJ became standard as they exhibit weight loss and may succumb to infection should the challenge parameters be stringent enough. For example, the use of a clade I virus given i.n. or i.p. at a sufficiently high dose, with reports of the i.p. route requiring smaller doses of virus, will generate uniform lethality. Ultimately, mice have been successfully used for pathogenesis studies aimed at comparing virulence between various MPV isolates and infection can be monitored using bioluminescence if non-invasive characterization of disease progression is required. Furthermore, evaluation of MCMs in mice can easily be conducted due to an observable reduction in mortality if a lethal model is used, as well as having immunoreagent availability toward characterizing associated immune responses. While other rodent models such as dormice, marmots, and ground and tree squirrels have shown to be highly susceptible to infection, they have been underused most likely due to the logistical issue surrounding procurement of these animals as their commercial availability ranges from minimal to non-existent. Importantly, these species have specific geographical distributions, making them harder to acquire by scientists conducting studies in countries located outside of the natural distribution of these animals. For example, prairie dogs have been extensively characterized as disease model for MPV infection in the United States due to their involvement in the 2003 outbreak, yet their use outside of the US remains limited as a model. Nonetheless, following an i.n. challenge, they exhibit numerous clinical signs, including skin lesions, which are not observed in mice except under very specific challenge conditions, and that vary in intensity depending on the viral strain used. Uniform lethality can be achieved under the correct conditions, making prairie dogs suitable for the evaluation of MCMs. This challenge model also results in a severe respiratory disease, featuring a crusty nose, laboured breathing, nasal discharge, as well as early viral shedding as detected in oral and nasal swabs, making this animal suitable for transmission studies.Ultimately, as is the case for many infectious diseases, NHPs have been considered the gold standard for mpox studies. Unsurprisingly, given their historical relevance in the discovery of MPV, the model has been refined for multiple applications. Studies evaluating the efficacy of prophylactic and therapeutic options have favoured the more aggressive i.v. challenge model in cynomolgus and rhesus macaques, which results in rapid viremia and viral distribution to key organs. Additionally, the use of a clade I virus at a dose of 5 × 107 PFU is almost always uniformly lethal, a key parameter for achieving statistical significance between control and treated or vaccinated animals, as numbers are often low for each group. However, this model has been criticized by those seeking to study MPV pathogenesis, given the high challenge dose required to achieve this effect, as well as the lack of resemblance to natural routes of exposure in humans. As an alternative, some studies have tried to purify challenge inoculums to reduce the required dose, with limited success. Currently, only marmosets have been shown to be highly susceptible to MPV challenge using low doses of virus, displaying 100% lethality at doses of only 48 PFU. Finally, challenge routes involving mucosal membranes, such as aerosol, intrabronchial, and intratracheal, have been evaluated successfully with varying degrees of lethality, providing alternatives for characterizing MPV pathogenesis in an animal model that more closely mimics the route of exposure and clinical progression observed in humans.While no animal model is perfect, the optimal choice will vary based on the purpose of the study, as well as the ability of the laboratory to procure and handle these animal species. Naturally-infected or susceptible species are of great value to understand disease ecology, pathogenesis, as well as zoonotic transmission. In a laboratory setting, transmission events have been best documented in prairie dogs and rabbits, but squirrels, multimammate mice, and NHPs may also be considered. For the evaluation of prophylactic and therapeutic options, most studies report data from mice, prairie dogs, and NHPs as lethal models have been highly characterized. However, the availability of immunological reagents for evaluating correlates of protection is higher for mice and NHPs, offering an additional insight into the protective mechanism of action of these MCMs. Finally, while most species discussed in this review are susceptible to infection in the context of pathogenesis studies, marmots, prairie dogs, and NHPs are the models consistently displaying the typical lesions and/or lymphadenopathy observed in humans. The continued development of these animal models, along with novel tools such as organ-on-a-chip systems and artificial intelligence solutions, is paramount to the development of efficacious medical countermeasures and furthering our understanding of mpox pathogenesis and transmission. These pave the way to clinical trials that ultimately result in life-saving therapeutics and vaccines, which have been reviewed elsewhere [142,143]. This is reinforced by the emergence in 2023 of a novel Clade Ib virus in the DRC. While Clade I viruses have historically been associated with higher disease severity and case fatality rates of up to 10%, this trend remains to be confirmed for Clade Ib as deaths remain limited. Of concern is the reported sustained human-to-human transmission, mainly through sexual contact, as well as the impact of genomic changes associated with this virus [10,144,145], which warrants further evaluation in animal models pertaining to MCMs, pathogenesis, and transmission.


Title: Monkeypox Virus in Animals: Current Knowledge of Viral Transmission and Pathogenesis in Wild Animal Reservoirs and Captive Animal Models

1. Mpox Epidemiology and Viral Transmission to HumansMonkeypox virus (MPXV) is a complex cytoplasmic double-stranded DNA virus, belonging to the genus Orthopoxvirus (OPXV), family Poxviridae [1,2]. OPXVs are a diverse group that includes pathogenic viruses of significance to public health and veterinary medicine and low pathogenic viruses that circulate undetected in wild animals [3,4,5]. The OPXV genus is subdivided into two main groups, Old World OPXV and North American OPXV [4]. The members of the Old World OPXV group such as variola virus (VARV), the cause of smallpox in humans; vaccinia virus (VACV); cowpox virus (CPXV); and monkeypox virus (MPXV), are associated with human infection and can cause disease and death in humans [3,5]. Within OPXVs that infect humans, MPXV and VARV are the most virulent pathogens [6,7,8,9]. Due to their high pathogenicity in humans and environmental stability, both MPXV and VARV are considered potential bioweapons [10,11]. MPXV and VARV are biosafety level 3 and 4 agents, respectively, with restrictions for laboratory experimentation and use [10,12]. OPXVs are highly successful viruses known to infect a variety of mammalian hosts, especially rodents, with a broad geographic distribution [5,13]. Another relevant feature of members of the genus OPXV is their extensive serological cross-reactivity, which makes their unequivocal diagnosis dependent on more specific molecular techniques, such as PCR, DNA-sequencing, and viral isolation [14,15,16]. Due to the severe restrictions on VARV cultivation and research, other OPXVs, such as MPXV, have frequently been used as models to understand its virulence and pathogenesis [6,7,17].MPXV is the causative agent of mpox disease in humans, a disease that resembles smallpox in its clinical manifestations [18,19]. MPXV infection can be fatal, with mortality rates as high as 10–17% for more virulent strains [6,20]. Because of the antigenic and genetic relationship between VACV, VARV, and MPXV, smallpox vaccines can protect against MPXV infection [7,21]. Human mpox is endemic in equatorial Africa, and, in contrast to the human-restricted infectivity of VARV, mpox is a zoonotic viral infection [9,19]. Mpox can be acquired by direct skin contact or mucosal exposure to infected animals, presumably rodents and monkeys [9,22]. Human-to-human transmission has often been mediated by close physical contact, but the airborne route has also been shown to play a role in secondary transmission [23]. Although human-to-human spread has historically been low, recent evidence has suggested that MPXV is becoming a more transmissible pathogen, and the recently recognized sexual transmission route could result in more efficient human-to-human transmission [24]. The incubation period is 10–14 days in humans, and the infectious period begins when clinical signs first appear, most commonly a pustular rash and lymphadenopathy [9,18,22].Isolates of MPXV have been subdivided into two clades that have different geographic distributions and virulence [19,25,26]. The phylogenetic comparison of MPXVs has suggested a long temporal separation between clades. Natural human infection and experimental infection of animals with viruses isolated from Central Africa (clade I) have caused more severe disease, as compared to virus isolates from West Africa (clade II) [6,25,26,27]. Although early studies of mpox identified cases in both Central Africa and West Africa, from 1989 to 2013, human mpox cases were only reported in countries in Central Africa [24,28]. In the years prior (1970–1987), human cases occurred in Benin, Cote d’Ivoire, Gabon, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone [24,28]. A serological survey in Ghana during the 2000s revealed the presence of antibodies against OPXV in humans and captured wild animals, suggesting the possibility of continued human contact with MPXV-infected animals [29], despite an apparent lack of human mpox cases in the region. Alternatively, a silent epizootic of an unknown OPXV could also explain these findings. Given this evidence and the sudden resurgence of human infections in the late 2010s, it was likely that MPXV was still circulating in animals and humans in regions of West Africa, even though human cases were not reported.In 2003, MPXV was reported outside of Africa for the first time, after being introduced to the United States through the importation of infected rodents from Ghana [25,30,31]. The virus was transmitted to pet prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus) co-housed with the imported African rodents and, subsequently, to humans [28]. Forty-seven human cases were reported in Wisconsin and Illinois, in persons who were in contact with the prairie dogs, but no cases of human-to-human transmission or deaths were reported [9,31]. A genomic sequence analysis showed that the virus belonged to clade II [28,31], making the outbreak in the United States the first incidence of human mpox originating from West Africa in over 20 years.Until very recently, most reported cases of human mpox had arisen in Central Africa. Outbreaks of mpox have predominantly occurred in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC; formerly Zaire), where human cases have been reported since 1970 [18]. From 2007 to 2015, the DRC reported over 1000 cases per year, the highest in any country [32]. Cases in other Central African countries, including Cameroon, the Central African Republic (CAR), and the Republic of Congo (ROC) were intermittent, and outbreaks were usually small [24]. In 2005, human mpox cases were also identified in Sudan and were thought to be associated with possible translocations of infected humans or animals from Central Africa [33].Beginning in the latter half of the 2010s, cases of mpox increased in both Central and West Africa. The majority of these cases occurred in the DRC, but numbers ranged from 2500 to 6216 per year in 2016–2021 [24]. In 2017 and 2018, a large outbreak of mpox occurred in Nigeria, with over 200 confirmed and suspected cases distributed over at least 17 states [34]. The distribution of cases in 2017 and early 2018 suggested multiple introductions from animals, as well as human-to-human transmission. This was the first confirmed human-to-human transmission of clade II MPXV [34]. During this outbreak, multiple exportation events occurred, to the United Kingdom (UK) [35], Singapore [36], Israel [37], and the United States [38]. These exported cases were primarily travelers who had visited Nigeria and healthcare workers [39]. Human mpox also increased during the period from 2015 to 2022 in Cameroon, the CAR, Liberia, the ROC, and Sierra Leone [24].Since May 2022, the largest ever outbreak of mpox has occurred, affecting 102 countries outside of the endemic region, resulting in over 85,650 cases to date [40]. The virus isolates circulating in Portugal and Belgium in May 2022 were most closely related to the isolates from the 2018 cases of mpox exported from Nigeria to Singapore, the UK, and Israel, as well as travel-associated cases from Nigeria in 2021 [41], suggesting that the current multinational outbreak originated in Nigeria, similar to the 2017 exportation events. However, others [42] have suggested a more complex scenario indicative of “cryptic”, uncharacterized human-to-human transmission prior to the recent outbreaks and involving multiple countries. Viral genomes with a distinct lineage (A.2) have been found in three countries (United States, India, and Thailand) and appear to be linked to travel to Nigeria and the United Arab Emirates. This lineage is different from the B.1 lineage of the virus that was linked to recent cases in Europe. Therefore, several events may have led to the transmission of the virus outside Africa, with some most likely occurring before 2022 [43]. Clearly, mpox is an emerging disease. Despite a lack of reported human cases in West Africa from the mid-1980s to the mid-2010s, clade IIb MPXV from this region initiated a worldwide epidemic in 2022. An apparent shift has occurred since 2015, with much greater case numbers and, potentially, an increase in human-to-human transmission, of both the clade I and clade II strains of the virus [44]. In the last five years, regular exportations of MPXV from Africa to other countries have occurred, making it imperative to determine the genetic diversity of the viral strains involved and their potential pathogenicity, so public health officials can remain vigilant for changes that would further increase transmission or pathogenicity and lead to the world’s next pandemic. The recent work by Gigante et al. [45] indicated that the human apolipoprotein B editing complex (APOBEC3) cytosine deaminase may be driving the evolution of clade IIb viruses. It is currently unknown how genetic changes described in the virus strains isolated in the recent outbreak affect their transmissibility.A decrease in the global immunity to OPXV since the cessation of smallpox vaccination campaigns has also been proposed as a potential reason for the increasing cases of mpox [22,46], as well as increases in international travel and spread across particular social networks [43]. Other potential causes are changes in the population and behavior of the reservoir species, increased hunting of wild animal reservoirs because of food insecurity and civil unrest, genetic changes in the virus, and improvements in the detection of mpox. Increased knowledge of the ecology of the virus in its natural host(s) is needed to address the root causes of the increased incidence and to develop public health solutions for this problem.One potential solution is the development of improved medical countermeasures for mpox. Although two effective vaccines against MPXV are available (ACAM200, IMVAMUNE/JYNNEOS), a large part of the world population has no immunity against this pathogen, and the supplies of these vaccines are insufficient to quickly vaccinate large portions of the world population. Several contraindications related to the ACAM2000 vaccine, including immunosuppression, pregnancy, breastfeeding, heart disease, and atopic dermatitis [22,28,47], have complicated its use. The Imvamune/JYNNEOS vaccine has been approved for emergency use but is largely untested for efficacy in humans [48]. Additionally, two antiviral drugs (tecovirimat, brincidofovir) are available, but they have not been well-studied for the treatment of human mpox and have not been approved for widespread use globally [49,50,51,52,53]. The increase in genomic variability and changes in the mpox eco-epidemiology have raised questions about the possibility of MPXV becoming a highly transmissible human pathogen, similar to VARV, due to the long-term absence of vaccination [5,22,28,54,55]. The higher susceptibility of the human population, the possibility of continued MPXV spread into non-endemic regions, and its potential use as a bioweapon, highlight the need to study the mechanisms of infection, the virulence factors, and the potential drug targets, and to characterize the pathogenesis of MPXV in animal models [9,22,28,56]. Later in this review, we describe the currently known animal models that could be used to address these gaps.2. Monkeypox Virus in Wild AnimalsMpox is a zoonosis, but much remains to be understood about its ecology. MPXV can infect a wide variety of mammalian species, and rodents are believed to be the most likely reservoir of the virus [57], though primates have also been considered as possible reservoirs. Despite many years of epidemiological surveillance for MPXV, the specific reservoir species of the virus have not been definitively identified [9,18]. This presents a major barrier to understanding the ecology of this virus, and one that deserves urgent attention. Furthermore, the geographic separation of clade I and clade II viruses has indicated the possibility that the reservoir(s) could also be distinct for each clade.MPXV was named after being isolated from laboratory monkeys in 1958 (von Magnus et al. 1959). Despite this, early serosurveys indicated the virus did not seem to be widely circulating in primate species [46]. MPXV has only been isolated directly in wild animals on rare occasions: from a Thomas’s rope squirrel (Funisciurus anerythrus) in the DRC in 1978, from a sooty mangabey (Cercocebus arys) in Cote d’Ivoire in 2010, and most recently, in a troop of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) in Cote d’Ivoire in 2017 [58,59,60]. The serological evidence of infection in wild animals has been found most often in rodents. In 1987, a very large investigation of MPXV reservoirs found that 24.7% of Thomas’s rope squirrels were seropositive in Zaire (now the DRC) [59]. The outbreak of mpox in the United States in 2003 was associated with the importation of pouched rats (Cricetomys spp.), rope squirrels (Funisciurus spp.), and African dormice (Graphiurus spp.), from Ghana [31]. In a 2004 follow-up investigation in Ghana, OPXV antibodies were found in pouched rats, African dormice, rope squirrels, and sun squirrels (Heliosciurus spp.), and OPXV DNA was found in the tissues of pouched rats, African dormice, and African ground squirrels (Xerus spp.) [29]. Neither of these results was specific for MPXV, so they could be evidence for MPXV circulation, or one or more other OPXVs could be circulating in these animals. A more recent study in Nigeria found that OPXV antibodies were found in Praomys spp. and Rattus rattus. Though there had been recent human mpox cases in Nigeria at the time, another rodent in the study (Mus baoulei) was found to be PCR-positive for OPXV but not MPXV, suggesting the circulation of another poxvirus in the local rodent populations [61]. Following an investigation of human mpox in 2017 in the Republic of Congo (ROC), 22% of Emin’s pouched rats (Cricetomys emini) were found to be seropositive [62]. Conversely, in another study, the same investigators found that mpox was epidemiologically linked to contact with non-human primates, and not rodents, in the DRC [63]. Lastly, MPXV-viral DNA was found in 93 of 1038 (9.0%) of the museum specimens of five Funisciurus species (F. anerythrus, F. carruthersi, F. congicus, F. lemiscatus, and F. pyrropus) in Central Africa [64]. Captive infection studies have also contributed to our understanding of MPXV in potential reservoir hosts from endemic areas in Africa. Several groups have performed experimental infection studies to characterize MPXV infection in Gambian pouched rats (Cricetomys gambianus) and rope squirrels (Funisciurus spp.). Mortality and morbidity were higher in rope squirrels than in pouched rats, but both species demonstrated some viral replication via in vivo bioluminescent imaging (BLI), in the absence of clinical signs [65,66]. It was also clear from these studies that MPXV could remain persistent in infected tissues for several weeks in both pouched rats and rope squirrels [65,66,67]. These animals shed high titers of MPXV in oral, nasal, and rectal secretions, which could have led to environmental contamination with MPXV and potential transmission to humans. An African dormouse species, Kellen’s dormouse (G. kelleni), was shown to be highly susceptible to intranasal (IN) infection with clade I MPXV, with an IN LD50 of only 12 pfu. The animals infected with 2 × 104 pfu shed the virus in nasal washes as early as day 2, indicating this species likely would have shed infective virus into the environment by nasal secretions [68]. In a separate study, in vivo imaging also demonstrated that the virus had been replicating in the nasal area of infected dormice as early as five days post-infection, although it was not clear from the report whether clinical signs had been observed during this early period of viral replication [69]. Currently, we are characterizing the infection of additional potential wild reservoir species captured in the DRC: Emin’s pouched rats (Cricetomys emini) and thicket rats (Grammomys surdaster). Further animal work could elucidate the most likely routes of transmission to help understand the length of time during which these species may be able to maintain and shed the virus and to model maintenance and transmission of MPXV in various species. This work could also parallel other work in the field to better understand the ecology and social behavior of these host species and how humans interact with them.The practical application of this information about native host species could also include educational campaigns to consumers of bush meat in Africa. For example, some species, such as primates, may only be infectious when they have skin lesions, whereas Gambian pouched rats had infectious MPXV in their tissues without gross evidence of disease [65]. This information could inform mitigation strategies, such as avoiding consumption of certain species or the use of gloves when handling uncooked specimens of certain species. As third-generation smallpox vaccines become more widely available, people that hunt and prepare bush meat, including rodent and primate species, could be prioritized for vaccination, along with healthcare workers.3. Animal Models Used to Study the Monkeypox Virus Captive animal studies have been used to understand many factors about MPXV infection in humans and how we could treat and prevent infections. Since the 1980s, researchers have searched for an animal model of mpox that mirrored the symptoms of human infection and that could be used to assess mpox pathogenesis as well as variations in viral virulence factors, and to test antiviral drugs and vaccines. To date, no perfect animal model has been identified, but several have been useful, with various positive and negative aspects. Early studies assessed the susceptibility of several rodent species to MPXV, including cotton rats (Sigmodon hispidus), red squirrels (Sciurus vulgaris), rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus), white rats (Rattus norvegicus domestica), and white mice (Mus musculus) [27,70,71]. These studies showed that the susceptibility of rodents to MPXV infection varied with the inoculation route, and reduced susceptibility was associated with age. Adult rodents tended to be more resistant to MPXV infection, while newborn animals were highly susceptible when inoculated by various routes, resulting in high morbidity and mortality rates. Because of the small size of the animals and the immature status of their immune systems, infant rodents are not currently used as animal models of MPXV infection [27]. Additionally, these models did not completely mimic human mpox clinical presentation and pathogenesis [13,71,72]. More recent experiments confirmed that the chinchilla strain of laboratory rabbits and Siberian miniature pigs (Sus scrofa) were not susceptible to infection by MPXV [73].MPXV infection has also been studied experimentally in nonhuman primates, and primate models have been used to test vaccines and other medical countermeasures [6,13,23,72,74]. Rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) developed severe fatal disease between 7 and 14 days, and the infection was characterized by maculopapular pox lesions in the skin and mucous membranes of the oral cavity, as well as hemorrhages in multiple organs and lymphadenopathy [75,76,77,78]. Cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) were highly susceptible to infection and showed clinical signs that resembled human mpox, including vesiculopapular rash, fibrinonecrotic pneumonia, lymphadenopathy, and death within 9–17 days post-infection [79,80]. Both models have typically been used with a lethal dose of approximately 5 × 107 PFU by the intravenous (IV) route [81]. Both intranasal and aerosol exposures of MPXV in cynomolgus macaques yielded similar results [23,76,82]. Marmosets have also been suggested as a potential model for human mpox, but their signs of the disease more resemble smallpox in humans, rather than mpox [83]. When given IV, moderate doses led to petechiae, pronounced lethargy, and death within three days, resembling the hemorrhagic form of smallpox disease. Lower doses adequately reproduced the lymphadenopathy found in human mpox, but the skin lesions did not progress through the typical OPXV lesion stages. The pulmonary lesions were less consistent than in the cynomolgus macaque model. In marmosets infected IN, typical OPXV skin lesions were seen in 2 of 4 marmosets. Dyspnea was evident, but the histology from the lungs and other organs was not reported. Large size, high cost, and the desirability of using lesssentient animal models have been limiting factors in primate models. Table 1 compares multiple primate and rodent models of MPXV infection by route, dose, and viral clade. The emergence of MPXV in the United States in 2003, following the importation of infected rodents from Africa, raised the possibility of using wild animals as models for mpox [13,72]. Three African rodent species were identified as potential sources of MPXV in the 2003 outbreak: rope squirrels (Funisciurus sp.), Gambian giant pouched rats (Cricetomys gambianus), and dormice (Graphiurus sp.) [31]. In laboratory studies, MPXV infection of dormice (Graphiurus kelleni) was highly lethal; the animals died within 7–8 days after IN infection, but no differences in morbidity and mortality were observed between MPXV clades [68]. This animal model was used to validate the prophylactic and therapeutic uses of smallpox vaccines against MPXV [68]. The 2003 MPXV outbreak in the United States also revealed a new potential animal model of mpox, as black–tailed prairie dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus) that had contact with infected African species were inadvertently infected, became sick, and died during that outbreak. The prairie dog model resembled the clinical characteristics of the human mpox disease and has been used extensively as a model to study the pathogenesis and transmission [13,72]. Black-tailed prairie dogs infected via intraperitoneal (IP), intradermal (ID), or IN routes developed severe lesions and clear signs of mpox. Systemic viral replication (blood, spleen, lungs, skin, liver, kidney, and heart) was detected after six days post-inoculation. Severely affected animals developed skin, tongue, and lip lesions and died within 8–16 days. These studies confirmed high levels of MPXV shedding via oral, nasal, ocular, and rectal routes, as well as animal-to-animal oral, respiratory, and mucosal transmission [87,90,91]. Because of the similarity to human mpox, prairie dogs have been used for vaccination and antiviral studies for the prevention and treatment of mpox [13,72,92]. Other species of ground squirrels may be similarly susceptible to MPXV and may be easier to acquire in some areas than black-tailed prairie dogs. Sergeev et al. [88] found that the Bobak Marmot (Marmota bobak) displayed similar lesions and tissue tropism to black-tailed prairie dogs, making them another potentially useful animal model of mpox.Other wild rodents from North America have also been used to study the MPXV pathogenesis and transmission [13,72,87,90,91,93]. The experimental infection of 13-lined ground squirrels (Spermophilus tridecemlineatus) by the IP route resulted in clinical disease and death within 7 days, whereas animals infected via the IN route died by day 9 post-infection [93]. All animals became lethargic and anorexic. However, neither detectable skin lesions nor respiratory symptoms were observed. Following an IP injection, the virus was detected in the blood by day 3 and throat swabs by day 4, with peak titers by day 5. Independent of the route of infection, high virus titers were found in the liver and spleen, but less in the kidney, lung, and heart [93]. Due to the lack of clinical signs compatible with human infection, the utility of this model is limited. Although wild animals have proven helpful in the study of MPXV pathogenesis, their use has been restricted by seasonal and poor availability, a lack of species-specific reagents, and difficult reproduction in captivity. Therefore, a more cost effective and easily produced animal model to study MPXV infection is needed [27]. Several laboratory mouse strains have been evaluated for their potential to characterize the replication and virulence differences between MPXV clades. However, most mouse strains have been resistant to infection, and differences in mortality were not observed [27,86,94]. In common laboratory mouse strains, such as BALB/c, C57BL/6J, as well as many others, high doses of MPXV inoculation did not cause mortality, and differences in morbidity between viral clades were difficult to identify [84]. Even the lack of type I and II interferon receptor genes in AG129 mice did not make them susceptible to disease from infection with clade II MPXV. Neither IN nor IP infection caused clinical signs of MPXV infection (File S1), but the virus replicated for longer periods (Figures S1–S6), up to 30 days post-inoculation [95]. SCID BALB/c mice were highly susceptible to IP MPXV infection, and the time-to-death was longer for clade II MPXV than clade I [86]. 3.1. Animal Studies on Immune Responses to Monkeypox Virus One specific knowledge gap that could be filled using data from animal studies is how MPXV interacts with the immune system. This is an important topic because the differences in the pathogenicity of the two clades of MPXV appear to be related to the presence of immunomodulatory genes in clade I viruses that are not present in clade II viruses [96]. Additionally, the development of improved vaccines requires the advanced study of the immune response following vaccination in an animal model. Much work has been performed using non-human primate models to understand the antibody response and the T-cell response to MPXV and mpox vaccines in cynomolgus and rhesus macaques [78,80,97,98]. Others have also used macaque models to study how antiviral medications co-administered with vaccines affect immune responses [81,99].To further this work, an immunocompetent mouse model that is susceptible to MPXV is needed. Sergeev et al. showed that IN infection with high doses of MPXV in outbred ICR mice caused pulmonary disease that was reduced with antiviral drugs. However, this model did not result in mortality, and the outward signs of clinical disease were limited to ocular disease and ruffled fur [73]. Although the severe pathology that could lead to mortality and the skin lesions typically associated with mpox were not evident in the ICR mice, this could be considered an immune-competent mouse model of viral pneumonia caused by MPXV. To date, the most common mouse breed used as a model of mpox has been the CAST/EiJ mouse. This mouse model was derived from Mus musculus castaneous and has been shown to be highly susceptible to MPXV [100]. The mouse-specific reagents available for studying the immune function of other strains of Mus musculus have worked well in this strain. The CAST/EiJ mouse model also has several unique features, as compared to other laboratory mice. MPXV infection in CAST/EIJ mice is lethal in a dose-dependent manner, and adult animals are susceptible to infection. Viral replication and spread caused systemic infection (lymph nodes, lung, spleen, liver, heart, and kidneys), significant weight loss, and mortality at days 6–10 post inoculation. More importantly, the immunization of CAST/EiJ mice with VACV induced antigen-specific T- and B-lymphocyte responses that protected the mice from lethal doses of MPXV, which supports the immune competence of this model [84,100]. Previous studies of CAST/EiJ mice concluded that the reason for their MPXV susceptibility was due to a deficiency in the IFN-γ production in the lung. However, they also showed that the levels of interferon in the other organs, including the spleen, were similar or greater than those measured in BALB/c mice [85]. This was evidence that CAST/EiJ mice are not lacking the IFN-γ gene or its expression, and their susceptibility is likely due to a lower level of circulating natural killer (NK) cells, which are major producers of interferons [101]. Later work by Earl et al. confirmed that CAST/EiJ mice had lower numbers of circulating NK cells and that this could be overcome with either a treatment of IL-15 or with a passive transfer of additional NK cells [102]. Therefore, although there is a difference in the innate immunity of the CAST/EiJ mice that makes them susceptible to OPXV, including MPXV, they can be considered immunocompetent. This model was recently used to confirm the efficacy of the antiviral drug tecovirimat for the MPXV strain circulating in the recent 2022 outbreak [103].3.2. The Utility of In Vivo Imaging in Investigation of Monkeypox Virus PathogenesisBased on the limitations of the various animal models for studying human mpox, it has become increasingly clear that a more thorough characterization of the disease with real-time technologies would be valuable [104,105,106]. Additionally, conventional pathogenic studies have required the sacrifice of numerous infected animals, which has limited MPXV experimentation [107]. In vivo imaging is a useful tool that could help resolve both concerns. In vivo imaging has been used extensively to detect fluorescent and luminescent signals in live animals in a variety of studies [104,105,106,108,109]. These signals have been coupled with pathogens (virus, bacteria, or protozoa), antibodies, and other biomolecules to study their presence, amount, and distribution inside live animals over time [106,107]. Bioluminescent imaging (BLI) refers specifically to in vivo imaging using luminescence detection. This methodology has been used to study and characterize pathogen infection and to evaluate the host immune-signaling pathways, cell-trafficking, and tumor growth, enabling the real-time quantification and analysis of experimental treatments [104,105,106,107].Taking advantage of the capacity to stably incorporate foreign genes into OPXV genomes [110,111], the insertion of luciferase and fluorescent genes markers has been used repeatedly to compare the infections of MPXV, CPXV, and VACV in rodents and primates [69,86,90,100,107,108]. Studies have shown that the insertion of the luciferase marker did not alter the viral replication or attenuate the virus, in vitro or in vivo, providing significant advantages for studying viral and host factors to determine the pathogenesis [86,106,112]. For example, Luker et al. [112] showed that the replication and the tissue dissemination of VACV was significantly increased in mice lacking receptors of type I and II IFNs, as compared to wild-type mice. In the same study, the authors demonstrated that the focal tissue luminescence was directly proportional to the virus titer in the tissue, enabling the quantification of the relative amounts of virus in various anatomical sites by BLI [112]. In our own study, BLI was used to show the differential replication of the clade I and II MPXV strains, despite a lack of differences in morbidity and mortality [86]. Using the same methodology to study MPXV infection, Earl et al. [69] constructed another recombinant clade I MPXV isolate expressing the luciferase gene and compared the outcome of IN infection of MPXV on the virulence, the tissue tropism, and the kinetics of replication between susceptible (CAST/EiJ) and resistant (BALB/c) mice strains. This study was conducted in two mouse models, and it also showed that the dissemination and the replication of the recombinant OPXV/Luc+ could be tracked within the internal organs. However, the analysis of the individual tissues from the CAST/EiJ mice showed that the luciferase emissions in different organs and body regions of mice infected with MPXV/Luc+ were not always directly associated with the tissue titers [69]. For example, when the luminescence in the area of the lung was equal to the luminescence in the abdomen, the viral titers in the lung were much higher than the titers in the liver and spleen. Similar findings were also found in the large prairie dog model, which were likely exacerbated by the larger amount of tissue between the tissues of origin and the imaging camera [90]. BLI has also been used to study interactions between the MPXV-elicited immune responses and the replication of the virus in vivo. We used CAST/EiJ mice and BLI to demonstrate that deletion of viral genes for secreted inhibitors of type I and type II interferons, an inhibitor of IL-1β, and two apoptosis modulators decreased viral pathogenicity and viral replication in mice but did not reduce viral replication in cell culture [96]. Future work could elucidate the effect of deletion of these genes individually. Earl et al. [102] used BLI to demonstrate that the addition of NK cells and IL-15 was sufficient to overcome the susceptibility of CAST/EiJ mice to VACV. Other examples of the use of BLI in OPXV research were in the preclinical evaluation of smallpox vaccines and the efficacy studies of antiviral treatments [113,114]. This technique has also been used to evaluate the CAST/EiJ mouse model for VACV and CPXV infections, vaccine testing, and the development of antiviral drugs [100,103]. Altogether, these studies using BLI demonstrated the utility of this methodology to compare and track MPXV and OPXV infections in mouse models, to evaluate host susceptibility, and to study the efficacy of vaccines and antivirals for mpox [86,100,112]. Not only is BLI a useful tool for understanding the virulence of MPXV strains, but it also has the potential to fulfill critical needs in the study of mpox epidemiology and pathogenesis in wild rodent species. We used BLI to track MPXV infection in potential reservoir species, such as rope squirrels and pouched rats, enabling us to monitor in real time where the virus was replicating in high amounts (the oral and nasal cavities) [65,66]. Using this method, we discovered viral replication at sites in the skin, without visible lesions in Gambian pouched rats [65], demonstrating that BLI could detect viral presence in areas that would not normally be collected for viral detection by PCR or viral culture. 3.3. Investigations of MPXV Genetic Diversity in Relation to Pathogenesis and VirulenceRecent findings have shown that the genetic diversity of MPXV in Central Africa is increasing; however, little is known about the differences in pathogenicity and the host range of circulating MPXVs. Sequencing and phylogenetic analyses have shown five short branches (lineages) within clade I viruses, suggesting a more recent diversification that could reflect viral adaptation to different hosts. In addition, the distribution of these viruses showed some associations between geographic origin and viral genetic variation. The genomic comparison of these circulating lineages showed genomic regions with high variability that could be associated with differences in the virulence and transmission in different reservoirs and humans [33,54,55]. Future work could investigate whether genomic differences between these five MPXV genotypes could explain the differences in pathogenicity. Using BLI in combination with the CAST/EiJ mouse model would be an ideal system for understanding the more subtle differences between the genotypes within a viral clade. Similarly, the methodology used in this research could be used to characterize the pathogenesis and transmissibility of the current clade II outbreak strains of MPXV and closely related viruses circulating in West Africa. Multiple studies showed that the CAST/EiJ animal model was useful for studying MPXV virulence factors, as well as the host immune response [96,102]. This model could be used in future studies to determine how viral genetics influence immunomodulation and transmission and if these genetic components are changing over time with increasing human-to-human transmission. On the other hand, prairie dogs have displayed clinical signs that more closely resemble mpox in humans. To understand the role of the virulence genes in the pathogenesis, future studies could use the prairie dog model to study the effects of the immunomodulation genes on the clinical signs and the progression of MPXV infection. This model, in concert with BLI, could be a very useful tool for studying the mechanism behind the apparent increase in transmissibility in recent outbreaks. 3.4. Alternative Routes of Monkeypox Virus Transmission The 2022 global outbreak of mpox revealed a potentially novel method of transmission: sexual contact. Sexual activity was highly common among human transmission events across the globe [57]. It is currently unknown if sexual contact is only an effective method of close contact with skin and mucous membranes or if sexual transmission via reproductive fluids such as semen is also possible. This determination would require studies of semen and testicular tissues, likely in larger animal models, such as primates and prairie dogs. The collection of semen over time would be most easily accomplished in primates. In the prairie dog model using BLI, viral replication was evident in the testicular tissues [90], and in SCID BALB/c mice, the virus and pox lesions were detected in the ovaries of the female mice [86]. A recent retrospective investigation uncovered MPXV in the testes of rhesus macaques for periods as long as 37 days post-exposure [115].The reports of spontaneous early miscarriages, as well as a second-trimester stillborn fetus, in human females that contracted mpox were most likely related to a clade I strain [116], which has raised concerns about the vertical transmission of the virus and the outcomes of the infection in pregnant people [117]. The tissues of the stillborn fetus were positive for MPXV DNA. Studies in primate models with both viral clades would be helpful in evaluating the risks of MPXV infection on maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality, as well as potential treatment options. 3.5. The Use of Animal Models to Develop Medical CountermeasuresNonhuman primates, prairie dogs, and laboratory mouse models have been used to evaluate medical countermeasures, such as antiviral drugs and vaccines. For example, the oral administration of the antiviral drug, tecovirimat, was shown to protect primates from MPXV disease by significantly reducing viral loads, clinical signs, and mortality [118]. Similarly, mortality was significantly reduced in treated prairie dogs [119]. This drug was shown to be safe in numerous subsequent clinical trials in humans [57], although more work is needed to confirm its efficacy and usefulness for treating mpox patients. Another antiviral drug, brincidofovir, was also tested using the prairie dog model and shown to be most useful if administered early in the course of infection [53]. Although licensed by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to treat human smallpox disease, more studies are needed on brincidofovir to determine its safety and efficacy in treating mpox patients. Animal models would be particularly useful for studying whether the development of drug-resistant strains of MPXV could occur with extended use. Potential vaccine candidates have also been screened and compared in animal models. For example, cynomolgus macaques that received a single immunization with the ACAM2000 attenuated smallpox vaccine were shown to be protected against aerosolized MPXV, whereas the newer third-generation vaccine, modified vaccinia Ankara (Imvamune/JYNNEOS), required an initial dose and a booster to elicit full protection [98]. In the prairie dog model, the vaccination with ACAM2000, 1–3 days after MPXV infection, significantly reduced mortality from infection, whereas Imvamune was only effective if administered 1 day post-exposure [92]. However, if administered prior to exposure, Imvamune elicited long-lasting protection against MPXV challenge, and because it is a non-replicating viral vaccine, it was considered safer, causing fewer side effects than ACAM2000 [120]. In these examples and others, the usefulness of screening new medical countermeasures in animal models is evident. The recent outbreak has stimulated a renewed interest in developing additional countermeasures to prevent and treat mpox, and several new products are currently being tested in animal models. 4. ConclusionsMany questions remain about MPXV epidemiology that require animal studies to answer. The most prominent of these questions are: (1) What are the reservoir species of MPXVin the wild? (2) What is the basis (viral genetics, host behaviors, or others) for the apparent increase in transmissibility in recent cases of human mpox? (3) How does MPXV interact with the immune system? (4) Can we use the genetic basis of these interactions to predict which strains may be more likely to become epidemic strains in the future? This review demonstrated that several animal models may be helpful in answering these questions about the viral pathogenesis of MPXV, most importantly in CAST/EiJ mice. The prairie dog and cynomolgus monkey models represent the best options to further test the immunoprophylaxis and antiviral treatments. The prairie dog model also holds promise in studying the transmission of the various MPXV strains. The identification of likely MPXV reservoir species for both clades of the virus will require both laboratory-based captive studies and extensive field work. A better understanding of the epizootiology of MPXV will help health officials determine which populations of humans should be targeted for prevention strategies. As we have seen, MPXV will likely continue to emerge in humans without further intervention. Only through continued studies in animals can we answer some of these long-standing questions and start implementing appropriate public health strategies.


Title: The outbreak of monkeypox: A clinical overview

BackgroundFrom 01 January 2022 to 15 September 2022, there have been over 60 320 laboratory-confirmed cases of monkeypox and 23 deaths reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) by 103 member states.1 The majority of these cases were reported by the WHO European Region, followed by the Americas, Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean and the Western Pacific.2 To date, five laboratory-confirmed cases of monkeypox have been reported in South Africa.2,3 While a global map maintained by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported 61 282 confirmed cases across 74 locations, what was concerning was that 68 locations included countries that had not reported monkeypox previously.4 On 23 July 2022, following the second meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) (IHR) Emergency Committee, it was announced that the WHO’s director-general had determined that the multicountry outbreak of monkeypox constituted a public health emergency of international concern.5Monkeypox is a contagious zoonotic disease caused by the double-stranded DNA virus of the Orthopoxvirus genus in the Chordopoxvirinae subfamily and Poxviridae family.6 There are currently over 80 poxviruses known to science, and these have been isolated from various animals, mammals and birds.7 Two main strains of the human monkeypox virus, the Congo Basin clade and the West African clade, have been identified. The Congo Basin clade is more virulent and transmissible.8 The overall case-fatality rate for monkeypox ranges from 1% to 10%.7The first known case of monkeypox was discovered in 1958 in Denmark. It was caused by a pox-like disease that affected a group of monkeys that were kept for research.9 The first human case of monkeypox was recorded in the Democratic Republic of Congo in 1970.10 It is believed that the virus can be introduced to humans through infected rodents. The monkeypox virus can be found in various animal species, such as tree squirrels, primates and rope squirrels in endemic areas. It is also believed that certain types of rodents are the carriers of the disease.7,11 Although monkeypox infections in humans are relatively rare, they can still occur in endemic areas.The endemic countries for monkeypox are the Central African Republic, Cameroon, Ghana, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Gabon, Ivory Coast, Liberia and the Democratic Republic of Congo.9 In the past, countries such as South Sudan and Benin have imported monkeypox. Frequently outbreaks of the West African clade are reported from Nigeria and Cameroon.7 All the endemic countries reported new disease cases as the multicountry outbreak has continued since January 2022. Usually, the cases of the monkeypox disease in other countries are linked to travel to endemic regions. However, the current outbreak is different from past travel-related outbreaks.2,12The number of people with no immunity to smallpox increased after the vaccination programme ended, resulting in a vulnerable population.13 Although there is currently no evidence that person-to-person transmission can sustain the ongoing outbreaks of zoonotic infections in humans, the≈increasing number of people infected with these pathogens highlights the interconnectedness of humans, animals and the environment.14,15 The importance of implementing a ‘One Human–Environmental–Animal Health’ approach to controlling zoonotic infections needs to be acknowledged by policymakers.15 Despite progress, more work is needed to achieve a more effective and sustainable solution.Clinical presentation of monkeypoxThe initial symptoms of monkeypox are usually fever, headache and fatigue.16 The incubation period for monkeypox is usually 7 to 14 days, but it can range from 5 to 21 days. During the prodromal phase, which lasts for about a week, patients may experience fever, back pain, headache, muscle aches and lymphadenopathy.16,17 After the fever subsides, the second phase usually begins with deep well-circumscribed vesicular, pustular and macular lesions. A centrifugal rash can start on the face and then spread to other body parts. It can also involve the mucous membranes of the oral cavity, genitalia, conjunctiva and cornea. The rash can progress through various other stages. It can then crust over and desquamate over 2 to 3 weeks.8,18Some patients present with atypical symptoms of monkeypox, such as a few lesions localised to the perineal or genital area. They can also develop a rash before constitutional or prodromal symptoms such as fever and fatigue.10 Lymphadenopathy is a common feature of this illness and can usually appear as early as the first week of illness.10,16Individuals who have not been vaccinated against smallpox and present in a nonendemic country with an acute rash on their hands and feet may be infected with the disease. However, the common causes of acute rash are viral infections, such as smallpox, chickenpox, rubella, syphilis, chikungunya and dengue.6,11
Figure 1 and Figure 2 demonstrate monkeypox’s suspected and probable case definition.FIGURE 1Suspected case definition of monkeypox.FIGURE 2Probable case of monkeypox case definition.Transmission of monkeypoxHumans can be infected with monkeypox through contact with mucocutaneous or infectious skin lesions.19 This can occur in various contact forms such as skin-to-skin, mouth-to-mouth or respiratory droplets. The virus can enter the body through broken skin, the respiratory tract or the oral and pharyngeal surfaces.6,19,20 In addition to skin lesions, monkeypox can also be transmitted from the environment to humans through the presence of infectious particles. These particles can then be inhaled and land on the broken skin or other mucosal membranes. The monkeypox virus can be further spread in endemic areas by handling infected bush meat through contact with bodily fluids and contaminated objects.19While the initial symptoms of the disease can appear for up to two weeks, infected individuals can remain contagious.2,19 Although the exact period during which patients are infectious can vary, most will be considered contagious until their skin lesions have crusted and their scabs have disappeared.11 It is believed that prolonged exposure to the respiratory tract and proximity to infected individuals are the factors that can trigger the transmission of monkeypox. However, it is not yet clear how sexual transmission can also occur. During pregnancy, the virus can cross the placenta and cause intrauterine exposure to the foetus.7,11 In addition, individuals in contact with infected health workers and household members are at increased risk of getting the disease.19
Figure 3 demonstrates the contact definition of monkeypox.FIGURE 3Contact definition of monkeypox.Isolation criteria for monkeypox exposurePer the case definition criteria, travel to an endemic country within the past 21 days, before the appearance of symptoms, is an essential criterion for assessing the probability of monkeypox.21 However, people do not need to stay away from work after exposure to monkeypox. The WHO does not recommend quarantine or work restrictions for exposed individuals during the contact tracing. The WHO encourages all contacts to follow proper hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette.19,21 It also recommends avoiding physical contact with immunocompromised individuals, pregnant women, children and sexual abstinence. Nonessential travel is also discouraged.21If asymptomatic contacts can still perform regular activities, such as school and work, they should refrain from donating blood, tissues and semen. They should also stay under observation for 21 days after their exposure.8 Health workers exposed to monkeypox but asymptomatic should also be allowed to continue working with appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE).19Vaccination for monkeypoxMass vaccination is not recommended for people with potential exposure to monkeypox.22 All decisions regarding the immunisation of monkeypox should be based on a joint assessment of the risks and benefits of the vaccines by a healthcare provider and a prospective vaccinee.2,22
Figure 4 demonstrates the assessed risk level of the possible exposure types. Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) can be used to prevent the onset of disease in people with a high to medium exposure to monkeypox,22 and the general recommendation is to be given within 4 days of exposure to the virus. It can also be given up to 14 days in the absence of symptoms, particularly for individuals at high risk of experiencing ongoing exposure.2,6,22FIGURE 4Assessed level of risk of the possible types of exposure.Pre-exposure prophylaxis is recommended for healthcare workers and individuals at high risk of potential exposure to the virus.22 This can also be offered to individuals performing diagnostic tests for monkeypox.Although the effectiveness of the smallpox vaccine has been known to be 85%, following the smallpox eradication in 1980, routine vaccinations against the disease were no longer advised.2,22 The original first-generation smallpox vaccine has been removed from the market due to the development of safer vaccines. Newer second- and third-generation vaccines developed for smallpox have been approved for use against monkeypox.22 For patients with immunosuppression, these smallpox vaccines have been contraindicated and can be replaced with vaccinia immune globulin.18Prevention of monkeypoxInfection control and prevention (IPC) are essential steps to prevent the spread of monkeypox. These include regular hand hygiene, the use of disinfectants and the proper disposal of needles and other medical equipment.23 Besides these, other precautions such as gloves and practising adequate respiratory hygiene are essential to prevent the spread of monkeypox infections.6,23
Figure 5 demonstrated the standard precautions to be followed by all healthcare workers when controlling the spread of monkeypox. However, there is a need for additional risk assessment to evaluate the effectiveness of these measures.FIGURE 5Infection prevention and control standard operating procedure for healthcare management of monkeypox patients.Laboratory diagnosis of monkeypoxA case that meets the diagnostic criteria of either a probable or suspected case can be confirmed by the presence of viral DNA. This can be carried out through polymerase chain reaction or sequencing.24 In addition, a positive result for an orthopoxvirus serological test can be obtained if the patient has not been vaccinated against smallpox or exposed to other viral infections.18,24 The ideal samples for monkeypox come from the skin lesions (vesicle or pustule skin or fluid, scab or dry crust).24 Other optional specimens that can be sent case-by-case in consultation with National Institute for Communicable Diseases (NICD) are throat swabs, rectal and/or genital swabs (if lesions present), semen, plasma or serum.Management of monkeypoxMost people infected with the monkeypox virus do not require specific treatment. Clinical management of cases aims to reduce morbidity and minimise transmission of disease. The disease is usually self-limited and can last up to 4 weeks.16 However, public health measures can be used to control the spread of monkeypox. These include early diagnosis, isolation and contact tracing.6,16 Follow the IPC steps to minimise the spread of the disease. If a person has been diagnosed with monkeypox and has been established as a confirmed case, they should be isolated until the skin lesions have turned into crusts and the scabs have disappeared.8When caring for an infected person, the caregiver must avoid close contact, and the patient’s lesions should be covered with a bandage or clothing. The following care is suggested for the skin and mucous membrane lesions of monkeypox:6,16,19The affected areas of the skin need to be cleaned with warm and soapy water and a povidone-iodine solution.Vitamin A supplementation is recommended to prevent corneal scarring and visual impairment.Use special protective glasses or pads to prevent the eyes from getting damaged.Performing a mouth wash with clean, warm salted water is recommended for mouth lesions.To minimise the pain caused by mouth ulcers, use an oral analgesic medication and encourage adequate fluid intake.Administer oral or topical antibiotics as needed to treat secondary bacterial infection.Both smallpox and monkeypox viruses are genetically similar. The vaccines and antiviral drugs developed for smallpox are effective against monkeypox. New generation smallpox vaccines have been approved against monkeypox as pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis.22 In January 2022, the European Medicines Agency approved using tecovirimat and brincidofovir (antiviral agents) for treating monkeypox.2,18 However, the availability of tecovirimat is currently limited to a specific country.Complications of monkeypoxComplications of the disease can include various conditions such as pneumonitis, encephalitis and meningitis.7,16 One of monkeypox’s recognised and common long-term complications is the formation of pitted scar tissue.16 Although the case fatality rate for unvaccinated individuals can range from around 0% – 11%, immunocompromised patients are more prone to experiencing more severe complications.22Prognosis of monkeypoxThe symptoms of the disease are usually mild and self-limiting. However, it can be severe among children, pregnant women and individuals with immune suppression.16 Having a residual immunity from the previous smallpox vaccination significantly reduces the severity and frequency of the clinical signs and symptoms of the disease.22ConclusionIn conclusion, the monkeypox virus has raised many important questions regarding its potential for rapid spread, especially after recent experiences with the ongoing coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. For instance, concerns may arise among lay community members that the monkeypox virus can develop new properties and mutate into a more contagious disease. Although there is currently no evidence that transmission by individuals can sustain zoonotic infections in humans, the continued emergence of these pathogens highlights the interconnectedness of animals and humans. The importance of implementing a ‘One Human–Environmental–Animal Health’ approach to controlling zoonotic infections must be acknowledged by policymakers.As monkeypox is a contagious disease, frontline primary healthcare workers should be on the lookout for additional symptoms and signs suggestive of the monkeypox case definition when dealing with patients presenting with an unexplained acute skin rash. Currently, there is no definitive treatment, but new-generation smallpox vaccines have been demonstrated to be very effective against monkeypox disease. As a part of the management strategy, primary care and public health professionals are expected to increase their efforts to be vigilant and contain any potential outbreaks.


Title: Exploring the genomic basis of Mpox virus-host transmission and pathogenesis

INTRODUCTIONOrthopoxviruses, a genus within Poxviridae, infect a wide variety of mammalian species and have been the cause of large-scale human devastation. Orthopoxviruses are enveloped, brick-shaped viruses with a single copy of a double-stranded DNA genome of approximately 200 kb and replicate in the cytoplasm. The middle portion of the genome is highly conserved among other genera within Poxviridae, which includes genes crucial for viral translation, replication, and packaging. This genetic arrangement allows for more variability within the left and right terminals of the different virus genomes. These more variable regions contain accessory genes that are not directly involved in essential functions needed to produce functional viral particles. Here, we focus on these accessory genes, as they are critically important in virus-host interaction events that are crucial for understanding Orthopoxvirus pathogenesis.Up to 50% of the Orthopoxvirus genome is dedicated to regulating the host innate and adaptive immune responses. Within the Orthopoxvirus genus, there are 105 common genes involved in host-virus interactions (1). While no single Orthopoxvirus species contains all 105 genes, there are the cowpoxviruses (CPXVs) that contain almost all (1). These genes were initially acquired through waves of horizontal gene transfer events from ancestral hosts and potentially other viruses (1–3). Over the millennia, these genes have undergone selective changes, including mutations, deletions, and duplication events, ultimately giving rise to the major species of Orthopoxviruses (1, 3, 4). Orthopoxvirus species differ in their composition of the left and right accessory gene regions, wherein the function and copy number influence host range and pathogenicity.While encoding a wealth of virulent factors can offer benefits to viral success, these benefits may be offset by fitness costs. First, a larger genome increases replication time, resulting in more time for the host immune response to recognize and respond to the viral infection. Second, an excess of host-modulating genes can disrupt the immune response excessively, hindering the host’s ability to survive and facilitate successful virion reproduction. Finally, different host species may contain or lack immune pathways that would leave viral genomes with redundant or inessential genes. Consequently, a recurrent pattern among Orthopoxviruses is their active engagement in reductive evolution, minimizing genome size to optimize fitness (1, 5). Eliminating superfluous immune evasion elements, fine-tuning species-specific codon usage, and mutating gene sequences to alter structure-specific binding patterns are all strategies that may narrow the host range while enhancing viral fitness by specializing within a particular host niche.The host range and pathogenesis of Orthopoxviruses are intricately linked to the presence or absence of virulence genes (6, 7). Among Orthopoxviruses, cowpoxviruses (CPXVs) exhibit the broadest host range, infecting numerous species with varying efficiency consistent with an extensive genomic complement of accessory genes. In contrast, ectromelia virus (ECTV), closely related to CPXVs, specializes in infecting small murine species. Variola virus, with a significantly reduced genome, demonstrates high host specificity, primarily an extremely successful human pathogen. There are too few virulence genes, such as the heavily attenuated modified vaccinia virus Ankara, which experienced excessive ~30-kbp gene loss during repeated in vitro passaging, thereby losing the ability to successfully replicate within any mammalian species (8). MPXVs, too, have experienced gene loss, which shaped the species into being a rodent-borne pathogen that has the capacity to effectively infect and be transmitted by humans. The genes that MPXV has lost can, in relation to other Orthopoxviruses, give us clues about the genes unnecessary to establish a niche within primates and Rodentia. Vice versa, Orthopoxviruses that share similar host preferences as MPXV may harbor similar orthopox genes (OPGs) that can provide insights into the important virulence and transmission factors.Comparative genomics has been widely used to study gene presence and absence related to pathogenesis and host range of Orthopoxviruses (6, 7, 9, 10). Here, we explore the genomic basis of MPXV host specificity and pathogenesis, covering the genes that define immune evasion strategies utilized among the MPXV species and clades. Additionally, we detail how these immune strategies may work to different effects within rodents, mice, and primates to explain the extended host range of MPXV compared to the narrow host range of other Orthopoxviruses. As MPXV has been elevated to a public health emergency of international concern, it is imperative to delineate the important virulence factors and evolutionary mechanisms that are currently fueling its rise (11).MPXV SPECIES DEFINING GENES IN RELATION TO OTHER ORTHOPOXVIRUSESUnderstanding the genes of MPXV is essential for unraveling its pathogenesis, host range, and potential for transmission. The genetic makeup of MPXV, distinct from other Orthopoxviruses, harbors a combination of relinquished and retained genes that play crucial roles in its evolutionary trajectory and interaction with hosts. By examining these genes, we can discern the adaptive evolutionary strategies employed by MPXV to navigate its ecological niche and infect various host species, including humans. In this exploration of relinquished and retained MPXV genes, we delve into the genetic adaptations that shape the virulence, transmission dynamics, and emergence of this significant zoonotic pathogen (Fig. 1).Fig 1Graphical abstract depicting the three sections of the review: MPXV species-defining traits, MPXV clade differences, and evolutionary forces acting upon MPXV.The figure compares the monkeypox virus with related viruses, revealing proteins for host range and clades I and II linked to cytokine storm pathways like IL-1 and MHC-I, along with genomic evolution processes like SNP generation and codon optimization.Interferon interruption in a species-specific manner dictates host rangeFor mammalian cells, the activation of protein kinase R (PKR) plays a crucial role in the establishment of an antiviral state. PKR activation has been extensively reviewed regarding its central role in signal transduction through STAT, IRF-1, p53, and NF-κB (12). Importantly, PKR serves as a cytosolic sensor for dsRNA pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) that are generated during transcription from dsDNA viruses, a result of both strands of DNA being transcribed simultaneously causing reciprocal RNA binding (12). Importantly, PKR additionally serves to modulate the host translational capability during a viral infection—through the regulation eIF2α (12).The first genetic difference we detail is a heavily conserved gene among all of Orthopoxviruses and plays a key role in inhibiting the downstream function of PKR. OPG041, also known as Cop-K3L, encodes an eIF2α mimic that interrupts PKR’s ability to modulate the host translational capability during viral infection. Without OPG041/K3L and upon binding to dsRNA, PKR phosphorylates the initiation factor, eIF2α, which competitively inhibits eIF2B resulting in the inhibition of general translation of viral and mammalian mRNAs except for stress-response mRNAs (12). The viral eIF2α mimic blocks the host eIF2α from being phosphorylated, in turn prohibiting viral translation (13). Interestingly, MPXV and ectromelia virus are the only two Orthopoxvirus species that contain a deleterious mutation causing the protein to become non-functional (1, 10). When OPG041 was deleted from vaccinia virus, the virus became attenuated in vitro (6). While the IFN response is important for most mammalian species to fight off infection, MPXV and ectromelia virus have adopted alternative strategies for handling down-stream interferon signaling—a potential compensating factor for the loss of function for OPG041.Vaccinia virus, ectromelia virus, cowpoxvirus, and MPXV contain OPG174, otherwise known as Cop A44L (10). This gene encodes a hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase protein that functions to convert steroid precursors into glucocorticoids, which have immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory properties, thereby counteracting an IFN-induced anti-viral immune response (10, 14). The deletion of this gene from the Vaccinia virus caused mice to increase IFN production throughout the course of infection (10). The deletion of this gene from the Ectromelia virus or MPXV, in combination with the natural loss of the PKR antagonist, OPG041, may induce a stronger IFN response from the host, thereby attenuating infection. This represents a unique strategy shared by these small-animal-infecting species.For MPXV, the ability to infect small animal species may depend on the reliance on glucocorticoid production; however, for viruses that infect larger mammalian species, such as primates, the blockage of PKR signaling is a strong selective pressure. Activating the PKR response is a major therapeutic strategy employed by the use of isatin-β-thiosemicarbazone (IBT)—which binds to the Orthopoxvirus RNA polymerase to instigate long mRNA synthesis and subsequent dsRNA PAMPS (15). MPXV is unique in that it has been shown to naturally produce less dsRNA during infection and is IBT-resistant—a result of an unknown mutation within viral RNA polymerases (16). The outcome of this mutation was shown to dampen but not inhibit the PKR response and subsequent IFN production (16). Additionally, OPG034 or VACV Cop-K1L is conserved in ectromelia and MPXV, although fragmented within variola virus. This protein has been shown to reduce the amount of dsRNA during infection, thus weakening PKR activation (17, 18). The combination of genes outlines MPXV’s strategy to overcome PKR activation and together may have allowed MPXV to establish various host niches.Hijacking proteasomal degradation to manipulate intracellular signaling cascadesDuring the extended 24-hour period of Orthopoxvirus replication, intracellular signaling cascades, following PAMP recognition and/or stress responses, are continuously activated and subsequently subverted by interfering viral products (19, 20). A large majority of innate immune signaling cascades coalesce around the ubiquitination of substrates that direct them for activation, translocation, or proteasomal degradation. The host ubiquitin system plays a fundamental role in regulating various cellular processes, including protein degradation, DNA repair, and signal transduction. Ubiquitin, a small protein, is covalently attached to target proteins, marking them for degradation by the proteasome or altering their function, localization, or interactions with other molecules. In the context of viral infections, many viruses have evolved strategies to manipulate the host ubiquitin system to promote their replication and evade immune detection. Here, we detail how Orthopoxviruses utilize ankyrin-like proteins and BTB-kelch proteins dysregulate host proteins, such as NF-κB, through their strategy of interfering host ubiquitin ligases. Additionally, we compare the gene presence and absence of these proteins within MPXV to Orthopoxviruses with restricted host ranges for us to highlight specific ankyrins and kelch-like proteins involved in the pathogenesis of different host species.First, ankyrin-containing proteins (ANK) and BTB-kelch proteins are major Poxviral gene families associated with interfering E3 ubiquitin ligases (21, 22). E3 ligases are a multi-subunit structure composed of S-phase protein kinase 1 (SKP-1) and Cullin1-3 proteins. Substrates interact with this structure through association with a linker-domain protein, either ANK/F-box, ANK/BC, or BTB-kelch proteins (21). Most poxviral ANK proteins contain an F-box domain, some contain BC domains, and OPG039 (K1L) contains no linker domain (21, 23). Kelch-like proteins also interact with E3 ubiquitin ligases, targeting the cullin 3 ligase, SCF3 (7, 24). Most importantly, ANK and kelch-like proteins have specific targets that are brought to the SCF complexes for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation—although many targets have yet to be found (22).Overall, poxviruses harbor 14 categories of ANK-containing paralogs (1, 21). Among them, variola and ectromelia viruses exhibit a reduction in half ANK/F-box paralogs, while MPXV has lost five (1). Additionally, BTB-kelch domains are widely dispersed across the Orthopoxvirus species. Variola virus and MPXV have extensive loss of most BTB-kelch proteins (1). Ectromelia, on the other hand, contains three or more BTB-kelch-like paralogs (1, 21). A collection of shared BTB-kelch and ANK proteins is summarized in Table 1.TABLE 1Selected relinquished and retained OPGs in Mpox virus species and cladesaOPGDescriptionGene differences in relation to MPXVVACV-Cop002CrmB; TNF-α and other chemokine-binding receptor homologMPXV species contains two copies on left and right terminals, VARV only includes one, truncated in ECTV and absent on the right terminal (6, 25).C22L003Ankyrin-containing protein/F-box. Binds to NF-κB subunitsPresent in MPXV species. Absent in VARV (7).C19L006-14Bcl-2 domain; PIE domain; BTB domain, no kelch domain; ANK and PRANC domains; C-type lectin domain, putative decoy ligand for NK cell inhibitory receptor; type II transmembrane, TAP inhibitor, inhibits peptide loading on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I and antigen presentation; BTB and kelch domains; PIE domain, SCP-2; TNF receptor vCD30 homolog, binds CD153, prevents CD30/CD153 interaction; ANK and PRANC domains, binds to cullin 2 and inhibits NF-κB activationAbsent in MPXV and VARV. Largely conserved between ECTV and CPXV.015Ankyrin-containing protein. Interacts with E3 cullin ligase to suppress NF-κB and IRF3 (23)Truncation in some Clade I MPXV isolates. Absent in VARV (7, 26, 27).–016MHC class I homolog; NKG2D receptorInactivation in some Clade I MPXV isolates. Absent in VARV (7, 26, 27).–023ANK/F-box protein and host-range factor; Chinese hamster ovary required factorDe novo deletions in MPXV Clade IIb B.1 genomes (28).–025Ankyrin-containing proteinPresent in MPXV species, truncated in VARV (7).C9L030Kelch-like proteinMissing in Clade IIa/b MPXV. Present in Clade I. En route to elimination (1, 26).C5L032Complement control proteinPresent in MPXV Clade I, VARV, and ECTV. Absent in Clade II MPXVs (6, 29).C3L033Kelch-like proteinHighly diverged from ancestral ortholog (30). MPXV Clade II is further truncated (26). Often lost in connection with OPG32 (1).C2L034TLR-signal inhibitor, Bcl-2 domainPresent in MPXV, VARV, and CPXV. Absent in ECTV.C1L038PIE domain, blocks SD28-mediated T cell activation, secretedPresent in MPXV and VARV species, absent in ECTV species (31).M2L039Ankyrin-containing protein, no F-boxPresent in MPXV species and ECTV. Truncation/fragmented in VARV (7, 10).K1L041PKR antagonist, eIF2α homologMPXV and ECTV species truncation, predicted nonfunctional (6, 10).K3L042Phospholipase-D like proteinPresent in MPXV, CPXV, AKMV, and VPXV. Absent in variola virus.K4L043Monoglyceride lipasePresent in MPXV, CPXV, AKMV, and VPXV. Absent in variola virus.K5L, K6L045PIE domain; blocks apoptosisPreviously absent in Clade II MPXVs, now full-length in both Clades I and II (32). Present in VARV, lengthier in ECTV.F1L047BTB-kelch domainMPXV Clade I contains full gene, large truncated in VARV (7). MPXV Clade II reported absence (26).F3L062Sequesters RAPTOR and dysregulates mTORC1-mTORC2 signalingImmunomodulator found within MPXV, VACV, VARV, CPXV, and ECTV (33).F17065Zα/dsDNA-binding proteinMPXV species contains truncation of Za binding domain, non-functional (10).E3L067RNA polymerase subunitPresent in all Orthopoxviruses. Truncated in MPXV Clade II.E5R071DNA polymerase catalytic subunitMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28).E9L105RNA polymerase subunitMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28).J6R109RNA polymerase-associated proteinMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28).H4L135Viral membrane-associated, early morphogenesis proteinLow sequence similarity among Orthopoxviruses.A9L153Intracellular mature virion surface tubule protein. Major host antibody target.STR genomic accordion positioned upstream in Clade IIb genomes (34). More prone to APOBEC3 mutations (28). Frequently lost throughout Orthopoxviruses (1). MPXV clade II more closely related to VARV than Clade I.A26L161EEV envelope glycoproteinC-terminal truncation in MPXV species.A33R174Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; converts steroids into immunosuppressive glucocorticoidsPresent in MPXV and ECTV species, absent in VARV species (10).A44L183CrmC; TNF-receptor homologPresent in MPXV Clade II and ECTV species, absent in MPXV Clade I and VARV species (6).A53R188Poxin-schlafenMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28). Absent in VACV and VARV (1).B2R-B3R192PIE domain; SCP-3, sequesters cytokinesPresent in MPXV and ECTV species, absent in VARV species (10, 25).B7R195PIE, inhibits MHC class I transportPresent in MPXV Clade I, fragmented in Clade II MPXV (7, 29, 35). Present in MPXV Clade I, fragmented in Clade II MPXV and VARV species (7, 29, 35). Absent in VARV and ECTV. Present in CPXV, VPXV, and AKMV.B9R198Serine/threonine kinase homologConserved sequence homology in most Orthopoxviruses except VARV.B12R201IL-1β receptor homolog, secreted, three Ig domainsPresent in MPXV Clade I (7). Absent/fragmented in historical MPXV Clade II genomes and VARV (10). New genomes of Clade IIb suggest a lengthier and more efficient protein (32).B16R204IFNα/β binding proteinSTR genomic accordion positioned upstream in Clade IIb MPXVs; generated alternative transcription start site (34).B19R208SPI-1; serpin 1STR genomic accordion positioned start of the reading frame in Clade IIb MPXVs; generated alternative transcription start site (34).C12210PIE domain; surface glycoprotein and T-cell response suppressorPresent in MPXV species and VARV species with high specificity for human T-cells, ECTV ortholog did not inhibit human T-cells (35). Also, a BTB-kelch protein heavily truncated from ancestral OPX (10). Present in MPXV species and VARV species with high specificity for human T-cells, ECTV ortholog did not inhibit human T-cells (35). Also, a BTB-kelch protein heavily truncated from ancestral OPX (10).–213CrmE, TNF receptor homologTruncated in MPXV species, further truncated in MPXV Clade IIb (26). Absent in VARV species (36).–

a

Orthopoxvirus genes included are present or absent from MPXV in relation to other Orthopoxviruses. OPGs are numbered based on the standard nomenclature (1). Gene names also include the vaccinia virus Copenhagen ortholog gene name. If no VACV name is provided (–), the respective ortholog is not present. VARV, variola virus; VACV, vaccinia virus; AKMV, Akhmeta virus; and VPXV, volepox virus.Despite a majority of ANK protein substrate targets are unknown, some studies have demonstrated their role in diminishing inflammation through their inhibition of NF-κB. OPG039, an ANK-repeat protein lacking the E3 ligase interaction domain, directly interacts with the p65 subunit of NF-κB, thereby restricting its translocation and subsequently inhibiting the upregulation of inflammatory genes (6, 7, 37). Interestingly, ectromelia and MPXV both contain a K1L ortholog sharing 96% sequence similarity with its counterpart in vaccinia virus. When directly comparing the anti-inflammatory effects of K1L of ectromelia virus compared to vaccinia virus, ectromelia K1L displays a species-specific tropism toward mouse cells (6). This is in contrast to the broader host range exhibited by vaccinia K1L, which is known to function moderately in human and rabbit cells (6, 17). MPXVs ortholog has yet to be studied for tissue tropism preferences defined by the structure of K1L. In total, MPXV carries eight ankyrin-containing proteins, some of which may have host-tropism preferences and therefore may regulate transcription through interfacing with E3 ligase substrates (38). Considering the demonstrated impact on tropism, additional biochemical investigations should be conducted on various poxviral ANK-containing proteins. Defining the substrates targeted by different ANK and BTB-kelch proteins, potentially involving an interplay between host and viral structure, would help delineate host-range determinants and shed light on a potential mechanism allowing for orthopoxviral zoonotic events.Cell death subversion and tumor necrosis factor interferenceAnother large class of virulence factors that participates in host-range differences is the presence or absence of poxvirus immune evasion elements (PIEs). These proteins are important for their structure, rather than their sequence, and are thought to assist with ligand binding (25). PIEs have been rarely lost among Orthopoxviruses and encompass a wide variety of functions, most of which are non-redundant (1, 25). Importantly, the incorporation of different PIEs within species of narrow host range provides insight into the necessary pathways that need to be overcome. For instance, ectromelia and MPXV contain OPG192, which contains a PIE and “secret” domain, which can sequester a host of chemokines (human and mouse CCL28, CCL25, CXCL12b, CXCL13, CXCL14, and mouse CCL23 and CXCL11) (10, 25). This gene is absent/fragmented in variola virus. Another PIE element category that is differentially shared among Orthopoxviruses is the cytokine response modifier, Crm, family. For instance, CrmB and CrmE are both tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) receptor homologs, OPG002 and OPG213, respectively. TNF-α sequestration from Orthopoxviruses can inhibit cell death cascades and maintain a cellular proliferation and survival state for periods of time to permit replication (24). MPXV and variola virus species both share CrmB, and MPXV and ectromelia virus species share CrmE (5, 6). As there are multiple genes performing the function of TNF-α sequestration, there may be Crm structural differences that exist to encounter TNF-α structures from various host species. Therefore, MPXV contains both OPG002 and OPG213 likely to be utilized to maintain a foothold in reservoirs, small rodents, and human species.Finally, MPXV is unique from all other Orthopoxviruses in that it has a 37AA N-terminal truncation in OPG065, otherwise known as Cop E3L (39). The E3L protein contains two domains, and the truncation occurs on the N-terminus, which deactivates a Zα domain (39). E3L’s second function, to inhibit PKR sensing of dsRNA, remains unaffected (39). The E3L Zα domain, historically, was shown to bind to Z-nucleic acids, an aberrant left-handed orientation of double-stranded nucleic acid (40). This domain was shown to be an important virulence factor in Vaccinia and Variola viruses, as it functions to subvert host-cell death and evade the type I IFN response (39, 41, 42). During various viral infections, Z-RNA is formed, which can be recognized by host PAMP recognition sensor ZBP1 and initiate an IFN response (43–45). The E3L Zα domain can obfuscate the Z-RNA via direct binding, which hides the PAMP recognition. It is perplexing that both the short and full-length isoforms of the E3L protein are transcribed naturally in Vaccinia, suggesting an additional unknown necessity for the non-functional Zα domain (39).It is unknown why other Orthopoxviruses have not yet lost or truncated this gene, potentially due to a missing compensatory mechanism that MPXVs possess. One such compensatory mechanism may be that MPXVs are found within OPG003, a viral inducer of RIPK3 degradation. MPXV and ectromelia both contain this gene, whereas vaccinia and variola viruses have truncated or deleted genes, respectively. OPG003 is a kelch-like protein that hijacks the ubiquitin proteasomal system to label target proteins, RIPK3, for degradation (46). The result of RIPK3 degradation is the cessation of the necroptosis cascade and continued cell survival (46). In addition to this product and the fact that MPXV experimentally produces less dsRNA during infection enable it to escape IFN activation and subsequent necroptotic cell death (16).Termini of Orthopoxvirus genomes dictate host range and virulenceAs stated previously, the middle portion of the Orthopoxvirus genome is heavily conserved. Additionally, the virus-host interaction genes that flank the center are also under positive selection (47). However, the left and right termini of the Orthopoxvirus genome are under constant negative selection and are more readily able to be deleted, duplicated, or inverted (48). Figure 2 is a representation of the Mauve alignment of Orthopoxvirus genomes (raw Mauve alignment files can be found under “Data Availability”). Interestingly, there are regions near the termini of the Orthopoxvirus genomes that are shared and/or lost, corresponding to the host range. The viruses found in rodents and mice, such as Akhmeta virus, volepox virus, ectromelia virus, and cowpoxvirus, all contain a conserved genomic region on the left termini (Fig. 2). The absence of this region from MPXV may be a relic from the separation of Old-World and New-World Orthopoxviruses (49). Therefore, the genes that enable MPXV to be a rodent-borne pathogen are found within the conserved portion of the genome (Fig. 2).Fig 2Graphical reconstruction of whole-genome Mauve alignment. Orthopoxvirus genomes were genome aligned via progressive Mauve application within Genious and separately visualized using BioRender. Whole-genome length is depicted using a black line scale. Colored blocks represent regions of the genome sequence that were predicted to be aligned to another genome, presumed homologous. The green block represents the conserved central portion of the Orthopoxvirus genome. Red, purple, and yellow blocks represent regions of shared homology among Orthopoxviruses on the left and right terminals. Reference genomes used are as follows: cowpoxvirus, strain Brighton Red (NC_000363); variola virus, VARV (NC_001611); and ectromelia virus (NC_004105). Clade Ia MPXV (NC_003310) and Clade IIa MPXV (NC_063383) from the Congo (DRC) and West Africa, respectively. Clade Ib MPXV has limited genomic annotations; however, sequences were acquired from recent deep sequencing release, sequenced on 25 December 2023 in South Kivu, DRC (accesion OX044336) (50). Clade IIb MPXV Rivers, 2022 (34). Akhmeta virus AKMV (NC_055230.1) and Volepox virus VPXV (NC_031033.1). Genious files are made available under “Data Availability.”Nine horizontal bars are aligned corresponding to CPXV, ECTV, VARV, MPXV Clades 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, AKMV, and VPXV. They represent genome alignments with genome size appended to the right. There are connections between the bars to highlight genomic change.The viruses that are known to cause human disease, cowpoxvirus, variola virus, and MPXV, all contain a conserved region common to the right genome terminus (Fig. 2). The genes of interest within this region contain ankyrin OPG003, IFN-gamma receptor mimic OPG001, apoptosis inhibitor OPG005, and CrmB OPG002 (51). Deletion of this portion within an MPXV-Congo 2003 strain revealed its role in modulating virulence (51). Variola virus also contains this virulence region located at the left termini (Fig. 2). Notably, there is an additional conserved region found among all the MPXVs and not contained in variola (Fig. 2). Genomic surveillance of this region in novel MPXV isolates has revealed considerable volatility (52–54). Whether this region plays a significant role in MPXVs adaptation to humans—or is a byproduct of Orthopoxvirus genomic mutability—remains unanswered.MPXV CLADE-SPECIFIC DIFFERENCESFollowing the characterization of genes that separated the MPXV genus from other Orthopoxviruses, we expand upon the thesis that gene content infers host range and therefore virulence toward humans. Here, we define gene content differences of Clade I and Clade II MPXVs in comparison to each other. While there are genomic differences within genes involved in replication, transcription, and virion morphogenesis, here we describe the virulence factor genes of importance (Fig. 1). We detail how changes in gene length, through deletion or fragmentation events, have modulated translation and function either to deactivate or increase the efficiency of encoded proteins within alternative host species and transmission contexts.Complement control proteinsThe Orthopoxvirus gene OPG032 codes for a complement control protein, CCP, and is most notoriously known as SPICE, the small-pox inhibitor for complement enzymes (55). CCPs are secreted proteins that cleave C3b and C4b, which are essential enzymes in the classical and alternative complement pathways, and their absence results in the extended survival of infected cells (10). The Orthopoxvirus CCP is well adapted to mammalian complement, and it likely arose through horizontal gene transfer into an ancestral Orthopoxvirus (6, 56, 57). Most Orthopoxviruses include a CCP that binds to species-specific complement proteins: SPICE for human and baboon complement, vaccinia virus CCP for dog and guinea pig complement, and ectromelia virus CCP for murine complement (10, 58). MPXV, too, contain their respective CCP titled “MOPICE,” the monkeypox inhibitor for complement enzymes.MOPICE cleaves C3b/C4b into similar products compared to SPICE but performs at the same or marginally better efficiency as vaccinia’s CCP (10, 59). No studies have definitively determined the species specificity of MOPICE. Interestingly, there is a clade distinction in the presence of MOPICE across the MPXV lineages. Clade I MPXV contains the full-length gene, whereas Clade II MPXV have a 10-kbp deletion, which removes the open reading frame and a large portion of MOPICE (29, 60). Even more interesting is the genomic surveillance of recent Clade Ib MPXV lineages within the DRC, which also shows a truncation of MOPICE (61). Removal of MOPICE from Clade I MPXVs reduced disease morbidity and mortality in prairie dog and non-human primate models; however, insertion of the MOPICE gene into Clade IIa MPXV did not increase disease severity (60, 62).As Clade IIb and Clade Ib infections have a higher transmission rate in humans compared to historical Clade IIa or Ia, MOPICE may be modulating the host-disease susceptibility, thereby weakening transmission potential. This might be an adaptation that favors human-to-human spread by minimizing visible pock lesions and scaring, thus promoting undetected spread. Conversely, the inclusion of the MOPICE could weaken transmission due to modulating systemic and uncontrolled viral spread in the body, thus increasing visible scaring throughout the body. However, as the prairie dog study mentioned prior shows, the inclusion of MOPICE is not a driving factor of virulence within MPXVs; rather, there are additional virulence factors that complement its function, which are present in Clade I rather than in Clade II (60). Therefore, the increased case-fatality rate of Clade Ib, currently spreading in the DRC, is still much higher than the global Clade IIb, driven by virulence factors we review below.Adaptive immune response interferenceAnother strategic difference between the clades is found in their disruption of communication between the innate and adaptive arms of the immune systems. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules are integral membrane proteins found on the surface of all nucleated cells in the body. They play a crucial role in the immune system by presenting peptide fragments of intracellular proteins to cytotoxic T cells. This process is essential for immune surveillance as it allows the immune system to monitor the intracellular environment for signs of infection or abnormal cell behavior.Orthopoxviruses contain various strategies to interrupt this immune surveillance, including the disruption of peptide loading, MHC trafficking to the cell surface, and T-cell recognition of MHC (31, 35, 63). MPXV clades differ in their gene sequence of OPG195, an MHC class-1 transport inhibitor (7, 36). MPXV Clade I expresses the full-length gene, whereas Clade II has a fragmented and predicted non-functional protein (51). Interestingly Variola also has this gene fragmented to a non-functional state (36). However, it has been shown that OPG195 is not necessary to disrupt T-cell stimulation, as another gene, OPG210, is able to compensate within MPXV and Variola species (35). OPG210 codes for a glycoprotein that is expressed at the cell surface and contains a PIE domain. It has been shown to suppress T-cell activation through an unknown mechanism (35). As it has been suggested that MPXV’s OPG195 is unimportant for CD4+CD8+ T-cell activation, it may be a gene en route to deletion and/or has alternative unknown functions within Clade I MPXVs (63).Intra- and extra-cellular signaling interferenceMPXV clades also differ in how they express OPG201, a secreted IL-1β receptor (10). IL-1β is an inflammatory cytokine that, once bound to its receptor, sets off multiple signaling cascades that can lead to cell death, transcription/translation of secreted inflammatory signaling molecules, and promotes an inflammatory immune landscape—all of which act to suppress viral spread. Orthopoxviruses utilize this secreted receptor mimic to inhibit apoptosis, interrupt inflammatory signal transduction, and affect the proliferation of B and T lymphocytes (10, 32). MPXVs differ in the translated length of this protein. MPXV Clade I has contained the full-length OPG201 since the first genomic annotation, whereas historical MPXV Clade II isolates have retained less than a fourth of the total gene length, predicted to be nonfunctional (29).OPG201 codes for an IL-1β receptor mimic, also containing three immunoglobulin domains that bind to the cell surface to competitively bind to IL-1β. Variola virus has been reported to not contain this gene (7, 36). It has been suggested that Variola suppresses the synthesis of IL-1β far more efficiently and does not require a downstream receptor mimic (7). Additionally, variola virus possesses OPG020, an IL-1 receptor antagonist, whereas each clade of MPXV contains different truncations that result in variable lengths, potentially disrupting this gene’s function (10). Interestingly, new strains of MPXV Clade IIb express OPG201, a lengthier, 180-amino acid protein, which suggests that the IL-1β-binding function has returned to Clade II (32). This new protein product expressed is predicted to bind to IL-1β more efficiently than Clade I’s ortholog (32). It is likely that MPXV clades require this protein due to their inactivated OPG020, suggesting that it is a necessary compensation. Therefore, we should continue surveillance into MPXV’s IL-1 interference genes to identify faults within its strategy as potential therapeutic interventions.Another interesting distinction between clades of MPXVs is the presence of three kelch-like proteins, orthologs to OPG030, OPG033, and OPG047 within Clade I MPXVs (26). To reiterate, kelch-containing proteins can have a direct effect on E3 Ubiquitin ligase targets, which modulate the host transcriptomic and immune responses. The specific targets that the three proteins target during MPXV Clade I pathogenesis remain unknown; however, their deletion from Clade II MPXVs suggests they are not required for human adaptation (26, 64). Within Clade IIb MPXVs, OPG033 is the most genomically diverged gene from ancestral Orthopoxviruses (30). This suggests an alternative function for the gene or its slow removal. Additionally, this gene has been consistently lost alongside OPG032, the complement control protein (1). The absence/high divergence of both genes from MPXV Clade II indicates a potentially significant interaction between them (1). Understanding why this concurrent loss occurred requires us to know how these two proteins interact within a currently unknown pathway. Further investigation into the roles of kelch-containing proteins would provide insights into their role within different hosts and contexts.INTRA-CLADE ADAPTATION AND GENOMIC DIFFERENCESThe spread of MPXV from isolated instances of zoonotic jumps to sustained human-to-human transmission may have been the result of the cessation of Smallpox vaccination (65). Unvaccinated regions became endemic for Mpox, thus establishing the possibility for host coevolution for decades. In this section, we cover two evolutionary mechanisms acting upon MPXV, which “fine-tunes” their gene products to better adapt to human hosts: APOBEC3 mutations and employment of genomic accordions (Fig. 1). Our current knowledge of these mechanisms has been studied within the 2022 global outbreak Clade IIb lineage; however, with the emergence of novel MPXV Clade Ib lineage, these evolutionary signatures are likely to be identified in both strains.Single nucleotide polymorphisms altering host tropismBoth the novel Clade Ib and Clade IIb MPXV lineages have extensive APOBEC3 editing signatures across their genome, which have occurred over many years (50, 66, 67). APOBEC3 is a cytosolic mRNA editing enzyme that has been shown to induce C-to-T and G-to-A mutations in DNA viruses including MPXV (68). Due to the recency of these findings, it begs the question as to the overall impact of APOBEC-like editing on the viral evolution of Orthopoxviruses. However, genomic analysis revealed that APOBEC3 mutations are generating more-than-expected numbers of non-synonymous and nonsense mutations across the genome, which follows the trend of reductive evolution within Orthopoxviruses (5, 66). These mutations should be kept under continued surveillance, as frameshifts or nonsense mutations may deactivate genes associated with murine host interaction, which then generates a better human-adapted virus. Additionally, the change of binding pockets through single-nucleotide polymorphisms as well as codon usage change may expand host tropism or restrict the species specificity of virus-host interaction proteins.There were observed APOBEC3 mutations in MPXV’s Clade IIb B.1 genes: OPG023: ANK/F-box protein and host-range factor; OPG047: BTB-kelch domain contributor of virulence and lesion size; OPG071: DNA polymerase catalytic subunit; OPG105: RNA polymerase subunit; OPG109: RNA polymerase-associated protein; OPG153: an intracellular mature virion surface tubule protein; OPG188: a poxin-schlafen like protein; and OPG210: a surface glycoprotein and T-cell response suppressor (28). While the mutations have not been experimentally determined to be the drivers of increased human-to-human transmission, there are reported codon biases that are preferentially used in human hosts (69). The SNP mutations within ankyrin-containing and BTB-kelch proteins may alter species-specific binding requirements for the stimulation of their target host proteins.Interestingly, OPG188 was also revealed to be more prone to mutation within MPXV compared to other accessory genes across the genome (28). OPG188 codes for a schlafen-like protein, which are RNA-binding proteins expressed in response to IFN, and plays a role in growth inhibition during an anti-viral state (70). OPG188 also has a conjoined poxin domain that interferes with the STING-dependent interferon pathway via functioning as a cGAMP-specific nuclease (1). Interestingly, the schlafen domain has been truncated, which results in a non-functional variant within variola and vaccinia viruses (1). There is a potential for the higher-than-average mutation rate in OPG188 to create non-synonymous or deleterious mutations that modulate the schlafen-like protein toward inactivation in human-adapted MPXVs, which may increase viral fitness within primate hosts.Genome expansion and retraction influence gene length and functionAnother interesting evolutionary mechanism, previously experimentally demonstrated within vaccinia virus, has now been found to play a role in the evolution of MPXV Clade IIb strains: the deployment of genomic accordions to modulate gene expression (71, 72). Orthopoxviruses, with their highly mutable genomes, can rapidly expand or contract gene copy numbers during replication cycles through gene duplication or deletion (48, 72–74). In response to selective pressure, the high duplication rate of the Orthopoxvirus genome allows for increases in gene copy number to overcome a host’s pressure (72). There may be toxicity or replication defects associated with a high copy number of specific genes, which may impede the transmissibility of infectious viral particles; thus, the gene copy number can be retracted back to a wild-type state (73). The concept of genomic accordions was first displayed with full genes, such as Cop-K3L (72). Accordion-like poly-A/T repeats have also been identified in vaccinia virus genes (71). Genomic accordions have now also been revealed to occur for short-tandem repeats, which modulate the transcription process of MPXV genes. Short tandem repeats (STRs) are located across the MPXV genome—positioned in intergenic regions or even within coding regions (34, 75). The expansion and retraction in the length of the STRs, much like genomic accordions, can induce frameshift mutations that can turn off, or conversely, turn on genes (71).In a recent report, Clade IIb MPXVs have been found to utilize genomic accordions of STR regions as well as homopolymer repeats to “fine-tune” their transcription profile (34). There were 21 regions identified that were placed either upstream, downstream, within the reading frame, or right before a promoter region, which displayed variability in length, rather than sequence, among circulating strains (34). There were three major identified accordions that have a functional impact.The first of which is a STR placed at the start of the reading frame for OPG208, coding for SPI-1, a serine protease that blocks multiple steps of IL-1 processing and cell death cascades (34). This STR produced an alternative start codon, which is transcribed in vitro, and incorporated 52 copies of human-associated TAC codons (34). The increased length of the STR more closely resembles the SPI-1 gene in Clade I MPXV (29).The second is another alternative methionine start codon, built by an STR accordion, upstream of OPG 204, a secreted decoy receptor for type I IFN (34). This alternative start codon is also transcribed in vitro, although the functional implications of an extended N-terminal Met-Lys repeat remain unknown.Finally, there is predicted inactivation of OPG153, a protein that attaches virions to laminin and regulates their egress, which is also a major epitope targeted by the host antibody response (34). This gene contains a poly-D accordion and the insertion of two isoleucines, resulting in a structurally similar OPG153 in Clade IIb, which closely resembles Clade I’s ortholog of OPG153 rather than sister Clade IIa’s ortholog (34). Throughout the history of Orthopoxviruses, this protein has been lost on 18 independent occasions, and its loss has been both shown to attenuate the virus as well as compensate for the loss of a missing transcription factor gene (1). Thus, we should monitor OPG153’s transcription within current Clade I and Clade IIb MPXVs in order to predict its changing epitope or potential for deletion.Intra-host variation and a vast genomic landscape promote the potential for novel successful strainsThese evolutionary mechanisms provoke the idea of the quasi-species hypothesis. Quasispecies is a concept, often taken from rapidly evolving RNA viruses, which states a viral species is not a monolithic entity but sometimes a diverse population of genomes (76). For Orthopoxviruses, there will be a consensus strain that either initiates the infection or is the most common transmittable product of infection, the “wild type.” However, during replication, Orthopoxviruses are extremely mutable and will generate many defective genomes, as well as potentially generating viruses that have increased copy number or genomic accordions modulating specific genes (48, 73, 77).Intra-host variation of APOBEC3 editing has been reported previously with Clade IIb (78). The occurrence of localized and systemic disease may be due to changes in the copy number of specific virulence factors of importance within different tissues. Whole genome sequencing at site-specific locations (e.g., multiple locations of skin lesions, nasopharyngeal swabs, or a lymph node biopsy) can aid our understanding of intra-host variants (79). Another instance of this genomic volatility occurred within a Clade I MPXV strain, wherein the genome had a large deletion that caused the truncation of an ankyrin-repeat-containing protein OPG015, and the inactivation of natural killer activating receptor inhibitor, OPG016 (27). This deletion is hypothesized to have increased human-to-human transmission for a short time period (26, 27). Moreover, molecular investigation has revealed that Orthopoxviruses can “steal” and expand genes to gain molecular footholds within related species during zoonotic jumps (74, 80). Such events are microcosms of the larger evolution of Orthopoxviruses. Consistent genomic surveillance in regions where MPXV is endemic, including sharing of raw deep sequencing data, would allow us to better assess the ever-evolving genomic landscape of emerging MPXV variants.CONCLUDING REMARKS ON THE FUTURE OF MPXVOrthopoxviruses are ubiquitous pathogens that infect a wide variety of species and have infected humans since before the domestication of cattle. The genes that Orthopoxviruses contain are specially crafted to interfere with the mammalian host immune responses. These genes disrupt intracellular signaling cascades, interfere with cellular communication and secretion of cytokines, as well as controlling host gene expression. The vast collection of immune evasion genes incorporated within Orthopoxviruses genomes is tailored in different combinations for host specialization. Therefore, for Orthopoxviruses to become better transmittable pathogens, they do not need to just decrease their virulence. Instead, they can first delete unnecessary genes from their genome that are not required in host niche specialization. With the emergence of MPXV—and the eventual arrival of novelly adapted human MPXVs—we can predict the important virulence genes involved in human disease with further investigation of the genes described in this review.Specifically, the loss of function in OPG041 and OPG065 (K3L and E3L, respectively) is a unique strategy of virulence that distances MPXV from all other Orthopoxviruses. Triggering IFN response in the host, as some have hypothesized, may be an important therapeutic strategy to combat MPXV infection (81). Furthermore, ankyrin-containing proteins play important roles in interfering with the viral-host response, and they influence the host range of Orthopoxviruses. MPXVs that specialize toward human adaptation may, therefore, alter structures of their ankyrin/F-box proteins to target human-specific proteins, while MPXVs that remain primarily zoonotic may induce weakly stimulatory effects on rodent and primate E3 ligases and their substrates. Previous investigations corroborate the fact that viral and host structures are inextricably linked to host range (82, 83). However, currently, there is a dearth of information on species-specific stimulatory effects based on ankyrin/F-box structures. Altogether, the ongoing jump of MPXVs from rodent-borne to becoming effective human pathogens is the result of continuous reductive evolution and refining of immune evasion strategies, which resulted in the establishment of a molecular foothold in human populations.Transmission within human communities is also modulated by the virulence of MPXV strains. MPXV exists within two clades with major differences in disease presentation and intra-host spread. Systemic infection versus localized acute infections may be attributed to the virulence factor differences found within each of the clades. The complement control protein OPG032, the IL-1β interference genes within OPG201 and 208, and the cell-to-cell communication-interfering genes OPG015 and OPG195—all of which contribute to the increased case fatality rate in MPXV Clade I compared to Clade II. However, as we continue to see highly transmissible Clade I MPXVs arise, we should assume that increased virulence of Mpox is not tightly intertwined with a decrease in transmissibility (84). Instead, increased human-to-human transmissibility is likely attributed to codon optimization through human APOBEC editing through continual human-to-human transmission chains (69, 85). Smallpox, caused by the Variola virus, should warn us that MPXV may not remain a niche-transmitted pathogen—instead, through continued human adaptation, it may incite another global outbreak of Mpox.While there is a large increase in human-to-human transmission, it is important to identify that there were multiple spillover events that began isolated transmission chains (86, 87). Therefore, novel strains of MPXV that were potentially more primed for human-to-human transmission were already circulating in small rodents prior to 2016. From an alternative viewpoint, there is the potential for the emergence of a well-adapted rodent MPXV to emerge or already have emerged. Enzootic spillover may have already occurred, but may not have been identified or sequenced yet (88). It is imperative to continue to survey, and predict, the perspective reservoir species to better anticipate the foundational genomic landscape of future MPXVs.In conclusion, our review underscores the critical need to understand the genetic basis of MPXV adaptation and transmission dynamics. The ongoing epidemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, fueled by the Clade I MPXV lineage, highlights the urgency of this endeavor. By merging insights from Orthopoxvirus genetics and MPXV epidemiology, we have elucidated potential genetic drivers influencing host range, pathogenesis, and human-to-human transmission. Our analysis emphasizes the importance of MPXV genome reduction in shaping its virulence and transmission potential. Through comparative genomics and examination of host-range genes, key genetic determinants that distinguish MPXV from other Orthopoxviruses are noted, offering insight into its unique pathogenicity. Furthermore, our exploration of recent strains, such as Clade Ib and Clade IIb, sheds light on the rapidly evolving landscape of MPXV. Moving forward, elucidating the molecular mechanisms of the genes included in this review will be crucial for effective surveillance, prevention, and therapeutic intervention measures. By linking MPXV genotypes to specific phenotypes of public health importance, we can better predict and mitigate the risks posed by this emerging infectious disease. Our collective efforts in understanding MPXV genetics and epidemiology will be instrumental in safeguarding global health security against potential pandemic threats.


Title: “Mpox in MSM: Tackling stigma, minimizing risk factors, exploring pathogenesis, and treatment approaches”

1IntroductionThe exact origin of the monkeypox virus (MPV) is yet to be fully understood. However, it is thought to be circulating among wildlife in Central and West Africa [1], and it was proposed that some species of wild squirrels may be the natural host [[2], [3], [4]]. The MPV likely spread to humans through direct contact with infected animals. Hunting, handling, and/or consuming bushmeat may have been associated with humans contracting MPV [5]. MPV can also be transmitted from person-to-person through close contact via respiratory droplets, bodily fluids, or skin lesions of infected individuals [5]. While mpox is primarily endemic to Central and West Africa, sporadic cases and outbreaks have been occurring outside Africa [6]. These cases have been generally associated with travelers returning from endemic regions or importing infected animals. It is important to note that the natural reservoir of the MPV is not defined [7,8]. The exact transmission dynamics and reservoir and/or hosts involved in maintaining and spreading the MPV in nature continue to evolve.During the 2022 mpox outbreak, most infections were transmitted through close, intimate contact with symptomatic individuals, and male-to-male sexual contact has been a significant transmission mode [[9], [10], [11], [12]]. However, heterosexual transmission, transmission to children through nonsexual skin-to-skin contact with caregivers, needlestick injuries, body piercing, tattooing, and occupational exposures without proper personal protective equipment have also been reported [13,14]. The predominant symptom of MPV infection is skin rashes, often accompanied by anogenital or oropharyngeal/perioral mucosal lesions [15]. Fever, chills, headache, and lymphadenopathy are other commonly reported symptoms among mpox patients. Unlike previous outbreaks, where these symptoms usually preceded skin rashes, up to half of the patients in the current outbreak reported rash as their initial symptom. It has been observed that individuals are infectious from the beginning of the symptoms, and some individuals can transmit the virus before displaying symptoms [16].Until 1980, vaccination against the variola virus provided approximately 85% protection against mpox [17]. With the discontinuation of vaccination against the variola virus in 1980, a significant portion of the population lacked immunity against variola virus and MPV viruses, rendering them susceptible to MPV infection. Additionally, no specific treatment is available for mpox [18]. During the 2022 outbreak, mucosal transmission through sexual contact emerged as one of the major modes of MPV transmission, other than close contact with pustules or pustular material, which has not been reported in previous outbreaks [10,19]. The mucosal transmission is often linked to recto-genital lesions in men, vaginal lesions in women, and pharyngeal lesions in both genders. Although the mechanism of mucosal transmission of MPV remains poorly understood and requires further investigation, the discovery of these novel transmission routes may have important implications, e.g. the risk of co-infections with HIV and the impact on vaccine responses. In this review, we discuss the role of social stigma associated with men who have sex with men (MSM) in increasing their risk of acquiring infectious diseases, including mpox, the risk factors related to the spread of MPV, the disease pathogenesis of mpox among MSM, as well as currently known prevention and treatment options.2Social stigma of MSM: increased risk of infectious diseases including mpoxThe term ’stigma’ is used to describe the pervasive presence of negative beliefs, judgments, and biases that individuals or societies hold against specific groups, characteristics, or behaviors [20]. It encompasses the act of labeling and devaluing individuals based on perceived differences or deviations from societal norms. Stigma often leads to discriminatory actions, exclusion, and the marginalization of affected individuals, harming their mental and physical well-being and resulting in social isolation [21]. Stigma can manifest in various contexts, including mental health, race, sexual orientation, gender identity, and other personal attributes [22]. Those who experience stigma commonly perceive themselves as being distinct and undervalued compared to others.Sexual orientation refers to a lasting pattern of emotional, romantic, and or sexual attraction towards individuals of the same, opposite, or both sexes. Sexual orientation encompasses a spectrum ranging from individuals exclusively attracted to the opposite sex to those attracted solely to the same sex [23]. Sexual orientation is broadly categorized into three main groups: heterosexual, gay/lesbian, and bisexual. These categories of sexual orientation are observed across various cultures globally. It is important to distinguish sexual orientation from other aspects of sex and gender, such as biological sex, gender identity, and social gender roles defined as cultural expectations of feminine and masculine behavior [24]. Thus, sexual orientation is closely connected to intimate relationships that fulfill deep emotional needs for love, affection, and intimacy. In addition to sexual behaviors, these relationships involve nonsexual physical affection, shared values, mutual support, and long-term commitment [25,26]. Various factors have been suggested to contribute to developing an individual's sexual orientation, including genetic, hormonal, developmental, social, and cultural influences [27,28]. It is often believed that nature and nurture play intricate roles in shaping the sexual orientation of an individual [29]. Gender identity and sexual orientation are shaped by a combination of factors at early events of brain development, including hormonal, genetic, and maternal factors [30]. Animal studies have supported the role of hormones and the genetic makeup of a person in shaping sexual orientation [30,31].Homosexuality has been a subject of societal controversy [32]. It has evoked different attitudes depending on the type of society cultural, moral, and political circumstances from the beginning of the civilization [33]. Even in contemporary society, homosexual behaviors, desires, and identities are often stigmatized and perceived as negative, immature, or inferior compared to heterosexuality, which promotes social exclusion [34]. Social exclusion is a complex set of interconnected processes that emerge from economic, political, and societal factors [34,35]. Over time, these processes create a sense of distance and marginalization, placing individuals, groups, and communities in a position of inferiority compared to a society's dominant values and norms. Homophobia is considered pervasive globally, posing significant threats to the rights of homosexual individuals through discrimination, harassment, and even criminalization of their sexual orientation [36]. This intolerance often extends to interference in their personal lives, perpetuating social exclusion and increasing the risk of discrimination and hate crimes [37]. Insufficient legal safeguards and support from state institutions further compound the issue, impeding the prevention of discrimination and violence based on sexual orientation.Social and familial expectations often clash with personal preferences among MSM individuals. This conflict can lead to psychological distress, including symptoms of depression and anxiety, and indulge in high-risk sexual behaviors [38]. Due to fear of social exclusion and stigma related to their sexual orientation, MSM individuals exhibit poor health-seeking behaviors, which increases their risk of acquiring sexually transmitted infections (STIs) [39]. The expressions of social exclusion of MSMs were reflected through their ‘conditioned’ support in the family at the cost of giving up their identity or facing expulsion from family ties and property, exclusion from community participation, denial of decent employment opportunities, lack of legal protection and social security system. They are also at an elevated risk of HIV transmission, stemming from the reuse of needles during substance abuse to alleviate mental distress and engaging in unprotected sexual encounters under the influence of substance use within both heterosexual and homosexual relationships [40]. The criminalization of homosexuality, including severe penalties like imprisonment and death, has contributed to the higher rate of high-risk activities and increased prevalence of HIV among MSM individuals [41]. The fear of disclosure and social stigma associated with their sexual behaviors further prevent them from accessing crucial HIV-related testing, treatment, care, and support services, leaving them hidden and marginalized.Mental health issues are frequently observed among MSM populations at risk for HIV infection [42]. The mental health challenges not only hinder the effectiveness of HIV prevention efforts but also pose challenges to existing conceptual models [43]. Traditional individual-based risk reduction programs, public health campaigns, and community-based interventions may not adequately serve the MSM, who also manage comorbid mental health issues [44]. To escalate the efficacy of the HIV prevention programs, it is crucial to integrate individual-based approaches to address mental health issues that can hinder prevention efforts [45]. Addressing the mental health challenges of at-risk MSM individuals can serve as a foundation for multiple prevention initiatives and empower those most vulnerable to high-risk sexual behaviors and transmitting infectious diseases.According to the National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH), an estimated 2.9% of adult men identified as gay or bisexual in the United States in 2019 [46]. The MSM community faces social stigma related to both mpox and HIV infections [[47], [48], [49], [50], [51]]. This stigma can create barriers to accessing healthcare services, proper diagnosis, and availing treatment. Therefore, it is crucial to address and combat this stigma to ensure the well-being of individuals within the MSM community [52]. The risk factors associated with MPV and HIV mono-infection, as well as co-infection among MSM, include engaging in unprotected sexual activities, having multiple sexual partners, and genital or oral mucosal lesions [53]. These factors increase the risk of transmission of both viruses (HIV and MPV) and underscore the importance of comprehensive sexual health education, use of barrier protection during sexual encounters, regular testing for HIV and other STIs, access to pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) for HIV prevention, combinational antiretroviral therapy for PLWH, and access to mpox vaccines. Establishing a nurturing and non-judgmental atmosphere that fosters open dialogue, promotes awareness, and embraces acceptance is crucial for the MSM community to tackle their high-risk behaviors and prevent disease outbreaks within the community [54]. The interconnection between the social exclusion experienced by the MSM community that led to their high-risk sexual encounters, the high prevalence of HIV transmission among the MSM community, and their vulnerability in the 2022 Mpox outbreak is depicted in [Fig. 1].Fig. 1The interlinked between the men who have sex with men (MSM) and the 2022 Mpox outbreak. The sexual orientation of MSM makes them vulnerable to exclusion from contemporary society, which in turn indulges them in frequent participation in saunas, and private or public sex clubs, where intimate and frequently anonymous sexual contact occurs. Along with that in the MSM community, the proportion of people living with HIV is much higher compared to the general population. Therefore, during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, initial introduction of the MPV infection among MSM make the entire community at higher risk of contracting the disease.Fig. 13The consequences of neglecting mpox endemic in sub-Saharan AfricaFollowing the mass vaccination program against the variola virus, during the 33rd World Health Assembly in 1980, smallpox was declared eradicated globally [55]. This was followed by WHO's recommendation to end the global vaccination program against the variola virus. As a result, a significant portion of the world's population lacks immune protection against variola virus [56] and closely related poxviruses, including MPV. Without cross-species protection, the lesser-known mpox became endemic in many West and Central African countries, including Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Ghana, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and South Sudan, among others, with sporadic reports outside of the endemic regions [56,57]. The lack of awareness about mpox due to the geographic confinement of the disease within endemic African countries has resulted in a knowledge gap regarding the transmission mechanism of MPV [58]. Most mpox cases were known to be self-limiting without reports of community transmissions [59]. In the early 1980s, serological investigations were conducted for MPV antibodies on over 10,000 unvaccinated children in Central and West Africa. The surveys revealed that fewer than 1% of the children were positive for the MPV antibody, signifying the rarity of the disease [60]. During subsequent decades, reported mpox cases kept on increasing [61]. Notably, in 1986, for the first time in history, in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a chain of human-to-human transmission of MPV was reported [62]. Prior to the 2022 outbreak, epidemiological data indicated a higher risk of mpox among unvaccinated individuals, with the cases predominantly among kids and young adults [63]. The severity of mpox cases during the 2022 outbreak has mostly been mild, and the genomic surveillance data indicates the presence of West African clad B1 lineage with mutations in virulence proteins.Additionally, APOBEC3-mediated GA > AA and TC > TT mutations reported in the genomes of MPV isolates during the 2022 outbreak are hypothesized to be responsible for the attenuated pathogenicity of the virus [[64], [65], [66]]. Future outbreaks might follow different patterns, particularly considering the potential introduction of the more pathogenic Clade I MPV due to ever-increasing intercontinental travel and trade [61]. With the passage of time and lack of attention by global public health watchdogs, mpox, once an endemic in a couple of West and Central African countries, has evolved into a worldwide health emergency [67]. During the 2022 outbreak of mpox, cases of human-to-animal transmission of the MPV were reported [45]; this reverse zoonotic transmission has the potential to expand the natural reservoirs of the virus in the future [68,69]. Unlike the variola virus, it is more challenging to eradicate MPV due to natural zoonotic reservoirs [67]. While cooperation is appreciated, the collaborative clinical research between resource-limited African countries and developed nations was key to the success during the Ebola and Zika epidemics [70,71]. On the contrary, setting up a surveillance program (the “parachute research”) for mpox in DRC in the early 2000s [72], which enabled foreign scientists to gather data and specimens for analysis in their own countries, failed to address the required capacity building for an emergency response to future outbreaks [71,73]. Therefore, efforts should be prioritized to build public health infrastructure in resource-limited African countries and train their front-line responders to address emerging and reemerging viral outbreaks [74].4Monkeypox virus (MPV) in human samples and implications for transmission among MSMThe 2022 outbreak of mpox became notable in May 2022, and showed a significant increase in human-to-human transmission, specifically among MSMs [75]. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) is the recommended method of detecting MPV infection [76]. Before the 2022 outbreak, cases reported in Europe and the USA lacked information on the distribution of the MPV in the various organs and tissues in humans as there was no report of fatalities [77,78]. However, during the 2022 outbreak, several studies have detected MPV DNA in anal and oral swabs, semen, and to a lesser extent, urine samples [79]. The concentration of viral DNA has been found to correlate with the amount of replication-competent virus, indicating viral burden, as determined by qPCR being a predictor of infectivity. In a study conducted in France on fifty male (n = 50) patients with confirmed MPV infection, samples were tested from skin, throat, anus, blood, urine, and semen. It was found that a significant proportion of oral and anal swabs were positive for MPV (71–77%), lower proportions of positivity in blood and urine samples (22–31%), and just over half of the semen samples were positive for MPV [79]. The detection of high concentrations of the MPV in the anal region, mouth, and semen aligns with the sexual practices potentially associated with the MPV spread among MSM and skin contact related to sexual or nonsexual proximity.Following the 2022 outbreak, WHO prioritized research on transmission dynamics, containment strategies, and response measures against mpox [80]. Mathematical modeling studies on MPV transmission were limited and have not adequately considered vaccine efficacy, coverage, and population heterogeneity [81]. A study using mathematical modeling predicted the reproduction number of mpox among MSM at 3.11 globally, 3.57 in Germany, and 3.14 in the UK, respectively [81], which is much higher than the predicted R0 (less than one) in endemic countries in Africa [17,[82], [83], [84]]. Without public health interventions, the model predicts an exponential increase in the number of new infections in major outbreak pockets in the UK and USA, which is expected to regress with increased public interaction and implementation of a vaccination strategy, especially among high-risk populations. The study also reports that the majority of the current mpox cases among MSM are concentrated in a few pockets of North America and Europe that have lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ+) friendly federal laws and routinely organize pride events, gay sauna, and other gatherings, that have a higher risk of close contacts through anal or genital sexual activity compared to general populations. Another systemic review reports that compartmental, branching process, Monte Carlo (stochastic), agent-based, and network-based modeling techniques were used to study the human-to-human and between-human and animal transmission dynamics of mpox [83]. In the majority of the compartmental models, the following compartments were included: susceptibility (S), exposed (E), infected (I), vaccinated (V), recovered (R), quarantined (Q), and investigate the endemic equilibrium points using a SIR framework [[85], [86], [87]].The prediction of this model suggests that the conditions for persistence and eradication differ from the deterministic models, which indicates that reproduction number dictates the disease trajectory. In the ‘branching process model’ offspring distributions are utilized to generate a model for the propagation of mpox disease [88,89]. In another study, the Monte Carlo stochastic model was used to simulate the MPV transmission from infected patients to their exposed close contacts by tracking the generation order for successive secondary cases. The study demonstrated that without smallpox vaccination, the frequency of new cases increased but did not reach pandemic levels [84]. These studies highlight the utility of diverse mathematical modeling approaches historically used to study MPV transmission. However, these models' applicability to the 2022 outbreak is limited due to underlying assumptions and data constraints. To address this, new empirical epidemiological studies are needed, accounting for disease complexities and global ramifications.The 2022 mpox outbreak emphasizes the importance of research focusing on neglected zoonoses and allocating resources to manage and contain emerging diseases worldwide. A recent study on the 2022 outbreak of mpox used a transmission model fitted to actual sexual partnership data using Weibull distributions [90], demonstrating that a heavy-tailed sexual partnership distribution, where a few individuals have significantly more partners, can account for the disproportional higher rate of spread of mpox among MSM. This pattern was not evident in previous outbreaks. These findings indicate that the basic reproduction number (R0) for mpox within the MSM sexual network might be significantly higher than 1, presenting difficulties in containing outbreaks within these communities compared to the general population. Therefore, targeted support and tailored messaging are essential to enhance prevention and early detection efforts among MSM with multiple partners [89].5Risk group for the 2022 mpox outbreakAfter the 2022 outbreak, MPV infection in the United States declined significantly. However, the risk of resurgence remains high in most jurisdictions if vaccination efforts are not sustained, as modeling analyses indicate that without continued vaccination of high-risk individuals, the likelihood and size of future mpox outbreaks are expected to increase over time [[91], [92], [93]]. The overall risk of mpox is determined by combining the infection probability with the disease impact on the affected population [94]. During the 2022 outbreak, most diagnosed human mpox cases were observed among MSM within the age group of 21–55 years [95], and the presenting genital lesions indicate a potential transmission during sexual intercourse [96]. While transmission through intact skin contact is less likely, it cannot be completely ruled out. Most cases within interconnected sexual networks among the MSM community might be considered a plausible source for the outbreak's initiation.5.1MSM-associated riskA significant proportion of the MSM population remains at risk of MPV infection. Specific sexual behaviors, such as engaging in multiple casual sexual partners within interconnected sexual networks, attending sexual events during the spring and summer months, and participating in chemsex parties, can further facilitate disease transmission [97]. Mpox transmission thrives in enclosed settings such as back rooms, saunas, and private or public sex clubs, where intimate and frequently anonymous sexual contacts occur. These settings create favorable conditions for the rapid spread of MPV infection [98]. During the 2022 outbreak, most MSM mpox patients did not have a recent travel history to the endemic regions in Central and Western African countries [99], affirming that human-to-human close contact is likely the primary transmission route [96]. While a majority of reported mpox cases among MSMs have been described as mild, the high likelihood of infection results in a moderate overall threat. It is important to emphasize that this moderate risk may be higher for vulnerable groups such as the elderly, PLWH, or those with compromised immune systems [100]. [Fig. 2] describes the percentage of MSM and people living with HIV who reported positive for MPV during the 2022 mpox outbreak.Fig. 2MSM community at higher risk of 2022 Mpox outbreak. (A)The pie chart describes the percentage of MSM reported positive for MPV. Out of the total cases of MPV reported during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, 32.00% were MSM, 6.47% were not MSM, and 61.53% did not disclose their status. (B) The pie chart describes the percentage of people living with HIV (PLWH) who reported positive for MPV. Out of the total cases of MPV reported during the 2022 Mpox outbreak, 20.73% were HIV positive, 18.60% were negative for HIV, and 60.66% did not disclose their status. (Source: https://worldhealthorg.shinyapps.io/mpx_global/accessed on 11-05-2023).Fig. 25.2Risk for the general populationThe risk of mpox transmission among the general population has been estimated to be low. Large gatherings increase the risk of MPV infection due to the close and frequent interactions among attendees. The data on the spread and pattern of MPV infection among the general population is limited, which warrants continuous monitoring of new cases globally [101].5.3Risk for health care workers (HCWs) and laboratory personnelOccupational exposure to the MPV is a significant concern as it can persist on surfaces for extended periods [102]. HCWs equipped with proper personal protective equipment (PPE) face a low risk of MPV transmission due to the disease's estimated low impact [103]. Medium risk arises during activities involving contact with a mpox patient's skin lesions or bodily fluids without appropriate PPE [104]. Conversely, unprotected HCWs face high risk if exposed to mpox patients' bodily fluids, inhalation of droplets, or experiencing penetrating sharps injuries. To mitigate mpox risk among HCWs, it is crucial to conduct thorough risk assessments and provide counseling on self-monitoring, timely reporting, and isolation protocols without neglecting the ongoing outbreak response.Risk among laboratory individuals: The MPV has been classified as an ACDP Category 3 pathogen by the Advisory Committee on Dangerous Pathogens (ACDP) [105]. If the recommended biosafety procedure are followed, the laboratory personnel have a low chance of occupational vulnerability. To ensure safety, each laboratory should conduct site- and activity-specific risk assessments for MPV infections, ensure enhanced safety precautions, and follow the WHO/US-CDC guidelines for specimen collection, handling, shipment, and testing [[106], [107], [108]]. This will require the collaboration of laboratory managers, testing personnel, and occupational health officers at each facility.5.4Risk of human-to-animal spillover eventsThe probability of cross-species spillover of the MPV is influenced by various barriers and bottlenecks, including differences in cellular receptors, immune responses, and other host restriction factors. The risk of MPV transmission from humans to pets is low as the reported cases of reverse zoonosis are limited. While in the USA, the Animal Health Authorities have assessed the risk of human-to-animal spillover of mpox to be very low [109], evidence of human-to-animal transmission of MPV has been reported in France and Brazil during the 2022 outbreak [69,110]. Therefore, monitoring and managing the potential risks associated with human-animal transmission is essential to prevent further transmission and possible disease establishment in wildlife.6Pathogenesis of mpox among MSMsThe common and nonspecific symptoms of mpox include fever, swollen lymph nodes, and muscle pain, which start appearing about one to two weeks after getting infected and can be mistaken for seasonal flu or a cold [111]. The immune system is triggered during this stage, leading to the enlargement of inguinal, maxillary, and cervical lymph nodes and the onset of fever [1]. Rashes typically appear in one to three days after the fever and lymph node swelling and follow a centrifugal distribution across the body, suggesting that the rashes appear more prominently on the extremities and face than on the abdomen and trunk [112]. The rash is a crucial feature of mpox and goes through different stages, starting with minor bumps and progressing to vesicles and pustules before finally crusting over [77].The rashes may sometimes damage the skin, making patients susceptible to secondary opportunistic infections. In rare cases, MPV can cause lung tissue damage and bronchopneumonia, especially in individuals co-infected with the influenza virus [113]. Severe inflammation and bronchopneumonia can make it difficult for patients to breathe and eat. In severe cases, mpox can lead to complications like corneal infection, resulting in scarring and permanent vision loss [114]. During the second week of illness, some patients develop gastrointestinal symptoms like vomiting and diarrhea that can lead to significant dehydration [77]. The accumulation of mutations within the MPV replication complex is predicted to play an important role in the 2022 mpox outbreak [115]. A recent report from the USA showed that during the 2022 outbreak of mpox, patients living with HIV were more prone to experience symptoms like rectal pain and bleeding, tenesmus, pus and blood in stool, and proctitis [15]. This indicates the requirements of close monitoring of PLWH for MPV infection and the development of severe diseases. In addition, the disease pathogenesis of the MPV/HIV co-infected persons needs special attention because the contraction of the body fluids from mpox lesions among MSM makes them more vulnerable to HIV infection. The pathogenesis of MPV/HIV co-infection among MSM is complex and needs to be studied in greater detail using animal models [116]. Additionally, MPV infection can compromise the immune system, making MSM individuals more susceptible to HIV acquisition and worsening the progression of the HIV disease. Furthermore, the presence of HIV can potentially increase the severity of mpox due to the presence of a compromised immune system.7Vaccine recommendation for mpox and its efficacy among MSMJYNNEOS (developed by Bavarian Nordic) is a Modified Vaccinia Ankara-Bavarian Nordic (MVA-BN) based vaccine initially developed as a 3rd generation smallpox vaccine [117] is approved by the FDA against MPV in people aged 18 years and above [91]. To ensure optimal protection against mpox, individuals must receive two doses of the vaccine within four weeks intervel. In animal studies, JYNNEOS demonstrated robust protection against MPV, with most of the animals receiving the vaccines developing sterilizing immunity, effectively preventing the disease without showing any symptoms [118]. As of August 2, 2023, the current guidelines from the CDC recommend vaccination against mpox for individuals who meet the following criteria: (1) if someone has known or suspected exposure to a person with mpox, (2) If someone has had a sex partner diagnosed with mpox within the past two weeks, (3) For gay, bisexual, or men who have sex with men (MSM), as well as transgender, nonbinary, or gender-diverse individuals who, in the past 6 months, have been diagnosed with sexually transmitted diseases (e.g., chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis), or have had more than one sexual partner. (4) If someone has engaged in any of the following within the past 6 months: had sex at a commercial sex venue, such as a sex club or bathhouse, or engaged in sexual activities related to a large commercial event or in an area (city or county) where monkeypox virus (MPV) transmission is occurring, or engaged in sex in exchange for money or other items, or has a sexual partner who belongs to any of the high-risk groups mentioned above, or has HIV or other causes of immune suppression and has had recent or anticipated future risk of monkeypox exposure from any of the scenarios mentioned above, or works in settings where there is a chance of monkeypox exposure, and persons who work with orthopoxviruses in a laboratory [119].A recent study from Israel included 2054 males who met the eligibility criteria for vaccination. Of these, 1037 individuals (50%) received a single dose of the JYNNEOS (MVA-BN) vaccine during the study recruitment period and completed at least 90-day follow-up, the other 50% served as placebo control. Over the study duration, five infections occurred in vaccinated individuals, whereas 16 infections were confirmed in the unvaccinated group. Utilizing a Cox proportional hazards regression model with time-dependent covariates and accounting for sociodemographic and clinical risk factors, the study reports that the estimated vaccine effectiveness was 86% (95% confidence interval, 59–95%). These findings indicate that a single dose of MVA-BN in a high-risk cohort is significantly associated with a reduced risk of MPV infection [91]. Another case-control study using a nationwide Epic electronic health record (EHR) database (Cosmos) in the USA estimated the efficacy of JYNNEOS during the period from August 15 to November 19, 2022 [120]. Case patients were identified based on having either a diagnosis code for MPV or a positive laboratory result for orthopoxvirus or MPV.On the other hand, control patients were selected if they had a new diagnosis of HIV infection or a prescription for preexposure prophylaxis against HIV. Out of 2193 case-patients, 25 individuals, and 8319 control patients, 335 received two vaccine doses. The estimated adjusted vaccine effectiveness for complete vaccination in these groups was 66.0%. Additionally, 146 case patients and 1000 control patients received only one dose of the vaccine, with the estimated adjusted vaccine effectiveness calculated at 35.8%. In another case-control study among MSM and transgender adults aged 18–49 years between August 19, 2022–March 31, 2023, the vaccine efficacy (VE) was estimated among a total of 309 case-patients (diagnosis of confirmed or probable MPV or Orthopoxvirus infection, made on or after August 19, 2022) with a matched 608 control patients (patients attended a clinic for sexually transmitted infections (STI), HIV care, or HIV preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) on or after August 19, 2022) [121]. The adjusted VE was 75.2% for partial vaccination (1 dose) and 85.9% for complete vaccination (2 doses). Among the full vaccination group, the adjusted VE was 70.2% among immunocompromised participants and 87.8% among immunocompetent participants, respectively. Overall, these studies indicate that although the smallpox vaccine comes out to help trim the rapid spread of the current outbreak of Mpox among MSM, this vaccine cannot provide sterilizing protection against the MPV and has blunted efficacy for immune-compromised patients [122]. Additionally, the current vaccines are not available in mpox-endemic countries in Africa, which keeps the possibility of spreading the infection in non-endemic locations.Meanwhile, caution should be exercised while administering the smallpox vaccines to immunocompromised persons as the live attenuated vaccine may cause severe and potentially life-threatening complications in immunocompromised individuals like PLWH, people undergoing chemotherapy for cancer treatment, and organ transplant patients [123]. Furthermore, considering the likely mucosal transmission of the MPV, mucosal immunity could play a crucial role in establishing long-lasting immune responses. It is unclear whether the available vaccines can effectively generate robust mucosal immunity. The mucosal dendritic cells (DCs) and IgA secretion at the mucosal interface need further investigation to better understand their role in protecting mucosal transmissions. Case reports of mpox in individuals with a history of smallpox vaccination suggest that smallpox vaccines may not provide lifelong immunity against MPV [124]. As a result, booster doses might be necessary, especially for individuals with ongoing exposure risk factors. The optimal timing for booster vaccinations must be determined using pre-clinical animal models.Additionally, a uniform vaccination approach is required to address the global problem effectively, and it is logical to provide vaccinations on a priority bases to the high-risk groups like MSMs with interconnected social and sexual networks in newly impacted countries. However, the vaccination strategies in endemic regions, like parts of the Africa, may need to focus on populations at the most significant risk of animal exposure. Alongside vaccination, there is an urgent requirement for improved treatments for those affected by the disease. These initiatives should be prioritized alongside traditional infection control and prevention methods to foster trust within the affected communities.8Treatment optionsIn the 2022 outbreak of mpox, the MSM community got a disproportionally higher infection rate than the general population. It is also well known that the prevalence of HIV is higher among MSMs due to several comorbid conditions. Whether HIV is an independent risk factor for acquiring MPV infection remains unknown. However, PLWH with unsuppressed viremia remains at higher risk of developing severe mpox disease if they are infected with MPV [[125], [126], [127]]. In the general population, mpox is self-limiting and only requires symptomatic care to prevent dehydration, and in rare cases antibiotics to prevent/treat secondary bacterial infections [128]. There are no approved antivirals to treat mpox. USA-FDA recommends use of tecovirimat in immunocompromised persons along with brincidofovir, and vaccinia immune globulin intravenous (VIGIV) as required [129]. Tecovirimat, referred to as TPOXX or ST-246, has received FDA approval to treat smallpox in both adults and children [130]. Tecovirimat binds with orthopoxviruses VP37 (a phospholipase protein), and blocks its interaction with cellular Rab9 GTPase and TIP47, essential for creating enveloped virions. Thereby halting the cell-to-cell and long-distance spread of the virus.A retrospective study reviews the efficacy of tecovirimat for severe mpox among HIV-positive and negative people under the CDC EA-IND protocol. Out of 154 people who received the treatment, 82 were HIV-negative, and 72 were positive for HIV. The overall treatment outcome was similar between the groups [125]. It must be noted that tecovirimat may lower the plasma concentration of rilpivirine, an essential component of CAB/RPV long acting treatment as part of the combinational antiretroviral therapy (cART) for PLWH [131]. Brincidofovir (Lipid-conjugated analog of cidofovir) or cidofovir (inhibits OPXV DNA polymerase) should be added to tecovirimat in critically ill patients or to patients in whom tecovirimat is contraindicated. While prescribing Brincidofovir among PLWH, it should be considered that HIV Protease inhibitors and cobicistat can boost its plasma concentration [131]. VIGIV (vaccinia immune globulin intravenous) is recommended for immunocompromised patients unable to mount desirable immune responses due to HIV infection or solid organ transplant. For patients receiving VIGIV infusion, vaccination with live viruses (varicella, measles, mumps, and rubella) should be deferred for three months [132]. In a comprehensive review, we discussed the use of all EUA-granted drugs against mpox, their limitations in inhibiting viral replication in strains having the signature mutations reported in the 2022 MPV, and the importance of the development of MPV-specific therapeutics for the current and future mpox outbreaks [133].9ConclusionThis review sheds light on the complex web of challenges of mpox 2022 outbreak within the context of the MSM community. It underscores the pressing need to address the medical aspects of mpox and the socio-cultural stigma that often surround it. By considering the multifaceted nature of the risk factors and pathogenesis, we have discussed the need to develop more inclusive and effective preventive strategies and personalized treatment interventions for the MSM community. As we navigate the intersection of healthcare and social dynamics among the sexual minorities like MSM, by fostering inclusivity, education, and collaboration of them with general population, we can aspire to a future where stigma is replaced by empathy, risk factors are mitigated through knowledge, and treatment approaches are grounded in a deep understanding of the challenges faced by the MSM community in the context of mpox and any future outbreaks of sexually transmitted diseases.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: NIPAH VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Delineating morbillivirus entry, dissemination and airborne transmission by studying 

IntroductionMorbilliviruses are enveloped, non-segmented, negative strand RNA viruses that belong to the family Paramyxoviridae [1]. They are highly contagious, spread via the respiratory route, cause profound immune suppression but also elicit lifelong immunity in surviving hosts, and have a propensity to cause large outbreaks associated with high morbidity and mortality in previously unexposed populations. Measles virus (MV) is the prototype morbillivirus and remains a significant cause of childhood morbidity and mortality in the developing world. Measles is characterized by fever, skin rash, cough and conjunctivitis, followed by a transient immune suppression [2]. The resulting increased susceptibility to secondary infections can lead to life-threatening complications [3]. In spite of the availability of safe and effective live-attenuated MV vaccines, measles outbreaks continue to occur in the industrialized world due to inadequate vaccination coverage and importations of this highly transmissible virus from endemic regions [4, 5].The narrow host range and long incubation period of MV have restricted the characterization of its pathogenesis since patients are not recognized as having measles until onset of rash, and animal studies predominantly rely on experimental infections of non-human primates (NHPs). A surrogate model for MV pathogenesis is infection of ferrets with canine distemper virus (CDV), a morbillivirus that can infect a wide range of carnivores [6, 7]. However, CDV in carnivores is highly neurotropic and often leads to fatal disease [8–12], which is in sharp contrast to MV infection of humans and NHPs.Morbilliviruses are amongst the most contagious viruses known and are primarily transmitted by aerosols or respiratory droplets. Once inhaled, virions establish primary infection by receptor-dependent fusion at the plasma membrane [13]. Two cellular receptors involved in morbillivirus infection have been identified: signaling lymphocyte activation molecule family member 1 (SLAM/F1, or CD150), expressed by subsets of thymocytes, dendritic cells (DCs), hematopoietic stem cells, macrophages, T- and B-lymphocytes [14], and nectin cell adhesion molecule 4 (nectin-4, previously known as poliovirus receptor-related 4), expressed at the adherens junction complex of epithelial cells [15, 16]. Both receptors play a crucial role in viral pathogenesis (reviewed in [17]), with CD150-mediated infection being critical for entry and dissemination [18, 19] and nectin-4-mediated infection critical for virus transmission [20, 21].A number of aspects of morbillivirus pathogenesis remain unresolved. Studies in mice and NHPs have shown that MV initially infects alveolar macrophages and DCs in the lungs, instead of epithelial cells of the upper respiratory tract [22–24]. Even though this is a possible entry route, it seems unlikely that a highly contagious virus with an R0 of 12–18 [25] and of which infection with one 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50) is sufficient to cause productive infection in macaques [26], exclusively depends on infection of target cells in the alveoli. Additional routes of entry into a susceptible host have been postulated, including infection of CD150+ immune cells within the epithelium of the respiratory tract [18, 27]. As DCs are abundant within this epithelium, and DC-SIGN was previously identified as an attachment receptor for MV [28, 29], it is suggested that DCs could play a crucial role in this entry route [30]. Additionally, damage to the upper respiratory tract epithelium by mechanical injury [31] or respiratory co-infections potentially exposes nectin-4 as a cellular entry receptor. Another potential route of entry for morbilliviruses involves CD150+ and/or DC-SIGN+ cells present in the conjunctiva of the eye [32, 33]. However, direct in vivo evidence from animal models for these alternative entry strategies is lacking.Recombinant (r) viruses expressing fluorescent reporter proteins have allowed sensitive assessment of morbillivirus entry and dissemination in vivo [18, 34, 35]. Multicolored viruses have been used to demonstrate MV polyploidy [36], ribonucleoprotein trafficking [37], superinfection immunity [38], potential of segmenting the genome [39] and a cross-genomic cooperation modulating phenotype [40]. Recognizing the power of this approach for in vivo competition studies, we simultaneously administered three rCDVs expressing green (Venus), red (dTom) or blue (TagBFP) fluorescent proteins to ferrets to assess viral entry, intra-host dissemination and inter-host transmission. We show that CDV enters the host efficiently if delivered to the nose or lung, and that infection of the host through conjunctival administration, although less efficient, is also possible. In vivo competition showed that the route of entry had no influence on viral dissemination. However, exclusive single-color virus transmission of the systemically dominant virus to recipient ferrets was observed, suggesting a bottleneck during transmission.ResultsRecombinant CDVs stably express different fluorescent reporter proteinsPlasmids containing full-length CDV strain Snyder-Hill (CDVSH) antigenomes were modified to encode rCDVs expressing fluorescent reporter proteins from an additional transcription unit (ATU). Three fluorescent reporter proteins (Venus, dTom and TagBFP) were selected on basis of spectral discernibility, brightness, photo-stability, lack of oligomerization and potential to be detected by in-house flow cytometer and confocal microscope. These viruses, rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) were rescued and grown on Vero cells modified to express canine (c) CD150 (Vero-cCD150) in which they produced high levels of fluorescence in multinucleated syncytia (Fig 1A). Infection of concanavilin A (ConA)-stimulated white blood cells (WBC) isolated from CDV-naive ferrets resulted in large numbers of fluorescent cells, as detected by confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, Fig 1B) and flow cytometry.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g001Fig 1In vitro validation and in vivo experimental design.(A, top panel) Three rCDVs expressing a fluorescent reporter protein as an ATU from the 6th position in the genome were generated (rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6), rCDVSHTagBFP(6)), rescued and (A, bottom panel) grown on Vero-cCD150 cells. (B) rCDVs were shown to efficiently infect ConA-stimulated ferret WBC. (C) Donor ferrets 1–6 (D1-6) were simultaneously inoculated with a low dose of the three indicated rCDVs delivered via Oc, IN and IT inoculation in different administration route combinations, divided over three sequential experiments.Simultaneous inoculation with three rCDVSHs causes lethal disease in ferretsSix donor ferrets (D1 –D6) were simultaneously inoculated in three consecutive experiments via the ocular (Oc), intra-nasal (IN) and intra-tracheal (IT) routes with a low dose of the indicated rCDVSH (3.3 x 103 TCID50/route), depositing viruses in the eyes, nose or lungs. Even though the viruses had been engineered to have identical genome lengths to prevent subtle differences in fitness impacting the outcome of the in vivo experiment, the rCDVs were alternated over the three route combinations to mitigate any unforeseen effect on pathogenesis (Fig 1C). All donor ferrets developed fever with a biphasic pattern, with temperature peaks around 5–7 and 12–14 days post-inoculation (DPI) (Fig 2A). The first fever peak corresponded with the onset of lymphopenia: peripheral lymphocyte counts were strongly reduced by the end of the first week after infection, and did not recover during the second week (Fig 2B). All donor ferrets became lethargic and were euthanized 14–16 DPI. Virus could be isolated from WBC of all ferrets from 4 DPI, with peak viremia levels observed around 6–8 DPI (Fig 2C). The decline in viral load in WBC during the second week was likely due to the virtual absence of lymphocytes in peripheral blood, resulting in exhaustion of susceptible CD150-positive cells. Virus was isolated from eye, nose, throat, and rectal swabs, in most ferrets with progressively increasing virus loads during the second week after inoculation (Fig 2D).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g002Fig 2Inoculation with rCDVs leads to systemic infection and disease.Simultaneous inoculation of donor ferrets (D1-6) via multiple administration routes with three reporter viruses resulted in systemic disease. (A) Body temperature was measured using an intra-peritoneal probe and a biphasic fever pattern was observed. (B) WBC counts measured in EDTA blood showed that animals became lymphopenic. (C) Systemic virus replication was detected by virus isolation from WBC on Vero-cCD150 cells, while (D) local virus replication was demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs.Simultaneous inoculation of ferrets with three rCDVs results in systemic replication of one or multiple virusesExpression of fluorescent proteins within WBC throughout the course of the experiment, or in single cell suspensions prepared from lymphoid tissues collected at necropsy, was assessed by flow cytometry (Fig 3A). In one ferret (D5) only one fluorescent protein was detected, in three ferrets (D1, D3, D4) a combination of two fluorescent proteins was detected and in two ferrets (D2, D6) all three inoculated viruses had initiated productive infections as shown by simultaneous detection of red, green and blue fluorescent proteins. Interestingly, in ferrets showing systemic infection with two or three viruses, all fluorescent proteins were already detectable in WBC collected at 6 DPI. This demonstrates that even though viruses were administered via multiple inoculation routes, parallel onset of viremia occurred within one week after inoculation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g003Fig 3Microscopic and macroscopic detection of fluorescence in donor ferrets.(A) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in directly inoculated (D1-6) ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. The circular inset shows which reporter virus was administered to a donor ferret via which route. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions of lymphoid tissues were determined by flow cytometry. rCDVs were detected in all lymphoid tissues (man LN: mandibular lymph node; ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; mes LN: mesenteric LN; GALT: gut-associated lymphoid tissue; PP: Peyer’s patches; BM: bone marrow; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 5/6 ferrets the IT delivered virus became dominant (D2 –D6). (B, C) Donor ferrets D1 and D2 were chosen as representative examples. Virus was isolated from WBC, BAL, CSF and throat, nose, eye and rectal swabs by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. (Left panels) Screening of virus isolations by CLSM allowed determination of the dominance of rCDVs at 8 DPI. (Centre panels) Relative contribution of the various reporter viruses to the total amount of rCDV present in the sample collected 8 DPI or at necropsy (CSF and BAL). (Right panels) Direct CLSM of various tissues at necropsy revealed fluorescence in the epithelium of the trachea (dotted line marks basement membrane, Lu marks lumen), and B-cell follicles in lymphoid tissues (delineated by dotted line). (D) Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was directly detected in live ferrets and during necropsy at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin. The inset in the second panel clearly shows that green and red foci of infected cells can be discerned (#). During necropsy, macroscopic fluorescence was detected in the tongue (arrows show tonsils), lungs and Peyer’s patches. Again, the inset in the third panel shows separate foci of green and red cells (#).rCDV uses multiple routes of entry in parallelIn all donor ferrets IT inoculation resulted in viremia, confirming that direct inoculation into the lower respiratory tract is a highly efficient entry route for morbilliviruses (Fig 3A). In five out of six donor ferrets, IN inoculation also resulted in viremia, demonstrating that morbilliviruses can also efficiently invade a host when 3300 TCID50 in a low volume (25μl/nostril) was deposited in the upper respiratory tract (Fig 3A). Finally, in two out of six ferrets the morbillivirus directly inoculated into the conjunctival sac behind the lower eyelid (again using a low volume inoculum) caused viremia, demonstrating this is a functional route for morbillivirus entry, although apparently less effective than entry through the respiratory route (Fig 3A).Multi-route delivery of rCDVs results in widespread systemic replicationNext we focused on the period between onset of viremia and euthanasia of the donor ferrets to assess morbillivirus dissemination. In one ferret (D1) the virus inoculated via the IN route became dominant, while in all other ferrets the virus given by IT inoculation became dominant. Likewise, viruses that predominated in WBC were in most cases also present at the greatest level in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues (Fig 3A).Detection of fluorescent protein expression in WBC (Fig 3A) showed a good correlation with virus isolation from WBC (Fig 3B and 3C, left panel). Ferrets D1 and D2 illustrate this since these animals represented two extremes of the study. In ferret D1 two viruses were detected systemically (rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6)), however one virus (rCDVSHdTom(6)) became dominant. In ferret D2 all three viruses replicated at comparable levels. Virus isolation from WBC in Vero-cCD150 cells resulted in predominantly red plaques for D1, and in multicolored plaques for D2. Photomicrographs in the left panels of Fig 3B and 3C show a high resolution CLSM image of a representative well, while the large pie charts show the relative color distribution produced by viruses isolated from WBC collected at 8 DPI. The smaller pie charts show the color distribution of virus isolated from other samples, including swabs of the conjunctivae, nose, throat and rectum collected at 8 DPI (see also Fig 2D), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) collected at necropsy. Interestingly, the proportion of green fluorescent virus in ferrets D1 and D2 was higher in BAL than in all other tissues, corresponding to IT inoculation of these two ferrets with rCDVSHVenus(6). In ferret D1, low systemic detection of green fluorescent cells, was contrasted by a relatively high percentage of green fluorescent cells in the tracheo-bronchial lymph node (TB LN) which drains the lungs (Fig 3A). At necropsy, CLSM analysis of respiratory tract tissues and lymph nodes of ferret D1 revealed a predominance of red fluorescent cells (Fig 3B, right panels), whereas the same tissues collected from ferret D2 contained a mixture of different colored fluorescent cells (Fig 3C, right panels).Macroscopic fluorescence produced by rCDVSHVenus(6) and rCDVSHdTom(6) was imaged both in living ferrets and at necropsy. Macroscopic detection of blue fluorescence was not technically possible using the available apparatus. Both green and red fluorescence were detected in the head of ferret D2 (Fig 3D, fluorescence was detected mainly at the nose, eyes, mouth and skin). Use of the light emitting diode (LED) lamp to detect green fluorescence, allowed detection of separate green and red foci of infected cells (Fig 3D, inset in second panel at (#)). Macroscopic imaging of tissues during necropsies is illustrated by photos of the tongue, lungs and Peyer’s patches (PP) of ferret D2, again showing a clear separation of green and red fluorescent foci of infection (Fig 3D, inset in third panel at (#)).Double- and triple-rCDV-infected cells in vivo during disseminationMorbillivirus viremia is mediated by circulation of infected cells rather than cell-free virions. As a consequence, morbilliviruses predominantly disseminate by cell-to-cell spread within the host. It has been hypothesized that superinfection immunity is a significant barrier to dual infections of cells. Unexpectedly, during virus isolation procedures from WBC we not only observed green, blue or red syncytia, but also syncytia that contained two or three fluorescent proteins, pseudo-colored as yellow (Venus / dTom), purple (dTom / TagBFP), cyan (Venus / TagBFP) or white (Venus / dTom / TagBFP) following image acquisition by CLSM (Fig 4A). Since it may be possible that double- and triple-positive syncytia could have been caused by fusion of single-infected cells, thus not representing true double or triple infections of single cells, we performed direct CLSM of tissues collected during necropsy. This confirmed the presence of double-infected cells in the epithelium of the trachea (Fig 4B, upper panel, Venus / TagBFP cell shown as cyan [*] and Venus / dTom cell shown as yellow [#]) and in the spleen (Fig 4B, lower panel). In the spleen, single-infected cells were observed throughout the section in red, green and blue, whereas many double-positive cells were observed in cyan, yellow and purple. Finally, double and triple infections were confirmed by flow cytometry. As an example, WBC obtained from ferret D2 at 8 DPI were gated for positive events for a single reporter protein (Fig 4C, left panels), for which subsequently the other two reporter proteins were plotted (Fig 4C, right panels). This demonstrated the presence of single-infected cells (lower-left quadrant), but double- (lower-right and upper-left quadrant) and triple-infected (upper-right quadrant) lymphocytes were also commonly detected. Although triple-infected cells were only detected in 2/6 animals, double-infected cells were more common and were detected in 5/6 animals. To confirm these in vivo observations, we performed in vitro competition experiments in canine B-lymphoblastoma (CLBL-1) cells [41], and confirmed that double infections were also achieved in vitro (Fig 4D). Moreover, in vitro double infections were also observed when the second virus infection was performed six hours after the first infection (S1 Fig).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g004Fig 4Detection of rCDV double- and triple-infected cells.(A) Virus isolation from WBC by titration on Vero-cCD150 cells revealed syncytia that were simultaneously positive for two reporter proteins (i.e. Venus/dTom [yellow], dTom/TagBFP [purple] or Venus/TagBFP [cyan]) or all three reporter proteins (Venus/dTom/TagBFP [white]). (B, upper panel) Direct confocal analysis of the trachea from ferret D2 showed that single infected cells (Venus, dTom or TagBFP) were dominant, but sparse Venus/TagBFP and Venus/dTom double-positive cells were detected as cyan (*) or yellow (#), respectively. (B, lower panel) Direct confocal analysis of the spleen from ferret D2 revealed the presence of single-infected and all possible combinations of double-infected cells. (C) Direct flow cytometry of WBC collected from ferret D2 on 8 DPI indicated that single-, double- and triple-positive cells were present in peripheral blood. Similar results were obtained at different time-points. (C, upper panel) When Venus+ cells were selected (as indicated by red gate), dTom-/TagBFP- (single-infected cells), dTom+/TagBFP- or dTom-/TagBFP+ (double-infected cells) and dTom+/TagBFP+ (triple-infected) cells were detected. (C, middle and lower panel) Similar results were obtained when the analysis was performed by initially gating dTom+ or TagBFP+ cells. Percentages of positive cells are indicated in the plots. (D) Canine lymphoma B-cells (CLBL-1) were inoculated with rCDVSHVenus(6) and/or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) in the presence of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4. Green and blue fluorescence levels were determined 24 hours post infection by flow cytometry. Venus and TagBFP single positive cells are shown in green and blue, respectively, while double-positive cells are shown in cyan.rCDV dissemination results in widespread infection of the nasal cavity and CNSSince airborne transmission of respiratory viruses is assumed to be associated with virus shedding from the upper respiratory tract [42, 43], we assessed the distribution of CDV-infected cells in the nasal cavity of ferrets D4 (Fig 5) and D5 (S2 Fig). Since CDVSH is highly neurotropic, we performed immunohistochemical analysis of slides containing a sagittal section of the entire ferret head which permitted assessment of infected cells in both the nasal cavity and brain. CDV-infected cells were mainly detected in the nasal cavity of ferret D4 (Fig 5A), and few positive cells were observed in the meninges. Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*) (Fig 5B). Very few cells within the olfactory epithelium were CDV positive (Fig 5C), whereas the respiratory epithelium contained many CDV-infected cells (Fig 5D), including ciliated epithelial cells and macrophage-like cells (Fig 5D, macrophages indicated by arrow and shown in inset). Throughout the nasal cavity the majority of CDV-positive cells was found in the submucosa and included fibroblasts, large macrophage-like cells, and lymphocyte-like cells. In the nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT) the majority of lymphoid cells were CDV positive (Fig 5E). In addition, CDV- infected glands were occasionally observed in the nasal cavity, mainly in the tip of the nose (Fig 5F). CDV-infected squamous epithelial cells were observed in the soft palate (Fig 5G), mimicking similar observations in MV-infected macaques.10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g005Fig 5rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D4.Immunohistochemistry detecting CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed abundant rCDV in the nasal turbinates (Nt, delineated by dotted line). In this ferret rCDV was only observed in few meningeal cells and not in the cerebrum (Br) and olfactory bulb (Ob). In general, CDV-positive cells were mainly found in the submucosa of the respiratory and olfactory mucosa and nasal-associated lymphoid tissues (NALT). (B) Cells surrounding the nerve twigs of the olfactory nerve were CDV-positive on both sides of the cribriform plate (dotted line), on both the side of the nasal cavity (#) and the olfactory bulb (*). (C) Few CDV-positive cells were detected in the olfactory epithelium, and many CDV-positive cells were present in the submucosa of the olfactory epithelium. Positive cells had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in the respiratory epithelium of the nasal turbinates, although most positive cells within the epithelium appear non-epithelial (arrows and insert). Again, CDV-positive cells were abundant in the submucosa and had an irregular macrophage-like morphology. (E) Positive stretch of CDV-positive cells, including NALT with infected lymphocytes and fibroblasts. CDV-positive macrophages were also detected in the epithelial layer. (F) Submucosal nasal glands stained occasionally positive for CDV predominantly in the tip of the nose (arrow). (G) Squamous epithelium of the soft palate stained positive for rCDV.In ferret D5, rCDV was detected in the nasal cavity and CNS (S2A Fig). In the nasal cavity, the number of CDV positive cells was lower in comparison to ferret D4, and consisted predominantly of fibroblasts and macrophage-like cells in the submucosa. In the CNS, CDV-infected cells were frequently observed in the meninges, predominantly in the meninges surrounding the cerebellum. Positive ependymal cells were detected in the choroid plexus, responsible for the production of CSF (S2B Fig), which corresponds to the isolation of virus from the CSF from this ferret. In the cerebellum, meninges surrounding the cerebellum and brainstem, endothelial cells and cells adjacent to blood vessels were occasionally CDV positive (S2C Fig). This suggests hematogenous spread of CDV into the CNS. In both the olfactory bulb and cerebrum foci of CDV positive cells, including neurons and glial cells, were detected (S2D and S2E Fig). Finally, CDV-positive cells were observed within the bone marrow.rCDV infection of donor ferrets results in airborne transmission to recipient ferretsTo assess airborne transmission, CDV-naive recipient (R1 –R6) ferrets were placed in transmission cages at 2 DPI. Donor and recipient ferrets were sampled every other DPI and followed for a maximum of 16 or 22 DPI respectively (Fig 6A and 6B). Ferrets were housed in pairs, meaning that recipient ferret R1 was placed in a cage adjacent to donor ferret D1. Body temperature was measured in 4 out of 6 recipient ferrets. Fever was not observed in the recipient ferrets tested up to the time point of euthanasia (Fig 6C). However, the majority of recipient ferrets showed decreased lymphocyte counts shortly before euthanasia (Fig 6D). Airborne transmission was confirmed in all donor-recipient pairs and infectious rCDV was isolated from WBC (Fig 6E), nose, throat, eye and/or rectal swabs collected from recipient ferrets (Fig 6F). By using flow cytometry, rCDV replication was detected in WBC of 5 out of 6 ferrets (Fig 6G). For recipient ferret (R4) in which CDV-infected cells were not detected by flow cytometry, rCDVSHdTom(6) was isolated from throat and eye swabs. In all cases, only a single colored rCDV transmitted to the recipient ferret, which was also found in the lymphoid tissues at euthanasia and always was the virus that predominated in the corresponding donor animal (Fig 3A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1006371.g006Fig 6In vivo transmission of rCDV to recipient ferrets.(A, B) Susceptible recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed pairwise in neighboring cages of the donor ferret at 2 DPI. Arrows indicate airflow. All directly inoculated ferrets were euthanized at 14 to 16 DPI, whereas recipient ferrets were euthanized 21 or 22 DPI. (C) Fever was rarely detected in recipient ferrets, but these animals developed (D) lymphopenia and (E) systemic virus replication as detected by virus isolation from WBC as well as (F) local virus replication demonstrated as virus isolation from eye, nose, throat and rectal swabs. In panels E and F, grey lines represent the respective virus loads in donor ferrets (as shown in Fig 2). Transmission was detected in 6/6 animal pairs. (G) WBC infection percentages of the rCDVs in recipient ferrets were determined by flow cytometry at different time-points. After necropsy, infection percentages of the rCDVs in single cell suspensions from lymphoid tissues were determined. rCDV was detected in most lymphoid tissues (ax LN: axillary LN; ing LN: inguinal LN; TB LN: tracheo-bronchial LN; RP LN: retropharyngeal LN; ND: not determined). Results obtained from lymph nodes corresponded to the kinetics of the rCDVs in WBC. In 6/6 ferrets the single-color virus dominant in the donor animal transmitted to the recipient ferret.DiscussionWe have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies in ferrets with virologically identical but spectrally distinct rCDVs administered simultaneously via multiple routes. Our aim was to study the temporal and spatial interplay of viruses during the early, intermediate and late stages of CDV infection. These “rainbow CDV” studies are the first to show that morbilliviruses can use multiple entry routes in parallel. Detection of circulating or lymphoid tissue-derived lymphocytes expressing multiple fluorescent reporter proteins was common, demonstrating that in vivo superinfection immunity is not a restrictive phenomenon. Airborne transmission to recipient ferrets was detected in all animal pairs, underpinning the highly infectious nature of morbilliviruses.Animal models of human viral diseases provide the bedrock of much of the current understanding of tropism and pathogenesis, and are essential for the development and licensure of drugs and vaccines. Ideally the human pathogen under study should not need to be adapted to the animal and the disease process should recapitulate the full clinical spectrum in people. This is challenging and oftentimes either the pathogen or host must be genetically altered to produce disease. Therefore, related animal pathogens infecting natural host species provide useful surrogates in the pathogenesis toolkit. For example, Sendai virus infection of mice [44], bovine respiratory syncytial virus infection of calves [45] and simian immunodeficiency virus infection of NHPs [46] have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of closely related human viruses. Likewise, experimental CDV infections of ferrets have provided important insights into the pathogenesis of MV and other morbilliviruses [47–50].Both measles [51] and canine distemper [47] are recognized as highly infectious diseases that are spread via the respiratory tract. The availability of rMVs expressing fluorescent proteins allowed us to identify alveolar macrophages and DCs in NHPs as early target cells following aerosol inhalation [24]. In that study, substantial numbers of MV-infected cells were not detected in the upper respiratory tract even though minuscule numbers of macrophages and DCs were detected in the deep lung at early time points after inoculation. This fitted well with our experience of IT inoculation as a highly reliable and standardized route of experimental MV infection [26]. The majority of CDV pathogenesis studies in ferrets has used IN inoculation, delivering the virus to the upper respiratory tract. Although it is important to note that IN inoculation of relatively large volumes can easily result in deposition of virus in both the upper and lower respiratory tracts [52], we also hypothesized that it was unlikely that morbilliviruses exclusively used the lower respiratory tract as a portal of entry [30]. Therefore, we simultaneously inoculated ferrets with multicolor rCDVs via the IN and IT routes, ensuring delivery to only the upper and lower respiratory tract, respectively. Since the conjunctivae have also been suggested as a portal of entry for many respiratory viruses [33], including MV [32], ocular inoculation was used as a third possible route of entry. IN and IT delivery resulted in viremia in 5 out of 6 and 6 out of 6 ferrets, respectively, within a week after inoculation. The fact that the IT-delivered virus became dominant in 5 out of 6 ferrets suggests that this is the most efficient port of entry, confirming previous observations with MV infection of NHPs [26]. This could be explained by the fact that in the lungs the potential target cells (alveolar macrophages and/or DCs) are directly accessible and not shielded by an epithelial barrier. However, since virus delivered by IN inoculation in a low volume also resulted in viremia in the majority of the ferrets, this demonstrated that multiple routes of entry can be used in parallel. Inoculation of the virus onto the conjunctivae resulted in infection in only 2 out of 6 ferrets, demonstrating that this is a legitimate, albeit less efficient entry portal. However, since there is a direct connection between the eyes and the upper respiratory tract via the nasolacrimal duct, transport of virus particles to the upper respiratory tract after conjunctival delivery cannot be excluded. Moreover, it is important to note that this study was not designed to assess statistically significant differences between these routes of entry.CDV dissemination is mediated by infected circulating and tissue-resident B- and T-lymphocytes [35], and results in lymphopenia and fever. During dissemination the infection remains highly cell-associated, and few virions are detected in plasma. Spread is mediated mostly by direct cell-to-cell transmission, e.g. by the formation of virological synapses [34, 53, 54]. Here, we show that regardless of the route of entry, all donor ferrets developed a similar course of fatal disease, and severity was independent of the number of circulating rCDVs. Interestingly, significant numbers of lymphocytes co-expressed two or three fluorescent reporter proteins, demonstrating that they were infected with viruses inoculated at different sites. Although it has been shown that morbillivirus infection induces superinfection immunity in vitro [38], the incredibly rapid dissemination of CDV (with percentages of infected WBC rising from undetectable to more than 50% within 2 days in some animals) leads to lymphocytes being double- or triple-infected. We consider serial, direct cell-to-cell transmission of rCDVs from different donor cells to single acceptor cells the most likely explanation of the existence of double or triple infections. In fact, double infection was readily reproduced in vitro by exposing a B-lymphoblastic canine cell line to two rCDVs, and was also reproduced when the second infection was performed six hours after the first.Multi-route delivery of virologically identical but phenotypically distinct viruses is a powerful approach to dissect the complex interplay in evolving pathogenesis. None of the data suggest that the expression of different fluorescent reporter proteins had an effect on virus fitness and we have done our utmost to ensure that rCDVs were genetically identical in terms of genome length and ATU design. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that genes encoding Venus, dTom and TagBFP contain secondary or tertiary RNA structures or immune-activating sequences. Alternating the rCDVs and administration routes in three subsequent experiments further mitigated this risk.Although epidemiological observations have demonstrated that CDV is a highly contagious virus, surprisingly few experimental studies have examined transmission. In 1926, Dunkin and Laidlaw meticulously described precautions taken to perform experimental CDV infections of ferrets and keep their breeding stock of animals free of canine distemper [47]. Three transmission pathways: direct contact between sick and healthy animals, housing a healthy animal in a cage from which a moribund animal had been removed several hours earlier, and airborne transmission were described [47]. The timespan between onset of disease in the donor and recipient animals was around ten days. Subsequent direct transmission studies documented a period of 6 to 11 days for development of disease in recipient animals [55] and experimental CDV outbreak studies in ferrets support a role for airborne transmission [56]. The observed time period required for CDV transmission in our experiment was in good accordance with these previous reports [47, 56].Even though we could not determine the exact tissue origin of transmitted virus due to widespread dissemination of different colored viruses throughout the donor ferrets, the dominant virus of the donor always was the only virus transmitted to the recipient. The added value of our study was that the transmission of a single color rCDV, even when two or three rCDVs were detected in donor ferrets, suggested a bottleneck event during airborne transmission: apparently only one or a few infectious units were transmitted from donor to recipient ferret. This mirrors influenza airborne transmission between ferrets, in which virus populations in recipient ferrets proved to be genetically much more homogeneous than those of the donor ferrets [43, 57, 58]. However, in this model transmission was restricted to airborne transmission, so the situation could be different for indirect and direct contact transmission. Overall, this illustrates the utility of gaining a comprehensive understanding of transmission in this important animal model, which is also being developed for Ebola virus and Nipah virus [59–61].Here, we have performed in vivo competition and transmission studies with rCDVs discernable on basis of their fluorescent reporter proteins. We believe that this model will prove its use in the future for in vivo competition studies to identify factors associated with viral fitness.Materials & methodsEthics statementAnimal experiments were conducted at Erasmus MC, in strict compliance with European guidelines (EU directive on animal testing 2010/63/EU) and Dutch legislation. The study protocol was approved by Stichting Dier Experimenten Commissie Consult (DEC Consult, permit number EMC3043), a Dutch independent animal experimentation ethics review board. The manuscript was prepared in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines [62].CDV-naive ferrets were housed in groups prior to rCDV infection, received standard feed on a daily basis and had access to water ad libitum. Cages contained several sources of environmental enrichment. During the infection and transmission studies, ferrets were housed in transmission cages [63]. Briefly, ferrets were housed individually in perspex cages, with paired donor (D) and recipient (R) ferrets being separated by two stainless steel grids. The bottom of the cages was covered with carpet and cages were not cleaned during the course of the experiment to prevent aerosolizing bodily excretions. Transmission cages were placed in HEPA-filtered, negatively pressurized biosafety level 3 (BSL-3) isolators. Animal welfare was checked on daily basis, and all animal handling was performed under light anesthesia using ketamine and medetomidine. After handling, atipamezole was administered to antagonize the effect of medetomidine.CellsVero cells stably expressing the CDV receptor canine SLAM (Vero-cCD150) (kind gift of Dr. Y. Yanagi, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan) were cultured as described previously [64]. To obtain primary ferret white blood cells (WBC), small-volume blood samples were collected from CDV-naive ferrets in Vacuette tubes (Greiner) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant. Red blood cells in blood were subsequently lysed with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine, 10% (V/V) heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin (100 U/ml) and streptomycin (100 μg/ml). The canine B-cell lymphoma cell line CLBL-1 [41] (kind gift of Dr. Barbara Rütgen, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria) was grown in complete RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% (V/V) FBS.Generation of rCDVs expressing Venus, dTom and TagBFP fluorescent proteinsRecombinant CDV strain Snyder-Hill (SH) viruses were generated as described previously [10]. Genes encoding the fluorescent reporter proteins Venus, dTom or TagBFP were added as an ATU at the sixth (6) position of the genome (between H and L) (Fig 1A). Importantly, TagBFP and dTom were modified by the addition of six (GGSGSG) and five (GSGSG) amino acids, respectively, to the carboxyl terminus to make them identical in size to Venus (239 amino acids). This ensured that the viral genome lengths were identical from the perspective of replication and transcription by the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. The three viruses were designated rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) and rCDVSHTagBFP(6). Fluorescence produced in cells infected with these viruses can be readily discerned by flow cytometry, UV epifluorescence microscopy and CLSM. Virus stocks were grown in Vero-cCD150 cells (Fig 1A) and tested negative for contamination with Mycoplasma species. Virus titers were determined by endpoint titration in Vero-cCD150 cells and expressed in TCID50/ml. Susceptibility of ferret WBC with the reporter viruses was determined in vitro. ConA stimulated ferret WBC were inoculated in quadruplicate with rCDVSHVenus(6), rCDVSHdTom(6) or rCDVSHTagBFP(6) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 3 for 1 hour, washed and subsequently cultured for 48 hours. Susceptibility of ferret WBC was analyzed directly by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM with a LSM700 system fitted on an Axio Observer Z1 inverted microscope (Zeiss) (Fig 1B) and by flow cytometry on a FACS Canto II (BD Biosciences).In vitro double infection of CLBL-1 cellsCLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 150μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 5x104 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide Pam3CSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide) and cultured for 23 hours in 96-well flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (Fig 4D).In a second experiment, CLBL-1 cells were seeded in 96-well V-bottom plates (Greiner) at 1.2x105 cells per well. After centrifugation (5 minutes, 350g) supernatants were removed, and cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium or (combinations of) rCDV(s) diluted to 1.2x105 TCID50 per well in the absence or presence of 10μg/ml of infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [65]. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide). Five hours later (i.e. six hours after infection 1), cells were centrifuged again and a second infection was performed in the presence or absence of PHCSK4. After 1 hour at 37°C, the plate was centrifuged, the medium was discarded, and the cells were resuspended in 100μl culture medium (without lipopeptide), and cultured for 23 hours in 96-wells flat bottom plates. Infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry (S1 Fig).Animal study designTwelve CDV-seronegative ferrets (Mustela putorius furo) were used for the rCDV infection and transmission studies. A temperature probe was implanted intraperitoneally 2 weeks before the beginning of the experiments to monitor body temperature noninvasively. Six donor ferrets (randomly selected, D1-6) were inoculated with 104 TCID50 rCDV, divided in three equal parts of rCDVSHVenus(6): rCDVSHdTom(6): rCDVSHTagBFP(6) (each 3.3 x 103 TCID50). Each reporter virus was administered via a different route, which were alternated over three experiments. Ferrets D1 and D2 received rCDVSHTagBFP(6) ocularly (Oc), rCDVSHdTom(6) intra-nasally (IN) and rCDVSHVenus(6) intra-tracheally (IT); ferrets D3 and D4 received rCDVSHVenus(6) Oc, rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IN and rCDVSHdTom(6) IT; ferrets D5 and D6 received rCDVSHdTom(6) Oc, rCDVSHVenus(6) IN and rCDVSHTagBFP(6) IT (Fig 1C). Oc administration was performed by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) directly onto each of the conjunctivae, IN inoculation by pipetting virus suspension (50μl) into the nostrils while the ferret was held on its back to prevent spread to the trachea and IT inoculations by direct instillation of virus suspension (1ml) into the lower respiratory tract after intubation with a flexible catheter. Following inoculation, the six donor ferrets were placed individually in purpose built cages specifically designed to allow airborne transmission over a 10 cm divide. Donor ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 14–16 DPI. Six CDV-seronegative recipient ferrets (R1-6) were placed in the transmission cages (Fig 6A) at 2 DPI of the donor ferret. Recipient ferrets were sampled every other day and were euthanized at 21/22 DPI (Fig 6B). The animal protocol specified that recipient animals had to be euthanized no later than 22 days after inoculation of the donor animals, which made it impossible to assess the full spectrum of disease in the recipient ferrets.Clinical specimensSmall-volume blood samples were collected in Vacuette tubes (Greiner Bio-One, Kremsmünster, Austria) containing K3EDTA as an anticoagulant every other DPI of donor ferrets, or every other day after placement of recipient ferrets in transmission cages. Recipient ferrets were always sampled first to prevent direct contamination of recipient animals by sampling of the donor animals. Total WBC and lymphocyte counts were obtained using an automated counter (pocH-100iV; Sysmex). WBC were obtained by lysis of whole blood with red blood cell lysis buffer (Roche, Basel, Switzerland), washed and resuspended in complete RPMI 1640 medium as described above. Cells were counted using a hemocytometer and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The percentages of WBC infected by different reporter viruses were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for cytopathic effect (CPE) by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 6 days and results were expressed as the number of virus-infected cells/106 total cells. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by screening virus isolations on Vero-cCD150 cells for Venus, dTom and TagBFP expression by CLSM.Throat and rectal swabs (cytobrush plus; Medscand Medical) and nose and eye swabs (polyester-tipped minitip urethral swab; Copan) were collected every other DPI from donor ferrets, or every other day after placement from recipient ferrets, in transport medium (Eagle's minimal essential medium [EMEM] with Hanks' salts, supplemented with lactalbumin enzymatic hydrolysate, penicillin, streptomycin, polymyxin B sulfate, nystatin, gentamicin, and glycerol) and frozen at −80°C. After being thawed, samples were vortexed, the swab was removed, and the remaining transport medium was used for virus isolation. Isolation of rCDV was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells using an infectious center test as previously described [66]. Virus isolations were monitored for CPE by microscopy after co-cultivation with Vero-cCD150 cells for 3 to 7 days and results were expressed as TCID50/ml. Relative contribution of the different reporter viruses to the number of virus-infected cells was determined by separately screening virus isolations for Venus, dTom and TagBFP by CLSM.NecropsyFerrets were euthanized by exsanguination under deep ketamine/medetomidine anesthesia. Macroscopic detection of Venus and dTom was performed with an LED lamp and the appropriate filters as described previously [10, 18]. Post-euthanasia, CSF was obtained by lumbar puncture. Virus isolation from CSF was performed by direct titration on Vero-cCD150 cells. A broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) was performed postmortem by direct infusion of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 5 ml) into the right-hand side of the lung. BAL cells were resuspended in culture medium with supplements as described above, counted, and used directly for flow cytometry and virus isolation. The infection percentages of BAL cells were determined by detection of fluorescent reporter proteins by flow cytometry. Virus isolation was performed on Vero-cCD150 cells as previously described for MV on Vero cells expressing human CD150 [18]. During necropsy, multiple tissues including brain, trachea, primary bronchus, lungs and spleen were harvested and screened directly for expression of fluorescent reporter proteins by CLSM. The left lung was inflated with 2% (W/V) low-melting-point agarose before being screened, as described previously [24, 67]. After screening, non-lymphoid tissues were transferred to 10% neutral-buffered formalin (FA). From two ferrets (D4 and D5), the complete head was stored in 10% neutral-buffered FA for immunohistochemistry. Lymphoid tissues were collected in PBS for preparation of single-cell suspensions using cell strainers with a 100 μm pore size (BD Biosciences, Erembodegem, Belgium) and directly used for flow cytometry. The infection percentages of single cell suspensions by different reporter viruses were determined by flow cytometry.Histological and immunohistochemical analysisAfter fixation in 10% formalin, ferret heads were decalcified in 10% EDTA (pH 7.4) for at least a month. After decalcification heads were embedded in paraffin. CDVSH was detected using a monoclonal antibody (VMRD Inc., Pullman, WA, USA). Briefly, 3μm paraffin sections were deparaffinized and antigens were retrieved by boiling slides for 15 minutes in citric acid buffer (10mM, pH 6.0). Sections were incubated with the anti-CDV antibody for 1 hour at RT. Binding of the primary antibody was detected using a biotinylated rabbit-anti-mouse Ig (DAKO), after which tissue sections were incubated with ABComplex-HRP (DAKO) for 30 minutes. Peroxidase was revealed using 3-Amino-9-ethyl-carbazole (AEC, Sigma) resulting in a bright red precipitate. In each staining procedure an isotype control was included as a negative control.Supporting informationS1 FigIn vitro single and double infections of canine B-lymphoblastoid cell line CLBL-1.(A) Experimental design: CLBL-1 cells were infected at T = 0 and / or T = 6 hours. One hour after the infections (or incubation with culture medium as mock control), cells were washed to remove unbound virus. At T = 30 hours infection percentages were determined by flow cytometry. (B) List of the conditions (#) applied for infection 1 (I1) or 2 (I2). All infections were performed in triplicate, using a multiplicity of infection of 1, in the presence or absence of the infection-enhancing lipopeptide PHCSK4 [63]. (C) Infection percentages (irrespective of which reporter protein was expressed) ranged from 14.5 to 51.3% or from 64.1 to 84.8% when performed in the absence (top) or presence (bottom) of infection-enhancing lipopeptide, respectively. (D) Examples of confocal scanning laser microscopy (top) or flow cytometry (bottom) measurements of conditions 1 (mock), 2 (Venus), 3 (dTom) and 6 (Venus + dTomOM) 30 hours post-infection in the presence of PHCSK4. In the FACS plots, single positive cells are shown in green (Venus) or red (dTom), while double-positive cells are shown in yellow. (E) Distribution of single- or double-positive cells in the infected cell populations of conditions 2–8.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigrCDV was detected in the central nervous system (CNS) and nasal cavity of directly inoculated ferret D5.Immunohistochemistry for the detection of CDV was performed on (A) complete ferret head sections (red box in inset shows anatomic location of section) and showed rCDV presence in the CNS (cerebellum [Cl], cerebrum and olfactory bulb). (B) CDV-positive cells within the ependyma and choroid plexus (arrow). (C) CDV was detected in endothelial cells and cells surrounding the blood vessel, suggestive of a hematogenous spread of rCDV to the brain. (D) CDV-positive cells were detected in neurons and glial cells of the olfactory bulb. (E) CDV-positive neurons and glial cells in the cerebrum.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Comparison of the Pathogenicity of Nipah Virus Isolates from Bangladesh and Malaysia in the Syrian Hamster

IntroductionNipah virus is a member of the family Paramyxoviridae, genus Henipavirus, and was discovered in 1998–99 to be the etiological agent responsible for an outbreak of severe respiratory disease in pigs [1] and encephalitis in humans in Malaysia [2]. All subsequent outbreaks of Nipah virus have occurred in Bangladesh or India, beginning in 2001, and have occurred on an almost annual basis [3]. Genetic data demonstrate that the isolates from Malaysia (NiV-M) and Bangladesh (NiV-B) represent two distinct Nipah virus strains [3], [4]. Nipah virus outbreaks have case fatality rates of up to 100% and there are no approved vaccines or treatments and these viruses have been categorized as a biosafety level 4 (BSL4) agents. Nipah virus differs from other paramyxoviruses in its ability to infect a wide range of mammals including bats [5], dogs [1], [6], horses [7], pigs [1], and cats [1], [8]. Wildlife surveillance at the time of the first outbreaks, along with several subsequent studies, has identified fruit bats of the family Pteropodidae as the natural reservoir of Nipah virus [5], [9]–[11].During the first Nipah virus outbreak in Malaysia, NiV-M caused over 265 cases of encephalitis with 105 human deaths, resulting in a case fatality rate of 40% [1]. Common clinical manifestations of Nipah virus infection included fever, headache, respiratory disease, encephalitis and loss of consciousness [12], [13]. Fatal human cases of NiV-M infection were characterized by pathology involving the respiratory tract, central nervous system (CNS), heart, kidney and spleen [13]. NiV-M infection causes vasculitis characterized by destruction of the endothelium, syncytia formation, thrombosis and necrosis, with infiltration of inflammatory cells throughout affected organs. In the lungs of infected humans, pulmonary edema, alveolar hemorrhage and pneumonia were documented as well as occasional multinucleated giant cells found in alveolar space [13]. During this outbreak, the disease predominantly affected the nervous system with prominent signs of brain stem dysfunction. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brains of infected individuals showed focal lesions throughout the white matter [13]. In a study examining 94 Nipah virus-infected patients in Malaysia, only 6% showed abnormal chest radiographs, and of these, only one presented with a cough [2]. Also, cases of late onset or relapsing encephalitis were documented during the Malaysia outbreak [2]. During the Malaysian outbreak, pigs predominantly showed signs of respiratory disease and were determined to be an intermediate host [14], [15].Epidemiologically, reports of infection with NiV-B differ from that of NiV-M infection in several aspects. Clinically, NiV-B infection resulted in a higher percentage of respiratory disease and a higher case fatality rate, reaching up to 100%, compared to NiV-M infection [12]. This disparity could reflect the differences in availability of health care and in reporting [16]. Disparities, however, could also be caused by intrinsic differences in the pathogenicity of NiV-M and NiV-B. NiV-B is transmitted from bats to humans by multiple routes including the ingestion of contaminated date palm sap [17], and can subsequently be transmitted nosocomially [18], or by human-to-human transmission [19]–[22]. Common clinical signs and symptoms of NiV-B infection included fever, altered mental status, headaches, cough, and difficulty breathing [16], [23]. During the Bangladeshi outbreaks, acute respiratory distress was noted in many patients [16], [24]. Febrile neurologic illnesses were also documented in some outbreaks of NiV-B, with lesions found in the gray and white matter of the brain [23], [25], [26]. In one study looking at 92 patients, 69% had difficulty breathing and 62% had a cough [16]. Limited studies have been conducted to describe the pathology in NiV-B infected patients.In contrast to most other paramyxoviruses, Nipah virus has a broad species tropism and there are few suitable animal models that recapitulate human disease. Experimentally cats, guinea pigs, ferrets, pigs, non-human primates, and Syrian hamsters have been shown to support NiV-M viral replication resulting in clinical signs of infection [27]–[29]. The Syrian hamster is the only small rodent model that closely mimics multiple aspects of human disease [8], [27], [30], [31]. When infected intraperitoneally (i.p.) or intranasally (i.n.) with NiV-M, hamsters develop respiratory disease and/or encephalitis. The pathological changes that occur in the hamster are similar to those described in humans. The presence of vasculitis, necrosis, and inflammation is seen in both the human and hamsters. Viral antigen and disease pathology is observed in lung, kidney and heart tissue [31], [32]. Similar to human infections that lead to encephalitis, hamsters show antigen positive neurons, necrosis, and vasculitis in the CNS [31]. These similarities in infection between humans and hamsters make the Syrian hamster a suitable model for the study of Nipah virus pathogenesis.This study was designed to compare NiV-B and NiV-M infections in a hamster-derived cell line, followed by a comparison of the pathogenesis and immune responses to infection by both virus strains in the Syrian hamster. Our results demonstrated that hamster cells are permissive for infection by both virus strains, with NiV-M causing increased syncytia formation and cytopathic effect (CPE) compared to NiV-B. In vivo, NiV-B infection resulted in a delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M infection. Overall NiV-M is more cytopathic in vitro and causes an accelerated disease in vivo, compared to NiV-B.Materials and MethodsEthical statementAll work with Nipah virus, potentially infectious materials, and infected hamsters was completed in the BSL4 facility at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health. All standard operating procedures applied were approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC). All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Rocky Mountain Laboratories and performed following the guidelines of the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International (AAALAC) by certified staff in an AAALAC-approved facility.Virus propagationNiV-B and NiV-M were provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. NiV-M was isolated from a human case (cerebrum) in 1999 and passaged on Vero E6 cells a total of four times before used in experiments [33]. NiV-B was isolated from a throat swab of a lethal human infection from Bangladesh in 2004 and passaged in Vero E6 cells a total of three times [4]. Viruses were propagated on Vero E6 cells in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium (DMEM) (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM l-glutamine, 50 IU/mL penicillin and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies). Supernatants were collected and clarified by low-speed centrifugation and stored in liquid nitrogen.Virus titrationFor plaque assays, Vero C1008 (European Collection of Cell Cultures) were grown to confluency in 6-well plates. Media was replaced with 250 µL of serial 10-fold dilutions of virus in DMEM and incubated for 1 hr at 37°C, rocking every 15 min. The virus inoculum was replaced with 2 mL of a 1∶1 mixture of 2× minimal essential medium (MEM) and 1.6% low-melt agarose (Life Technologies). The cells were then incubated for 3 d at 37°C, 5% CO2 before staining with 2 mL of a 0.25% crystal violet solution in 10% formalin for 3 hr at room temperature. The stain and overlay were then removed from the wells and the plaques were enumerated.To determine the 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50), monolayers of Vero C1008 cells were grown in 96-well plates and 100 µL of serial 10-fold diluted samples in MEM containing 2% FBS, were added to the wells. Cells were then incubated for 5 d at 37°C, 5% CO2 and then scored for CPE.Cell lines and in vitro infectionsBaby hamster kidney cells (BHK-21) from the American Type Culture Collection were propagated in MEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM l-glutamine, 50 IU/mL penicillin and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies). Nipah virus infections were performed in 48-well plates when cells reached 95–100% confluency. Infections were performed by replacing medium with 250 µL of diluted virus (multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 and 0.01) in MEM, 2% FBS. After 1 hr, the inoculum was replaced with MEM supplemented with 2% FBS. Supernatants were collected at 1 hr, and 1, 2, and 3 days post infection (dpi) for virus titration. Cells were stained using the Kwik Diff Kit (Thermo scientific) to visualize syncytia according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Cells were monitored for CPE with a light microscope and images were captured using a Nikon DS-Fi1 camera.Inoculation of hamsters and sample collectionGroups of 5 to 6 week old female Syrian hamsters (Harlan) were inoculated with the indicated doses of NiV-M or NiV-B diluted in sterile DMEM and administered via the i.p. route in a total volume of 500 µL. Control animals received the equivalent volume of sterile DMEM by the same route. Two groups were inoculated i.n. with 105 TCID50 per hamster of either NiV-M or NiV-B diluted in sterile DMEM. Fifty microliters of virus preparation was delivered to each nare using a pipette. Hamsters were weighed and scored daily for clinical signs for two weeks. When signs of disease no longer existed, animals were monitored but no longer weighed. The health of animals was assessed and scored according to the following criteria: 0 = no signs of disease; 1 = ruffled fur; 2 = ruffled fur & weight loss <5%; 3 = ruffled fur, hunched posture & weight loss >5%; 4 = ruffled fur, hunched posture & weight loss >10%; 5 = ruffled fur, hunched posture, weight loss >15%, or encephalitic signs, or hemorrhagic signs, or paralytic signs or dyspnea; 6 = ruffled fur, hunched posture, weight loss >20%, or encephalitic signs, or hemorrhagic signs, or paralytic signs or dyspnea; 7 = death. Euthanasia occurred at a score of 5 and above. At the time of euthanasia, animals were bled (EDTA- and heparin-treated vacutainer tubes) via cardiac puncture. Necropsies were performed to collect lung, spleen, heart and brain tissue. Tissues were placed in lysis buffer RLT (Qiagen) for RNA extraction, or 10% formalin for histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis.RNA extraction and quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)Tissues (30 mg pieces) were homogenized in RLT buffer and removed from the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturers' instructions. Whole blood was collected and inactivated in AVL buffer and removed from the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Total RNA was extracted using QIAamp viral RNA kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturers' instructions.The RNA was quantified on a nanodrop 8000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed on a rotor-gene 6000 instrument (Corbett Life Science) using QuantiFast probe reagents (Qiagen) targeting the NiV-M or NiV-B nucleocapsid protein gene. Primers and probes used were: NiV-B sense (5′-GTTCAGGCCAGAGAAGCTAAATTT-3′), NiV-B antisense (5′-CCTCTTCGTCGACATCTTGATCA-3′), NiV-M sense (5′- GTTCAGGCTAGAGAGGCAAAATTT-3′), NiV-M antisense (5′- CCCCTTCATCGATATCTTGATCA-3″), NiV-B probe (5′-6FAM-CTGCAGGAGGTGTGCTCATCGGAGG-TAMRA-3′) and NiV-M probe (5′-6FAM-CTGCAGGAGGTGTGCTCATTGGAGG-TAMRA-3″). qRT-PCR components were used at the concentrations recommended by the manufacturer and 5 µL of RNA was added to each reaction and the following thermocycling parameters were used: 50°C for 10 min, 95°C for 5 min, and 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 s, 60°C for 10 s. Dilutions of RNA extracted from a known titer of each Nipah virus were run in triplicate to generate a standard curve from which sample TCID50 equivalents were extrapolated. Hamster immune gene expression was determined as previously described [34]. Briefly, RNA was extracted from tissues and qRT-PCR was performed as described above using gene-specific primers and probes under multiplex conditions. The fold-change in each gene was calculated by normalizing the change in CT (ΔCT) to the CT values for RPL18 (as an internal reference gene) for each sample and comparing this to the CT values of uninfected hamsters (2−ΔΔCT).Histopathology and immunohistochemistryTissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 7 d with one volume change, then transferred out of the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Tissues were then placed in cassettes and processed with a Sakura VIP-5 Tissue Tek, on a 12 hr automated schedule, using a graded series of ethanol, xylene, and ParaPlast Extra. Embedded tissues were sectioned at 5 µm and dried overnight at 42°C prior to staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).Specific Nipah virus IHC was performed using an anti-Nipah virus N protein rabbit primary antibody at a 1∶5000 dilution (kindly provided by L. Wang, CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Australia) [35]. The tissues were then processed using the Discovery XT automated processor (Ventana Medical Systems) with a DAPMap (Ventana Medical Systems) kit.StatisticsStatistical analyses were performed on the data form the TCID50 and qRT-PCR experiments using a 2-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni's post-test. To determine whether there were significant differences in the time to death between the viruses, we performed a log-rank test. The mean and SEM is represented and significance (* = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01 and *** = p<0.001) is reported where appropriate.ResultsNiV-M causes increased cytopathology in BHK-21 cells, compared to NiV-BTo determine the cellular responses and replication kinetics of the two Nipah virus strains in a hamster cell line, we infected BHK-21 cells with either NiV-M or NiV-B at MOIs of either 0.01 or 0.1. As early as 1 dpi, syncytia formation was apparent in all NiV-M-infected cultures. By 3 dpi, and at both MOIs, NiV-M-infected cells showed extensive CPE and nearly complete destruction of the cell monolayer (Figure 1A). NiV-B-infected cells showed little CPE at any of the time points sampled, regardless of the inoculation dose. At 3 dpi, NiV-B-infected cells began to form small syncytia. At both MOIs, NiV-M replicated sooner and reached higher virus titers in the supernatant at earlier time points compared to NiV-B (Figure 1B and C). At the lower MOI, NiV-M reached a titer that was 4 logs higher at 3 dpi than NiV-B (Figure 1B), whereas end titers were similar for both Nipah virus strains at the higher MOI, with a faster progression for NiV-M (Figure 1C).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g001Figure 1NiV-M replicates more efficiently and causes increased cytopathogenicity in hamster cells compared to NiV-B.To study the cytopathogenicity of these Nipah viruses, BHK-21 cells were infected with NiV-M or NiV-B at an MOI of 0.01 and stained using the Kwik Diff Kit at 1, 2, and 3 dpi (A). Arrows point to multinucleated giant cells. To examine the viral growth kinetics, BHK-21 cells were infected with Nipah virus at an MOI of 0.01 (B) or 0.1 (C). and supernatants were collected at the indicated time points. Supernatants of NiV-M at an MOI of 0.1 at 3 dpi were not collected due to extensive destruction of the cell monolayer. Virus was titrated on Vero C1008 cells and the results are expressed as the mean of three replicates and error bars indicate the SEM. The dotted line denotes limit of detection for the assay. A 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's post test was used to compare the viruses (* = p<0.05).Disease progression during NiV-B infection of hamsters is delayed compared to NiV-M infectionTo date, NiV-B infection has not been examined in an animal model. To assess the suitability of the hamster as a model for NiV-B infection, as well as to compare the two strains, hamsters were inoculated i.p. with 10-fold serial dilutions of Nipah virus from 105 to 1 TCID50 (Figure 2). Animals were evaluated for clinical signs of disease on a daily bases according to a scoring system outlined in the Materials and Methods section. Only one hamster showed abnormal clinical signs on the day prior to euthanasia, which consisted of ruffled fur. All other hamsters did not display abnormal clinical signs until the day euthanasia was necessary. Hamsters challenged with either virus strain showed clinical signs of respiratory distress and/or neurologic dysfunction leading to a score that required euthanasia. Signs of respiratory disease included labored abdominal breathing and hunched posture; neurological dysfunction included imbalance, partial paralysis and seizures. Similar to previous studies with NiV-M, respiratory distress was observed only in animals infected at the highest doses (104 and 105 TCID50/animal) [32]. The majority of animals inoculated with the lower doses of Nipah virus (100 through 103 TCID50/animal) displayed neurologic dysfunction prior to euthanasia. One animal infected with NiV-M at the highest dose (105 TCID50) and two animals infected with NiV-B (one inoculated with 104 and one with 105) presented with both respiratory and neurologic dysfunction, while the rest of animals had either respiratory or neurological signs of distress that required euthanasia. NiV-M-infected animals showing severe respiratory signs of disease were euthanized between 5–7 dpi, whereas animals displaying neurological disorders were euthanized between days 5–11. Disease progression in NiV-B-infected animals was generally slower, and animals displaying severe respiratory distress or neurological dysfunction were euthanized on 8–9 dpi or 8–14 dpi for NiV-M and NiV-B infection, respectively (Table 1). The slower disease progression in NiV-B-infected animals was reflected in the overall survival curves with 80% lethal disease outcome even at the highest dose of infection (Figure 2 and Table 1). The LD50 for NiV-M and NiV-B was 68 and 528 TCID50, respectively. At both 103 and 105 TCID50, there was a statistically significant difference in the time to death between the two virus strains, with death occurring approximately two days later for NiV-B infected animals at each dose (Table 1). To determine if the delay in survival is associated with the route of infection, we inoculated hamsters i.n. with 105 TCID50 of either NiV-M or NiV-B. The mean time to death was delayed by two days in hamsters inoculated with NiV-B compared to NiV-M (Figure S1). Both routes of inoculation showed a two-day delay in NiV-B compared to NiV-M, although the mean time to death was later in both virus groups with the i.n. compared to i.p. route.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g002Figure 2Hamsters inoculated with NiV-B show delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M-infected hamsters.Groups of 5 hamsters were inoculated i.p. with 10-fold serial dilutions of virus from 105 to 1 TCID50. The hamsters were monitored for 30 dpi for survival.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.t001Table 1Clinical signs and outcome of hamsters inoculated with NiV-M or NiV-B.InoculumDose (TCID50)Survival (%)Mean time to death (days)a
NiV-M1×100
100N/A1×101
100N/A1×102
408.7±1.71×103
07.2±1.9*
b
1×104
07±21×105
05.8±0.7**
c
NiV-B1×100
100N/A1×101
6014±01×102
100N/A1×103
409±1.4*
b
1×104
208.5±1.11×105
207.75±0.8**
c
aExcluding survivors.bSignificant difference between NiV-M and NiV-B at dose 103 TCID50,*p<0.05: Log-rank test.cSignificant difference between NiV-M and NiV-B at dose 105 TCID50,**p<0.01: Log-rank test.Both Nipah viruses replicate in hamster lung, brain and spleen tissueTo compare the pathogenesis of NiV-M to NiV-B, groups of hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of either Nipah virus and tissues were collected on 1, 3 and 5 dpi for both virus groups, and 7 dpi for NiV-B. Based on the time to death at this dose from our survival experiment, 7 dpi tissues were not collected for NiV-M-inoculated animals for this pathology experiment. Viral RNA was detected using Nipah virus N-specific qRT-PCR (Figure 3). In NiV-M-inoculated animals, replication was detected at an earlier time point than NiV-B replication. As early as 1 dpi, viral RNA was detected in lungs, brain and spleen tissue of some NiV-M-infected animals. NiV-B-infected animals had detectable levels of viral RNA at 1 dpi in lung tissue of some hamsters, and in the spleen by 3 dpi. Both strains showed an increase in viral RNA over time in the lungs, brain and spleen, with the highest overall titers in the lungs at the last time point sampled. We assessed viremia in hamsters inoculated with either virus by qRT-PCR. Levels of viral RNA were barely detectable and viral RNA was undetectable in some animals at each time point (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g003Figure 3NiV-B replication is delayed in hamster organs compared to NiV-M replication.Hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus and 9 animals/group were euthanized at 1, 3, 5, and 7 (for NiV-B only) dpi and tissues were collected. Total viral RNA was extracted and Nipah virus N-specific viral RNA was quantified by qRT-PCR. Gray bars represent NiV-B and white NiV-M. Bars represent the mean and error bars represent the SEM.Host gene expression in lung, brain and spleen tissue of hamsters is differentially regulated during Nipah virus infectionTo examine the kinetics of the host immune response to Nipah virus infection, and compare responses between NiV-M and NiV-B infections, the expression level of a subset of cytokine and chemokine mRNAs were examined by qRT-PCR in the lungs, brain and spleen (Figure 4). Throughout the infection, the largest overall response was seen in the lungs. At 1 dpi, a statistical difference in the upregulation of interleukin-4 (IL-4), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and interferon-γ (IFNγ) was observed between NiV-M and NiV-B infections, with higher expression of these genes in response to NiV-M. A similar result was measured at 3 dpi for IFNγ in the lungs (Figure 4). At 3 dpi, IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were upregulated similarly in response to both virus strains and remained upregulated throughout the course of infection. Upregulation of the gene for myxovirus resistance protein-2 (Mx2) in the lungs was detected only at the last time point for both virus strains. IFNγ-induced protein 10 (IP-10) mRNA increased starting at 1 dpi and remained upregulated in the lungs throughout the course of infection, peaking at 3 dpi in NiV-M-infected hamsters and 5 dpi in NiV-B-infected hamsters. IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were also upregulated in brain (Figure 4). There was a significant increase in Mx2 transcription in the spleens of NiV-M-infected hamsters at 3 dpi compared to NiV-B. In the brain, IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were slightly upregulated over control animals. IL-4, IL-6, TNF, and IFNγ mRNAs were downregulated in the spleen.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g004Figure 4Host gene expression in lung, brain and spleen tissue of hamsters is differentially regulated during infection with Nipah viruses.Quantitative RT-PCR for IL-4, IP-10, IL-6, Mx2, TNF and IFNγ was performed on lung, brain and spleen tissues from groups of 9 hamsters inoculated with 105 TCID50 of NiV-M (white bars) or NiV-B (gray bars) at the indicated time points. Data are shown as the fold-change of each gene over uninfected controls and normalized to an internal reference gene (RPL18). Error bars represent the SEM. A 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's post-test was used to determine statistical significance between viruses (* = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01 and *** = p<0.001).Histopathological changes occurred earlier in NiV-M-infected hamsters compared to NiV-B-infected animalsTo compare the pathology between the two strains, hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of NiV-B or NiV-M and tissues were examined histologically. Pathology was observed for both infections and was composed of a mild to moderate multifocal, subacute, bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis on 5 dpi for NiV-M and NiV-B infection (Figure 5). By 7 dpi in NiV-B-infected animals, the pneumonia progressed to marked, multifocal to coalescing, subacute bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis, necrosis, edema, and fibrin deposits. The pneumonia in both groups, on day 5 dpi for NiV-M infection and 7 dpi for NiV-B infection, was characterized by effacement of terminal bronchioles and adjacent alveoli by small to moderate numbers of macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells. Multifocal vasculitis was observed with disruption of the arterial tunica media by small numbers of neutrophils and lymphocytes. Syncytial endothelial cells were found in affected small to medium caliber vessels. Hamsters from the final time points had moderate to marked lesions in the lungs and demonstrated a loss of pulmonary architecture with replacement by cellular and karyorrhectic debris with small to moderate amounts of hemorrhage, fibrin deposits and edema. IHC revealed viral antigen in alveolar capillary endothelium, small and medium caliber arteriolar endothelium, and in mononuclear inflammatory cells starting at 3 dpi for NiV-M infection and 5 dpi for NiV-B infection (Figure 5B). The presence of viral antigen was strongly associated with areas of inflammation. No pathological changes were observed in the CNS of hamsters infected at the high dose used in the pathology study.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g005Figure 5NiV-M infection results in accelerated pathology compared to NiV-B infection in hamsters.Nipah virus inoculated hamsters were euthanized at 3, 5 and 7 dpi (for NiV-B only) and lung sections were stained with H&E (A) and for Nipah virus nucleocapsid protein (IHC) (B) Images were taken at a magnification of 100× and 400× (insets). Asterisks denote arteries with vasculitis as demonstrated by recruitment of inflammatory cells with effacement of the tunica intima and tunica media. Open arrows denote areas of acute hemorrhage and closed arrows indicate fibrin deposits.DiscussionNipah virus is a zoonotic pathogen that causes encephalitis and pulmonary disease with a high case fatality rate and is classified as a category C pathogen by the NIAID's pathogen priority list [12]. Two strains of Nipah virus, NiV-M and NiV-B, have been isolated from geographically and temporally separated outbreaks [4]. Human outbreaks caused by these strains differ in disease progression and epidemiologically [23]. The Syrian hamster has been established as a disease model for NiV-M infection [31], [32], but NiV-B infection studies have not been reported for any animal model. The goal of this study was to compare the replication, pathogenesis, and immune response to infection with NiV-M and NiV-B using in vitro and in vivo methods. BHK-21 cells infected with NiV-M showed more severe damage and supported higher virus replication compared to NiV-B-infected cells. Hamsters infected with NiV-B had a delay in disease progression and increased survival rates compared to NiV-M infected animals.
In vitro, BHK-21 cells were permissive for infection by both NiV-M and NiV-B. NiV-M replicated to higher titers in the supernatant at an earlier time point, and infection resulted in widespread syncytia formation causing extensive CPE. Widespread CPE was not observed in NiV-B-infected BHK-21 cells, although a few syncytia were present at later time points. The differences observed in virus replication and syncytia formation could be attributed to either higher viral replication causing more syncytia, or more syncytia formation resulting to higher virus load. Differences in replication efficiency including protein production, viral assembly and budding could explain the higher virus production and large number of syncytia observed in NiV-M infected cultures. Conversely, differences in fusion kinetics could account for disparate amounts of syncytia that then lead to variation in virus replication. The high amount of fusion and syncytia formation in cells could result in the infection of cells that were not initially infected at the low MOIs used in our experiments. This could lead to higher overall levels of virus production. Previous studies using paramyxoviruses have demonstrated that viral spread can occur by cell-cell fusion; the surface proteins of Nipah virus are present at the cell junctions and have been shown to initiate fusion and spread of virus [36]–[38]. Slower fusion kinetics could lead to less and slower formation of syncytia observed in NiV-B infected cells. The affinity of Nipah virus glycoprotein to its receptors, ephrin B2 and B3, as well as the ability of the glycoprotein to trigger the fusion protein could also affect fusion rates. Further experiments need to be completed to examine the relationship between replication and syncytia formation.In our experiments, we chose i.p. as the route of inoculation due to the more uniform disease progression and outcomes described in previous Nipah virus studies [31]. It is likely that i.p. inoculation would more readily allow for the detection of subtle differences between strains that may not be detectable in a less uniform infection route, such as i.n. When infected with NiV-M or NiV-B, hamsters developed clinical signs of disease similar to human infection [2], [13], [31], [39]. The onset of disease and death in hamsters was rapid and occurred between 5–14 dpi, which corresponds to human cases, where symptoms start to develop between 7–10 dpi [15], [40], [41]. We observed earlier replication of NiV-M than NiV-B in all organ types sampled, although, once NiV-B RNA was detected, it reached similar values within two days. Earlier replication of NiV-M in tissues corresponded with earlier pathologic changes and accelerated disease and death compared to NiV-B infection. In humans, CNS pathology is documented, but in our comparative pathology experiment, we did not observe pathology in the CNS. This is likely attributed to the high dose of inoculum for the pathology experiment (105 TCID50) and route of inoculation (i.p.). However, we did observe pathology in the lungs consisting of multifocal subacute bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis. The pneumonia was characterized by inflammation in the terminal bronchioles and alveoli spaces, necrosis, hemorrhage, fibrin deposits, edema and syncytia in endothelial cells. In human cases, fibrinoid necrosis, vasculitis, pulmonary edema, alveoli hemorrhaging, and syncytia were documented [13], [15], [40]. It is probable that hamsters inoculated with this high dose (105 TCID50) succumbed to infection due to inflammation, edema, and widespread vasculitis in the lungs that caused interstitial pneumonia. Even with low levels of viral antigen, pathology was severe enough to cause a fatal outcome.The typical dose that humans are infected with, as well as the route of infection is not known. In hamsters, both virus strains caused respiratory distress and/or neurological dysfunction in a dose-dependent manner. Based on previous data in hamsters, it is likely that dose and route of infection might play a role in Nipah virus outcome in humans [32]. Disease progression could be altered by the transmission route, which could include fomite [18], [42], oral ingestion [17], [43], and respiratory droplets [42], [44], [45]. In this study, inoculation of hamsters with NiV-B resulted in a delay in disease progression and the LD50 was approximately a log higher compared to NiV-M. However these data are contrary to what has been reported in humans, where NiV-B results in higher case fatality rates compared to NiV-M. Since we did not observe a difference in disease that would explain differences in the epidemiological data for the two Nipah virus strains, factors other than the intrinsic pathogenicity likely contribute to the disparities in the documented epidemiological data. The suboptimal health care, lack of supportive care and inconsistencies in reporting could account for higher documented case fatality rates and differences in disease manifestations during NiV-B outbreaks [16].Cytokine and chemokine mRNAs were quantitated in the hamsters over the course of infection and several immune genes were upregulated in the lung, brain, and spleen, although there was a slight downregulation of some genes in the spleen. NiV-M induced an earlier and more robust immune response compared to NiV-B, which eventually reached similar levels to hamsters infected with NiV-M. Early TNF activation during NiV-M infection may contribute to recruitment of inflammatory cells, as observed in the lungs of infected hamsters by histopathology. The upregulation of IP-10 in the lungs coincided with lymphocyte recruitment, appearance of vascular damage, and necrosis in the lungs. IP-10 upregulation has been documented in other Nipah virus studies, specifically focusing on endothelial cells [46], [47]. Teruya-Feldstein et al reported that high levels of IP-10 are found in necrotic tissue and in areas of vascular damage associated with Epstein-Barr virus-positive lymphoproliferative processes in mice [48]. They demonstrated a correlation between IP-10 regulation, tissue necrosis, and vascular damage during viral infection. Similarly, IP-10 is upregulated in the airways of patients with pulmonary diseases such as tuberculosis and plays a role in recruitment of activated T cells [49]. IL-6 gene expression was increased earlier in the lung in NiV-M compared to NiV-B infected hamsters. IL-6 activates T cells [50] and the recruitment of T cells likely contributed to the widespread vasculitis associated with Nipah virus infection and disease. Recruitment of lymphocytes could also be a way for Nipah virus to disseminate throughout the host, as it has recently been published that lymphocytes and monocytes can carry virus without becoming infected and release virus at distant sites from the original infection [51], [52]. In the lungs, IL-4 was also upregulated, following similar kinetics than IL-6. IL-4 promotes differentiation of B cells, and is upregulated is indicative of the activation of a Th2 response [53]. However, during disease, specific antibody production would not occur fast enough, since animals succumb to infection before significant antibody production can likely occur. Due to the use of the hamster as a model, we are limited in the amount of reagents available for a detailed examination of the immune response and future work is needed to get a more complete picture of the immune response to Nipah virus infection. In general NiV-M infection caused earlier induction of immune genes which probably corresponds to the earlier pathology observed. It is possible that the strong early immune response in Nipah virus-infected animals might contribute to disease via an immunopathogenic mechanism.In conclusion, there is a delay in NiV-B-induced disease progression compared to NiV-M, specifically in time to death, virus replication, pathology and immune responses. NiV-M is more cytopathic in vitro and more pathogenic in vivo. Viral antigen staining was low in tissues, although the pathologic changes were extensive and the inflammatory response was robust, suggesting disease progression may not only be a result of direct effects of the virus, but likely has an immunopathogenic component. The experimental data presented herein characterizes the hamster as a suitable small animal model for NiV-B infection, showing clinical signs, viral tropism, and pathologic changes similar to those observed in humans. These data are important to further the understanding of Nipah virus infection and pathogenesis. By applying the hamster model for NiV-B this allows for future studies in transmission, pathology and therapeutics, specifically focusing on the Nipah virus strain responsible for recent outbreaks.Supporting InformationFigure S1
Hamsters inoculated intranasally with NiV-B show delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M-inoculated hamsters. Groups of 5 hamsters were inoculated i.n. with 105 TCID50. The hamsters were monitored for survival. A log- rank test was used to compare survival curves (* = p<0.05). NiV-B infected animals had a mean time to death of 11.6 days and NiV-M infected animals 9.4 days.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Nipah Virus Transmission in a Hamster Model

IntroductionNipah virus is a member of the Henipavirus genus in the Paramyxoviridae family. Nipah virus first emerged in humans in Malaysia in 1998–1999, during a large outbreak of encephalitis and respiratory disease in humans, causing 276 cases of encephalitis, with 106 fatalities [1]. The subsequent detection of antibodies against Nipah virus, Nipah viral RNA and the isolation of Nipah virus from samples of Pteropus spp fruit bats indicated that they form the natural reservoir of Nipah virus [2], [3], [4], [5]. In Malaysia, Nipah virus-infected pigs formed the intermediate and amplifying host in the transmission cycle from the natural reservoir to humans [6]. The second Nipah virus outbreak occurred in India in 2001, resulting in 66 cases of encephalitis with a case-fatality of 74% [7]. Epidemiological data suggest that 75% of the Nipah virus patients in this outbreak were exposed to the virus within a hospital setting, with human-to-human transmission as the most likely route [7]. Since 2001, outbreaks of Nipah virus have occurred almost every year in Bangladesh. Clinical presentation of Nipah virus in Bangladesh is somewhat different from that in Malaysia, with a higher proportion of respiratory disease and a higher case-fatality rate of up to 90% [8]. No intermediate host was implicated in the Nipah virus outbreaks in India and Bangladesh. Rather, epidemiological data suggest transmission of Nipah virus from bats to humans through the consumption of fruit or date palm sap contaminated by infected fruit bats [9], [10]. In addition, human-to-human transmission occurred on a larger scale during outbreaks in India and Bangladesh compared to Malaysia. For the Nipah virus outbreaks in Bangladesh between 2001 and 2007, it was estimated that ∼50% of Nipah virus cases were the result of human-to-human transmission events [11]. Since such a large proportion of Nipah cases was likely the result of human-to-human transmission it is important to understand the mode of transmission of Nipah virus and implement measures to prevent it in future outbreaks. Nipah virus has been isolated from human urine, saliva, nasal and oropharyngeal secretions and epidemiological data suggest that direct contact with these secretions of Nipah virus spreaders resulted in greater risk of Nipah virus infection. Three potential modes of human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus could be transmission via fomites, direct contact or aerosols.In this study we assessed the potential of human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus in the Syrian hamster model. The Syrian hamster has been shown to replicate both the respiratory and neurological symptoms seen in humans [12], [13]. Through systematic transmission studies in the Syrian hamster model, we show that direct contact is the most efficient route of Nipah virus transmission.MethodsEthics statementAll animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Rocky Mountain Laboratories (ASP #2011-03), and performed following the guidelines of the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International (AAALAC) by certified staff in an AAALAC-approved facility.Virus and cells. Nipah virus (strain Malaysia) was kindly provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States and propagated in VeroE6 cells in DMEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Hyclone, Logan), 1 mM L-glutamine (Lonza), 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco).Animal experimentsTo study the relation between inoculation dose and Nipah virus shedding, 3 groups of 18 6–8 week old female Syrian hamsters (HsdHantm:AURA, Harlan Laboratories) were inoculated intranasally with 103, 105 or 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus in a total volume of 100 µl. On days 2 and 4 post inoculation 6 animals were euthanized and lungs, trachea and nasal turbinates were collected for virologic and histopathologic analysis. Daily nasal, oropharyngeal, urinogenital and rectal swabs were obtained from the remaining 6 hamsters. Swabs were collected in vials containing 1 ml DMEM supplemented with 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin. Hamsters were euthanized on day 14 post inoculation or earlier upon signs of severe infection.For fomite transmission experiments, eight 6–8 week old female singly housed Syrian hamsters, housed in a plastic cage with wood shavings, a feeder and a water bottle, were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 in a total volume of 100 µl. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained daily to monitor the infectious status. On day 4 post inoculation, hamsters were euthanized and a single naïve hamster was placed in each cage. Bodyweight of these hamsters was determined daily and nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were taken until swabs were PCR-negative on three consecutive days. Naïve hamsters were euthanized upon signs of severe disease or four weeks post exposure.For direct contact transmission experiments, eight 6–8 week old female singly housed Syrian hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 in a total volume of 100 µl. On day 1 post inoculation, a naïve hamster was added to each cage. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained from inoculated and naïve hamsters daily and bodyweight of naïve hamsters was determined. On signs of severe disease, inoculated and naïve hamsters were euthanized; remaining hamsters were euthanized four weeks post exposure.For aerosol transmission experiments, eight 6–8 week old female Syrian hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 in a total volume of 100 µl and singly housed in specially designed aerosol transmission cages. On day 1 post inoculation, a naïve hamster was placed on the opposite side of the inoculated hamster. The hamsters were separated by two stainless steel grids, allowing airflow from the inoculated to the naive hamster but preventing direct contact and fomite transmission. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained from inoculated and naïve hamsters daily and bodyweight of naïve hamsters was determined. On signs of severe disease, inoculated and naïve hamsters were euthanized; remaining hamsters were euthanized four weeks post exposure.Virus titrationsVirus titrations were performed by end-point titration in VeroE6 cells. VeroE6 cells were inoculated with tenfold serial dilutions of swab medium or tissue homogenates. One hour after inoculation, the inoculum was removed and replaced with 200 µl DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Hyclone, Logan), 1 mM L-glutamine (Lonza), 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco). Three days after inoculation, cytopathic effect (CPE) was scored and the TCID50 was calculated from 5 replicates by the method of Spearman-Karber. Tissue homogenates were prepared by adding 1 ml DMEM to the weighed tissue and homogenizing using a TissueLyzer II (Qiagen). Homogenates were centrifuged to clear the homogenate before inoculating cells.Histopathology and immunohistochemistryHistopathology and immunohistochemistry was performed on hamster tissues. Anaesthetized hamsters were euthanized by exsanguination. Necropsies and tissue sampling were performed according to a standard protocol approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee. After fixation for 7 days in 10% neutral-buffered formalin and embedding in paraffin, tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and an immunohistochemical method using a rabbit polyclonal antiserum against the Nipah virus nucleoprotein [14] (1∶5000; kindly provided by L. Wang, CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Australia) as a primary antibody for detection of Nipah virus antigen. For the histopathological analysis of the nasal turbinates (NT) whole hamster skulls were used. The skulls were decalcified using a 20% EDTA solution in sucrose (Newcomer Supply) and allowed to sit at room temperature for 3 weeks. The 20% EDTA/sucrose solution was changed ×2 prior to gross sectioning the skull. The following tissues were examined: NT, trachea and lungs. Lesions were assigned a subjective score from 0 to 4 based on the percentage of the tissue that was immunopositive. The slides were evaluated by a veterinary pathologist.Quantitative PCRRNA was extracted from swab samples using the NucleoSpin 96 Virus Core kit (Macherey-Nagel) and a Corbett Robotics model CAS 1820 automatic RNA extractor. RNA was eluted in 100 µl. 5 µl RNA was used in a one-step real-time RT-PCR targeted at the NP gene using the Rotor-Gene™ probe kit (Qiagen) according to instructions of the manufacturer (primer sequences are available on request). In each run, standard dilutions of a titered virus stock were run in parallel, to calculate TCID50 equivalents in the samples.Virus neutralization assayTwo-fold serial dilutions of heat-inactivated hamster sera were prepared in DMEM containing 2% fetal calf serum, 1 mM L-glutamine, 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin and 100 TCID50 of Nipah virus was added. After 1 hr at 37°C, this mix was added toVeroE6 cells. Three days after inoculation, wells were scored for CPE. The virus neutralization titer was expressed as the reciprocal value of the highest dilution of the serum, which still inhibits Nipah virus replication.ELISAImmuno-globulin G antibody responses were measured in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using Nipah virus Malaysia. Nipah virus-containing cell culture supernatant was concentrated and purified by spinning two hours at 21000 rpm over a 20% sucrose cushion. The pellet was resuspended in PBS and triton X-100 was added to a final concentration of 1%. This suspension was then used to coat immuno 96 microwell maxisorp plates (NUNC) at 4°C overnight. Subsequently, plates were blocked with 5% skim milk in PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 (PBST) for 1.5 hours at 4°C. After 3 washes with PBST, 50 µL of diluted serum samples were added, and the plates were incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. Bound antibodies were detected after 3 washes using an anti-hamster secondary antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP; KPL). Following incubation for 1 hour at 37°C, bound HRP was detected using the ABTS® Peroxidase Substrate System (KPL). The absorbance at 405 nm was measured using a microplate spectrophotometer. Sera were considered positive when absorbance was higher than three standard deviations above the mean of negative control sera.ResultsShedding of Nipah virus in infected hamstersIn order to determine the dose of Nipah virus to be used for transmission experiments, hamsters were inoculated intranasally with three different doses of the Malaysia strain of Nipah virus, 103, 105 or 107 TCID50, to select the dose that resulted in the highest amount of Nipah virus shed from the nose, throat, urogenital tract and rectum. Upon intranasal inoculation of hamsters with 103 TCID50, limited shedding of Nipah virus was observed in nasal, oropharyngeal, urogenital tract and rectal swabs in five out of six hamsters (Figures 1 and S1). One out of six hamsters did not shed any Nipah virus during the 14 days duration of the experiment. Two out of 6 hamsters showed weight loss in the days before presentation of neurological signs and were euthanized according to humane endpoint scoring criteria on days 8 and 14 post inoculation (Figure S2). The remaining three hamsters all shed virus on several days, although not all four swabs per time point were positive for all hamsters.10.1371/journal.pntd.0001432.g001Figure 1Shedding of Nipah virus RNA in inoculated hamsters.Groups of 6 hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 103 (black bars), 105 (grey bars) or 107 TCID50 (white bars) Nipah virus. Nasal (A), oropharyngeal (B), urogenital (C) and rectal (D) swabs were collected daily and viral load in the swabs was determined as TCID50 equivalents by real-time RT-PCR. Geometric mean viral loads are displayed; error bars indicate standard deviation.With a dose of 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus, 5 out of 6 hamsters lost bodyweight; 2 hamsters survived until the end of the experiment on 14 dpi, the other four hamsters had to be euthanized due to severity of disease on 9 (three hamsters) and 12 dpi (Figure S2). In real-time RT-PCR, all six hamsters had positive nasal, oropharyngeal, urogenital and rectal swabs (Figures 1 and S1), starting at 2 dpi for the nasal shedding, 1 dpi for the oropharyngeal shedding, 3 dpi for the urogenital shedding and 2 dpi for the rectal shedding (Figure 1). Viral load in the oropharyngeal swabs was highest compared to the swabs obtained from the other orifices.Upon inoculation with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus, hamsters had to be euthanized due to severity of disease on days 4 and 5 post inoculation (Figure S2). Virus shedding was observed starting at 1 dpi for all hamsters and all four swabs. Viral load in throat, nose, urogenital and rectal swabs were significantly higher for animals inoculated with 107 TCID50 than from animals inoculated with either 103 TCID50 or 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus (2-way ANOVA, nose p<0.001, throat p<0.001, urogenital p<0.001 and rectal p<0.001, for both 107 TCID50 vs 103 TCID50 vs and 107 TCID50 vs 105 TCID50).Virus titrations were performed on all PCR-positive swabs. For all infectious doses, urogenital and rectal swabs were negative upon virus titration. Upon inoculation with 103 or 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus, only oropharyngeal swabs were positive (Figure 2). With a dose of 103 TCID50 only four swabs were positive, three of which in the animal that was euthanized on day 8. On day 2–5 post inoculation, oropharyngeal swabs of all six animals inoculated with 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus were positive in virus titrations. With a dose of 107 TCID50, Nipah virus could be detected in the nasal swabs of 5 out of 6 hamsters; oropharyngeal swabs of all hamsters were positive in virus isolation (Figure 2). Comparison of the total amounts of virus shed during the oropharyngeal shedding period indicated that a significantly higher amount of virus was shed with a dose of 107 TCID50 compared to either of the two other doses in the first 4 dpi (area under curve analysis 0.2639 (95% confidence intervals of −0.2322 and 0.7600) for 103 TCID50 vs. 4.958 (95% confidence intervals of 3.040 and 6.875) for 105 TCID50 vs 7.44 (95% confidence intervals of 5.809 and 9.079) for 107 TCID50, 1-way ANOVA p<0.0001).10.1371/journal.pntd.0001432.g002Figure 2Shedding of Nipah virus from the respiratory tract.Virus titers in oropharyngeal swabs from hamsters inoculated with 103 TCID50 (A); virus titers in oropharyngeal swabs from hamsters inoculated with 105 TCID50 (B) and virus titers in oropharyngeal (C) and nasal (D) swabs from hamsters inoculated with 107 TCID50. Nipah virus titers were determined on VeroE6 cells for real-time RT-PCR positive swabs by means of end-point titration. Geometric mean titers are displayed; error bars indicate standard deviation. To calculate the geometric mean, the cutoff value was used for negative swabs. The dotted line indicates cutoff value.On 2 and 4 dpi, 6 hamsters of each group were euthanized and virus titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea and lungs were determined for 3 of these animals; the remaining three hamsters were used for histopathological analyses. Only with the inoculum of 107 TCID50 could Nipah virus be isolated in all three tissues of all three hamsters. The inoculum of 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus showed significantly higher virus titers for 2 dpi and 4 dpi compared to the other 2 inoculum doses (2-way ANOVA, nasal turbinates 103 TCID50 vs. 107 TCID50, p<0.0001 and 105 TCID50 vs. 107 TCID50, p<0.0001, trachea 103 TCID50 vs. 107 TCID50, p<0.01 and 105 TCID50 vs. 107 TCID50, p<0.05 and lungs 103 TCID50 vs. 107 TCID50, p<0.0001 and 105 TCID50 vs. 107 TCID50, p<0.0001 (Figure 3)).10.1371/journal.pntd.0001432.g003Figure 3Nipah virus titers in respiratory tract tissues of inoculated hamsters.Virus titers in lung, trachea and nasal turbinates of hamsters inoculated intranasally with 103 (black bars), 105 (grey bars) or 107 TCID50 (white bars) Nipah virus at 2 dpi (A) and 4 dpi (B). Nipah virus titers were determined on VeroE6 cells by means of end-point titration. Geometric mean titers are displayed; error bars indicate standard deviation. To calculate the geometric mean, the cutoff value was used for negative tissues. The dotted line indicates cutoff value.In agreement with the absence of Nipah virus titers in the nasal turbinates, trachea and lungs of hamsters inoculated with 103 TCID50 of Nipah virus did not show any pathological changes at 2 dpi (Table 1). One hamster showed a small number of alveolar epithelial cells and fewer macrophages in the lungs positive for Nipah viral antigen. At 4 dpi, one hamster showed moderate bronchointerstitial pneumonia characterized by multifocal bronchiolar epithelial degeneration and loss with thickening of adjacent alveolar septae by edema, fibrin and small numbers of neutrophils, macrophages and lymphocytes. One hamster inoculated with 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus had a minimal bronchointerstitial pneumonia and associated viral antigen at 2 dpi and one animal had detectable viral antigen in the epithelium of the nasal turbinates (Table 1). At 4 dpi every hamster had acute rhinitis of both respiratory and olfactory epithelium, in two animals with associated viral antigen and one animal displayed mild multifocal bronchointerstitial pneumonia. The hamsters inoculated with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus demonstrated mild to moderate acute and necrotizing rhinitis in both respiratory and olfactory epithelium along with associated viral antigen at 2 dpi. All animals had multifocal chronic bronchointerstitial pneumonia with associated viral antigen. Similar pulmonary lesions were seen at day 4 dpi (Table 1, Figure 4). When comparing the different inoculum doses there was a clear dose effect with the higher dose inducing rhinitis and bronchointerstitial pneumonia at an earlier time frame when compared to the lower and intermediate doses (Table 1).10.1371/journal.pntd.0001432.g004Figure 4Immunohistochemical analysis of respiratory tract tissues of hamsters inoculated with Nipah virus.Hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 Nipah virus and respiratory samples were collected at 2 and 4 days post inoculation. Tissue sections of the nasal turbinates (A), trachea (B), and lung (C) were stained with a monoclonal antibody against Nipah virus nucleoprotein, which is visible as a red-brown staining.10.1371/journal.pntd.0001432.t001Table 1Histopathology score based on immunohistochemistry of respiratory tissues of hamsters inoculated with Nipah virus.103 TCID50
105 TCID50
107 TCID50
2 dpi4 dpi2 dpi4 dpi2 dpi4 dpiNasal turbinates00000001010111123Trachea00000100000101110Lungs01000100100222230Hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 103, 105 or 107 TCID50; three hamsters per dose per time point were sampled except for the 107 TCID50 group at 4 dpi, when only 2 animals remained; each column represents one animal.Score: 0: no immunopositivity; 1: 1 to 25% of tissue immunopositive; 2: 26 to 50% of tissue immunopositive; 3: 51 to 75% of tissue immunopositive; 4: 76 to 100% of tissue immunopositive.Fomite transmissionBased on the results of the studies described above, which showed significantly more Nipah virus shedding with the inoculum of 107 TCID50, this dose was chosen for the following transmission experiments. To determine whether Nipah virus can be transmitted via fomites, eight singly housed hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained daily. On 4 dpi, all inoculated hamsters were euthanized and a naïve hamster was placed in their cage, while leaving existing bedding, food and water bottles in place. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained daily from the naïve hamsters. Swabs were analyzed by real time RT-PCR. Swabs from all eight naïve hamsters were positive on at least 2 days (Figure 5). The naïve hamsters did not show loss of bodyweight or other signs of disease; however, one hamster was found dead on day 7 post exposure. Histopathology of the respiratory tract and brain of this animal did not show any presence of Nipah virus, suggesting an unrelated cause of death. Remaining animals were euthanized four weeks post exposure. In a virus neutralization assay performed on the sera from these animals, no neutralizing antibodies against Nipah virus were detected; nor did the sera test positive in an ELISA using whole virus (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pntd.0001432.g005Figure 5Transmission of Nipah virus.Shedding of Nipah virus in inoculated (left panels) and naïve (right panels) hamsters in fomite (A), direct contact (B) and aerosol (C) transmission setups. Nasal (white bars) and oropharyngeal (black bars) were collected daily; viral load in the swabs was determined as TCID50 equivalents by real-time RT-PCR. Geometric mean titers are displayed; error bars indicate standard deviation.Direct contact transmissionTo determine whether Nipah virus can be transmitted through direct contact, 8 singly housed hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus. One day post inoculation, a naïve hamster was added to each cage. The naive hamsters did not lose bodyweight during the experiment. One hamster showed signs of disease on 10 dpi and was euthanized. The cause of death was not histologically apparent in this animal and was thus likely unrelated to Nipah virus infection. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained from all hamsters. Swabs from all hamsters were positive on at least two days (Figure 5). More swabs of the direct contact hamsters were positive than of the fomite hamsters (35 vs. 14 for nasal swabs and 29 vs. 13 for oropharyngeal swabs). Remaining animals were euthanized four weeks post exposure. Upon histological examination, two hamsters showed minimal acute interstitial pneumonia characterized by small, nodular aggregates of macrophages and viable neutrophils that filled alveoli and mildly thickened adjacent alveolar septa (data not shown). In a virus neutralization assay performed on the sera from all eight hamsters, neutralizing antibodies were detected in three hamsters, with neutralizing titers ranging from 64–256. These sera also contained high titer antibodies as determined by ELISA, the remaining sera from hamsters in this group were negative.Aerosol transmissionTo determine whether Nipah virus can be transmitted through aerosols, eight singly housed hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus and kept in cages with a divider. One day post inoculation, a naïve hamster was added to the opposite side of the divider in each cage. The divider was specifically designed to allow airflow from the infected to the naïve hamster, but prevent contact and fomite transmission. Hamsters were swabbed daily. Between 4 and 7 dpi, all inoculated animals were euthanized due to respiratory distress. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs of the naïve hamsters remained negative (Figure 5). Naïve hamsters were euthanized four weeks post exposure. In a virus neutralization assay performed on the sera from these animals, no neutralizing antibodies against Nipah virus were detected; nor did the sera test positive in an ELISA using whole virus (data not shown).DiscussionSince its' first emergence in 1999, outbreaks of Nipah virus have occurred almost every year. Introduction of Nipah virus into the human population and subsequent transmission within the human population appears to occur via multiple routes of introduction and transmission. Whereas the Malaysian Nipah virus outbreak was caused by an introduction of Nipah virus into the susceptible swine population and was subsequently transmitted to humans [6], the multiple outbreaks in India and Bangladesh appear to have been caused by direct transmission of Nipah virus from the natural reservoir without an amplifying intermediate host [9]. Based on epidemiological data, it has been suggested that both swine-to-human and human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus have played a major role in past Nipah virus outbreaks [1], [6], [7], [11], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22].Currently, most data on the human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus originate from investigations into the multiple outbreaks in Bangladesh, where human-to-human transmission has occurred frequently [11], [15], [16], [17], [18], [20], [22]. In the present study, we have gathered scientific data that strengthen these epidemiological observations. In a hamster model, efficient Nipah virus transmission was observed via direct contact between inoculated and naïve hamsters. The transmission was confirmed by the presence of neutralizing antibodies in the naïve hamsters. Although viral RNA was detected in nose and throat swabs obtained from naïve hamsters during the fomite transmission experiment, no virus replication or neutralizing antibodies were detected, suggesting that although there is a potential for fomite transmission it seemed very inefficient under the experimental conditions of our model. Within our model, no aerosol transmission of Nipah virus occurred as indicated by a lack of apparent signs of disease, virus shedding, neutralizing antibodies and presence of viral antigen in organs of exposed naïve hamsters.In a previous study by Wong et al., transmission of Nipah virus strain Malaysia was not observed in a hamster model upon intraperitoneal (i.p.) inoculation with a dose of 105 TCID50
[13]. Virus shedding in inoculated or naïve transmission hamsters was not tested and the absence of transmission was concluded based on the absence of disease signs and seroconversion in the naïve hamsters. This could either indicate that i.p. inoculation did not result in sufficient shedding of viable virus particles to allow transmission, since the virus would have to migrate to the nasal cavity or urinary bladder, that transmission efficiency is dose dependent, or a combination thereof.Our data suggest that hamsters inoculated with 107 TCID50 not only shed significantly more Nipah virus particles as determined by realtime RT-PCR than hamsters inoculated with lower doses, but more importantly also shed more viable Nipah virus as determined by virus titration. With the lower inoculum doses limited shedding of viable Nipah virus was observed, indicating that the inoculum dose may very well affect the ability of Nipah virus to transmit efficiently, through an effect on virus shedding. Our results indicate the importance of nasal and oropharyngeal shedding and transmission and are in line with previous experimental Nipah virus infections in pigs where virus excretion was also observed in inoculated and contact pigs, although the mechanism by which the transmission occurred was not investigated [23]. This suggests that the mode of transmission from pig-to-pig, pig-to-human and human-to-human are the same and is facilitated by direct contact with Nipah virus containing nasal and oropharyngeal secretions.Interestingly, epidemiological data gathered during the Nipah virus outbreak in Malaysia have not identified human-to-human transmission in this outbreak, although four potential cases of nosocomial transmission have been reported [24], [25]. Our results show that Nipah virus strain Malaysia has the ability to transmit upon contact with nasal or oropharyngeal secretions during close social interactions. This is in agreement with the epidemiological data suggesting that the introduction of Nipah virus in the human population in Malaysia occurred upon direct contact with infected swine. The absence of disease signs in hamsters that were infected with Nipah virus via the direct contact route could be due to the relatively low inoculum dose as indicated by the low infectious virus titers shed by infected hamsters (Figure 2). As previously shown, a low inoculum dose can result in slow progression towards neurological disease after a limited transient respiratory infection [12], suggesting that the contact hamsters may have been euthanized before they presented with neurological disease signs. This may explain the epidemiology of the Malaysian Nipah virus outbreak, in which very limited human-to-human transmission was observed, where patients may have experienced little respiratory involvement and thus likely did not shed amounts of virus sufficient for human-to-human transmission. The absence of human-to-human transmission in the Malaysia outbreak as compared to more prominent human-to-human transmission in Bangladesh could potentially be caused by an intrinsic difference in transmissibility of the respective virus [26], e.g. the ability of the virus to efficiently replicate in humans and be shed with higher titers could potentially facilitate more efficient human-to-human transmission. Alternatively, different cultural or health care practises may underlie the observed difference in human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus strain Bangladesh and Nipah virus strain Malaysia. Experiments to compare the transmission efficiency of Nipah virus Bangladesh, which was not available to us, with Nipah virus Malaysia should be performed to gain insight in the cause of differences in observed human-to-human transmission of Nipah virus isolated from Malaysia vs. Bangladesh.Evidence for vertical transmission was observed in a cat model of Nipah virus disease. In a pregnant cat, infectious virus was detected in placental tissue and Nipah virus genomic RNA was detected in fetal tissue [27]. Since Hendra virus has been isolated from fetal material and uterine fluid of Pteropus bats, vertical transmission may be an important transmission route in the natural reservoir of Nipah and Hendra virus. It has been suggested that Nipah virus-infected fetal tissues or fluid may play a role in the zoonotic transmission of Nipah virus from bats to other mammals [28], [29]. Although vertical transmission of Nipah virus in bats or incidental hosts of Nipah virus may occur, it seems unlikely that vertical transmission would play an important role in the perpetuation of Nipah virus outbreaks in humans.The experimental data on the route of transmission of Nipah virus presented here have important public health implications with regards to the risk assessment and management of future Nipah virus outbreaks. In addition, this novel transmission model can be used to evaluate the efficacy of outbreak intervention strategies, such as vaccination and antiviral therapies. Whereas current intervention strategies are predominantly focused at post exposure treatment, the ability to efficiently block transmission and thereby spread of the outbreak is currently not assessed in antiviral or vaccination treatment strategies [14], [30], [31], [32], [33]. The novel contact transmission model not only allows an experimental approach to understanding the biotic and abiotic factors underlying human-to-human transmission, but in addition might allow incorporation of the role of foodborne transmission of Nipah virus Bangladesh through contaminated date palm juice, that is suggested to play a major role in the introduction of Nipah virus into the human population in Bangladesh [9], [10]. Moreover, the hamster transmission model can be used to test the effect of intervention strategies on the containment of the outbreak by preventing transmission. As such, the hamster transmission model will not only contribute to the basic understanding of Nipah transmission, it will also be of value from a public health perspective.Supporting InformationFigure S1
Shedding of Nipah virus RNA in inoculated hamsters. Groups of 6 hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 103 (black bars), 105 (grey bars) or 107 TCID50 (white bars) Nipah virus. Nasal (A), oropharyngeal (B), urogenital (C) and rectal (D) swabs were collected daily for 14 days and viral load in the swabs was determined as TCID50 equivalents by real-time RT-PCR. Geometric mean viral loads are displayed; error bars indicate standard deviation.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Figure S2
Loss of bodyweight and survival in hamsters inoculated with Nipah virus. Loss of bodyweight (A) and survival (B) after intranasal inoculation of with 103 (solid line, circles), 105 (dashed line, squares) or 107 (small dashed line, triangles) TCID50 Nipah virus are plotted. Hamsters were weighed daily, and the percentage of body weight was calculated relative to the weight at time of inoculation. The percentage of mice surviving the infection is shown as a function of time.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


Title: Molecular Pathogenesis of Nipah Virus

Introduction
Viral diseases are responsible for high amount of mortality and morbidity among different communities throughout the world. Many of these viruses are zoonotic in nature and infect animals first and from them transmitted to humans. Nipah virus (NiV) is a bat-borne pathogen (zoonotic virus), which causes lethal encephalitis in humans and can be transmitted through infected food or directly to humans [1]. The virus causes a variety of diseases ranging from subclinical infections to severe respiratory infections and fatal encephalitis. The virus can also cause serious diseases in animals leading to significant economic losses for farmers [2]. It is one of the many deadly viruses and comes within the order of Mononegavirales; other fatal viruses of this order are Hendra, Ebola, and Marburg [3]. Pteropus fruit bats are considered natural sources of the virus. The first outbreak of Nipah was reported in the year 1999 in Malaysia. This virus was first isolated from a patient from the southwestern Sungai Nipah region of Malaysia. Hence, it is named as Nipah virus (NiV). NiV was discovered in 1998, the first reported outbreak within Sungai Nipah [4].In India, the first outbreak occurred in Siliguri, West Bengal in 2001 and in 2007, a recurring outbreak was reported from Nadia in West Bengal, India. More recently, in 2018, a new outbreak was recorded in the Kozhikode district in Kerala, a state in southern India where the person affected was said to have contracted NiV from fruit bats [5]. All the outbreaks recorded high mortality rates including 91% of deaths over time in the recent Kerala outbreak. In humans, infection quickly advances to extreme sickness, which causes serious respiratory ailments as well as serious encephalitis [6]. Absence of antibodies or therapeutics to counter this sickness is a major cause why scientists worldwide are trying to develop a powerful NiV immunization and therapy policy. This particular review reports the pathogenesis of Nipah virus and includes studies on the interaction between host and pathogen, host resistance, if any, and its risk factors [7].StructureThere are various species of Henipavirus. One of them is Henipavirions. It does not have any particular shape; it is pleomorphic to some extent. Its length ranges from 40 to 600 nm in diameter [8]. Enveloped RNA virus possesses a helical symmetry; it is non-segmented and single-stranded. The RNA genome primarily contains six basic genes, and these are nucleocapsid, phosphoprotein, matrix, fusion glycoprotein, attachment glycoprotein, and long polymerase as mentioned in Fig. 1. They have their viral matrix protein shell overlayed by a lipid membrane. The genomic RNA of the core is tightly attached to the nucleocapsid and phosphoprotein proteins. There is a spike made up of F (fusion) protein trimers and G (attachment) protein, which is tetramer in nature and embedded within the lipid membrane [9]. The G protein helps to attach the virus to the surface of host cells via interaction with the conserved mammalian protein family, ephrin b1, b2, or b3 [10]. The fusion protein helps to fuse the membranes of the host cell and the virus, which liberates the virions into the host cell. It also induces swollen cells to fuse with adjacent cells to form massive syncytia.Fig. 1Structure of Nipah virus (picture reference: adapted from Pillai et al. 2020 under Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license [4]
EtiopathogenesisNiV or Nipah virus is an infectious disease, which is transmitted initially from animal to human and human to human. This kind of disease can spread through pigs and bats. If humans consume fruits that are already contaminated by any infected pig or bat, then the disease can spread to humans [11]. During summer, several fruits, most notably litchis and mangoes, are consumed by people, particularly children. Bats may bite fruits on trees at night, and these fruits are sold in the market the next morning, making it difficult to determine if the fruits in the trees were eaten by bats or not [12]. The virus can also spread to the human body through the urine and saliva of these creatures. Hence, fruits or saps contaminated with the urine and saliva of an infected animal can also be a potent source of transmission of infection. Bats also may leave their saliva or secretions on trees and hence can infect people while climbing the trees.By identifying the antigen, isolating the virus, and using serology, this infection may be tested. Histopathology can be used to carry out detection. To find the Nipah virus in pigs, various tissues, blood, and respiratory secretions have been employed. Additionally, feline blood, urine, and respiratory secretions can all be tested for the virus. Nevertheless, the virus is found in dogs’ brain, spleen, liver, lung, kidney, adrenal gland, and other organs. The disease-causing pathway is explained in Fig. 2.Fig. 2Nipah virus disease-causing pathwayNipah virus can spread by human respiratory secretions, and it is one of the major sources of human-to-human transmission [13]. Affected individuals can spread it through coughing, sneezing, urine, saliva etc. Cellular interactions are controlled by the fusion (F) and attachment (G) proteins. Two subunits, viz., F1 and F2, by host protease are cleaved by the newly produced precursor (F) protein (F0). The merging peptide of the virus is present within the F1 subunit and helps in virus and host cell binding [14]. The viral M protein is involved in morphogenesis and budding. Antibodies to G proteins are important for neutralizing NiV infectivity [15].Due to the coordinated efforts of glycoprotein fusion and attachment, it is very natural for the enveloped Henipavirus, which contains NiV, to invade target cells after binding. Interactions between class B ephrin (viral receptor) and NiV glycoprotein (G) in host cells cause conformational changes within the latter, resulting in activation and membrane fusion of F glycoprotein [16]. The Nipah G protein binds to the host ephrin B2/3 receptor and amplifies the conformational change of the G protein that causes F protein refolding [17]. It has been demonstrated that monomeric ephrin B2 fusion causes allosteric changes in Nipah G protein, which paves the way to receptor-activated virus entry into host cells. Presently, viral regulation of host cell machinery has been in the center of focus to understand the nucleolar DNA-damage reply pathway.Pathogenesis of Nipah VirusDuring the commencing stage of infection, diagnosis of NiV can be executed in epithelial cells, especially in the bronchiole [18]. Viral antigens have been observed in lungs, specifically in the bronchi and in some cases even in alveoli. Cytokines are secreted due to the swollen epithelium of the respiratory tract because of the infection, thereby ultimately leading to the development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)-like disorder [19]. Inflammatory mediators such as interleukin granulocyte-colony stimulating issue are also secreted in the airway epithelium during the later stage of infection [20]. From the breathing epithelium, the virus is promulgated to the cells of the endothelium. With progression of infection, the virus can gain access into the bloodstream. Apart from the respiratory, digestive, and execratory systems the brain and other organs can also be a target, which leads to multi-organ failure. In hamster animal models, it is also reported that leukocytes can also be infected with NiV that leads to lethal consequences [13]. Viral genome arrangements are illustrated in Fig. 3.Fig. 3Arrangement of Nipah viral genomeThe virus enters in the central nervous system (CNS) through the blood vessels of the cerebrum known as the choroid plexus. The blood–brain barrier (BBB) can be disrupted due to this infection and ultimately leads to several neurological problems.In humans, infected CNS may contain nonliving viral particles, which can lead to necrosis. Several recent studies on animal models reported the possibility of the virus immediately entering the central nervous system via the olfactory nerve [11]. The infection can eventually spread through the olfactory bulb. Ultimately, the virus spreads through the whole ventral cortex at the side of the olfactory tubercle [11]. There is some structural information on the proteins and interactions of the viral proteins are mentioned in Table 1.Table 1Structural information on proteins and interactions with viral proteinsClinical Manifestations and SymptomsThe primary repository host of the infection is bats of the family Pteropus. In some cases, the intermediate host (pig) can transmit the disease to humans. In comparison to humans, respiratory distress is more severe in the case of pigs. The virus is responsible for bringing about the severity in the respiratory system as well as the nervous system [22]. After exposure to the virus, it takes about 4–14 days for symptoms to appear; hence, the incubation period is about 4–14 days [23].Symptoms in HumansInitial symptoms in humans include fever, vomiting, headache, cough, sore throat, and muscle aches. Septicemia may also turn up accompanied by renal system impairment and can also cause bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract [24]. Also, some patients may experience difficulty in breathing, which ranges from atypical pneumonia to acute respiratory perturbation. These are followed by certain severe symptoms like disorientation, drowsiness, mental confusion, seizures, and some neurological signs that indicate encephalitis (brain swelling). The disease may result in coma and death within a few days [25]. It has been statistically found out that the mortality rate of this viral disease is about 40–75%. In the case of Nipah virus survivors, it has been witnessed that some long-term side effects persisted in them like convulsions and certain changes in personality and certain other neurological disorders [26].Symptoms in AnimalsIn pigs, this sickness is also named as porcine respiratory and encephalitis syndrome (PRES). Also, it is famous as barking pig syndrome (BPS) (in peninsular Malaysia) or one-mile hack. An acute feverish illness is reported to develop especially in pigs below 6 years of age. Respiratory sickness is accompanied with rapid labored breathing. In the case of animals that are specially confined or allowed restricted movement, the morbidity rate may approach up to 100 percent [10]. Since this involves impairment of the nervous system; hence, muscle twitch, hind leg weakness, tremors, and flaccid or spastic paresis are experienced [27]. In boars or common wild male pigs and in adult females that are sows, a condition has been reported called nystagmus where the eyes make uncontrolled movements, which result in reduced vision and affect balance and coordination. Also, this is responsible for seizures in pigs [6]. In NiV-affected dogs, inflammation of the lungs is experienced. Also, there are other conditions such as necrosis of glomeruli and tubules accompanied by syncytia formation in the kidneys [8].Infected cats are found to develop endothelial syncytia and vascular abnormalities in their multiple organs. In several other species, for example, guinea pig, hamster, and African green monkey, when they are experimentally infected with NiV, some primary clinical signs are observed. The signs include lesions in the parenchyma in the central nervous system along with severe vascular abnormalities in several multiple organs and weight loss [9].DiagnosisIsolation of the virus, as well as serological testing and assays for viral nucleic acid amplification, is required to confirm the presence of infections in humans and animals. These serological tests are essentially antibody tests that look for antibodies in the blood and give a positive result if infection is present. For NiV confinements and their proliferation, biosafety level-4 (BSL-4) facilities are required. A monoclonal neutralizer-based antigen ELISA has been created for detecting NiV[9]. IgG ELISAs have been utilized for testing pig and human sera, and an IgM mediated ELISA using a recombinant N protein of NiV has been extremely helpful in identifying the viral contamination [20]. Sandwich ELISA using a polyclonal neutralizer to NiV G protein has been created and proved to be a rapid test for diagnosing the disease. By the usage of pseudo-typed particles, a serum balance test for NiV can be performed under BSL-2 conditions. Microsphere measure has been used for the area of antibodies against a glycoprotein (NiVsG) in the sera of pigs and ruminants like goats and steers [21]. ELISA using recombinant full-length N and G protein has been created [22]Molecular EpidemiologyIt has been perceived by nucleotide sequencing that there is no huge distinction in the nucleotide sequences of NiV isolated from throat discharge and cerebrospinal fluid [22]. Nucleotide homology has been done between the sequences from Bangladesh and Malaysia.Phylogenetic assessments have been performed on NiV strains from the years 2008 to 2010 in Bangladesh. In view of a nucleotide course of action window, a genotyping plan has been introduced. For sequence classification of NiV, phylogenetic tree analysis is very useful [10]. Phylogenetic investigation showed the close homology of arrangements in sequences from pigs and people during the Malaysian flare-up [23]. Henipavirus outbreak and Pteropus distribution are shown in Fig. 4. Phylogenetic tree showing close homology between Indian and Malaysian strains is mentioned in Fig. 5Fig. 4Henipavirus outbreak and Pteropus distribution mapFig. 5Phylogenetic tree showing close homology between Indian and Malaysian strainsCurrent ResearchNiv enters its target cells via surface glycoproteins, i.e., proteins G and F. G glycoprotein binds attachment to extracellular receptors and the fused protein (f) induces viral cell membranes to invade the cell. Mutations in the NiVG protein that open the way to its full function and access to the receptor-activated virus in host cells. Recently, viral control of mobile devices has been revealed in the target of the nucleolar DNA-damage reaction (DDR) method with the help of inhibiting nucleolar treacle protein that will increase the production of henipavirus (Hendra and Nipah viruses) [19]. Nipah virus can remain viable for a few days in few fruit juices or mango fruits, and at least 7 days in palm milk. Bats act as a breeding ground for many dangerous viruses, including Nipah, rabies, and Marburg viruses. Such viruses are not associated with any major pathological changes within the bat population [24]. Detailed research is needed to identify the ways of transmission of NiV from bats to pigs, pigs to human, and from palm milk to human source. Transmission of NiV occurs by eating contaminated food. Risks include contact, touch, breastfeeding, or exposure to an infected person, thereby making it easier to come in contact with a droplet of NiV infection. More recently, experimental studies with aerosolized NiV in Syrian hamsters have found that NiV droplets (aerosol distribution) may cause NiV transmission during close contact [25]. Drinking fresh palm milk is a very common method, and the use of Tari (ripe palm juice) is a powerful way to transmit the virus. Tari-related Niv infections can be avoided by restricting access to bats to date palm milk [24]. Research using infrared cameras has shown that palm trees are often visited by bats such as Pteropus giganteus, and that from time to time bats lick them. The virus can persist for several days in a sugary solution, i.e., fruit pulp. High seroprevalence of anti-Nipah virus antibodies are reported in Petrous spp [25]. This suggests the fact that the virus has passed through adaptation in order to spread among Pteropusbats. Vaccination of people is an important part of preventing infection of NiV. Prevention also includes vaccination of farm animals such as pigs and horses in permanent habitats [10]. Outbreaks cannot be avoided among livestock in areas where palm milk contamination serves as a first step in the spread of NiV infection. However, if vaccination of cattle is done at a reasonable price, it may appear to be successful in these areas. Despite these trends, pharmaceutical agencies are reluctant to invest in vaccine development courses such as against NiV, which are rare, despite high mortality [26].Future ProspectsOver the past few decades, Nipah viral pathogenesis alongside the transmission mechanism has been in the focus for extensive research. This knowledge can be greatly improved in the coming decades [27]. It is important to note in this regard that rational use of this understanding must be used to achieve Nipah vaccine in clinical trials on humans, as well as in reducing the risk factors to prevent infection [28]. Prevention of this zoonotic disease is of utmost importance. Scientists have created a global outbreak network and a response network especially in the aftermath of epidemics in Bangladesh and India and recognized the need for improved communication between veterinary and medical services about the disease [29]. By involving more than one industry and multi-sector strategies, some robust prevention strategies can be developed and implemented [29]. In addition, people should be aware of food hygiene in addition to public hygiene.ConclusionDespite several warnings in the past 2 decades, regular outbreaks of NiV have led to numerous mortalities and morbidities in both humans and animals. Additionally, due to its pandemic potential, prevention of this disease is of critical importance due to its capability of causing a significant physical and economic burden and high mortality. Therefore, this calls for an urgent need for health authorities to conduct clinical trials to establish possible treatment regimens to prevent any further outbreaks of NiV.



Title: Emerging Infectious Diseases and the Eye: Ophthalmic Manifestations, Pathogenesis, and One Health Perspectives

INTRODUCTIONOne Health is a collaborative, multisectoral approach that aims to optimize health outcomes by recognizing the close connection of human health to the health of animals and our shared environment.1 The One Health concept was first associated with animal-human transmission during the emergence of severe acute respiratory disease (SARS) in 2003 and demonstrated the significance of animal reservoirs with the potential to cause high mortality in urban populations.2
Recently, highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) presented as isolated, bilateral conjunctivitis in the absence of systemic symptoms in humans who were exposed to dairy cows and poultry infected with H5N1. These unusual findings highlight the extreme relevance of human-animal interactions, as well as the ocular system in clinical disease detection and management.3–6 Zoonoses account for a large majority of emerging infectious diseases, and as interactions between humans, animals, and the environment continue to expand, monitoring these interactions to better control disease outbreaks is paramount.7
The eye is uniquely suited to harbor persistent pathogens, acting as a long-term reservoir for multiple pathogens that may lead to chronic indolent inflammation (eg, anterior uveitis due to rubella or cytomegalovirus) or aggressive, sight-threatening uveitis [eg, panuveitis due to Ebola virus disease (EVD)] (Fig. 1). Besides viruses, parasites such as Toxoplasma gondii that may lead to chorioretinitis further highlight these relevant human-animal relationships and the eye. While ophthalmologists often focus on the known host risk factors, ophthalmic disease findings, and targeted therapies for patients with eye disease, a more comprehensive understanding of the animal reservoir-host-environment relationships and One Health concepts can broaden the view of disease from an eye care provider’s standpoint (Fig. 2). Beyond an improved understanding of disease life cycle, pathogenesis and interactions, these insights provide opportunities for therapeutic considerations that extend beyond the patient’s visual system.FIGURE 1Reported ocular manifestations of zoonotic pathogens. Created in BioRender. Blyden, K. (2024). Biorender.com/e49s563FIGURE 2One Health concepts for emerging infectious diseases and the eye. Created in BioRender. Yeh, S. (2024). BioRender.com/n53n924This review aims to highlight One Health concepts that clinicians may also consider when dealing with emerging infectious diseases that affect the eye. This review focuses on clinically relevant risk factors, including pathogen-reservoir-host life cycle interactions, the environmental aspects of disease transmission, and ocular pathogenesis (Fig. 3). Utilizing this approach offers insights that inform methods of mitigating transmission and disease management that may eventually lead to improved clinical outcomes.8 Given the breadth and multifaceted nature of the One Health approach, this review is not meant to be exhaustive. Additional details related to implementation frameworks and One Health challenges, and other specialized reviews are available.9,10
FIGURE 3Ocular manifestations in zoonotic infections: host-pathogen dynamics. Created in BioRender. Blyden, K. (2024). Biorender.com/v80m899
Ebola Virus DiseaseEbola virus disease (EVD) is a deadly viral hemorrhagic fever caused by Ebolavirus (EBOV). EBOV is a negative sense, single-stranded RNA virus which belongs to the Filoviridae family and is endemic to regions of west and equatorial Africa.11 EVD was first discovered in 1976 when 2 simultaneous outbreaks occurred in South Sudan and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).12 Since its discovery, over 30 outbreaks of Ebola disease have been recorded in sub-Saharan Africa, with a high case fatality rate exceeding 50%.13 Between 2014 and 2016, the largest EVD outbreak occurred in West Africa that ultimately exceeded 28,000 cases and over 11,300 deaths. Thousands of EVD survivors predominantly within Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Guinea were found to be at-risk for sight-threatening ocular disease and systemic sequelae.14,15
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirEbolavirus enters cells via a viral surface fusion glycoprotein (GP)-mediated binding to a variety of potential host cell attachment factors, followed by micropinocytosis, a nonspecific cellular engulfing process. This viral endosome enters the endosomal/lysosomal pathway, where the proteases cathepsin B and L process GP, allowing for the interaction of Niemann-Pick C1 (NPC-1), subsequent fusion with the endosomal membrane and release of viral particle into the cytoplasm, allowing for viral replication, assembly, and budding.16,17 Here, it is proposed that the ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complex associated protein, VP24, is released, allowing for transcription by RNP complex proteins NP, VP35, VP30, and L. Host ribosomes translate viral mRNA, and virion assembly is coordinated by VP40 at the plasma membrane, with eventual release of the virus to the extracellular space.18
A review of literature suggests that the single natural reservoir of EBOV is yet to be identified, but suspected incidental animal reservoirs have tested positive for EBOV RNA and include duikers, gorillas, chimpanzees, and rodents.11,19–21 Multiple studies suggest that bats, specifically fruit bats that belong to the Pteropodidae family, are a natural reservoir of EBOV.22 These conclusions have been made based on the probable index cases of EVD outbreaks, which involve a history of contact with wild animals that lead to the transmission event.11
TransmissionMultiple outbreaks have begun by EBOV being introduced to humans through transmission from an unidentified, likely animal reservoir with subsequent human-to-human transmission through direct contact or contact with body fluids, infected tissues, or contaminated fomites.23,24 EBOV has been identified in multiple bodily fluids including breast milk, saliva, urine, semen, cerebrospinal fluid, and blood. During survivorship, EBOV has also been detected in the aqueous humor, cerebrospinal fluid, and semen.25–27 While uncommon, sexual transmission of EBOV by survivors has been reported, leading to novel transmission chains.28
Ocular ManifestationsDuring the 2014-2016 EVD outbreak, many survivors experienced sight-threatening ophthalmic complications ranging from anterior uveitis to panuveitis, which developed during convalescence. The range of inflammatory response can be mild to severe, resulting in secondary structural complications (ie, cataract, vitreous opacity) and resultant severe vision impairment or blindness.29,30 The PREVAIL longitudinal study of survivors of EVD demonstrated an increase in the prevalence and incidence of uveitis during the first year of follow-up.31 EBOV detection from an aqueous humor sample obtained from an EVD survivor with severe, sight-threatening panuveitis highlights the contribution of EBOV persistence to disease pathogenesis.One Health Mitigation of Ebola Virus DiseaseFactors that influence EVD spillover and transmission include ecological as well as socioeconomic challenges and civil conflicts as demonstrated in the Democratic Republic of Congo, where numerous deadly EVD outbreaks have occurred.32 While the specific, unique reservoir for EBOV has not been identified, it is speculated to originate in the rainforest,33 and the likelihood of EVD outbreaks is also related to the incidence of recent deforestation.34 EBOV spillover into African great apes has also been documented, threatening their populations and providing an additional potential source of human infection via bushmeat hunting and consumption. Great apes may serve as sentinels in EBOV-endemic areas, and consideration of veterinary interventions such as vaccination could provide reciprocal benefits to human and nonhuman health.35 Understanding the environmental and mammalian distribution of EBOV allows for the identification of possible zones that serve as an interface between susceptible mammalian subtypes, ecosystems, and humans.36 Robust monitoring, reduction of deforestation, health interventions for affected animal populations, and community education are some strategies that could be considered in a coordinated One Health approach to prevent EVD spillover and transmission among human populations and reduce the burden of vision impairment in resource-limited settings.34,37,38
Zika Virus DiseaseZika virus disease, caused by the Zika virus (ZIKV), is transmitted by Aedes mosquitoes. ZIKV is positive-sense, single-stranded RNA arthropod-borne virus (arbovirus) in the genus Flavivirus and the family Flaviviridae. ZIKV was first identified in the Zika forest of Uganda in 1947 in a febrile rhesus macaque monkey, and was subsequently identified in humans in 1954 in Nigeria.39 Outbreaks of Zika virus disease have been recorded in Africa, the Americas, Asia and the Pacific. The first outbreak of Zika virus disease was reported in the Island of Yap (Federated States of Micronesia) in 2007, infecting over 70% of the population.40 This was followed by a larger outbreak in French Polynesia and other countries and territories in the Pacific in 2013. In March 2015, Brazil reported a large outbreak of Zika virus disease, where a surge in associated Guillain-Barré syndrome cases was observed.41
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe viral life cycle of ZIKV begins when an infected mosquito bites the host organism, from which the virus can then infect different cells, including skin cells (fibroblasts, keratinocytes).42 ZIKV also has tropism for retinal pericytes, retinal microvascular endothelial cells, and neural progenitor cells, as many of these cells contain cell surface receptors (Tyro3, DC-SIGN, AXL, and TIM01) that facilitate viral entry.43 ZIKV attaches to these host cell receptors using its envelope (E) protein and is then endocytosed by clathrin proteins.44 Mature virions exit the infected cell via exocytosis, where they can be picked up by another feeding Aedes mosquito.While ZIKV was first isolated from a febrile rhesus macaque monkey, the precise animal reservoir has yet to be identified.45 ZIKV is an arbovirus, maintained in nature through biological transmission between a susceptible vertebrate host and a hematophagous arthropod such as a mosquito. Anti-ZIKV antibodies have been observed in many nonhuman primates and other wild and domestic animals such as rodents, domestic sheep, goats, and orangutans, suggesting multiple animal reservoirs.44
TransmissionZIKV is usually transmitted when an infected female Aedes mosquito bites a human or a nonhuman primate and has distinct human and nonhuman primate transmission cycles.44 The most common mode of biological transmission is horizontal via a mosquito vector that has taken a viremic blood meal. ZIKV has been associated with intrauterine vertical transmission and congenital infections, resulting in severe microcephaly and cerebral atrophy with coarse subcortical calcifications. In mothers with clinical signs of ZIKV, studies have demonstrated intrauterine transmission with ZIKV RNA via reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) in the brain and placental tissues of fetuses and mothers, respectively.46,47 In addition, there have been reports of successfully cultured ZIKV particles from breast milk isolates, suggesting that breastfeeding may be a potential route of transmission.48 Sexual transmission has also been implicated. While ZIKV infections related to blood transfusions have not been reported, there is one case report of probable transmission of ZIKV through a platelet transfusion.49,50
Ocular ManifestationsZIKV-infected patients experience a range of ophthalmic manifestations, from common (eg, mild conjunctivitis, retrobulbar pain) to rarely reported findings (eg, chorioretinal lesions and uveitis). These findings are thought to develop as ZIKV infects blood-retinal barrier cells and cause an inflammatory response mediated by TNFα, IFNα, and interleukins.43 Up to 50% of infants with congenital Zika syndrome (CZS) present with ophthalmic manifestations.51 CZS presents with retinal findings including pigment mottling of the macula and well-circumscribed chorioretinal atrophy.52 In patients in whom anterior uveitis develops, patients may present with ocular hypertension, which may be treated with a combination of corticosteroid and anti-inflammatory medications applied topically.53,54 Cases of posterior uveitis have had varying presentations including bilateral neuroretinitis, optic disc edema, chorioretinal lesions, and outer retinal and retinal pigment epithelial architecture disruption.55
Studies in mice have confirmed the detection of ZIKV in tears, and ZIKV in conjunctival swab samples.56,57 ZIKV RNA can be detected in conjunctival swabs in the late convalescent phase as well, suggesting that the ocular surface may be a reservoir for the virus with a potential public health risk of transmission even after recovery.58
One Health Mitigation of Zika Virus DiseaseArthropod-borne viruses remain a continuing threat to humans living in endemic regions. One Health approaches to ZIKV prevention and control may utilize vector control strategies including physical alteration of environments to reduce mosquito breeding, mechanical traps that lure and kill mosquitoes, and chemical and biological measures. Environmental health interventions that focus on water-based viral surveillance and outbreak control may allow for early detection, vector control, and reduction in outbreak potential.59 The integrated vector management approach is a promising vector control strategy that focuses on making vector control more economically advantageous and ecologically sustainable.60 The use of plain language public health messaging regarding disease transmission is an additional consideration in the One Health approach to reducing the burden of ZIKV disease.61
Human Coronavirus InfectionThe human coronavirus (CoV) was first documented in 1965 and is known for its ability to cause acute upper respiratory tract infections in adults. Besides the recent COVID-19 pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2, CoV outbreaks of significant public health impact include severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), caused by SARS-CoV-1 and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), caused by MERS-CoV. These resulted from cross-species infections and spill-over events due to increased human-animal interactions.62,63 CoV are single-stranded, positive-sense RNA viruses that belong to the Coronaviridae family.64 To date, there are 7 coronaviruses that infect humans, with SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV associated with higher mortality.Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe coronavirus family is well-known for its spike protein, which facilitates viral entry into target cells by binding to an angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 receptor. This interaction allows viral attachment to the surface of the target cell and subsequent fusion of viral and cellular membranes.65
Animal coronaviruses, including bovine coronavirus and feline infectious peritonitis virus, have been recognized since as early as the 1930s.66 The first CoV isolated was an avian infectious bronchitis virus in 1937. Bats are reservoir hosts for all CoVs, serving as gene pools and playing a crucial role in their evolutionary pathway.67,68
TransmissionHuman coronaviruses are typically transmitted via respiratory droplets, aerosol, fecal-oral route, and contact with contaminated surfaces.69 The precise mechanism of zoonotic transmission from the reservoir host to humans remains unclear, and it is speculated that intermediate hosts play an important role in viral transmission. The prevalence and genetic diversity of bat coronaviruses, along with the frequent recombination events within bats provide an ideal milieu for spillover to humans. In SARS-CoV-1, intermediate hosts, including civets and other mammals, allow for mutation acquisition with resultant spillover.70
Human coronavirus 229E (HCoV-229E), the first human CoV isolated, is closely related with CoVs that existed in African bats suggesting transmission to humans from these reservoir hosts.71 MERS-CoV strains responsible for MERS outbreaks have been associated with contact with dromedary camels.67 Even then, there is a phylogenetic gap between bat MERS-related CoV and human and camel MERS-CoV, indicating that viruses that have not yet been identified contributed to the emergence of MERS-CoV in humans and camels.Ocular ManifestationsThe eye is not a commonly known entry route for human CoVs and is rarely involved in infection despite the conjunctiva being exposed to pathogens and communicating with the upper respiratory tract via the nasolacrimal duct. While the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the tear film of patients with COVID-19 has been low in several studies, one hospital-based evaluation showed that 25% of hospitalized patients with acute illness tested positive for SARS-CoV-2.72–74
In animal populations, CoV may have unique and important ophthalmic findings.75 Feline CoV is a coronavirus that affects domestic and wild cats and has been associated with pyogranulomatous anterior uveitis, choroiditis with retinal detachment, and retinal vasculitis. Murine CoV mouse hepatitis virus is associated with a virus-induced retinal degeneration and is considered neurovirulent.14 While some of these specific ophthalmic findings associated with coronavirus have not been observed in humans, understanding the ocular manifestations of coronavirus and related pathogenesis in animals may help in identifying parallel mechanisms to understand and manage human ophthalmic disease in the future.One Health Mitigation of Human Coronavirus DiseaseOne Health actions to target human CoV disease include the development of diagnosis and treatment capacity, food safety measures, and surveillance strategies.63,76 Most of these One Health approaches to preventing human CoV disease address the animal-human interface, with relatively fewer approaches addressing the human-animal-environment interface despite having relevance to outbreak prevention and control. Further research is needed to evaluate the environmental drivers of spillover, the ecology of the viruses in the wildlife, and the effects of habitat loss and destruction.63,77
Avian Influenza Virus DiseaseAvian influenza viruses (AIVs) are type A influenza viruses and members of the Orthomyoxoviridae family infecting birds and mammals. Influenza A viruses are single-stranded, segmented RNA viruses with genes encoding 2 particular transmembrane proteins, hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), which are key players in infectivity as HA and NA facilitate viral entry and release, respectively.78 Among AIVs, 16 HA and 9 NA subtypes have been identified, creating a source of antigenic diversity and increasing outbreak potential.79
There are reports as early as 1878 of a nonbacterial disease of high mortality in domestic chickens and poultry, described as the “fowl plague.”80 It was not until 1955 that the type A influenza virus was identified as the causative pathogen of what is now known as avian influenza virus disease.81,82 Highly pathogenic AIVs (HPAI) consist of the H5 or H7 subtypes thought to arise from mutations in low pathogenic AIVs (LPAI) in poultry.83 The HPAI H5N1 virus strain found in geese in Guandong Province, China caused outbreaks in chicken farms in Hong Kong in 1997, with zoonic transmission resulting in human fatalities. Despite all poultry in Hong Kong being culled, H5N1 viruses re-emerged in 2001 and have since spread from Asia into Europe, Africa, the Mediterranean, Russia, and as of recently, Canada and the United States.3,81,82,84 Approaches to disease reduction and prevention in humans before the emergence of highly pathogenic disease outbreaks like H5N1 have either lapsed over time or were never implemented.81 Subsequent outbreaks of HPAI viruses from zoonotic transmission call for a One Health approach to bring awareness to this potentially fatal disease.81
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe life cycle of AIVs involves host cell entry via HA binding to host cell sialic acid residues and receptor-mediated endocytosis into an endosome.85 The acidic environment of the endosome allows for viral ribonucleoproteins (vRNP) to be released and enter the host cell cytoplasm. The nuclear localization signals associated with vRNPs lead the proteins to the nucleus for transcription and eventual exit from the nucleus via Exportin 1.86,87 The viral particles form in the cytoplasm alongside its segmented genome, and NA removes sialic acid residues, allowing for viral release from the plasma membrane.85
Wild aquatic birds like wild waterfowl (Anseriformes) and shorebirds (Charadriiformes) are considered natural hosts to all influenza viruses.TransmissionType A influenza viruses are transmitted from bird to bird via the fecal-oral route. Transmission to other intermediate hosts can occur via direct contact with an infected bird’s saliva, mucus, or feces, or indirectly from environmental contamination or an intermediate host.88 While direct transmission of AIVs from its natural host to humans is documented and associated with the 1997 outbreak in Hong Kong,89–91 transmission to humans typically requires an intermediate host.91 Transmission of AIVs to domestic birds and mammals offers additional avenues for reassortment and human spillover.92–94 Although HPAI H5N1 is rarely transmissible among mammals, the outbreak of HPAI H5N1 in lactating dairy cattle across multiple US states in March 2024 marks an unprecedented and sustained mammal-to-mammal transmission. Furthermore, cases of conjunctivitis in humans exposed to infected poultry and dairy cows highlight the potential for H5N1 to spill over into the human population, raising concern for another respiratory pandemic.3,95–97
The HA of AIVs recognize α-2,3-linked sialic acid receptors on the conjunctiva and ciliated nasal epithelial cells and allow viral entry and propagation.98–100 Influenza A viruses are prone to antigenic shifts that increase transmissibility and risk of pandemics due to the segmented nature of the viral genome, the ability for influenza A virus to undergo reassortment, and the error-prone RNA polymerase.79,101 Such antigenic shifts have been the cause of major influenza A outbreaks, including the Asian flu of 1957 (H2N2), and the Hong Kong flu of 1968 (H3N2).102
Ocular ManifestationsThe ocular surface is likely a portal of entry for AIV infection, as the virus has demonstrated replication within the corneal epithelium as well as an ocular surface tropism.103 Ocular involvement of HPAI H5N1 appears to be limited to isolated conjunctivitis with at least one report of a subconjunctival hemorrhage.6,104 Viral presence has been confirmed through positive RT-PCR results in conjunctival swabs from infected patients.3,105 In addition, H5N1-inoculated domestic ducks developed corneal opacification with keratitis and edema.106 Treatment with the antiviral oseltamivir inhibits virus replication in ocularly inoculated animal models; however, the persistence of HPAI in ocular tissue after infection resolution has not been shown.107,108
One Health Mitigation of Avian Influenza Virus DiseaseThe One Health approach to AIV disease largely involves controlling outbreaks in poultry populations with large-scale culling operations during outbreaks, surveillance of human exposure, and antiviral prophylaxis of those exposed while conducting depopulation operations.109 However, mitigating the spread of AIV is complicated by the influence of climate change, which alters the AIV ecology and transmission cycle due to shifts in bird migration patterns. These migrational changes facilitate interactions between host species and intermediate hosts, potentially driving AIV evolution and enabling interspecies transmission.110 Interspecies transmission events have been associated with the recent spillover of HPAI to dairy cattle, efficient cow-cow transmission, and cow-human transmission.111 This bovine HPAI facilitates the risk of infection and transmission in mammals, as AIV RNA has also been isolated in other animals on affected farms (eg, raccoons, domestic cats). Transmission of H5N1 virus from bovine milk-inoculated lactating mice to offspring as well as mice in proximity to H5N1 infected mice has been documented.112 This important discovery of mammal-to-mammal transmission emphasizes that following the spill-over of AIV, the public health risk and pandemic potential of HPAI is increased. Moreover, these data call for increased AIV research, surveillance, and multidisciplinary collaboration among relevant authorities including public health departments, the United States Food and Drug Administration, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, veterinary health organizations, etc.AIV persists in aquatic environmental reservoirs like ice lakes and ponds, also facilitates viral transmission among other species and increasing the risk for spillover.113 Areas of potential mitigation include enhanced biosecurity, hygiene, contact precautions with birds and poultry, and surveillance of environmental reservoirs.114 Transmission of AIV can be prevented by treatment of agricultural water supplies and avian protein sources, in addition to separation of animals with known transmissibility.101 In addition, an “all-in and/or all-out” approach can be applied to birds removed from their farm and taken to the market, or any transmission-susceptible environment, and they should not be returned back to the farm.114 A combination of clinical and veterinary surveillance along with human and veterinary collaboration will ultimately be needed to significantly reduce the probability of transmission.114
ToxoplasmosisToxoplasmosis is a global zoonotic disease caused by the single-celled protozoan Toxoplasma gondii and is a member of the Apicomplexa group of parasitic protozoans. T. gondii was first isolated in 1908, where it was proposed to have originated in South American felids and spread to domestic animals including cats, rats and mice through the transatlantic slave trade.115 It is estimated that around 2 billion people are chronically infected by this parasite globally, and it is recognized as the leading cause of posterior infectious uveitis worldwide.116,117 Toxoplasmosis can develop in those who are immunocompromised or pregnant.118 The most notable disease manifestation in the immunocompromised is encephalitis. Pregnant women with acquired infection are at risk for transplacental migration of the parasite and subsequent systemic congenital infection that is characterized by premature birth, intrauterine growth retardation, fever, pneumonia, hepatosplenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, and fetal death.119,120 Congenital disease commonly affects the eyes and brain, resulting in chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, meningoencephalitis, seizures, microcephaly, cerebral calcifications, and/or deafness.Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe life cycle of T. gondii begins in its definitive, obligate felid host with spread into intermediate hosts, including homeotherm (warm-blooded) vertebrates like sheep, goats, pigs, chickens.119,121 Once T. gondii reaches its intermediate host, it can only reproduce sexually, excreting massive numbers of oocysts into the external environment by way of feces.122 The oocytes sporulate infectious sporozoites, and these sporulated oocysts are ingested or inhaled by an intermediate host and invade host tissues like the heart, lungs, and CNS beginning asexual reproduction. The life cycle is completed when the tissues of intermediate hosts are consumed by the definitive hosts. T. gondii has been shown to use host manipulation to attract intermediate hosts (eg, rodents) to cat urine by causing rodents to lose their innate fear of cats, thereby completing their life cycle.123
Transmission
T. gondii is easily transmitted between organisms via the fecal-oral route. Inoculation of T. gondii is associated with consumption of raw or undercooked meat containing parasitic cysts, or ingestion of contaminated water or other substance contaminated with feces containing oocysts. It is estimated that 30 to 80 million feral domestic cats exist in the United States, allowing for easy transmissability.119
T. gondii infection is also known to be associated with blood transfusions and organ transplants.124 The more common of the 2 is due to the transplantation of an organ containing parasitic cysts. A patient who receives a contaminated organ may succumb to an active infection due to their immunocompromised status.124 This parasite is also known to be transmitted vertically via transplacental migration to the fetus.Ocular ManifestationsInfection with T. gondii can cause ocular toxoplasmosis, with around 2% of immunocompetent adults developing ocular manifestations.125
T. gondii invades target tissues using what is likened to a trojan horse approach by utilizing immune cells.126 Once it has achieved intracellular access, it secludes itself from the host cytoplasm by forming a vacuole that protects it from potentially toxic host molecules and the acidic host phagolysosomes.127 In fact, pH plays a significant role in T. gondii invasiveness and host defense. Tachyzoites are very susceptible to acidic environments, and phagosome acidification likely serves as a primary immune defense against T. gondii in ocular tissues.128,129 This is further supported by the higher risk of being diagnosed with ocular toxoplasmosis in patients exposed to protein pump inhibitors or histamine 2 blockers, which suggests a possible mechanism of ocular parasite persistence.130
Though the details of retinal invasion are still being studied, Toxoplasma has been shown to cross retinal pigment epithelial cells in its free form using intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), and using vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) and activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM) in dendritic cells.131 The largest indicator of progression or recurrence of ocular toxoplasmosis seems to be the quality of the immune response.131 Due to the lack of proper lymphatic drainage of the eye, the presentation of ocular-derived antigens to T cells is significantly reduced. The posterior pole of the eye provides an ideal environment for chronic Toxoplasma ocular persistence as it is an immunosuppressed area due to the excretion of suppressive cytokines like TGFB2, a-MSH, and vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP).132
One Health Mitigation of ToxoplasmosisThough the global seroprevalence of T. gondii is high, its seroprevalence appears to be dependent on various regional factors including climate, diet, and hygiene that call for a One Health approach.133–135 Despite the prevalence and disease burden of toxoplasmosis, additional work that focuses on implementing strategies that explore the transmission and life cycle of T. gondii is needed. One Health mitigation strategy could be aimed at environmental control by improving the understanding of oocyst resistance, survival in environmental and tissue reservoirs, and the reduction of contamination of these reservoirs while improving hygienic practices.133 In addition, understanding the prevalence in other animal reservoirs of different environments may offer a continued refinement of the One Health approach to understanding and reducing the burden of Toxoplasmosis.136–138
MalariaMalaria is a mosquito-borne disease that is caused by parasites of the Plasmodium genus. There are 5 species known to infect humans: Plasmodium falciparum, Plasmodium vivax, Plasmodium malariae, Plasmodium ovale, and Plasmodium knowlesi. P. falciparum and vivax are the primary species responsible for the majority of malarial infections, with P. falciparum being the most prevalent in Africa and also the deadliest malaria species.139 Millenia of human exposure to many of these species have placed selection pressures that have led to a finely tuned human-parasite interaction.140
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe malaria parasite’s life cycle begins as a sporozoite in Anopheles spp. mosquito’s salivary gland. When the mosquito feeds on a human, the sporozoites in the mosquito’s saliva are released into the blood stream and undergo an asexual reproductive process known as schizogony to form merozoites once they reach target organs, like the liver. These merozoites enter the bloodstream and bind to red blood cells (RBCs) and undergo the erythrocytic phase to form the trophozoite. These trophozoites mature to their final mitotic replicative developmental stage called the schizont, then differentiate into merozoites and eventually gametocytes and oocytes. These oocysts mature before rupturing and releasing infectious sporozoites that migrate to the salivary gland for further transmission.141
TransmissionTransmission from mosquito to human is influenced by many factors including age, gametocyte density and sex ratio, antimalarial treatment, and host immunity. Malaria’s pathogenesis is primarily driven by asexual stages. However, about 0.1% to 5% of asexual parasites develop into male and female gametocytes, and this gametocyte is the only stage that is transmitted to the mosquito vector.141 The fertilization of the gametes leads to the development of sporozoites in the mosquito, making them infectious to humans.Ocular ManifestationsCerebral malaria is a serious and deadly complication of malaria, characterized by an unarousable coma. A pattern of retinal changes secondary to cerebral malaria were first described in Malawian children.142 These retinal changes present as a symmetrical retinopathy in both eyes and include retinal whitening, vessel discoloration, retinal hemorrhages resembling Roth spots, and optic disc edema.142 The solitary finding of optic disc edema suggests severe illness and possible co-infection.143 The diagnosis of cerebral malaria can be confirmed by examination of the retina for signs of malaria retinopathy, with retinal hemorrhages being a significant prognostic sign.144,145 Pathogenesis of ocular malaria involves small vessel occlusion by sequestered red blood cells in the microvasculature of the retina leading to hypoxia and ischemia.146 Recent studies in murine models have shown that malaria parasites cross the blood-brain barrier and infiltrate the neuroretina and can cause irreversible retinal neurodegeneration.147
One Health Mitigation of MalariaThe One Health approach to malaria largely relies on vector control and includes insecticide-mediated interventions such as insecticide-treated nets and indoor residual spraying.148 Economic development during periods when malaria burden is low has added incentive to vector control efforts, thus leading to a considerable decline in malaria cases.149 A campaign to prioritize malaria eradication called for by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation in 2007 focused on reduction of transmission.32–34 Current mitigation strategies focus on controlling the vector through insecticide-treated nets and antimalarial combination therapy including a transmission-blocking drug.141 In addition, methods of larval source management aimed at controlling environmental reservoirs and decreasing mosquito survival and breeding are also a crucial role in the One Health approach to malaria. These methods include alterations of aquatic habitats, habitat modification, larvicide, and the introduction of predatorial biological controls into such environments.150 Despite the efforts made toward vector control, the increase in insecticide resistance in Anopheles mosquitos and the morbidity and mortality of the disease are concerning.151 The vaccine landscape continues to develop with favorable potential, as the MosquirixTM vaccine and other candidate vaccines like R21/Matrix-M and PfSPZ have proved efficacious in clinical trials.152 While hopeful, vaccine deployment in addition to continued vector control improvements might enhance the One Health approach to malaria.Nipah Virus DiseaseNipah virus disease is caused by a virus from the family Paramyxoviridae and is a single stranded RNA virus.153 It was first discovered in 1998 in the village of Sungai Nipah in Malaysia after many pigs began dying from respiratory and neurological disease, accompanied by an outbreak of acute encephalitis in surrounding human populations.154 Nipah virus (NiV) then spread to Singapore in early 1999 after pigs were imported from Malaysia.153 Since then, there have been outbreaks in Malaysia, Bangladesh, and India, with nearly annual outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001.153 In India, the first reported case was in West Bengal with more recent outbreaks in Kerala. An epidemiologic study from the 2018 Kerala outbreak showed that 87% of cases showed respiratory symptoms with a fatality of 91%.153,154
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirThe life cycle of NiV starts when the virus attaches to the host cell. NiV infects host cells by 2 glycoproteins, G and F proteins. G protein aids with attachment to host cell receptors while the F protein allows fusion of virus to host.154 In addition, viruses can target the DNA-damage response pathway to increase Nipah virus production as well as encode accessory proteins to avoid immune detection.154,155
Pteropus fruit bats are the natural reservoir for the disease.153 These bats are endemic to tropical and subtropical areas of Asia, East Africa, and Australia. While the bats are asymptomatic carriers, they shed the virus in fluids such as saliva, urine, and excreta.153 Pigs can be an intermediate and amplifying source, allowing for zoonotic transmission.154
TransmissionNipah virus disease can be transmitted in many ways including indirectly from the bat reservoir, by intermediate hosts, or, in some instances, human-to-human.154 In Malaysia, Nipah virus was transmitted to humans through infected pigs.153 In Bangladesh and India, NiV has been transmitted from consumption of raw date palm sap contaminated by bat urine, excreta, or saliva. There have also been reports of human-to-human transmission associated with close contact with an infected person, although cases have been limited.153 The transmission of NiV has changed with variations in resources and landscapes that have altered the natural habitat for fruit bats leading to more unseasonal spillover in areas such as Bangaldesh.154
Ocular ManifestationsOcular manifestations are not well-studied in NiV disease, but some reports include blurry vision, photophobia, and double vision during the acute illness phase.156 There are also limited reports of transient blindness, Horner’s syndrome, and branch retinal artery occlusion (BRAO).157 In some patients, doll’s eye reflex was also found, and this brainstem involvement indicated a poor prognosis and higher rate of mortality.One Health Mitigation of Nipah Virus DiseaseThe One Health approach to mitigating NiV disease outbreaks focuses on reducing transmission from bats to humans. While raw sap from fresh date palms is a popular delicacy in Southeast Asian countries, it is associated with the indirect transmission of NiV from bats to humans. Fruit bats also consume date palms, making it is easy for them to contaminate and spread NiV to humans who consume raw date palm sap. To reduce contamination, date palm juice can be boiled, fruits should be washed thoroughly before eating, and bat exposure to fruits and sap sources like bamboo sap skirts should be limited.158 Bat-human habitats continue to overlap due to deforestation and urbanization increasing the odds of spillover events with outbreak potential, emphasizing the effect that early detection systems can have on preparedness against future outbreaks. In addition, personal protection may decrease the risk of human-human and animal-human transmission, especially for those handling sick animals or humans.158,159 The limited availability of antiviral therapeutics and vaccines further emphasize the role of strengthening and integrating current One Health approaches that includes increased community awareness, early detection with the implementation of integrated data systems, and garnering resources to fund the comprehensive management of NiV disease.160,161
Dengue Virus DiseaseDengue virus is a member of the Flavivirus genus and is a single-stranded positive sense RNA virus that can be caused by 4 serotypes (DENV 1-4).162 Dengue was first reported in the late 1700s in Asia, Africa, and North America; however, a disease with similar symptoms was also reported during the Chin Dynasty in 265-420 ad.162 In the last 50 years, this virus has increased 30-fold in incidence,163 with outbreaks reported in tropical and subtropical areas with an increased spread with urbanization, global travel, and poor mosquito control measures. The epicenter of DENV is India although dengue is endemic to over 100 countries.163
Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirSimilar to other viral processes, the dengue viral replication process initiates with attachment to the host cell and the formation of an endosome that seals around the virus to allow entry into the cell.164 Viral RNA is then released into the cytoplasm and the virus hijacks host cell mechanisms to further replicate and mature to then infect other cells. DENV is spread through the bite of an Aedes mosquito, which has a life cycle of around 8 to 10 days at room temperature and has both an aquatic and terrestrial phase.163 In addition, humans can serve as reservoirs for dengue in urban settings, while nonhuman primates are reservoirs in a sylvatic cycles.165
TransmissionDengue virus disease is transmitted to humans from the female Aedes mosquito into skin epithelium during a blood meal, where it infects and replicates in cells of mononuclear lineage.162,163 It can then spread into the lymph node and continue replicating, ultimately leading to a systemic infection. When viremia occurs in humans, Aedes mosquitoes can feed and become a dengue vector and continue to spread the disease. Transmission of dengue infection via a blood transfusion is rare, but has been documented.166
Ocular ManifestationsOcular symptoms usually include blurred vision, subconjunctival hemorrhages, eye pain, and photophobia167 with many of these symptoms presenting during the acute, self-limiting phase. More severe ophthalmic findings have been described including bilateral maculopathy, vasculitis, optic neuropathy, and endophthalmitis.168 Foveolitis may even persist and cause a chronic central scotoma.167 Notably, uveitis noted in Dengue survivors has responded well to topical corticosteroids.169
One Health Mitigation of Dengue Virus DiseaseDengue virus outbreaks are exacerbated by numerous determinants including urbanization, climate change, insufficient population immunity, and the rapidly evolving nature of DENV.170 Many of these factors have resulted in an increase in DENV vector distribution in addition to inadequate vector control.171 In fact, since the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a global resurgence in the number of Dengue cases, with cases in America reaching over 9.7 million as of June of 2024, which is more than double that of 2023.172 Climate change is believed to be a major factor in the recent resurgence of DENV cases, as rising global temperatures create warmer environments more conducive to DENV transmission, survival, and increased biting rates.173
Vector control strategies are crucial and provide a comparably practical approach to DENV management, and include interventions such as removing stagnant water, managing waste, manipulating vector habitats, and decreasing the reproducibility of mosquitoes.170 The incorporation of vector geographic distribution prediction models might also prove to be of use in public health planning.174,175 To reduce insecticide resistance, biological controls, like bacterial larvicide with Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis, can serve as alternatives to vector control strategies that rely on insecticides.176 Though the efficacy of the vaccines Dengvaxia (CYD-TDV) and Qdenga (TAK-003) still require more research, they are somewhat limited as Dengvaxia can only be used in someone with previous infection, while Qdenga vaccine protection in the setting of a highly mutable virus could result in more severe infection in the future.177,178
Chikungunya Virus DiseaseChikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arbovirus belonging to the family Togaviridae. It is an enveloped, single stranded positive sense RNA virus with four different genotypes that are separated by geographic regions: West African, East/Central/South African, Asian, and Indian Ocean.168 It was initially discovered in present day Tanzania in 1952 where the name Chikungunya originated, meaning “disease that bends up joints.”179 There have been cases internationally reported including in the Americas, Africa, Europe, and Asia. Large outbreaks include Comoros in 2005 with over 200,000 infections, Reunion Island with 3500 confirmed cases and more than 200,000 suspected cases,180 and Kenya in 2004.181 Outbreaks in Americas started in 2013 on Saint Martin Island in the Caribbean with nearly 1 million cases reported by the end of 2015.182 In addition, certain areas have been impacted with dual infection of CHIKV and either DENV or ZIKV. While mortality rates are low (0.1%),179 morbidity can be high. Outbreaks tend to correlate with periods of heavy rains, which can make a more opportune habitat for mosquitos.Life Cycle and Animal ReservoirCHIKV entry is clathrin-mediated endocytosis that requires an acidic environment for entry and fusion.183 The viral genome codes E1, a fusion protein, and E2, an attachment protein. These 2 proteins then form a complex by conformational change to enhance endocytosis. Fusion releases nucleocapsid into the cytosol where viral replication compartments named spherules form. Nucleocapsids then assemble and develop mature progeny.179 Infections can occur in human epithelial and endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and macrophages.181 This can then spread throughout the body to several organs including liver, muscle, joints and lymphoid tissue.Nonhuman primates such as chimpanzees and baboons have been implicated as natural reservoirs for disease in more rural areas.184 Other reservoirs include bats and rodents, although rodents do not exhibit clinical signs and may be dead-end hosts.185 In urban areas, mosquito-to-human-to-mosquito is the most common pattern of transmission with no animal reservoirs identified.186
TransmissionCHIKV can be transmitted to humans by mosquitos of the Aedes genus via blood meals. CHIKV can also be transmitted vertically intrapartum or peripartum, with rare reports of intrauterine transmissions.187,188 Two transmission cycles have been noted for chikungunya: rural/sylvatic and urban. The rural cycle involves mosquito-animal reservoir transmission with occasional spillover into humans.182 Nonhuman primates are the major reservoir in this cycle.181 Urban introduction has occurred largely via Aedes aegypti or Aedes albopictus, with a mosquito-to-human transmission cycle.179 In recent times, the virus has become adapted to urban cycles, which may result in large outbreaks even when lower levels of virus circulation are present.182
Ocular ManifestationsOcular symptoms can vary based on phase of the disease. In the acute phase, symptoms may include photophobia, retro-orbital pain, and redness of the eye.168 Later in the disease course, patients may have anterior uveitis and keratic precipitates, and there have been reports of retinitis with good recovery.168
One Health Mitigation of Chikungunya Virus DiseaseThe global spread of CHIKV has been heavily influenced by international travel.189–191 Ecological studies reveal an inverse relationship of a city’s spatial distribution of arbovirus incidence and sanitation, sewage-treatment networks, solid waste management, and urban water drainage. In addition, arbovirus incidence increases with an increase in rainfall depth. Aedes vector control systems utilize environmental methods that range from capturing, killing, or sterilizing mosquitos, including novel interfering RNA formulations used to kill mosquito larvae.192–195 In addition to these studies focused on vector spatial distribution surveillance, studies evaluating case surveillance data from domestic and imported cases of CHIKV disease may increase our knowledge in vector-human transmission dynamics, with possible implications in outbreak predictions and the development of outbreak mitigation strategies.196 The most advanced vaccine against chikungunya virus is VLA1553, which has proved to be well-tolerated and efficacious.197,198 However, since vaccine is a live, attenuated virus, the development of candidate vaccines that are more tolerable by immunocompromised and pregnant patients might prove to be beneficial in a vaccine that would need to be widely distributed.199
CONCLUSIONGiven the distinct ophthalmic manifestations observed within a range of emerging infectious diseases including viral hemorrhagic fevers and a number of vector-borne illnesses, it is evident that individual health care provider and public health response, as well as a broad understanding of the disease characteristics, pathogenesis, and a One Health perspective is needed. While clinicians require a keen understanding of the specific ophthalmic manifestations of diseases and existing treatments that address disease mechanism, improved understanding of transmission dynamics may improve the ability to detect risk factors and host-animal-environment interactions that also play a role in disease presentation. Ultimately, a One Health approach is required to address the multiplicity of factors that lead to disease that affect humans, animals, and their shared environments.The One Health approach may involve multisectoral collaboration to bridge animal and human health dynamics by bringing together experts who evaluate outbreak details from varying perspectives in fields including health, livestock, fisheries, wildlife, environment and disaster respose.32 Moreover, the inclusion of ecologists in One Health efforts can improve assessment and management of environmental risks in disease control and prevention.186,187
One Health approaches to research and global health efforts have improved our understanding of the interconnectedness of pathogens, humans, and the environment, allowing us to develop holistic strategies to prevent and mitigate disease outbreaks. Using this approach when considering ocular manifestations of emerging infectious etiologies may improve disease assessment and management with the broader goal of reducing disease burden and improving clinical outcomes.


Title: Possible high risk of transmission of the Nipah virus in South and South East Asia: a review

IntroductionNipah virusNipah virus (NiV) disease is an emerging zoonotic disease. NiV is an RNA virus from the family Paramyxoviridae, genus Henipavirus, subfamily Paramyxovirinae and order Mononegavirales, causing severe respiratory disease and encephalitis in South Asia, with high mortality [1, 2]. NiV closely resembles the Hendra virus, Cedar virus and Mojiang virus [3]. NiV is pleomorphic, spherical, thread-like and enveloped, with a size of 40–1900 nm, negative-sense, non-segmented, with a single-stranded RNA possessing helical symmetry with an average length of approximately 18 kb [44]. The RNA genome of NiV is composed of six major structural proteins: nucleocapsid (N), phosphoprotein (P), matrix (M), fusion glycoprotein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G) and long polymerase (L). Furthermore, N, P and L are responsible for the attachment of viral RNA to form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP), whereas F and G are responsible for the cellular attachment of the virion and the subsequent entry into the host cell [6–13] (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Structure of NiV and Pathogenesis of NiV infection Source: References [6–11]Phylogenetic analysis genetically characterised NiV into two major distinct genotypes: NiV-Malaysia (NiV-MY), recognised in Malaysia and Cambodia, and NiV-Bangladesh (NiV-BD), recognised in Bangladesh and India [14, 15]. Furthermore, NiV-MY genotypes have shown more virulence than NiV-BD, which directly correlates with the clinical manifestation, pathogenicity, route of transmission and severity of the disease [16].The reservoir hosts of NiV are fruit bats belonging to the genus Pteropus, also called flying foxes [17]. Sequencing data suggests that NiV is most closely related to the Hendra virus and evolutionary originated from the route of bat species. A sero-epidemiological study from Malaysia showed that four fruit bat species were implicated: Pteropus hypomelanus, Pteropus vampyrus, Cynopterus brachyotis and Eonycteris spelaea, as well as the insectivorous bat Scotophilus kuhlii [18]. Likewise, the fruit bat species Pteropus giganteus, Pteropus lylei and Hipposideros larvatus were also verified as reservoir hosts of NiV in Bangladesh, Cambodia and Thailand [19]. Serological tests based on antibodies against the NiV detected its presence in the serum of fruit bats collected in India, Indonesia and Timor-Leste [20]. Likewise, epidemiological studies on bat species from Nepal (Pteropus giganteus, Rousettus leschenaultii, Eonycteris spelaea, Rhinolophus sinicus, R. affinis, R. ferrumequinum, Nyctalus noctula and Scotophilus sp.) reported that potential reservoir hosts for several viruses are often found in human proximity and some of them even enter human dwellings at night [21]. Some fruit bats such as P. giganteus and R. leschenaultii are even consumed as bushmeat by some communities in Nepal [21]. Nepal also faces a high risk of rabies virus transmission from bat bites, implying that a zoonotic viral outbreak is likely in the future [21, 22]. However, the situation of NiV infections in other countries in South and South East Asia is unknown.NiV encephalitis is an emerging and re-emerging infectious disease considered a major public health problem by the World Health Organization (WHO). NiV is present mainly in South East Asia and can cause severe respiratory illness and deadly encephalitis in humans. NiV can be transmitted to humans from animals (bats or pigs), contaminated foods or infected fluids and can also be transmitted directly from human to human. The main objective of this review is to understand the epidemiology, pathogenesis, molecular surveillance, transmission dynamics, genetic diversity, reservoir host, clinical characteristics, and phylogenetics of NiV.MethodsA literature search was performed using PubMed, Web of Science and Google Scholar. The following keywords were used: ‘Nipah virus infection’ or ‘epidemiology Nipah virus’, or ‘clinical features Nipah virus’ or ‘diagnosis Nipah virus’, or ‘surveillance Nipah virus’, or ‘prevention and control’, ‘South and South East Asia’. Research papers, review papers and case reports were included in the search.Epidemiology and Nipah virus outbreaks (1998–2020)NiV was named after the village of Sungai Nipah (Nipah River Village) in Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia, where NiV was first identified in 1999. At that time, the virus crossed the species barrier from bats and infected humans, resulting in encephalitis with up to 40% mortality and residual neurological problems among survivors. The outbreak was first recognised in pigs that consumed fruit partially eaten by fruit bats and transmitted the infection to humans. In March 1999, an outbreak of acute NiV infection was confirmed in 11 male abattoir workers with an average age of 44 years in Singapore. One of these workers died because of speculated transmission of the virus during the import of pork from Malaysia. Between 1998 and 1999, both countries (Singapore and Malaysia) reported 246 cases of febrile encephalitis by NiV in addition to pigs in farms showing neurological and respiratory symptoms. In 2004, Bangladesh confirmed its first NiV outbreak by the presence of anti-NiV antibodies in serum samples. Since 2004, researchers have detected the viral nucleic acid of NiV by genome analysis. From 2004 to 2010, nine outbreaks were documented in Bangladesh. Likewise, in 2011 another NiV outbreak was reported to cause 15 deaths in a remote town named Hatibandha in the Lalmonirhat district of northern Bangladesh [23]. The research findings showed that the main source of NiV transmission in Bangladesh was the consumption of infected raw date palm fruits [24] (Table 1).Table 1Nipah Virus Outbreaks in South Asia Countries (1999–2021).Sources: updated from WHO–SEARO References [35–40]Country (place)YearNo. of casesNo. of deaths(Case fatality rate, %)Primary route of transmissionLaboratory diagnosisMalaysia1998–1999265105(39.6%)Close contact with pigs(i.e., pig farmers)Singapore1999111(9.1%)Contact with pigsIndia (Siliguri)Jan–Feb 20016645(68.2%)Human to human close direct contactContact with bats from the Pteropus spp.BangladeshApr–May 2001139(69.2%)Consumption of fruits or fruit products (raw date palm juice)- Contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit batsBangladeshJan 2003/April 200412/318/23(67%/74%)Same as aboveBangladeshJan–Mar 20051211(9%2)BangladeshJan–Feb 2007/March–April 20078/35/1(63%/33%)India (Nadia)Apr 200755(100%)BangladeshFeb–April 20084/74/5(100%/71%)BangladeshJan 200941(75%)BangladeshFeb–March 2010/Jan–Feb 201116/4414/40(88%/91%)BangladeshFeb 2012/Jan–Apr 201312/2410/21(83%/88%)Philippines2014179(53%)Bangladesh2014/201518/99/6(50%/67%)India (Kerala State)May 20181817(94.4%)Suspected of consumption of fruits or fruit productsIndia (Kerala State)September 202111(100%)Contact with horses/Consumption of horse meatOn 4 September, 2021 the presence of Nipah virus in the plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and serum samples was confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and IgM antibodies was confirmed in the plasma sample by ELISA serology test at NIV PuneThe first outbreak of NiV in India was detected in Siliguri, West Bengal, in 2001, characterised by febrile illness in association with altered sensorium [25]. Some Siliguri outbreak isolates showed close similarity to those of the outbreak in Bangladesh. A subsequent outbreak was confirmed in Nadia, West Bengal, in 2007. Then, in 2018, a NiV infection outbreak was reported in Kozhikode, northern Kerala, India, with fruit bats as the source of the outbreak [26, 27]. During the 2018 outbreak, most deaths occurred in infected patients and health personnel who were involved in their treatment. A total of 60 infected persons died in the Malappuram and Kozhikode districts, identified by laboratory diagnosis employing real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). DNA sequencing showed that the genome of the confirmed isolates of NiV infection was very similar to the BD strain of MY [28]. Recently, a fifth NiV outbreak on 4 September 2021 was reported by the Kerala State Health Department in Kozhikode, Kerala, India. On 29 August 2021, a 12-year-old boy showed a low-grade fever and was transferred to several hospitals but his condition deteriorated. On 4 September 2021, the presence of NiV in the boy’s plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and serum samples was confirmed by RT-PCR, and IgM antibodies were detected in the plasma sample by ELISA. The next day, the patient died and a safe cremation was performed on the same day in Kozhikode. Since then, NiV infection has claimed at least 20 lives and is rapidly spreading in the southern state of Kerala [28] (Table 1).NiV infection in humans has a range of clinical presentations from asymptomatic infection to acute respiratory infection, fatal encephalitis and severe neurological disease. The death rate is in the range of 40–75% according to reported outbreaks between 1998 and 2018 [29–31]. According to the WHO, NiV is one of the highly infectious pathogens that should be handled in facilities classified at biosafety level 4 (BSL4), which is challenging because of the limited access to sophisticated laboratories in most countries.A study on the genetic diversity of NiV in Bangladesh was conducted in 2012. RT-PCR was used to screen a total of 456 bat roost urine samples; among them, 38 (8%) were positive for NiV RNA, with cycle threshold (CT) values ranging from 32.7 to 38.5 including NiV-N gene fragments (N ORF 188–1599) sequenced from 100 roost urine specimens [32]. Moreover, in a follow-up study, 39 samples were collected from humans during 2012–2018 in areas, where NiV RNA was previously detected. RNA was detectable in 31 samples (80%) by RT-PCR, and nucleotide sequences were successfully identified from 21 samples by Sanger sequencing [32]. Phylogenetic tree analyses revealed that the N gene sequence obtained from bat roost urine in Joypurhat in 2012 was almost identical (98.6–95.4%) to the NiV-BD genotype present in Bangladesh, India and Thailand. The phylogenetic tree revealed an evolutionary rate of 4.64 × 104 for the NiV-BD genotype, which diverged from 1995 into two sub-lineages. Furthermore, phylogenetic tree analyses from bat roost urine and human samples categorised these samples into the same genotype (NiV-BD). NiV sequences from Malaysia, Cambodia and Thailand were categorised into NiV-MY genotypes, whereas those from Bangladesh, India and Thailand were categorised into other NiV-BD genotypes (Fig. 2). The above studies [32] provide molecular information for designing laboratory methods for the early detection of NiV in environmental samples to evaluate its potential risk of transmission in the human population. More detailed studies on the genetic variability between the NiV strains detected in bats and humans can also contribute to identifying the transmissibility and infection potential of the virus and can thus help to predict outbreaks and identify vaccine–candidate strains.Fig. 2Phylogenetic analysis of NIV infection in South Asia Countries (1999–2021).Source: References [35–40]Nepal is a South Asian country located along the central foothills of the Himalayas, sharing porous borders with India in the south, east and west. Open borders can cause an unprecedented outbreak of NiV in Nepal through human transmission. Furthermore, some fruit bat colonies in the foothills of Nepal are speculated to adopt seasonal migration patterns from higher to lower elevations (cross-border migration as well), which represents a high risk of zoonotic virus spread in Nepal. Another important factor that contributes to the rapid transmission of infectious diseases in South Asian and South East Asian countries is the increase in the human population [33]. Poultry and pig farming and cattle rearing in the proximity of fruit bat colonies may increase the risk of transmission of zoonotic diseases. Bats generally prefer warmer temperatures, although a few bat species can live in cold environments through torpor and hibernation. Hence, in the mountains of Nepal, some bats roost in human-made structures to avoid the cold in winter. Because bats co-exist with human communities, the risk of a bat-borne viral outbreak in Nepal is latent, although there is no solid evidence of such a health hazard for the country. Our emphasis is on preparedness to tackle such probable risks by increasing our understanding of the disease based on research and solid evidence. Therefore, the authorities in South Asian countries need to remain vigilant to tackle NiV outbreaks [34].Many studies have confirmed that fruit bat species (Pteropus) are the natural hosts of NiV, which is a virus of concern for future epidemics and also seems to be spilling over from its animal reservoir to humans. Sequencing analysis confirmed that fruit bats are responsible for the transmission of NiV to domestic animals and humans through contaminated food or indirectly from person to person. Thus, NiV infection in domestic animals such as pigs should be monitored routinely and the farm should be cleaned daily using appropriate disinfection agents or detergents to prevent an outbreak. At border checkpoints in South Asian countries, domestic animals should be quarantined and tested for zoonotic diseases. In addition, banning the movement of animals from infected farms to other areas can reduce the spread of disease. Moreover, the One Health approach should be strictly employed to detect new cases by performing surveillance and quarantining domestic animals for providing an early warning to veterinary and human public health authorities [34–39].Laboratory diagnosis and treatmentThere are currently no specific vaccines or effective antiviral drugs available for the treatment of NiV infection. However, intensive and supportive care and prevention will be the mainstays of management, as treatments are only recommended by the WHO in the case of severe respiratory and neurologic complications. NiV infection can be diagnosed at the early stages through RT-PCR tests of the throat, nasal passage, urine, cerebrospinal fluid and blood. Furthermore, diagnosis may also include nucleic acid amplification, sequencing, immunofluorescence assay, histopathology, virus isolation, neutralisation and high throughput techniques for whole-genome sequencing of NiV infecting humans and animals. In addition, viruses can be diagnosed during the patient’s recovery stage, and antibodies can be detected using IgG/IgM ELISA. According to the WHO and standard diagnostics for NiV, PCR is strongly recommended as the most sensitive method for diagnosis of active NiV infection but NiV-specific IgM ELISA is an alternative serological approach, where PCR is not available. However, although the detection of NiV with ELISA is reliable, it has less sensitivity and specificity than molecular detection [34–42].Prevention of NiVScientists are currently working on the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines for NiV. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases conducted a clinical trial of an mRNA NiV agent. For the prevention and control of NiV in South and South East Asia, each country in the region should develop an action plan including policies and strategies for controlling the virus. This should be followed by the implementation of the endorsed action plan strategies and raising public health awareness regarding NiV outbreaks and the importance of preventive measures to mitigate risk factors. In the twenty-first century, social media platforms are one of the most important modes used for informing the public in addition to local television, FM radio stations and printed media (e.g., posters and pamphlets). For instance, farm workers may be instructed to avoid direct contact with farm animals, especially during slaughter and disposal, and wear appropriate personal protective equipment and clothing. Villagers may be taught to avoid consuming date palm fruits and drinking date palm juice that may be contaminated if bats live on those palm trees. Furthermore, surveillance of NiV and other infectious diseases that could be at high risk of transmission from animals to humans should be carried out. High-risk areas in South and South East Asia along the NiV girdle should be identified and mapped, and then continual surveillance should be conducted to facilitate the early detection of virus outbreaks, identify circulating strains among fruit bats, and monitor environmental factors and the dynamics of wide-ranging transmission.To respond to an outbreak, specialised research teams should be established to identify suspected cases of infection in humans and further analyse the possibility of the emergence of new species as potential reservoir hosts of the virus that may be responsible for its transmission to humans from bats. In other words, establishing mechanisms for cross-border screening, laboratory testing, and diagnosis facilities at points of entry and exit would ensure that suspected cases are referred to facilities at the provincial level for confirmation of NiV. Furthermore, more reliable tests for the surveillance of communities and livestock will be vital to achieving a better understanding of the ecology of the fruit bat host and transmission risks to intermediate hosts, enabling the implementation of the One Health approach for outbreak prevention and the management of zoonotic diseases like that caused by NiV. In summary, the control and prevention of NiV would be possible only if strictly endorsed guidelines and control strategies are implemented by employing the One Health approach in all South and South East Asian countries [4, 5, 40, 43, 44].Role of medicinal plants for NiV treatmentIn the absence of specific antivirals and vaccines, medicinal plants can play an important role by providing therapeutic agents for the treatment of various viral diseases. Previous studies have revealed that medicinal plants have promising antiviral properties and are used to protect against various public health threats that affect humans and animals. South East Asian countries have medicinal plant candidates that could be screened for the treatment of viral diseases, such as NiV. The following steps would be taken for this purpose: evaluation of current treatment approaches for viral infection, screening of antiviral drug candidates from natural products and elucidation of mechanisms, inhibition of viral protease, viral replication, viral spike protein, and receptor, and finally, screening of medicinal plant target compounds to develop an antiviral drug against NiV. The best method will probably be the screening of compounds that are responsible for altering or disturbing any step of the virus’ replication. Studies on medicinal plants for the treatment of viral diseases have reported 93 antiviral drug candidates, which could be a potential area of research in antiviral drug discovery. Furthermore, these drug candidates might also show inhibitory effects against influenza, parainfluenza, and other respiratory viruses [45]. Therefore, medicinal plant extracts, phytochemicals, and herbs could have potential as antiviral agents for the effective control of NiV, and medicinal plant formulations could prevent or cure NiV and other highly infectious pandemic-prone viral diseases in Asia [46]. In-depth studies will be necessary, using both in vitro and in vivo models, to test the medicinal plants and their phytochemicals to measure their antiviral activities against NiV infection [45, 46].RecommendationsSouth Asian and South East Asian countries should increase awareness of the NiV risk factors and educate their people on measures to reduce NiV exposure and risk of infection. By applying the strategies listed in [39], public health educational messages should focus on reducing the following risk factors: bat-to-human transmission, animal-to-human transmission and human-to-human transmission. Healthcare workers should be aware of this risk while caring for suspected or confirmed patients or handling specimens, and should strictly follow the universal standard infection prevention guidelines (i.e., wearing personal protective equipment, an N95 mask, goggles and a face shield) at all times. Furthermore, samples from people and animals with suspected NiV infection should be collected and handled by trained health and laboratory personnel in a well-equipped molecular laboratory. Standard guidelines should be followed at all times when handling suspected or confirmed animal or human samples. Effective vaccination strategies ought to be developed in the nearby future to tackle the risk of infectious agents, such as NiV. Therefore, we encourage the governments of South Asian and South East Asian countries to endorse the One Health approach to reduce the risk of zoonotic disease transmission [35–42]. For instance, India has adopted guidelines for the clinical management of NiV disease, using the One Health approach. Moreover, the Indian Council of Medical Research and Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme has partnered with veterinary divisions, such as the National Centre for Disease Control in India. This model could be emulated by other South Asian nations [47, 48].


Title: Development of a reverse genetics system for Sosuga virus allows rapid screening of antiviral compounds

IntroductionThe Paramxyoviridae (order Mononegavirales) represent a diverse family of viruses, many of which, such as measles virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and mumps virus, are significant human pathogens [1]. Within this family, bat-borne paramyxoviruses have previously been recognized as potential novel zoonotics with the ability to spill over into the human population and cause disease [2–4]. The 2 bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses with the greatest public health impact to date are Hendra (HeV) and Nipah (NiV) viruses, which together comprise the Henipavirus genus and are vectored by fruit bats of the Pteropus genus [5]. First recognized in 1994, HeV infections in both domestic horses and humans have occurred sporadically [6,7], while NiV infections in Bangladesh, India, and Malaysia have resulted in over 600 human infections to date [8].Sosuga virus (SOSV) is a recently discovered zoonotic paramyxovirus [9]. It was first identified from a single clinical case in 2012, when a wildlife researcher who conducted a 6-week field expedition in South Sudan and Uganda presented with fever, generalized myalgia and arthralgia, neck stiffness, and a sore throat shortly upon returning to the USA [10]. The patient was hospitalized as symptoms worsened, including the development of a confluent maculopapular rash; after 14 days, all symptoms had sufficiently resolved to allow discharge. After several differential diagnoses were ruled out, sequence analysis revealed the presence of a novel rubula-like paramyxovirus in samples taken from the patient, from which the virus was later isolated. Further ecological and epidemiological investigations revealed Egyptian rousette bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus) as the likely reservoir for the virus, with this case representing a single spillover event into humans [11]. While only one case of SOSV infection has been confirmed to date, its detection in bat populations sampled over a 3-year period at multiple geographic locations in Uganda means that the possibility exists for future spillover events into the human population [11].Reverse genetics systems allow for precise manipulation of viral genomes, and the ability to modify them to suit the required application. One such application is the generation of recombinant viruses expressing reporter proteins that facilitate indirect quantification of viral replication in infected cells. However, for pathogenic viruses such as SOSV, which require manipulation under high biocontainment levels, minigenome-based assays are also valuable surrogates that recapitulate viral replication and transcriptional processes without generating infectious particles. Here we describe a reverse genetics system for SOSV that can be used to rapidly screen for compounds that inhibit viral replication. An initial minigenome screen performed under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) biocontainment was used to identify only those compounds with potential antiviral activity, which were then assessed for their ability to inhibit authentic viral replication processes using the reporter SOSV at BSL-3. As well as screening for antiviral compounds, these reverse genetics system will provide a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis in both in vitro and in vivo systems.Materials and methodsCellsHuh7 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. BSR-T7/5 (generous gifts from Klaus Conzelmann, Germany), BHK-1 (ATCC, USA), and Vero-E6 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.Reverse genetics: Minigenome assay and rescue of recombinant virusesThe SOSV minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I promoter-based plasmid (S1 Fig., Genbank #MG880223), and transfected into Huh7 cells in conjunction with Pol-II expression plasmids (pCAGGS) supplying SOSV polymerase (L), nucleoprotein (NP), and phosphoprotein (P) proteins in trans. The minigenome assay was performed in a 96-well plate on cells seeded at 2 × 104 cells per well, with the following amounts of plasmids (150 ng total) transfected per well: 75 ng minigenome, 12.5 ng L, 50 ng NP, and 12.5 ng P. Minigenome activity was based on ZsGreen1 (ZsG) fluorescence levels determined at 72 h post transfection (hpt). To rescue recombinant virus, a T7 promoter-based plasmid containing full-length anti-genomic sense SOSV (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880224) was constructed. To rescue the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG, a modified genome was constructed in which the M open reading frame (ORF) was replaced with one encoding ZsG-P2A-M, leaving the M gene start and gene end intact (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880225). Virus rescue was performed in 6-well plates seeded with BSR-T7 cells (approximately 70% confluent) transfected with genome plasmid in conjunction with the SOSV-L, -NP, and -P expression plasmids (2 μg genome, 1 μg SOSV-L, 0.5 μg SOSV-NP, and 0.25 μg SOSV-P). At 96 hpt, cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified by low-speed centrifugation, and used to infect BHK-21 cells. At 96 h post infection (hpi), cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified, and titered by tissue culture infective dose 50 (TCID50) assays in Vero-E6 cells based on crystal violet visualization of cytopathic effects [12].Antiviral compound screeningAll compounds were obtained from either Selleckchem (Houston, TX, USA) or Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA) with the exception of T-705 (BOC Sciences, Shirley, NY, USA) and 09167 (Vitas-M Laboratory, Champaign, IL, USA). For both screening assays, Huh7 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at 2 × 104 cells per well 16–20 h prior to treatment with DMSO-diluted compounds (final DMSO concentration 0.5%). For the minigenome screening assay, cells were transfected with the required plasmids using TransIT- LT-1 (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI, USA) 1 h post treatment. Total ZsG fluorescence was determined 72 hpt using a microplate reader (H1MD, BioTek Synergy, Winooski, VT, USA), with levels recorded at a height of 6 mm with 75 gain/sensitivity. ZsG levels were normalized to levels in mock-treated cells. For the reporter and wild-type screening assays, cells were infected 1 h post treatment with either rSOSV/ZsG or rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, supernatants were collected (rSOSV-infected cells) for titer determination, or total ZsG fluorescence in the infected cell monolayer determined (rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells) using a H1MD plate reader (height 6 mm; 100 gain/sensitivity). For both assays, cell viability was determined by measuring ATP content in parallel with compound-treated, mock-transfected/infected cells using CellTiter-Glo 2.0 (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). All experiments were performed in quadruplicate and repeated at least 3 times.Microscopy and high-content imagingZsG fluorescence in infected cells was imaged directly using an EVOS digital inverted microscope (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). For immunofluorescence, cells were fixed in 10% formalin for 30 min, permeabilized in PBS containing 0.1% Triton-X100 (v/v) for 10 min, and blocked with PBS 5% BSA (v/v) for 30 min. Primary antibody was rabbit α-SOSV NP (Genscript, Waltham, MA, USA), visualized with an AlexaFluor 488-labeled secondary antibody (Thermo-Fisher, #A11034). Quantification of total rSOSV protein production in Huh7 cells was performed on infected cells labeled as described above, and further stained with Nuc-Blue and Cell-Mask Red (Thermo-Fisher). Images were collected on the Operetta high-content imaging system (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA) using a 20× objective, with 16 fields per well analyzed using the Harmony software package (PerkinElmer). Total 488 fluorescence per field was determined, averaged for the well, and then normalized to values from control wells containing rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells.Data analysisZsG fluorescence values for compound-treated, rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells were normalized to those in mock-treated (DMSO only) cells, and used to fit a 4-parameter equation to semilog plots of the concentration-response data. From this, the compound concentrations inhibiting 50% of the ZsG expression (50% effective concentration, EC50) were interpolated. Cell viability was similarly calculated in compound-treated, mock-infected cells to determine the 50% cell cytotoxicity concentration (CC50) of each compound. The selectivity index (SI) was calculated by dividing the CC50 by the EC50. Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism v7. Suitability for high-throughput screening was determined using the Z prime (Z′) score, a measure of statistical effect size, with values between 0.5 and 1.0 considered acceptable [13].Accession numbersSOSV Minigenome plasmid; pSOSV MG; Genbank # MG880223Rescue plasmid for rSOSV; pSOSV FL; Genbank #MG880224Rescue plasmid for rSOSV/ZsG; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225ResultsScreening of antiviral compounds using a SOSV minigenome assayWe constructed a SOSV minigenome segment containing the parental SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for NP and the gene end sequence for L. All internal coding sequences and intergenic regions were replaced with the coding sequence for ZsGreen1 (ZsG), a green fluorescent protein (Fig 1A). Protein expression plasmids under control of the Pol-II promoter (pCAGGS) allowed in trans expression of SOSV NP, L, and P, the minimum requirement to initiate paramyxovirus replication and transcription [1]. The minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I expression plasmid in the negative orientation, meaning it has to be replicated first by the NP + L + P replication complex before transcription of ZsG mRNA can occur.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g001Fig 1Design and optimization of the Sosuga virus minigenome screening assay.a. Genome schematic representing the design of the Sosuga virus (SOSV) minigenome segment. The minigenome contains the full-length SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for nucleoprotein (NP) and the gene end sequence for the viral polymerase (L), with the parental coding and intergenic regions replaced by the coding sequence of ZsGreen1 (ZsG). Transfected into cells in conjunction with plasmids expressing SOSV L, NP, and phosphoprotein (P), this minigenome allows for expression of quantifiable ZsG. b. The minigenome assay was optimized for Huh7 cells in a 96-well plate format using different ratios of the plasmids expressing L, NP, and P with a constant amount of minigenome plasmid. Cells were transfected with 75 ng minigenome plasmid and 75 ng total of plasmids expressing L, NP, and P, with ratios of each stated underneath the bars. Relative ZsG fluorescence over control reactions with no L was calculated at 48 and 72 h post transfection (hpt). c. Dose-response curve for the optimized SOSV minigenome assay against ribavirin. Cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 hpt with the minigenome plasmids, and ZsG fluorescence was measured at 72 hpt. ZsG fluorescence (green) was normalized to mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-transfected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments.Next, the SOSV minigenome screen was optimized to achieve maximum reporter protein expression with the greatest signal-to-noise ratio in a 96-well plate format using Huh7 cells. Huh7 cells have previously proven useful for evaluating nucleoside analog activity against other viruses, and are highly permissive to SOSV infection [14–17]. Alongside a constant amount of minigenome plasmid, differing ratios of pCAGGS-L, -NP, and -P were transfected, and ZsG fluorescence was determined at both 48 and 72 hpt (Fig 1B). We determined the optimal ratio of plasmids for the assay to be 6:1:4:1 of genome, pCAGGS-L, -NP, and–P respectively, with ZsG fluorescence read at 72 hpt. To determine whether the optimized minigenome assay was suitable for screening antiviral compounds, we used the broad-spectrum antiviral ribavirin. Using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control and DMSO as the vehicle-only control, the Z′ score of the assay was 0.58. Dose-dependent reduction of ZsG fluorescence was also observed in the SOSV minigenome assay using a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin, giving an EC50 of 5.91 ± 0.85 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 1C). These data indicated that the assay was robust, and suitable for screening anti-SOSV compounds at BSL-2.As minigenome assays can be used as surrogates for measuring viral replication and transcription, we evaluated a panel of 40 compounds predicted to inhibit these processes. These were a collection of nucleoside analogs supplemented with other select compounds reported to inhibit viral replication. Compounds were initially screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content (S1 Table). Compounds inhibiting the minigenome by >50% whilst retaining >80% cell viability were then chosen for further analysis; these were 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 5-fluorouridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), and 6-azauridine. Dose-response analysis of these compounds demonstrated that both 2′-dFC and 6-azauridine inhibited minigenome activity in the absence of cell toxicity, with EC50 values of 1.31 ± 0.15 μM and 5.17 ± 1.01 μM, respectively (Fig 2). While 5-fluorouridine was not cytotoxic at the concentrations evaluated, it did not completely inhibit minigenome signal even at the highest concentrations evaluated, and was therefore dropped at this point. MPA inhibited minigenome activity at sub-micromolar concentrations, but was cytotoxic at higher concentrations. However, with an SI of 7, it was incorporated into the secondary virus screen to determine if a larger therapeutic window became apparent in the context of authentic viral replication.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g002Fig 2Dose-response curves for selected compounds using the minigenome assay.Compounds selected during the initial screen as potential SOSV antivirals were assessed by concentration-response curves using serial 2-fold dilutions of each compound. ZsG fluorescence (green) at 48 hpt was normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to those in mock-transfected cells. Graphs are representative of at least 3 independent experiments. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with errors bars indicating the standard deviation.Design and rescue of a reporter SOSV expressing a fluorescent proteinThe single-stranded, negative-sense RNA genome of SOSV encodes 6 genes to express 7 proteins, with 1 protein generated by V/P gene mRNA editing. The intergenic regions of SOSV contain transcriptional promoter and terminator sequences. We cloned the full-length SOSV genome into an expression plasmid under control of the T7 polymerase promoter. When transfected into cells and supplied with SOSV P, NP, L, and T7 polymerase in trans, this system successfully generated infectious recombinant SOSV (rSOSV). After optimizing the rSOSV rescue system, we designed another recombinant SOSV genome capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter protein in infected cells. Previous approaches to develop recombinant paramyxoviruses expressing reporter genes have included the reporter as either a separate open reading frame (ORF), or incorporated it within a parental ORF [18–22]. We employed the latter approach, and generated a SOSV genome in which the ZsG ORF was inserted upstream of the M ORF, fused to the viral protein via the self-cleaving P2A motif taken from porcine teschovirus 1 [23]. The authentic SOSV M gene start and gene end sequences therefore transcribe a single mRNA encoding the ORF for both M and ZsG, which, upon translation, results in the expression of 2 separate proteins via the P2A ribosomal skipping motif. Incorporation of this recombinant SOSV genome into the previously described SOSV rescue system (Fig 3A) resulted in the successful rescue of the reporter SOSV (rSOSV/ZsG).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g003Fig 3Optimization of an antiviral screening assay using a recombinant SOSV expressing ZsG.a. Schematic representation of the wild-type recombinant SOSV (rSOSV), and the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG (rSOSV/ZsG). The ZsG coding sequence was inserted immediately 5′ of the M coding sequence (antigenomic sense), separated from the viral protein by the P2A sequence from porcine teschovirus 1. This self-cleaving amino acid motif allows expression of both ZsG and M from a single mRNA generated by the parental SOSV M promoter and terminator sequences. b. Vero-E6 cells infected with either rSOSV or rSOSV/ZsG at 72 hpi showing formation of syncytia. In rSOSV/ZsG-infected cell monolayers, syncytia were associated with extensive ZsG expression (images taken at 4 × magnification). c. Growth curves for wild-type SOSV, rSOSV, and rSOSV/ZsG were performed in Vero-E6 cells infected at MOI 0.1. Titers (TCID50) were determined at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. d. The optimized rSOSV/ZsG antiviral screening assay was validated using ribavirin. Huh7 cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 h prior to infection at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 72 hpi and normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph representative of 3 independent experiments.Infecting Vero-E6 cells with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.1 resulted in extensive syncytia formation in the cell monolayer similar to infection with rSOSV, with strong ZsG fluorescence detectable in these infected cells (Fig 3B). To compare growth kinetics of the recombinant viruses, Vero-E6 cells were infected with rSOSV, rSOSV/ZsG, or wild-type SOSV at MOI 0.1, with titers determined by TCID50 at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. All 3 viruses grew to similar titers over the 120 h time course, with no attenuation apparent in either of the recombinant viruses compared to the wild-type (Fig 3C). This indicated that incorporation of the ZsG ORF into the SOSV genome did not negatively impact the virus phenotype. To assess whether rSOSV/ZsG could be used to confirm antiviral activity of a compound by measuring the reduction in ZsG fluorescence in treated cells, we optimized a screening assay in Huh7 cells using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control; the resultant Z′ score was 0.74, indicating a robust assay. A concentration-response curve using a 2-fold serial dilution of ribavirin demonstrated dose-dependent reduction in ZsG fluorescence in rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells, giving an EC50 of 6.10 ± 0.09 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 3D).Screening of candidate antiviral compounds with recombinant virusesTo confirm the inhibitory effect of 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, and MPA in the context of authentic viral replication, we performed counter-screening with rSOSV/ZsG. Alongside these 3 compounds, we included 09167, an antagonist of the innate immune system that was shown to inhibit NiV and other paramyxoviruses in a similar screening assay [22,24]. Huh7 cells were treated with compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at an MOI of 0.2, with ZsG fluorescence read 48 hpi. All 3 compounds reduced ZsG expression in a dose-dependent manner, with EC50 values similar to those observed during the minigenome screen (Fig 4A). 2′-dFC (EC50 = 1.48 ± 0.22 μM) and 6-azauridine (EC50 = 7.99 ± 1.32 μM) potently inhibited ZsG fluorescence without cytotoxicity at the highest compound concentrations. While MPA had an EC50 value of 0.33 ± 0.04 μM, similar to that obtained in the minigenome screen, it again had a low SI of 5 due to its cytotoxicity at higher concentrations (Table 1). The 0.67 ± 0.05 μM EC50 value of 09167 was consistent with the sub-micromolar concentrations used to inhibit other paramyxoviruses, indicating that SOSV was similarly sensitive to this compound [24].10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g004Fig 4Using SOSV/ZsG as a tool to screen antiviral compounds.a. Representative concentration-response curves of Huh7 cells treated with 2-fold serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 48 hpi and normalized to mock-treated cells. Cell viability was assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue), with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments. b. Confirmatory counter-screening of each compound with wild-type rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 2 days post infection cells were fixed, and SOSV proteins stained and quantified using immunofluorescence microscopy. Relative fluorescence (red; total fluorescence normalized to mock-treated cells) in each well was determined, with cell viability assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue). Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation. Values stated are the 50% effective concentration (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentration (CC50), and selectivity index (SI).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.t001Table 1Selected compounds’ 50% effective concentrations (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentrations (CC50), and selectivity indices (SI) determined by minigenome and reporter virus screening assays.CompoundMinigenome ScreenrSOSV/ZsG ScreenCC50Compound ClassEC50SIEC50SIRibavirin5.91 ± 0.85> 86.10 ± 0.09> 8> 50.0Nucleoside analog2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine1.31 ± 0.15> 381.48 ± 0.22> 33> 50.0Nucleoside analog5-fluorouridine0.29 ± 0.13> 172NTNT> 50.0Nucleoside analogMycophenolic acid± 0.0670.33 ± 0.0451.74 ± 0.42IMPDH inhibitor6-azauridine5.17 ± 1.01> 97.99 ± 1.32> 6> 50.0Nucleoside analog09167NTNT0.67 ± 0.05> 74>50.0Innate immune antagonistNT, not tested; IMPDH, inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase. All values in μM ± standard deviation from at least 3 independent experiments.To ensure the validity of using the ZsG-expressing virus to accurately identify specific inhibitors, we investigated whether these compounds also inhibited the replication of rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, MPA, or 09167, and infected with rSOSV (MOI = 0.2) 1 h post treatment. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and total SOSV protein production was visualized using rSOSV-specific and fluorescently labelled antibodies. Total fluorescence due to rSOSV protein staining per well (average of 16 analyzed fields per well) was normalized to rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells, allowing determination of the relative reduction in virus replication due to the inhibitory effects of each compound. All compounds tested reduced rSOSV protein production in a dose-dependent manner, indicating inhibition of viral replication and growth (Fig 4B). Direct visualization of the compound-treated rSOSV infected cell monolayers clearly demonstrated the reduction in viral protein production, and also demonstrated the ability of rSOSV to form extensive syncytia in Huh7 cells at sub-optimal concentrations of compound (Fig 5). These results indicate that inhibition caused by the compounds is indeed due to a SOSV-specific mechanism, rather than one unique to the ZsG-expressing recombinant.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g005Fig 5Immunofluorescent imaging of rSOSV infected Huh7 cells treated with selected antiviral compounds.Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of either 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 6-azauridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), or 09167 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and SOSV proteins (green) and cell nuclei (blue) visualized by immunofluorescence. Concentration of compound is shown in white text on each representative image (mM); control cells were treated with DMSO only. Images taken using a 20 × objective. White bar represents 100 μm.DiscussionThat SOSV, a previously unknown paramyxovirus vectored by bats, could cause severe disease in humans is not unexpected, given that bats are increasingly implicated as sources of novel zoonotic infections [3,25–27]. A recent study focusing on only 10% of bat species in relatively small geographic areas discovered evidence of 66 novel paramyxoviruses [28], so undiscovered pathogens with the capacity to threaten human health may yet be present in bat populations worldwide. With reverse genetics systems already developed for the highly pathogenic paramyxoviruses NiV and HeV, the establishment of SOSV reverse genetics based on similar design concepts ensures that any investigations into future outbreaks can be quickly initiated [20,21,29]. Furthermore, a common feature of paramyxoviruses appears to be that expression of reporter genes does not negatively affect the viral phenotype either in vitro or in vivo, increasing the usefulness of these systems [21,22,30,31]. The minigenome screening methods described here were successfully used to identify several compounds that inhibit SOSV replication. We were then able to confirm the antiviral activity of candidate compounds by using the reporter virus screen. While the minigenome screen is useful for identifying compounds that inhibit viral replication and transcription, the reporter virus screen can be utilized to identify other compounds, especially those that affect other viral life cycle processes, such as cell tropism, entry, budding, and transmission.The antiviral activity of 6-azauridine and its derivatives toward several viruses has been reported, including for viruses closely related to SOSV, such as NiV, measles, and human parainfluenza virus 3 [22,32,33]. In a clinical setting, the derivative 6-azauridine triacetate has been used therapeutically to treat severe psoriasis for over 40 years, with minimal side effects observed at a dosage level of 125 mg/kg/day [34,35]. Encouragingly, research also shows that at that dose, plasma concentrations in human subjects reach 100 μM or greater, with successive doses over several days maintaining this level [36]. This is far in excess of the 5.17 μM EC50 for 6-azauridine reported here, so the potential usefulness in treating SOSV even at lower and less frequent doses should be further evaluated. 2′-dFC has been shown to potently inhibit several other negative strand viruses, including influenza and hepatitis C virus [37,38], although concerns over mitochondrial toxicity have limited the therapeutic use of 2′-dFC and its derivatives to date [39]. However, the potent antiviral activity of 2′-dFC makes worthwhile to investigate whether other 2′-deoxynucleoside analogs have similar antiviral activity against SOSV in the absence of toxicity.The antiviral activity demonstrated by ribavirin was expected, and has been reported previously for NiV [22,40,41]. Ribavirin has also been used to treat human patients during a non-randomized, unblinded limited clinical trial during an NiV outbreak in Malaysia in 1998–1999; mortality was reduced by 37% in the treated group [42]. However, its effectiveness when used in NiV animal models is less clear [40,43,44]. A similar discrepancy between in vivo and in vitro potency of these compounds may exist for SOSV, although this will remain unclear until a suitable SOSV animal model is developed. Promisingly, the limiting factor to henipavirus treatment effectiveness appears to be the compound’s ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Ribavirin treatment in a non-human primate model of HeV infection reduced viral loads to levels low enough to prevent development of the respiratory signs of infection, but not to prevent spread to the central nervous system [44]. As ribavirin cannot cross the BBB, the disease then manifested as neurological signs. However, no neurological symptoms were reported from the one SOSV case to date, so nucleoside analogs such as ribavirin, 6-azauridine, and 2′-dFC may be more effective treatment options for this disease.In conclusion, we have developed a minigenome assay to investigate SOSV replication and transcriptional processes, as well as a rescue system to recover infectious recombinant virus. We used this system to rescue a recombinant SOSV capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter in infected cells with no loss of fitness compared to parental virus. A high-throughput screen using both systems identified 3 compounds that inhibited SOSV replication with acceptable SI values, providing information that may help direct therapeutic options for any future cases of SOSV. Finally, as well as being a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis, the minigenome and reporter systems may help us better understand the potential public health threats posed by bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses, and provide strategies on best combating these emerging threats.Supporting informationS1 FigPlasmids use in the SOSV minigenome assay.The SOSV minigenome (mg) segment, containing the SOSV leader sequence and gene start for the nucleoprotein ORF, the ZsGreen1 ORF (ZsG), the polymerase ORF gene end, and the SOSV trailer sequence (Genbank #MG880223). Expression is controlled RNA-polymerase I promoter (pol I prom) and a RNA-polymerase I terminator sequences (pol I term).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigPlasmids used in the rescue of rSOSV (pSOSV FL) and rSOSV/ZsG (pSOSV/ZsG FL).Red arrows represent full-length viral genome, blue arrows represent viral protein open reading frames: NP–nucleoprotein; P–phosphoprotein; V–V protein; M–matrix protein; F–fusion protein; HN–hemagglutinin-neuraminidase; L–polymerase. Green arrow represents ZsGreen1 (ZsG) open reading frame. T7 prom–T7 polymerase promoter; HDV Rz–Hepatitis D virus ribozyme; T7term–T7 polymerase terminator; P2A –nucleotide sequence encoding the self-cleaving amino acid motif from porcine teschovirus 1. Sequences available at: pSOSV FL, Genbank #MG880224; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableScreening a panel of selected compounds for inhibition of SOSV minigenome in Huh7 cells.Compounds were screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: A Human Lung Xenograft Mouse Model of Nipah Virus Infection

IntroductionNipah virus (NiV) is a member of the genus Henipavirus (family Paramyxoviridae) that causes severe and often lethal respiratory illness and encephalitis in humans resulting in case fatality rates of up to 92% [1]. The first human cases of NiV infection were identified during an outbreak of severe febrile encephalitis in Malaysia and Singapore in 1998–1999 [2], [3]. More recently, outbreaks have occurred in Bangladesh and India almost yearly since 2001 [1], [4]. NiV can cause Acute Lung Injury (ALI) in humans, and human-to-human transmission has been observed in recent outbreaks of NiV [5], [6], [7]. Data on the histopathology of the lungs of NiV cases is limited to necropsy findings in the respiratory tract of NiV infected cases and include hemorrhage, necrosis and inflammation in the epithelium of the small airways but not in the bronchi [8].Endothelial cells have been identified as a major target for NiV and most studies have focused on the role of the endothelium in NiV pathogenesis [9], [10], [11]. However very limited data is available on the host responses following NiV infection in the human lung. While the endothelium plays an important role in the terminal stages of NiV infection, the role of the respiratory epithelium in the early stages of infection is critical; however, it remains largely unexplored. The specific sites of henipavirus infection in the human respiratory tract are still unknown as well as the molecular mechanism by which these viruses cause disease in humans. We have previously shown that NiV can efficiently infect human respiratory epithelial cells from the trachea, bronchi and small airways resulting in the induction of key inflammatory mediators that have been implicated in leukocyte recruitment and ALI [12]. Similarly, in animal models (hamster, ferret and African green monkey), NiV can replicate to high titers in the lungs of these animals and cause acute and severe respiratory distress [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. Human xenograft mouse models have previously been used to study tissue development and cancer as well as the pathogenesis of infectious agents [18], [19], [20]. The majority of viral pathogenesis studies involving human xenograft mice focus on Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) or Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) in humanized mice that have been grafted with human hematopoietic stem cells and thymus [21], [22].Here we report the first characterization of NiV infection of the human respiratory tract using a human lung xenograft model to gain further insight into the mechanisms of NiV pathogenesis in humans. Our results showed that NiV replicates to high titers in the human lung and that infection results in the induction of a robust host response.ResultsHuman lung xenograft developmentSeverely immunodeficient NSG mice served as hosts to support the successful engraftment of human lung xenografts. We implanted 6 small fragments of human fetal lung in the dorsal subcutaneous space, 3 on each side of the spine. Following transplantation, human fetal lung xenografts typically increased in size by 2–10 fold over 3 months. The human fetal lung xenografts rapidly grafted and developed mature structures similar to those seen in adult lung (Figure 1A). These mature structures included bronchi that were partially surrounded by cartilage (Figure 1B), lined with ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium (Figure 1C) and surrounded by longitudinal elastic fibers. The bronchi divide into bronchioles and terminal bronchioles lined by cuboidal to flat epithelium (Figure 1D). The distal respiratory tract comprises of primitive alveolar spaces that are lined with both cells that have flat (type 1) and larger rounded (type 2) pneumocyte morphology (Figure 1E). The alveolar walls of xenografts were thicker than those of normal adult human lungs. The human graft was well vascularized with the presence of arteries, veins, and capillaries (Figure 1F). Finally, the expression patterns of ephrin B2, the receptor of NiV, was similar to that seen in normal human lung tissue [23] (Figure 1G) with expression on bronchial epithelium, alveolar cells and vasculatures (Figure 1H).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g001Figure 1Histological characterization of human lung xenografts.Normal (A) and xenograft (B–F) human lung sections were stained with H&E as described in Experimental Procedures. Following transplantation, human lung xenografts develop mature structures (B) similar to those seen in normal human lung (A)(10× magnification). Structures include pseudostratified ciliated epithelium (C) (40× magnification), terminal bronchioles (D) (10× magnification), alveolar spaces (E)(40× magnification) and pulmonary vasculature (F)(10× magnification). Ephrin B2 expression was observed in normal human lung (red) (G) and human lung xenograft tissues (yellow) (H) with similar distribution on epithelium (10× magnification). Br = bronchi, V = pulmonary vasculature, Av = alveoli, Ca = cartilage, Ci = cilia, Pe = pseudostratified epithelium, Ef = elastic fibers, Tb = terminal bronchiole.NiV replication in human lung xenograftsNatural NiV infection involves exposure to the virus through the respiratory epithelium. To mimic this route in human lung xenografts that lack air exchange, tissues were directly injected with NiV. Following direct intragraft injection of the 3 lung tissues on the left side (primary infection) within each mouse, NSG mice did not show any signs of morbidity or mortality during our observation period of 10 days. In addition, two non-grafted NSG mice that were challenged intradermally as controls, with the same dose as xenografts, did not develop any clinical signs. Primary infection of the human lung xenografts resulted in detection of infectious NiV as early as 1 day post infection (Figure 2A) and NiV replicated to high titers (107 TCID50/gram tissue) by day 3 post infection. NiV titers remained high until the end of the experiment at 10 days post infection. Importantly, high titers of NiV were also detected in the other 3 lung tissues (on the right side of each mouse) that were not initially infected through direct intragraft injection as early as 3 days post infection. This finding clearly demonstrates that the virus can spread from infected human lung grafts to uninfected grafts in the same mouse, most likely through viremia (secondary infection; Figure 2A). The presence of viremia was further supported by the observation that infectious NiV was detected, albeit at lower levels, in several mouse tissues including lung, brain, heart, spleen and kidney at various time points post infection (Figure 2B). In fact, viremia was detected in a blood sample of 1 animal on day 10 post infection in which a low level (300 TCID50/mL) of infectious NiV was determined (Table 1). Interestingly, virus was not detected in organs from non-grafted NSG mice that were challenged intradermally with the same dose (Table 1), suggesting the NSG mouse tissues are probably not intrinsically susceptible to NiV. In order to confirm that the human lung xenografts could be infected via the hematogenous route, we next challenged 2 lung-engrafted NSG mice with NiV via the IP route. The IP challenge with NiV in this model confirmed that infection resulted in detectable viremia in 1 animal with virus spreading to the human lung xenografts in both, replicating to high titers and resulting in histopathological changes similar to those observed with intragraft challenge (Table 1). Together, these data suggest that following intragraft infection, the human lung is highly susceptible to NiV infection and results in viremia and subsequent spread to other organs in the absence of disease.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g002Figure 2Nipah virus replication in human lung xenografts.Virus replication was determined in human lung (A) and mouse (B) tissues at days 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 post infection by virus titration. Titers were determined in human lung following primary (direct injection) or secondary (infection due to viremia). Samples from three animals were assayed and analyzed and the mean titers were calculated as TCID50/gram tissue. The error bars represent the standard deviation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.t001Table 1Summary of virological and histological findings in human lung graft, mouse tissues and blood following Nipah virus challenge.Route of infectionHuman lungMouse tissue
Infectious Virus

Viral Antigen

Histopathology

Infectious Virus

Viral Antigen

Histopathology

Blood

Direct (n = 15; Primary)
+++++++++
Indirect (n = 9; Secondary)
+++++++++++; starting 5DPI in lung−+
IP
*
(n = 2)
+++++++++++; in lung−+
SC
#
(n = 2)
N/AN/AN/A−−−−N/A = Not applicable. Direct = injection into the graft, resulting in primary infection; Indirect = secondary infection resulting from virus dissemination from the direct infected lung graft. IP = Intraperitoneal challenge. SC = Subcutaneous challenge. Infectious virus was determined in human lung and mouse tiisues and whole blood by TCID50% as described in Materials & Methods. Viral antigen was detected with an anti N antibody as described in Materials & Methods. Histopathology is based on H&E stained lung sections described in Materials & Methods.* = data available on day 10 post infection only.# = for control NSG mice only.+++ = high virus titer/intense immunostaining/extensive histopathological changes. + = low virus titer/low intensity immunostaining, − = not detected.NiV induced histopathology in human lung xenograftsIn order to study the histopathological changes associated with NiV infection in the human lung, tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). No gross pathologic lesions were observed in the human lung grafts. Since NSG mice exhibit multiple defects in innate and adaptive immunity [24], NiV infection in human lung grafts did not result in significant inflammation. Histopathological changes in the human lung tissues following NiV infection were independent of the route of infection (intragraft, indirect or intraperitoneal) and included small focal areas with syncytia and necrosis as early as day 3 pi (Figure 3A). These areas rapidly expanded to large areas with hemorrhages and significant loss of architecture of the small airways by day 10 pi (Figure 3B). The main histopathological features of NiV infection in these tissues were the characteristic syncytia formation (Figure 3C) and areas of necrosis (Figure 3D). Syncytia formation could be observed in bronchial epithelium (Figure 3C), alveolar epithelium (Figure 3E) and vascular endothelium (Figure 3F). In addition, fibrinoid necrosis was observed in some of the vasculature as well as recruitment of granulocytes (Figure 3F). In agreement with the absence of clinical signs, NiV infection did not result in histopathological changes in any visceral mouse tissue (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g003Figure 3Histopathological changes during Nipah virus infection in human lung xenografts.Human lung sections were stained with H&E as described in Experimental Procedures. (A) Human lung with focal areas of necrosis and syncytia formation (black arrow) on day 3 post infection (10× magnification). (B) Human lung with extensive areas of necrosis, syncytia formation and loss of architecture on day 10 post infection (10× magnification). (C) Bronchi with syncytia formation (*) on day 3 post infection (20× magnification). (D) Loss of alveolar architecture and areas of necrosis (black arrow) on day 10 post infection (20× magnification). (E) Alveolar space with syncytial formation (*) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (F) Pulmonary vasculature with syncytial formation (*) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification), fibrinoid necrosis of the intima, and influx of granulocytes (black arrowhead). Data are representative from 6 tissues per animal, 3 animals per time point.NiV tropism in human lung xenograftsIn order to identify the cells targeted by NiV in the human lung, viral nucleocapsid protein (N) expression in human lung grafts was examined with immunohistochemistry. Expression of NiV N coincided with the focal areas of histopathological changes on day 3 pi and showed intense staining (Figure 4A). By day 10, widespread expression of NiV N was observed throughout the human lung tissues (Figure 4B). NiV primarily targeted the respiratory epithelium of the bronchi and bronchioles, interstitial mesenchymal cells (Figure 4C), and the small airways (Figure 4D). Cells targeted in the small airways were primarily cuboidal, which is consistent with type-2 pneumocyte morphology, although cells with type-1 pneumocyte morphology also showed reactivity. In addition to the respiratory epithelium, NiV replication also involved the vasculature (Figure 4E). In agreement with the observation that low levels of infectious virus were detectable in several mouse tissues, small focal areas of viral antigen primarily focused in small airway epithelium could be detected in mouse lungs (Figure 4F) but not in other organs tested (Table 1). Tropism of viral antigen in mouse lung was similar between tissues infected by direct injection or following IP challenge (data not shown).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g004Figure 4Nipah virus tropism in human lung xenografts.Lung sections were stained by immunohistochemical (IHC) detection of Nipah virus nucleoprotein as described in Experimental Procedures. An overview of viral antigen distribution is shown on day 3 (A) and day 10(B) post infection (10× magnification). (C) Bronchial epithelium positive for NiV antigen in a syncytium (black arrow) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (D) Alveolar space with NiV positive cell, primarily cuboidal morphology on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (E) Pulmonary vasculature positive for NiV antigen on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (F) Small focal area in mouse lung tissue positive for NiV antigen (red) on day 10 post infection (10× magnification)(nuclei in blue). Br = bronchi, V = pulmonary vasculature. T2 = Type 2 pneumocyte. Data are representative from 3 animals per time point.Although focal areas were generally not centered around vessels (Figure 5A) during the early stages of infection, when NiV infection involved the vasculature, CD31-positive endothelial cells were a specific target of infection (Figure 5B). Similar findings were observed in animals challenged via the IP route (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g005Figure 5Cell tropism of Nipah virus in human lung xenografts.Lung sections were stained by immunofluorescent detection of Nipah virus nucleoprotein (red), CD31 (green) and nucleus (blue) as described in Experimental Procedures. (A) Human lung showing focal area of Nipah virus distinct from pulmonary vasculature on day 3 post infection (10× magnification). (B) CD31 positive endothelium of pulmonary vasculature is positive for Nipah virus antigen (40× magnification). Data are representative from 3 animals per time point.Inflammatory responses during NiV infectionIn order to elucidate the host responses following NiV infection in the human lung, the expression of several cytokines and chemokines was determined in homogenates of human lung xenografts following direct infection with NiV (Figure 6). Since human immune cells were absent in this model, any expression of human cytokines or chemokines was primarily the result from NiV infection of human epithelial and endothelial cells. NiV infection in human lung resulted in the expression of several cytokines/chemokines, including eotaxin-1, G-CSF, GM-CSF, TNFα, VEGF, IP-10, IL-1β and IL-6 starting by day 5 pi (Figure 6). Expression of GM-CSF, TNFα, IP10 and IL-1β peaked on day 5 post infection and gradually declined over time. IL-6 and eotaxin-1 expression peaked at day 7 pi, whereas G-CSF initially peaked on day 5 but remained high throughout infection. Interestingly, VEGF expression continued to increase over time concomitant with the increased hemorrhaging and remodeling of the lung. The cytokine and chemokines profiles were similar between lung xenografts following primary (direct) or secondary (indirect) infection (data not shown).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g006Figure 6Cytokine levels in Nipah virus infected human lung xenografts.The concentrations of cytokines were determined in lung homogenates of human lung xenografts following direct infection with NiV as described in the Experimental Procedures. Concentrations are expressed as picogram (pg) cytokine per gram lung tissue. The error bars represent the standard deviation.DiscussionNipah virus is an emerging zoonotic virus that can cause severe respiratory distress and encephalitis in humans [1]. Despite intensive studies in vitro and in animal models, little is known about the mechanisms governing the development of NiV-related respiratory disease in humans; this is due to difficulties in obtaining human samples where the disease is endemic. To address this important limitation, the goal of the present study was to characterize a novel human lung xenograft model to study the pathogenesis of NiV infection in human lung in vivo.Studies on the molecular mechanisms of NiV-mediated pathogenesis have been hampered by the lack of biologically relevant in vitro models for studying the initial host responses to NiV infection in the human lung [7], [13], [15]. To fill this gap, we recently showed that NiV can efficiently replicate in primary epithelial cells from the human respiratory tract [12]. While this is an attractive model to study the early steps of NiV entry in the host, it lacks the complexity of the microenvironment in the lung. In the current model, we show that human fetal lung tissues grafted on an immunocompromised mouse develop into more mature human lung tissues within 3 months after implantation. Transplanted lung tissues rapidly vascularized and developed bronchioles, lined with columnar epithelium, and alveolar-like spaces closely resembling those seen in normal human lung tissue.The prototype strain of NiV (Malaysia) was used in this study. While the outbreaks in Malaysia and Singapore have primarily been associated with the development of severe febrile encephalitis with a case fatality rate of 38%, respiratory symptoms were observed (40% of lethal cases) [8]. Interestingly, the more recent outbreaks in Bangladesh and India are associated with a higher prevalence of respiratory disease as well as a significantly higher case fatality rate of 67% to 92% [1], [6]. It is currently unknown whether differences in respiratory involvement are due to genetic difference between the Malaysia and Bangladesh strains of NiV or whether confounding factors are involved, however both NiV strains can replicate efficiently and cause respiratory distress in animals [25], [26]. In addition, no histopathological data is available for human cases of the Bangladesh strain of NiV; therefore, the Malaysia strain was used in this study to allow for comparisons of histopathology and viral tropism. In humans, vasculitis and fibrinoid necrosis in the lungs was observed in the majority of fatal cases of NiV infection [8]. Multinucleated giant cells were occasionally observed in alveolar spaces and showed prominent immunostaining for viral antigen, along with alveolar hemorrhage, edema and pneumonia. Bronchial epithelium rarely showed histopathological changes. Nipah viral antigen could also be observed in the vasculature and rarely in bronchiolar epithelium [8]. We believe that the lack of viral antigen in the bronchial epithelium in fatal human cases is most likely due to timing of sampling. We previously showed, using a hamster model, that the bronchial epithelium is initially targeted by NiV early on during infection followed by rapid spread to the interstitium and involvement of pulmonary vessels [13].In the present model, NiV replicated to high titers following intragraft injection, and virus was found to primarily replicate in respiratory epithelium of the bronchi and small airways. This is consistent with our previous finding that human respiratory epithelium is highly susceptible to NiV infection [12]. In animal models, the lung is the primary target organ of NiV infection following intranasal challenge [13], [14]. In addition to the respiratory epithelium, NiV replication was also found in the endothelium, a type of cell that has been identified as an important target for NiV [11]. The infection of the vascular system is thought to occur in the late stages of disease and lead to systemic spread of these viruses to other organs, including brain and kidney [13], [27]. In our model, systemic spread of the virus was indicated by similar titers and replication kinetics of NiV in directly inoculated lung grafts and grafts not directly injected with virus. This suggests that following infection of the lung, NiV quickly becomes viremic and spreads to other organs. In addition, systemic infection through intraperitoneal injection with NiV also resulted in infection of the human lung grafts, thus confirming hematogenous spread of the virus.Interestingly, NiV infection in NSG mice engrafted with human lung tissues did not result in clinical signs despite evidence of replication in mouse organs, including lung and brain. Previous studies have shown that NiV infection in type I IFN receptor knock-out mice and aged mice is lethal [28], [29]. Aged mice have been shown to mount an aberrant IFN response [30]. While the NSG mice are immunocompromised, they can mount an IFN response, which seems sufficient to protect against lethal disease in our studies. Alternatively, it is possible that NSG mice are not susceptible to NiV and that the virus measured in mouse organs is only found in the blood. Also, the small foci of viral antigen detected in mouse lungs could correspond to emboli of infected human cells that slough off from the infected grafts.Several cytokines and especially IL-6, IP-10 and VEGF were upregulated during NiV infection in the human lung. Interestingly, the levels of cytokines observed in our xenograft lung model are similar to those observed in the lungs of fatal cases of influenza virus A (H1N1) [31]. Upregulation of inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α, IP-10, IL-1β and IL-6 in the lungs was previously shown to play a role in the pathogenesis of lethal NiV in hamsters [13], as well as in the development of ALI with other respiratory virus infections, including SARS-CoV and influenza virus (H5N1) [30], [32], [33]. VEGF has an important role in ALI pathogenesis by acting as a growth factor and increasing vascular permeability [34]. We previously showed that VEGF is expressed by human respiratory epithelial cells during NiV infection [12]. This suggests that VEGF may be partly responsible for the increased pulmonary hemorrhage, endothelial destruction, and alveolar remodeling in an emphysema-like phenotype as observed in our model. Since these inflammatory mediators also play an important role in the recruitment of immune cell, our data suggests that inflammation could be observed in this model when human immune cells are present.In addition to implanting human lung xenografts, the NSG mice have been used to engraft the human hematopoietic system to study hematopoiesis, immunity, inflammatory disease and human-specific pathogens. This humanized NSG mouse model routinely contains >25% human CD45+ cells in the peripheral blood 12 weeks post engraftment of hematopoietic stem cells [35]. Many of the inflammatory mediators expressed in the current study play an important role in immune cell recruitment [36], [37]. The ability to engraft human immune cells will allow us to study the effect of these mediators on specific immune cells populations. Future studies will make use of the fully humanized lung xenograft model to study the role of the inflammatory response in the pathogenesis of the different henipavirus strains in the human lung.In conclusion, these data confirm that the human lung is highly susceptible to NiV infection. NiV is capable of replicating to high titers in the human lung and targets both respiratory epithelium and endothelium. Infection results in the characteristic syncytial formation and extensive lung damage. Key inflammatory mediators such as IL-6, IP-10, G-CSF and GM-CSF are expressed during infection. This model will allow for more detailed studies of the pathogenesis of respiratory disease caused by henipavirus infection. Furthermore, these data point to several inflammatory mediators that potentially play critical roles in henipavirus pathogenesis, which may be valuable as candidates for future studies of the mechanism of henipavirus pathogenesis and as potential targets for treatment.Materials and MethodsEthics statementApproval for animal experiments was obtained from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, University of Texas Medical Branch (protocol number 0905041). Animal work was performed by certified staff in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) approved facility. Animal housing, care and experimental protocols were in accordance with NIH guidelines of the Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare. Discarded tissue from deceased human fetuses was obtained via a non-profit partner (Advanced Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA) as approved under exemption 4 in the HHS regulations (45 CFR Part 46). Need for informed consent was waived by the UTMB Institutional Review Board.Viruses and cellsNiV (Malaysia strain) was kindly provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States. The virus were propagated on Vero cells in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT), L-glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified CO2 incubator (5%). All infectious work was performed in a class II biological safety cabinet in a biosafety level 4 laboratory (BSL4) at the Galveston National Laboratory.Human lung xenograft mouse modelNOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice, also known as NOD/SCID/γcnull or NSG mice (Jackson Laboratories), 3–5 weeks of age, were housed in a sterile microisolator environment. Mice were engrafted with human lung tissue (Advanced Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA). Six fragments of human fetal lung from the same donor (15–19 weeks of age) were sutured to muscle fascia in the dorsal subcutaneous space in each mouse (∼0.5 cm from the spine, three on each side). Animals received appropriate post-surgery treatment including antibiotics and analgesics.Animal infectionTwelve weeks post-engraftment, animals were transferred to an ABSL-4 facility. Prior to infection, animals were anesthetized by chamber induction (5 Liters/min 100% O2 and 3–5% isoflurane). Three of the six lung tissues were inoculated via intragraft injection of 105 TCID50 NiV in a 50 µl volume. Animals were monitored daily for weight loss and clinical signs. Groups of 3 animals were euthanized on days 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 post infection, and samples for virus isolation and histological examination were procured from whole blood (EDTA vacutainer), human lung tissues, and mouse liver, spleen, kidney, lung, heart and brain. In a separate experiment, 2 animals were injected via the intraperitoneal route with 105 TCID50 NiV and euthanized 10 days post infection. Control groups were NSG mice without a lung xenograft and challenged via the intradermal route with 105 TCID50 NiV on the back of the mouse at the same location the human lung xenografts would be.Virus titrationsWhole blood was tested for presence of infectious virus by 10-fold diltutions as described below. Tissue samples were weighed and homogenized in 10 equivalent volumes of DMEM to generate a 10% solution. The solution was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm under aerosol containment in a table top centrifuge for 5 min to pellet insoluble parts. Virus titration was performed using a TCID50 assay on 96-well plates (1×104 Vero cells per well) with 100 µL inocula (cleared homogenate or whole blood) from 10-fold serial dilutions. Plates were incubated for 3 days at 37°C, and wells were scored for cytopathic effect (CPE). Virus concentrations were calculated as TCID50 per gram of tissue.Histopathology and immunohistochemistryAll tissue samples were immersion-fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for at least 7 days under BSL4 conditions. Prior to removal from the BSL4 laboratory, formalin was changed and specimens were processed under BSL2 conditions by conventional methods, either embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 µm thickness and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or embedded in Tissue Tek and frozen sections cut at 3–8 µm thickness and used for immunofluorescent (IF) staining. Tissues for immunohistochemistry (IHC) were stained as previously described using a rabbit anti-NiV-nucleoprotein (N) antibody (kindly provided by Dr. C. Broder, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD) [13]. Tissues for IF were stained with a rabbit anti-NiV-N antibody, a biotinylated anti-CD31 (eBioscience), anti-collagen IV labeled with Alexa 647 (eBioscience), anti ephrin B2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or ephrin B3 (R&D Systems) and Hoechst for nuclear staining. NiV N in mouse tissue could only be detected following immunofluorescent staining, likely due to the limit of detection by conventional IHC. An Alexa 546 labeled secondary antibody (Life Technologies) was used for detection of the anti NiV N antibody as well as anti ephrin B2 and B3 antibodies and an Alexa 488 conjugated streptavidin (R&D Systems) was used for detection of the anti-CD31 antibody.Milliplex analysisCytokine/chemokine concentrations in the homogenates of NiV infected human lung tissues were determined using a Milliplex Human Cytokine PREMIXED 28 Plex Immunoassay Kit (Millipore, Billerica, USA). Prior analysis, samples were inactivated on dry ice by gamma-radiation (5 MRad). The assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. The concentration of the following 28 cytokines were determined using the Bio-Plex 200 system (BioRad): Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF), Granulocyte-Colony Stimulating Factor (G-CSF), Granulocyte Macrophage-Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF), interferon (IFN)-α2, IFNγ, Interleukin (IL)-1α, IL-1ß, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12(p40), IL-12(p70), IL-13, IL-15, IL-17A, chemokine ligand 3-like 1 (CCL3L1 or MIP-1α), chemokine ligand 4 (CCL4 or MIP-1ß), chemokine ligand 10 (IP-10 or CXCL10), chemokine ligand 11 (CCL11 or Eotaxin-1), chemokine ligand 13 (CCL13 or MCP-1), Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF-α), Lymphotoxin alpha (TNFß) and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF).


Title: Foodborne Transmission of Nipah Virus in Syrian Hamsters

IntroductionNipah virus first emerged in 1998 during a large outbreak of encephalitis and respiratory disease in Malaysia and Singapore, causing 276 cases of encephalitis with 106 fatalities [1]. Since 2001, outbreaks of Nipah virus have occurred almost every year in Bangladesh with a strikingly high case-fatality rate of up to 90% [2], with 24 cases of Nipah virus occurring to date in 2013 [3]. The recurrent outbreaks of Nipah virus in Bangladesh have been epidemiologically associated with the consumption of date palm sap, which has led to the hypothesis that Nipah virus zoonosis is a result of drinking date palm sap contaminated by infected fruit bats [4], [5]. In Bangladesh, date palm sap is harvested at nighttime from October to March [6], which overlaps with the occurrence of Nipah virus outbreaks. Although to our knowledge Nipah virus has so far not been detected in date palm sap, human observation and analysis by infrared camera has shown that bats frequently drink from date palm sap during collection [7], [8]. Since bats can shed Nipah virus in their urine and saliva [9]–[12], it is thought that bats contaminate the date palm sap while drinking from the sap stream or date palm sap collection vessel.In addition to the initial zoonotic transmission, subsequent human-to-human transmission also plays an important role in the epidemiology of Nipah virus outbreaks in Bangladesh. It was estimated for the outbreaks in Bangladesh between 2001 and 2007 that approximately 50% of cases was the result of human-to-human transmission [13].Thus far, the epidemiological association between drinking date palm sap and Nipah virus infection has not been confirmed experimentally. Therefore, we set out to assess the ability of date palm sap to function as a vehicle for zoonotic transmission of Nipah virus using a well-established small animal model for Nipah virus pathogenesis and transmission, the Syrian hamster [14]–[16]. We showed that, upon drinking of artificial palm sap containing high doses of Nipah virus, hamsters became infected and developed neurological signs of disease. Moreover, hamsters infected through the drinking route transmitted Nipah virus to naïve hamsters via direct contact.ResultsStability of Nipah virus in artificial palm sapThe composition of palm sap was derived from a published report [17] and artificial palm sap was produced in the laboratory consisting of 13% sucrose and 0.21% BSA in water, pH 7.0. The stability of three different doses (103, 105 and 107 TCID50/ml) of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) in artificial palm sap was determined at 22°C. Of note, between October and March (the date palm sap harvesting season) the average temperature in Bangladesh fluctuates between 20°C and 28°C. No significant difference was detected between the slopes of the three lines (slope ± standard error: 0.001140±0.001026 for the 103 TCID50, 0.002115±0.0008557 for the 105 TCID50 and 0.0007124±0.001272 for the 107 TCID50). In addition, the slopes of the three groups were also not significantly different from zero (p = 0.2812 for the 103 TCID50, p = 0.0950 for the 105 TCID50, p = 0.5823 for the 107 TCID50). Thus, no significant reduction in Nipah virus infectious titer was observed at any of the dilutions for at least 8 days at 22°C (Fig. 1). At 28°C, Nipah virus titers decreased only 5–10 fold during the eight day incubation period (Fig. S1A), thus indicating preservation of Nipah virus viability in date palm sap at both temperatures.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.g001Figure 1Stability of Nipah virus in artificial palm sap at 22°C.Nipah virus was diluted to 107 (black triangles), 105 (black squares) and 103 (black circles) TCID50/ml in artificial palm sap and left at 22°C for 8 days. Samples were taken at the indicated time points and virus titer in those samples was determined by titration on Vero C1008 cells. The stability data were analyzed using the linear regression model in the GraphPad prism 6 software package. The regression line (solid) is plotted together with the 95% confidence interval (dotted line).Since heating of date palm sap before consumption has been suggested as a means of inactivating Nipah virus and thereby preventing Nipah virus infection, we tested the stability of Nipah virus in artificial palm sap at 70°C and 100°C. At both temperatures, virus titers decreased about 4 log in the first 5 minutes (Fig. S1B). However, incubation of Nipah virus in artificial palm sap at 70°C for 1 hour did not inactivate all infectious virus. In contrast, incubation at 100°C for more than 15 minutes completely inactivated Nipah virus.Esophageal inoculation of Syrian hamstersTo assess the ability of Nipah virus to establish an infection upon ingestion of virus, hamsters were inoculated esophageally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066). Eight hamsters were monitored daily for signs of disease for up to 28 days post inoculation (dpi). One hamster succumbed to respiratory disease on 6 dpi; a second hamster was euthanized on 12 dpi (Fig. 2A). Two out of the six surviving hamsters seroconverted by 28 dpi, indicating that 4 out of 8 hamsters were likely infected with Nipah virus after esophageal inoculation. For comparison, a group of hamsters was inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus. All eight intranasally inoculated animals were euthanized due to severe disease signs between 5 and 14 dpi (Fig. 2A).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.g002Figure 2Survival of Syrian hamsters after inoculation with Nipah virus via different routes.Groups of eight hamsters were inoculated with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) intranasally (purple line) or esophageally (green line) (A) or via drinking of 107 (blue line) or 5×108 TCID50 (red line) of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) (B). The percentage of animals surviving over time is shown.On 2, 4, and 8 dpi, groups of 4 hamsters inoculated esophageally or intranasally were euthanized and 17 tissues were collected from each hamster for virus titration. In addition, whole blood was collected for analysis of the presence of viral RNA by qRT-PCR. For both inoculation routes, virus was mainly detected in nasal turbinates, trachea and lungs; virus in non-respiratory tissues was observed mostly in animals with evidence of viremia. In the esophageally inoculated hamsters, virus was detected on 2 dpi in 2 out of 4 hamsters (Fig. 3 & Table S1), with viremia detected by qRT-PCR in one of the two remaining hamsters. On 4 dpi, virus was detected in only one hamster, including a low amount of virus in the esophagus of this animal. By 8 dpi, virus could no longer be detected in tissues or blood. On 2 and 4 dpi, virus was detected in respiratory tissues of all intranasally inoculated animals; on 8 dpi, virus could not be detected in the tissues of all three remaining animals, although viremia was detected by RT-PCR in one animal at this time-point (Fig. 3 and Table S1). Histopathological examination did not reveal evidence of virus replication in intestinal tissues in hamsters that were inoculated esophageally (Table S2).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.g003Figure 3Virus titers in respiratory tissues of hamsters inoculated with Nipah virus.Samples of nasal turbinates (NT; black circles), trachea (black squares) and lungs (black triangles) were collected on 2, 4 and 8 dpi from four animals inoculated intranasally (A) or esophageally (B) with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) or with 5×108 TCID50 via drinking (C) and virus titers were determined by titration on Vero C1008 cells. Each symbol represents one animal; horizontal line indicates geometric mean; error bars indicate standard deviation.Nipah virus infection through virus-containing palm sapNext, the ability of Nipah virus to infect Syrian hamsters via drinking of virus-containing artificial palm sap was assessed. Eight animals were singly housed and their drinking water was replaced with 30 ml artificial palm sap containing 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus; animals drank the artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus in approximately 2 days. Animals were assessed for signs of disease and survival for up to 28 days. On 10 and 11 days after supplying the hamsters with artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus, one hamster was euthanized due to neurological signs of disease (Fig. 2B). The remaining six hamsters did not show signs of disease until the end of the experiment at day 28; however, two out of these six hamsters seroconverted, indicating that these animals were likely infected with Nipah virus. Tissues from 4 animals collected on 2 and 4 days after supplying the hamsters with artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus were negative in virus titration and viremia could not be detected by qRT-PCR (Table S1). On day 8, a low amount of virus was detected in the kidney of 1 animal; all other tissues of this hamster and all tissues of three other hamsters were negative (Table S1).Since human-to-human transmission plays an important role in Nipah virus outbreaks in Bangladesh and virus shedding is a prerequisite for transmission, we collected nasal, oropharyngeal, urogenital and rectal swabs daily for nine days after supplying the hamsters with artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus and analyzed these for the presence of Nipah virus RNA. Nipah virus RNA could be detected in only six of the collected swabs; all PCR-positive swabs were oropharyngeal swabs. One of the seroconverted hamsters had a positive swab on 4 and 6 days after supplying it with artificial palm sap; one of the hamsters that was euthanized with neurological signs had positive oropharyngeal swabs on days 5, 6 and 7 after inoculation (data not shown), likely indicating an active infection. In comparison, all intranasally inoculated hamsters shed virus from the nose for up to 7 days and from the throat up to 11 dpi (Fig. 4).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.g004Figure 4Virus shedding in Syrian hamsters inoculated with Nipah virus via different routes.Groups of eight hamsters were inoculated with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) intranasally (red bars) or esophageally (blue bars) and with 5×108 TCID50 via drinking (green bars) and nasal (A), pharyngeal (B), urogenital (C) and rectal (D) swabs were collected daily until 12 dpi. Viral load in the swabs was determined as TCID50 equivalents by real-time RT-PCR. TCID50 equivalents were extrapolated from standard curves generated by adding dilutions of RNA extracted from a Nipah virus stock with a known virus titer in parallel to each run. Geometric mean viral loads are displayed; error bars indicate standard deviation.Increased virus shedding upon exposure to a higher dose of Nipah virusTo determine whether virus shedding increased when animals were supplied with a higher dose of Nipah virus in artificial palm sap, we repeated the drinking experiment with 5×108 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) in artificial palm sap. Nasal, oropharyngeal, urogenital and rectal swabs were collected up to 11 days after supplying the hamsters with artificial palm sap. All eight tested hamsters shed virus for several days, mainly via the oropharynx and, at later time points, the intestinal tract (Fig. 4).Between 10 and 18 days after supplying the hamsters with artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus, 5 hamsters had to be euthanized due to the severity of disease; with neurological signs apparent in 4 out of 5 hamsters (Fig. 2B). The three remaining hamsters survived until the end of the experiment at day 28; 2 out of three survivors had seroconverted at that time, indicating that 7 of 8 hamsters likely became infected after drinking artificial palm sap containing a high dose of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066). Histopathological examination of tissues collected from hamsters euthanized due to severity of disease revealed signs of bronchointerstitial pneumonia with syncytial cells, fibrin and edema in all 5 hamsters; 2 out of 5 hamsters demonstrated signs of subacute meningitis (Fig. 5 and Table S2).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.g005Figure 5Immunohistochemical analysis of tissues collected from a Syrian hamster inoculated with Nipah virus via drinking.Lungs, olfactory bulb and cerebellum were collected from a hamster inoculated with 5×108 TCID50 of Nipah virus via drinking on 8 dpi when the animal was euthanized with neurological signs of diseases. Tissues were stained with a polyclonal antibody against Nipah virus nucleoprotein, which is visible as a red-brown staining.On day 2 after supplying the hamsters with artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus, virus could only be detected in the nasal turbinates of one out of 4 tested hamsters; all other tested tissues were negative in virus titration and whole blood was negative by RT-PCR (Fig. 3 and Table S1). On day 4, infectious virus was detected in respiratory tissues of 3 out of 4 tested hamsters, but no viral RNA was detected in blood. On day 8, infectious virus was detected in tissues of two out of four hamsters (Fig. 3 and Table S1). Again, histopathological examination of tissues did not implicate involvement of the intestinal tract in virus replication or initiation of infection (Table S2).Visualization of deposition of virus in the respiratory tract upon inoculationTo understand how the different inoculation routes could result in virus replication in the lower respiratory tract, we fluorescently labeled Nipah virus and inoculated hamsters with 107 TCID50 of this labeled virus intranasally, esophageally or via drinking. After 10 minutes, hamsters were euthanized and the lungs and head prepared for ex vivo imaging, to visualize where the inoculum was deposited. In agreement with our tissue distribution data, a large proportion of virus was deposited in the lungs, regardless of whether animals were inoculated intranasally, esophageally or via drinking (Fig. 6). Of note, virus deposition in the stomach could not be assessed due to background fluorescence in this organ. Deposition of virus in the lungs upon esophageal inoculation was likely a result of trace inoculum entering the trachea when the gavage needle was inserted or removed; drinking may result in the generation of aerosols and/or small droplets that were subsequently deposited in the lungs.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.g006Figure 6Deposition of virus in the respiratory tract of Syrian hamsters after inoculation with Nipah virus.Nipah virus was purified and fluorescently labeled with Alexa Fluor 680; three hamsters were inoculated intranasally, esophageally or via drinking with 107 TCID50 of labeled virus; two hamsters were not inoculated (mock). The head and respiratory tract were collected and imaged in an IVIS Spectrum imager. Scale bar indicates average radiant efficiency. Graph bar indicates average radiant efficiency in the head (top) and lungs (bottom) averaged from 3 animals per inoculation route and 2 animals for mock; error bars indicate standard error of the mean.Nipah virus transmission upon drinking of palm sap containing Nipah virusWe have recently shown that Nipah virus (strain Malaysia) is transmitted between Syrian hamsters primarily through direct contact [14]. We have also determined the transmission route of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066). Groups of eight hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) and singly housed to examine transmission via fomites, direct contact or aerosols as described previously [14]. At 1 dpi, a naïve hamster was added to each cage. Inoculated and naïve hamsters were swabbed daily. At 28 dpi all naïve hamsters were euthanized and sera were tested for antibodies to Nipah virus. None of the hamsters exposed through fomites or aerosols seroconverted (Fig. 7). Two out of 8 hamsters exposed via direct contact seroconverted (Fig. 7), indicating that transmission of Nipah virus (strain Malaysia) and Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) occurs via a similar route and at a similar rate [14].10.1371/journal.ppat.1004001.g007Figure 7Transmission of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) in Syrian hamsters.Shedding of Nipah virus in inoculated (left panels) and naïve (right panels) animals in fomite, contact and aerosol transmission. Hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) or via drinking of 5×108 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) in artificial palm sap; nasal (white bars) and pharyngeal (black bars) swabs were collected daily. Seroconversion in naïve hamsters at 28 dpi as determined by ELISA is indicated on the right as the number of seroconverted hamsters/total number of exposed hamsters. Viral load in the swabs was determined as TCID50 equivalents by real-time RT-PCR. TCID50 equivalents were extrapolated from standard curves generated by adding dilutions of RNA extracted from a Nipah virus stock with a known virus titer in parallel to each run. Geometric mean viral loads are displayed; error bars indicate standard deviation.Next, we set out to determine if hamsters infected with Nipah virus through drinking of artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus could transmit the virus to naïve hamsters via direct contact. Of note, a larger number of animals was used in this experiment since the hamsters infected with Nipah virus through drinking of artificial palm sap shed a lower amount of virus than intranasally inoculated hamsters (Fig. 4) and transmission was therefore expected to be less efficient. Twenty-four hamsters were supplied with 30 ml of artificial palm sap containing 5×108 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066). After two days, when the hamsters had drunk the artificial palm sap, drinking bottles were replaced with bottles containing water and a naïve hamster was added to each cage. At 28 dpi the naïve hamsters were euthanized and sera were collected. Out of 24 naïve hamsters, 2 hamsters showed presence of antibodies directed against Nipah virus in ELISA, likely indicating that Nipah virus was transmitted to these hamsters.DiscussionEpidemiological investigations in Bangladesh suggest that Nipah virus is introduced into the human population via the consumption of raw date palm sap. This study provides the first experimental evidence for the transmission of Nipah virus via the consumption of palm sap containing Nipah virus, resulting in neurological signs of disease in Syrian hamsters. Although these findings do not directly demonstrate that date palm sap contaminated with Nipah virus by bats is the origin of Nipah virus outbreaks in Bangladesh, they provide experimental support for the current hypothesis, based on epidemiological observations, of the zoonotic introduction of Nipah virus via contaminated date palm sap.Nipah virus was very stable in artificial palm sap, likely due to its neutral pH and high sugar content. Nipah virus was preserved much better in artificial palm sap than on the surface of fruit or in fruit juice [18]. In fruit bats, Nipah virus is predominantly shed via urine [11], [19], [20]. Although bat urine itself may not preserve Nipah virus very well [18], the urine would be quickly diluted in the palm sap. Thus, palm sap is likely a very suitable carrier for foodborne transmission of Nipah virus. The rapid decrease in virus titer upon heat treatment of Nipah virus-containing palm sap suggests that this might reduce the risk of Nipah virus transmission to humans.Based on virus distribution in tissues of infected hamsters and the presence of vRNA mainly in throat swabs rather than urogenital or rectal swabs, the porte d'entrée for the initial Nipah virus infection upon drinking of artificial palm sap containing Nipah virus was the respiratory tract rather than the intestinal tract. This finding was further strengthened using fluorescently labeled Nipah virus to visualize the deposition of virus upon inoculation via the nose, gavage or upon drinking. These experiments clearly showed that during drinking the virus does not only end up in the intestinal tract but some of the volume is also deposited in the lungs, thereby explaining the replication of virus in respiratory tissues. However, the main disease manifestation in hamsters infected through drinking was the development of neurological signs, suggesting that the animals became infected with a relatively low dose, despite the high amount of virus present in the artificial palm sap. Previous studies have shown that inoculation of hamsters with a low dose of Nipah virus results in neurological signs of disease, whereas a high dose results in respiratory disease [15], [21].In one of the hamsters infected with Nipah virus through drinking of palm sap, virus was detected by immunohistochemistry in the olfactory bulb, indicating that virus traveled from olfactory neurons in the nasal turbinates through the cribriform plate into the olfactory bulb and from there further into the central nervous system. Although this route of Nipah virus into the brain has been described before [22], [23], this is the first time it is described in animals without deliberate inoculation of the nasal cavity.Besides the ability of Nipah virus to infect hamsters via the drinking route, we showed here that Syrian hamsters infected with Nipah virus through drinking of palm sap containing Nipah virus can transmit the virus through direct contact with naïve hamsters. Transmission upon drinking of Nipah virus-containing artificial palm sap was less efficient than upon intranasal inoculation with Nipah (strain Bangladesh/200401066), likely as a result of decreased virus shedding upon infection through drinking. Within the transmission model for Nipah virus in Syrian hamsters no differences were observed in transmission route or efficiency between the Malaysian [14] and a virus isolate from Bangladesh. Although experimental infection of ferrets suggested that there is increased oral shedding with a Nipah virus isolate from Bangladesh as compared to a virus isolate from Malaysia, this study did not include transmission experiments [24]. Thus it is currently not clear whether the differences in virus shedding observed in the ferret model result in differences in transmission efficiency. Different Nipah virus isolates from several Nipah virus outbreaks in Bangladesh would have to be tested in the different animal models to assess the transmission efficiency of this virus properly.Prophylactic or therapeutic intervention measures are currently not available to prevent, treat or contain zoonotic transmission of Nipah virus. Moreover, medical interventions might be difficult to implement in rural outbreak areas. Therefore, our best hope to prevent or intervene in future outbreaks of Nipah virus lies in the potential to efficiently block zoonotic and human-to-human transmission and thereby spread of the outbreak. Currently, efforts are underway in Bangladesh to prevent zoonotic transmission of Nipah virus from fruit bats to people by restricting access of bats to date palm collection pots and thereby preventing contamination of the date palm sap with Nipah virus [8], [25]. The data presented here stress the importance of these efforts in Bangladesh in the prevention of Nipah virus outbreaks.Materials and MethodsEthics statementAll animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Rocky Mountain Laboratories, and performed following the guidelines of the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International (AAALAC) by certified staff in an AAALAC-approved facility.Virus and cellsNipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) was kindly provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States. This strain (SPBLOG# 200401066) was isolated from a throat swab collected from patient #3001 on January 22 2004 in Bangladesh. This patient was a 10-year old male who developed altered mental status on January 21 and cough and breathing difficulties later that day. The patient was admitted to Goalando Hospital, Bangladesh, on January 22. None of the patient's contacts developed Nipah virus infection; the patient is presumed to have been infected via direct spillover from the bat reservoir (dr. Steve Luby, personal communication). The virus isolate was propagated in Vero C1008 cells in DMEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1 mM L-glutamine (Lonza), 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco). For fluorescent labelling of virus, Nipah virus-containing cell supernatant was cleared by low speed centrifugation and virus was pelleted by spinning 2 hours at 21000 rpm in the ultracentrifuge. The pellet was resuspended in 1 ml PBS and loaded onto a 20%–60% (w/w) sucrose gradient and centrifuged overnight at 39000 rpm. The virus fraction was collected and pelleted once again by centrifuging 2 hours at 21000 rpm; the pellet was resuspended in 1 ml PBS. Purified Nipah virus particles were labeled using an Alexa Fluor 680 Protein Labeling Kit (Molecular Probes). Excess dye was removed by dialyzing against PBS.Artificial palm sapArtificial palm sap was prepared based on a literature report [17] and consisted of 13% sucrose (w/v) and 0.21% BSA in water. The pH of the artificial palm sap was 7 without any adjustments.Stability of Nipah virus in artificial palm sapNipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) was added to artificial palm sap at the desired concentration, aliquotted into 1 ml aliquots and incubated at 22°C or 28°C for up to eight days. The stability data were analyzed using the linear regression model in the GraphPad prism 6 software package. For inactivation of Nipah virus in artificial palm sap, Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) was added to artificial palm sap at 107 TCID50/ml, aliquotted into 1 ml aliquots and incubated at 70°C or 100°C for up to one hour.Animal experiment: Different inoculation routesFour groups of 40 6–8 week old female Syrian hamsters (HsdHantm:AURA, Harlan Laboratories) were inoculated with Nipah virus via different routes. One group received 107 TCID50 Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) via intranasal inoculation in a total volume of 80 µl. One group received 107 TCID50 Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh) via gavage in a total volume of 500 µl. The remaining two groups received 107 and 5×108 TCID50 Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066), respectively through drinking of artificial palm sap. Animals were housed singly and supplied with 30 ml artificial palm sap containing a total dose of 107 or 5×108 TCID50 Nipah virus instead of drinking water. When animals had drunk all artificial palm sap, in about 2 days, they were again supplied with drinking water. Nasal, oral, urogenital and rectal swabs were collected daily from eight hamsters inoculated via all four different routes. Swabs were collected in vials containing 1 ml DMEM supplemented with 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin. On days 2, 4, 8, 12 and 28 post inoculation 8 animals from each inoculation group were euthanized and blood, trachea, lungs, heart, liver, spleen, kidney, esophagus, stomach, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, colon (proximal and distal), bladder, brain and nasal turbinates were collected for virological (4 animals/time point) and histopathological (4 animals/time point) analysis. Hamsters used for histopathological analysis were anaesthetized using ketamine (80–100 mg/kg) and xylazine (7–10 mg/kg) and perfused with PBS containing 5 mM EDTA, followed by 4% paraformaldehyde. Tissues of interest were then further fixed according to BSL4 standard operating procedures for a minimum of 7 days in 10% neutral buffered formalin.Animal experiment: Ex vivo imagingTo visualize the deposition of virus in the hamster respiratory tract after inoculation, 3 hamsters per inoculation route were inoculated intranasally, esophageally and via drinking as described above with 107 TCID50 of fluorescently labeled Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066). To prevent fusion of virus particles with target cells, hamsters were euthanized ten minutes after inoculation and the respiratory tract was excised; ex vivo imaging was subsequently performed on the head and respiratory tract in an IVIS Spectrum imager (PerkinElmer). Images were acquired using an excitation wavelength of 675 nm with an emission scan at 720, 740, 760 and 780 nm at field of view B (6.6 cm) in auto-exposure mode with medium binning, f-stop 3. Following acquisition, images were unmixed in Living Image 4.2 with tissue autofluorescence subtracted. The resulting AF680 image was used for subsequent analysis. Rectangular Regions of Interest were drawn around the entire lung, trachea or nasal tract. The resulting average radiant efficiency was used to determine the quantity of labelled virus that was detected in the respiratory tract (combined trachea and lungs) or in the nasal tract (head).Animal experiment: Transmission routeTo determine the transmission route for Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) we used the recently described Syrian hamster transmission model [14]. For fomite transmission experiments, eight 6–8 week old female singly housed Syrian hamsters, housed in a plastic cage with wood shavings, a feeder and a water bottle, were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh) in a total volume of 80 µl. On day 4 post inoculation, hamsters were euthanized and a single naïve hamster was placed in each cage. For direct contact transmission experiments, eight 6–8 week old female singly housed Syrian hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) in a total volume of 80 µl. On day 1 post inoculation, a naïve hamster was added to each cage. For aerosol transmission experiments, eight 6–8 week old female Syrian hamsters were inoculated intranasally with 107 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) in a total volume of 80 µl and singly housed in specially designed aerosol transmission cages. On 1 dpi, a naïve hamster was placed on the opposite side of the inoculated hamster. The hamsters were separated by two stainless steel grids, allowing airflow from the inoculated to the naive hamster but preventing direct contact and fomite transmission. In all transmission experiments, nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained from inoculated and naïve hamsters daily and the bodyweight of naïve hamsters was determined. Upon signs of severe disease, inoculated and naïve hamsters were euthanized; remaining hamsters were euthanized four weeks post exposure.Animal experiment: Transmission after inoculation via drinkingTo determine whether Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) is transmitted via direct contact after infection through palm sap containing Nipah virus, 24 6–8 week old female singly housed Syrian hamsters were supplied with 30 ml artificial palm sap containing 5×108 TCID50 of Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) instead of drinking water. When animals had drunk all artificial palm sap they were again supplied with drinking water and a naïve hamster was added to each cage. Nasal and oropharyngeal swabs were obtained from inoculated and naïve hamsters daily and bodyweight of naïve hamsters was determined. On signs of severe disease, inoculated and naïve hamsters were euthanized; remaining hamsters were euthanized four weeks post exposure.Virus titrationsVirus titrations were performed by end-point titration in VeroC1008 cells. VeroC1008 cells were inoculated with tenfold serial dilutions of swab medium or tissue homogenates. One hour after inoculation, the inoculum was removed and replaced with 200 µl DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 1 mM L-glutamine (Lonza), 50 U/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco). Five days after inoculation, cytopathic effect (CPE) was scored and the TCID50 was calculated from 5 replicates by the method of Spearman-Karber. Tissue homogenates were prepared by adding 1 ml DMEM to the weighed tissue and homogenizing using a TissueLyzer II (Qiagen). Homogenates were centrifuged to clear the homogenate before inoculating cells.Histopathology and immunohistochemistryHistopathology and immunohistochemistry was performed on hamster tissues. Necropsies and tissue sampling were performed according to a standard protocol approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee. After fixation for 7 days in 10% neutral-buffered formalin and embedding in paraffin, tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and an immunohistochemical method using a rabbit polyclonal antiserum against the Nipah virus nucleoprotein [26] (1∶5000; kindly provided by L. Wang, CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Australia) as a primary antibody for detection of Nipah virus antigen. For the histopathological analysis of the nasal turbinates (NT) whole hamster skulls were used. The skulls were decalcified using a 20% EDTA solution in sucrose (Newcomer Supply) and allowed to sit at room temperature for 3 weeks. The 20% EDTA/sucrose solution was changed 2 times prior to gross sectioning the skull. The following tissues were examined: NT, trachea and lungs. Lesions were assigned a subjective score from 0 to 4 based on the percentage of the tissue that was immunopositive. The slides were evaluated by a board-certified veterinary pathologist.Quantitative PCRRNA was extracted from swab samples using the NucleoSpin 96 Virus Core kit (Macherey-Nagel) and a Corbett Robotics model CAS 1820 automatic RNA extractor. RNA was eluted in 100 µl. 5 µl RNA was used in a one-step real-time RT-PCR targeted at the NP gene using the Rotor-Gene probe kit (Qiagen) according to instructions of the manufacturer (primer and probe sequences are available on request). In each run, standard dilutions of a titered virus stock were run in parallel, to calculate TCID50 equivalents in the samples.ELISAAntibody responses were measured in an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using inactivated Nipah virus (strain Malaysia) as the antigen. Nipah virus-containing cell culture supernatant was concentrated and purified by centrifuging for two hours at 21000 rpm over a 20% sucrose cushion. The pellet was resuspended in PBS and Triton X-100 was added to a final concentration of 1%; the preparation was then inactivated with γ-radiation according to standard operating procedures. This suspension was used to coat immuno 96 microwell maxisorp plates (NUNC) at 4°C overnight. Subsequently, plates were blocked with 5% skim milk in PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 (PBST) for 1.5 hours at 4°C. After 3 washes with PBST, 50 µL of diluted serum samples were added, and the plates were incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. Bound antibodies were detected after 3 washes using an anti-hamster secondary antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP; KPL). Following incubation for 1 hour at 37°C, bound HRP was detected using the ABTS Peroxidase Substrate System (KPL). The absorbance at 405 nm was measured using a microplate spectrophotometer. Sera were considered positive when absorbance was higher than three standard deviations above the mean of negative control sera.Supporting InformationFigure S1Stability of Nipah virus in artificial palm sap. (A) Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) was diluted to 107 (black triangles) and 105 (black squares) TCID50/ml in artificial palm sap and left at 28°C for 8 days. Samples were taken at the indicated time points and virus titer in those samples was determined by titration on Vero C1008 cells. The stability data were analyzed using the linear regression model in the GraphPad prism 6 software package. The regression line (solid) is plotted together with the 95% confidence interval (dotted line). (B) Nipah virus (strain Bangladesh/200401066) was diluted to 107 TCID50/ml in artificial palm sap and left at 70°C (green line) or 100°C (blue line) for 1 hour. Samples were taken at the indicated time points and virus titer in those samples was determined by titration on Vero C1008 cells. Geometric mean titers were calculated from three replicates; error bars indicate standard deviation; dotted line indicates the cut off value of the assay.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.Table S1Tissue distribution of Nipah virus in hamsters inoculated intranasally, esophageally or via drinking as determined by virus titration. Numbers in the table indicate number of animals in which virus was detected in the indicated tissues at the indicated time points; total number of animals is indicated at the top of the column. 1 Viremia was determined by real-time RT-PCR.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.Table S2Tissue distribution of Nipah virus in hamsters inoculated intranasally, esophageally or via drinking as determined by immunohistochemistry. Numbers in the table indicate number of animals in which viral antigen was detected in the indicated tissues at the indicated time points; total number of animals is indicated at the top of the column. 1 Tissues were collected when animals were euthanized due to severity of disease signs. 2 nc: not collected.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: HENDRA VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Possible high risk of transmission of the Nipah virus in South and South East Asia: a review

IntroductionNipah virusNipah virus (NiV) disease is an emerging zoonotic disease. NiV is an RNA virus from the family Paramyxoviridae, genus Henipavirus, subfamily Paramyxovirinae and order Mononegavirales, causing severe respiratory disease and encephalitis in South Asia, with high mortality [1, 2]. NiV closely resembles the Hendra virus, Cedar virus and Mojiang virus [3]. NiV is pleomorphic, spherical, thread-like and enveloped, with a size of 40–1900 nm, negative-sense, non-segmented, with a single-stranded RNA possessing helical symmetry with an average length of approximately 18 kb [44]. The RNA genome of NiV is composed of six major structural proteins: nucleocapsid (N), phosphoprotein (P), matrix (M), fusion glycoprotein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G) and long polymerase (L). Furthermore, N, P and L are responsible for the attachment of viral RNA to form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP), whereas F and G are responsible for the cellular attachment of the virion and the subsequent entry into the host cell [6–13] (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Structure of NiV and Pathogenesis of NiV infection Source: References [6–11]Phylogenetic analysis genetically characterised NiV into two major distinct genotypes: NiV-Malaysia (NiV-MY), recognised in Malaysia and Cambodia, and NiV-Bangladesh (NiV-BD), recognised in Bangladesh and India [14, 15]. Furthermore, NiV-MY genotypes have shown more virulence than NiV-BD, which directly correlates with the clinical manifestation, pathogenicity, route of transmission and severity of the disease [16].The reservoir hosts of NiV are fruit bats belonging to the genus Pteropus, also called flying foxes [17]. Sequencing data suggests that NiV is most closely related to the Hendra virus and evolutionary originated from the route of bat species. A sero-epidemiological study from Malaysia showed that four fruit bat species were implicated: Pteropus hypomelanus, Pteropus vampyrus, Cynopterus brachyotis and Eonycteris spelaea, as well as the insectivorous bat Scotophilus kuhlii [18]. Likewise, the fruit bat species Pteropus giganteus, Pteropus lylei and Hipposideros larvatus were also verified as reservoir hosts of NiV in Bangladesh, Cambodia and Thailand [19]. Serological tests based on antibodies against the NiV detected its presence in the serum of fruit bats collected in India, Indonesia and Timor-Leste [20]. Likewise, epidemiological studies on bat species from Nepal (Pteropus giganteus, Rousettus leschenaultii, Eonycteris spelaea, Rhinolophus sinicus, R. affinis, R. ferrumequinum, Nyctalus noctula and Scotophilus sp.) reported that potential reservoir hosts for several viruses are often found in human proximity and some of them even enter human dwellings at night [21]. Some fruit bats such as P. giganteus and R. leschenaultii are even consumed as bushmeat by some communities in Nepal [21]. Nepal also faces a high risk of rabies virus transmission from bat bites, implying that a zoonotic viral outbreak is likely in the future [21, 22]. However, the situation of NiV infections in other countries in South and South East Asia is unknown.NiV encephalitis is an emerging and re-emerging infectious disease considered a major public health problem by the World Health Organization (WHO). NiV is present mainly in South East Asia and can cause severe respiratory illness and deadly encephalitis in humans. NiV can be transmitted to humans from animals (bats or pigs), contaminated foods or infected fluids and can also be transmitted directly from human to human. The main objective of this review is to understand the epidemiology, pathogenesis, molecular surveillance, transmission dynamics, genetic diversity, reservoir host, clinical characteristics, and phylogenetics of NiV.MethodsA literature search was performed using PubMed, Web of Science and Google Scholar. The following keywords were used: ‘Nipah virus infection’ or ‘epidemiology Nipah virus’, or ‘clinical features Nipah virus’ or ‘diagnosis Nipah virus’, or ‘surveillance Nipah virus’, or ‘prevention and control’, ‘South and South East Asia’. Research papers, review papers and case reports were included in the search.Epidemiology and Nipah virus outbreaks (1998–2020)NiV was named after the village of Sungai Nipah (Nipah River Village) in Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia, where NiV was first identified in 1999. At that time, the virus crossed the species barrier from bats and infected humans, resulting in encephalitis with up to 40% mortality and residual neurological problems among survivors. The outbreak was first recognised in pigs that consumed fruit partially eaten by fruit bats and transmitted the infection to humans. In March 1999, an outbreak of acute NiV infection was confirmed in 11 male abattoir workers with an average age of 44 years in Singapore. One of these workers died because of speculated transmission of the virus during the import of pork from Malaysia. Between 1998 and 1999, both countries (Singapore and Malaysia) reported 246 cases of febrile encephalitis by NiV in addition to pigs in farms showing neurological and respiratory symptoms. In 2004, Bangladesh confirmed its first NiV outbreak by the presence of anti-NiV antibodies in serum samples. Since 2004, researchers have detected the viral nucleic acid of NiV by genome analysis. From 2004 to 2010, nine outbreaks were documented in Bangladesh. Likewise, in 2011 another NiV outbreak was reported to cause 15 deaths in a remote town named Hatibandha in the Lalmonirhat district of northern Bangladesh [23]. The research findings showed that the main source of NiV transmission in Bangladesh was the consumption of infected raw date palm fruits [24] (Table 1).Table 1Nipah Virus Outbreaks in South Asia Countries (1999–2021).Sources: updated from WHO–SEARO References [35–40]Country (place)YearNo. of casesNo. of deaths(Case fatality rate, %)Primary route of transmissionLaboratory diagnosisMalaysia1998–1999265105(39.6%)Close contact with pigs(i.e., pig farmers)Singapore1999111(9.1%)Contact with pigsIndia (Siliguri)Jan–Feb 20016645(68.2%)Human to human close direct contactContact with bats from the Pteropus spp.BangladeshApr–May 2001139(69.2%)Consumption of fruits or fruit products (raw date palm juice)- Contaminated with urine or saliva from infected fruit batsBangladeshJan 2003/April 200412/318/23(67%/74%)Same as aboveBangladeshJan–Mar 20051211(9%2)BangladeshJan–Feb 2007/March–April 20078/35/1(63%/33%)India (Nadia)Apr 200755(100%)BangladeshFeb–April 20084/74/5(100%/71%)BangladeshJan 200941(75%)BangladeshFeb–March 2010/Jan–Feb 201116/4414/40(88%/91%)BangladeshFeb 2012/Jan–Apr 201312/2410/21(83%/88%)Philippines2014179(53%)Bangladesh2014/201518/99/6(50%/67%)India (Kerala State)May 20181817(94.4%)Suspected of consumption of fruits or fruit productsIndia (Kerala State)September 202111(100%)Contact with horses/Consumption of horse meatOn 4 September, 2021 the presence of Nipah virus in the plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and serum samples was confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and IgM antibodies was confirmed in the plasma sample by ELISA serology test at NIV PuneThe first outbreak of NiV in India was detected in Siliguri, West Bengal, in 2001, characterised by febrile illness in association with altered sensorium [25]. Some Siliguri outbreak isolates showed close similarity to those of the outbreak in Bangladesh. A subsequent outbreak was confirmed in Nadia, West Bengal, in 2007. Then, in 2018, a NiV infection outbreak was reported in Kozhikode, northern Kerala, India, with fruit bats as the source of the outbreak [26, 27]. During the 2018 outbreak, most deaths occurred in infected patients and health personnel who were involved in their treatment. A total of 60 infected persons died in the Malappuram and Kozhikode districts, identified by laboratory diagnosis employing real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). DNA sequencing showed that the genome of the confirmed isolates of NiV infection was very similar to the BD strain of MY [28]. Recently, a fifth NiV outbreak on 4 September 2021 was reported by the Kerala State Health Department in Kozhikode, Kerala, India. On 29 August 2021, a 12-year-old boy showed a low-grade fever and was transferred to several hospitals but his condition deteriorated. On 4 September 2021, the presence of NiV in the boy’s plasma, cerebrospinal fluid and serum samples was confirmed by RT-PCR, and IgM antibodies were detected in the plasma sample by ELISA. The next day, the patient died and a safe cremation was performed on the same day in Kozhikode. Since then, NiV infection has claimed at least 20 lives and is rapidly spreading in the southern state of Kerala [28] (Table 1).NiV infection in humans has a range of clinical presentations from asymptomatic infection to acute respiratory infection, fatal encephalitis and severe neurological disease. The death rate is in the range of 40–75% according to reported outbreaks between 1998 and 2018 [29–31]. According to the WHO, NiV is one of the highly infectious pathogens that should be handled in facilities classified at biosafety level 4 (BSL4), which is challenging because of the limited access to sophisticated laboratories in most countries.A study on the genetic diversity of NiV in Bangladesh was conducted in 2012. RT-PCR was used to screen a total of 456 bat roost urine samples; among them, 38 (8%) were positive for NiV RNA, with cycle threshold (CT) values ranging from 32.7 to 38.5 including NiV-N gene fragments (N ORF 188–1599) sequenced from 100 roost urine specimens [32]. Moreover, in a follow-up study, 39 samples were collected from humans during 2012–2018 in areas, where NiV RNA was previously detected. RNA was detectable in 31 samples (80%) by RT-PCR, and nucleotide sequences were successfully identified from 21 samples by Sanger sequencing [32]. Phylogenetic tree analyses revealed that the N gene sequence obtained from bat roost urine in Joypurhat in 2012 was almost identical (98.6–95.4%) to the NiV-BD genotype present in Bangladesh, India and Thailand. The phylogenetic tree revealed an evolutionary rate of 4.64 × 104 for the NiV-BD genotype, which diverged from 1995 into two sub-lineages. Furthermore, phylogenetic tree analyses from bat roost urine and human samples categorised these samples into the same genotype (NiV-BD). NiV sequences from Malaysia, Cambodia and Thailand were categorised into NiV-MY genotypes, whereas those from Bangladesh, India and Thailand were categorised into other NiV-BD genotypes (Fig. 2). The above studies [32] provide molecular information for designing laboratory methods for the early detection of NiV in environmental samples to evaluate its potential risk of transmission in the human population. More detailed studies on the genetic variability between the NiV strains detected in bats and humans can also contribute to identifying the transmissibility and infection potential of the virus and can thus help to predict outbreaks and identify vaccine–candidate strains.Fig. 2Phylogenetic analysis of NIV infection in South Asia Countries (1999–2021).Source: References [35–40]Nepal is a South Asian country located along the central foothills of the Himalayas, sharing porous borders with India in the south, east and west. Open borders can cause an unprecedented outbreak of NiV in Nepal through human transmission. Furthermore, some fruit bat colonies in the foothills of Nepal are speculated to adopt seasonal migration patterns from higher to lower elevations (cross-border migration as well), which represents a high risk of zoonotic virus spread in Nepal. Another important factor that contributes to the rapid transmission of infectious diseases in South Asian and South East Asian countries is the increase in the human population [33]. Poultry and pig farming and cattle rearing in the proximity of fruit bat colonies may increase the risk of transmission of zoonotic diseases. Bats generally prefer warmer temperatures, although a few bat species can live in cold environments through torpor and hibernation. Hence, in the mountains of Nepal, some bats roost in human-made structures to avoid the cold in winter. Because bats co-exist with human communities, the risk of a bat-borne viral outbreak in Nepal is latent, although there is no solid evidence of such a health hazard for the country. Our emphasis is on preparedness to tackle such probable risks by increasing our understanding of the disease based on research and solid evidence. Therefore, the authorities in South Asian countries need to remain vigilant to tackle NiV outbreaks [34].Many studies have confirmed that fruit bat species (Pteropus) are the natural hosts of NiV, which is a virus of concern for future epidemics and also seems to be spilling over from its animal reservoir to humans. Sequencing analysis confirmed that fruit bats are responsible for the transmission of NiV to domestic animals and humans through contaminated food or indirectly from person to person. Thus, NiV infection in domestic animals such as pigs should be monitored routinely and the farm should be cleaned daily using appropriate disinfection agents or detergents to prevent an outbreak. At border checkpoints in South Asian countries, domestic animals should be quarantined and tested for zoonotic diseases. In addition, banning the movement of animals from infected farms to other areas can reduce the spread of disease. Moreover, the One Health approach should be strictly employed to detect new cases by performing surveillance and quarantining domestic animals for providing an early warning to veterinary and human public health authorities [34–39].Laboratory diagnosis and treatmentThere are currently no specific vaccines or effective antiviral drugs available for the treatment of NiV infection. However, intensive and supportive care and prevention will be the mainstays of management, as treatments are only recommended by the WHO in the case of severe respiratory and neurologic complications. NiV infection can be diagnosed at the early stages through RT-PCR tests of the throat, nasal passage, urine, cerebrospinal fluid and blood. Furthermore, diagnosis may also include nucleic acid amplification, sequencing, immunofluorescence assay, histopathology, virus isolation, neutralisation and high throughput techniques for whole-genome sequencing of NiV infecting humans and animals. In addition, viruses can be diagnosed during the patient’s recovery stage, and antibodies can be detected using IgG/IgM ELISA. According to the WHO and standard diagnostics for NiV, PCR is strongly recommended as the most sensitive method for diagnosis of active NiV infection but NiV-specific IgM ELISA is an alternative serological approach, where PCR is not available. However, although the detection of NiV with ELISA is reliable, it has less sensitivity and specificity than molecular detection [34–42].Prevention of NiVScientists are currently working on the development of antiviral drugs and vaccines for NiV. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases conducted a clinical trial of an mRNA NiV agent. For the prevention and control of NiV in South and South East Asia, each country in the region should develop an action plan including policies and strategies for controlling the virus. This should be followed by the implementation of the endorsed action plan strategies and raising public health awareness regarding NiV outbreaks and the importance of preventive measures to mitigate risk factors. In the twenty-first century, social media platforms are one of the most important modes used for informing the public in addition to local television, FM radio stations and printed media (e.g., posters and pamphlets). For instance, farm workers may be instructed to avoid direct contact with farm animals, especially during slaughter and disposal, and wear appropriate personal protective equipment and clothing. Villagers may be taught to avoid consuming date palm fruits and drinking date palm juice that may be contaminated if bats live on those palm trees. Furthermore, surveillance of NiV and other infectious diseases that could be at high risk of transmission from animals to humans should be carried out. High-risk areas in South and South East Asia along the NiV girdle should be identified and mapped, and then continual surveillance should be conducted to facilitate the early detection of virus outbreaks, identify circulating strains among fruit bats, and monitor environmental factors and the dynamics of wide-ranging transmission.To respond to an outbreak, specialised research teams should be established to identify suspected cases of infection in humans and further analyse the possibility of the emergence of new species as potential reservoir hosts of the virus that may be responsible for its transmission to humans from bats. In other words, establishing mechanisms for cross-border screening, laboratory testing, and diagnosis facilities at points of entry and exit would ensure that suspected cases are referred to facilities at the provincial level for confirmation of NiV. Furthermore, more reliable tests for the surveillance of communities and livestock will be vital to achieving a better understanding of the ecology of the fruit bat host and transmission risks to intermediate hosts, enabling the implementation of the One Health approach for outbreak prevention and the management of zoonotic diseases like that caused by NiV. In summary, the control and prevention of NiV would be possible only if strictly endorsed guidelines and control strategies are implemented by employing the One Health approach in all South and South East Asian countries [4, 5, 40, 43, 44].Role of medicinal plants for NiV treatmentIn the absence of specific antivirals and vaccines, medicinal plants can play an important role by providing therapeutic agents for the treatment of various viral diseases. Previous studies have revealed that medicinal plants have promising antiviral properties and are used to protect against various public health threats that affect humans and animals. South East Asian countries have medicinal plant candidates that could be screened for the treatment of viral diseases, such as NiV. The following steps would be taken for this purpose: evaluation of current treatment approaches for viral infection, screening of antiviral drug candidates from natural products and elucidation of mechanisms, inhibition of viral protease, viral replication, viral spike protein, and receptor, and finally, screening of medicinal plant target compounds to develop an antiviral drug against NiV. The best method will probably be the screening of compounds that are responsible for altering or disturbing any step of the virus’ replication. Studies on medicinal plants for the treatment of viral diseases have reported 93 antiviral drug candidates, which could be a potential area of research in antiviral drug discovery. Furthermore, these drug candidates might also show inhibitory effects against influenza, parainfluenza, and other respiratory viruses [45]. Therefore, medicinal plant extracts, phytochemicals, and herbs could have potential as antiviral agents for the effective control of NiV, and medicinal plant formulations could prevent or cure NiV and other highly infectious pandemic-prone viral diseases in Asia [46]. In-depth studies will be necessary, using both in vitro and in vivo models, to test the medicinal plants and their phytochemicals to measure their antiviral activities against NiV infection [45, 46].RecommendationsSouth Asian and South East Asian countries should increase awareness of the NiV risk factors and educate their people on measures to reduce NiV exposure and risk of infection. By applying the strategies listed in [39], public health educational messages should focus on reducing the following risk factors: bat-to-human transmission, animal-to-human transmission and human-to-human transmission. Healthcare workers should be aware of this risk while caring for suspected or confirmed patients or handling specimens, and should strictly follow the universal standard infection prevention guidelines (i.e., wearing personal protective equipment, an N95 mask, goggles and a face shield) at all times. Furthermore, samples from people and animals with suspected NiV infection should be collected and handled by trained health and laboratory personnel in a well-equipped molecular laboratory. Standard guidelines should be followed at all times when handling suspected or confirmed animal or human samples. Effective vaccination strategies ought to be developed in the nearby future to tackle the risk of infectious agents, such as NiV. Therefore, we encourage the governments of South Asian and South East Asian countries to endorse the One Health approach to reduce the risk of zoonotic disease transmission [35–42]. For instance, India has adopted guidelines for the clinical management of NiV disease, using the One Health approach. Moreover, the Indian Council of Medical Research and Integrated Disease Surveillance Programme has partnered with veterinary divisions, such as the National Centre for Disease Control in India. This model could be emulated by other South Asian nations [47, 48].


Title: Cryptic etiopathological conditions of equine nervous system with special emphasis on viral diseases

IntroductionThe domestication of modern horses (Equus caballus) started approximately 5000 years ago [1]. E. caballus originated from same ancestor of equids around 4-4.5 years ago [2]. The equines are major contributors for providing food, transportation, employment, and income to poor farmers in many parts of the globe including India and have pivot role in sports and military activities as well. Since a century onward, this animal is continuously used in the field of science, for raising diphtheria antitoxin, antivenom sera which serves a boon for humans as well as animal lives [3,4] and recently proved as an efficient animal model for studying the human infectious conditions such as allergies [5]. Large white donkeys of Indian origin are already extinct, while most of the Indian ponies (Manipuri, Zanskari, Spiti, and Bhutia) and horse breeds (Marwari and Kathiawari) are at the verge of being declared as endangered. The most contributory factor for this decline in population of equids is the emergence of deadly diseases of equines. Among these diseases, neurological conditions play a significant role in equine death and euthanasia, as it is difficult to diagnose the origin of such encephalitic conditions [6].The pathological conditions associated with nervous system of equines can be classified on the basis of the etiological agents involved (viral, bacterial, parasitic, fungal, algal, and plant toxins/mycotoxins) or by anatomical location of lesions, e.g., hepatic encephalopathy (hepatotoxic plants causes damage to cerebral cortex and basal nuclei) [6,7]; nigropallidal encephalomalacia mainly due to the consumption of Rhaponticum repens (creeping knapweed) (leads to destruction of nigrostriatal pathways causing dopamine deficiency), are the conditions mainly involving the brain [7,8] while arboviral encephalomyelitis such as Eastern equine encephalitis (EEE), Western equine encephalitis (WEE), Venezuelan equine encephalitis (VEE), and West Nile fever (WNF) [9], rabies, pelvic limb paralysis [10], and equine protozoal myeloencephalitis [11], mainly affect brain stem and part of spinal cord [6]. Equine motor neuron disease and wobbler disease (incoordination) [12], affect spinal cord, while stringhalt [13], laryngeal hemiplegia (racing thoroughbred horses) [6,14], and polyneuritis equids (caused by Halicephalobus gingivalis) are associated with nerves and ganglion affections. At the same time the most important diseases of horse, i.e., tetanus (sawhorse stance, spastic paralysis) and botulinum (flaccid paralysis) involve the NM (neuromuscular) junction [6], in this article, we are mainly focusing on the status and etiopathology of some of the important viruses induced neurological conditions often encountered in equines.Alphaviruses, flaviviruses, and bunyaviruses (least important to cause encephalitis) are the major group of viruses responsible to cause encephalitis in equines (Table-1) [6,9]. The family flaviviridae contains a vast range of viruses including dengue, yellow fever, WNF, japanese encephalitis (JE), and a newly emerged virus Zika virus [15,16]. WNF and JE are of major concern as far as human and equine populations are concerned [17,18]. Horses are dead-end host for most of the arboviral diseases, except for VEE virus (VEEV) where these acts as amplifying hosts [19]. Flaviviruses are growing group of viruses which can be insect-specific, mosquitoes borne, tick-borne, and vertebrate borne in nature [20]. Within the world of RNA viruses, flaviviruses are highly pathogenic.Table-1Different groups of viruses associated with equine encephalitis along with their reservoir hosts and geographic distribution [6,9].Different groups of virusesReservoirsGeographic locationBunyavirusAll bunyaviruses and flaviviruses cause encephalomyelitis in general but Ross river virus in addition cause systemic hemolymphatic neurotoxic ataxia California virusLogomorphs and rodentsNorth America and part of Eastern AsiaAlphaviruses Ross river virusMarsupials and other placental mammalsAustralia, Papua New Guinea Semliki forest virusUnknownEast and West Africa EEEBirds, rodents, snakesNorth/South/Central America WEEBirds, rodents, snakesNorth/South America VEECotton ratNorth/Central AmericaFlaviviruses WNFPasserine birdsEurope, North/South/Central America, Australia, and AfricaAll flaviviruses are responsible to cause encephalomyelitis. St. Louis encephalitis and Usutu are only serologically recorded JEBirds, swineRussia, Asia, India, Western Pacific UsutuBirdsAfrica and Europe Murray valleyBirds, horse, cattle, foxes, marsupialsAustralia, Papua New Guinea St. Louis encephalitisBirdsNorth/South/Central America Kunjin virusWaterbirdsAustralia PowassanRodents, mice, skunks, dogs, birds, lagomorphs- Tick-borne encephalitisSmall rodentsAsia, Europe, Russia, Finland Louping illSheep, grouseU.K., Iberian PeninsulaEEE=Eastern equine encephalitis, WEE=Western equine encephalitis, VEE=Venezuelan equine encephalitis, WNF=West Nile fever, JE=Japanese encephalitisWNFWNF is an emerging threat, and in the past, many outbreaks have been reported globally [21-23]. The first case of WNF was reported in Uganda in year 1937 [24] while in India 1st case was reported from human in year 1952 in Mumbai [25]. This disease leads to huge mortality in horses [26] as well as in wild and domestic birds [27]. The zoonotic potential of this virus can be assessed by the cases of encephalitis in human beings [28]. The different spp. of Culex are the major vector species associated with the transmission of WNF virus (WNFV). In southern part of India, ardeid birds (Ardeola grayii and Bubulcus ibis) and domestic pigs (poor hosts) [29,30] have also shown antibodies against WNFV. Human and horses acts as dead-end host for WNFV. Falcon also plays an important role in the transmission of lineage 1 and 2 of WNF, which was evident by diagnostic techniques such as VNT, ELISA, and real-time reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) [31]. The WNF have four lineages, namely, L1, L2, L3, and L4. Although lineages L2, L3, and L4 along with L1 were involved with many outbreaks of the world, but L1 has been found to be more significantly pathogenic [6,31]. From India L1a and L1c have been reported but L1c was found to be non-pathogenic [9]. In Italy, lineage 1 of this virus led to infection in crows, pigeons, and magpies but no severe mortalities has been noticed while great fatalities have been reported among owls, crows, and hawks in certain other parts of the world [32]. In Europe in year 2004, first time the fatalities caused by lineage 2 were reported in wild birds [33] and later on deaths among wild birds in Hungry and Austria were also reported by this lineage [34]. Human, birds, and horses also showed cases of WNF infected with lineage 2 in northern part of Greece [35-37].Most of human cases have been reported from northeastern and southern part of India. In year 2006, a total number of 167 cases were reported and out of these 13 died. Recently an outbreak of WNF has been reported from Kerala (India) [38].WNFV from horses in India has not been documented till date, but many major outbreaks have been reported from different parts of the world. The major outbreaks have been reported from US (5674 human and 690 horse cases in year 2012) [39-41]. Outbreaks in France (in years 1962, 1965, 2000, 2003, 2004, and 2006), Italy (1998, 2008-2012), Egypt (1959), Mexico (2002, 2003), Canada (2002, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2009, and 2010), and many more parts throughout the world caused by lineage 1a (L1a) while lineage 1b reported from Australia (2011) [9]. The outbreaks caused by lineage L2 have also been reported from Hungry (2007-2011), Romania (2010) and Greece (2010, 2011). Lineages L3 and L4 were not much involved with outbreaks, but often found to be circulated among human and equine populations as shown in figures-1 and 2 [6]. The emergence of lineage L2 has been reported after 2007, as active immunization against lineage L1 of WNFV has been started in later part of year 2003 [9,23 and 39].Figure-1The occurrence of human cases of West Nile fever since 1994 to 2010 (upside); human cases in India stating from 1952 to 2011 (lower side). This figure is prepared by the authors with the help of SmartArt in PowerPoint.Figure-2Different circulating lineages of West Nile fever virus. This figure is prepared by the authors with the help of SmartArt in PowerPoint.WNFV causes meningioencephalitis, necrotizing myocarditis, and degenerative changes in nervous system and these changes are of varying degree in different species and human beings [23,42]. The myocarditis and pancreatitis have been reported in very rare cases while non-suppurative arteritis has also been reported in falcons like raptors [43]. OAS gene of WNFV activates Ribonuclease-L, which ultimately degrade the viral nucleic acid and is responsible for pathogenic attributes of this virus [41,44]. The diagnosis of WNF can be made by seeing the color of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which is xanthochromic and there is a mild increase in protein values along with significant increase in mononuclear cells [9].JEJE in India is important flaviviral encephalitis which is having two serotypes, i.e., JaGar-01 and Nakayama [45]. This virus is transmitted by Culex gelidus in all states of India, except in northern part [46] and is also transmitted by Culex tritaeniorhynchus through trans-ovarian route [47,48]. The C. gelidus along with JE have potential to transmit Ross river virus, Kunjin, and Murray valley encephalitis, as seen experimentally [49], which is an alarming indication for the spread of these deadly diseases in future. The birds are the main reservoir hosts along with pigs as major amplifying hosts, while human beings and horses are the incidental (dead end) hosts associated with this disease [6]. In southern part of India, co-infection of cysticercosis and JE in children has been reported, in which pigs were the intermediate as well as amplifying hosts for these diseases [50].The first case of JE was reported in 1871 from Japan, while in India 1st report has been seen in CMC Vellore in 1955 [6]. The evidence and sero-prevalence of JE among horses have been reported from Haryana (India) during 2006-2010, which were confirmed by RT-PCR. This viral strain was closely related with Vellore JE virus (JEV) isolates, i.e., H225. In year 2015, total 1620 cases of human JE were reported in India, out of these 281 people were died. The maximum number of deaths has been reported from Assam (135/614), West Bengal (74/342), Uttar Pradesh (42/351), and Bihar (12/66), shown in Figure-3. Up to March 2016, total 21 cases were reported from different parts of India, where total three people died.Figure-3Highlighted red areas show the states with cases of Japanese encephalitis (JE) in year 2015 (left); highlighted green areas shows the states with cases of JE in year 2016 till March (right). This figure is prepared by the authors with the help of SmartArt in PowerPoint.In JE the blood-brain barrier (BBB) plays an important role to regulate neuro-invasion by leukocytes in late phases of infection. However, in acute stages, infiltration of inflammatory cells occurs in nervous tissue [51,52]. BBB has tight junction proteins claudin and occludin which are connected to cytoskeleton by zonula occludens (cytoplasmic proteins) and maintain the integrity of BBB [53]. However, in infections such as WNF, HIV, and JE this integrity of BBB is lost and leads to migration of inflammatory cells to parenchyma and perivascular space thereby plays a role in the development of encephalitis [54,55].JE mainly infiltrate dendritic cells and macrophages/monocytes; thereby get access to nervous system and leads to nervous signs. CD11b+Ly-6 Chi monocytes are the characteristic hallmark cells in nervous tissue in JE, which enter into brain by breaking BBB and differentiate into macrophages, DCs and microglia cells [56-58]. In JEV infected microglia cells, Src-related Ras/Raf/ERK cascades participate in NF-KB activation and in the expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) and interleukin-1 beta (IL-1β). The TNF-α and IL-1β are most important mediators for inflammatory reactions of nervous system and can be evaluated in serum and CSF [59,60]. Along with activated microglia cells, activated astrocytes are also found in JE infection in brain but microglia cells are mainly concerned with neurotoxic action [61-64].Henipavirus (Nipah Virus [NiV] and Hendra Virus [HeV])Both NiV and HeV (-strand RNA, enveloped virus) belongs to family Paramyxoviridae and are fatal to humans as well as animals [65-68]. Fruit bats of genus Pteropus (Pteropus giganteus in Siliguri) are the major reservoir [69] for these viruses. The pigs (NiV) and horses (HeV) are the major spillover host identified. Bats besides a reservoir host often acts as a spillover host for man. Man participates as a dead end host in this transmission [70]. These viruses are zoonotic and responsible to cause threat in animals as well. However, no man-to-man transmission has been reported by NiV and HeV [71]. These viruses are responsible for many of the sporadic outbreaks of pneumonia and encephalitis in Southeast Asia [72]. First case of NiV outbreak was reported from Malaysia, isolated from the CSF of an infected patient [73]. This outbreak was a result of human and pig contacts. Later on, this virus spread to Singapore by the trading and movements of pigs [74,75]. In India, the first case of NiV has been reported in year 2001 in Siliguri (West Bengal) neighbor to Bangladesh, where already outbreaks of NiV occurred in years 2001, 2002, and 2004. The people died due to this disease until date are presented in given Figure-4. The total CFR in this entire scenario was approximately 52%, which was quite high. HeV was 1st reported in Hendra, a suburb of Brisbane, Australia in 2009 which leads to the death of 13 horses due to respiratory failure [76] and later the outbreaks has been reported from Queensland between 1994 and 2008 [77]. Until date, only two human cases infected with HeV virus have been noticed, which shows meningitis [77,78]. Almost in all species, endothelial cells are the main target cells for henipaviruses [79]. NiV replicates in Dendritic cells and up-regulate the expression of CD40, CD80, and CD86 thereby affect the priming of CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells and ultimately leads to apoptosis of cells by decreasing the level of Bcl2 and elevating Caspase-3 expression. These viruses have fusion protein and glycoprotein G, and the coordinated function of these proteins helps in the attachment and entry of the virus into the host cell [80,81].Figure-4Status of Nipah virus (NiV) in India (left, yellow highlighted areas); status of NiV in the world (right). This figure is prepared by the authors with the help of SmartArt in PowerPoint.EEE/WEE/VEEEEV virus (EEEV)/Western virus (WEEV)/VEEV belongs to highly zoonotic new-world alphaviruses of family Togaviridae and leads to encephalitis in humans as well as in equids and are often used as potent biological weapon for bioterrorism. EEEV and WEEV lead to outbreaks to a limited area in human and horses, while VEEV causes huge epizootics in horses and spillover outbreaks in man [19,82].EEEV was 1st reported from an outbreak in Vermont from Emu population, and in the same year a confirmed case of humans was also detected from the same place. EEE is mainly prevalent in northeast part of US and often involve Culiseta melanura and perching birds in their transmission cycle [83,84]. C. melanura is a potent vector as well as an occasional contributor for epidemic/epizootic transmission of EEEV. Hence, it is supposed to be a mammographic bridge vector due to its feeding habit on mammalian species (man, horse) [85-87]. Northeastern part (Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont, New York, and New Hemisphere) has been reported with heavy viral load of EEEV [88]. In horses, cases of EEE have been reported from Onterio (1994), Central Onterio (2001, 2002), and Nova Scotia (2009). Major outbreaks in horses have been reported in Quebec (1972), Nova Scotia (2009) and from emus in year 2008 from Quebec [6,9]. More severe form of encephalitis is caused by EEEV and WEEV than VEEV. WEEV was 1st isolated from the brain of an infected horse in California in year 1930. Culex tarsalis is most common mosquito vector associated with this infection, and the enzootic cycle often involves a link between passerine birds and vertebral hosts (Table-2 and Figure-5) [9,89].Table-2Comparison between EEEV, WEEV, and VEEV [9,89].CharacteristicsEEEVWEEVVEEV (epizootic)VEEV (enzootic)DistributionEastern and Northern U.S.; South AmericaWestern U.S.; South AmericaSouth and Central AmericaSouthern U.S. (Florida); South and Central AmericaTransmission cycleAvian-Culiseta melanuraAvian-Culex tarsalisUnknownRodents-Culex spp.Horse as amplifier hostsSometimesNoHorsesNot knownVector (humans/equines)Aedes and coquillettidia spp.Culex tarsalisMosquitoesCulex spp.Human mortality50-75%37%1%-Horse mortality70-90%3-50%20-80%-CSF examinationColor is mild turbid with increased protein content and increase infiltration of neutrophils and monocytesColor of CSF is normal with mild increase in protein content and mononuclear cells--EEV=Eastern equine encephalitis virus, WEEV=Western equine encephalitis virus, VEEV=Venezuelan equine encephalitis virus, CSF=Cerebrospinal fluidFigure-5Characteristics of Eastern equine encephalitis, Western equine encephalitis and Venezuelan equine encephalitis viruses and their pathogenic mechanisms. This figure is prepared by the authors with the help of SmartArt in PowerPoint.In 1938, Beck and Wyckoff 1st time reported VEEV is a zoonotic pathogen just like EEEV and WEEV in Venezuela. Ochlerotatus taeniorhynchus is a major vector, and cotton spiny rat is the most common rodent host responsible for the transmission of this virus [90]. During epizootics, viremia has been developed in horses and leads to infection in mosquitoes. Hence, ultimately a spillover has been seen in human population [89,91]. EEE and WEE viruses mainly replicate in phagocytic cells, whereas VEEV virus mainly found to show neuro-invasion towards olfactory bulb [19,92,93] as has been reported in mice model with contrast to other arboviral infections. This virus mainly leads to the destruction of pyramidal layer of the cerebral cortex and hippocampal neurons by Bcl2 induced apoptosis in similar manner as shown by Sindbis virus [9] shown in Figure-5. In human, VEEV in central nervous system (CNS) leads to edema, vasculitis, and meningioencephalitis, while interstitial pneumonia in lungs, lymphocytic depletion, and degenerative changes in liver also has been reported from infected patients [19,89]. The vaccines of potent efficacy are still lacking against these viruses [94-96]. There are certain live attenuated vaccine strains like TC83 developed in past years, but these vaccines are having residual harmful effects to human beings [97]. Prophylactic as well as therapeutic protection has been reported by passive immunization with monoclonal antibodies against VEEV in mice [98,99]. DNA vaccines can also be proved as a cost-effective way for preventing viral replication [100,101].Equine Herpes Virus-1 (EHV-1)EHV-1 belongs to subfamily alpha herpesvirinae, a member of genus varicellovirus and has been identified as pathogenic to domestic horses [102]. Equids act as a natural and definitive host for EHV-1. Out of nine species of EHV, only five herpes viruses (namely, EHV1, 2, 3, 4, and 5) have the ability to produce diseases in horses [103]. However, along with EHV-1, EHV-9 also has been found to be show nervous form in nature as reported in Thomson’s gazelles, which died of encephalitis in an outbreak and from calves [104]. EHV-1 and EHV-9 often found to show jumping behavior from equids to other non-equid species including polar bears, Giraffe, and Indian rhinoceros [105-107]. Both EHV-1 and EHV-2 are economically important viruses affecting the respiratory tract of horses. However, only EHV1 causes abortion and neurological disorders [102]. EHV-1 is transmitted mainly by the inhalation of the infected droplets or ingestion of EHV-1 contaminated material [108]. After entering into the body, the virus multiplication occurs in the epithelium of respiratory tract and then spread to the regional lymph nodes. Then, through leukocytes, endothelial cells of blood and lymphatic vessels spread systemically. The virus then cross the placenta, infect fetus and ultimately leads to abortion due to damage blood vessel’s endothelium.The clinical sign includes a high fever of 102-107°F for 1-7 days, nasal discharges, coughing, abortion, and other non-specific clinical signs [109]. Abortion usually occurs after 2-12 weeks of infection in late gestation (between 7 and 11 months of gestation). In recent years, equine herpesvirus myeloencephalopathy incidences were increased, and it leads to vasculitis (due to its endotheliotropic nature), multifocal myeloencephalopathy, ischemic neuronal injury, perivascular cuffing, gliosis, hemorrhage, and thrombosis [110,111]. On rare occasions, the paralysis may advance to quadriplegia and finally death of the animal [112,113].A number of diagnostic techniques were used for the diagnosis of EHV-1. The diagnosis of this virus by isolation, direct immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry (IHC) is usually difficult, but PCR based assays for detection of the viral genes are quite reliable, fast and sensitive method for the detection of EHV-1 and EHV-4 [114-117]. A real-time PCR assay using allelic discrimination (E2) to distinguish between neuro-pathogenic and non-neuropathogenic strains of EHV1 has been used [118]. Similarly, the development of ORF30 region specific, allelic discrimination (E1) EHV1 real-time PCR test has also been implicated [119]. The effective vaccination together with good management practices is effective tool for prevention of EHV-1 [120]. Nowadays multivalent combined vaccines containing EHV-1, 4, EIV, EEEV, WEEV, VEEV, and tetanus are also used with promising effects against multiple infections of equines.RabiesRabies is caused by Lyssavirus (negative strand ssRNA virus of family Rhabdoviridae). This disease often found to occur in three clinical forms including dumb, furious, and paralytic. The incubation period of this disease is approximately 15 days in experimental cases, while in clinical cases it is always fatal and leads to death within 5-10 days [6]. The behavioral changes along with progressive paralysis are the major outcomes of this disease. In contrast to other animals equines shows the involvement of spinal cord more commonly and histopathologically, most of the cases shows presence of Negri bodies in spinal cord section [10,121]. This virus is most deadly viruses in the world and having no cure if animals start showing signs and death is the final fate for the culprit. Lyssavirus mainly shows axon-neuronal transport by binding with Ach-receptors at motor end plate and multiply at the ventral horn of the spinal cord, which is the first site of replication then spread centrifugally and ultimately leads to encephalomyelitis [6]. Spinal cord is the most affected site in horse rabies cases, followed by brain stem. These portions of brain show polioencephalomyelitis along with perivascular cuffing of MNCs and formation of glial nodules on histopathological examination [10]. Fluorescent antibodies test is one of the most reliable and sensitive test, which can be used to detect the viral antigen in rabies, infected cases [6] (Figure-6).Figure-6Brief overview of pathogenesis of rabies (lyssavirus). This figure is prepared by the authors with the help of SmartArt in PowerPoint.DiagnosisThe diagnosis of encephalitic conditions in equines is based on many factors including season, vector and host involvement, type of etiology associated, clinical, serological, and molecular results. Laboratory diagnosis of most of arboviral infections is accomplished by testing of CSF or serum samples to detect virus-specific IgM and neutralizing antibodies. Serology is the key to ante-mortem diagnosis of alphavirus and flavivirus infection. No pathognomonic signs distinguish flavivirus infection from other CNS diseases in horses. IgM capture ELISA is the test of choice to detect recent exposure to alphavirus and flavivirus. CSF from horses with acute EEEV infection typically shows a neutrophilic pleocytosis. Although WNV-infected horses can have normal CSF, if the CSF is abnormal, there is mononuclear pleocytosis. Clinically, peripheral lymphopenia can be seen in EEEV and WNV. Laboratory diagnosis of NiV can be made by virus isolation, identification of the RNA by use of RT-PCR, IHC, histopathology, or serologic tests such as indirect ELISA and virus neutralization tests. Real-time PCR on samples obtained from CSF, nasal secretions, or neural tissue can be done to detect the neuropathic strain of EHV-1. PCR testing and IHC for EEEV and EHV-1 are relatively straightforward compared with that for WNV. In recent advance researchers, pattern recognition receptors (TLRs, CLRs, RLRs, and NLRs) also found to have major role in detection of immune response against flaviviruses [44] (Table-3).Table-3Most commonly used diagnostic tests for the detection of equine encephalomyelitis causing viral diseases.Viral diseasesCommon diagnostic methodsDiagnosis of encephalomyelitis causing viruses: • CSF examination • Cell culture isolation • Gross and microscopic examinationDetection of nucleic acids• PCR and real-time PCR• Isothermal amplification• Restriction fragment length polymorphisms• Genome sequencing• DNA probes and DNA microarray technologies• MetagenomicsDetection of antigens• Ag ELISA, FAT, IHC, RIA, ImmunochromatographyDetection of antibody• Agglutination, AGID, CFT, ELISA, bELISA, ImmunoblottingRecent technologies• Proteomics• Production of antigens by recombinant DNA technologyCSF = Cerebrospinal fluid, PCR = Polymerase chain reaction, FAT = Fluorescent antibodies test, IHC = Immunohistochemistry, RIA = Radioimmunoassay, Ag ELISA = Antigen enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, CFT = Complement fixation test, AGID: Agar gel immunodiffusionConclusionThe nervous systems affections are ubiquitous in equines worldwide and often serve as a potent source of infection to other species. Recent emergence of many diseases of equine origin has pose a threat to human civilization. The nervous system associated outbreaks (WNF, JE, NiV, EEE, WEE, and VEEE) have already been encountered globally in equines and often signifies the zoonotic potential as well. The different disease conditions associated with the nervous system shows their different spectrum of transmission and pathogenesis. Hence, nowadays, it becomes a continuous challenge to veterinarians to elucidate the different ways to establish diagnostics and therapeutic measures in more recent and advanced manner. For this, proper advances in neuroprotective strategies, proper vector control, and novel immunization strategies are highly recommended. The present review summarizes only the known viral encephalitic conditions, but still more studies are required to investigate some other unknown causes associated with the affections of the nervous system in equines.Authors’ ContributionsCollection, compilation and writing work along with construction of flow diagrams and tables done by RK. Editing and formatting work done by RDP. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.


Title: De novo transcriptome reconstruction and annotation of the Egyptian rousette bat

BackgroundBats (order: Chiroptera) constitute an abundant and diverse mammalian lineage comprising approximately 20 % of all known mammalian diversity [1]. Bats have evolved apart from other mammals for more than 50 million years [2] and are divided into two major suborders; the Yinpterochiroptera (megachiroptera) and the Yangochiroptera (microchiroptera). Yinpterochiroptera includes the family Pteropodidae and genera Rousettes and Pteropus whereas Yangochiroptera includes the family Myotidae and genus Myotis [3]. Unlike most mammals, bats can fly and this ability enabled their wide geographical range and increased metabolism [2]. Interestingly, bats have recently come to the forefront of zoonotic disease research with vast number of pathogens identified in a wide variety of bat species [2].Upwards of 85 different viruses, primarily RNA viruses, have been detected and/or isolated from bats [2, 4]. Amongst these are emerging viruses that cause lethal disease in humans and nonhuman primates including Nipah virus [5, 6], Hendra virus [7], severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)-like coronavirus [8], Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [9], Marburg virus (MARV) [10–13], and Ebola virus (EBOV) [14–16]. Despite the severe virulence of these viruses in humans, infected bats are often asymptomatic [13, 17–22]. Nipah virus and Hendra virus interactions with their natural reservoir hosts, Pteropus vampyrus and Pteropus alecto, respectively, are well characterized. Experimental infections of bats with high doses of henipaviruses have shown virus replication and shedding with little to no disease [20–22]. Remarkably, the only viruses known to have induced any observable pathology in bats are rabies virus and Australian bat lyssavirus [2, 23]. Understanding mechanisms of disease and differential responses to infection in asymptomatic reservoir host species compared to species that exhibit severe pathology will help inform the development of novel therapeutics and disease prevention approaches.Rousettus aegyptiacus, commonly known as the Egyptian rousette bat, has been identified as a natural reservoir host for MARV through ecological, epidemiological, and experimental studies [10, 12, 13, 18, 19, 24]. Furthermore, it has been speculated this bat could host Ebola virus [12, 25–27], although recent experimental infection studies have shown Ebola virus does not replicate well in R. aegeyptiacus [28]. The majority of human outbreaks due to MARV have been associated with caves inhabited by R. aegyptiacus. Furthermore, epidemiological surveillance of the R. aegyptiacus colony located in the Python cave in Uganda revealed a biannual spike in Marburg virus prevalence. This pattern correlated strongly with spillover transmission events in humans [24]. Initial studies in captive bats evaluated clinical signs, virus dissemination, and virus shedding patterns during experimental infection with a MARV isolate derived from wild bats [13]. Consistent with a natural reservoir host, the bats showed little to no evidence of disease even though the virus disseminated throughout their body and was actively shed [13]. These results were confirmed when bats were infected with MARV Angola, a strain isolated from a lethal human case [18]. In the absence of genetic and transcriptomic information for R. aegyptiacus and with limited available reagents, studying this reservoir host animal model has been challenging.The rapid expansion in genomic knowledge for different bat species has facilitated comparative studies that rely on the identification of genes and gene families, and has established a framework for developing necessary reagents. Full genome annotations for Pteropus vampyrus (2.63X, [29]), Myotis lucifugus (6.6X, [29]) Pteropus alecto (110x, [30]), Myotis davidii (110x, [30]), and Myotis brandtii (77.8X, [31]) are now available. Additionally, transcriptomic annotations for Pteropus alecto [32] and Artibeus jamaicensis [33] have been published. In particular, the complementary genome and transcriptome annotations for P. alecto has aided studies on henipavirus infections in its reservoir host [30, 32]. The host transcriptional response to different viruses was also recently assessed in a kidney cell line derived from P. vampyrus utilizing the previously annotated genome [34].In this manuscript, we report the transcriptomic annotation of R. aegyptiacus from a de novo assembly of RNA sequencing data from 11 tissues isolated from a male and a female bat. We identified 24,118 canonical coding transcripts whose expression profiles were consistent with the corresponding tissues of origin. In addition, we identified and validated novel coding transcripts that do not have any homology with the known sequences. Furthermore, we evaluated the annotation for immune-related genes and assessed the presence and expression of genes associated with a variety of immune functions.Results and discussionDe novo transcriptome assembly of R. aegyptiacusWe employed a de novo assembly approach to generate a comprehensive transcriptome without relying on a genome reference. First, we generated 20 RNA-seq libraries consisting of 11 tissue types (Table 1, Fig. 1a) each collected from one male and one female R. aegyptiacus bat, which yielded approximately 2.1 billion reads. We then assembled the high quality reads using Trinity [35] (Fig. 1b). This process generated 14,796,219 contigs. The assembly had high continuity and coverage with a median number of 718,807 contigs and median N50 of 1,540 across all tissues (Table 1). To comprehensively annotate the contigs, we used the Multiple Species Annotation (MSA) pipeline [36], which leverages the homology of known sequences of related species. We assigned gene symbols to contigs when this information was available. This process clustered the contigs into isoform groups (Fig. 1c).
Fig. 1Schematic of the de novo transcriptome reconstruction and analysis pipeline. The pipeline consists of 5 steps. a Data generation: Multiple tissues are extracted from R. aegyptiacus and sequenced. b
De novo Transcriptome assembly: Individual samples are first preprocessed to remove adapter sequences and assembled into contigs de novo. c MSA annotation: Once the set of contigs is generated, they are annotated using BLAST against three databases. In each step, unannotated contigs are iteratively annotated using the downstream databases. d Mering and Expression studies: A nonredundant contig set is obtained by merging the contig set of individual tissues two at a time. This pairwise merging is repeated until only one contig set is left. The subset of this contig can be obtained for the downstream analysis such as gene expression analysis by taking the transcripts with gene symbol and ORF sequence. See Fig. 2 for details. e Discovery of Novel Coding Transcripts: Novel coding transcripts can be identified by searching for contigs that failed annotation in the previous steps. Various metrics can be applied to generate high confidence novel coding transcript candidatesTable 1Library Information and Assembly StatisticsBatGenderTissueRead countLibraryN50Number of contigsBAT01FBM67896687single1736609943BAT02FBR55004118single884896445BAT03FHT77315750single1263717588BAT04FKY59782352single1174720026BAT05FLG77510852paired1822903831BAT06FLN63170354single1566638083BAT07FLV89970603paired1566697125BAT08FOV75051316single1401875888BAT09FPB56553369single1890404332BAT10FSP56141808single1340716771BAT11MBM47988156paired1808744115BAT12MBR75378417paired14901088331BAT13MHT20042200paired748497729BAT14MKY71478010paired1514872829BAT15MLG15525010paired668575991BAT16MLN88471565paired2186797125BAT17MLV27358079paired925431513BAT18MPB92707184paired1745556053BAT19MSP98465277paired2141873259BAT20MTT96476242paired18661179242R.aegyptiacus transcriptome captures a majority of bat transcriptsWe compared our assembly to the transcriptomes of three related bat species -- M. davidii, P. alecto, and M. brandtii. Using BLAST, we recovered 90.1 % of M. davidii transcripts, 89.54 % of M. brandtii transcripts, and 97.38 % of P. alecto transcripts. This result is consistent with the evolutionary history of these bats considering that P. alecto and R. aegyptiacus belong to the same family of Pteropodidae.Combining the transcriptome to generate nonredundant contigsTissue-specific transcriptome assemblies contained different numbers of contigs, due to their different levels of expression and sequencing depth. Without a common ground for comparison, it was difficult to perform downstream comparative analyses such as differential gene expression analysis; therefore, we combined contigs from all tissues into one unified, nonredundant reference transcriptome (Fig. 1d). To this end, we iteratively merged the assemblies two at a time, similar to the approach employed in [37] (Fig. 1d). We obtained 4,746,293 nonredundant contigs. Among the nonredundant contigs, 974,765 (20.54 %) of the sequences were annotated by bat sequences, 860,578 (18.13 %) by primate sequences, and 104,796 (2.2 %) by sequences in nt database (Fig. 2a). The nonredundant contig set had slightly lower sensitivity, though it still remained high; 86.60 % of M. davidii, 85.95 % of M. brandtii, and 95.30 % of P. alecto transcripts were recovered. The resulting annotated contigs were assigned gene names and combined using the longest annotated ORF as the transcript. This resulted in an annotation for R. aegyptiacus that contained a total of 24,118 genes. To determine the efficiency of using the MSA pipeline, we determined that 84 % (20,207 genes) of the contigs were annotated using the bat database and 16 % (3,911 genes) were subsequently annotated using the primate database. These data show that the MSA pipeline, which utilizes known transcripts from related species only, is a sensitive and efficient method for de novo transcriptome annotation.
Fig. 2Generation of Nonredundant Contig Set, Canonical Coding Transcript Set, and High Confidence Novel Transcript Set. From the union of all contigs, we generated the nonredundant set of transcripts by iterative pairwise merging of contig set of all tissues; this yielded 68 % reduction of the contig set. a To generate Canonical Coding Transcript Set, we selected the contigs that are annotated with MSA pipeline. The annotated contigs are further filtered for contigs that have a gene symbol. For an individual gene cluster, we chose a transcript with the longest ORF to represent the corresponding gene (Canonical Coding Transcript Set). b For unannoated contigs, we selected for expression level, presence of an ORF with both start and stop codons in the CDS, and a minimum length of 400 nucleotides. We identified 8 high-confidence novel coding transcript candidates for validationBiological validity via expression analysisWe evaluated biological validity of the reconstructed transcriptome by analyzing global expression patterns across the different tissues. If the transcriptome assembly and annotations were accurate, the expression profiles of a given tissue should cluster with those of the same tissue origin and segregate from those of different origins [36, 38]. A gene can result in more than one transcript isoform; therefore, to capture the highest amount of information, for each gene, we focused on the transcript with the longest open reading frame (ORF) (Fig. 2a). After normalizing the expression values, we performed Multidimensional Scaling (MDS) to determine the relationships between the gene expression patterns in different tissues. As expected, MDS showed a clear separation of the samples according to the tissue of origin (Fig. 3a) and explains 74 % of the variance in the data. To examine the evolutionary relationship among tissues, we performed hierarchical clustering of the gene expression profiles (Fig. 3b). The brain, which has a different developmental pathway compared to the other organs, was classified as an outgroup. The spleen, lymph node, and bone marrow are all organs of the immune system and, as expected, clustered near each other. The peripheral blood contains some of the same cell types as the immune organs, thus, clustered near these tissues. Lastly, the gonads and kidney, which develop from the intermediate mesoderm, were grouped as neighbors in the tree. These results suggest that our transcriptome captured sufficient heterogeneity of gene expression to distinguish individual tissues while preserving their developmental relationships.
Fig. 3MDS of Gene Expression Profiles of Bat Tissues. a We assessed the biological validity and quality of our transcriptome annotations by performing Multidimensional Scaling (using 1-spearman correlation as distance) on gene expression profiles of all tissues using the 22,398 genes as feature vector. The first two coordinates explained 73.9 % of the variance in the data. b We performed hierarchical clustering of expression profiles using 1-spearman correlation as distance. The clustering suggested presence of three groups that correspond to separate developmental origins. Tissues used are Bone (BM), Brain (BR), Heart (HT), Kidney (KY), Liver (LV), Lung (LG), Lymph (LN), Ovary (OV), PBMC (PB), Spleen (SP), Testes (TT) of the male (M) and female (F) batGene Ontology analysisWe further assessed biological validity of our transcriptome assembly through gene Ontology (GO) analysis of tissue-specific expression profiles. We compared expression profile of each tissue with the average expression in the whole dataset, and identified the top 200 most differentially expressed genes based on a generalized linear modeling framework. Using this list, we examined the enriched GO biological process (BP) terms. Figure 4 shows the top 10 GO BP terms from the bone marrow, spleen, lymph nodes, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). (For other tissues, see Additional file 1). Terms enriched for each tissue are consistent with their expected physiological functions.
Fig. 4Top Ten Enriched Gene Ontology Biological Process Terms for bone marrow, spleen, lymph node, and PBMC. In each panel, the terms are listed in descending order of significance of enrichment. These tissues, in particular are associated with different aspects of the immune system and these associations are observed within the GO BP terms identifiedIdentification of immune-related transcriptsR. aegyptiacus is a natural reservoir host for MARV, allowing for virus replication and dissemination with little to no pathological consequences [13, 17–22]. One important aspect of reservoir host biology is how their immune response compares to that of animal species that experiences severe disease, such as humans. Therefore, we examined the transcriptome for the presence of immune-related genes. We associated the R. aegyptiacus gene set with GO terms based on the human-specific gene ontology annotation. This resulted in 14,781 genes that mapped to 14,817 GO terms. We used CateGOrizer [39] and applied the immune class GOSlim terms to identify immune-related genes from this set. Similar to previous studies in P. alecto and A. jamaicensis, we found that out of 14,817 GO terms, approximately 2.75 % were associated with immune response [32, 33]. Amongst the most represented GO terms were cytokine production, lymphocyte activation, T cell activation, regulation of apoptosis, and regulation of lymphocyte activation (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5Distribution of immune genes within the R. aegyptiacus transcriptome at the GO Slim level using CateGOrizer. Genes annotated in the transcriptome were assessed for association with the immune response by analyzing them with CateGOrizer using the immune class GO Slim terms. The frequency shown is the percent of immune class GO slim terms associated with that particular pathway out of all the GO terms that were identifiedWe next searched for specific genes related to various aspects of the immune response in other mammals, primarily mice and humans. We first evaluated the annotation of the transcriptome for the presence of anti-viral genes. A multitude of pattern recognition receptors were identified including toll-like receptors (TLRs) 1–9, RIG-I, MDA5, and LGP2 along with the important scaffold and signaling molecules Myd88 and MAVS. A variety of antiviral molecules were also found, including Mx1 and Mx2, PKR, STING, IRF3, IRF5, IRF7, members of the IFIT and IFITM families, and ISG15. We also looked for the presence of type I, II, and III interferons (IFN). We were able to identify IFNgamma, IFNgamma2, and IFNalpha. Transcripts corresponding to the IFN receptor subunits IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 were also identified. IFNalpha and IFNbeta have been previously characterized by cloning from stimulated cells [40]. We, however, did not find any contigs corresponding to IFNB. To eliminate the possibility of an impaired assembly, we aligned the processed RNA-seq reads to the IFNB sequence from P. alecto [41] (Additional file 2 and Additional file 3). We detected only 2 reads from R. aegyptiacus,which did not provide sufficient coverage to construct the transcript. These data suggest that IFNB expression in healthy tissues of R. aegyptiacus is low, consistent with other mammals in which IFNB is primarily expressed after exposure to a stimulus.We also searched the transcriptome for genes associated with innate immune cells. We found the transcripts for the CD14 and CD11c genes, which are commonly used for phenotyping macrophages and dendritic cells, as well as transcripts for the CD80 and CD86 genes, which are useful for evaluating the activation status of these cells. Genes associated with natural killer (NK) cells, however, were less evident. We were able to identify transcripts of co-receptor gene CD56, but not CD16. Transcripts of genes encoding for molecules in the killer cell lectin-like receptor (KLR) family, including NKG2A and NKG2D, were also not found. In other bat transcriptomes, such as P. alecto and A. jamaicensis, coverage of NK cell-related genes was more sparse than that of other mammals [32, 33]. A similar observation was made in the genome of M. davidii [30]. The absence of NK cell-related genes in the R. aegyptiacus transcriptome further strengthens the theory that bats might contain a different NK cell receptor repertoire than other species.Next, we examined the repertoire of genes associated with adaptive the immune response. We identified a variety of transcripts associated with T cell identification, activation, inhibition, and differentiation including CD3 ε, CD4, CD8a, CD25, CD69, CCR7, PD-1, CTLA4, GATA3, foxp3, and Tbet. Interestingly, we were able to identify transcripts for the TCR α and TCR β chains, but were unable to find transcripts for the TCR δ and TCR γ chains. The transcriptome annotation for P. alecto included these genes, but they were present at low levels [32]. This supports the notion that αβ T cells are the predominant T cell subset in bats. We also looked at genes associated with B cells and were able to find transcripts for CD19, CD20, CD27, as well as transcripts that were similar to the immunoglobulin heavy chains A, E, G, and M and the immunoglobulin light chains κ and λ. Future analysis of the R. aegyptiacus genome is required to fully evaluate the immunoglobulin gene repertoire.Finally, we studied the cytokine and chemokine repertoire, important for shaping both innate and adaptive immune responses. We found a variety of transcripts corresponding to a wide array of both pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. These included IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-12a, IL-12b, IL-17a, IL-23, IL-10, TGF β, TNF, IFN γ, IL-1 β, CCL2, CCL5, and CXCL10. Altogether, the reference transcriptome generated for R. aegyptiacus provides an excellent foundation for investigating reservoir host immunology in bats.Novel transcriptsThere were 2,806,154 unannotated contigs from the nonredundant contig set (Fig. 2b). Of those, 71.6 % (2,008,503 contigs) did not have an ORF suggesting the majority of these contigs may be noncoding transcripts. To determine if the unannotated contigs were real or artifacts from the assembly, we used BLAST to align this set of contigs to the P. alecto genome and found that 96 % (2,706,432 contigs) were aligned. To evaluate the possibility of an incomplete or impaired assembly, we grouped the aligned contigs into a total of 1,012,664 clusters based on the presence of overlapping sequences. This reduction suggests that multiple isoform expression patterns between different tissues may have affected our assembly or that our short read assembly may have been incomplete. Nonetheless, the number of unannotated contigs that aligned to the P. alecto genome suggests that these contigs, either coding or noncoding, may be novel transcripts shared within the order Pteropodinae. Future studies evaluating the conservation and possible functions of these sequences are essential to determine the importance of these genetic elements. To validate novel contigs in R. aegyptiacus that appeared to be coding we utilized PCR. Primers were designed to produce amplicons for eight highly expressed, unannotated contigs that contained ORFs longer than 400 bp. Using RNA isolated from the spleen, we were able to produce amplicons of the expected size from at least one bat (Fig. 6 and Additional file 4). The sequences of these amplicons were found to match the expected sequence from the assembled ORF of the unannotated contig. These contigs also showed high sequence similarity to the P. alecto genome. In particular, six of the 8 validated transcripts showed sequence similarity higher than 75 % at a query coverage greater than 64 %. The other two validated transcripts had a query coverage of 23 with 78.36 % identity (transcript 1 in Fig. 6) and a query coverage of 7 with 91.27 % identity (transcript 2 in Fig. 6) (Additional file 5); therefore, we hypothesize that these transcripts might be specific to R. aegyptiacus. Further investigation is needed to fully understand the characteristics and biological functions associated with the proteins these contigs encode.
Fig. 6Unannotated, novel transcripts from R. aegyptiacus were validated of by RT-PCR. RNA from the spleen of both bats was reverse transcribed to make cDNA. The cDNA was amplified using primers specific for one of 8 novel transcripts that were unannotated in the assembly, but contained a complete ORF larger than 400 nucleotides. The expected product sizes were: transcript 1, 457 bp; transcript 2, 450 bp; transcript 3, 419 bp; transcript 4, 548 bp; transcript 5, 469 bp, transcript 6, 277 bp; transcript 7, 507 bp; and transcript 8, 301 bpConclusionIn this paper, we presented the comprehensively annotated of transcriptome of R. aegyptiacus and assessed its quality and biological validity. This transcriptome will be an important resource to study bat immunology. In particular, it will facilitate the process of investigating differences in host responses between asymptomatic reservoir host species and species that exhibit severe pathology. It will also pave the way for the development of novel therapeutics and prevention approaches against emerging zoonotic virus outbreaks.MethodsSample preparationTissues and blood were collected from one male and one female adult R. aegyptiacus bats that were bred and housed at the colony established at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA (Amman et al. 2015 [13]). Approximately 100 mg of the following tissues were collected and homogenized in 1 mL of Trizol LS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA): liver (bat id:BAT7, BAT17), lung (BAT05, BAT15), heart (BAT03, BAT13), kidney (BAT04, BAT14), brain (BAT02, BAT12), axillary lymph nodes (bilateral, pooled) (BAT06, BAT16), spleen (BAT10, BAT19), bone marrow (BAT01, BAT11), and gonad (BAT08, BAT20). PBMCs (BAT08, BAT18) were isolated from the blood and stored in Trizol LS as well.RNA was extracted using the PureLink RNA Mini kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). cDNA was synthesized using the TruSeq Stranded Total RNA Sample Prep Kit (Illumina, San Deigo, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The libraries were evaluated for quality using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA). After quantification by real-time PCR with the KAPA qPCR Kit (Kapa Biosystems, Woburn, MA), libraries were diluted to 10 nM. Cluster amplification was performed on the Illumina cBot and libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500. Eight of the female bat libraries were single-end, while the remaining tissues from the female bat and all tissues from the male bat were paired-end. All of the libraries sequenced were 125 bp in length. The average library depth was 66 M reads (minimum 16 M and maximum 98 M).Ethics statementAll experimental procedures were conducted with approval from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC, Atlanta, GA, USA) Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, and in strict accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Committee for the Update of the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals 2011). The CDC is an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care International fully accredited research facility. No human patient-derived clinical materials were used in these studies.De novo transcriptome assemblyWe first examined the quality of the reads using FastQC v0.11.3 [42]. We also preprocessed the reads to remove the adapter sequence using cutadapt v1.5 [43]. We removed “AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCTGAACTCCAGTCAC” from the forward strand and “AGATCGGAA-GAGCGTCGTGTAGGGAAAGAGTGT-AGATCTCGG- TGGTCGCCGTATCATT” from the reverse strand. We performed strand-specific de novo transcriptome assembly using Trinity r20140413p1 [35] with the parameters: “–normalize_reads” and “–SS_lib_type FR”, along with its default parameters for all of our samples.Homology based annotation of the transcriptomeFor annotation of contigs and clustering them into a gene model, we used Multiple Species Annotation pipeline, an nucleotide-based annotation approach that is more efficient and faster than BLASTX [36]. To make a BLAST [44] database for bats, we started with the complete “Nucleotide collection” (nt) database. We exported all accession numbers of the bat sequences at NCBI and made a subset database from nt using “blastdb_aliastool -db nt -dbtype nucl -gilistbats.sequence.gi.txt -title Bats -out Bats”. Using the same type of query, we also created a database for primates including humans due to their extraordinarily well-annotated transcriptomes, which will maximize the power of our annotation pipeline. We then used BLAST to iteratively align the contigs to the bat db, the primate db, and finally nt using a subtractive approach: what did not align to the bat db was aligned to the primate db, and what did not align to the primate db was aligned to nt.Sensitivity of R.aegyptiacus transcriptomeTo assess the coverage of our transcriptome, we downloaded the M. davidii, P. alecto, and M. brandtii transcriptomes from NCBI Eukaryotic genomes annotations [41]. We generated a BLAST index out of union of all contigs from our samples, and aligned the three bat contigs to our BLAST databases. We chose the alignment with 70 % of sequence identity with maximum evalue of 1e-4.Nonredundant transcriptome assemblyTo generate a nonredundant set of contigs, we iteratively merged individual assemblies using the the methods similar to the [37] employed to merge the kmers. Using CD-HIT-EST v4.6 [45] with sequence identity threshold of 0.99, we merged the first two pairs of contig sets (of sample i and sample i+1) upto the final sample n. After each iteration, we merged the resulting merged contig sets using a similar approach until only one contig set remained.Canonical coding transcript setFor the expression profiling, we generated a reference transcriptome consisting of transcripts each representing a gene model according to the following method: We first used TransDecoder (r20140413p1) [46] to find the ORF of all transcripts. Then, based on the MSA pipeline, we chose a transcript with gene symbols and the longest ORF in each gene cluster to capture the most information for downstream expression analysis. We did not consider the contigs mapped to nt database in this manuscript because obtaining feature files for all sequences as required by the MSA pipeline was computationally impractical, and a majority of the gene symbols (24,118) are captured in the bat and primate databases.Gene expression and gene ontology analysisAfter a canonical transcript set was obtained, we used this as a transcriptome reference for expression analysis. We mapped the preprocessed reads to this reference using RSEM v1.2.19 [47] and obtained a gene-to-count matrix. We removed the transcripts with expression variance equal to zero or with low expression (count <=10). For MDS plot, we used the spearman correlaton as a distance measure and “cmdscale” from the “stats” package in R [48]. To explore the biological processes in each gene expression profile, we employed a one-to-all sample comparison using the EdgeR generalized linear model framework [49, 50]. For each tissue, we compared individual gene expression within the tissue versus the average expression of all other tissues. With each tissue having differently ranked gene lists, we then selected top 200 genes and ran gene ontology analysis using topGO [51] with human-specific gene ontology annotation [52].Analysis of unannotated transcripts and identification of novel transcripts and validationWe used BLAST [44] to align unannotated contigs to the genome of P. alecto with the evalue of 1e-4 and query coverage of 40 %. To cluster the aligned contigs into groups, we used bedtools [53] setting the distance threshold parameter at 0. For transcripts that did not align with any similarity to bat, primate, or nt BLAST databases, we applied a series of filters to select for the coding transcripts to be validated. We used the following criteria: an ORF that was complete with both a start and stop codon, an ORF that was at least 400 bp in size, and a transcript that was expressed (a read count >0). We further selected for the novel transcripts with usuable primers using primer-BLAST [54]. Using these criteria, the number of novel transcripts was narrowed down to a total of 8. The primers and expected amplicon size are listed in Additional file 4.For validation, RNA was extracted from the spleen tissue of both the male and female bats using Trizol LS (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). cDNA was synthesized from 2.5 μg of RNA using the Superscript III First-strand Synthesis SuperMix (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Amplicons for each of the primer sets were generated using Phusion HotStart Flex DNA polymerase (New England BioLabs, Ipswitch, MA) and run on a 1.5 % agarose gel for visualization. The correct size amplicon was gel extracted, quantified, and Sanger sequenced on the Applied Biosystems 3730 ×1 DNA Analyzer.


Title: Animal Models for Henipavirus Research

1. IntroductionHendra virus (HeV) and Nipah virus (NiV) are zoonotic pathogens found within the Henipavirus (HNV) genus (family Paramyxoviridae) that emerged in the 1990s [1,2,3]. Following the identification of HeV and NiV, other HNV members were later discovered, including Cedar virus [4], Mojiang virus [5], Ghana virus [6,7], and Langya virus [8]. Both HeV and NiV cause severe respiratory and neurological diseases in humans and certain livestock [1,2]. Fruit bats of the Pteropus genus are the natural reservoirs of NiV and HeV and replicating virus has been isolated in several bat species local to endemic regions of outbreaks [9,10,11]. The suspected natural hosts of Mojiang and Langya viruses are rats and shrews, respectively [5,8].HeV first emerged in September of 1994, after several horses at a stable in Brisbane, Australia, developed a severe respiratory illness that was lethal in 65% of animals infected [12]. Two humans who came into direct contact with the fatally infected horses developed a severe influenza-like illness, which was lethal in one individual [1,12,13,14]. In 2004, 2008, and 2009, subsequent human cases occurred in veterinary or husbandry staff who came into contact with infected horses [15,16,17]. Additional equine outbreaks have occurred since then, but no other human cases have been reported. Since HeV’s emergence, there have been at least 63 spillover events in horses with an overall fatality rate of ~75% [18]. Only seven human cases of HeV have been recorded, 4 of which were fatal, and all occurred after direct contact with infected, symptomatic horses [19]. A second genotype of HeV (HeV-g2) was discovered in flying foxes [20] and horses [21]. HeV-g2 shares ~83% sequence homology to the prototype HeV. This genotype is lethal in horses, yet its pathogenicity in humans and nonhuman primates is presently unknown.NiV was identified following an outbreak among pig farmers, first in Malaysia and then in Singapore during 1998 and 1999, resulting in 265 total cases and 105 deaths, corresponding to a mortality rate of 39% [2,3,22,23]. Epidemiological investigations early in these outbreaks found that many NiV-infected patients had direct contact with blood, tissues, or secretions of pigs suspected of NiV infection [2,3]. In Malaysia, as many as 93% of patients reported direct contact with swine in the two weeks prior to developing symptoms of NiV encephalitis [2]. A case-control study identified that close contact with pigs was the primary source of the NiV outbreak in Malaysia [24]. Furthermore, this initial outbreak of NiV in Malaysia and Singapore was quelled by the culling of an estimated 1 million pigs in Malaysia and the cessation of pig exports from Malaysia to Singapore [22]. Overall, the total number of NiV cases recorded exceeds 650, and the continual emergence of the virus in Bangladesh and India increases these numbers almost annually [25].The ominous potential of NiV was swiftly realized as it manifested as febrile encephalitis and severe respiratory disease in humans, with case fatality rates (CFR) of up to 100% in certain outbreaks [26,27,28]. Genetic analysis has identified at least two strains of NiV responsible for outbreaks in different geographical areas: NiV-Malaysia (NiV-M) and NiV-Bangladesh (NiV-B) [29,30]. NiV-M and NiV-B share ~92% nucleotide sequence homology [30] and may exhibit divergent pathologies in humans [23,31]. The Malaysia strain caused the initial outbreak of NiV from 1998–1999 in Malaysia and Singapore and resulted in a high percentage of patients with neurological disease, with most encephalitic cases correlating with lethality in these outbreaks [26,27,28]. An additional outbreak of the Malaysia strain in the Philippines in 2014 was associated with a ~82% CFR in patients presenting with acute encephalitis syndrome [32]. The Bangladesh strain of NiV has caused repeated and near-annual outbreaks in Bangladesh and India between 2001 and 2023 [27,28,33,34]. The outbreaks caused by NiV-B have had higher CFRs, averaging about 75% [31], with human-to-human transmission also observed [35,36]. A 2018 outbreak of NiV-B in India resulted in 21 deaths among 23 total cases (91% CFR) [33], and a current outbreak of NiV-B in Bangladesh has resulted in 11 cases with eight deaths [34]. Subsequent outbreaks of NiV-B that have occurred in Bangladesh and/or India have reported a higher proportion of respiratory disease observed than in Malaysia [31,37]. Although imprecise characterizations have distinguished the Malaysia strain for causing neurological disease and the Bangladesh strain for causing pulmonary disease, it is important to note that both strains inflict pulmonary and neurological disease in both humans and animal models.Viral entry of HNVs is initiated following binding of the attachment (G) glycoprotein to host-cell Ephrin-B2 or Ephrin-B3 ligands, after which the fusion (F) glycoprotein mediates membrane fusion between the viral and host-cell membranes, enabling viral entry to the cell [38,39]. Ephrin B2 is present in various cell types, including neurons, endothelial cells, smooth muscle surrounding arteries, placental tissue, spleen, and the lining of lymph nodes’ sinuses. In contrast, ephrin B3 is predominantly expressed in the central nervous system (CNS), particularly the spinal cord midline, and functions to prevent corticospinal tract axons from recrossing the midline [40]. Ephrin B3 is also expressed on lymphoid cells, which could potentially explain the occurrence of acute lymphoid necrosis induced by NiV infection; while lymphocytes are not directly permissive to NiV, the virus can bind these cells as a vehicle for spread into tissues [38,41]. The extensive species tropism of HNVs is primarily attributed to the conserved protein sequence of ephrin B2 and B3 across numerous species [42]. Despite this high conservation, HNVs do not cause disease in immunocompetent mice after intraperitoneal challenge [43]. Hamsters and ferrets have been the most valuable small in vivo models, particularly for triaging candidate vaccines and treatments, but these fail to reflect some major aspects of NiV disease in humans [44]. The animal model that appears to reproduce human NiV infection most faithfully is African green monkeys (AGMs) [44,45], which we will discuss in detail below.This review comprehensively evaluates the suitability of current animal models for conducting studies on the pathogenesis and transmission of HeV and NiV and assessment of experimental countermeasures. A detailed examination of the strengths and limitations of each model is offered to facilitate an informed selection of the optimal model for the intended research purpose. Figure 1 describes the general suitability of several animal models for specific research objectives.2. Henipavirus Infection in Humans2.1. Hendra VirusHeV infection in humans produces an acute respiratory and encephalitic disease. At present, seven human patients are confirmed to have been infected with HeV, five of whom died. The incubation period ranges from as few as four days to two weeks following exposure. All cases initially exhibit non-specific, flu-like symptoms of fever, cough, myalgia, nausea, and lethargy, which subsequently progress to acute respiratory distress and encephalitis in fatal cases [13,15,16]. Findings in human cases of HeV infection included pneumonitis, respiratory failure, renal failure, and arterial thrombosis [15]. Neurological signs and symptoms are presented as headache and confusion, and, in fatal cases, tonic-clonic seizure and ataxia [13]. Notably, a single case of fatal relapsing encephalitis occurred approximately 13 months after acute signs of HeV disease resolved [46]. Importantly, no human-to-human transmission of HeV has been observed.2.2. Nipah VirusClinically, the incubation period for NiV infection ranges from a few days to two weeks [23,31]. NiV can cause atypical pneumonia [23] or necrotizing alveolitis with hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, and aspiration pneumonia [47], leading to acute respiratory distress syndrome. The pulmonary syndrome is presented as an influenza-like illness, with hypoxemia and diffuse alveolar shadowing in chest X-rays. NiV also causes severe encephalitis with cognitive, sensory, and motor neurological signs and symptoms [22,23,31,48]. Clinical signs reported in NiV encephalitic syndrome include areflexia, hypotonia, abnormal pupillary and doll’s eye reflex, tachycardia, hypertension, myoclonus, meningism, convulsions, and seizures. Brain MRI scans in acute NiV encephalitis show disseminated, small, discrete hyperintense lesions in both grey and white matter. Targeting endothelial cells by NiV leads to systemic vasculitis and infection of multiple organ systems, including the kidneys, liver, heart, and brain [49,50]. Pulmonary or encephalitic disease can be lethal, and many survivors of encephalitic infection face long-term neurological sequelae [51]. Late-onset and relapsing encephalitis due to prior NiV infection has been reported months to years after initial infection, with the longest time to relapse described so far being 11 years [52,53,54].3. Animal Models of HNV Infection—Initial StudiesThe first animal challenge studies with HeV (previously equine morbillivirus) were performed in healthy adult horses to reproduce the severe respiratory disease observed during the initial outbreak [1,12,13]. The experiments successfully recapitulated clinical signs of disease seen in natural infection, including anorexia, fever, and respiratory distress, with the primary accompanying pathology being pulmonary edema and histological evidence of syncytial cell formation of vascular endothelium across lung, brain, spleen, heart, and kidneys [1]. Shortly after the initial equine experiments, a pilot study was performed to identify the susceptibility of several common laboratory species, including mice, guinea pigs, rats, chickens, rabbits, cats, and dogs with 5 × 104 TCID50 of HeV administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) [55]. Only in guinea pigs and cats were clinical signs of disease observed. A wide range of species were then investigated for suitability as models of HNV disease.4. MiceThe mouse model for HNV disease has not been widely used in the field for studies of pathogenesis or medical countermeasures due to initial challenge experiments failing to produce clinical disease in immunocompetent mice (Table 1). Recent studies employing transgenic mice with modifications aimed to dampen the host antiviral immune response have yielded positive findings, suggesting that the model may be of utility if further refined (Table 2). A mouse model for HNV disease would be highly useful due to plentiful reagent availability, ease of handling, space requirements in Biosafety Level (BSL)-4 containment, and low cost.4.1. Immunocompetent MiceInitial challenge studies employing immunocompetent, juvenile mice (Table 1) did not result in clinical disease or seroconversion when inoculated i.p. with 5 × 103 TCID50 of HeV-prototype or 1 × 107 PFU of NiV-M [43,55]. Mice surviving infection with NiV were re-challenged and developed an antibody response but still did not show clinical signs of disease [43]. A later study demonstrated that intracerebral (i.c.) NiV-M infections with 1 × 105 PFU were 100% lethal by day 5 post-infection in C57BL/6 mice, whereas i.p. inoculation with a 1 × 106 PFU dose in this model did not result in disease [58]. A subsequent study examining the susceptibility of juvenile (8-week-old) and aged (12-month-old) BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice to HeV found that a 5 × 104 TCID50 dose administered intranasally (i.n.) was lethal in aged mice of both genetic backgrounds [56]. This study also examined subcutaneous (s.c.) HeV challenge (5 × 104 TCID50), but mice did not exhibit clinical signs, and only a small minority developed a neutralizing antibody response. In contrast, juvenile BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice did not develop clinical signs of disease; however, histological assessment of asymptomatic mice did uncover encephalitic lesions and viral antigen deposition. Clinical signs of disease observed in aged mice challenged with HeV in this study were largely neurological, with depression, ataxia, hypersensitivity, and tremors reported, with mice succumbing to disease or meeting euthanasia criteria between 11- and 21-days post-infection. Encephalitis characterized by neuronal degradation, perivascular cuffing, and non-suppurative meningitis was identified in all C57BL/6 mice showing clinical signs of disease [56]. Antigen deposition was detected in the lungs of animals, and live virus was re-isolated in BALB/c mice; however, clinical signs of respiratory distress were not observed, and no histological lesions were present in major target organs of HeV infection [56].4.2. Immunodeficient MiceThe susceptibility of immunocompromised mice has also been evaluated, with type I interferon receptor knockout (IFNAR-KO) mice demonstrating uniform lethality for both NiV and HeV (Table 2) [58]. I.p. infection with 1 × 106 PFU in 3– (HeV) and 9–10-week-old (NiV) IFNAR-KO mice achieved uniform lethality [58]. Groups of 3- and 12-week-old IFNAR-KO mice were next i.n. challenged with 1 × 106 PFU of HeV, but neither group developed clinical disease. Nevertheless, HeV genomic RNA was detected in the brain at levels lower than groups challenged i.p. [58]. Interestingly, immunocompetent mice supported higher levels of HeV RNA in the brain following i.n. infection as compared to those inoculated via the s.c. route at an identical challenge dose [56]. Among many potential reasons, this disparity may be attributed to the i.n. route delivering more infectious particles in close anatomical proximity to the olfactory bulb. Not only was i.n. challenge lethal in aged immunocompetent mice, but the challenge dose was also lower than that used in the IFNAR-KO mice [56,58]. Taken together, these findings indicate that lethality is both dose- and route-dependent. It is unclear how lethality was higher in immunocompetent mice inoculated with a lower dose than that used in the IFNAR-KO mouse model. These discrepancies warrant further investigation.IFNAR-KO mice infected i.p. with NiV-M showed clinical signs consistent with neurological disease, including head tilt and locomotor disabilities that progressed to paralysis in the late stages of infection. Breathing difficulty was seen only in some i.n. challenged animal. Other clinical signs included hunched posture, decreased grooming, and weight loss. The LD50 for NiV-M in IFNAR-KO mice inoculated via the i.p. route was determined to be 8 × 103 PFU. Transgenic mice deficient in multiple innate pattern recognition signaling adaptor proteins including myeloid differentiation primary response 88 (MyD88), TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-b (TRIF), mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS), and stimulator of interferon genes (STING) (MyD88/TRIF/MAVS/STING-KO) were also assessed for susceptibility to NiV infection. These adaptor molecules are implicated in the antiviral sensing activities of toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), which detect DNA and RNA typically associated with viruses and their replication cycle. MyD88/TRIF/MAVS/STING-KO mice developed lethal disease following i.p. challenge with 1 × 106 PFU of NiV-M, and clinical signs were consistent with those observed in IFNAR-KO studies [61]. Principal clinical signs aligned with a neurological-skewed disease course as hunched posture, prostration, and paralysis were observed, with all (MyD88/TRIF/MAVS/STING-KO) subjects succumbing to disease by 11 days post-infection [62]. Gross or histopathologic lesions were not described by the authors of this study; however, antigen was detected in the brain.
viruses-15-01980-t002_Table 2Table 2Experimental findings in immunodeficient mouse models of HNV Disease.Species/Genetic Background (Age)Virus (Isolate)DoseRoute% LethalityClinical DiseaseReferenceIFNAR-KO (3-week-old)HeV (prototype)1 × 106PFUi.p.100%Weight loss, aggressiveness, prostration, paralysis[58]IFNAR-KO (6-week-old)~80%IFNAR-KO (18-week-old)50%IFNAR-KO1 × 106PFUi.n.NoneNoneNOD/SCID/γcnullNiV-M1 × 105 TCID50intra-graftNoneNone[63]1 × 105 TCID50i.d.IFNAR-KONiV-M (UMMC1)1 × 106PFUi.p.100% (5/5)Weight loss, aggressiveness, prostration, paralysis[58]1 × 106PFUi.n60%(3/5)1 × 105PFUi.c.100% (5/5)a rNiV-FlucNP8 × 104PFUi.n.50%(2/4)Hunched posture[64]8 × 105PFUi.p.100% (4/4)Hunched posture, lethargy, ataxia, seizureC57BL/6 MyD88/MAVS-KONiV-M (UMMC1)1 × 106PFUi.p.66% (4/6)Lordosis, prostration, paralysis[61]C57BL/6 IFNAR-KO1 × 106PFU83% (5/6)C57BL/6 MyD88/TRIF/MAVS/STING-KONiV-M (UMMC1)1 × 106PFUi.p.100% (5/5)Yes, not described[62]C57BL/6 MyD88/TRIF/MAVS-KO1 × 106PFU40% (2/5)C57BL/6 IFNAR-KO1 × 106PFU80% (4/5)C57BL/6 MyD88 KO1 × 106PFUNoneNoneC57BL/6 MyD88/TRIF-KO1 × 106PFUNoneIFNAR-KO(37–44-day-old)NiV-M1 × 104 TCID50i.p.50%(4/8)Clinical signs including weight loss b[59]1 × 106 TCID5063%(5/8)1 × 107 TCID5075%(6/8)a Recombinant NiV containing a luciferase reporter gene. b Comprehensive numerical clinical scores were described in this study, with individual signs not specified for subjects.Currently, no published studies employ mice as a model to study antiviral countermeasures to HNV infection. The use of immunocompromised mouse strains clouds interpretations of the immune response to HNV infection or medical countermeasures. Additional challenge studies should be performed to refine the challenge route and dose across multiple genotypes. Since intranasal inoculation of HeV is uniformly lethal in immunocompetent mice, determination of LD50 should be conducted. Because of the relevancy to NiV pathogenesis and transmission, aerosol challenge studies should also be carried out. Lastly, to detect pathogenicity differences, challenge studies should be performed with multiple strains, including NiV-B, the strain responsible for the most frequent, recent, and lethal outbreaks in India and Bangladesh [33,34].5. Syrian Golden HamsterThe Syrian golden hamster (SGH; Mesocricetus auratus) model is the most common rodent model employed in HNV pathogenesis, prophylaxis, and treatment studies. Both HeV and NiV infections produce disease in SGHs that is highly similar to that observed in human cases. The SGH model was first developed for NiV in 2003 [43] and HeV in 2009 [65]. Following these initial studies, continued investigation of challenge route, dosing, and HNV strains has enabled refinement of the model (Table 3). The SGH model has been used to evaluate the in vivo efficacy of antivirals, including favipiravir [66], ribavirin [67], and chloroquine [68] against lethal NiV challenge. Experimental vaccine countermeasures to HNVs spanning a variety of platforms, including ChAdOx1 [69], virus-like particle [70], mRNA [71], and recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus [72] based vaccines, have been described. Monoclonal antibody [73] and passive immune sera treatment studies [74] have also been studied in this model.SGHs are highly susceptible to lethal HeV infection, with an LD50 calculated to be 12 PFU in seven-week-old animals challenged via the i.p. route [65]. Inoculation with doses as low as 1 × 103 PFU i.p. resulted in death within six days of challenge [65]. Unlike humans and AGMs, the Bangladesh strain is less pathogenic than the Malaysia strain in hamsters [79]. HeV infection of SGHs resulted in acute respiratory disease marked by labored breathing and diffuse pulmonary infiltrates on thoracic radiography alongside neurological signs, including paralysis, limb trembling, and seizure [65,78]. Antigen was detected in the brain, lungs, heart, kidney, liver, and spleen as well as within blood vessel walls within 2–3 days of i.p. infection with 1 × 103 PFU of HeV [65]. A higher challenge dose (1 × 105 PFU) of HeV produced more severe lesions in the same organs. The challenge dose and route of HeV in the SGH model results in varying clinical signs and disease courses, with high-dose i.n. challenge producing a more severe respiratory disease state and rapid death, and low-dose producing a more neurological skewed disease course [78]. The lethality of HeV infection in SGH does decrease in response to the age of the hamster, with a dose of 100 LD50 being completely lethal in seven-week-old hamsters but only ~84% lethal in 11-week-old hamsters [65]. Furthermore, while seven-week-old hamsters all died by day 5 post-infection, fatally infected SGHs in the 11-week-old group died by day 12 post-infection. The potentially decreased sensitivity to lethal HeV infection with increased age must be accounted for in vaccine studies, as prime-boost dose regiments may require higher challenge doses to achieve uniform lethality in control animals.NiV infection of SGHs results in respiratory and neurological signs of disease consistent with human infection, including acute interstitial pneumonia, systemic vasculitis, encephalitis, and death. Uniform lethality is achieved through multiple challenge routes, including i.n., i.p., and small particle aerosol. A number of experiments have been performed to elucidate the LD50 of NiV-M and NiV-B delivered i.p. and i.n., and there is some variation in these values [79,83]. As was seen with the HeV challenge, the disease severity of NiV-infected SGH is route and dose-dependent, and there are differences in pathogenicity observed between NiV-M and NiV-B. Initial studies determined the LD50 of NiV-M in SGH to be 2.7 × 102 PFU and 4.7 × 104 PFU via the i.p. and i.n. routes, respectively [43]. Doses of 1 × 104 PFU or 1 × 103 TCID50 are uniformly lethal when delivered via the i.p. route. Lethality is more reliably achieved with lower doses via the i.p. route. Time-to-death also varied depending on the challenge route, with i.p. challenged animals succumbing to the disease within 5–9 days post-infection and 9–15 days for i.n. [43]. A recent study sought to robustly determine whether differences in lethality, disease course, and time to death varied between i.n. and i.p. challenge routes. This report found that the i.p. challenge disseminated the virus more rapidly to tissues and that there was no difference in survival when the same dose was delivered [83]. Initial dose susceptibility employing serial dilutions of NiV-M ranging from 1 × 104 to 1 × 106 TCID50 i.n. and 1 × 103 to 1 × 105 TCID50 i.p. were uniformly lethal; however, a dose of 1 × 102 TCID50 i.p. resulted in 1 of 4 animals surviving, which is consistent with other studies [79,83]. The challenge of SGHs with 1 × 102 TCID50 of NiV-B delivered i.p. resulted in 100% survival in a separate study by a different group [79]. Challenge of SGH via the i.n. route produces a respiratory-skewed disease, and i.p. challenge results in more neurological signs. Lesion severity in the lungs diverges at the early stages of the disease. Severe broncho-interstitial pneumonia and thickening of alveolar walls occurred at days 2 and 4 post-infection, whereas i.p. challenged animals showed only mild interstitial pneumonia [83]. Viral RNA was detected in high abundance starting at day 2 post-infection in i.n. challenged subjects; however, no RNA was observed at this time point in i.p. challenged animals. This is likely because the i.n. delivery ensures large amounts of virus travel deep into the lungs, producing acute and severe respiratory disease. Meningitis was observed only in i.p. challenged animals, and no viral RNA was found in the brain of i.n. challenged animals [83].The challenge of SGHs with whole-body aerosols containing NiV-M at doses of 1 × 102 to 1 × 105 PFU resulted in uniform lethality at the highest dose, with an estimated LD50 of less than 1 × 102 PFU [80]. Animals exhibited clinical signs of disease starting five days post-infection, including weight loss and decreased grooming, which progressed to severe respiratory and neurological signs of disease. The mean time-to-death occurred around seven days post-infection for animals receiving a 1 × 105 PFU dose [80]. Prominent pathological findings included vasculitis of medium and large blood vessels, edema, broncho-interstitial pneumonia, and mild meningitis. As seen with other routes of challenge, lower challenge doses resulted in incomplete lethality and extended disease courses. Notably, there was no correlation between dose and whether the infection produced a neurological or respiratory-focused disease, as animals in all dose groups demonstrated a mix of respiratory and neurological disease. These studies suggest that the aerosol challenge of NiV in the SGH model is useful for evaluating medical countermeasures against potential natural routes of exposure.There is no evidence of HeV transmission between SGHs through direct contact or aerosols. Naïve animals co-housed with HeV-infected subjects did not show clinical signs of disease or seroconvert by study endpoint [65]. Similar studies evaluated viral shedding and transmission of NiV via direct contact, aerosol, and fomites. Virus shedding detected by titration was identified in oral swabs with doses as low as 1 × 103 TCID50 i.n.; however, the virus was detected in oral, nasal, rectal, and urogenital swabs from animals inoculated with a higher dose of 1 × 107 TCID50 of NiV-M [77]. Naïve SGHs exposed to aerosols from NiV-M infected subjects did not seroconvert nor exhibit clinical signs of disease. However, viral shedding was detected by qRT-PCR in naïve SGHs co-housed with NiV-M infected subjects or those exposed to bedding, food, and water from infected animals [77]. None of the naïve animals in the fomite or aerosol transmission group seroconverted by study endpoint; however, several animals from the direct contract transmission group did, which is consistent with other direct-contact NiV transmission experiments in the SGH model [43]. Foodborne transmission of NiV has also been investigated; ~63% of SGHs drinking simulated date palm sap contaminated with 5 × 108 TCID50 of NiV-B developed neurological disease [85].6. Guinea PigThe guinea pig (Cavia porcellus) was among the first rodents to be experimentally infected with Hendra virus (Table 4) [55]. Four out of five guinea pigs challenged via the s.c. route with 5 × 104 TCID50 of HeV succumbed to disease 8–13 days post-infection after clinical signs of acute respiratory distress were observed [55,86]. Only one of twelve guinea pigs challenged i.n. with 3 × 104 TCID50 of HeV showed clinical signs of dyspnea and was euthanized; however, all asymptomatic animals seroconverted and remained clinically well through the study endpoint [87]. Intradermal inoculation also failed to produce clinical disease, and animals did not seroconvert [87]. The guinea pig model recapitulated the systemic vasculitis seen in human HeV infection, with principal histological findings including syncytial cell formation in vascular endothelium, fibrinoid degeneration of arteries and veins, and thrombi [86,87]. Vasculitis in the lungs, heart, kidney, urinary bladder, and brain was marked by infiltration of mononuclear cells, eosinophils and fibroblasts into vessel walls and surrounding structures. In contrast to the disease seen in humans and horses, signs of severe pulmonary edema or acute encephalitis were absent. Pregnant guinea pigs challenged i.p. with 5 × 104 TCID50 of HeV showed clinical signs consistent with previous studies, yet infection was abortive in one subject, and HeV was re-isolated from fetal tissues [88]. Placental tissue also showed multi-focal necrosis and vascular degeneration.Limited studies have been performed to establish guinea pigs as a model for NiV disease. An initial study showed guinea pigs i.n. infected with 6 × 105 PFU of NiV-M did not result in clinical disease or seroconversion by the study endpoint, and challenge with 1 × 107 PFU i.p. resulted in only low fever and weight loss [43]. The lack of clinical disease in guinea pigs challenged i.n. with NiV or HeV indicates that this challenge route is not conducive to productive infection. Guinea pigs challenged with a lower i.p. dose of 5 × 104 TCID50 produced similarly mild clinical signs, including ruffled fur and slight ataxia 7–9 days post-infection [90]. A subsequent study in guinea pigs exposed to 6 × 104 PFU of NiV-M resulted in severe clinical signs of disease and 92% lethality within 4–8 days post-infection [91]. Histopathological lesions were present in guinea pig lung, spleen, brain, bladder, uterus, kidney and lymph nodes, and consisted of epithelial syncytial cell formation and fibrinoid necrosis. It is unclear why 1 × 107 PFU i.p. did not result in clinical signs, but 6 × 104 PFU caused nearly uniformly lethal disease. Except for the ataxia reported in one guinea pig challenged with 5 × 104 TCID50, clinical neurological signs are not reported for NiV challenge in guinea pigs. However, histopathological lesions can include viral and eosinophilic inclusions, meningeal vasculitis, and lymphocytic meningitis [91]. The most severe lesions are found in the urogenital tract. Further studies are needed in this model to determine appropriate infective doses and whether NiV-B produces similar disease.7. FerretThe domesticated ferret (Mustela putorius furo) is a well-characterized model that effectively recapitulates human NiV and HeV disease (Table 5). In ferrets, infection with HNVs through the combined intranasal/intratracheal (i.t./i.n.) or oronasal (o.n.) route leads to the onset of fever between days 4 and 7 post-challenge [92,93]. This fever progresses rapidly, resulting in severe respiratory distress and neurological signs appearing between days 6 and 10, depending on the challenge dose. Clinical manifestations in ferrets include coughing, nasal discharge, dyspnea, cerebral edema, tremors, and partial or complete limb paralysis. Unlike hamsters, there is no observable connection between the challenge dose and the clinical outcome in ferrets.Gross pathological changes mainly manifest within the respiratory tract and include scattered pinpoint hemorrhagic lesions throughout the lung surface (Figure 2). These lesions stand out as they are notably different from the extensive hemorrhagic lesions found in hamsters and AGMs [78,103,104]. Histopathological alterations are primarily concentrated in the lungs, spleen, and kidneys [92] and include acute focal necrotizing alveolitis and pulmonary vasculitis, as well as necrosis in the spleen and kidneys. While vasculitis and encephalitis are typically absent, occasional instances of nonsuppurative meningitis can be observed. The presence of viral antigen is detected in syncytial cells of small blood vessels and alveolar walls in the lungs, along with necrotic glomerular and tubular epithelium in the kidneys. Despite minimal histopathological changes in the brain, HNV antigen is identified in meningeal blood vessels, choroid plexus endothelium, and neurons. Antigen detection is noted in various tissues, including the respiratory tract, brain, liver, spleen, and kidneys [92,98].The ferret model has been utilized to compare potential distinctions in transmission and pathogenesis between the Malaysia and Bangladesh strains of NiV [98]. Throughout the infection course in ferrets, notably higher virus levels are retrieved from oral secretions in animals infected with NiV-B compared to NiV-M. Nevertheless, no endeavors have been undertaken to study inter-animal transmission in this model. Beyond transmission and pathogenesis investigations, ferret models have also proven effective in evaluating vaccines and therapeutics [92,93,94]. The main disadvantage of the ferret model is that limited reagents exist to conduct advanced immunological analyses.8. Nonhuman PrimatesExperimental challenge studies of NiV and HeV have been performed in a diverse array of nonhuman primates species, AGMs (Chlorocebus aethiops) [103,104], cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) [105], and the common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus) [106]. Lethal infection is reliably achieved in AGMs across multiple routes that simulate natural routes of exposure, including inhaled small particle aerosol and i.t./i.n. inoculation. Conversely, infection of cynomolgus macaques results in mild to no disease or inconsistent lethality [105]. AGMs are ideal for evaluating promising medical countermeasures to NiV and HeV as they faithfully recapitulate the respiratory and neurological disease observed in human cases.8.1. African Green MonkeyAs mentioned, the AGM model is the gold standard for both NiV and HeV infection, as it accurately recapitulates human pathogenesis and is amenable to multiple challenge routes, including aerosol. Moreover, a wide range of immunological reagents are available for detailed characterization of the host response [105,107].The challenge of AGMs i.t. with 4 × 105 TCID50 of HeV resulted in a uniformly lethal disease course highly similar to that observed in humans with animals succumbing to disease or meeting euthanasia criteria 7–9 days following the challenge (Table 6) [104]. Clinical signs of disease became apparent 5–6 days after infection and included frothy nasal discharge, labored breathing, mild depression, seizures, muscle fasciculations, and radiology depicting pulmonary congestion and consolidation by days 7 and 8, indicative of interstitial pneumonia [104].Lungs of HeV-infected AGMs were discolored, wet and heavy upon necropsy with areas of multifocal congestion and hemorrhage. Pathological findings were similar in NiV-infected AGMs (Figure 3). Infection of AGMs i.t. with NiV-M with doses ranging from 2.5 × 103–1.3 × 106 PFU resulted in mostly lethal disease with death occurring between 9- and 12-days following challenge [103]. Subjects demonstrated clinical signs of disease consistent with human NiV infection (acute respiratory distress, inappetence, lethargy, depression, fever, neurological signs) and NiV RNA was detectable in plasma samples as early as 7 dpi and in nasal swabs 4 dpi [103]. Notably, AGM models for both Malaysia and Bangladesh strains of NiV have been established [103] that are consistent with human disease [116,120]. In line with the high mortality rates in humans reported in outbreaks caused by the latter strain, NiV-B appears more pathogenic than NiV-M in the AGM model under identical experimental conditions, resulting in uniform lethality (NiV-B) as opposed to partial lethality (NiV-M) [116].Severe neurological signs of disease, including seizure, headache, dizziness, myoclonus, and dysphasia, were reported in human NiV-M infections, with over 50% of patients presenting with reduced levels of consciousness and brain-stem dysfunction [23]. Notably, 78% of patients in the outbreak received either oral or intravenous ribavirin. Interestingly, treatment of HeV infection AGMs with ribavirin increased the propensity of animals to exhibit neurological signs (muscle fasciculations, seizure) and a delayed disease course (by 1–2 days) but ultimately did not improve survival [104]. Human patients infected with HeV have also received ribavirin therapy, and consistent with what was observed in AGMs, this treatment does not appear to benefit outcomes, although the small number of HeV patients prohibits definitive conclusions from being reached. One of the more promising treatments tested in NiV and HeV-infected AGMs is monoclonal antibodies targeting the surface glycoproteins of HNVs, including m102.4 [108,116]. Remdesivir (GS-5734) was also found to be protective [121]. A variety of vaccine countermeasures have been evaluated in the AGM model against NiV and HeV, including rVSV displaying NiV-B (G) glycoprotein [107,122], soluble HeV (G) glycoprotein [109,117], and a chimpanzee adenovirus platform (ChAdOx1) displaying the NiV-M (G) glycoprotein [123]. Thus, the AGM model is versatile and can be used to explore HNV pathogenesis (including neuropathologies) and to develop medical countermeasures.8.2. Cynomolgus MacaqueInfection of cynomolgus macaques with 5 × 105 PFU of HeV via the i.t./i.n. route caused very mild clinical disease in some animals with signs of agitation, increased aggressiveness, and abdominal breathing, accompanied by decreased white blood cell counts and increased levels of liver enzymes ALT and AST (Table 7) [105]. HeV RNA is detectable throughout the course of infection in cynomolgus macaques starting three days post-challenge in blood samples and oral, nasal, and rectal swabs, with levels similar to that of HeV-infected AGMs. No evidence of pathological lesions was observed at necropsy, nor was viral antigen detected. HeV-infected macaques seroconverted and achieved neutralizing antibody titers approximately equal to those seen to protect AGMs from lethal HNV challenge successfully. Assessment of global transcriptional changes related to immune signaling revealed that surviving HeV-infected macaques showed upregulated levels of transcripts mapped to adaptive immunity signaling pathways, including B-cell antigen presentation and differentiation into plasma cells. Instead, downregulated transcripts were implicated in complement activation, apoptosis, and cytotoxic granule release [105]. Additionally, macaques displayed lower levels of MCP-1, a chemoattractant involved in the trans-endothelial migration of monocytes, likely reducing the systemic spread of the virus following infection. Infection with 5 × 105 PFU i.t./i.n. of NiV-M or NiV-B produced limited signs of clinical illness similar to what was observed following the HeV challenge. The lack of lethal infection, clinical disease, or obvious pathological lesions following challenge with HNVs indicates that the model is of little utility for the study of medical countermeasure efficacy against HNV infection; however, further study of the immune response could inform the development of immunomodulatory drugs.8.3. Common MarmosetThe marmoset model is the most recent nonhuman primate model of HNV disease to be developed and recapitulates the respiratory features of human NiV infection (Table 7). Seven-year-old marmosets challenged via the i.t./i.n. route with 6.33 × 104 PFU of NiV-B succumbed to disease 8–11 days after infection and showed clinical signs of anorexia, hyperventilation, hunched posture, and hind-limb tremors within eight days following challenge [106]. X-ray of the chest revealed opacities starting at day seven post exposure. Principal gross pathological findings included pulmonary edema and multifocal hemorrhage, with diffuse, macroscopic necrosis of the liver. Histopathological lesions included syncytial cells in the heart, kidney, and pulmonary vessels. Viral antigen was identified in the heart, pulmonary vessels, liver, kidney, and spleen; however, no lesions or antigens were found in the brain [106]. The marmoset model appears to replicate the respiratory pathology and systemic vasculitis caused by NiV infection in humans and AGMs, but the model lacks lesions in the brain typical of NiV encephalitis. One key advantage of the marmoset species as a model for HNV disease is their small size, which permits greater numbers of animals to be housed and included in studies, thereby increasing statistical power. However, the availability of immunological reagents may prohibit some studies from being performed, and the pathogenesis of HeV in this model has not been studied.8.4. Squirrel MonkeyIn a single study, squirrel monkeys were exposed to a NiV-M isolate using either intravenous (i.v.) or i.n. routes (Table 7) [124]. Both infection routes used viral doses of either 1 × 103 or 1 × 107 PFU. While clinical signs were observed in monkeys infected through both i.n. and i.v. routes, the duration of the disease was longer in i.n. infected animals (lasting seven days) compared to monkeys infected i.v. (lasting 2–3 days). Among i.v. infected monkeys, 3 out of 4 animals succumbed to the disease. Monkeys infected i.n. exhibited milder states of disease, with only 2 out of 4 animals showing signs before recovering after 3–7 days of illness [124]. The observed clinical indicators in these monkeys closely resembled those documented in human infections, with notable involvement of neurological and respiratory systems. NiV-specific RNA was detectable in various organs exclusively in monkeys infected i.v., accompanied by mild histologic lesions, primarily characterized by lung parenchymal inflammation. Unlike human infections, significant vasculitis and brain abnormalities were less pronounced. Nonetheless, immunohistochemistry demonstrated viral antigen localization in the brain, lungs, spleen, and kidney extravascular parenchyma, thus confirming viral presence in these organs [124].9. Other Models of NoteHNVs emerged via zoonosis in livestock amplifying reservoirs horses (HeV) and pigs (NiV). Initial studies of HeV in horses were necessary to determine the etiology and characterize the causative agent of the outbreaks. Since horses and pigs can transmit HNVs to humans, the development of vaccine countermeasures to break transmission has been evaluated in these models. Other species, including cats and dogs, have been evaluated for HNV permissiveness [55]. The cat model was briefly pursued and used to evaluate an experimental vaccine for NiV infection [125], which proved effective. No further countermeasure testing was reported in this model. Similarly, only a single experimental challenge study in dogs has been performed to investigate the pathogenesis and transmission of HeV in this model. Dogs and cats are not consistently used as animal models for HNV disease for a variety of reasons, including their status as companion animals, their inability to fully recapitulate the HNV disease observed in humans, and the existence of better-suited species for biomedical research. Epidemiologic surveillance and observational studies of peridomestic animals, including cats and dogs, may be of use in outbreaks due to the potential for livestock to transmit HNVs to these species, which may then be capable of subsequent transmission to humans.9.1. HorsesNatural HeV infection of horses leads to a severe and often fatal disease characterized by a sudden onset of influenza-like signs, including fever, inappetence, lethargy, respiratory signs of frothy nasal discharge, coughing, tachypnea, and neurological signs of aggression, muscle tremors, unsteadiness, head-tilt, and altered behavior [1]. Disease progression can be rapid, with horses deteriorating within a matter of days. Naturally, infected animals die or are typically humanely euthanized 5–15 days after showing clinical signs. Due to the severity of the disease and the potential for transmission to humans, HeV infection of horses is of significant concern for both equine and public health. Experimental infection of horses (Table 8) via i.v., i.n., or o.n. routes with HeV-containing tissue homogenate from fatal equine cases or cell culture isolates of HeV resulted in rapid and fatal disease characterized by severe pulmonary edema, congestion, focal hemorrhagic lesions and cyanosis of the lungs, and enlarged spleen [126]. Histopathological findings included the presence of syncytial cells in pulmonary vessels and the kidney, alveolar edema, and systemic vasculitis found in the brain, lungs, lymph nodes, kidney, spleen, uterus, and intestine [126,127]. Natural infection of horses with NiV has been reported [32]. A veterinary vaccine formulated with the soluble HeV-G glycoprotein is currently approved for use in Australia to protect horses from HeV infection and has demonstrated efficacy in preventing outbreaks [128].9.2. PigsExperimental infection of pigs with NiV or HeV produces clinical disease with both respiratory and neurological features but typically does not result in fatal outcomes (Table 9). NiV infection of humans in Malaysia and Singapore in 1999 was preceded by widespread infection of pigs on farms, with animals typically displaying a characteristic barking cough and occasionally muscle spasms, myoclonus, trembling, and fever [129]. Although experimental infection often produces a mild, self-limiting disease with clinical signs evident by day 7 post-infection, NiV is shed in nasal secretions in pigs [130]. Gross macroscopic lesions are present in the lungs and include reddish-purple consolidation and hemorrhage. Histopathological lesions include syncytial cell formation, moderate to severe meningitis, and fibrinoid necrosis of pulmonary vessels [130,131]. Landrace pigs challenged with 6.6 × 107 PFU of HeV via the o.n. route resulted in the development of clinical signs, including depression, inappetence, and weight loss as soon as four days post-infection [89]. Gottingen minipigs challenged with 2 × 107 PFU i.n. developed clinical signs of the disease 3–7 days post-infection, and at necropsy, had evident petechial hemorrhage of the lungs and lymph nodes, with histological lesions including pulmonary edema and syncytial cells. Landrace pigs developed more severe interstitial pneumonia and extensive syncytial cell formation in the alveoli and bronchiolar epithelium; infiltration of inflammatory cells was observed in the bronchial lymph nodes [89]. A variety of veterinary vaccines have been experimentally evaluated in this model [131,132,133].9.3. DogsDogs were among the first species to be experimentally infected with HeV [55]. Several dogs have been observed to be directly infected with HeV or NiV, and serosurveillance suggests infections of dogs during NiV outbreaks are frequent. Livestock-to-dog and dog-to-human transmission events pose a potential transmission risk during outbreaks. Dogs are not a natural host of HeV or NiV but potentially serve as amplifying reservoirs during epidemics. Infection of dogs with Hendra virus has been described in two experimental challenge studies (Table 10) and a case report of natural HeV infection [138], which generally describe subclinical illness with limited evidence of pathologies in the respiratory or central nervous system.HeV is not highly pathogenic in canines, but viremia and oral shedding suggest dogs are capable of transmitting the virus to humans. The challenge of dogs with 5 × 103 TCID50 of the prototype HeV strain via the s.c. route produced no clinical signs of disease, animals did not seroconvert, and gross or histopathological lesions were absent upon necropsy [55]. In 2013, a dog was found to be naturally infected with HeV following contact with an HeV-infected horse during an outbreak and was subsequently euthanized following confirmation of infection [138]. The dog did not show clinical signs of illness, but gross- and histopathological lesions were discovered at necropsy. Primary gross lesions included reddening of the lungs, frothy edematous fluid in the trachea and bronchi, and hyperplasia of mandibular, tonsillar, bronchial, and mediastinal lymph nodes. Significant vasculitis and fibrinoid necrosis were identified in the lymph nodes, kidneys, and brain, in addition to the spleen, lungs, intestines, and liver [138]. Further histopathological lesions were identified throughout the brain, including the brain stem and meninges. Although the virus was not isolated from tissues, the dog was seropositive and viral antigen was present in the kidney [138].Experimental challenge of beagles with HeV dosed at 2 × 106 TCID50 via the o.n. route was not lethal and produced only mild clinical signs of disease, including inappetence and low fever at days 6 and 10 post-infection [139]. The virus was re-isolated from oral swabs at days 2 and 4 post-infection and from respiratory tissues at days 2, 4, 6, and 8; however, it was not recovered from the blood at any point [139]. Gross pathological lesions at necropsy were generally consistent with those observed in natural infection and included mild consolidation of the lungs, hyperplasia of the tonsils and tracheobronchial lymph nodes, and areas of focal hemorrhage and congestion of the mediastinal and retropharyngeal lymph nodes [138,139]. Histopathological lesions of the lungs included bronchointerstitial pneumonia, vasculitis, and antigen deposition in the bronchiolar epithelium and vascular endothelium. Limited syncytial cell formation was observed in the bronchiole lymph nodes. Notably, no evidence of neuroinfection from clinical signs or histopathological lesions was observed in experimentally infected dogs [138,139]. These findings suggest that experimental and natural HNV infections produce mild disease in dogs. Oral swabs collected from HeV-infected dogs at days 2 and 4 following the challenge were used to inoculate naïve ferrets. Ferrets developed fever, depression, and paralysis and were euthanized 7–9 days after infection, demonstrating that virus shedding from HeV-infected dogs was infective to naïve, susceptible animals [139]. This finding suggests that dogs may potentially pose a risk to humans, horses, and other peridomestic animals during HeV outbreaks.During the 1998–1999 outbreak of NiV in Malaysia, it was reported that domestic dogs were also infected [140]. Serosurveillance in April of 1999 identified that 57% of 63 dogs sampled were positive for NiV-reactive antibodies, and additional measurements from the same area in May of 1999 saw a non-significant decrease in percent positivity to 26%, suggesting that dog-to-dog transmission was not taking place [141]. Limited data is available for dogs confirmed to have been actively infected with NiV, and no studies involving experimental infection of dogs with NiV have been published to date. During the 1999 outbreak, one moribund and one deceased dog were necropsied, with clinical signs observed in the moribund dog being respiratory distress, fever, nasal discharge, and conjunctivitis [142]. Gross findings at necropsy were consistent with human respiratory pathologies: heavy lungs with visible congestion, mottling, and consolidation of all lobes in addition to reddening of the renal capsules and cortices [142]. Histological lesions were reported in the lungs (severe pulmonary edema, interstitial pneumonia), kidneys (glomerular atrophy and syncytia), and brain (nonsuppurative meningitis). Virus isolation or antigen deposition in tissues was not described [142]. This report and evidence of seroprevalence during active NiV outbreaks indicate that close attention should be paid to dogs during outbreaks. Furthermore, disease control practices should be enforced to reduce and prevent contact between dogs and known amplifying reservoirs of NiV. Further epidemiological surveillance and investigation of apparent NiV- or HeV-infected animals during outbreaks should be a priority to understand modes of HNV transmission further.9.4. CatExperimental challenge of cats revealed high susceptibility to both HeV and NiV by a variety of challenge routes and doses (Table 11). The challenge of cats with ~1 × 103–5 × 104 TCID50 of HeV s.c., o.n., or oral (o.r.) routes produces influenza-like clinical signs characterized by fever and respiratory distress [55,143]. Gross pathology in HeV-infected felines was characteristic of acute HeV disease with focal hemorrhagic lesions of the lungs, pulmonary edema and hydrothorax, and the enlargement of the spleen and mesenteric lymph nodes [86]. Histopathologic lesions were consistent with those observed in horses, including systemic vasculitis with syncytial cells, fibrinoid necrosis, and mononuclear inflammatory cell infiltration in the lungs. The virus was isolated from the respiratory tract, liver, spleen, kidney, lymph node, bladder, pleural fluid, urine, and brain. Neurological signs were not reported [86,143].Infection of domestic shorthair cats with 5 × 102–5 × 103 TCID50 of NiV-M via the s.c. or o.n. route resulted in clinical disease characterized by fever, depression, and respiratory distress. NiV infection produced lesions highly similar to HeV-infected cats, with focal hemorrhagic necrosis of the pleura and wet and heavy lungs with edema and hydrothorax. Histopathological lesions of the lungs included bronchitis and alveolar hemorrhage. Vasculitis with syncytial cell formation and inflammatory cell infiltrates was observed in large arterial vessels of the lungs and endothelial cells of the lungs, spleen, lymph nodes, and brain [125,130]. Meningitis was also found. NiV antigen was detected in the lungs, spleen, bladder, and lymph nodes, where the infectious virus was recoverable, in addition to the tonsil [125,130]. Transmission of NiV to or from cats has not been documented during outbreaks; however, vertical transmission of NiV was observed in a cat discovered to be pregnant at necropsy [145], with infectious virus found in the placenta, fetus and uterine fluid.10. Future DirectionsWell-characterized animal models for both NiV and HeV are currently required for investigating the efficacy of medical countermeasures against these pathogens. Here, we describe several highly reliable models for recapitulating human infection by HNVs. AGMs closely mimic the pathogenesis and clinical signs of NiV and HeV disease in humans and are the gold standard for evaluating medical countermeasures, including vaccines, antivirals, and monoclonal antibodies. Hamsters and ferrets are the most well-characterized small- and mid-sized animal models for HNV disease, and continued optimization and refinement of these models has allowed for pathogenesis and countermeasure efficacy studies for HeV and NiV. Continued development of these models should be pursued to allow for better harmonization of challenge dosing and clinical scoring. The field should also prioritize the development and validation of species-specific reagents for hamsters and ferrets, as the lack of commercial availability fetters opportunities for more precise characterization of HNV pathogenesis. Models consistently recapitulating the CNS pathologies of HNV infection would also prove useful, especially for studying the recrudescence and chronic encephalitis seen in human NiV infection. This would allow for the evaluation of CNS-based therapeutics for HNV disease.The seasonal nature of NiV and HeV virus outbreaks in their respective endemic areas continues to pose a risk to public health. The frequency and severity of NiV outbreaks in Bangladesh and India appear to be increasing, with a recent outbreak resulting in 11 cases and eight deaths earlier this year. The wide geographic distribution of natural reservoirs of HNVs and the emergence of novel HNVs, including Cedar, Mojiang and Langya, suggest continued efforts are needed to understand these viruses. Animal models have been pivotal in our study of HeV and NiV disease pathogenesis and for evaluating medical countermeasures to potentially protect against future outbreaks of these deadly viruses.


Title: Bat humoral immunity and its role in viral pathogenesis, transmission, and zoonosis

1IntroductionThe immune system has innate and adaptive arms that have evolved to respond to a variety of diverse pathogens (1). Upon infection, the innate immune system rapidly responds through germline-encoded innate immune receptors that recognize common molecular patterns [e.g., Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), flagellin, and RNA] shared among many pathogens (1). In contrast, the adaptive immune system recognizes antigens unique to a pathogen (1) and can generate a “memory” response, which can protect from future infections by the same or similar pathogen, such as repeated exposures to viruses (1).A major component of adaptive immunity is the humoral response, comprised of both B and T cells. Antibodies, produced by the former, have two functional domains: the antigen-binding fragment (Fab) that recognizes a specific epitope on an antigen and the crystallizable fragment (Fc) that drives effector functions (2, 3). Antibodies primarily recognize antigens with complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) on their Fab domain. Upon viral infection, naïve B cells that recognize the virus are selected to undergo somatic hypermutation, a mutational process known as affinity maturation, to refine specificity and increase affinity to the antigen (4, 5). In this way, adaptive immunity can generate antigen-specific, high-affinity antibodies that often neutralize viruses. Once bound to the virus, antibodies can interfere with key steps in the viral lifecycle. These can include sterically blocking the virus from binding to host cell receptors, preventing the virus from undergoing conformational changes required for fusion or entry, or inhibiting viral progeny release (6–9). The Fc region of bound antibodies also triggers a series of Fc-mediated responses that can activate innate immune cells (4).Although the origin and evolution of humoral responses have been studied, the specific role and dynamics of antibody responses in bats are not well understood. Bats are a diverse taxa of mammals, second in species richness only to rodents, and are host to a wide range of pathogens (10) (
Figure 1A
). Their importance to public health have become increasingly recognized, as viruses that have caused severe outbreaks in humans have been found to circulate within bats, including paramyxoviruses, coronaviruses, and filoviruses (14–17) (
Figure 1B
). Several aspects of bat ecology and physiology are thought to make them particularly suitable to contract and maintain viruses, namely, their long lifespan, dense colonies, and multispecies roosts (10). Factors such as land use changes, wildlife hunting, and trade have increased human exposures to bats and their associated viruses (18, 19). As such, there is an urgent need to understand and mitigate the zoonotic hazards posed by viruses present in bats.Figure 1Bat species distribution and viral families. (A) Bats are diverse, with families that inhabit disparate regions across the globe. Calogram at the family level [adapated from (11)] at the family level. Colors correspond to families with named species in the text; named species are specified in colored boxes. Species distribution data from IUCN (2023) (12). (B) Bat viruses are similarly diverse. Species viral data from DBatVir (2023) (13). Proportions were calculated as the number of viruses (as per NCBI taxonomy) in each viral family per total number of viruses recorded for named species in the family.It is unclear how bat antibody responses impact viral replication, clearance, and persistence. This knowledge will help clarify infection dynamics at a population level and may help predict spillover risk. In this review, we summarize current knowledge of bat antibody immunity and its similarities and differences to mouse and human repertoires.2Antibody genes are diverse among bat speciesAntibodies are generated through the rearrangement of germline-encoded variable (V), diversity (D), and joining (J) immunoglobulin (Ig) gene segments (20) (
Figure 2A
). The antibody heavy chain variable region consists of rearranged V, D, and J gene segments, while the light chain consists of rearranged V and J segments only (23, 24). The variable region can be further divided into CDRs and framework regions (FWRs). The FWRs form, as their name suggests, the structural framework for the CDRs to protrude, like fingers, to interact with the antigen. Both the rearranged heavy and light chains have three flexible CDR loops, which largely determine antigen specificity (25).Figure 2Immunoglobulin loci organization and gene abundance. (A) The variable region of antibodies is comprised of somatically rearranged V, D, and J (heavy chain) or V and J (light chain) genes. During somatic rearrangement, diversity is further introduced in the junctions between rearranged genes through the addition of non-templated P and N nucleotides (light green). The complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) are shown for both heavy and light chains. The heavy chain CDRs for antibody CH67 (PDB 4HKB) are highlighted in blue. (B) Functional V gene abundances are variable between species (*gene conversion). (C) Ig gene organization is unique for Egyptian rousette bats (ERBs) where D and J genes are interspersed rather than sequential (21), as seen in human and mouse Ig loci (22).Combinatorial diversity is introduced during B-cell development when V, D, and J segments in the heavy chain and the V and J segments in the light chain are rearranged to generate a pre-immune, or naïve, repertoire. Unlike CDR1 and CDR2, which are encoded by the V gene, CDR3 spans V, (D), and J genes. As such, gene rearrangement further diversifies the CDR3 through the addition of non-templated n nucleotides between gene segments. CDR3 is therefore the longest and the most variable of the CDRs, contributing significantly toward naïve repertoire diversity. The resulting naïve antibody is displayed on the surface of B cells as part of the B-cell receptor (BCR) complex. The genetic architecture of the Ig loci (i.e., location of gene segments, abundance of V genes, and sequence conservation between V gene segments) shapes the initial diversity of the naïve antibody repertoire. Although the antibody variable regions are further diversified through somatic mutation during B-cell maturation, baseline antigen specificity is defined by the germline Ig gene segments.2.1Number and sequence variability in bat immunoglobulin gene segmentsThe copy number of V, D, and J genes varies greatly between species (
Figure 2B
). The abundance of heavy chain V genes (VH) genes can range anywhere from >100 VH (mice) and 44 VH (humans) to four VH (goats) (26, 27). Like mice, rabbits also have over 100 functional VH genes but preferentially rearrange one gene to generate the majority of their antibody repertoire (28). In contrast, chickens rearrange a single functional VH and numerous VH pseudogenes to generate their naïve repertoire, a process known as somatic gene conversion (29). After a B cell recognizes an antigen through the BCR, rounds of somatic hypermutation (SHM) and affinity-based selections further refine the specificity defined by the germline usage and CDR3 compositions (4). This process is called affinity maturation.Antibody genes are diverse between bat species. Early transcriptional and genomic sequencing from the big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus) (30), Seba’s short-tailed bat (Carollia perspicillata) (30), greater short-nosed fruit bat (Cynopterus sphinx) (30), black flying fox (Pteropus alecto) (23), and large flying fox (Pteropus vampyrus) (23) identified putative functional VH genes that are diverse in primary sequences. The little brown bat (Myotis lucifugus) has an estimated 236 unique VH genes from the VH3 family alone, along with at least 13 JH and numerous DH genes, though there is yet no reference genome for this species (31). These Ig sequences were identified using a VH3 family-specific forward primer and porcine recombination signal sequence (RSS) reverse primer to amplify and sequence germline VH3 genes (31). A total of 75 unique sequences were identified, and based on the frequency at which each unique sequence was recovered more than once, a probabilistic model was used to estimate the total number of little brown bat VH3 genes (31). In contrast, the IGDectective algorithm has been leveraged to predict the Ig genes from four reference quality bat genomes (32), none of which seem to share the same expansion of VH genes as the little brown bat (33). This algorithm identified 10 VH from the velvety free-tailed bat, nine VH from Kaul’s pipistrelle, 32 VH from the pale spear-nosed bat (Phyllostomus discolor), and 63 VH from the greater horseshoe bat (33). It is possible that IGDectective underestimated the number of VH genes from these four bat species, as divergent RSS that do not pass the likelihood threshold of the algorithm are excluded from analysis (33). If bats do have a significant number of divergent RSS motifs, one would expect that a porcine RSS reverse primer would also undersample a significant portion of little brown bat V genes, unless divergent RSS motifs are highly bat species-specific. It is also possible that the probabilistic model used to estimate the number of little brown bat VH genes did not capture the true quantity of V genes, as it relies on a relatively small sampling of 90 sequences (31).The most thoroughly annotated bat Ig locus to date is that of the Egyptian rousette bat (ERB) (Rousettus aegyptiacus), providing the most detailed understanding of any bat Ig architecture (21). ERB has 66 VH genes (55 functional, 10 pseudogenes, and one truncated), eight functional DH genes, and nine JH genes (seven functional and two pseudogenes) (21). Unlike other mammalian immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) loci where V, D, and J genes are organized sequentially, the ERB D and J genes are interspersed (i.e., IGHD-J-D-J) (21) (
Figure 2C
). When compared to the predicted Ig genes from the velvety free-tailed bat (Molossus molossus), Kaul’s pipistrelle (Pipistrellus kuhlii), and greater horseshoe bat (Rhinolophus ferrumequinum) with their sequential D to J organization, this interspersed organization is not shared between all bats (33). It is unclear how this heavy chain organization impacts recombination between V, D, and J segments.The inter-species differences in VH gene sequence and quantity suggest distinct encoded specificities of each species’ naïve antibody repertoire. Together, the abundance and primary sequence diversities of putative functional VH genes between bat species suggest varying degrees of naïve repertoire diversity and specificities.2.2Anti-viral immunoglobulin gene expansion and germline biasingCo-evolution with viruses can shape the diversity and specificity of the naïve repertoire (21, 34). Certain V genes are known to predispose antibodies toward recognizing specific antigens (35, 36). These V genes may have germline-associated features that have a functional effect, such as encoding CDR lengths or amino acids in fixed positions that facilitate binding (37, 38). V genes are under positive selection to maximize binding diversity while retaining specificity (34). This type of selection can present as the genomic expansion of V genes encoding antibodies with predispositions as well as the preferential usage of certain V genes upon infection. The former would be evident in germline V gene abundance, while the latter would require transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of the rearranged and expressed antibody repertoire. Precursor biasing can be leveraged to design vaccines that target naïve B-cell precursors from germlines known to elicit broadly neutralizing antibodies (39–41). It is unclear whether the bat Ig germlines have similarly been shaped to respond effectively against the viruses that circulate in them. ERBs, the reservoir for Marburg virus (MARV) (42), have expanded VH genes that are associated with protective responses against viruses in humans. In particular, ERBs have expanded VH genes associated with protection against Ebola virus (EBOV) (VH1–8, four copies; VH3–23, five copies; VH3–48, five copies) and MARV (VH4–59, eight copies; one copy each of VH4–61, VH4–39, and VH3–7) based on sequence similarity to human V genes (21). Although these expanded V genes suggest that ERBs could elicit a comparable protective response against MARV and EBOV, biochemical and biophysical characterization of isolated monoclonal antibodies is necessary to demonstrate that this is possible.3Affinity maturation and somatic hypermutationAntigen specificity is largely defined by three CDRs on the heavy and light chains, which form the antigen combining site (34, 43, 44) (
Figure 2A
). CDR1 and CDR2 are germline encoded by the VL and VH elements of the light and heavy chains, respectively. CDR3 of the light chain is encoded primarily by the V segment, with additional diversity introduced at the V and J junctions during recombination. CDR3 of the heavy chain spans the end of the V gene to the beginning of the J gene, with substantial junctional diversity introduced somatically through V–DJ joining (34). The heavy chain CDR3 can therefore be variable in length and sequence identity. It is the key determinant for specificity in antigen recognition (44). While the germline V(D)J segments form the initial binding specificity of the naïve repertoire, subsequent rounds of SHM introduce mutations that improve affinity and refine specificity (45). Mutations introduced typically occur in the CDRs to directly influence binding, whereas mutations within framework regions can impact antibody folding and CDR conformation (46, 47).3.1Bat antibody CDR3 featuresThe CDR3 lengths of several bat species have been characterized based on Ig transcript sequences. Black flying fox CDR3 regions ranged from six to 18 amino acids (aa) in length, comparable to IgG transcript CDR3 lengths isolated from the little brown bat (4–12 aa), big brown bat (4–13 aa), Seba’s short-tailed bat (8–12 aa), and greater short-nosed fruit bat (4–12 aa) (23, 30).The sequence compositions of CDR3 in mice and human repertoires are typically enriched for tyrosine, glycine, and serine (48). In the black flying fox, the CDR3 is de-enriched for tyrosine residues in germline DH and JH segments and in Ig transcripts (23). The cDNA transcripts of the Jamaican fruit bat (Artibeus jamaicensis) infected with Tacaribe virus (TCRV) demonstrate a large distribution of tyrosines within the CDR3, ranging from two tyrosine residues to six (49). Enrichment of tyrosine residues specifically for the Jamaican fruit bat could be indicative of affinity-matured antibodies against TCRV. Some arenaviruses, including TCRV, bind an exposed tyrosine residue on receptor TfR1 to mediate viral entry (50). There are human neutralizing antibodies against arenaviruses that bind the viral receptor binding pocket with tyrosines on their CDRs (50). It is possible that the enrichment of tyrosines in Jamaican fruit bats predisposes the repertoire to neutralize through the same pathway, though this is unlikely, as experimental infection with TCRV is typically fatal to Jamaican fruit bats, and only a few surviving bats had detectable neutralizing antibody titers (51). Without a reference genome, it is not possible to determine whether CDR3 tyrosine residues were germline encoded for this bat species, which could indicate germline biasing toward the generation of neutralizing antibodies.3.2Diversification through somatic hypermutationSHM, mainly in the CDR regions, enhances diversity (52); indeed, SHM within the CDR3 can be sufficient to diversify the antibody repertoire of germline-restricted mice with only one functional VH to recognize a multitude of unique antigens (44). The degree to which affinity maturation diversifies the bat antibody repertoire is not well characterized. One hypothesis is that the “accordion-like” expansion of VH3 genes in the little brown bat provides sufficient combinatorial diversity through recombination alone and that SHM, which was estimated to be low (31), is not essential in the little brown bat (31). It is also possible that the probabilistic model used overestimated the number of germline V genes. For bat species where germline V gene information is available, none share this “accordion” expansion of VH3 genes as inferred for the little brown bat. Indeed, transcriptomic studies of the Jamaican fruit bat found that activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), the protein involved in class switching and affinity maturation, was not induced after infection with TCRV (49, 53). Even without the apparent induction of AID, Jamaican fruit bats generated multiple class-switched antibody isotypes, a process that requires functional AID in other animals (49, 53). It is possible that the apparent lack of AID induction is due to the difficulty of evaluating enzyme transcripts in RNA-seq data with differential expression analysis. Although experimental infection of Jamaican fruit bats with TCRV proved mostly fatal, a minority of bats survived, with or without detectable neutralizing antibody titers (51). If AID was not induced in Jamaican fruit bats after infection, then it is unclear how bats were able to mount neutralizing antibodies, unless those neutralizing antibodies were germline encoded. In the black flying fox, nucleotide substitutions are present in germline and Ig transcript sequences indicative of SHM (23). However, without more comprehensive analysis of the transcribed repertoire and annotated bat Ig loci, it is difficult to accurately describe the degree of SHM that occurs during bat Ig maturation and whether reliance on SHM is species dependent.4Kappa and lambda light chain usageThe antibody variable light chain (VL) also contributes to antigen recognition by direct binding with light chain CDRs and/or by influencing the conformation of the heavy chain (54, 55). The light chain is encoded either by the kappa or lambda loci (56). The ratio of kappa to lambda antibodies varies between species ranging from 95:5 in mice, 60:40 in humans, to 7:93 in horses (26, 57). Birds have evolved to express only lambda light chains (58, 59).There is evidence that bats generate antibodies with lambda light chains. For example, a mouse monoclonal antibody specific to big brown bat lambda light chain Igs cross-reacts with Yangochiroptera [e.g., little brown bat, hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus), silver-haired bat (Lasionycteris noctivagans), and eastern red bat (Lasiurus borealis)] Igs but not with Yinpterochiroptera [e.g., grey-headed flying fox (Pteropus poliocephalus), large flying fox, and Indian flying fox (Pteropus giganteus)] Igs (60), suggesting that the lambda light chain sequence is conserved within Yangochiroptera, but Yinpterochiroptera have sequence-divergent light chains. No kappa light chains were detected in big brown bat serum using Protein L magnetic beads that bind kappa light chains from many, but not all, mammalian species (60). It is possible that the big brown bat expresses kappa light chains and that none were detected in this experiment due to the limited breadth of the Protein L beads. Both kappa and lambda light chain transcripts were identified in the black flying fox (Yinpterochiroptera) (61). Lambda transcripts were more abundant than kappa transcripts, which could indicate preferential lambda usage in Yinpterochiroptera. Several outstanding questions remain, including whether Yangochiroptera generates kappa light chain antibodies, the kappa:lambda usage ratio among bat species, and whether bats rearrange one light chain before the next similar to humans (62).5Antibody isotypes and subclassesThe Fc of an antibody bridges the adaptive and innate immune systems. The Fc domain engages receptors (FcR) on innate immune cells and exerts their effector functions (63). Humans have five antibody isotypes (IgG, IgM, IgD, IgA, and IgE), some of which are further differentiated into subclasses (e.g., IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4). Each antibody isotype and when applicable, subclass are recognized by multiple host FcRs, each associated with its unique set of effector functions (64). The genes that encode the Fc are located in a cluster downstream of the J segments in the heavy chain locus (34). After rearrangement, B cells undergo class switching primarily before entering the germinal center reaction where affinity maturation of the variable regions takes place (65). The resultant antibody gains Fc-specific effector functions and retains antigen binding specificity.Antibody isotypes are structurally distinct. For example, human IgM forms pentameric complexes that can avidly bind multiple antigens at once and activate complement-mediated clearance of infection (3). Due to their varied functions, each isotype is differentially expressed in each part of the body, and their expression levels are tightly regulated.5.1Immunoglobulin isotypes and expression profilesOur understanding of bat antibody isotypes ranges from genomic sequences to transcriptomic data and characterizations of serum antibodies. IgG, IgA, IgE, and IgM isotypes have been identified both in the bat genome and transcriptionally (21, 30, 61). So far, IgD transcripts have only been identified in little brown bats and big brown bats, further illustrating divergent Ig repertoires among species and suborders (21, 30, 49, 61). Black flying fox IgG and IgM are abundant in the lymph node and spleen, consistent with expression patterns in ERBs (21). IgA is highly transcribed in the lungs of both black flying foxes and ERBs. Black flying fox brain, heart, and kidney tissues showed low expression of all three Ig isotypes, whereas ERBs have moderate expression of these isotypes in the same tissues (21, 66). Circulating antibodies in black flying foxes are predominantly IgG and IgM, with low levels of IgA detected (66).In humans, IgG is the most abundant immunoglobulin isotype in serum and plays a direct role in controlling viral infections (67). IgG is similarly abundant in bat serum (68). There is evidence that bats transfer maternal IgG through both the placenta and mammary gland. IgG isolated from three species [long-fingered bat (Myotis capaccinii), greater mouse-eared bat (Myotis myotis), and common noctule (Nyctalus noctule)] were able to bind human and mouse neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn), the receptor responsible for transfer of maternal IgG across the placenta (69). Unlike other mammals, bat IgG was dominant over IgA in maternal lacteal secretion, suggesting an additional pathway to transfer maternal antibodies (66). Pups born to vaccinated or naturally infected, seropositive dams inherit maternal virus-specific antibodies (70). Maternal IgG is detectable for up to 3–5 months in ERB pups (71, 72) and up to 7.5 and 8.5 months in small flying foxes (Pteropus hypomelanus) and black flying foxes, respectively (70). Transfer of maternal antibody transfer has implications for population immunity and viral maintenance as bats typically have synchronized breeding and birthing cycles marked by the influx of colony size and routes of transmission followed by new pups that will lose their maternal antibodies within a year from birth (73).The annotated ERB heavy chain locus is the highest resolution of the Fc segments of an important viral reservoir species. ERB IgA and IgM are predicted to share similar functions as their human counterparts. However, gene ontology analysis of ERB IgG and IgE predicts divergent functions compared to their human homologs (21).5.2Immunoglobulin subtypes are species specificERBs have an expanded set of epsilon genes, with two functional and three pseudogenes, making this species the only known mammal with two functional IgE subtypes (21). In humans, IgE binds to FcεRI expressed on the surface of mast cells and basophils. Though both IgE subtypes are expressed in circulation and secondary lymphoid organs in ERBs, only IgE2 is detectable in the lungs and bone marrow (21). Unlike human IgE, ERB IgE1 has an internal deletion compared to human IgE1 that shortens its cytosolic tail, potentially impacting downstream signaling (21). Tissue expression and structural differences between the two IgE subclasses in ERBs likely indicate divergent functions, though those functions are not yet known.Several bat species seem to express multiple IgG and IgM subtypes. The ERB locus contains four gamma subtypes that have varying tissue expression profiles and differ primarily in the hinge and CH2 domains (21, 67). Black flying foxes also appear to have multiple subtypes of IgG and IgM (66), consistent with transcripts of multiple IgG subtypes identified in the little brown bat (five subtypes), greater short-nosed fruit bat (three subtypes), and big brown bat (two subtypes) (30). There are currently no functional data for the bat IgG subtypes or whether these subtypes share structural similarity with human IgG subtypes.Several outstanding questions remain for bat Ig isotypes. The handful of species whose Fc compositions have been characterized show divergence between species. Although we now have more in-depth knowledge of ERB Fc sequences and tissue expression profiles (21), their unique Fc makeup is likely not widely applicable across all bat species. Speculation on function based on sequence alone requires further validation. It remains to be seen what the varying quantities of expressed Ig isotypes are among species, the affinity of each Ig isotype for their Fc receptors, the tissue expression profiles for each isotype paired with the detection of antibody in that tissue (to delineate tissue-specific expression and recruitment of antibodies to a tissue type from elsewhere), and, most importantly, detailed understanding of bat Fc effector functions. There is no reported functional characterization of bat isotypes, especially in the context of innate immune cells and complement activation, or the relative abundance of each isotype produced after infection or vaccination.6Biochemical and structural characteristicsOur understanding of bat antibodies is based almost entirely on sequencing and bulk serum analysis of antibody responses after infection. There is limited understanding of the biophysical characteristics of bat monoclonal antibodies, which appear to have unique structural properties. An N-linked glycosylation site at position 297 is conserved across ERB and human IgGs and is important for FcγR binding. Interestingly, ERB IgG1 contains a unique N-linked glycosylation motif at the hinge region, in addition to N297, that is not present in other ERB or human IgGs. Glycans can shield or cover important functional domains, restrict otherwise flexible protein domains, and affect protein folding. IgG1 is the most expressed antibody isotype and subtype in ERBs, and it is unknown how the N-linked glycan at the IgG1 hinge region may impact antibody folding, receptor binding, and effector function. Unlike IgG1, ERB IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4 all lack the canonical CxxC motif that enables inter-chain disulfide bonding in human IgGs (21). Without inter-chain disulfide bonding, it is possible that ERB IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4 can undergo Fab-arm exchange to become bispecific antibodies, a process observed for human IgG4 (74). For humans, Fab-arm exchange reduces immune activation as bispecific IgG4 cannot crosslink antigen (74). In contrast, the greater short-nosed fruit bat and the little brown bat IgG subtypes contain the canonical CxxC motif as identified through Ig transcript sequencing (30). Without structural and biochemical characterization of bat antibodies, one can only speculate on how the loss of CxxC impacts Ig folding, assembly, and the types of antibodies secreted.ERB IgG2, IgG3, and IgG4 also have an amino acid substitution (Leu234Pro) in the lower hinge region that removes an important contact in human IgGs for Fc receptor FcγR (21). This substitution may impact affinity for FγR and subsequently impact effector functions downstream of binding [i.e., antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity, immune complex clearance, and phagocytosis of pathogens] (21). These sequencing differences could be indicative of biochemical and structural characteristics of bat antibodies that could further our understanding of anti-viral function and duration of responses.Cysteine-rich V genes from velvety free-tailed bats, pale spear-nosed bats, and greater horseshoe bats can be found on the IMGT database (33). These V genes contain more than the two conserved cysteines that form a disulfide bond between frameworks 1 and 3 (33). They have additional cysteines in both their CDR1 and CDR2 loops (33). The ERB IGH locus similarly contains VH family cysteines in both CDR1 and CDR2 loops (VH4–30 and VH4–39) (21). It is likely that the cysteines in CDR1 and CDR2 form an intrachain disulfide bond that would impact antibody conformation, hypervariable loop rigidity, and antigen specificity.There is much to be learned from the biochemical and structural characterization of individual bat antibodies. These types of studies can uncover bat antibody binding affinities, viral epitope targeting, divergent antibody structural features, and more definitely quantify the neutralization profiles of viral-specific antibodies. Recombinant bat antibodies would also enable a more detailed analysis of Fc-mediated effector functions.7Antibody responses after infectionSeveral parameters determine the effectiveness of an antibody response. The first parameter is the magnitude and durability of the virus-specific primary and secondary responses (i.e., antibody titers) (75). The primary response occurs during the first viral encounter, where naïve B cells affinity-mature to improve specificity and affinity. Affinity-matured B cells can differentiate into plasma cells that circulate and secrete high-affinity antibodies or develop into memory B cells. The secondary response occurs upon re-exposure to the same or very similar virus. Unlike the primary response where high-affinity B cells are generated de novo, the secondary response is marked by rapid and robust antibody production as class-switched memory B cells already exist (76).The abundance of neutralizing antibodies within the elicited antibody pool also influences viral clearance and transmission. Neutralizing antibodies directly prevent viruses from infecting host cells, by either blocking receptor engagement or viral fusion. The longevity of the memory compartment varies between species and against viruses, which determines the length of protection offered after primary exposure. For example, the yellow fever vaccine provides lifelong immunity with measurable IgG titers 40 years after a single vaccination, whereas annual influenza vaccinations are needed to maintain partial immunity (77). These temporal dynamics are shaped by both the durability of the antibody response and the mutability of the viral pathogen. Viruses that mutate frequently (e.g., influenza virus) can readily evade humoral memory responses.7.1Temporal dynamics of bat antibody responsesBats generate antigen-specific antibodies upon immunization and natural or experimental infection. One of the first studies to demonstrate this was through experimental immunization of big brown bats with bacteriophage øX174 (78). Virus-specific bat antibodies have since been identified for EBOV (16), Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) (79), MERS-CoV (80), Dengue virus (81), Nipah virus (NiV) (82, 83), Hendra virus (HeV) (83, 84), and MARV (71, 72, 85–88). Virus-specific antibodies are typically detectable between 10 and 28 days post-inoculation (dpi) (72, 82, 83, 85), with peak IgG levels measured at 14 dpi (71, 72). However, some studies report no seroconversion upon experimental infection with HeV (83), EBOV (89), and MERS-CoV (80). In humans, after primary infection, there is typically a lag where antigen-specific responses shift from IgM to IgG, accounting for B-cell class switching and generation of high-affinity secreted antibodies. This also appears to be the case for bats. For example, bats infected with JEV show a delayed shift from IgM to IgG response approximately 20 dpi (79).The durability of the primary antibody response varies widely between bat species, infecting agents, and immune history. When inoculated with MARV, ERB antibody titers begin to wane as early as 30 dpi, falling below detection 3–4 months post-infection (71, 72, 85, 86). MARV-positive, wild-caught ERBs had detectable antibody titers up to 11 months post-capture, though their exposure history is unknown (72). This durability could be due to multiple re-exposures to MARV prior to capture, as re-exposure is known to maintain the memory B-cell compartment (90). Wild-caught common vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus), vaccinated and then challenged with rabies virus, similarly elicit neutralizing antibodies with variable timelines for decline, from as early as 43 days to 117 days (91). Virus-specific antibody responses in bats are reported to rapidly decline after infection with NiV (83), HeV (83), and JEV (92).The magnitude of antibody responses in bats is generally lower compared to that of other mammals. Bats immunized with bacteriophage øX174 elicited a less robust response with lower anti-phage activity compared to guinea pigs and rabbits in the same study, despite receiving the same stimuli (78). An early study of bats immunized with sheep erythrocytes also found that bats generate fewer primary neutralizing antibody-secreting cells compared to mice (93). Specific pathogen-free Jamaican fruit bats had low IgG titers after SARS-CoV-2 infection with low levels of IL-21, which is expressed by T follicular helper cells that aid B cells undergoing affinity maturation (94). Jamaican fruit bats also generated low antibody titers against MERS-CoV (80), H18N11 influenza virus (95), and TCRV (51). These are surprising observations given the abundance of B cells in bat spleens and in circulation. Recent studies report that B cells make up roughly 30% of peripheral blood mononuclear cells and 35% of spleen cells from black flying foxes (96), comparable to mice B-cell abundance, and that 90% of B cells are IgG+ (97). There also appears to be an age-dependent fluctuation of B-cell quantity, where juvenile ERBs had approximately fourfold higher numbers of circulating B cells compared to their adult counterparts (98).7.2Efficacy of bat humoral immunityA major outstanding question is whether antibody responses in bats are protective against viral infections, as measured by viral clearance and degree of viral transmission. Infected bats can shed their viruses through their bodily fluids (i.e., saliva, blood, and urine). Viral load in these samples is a proxy for transmission potential. For grey-headed flying foxes inoculated with NiV (82) or HeV (84), the presence of virus-specific antibodies coincided with viral clearance. This is consistent with black flying foxes inoculated with HeV, where the virus was cleared from blood and urine samples in bats with measurable antibody titers (83). A single grey-headed flying fox inoculated with NiV had detectable virus in urine samples despite the presence of neutralizing antibodies in circulation (82). Wild-caught great fruit-eating bats (Artibeus intermedius) experimentally infected with rabies virus rapidly mounted a neutralizing antibody response and were protected from disease (99), though the immune history of these bats is unknown.There is extensive literature focusing on ERB antibody responses upon experimental infection with MARV. MARV-naïve ERBs seroconverted within 14 dpi and did not transmit MARV to co-housed naïve bats (71). Another study reports naïve ERBs seroconverted with peak MARV-specific antibodies between 14 and 28 dpi. All bats in this study became viremic between 5 and 12 dpi, with oral and rectal shedding detectable up until 14 dpi and 8 dpi, respectively (85). This is consistent with the report of Amman et al. that MARV is cleared from the blood by 10 dpi and that oral shedding peaks at 9 dpi and lasts up to 14 dpi (88). In these bats, MARV antibody titers are detectable by 9 dpi (88). In all three studies, MARV-specific antibody titers coincide with a decline in viral load (71, 85, 88). Naïve ERBs co-housed with infected ERBs did not develop detectable viremia and did not seroconvert (71). This suggests that the infected ERBs did not transmit their virus to their naïve housemates.Typically, the abundance of neutralizing antibodies is a proxy for protection. Though virus-specific antibodies correlate with viral clearance in experimentally infected bats, the protective role neutralizing antibodies play in bats is still unclear. Serological surveillance of wild-caught bats from around the world has identified neutralizing antibodies against paramyxoviruses (e.g., NiV) (100), lyssaviruses (e.g., Lagos bat virus) (101), and flaviviruses (e.g., dengue virus) (81, 102). Bats experimentally infected with JEV generated 100-fold lower neutralizing titers compared to guinea pig counterparts (79). Low neutralizing titers were similarly observed for experimental infection with NiV (83), HeV (83), and MARV (72). Experimental prime and prime-boost regimes with EBOV or Sosuga virus did not elicit detectable neutralizing antibodies from ERBs (87). This is surprising due to the expanded VH genes associated with protective responses against viruses that have been identified in ERBs (21). Despite low neutralizing titers, bats appear to retain short- and long-term humoral immunity upon re-infection with homologous virus (discussed in the next section) (72, 85, 86).Experimental immunization and vaccination studies are direct measurements of protective humoral immunity. Experimental vaccination of wild-caught common vampire bats with replicating vaccinia virus expressing rabies glycoprotein elicits a short-term protective antibody response (103). Rabies virus is one of few viruses pathogenic and potentially lethal to bats. After vaccination, bats are protected between 18 and 90 days post-vaccination, with maximal protection 30 days after vaccination (80% survival) (103). Anti-rabies antibody titers drop by 120 days after vaccination, and bats are no longer protected upon challenge (103). The highest rate of seroconversion was observed 30 days after vaccination, where half of the vaccinated bats had anti-rabies antibodies (103). Interestingly, bats do not seroconvert by 18 days after vaccination but are still protected upon challenge with 60% survival (103). Seronegative bats vaccinated 30 or 90 days prior to the challenge are similarly protected in the absence of anti-rabies antibodies (103). It is worth noting that the bats used in this study were wild-caught, albeit from a region without documented cases of sylvatic rabies. Note that their immune histories are not known, as this could impact antibody responses.A separate study similarly showed that wild-caught common vampire bats vaccinated with replicating vaccinia virus expressing rabies glycoprotein are protected from lethal challenge, even without detectable anti-rabies antibodies (104). In this study, all bats were challenged 31 days after vaccination. Of the 31 surviving vaccinated bats, nine did not have detectable anti-rabies antibodies at the time of lethal challenge (104). Sera collected from representative bats 90 days after the challenge contained high titers of anti-rabies antibodies (104). Wild-caught big brown bats vaccinated with raccoonpox (RCN) virus expressing either rabies glycoprotein or mosaic rabies glycoprotein did not consistently mount anti-rabies neutralizing antibodies, though both vaccinated groups showed improved survival against rabies challenge (91).7.3Memory compartmentMemory recall forms the basis of long-term humoral immunity (90). Upon re-exposure to a homologous or similar virus, high-affinity memory B cells are quickly reactivated and clonally expand. Bats immunized with bacteriophage øX174 generate neutralizing antibody titers that rapidly rise after the first and second boosts (78). The majority of neutralizing antibodies were initially 2-ME-sensitive IgM but transitioned to predominantly 2-ME-insensitive IgG by 28 dpi (78). As expected for animals with a memory compartment, the secondary antibody response inactivated phage more rapidly than those in the primary response (78).ERBs have protective short- and long-term immunological memory to MARV. ERBs re-challenged with MARV generate a rapid secondary response as early as 5–10 dpi (71, 72). Rapid elicitation of virus-specific antibodies indicates a memory B-cell compartment. Seropositive ERBs challenged with MARV did not have viremia after 7 dpi, in contrast to their unprimed naïve counterparts (71). This suggests that immunological memory can offer short-term protection in ERBs against MARV re-challenge.The majority of seropositive ERBs re-infected with a heterologous isolate of MARV became viremic despite a rapid secondary humoral response (72). ERB immunological memory to MARV may be relatively limited in breadth. Despite this, immunological memory seemed partially protective against heterologous challenge as evidenced by limited MARV replication in the spleen and liver of re-infected bats without systemic infection as seen in their naive counterparts (72).The durability of the bat memory compartment is not fully characterized, with data exclusively for ERBs. Seronegative ERBs that had been previously infected with MARV 2 years prior mount robust MARV-specific antibodies as early as 7 days post-challenge with homologous virus (86). This robust secondary response was protective with no viral replication or shedding detectable (86), indicating that ERBs retain long-term immunological memory after primary infection.Immunological memory has implications for transmission and viral maintenance in ERBs. In all three re-challenge studies, MARV was not detectable in any tissues that could contribute toward transmission (i.e., salivary glands, intestines, reproductive tract, and bladder) (71, 72), suggesting that MARV may require encounters with naïve bats or evolve to escape immunological memory for maintenance within the bat population.A pitfall in these historical studies using wild-caught bats is that the immune history of these bats is unknown. Wild-caught bats without detectable antibody and virus titers at the time of capture are considered “naïve” in these studies, even though they could have been infected multiple times and their antibody titers have since waned. This complicates whether these bats are generating de novo antibody responses or memory recall upon a secondary exposure. It is likely that antibody responses of a truly naïve bat would be different from one that has sero-reverted, as the length of time between exposures as well as the number of exposures will impact the magnitude of the secondary response. The benefit of established bat colonies can remove some of these complicating factors, as the bats would have known immune histories. However, these colonies often pose financial and technical challenges, especially for insectivorous bats.7.4Immune control in bat populationsThe durability and protectiveness of bat antibody responses form the basis for hypotheses around population immune control of viruses in bats. Three hypotheses dominate current research on population-level bat infection: that pulses of infection within populations are driven by 1) transmission of short-lived infections that provide long-lasting immunity [susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) dynamics], 2) transmission of short-lived infections with fluctuating host immunity [susceptible-infected-recovered-susceptible (SIRS) dynamics], and 3) acute infection without clearance of virus, with subsequent transmission of reactivated viral infection [susceptible-infectious-latent-infectious (SILI) dynamics] (105). Within-host immune dynamics are a common driver among the three scenarios, but with distinct mechanisms to drive susceptibility and clearance of infection. Understanding the antibody response and its effects on current and future infections is a key challenge in deciphering these mechanisms. A better understanding of antibody responses will be key for interpretation and parameterization from prevalence and seroprevalence data.8Conclusions and future directionsAntibodies can engage viruses and their surface-exposed glycoproteins to directly neutralize or contribute to the clearance of infected cells through Fc-mediated functions. It is still unclear how such humoral immunity impacts viral pathogenesis, transmission, maintenance, and evolution in bat populations. While only a few bat species have been studied in-depth, their antibody genes and antibody responses vary greatly between species. This variation has directly contributed to observed differences in viral pathogenesis and transmission. Furthermore, studies involving wild-caught bats are complicated by unknown exposure histories. Establishing bat colonies would therefore enable controlled infection and vaccination studies to help deconvolute these complexities. Current studies on bat antibodies have largely been limited to sequence and transcriptomic data or serum analyses. Additional biochemical and biophysical characterization of the bat antibody repertoire including isolating monoclonal antibodies is needed. Such functional analyses would help uncover numerous features of bat humoral immunity, including epitope immunodominance, neautralization profiles, effector functions, and structural properties. This knowledge will greatly advance our understanding of host-pathogen interactions in an important viral reservoir and lay the groundwork for furthering our understanding of the bat immune system.Author contributionsAAR: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. DM: Writing – review & editing. TJL: Writing – review & editing. KMF: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition. TS: Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing. AGS: Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft.


Title: Development of a reverse genetics system for Sosuga virus allows rapid screening of antiviral compounds

IntroductionThe Paramxyoviridae (order Mononegavirales) represent a diverse family of viruses, many of which, such as measles virus, respiratory syncytial virus, and mumps virus, are significant human pathogens [1]. Within this family, bat-borne paramyxoviruses have previously been recognized as potential novel zoonotics with the ability to spill over into the human population and cause disease [2–4]. The 2 bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses with the greatest public health impact to date are Hendra (HeV) and Nipah (NiV) viruses, which together comprise the Henipavirus genus and are vectored by fruit bats of the Pteropus genus [5]. First recognized in 1994, HeV infections in both domestic horses and humans have occurred sporadically [6,7], while NiV infections in Bangladesh, India, and Malaysia have resulted in over 600 human infections to date [8].Sosuga virus (SOSV) is a recently discovered zoonotic paramyxovirus [9]. It was first identified from a single clinical case in 2012, when a wildlife researcher who conducted a 6-week field expedition in South Sudan and Uganda presented with fever, generalized myalgia and arthralgia, neck stiffness, and a sore throat shortly upon returning to the USA [10]. The patient was hospitalized as symptoms worsened, including the development of a confluent maculopapular rash; after 14 days, all symptoms had sufficiently resolved to allow discharge. After several differential diagnoses were ruled out, sequence analysis revealed the presence of a novel rubula-like paramyxovirus in samples taken from the patient, from which the virus was later isolated. Further ecological and epidemiological investigations revealed Egyptian rousette bats (Rousettus aegyptiacus) as the likely reservoir for the virus, with this case representing a single spillover event into humans [11]. While only one case of SOSV infection has been confirmed to date, its detection in bat populations sampled over a 3-year period at multiple geographic locations in Uganda means that the possibility exists for future spillover events into the human population [11].Reverse genetics systems allow for precise manipulation of viral genomes, and the ability to modify them to suit the required application. One such application is the generation of recombinant viruses expressing reporter proteins that facilitate indirect quantification of viral replication in infected cells. However, for pathogenic viruses such as SOSV, which require manipulation under high biocontainment levels, minigenome-based assays are also valuable surrogates that recapitulate viral replication and transcriptional processes without generating infectious particles. Here we describe a reverse genetics system for SOSV that can be used to rapidly screen for compounds that inhibit viral replication. An initial minigenome screen performed under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) biocontainment was used to identify only those compounds with potential antiviral activity, which were then assessed for their ability to inhibit authentic viral replication processes using the reporter SOSV at BSL-3. As well as screening for antiviral compounds, these reverse genetics system will provide a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis in both in vitro and in vivo systems.Materials and methodsCellsHuh7 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 5% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin. BSR-T7/5 (generous gifts from Klaus Conzelmann, Germany), BHK-1 (ATCC, USA), and Vero-E6 cells (ATCC, USA) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum, non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 μg/mL streptomycin.Reverse genetics: Minigenome assay and rescue of recombinant virusesThe SOSV minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I promoter-based plasmid (S1 Fig., Genbank #MG880223), and transfected into Huh7 cells in conjunction with Pol-II expression plasmids (pCAGGS) supplying SOSV polymerase (L), nucleoprotein (NP), and phosphoprotein (P) proteins in trans. The minigenome assay was performed in a 96-well plate on cells seeded at 2 × 104 cells per well, with the following amounts of plasmids (150 ng total) transfected per well: 75 ng minigenome, 12.5 ng L, 50 ng NP, and 12.5 ng P. Minigenome activity was based on ZsGreen1 (ZsG) fluorescence levels determined at 72 h post transfection (hpt). To rescue recombinant virus, a T7 promoter-based plasmid containing full-length anti-genomic sense SOSV (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880224) was constructed. To rescue the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG, a modified genome was constructed in which the M open reading frame (ORF) was replaced with one encoding ZsG-P2A-M, leaving the M gene start and gene end intact (S2 Fig.; Genbank #MG880225). Virus rescue was performed in 6-well plates seeded with BSR-T7 cells (approximately 70% confluent) transfected with genome plasmid in conjunction with the SOSV-L, -NP, and -P expression plasmids (2 μg genome, 1 μg SOSV-L, 0.5 μg SOSV-NP, and 0.25 μg SOSV-P). At 96 hpt, cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified by low-speed centrifugation, and used to infect BHK-21 cells. At 96 h post infection (hpi), cell culture supernatants were harvested, clarified, and titered by tissue culture infective dose 50 (TCID50) assays in Vero-E6 cells based on crystal violet visualization of cytopathic effects [12].Antiviral compound screeningAll compounds were obtained from either Selleckchem (Houston, TX, USA) or Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA) with the exception of T-705 (BOC Sciences, Shirley, NY, USA) and 09167 (Vitas-M Laboratory, Champaign, IL, USA). For both screening assays, Huh7 cells were seeded in a 96-well plate at 2 × 104 cells per well 16–20 h prior to treatment with DMSO-diluted compounds (final DMSO concentration 0.5%). For the minigenome screening assay, cells were transfected with the required plasmids using TransIT- LT-1 (Mirus Bio, Madison, WI, USA) 1 h post treatment. Total ZsG fluorescence was determined 72 hpt using a microplate reader (H1MD, BioTek Synergy, Winooski, VT, USA), with levels recorded at a height of 6 mm with 75 gain/sensitivity. ZsG levels were normalized to levels in mock-treated cells. For the reporter and wild-type screening assays, cells were infected 1 h post treatment with either rSOSV/ZsG or rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, supernatants were collected (rSOSV-infected cells) for titer determination, or total ZsG fluorescence in the infected cell monolayer determined (rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells) using a H1MD plate reader (height 6 mm; 100 gain/sensitivity). For both assays, cell viability was determined by measuring ATP content in parallel with compound-treated, mock-transfected/infected cells using CellTiter-Glo 2.0 (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). All experiments were performed in quadruplicate and repeated at least 3 times.Microscopy and high-content imagingZsG fluorescence in infected cells was imaged directly using an EVOS digital inverted microscope (Thermo-Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). For immunofluorescence, cells were fixed in 10% formalin for 30 min, permeabilized in PBS containing 0.1% Triton-X100 (v/v) for 10 min, and blocked with PBS 5% BSA (v/v) for 30 min. Primary antibody was rabbit α-SOSV NP (Genscript, Waltham, MA, USA), visualized with an AlexaFluor 488-labeled secondary antibody (Thermo-Fisher, #A11034). Quantification of total rSOSV protein production in Huh7 cells was performed on infected cells labeled as described above, and further stained with Nuc-Blue and Cell-Mask Red (Thermo-Fisher). Images were collected on the Operetta high-content imaging system (PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA, USA) using a 20× objective, with 16 fields per well analyzed using the Harmony software package (PerkinElmer). Total 488 fluorescence per field was determined, averaged for the well, and then normalized to values from control wells containing rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells.Data analysisZsG fluorescence values for compound-treated, rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells were normalized to those in mock-treated (DMSO only) cells, and used to fit a 4-parameter equation to semilog plots of the concentration-response data. From this, the compound concentrations inhibiting 50% of the ZsG expression (50% effective concentration, EC50) were interpolated. Cell viability was similarly calculated in compound-treated, mock-infected cells to determine the 50% cell cytotoxicity concentration (CC50) of each compound. The selectivity index (SI) was calculated by dividing the CC50 by the EC50. Data analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism v7. Suitability for high-throughput screening was determined using the Z prime (Z′) score, a measure of statistical effect size, with values between 0.5 and 1.0 considered acceptable [13].Accession numbersSOSV Minigenome plasmid; pSOSV MG; Genbank # MG880223Rescue plasmid for rSOSV; pSOSV FL; Genbank #MG880224Rescue plasmid for rSOSV/ZsG; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225ResultsScreening of antiviral compounds using a SOSV minigenome assayWe constructed a SOSV minigenome segment containing the parental SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for NP and the gene end sequence for L. All internal coding sequences and intergenic regions were replaced with the coding sequence for ZsGreen1 (ZsG), a green fluorescent protein (Fig 1A). Protein expression plasmids under control of the Pol-II promoter (pCAGGS) allowed in trans expression of SOSV NP, L, and P, the minimum requirement to initiate paramyxovirus replication and transcription [1]. The minigenome segment was cloned into a Pol-I expression plasmid in the negative orientation, meaning it has to be replicated first by the NP + L + P replication complex before transcription of ZsG mRNA can occur.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g001Fig 1Design and optimization of the Sosuga virus minigenome screening assay.a. Genome schematic representing the design of the Sosuga virus (SOSV) minigenome segment. The minigenome contains the full-length SOSV 3′ and 5′ leader and trailer sequences, along with the gene start sequence for nucleoprotein (NP) and the gene end sequence for the viral polymerase (L), with the parental coding and intergenic regions replaced by the coding sequence of ZsGreen1 (ZsG). Transfected into cells in conjunction with plasmids expressing SOSV L, NP, and phosphoprotein (P), this minigenome allows for expression of quantifiable ZsG. b. The minigenome assay was optimized for Huh7 cells in a 96-well plate format using different ratios of the plasmids expressing L, NP, and P with a constant amount of minigenome plasmid. Cells were transfected with 75 ng minigenome plasmid and 75 ng total of plasmids expressing L, NP, and P, with ratios of each stated underneath the bars. Relative ZsG fluorescence over control reactions with no L was calculated at 48 and 72 h post transfection (hpt). c. Dose-response curve for the optimized SOSV minigenome assay against ribavirin. Cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 hpt with the minigenome plasmids, and ZsG fluorescence was measured at 72 hpt. ZsG fluorescence (green) was normalized to mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-transfected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments.Next, the SOSV minigenome screen was optimized to achieve maximum reporter protein expression with the greatest signal-to-noise ratio in a 96-well plate format using Huh7 cells. Huh7 cells have previously proven useful for evaluating nucleoside analog activity against other viruses, and are highly permissive to SOSV infection [14–17]. Alongside a constant amount of minigenome plasmid, differing ratios of pCAGGS-L, -NP, and -P were transfected, and ZsG fluorescence was determined at both 48 and 72 hpt (Fig 1B). We determined the optimal ratio of plasmids for the assay to be 6:1:4:1 of genome, pCAGGS-L, -NP, and–P respectively, with ZsG fluorescence read at 72 hpt. To determine whether the optimized minigenome assay was suitable for screening antiviral compounds, we used the broad-spectrum antiviral ribavirin. Using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control and DMSO as the vehicle-only control, the Z′ score of the assay was 0.58. Dose-dependent reduction of ZsG fluorescence was also observed in the SOSV minigenome assay using a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin, giving an EC50 of 5.91 ± 0.85 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 1C). These data indicated that the assay was robust, and suitable for screening anti-SOSV compounds at BSL-2.As minigenome assays can be used as surrogates for measuring viral replication and transcription, we evaluated a panel of 40 compounds predicted to inhibit these processes. These were a collection of nucleoside analogs supplemented with other select compounds reported to inhibit viral replication. Compounds were initially screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content (S1 Table). Compounds inhibiting the minigenome by >50% whilst retaining >80% cell viability were then chosen for further analysis; these were 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 5-fluorouridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), and 6-azauridine. Dose-response analysis of these compounds demonstrated that both 2′-dFC and 6-azauridine inhibited minigenome activity in the absence of cell toxicity, with EC50 values of 1.31 ± 0.15 μM and 5.17 ± 1.01 μM, respectively (Fig 2). While 5-fluorouridine was not cytotoxic at the concentrations evaluated, it did not completely inhibit minigenome signal even at the highest concentrations evaluated, and was therefore dropped at this point. MPA inhibited minigenome activity at sub-micromolar concentrations, but was cytotoxic at higher concentrations. However, with an SI of 7, it was incorporated into the secondary virus screen to determine if a larger therapeutic window became apparent in the context of authentic viral replication.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g002Fig 2Dose-response curves for selected compounds using the minigenome assay.Compounds selected during the initial screen as potential SOSV antivirals were assessed by concentration-response curves using serial 2-fold dilutions of each compound. ZsG fluorescence (green) at 48 hpt was normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to those in mock-transfected cells. Graphs are representative of at least 3 independent experiments. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with errors bars indicating the standard deviation.Design and rescue of a reporter SOSV expressing a fluorescent proteinThe single-stranded, negative-sense RNA genome of SOSV encodes 6 genes to express 7 proteins, with 1 protein generated by V/P gene mRNA editing. The intergenic regions of SOSV contain transcriptional promoter and terminator sequences. We cloned the full-length SOSV genome into an expression plasmid under control of the T7 polymerase promoter. When transfected into cells and supplied with SOSV P, NP, L, and T7 polymerase in trans, this system successfully generated infectious recombinant SOSV (rSOSV). After optimizing the rSOSV rescue system, we designed another recombinant SOSV genome capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter protein in infected cells. Previous approaches to develop recombinant paramyxoviruses expressing reporter genes have included the reporter as either a separate open reading frame (ORF), or incorporated it within a parental ORF [18–22]. We employed the latter approach, and generated a SOSV genome in which the ZsG ORF was inserted upstream of the M ORF, fused to the viral protein via the self-cleaving P2A motif taken from porcine teschovirus 1 [23]. The authentic SOSV M gene start and gene end sequences therefore transcribe a single mRNA encoding the ORF for both M and ZsG, which, upon translation, results in the expression of 2 separate proteins via the P2A ribosomal skipping motif. Incorporation of this recombinant SOSV genome into the previously described SOSV rescue system (Fig 3A) resulted in the successful rescue of the reporter SOSV (rSOSV/ZsG).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g003Fig 3Optimization of an antiviral screening assay using a recombinant SOSV expressing ZsG.a. Schematic representation of the wild-type recombinant SOSV (rSOSV), and the reporter SOSV expressing ZsG (rSOSV/ZsG). The ZsG coding sequence was inserted immediately 5′ of the M coding sequence (antigenomic sense), separated from the viral protein by the P2A sequence from porcine teschovirus 1. This self-cleaving amino acid motif allows expression of both ZsG and M from a single mRNA generated by the parental SOSV M promoter and terminator sequences. b. Vero-E6 cells infected with either rSOSV or rSOSV/ZsG at 72 hpi showing formation of syncytia. In rSOSV/ZsG-infected cell monolayers, syncytia were associated with extensive ZsG expression (images taken at 4 × magnification). c. Growth curves for wild-type SOSV, rSOSV, and rSOSV/ZsG were performed in Vero-E6 cells infected at MOI 0.1. Titers (TCID50) were determined at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. d. The optimized rSOSV/ZsG antiviral screening assay was validated using ribavirin. Huh7 cells were treated with a serial 2-fold dilution of ribavirin 1 h prior to infection at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 72 hpi and normalized to levels in mock-treated cells (DMSO only). Cell viability (blue) was determined concurrently by measuring ATP content, with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph representative of 3 independent experiments.Infecting Vero-E6 cells with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.1 resulted in extensive syncytia formation in the cell monolayer similar to infection with rSOSV, with strong ZsG fluorescence detectable in these infected cells (Fig 3B). To compare growth kinetics of the recombinant viruses, Vero-E6 cells were infected with rSOSV, rSOSV/ZsG, or wild-type SOSV at MOI 0.1, with titers determined by TCID50 at 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. All 3 viruses grew to similar titers over the 120 h time course, with no attenuation apparent in either of the recombinant viruses compared to the wild-type (Fig 3C). This indicated that incorporation of the ZsG ORF into the SOSV genome did not negatively impact the virus phenotype. To assess whether rSOSV/ZsG could be used to confirm antiviral activity of a compound by measuring the reduction in ZsG fluorescence in treated cells, we optimized a screening assay in Huh7 cells using 50 μM ribavirin as the positive control; the resultant Z′ score was 0.74, indicating a robust assay. A concentration-response curve using a 2-fold serial dilution of ribavirin demonstrated dose-dependent reduction in ZsG fluorescence in rSOSV/ZsG-infected cells, giving an EC50 of 6.10 ± 0.09 μM with no cytotoxicity (CC50 > 50 μM; Fig 3D).Screening of candidate antiviral compounds with recombinant virusesTo confirm the inhibitory effect of 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, and MPA in the context of authentic viral replication, we performed counter-screening with rSOSV/ZsG. Alongside these 3 compounds, we included 09167, an antagonist of the innate immune system that was shown to inhibit NiV and other paramyxoviruses in a similar screening assay [22,24]. Huh7 cells were treated with compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at an MOI of 0.2, with ZsG fluorescence read 48 hpi. All 3 compounds reduced ZsG expression in a dose-dependent manner, with EC50 values similar to those observed during the minigenome screen (Fig 4A). 2′-dFC (EC50 = 1.48 ± 0.22 μM) and 6-azauridine (EC50 = 7.99 ± 1.32 μM) potently inhibited ZsG fluorescence without cytotoxicity at the highest compound concentrations. While MPA had an EC50 value of 0.33 ± 0.04 μM, similar to that obtained in the minigenome screen, it again had a low SI of 5 due to its cytotoxicity at higher concentrations (Table 1). The 0.67 ± 0.05 μM EC50 value of 09167 was consistent with the sub-micromolar concentrations used to inhibit other paramyxoviruses, indicating that SOSV was similarly sensitive to this compound [24].10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g004Fig 4Using SOSV/ZsG as a tool to screen antiviral compounds.a. Representative concentration-response curves of Huh7 cells treated with 2-fold serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV/ZsG at MOI 0.2. ZsG fluorescence (green) was measured at 48 hpi and normalized to mock-treated cells. Cell viability was assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue), with values normalized to mock-infected cells. Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation; graph is representative of 3 independent experiments. b. Confirmatory counter-screening of each compound with wild-type rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of compound 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 2 days post infection cells were fixed, and SOSV proteins stained and quantified using immunofluorescence microscopy. Relative fluorescence (red; total fluorescence normalized to mock-treated cells) in each well was determined, with cell viability assessed concurrently by determining ATP content (blue). Each point represents the mean of quadruplicate wells, with error bars showing standard deviation. Values stated are the 50% effective concentration (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentration (CC50), and selectivity index (SI).10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.t001Table 1Selected compounds’ 50% effective concentrations (EC50), 50% cytotoxic concentrations (CC50), and selectivity indices (SI) determined by minigenome and reporter virus screening assays.CompoundMinigenome ScreenrSOSV/ZsG ScreenCC50Compound ClassEC50SIEC50SIRibavirin5.91 ± 0.85> 86.10 ± 0.09> 8> 50.0Nucleoside analog2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine1.31 ± 0.15> 381.48 ± 0.22> 33> 50.0Nucleoside analog5-fluorouridine0.29 ± 0.13> 172NTNT> 50.0Nucleoside analogMycophenolic acid± 0.0670.33 ± 0.0451.74 ± 0.42IMPDH inhibitor6-azauridine5.17 ± 1.01> 97.99 ± 1.32> 6> 50.0Nucleoside analog09167NTNT0.67 ± 0.05> 74>50.0Innate immune antagonistNT, not tested; IMPDH, inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase. All values in μM ± standard deviation from at least 3 independent experiments.To ensure the validity of using the ZsG-expressing virus to accurately identify specific inhibitors, we investigated whether these compounds also inhibited the replication of rSOSV. Huh7 cells were treated with 2′-dFC, 6-azauridine, MPA, or 09167, and infected with rSOSV (MOI = 0.2) 1 h post treatment. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and total SOSV protein production was visualized using rSOSV-specific and fluorescently labelled antibodies. Total fluorescence due to rSOSV protein staining per well (average of 16 analyzed fields per well) was normalized to rSOSV-infected, mock-treated cells, allowing determination of the relative reduction in virus replication due to the inhibitory effects of each compound. All compounds tested reduced rSOSV protein production in a dose-dependent manner, indicating inhibition of viral replication and growth (Fig 4B). Direct visualization of the compound-treated rSOSV infected cell monolayers clearly demonstrated the reduction in viral protein production, and also demonstrated the ability of rSOSV to form extensive syncytia in Huh7 cells at sub-optimal concentrations of compound (Fig 5). These results indicate that inhibition caused by the compounds is indeed due to a SOSV-specific mechanism, rather than one unique to the ZsG-expressing recombinant.10.1371/journal.pntd.0006326.g005Fig 5Immunofluorescent imaging of rSOSV infected Huh7 cells treated with selected antiviral compounds.Huh7 cells were treated with serial dilutions of either 2′-deoxy-2′-fluorocytidine (2′-dFC), 6-azauridine, mycophenolic acid (MPA), or 09167 1 h prior to infection with rSOSV at MOI 0.2. At 48 hpi, cells were fixed and SOSV proteins (green) and cell nuclei (blue) visualized by immunofluorescence. Concentration of compound is shown in white text on each representative image (mM); control cells were treated with DMSO only. Images taken using a 20 × objective. White bar represents 100 μm.DiscussionThat SOSV, a previously unknown paramyxovirus vectored by bats, could cause severe disease in humans is not unexpected, given that bats are increasingly implicated as sources of novel zoonotic infections [3,25–27]. A recent study focusing on only 10% of bat species in relatively small geographic areas discovered evidence of 66 novel paramyxoviruses [28], so undiscovered pathogens with the capacity to threaten human health may yet be present in bat populations worldwide. With reverse genetics systems already developed for the highly pathogenic paramyxoviruses NiV and HeV, the establishment of SOSV reverse genetics based on similar design concepts ensures that any investigations into future outbreaks can be quickly initiated [20,21,29]. Furthermore, a common feature of paramyxoviruses appears to be that expression of reporter genes does not negatively affect the viral phenotype either in vitro or in vivo, increasing the usefulness of these systems [21,22,30,31]. The minigenome screening methods described here were successfully used to identify several compounds that inhibit SOSV replication. We were then able to confirm the antiviral activity of candidate compounds by using the reporter virus screen. While the minigenome screen is useful for identifying compounds that inhibit viral replication and transcription, the reporter virus screen can be utilized to identify other compounds, especially those that affect other viral life cycle processes, such as cell tropism, entry, budding, and transmission.The antiviral activity of 6-azauridine and its derivatives toward several viruses has been reported, including for viruses closely related to SOSV, such as NiV, measles, and human parainfluenza virus 3 [22,32,33]. In a clinical setting, the derivative 6-azauridine triacetate has been used therapeutically to treat severe psoriasis for over 40 years, with minimal side effects observed at a dosage level of 125 mg/kg/day [34,35]. Encouragingly, research also shows that at that dose, plasma concentrations in human subjects reach 100 μM or greater, with successive doses over several days maintaining this level [36]. This is far in excess of the 5.17 μM EC50 for 6-azauridine reported here, so the potential usefulness in treating SOSV even at lower and less frequent doses should be further evaluated. 2′-dFC has been shown to potently inhibit several other negative strand viruses, including influenza and hepatitis C virus [37,38], although concerns over mitochondrial toxicity have limited the therapeutic use of 2′-dFC and its derivatives to date [39]. However, the potent antiviral activity of 2′-dFC makes worthwhile to investigate whether other 2′-deoxynucleoside analogs have similar antiviral activity against SOSV in the absence of toxicity.The antiviral activity demonstrated by ribavirin was expected, and has been reported previously for NiV [22,40,41]. Ribavirin has also been used to treat human patients during a non-randomized, unblinded limited clinical trial during an NiV outbreak in Malaysia in 1998–1999; mortality was reduced by 37% in the treated group [42]. However, its effectiveness when used in NiV animal models is less clear [40,43,44]. A similar discrepancy between in vivo and in vitro potency of these compounds may exist for SOSV, although this will remain unclear until a suitable SOSV animal model is developed. Promisingly, the limiting factor to henipavirus treatment effectiveness appears to be the compound’s ability to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Ribavirin treatment in a non-human primate model of HeV infection reduced viral loads to levels low enough to prevent development of the respiratory signs of infection, but not to prevent spread to the central nervous system [44]. As ribavirin cannot cross the BBB, the disease then manifested as neurological signs. However, no neurological symptoms were reported from the one SOSV case to date, so nucleoside analogs such as ribavirin, 6-azauridine, and 2′-dFC may be more effective treatment options for this disease.In conclusion, we have developed a minigenome assay to investigate SOSV replication and transcriptional processes, as well as a rescue system to recover infectious recombinant virus. We used this system to rescue a recombinant SOSV capable of expressing a fluorescent reporter in infected cells with no loss of fitness compared to parental virus. A high-throughput screen using both systems identified 3 compounds that inhibited SOSV replication with acceptable SI values, providing information that may help direct therapeutic options for any future cases of SOSV. Finally, as well as being a powerful tool for analyzing mechanisms of SOSV pathogenesis, the minigenome and reporter systems may help us better understand the potential public health threats posed by bat-transmitted paramyxoviruses, and provide strategies on best combating these emerging threats.Supporting informationS1 FigPlasmids use in the SOSV minigenome assay.The SOSV minigenome (mg) segment, containing the SOSV leader sequence and gene start for the nucleoprotein ORF, the ZsGreen1 ORF (ZsG), the polymerase ORF gene end, and the SOSV trailer sequence (Genbank #MG880223). Expression is controlled RNA-polymerase I promoter (pol I prom) and a RNA-polymerase I terminator sequences (pol I term).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S2 FigPlasmids used in the rescue of rSOSV (pSOSV FL) and rSOSV/ZsG (pSOSV/ZsG FL).Red arrows represent full-length viral genome, blue arrows represent viral protein open reading frames: NP–nucleoprotein; P–phosphoprotein; V–V protein; M–matrix protein; F–fusion protein; HN–hemagglutinin-neuraminidase; L–polymerase. Green arrow represents ZsGreen1 (ZsG) open reading frame. T7 prom–T7 polymerase promoter; HDV Rz–Hepatitis D virus ribozyme; T7term–T7 polymerase terminator; P2A –nucleotide sequence encoding the self-cleaving amino acid motif from porcine teschovirus 1. Sequences available at: pSOSV FL, Genbank #MG880224; pSOSV/ZsG FL, Genbank #MG880225).(TIF)Click here for additional data file.S1 TableScreening a panel of selected compounds for inhibition of SOSV minigenome in Huh7 cells.Compounds were screened for activity at concentrations of 5000, 500, and 50 nM, with cell viability determined concurrently by assessing ATP content.(DOCX)Click here for additional data file.


Title: A Human Lung Xenograft Mouse Model of Nipah Virus Infection

IntroductionNipah virus (NiV) is a member of the genus Henipavirus (family Paramyxoviridae) that causes severe and often lethal respiratory illness and encephalitis in humans resulting in case fatality rates of up to 92% [1]. The first human cases of NiV infection were identified during an outbreak of severe febrile encephalitis in Malaysia and Singapore in 1998–1999 [2], [3]. More recently, outbreaks have occurred in Bangladesh and India almost yearly since 2001 [1], [4]. NiV can cause Acute Lung Injury (ALI) in humans, and human-to-human transmission has been observed in recent outbreaks of NiV [5], [6], [7]. Data on the histopathology of the lungs of NiV cases is limited to necropsy findings in the respiratory tract of NiV infected cases and include hemorrhage, necrosis and inflammation in the epithelium of the small airways but not in the bronchi [8].Endothelial cells have been identified as a major target for NiV and most studies have focused on the role of the endothelium in NiV pathogenesis [9], [10], [11]. However very limited data is available on the host responses following NiV infection in the human lung. While the endothelium plays an important role in the terminal stages of NiV infection, the role of the respiratory epithelium in the early stages of infection is critical; however, it remains largely unexplored. The specific sites of henipavirus infection in the human respiratory tract are still unknown as well as the molecular mechanism by which these viruses cause disease in humans. We have previously shown that NiV can efficiently infect human respiratory epithelial cells from the trachea, bronchi and small airways resulting in the induction of key inflammatory mediators that have been implicated in leukocyte recruitment and ALI [12]. Similarly, in animal models (hamster, ferret and African green monkey), NiV can replicate to high titers in the lungs of these animals and cause acute and severe respiratory distress [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. Human xenograft mouse models have previously been used to study tissue development and cancer as well as the pathogenesis of infectious agents [18], [19], [20]. The majority of viral pathogenesis studies involving human xenograft mice focus on Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) or Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) in humanized mice that have been grafted with human hematopoietic stem cells and thymus [21], [22].Here we report the first characterization of NiV infection of the human respiratory tract using a human lung xenograft model to gain further insight into the mechanisms of NiV pathogenesis in humans. Our results showed that NiV replicates to high titers in the human lung and that infection results in the induction of a robust host response.ResultsHuman lung xenograft developmentSeverely immunodeficient NSG mice served as hosts to support the successful engraftment of human lung xenografts. We implanted 6 small fragments of human fetal lung in the dorsal subcutaneous space, 3 on each side of the spine. Following transplantation, human fetal lung xenografts typically increased in size by 2–10 fold over 3 months. The human fetal lung xenografts rapidly grafted and developed mature structures similar to those seen in adult lung (Figure 1A). These mature structures included bronchi that were partially surrounded by cartilage (Figure 1B), lined with ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium (Figure 1C) and surrounded by longitudinal elastic fibers. The bronchi divide into bronchioles and terminal bronchioles lined by cuboidal to flat epithelium (Figure 1D). The distal respiratory tract comprises of primitive alveolar spaces that are lined with both cells that have flat (type 1) and larger rounded (type 2) pneumocyte morphology (Figure 1E). The alveolar walls of xenografts were thicker than those of normal adult human lungs. The human graft was well vascularized with the presence of arteries, veins, and capillaries (Figure 1F). Finally, the expression patterns of ephrin B2, the receptor of NiV, was similar to that seen in normal human lung tissue [23] (Figure 1G) with expression on bronchial epithelium, alveolar cells and vasculatures (Figure 1H).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g001Figure 1Histological characterization of human lung xenografts.Normal (A) and xenograft (B–F) human lung sections were stained with H&E as described in Experimental Procedures. Following transplantation, human lung xenografts develop mature structures (B) similar to those seen in normal human lung (A)(10× magnification). Structures include pseudostratified ciliated epithelium (C) (40× magnification), terminal bronchioles (D) (10× magnification), alveolar spaces (E)(40× magnification) and pulmonary vasculature (F)(10× magnification). Ephrin B2 expression was observed in normal human lung (red) (G) and human lung xenograft tissues (yellow) (H) with similar distribution on epithelium (10× magnification). Br = bronchi, V = pulmonary vasculature, Av = alveoli, Ca = cartilage, Ci = cilia, Pe = pseudostratified epithelium, Ef = elastic fibers, Tb = terminal bronchiole.NiV replication in human lung xenograftsNatural NiV infection involves exposure to the virus through the respiratory epithelium. To mimic this route in human lung xenografts that lack air exchange, tissues were directly injected with NiV. Following direct intragraft injection of the 3 lung tissues on the left side (primary infection) within each mouse, NSG mice did not show any signs of morbidity or mortality during our observation period of 10 days. In addition, two non-grafted NSG mice that were challenged intradermally as controls, with the same dose as xenografts, did not develop any clinical signs. Primary infection of the human lung xenografts resulted in detection of infectious NiV as early as 1 day post infection (Figure 2A) and NiV replicated to high titers (107 TCID50/gram tissue) by day 3 post infection. NiV titers remained high until the end of the experiment at 10 days post infection. Importantly, high titers of NiV were also detected in the other 3 lung tissues (on the right side of each mouse) that were not initially infected through direct intragraft injection as early as 3 days post infection. This finding clearly demonstrates that the virus can spread from infected human lung grafts to uninfected grafts in the same mouse, most likely through viremia (secondary infection; Figure 2A). The presence of viremia was further supported by the observation that infectious NiV was detected, albeit at lower levels, in several mouse tissues including lung, brain, heart, spleen and kidney at various time points post infection (Figure 2B). In fact, viremia was detected in a blood sample of 1 animal on day 10 post infection in which a low level (300 TCID50/mL) of infectious NiV was determined (Table 1). Interestingly, virus was not detected in organs from non-grafted NSG mice that were challenged intradermally with the same dose (Table 1), suggesting the NSG mouse tissues are probably not intrinsically susceptible to NiV. In order to confirm that the human lung xenografts could be infected via the hematogenous route, we next challenged 2 lung-engrafted NSG mice with NiV via the IP route. The IP challenge with NiV in this model confirmed that infection resulted in detectable viremia in 1 animal with virus spreading to the human lung xenografts in both, replicating to high titers and resulting in histopathological changes similar to those observed with intragraft challenge (Table 1). Together, these data suggest that following intragraft infection, the human lung is highly susceptible to NiV infection and results in viremia and subsequent spread to other organs in the absence of disease.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g002Figure 2Nipah virus replication in human lung xenografts.Virus replication was determined in human lung (A) and mouse (B) tissues at days 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 post infection by virus titration. Titers were determined in human lung following primary (direct injection) or secondary (infection due to viremia). Samples from three animals were assayed and analyzed and the mean titers were calculated as TCID50/gram tissue. The error bars represent the standard deviation.10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.t001Table 1Summary of virological and histological findings in human lung graft, mouse tissues and blood following Nipah virus challenge.Route of infectionHuman lungMouse tissue
Infectious Virus

Viral Antigen

Histopathology

Infectious Virus

Viral Antigen

Histopathology

Blood

Direct (n = 15; Primary)
+++++++++
Indirect (n = 9; Secondary)
+++++++++++; starting 5DPI in lung−+
IP
*
(n = 2)
+++++++++++; in lung−+
SC
#
(n = 2)
N/AN/AN/A−−−−N/A = Not applicable. Direct = injection into the graft, resulting in primary infection; Indirect = secondary infection resulting from virus dissemination from the direct infected lung graft. IP = Intraperitoneal challenge. SC = Subcutaneous challenge. Infectious virus was determined in human lung and mouse tiisues and whole blood by TCID50% as described in Materials & Methods. Viral antigen was detected with an anti N antibody as described in Materials & Methods. Histopathology is based on H&E stained lung sections described in Materials & Methods.* = data available on day 10 post infection only.# = for control NSG mice only.+++ = high virus titer/intense immunostaining/extensive histopathological changes. + = low virus titer/low intensity immunostaining, − = not detected.NiV induced histopathology in human lung xenograftsIn order to study the histopathological changes associated with NiV infection in the human lung, tissue sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). No gross pathologic lesions were observed in the human lung grafts. Since NSG mice exhibit multiple defects in innate and adaptive immunity [24], NiV infection in human lung grafts did not result in significant inflammation. Histopathological changes in the human lung tissues following NiV infection were independent of the route of infection (intragraft, indirect or intraperitoneal) and included small focal areas with syncytia and necrosis as early as day 3 pi (Figure 3A). These areas rapidly expanded to large areas with hemorrhages and significant loss of architecture of the small airways by day 10 pi (Figure 3B). The main histopathological features of NiV infection in these tissues were the characteristic syncytia formation (Figure 3C) and areas of necrosis (Figure 3D). Syncytia formation could be observed in bronchial epithelium (Figure 3C), alveolar epithelium (Figure 3E) and vascular endothelium (Figure 3F). In addition, fibrinoid necrosis was observed in some of the vasculature as well as recruitment of granulocytes (Figure 3F). In agreement with the absence of clinical signs, NiV infection did not result in histopathological changes in any visceral mouse tissue (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g003Figure 3Histopathological changes during Nipah virus infection in human lung xenografts.Human lung sections were stained with H&E as described in Experimental Procedures. (A) Human lung with focal areas of necrosis and syncytia formation (black arrow) on day 3 post infection (10× magnification). (B) Human lung with extensive areas of necrosis, syncytia formation and loss of architecture on day 10 post infection (10× magnification). (C) Bronchi with syncytia formation (*) on day 3 post infection (20× magnification). (D) Loss of alveolar architecture and areas of necrosis (black arrow) on day 10 post infection (20× magnification). (E) Alveolar space with syncytial formation (*) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (F) Pulmonary vasculature with syncytial formation (*) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification), fibrinoid necrosis of the intima, and influx of granulocytes (black arrowhead). Data are representative from 6 tissues per animal, 3 animals per time point.NiV tropism in human lung xenograftsIn order to identify the cells targeted by NiV in the human lung, viral nucleocapsid protein (N) expression in human lung grafts was examined with immunohistochemistry. Expression of NiV N coincided with the focal areas of histopathological changes on day 3 pi and showed intense staining (Figure 4A). By day 10, widespread expression of NiV N was observed throughout the human lung tissues (Figure 4B). NiV primarily targeted the respiratory epithelium of the bronchi and bronchioles, interstitial mesenchymal cells (Figure 4C), and the small airways (Figure 4D). Cells targeted in the small airways were primarily cuboidal, which is consistent with type-2 pneumocyte morphology, although cells with type-1 pneumocyte morphology also showed reactivity. In addition to the respiratory epithelium, NiV replication also involved the vasculature (Figure 4E). In agreement with the observation that low levels of infectious virus were detectable in several mouse tissues, small focal areas of viral antigen primarily focused in small airway epithelium could be detected in mouse lungs (Figure 4F) but not in other organs tested (Table 1). Tropism of viral antigen in mouse lung was similar between tissues infected by direct injection or following IP challenge (data not shown).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g004Figure 4Nipah virus tropism in human lung xenografts.Lung sections were stained by immunohistochemical (IHC) detection of Nipah virus nucleoprotein as described in Experimental Procedures. An overview of viral antigen distribution is shown on day 3 (A) and day 10(B) post infection (10× magnification). (C) Bronchial epithelium positive for NiV antigen in a syncytium (black arrow) on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (D) Alveolar space with NiV positive cell, primarily cuboidal morphology on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (E) Pulmonary vasculature positive for NiV antigen on day 3 post infection (40× magnification). (F) Small focal area in mouse lung tissue positive for NiV antigen (red) on day 10 post infection (10× magnification)(nuclei in blue). Br = bronchi, V = pulmonary vasculature. T2 = Type 2 pneumocyte. Data are representative from 3 animals per time point.Although focal areas were generally not centered around vessels (Figure 5A) during the early stages of infection, when NiV infection involved the vasculature, CD31-positive endothelial cells were a specific target of infection (Figure 5B). Similar findings were observed in animals challenged via the IP route (Table 1).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g005Figure 5Cell tropism of Nipah virus in human lung xenografts.Lung sections were stained by immunofluorescent detection of Nipah virus nucleoprotein (red), CD31 (green) and nucleus (blue) as described in Experimental Procedures. (A) Human lung showing focal area of Nipah virus distinct from pulmonary vasculature on day 3 post infection (10× magnification). (B) CD31 positive endothelium of pulmonary vasculature is positive for Nipah virus antigen (40× magnification). Data are representative from 3 animals per time point.Inflammatory responses during NiV infectionIn order to elucidate the host responses following NiV infection in the human lung, the expression of several cytokines and chemokines was determined in homogenates of human lung xenografts following direct infection with NiV (Figure 6). Since human immune cells were absent in this model, any expression of human cytokines or chemokines was primarily the result from NiV infection of human epithelial and endothelial cells. NiV infection in human lung resulted in the expression of several cytokines/chemokines, including eotaxin-1, G-CSF, GM-CSF, TNFα, VEGF, IP-10, IL-1β and IL-6 starting by day 5 pi (Figure 6). Expression of GM-CSF, TNFα, IP10 and IL-1β peaked on day 5 post infection and gradually declined over time. IL-6 and eotaxin-1 expression peaked at day 7 pi, whereas G-CSF initially peaked on day 5 but remained high throughout infection. Interestingly, VEGF expression continued to increase over time concomitant with the increased hemorrhaging and remodeling of the lung. The cytokine and chemokines profiles were similar between lung xenografts following primary (direct) or secondary (indirect) infection (data not shown).10.1371/journal.ppat.1004063.g006Figure 6Cytokine levels in Nipah virus infected human lung xenografts.The concentrations of cytokines were determined in lung homogenates of human lung xenografts following direct infection with NiV as described in the Experimental Procedures. Concentrations are expressed as picogram (pg) cytokine per gram lung tissue. The error bars represent the standard deviation.DiscussionNipah virus is an emerging zoonotic virus that can cause severe respiratory distress and encephalitis in humans [1]. Despite intensive studies in vitro and in animal models, little is known about the mechanisms governing the development of NiV-related respiratory disease in humans; this is due to difficulties in obtaining human samples where the disease is endemic. To address this important limitation, the goal of the present study was to characterize a novel human lung xenograft model to study the pathogenesis of NiV infection in human lung in vivo.Studies on the molecular mechanisms of NiV-mediated pathogenesis have been hampered by the lack of biologically relevant in vitro models for studying the initial host responses to NiV infection in the human lung [7], [13], [15]. To fill this gap, we recently showed that NiV can efficiently replicate in primary epithelial cells from the human respiratory tract [12]. While this is an attractive model to study the early steps of NiV entry in the host, it lacks the complexity of the microenvironment in the lung. In the current model, we show that human fetal lung tissues grafted on an immunocompromised mouse develop into more mature human lung tissues within 3 months after implantation. Transplanted lung tissues rapidly vascularized and developed bronchioles, lined with columnar epithelium, and alveolar-like spaces closely resembling those seen in normal human lung tissue.The prototype strain of NiV (Malaysia) was used in this study. While the outbreaks in Malaysia and Singapore have primarily been associated with the development of severe febrile encephalitis with a case fatality rate of 38%, respiratory symptoms were observed (40% of lethal cases) [8]. Interestingly, the more recent outbreaks in Bangladesh and India are associated with a higher prevalence of respiratory disease as well as a significantly higher case fatality rate of 67% to 92% [1], [6]. It is currently unknown whether differences in respiratory involvement are due to genetic difference between the Malaysia and Bangladesh strains of NiV or whether confounding factors are involved, however both NiV strains can replicate efficiently and cause respiratory distress in animals [25], [26]. In addition, no histopathological data is available for human cases of the Bangladesh strain of NiV; therefore, the Malaysia strain was used in this study to allow for comparisons of histopathology and viral tropism. In humans, vasculitis and fibrinoid necrosis in the lungs was observed in the majority of fatal cases of NiV infection [8]. Multinucleated giant cells were occasionally observed in alveolar spaces and showed prominent immunostaining for viral antigen, along with alveolar hemorrhage, edema and pneumonia. Bronchial epithelium rarely showed histopathological changes. Nipah viral antigen could also be observed in the vasculature and rarely in bronchiolar epithelium [8]. We believe that the lack of viral antigen in the bronchial epithelium in fatal human cases is most likely due to timing of sampling. We previously showed, using a hamster model, that the bronchial epithelium is initially targeted by NiV early on during infection followed by rapid spread to the interstitium and involvement of pulmonary vessels [13].In the present model, NiV replicated to high titers following intragraft injection, and virus was found to primarily replicate in respiratory epithelium of the bronchi and small airways. This is consistent with our previous finding that human respiratory epithelium is highly susceptible to NiV infection [12]. In animal models, the lung is the primary target organ of NiV infection following intranasal challenge [13], [14]. In addition to the respiratory epithelium, NiV replication was also found in the endothelium, a type of cell that has been identified as an important target for NiV [11]. The infection of the vascular system is thought to occur in the late stages of disease and lead to systemic spread of these viruses to other organs, including brain and kidney [13], [27]. In our model, systemic spread of the virus was indicated by similar titers and replication kinetics of NiV in directly inoculated lung grafts and grafts not directly injected with virus. This suggests that following infection of the lung, NiV quickly becomes viremic and spreads to other organs. In addition, systemic infection through intraperitoneal injection with NiV also resulted in infection of the human lung grafts, thus confirming hematogenous spread of the virus.Interestingly, NiV infection in NSG mice engrafted with human lung tissues did not result in clinical signs despite evidence of replication in mouse organs, including lung and brain. Previous studies have shown that NiV infection in type I IFN receptor knock-out mice and aged mice is lethal [28], [29]. Aged mice have been shown to mount an aberrant IFN response [30]. While the NSG mice are immunocompromised, they can mount an IFN response, which seems sufficient to protect against lethal disease in our studies. Alternatively, it is possible that NSG mice are not susceptible to NiV and that the virus measured in mouse organs is only found in the blood. Also, the small foci of viral antigen detected in mouse lungs could correspond to emboli of infected human cells that slough off from the infected grafts.Several cytokines and especially IL-6, IP-10 and VEGF were upregulated during NiV infection in the human lung. Interestingly, the levels of cytokines observed in our xenograft lung model are similar to those observed in the lungs of fatal cases of influenza virus A (H1N1) [31]. Upregulation of inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α, IP-10, IL-1β and IL-6 in the lungs was previously shown to play a role in the pathogenesis of lethal NiV in hamsters [13], as well as in the development of ALI with other respiratory virus infections, including SARS-CoV and influenza virus (H5N1) [30], [32], [33]. VEGF has an important role in ALI pathogenesis by acting as a growth factor and increasing vascular permeability [34]. We previously showed that VEGF is expressed by human respiratory epithelial cells during NiV infection [12]. This suggests that VEGF may be partly responsible for the increased pulmonary hemorrhage, endothelial destruction, and alveolar remodeling in an emphysema-like phenotype as observed in our model. Since these inflammatory mediators also play an important role in the recruitment of immune cell, our data suggests that inflammation could be observed in this model when human immune cells are present.In addition to implanting human lung xenografts, the NSG mice have been used to engraft the human hematopoietic system to study hematopoiesis, immunity, inflammatory disease and human-specific pathogens. This humanized NSG mouse model routinely contains >25% human CD45+ cells in the peripheral blood 12 weeks post engraftment of hematopoietic stem cells [35]. Many of the inflammatory mediators expressed in the current study play an important role in immune cell recruitment [36], [37]. The ability to engraft human immune cells will allow us to study the effect of these mediators on specific immune cells populations. Future studies will make use of the fully humanized lung xenograft model to study the role of the inflammatory response in the pathogenesis of the different henipavirus strains in the human lung.In conclusion, these data confirm that the human lung is highly susceptible to NiV infection. NiV is capable of replicating to high titers in the human lung and targets both respiratory epithelium and endothelium. Infection results in the characteristic syncytial formation and extensive lung damage. Key inflammatory mediators such as IL-6, IP-10, G-CSF and GM-CSF are expressed during infection. This model will allow for more detailed studies of the pathogenesis of respiratory disease caused by henipavirus infection. Furthermore, these data point to several inflammatory mediators that potentially play critical roles in henipavirus pathogenesis, which may be valuable as candidates for future studies of the mechanism of henipavirus pathogenesis and as potential targets for treatment.Materials and MethodsEthics statementApproval for animal experiments was obtained from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, University of Texas Medical Branch (protocol number 0905041). Animal work was performed by certified staff in an Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) approved facility. Animal housing, care and experimental protocols were in accordance with NIH guidelines of the Office of Laboratory Animal Welfare. Discarded tissue from deceased human fetuses was obtained via a non-profit partner (Advanced Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA) as approved under exemption 4 in the HHS regulations (45 CFR Part 46). Need for informed consent was waived by the UTMB Institutional Review Board.Viruses and cellsNiV (Malaysia strain) was kindly provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia, United States. The virus were propagated on Vero cells in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Hyclone, Logan, UT), L-glutamine, penicillin and streptomycin at 37°C in a humidified CO2 incubator (5%). All infectious work was performed in a class II biological safety cabinet in a biosafety level 4 laboratory (BSL4) at the Galveston National Laboratory.Human lung xenograft mouse modelNOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ mice, also known as NOD/SCID/γcnull or NSG mice (Jackson Laboratories), 3–5 weeks of age, were housed in a sterile microisolator environment. Mice were engrafted with human lung tissue (Advanced Bioscience Resources, Alameda, CA). Six fragments of human fetal lung from the same donor (15–19 weeks of age) were sutured to muscle fascia in the dorsal subcutaneous space in each mouse (∼0.5 cm from the spine, three on each side). Animals received appropriate post-surgery treatment including antibiotics and analgesics.Animal infectionTwelve weeks post-engraftment, animals were transferred to an ABSL-4 facility. Prior to infection, animals were anesthetized by chamber induction (5 Liters/min 100% O2 and 3–5% isoflurane). Three of the six lung tissues were inoculated via intragraft injection of 105 TCID50 NiV in a 50 µl volume. Animals were monitored daily for weight loss and clinical signs. Groups of 3 animals were euthanized on days 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 post infection, and samples for virus isolation and histological examination were procured from whole blood (EDTA vacutainer), human lung tissues, and mouse liver, spleen, kidney, lung, heart and brain. In a separate experiment, 2 animals were injected via the intraperitoneal route with 105 TCID50 NiV and euthanized 10 days post infection. Control groups were NSG mice without a lung xenograft and challenged via the intradermal route with 105 TCID50 NiV on the back of the mouse at the same location the human lung xenografts would be.Virus titrationsWhole blood was tested for presence of infectious virus by 10-fold diltutions as described below. Tissue samples were weighed and homogenized in 10 equivalent volumes of DMEM to generate a 10% solution. The solution was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm under aerosol containment in a table top centrifuge for 5 min to pellet insoluble parts. Virus titration was performed using a TCID50 assay on 96-well plates (1×104 Vero cells per well) with 100 µL inocula (cleared homogenate or whole blood) from 10-fold serial dilutions. Plates were incubated for 3 days at 37°C, and wells were scored for cytopathic effect (CPE). Virus concentrations were calculated as TCID50 per gram of tissue.Histopathology and immunohistochemistryAll tissue samples were immersion-fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for at least 7 days under BSL4 conditions. Prior to removal from the BSL4 laboratory, formalin was changed and specimens were processed under BSL2 conditions by conventional methods, either embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 µm thickness and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or embedded in Tissue Tek and frozen sections cut at 3–8 µm thickness and used for immunofluorescent (IF) staining. Tissues for immunohistochemistry (IHC) were stained as previously described using a rabbit anti-NiV-nucleoprotein (N) antibody (kindly provided by Dr. C. Broder, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD) [13]. Tissues for IF were stained with a rabbit anti-NiV-N antibody, a biotinylated anti-CD31 (eBioscience), anti-collagen IV labeled with Alexa 647 (eBioscience), anti ephrin B2 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or ephrin B3 (R&D Systems) and Hoechst for nuclear staining. NiV N in mouse tissue could only be detected following immunofluorescent staining, likely due to the limit of detection by conventional IHC. An Alexa 546 labeled secondary antibody (Life Technologies) was used for detection of the anti NiV N antibody as well as anti ephrin B2 and B3 antibodies and an Alexa 488 conjugated streptavidin (R&D Systems) was used for detection of the anti-CD31 antibody.Milliplex analysisCytokine/chemokine concentrations in the homogenates of NiV infected human lung tissues were determined using a Milliplex Human Cytokine PREMIXED 28 Plex Immunoassay Kit (Millipore, Billerica, USA). Prior analysis, samples were inactivated on dry ice by gamma-radiation (5 MRad). The assay was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. The concentration of the following 28 cytokines were determined using the Bio-Plex 200 system (BioRad): Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF), Granulocyte-Colony Stimulating Factor (G-CSF), Granulocyte Macrophage-Colony Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF), interferon (IFN)-α2, IFNγ, Interleukin (IL)-1α, IL-1ß, IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-10, IL-12(p40), IL-12(p70), IL-13, IL-15, IL-17A, chemokine ligand 3-like 1 (CCL3L1 or MIP-1α), chemokine ligand 4 (CCL4 or MIP-1ß), chemokine ligand 10 (IP-10 or CXCL10), chemokine ligand 11 (CCL11 or Eotaxin-1), chemokine ligand 13 (CCL13 or MCP-1), Tumor Necrosis Factor (TNF-α), Lymphotoxin alpha (TNFß) and Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A (VEGF).


Title: Comparison of the Pathogenicity of Nipah Virus Isolates from Bangladesh and Malaysia in the Syrian Hamster

IntroductionNipah virus is a member of the family Paramyxoviridae, genus Henipavirus, and was discovered in 1998–99 to be the etiological agent responsible for an outbreak of severe respiratory disease in pigs [1] and encephalitis in humans in Malaysia [2]. All subsequent outbreaks of Nipah virus have occurred in Bangladesh or India, beginning in 2001, and have occurred on an almost annual basis [3]. Genetic data demonstrate that the isolates from Malaysia (NiV-M) and Bangladesh (NiV-B) represent two distinct Nipah virus strains [3], [4]. Nipah virus outbreaks have case fatality rates of up to 100% and there are no approved vaccines or treatments and these viruses have been categorized as a biosafety level 4 (BSL4) agents. Nipah virus differs from other paramyxoviruses in its ability to infect a wide range of mammals including bats [5], dogs [1], [6], horses [7], pigs [1], and cats [1], [8]. Wildlife surveillance at the time of the first outbreaks, along with several subsequent studies, has identified fruit bats of the family Pteropodidae as the natural reservoir of Nipah virus [5], [9]–[11].During the first Nipah virus outbreak in Malaysia, NiV-M caused over 265 cases of encephalitis with 105 human deaths, resulting in a case fatality rate of 40% [1]. Common clinical manifestations of Nipah virus infection included fever, headache, respiratory disease, encephalitis and loss of consciousness [12], [13]. Fatal human cases of NiV-M infection were characterized by pathology involving the respiratory tract, central nervous system (CNS), heart, kidney and spleen [13]. NiV-M infection causes vasculitis characterized by destruction of the endothelium, syncytia formation, thrombosis and necrosis, with infiltration of inflammatory cells throughout affected organs. In the lungs of infected humans, pulmonary edema, alveolar hemorrhage and pneumonia were documented as well as occasional multinucleated giant cells found in alveolar space [13]. During this outbreak, the disease predominantly affected the nervous system with prominent signs of brain stem dysfunction. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brains of infected individuals showed focal lesions throughout the white matter [13]. In a study examining 94 Nipah virus-infected patients in Malaysia, only 6% showed abnormal chest radiographs, and of these, only one presented with a cough [2]. Also, cases of late onset or relapsing encephalitis were documented during the Malaysia outbreak [2]. During the Malaysian outbreak, pigs predominantly showed signs of respiratory disease and were determined to be an intermediate host [14], [15].Epidemiologically, reports of infection with NiV-B differ from that of NiV-M infection in several aspects. Clinically, NiV-B infection resulted in a higher percentage of respiratory disease and a higher case fatality rate, reaching up to 100%, compared to NiV-M infection [12]. This disparity could reflect the differences in availability of health care and in reporting [16]. Disparities, however, could also be caused by intrinsic differences in the pathogenicity of NiV-M and NiV-B. NiV-B is transmitted from bats to humans by multiple routes including the ingestion of contaminated date palm sap [17], and can subsequently be transmitted nosocomially [18], or by human-to-human transmission [19]–[22]. Common clinical signs and symptoms of NiV-B infection included fever, altered mental status, headaches, cough, and difficulty breathing [16], [23]. During the Bangladeshi outbreaks, acute respiratory distress was noted in many patients [16], [24]. Febrile neurologic illnesses were also documented in some outbreaks of NiV-B, with lesions found in the gray and white matter of the brain [23], [25], [26]. In one study looking at 92 patients, 69% had difficulty breathing and 62% had a cough [16]. Limited studies have been conducted to describe the pathology in NiV-B infected patients.In contrast to most other paramyxoviruses, Nipah virus has a broad species tropism and there are few suitable animal models that recapitulate human disease. Experimentally cats, guinea pigs, ferrets, pigs, non-human primates, and Syrian hamsters have been shown to support NiV-M viral replication resulting in clinical signs of infection [27]–[29]. The Syrian hamster is the only small rodent model that closely mimics multiple aspects of human disease [8], [27], [30], [31]. When infected intraperitoneally (i.p.) or intranasally (i.n.) with NiV-M, hamsters develop respiratory disease and/or encephalitis. The pathological changes that occur in the hamster are similar to those described in humans. The presence of vasculitis, necrosis, and inflammation is seen in both the human and hamsters. Viral antigen and disease pathology is observed in lung, kidney and heart tissue [31], [32]. Similar to human infections that lead to encephalitis, hamsters show antigen positive neurons, necrosis, and vasculitis in the CNS [31]. These similarities in infection between humans and hamsters make the Syrian hamster a suitable model for the study of Nipah virus pathogenesis.This study was designed to compare NiV-B and NiV-M infections in a hamster-derived cell line, followed by a comparison of the pathogenesis and immune responses to infection by both virus strains in the Syrian hamster. Our results demonstrated that hamster cells are permissive for infection by both virus strains, with NiV-M causing increased syncytia formation and cytopathic effect (CPE) compared to NiV-B. In vivo, NiV-B infection resulted in a delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M infection. Overall NiV-M is more cytopathic in vitro and causes an accelerated disease in vivo, compared to NiV-B.Materials and MethodsEthical statementAll work with Nipah virus, potentially infectious materials, and infected hamsters was completed in the BSL4 facility at the Rocky Mountain Laboratories, Division of Intramural Research, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health. All standard operating procedures applied were approved by the Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC). All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Rocky Mountain Laboratories and performed following the guidelines of the Association for Assessment and Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care, International (AAALAC) by certified staff in an AAALAC-approved facility.Virus propagationNiV-B and NiV-M were provided by the Special Pathogens Branch of the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA. NiV-M was isolated from a human case (cerebrum) in 1999 and passaged on Vero E6 cells a total of four times before used in experiments [33]. NiV-B was isolated from a throat swab of a lethal human infection from Bangladesh in 2004 and passaged in Vero E6 cells a total of three times [4]. Viruses were propagated on Vero E6 cells in Dulbecco's minimal essential medium (DMEM) (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM l-glutamine, 50 IU/mL penicillin and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies). Supernatants were collected and clarified by low-speed centrifugation and stored in liquid nitrogen.Virus titrationFor plaque assays, Vero C1008 (European Collection of Cell Cultures) were grown to confluency in 6-well plates. Media was replaced with 250 µL of serial 10-fold dilutions of virus in DMEM and incubated for 1 hr at 37°C, rocking every 15 min. The virus inoculum was replaced with 2 mL of a 1∶1 mixture of 2× minimal essential medium (MEM) and 1.6% low-melt agarose (Life Technologies). The cells were then incubated for 3 d at 37°C, 5% CO2 before staining with 2 mL of a 0.25% crystal violet solution in 10% formalin for 3 hr at room temperature. The stain and overlay were then removed from the wells and the plaques were enumerated.To determine the 50% tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50), monolayers of Vero C1008 cells were grown in 96-well plates and 100 µL of serial 10-fold diluted samples in MEM containing 2% FBS, were added to the wells. Cells were then incubated for 5 d at 37°C, 5% CO2 and then scored for CPE.Cell lines and in vitro infectionsBaby hamster kidney cells (BHK-21) from the American Type Culture Collection were propagated in MEM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 2 mM l-glutamine, 50 IU/mL penicillin and 50 µg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies). Nipah virus infections were performed in 48-well plates when cells reached 95–100% confluency. Infections were performed by replacing medium with 250 µL of diluted virus (multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1 and 0.01) in MEM, 2% FBS. After 1 hr, the inoculum was replaced with MEM supplemented with 2% FBS. Supernatants were collected at 1 hr, and 1, 2, and 3 days post infection (dpi) for virus titration. Cells were stained using the Kwik Diff Kit (Thermo scientific) to visualize syncytia according to the instructions of the manufacturer. Cells were monitored for CPE with a light microscope and images were captured using a Nikon DS-Fi1 camera.Inoculation of hamsters and sample collectionGroups of 5 to 6 week old female Syrian hamsters (Harlan) were inoculated with the indicated doses of NiV-M or NiV-B diluted in sterile DMEM and administered via the i.p. route in a total volume of 500 µL. Control animals received the equivalent volume of sterile DMEM by the same route. Two groups were inoculated i.n. with 105 TCID50 per hamster of either NiV-M or NiV-B diluted in sterile DMEM. Fifty microliters of virus preparation was delivered to each nare using a pipette. Hamsters were weighed and scored daily for clinical signs for two weeks. When signs of disease no longer existed, animals were monitored but no longer weighed. The health of animals was assessed and scored according to the following criteria: 0 = no signs of disease; 1 = ruffled fur; 2 = ruffled fur & weight loss <5%; 3 = ruffled fur, hunched posture & weight loss >5%; 4 = ruffled fur, hunched posture & weight loss >10%; 5 = ruffled fur, hunched posture, weight loss >15%, or encephalitic signs, or hemorrhagic signs, or paralytic signs or dyspnea; 6 = ruffled fur, hunched posture, weight loss >20%, or encephalitic signs, or hemorrhagic signs, or paralytic signs or dyspnea; 7 = death. Euthanasia occurred at a score of 5 and above. At the time of euthanasia, animals were bled (EDTA- and heparin-treated vacutainer tubes) via cardiac puncture. Necropsies were performed to collect lung, spleen, heart and brain tissue. Tissues were placed in lysis buffer RLT (Qiagen) for RNA extraction, or 10% formalin for histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis.RNA extraction and quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR)Tissues (30 mg pieces) were homogenized in RLT buffer and removed from the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturers' instructions. Whole blood was collected and inactivated in AVL buffer and removed from the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Total RNA was extracted using QIAamp viral RNA kit (Qiagen), according to the manufacturers' instructions.The RNA was quantified on a nanodrop 8000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) was performed on a rotor-gene 6000 instrument (Corbett Life Science) using QuantiFast probe reagents (Qiagen) targeting the NiV-M or NiV-B nucleocapsid protein gene. Primers and probes used were: NiV-B sense (5′-GTTCAGGCCAGAGAAGCTAAATTT-3′), NiV-B antisense (5′-CCTCTTCGTCGACATCTTGATCA-3′), NiV-M sense (5′- GTTCAGGCTAGAGAGGCAAAATTT-3′), NiV-M antisense (5′- CCCCTTCATCGATATCTTGATCA-3″), NiV-B probe (5′-6FAM-CTGCAGGAGGTGTGCTCATCGGAGG-TAMRA-3′) and NiV-M probe (5′-6FAM-CTGCAGGAGGTGTGCTCATTGGAGG-TAMRA-3″). qRT-PCR components were used at the concentrations recommended by the manufacturer and 5 µL of RNA was added to each reaction and the following thermocycling parameters were used: 50°C for 10 min, 95°C for 5 min, and 40 cycles of 95°C for 5 s, 60°C for 10 s. Dilutions of RNA extracted from a known titer of each Nipah virus were run in triplicate to generate a standard curve from which sample TCID50 equivalents were extrapolated. Hamster immune gene expression was determined as previously described [34]. Briefly, RNA was extracted from tissues and qRT-PCR was performed as described above using gene-specific primers and probes under multiplex conditions. The fold-change in each gene was calculated by normalizing the change in CT (ΔCT) to the CT values for RPL18 (as an internal reference gene) for each sample and comparing this to the CT values of uninfected hamsters (2−ΔΔCT).Histopathology and immunohistochemistryTissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 7 d with one volume change, then transferred out of the BSL4 using approved standard operating procedures. Tissues were then placed in cassettes and processed with a Sakura VIP-5 Tissue Tek, on a 12 hr automated schedule, using a graded series of ethanol, xylene, and ParaPlast Extra. Embedded tissues were sectioned at 5 µm and dried overnight at 42°C prior to staining with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E).Specific Nipah virus IHC was performed using an anti-Nipah virus N protein rabbit primary antibody at a 1∶5000 dilution (kindly provided by L. Wang, CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Australia) [35]. The tissues were then processed using the Discovery XT automated processor (Ventana Medical Systems) with a DAPMap (Ventana Medical Systems) kit.StatisticsStatistical analyses were performed on the data form the TCID50 and qRT-PCR experiments using a 2-way ANOVA with a Bonferroni's post-test. To determine whether there were significant differences in the time to death between the viruses, we performed a log-rank test. The mean and SEM is represented and significance (* = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01 and *** = p<0.001) is reported where appropriate.ResultsNiV-M causes increased cytopathology in BHK-21 cells, compared to NiV-BTo determine the cellular responses and replication kinetics of the two Nipah virus strains in a hamster cell line, we infected BHK-21 cells with either NiV-M or NiV-B at MOIs of either 0.01 or 0.1. As early as 1 dpi, syncytia formation was apparent in all NiV-M-infected cultures. By 3 dpi, and at both MOIs, NiV-M-infected cells showed extensive CPE and nearly complete destruction of the cell monolayer (Figure 1A). NiV-B-infected cells showed little CPE at any of the time points sampled, regardless of the inoculation dose. At 3 dpi, NiV-B-infected cells began to form small syncytia. At both MOIs, NiV-M replicated sooner and reached higher virus titers in the supernatant at earlier time points compared to NiV-B (Figure 1B and C). At the lower MOI, NiV-M reached a titer that was 4 logs higher at 3 dpi than NiV-B (Figure 1B), whereas end titers were similar for both Nipah virus strains at the higher MOI, with a faster progression for NiV-M (Figure 1C).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g001Figure 1NiV-M replicates more efficiently and causes increased cytopathogenicity in hamster cells compared to NiV-B.To study the cytopathogenicity of these Nipah viruses, BHK-21 cells were infected with NiV-M or NiV-B at an MOI of 0.01 and stained using the Kwik Diff Kit at 1, 2, and 3 dpi (A). Arrows point to multinucleated giant cells. To examine the viral growth kinetics, BHK-21 cells were infected with Nipah virus at an MOI of 0.01 (B) or 0.1 (C). and supernatants were collected at the indicated time points. Supernatants of NiV-M at an MOI of 0.1 at 3 dpi were not collected due to extensive destruction of the cell monolayer. Virus was titrated on Vero C1008 cells and the results are expressed as the mean of three replicates and error bars indicate the SEM. The dotted line denotes limit of detection for the assay. A 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's post test was used to compare the viruses (* = p<0.05).Disease progression during NiV-B infection of hamsters is delayed compared to NiV-M infectionTo date, NiV-B infection has not been examined in an animal model. To assess the suitability of the hamster as a model for NiV-B infection, as well as to compare the two strains, hamsters were inoculated i.p. with 10-fold serial dilutions of Nipah virus from 105 to 1 TCID50 (Figure 2). Animals were evaluated for clinical signs of disease on a daily bases according to a scoring system outlined in the Materials and Methods section. Only one hamster showed abnormal clinical signs on the day prior to euthanasia, which consisted of ruffled fur. All other hamsters did not display abnormal clinical signs until the day euthanasia was necessary. Hamsters challenged with either virus strain showed clinical signs of respiratory distress and/or neurologic dysfunction leading to a score that required euthanasia. Signs of respiratory disease included labored abdominal breathing and hunched posture; neurological dysfunction included imbalance, partial paralysis and seizures. Similar to previous studies with NiV-M, respiratory distress was observed only in animals infected at the highest doses (104 and 105 TCID50/animal) [32]. The majority of animals inoculated with the lower doses of Nipah virus (100 through 103 TCID50/animal) displayed neurologic dysfunction prior to euthanasia. One animal infected with NiV-M at the highest dose (105 TCID50) and two animals infected with NiV-B (one inoculated with 104 and one with 105) presented with both respiratory and neurologic dysfunction, while the rest of animals had either respiratory or neurological signs of distress that required euthanasia. NiV-M-infected animals showing severe respiratory signs of disease were euthanized between 5–7 dpi, whereas animals displaying neurological disorders were euthanized between days 5–11. Disease progression in NiV-B-infected animals was generally slower, and animals displaying severe respiratory distress or neurological dysfunction were euthanized on 8–9 dpi or 8–14 dpi for NiV-M and NiV-B infection, respectively (Table 1). The slower disease progression in NiV-B-infected animals was reflected in the overall survival curves with 80% lethal disease outcome even at the highest dose of infection (Figure 2 and Table 1). The LD50 for NiV-M and NiV-B was 68 and 528 TCID50, respectively. At both 103 and 105 TCID50, there was a statistically significant difference in the time to death between the two virus strains, with death occurring approximately two days later for NiV-B infected animals at each dose (Table 1). To determine if the delay in survival is associated with the route of infection, we inoculated hamsters i.n. with 105 TCID50 of either NiV-M or NiV-B. The mean time to death was delayed by two days in hamsters inoculated with NiV-B compared to NiV-M (Figure S1). Both routes of inoculation showed a two-day delay in NiV-B compared to NiV-M, although the mean time to death was later in both virus groups with the i.n. compared to i.p. route.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g002Figure 2Hamsters inoculated with NiV-B show delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M-infected hamsters.Groups of 5 hamsters were inoculated i.p. with 10-fold serial dilutions of virus from 105 to 1 TCID50. The hamsters were monitored for 30 dpi for survival.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.t001Table 1Clinical signs and outcome of hamsters inoculated with NiV-M or NiV-B.InoculumDose (TCID50)Survival (%)Mean time to death (days)a
NiV-M1×100
100N/A1×101
100N/A1×102
408.7±1.71×103
07.2±1.9*
b
1×104
07±21×105
05.8±0.7**
c
NiV-B1×100
100N/A1×101
6014±01×102
100N/A1×103
409±1.4*
b
1×104
208.5±1.11×105
207.75±0.8**
c
aExcluding survivors.bSignificant difference between NiV-M and NiV-B at dose 103 TCID50,*p<0.05: Log-rank test.cSignificant difference between NiV-M and NiV-B at dose 105 TCID50,**p<0.01: Log-rank test.Both Nipah viruses replicate in hamster lung, brain and spleen tissueTo compare the pathogenesis of NiV-M to NiV-B, groups of hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of either Nipah virus and tissues were collected on 1, 3 and 5 dpi for both virus groups, and 7 dpi for NiV-B. Based on the time to death at this dose from our survival experiment, 7 dpi tissues were not collected for NiV-M-inoculated animals for this pathology experiment. Viral RNA was detected using Nipah virus N-specific qRT-PCR (Figure 3). In NiV-M-inoculated animals, replication was detected at an earlier time point than NiV-B replication. As early as 1 dpi, viral RNA was detected in lungs, brain and spleen tissue of some NiV-M-infected animals. NiV-B-infected animals had detectable levels of viral RNA at 1 dpi in lung tissue of some hamsters, and in the spleen by 3 dpi. Both strains showed an increase in viral RNA over time in the lungs, brain and spleen, with the highest overall titers in the lungs at the last time point sampled. We assessed viremia in hamsters inoculated with either virus by qRT-PCR. Levels of viral RNA were barely detectable and viral RNA was undetectable in some animals at each time point (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g003Figure 3NiV-B replication is delayed in hamster organs compared to NiV-M replication.Hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of Nipah virus and 9 animals/group were euthanized at 1, 3, 5, and 7 (for NiV-B only) dpi and tissues were collected. Total viral RNA was extracted and Nipah virus N-specific viral RNA was quantified by qRT-PCR. Gray bars represent NiV-B and white NiV-M. Bars represent the mean and error bars represent the SEM.Host gene expression in lung, brain and spleen tissue of hamsters is differentially regulated during Nipah virus infectionTo examine the kinetics of the host immune response to Nipah virus infection, and compare responses between NiV-M and NiV-B infections, the expression level of a subset of cytokine and chemokine mRNAs were examined by qRT-PCR in the lungs, brain and spleen (Figure 4). Throughout the infection, the largest overall response was seen in the lungs. At 1 dpi, a statistical difference in the upregulation of interleukin-4 (IL-4), interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and interferon-γ (IFNγ) was observed between NiV-M and NiV-B infections, with higher expression of these genes in response to NiV-M. A similar result was measured at 3 dpi for IFNγ in the lungs (Figure 4). At 3 dpi, IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were upregulated similarly in response to both virus strains and remained upregulated throughout the course of infection. Upregulation of the gene for myxovirus resistance protein-2 (Mx2) in the lungs was detected only at the last time point for both virus strains. IFNγ-induced protein 10 (IP-10) mRNA increased starting at 1 dpi and remained upregulated in the lungs throughout the course of infection, peaking at 3 dpi in NiV-M-infected hamsters and 5 dpi in NiV-B-infected hamsters. IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were also upregulated in brain (Figure 4). There was a significant increase in Mx2 transcription in the spleens of NiV-M-infected hamsters at 3 dpi compared to NiV-B. In the brain, IL-4, IL-6 and TNF were slightly upregulated over control animals. IL-4, IL-6, TNF, and IFNγ mRNAs were downregulated in the spleen.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g004Figure 4Host gene expression in lung, brain and spleen tissue of hamsters is differentially regulated during infection with Nipah viruses.Quantitative RT-PCR for IL-4, IP-10, IL-6, Mx2, TNF and IFNγ was performed on lung, brain and spleen tissues from groups of 9 hamsters inoculated with 105 TCID50 of NiV-M (white bars) or NiV-B (gray bars) at the indicated time points. Data are shown as the fold-change of each gene over uninfected controls and normalized to an internal reference gene (RPL18). Error bars represent the SEM. A 2-way ANOVA with Bonferroni's post-test was used to determine statistical significance between viruses (* = p<0.05, ** = p<0.01 and *** = p<0.001).Histopathological changes occurred earlier in NiV-M-infected hamsters compared to NiV-B-infected animalsTo compare the pathology between the two strains, hamsters were inoculated with 105 TCID50 of NiV-B or NiV-M and tissues were examined histologically. Pathology was observed for both infections and was composed of a mild to moderate multifocal, subacute, bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis on 5 dpi for NiV-M and NiV-B infection (Figure 5). By 7 dpi in NiV-B-infected animals, the pneumonia progressed to marked, multifocal to coalescing, subacute bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis, necrosis, edema, and fibrin deposits. The pneumonia in both groups, on day 5 dpi for NiV-M infection and 7 dpi for NiV-B infection, was characterized by effacement of terminal bronchioles and adjacent alveoli by small to moderate numbers of macrophages, neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells. Multifocal vasculitis was observed with disruption of the arterial tunica media by small numbers of neutrophils and lymphocytes. Syncytial endothelial cells were found in affected small to medium caliber vessels. Hamsters from the final time points had moderate to marked lesions in the lungs and demonstrated a loss of pulmonary architecture with replacement by cellular and karyorrhectic debris with small to moderate amounts of hemorrhage, fibrin deposits and edema. IHC revealed viral antigen in alveolar capillary endothelium, small and medium caliber arteriolar endothelium, and in mononuclear inflammatory cells starting at 3 dpi for NiV-M infection and 5 dpi for NiV-B infection (Figure 5B). The presence of viral antigen was strongly associated with areas of inflammation. No pathological changes were observed in the CNS of hamsters infected at the high dose used in the pathology study.10.1371/journal.pntd.0002024.g005Figure 5NiV-M infection results in accelerated pathology compared to NiV-B infection in hamsters.Nipah virus inoculated hamsters were euthanized at 3, 5 and 7 dpi (for NiV-B only) and lung sections were stained with H&E (A) and for Nipah virus nucleocapsid protein (IHC) (B) Images were taken at a magnification of 100× and 400× (insets). Asterisks denote arteries with vasculitis as demonstrated by recruitment of inflammatory cells with effacement of the tunica intima and tunica media. Open arrows denote areas of acute hemorrhage and closed arrows indicate fibrin deposits.DiscussionNipah virus is a zoonotic pathogen that causes encephalitis and pulmonary disease with a high case fatality rate and is classified as a category C pathogen by the NIAID's pathogen priority list [12]. Two strains of Nipah virus, NiV-M and NiV-B, have been isolated from geographically and temporally separated outbreaks [4]. Human outbreaks caused by these strains differ in disease progression and epidemiologically [23]. The Syrian hamster has been established as a disease model for NiV-M infection [31], [32], but NiV-B infection studies have not been reported for any animal model. The goal of this study was to compare the replication, pathogenesis, and immune response to infection with NiV-M and NiV-B using in vitro and in vivo methods. BHK-21 cells infected with NiV-M showed more severe damage and supported higher virus replication compared to NiV-B-infected cells. Hamsters infected with NiV-B had a delay in disease progression and increased survival rates compared to NiV-M infected animals.
In vitro, BHK-21 cells were permissive for infection by both NiV-M and NiV-B. NiV-M replicated to higher titers in the supernatant at an earlier time point, and infection resulted in widespread syncytia formation causing extensive CPE. Widespread CPE was not observed in NiV-B-infected BHK-21 cells, although a few syncytia were present at later time points. The differences observed in virus replication and syncytia formation could be attributed to either higher viral replication causing more syncytia, or more syncytia formation resulting to higher virus load. Differences in replication efficiency including protein production, viral assembly and budding could explain the higher virus production and large number of syncytia observed in NiV-M infected cultures. Conversely, differences in fusion kinetics could account for disparate amounts of syncytia that then lead to variation in virus replication. The high amount of fusion and syncytia formation in cells could result in the infection of cells that were not initially infected at the low MOIs used in our experiments. This could lead to higher overall levels of virus production. Previous studies using paramyxoviruses have demonstrated that viral spread can occur by cell-cell fusion; the surface proteins of Nipah virus are present at the cell junctions and have been shown to initiate fusion and spread of virus [36]–[38]. Slower fusion kinetics could lead to less and slower formation of syncytia observed in NiV-B infected cells. The affinity of Nipah virus glycoprotein to its receptors, ephrin B2 and B3, as well as the ability of the glycoprotein to trigger the fusion protein could also affect fusion rates. Further experiments need to be completed to examine the relationship between replication and syncytia formation.In our experiments, we chose i.p. as the route of inoculation due to the more uniform disease progression and outcomes described in previous Nipah virus studies [31]. It is likely that i.p. inoculation would more readily allow for the detection of subtle differences between strains that may not be detectable in a less uniform infection route, such as i.n. When infected with NiV-M or NiV-B, hamsters developed clinical signs of disease similar to human infection [2], [13], [31], [39]. The onset of disease and death in hamsters was rapid and occurred between 5–14 dpi, which corresponds to human cases, where symptoms start to develop between 7–10 dpi [15], [40], [41]. We observed earlier replication of NiV-M than NiV-B in all organ types sampled, although, once NiV-B RNA was detected, it reached similar values within two days. Earlier replication of NiV-M in tissues corresponded with earlier pathologic changes and accelerated disease and death compared to NiV-B infection. In humans, CNS pathology is documented, but in our comparative pathology experiment, we did not observe pathology in the CNS. This is likely attributed to the high dose of inoculum for the pathology experiment (105 TCID50) and route of inoculation (i.p.). However, we did observe pathology in the lungs consisting of multifocal subacute bronchointerstitial pneumonia with vasculitis. The pneumonia was characterized by inflammation in the terminal bronchioles and alveoli spaces, necrosis, hemorrhage, fibrin deposits, edema and syncytia in endothelial cells. In human cases, fibrinoid necrosis, vasculitis, pulmonary edema, alveoli hemorrhaging, and syncytia were documented [13], [15], [40]. It is probable that hamsters inoculated with this high dose (105 TCID50) succumbed to infection due to inflammation, edema, and widespread vasculitis in the lungs that caused interstitial pneumonia. Even with low levels of viral antigen, pathology was severe enough to cause a fatal outcome.The typical dose that humans are infected with, as well as the route of infection is not known. In hamsters, both virus strains caused respiratory distress and/or neurological dysfunction in a dose-dependent manner. Based on previous data in hamsters, it is likely that dose and route of infection might play a role in Nipah virus outcome in humans [32]. Disease progression could be altered by the transmission route, which could include fomite [18], [42], oral ingestion [17], [43], and respiratory droplets [42], [44], [45]. In this study, inoculation of hamsters with NiV-B resulted in a delay in disease progression and the LD50 was approximately a log higher compared to NiV-M. However these data are contrary to what has been reported in humans, where NiV-B results in higher case fatality rates compared to NiV-M. Since we did not observe a difference in disease that would explain differences in the epidemiological data for the two Nipah virus strains, factors other than the intrinsic pathogenicity likely contribute to the disparities in the documented epidemiological data. The suboptimal health care, lack of supportive care and inconsistencies in reporting could account for higher documented case fatality rates and differences in disease manifestations during NiV-B outbreaks [16].Cytokine and chemokine mRNAs were quantitated in the hamsters over the course of infection and several immune genes were upregulated in the lung, brain, and spleen, although there was a slight downregulation of some genes in the spleen. NiV-M induced an earlier and more robust immune response compared to NiV-B, which eventually reached similar levels to hamsters infected with NiV-M. Early TNF activation during NiV-M infection may contribute to recruitment of inflammatory cells, as observed in the lungs of infected hamsters by histopathology. The upregulation of IP-10 in the lungs coincided with lymphocyte recruitment, appearance of vascular damage, and necrosis in the lungs. IP-10 upregulation has been documented in other Nipah virus studies, specifically focusing on endothelial cells [46], [47]. Teruya-Feldstein et al reported that high levels of IP-10 are found in necrotic tissue and in areas of vascular damage associated with Epstein-Barr virus-positive lymphoproliferative processes in mice [48]. They demonstrated a correlation between IP-10 regulation, tissue necrosis, and vascular damage during viral infection. Similarly, IP-10 is upregulated in the airways of patients with pulmonary diseases such as tuberculosis and plays a role in recruitment of activated T cells [49]. IL-6 gene expression was increased earlier in the lung in NiV-M compared to NiV-B infected hamsters. IL-6 activates T cells [50] and the recruitment of T cells likely contributed to the widespread vasculitis associated with Nipah virus infection and disease. Recruitment of lymphocytes could also be a way for Nipah virus to disseminate throughout the host, as it has recently been published that lymphocytes and monocytes can carry virus without becoming infected and release virus at distant sites from the original infection [51], [52]. In the lungs, IL-4 was also upregulated, following similar kinetics than IL-6. IL-4 promotes differentiation of B cells, and is upregulated is indicative of the activation of a Th2 response [53]. However, during disease, specific antibody production would not occur fast enough, since animals succumb to infection before significant antibody production can likely occur. Due to the use of the hamster as a model, we are limited in the amount of reagents available for a detailed examination of the immune response and future work is needed to get a more complete picture of the immune response to Nipah virus infection. In general NiV-M infection caused earlier induction of immune genes which probably corresponds to the earlier pathology observed. It is possible that the strong early immune response in Nipah virus-infected animals might contribute to disease via an immunopathogenic mechanism.In conclusion, there is a delay in NiV-B-induced disease progression compared to NiV-M, specifically in time to death, virus replication, pathology and immune responses. NiV-M is more cytopathic in vitro and more pathogenic in vivo. Viral antigen staining was low in tissues, although the pathologic changes were extensive and the inflammatory response was robust, suggesting disease progression may not only be a result of direct effects of the virus, but likely has an immunopathogenic component. The experimental data presented herein characterizes the hamster as a suitable small animal model for NiV-B infection, showing clinical signs, viral tropism, and pathologic changes similar to those observed in humans. These data are important to further the understanding of Nipah virus infection and pathogenesis. By applying the hamster model for NiV-B this allows for future studies in transmission, pathology and therapeutics, specifically focusing on the Nipah virus strain responsible for recent outbreaks.Supporting InformationFigure S1
Hamsters inoculated intranasally with NiV-B show delayed disease progression compared to NiV-M-inoculated hamsters. Groups of 5 hamsters were inoculated i.n. with 105 TCID50. The hamsters were monitored for survival. A log- rank test was used to compare survival curves (* = p<0.05). NiV-B infected animals had a mean time to death of 11.6 days and NiV-M infected animals 9.4 days.(TIF)Click here for additional data file.


Title: Research Progress of Fever with Thrombocytopenia Syndrome

IntroductionSevere fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome(SFTS) is an infectious disease caused by viral infection. It was first reported in 2009 in the Ta-pieh Mountains in central China, and then in 2010, Yu et al. [1]. isolated this pathogen as a virus, known as severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV), which belongs to the Bunyaviridae, also known as the novel bunyavirus. The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses named the virus Dabie bandavirus in 2019, which belongins to Bandavirus genus,Phenuiviridae family, Bunyavirales order. But SFTSV is currently the most widely used in the world [2]. The appearance of SFTSV is spherical, with a diameter of 80–100 nm. It consists of a single strand of negative strand RNA, including three fragments: large (L), medium (M) and small (S). L-segment encodes RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp), which functions as a transcriptase / replicase of the virus [3]. The M segment encodes the viral surface glycoproteins, which consists of two glycoproteins, Gn and Gc. They form the envelope of the virus. This envelope has antigenic characteristics, after the virus invades the body, it can stimulate the body to produce specific neutralizing antibody recognition targets, these characteristics can provide a direction for future vaccine research. Therefore, the study of viral envelope Gn/Gc and the analysis of antigenic characteristics are very important. S-segment is a double RNA, which is composed of coding nuclear protein Np and non-structural protein NSs. Np plays an important role in viral RNA encapsulation/RNP complex, and NSs interferes with host interferon production [4].Currently, there are no effective therapeutics or vaccines to combat the infection of SFTSV. Hence, it is imperative for the further study of SFTSV. This review mainly focuses the studies of SFTS disease in epidemiology, transmission, pathogenesis and countermeasures.Vector and Disease TransmissionThe life cycle and mechanism of continuous transmission of SFTSV in nature are not clear [5]. Through the existing research confirmed that SFTSV is mainly transmitted by ticks, and most of the patients initially diagnosed as SFTS have a history of tick bites before the onset of SFTS [6]. Ticks are not only the main transmission vector of SFTSV, but also the important storag through eggs. Haemaphysalis longicornis are mainly distributed in the Ta-pieh Mountains in central China, including Henan, Hubei and Anhui provinces.SFTS occurrence probability is high when altitude is between − 100 m and 100 m, and the probability is nearly 0 when altitude is beyond 3000 m [7]. Haemaphysalis longicornis has a wide range of hosts, including wild and domestic mammals and birds, and is unique to the Asia–Pacific region in terms of distribution [8].Asian longhorned ticks, probably transported by migratory birds, play a major role in the rapid spread of SFTSV [9].SFTS RNA can be detected in arthropods of ticks such as Haemaphysalis, Ixodes minimus, Ixodes tortoise, Ixodes asiatica and Ixodes japonicus in the endemic areas of SFTSV. Another feature of these tick species is that they can reproduce parthenogenetically and survive in a variety of environmental conditions [10]. Although these tick species carry a novel bunyavirus, further studies are needed to confirm whether the virus can be transmitted to animals or humans [8]. Because the ability of SFTSV transmission and infection depends on the ability of tick species to enlarge and transmit the virus to animals and humans [11]. Recently, Haemaphysalis longicornis has been found in the United States and is spreading rapidly. It has been reported that someone has been bitten by Haemaphysalis longicornis [12]. The Department of Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of the United States has designated SFTA as one of the top ten infectious diseases and has conducted surveillance studies on ticks. Fortunately, no RNA fragment of the novel bunyavirus was found in Haemaphysalis longicornis[12].SFTSV maintains virus replication in nature through tick-to-tick cycles (through egg or cross-worm, the virus spreads from adult ticks to young ticks, or by co-feeding on the same host). In the tick cycle, ticks act not only as a carrier, but also as a host of SFTSV [13] (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Tick life cycleSFTSV can also be detected in livestock and wild animals. Most animals are found to be subclinical infected with SFTSV. The reason for subclinical infection is that infected animals do not have prolonged symptoms of viremia and viral infection. SFTSV's RNA can be detected in cattle, goats, pigs, chickens, dogs, cats, deer, hedgehogs and minks, but these animals did not develop the disease. The novel bunyavirus is transmitted to these vertebrates through tick bites, which serve as storage hosts for SFTSV. This cycle makes SFTSV spread in nature to achieve a lasting cycle. Human beings usually have a lot of contact with domestic animals and need special precautions. There is also a potential risk of cross-regional transmission of migratory birds infected with SFTSV [14]. Different factors affect the infection rate coefficients of different transmission routes. Sunshine duration, relative humidity, temperature and tick density are important factors affecting the occurrence of SFTS. Hurricanes reduce the incidence of SFTS in the short term, but have little effect in the long term. The most effective intervention to reduce the incidence of SFTS is to reduce population exposure to high-risk environments [15].Tick bites are the main route of transmission of SFTSV, as initial epidemiological reports show that patients diagnosed with SFTS have a history of tick bites before the onset of SFTS [16]. With the increase of SFTS cases and the improvement of epidemiological investigation, it was found that human-to-human transmission of SFTSV infection occurred [17]. Recently, it has been reported many times that medical staff and family members have direct blood contact with patients with SFTS without wearing protective equipment, which leads to aggregation infection [18, 19]. Laboratory tests showed that after SFTSV infection, the viral load of serum, sputum, saliva, cerebrospinal fluid, semen and urine were higher [20]. All data above shows that SFTSV could be transmitted from person to person by direct contact of body fluid. Especially, the health care worker should take preventive measures to prevent infection.Prevalence of SFTSV in VertebratesHaemaphysalis longicornis of Asia undergo three unique life stages (larva, nymph and adult). At each stage, they are parasitic on a variety of wild and domestic animals, including birds, livestock, etc.There is a close relationship between humans and animals, especially in SFTSV-endemic areas, which increases the risk of SFTS epidemic [21]. Ticks spread the virus to wild or domestic animals after biting them. These animals may have no clinical symptoms, but their secretions contain SFTSV RNA, which can be transmitted to humans after contact [22].SFTSV antibodies can be detected in many animals, including goats, sheep, cattle, dogs, pigs, chickens, cats, rodents, deer, wild boars and hedgehogs[23]. A cross-sectional cohort study conducted by virologists in China also revealed the infection rate of livestock, with a relatively high serum positive rate of 69.5% in sheep, 60.4% in cattle, 37.9% in dogs and 47.4% in chickens, while the prevalence rate in pigs was only 3.1% [24]. Differences in infection rates among animals may depend on the number of ticks parasitized on them. Sheep, goats and cattle are usually kept free, which makes them vulnerable to tick bites in nature.And it makes them more likely to get SFTSV infection. Interestingly, although rodents are also known hosts of Bunya virus, the serum positive rate of SFTSV in rodents is much lower than that in domestic animals [25]. These susceptible vertebrate hosts are necessary to establish and maintain arbovirus transmission cycles. It is not clear whether long-term or persistent infection will occur in animals infected with SFTSV.Geographical Distribution and Genetic DiversitySFTS was first reported in the Ta-pieh Mountains in central China in 2009, and quickly spread to Zhejiang, Jiangsu, Shandong and other regions. Japan and South Korea also reported cases of SFTS in 2012 [26, 27]. Recently, Vietnam and Taiwan have also reported SFTS-related cases [28, 29].The mechanism of rapid spread of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome is unclear. However, the spread of the virus is usually attributed to two main mechanisms:increased contact between wildlife and human populations and geographical spread of hematophagous arthropod vector or their vertebrate host outside the area of endemicity. Haemaphysalis longicornis is also a common parasite of migratory birds, which usually breeds and migrates between the endemic areas of China, Korea and Japan, and the endemic areas of STFS match the migration routes of migratory birds [30]. However, further field studies are needed to understand the relationship between tick vector habitats and tick infection rates in migratory birds in China, Korea and Japan. Understanding the transmission mechanism is very important for in-depth understanding of the ecological epidemiology of the virus within its epidemic range.Several studies have highlighted the genetic diversity of SFTSV. The novel bunyavirus consists of several gene fragments. Because it is a RNA virus, the gene mutation caused by lack of proofreading function of SFTSV in viral RNA replication and transcription, which will lead to gene recombination. As a result, genetic diversity and new genome lines have emerged in different hosts [31]. According to the suggestion of Professor Fu of Fudan University in Shanghai, the phylogenetic analysis of SFTSV strain can be divided into 6 genotypes, which are called genotypes A to F [32]. The prevalence of SFTSV genotypes is also different in different countries. Recently, Yun et al. have proved in the laboratory that genotype B can be further subdivided into three different gene subtypes, Bmuri 1, Bmai 2 and Bmi 3 [33]. There are at least 9 different recombinant genes in Korea and 7 SFTSV recombinant genes reported in China, which indicates that the SFTSV virus strain is undergoing continuous evolution in nature [24, 25]. Reported SFTS case fatality rates vary widely in affected countries in East Asia, which is estimated to be related to different genotypes of human infection. At present, it is reported that the high mortality rates in Japan and South Korea are 27% and 23.3% respectively. By contrast, the mortality rate of SFTSV in China is about 10–30% [24]. Some virologists further subdivided the most popular genotypes in Japan and Korea as Bmur2, with an incidence of 86% and 36.1% respectively [34]. In China, the most common incidence of genotype F is 43.6%, followed by the incidence of genotype An at 20.1% [24]. Therefore, this suggests that the reported difference in mortality may be related to the different distribution of SFTSV genotypes, and Yun et al. in Korea further support this view [25]. The above studies on genotypes suggest that the morbidity and mortality in epidemic areas are related to the genotype of the virus, but it should also be noted that age, sex and underlying diseases are also closely related to mortality.Clinical Manifestations of Patients with SFTSThe main clinical symptoms of SFTSV infection are fever and thrombocytopenia. In addition to these two major clinical manifestations, it also includes gastrointestinal symptoms such as poor anorexia of nausea and vomiting, leukocytopenia, low lymphocyte count, coagulation dysfunction and hemorrhagic tendency. In addition, there are also reported cases of atypical and asymptomatic SFTS infection [6]. The incubation period of SFTS is generally 7–14 days (average 9 days), and it’s clinical course can be divided into three different stages according to the progression of the disease: fever stage, multiple- organ dysfunction (MOD) stage and convalescent stage. In the stage of fever, the patient initially presented with acute high fever and high serum viral load, and the highest body temperature was 39–40 ℃, accompanied by thrombocytopenia, leukocytopenia and lymphadenopathy. Laboratory examination showed that the circulating threshold of real-time quantitative PCR of novel bunyavirus RNA was very low, and the viral load was very high [32]. It usually takes 5–7 days for the disease to develop into MODS from the febrile phase. The characteristics of MODS phase are as follows: Hematological symptoms include hemorrhagic manifestations, persistent decrease in platelet count, persistent abnormality of blood coagulation, and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC);Neurological symptoms include drowsiness, muscle tremors, convulsions, convulsions and coma; Respiratory symptoms include shortness of breath and decreased blood oxygen saturation. The circulatory system will have shock manifestations such as decreased blood pressure, increased heart rate, and systemic hypoperfusion. Of course, there will be jaundice, anuria and other manifestations of liver and kidney failure. These manifestations occur at the end of the disease, and are often sequential organ function damage, developing into severe, critical, which is also the direct cause of death of patients [35]. Some patients with mild symptoms can progress directly from the febrile period to the recovery stage. Other clinical aspects of SFTS included the increase of activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT), serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine (Cr), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and myocardial enzymes [36].As early as 2013, according to the clinical characteristics of Chinese patients, clinical experts divided the severity of SFTS into mild, severe and critical. After classification, it is beneficial to focus on treatment and find critical patients in time. The patients with T < 38 ℃, muscle soreness, digestive system symptoms such as anorexia, diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, no systemic bleeding tendency, clear mind and no nervous system symptoms were divided into mild symptoms. The patients with T > 38 ℃, obvious symptoms of general fatigue, severe anorexia; mental malaise, accompanied by neurological symptoms, such as lethargy, muscle tremor, systemic involuntary tremor, convulsions, convulsions and delirium are divided into severe cases.On the basis of severe cases, patients with any of the following conditions such as: ARDS, heart failure, AKI, sepsis or septic shock; DIC, encephalitis, that is, summarized as critical [37]. The above clinical classification is very important for front-line doctors. The doctors can identify severe and critical patients in time, and include patients in ICU, so as to strengthen the monitoring of patients and support treatment for their organs.Pathogenesis of SFTSVPathological study is of great significance for understanding the pathogenesis of the virus. Autopsy of patients who died of SFTS can better understand it’s pathogenesis. A pathological study of SFTS suggests that biopsy of lymph nodes near tick bites indicates necrotizing lymphadenitis, which is consistent with the signs of SFTS patients. These patients are prone to enlarged lymph nodes at the bitten site [38]. In addition to the involvement of the surrounding lymphatic system, another important pathological feature of SFTS is that non-lymphoid organs such as solid organs (lungs, liver, kidney, etc.) will also be involved, which is consistent with multiple organ failure in critically ill patients. Some studies suggest that SFTSV is not detected in parenchymal cells, but SFTSV is found in B lymphocytes in capillaries of non-lymphoid organs. B lymphocytes are the center of humoral immune response and are responsible for mediating the production of antigen-specific immunoglobulins [39]. Immunoglobulin (IgG) is essential for neutralizing and eliminating viruses. However, it was found that the titer of IgG antibody produced by B lymphocytes in patients with severe SFTS was very low. This situation may suggest that the humoral immunity mediated by B lymphocytes is damaged when the novel bunyavirus is infected, especially in severe patients (Fig. 2). In addition, the analysis of severe SFTS cases showed that most of the peripheral plasma mother cells did not express IgM and IgG, which suggested the deficiency of humoral lymphocyte immune response. Moreover, neutralizing antibody IgG could not be detected in severe SFTS cases, which may be due to the inability of IgG-positive B cells to perform class conversion at the time of infection [40]. Taken together, these findings suggest that in severe SFTSV infection, the virus interferes with the differentiation of B lymphocytes in secondary lymphoid organs. The susceptibility of SFTSV to B lymphocytes and how the virus destroys the humoral immune mechanism of the body will be an important topic worth exploring.Fig. 2The mechanism of SFTSV pathogenesis. SFTSV transmission to humans commonly occurs from virus-carrying-tick-bite. The SFTSV then invades the lymph node nearest to the tick-bite wound, targeting immune cells such as B-cells, impairing host immune response from invading pathogen.It also leads to a decrease in white blood cells.After further replication, the virus goes to the systemic circulation, in response to viremia, other immune cells are over-stimulated causing cytokine storm and severe inflflammatory response syndrome(SIRS). SIRS causes damage to the vascular endothelium, which allows platelets to adhere and aggregate.Thrombocytopenia is a hallmark of SFTSV infection.Body response disorder and stress response caused by cytokine storm lead to multi-organ dysfunction, reflflected by the elevation of liver, kidney, and heart serum markers. Severe cases often die from MODSThe immunopathogenesis of SFTSV infection is complex, which includes a cascade of reactions involving a wide range of immune cells, inflammatory mediators, inflammasomes and signaling pathways [41]. SFTSV affects the differentiation of B lymphocytes and leads to humoral immunity deficiency. Inflammatory storm of cytokines caused by viral infection is also considered to be a major pathological feature of patients with s evere SFTS. Studies on the expression of cytokines and chemokines in patients with SFTS have shown that levels of IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ-inducible protein (IP)-10 and IFN- γ usually increase in the early stages of the disease [42]. Professor Kwon's research says there is a significant correlation between IP-10 levels and viral load.But because of the small sample size, further research is needed to confirm this [43]. In addition, the relationship between cytokine / chemokine levels and platelet count and serum enzymology (AST, LDH, ALT) has also been reported [38, 39]. The decrease of platelet level is related to the decrease of soluble CD40 ligand and platelet-derived growth factor BB. Similarly, when IL10, IL-2 receptor and IP-10 levels increased, platelet levels decreased [39]. The serum levels of AST, ALT and LDH were positively correlated with IL-10, sIL-2RA, HSP70, IP-10, IL-4, IFN- γ, tPAI-1 and other inflammatory / chemokines. In addition, it is reported that IL-10 is oversecreted in severe SFTS, which can induce compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome and trigger abnormal and uncontrolled inflammatory disorders, thus causing damage to various organs of the body [44].Treatment of SFTSRibavirinAt present, the main treatment for SFTS disease is symptomatic treatment and traditional Chinese medicine treatment. Symptomatic treatment is to deal with fever, give drugs to increase platelet and leukocyte use.For example, the Chinese medicine Xuebijing injection can reduce SIRS reaction. It can also reduce the DIC score of SFTS and restore the platelets to normal [41]. According to the national guidelines for the prevention and control of SFTS issued by the Ministry of Health of China in 2010, ribavirin, a synthetic nucleoside antiviral drug, is recommended for clinical treatment of SFTS [47]. Ribavirin is a synthetic nucleotide antiviral drug that exhibits broad-spectrum antiviral activity against a variety of viruses, such as respiratory syncytial virus, influenza, measles, herpesvirus, and in combination with interferon (IFN)-α can inhibit hepatitis C. A study by Professor Lee from Korea showed that ribavirin inhibited SFTSV replication in SFTS patients after 48 h of ribavirin use [45]. Although the successful treatment of ribavirin has been reported, the use of ribavirin did not reduce the final outcome of SFTS in more than one study. Professor Liu Wei of the Beijing Institute of Microbiology conducted a retrospective study on the 154 Hospital of the people's Liberation Army in Xinyang City, Henan Province. The professor selected a total of 311 cases, including 54 deaths. They found that there was no increase in platelet count and no decrease in viral load in patients treated with ribavirin compared with patients who did not receive ribavirin. He even found that patients who received ribavirin had lower platelet counts than those who did not receive treatment [46]. The therapeutic effect of ribavirin on SFTSV infection often depends on the viral load, which is less than 1 copy, and the therapeutic effect of ribavirin is better in the early stage of the disease [47]. Although there are many studies on SFTSV, the pathogenesis of the virus is not clear. The number of antiviral drugs against SFTSV is limited. More importantly, obtaining new drugs through the basic research process is a very long-term process. However, it is a relatively fast method to evaluate the efficacy of existing antiviral drugs.FavipiravirFavipiravir, discovered and synthesized by Toyama Chemical Co., Ltd., Japan, is a new antiviral drug so far. It has a wide range of activities against a variety of RNA viruses, including influenza virus, Bunya virus, West Nile virus, yellow fever virus and foot-and-mouth disease virus [48]. It’s mechanism is that Favipiravir ribosyl-5-triphosphate inositol (fapiravir RTP) is produced by phosphoribosylation by host cell enzymes, and the viral RNA polymerase mistakenly recognizes Favipiravir RTP, which inserts Favipiravir RTP into the viral RNA chain or binds to the viral RNA polymerase domain, thus hindering the replication and transcription of the viral RNA chain [49].In many animal models of SFTSV infection, the efficacy of Favipiravir in vivo has been fully verified. One study showed that when treatment began 3 days or earlier after SFTSV infection, all mice treated with Favipiravir survived, even though mice treated 4 and 5 days after infection showed a survival rate of 83% and 50%, respectively [49]. At present, there are few reports on the clinical use of Favipiravir in the treatment of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome, which needs more attention.Calcium Channel BlockersCalcium channel blockers(CCBs) can reduce intracellular Ca2+ levels and are widely used in the treatment of various cardiovascular diseases, including hypertension, angina pectoris and supraventricular arrhythmias. In recent years, some studies have shown that CCBs has strong antiviral activity against Ebola virus, Marburg virus and Japanese encephalitis virus [50, 51]. Among many calcium antagonists, two drugs, benidipine hydrochloride and nifedipine, can inhibit Ca2+ replication by reducing virus-induced SFTSV influx [52]. Professor Li's study further analyzed the anti-sftsv effects of these two kinds of CCB in C57BL/6 mice and humanized mice [49]. It was found that the two drugs could reduce viral load, increase platelet count and reduce mortality in humanized mouse model. They also conducted a retrospective clinical study of SFTS patients, including 83 patients who received nifedipine (nifedipine before and during hospitalization), 48 patients who did not receive nifedipine (nifedipine before admission but not nifedipine during hospitalization), and 249 general SFTS patients who did not take nifedipine at all.It was found that the case fatality rate of nifedipine treatment group (3.6%) was 5 times lower than that of general SFTS treatment group (19.7%) or non-nifedipine treatment group (20.8%). The results of these studies show that CCBs has potential therapeutic effects on patients with SFTS [53]. In the future, we can consider a prospective way to evaluate the antiviral efficacy of CCBs in SFTS.Immunoglobulin (IVIG)IVIG plays an important role in the treatment of various viral diseases by triggering complement activation, virus neutralization, antibody-dependent cytotoxicity and conditioning. Based on the mechanism of immunosuppression and inflammatory factor disorder in the pathogenesis of SFTS, we believe that IVIG can help reduce viral load in patients with SFTS, inhibit SFTSV transmission, and effectively inhibit cytokine storm. However, there are only a few cases of successful use of IVIG in patients with severe SFTS [54]. The mechanism of IVIG in patients with SFTS is not completely clear, which needs to be further confirmed by clinical data.GlucocorticoidSevere SFTS can lead to rapid deterioration of the disease, and patients are easy to die of septic shock and MODS,DIC. The key to this pathogenic process is the cytokine storm. Considering the pathogenesis of SFTS, clinicians believe that steroids are a therapeutic option for suppressing the immune system of patients with severe SFTS. Kim et al. [54] reported two cases of successful treatment of SFTS with glucocorticoid combined with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) in South Korea. Nakamura et al. [55] reported that steroids were effective in 3 Japanese patients with SFTS complicated with encephalopathy. Glucocorticoid therapy may increase the chance of secondary infection, especially fungal infection. Because SFTS patients themselves may have secondary fungal infection, and there is evidence that SFTS patients with secondary fungal infection are more ill and have a higher mortality. Based on this situation, we do not recommend glucocorticoid as a routine treatment for SFTS, especially in patients with mild or mild symptoms within 5 days after the onset of symptoms [56].Plasma Exchange (TPE)SFTSV infection can lead to a storm of cytokines all over the body, which can damage organ function. Plasma exchange may be a possible rescue method for the removal of cytokines. Korean scholars have done much research on this therapy. A Korean hospital reported 2 cases of SFTS treated with therapeutic Plasma exchange(TPE) and oral ribavirin [57]. Another study on the use of TPE in SFTS patients found that the clinical and laboratory parameters of most SFTS patients improved rapidly after plasmapheresis [58]. Statistical analysis of some studies on TPE treatment of SFTS shows that there is no significant difference between the TPE group and the non-TPE group. In addition, TPE also has side effects [59]. The above TPE studies are limited because they show only a relatively small number of clinical samples and there is no strict comparison. Doctors still need to observe the clinical manifestations of patients and use TPE cautiously.Vaccine Research of SFTSVVaccine is the most effective way to deal with infectious diseases, and the development of a vaccine against the novel bunyavirus can provide mass immunity to people living in epidemic areas. In 2019, researchers at the University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences published a paper on a novel bunyavirus vaccine using recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus (rVSV) as a vector. In this study, VSV has been developed as a promising attenuated virus vaccine vector to induce the production of neutralizing antibodies that can effectively resist the deadly challenges of a variety of pathogens, including Hendra virus, Lassa virus, Ebola virus, Marburg virus, Nipah virus, etc. [60].VSV is classified as a RNA virus of the family Rhabdoviridae, which is covered with an envelope protein when it sprouts. The envelope protein is composed of two substances, one is lipid bilayer and the other is anchoring protein derived from glycoprotein. The reason why VSV is used as a vaccine vector and model is that it’s envelope protein can be recombined with foreign virus envelope protein to form virus particles, and the antigen composition remains unchanged. The effects of recombinant vesicular stomatitis virus in invading the body, being recognized by the immune cells of the body, binding to the receptor, and producing neutralizing specific antibodies are basically similar to that produced by SFTSV invading the body [61, 62]. Therefore, using rVSV to develop SFTSV vaccine will have a great prospect.Treatment of MODSSFTS is prone to sepsis and MODS [37]. In principle, all patients with MODS should be admitted to ICU for emergency treatment. At present, the main treatment includes etiology treatment and organ function support.The cause of MODS was actively eliminated. For SFTS patients, the cause was the storm of cellular inflammatory factors caused by viral infection. If septic shock is present, tissue and organ perfusion should be improved as soon as possible to avoid further aggravating organ function damage. If a bacterial infection presents clinically, combined antibiotic therapy is required [42].The main measures to improve oxygen metabolism and correct tissue hypoxia include increasing oxygen supply, reducing oxygen consumption and improving the ability of tissue cells to use oxygen. At present, increasing oxygen supply is the most feasible means to improve tissue hypoxia, which requires three conditions: ① normal hemoglobin content; ② Oxygen therapy, if necessary, mechanical ventilation to support breathing, so that SaO2&gt; 90%; ③ Normal cardiac function and effective circulating blood volume. Vasoactive drugs can be used appropriately to maintain tissue and organ perfusion. Reducing oxygen consumption is often overlooked and can be achieved through sedation, hypothermia and mechanical ventilation to support breathing.Respiratory support treatment Respiratory support is one of the important means to improve oxygen delivery and reduce oxygen consumption. When selecting ventilator mode and setting ventilator parameters, attention should be paid to the prevention and treatment of ventilator related lung injury, and the influence of mechanical ventilation on organ function should be reduced as far as possible [63].General ConclusionsSFTSV has the potential of pandemic, has an impact on global public health and poses a great threat. People in affected areas are at risk of being bitten by ticks when engaged in agricultural and outdoor activities. With the migration of migratory birds, virus spillovers often spread between humans, animals and ticks. Some studies have investigated the complex interaction between SFTSV and the host immune system. For example, the failure to produce a virus-specific humoral response is attributed to b-cell dysfunction. It has also been reported that B cell differentiation in secondary lymphoid organs is the main target of the virus at the end of fatal SFTSV infection. In addition, an inflammatory storm caused by an overimmune response to the virus can lead to progressive sexual organ damage and death. The mainly reasons are: First, the early pathogenesis of SFTSV infection; Second, the similarities and differences and interrelationship between the pathogenesis of fatal and surviving SFTSV infection. At present, there is no specific antiviral drug against SFTSV infection, nor is there a commercial vaccine. Redeveloping new antivirals is a promising approach, but it consumes time and resources. Therefore, more and more people are looking for candidate treatments for emerging viruses through the reuse of existing antiviral drugs. Vaccines are the most powerful tool to prevent outbreaks in response to this infectious disease, and some vaccine-related studies have been published. As the research on SFTSV is still in its infancy, there are still many problems to be solved.


Title: Nipah virus: pathogenesis, genome, diagnosis, and treatment

IntroductionThe emergence of novel pathogenic viral strains and their outbreaks has been reported more frequently in the last few decades, possibly due to rapid urbanization and changing climatic conditions. Newly emerging viruses such as Ebola virus, Crimean Congo hemorrhagic fever (CCHF) virus, Zika virus, swine flu virus, Lassa fever virus, Marburg virus, coronaviruses, Nipah virus (NiV), and Rift Valley fever (RVF) virus, are serious threats to human health and have been classified as pathogens of global concern (Rizzardini et al. 2018). Their ability to spread quickly may lead to an international public health crisis similar to COVID- 19 (Sweileh 2017). These viral outbreaks are responsible for high mortality, morbidity, and economic burden worldwide. Old viruses such as influenza have the potential to resurface and pose new epidemic and pandemic threats (Taubenberger and Morens 2010). Viruses employ various strategies to infect humans, either by direct or by indirect means or through different reservoir host animals. Despite implementing stringent precautionary measures, the COVID- 19 pandemic appeared to be virtually unstoppable, leading to its spread throughout the globe. Similar to SARS-CoV- 2, many viral pathogens with increased propensity for causing an epidemic, such as NiV, Ebola, and Middle East respiratory coronavirus (MERS-CoV), originated from bats, and later spread by cross-species transmission through intermediate hosts (Mohd et al. 2016; Zhou et al. 2020; Letko et al. 2020).NiV is a zoonotic single-stranded RNA-genome containing bat-borne pathogen of the family Paramyxoviridae. The other human pathogenic viruses of this family are Hendra virus (HeV), measles virus, human parainfluenza virus, and mumps virus (Ksiazek et al. 2011). It has the potential to trigger severe acute respiratory infection as well as encephalitis (Bellini et al. 2005). NiV is listed as a class C pathogen in the classification of pathogens. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as well as the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), it poses a threat of bioterrorism (Mohapatra et al. 2024). The fruit bat (Pteropus medius) is a reservoir host of NiV and is responsible for animal-to-human transmission (Hayman et al. 2008). The first known case of NiV was documented in 1998 in the Malaysian town of Sungai Nipah, followed by cases in Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines. Infections were reported to have occurred in humans from pigs, the virus’s intermediate host. Since 1999, there have not been any recorded NiV outbreaks in Malaysia. Nevertheless, in India and Bangladesh, new cases have been reported quite regularly (Chadha et al. 2006; Blum et al. 2009). Between 2001 and 2015, several NiV encephalitis cases in Bangladesh have been documented. In 2018, a NiV epidemic was reported from Kerala, India (Kozhikode district), and it was later confirmed that the index patient had contracted the virus from fruit bats (Thomas et al. 2019). However, there were no clinical or statistical data to support the transmission. Because of the high human mortality rate of NiV, zoonotic origin, the likelihood of inter-human contagion, and unavailability of a vaccine, NiV has been declared a global epidemic. The World Health Organization (WHO) has designated it as a worldwide epidemic-causing pathogenic agent, and NiV infection is deemed to be one of the most severe health concerns (Anderson et al. 2019). While only ~ 10% of Nipah-infected individuals contribute to viral transmission, the spread of the disease is considered to be highly heterogeneous and may infect several people (Nikolay et al. 2019). Recently, in 2019, NiV infection was reported from the Ernakulum district of Kerala, India (Sudeep et al. 2021). Another incidence of NiV encephalitis was reported on September 5, 2021, with the demise of a 12-year-old boy, due to this virus, in Kerala’s Kozhikode. All these outbreaks have reported high mortality rates, including a ~ 91% mortality rate reported for the recent Kerala outbreak (Arunkumar et al. 2019a). According to a report from Aster MIMS Hospital in Calicut, India, the most recently recorded emergence of NiV occurred in the Malappuram town in Kerela on 21 July 2024, where a 14-year-old boy died from NiV infection, and another 60 individuals were put in the high-risk category. A detailed information about the CFR and geographical outbreaks of NiV since 1998 is depicted in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.Fig. 1Epidemiological trends of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks illustrating confirmed cases (orange), deaths (blue), and case fatality rates (CFR) (grey). A Country-wise distribution of NiV cases and deaths, with the CFR demonstrating variability in virus infectivity across nations. B Year-wise trends in Bangladesh, highlighting recurrent outbreaks since 2001, with variations in case numbers and CFR over the years. C Year-wise deaths over confirmed cases data for India, emphasizing notable outbreaks in Kerala (2001, 2018, and 2023), where CFR has remained high despite improved surveillance and healthcare responses. The graphs combinedly demonstrate the impact of NiV, showing global as well as regional differences in epidemiological dynamics and disease outcomesFig. 2Global distribution of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks, highlighting cumulative deaths over confirmed cases. The map illustrates affected countries, including Malaysia, Bangladesh, India, Singapore, and the Philippines, with outbreak hotspots marked according to the reported number of cases and fatalities. The color intensity represents the severity of outbreaks, with the highest number of cases recorded to date. Regions with repeated outbreaks in India (Kerala and West Bengal) have been highlighted in blueFig. 3Timeline of Nipah virus (NiV) outbreaks from 1998 to 2024. The figure illustrates key outbreaks, highlighting their geographic locations, case fatality rates, and major transmission routes. The first recorded outbreak in Malaysia (1998–1999) involved pig-to-human transmission, whereas subsequent outbreaks, particularly in Bangladesh and India, were linked to direct bat-to-human or human-to-human transmission. Notable events include the recurrent outbreaks in Bangladesh since 2001, the Kerala outbreaks in India (2018, 2019, and 2023), and recent cases in 2024To date, no dedicated antivirals or vaccines have been successfully developed for treating or preventing NiV, and only symptomatic management treatments are given to patients. This emerging zoonotically transmitted virus might cause a global health issue and thus require a universal approach to reduce its disease burden. As NiV is considered a BSL- 4 pathogen, scientists have speculated that it has the capacity to trigger a future pandemic. Hence, there is an urgent need to conduct rigorous research, in order to develop vaccines and therapies against NiV.In this review, we have discussed the genetic composition, epidemiology, diversity, pathology, prophylaxis, clinical aspects, and the risk factors associated with NiV. This review encompasses the collective data published up to July 1, 2024, in the form of research articles, literature reviews, and case reports. This review also focuses on different circulating NiV strains and provides a comparative analysis of these strains based on their origin, lethality, and mode of transmission from reservoir to host species. Additionally, this review also includes clinical data obtained from various model organisms used to study the biology of NiV. Furthermore, this review discusses presently available and ongoing medical countermeasures against NiV in accordance with the epidemiological data provided by the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), WHO, and other public health organizations.Genetic diversity associated with NiV strainsNiV was first isolated in 1999 (Farrar 1999) and currently two major genetic lineages of human disease-causing NiVs have been identified by genome sequencing, i.e., NiV Bangladesh (NiV-B) and NiV Malaysia (NiV-M) (Harcourt et al. 2005) (Table 1). Both lineages have similar lengths of nucleotides except for an extra six nucleotides located at the 5′ non-translated region of the F protein of NiV-B (Chan et al. 2001; AbuBakar et al. 2004). Although both strains have high sequence identity (91.8%), NiV-B is proposed to have greater mortality rate (Lo et al. 2012). Moreover, the NiV strains isolated from India showed 99% and 97% resemblance to the Bangladeshi lineage (Pallivalappil et al. 2020).
Table 1Comparative analysis of NiV strains—NiV-Malaysia (NiVM), NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB), and NiV-India (NiVI)—based on key epidemiological, clinical, and virological characteristics. It highlights differences in mortality, human-to-human transmission rates, clinical manifestations, and public health responsesFeatureNiV-Malaysia (NiVM)NiV-Bangladesh (NiVB)NiV-India (NiVI)First identified1998–1999 (Malaysia and Singapore)2001 (Bangladesh)2001 (India, Siliguri outbreak)Primary reservoirPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsPteropus fruit batsIntermediate hostPigs; Horse (Philippines)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)None (direct bat-to-human transmission)Major outbreaksMalaysia (1998–1999), Singapore (1999); Philippines (2014)Bangladesh (2001, 2003, 2004, 2011, 2018)Siliguri (2001), Kerala (2018, 2019, 2021, 2023)Mortality rate (%) ~ 40%65–100%70–100%Morbidity (severity of disease)Severe encephalitis, high case recovery rateAcute respiratory distress, severe encephalitisAcute respiratory distress, encephalitisHuman-to-human transmission rateLow (~ 8%)High (~ 33–75%)High (~ 75%)Mode of transmissionZoonotic (pig-to-human; horse-to-human) with limited human-to-humanDirect bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Direct bat-to-human and human-to-human (via saliva, respiratory droplets)Clinical featuresFever, encephalitis, respiratory involvement rareFever, cough, acute respiratory distress, encephalitisFever, severe respiratory distress, encephalitisUnique epidemiological featuresPigs as amplifying hosts, first outbreak outside India/Bangladesh, led to culling of > 1 million pigsFrequent spillovers, seasonal outbreaks (winter-spring), human-to-human super-spreader eventsRecurring outbreaks in Kerala, high human-to-human transmission, limited genetic data availableGenetic differencesMore closely related to Hendra virus (HeV)More virulent, higher human-to-human spreadClosely related to NiVB but with distinct mutationsPublic health responseCulling of pigs, quarantine measures, strict biosecurity protocolsCase isolation, community awareness, surveillanceCase isolation, contact tracing, state-wide lockdowns during outbreaksHowever, in the clinical course, several differences have been reported between NiV-B and NiV-M epidemics. In contrast to NiV-M, NiV-B has a narrower average incubation period (Kulkarni et al. 2013). Although genetically comparable, NiV strains from Bangladesh and India caused a much larger number of deaths in comparison to the NiV-M strain, though that was largely due to the poor quality of health services and the high frequency of new viral infections in these countries (Sharma et al. 2019; Ochani et al. 2019; Thakur and Bailey 2019). The NiV-B infections are generally associated with both respiratory illness and encephalitis. However, NiV-M infections are primarily associated with encephalitis, with limited evidence of respiratory disease (Chadha et al. 2006; Hossain et al. 2008). NiV-B strain is more frequently linked to the development of atypical pneumonia with respiratory distress. Inter-human transmission cases with the absence of involvement of intermediary hosts were more frequently reported in the NiV-B strain, which has a high mortality rate of ~ 75% compared to the ~ 40% mortality rate of the NiV-M strain (Fig. 1) (Mire et al. 2016). At the same time, the genetic heterogeneity within NiV-B strains is considerably higher compared to the NiV-M strain.Although NiV-B has shown associations with multiple outbreaks, all in vitro and in vivo therapeutic studies have been focused on the NiV-M strain instead of the ubiquitous NiV-B strain (Clayton et al. 2012). The two strains are biologically indistinguishable, various investigations performed using both small animal models like hamsters, and ferrets and large animal models like African green monkeys (AGMs) indicate that the two strains are distinct in several ways (Baseler et al. 2015). Disease pathogenesis and cytopathic effects were lower in NiV-B-infected hamsters relative to NiV-M-infected hamsters (DeBuysscher et al. 2013). Similarly, it has been shown that disease progression and development of immune responses were slower in NiV-B infections as compared to NiV-M. These findings were further confirmed, by the viral replication titer studies that showed that viral replication was slower during NiV-M infection. However, NiV-B and NiV-M strains caused similar lesions in the hamster’s respiratory tract, indicating that there are no inherent differences between the two strains causing human epidemics (Baseler et al. 2015). NiV-B and NiV-M infections in ferrets resulted in similar pathological phenotypes and diseases. Ferrets with NiV-B or NiV-M infection have a much higher viral load in their blood, and ferrets with NiV-B infection have a higher shedding rate in their oral secretions, leading to higher transmission rates of NiV-B, between humans, during outbreaks (Clayton et al. 2012). In AGMs, NiV-M infection caused 50% mortality, whereas NiV-B infection resulted in the death of all the experimental animals (Mire et al. 2016).Host rangeFruit bats, predominantly belonging to the genus Pteropus act as reservoir hosts for NiV. In Malaysia, NiV has been detected in different bat species like Pteropus vampyru, Pteropus hypomelanus, and Pteropus lylei (Yob et al. 2001; Wacharapluesadee et al. 2005). In India, NiV was first identified in Megaderma spasma and later detected in fruit bats such as Pteropus giganteus (Yadav et al. 2012). Investigations into the Malaysian outbreak revealed that pigs can act as both intermediate and amplifying hosts for this virus (Mohd Nor et al. 2000; de Wit and Munster 2015). Serological studies confirmed NiV infection in dogs, at the time of Malaysia’s first outbreak, and viral transmission was associated with the ingestion of virus-infected pork or direct physical contact with NiV-infected pigs (Mills et al. 2009). A 2001 study reported the spread of NiV from sick cows in the Meherpur district of Bangladesh (Hsu et al. 2004). Domestic animals, namely cows and goats, are an important factor in the spillover of bat-borne viruses like NiV, although their exact roles as amplifying or bridging species are not yet completely known (Chua 2003; Glennon et al. 2018) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Illustration of the complex dynamics of Nipah virus transmission in various animal models. The intricate interactions involved in the virus's transmission among different species are graphically depictedMode of transmission and risk factorsHumans mainly contract NiV via foods contaminated by infected bats, proximity to infected animals, and body fluids from infected individuals (R et al. 2008; Luby et al. 2009). Virus spread from bats to pigs is attributed to the ingestion of leftovers or fruits contaminated by NiV-infected bats (Luby 2013). Bat infections can be transmitted to humans in primarily two ways (Fig. 4): through an intermediary animal host (outbreak in Malaysia), or straight from bats to humans (outbreaks in Bangladesh and India) (Hsu et al. 2004). In the case of the Malaysian outbreak, the major risk of human-to-human NiV transmission was linked to direct exposure to the infectious secretions or excretions of NiV-infected pigs which happened mainly during the handling of pigs (Luby and Gurley 2012). Alarmingly, the transport of pig meat from NiV-infected areas to other geographical locations worldwide may have also facilitated the transmission of the disease to uninfected regions (Kulkarni et al. 2013). This was evident in Singapore, where the import of infected pork from Malaysia led to the spread of NiV infection among abattoir workers (Chew et al. 2000). In Bangladesh, ingesting infected date palm sap was a common risk factor associated with human NiV infections (Chakraborty et al. 2016). Working in a healthcare setting increases the risk of being vulnerable to NiV infection, mainly because of the sneezing and coughing of infected individuals, resulting in the formation of aerosol droplets containing infectious viruses, which infect other individuals in poorly ventilated rooms (Wang et al. 2021). A recent study, undertaken on Syrian hamsters, using aerosolized NiV suggested that the transmission of NiV occurred through aerosolized NiV droplets, during close contact with animals (Escaffre et al. 2018). Contact with respiratory and urine secretions from infected individuals is another cause of human-to-human spread (Gurley et al. 2007). Research carried out in Bangladesh by Hassan et al. revealed that hospital surfaces, like the area of the wall in contact with patients, bed sheets, and patient record files, were contaminated with NiV RNA (Hassan et al. 2018). A significant outbreak in India stemmed from nosocomial transmission via respiratory secretions, primarily owing to inefficient utilization of personal protective equipment (Chadha et al. 2006). Individuals having direct physical contact with NiV-infected patients but had not come into direct contact with their body fluids had a reduced probability of developing subclinical illnesses (Gurley et al. 2007). NiV-infected patients with hard breathing are more likely to spread the virus, than those without any respiratory issues (Luby et al. 2009).Animal models used for studying NiVThe availability of animal models is a critical factor for understanding the pathogenesis of viral diseases. Several animal models exist for studying NiV viz bats, cats, dogs, ferrets, horses, African green monkeys (AGM), squirrel monkeys, pigs, mice, immunodeficient mice, hamsters, guinea pigs, rats, rabbits, and chickens. Guinea pigs were among the first to be used in animal experiments to study NiV. They were subjected to both intranasal and intraperitoneal inoculation with NiV; however, the former failed to elicit any clinical symptoms and, hence, the peritoneal route was considered more suitable for administering NiV inoculum (Middleton et al. 2007). Pigs infected through oral routes showed symptoms of natural NiV infection but increased severity was observed after subcutaneous inoculation of NiV (Middleton et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Subcutaneous, intranasal, or oral routes of infection in cats showed clinical symptoms within 4–8 days (Mungall et al. 2006). Every method of inoculation leads to infection or death, with the virus being detected across several organs such as the brain, kidney, spleen, and lungs (Hooper et al. 2001). Cats developed good IgG and IgA responses in vaccine studies when challenged with a 50,000 TCID50 dose of NiV (Zhu et al. 2006; McEachern et al. 2008). In pregnant cats, NiV was found in the fetal tissue, placenta, and uterine fluid, and they were involved in the vertical transmission of NiV (Mungall et al. 2007). Ferrets also served as animal models and were widely used to check the efficacy of antivirals and vaccines against henipaviral infection (Bossart et al. 2009; Clayton et al. 2016; Mire et al. 2020). Ferrets subjected to NiV infection developed respiratory and neurological symptoms including fever, cough, nasal discharge, depression, and paralysis (Bossart et al. 2009; Pallister et al. 2009, 2011).Both AGMs and squirrel monkeys are extremely vulnerable to NiV infection and exhibit common clinical symptoms that are also observed in human NiV cases (Marianneau et al. 2010; Geisbert et al. 2010, 2020). Experimental infection of AGMs revealed that the NiV-B strain exhibited increased pathogenicity as compared to NiV-M (Mire et al. 2016; Prasad et al. 2020) Due to their high genetic similarity with humans, AGM models have been extensively used for testing antiviral drugs against NiV (Rockx et al. 2010; Bossart et al. 2011, 2012). Common laboratory mice models like Balb/c and C57BL/6 did not develop henipaviral infection post-exposure to the virus via intra-nasal or intraperitoneal route; however, intracranial administration of the virus caused fatal infection (Westbury et al. 1995; Dhondt et al. 2013). Despite having a lower susceptibility to NiV infection, murine models are widely employed to assess the efficacy of mRNA vaccine candidates (Valbuena et al. 2014; Yun et al. 2015; Keshwara et al. 2019; Stroh et al. 2019; Kalodimou et al. 2019; Shuai et al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Loomis et al. 2021). Golden Syrian hamsters are another in vivo animal model for testing henipaviral therapeutics, as they recapitulate similar pathological manifestations as those in humans (Guillaume et al. 2004a; De Wit et al. 2011; Marsh et al. 2012; Baseler et al. 2016; Escaffre et al. 2018). Intranasal or intraperitoneal inoculation of NiV on hamsters showed clinical signs of infection in the respiratory and nervous systems (Wong et al. 2003).Genome of NiVNiV is a pleomorphic, thread-like, or spherical, encapsulated virus that ranges in size from 40 to 1900 nm with a single layer of surface projections that are ~ 17 nm in length (Ang et al. 2018; Singh et al. 2019). It has a negative-sense, single-stranded, non-segmented, RNA genome of ~ 18.2 kb (Jack et al. 2005). RNA viruses have a higher potential of infecting new host species, due to their incredibly short generation time, and their ability to evolve faster, due to high mutational frequency. They are currently thought to be the key etiological agents for ~ 25–44% of current infectious illnesses (J Woolhouse et al. 2013; Devnath and Masud 2021).The NiV genome codes for six structural proteins, namely, fusion protein (F), attachment glycoprotein (G), matrix protein (M), phosphoprotein (P), nucleoprotein (N), and the large RNA-dependent RNA polymerase protein (L). Further, the P gene codes for three non-structural proteins that include proteins C, W, and V (Fig. 5) (Sun et al. 2018). The N, P, and L proteins, in conjunction with the viral RNA, form the virus ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) complex, that regulates transcription of the viral genome and viral replication (Ranadheera et al. 2018) The NiV F protein is heavily glycosylated and mediates viral entry and integration into the host membrane (Aguilar et al. 2006). Studies have confirmed that altering the glycosylation pattern in F protein diminishes its fusion efficacy. At the same time, different investigations have reported that the N-glycans on NiV G glycoprotein act as a decoy and protect the viral envelope from antibody-mediated neutralization (Biering et al. 2012; Aguilar et al. 2006). The NiV-F glycoprotein in its pre-fusion form is a hexamer of trimers for which the crystal structure has already been determined (Xu et al. 2015), while NiV-G glycoprotein is a homo-tetramer whose crystal structure has also been solved (Bowden et al. 2008). The F and G proteins, along with three accessory proteins (C, W, and V), encapsulate the NiV viral genome (Fig. 5) (Rodriguez et al. 2002, 2004; Shaw et al. 2004). The NiV-F and NiV-G proteins are major targets of neutralizing antibodies as they help in not only viral binding and fusion but also viral budding (Vogt et al. 2005).Fig. 5Representation of the structure and proteins of the Nipah virus. Comprehensive illustration of the virus's molecular structure provides an unobstructed view of its structural elements. All the important structural elements and proteins of the Nipah virus are shownPathogenesis of NiVVirus entryThe oronasopharyngeal route serves as the primary passage through which NiV enters the host, and studies involving infected pigs and hamsters have confirmed respiratory epithelium to be the first site of NiV infection (Weingartl et al. 2009; De Wit et al. 2011). Following initial replication in the respiratory tract, NiV spreads systemically, infecting airway endothelial cells during viremia and subsequently targeting epithelial cells in the bladder and kidneys (Lamp et al. 2013). With disease progression, NiV enters the bloodstream and infects the brain, digestive, and excretory systems (Talukdar et al. 2023). Entry of NiV inside the CNS can happen due to multiple reasons such as replication of NiV in the endothelial cells resulting in the compromised integrity of the blood–brain barrier (BBB); the transmigration of NiV-bound uninfected leukocytes into the brain; and the transport of NiV through the nasal cavity into the CNS via olfactory neurons (Weingartl et al. 2005; de Wit and Munster 2015). Nucleoprotein aggregation in degenerating axons is an effective mechanism for NiV dissemination throughout the CNS, following its entrance into most animal models (Munster et al. 2012).Host–pathogen interactionsThe F and G proteins present in the viral envelope of NiV control virus attachment and its entry into host cells (Figs. 6). Ephrin-B2 (EFNB2) and ephrin-B3 (EFNB3), which are host cell receptors, found on epithelial cells and neurons, respectively, serve as a binding partner for the G protein. Seven contiguous residues on top of the globular head of G protein mediate its interaction with the EFNB2 receptor (Guillaume et al. 2006). The interlinkage of the receptor exposes the G protein’s stalk domain and induces F protein conformational changes, from pre-fusion form to pre-hairpin intermediate, and finally to post-fusion form that is ready for membrane fusion (Ortega et al. 2022). The presence of a KKR motif located in the cytoplasmic tail of the F protein stimulates viral membrane fusion with the host cells in a pH-independent manner, thereby allowing virion penetration (Lamp et al. 2013; Aguilar et al. 2007; Negrete et al. 2005; Xu et al. 2012) (Fig. 6). The F protein is initially present as a precursor, F0, which undergoes proteolytic processing. This processing is likely mediated by cathepsin L in Vero cells, and cathepsin B in MDCK cells, resulting in the formation of disulfide-linked F1 and F2 subunits that constitute a mature fusogenic F heterodimer (Pager et al. 2006; Diederich et al. 2012). The F1 subunit mainly facilitates the fusion of the viral membrane and the host cellular membrane.Fig. 6Representation of the Nipah virus life cycle, including all important phases from entry to exit in host cells. Graphical illustrations of how the virus enters the cell, replicates, and leaves the cell are shownCellular mechanisms, viral replication and buddingThe binding of the G protein with the ephrin-B2/B3 receptor, followed by viral entry, triggers the release and duplication of the viral mRNA of NiV (Fig. 6) (Bonaparte et al. 2005). Subsequently, the viral mRNA undergoes translation into the primary structural proteins, after the L and P proteins mediate its transcription (Patch et al. 2007). The molecular weight of NiV L protein is ~ 250 kDa and is responsible for replication, transcription, and capping of the viral genome, in close coordination with the viral phosphoprotein P. The L protein’s C-terminal region contains an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) domain; a poly-ribonucleotidyltransferase (PRNTase) domain essential for mRNA capping; a methyltransferase (MTase) domain; and an uncharacterized domain (Diederich and Maisner 2007; Cox and Plemper 2017). The N protein also participates in replication, gene transcription, and wrapping of the viral genome (Lo et al. 2012).The molecular features of the virus are preserved by the M protein, as it recruits a variety of cell machinery, to initiate viral morphogenesis and virion budding (Watkinson and Lee 2016; Eaton et al. 2006). The M protein also participates in the last phase of the assembly of the virion, which includes virion encapsulation, followed by the release of new virus particles from the host cell (Sun et al. 2018). Furthermore, the M protein acts as a shuttle between the nucleus and cytoplasm, as it contains nuclear import/export signal sequences, and performs nuclear transit, even though NiV replicates in the cytoplasm (Ringel et al. 2020). Inhibition of the nucleolar treacle protein by virus-mediated modulation of the host cell machinery enhances Henipavirus production as this targets the DNA-damage response (DDR) pathway (de Wit et al. 2014; Rawlinson et al. 2018). Aggregation of M protein leads to the formation of virus-like particles (VLPs) at the plasma membrane and in association with the F protein it induces G protein recruitment into VLPs (Johnston et al. 2017; Sun et al. 2018).Host immune responseIn vitro studies, involving endothelial cell lines, infected with NiV, have been found to trigger the release of type I interferon (IFN-I), and various cytokines and inflammatory chemokines (Lo et al. 2010). Upon NiV attachment and subsequent fusion with host cells, RNA helicases present in the cytoplasm recognize viral RNA, inducing a strong IFN-I response that causes the activation of multiple IFN-induced genes, like OAS1, ISG56, and IP- 10, thereby influencing innate antiviral defense (Habjan et al. 2008; Leon et al. 2018). A constitutive INF level is maintained by pteropid bats even in the absence of infection, which helps them to inhibit NiV replication, and act as a reservoir without getting infected (Liew et al. 2022). In in vivo studies, involving NiV-infected Syrian Golden hamster, the upregulation of IFN-I signaling, cytokines, and chemokines initially occurred in the lung, followed by the brain, correlating with disease progression (Rockx et al. 2011). Apart from IFN-I response, pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL- 1 and TNF-α, were also induced, following NiV infection (Liew et al. 2022).Serum samples, from NiV-infected survivors, of the 2018 Indian outbreak, displayed elevated B-lymphocyte counts, correlating with the production of anti-NiV IgG and IgM antibodies (Arunkumar et al. 2019b). However, the adaptive immune response against NiV is not completely clear in humans due to insufficient clinical samples from fatal cases. Studies, involving animal models, were conducted to have a better understanding of NiV-induced humoral responses. Swine subjects, experimentally infected with NiV, developed neutralizing antibodies that became detectable within a week and reached high titers by 2 weeks post-infection (Berhane et al. 2008). On the other hand, African green monkeys exhibited B cell exhaustion by 12 days post-NiV infection, which indicated rapid progression of infection (Lara et al. 2019).Immune evasion strategiesDetection of viral RNA, by receptors like RIG-I and MDA- 5, induces the production of IFN-β which triggers the JAK/STAT pathway and downstream signaling pathways that regulate IFN-stimulated gene expression (García-Sastre and Biron 2006). It has been seen in various studies that the NiV P, V, W, and C proteins help to bypass the defenses imposed by the host immune system. To inhibit JAK/STAT signaling, the W, V, and P proteins of NiV bind to STAT1 protein, through their N-terminal domain, and stop it from getting phosphorylated (Shaw et al. 2004). MDA- 5 and RIG-I, as well as STAT2, which is another contributor to antiviral responses, are inhibited by the phosphatase PP1 mechanism of NiV V protein. Both NiV V and W proteins are responsible for blocking IKKε signaling, which affects signaling pathways induced by viral RNA or TLR3. The C protein blocks IFN-α induction and indirectly suppresses type I IFN induction, by reducing the synthesis of viral RNA (Satterfield et al. 2016b).Tissue tropismIn humans, NiV causes a severe and fast-developing disease, mostly affecting the respiratory and central nervous systems (CNS) (Hossain et al. 2008). More than 90% of infections impact the CNS and 62% of infections affect the respiratory system. Biopsy samples taken from NiV-infected individuals’ brains and other body organs revealed the presence of syncytial multinucleated large endothelial cells that distinguish NiV-associated encephalitis, from encephalitis caused by other viruses (Wong et al. 2002; Weingartl et al. 2005). Endothelial cells, macrophages, neurons, glial cells, smooth muscle cells, alveolar pneumocystis cells, and epithelial cells in the upper respiratory tract are among the many cell types that NiV may infect (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). The ephrin-B2/B3 receptors play an important role in determining the virus’s ability to infect cells. A study conducted on NiV-infected Syrian hamsters reported that NiV antigens were absent in veins, but present in medium- and small-sized arteries. These findings align with the fact that the ephrin-B2 receptor is expressed in the arterial endothelium, but absent in venous endothelium (Bossart et al. 2008). Although NiV receptors are abundantly accessible, the virus must spread throughout the body, via bloodstream to reach and infect various cell types (Mathieu et al. 2011).Once NiV enters the bloodstream, it disseminates to the spleen, brain, and kidneys, either in free-form or in a host leukocyte-bound form (Rockx et al. 2011; Escaffre et al. 2013). The tropism of NiV, into the capillaries of the brain and lungs, is mediated by infection of CD6-expressing T cells, which acts as a ligand for the CD166 molecule (activated leukocyte cell adhesion molecule (ALCAM)), displayed by microvascular endothelial cells present in the blood–brain and blood-air barrier (Erbar et al. 2008; Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012). Disruption of the BBB is followed by infection of the CNS by the virus. This results in the production of TNF-α and IL- 1, which in turn triggers the onset of neurological symptoms. In lungs, type 2 pneumocytes and bronchial epithelium serve as the principal targets of these antigens (Rockx et al. 2011). Infection of the airway epithelium activates inflammatory mediators (Escaffre et al. 2016), and in the latter stages of the illness, the virus spreads to the lung endothelial cells (Baseler et al. 2016). Inflammation of the respiratory tract epithelium causes acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)–like condition, which subsequently triggers the production of inflammatory cytokines (Moldoveanu et al. 2009). In addition to leukocytes, other immune cells such as T lymphocytes, NK cells, and monocytes can also be infected by NiV (Stachowiak and Weingartl 2012).Clinical features linked with NiVThe incubation time for NiV has been reported to be less than 15 days (Hossain et al. 2008). However, in certain situations, the incubation period may go up to 4 months or more (Goh et al. 2000). It has been noted that latent infection might resurface, after several months/years, post-acute infection (Ang et al. 2018). Asymptomatic infections are very unlikely in cases with NiV infections (Parashar et al. 2000). Patients generally begin to show symptoms of infection after 3 to 14 days of exposure to NiV (Hossain et al. 2008; Arunkumar et al. 2019). The body temperature rises quickly, causing lethargy and a headache and certain individuals may exhibit coughing and respiratory discomfort at the same time (Hossain et al. 2008). A sore throat, nausea, and muscular pain are all possible symptoms associated with NiV infection (Singh et al. 2019). Within 24–48 h of infection, encephalitis may develop, resulting in convulsions and coma in the most severe instances (Benmimoun et al. 1982). The most typical symptoms are hypotonia, gaze palsy, segmental myoclonus, disturbed mental state, and areflexia, as well as weakness in the limbs (Chua et al. 2001). Additionally, several clinical characteristics are also associated with vascular and cell injuries in the brain, lungs, and kidneys (Wong et al. 2002). Patients go from stable to comatose in a matter of days and about 20% of survivors develop residual neurological abnormalities, which include tiredness, localized neurological problems, and depression (Montgomery et al. 2008). Septicemia, renal failure, and gastrointestinal bleeding are the other possible side effects of this infection (Wong et al. 2002). In addition to these symptoms, histopathological investigations revealed meningitis, interstitial pneumonia, and pulmonary edema in several studies (Parashar et al. 2000; Field et al. 2001; Mills et al. 2009).Laboratory DiagnosisAn early diagnosis is extremely critical for NiV infection, because NiV infection is characterized by serious case fatalities. For clinical diagnosis, blood, throat/nasal swabs, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid from infected people and animals are used as samples. Virological diagnosis involves detecting viral RNA, through nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), for instance, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), which offer high sensitivity and specificity, particularly during early infection stages. Immunohistochemistry and virus isolation techniques are also employed for confirmatory diagnosis, although virus isolation is more time-consuming (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019; Pandey et al. 2024). Serological assays, like enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), detect NiV-specific IgM and IgG antibodies. Apart from these, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and recombinase polymerase assay have also been used to detect NiV (Fig. 7).Fig. 7Illustration of the diagnosis of Nipah virus using a variety of techniques. A variety of virus detection methods and their visual description are shown, e.g., SHERLOCK Assay, Lateral flow assay, ELISA, PCR, and Live Virus Neutralization AssayELISA testELISA employs a monoclonal antibody (mAb)–based diagnostic approach for NiV detection (Abdullah and Tan 2014; Satterfield et al. 2016a) (Fig. 7). Since the N protein of NiV is more abundantly expressed during the acute stage of NiV infection, researchers cloned, expressed, and purified the recombinant version of the N protein, and used it in an IgM capture ELISA to analyze human sera. IgM antibodies are among the first to appear during infection, usually detectable within the first 5 days of symptoms, and their levels gradually decline over 2–3 months and eventually disappear (Hassan et al. 2022). At the same time, an indirect IgG ELISA was developed that was capable of testing pig as well as human sera (Yu et al. 2006). Anti-NiV IgM peaks were observed in serum samples post- 9 days of infection and were reported to last for up to 90 days (Fischer et al. 2018). On the other hand, anti-NiV IgG peaks are seen 2 to 4 weeks after the onset of symptoms and can last for several months to years. Thus, IgM ELISA is useful for identifying recent or acute infections, while IgG tests are mostly used in serosurveillance studies, where a positive IgG ELISA test confirms the convalescence stage of infection in recovered patients (Mazzola and Kelly-Cirino 2019).Polymerase chain reactionThe high sensitivity and specificity of PCR makes it a reliable method to detect viral infection (Fig. 7). RNA of NiV in respiratory secretions, serum, urine, and cerebrospinal fluid can be detected by real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). Apart from that, RT-PCR, duplex, and nested RT-PCR (nRT-PCR) can also be used to detect NiV, with amplicon nucleotide sequencing providing further confirmation (Guillaume et al. 2004b; Wacharapluesadee and Hemachudha 2007). The monitoring of the emerging Henipaviruses, including novel NiV strains, was made possible through TaqMan-based qRT-PCR (Applied Biosystems, USA), which involved the identification of unique sequences present in the NiV N gene (Thakur and Bailey 2019).The absence of adequate infrastructure, required to set up a PCR testing facility, can limit its usage in some endemic regions. Furthermore, these tests might lose their sensitivity due to genetic mutations, which can lead to the appearance of novel NiV variants, exhibiting variations in the conserved sequences that are used to design probes. Probes are often constructed for highly conserved (mutation-resistant) regions, present in the sequences of all known strains of the pathogen of interest, to assure coverage for genetic variations. The CDC devised a conventional PCR protocol targeting the NiV N protein (Chua et al. 2000; Lo et al. 2012). RT-PCR assays have targeted the conserved N, M, or P regions of the NiV RNA genome as well. A SYBR Green-based assay encoding primers specific for different regions of N has been additionally reported (Chang et al. 2006), although it has a lesser sensitivity (100 pfu). In 2018, a one-step qRT-PCR was developed, which targets the sequences between the F and G genes, and gives an accurate estimation of replicative NiV RNA (Jensen et al. 2018). This PCR procedure might be more precise than standard qRT-PCR, as it eliminates the mRNA amplification step. A portable, battery-operated PCR machine jointly developed by the National Institute of Virology (NIV), and Molbio Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd., is currently the only approved rapid diagnostic kit available. The effectiveness of this PCR kit called Truenat™ Nipah PoC system was validated by NIV and was found to be ~ 97% sensitive and ~ 100% specific. This PCR platform was used during the 2019 NiV outbreak in Kerala and had a detection level similar to the TaqMan rtPCR assay (Yadav et al. 2021; Moore et al. 2024).Additionally, next-generation sequencing and deep sequencing is an alternate way for effectively identifying viral subtypes and newer strains; however, from a diagnostic perspective, this method is not frequently employed for screening of large number of viral samples (Matranga et al. 2016). It enables a direct sequence analysis of the viral genome, permitting virus as well as lineage determination without offering information about the virus composition. It enables one to determine the phylogenetic evolution of viral specimens over time and topography, when applied retrospectively (Matranga et al. 2014; Carroll et al. 2015).Recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) assayThe incorporation of the CRISPR/Cas technique, in an isothermal amplification assay like RPA, has led to the development of an inexpensive and rapid point-of-care viral diagnostic test called Specific High Sensitivity Enzymatic Reporter UnLOCKing or SHERLOCK. This has been effectively employed to diagnose infections caused by different viruses like Zika, Dengue, Ebola, and SARS-CoV- 2 (Gootenberg et al. 2017; Barnes et al. 2020; Crone et al. 2020; Freije and Sabeti 2021). Recently, in 2024, researchers in China developed a novel diagnostic method that employed the DNase activity of Cas12a protein against the highly conserved N gene of NiV (Fig. 7). Activation of Cas12a, upon target sequence recognition, leads to non-specific cleavage of single-stranded DNA reporters, which is detectable through a microplate reader or on a lateral flow strip (Yang et al. 2024). Similar to this technique, a one-pot RPA-CRISPR assay has also been developed that uses the Cas13a protein and a quenched RNA probe to diagnose NiV (Fig. 7). Unlike the conventional SHERLOCK technique, this one-pot assay reduces the contamination risk and minimizes false-positive results, as the entire assay can be completed in a single tube without the need for reaction transfer (Miao et al. 2023). These novel diagnostic methods offer safer and cost-effective alternatives, as they can be performed in BSL- 2 facilities without requiring expensive thermal cyclers used in conventional PCR assays.ImmunohistochemistryImmunohistochemistry (IHC) is another way to detect NiV infection which employs formalin-fixed tissue samples (Hooper et al. 1996). Since virus replication occurs in vascular endothelium, tissues can be used from various organs such as the brain, lung, spleen, kidney, and lymph nodes. Initially, IHC was performed using convalescent human serum (Daniels et al. 2001), but currently, rabbit serum against NiV is used (Kashiwazaki et al. 2004). For NiV detection, an antibody-based IHC diagnostic method has been developed by the National Institute of Animal Health in Japan (Tanimura et al. 2004a). The IHC-based detection method involved 4 mice-based mAbs (12 A5, 13 A5, 18 C4 11 F6) that were used to test NiV-infected pig tissue fixed with formalin. The study found that 11 F6 was able to detect NiV antigens across different tissues such as the renal and respiratory epithelium, smooth muscle cells, and at the same time, certain novel tissue sites such as Schwann cells of the spleen, laryngeal epithelial cells, and endothelial cells present in the heart valves were also found to be NiV positive. Apart from that, 12 A5 also showed NiV detection capabilities; however, the binding efficiency of 13 A5 and 18 C4 were reduced. In fatal cases, IHC is used to confirm NiV diagnosis via histopathology (Tanimura et al. 2004b).Treatment and prophylaxisNiV is on the priority pathogen list of WHO, as it possesses high pandemic potential and must be taken more seriously. Currently, there are no effective drugs or vaccines targeting NiV, so patient treatment procedures are confined to supportive treatment options and preventative measures only (Sharma et al. 2019; Chakraborty et al. 2019). Maintaining respiratory function, minimizing the likelihood of venous thrombosis, and retaining fluid and electrolyte homeostasis are the most important clinical strategies to combat NiV infection after detection (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ambat et al. 2019). Furthermore, broad-spectrum antibiotics are also administered to NiV-infected people (Ambat et al. 2019).Antiviral drugs in progressMultiple studies have been conducted on developing antivirals against NiV (Fig. 8) (Table 2). According to the Infectious Diseases Society of America, the antiviral drug Ribavirin could be employed to treat NiV encephalitis, even though ribavirin’s efficacy in combating NiV is unknown. It causes teratogenicity in animals, and there are several side effects associated with prolonged treatment. Moreover, the therapeutic efficacy of ribavirin, in managing the Malaysian outbreak, as well as the efficiency of acyclovir, used in Singapore, remains unclear (Paton et al. 1999). Due to a lack of effective vaccines and therapeutics against NiV, the National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) in India has recommended the use of Ribavirin (a guanosine analog) in confirmed NiV cases (Chong et al. 2001). This broad antiviral drug acts on the RNA replication pathway, and was effective against NiV and HeV in in vitro assays. However, when Ribavirin was tested in in vivo animal models, it was found to be ineffective (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006). Ribavirin was found to be effective against acute NiV encephalitis and, as a result, the fatality rate of the NiV-infected patients was reduced by 36% (Chong et al. 2001). The antimalarial drug chloroquine demonstrated its efficacy in cell culture experiments; however, it did not succeed in averting fatalities of NiV-infected hamsters when administered independently or in conjunction with ribavirin (Aditi and Shariff 2019; Ochani et al. 2019).Fig. 8Different treatment approaches for Nipah virus infection. Representation of the complexity of various possible methods to prevent the virus infection including immunotherapies, nano-therapies, and antiviral drugsTable 2Antiviral drug development against NiV. An overview of antiviral drugs investigated for Nipah virus (NiV) treatment, categorizing them based on whether they are repurposed or newly developed. It also highlights their mechanisms of action, efficacy in in vitro and in vivo studies, and their current stage of developmentStrategyDrug/therapeutic approachMechanism of actionEfficacyLimitationsRepurposed or new?Stage of developmentReferencesNucleoside analoguesRibavirinInhibits viral RNA replicationReduced fatality by 36% in NiV encephalitis casesTeratogenic; ineffective in in vivo models; side effectsRepurposed (used for other viral infections)Recommended for emergency useChong et al. (2001); Georges-Courbot et al. (2006)4′-Azidocytidine (R1479)/BalapiravirPolymerase inhibitionEffective in vitro against NiV and HeVRequires further in vivo validation; toxic side effectsRepurposed (developed for HCV)PreclinicalLo et al. (2017); Roberts et al. (2008); Nguyen et al. (2013)RNA polymerase inhibitorsRemdesivirInhibits viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp)100% survival in non-human primatesNeeds further clinical testing for NiVRepurposed (developed for Ebola)Preclinical for NiV, widely used for SARS-CoV- 2Lo et al. (2017); Sheahan et al. (2017)FavipiravirRdRp inhibitorHighly effective in Syrian hamster modelsClinical trials needed for NiVRepurposed (approved for influenza in Japan)Preclinical for NiVDawes et al. (2018); Lipin et al. (2021)Antimalarial drugChloroquineInterferes with viral entry and replicationEffective in vitro; ineffective in vivoFailed to prevent fatalities in hamstersRepurposed (antimalarial drug)PreclinicalAditi and Shariff (2019); Ochani et al. (2019)Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)m102.4Blocks NiV-G binding to ephrin-B2/B3 receptorsEffective in animal models; approved for emergency use in IndiaResistance reported in ferrets and AGMs; side effectsNewPhase I Clinical TrialsPrabakaran et al. (2009); Xu et al. (2013); Playford et al. (2020)h5B3.1Inhibits NiV-F conformational changesEffective in ferretsLimited in vivo studiesNewPreclinicalDang et al. (2019); Mire et al. (2020)ImmunomodulatorsPoly (I)-poly (C12U)Interferon inducerPrevented NiV-induced deaths in hamstersMore studies needed-PreclinicalGeorges-Courbot et al. (2006)Lectin-based antiviralsGriffithsin (GRFT); 3 mGBinds viral glycosylation signaturesBroad-spectrum efficacy (HIV, HCV, SARS-CoV, etc.)Limited survival rates in hamsters (35% for Q-GRFT; 15% for 3 mG)Repurposed (being evaluated for HIV- 1)PreclinicalLusvarghi and Bewley (2016); Lo et al. (2020)Defective interfering particles (DIPs)DIPsReduces viral titers and cytopathic effectsDecreased viral load by 100-fold in vitroRequires further validation in vivo-PreclinicalWelch et al. (2020); Vignuzzi and López (2019)Vaccine candidatesHeV-sG (subunit vaccine)Induces cross-immune response against NiVEffective in multiple animal models; effective against both NiV-M and NiV-BIneffective in pigsNewPhase I clinical trialsPallister et al. (2013); Middleton et al. (2014)mRNA- 1215 (Moderna)Encodes pre-fusion NiV-F proteinEfficacy yet to be determinedEfficacy undeterminedNewPhase I clinical trials NCT05398796PHV02 (rVSV-based)Expresses NiV-G and Ebola glycoproteinVaccination within 7 days of exposure may protect against severe illness and deathStill in developmentNewPreclinicalNCT06221813ChAdOx1 NiVBAdenoviral vector-based vaccineEfficacious against disease in AGMsPassive immunity tested only in AGMsNewPhase I clinical trialsISRCTN87634044rMV-NiVRecombinant measles virus expressing NiV-G proteinInduced strong immune response in hamstersMore studies requiredNewPreclinicalPedrera et al. (2020)Rabies-based vaccineLive-attenuated vaccineEvaluated in wildlifeEfficacy under investigationNewPreclinicalKeshwara et al. (2019)Equivac® (Zoetis)Veterinary vaccine for NiV preventionApproved for horses; single-dose protectionNo human application yetRepurposedApproved for veterinary useMire et al. (2016); Geisbert et al. (2021)Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)Elicits immune response without live virusStrong immunogenicityRequires further validationNewPreclinicalWalpita et al. (2017)Multi-Epitope VaccineDesigned using immunoinformaticsNon-toxic and non-allergenicClinical trials neededNewPreclinicalSoltan et al. (2021)Remdesivir is another antiviral drug, with wide spectrum potency, that has significantly reduced fatality in Ebola-infected non-human primates and at the same time showed positive results in in vitro activity against NiV (Lo et al. 2017; Sheahan et al. 2017). Remdesivir is also effective in in vivo animal models and results in 100% survival. Lo et al. carried out a study to test the therapeutic effect of remdesivir against the NiV-B strain in AGMs. The data from that study reported that all the monkeys administrated with lethal doses of the virus survived, and mild respiratory symptoms were observed in a few monkeys (Lo et al. 2019). Amid the COVID- 19 pandemic, remdesivir has been employed in an antiviral treatment regime for SARS-CoV- 2 patients, and clinical improvement in infected individuals has been documented, but its efficacy needs to be tested further (Grein et al. 2020; Okoli et al. 2021). A cytidine analog called 4′-azidocytidine or R1479, along with its prodrug balapiravir, is the most recent nucleoside analogs to be tested against NiV (Lo et al. 2017). Balapiravir, a polymerase inhibitor drug, is being looked at as a possible antiviral drug against NiV. In vitro efficacy studies have highlighted the effectiveness of this antiviral agent against both NiV and HeV; however, in vivo, animal studies are further required to validate this. Recently, this drug has also been tested for Dengue virus and hepatitis C virus (HCV), and its narrow therapeutic index and hazardous side effects have been documented (Roberts et al. 2008; Nguyen et al. 2013).The purine analog T- 705, which goes by the name favipiravir, was subjected to phase II and phase III clinical trials in Europe and the USA, and has received approval for treating influenza in Japan. Favipiravir is an inhibitor of viral RdRp and was found to be effective against henipaviruses in Syrian hamster models (Dawes et al. 2018; Sen et al. 2019). According to a recent study, favipiravir appears to have the highest antiviral effectiveness against NiV infection (Lipin et al. 2021). A neutralizing human mAb, called m102.4, was proven to be useful in mice models when administered in combination with favipiravir (Geisbert et al. 2014). Furthermore, among the interferon inducers, poly (I)-poly (C12U) showed effective prevention of NiV-induced deaths in hamster models (Georges-Courbot et al. 2006).Inhibition of viral entry into host cells is an important aspect of antibody-mediated neutralization, both for prophylactic and for therapeutic antiviral therapy. Glycosylation signatures present on the viral surface have also been explored as new targets for antiviral development. Lectins or carbohydrate-binding proteins have been investigated as potent antivirals that specifically recognize glycosylation signatures present solely on the viral surface (O’Keefe et al. 2003; Swanson et al. 2010; Huskens et al. 2010). A mannose oligosaccharide-binding lectin derived from red algae, known as griffithsin (GRFT) protein, has shown broad-spectrum effectiveness against several clinically important enveloped viruses such as HIV, HCV, Herpes simplex virus, SARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV- 2 in both in vitro and in vivo conditions while causing less host damage (Lusvarghi and Bewley 2016). At the same time, the synthetic trimeric tandemer of GRFT called 3 mG is found to be capable of preventing syncytia formation, induced by the G protein of NiV, during infection. Further in vivo studies conducted on NiV-infected Syrian golden hamsters revealed the considerable resistance imparted by oxidation-resistant GRFT (Q-GRFT) and 3 mG against NiV, with 35% and 15% survival rates, respectively (Lo et al. 2020).Similarly, researchers have explored the use of defective interfering particles (DIPs), as a potential regulator of the dynamics of the viral population that effectively prevents NiV replication. It has been reported that DIPs can effectively decrease viral titers by a factor of 100 and reduce cytopathic effects in Vero cells in in vitro experiments (Welch et al. 2020). DIP genomes are also involved in viral pathogenesis, through various processes, such as viral interference, persistence, and immunological activation (Vignuzzi and López 2019). DIPs can modulate virulence, which has led to an interest in their potential as therapeutic agents. In vivo studies have shown that DIP accumulation reduces disease severity, while the inclusion of DIPs in vaccines increases immunogenicity (Easton et al. 2011).ImmunotherapyAntibodies can be an effective therapy for NiV infection (Fig. 8). In India, emergency use of mAbs against the F and G proteins of NiV has been permitted (Prabakaran et al. 2009). One of these mAb is m102.4, an affinity matured variety of m102. The development of m102.4 involved phage display panning of a large nonimmune human mAb library against sGHeV (HeV attachment-envelope glycoprotein G), leading to the selection of m102 for its strong neutralization of both HeV and NiV. Affinity maturation using light-chain shuffling and random mutagenesis enhanced m102 binding, resulting in m102.4, which was converted to IgG1 and tested against live viruses. It exhibited exceptionally potent neutralization, with IC50 below 0.6 μg/mL and 0.04 μg/mL for HeV and NiV, respectively, binding sGNiV more strongly, despite being selected against sGHeV (Zhu et al. 2008). In 2016, 40 human participants completed a phase I clinical trial in Australia that assessed the immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the mAb m102.4 against NiV-G protein. This antibody blocked the attachment of NiV-G to ephrin-B2/B3 receptors located on the host cell surface (Xu et al. 2013). As of now, there were 86 reported side effects related to this course of therapy, with similar frequencies across treated and placebo cohorts; however, no fatalities have been reported in any group so far (Playford et al. 2020). Resistance to m102.4 has also been reported in studies conducted in ferrets and AGMs as post-exposure prevention, following NiV challenge. However, it has been shown in animal studies that m102.4 was effective within 5 days of infection with NiV-M and 3 days of infection with HeV, even after the development of viral viremia and clinical manifestations of the disease (Bossart et al. 2009; Geisbert et al. 2014). Another human mAb called h5B3.1, the humanized version of mAb 5B3, that was developed by immunizing BALB/c mice with NiV glycoproteins, followed by hybridoma generation, through splenic lymphocyte fusion with SP2/0 cells. Hybridomas producing NiV F-specific antibodies were identified via ELISA and immunoprecipitation, then purified using protein G-Sepharose affinity chromatography. mAb 5B3 completely neutralized NiV at 1.5 μg/mL and HeV at 12.5 μg/mL (Chan et al. 2012). It inhibits the conformational changes, required by the F protein of NiV, to initiate membrane fusion, and this mAb has been established to effectively combat NiV and HeV infections in ferrets (Dang et al. 2019; Mire et al. 2020). Despite this, since h5B3.1 is only partially characterized in in vivo experiments, more studies are needed before it can be given to patients, alone or in combination with m102.4.Vaccine in progressBased on emerging knowledge, various vaccines against NiV are under investigation. Different vaccine candidates have been or are being explored for the development of vaccines against NiV. Among these different vaccine candidates, few of them have already been proven effective in in vivo animal experiments. CEPI has been sponsoring the clinical development of more than 30 vaccine candidates against priority pathogens and NiV is one among them. The University of Oxford has started a human clinical trial for testing the NiV vaccine and this trial is supported by CEPI. Several viral vector-based vaccines have been tested such as recombinant proteins from viruses, viral mRNA, and virus-like particles (Broder et al. 2016; Amaya and Broder 2020). Until now, the best candidate has been a subunit-vaccine constructed using the soluble G-glycoprotein of the Hendra virus (HeV-sG; NCT04199169). A human codon-optimized HeVsG construct was cloned into pcDNA-CMV with hygro, transfected into 293 F cells, and developed into a HeVsG-secreting stable cell line. Recombinant HeVsG was produced in serum-free cultures, purified via affinity and gel filtration chromatography, and formulated with Alhydrogel™ and CpG ODN 2007 (Pallister et al. 2011). HeV-sG evokes a cross-protective immune defense against NiV and is under phase I clinical trials. HeV-sG is effective against NiV strains from Malaysia, Bangladesh, and HeV in non-human primates, ferrets, cats, and horses; however, it demonstrates no effectiveness in porcine subjects (Pallister et al. 2013; Middleton et al. 2014). Current research has revealed that HeV-sG can also protect AGMs against the deadly NiV illness 7 days after vaccination (Geisbert et al. 2021).The mRNA vaccine, mRNA- 1215 (NCT05398796), encodes the secreted stable pre-fusion F protein of the NiV-M strain which is covalently coupled with its G monomer. This mRNA vaccine was collaboratively designed by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), Moderna, and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID). It was synthesized using T7 RNA polymerase, with N1-methyl-pseudouridine for enhanced stability. It was optimized with Moderna’s codon algorithms. After capping and purification, the mRNA was encapsulated in LNPs via ethanol-drop nanoprecipitation and the final vaccine underwent analytical characterization (Loomis et al. 2021; Rodrigue et al. 2024). In 2022, Moderna announced the phase I clinical trials of this vaccine, and the efficacy of this vaccine is still under investigation. The development of a rVSV-NiV chimeric vaccine candidate, called PHV02 (NCT06221813), was also sponsored by CEPI and is currently under pre-clinical trials. PHV02 shares similarities with the Ebola vaccine (Ervebo), as it expresses the envelope glycoprotein of Ebola along with the G gene of NiV. A rVSV-based live-attenuated vaccine system (NCT05178901), encoding F and G protein of NiV, is also under phase I clinical trials. The preclinical studies of this vaccine, in animal models, showed the presence of neutralizing antibodies against the NiV-B strain, within three weeks of immunization, and later protection studies using the NiV-B challenge showed no indications of illness (Mire et al. 2019). Another vaccine candidate, ChAdOx1 NiVB (ISRCTN87634044), was developed by cloning the codon optimized NiV-B G glycoprotein gene into a modified CMV promoter plasmid with TetO sites, and inserting it into a ChAdOx1 genomic clone at the E1 locus. The recombinant ChAdOx1 virus was retrieved, cultured in T-REx- 293 cells, purified via CsCl ultracentrifugation, and titered for vaccination. Phase I clinical trials, conducted by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Oxford University, show that this vaccine, which is a viral vector infused with NiV glycoprotein, confers passive immunity in AGMs.In AGMs, a recombinant measles virus (rMV) expressing NiV G protein, also exhibited similar findings (Pedrera et al. 2020). Recombinant rMV-based vaccines, encoding NiV G, F, and N proteins, were also evaluated in vivo in Syrian hamster animal models. The preliminary data were encouraging, as even the first vaccine dosage elicited a strong humoral immune response (DeBuysscher et al. 2014). To elicit long-lasting humoral immune responses, a live-attenuated rabies vaccine against NiV is being evaluated in wildlife (Keshwara et al. 2019). To date, Equifax®, developed by Zoetis Inc., is the only vaccine legally registered and endorsed by the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), to treat horses, as a preventative measure. Studies in animals, challenged with NiV, have confirmed that a single administration of this vaccine was found to effectively confer protection. This data provides a rationale for its application in the event of unexpected NiV outbreaks (Mire et al. 2016; Geisbert et al. 2021).Recently, with the help of immunoinformatics-based approaches, a multi-epitope vaccine was investigated that was based on high-ranking B and T cell epitopes present on selected NiV proteins. The vaccine’s physicochemical properties, antigenicity, and solubility as well as allergenicity and toxicity were assessed and were found to be both non-toxic and non-allergenic, although randomized studies are warranted to establish the clinical utility of this vaccine (Soltan et al. 2021). A virus-like particle vaccine (VLP), created from animal cell culture, has also been developed for both native F and G glycoproteins. VLPs create significant immunogenicity and, at the same time, it does not cause any health-related hazards linked with the employment of a virion that contains viral DNA (Walpita et al. 2017). Like mRNA vaccines, pre-fusion F and pre-fusion G proteins elicit strong neutralizing antibody responses (Loomis et al. 2021). Another study found that the pre-fusion F protein has more neutralizing potential than post-fusion F, demonstrating the necessity to maintain the pre-fusion conformation in order to enhance immunogenicity. To encompass a broader spectrum of diversity, in response to various antigenic sites, it is necessary to design a singular vaccine construct having the stabilized antigenic conformations of the prefusion NiV G and F proteins (Loomis et al. 2020). Data have validated that NiV G and F can be potentially effective immunogens for vaccine development; however, to verify the practical usefulness of this proposed vaccine design, more studies are required. The low number of NiV cases globally creates a hindrance in the development of NiV vaccines, as this results in a low sample size, which becomes inadequate for conducting traditional phase III clinical trials. Additionally, even though the development of NiV vaccines and treatment strategies are urgently needed, it was unlikely to be emphasized during the COVID- 19 pandemic. As a result, a thorough investigation into the progress of NiV vaccines or prospective antiviral therapies is highly suggested.PerspectiveWe have witnessed multiple sporadic NiV outbreaks in the last couple of decades. However, comprehensive research into NiV life cycle, transmission, and pathogenesis is still at an early stage. One of the limiting factors in NiV research is that it is a BSL- 4 pathogen, and such facilities are available in limited clinical setups globally, making it a challenging virus to study. Nonetheless, substantial advancements have been made in the fundamental understanding of the virus. The availability of several animal models helps in the extensive research into the nature of NiV, and at the same time makes it easier to test different therapies and design novel vaccine candidates. The high CFR associated with NiV infections, and its limited human-to-human transmission, may reduce the likelihood of NiV causing a pandemic, as it is known that viruses with high fatality rates typically do not spread in wider regions. Due to an error-prone replication machinery of NiV, the possibility of the emergence of a novel strain, with lower mortality and higher infectivity, cannot be ruled out. Hence, it is important to be vigilant, as NiV could evolve into a virulent strain, capable of transmitting itself efficiently across individuals, leading to a global health crisis. To effectively minimize the impact of future outbreaks, we believe that research on NiV should be an important priority of funding agencies, as well as national and international science programs given its high lethality and pandemic potential.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: VARIOLA VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Monkeypox: a global health emergency

1.IntroductionThe first known human case of the zoonotic disease called monkeypox (mpox) was reported in 1970, although the virus that causes it was first identified in 1958, as a part of the Orthopoxvirus genus, in the Poxviridae family (Breman et al., 1980). A series of infections with poxviruses taking place from 1958 until 1968 started being observed in Denmark. This was observed in cynomolgus monkeys that had recently been brought from Singapore. The presence of a virus was confirmed after a thorough analysis of the samples taken from one of the monkeys that were showing a generalized vesiculopustular illness (Damon, 2011).Further epidemiological investigations took place within that same period of time in the Democratic Republic of Congo, when an mpox-like virus was isolated for the first time in 1970 from a 9-month-old patient whose symptoms were suspected to be part of the smallpox clinical picture (Ladnyj et al., 1972). This case represented the beginning of acknowledging mpox as an ongoing endemic infection by the World Health Organization (WHO) within the African continent. This led to the observation of this health phenomenon in the central regions of the Democratic Republic of Congo, while also initiating certain animal studies (Parker and Buller, 2013), in the following decade, during the 1970s.In this narrative review, we are summarizing the main clinical manifestations of the mpox disease, while also presenting the structure of the virus and including a classification of the main strains. Furthermore, we include a useful analysis on how this public health emergency is being handled globally, in terms of prevention, which is comprised the two vaccines recently approved by the US Food and Drugs Administration (FDA), ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS, and also in regard to the recommended treatment with antivirals, its main representant being tecovirimat. The latter is also known as ST-246 or TPOXX and it constitutes the first choice in treating mpox virus infections, due to the lack of major side effects, opposed to the other antivirals approved by the US FDA, called brincidofovir and cidofovir.2.Structure of the orthopoxvirus genus, particularly monkeypox virusGlobal research efforts were deployed once the cases of patients infected with an unknown member of the Poxviridae family were slowly increasing during the 1970s, a decade which was also marked by the cessation of smallpox vaccine production. Therefore, a vaccine which was once used to ensure cross-immunity to the mpox virus as well (Kennedy et al., 2009; Gilchuk et al., 2016; Kaler et al., 2022), was now stopped from being used. This allowed a more extensive group of patients to be at risk (Rimoin et al., 2010). However, the 2003 outbreak in the Western Hemisphere actually brought international awareness to the mpox virus. This was the first time a large number of cases outside Africa were confirmed, after native prairie dogs (Cynomys spp.) that had been in contact with African rodents were brought into the United States from Ghana (Reed et al., 2004).The general structure of poxviruses (Luna et al., 2022) was already known to be of brick-shaped particles, formed by large, linear, double-stranded DNA viruses that utilize virion proteins conserved in all species, which allow them to replicate in the cytoplasm (Moss, 2013; Figure 1). However, it was outlined that due to its large size, the mpox virus barely crosses the host’s natural barriers used for protection against infections. Consequently, it needs a set of rearranged viral proteins that would enhance its resistance against the host’s foreseeable immune responses (Kaler et al., 2022).Figure 1Structure of mpox. This figure was created with GoodNotes and adapted from Lu et al. (2022).The intracellular proteins that help modulate the actions of the mpox virus are first represented by the virotransducer ones, which interact with the apoptotic pathways. Secondly, the virostealth proteins are involved in the process of downregulation of immune recognition molecules, such as major histocompatibility complex class I and CD4. Thus, they lower the chance of the virus being identified by the immune system. The extracellular viral modulators, also known as viromimic proteins, consist of viroreceptors, reducing the host’s cytokines and chemokines impact and virokines, which are in a quest to imitate the host’s cytokines and chemokines (Okyay et al., 2022). Under the conditions of not having a fully developed immune system, young patients are prevalent among cases with poxvirus infection, due to the lack of maternal antibodies (Hurisa et al., 2019), followed by immunodeficient patients that are not capable of ensuring a competent immune response.Although the mpox virus shares its linear double-stranded DNA genome with variola and vaccinia viruses (di Giulio and Eckburg, 2004), the former does not inherit all of the properties that the smallpox virus holds, such as the lack of open reading frames (ORFs) in the inverted terminal repeat (ITR) region, which contains the origins of replication (Hurisa et al., 2019). However, this ORF comparison further led to the mpox virus’ ability to interact with the complement, in both its classical and alternate pathways. In comparison, one of the other members of the same genus, the variola virus, which specifically targets human hosts, also manages to efficiently inhibit the human complement system through its proteins, which are better designed to defeat the innate immune response (Rosengard et al., 2002).Another particularity that differentiates the mpox virus structure from the rest of the orthopoxviruses is given by the rather incomplete inhibition of E3L and K3L orthologs, derived from genes of the vaccinia virus. These mutations are considered to be the source of attenuation of mpox virus in a wide range of hosts, thus improving its transmission rates (Haller et al., 2014).3.Pathogenesis of the monkeypox virusSo far, two distinct clades of mpox virus have been declared, represented by the African regions with their highest prevalence (Samson Enitan, 2022). The Central African category, also called the “Congo Basin mpox virus clade” or clade I, could be considered more virulent than the West African (clades IIa and IIb) one due to its increased effectiveness in blocking the complement-initiated viral neutralization. Regarding the molecular aspect, the latter strain proved to have an additional 453-nucleotide residue, during a LightCycler quantitative PCR analysis (Saijo et al., 2008), which was used for the diagnosis of this disease, by targeting the A-type inclusion body gene of the mpox virus.Further epidemiological studies revealed a parallel presence of antibodies among unvaccinated patients in both the Western and Central regions, although the Congo area held more than 90% of these cases, including the only fatal ones. The Central African mpox presents a greater rate of morbidity and human-to-human transmission, also confirmed by the 2003 US outbreak, which had no case-fatalities, since the initial strain was West African (Chen et al., 2005).The mechanisms behind this high virulence reside in a suppression of the inflammatory cytokine production in human cells. This phenomenon is caused by preventing T-cell activation (Zandi et al., 2023a) and by hindering apoptosis processes in the infected host (Wilson et al., 2014). Moreover, the West African strain presents a lack of complement enzyme‘s inhibition. Thus, it manages to become an important immune-modulating factor that contributes to the enhanced viral load of the Central African strains.This peculiarity of the virus being able to suppress the host’s T-cell response (Hammarlund et al., 2008), which further outlines its antibody-dependent neutralization, also noticed in vaccinia’s case (Isaacs et al., 1992), could explain why the Congo clade was associated, in some cases, with longer periods in which the virus was detected in the patients’ blood samples (Likos et al., 2005).4.Transmission of the monkeypox virusAlthough it was first discovered in monkeys, mpox virus does not originate in these mammals (Kaler et al., 2022) and has a wider range of possible hosts, due to its better transmissibility made possible through the aforementioned attainment of E3L and K3L orthologs, after recombining with the rest of the Poxviridae family members.Although the main host reservoir of mpox is still unknown, small animals, such as rope squirrels (Funisciurus sp.), sun squirrels (Heliosciurus sp.), and Gambian giant rats (Cricetomys sp.; Haller et al., 2014), could act as the host reservoirs of the mpox virus. In contrast to this broad availability, variola virus proved to be human-specific since its beginnings, while mpox only started being considered a health threat for humans after the discontinuance of mass vaccination against the once devastating smallpox disease (Essbauer et al., 2010).Being an emergent zoonotic disease, the usual source of infection for humans with mpox virus is direct exposure to infected animals (Nolen et al., 2015; Quiner et al., 2017).Regarding human-to-human transmission, which is currently considered to be extensive (Nolen et al., 2016), individuals get infected through getting in touch with mpox virus patients’ mucocutaneous lesions or their respiratory droplets, given the presence of the virus in their oropharyngeal secretions. Even though the efficiency of this interhuman transmission is lower than the one in the case of variola virus, it did appear in almost 11.7% of household contacts of several patients that were non-vaccinated with the smallpox vaccine, which was known to be protective against mpox (Saijo et al., 2009).Therefore, both salivary and airborne ways of transmission are significant and should present awareness among healthcare workers (Yang et al., 2023). Moreover, mpox testing can rely on saliva and air samples as materials for diagnosis (Allan-Blitz et al., 2023; Figure 2).Figure 2Transmission of mpox. This figure was created with GoodNotes and adapted from Wang et al. (2021).5.The clinical picture of the disease produced by a monkeypox virus infectionDuring a study of the two strains of mpox virus in non-human primates, the viral load levels in the monkeys infected with the Congo Basin one (clade I) proved to be almost 10 times higher than the ones with the Western African (clades IIa and IIb) mpox variation. Moreover, the more virulent clade also proved to spread into the respiratory, genito-urinary and digestive systems more harshly than the other one, which could be considered milder in terms of manifestation (Damon, 2011).What should be noted is that the clinical picture of the mpox virus consists of symptoms which are characteristic of smallpox (Sale et al., 2006), such as the initial fever of the later onset, headache, and fatigue. However, a major difference resides in the presence of lymphadenopathy among mpox virus patients, which could possibly indicate a more effective immune response given by the host in this case (Wilson et al., 2014).Regarding the incubation period, two intervals were outlined during the 1980s mpox virus observations. One of them, which was approximately 10–14 days, the asymptomatic time frame, was measured from the exposure moment until the fever onset. The other one was estimated to last until the rash onset, and it was considered to take about 12–16 days. However, the period that lasts from the fever episodes until the rash burst also proved to be longer in the case of non-vaccinated patients (Damon, 2011).The rash burst marks the moment in which the fever level lowers. The lesions begin by appearing slightly confluent, but can evolve into specific maculopapular and vesiculopustular phases, which could be a differentiating criterion from other diseases that present the same skin manifestation (Jezek et al., 1986). Varicella, an illness caused by the varicella zoster virus, also causes a rash as a symptom. However, in comparison with mpox and smallpox, it progresses faster, and the manifested fever is milder (Wilson et al., 2014).Separating the mpox virus diagnosis from the variola virus one can only be performed through laboratory extended analysis (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008). Other lesions may appear in the oropharynx in most unvaccinated patients, such as oral ulcers, tonsillitis, or cough (Joseph and Anil, 2022). Ocular symptoms, such as conjunctivitis and blepharitis, may occur as well (Damon, 2011).Perhaps, the sign with the highest incidence among mpox virus patients is represented by lymphadenopathies that appear in the cervical and submaxillary areas (Nalca et al., 2005). They usually occur early on in the evolution of the disease, about 1 or 2 days after the fever episode ends. The size of the inflamed lymph nodes ranges between 1 and 4 cm in diameter, with a firm consistency and a possible appearance of pain during their examination.One difficulty arises in the process of diagnosing patients with mpox who already have the human immunodeficiency virus infection and syphilis, due to the fact that they can present with atypical clinical aspects. A thorough screening for mpox should be initiated among patients with skin affections, therefore decreasing the risk of spreading mpox in hospitals (Jang et al., 2023).Overall, mpox cases last approximately 2–4 weeks (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008), from the data gathered so far, even despite possible complications. Although there have been mpox cases with complications due to possible secondary infections from bacteria, such as pulmonary and digestive ones, with symptoms such as diarrhea or vomiting, most of the patients heal within 2–4 weeks. Moreover, the only possible consequences that appeared post-illness in some survivors were major scarring of the skin and blindness (Parker et al., 2012; Brown and Leggat, 2016; Kaler et al., 2022).To sum up the classification mentioned before, mpox is considered to have the following major clades: clade I, or the Congo strain; clade IIa, which exists in West Africa and presents low mortality; and clade IIb, which is currently being spread worldwide through human-to-human transmission (Americo et al., 2023).In a long-term follow-up study that included clade IIb mpox patients, the residual morbidity after they were healed was studied. During their mpox infections, they presented with nonspecific prodromal symptoms and localized lesions of the skin and mucosae, surrounding the anal and genital regions. Two-thirds of them still had anorectal pain and genital issues at their follow-up, 3–20 weeks after healing, besides persistent fatigability, which was also seen in other infectious diseases such as COVID-19 (White et al., 2001). The conclusions of the study were that most of the patients still had ongoing symptoms weeks after their initial disease disappeared. Therefore, physicians should be conscious of the pain and possible issues that still affect the mental health of their patients, after an apparently resolved disease, such as the infection with the clade IIb mpox strain (Berens-Riha et al., 2023).6.The current global situation regarding outbreaks of monkeypox virus infectionsFor the past 2 years, the world has faced the impactful COVID-19 pandemic, with tremendous impact upon so many aspects of our lives, such as health, economy, and tourism (Doherty, 2021; Fortner and Schumacher, 2021; Haq et al., 2021; Rabbi et al., 2021; Walia et al., 2021). As the COVID-19 pandemic situation globally ameliorates, the fear of a new epidemic phenomenon happening becomes more and more prevalent, as mpox virus cases arise in areas beyond the endemic ones in Africa, spreading in European countries and in the Western Hemisphere (Kaler et al., 2022).Given this situation, considered to be a multi-country issue of high risk, the Director-General of WHO declared the ongoing mpox outbreak as a public health event of international concern (WHO, 2022a).Since the beginning of the year 2022 and as of 22 August 2022, 41,664 mpox cases and 12 fatalities were confirmed in about 96 countries, in all the six WHO regions, in an epidemiological update from WHO regarding the multi-country ongoing outbreak of this disease (WHO, 2022b). The report revealed that 23 countries presented an increasing number of cases compared to the previously declared situation in the last WHO report, with the highest rise in the United States of America. The Democratic Republic of Congo remains the country most affected by the mpox virus, with continuous reports over the last five decades regarding confirmed cases (Bunge et al., 2022). After the disease was no longer seen as endemic, but a worldwide outbreak, it was declared as an emergency independent of any travel causal factors, but with a major negative contribution brought by sexual transmission (Karagoz et al., 2023).Further epidemiological investigations confirmed the fact that most of the affected patients, in a proportion of 95.8% of the cases reported with sexual orientation to the WHO, are represented by men aged 20–50, who identify themselves as men having sex with men (MSM), without any recent journeys to mpox endemic countries from Africa (Samson Enitan, 2022). However, there were multiple cases among heterosexual patients as well, this being a reason which opposes the stigmatization of the MSM community. What is more, a bigger threat is represented by countries where hygiene is not up to the accepted standards, this matter should be addressed first, since the mpox DNA is also found in urine and faeces (Singla and Shen, 2022).Due to the increasing number of infected cases in their country, Portuguese scientists managed to release the first draft of the genome sequence of the mpox virus strain that had been recently identified in the non-African outbreak. After gathering genetic data, it was proved that the 2022 mpox virus is part of the West African mpox virus clade (Simpson et al., 2020).The clinical management suggested by the WHO represents an advisory for Member States to pursue their national immunization technical advisory groups and develop recommendations regarding immunization for mpox, for groups of high risk in their countries (WHO, 2022b).Immunocompromised people, pregnant women, and young people present a more prevalent risk of exposure. The recently approved vaccines for prevention of mpox virus are JYNNEOS and ACAM2000, as mentioned by the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; CDC, 2022a). The latter vaccine represents an alternative to the former one, given the fact that it only has a single dose. However, it also comes with more impactful, apparent potential side effects.Regarding potential therapeutics, on May 2019, 2022, United States, Canada, and Europe confirmed that tecovirimat (Tpoxx) can be used for means of treatment of both patients with smallpox and patients with mpox (Otu et al., 2022).Another issue of important matter in facing the mpox phenomenon resides in misinformation of people, causing a so-called “misinfodemic” (Brainard and Hunter, 2020), with many false claims, such as those linking mpox to COVID-19 vaccination, especially the AstraZeneca vaccine and also the fact that many social media platforms spread the idea that the images with the clinical manifestations such as skin rashes of the mpox are nothing more than re-edited old photos from previous African outbreaks. These altogether manage to induce a lack of trust from readers that want to get informed on the current mpox situation, through making the untrustworthy sources hard to be differentiated from the reliable ones (Ennab et al., 2022).Although measures are being globally taken, most challenges occur in the areas which are perhaps most in need, with the highest numbers of cases. People from African endemic regions have to deal with issues such as the expenses that arise from the use of healthcare facilities and limit their intentions of accessing them, further leading to underreporting of cases, with an impact on worldwide surveillance. Furthermore, there is also a limited availability of vaccine provisions and therapeutics due to the low possibility of African countries producing their own supplies (Samson Enitan, 2022).7.Measures of prevention against potential pandemic outbreaksPublic health awareness from all over the world could be improved and coordinated efforts on an international level should be made in order to take proactive measures regarding the prevention of even more cases of mpox than the current situation, thus not allowing it to become the next pandemic (WHO, 2022c).Information sharing among countries worldwide, disease control via personal and collective hygiene, and monitoring new cases are important rules when it comes to global prevention. It is especially important to start all these measures in the early stages of an infection, and immediate action is necessary for controlling further outbreaks. Another effective measure is vaccination. The US FDA approved two vaccines that may provide protection against mpox disease, ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS (Poland et al., 2022). These vaccines are approved for certain individuals that are at high risk for contacting this virus, as well as for the relatives and direct contacts of those infected with mpox virus (Luo and Han, 2022).It is of high importance that groups of individuals at risk, such as men having sex with men (Martínez et al., 2022), are informed and have access to knowledge campaigns. Raising awareness among these groups of people is especially crucial, but the remaining population should not be neglected, as any individual should benefit from medical prevention education. Groups at risk should be a priority (Harapan et al., 2020) and they should be the first category taken into consideration when it comes to campaigns, sharing information and raising awareness efforts.The result of vaccination is an improved clinical response to the infection, milder symptoms and faster recovery (Zandi et al., 2023b). The best and most effective measure of pre-exposure to the virus prophylaxis is vaccination (Rizk et al., 2022). Alongside vaccination, another useful measure of global prevention is isolation of the individuals with this infection, restricting their contact with other humans (CDC, 2022b). Because the incubation time of the virus is well known, close contacts of those infected should be traced and reported to the health department as fast as possible, accompanied by meticulous monitoring (Meaney-Delman et al., 2022).8.Vaccines approved for smallpox, monkeypox, and other orthopoxvirusesSince smallpox was eradicated, the most common Orthopoxvirus infection in humans known today is the infection with the mpox virus (Sklenovská and van Ranst, 2018). As mentioned before, due to its antigenic similarities to the smallpox virus, the vaccines developed for the smallpox disease have cross-protection against the mpox virus and against other Orthopoxviruses (Poland et al., 2022). Because the smallpox vaccine brought about the eradication of this pathology, more than 70% of the global population today has never received the smallpox vaccine. Therefore, the global population is very susceptible to an Orthopoxvirus infection (Kmiec and Kirchhoff, 2022).Currently, there is a low immunity (Shafaati and Zandi, 2022, 2023) in the population that was vaccinated prior to the eradication of the smallpox virus, in 1980 (Reynolds and Damon, 2012). Recent data suggests that this vaccination taken place over 25 years ago may still offer at least some protection to these individuals against an infection with an Orthopoxvirus (Wilson et al., 2014).At the moment, there are only three available vaccines against mpox: ACAM2000, JYNNEOS, and LC-16, the first one being a second-generation vaccine and the latter two being third-generation vaccines.LC-16 contains the Lister strain of Vaccinia and is partially replicating as it is an attenuated strain. It can be administered in a single dose. It is a vaccine that lacks severe adverse reactions, and the local and systemic adverse events are mild and easily manageable (Kenner et al., 2006; Saito et al., 2009; Nishiyama et al., 2015). The vaccine used in the past for the eradication of smallpox (Dryvax—ACAM2000), a live vaccine incorporated with unattenuated vaccinia virus strains, is highly dangerous, as it can generate alarming side effects, leading to long-term sequelae (Zielinski et al., 2010). This vaccine is considered to be the gold standard for its efficacy, because it is highly immunogenic. However, it preserves enough residual virulence in order to produce threatening aftereffects and this residue is transmissible, as well. Recent studies have reported that there is a persistence of both cellular and humoral immunity after a single dose of Dryvax. However, as mentioned before, it is highly unsafe (Zielinski et al., 2010; Moss, 2013). This vaccine is not in use for the mpox infection, since it is not approved by the US FDA. Since there is a large number of high-risk consequences, there is a need for a safer vaccine that can match the effectiveness of the original vaccine (Zielinski et al., 2010). Currently, there are several approved vaccines for the smallpox virus (Wilson et al., 2014), as presented in Table 1.Table 1FDA approved vaccines for the smallpox virus.VaccineType of vaccineProsCons and side effectsStage of development or useReferencesACAM2000Live vaccinia virus/replication competent vaccinia virus (a derivative of the original Dryvax)-Single dose-long-term storage.Lesion at vaccination site -replication in mammalian cells is transmissible-cardiac complications post-vaccination were reported -contraindicated in immunosuppressed individuals, atopic patients, patients with cardiac diseases and pregnant women-high risk of inadvertent inoculation and autoinoculation, which may lead to uncontrolled viral replication-similar reactogenicity and residual virulence profile as Dryvax.Licensed in the US.Zielinski et al. (2010); Rizk et al. (2022)Modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA)/Imvamune/Imvanex/JYNNEOSAttenuated vaccinia virus/replication-deficient modified vaccinia Ankara-Does not achieve complete replication in mammalian cells—protection was reported in primate models injected with lethal doses of mpox virus—no lesion at injection site-can be administered to immune suppressed individuals-can be used as a pre-vaccine -stimulates antibody production in atopic patients as well as in immunosuppressed individuals.-Two doses, 4 weeks apartAuthorized by European Commission. Licensed by US FDA in 2019. Indicated for prevention of an orthopoxvirus infection, such as mpox.Earl et al. (2004); Moore et al. (2022)LC16m8Attenuated vaccinia virus-Single dose-less adverse reactions-prevents viral replication-protection was reported in non-human primates against severe mpox disease.-Replication of the attenuated virus in mammalian cells.Licensed in Japan. More than 50,000 schoolchildren vaccinated.
Kennedy et al. (2009)
Aventis pasteur smallpox vaccine (APSV)Replication-competent live vaccinia virus-Contraindicated in immunosuppressed individuals.
Islam et al. (2022)
The only vaccine approved by the US FDA, JYNNEOS, is also used for the prevention of smallpox, since it is based on a harmless vaccinia virus, with a decreased viral load (FDA, 2022). It is a replication-deficient live virus vaccine that contains a weakened Orthopoxvirus virus, the Modified Vaccinia Ankara-Bavarian Nordic virus (Sah et al., 2023). This vaccine was originally created as a weapon against bioterrorist attacks by smallpox virus. This vaccine is safer than the ACAM2000 (Sah et al., 2023) and the upper hand of this vaccine is that it is also considered safe for immunocompromised patients who may not always be allowed to get vaccinated with live vaccines (Overton et al., 2015). JYNNEOS appeared as a replacement for the ACAM2000 vaccine, which had multiple adverse reactions, the former one being authorized for emergency use, as well (Rao et al., 2022). The adverse reactions of this vaccine are much less severe and much more manageable than those of the ACAM2000 vaccine. In contrast to the administration of the JYNNEOS vaccine in two-dose series, ACAM2000 consists in only one dose which forms a vaccination site, outlined by multiple punctured spots. This leads to its adverse properties being spread to other areas of the body, an infection of the eye with the vaccinia virus being a valid possibility, eventually leading to blindness. Through the numerous adverse reactions of the ACAM2000 vaccine, myocarditis and pericarditis, but also swelling in the central and peripheral nervous systems, occur most often (Faix et al., 2020). On the other hand, in the JYNNEOS vaccine, severe adverse reactions that were observed after ACAM2000 vaccination, such as myocarditis and pericarditis, were not reported, turning this vaccine into a much safer option for the population (Yang and Yonts, 2019). Because of the need of a safer vaccine, one that can match the efficacy of the first-generation vaccines, scientists reported that integrating the human interleukin-15 cytokine into the genome of the Wyeth strain of vaccinia (Wyeth/IL-15) results in a vaccine with higher immunogenicity in mouse models. IL-15 is a cytokine with multiple effects on both innate and adaptive immunity, being necessary for the development, differentiation, activation, and proliferation of CD8+ T-cells, dendritic cells, and natural killer (NK) cells. These cells, especially NK cells, play a central role in the clearance of the virus (Zielinski et al., 2010). Taking these into consideration, the Wyeth/IL-15 vaccine may be a better alternative for the modern population, as it may be safer and highly effective.9.Antiviral drugs approved for the treatment of monkeypox infectionsSince there is no approved drug and current specific treatment for the mpox virus infection and because there is a high structural resemblance between the mpox virus and the smallpox virus, both being part of the Poxviridae family, Orthopoxvirus genus, antiviral drugs used, and approved for the infection with smallpox virus may potentially be used in treating mpox virus infections as well. The main purpose of the clinical treatment is to improve the quality of life by reducing the chances of developing long-term sequelae. The drugs approved by the US FDA are tecovirimat, brincidofovir, and cidofovir in adults and children (Russo et al., 2020b; Luo and Han, 2022; Figure 3). These drugs have already been approved for the treatment of the infections with the smallpox virus. Thus, they could potentially be used for the treatment of the mpox virus infection.Figure 3Food and Drugs Administration (FDA) approved drugs for the treatment of both smallpox and monkeypox virus infections (A,B); Tecovirimat; (C) Cidofovir; (D) Brincidofovir. This figure was created with GoodNotes.Out of these three antiviral drugs, tecovirimat, also known as ST-246 or TPOXX, is of first choice, since it does not present significant side effects and unveils a remarkable reduction in viremia. Its mechanism of action consists of inhibiting the virus replication in vitro, by targeting the variola virus VP37 protein related to the release of enveloped virions (Jordan et al., 2009; Russo et al., 2018). Although this drug does not prevent viral replication, it is very effective against viral dissemination (Russo et al., 2020a). It has been observed that, at low concentrations, this antiviral drug is capable of inhibiting the cytopathic effect of poxviruses. However, in order to inhibit other RNA and DNA viruses, a higher concentration is required (Stafford et al., 2023). US CDC offers the latest recommendations, detailed guidelines, and a protocol for the access and use of tecovirimat in mpox virus infections and other non-variola orthopoxvirus infections, in both adults and children (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Center for Preparedness and Response Monkeypox Outbreak, 2022). The recovery after treatment with tecovirimat is faster than with the other two drugs. Tecovirimat has good oral bioavailability and has one important adverse reaction reported, pulmonary embolus. Other adverse reactions are more common, and they include headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting (Stafford et al., 2023).Cidofovir, a nucleotidic analog and an antiviral drug that acts by inhibiting viral DNA polymerase, is known to exhibit nephrotoxicity. This is a prodrug and its active form, cidofovir diphosphate is obtained after intracellular phosphorylation. Because of its toxic effects on the kidneys, it is usually administered alongside oral probenecid and pre-hydration fluids. Unlike tecovirimat, it has poor oral bioavailability. Therefore, it is intravenously administered (Stafford et al., 2023).However, CMX-001 is a modified cidofovir compound that has no adverse reactions and complications toward the kidneys and showed promising results against a variety of Orthopoxvirus species (MacNeil et al., 2009).Brincidofovir is the oral analog of the intravenous cidofovir, and it may be safer, since it is less toxic upon the renal system. However, there have been reports suggesting that brincidofovir is highly toxic for certain human organs, being associated with liver malfunction, since it may increase transaminases and bilirubin in the serum (Quarleri et al., 2022; Rizk et al., 2022). On the other hand, in case of a severe mpox disease, tecovirimat in association with brincidofovir is indicated by some studies (Rizk et al., 2022).Furthermore, an adjuvant to these drugs would be the vaccinia immune globulin, which is a hyperimmune globulin that could be very useful in the treatment of specific complications and adverse reactions regarding the vaccinia vaccination, as licensed by the US FDA. Although it sounds promising as a possible treatment, the lack of data regarding its effectiveness against mpox and the absence of human testing shape the image of this drug into one that needs to be further investigated, although clinical trials completed so far rarely indicate any serious adverse reactions and no discontinuation of the vaccinia immune globulin took place (Lai et al., 2022; Rizk et al., 2022).Reported data have shown that antiviral treatment (tecovirimat), either used alone or as an adjuvant to vaccination, is fully protective against an mpox infection, as opposed to vaccination alone. Moreover, antiviral drugs do not interfere with the protective immunity induced by vaccination, by not compromising it, as shown in both mice and monkeys (Berhanu et al., 2015).It is of high importance to know how antiviral drugs and vaccines interact in order to trigger the best immune response in individuals. As mentioned before, tecovirimat is of first choice when it comes to antiviral therapy. Thus, the interaction of this drug with vaccines was intensely studied (Desai et al., 2022).Tecovirimat has exhibited full protection against mpox disease when administered up to 72 h post infection in cynomolgus macaques, 5 days, post infection, intravenously, in non-human primates and up to 14 days post infection, via aerosol challenge, in these non-human primates. All in all, 100% survival was reported when this drug was administered before the emergence of clinical symptoms (Russo et al., 2020a).Studies on animals have reported that, when treated with tecovirimat, post-administration of the ACAM2000 vaccination site lesions was milder and the adverse reactions were lighter, as well. These studies were done on both vaccinated and non-vaccinated animals, to investigate the behavior of the vaccine-antiviral association. Whether the animals were vaccinated or not, when treated with tecovirimat/TPOXX, they survived, suggesting that this drug does not interfere with the effects of the vaccine. The results of animal testing imply that the combination tecovirimat-vaccine attenuates the reactogenicity (Russo et al., 2020a). While the protective efficacy of the vaccine, when measured by survival, is not affected by tecovirimat, the humoral response to the vaccine may be diminished, resulting in a lower efficacy of the vaccine. In comparison, tecovirimat is highly effective even in infected patients who present a progression of their clinical symptoms, while the efficacy of the vaccine decreases with the advance of the disease and it should be administered as close as possible to the first manifestations of the disease (Russo et al., 2020a). The administration of the vaccine post-exposure to mpox virus does not provide a protection. However, post-exposure treatment with tecovirimat, with or without vaccination, offered full protection (Berhanu et al., 2015).10.Discussion and conclusionAlthough the world currently faces a potential epidemic of the mpox virus, past knowledge and research performed on the Orthopoxvirus genus is highly advantageous in the present days. The existence of potent vaccines and effective antiviral drugs against mpox virus are a few of the measures that can easily prevent major outbreaks. Therefore, vaccines such as ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS, also known as Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA), are useful against mpox for both infection prevention and treatment. In addition, the use of the tecovirimat antiviral drug is highly effective against an infection with the mpox virus. The vaccinia immune globulin, a hyperimmune globulin, could be used as an adjuvant to antivirals. This hyperimmune globulin could prevent, or even treat, if there is the case, complications and adverse reactions to the vaccines. However, further studies are required, because there are not enough data and research about this globulin and its use as a vaccine could be considered unsafe so far.Moreover, the wisdom (Zhu et al., 2020) and awareness and knowledge (Elie, 2020; Jan et al., 2020; Mouffak et al., 2021) that the world has gained since the COVID-19 pandemic (Habas et al., 2020; Saha et al., 2020) are of extreme use in avoiding catastrophic outcomes with the monkeypox virus. By using everything that is known up to the present moment, such as the acknowledgments of the Orthopoxvirus genus, the research and clinical trials on both vaccines and antiviral drugs, as well as the insights from the most recent pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemic, another potential pandemic with the mpox virus could be avoided with ease. “History repeats itself” is a very true, well-known saying. Thus, it is an opportunity for humans to learn from the past, in order to avoid making the same mistakes in the future.Author contributionsRIS, AMS, and OB designed and organized the review. RIS and AMS analyzed and summarized the information, and wrote the manuscript. OB, ALS, and AT supervised the work and contributed to the writing and improvement of the manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.FundingALS was funded by a T32 grant from the US NIH. OB is funded by a grant of the Romanian Ministry of Education and Research, CNCS-UEFISCDI, project number PN-III-P4-ID-PCE-2020-2027, within PNCDI III. The authors would like to acknowledge the funding from the Ministry of Research, Innovation, and Digitization in Romania, under Program 1—The Improvement of the National System of Research and Development, Subprogram 1.2—Institutional Excellence—Projects of Excellence Funding in RDI, Contract No. 31PFE/30.12.2021.Conflict of interestThe authors declare that the manuscript was developed in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.Publisher’s noteAll claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.


Title: None

BackgroundIn May 2022, the first cases of monkeypox (Mpox) were reported in countries where the disease is not endemic [1].As of 5 June 2023, a total of 87,929 laboratory-confirmed cases of Mpox and 146 deaths have been reported to WHO. Since May 2022, a high percentage of these cases have been reported from countries without previously documented transmission of Mpox. It is the first time that cases and infections have been reported in countries without direct or immediate epidemiological links to areas of West or Central Africa [2].The monkeypox virus is an Orthopoxvirus that causes a disease with symptoms similar to smallpox, although less severe. Orthopoxvirus is a genus of dsDNA viruses in the Poxviridae family that infect mammals.Monkeypox virus (MPXV) is a double-stranded DNA virus. It is normally associated with rodents and occasionally spreads to humans. The emergence of cases in countries not normally affected by Mpox has brought to the attention of society a family of viruses which includes the terrible Variola virus, or smallpox virus, which killed millions of people for centuries [3].Smallpox is an extremely contagious, severe infectious disease, with a historical fatality rate of around 30%. The disease is transmitted from person to person, as there are no other reservoirs in nature. It has been dreaded since ancient times, owing to both its high mortality and the fact that survivors were left with disfiguring marks all over their bodies.Although there is evidence of smallpox dating back thousands of years, the timing of the appearance of the causative agent of the Variola virus and the way it evolved have caused quite a few controversies among scholars.In 2016 Hendrik Poinar, a biologist specialized in ancient DNA has reconstructed the family tree of the Variola virus extracted from a 17th century Lithuanian mummy and established that the common ancestor appeared in modern historical times, between 1530 and 1645 [4].Smallpox was eradicated in 1980, thanks to an intensive worldwide vaccination program.Vaccination is a method of preventing smallpox, devised in 1796 by the English physician Edward Jenner (1749-1823) [5], who presented it in his book The Origin of the Vaccine Inoculation (1801) [6]. Having observed that people who had recovered from “cowpox” did not contract “smallpox”, Jenner deduced that the former disease could confer protection against the latter [7]. He began vaccinating healthy people by injecting material from a cowpox pustule. After developing the disease, the vaccinated person became immunized for both cowpox and human smallpox. This result was due to the similarity of the antigens of the two viruses: antibodies active against cowpox were also active against smallpox [8,9].The smallpox vaccine was created by using viruses of the same species of Orthopoxvirus: Cowpox virus and Vaccinia virus (VACV), which do not cause human smallpox but elicits cross-immunity which protects the vaccinated individual against possible attack by the Variola virus.Cowpox virus, Vaccinia virus and Variola virus, the cause of smallpox, are all closely related immunologically. For this reason, both VACV and CPXV determine immunity to smallpox.VACV was the first animal virus to be purified and chemically analyzed. It was also the first virus to be genetically engineered, the recombinant viruses being utilized in vaccines against other infectious diseases” [10, 11].Today, 200 years after the death of Edward Jenner, the world is still indebted to him for this fundamental discovery, which enabled smallpox to be eradicated and inspired the creation of vaccines against many other diseases.Although the smallpox virus (Variola virus) has been eradicated worldwide, it is still preserved in some laboratories, and the possibility that it may be accidentally or deliberately reintroduced could have catastrophic consequences. In the event of biological attack, devastating smallpox epidemics could spread elsewhere but thankfully World Health Organization (WHO) and some countries like Italy have in their stocks important stash of vaccine.There are 12 known Orthopoxvirus species, four of which can infect humans: Variola virus (VARV), i.e. the virus of human smallpox and Alastrim; Monkeypox (Mpox) virus, Cowpox virus and the Vaccinia virus used for smallpox vaccination.The term variola derives from the Latin varius (spotted) or varus (pimple): it was used for the first time in the sixth century by Bishop Marius of Avenches (Switzerland), when smallpox had already become endemic in Europe. In the Anglo-Saxon world, in the 10th century, the word poc or pocca, a bag or a pouch, described an exanthematous disease. With the appearance of syphilis in Europe at the end of the 15th century, writers began to use the prefix small to distinguish variola, smallpox, from syphilis, the great pox [12].Mpox: a long-term global threat?With the eradication of smallpox in 1980, and the subsequent cessation of smallpox vaccination, Mpox has emerged as the most important Orthopoxvirus, in terms of its possible public health impact; the case-fatality rate of the Congo basin strain is ≤ 10%, while that of the West African strain is < 1% [13].The first MPXV genome sequences from the outbreak were reported from Portugal on May 19, 2022, and multiple additional sequences, which can shed light on virus circulation, are now available.Initial phylogenetic analyses indicated that the 2022 outbreak was caused by the virus belonging to the clade MPXV II (former West African clade), which is less severe than clade I (former Congo Basin clade). These analyses have led to think that the current outbreak was caused by the recent introduction of the virus into communities in non-endemic MPXV countries. However, further studies that include additional MPXV genome sequences point to a different scenario [14].Current data on the spread of cases outside countries where the virus is normally endemic suggests that Mpox could pose a long-term global threat.On 23 July 2022, the Director-General of the WHO, Thedos Adhanom Ghebreyesus, issued an international public health alert regarding cases of monkeypox [15]. Indeed, within a few months, the number of individuals infected by monkeypox increased exponentially.Mpox is a zoonosis, that is transmitted from animals to humans, with cases often found close to tropical rainforests where there are animals that carry the virus.“The disease can also spread from humans to humans, through contact with bodily fluids, lesions on the skin or on internal mucosal surfaces, such as in the mouth or throat, respiratory droplets and contaminated objects” [16].In humans, Mpox begins with non-specific symptoms, such as fever, headache, chills, asthenia, enlarged lymph nodes and muscle pain. Within three days, a rash appears, first involving the face and then spreading to other parts of the body, including the hands and feet. The skin lesions evolve in the form of papules, then vesicles, pustules and finally crusts. In most people, Mpox lasts for two to four weeks and heals completely.Prior to the 2022 outbreak, the majority of cases of monkeypox had been reported in people living in central and western Africa. Almost all of the cases identified in subjects living outside Africa were linked to travel to countries where the disease was endemic or were due to contact with sick animals brought from Africa. Within a few months, the disease aroused interest in Europe and the United States.The interest of the scientific community also focused on the modes of transmission of the disease, which seemed to affect mainly, though not exclusively, men who had sex with other men [17].Although direct contact through sexual activity appears to have been the main mode of transmission during the 2022 outbreak, recent studies have shown that “Human-to-human transmission of monkeypox virus can occur through respiratory secretions, direct contact, vertical transmission, percutaneous transmission, or indirect contact through fomites” [18].This declaration also seems to have curbed, to some degree, the stigmatization of people affected by this disease.Therefore, it is important “to disseminate precise communication to the entire population that must not be directed only to high-risk groups, i.e., MSM, people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA), and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (or questioning), plus other sexual and gender identities (LGBTQI+ community)” [19].At the same time, the WHO changed the name of the disease from Monkeypox to Mpox, as the term ‘monkeypox’ could be discriminatory, stigmatizing and misleading.Indeed, when the outbreak of monkeypox expanded earlier this year, racist and stigmatizing language online, in other settings and in some communities was observed and reported to the WHO.Thus, “Following a series of consultations with global experts, the WHO will begin using a new preferred term “Mpox” as a synonym for monkeypox. Both names will be used simultaneously for one year while “monkeypox” is phased out [20].Discovered in 1958 in colonies of captive-bred research monkeys, the virus came to be known as “monkeypox”, although the source of the disease was unknown. The first case of animal-to-human zoonotic MPV transmission was registered in 1970 in Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo, DRC) in a 9-month-old baby boy [21-24]. Over the years, a few cases of monkeypox were recorded outside Africa, such as an outbreak in the United States of America in 2003 due to animals imported from Ghana [25] and sporadic travel-related cases registered in the UK, Singapore and Israel [26]. The WHO Bulletin reported over 6200 confirmed cases and 9400 suspected cases in 2020 and 2021, respectively [27, 28].Moreover, these data are probably underestimated, owing to the lack of robust surveillance systems in endemic regions. However, little attention was paid to this disease until the WHO Director-General’s international public health alert in July 2022.In addition, as the African countries where the virus is endemic are developing countries, they have little or no possibility to monitor and report cases of monkeypox, the clinical symptoms of which resemble those of some other widespread diseases, such as syphilis and chickenpox. This lack of rigorous health surveillance may facilitate the spread of the epidemic.In addition to Mpox, the Cowpox and Vaccinia viruses, which are used in vaccines against smallpox and are normally responsible for zoonoses, can also infect humans.Alastrim, a disease that spread rapidly everywhereThanks to the extraordinary vaccination campaign implemented worldwide, not only human smallpox has been eradicated but also the clinically less serious form, Alastrim [29,30]. The name Alastrim is of Brasilian origin, being derived from a Portuguese word meaning to spread or strew about.This term, introduced in the scientific language in 1910 by the Brazilian doctor Emilio Ribas, in the Portuguese language indicates “something that spreads rapidly everywhere” [31, 32].Alastrim was also known as pseudovariola or whitepox, Kaffir pox [33] and by various other names.Variola minor produced a milder illness with case-fatality rates of 1% or less, as opposed to 30% in the case of Variola virus. This is why it was used in antiquity in the variolation technique.De Korte described it as “Cafri fever” for the first time in the late 19th century in South Africa. And in 1897 Chapin witnessed its presence in the United States of America. Variola minor became the prevalent variety in America, Europe and some areas of eastern and southern Africa [12].In 1921, Alastrim struck Jamaica [34] and in November 1922 it appeared in French Guiana, where many cases were mistaken for chickenpox, given the many points of similarity between the two diseases. In a 1924 article by Stéphen Chauvet, a physician of internal medicine at the Paris Hospitals, Alastrim was described as an almost unknown disease, unmentioned in pathology textbooks. “Some seaports visited by steamships from Central America and the Antilles (Bordeaux, Saint Nazare, le Havre) have recently seen cases of an eruptive disease hitherto completely unknown in France, Alastrim […]” [35].At the time of Dr. Chauvet, Alastrim also raised an important diagnostic problem: that of his relationship with smallpox, asserted by some and denied by others. From this theoretical problem important practical deductions necessarily arose regarding the curative and preventive treatment and the choice of prophylactic sanitary measures.Clinically, after an incubation period of 10-14 days (like that of Variola maior), which however in some cases is reduced to 7 days, the infected person developed dermatitis.The lesions were initially erythematous, subsequently papular, and then papulo-vesicular; in the following 1-2 days, centrally umbilicated pustular lesions appeared. The papules, which were fewer than in cases of Variola maior, first appeared on the face and then on the trunk, without itching. In addition to the skin lesions, the patient presented general malaise, digestive disturbances and a slight fever, which disappeared when the rash appeared (Fig. 1).In his article, Stéphen Chauvet stated that Alastrim had a “predilection for the black race”, unlike smallpox, smallpox and chickenpox, which “affect all races without distinction”. However, the editorial staff of the journal inserted a note, specifying that: “This article was in composition when Dr. Léon Bernard presented some preliminary clarifications on Alastrim to the Paris Academy of Medicine (October, 1923): this author now states that only negroes are affected. In reality, this statement, which Dr. Bernard absolutely insisted on, is completely wrong; the white race is affected just like blacks. Perhaps, as Dr. Blin observes, the black race is particularly sensitive; it is, however, more likely that blacks are affected more frequently owing to their lack of hygiene. We note that the photographs presented by Dr. Stéphen Chauvet in this article show a white sailor affected by Alastrim” [35].Clearly, the content of this note and the terminology used are absolutely unacceptable. Nevertheless, the note shows that Alastrim long remained an almost unknown disease, so much so that doubts were raised as to whether the virus responsible actually belonged to the Orthopoxvirus family. Indeed, the linear double-stranded DNA sequences of the Alastrim virus genome were only determined in the 1960s [36].ConclusionIt was precisely this virus that infected Ali Maow Maalin (1954-2013) (Fig. 2), the last person to be infected with Variola minor.On 22 October 1977, Maalin, who was occasionally involved in smallpox vaccination campaigns organized by the WHO in Somalia, developed fever and headache, and was given antimalarial drugs. Four days later, a rash typical of smallpox appeared. However, presuming that Maalin had been vaccinated against smallpox, the doctors assumed he had chickenpox. After a few days, the symptoms began to indicate smallpox infection. However, not wishing to be placed in solitary confinement, Maalin did not report himself as a probable smallpox patient; he therefore came into contact with numerous individuals. Eventually, the diagnosis of smallpox caused by Variola minor became clear, and was confirmed by laboratory tests. Containment measures were immediately implemented, first in the Merca region, where Maalin lived, and later throughout Somalia. On April 17, 1978, a communiqué from the WHO office in Mairobi stated: “Search complete. No cases discovered. Ali Maow Maalin is the world’s last known smallpox case” [37].Thus ended the story of smallpox, which, on 8 May 1980, was declared by the WHO to have been eradicated from the world! [38] And so it was Alastrim - a disease caused by the minor form of the Variola virus and far less well-known than human smallpox - that closed the story of an evil that had afflicted humanity since the dawn of time, striking terror into people’s hearts.Funding sourcesThis research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.Conflict of interest statementThe authors declare no conflict of interest.Authors’ contributionsDO and MM conceived the study; DO designed the study; MM and DO drafted the manuscript. DO, MM and NLB performed a search of the literature.All authors revised the manuscript; NLB and MB critically revised the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the latest version of the paper for publication. Furthermore: DO: conceptualization, and MM, DO, NLB: methodology, validation, and data curation; NLB, MB: formal analysis; MM and DO: original draft preparation; MM: review, DO editing.Figures and tablesFig. 1.Patient affected by Alastrim (from Chauvet S. L’Alastrim. 1924)Fig. 2.Ali Maow Maalin, 1977, while infected with Alastrim (Wikipedia commons - public domain)


Title: Dynamics of Pathological and Virological Findings During Experimental Calpox Virus Infection of Common Marmosets (

1. IntroductionAlthough smallpox was successfully eradicated in 1980 [1], its causative agent, variola virus (VARV) still remains of concern because of the possible intentional release by bioterrorism [2,3]. Moreover, cessation of cross-protective smallpox vaccination has led to waning herd immunity, not only against VARV, but also against other orthopoxviruses (OPXV) [4]. As a consequence, human OPXV infections with monkeypox (MPXV) and cowpox (CPXV) are increasing [5,6,7].MPXV is endemic in Central and Western Africa, with a 20-fold increase in human monkeypox incidence in the Democratic Republic of Congo over a 20-year period (between the 1980s and 2000s) [8,9]. In 2003, MPXV was accidentally imported into the US by MPXV-infected rodents from West Africa. The virus was transmitted via prairie dogs to some 40 humans [10]. In Europe CPXV infections in humans as well as in animals are also increasing [11,12,13,14]. Their ability to cross species barriers, to circulate among wild rodents and domestic animals, the limited options of therapeutics, and the severe course of disease in immunocompromised and atopic individuals, make CPXV a pathogen of public health concern [15,16,17,18]. In humans, the virus is often transmitted via skin or mucosal lesions from pet rats or cats, and causes self-limiting, painful hemorrhagic skin lesions, particularly located on the hands, face, or trunk in immune competent individuals [19,20]. CPXVs exist in many host species in Europe, but have also been reported in Israel and Egypt [21,22,23]. More than 30 outbreaks in zoological gardens have been reported over the last four decades [14,19,24,25,26]. Asymptomatic infected wild rodents seem to be the main natural reservoir for CPXV [27,28,29].Therefore, development of medical interventions and new vaccine strategies and studies on pathogenesis are essential and require animal models, on which the efficacy of new vaccines and therapeutics can be tested. Over the last few decades, considerable progress has been made in developing small animal and nonhuman primate models with different OPXV, among them variola; but none fully mimic the natural route or course of infection in humans [30,31,32,33,34]. The advantage of small animal models is that larger numbers of animals can be used at lower maintenance costs compared to nonhuman primate models. However, the best species to evaluate new vaccines, therapeutics, or pathogenesis in an animal model, are nonhuman primates, due to their close relatedness to humans [35,36]. Owing to its high risk potential, research with VARV is restricted to two laboratories worldwide and there is an increasing international political interest in the eradication of the remaining VARV stocks. In July 2014, an unmarked box with smallpox virus was detected in a laboratory in Bethesda, Maryland, which has relaunched the debate about destroying all remaining virus stocks. The World Health Organization (WHO) has again postponed their decision for a destruction deadline, which is still under debate [37,38,39,40,41]. This uncertain future of VARV research requires development of other OPXV models [42]. CPXV-induced disease is an ideal model for OPXV, as experiments can be performed under Biosafety Level 2 laboratory conditions, in contrast to MPXV and VARV. Furthermore, CPXV shares homology with MPXV and VARV [43], and can induce disease in mice and NHPs [44,45].In 2002, a lethal OPXV outbreak occurred in a German private husbandry [46], in which New World monkeys showed fever, lymphadenopathy, and severe erosive-ulcerative lesions of oral membranes. The isolated OPXV belonged to a small distinct CPXV cluster [19], and we designated it calpox according to its host Callithrix jacchus, the common marmoset [45]. Carroll and colleagues present in their study genotypic data of many different OPXV, among them the above described calpox virus (19). They conclude that the examined CPXV belong to five groups: groups 1 to 4 describe CPXV-like clades and one further group describes VACV-like clades. Calpox virus is grouped together with CPXV, which was isolated in 1980 from a local skin lesion of an elephant in Germany [47]. By experimental infection of common marmosets with calpox, a new animal model for OPXV disease was established. Compared to other animal models, intranasal application of very low doses of 5 × 102 plaque-forming units (PFU) led to a severe systemic disease comparable to natural OPXV infection [45].Previous studies in which the pathology of calpox was investigated, focused on the final stage of disease, in which characteristic pox-like lesions were detected in skin, mucous membranes, lymph nodes, liver and spleen [48]. Here we describe a pathogenesis study starting with analyses early after inoculation and looking for primary replication sites, cell tropism, and the progress of systemic viral spread at defined time points following infection. Our findings suggest that upon intranasal inoculation, the viral portals of entry are the nasal mucosa and bronchi.2. Material and Methods2.1. Experimental AnimalsOverall, 21 healthy, sexually mature common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus) of different age and either sex from the breeding colony of the German Primate Center were used in this study (see Table 1). They were kept under Biosafety Level 2 conditions, received a complete balanced diet and water ad libitum, and were provided with standard environmental enrichment. All experimental procedures complied with the German Animal Welfare Act. The study was approved by the responsible veterinary authorities (approval number 33.9-42502-04-12/0745, 19 April 2012) and was conducted in accordance with European Union (EU) guidelines for the accommodation and care of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes. During the study, animals were assessed by experienced animal care takers twice a day for any signs of distress, pain, or sickness, by inspecting water and feed intake, feces consistency, and general condition. Measurement of the body temperature was not possible. In case of any unusual presentation, animals were attended by veterinarians.2.2. Virus, Infection and NecropsyThe calpox virus used in this study originated from an outbreak in a private husbandry in 2002 [46]. It was propagated in Hep2 cells and stored in aliquots at −80 °C until use. Plaque assays were carried out to determine the median tissue culture infectious dose of the virus stock before in vivo use [45]. For virus inoculation, animals were anaesthetized by intramuscular injection of 0.1 mL of a mixture of 5% ketamine, 1% xylazine and 0.01% atropine per 200 g body weight. Animals euthanized on day 5, 7, 10, and 12 were infected intranasally [45] with 8.3 × 103 PFU of calpox virus. This dose was chosen because it reliably led to infection in 6 out of 6 control animals from unrelated studies [45]. To increase the likelihood for the identification of the port of viral entry, the animals euthanized on day 3 were inoculated an approximately 40-fold higher dose (3.5 × 105 PFU) by the same route. Animals were monitored daily for the appearance of disease symptoms. At defined time points (see Table 1) animals were humanely euthanized by premedication with the anesthesia mixture followed by an intraperitoneal overdose of pentobarbital (Narcoren, Fa. Merial GmbH, Hallbergmoss, Germany). To compare the histological alterations observed during the incubation period with those after onset of disease, a further six animals (serving as untreated controls in a vaccine study) were included. They were euthanized due to animal welfare reasons, as they met endpoint criteria or died spontaneously.2.3. MicroscopyFull necropsy was performed to collect samples from 30 organs. Samples were fixed in 4% neutral buffered formalin, processed routinely and embedded in paraffin. Sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin using the Varistain Gemini automated stainer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Frankfurt/Main, Germany). To determine the distribution of calpox virus, immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed using a streptavidin alkaline phosphatase detection kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) on 2–4 µm thick sections of formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue. Sections were loaded into a DiscoveryXT autostainer (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), deparaffinized, rehydrated, and incubated with a rabbit anti-vaccinia virus polyclonal antibody (purified IgG fraction, 1:2000 dilution; Catalog #YVS8101, Accurate Chemical, Westbury, NY, USA) for 32 min at 37 °C followed by incubation with the secondary antibody (1:500 dilution, biotinylated immunoglobulin (Ig) cocktail of goat anti-mouse IgG, goat anti-mouse IgM, goat anti-rabbit IgG and protein block) for 20 min. Fast Red (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) was used as the substrate chromogen and slides were counterstained with hematoxylin before examination by light microscopy. Tissue sections from previously confirmed calpox virus infected marmosets were used as positive control samples. Negative control staining was performed by omission of the primary antibody on the infected tissue and by using tissue of uninfected animals. Additionally, selected tissues were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde, embedded in epon, and prepared for transmission electron microscopy (TEM).2.4. Histologic and Immunohistochemistry ScoringHistological lesions were graded semiquantitatively according to the following scale: Grade 1 represented very mild lesions; Grade 2 represented lesions which were more severe in their character but did not affect the whole organ; Grade 3 represented severe lesions that involved most parts of the organ.We employed a semiquantitative scoring method that assigned immunohistochemistry scores as a percentage of calpox virus positive cells with slides being scored as negative, very weakly positive (+, only scattered cells), mildly positive (+, staining in less than 5% of cells per high power field), moderately positive (++, staining in less than 50% of cells), and strongly positive (+++, staining in more than 50% of cells). Negative control slides (without primary antibody and tissue of non-infected animals with primary antibody) did not show any specific reaction.2.5. Microbiological ExaminationsImmediately after opening the body cavities, bacteriological smears were collected from different organs (heart, lung, liver, spleen, kidney, brain, small and large intestine) with a sterile inoculation loop, spread on nutrient agar (blood agar, Columbia agar, MacConkey agar, SS-agar, Sabouraud agar) and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Isolated bacteria were characterized biochemically. The E. coli strains were typed as serovar O2:H14 by a reference laboratory.2.6. Isolation of Calpox Virus DNA from TissuesAfter weighing each tissue sample, phosphate buffered saline (PBS) was added at a ratio of 1:10 as well as a 5 mm diameter stainless bead. The TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was then used for homogenization. The homogenization times varied among tissues ranging from 20 s (brain and bone marrow) to three rounds of 1 min (skin). After centrifugation of the homogenates at 125 g for 10 min, the supernatant was removed. 100 µL-aliquots each were used for DNA extraction and an endpoint dilution assay. In few cases, not all organs were available for homogenization (see Figure 3). For DNA extraction from tissues, the QIAamp® DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used. DNA was eluted in 100 µL AE buffer (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and stored at −20 °C.2.7. Isolation of Calpox Virus DNA from BloodFor extraction of Calpox virus DNA from blood, 100 µL of whole blood containing ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid were diluted 1:2 with PBS. Extraction followed the manufacturer´s protocol of the QIAamp® DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen). Elution and storage was the same as for tissue DNA preparation.2.8. Analysis of Viral Load by Real-Time PCRIn order to determine the load of calpox virus in various organs and body fluids, a real-time PCR targeting the gene region of the ankyrin repeat-containing protein (GenBank accession number HQ420898) was used. A quantified molecular DNA standard with the target DNA cloned into a TOPO-TA vector (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany) was applied to calculate the concentration of calpox viral DNA either per gram of tissue or per microliter of blood. The TaqMan® Universal PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific (formerly Life Technologies), Darmstadt, Germany) was used as follows: 7.5 µL of TaqMan® Universal PCR Master Mix was mixed with 1 µL of each primer at a concentration of 10 nmol (Calp1for: 5′-CCggCATgCgTgACTgAATT-3′ and Calp1rev 5′-TAAgATgCgAgCCgAgAAgC-3′), 0.5 µL of the 10 nmol of TaqMan probe TIB-1 (FAM -TgCTCCgTgTTCTACCATCgTgCg-TAMRA), 4 µL molecular biology grade water and 1 µL of the extracted DNA. Oligonucleotides were synthesized by TIB Molbiol (Berlin, Germany). The real-time PCR was performed using the 5-Plex Rotor-Gene Q (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and the following cycling conditions were applied: initial activation at 95 °C for 10 min, and 45 cycles of 94 °C for 15 s, and 58 °C for 45 s. Absolute quantification was conducted via Rotor-Gene Q Series Software 2.1.0 (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany).2.9. Quantification of Infectious Virus by Endpoint Dilution AssayInfectious calpox virus in tissue homogenates was determined by endpoint dilution assay. For that purpose, 100 µL of the tissue homogenate (see: Isolation of calpox virus DNA from tissues) was used. The tissue homogenates were ten-fold serially diluted with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), 4.5 g/L glucose (PAN-Biotech) with 2% fetal calf serum (FCS) and a mixture of antibiotics (1% penicillin-streptomycin; 50 µg/mL neomycin; 100 µL/mL nystatin; 1 µg/mL amphotericin and 1% gentamycin). 100 µL of each dilution were added to Vero E6 cells pre-seeded in quadruplicate in 96-well (MT) plates and allowed to incubate at 37 °C and 5% CO2 for four days. Thereafter, viral antigen was visualized by intracellular immunoperoxidase staining. Briefly, cells were permeabilized with methanol for 15 min. at −20 °C. Then plates were washed with PBS three times, and unspecific protein binding sites blocked with PBS containing 2% milk powder for 1 h at 37 °C. For all further dilutions, PBS containing 2% milk powder was used. Next, 50 µL of optimally diluted human hyperimmune serum against VACV (kindly provided by Claus-Peter Czerny, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany) was added to each well. After 1 h incubation at 37 °C plates were washed three times with PBS and 50 µL of a 1:1000 dilution of goat anti-human IgG peroxidase conjugate (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West Grove, PA, USA) was added to each well. Following 1 h incubation at 37 °C plates were extensively washed with PBS and a chromogen-substrate mixture was added (for one MT plate 2 mg 3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole dissolved in 300 µL dimethylformamide added to 5 mL 50 mmol sodium acetate and 25 µL 3% H2O2). Color development was stopped after 20 min by washing with distilled water and the cells were scored under a light microscope, with infected cells being identified by a dark brown cytoplasmic staining. Results are given as 50% tissue culture infective dose (TCID50)/g tissue.3. Results3.1. Clinical FindingsAnimals which were euthanized at predetermined time points within the first 10 days did not show any clinical signs of disease. However, the animals which were euthanized or died spontaneously between 12 and 16 days after inoculation (dpi), showed varying symptoms. Two out of three animals from the group of predefined euthanasia on day 12 had only very few typical pox lesions on skin and mucocutaneous junctions and mild nasal discharge while the third one (animal no. 15) presented with severe clinical disorders, i.e., fatigue and hemorrhagic nasal discharge on the day before necropsy and additionally hemorrhagic urine, hemorrhagic anal discharge and multiple pox lesions on skin and mucocutaneous junctions on the day of necropsy.3.2. Gross Necropsy FindingsComprehensive post mortem examinations were performed on days 3, 5, 7, 10 and 12 (n = 3/time point), or when the animals died spontaneously or met the endpoint criteria on day 12 (animal no. 16, 17), 13 (animal no. 18), 14 (animal no. 19, 20) and 16 (animal no. 21). Within the first 10 days, only very discrete lesions concerning the lymphoid system were observed. Mild lymphoid hyperplasia of the spleen, the submandibular and axillary lymph nodes were the most prominent lesion. Final stage animals revealed seromucous nasal discharge, focal erosive-ulcerative gingivitis coinciding with loss of incisors (animal no. 18, 19, 21), and typical calpox lesions on skin, mucocutaneous junctions and larynx (animal no. 17), consisting of erythema or vesicular lesions distributed over the whole body (lips, eyelid, thighs, arm, abdomen, thorax, inguinal and anogenital region). Subcutaneous tissue of one animal was moderately edematous (animal no. 17). Additional findings included multifocal hemorrhages in the lung (animal no. 15), moderate splenomegaly, severe lymphoid hyperplasia and hyperemia of submandibular, axillary, and inguinal lymph nodes, hemorrhages in the mesovarium (animal no. 17), scrotum (animal no. 13, 15), tonsil (animal no. 21), and the hamstring muscle (animal no. 21), focal hyperemia of small and big intestine (animal no. 13, 15), hemorrhagic cystitis (animal no. 13, 15, 16, 21), and mild serosanguinous pericardial effusion (animal no. 13, 15).3.3. Histopathology and ImmunohistochemistryTissues were examined by light microscopy and histopathological and immunohistochemical findings in selected organs are summarized in Table 2 and Table 3.Upper respiratory tract: First alterations in the nasal ciliated epithelium were visible 3 dpi. Severity of alterations increased with duration of infection. At 12 dpi, extensive necrosis and acanthosis of ciliated epithelium with intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies were seen. Immunohistochemically, calpox specific antigens were first seen in respiratory epithelium (3 dpi) and additionally in endothelial cells, collagen fibers and histiocytes at later time points (Figure 1a).Lung: Hyperplastic bronchiolar epithelial cells were observed at 3 dpi with detection of viral antigen (Figure 1b). By day 7, epithelium presented with acantholysis and showed signs of acute necrosis (Figure 1c). At 12 and 14 dpi multifocal bronchopneumonia with degeneration and acute necrosis of bronchiolar epithelium (Figure 1e) was observed. Viral antigen was detected in bronchiolar epithelial cells at 3 dpi in the lung of animals that were infected with the higher dose. From day 7 to 12 onwards, viral antigen was seen in the lungs of all animals (Figure 1d,f).Lymph nodes: During the asymptomatic phase, the enlarged submandibular lymph nodes showed reactive lymphoid hyperplasia of the follicles (Figure 2a). From day 12 onwards, severe alterations consisting of necrotizing lymphadenitis with diffuse hemorrhage, lymphoid depletion, capsulitis, and partly basophilic bacterial colonies were evident. Positive immunostaining for viral antigen was seen in cortical regions directly subjacent to the subcapsular sinus starting at day 7. By day 10, diffuse immunostaining was noted (Figure 2b).Spleen: Splenic changes resembled those seen in submandibular lymph nodes: Mild to marked follicular hyperplasia within 10 dpi, and by 12 dpi severe necrotizing alterations with lymphoid depletion and partly with basophilic bacterial colonies were observed. Calpox viral antigen was detected in one animal by 7 dpi, and at later time points in periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths, endothelial cells, and mesothelial cells of the splenic capsule.Liver: Only mild histopathological alterations (hepatocellular vacuolation) were observed within 10 dpi. However, multifocal coagulation necrosis and degenerated hepatocytes with eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies were obvious by day 12. Calpox viral antigen was detectable in scattered Kupffer cells within the sinusoid, beginning on day 10. By day 12, numerous hepatocytes showed calpox specific immunoreactivity and inclusion bodies. However, two animals in the later stage did not reveal any labelled cells in the liver at all.Skin: Skin lesions typical for calpox virus were not detectable before 12 dpi. The prominent lesions consisted of intraepidermal vesicles with serocellular crusting, and ballooning degeneration of adjacent keratinocytes. Many keratinocytes of all cell layers contained eosinophilic intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies. The inflammatory cell infiltrate consisted of mainly mononuclear and few neutrophilic cells. The inclusion bodies consistently showed a strong immunoreactivity for calpoxviral antigen.Further lesions which were observed at the late stage of disease comprised hemorrhagic cystitis (n = 3) with viral antigen present in transitional epithelium, macrophages and fibroblasts; hemorrhages within subcutaneous tissue of the scrotum (n = 2) and within the mesovarian tissue (n = 1); hemorrhage of the hamstring muscle (n = 1) with proof of viral antigen in spindle-shaped cells; and inflammatory cell infiltrates within the zona fasciculata of the adrenal gland (n = 3) with immunopositive inclusion bodies within epithelial cells.To sum up, only discrete virus-associated lesions were observed within the first 10 days after infection. The primary target organ with proof of intralesional viral antigen was the nasal epithelium (3 dpi). Submandibular lymph nodes showed follicular hyperplasia along with the presence of viral antigen at day 7. At 10 dpi, viral antigen was detectable within the liver, i.e., Kupffer cells. From day 12 onwards, virus-associated pneumonia, hepatitis, dermatitis, splenitis, and lymphadenitis with lymphocytic depletion were seen (see Table 2).3.4. Transmission Electron MicroscopyUltrastructurally, virus was not detectable before day 12. Transmission electron microscopy revealed developing and mature stages of calpox virus in mononuclear and epithelial cells of lung, skin, buccal mucosa, liver, adrenal gland, uterus, spleen, bone marrow, and lymph nodes. Virus factories (B-type inclusions) with virion assembly and maturation, as well as mature viral particles in the cytoplasm and in A-type inclusions (ranging from 0.5 µm to 9 µm in diameter) were noticed. The appearance of the immature stages varied from crescent structures to circular forms containing electron-dense, granular material. At later stages the nucleoprotein condensated and a dense dumbbell-shaped core arose. Mature enveloped viral particles averaging 300 nm in length were oval to brick shaped. The core was flanked by lateral bodies.3.5. Microbiological ExaminationFour animals were found to be positive for bacteria in several organs by culturing tissue smears on blood agar at necropsy. Two animals revealed growth of hemolyzing Escherichia coli (E. coli) in heart, lung, spleen, liver, brain and kidney. One animal with severe growth of E. coli showed additional growth of Klebsiella pneumoniae in heart and lung (animal no. 16). The other animal showed only mild growth of E. coli (animal no. 21). From the spleen of one monkey, a few colonies of hemolyzing E. coli were isolated (animal no. 18) and another monkey showed germs in the heart, lung, spleen, liver, brain, and kidney (animal no. 17). To further identify the E. coli strain, single colonies were analyzed and typed as serovar O2:H14.3.6. Calpox Virus Load in Different TissuesInfectious calpox virus in tissues was quantified by endpoint dilution assay and compared to real-time PCR results using the same tissue preparation. Data obtained by the two different techniques were normalized to one gram of tissue. It was difficult to predict at which time point after inoculation we would be able to find first traces of virus with our assays. Thus, we started sacrificing animals five days after inoculation with 8.3 × 103 PFU of calpox virus. Indeed, low levels of viral DNA (7 × 104–4.7 × 106 copy numbers/gram tissue) were detectable in two out of three animals, i.e., in one in the tonsil, and in the other in nasal mucosa and submandibular lymph node (Figure 3, upper left panel), but no virus was isolated from any organ. Next, we euthanized animals inoculated with the same dose at days, 7, 10 and 12. In animals sacrificed one week after inoculation, our findings indicated a systemic spread of the virus. At this time, when considering the findings from the three animals collectively, all organs tested were found to be positive for viral DNA, from half of them infectious virus was isolated. Highest viral loads were observed in the nasal mucosa of one animal (animal no. 8: 2.2 × 1011 DNA copies and 2.3 × 108 TCID50). In the other organs, viral loads were lower ranging from around 105–109 DNA copy numbers and 102–4 × 107 TCID50 (Figure 3, upper right panel). By day 10, viral loads did not seem to have increased compared to those observed in the day-7 animals (Figure 3, lower left panel). On this day of necropsy, infectious virus was detectable in only around 50% of the tissues, and levels of infectivity were the same (animal 11, nasal mucosa), or between one and five orders of magnitude lower compared to DNA copy numbers. Overall, highest viral loads were detected in the day-12 animals, reaching up to 1016 copy numbers (animal 13, nasal mucosa, bone marrow and adrenal gland) and up to 109 infectious units (animal 13, bone marrow). It is of note that from each organ and mostly from all three animals, infectious virus was recovered at this time point (Figure 3, lower right panel). To investigate the events that took place even earlier following viral inoculation, i.e., 3 dpi, and as hardly any virus was detectable in the day-5 animals, we increased the viral dose 40-fold for the animals to be sacrificed three days after virus application. In two of the three animals, viral DNA and infectious virus was found, one further animal remained negative for the two parameters in any organ. In the two animals being positive for virus, 6 × 108–5 × 109 viral DNA copy numbers, as well as considerable levels of infectious virus (105 TCID50) were found in the nasal mucosa. In addition, one animal was positive for viral DNA in tonsil, tongue, lung and eyes, but loads were three or more orders of magnitude lower compared to the nasal mucosa (≤106 copy numbers). Low numbers of infectious virus (~50 TCID50) were also found in tongue and esophagus (Figure 4).3.7. Calpox Viral Load in BloodUnexpectedly, calpox viral DNA was already detectable at a low level in blood (100 DNA copies/µL) of one of three animals (animal no. 3) inoculated with the high viral dose and sacrificed on day three after viral exposure. The same animal exhibited a higher frequency of calpox positive organs including those distally located from the inoculation site. Following inoculation with the lower viral dose, calpox viral DNA was detected in two of three animals at low levels at 7 dpi (animal no. 7 and 8), whereas the day-5 animals remained viral DNA negative in blood. Three days further in the infection course, only two out of three animals were still viremic, with a slightly increased viral load level in one animal. Highest calpox DNA levels were observed in the animals euthanized at 12 dpi ranging from 4.5 × 104–8.4 × 105 DNA copy numbers per microliter blood (Table 4).4. DiscussionOPXV models are urgently needed to test new therapeutics and vaccines against emerging OPXV infections and to develop countermeasures against a potential bioterrorist smallpox attack. CPXV is suitable for studying human smallpox, because it shares 19 immunomodulatory genes with VARV, the agent of smallpox [43,49]. Furthermore, its infection route closely resembles that of natural smallpox transmission, in which through inhalation of infectious droplets the oral, nasal, or pharyngeal mucosae or, if deeper inhalation occurs, the lung are exposed and disease develops [50,51]. In previous studies, we demonstrated that in the calpox model, very low viral doses applied intranasally reliably led to lethal infection. Our model is highly suitable for studying OPXV-induced disease [45,48], as most of the clinical signs resemble those commonly found in smallpox. However, in those studies with calpox virus, we did not focus on the early phase of infection and the portal of virus entry which remain elusive so far. Until now, comprehensive analyses on pathological alterations were only carried out when the animals succumbed to disease. Also, nothing was known about the kinetics of calpox replication in organs. Therefore, we performed a study comprising serial necropsies during the asymptomatic phase of calpox infection in marmosets. At each defined time point, a broad spectrum of organs were collected and analyzed for histopathological alterations and the presence of virus to identify primary target cells and invaded organs. When the animals were inoculated with a low dose of calpox virus we observed only very mild histological alterations at day 5, 7 and 10. To increase the likelihood of finding first traces of virus and subtle morphological changes with our assays even earlier after viral exposure, a further three animals were inoculated with an approximately 40-fold higher dose and sacrificed at day three.Our results demonstrate that the nasal epithelial cells serve as the principal target for primary replication after intranasal inoculation as we demonstrated at this site the presence of viral antigen within inclusion bodies by immunohistochemistry already at three dpi. The nasal mucosa is lined by a nasopharyngeal-associated lymphoid tissue (NALT), which contains many immune cells (B cells, T cells, macrophages, dendritic cells) [52]. Furthermore, the overlying epithelium is rich in microfold cells (M cells), which are responsible for uptake of viral antigen and transporting them to the deeper layers. Dendritic cells with antigen will migrate to the draining lymph node and present the antigen to T cells [53].The presence of viral antigen within hyperplastic bronchial epithelium as early as three dpi suggests that a considerable amount of virus must have been inhaled after intranasal inoculation. However, keeping in mind that these animals received a high viral dose (3.5 × 105 PFU), this could be a dose-related effect. Similar alterations were only found in one “low-dose” animal at day 7. Similarly, previous studies have shown that lung lesions could be seen in only 4 of 19 animals which were inoculated intranasally with different doses of calpox virus [48]. Diffuse pulmonary lesions (bronchopneumonia and interstitial pneumonia) with abundant viral antigens were detectable in our study from day 12 onwards, and seemed to be a consequence of systemic viral spread.Destruction of respiratory epithelium results in an impaired clearance of microorganisms in the mucous blanket promoting secondary pulmonary infections. In our study, Klebsiella pneumoniae and hemolyzing Escherichia coli were found in lung tissue 12 and 16 dpi. Our results are in in line with data from mice infected intranasally with CPXV. In those animals, alveolar histiocytes and bronchiolar epithelial cells were observed to be the primary target cells [54,55]. In another study, infrequent bronchopneumonia was reported after intranasal and intradermal inoculation of cowpox virus into rats. However, secondary bacterial infections being responsible for pulmonal lesions could not be ruled out [56]. Severe pneumonia is known to be characteristic in OPXV infections [31,56,57,58,59,60] and especially in human smallpox, albeit it is not clear if it is directly virus-induced or due to secondary bacteremia [61]. However, our immunohistochemical results suggest that pulmonal lesions observed in our study are most probably virus-related. Contrary to aerosolized virus particles, which are more likely to be inhaled deeply and to reach distal parts of the lung, intranasally inoculated virus can cause tracheal and bronchial lesions related to the application of high doses [62], which we also found in our study.It might be reasonable to assume that virus could cross the endothelial barrier of an adjacent artery leading to viremia and causing calpox-related lesions in more distant organs. Some tissues like buccal mucosa, spleen, axillary lymph node, adrenal gland, liver, lung, and skin showed in almost all animals that were immunoreactive for viral antigens from day 12 onwards, whereas other tissues like urinary bladder, kidney, tongue, and trachea were only occasionally affected.Interestingly, viral antigen could be demonstrated only by day 7 in cortical regions of the submandibular lymph node, which is draining the inoculation site. Similar to this observation, infectious capripox virus could not be recovered from the draining lymph node until 8 dpi in a study with sheep and goats [63]. However, in our study, a mild hyperplastic response of the submandibular lymph node was observed already on day 3, suggesting immune activation associated with hyperplasia. This is further supported by the lack of severe histological lesions of other organs until day 12. After this time point, lymphoid necrosis replaced hyperplasia as part of collapse of the immune system allowing uncontrolled distribution of virus via macrophages to other tissues resulting in marked pathological alterations and high numbers of infected cells. Interestingly, lymphadenopathy is a classic alteration in many OPXV infections, but not in human smallpox [64,65].Besides the submandibular lymph node, viral antigen could be detected in the spleen of one of the three day 7 animals via immunohistochemistry. Therefore, we assume these tissues represent sites of secondary replication. This hypothesis is supported by the detection of intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies in macrophages. In the submandibular lymph node, antigen was detected mainly in macrophages of the subcapsular sinus as well as in activated germinal centers. This is similar to observations made in a capripoxvirus study, although there were only few positive macrophages observed [64]. Infected macrophages might have reached the cortical regions via afferent lymph from the subcapsular sinus. It is likely that further infection of deeper regions of the lymph node at later time points happened through trafficking, via macrophages or dendritic cells [66].Lesions in liver were absent to mild within the first 10 days and were restricted to multifocal to diffuse hepatocellular vacuolar degeneration without calpox specific immunohistochemistry. Observed vacuolar degeneration may be due to drugs used for anesthesia and euthanasia (ketamine, xylazine, pentobarbitone). Single calpox viral antigen positive Kupffer-cells by day 10 corroborate the importance of the mononuclear phagocyte system for pathogenesis. However, the livers of animals at a later stage of the disease showed dramatic alterations consisting of huge necrotic areas and focal hemorrhages. These findings are similar to those documenting MPXV-associated liver changes only by day 13. Contrary to our findings, Zaucha and co-workers only observed very little viral antigen within hepatocytes [66]. In another study with macaques receiving aerosolized MPXV, no virus-associated hepatic lesions were observed [35]. Embury-Hyatt et al. also noted the absence of hepatic (and splenic) lesions before day 11. This pattern is also typical for human smallpox, in which VARV does not cause drastic tissue destruction [64].Animals which died spontaneously or were euthanized for ethical reasons by day 12, showed bacterial growth (hemolyzing Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumonia) in heart, lung, spleen, liver, and brain. This coinfection was probably due to immunosuppression, as it was always accompanied by lymphoid necrosis. Furthermore, poxvirus-infected macrophages which are originally attracted to fight the bacterial infection may in fact enhance dissemination of virus to areas that otherwise would be less affected [66]. Therefore, it can be assumed that acquired secondary bacteremia may lead to an accelerated disease course. This kind of secondary bacteremia was also found in several other OPXV models [49,56,66,67,68]. It is well known that CPXV manipulate the immune system, which in consequence could favor secondary bacterial infections [43,69,70,71]. Interestingly, secondary bacterial infections seen in studies with VARV, MPXV and CPXV were always associated with a hemorrhagic form of disease, which was also observed in animal models of human smallpox [49,61,66,67,68]. This was only partly true in our study as three of the four animals with bacterial growth in organs also showed signs of hemorrhagic disease. However, two monkeys suffering from hemorrhages in many organs were negative in bacterial culture. In our study, potential entry sites for bacteria were calpox-virus induced skin and mucosal lesions. Single animals (n = 3) showed mild lesions of the gastrointestinal tract, which could have also served as a portal for bacterial entry. Hemorrhage is a common finding in CPXV-induced lesions [31,62,72]. A study identified a viral protein that may inhibit the enzymes involved in blood coagulation resulting in hemorrhage [73]. The presence of viral antigen within endothelial cells could also result in damage of endothelial integrity and consequently hemorrhage. Furthermore, necrosis in liver could result in a reduced production of blood coagulation factors and thus in an increased hemorrhagic diathesis.To determine the viral load in tissues two different methods were applied, i.e., measuring the infectious titers by an endpoint dilution assay and the viral DNA copy numbers by real-time PCR. Usually, the infectious titers were by several orders of magnitude lower than the viral copy numbers suggesting exceeding production of defective particles. Results from endpoint dilution assay and real-time PCR mostly matched with the pathological findings (e.g., nasal mucosa was negative for all 7 dpi animals, except in animal no. 8, which presented with highest viral load and mild histological lesions). The reasons for the discrepancies between pathological and virological findings (e.g., trachea was negative for all 12 dpi animals in immunohistochemistry and no histological lesions were found, but was virus positive, see Figure 4) most likely were attributable to the fact that for histology/immunohistochemistry different locations within one organ were analyzed compared to the material used for virological analyses. Thus, missing focal viral replication by either method was likely to happen. As expected, highest viral loads in tissue were observed in day-12 animals as they were close to or in one animal reaching mortality. Most efficient replication of calpox virus seemed to have taken place in nasal mucosa and the submandibular lymph node, but also in other lymph nodes and bone marrow. Less preferred targets for replication of calpox virus in the prefinal stage were the central nervous system, tongue, esophagus, and stomach, as indicated by low infectious titers and viral DNA copy numbers. These findings are consistent with other studies [39]. In two of the day-3 animals calpox DNA and/or infectious virus were detected in nasal mucosa, submandibular lymph node, tongue, esophagus, lung and eye, albeit calpox DNA copies were at least by three and infectious viral titers by five orders of magnitude higher in nasal mucosa compared to the viral load in the other organs. This strongly indicates that the nasal mucosa represents the portal of viral entry and primary replication site which is completely in line with the detection of calpox antigen in nasal epithelium by immunohistochemistry. Virus positivity in the other few organs was probably caused by swallowed or inhaled virus and attributable to the high viral load applied exceeding the inhaled variola dose sufficient to infect humans by 3500-fold [39]. Virus data from day-5 and day-7 animals support this evidence from the day-3 animals, as again considerably higher viral loads were observed in the nasal mucosa indicating preferential replication at this site independent of the inoculation dose. Based on the presence of calpox DNA copy numbers and infectious virus in a broad spectrum of organs from 7 dpi to 12 dpi we conclude that after local viral expansion at the inoculation site virus is systemically spread leading to viremia by day 7.OPXV are known to be epitheliotropic and our results confirm this observation. We could detect calpox viral antigen in keratinocytes, urothelium, in scattered epithelial cells of the renal convoluted tubules, pneumocytes and in adrenal gland cells of the zona fasciculata. Interestingly, antigen was also detectable in endothelial cells mainly at the later stage of disease. Damage of endothelial cells can cause edema, hemorrhages and activates the extrinsic coagulation cascade leading to microthrombosis and disseminated intravascular coagulation [74].Our results indicate that macrophages are likely to be involved in further spreading of virus. Recruitment of macrophages to virus-infected inflammation areas is a double-edged sword; it implies that macrophages can contribute to virus clearance, but they can also spread virus to further parts of the body [42]. The observed calpox virus loaded cells in the hamstring muscle of animal no. 21 could be explained by a calpox-unrelated lesion in the muscle, which could be due to intramuscular inoculation of ketamine for drawing blood samples. Macrophages which were attracted by the lesions might have been calpox virus infected causing a distribution of the virus to this untypical location. These macrophages carrying virus were also observed in many other OPXV studies [48,56,64,66,67,75]. An in vitro study with VACV confirms our observation, as monocytes were the most frequently infected cell population, followed by B cells, natural killer cells, and T cells [76].The exact cause of death remains unknown, but seems to be related to multi-organ system failure, collapse of the immune system, and resulting opportunistic bacterial infections with sepsis. A “cytokine storm” is assumed to play also an important role [49]. However, due to the limited availability of reagents for common marmosets, the immunological details of calpox virus pathogenesis have been difficult to elucidate. This remains a key research priority for the future.In agreement with the results of our previous studies [45], the incubation period was estimated as 11 to 12 days, which is comparable to human smallpox [77].Mice models using Ectromelia Virus (ECTV) reveal similarities with our above-described animal model. As calpox virus, ECTV is infectious at low doses and causes high mortality [78]. The pathogenesis with localized replication followed by systemic spread is also comparable. ECTV is naturally transmitted via skin lesions [31]. In contrast, nothing is known about the natural transmission route of calpox virus. Bilateral conjunctivitis may be present at ECTV infections, which is not seen in our model [79]. However, the hepatotropic nature of ECTV is a further shared feature of the two models [31].Intranasal infection of mice with VACV has also been extensively studied, and similar to our model, pulmonary lesions with peribronchial and perivascular inflammation and intra-alveolar edema are described [80]. Williamson et al. propose a pathogenesis which differs from our assumptions: According to him, respiratory infection is followed by viremia and infection of the central nervous system (CNS), although they cannot exclude direct CNS infection via cribriform plate [81].In summary, this paper sheds light on the development of intranasal calpox virus infection in common marmosets during the incubation time and at the final disease stage (Figure 5). Our data indicate that early replication of calpox virus takes place in nasal epithelium starting at least at day 3 after intranasal inoculation, but maybe even earlier. Trafficking of infected macrophages presumably led to secondary replication in multiple organs including the submandibular lymph node and the spleen. Around day 7, Viremia, presumably monocyte associated, coincides with systemic dissemination of the virus proceeding in viral replication and typical calpox lesions in lung, liver, lymphatics, adrenal gland, mucocutaneous junctions, and skin. With the end of the incubation period of approximately 11 to 12 days, the animals start to develop a peracute progression of disease, and die within one to four days after the onset of clinical signs. The consistently fatal disease course indicates that our model is very suitable for the evaluation of new vaccines and therapeutics.


Title: An overview on monkeypox virus: Pathogenesis, transmission, host interaction and therapeutics

1Introduction to virusesViruses are organisms that cause infectious diseases globally and their infections to humans have been observed since ancient times (Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Studies on viruses and viral diseases began in 19th century (Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Reports have shown that at least 219 virus species can cause infections in humans (Woolhouse et al., 2012). The first virus to be identified by Iwanovsky and Beijerinck was the tobacco mosaic virus in 1892 and the foot-and-mouth disease virus by Loeffler and Frosch in 1898 (van Kammen, 1999; Woolhouse et al., 2012; Chappell and Dermody, 2015). In humans, the first discovery was the yellow fever virus in 1901 (Woolhouse et al., 2012; Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Since then, multiple viruses have been discovered.Several viruses have been infecting humans and posing a challenge in finding effective therapeutics (Wong et al., 2017), such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (Lloyd, 1996; Simon et al., 2006) and SARS-CoV-2 (Dhama et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a). Particularly, the SARS-CoV-2 has hampered the health system, and this virus also warrants the scientific community to be ready for future pandemics. One such infectious diseases is monkeypox, which has been recently spreading globally.2MonkeypoxMonkeypox (MP) is a zoonotic disease that demonstrates smallpox-like characteristics in humans and is related to variola virus, the causative agent of small pox (Bunge et al., 2022). Monkeypox virus (MPV) belongs to the family: Poxviridae, subfamily: chordopoxvirinae, genus: orthopoxvirus, and species: Monkeypox virus (Moore et al., 2022). Other members of this genus include cowpox, camelpox, and vaccinia (VV) (Pauli et al., 2010; McCollum and Damon, 2014; Silva et al., 2020). As on 14th October 2022, a total of 73,288 cases have been recorded according to https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/response/2022/world-map.htm. Distribution of MPV infection in different countries (
Figure 1
).Figure 1The global spread of monkey pox virus (MPV). The figure is prepared using PowerBI desktop.3Monkeypox and smallpoxInterestingly, variola virus (VARV) and MPV are related antigenically and genetically (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Cann et al., 2013). However, these viruses vary in the regions of their sequence for virulence and host-range factors at the genome termini (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Cann et al., 2013). Upon comparing the VARV strain Japan 1951 (Harper, Masterseed) and MPV strains (Zaire 96-I-16), the length of MPV genome was 10,678 bp larger than Variola virus (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Esposito et al., 2006; Cann et al., 2013). Furthermore, MPV has displayed mutations that influence the process of translation of interferon resistance genes that code for proteins C3L and E3L. The MPV genome also encodes a secreted interleukin (IL)-1β-binding protein, which is absent in VARV genomes. The absence of this vaccinia virus (VACV) - gene corresponds to amplified pathogenicity (Cann et al., 2013).4History of MPVThe advent of MPV was primarily observed in monkeys shipped from Singapore to Copenhagen in 1958 by von Magnus et al. (Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). The name monkey virus is coined after its first discovery from monkeys (Bunge et al., 2022). Approximately, 20-30% of animals have manifested clinical illness (Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). Notably, out of the 6 cases in 1970, the first human infection was reported in an infant (9 months old) from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Ladnyj et al., 1972; Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). Four other infections were observed in children from Bouduo, Liberia aged 4-9 years (Cho and Wenner, 1973), and the other case was in a male of 24 years from Sierra Leone (Cho and Wenner, 1973). In 2003, MPV cases were recorded in the USA that is outside Africa (Bunge et al., 2022). Notably, this is caused due to animal-to- human transmission (Reed et al., 2004). Between 2018 and 2021, the MPV spread was observed in the USA, the UK, Israel, and Singapore (Mauldin et al., 2022). By 2022, MPV reached 31 countries (Xiang and White, 2022) with no travel history to endemic countries, and the virus isolates are reported as West African clade (Xiang and White, 2022).5Genome and structure of MPVThe MPV genome is a linear genome with a size of approximately 197 kb (196,858-base pairs) (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Alkhalil et al., 2009) comprising ≈190 non-overlapping ORFs >180 nt in length (Kugelman et al., 2014). The central coding region sequence is positioned at ≈56000–120000 nucleotides (Kugelman et al., 2014). This conserved region is flanked by variable ends that comprise inverted terminal repeats (ITRs). The genome encodes biological machinery that is essential for the survival of the virus (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Genes in the central region are necessary for entry, self-replication, and maturation (Alkhalil et al., 2009). The less conserved terminal regions are useful for host-virus interaction (Alkhalil et al., 2009).At the ITR zone, a minimum of 4 ORFs are present (Kugelman et al., 2014).There are two clades present in the MPV: the Congo Basin strain and West African strain (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). The Congo Basin strain is also known as the Central African strain (ZAI-96). The West African strains are SL-V70, COP-58, and WRAIR-6 (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008). These clades demonstrate dissimilar virulence (Kindrachuk et al., 2012) and are geographically, clinically, and genetically different (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). The Congo Basin strain demonstrated a case fatality rates of approximately 10% noticed in the people who are non-vaccinated than the less lethal West African MPV clade (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). Furthermore, the fatality rate differs with the strain, with 3.6% with the West African clade and 10.6% with the Central African clade (Bunge et al., 2022).The West African strain is linked with lower transmission within the humans (Hutson et al., 2009), with a difference of 0.55-0.56% nucleotide between both the strains (Chen et al., 2005). A difference of 0.01–0.07% nucleotides is observed among the West African strains (Chen et al., 2005). A recent study conducted through shotgun metagenomics, showed that the MPV belongs to clade 3 and presumably has a single origin (Isidro et al., 2022). Another phylogenetic study was conducted on African monkeypox (Nakazawa et al., 2015). The authors examined fairly large genomic sequence data obtained from the MPV isolates across the area of their distribution to determine the relationship between the clades and among the isolates and further improve the phylogenetic analysis (Nakazawa et al., 2015).Furthermore, the amplified virulence observed in the Central African strains is believed to be due to D14L (complement inhibitor), D10L (host range protein), B14R (interleukin [IL]-1β binding protein), B10R (apoptotic regulator), and B19R (serine protease inhibitor-like protein) genes (Estep et al., 2011) (Karumathil et al., 2018). The West African strains are devoid of D14L (Estep et al., 2011). The orthologs of D10L and B19R orthologs are conserved in both clades (Chen et al., 2005). The orthologs of ZAI-96, B10R and B14R are absent in West African strain (Chen et al., 2005). Additionally, selective repression of the host response is noticed in Central African strain demonstrated by its ability to regulate apoptosis in the host (Kumar et al., 2022).MPV is one of the largest and most highly complex viruses (Barreto-Vieira and Barth, 2015) demonstrating a brick-shaped structure with a length of 220 - 450 nm and a width ranging from 140 - 260 nm (Hyun, 2022). It has four components: core, lateral bodies, outer membrane, and outer lipoprotein envelope (Sklenovská, 2020). The core is the central part, encompassed by core fibrils and double stranded viral DNA. This layer is encircled by a rigid structure called the palisade layer (Sklenovská, 2020). The outer membrane accommodates the palisade layer, lateral bodies and the central core (Sklenovská, 2020). The structures called the surface tubules and are present on the outer surface (Sklenovská, 2020) (
Figure 2
).Figure 2The structure of MPV particle.Typically two types of virions are noticed in the negatively stained preparations of orthopoxviruses, namely the M form (mulberry) and C form (capsule) (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). The M-type virions are undamaged, while the C forms are the damaged ones (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). In C type virions, the stain percolates the cell, exposing the outer membrane and partially exposing the internal structures (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). Clinically, the M-types is present in the vesicle fluid and the C type in dried scabs (Jezek and Fenner, 1988).6Reservoir and transmissionThe common reservoir for MPV is thought to be not only monkeys (Moore et al., 2022), but also other animals such as squirrels (Khodakevich et al., 1987), and sooty mangabey. (Radonić et al., 2014). Although the rate at which the virus resides among animals is still obscure, rodents are thought to be the reservoir hosts for this virus (Nolen et al., 2015; Wilson, 2017). Infections may also occur in mice, rats, humans (Learned et al., 2005; Nolen et al., 2016; Besombes et al., 2019), and prairie dogs (Tesh et al., 2004; Moore et al., 2022). MPV transmission may occur when a healthy individual comes into contact with the skin lesions, droplets, and bodily fluids of infected animals. Partially cooked food might also be a reason for the infection (Ahmed et al., 2022). The infection may also result from to contact with contaminated fomites (Moore et al., 2022). Additionally, the infections may also result due to activities that enhance exposure to animals, such as sleeping on the ground outside and habituating near the forest (Fuller et al., 2011; Guagliardo et al., 2020). The risk of infection may also be noted when eating bushmeat or wild game (Kmiec and Kirchhoff, 2022).In 2018, MPV transmission was observed from an infected patient to a healthcare assistant which might be due to contact with bedding that was contaminated (Vaughan et al., 2020). Human-to-human transmission has also been noted in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Nolen et al., 2016). Transmission within humans can also occur by sharing the same household and consuming food or water from the same dish as the patient (Bunge et al., 2022). In 2022, the United Kingdom witnessed an increase in MPV cases, categorized into three different events (Vivancos et al., 2022). The first case was in Nigerian imports, the second case was a cluster in a household, and the third case was reported in men with no reported link with previous cases or the travel history (Vivancos et al., 2022). One study reported the first case of MPV transmission from a human to dog (Seang et al., 2022). A recent report showed that out of 528 infections across 16 countries, 98% were bisexual or gay, 75% of the infections were seen within the white, and 41% were positive for HIV (Thornhill et al., 2022) (
Figure 3
).Figure 3Transmission modes of MPV from animals (reservoirs) to humans and humans to animals.7ReplicationTo gain insight onto MPV replication, we relied on pox virus replication. Poxvirus replication occurs in the cytoplasm in specific structures known as Guarnieri bodies (Kieser et al., 2020; Kaler et al., 2022). These bodies are also called factories obtained from infecting particles (Kieser et al., 2020). The count (number) of factories depends on the multiplication rate of infection (Moss, 2013). The factory is the site where transcription translation, and assembly of virions take place (Moss, 2013).Generally, there exists two types of infectious forms of MPV: the mature virion [MV, also called intracellular mature virions (IMV)] and the enveloped virion (EV, also called extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs)) and cell-associated enveloped virions (CEVs) (Chung et al., 2006; Moss, 2012). The MV has a single membrane, and the EV has an additional outer membrane that is cleaved before fusion. When the MV is enclosed within an endosomal membrane or trans-Golgi, it forms a triple-membrane. These are hence termed wrapped virions (WVs, also called intracellular enveloped virions (IEVs) (Moss, 2012). Unenclosed MVs remain free until cell lysis occurs (Chung et al., 2006; Moss, 2012). Both MV and EV are infectious and can spread the disease (Moss, 2012; Sklenovská, 2020). Comparatively, the stable MV transmits the infection between the host animals, while EVs with fragile external membranes are instrumental in spreading the disease within the host (Moss, 2012; Sklenovská, 2020).The proteins facilitate the attachment of the virus to the cell, fusion of the membrane and entry into the host cell (Kaler et al., 2022). The single membrane in MV and an extra outer membrane in the EV perform the disruption prior to fusion (Kaler et al., 2022). There are a total of four viral proteins connected to the MV that help in the process of attachment of MV to the host cell (Kaler et al., 2022).The virus attaches to the host via 11 to 12 non-glycosylated transmembrane proteins (4- to 43-kDa) (Moss, 2012; Kaler et al., 2022). In some pox viruses, laminin and heparine sulfate aid in the attachment (Kmiec and Kirchhoff, 2022). After infection DNA synthesis is initiated for no more than 2 hours (Moss, 2013). For replication, MV initially uncoats to gain entry into the cytoplasm (Sklenovská, 2020). The early genes are then expressed after the inactivation of the cells defence mechanisms. This inactivation is achieved by the generation of prepackaged viral proteins and the enzymatic factors (Sklenovská, 2020). Subsequently, the early messenger RNA (mRNA) is synthesized through the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the virus. The translated early mRNA assists another uncoating mechanism, replication of DNA, and generation of intermediate transcription factors. (Sklenovská, 2020). Then the transcription and translation of intermediate mRNA occurs to promote the late mRNAs expression. Further, the translation of late mRNAs into structural and nonstructural proteins initiates (Sklenovská, 2020). The proteins that are translated are gathered together with the concatemers of DNA that are processed in the earlier step of replication (Sklenovská, 2020). They are enclosed to form an immature virions (IMVs) that transform to MV which are devoid of external membrane and causes infection when liberated due to the disruption of the cell. (Hiller and Weber, 1985; Bray and Buller, 2004; Roberts and Smith, 2008) They then travel into the inner cell membrane aided by the microtubules and eventually fuses to from the cell-associated virions (CEVs). These trigger the actin polymerization and the development of the filaments. The CEVs exists the cell that are now called the extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs) (Roberts and Smith, 2008) (
Figure 4
).Figure 4The steps involved in the replication of MPV and the generation of new viral progeny.8Symptoms and clinical manifestations of MPThe symptoms of MP are similar to those of smallpox but are generally milder (Ligon, 2004). Once exposed to an infection, the incubation period is between 10 and 14 days and followed by a prodromal period of two days (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008). The individuals demonstrate, muscle aches, backache, headache, intense asthenia, fever between 38.5°C and 40.5°C (McCollum and Damon, 2014) with swollen lymph nodes. Often, patients experience discomfort and exhaustion (Ligon, 2004). The feature that separates monkeypox from smallpox is lymphadenopathy (Moore et al., 2022). Mucosal lesions are observed in the mouth (enanthem) (Kaler et al., 2022) after 1 or 2 days. The skin lesions appear on the face and extremities. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) the face is highly affected, as noticed in 95% of the cases. In 75% of the cases, the palms and soles are affected and in 75% of the cases the oral mucous membranes are affected. The affect is also noticed on genitalia and conjunctivae in 30% and 20% of the cases.The lesions progress through four stages namely, the macular (development of macular lesions), popular (the lesions are a slightly raised), vesicular (the lesions are raised clearly and filled with fluid), and pustula (lesions are filled with opaque fluid and forms a depression at the Centre and remain for about 5 - 7 days) in the next 2 - 4 weeks (Moore et al., 2022). After the pustular phase, the formation of the crust starts and desquamates in the next 7 - 14 day (Moore et al., 2022). Once the crusts are fallen off, the patients are no longer infectious (Moore et al., 2022). Lesions can cause dyspigmented scars in a few instances (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008).The distribution of the lesion is typically centrifugal and appears firm, deep, well-circumscribed and umbilicated (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Additionally, dissimilarities were observed in the morphology of lesions between vaccinated and unvaccinated people (McCollum and Damon, 2014). In individuals those who were vaccinated <20 years before the infection, the lesions were smaller and fewer, with the centrifugal spreading of the rash (McCollum and Damon, 2014). The skin of patients is firm, inflamed, and painful before the formation of crusts (McCollum and Damon, 2014) (
Figure 5
).Figure 5Infection with MPV. The symptoms and different stages observed in an infected individual.Sequelae and serious complications have also been noticed usually in unvaccinated individuals of approximately 74% compared to those in the vaccinated individuals (39.5%) (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Patients develop pulmonary distress or bronchopneumonia indicating that an infection of the lungs could be a secondary infection (McCollum and Damon, 2014). In others, vomiting or diarrhoea leading to acute dehydration was noticed (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Encephalitis, ocular infections and septicaemia were also recorded, with an average case-fatality rate of 11% in unvaccinated patients with children being highly vulnerable (McCollum and Damon, 2014).9Virus-host interactionIt has been reported that the MPV encompasses a substantial number of accessory genes and notably hasa broader host range (Bonilla-Aldana and Rodriguez-Morales, 2022; Xiang and White, 2022). Interestingly, the loss of an accessory gene in approximately 17% of samples from West African strain demonstrated an association with an upsurge in human-to-human transmission (Xiang and White, 2022).A gene-expression profile study was conducted to understand the viral-host biology (Alkhalil et al., 2010). The experiment was conducted on kidney epithelial cells (MK2) of Macaca mulatta using the GeneChip rhesus macaque genome microarrays (Alkhalil et al., 2010). The findings from this study demonstrate the function of ion channels, cell cycle regulators, histones, and actin play a role in MPV infection (Alkhalil et al., 2010).A recent bioinformatics study based on transcriptome analysis was conducted to identify biomarkers and signaling pathways in cells infected with monkeypox (Tang et al., 2022). GSE36854 and GSE11234 were retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (Tang et al., 2022). The results showed that from the GSE36854 dataset, 84 genes were significantly different. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) interactions and the identification of hub genes has revealed that the genes such as ZC3H12A, IER3, EREG, IFIT2, AREG, IL11, IFIT1 IER2, NFKBIE, and FST as the 10 hub genes. (Tang et al., 2022). The genes IFIT1 and IFIT2 (antiviral genes) were noticed to be remarkably repressed. Furthermore, upon searching the drugs that essentially target the hub genes, itraconazole and AP-26113 were found to stimulate the expression levels of IFIT1 and IFIT2 illuminating their ability as MP therapeutics (Tang et al., 2022).To discover variations in the expression of genes, co-regulated genes, and the pathways that are of concern during MP progression, another research group worked on in vitro models that were infected with MPV (Xuan et al., 2022). The two models on which several analysis were performed were, rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) kidney epithelial (MK2) cells and human immortal epithelial cancer (HeLa) cells (Xuan et al., 2022). The results showed that in the animal cell line model, the prominent regulators were histamine, plasmin and cluster of differentiation 40 (CD40), whereas in the human cell line model, the neutrophil-related signaling pathways and macrophages were noted (Xuan et al., 2022). Additionally, in both models, certain genes that were remarkably expressed during the progression of the infection including, TNFAIP3, IL11, ADORA2A, DUOX1, BIRC3, PTX3, CXCL1, LIF, IER3, IL6, ZC3H12A, EGR1, CSF2, and CCL2. Additionally, epigenetic regulators were also observed, namely, HIST1H3D and HIST1H2BJ (Xuan et al., 2022). Furthermore, a computational study uncovered the over-expression of some histones in both humans and monkeys infected with monkeypox-infected cells (Xuan et al., 2022). The elevated histone members are HIST1H2BB, HIST1H2AK, HIST2H2AB, HIST1H2AC, HIST1H2BM, HIST1H2BJ, HIST1H2BH, HIST1H2AD, HIST1H3D, and HIST1H1B highlighting the possibility of the role epigenetic regulators in monkeypox infection (Xuan et al., 2022).Another study also has identified the upregulation of histone genes namely, HIST1H2BJ, HIST4H4, HIST1H3I, HIST1H2AD, and, HIST1H1D, while H1F0, the linker histone was downregulated (Alkhalil et al., 2010). Certain genes such as MYCBP2, PRMT3, RARS2, FBXO11 and MYST2 were repressed (Alkhalil et al., 2010). During the infection, the repression of ten ion channels and transporters was observed. The cell cycle regulators and actin MPV infection were noticed to participate in MPV infection (Alkhalil et al., 2010). Furthermore, the disease biomarkers can be discovered through proteomics analysis (Wang et al., 2022).Bourquain et al, conducted an experiment to determine how poxviruses vary their host cell gene expression. HeLa cells were selected, and the changes were recorded using microarrays that are representative of the whole human genome (Bourquain et al., 2013). HeLa cells were treated with CPXV Brighton Red (BR) reference strain, central African MPV strain MSF-6, or the mouse-pathogenic VACV strain IHD-W (Bourquain et al., 2013). In particular to the MPV results, merely 321 (1.1%) transcripts showed 2-fold expression variations with 219 (68.2%) upregulated transcripts and 102 downregulated transcripts (Bourquain et al., 2013). Interestingly, the results also showed common transcripts among infections (Bourquain et al., 2013). The MPV has regulated 321 host transcripts of which 241 (75.1%) were observed with cowpox virus (CPXV) and 148 (46.1%) within VACV infection (Bourquain et al., 2013). Genes such as DUSP5/6, SPRED1/2, and SPRY2/4 are upregulated along with EGR1 and EGR2. After infection, the EGR1 upregulation was observed via the MAPK-ERK pathway (Bourquain et al., 2013).In MPV infection, the genes that take part in the negative regulation of MAPK activity and intracellular protein kinase cascade were enriched, and they induced genes associated with chemotaxis or leukocyte activation (Bourquain et al., 2013). Hammarlund et al, reported that monocytes infected with MPV do not recognize antiviral CD4+ and CD8+ T Cells (Hammarlund et al., 2008). MPV can cause infection in primary human monocytes without eliciting the production of inflammatory cytokines (IFNγ or TNFα) (Hammarlund et al., 2008). It was also reported that MPV impedes the activation of T- cell by VV, implying that MPV bears an immunomodulatory protein which is absent in VV (Hammarlund et al., 2008). This inhibition in trans can also obstruct the activation of T - cells by other virus-infected cells that are not precisely MPV-infected, suggesting that MPV is immunosuppressive and immune-evasive (Hammarlund et al., 2008). Cell-associated factor/factors generated in MPV hinder the activation of T - cells autonomously by MHC class I or class II processing or presentation (Hammarlund et al., 2008).10Treatments against MPV10.1Small molecule inhibitorsThe replication of MPV can be brought about by the RNA interference using genome-wide expression studies combined with a bioinformatics approach (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Accordingly 12 viral genes were targeted using small interfering RNA (siRNAs). Eventually, siA6-a inhibited replication of the virus for 7 days when administered at 10 nM (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Additionally, this study also demonstrated the significance of the A6R gene in replication (Alkhalil et al., 2009). The use of interferon-β (IFN-β) is another approach to curb MPV spread and multiplication (Johnston et al., 2012). IFN-β has been approved by the FDA for treating multiple sclerosis (Johnston et al., 2012). IFN-β administration after 6-8 hours after infection remarkably inhibited the production and spread of MPV, thereby highlighting the potential of IFN-β as an effective therapeutic option against MPV (Johnston et al., 2012). In previous studies, silver-based nanoparticles have been found to repress plaque formation of MPV with a diameter of 10 nm (Rogers et al., 2008), suggesting the role of silver-based nanoparticles as MPV treatment option (Rogers et al., 2008).Tecovirimat may offer improved survival when administered for up to 8 days after the lethal aerosol MPV challenge in cynomolgus macaques (Russo et al., 2018). It offers a shield from the clinical effects of the disease earlier than 5 days after the challenge (Russo et al., 2018). This FDA approved drug is used to treat smallpox (Smith et al., 2011; Grosenbach et al., 2018; Laudisoit et al., 2018; Russo et al., 2018). The compound tecovirimat is believed to repress the product of F13L gene which is present across orthopoxviruses (Matias et al., 2022) and is used for orthopoxvirus wrapping (Duraffour et al., 2008; Duraffour et al., 2015). The drug brincidofovir, a nucleotide analogue, has demonstrated promising results in animal models when assessed against MPV (Adler et al., 2022). Improved survival was observed in prairie dog models, administered with brincidofovir soon after monkeypox contact (Hutson et al., 2021; Siegrist and Sassine, 2022).Computational methods are paramount in the development and design of new drugs. The predominant methods include molecular docking (Morris and Lim-Wilby, 2008; Rampogu and Lee, 2021c; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a), and molecular dynamics simulation (Durrant and McCammon, 2011; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a). Pharmacophore modeling can also be adapted when there are any experimentally known ligands/inhibitors or when the X-ray structure of the target protein is present (Yang, 2010; Rampogu et al., 2020). Homology modeling can be used to build a structure when the X-ray structure is not resolved (Muhammed and Aki-Yalcin, 2019). In one study, five targets were investigated, and compounds, such as NMCT, rutaecarpine, nilotinib, simeprevir, hypericin, naldemedine, fosdagrocorat and lixivaptan (Lam et al., 2022), were found to have potential inhibitory activities. These five targets were A48R, A50R, D13L, F13L and I7L (Lam et al., 2022). An in silico study revealed that the compound fludarabine is a potential inhibitor of the MPV target DNA-dependent RNA polymerase subunit (A6R) along with two other targets, protein catalysing the envelopment of intracellular mature virus particles (F13L) and proteins involved in cell entry (D8L) (Altayb, 2022). Sahoo et al., identified four potential inhibitors, Tipranavir, Cefiderocol, Doxorubicin, and Dolutegravir towards the targets thymidylate kinase and D9 (decapping enzyme) (Sahoo et al., 2022) (
Table 1
).Table 1Current treatments/small molecules available for MPV therapeutics.InhibitorMethodActs onDosageReferencesiA6-agenome-wide expression, bioinformaticsA6R10 nM(Alkhalil et al., 2009)IFN-β
in vitro
MPV spread and multiplication–(Johnston et al., 2012)NMCT, Rutaecarpine, Nilotinib, Simeprevir, Hypericin, Naldemedine, Fosdagrocorat and LixivaptanComputationalA48R, A50R, D13L, F13L, I7L–(Lam et al., 2022)FludarabineComputationalA6R–(Altayb, 2022)Tipranavir, Cefiderocol, Doxorubicin, and DolutegravirComputationalThymidylate kinase and D9–(Sahoo et al., 2022)TecovirimatFDA-approved drug for smallpoxF13L–(Matias et al., 2022)BrincidofovirFDA-approved drug for smallpoxThe effect shown in prairie dogs(Adler et al., 2022)Vaccinia immune globulin (VIG)FDA-approvedintramuscular–(Siegrist et al., 2020)CRISPR/Cas9vaccinia virus (VACV) modelA17L, E3L, and I2L–(Siegrist et al., 2020)A study was conducted to evaluate the role of specific genes in viral replication and pathogenicity (Lopera et al., 2015). Correspondingly, a bioinformatics approach has been adapted to discover genomic regions in MPV possessing numerous virulence genes (Lopera et al., 2015). Following this, two regions were selected, and the study was conducted in vitro and in vivo after single deletion and double deletion of the selected genes. The results demonstrated that simultaneous deletion of both genes led to a decrease in replication observed in cell culture (Lopera et al., 2015). When either region was deleted, a remarkable amplified attenuation in vivo was observed (Lopera et al., 2015).10.2VaccinationIn addition to small molecules, vaccines are also widely used as a treatment option (Hooper et al., 2004). Notably, the smallpox vaccine has demonstrated protection in Nonhuman Primates against MPV (Hooper et al., 2004). It is reported that smallpox has provided approximately 85% protection against monkeypox (Bunge et al., 2022). JYNNEOS is a modified vaccinia ankara (MVA) vaccine that has been approved for MPV disease in adults ≥18 years of age (Rao et al., 2022). This was a subcutaneous injection administered at two doses with 28 days apart (Rao et al., 2022). In 2017, healthcare individuals were administered with IMVAMUNE® which is a smallpox vaccine (Petersen et al., 2019). This study aimed to understand the immunogenicity, effectiveness, and safety of IMVAMUNE® in patients at high risk for MPV (Petersen et al., 2019). Another smallpox vaccine, the live VACV Dryvax protects against monkeypox (Heraud et al., 2006; Earl et al., 2008). A multivalent DNA vaccine with eight VACVs virus (Western Reserve strain genes: A4L, A27L, A33R, A56R, B5R, F9L, H3L, and L1R) confers protection against MPV in nonhuman primates cynomolgus macaques (Hirao et al., 2011).It has been observed that, patients vaccinated for smallpox showed immunity (orthopoxvirus [OPXV], IgG and memory B cells) upon exposure to MPV (Nguyen et al., 2021). Interestingly, the smallpox vaccine triggers both humoral and cell-mediated responses towards OPXV which also includes MPV (Nguyen et al., 2021). They target a host of viral elements, thereby hindering viral replication (Nguyen et al., 2021). Vaccinia immune globulin is an approved medication used after contacting the MPV, which is administered intramuscularly (Lederman et al., 2012; Siegrist et al., 2020; Parker et al., 2021). In one study, CRISPR/Cas9 was used to treat orthopoxviruses with VACV, which was used as a model organism (Siegrist et al., 2020). This study focused on the indispensable conserved genes A17L, E3L, and I2L using an adeno-associated virus as a vector (Siegrist et al., 2020). The results have shown a reduction in the viral titre further protecting host cells (Siegrist et al., 2020). An assay based on CRISPR-Cas12a and real-time PCR was used to detect MPV (Li et al., 2006; Sui et al., 2022).In order to find effective therapeutics, few clinical trials have been conducted. Upon searching for clinical trial information, it was found that nine studies are currently being performed that are either on-going or completed (https://clinicaltrials.gov/)11Conclusion and future outlookViruses are notorious microorganisms that cause serious human infections. Pox viruses are not new as they exist in reptiles, birds, insects, and mammals. Hence, they are also known as ancient viruses (Alakunle et al., 2020). Human MP is a zoonotic disease that is recently spreading globally. In order to prevent the spread of the disease, the contact tracing is an important step (Titanji et al., 2022). If a person is in close proximity with a confirmed case of monkeypox, then that individual should be observed for development of symptoms for 21 days (Titanji et al., 2022).Since the treatment options for monkeypox are limited (Kaler et al., 2022), the available research methods, such as computational drug discovery, could be an effective method to identify drugs (Ou-Yang et al., 2012; Sliwoski et al., 2014). This approach is useful for discovering new drugs over a short period (Leelananda and Lindert, 2016). Drug repurposing is another approach that can be used to identify mmediate candidate compounds (Pushpakom et al., 2018; Begley et al., 2021). This approach has been proven to be promising for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2. Remdesivir is one such candidate (Li and Peng, 2021). To prevent the spread of virus in the developing countries the awareness on health hygiene is essentially important as the samples from the excreta are reported to have monkeypox virus DNA (Singla and Shen, 2022). Additionally, the knowledge and treat from the pandemics and similar kind of diseases should be widely spread among all the sections of the people (Poland et al., 2022). Countries need to review their approach and preventive measure are to be taken during the outbreaks and be prepared for any such kind in the future (Poland et al., 2022). To conclude, since the spread of MPV is swift, it demands extra awareness and thoughtfulness to control the transmission and thereby to mitigate the disease and further its future reappearance.Author contributionsSR and KW conceived the idea. SR wrote the manuscript. KW, S-WK, and YK reviewed the manuscript and revised. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.


Title: Monkeypox Transmission and Pathogenesis in Prairie Dogs

During May and June 2003, the first cluster of human monkeypox cases in the United States was reported (1–4). Most human case-patients with this febrile vesicular rash illness were believed to have acquired the infection from prairie dogs (Cynomys spp.) that became ill after contact with various exotic African rodents (Funiscuirus spp., Heliosciurus spp., Cricetomys spp., Atherurus spp., Graphiurus spp., and Hybomys spp.) shipped from Ghana to the United States in April 2003 (1,2). Some African rodents from this shipment became ill and died shortly after arriving in the United States. Culture and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) demonstrated monkeypox virus in two rope squirrels (Funiscuirus spp.), one Gambian rat (Cricetomys sp.), and three dormice (Graphiurus spp.) (2). The two prairie dogs described in this report came from the same wholesale pet store where other monkeypox virus–infected rodents were housed.In areas of Africa where monkeypox infections in humans have been documented previously, serologic surveys of wild animals have suggested that infection with monkeypox virus occurs in several species of African rodents (5). The virus has been isolated from skin lesions on a rope squirrel from Zaire (6). However, pathologic studies of naturally acquired monkeypox virus infections in animals have not been reported. Here we present pathologic, immunohistochemical (IHC), electron microscopy (EM), and molecular findings in two monkeypox virus–infected prairie dogs associated with the recent outbreak of the disease in humans in the United States. These results help elucidate the pathogenesis of naturally occurring monkeypox virus infections in mammals and shed light on possible routes of viral transmission between rodents and to humans during this outbreak.Materials and MethodsThe two prairie dogs from whom data are presented here came from a group of approximately 200 prairie dogs that were housed at a wholesale pet store with multiple species of exotic African rodents. About 110 prairie dogs were sold before 15 reportedly became ill. Of the 15 ill prairie dogs, 10 died rapidly, and 5 exhibited anorexia, wasting, sneezing, coughing, swollen eyelids, and ocular discharge. Initially, tularemia was suspected clinically, and two of the ill prairie dogs were euthanized for pathologic confirmation. The remaining prairie dogs were destroyed (3,4).Culture and Molecular AnalysisFresh lung tissue specimens were evaluated for the presence of viable infectious virus by injecting them into BSC-40 tissue culture and observing them daily for typical cytopathic effect. Fresh, unfixed tissues from lung were examined for specific signatures of monkeypox virus by using PCR. Samples were initially evaluated by single-gene PCR, followed by restriction-endonuclease fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) identification of monkeypox-specific fragment patterns (7–9). An additional novel multiplex standard PCR assay (10) discriminated monkeypox from vaccinia and variola orthopoxvirus species on the basis of specific DNA polymerase gene amplicons. Real time (RT)-PCR assays included a specific monkeypox virus nucleic acid signature encoded in the envelope gene (monkeypox-B6R) and orthopoxvirus nucleic acid signatures in the DNA polymerase gene (E9L non var.). Controls included DNA from monkeypox virus, other orthopoxviruses, and no-template controls.Pathologic ExaminationTissues were examined grossly and microscopically. Hematoxylin- and eosin-stained slides were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples of the central nervous system, conjunctivae, tongue, salivary glands, lungs, heart, liver, gastrointestinal tract, spleen, adrenal glands, kidneys, and lymph nodes. IHC assays were performed as previously described for other infectious agents in the DAKO autostainer (Dako Corp., Carpinteria, CA) (11–14). Briefly, 3-μm sections of the tissues were deparaffinized and rehydrated. Tissue sections were then digested with 0.1 mg/mL proteinase K (Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) in 0.6 M Tris (pH 7.5)/ 0.1% CaCl2 (proteinase K buffer) for 15 min and later blocked with 20% normal sheep serum in Tris-saline-tween-20. Tissue sections were incubated for 60 min with a primary antibody. Primary antibodies included three polyclonal antiorthopoxvirus antibodies (rabbit antivariola virus, mouse antivaccinia virus, and rabbit antimonkeypox virus [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Atlanta, GA]); in addition, a monoclonal anti-Francisella tularensis antibody (Naval Biodefense Program, Bethesda, MD), and a polyclonal anti–Yersinia pestis antibody (CDC, Fort Collins, CO). This was followed by sequential application of swine antimouse or swine antirabbit link antibody, avidin-alkaline phosphatase, and naphthol/fast red substrate (Dako Corp). Sections were then counterstained in Meyer’s hematoxylin (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA).Positive controls included formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded cells infected with variola virus, vaccinia virus, and monkeypox virus. Negative controls included similar cells infected with influenza A virus and human herpesvirus 1 (herpes simplex) and 3 (varicella-zoster); animal tissue samples infected with Ebola virus, Y. pestis, and F. tularensis; human skin lesions known to have human herpesvirus 1 and 3; and human skin samples with noninfectious dermatitis caused by poison ivy or drug eruptions. Negative controls for the prairie dogs specimens consisted of sequential tissue sections incubated with normal rabbit or mouse serum.Electron Microscopy (EM)Specimens for EM were excised from paraffin-embedded blocks of lung and tongue in areas that corresponded to positive IHC results. Tissues were deparaffinized for 1 h in xylene warmed to 60°C, rehydrated through a graded series of alcohols, postfixed in phosphate-buffered 2.5% glutaraldehyde and 1% osmium tetroxide, stained with 4% uranyl acetate, dehydrated through a graded series of alcohols and propylene oxide, and embedded in a mixture of Epon-substitute and Araldite. Ultrathin sections were stained with 4% uranyl acetate and Reynold's lead citrate.ResultsGross examination of both animals revealed yellow mucoid discharge in the eyelids. One animal had a 3- to 4-mm ulcer in the center of the tongue. The lungs showed patchy areas of red-brown consolidations involving about 50% of the pulmonary parenchyma. The livers were red with a few scattered, tanned, mottled areas. Typical orthopoxvirus sequences were revealed in lung tissue samples by use of a novel multiplex PCR assay, which detected the essential DNA polymerase gene; however, the standard single-gene PCR and RFLP analysis did not show the presence of monkeypox virus. Specific monkeypox virus sequences were also obtained with more sensitive RT-PCR assays. Viral cytopathic effects were observed at days 4 and 5 in cultures inoculated with fresh lung samples.Histopathologic examination of the eyelids showed a necrotic, ulcerated lesion of the palpebral conjunctiva. The ulcer bed consisted of necrotic debris and pyknotic epithelial cells. Columnar epithelial cells surrounding the ulcer were swollen and contained dense, eosinophilic, cytoplasmic granules of various sizes that suggested Guarnieri-like inclusions. The submucosa showed mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate, necrosis, and edema. Other areas of the palpebral conjunctiva and skin showed inflammatory foci in the epithelium without ulcer formation but with ballooning degeneration of epithelial cells, acantholysis, and occasional cell necrosis. Abundant orthopoxvirus antigens were detected in areas with grossly and microscopically identified lesions (Figure 1A, B) by using orthopoxvirus IHC assays. Viral antigens were present prominently in the squamous and columnar epithelium (Figure 1B) and in lesser amounts in fibroblasts and histiocytes in the ulcer bed or underlying the lesions. In epithelial cells, antigens were observed in the cytoplasm intensely staining the cytoplasmic Guarnieri-like inclusions.Figure 1Immunohistochemical staining of a prairie dog eyelid infected with monkeypox virus, showing orthopox virus antigen staining of the cytoplasm of the epithelium of the palpebral conjunctivae (assay using anti–variola virus antibody; original magnifications: A, 12.5X; B, 25X).Histopathologically, the tongue ulcer demonstrated necrosis and mixed inflammation at the ulcer bed (Figure 2A). Nonulcerated mucosa showed focal areas of lichenoid interface, mixed inflammatory infiltrate with necrosis, ballooning degeneration, and dense eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules (Guarnieri-like inclusions) in the squamous epithelium. IHC assays showed viral antigens only in lesions (Figure 2B); the antigens had a pattern similar to that described for the necrotic, ulcerated lesion of the conjunctivae. EM examination revealed abundant mature and immature poxvirus particles in the cytoplasm of epithelial cells (Figure 2C, D).Figure 2Ulcer on tongue of a prairie dog infected with monkeypox virus (A: hematoxylin and eosin stain, 12.5X original magnification). Orthopox viral antigens are abundant in the squamous epithelium, with lesser amounts in the ulcer bed (B: immunohistochemical stain using the anti-smallpox antibody, 12.5X original magnification). Tongue epithelial cell adjacent to epidermal basement membrane (small arrows) with Guarnieri-like inclusion (large arrow) (C: transmission electron microscopy, 2,400X original magnification). Higher magnification of the Guarnieri-like inclusion shows intracellular immature (arrowhead) and mature (arrows) orthopox virions. The mature virions consist of a dense core surrounded by several laminated zones and enclosed within an outer membrane. (D: transmission electron microscopy, 17,000X original magnification.)The lungs showed concentric, coalescing bronchioalveolar pneumonia. Airways showed necrosis and mixed infiltrate of neutrophils and histiocytes in the lumen and epithelium, and the bronchial epithelium showed a reactive proliferative response (Figure 3A). Inflammation extended through the bronchilolar walls into surrounding alveoli, which demonstrated fibrinous edema, necrosis, and marked infiltrate of macrophages, some having intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions, while others showed multinucleation. Adjacent arterioles showed reactive fibrinocellular edema in the adventitia and inflammatory infiltrate. The nonnecrotic areas of the lung demonstrated intraalveolar edema. IHC assays demonstrated abundant viral antigens in the areas with bronchioalveolar inflammation (Figure 3D). Viral antigens were observed in the cytoplasm of macrophages, bronchial epithelial cells, and fibroblasts; viral antigens were also present in the necrotic debris and interstitial connective tissue (Figure 3C). Immature and mature poxvirus particles were demonstrated inside bronchial epithelial cells by using EM (Figure 3B).Figure 3Lung of prairie dog infected with monkeypox virus, showing abundant intraalveolar mixed inflammatory infiltrate and necrosis (A: hematoxylin and eosin stain, 50X original magnification). Orthopox viral antigens are abundant in the cytoplasm of the bronchiolar epithelium (D: immunohistochemical assay anti–variola virus antibody, 100X original magnification). Macrophages, fibroblasts, and alveolar epithelial cells, as well as necrotic debris demonstrate orthopox viral antigens in pneumonic areas of the lung (C: immunohistochemical stain anti–variola virus antibody, 100X original magnification). Accumulation of intracellular mature virions (arrow) in bronchial epithelial cell (arrowhead pointing to cilia) (B: transmission electron microscopy, 2,400X original magnification).Except for mild portal inflammation in the liver and reactive hyperplasia in the spleen, no significant pathologic changes were noted in other organs. Viral antigens were not observed in other tissues, with the exception of occasional medullary and subcapsular sinusoidal histiocytes in a submandibular lymph node. No IHC evidence of F. tularensis and Y. pestis was observed in the tissues.DiscussionDuring the 2003 outbreak of human monkeypox in the United States, a shipment of African rodents that contained Gambian rats and dormice is thought to have resulted in secondary infection of prairie dogs (1–4). Exposure to infected prairie dogs resulted in 37 human infections involving exotic pet dealers, pet owners, and veterinary care workers in the United States (1–3). The mode of transmission of the monkeypox virus between infected animals and humans is not clearly defined, partly because histopathologic and immunohistochemical studies of animals with naturally acquired infection have not been published. The prairie dogs in this study demonstrated abundant viral antigens and mature poxvirus particles in the tongue and conjunctival lesions; hence, direct contact with saliva or exudates from these lesions could have inoculated monkeypox virus to skin or mucous membranes of other hosts. In addition, the lungs demonstrated abundant replicating monkeypox virus in the bronchi and lung parenchyma; thus, transmission to other rodents and humans may have occurred when the infected animal coughed and dispersed infective droplets. Furthermore, the pneumonic process in these prairie dogs suggests a respiratory route of infection between rodents. Thus, the pathologic study of severely ill prairie dogs in this outbreak provided evidence that direct mucocutaneous contact and respiratory routes played a role in transmission, as has been suggested in African outbreaks of human disease (15–19).Prairie dogs may be an excellent animal model for the further study of monkeypox infections because they are small, plentiful, and susceptible to severe monkeypox virus disease. In naturally or experimentally infected animals, a spectrum of clinical illness will develop; for example, of the nonhuman species that naturally acquire monkeypox virus infections, skin lesions have only been observed in some African primate species and rope squirrels (Funiscuirus spp.) (5,20). The pathologic features observed in prairie dogs, including a necrotizing bronchopneumonia, have been described in Cynomolgus monkeys infected experimentally by inhalation of monkeypox virus (21). In these animals, the lower respiratory epithelium was the target for primary replication of virus. Monocytes carried the virus to lymphoid tissues, where a secondary viral replication occurred and resulted in the seeding of other tissues, including skin, oral mucosa, gastrointestinal tract, and the tissues of the reproductive system. In this monkey model, secondary viral replication sites had necrotizing lesions. Necrotizing lesions with viral antigens in lymphoid tissues have been seen in other animals, including prairie dogs that fell ill and died during the U.S. outbreak (data not shown). The prairie dogs in this study did not have necrotizing lymphadenitis or splenitis, which may indicate that these rodents were euthanized relatively early in the disease course.Monkeypox virus infected predominantly epithelial cells in conjunctivae, tongue, and bronchi. Histopathologically, infected epithelial cells showed prominent ballooning degeneration and dense, eosinophilic, cytoplasmic granules that were difficult to distinguish from keratohyalin bodies. Epithelial cells occasionally coalesced, forming syncytia, and their nuclei showed eosinophilic, ground-glass staining that must be differentiated from herpetic inclusions for diagnostic purposes. By use of IHC, the eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules seen in infected epithelial cells were proven to be viral inclusions (Guarnieri-like inclusions), and EM examination corroborated these findings. In the prairie dogs studied, orthopoxvirus antigens were also demonstrated in other cells, including macrophages and fibroblasts in areas adjacent to infected epithelial cells. Histopathologic studies of human monkeypox skin vesicular lesions showed an IHC staining pattern similar to that found in the tongue and conjunctiva of the infected prairie dogs (1–4,22,23).The U.S. monkeypox virus outbreak demonstrated how new diseases can emerge due to facile movement of species from one location to another (including the illegal transporting of species). The investigation of human cases at the wholesale pet store that housed a variety of African rodents and the two prairie dogs studied revealed a spectrum of monkeypox-associated disease ranging from only serologic evidence of monkeypox infection to febrile vesicular rash illness (3). Differences in disease severity may relate to the source of exposure, transmission route (i.e., inhalational versus direct mucocutaneous contact), amounts of virus inoculated, virus strain, or host susceptibility. Epidemiologic studies of human monkeypox infections have shown that younger children and persons not vaccinated against smallpox can have severe disease and complications, which supports the importance of host susceptibility, including previous immunity (18,24,25). This outbreak of monkeypox virus infection in humans and nonhuman animals is an important reminder to monitor surveillance programs for febrile rash illnesses designed to detect potential bioterrorism attacks with smallpox virus, which may be beneficial for detecting emerging infections (26).A variety of methods were used to diagnose and study monkeypox virus infection in these prairie dogs. IHC studies permitted demonstration of the virus in the context of histopathology. EM and culture demonstrated viral replication, while molecular studies were essential for determining the specific signatures of monkeypox virus. In the prairie dogs studied, standard PCR and RFLP did not show monkeypox DNA. However, RT-PCR detected monkeypox viral DNA since RT-PCR is more sensitive and can be used to accurately titrate up to 4–10 DNA copies (27).Studying necropsied animal specimens was of great benefit during this monkeypox outbreak investigation. Research into the natural biology of monkeypox has been limited because the disease is rare in humans and no descriptions exist of naturally acquired animal infections. The pathologic findings in this study of prairie dogs can be used to better define possible transmission routes and pathogenesis of human and animal monkeypox, and such a model may help develop new vaccine and treatment strategies for orthopoxvirus infections.


Title: Evidence of Long-Distance Aerial Convection of Variola Virus and Implications for Disease Control

1. IntroductionSmallpox was a widespread disease in humans caused by the variola virus, which is a member of the poxvirus family [1]. Smallpox was declared eradicated by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1980, following successful vaccination campaigns and other favorable conditions [2]. However, smallpox poses a public health threat of re-emergence due to the absence of mass vaccination, waning immunity and advances in synthetic biology, which make synthesis of variola possible [3,4]. Smallpox transmission occurs from person to person, primarily through respiratory droplets but can also transmitted through contact with infected clothing and bedding [5]. The R0 is estimated to be around 5 [6]. Whilst most pathogens have a dominant mode of transmission, they usually have more than one mode of transmission, and quantifying the relative contributions of different modes of transmission in the spread of an infection is difficult [7]. Two distinct phenomena of airborne transmission are described with variola—firstly, direct person-to-person transmission by the airborne respiratory route, and secondly, transmission over greater distances, sometimes over a mile, referred to as “aerial convection” [8].It is believed that variola virus can transmit through the airborne, aerosol and contact routes, and some cases of indirect spread via fine particle aerosols or fomites have been reported [9,10,11,12]. The risk of person-to-person airborne infection is a function of the virus concentration in respiratory fluid, the expiratory event rate, the size and volume distribution of the particles emitted per expiratory event, the receptor’s breathing rate, exposure duration, and the receptor’s location in the room relative to the source case [12]. There have been various experimental studies on animals, which confirm that infection can be produced by a single plaque-forming unit (PFU) of virus carried in respirable particles—even a submicrometric aerosol of variola can cause infection in animals [12,13,14,15].Smallpox can be transmitted through aerosols and the airborne route, as evidenced by air-sampling techniques together with culture and molecular detection methods [16]. There is also evidence showing the association between ventilation and the control of airflow directions in buildings and the transmission of infectious diseases [17]. Airborne transmission accounts for at least 10% of all nosocomial infections, based on patient-based surveillance systems and environmental sampling techniques in hospital settings [16,18].Smallpox can survive in the environment under certain conditions and contaminated particles may be still isolated from the air in the later stages of the disease corresponding to a smaller number of lesions [19]. Thomas (1974) recovered the smallpox virus from an isolation unit using an adhesive surface air-sampling technique in the presence of very low aerosol concentrations [20]. A review of the literature suggests that the role of airborne transmission may have been underestimated in many instances [21].In addition to direct respiratory transmission from person to person within 1–2 m of spatial separation, a more distant transmission has been described. Whilst it is well-established that airborne infection can occur [8,19], the spread of smallpox by means of “aerial convection” is less well understood. Aerial convection refers to transmission over a substantial distance, (greater than expected during direct person to person respiratory transmission of 1–2 metres and possibly aided by wind or air currents) a concept accepted by many epidemiologists. In recognition of this, the Ministry of Health regulations in Britain in the 1940s stipulated that smallpox hospitals should be “at least a quarter of a mile from another institution or a population of 200, and at least a mile from a population of 600” [8].Aerosol transmission can occur over short distances or long distances, and the transmission is primarily governed by air flows driven by pressure differences generated by ventilation systems, open windows and doors, movement of people or temperature differences [16]. Aerosolised particles have the potential to remain suspended in the air for hours and can expose a larger number of susceptible individuals to potential infections at a greater distance from the source [21]. Our understanding of respiratory transmission and measurement methods have improved substantially since eradication [22], which makes it timely to review the evidence. Now 40 years since clinicians and public health agencies have managed smallpox, there is a need to review the pre-eradication human evidence around smallpox transmission, especially the role of aerial convection, for which there is little awareness among contemporary clinicians. This is essential to inform disease control strategies and health care worker occupational safety in preparedness planning.The aim of this paper was to study the data and epidemiology of transmission of variola by aerial convection, and examine the hypothesis that aerial convection was only observed when the incidence of smallpox is sufficiently low to exclude other sources of infection.2. Materials and MethodsGiven the phenomenon of aerial convection was observed in the last 100 years of smallpox endemicity in the world, we examined the incidence of smallpox using the best available data, in relation to the period of observation of aerial convection. We used the systematic review methodology to identify data and evidence for aerial convection, and then analysed incidence data, documented distances of transmission, and the period of observation of aerial convection in relation to the epidemiology of smallpox deaths.2.1. Smallpox Data AnalysisIn order to clearly demonstrate the window during which aerial convection was observed relative to the epidemiology of the disease, we created the timeline of all identified observations of aerial convection that was plotted over the number of smallpox deaths using available data in London from 1700–1980. London was selected because there was better data for deaths (than cases) than global data or other countries, and the largest number of observations of aerial convection were from England.We collected the data of the annual number of deaths from smallpox in London from 1700 to 1902 [23]. Due to missing data on deaths in London between 1903 and 1958, we collected the available data to estimate data for London, including (1) the number of deaths from smallpox in England and Wales from 1911 to 1919 [24], (2) population in London, England and Wales in 1911 (26), (3) number of cases and case fatality rate in the UK from 1920–1958 [25], and (4) the number of deaths in London between 1959 and 1980 [26,27,28].We estimated that the annual deaths in London were 13% of deaths in England and Wales between 1911 and 1919, according to the population in London (4.52 million) taking 13% of the population in England and Wales (36.07 million) in 1911 [29]. Using the case fatality rate of 30% [30], we calculated the annual number of deaths in the UK from 1920 to 1958 based on the yearly reported cases [31]. The annual deaths in London were 17% of deaths in the UK between 1920 and 1958, according to the population in London (7.39 million) [32] taking 17% of the UK population (43.90 million) in 1921 [33]. The deaths in London between 1958 and 1980 were extracted from documented smallpox outbreaks in the UK [26,27,28]. These different data sources were used to create a timeline of smallpox deaths in London from 1700–1980. Then we plotted all identified observations of aerial convection over this timeline, to show the relationship of this observation period of aerial convection to the epidemiology of smallpox and the waning incidence of smallpox.2.2. Search StrategyA systematic review was conducted on finding evidence for aerial transmission of smallpox. Our review focused on identifying smallpox outbreaks occurring in humans and studying the reported transmission pattern to find evidence of aerial convection spread. Specifically, we looked for cases where people acquired smallpox in the vicinity of, but at a distance of >2 m from a known smallpox case. We searched five databases: Medline (1946 to present), Embase (1974 to present), Scopus (1960 to present), Web of Science (1898 to present), Global Health (1910 to present). Results were limited to peer-reviewed publications in English. Search terms used were “smallpox” OR “variola” AND “transmission” AND “outbreak”. We also reviewed the bibliography of retrieved articles to identify other references that might not otherwise have been identified. Secondary searches were conducted which included the cross-references from various relevant papers. Author AD independently screened each title and abstract in the search result and in case of uncertainty, the author (CRM) was consulted. A full-text evaluation was conducted by three review authors (CRM, AD and XC). The results from our review are presented in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines, which is the accepted standard for a systematic review (Figure 1) [34].2.3. Selection Criteria and InclusionWe focused on the aerial transmissibility of smallpox in outbreaks and on the evidence of transmission route from analysis of relevant outbreaks. Eligible studies had to fulfil the following criteria: (1) Peer-reviewed journal articles, (2) published in English, (3) primary focus on smallpox outbreaks in humans, (4) outbreak case studies showing evidence of transmission at distances >2 m in the absence of known smallpox transmission in the surrounding community, (5) studies on variola major or variola minor.2.4. Exclusion CriteriaFollowing the full-text assessment, we excluded (1) an outbreak or case of smallpox acquired where the acquired case was in close proximity (within a distance of 2 m) of a known case of smallpox, enabling direct respiratory transmission by droplets or aerosols, or through physical contact, or where the outbreak occurred in the presence of known smallpox transmission in the surrounding community, making transmission too widespread to observe long-distance transmission. (2) Laboratory experiments and studies unrelated to transmission route of smallpox, (3) non-human studies, (4) mathematical modelling studies, (5) studies focussing on smallpox eradication or vaccination, and (6) studies focusing on vaccinia virus.2.5. ReviewFirstly, we read all titles and abstracts of the studies identified through the search and after removing duplicates, we included relevant, eligible papers for full-text assessment studies. While considering the contributory role of airborne transmission of smallpox, we assumed that fulfillment of the following conditions indicated evidentiary support [17].An outbreak or case of smallpox in a setting that occurred due to transmission of infectious particles from one location to another spatially separate location, farther than possible through direct person to person respiratory transmission (>2 m) and without evidence of other community transmissions that could have explained incident infections. The term “aerial convection” (used in the pre-eradication era) was used for distant transmission.All the review authors were asked to consider these criteria while rating the findings of each study as “Conclusive” if aerial convection was the only explanation for one or more transmissions or “Partially conclusive” if aerial convection was one explanation for one or more transmissions, but other explanations were also possible [35].3. ResultsWe identified 22 studies meeting the inclusion criteria, which described 17 different outbreaks. The outbreaks with evidence of transmission route from the selected studies are summarized in Table 1. Eight outbreaks involved very long-range transmission beyond a single building or location and nine involved transmission within a building that could not be explained by direct person to person contact. This included two outbreaks where transmission occurred vertically from one floor to another floor of a building.Figure 2 summarises the distances of aerial convection of smallpox in different outbreaks described in Table 1, where distance was quantified. This ranged from half a mile (0.8 km) to over 9 miles (15 km) in the case of the Aralsk outbreak. Most were between 0.5–1 mile (0.8–1.6 km).Figure 3 shows the epidemiology of smallpox cases in London and the window during which aerial convection was observed, which was in a period of the very low incidence of infection, from 1881 to 1978, two years before eradication.The outbreaks we studied showed two different patterns of transmission. One was of very long-range transmission over distances of a half-mile to a mile. This comprised single source cases and a secondary case occurring at a long horizontal distance, or clustering of cases in the community within a radius around a smallpox hospital (building or ship). The second was transmission within a building (often vertically from one floor to another) or between adjacent buildings in the absence of relevant contact with an infected case. The Birmingham case [27,28], the Meschede outbreak [9,10,11,17,41,42,49] and the New York outbreak [39] showed transmission from one floor of a building to another, suggesting air currents can carry virus either through the air conditioning systems or through open windows. One study supporting aerial convection of variola is the controlled experimental work conducted in the Meschede, Germany outbreak via smoke flow visualisation [9,10,49]. These results clearly revealed that the airflow patterns matched the location of cases within buildings. At the time, however, such studies were limited, and emphasis was placed on trying to explain transmission by other modes of transmission.The second pattern was long-distance horizontal transmission from one site to another of a mile or more, as seen in Fulham [8,36], Salonika [37], Gravesend [37], and Purfleet [8], among others. The Fulham data are particularly convincing because of the painstaking collection of data and mapping of smallpox cases in proximity to hospitals, and the fact that the initial observations in Fulham were reproduced around the country. [8,36] The observations from the smallpox ships in the Thames and recurrent epidemics in the nearest communities to shore were also supportive. An outlier case was that of the Lev Berg ship in the Aral sea. In this instance, it is likely that the official reports (which state the index case got off the ship at several stops) was an obfuscation of the truth, and that the comments of Dr Pyotr Burgasov after the collapse of the Soviet Union (that a 400 g smallpox “bomb” was exploded on Vozrozhdeniye Island) were closer to the truth [50]. The Lev Berg sailed 15 km off the coast of Vozrozhdeniye Island, which was a known Soviet biological weapon testing site. It seems likely this was the source of infection, and possible that a weaponised attack may disperse the virus at least 15 km.4. DiscussionUnderstanding smallpox transmission is crucial for preparedness planning and can inform control of a re-emergent epidemic of smallpox. It was accepted that variola was most effectively transmitted by the respiratory route, and it was formerly called a “preferentially” airborne infectious disease” [51]. Variola virus has been recovered in airborne droplets from air sampling, supporting aerosol transmission [20]. The observation of aerial convection in a number of outbreaks further supports airborne transmission. Aerial convection, however, was more controversial and is not a concept that is currently in the corporate memory or included in hospital infection control protocols. We found supportive evidence of aerial convection from 12 out of 17 outbreaks, and a further 5 outbreaks which were partially conclusive. The examples of transmission from one floor to another or one building to another, presumably by air currents, are more easily explained, as distances were shorter and supported by the smoke experiments at Meschede, Germany [9,10,49]. In the last documented case of smallpox in the world, the Birmingham case, we can be fairly certain the patient was infected from a virus in the laboratory. Case ascertainment was high at that time, the location was the UK, which had long since eliminated smallpox, so it is likely the source of infection was an aerosolised virus through air-conditioning dust or an open window. More recently, the transmission of SARS in the Amoy Gardens building, where aerosolised faecal material spread from floor to floor through plumbing and open bathroom grates, but also from open windows to adjacent buildings, demonstrated that air currents can carry virus particles from one building to another [52]. However, in over half of the outbreaks we reviewed, there were reports of infections from a single index patient that were between a quarter to one mile apart in the absence of other smallpox cases in the community. At such distances, other modes of transmission are largely infeasible, although secondary aerosolization from contaminated clothing or bedlinen carried from the patient room to the community is possible. Another possibility in the apparently long-range transmissions is that these were exposed to missed mild or vaccine-modified cases. However, it should be noted in the case in Greece, that the secondary case occurred within the incubation period of the index case being symptomatic [37].The theory of aerial convection is biologically plausible. Several studies in humans and animals have shown that virus concentration is higher in the lower respiratory tract than the upper respiratory tract and that the infectious dose is very low, consistent with smaller airborne infectious particles from the lower respiratory tract being the source of infection transmission from smallpox patients [8]. In fact, asymptomatic contacts have been documented to have variola in the oropharynx, but are not infectious and only a minority go on to develop smallpox [53]. This suggests that transmission of infection occurs preferentially with a lower respiratory infection, which would generate fine airborne infectious particles [8].It should be noted that the theory of aerial convection was first proposed in England in 1881 following the observations around Fulham and that the data collected since then was in an era of rapidly declining incidence of disease, well after compulsory smallpox vaccination in the country in the mid-1800s. It is likely that prior to routine vaccination, transmission in the community was too widespread and intense to observe unusual patterns of aerial transmission from a single case to others. If there were many cases in a community, any incident cases would be attributed to close proximity transmission. It was only in the period of decline in the incidence of smallpox that the phenomenon became apparent because explanatory source cases in the community were largely absent. During the 100 years leading up to eradication, the low incidence of smallpox made it easier to observe unusual transmissions from single cases, and exclude close contact with a known case. There was, therefore, a limited window to collect data before smallpox became exceedingly rare in England [8]. Whilst the theory was debated and disputed, including the role of climatic wind conditions in the dispersion of smallpox by air, by 1904 more experts were in favour of aerial convection than against. However, by this time smallpox became too rare to collect ongoing outbreak data, and we are left only with the data from documented outbreaks between 1881 and 1971 [8]. Other than the systematic analysis of data attempted in England in the late 19th century, we are left with evidence from the individual outbreaks reviewed in this study.In 1886, Sir George Buchannan addressed the Epidemiologic Society of England on the topic of aerial convection of smallpox: “We cannot get away from these facts; they are as definite as any known to epidemiology. They had already been ascertained by a multiplicity of careful and detailed observations, in many hospitals, in different epidemics, in London and the Provinces. Recent epidemics have now enabled the question to be tested afresh. That smallpox hospitals have had a deleterious influence in disseminating the disease in surrounding areas is now admitted, so there is no need for this aspect of the case to be argued further, but it is noteworthy that with no other disease has a similar influence been established. In this respect, smallpox stands alone, which proves that its infectivity is exceptional” [8]. The uniqueness of smallpox transmission in contrast to other infections is the striking point made. There are alternative explanations to cases occurring within the incubation period of theoretical exposure to a distantly located primary case. In the Purfleet examples, some experts felt that staff were visiting the communities onshore in secret, possibly carrying with them contaminated clothing or bedding. It was also postulated in Fulham and the rest of the English hospitals that the rings of infection around the buildings were due to movement of staff wearing contaminated clothing. Secondary aerosolization of virus from scabs or other bodily secretions on clothing is possible. The hospital staff, if immune, could conceivably carry fragments of scabs on their clothing which could infect susceptible community contacts whilst the staff themselves remained well. It was documented that smallpox particles are extraordinarily resistant to inactivation by drying (low humidity conditions) and if not exposed to direct sunlight, can remain within dust particles for long periods of time (54,55). If this is the case, isolated single cases could occur by re-aerosolisation of scab material on clothing or bedding. One study in 1957 showed that scabs from smallpox patients could contain the viable virus for 18 months, and for years if the scabs were kept in bottles [54]. In a later study in 1967, Wolff and Croon showed that in dried crusts from skin lesions of variola minor, the virus can remain viable for at least 13 years at room temperature [55].5. ConclusionsIn summary, the evidence from these outbreaks is supportive of aerial convection of smallpox at distances of more than a mile in some cases and is biologically plausible due to higher concentration of virus in the lower respiratory tract, environmental factors such as wind, and the low infectious dose. In addition, in many of the observed long-range transmissions, there was a temporal association between potential exposure to a known case and illness. It is possible, that some cases of smallpox were “super-spreaders” with much higher viral shedding than others. This has been seen with other viral respiratory pathogens such as SARS. If this is the case, super-spreaders could explain long-range transmission.The theory of aerial convection arose in the period of decline in smallpox incidence in the UK, as the rarity of the disease made it possible to notice unusual transmissions in the absence of close contact. This small window of opportunity for studying aerial convection then rapidly closed, as smallpox became extremely rare in the UK by the early 20th century. This may, in part, explain the loss of this disease transmission theory from current infection control policy and practice, but potentially places smallpox in a different category from other known respiratory transmissible infections. In modern hospitals in high-income countries, negative pressure isolation rooms would reduce any risk of aerial convection. Other explanations for apparent aerial convection are possible, including missed chains of transmission, fomite transmission and secondary aerosolization of contaminated materials such as bed linen. Should smallpox re-emerge, awareness of the possibility of aerial convection is important, as it could inform planning for smallpox treatment facilities and protecting hospitals and surrounding communities.


Title: Monkeypox: epidemiology, pathogenesis, treatment and prevention

IntroductionMonkeypox, an endemic disease in both West and Central Africa, before 2022 outbreak, a few cases were reported outside of Africa and these were associated with imports from endemic countries.1–5 However, following the initial case diagnosed in the United Kingdom, the number of monkeypox infection have dramatically increased.3,4,6–8 We are now facing the first multiple countries outbreak most with no clear epidemiological links to the endemic countries.9,10 World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General has announced the ongoing monkeypox outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).11,12 The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that as of 13 September 2022 more than 57,995 confirmed cases had been documented in 100 countries/territories13 (Fig. 1 and Table 1).Fig. 1Geographical distribution of confirmed monkeypox cases during the outbreak between January and September 2022. Confirmed cases include those laboratory-confirmed as monkeypox virus and may include cases only confirmed as orthopoxvirus. Data presented as of 12 September 2022 were obtained from CDC. Diagram generated with GraphPad Prism 9Table 12022 monkeypox global outbreakCountryCasesaCountryCasesCountryCasesCountryCasesUnited States of America21984Poland145Estonia10Qatar3Spain6749Australia129India10Congo3Brazil6033Bolivia103Central African Republic8Venezuela3France3789Norway82Lebanon8The Bahamas2Germany3533Ghana76Saudi Arabia8Cuba2United Kingdom3491Hungary71Cameroon7Georgia2Peru1808Greece66Thailand7Greenland (Den.)2Canada1321Ecuador59Bulgaria5Guyana2Netherlands1198Czechia58Cyprus5Liberia2Colombia938Luxembourg53Lithuania5Moldova2Portugal871Slovenia45New Zealand5Montenegro2Italy805Romania36South Africa5South Korea2Mexico788Malta33Uruguay5South Sudan2Belgium726Serbia31Andorra4Sudan2Chile486Finland30Honduras4Barbados1Switzerland480Croatia27Japan4Egypt1Austria286Dominican Republic21Latvia4El Salvador1Israel241Singapore16Philippines4Indonesia1Argentina221United Arab Emirates16China4Iran1Nigeria220Slovakia14Benin3Paraguay1Democratic Republic of Congo195Guatemala12Bosnia and Herzegovina3Russia1Denmark183Iceland12Costa Rica3Turkey1Sweden165Panama12Monaco3Ireland160Jamaica11Morocco3aData updated on September 13, 2022 (Source: CDC)Monkeypox virus belongs to the Poxviridae family’s Orthopoxvirus (OPV) genus, along with variola virus (VARV, also known as smallpox), vaccinia virus (VACV), camelpox virus (CMPV), and cowpox virus (CPXV),14–16 all of which are pathogenic for humans. There was 96.3% identity between the monkeypox virus genome’s central region, which encodes essential enzymes and structural proteins, and VARVs, which means they are highly genetically similar.17,18 In 1980, the WHO certified that smallpox had been eradicated worldwide after successful vaccination.19–22Monkeypox virus has double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) as its genetic material that resembles brick-like particles ranging in size from 200–250 nm in diameter and thus can be seen by electron microscopy (magnified approximately ×10,000).23,24 In monkeypox virus, there are two genetic clades: West Africa (WA, Clade II) clade and Congo Basin (CB, Clade I) clade,25,26 the latter is also known as the Central African (CA) clade and more severe after infection.27–32 In 1958, monkeypox virus was first discovered in Copenhagen among laboratory monkeys, and its first monkeypox virus infection of a human occurred in 1970 in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in a 9-month-old child, with suspected smallpox.33–35 Monkeypox is endemic in both West Africa and Central Africa since 1970, with a mortality rate between 1 and 10%.36,37 Sequencing analysis of the current outbreak of monkeypox indicates that the virus is Western African in origin.38–43Recently, the number of patients of monkeypox has increased dramatically, provoking great concern.44–49 For this epidemic to be controlled, monkeypox virus must be better understood and re-evaluated.50,51 Here, we review the recent investigations on monkeypox, including epidemiology of monkeypox, monkeypox virus reservoirs, novel transmission patterns, mutations and mechanisms of viral infection, clinical characteristics, laboratory diagnosis and treatment measures, as well as prevention of monkeypox infection.Epidemiology of monkeypoxIt was in 1970 that the first patient of human monkeypox was diagnosed in the DRC.33 After that, more than 400 monkeypox patients were documented in Africa between 1970 and 1990. Of these, the vast majority were diagnosed at DRC,28,52–54 followed by 6 cases in Central African Republic (CAR),55 2 cases in Cameroon,56,57 3 cases in Nigeria,14,58,59 2 cases in Ivory Coast,60 4 cases in Liberia,58 and 1 case each in Sierra Leone and Gabon.56 In 1990, there have been four cases of suspected monkeypox in Cameroon, one of which has been confirmed.61,62 In 1996, the DRC experienced a prolonged outbreak of human monkeypox. Initially, a patient was confirmed in February 1996, and until August of that year, a total of 71 suspected monkeypox cases were reported. As of 1999, over 500 patients of monkeypox were reported in the DRC.61,63–65 From February to August 2001, a total of 16 cases of monkeypox were identified in the province of Equateur in the DRC.66 Meanwhile, a study conducted by Anne et al.67 in the DRC from 2001 to 2004 examined vesicle fluids and crusted scabs from 136 people suspected of having monkeypox. They found 51 patients of monkeypox.Human monkeypox attracted little attention worldwide until the first outbreak outside Africa occurred in the United States in 2003.68,69 Forty-seven cases, with confirmed (37 patients) and suspected (10 patients) monkeypox were reported, and all people infected by contact with pet prairie dogs (Cynomys spp.).70 The pets were infected after being in close proximity to imported small mammals (African rodents, rope squirrels (Funiscuirus spp.), tree squirrels (Heliosciurus spp.), Gambian giant rats (Cricetomys spp.), brushtail porcupines (Atherurus spp.), dormice (Graphiurus spp.), and striped mice (Hybomys spp.) from Ghana. According to CDC, laboratory tests using virus isolation and PCR amplification have proved that at least three dormice, two rope squirrels, and one Gambian giant rat were found to be infected by monkeypox. It was noted that no deaths occurred and no human-to-human transmission was observed,68 which was explained by the strain being a West African strain, based on genetic analysis.69 In addition, a study has conducted to evaluate the effects of the route of infection on the clinical illness of human monkeypox and demonstrated that significant symptoms of systemic diseases were more likely to occur in cases exposed to complex exposures than in cases exposed to noninvasive exposures (49.1 vs. 16.7%; P = 0.041).70 In contrast to Africa, a large number of cases confirmed in this outbreak are adults.71 In 2003, the Republic of Congo (ROC) reported the first outbreak of human monkeypox. It was recorded in this outbreak that 11 patients of monkeypox were confirmed and probable, all of whom were younger than 18 years of age, one death occurred. It is believed that the monkeypox virus has been transmitted from human to human six consecutive times, making it the longest recorded series of consecutive transmissions of monkeypox from one individual to another.72 In Unity State, Sudan, between September and December 2005, ten confirmed and nine possible patients of monkeypox were described in 5 villages (2 in Bentiu, 3 in Modin, 5 in Nuria, 5 in Rubkona, and 4 in Wang Kay).73 Between 2010 and 2018, varying numbers of monkeypox patients were documented in several African countries, including DRC,74,75 CAR,76–78 Cameroon,79,80 Liberia,76 Sierra Leone,81 as well as COA.82 In addition, it was reported in 2017 that Nigeria was experiencing an outbreak. 122 confirmed or possible patients of human monkeypox were reported between September 2017 and September 2018 in 17 states in Nigeria. Six deaths were recorded (case fatality rate 6%).83–85Thousands of people around the world have been infected by the monkeypox outbreak in 2022, which followed several years of sporadic cases outside of Africa (United Kingdom,86–88 Singapore,89,90 Israel,91,92 United States93). On May 2022, multiple cases of monkeypox were identified in the United Kingdom.2 On 6 May 2022, an individual with travel ties to Nigeria was diagnosed with monkeypox.94 On 12 May, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) in London confirmed two additional cases of monkeypox.95 There is no link between the two of them and they have never traveled to the endemic region. A week later, another four cases were confirmed. Unusually, there was no known contact between these patients and the previous confirmed cases.96 By polymerase chain reaction (PCR) experiment of patient swab samples, the outbreak was caused by the West African clade of monkeypox virus, which is less fatal than the other known monkeypox variant (CB, Clade I) after infection, with a case lethally rate of only 1%.39,50,97,98Portugal, Canada, and Spain documented 14, 13, and 7 cases of monkeypox, respectively, on 18 May.99–101 It was also the same day that the United States identified its first monkeypox patient of 2022.102 On 19 May, Belgium and Sweden reported their first cases.103,104 Belgium announced that monkeypox cases were required to be isolated for 21 days at once. Belgium also became the first country in the world to require self-isolation of monkeypox cases. At the same time, Italy has reported first case, a traveler from the Canary Islands.105 Besides, France has reported a suspected case. Genomic analysis the virus isolated from a monkeypox virus infecting case in Portugal showed that the virus also belonged to the WA branch of evolution, closest to the virus carried by cases imported from Nigeria in 2018 and 2019.43 Two patients of monkeypox were confirmed in Australia on 20 May, both of whom had recently returned from travel to Europe.106 On the same day, the first cases were confirmed in Germany, as well as in the Netherlands and France.106–110 On the next day, the first cases were confirmed in both Switzerland111 and Israel,112 and the patient documented by the Israeli Ministry of Health is also the first case of monkeypox in Asia.113After May 2022, a large number of monkeypox patients were confirmed in non-endemic countries worldwide. This unusual outbreak promoting the WHO to declare monkeypox as an “evolving threat of moderate public health concern” on June 23. Furthermore, the WHO announced that monkeypox outbreaks in many countries and regions constitute a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” (PHEIC) on July 23, 2022.114,115 Meanwhile, monkeypox prevention and treatment guidelines have been issued in several countries around the world.116 As of 13 September 2022, 57,995 monkeypox virus infections which were laboratory confirmed have been reported in >100 countries or regions across all six WHO regions13 (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Of these, a total of 18 deaths were reported in 9 countries. In particular, a very recent news indicated that the first person of monkeypox was confirmed in Hong Kong on September 6.117 Epidemiological investigation revealed that this patient arrived in Hong Kong from the Philippines on September 5 at the age of 30 years. Consequently, as a result of the monkeypox emergence in Hong Kong, a preparedness and response plan has been activated by the Hong Kong Government. Also, this is the first reported person of monkeypox since the four cases were confirmed in Taiwan Province of China.118,119 Notably, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) declared monkeypox a public health emergency on August 4, 2022 in the United States.120 The monkeypox epidemic in the United States is extremely serious, as of September 6, monkeypox had since spread to every state, with a total of 20,733 cases.121,122Monkeypox virus reservoirsMonkeypox is a zoonotic disease whose natural reservoir remains unknown.123,124 Several researches have conducted to determine the reservoir or natural hosts of monkeypox virus, Khodakevich et al.125,126 Have reported that antibodies to the virus were found in 2 of 18 squirrels tested. The monkeypox virus was extracted from a diseased squirrel, Funisciurus anerythrus, which was the first report of monkeypox virus being isolated from a wild animal. Other researches have also suggested that squirrels of the genera Funisciurus and Heliosciurus are related to the natural cycle of monkeypox virus in DRC,127–130 as well as Rodents of the genera Cricetomys, Graphiurus, elephant shrews of the genus Petrodromus.127 In March 2012, monkeypox virus was separated from a wild-living monkey (a sooty mangabey) by Radonic et al.131 Its whole-genome sequence showed that it had significant similarities with monkeypox viruses located in Western Africa. Patrono and colleagues132 described the frequent appearance of monkeypox virus in a wild-living chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus, hereafter chimpanzee) population from Taï National Park, Ivory Coast. A number of animal species, mostly rodents and non-human primates, have been confirmed to be susceptible to the virus after multiple investigations,133,134 as listed in Table 2.Table 2Animal species susceptible to infection with monkeypox virusOrderFamilySpeciesCommon nameReferenceDidelphimorphiaDidelphidaeMonodelphis domestica, Didelphis marsupialisGray short-tailed opossum, Southern opossum483EulipotyphlaErinaceidaeAtelerix spp.African hedgehog483LagomorphaLeporidaeOryctolagus cuniculusWhite rabbit484MacroscelideaMacroscelididaePetrodromus tetradactylusFour toed sengis (elephant shrews)127,133PilosaMyrmecophagidaeMyrmecophaga tridactylaNew World giant anteater485RodentiaChinchillidaeChinchilla lanigeraChinchilla483CricetidaeSigmodon hispidusCotton rat486DipodidaeJaculus spp.Jerboa483GliridaeGraphiurus spp.African dormouse483,487MuridaeMus musculus, Mastomy natalensis, Oenomys hypoxanthus, Rattus norvegicusHouse mouse, Multimammate mouse, Rufus-nosed rat, Brown rat133,134,488–491NesomyidaeCricetomys spp.Giant pouched rat483,492SciuridaeCynomys ludovicanus, Funiscirus spp., Heliosciurus gambianus, Protexerus stranger, Marmota monax, Marmota bobak, Spermophilus tridecemlineatus, Sciurus vulgaris, Xerus sp., Funisciurus lemniscatus, Funisciurus anerythrus, Funisciurus ilsabella, Funisciurus congicus, Heliosciurus gambianus, Heliosciurus rufobrachiumBlack-tailed priarie dog, Rope squirrel Sun squirrel, Forest giant squirrel, groundhog, Ground squirrel, 13-Lined ground squirrel, Red squirrel, Unstriped ground squirrels, Ribboned rope squirrel Thomas’s rope squirrel, Lady Burton’s rope squirrel, Gambian sun squirrel, Red-legged sun squirrel125,127,129,130,133,483,490,493–499HystricidaeAtherurus africanusAfrican brush-tailed porcupine490PrimatesCallitrichidaeCallithrix JacchusMarmoset500CeropithicediaeColobus spp., Cercocebus atys, Cercocebus galeritus, Cercopithecus Ascanius, Cercopithecus mona, Cercopithecus aethiops, Cercopithecus nictitans, Cercopithecus petaurista, Cercopithecus neglectus, Cercopithecus pogonias, Cercopithecus hamlyni, Cercopithecus spp., Colobus badius (now Procolobus badius), Allenopithecus nigroviridis, Macaca mulatta, Macaca fascicularis, Semnopithecus spp., Colobus badiusColobuses, Sooty mangabey, Agile or Crested mangabey, Black-cheeked white-nosed monkey/Red-tailed monkey, Mona monkey, Grivet, Putty-nosed Monkey, Lesser Spot-nosed Monkey, De Brazza’s Monkey, Crowned Monkey, Hamlyn’s Monkey, Guenons, Red colobus monkey, Allen’s swamp monkey, Rhesus monkey, Crab-eating Macaque, Gray langur, Red Colobus125,130,131,490,498,499,501–504HominidaeGorilla sp., Pan troglodytes, Pongo sp., Homo sapiensGorilla, Chimpanzee, Orangutan, Human76,485,490HylobatidaeHylobates larLar Gibbon505CebidaeSaimiri sciureussquirrel monkey505LorisidaePerodicticus pottoWest African Potto490CarnivoraProcyonidae, FelidaeNasua nasua, Felis spp.South American Coati, Felis483,490,498ArtiodactylaSuidaeSus scrofaEurasian Wild Pig127Novel transmission patternsMonkeypox transmission from animals to human may include direct contact with diseased parts or body fluids of infected animals, scratching or biting by animals, eating meat from infected animals, and contact with contaminated objects.135–141 Person to person transmission of monkeypox is caused by close contact with a human with monkeypox virus infection, including contact respiratory secretions from those infected individuals, skin lesions or genitals, prolonged face-to-face contact, along with their bedding and clothing142–144 (Fig. 2). There is very limited data on monkeypox infection during pregnancy, although a study has demonstrated the existence of vertical transmission of monkeypox virus.145,146 At the General Hospital of Kole, an observational research was conducted, Mbala et al. described the fetal outcomes for one of four pregnant women.147 Of the four women, one delivered a healthy baby, one had fetal death and two delivered miscarriages in their first trimester. In addition, monkeypox virus was detected in semen sample by researchers.148 Therefore, more attention is needed cause individuals such as children and pregnant women are more susceptible with increasing cases.145,147,149–157 Notably, a very recent report proved that human-to-dog transmission of monkeypox virus.158 Next-generation sequencing was used to compare the DNA sequences of the monkeypox virus from the dog and the patient. The samples both contained viruses of the human monkeypox virus-1 clade, lineage B.1, that have been spreading in countries that are not endemic to the disease.According to previous reports, monkeypox virus was not previously been highly contagious. Monkeypox of the CB clade was found to have a lower basic reproduction number (R0) than 1 between 1980 and 1984 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.159,160 Disseminated patients of monkeypox have been recorded in Africa, usually because of close contact with wild animals, especially rodents. Such travel related monkeypox individuals have limited secondary spread, making human-to-human transmission inefficient.1,76,83 However, a recent study by Du et al.161 reported that the reproduction number was estimated to be 1.39 (95% CrI: 1.37, 1.42) by aggregating all patients in 70 countries as of July 22 2022. According to initial estimates based on analysis of the first 255 PCR-identified patients of monkeypox in Italy in 2022, the reproduction number among men who have sex with men is 2.43 (95% CI 1.82–3.26).162 Which indicates that the disease has epidemic potential. Meanwhile, the vast majority of monkeypox patients had not recently traveled to the endemic regions of Africa, such as Nigeria, the DRC as well as central and western Africa.163 Human-to-human transmission of this virus is unusually frequent in this outbreak, suggesting close contact is the most likely route of transmission.164Another unusual feature is that the large number of cases diagnosed with monkeypox are male, and a considerable part of patients have sex with men (MSM), particularly in Canada, Spain, and the UK, suggesting that sexuality is another forms of close contact, even though monkeypox was not considered a sexually transmitted disease before.165–177 It is reported that higher proportion of MSM infected is due to accidental entry into the community and then sexual behavior constituting “close contact” rather than sexual transmission of the monkeypox virus itself.178 However, a study of samples from 528 confirmed cases outside endemic areas in Africa between April and June showed that 98% of patients were bisexual men or gay and 95% of those infected were suspected of transmission through sexual activity.179 A prospective cohort study in Spain indicated that 91.7% cases identifying as MSM in 181 monkeypox infection cases.180 Besides, monkeypox virus DNA was detected by PCR in seminal fluid in 29 of the 32 cases.179 On 3 August, In the Monkeypox Surveillance Bulletin published by the ECDC-WHO Regional Office for Europe, 99% (15,439/15,572) of the cases were males, with 43.4% of MSM cases.181 Meanwhile, using a branching process transmission model, researchers showed that a small minority of people have disproportionately large numbers of partners, which could explain the continued increase in monkeypox patients among MSM population.182 Another research showed a transmission number of 2.43 in the MSM community among Italian cases in May-June 2022.183 According to Endo and colleagues,182 monkeypox’s basic reproductive number (R0) may be significantly higher than 1 over the MSM sexual contact network. Monkeypox virus spread model for assessing outbreak risk in a metropolitan area indicated that if transmission efficiency increases in the higher-risk group like gays and MSMs, broader populations may be affected.184 On the other hand, Bragezzi et al.185 conducted a meta-analysis to show that sexual contact is involved in 91% cases (total 124 cases). Notably, a recent study of 21,098 monkeypox cases (data from 41 countries, as of August 23, 2022) revealed that the vast majority were MSM, with a typical rash characteristic.186 Transmission was mainly through close contact during sexual activities. Overall, all these reports suggested that MSM was up to now the most frequently suspected route of transmission.173,175,187–193 Consequently, targeted interventions are needed in communities with a large part of MSM individuals to prevent further transmission. And further research is demanded to determine whether sexual transmission is possible.Monkeypox virus mutations and mechanisms of viral infectionMonkeypox virus is a species of double-stranded DNA virus which causes monkeypox in humans and other animals. It belongs to the genus Orthopoxvirus in the family Poxviridae. Among all animal viruses, poxviruses have the largest and most complex DNA genomes.194,195 There are four major elements of the virion: core, lateral bodies, outer membrane, and the outer lipoprotein envelope.196 The central core contains the viral dsDNA and core fibrils. The monkeypox virus genome consists of 197 kb with the central genomic region comprising of 101 kb.17 Both terminal variables regions include a 6379 bp terminal inverted repetition (ITR) with approximately 80 bp long hairpin loop, 70 or 54 bp short tandem repeats and unique ITR sequences NR 1 and NR 2 and the coding region.32,197,198 The virus contains about 190 nonoverlapping open reading frames (ORFs),17,197,199,200 four of which are located in the ITR sequence.197 Genes responsible for viral replication, transcription, assembly, and release are conservatively located in the genome’s central region, as they are in all orthopoxviruses.200 While most of the genes expressing virulence and host tropism are found at both ends of the genome. These terminal genes play a role in immune evasion by interfering with signaling, presentation, and recognition of antigens and apoptosis.201–203Monkeypox virus has a low frequency of genomic mutations, due to the DNA double-stranded structure, and the 3’–5’ exonuclease activity of its DNA polymerase.204,205 However, the 2022 monkeypox virus diverges from the related 2018–2019 viruses by a mean of 50 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), considering previous estimates of the substitution rate for orthopoxviruses, this is much higher than expected.39,206 Such a divergent branch could speed up the evolution of the monkeypox virus. Notably, further examination of the mutational profiles of these SNPs suggested a dramatic mutational bias, with 26 (14 non-synonymous, 10 synonymous, and 2 intergenic) and 15 (nine non-synonymous and 16 synonymous) being GA>AA and TC>TT nucleotide replacements, respectively. Several studies have indicated that mutations observed in viral genome editing may be caused by apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing catalytic polypeptide-like 3 (APOBEC3) enzymes.207–212 Another phylogenetic analysis indicated that the monkeypox virus‐2022 strains contained 46 new consensus mutations, including 24 nonsynonymous mutations, compared with the monkeypox virus-2018 strain.213 We suspected that the lower mortality and higher transmission of 2022 monkeypox virus than previous monkeypox virus may related to these viral mutations. Although these viruses are under continual adaptation, it is unknown whether these mutations contribute to help the virus evade host immunity. To further understand how these mutations affect viral function, additional research is required.Unlike other DNA viruses, monkeypox virus replicates in the cytoplasm of the host cell.196 Poxviruses enter into the host cell may be divided into 3 steps (Fig. 3): virus attachment, hemifusion, and core entry, which occurs at the cell membrane or following endocytosis.196,214,215 A unique feature of poxviruses is that they produce two types of infectious particles: extracellular virions (EVs) and mature virions (MVs), both viral particles have different viral surface epitopes.216 Poxviruses enter cells through different mechanisms depending on their infectious forms, mature virion (MV) with single outer membrane, or enveloped virion (EV) with additional membrane and different protein composition.217–222Fig. 2Schematic illustration of the transmission and clinical characteristics of monkeypox. There are many modes of transmission, animals infected with monkeypox virus (such as squirrels, rodents, monkey, and sooty mangabey), direct contact with body fluids or diseased parts of infected animals, scratching or biting by animals, consumption of meat from infected animals, sexual contact (MSM), and contact with contaminated objects, respiratory secretions from those infected individuals, skin lesions, along with their bedding and clothing. The clinical characteristics of monkeypox are depicted on the right side of the figure. General features such as lymphadenopathy, fever, headache, chills and/or sweats, sore throat, muscle ache, lack of energy, rash, and genital rashes are seen commonly. Complications of monkeypox include pneumonitis, encephalitis, keratitis, and secondary bacterial infectionsDespite not being able to identify specific receptors for poxviruses, many glycosaminoglycans including heparin sulfates and chondroitin, as well as laminin, contribute to their attachment to cells.217,223,224 Up to now, many researches have been demonstrated that several vaccinia virus proteins are vital for binding to the cell surface, including D8L,225,226 A27L,227,228 A34R,229–232 A26L224 and H3L.233–235 It is following viral attachment that the virion binds to the membrane and fuses with the host cell, causing its core to be released into the cell’s cytoplasm. Virion core contains enzymes and factors that initiate transcription. It was proven that L1, F9, A28, A27, L5, H2 were essential viral envelope proteins for cellular entry.236–243 Virus-encoded multi-subunit DNA-dependent RNA polymerase initiates viral transcription, which is followed by host ribosome-mediated translation of early, intermediate, and late proteins. The intermediate and late stages of viral gene transcription require cooperation with host-derived transcription factors.244–248 Synthesis of poxvirus DNA occurs in the cytoplasm. A majority of viral particles remain in the cytoplasm as intracellular mature virions (IMVs) and are encased within the protein matrix of scabs. A second envelope (intracellular enveloped virions, IEVs) may be acquired by the remaining virions, and they are attached to the cell membrane of their host.249 As cell surface-associated enveloped virions (CEVs), they cause cell-to-cell transmission of the virus, while extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs) contribute to systemic transmission.250Clinical characteristicsThe clinical characteristics of monkeypox are quite similar to those of smallpox, but the monkeypox is clinically milder.37,251–253 It is crucial to realize that monkeypox and smallpox differ mainly by the occurrence of lymphadenopathy,141 since 90% of monkeypox patients suffer from lymph node enlargement.254 Monkeypox is most commonly confused with chickenpox, caused by varicella-zoster virus (VZV). In terms of their clinical characteristics, these two diseases share a great deal in common. Moreover, several studies have reported that individuals are infected both monkeypox virus and VZV.66,67,127The incubation time of monkeypox virus is usually 5–21 days.162,183,255,256 According to Miura’s report, incubation period (18 cases) is estimated to be 8.5 days on average.255 Based on 22 possible (N = 1) and confirmed (N = 21) monkeypox patients reported in the United States through 6, 2022, Charniga and colleagues estimated the incubation time for monkeypox.256 According to their study, the incubation time from exposure to the onset of symptoms was 7.6 days on average. Besides, another research found that among 23 people with known history of exposure, the median incubation period was 7 days (between 3 and 20 days).179In humans, monkeypox disease can be divided into two phases: the prodrome and the rash. Initial symptoms of monkeypox virus infection include headache, lack of energy, fever, chills and/or sweats, sore throat, muscle ache, and lymphadenopathy5,257–260 (Fig. 2). Usually, few days after fever and lymphadenopathy, the rash appears. Rash starts with the face and then appears the whole body, and is characterized by a few to several thousand lesions.83,91,261 As the rash progresses about 2–4 weeks, plaque is replaced by papules, blisters, pustules, scabs, followed by shedding.28,254,262 Complications of monkeypox include encephalitis, keratitis, pneumonitis, and secondary bacterial infections.28,143,254,263In the United States, a report on the epidemiological and clinical features of monkeypox cases showed 42% of persons (n = 291 participants) has no prodromal symptoms, and 37% of patients did not have fever as of the time of assessment, despite most patients included typical features.122 And genital rashes were observed in many cases, which was also recently proven in another studies.264–270 Other recent reports describe similar clinical characteristics.180,271,272 Patel and colleagues272 demonstrated that all 197 monkeypox infection cases developed mucocutaneous lesions, typically in the genitals (111 of 197 patients) or the perianal areas, causing rectal pain and penile edema. Moreover, according to a case report from Spain, 78 of 181 persons had lesions in the oral and perioral region and 141 in the anogenital region. The following complications occurred in 70 of the 181 patients: 45 (24.9%) of 181 had a proctitis, 19 (10.5%) tonsillitis, and 6 (3.3%) had a bacterial skin abscess.180 The clinician should remain vigilant for monkeypox-like rashes regardless of whether the rash has disseminated or had a prodrome prior to the rash. Notably, the possibility of some monkeypox virus infections being asymptomatic has been raised by two recent case reports from Europe. It has been shown in several studies that monkeypox could go unobserved when it is propagable, so physicians and persons at high risk should be aware of this fact.171,172,273Available data from the European Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States indicated that 28–51% have human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection among MSM patients with monkeypox.122,167,179,180,272,274 Currently, the risk for monkeypox infection is unknown, however, in people with HIV.Symptoms of monkeypox last 2–4 weeks, and the disease is usually self-limiting. The lethality of monkeypox patients after infection depend on the clade of virus infected, route of infection, patient age, and patients infected with the CA clade of the virus is generally higher than the WA clade.6,70,141,275 Previous reports80,83,97,276–278 indicated that the case fatality rates (CFR) of monkeypox ranging from 1 to 11%. What’s more, in a systematic review that exclusively evaluated the case fatality rates (CFR) by clades, the overall rate of case fatalities was confirmed to be 8.7%, which was significantly lower for West African clade (3.6%, 95% CI 1.7–6.8%) than Central African clade (10.6%, 8.4–13.3%).1,66 Among 1958 patients, some 4% (95% CI 1–9%) of hospitalized patients had fatal outcomes.260 In the current 2022 monkeypox outbreak, it was reported that patients at least sixteen years old always have milder symptoms in the current investigations, with a pooled case fatality rate of 0.03% (1 of 2941 patients).279 Monkeypox is more often fatal in children, which is similar to smallpox.36,80 As of September 2022, a total of 15 deaths have been documented in this monkeypox global outbreak, in which 9 deaths in locations that have historically recorded monkeypox.Laboratory diagnosisDiagnosis of monkeypox requires a combination of clinical symptoms, epidemiological information, and laboratory tests. According to WHO recommendations, nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) has been conducted for monkeypox virus detection.280 Genes commonly used for conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing include hemagglutinin,281 the acidophilic-type inclusion body gene,282,283 and the crmB gene.284 Compared with other diagnostic methods, real-time PCR provides high throughput, high sensitivity, and fast results. Several genes have been developed to detect monkeypox virus, such as envelope protein gene (B6R),285 B7R gene,286 DNA polymerase gene E9L,69,285 complement binding protein C3L,278,287 DNA-dependent RNA polymerase subunit 18 (RPO18) gene,288 F3L and N3R.289 Meanwhile, recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) method has been proven to be an alternative to real-time PCR. It was reported that the monkeypox virus-RPA-method was especially sensitive with a limit of detection (LOD) of 16 DNA molecules per microliter by targeting the tumor necrosis factor binding protein gene.290 With different target sites in the viral genome, these tests have varying sensitivities and limits of detection for monkeypox virus.291 According to Li et al.278 real-time PCR assay for generic monkeypox virus has a limit of detection for 0.7 fg (∼3.5 genomes), while monkeypox virus West Africa specific (G2R_WA) assay’s LOD is at 1.7 fg (∼8.2 genome), and monkeypox virus Congo Basin (C3L) assay’s LOD is at 9.46 fg (∼40.4 genomes). As well, Maksyutov et al.292 developed real-time PCR assay that targets viral F3L gene with a LOD of 20 copies per reaction. Several other studies reported LOD for monkeypox virus assays of 6.359 copies/mL,293 20 copies/reaction,286 11–55 fg (50–250 copies of each gene),289 2 fg (~10 viral copies),285 0.05 fg (25 copies/assay).294Recently, a high-throughput molecular testing method for monkeypox virus was established,293 which may expand the detection capacity and reduces the detection of time. In the current outbreak, the whole genome sequencing was also used to identify the monkeypox strain.40,92,198,295 What’s more, there are several other DNA-based assays have been investigated for monkeypox virus detection, such as loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP),296 restriction length fragment polymorphism (RFLP),98,297 as well as recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA).290Laboratory methods for detecting monkeypox also include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),298,299 western blot (WB)136,300 and immunohistochemistry (IHC).30,301 It is often necessary to use serologic diagnostic procedures to diagnose poxvirus when there is no virological sample. In most cases, ELISA is the most frequently used serologic test. Serological testing of the specific IgM and IgG antibodies are commonly deployed. As soon as the rash appears, IgM antibodies appear and rise approximately 2 weeks before declining and disappearing within 1 year. While IgG antibodies also generate quickly after the rash onset, rise approximately 6 weeks, and lasts for decades.302 However, the specificity is low, due to the immunologic cross-reactivity between monkeypox virus and other othopoxviruses.37,251 Electron microscopic observation can be used as an auxiliary method to detect monkeypox virus.24,303 However, due to the laborious and costly sample preparation, it is difficult to be used popularly.TreatmentTreatment is suggested for monkeypox virus-infected individuals with severe disease at present or who may be at high risk for developing serious illness (people who are immunocompromised, pediatric population, have characteristic dermatitis or history, have skin symptoms of exfoliation, pregnant or breastfeeding woman, one or more complications), or those with monkeypox virus aberrant infections, including accidental implantation in mouth, eyes, or other anatomical areas where monkeypox virus infection that could pose a special threat (such as the genitals or anus). For most patients, treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Despite the fact that monkeypox has no specific treatment, smallpox antiviral drugs such as brincidofovir, tecovirimat, and cidofovir may have effect against monkeypox because of their similar genetics.258,304–308Fig. 3Monkeypox life cycle and mechanisms of action of antivirals. This diagram depicts the life cycle of monkeypox virus inside a human cell. Notably, Replication cycle of monkeypox virus occurs in the cytoplasm of the host cell. Following viral attachment, virion binds and fuses with the host cell membrane, the viral core is released into the cytoplasm of the host cell. Viral particles are assembled into intracellular mature viruses (MV), then stay in the cytoplasm as intracellular mature virions of released as extracellular enveloped viruses during cell lysis. MV can also wrap an additional envelope and attached to the cell membrane, then then release through exocytosis. Cidofovir and its prodrug brincidofovir inhibit the viral DNA polymerase during DNA replication. Tecovirimat targets the VP37 protein, which is vital for envelopment of intracellular mature virus with Golgi-derived membrane to form enveloped virus (EV), prevents the virus from leaving an infected cell, hindering the spread of the virus within the bodyTecovirimatTecovirimat (also known as TPOXX, ST-246), a small-molecule inhibitor of virus, is effective against orthopoxviruses both in vitro and in vivo, including vaccinia virus, camelpox virus, cowpox virus, mousepox virus, variola viruses, and monkeypox virus.309 Tecovirimat targets the VP37 protein, inhibits the spread of viruses within the body by preventing them from leaving infected cells,309,310 as shown in Fig. 3. Tecovirimat inhibits neither DNA or protein synthesis nor the formation of mature virus. The mature virus remains in the host cell until cell lysis. Tecovirimat displayed s strong antiviral efficacy with an EC50 range of 0.01 to 0.07 μM.309,311,312 Several studies have demonstrated that the VP37 protein plays an essential role in encapsulating intracellular mature virus with Golgi-derived membrane to form enveloped virus.309,313–317Tecovirimat has a distinguished antiviral effect against the monkeypox virus lineage responsible for the 2022 outbreak in vitro.318 Further, the effectiveness and safety of tecovirimat has been revealed in multiple animal studies.319–324 Treatment with 10 mg per kilogram of body weight of tecovirimat for 14 days in the monkeypox model could achieve >90% survival.324 In a nonhuman primate (NHP) model, by taking orally once a day, tecovirimat was found to be effective in protecting NHP from monkeypox virus illness, with reduced viral loads, fewer rashes, prolonged survival and significantly reduced mortality in the treatment group compared with the vehicle mongkeys.325 Smith et al.326 assessed the efficacy of tecovirimat against monkeypox virus challenge of 65 times the 50% lethal dose (LD50) in prairie dogs, and found that one hundred percent of animals that received tecovirimat survived challenge, while 75% of infected animals receiving vehicle alone succumbed to infection. Meanwhile, multiple phase 3 clinical trials of tecovirimat have demonstrated its safety and well tolerated (Table 3).Table 3Treatment and prevention of orthopoxvirusesCategoriesNameMechanism of actionAdministrationTypical dosageFDA approval statusClinical trialsaReferenceAntiviral medicineTecovirimatTecovirimat targets the VP37 protein, inhibits the spread of viruses within the body by preventing them from leaving infected cellsPO, IVOral dosage by body weight: 13 kg to less than 25 kg: 200 mg (1 capsule) every 12 h 25 kg to less than 40 kg: 400 mg (2 capsules) every 12 h 40 kg to less than 120 kg: 600 mg (3 capsules) every 12 h 120 kg and above: 600 mg (3 capsules) every 8 h Duration of therapy: 14 days Intravenous infusion dosage by body weight: 3 kg to less than 35 kg: 6 mg/kg every 12 h by IV infusion over 6 h 35 kg to less than 120 kg: 200 mg every 12 h by IV infusion over 6 h 120 kg and above: 300 mg every 12 h by IV infusion over 6 h Duration: up to 14 daysSmallpox, 2018NCT05380752, NCT02080767, NCT02474589, NCT03972111, NCT00907803, NCT04392739, NCT04485039, NCT04971109, NCT04957485, NCT00728689324CidofovirPrevent viral replication and transcription by inhibiting viral DNA polymeraseIV5 mg/kg via IV infusion onceCMV retinitis in patients with AIDS, 1996NANABrincidofovirInhibits the synthesis of viral DNA by inhibiting the DNA polymerase activity or by acting as an acyclic nucleotide and binding to the viral DNA strandPOAdults and children weighing 48 kilograms (kg) or more—200 milligrams (mg) (two 100 mg tablets) once a week for 2 doses (on Days 1 and 8). Children weighing less than 48 kg—Use of oral liquid is recommendedSmallpox, 2021NCT01143181,386Blood productVaccinia immune globulinAntibody isolated from healthy donors previously vaccinated and inhibit viral infectionIVAdministered at a dose of 6000 U/kgTreatment of complications resulting in smallpox vaccination including eczema vaccinatum, 2005NANAVaccineACAM2000Second generation, a live attenuated vaccinia vaccineTDDReconstituted by addition of 0.3 mL of diluent to the vial containing lyophilized vaccineSmallpox, 2007NCT01158157, NCT01913353, NCT02977715, NCT00082446, NCT02038881, NCT00857493, NCT01144637, NCT00316524, NCT03699124, NCT00437021, NCT00133575, NCT00607243424,445,506–513JYNNEOSThird generation, highly attenuated vaccinia virusSCAdminister two doses (0.5 mL each) of JYNNEOS 4 weeks apartSmallpox and monkeypox, 2019NCT00914732, NCT02977715, NCT01144637, NCT00316524, NCT00437021, NCT00565929, NCT03699124, NCT02038881, NCT01144637, NCT00316524, NCT00565929, NCT00133575, NCT02977715424,425,452,507,509–512,514LC16A live, replicating attenuated third-generation vaccinesID108 plaque-forming units/mL, 0.02 μLSmallpox, 1975NCT00103584465NA not availableaClinical phase 3 and published clinical trials are shownIn 2018, the FDA approved its first use for treating smallpox after studies showed it was safe in humans and effective in animals with similar viruses.304,323,327,328 A trial in monkeypox people showed the tecovirimat (600 mg twice daily for 2 weeks orally) did not cause side effects and that viral shedding and illness lasted shorter time.329 Besides, data collected from 25 cases with diagnosed monkeypox infection had completed a course of tecovirimat therapy revealed all cases tolerated the antiviral medicine well, with minor side effects. The lesions and pain of 10 patients (40%) were completely resolved by day 7 of therapy, and 23 of 25 patients on day 21. The most frequently adverse events of therapy reported including diarrhea in 2 (8%), itching in 2 (8%), nausea in 4 (16%), headache in 5 (20%), and fatigue in 7 patients (28%).308 Moreover, several reports have also documented the efficacy and safety of tecovirimat in the treatment of monkeypox.308,330–332 Healthcare providers can now provide tecovirimat treatment to monkeypox patients under an expanded access Investigational New Drug (EA-IND) protocol developed by CDC and FDA. A total of 1001 cases receiving this antiviral drug have been documented, in addition, data was abstracted by the Centers for Disease Control.333Despite this, more clinical trials are needed to determine whether this antiviral drug is effective and safe for treating monkeypox infections in people.334 A double-blind, randomized controlled study will be conducted by the National Institutes of Health’s (NIH) National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) in treating individuals confirmed with monkeypox in adults and children to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of tecovirimat.335 Meanwhile, through the AIDS Clinical Trials Group, NIH/NIAID is conducting a phase 3 double-blind, randomized controlled investigation of tecovirimat in outpatient in the United States settings to treat monkeypox.335 According to the latest report, it is currently underway or planned to conduct several clinical experiments to evaluate tecovirimat’s safety and effectiveness in treating monkeypox patients (PALM-007, PLATINUM, WHO/ARNS, and ACTG5418).336,337CidofovirSince 1996, Cidofovir (CDV, also known as Vistide) has been approved for clinical use to treat cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis in persons with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).338–341 CDV is a prodrug, and it must be phosphorylated by enzymes of the cytoplasm after enter the host cells, and into CDV diphosphate (CDV-pp), which has a prolonged half-life.342–344 CDV-pp inhibits the viral DNA polymerase during DNA replication, as well as inhibits DNA polymerase 3′–5′ exonuclease activity.343Many animal models and experiments in vitro have reported the effectiveness of cidofovir for treatment orthopoxviruses, including vaccinia, mousepox, as well as monkeypox.338,345–350 Between 72 to 96 h post-infection, treatment of mice inoculated with cowpox virus (CV) or vaccinia virus (VV) resulted in significant protection. And when given at least 5 days before infection or 3 days after infection with either VV or CV, a single-dose pretreatment or posttreatment with CDV at 3 to 100 mg/kg was effective.351 Another mouse model demonstrated that it was completely protective against virus-induced cutaneous lesions and against the associated mortality when started on the day of infection or the first post-infection day of topical treatment with cidofovir. In addition, systemic treatment with cidofovir caused lesions to heal and regress.346 The treatment of mice with cidofovir (for two days after 24 h of virus exposure) suppressed viral loads as well as cytokine levels in plasma and tissue, including interleukin (IL)-10, IL-6, IL-3, and IL-2.352 In non-human primate model, researches proved a significant reduction in mortality and cutaneous monkeypox lesions when CDV treatment is initiated 24 h after lethal intratracheal monkeypox virus infection.353Various studies have shown the effectiveness of CDV against poxvirus. Patients with recalcitrant molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) treated with intravenous cidofovir exhibited dramatic cleaning of their MCV lesions, and all three cases remain clean of recurrence.354 The use of topical CDV was found to be effective in treating molluscum contagiosum (MC) in a 12-year-old boy with Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome.355 Two children with AIDS were also successfully treated with topical 3% cidofovir in a combination vehicle (Dermovan) for recalcitrant MC.356 CDV has also been documented to be effective against cowpox and human vaccinia in additional case reports.357–359 Despite the lack of clinical evidence to support its use in treating monkeypox, cidofovir is generally thought to be effective. According to the CDC’s guidance, an outbreak of orthopoxviruses, including monkeypox virus, can be treated with this anti-viral medicine.BrincidofovirBrincidofovir (also known as CMX001 or Tembexa) is a lipid conjugate of the acyclic nucleotide phosphonate, cidofovir (CDV). After brincidofovir entry into target cells, a phospholipase enzyme cleaves the lipid ester linkage in brincidofovir, liberating CDV and activated by two sequential phosphorylations, first yield cidofovir monophosphate (CDV-P) and then yield cidofovir diphosphate (CDV-PP).360 CDV-pp suppresses the synthesis of viral DNA by inhibiting the DNA polymerase activity of several double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses or by acting as an acyclic nucleotide and binding to the viral DNA strand361–365 (Fig. 3).Brincidofovir has under gone numerous animal studies328,366–374 to demonstrate its antiviral efficacy against double-stranded DNA viruses including poxviruses such as monkeypox virus and is currently in human clinical investigations for treating other double-stranded DNA viruses (Table 3). In addition, An antiviral regimen with brincidofovir and ST-246 administered on the day of monkeypox virus infection protects mice with the STAT1-deficient C57BL/6 mouse model.375 Lethal rabbitpox models revealed that brincidofovir administration at or before the midpoint of illness could reduce the fatality rate from rabbitpox virus infection, as well as reduce viral loads, which might contribute to decrease infectivity of the virus.376,377 Studies have been conducted using the prairie dog monkeypox virus model to determine the effectiveness of anti-poxvirus therapeutics.378,379 In a monkeypox virus animal model, brincidofovir was administered orally to prairie dogs to determine its pharmacokinetics (PK). It was found that BCV treatment early in the illness tended to increase survival against a lethal monkeypox virus challenge; the earlier the treatment was initiated, the greater the chance of survival.380,381 In summary, these models suggest that treating monkeypox patients early with brincidofovir is more likely to have better outcomes.In 2021, Brincidofovir was licensed by the FDA for treating human smallpox disease in both adults and children. To facilitate the use of brincidofovir for the treatment of monkeypox, the CDC is currently developing an Expanded Access Investigational New Drug.382 In comparison with cidofovir, brincidofovir has higher intracellular levels of the active drug, well oral bioavailability, superior antiadenoviral activity, and no nephrotoxicity.314,375,383–387 The complete resolution in a patient with progressive vaccinia (PV) demonstrated the effectiveness of brincidofovir in combination with other antiviral drugs.388 Recent research, however, indicates brincidofovir is associated with serious adverse effects in monkeypox patients. Over the past three years, three cases have experienced liver toxicity in the United Kingdom.329 Further studies are warranted in humans regarding the efficacy of brincidofovir against monkeypox virus.VIGIVVaccinia immune globulin intravenous (VIGIV), a FDA-approved medicine, is applied to treat smallpox vaccination complications such as severe generalized vaccinia, vaccinia infections in people who have skin conditions, eczema vaccinatum, progressive vaccinia and aberrant infections induced by vaccinia virus (excluding isolated keratitis).389 Vaccinia immune globulin (VIG) is a sterile solution made up of high titers of IgG antibodies against the vaccinia virus taken from healthy persons who had been previously vaccinated against the live vaccinia virus.390 CDC allows the use of VIG for the treatment of monkeypox in an outbreak. Several studies have reported the patients received VIGIV for the treatment of orthopoxvirus infection.391–393 Nevertheless, data on VIG’s effectiveness in treating monkeypox virus infection are unavailable. Physicians may consider using it in severe cases. The VIG is also suitable for prophylactic use in persons with severe immunodeficiency in T cell function for whom smallpox vaccination is contraindicated after exposure to monkeypox virus.Monkeypox preventionTo prevent getting monkeypox, CDC suggest that people need to avoid close, skin-to-skin contact with someone who has monkeypox-like rashes, avoid contact with objects and materials that a case with monkeypox has used, use hand sanitizers that contain alcohol before eating, touching the face, and wash your hands frequently after using the bathroom.There is no vaccine specifically designed to prevent monkeypox virus infection. Owning to immunological cross protection among orthopoxviruses,194,298,394–398 smallpox vaccines (vaccinia virus-based) were recommended for use in the current outbreak of monkeypox.279,399–405 Epidemiological data on human monkeypox collected in Zaire from 1980 to 1984 revealed that there was a significant difference in attack rates between contacts without a vaccination scar and those who had been vaccinated in the past (7.2% vs. 0.9%).406 Rimoin et al. suggested that monkeypox incidence increased dramatically in the DRC 30 years after smallpox vaccination campaigns ended.407 Furthermore, their data suggested that vaccine-induced immunity lasts a long time as individuals vaccinated against smallpox >25 years ago are still at reduced risk of monkeypox today. As demonstrated by the US monkeypox outbreak of 2003, smallpox vaccination can potentially sustain cross-immune protection against West African monkeypox for decades afterward. Three individuals who had not previously been infected with monkeypox virus and had been vaccinated against smallpox for decades were unaware of their subsequent infection because none of them had any clinical characteristics associated with the monkeypox.298Studies have reported that first-generation live vaccinia vaccines can provide approximately 85% protection against monkeypox infection due to cross-reactive antibodies that can be induced by orthopoxviruses.160 Second-generation vaccine is ACAM2000, a live attenuated vaccinia vaccine approved in the USA in August 2007 for prevention of smallpox408,409 (Fig. 4). Its effectiveness has been demonstrated in both animal models327,410–412 and clinical trials (Table 3).Fig. 4Development of monkeypox vaccines in the future. Currently, live attenuated vaccines such as ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS are clinically recommended for the prevention of monkeypox, but these vaccines were originally designed to prevent smallpox. Therefore, there is a demand for the development of vaccines that specifically prevent monkeypox, such as inactivated vaccines, DNA vaccines, RNA vaccines, and recombinant protein vaccines. These types of vaccines have proven their efficacy and safety in the COVID-19 epidemicAssessment of the protective effect against aerosolized monkeypox virus in cynomolgus macaques revealed that a single immunization with ACAM2000 vaccines were protected completely.410 Monkeys challenged with lethal monkeypox virus after vaccinated with the ACAM200 live attenuated smallpox vaccine, all (N = 12) vaccinated treated monkeys survived.412 In a prairie dog model, for ACAM2000, the vaccine administered at 1 day postexposure was similarly effective with the vaccine administered at 3 days postexposure, resulting in 50–62% survival, compared with only 25% survival in the unvaccinated group.411 Taken together, ACAM2000 is likely effective at preventing monkeypox; however, due to its potential for replication, it may cause severe side effects, including progressive vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum, and myopericarditis.388,409,413–421 A person with a weak immune system, including someone with HIV, pregnant women, and those who suffer from skin conditions like eczema, are not advised to use it.150,422The third-generation vaccine, modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA, JYNNEOS in the United States, IMVANEX in the European Union, and IMAMUNE in Canada), was approved in individuals 18 years of age or older considered to be more susceptible for smallpox or monkeypox infection in US to prevent both smallpox and monkeypox disease in 2019.423 Unlike ACAM2000, JYNNEOS is a nonreplicating vaccine, which will not lead to the production of live virus. As a smallpox vaccine, JYNNEOS has demonstrated good immunogenicity, safety, and efficacy both in animal models and clinicals.424–436 It was the only currently FDA-approved vaccinia vaccine for the prevention of monkeypox disease437 (Fig. 4). Several animal model studies exhibited good protective effects against monkeypox,411,438–440 furthermore, in macaque challenge trials 100% protection against monkeypox infection was demonstrated, along with long lasting immunity410,441 and long lasting protective immunity for a lethal monkeypox challenge.442 Petersen et al.443 evaluated its effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety in healthcare workers at risk of monkeypox virus infection in the DRC. Meanwhile, another human clinical investigation examining the effectiveness of monkeypox vaccination after exposure is currently underway.444 Numerous clinical trials of MVA445 have proved the efficacy and safety of JYNNEOS, as listed in Table 3.As a result of the outbreak of monkeypox in 2022, several countries, including the United States, Spain, Germany and the United Kingdom, have announced they are buying vaccines and/or releasing vaccines them from national stockpiles to combat the epidemic. JYNNEOS is being used by the US for pre-exposure vaccination of people who are at risk of occupational exposure to orthopoxviruses according to CDC announcements made in May 2022.399,446 Meanwhile, in its interim guidance for monkeypox vaccines, WHO recommended post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) ideally within 4 days of the first exposure, pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is recommended for health workers at risk, clinical laboratory staff performing diagnostic testing, laboratory personnel working with orthopoxviruses, and others at risk under national policy.447 IMAMUNE is approved for immunization against monkeypox and Orthopox virus by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), and IMVANEX is recommended by the European Medicine Agency (EMA) for monkeypox prevention.448,449 By July 27, 786,000 more doses are expected to be released that week after the federal government distributed 300,000 doses of vaccine to state and local health authorities and clinics throughout the country. JYNNEOS is manufactured exclusively by Bavarian Nordic, which has a limited production capacity. Recently, due to the vaccine shortage, Bavarian Nordic has expanded its capacity by working with U.S. contract manufacturer to fill smallpox/monkeypox vaccines.450 In addition, a European Union Authorization (EUA) was approved by the FDA for the JYNNEOS vaccine, allowing healthcare providers to administer it intradermally to individuals 18 years of age and older who have been considered to be more susceptible for monkeypox infection.451 Individuals vaccinated intradermally were less vaccinated (by one-fifth) than those vaccinated subcutaneously (SC). The total dose available for use could increase by five-fold as a result. A study with lower intradermal doses of MVA was found to be immunologically noninferior to the standard subcutaneous dose (NCT00914732).452In 1975, the other smallpox vaccine, LC16m8, was licensed for active immunization against smallpox in Japan. This vaccine is derived from the Lister (Elstree) strain of vaccinia and is a live, replicating, attenuated 3rd generation vaccine.453 This high attenuation resulted from a single nucleotide deletion mutation in the B5R viral gene, resulting in a truncated membrane protein B5, which is one of the most immunogenic proteins.454–456 Several animal model challenge studies of safety and efficacy of LC16m8 have been conducted in mouse,454,457–461 rabbit,459,460 and nonhuman primates.462,463 Both the intranasal and subcutaneous inoculation models showed no symptoms of monkeypox after immunization with LC16m8.462 A single vaccination of non-human primate model revealed that LC16m8 exhibited long-lasting protection against monkeypox virus, evidence from the reduction in viremia and the IgG antibody response.464 Notably, another nonhuman primate model revealed that for immunocompromised individuals, LC16m8 is a safer and more effective alternative to ACAM2000 and Dryvax (first-generation vaccines).463 LC16m8 was shown to produce neutralizing antibodies for vaccinia, monkeypox, and variola major, as well as broad T cell responses in a phase I/II clinical trial.465 In addition, various immunogenic studies in human have confirmed a good safety profile about LC16m8.466–472 In summary, these results reveal that LC16m8 may be effective for preventing people against monkeypox. Japanese authorities expanded the range of indications for this vaccine to include protection against monkeypox in August 2022.473Conclusion and perspectivesMonkeypox, COVID-19, and polio are among the three emergencies that WHO has declared worldwide at the moment. Monkeypox is now an international problem after previously being endemic to Africa. Until September 2022, more than 56000 patients have been diagnosed in the monkeypox 2022 outbreak. Monkeypox infection patients are rapidly increasing around the world, it is likely to be caused by a combination of natural and human factors. On the other hand, there has been an increase in human–wildlife contact due to climate change, deforestation, and the Ukrainian–Russian war, among other factors. In addition, it is still possible that monkeypox virus will become more prevalent due to the cessation of smallpox vaccination with vaccinia vaccine in 1980. Currently, in spite of the fact that mass vaccination is not recommended or achievable, individuals manage monkeypox may though vaccine (post-exposure prophylaxis, or pre-exposure prophylaxis), anti-viral medicines, as well as isolate or quarantine of the patients and any contacts with the patients.Particularly, there are large number of patients have been confirmed in MSM population in this 2022 outbreak and has been related to unanticipated anal and genital lesions, suggesting the monkeypox virus may be spreading via sexual transmission.158,170,179,180,185,272 This novel transmission pattern was suspected during 2017 outbreak of human monkeypox in Nigeria, but was not proven.474 Meanwhile, MSM population has higher risk on other disease through sexual transmission, such as HIV. In Ogoina and colleagues’ study,475 it was reported that monkeypox patients in Nigeria who were HIV-positive had longer-lasting illness, and larger lesions, and a higher percentage of and genital ulcers and secondary bacterial skin infections. By contrast, Tarin-Vicente and his colleagues180 reported that there was no difference between HIV-positive patients and the rest of the population in terms of severity or progression of the disease. Therefore, more investigations are needed to understand the effectiveness of anti-viral treatment among individuals infected with both HIV and human monkeypox virus. Besides, in order to reduce monkeypox transmission within MSM groups, public health efforts must deal with challenges including homophobia, stigma, and discrimination.Given the current global monkeypox epidemic, a race to create monkeypox -specific vaccines may occur like COVID-19 (Fig. 4). Moderna has announced that they have initiated a program to consider whether developing an mRNA monkeypox vaccine or not because of growing demand for vaccination, even though no further information on the vaccine or potential development timeline was released latter.476 Meanwhile, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has addressed a patent to the Tonix Pharmaceuticals company for its vaccine candidate namely TNX-801, which was designed to protect against smallpox and monkeypox.477 TNX-801 is a novel, horsepox-based live virus vaccine based on synthesized horsepox (sHPXV). Effectiveness and safety have been demonstrated both in mouse models previously.478 In addition, TNX-801 vaccination protects macaques from monkeypox challenge, no lesions were seen in all monkeys.479 The monkeypox virion membrane surface-binding protein E8L is vital for virus attachment to host cells, which may be also used to explore new vaccine against monkeypox.480 Importantly, knowledge of the immunological response and mechanism of monkeypox virus infection would be critical, providing new ideas for vaccine development. Identification of the genes responsible for the host-range defect of virus may engineer more effective and safe vaccines, such as C16L/B22R, C16L (MVA genome).481 For severely immunocompromised individuals, valid vaccination strategies that bypass CD4 negative cell help are needed to protect against virus.482Global public health has been severely tested by the COVID-19 pandemic in the past two years. Confirmed cases of monkeypox are increasing rapidly worldwide especially in the US, which may have a negative impact on the global economy. With monkeypox being announced a public health emergency of international concern by WHO,11 people should raise awareness and build diagnostic capacity for the monkeypox epidemic in order to limit further spread of the virus. We should improve understanding and clinical management of monkeypox, as well as infection prevention and control skills, especially among public health personnel. At the same time, stigma and discrimination within the MSM community should be properly addressed and equitable access to treatment and vaccines should be ensured. Finally, we should initiate a global collaboration to conduct clinical investigations to test the efficacy and safety of monkeypox vaccines as well as antiviral drugs.


Title: Basic Concepts

Viral pathogenesis seeks to understand how a virus interacts with its host at multiple levels. Key questions include the source (an infected human, animal, or insect vector), the transmission mechanism, and how the virus is shed and transmitted. Following transmission, pathogenesis is governed by the initial site of replication, whether the virus disseminates within the host, and its tropism for specific tissues and organs. In turn, these steps are dictated by the structure and replication strategy of the virus. In addition to utilizing selected synthetic biochemical pathways in the host cell, viruses frequently reprogram host cells by inducing intracellular signaling pathways that render the cell more permissive to infection. Host–virus interactions also control whether the infection is acute, chronic, latent, or transforming; how the virus interacts with the immune system; and the consequent pathophysiological response of the host. This chapter provides an overview of these basic concepts of viral pathogenesis, with emphasis on the interactions of viruses with their host cells and organisms.1Virus–Cell Interactions1.1Cellular Receptors and Viral TropismPeter Medawar described viruses as “bad news wrapped up in protein,” a succinct summary of the structure of all viruses, in which the nucleic acid genome is enclosed by a protein shell (a capsid) that is sometimes further enwrapped by a lipid membrane from which project one or more viral glycoproteins. However, the news is bad only if it gets delivered: the viral genome must be introduced into the cytoplasm of the host cell, and for this to occur the virus must attach to the cell surface and then penetrate a cellular membrane to deliver its nucleic acid payload along with any viral proteins needed for subsequent replication. The ability of a virus to enter various types of cells is one of the major determinants of viral tropism.
Virus attachment factors. Initial viral attachment often occurs via relatively nonspecific, low affinity interactions with virus attachment factors. Virus attachment factors—in contrast to virus receptors—are cell surface molecules that support virus binding but are not required for virus infection. However, they can make virus attachment and infection more efficient. When infecting cells in tissue culture, the rate-limiting step in infection typically is attachment to the cell surface, as virions are in a large volume of media that minimizes chance encounters with cells. Anything that enhances this step can result in a much greater level of virus infection. The addition of a polycation such as diethylaminoethyl (DEAE)–dextran to virus-containing media typically boosts infection efficiency of tissue culture cells more than 10-fold, by serving as an electrostatic bridge, linking the virus to the cell surface. Glycosoaminoglycans, highly charged molecules on the cell surface, are well known factors that can result in more efficient virus attachment via electrostatic interactions. Multiple copies of viral attachment factors on the cell surface means that even low affinity interactions can result in high avidity binding of virus.Cell surface lectins (carbohydrate-binding proteins) can also promote attachment of enveloped viruses to target cells as the viral proteins protruding from the viral surface are often heavily glycosylated. A well-studied example is the C-type (for calcium-dependent) lectin DC-SIGN, which binds to high mannose carbohydrates and is expressed on dendritic cells (DCs). The HIV-1 envelope protein (Env) is heavily glycosylated, and most of its N-linked carbohydrates have a high-mannose structure. HIV-1 binds avidly to DC-SIGN, resulting in efficient capture of virus by DCs (Geijtenbeek et al., 2000).Thus, cell surface attachment factors restrict virus to the two-dimensional surface of the plasma membrane, making subsequent interactions with virus receptors more efficient. However, the importance of attachment factors in vivo is uncertain as the ratio of extracellular space volume to cells is very low and cells are in close spatial proximity. In contrast, virus receptors are critically important for virus infection both in vitro and in vivo.
Virus receptors. Virus receptors are host cell molecules, most often glycoproteins on the plasma membrane, that not only bind virions but are often essential for subsequent virus infection (Figure 1
). Viral receptors are naturally occurring cellular molecules that serve physiological functions for the cell—functions that have nothing to do with infection. Viruses usually bind to their receptors with higher affinity than they do to attachment factors.Figure 1Molecular backbone cartoons of some viral receptors. Receptors diverge widely in their structure and physiological function. The amino and carboxy termini are shown, together with important disulfide bonds and the probable domains that bind virus. αvβ6: integrin chains (integrin dimers serve as receptors for many different viruses); ICAM: intercellular adhesion molecule; CCR5: chemokine receptor 5; CAT: cationic amino acid transporter; CEACAM: carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule; HAVcr-1: hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 1; PiT: inorganic phosphate transporter; PVR: poliovirus receptor; Viruses: polio: poliovirus; rhino: rhinovirus, major group; FMD: foot and mouth disease virus; HAV: hepatitis A virus; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; MHV: mouse hepatitis virus (a coronovirus); BLV: bovine leukemia virus; ALV-A: avian leukosis virus A; MLV-E: murine leukemia virus E; GALV: gibbon ape leukemia virus; MLV-A: murine leukemia virus A; FeLV-B; feline leukemia virus B.Attachment of the virus particle to its cellular receptor is conferred by a virion surface protein, often called the viral attachment protein (VAP). As a rule, there is a single VAP although other viral surface proteins often play an essential role in the steps that follow the initial attachment of virions to the cell surface. For enveloped viruses, the VAP is a surface glycoprotein that oligomerizes to form spikes that protrude from the viral envelope. For nonenveloped viruses, the VAP is one of the surface proteins that form the external structure of the viral capsid. While binding to virus attachment factors is often electrostatic in nature, receptor binding usually occurs via a specific domain on the VAP, most often in the form of a pocket or “canyon” that subsequently interacts with a specific domain on the cellular receptor. These domains can be defined by structural studies and mutations introduced into the cellular receptor protein or the VAP.Antibodies neutralize virus by binding to the VAP in a way that blocks receptor binding. Since the receptor-binding domain on a VAP often lies in a recessed pocket where it is not directly accessible to antibodies, antibodies that bind to epitopes distant from the pocket can also neutralize the virus. Therefore, viral mutants may escape neutralization without affecting receptor binding. Such escape mutants allow many different virus serotypes to use the same receptor-binding domain of the VAP, as seen for rhinoviruses. Neutralizing antibody escape mutants of this kind are important for the persistence of some viruses, including HIV.Carbohydrates can also serve as virus receptors. The best studied example is binding of the influenza virus hemaglutinin protein to sialic acid (or N acetyl neuraminic acid), a modified sugar that is found on the tips of some of the branched carbohydrate side chains of glycosylated proteins and glycosphingolipids. Different influenza hemagglutinins bind preferentially to different terminal sialic acid residues, depending on the linkage of the sialic acid to a proximal galactose or galactosamine molecule in the carbohydrate chain. Thus, human-type A influenza viruses bind most avidly to sialic acid α-2,3 galactose configurations while avian-type A influenza viruses bind best to sialic acid α-2,6 galactose. This exquisite specificity of the interaction between the VAP and its cellular receptor helps explain the species tropism of influenza viruses, since different host species express different sialic acid linkages. In turn, this distinction can determine whether an avian or porcine influenza virus can efficiently infect humans (Shinya et al., 2006).
The role of virus receptors in entry. Why are receptors essential for infection whereas attachment factors are not? While virus attachment factors merely support virus binding, virus receptors do something else: they either induce conformational changes in viral proteins that are required for membrane penetration and/or result in delivery of virions to a cellular domain or compartment that is required for entry. This distinction explains why attachment factors are not required for virus infection whereas receptors are required. A host molecule can be considered to be a virus receptor if its elimination from an animal model or one or more cell types prevents infection. The loss of a receptor may not block infection of all cell types since some viruses can utilize more than one receptor. As an example, lab-adapted strains of measles virus use CD46 as a receptor to infect cells, while wild-type strains use CD150 as a receptor to infect lymphocytes, and nectin 4 to infect epithelial cells.The importance of receptor specificity is exemplified by recent studies of dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPPT4), the receptor for MERS-CoV, the cause of a newly emerging infectious disease, Middle East respiratory syndrome (see Chapter 16, Emerging viral diseases). Humans express DPPT4, but mice, hamsters, or ferrets do not and are not susceptible to infection. Molecular studies show that five amino acids in the binding domain of DPPT4 differ between human and hamster cells. Furthermore, DPPT4 on camel cells binds the MERS-CoV attachment protein. This observation provided an explanation for the apparent role of camels as an intermediate host responsible for transmission of this virus to humans (van Doorenmalen et al., 2014). Marmoset cell DPPT4 binds MERS-CoV with affinity similar to that of human cells, and marmosets are an excellent model host for this virus (Falzarano et al., 2014).1.2Viral EntryViral entry is a multistep process that follows attachment of the virion to the cell surface and results in delivery of the viral genome to the site of replication, either in the cytosol or nucleus. The key step in virus entry is penetration of a cellular membrane. For enveloped viruses, delivery of the viral genome across the lipid bilayer of the virus and a cellular membrane is accomplished by a membrane fusion reaction. For nonenveloped viruses, the viral genome is usually delivered across a cellular membrane by a pore that is formed by protein components of the viral capsid. Virus fusion and penetration proteins exist in metastable states that must be triggered in some way to undergo the needed conformational changes.
Triggers of virus entry. A number of cellular cues induce the irreversible conformational changes in viral proteins that lead to membrane fusion in the case of enveloped viruses, or membrane penetration in the case of nonenveloped viruses (Figure 2
). One of the best understood is low pH. Many viruses, after binding to receptors on the cell surface, are endocytosed and delivered to endosomes where the low pH environment induces changes in viral structural proteins that mediate membrane fusion by protonating acidic residues (Helenius et al., 1980). The low pH-dependent entry of many enveloped viruses is exemplified by influenza virus. Nonenveloped viruses may also use this pathway, but instead of eliciting membrane fusion the acidic environment induces structural changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the cellular membrane, forming a pore through which the viral genome can pass (Figure 2).
Figure 2Pathways of virus entry into host cells. A. Entry of influenza virus. Key events are: attachment of the virion; internalization of the virion by endocytosis; lowering the pH (to <pH 5.5) of the endocytic vacuole leading to drastic reconfiguration of the viral attachment protein (hemagglutinin, HA1 and HA2); insertion of a hydrophobic domain of HA2 into the vacuolar membrane; fusion of the viral and vacuolar membranes; release of the viral nucleocapsid into the cytosol. This cartoon shows a nucleocapsid containing one of the eight genome segments of influenza virus. B. Entry of poliovirus. After binding to cell surface receptors, poliovirus is endocytosed and ultimately delivered to low pH endosomes. There, the low pH environment triggers conformational changes in the viral capsid that result in exposure of hydrophobic domains that insert into the endosomal membrane, forming a protein pore through which the viral genome can exit and enter the cytoplasm. C. Entry of HIV. HIV attaches to the cell surface via binding to various attachment factors such as DC-SIGN. The first required step for entry is binding of the viral envelope glycoprotein to CD4, a type 1 integral membrane protein. This binding event triggers structural alterations in the envelope glycoprotein that induce the exposure of a second receptor binding domain that engages the chemokine coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Coreceptor binding triggers additional changes in envelope that enable it to elicit membrane fusion with the cell membrane.While many viruses use low pH as a trigger to induce membrane fusion or penetration, other viruses use one or more receptors to trigger needed conformational changes for virus entry. HIV entry is an example of pH-independent entry. The HIV Env binds to CD4, a cell surface protein found on some types of T cells, macrophages, and DCs. CD4 binding induces conformational changes in Env that then enables it to bind to a second receptor, termed a coreceptor (Figure 2). The coreceptors for HIV are the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4, seven transmembrane domain receptors. Coreceptor binding induces further conformational changes in the Env protein that lead to membrane fusion (Wilen et al., 2012). Viruses can also employ other cellular cues. Binding of Rous sarcoma virus to its cellular receptor induces conformational changes that then make it responsive to low pH, while the Ebola virus glycoprotein must be cleaved by a host cell protease before it can undergo the changes needed for membrane fusion (Sakurai et al., 2015).
Other host determinants of viral tropism. While receptors and triggering mechanisms for virus entry are major determinants of viral tropism, other host factors can also influence cellular susceptibility. A number of enveloped viruses are not infectious when they bud from cells because one of the viral surface glycoproteins requires proteolytic cleavage by a host cell protease to be activated. Viruses that have Class I membrane fusion proteins (retroviruses, orthomyxoviruses, paramyxoviruses) are examples. In such instances, infectious virus is only produced by replication in cell types that express the appropriate protease, which is localized in the secretory pathway. Alternatively, some viral fusion glycoproteins may be cleaved by enzymes in extracellular fluid. In many instances, the degree of susceptibility to proteolytic cleavage is determined by a few amino acids (such as one vs several arginines) at the site of cleavage, so that mutations in 1–2 critical amino acids can alter the tissue tropism of a virus by making it more or less susceptible to this critically important proteolytic cleavage event.A case in point is Newcastle disease virus, a paramyxovirus of birds. Virulent isolates of Newcastle disease virus encode a fusion protein that is readily cleaved by furin, a proteolytic enzyme present in the Golgi apparatus, so that the protein is activated during maturation prior to reaching the cell surface, and before budding of nascent virions. This makes it possible for virulent strains of the virus to infect many avian cell types, thereby increasing its tissue host range, and causing systemic infections that are often lethal. In contrast, avirulent strains of Newcastle virus encode a variant fusion protein that is not cleaved during maturation in the Golgi, so that nascent virus requires activation by an extracellular protease. The required protease is found only in the respiratory or enteric tracts, thereby limiting tropism to surface cells and conferring an attenuated phenotype on the virus (Panda et al., 2004). Host cell transcription factors can influence the tropism of some viruses. Papillomaviruses replicate in skin and may cause tumors, varying from benign warts to malignant cancer of the cervix. Papillomaviruses commence their replication in germinal cells that are permissive for replication of the viral genomes. However, germinal cells produce proteins that block the transcription of late structural genes of the virus. As the infected basal cells move outward and begin to differentiate, they become permissive for transcription and translation of the papillomavirus structural genes, so that complete infectious virus is only formed in cells that are about to be sloughed. Release of virus from the superficial layers of dead cells promotes the transmission of infection to new sites on the infected person and also to new uninfected hosts (Doorbar et al., 2012).
Physical factors that impact tropism. While the vast majority of human viruses replicate optimally at 37 
°C, some mucosal surfaces such as the upper respiratory tract have a lower temperature, about 33 
°C. Certain viruses, such as rhinoviruses that replicate in the epithelial cells of the nose and throat, have evolved to replicate optimally at 33 
°C. As a result, such viruses are usually restricted in their tissue distribution by their relative inability to replicate at 37 
°C, which limits their spread beyond the upper respiratory tract. The harsh environment of the gastrointestinal tract can impact virus tropism as well, due to the acid pH of the stomach, the alkaline pH of the intestine, and the destructive effects of pancreatic digestive enzymes. In general, enterotropism is limited to viruses that can survive these adverse conditions, although there are some exceptions.1.3Virus Structure and Replication Can Impact PathogenesisThere are several links between viral structure and pathogenesis. Large viruses such as poxviruses or filamentous forms of viruses, such as influenza and Ebola, are simply too large to utilize clathrin-coated pits, caveolae, or other commonly used entry routes. Instead, these viruses trigger internalization by activating macropinocytosis—an example of viruses reprogramming cells to assist virus replication (Marsh and Helenius, 2006).Another important structural feature is the surface of the virion. Enveloped viruses are not stable outside of the human body, and are typically transmitted by transfer of body fluids. In contrast, nonenveloped viruses are much more stable, and many can be transmitted by other mechanisms such as the fecal–oral route—this is how polio and many other GI viruses are transmitted. Hepatitis, from contaminated shellfish for example, is caused by hepatitis A, a nonenveloped virus that is stable outside of the human body. In contrast, hepatitis B and C viruses have envelopes, and are transmitted by sexual contact or by blood. The Caliciviruses that cause outbreaks of diarrhea on cruise ships are nonenveloped, making transmission by fomites much easier and sterilization more difficult.Viral replication strategies are numerous, but there are several general features that provide links between replication and pathogenesis. DNA viruses that replicate in the nucleus must utilize a host cell pathway to transport their genome to the nucleus. This almost always entails interactions between the virus and the cell’s cytoskeleton. RNA polymerases lack proof reading capability, and have high mutation rates that enable the virus to evolve quickly in the face of new selective pressures, such as the adaptive immune response (see Chapter 17, Virus Evolution).While only about 3% of the human genome actually codes for proteins, a very large fraction of viral genomes encode proteins. Viruses use four basic strategies to pack as much genetic information as possible into the smallest amount of genetic material (Figure 3
). (1) Polyproteins: Instead of having one promoter for each viral gene, many viruses encode polyproteins. These polyproteins are translated, and cellular or viral proteases then cleave them into individual proteins. (2) Differential splicing: Some viruses use the cell’s machinery to splice their genome, and a single promoter is used to transcribe different viral genes. (3) Overlapping reading frames: By having start codons in several sites, virus genes can overlap. (4) Ribosomal frame-shifting: In some viruses, a ribosome starts translating a protein and then “slips” back one base before starting again. When this happens, it is now in a new reading frame, and thus begins translating a different viral protein. These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive—HIV employs all four, for example. The net effect is to pack an impressive punch within a small genome.Figure 3How viruses pack maximum information into small genomes. A. Many viruses produce one or more large polyprotiens that are cleaved by cellular or viral proteases co- or posttranslationally, resulting in the generation of multiple viral proteins all of which were transcribed via a single promoter. B. Some viruses utilize the cell’s RNA splicing machinery, which makes it possible to place a single, common promoter in front of different viral genes. C. Some viruses use overlapping reading frames, which saves genetic space. D. Ribosomal frame-shifting is used by retroviruses. If the ribosome slips back a base and then proceeds, the reading frame is shifted and a different protein is produced.2Routes of Viral TransmissionMost human infections result from transmission of virus from another infected human. However, some viruses are transmitted to humans from animals (bunyaviruses, arenaviruses) or via an insect vector (Dengue, West Nile viruses)—a fact that has been recognized in the case of rabies virus for hundreds of years (Figure 4
). In these cases, the virus has to interact with pathways present in the animal or insect vector as well in the human host. The transmission process must deliver virus to a specific site that harbors cells susceptible to infection, such as the respiratory or gastrointestinal tracts. Following transmission, the virus typically establishes a primary, local infection. Sometimes, symptoms result from replication at the primary site of infection and virus produced at this site can be spread to other hosts. Other viruses disseminate within the host, being delivered to other tissues and organs that support virus replication. Dissemination can occur by different pathways—lymphatic spread, hematogenous spread, neural spread—and reflects an impressive degree of virus–host adaptation. Upon initiation of infection, the innate and adaptive immune systems are activated and attempt to clear the virus. However, viruses often employ immune evasion strategies, and the balance between immune responses and viral evasion strategies does much to dictate the outcome (see Chapters 4, 5, and 6,Chapter 4Chapter 5Chapter 6 Innate, Adaptive, and Aberrant immunity).Figure 4Historical illustration showing the transmission of rabies. Arabic painting by Abdallah ibn al-Fadl, Baghdad school, 1224.Courtesy of the Freer Gallery of Art, Washington, DC.
Respiratory tract. This is a common route of infection, with transmission mediated by aerosolized droplets or infected saliva and nasopharyngeal secretions. Droplet size, which is affected by temperature and humidity, plays a major role in determining the anatomic site to which the virus is delivered, with larger droplets lodging in the nose and upper airways and smaller droplets in the alveoli. Innate defenses include mucus and cilia, which trap pathogens and deliver them to the digestive tract, secretory IgA, and alveolar macrophages. Some viruses tend to infect the pharynx—hence pharyngitis; others may infect epithelial cells in bronchioles, causing bronchitis. The site of initial replication can be impacted by the virus inoculum, the site in the respiratory tract to which it is delivered, and the tropism of the virus for distinct cell types within the respiratory system. Avian influenza provides a good example: In humans, there is an anatomical difference in the distribution of sialic acid linkages in the respiratory tract. The α-2,3 linkage preferred by avian influenza is found only deeper in the human respiratory pathway, while the α-2,6 linkage used by human influenza viruses is found in the upper respiratory tract, helping to explain the relative protection of humans from “bird flu.”
Gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Many viruses are transmitted via the fecal–oral route where the environment is challenging—very low pH in the stomach, an alkaline pH in the small intestine, proteases, and bile detergents that will inactivate most viruses. Thus, viruses that infect the GI tract are almost always nonenveloped, and have evolved the ability to survive in the GI environment. In fact, some viruses require these conditions. For reoviruses to infect cells, their outer surface proteins have to be cleaved by host cell proteases which then enables them to bind to M cells, which are found in the epithelium that overlies Peyer’s patches. The bound virus is internalized and transcytosed to the basolateral surface, enabling virus to spread beyond the epithelium (Danthi et al., 2013). There is considerable specialization, as different viruses enter and replicate in different locations throughout the GI tract, from the tonsils to the distal colon.
Urogenital tract. The urogenital tract is the preferred site of entry for a number of viruses, some of which are well adapted to infect epithelial cells and replicate locally while others use this route as a portal of entry to gain access to other tissues. Preexisting lesions can greatly increase the transmission of other viruses via breaches in the epithelium. This is a significant issue with HIV, where other sexually transmitted diseases enhance susceptibility.
Skin and mucous membranes. The intact skin is not a hospitable environment for viruses as it is covered by keratin and a layer of dying cells. As a result, infection via this route will require a break in the skin, which can be mechanical (a scratch), or the bite of an insect vector (a mosquito, tick, sandfly). Many viruses replicate in the dermis, a layer of highly vascularized tissue with fibroblasts and DCs that lies immediately below the epidermis. A smaller number of viruses replicate in the epidermis itself, notably the papillomaviruses. Direct infection of epithelial cells that line mucosal surfaces is more prevalent, though mucus and IgA serve as intrinsic barriers.
3Viral Dissemination and MovementViruses have evolved strategies to usurp host cell pathways to move at both the microscopic scale within and between cells, and the macro scale, within the host.3.1Movement on the Microscope Scale
Movement of virions along the surface of a cell. The plasma membrane is structurally heterogeneous. There are tight junctions in polarized epithelial cells, lipid rafts that serve to concentrate some cell surface proteins and exclude others, and projections such as microvilli. This means that virions not only have to bind to the surface of a host cell, but must either bind or migrate to the location on the cell surface that provides molecules or endocytic pathways needed for entry. Many viruses have evolved mechanisms that result in their directed movement on the surface of the plasma membrane (“virus surfing”) until they reach a location that is compatible with entry (Lehmann et al., 2005).A notable example of this process is provided by Group B coxsackie viruses, nonenveloped virions that must bind to the coxsackie–adenovirus receptor (CAR). However, coxsackie viruses infecting the apical surface of polarized epithelial cells are faced with a conundrum: CAR is strictly localized at tight junctions and is not accessible to virions that attach to the apical plasma membrane. How then can the virus and its receptor interact? On polarized epithelial cells, coxsackie virus first binds to decay-accelerating factor (DAF), a GPI-anchored protein that is relatively evenly distributed on the apical surface of the plasma membrane. Virus binding to DAF triggers the activation of Abl kinase that in turn initiates Rac-dependent actin rearrangements, which result in rapid movement of DAF, with the associated virus, to tight junctions, where it can then bind to its primary receptor and be internalized via caveolae (Coyne and Bergelson, 2006).
Viruses can trigger their own internalization into cells. Many viruses have to be endocytosed by the host cell, and there are many pathways by which this occurs (Marsh and Helenius, 2006). Some viruses enter cells via constitutive endocytic pathways (coated pits/vesicles, caveolae), perhaps assisted by virus-induced cross-linking of cell surface receptors. However, many viruses utilize nonclathrin-dependent pathways, and transduce signals upon binding to the cell surface that causes the cell to engulf the virus by micropinocytosis, a mechanism employed by cells to internalize large particles.
Active dissemination: movement within a cell via microtubules. Once within the cytoplasm, a virus must deliver its genome to the site of virus replication. This can be a considerable distance, particularly if replication occurs in the nucleus. However, the highly viscous nature of the cytoplasm and the extensive cytoskeletal network immobilizes virions in the cytosol. To move within a cell, virions must utilize cellular pathways, often involving the microtubule network (Urnavicius et al., 2015). Interactions with microtubules can be indirect: A virus can be internalized and delivered to a vesicle that itself is transported along microtubules. Alternatively, a number of viruses interact directly with the microtubule machinery to effect retrograde (away from the nucleus) or anterograde (toward the nucleus) transport.A particularly well-understood example of viral movement along microtubules in both directions is provided by HSV-1 which spreads from its primary site of infection at a mucosal surface by entering local nerve endings. After membrane fusion, the viral capsid is released into the cytosol and interacts with dynein, a motor protein that transports cargo toward the microtubule organizing center that is in close proximity to the nucleus. Viral capsids are thus transported, from the site of entry to a location near the nucleus, in an efficient and rapid manner over distances that can be as long as several feet in the case of retrograde movement within an axon. Following replication, newly assembled virions need to be transported in the opposite direction, which is accomplished by specific interactions to kinesin, a molecular motor responsible for anterograde transport along microtubules (Radtke et al., 2006).Herpes zoster, like HSV-1, establishes a latent infection in sensory ganglia by moving in a retrograde fashion, from the periphery to the nerve bodies in the ganglia. Upon reactivation, which can be caused by triggers such as stress, newly synthesized particles move in an anterograde fashion along axons, delivering virus to the periphery where it forms a painful rash that involves a single dermatome (area of skin supplied by a single sensory ganglia). Thus, the lesions are typically unilateral, and can keep appearing in the same place (as cold sores do around the mouth).
Viruses can also move efficiently from cell to cell. Just as viruses can utilize cellular pathways to effect directed movement along the cell surface and through the cytoplasm, newly assembled viruses can utilize similar pathways to move to the cell surface and achieve efficient transmission between cells. Poxviruses, after assembling in the cytosol, move along microtubules to the cell surface. Some viruses preferentially bud at the site of cell–cell contact, which results in the formation of a structure termed the virologic synapse, and makes transfer of virus to the new host cell a very efficient process (Mothes et al., 2010).Another mechanism used by viruses to effect directed transfer to an adjoining cell utilizes surface-based glycosylaminoglycans. In cells chronically infected with murine leukemia virus, newly assembled and budded virus particles are not immediately released, but are bound to glycosylaminoglycans on the cell surface. There is a concentration of viruses to the infected cell periphery, enabling them to be efficiently transmitted to neighboring cells (Mothes et al., 2010).Finally, some viruses use actin to move between cells. Newly synthesized vaccinia virus particles have actin-binding proteins at one end of the brick-shaped virion. Actin polymerizes at the end of the virus, which propels the virion. The virus can actually be pushed out of the cell by this actin “rocket,” still enshrouded by the plasma membrane. If this projection impales an adjoining cell, the membrane “shroud” then breaks off and the virus finds itself in a new host. A virus that moves in this way from cell to cell, does not enter the extracellular space, and avoids neutralization by extracellular antibodies (Cudmore et al., 1995).3.2Long-Range Movement within the HostViruses can undergo long-range dissemination within the host, utilizing the lymphatics, the blood, or the peripheral nervous system. HIV is a good example of a virus that can spread via lymphatics as cell-associated virions. During sexual transmission, HIV must cross the epithelium, perhaps through a tear or an abrasion. DCs express lectins—such as DC-SIGN and the macrophage mannose receptor—on their surface, and are among the first cell type that HIV encounters. HIV binds avidly to these lectins, and once bound to DCs, the virus is internalized and retained in an intracellular compartment. Cross-linking of DC-SIGN triggers migration of DCs to regional lymph nodes. Once in the lymph node, HIV is returned to the DC surface and is surrounded by T cells that it can infect. Thus, for all intents and purposes, HIV uses the DC as a “taxi” for transport from a mucosal surface to a more proximal lymphoid organ.The most common mode of dissemination is via blood (viremia), and blood-borne virus can circulate either cell-free or as cell-associated virions. Poliovirus moves through the lymphatics to reach regional lymph nodes, eventually draining into the blood stream, and reaching the central nervous system (CNS). Because poliovirus circulates as cell-free virions in the plasma, humoral neutralizing antibody can prevent virus from reaching the CNS, and protect against paralytic poliomyelitis. This is the mechanism that underpins the protective efficacy of inactivated poliovirus vaccine.Selected viruses can spread via the peripheral nervous system. The classical example is rabies virus that does not cause a viremia but only spreads from the point of infection to the CNS and then to the salivary glands. As noted above, viruses that spread via peripheral nerves utilize intracellular transport mechanisms to “hitch a ride” within the neuron.4Virus Shedding and TransmissionVirus must be shed to be transmitted to a new, naive host. Viruses may be discharged into respiratory aerosols, feces, or other body fluids or secretions, and each of these modes is important for selected agents. Nonenveloped viruses are more resistant to desiccation and other environmental extremes than are viruses surrounded by lipid bilayers. For this reason, viruses transmitted by the fecal–oral route are generally nonenveloped viruses, while fragile enveloped viruses are usually transmitted by body fluids typically within a short time after release. Viruses that cause acute infections are usually shed intensively over a short time period, often 1–4 weeks, and transmission tends to be relatively efficient. Viruses such as HBV and HIV, that cause persistent infections, can be shed at lower titers for months to years but will eventually be transmitted during the course of a long-lasting infection.
Oropharynx and gastrointestinal tract. Enteroviruses may be shed in pharyngeal fluids and feces. Poliovirus replicates in the lymphoid tissue of the tonsil and in Peyer’s patches (lymphoid tissue accumulations in the wall of the small intestine) whence it is discharged into the intestinal lumen. Other viruses may be excreted into feces from the epithelial cells of the intestinal tract (reoviruses and rotaviruses) or from the liver via the bile duct (hepatitis A virus).
Respiratory tract. Viruses that multiply in the nasopharynx and respiratory tract may be shed either as aerosols generated by sneezing or coughing, or in pharyngeal secretions that are spread from hand to mouth. Often, transmission is via contaminated fomites, such as handkerchiefs, clothing, or toys.
Skin. Relatively few viruses are shed from the skin. Papillomaviruses and certain poxviruses that cause warts or superficial tumors may be transmitted by mechanical contact. A few viruses, such as variola virus, the cause of smallpox, and varicella virus, the cause of chickenpox, that are present in skin lesions can be aerosolized and transmitted by the respiratory route. In fact, it is claimed that the earliest instance of deliberate “biological warfare” was the introduction into Indian tribes of blankets containing desquamated skin from smallpox cases.
Mucous membranes, oral, and genital fluids. Viruses that replicate in mucous membranes and produce lesions of the oral cavity or genital tract are often shed in pharyngeal or genital fluids. An example is herpes simplex virus (type 1 in the oral cavity and type 2 in genital fluids). A few viruses are excreted in saliva, such as Epstein Barr virus, a herpesvirus that causes infectious mononucleosis, sometimes called the “kissing disease.” The most notorious example is rabies virus, which replicates in the salivary gland and is transmitted by a bite that inoculates virus-contaminated saliva. Several important human viruses, such as HBV and HIV, may be present in the semen.
Blood, urine, milk. Blood is an important potential source of virus infection in humans wherever transfusions, injected blood products, and needle exposure are common. In general, viruses transmitted in this manner are those that produce persistent viremia, such as HBV, HCV, HIV, and cytomegalovirus. Occasionally, viruses that produce acute short-term high titer viremias, such as Ebola virus or parvovirus B19, may contaminate blood products. Although a number of viruses are shed in the urine, this is usually not an important source of transmission. One exception is certain animal viruses that are transmitted to humans; several arenaviruses are transmitted via aerosols of dried urine. A few viruses are shed in milk and transmitted to newborns in that manner. The most prominent example is HIV, though visna-maedi virus of sheep and mouse mammary tumor virus can also be transmitted via milk.
Transmission. Enteric viruses are commonly transmitted by oral or fecal contamination of hands, with passage to the hands and thence the oral cavity of the next infected host. Inhalation of aerosolized virus is the major mode of transmission for respiratory viruses. Another significant route is by direct host-to-host interfacing, including oral–oral, genital–genital, oral–genital, or skin–skin contacts. Transmission may involve less natural modes such as blood transfusions, organ transplants, or reused needles. In contrast to propagated infections are transmissions from a contaminated common source, such as food, water, or biologicals. Common source transmission is quite frequent and can produce explosive outbreaks that range in size depending on the number of recipients of the tainted vehicle and the level of virus contamination. One of the most infamous was the World War II epidemic of HBV among military personnel, transmitted by a contaminated batch of 17D yellow fever vaccine.Sexually transmitted viruses present a special situation, since the probability of spread depends upon the gender and type of sexual interaction between infected host and her/his uninfected contact. For instance, an HIV-infected male is more likely to transmit to a female partner via anal than vaginal intercourse, and that risk is reduced if the male partner is circumcised.Transmission of arboviruses is complex, since it involves the cycle between an insect vector and a vertebrate host. There are a number of quantitative variables that determine the efficiency of vector transmission. Vertebrate host determinants include the titer and duration of viremia, while insect determinants include the competence of the vector (that is, the ability of the vector to support viral replication in several tissues and shed virus in its saliva) and the extrinsic incubation period (the interval between ingesting the virus and shedding in the saliva), as well as the distinctive feeding preferences of each insect vector. Also, there are a number of alternative patterns of viral maintenance in the vector, including overwintering of virus in hibernating mosquitoes, transovarial transmission of the virus, and venereal spread between male and female mosquitoes.5Patterns of Virus InfectionViruses can cause acute, chronic, or latent infections. Most viruses cause acute, self-limited infections, and most infections in turn are asymptomatic. Symptomatic infections are preceded by an asymptomatic incubation period, the length of which can be related to the inoculum (dose of the virus), the rate of replication, and many other factors. For a virus to initiate a persistent infection, a set of special circumstances must exist that permit the virus to escape the adaptive immune response. The general principles associated with each of these infection patterns are described in Chapter 7, Patterns of Infection.6Major Disease MechanismsViruses can cause disease in many ways, which are discussed in subsequent chapters. Here, we will briefly review the major mechanisms involved.
Direct cytopathic effects. Many viruses kill cells, directly by lysis or by inducing apoptosis, and disease can result from loss of parenchymal cells. An example is West Nile virus which infects neurons and induces apoptosis via caspase 3, leading to encephalitis and movement disorders. Another example is Ebola virus. Individuals infected with the Zaire strain of Ebola virus typically develop a hemorrhagic fever, with loss of vascular integrity. The spike protein of Ebola virus appears to be a major culprit; it induces loss of contact with neighboring cells, which plays a role in the vascular leakage and hypotension that are characteristic of fatal Ebola hemorrhagic shock syndrome (Feldman and Geisbert, 2011).Another example is syncytia formation. Enveloped viruses that bud from the plasma membrane deliver their glycoproteins to the cell surface. These viral proteins can bind to receptors on the surface of adjoining cells, eliciting cell–cell fusion, and syncytia formation. Respiratory syncytial virus, the major cause of viral pneumonia in young children, derives its name from the fact that it can form syncytia not only in tissue culture, but also in the lungs of infected patients.
Disease caused by antibody-mediated immunity. Some viruses, such as hepatitis B, release large amounts of antigen into the blood. Antibodies can bind to the viral antigens, leading to the formation of immune complexes that are deposited in the basement membranes of glomeruli in the kidney, leading to renal dysfunction.
Another example of antibody-mediated diseases is dengue, caused by a mosquito-borne virus that infects millions of people a year. There are four major dengue virus serotypes. Antibodies that neutralize one serotype do not neutralize the others. When a human is infected with a second serotype, antibodies produced against the first serotype bind to, but do not neutralize, the second serotype. The virus is now partially coated with non-neutralizing antibodies, enabling it to bind to cells—such as monocytes and macrophages—that have Fc receptors on their surface. This results in the efficient infection of these cells with massive release of cytokines and subsequent vascular leakage and hemorrhage (Paessler and Walker, 2013). As a consequence, there is a chance that the patient will now develop dengue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syndrome, which carries significant mortality.
Disease caused by virus-initiated autoimmunity. Viral antigens are sometimes similar to host antigens so that antibody or cellular responses directed against a pathogen may also cross-react with normal host molecules and cells. It is widely thought that some immunopathological diseases are the result of molecular mimicry, such as the demyelinating diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS) and Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS). GBS is often preceded by a viral illness. It is hypothesized that a viral peptide presented by the class I pathway resembles a cellular protein (the myelin basic protein), and triggers an autoimmune response that results in demyelination.
Diseases associated with innate immunity and a cytokine “storm.” Recent studies of the reconstructed 1918 strain of influenza virus suggest that the severe disease was due to an exuberant host response in the lungs that led to pulmonary edema and respiratory failure. It is postulated that an excess of proinflammatory cytokines triggered this excessive response (Tisoncik et al., 2012; Peng et al., 2014). Another example is Ebola virus disease, a hemorrhagic fever, accompanied by very high temperature and a clinical crisis. It is postulated that a cytokine storm plays a major role in acutely fatal cases.
Disease caused by virus-induced immunosuppression. Some virus infections can lead to immunosuppression, making the human host susceptible to other infectious agents (see Chapter 6, Aberrant Immunity). Measles virus suppresses the secretion of certain cytokines, leading to transient immunosuppression. Measles kills 150,000 children annually, but deaths are usually not the direct result of the virus, but rather via virus-enhanced infection with other viruses or bacteria.
Disease caused by virus-induced tumorigenesis. Oncogenic viruses are the subject of Chapter 9. Suffice it to say that RNA tumor viruses transform via different mechanisms than those used by DNA tumor viruses. However, in all instances, there is a final common pathway, with a release of the “brakes” on the cell cycle which limit the replication of normal cells. Tumorigenesis involves a multistep process that confers on virus-transformed cells; the ability to grow in the host animal.7RepriseThe steps in viral infection begin with infection of individual cells followed by spread through a multicellular host organism. At the cellular level, viruses use attachment factors to associate with the cell surface and then specific cellular receptors to initiate attachment. Entry is a multistep process that involves membrane fusion of enveloped viruses or conformational changes in naked capsids, to deliver the viral genome to either the cytoplasm or nucleus. In general, RNA viruses replicate in the cytoplasm and DNA viruses in the nucleus, with a few notable exceptions, such as poxviruses and retroviruses. The virus uses viral or host enzymes to replicate its genome and for transcription and translation of viral proteins. In many instances, viruses shanghai normal cellular metabolism to support their replication and assembly. Shedding of newly synthesized virions is implemented by lysis of the infected cell to release encapsidated viruses or budding from the plasma membrane to release enveloped viruses. Host cells encode some antiviral proteins and many viruses have evolved countermeasures to evade these intrinsic defenses and to prolong the life of the virus-infected cell by blocking apoptosis or necrosis.At the level of the host organism, there are many different routes of infection, each of which is characteristic for a specific virus. Viruses usually initiate infection via inhalation, ingestion, or penetration of the skin or mucous membranes. Virions often spread through the lymphatics to the lymph nodes where many of them replicate, to be discharged into the blood as free or cell-associated particles. Blood-borne viruses invade and replicate in various target organs, again characteristic for each virus. Spread from an infected animal or human is usually by release from either the lung, mouth and gastrointestinal tract, mucous membranes, or skin.Viral infections range from innocuous to lethal. Some viruses are not cytocidal and do not kill infected cells; likewise many viral infections of human or animal hosts occur without apparent illness. However, viruses can cause pathological changes through a variety of mechanisms. These include direct tissue injury such as seen in smallpox, HAV hepatitis, paralytic poliomyelitis, and herpes simplex encephalitis. Virus-initiated immune-mediated diseases include HBV acute hepatitis, dengue hemorrhagic fever, and some cases of influenza pneumonia. Diseases associated with immunosuppression include measles, pneumonia, and congenital rubella. Virus-initiated cancers of humans include cervical cancer (HPV), lymphoma (HTLV-1), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HBV and HCV).



Title: Clinical Manifestation, Transmission, Pathogenesis, and Diagnosis of Monkeypox Virus: A Comprehensive Review

1. Introduction The zoonotic virus monkeypox virus (MPXV) was discovered in 1958 after an outbreak of a smallpox-like disease in macaques at a Danish research facility—hence the name monkeypox [1,2]. The first human case of smallpox was identified in 1970 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, when smallpox surveillance was increasing [3]. During the subsequent ten years, additional monkeypox virus (MPXV) cases were diagnosed, with children accounting for 83% of all cases in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) and four other Central and West African nations: Nigeria, Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Ivory Coast [4]. Most cases documented in the DRC throughout the 1970s and 1980s had an estimated case fatality rate (CFR) of 11% among persons who had not received a smallpox vaccine. Children under four had the greatest CFR (15%) [5]. Most cases were proven to have occurred in the DRC due to increased surveillance, revealing new MPX-endemic locations in Benin, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, Ghana, Sierra Leone, and South Sudan [6]. In 2003, the United States reported the first MPXV outbreak in people outside of Africa, related to an imported exotic pet from Ghana. Seventy-one monkeypox virus cases were reported in individuals exposed to infected prairie dogs, but no deaths were reported [7]. Several nations, including the UK in 2018 to 2022, Israel in 2018, and Singapore in 2019, have recently reported imported MPX cases due to recent travel to sub-Saharan Africa (SSA). The detection of MPX infections in patients in the USA in July 2021 and November 2021 has now been further confirmed by the CDC [8,9,10]. A patient with an unexplained rash who had recently traveled to Nigeria presented at a United Kingdom hospital before 4 May 2022. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results on a vesicular swab confirmed the diagnosis of the monkeypox virus [6]. Several more cases were discovered in the following months throughout over 50 countries and six regions, with the largest concentrations occurring in England, Germany, Spain, France, and Portugal [11].2. Features of Monkeypox EpidemicsMonkeypox virus has evolved into two separate clades: West Africa and Congo Basin [12]. Different epidemiological and clinical characteristics distinguish the diseases caused by the two MPXV clades. The Congo Basin strain has a fatality rate of 10% [13]. West Africa has a fatality rate of approximately 1%, with a higher mortality rate among patients with HIV co-infection [14]. From 1986 to 1992, only 13 incidents were reported of monkeypox, and none were recorded from 1993 to 1995 [15]. In 1997, a total of 88 individuals were confirmed to have monkeypox (MPX) infection, whereas in 1996, there was a sudden increase in the number of MPXV-infected human cases reported in DRC [15,16]. MPX outbreak occurred in the United States in 2003. This is the first outbreak of MPX outside of Africa, and it has been linked to the importation of marmots from Africa into the United States. A total of 47 people have been detected in five states [17,18]. From September to December of 2005, Sudan reported ten confirmed cases and nine suspected cases of MPXV due to an outbreak of MPX [19]. Between 2006 and 2007, human MPX infection was again detected in DRC. Since the 1980s, MPX transmission has increased by 20, while smallpox vaccination reduces disease risk by 21 [20].In addition, monkeypox from Central Africa inhibits T-cell receptor-mediated activation, suppressing proinflammatory cytokine production within human cells from earlier infected monkeypox patients [21]. The MPXV inhibitor supplementing the enzymes or gene inhibits enzymes missing in West African strains and has been recognized as an essential immune modulating factor contributing to the increased virulence of Central African strains [22]. Additionally, the central African strain selectively regulates host responses, particularly in host cell death [23]. Infection with central African monkeypox appears to preferentially inhibit the transcription of genes essential in host immunity, according to transcriptional research [20,24].3. Nomenclature of Monkeypox Virus The Orthopoxvirus genus of the Poxviridae family includes numerous zoonotic infections, particularly monkeypox [25]. To replace monkeypox, the WHO will adopt the new preferred name, “Mpox” [26]. Poxviruses’ primary hosts are lemmings, rabbits, and primates, which can be infrequently passed to humans, allowing the incidence of human-to-human transmission [27]. The Poxviridae family is divided into two taxonomic groups: Entomopoxvirinae and Chorodopoxvirinae. The subfamily classification depends upon whether the virus infects insects, as in Entemopovirinae, or vertebrates, as in Chorodopoxvirinae [28].DNA viruses usually increase and express their genomes in the nucleus, making substantial use of cellular proteins; unfortunately, this is not the case for poxviruses [29,30]. The main portion of the genome will contain genes participating the important function, such as virus assembly and transcription, while some are located at termini which participate in virus–host interactions [31]. Poxviruses encode more than 150 genes, and 49 genes are common across all sequence members of the provirus family, while 90 are frequent inside the subfamily of chorodopoxviruses [32]. Further, poxvirus genera are divided into eight vertebrates: Yatapoxvirus, Orthopoxvirus, Caprioxviru, Molluscipoxvirus, Suipoxvirus, Capripoxvirus, Avpoxvirus, and Parapoxvirus (Figure 1). These viruses share the same DNA sequence with the same antigens for reactivity [33].Poxviruses contain the human smallpox virus, declared eradicated in 1980 by the World Health Organization. Other poxviruses that can infect humans include the cowpox virus, smallpox virus, and Akhmeta virus, as well as viruses from different animal species that can cause a pandemic when combined with the monkeypox virus. The monkeypox virus is the most prevalent of these in humans. Bovine pox is another zoonotic disease with a large population in the animal kingdom, a clear relationship to livestock exposure in humans with variable prevalence and severity and a progression of several weeks. Paraboxvirus is a viral genus in the poxvirus family that includes species widespread among sheep, goats, cattle, camels, and the cervix. They are emollients in humans (breast nodules) infected by oral or pharyngeal (papular stomatitis) or skin contact (cellular dermatitis), typically with a moderate granulomatous reaction, causing a variety of clinical manifestations in animals.Moreover, Paraboxvirus results in the formation of large nodular or vascular lesions. The species generates less immunity than Orthopoxviruses, increasing the likelihood of reinfection. Molluscum contagiosum is a common disease in humans, children, and adults caused by species of the genus Molluscipoxvirus, with specific human swellings and erythematous papules mimicking soft tumors, usually with few and variable numbers of immunizations. In the planting area, it is mainly distributed in roots, trunk, and limbs. Immunity is self-limited. The spreading of Molluscum contagiosum disease via direct contact with the genital lesions is facilitated by sexual contact and is also spread by Candida.In contrast to other viruses, smallpox viruses have a much lower mutation ability than RNA viruses, such as influenza viruses. However, these viruses have extensive genetic ability, which explains their ability to attack and evade the virus and the immune system [34,35].4. TransmissionHuman monkeypox outbreaks started in the USA in 2003. The first rats were imported from Ghana and sold as exotic pets, which started the trend. These rodents are believed to spread the infection to prairie dogs living in close areas that were also being sold as pets [36,37].There are multiple routes of transmission for the monkeypox virus (Figure 2), all of which involve direct contact with infected humans or animals. Human infection has been linked to direct animal contact. Still, it is an investigation whether the virus is transmitted through rodent infiltrations or the consumption of bush meat from a common species. Infection with the monkeypox virus in humans is caused by direct contact with animals, especially body fluids such as respiratory fluids and saliva, which may originate from exudates of cutaneous and mucous lesions. Shedding viruses through feces could be an additional route of exposure [38].In endemic areas of Africa with limited infrastructure and resources, exposure to the feces of infected animals can be a significant risk factor. Many people also choose to sleep outdoors, on the ground, or live close to or visit forests where infected animals are significantly more abundant [39]. In those areas that lack resources and basic needs, such as food, there is no alternative to hunting, which increases the risk of exposure to monkeypox. The transmission rate from animal to animal is higher than human-to-human transmission; respiratory droplets are typically involved, as well as face-to-face and lesion contact among infected individuals [40]. Contact with the contaminated area, such as touching a contaminated object or living, eating, and drinking with the same dishes as an infected person, increases the transmission rate among the population. Due to the possibility of transmission through men who have sex with men (MSM), the monkeypox virus is more prevalent in males than in females during the current epidemic [41,42,43]. In 2022, there is currently a widespread Mpox epidemic affecting several nations in different regions, mainly in the community of MSM, with an appearance that primarily consists of genital lesions [10]. In total, 99% of cases were found in the MSM community in a cohort of 595 confirmed cases of Mpox in Spain in 2022, with the lesions primarily affecting the vaginal, perineal, or perianal regions. Inguinal lymphadenopathy was also shown to be a common characteristic in the research, supporting the idea that sexual transmission was the primary method of infection [42]. As of 6 July 2022, Germany had recorded 1304 confirmed cases, primarily among MSM [44]. Among some verified cases from Nigeria, the findings demonstrate that sexual contact plays a part in the spread of monkeypox [45].5. Morphology and Pathogenesis of MonkeypoxPoxvirus mature structure (Figure 3) has a distinctive dumbbell-shaped nucleoprotein core composed of a double-stranded DNA genome [17]. Monkeypox virions consist of 30 structural and membrane viral proteins, virus-encoded DNA-dependent RNA polymerase, and associated transcription enzymes [46,47]. The virus genome comprises 197,000 bp and contains hairpin termini along with >190 non-overlapping open reading frames (ORFs) [48,49]. The genome’s highly conserved central coding region is guarded by variable ends comprising inverted terminal repeats. At least ninety open reading frames (ORFs) are required for the virion’s replication and morphogenesis. Many non-essential ORFs play a role in the differences in poxvirus host tropism, immunomodulation, and pathogenesis, with many ORFs yet to be functionally categorized [50].The pathogenicity and pathophysiology of the monkeypox virus begin with virus transmission, which starts with close contact of animal to human or human-to-human. Smallpox and monkeypox infect through the host’s respiratory or oropharyngeal mucosa. The virus enters through the inoculation site and begins replication in the respiratory and oropharyngeal mucosa. Viruses spread to the local lymph nodes in primary viremia. However, these viruses enter lymph nodes and organs via blood circulation in secondary viremia. This process represents the incubation period of 7 to 14 or 21 days [39].External virion proteins, cellular glycosaminoglycans on the target cell’s surface, and extracellular matrix components are most likely involved in monkeypox virion attachment. Poxviruses enter host cells via a low-pH endosomal pathway or direct fusion with the plasma membrane at neutral pH, releasing the viral core in the cytoplasm. A complex of 12 non-glycosylated viral membrane proteins is required for intracellular mature virions and enveloped extracellular virions to fuse with the cell [51]. Following entry, the virus-encoded multi-subunit DNA-dependent RNA polymerase initiates viral transcription, followed by the translation of early, intermediate, and late proteins on host ribosomes [52]. Poxvirus DNA synthesis occurs in cytoplasmic structures known as “factories”, which gradually transition from compact DNA-containing structures wrapped in Endoplasmic reticulum membranes to crescent-shaped structures where virion assembly takes place. While most mature virions remain within the cell (intracellular mature virions), some are transported via microtubules and enveloped by two Endoplasmic reticulum or Golgi-derived membranes. These enveloped virions can either initiate actin polymerization, which propels the particle on an actin tail toward an adjacent cell, or exit the cell via cytoplasmic membrane fusion and become enveloped extracellular virions (Figure 4) [53].6. SymptomsIn non-human primates, MPVX typically causes a short-lived rash. Plague and 1–4 mm epidermal papules that develop into pustules and crust over are the first clinical signs. A typical lesion has a red, necrotic, and depressed center surrounded by epidermal hyperplasia. These “smallpox pustules” can appear anywhere on the body, but the face and extremities are the most common. Most infected animals recover quickly; however, fatal cases occur, particularly in neonatal monkeys. Following vaccination, MPVX-caused illness was discovered in various rodents, including prairie dogs, dormice, and squirrels. Clinical symptoms in each of these cases (Figure 5) vary, but fever, weight loss, nasal discharge, coughing, respiratory involvement, and mouth ulcers may establish [2,47,54]. MSM have been reported to represent the majority of cases in the current outbreak, often resulting in genital lesions or a vesicular–pustular rash [40,55,56,57,58,59]. The fact that the perineum and vaginal area are commonly affected by the rash suggests that sexual contact may have been the cause of the condition. Monkeypox is often confused with other sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as granuloma inguinale, molluscum contagiosum, chancre, or herpes simplex infection [60,61].The clinical features of traditional smallpox with a high mortality rate are classified as typical, altered, variola sine eruption, hemorrhage, and flat type [62]. The hemorrhagic type, which causes widespread bleeding in the skin and mucosal membranes, and the flat type, in which the pustules remain flat, were both frequently fatal. The pathophysiology of these virulent strains of smallpox is poorly studied. Non-human primate models of smallpox and Orthopoxviral infections have been developed utilizing cynomolgus and rhesus macaques [30].7. Diagnostic TestsEnzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) can detect specific IgM and IgG antibodies in the serum of monkeypox-infected patients after 5 and 8 days of infection, respectively, for serological testing. A four-fold increase in serum antibodies can be used to diagnose monkeypox virus infection at both the acute and convalescent stages. Specificity is insufficient due to antigenic cross-reactions between MPXV and other poxviruses. Consequently, this method is inefficient in identifying monkeypox virions and is frequently employed in epidemiologic studies. Similarly, identification by an electronic microscope is not entirely reliable because virions cannot be distinguished morphologically [63].Real-time polymer chain reaction (RT-PCR) is a genetic method for detecting monkeypox. The conserved regions of extracellular envelope protein gene (B6R), DNA polymerase gene E9L, DNA-dependent RNA polymerase subunit 18 (RPO18) gene, and complement binding protein C3L, F3L, and N3R genes are usually selected as targets for PCR amplification. Furthermore, for MPXV DNA detection, recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA), loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP), and restriction length fragment polymorphism (RFLP) have also been developed for detection purposes [64].8. Immune Response The monkeypox virus (MPXV) produces many viral proteins that help it to hide from the body’s immune system (Figure 6). These can interfere with the signaling cascade of pathogen recognition receptors and stop key transcription factors, such as interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB), from turning on inflammatory genes. MPXV can also mess with interferon signaling by blocking interferon-alpha/beta receptors (IFNα/β) from binding or generating IFNα/β and by blocking pathways that are controlled by protein kinase R (PKR). Monkeypox virus also makes proteins that can attack key molecules that cause inflammation, such as Tumor necrosis factor, interferons, interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-18 (IL-18), and interleukin-6 (IL-6). MPXV can also stop apoptosis in infected cells by making many viral proteins that target the apoptotic pathways. The MPXV Zaire strain from Central Africa also makes D14, which prevents the complement cascade from initiating. However, the West African MPXV strain does not make this viral protein. Lastly, MPXV can slow down the activity of natural killer cells and T cells by interfering with the process of their activation [65].Monkeypox infection results in the accumulation of less dsRNA than vaccinia virus and inhibits the phosphorylation of the pattern recognition immune receptor protein kinase R (PKR) and Eukaryotic Initiation Factor 2 alpha (eIF2), thereby inhibiting the activation of antiviral responses [66]. It has been reported that a homolog of D7L inhibits the proinflammatory cytokine Interleukin 18 (IL-18), which is essential for the control of monkeypox viremia in mice [67]. Zinc-finger antiviral protein (ZAP) selectively targets CpG dinucleotides in RNAs and exerts selective pressure against CpGs in viral genomes [68,69,70]. However, neither the MPXV genome nor mRNAs are suppressed in CpGs. It has been demonstrated that the C16 protein of the vaccinia virus binds ZAP and inhibits its antiviral activity [71], and its homolog in MPXV may play a similar role. Complement control protein (CCP), which prevents the initiation of the complement activation pathway, is another example of an MPXV immunomodulatory [72]. MPXV also inhibits the T cell receptor-mediated activation of antiviral CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, thereby interfering with adaptive immune responses [73].9. Prevention, Treatment, and Therapeutics According to data, the vaccines used for smallpox are the most effective against monkeypox and reduce the severity of clinical symptoms [50]. There are three types of smallpox vaccines in the US strategic stockpile, including ACAM2000 and JYNNEOSTM, licensed for smallpox. The smallpox vaccine produced by Aventis Pasteur could be utilized in an experimental new treatment for smallpox.JYNNEOSTM, made from modified vaccinia Ankara Bavarian Nordic strain, is a non-replicating and live attenuated Orthopoxviral and was approved by the FDA in September 2019; it is currently used to treat monkeypox and smallpox [51]. Data indicate that vaccination with the vaccinia virus for smallpox is 85 percent effective against monkeypox [51,52]. Europe has approved the smallpox vaccine IMVANEX, although the United Kingdom has been using it off-label to treat cases of monkeypox [53].ACAM2000® also has a live vaccinia virus. The FDA approved it in August 2017 to replace the Orthopoxviral vaccine Dryvax, which was withdrawn by the manufacturer [54]. ACAM2000 is used for active immunizations against smallpox disease in individuals with a higher probability of infection. The CDC has recommended an urgent approach with an IND procedure, which enables the use of ACAM2000® for non-variola Orthopoxviral infections for the duration of the pandemic [63].Neutralizing antibodies appear to be an essential component of the immunological mechanisms underlying cross-protection through vaccination against the vaccinia virus. Vaccinating monkeys with a human smallpox vaccine provides protection against monkeypox, which is consistent with the potential of the smallpox vaccine to provide cross-protection for humans against monkeypox [17,18]. Since smallpox vaccines were discontinued in 1978, resistance to various Orthopoxviruses has decreased, particularly in younger individuals lacking vaccinia-induced immunity, and the number of untreated, affected individuals has increased globally. Indeed, there has been an increase in the incidence and geographic spread of human monkeypox in recent years. Percutaneous vaccinia virus infection induces a broad and heterogeneous serum immune response against a broad spectrum of antigenic vaccinia virus features [64]. The antiviral inhibitory activity of serum from immunized individuals is composed of antibodies with various characteristics [65].9.1. VaccineThe FDA approved Cidofovir for the first time in 1996 to prevent cytomegalovirus eye diseases in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Cidofovir has broad antiviral efficacy against many viruses, particularly herpes and adenovirus. Regarding its use in Orthopoxvirus infection, cidofovir was used to treat resistant atopic dermatitis in a 28-month-old boy who had developed severe eczema after contact with his father. The boy survived with no long-term consequences [66].Bricidofovir was approved by the FDA for the first time in June 2021 to treat smallpox injections [67]. It has previously been used in patients with Cytomegalovirus, Orthopoxvirus, and adenovirus infections [68,69]. Brincidofovir was used as a combination therapy in a patient who had received a smallpox vaccine and later developed leukemia [70]. Following chemotherapy, the patient was inoculated gradually and treated with various drugs, including six parts pransidovir [71]. In May 2022, the diagnosis and treatment of seven people infected with the monkeypox virus in the United Kingdom were highlighted. In this retrospective study, three patients were given bransidovir, and all three had elevated liver enzymes, a common side effect of bransidovir use that eventually led to treatment discontinuation [71].The FDA recognized Tecovirimat in 2018 to cure the smallpox virus [72]. The European Medicines Agency approved it for the treatment of cowpox in January 2022. It has been used to treat cowpox-related eye infections in several cases [73,74]. Infection with vaccinia as part of a multidrug regimen. A laboratory worker exposed to the virus was also given the Tecovirimat vaccine [75]. Table 1 shows additional instances where tecovirimat has been used previously. In the case of MPXV infections, tecovirimat was used to treat a patient who had a travel-related case of monkeypox in the United States in 2021. In July 2021, an extended access protocol for the Central African Republic was announced, along with a proposal for 500 tecovirimat curricula to treat monkeypox [76,77].9.2. Vaccinia Immune Globulin IntravenousThe FDA approved vaccinia-resistant globulin intravenous in 2005 to treat the immunization difficulties caused by vaccinia infection [78]. The vaccine insusceptible globulin was given intramuscularly [79]. The VIGIV version was used intravenously in previously reported cases with FDA approval. Many of the patients in Table 1 received VIGIV in addition to antivirals for treating OPXV infections. Vaccinia immune globulin was also given intravenously to a patient with inflammatory bowel disease who had become infected after exposure to a vaccinia–rabies glycoprotein recombinant virus used in animal bait to help to reduce rabies spread in the animal population. Vaccinia immune globulin was also administered intravenously to a patient with inflammatory bowel disease who became infected after exposure to the rabies virus vaccine used in infected animal bait to reduce rabies transmission in animal populations. VIG is also used to treat two patients who developed symptoms of vaccine infection due to a sexual encounter between a smallpox vaccine recipient and one of the case patients [80,81].10. ConclusionsFollowing the discovery of isolated cases in the western hemisphere, the monkeypox virus, previously restricted to African regions, poses a threat to humans worldwide. Because human-to-human transmission is common via respiratory globules and direct contact with an infected person’s mucocutaneous sores, social isolation and contact tracking are essential. MPX has been confirmed in adults in their twenties. This is due to smallpox vaccine pass-through immunity, which is lost in the elderly and the young population (aged < 45 years) not vaccinated in numerous countries, especially in Europe. This virus develops and replicates in the cytoplasm before entering the main viremia and infecting surrounding lymph nodes. Monkeypox infection can result in encephalitis, dehydration, respiratory distress, and bronchopneumonia. Corneal scarring is the first and most concerning issue, which can lead to vision loss. It is critical to provide the necessary maintenance treatment to reduce the risk of these diseases as much as possible. Supportive therapy, such as moist occlusive bandages, may be used in areas where the rash is concentrated. Organizations are focusing on understanding how these infections emerge intermittently across Europe and the Western hemisphere as new cases of monkeypox are confirmed worldwide. It is critical to investigate any potential treatments as well as understand the full spectrum of each monkeypox symptom as well as the long-term consequences of the virus and symptoms.


Title: Exploring the genomic basis of Mpox virus-host transmission and pathogenesis

INTRODUCTIONOrthopoxviruses, a genus within Poxviridae, infect a wide variety of mammalian species and have been the cause of large-scale human devastation. Orthopoxviruses are enveloped, brick-shaped viruses with a single copy of a double-stranded DNA genome of approximately 200 kb and replicate in the cytoplasm. The middle portion of the genome is highly conserved among other genera within Poxviridae, which includes genes crucial for viral translation, replication, and packaging. This genetic arrangement allows for more variability within the left and right terminals of the different virus genomes. These more variable regions contain accessory genes that are not directly involved in essential functions needed to produce functional viral particles. Here, we focus on these accessory genes, as they are critically important in virus-host interaction events that are crucial for understanding Orthopoxvirus pathogenesis.Up to 50% of the Orthopoxvirus genome is dedicated to regulating the host innate and adaptive immune responses. Within the Orthopoxvirus genus, there are 105 common genes involved in host-virus interactions (1). While no single Orthopoxvirus species contains all 105 genes, there are the cowpoxviruses (CPXVs) that contain almost all (1). These genes were initially acquired through waves of horizontal gene transfer events from ancestral hosts and potentially other viruses (1–3). Over the millennia, these genes have undergone selective changes, including mutations, deletions, and duplication events, ultimately giving rise to the major species of Orthopoxviruses (1, 3, 4). Orthopoxvirus species differ in their composition of the left and right accessory gene regions, wherein the function and copy number influence host range and pathogenicity.While encoding a wealth of virulent factors can offer benefits to viral success, these benefits may be offset by fitness costs. First, a larger genome increases replication time, resulting in more time for the host immune response to recognize and respond to the viral infection. Second, an excess of host-modulating genes can disrupt the immune response excessively, hindering the host’s ability to survive and facilitate successful virion reproduction. Finally, different host species may contain or lack immune pathways that would leave viral genomes with redundant or inessential genes. Consequently, a recurrent pattern among Orthopoxviruses is their active engagement in reductive evolution, minimizing genome size to optimize fitness (1, 5). Eliminating superfluous immune evasion elements, fine-tuning species-specific codon usage, and mutating gene sequences to alter structure-specific binding patterns are all strategies that may narrow the host range while enhancing viral fitness by specializing within a particular host niche.The host range and pathogenesis of Orthopoxviruses are intricately linked to the presence or absence of virulence genes (6, 7). Among Orthopoxviruses, cowpoxviruses (CPXVs) exhibit the broadest host range, infecting numerous species with varying efficiency consistent with an extensive genomic complement of accessory genes. In contrast, ectromelia virus (ECTV), closely related to CPXVs, specializes in infecting small murine species. Variola virus, with a significantly reduced genome, demonstrates high host specificity, primarily an extremely successful human pathogen. There are too few virulence genes, such as the heavily attenuated modified vaccinia virus Ankara, which experienced excessive ~30-kbp gene loss during repeated in vitro passaging, thereby losing the ability to successfully replicate within any mammalian species (8). MPXVs, too, have experienced gene loss, which shaped the species into being a rodent-borne pathogen that has the capacity to effectively infect and be transmitted by humans. The genes that MPXV has lost can, in relation to other Orthopoxviruses, give us clues about the genes unnecessary to establish a niche within primates and Rodentia. Vice versa, Orthopoxviruses that share similar host preferences as MPXV may harbor similar orthopox genes (OPGs) that can provide insights into the important virulence and transmission factors.Comparative genomics has been widely used to study gene presence and absence related to pathogenesis and host range of Orthopoxviruses (6, 7, 9, 10). Here, we explore the genomic basis of MPXV host specificity and pathogenesis, covering the genes that define immune evasion strategies utilized among the MPXV species and clades. Additionally, we detail how these immune strategies may work to different effects within rodents, mice, and primates to explain the extended host range of MPXV compared to the narrow host range of other Orthopoxviruses. As MPXV has been elevated to a public health emergency of international concern, it is imperative to delineate the important virulence factors and evolutionary mechanisms that are currently fueling its rise (11).MPXV SPECIES DEFINING GENES IN RELATION TO OTHER ORTHOPOXVIRUSESUnderstanding the genes of MPXV is essential for unraveling its pathogenesis, host range, and potential for transmission. The genetic makeup of MPXV, distinct from other Orthopoxviruses, harbors a combination of relinquished and retained genes that play crucial roles in its evolutionary trajectory and interaction with hosts. By examining these genes, we can discern the adaptive evolutionary strategies employed by MPXV to navigate its ecological niche and infect various host species, including humans. In this exploration of relinquished and retained MPXV genes, we delve into the genetic adaptations that shape the virulence, transmission dynamics, and emergence of this significant zoonotic pathogen (Fig. 1).Fig 1Graphical abstract depicting the three sections of the review: MPXV species-defining traits, MPXV clade differences, and evolutionary forces acting upon MPXV.The figure compares the monkeypox virus with related viruses, revealing proteins for host range and clades I and II linked to cytokine storm pathways like IL-1 and MHC-I, along with genomic evolution processes like SNP generation and codon optimization.Interferon interruption in a species-specific manner dictates host rangeFor mammalian cells, the activation of protein kinase R (PKR) plays a crucial role in the establishment of an antiviral state. PKR activation has been extensively reviewed regarding its central role in signal transduction through STAT, IRF-1, p53, and NF-κB (12). Importantly, PKR serves as a cytosolic sensor for dsRNA pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPS) that are generated during transcription from dsDNA viruses, a result of both strands of DNA being transcribed simultaneously causing reciprocal RNA binding (12). Importantly, PKR additionally serves to modulate the host translational capability during a viral infection—through the regulation eIF2α (12).The first genetic difference we detail is a heavily conserved gene among all of Orthopoxviruses and plays a key role in inhibiting the downstream function of PKR. OPG041, also known as Cop-K3L, encodes an eIF2α mimic that interrupts PKR’s ability to modulate the host translational capability during viral infection. Without OPG041/K3L and upon binding to dsRNA, PKR phosphorylates the initiation factor, eIF2α, which competitively inhibits eIF2B resulting in the inhibition of general translation of viral and mammalian mRNAs except for stress-response mRNAs (12). The viral eIF2α mimic blocks the host eIF2α from being phosphorylated, in turn prohibiting viral translation (13). Interestingly, MPXV and ectromelia virus are the only two Orthopoxvirus species that contain a deleterious mutation causing the protein to become non-functional (1, 10). When OPG041 was deleted from vaccinia virus, the virus became attenuated in vitro (6). While the IFN response is important for most mammalian species to fight off infection, MPXV and ectromelia virus have adopted alternative strategies for handling down-stream interferon signaling—a potential compensating factor for the loss of function for OPG041.Vaccinia virus, ectromelia virus, cowpoxvirus, and MPXV contain OPG174, otherwise known as Cop A44L (10). This gene encodes a hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase protein that functions to convert steroid precursors into glucocorticoids, which have immunosuppressive and anti-inflammatory properties, thereby counteracting an IFN-induced anti-viral immune response (10, 14). The deletion of this gene from the Vaccinia virus caused mice to increase IFN production throughout the course of infection (10). The deletion of this gene from the Ectromelia virus or MPXV, in combination with the natural loss of the PKR antagonist, OPG041, may induce a stronger IFN response from the host, thereby attenuating infection. This represents a unique strategy shared by these small-animal-infecting species.For MPXV, the ability to infect small animal species may depend on the reliance on glucocorticoid production; however, for viruses that infect larger mammalian species, such as primates, the blockage of PKR signaling is a strong selective pressure. Activating the PKR response is a major therapeutic strategy employed by the use of isatin-β-thiosemicarbazone (IBT)—which binds to the Orthopoxvirus RNA polymerase to instigate long mRNA synthesis and subsequent dsRNA PAMPS (15). MPXV is unique in that it has been shown to naturally produce less dsRNA during infection and is IBT-resistant—a result of an unknown mutation within viral RNA polymerases (16). The outcome of this mutation was shown to dampen but not inhibit the PKR response and subsequent IFN production (16). Additionally, OPG034 or VACV Cop-K1L is conserved in ectromelia and MPXV, although fragmented within variola virus. This protein has been shown to reduce the amount of dsRNA during infection, thus weakening PKR activation (17, 18). The combination of genes outlines MPXV’s strategy to overcome PKR activation and together may have allowed MPXV to establish various host niches.Hijacking proteasomal degradation to manipulate intracellular signaling cascadesDuring the extended 24-hour period of Orthopoxvirus replication, intracellular signaling cascades, following PAMP recognition and/or stress responses, are continuously activated and subsequently subverted by interfering viral products (19, 20). A large majority of innate immune signaling cascades coalesce around the ubiquitination of substrates that direct them for activation, translocation, or proteasomal degradation. The host ubiquitin system plays a fundamental role in regulating various cellular processes, including protein degradation, DNA repair, and signal transduction. Ubiquitin, a small protein, is covalently attached to target proteins, marking them for degradation by the proteasome or altering their function, localization, or interactions with other molecules. In the context of viral infections, many viruses have evolved strategies to manipulate the host ubiquitin system to promote their replication and evade immune detection. Here, we detail how Orthopoxviruses utilize ankyrin-like proteins and BTB-kelch proteins dysregulate host proteins, such as NF-κB, through their strategy of interfering host ubiquitin ligases. Additionally, we compare the gene presence and absence of these proteins within MPXV to Orthopoxviruses with restricted host ranges for us to highlight specific ankyrins and kelch-like proteins involved in the pathogenesis of different host species.First, ankyrin-containing proteins (ANK) and BTB-kelch proteins are major Poxviral gene families associated with interfering E3 ubiquitin ligases (21, 22). E3 ligases are a multi-subunit structure composed of S-phase protein kinase 1 (SKP-1) and Cullin1-3 proteins. Substrates interact with this structure through association with a linker-domain protein, either ANK/F-box, ANK/BC, or BTB-kelch proteins (21). Most poxviral ANK proteins contain an F-box domain, some contain BC domains, and OPG039 (K1L) contains no linker domain (21, 23). Kelch-like proteins also interact with E3 ubiquitin ligases, targeting the cullin 3 ligase, SCF3 (7, 24). Most importantly, ANK and kelch-like proteins have specific targets that are brought to the SCF complexes for ubiquitination and subsequent degradation—although many targets have yet to be found (22).Overall, poxviruses harbor 14 categories of ANK-containing paralogs (1, 21). Among them, variola and ectromelia viruses exhibit a reduction in half ANK/F-box paralogs, while MPXV has lost five (1). Additionally, BTB-kelch domains are widely dispersed across the Orthopoxvirus species. Variola virus and MPXV have extensive loss of most BTB-kelch proteins (1). Ectromelia, on the other hand, contains three or more BTB-kelch-like paralogs (1, 21). A collection of shared BTB-kelch and ANK proteins is summarized in Table 1.TABLE 1Selected relinquished and retained OPGs in Mpox virus species and cladesaOPGDescriptionGene differences in relation to MPXVVACV-Cop002CrmB; TNF-α and other chemokine-binding receptor homologMPXV species contains two copies on left and right terminals, VARV only includes one, truncated in ECTV and absent on the right terminal (6, 25).C22L003Ankyrin-containing protein/F-box. Binds to NF-κB subunitsPresent in MPXV species. Absent in VARV (7).C19L006-14Bcl-2 domain; PIE domain; BTB domain, no kelch domain; ANK and PRANC domains; C-type lectin domain, putative decoy ligand for NK cell inhibitory receptor; type II transmembrane, TAP inhibitor, inhibits peptide loading on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I and antigen presentation; BTB and kelch domains; PIE domain, SCP-2; TNF receptor vCD30 homolog, binds CD153, prevents CD30/CD153 interaction; ANK and PRANC domains, binds to cullin 2 and inhibits NF-κB activationAbsent in MPXV and VARV. Largely conserved between ECTV and CPXV.015Ankyrin-containing protein. Interacts with E3 cullin ligase to suppress NF-κB and IRF3 (23)Truncation in some Clade I MPXV isolates. Absent in VARV (7, 26, 27).–016MHC class I homolog; NKG2D receptorInactivation in some Clade I MPXV isolates. Absent in VARV (7, 26, 27).–023ANK/F-box protein and host-range factor; Chinese hamster ovary required factorDe novo deletions in MPXV Clade IIb B.1 genomes (28).–025Ankyrin-containing proteinPresent in MPXV species, truncated in VARV (7).C9L030Kelch-like proteinMissing in Clade IIa/b MPXV. Present in Clade I. En route to elimination (1, 26).C5L032Complement control proteinPresent in MPXV Clade I, VARV, and ECTV. Absent in Clade II MPXVs (6, 29).C3L033Kelch-like proteinHighly diverged from ancestral ortholog (30). MPXV Clade II is further truncated (26). Often lost in connection with OPG32 (1).C2L034TLR-signal inhibitor, Bcl-2 domainPresent in MPXV, VARV, and CPXV. Absent in ECTV.C1L038PIE domain, blocks SD28-mediated T cell activation, secretedPresent in MPXV and VARV species, absent in ECTV species (31).M2L039Ankyrin-containing protein, no F-boxPresent in MPXV species and ECTV. Truncation/fragmented in VARV (7, 10).K1L041PKR antagonist, eIF2α homologMPXV and ECTV species truncation, predicted nonfunctional (6, 10).K3L042Phospholipase-D like proteinPresent in MPXV, CPXV, AKMV, and VPXV. Absent in variola virus.K4L043Monoglyceride lipasePresent in MPXV, CPXV, AKMV, and VPXV. Absent in variola virus.K5L, K6L045PIE domain; blocks apoptosisPreviously absent in Clade II MPXVs, now full-length in both Clades I and II (32). Present in VARV, lengthier in ECTV.F1L047BTB-kelch domainMPXV Clade I contains full gene, large truncated in VARV (7). MPXV Clade II reported absence (26).F3L062Sequesters RAPTOR and dysregulates mTORC1-mTORC2 signalingImmunomodulator found within MPXV, VACV, VARV, CPXV, and ECTV (33).F17065Zα/dsDNA-binding proteinMPXV species contains truncation of Za binding domain, non-functional (10).E3L067RNA polymerase subunitPresent in all Orthopoxviruses. Truncated in MPXV Clade II.E5R071DNA polymerase catalytic subunitMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28).E9L105RNA polymerase subunitMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28).J6R109RNA polymerase-associated proteinMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28).H4L135Viral membrane-associated, early morphogenesis proteinLow sequence similarity among Orthopoxviruses.A9L153Intracellular mature virion surface tubule protein. Major host antibody target.STR genomic accordion positioned upstream in Clade IIb genomes (34). More prone to APOBEC3 mutations (28). Frequently lost throughout Orthopoxviruses (1). MPXV clade II more closely related to VARV than Clade I.A26L161EEV envelope glycoproteinC-terminal truncation in MPXV species.A33R174Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; converts steroids into immunosuppressive glucocorticoidsPresent in MPXV and ECTV species, absent in VARV species (10).A44L183CrmC; TNF-receptor homologPresent in MPXV Clade II and ECTV species, absent in MPXV Clade I and VARV species (6).A53R188Poxin-schlafenMore prone to APOBEC3 mutations in Clade IIb MPXV (28). Absent in VACV and VARV (1).B2R-B3R192PIE domain; SCP-3, sequesters cytokinesPresent in MPXV and ECTV species, absent in VARV species (10, 25).B7R195PIE, inhibits MHC class I transportPresent in MPXV Clade I, fragmented in Clade II MPXV (7, 29, 35). Present in MPXV Clade I, fragmented in Clade II MPXV and VARV species (7, 29, 35). Absent in VARV and ECTV. Present in CPXV, VPXV, and AKMV.B9R198Serine/threonine kinase homologConserved sequence homology in most Orthopoxviruses except VARV.B12R201IL-1β receptor homolog, secreted, three Ig domainsPresent in MPXV Clade I (7). Absent/fragmented in historical MPXV Clade II genomes and VARV (10). New genomes of Clade IIb suggest a lengthier and more efficient protein (32).B16R204IFNα/β binding proteinSTR genomic accordion positioned upstream in Clade IIb MPXVs; generated alternative transcription start site (34).B19R208SPI-1; serpin 1STR genomic accordion positioned start of the reading frame in Clade IIb MPXVs; generated alternative transcription start site (34).C12210PIE domain; surface glycoprotein and T-cell response suppressorPresent in MPXV species and VARV species with high specificity for human T-cells, ECTV ortholog did not inhibit human T-cells (35). Also, a BTB-kelch protein heavily truncated from ancestral OPX (10). Present in MPXV species and VARV species with high specificity for human T-cells, ECTV ortholog did not inhibit human T-cells (35). Also, a BTB-kelch protein heavily truncated from ancestral OPX (10).–213CrmE, TNF receptor homologTruncated in MPXV species, further truncated in MPXV Clade IIb (26). Absent in VARV species (36).–

a

Orthopoxvirus genes included are present or absent from MPXV in relation to other Orthopoxviruses. OPGs are numbered based on the standard nomenclature (1). Gene names also include the vaccinia virus Copenhagen ortholog gene name. If no VACV name is provided (–), the respective ortholog is not present. VARV, variola virus; VACV, vaccinia virus; AKMV, Akhmeta virus; and VPXV, volepox virus.Despite a majority of ANK protein substrate targets are unknown, some studies have demonstrated their role in diminishing inflammation through their inhibition of NF-κB. OPG039, an ANK-repeat protein lacking the E3 ligase interaction domain, directly interacts with the p65 subunit of NF-κB, thereby restricting its translocation and subsequently inhibiting the upregulation of inflammatory genes (6, 7, 37). Interestingly, ectromelia and MPXV both contain a K1L ortholog sharing 96% sequence similarity with its counterpart in vaccinia virus. When directly comparing the anti-inflammatory effects of K1L of ectromelia virus compared to vaccinia virus, ectromelia K1L displays a species-specific tropism toward mouse cells (6). This is in contrast to the broader host range exhibited by vaccinia K1L, which is known to function moderately in human and rabbit cells (6, 17). MPXVs ortholog has yet to be studied for tissue tropism preferences defined by the structure of K1L. In total, MPXV carries eight ankyrin-containing proteins, some of which may have host-tropism preferences and therefore may regulate transcription through interfacing with E3 ligase substrates (38). Considering the demonstrated impact on tropism, additional biochemical investigations should be conducted on various poxviral ANK-containing proteins. Defining the substrates targeted by different ANK and BTB-kelch proteins, potentially involving an interplay between host and viral structure, would help delineate host-range determinants and shed light on a potential mechanism allowing for orthopoxviral zoonotic events.Cell death subversion and tumor necrosis factor interferenceAnother large class of virulence factors that participates in host-range differences is the presence or absence of poxvirus immune evasion elements (PIEs). These proteins are important for their structure, rather than their sequence, and are thought to assist with ligand binding (25). PIEs have been rarely lost among Orthopoxviruses and encompass a wide variety of functions, most of which are non-redundant (1, 25). Importantly, the incorporation of different PIEs within species of narrow host range provides insight into the necessary pathways that need to be overcome. For instance, ectromelia and MPXV contain OPG192, which contains a PIE and “secret” domain, which can sequester a host of chemokines (human and mouse CCL28, CCL25, CXCL12b, CXCL13, CXCL14, and mouse CCL23 and CXCL11) (10, 25). This gene is absent/fragmented in variola virus. Another PIE element category that is differentially shared among Orthopoxviruses is the cytokine response modifier, Crm, family. For instance, CrmB and CrmE are both tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) receptor homologs, OPG002 and OPG213, respectively. TNF-α sequestration from Orthopoxviruses can inhibit cell death cascades and maintain a cellular proliferation and survival state for periods of time to permit replication (24). MPXV and variola virus species both share CrmB, and MPXV and ectromelia virus species share CrmE (5, 6). As there are multiple genes performing the function of TNF-α sequestration, there may be Crm structural differences that exist to encounter TNF-α structures from various host species. Therefore, MPXV contains both OPG002 and OPG213 likely to be utilized to maintain a foothold in reservoirs, small rodents, and human species.Finally, MPXV is unique from all other Orthopoxviruses in that it has a 37AA N-terminal truncation in OPG065, otherwise known as Cop E3L (39). The E3L protein contains two domains, and the truncation occurs on the N-terminus, which deactivates a Zα domain (39). E3L’s second function, to inhibit PKR sensing of dsRNA, remains unaffected (39). The E3L Zα domain, historically, was shown to bind to Z-nucleic acids, an aberrant left-handed orientation of double-stranded nucleic acid (40). This domain was shown to be an important virulence factor in Vaccinia and Variola viruses, as it functions to subvert host-cell death and evade the type I IFN response (39, 41, 42). During various viral infections, Z-RNA is formed, which can be recognized by host PAMP recognition sensor ZBP1 and initiate an IFN response (43–45). The E3L Zα domain can obfuscate the Z-RNA via direct binding, which hides the PAMP recognition. It is perplexing that both the short and full-length isoforms of the E3L protein are transcribed naturally in Vaccinia, suggesting an additional unknown necessity for the non-functional Zα domain (39).It is unknown why other Orthopoxviruses have not yet lost or truncated this gene, potentially due to a missing compensatory mechanism that MPXVs possess. One such compensatory mechanism may be that MPXVs are found within OPG003, a viral inducer of RIPK3 degradation. MPXV and ectromelia both contain this gene, whereas vaccinia and variola viruses have truncated or deleted genes, respectively. OPG003 is a kelch-like protein that hijacks the ubiquitin proteasomal system to label target proteins, RIPK3, for degradation (46). The result of RIPK3 degradation is the cessation of the necroptosis cascade and continued cell survival (46). In addition to this product and the fact that MPXV experimentally produces less dsRNA during infection enable it to escape IFN activation and subsequent necroptotic cell death (16).Termini of Orthopoxvirus genomes dictate host range and virulenceAs stated previously, the middle portion of the Orthopoxvirus genome is heavily conserved. Additionally, the virus-host interaction genes that flank the center are also under positive selection (47). However, the left and right termini of the Orthopoxvirus genome are under constant negative selection and are more readily able to be deleted, duplicated, or inverted (48). Figure 2 is a representation of the Mauve alignment of Orthopoxvirus genomes (raw Mauve alignment files can be found under “Data Availability”). Interestingly, there are regions near the termini of the Orthopoxvirus genomes that are shared and/or lost, corresponding to the host range. The viruses found in rodents and mice, such as Akhmeta virus, volepox virus, ectromelia virus, and cowpoxvirus, all contain a conserved genomic region on the left termini (Fig. 2). The absence of this region from MPXV may be a relic from the separation of Old-World and New-World Orthopoxviruses (49). Therefore, the genes that enable MPXV to be a rodent-borne pathogen are found within the conserved portion of the genome (Fig. 2).Fig 2Graphical reconstruction of whole-genome Mauve alignment. Orthopoxvirus genomes were genome aligned via progressive Mauve application within Genious and separately visualized using BioRender. Whole-genome length is depicted using a black line scale. Colored blocks represent regions of the genome sequence that were predicted to be aligned to another genome, presumed homologous. The green block represents the conserved central portion of the Orthopoxvirus genome. Red, purple, and yellow blocks represent regions of shared homology among Orthopoxviruses on the left and right terminals. Reference genomes used are as follows: cowpoxvirus, strain Brighton Red (NC_000363); variola virus, VARV (NC_001611); and ectromelia virus (NC_004105). Clade Ia MPXV (NC_003310) and Clade IIa MPXV (NC_063383) from the Congo (DRC) and West Africa, respectively. Clade Ib MPXV has limited genomic annotations; however, sequences were acquired from recent deep sequencing release, sequenced on 25 December 2023 in South Kivu, DRC (accesion OX044336) (50). Clade IIb MPXV Rivers, 2022 (34). Akhmeta virus AKMV (NC_055230.1) and Volepox virus VPXV (NC_031033.1). Genious files are made available under “Data Availability.”Nine horizontal bars are aligned corresponding to CPXV, ECTV, VARV, MPXV Clades 1A, 1B, 2A, 2B, AKMV, and VPXV. They represent genome alignments with genome size appended to the right. There are connections between the bars to highlight genomic change.The viruses that are known to cause human disease, cowpoxvirus, variola virus, and MPXV, all contain a conserved region common to the right genome terminus (Fig. 2). The genes of interest within this region contain ankyrin OPG003, IFN-gamma receptor mimic OPG001, apoptosis inhibitor OPG005, and CrmB OPG002 (51). Deletion of this portion within an MPXV-Congo 2003 strain revealed its role in modulating virulence (51). Variola virus also contains this virulence region located at the left termini (Fig. 2). Notably, there is an additional conserved region found among all the MPXVs and not contained in variola (Fig. 2). Genomic surveillance of this region in novel MPXV isolates has revealed considerable volatility (52–54). Whether this region plays a significant role in MPXVs adaptation to humans—or is a byproduct of Orthopoxvirus genomic mutability—remains unanswered.MPXV CLADE-SPECIFIC DIFFERENCESFollowing the characterization of genes that separated the MPXV genus from other Orthopoxviruses, we expand upon the thesis that gene content infers host range and therefore virulence toward humans. Here, we define gene content differences of Clade I and Clade II MPXVs in comparison to each other. While there are genomic differences within genes involved in replication, transcription, and virion morphogenesis, here we describe the virulence factor genes of importance (Fig. 1). We detail how changes in gene length, through deletion or fragmentation events, have modulated translation and function either to deactivate or increase the efficiency of encoded proteins within alternative host species and transmission contexts.Complement control proteinsThe Orthopoxvirus gene OPG032 codes for a complement control protein, CCP, and is most notoriously known as SPICE, the small-pox inhibitor for complement enzymes (55). CCPs are secreted proteins that cleave C3b and C4b, which are essential enzymes in the classical and alternative complement pathways, and their absence results in the extended survival of infected cells (10). The Orthopoxvirus CCP is well adapted to mammalian complement, and it likely arose through horizontal gene transfer into an ancestral Orthopoxvirus (6, 56, 57). Most Orthopoxviruses include a CCP that binds to species-specific complement proteins: SPICE for human and baboon complement, vaccinia virus CCP for dog and guinea pig complement, and ectromelia virus CCP for murine complement (10, 58). MPXV, too, contain their respective CCP titled “MOPICE,” the monkeypox inhibitor for complement enzymes.MOPICE cleaves C3b/C4b into similar products compared to SPICE but performs at the same or marginally better efficiency as vaccinia’s CCP (10, 59). No studies have definitively determined the species specificity of MOPICE. Interestingly, there is a clade distinction in the presence of MOPICE across the MPXV lineages. Clade I MPXV contains the full-length gene, whereas Clade II MPXV have a 10-kbp deletion, which removes the open reading frame and a large portion of MOPICE (29, 60). Even more interesting is the genomic surveillance of recent Clade Ib MPXV lineages within the DRC, which also shows a truncation of MOPICE (61). Removal of MOPICE from Clade I MPXVs reduced disease morbidity and mortality in prairie dog and non-human primate models; however, insertion of the MOPICE gene into Clade IIa MPXV did not increase disease severity (60, 62).As Clade IIb and Clade Ib infections have a higher transmission rate in humans compared to historical Clade IIa or Ia, MOPICE may be modulating the host-disease susceptibility, thereby weakening transmission potential. This might be an adaptation that favors human-to-human spread by minimizing visible pock lesions and scaring, thus promoting undetected spread. Conversely, the inclusion of the MOPICE could weaken transmission due to modulating systemic and uncontrolled viral spread in the body, thus increasing visible scaring throughout the body. However, as the prairie dog study mentioned prior shows, the inclusion of MOPICE is not a driving factor of virulence within MPXVs; rather, there are additional virulence factors that complement its function, which are present in Clade I rather than in Clade II (60). Therefore, the increased case-fatality rate of Clade Ib, currently spreading in the DRC, is still much higher than the global Clade IIb, driven by virulence factors we review below.Adaptive immune response interferenceAnother strategic difference between the clades is found in their disruption of communication between the innate and adaptive arms of the immune systems. Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules are integral membrane proteins found on the surface of all nucleated cells in the body. They play a crucial role in the immune system by presenting peptide fragments of intracellular proteins to cytotoxic T cells. This process is essential for immune surveillance as it allows the immune system to monitor the intracellular environment for signs of infection or abnormal cell behavior.Orthopoxviruses contain various strategies to interrupt this immune surveillance, including the disruption of peptide loading, MHC trafficking to the cell surface, and T-cell recognition of MHC (31, 35, 63). MPXV clades differ in their gene sequence of OPG195, an MHC class-1 transport inhibitor (7, 36). MPXV Clade I expresses the full-length gene, whereas Clade II has a fragmented and predicted non-functional protein (51). Interestingly Variola also has this gene fragmented to a non-functional state (36). However, it has been shown that OPG195 is not necessary to disrupt T-cell stimulation, as another gene, OPG210, is able to compensate within MPXV and Variola species (35). OPG210 codes for a glycoprotein that is expressed at the cell surface and contains a PIE domain. It has been shown to suppress T-cell activation through an unknown mechanism (35). As it has been suggested that MPXV’s OPG195 is unimportant for CD4+CD8+ T-cell activation, it may be a gene en route to deletion and/or has alternative unknown functions within Clade I MPXVs (63).Intra- and extra-cellular signaling interferenceMPXV clades also differ in how they express OPG201, a secreted IL-1β receptor (10). IL-1β is an inflammatory cytokine that, once bound to its receptor, sets off multiple signaling cascades that can lead to cell death, transcription/translation of secreted inflammatory signaling molecules, and promotes an inflammatory immune landscape—all of which act to suppress viral spread. Orthopoxviruses utilize this secreted receptor mimic to inhibit apoptosis, interrupt inflammatory signal transduction, and affect the proliferation of B and T lymphocytes (10, 32). MPXVs differ in the translated length of this protein. MPXV Clade I has contained the full-length OPG201 since the first genomic annotation, whereas historical MPXV Clade II isolates have retained less than a fourth of the total gene length, predicted to be nonfunctional (29).OPG201 codes for an IL-1β receptor mimic, also containing three immunoglobulin domains that bind to the cell surface to competitively bind to IL-1β. Variola virus has been reported to not contain this gene (7, 36). It has been suggested that Variola suppresses the synthesis of IL-1β far more efficiently and does not require a downstream receptor mimic (7). Additionally, variola virus possesses OPG020, an IL-1 receptor antagonist, whereas each clade of MPXV contains different truncations that result in variable lengths, potentially disrupting this gene’s function (10). Interestingly, new strains of MPXV Clade IIb express OPG201, a lengthier, 180-amino acid protein, which suggests that the IL-1β-binding function has returned to Clade II (32). This new protein product expressed is predicted to bind to IL-1β more efficiently than Clade I’s ortholog (32). It is likely that MPXV clades require this protein due to their inactivated OPG020, suggesting that it is a necessary compensation. Therefore, we should continue surveillance into MPXV’s IL-1 interference genes to identify faults within its strategy as potential therapeutic interventions.Another interesting distinction between clades of MPXVs is the presence of three kelch-like proteins, orthologs to OPG030, OPG033, and OPG047 within Clade I MPXVs (26). To reiterate, kelch-containing proteins can have a direct effect on E3 Ubiquitin ligase targets, which modulate the host transcriptomic and immune responses. The specific targets that the three proteins target during MPXV Clade I pathogenesis remain unknown; however, their deletion from Clade II MPXVs suggests they are not required for human adaptation (26, 64). Within Clade IIb MPXVs, OPG033 is the most genomically diverged gene from ancestral Orthopoxviruses (30). This suggests an alternative function for the gene or its slow removal. Additionally, this gene has been consistently lost alongside OPG032, the complement control protein (1). The absence/high divergence of both genes from MPXV Clade II indicates a potentially significant interaction between them (1). Understanding why this concurrent loss occurred requires us to know how these two proteins interact within a currently unknown pathway. Further investigation into the roles of kelch-containing proteins would provide insights into their role within different hosts and contexts.INTRA-CLADE ADAPTATION AND GENOMIC DIFFERENCESThe spread of MPXV from isolated instances of zoonotic jumps to sustained human-to-human transmission may have been the result of the cessation of Smallpox vaccination (65). Unvaccinated regions became endemic for Mpox, thus establishing the possibility for host coevolution for decades. In this section, we cover two evolutionary mechanisms acting upon MPXV, which “fine-tunes” their gene products to better adapt to human hosts: APOBEC3 mutations and employment of genomic accordions (Fig. 1). Our current knowledge of these mechanisms has been studied within the 2022 global outbreak Clade IIb lineage; however, with the emergence of novel MPXV Clade Ib lineage, these evolutionary signatures are likely to be identified in both strains.Single nucleotide polymorphisms altering host tropismBoth the novel Clade Ib and Clade IIb MPXV lineages have extensive APOBEC3 editing signatures across their genome, which have occurred over many years (50, 66, 67). APOBEC3 is a cytosolic mRNA editing enzyme that has been shown to induce C-to-T and G-to-A mutations in DNA viruses including MPXV (68). Due to the recency of these findings, it begs the question as to the overall impact of APOBEC-like editing on the viral evolution of Orthopoxviruses. However, genomic analysis revealed that APOBEC3 mutations are generating more-than-expected numbers of non-synonymous and nonsense mutations across the genome, which follows the trend of reductive evolution within Orthopoxviruses (5, 66). These mutations should be kept under continued surveillance, as frameshifts or nonsense mutations may deactivate genes associated with murine host interaction, which then generates a better human-adapted virus. Additionally, the change of binding pockets through single-nucleotide polymorphisms as well as codon usage change may expand host tropism or restrict the species specificity of virus-host interaction proteins.There were observed APOBEC3 mutations in MPXV’s Clade IIb B.1 genes: OPG023: ANK/F-box protein and host-range factor; OPG047: BTB-kelch domain contributor of virulence and lesion size; OPG071: DNA polymerase catalytic subunit; OPG105: RNA polymerase subunit; OPG109: RNA polymerase-associated protein; OPG153: an intracellular mature virion surface tubule protein; OPG188: a poxin-schlafen like protein; and OPG210: a surface glycoprotein and T-cell response suppressor (28). While the mutations have not been experimentally determined to be the drivers of increased human-to-human transmission, there are reported codon biases that are preferentially used in human hosts (69). The SNP mutations within ankyrin-containing and BTB-kelch proteins may alter species-specific binding requirements for the stimulation of their target host proteins.Interestingly, OPG188 was also revealed to be more prone to mutation within MPXV compared to other accessory genes across the genome (28). OPG188 codes for a schlafen-like protein, which are RNA-binding proteins expressed in response to IFN, and plays a role in growth inhibition during an anti-viral state (70). OPG188 also has a conjoined poxin domain that interferes with the STING-dependent interferon pathway via functioning as a cGAMP-specific nuclease (1). Interestingly, the schlafen domain has been truncated, which results in a non-functional variant within variola and vaccinia viruses (1). There is a potential for the higher-than-average mutation rate in OPG188 to create non-synonymous or deleterious mutations that modulate the schlafen-like protein toward inactivation in human-adapted MPXVs, which may increase viral fitness within primate hosts.Genome expansion and retraction influence gene length and functionAnother interesting evolutionary mechanism, previously experimentally demonstrated within vaccinia virus, has now been found to play a role in the evolution of MPXV Clade IIb strains: the deployment of genomic accordions to modulate gene expression (71, 72). Orthopoxviruses, with their highly mutable genomes, can rapidly expand or contract gene copy numbers during replication cycles through gene duplication or deletion (48, 72–74). In response to selective pressure, the high duplication rate of the Orthopoxvirus genome allows for increases in gene copy number to overcome a host’s pressure (72). There may be toxicity or replication defects associated with a high copy number of specific genes, which may impede the transmissibility of infectious viral particles; thus, the gene copy number can be retracted back to a wild-type state (73). The concept of genomic accordions was first displayed with full genes, such as Cop-K3L (72). Accordion-like poly-A/T repeats have also been identified in vaccinia virus genes (71). Genomic accordions have now also been revealed to occur for short-tandem repeats, which modulate the transcription process of MPXV genes. Short tandem repeats (STRs) are located across the MPXV genome—positioned in intergenic regions or even within coding regions (34, 75). The expansion and retraction in the length of the STRs, much like genomic accordions, can induce frameshift mutations that can turn off, or conversely, turn on genes (71).In a recent report, Clade IIb MPXVs have been found to utilize genomic accordions of STR regions as well as homopolymer repeats to “fine-tune” their transcription profile (34). There were 21 regions identified that were placed either upstream, downstream, within the reading frame, or right before a promoter region, which displayed variability in length, rather than sequence, among circulating strains (34). There were three major identified accordions that have a functional impact.The first of which is a STR placed at the start of the reading frame for OPG208, coding for SPI-1, a serine protease that blocks multiple steps of IL-1 processing and cell death cascades (34). This STR produced an alternative start codon, which is transcribed in vitro, and incorporated 52 copies of human-associated TAC codons (34). The increased length of the STR more closely resembles the SPI-1 gene in Clade I MPXV (29).The second is another alternative methionine start codon, built by an STR accordion, upstream of OPG 204, a secreted decoy receptor for type I IFN (34). This alternative start codon is also transcribed in vitro, although the functional implications of an extended N-terminal Met-Lys repeat remain unknown.Finally, there is predicted inactivation of OPG153, a protein that attaches virions to laminin and regulates their egress, which is also a major epitope targeted by the host antibody response (34). This gene contains a poly-D accordion and the insertion of two isoleucines, resulting in a structurally similar OPG153 in Clade IIb, which closely resembles Clade I’s ortholog of OPG153 rather than sister Clade IIa’s ortholog (34). Throughout the history of Orthopoxviruses, this protein has been lost on 18 independent occasions, and its loss has been both shown to attenuate the virus as well as compensate for the loss of a missing transcription factor gene (1). Thus, we should monitor OPG153’s transcription within current Clade I and Clade IIb MPXVs in order to predict its changing epitope or potential for deletion.Intra-host variation and a vast genomic landscape promote the potential for novel successful strainsThese evolutionary mechanisms provoke the idea of the quasi-species hypothesis. Quasispecies is a concept, often taken from rapidly evolving RNA viruses, which states a viral species is not a monolithic entity but sometimes a diverse population of genomes (76). For Orthopoxviruses, there will be a consensus strain that either initiates the infection or is the most common transmittable product of infection, the “wild type.” However, during replication, Orthopoxviruses are extremely mutable and will generate many defective genomes, as well as potentially generating viruses that have increased copy number or genomic accordions modulating specific genes (48, 73, 77).Intra-host variation of APOBEC3 editing has been reported previously with Clade IIb (78). The occurrence of localized and systemic disease may be due to changes in the copy number of specific virulence factors of importance within different tissues. Whole genome sequencing at site-specific locations (e.g., multiple locations of skin lesions, nasopharyngeal swabs, or a lymph node biopsy) can aid our understanding of intra-host variants (79). Another instance of this genomic volatility occurred within a Clade I MPXV strain, wherein the genome had a large deletion that caused the truncation of an ankyrin-repeat-containing protein OPG015, and the inactivation of natural killer activating receptor inhibitor, OPG016 (27). This deletion is hypothesized to have increased human-to-human transmission for a short time period (26, 27). Moreover, molecular investigation has revealed that Orthopoxviruses can “steal” and expand genes to gain molecular footholds within related species during zoonotic jumps (74, 80). Such events are microcosms of the larger evolution of Orthopoxviruses. Consistent genomic surveillance in regions where MPXV is endemic, including sharing of raw deep sequencing data, would allow us to better assess the ever-evolving genomic landscape of emerging MPXV variants.CONCLUDING REMARKS ON THE FUTURE OF MPXVOrthopoxviruses are ubiquitous pathogens that infect a wide variety of species and have infected humans since before the domestication of cattle. The genes that Orthopoxviruses contain are specially crafted to interfere with the mammalian host immune responses. These genes disrupt intracellular signaling cascades, interfere with cellular communication and secretion of cytokines, as well as controlling host gene expression. The vast collection of immune evasion genes incorporated within Orthopoxviruses genomes is tailored in different combinations for host specialization. Therefore, for Orthopoxviruses to become better transmittable pathogens, they do not need to just decrease their virulence. Instead, they can first delete unnecessary genes from their genome that are not required in host niche specialization. With the emergence of MPXV—and the eventual arrival of novelly adapted human MPXVs—we can predict the important virulence genes involved in human disease with further investigation of the genes described in this review.Specifically, the loss of function in OPG041 and OPG065 (K3L and E3L, respectively) is a unique strategy of virulence that distances MPXV from all other Orthopoxviruses. Triggering IFN response in the host, as some have hypothesized, may be an important therapeutic strategy to combat MPXV infection (81). Furthermore, ankyrin-containing proteins play important roles in interfering with the viral-host response, and they influence the host range of Orthopoxviruses. MPXVs that specialize toward human adaptation may, therefore, alter structures of their ankyrin/F-box proteins to target human-specific proteins, while MPXVs that remain primarily zoonotic may induce weakly stimulatory effects on rodent and primate E3 ligases and their substrates. Previous investigations corroborate the fact that viral and host structures are inextricably linked to host range (82, 83). However, currently, there is a dearth of information on species-specific stimulatory effects based on ankyrin/F-box structures. Altogether, the ongoing jump of MPXVs from rodent-borne to becoming effective human pathogens is the result of continuous reductive evolution and refining of immune evasion strategies, which resulted in the establishment of a molecular foothold in human populations.Transmission within human communities is also modulated by the virulence of MPXV strains. MPXV exists within two clades with major differences in disease presentation and intra-host spread. Systemic infection versus localized acute infections may be attributed to the virulence factor differences found within each of the clades. The complement control protein OPG032, the IL-1β interference genes within OPG201 and 208, and the cell-to-cell communication-interfering genes OPG015 and OPG195—all of which contribute to the increased case fatality rate in MPXV Clade I compared to Clade II. However, as we continue to see highly transmissible Clade I MPXVs arise, we should assume that increased virulence of Mpox is not tightly intertwined with a decrease in transmissibility (84). Instead, increased human-to-human transmissibility is likely attributed to codon optimization through human APOBEC editing through continual human-to-human transmission chains (69, 85). Smallpox, caused by the Variola virus, should warn us that MPXV may not remain a niche-transmitted pathogen—instead, through continued human adaptation, it may incite another global outbreak of Mpox.While there is a large increase in human-to-human transmission, it is important to identify that there were multiple spillover events that began isolated transmission chains (86, 87). Therefore, novel strains of MPXV that were potentially more primed for human-to-human transmission were already circulating in small rodents prior to 2016. From an alternative viewpoint, there is the potential for the emergence of a well-adapted rodent MPXV to emerge or already have emerged. Enzootic spillover may have already occurred, but may not have been identified or sequenced yet (88). It is imperative to continue to survey, and predict, the perspective reservoir species to better anticipate the foundational genomic landscape of future MPXVs.In conclusion, our review underscores the critical need to understand the genetic basis of MPXV adaptation and transmission dynamics. The ongoing epidemic in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, fueled by the Clade I MPXV lineage, highlights the urgency of this endeavor. By merging insights from Orthopoxvirus genetics and MPXV epidemiology, we have elucidated potential genetic drivers influencing host range, pathogenesis, and human-to-human transmission. Our analysis emphasizes the importance of MPXV genome reduction in shaping its virulence and transmission potential. Through comparative genomics and examination of host-range genes, key genetic determinants that distinguish MPXV from other Orthopoxviruses are noted, offering insight into its unique pathogenicity. Furthermore, our exploration of recent strains, such as Clade Ib and Clade IIb, sheds light on the rapidly evolving landscape of MPXV. Moving forward, elucidating the molecular mechanisms of the genes included in this review will be crucial for effective surveillance, prevention, and therapeutic intervention measures. By linking MPXV genotypes to specific phenotypes of public health importance, we can better predict and mitigate the risks posed by this emerging infectious disease. Our collective efforts in understanding MPXV genetics and epidemiology will be instrumental in safeguarding global health security against potential pandemic threats.


================================================================================
PATHOGEN: CAMELPOX VIRUS
================================================================================
Title: Searching for animal models and potential target species for emerging pathogens: Experience gained from Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) coronavirus

1IntroductionOver the past years, outbreaks of zoonotic diseases and growing resistance against antibiotics have emphasized the need for interdisciplinary collaboration between human health, veterinary medicine and environmental sciences, a concept commonly known as “One health” [1]. Most of emerging diseases are zoonotic [2]. For instance, the human flu pandemics have originated in domestic animals and wildlife, and have been driven by ecological, behavioral, or socioeconomic changes [3]. In these cases, the reaction time between detection of a new outbreak and application of medical countermeasures are critical in terms of epidemic control. To understand the potential role that animal sources could play in virus dissemination and the epidemiology of the disease, surveillance studies, as well as experimental infections in potential target species, are required. Furthermore, after having identified the novel or re-emerged virus responsible of the outbreak, it is important to rapidly provide an accurate diagnosis as a basis for quarantine measures. It is also imperative to focus on the search for new vaccines and treatments for highly pathogenic viruses, especially for those that represent a threat to human and animal health, particularly livestock.Until the beginning of the last decade, human coronaviruses (HCoV) infections were considered to be restricted to the upper respiratory tract (URT), with low mortality rate, and recognized as the second ranked cause of the common cold after rhinoviruses [4]. However, in the late-2002, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) emerged in China. It rapidly spread worldwide with more than 8000 causalities and a lethality rate of 10% [5]. Ten years later, a novel HCoV associated with severe pneumonia emerged in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [6]. The new CoV was named Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and by March 2014, a total of 207 cases and 45% fatalities were recorded. One month later, only in April 2014, an increase in human cases was registered with at least 217 more infected people and 38 fatalities. More recently, as of December 2016, 1842 cases of MERS-CoV have been reported to the World Health Organization (WHO), including at least 652 deaths [7].Besides coronaviruses, highly pathogenic viruses belonging to other families represent a threat to either human or animal health, or both. One of the most recent examples is the outbreak of Ebola virus (Filoviridae) in West Africa, which started in December of 2013 in Guinea and evolved as the largest Ebola outbreak recorded with more than 28,600 cases [8]. Furthermore, during recent years, outbreaks caused by other emerging viral pathogens from Arenaviridae, Bunyaviridae, and Flaviviridae families among others, disturbed public and private health, social networks and the economies of the affected countries [9], [10]. Prevention and control of emerging and reemerging viral diseases is efficient when several actions are combined: i.e. creating diagnostic networks and surveillance programs, training medical and veterinary staff, informing the population about sanitary measures, and also promoting research on prophylaxis, treatments and on the causative agent pathogenesis. Regarding the last point, animal models are crucial to study the viral and host factors contributing to the disease as well as transmission outcomes of virus infection and to allow pre-clinical testing of antiviral drugs and vaccines. Non-human primates (NHP) are the preferred models for pathogenesis studies, and potential vaccine and treatment testing, as they better translate to humans [11]. However, working with NHP is costly, with limited availability, and raises ethical problems. Therefore small-animal models are usually the first choice for drug screening. The United States Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) Animal Rule provides guidelines concerning the appropriateness of animal models for licensing purposes [12]. Additionally, by controlling the disease in animal reservoirs and/or in intermediate hosts, virus transmission to humans can be significantly reduced [13], [14]. This is particularly true for domestic or feral animals for which efficient vaccines and vaccination strategies can be implemented [15]. Therefore, in cases of new pathogenic virus outbreaks, the search for natural hosts or potential target animals (as opposed to laboratory animals) seems to be relevant not only to implement prophylactic solutions but also to improve the preparedness for an eventual global extension of diseases. Nowadays, this task is rendered possible by the availability of improved biosafety levels 3 and 4 (BSL3 and 4) animal facilities, which can accommodate large animal experimentation with such highly virulent pathogens [16].In this article, the current situation of comprehension on potential hosts for MERS-CoV is reviewed. Based on the coronaviruses experience, benefits and limitations of these species as animal models and transmission studies are discussed.2Animal models for MERS researchSeveral review articles have described and discussed animal models for MERS-CoV infection [17], [18], [19], [20]. In this section, the current status of animal models for MERS disease reproduction is briefly summarized.After the identification of MERS-CoV in 2012 [6], the efforts were directed to develop an animal model to study pathogenesis and to test the efficacy of vaccines and/or treatments in vivo. Similar to SARS-CoV, rhesus macaques have demonstrated susceptibility to MERS-CoV [21], [22], [23]. A work led by Munster demonstrated that the common marmoset is also suitable as a MERS-CoV model [24]. They showed that this model recapitulates the disease observed in humans; therefore, findings in the evaluation of potential therapeutic strategies might be implemented in humans. However, small animals are required for controlled, large and comprehensive studies. While, at first, experiences with SARS-CoV turned out to be very helpful for the research on MERS-CoV, the development of a small animal model for MERS was a more difficult task [18], [19]. Raj and collaborators rapidly identified dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4) as the functional receptor for MERS-CoV [25], and DPP4 is present in lung cells of many rodents. Thus, rodents were expected to be susceptible for MERS-CoV. However, and as predicted by the crystal structure analysis of the MERS-CoV receptor binding domain (RBD) with the human DPP4 (hDDP4) extracellular domain [26], so far, no rodent model is naturally permissive for MERS-CoV infection. In Syrian hamster, the DPP4 receptor was shown to be expressed on bronchiolar epithelium, but inoculation of MERS-CoV via aerosols or intratracheal routes with different doses did not lead to productive infection [27]. Wild type and immune-deficient mice were also tested for MERS-CoV infection without success [28]. Since then, several groups have been focused on new strategies to develop a small animal model susceptible to MERS-CoV infection. It was found that mouse cells could be made permissive for MERS-CoV when expressing hDPP4. Consequently, the hDPP4 was transduced into mouse lungs using an adenovirus vector, which resulted in animals susceptible to MERS-CoV infection. These mice exhibited pneumonia and extensive inflammatory-cell infiltration with the presence of virus in the lungs [29]. Recently, a transgenic mice model expressing hDPP4, highly susceptible to MERS-CoV infection and able to display systemic lesions, has been developed [30]. As demonstrated for several diseases, transgenic animal models have become an important tool to improve medical research [31]. On the other hand, glycosylation of the murine DPP4 is a major factor impacting the receptor function by blocking the binding to MERS-CoV [32]. Therefore, the modification of the mouse genome to match the sequence in the hDPP4 made this species susceptible to MERS-CoV infection [33]. Accordingly, these newly established mice models are useful to evaluate the efficacy of vaccines and therapeutic agents against MERS-CoV infection [30], [34], [35], [36]. VelocImmune and VelociGene technologies have been used to develop a humanized mouse model for MERS-CoV infection [36]; these methodologies can be also applied for other pathogens in future emerging epidemics.3MERS-CoV animal reservoir and the role of domestic animalsResearchers worldwide have identified several animal species which could have a role in the transmission of MERS-CoV to humans (summarized in Fig. 1). Bats have been suggested to be the reservoir for MERS-CoV, but RNA of MERS-like CoVs (and no MERS-CoV) has been found in several bat families (Vespertillionidae, Molosidae, Nycteridae and Emballonuridae) in Africa, America, Asia and Europe [37], [38]. Recently, an experimental infection with Jamaican fruit bats (Artibeus jamaicensis) confirmed that MERS-CoV can replicate in bats [39]. However, MERS-CoV strains causing disease in humans have not been so far identified in bats. The presence of MERS-CoV neutralizing antibodies has been reported in dromedary camels (Camelus dromedaries) [40], [41] and, more recently, a link between MERS-CoV infection in camels and a human infection in Qatar has been suggested [42], [43], [44], [45]. Most importantly, the MERS-CoV strain that caused the 2015 human outbreak was found in dromedary camels; in fact, phylogenetic analyses indicate that MERS-CoV was generated in this species by recombination [46]. In addition, Adney and collaborators have provided experimental evidence to support the role of dromedary camels as a MERS-CoV reservoir [47]. Recently, evidence was provided that other members of the Camelidae family such as alpaca (Vicugna pacos) and llama (Lama glama), are also susceptible to MERS-CoV infection [48], [49], [50]. Field studies with alpacas performed in Qatar confirmed this finding [51]. A recently published experimental study has demonstrated that domestic pigs are also susceptible to MERS-CoV infection, suggesting the possibility of MERS-CoV circulation in other unsuspected animal species such suidae [50]. While DPP4 in silico predictions and in vitro studies suggested that other livestock species such as goats, sheep, or horses could be susceptible to MERS-CoV infection, experimental data suggested the opposite [50]. Each natural and potential host for MERS-CoV infection is discussed below in detail and summarized in Table 1, Table 2.Fig. 1Illustration of the known and potential host range of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV). Dromedary camel is a demonstrated reservoir of MERS-CoV, but other species might act as hosts. In red: reported MERS-CoV-seropositive species and/or species in which virus has been naturally detected. In orange: other animal species that might be considered potential hosts since they are experimentally susceptible to MERS-CoV infection. Alpacas fit into both scenarios (red and orange). In black: animals (bats, to date) in which RNA of different sequences of MERS-CoV-like viruses have been found. Continuous arrows represent already described intra- and inter-species transmission events. Discontinuous arrows represent potential inter-species transmission.Fig. 1Table 1Summary of MERS-CoV shedding and presence of virus in different tissues in the potential animal reservoirs for MERS-CoV after experimental inoculation.Table 1SpeciesRoute and dose of inoculationMERS-CoV sheddingMERS-CoV RNA in tissuesMERS-CoV antigen in tissuesInfectious MERS-CoV in tissuesReferencesCamelidsDromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius)IT, IN, conjunctival or IN only; 107 TCID50Viral RNA in NS (1 to 13 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 6 dpi)URT, LRT, tracheal LN, pulmonary LN, cervical LN, tonsil, PSG, intestine, liver, spleen, kidney, heart, adrenalNasal respiratory epithelial cellsURT, trachea, large bronchus, tracheal LN[47], [53]Alpacas (Vicugna pacos)IN; 107 PFU in 3 mL saline solutionInfectious virus in NS (1 to 5 dpi)URT, tracheaNasal respiratory epithelial cellsND[48], [49]Llamas (Lama glama)IN; 107 TCID50 in 3 mL saline solutionViral RNA in NS (1 to 15 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 7 dpi)URT, trachea and bronchusNasal respiratory epithelial cellsND[50]Non-camelid domestic speciesDomestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus)IN; 107 TCID50 in 3 mL saline solutionViral RNA in NS (1 to 10 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 4 dpi)URT, trachea and bronchusNasal respiratory epithelial cellsND[50]Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)IN (1 × 106 TCID50), IT (4 × 106 TCID50)Viral RNA in NS (1 to 10 dpi)Infectious virus in NS (1 to 7 dpi)Mainly in URT, LRTNasal respiratory and bronchiolar epithelial cellsND[54]NHPRhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta)IT, OC, oral, IN; 7 × 106 TCID50/IT, 6,5 × 107 TCID50Viral RNA in NS, BAL samples, and few OSURT, lung, mediastinal LNType I and II pneumocytes, alveolar MΦLung[21], [22], [23]Common marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)OC, oral, IT, IN; 5 × 106/IT, 5 × 107 TCID50Viral RNA in NS and OSURT, lung, mediastinal LN, bloodType I pneumocytes, alveolar MΦNasal mucosa, trachea, lung[24], [55]Abbreviations: BAL, bronchoalveolar lavages; dpi, days post inoculation; IN, intranasal; IT, intratracheal; LN, lymph node; LRT, lower respiratory tract; MΦ, macrophages; ND, non-determined; NHP, non-human primates; NS, nasal swabs; OC, ocular; OS, oropharyngeal swabs; PFU, plaque-forming units; PSG, parotid salivary gland; RNA, ribonucleic acid; TCID50, 50% tissue culture infectious dose; URT, upper respiratory tract.Table 2Summary of clinical signs, pathological findings and target cells in tissues of natural and potential reservoir hosts for MERS-CoV infection as experimental animal models.Table 2SpeciesClinical signsGross findingsHistopathological lesionsTarget cells in tissuesReferencesCamelidsDromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius)Mild respiratory disease, nasal dischargeNot presentMultifocal moderate rhinitis, tracheitis and bronchitis with epithelial necrosis. Hyperplasia of lymph nodes and tonsilRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[47], [53]Alpacas (Vicugna pacos)Not observableNot presentSquamous metaplasia of the epithelium of the turbinate. Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of lymph nodesRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[48], [49]Llamas (Lama glama)Mild mucus secretion in one nostrilNot presentMild to severe rhinitisRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[50]Non-camelid domestic speciesDomestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus)Mild excretion of mucus in the noseNot presentMild to severe rhinitisRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[50]Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)Not observableNot presentFocal mild to moderate rhinitis with necrosisRespiratory epithelial cells in the URT[54]NHPRhesus macaquesa(Macaca mulatta)Fever, mild to moderate respiratory diseaseLung congestion and nodules in lungNo extra pulmonary lesionsMultifocal mild-to-moderate interstitial pneumoniaType I and II pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages[21], [22], [23]Common marmoseta(Callithrix jacchus)Mild to severe respiratory diseaseCongestion of bronchiolesDiffuse interstitial infiltration in lower lung lobes, bronchointerstitial pneumoniaType I pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages[24]Abbreviations: NHP, non-human primates; URT, upper respiratory tract.aAlso animal models of disease (translation to human).3.1CamelidsDromedary camels are the main source of MERS-CoV zoonotic transmission (reviewed in [52]). In experimental intranasal inoculations with MERS-CoV, only mild clinical signs (i.e. nasal discharge) with URT infection were observed. Viral RNA was detected in nasal swabs, in upper and lower respiratory tracts, and also in extra-pulmonary tissues (i.e. lymph nodes, tonsil, intestine, liver, adrenal gland, etc.). In contrast, infectious virus was only detected in the URT, trachea, large bronchus and tracheobronchial lymph node. Gross lesions were not observed in dromedary camels, but inflammation in the nasal cavity, trachea and bronchus was present. The virus replication in dromedaries was only detected in epithelial cells in the URT [47], [53].Llamas and alpacas, also known as domestic new world camelids, developed a similar clinical-pathological picture to that of dromedaries after experimental MERS-CoV infection. In both species the virus was inoculated via intranasal route, and either no clinical signs (alpacas) or mild mucus secretion (llamas) was observed. MERS-CoV was detected in nasal swabs, and in the URT and trachea of both llamas and alpacas. None of the species showed lesions macroscopically, but microscopically mild to severe rhinitis was detected in alpacas as well as metaplasia of the epithelium of the turbinate in alpacas. Similar to dromedaries, the epithelial cells in the URT were the main target cells for virus replication. Concomitant to an antibody response, the virus was cleared from the URT 7 to 10 days after experimental infection [48], [49], [50].3.2Non-camelid domestic speciesAfter intranasal inoculation of MERS-CoV, only mild excretion of mucus was observed in 6 to 8-week old domestic pigs [50]. Viral RNA was detected in nasal swabs, in the URT, trachea and bronchus. Although gross lesions were not present in pigs, they showed mild to moderate rhinitis, with virus replication observed in the epithelial cells in the URT. Shedding of MERS-CoV was detected in nasal swabs from days 1 to 10 PI, but infectious virus was only detected until day 4 PI. Viral RNA was also detected in the URT, trachea and bronchus [50].New Zealand white rabbits did not exhibit clinical signs or significant gross lesions at necropsy after experimental MERS-CoV inoculation; thus, they were considered an animal model of asymptomatic infection [54]. Similar to pigs, mild to moderate rhinitis with necrosis was observed, and respiratory epithelial cells in the URT were identified as the target cells for MERS-CoV replication. Viral RNA was present in nasal swabs, and upper and lower respiratory tracts. Infectious virus was also detected in nasal swabs up to 7 days PI [54].3.3Non-human primatesThe rhesus macaque was used as the first animal model developed for MERS-CoV infection, showing mild to moderate respiratory disease from day 1 to 4 PI after intratracheal inoculation [21]. Gross lesions were present only in the lung, consisting in congestion and presence of nodules, and the main observed microscopical lesion was interstitial pneumonia. Although MERS-CoV RNA was detected in nasal swabs, bronchoalveolar lavage samples, oropharyngeal swabs, and also in some upper and lower respiratory tract tissue samples, infectious virus was only isolated from the lungs. MERS-CoV replication occurred in type I and II pneumocytes, and viral antigen co-localized with sites of pneumonia [21]. Macaques represent a useful model to study mild MERS-CoV infection because they develop a transient respiratory disease similar to humans.On the other hand, common marmosets exhibited moderate to severe respiratory disease from 1 to 13 days after inoculation of MERS-CoV through multiple routes (ocular, oral, intratracheal and intranasal) [24]. Similar to macaques, gross findings were present only in the lung and correlated with moderate to severe bronchointerstitial pneumonia. MERS-CoV antigen was detected by immunohistochemistry in both type I and II pneumocytes and alveolar macrophages, but the virus replicated only in type I pneumocytes and macrophages. Similar results were observed in marmosets after inoculation of MERS-CoV only via intratracheal route [55]. However, the outcome of MERS-CoV infection in marmosets has been controversial after the publication of a recent study by Johnson and collaborators, which demonstrated no lethality after intratracheal inoculation [56]. The outcome of experimental infections in both species is reviewed in recent publications [17], [18], [19], [20].4Advantages and disadvantages of animal hosts used for MERS-CoV experimental infectionAs described in the previous section, a number of animal species have been described as either natural reservoir (dromedary camel) or potential intermediate hosts of MERS-CoV, each one with its benefits and limitations (Table 3) when used as experimental infection models. Camelids (dromedary camels, alpacas and llamas), non-camelid domestic species (pigs and rabbits), and NHP (rhesus macaques and common marmosets) have been experimentally demonstrated to be susceptible to MERS-CoV infection, but with differences among them [21], [22], [23], [24], [47], [48], [49], [50], [53], [54]. Experiments with dromedary camels, the natural MERS-CoV host, and probably the first target for controlling MERS through vaccination [53], are costly and represent a high security risk for animal caretakers because of the difficulty in handling these animals under appropriate biosafety conditions. The main advantages of using the llama or alpaca models are that both belong to the family Camelidae, have smaller size, more gentle behavior, and are more available at a commercial level than dromedary camels; importantly, specific reagents for immune monitoring have been developed for new world camelids [57]. Therefore, they may be useful surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions. However, both models are also quite expensive and require large and complex BSL3 facilities. In contrast to camelids, other domestic species such as pigs and rabbits are readily available, with lower cost and easier handling. Additionally, an extensive panel of specific-immunological reagents is available for these species. When compared to camelids, however, lower MERS-CoV titers were detected in nasal cavities and tissue samples of pigs and rabbits during the infection. Furthermore their usefulness as animal models for transmission studies has not yet been addressed.Table 3Advantages and limitations of natural and potential intermediate hosts for MERS-CoV infection as experimental animal models as well as for transmission studies.Table 3SpeciesAdvantagesLimitationsCamelidsDromedary camels (Camelus dromedarius)•Natural host for MERS-CoV•Efficient animal-to-animal transmission (field studies)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)Alpacas (Vicugna pacos)•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Efficient animal-to-animal transmission (experimental)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)Llamas (Lama glama)•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)•No animal-to-animal transmission studies availableNon-camelid domestic speciesDomestic pig (Sus scrofa domesticus)•Relative low cost and readily available•Ease handling•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Animal-to-animal transmission (experimental)•Pig-specific immunological reagents are available•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)•Limited transmission (only via direct contact, and during few days)•Lower viral titers in NS and tissues upon infectionRabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)•Low cost and readily available•Ease handling•Potential surrogates for dromedaries under experimental conditions (potential hosts for MERS-CoV)•Rabbit-specific immunological reagents are available•No animal-to-animal transmission studies available•Lower viral titers in NS and tissues upon infectionNHPRhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta)•Human-specific immunological reagents are widely available•Clinical disease similar to humans: translational research (for intra species transmission)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities)•No animal-to-animal transmission studies availableCommon marmoset (Callithrix jacchus)•Some human-specific immunological reagents cross-react•Clinical disease similar to humans: translational research (for intra species transmission)•Expensive and limited availability•Complex husbandry requirements (large BSL3 facilities);•No animal-to-animal transmission studies availableAbbreviations: BSL3, biosafety level 3; MERS-CoV, Middle East respiratory syndrome; NHP, non-human primates; NS, nasal swabs.Contrary to the mentioned species, both macaques and common marmosets develop clinical disease relatively similar to humans. In that respect, phylogenetically-related species as baboons [58], which live in Africa and Arabic Peninsula, might also play a role in the transmission of the virus. However, little attention has been paid to these species since no sero-epidemiology has been documented. There are important limitations when working with NHP models, namely the complex husbandry requirements that lead to substantially increased costs, some controversy results among different groups. Besides practical considerations, human-specific immunological reagents cross-react with NHP species and are widely available.5Conclusion and future stepsAs summarized in this review, several species of animals are susceptible to experimental MERS-CoV infection; thus, they might act as potential intermediate hosts of the disease. However, the presence of viral RNA and/or specific antibodies against the virus has been only demonstrated in the field in dromedaries and alpacas [41], [51]. At the light of recent experimental studies, it seems that the list of potential host targets for MERS-CoV is not closed. MERS surveillance programs should be implemented in endemic areas in animal species for which experimental evidence of susceptibility has been provided and species closely related to them.SARS and MERS outbreaks taught us many lessons, and one of the most important is that, even in the absence of an overt threat, there is the possibility of the re-emergence of a virus or other similar viruses. On the other hand, and since the first case of MERS, continuous new cases have been described in different countries around the world [59], [60], [61], [62]. This underlines the importance of the development of animal models closer to the natural host targets. The key role of domestic animals and wildlife in the transmission of MERS-CoV should be further elucidated; meanwhile, countermeasures against deadly coronaviruses must be further explored since the risk of a global outbreak is not negligible. Noteworthy, after more than a decade of SARS and five years of MERS epidemics, there are still no licensed preventive or therapeutic drugs available that could be used in case of an eventual re-emergence of SARS or MERS. This scenario is not the outcome of technical issues, since effective vaccine prototypes against those pathogens are already available [53], [63], [64]. In case of MERS-CoV, vaccination of dromedary camels, the main source of zoonotic transmission, might be useful to control the spread of MERS [53]. However, when developing a vaccine, besides testing the protection efficacy, researchers need to think about social problems such as the reticence of camel owners to vaccinate their animals. Thus, the development of a dual vaccine able to protect against both, MERS-CoV and camelpox virus (an endemic disease in the Middle East, Africa and Asia) might be an ideal solution [53]. Recently, another dual-vaccine for humans and animals against MERS-CoV and rabies virus has been designed [65]. Political aspects have also a key role in the release of a vaccine into the market. Unless the requirements and timings for vaccine licensing procedures are facilitated, pharmaceutical companies will unlikely invest in their development taking into account the current market demand. Moreover, fragmentation of intellectual property rights may also adversely affect the development of vaccines to combat those infections [66].Conflicts of interestNone.


Title: An overview on monkeypox virus: Pathogenesis, transmission, host interaction and therapeutics

1Introduction to virusesViruses are organisms that cause infectious diseases globally and their infections to humans have been observed since ancient times (Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Studies on viruses and viral diseases began in 19th century (Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Reports have shown that at least 219 virus species can cause infections in humans (Woolhouse et al., 2012). The first virus to be identified by Iwanovsky and Beijerinck was the tobacco mosaic virus in 1892 and the foot-and-mouth disease virus by Loeffler and Frosch in 1898 (van Kammen, 1999; Woolhouse et al., 2012; Chappell and Dermody, 2015). In humans, the first discovery was the yellow fever virus in 1901 (Woolhouse et al., 2012; Chappell and Dermody, 2015). Since then, multiple viruses have been discovered.Several viruses have been infecting humans and posing a challenge in finding effective therapeutics (Wong et al., 2017), such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) (Lloyd, 1996; Simon et al., 2006) and SARS-CoV-2 (Dhama et al., 2020; Hu et al., 2021; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a). Particularly, the SARS-CoV-2 has hampered the health system, and this virus also warrants the scientific community to be ready for future pandemics. One such infectious diseases is monkeypox, which has been recently spreading globally.2MonkeypoxMonkeypox (MP) is a zoonotic disease that demonstrates smallpox-like characteristics in humans and is related to variola virus, the causative agent of small pox (Bunge et al., 2022). Monkeypox virus (MPV) belongs to the family: Poxviridae, subfamily: chordopoxvirinae, genus: orthopoxvirus, and species: Monkeypox virus (Moore et al., 2022). Other members of this genus include cowpox, camelpox, and vaccinia (VV) (Pauli et al., 2010; McCollum and Damon, 2014; Silva et al., 2020). As on 14th October 2022, a total of 73,288 cases have been recorded according to https://www.cdc.gov/poxvirus/monkeypox/response/2022/world-map.htm. Distribution of MPV infection in different countries (
Figure 1
).Figure 1The global spread of monkey pox virus (MPV). The figure is prepared using PowerBI desktop.3Monkeypox and smallpoxInterestingly, variola virus (VARV) and MPV are related antigenically and genetically (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Cann et al., 2013). However, these viruses vary in the regions of their sequence for virulence and host-range factors at the genome termini (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Cann et al., 2013). Upon comparing the VARV strain Japan 1951 (Harper, Masterseed) and MPV strains (Zaire 96-I-16), the length of MPV genome was 10,678 bp larger than Variola virus (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Esposito et al., 2006; Cann et al., 2013). Furthermore, MPV has displayed mutations that influence the process of translation of interferon resistance genes that code for proteins C3L and E3L. The MPV genome also encodes a secreted interleukin (IL)-1β-binding protein, which is absent in VARV genomes. The absence of this vaccinia virus (VACV) - gene corresponds to amplified pathogenicity (Cann et al., 2013).4History of MPVThe advent of MPV was primarily observed in monkeys shipped from Singapore to Copenhagen in 1958 by von Magnus et al. (Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). The name monkey virus is coined after its first discovery from monkeys (Bunge et al., 2022). Approximately, 20-30% of animals have manifested clinical illness (Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). Notably, out of the 6 cases in 1970, the first human infection was reported in an infant (9 months old) from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Ladnyj et al., 1972; Cho and Wenner, 1973; Moore et al., 2022). Four other infections were observed in children from Bouduo, Liberia aged 4-9 years (Cho and Wenner, 1973), and the other case was in a male of 24 years from Sierra Leone (Cho and Wenner, 1973). In 2003, MPV cases were recorded in the USA that is outside Africa (Bunge et al., 2022). Notably, this is caused due to animal-to- human transmission (Reed et al., 2004). Between 2018 and 2021, the MPV spread was observed in the USA, the UK, Israel, and Singapore (Mauldin et al., 2022). By 2022, MPV reached 31 countries (Xiang and White, 2022) with no travel history to endemic countries, and the virus isolates are reported as West African clade (Xiang and White, 2022).5Genome and structure of MPVThe MPV genome is a linear genome with a size of approximately 197 kb (196,858-base pairs) (Shchelkunov et al., 2001; Alkhalil et al., 2009) comprising ≈190 non-overlapping ORFs >180 nt in length (Kugelman et al., 2014). The central coding region sequence is positioned at ≈56000–120000 nucleotides (Kugelman et al., 2014). This conserved region is flanked by variable ends that comprise inverted terminal repeats (ITRs). The genome encodes biological machinery that is essential for the survival of the virus (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Genes in the central region are necessary for entry, self-replication, and maturation (Alkhalil et al., 2009). The less conserved terminal regions are useful for host-virus interaction (Alkhalil et al., 2009).At the ITR zone, a minimum of 4 ORFs are present (Kugelman et al., 2014).There are two clades present in the MPV: the Congo Basin strain and West African strain (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). The Congo Basin strain is also known as the Central African strain (ZAI-96). The West African strains are SL-V70, COP-58, and WRAIR-6 (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008). These clades demonstrate dissimilar virulence (Kindrachuk et al., 2012) and are geographically, clinically, and genetically different (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). The Congo Basin strain demonstrated a case fatality rates of approximately 10% noticed in the people who are non-vaccinated than the less lethal West African MPV clade (Kindrachuk et al., 2012). Furthermore, the fatality rate differs with the strain, with 3.6% with the West African clade and 10.6% with the Central African clade (Bunge et al., 2022).The West African strain is linked with lower transmission within the humans (Hutson et al., 2009), with a difference of 0.55-0.56% nucleotide between both the strains (Chen et al., 2005). A difference of 0.01–0.07% nucleotides is observed among the West African strains (Chen et al., 2005). A recent study conducted through shotgun metagenomics, showed that the MPV belongs to clade 3 and presumably has a single origin (Isidro et al., 2022). Another phylogenetic study was conducted on African monkeypox (Nakazawa et al., 2015). The authors examined fairly large genomic sequence data obtained from the MPV isolates across the area of their distribution to determine the relationship between the clades and among the isolates and further improve the phylogenetic analysis (Nakazawa et al., 2015).Furthermore, the amplified virulence observed in the Central African strains is believed to be due to D14L (complement inhibitor), D10L (host range protein), B14R (interleukin [IL]-1β binding protein), B10R (apoptotic regulator), and B19R (serine protease inhibitor-like protein) genes (Estep et al., 2011) (Karumathil et al., 2018). The West African strains are devoid of D14L (Estep et al., 2011). The orthologs of D10L and B19R orthologs are conserved in both clades (Chen et al., 2005). The orthologs of ZAI-96, B10R and B14R are absent in West African strain (Chen et al., 2005). Additionally, selective repression of the host response is noticed in Central African strain demonstrated by its ability to regulate apoptosis in the host (Kumar et al., 2022).MPV is one of the largest and most highly complex viruses (Barreto-Vieira and Barth, 2015) demonstrating a brick-shaped structure with a length of 220 - 450 nm and a width ranging from 140 - 260 nm (Hyun, 2022). It has four components: core, lateral bodies, outer membrane, and outer lipoprotein envelope (Sklenovská, 2020). The core is the central part, encompassed by core fibrils and double stranded viral DNA. This layer is encircled by a rigid structure called the palisade layer (Sklenovská, 2020). The outer membrane accommodates the palisade layer, lateral bodies and the central core (Sklenovská, 2020). The structures called the surface tubules and are present on the outer surface (Sklenovská, 2020) (
Figure 2
).Figure 2The structure of MPV particle.Typically two types of virions are noticed in the negatively stained preparations of orthopoxviruses, namely the M form (mulberry) and C form (capsule) (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). The M-type virions are undamaged, while the C forms are the damaged ones (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). In C type virions, the stain percolates the cell, exposing the outer membrane and partially exposing the internal structures (Jezek and Fenner, 1988). Clinically, the M-types is present in the vesicle fluid and the C type in dried scabs (Jezek and Fenner, 1988).6Reservoir and transmissionThe common reservoir for MPV is thought to be not only monkeys (Moore et al., 2022), but also other animals such as squirrels (Khodakevich et al., 1987), and sooty mangabey. (Radonić et al., 2014). Although the rate at which the virus resides among animals is still obscure, rodents are thought to be the reservoir hosts for this virus (Nolen et al., 2015; Wilson, 2017). Infections may also occur in mice, rats, humans (Learned et al., 2005; Nolen et al., 2016; Besombes et al., 2019), and prairie dogs (Tesh et al., 2004; Moore et al., 2022). MPV transmission may occur when a healthy individual comes into contact with the skin lesions, droplets, and bodily fluids of infected animals. Partially cooked food might also be a reason for the infection (Ahmed et al., 2022). The infection may also result from to contact with contaminated fomites (Moore et al., 2022). Additionally, the infections may also result due to activities that enhance exposure to animals, such as sleeping on the ground outside and habituating near the forest (Fuller et al., 2011; Guagliardo et al., 2020). The risk of infection may also be noted when eating bushmeat or wild game (Kmiec and Kirchhoff, 2022).In 2018, MPV transmission was observed from an infected patient to a healthcare assistant which might be due to contact with bedding that was contaminated (Vaughan et al., 2020). Human-to-human transmission has also been noted in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Nolen et al., 2016). Transmission within humans can also occur by sharing the same household and consuming food or water from the same dish as the patient (Bunge et al., 2022). In 2022, the United Kingdom witnessed an increase in MPV cases, categorized into three different events (Vivancos et al., 2022). The first case was in Nigerian imports, the second case was a cluster in a household, and the third case was reported in men with no reported link with previous cases or the travel history (Vivancos et al., 2022). One study reported the first case of MPV transmission from a human to dog (Seang et al., 2022). A recent report showed that out of 528 infections across 16 countries, 98% were bisexual or gay, 75% of the infections were seen within the white, and 41% were positive for HIV (Thornhill et al., 2022) (
Figure 3
).Figure 3Transmission modes of MPV from animals (reservoirs) to humans and humans to animals.7ReplicationTo gain insight onto MPV replication, we relied on pox virus replication. Poxvirus replication occurs in the cytoplasm in specific structures known as Guarnieri bodies (Kieser et al., 2020; Kaler et al., 2022). These bodies are also called factories obtained from infecting particles (Kieser et al., 2020). The count (number) of factories depends on the multiplication rate of infection (Moss, 2013). The factory is the site where transcription translation, and assembly of virions take place (Moss, 2013).Generally, there exists two types of infectious forms of MPV: the mature virion [MV, also called intracellular mature virions (IMV)] and the enveloped virion (EV, also called extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs)) and cell-associated enveloped virions (CEVs) (Chung et al., 2006; Moss, 2012). The MV has a single membrane, and the EV has an additional outer membrane that is cleaved before fusion. When the MV is enclosed within an endosomal membrane or trans-Golgi, it forms a triple-membrane. These are hence termed wrapped virions (WVs, also called intracellular enveloped virions (IEVs) (Moss, 2012). Unenclosed MVs remain free until cell lysis occurs (Chung et al., 2006; Moss, 2012). Both MV and EV are infectious and can spread the disease (Moss, 2012; Sklenovská, 2020). Comparatively, the stable MV transmits the infection between the host animals, while EVs with fragile external membranes are instrumental in spreading the disease within the host (Moss, 2012; Sklenovská, 2020).The proteins facilitate the attachment of the virus to the cell, fusion of the membrane and entry into the host cell (Kaler et al., 2022). The single membrane in MV and an extra outer membrane in the EV perform the disruption prior to fusion (Kaler et al., 2022). There are a total of four viral proteins connected to the MV that help in the process of attachment of MV to the host cell (Kaler et al., 2022).The virus attaches to the host via 11 to 12 non-glycosylated transmembrane proteins (4- to 43-kDa) (Moss, 2012; Kaler et al., 2022). In some pox viruses, laminin and heparine sulfate aid in the attachment (Kmiec and Kirchhoff, 2022). After infection DNA synthesis is initiated for no more than 2 hours (Moss, 2013). For replication, MV initially uncoats to gain entry into the cytoplasm (Sklenovská, 2020). The early genes are then expressed after the inactivation of the cells defence mechanisms. This inactivation is achieved by the generation of prepackaged viral proteins and the enzymatic factors (Sklenovská, 2020). Subsequently, the early messenger RNA (mRNA) is synthesized through the DNA-dependent RNA polymerase of the virus. The translated early mRNA assists another uncoating mechanism, replication of DNA, and generation of intermediate transcription factors. (Sklenovská, 2020). Then the transcription and translation of intermediate mRNA occurs to promote the late mRNAs expression. Further, the translation of late mRNAs into structural and nonstructural proteins initiates (Sklenovská, 2020). The proteins that are translated are gathered together with the concatemers of DNA that are processed in the earlier step of replication (Sklenovská, 2020). They are enclosed to form an immature virions (IMVs) that transform to MV which are devoid of external membrane and causes infection when liberated due to the disruption of the cell. (Hiller and Weber, 1985; Bray and Buller, 2004; Roberts and Smith, 2008) They then travel into the inner cell membrane aided by the microtubules and eventually fuses to from the cell-associated virions (CEVs). These trigger the actin polymerization and the development of the filaments. The CEVs exists the cell that are now called the extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs) (Roberts and Smith, 2008) (
Figure 4
).Figure 4The steps involved in the replication of MPV and the generation of new viral progeny.8Symptoms and clinical manifestations of MPThe symptoms of MP are similar to those of smallpox but are generally milder (Ligon, 2004). Once exposed to an infection, the incubation period is between 10 and 14 days and followed by a prodromal period of two days (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008). The individuals demonstrate, muscle aches, backache, headache, intense asthenia, fever between 38.5°C and 40.5°C (McCollum and Damon, 2014) with swollen lymph nodes. Often, patients experience discomfort and exhaustion (Ligon, 2004). The feature that separates monkeypox from smallpox is lymphadenopathy (Moore et al., 2022). Mucosal lesions are observed in the mouth (enanthem) (Kaler et al., 2022) after 1 or 2 days. The skin lesions appear on the face and extremities. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) the face is highly affected, as noticed in 95% of the cases. In 75% of the cases, the palms and soles are affected and in 75% of the cases the oral mucous membranes are affected. The affect is also noticed on genitalia and conjunctivae in 30% and 20% of the cases.The lesions progress through four stages namely, the macular (development of macular lesions), popular (the lesions are a slightly raised), vesicular (the lesions are raised clearly and filled with fluid), and pustula (lesions are filled with opaque fluid and forms a depression at the Centre and remain for about 5 - 7 days) in the next 2 - 4 weeks (Moore et al., 2022). After the pustular phase, the formation of the crust starts and desquamates in the next 7 - 14 day (Moore et al., 2022). Once the crusts are fallen off, the patients are no longer infectious (Moore et al., 2022). Lesions can cause dyspigmented scars in a few instances (Weaver and Isaacs, 2008).The distribution of the lesion is typically centrifugal and appears firm, deep, well-circumscribed and umbilicated (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Additionally, dissimilarities were observed in the morphology of lesions between vaccinated and unvaccinated people (McCollum and Damon, 2014). In individuals those who were vaccinated <20 years before the infection, the lesions were smaller and fewer, with the centrifugal spreading of the rash (McCollum and Damon, 2014). The skin of patients is firm, inflamed, and painful before the formation of crusts (McCollum and Damon, 2014) (
Figure 5
).Figure 5Infection with MPV. The symptoms and different stages observed in an infected individual.Sequelae and serious complications have also been noticed usually in unvaccinated individuals of approximately 74% compared to those in the vaccinated individuals (39.5%) (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Patients develop pulmonary distress or bronchopneumonia indicating that an infection of the lungs could be a secondary infection (McCollum and Damon, 2014). In others, vomiting or diarrhoea leading to acute dehydration was noticed (McCollum and Damon, 2014). Encephalitis, ocular infections and septicaemia were also recorded, with an average case-fatality rate of 11% in unvaccinated patients with children being highly vulnerable (McCollum and Damon, 2014).9Virus-host interactionIt has been reported that the MPV encompasses a substantial number of accessory genes and notably hasa broader host range (Bonilla-Aldana and Rodriguez-Morales, 2022; Xiang and White, 2022). Interestingly, the loss of an accessory gene in approximately 17% of samples from West African strain demonstrated an association with an upsurge in human-to-human transmission (Xiang and White, 2022).A gene-expression profile study was conducted to understand the viral-host biology (Alkhalil et al., 2010). The experiment was conducted on kidney epithelial cells (MK2) of Macaca mulatta using the GeneChip rhesus macaque genome microarrays (Alkhalil et al., 2010). The findings from this study demonstrate the function of ion channels, cell cycle regulators, histones, and actin play a role in MPV infection (Alkhalil et al., 2010).A recent bioinformatics study based on transcriptome analysis was conducted to identify biomarkers and signaling pathways in cells infected with monkeypox (Tang et al., 2022). GSE36854 and GSE11234 were retrieved from Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (Tang et al., 2022). The results showed that from the GSE36854 dataset, 84 genes were significantly different. The protein-protein interaction (PPI) interactions and the identification of hub genes has revealed that the genes such as ZC3H12A, IER3, EREG, IFIT2, AREG, IL11, IFIT1 IER2, NFKBIE, and FST as the 10 hub genes. (Tang et al., 2022). The genes IFIT1 and IFIT2 (antiviral genes) were noticed to be remarkably repressed. Furthermore, upon searching the drugs that essentially target the hub genes, itraconazole and AP-26113 were found to stimulate the expression levels of IFIT1 and IFIT2 illuminating their ability as MP therapeutics (Tang et al., 2022).To discover variations in the expression of genes, co-regulated genes, and the pathways that are of concern during MP progression, another research group worked on in vitro models that were infected with MPV (Xuan et al., 2022). The two models on which several analysis were performed were, rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) kidney epithelial (MK2) cells and human immortal epithelial cancer (HeLa) cells (Xuan et al., 2022). The results showed that in the animal cell line model, the prominent regulators were histamine, plasmin and cluster of differentiation 40 (CD40), whereas in the human cell line model, the neutrophil-related signaling pathways and macrophages were noted (Xuan et al., 2022). Additionally, in both models, certain genes that were remarkably expressed during the progression of the infection including, TNFAIP3, IL11, ADORA2A, DUOX1, BIRC3, PTX3, CXCL1, LIF, IER3, IL6, ZC3H12A, EGR1, CSF2, and CCL2. Additionally, epigenetic regulators were also observed, namely, HIST1H3D and HIST1H2BJ (Xuan et al., 2022). Furthermore, a computational study uncovered the over-expression of some histones in both humans and monkeys infected with monkeypox-infected cells (Xuan et al., 2022). The elevated histone members are HIST1H2BB, HIST1H2AK, HIST2H2AB, HIST1H2AC, HIST1H2BM, HIST1H2BJ, HIST1H2BH, HIST1H2AD, HIST1H3D, and HIST1H1B highlighting the possibility of the role epigenetic regulators in monkeypox infection (Xuan et al., 2022).Another study also has identified the upregulation of histone genes namely, HIST1H2BJ, HIST4H4, HIST1H3I, HIST1H2AD, and, HIST1H1D, while H1F0, the linker histone was downregulated (Alkhalil et al., 2010). Certain genes such as MYCBP2, PRMT3, RARS2, FBXO11 and MYST2 were repressed (Alkhalil et al., 2010). During the infection, the repression of ten ion channels and transporters was observed. The cell cycle regulators and actin MPV infection were noticed to participate in MPV infection (Alkhalil et al., 2010). Furthermore, the disease biomarkers can be discovered through proteomics analysis (Wang et al., 2022).Bourquain et al, conducted an experiment to determine how poxviruses vary their host cell gene expression. HeLa cells were selected, and the changes were recorded using microarrays that are representative of the whole human genome (Bourquain et al., 2013). HeLa cells were treated with CPXV Brighton Red (BR) reference strain, central African MPV strain MSF-6, or the mouse-pathogenic VACV strain IHD-W (Bourquain et al., 2013). In particular to the MPV results, merely 321 (1.1%) transcripts showed 2-fold expression variations with 219 (68.2%) upregulated transcripts and 102 downregulated transcripts (Bourquain et al., 2013). Interestingly, the results also showed common transcripts among infections (Bourquain et al., 2013). The MPV has regulated 321 host transcripts of which 241 (75.1%) were observed with cowpox virus (CPXV) and 148 (46.1%) within VACV infection (Bourquain et al., 2013). Genes such as DUSP5/6, SPRED1/2, and SPRY2/4 are upregulated along with EGR1 and EGR2. After infection, the EGR1 upregulation was observed via the MAPK-ERK pathway (Bourquain et al., 2013).In MPV infection, the genes that take part in the negative regulation of MAPK activity and intracellular protein kinase cascade were enriched, and they induced genes associated with chemotaxis or leukocyte activation (Bourquain et al., 2013). Hammarlund et al, reported that monocytes infected with MPV do not recognize antiviral CD4+ and CD8+ T Cells (Hammarlund et al., 2008). MPV can cause infection in primary human monocytes without eliciting the production of inflammatory cytokines (IFNγ or TNFα) (Hammarlund et al., 2008). It was also reported that MPV impedes the activation of T- cell by VV, implying that MPV bears an immunomodulatory protein which is absent in VV (Hammarlund et al., 2008). This inhibition in trans can also obstruct the activation of T - cells by other virus-infected cells that are not precisely MPV-infected, suggesting that MPV is immunosuppressive and immune-evasive (Hammarlund et al., 2008). Cell-associated factor/factors generated in MPV hinder the activation of T - cells autonomously by MHC class I or class II processing or presentation (Hammarlund et al., 2008).10Treatments against MPV10.1Small molecule inhibitorsThe replication of MPV can be brought about by the RNA interference using genome-wide expression studies combined with a bioinformatics approach (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Accordingly 12 viral genes were targeted using small interfering RNA (siRNAs). Eventually, siA6-a inhibited replication of the virus for 7 days when administered at 10 nM (Alkhalil et al., 2009). Additionally, this study also demonstrated the significance of the A6R gene in replication (Alkhalil et al., 2009). The use of interferon-β (IFN-β) is another approach to curb MPV spread and multiplication (Johnston et al., 2012). IFN-β has been approved by the FDA for treating multiple sclerosis (Johnston et al., 2012). IFN-β administration after 6-8 hours after infection remarkably inhibited the production and spread of MPV, thereby highlighting the potential of IFN-β as an effective therapeutic option against MPV (Johnston et al., 2012). In previous studies, silver-based nanoparticles have been found to repress plaque formation of MPV with a diameter of 10 nm (Rogers et al., 2008), suggesting the role of silver-based nanoparticles as MPV treatment option (Rogers et al., 2008).Tecovirimat may offer improved survival when administered for up to 8 days after the lethal aerosol MPV challenge in cynomolgus macaques (Russo et al., 2018). It offers a shield from the clinical effects of the disease earlier than 5 days after the challenge (Russo et al., 2018). This FDA approved drug is used to treat smallpox (Smith et al., 2011; Grosenbach et al., 2018; Laudisoit et al., 2018; Russo et al., 2018). The compound tecovirimat is believed to repress the product of F13L gene which is present across orthopoxviruses (Matias et al., 2022) and is used for orthopoxvirus wrapping (Duraffour et al., 2008; Duraffour et al., 2015). The drug brincidofovir, a nucleotide analogue, has demonstrated promising results in animal models when assessed against MPV (Adler et al., 2022). Improved survival was observed in prairie dog models, administered with brincidofovir soon after monkeypox contact (Hutson et al., 2021; Siegrist and Sassine, 2022).Computational methods are paramount in the development and design of new drugs. The predominant methods include molecular docking (Morris and Lim-Wilby, 2008; Rampogu and Lee, 2021c; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a), and molecular dynamics simulation (Durrant and McCammon, 2011; Rampogu and Lee, 2021a). Pharmacophore modeling can also be adapted when there are any experimentally known ligands/inhibitors or when the X-ray structure of the target protein is present (Yang, 2010; Rampogu et al., 2020). Homology modeling can be used to build a structure when the X-ray structure is not resolved (Muhammed and Aki-Yalcin, 2019). In one study, five targets were investigated, and compounds, such as NMCT, rutaecarpine, nilotinib, simeprevir, hypericin, naldemedine, fosdagrocorat and lixivaptan (Lam et al., 2022), were found to have potential inhibitory activities. These five targets were A48R, A50R, D13L, F13L and I7L (Lam et al., 2022). An in silico study revealed that the compound fludarabine is a potential inhibitor of the MPV target DNA-dependent RNA polymerase subunit (A6R) along with two other targets, protein catalysing the envelopment of intracellular mature virus particles (F13L) and proteins involved in cell entry (D8L) (Altayb, 2022). Sahoo et al., identified four potential inhibitors, Tipranavir, Cefiderocol, Doxorubicin, and Dolutegravir towards the targets thymidylate kinase and D9 (decapping enzyme) (Sahoo et al., 2022) (
Table 1
).Table 1Current treatments/small molecules available for MPV therapeutics.InhibitorMethodActs onDosageReferencesiA6-agenome-wide expression, bioinformaticsA6R10 nM(Alkhalil et al., 2009)IFN-β
in vitro
MPV spread and multiplication–(Johnston et al., 2012)NMCT, Rutaecarpine, Nilotinib, Simeprevir, Hypericin, Naldemedine, Fosdagrocorat and LixivaptanComputationalA48R, A50R, D13L, F13L, I7L–(Lam et al., 2022)FludarabineComputationalA6R–(Altayb, 2022)Tipranavir, Cefiderocol, Doxorubicin, and DolutegravirComputationalThymidylate kinase and D9–(Sahoo et al., 2022)TecovirimatFDA-approved drug for smallpoxF13L–(Matias et al., 2022)BrincidofovirFDA-approved drug for smallpoxThe effect shown in prairie dogs(Adler et al., 2022)Vaccinia immune globulin (VIG)FDA-approvedintramuscular–(Siegrist et al., 2020)CRISPR/Cas9vaccinia virus (VACV) modelA17L, E3L, and I2L–(Siegrist et al., 2020)A study was conducted to evaluate the role of specific genes in viral replication and pathogenicity (Lopera et al., 2015). Correspondingly, a bioinformatics approach has been adapted to discover genomic regions in MPV possessing numerous virulence genes (Lopera et al., 2015). Following this, two regions were selected, and the study was conducted in vitro and in vivo after single deletion and double deletion of the selected genes. The results demonstrated that simultaneous deletion of both genes led to a decrease in replication observed in cell culture (Lopera et al., 2015). When either region was deleted, a remarkable amplified attenuation in vivo was observed (Lopera et al., 2015).10.2VaccinationIn addition to small molecules, vaccines are also widely used as a treatment option (Hooper et al., 2004). Notably, the smallpox vaccine has demonstrated protection in Nonhuman Primates against MPV (Hooper et al., 2004). It is reported that smallpox has provided approximately 85% protection against monkeypox (Bunge et al., 2022). JYNNEOS is a modified vaccinia ankara (MVA) vaccine that has been approved for MPV disease in adults ≥18 years of age (Rao et al., 2022). This was a subcutaneous injection administered at two doses with 28 days apart (Rao et al., 2022). In 2017, healthcare individuals were administered with IMVAMUNE® which is a smallpox vaccine (Petersen et al., 2019). This study aimed to understand the immunogenicity, effectiveness, and safety of IMVAMUNE® in patients at high risk for MPV (Petersen et al., 2019). Another smallpox vaccine, the live VACV Dryvax protects against monkeypox (Heraud et al., 2006; Earl et al., 2008). A multivalent DNA vaccine with eight VACVs virus (Western Reserve strain genes: A4L, A27L, A33R, A56R, B5R, F9L, H3L, and L1R) confers protection against MPV in nonhuman primates cynomolgus macaques (Hirao et al., 2011).It has been observed that, patients vaccinated for smallpox showed immunity (orthopoxvirus [OPXV], IgG and memory B cells) upon exposure to MPV (Nguyen et al., 2021). Interestingly, the smallpox vaccine triggers both humoral and cell-mediated responses towards OPXV which also includes MPV (Nguyen et al., 2021). They target a host of viral elements, thereby hindering viral replication (Nguyen et al., 2021). Vaccinia immune globulin is an approved medication used after contacting the MPV, which is administered intramuscularly (Lederman et al., 2012; Siegrist et al., 2020; Parker et al., 2021). In one study, CRISPR/Cas9 was used to treat orthopoxviruses with VACV, which was used as a model organism (Siegrist et al., 2020). This study focused on the indispensable conserved genes A17L, E3L, and I2L using an adeno-associated virus as a vector (Siegrist et al., 2020). The results have shown a reduction in the viral titre further protecting host cells (Siegrist et al., 2020). An assay based on CRISPR-Cas12a and real-time PCR was used to detect MPV (Li et al., 2006; Sui et al., 2022).In order to find effective therapeutics, few clinical trials have been conducted. Upon searching for clinical trial information, it was found that nine studies are currently being performed that are either on-going or completed (https://clinicaltrials.gov/)11Conclusion and future outlookViruses are notorious microorganisms that cause serious human infections. Pox viruses are not new as they exist in reptiles, birds, insects, and mammals. Hence, they are also known as ancient viruses (Alakunle et al., 2020). Human MP is a zoonotic disease that is recently spreading globally. In order to prevent the spread of the disease, the contact tracing is an important step (Titanji et al., 2022). If a person is in close proximity with a confirmed case of monkeypox, then that individual should be observed for development of symptoms for 21 days (Titanji et al., 2022).Since the treatment options for monkeypox are limited (Kaler et al., 2022), the available research methods, such as computational drug discovery, could be an effective method to identify drugs (Ou-Yang et al., 2012; Sliwoski et al., 2014). This approach is useful for discovering new drugs over a short period (Leelananda and Lindert, 2016). Drug repurposing is another approach that can be used to identify mmediate candidate compounds (Pushpakom et al., 2018; Begley et al., 2021). This approach has been proven to be promising for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2. Remdesivir is one such candidate (Li and Peng, 2021). To prevent the spread of virus in the developing countries the awareness on health hygiene is essentially important as the samples from the excreta are reported to have monkeypox virus DNA (Singla and Shen, 2022). Additionally, the knowledge and treat from the pandemics and similar kind of diseases should be widely spread among all the sections of the people (Poland et al., 2022). Countries need to review their approach and preventive measure are to be taken during the outbreaks and be prepared for any such kind in the future (Poland et al., 2022). To conclude, since the spread of MPV is swift, it demands extra awareness and thoughtfulness to control the transmission and thereby to mitigate the disease and further its future reappearance.Author contributionsSR and KW conceived the idea. SR wrote the manuscript. KW, S-WK, and YK reviewed the manuscript and revised. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.


Title: Poxvirus-driven human diseases and emerging
therapeutics

Introduction and viral taxonomyPoxviruses are infrequently encountered in clinical practice but are well-established
agents of human disease belonging to the family Poxviridae. Current
viral taxonomy divides the family into subfamilies Chordopoxvirinae
and Entomopoxvirinae.1 The genera
Orthopoxvirus, Parapoxvirus,
Molluscipoxvirus, and Yatapoxvirus belong to
the Chordopoxvirinae family and are best known for human diseases
caused by Poxviridae. Major orthopoxviruses include
Variola, Vaccinia, and Monkeypox
virus species. Among Parapoxviruses, Orf virus and
Molluscum contagiosum virus species of
Molluscipoxvirus are well-described human pathogens. Finally,
Yatapoxvirus species Tanapox virus and
Yaba monkey tumor virus can affect human hosts.Viral taxonomy of Poxviridae is detailed in Table 1.1Table 1.Viral taxonomy of Poxviridae.Subfamily
Chordopoxvirinae
GenusAvipoxvirus (Species: Canarypox virus,
Flamingopox virus, Fowlpox virus, Juncopox virus, Mynahpox
virus, Penguinpox virus, Pigeonpox virus, Psittacinepox
virus, Quailpox virus, Sparrowpox virus, Starlingpox
virus)Capripoxvirus (Species: Goatpox virus,
Lumpy skin disease virus, Sheeppox virus)Centapoxvirus (Species: Murmansk
microtuspox virus, Yokapox virus)Cervidpoxvirus (Species: Mule deerpox
virus)Crocodylidpoxvirus (Species: Nile
crocodilepox virus)Leporipoxvirus (Species: Hare fibroma
virus, Myxoma virus, Rabbit fibroma virus, Squirrel fibroma
virus)Macropopoxvirus (Species: Eastern
kangaroopox virus, Western kangaroopox virus)Molluscipoxvirus (Species: Molluscum
contagiosum virus)Mustelpoxvirus (Species: Sea otterpox
virus)Orthopoxvirus (Species: Abatino
macacapox virus, Akhmeta virus, Camelpox virus, Cowpox
virus, Ectromelia virus, Monkeypox virus, Raccoonpox virus,
Skunkpox virus, Taterapox virus, Vaccinia virus, Variola
virus, Volepox virus)Oryzopoxvirus (Species: Cotia
virus)Parapoxvirus (Species: Bovine papular
stomatitis virus, Grey sealpox virus, Orf virus,
Pseudocowpox virus, Red deerpox virus)Pteropopoxvirus (Species: Pteropox
virus)Salmonpoxvirus (Species: Salmon gillpox
virus)Sciuripoxvirus (Species: Squirrelpox
virus)Suipoxvirus (Species: Swinepox
virus)Vespertilionpoxvirus (Species:
Eptesipox virus)Yatapoxvirus (Species: Tanapox virus,
Yaba monkey tumor virus)
Subfamily

Entomopoxvirinae
GenusAlphaentomopoxvirus (Species: Anomala
cuprea entomopoxvirus, Aphodius tasmaniae entomopoxvirus,
Demodema bonariensis entomopoxvirus, Dermolepida albohirtum
entomopoxvirus, Figulus sublaevis entomopoxvirus, Geotrupes
sylvaticus entomopoxvirus, Melolontha melolontha
entomopoxvirus)Betaentomopoxvirus (Species: Acrobasis
zelleri entomopoxvirus, Adoxophyes honmai entomopoxvirus,
Amsacta moorei entomopoxvirus, Arphia conspersa
entomopoxvirus, Choristoneura biennis entomopoxvirus,
Choristoneura conflicta entomopoxvirus, Choristoneura
diversuma entomopoxvirus, Choristoneura fumiferana
entomopoxvirus, Choristoneura rosaceana entomopoxvirus,
Chorizagrotis auxiliaris entomopoxvirus, Heliothis armigera
entomopoxvirus, Locusta migratoria entomopoxvirus, Mythimna
separata entomopoxvirus, Oedaleus senegalensis
entomopoxvirus, Operophtera brumata entomopoxvirus,
Schistocerca gregaria entomopoxvirus)Deltaentomopoxvirus (Species:
Melanoplus sanguinipes entomopoxvirus)Gammaentomopoxvirus (Species: Aedes
aegypti entomopoxvirus, Camptochironomus tentans
entomopoxvirus, Chironomus attenuatus entomopoxvirus,
Chironomus luridus entomopoxvirus, Chironomus plumosus
entomopoxvirus, Goeldichironomus holoprasinus
entomopoxvirus, Diachasmimorpha
entomopoxvirus)Structurally, these are large viruses (220–450 nm length) with an envelope that
contains the viral genetic material, namely, double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid
(dsDNA) arranged linearly with hairpin terminals forming continuous polynucleotide
chains.2 The virions are oval or brick shaped, which can differ between
species. Poxviruses are unique in their replicative process which occurs in host
cellular cytoplasm opposed to host-cell nuclei where most other DNA viruses are
known to replicate.3In this narrative review, we discuss the epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical
manifestations, and management of the best known ‘human poxviral diseases’, namely,
Smallpox, Monkeypox, Orf, Tanapox, and Molluscum among others; this is followed by a
discussion of emerging therapeutics that employ Poxviruses with oncolytic
potential.Clinical diseasesGenus OrthopoxvirusThe Orthopoxvirus genus of the Poxviridae
family has at least 12 species.1 Multiple vertebrates
including humans play host to this genus. In the evolutionary history of this
genus multiple genes have been lost or truncated. The species in this genus
include Abatino macacapox, Akhmeta, Camelpox, Cowpox, Ectromelia,
Monkeypox, Raccoonpox, Skunkpox, Taterapox, Vaccinia, Variola, and
Volepox. The cowpox strain seems to have the most conserved
genes.4 The orthopoxviruses, around 250 nm long and 220-450 nm wide,
have linear dsDNA genomes, put together in a brick shaped geometry.5 The genome,
housed within the nucleoprotein complex, consists of about 170–250 kbp of dsDNA
closed covalently into telomere-like hairpin bends. Each virion also contains a
host of structural proteins and ribonucleic acid (RNA)-polymerase units that
allow robust viral gene transcription, as seen in Figure 1.5Figure 1.Structure of the extracellular enveloped and intracellular mature
orthopox virion.The well-orchestrated life cycle of orthopoxvirus occurs in the host-cell
cytoplasm. Upon fusion of viral proteins to cellular membrane
glycosaminoglycans, the former releases its core into cytoplasm, while early
expression of viral proteins, through RNA-polymerase, uncoats its genome to
begin replication by viral DNA-polymerase. This process takes about 100 minutes
post initial infection. Further, the proto-virion is assembled in host
cytoplasmic viral factories, over the next 140 minutes to 48 hours
post-infection. The mature virions are released via host-cell
lysis or acquiring a double membrane from the golgi apparatus and budding as an
external enveloped virion (EEV). The latter utilizes the cellular microtubule
transport, fusing to the lipoprotein layer before releasing into the outer
surface.5 These mature virions, with enveloped or nonenveloped
forms (IMV), attached to the outer cell surface each have distinct antigenic
properties and are believed to have different attached sites on the
cells.5 Variability in antigenic expression from these virions
modulates the host immune response and infectivity of progeny virions.6
Figure 2 summarizes the
replication cycle of orthopoxviruses in cytoplasm.Figure 2.Schematic representation of the Orthopoxvirus
replication cycle and release of mature virion in the host-cell
cytoplasm.Although Ectromelia and Camelpox are known to
be highly host-specific, the four zoonotic orthopoxvirus species known to cause
human diseases are Cowpox/Buffalopox, Monkeypox,
Variola (smallpox), and Vaccinia (smallpox
vaccine). Until eradication in the 1980s, Variola caused
significant morbidity and mortality. Although Vaccinia
continues to be utilized as a disease-prevention tool through immunization,
there have been sporadic reports of disease in laboratory workers and vaccinated
individuals. In addition, in Brazilian and Indian cow/buffalo cow herders, a
Vaccinia-like virus has been reported to infect not just
cows, rodents but also humans in contact.7,8 Cowpox infection in humans
is commonly associated with occupational exposure in farmers. Occupational
exposure to Cowpox virus in veterinarians is not only through
cows but also other animals like cats, rats, and elephants.9,10
Interestingly, monkeypox was distinguished as a separate infection than smallpox
only after the 1970s, causing disease mainly in humans and monkeys, although
maintained in nature in rodent hosts. Most clinical symptoms are similar to the
ordinary smallpox infection although milder.11In humans infected with orthopoxviruses initial infection symptoms are
constitutional including fever, headache, myalgia, malaise, vomiting, and
lymphadenopathy. Dermatological manifestations include a skin rash comprising
either vesicles or pustules or both. Although skin lesions alone are not
diagnostic of Orthopoxvirus infections, individual lesions are
very often seen progressing to eventually form a dry crust. In severe cases,
this may progress to general erythema and edema and involve the nervous system
causing encephalitis or myelitis.8 Diagnosis in infected
individuals is clinical, eventually established by a confirmatory molecular
test; the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends use of the
diagnostic algorithm to aid the process.8 Management in most cases
includes supportive care (nutritional supplementation, hydration, covering of
lesions to prevent spread) and preventing secondary infections with rigorous
infection prevention and control practices,8 allowing the course of
infection to subside combated by the host immune response. Although human
disease caused by orthopoxviruses have common traits, it is important to
understand their individual epidemiology, pathogenesis, transmission, and
disease progression pathways to treat them robustly.Variola (smallpox), Cowpox, and
VacciniaHistory and EpidemiologyThe Variola virus species is the most prominent member
of the Orthopoxvirus genus. In nature causing infection
primarily in humans, it has been historically reported in both Indian
and Chinese medical texts from 1500 to 1100 BCE, originally speculated
to have been spread from Egypt by traders.12 Over the middle
ages, smallpox had become significantly prevalent across Europe and
spread further into the new world through increasing colonization, with
estimates suggesting over 30% mortality.13 By the 18th
century smallpox was a leading cause of death in Europe and killed an
estimated 400,000 people each year,14 and although
remaining largely endemic to separate regions in the world, it was still
a significant burden to human health.Virology and PathogenesisVariola is a large, linear dsDNA virus – 186 kbp in size
with telomere-like hairpin loops in the end.15 The brick-like
outer structure housing the genome is around 330 nm × 250 nm in size
(Figure 1),
presenting 2 viral strains–Variola major and
Variola minor.16 Fascinating in
their replication, as with the other species in the genus,
Variola replicate primarily in host-cell cytoplasm
and utilize a robust machinery of special proteins, specifically the
DNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Both the enveloped or nonenveloped forms
of the mature virion emerging at the cell surface are highly infectious.
Smallpox was highly contagious and transmission was predominantly
through the inhalation route of airborne viral agents, from an infected
individual’s oral, oropharyngeal, and nasopharyngeal regions, over
sustained contact. Infection transmission through fomites, contaminated
sheets, clothes, and so on, was also possible. Although transmission
could occur throughout the illness, viral shedding is high past the
prodromal stage, particularly with rash or lesion development in the
oropharyngeal regions. Although the peak of infectivity wanes after 7 to
10 days, as the scabs cover lesions, transmission is possible until all
lesions heal completely.17,18 Infection with
one strain often conferred immunity against the other.19
Upon inhalation, the virus could gain entry into the mucous membrane of
the nasal, oral, pharyngeal, or respiratory epithelium of the host,
before invading the lymph nodes. During the course of disease, an
increasing viral load may cause widespread host-cell lysis and may be
detectable in the bloodstream causing viremia. This could further
potentiate and subsequently exacerbate the disease by furthering viral
spread into other organs such as the bone marrow and spleen.19Clinical Manifestations and DiagnosisInitial infection is often associated with fever (at least 101°F),
fatigue, malaise, myalgia and headache. Generalized symptoms may also
include nausea and vomiting. After the prodromal and incubation phase
the initial visible red lesions appear by days 12 to 19, over mucosal
membrane in the mouth, tongue, palate, and pharynx, while the body
temperature may lower to normal. Soon these lesions enlarge and rupture,
increasing the salivary viral load dramatically.19
The striking feature of smallpox is the appearance of rashes, 24 to
48 hours after mucosal lesions develop, in different regions of the body
starting from the forehead, face, and proximal extremities. These
lesions, seated deeper epidermally; 0.5 to 1 cm in size, pass through
the stages of macules, papules, and vesicles before developing scabs
during week 2 to 3, resulting in the classical smallpox
pockmarks.19 Although the skin
lesions make smallpox recognition distinct, differential diagnosis
considered include cowpox infection, molluscum contagiosum, severe
chickenpox, disseminated varicella zoster, herpes simplex infection, and
secondary syphilis.20 The CDC has
designated a streamlined diagnostic algorithm to aid patient
evaluation.21Microscopic diagnosis of variola depicts the characteristic cytoplasmic
inclusion bodies – guarnieri bodies, appearing as strong pink areas in
the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining of skin biopsies. These may
appear in other poxviral diseases too, and their absence does not rule
out smallpox.19,22 In addition, viral agents in the scabs or
pustular fluid can be identified using electron microscopy, identifying
the brick-shaped poxvirus and eliminating other infectious agents. A
definite diagnostic method that was used involved culturing the virus
over the chorioallantoic membrane of chicken eggs to observe development
of the classic smallpox pock lesions. Critically, real-time polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) assessment generates a specific and sensitive
characterization of the infecting viral strain and species.23–25
Point-of-care antigen detection assays are also of high value to help
initiate rapid countermeasures to disease management.25Management and PreventionInitial treatment is often supportive in nature and involves fluid
resuscitation, wound care, infection control and secondary bacterial
infection prevention. Importantly, vaccination, even 3 days
post-exposure, significantly prevents and decreases disease
severity.26 Immunization
through ‘variolation’ was common practice in the early history of
smallpox in India and China, introducing pustular material from infected
individuals into infected naive individuals.25 Although this
immunization was successful, smallpox associated mortality was still
significant. The discovery of Cowpox virus, infection
in milkmaids and the inoculation of its infectious material into
infection naive individuals led to a new era of vaccines, by Edward
Jenner, with the same level of protection as variolation but lower
adverse effects.27 Subsequently,
vaccines were mass produced under animal skins and the chorioallantoic
membranes of embryonated eggs.25 This led to the
development of Vaccinia virus, used for vaccination as
‘calf-lymph’, although its actual history remains undetermined. Recent
studies show that Horsepox may be closely related to
Vaccinia virus (99.7%).28 20th- and
21st-century vaccines were developed in calves (Dryvax – freeze-dried
live-virus smallpox vaccine prepared from calf lymph and used for
smallpox eradication efforts) or cell lines (ACAM2000 – live
Vaccinia, cloned from the same strain as Dryvax,
cultured in vero cell lines).25,29,30 A third vaccine –
MVA-BN, is a live, nonreplicating vaccine for smallpox and monkeypox,
derived from Modified Vaccinia Ankara, an attenuated strain of the
Vaccinia.31Therapeutics have also been developed to counter smallpox, marking a
significant achievement in drug development. ‘Tecovirimat’, the first
drug approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
for smallpox treatment, acts by targeting a key viral phospholipase thus
inhibiting viral exit from host cell. It also blocks formation of
enveloped virions, thereby effectively inhibiting virus dissemination
both in vitro and in vivo.32
More recently a second drug – brincidofovir, a prodrug of cidofovir, has
been approved for smallpox therapy caused by
Variola.33 It acts by
increasing the intracellular concentration of cidofovir thus effectively
acting against viral replication as a nucleoside analogue that
selectively inhibits the viral DNA polymerase.34 Development of
therapeutics and vaccines in the post-smallpox eradication era has been
given special attention, due to the scare of potential biothreats and
biorisks, from intentional misuse of the in-store
Variola and Vaccinia. Routine
smallpox vaccination was stopped in 1972 after the disease was
eradicated in the United States. The World Health Organization (WHO)
declared smallpox an eradicated disease in 1980.35MonkeypoxHistory and EpidemiologyMonkeypox virus is a species of the
Orthopoxvirus genus, an emerging zoonotic
infectious disease, that has gained prominence in the post-smallpox
eradication era. Human infection presents very similarly to
smallpox–prodromal stage followed by skin lesions.36
It was first described in 1958 in an outbreak in cynomolgus monkeys,
used for polio vaccine research, at Statens Serum Institut,
Denmark.37 Subsequently
other cases were reported in monkeys in Europe and the United
States.38 The first human case was reported in 1970 in
the Republic of Congo.39 Since then cases
have been recorded in over 11 countries including western and central
Africa.40 Once considered a rare zoonotic disease, new
cases have increased and spread to multiple regions, highlighting its
emergence as an important global disease.Virology, Pathogenesis and Clinical ManifestationsInterestingly, Monkeypox virus is similar to Variola. Monkeypox virus is
a large brick like virus, often even discernable by light microscope,
ranging in size from 220 to 450 nm in length and 140 to 260 nm in width.
The inner dsDNA is covered in a core complex, surrounded by the lateral
bodies and wrapped in a lipoprotein outer cover. The monkeypox genome,
one of the largest of all viruses, is about 197 kbp. There is
significant homology of the genes in the central region, across
orthopoxviruses, and variability in the terminal ends, leading to the
different virulence across species in the genus.41
Similar to other orthopoxviruses, each virion has a complex system of
proteins and enzymes that hack host cellular mechanisms to aid
stimulation of its replication, assembly and exit, responsible for
further transmission.42 Two distinct
genetic clades of the virus have been identified leading to infection –
the west African and the central African clade.43The virus can spread from animals to humans by either animal bite or
contact with infectious bodily fluids. In human-to-human contact, the
virus is spread through inhalation of oral, nasal, and oro-pharyngeal
droplets, or fomite contact from infected individuals. The incubation
period remains under speculation but thought to be commonly between 7
and 14 days and can range from 5 to 21 days.44 It is proposed
that incubation may vary by the route of transmission.45
As with smallpox infections, the prodromal stage in monkeypox presents
with symptoms such as fever, myalgia, malaise, fatigue, headache, sore
throat, chills/sweats, and lymphadenopathy.46,47 Lymphadenopathy
is a distinguishing feature of Monkeypox and differentiates it from
smallpox. Patients can also experience gastrointestinal symptoms such as
nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite, and diarrhea. The second stage to
infection – rash phase manifests from 24 to 72 hours after onset of
fever and lymphadenopathy. Lesions have been described as well
circumscribed, deep seated, often with umbilication and may affect palms
and soles.44 The lesions appear simultaneously across the
body in severe disease, more in the periphery in milder form, progress
from papules, vesicles, pustules, and finally crusts, over 2–3 weeks
duration. Importantly, individuals immunized against smallpox with
Vaccinia develop significantly less
lesions.48,49 Ocular and
respiratory involvement during the course of infection can occur and may
lead to complications such as loss of vision or bronchopneumonia.
Encephalitis, secondary bacterial infections, and sepsis are other
critical complications. Mortality associated with monkeypox is 1–11% and
higher rates are noted in the central African clade than west
African.48 Monkeypox lesions
can easily be mistaken for other conditions such as varicella, secondary
syphilis, measles, and even smallpox.The pathogenesis model of monkeypox in humans has been best mimicked and
studied in black-tailed prairie dogs. During initial infection, the
virus is largely local to the site and associated with acute
inflammatory host response – phagocytosis, cell necrosis, and
vasculitis. This is accompanied with local replication of the virus,
followed by spread to the regional lymph nodes and lymphatics eventually
resulting in primary viremia. This further propels viral spread
systemically to other organs–bone marrow, liver and spleen resulting in
secondary viremia, causing disseminated lesions.50,51
Morphological features observed in H&E staining include the classic
guarnieri bodies type b inclusion bodies and type a inclusion bodies.
Importantly, there are pathological differences among the two clades of
monkeypox, with the central African clade exhibiting a more rapid spread
and accumulation in tissues causing increased disease burden.51Diagnosis, Management, and PreventionAlthough historical diagnostic methods using confirmation of viral pocks
on a chicken embryo chorioallantoic membrane and electron microscopy can
confirm infection by orthopoxvirus, contemporary confirmatory testing is
the RT-PCR. The variable terminal end of the genome makes for ideal
targets for detection. Other genes targeted for the confirmatory
diagnostic test are hemagglutinin, envelope protein, inclusion body
gene, crmB gene, B7R gene, and so on.52–54 As confirmatory
tests are time-consuming, point-of-care tests can play a critical role
in early detection, even as confirmatory tests are awaited. Two tests
have been developed in this area: Antibody Immuno Column for Analytical
Processes (ABICAP) immunofiltration system and Tetracore Orthopox
BioThreat.55,56Once diagnosed, treatment for monkeypox is largely supportive and
symptomatic. There are no approved therapies for monkeypox, but animal
studies suggest cidofovir, tecovirimat, and brincidofovir may have a
role in treatment or lowering disease burden.57 Adler et
al. have reported successful clinical treatment of human
Monkeypox with oral Brincidofovir in three cases – the dosing regimen
was 200 mg as a single dose in one case and two doses in the other two
cases. The major clinical complication associated with Brincidofovir use
was reportedly transaminitis.They also report clinical success treating a case of Monkeypox with oral
Tecovirimat, 600 mg twice daily for 2 weeks.58Vaccinia immune globulin (VIGIV) is another therapy that could be
utilized in monkeypox complication treatment. Antibodies are derived and
purified from individuals inoculated with smallpox vaccine and
administered intravenously to manage the serious side effects caused in
some individuals after being dosed with the smallpox vaccine. Although
no data are available on its effectiveness in treating severe monkeypox,
VIC and cidofovir may be used to control monkeypox outbreaks.59The spread of monkeypox, once a rare zoonotic disease, raises concerns in
an era when there may be lowered smallpox herd immunity owing to
cessation of immunization posteradication. Monkeypox can pose a threat
if transmission becomes widespread, combined with changes in
virulence.60 It continues to
be treated as a biosafety level 3 infectious agent.61
In this context, prevention becomes an important factor. Although prior
vaccinia immunization lowers disease burden in monkeypox, there is a
need for newer vaccines targeting monkeypox. Significantly, the modified
vaccinia Ankara – JYNNEOSTM has been approved by the FDA for
prevention of both smallpox and monkeypox.62
JYNNEOSTM can be administered subcutaneously and the
regimen consists of two doses given 28 days apart. Although its approval
has been based on survival studies in nonhuman primates, results on
effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety tests on human subjects are
awaited.63Monkeypox outbreak 2022 – current state of affairsMonkeypox is considered to be endemic within the countries of Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Nigeria, and
Republic of Congo. Among endemic countries, highest case counts were
reported out of DRC – a total of 1284 cases were captured
via Integrated Disease Surveillance and Response (IDSR)
between January 1 and May 8, 2022. Recently, cases have surfaced among
countries that are not considered endemic for monkeypox. As of this writing,
the WHO has reported a total of 61,282 confirmed cases of Monkeypox in 97
nonendemic countries, as of September 16, 2022.64 Most cases have been
reported to occur among males aged 20 to 50 years.65 The first case was
reported out of the United Kingdom on May 7, 2022, in a returning traveler
from Nigeria.66Per preliminary reports, the vast majority of cases were not associated with
travel while epidemiological investigations remain ongoing. Zumla et
al. underscore an important aspect of this outbreak – a
speculation as to whether silent transmission of Monkeypox may have preceded
the current cases. Although there has been much flutter around whether a
change in viral genetics could be a contributor to transmission beyond
endemic regions, the authors note that the Monkeypox virus
has a large genome thus conferring stability and efficiency at repairing
genetic mutations.67–70 Per
the CDC and European Centers for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), many
cases of the current Monkeypox outbreak were diagnosed among men who self
identify as gay, bisexual or men who have sex with men (MSM). There is
speculation that disease transmission may have occurred during sexual
intercourse and this is a stark feature of the current outbreak. The
likelihood of spread among MSMs with multiple sexual partners is considered
to be high thus highlighting the need for robust contact tracing
programs.71 Some cases were also reported among people residing
in the same household as the infected person.67 Fortunately, at the
time of this publication, no cases of severe disease or death amid the
current Monkeypox outbreak have been reported. A summary of monkeypox
transmission, disease progression and symptoms is depicted in Figure 3.Figure 3.A diagrammatic summary of the transmission, symptoms, and disease
progression in monkeypox.72Source: This graphic was created by the authors.Although the risk of spread to the general public has currently been deemed
low, the CDC has issued a level 2 travel health notice urging persons
traveling to countries where cases have been reported to practice enhanced
precautions which includes avoiding contact with ill individuals especially
those with dermatological or genital lesions and their belongings, avoiding
contact with dead or alive wild animals and avoiding eating or preparing
bushmeat.67 Outbreak containment strategies include clinical
education and re-education, early clinical recognition, speedy clinical and
laboratory assessment, contact tracing, along with practicing infection
control measures. For suspected and confirmed cases of Monkeypox, the CDC
recommends standard, contact, droplet, and airborne precautions with
patients placed in a negative pressure room if possible. The duration of
isolation precautions would vary depending upon the length of time required
for all lesions to crust and thereafter fully re-epithelize. Once newly
formed skin is noted, isolation precautions may be discontinued.73
Furthermore, disease containment would also require exposed healthcare
workers to be identified and offered protection by immunization. The
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) published
recommendations on the use of ACAM2000 and JYNNEOSTM for
preexposure prophylaxis among those at risk of occupational exposure and
this includes laboratory personnel handling Orthopoxviruses, designated
response team members at the discretion of public health authorities and
healthcare workers who care for patients with Orthopoxviral diseases and/or
administer ACAM2000, the live Vaccinia vaccination.
Boosters are recommended for those who have a continuing risk of
occupational exposure. The recommended booster frequency for those working
with more virulent Orthopoxvirus, that is, Variola
virus and Monkeypox virus is every 2 years if
using the JYNNEOSTM or every 3 years if using ACAM2000. Those
working with less virulent Orthopoxviruses such as Vaccinia
virus or Cowpox virus should seek boosters at
least every 10 years. Notably, ACAM2000 is contraindicated among
immunocompromised persons, patients with atopic dermatitis or another
exfoliative dermatological condition, persons with an allergy to a
vaccination component, pregnant or breastfeeding women and in those with
underlying cardiac conditions such as coronary artery disease or
cardiomyopathy.74Genus ParapoxvirusGenus Parapox comprises species Orf virus, Pseudocowpox
virus, Bovine papular stomatitis virus, Red deerpox virus, and
Gray sealpox virus. Parapoxviruses can result in zoonotic
skin infections among humans while the primary host is usually sheep, goat,
cattle, camels, reindeer, caribou, chamois, musk-ox, and red deer among
terrestrial animals; and seals or sea lions among animals with a predominantly
aquatic habitat. Human infections are most often an occupational hazard among
animal handlers including shepherds, farmers, slaughterhouse workers and
veterinarians but can also occur as a recreational health hazard among hunters
or after petting infected animals.75,76 Structurally,
parapoxviruses are oblong, ovoid, or round in shape with lengths between 220 and
300 nm and widths reported between 140 and 170 nm. Their genome has been
described to be one of the smallest among Poxviridae and is
about 140 kbp of linear dsDNA.76,77 They have also been
described to have a ‘ball-of-yarn’ appearance on electron microscopy.78 Their
replicative life cycle is similar to Orthopoxviruses and occurs within cellular
cytoplasm.Herein we discuss a clinically noteworthy Parapoxviral infectious disease; namely
Orf.OrfPathogenesis, Transmission, and Clinical ManifestationsOrf virus is a Parapoxvirus and can
result in a zoonosis called ‘Orf’, also known as contagious ecthyma or
contagious pustular dermatitis. Sheep and goats are natural hosts and
suffer lesions in their mouth, around the lips or muzzle. Human
transmission may occur via direct inoculation when
broken or ulcerated skin, the portal of entry, comes in contact with an
infected animal harboring the virus or via contaminated
equipment.79Human pursuits that may place one at risk include, rearing sheep and
goats (including bottle feeding and grooming), petting infected animals
and having contact with contaminated material such as an animal harness.
Animal bites and contact with recently vaccinated animals could also
result in Orf since the most widely used veterinary Orf
virus vaccines contain live, attenuated virus.80,81Human to human transmission is not known to occur. Clinical disease may
begin after an incubation period of 3 to 5 days as an erythematous
macule progressing to form papules which may have a target-like
appearance. The lesions further progress to form nodular or vesicular
lesions which often ulcerate around the 2- to 3-week mark, also known as
‘acute stage’. This is usually followed by the appearance of a
regenerative papilloma and lesion regression with self resolution, the
entire process taking about 4 to 6 weeks of time. Orf lesions heal
without any scarring. Stages of Orf were best described by Leavell
et al.82 and are
summarized in Table 2. Rarely, immunocompromised hosts may develop
substantial sized lesions, also called ‘giant orf’. Constitutional
symptoms such as malaise and lymphadenopathy are uncommon as is
disseminated disease. Veterinary Orf lesions are considered infectious
even after crust formation and a crust that falls off may have potential
to transmit the virus. The virus is believed to be resistant to heat and
drying and is reported to persist on environmental surfaces for extended
periods of time thereby contributing to potential downstream
transmission.82 Lesions are
considered noninfectious after the epithelium has completely healed and
regenerated itself.Table 2.Clinical stages of Orf, originally described by Leavell
et al.StageClinical featuresMaculopapular stageMacular/papular/maculopapaular skin lesionTarget stageBulls eye lesion with pericentral clearing and outer
erythematous ringAcute stageNodule (raised) with ulcerationRegenerative stageDry, crusted lesionPapillomatous stagePapillomas with finger like projectionsRegressive stageReduction in elevation and continued crust
formationDiagnosis and ManagementDiagnosis is largely clinical based on physical examination along with a
suggestive exposure history. Diagnostic technologies that may be
employed are polymerase chain reaction (PCR), negative stain
transmission microscopy, viral culture and Parapoxviral serologies; of
these, PCR and serology are the most widely used. Samples often need to
be sent to reference or public health laboratories requesting
Orf virus or Parapoxvirus
detection. Most lesions self heal over 4 to 6 weeks’ time and do not
need pharmacological therapies. Topical cidofovir has shown success when
used for Orf treatment in an immunocompromised host, a renal transplant
recipient. The regimen described by Geerinck et
al.83 encompassed 1%
cidofovir cream administered topically to the site of the lesion over
five cycles of 5 days of cream application followed by 5 days of no
treatment. Notably, there was recurrence two months after lesion
resolution which was successfully managed with two more courses of
topical cidofovir in this case.Erbağci et al. describe four cases of Orf treated
successfully with topical imiquimod including one case of giant Orf.
Imiquimod topical application two times a day resulted in clinical
success among the described cases with duration of therapy varying from
5 to 18 days (average time to resolution ~ 8 days).84
Randomized clinical trials for both pharmacological therapies for Orf,
namely topical cidofovir and imiquimod are lacking. Prior literature has
also described a case where surgical excision was performed for an Orf
lesion with clinical success.82The exact duration of immunity derived from Orf virus
infection among humans remains elusive, but there is literature to
support a rapid cell mediated immune response followed by an antibody
response after initial infection.85 Notably, Yirrell
et al. found that smallpox vaccination did not
confer protection against Orf.Genus YatapoxvirusesGenus Yatapoxvirus comprises two viral species, namely,
Tanapox virus and Yaba monkey tumor virus. Tanapox
virus and Yaba like disease virus are considered
different strains of species Tanapox virus (TPV).86
Yatapoxviruses akin to other poxviridae are
large, brick-shaped, enveloped dsDNA viruses and replicate in host cellular
cytoplasm, while their genomes are among the smallest. Monkeys and other
primates are believed to be natural hosts and may serve as a viral
reservoir.86 Yatapoxviral infections in humans are thought to be
zoonoses that could spread during periods of ecological imbalance such as floods
or via insect bites.Tanapox was originally described by Downie et al. in 1972. It
was noted among tribal people living in the Tana river valley in Kenya. The
observations dated back to 1957 and 1962 and were reported as a short febrile
illness along with other prodromal symptoms and a skin rash.87 Since
then, a few reports of Tanapox have emerged among returning travelers from the
republic of Congo and Tanzania.88,89 A case series also
describes numerous cases among residents of Zaire.90Yaba monkey tumor virus (YMTV) infections in humans proliferate
slowly, involving mesodermal cells, from histiocytomas to large subcutaneous
masses, comprised of polygonal mononuclear cells, considered benign tumors. The
lesions became apparent as nodules after 7 to 10 days, while becoming raised
tumors peaking in size after 3 to 6 weeks and regressing only after 2 to
3 months.86 Whereas, TPV produces rapidly resolving dermal lesions,
localized to the extremities, with little evidence of vesiculation.86 Lesions
begin as a papule and grow into raised, umbilicated vesicles that do not become
pustular, while histopathological examination shows pronounced dermal
hyperplasia and cytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions, typical of poxviral
infection.86 The TPV lesions appear at 3 to 4 days and peak at 1 to
2 weeks, while the lesions regress after 4 to 6 weeks. TPV infection usually
occurs as a single lesion and seldom more than 2, a characteristic quite
different from Monkeypox or other poxviral infections even though the nodules
appear similar.86,91 A widespread TPV illness observed in at least 50
individuals, across ages and sex, suggested the disease occurred during flooding
and subsequently increased mosquito activity. In addition, the lesions were
restricted to the exposed region of skin, confirming that mosquitoes may be the
transmitting vector.91 In subsequent studies, transmission of disease by viral
inoculation was observed only in monkeys, while the viral strain could only be
grown in human and monkey cell lines. These studies suggested that monkeys may
be the reservoir species,91 although the natural host
of Yatapoxviruses are still uncertain.86Importantly, YMTV and TPV, while similar morphologically to other members of
Poxviridae, are immunologically distinct. Vaccination or
infection from vaccinia or variola or monkeypox does not confer immunity against
infection from YMTV or TPV and is the same conversely too.86,91
Interestingly, YMTV and TPV cause different diseases but are immunologically
related and have a similar host range.86 Although natural YMTV
infections have not been observed, TPV generally causes self limiting
disease.91 The Yatapoxviruses, an interesting
genus, are not regarded as a major human health threat, and are a poorly
researched group of viruses that require further investigation including
prevention and therapeutic options. YMTV infection in humans can be controlled
by following stringent biological safety protocols when handling monkeys, while
TPV infection control is associated with mosquito control measures.91 Another
potentially valuable perspective to research Yatapoxviruses
comes from the understanding of their slow replication cycle and sustained
antigen expression. This can be helpful in developing recombinant vaccines or
vectors for cancer gene therapy.86,92Genus MolluscipoxvirusGenus Molluscipoxvirus comprises a single viral species namely
Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV). MCV is oval shaped and
contains linear dsDNA, approximately 190 kbp.93 MCV replicates in
cellular cytoplasm like its other poxviral counterparts. Human disease has been
vastly reported, although some veterinary literature has described Molluscum
contagiosum in horses.94,95Though broadly regarded as a pediatric ailment, Molluscum contagiosum may affect
adults. Those at risk include children between the ages of 1 to 10 years,
persons with atopic dermatitis, immunocompromised persons, people residing in
humid climates or crowded living circumstances. Transmission can occur by direct
contact or via fomites such as shared clothing, linen, towels,
or toys. Although a high frequency of swimming pool attendance was significantly
more frequent among patients with Molluscum contagiosum, a definite causal
association was not proven in the study by Castilla et
al.96 Per Choong et al.,97 only
swimming in a school pool was significantly associated with Molluscum
transmission along with sharing bath sponges and bath towels with an infected
person. Autoinoculation is a distinct possibility due to itching or picking at
skin lesions. Shaving may also result in the spread of lesions across the
body.Clinical disease tends to be mild and self limiting in otherwise healthy hosts
but can manifest as disseminated disease among immunocompromised persons.
Molluscum is a dermal disease and manifests as small, raised, pearly white, pink
or flesh-colored papules with central umbilication. These are the characteristic
lesions of the disease also known as ‘Mollusca’ and can vary in size from 2 to
5 mm. Lesions may appear on any part of the body including face, trunk and
extremities. Typically, lesions do not occur on palms and soles. Self resolution
timelines vary between patients but most cases resolve in 6 to 12 months without
scarring. For cases that require treatment, options include physical and
chemical treatments. Physical treatment modalities that may be employed include
cryotherapy, curettage and laser application. Chemical treatment could be oral
therapy with cimetidine and may sometimes be preferred in pediatric patients who
fear physical lesion excision. Although there are reports of clinical success
with this regimen, conflicting reports cite the inefficacy of oral cimetidine
for children with Molluscum who did not have atopic dermatitis.98–100Topical treatments include 0.7% cantharidin application and 0.5% podophyllotoxin
cream application twice daily for 3 days, which was reported to be more
efficacious than the 0.3% strength.101,102 Other topical options
include 5% Imiquimod cream, iodine and salicylic acid, potassium hydroxide and
tretinoin.103 Among those with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
and Molluscum contagiosum, antiretroviral therapy and the consequent improvement
of CD4 cell counts are highly encouraged in addition to physical remedies.
Clinical success with the use of intralesional interferon injection among
patients with HIV and Molluscum was reported by Nelson et
al.104 Interferon alpha intralesional injections were
reported to have clinical success among two pediatric patients with combined
immunodeficiency.105Application of poxviruses in emerging cancer therapiesPoxviruses possess strong virulence, harnessing the host-cell machinery to benefit
its replication and transmission forward. These properties can be tuned for human
benefit by utilizing them as oncolytic vectors. By definition, the FDA suggests an
engineered recombinant therapeutic agent is one that – ‘mediate their effects by
transcription and/or translation of transferred genetic material and/or by
integrating into the host genome and that are administered as nucleic acids,
viruses, or genetically engineered microorganisms’.106 The poxviruses with large
genomes have the capability to incorporate significant foreign DNA and deliver it to
the host cell.107 Zoonotic poxviruses like vaccinia have been studied
extensively to manage disease, and it has been noted that during the replication
phase (which happens completely in host cytoplasm) of the viral genome, it does not
get incorporated into host DNA and no splicing of viral transcripts
occurs.108 Hence the vaccinia and myxoma viruses, among others, have been
extensively studied to deliver therapeutic transgenes or manipulate the host cancer
cell, as vectors.Although initially these agents were envisioned and studied to selectively infect
cancer cells and destroy them by cytolytic activity, more recently their use has
pivoted toward remodeling host immune response toward cancer cells. They can also
successfully alter the tumor microenvironment, particularly to facilitate the
cytotoxic T-cell response over cancerous cells.109 Synergistically, these
poxviral vectors can also be complemented to transfer transgenes, prodrug
activators, cytokines and chemokines, apoptosis inducers, and so on.110–112 Furthermore, the addition
of luciferase, sodium iodide symporters113,114 have been beneficially
delivered through these vectors. By far, the Vaccinia virus has
been studied the most as an oncolytic vector candidate, and multiple candidates have
been advanced into phase I/II clinical trials.115 In the study by Cripe
et al., the viral vector has been engineered to insert the
human granulocyte-monocyte colony stimulating factor into the thymidine kinase (TK)
gene. A second study uses modification in the vector for insertion of
β-galactosidase into the viral TK gene, and the insertion of β-glucuronidase into
the viral hemagglutinin open reading frame (ORF).116 In addition the virotherapy
may complement and benefit immunotherapy, chemotherapy and radiotherapy.117–119 More recently, the
Myxoma virus, a Leporipoxvirus, has also
gained prominence as an alternative to vaccinia vector therapy, in preclinical
studies, of particular interest within aging populations where efficacy concerns
with the Vaccinia arise.120 Myxoma is antigenically
similar to vaccinia and has high tropism for European rabbits.121 In
preclinical models, it has shown significant promise, particularly in difficult to
treat cancers like pancreatic, medulloblastoma, and gliomas.119,122,123Due to the high complexity of tumorigenesis, cancer therapy must target oncogene
abnormalities, tumor suppressor gene abnormalities, immune evasion, tumor
microenvironment, and much more. Poxviruses have been long studied, have individual
species tropism, and have robust replication proficiency and progress with
nonincorporation into the host genome, making them promising oncolytic virotherapy
agents, with a strong potential to aid cancer therapy.124ConclusionsPoxviridae have been longstanding pathogens causing human disease.
They have substantial potential in shaping the course of modern medicine. The
current monkeypox outbreak in otherwise nonendemic regions illustrates human
vulnerability owing to loss of cross-protective immunity derived from smallpox
disease and vaccination in a posteradication era. Understanding poxviruses gives us
critical insights toward their molecular mechanisms, replication, epidemiology, and
ecology. This information can help us develop robust strategies to manage these
viral diseases, prevent future outbreaks, and utilize certain poxviruses in
oncolytic therapies, gene and vaccine delivery applications.


Title: Mpox Virus as a Global Public Health Emergency: A Scoping Review

1. IntroductionMonkeypox (Mpox) virus is a double-stranded DNA virus belonging to the genus Orthopoxvirus of the family Poxviridae and causes zoonotic infections. Mpox was declared a global public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC) by the World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva, in August 2024. The virus appears to have been primarily confined to the tropical rainforest regions of Central and Western Africa. Having remained largely unrecognized until 1760, the first description of the infection originated from monkeys of the Brazilian forest showing lesions akin to smallpox pustules followed by several reports during 1850–70. The virus was placed within the group of poxviruses in 1959 [1].The first confirmed global outbreak of Mpox was reported in Denmark in 1958 among Cynomolgus monkeys imported from Singapore followed by outbreaks documented in the Netherlands, the United States, the Philippines, Malaysia and certain other countries [2]. Nevertheless, as the infections were largely confined among primates, the absence of human infections during these outbreaks misled the transmissibility of the virus, and humans were considered nonsusceptible [1, 3]. The Mpox virus was antigenically related to other poxviruses including smallpox, cowpox, camelpox, buffalopox and rabbitpox viruses as reported in the 1960s, based on morphology, nature of inclusion bodies (Guarnieri Type B), clinical manifestations and serological reactions [4]. The pathogenesis largely resembled smallpox and cowpox except the cutaneous haemorrhagic lesions that are produced in rabbits. Subsequently, human Mpox virus infection was reported in six individuals between late 1970 and early 1971 across three different West African regions [5]. At least four of these were confirmed with culture, hemagglutination and neutralizing titres with the poxvirus group. This confirmed the susceptibility of humans to Mpox and that vaccination against smallpox gave protection against Mpox [6]. During the same time, at least five species of rodents were found to be susceptible to Mpox virus, of which rabbits and white mice were highly susceptible, as the Mpox-specific antibodies were detectable in these species for over a year [7].When the smallpox eradication programme ended in Africa, sporadic outbreaks of Mpox infection were documented from the tropical rainforest regions of Central and West Africa (Figure 1). The animal reservoir of these infections remains essentially undiscovered, and most of the patients with documented Mpox had been in close contact with unvaccinated individuals [8]. A specific large outbreak in different regions of Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo) during 1980–1985 among all age groups led to the revival of surveillance programs on zoonotic diseases [9] and presumed human-to-human transmission [10]. This outbreak also confirmed that Mpox infection occurred largely among unvaccinated contacts. The virus emergence and re-emergence in Zaire served as a model to study the disease pattern, incidence and attack rates, disease surveillance and establishment of laboratory diagnosis modalities such as ELISA for the detection of neutralizing antibodies [11].The genomic compositions for smallpox, cowpox and Mpox were first reported in 1990 and revealed considerable similarity in genomic regions that determine the host range [12]. The evolution of PCR assays helped in differentiating further as distinct sequences among the poxviruses [13, 14]. In 2000, Mpox was declared a potential biowarfare agent, and the Mpox infection was considered an emerging zoonotic disease with public health importance, and several antiviral drugs were reviewed for likely repurposing and patient management [15, 16]. The infection was considered endemic in the rodent population in parts of West Africa. In 2003, imported rodents, exotic pets and Prairie dogs (Cynomys sp.) that were used in hunting caused an outbreak in different regions of the United States (Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, Ohio and Wisconsin) [17–19]. The imported rodents included African rope squirrels (Funisciurus sp.), tree squirrels (Heliosciurus sp.), African giant pouched rats (Cricetomys sp.), brush-tailed porcupines (Atherurus sp.), dormice (Graphiurus sp.) and striped mice (Hybomys sp.). The smallpox vaccine helped prevent the spread of orthopox viruses and even outweighed the neurological complications the vaccine can give rise to as a side effect. Considering the surge in human-to-human transmission rates, especially among close contacts and healthcare workers, following the global lack of smallpox vaccination, the Mpox virus was placed on the red alert list, leading to a revival of antiviral therapies and vaccination programs [20, 21].The first immunological evidence of protection against the Mpox virus by the smallpox vaccine focussed only on cross-reactive neutralizing antibodies but not cell-mediated immune responses [22]. Later, the CD8+ T-cells were reported to complement the antibody-mediated viral killing necessary for developing resistance against the infection [23]. The Mpox virus was distinguished as two distinct clades: Clades I and II. The virus types that are identified in Central Africa, especially in the Democratic Republic of Congo, were categorized as Clade I, which primarily afflicted children and adolescents [24]. The virus types that caused an outbreak in 2003 in the United States were categorized as Clade IIa and those that caused the 2017–2019 Mpox outbreak in Nigeria and the 2022 global outbreak were labelled as Clade IIb. During this global outbreak, the Clade IIb Mpox caused ∼99,000 confirmed cases and approximately 170 deaths in more than 117 countries (https://www.cdc.gov).2. Epidemiology2.1. Prevalence Data-Global TrendsThe Mpox virus has become the most common and aggressive orthopoxvirus in the human population after the smallpox virus that was successfully eradicated in 1979. In the backdrop of waning immunity to the smallpox virus attributed to the global stop of vaccination, there is a universally acceptable consensus on the resurgence of related viruses.In 2022, sporadic cases of Mpox from different countries outside of Africa were reported including the United Kingdom, the United States, Singapore and Israel. Most of them had a travel history to endemic areas or contact with individuals diagnosed with Mpox. The Mpox virus strains were identified as variant Clade I, which is considered to have a low fatality rate (1%). Soon, countries including Portugal followed by Canada, Spain and other European countries such as Belgium, Sweden, Germany, France, Canary Islands, the Netherlands and Italy reported a surge in Mpox cases. The WHO declared by mid-2023 a ‘PHEIC' considering the large outbreaks in several countries. By the end of 2023, the outbreak amplified exponentially to as high as 58,000 laboratory-confirmed cases and 20 deaths that spread to Asian countries including Hong Kong, China, the Philippines and Taiwan.Currently, an alarming escalation in the global incidence of Mpox infections is being reported. Between 1 January 2022 and 31 July 2024, the total reported Mpox cases from 121 member states across all six WHO regions are 103,048 laboratory-confirmed cases and 229 deaths as per the WHO recent report (https://worldhealthorg.shinyapps.io/mpx_global/accessed on 12 September 2024). It is interesting to note that the majority of Mpox-infected (> 95%) and Mpox-related deaths (> 94%) documented were from regions that had no historical reports. The Mpox impact in the West and Central Africa corresponded to historical reports. This indicates that the reported sporadic cases during this outbreak are mostly linked to travel history and animals imported from the endemic regions. The most affected countries globally since January 2022 include the United States (n = 33,556), Brazil (n = 11,841), Spain (n = 8104), Democratic Republic of Congo (n = 4395), France (n = 4283), Colombia (n = 4256), Mexico (n = 4132), the United Kingdom (n = 4018), Peru (n = 3939) and Germany (n = 3886). All these countries account for 80% of the cases reported, globally as per the WHO. Among the confirmed cases, African Americans were highly affected (32.2%) followed by Hispanics or Latinos (31.03%), Whites (29.75%) and Asians (2.87%). The global trend also indicated that men aged 31 to 35 years are affected to a higher extent compared to other gender and age groups. The endemic Mpox infection peaks generally during the months of May and June and is the lowest from August to October (https://www.cdc.gov). In the USA, as of mid-January 2024, 32,063 cases and 58 deaths have been reported due to Mpox Clade II subtype. California reported the highest number of cases (6 160) followed by New York (n = 4528), Texas (n = 3163), Florida (n = 2992) and Georgia (n = 2075). A vast majority of the populations in these locations were either unvaccinated or had received only one dose of the smallpox vaccine. In the United States, the 2022 outbreak of Clade I Mpox viruses ended with ∼30,000 confirmed cases. The 2024 outbreak was caused by the Clade II virus, which is responsible for the ongoing worldwide outbreak since July 2024 (https://www.who.int).The first Mpox case in the WHO Southeast Asian region was reported from India in July 2022, and this was an individual who had a travel history to the Middle East. In a period of two to three months, at least 20 Mpox cases were reported thereafter from across different parts of Southeast Asia, predominantly from India followed by Thailand and Indonesia [25]. In July 2024, three major states of the Democratic Republic of Congo—Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda—reported confirmed cases with Clade I Mpox viruses. Although the viruses are endemic in these regions, the outbreak was more widespread across neighbouring countries and has led to stringent public health measures for prevention and response. Clade I is reported to be associated with a higher rate of severe disease as compared to Clade II [26]. The outbreaks that were reported from different countries from 1958 to 2023 are listed in Table 1, and the recent outbreaks in 2024 are shown in Figure 2.2.2. Zoonotic TransmissionPrimarily being a zoonotic disease, the natural animal reservoirs of the Mpox virus largely remain enigmatic. The initial detection of Mpox in diseased monkeys was followed by rope and sun squirrels (Funisciurus anerythrus) and other wild rodents. The infected animal likely shows symptoms such as fever, rashes, lethargy, loss of appetite, coughing, bloating, nasal/eye secretions and skin blisters (https://www.cdc.gov). Although many mammals could be susceptible to Mpox, there are very limited data available on the complete viral host range. The susceptibility among the species or varieties or strains that can affect each animal species largely remains ambiguous [27]. A retrospective observational study on animal reservoirs indicated four animal species including the African striped squirrel (Funisciurus sp.), African dormouse (G. crassicaudatus, G. lorraineus) and Gambian pouched rat (C. gambianus) acting as major animal reservoirs for Mpox [9].Humans acquire Mpox infection from animals through direct contact with the body fluids, ingestion of infected or contaminated meat, animal bites and scratches. The virus is transmitted from infected humans through direct skin or lesion contact, respiratory droplets or large water droplets during prolonged face-to-face and sexual contact [28]. Furthermore, transmission can also occur via fomites contaminated with infectious material derived from infected lesions. Vertical transmission from the infected mother is not clear, but adverse foetal outcome was reported in an infected mother [29]. A recent meta-analysis indicated a high prevalence of Mpox DNA in seminal fluids (72.4%), indicating the potential role of sexual transmission. The rate of PCR positivity was higher in skin samples (89%) followed by anogenital/rectal samples, but lower in nasopharyngeal, urine and blood/plasma samples [30]. During the 2022 outbreak, 91% of the infected individuals tested positive for Mpox virus in their seminal fluids. However, horizontal transmission through genital secretions during sexual activity remains unclear despite the evidence of infections acquired following sexual contact. There is also considerable evidence that Mpox infection inflicts a considerable degree of tissue damage in the rectal compartment, leading to severe proctitis [31–33].The use of experimental animal models represents a key strategy for studying the transmission dynamics and pathophysiology of Mpox virus infection in animals. Despite the serological and molecular evidence of virus infection in certain animals is it important to use correct models [26]. The prairie dog model resulted in similar pathological changes characterized by skin lesions and lymphoid tissue necrosis as seen in humans. Viral shedding was higher in the nasal secretions of the infected animals followed by spleen and cutaneous lesions. The lymphatic spread followed by hematogenous spread occurred resulting in secondary viremia [34]. The squirrel model showed similar results in the viral shedding being the highest in the oral secretions but did not reveal the involvement of the liver or spleen [35]. The Gambian pouched rat model indicated the highest viral shedding in oral secretions and indicated clinical signs of the disease [36].2.3. Travel-Associated Mpox OutbreaksThe Democratic Republic of Congo recorded a high outbreak in 2023 with Clade I Mpox followed by the other outbreak in April 2024 with the same clade. International travel and social gatherings play an important role in Mpox transmission and so the neighbouring countries of the Democratic Republic of Congo are at a high risk of Mpox infection outbreaks. Hitherto, the countries bordering the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo including Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda have reported several cases of outbreaks due to Clade I Mpox suggesting transmission to neighbouring countries [37].Mpox vaccination has been recommended for people at risk, which includes the unvaccinated population, pregnant women, neonates, individuals with other skin infections and immunocompromised individuals. Owing to the travel restrictions including commercial vehicles from and to the Democratic Republic of Congo, the risk of spread is limited (https://www.cdc.gov). Nevertheless, infection prevention and control as per the Centre for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines are provided to reduce the risk of transmission and management of travel-associated Mpox. Travel to an afflicted country along with the onset of illness within 21 days of travel is considered an important epidemiologic criterion for probable disease confirmation (https://www.cdc.gov).Vaccination recommendations, enhanced surveillance and public health measures play a key role in the mitigation of emerging Mpox. Travel to the countries that reported Mpox cases requires vaccination with a commercial JYNNEOS or ACAM2000 vaccine completed, with two doses at least 28 days apart. The second dose can be administered sooner if the individual is at risk [38]. However, the spread of Mpox cases with no evident travel links to any endemic areas, contact tracing and measures of infection severity are key epidemiological metrics, and even if challenging, it is essential to establish the public health policy [39].2.4. Genomic VariantsThe viral genome is a double-stranded DNA of about 196,858 base pairs in length coding for > 200 genes. The central part of the genome of about 101 kb is flanked by variable regions and inverted terminal repeats. The central region possesses conserved sequences coding for essential functions including transcription, replication, structural proteins and enzymes [34]. The virus shows antigenic similarities with other orthopox viruses, which provide cross-protection. Microevolution is believed to have emerged as a cause of hypermutations induced by apolipoprotein B mRNA–editing catalytic polypeptide-like 3 (APOBEC3), the enzyme that mediates cytidine deamination to uracil and also plays a vital role in antiviral immunity. The mutations in the specific viral DNA motifs could have implications for the evolutionary potential of Mpox during the outbreak [40, 41].The difference in the virulence and transmission between the two Mpox clades are studied as it is vital for developing appropriate therapeutic strategies. The Clade I Mpox closely aligned with smallpox virus infections. Clade I was reported as the causative agent of a more severe form of the disease, mostly affecting the smallpox-unvaccinated group. Clades I and IIa were mostly endemic, but the Clade IIb infections occurred across the countries including the nonendemic regions with varied clinical presentation [42]. Clade II is connected to the transmission among sexual contacts especially among high-risk individuals such as men who have sex with men and people living with HIV. Clade II Mpox viruses also have a high human-to-human transmission without any apparent zoonotic link. Clade I Mpox cases were primarily among children and young men and had a high zoonotic transmission link [43].The genetic characteristics of Clade IIb that separate it from Clade I and Clade IIa should be considered for further investigation on unique Mpox transmission potential. Mpox Clade I showed increased virulence with 2-logs higher lethal dose (LD50) than Clade II in animal models [44]. Significant differences in virulence were also observed among the Mpox clades with different routes of infection [24, 45]. The gene variations between Clades I and II that contribute to the severity of the transmission potential of the virus are not clearly understood, but it is believed that variable genes such as OPG195, B14R and OPG032 determine functions including host range, virulence and immunomodulation. Furthermore, the identical but inverted repeats of 6.4 kb sequences flanking at each end of the Mpox genome play a major role in immune evasion and host range. Insertion and expansion of inverted DNA repeats in the Mpox virus were reported to be a major factor in an outbreak in Germany [46].Case-fatality ratio (CFR) associated with Clade I is about 10%, while Clade II has a CFR of around 1%. Compared to Clade I, the genes D14L, D15L, D16L and D17L are lost and the genes D4L, B14L and B15L are curtailed in Clade II. In addition, genes N3R, N2R, N1R and R1R that are present in Clade IIa are absent in Clades I and IIb. The role of these genetic changes in the pathogenesis mechanism is so far unknown [47].3. Immunopathogenesis3.1. PathophysiologyThe virus enters the host through various routes such as the mucosa overlying the oropharynx, nasopharynx, ocular, rectal and genitourinary tracts, and the skin. Although the virus primarily affects the lymphoid tissue, it has a broad cell tropism and therefore can afflict multiple organs [48]. The specific host cell receptors that mediate virus entry are not clearly defined, but virulence factors such as the Mpox inhibitor of complement enzymes (MOPICEs), a 24-kDa secretory protein and its homologue, complement control protein are reported to modulate the host range and tissue tropism [47, 49]. MOPICE is expressed by the highly virulent strains of Clade I, while Clade II lacks this protein. This protein is also found to modulate adaptive immune responses in the host [50].Similar proteins that appear in variola and vaccinia viruses are called smallpox inhibitors of complement enzymes (SPICEs) and vaccinia complement control protein (VCP), respectively. These proteins regulate the human complement system, and their dimeric forms act as major virulence factors. These proteins show significant differences in their efficiency among the poxviruses [45]. This could be a major factor determining the host range, infectivity and transmission potential of different poxviruses. These complement regulators and other virulence factors such as IL-1 binding protein, B10R, B14R, B19R, D10L and D14L could play a vital role in the pathogenesis and tissue tropism [51, 52]. Further studies on the differences in the structural and functional motifs of these proteins could help with our understanding of the broad tissue and host tropisms of Mpox viruses. The virus possibly uses multiple ligands to interact with the cell surface receptors, which may also explain the broad animal and human host cell tropism and the challenges in the identification of specific receptors used by the virus to infect. Multiple receptors including heparan sulphate, glycosaminoglycans and chondroitin have been reported to mediate virus entry [53]. The viral genome expresses 25 membrane proteins that are species-specific and contribute to the pathogenesis based on their presence or modifications in these proteins [54]. The membrane proteins vary in composition within the two distinct infectious poxvirus particles viz. extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs) and intracellular enveloped virions (IEVs) [34].After gaining cellular entry, early, intermediate and late viral mRNA synthesis occurs followed by protein synthesis. The infectious virions are assembled and become an IEV as it is encased within a bilayer membrane generated from the Golgi complex including Golgi-associated retrograde protein and conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex [50]. These also play a vital role in virus–host interaction and are part of the formation of EEVs for a successful egress process.3.2. Immune Response and Host InteractionsThe virus entry into a susceptible host cell is mediated by COG complex proteins. These proteins assist viral fusion and mediate the virus entry and early gene expression [53]. The viral-induced host immune response may play a significant role in the disease pathogenesis. The disseminated Mpox infection activates a strong immune response involving multiple organs including lymphoid organs [34]. The viruses also possess unique immune evasion strategies, leading to an increase in prevalence rates among vulnerable animal and human populations, and one of these strategies is the viral evasion of TLR3 signalling and through the downregulation of cytokines and chemokines such as TNF-α, IL-1α and CCL5 [55].The innate immune responses act as the first line of defence and include cells such as monocytes and natural killer (NK) cells and innate factors such as Type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines. Adaptive immunity plays a substantial role in virus clearance and long-term protection. The efficacy of the NK cells is hampered by downregulating the chemokine receptors such as CCR2, CCR5, CCR7, CXCR3 and CX3CR1 required for NK cell migration [56, 57]. The most notable innate mechanism activated is the cGAS-STING/MITA pathway. The pathway mediates immune responses against many DNA viruses, bacteria, parasites, autoimmune diseases and cancers. This pathway has emerged as a crucial element of innate antiviral immunity. The viral F17 protein interferes with the cGAS-STING/MITA signalling pathway and sequesters the regulators of mammalian targets of rapamycin complexes mTORC1 and mTORC2 [58] and through other nuclease enzymes termed as ‘poxins' that cleave 2′3′-cGAMP to control cGAS-STING/MITA signalling [53]. Many other viral genes including vaccinia virus protein 018 and E3 protein inhibit IFN-signalling pathways, and F14 protein disrupts NF-κB activation [59]. Regarding viral effects on the activation of the adaptive response, the M2 protein and A35 protein disrupt antigen presentation, T-cell priming, and chemokine synthesis and function together in modulating the host immune responses (Figure 3) [50].4. Clinical Manifestations4.1. Pathological FeaturesFollowing an incubation period of 9.5 days, the virus replicates in the local inoculation site and spreads to local lymph nodes. The symptom onset resembles smallpox infection with early symptoms of painful lesions with fever and other prodromal syndromes that last for 1–4 days including chills and lymphadenopathy. Moreover, the symptom of myalgia occurs either before or after the appearance of lesions [28]. Lymphadenopathy is considered an important clinical manifestation and the pathognomonic sign of Mpox that could help distinguish it from other orthopoxvirus infections and other skin diseases [60]. Rashes appear within 3 days of fever, and the common skin sites include the face, chest, arms, legs, genitals, anorectals, palms, soles, mouth and eyes. The rash is predominantly monomorphic in a centrifugal distribution and develops into vesicular and pustular lesions that last for 5–7 days; thereafter, they become crusts and peel off within a 15–22-day period [61]. Based on the skin lesions, the severity score can be classified as mild (< 25 lesions), moderate (25–99 lesions), severe (100–250 lesions) and very severe (> 250 lesions) (https://www.who.int). Hospitalization is not required in most cases, the treatment largely includes attentive monitoring, antiviral therapy and management of secondary infections and associated complications (https://www.cdc.gov).4.2. Other ManifestationsMpox is foremost a self-limiting disease but can give extended clinical manifestations involving multisystems, which are associated with fatal outcomes, especially among the high-risk groups [62]. Immunocompromised individuals, individuals with pre-existing skin eczema, and children and HIV infection are considered risk groups for developing life-threatening Mpox. Mpox can, apart from giving vesiculopustular lesions on the skin and oral mucosa, cause oral, ocular and neurological manifestations, acute renal injury, fulminant myocarditis leading to pericardial effusion, and pericarditis and lymphadenitis in the cervical, submandibular and inguinal regions [63–66].Oral manifestations primarily are based on sexual behaviour and mainly present sore throat, ulcers, vesicles and dysphagia. Signs and symptoms in the pharynx or oropharynx, especially the tonsils, tongue and perioral site, are predominantly reported followed by lips and palate. The key clinical features resemble other viral and bacterial infections such as Herpes viruses, Coxsackie viruses and Streptococcus pneumoniae, presenting oral lesions with sore throat and should be considered for differential diagnosis [67]. It is noteworthy that the appearance of oral lesions following sexual contact should be considered highly suspicious as they were increasingly observed among individuals who had oral sex with Mpox-infected individuals [67].Anogenital lesions and skin rashes with lymphadenopathy were predominantly seen among the infected during the 2022 outbreak. Other sexually transmitted infections such as syphilis and gonorrhoea should be considered for differential diagnosis as these pathogens cause pharyngeal infections as well as maculopapular lesions in the genitals along with fever and lymphadenopathy [68].The neurological symptoms range from mild headache and myalgia to encephalitis. More severe cases presented decreased general responsiveness, rigidity and bilateral Babinski signs, which are common neurological presentations associated with many neurodegenerative diseases and pathogens infecting the central nervous system [69]. Apart from these, Mpox-associated ocular infections can lead to keratitis and conjunctivitis, and this can lead to decreased vision [69].4.3. Secondary Bacterial InfectionsSeveral bacterial pathogens mimic Mpox infection due to their clinical manifestations and could result in underreporting or misdiagnosis, which could further increase morbidity and mortality or predispose to outbreaks. Secondary bacterial infections occur with Mpox with a prevalence of 30%–75% and are further complicated by increasing the severity of Mpox infection [70]. Notably, pharyngeal coinfections with Group A streptococci have been frequently reported during the 2022 outbreak. The infected patients exhibited posterior oropharyngeal erythema, uvula oedema and vesicular lesion on the epiglottis. These patients respond to antibiotics but require lengthy hospitalization with serious complications. It is therefore important for clinicians to monitor for oropharyngeal manifestations especially when corticosteroids are administered [71, 72]. Moreover, Streptococcus infection in HIV-infected has been reported with multimucosal involvement and systemic infection, indicating its importance among patients with comorbidities. Patients with secondary bacterial sepsis during Mpox infection succumb to polymicrobial infection, septic shock with multiorgan involvement, and death [72].The secondary bacterial infections could be mild and localized but can become complicated if early identification and clinical management are not done with appropriate antibiotics. Mpox-associated genital lesions are commonly seen in patients infected with sexually transmitted infections. These infections lead to further complications such as rectitis and proctitis in men and infertility in women. MSM usually presents lesions in the anogenital areas and frequently reports coinfections with Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis [73] and Treponema pallidum [74]. Coinfection with such sexually transmitted pathogens results in delayed clearance of Mpox, leading to prolonged viral shedding and decelerating therapeutic drug response [70].4.4. At-Risk PopulationsPeople living in the endemic regions of Africa, or neighbouring areas, and individuals having close contact with the affected communities have a high risk of acquiring the disease. Close physical contact including sexual and nonsexual interactions is of serious concern, especially in the adult population [75].The lack of or incomplete smallpox vaccination is a major factor associated with Mpox [76, 77]. Prior immunization for smallpox is reported to protect from Mpox with up to 80.7% efficacy and decreases the risk 5.2-fold [78]. According to the European CDC, the overall risk of the disease is low; however, among high-risk groups such as those underlying immunocompromised conditions due to HIV infection, pregnant women and newborns are reported with moderate or high risk (https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/). The other risk factors include handling, hunting and consuming rodents, contact with wildlife, shared drinking, sleeping and eating and coinfection with large skin lesions, patients lacking sufficient data and patients with chronic skin conditions such as atopic dermatitis and acute skin conditions such as burns [79].5. Transmission Dynamics5.1. Simulation Model and Parameter EstimationEstimation of transmission potential from the high-risk group, men having sex with men (MSM) to non-MSM was analysed using a multigroup dynamic model. The possibility of contact Mpox infection from an individual with a high-risk sexual behaviour was less than 10−5, the cumulative incidence rate was about 6 × 10−8, the required vaccine coverage was 80%, and the simulated R0 was 2.13 [80].A recent study analysed transmission dynamics through mathematical modelling among different high-risk sexual behaviour groups including MSM, gay and bisexual individuals. The study indicated an incubation period of 6.9 days and R0 ranging from 1.41 to 2.17. The study also showed MSM to be the group with the highest risk and emphasized the efficacy of vaccination in reducing the rate of infection [81]. Sexual transmission is reported to be the major route of spread compared to nonsexual contact transmission such as through respiratory particles and contaminated surfaces. During the 2022 outbreak, among different modes of transmission, male-to-male sexual contact had been the most significant mode that appears to have increased the risk of disease acquisition. This could be possibly due to certain sociobehavioural correlates in the population. Another study identified the superspreader gatherings and sexual networks particularly among MSMs as a major risk factors for the spread of Mpox. The time-discrete susceptible-exposed-infectious-recovered (SEIR) model estimated R0 of 2.25 to 2.7 when different factors including travel history, exposure settings and transmission routes were analysed [82]. A systematic review of mathematical models on Mpox transmission indicates several parameters including human-to-human contact/transmission rate, progression rate, recovery rate and death rate. The study reported an R0 of 0.3 and an effective reproduction number Re of 0.08 [83].Mpox cases are considerably higher among MSMs due to their specific sexual patterns. This includes having sexual contact with multiple partners, engaging in interconnected sexual networks and sexual events such as Chemsex parties and social stigma associated with MSM significantly [75]. These markedly increase the risk of Mpox disease transmission. Massive super spreading events are linked to crowding within confined spaces, repeated or new sexual contact and coinfections such as HIV. Another study showed the potential increase in Mpox spread in the population associated with HIV endemicity. Mpox spread has been reported to increase in the presence of HIV and is therefore applicable to MSM population [84]. Among MSMs, the presence of primary lesions in the external genitalia and anus and subsequent contact with the lesions during the sexual practices further facilitate the disease transmission within the MSM population [85].A Bayesian susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model was used to estimate the transmission dynamics, which showed an R0 of 0.817 to 2.251 with an infectious period of 8.5 days. The ratio of R0 and effective reproductive number (Re) ranged from 1 to 1.46 and indicated the required vaccine coverage of 37% [86]. The Re value indicates the average number of secondary cases per infectious case in both susceptible and protected populations, while R0 indicates the number of persons infected by infectious persons in the susceptible population. The values of both R0 and Re help in predicting a pandemic outbreak using contact-tracing data and mathematical models [87].Hence, these different mathematical models indicate varied R0 and Re values that make prediction more unreliable and clearly demonstrate that it is important to include several epidemiological factors to calculate an accurate prediction of transmission dynamics.6. Outbreak ManagementMpox represents a significant public health concern and warrants a robust public health initiative on emergency response management targeting enhanced preparedness, rapid diagnosis, strengthened epidemiological surveys, effective interventions and vaccination. The Korean Disease Control and Prevention Agency had recommended pre-exposure prophylaxis for high-risk groups [88].The standard care during the Mpox outbreak situation could begin with individual testing and assessment to determine the risk group/s and the requirement of hospitalization, if not home isolation will be adequate. These cases shall undergo testing by PCR. Patients presenting severe illness or posing a risk to others should be immediately notified to public health for appropriate infection control. The PCR-negative patients shall be advised to undergo rest and isolation if the symptoms are evident and look for other differential diagnoses [89].The WHO guidelines on the management of Mpox patients among high-risk groups recommend management with optimized supportive care interventions (https://www.who.int). Recommendations on the prevention and control measures are provided by the CDC for patients in a healthcare setting. This includes additional precautions to prevent transmission with appropriate infection control practices in place, patients placed in individual rooms, use of personal protective equipment (PPE) and waste management (https://www.cdc.gov).Environmental infection control in healthcare facilities including soiled linens, clothing and bedding are handled following the specific guidelines of the CDC (Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in Health-care Facilities) with special care as they are implicated in disease transmission (https://www.cdc.gov). Among the healthcare workers, infection prevention measures should be implemented including hand hygiene, training on standard procedures on the use of PPE and provision of special care for pregnant and immunosuppressed individuals. Alongside standard infection control practices, patient isolation or self-isolation, use of PPE, personal hygiene, waste management and other environmental infection control protocols are advocated. The use of EPA-registered hospital-grade disinfectant with potential antiviral property, appropriate handling of soiled linens/surfaces and avoidance of activities such as sharing clothing, dry-dusting and sweeping have been recommended in the guidelines. Postexposure assessment of risk including 21-day monitoring period shall be followed in accordance with the recommended guidelines.The current outbreak indicates a deficiency in sufficient and quick response to infections with the potential to cause outbreaks. The clinical outcomes for individuals in high-risk groups are of serious concern. Asian and Oceania countries with extremely concentrated and connected sexual contact networks are more vulnerable to transmission and require urgent management strategies to prevent outbreaks among them. Necessary screening and evaluation for sexually transmitted infections including HIV testing along with health education and improved accessibility should be a priority for substantial improvement in prevention and treatment.7. Diagnosis and Treatment7.1. Diagnostic AssaysImmediate testing for Mpox should be conducted on any suspected case. The result should be interpreted after careful consideration of associated clinical and epidemiological factors for assessing the likelihood of infection. Due to the atypical presentation of skin rashes, a diagnosis could be challenging, and hence, it is important to consider potential causes of skin rashes and differential diagnosis.The appropriate clinical specimen for diagnostic confirmation includes skin lesion material such as swabs of lesion exudate, roofs of multiple lesions or lesion crust from the suspected cases. The collected swabs should be placed in a viral transport medium, and preferably, samples from lesions, crusts and vesicular fluids should be collected in separate tubes. Depending on the clinical presentation and availability of sufficient viral genomic material from the lesion, additional specimens including urine, semen, genital and rectal swabs and blood samples could be considered especially during acute viremia. It is recommended to collect the sample preferably during the prodromal phase and lesions during the macular stage by trained personnel. In the case of neurological involvement, PCR on CSF specimens should be considered [69].PCR is the recommended confirmatory test for either generic identification of orthopox viruses or specific Mpox viruses. Viral culture is not recommended for a routine diagnostic procedure. Additional sequencing techniques might provide additional information on virus clade useful for epidemiological purposes [90].7.2. Antiviral DrugsThere is no approved treatment for Mpox infections available, but tecovirimat or Tpoxx, a potent antiviral drug approved by the FDA for the treatment of smallpox was used successfully during the 2022 outbreak [91]. The efficacy of tecovirimat has been shown specifically beneficial, especially among high-risk groups, but this drug is not recommended for a mild infection. A reduction in the duration of Mpox lesions in children and adults was not achieved by the drug for Mpox infections caused by Clade I viruses; nevertheless, it significantly reduced the mortality rate from 3.6% to 1.7% [92]. The drug did not show any adverse effects, was tolerated well, and improved the clinical outcome at different scales of clinical severity [93]. To note, tecovirimat is still at the experimental stage being tested for its safety and efficacy for Mpox. The study of tecovirimat for Mpox (STOMP) is ongoing, and the result from this clinical trial is expected to be available soon. Additional strategies such as a combination of tecovirimat with other antiviral or antibiotics should be considered to treat specific or clinical manifestations such as systemic infections, and ocular and oral infections.Brincidofovir, a prodrug of cidofovir is being used to treat severe cases of smallpox disease and has shown to be effective against Mpox viruses as well. The drug is recommended for adults and neonates who do not respond well to tecovirimat, are severely immunodeficient, or report severe disease or a high risk of progression to severe disease (https://www.cdc.gov).Vaccinia immune globulin intravenous (VIGIV) is a licenced treatment for vaccinia-vaccine-induced complications. This therapy can be considered as prophylaxis for severely immunocompromised individuals or can be used in addition to tecovirimat or brincidofovir treatment of Mpox.7.3. Vaccine ResearchAdvocacy for vaccination against the orthopox viruses dates back to 1798 when Edward Jenner demonstrated immunogenicity and cross-protection by cowpox virus (vaccinia) against smallpox virus. Dryvax was the first-generation smallpox vaccine, which was used globally and withdrawn in 2008. The ACAM2000, a second-generation live vaccine, is in use for certain at-risk populations. The JYNNEOS vaccine based on the modified vaccinia Ankara-Bavarian Nordic (MVA-BN) is a live attenuated, third-generation, smallpox vaccine developed by Bavarian Nordic, Denmark. A single dose of MVA-BN is recommended for adults and is shown to be highly effective among high-risk sexual contact populations. Apart from adults, the vaccine is highly effective in inducing humoral and cell-mediated immune responses in children as well [94]. A systematic review and meta-analysis on the efficacy and safety of MVA-BN indicate 75% efficacy with a single dose and up to 80% efficacy with a two-dose vaccine [95]. A single vaccination also showed high efficacy in protection as pre-exposure prophylaxis in HIV of a high-risk Spanish cohort population [96]. The JYNNEOS is administered subcutaneously in a two-dose series (0.5 mL per dose) 1 month apart or as a two-dose series as intradermal routes of administration (CDC, Atlanta, USA).8. ConclusionsDuring the global health emergency, it is of utmost importance to focus on pandemic preparedness, efficient management of epidemics and strengthening international ties for combined efforts in diagnosis, treatment and prevention.To implement the appropriate and effective countermeasures against emerging viruses, there is a need to enhance the laboratory testing facilities with wider testing platforms towards early detection. Considering the growing number of afflicted populations, joint international action for coordinated measures through evidence-based national and international policy guidelines. Several challenges remain in implementing public health policies, especially in resource-limited settings and regions with socioethnic issues. Reinforced surveillance measures, multisector partnerships, prophylactic measures, capacity strengthening, tackling social stigma, guaranteeing fair access to vaccines and healthcare services are a few strategies that can help overcome these obstacles. Isolation, active monitoring of high-risk individuals and effective vaccination strategies are the key public health measures to be implemented. Future research focussing on the long-term clinical impact of Mpox, outbreak preparedness, enhanced diagnostics and effective vaccines is imperative. The use of the two vaccines recommended by the WHO Advisory Group of Experts on immunization and national regulatory bodies shall be accelerated for all countries, especially for lower-income countries. A such harmonized battle along with public health professionals, similar to the handling of COVID-19 pandemic, could help mitigate Mpox infection successfully.


Title: Camelpox Virus in Western Kazakhstan: Assessment of the Role of Local Fauna as Reservoirs of Infection

1. IntroductionCamel breeding is one of the traditional branches of agriculture in the Republic of Kazakhstan and is widespread in many other countries, particularly in regions with hot and dry climates. The Republic of Kazakhstan encompasses various natural areas, including dry steppe and semi-desert areas, which can be developed through camel breeding. Such regions include the Mangystau, Atyrau, Aktobe, Kyzylorda, Zhambyl, Almaty and East Kazakhstan regions. In recent years, the increase in the number of farms engaged in camel breeding indicates Kazakhstan’s ambition to take a leading position in the international arena.Bacterial and viral infectious diseases are the primary constraints on livestock growth and farm development [1]. One of these most common diseases is camelpox [2].The camelpox virus (CMLV) belongs to the genus Orthopoxvirus, which is part of the extensive family Poxviridae. Phylogenetic analysis of Camelpoxvirus shows that it is closely related to the Variola virus (VARV), the causative agent of human smallpox, which has been eradicated worldwide [3]. Although camelpox is a zoonotic disease that can negatively impact agriculture, its significance for public health is currently low, as the disease is rare in humans and typically causes only mild symptoms [4].In Kazakhstan and neighboring countries such as Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Mongolia, double-humped camels (Camelus bactrianus) are a possible major source of camelpox virus. Camels living in these regions often interact closely with each other, which can contribute to the spread of the virus [5]. Transmission of camelpox occurs through direct contact with infected animals, either via skin abrasions or aerosols. Materials such as scabs, saliva and secretions from affected camels can release the virus into the environment, including water sources, which then become infection reservoirs. Various studies have shown that the incidence of camelpox outbreaks increases during rainy seasons, often leading to more severe cases. This may be attributed to enhanced virus stability in moist conditions, facilitating further transmission to susceptible animals. Additionally, the presence of arthropods during these seasons, which may act as mechanical vectors for the virus, could play a role, such as ticks and mosquitoes. Among tick species, Hyalomma dromedarii has been identified as the predominant species affecting camels, accounting for ~90% of the total. Wernery et al. [6] supported this idea through their isolation of CMLV from Hyalomma dromedarii ticks [7,8,9].In Kazakhstan, outbreaks of camelpox are recorded with a certain frequency, especially in the southern and western regions, where there is a high density of camel populations. A similar situation is observed in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, where camels also play an important role in agriculture [10]. Mongolia, with its significant number of camels, also faces periodic outbreaks of the disease, especially in areas with unfavorable climatic conditions that can contribute to the spread of infection [11].Similar outbreaks were systematically observed on the territory of the country in the Mangystau and Atyrau regions in 1930, 1942–1943, 1965–1967, 1968–1969, 1996 and 2020 [12]. During the outbreak in 1996, the epidemic spread widely in three districts of the Mangystau region; 830 cases and 43 deaths out of 8 thousand camels were registered. Subsequently, the viral strain that caused the epidemic situation was isolated, sequenced and deposited in the GenBank database (No. AF438165.1) [13]. The last outbreak of camelpox in the Mangystau region in 2019–2020 was confirmed in 70 camels in the Karakiya and Beineu districts. In addition, an outbreak of camelpox was recorded in the Mangystau and Munaily districts. The evaluation of statistical data on the incidence of camelpox in these regions of the Republic of Kazakhstan allowed us to determine the cycle of occurrence of epizootics, which is about 10–20 years [2,14].This research analyzes possible reservoirs of camelpox virus in the western part of Kazakhstan, as well as studies on the likelihood of the disease. In addition, information on the epidemiology and methods of transmission of camelpox to possible reservoirs was also included.2. Materials and Methods2.1. SamplingIn 2023, spring and autumn expeditions were conducted to collect biological samples from economic entities of the Mangystau region: Beineu, Karakiya, Mangystau, Munaily and Tupkaragan. In 2024, similar work was carried out in the Atyrau region in the following districts: Zhylyoi, Inder, Isatay, Kyzylkoga, Kurmangazy, Makat and Makhambetbet. The expedition areas are indicated on the map shown in Figure 1.To conduct experiments, the necessary materials from animals were obtained with the permission of the Veterinary Control and Supervision Committee of the Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Kazakhstan.During the field expeditions, biological samples were collected: blood and serum from camels and rodents, as well as ticks and blood-sucking insects. The process of collecting biological samples is illustrated in Figure 2.Camels: The Mangystau and Atyrau regions of Kazakhstan are home to various species of camels, such as the double-humped camel (Camelus bactrianus) and the single-humped camel (Camelus dromedarius) [15], which play a significant role in the lives of local residents.Blood sampling from camels was performed using a 21 G × 1.5-inch needle inserted into the jugular vein in the upper third, with samples collected in vacuum tubes containing EDTA K2, each with a volume of 5 mL. For serum samples, special vacuum tubes with a coagulation activator and gel were used.Ticks: Ticks play an important role in ecosystems and can be carriers of various diseases. Table 1 shows the species of ticks that are adapted to the local climatic conditions of the Mangystau and Atyrau regions [16,17].In the Atyrau and Mangystau regions of Kazakhstan, species of ticks from the genus Hyalomma, which parasitize camels, are found. These regions have suitable climatic conditions that facilitate the spread of these ticks. The tick activity season in the Atyrau and Mangystau regions begins in spring (April–May) and continues through to autumn (September–October). During the summer months, tick activity may decrease, but they remain a threat to animals throughout the period [18].The lifespan of Hyalomma ticks that parasitize camels can vary depending on environmental conditions and the tick’s developmental stage. Table 2 provides the approximate lifespan of these ticks. It is important to note that ticks go through several developmental stages: egg, larva, nymph and adult tick. Each stage has its own lifespan characteristics.Temperature and humidity strongly affect the lifespan of these ticks. In hot and dry conditions, life expectancy may decrease. Ticks need the host’s blood at every stage of their development, with the exception of the egg stage. The adult male does not need a blood meal, whereas the adult female requires one to lay eggs. Without a suitable host, ticks can fall into a dormant state and remain alive for several months to a year.The collection of ticks was carried out from the surface of the camels and in the rooms where the camels were kept using personal protective equipment. The collected ectoparasites were placed in 100 mL plastic jars filled with 70% alcohol.Blood-sucking insects: In addition to ticks, the Atyrau and Mangystau regions are home to various species of blood-sucking insects (Table 3), which can also play an important role in the transmission of diseases among animals and humans. These insects actively feed on the blood of their hosts, especially in the warmer seasons.To catch blood-sucking insects, special light traps with ultraviolet lamps were installed in places where camels were kept. Insects collected in traps were placed in 200 mL plastic jars containing 100 mL of 70% alcohol. Collected blood-sucking arthropods after their capture should be sorted by gender and parity (determined visually under a dissecting magnifying glass) by wing pattern and size [23]. Before determining the species, blood-sucking insects are treated with tobacco smoke, in order to immobilize the insect, and then packed in 20 copies, in individual packaging.Rodents: The Mangystau and Atyrau regions of Kazakhstan are distinguished by their semi-desert and desert landscapes, which affects the species composition of rodents living in these regions. Table 4 below shows the approximate number of some rodent species found in these areas:Rodents were caught alive using live traps in the form of nets or boxes, in which 1 cm3 pieces of bread soaked in vegetable oil were placed. After collecting the necessary amounts of blood for research, the rodents were released.Biological samples were randomly selected and immediately delivered to the laboratory in a Dewar vessel with liquid nitrogen. Upon arrival at the laboratory, all samples were stored at −40 °C until the start of research work.Based on the weather forecast from the KazHydroMet meteorological service [28], as well as the population density of the regions and the total number of camels, the following average number of samples was collected in each area (Figure 3):2.2. Preparation of MaterialsFor the experiment, age-related differences and the immune status of camels were studied. Blood and serum samples obtained from camels and rodents were aliquoted, labeled and stored at −20 °C until further analysis, such as DNA and virus extraction.Morphological analysis and identification of collected ticks and blood-feeding insects were conducted with adherence to biological safety measures, using a stereomicroscope (Leitz Diavert, Wetzlar, Germany). The research plans were approved by the Bioethics Supervisory Board of the Scientific Research Institute for Biosafety Problems with permission No. 1511/011 prior to the start of the research. Throughout the study, institutional codes, operational procedures and recommendations for the treatment of animals were strictly followed.2.3. Detection of CMLV-Specific AntibodiesFor serological research aimed at detecting antibodies against camelpox, the Camelpox Virus Antibody (CMLV-Ab) ELISA Kit (Abbexa Ltd., Cambridge, UK) was used, following the instructions provided with the commercial kit. Additionally, camelpox virus neutralization tests were performed.The virus neutralization test (VNT) was conducted in accordance with the WOAH guidelines for terrestrial use (2012) [29]. This method uses blood serum, which was diluted in a ratio from 1:2 to 1:128 and mixed in equal volumes with the vaccine strain KM-40 at a concentration of 100 TCID50/mL [30].2.4. DNA ExtractionTotal genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples of camels, rodents and from blood-feeding insects and ticks using the Blood and Tissue DNeasy Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the provided protocol. Prior to DNA extraction, the ticks and blood-feeding insects were frozen and then homogenized. The DNA was eluted in 100 µL of elution buffer, free from DNA/RNA contaminants, and stored at −20 °C until further analysis.2.5. Molecular Genetic AnalysisTo diagnose camelpox virus, the PCR-RV diagnostic system (QuantStudio 5) was used with a set of Primerdesign LTD reagents (Genesig, Eastleigh, UK). Briefly, the volume of 1 reaction was 20 µL, of which 15 µL was the reaction mixture and 5 µL was the test DNA. The condition for PCR amplification consisted of 2 steps: Step 1—shutter speed 95 °C for 2 min; Step 2—95 °C for 10 s, 60 °C for 60 s with FAM signal detection. A total of 50 cycles were performed. Samples that were above the threshold and showed up positive before the 32nd cycle were considered positive.2.6. Statistical AnalysisStatistical data processing was carried out using EpiInfo 7.2.2.2 (CDC) software and GraphPad Prism 8.0.1. The creation of maps and cartographic designations were performed in the Esri ArcGIS 2.2 program.2.7. BioethicsAll manipulations related to animals were carried out in accordance with the Law on Responsible Treatment of Animals of the Republic of Kazakhstan (Law No. 97-VII LRK, Republic of Kazakhstan, 30 December 2021) and other applicable recommendations. The research plans were approved by the Bioethics Supervisory Board of the Scientific Research Institute for Biosafety Problems with permission No. 1511/011 prior to the start of the research. Throughout the study, institutional codes, operational procedures and recommendations for the treatment of animals were strictly followed.3. ResultsFrom March to April and from September to October 2023, as well as from May to June 2024, a field expedition was conducted to the western regions of Kazakhstan, where camel breeding is widespread. The study was conducted against the background of an outbreak of camelpox registered in 2019 in the Beineu, Karakiya, Mangystau and Munaily districts of the Mangystau region. The main purpose of the expedition was to identify potential reservoirs of camelpox virus in the fauna of Mangystau and Atyrau. During the expedition, samples were collected from camels of various age groups, as well as from rodents, blood-sucking insects and ticks. The age differences among the camels from which samples were collected for the study are shown in Table 5.In 20 farms of the Mangystau region, from which the materials for the study were obtained, all camels older than 2 years were vaccinated against camelpox with a live attenuated vaccine (strain KM-40), as well as against other epidemic diseases such as rabies, plague and anthrax. In the Atyrau region, camels from which blood samples were taken, according to documents, were vaccinated against camelpox in 2023. The collection of materials in 2024 coincided with the period before the annual revaccination. In total, biomaterials were collected from 720 camels.During the analysis of the collected blood-sucking insects, a thorough examination of their various parts, including the veins of the wings, heads and abdomens, was carried out. As a result of the study, it was possible to identify insects as Anopheles hyrcanus and Culex pipiens belonging to the family Culicidae spp. (Table 3). These species have significant epidemiological significance, as they can be carriers of various infectious diseases.Morphological analysis of the ticks revealed that the detected ticks belong to the ticks found in the Atyrau and Mangystau regions indicated in Table 1 above. The Hyalomma dromedarii species, which is unique to camels, was selected from the collected ticks. This type of tick plays a key role in the transmission of certain diseases and is an important object of study for assessing the risks associated with infectious diseases of camels.3.1. Molecular Diagnostic ResultsThe results of the PCR analysis for detecting the causative agent of camelpox showed positive results in 19 (6.3%) out of 300 samples from camels in the Mangystau region and in 22 (5.24%) out of 420 samples from the Atyrau region. In total, 41 positive samples were identified, which constitutes 6% of all examined samples.The analysis revealed that in the Mangystau region, the proportion of positive samples among young animals not vaccinated against camelpox was 12 (63.15%) of the total positive samples. In the Atyrau region, this proportion was 13 (59.1%). Positive samples for the presence of the camelpox virus are shown in Table 6. These data indicate that young animals are particularly susceptible to the camelpox virus and are at a higher risk of infection.Other objects, from which DNA samples isolated from ticks (n = 205) and mosquitoes (n = 587) were used for analysis, were tested for the presence of camelpox virus using the pool testing method. The results of testing of all samples are shown in Figure 4. It was found that only one sample showed an insignificant signal at 43 cycles of PCR-RT, which indicates the possible presence of the virus in this sample but does not confirm its presence in significant quantities. The camelpox virus was not detected in 27 blood samples of the small gopher, which confirms the absence of this species as a reservoir of the virus in the studied region.In general, the course and outcome of camelpox can vary based on age, sex and circulating strains of CMLV, which differ in virulence. Thus, risk factors associated with higher morbidity from camelpox include the average age of animals (under 4 years), the rainy season, the introduction of new camels into the herd and shared water sources [31].3.2. Results of Serological TestsSerological analyses showed that of the 150 studied serums of adult camels in the Mangystau region, 86 (57.3%) have antibodies against the camelpox virus, and of 210 adult camels in the Atyrau region, antibodies were found only in 23 (15.3%) camels. All serum samples from young camels in both areas showed negative results. In addition, the blood serum of the rodent Spermophilus pygmaeus n = 23 and Meriones meridianus n = 24 also did not give positive results (Table 7).In the Mangystau region, a higher number of antibodies and viral particles were recorded compared to the Atyrau region, which may indicate a higher activity of the virus in this region. This difference may be related to epidemiological characteristics, conditions of keeping camels and the level of vaccination in both areas. The absence of antibodies in all the studied young camels in both areas indicates that this age group may not have been exposed to the virus as well as vaccinated.4. DiscussionMany viruses of the Orthomyxoviridae family are able to infect and reproduce in a wide range of host species and taxa [32]. Currently, little is known about the mechanisms of transmission and conservation of zoonotic OPXV in natural conditions. These viruses often remain mysterious and manifest themselves only in secondary infections in species that are probably not the main natural hosts of the virus [33,34,35,36,37]. Thus, most of the knowledge about OPXV is obtained as a result of accidental interspecific transmission, usually from an unknown source, including humans, predators or domestic animals [31,38,39,40].Camelpox is registered in almost all countries where camels are bred [8]. In the period from 2017 to 2021, outbreaks of camelpox were recorded in 12 countries [2]. An analysis of cases over the past eight years has shown that sporadic cases have been reported in four countries (Israel, Iraq, Eritrea and Kazakhstan), while in the remaining eight countries (Iran, Libya, Oman, Palestine, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Tunisia and Ethiopia), the disease is endemic [2,41].Environmental and geographical conditions in Kazakhstan and neighboring countries play an important role in the spread of the camelpox virus. In areas with a dry climate and limited access to water, camels are often kept in close groups, which increase the risk of infection. In addition, seasonal camel migrations between regions can contribute to the spread of the virus over long distances [42]. Increased attention to the control of animal trafficking, especially from areas with known outbreaks, as well as the provision of strict quarantine measures and medical examinations, can significantly reduce the risk of spreading the virus.Significant outbreaks of camelpox in Kazakhstan have been recorded since 1930. The Mangystau region, which borders Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, previously suffered from epizootics in Turkmenistan when this country was part of the USSR. In the period from 1965 to 1969, large epizootics in Turkmenistan spread to the territory of the Kazakh SSR, causing epizootics in the Mangystau region [42]. In 2018 and 2019, cases of camelpox were observed in the Balkan province of Turkmenistan, adjacent to the Mangystau region, which led to the death of both young and adult animals [43]. Turkmenistan also borders Iran, where outbreaks of this infection are recorded annually [44]. Sporadic cases and even epizootics of camelpox may occur in Uzbekistan, but there is currently no specific information about such events.According to media reports, in the spring months of 2019, a massive outbreak of camelpox occurred in the western regions of Turkmenistan, as a result of which many camels died. Local residents reported an unknown disease that periodically affects camels and cows, leading to the death of livestock. However, the authorities denied information about the disease that occurs among camels, claiming that camels die of starvation [45,46]. During a field expedition conducted in 2023–2024, our researchers found out that camels from Turkmenistan were imported to Kazakhstan in 2019–2020. After their transportation, the disease began to spread among local camels located near transport routes. In addition, in 2019, a massive outbreak of camelpox occurred in the Beine district of the Mangystau region, which was confirmed by laboratory tests.The camelpox outbreak in Turkmenistan and the Mangystau region of Kazakhstan in 2019 illustrates how rapidly the disease can spread in the absence of adequate control measures. The cross-border nature of the regions necessitates coordinated efforts for monitoring and control. The intensification of trade activities between Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan, particularly without proper quarantine controls, can facilitate the spread of the virus. Strengthening cooperation between countries is essential to prevent the spread of the disease.Currently, besides preventive measures, the only method of protection against camelpox involves vaccines based on CMLV. However, these vaccines are not widely used and currently protect only camel calves older than 6 months.Protection against CMLV (camelpox virus) relies on both humoral and cellular immune responses in animals. Vaccination against camelpox can be achieved with either live attenuated or inactivated vaccines. Although the immunity provided by the attenuated vaccine is long-lasting, revaccination is recommended every 6–9 months. In contrast, inactivated vaccines typically require annual revaccination [47].Following the successful completion of field trials in Kazakhstan in 2023, a vaccination program was launched using a domestic live attenuated camelpox vaccine. According to the results of the field trials, the humoral immunity in vaccinated camels diminishes after 6 months post-vaccination [14].Based on the serological analyses conducted during the study, antibodies against the camelpox virus were detected in 57.33% of the samples from the Mangystau region, while in the Atyrau region, this figure was only 10.95%. It is important to note that camels in the Atyrau region were not vaccinated in 2024. These results suggest that the seroprevalence of the camelpox virus varies with age, as vaccination is only administered to camels older than six months. Consequently, PCR analysis for detecting the Camelpox pathogen revealed positive results in 6% of adult camels and 61% of juvenile camels among all tested samples. The presence of the virus in asymptomatic camels confirms their role as hidden reservoirs, complicating disease control and highlighting the need for regular monitoring and preventive measures.Analysis of the literature on CMLV reveals that there is information suggesting the potential involvement of wild rodents [48,49,50], arthropods and insects [6,51] in the transmission of camelpox among camels. However, these data are presented mainly as hypotheses and have not been thoroughly investigated. It is noteworthy that the CMLV shares similarities with the CPXV pathogen, for which domestic and wild rodents are known primary reservoirs [48]. J. Chantrey et al. [49], demonstrated that the primary reservoirs for bovinepox are field voles. They also hypothesize that bank voles might not sustain the infection alone, which could explain the absence of bovinepox in Ireland, where voles are not present. Infection among wild rodents varies seasonally, and these fluctuations likely account for the pronounced seasonal disease occurrence in incidental hosts such as humans and domestic cats [49,50].In our studies, almost all samples from rodents (Meriones meridianus and Spermophilus pygmaeus) and blood-feeding insects yielded negative results, suggesting their minimal role in the epidemiological chain of camelpox transmission. However, these results do not completely rule out their potential as reservoirs, considering that several rodent and blood-feeding insect species in Western Kazakhstan remain unstudied. This highlights the need for further investigation into other potential reservoirs and transmission pathways, including other rodents and domestic animal species, to ensure a comprehensive approach to disease control. Additionally, the results underscore the importance of monitoring insect populations, as they might play a significant role in camelpox transmission. Seasonal and geographical variations in viral activity among ticks and insects should be considered when developing control strategies.The primary reservoir for camelpox remains the camels themselves. However, the role of other animals (such as rodents of the species Allactaga major, Meriones tamariscinus and Apodemus sylvaticus), fauna (blood-feeding insects like Culicidae, Simuliidae, Ceratopogonidae and Haematopinus tuberculatus; other tick species of the genus Hyalomma spp.) and environmental factors also requires further investigation, as some of the studied materials proved insufficient. For example, during the collection of biological samples in the Beineu district, disinfection against ticks and insects was conducted. During the visit to Atyrau, blood-feeding insects could not be found in two districts due to unfavorable weather conditions. Additionally, in some areas, it was impossible to collect rodents for biological samples due to adverse regional conditions and poor weather, such as flooding in Atyrau region in 2024. Efforts are ongoing to isolate the camelpox virus from positive samples and to gather additional field data for more thorough analysis.Overall, monitoring natural populations over time can more precisely establish the dynamics of circulating pathogens. The obtained information is valuable for understanding host–pathogen interactions and assessing the risk of zoonotic diseases. Studying camelpox virus reservoirs in Kazakhstan and neighboring countries is crucial for developing effective disease prevention and control strategies.


Title: Human monkeypox: epidemiology, transmission, pathogenesis, immunology, diagnosis and therapeutics

IntroductionUntil recently, monkeypox was only known to exist in Africa, but it has now been confirmed in more than ninety non-African countries, impacting over seventy-nine thousand individuals in just a few months. It is highly concerning that the virus has started to arise in different populations throughout the world, in places where it is unusual for it to do so. The United States of America is the worst-hit country with 28,999 reported cases and 11 deaths till date, that is, 16 November 2022 [1]. Next in the list is Brazil with 9637 reported cases. Rising occurrences of monkeypox have undoubtedly raised concerns, particularly at a time when the entire world is still healing from the pandemic shock of COVID-19. The World Health Organization (WHO) issued a global public health emergency of concern proclamation on 23 July 2022 to the ongoing monkeypox pandemic. Considering the aforementioned information, the purpose of this review paper is to familiarize the readers to the monkeypox illness, its epidemiology, pathology, diagnosis, and current therapeutic options.MethodologyIn order to write this review article, more than 200 research papers were obtained from the different search engines like Google, Science Direct, NCBI Library; websites of important organizations like WHO, CDC, and news reports, etc., using keywords like epidemiology of monkeypox, diagnosis of monkeypox, therapeutics of monkeypox disease, vaccines for prophylaxis of monkeypox, differences between monkeypox and other orthopox viruses, differences between monkeypox and smallpox, differences between monkeypox and chickenpox, differences between monkeypox and COVID-19, etc. After reading all the articles obtained from the above-mentioned sources, around 100 articles were short-listed and the information gathered from them is summarized in the form of the present review article. The map showing the geographical distribution of the monkeypox disease has been created using the data wrapper software (Fig. 1). Rest all figures have been prepared using the latest version of the Microsoft powerpoint software.Fig. 1Map showing worldwide distribution of MPXV cases till 16 Nov 2022. The map has been created by using data wrapper softwareThe monkeypox virusThe monkeypox virus (MPXV) is a member of the Poxviridae family, specifically the Chordopoxvirinae subfamily, and it is a double-stranded DNA virus that is enveloped and is brick shaped. The virus was first discovered in primates in 1958 [2] in a laboratory in Denmark. The term “Monkeypox virus” comes from the fact that the virus was first discovered in monkeys. However, the name is misleading since monkeys are the incidental and not the natural hosts of the virus.Different clades of the monkeypox virusThere are two clades of the virus which differ in their pathogenicity, modulation of host immune responses and rate of transmission. The monkeypox virus clade found in the Congo Basin is more fatal than the one found in West Africa. Central Africa’s case fatality rate was 10.6%, far higher than the 3.6% rate seen in the West African clade. As a whole, monkeypox is becoming more significant around the globe [3]. The Basin clade is more prone to spread and has historically caused more severe cases. The current monkeypox epidemic seems to have originated in the West Africa clade. Cameroon, which separates the two groups geographically, is the only country where both viral clades have been found [4].Comparison of the genomes of monkeypox virus and the smallpox virusGenetic analysis shows that the monkeypox virus is distinct from other members of the Poxviridae family, such as variola, vaccinia, ectromelia, camelpox, and cowpox. In 1958, researchers at Copenhagen’s Statens Serum Institute identified it as the agent responsible for a smallpox-like illness in cynomolgus monkeys [2]. For the first time, anything like this was uncovered. It was recognized as a novel species of orthopox virus after culture on embryonated eggs revealed pocks that resembled those of the variola virus but had other biological properties different from those of the variola virus. In 2001, a genetic comparison of MPXV and variola virus was published [5]. The essential enzymes and structural proteins are encoded by the core region of the MPXV genome, which shares 96.3% of its sequence with the variola virus. But the MPXV terminal regions that code for virulence and host range features vary greatly across strains. When comparing the MPXV genome to other orthopoxvirus genomes, it has been found that the central genomic regions are conserved and the terminal regions vary. For details, readers may refer to the work done by Shchelkunov and coworkers [5]. As with every other orthopox virus, it possesses a distinct surface epitope composition, different polypeptides, specific DNA cleavage sites, and various modifications in the double-stranded DNA genome’s long terminal repeats. The detailed genomic analysis shows that MPXV evolved from an orthopox viral progenitor apart from variola virus. The variola virus cannot easily be generated from MPXV since MPXV is not the variola virus’s direct ancestor (or vice versa). This and other data allayed worries that MPXV would transform into variola virus and reaffirmed faith in the long-term effectiveness of the smallpox immunization programme.Similarities and differences between the monkeypox virus and the chickenpox virusChickenpox is caused by Herpes virus which has no correlation with the orthopox viruses but the clinical presentation of monkeypox and chickenpox appear similar which is why sometimes the disease may be misdiagnosed. However, as compared to the monkeypox, chickenpox has a brief, moderate prodrome, a mild clinical course, seldom causes lymphadenopathy, and often causes pleomorphic skin lesions to grow in a centripetal pattern, with a very low death rate [6, 7].Epidemiology of the monkeypox diseaseBetween 1970 and 1979, epidemiological investigations were done in the rain forest regions of sub-Saharan Africa, where they discovered 47 cases of human monkeypox. Of these 47 occurrences, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) was responsible for 38, followed by Cameroon, the Central African Republic, Gabon, Cote d’Ivoire, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone (together accounting for 11 incidences) [8]. Each event in the DRC had similarities that pointed to animal interaction as the likely cause; each also occurred near tropical rain forests. Of the 47 infections, only 7 were fatal. Transmission from a vulnerable person to another is the most likely explanation for illness in four of the instances. The probability of secondary transmission is 7.5% among close relatives and 3.3% among all susceptible contacts. The majority of documented instances since 1980 have come from the Democratic Republic of the Congo. For the purpose of gauging the potential of a monkeypox epidemic in central Africa, the World Health Organization (WHO) conducted surveillance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) between 1981 and 1986 [9].Only 13 occurrences from 1986 to 1992 were documented in the literature, and no cases from 1993 to 1995 were reported. But in Kasai-Oriental province, DRC, during 1996 and 1997, more than 500 probable cases of monkeypox were recorded [10, 11]. In spite of the fact that only a small percentage of these cases were confirmed by laboratories, the high prevalence of secondary cases (78 per cent) and the low mortality rate (one per cent to five per cent) suggest that the vast majority were in fact instances of varicella. Until 2001, when 31 individuals with monkeypox in 7 distinct illness clusters were documented in the DRC’s Equateur region, there had been no fresh reports of suspected monkeypox cases.In total, 10 African nations and 4 other nations had then subsequently reported cases of human monkeypox. Examples include Nigeria, where the illness returned after a 40-year absence in the past decade, and the United States, where an epidemic happened in 2003. The number of cases grew at least ten times, and from young children (4 years old) in the 1970s to young adults (21 years old) in 2010–2019 [12].
The 2022 monkeypox outbreakThe current outbreak is an illustration of how quickly the virus may be transmitted by intimate contact with infected wounds. Since the beginning of May 2022, cases of the sickness have also been reported in a number of countries in which it was not endemic. Till date (16 Nov 2022) more than 79,655 cases have been recorded worldwide and less than two per cent cases are from Africa, rest all are from the non-African countries where the disease is not prevalent otherwise [1]. This is a cause of concern. By now, the disease has spread in six continents leaving just Antarctica where no case has been reported so far. These include 12 African and 93 non-African countries. The majority of reported cases had no connection to travel to an endemic nation [12]. The worldwide distribution of monkeypox cases is summarized in Table 1 and Fig. 1.Table 1Worldwide distribution of MPXV cases till 16 Nov 2022S. No.RegionCountryNo. of confirmed casesFirst case reportedReferences1AsiaGeorgia2July 2022[1, 38]India17*July 2022[1, 39, 40]Indonesia1August 2022[1, 41]Iran1August 2022[1, 42]Israel262May 2022[1, 43]United Arab Emirates16May 2022[1, 44]Thailand12July 2022[1, 45]Philippines4July 2022[1, 46]Japan7July 2022[1, 47]Qatar5July 2022[1, 48, 49]Saudi Arabia8July 2022[1, 50]South Korea2June 2022[1, 51]Singapore19July 2022[1, 52]Lebanon18June 2022[1, 53]China1September 2022[1, 54]Bahrain1September 2022[1, 55]Jordan1September 2022[1, 56]Taiwan4July 2022[1, 57]2EuropeTurkey12June 2022[1, 58]Andorra4July 2022[1, 59]Germany3671May 2022[1, 60]Croatia29June 2022[1, 61]Lithuania5August 2022[1, 62]Luxembourg56June 2022[1, 63]Malta33May 2022[1, 64]Cyprus5August 2022[1, 65]Ireland210May 2022[1, 66]Moldova2August 2022[1, 67]Monaco3July 2022[1, 68]Latvia6June 2022[1, 69]Italy915May 2022[1, 70]Czechia70*May 2022[1, 71]Montenegro2July 2022[1, 72]Finland42May 2022[1, 73]France4102May 2022[1, 74]Greece85June 2022[1, 75]Norway93May 2022[1, 76]Netherlands1240May 2022[1, 77]Hungary80May 2022[1, 78]Iceland16June 2022[1, 79]Austria325May 2022[1, 80]Poland212June 2022[1, 81]Portugal948May 2022[1, 82]Romania45June 2022[1, 83]Russia2July 2022[1, 84]Spain7377*May 2022[1, 85]Sweden212May 2022[1, 86]Switzerland546May 2022[1, 87]Estonia11June 2022[1, 88]Belgium785*May 2022[1, 89]Bosnia and Herzegovina9July 2022[1, 90]Bulgaria6June 2022[1, 91]Serbia40June 2022[1, 92]Slovakia14July 2022[1, 93]Slovenia47May 2022[1, 94]Denmark191May 2022[1, 95]Gibraltar6June 2022[1, 96]Ukraine5September 2022[1, 97]United Kingdom3703May 2022[1, 98]3AfricaSouth Africa5June 2022[1, 99]Central African Republic12March 2022[1, 100]Liberia32018[1, 101]Cameroon16*December 2019[1, 102]Benin3June 2022[1, 103]Ghana107*June, 2022[1, 104]Morocco3June 2022[1, 105]Nigeria624*1970[1, 106]Sudan18*July 2022[1, 107]Egypt1September 2022[1, 108]Democratic Republic of the Congo2061970[1, 11]Mozambique1*October 2022[1, 109]4North AmericaCanada1444July 2022[1, 110]Costa Rica16July 2022[1, 111]Martinique1July 2022[1, 112]Cuba8*August 2022[1, 113]Mexico3007*May 2022[1, 114]Jamaica16August 2022[1, 115]Greenland2August 2022[1, 116]Panama21July 2022[1, 117]Guadeloupe1July 2022[1, 118]Guatemala111August 2022[1, 119]Honduras10August 2022[1, 120]Bermuda1July 2022[1, 121]Dominican Republic52July 2022[1, 122]Bahamas2June 2022[1, 123]Barbados1July 2022[1, 124]Saint Martin1August 2022[1, 125]United States28,999*July 2022[1, 126]El Salvador17September 2022[1, 127]5South AmericaArgentina808May 2022[1, 128]Aruba3July 2022[1, 129]Chile1243June 2022[1, 130]Colombia3630June 2022[1, 131]Paraguay7August 2022[1, 132]Peru3299June 2022[1, 133]Guyana2August 2022[1, 134]Bolivia248August 2022[1, 135]Ecuador311*July 2022[1, 136]Brazil9637*June 2022[1, 137]CuraÃ§ao3August 2022[1, 138]Uruguay14July 2022[1, 139]Venezuela10June 2022[1, 140]6OceaniaNew Caledonia1July 2022[1, 141]New Zealand33July 2022[1, 142]Australia141May 2022[1, 143]7AntarcticaNo confirmed cases yet*Countries where death cases have been reportedTransmission of the monkeypox virusSquirrels (particularly Funisciurus anerythrus) living in agricultural regions have been identified in several epidemiological studies from the Democratic Republic of the Congo as the main carriers of viral transmission among local populations [13]. Funisciurus spp. squirrels showed a higher rate of MPXV seropositivity in an earlier research compared to other animals tested [14]. Gambian rats and many other non-primate and primate mammals have also been found to be seropositive [15, 16]. In conclusion, it has been determined that several animal species are vulnerable to the monkeypox virus and may serve as reservoir for the same.Zaire was the first place where the monkeypox virus, a zoonotic orthopox DNA virus, was found in humans, back in 1970. After being discovered as a zoonotic illness in the 1970s, the MPXV virus began a pattern of frequent transmission from its reservoir hosts to humans. The transmission rate among humans was low. Most cases of this zoonosis have been documented in the Democratic Republic of the Congo among very young rural boys who participate in small-game hunting [17]. The virus may be transmitted from animals to humans by eating of bush meat, coming in contact with the body parts or body fluids of infected animals, respiratory droplets, etc.However, the 2017 Nigerian epidemic was concentrated amongst adult males between the ages of 25 and 40 who were residents of urban or periurban areas and had no discernible contact with animal reservoirs. This might be because of sexual transmission among males. Numerous studies indicate that keeping infected people isolated reduces the spread of disease. A person can contract monkeypox virus through a variety of sexual or non-sexual contact-related methods. The latter include coming into direct contact with wounds of an infected person; coming into contact with objects and surfaces that have been contaminated by an infected person; and coming into contact with respiratory droplets or oral fluids from an infected person. Monkeypox virus may be able to penetrate the placenta, although the consequences of infection during pregnancy are yet unclear. The transmission of virus among men is corroborated by scientific testing that revealed MPXV qPCR positivity in MSM seminal fluid from Germany and other nations [18]. The different transmission routes by which the monkeypox virus can spread from animals to humans or humans to humans are summarized in Fig. 2.Fig. 2Different routes of animal–human and human–human transmission of MPXVPathology and clinical featuresLike other poxviruses, monkeypox has a pathogenesis that is distinguished by pronounced intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions in epithelial cells [19]. The epidermis may also exhibit hyperplasia, keratinocyte necrosis, and ballooning degeneration. Ulceration and neutrophils, eosinophils, and multinucleated giant cells follow the lymphocytic inflammation seen in the dermis. As well, vascular inflammation (vasculitis) is evident.Monkeypox in humans starts with a brief (2–3 day) febrile prodrome and proceeds to a broad rash with monomorphic, well-defined, deep-seated, and often umbilicated pustules [20]. Most skin lesions tend to show up on the face and the palms of hands and bottoms of feet. During the pustular phase, the visual features of monkeypox rash lesions clearly suggest an infection caused by the orthopox virus.The incidence and severity of certain clinical characteristics are independent of sex, age, or vaccination status. Pre-eruptive and eruptive are the two stages of the illness’s clinical course, accordingly [21].Pre-eruptive stage. There aren’t many chances to study patients in the pre-eruptive stage since they often seek guidance or medical assistance after several days of sickness, when lymph nodes have swelled and skin eruptions have begun. It is feasible to pinpoint the onset of the fever and rash by inquiring from the patients. It has been observed that the patient temperature ranges from 38.5 to 40.5 ℃ and reaches its peak during the second day of the illness. The patients generally experience extreme weakness, fatigue and back ache. Fever is the second most common symptom, with a headache (sometimes frontal, but often broad) being the most common symptom overall. Several people have lymph node enlargement before they develop a rash.Eruptive stage. Except for the face, the skin rash manifests itself first on other regions of the body, such as the forearms. Lesions went through the same stages as smallpox, starting as macules and progressing through papules, vesicles, pustules, and finally umbilication, drying, and desquamation. In specific circumstances, there might have been a few or several thousand skin lesions. Vaccinated individuals had considerably fewer lesions than unvaccinated patients. In most cases, higher fever, more severe symptoms, and longer illness corresponded to higher lesion densities.Lymph node enlargement is the only clinical indicator that may differentiate human monkeypox from smallpox and chickenpox.The way monkeypox is currently presenting itself is also novel. Most instances of the present worldwide pandemic, including those in Nigeria, manifest as an ulcerating genital rash rather than the more widespread lesions that were seen in previous epidemics [22]. The generalized pustular rash, which is frequently mild, comes before the genital rash in clinical presentations that occur outside of Africa [23, 24]. According to this depiction, the genital area is an initial infection site that causes a discrete rash before occasionally progressing to a subsequent, disseminated illness.Monkeypox is usually a short-lived infection, with symptoms often disappearing within two to four weeks. Severe cases are associated with the extent of virus exposure, the patient’s state, and the kind of difficulties and are more common in children. Having immunological deficiencies may make matters worse. Although smallpox immunization proved protective in the past, but people who were vaccinated more than 40 years ago may now be more vulnerable to monkeypox. Monkeypox complications can include secondary infections, bronchopneumonia, sepsis, encephalitis, and corneal infections with subsequent vision loss [25].In the general population, the case fatality ratio of monkeypox has traditionally varied from 0 to 11%; it has been greater in young children [4].DiagnosisPolymerase chain reaction, often known as PCR, is now generally accepted as the gold standard for laboratory testing due to its reliability and sensitivity. Monkeypox is no exception to this rule and is best diagnosed by real-time PCR conducted on fluid isolated come from skin lesions. This fluid can also be used for viral culture, another reliable diagnostic test but this consumes longer time as compared to RT-PCR. Biopsy samples from lesions can also be used for viral detection by electron microscopy or immunohistochemistry. The serum IgG and IGM levels can also be used for detecting present or past infection [26]. However, the serological investigations do not offer any promise of monkeypox-specific infection because orthopox viruses are cross-reactive. Also, people immunized with smallpox vaccines may give false positive results [4].TherapeuticsIn the absence of any treatment option available for the monkeypox disease, FDA approved. Oral tecovirimat is currently being used as an emergency drug for the severely infected patients. Tecovirimat (TPOXX) is a drug approved by FDA for the treatment of smallpox but since the symptoms of both the diseases overlap, the drug is being used for treating MPXV-infected patients also. However, the FDA approval for the same is still pending and the clinical trials for testing the drug efficacy are going on. It is noteworthy that tecovirimat is recommended for severe cases only. As per CDC, if the drug is given to milder cases, the monkeypox virus is likely to develop resistance against it [27]. Brincidofovir and cidofovir are other drugs used for monkeypox treatment. Both the drugs stop the viral replication by inhibiting DNA polymerase enzyme. Tecovirimat on the other hand interferes with the viral envelope formation [28]. The former is lesser nephrotoxic as compared to the latter [29]. Another antiviral drug NIOCH-14 which is known to stop viral replication by serving as nucleoside is in clinical trials and approval is anticipated soon [30]. In addition to the treatment, the patients need to be fed and hydrated to keep their nutritional health in good shape [25]. Figure 3 summarizes the mode of action of different drugs used in the treatment of the monkeypox disease.Fig. 3Treatment options for the monkeypox disease, and their underlying mechanisms of action. Brincidofovir and cidofovir stop the viral replication by inhibiting DNA polymerase enzyme. Tecovirimat on the other hand interferes with the viral envelope formation. Another antiviral drug NIOCH-14 is known to stop viral replication by serving as nucleosideImmunomodulation by MPXVHuman cells obtained from monkeypox patients are resistant to T-cell receptor-mediated T-cell activation, meaning they cannot produce inflammatory cytokines. These findings point to the possibility that monkeypox generates a modulator that dampens T-cell responses in the host. It is now known that MPXV manipulates host immune responses via virotransducer and virostealth proteins. The former changes the cell’s ability to respond to infection, while the latter decreases the virus’s immunological recognition molecules, allowing it to elude the immune system. Moreover, unlike West African strains, Central African monkeypox strains preferentially downregulate host responses, including apoptosis in the host [31]. Extracellular proteins, known as viromimic proteins, function as viroreceptors to imitate cytokine and chemokine receptors, preventing glycoprotein receptors from binding, and as virokines to imitate cytokines and chemokines, disrupting host immune activation pathways and inhibiting viral reproduction [32]. Weaver and Issacs (2008) enumerated many genes encoding distinct proteins of monkeypox virus important for regulation of host immune responses, such as MOPICE in the Congo clade of monkeypox virus, which suppresses the host complement enzymes. The readers might consult the works of Weaver and Issacs (2008) for information on the remaining genes of orthopox viruses responsible for modulating the host immune responses [33].VaccinationThe smallpox vaccination has been found in several studies to be around 85% effective at preventing monkeypox [4]. Dryvax, the smallpox vaccine of the first generation, has been rendered unusable because of the adverse side effects it may cause [34]. Similar is the case with ACAM2000, the second-generation vaccine. Recently, a third-generation vaccine developed from the Ankara strain of the modified attenuated vaccinia virus was approved for use in the prevention of monkeypox. The vaccine is marketed under the name JYNNEOOS [35, 36]. Moreover, clinical studies for the VAC6 vaccine, a vaccination of the fourth generation, are now underway [37]. All these vaccines are made from vaccinia virus since it provides cross-protection to the orthopox viruses. However, the vaccination is recommended only for immunocompromised people or for the frontline health workers who are at risk of high exposure. Because vaccinations are in short supply, it is not advised for healthy people to be vaccinated.Future perspectiveThese international outbreaks of monkeypox will probably grow more frequent over time since population immunity won’t likely increase significantly in the foreseeable future. For monkeypox, a vaccination (JYNNEOS) is now available, but there is a need to look for more promising vaccine candidates. Similarly, although the treatment options are available but drug resistance might be a problem in the near future. Therefore, novel therapeutic strategies are required such as nanoparticle-based targeted drug delivery, etc. Also, the viral zoonoses are becoming a serious health issue and there is an urgent need to change our behaviour towards animals. Wild animals should remain undisturbed in their habitat, and the health of domesticated animals should be regularly monitored for any kind of pathogenesis. Also, the animals should be bred in clean and hygienic conditions to eliminate the pests like rats which can act as reservoir hosts.ConclusionThe international outbreak has again highlighted global health inequities. In contrast to COVID-19, monkeypox did not spring upon suddenly. An unusual virus that travelled from forest species in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to villagers who hunted the animals was first discovered decades earlier.Monkeypox is closely related to smallpox. They both belong to the same family of viruses. A smallpox infection or smallpox vaccination provides excellent protection against both smallpox and monkeypox. In other words, protection against smallpox also cross-protects against monkeypox. Since, the major population was either vaccinated for smallpox or survived an infection back in 1970s, they had some sort of immunity towards monkeypox too. However, the globe ceased immunizing individuals against smallpox in the late 1970s. Thankfully, the spread of the disease ceased among people. Therefore, immunity to smallpox and monkeypox has drastically decreased during the past forty years.
When infection does affect humans, it can be clinically difficult to identify from the chickenpox and smallpox. Severe lymphadenopathy is the most useful diagnostic clinical sign of human monkeypox; nonetheless, laboratory analysis is required for a firm diagnosis. We saw that the monkeypox virus has two clades: West African and Congo Basin. The latter causes a more serious condition. Though it was first observed in monkeys and since rodents, not monkeys, appear to be the disease’s primary natural reservoir in terms of both absolute numbers and percentages, the name “monkeypox” is rather imprecise.
The current 2022 outbreak has shown us that the stakes are really high now. A weak link anywhere is a threat everywhere. Since population immunity won’t likely increase significantly in the foreseeable future, immunising people who have come into contact with sick individuals by vaccinating them as well as accelerating our trials on currently underway therapeutics and not forgetting about making diagnostics broadly accessible must be our main focus right at the moment.



Title: Monkeypox: epidemiology, pathogenesis, treatment and prevention

IntroductionMonkeypox, an endemic disease in both West and Central Africa, before 2022 outbreak, a few cases were reported outside of Africa and these were associated with imports from endemic countries.1–5 However, following the initial case diagnosed in the United Kingdom, the number of monkeypox infection have dramatically increased.3,4,6–8 We are now facing the first multiple countries outbreak most with no clear epidemiological links to the endemic countries.9,10 World Health Organization (WHO) Director-General has announced the ongoing monkeypox outbreak a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC).11,12 The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that as of 13 September 2022 more than 57,995 confirmed cases had been documented in 100 countries/territories13 (Fig. 1 and Table 1).Fig. 1Geographical distribution of confirmed monkeypox cases during the outbreak between January and September 2022. Confirmed cases include those laboratory-confirmed as monkeypox virus and may include cases only confirmed as orthopoxvirus. Data presented as of 12 September 2022 were obtained from CDC. Diagram generated with GraphPad Prism 9Table 12022 monkeypox global outbreakCountryCasesaCountryCasesCountryCasesCountryCasesUnited States of America21984Poland145Estonia10Qatar3Spain6749Australia129India10Congo3Brazil6033Bolivia103Central African Republic8Venezuela3France3789Norway82Lebanon8The Bahamas2Germany3533Ghana76Saudi Arabia8Cuba2United Kingdom3491Hungary71Cameroon7Georgia2Peru1808Greece66Thailand7Greenland (Den.)2Canada1321Ecuador59Bulgaria5Guyana2Netherlands1198Czechia58Cyprus5Liberia2Colombia938Luxembourg53Lithuania5Moldova2Portugal871Slovenia45New Zealand5Montenegro2Italy805Romania36South Africa5South Korea2Mexico788Malta33Uruguay5South Sudan2Belgium726Serbia31Andorra4Sudan2Chile486Finland30Honduras4Barbados1Switzerland480Croatia27Japan4Egypt1Austria286Dominican Republic21Latvia4El Salvador1Israel241Singapore16Philippines4Indonesia1Argentina221United Arab Emirates16China4Iran1Nigeria220Slovakia14Benin3Paraguay1Democratic Republic of Congo195Guatemala12Bosnia and Herzegovina3Russia1Denmark183Iceland12Costa Rica3Turkey1Sweden165Panama12Monaco3Ireland160Jamaica11Morocco3aData updated on September 13, 2022 (Source: CDC)Monkeypox virus belongs to the Poxviridae family’s Orthopoxvirus (OPV) genus, along with variola virus (VARV, also known as smallpox), vaccinia virus (VACV), camelpox virus (CMPV), and cowpox virus (CPXV),14–16 all of which are pathogenic for humans. There was 96.3% identity between the monkeypox virus genome’s central region, which encodes essential enzymes and structural proteins, and VARVs, which means they are highly genetically similar.17,18 In 1980, the WHO certified that smallpox had been eradicated worldwide after successful vaccination.19–22Monkeypox virus has double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) as its genetic material that resembles brick-like particles ranging in size from 200–250 nm in diameter and thus can be seen by electron microscopy (magnified approximately ×10,000).23,24 In monkeypox virus, there are two genetic clades: West Africa (WA, Clade II) clade and Congo Basin (CB, Clade I) clade,25,26 the latter is also known as the Central African (CA) clade and more severe after infection.27–32 In 1958, monkeypox virus was first discovered in Copenhagen among laboratory monkeys, and its first monkeypox virus infection of a human occurred in 1970 in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in a 9-month-old child, with suspected smallpox.33–35 Monkeypox is endemic in both West Africa and Central Africa since 1970, with a mortality rate between 1 and 10%.36,37 Sequencing analysis of the current outbreak of monkeypox indicates that the virus is Western African in origin.38–43Recently, the number of patients of monkeypox has increased dramatically, provoking great concern.44–49 For this epidemic to be controlled, monkeypox virus must be better understood and re-evaluated.50,51 Here, we review the recent investigations on monkeypox, including epidemiology of monkeypox, monkeypox virus reservoirs, novel transmission patterns, mutations and mechanisms of viral infection, clinical characteristics, laboratory diagnosis and treatment measures, as well as prevention of monkeypox infection.Epidemiology of monkeypoxIt was in 1970 that the first patient of human monkeypox was diagnosed in the DRC.33 After that, more than 400 monkeypox patients were documented in Africa between 1970 and 1990. Of these, the vast majority were diagnosed at DRC,28,52–54 followed by 6 cases in Central African Republic (CAR),55 2 cases in Cameroon,56,57 3 cases in Nigeria,14,58,59 2 cases in Ivory Coast,60 4 cases in Liberia,58 and 1 case each in Sierra Leone and Gabon.56 In 1990, there have been four cases of suspected monkeypox in Cameroon, one of which has been confirmed.61,62 In 1996, the DRC experienced a prolonged outbreak of human monkeypox. Initially, a patient was confirmed in February 1996, and until August of that year, a total of 71 suspected monkeypox cases were reported. As of 1999, over 500 patients of monkeypox were reported in the DRC.61,63–65 From February to August 2001, a total of 16 cases of monkeypox were identified in the province of Equateur in the DRC.66 Meanwhile, a study conducted by Anne et al.67 in the DRC from 2001 to 2004 examined vesicle fluids and crusted scabs from 136 people suspected of having monkeypox. They found 51 patients of monkeypox.Human monkeypox attracted little attention worldwide until the first outbreak outside Africa occurred in the United States in 2003.68,69 Forty-seven cases, with confirmed (37 patients) and suspected (10 patients) monkeypox were reported, and all people infected by contact with pet prairie dogs (Cynomys spp.).70 The pets were infected after being in close proximity to imported small mammals (African rodents, rope squirrels (Funiscuirus spp.), tree squirrels (Heliosciurus spp.), Gambian giant rats (Cricetomys spp.), brushtail porcupines (Atherurus spp.), dormice (Graphiurus spp.), and striped mice (Hybomys spp.) from Ghana. According to CDC, laboratory tests using virus isolation and PCR amplification have proved that at least three dormice, two rope squirrels, and one Gambian giant rat were found to be infected by monkeypox. It was noted that no deaths occurred and no human-to-human transmission was observed,68 which was explained by the strain being a West African strain, based on genetic analysis.69 In addition, a study has conducted to evaluate the effects of the route of infection on the clinical illness of human monkeypox and demonstrated that significant symptoms of systemic diseases were more likely to occur in cases exposed to complex exposures than in cases exposed to noninvasive exposures (49.1 vs. 16.7%; P = 0.041).70 In contrast to Africa, a large number of cases confirmed in this outbreak are adults.71 In 2003, the Republic of Congo (ROC) reported the first outbreak of human monkeypox. It was recorded in this outbreak that 11 patients of monkeypox were confirmed and probable, all of whom were younger than 18 years of age, one death occurred. It is believed that the monkeypox virus has been transmitted from human to human six consecutive times, making it the longest recorded series of consecutive transmissions of monkeypox from one individual to another.72 In Unity State, Sudan, between September and December 2005, ten confirmed and nine possible patients of monkeypox were described in 5 villages (2 in Bentiu, 3 in Modin, 5 in Nuria, 5 in Rubkona, and 4 in Wang Kay).73 Between 2010 and 2018, varying numbers of monkeypox patients were documented in several African countries, including DRC,74,75 CAR,76–78 Cameroon,79,80 Liberia,76 Sierra Leone,81 as well as COA.82 In addition, it was reported in 2017 that Nigeria was experiencing an outbreak. 122 confirmed or possible patients of human monkeypox were reported between September 2017 and September 2018 in 17 states in Nigeria. Six deaths were recorded (case fatality rate 6%).83–85Thousands of people around the world have been infected by the monkeypox outbreak in 2022, which followed several years of sporadic cases outside of Africa (United Kingdom,86–88 Singapore,89,90 Israel,91,92 United States93). On May 2022, multiple cases of monkeypox were identified in the United Kingdom.2 On 6 May 2022, an individual with travel ties to Nigeria was diagnosed with monkeypox.94 On 12 May, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) in London confirmed two additional cases of monkeypox.95 There is no link between the two of them and they have never traveled to the endemic region. A week later, another four cases were confirmed. Unusually, there was no known contact between these patients and the previous confirmed cases.96 By polymerase chain reaction (PCR) experiment of patient swab samples, the outbreak was caused by the West African clade of monkeypox virus, which is less fatal than the other known monkeypox variant (CB, Clade I) after infection, with a case lethally rate of only 1%.39,50,97,98Portugal, Canada, and Spain documented 14, 13, and 7 cases of monkeypox, respectively, on 18 May.99–101 It was also the same day that the United States identified its first monkeypox patient of 2022.102 On 19 May, Belgium and Sweden reported their first cases.103,104 Belgium announced that monkeypox cases were required to be isolated for 21 days at once. Belgium also became the first country in the world to require self-isolation of monkeypox cases. At the same time, Italy has reported first case, a traveler from the Canary Islands.105 Besides, France has reported a suspected case. Genomic analysis the virus isolated from a monkeypox virus infecting case in Portugal showed that the virus also belonged to the WA branch of evolution, closest to the virus carried by cases imported from Nigeria in 2018 and 2019.43 Two patients of monkeypox were confirmed in Australia on 20 May, both of whom had recently returned from travel to Europe.106 On the same day, the first cases were confirmed in Germany, as well as in the Netherlands and France.106–110 On the next day, the first cases were confirmed in both Switzerland111 and Israel,112 and the patient documented by the Israeli Ministry of Health is also the first case of monkeypox in Asia.113After May 2022, a large number of monkeypox patients were confirmed in non-endemic countries worldwide. This unusual outbreak promoting the WHO to declare monkeypox as an “evolving threat of moderate public health concern” on June 23. Furthermore, the WHO announced that monkeypox outbreaks in many countries and regions constitute a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” (PHEIC) on July 23, 2022.114,115 Meanwhile, monkeypox prevention and treatment guidelines have been issued in several countries around the world.116 As of 13 September 2022, 57,995 monkeypox virus infections which were laboratory confirmed have been reported in >100 countries or regions across all six WHO regions13 (Fig. 1 and Table 1). Of these, a total of 18 deaths were reported in 9 countries. In particular, a very recent news indicated that the first person of monkeypox was confirmed in Hong Kong on September 6.117 Epidemiological investigation revealed that this patient arrived in Hong Kong from the Philippines on September 5 at the age of 30 years. Consequently, as a result of the monkeypox emergence in Hong Kong, a preparedness and response plan has been activated by the Hong Kong Government. Also, this is the first reported person of monkeypox since the four cases were confirmed in Taiwan Province of China.118,119 Notably, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) declared monkeypox a public health emergency on August 4, 2022 in the United States.120 The monkeypox epidemic in the United States is extremely serious, as of September 6, monkeypox had since spread to every state, with a total of 20,733 cases.121,122Monkeypox virus reservoirsMonkeypox is a zoonotic disease whose natural reservoir remains unknown.123,124 Several researches have conducted to determine the reservoir or natural hosts of monkeypox virus, Khodakevich et al.125,126 Have reported that antibodies to the virus were found in 2 of 18 squirrels tested. The monkeypox virus was extracted from a diseased squirrel, Funisciurus anerythrus, which was the first report of monkeypox virus being isolated from a wild animal. Other researches have also suggested that squirrels of the genera Funisciurus and Heliosciurus are related to the natural cycle of monkeypox virus in DRC,127–130 as well as Rodents of the genera Cricetomys, Graphiurus, elephant shrews of the genus Petrodromus.127 In March 2012, monkeypox virus was separated from a wild-living monkey (a sooty mangabey) by Radonic et al.131 Its whole-genome sequence showed that it had significant similarities with monkeypox viruses located in Western Africa. Patrono and colleagues132 described the frequent appearance of monkeypox virus in a wild-living chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus, hereafter chimpanzee) population from Taï National Park, Ivory Coast. A number of animal species, mostly rodents and non-human primates, have been confirmed to be susceptible to the virus after multiple investigations,133,134 as listed in Table 2.Table 2Animal species susceptible to infection with monkeypox virusOrderFamilySpeciesCommon nameReferenceDidelphimorphiaDidelphidaeMonodelphis domestica, Didelphis marsupialisGray short-tailed opossum, Southern opossum483EulipotyphlaErinaceidaeAtelerix spp.African hedgehog483LagomorphaLeporidaeOryctolagus cuniculusWhite rabbit484MacroscelideaMacroscelididaePetrodromus tetradactylusFour toed sengis (elephant shrews)127,133PilosaMyrmecophagidaeMyrmecophaga tridactylaNew World giant anteater485RodentiaChinchillidaeChinchilla lanigeraChinchilla483CricetidaeSigmodon hispidusCotton rat486DipodidaeJaculus spp.Jerboa483GliridaeGraphiurus spp.African dormouse483,487MuridaeMus musculus, Mastomy natalensis, Oenomys hypoxanthus, Rattus norvegicusHouse mouse, Multimammate mouse, Rufus-nosed rat, Brown rat133,134,488–491NesomyidaeCricetomys spp.Giant pouched rat483,492SciuridaeCynomys ludovicanus, Funiscirus spp., Heliosciurus gambianus, Protexerus stranger, Marmota monax, Marmota bobak, Spermophilus tridecemlineatus, Sciurus vulgaris, Xerus sp., Funisciurus lemniscatus, Funisciurus anerythrus, Funisciurus ilsabella, Funisciurus congicus, Heliosciurus gambianus, Heliosciurus rufobrachiumBlack-tailed priarie dog, Rope squirrel Sun squirrel, Forest giant squirrel, groundhog, Ground squirrel, 13-Lined ground squirrel, Red squirrel, Unstriped ground squirrels, Ribboned rope squirrel Thomas’s rope squirrel, Lady Burton’s rope squirrel, Gambian sun squirrel, Red-legged sun squirrel125,127,129,130,133,483,490,493–499HystricidaeAtherurus africanusAfrican brush-tailed porcupine490PrimatesCallitrichidaeCallithrix JacchusMarmoset500CeropithicediaeColobus spp., Cercocebus atys, Cercocebus galeritus, Cercopithecus Ascanius, Cercopithecus mona, Cercopithecus aethiops, Cercopithecus nictitans, Cercopithecus petaurista, Cercopithecus neglectus, Cercopithecus pogonias, Cercopithecus hamlyni, Cercopithecus spp., Colobus badius (now Procolobus badius), Allenopithecus nigroviridis, Macaca mulatta, Macaca fascicularis, Semnopithecus spp., Colobus badiusColobuses, Sooty mangabey, Agile or Crested mangabey, Black-cheeked white-nosed monkey/Red-tailed monkey, Mona monkey, Grivet, Putty-nosed Monkey, Lesser Spot-nosed Monkey, De Brazza’s Monkey, Crowned Monkey, Hamlyn’s Monkey, Guenons, Red colobus monkey, Allen’s swamp monkey, Rhesus monkey, Crab-eating Macaque, Gray langur, Red Colobus125,130,131,490,498,499,501–504HominidaeGorilla sp., Pan troglodytes, Pongo sp., Homo sapiensGorilla, Chimpanzee, Orangutan, Human76,485,490HylobatidaeHylobates larLar Gibbon505CebidaeSaimiri sciureussquirrel monkey505LorisidaePerodicticus pottoWest African Potto490CarnivoraProcyonidae, FelidaeNasua nasua, Felis spp.South American Coati, Felis483,490,498ArtiodactylaSuidaeSus scrofaEurasian Wild Pig127Novel transmission patternsMonkeypox transmission from animals to human may include direct contact with diseased parts or body fluids of infected animals, scratching or biting by animals, eating meat from infected animals, and contact with contaminated objects.135–141 Person to person transmission of monkeypox is caused by close contact with a human with monkeypox virus infection, including contact respiratory secretions from those infected individuals, skin lesions or genitals, prolonged face-to-face contact, along with their bedding and clothing142–144 (Fig. 2). There is very limited data on monkeypox infection during pregnancy, although a study has demonstrated the existence of vertical transmission of monkeypox virus.145,146 At the General Hospital of Kole, an observational research was conducted, Mbala et al. described the fetal outcomes for one of four pregnant women.147 Of the four women, one delivered a healthy baby, one had fetal death and two delivered miscarriages in their first trimester. In addition, monkeypox virus was detected in semen sample by researchers.148 Therefore, more attention is needed cause individuals such as children and pregnant women are more susceptible with increasing cases.145,147,149–157 Notably, a very recent report proved that human-to-dog transmission of monkeypox virus.158 Next-generation sequencing was used to compare the DNA sequences of the monkeypox virus from the dog and the patient. The samples both contained viruses of the human monkeypox virus-1 clade, lineage B.1, that have been spreading in countries that are not endemic to the disease.According to previous reports, monkeypox virus was not previously been highly contagious. Monkeypox of the CB clade was found to have a lower basic reproduction number (R0) than 1 between 1980 and 1984 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.159,160 Disseminated patients of monkeypox have been recorded in Africa, usually because of close contact with wild animals, especially rodents. Such travel related monkeypox individuals have limited secondary spread, making human-to-human transmission inefficient.1,76,83 However, a recent study by Du et al.161 reported that the reproduction number was estimated to be 1.39 (95% CrI: 1.37, 1.42) by aggregating all patients in 70 countries as of July 22 2022. According to initial estimates based on analysis of the first 255 PCR-identified patients of monkeypox in Italy in 2022, the reproduction number among men who have sex with men is 2.43 (95% CI 1.82–3.26).162 Which indicates that the disease has epidemic potential. Meanwhile, the vast majority of monkeypox patients had not recently traveled to the endemic regions of Africa, such as Nigeria, the DRC as well as central and western Africa.163 Human-to-human transmission of this virus is unusually frequent in this outbreak, suggesting close contact is the most likely route of transmission.164Another unusual feature is that the large number of cases diagnosed with monkeypox are male, and a considerable part of patients have sex with men (MSM), particularly in Canada, Spain, and the UK, suggesting that sexuality is another forms of close contact, even though monkeypox was not considered a sexually transmitted disease before.165–177 It is reported that higher proportion of MSM infected is due to accidental entry into the community and then sexual behavior constituting “close contact” rather than sexual transmission of the monkeypox virus itself.178 However, a study of samples from 528 confirmed cases outside endemic areas in Africa between April and June showed that 98% of patients were bisexual men or gay and 95% of those infected were suspected of transmission through sexual activity.179 A prospective cohort study in Spain indicated that 91.7% cases identifying as MSM in 181 monkeypox infection cases.180 Besides, monkeypox virus DNA was detected by PCR in seminal fluid in 29 of the 32 cases.179 On 3 August, In the Monkeypox Surveillance Bulletin published by the ECDC-WHO Regional Office for Europe, 99% (15,439/15,572) of the cases were males, with 43.4% of MSM cases.181 Meanwhile, using a branching process transmission model, researchers showed that a small minority of people have disproportionately large numbers of partners, which could explain the continued increase in monkeypox patients among MSM population.182 Another research showed a transmission number of 2.43 in the MSM community among Italian cases in May-June 2022.183 According to Endo and colleagues,182 monkeypox’s basic reproductive number (R0) may be significantly higher than 1 over the MSM sexual contact network. Monkeypox virus spread model for assessing outbreak risk in a metropolitan area indicated that if transmission efficiency increases in the higher-risk group like gays and MSMs, broader populations may be affected.184 On the other hand, Bragezzi et al.185 conducted a meta-analysis to show that sexual contact is involved in 91% cases (total 124 cases). Notably, a recent study of 21,098 monkeypox cases (data from 41 countries, as of August 23, 2022) revealed that the vast majority were MSM, with a typical rash characteristic.186 Transmission was mainly through close contact during sexual activities. Overall, all these reports suggested that MSM was up to now the most frequently suspected route of transmission.173,175,187–193 Consequently, targeted interventions are needed in communities with a large part of MSM individuals to prevent further transmission. And further research is demanded to determine whether sexual transmission is possible.Monkeypox virus mutations and mechanisms of viral infectionMonkeypox virus is a species of double-stranded DNA virus which causes monkeypox in humans and other animals. It belongs to the genus Orthopoxvirus in the family Poxviridae. Among all animal viruses, poxviruses have the largest and most complex DNA genomes.194,195 There are four major elements of the virion: core, lateral bodies, outer membrane, and the outer lipoprotein envelope.196 The central core contains the viral dsDNA and core fibrils. The monkeypox virus genome consists of 197 kb with the central genomic region comprising of 101 kb.17 Both terminal variables regions include a 6379 bp terminal inverted repetition (ITR) with approximately 80 bp long hairpin loop, 70 or 54 bp short tandem repeats and unique ITR sequences NR 1 and NR 2 and the coding region.32,197,198 The virus contains about 190 nonoverlapping open reading frames (ORFs),17,197,199,200 four of which are located in the ITR sequence.197 Genes responsible for viral replication, transcription, assembly, and release are conservatively located in the genome’s central region, as they are in all orthopoxviruses.200 While most of the genes expressing virulence and host tropism are found at both ends of the genome. These terminal genes play a role in immune evasion by interfering with signaling, presentation, and recognition of antigens and apoptosis.201–203Monkeypox virus has a low frequency of genomic mutations, due to the DNA double-stranded structure, and the 3’–5’ exonuclease activity of its DNA polymerase.204,205 However, the 2022 monkeypox virus diverges from the related 2018–2019 viruses by a mean of 50 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), considering previous estimates of the substitution rate for orthopoxviruses, this is much higher than expected.39,206 Such a divergent branch could speed up the evolution of the monkeypox virus. Notably, further examination of the mutational profiles of these SNPs suggested a dramatic mutational bias, with 26 (14 non-synonymous, 10 synonymous, and 2 intergenic) and 15 (nine non-synonymous and 16 synonymous) being GA>AA and TC>TT nucleotide replacements, respectively. Several studies have indicated that mutations observed in viral genome editing may be caused by apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing catalytic polypeptide-like 3 (APOBEC3) enzymes.207–212 Another phylogenetic analysis indicated that the monkeypox virus‐2022 strains contained 46 new consensus mutations, including 24 nonsynonymous mutations, compared with the monkeypox virus-2018 strain.213 We suspected that the lower mortality and higher transmission of 2022 monkeypox virus than previous monkeypox virus may related to these viral mutations. Although these viruses are under continual adaptation, it is unknown whether these mutations contribute to help the virus evade host immunity. To further understand how these mutations affect viral function, additional research is required.Unlike other DNA viruses, monkeypox virus replicates in the cytoplasm of the host cell.196 Poxviruses enter into the host cell may be divided into 3 steps (Fig. 3): virus attachment, hemifusion, and core entry, which occurs at the cell membrane or following endocytosis.196,214,215 A unique feature of poxviruses is that they produce two types of infectious particles: extracellular virions (EVs) and mature virions (MVs), both viral particles have different viral surface epitopes.216 Poxviruses enter cells through different mechanisms depending on their infectious forms, mature virion (MV) with single outer membrane, or enveloped virion (EV) with additional membrane and different protein composition.217–222Fig. 2Schematic illustration of the transmission and clinical characteristics of monkeypox. There are many modes of transmission, animals infected with monkeypox virus (such as squirrels, rodents, monkey, and sooty mangabey), direct contact with body fluids or diseased parts of infected animals, scratching or biting by animals, consumption of meat from infected animals, sexual contact (MSM), and contact with contaminated objects, respiratory secretions from those infected individuals, skin lesions, along with their bedding and clothing. The clinical characteristics of monkeypox are depicted on the right side of the figure. General features such as lymphadenopathy, fever, headache, chills and/or sweats, sore throat, muscle ache, lack of energy, rash, and genital rashes are seen commonly. Complications of monkeypox include pneumonitis, encephalitis, keratitis, and secondary bacterial infectionsDespite not being able to identify specific receptors for poxviruses, many glycosaminoglycans including heparin sulfates and chondroitin, as well as laminin, contribute to their attachment to cells.217,223,224 Up to now, many researches have been demonstrated that several vaccinia virus proteins are vital for binding to the cell surface, including D8L,225,226 A27L,227,228 A34R,229–232 A26L224 and H3L.233–235 It is following viral attachment that the virion binds to the membrane and fuses with the host cell, causing its core to be released into the cell’s cytoplasm. Virion core contains enzymes and factors that initiate transcription. It was proven that L1, F9, A28, A27, L5, H2 were essential viral envelope proteins for cellular entry.236–243 Virus-encoded multi-subunit DNA-dependent RNA polymerase initiates viral transcription, which is followed by host ribosome-mediated translation of early, intermediate, and late proteins. The intermediate and late stages of viral gene transcription require cooperation with host-derived transcription factors.244–248 Synthesis of poxvirus DNA occurs in the cytoplasm. A majority of viral particles remain in the cytoplasm as intracellular mature virions (IMVs) and are encased within the protein matrix of scabs. A second envelope (intracellular enveloped virions, IEVs) may be acquired by the remaining virions, and they are attached to the cell membrane of their host.249 As cell surface-associated enveloped virions (CEVs), they cause cell-to-cell transmission of the virus, while extracellular enveloped virions (EEVs) contribute to systemic transmission.250Clinical characteristicsThe clinical characteristics of monkeypox are quite similar to those of smallpox, but the monkeypox is clinically milder.37,251–253 It is crucial to realize that monkeypox and smallpox differ mainly by the occurrence of lymphadenopathy,141 since 90% of monkeypox patients suffer from lymph node enlargement.254 Monkeypox is most commonly confused with chickenpox, caused by varicella-zoster virus (VZV). In terms of their clinical characteristics, these two diseases share a great deal in common. Moreover, several studies have reported that individuals are infected both monkeypox virus and VZV.66,67,127The incubation time of monkeypox virus is usually 5–21 days.162,183,255,256 According to Miura’s report, incubation period (18 cases) is estimated to be 8.5 days on average.255 Based on 22 possible (N = 1) and confirmed (N = 21) monkeypox patients reported in the United States through 6, 2022, Charniga and colleagues estimated the incubation time for monkeypox.256 According to their study, the incubation time from exposure to the onset of symptoms was 7.6 days on average. Besides, another research found that among 23 people with known history of exposure, the median incubation period was 7 days (between 3 and 20 days).179In humans, monkeypox disease can be divided into two phases: the prodrome and the rash. Initial symptoms of monkeypox virus infection include headache, lack of energy, fever, chills and/or sweats, sore throat, muscle ache, and lymphadenopathy5,257–260 (Fig. 2). Usually, few days after fever and lymphadenopathy, the rash appears. Rash starts with the face and then appears the whole body, and is characterized by a few to several thousand lesions.83,91,261 As the rash progresses about 2–4 weeks, plaque is replaced by papules, blisters, pustules, scabs, followed by shedding.28,254,262 Complications of monkeypox include encephalitis, keratitis, pneumonitis, and secondary bacterial infections.28,143,254,263In the United States, a report on the epidemiological and clinical features of monkeypox cases showed 42% of persons (n = 291 participants) has no prodromal symptoms, and 37% of patients did not have fever as of the time of assessment, despite most patients included typical features.122 And genital rashes were observed in many cases, which was also recently proven in another studies.264–270 Other recent reports describe similar clinical characteristics.180,271,272 Patel and colleagues272 demonstrated that all 197 monkeypox infection cases developed mucocutaneous lesions, typically in the genitals (111 of 197 patients) or the perianal areas, causing rectal pain and penile edema. Moreover, according to a case report from Spain, 78 of 181 persons had lesions in the oral and perioral region and 141 in the anogenital region. The following complications occurred in 70 of the 181 patients: 45 (24.9%) of 181 had a proctitis, 19 (10.5%) tonsillitis, and 6 (3.3%) had a bacterial skin abscess.180 The clinician should remain vigilant for monkeypox-like rashes regardless of whether the rash has disseminated or had a prodrome prior to the rash. Notably, the possibility of some monkeypox virus infections being asymptomatic has been raised by two recent case reports from Europe. It has been shown in several studies that monkeypox could go unobserved when it is propagable, so physicians and persons at high risk should be aware of this fact.171,172,273Available data from the European Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States indicated that 28–51% have human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection among MSM patients with monkeypox.122,167,179,180,272,274 Currently, the risk for monkeypox infection is unknown, however, in people with HIV.Symptoms of monkeypox last 2–4 weeks, and the disease is usually self-limiting. The lethality of monkeypox patients after infection depend on the clade of virus infected, route of infection, patient age, and patients infected with the CA clade of the virus is generally higher than the WA clade.6,70,141,275 Previous reports80,83,97,276–278 indicated that the case fatality rates (CFR) of monkeypox ranging from 1 to 11%. What’s more, in a systematic review that exclusively evaluated the case fatality rates (CFR) by clades, the overall rate of case fatalities was confirmed to be 8.7%, which was significantly lower for West African clade (3.6%, 95% CI 1.7–6.8%) than Central African clade (10.6%, 8.4–13.3%).1,66 Among 1958 patients, some 4% (95% CI 1–9%) of hospitalized patients had fatal outcomes.260 In the current 2022 monkeypox outbreak, it was reported that patients at least sixteen years old always have milder symptoms in the current investigations, with a pooled case fatality rate of 0.03% (1 of 2941 patients).279 Monkeypox is more often fatal in children, which is similar to smallpox.36,80 As of September 2022, a total of 15 deaths have been documented in this monkeypox global outbreak, in which 9 deaths in locations that have historically recorded monkeypox.Laboratory diagnosisDiagnosis of monkeypox requires a combination of clinical symptoms, epidemiological information, and laboratory tests. According to WHO recommendations, nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) has been conducted for monkeypox virus detection.280 Genes commonly used for conventional polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing include hemagglutinin,281 the acidophilic-type inclusion body gene,282,283 and the crmB gene.284 Compared with other diagnostic methods, real-time PCR provides high throughput, high sensitivity, and fast results. Several genes have been developed to detect monkeypox virus, such as envelope protein gene (B6R),285 B7R gene,286 DNA polymerase gene E9L,69,285 complement binding protein C3L,278,287 DNA-dependent RNA polymerase subunit 18 (RPO18) gene,288 F3L and N3R.289 Meanwhile, recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA) method has been proven to be an alternative to real-time PCR. It was reported that the monkeypox virus-RPA-method was especially sensitive with a limit of detection (LOD) of 16 DNA molecules per microliter by targeting the tumor necrosis factor binding protein gene.290 With different target sites in the viral genome, these tests have varying sensitivities and limits of detection for monkeypox virus.291 According to Li et al.278 real-time PCR assay for generic monkeypox virus has a limit of detection for 0.7 fg (∼3.5 genomes), while monkeypox virus West Africa specific (G2R_WA) assay’s LOD is at 1.7 fg (∼8.2 genome), and monkeypox virus Congo Basin (C3L) assay’s LOD is at 9.46 fg (∼40.4 genomes). As well, Maksyutov et al.292 developed real-time PCR assay that targets viral F3L gene with a LOD of 20 copies per reaction. Several other studies reported LOD for monkeypox virus assays of 6.359 copies/mL,293 20 copies/reaction,286 11–55 fg (50–250 copies of each gene),289 2 fg (~10 viral copies),285 0.05 fg (25 copies/assay).294Recently, a high-throughput molecular testing method for monkeypox virus was established,293 which may expand the detection capacity and reduces the detection of time. In the current outbreak, the whole genome sequencing was also used to identify the monkeypox strain.40,92,198,295 What’s more, there are several other DNA-based assays have been investigated for monkeypox virus detection, such as loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP),296 restriction length fragment polymorphism (RFLP),98,297 as well as recombinase polymerase amplification (RPA).290Laboratory methods for detecting monkeypox also include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),298,299 western blot (WB)136,300 and immunohistochemistry (IHC).30,301 It is often necessary to use serologic diagnostic procedures to diagnose poxvirus when there is no virological sample. In most cases, ELISA is the most frequently used serologic test. Serological testing of the specific IgM and IgG antibodies are commonly deployed. As soon as the rash appears, IgM antibodies appear and rise approximately 2 weeks before declining and disappearing within 1 year. While IgG antibodies also generate quickly after the rash onset, rise approximately 6 weeks, and lasts for decades.302 However, the specificity is low, due to the immunologic cross-reactivity between monkeypox virus and other othopoxviruses.37,251 Electron microscopic observation can be used as an auxiliary method to detect monkeypox virus.24,303 However, due to the laborious and costly sample preparation, it is difficult to be used popularly.TreatmentTreatment is suggested for monkeypox virus-infected individuals with severe disease at present or who may be at high risk for developing serious illness (people who are immunocompromised, pediatric population, have characteristic dermatitis or history, have skin symptoms of exfoliation, pregnant or breastfeeding woman, one or more complications), or those with monkeypox virus aberrant infections, including accidental implantation in mouth, eyes, or other anatomical areas where monkeypox virus infection that could pose a special threat (such as the genitals or anus). For most patients, treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Despite the fact that monkeypox has no specific treatment, smallpox antiviral drugs such as brincidofovir, tecovirimat, and cidofovir may have effect against monkeypox because of their similar genetics.258,304–308Fig. 3Monkeypox life cycle and mechanisms of action of antivirals. This diagram depicts the life cycle of monkeypox virus inside a human cell. Notably, Replication cycle of monkeypox virus occurs in the cytoplasm of the host cell. Following viral attachment, virion binds and fuses with the host cell membrane, the viral core is released into the cytoplasm of the host cell. Viral particles are assembled into intracellular mature viruses (MV), then stay in the cytoplasm as intracellular mature virions of released as extracellular enveloped viruses during cell lysis. MV can also wrap an additional envelope and attached to the cell membrane, then then release through exocytosis. Cidofovir and its prodrug brincidofovir inhibit the viral DNA polymerase during DNA replication. Tecovirimat targets the VP37 protein, which is vital for envelopment of intracellular mature virus with Golgi-derived membrane to form enveloped virus (EV), prevents the virus from leaving an infected cell, hindering the spread of the virus within the bodyTecovirimatTecovirimat (also known as TPOXX, ST-246), a small-molecule inhibitor of virus, is effective against orthopoxviruses both in vitro and in vivo, including vaccinia virus, camelpox virus, cowpox virus, mousepox virus, variola viruses, and monkeypox virus.309 Tecovirimat targets the VP37 protein, inhibits the spread of viruses within the body by preventing them from leaving infected cells,309,310 as shown in Fig. 3. Tecovirimat inhibits neither DNA or protein synthesis nor the formation of mature virus. The mature virus remains in the host cell until cell lysis. Tecovirimat displayed s strong antiviral efficacy with an EC50 range of 0.01 to 0.07 μM.309,311,312 Several studies have demonstrated that the VP37 protein plays an essential role in encapsulating intracellular mature virus with Golgi-derived membrane to form enveloped virus.309,313–317Tecovirimat has a distinguished antiviral effect against the monkeypox virus lineage responsible for the 2022 outbreak in vitro.318 Further, the effectiveness and safety of tecovirimat has been revealed in multiple animal studies.319–324 Treatment with 10 mg per kilogram of body weight of tecovirimat for 14 days in the monkeypox model could achieve >90% survival.324 In a nonhuman primate (NHP) model, by taking orally once a day, tecovirimat was found to be effective in protecting NHP from monkeypox virus illness, with reduced viral loads, fewer rashes, prolonged survival and significantly reduced mortality in the treatment group compared with the vehicle mongkeys.325 Smith et al.326 assessed the efficacy of tecovirimat against monkeypox virus challenge of 65 times the 50% lethal dose (LD50) in prairie dogs, and found that one hundred percent of animals that received tecovirimat survived challenge, while 75% of infected animals receiving vehicle alone succumbed to infection. Meanwhile, multiple phase 3 clinical trials of tecovirimat have demonstrated its safety and well tolerated (Table 3).Table 3Treatment and prevention of orthopoxvirusesCategoriesNameMechanism of actionAdministrationTypical dosageFDA approval statusClinical trialsaReferenceAntiviral medicineTecovirimatTecovirimat targets the VP37 protein, inhibits the spread of viruses within the body by preventing them from leaving infected cellsPO, IVOral dosage by body weight: 13 kg to less than 25 kg: 200 mg (1 capsule) every 12 h 25 kg to less than 40 kg: 400 mg (2 capsules) every 12 h 40 kg to less than 120 kg: 600 mg (3 capsules) every 12 h 120 kg and above: 600 mg (3 capsules) every 8 h Duration of therapy: 14 days Intravenous infusion dosage by body weight: 3 kg to less than 35 kg: 6 mg/kg every 12 h by IV infusion over 6 h 35 kg to less than 120 kg: 200 mg every 12 h by IV infusion over 6 h 120 kg and above: 300 mg every 12 h by IV infusion over 6 h Duration: up to 14 daysSmallpox, 2018NCT05380752, NCT02080767, NCT02474589, NCT03972111, NCT00907803, NCT04392739, NCT04485039, NCT04971109, NCT04957485, NCT00728689324CidofovirPrevent viral replication and transcription by inhibiting viral DNA polymeraseIV5 mg/kg via IV infusion onceCMV retinitis in patients with AIDS, 1996NANABrincidofovirInhibits the synthesis of viral DNA by inhibiting the DNA polymerase activity or by acting as an acyclic nucleotide and binding to the viral DNA strandPOAdults and children weighing 48 kilograms (kg) or more—200 milligrams (mg) (two 100 mg tablets) once a week for 2 doses (on Days 1 and 8). Children weighing less than 48 kg—Use of oral liquid is recommendedSmallpox, 2021NCT01143181,386Blood productVaccinia immune globulinAntibody isolated from healthy donors previously vaccinated and inhibit viral infectionIVAdministered at a dose of 6000 U/kgTreatment of complications resulting in smallpox vaccination including eczema vaccinatum, 2005NANAVaccineACAM2000Second generation, a live attenuated vaccinia vaccineTDDReconstituted by addition of 0.3 mL of diluent to the vial containing lyophilized vaccineSmallpox, 2007NCT01158157, NCT01913353, NCT02977715, NCT00082446, NCT02038881, NCT00857493, NCT01144637, NCT00316524, NCT03699124, NCT00437021, NCT00133575, NCT00607243424,445,506–513JYNNEOSThird generation, highly attenuated vaccinia virusSCAdminister two doses (0.5 mL each) of JYNNEOS 4 weeks apartSmallpox and monkeypox, 2019NCT00914732, NCT02977715, NCT01144637, NCT00316524, NCT00437021, NCT00565929, NCT03699124, NCT02038881, NCT01144637, NCT00316524, NCT00565929, NCT00133575, NCT02977715424,425,452,507,509–512,514LC16A live, replicating attenuated third-generation vaccinesID108 plaque-forming units/mL, 0.02 μLSmallpox, 1975NCT00103584465NA not availableaClinical phase 3 and published clinical trials are shownIn 2018, the FDA approved its first use for treating smallpox after studies showed it was safe in humans and effective in animals with similar viruses.304,323,327,328 A trial in monkeypox people showed the tecovirimat (600 mg twice daily for 2 weeks orally) did not cause side effects and that viral shedding and illness lasted shorter time.329 Besides, data collected from 25 cases with diagnosed monkeypox infection had completed a course of tecovirimat therapy revealed all cases tolerated the antiviral medicine well, with minor side effects. The lesions and pain of 10 patients (40%) were completely resolved by day 7 of therapy, and 23 of 25 patients on day 21. The most frequently adverse events of therapy reported including diarrhea in 2 (8%), itching in 2 (8%), nausea in 4 (16%), headache in 5 (20%), and fatigue in 7 patients (28%).308 Moreover, several reports have also documented the efficacy and safety of tecovirimat in the treatment of monkeypox.308,330–332 Healthcare providers can now provide tecovirimat treatment to monkeypox patients under an expanded access Investigational New Drug (EA-IND) protocol developed by CDC and FDA. A total of 1001 cases receiving this antiviral drug have been documented, in addition, data was abstracted by the Centers for Disease Control.333Despite this, more clinical trials are needed to determine whether this antiviral drug is effective and safe for treating monkeypox infections in people.334 A double-blind, randomized controlled study will be conducted by the National Institutes of Health’s (NIH) National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease (NIAID) in treating individuals confirmed with monkeypox in adults and children to evaluate the effectiveness and safety of tecovirimat.335 Meanwhile, through the AIDS Clinical Trials Group, NIH/NIAID is conducting a phase 3 double-blind, randomized controlled investigation of tecovirimat in outpatient in the United States settings to treat monkeypox.335 According to the latest report, it is currently underway or planned to conduct several clinical experiments to evaluate tecovirimat’s safety and effectiveness in treating monkeypox patients (PALM-007, PLATINUM, WHO/ARNS, and ACTG5418).336,337CidofovirSince 1996, Cidofovir (CDV, also known as Vistide) has been approved for clinical use to treat cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis in persons with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).338–341 CDV is a prodrug, and it must be phosphorylated by enzymes of the cytoplasm after enter the host cells, and into CDV diphosphate (CDV-pp), which has a prolonged half-life.342–344 CDV-pp inhibits the viral DNA polymerase during DNA replication, as well as inhibits DNA polymerase 3′–5′ exonuclease activity.343Many animal models and experiments in vitro have reported the effectiveness of cidofovir for treatment orthopoxviruses, including vaccinia, mousepox, as well as monkeypox.338,345–350 Between 72 to 96 h post-infection, treatment of mice inoculated with cowpox virus (CV) or vaccinia virus (VV) resulted in significant protection. And when given at least 5 days before infection or 3 days after infection with either VV or CV, a single-dose pretreatment or posttreatment with CDV at 3 to 100 mg/kg was effective.351 Another mouse model demonstrated that it was completely protective against virus-induced cutaneous lesions and against the associated mortality when started on the day of infection or the first post-infection day of topical treatment with cidofovir. In addition, systemic treatment with cidofovir caused lesions to heal and regress.346 The treatment of mice with cidofovir (for two days after 24 h of virus exposure) suppressed viral loads as well as cytokine levels in plasma and tissue, including interleukin (IL)-10, IL-6, IL-3, and IL-2.352 In non-human primate model, researches proved a significant reduction in mortality and cutaneous monkeypox lesions when CDV treatment is initiated 24 h after lethal intratracheal monkeypox virus infection.353Various studies have shown the effectiveness of CDV against poxvirus. Patients with recalcitrant molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) treated with intravenous cidofovir exhibited dramatic cleaning of their MCV lesions, and all three cases remain clean of recurrence.354 The use of topical CDV was found to be effective in treating molluscum contagiosum (MC) in a 12-year-old boy with Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome.355 Two children with AIDS were also successfully treated with topical 3% cidofovir in a combination vehicle (Dermovan) for recalcitrant MC.356 CDV has also been documented to be effective against cowpox and human vaccinia in additional case reports.357–359 Despite the lack of clinical evidence to support its use in treating monkeypox, cidofovir is generally thought to be effective. According to the CDC’s guidance, an outbreak of orthopoxviruses, including monkeypox virus, can be treated with this anti-viral medicine.BrincidofovirBrincidofovir (also known as CMX001 or Tembexa) is a lipid conjugate of the acyclic nucleotide phosphonate, cidofovir (CDV). After brincidofovir entry into target cells, a phospholipase enzyme cleaves the lipid ester linkage in brincidofovir, liberating CDV and activated by two sequential phosphorylations, first yield cidofovir monophosphate (CDV-P) and then yield cidofovir diphosphate (CDV-PP).360 CDV-pp suppresses the synthesis of viral DNA by inhibiting the DNA polymerase activity of several double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) viruses or by acting as an acyclic nucleotide and binding to the viral DNA strand361–365 (Fig. 3).Brincidofovir has under gone numerous animal studies328,366–374 to demonstrate its antiviral efficacy against double-stranded DNA viruses including poxviruses such as monkeypox virus and is currently in human clinical investigations for treating other double-stranded DNA viruses (Table 3). In addition, An antiviral regimen with brincidofovir and ST-246 administered on the day of monkeypox virus infection protects mice with the STAT1-deficient C57BL/6 mouse model.375 Lethal rabbitpox models revealed that brincidofovir administration at or before the midpoint of illness could reduce the fatality rate from rabbitpox virus infection, as well as reduce viral loads, which might contribute to decrease infectivity of the virus.376,377 Studies have been conducted using the prairie dog monkeypox virus model to determine the effectiveness of anti-poxvirus therapeutics.378,379 In a monkeypox virus animal model, brincidofovir was administered orally to prairie dogs to determine its pharmacokinetics (PK). It was found that BCV treatment early in the illness tended to increase survival against a lethal monkeypox virus challenge; the earlier the treatment was initiated, the greater the chance of survival.380,381 In summary, these models suggest that treating monkeypox patients early with brincidofovir is more likely to have better outcomes.In 2021, Brincidofovir was licensed by the FDA for treating human smallpox disease in both adults and children. To facilitate the use of brincidofovir for the treatment of monkeypox, the CDC is currently developing an Expanded Access Investigational New Drug.382 In comparison with cidofovir, brincidofovir has higher intracellular levels of the active drug, well oral bioavailability, superior antiadenoviral activity, and no nephrotoxicity.314,375,383–387 The complete resolution in a patient with progressive vaccinia (PV) demonstrated the effectiveness of brincidofovir in combination with other antiviral drugs.388 Recent research, however, indicates brincidofovir is associated with serious adverse effects in monkeypox patients. Over the past three years, three cases have experienced liver toxicity in the United Kingdom.329 Further studies are warranted in humans regarding the efficacy of brincidofovir against monkeypox virus.VIGIVVaccinia immune globulin intravenous (VIGIV), a FDA-approved medicine, is applied to treat smallpox vaccination complications such as severe generalized vaccinia, vaccinia infections in people who have skin conditions, eczema vaccinatum, progressive vaccinia and aberrant infections induced by vaccinia virus (excluding isolated keratitis).389 Vaccinia immune globulin (VIG) is a sterile solution made up of high titers of IgG antibodies against the vaccinia virus taken from healthy persons who had been previously vaccinated against the live vaccinia virus.390 CDC allows the use of VIG for the treatment of monkeypox in an outbreak. Several studies have reported the patients received VIGIV for the treatment of orthopoxvirus infection.391–393 Nevertheless, data on VIG’s effectiveness in treating monkeypox virus infection are unavailable. Physicians may consider using it in severe cases. The VIG is also suitable for prophylactic use in persons with severe immunodeficiency in T cell function for whom smallpox vaccination is contraindicated after exposure to monkeypox virus.Monkeypox preventionTo prevent getting monkeypox, CDC suggest that people need to avoid close, skin-to-skin contact with someone who has monkeypox-like rashes, avoid contact with objects and materials that a case with monkeypox has used, use hand sanitizers that contain alcohol before eating, touching the face, and wash your hands frequently after using the bathroom.There is no vaccine specifically designed to prevent monkeypox virus infection. Owning to immunological cross protection among orthopoxviruses,194,298,394–398 smallpox vaccines (vaccinia virus-based) were recommended for use in the current outbreak of monkeypox.279,399–405 Epidemiological data on human monkeypox collected in Zaire from 1980 to 1984 revealed that there was a significant difference in attack rates between contacts without a vaccination scar and those who had been vaccinated in the past (7.2% vs. 0.9%).406 Rimoin et al. suggested that monkeypox incidence increased dramatically in the DRC 30 years after smallpox vaccination campaigns ended.407 Furthermore, their data suggested that vaccine-induced immunity lasts a long time as individuals vaccinated against smallpox >25 years ago are still at reduced risk of monkeypox today. As demonstrated by the US monkeypox outbreak of 2003, smallpox vaccination can potentially sustain cross-immune protection against West African monkeypox for decades afterward. Three individuals who had not previously been infected with monkeypox virus and had been vaccinated against smallpox for decades were unaware of their subsequent infection because none of them had any clinical characteristics associated with the monkeypox.298Studies have reported that first-generation live vaccinia vaccines can provide approximately 85% protection against monkeypox infection due to cross-reactive antibodies that can be induced by orthopoxviruses.160 Second-generation vaccine is ACAM2000, a live attenuated vaccinia vaccine approved in the USA in August 2007 for prevention of smallpox408,409 (Fig. 4). Its effectiveness has been demonstrated in both animal models327,410–412 and clinical trials (Table 3).Fig. 4Development of monkeypox vaccines in the future. Currently, live attenuated vaccines such as ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS are clinically recommended for the prevention of monkeypox, but these vaccines were originally designed to prevent smallpox. Therefore, there is a demand for the development of vaccines that specifically prevent monkeypox, such as inactivated vaccines, DNA vaccines, RNA vaccines, and recombinant protein vaccines. These types of vaccines have proven their efficacy and safety in the COVID-19 epidemicAssessment of the protective effect against aerosolized monkeypox virus in cynomolgus macaques revealed that a single immunization with ACAM2000 vaccines were protected completely.410 Monkeys challenged with lethal monkeypox virus after vaccinated with the ACAM200 live attenuated smallpox vaccine, all (N = 12) vaccinated treated monkeys survived.412 In a prairie dog model, for ACAM2000, the vaccine administered at 1 day postexposure was similarly effective with the vaccine administered at 3 days postexposure, resulting in 50–62% survival, compared with only 25% survival in the unvaccinated group.411 Taken together, ACAM2000 is likely effective at preventing monkeypox; however, due to its potential for replication, it may cause severe side effects, including progressive vaccinia, eczema vaccinatum, and myopericarditis.388,409,413–421 A person with a weak immune system, including someone with HIV, pregnant women, and those who suffer from skin conditions like eczema, are not advised to use it.150,422The third-generation vaccine, modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA, JYNNEOS in the United States, IMVANEX in the European Union, and IMAMUNE in Canada), was approved in individuals 18 years of age or older considered to be more susceptible for smallpox or monkeypox infection in US to prevent both smallpox and monkeypox disease in 2019.423 Unlike ACAM2000, JYNNEOS is a nonreplicating vaccine, which will not lead to the production of live virus. As a smallpox vaccine, JYNNEOS has demonstrated good immunogenicity, safety, and efficacy both in animal models and clinicals.424–436 It was the only currently FDA-approved vaccinia vaccine for the prevention of monkeypox disease437 (Fig. 4). Several animal model studies exhibited good protective effects against monkeypox,411,438–440 furthermore, in macaque challenge trials 100% protection against monkeypox infection was demonstrated, along with long lasting immunity410,441 and long lasting protective immunity for a lethal monkeypox challenge.442 Petersen et al.443 evaluated its effectiveness, immunogenicity, and safety in healthcare workers at risk of monkeypox virus infection in the DRC. Meanwhile, another human clinical investigation examining the effectiveness of monkeypox vaccination after exposure is currently underway.444 Numerous clinical trials of MVA445 have proved the efficacy and safety of JYNNEOS, as listed in Table 3.As a result of the outbreak of monkeypox in 2022, several countries, including the United States, Spain, Germany and the United Kingdom, have announced they are buying vaccines and/or releasing vaccines them from national stockpiles to combat the epidemic. JYNNEOS is being used by the US for pre-exposure vaccination of people who are at risk of occupational exposure to orthopoxviruses according to CDC announcements made in May 2022.399,446 Meanwhile, in its interim guidance for monkeypox vaccines, WHO recommended post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) ideally within 4 days of the first exposure, pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is recommended for health workers at risk, clinical laboratory staff performing diagnostic testing, laboratory personnel working with orthopoxviruses, and others at risk under national policy.447 IMAMUNE is approved for immunization against monkeypox and Orthopox virus by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), and IMVANEX is recommended by the European Medicine Agency (EMA) for monkeypox prevention.448,449 By July 27, 786,000 more doses are expected to be released that week after the federal government distributed 300,000 doses of vaccine to state and local health authorities and clinics throughout the country. JYNNEOS is manufactured exclusively by Bavarian Nordic, which has a limited production capacity. Recently, due to the vaccine shortage, Bavarian Nordic has expanded its capacity by working with U.S. contract manufacturer to fill smallpox/monkeypox vaccines.450 In addition, a European Union Authorization (EUA) was approved by the FDA for the JYNNEOS vaccine, allowing healthcare providers to administer it intradermally to individuals 18 years of age and older who have been considered to be more susceptible for monkeypox infection.451 Individuals vaccinated intradermally were less vaccinated (by one-fifth) than those vaccinated subcutaneously (SC). The total dose available for use could increase by five-fold as a result. A study with lower intradermal doses of MVA was found to be immunologically noninferior to the standard subcutaneous dose (NCT00914732).452In 1975, the other smallpox vaccine, LC16m8, was licensed for active immunization against smallpox in Japan. This vaccine is derived from the Lister (Elstree) strain of vaccinia and is a live, replicating, attenuated 3rd generation vaccine.453 This high attenuation resulted from a single nucleotide deletion mutation in the B5R viral gene, resulting in a truncated membrane protein B5, which is one of the most immunogenic proteins.454–456 Several animal model challenge studies of safety and efficacy of LC16m8 have been conducted in mouse,454,457–461 rabbit,459,460 and nonhuman primates.462,463 Both the intranasal and subcutaneous inoculation models showed no symptoms of monkeypox after immunization with LC16m8.462 A single vaccination of non-human primate model revealed that LC16m8 exhibited long-lasting protection against monkeypox virus, evidence from the reduction in viremia and the IgG antibody response.464 Notably, another nonhuman primate model revealed that for immunocompromised individuals, LC16m8 is a safer and more effective alternative to ACAM2000 and Dryvax (first-generation vaccines).463 LC16m8 was shown to produce neutralizing antibodies for vaccinia, monkeypox, and variola major, as well as broad T cell responses in a phase I/II clinical trial.465 In addition, various immunogenic studies in human have confirmed a good safety profile about LC16m8.466–472 In summary, these results reveal that LC16m8 may be effective for preventing people against monkeypox. Japanese authorities expanded the range of indications for this vaccine to include protection against monkeypox in August 2022.473Conclusion and perspectivesMonkeypox, COVID-19, and polio are among the three emergencies that WHO has declared worldwide at the moment. Monkeypox is now an international problem after previously being endemic to Africa. Until September 2022, more than 56000 patients have been diagnosed in the monkeypox 2022 outbreak. Monkeypox infection patients are rapidly increasing around the world, it is likely to be caused by a combination of natural and human factors. On the other hand, there has been an increase in human–wildlife contact due to climate change, deforestation, and the Ukrainian–Russian war, among other factors. In addition, it is still possible that monkeypox virus will become more prevalent due to the cessation of smallpox vaccination with vaccinia vaccine in 1980. Currently, in spite of the fact that mass vaccination is not recommended or achievable, individuals manage monkeypox may though vaccine (post-exposure prophylaxis, or pre-exposure prophylaxis), anti-viral medicines, as well as isolate or quarantine of the patients and any contacts with the patients.Particularly, there are large number of patients have been confirmed in MSM population in this 2022 outbreak and has been related to unanticipated anal and genital lesions, suggesting the monkeypox virus may be spreading via sexual transmission.158,170,179,180,185,272 This novel transmission pattern was suspected during 2017 outbreak of human monkeypox in Nigeria, but was not proven.474 Meanwhile, MSM population has higher risk on other disease through sexual transmission, such as HIV. In Ogoina and colleagues’ study,475 it was reported that monkeypox patients in Nigeria who were HIV-positive had longer-lasting illness, and larger lesions, and a higher percentage of and genital ulcers and secondary bacterial skin infections. By contrast, Tarin-Vicente and his colleagues180 reported that there was no difference between HIV-positive patients and the rest of the population in terms of severity or progression of the disease. Therefore, more investigations are needed to understand the effectiveness of anti-viral treatment among individuals infected with both HIV and human monkeypox virus. Besides, in order to reduce monkeypox transmission within MSM groups, public health efforts must deal with challenges including homophobia, stigma, and discrimination.Given the current global monkeypox epidemic, a race to create monkeypox -specific vaccines may occur like COVID-19 (Fig. 4). Moderna has announced that they have initiated a program to consider whether developing an mRNA monkeypox vaccine or not because of growing demand for vaccination, even though no further information on the vaccine or potential development timeline was released latter.476 Meanwhile, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) has addressed a patent to the Tonix Pharmaceuticals company for its vaccine candidate namely TNX-801, which was designed to protect against smallpox and monkeypox.477 TNX-801 is a novel, horsepox-based live virus vaccine based on synthesized horsepox (sHPXV). Effectiveness and safety have been demonstrated both in mouse models previously.478 In addition, TNX-801 vaccination protects macaques from monkeypox challenge, no lesions were seen in all monkeys.479 The monkeypox virion membrane surface-binding protein E8L is vital for virus attachment to host cells, which may be also used to explore new vaccine against monkeypox.480 Importantly, knowledge of the immunological response and mechanism of monkeypox virus infection would be critical, providing new ideas for vaccine development. Identification of the genes responsible for the host-range defect of virus may engineer more effective and safe vaccines, such as C16L/B22R, C16L (MVA genome).481 For severely immunocompromised individuals, valid vaccination strategies that bypass CD4 negative cell help are needed to protect against virus.482Global public health has been severely tested by the COVID-19 pandemic in the past two years. Confirmed cases of monkeypox are increasing rapidly worldwide especially in the US, which may have a negative impact on the global economy. With monkeypox being announced a public health emergency of international concern by WHO,11 people should raise awareness and build diagnostic capacity for the monkeypox epidemic in order to limit further spread of the virus. We should improve understanding and clinical management of monkeypox, as well as infection prevention and control skills, especially among public health personnel. At the same time, stigma and discrimination within the MSM community should be properly addressed and equitable access to treatment and vaccines should be ensured. Finally, we should initiate a global collaboration to conduct clinical investigations to test the efficacy and safety of monkeypox vaccines as well as antiviral drugs.


Title: Study of Camelpox Virus Pathogenesis in Athymic Nude Mice

IntroductionCamelpox virus (CMLV) is a member of the genus Orthopoxvirus (OPV) of the family Poxviridae
[1], [2]. In contrast to other OPV members, such as vaccinia virus (VACV), cowpox virus (CPXV) or monkeypox virus, CMLV remains poorly studied, although it is, genetically, the closest virus related to variola virus (VARV) [2]. While other OPVs can infect various hosts, including rodents, zoo animals, monkeys and humans, VARV and CMLV are restricted to a single host, humans for VARV and camels for CMLV, in which they induce a severe disease. Old World (dromedary and Bactrian) camelids have been recognized as the reservoir hosts of CMLV, although New World camelids, such as guanacos, may be experimentally infected [3]. The disease camelpox is endemic in almost every country in which camel husbandry is practiced, and outbreaks have been reported in the Middle East, in Asia, in Africa and in southern parts of Russia and India [4]. The transmission of camelpox is by direct contact or via contaminated environment. Of note, arthropod vectors could also be involved in the transmission of the disease [5].Human cases of camelpox have been described as rare or inexistent [6]–[8]. Indeed, few articles reported individuals with lesions on the arms, or ulcers on the lips and in the mouth (from drinking milk of infected animals), but they all remained unconfirmed [6], [8]. However, recently, camelpox has been described as a possible zoonosis with three human cases identified and laboratory confirmed in India [9]. These camel handlers, in direct contact with camelpox-infected animals, developed skin lesions localized on the fingers and the hands. Identification of CMLV as the causative agent was made (i) based on the detection of camelpox neutralizing antibodies in serum samples of the three suspected cases, (ii) by amplification of a CMLV specific gene (C18L), and (iii) by further amplification and sequencing of other genes whose sequences were confirmed to match those of CMLV. These findings should be taken into consideration in the actual context of increasing number of OPV infections in humans and animals. Indeed, the last years, outbreaks of CPXV infections have been identified in European countries and involved humans, pets (rats and dogs) and exotic zoo animals (elephants, mongooses, jaguarundis) [10]–[14]. Also, zoonotic infections of buffalopox have been reported in India [15], and VACV infections are seen in humans, cattle and monkeys in Brazil [16], [17]. It is hypothesized that cessation of smallpox vaccination 30 years ago may have rendered the populations more susceptible to OPV infections, a concept that is supported by the recent finding of a 20-fold increase in human monkeypox incidence in Democratic Republic of Congo [18]. However, camelpox appears largely restricted to camels, and seldom produces clinical disease in humans. Reports of human camelpox cases, either confirmed or not by virological tests, have suggested a mild course of disease even though CMLV is genetically more closely related to VARV than to other OPVs.In camels, camelpox is a contagious proliferative skin disease with localized or generalized vesicles on the skin and mucous membranes of the lips and the nose [5], [19], [20]. The clinical presentations observed are from mild to severe infections, which may reflect the existence of strains of CMLV of variable pathogenicity [8]. In agreement with previous reports, a recent study showed that young calves and pregnant females were the most susceptible to camelpox [4]. In the same study, the morbidity, mortality and abortion rates were of 30–90%, 1–15% and 80–90%, respectively [4]. Camelpox outbreaks cause not only severe economic losses in camel breeding areas, as camels are used for milk, meat, wool production, transport or racing [21], but also require logistical measures of containment for avoiding the spread in neighboring countries [22].In this context, laboratories have conducted researches to develop live attenuated (Dubai camelpox vaccine or Ducapox) and inactivated camelpox vaccines [3], [23], [24]. For instance, a single dose of Ducapox, given 6 years prior lethal challenge with CMLV, could protect camels from camelpox disease and related death. However, 6 to 9 month-old camels should receive a booster injection for a full protection [3]. In addition to these prophylactic options, post-exposure therapies could be of interest, particularly in young camels, but they have not yet been investigated in vivo due to the lack of small animal models. In vitro, ST-246 [Tecovirimat®, 4-trifluoromethyl-N-(3,3a,4,4a,5,5a,6,6a-octahydro-1,3-dioxo-4,6-ethenocycloprop[f]isoindol-2(1H)-yl)-benzamide] potently inhibited CMLV replication in several cell culture models by preventing the production of enveloped virus particles [25]–[27]. Also, several inhibitors of viral DNA polymerase, such as the acyclic nucleoside phosphonate HPMPC [cidofovir or Vistide®, (S)-1-(3-hydroxy-2-phosphoylmethoxypropyl)cytosine] and the 2,6-diaminopurine analog HPMPDAP, have shown potent antiviral activities against CMLV replication in vitro
[28]. Also, ST-246, HPMPC and CMX-001 (hexadecyloxypropyl-HPMPC) are currently recognized as potent inhibitors of OPVs in vivo, as demonstrated in various animal models [29], [30]. ST-246 and CMX-001 are orally available and HPMPC requires intravenous administration. These compounds have been successfully used as emergency investigational new drugs in humans for the treatment of life-threatening VACV infections [31]–[37]. Based on these data, ST-246 and acyclic nucleoside phosphonates could be considered as therapeutic options against natural CMLV infections. However, their further evaluation requires the availability of animal models.For the past forty years, several studies have supported the narrow host range of CMLV. Indeed, experimental inoculations of CMLV into cattle, sheep, goats, rabbits, guinea pigs, rats, hamsters and adult mice have been unsuccessful [22], [38]–[41]. In one study, monkeys challenged with CMLV strain Etha 78 developed typical pox lesions passing all stages from day 8 to day 18 post-inoculation [39], whereas in another report, monkeys inoculated with CMLV strain CM-G2 did not develop a rash [38]. Suckling and two week-old mice have been shown to be highly susceptible to certain strains of CMLV given intraperitoneally or intracerebrally, with 50% lethal doses varying with the strain used [21], [38], [42]. Five day-old or adult immunocompetent mice have been described resistant to CMLV when inoculated intradermally, albeit such strains caused considerable morbidity in camel herds or generalized pox lesions and death of 10 month-old camels [22], [40], [43]. Nevertheless, the availability of small animal models of CMLV infection would greatly enhance the understanding of CMLV pathogenesis, including its immune evasion mechanisms, and would allow the evaluation of (i) antivirals efficacy and (ii) the virulence of different CMLV strains. Moreover, there are evidences that camelpox might become a zoonosis, and severe forms of the disease should be considered in immunocompromised individuals.Thus, considering that common adult immunocompetent laboratory mice seemed being resistant to CMLV, we decided to focus on immunodeficient mice. A similar approach has been successfully reported with monkeypox virus [44], [45]. Indeed, most of the laboratory-derived immunocompetent mice appeared resistant to monkeypox virus, while wild-derived inbred immunocompetent strains (CAST/EiJ) and immunodeficient mice, such as SCID BALB/c, C57BL/6 Stat1-/- and 129 Stat1-/-, were highly susceptible [44]–[46].The aim of our work was to investigate whether four week-old athymic nude mice might be permissive for CMLV replication and propagation following intranasal (i.n.) or intracutaneous (i.c.) challenge. We further evaluated if the delivery routes could exert different pathogenic effects, as already reported for other OPVs [Schriewer, J. et al., XVIII International Poxvirus, Asfivirus, and Iridovirus Symposium, Sedona, Arizona, USA, June 5–10, 2010, P8.12], [43], in terms of disease progression and outcome, immune cell recruitment and cytokine production. Our findings demonstrate that the survival and pathogenesis of nu/nu mice depends on the route of infection which drives different patterns of immune cell recruitment in the spleen and lymph nodes of infected animals. In addition, the benefits of HPMPC and HPMPDAP treatments given topically or systemically were assessed and it was found that both treatments had an effect on CMLV-induced disease with HPMPC offering 100% protection from morbidity.Results
nu/nu mice are susceptible to i.n. and i.c. CML1 infectionIn pilot studies, the pathogenicity of CMLV strain Iran (CML1) was first evaluated in 4 to 5 week-old NMRI immunocompetent mice, challenged via the i.n. route with 2.0×106 PFU/mouse. These mice were followed for 70 days after infection and did not show any symptoms or loss of body weight (data not shown). This is in line with published studies describing the lack of virulence of CMLV in immunocompetent mice following intracranial or intradermal inoculation [22], [38]. Also, all of the animals challenged with CMLV seroconverted with a 50% neutralizing antibody titer mean of 1.54±0.23 log10 at day 70 post-infection. We then hypothesized that depletion of T cell-mediated responses could facilitate camelpox disease. Indeed, it has been shown that an effective cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response was important for successful OPV clearance, for instance, by inducing interferon-γ (IFN-γ) by TH1 cytokines [47]. Athymic nude mice were chosen as they lack thymic T cells, and animals at a young age (4 to 5 week-old, corresponding to an average body weight of 13 to 15 g) were used, since it was shown that susceptibility of mice to CMLV could be age dependent [21]. Based on other animal models of OPV infection, two routes of inoculation were investigated: i.n. and i.c. by light scarification at the lumbosacral region [48]. Various inocula were evaluated in both models to determine the conditions required to reach 100% morbidity or mortality, and these results are presented here. Of note, all animal's deaths recorded in the following experiments were induced by euthanasia based on humane end-points in order to minimize pain and distress, as defined in the materials and methods section.From these experiments, we demonstrated that mice infected i.n. with CML1 at an inoculum of 2.0×106 PFU/mouse failed to gain weight at the same rate as uninfected mice, starting from day 10 post-infection (
Figure 1A

). This was accompanied with severe disease progression, and clinical manifestations of camelpox were seen and consisted of pox-like lesions along the tail and on the legs (starting on day 25 post-infection) while the rest of the body remained lesion-free. Edemas of the joints and of the tail could be observed in some of the animals (
Figure 2
). For these reasons, animals presenting both parameters, i.e. absence of body weight take and severe disease, were euthanized and survival curves could be established. As shown in 
Figure 1B
, 100% of the i.n. infected cohort was euthanized by day 45 post-infection. Virus replication could be detected at days 25 and 45 post-infection in the sera and the lungs of, respectively, 100% and 50% of the infected animals by quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR, 
Figure 1C and D
). CML1 DNA copies were also detected in liver and spleen at the same time points (data not shown). Importantly, at earlier times, CMLV DNA copies could not be detected in the sera and in various tissues suggesting the spreading of the virus from the initial site of infection (data not shown). The presence of CML1 in skin lesions was confirmed by qPCR analyses of skin lesions (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g001Figure 1CML1 is pathogenic for athymic nude mice.Body weight evolution (A, E), survival curve (B), viral titers (C, D, G, H) and disease indices (F) recorded in nu/nu mice infected i.n. (A–D) or i.c. by light scarification on the back (E–H). (A–B, E–F) Ten mice per group (uninfected group and CML1-infected group) were followed for 80 days for their body weight and disease progression. Survival curves (B) were built based on i.n. infected animals that were euthanized due to (i) failure in gaining weight and (ii) severe disease when compared to uninfected controls (see materials and methods section). Disease indices (F) were attributed as stated in materials and methods. (C–D, G–H) Viral loads (n = 4 mice per time point) of serum, liver or back skin samples of CML1-infected mice were determined by qPCR (see materials and methods) and plotted on a logarithmic scale as viral DNA copies per 50 µl serum or per mg tissue. Results are presented as means±standard error of the mean (SEM). ***p<0.001: statistic differences in body weight evolution (unpaired t test) and in survival (Log-rank test). Results are representative of three independent experiments.10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g002Figure 2Symptoms observed at day 30 post-infection in nu/nu mice infected i.n. with CML1.Note the vesicles localized on the leg (A and B), the swelling of the joint of the leg (B and C), and the presence of lesions along the tail (D and E). Similar symptoms are seen with i.c. infection.Interestingly, nu/nu mice infected with CML1 by scarification (2.0×106 PFU/mouse) exhibited a body weight evolution similar to that of uninfected controls along the 75 days of the experiment (
Figure 1E
). However, i.c. infected mice did develop “pock-like” primary lesions at the site of scarification, which further spread towards the extremities. As shown in 
Figure 1F
, animals were scored for severity of lesions that appeared as soon as day 5 post-infection and then extended to the tail and/or legs by day 30 post-infection. In this model, the presence of CML1 was detected in the serum of 50% of the mice, while all skin biopsies exhibited high CML1 DNA copy numbers at days 30 and 45 post-infection (
Figure 1G and H
). At similar time points, animals with CML1-positive serum also demonstrated virus in the spleen and the tail, indicating the systemic spread of the virus (data not shown). This is further supported by the fact that, at earlier times, CMLV DNA copies were only detected in skin biopsies and swabs, and not in other tissues (data not shown).These results demonstrated that i.n. infection with CML1 resulted in drastic failure in weight gain, which, associated with a severe illness, led to death by euthanasia of the entire cohort. In contrast, CML1 administrated by the i.c. route provoked primary localized lesions, which then disseminated to the tail and/or legs of the mice, but did not affect body weight as compared with uninfected controls. We therefore wondered whether the differences in disease progression seen between the two models of infection could be explained by the circulation of neutralizing antibodies. Indeed, athymic nude mice can mount B cell responses. Seroneutralization experiments were performed with sera (n = 4 mice per group) collected at days 25 and 45 post-infection, and at days 30 and 75 post-infection for the i.n. and i.c. infection, respectively. Animals challenged with CML1 via i.n. or i.c. route did not produce neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, CML1 delivery route is of importance in nu/nu mice to determine the outcome of the disease.Histopathology of nu/nu mice infected with CML1To further study the two models, histopathology of various tissue biopsies was undertaken. As depicted in 
Figure 3A

, lungs, at 45 days after i.n. instillation, lung tissue showed the presence of dilated vessels in the interalveolar septa, but no inflammatory cells, and alveolar macrophages were sparse. Also, the epithelium lining the bronchioles was found normal, in comparison with lung tissue of uninfected animals. In addition, the leg was swollen due to massive edema of the muscular compartment; blood vessels showed vasodilatation and the muscle fibers were dissected by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate containing many macrophages; the bone marrow was hypercellular due to hyperplasia of the white cell series (
Figure 3B

, proximal leg). Histopathogical examination of the tail showed a swelling due to a diffuse infiltrate of neutrophils that extended from the deep dermis up to the underlying bone; the inflammatory cells infiltrated in and between the muscle fibers, and produced an irregular outline of the cortical bone; increased numbers of osteoblasts and osteoclasts were seen (
Figure 3C

, tail).10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g003Figure 3Histological examinations of lungs (A), proximal leg (B) and tail (C) of nu/nu mice infected i.n. with CML1.Hematoxylin and eosin-stained tissues are shown at day 45 post-infection for uninfected nu/nu mice (upper panels) and animals infected with CML1 by i.n. instillation (lower panels). (A) In CML1 infected animals, in comparison with uninfected animals, the lung tissue is characterized by open alveolar spaces, bronchioli without changes, and some dilated vessels in the interalveolar septa. (B) The disease induced in CML1 infected animals is also characterized by a massive edema of the muscular compartment of the proximal leg. (C) Histopathological changes in the tail upon infection are indentified by a diffuse infiltrate of neutrophils that extends from the deep dermis up to the underlying bone. Magnifications are indicated on each panel, and the 10× or 20× images represent the boxed region of the corresponding 2.5× image.

Figure 4A
 shows the back skin from mice infected by scarification. At day 15 post-infection, foci of inflammation around the deep part of follicles, comprised of eosinophils and mononuclear cells, were seen. Fifteen days later, there were several exophytic lesions, covered by hyperplastic squamous epithelium that centrally invaginated to form a crater, filled with parakeratin and inflammatory cells, as well as some exfoliated epithelial cells. The hyperplastic epithelium contained few, scattered dyskeratotic cells. The epithelium was focally eroded and replaced by a crusta. At its base, the lesion was surrounded by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate that extended into the underlying muscular layer. At day 45 post-infection, a partly exophytic, partly endophytic lesion, comprising hyperplastic squamous epithelium that centrally invaginated, was observed. In the stroma around this lesion, a mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate was seen. Finally, at 72 days post-infection (dpi), the skin presented a large erosion in which the squamous epithelium was lost, and replaced by a crusta. In addition, no hair follicles were left in the underlying tissue, and the fatty tissue was broken up by thin collagenous strands containing some mononuclear inflammatory cells.10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g004Figure 4Histology of back skin (scarified-zone), proximal leg and tail in nu/nu infected by scarification with CML1.(A) Hematoxylin and eosin-stained skin tissues are shown for uninfected and CML1-scarified nu/nu mice at 15, 30, 45 and 75 dpi. Inflammation is centered around hair follicles, as well as in the deep muscle, and the hyperplastic epithelium invaginates to form a crater. (B) Histological examinations of proximal leg and tail of CML1-scarified nu/nu mice are shown at 45 and 75 days after virus infection. Note the epithelial hyperplasia and ulceration in the skin of the leg and of the tail, and the massive edema that extends between individual muscle fibers of the leg at 75 dpi. Magnifications are indicated on each panel, and the 10× images represent the boxed region of the corresponding 2.5× image.As shown in 
Figure 4B
, similar findings were observed in the skin of the leg and of the tail at 45 dpi. The observations of the leg at day 75 post-infection were comparable to those reported above for the i.n. model. However, in some areas, neutrophils predominated and formed small abcess-like accumulations in which nuclear dust was found. The inflammatory infiltrate encroached focally upon the cortical bone resulting in piecemeal break-down and irregular outline. The tail showed focal epithelial hyperplasia and ulceration, covered by a crusta containing parakeratin; in the epithelium, scattered dyskeratotic cells were seen. At the base of this lesion, a band-like mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate was observed (
Figure 4B
).CML1 infection affects innate and B cell responsesThe route of CML1 administration appeared to drive the disease outcome. In this context, we speculated that immune responses induced in each model could help understanding CML1 pathogenesis. Athymic nude mice lack thymic T cells, but have potent innate immune, as well as B cell, responses. We determined the changes in the number of macrophages, neutrophils, NK cells and B cells in the spleen and in a pool of draining lymph nodes (DLNs; axillary, inguinal, mesenteric and lumbar) after exposure to CML1, in comparison with non infected animals, by flow cytometric analysis at days 25 and 45 post-infection for the i.n. model, and at days 30 and 75 post-infection for the i.c. model. Of note, we observed a severe enlargement of the lumbar lymph nodes in both models, and scarified-animals also exhibited moderate enlargement of inguinal and axillary lymph nodes, as seen at days 30 and 75 post-infection.Analysis of splenocytes revealed a significant and sustained recruitment of CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages and a strong, but transient, increase of CD11b+Gr1+ neutrophils in the spleen after i.n. CML1 inoculation (
Figure 5A and B
). A comparable pattern of macrophage increase was seen after i.c. infection, whereas the neutrophil population only rose at 75 dpi (
Figure 5E and F
). In terms of NK cell response, a significant and temporary increase in DX5+ subset was observed at 25 dpi following i.n. challenge. In contrast, no significant changes in NK cell populations were noticed after i.c. inoculation (
Figure 5C and G
). After i.n. infection, B220+CD19+ B cell subset was slightly decreased at days 25 and 45 post-infection, and this trend was also viewed in the i.c. model (
Figure 5D and H
). It has to be mentioned that the decreased trend of the B220+CD19+ population was not statistically significant in other independent experiments. Our results suggest that the recruitment of neutrophils, DX5+ NK cells and B220+CD19+ cell population differ to some extent between the two models, while macrophages are similarly recruited.10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g005Figure 5Identification of changes in immune cell populations from spleen of nu/nu mice exposed to CML1.Mice (n = 4 per group) were challenged i.n. (A–D) or i.c. (E–H) with PBS (uninfected) or with CML1 at a dose of 2.0×106 PFU. At 25 and 45 dpi for the i.n. model or at 30 and 75 dpi for the i.c. model, spleen were harvested and CD11b+F4/80+ macrophages, CD11b+Gr1+ neutrophils, DX5+ NK cells and B220+CD19+ mature B cells were identified by FACS. Results are presented as percent gated cells. Bars represent mean±SD, standard deviation (n = 4). ***p<0.001; **p<0.01 and *p<0.05: CML1 differs significantly from uninfected group as determined by unpaired t test; representative of two independent experiments.Analysis of the DLNs i.n. and i.c. inoculations revealed no changes in the levels of DX5+CD3- NK cells and of B220+CD19+ mature B cells in both models, compared with the uninfected controls (data not shown). In contrast, after i.n. challenge, the amounts of CD11c+CD8α+ lymphoid and CD11c+CD11b+ myeloid dendritic cells (DCs) appeared increased at 25 dpi, in comparison with uninfected nu/nu mice (
Figure 6A and B
). However, these differences were not statistically significant but were seen in two independent experiments. At 45 dpi, the levels of the two DC subsets were comparable to those of the controls. In contrast, at 30 dpi, there was a little trend of decreased amounts of lymphoid and myeloid DCs in DLNs of mice inoculated by the i.c. route compared with the controls, while at 75 dpi, both DC populations remained constant (
Figure 6C and D
). Therefore, both routes of inoculation only induced small changes in the distribution of the various cell populations (i.e., DCs, NK and B cells) found in the DLNs.10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g006Figure 6DLN responses to CML1 in nu/nu mice following i.n. or i.c. infection.Mice received PBS (uninfected) or 2.0×106 PFU of CML1. At 25 and 45 dpi for the i.n. model (A–B) or at 30 and 75 dpi for the i.c. model (C–D), DLNs (pool of inguinal, axillary, mesenteric and lumbar lymph nodes) were collected and the CD11c+CD8α+ lymphoid and CD11c+CD11b+ myeloid DCs were identified. The magnitude of DC responses is depicted as percent gated cells plotted on box- and whiskers-graphs. Bars represent Min to Max whiskers (n = 4 individual mice for each group). Results were submitted to unpaired t test but the differences between the groups were not significant.CML1 infection alters cytokine profiles in the seraA number of cytokines have been shown to play important roles in the virulence or in the resolution of acute infection of OPVs [49]–[51]. Thus, to better understand the contrast seen between the i.n. and i.c. route of infection, we aimed to examine cytokine responses in the serum of animals exposed to CML1. For that purpose, sera were collected on days 25 and 45, and on days 30 and 75 after virus exposure for the i.n. and i.c. model, respectively. Four animals per group and per time point were used. As shown in 
Figure 7A
, i.n. CML1 challenge resulted in significant increase of interleukin (IL)-18 at day 45 post-infection as compared with uninfected controls; though this trend was already seen at 25 dpi. A 4-fold increase in the levels of IL-6 was recorded upon i.n. infection, albeit only low levels of IL-6 were detected (mean levels of 20 pg/ml), compared with uninfected controls. This increase has been further confirmed in an additional ELISA assay (see materials and methods) which showed mean IL-6 levels of 71±34 pg/ml and of 65±23 pg/ml in the sera of i.n. infected mice at, respectively, 25 and 45 dpi, while the uninfected animals had IL-6 levels under the limit of detection. IL-1β appeared very slightly up-regulated after CML1 exposure, but precaution should be taken to interpret this result as the significance is based on a p value of 0.0456. All the other cytokines evaluated in the i.n. model had levels similar to those of the uninfected animals.10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g007Figure 7Cytokine production in the sera of nu/nu after exposure to CML1.Sera from mice inoculated i.n. (A) or i.c. (B), isolated at two time points after exposure to PBS or to CML1, were used to measure cytokine levels by ELISA. Data are the average±SEM (n = 4 mice for each group). ***p<0.001; **p<0.01 and *p<0.05, CML1 versus the corresponding values of the uninfected group by unpaired t test. Boxed regions represent a zoom-in of the corresponding field, i.e., IL-1β and IL-6.Interestingly, a similar cytokine profile was seen in the i.c. model with IL-18 levels being boosted in response to CML1 scarification, while the levels of the other cytokines were in the range of the controls, including IL-6 (
Figure 7B
). This result, further confirmed with an ELISA assay, highlighted the discrepancies in IL-6 levels seen between the two models, although precaution should be taken as the IL-6 levels observed in the i.n. model were low.Systemic HPMPC, and to a lesser extent HPMPDAP, protect nu/nu mice against severe disease development after i.n. challenge with CML1To investigate the feasibility of using the i.n. model for the evaluation of antivirals, we assessed the efficacy of HPMPC and of HPMPDAP. The choice of HPMPDAP was based on its 10-fold higher antiviral activity against CML1 in cell culture, compared to HPMPC [28]. Four-week old mice were infected i.n. with 2.0×106 PFU of CML1, and treated intraperitoneally for 3 days, once per day, with 50 mg/kg of HPMPC and HPMPDAP or with PBS (placebo). As shown in 
Figures 8A and 8B
, body weight curve of animals infected with CML1 and non-treated significantly diverged from that of the uninfected group from day 17 post-infection, and all animals had to be euthanized between days 32 and 45 post-infection based on our defined end-points (see materials and methods). In contrast, HPMPC treatment protected mice from changes in body weight and severe illness (
Figures 8A and 8B
). Animals infected and treated with HPMPDAP showed significant failure in weight gain, compared to uninfected group, which started at day 5 post-infection, and 40% of these mice did develop severe disease requiring euthanasia (
Figure 8A
). From the entire HPMPDAP cohort, 60% of the animals survived CML1 challenge, as seen at day 70 post-infection (
Figure 8B
).10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g008Figure 8HPMPC protects against lethal CML1 i.n. challenge, whereas HPMPDAP showed an intermediate protection.
Nu/nu mice were inoculated i.n. with PBS (uninfected group) or with CML1 at a dose of 2.0×106 PFU (CML1, HPMPC and HPMPDAP groups). HPMPC and HPMPDAP groups were treated intraperitoneally for 3 days, starting the day of infection, with 50 mg/kg of HPMPC or HPMPDAP, respectively; uninfected and CML1 groups received a similar treatment regimen but with PBS. Animals were monitored for 70 days for body weight (A). Survival curves (B) were built based on i.n. infected animals treated or not that were euthanized due to (i) failure in gaining weight and (ii) severe illness in comparison with uninfected controls (see materials and methods). Viral loads in the serum and various organs (C) and in skin swabs of tail and leg (D) were determined by qPCR at days 25 and 45 post-infection. Data are mean±SEM. Statistical analyses were performed as described in materials and methods. Results are representative of two independent experiments.As depicted in 
Figure 8C and D
, virus dissemination was confirmed in the serum, liver, lungs, spleen and lymph nodes of all animals of the CML1 group, and the viral DNA loads showed that animals were similarly infected. The presence of viral genome in skin lesions of the tail or leg was also validated. Under HPMPC treatment, CML1 viral genome remained undetected in the serum, lungs, spleen and lymph nodes at days 25 and 45 post-infection. However, at 25 dpi, one mouse did show virus DNA copies in the liver, and two mice had positive swabs of the tail and of the leg, but these viral DNA loads were still significantly lower than those seen in the CML1 group. At day 25 post-infection, HPMPDAP treatment significantly reduced viral DNA loads in the serum, liver, spleen and swabs compared to those of CML1-group. Also, at that day, the only organs that remained free of CML1 under HPMPDAP therapy were the lymph nodes. At 45 dpi, depending on the organ analyzed, one to three out of four of the euthanized mice exhibited CML1 DNA copies. This suggests that systemic administration of HPMPDAP for 3 days was not as effective as HPMPC for preventing CML1 dissemination in nu/nu mice.Topical HPMPC and HPMPDAP affect CML1 dissemination in nu/nu mice following i.c. infectionWe further wanted to determine whether the scarification model could be useful for evaluating the antiviral efficacy of cream-based therapeutics. The efficacy of 1% HPMPC-cream has already been shown against cutaneous VACV or CPXV infections in immunodeficient mice [52], [53]. Here, in addition to an HPMPC-cream, we also evaluated the antiviral activity of an HPMPDAP-cream against CML1-induced disease. Athymic nude mice were inoculated with CML1 by light scarification at the lumbosacral region. Topical treatments of 1% HPMPC- or HPMPDAP-cream were given once daily for 5 days, starting the day of infection, and mice were followed for 75 days after virus contact. As expected, no changes in body weight were seen between the different groups (
Figure 9A
). In addition, HPMPC and HPMPDAP therapies abolished lesion development at the site of scarification and propagation to the tail and/or leg through the 75 days of monitoring, as demonstrated in 
Figures 9B and C
. It has to be noticed that the 1%-HPMPC formulation could cause skin irritation, which was not observed in the placebo- or HPMPDAP-group (data not shown).10.1371/journal.pone.0021561.g009Figure 9Effects of topical HPMPC and HPMPDAP against CML1 propagation in cutaneously infected nu/nu mice.Animals were scarified with PBS (uninfected group) or with CML1 at a dose of 2.0×106 PFU (CML1, HPMPC and HPMPDAP groups). Topical application of 1% HPMPC- and HPMPDAP-cream started the day of infection for 5 days, once per day. Uninfected and CML1 groups were treated similarly with a placebo-cream. Animals were monitored for 75 days for body weight (A, n = 5), lesions development (B–C), and viral loads (D). B; Disease indices or scores were given as stated in materials and methods. Data are mean±SEM (n = 5). C; photos were taken at 4, 18, 30, 46 and 75 dpi, and show the evolution of the primary lesions and their spread to the tail. D; the disease index of the sacrificed mice (n = 4 per group) is shown. Viral loads in various tissues and swabs were determined by qPCR at days 30 and 75 post-infection. Data are mean±SEM. For statistical analyses, see materials and methods. Results are representative of two independent experiments.Viral loads in various samples were then determined at days 30 and 75 post-infection. For that purpose, four mice of each group were chosen at random, sacrificed at both time points and their scores (disease indices) were recorded. As shown in 
Figure 9D
, all animals from the CML1-cohort had mean scores of 4 and 5, demonstrating the severity of the lesions. It has to be mentioned that the back lesion of one mouse killed at day 75 post-infection was almost healed but this animal still had severe lesions on the tail and swollen joints. The HPMPC-group had no signs of disease (score of zero). Interestingly, a score of 1 was reported in one animal of the HPMPDAP-group at day 30 post-infection, while the others remained disease free. As shown in 
Figure 9D
, animals belonging to the CML1-cohort exhibited intermediate to high viral loads among the various samples. Per time points and per samples, CML1 copy numbers were nicely grouped to each other, with the exception of spleen and serum samples at day 30 post-infection. At 30 dpi, viral loads found in skin biopsies were diminished approximately by 10,000-fold after HPMPC treatment, compared with the CML1-group, which showed an average viral DNA copies of 5×106 (
Figure 9D
). HPMPC treatment resulted in undetectable levels of CML1 at 30 dpi in swabs from skin and tail, and in sera, spleen and lymph nodes, compared to those of the CML1-cohort. At later time point, the antiviral efficacy of HPMPC treatment was still seen with a strong reduction or inhibition of viral loads in the skin biopsies, skin and tail swabs and serum. However, HPMPC only delayed viral dissemination to the spleen and the lymph nodes at day 75 post-infection, since, respectively, 50% and 75% of the animals had viral loads similar to those of the CML1-group.HPMPDAP topical treatment afforded strong reductions in viral DNA loads in the various samples recovered in 3 out of 4 animals at day 30 post-infection. At this time point, the mouse that showed high viral DNA copies, not only in the skin biopsy, but also in most of the other samples examined (i.e., skin swab, serum and lymph nodes), corresponded to the one reported with a disease index of 1 (
Figure 9D
). At 75 dpi, statistically significant diminutions in viral DNA loads, reaching sometimes undetectable levels, were seen in the skin biopsies, swabs and sera recovered from mice under HPMPAP therapy. Similarly to HPMPC, topical HPMPDAP provided only partial effect in reducing titers in the spleen and lymph nodes. As a general conclusion, both topical treatments inhibited the development of primary cutaneous lesions and of satellite lesions as well, at 30 and 75 dpi, but failed to clear the entire cohorts at later time points from CML1 spread to the spleen and the lymph nodes.Immune responses and cytokine production following HPMPC and HPMPDAP treatments are similar to those of the uninfected animalsFinally, in order to explore whether HPMPC or HPMPDAP treatments could have an effect on the immune system to help for viral clearance, we characterized the immune cell populations in spleen and DLNs (by FACS analysis) and compared cytokine induction in sera (by ELISA) among the different cohorts. During the animal experiments in which the antiviral activities of HPMPC and HPMPDAP were assessed, samples were collected and used for these analyses. FACS experiments performed on spleen and DLNs revealed that the levels of immune cells, such as macrophages, neutrophils, NK, B, lymphoid and myeloid DC cells, in the infected-treated cohorts were comparable with those of uninfected animals. Likewise, levels of cytokines were comparable between infected-treated animals and uninfected mice. Thus, at the time-points investigated, the treated animals exhibited immune and cytokine responses that were similar to those of naïve animals.DiscussionIn this report we described the establishment and the characterization of two immunodeficient mouse models of CMLV infection. The choice of an immunodeficient model was based on the literature [38], [41] and on our data confirming that four to five week-old immunocompetent mice were resistant to i.n. CMLV infection and that the entire cohort had neutralizing antibody titers against CMLV. This avirulent phenotype could be circumvented by using severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice, which lack B and T cells (data not shown), and athymic nude mice, which lack a normal thymus and thus functionally mature T cells. We observed that i.n. or intraperitoneal administration of CMLV to SCID mice induced 80% mortality between 20 to 30 dpi at a dose of 3×105 and 4×106 PFU, respectively (data not shown). Further experiments performed in athymic mice showed that CMLV given i.n., i.c. or intraperitoneally rendered animals sick. Disease appearance and CMLV-related death (by euthanasia) in nu/nu mice were observed later to what was seen with the SCID mice. Therefore, the involvement of B cell responses might be then hypothesized for slowing down camelpox disease progression. We focused our works on nu/nu mice, which are partially immunosuppressed, and decided to investigate the two routes of infection that resemble those occurring in the natural host.We showed that CMLV given by the i.n. and the i.c. route induced the development of camelpox disease in nu/nu mice. In both models, the clinical signs of camelpox disease were noticeable with appearance of lesions along the tail, starting from its base towards the extremity, together with edemas of the tail and/or of the joints of the feet and legs. The outcome was different depending on the model of infection, one altering the body weight evolution and leading to death by euthanasia while the other model not. The progression and severity of camelpox disease was measured (i) in the i.n. model by the absence of body weight gain associated with severe illness which justified the euthanasia of the animals and (ii) in the i.c. model by the development of cutaneous ulcerations. Also, monitoring of the disease was possible by performing qPCR on various tissues, body fluids and swabs. Consequently, the two models offered suitable features for enabling the visual and molecular evaluation of antiviral drug efficacies.In general, the disease observed upon CMLV infection in nu/nu mice was prolonged, in contrast with what is seen with pathogenic OPVs such as VACV strain Western Reserve (VACV-WR). Indeed, at doses of virus ranging from 104 to 106 PFU, i.n. infection with VACV-WR resulted in death of all nu/nu mice by day 9 post-infection [54], while mortality by euthanasia was observed between days 32 to 45 post-infection with CMLV (dose of 2×106 PFU). This difference in pathogenicity can also be seen in the i.c. model in which CPXV strain Brighton (CPXV-Br) or VACV-WR inoculated to nu/nu mice at a dose of 104 PFU induced death of the entire cohort at day 12 after virus exposure (our unpublished data), while animals scarified with CMLV (dose of 104 PFU) did not exhibit signs of disease. However, increasing the dose of CMLV in the i.c. model caused development of lesions at the site of scarification and their propagation to the tail and/or legs. Therefore, in comparison with other pathogenic OPVs, CMLV exhibits an intermediate phenotype with an attenuated degree of virulence in mice. However, CMLV virulence appears to be similar to that seen with vaccine strains of VACV, such as Lederle and Lister, in immunodeficient mice. Indeed, VACV strain Lederle administrated i.n. to nu/nu mice at a dose of 2×106 PFU led to death of the animals between days 23 to 33 post-infection, while a 100-fold lower virus dose induced 25% mortality (our unpublished data). Furthermore, i.c. inoculation of VACV strain Lister (dose of 5×105 PFU) to athymic nude mice resulted in death at day 34±7 post-infection [55].In terms of histopathology, examination of cutaneous lesions described in the i.c. model revealed epithelial hyperplasia, inflammation centered on the hair follicles that extended into the deep muscle in some cases, and development of tumor-like lesions. These features could resemble the histological descriptions of skin lesions found not only in animals infected i.c. with other OPVs such as ectromelia virus (ECTV) [48], but also in humans with VARV, monkeypox virus and molluscum contagiosum virus [56]–[58]. In the case of the i.n. model, lung histology demonstrated the presence of dilated vessels in the interalveolar septa without signs of inflammation. More pronounced respiratory infections of mice have been described following i.n. route with ECTV, VACV and CPXV which provoked lung inflammation, necrotizing bronchopneumonia and bronchiolitis, respectively [48]. However, our observations are comparable to those showing that lethal i.n. CPXV infection performed with a volume of virus of 5 µl led to absence of histological changes of the lungs, while a volume of 50 µl resulted in pneumonitis [50]. We hypothesized that the 10 µl volume used for CMLV infection might have confined pathological changes to the upper respiratory tract.From our experiments, it appeared that (i) T cell responses were essential for controlling CMLV infection in immunocompetent animals, which is in agreement with published data on other OPVs [59]–[61], (ii) the site of virus entry might give different immune responses which could be responsible for different disease outcome, and (iii) eventually, the genetic background of CMLV itself may help understanding its attenuated virulence phenotype, such as the absence or presence of specific immunomodulatory genes or of host range genes from CMLV genome. Also, our findings with CMLV might help to understand some of the mechanisms used by VARV to evade the host immune system since both viruses share common biological properties including their closely related genomic sequences, their single host species and their poor pathogenicity in adult immunocompetent mice [38].As a first step to understand the differences seen in the pathogenicity induced by CMLV when it was given i.n. or i.c., we characterized the immune responses induced by CMLV challenge, and the cytokines produced in sera as well. It has indeed been shown that following i.n. or intradermal VACV-WR infection in BALB/c mice, marked differences were seen in the pathogenesis and in the cellular inflammatory response [62]. O'Gorman and colleagues have recently evidenced that VACV immunization induced a TLR2- and IL-6-dependent STAT3 pathway, while lethal ECTV infection did not activate STAT3 [63]; albeit this was observed using two different viruses. Finally, Abadie et al. have nicely shown that modified VACV Ankara (MVA) administrated via the intradermal or intramuscular route could recruit antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in a different manner, priming different T cell responses and thus shaping different quality of cytokine-producing virus-specific T cells [64]. Therefore, the route of OPV infection, including CMLV, can result in different pathogenicity by inducing distinct immune responses [Schriewer, J. et al., XVIII International Poxvirus, Asfivirus, and Iridovirus Symposium, Sedona, Arizona, USA, June 5–10, 2010, P8.12] [43], [65].Nude mice, even though lacking functional T cells, can mount innate immune and B cell responses. At day 25 post-infection, i.n. infection resulted in substantial flow of macrophages, neutrophils and DX5+ NK cells in the spleen, while the pool of B cells decreased. Moreover, at the same time, recruitment of myeloid and lymphoid DCs was noticed in the DLNs. Intracutaneous infection, in contrast, resulted in an influx of macrophages in the spleen at days 30 and 75 post-infection, while slight accumulation of neutrophils was observed only at late time point, and no change, compared to uninfected controls, was found in the DLNs. In conclusion, the two models recruited or diminished different cell population pools in response to CMLV, even though they exhibited comparable massive macrophage invasion. In both models, the presence of neutralizing antibodies was not detected.We further examined the cytokines released in the sera of nu/nu mice after i.n. or i.c. challenge. Poxviruses possess various immune evasion strategies to counteract host cell-mediated immunity. To this end, CMLV expresses for example proteins that bind IFN-γ, IFN-α/β, CC chemokines, tumor necrosis factor and IL-1β [2]. Cytokines such as IL-2, -4, -5, -10, -13, -17 and IFN-γ, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)- α, macrophage and granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF and GM-CSF, respectively) in infected animals were in the same range as in uninfected controls. In our hands, i.n. inoculation provoked a very slight increase in IL-1β level at 45 dpi. However, IL-1β may be inactive since CMLV possesses two ways for inhibiting IL-1β activity. The first way could be the production of a viral soluble receptor for IL-1β, encoded by three CMLV genes CMLV193, 194 and 196 which are multiple regions of the VACV B16R IL-1 binding protein; although there are no proofs that these small open reading frames are functional [1]. The second way is the production of a caspase 1 inhibitor, known as SPI-2 (CMLV191 gene homolog to VACV B13R gene [1]), which blocks the cleavage of proIL-1β into IL-1β [1].Intranasal CMLV inoculation of immunocompromised mice led to significant increases of IL-6 levels by approximately 4-fold. Nevertheless, this increase remains much lower than that observed in immunocompetent mice upon lethal VACV or CPXV infection for which, in comparison with uninfected controls, a 60-fold increase in IL-6 concentrations has been recorded [50], [66]. It is recognized that IL-6 deficient animals are highly susceptible to OPV infection demonstrating its role for surviving an OPV infection [49], [63]. However, as hypothesized by Smee et al., the hyper-induction of IL-6 and its sustained levels might be deleterious for the host, counteracting the beneficial role of timely release cytokines for helping virus clearance [50].Both routes of CMLV inoculation induced an increase in IL-18 levels. These findings may reflect our FACS data since this pro-inflammatory cytokine can be produced by macrophages. Interestingly, although the IL-18 increase was measured after CMLV contact, IFN-γ levels in CMLV-infected animals were similar to those of uninfected animals. In contrast to VACV, VARV or ECTV, CMLV does not encode for an IL-18 binding protein, although IL-18 is a key pro-inflammatory cytokine, originally identified as an IFN-γ-inducing factor. IL-18 has been shown to induce Th1 responses, NK cell activation and T cell proliferation, and to induce host-derived IFN-γ [67]. OPV IL-18 binding proteins have been shown to promote virulence by decreasing IFN-γ levels, and NK and T cell activities as well [68]. The authors have also described that IL-18 was still produced after in vivo VACV infection, demonstrating that IL-18 binding protein did not affect levels of IL-18 in the lungs. According to these findings and our data showing the recruitment of DX5+ NK cells in the spleen and increased IL-18 levels, we expected to see elevated levels of IFN-γ in the sera (although we might have failed to detect it because our first time point was 25 dpi). In addition, Alcami et al. described that the soluble receptor of IFN-γ produced by CMLV could, in vitro, bind and inhibit the biological activity of human, bovine and rat IFN-γ, but not mouse IFN-γ, favoring the hypothesis that IFN-γ could have been induced in response to CMLV [69]. We can also speculate that the absence of IFN-γ production could be explained by the activity of the CMLV097 gene product. The CMLV097 gene is homolog of the VACV H1L gene that encodes for a dual-specificity protein tyrosine phosphatase, which has been shown to dephosphorylate STAT1 and thus prevent the induction of IFN-γ [70].From these data, it appears that the differences in outcome upon i.n. and i.c. challenge do not seem being related to difference in cytokine profiles. However, in this study, FACS and cytokine analyses were performed late after virus exposure. In further experiments, earlier, as well as closer time points should be considered in order to evaluate whether striking discrepancies between the two models exist and to investigate whether a transient induction of IFN-γ may occur. Moreover, early immune responses should be studied not only in nu/nu mice, but also in CMLV-resistant immunocompetent mice, with the aim to identify the immune events trigger by these two types of infection.To our knowledge, this is the first time that the benefit of an antiviral therapy has been evaluated in vivo against CMLV. Two compounds among the acyclic nucleoside phosphonate family were tested, but HPMPC was used as a proof of concept for validating our in vivo models to assess therapeutics. Indeed, HPMPC has already proved its anti-poxvirus activity in vivo for several years now and is widely used as reference compound in animal studies involving poxviruses [71]. In our hands, systemic HPMPC (50 mg/kg for 3 days once a day) protected nu/nu mice in the i.n. model from camelpox disease and related death by euthanasia. Furthermore, following HPMPC treatment, CMLV was cleared from the serum, liver, spleen, lungs and lymph nodes, and no signs of sickness were seen at the end of the experiment. In contrast, although promising from the in vitro studies, HPMPDAP exhibited a lower antiviral efficacy, compared to its parent molecule HPMPC, since HPMPDAP protected 60% of the animals from death by euthanasia, and 25% to 50% from systemic spread of the virus, as shown by viral DNA loads. In addition, signs of toxicity were seen following systemic HPMPDAP treatment in nu/nu mice aged of four to five weeks, while this was not reported in adult NMRI mice [72]. Regarding the i.c. model, topical treatment with 1% HPMPC abolished primary cutaneous lesions and inhibited the development of lesions on the tail and/or legs, as well as the edemas of the joints. In agreement with that, viral loads in skin biopsies were reduced by 10,000-fold and circulating CMLV was not detected in the sera, spleens and lymph nodes at day 30 after virus exposure. At the end of the experiment, no recurrent lesions were visualized in the treated group, although a systemic presence of CMLV was found in most of the animals. These results demonstrated that HPMPC-cream slowed camelpox disease progression and was not able to counteract the systemic dissemination of CMLV. Smee and colleagues reported comparable observations with VACV, although their model in cyclophosphamide immunosuppressed mice was lethal [53]. The protection afforded by a 1%-HPMPC-cream against VACV-WR reduced the severity and the spread of the lesions, and delayed death. Additionally, topical administration of 1% HPMPC-DMSO solution in nu/nu mice scarified with VACV strain Lister, a vaccinal strain, offered a complete protection from disease development and death, although viral loads in vital organs were not reported [55]. Comparable conclusions could be drawn with the HPMPDAP-cream, 100% protection was given against disease appearance and propagation, while systemic spread of CMLV to vital organs was delayed but not stopped.In conclusion, we developed murine models of CMLV infection, and defined the immunologic parameters induced by CMLV which represent the basis needed for the further study of CMLV pathogenesis and for antiviral drug testing. Moreover, CMLV strains of different pathogenicity might exist [21] and these models could serve for the evaluation of their virulence. Our findings demonstrate also that these models could serve for a better understanding of the immune evasion mechanisms of CMLV, which were until now hampered by the absence of in vivo models. The immune modulation offered by CMLV was often characterized by cloning a CMLV gene of interest into a VACV backbone genome [73], [74]. We provide here novel tools for avoiding genetic manipulations between two OPV species, VACV, which can be pathogenic for humans, and CMLV, which induces a localized to generalized and lethal disease in camels.Materials and MethodsCells and virusCMLV strain Iran (CML1, kindly provided by H. Meyer, Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology, Germany) was used in these studies [40]. Human embryonic lung (HEL) fibroblast cells were grown in Earle's minimum essential medium (MEM Earle's, Invitrogen™, Merelbeke, Belgium) containing 5% fetal calf serum (FCS), 0.2% serum substitute for animal cell culture (Ultroser®G, PALL Life Sciences, Cergy-Saint-Christophe, France), 1% HEPES, 1% non-essential amino acids, 1% sodium pyruvate, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin/glutamine (Invitrogen™) at 37°C under a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Virus was grown and titrated on HEL cell monolayers. CML1 was purified through a 36% sucrose cushion. Briefly, HEL cells were infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.01 for 2 hr in MEM 2% FCS, and then replaced in fresh MEM 2%. At day 2 post-infection, the supernatant was removed, cells were scraped in phosphate buffer saline (PBS) and frozen at −80°C. Infected cells were homogenized on ice in a glass dounce homogenizer (type A pestel) with 15 strokes. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 1200 rpm, 4°C, and the supernatant was layered on a cold 36% sucrose cushion. Following ultracentrifugation (13,500 rpm, 90 min, 4°C), the viral pellet was resuspended in 1 mM Tris-HCl pH 9.5 and crude virus stocks were stored at −80°C.MiceFemale athymic nude (nu/nu) NMRI mice were purchased from Elevage-Janvier (Le-Genest-St-Isle, France). All experimental and animal experimentations were completed at biosafety level 2. Animals were 13 to 15 g (4 to 5 week-old) the day of infection, and groups were defined as uninfected, CML1-infected, HPMPC-treated or HPMPDAP-treated. Depending on the experiment, 5 to 20 animals per group were used.Ethics StatementAll animal work was approved by the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven Ethics Committee for Animal Care and Use (Permit number: P044-2010). All animal guidelines and policies were in accordance with the Belgian Royal Decree of 14 November 1993 concerning the protection of laboratory animals and the European Directive 86-609-EEC for the protection of vertebrate animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes. Infections were performed under anesthesia using ketamine/xylazine in saline and, when required, euthanasia was done by administration of pentobarbital sodium.Animal infectionsFor i.n. infections, mice were anesthetized using a cocktail of ketamine/xylazine in saline, and inoculated with 10 µl of PBS containing 2.0×106 PFU CML1 (5 µl per nostril) or mock-inoculated with 10 µl of PBS. For i.c. infections, mice received a light anesthesia (ketamine/xylazine in saline) and were immobilized manually by one person. Scarifications were made, as described elsewhere [55], by applying a 10 µl drop of 2.0×106 PFU CML1 at the lumbosacral region.Animal's monitoring and scoringIn all experiments, mice were monitored for body weights, morbidity and mortality for 45 (i.n. model) or 75 days (i.c. model). In the i.c. model of infection, the development and propagation of the lesions were referred to a disease index scored on a 0 to 5 scale as follow: 0, absence of lesions; 1, appearance of tiny lesions; 2, visible lesions; 3, enlargement of lesion's size; 4, increase of lesion's severity (bleeding); 5, spreading of the lesions to the tail and/or the legs. Also, all deaths reported were due to sacrifices based on humane end-points in order to minimize pain and distress. For the i.n. model, animals were euthanized because of (i) failure in gaining weight as compared with uninfected controls (i.e., there was more than 35% difference in body weight when compared to uninfected controls) and (ii) severe sickness associated with development of lesions and/or edemas. Animals responding to these criteria were also prostrated. In the i.c. model, animals were euthanized based on severe disease development (high average disease index) with or without differences in body weight when compared to uninfected controls; animals met these criteria around day 75 post-infection.Antiviral compounds and treatments(S)-HPMPC was provided by Gilead Sciences (Foster City, CA, US) and (S)-HPMPDAP was synthesized by Marcela Krečmerová at the Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague. Animals infected via the i.c. route received cream-based treatments consisting of a 1% (S)-HPMPC- or (S)-HPMPDAP in cetomacrogol ointment. Treatments were applied by light finger-massages on the scarified zone once per day for 5 days, starting the day of scarification. For systemic administrations, working solutions were prepared in PBS at a concentration of 4 mg/ml. Each compound was administrated intraperitoneally at a dose of 50 mg/kg once per day for 3 days starting the day of infection.Tissue collectionTo determine the extent of viral replication, 4 mice per group were euthanized at days 25 and 45 post-i.n. infection, and at days 30 and 75 post-i.c. infection. Heart punction was performed to collect blood. Serum was isolated following clotting of the blood at +4°C, centrifugation and supernatant was collected and stored at −20°C. Swabs of the skin of the lumbosacral region (i.c.), of the tail (i.c. and i.n.), and of the legs (i.n.) were collected in 500 µl PBS containing 2% FCS (PBS 2%) and stored at −20°C. Lymph nodes, spleen, liver, lungs, back skin, tail and leg were dissected aseptically. Lymph nodes and spleen were processed separately, and the isolated cells were used for flow cytometry and viral DNA quantification. Liver, lungs and back skin were collected in PBS 2%, weighed, frozen at −20°C, and homogenized prior DNA extraction. All DNA extractions were performed by using QIAamp® DNA Mini and blood Mini kits (Qiagen, Venlo, Netherlands) following manufacturer's instructions, and samples were then subjected to quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR).SeroneutralizationPlaque neutralization assays were performed in 96-well microplates. Each serum was tested individually. Sera were diluted 1 10 in MEM 2%, inactivated for 30 min at 56°C and two-fold dilutions were done to reach 1 640. CML1, diluted in MEM 2% to a concentration of 100 TCID50 in 100 µl, was added to each well containing the sera to test and to the virus-control wells. The microplates were incubated for 2 h at 37°C. HEL cells, resuspended in MEM 2%, were then added at a concentration of 2.8×104 cells per 80 µl per well. Microplates were incubated for 3 days at 37°C and examined for plaque formation. The neutralization titer was calculated using the Spearman-Karber formula which is the negative logarithm of the highest dilution of serum that caused a 50% reduction in the number of wells exhibiting CPE. The assays included virus control, cell control, negative controls of uninfected animals and controls to evaluate potential toxicity of the serum alone.Viral DNA detectionqPCR targeting the CMP48L gene (homolog of the F13L gene of VACV strain Copenhagen) was used to quantify viral DNA. qPCR was done on 5 µl of total DNA extracted in a 20 µl reaction volume using the TaqMan® Fast Universal PCR master mix, forward primer [5′-CAA CTC CAT TAT AGA AGC CAT T-3′], reverse primer [5′-CGT VGT TCT TAT CCC AAT TAC CA-3′], and an MGB probe [6-FAM-ATA GAG GAG TTA AGA TCA GAC TT-MGB] (Applied Biosystems, Halle, Belgium and Warrington, UK). Reactions were processed by using the SDS7500Fast apparatus. Plasmid DNA containing the CMP48L gene was used to obtain the standard curve and to determine the DNA copy numbers per sample. The limit of detection per 5 µl sample was 10 DNA copies.HistopathologyOne mouse of each group, i.e., group uninfected or group CML1, was euthanized and various tissue samples, such as skin, tail, leg, lungs, lymph nodes, were collected for histological examinations. Samples were fixed for one day in formol 6% and then placed in PBS. Samples were embedded in paraffin and 5 micrometer sections were stained with hematoxylin-eosin.Preparation of cell suspensionsSpleen and pool of draining lymph nodes (DLNs; inguinal, axillary, mesenteric and lumbar lymph nodes) were isolated from 4 individual mice in each group and processed separately. Organs were disrupted in cold PBS 2%, and filtered through a 70 µm nylon cell strainer. For all procedures, cell suspensions were kept on ice and washings were done with cold PBS 2%. Cell suspensions from the spleen were washed once, treated with ammonium chloride and washed again. Lymph node cells were only washed once. Cells were then counted before antibody (Ab) staining.Flow cytometryThe following conjugated Abs, purchased from eBioscience (San Diego, CA, USA), were used: anti-CD19-FITC (clone 1D3), anti-Ly-6G (Gr1)-FITC (clone RB6-8C5), anti-CD11c-FITC (clone N418), anti-CD45R (B220)-PE (clone RA3-6B2), anti-F4/80-PE (clone BM8), anti-CD11b-APC (clone M1/70), anti-pan-NK cells (CD49b)-APC (clone DX5). Cell suspensions obtained from the spleen and lymph nodes (106 cells/tube) were blocked with a 1/3 dilution of FcR Blocking Reagent (Miltenyi Biotec, Bergisch Gladbach, Germany) for 20 min at 4°C, and then stained in PBS 2% for 20 min at 4°C with the Ab of interest. Cells were washed once with cold PBS 2% between each Ab staining, and washed twice before fixation with a 3% formaldehyde solution. Fluorescence was acquired on a total of 2×104 cells (spleen) or 1.5×104 cells (lymph nodes) with a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA, USA) and the data were analyzed with the Cellquest software (BD Biosciences).Cytokine assaysThe sera of each group of mice were used for cytokine detection. IL-1β, IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13, IL-17, IL-18, GM-CSF, IFN-γ, TNF-α, M-CSF were measured using the kit Bio-Plex Pro™ Mouse cytokine multiplex Assay (Biorad, Nazareth Eke, Belgium), according to manufacturer's instructions. IL-6 immunoassays were performed using the kit Quantitine® (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, US), according to manufacturer's instructions. Only cytokine levels over 10 pg/ml were considered for statistical analyses.Statistical analysesAll statistical analyses were done with GraphPad Prism 5 software (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Viral loads and FACS results were analyzed with Mann Whitney test and unpaired Student t test, respectively, and survival curves with Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) test. Statistic significance was defined as follow: p<0.001 or ***, extremely significant; p<0.01 or **, very significant; p<0.05 or *, significant; and p>0.05 or ns, not significant.


Title: Prevention and Treatment of Monkeypox: A Step-by-Step Guide for Healthcare Professionals and General Population

Introduction and backgroundMonkeypox belongs to the same genus that causes smallpox. Many common viruses belong to this genus, including cowpox, horsepox, camelpox, and alaskapox. The variola virus is the most common and well-known member among all the viruses present in this genus. The World Health Organization (WHO) formally declared the eradication of smallpox in 1980 [1].Even though the monkeypox virus is homologous to the smallpox virus, the mortality risk and contact transmission from monkeypox are substantially lower than that of smallpox [2,3]. However, the signs and symptoms, primarily the rash, are very similar to smallpox. In Africa, two distinct lineages of the monkeypox virus are identified, clade 1 and clade 2. Clade 1 is predominantly prevalent in Central Africa and the Congo Basin, whereas clade 2 is restricted to West Africa [2]. The clade 2 strain of monkeypox is linked to the current monkeypox pandemic, triggering a global public health emergency. However, a recent study shows that the circulating strain of the virus has had multiple mutations in its DNA genome, which raises the possibility that the circulating virus is changing for human adaptation, and contagion [3].ReviewMethodologyA iterature search for monkeypox was performed using PubMed, ScienceDirect, and Google Scholar search engines. The search syntax included the following terms: "Monkeypox" and "origin," "spread", "symptoms", "prevention", "treatment", "vaccine", OR "risk to the healthcare worker". Four physician authors reviewed the literature, and the information is summarized in this article for simplicity of comprehension.EpidemiologyMonkeypox was initially isolated in Denmark from monkeys used in the resource of poliovirus in 1959 [4]. Some sporadic monkey virus outbreaks have been seen in different animals since then. In the 1970s, researchers in Congo identified the first human case of monkeypox. Later, in the late 1970s, many instances of this virus were identified in Central and West Africa. Since the first monkeypox virus outbreak in the United States in 2003 [5], several sporadic cases have been observed in numerous non-endemic continents, including Europe and Asia. The current epidemic is widespread worldwide and exhibits person-to-person transmission (explained below). Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the total number of monkeypox cases worldwide as of August 12, 2022. The Center for Disease Control (CDC) publicly made the data available [6]. These figures highlight the countries most affected by the Monkeypox virus.Figure 1Monkeypox cases worldwideMonkeypox cases in the world as of August 12, 2022 [6]Figure 2Number of confirmed monkeypox cases by countryNumber of confirmed cases by country [6]Immunization against smallpox also protects humans against the monkeypox virus; after the smallpox vaccination program was abandoned due to the disease's eradication, the WHO was concerned about greater susceptibility and incidence of monkeypox infection in the contemporary population. A survey conducted between 2005-2007 in the Democratic Republic of Congo showed that monkeypox infection in this country rose by 20-fold [7].Early May 2022 saw the isolation of the first cases of the current major monkeypox outbreak in Europe [8], and since then, cases have risen globally, including in non-endemic nations. WHO declared monkeypox a public health emergency of international concern on July 23, 2022 [9], and it is soon to reach pandemic levels. Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the total number of monkeypox cases in the United States and their breakdown by state. Figure 5 shows the rising trend of monkeypox cases in the United States [6]. Figure 3States affected by monkeypoxStates affected by Monkeypox virus in the United States [6]Figure 4Breakdown of the total number of confirmed cases in the US by statesNumber of confirmed cases in the US by states [6]Figure 5Trends in the current outbreak of monkeypox cases in the United StatesTrends in the current outbreak of monkeypox cases in the United States since May 17, 2022 [6]The transmission of the monkeypox virus can happen in two waysAnimal to Human TransmissionDuring this transmission, humans come in contact with the virus via infected animals' body fluids or by an infected animal's bite. It can also be transmitted when consuming raw/minimally processed meat from an infected animal. This raw or minimally processed meat consumption is also known as bushmeat. The monkeypox virus in Africa is typically found in animals like squirrels, rats, and monkeys [10].Human to Human TransmissionHuman transmission can occur in different ways, which include direct contact, indirect contact, respiratory droplets, and vertical transmission [11-15].Direct contact: Transmission occurs when a person comes in direct contact with the infection source, for example, infected body fluids or scabs. The ongoing outbreak of monkeypox in the world, especially in non-endemic countries, is thought to be due to the person's direct contact, mostly during sexual activities [11]. A non-infected person gets exposed to the infectious material from the skin of an infected person with close physical contact and therefore acquires this infection [11,12].Indirect contact: Transmission occurs when materials like clothes or linens come in contact with infected material like bodily fluids. A non-infected person can then come in contact with these materials and get infected [13].Respiratory transmission: Transmission occurs via respiratory secretions/droplets from coughing and sneezing [14].Vertical transmission: Transmission occurs upon a fetus being exposed to the virus from her mother. The virus is known to cross the placenta and can lead to congenital monkeypox infection in newborn babies [15].Future studies are required to better comprehend the role of virus transmission through genital fluids versus other secretions/forms [16]. Hence, labeling the disease as a sexually transmitted disease will lead to the underutilization of preventive efforts, which will move us closer to a pandemic scenario [16].PathogenesisMonkeypox virus can be transmitted via animal or human contact, as described above. The virus enters the host, replicates at the entry site, and circulates via the lymphatic system. This leads to systemic infection, also known as primary viremia. The virus will now start replicating in the lymphoid organs and distant lymph nodes, resulting in infection of the epithelium and tertiary organs, producing mucosal and skin lesions, which results in the clinical manifestation of this virus [17].Clinical manifestationsThe incubation period for the monkeypox virus can range from five days to three weeks [17]. Monkeypox causes high-grade fever, chills, fatigue, lymphadenopathy, muscle pain, and vesicular eruptions with a rash. The prodromal phase is associated with all the symptoms but without a rash. The prodromal period lasts about four to five days. The rash typically appears after four to five days of fever and continues for two to three weeks (Figure 6, 7). Figure 6Monkeypox rash with pustulesReprinted from Ajmera et al. [18]Figure 7Monkeypox rashReprinted from Ajmera et al. [18]However, some patients can get the rash without going through the prodromal phase [14]. The rash typically appears on the face but can also be found on the palms of hands and soles of the feet. Recent cases of monkeypox infection are associated with the involvement of the genitalia, anus, and oral mucous membranes [19,20]. The rash looks like a macule of around 2 to 5 mm in diameter. These macules/lesions will subsequently develop into vesicles and pustules. The lesions are very well-circumscribed, with central umbilication/depression on top of the lesion. These lesions will eventually crust over, dry, and fall off the skin in about one to two weeks. The rash during the developmental phase can be painful but mostly becomes itchy during the healing phase, i.e., during the formation of the dry crust [21]. The lab findings associated with monkeypox infection are nonspecific and include abnormal liver function enzymes, leukocytosis, and even thrombocytopenia [22]. The mortality risk associated with monkeypox varies depending upon which strain a person is infected with, i.e., clade 1 vs. clade 2. The current outbreak of monkeypox is similar to clad 2 strain which is less virulent than clad 1. So far, till July 2022, close to 14,000 cases of monkeypox worldwide have been reported, which include five deaths in African nations [23]. Immunocompromised status, complicated infections causing end-organ damage, children younger than eight years old, pregnant or breastfeeding women, and monkeypox infection in unusual places, including the eyes, are independent predictors of disease severity [24].DiagnosisPatients with typical rash and symptoms such as fever/chills should be suspected of having monkeypox infection, particularly if they have risk factors like recent travel to areas endemic for monkeypox. Additionally, patients who experience symptoms of sexually transmitted infections, such as genital rash, and who do not improve after receiving empiric treatment should be treated with a high degree of suspicion.Laboratory evidence such as that of the predominance of the virus or IgM (immunoglobulin) antibodies must be present if monkeypox is suspected in the patient. Viral or serological testing can be used to determine this.Viral testing includes a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test performed on the infected lesion. A patient whose PCR test result shows positive Orthopoxvirus is suspected of having monkeypox infection per CDC guidelines for the 2022 outbreak of the monkey virus. Confirmation of the virus can be made when monkey virus DNA can be demonstrated by PCR.Serological testing for the detection of monkeypox can be used if viral testing such as PCR is unavailable. The patient infected with the monkeypox virus will have elevated anti-Orthopoxvirus IgM & IgG antibodies, typically developing five to eight days after the rash [25].Monkeypox virus-infected cells have a brick-like form on electron microscopy identical to variola or vaccinia virus-infected cells, as seen in Figure 3.Figure 8Monkeypox virus infected cellsImage of monkeypox virus as seen from an electron microscopic in a human skin sample: CDC public health image library [26]TreatmentThe majority of monkeypox virus patients have mild symptoms and should make a full recovery without any professional attention. However, some patients could need hospitalization and supportive care due to nausea, vomiting, the potential for dehydration, or pain management. Antiviral medication is advised for those people who, as was previously noted, are at high risk of contracting a severe illness.Multiple antiviral medications are available which can be used for the treatment of monkeypox. Some of these medications were developed for treating smallpox in animals but are expected to have the same activity against monkeypox [24,25]. Of all the antivirals available, tecovirimat is a treatment of choice for most cases. Patients with severe disease may also benefit from dual therapy of tecovirimat and cidofovir. Public health officials should be made aware when starting these treatments.TecovirimatTecovirimat is available in both an IV and oral form. This medication inhibits the VP37 protein present in Orthopoxvirus and therefore blocks the interaction of the virus with the host cell. This leads to inhibition of the infectious virus particles and prevents the host cell from getting infected. In 2018, the United States (US) approved tecovirimat to treat the smallpox virus [27]. Tecovirimat's dose depends upon the patient's weight and renal functions (on the IV); the treatment duration is 14 days. The only contraindication of tecovirimat, when given in IV form, is a severe renal impairment with creatinine clearance <30 mL/min. The oral form, however, has no contraindication with any form of renal function. Tecovirimat has not been studied in pregnant and breastfeeding females. It is not known whether tecovirimat is present in breast milk [27]. If treatment is indicated in a pregnant or breastfeeding patient infected with the monkeypox virus, tecovirimat should be considered the first line of treatment for these patients. As mentioned before, information is limited on whether tecovirimat affects the fetus in the reproductive development; however, animal studies in the past showed no specific fetal effects even though the dose used in the animal study was 23 times higher than the dose used in humans [28,10]. CidofovirThis medication is effective against monkeypox in animal studies [27]. However, no significant clinical data exists on its efficacy toward monkeypox infection in humans. The mechanism of action of cidofovir includes converting cidofovir to its active metabolite called cidofovir diphosphonate. This cidofovir diphosphate then causes selective inhibition of viral DNA synthesis, suppressing virus replication. Cidofovir comes with a US boxed warning, including the possibility of severe nephrotoxicity. Severe acute renal failure resulting in dialysis can happen in as few as one to two doses of this medication. Renal functions must be monitored with each dose of cidofovir [29]. Patients who must be treated with this medication should also receive intravenous saline for rehydration and oral probenecid. Probenecid decreases the renal clearance of cidofovir by blocking the kidney's tubular secretions, reducing the incidence of nephrotoxicity [30].Other US boxed warnings: This medication can be carcinogenic and teratogenic based on animal studies. Also, patients are at risk of neutropenia with this medication; therefore, the patient's neutrophil count must be monitored when receiving this medication. There is a risk for metabolic acidosis along with hepatic impairment and pancreatitis. Cidofovir should be avoided in pregnant females as it can be teratogenic; however, if use is warranted, systemic therapy should be avoided during the first trimester if possible [31]. It is not known whether cidofovir can pass into the breastmilk or not at this time. However, breastfeeding is not recommended because of serious adverse reactions possible with this medication [29,31].Brincidofovir:This medication is similar to cidofovir but likely has fewer side effects. This medication is a lipid conjugate that is converted to cidofovir intracellularly, which is then further converted to cidofovir diphosphonate, an active metabolite of cidofovir. Cidofovir diphosphate causes selective viral DNA inhibition, suppressing the virus application. Significant side effects include hepatotoxicity. Upon initiating this medication, patients with hepatic impairment should closely monitor their liver functions. [32] If a patient develops hepatic impairment during the treatment, consider discontinuation if alanine transaminase (ALT) remains consistently high, >10 times the upper limit of normal [33,34]. Pregnant females should avoid taking this medication as in utero exposure to brincidofovir may harm the fetus. It is unknown if brincidofovir can transfer into breastmilk; therefore, breastfeeding is not recommended when the patient is on this medication [34].Trifluridine:This medication can be used to treat and prevent corneal and conjunctival involvement in patients with monkeypox lesions involving the eye. This medication comes in topical antibiotic drops or ointment, which can be applied every four hours for seven to 10 days [35,36]. No dosage adjustment is needed for patients with hepatic and kidney impairment. Trifluridine mechanism of action involves interference with replication of the virus by inhibiting thymidylate synthetase, reducing the viral load.PreventionFor prevention, a two-fold approach is needed. The first goal should be to promptly treat those infected and provide post-exposure management to minimize the onset of illness. The second goal will be at the public health and policy/ administrative level with increased funding and making diagnostic tests and vaccine availability a priority. Increased community awareness and wider surveillance of current cases and exposure is the first step toward preventing the spread [37,38]. There is a lack of evidence-based prevention methods, but we can utilize the knowledge learned from the COVID-19 pandemic [39]. From COVID-19, we learned that early diagnosis, quarantine for those with the infection, and open data sharing would be crucial for any community intervention to minimize the spread of any viral outbreaks [40]. Minimizing or avoiding stigmatization is needed to prevent discrimination and optimize disease response. Especially in the LGBTQ+ community and the public in general, aggressive educational campaigns regarding the transmission and spread will help minimize the stigma and, thereby, the hesitancy to seek help [41]. The stigmatization can also result in delays at the community, state, and even international levels, affecting political decision-making and resource allocation. In the past, Roess et al. noted educational activities to be effective in improving community-level knowledge and seeking professional advice [42]. Modifying the message delivery to match the current communication methods, including various forms of social media, should lead to similar results. The panic related to the current global health emergency, which is likely approaching the pandemic level, can be minimized with better education and unified messaging [39]. Key preventive measure is related to minimizing contact with the lesions, as close and prolonged contact appears to be the primary mode of transmission [11]. Social distancing from those with infection or post-exposure can also be considered useful, thereby minimizing possible respiratory transmission [12]. Avoiding sharing of beddings, towels, and clothes is needed [13].Pre-exposure prophylaxis vaccineThe Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommends pre-exposure prophylaxis by using the modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) vaccine for individuals who are at high risk due to occupational exposure to orthopoxvirus infections [43], for example, clinical laboratory personnel or scientists who are performing diagnostic testing for orthopoxviruses and designated response team members who are at risk of occupational exposure as well [44]. Experts are even discussing the use of pre-exposure prophylaxis MVA vaccine for high-risk patients. These individuals may be able to get vaccines once we have enough supplies of the MVA vaccine [45].Post-exposure risk assessmentPeople should watch closely for symptoms for at least 21 days post-exposure with a monkeypox patient. If a person remains asymptomatic, they can resume their normal activities; however, if they start to experience symptoms, they should quarantine themselves and seek further medical attention from their primary care provider or the health department. There are three categories of risk of exposure [36].High-Risk ExposureCDC considers patients as high-risk exposure if they had: a) contact with infected patient's skin, mucous membranes, skin lesions, and/or body fluids, for example, sexual contact, contact with patient's saliva to the eye or oral cavity of an uninfected individual, contact with contaminated materials like clothes. b) Being within six feet of an infected patient undergoing procedures that increase the risk of creating aerosol from oral or skin lesions without wearing proper N95 and eye protection, for example, dental procedures, or shaking soiled infected clothes.Intermediate Risk ExposureA non-infected individual within six feet of an individual infected with monkeypox without wearing a mask for three hours or more is considered intermediate risk. Individuals should be wearing at least a surgical mask. An additional intermediate degree exposure is when a non-infected person using only gloves and not donning a gown comes in contact with an infected patient's bodily fluids, skin sores, or dirty clothing.Low-Risk ExposureCDC considers low risk when a non-infected individual comes in contact with an infected patient a) while taking all proper precautionary measures when entering a patient's room, b) without wearing eye protection regardless of the duration of exposure, and c) is within six feet for less than three hours, and not wearing a mask.CDC recommends that individuals exposed to the monkeypox virus refrain from donating organs, blood, or breastmilk for at least 21 days to ensure they do not develop symptoms [36].Post-exposure treatmentIndividuals exposed to the monkeypox virus should consult their public health authority, which will determine treatment plans depending on the exposure risk mentioned above. Individuals eligible for prophylactic vaccinations should be vaccinated within four days of exposure to achieve the maximum benefit. Even though the vaccine can be given for up to 14 days post-exposure, if given between four and 14 days post-exposure, it minimizes the symptoms and does not prevent infection [46].In individuals with high-risk exposure to monkeypox, per CDC guidelines, postexposure modified vaccinia Ankara (MVA) vaccination is required. Immunocompetent individuals may use the ACAM2000 vaccine as well. According to CDC guidelines [46], post-exposure prophylactic vaccination is determined case-by-case for individuals with intermediate risk exposure, including evaluation by likelihood of transmission. Post-exposure prophylactic vaccination is not indicated for individuals with a low risk of exposure.Vaccinia Immune GlobulinPatients who are immunocompromised and exposed to the monkeypox virus may require the use of vaccinia immune globulin. CDC must be contacted for this agent to be available for the patient if needed.Post-exposure vaccinationThere are two types of vaccination available that can reduce the risk of monkeypox infection.Modified Vaccinia Ankara (MVA) VaccineSold under the trade name Jynneos (also known as Imvamune or Imvanex) in the United States (US), it is a live, nonreplicating vaccine. This vaccination has an excellent safety profile and can even be used in immunocompromised patients and patients with skin disorders. This vaccine requires two doses subcutaneously, which are administered four weeks apart. This vaccination is made from the nonreplicating vaccinia virus. Common side effects of the MVA vaccine include headache, myalgia, pain at injection site, and lymphadenopathy that last only a few days post-vaccination [47].ACAM2000ACAM2000 is a replication-competent smallpox vaccine. This vaccination should be used only in healthy, immunocompetent, and nonpregnant patients with a high risk of exposure. This vaccination is associated with more side effects when compared to the MVA vaccine because ACAM2000 requires an infectious dose on a bifurcated sterile needle that is penetrated into the epidermis of the deltoid region of the arm about 15 times. This process is known as scarification. After two to five days of vaccination, a papule will form, becoming a vesicle after a few more days [48]. The vesicle reaches its maximum size in about one week to 10 days, and then a scab forms in two weeks, which then falls off. Patients vaccinated with ACAM2000 often complain of mild fever and lymphadenopathy for the first two weeks after vaccination.ConclusionsThe Orthopoxvirus, also known as monkeypox virus, was initially discovered in the 1950s. Previously, this virus was primarily confined to Central and West Africa. However, monkeypox virus infection has gradually expanded worldwide with the termination and eradication of the smallpox vaccine and virus. Therefore, on July 23, 2022, the WHO recently designated the monkeypox virus as a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC). Attributed to the rise in cases, the CDC advises clinicians and other healthcare providers to remain vigilant and report to local health departments if they discover any patients infected with the monkeypox virus. These local health departments can then reach out to the CDC and formulate a strategy for individuals who had direct contact with these patients. Since this infection can spread via droplets or skin-to-skin contact, the healthcare professionals treating a patient suspected of monkeypox should use standard contact and droplet precautions. A crucial lesson is avoiding close contact with suspected patients to reduce transmission. Community education to maximize prevention efforts and destigmatizing to minimize barriers to seeking help are key to containment. 


Title: The recent re-emergence of human monkeypox: Would it become endemic beyond Africa?

IntroductionViral diseases continuously emerge and pose challenges to global health. Since the end of 2019, we have experienced a novel coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), which has caused a global pandemic to date. In the meantime, we also experience several viral outbreaks across the world, including influenza A viruses, Japanese encephalitis, Ebola virus, Yellow fever, and Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) [1]. Another large, multicountry outbreak is currently reported in several European countries and the United States (US). The outbreak is due to the human monkeypox virus (hMPXV) that was previously only endemic in the western and central parts of Africa. Monkeypox is originally an ancient disease. Investigations of archived specimens of five species of African rope squirrel (Funisciurus sp.) collected across central Africa over the past 120 years demonstrated the earliest evidence of monkeypox infection in 1899 [2]. This finding suggests that the historical pox-like outbreaks were more likely due to monkeypox rather than variola (smallpox) viruses [2]. The emergence of outbreaks outside of Africa emphasizes the disease's global significance. In this review, we discuss briefly the monkeypox virus, its transmission, pathogenesis, and clinical manifestation, as well as its changing global epidemiology and possible driving factors of the current outbreak.A brief overview of the virology of the monkeypox virusMonkeypox virus belongs to the Orthopoxvirus genus within the Chordopoxvirinae subfamily of the Poxviridae family [3]. The Orthopoxvirus genus contains several viruses that pose a high risk to the human population, including variola virus (the cause of smallpox), vaccinia virus (the strains used for smallpox vaccination), camelpox, cowpox, and mousepox (ectromelia virus) [4]. The Orthopoxvirus infects a wide range of animals, from humans to domestic and wild animals [5]. New members of the Orthopoxvirus genus have been recently identified, such as the Alaskapox virus [6], Akhmeta virus [7], and Abatino virus [8].Monkeypox virus is a large, brick-shaped or ovoid, enveloped, double-stranded, linear DNA (dsDNA) virus of ∼190 kb with a diameter of approximately 200–250 nm (
Fig. 1). Monkeypox virus uniquely replicates within the cytoplasm of the infected cells rather than in the nucleus. This process is almost independent of the host cell’s cellular machinery [9]. The virus particle is extremely complex and contains more than 100 viral proteins. Of note, there are several enzymes found in the virus particle, largely involved in the genome replication [9]. During viral replication in the infected cells, two different forms of viral particles are produced, intracellular mature virus (IMV) and extracellular enveloped virus (EEV). IMV has only one inner membrane, while EEV has two membranes derived from the endoplasmic reticulum. Both forms are infectious, although they employ distinct mechanisms to infect susceptible cells [10].Fig. 1The structure of monkeypox virus.Fig. 1The viral genome contains more than 200 open reading frames (ORFs) [11]. Based on genomic sequencing analysis, there are two major clades of monkeypox virus, namely Congo Basin (Central African) and the West African clades [11], currently termed as monkeypox virus clade 1 and clade 2, respectively [12]. A new clade 3 contains monkeypox virus isolates that have been identified since 2017, and together with clade 2, they belong to the West African clade [12], [13]. Studies in cynomolgus monkeys revealed that the Congo Basin clade was more virulent than the West African clade [14]. Similarly, in infected patients, the Congo Basin clade had higher morbidity and mortality as well as viremia levels [11]. Molecular evolution analyses estimated that the monkeypox virus initiated its independent evolution around 3500 years ago, although the West African clade emerged more recently, about 600 years ago [15].The antigenic properties of Orthopoxvirus are capable of inducing both species-specific and cross-reacting antibodies. Smallpox vaccination with vaccinia virus confers an approximate 85% cross-protection immunity against monkeypox virus infection in humans [16]. However, following the eradication of smallpox in the 1980 s, widespread vaccination with live-attenuated vaccinia virus was discontinued. Consequently, most people under the age of 45 years may no longer be protected against Orthopoxvirus infections, including the monkeypox virus [17]
. After more than 40 years of smallpox eradication and declining immunity against smallpox, the monkeypox virus has become the most important Orthopoxvirus infection in humans [18], [19].Natural reservoirs and transmission of the monkeypox virusMonkeypox virus was first isolated in 1959 in cynomolgus monkeys maintained within an animal laboratory in Copenhagen, Denmark, following an outbreak of non-fatal pox-like diseases, hence its name [20]. The first diagnosis of human monkeypox case was reported in 1970 in Zaire (now in the Democratic Republic of Congo, DRC) during the final effort to eradicate smallpox. The patient was a male, 9-month old of age, and developed symptoms of smallpox-like disease [21]. Since then, the monkeypox has been endemic in the DRC as well as in the west and central African countries [22]. Beyond African countries, monkeypox cases were first recorded in a multistate outbreak in the US following the import of small exotic animal pets from Ghana in 2003 [23].Natural reservoirs for monkeypox virus transmission to humanMonkeypox is a zoonotic disease, i.e. primarily transmitted from animal to human, in contrast to variola virus, which is exclusively a human pathogen. Although first discovered in monkeys, the natural reservoir of the virus remains elusive [24]. Non-human primates serve as accidental hosts of the monkeypox virus [5]. In wild chimpanzees, distinct lineages of the monkeypox virus could concurrently circulate and might cause mild to severe respiratory syndrome with limited or absence of exanthema [25]. In a long-term observation of the chimpanzee population in Taï National Park, Ivory Coast, simultaneous outbreaks were observed in different forest areas, suggesting multiple sources of introduction from unknown reservoir hosts. Interestingly, an outbreak period in chimpanzees was preceded by years of the absence of the diseases, suggesting that certain ecological or environmental factors may cause a sudden surge of spillover events [25].Current data suggest that rodents are the primary reservoir of the virus [26]. Monkeypox virus is known to infect a wide range of rodents, including mice, rabbits, and hamsters [5]. During an outbreak investigation in the DRC, two of three rope squirrels (Funisciurus sp.) were positive for antibodies to Orthopoxviruses
[27]
. However, consumption or preparation of rope squirrels was not associated with an increased risk of contracting monkeypox infection [27]. Another study showed that pouched Gambian rats (Cricetomys gambianus) were susceptible to monkeypox virus infection and were capable of shedding viable virus particles, suggesting its role in maintaining the virus in the wildlife population [28]. Close or direct contact with the blood, body fluids, salivary/respiratory droplets, bites, or inoculation via mucocutaneous lesions and consumption of the animals (bushmeat) are the primary modes of zoonotic transmission events [3].Secondary human-to-human transmissionThe further spread of the monkeypox virus in the human population is because of subsequent human-to-human transmission event, which occurs via close contact with respiratory droplets, body fluids, skin lesion, or contaminated patient’s environment or items [3]. Thus, isolation of infected individuals is essential to reduce viral transmission [29]. The amount of viral DNA in the clinical samples (as determined by the PCR) was associated with infectivity. A Cq value of ≥ 35 was correlated with low or very low infectivity of the virus [30]. This report may support decision-making regarding the confirmed cases and their close contacts. Indirect transmission may occur since viable viruses have been successfully isolated from feces and flies associated with the infected chimpanzees [25]. In addition, orthopoxvirus virion is highly stable in the environment. Viable and infectious variola virus particles were successfully recovered from smallpox scabs after 13 years of storage at room temperature (15 °C-20 °C) [31].The primary zoonotic transmission event (close contact with wild and domestic animals) was followed by secondary human-to-human transmission, leading to outbreaks in the affected area [32]. There are three possible modes of human-to-human transmission of monkeypox: familial, healthcare-related (nosocomial), and transport-related [33]. However, monkeypox transmission is uncommon in healthcare settings. During the outbreak in 2003 in the US, the exposed healthcare workers did not develop signs and symptoms of monkeypox [34]. In the United Kingdom (UK), one case of nosocomial transmission became the first reported human-to-human transmission of monkeypox beyond African countries [35]. It was suggested that transmission was through contaminated bedding. Four of 134 contacts developed symptoms, and fortunately, all of them recovered [36].During the current outbreak, a possible reverse zoonotic transmission event (human-to-animal transmission) has been reported and may pose a serious challenge to stopping the transmission of the monkeypox virus. A monkeypox virus-infected dog was reported in France at 12 days after the symptom onset of the owner (a man, 44 years old) who had been tested positive for monkeypox virus. Sequencing analyses demonstrated that both viruses belonged to the hMPXV-1 clade 1, lineage B.1, with 100% homology of the 19.5 kbp sequenced [37]. Thus, there is a high possibility that the infection was acquired through human transmission via close contact with his dog [37].The pathogenesis of the monkeypox virus infectionThe clinical features of monkeypox infection in humans are highly associated with the acquisition route, with the respiratory tract and the oral cavity as the common entry route. In an experimental model of monkeypox virus infection in cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis), epithelial cells in the lower respiratory tract were the primary target of infection following aerosol exposure [38]. Tonsil, mediastinal, and mandibular lymph nodes may also serve as additional sites of primary infections, from which the virus can disseminate through lymphatogenous spread. Systemic dissemination via blood (haematogenous route) was acquired through monocytic cells-associated viremia and led to the development of characteristic lesions in the skin, oral mucosa, gastrointestinal, and reproductive tracts [38]. In the blood, monkeypox virus induced massive expansion of natural killer (NK) cells but suppressed their cytotoxic and cytokine production capacity [39]. In mousepox infection models, secondary viremia may occur following primary dissemination of the virus in the spleen and liver [40].Monkeypox virus could also be transmitted via sexual contact [41]. Monkeypox virus DNA has been detected in rectal swabs, semen, and feces, with the median time of persistence of 8.3, 11.4, and 9.4, respectively; thus, increasing the likelihood of acquisition through sexual contacts [42], [43]. In a case report, it was reported that genital rash occurred at 5 days after sexual contact, followed by fever and lymphadenopathy at 3 days after rash onset [44]. Accordingly, the presence of genital and perianal lesions was related to the role in sexual intercourse [45]. In a prospective cross-sectional study in Spain, all patients had systemic symptoms after the primary acquisition of contact during sexual activities [46]. Further studies are urgently required to identify the reservoirs of the virus in the reproductive tissue and the mechanisms of its systemic dissemination.The clinical presentation of the monkeypox virus infectionThe incubation period of monkeypox virus infection is about 7–17 days and can be longer until 21 days. The classical clinical presentation of monkeypox virus infection is similar to smallpox and varicella. Thus, clinical diagnosis may be difficult, particularly in resource-limited settings of supporting diagnostic tools [47]. Vesiculopustular rash distributed in the face, legs, trunk, arms, palms, and genitalia is the most prominent symptom. In many cases, the rash starts from the face and could spread to other parts of the body, for instance, genital areas [48]. The rash develops in various stages and has similarities with syphilis, chancroid, herpes simplex virus infection, and chickenpox. Afterwards, the lesion forms a scab, and the scab then falls off [47].Other accompanying symptoms include fever, headache, pruritus, myalgia, sore throat, lymphadenopathy, and conjunctivitis. Fever may precede the development of rash in a sub-group of patients and vice versa [32], [49]. The interval between rash and fever is about two days [50]. Smallpox was not associated with lymphadenopathy [47]. Viral DNA could be detected in the blood (viremia), urine, and upper respiratory swabs [51]. Of note, prolonged PCR positivity in the blood and upper respiratory tract samples has been observed in monkeypox patients, and consequently, challenges the infection control measures to prevent viral spread [51].The illness is mostly mild and could recover within three weeks from the onset period. The treatment is mainly supportive. Two available oral antiviral drugs approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for smallpox, brincidofovir and tecovirimat, have been used as off-label drugs for monkeypox treatment [51]. Unfortunately, secondary bacterial infections of the skin lesion, followed by sepsis, may occur. Other complications include gastroenteritis, bronchopneumoniae, encephalitis, and fetal death [49]. In endemic countries, coinfections with varicella-zoster virus (VZV) are quite common and may influence the clinical severity [52]. During the outbreak of monkeypox in Nigeria in 2017–2018, the case fatality rate (CFR) was approximately 6% [32]. In the UK cases between 2018 and 2021, no deaths were reported [51]. A recent meta-analysis estimated that about 35% of monkeypox cases were hospitalized, with approximately 4% fatalities among the hospitalized cases [53].Pre-outbreak situations of monkeypox virus infections in humans (1970–2021)A recent systematic review of peer-reviewed and grey literature (until 7 September 2020) showed that the reported human monkeypox cases had increased significantly since the 1970 s. Between 1970 and 1979, confirmed and probable human monkeypox cases were reported from Sierra Leone (n = 1), Liberia (n = 4), Côte d′Ivoire (n = 1), Nigeria (n = 3), Cameroon (n = 1), and the DRC (n = 38). Between 2010 and 2019, the total number of confirmed, probable, and/or possible human monkeypox cases remarkably increased. During this period, the DRC reported more than 18,000 cases. The human monkeypox was reported in 10 African countries (Sierra Leone, Liberia, Cote d′Ivoire, Nigeria, Cameroon, the DRC, Central African Republic [CAR], Gabon, South Sudan, and Congo) and four countries beyond Africa [the US (n = 47 in 2003 across six states), the UK (n = 4 in 2018 and 2019), Israel (n = 1 in 2018), and Singapore (n = 1 in 2019)] [22].Most cases in endemic countries were due to infections of the Central African clade. However, beyond Africa, the cases were due to the West African clade, and they were import- and travel-related cases leading to sporadic outbreaks [22], [35]. Across all countries, the estimated CFR was 8.7% (95% CI: 7.0%−10.8%). The CFR for the Central African clade was significantly higher than the West African clade (10.6% vs. 3.6%). Of note, the median age at presentation has increased from 4 years in the 1970 s to 21 years in the 2010–2019 period [22].Currently, Nigeria is experiencing an ongoing monkeypox outbreak. In 2021, the total number of confirmed cases was 34, while up to April 2022, 15 confirmed cases have been recorded [54]. This led to several imported cases of monkeypox to the UK and the US during the upsurge of Delta variant of SARS-CoV-2 [55]. In May 2021, an imported case of the West African clade was reported from the UK. The index case had a travel history from Delta State, Nigeria. Secondary transmission occurred within two family members [56]. Another imported case of the West African clade was reported from Dallas, Texas, the US in July 2021. The index case was an early middle-aged man with less than one week of travel history to Nigeria. Fortunately, no secondary transmission occurred [57]. In the US, an imported case was also reported from Maryland in a 28-year-old man travelling from Lagos, Nigeria [58].Current outbreak situations (May, 2022 to January 5, 2023)On May 7, 2022, the United Kingdom Health Security Agency (UKHSA) reported the first confirmed monkeypox case in 2022 in Britain, a non-endemic country of monkeypox. The case had a travel history to Nigeria as the endemic country on May 3, 2022 and previously experienced a rash on April 29, 2022. A confirmed case is a suspected or probable case and is proved with monkeypox virus detection by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and/or sequencing [59]. The monkeypox virus PCR was performed toward this case by UKHSA Rare and Imported Pathogen Laboratory on May 6, 2022 from a vesicle swab specimen. Then, on May 13, 2022, two other confirmed cases in the same household were reported. However, this family cluster case had no association with the first case recorded on May 7, 2022. On May 15, 2022, four other confirmed cases were reported in the UK, and these cases also have no links to the first case (reported on May 7, 2022) and the family cluster case (reported on May 13, 2022). These four cases were men who have sex with men (MSM) and were detected when they were examined in genitourinary medicine clinics [60].From May 7 to May 25, 2022, there were 90 confirmed cases in the UK [61]. On May 18, 2022, Portugal also reported 14 confirmed cases of men. On May 19, 2022, seven confirmed cases were reported in Spain [60]. In addition, on May 18, 2022, a confirmed case of monkeypox was also detected in the US resident who travelled from Canada to the US [62]. In Australia, the first monkeypox case was reported in a male, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive individual with travel history to Europe. He developed a genital rash five days after unprotected anal intercourse with four males during his visit in Europe [44]
. Between May 17 and May 22, 2022, Italy also reported four monkeypox cases, all of them were young adult MSM males, two of them were HIV positive [63]
.
The number of cases from the period of May 7, 2022 to January 5, 2023 is described in
Fig. 2. Sequence analysis showed that the West African clade is responsible for the current outbreak [44], [63], [64]
. Until January 5, 2023, there were 84,318 confirmed cases reported worldwide. From those cases, 83,127 cases were found in regions which have not previously reported monkeypox (103 countries), and 1191 cases were detected in regions which have historically reported monkeypox cases (7 countries). Furthermore, the number of death was 74 cases in 17 countries, such as Argentina (1), Belgium (1), Brazil (14), Cameroon (3), Chile (2), Cuba (1), Czechia (1), Ecuador (2), Ghana (4), India (1), Mexico (4) Mozambique (1), Nigeria (7), Peru (8), Spain (3), Sudan (1), and United States of America (20) [65].Fig. 2Geographical distribution of confirmed cases of human monkeypox virus infection (up to January 5, 2023).Fig. 2What are the underlying factors associated with the current outbreaks?Silent, undetected chain of transmission events preceding the outbreaksMonkeypox virus infection in humans is endemic only in the west and central Africa. Previous cases of monkeypox virus outside of African countries were always associated with travel to these endemic areas. Those imported cases were due to the West African clade, which was known to have lower fatality and less human-to-human transmission rates. In the current multi-country outbreak, West African clades were also identified among confirmed cases. A previous systematic review also showed no emergence of new strains of the monkeypox virus [24]. In addition, the current outbreak appears to be spreading in different ways than previous outbreaks outside of Africa.Sequence analysis of the virus available at this moment indicated that the current outbreak originates from a single origin and is closely associated with the exported virus from Nigeria to the UK, Singapore, and Israel in 2018 and 2019 [59], [66]. This circumstance reminds us with a human case in Cameroon in 2018 after no reported monkeypox cases since 1989. Sequence analysis showed that the virus was the West African clade and was closely related to the monkeypox virus isolated from an outbreak in Nigeria from 2017 to 2018. While in 1989 cases, it was due to the Congo Basin clade. Interestingly, there was no travel history to Nigeria nor interaction with travellers from Nigeria of the infected case. This finding may suggest a “cryptic” transmission event of the monkeypox virus in Cameroon before the reported human case, although an importation from Nigeria could not be completely ruled out [67]. Noteworthy, another serological study in Cameroon demonstrated that silent, undetected transmissions of asymptomatic animals and humans may occur until certain levels that could be recognized by a surveillance system [68]. In line, it was shown that the monkeypox virus maintained its circulation in animal hosts in Ghana, but no apparent human cases were identified [69], until it was exported to the US and precipitated the outbreak [22]. The fact that monkeypox cases were found in patients who had no obvious association each other shows that the virus might have silently circulated for a given period of time preceding the outbreaks [70].Are there any genetic determinants of the current outbreak?Recent studies reported comprehensive analyses of the human monkeypox virus sequences obtained from the past to the current outbreaks. A maximum-likelihood tree demonstrated clustering of the sequences into three major clusters: (1) MPXV clade 1 contained sequences derived from 1970 to 2017 outbreaks in Central Africa; (2) MPXV clade 2 contained sequences derived from 1970 to 2017 outbreaks in different countries; and (3) MPXV clade 3 contained sequences derived from the last two outbreaks (2017–2022). Several sub-lineages have been identified in clade 3, including A.1, A.1.1., A.2 and B.1 [12]. Interestingly, all genomes obtained from the current 2022 outbreaks were clustered in B.1. lineage of clade 3 and emerged in Europe as early as March 2022 [12], [13]. These studies indicated that the current outbreak had a single origin and clearly showed diversification of monkeypox virus following sustained transmission in non-endemic regions.Monkeypox virus is a DNA virus which commonly has a slower mutation rate compared to an RNA virus, thus the genome is relatively stable [71]. It was estimated that the mutation rate of Orthopoxvirus was± (4−6) x 10−6 substitutions/site/year [72]. However, it has been shown that poxviruses can quickly adapt to changing environments in the infected host (human) cells despite their low mutation rate [73]. Interestingly, seven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and one deletion were observed among sequenced viruses from the UK, US, and Portugal, indicating ongoing microevolution of the circulating viruses responsible for the current outbreaks [66]. However, it is hard to believe that these genetic changes are associated with selective advantage by increasing the transmission capability of the virus. Three non-synonymous substitutions in the surface glycoprotein B21R (D209N, P722S, and M1741I) could provide selective advantage for the monkeypox virus by enhancing its transmission capacity [12]. Amino acid variabilities in H3L, another viral envelope protein, between variola and monkeypox viruses may also associate with virus adaptation to humans [74].It is important to note that sustained human-to-human transmission during the current outbreak may provide sufficient time and opportunities for the monkeypox virus to improve and fine-tune its adaptation and specificity in the human host, as we have seen in SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern (VOC). Further comprehensive studies are required to investigate any genetic changes that may alter the behavior of the virus.Treatment and preventive strategiesTreatment strategiesPain management and supportive treatment could be a strategy for treating monkeypox. Topical and systemic medications, including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), acetaminophen, or lidocaine, can be used to relieve pain in monkeypox cases. For severe pain, gabapentin or opioids can be prescribed with caution of the side effects [75]. Furthermore, supportive treatments should be given to monkeypox patients. Mucous membrane and compromised skin should be cleaned with antiseptic, protected with light dressing, and treated with mupironic acid. In addition, systemic antibiotics in secondary infection cases could be needed. Monkeypox patients can suffer from dehydration due to nausea, vomiting, or poor appetite. Thus, they should obtain nutritional care and rehydration therapy, for instance, oral fluids, intravenous fluids, and healthy diet. Symptom-relieving medications also should be prescribed for fever, itching, vomiting, malaise, or symptoms regarding the patient’s condition [76].To date, specific antiviral treatment for monkeypox approved by the US FDA is not available. However, antiviral drugs for smallpox might be beneficial for treating monkeypox, e.g., tecovirimat, brincidofovir, Vaccinia Immune Globulin Intravenous (VIGIV), and cidofovir [77]. A phase 3 clinical trial is currently being conducted to evaluate the efficacy of tecovirimat for monkeypox treatment (NCT05534984). A retrospective observational study in the UK revealed that one monkeypox patient treated with tecovirimat (600 mg per oral, twice daily for two weeks) experienced no adverse effects. The patient also had a shorter duration of illness and viral shedding than the other patients, with ten days of hospitalization [51]. According to the FDA’s review, brincidofovir is considered for monkeypox patients with severe disease or contraindications for tecovirimat. VIGIV can be considered for severe cases of monkeypox, and clinicians should request the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Cidofovir is effective against Orthopoxvirus based on in vitro as well as animal studies. Yet, it cannot be used with brincidofovir [77]. Large clinical trials to assess the efficacy of antiviral therapy against monkeypox in humans are still needed.Prevention and vaccination strategiesThe preventive measures for monkeypox could be enhanced by raising awareness about its associated risk factors. Human-to-human transmission could be reduced by active surveillance and contact tracing. Health providers with close contact with patients and laboratory staff handling specimens should follow infection control precautions appropriately. In addition, risks of zoonotic transmission should be reduced by using protective equipment during contact with wild animals and consuming cooked meat. Furthermore, isolating infected animals and restricting animal trade, such as rodents and non-human primates, could prevent monkeypox transmission [41].The smallpox vaccination is also effective in preventing monkeypox, with 85% of efficacy [16]. Currently, there are three smallpox vaccines. However, there are only two vaccines that are licensed by the US FDA, i.e. ACAM2000 and JYNNEOS. ACAM2000 contains replication-competent vaccinia virus and is indicated for active immunization against smallpox disease in people with high risks of smallpox infection. ACAM2000 is a single-dose vaccine that is administered percutaneously. Meanwhile, JYNNEOS is a live-attenuated vaccine and can be used for populations 18 years old and above with immunodeficiencies, such as HIV patients. JYNNEOS is administered subcutaneously with two doses, 4 weeks apart. ACAM2000 has more side effects than JYNNEOS and it is not recommended for immunocompromised people [78]. The other smallpox vaccine is an investigational vaccine, Aventis Pasteur Smallpox Vaccine (APSV), which might be used under Emergency Use Authorization (EUA). People at risk are recommended for smallpox vaccination, for instance, research laboratory staff, clinical laboratory staff handling tests for Orthopoxviruses, and healthcare personnel who treat patients with vaccinia virus infection [79].According to the interim guidance by WHO on November 16, 2022, mass vaccination is not required and not recommended at the moment. Public health measures could curb monkeypox cases, for instance, surveillance, contact tracing, early diagnosis, and isolation. Vaccination should be considered as an additional measure. WHO also recommends that member states share vaccine doses with countries with limited vaccine supply [80].Vaccination challengesInequity is one of the challenges in vaccination for monkeypox. The hindrances of vaccination include geographic location and transportation, education, racism, language, vaccine hesitancy, and lack of trust from government [81]. Since September 15, 2022, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has developed “The Monkeypox Vaccine Equity Pilot Program” to increase vaccine access in most impacted communities with monkeypox virus, for instance Black/African American and Hispanic/Latino gay, bisexual, and MSM. The examples of the pilot projects are ‘Vaccine clinics’ at pharmacies in rural areas, events in LGBTQ+ concerts, and clinics for MSM who are not reached by vaccine administration channels [82]. Post-exposure vaccination of high-risk contacts of monkeypox has a challenge in contact tracing because of unwillingness to disclose the sexual partners due to stigma [83].Would the monkeypox virus become endemic beyond Africa?The monkeypox virus might occupy the ecological, epidemiological, or immunological niche left by smallpox following its eradication [17]. A recent systematic review found that the median age of patients has changed from 4 years in the 1970 s to 21 years in the 2010–2019 period. From the 1970 s to the 1990 s, all fatal cases were among children< 10 years. However, there were 37.5% (6/16) of deaths found among children< 10 years of age in the last two decades (2000–2019) [22]. Those who were considered to have received smallpox vaccination had a lower incidence of monkeypox than those who were presumed unvaccinated [50], [84]. Thus, the current outbreaks may represent a real effect of diminished immunity against monkeypox at the population levels as the unvaccinated individuals become older. The currently available live-attenuated vaccines could be considered as pre- or post-exposure prophylaxis for contacts and health workers [62]. People with high-risk contacts with confirmed cases are suggested for self-isolation at home until 21 days [61], [85].The available data highly suggests that human-to-human transmission is currently happening and the existence of unconnected clusters [64]. It raises questions about whether monkeypox would replace smallpox and become a significant human pathogen globally. Another distinguishing feature is that a considerable number of cases have been identified in MSM, though not all, and many of these cases are being detected in sexually transmitted infection (STI) clinics [63], [64], [86]. Although monkeypox has never been recognized as a sexually transmitted infection, it could be transmitted by direct contact during sexual activities via genital or perianal lesions. Accordingly, seminal fluid of the infected patients in Italy was positive for the viral DNA [63]. Since the virus is apparently less transmissible than SARS-CoV-2, it should be easier to contain. However, a major factor of endemicity is that monkeypox virus could spill back to an unidentified animal reservoir widely distributed outside Africa and then establish new reservoirs in these areas. Indeed, experimental infections of ground squirrels (Spermophilus tridecemlineatus) obtained from the North America showed that this species was susceptible to monkeypox virus infection [87].In addition, the possibility of spillback events is supported by the fact that monkeypox can infect a wide range of animals. This kind of spillback event has been identified in SARS-CoV-2 [88], [89] and influenza A virus [90]. If this truly happens in the monkeypox virus as reported in a current study [37], the virus could maintain its continuous circulation in animals during the endemic or inter-epidemic period. The likelihood of human infection will then depend on cross-protective immunity derived from (smallpox) vaccination or from natural infection to variola or other Orthopoxviruses. If the monkeypox case becomes endemic, one of the main challenges in preventing the case is the low level of understanding about monkeypox amongst health care workers [91].ConclusionThe current monkeypox outbreak is an alarming situation for global health since this is the first large, multicountry outbreak outside Africa with no travel-association to endemic countries or importations of infected animals. The number of suspected and confirmed monkeypox cases keeps increasing. Another distinguishing characteristic is that a significant number of cases were found among MSM, raising awareness of whether the virus has established continuous circulation in a specific population. Efforts are ongoing to unravel the social and epidemiological links between cases and more importantly, the origin and driving factors of the current, mysterious outbreak, including viral and host genetic determinants, human behavior, animal reservoirs, as well as environmental and ecologic changes. In line, increased active case detection, immediate isolation, contact tracing, and postexposure vaccination should be performed to promptly contain the outbreak. Last but not least, enhancing our global preparedness is crucial to build disease surveillance and response capacities to monkeypox.Declaration of Competing InterestThe authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

